Commentary on the Apocalypse of the Blessed John (Victorinus of Pettau)
Ante-Nicene Fathers, 1885. Public domain.
Source: Christian Classics Ethereal Library (https://ccel.org/ccel/schaff/anf07.vi.html).
Hosted by the Tower of Babel library, antarctic-labs.com.

======================================================================

  COMMENTARY ON THE APOCALYPSE OF THE BLESSED JOHN

 from the first chapter.

 1. "The Revelation of Jesus Christ, which God gave to Him, and showed
 unto His servants things which must shortly come to pass, and signified
 it. Blessed are they who read and hear the words of this prophecy, and
 keep the things which are written."] The beginning of the book promises
 blessing to him that reads and hears and keeps, that he who takes pains
 about the reading may thence learn to do works, and may keep the
 precepts.

 4. "Grace unto you, and peace, from Him which is, and which was, and
 which is to come."] He is, because He endures continually; He was,
 because with the Father He made all things, and has at this time taken
 a beginning from the Virgin; He is to come, because assuredly He will
 come to judgment.

 "And from the seven spirits which are before His throne."] We read of a
 sevenfold spirit in Isaiah, [2242] --namely, the spirit of wisdom and
 of understanding, the spirit of counsel and might, of knowledge and of
 piety, and the spirit of the fear of the Lord.

 5. "And from Jesus Christ, who is the faithful witness, the
 first-begotten of the dead."] In taking upon Him manhood, He gave a
 testimony in the world, wherein also having suffered, He freed us by
 His blood from sin; and having vanquished hell, He was the first who
 rose from the dead, and "death shall have no more dominion over Him,"
 [2243] but by His own reign the kingdom of the world is destroyed.

 6. "And He made us a kingdom and priests unto God and His Father."]
 That is to say, a Church of all believers; as also the Apostle Peter
 says: "A holy nation, a royal priesthood." [2244]

 7. "Behold, He shall come with clouds, and every eye shall see Him."]
 For He who at first came hidden in the manhood that He had undertaken,
 shall after a little while come to judgment manifest in majesty and
 glory. And what saith He?

 12. "And I turned, and saw seven golden candlesticks; and in the midst
 of the seven golden candlesticks one like unto the Son of man."] He
 says that He was like Him after His victory over death, when He had
 ascended into the heavens, after the union in His body of the power
 which He received from the Father with the spirit of His glory.

 13. "As it were the Son of man walking in the midst of the golden
 candlesticks."] He says, in the midst of the churches, as it is said in
 Solomon, "I will walk in the midst of the paths of the just," [2245]
 whose antiquity is immortality, and the fountain of majesty.

 "Clothed with a garment down to the ankles."] In the long, that is, the
 priestly garment, these words very plainly deliver the flesh which was
 not corrupted in death, and has the priesthood through suffering.

 "And He was girt about the paps with a golden girdle."] His paps are
 the two testaments, and the golden girdle is the choir of saints, as
 gold tried in the fire. Otherwise the golden girdle bound around His
 breast indicates the enlightened conscience, and the pure and spiritual
 apprehension that is given to the churches.

 14. "And His head and His hairs were white as it were white wool, and
 as it were snow."] On the head the whiteness is shown; "but the head of
 Christ is God." [2246] In the white hairs is the multitude of abbots
 [2247] like to wool, in respect of simple sheep; to snow, in respect of
 the innumerable crowd of candidates taught from heaven.

 "His eyes were as a flame of fire."] God's precepts are those which
 minister light to believers, but to unbelievers burning.

 16. "And in His face was brightness as the sun."] That which He called
 brightness was the appearance of that in which He spoke to men face to
 face. But the glory of the sun is less than the glory of the Lord.
 Doubtless on account of its rising and setting, and rising again, that
 He was born and suffered and rose again, therefore the Scripture gave
 this similitude, likening His face to the glory of the sun.

 15. "His feet were like unto yellow brass, as if burned in a furnace."]
 He calls the apostles His feet, who, being wrought by suffering,
 preached His word in the whole world; for He rightly named those by
 whose means the preaching went forth, feet. Whence also the prophet
 anticipated this, and said: "We will worship in the place where His
 feet have stood." [2248] Because where they first of all stood and
 confirmed the Church, that is, in Judea, all the saints shall assemble
 together, and will worship their Lord.

 16. "And out of His mouth was issuing a sharp two-edged sword."] By the
 twice-sharpened sword going forth out of His mouth is shown, that it is
 He Himself who has both now declared the word of the Gospel, and
 previously by Moses declared the knowledge of the law to the whole
 world. But because from the same word, as well of the New as of the Old
 Testament, He will assert Himself upon the whole human race, therefore
 He is spoken of as two-edged. For the sword arms the soldier, the sword
 slays the enemy, the sword punishes the deserter. And that He might
 show to the apostles that He was announcing judgment, He says: "I came
 not to send peace, but a sword." [2249] And after He had completed His
 parables, He says to them: "Have ye understood all these things? And
 they said, We have. And He added, Therefore is every scribe instructed
 in the kingdom of God like unto a man that is a father of a family,
 bringing forth from his treasure things new and old," [2250] --the new,
 the evangelical words of the apostles; the old, the precepts of the law
 and the prophets: and He testified that these proceeded out of His
 mouth. Moreover, He also says to Peter: "Go thou to the sea, and cast a
 hook, and take up the fish that shall first come up; and having opened
 its mouth, thou shalt find a stater (that is, two denarii), and thou
 shalt give it for me and for thee." [2251] And similarly David says by
 the Spirit: "God spake once, twice I have heard the same." [2252]
 Because God once decreed from the beginning what shall be even to the
 end. Finally, as He Himself is the Judge appointed by the Father, on
 account of His assumption of humanity, wishing to show that men shall
 be judged by the word that He had declared, He says: "Think ye that I
 will judge you at the last day? Nay, but the word," says He, "which I
 have spoken unto you, that shall judge you in the last day." [2253] And
 Paul, speaking of Antichrist to the Thessalonians, says: "Whom the Lord
 Jesus will slay by the breath of His mouth." [2254] And Isaiah says:
 "By the breath of His lips He shall slay the wicked." [2255] This,
 therefore, is the two-edged sword issuing out of His mouth.

 15. "And His voice as it were the voice of many waters."] The many
 waters are understood to be many peoples, or the gift of baptism that
 He sent forth by the apostles, saying: "Go ye, teach all nations,
 baptizing them in the name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the
 Holy Ghost." [2256]

 16. "And He had in His right hand seven stars."] He said that in His
 right hand He had seven stars, because the Holy Spirit of sevenfold
 agency was given into His power by the Father. As Peter exclaimed to
 the Jews: "Being at the right hand of God exalted, He hath shed forth
 this Spirit received from the Father, which ye both see and hear."
 [2257] Moreover, John the Baptist had also anticipated this, by saying
 to his disciples: "For God giveth not the Spirit by measure unto Him.
 The Father," says he, "loveth the Son, and hath given all things into
 His hands." [2258] Those seven stars are the seven churches, which he
 names in his addresses by name, and calls them to whom he wrote
 epistles. Not that they are themselves the only, or even the principal
 churches; but what he says to one, he says to all. For they are in no
 respect different, that on that ground any one should prefer them to
 the larger number of similar small ones. In the whole world Paul taught
 that all the churches are arranged by sevens, that they are called
 seven, and that the Catholic Church is one. And first of all, indeed,
 that he himself also might maintain the type of seven churches, he did
 not exceed that number. But he wrote to the Romans, to the Corinthians,
 to the Galatians, to the Ephesians, to the Thessalonians, to the
 Philippians, to the Colossians; afterwards he wrote to individual
 persons, so as not to exceed the number of seven churches. And
 abridging in a short space his announcement, he thus says to Timothy:
 "That thou mayest know how thou oughtest to behave thyself in the
 Church of the living God." [2259] We read also that this typical number
 is announced by the Holy Spirit by the mouth of Isaiah: "Of seven women
 which took hold of one man." [2260] The one man is Christ, not born of
 seed; but the seven women are seven churches, receiving His bread, and
 clothed with his apparel, who ask that their reproach should be taken
 away, only that His name should be called upon them. The bread is the
 Holy Spirit, which nourishes to eternal life, promised to them, that
 is, by faith. And His garments wherewith they desire to be clothed are
 the glory of immortality, of which Paul the apostle says: "For this
 corruptible must put on incorruption, and this mortal must put on
 immortality." [2261] Moreover, they ask that their reproach may be
 taken away--that is, that they may be cleansed from their sins: for the
 reproach is the original sin which is taken away in baptism, and they
 begin to be called Christian men, which is, "Let thy name be called
 upon us." Therefore in these seven churches, of one Catholic Church are
 believers, because it is one in seven by the quality of faith and
 election. Whether writing to them who labour in the world, and live
 [2262] of the frugality of their labours, and are patient, and when
 they see certain men in the Church wasters, and pernicious, they hear
 them, lest there should become dissension, he yet admonishes them by
 love, that in what respects their faith is deficient they should
 repent; or to those who dwell in cruel places among persecutors, that
 they should continue faithful; or to those who, under the pretext of
 mercy, do unlawful sins in the Church, and make them manifest to be
 done by others; or to those that are at ease in the Church; or to those
 who are negligent, and Christians only in name; or to those who are
 meekly instructed, that they may bravely persevere in faith; or to
 those who study the Scriptures, and labour to know the mysteries of
 their announcement, and are unwilling to do God's work that is mercy
 and love: to all he urges penitence, to all he declares judgment.

 [2242] Isa. xi. 2. [[215]P. 342, supra.]

 [2243] Rom. vi. 9.

 [2244] 1 Pet. ii. 9.

 [2245] Prov. viii. 20.

 [2246] 1 Cor. xi. 3.

 [2247] [Abba = father. Fathers, rather.]

 [2248] Ps. cxxxii. 7.

 [2249] Matt. x. 34.

 [2250] Matt. xiii. 51, 52.

 [2251] Matt. xvii. 27.

 [2252] Ps. lxii. 11.

 [2253] John xii. 48.

 [2254] 2 Thess. ii. 8.

 [2255] Isa. xi. 4.

 [2256] Matt. xxviii. 19.

 [2257] Acts ii. 33.

 [2258] John iii. 34, 35. [Compare Wordsworth on the Apocalypse.]

 [2259] 1 Tim. iii. 15.

 [2260] Isa. iv. 1.

 [2261] 1 Cor. xv. 53.

 [2262] Operantur, conjectured to be "vivunt."

 from the second chapter.

 2. "I know thy works, and thy labour, and thy patience."] In the first
 epistle He speaks thus: I know that thou sufferest and workest, I see
 that thou art patient; think not that I am staying long from thee.

 "And that thou canst not bear them that are evil, and who say that they
 are Jews and are not, and thou has found them liars, and thou hast
 patience for My name's sake."] All these things tend to praise, and
 that no small praise; and it behoves such men, and such a class, and
 such elected persons, by all means to be admonished, that they may not
 be defrauded of such privileges granted to them of God. These few
 things He said that He had against them.

 4, 5. "And thou hast left thy first love: remember whence thou hast
 fallen."] He who falls, falls from a height: therefore He said whence:
 because, even to the very last, works of love must be practised; and
 this is the principal commandment. Finally, unless this is done, He
 threatened to remove their candlestick out of its place, that is, to
 disperse the congregation.

 6. "This thou hast also, that thou hatest the deeds of the
 Nicolaitanes."] But because thou thyself hatest those who hold the
 doctrines of the Nicolaitanes, thou expectest praise. Moreover, to hate
 the works of the Nicolaitanes, which He Himself also hated, this tends
 to praise. But the works of the Nicolaitanes were in that time false
 and troublesome men, who, as ministers under the name of Nicolaus, had
 made for themselves a heresy, to the effect that what had been offered
 to idols might be exorcised and eaten, and that whoever should have
 committed fornication might receive peace on the eighth day. Therefore
 He extols those to whom He is writing; and to these men, being such and
 so great, He promised the tree of life, which is in the paradise of His
 God.

 The following epistle unfolds the mode of life and habit of another
 order which follows. He proceeds to say:--

 9. "I know thy tribulation and thy poverty, but thou art rich."] For He
 knows that with such men there are riches hidden with Him, and that
 they deny the blasphemy of the Jews, who say that they are Jews and are
 not; but they are the synagogue of Satan, since they are gathered
 together by Antichrist; and to them He says:--

 10. "Be thou faithful unto death."] That they should continue to be
 faithful even unto death.

 11. "He that shall overcome, shall not be hurt by the second death."]
 That is, he shall not be chastised in hell.

 The third order of the saints shows that they are men who are strong in
 faith, and who are not afraid of persecution; but because even among
 them there are some who are inclined to unlawful associations, He
 says:--

 14-16. "Thou hast there some who hold the doctrine of Balaam, who
 taught in the case of Balak that he should put a stumbling-block before
 the children of Israel, to eat and to commit fornication. So also hast
 thou them who hold the doctrine of the Nicolaitanes; but I will fight
 with them with the sword of my mouth."] That is, I will say what I
 shall command, and I will tell you what you shall do. For Balaam,
 [2263] with his doctrine, taught Balak to cast a stumbling-block before
 the eyes of the children of Israel, to eat what was sacrificed to
 idols, and to commit fornication,--a thing which is known to have
 happened of old. For he gave this advice to the king of the Moabites,
 and they caused stumbling to the people. Thus, says He, ye have among
 you those who hold such doctrine; and under the pretext of mercy, you
 would corrupt others.

 17. "To him that overcometh I will give the hidden manna, and I will
 give him a white stone."] The hidden manna is immortality; the white
 gem is adoption to be the son of God; the new name written on the stone
 is "Christian."

 The fourth class intimates the nobility of the faithful, who labour
 daily, and do greater works. But even among them also He shows that
 there are men of an easy disposition to grant unlawful peace, and to
 listen to new forms of prophesying; and He reproves and warns the
 others to whom this is not pleasing, who know the wickedness opposed to
 them: for which evils He purposes to bring upon the head of the
 faithful both sorrows and dangers; and therefore He says:--

 24. "I will not put upon you any other burden."] That is, I have not
 given you laws, observances, and duties, which is another burden.

 25, 26. "But that which ye have, hold fast until I come; and he that
 overcometh, to him will I give power over all peoples."] That is, him I
 will appoint as judge among the rest of the saints.

 28. "And I will give him the morning star."] To wit, the first
 resurrection. He promised the morning star, which drives away the
 night, and announces the light, that is, the beginning of day.

 [2263] Num. xxiii. [Wordsworth, ed. 1852, pp. 78-92.]

 from the third chapter.

 The fifth class, company, or association of saints, sets forth men who
 are careless, and who are carrying on in the world other transactions
 than those which they ought--Christians only in name. And therefore He
 exhorts them that by any means they should be turned away from
 negligence, and be saved; and to this effect He says:--

 2. "Be watchful, and strengthen the other things which were ready to
 die; for I have not found thy works perfect before God."] For it is not
 enough for a tree to live and to have no fruit, even as it is not
 enough to be called a Christian and to confess Christ, but not to have
 Himself in our work, that is, not to do His precepts.

 The sixth class is the mode of life of the best election. The habit of
 saints is set forth; of those, to wit, who are lowly in the world, and
 unskilled in the Scriptures, and who hold the faith immoveably, and are
 not at all broken down by any chance, or withdrawn from the faith by
 any fear. Therefore He says to them:--

 8. "I have set before thee an open door, because thou hast kept the
 word of my patience."] In such little strength.

 10. "And I will keep thee from the hour of temptation."] That they may
 know His glory to be of this kind, that they are not indeed permitted
 to be given over to temptation.

 12. "He that overcometh shall be made a pillar in the temple of God."]
 For even as a pillar is an ornament of the building, so he who
 perseveres shall obtain a nobility in the Church.

 Moreover, the seventh association of the Church declares that they are
 rich men placed in positions of dignity, but believing that they are
 rich, among whom indeed the Scriptures are discussed in their
 bedchamber, while the faithful are outside; and they are understood by
 none, although they boast themselves, and say that they know all
 things,--endowed with the confidence of learning, but ceasing from its
 labour. And thus He says:--

 15. "That they are neither cold nor hot."] That is, neither unbelieving
 nor believing, for they are all things to all men. And because he who
 is neither cold nor hot, but lukewarm, gives nausea, He says:--

 16. "I will vomit thee out of My mouth."] Although nausea is hateful,
 still it hurts no one; so also is it with men of this kind when they
 have been cast forth. But because there is time of repentance, He
 says:--

 18. "I persuade thee to buy of Me gold tried in the fire."] That is,
 that in whatever manner you can, you should suffer for the Lord's name
 tribulations and passions.

 "And anoint thine eyes with eye-salve."] That what you gladly know by
 the Scripture, you should strive also to do the work of the same. And
 because, if in these ways men return out of great destruction to great
 repentance, they are not only useful to themselves, but they are able
 also to be of advantage to many, He promised them no small reward,--to
 sit, namely, on the throne of judgment.

 from the fourth chapter.

 1. "After this, I beheld, and, lo, a door was opened in heaven."] The
 new testament is announced as an open door in heaven.

 "And the first voice which I heard was, as it were, of a trumpet
 talking with me, saying, Come up hither."] Since the door is shown to
 be opened, it is manifest that previously it had been closed to men.
 And it was sufficiently and fully laid open when Christ ascended with
 His body to the Father into heaven. Moreover, the first voice which he
 had heard when he says that it spoke with him, without contradiction
 condemns those who say that one spoke in the prophets, another in the
 Gospel; since it is rather He Himself who comes, that is the same who
 spoke in the prophets. For John was of the circumcision, and all that
 people which had heard the announcement of the Old Testament was
 edified with his word.

 "That very same voice," said he, "that I had heard, that said unto me,
 Come up hither."] That is the Spirit, whom a little before he confesses
 that he had seen walking as the Son of man in the midst of the golden
 candlesticks. And he now gathers from Him what had been foretold in
 similitudes by the law, and associates with this scripture all the
 former prophets, and opens up the Scriptures. And because our Lord
 invited in His own name all believers into heaven, He forthwith poured
 out the Holy Spirit, who should bring them to heaven. He says:--

 2. "Immediately I was in the Spirit."] And since the mind of the
 faithful is opened by the Holy Spirit, and that is manifested to them
 which was also foretold to the fathers, he distinctly says:--

 "And, behold, a throne was set in heaven."] The throne set: what is it
 but the throne of judgment and of the King?

 3. "And He that sat upon the throne was, to look upon, like a jasper
 and a sardine stone."] Upon the throne he says that he saw the likeness
 of a jasper and a sardine stone. The jasper is of the colour of water,
 the sardine of fire. These two are thence manifested to be placed as
 judgments upon God's tribunal until the consummation of the world, of
 which judgments one is already completed in the deluge of water, and
 the other shall be completed by fire.

 "And there was a rainbow about the throne."] Moreover, the rainbow
 round about the throne has the same colours. The rainbow is called a
 bow from what the Lord spake to Noah and to his sons, [2264] that they
 should not fear any further deluge in the generation of God, but fire.
 For thus He says: I will place my bow in the clouds, that ye may now no
 longer fear water, but fire.

 6. "And before the throne there was, as it were, a sea of glass like to
 crystal."] That is the gift of baptism which He sheds forth through His
 Son in time of repentance, before He executes judgment. It is therefore
 before the throne, that is, the judgment. And when he says a sea of
 glass like to crystal, he shows that it is pure water, smooth, not
 agitated by the wind, not flowing down as on a slope, but given to be
 immoveable as the house of God.

 "And round about the throne were four living creatures."] The four
 living creatures are the four Gospels.

 7-10. "The first living creature was like to a lion, and the second was
 like to a calf, and the third had a face like to a man, and the fourth
 was like to a flying eagle; and they had six wings, and round about and
 within they were full of eyes; and they had no rest, saying, Holy,
 holy, holy, Lord Omnipotent. And the four and twenty elders, falling
 down before the throne, adored God."] The four and twenty elders are
 the twenty-four books of the prophets and of the law, which give
 testimonies of the judgment. Moreover, also, they are the twenty-four
 fathers--twelve apostles and twelve patriarchs. And in that the living
 creatures are different in appearance, this is the reason: the living
 creature like to a lion designates Mark, in whom is heard the voice of
 the lion roaring in the desert. And in the figure of a man, Matthew
 strives to declare to us the genealogy of Mary, from whom Christ took
 flesh. Therefore, in enumerating from Abraham to David, and thence to
 Joseph, he spoke of Him as if of a man: therefore his announcement sets
 forth the image of a man. Luke, in narrating the priesthood of
 Zacharias as he offers a sacrifice for the people, and the angel that
 appears to him with respect of the priesthood, and the victim in the
 same description bore the likeness of a calf. John the evangelist, like
 to an eagle hastening on uplifted wings to greater heights, argues
 about the Word of God. Mark, therefore, as an evangelist thus
 beginning, "The beginning of the Gospel of Jesus Christ, as it is
 written in Isaiah the prophet;" [2265] The voice of one crying in the
 wilderness," [2266] --has the effigy of a lion. And Matthew, "The book
 of the generation of Jesus Christ, the son of David, the son of
 Abraham:" [2267] this is the form of a man. But Luke said, "There was a
 priest, by name Zachariah, of the course of Abia, and his wife was of
 the daughters of Aaron:" [2268] this is the likeness of a calf. But
 John, when he begins, "In the beginning was the Word, and the Word was
 with God, and the Word was God," [2269] sets forth the likeness of a
 flying eagle. Moreover, not only do the evangelists express their four
 similitudes in their respective openings of the Gospels, but also the
 Word itself of God the Father Omnipotent, which is His Son our Lord
 Jesus Christ, bears the same likeness in the time of His advent. When
 He preaches to us, He is, as it were, a lion and a lion's whelp. And
 when for man's salvation He was made man to overcome death, and to set
 all men free, and that He offered Himself a victim to the Father on our
 behalf, He was called a calf. And that He overcame death and ascended
 into the heavens, extending His wings and protecting His people, He was
 named a flying eagle. Therefore these announcements, although they are
 four, yet are one, because it proceeded from one mouth. Even as the
 river in paradise, although it is one, was divided into four heads.
 Moreover, that for the announcement of the New Testament those living
 creatures had eyes within and without, shows the spiritual providence
 which both looks into the secrets of the heart, and beholds the things
 which are coming after that are within and without.

 8. "Six wings."] These are the testimonies of the books of the Old
 Testament. Thus, twenty and four make as many as there are elders
 sitting upon the thrones. But as an animal cannot fly unless it have
 wings, so, too, the announcement of the New Testament gains no faith
 unless it have the fore-announced testimonies of the Old Testament, by
 which it is lifted from the earth, and flies. For in every case, what
 has been told before, and is afterwards found to have happened, that
 begets an undoubting faith. Again, also, if wings be not attached to
 the living creatures, they have nothing whence they may draw their
 life. For unless what the prophets foretold had been consummated in
 Christ, their preaching was vain. For the Catholic Church holds those
 things which were both before predicted and afterwards accomplished.
 And it flies, because the living animal is reasonably lifted up from
 the earth. But to heretics who do not avail themselves of the prophetic
 testimony, to them also there are present living creatures; but they do
 not fly, because they are of the earth. And to the Jews who do not
 receive the announcement of the New Testament there are present wings;
 but they do not fly, that is, they bring a vain prophesying to men, not
 adjusting facts to their words. And the books of the Old Testament that
 are received are twenty-four, which you will find in the epitomes of
 Theodore. But, moreover (as we have said), four and twenty elders,
 patriarchs and apostles, are to judge His people. For to the apostles,
 when they asked, saying, "We have forsaken all that we had, and
 followed Thee: what shall we have?" our Lord replied, "When the Son of
 man shall sit upon the throne of His glory, ye also shall sit upon
 twelve thrones, judging the twelve tribes of Israel." [2270] But of the
 fathers also who should judge, says the patriarch Jacob, "Dan also
 himself shall judge his people among his brethren, even as one of the
 tribes in Israel." [2271]

 5. "And from the throne proceeded lightnings, and voices, and thunders,
 and seven torches of fire burning."] And the lightnings, and voices,
 and thunders proceeding from the throne of God, and the seven torches
 of fire burning, signify announcements, and promises of adoption, and
 threatenings. For lightnings signify the Lord's advent, and the voices
 the announcements of the New Testament, and the thunders, that the
 words are from heaven. The burning torches of fire signify the gift of
 the Holy Spirit, that it is given by the wood of the passion. And when
 these things were doing, he says that all the elders fell down and
 adored the Lord; while the living creatures--that is, of course, the
 actions recorded in the Gospels and the teaching of the Lord--gave Him
 glory and honour. [2272] In that they had fulfilled the word that had
 been previously foretold by them, they worthily and with reason exult,
 feeling that they have ministered the mysteries and the word of the
 Lord. Finally, also, because He had come who should remove death, and
 who alone was worthy to take the crown of immortality, all for the
 glory of His most excellent doing had crowns.

 10. "And they cast their crowns under His feet."] That is, on account
 of the eminent glory of Christ's victory, they cast all their victories
 under His feet. This is what in the Gospel the Holy Spirit consummated
 by showing, For when about finally to suffer, our Lord had come to
 Jerusalem, and the people had gone forth to meet Him, some strewed the
 road with palm branches cut down, others threw down their garments,
 doubtless these were setting forth two peoples--the one of the
 patriarchs, the other of the prophets; that is to say, of the great men
 who had any kind of palms of their victories against sin, and cast them
 under the feet of Christ, the victor of all. And the palm and the crown
 signify the same things, and these are not given save to the victor.

 [2264] Gen. ix. [Wordsworth, Lect. iv.]

 [2265] Mark i. 3. [On the Zoa, see [216]p. 341, supra.]

 [2266] Isa. xl. 3.

 [2267] Matt. i. 1.

 [2268] Luke i. 5.

 [2269] John i. 1.

 [2270] Matt. xix. 27, 28.

 [2271] Gen. xlix. 16.

 [2272] The living creatures are held to be the Gospels, or the acts and
 teaching of our Lord narrated in them. [Wordsworth, Lect. iv.]

 from the fifth chapter.

 1. "And I saw in the right hand of Him that sat upon the throne, a book
 written within and without, sealed with seven seals."] This book
 signifies the Old Testament, which has been given into the hands of our
 Lord Jesus Christ, who received from the Father judgment.

 2, 3. "And I saw an angel full of strength proclaiming with a loud
 voice, Who is worthy to open the book, and to loose the seals thereof?
 And no one was found worthy, neither in the earth nor under the earth,
 to open the book."] Now to open the book is to overcome death for man.

 4. "There was none found worthy to do this."] Neither among the angels
 of heaven, nor among men in earth, nor among the souls of the saints in
 rest, save Christ the Son of God alone, whom he says that he saw as a
 Lamb standing as it were slain, having seven horns. What had not been
 then announced, and what the law had contemplated for Him by its
 various oblations and sacrifices, it behoved Himself to fulfil. And
 because He Himself was the testator, who had overcome death, it was
 just that Himself should be appointed the Lord's heir, that He should
 possess the substance of the dying man, that is, the human members.

 5. "Lo, the Lion of the tribe of Judah, the root of David, hath
 prevailed."] We read in Genesis that this lion of the tribe of Judah
 hath conquered, when the patriarch Jacob says, "Judah, thy brethren
 shall praise thee; thou hast lain down and slept, and hast risen up
 again as a lion, and as a lion's whelp." [2273] For He is called a lion
 for the overcoming of death; but for the suffering for men He was led
 as a lamb to the slaughter. But because He overcame death, and
 anticipated the duty of the executioner, He was called as it were
 slain. He therefore opens and seals again the testament, which He
 Himself had sealed. The legislator Moses intimating this, that it
 behoved Him to be sealed and concealed, even to the advent of His
 passion, veiled his face, and so spoke to the people; showing that the
 words of his announcement were veiled even to the advent of His time.
 For he himself, when he had read to the people, having taken the wool
 purpled with the blood of the calf, with water sprinkled the whole
 people, saying, "This is the blood of His testament who hath purified
 you." [2274] It should therefore be observed that the Man is accurately
 announced, and that all things combine into one. For it is not
 sufficient that that law is spoken of, but it is named as a testament.
 For no law is called a testament, nor is any thing else called a
 testament, save what persons make who are about to die. And whatever is
 within the testament is sealed, even to the day of the testator's
 death. Therefore it is with reason that it is only sealed by the Lamb
 slain, who, as it were a lion, has broken death in pieces, and has
 fulfilled what had been foretold; and has delivered man, that is, the
 flesh, from death, and has received as a possession the substance of
 the dying person, that is, of the human members; that as by one body
 all men had fallen under the obligation of its death, also by one body
 all believers should be born again unto life, and rise again.
 Reasonably, therefore, His face is opened and unveiled to Moses; and
 therefore He is called Apocalypse, Revelation. For now His book is
 unsealed--now the offered victims are perceived--now the fabrication of
 the priestly chrism; moreover the testimonies are openly understood.

 8, 9. "Twenty-four elders and four living creatures, having harps and
 phials, and singing a new song."] The proclamation of the Old Testament
 associated with the New, points out the Christian people singing a new
 song, that is, bearing their confession publicly. It is a new thing
 that the Son of God should become man. It is a new thing to ascend into
 the heavens with a body. It is a new thing to give remission of sins to
 men. It is a new thing for men to be sealed with the Holy Spirit. It is
 a new thing to receive the priesthood of sacred observance, and to look
 for a kingdom of unbounded promise. The harp, and the chord stretched
 on its wooden frame, signifies the flesh of Christ linked with the wood
 of the passion. The phial signifies the Confession, [2275] and the race
 of the new Priesthood. But it is the praise of many angels, yea, of
 all, the salvation of all, and the testimony of the universal creation,
 bringing to our Lord thanksgiving for the deliverance of men from the
 destruction of death. The unsealing of the seals, as we have said, is
 the opening of the Old Testament, and the foretelling of the preachers
 of things to come in the last times, which, although the prophetic
 Scripture speaks by single seals, yet by all the seals opened at once,
 prophecy takes its rank.

 [2273] Gen. xlix. 8, 9.

 [2274] Ex. xxiv. 7, 8.

 [2275] [The Creed and the evangelical priests. Vol. ii. [217]note 4, p.
 173.]

 from the sixth chapter.

 1, 2. "And when the Lamb had opened one of the seven seals, I saw, and
 heard one of the four living creatures saying, Come and see. And, lo, a
 white horse, and He who sat upon him had a bow." ] The first seal being
 opened, he says that he saw a white horse, and a crowned horseman
 having a bow. For this was at first done by Himself. For after the Lord
 ascended into heaven and opened all things, He sent the Holy Spirit,
 whose words the preachers sent forth as arrows reaching to the human
 heart, that they might overcome unbelief. And the crown on the head is
 promised to the preachers by the Holy Spirit. The other three horses
 very plainly signify the wars, famines, and pestilences announced by
 our Lord in the Gospel. And thus he says that one of the four living
 creatures said (because all four are one), "Come and see." "Come" is
 said to him that is invited to faith; "see" is said to him who saw not.
 Therefore the white horse is the word of preaching with the Holy Spirit
 sent into the world. For the Lord says, "This Gospel shall be preached
 throughout the whole world for a testimony to all nations, and then
 shall come the end." [2276]

 3, 4. "And when He had opened the second seal, I heard the second
 living creature saying, Come and see. And there went out another horse
 that was red, and to him that sat upon him was given a great sword."]
 The red horse, and he that sat upon him, having a sword, signify the
 coming wars, as we read in the Gospel: "For nation shall rise against
 nation, and kingdom against kingdom; and there shall be great
 earthquakes in divers places." [2277] This is the ruddy horse.

 5. "And when He had opened the third seal, I heard the third living
 creature saying, Come and see. And, lo, a black horse; and he who sat
 upon it had a balance in his hand."] The black horse signifies famine,
 for the Lord says, "There shall be famines in divers places;" but the
 word is specially extended to the times of Antichrist, when there shall
 be a great famine, and when all shall be injured. Moreover, the balance
 in the hand is the examining scales, wherein He might show forth the
 merits of every individual. He then says:--

 6. "Hurt not the wine and the oil."] That is, strike not the spiritual
 man with thy inflictions. This is the black horse.

 7, 8. "And when He had opened the fourth seal, I heard the fourth
 living creature saying, Come and see. And, lo, a pale horse; and he who
 sat upon him was named Death."] For the pale horse and he who sat upon
 him bore the name of Death. These same things also the Lord had
 promised among the rest of the coming destructions--great pestilences
 and deaths; since, moreover, he says:--

 "And hell followed him."] That is, it was waiting for the devouring of
 many unrighteous souls. This is the pale horse.

 9. "And when He had opened the fifth seal, I saw under the altar the
 souls of them that were slain."] He relates that he saw under the altar
 of God, that is, under the earth, the souls of them that were slain.
 For both heaven and earth are called God's altar, as saith the law,
 commanding in the symbolical form of the truth two altars to be
 made,--a golden one within, and a brazen one without. But we perceive
 that the golden altar is thus called heaven, by the testimony that our
 Lord bears to it; for He says, "When thou bringest thy gift to the
 altar" (assuredly our gifts are the prayers which we offer), "and there
 rememberest that thy brother hath ought against thee, leave there thy
 gift before the altar." [2278] Assuredly prayers ascend to heaven.
 Therefore heaven is understood to be the golden altar which was within;
 for the priests also were accustomed to enter once in the year--as they
 who had the anointing--to the golden altar, the Holy Spirit signifying
 that Christ should do this once for all. As the golden altar is
 acknowledged to be heaven, so also by the brazen altar is understood
 the earth, under which is the Hades,--a region withdrawn from
 punishments and fires, and a place of repose for the saints, wherein
 indeed the righteous are seen and heard by the wicked, but they cannot
 be carried across to them. He who sees all things would have us to know
 that these saints, therefore--that is, the souls of the slain--are
 asking for vengeance for their blood, that is, of their body, from
 those that dwell upon the earth; but because in the last time,
 moreover, the reward of the saints will be perpetual, and the
 condemnation of the wicked shall come, it was told them to wait. And
 for a solace to their body, there were given unto each of them white
 robes. They received, says he, white robes, that is, the gift of the
 Holy Spirit.

 12. "And I saw, when he had opened the sixth seal, there was a great
 earthquake."] In the sixth seal, then, was a great earthquake: this is
 that very last persecution.

 "And the sun became black as sackcloth of hair."] The sun becomes as
 sackcloth; that is, the brightness of doctrine will be obscured by
 unbelievers.

 "And the entire moon became as blood."] By the moon of blood is set
 forth the Church of the saints as pouring out her blood for Christ.

 13. "And the stars fell to the earth."] The falling of the stars are
 the faithful who are troubled for Christ's sake.

 "Even as a fig-tree casteth her untimely figs."] The fig-tree, when
 shaken, loses its untimely figs--when men are separated from the Church
 by persecution.

 14. "And the heaven withdrew as a scroll that is rolled up."] For the
 heaven to be rolled away, that is, that the Church shall be taken away.

 "And every mountain and the islands were moved from their places."]
 Mountains and islands removed from their places intimate that in the
 last persecution all men departed from their places; that is, that the
 good will be removed, seeking to avoid the persecution.

 [2276] Matt. xxiv. 14

 [2277] Luke xxi. 10, 11

 [2278] Matt. v. 23, 24

 from the seventh chapter.

 2. "And I saw another angel ascending from the east, having the seal of
 the living God."] He speaks of Elias the prophet, who is the precursor
 of the times of Antichrist, for the restoration and establishment of
 the churches from the great and intolerable persecution. We read that
 these things are predicted in the opening of the Old and New Testament;
 for He says by Malachi: "Lo, I will send to you Elias the Tishbite, to
 turn the hearts of the fathers to the children, according to the time
 of calling, to recall the Jews to the faith of the people that succeed
 them." [2279] And to that end He shows, as we have said, that the
 number of those that shall believe, of the Jews and of the nations, is
 a great multitude which no man was able to number. Moreover, we read in
 the Gospel that the prayers of the Church are sent from heaven by an
 angel, and that they are received against wrath, and that the kingdom
 of Antichrist is cast out and extinguished by holy angels; for He says:
 "Pray that ye enter not into temptation: for there shall be a great
 affliction, such as has not been from the beginning of the world; and
 except the Lord had shortened those days, no flesh should be saved."
 [2280] Therefore He shall send these seven great archangels to smite
 the kingdom of Antichrist; for He Himself also thus said: "Then the Son
 of man shall send His messengers; and they shall gather together His
 elect from the four corners of the wind, from the one end of heaven
 even to the other end thereof." [2281] For, moreover, He previously
 says by the prophet: "Then shall there be peace for our land, when
 there shall arise in it seven shepherds and eight attacks of men; and
 they shall encircle Assur," that is, Antichrist, "in the trench of
 Nimrod," [2282] that is, in the nation of the devil, by the spirit of
 the Church. Similarly when the keepers of the house shall be moved.
 Moreover, the Lord Himself, in the parable to the apostles, when the
 labourers had come to Him and said, "Lord, did not we sow good seed in
 Thy field? whence, then, hath it tares? answered them, An enemy hath
 done this. And they said to Him, Lord, wilt Thou, then, that we go and
 root them up? And He said, Nay, but let both grow together until the
 harvest; and in the time of the harvest I will say to the reapers, that
 they gather the tares and make bundles of them, and burn them with fire
 everlasting, but that they gather the wheat into my barns." [2283] The
 Apocalypse here shows, therefore, that these reapers, and shepherds,
 and labourers, are the angels. And the trumpet is the word of power.
 And although the same thing recurs in the phials, still it is not said
 as if it occurred twice, but because what is decreed by the Lord to
 happen shall be once for all; for this cause it is said twice. What,
 therefore, He said too little in the trumpets, is here found in the
 phials. We must not regard the order of what is said, because
 frequently the Holy Spirit, when He has traversed even to the end of
 the last times, returns again to the same times, and fills up what He
 had before failed to say. [2284] Nor must we look for order in the
 Apocalypse; but we must follow the meaning of those things which are
 prophesied. Therefore in the trumpets and phials is signified either
 the desolation of the plagues that are sent upon the earth, or the
 madness of Antichrist himself, or the cutting off of the peoples, or
 the diversity of the plagues, or the hope in the kingdom of the saints,
 or the ruin of states, or the great overthrow of Babylon, that is, the
 Roman state.

 9. "After this I beheld, and, lo, a great multitude, which no man was
 able to number, of every nation, tribe, and people, and tongue, clothed
 with white robes."] What the great multitude out of every tribe
 implies, is to show the number of the elect out of all believers, who,
 being cleansed by baptism in the blood of the Lamb, have made their
 robes white, keeping the grace which they have received.

 [2279] Mal. iv. 5, 6

 [2280] Mark xiii. 18-20.

 [2281] Mark xiii. 27.

 [2282] Mic. v. 5, 6.

 [2283] Matt. xiii. 27-30.

 [2284] [The rule of Mede's "Synchronisms."]

 from the eighth chapter.

 1. "And when He had opened the seventh seal, there was silence in
 heaven for about half an hour."] Whereby is signified the beginning of
 everlasting rest; but it is described as partial, because the silence
 being interrupted, he repeats it in order. For if the silence had
 continued, here would be an end of his narrative.

 13. "And I saw an angel flying through the midst of heaven."] By the
 angel flying through the midst of heaven is signified the Holy Spirit
 bearing witness in two of the prophets that a great wrath of plagues
 was imminent. If by any means, even in the last times, any one should
 be willing to be converted, any one might even still be saved.

 from the ninth chapter.

 13, 14. "And I heard a voice from the four horns of the golden altar
 which is in the presence of God, saying to the sixth angel which had
 the trumpet, Loose the four angels."] That is, the four corners of the
 earth which hold the four winds.

 "Which are bound in the great river Euphrates."] By the corners of the
 earth, or the four winds across the river Euphrates, are meant four
 nations, because to every nation is sent an angel; as said the law, "He
 determined them by the number of the angels of God," [2285] until the
 number of the saints should be filled up. They do not overpass their
 bounds, because at the last they shall come with Antichrist.

 [2285] Deut. xxxii. 8


 from the tenth chapter.

 1, 2. "I saw another mighty angel coming down from heaven, clothed with
 a cloud; and a rainbow was upon his head, and his face was as it were
 the sun, and his feet as pillars of fire: and he had in his hand an
 open book: and he set his right foot upon the sea, and his left foot
 upon the earth."] He signifies that that mighty angel who, he says,
 descended from heaven, clothed with a cloud, is our Lord, as we have
 above narrated.

 "His face was as it were the sun."] That is, with respect to the
 resurrection.

 "Upon his head was a rainbow."] He points to the judgment which is
 executed by Him, or shall be.

 "An open book."] A revelation of works in the future judgment, or the
 Apocalypse which John received.

 "His feet,"] as we have said above, are the apostles. For that both
 things in sea and land are trodden under foot by Him, signifies that
 all things are placed under His feet. Moreover, he calls Him an angel,
 that is, a messenger, to wit, of the Father; for He is called the
 Messenger of great counsel. He says also that He cried with a loud
 voice. The great voice is to tell the words of the Omnipotent God of
 heaven to men, and to bear witness that after penitence is closed there
 will be no hope subsequently.

 3. "Seven thunders uttered their voices."] The seven thunders uttering
 their voices signify the Holy Spirit of sevenfold power, who through
 the prophets announced all things to come, and by His voice John gave
 his testimony in the world; but because he says that he was about to
 write the things which the thunders had uttered, that is, whatever
 things had been obscure in the announcements of the Old Testament; he
 is forbidden to write them, but he was charged to leave them sealed,
 because he is an apostle, nor was it fitting that the grace of the
 subsequent stage should be given in the first. "The time," says he, "is
 at hand." [2286] For the apostles, by powers, by signs, by portents,
 and by mighty works, have overcome unbelief. After them there is now
 given to the same completed Churches the comfort of having the
 prophetic Scriptures subsequently interpreted, for I said that after
 the apostles there would be interpreting prophets.

 For the apostle says: "And he placed in the Church indeed, first,
 apostles; secondly, prophets; thirdly, teachers," [2287] and the rest.
 And in another place he says: "Let the prophets speak two or three, and
 let the others judge." [2288] And he says: "Every woman that prayeth or
 prophesieth with her head uncovered, dishonoureth her head." [2289] And
 when he says, "Let the prophets speak two or three, and let the others
 judge," he is not speaking in respect of the Catholic prophecy of
 things unheard and unknown, but of things both announced and known. But
 let them judge whether or not the interpretation is consistent with the
 testimonies of the prophetic utterance. [2290] It is plain, therefore,
 that to John, armed as he was with superior virtue, this was not
 necessary, although the body of Christ, which is the Church, adorned
 with His members, ought to respond to its position.

 10. "I took the book from the hand of the angel, and ate it up."] To
 take the book and eat it up, is, when exhibition of a thing is made to
 one, to commit it to memory.

 "And it was in my mouth as sweet as honey."] To be sweet in the mouth
 is the reward of the preaching of the speaker, and is most pleasant to
 the hearers; but it is most bitter both to those that announce it, and
 to those that persevere in its commandments through suffering.

 11. "And He says unto me, Thou must again prophesy to the peoples, and
 to the tongues, and to the nations, and to many kings."] He says this,
 because when John said these things he was in the island of Patmos,
 condemned to the labour of the mines by Cæsar Domitian. There,
 therefore, he saw the Apocalypse; and when grown old, he thought that
 he should at length receive his quittance by suffering, Domitian being
 killed, all his judgments were discharged. And John being dismissed
 from the mines, thus subsequently delivered the same Apocalypse which
 he had received from God. This, therefore, is what He says: Thou must
 again prophesy to all nations, because thou seest the crowds of
 Antichrist rise up; and against them other crowds shall stand, and they
 shall fall by the sword on the one side and on the other.

 [2286] Rev. i. 3, xxii. 10.

 [2287] 1 Cor. xii. 28.

 [2288] 1 Cor. xiv. 29.

 [2289] 1 Cor. xi. 5.

 [2290] [Some excuse for Tertullian's lapse is found in the prevailing
 uncertainty about the withdrawal of prophetic gifts.]

 from the eleventh chapter.

 1. "And there was shown unto me a reed like unto a rod: and the angel
 stood, saying, Rise, and measure the temple of God, and the altar, and
 them that worship therein."] A reed was shown like to a rod. This
 itself is the Apocalypse which he subsequently exhibited to the
 churches; for the Gospel of the complete faith he subsequently wrote
 for the sake of our salvation. For when Valentinus, and Cerinthus, and
 Ebion, and others of the school of Satan, were scattered abroad
 throughout the world, there assembled together to him from the
 neighbouring provinces all the bishops, and compelled him himself also
 to draw up his testimony. Moreover, we say that the measure of God's
 temple is the command of God to confess the Father Almighty, and that
 His Son Christ was begotten by the Father before the beginning of the
 world, and was made man in very soul and flesh, both of them having
 overcome misery and death; and that, when received with His body into
 heaven by the Father, He shed forth the Holy Spirit, the gift and
 pledge of immortality, that He was announced by the prophets, He was
 described by the law, He was God's hand, and the Word of the Father
 from God, Lord over all, and founder of the world: this is the reed and
 the measure of faith; and no one worships the holy altar save he who
 confesses this faith.

 2. "The court which is within the temple leave out."] The space which
 is called the court is the empty altar within the walls: these being
 such as were not necessary, he commanded to be ejected from the Church.

 "It is given to be trodden down by the Gentiles."] That is, to the men
 of this world, that it may be trodden under foot by the nations, or
 with the nations. Then he repeats about the destruction and slaughter
 of the last time, and says:--

 3. "They shall tread the holy city down for forty and two months; and I
 will give to my two witnesses, and they shall predict a thousand two
 hundred and threescore days clothed in sackcloth."] That is, three
 years and six months: these make forty-two months. Therefore their
 preaching is three years and six months, and the kingdom of Antichrist
 as much again.

 5. "If any man will hurt them, fire proceedeth out of their mouth, and
 devoureth their enemies."] That fire proceedeth out of the mouth of
 those prophets against the adversaries, bespeaks the power of the
 world. For all afflictions, however many there are, shall be sent by
 their messengers in their word. Many think that there is Elisha, or
 Moses, with Elijah; but both of these died; while the death of Elijah
 is not heard of, with whom all our ancients have believed that it was
 Jeremiah. For even the very word spoken to him testifies to him,
 saying, "Before I formed thee in the belly I knew thee; and before thou
 camest forth out of the womb I sanctified thee, and I ordained thee a
 prophet unto the nations." [2291] But he was not a prophet unto the
 nations; and thus the truthful word of God makes it necessary, which it
 has promised to set forth, that he should be a prophet to the nations.

 4. "These are the two candlesticks standing before the Lord of the
 earth."] These two candlesticks and two olive trees He has to this end
 spoken of, and admonished you that if, when you have read of them
 elsewhere, you have not understood, you may understand here. For in
 Zechariah, one of the twelve prophets, it is thus written: "These are
 the two olive trees and two candlesticks which stand in the presence of
 the Lord of the earth;" [2292] that is, they are in paradise. Also, in
 another sense, standing in the presence of the lord of the earth, that
 is, in the presence of Antichrist. Therefore they must be slain by
 Antichrist.

 7. "And the beast which ascendeth from the abyss."] After many plagues
 completed in the world, in the end he says that a beast ascended from
 the abyss. But that he shall ascend from the abyss is proved by many
 testimonies; for he says in the thirty-first chapter of Ezekiel:
 "Behold, Assur was a cypress in Mount Lebanon." Assur, deeply rooted,
 was a lofty and branching cypress--that is, a numerous people--in Mount
 Lebanon, in the kingdom of kingdoms, that is, of the Romans. Moreover,
 that he says he was beautiful in offshoots, he says he was strong in
 armies. The water, he says, shall nourish him, that is, the many
 thousands of men which were subjected to him; and the abyss increased
 him, that is, belched him forth. For even Isaiah speaks almost in the
 same words; moreover, that he was in the kingdom of the Romans, and
 that he was among the Cæsars. The Apostle Paul also bears witness, for
 he says to the Thessalonians: "Let him who now restraineth restrain,
 until he be taken out of the way; and then shall appear that Wicked
 One, even he whose coming is after the working of Satan, with signs and
 lying wonders." [2293] And that they might know that he should come who
 then was the prince, he added: "He already endeavours after the secret
 of mischief" [2294] --that is, the mischief which he is about to do he
 strives to do secretly; but he is not raised up by his own power, nor
 by that of his father, but by command of God, of which thing Paul says
 in the same passage: "For this cause, because they have not received
 the love of God, He will send upon them a spirit of error, that they
 all may be persuaded of a lie, who have not been persuaded of the
 truth." [2295] And Isaiah saith: "While they waited for the light,
 darkness arose upon them." [2296] Therefore the Apocalypse sets forth
 that these prophets are killed by the same, and on the fourth day rise
 again, that none might be found equal to God.

 8. "And their dead bodies shall lie in the streets of the great city,
 which spiritually is called Sodom and Egypt."] But He calls Jerusalem
 Sodom and Egypt, since it had become the heaping up of the persecuting
 people. Therefore it behooves us diligently, and with the utmost care,
 to follow the prophetic announcement, and to understand what the Spirit
 from the Father both announces and anticipates, and how, when He has
 gone forward to the last times, He again repeats the former ones. And
 now, what He will do once for all, He sometimes sets forth as if it
 were done; and unless you understand this, as sometimes done, and
 sometimes as about to be done, you will fall into a great confusion.
 Therefore the interpretation of the following sayings has shown
 therein, that not the order of the reading, but the order of the
 discourse, must be understood.

 19. "And the temple of God was opened which is in heaven."] The temple
 opened is a manifestation of our Lord. For the temple of God is the
 Son, as He Himself says: "Destroy this temple, and in three days I will
 raise it up." And when the Jews said, "Forty and six years was this
 temple in building," the evangelist says, "He spake of the temple of
 His body." [2297]

 "And there was seen in His temple the ark of the Lord's testament."]
 The preaching of the Gospel and the forgiveness of sins, and all the
 gifts whatever that came with Him, he says, appeared therein.

 [2291] Jer i. 5.

 [2292] Zech. iv. 14.

 [2293] 2 Thess. ii. 7, 8, 9.

 [2294] 2 Thess. ii. 10.

 [2295] 2 Thess. ii. 11.

 [2296] Isa. lix. 9.

 [2297] John ii. 19, 20, 21

 from the twelfth chapter.

 1. "And there was seen a great sign in heaven. A woman clothed with the
 sun, and the moon under her feet, and on her head a crown of twelve
 stars. And being with child, she cried out travailing, and bearing
 torments that she might bring forth."] The woman clothed with the sun,
 and having the moon under her feet, and wearing a crown of twelve stars
 upon her head, and travailing in her pains, is the ancient Church of
 fathers, and prophets, and saints, and apostles, [2298] which had the
 groans and torments of its longing until it saw that Christ, the fruit
 of its people according to the flesh long promised to it, had taken
 flesh out of the selfsame people. Moreover, being clothed with the sun
 intimates the hope of resurrection and the glory of the promise. And
 the moon intimates the fall of the bodies of the saints under the
 obligation of death, which never can fail. For even as life is
 diminished, so also it is increased. Nor is the hope of those that
 sleep extinguished absolutely, as some think, but they have in their
 darkness a light such as the moon. And the crown of twelve stars
 signifies the choir of fathers, according to the fleshly birth, of whom
 Christ was to take flesh.

 3. "And there appeared another sign in heaven; and behold a red dragon,
 having seven heads."] Now, that he says that this dragon was of a red
 colour--that is, of a purple colour--the result of his work gave him
 such a colour. For from the beginning (as the Lord says) he was a
 murderer; and he has oppressed the whole of the human race, not so much
 by the obligation of death, as, moreover, by the various forms of
 destruction and fatal mischiefs. His seven heads were the seven kings
 of the Romans, of whom also is Antichrist, as we have said above.

 "And ten horns."] He says that the ten kings in the latest times are
 the same as these, as we shall more fully set forth there.

 4. "And his tail drew the third part of the stars of heaven, and cast
 them upon the earth."] Now, that he says that the dragon's tail drew
 the third part of the stars of heaven, this may be taken in two ways.
 For many think that he may be able to seduce the third part of the men
 who believe. [2299] But it should more truly be understood, that of the
 angels that were subject to him, since he was still a prince when he
 descended from his estate, he seduced the third part; therefore what we
 said above, the Apocalypse says.

 "And the dragon stood before the woman who was beginning to bring
 forth, that, when she had brought forth, he might devour her child."]
 The red dragon standing and desiring to devour her child when she had
 brought him forth, is the devil,--to wit, the traitor angel, who
 thought that the perishing of all men would be alike by death; but He,
 who was not born of seed, owed nothing to death: wherefore he could not
 devour Him--that is, detain Him in death--for on the third day He rose
 again. Finally, also, and before He suffered, he approached to tempt
 Him as man; but when he found that He was not what he thought Him to
 be, he departed from Him, even till the time. Whence it is here said:--

 5. "And she brought forth a son, who begins to rule all nations with a
 rod of iron."] The rod of iron is the sword of persecution.

 "I saw that all men withdrew from his abodes."] That is, the good will
 be removed, flying from persecution. [2300]

 "And her son was caught up to God, and to His throne."] We read also in
 the Acts of the Apostles that He was caught up to God's throne, just as
 speaking with the disciples He was caught up to heaven.

 6. "But the woman fled into the wilderness, and there were given to her
 two great eagle's wings."] The aid of the great eagle's wings--to wit,
 the gift of prophets--was given to that Catholic Church, whence in the
 last times a hundred and forty-four thousands of men should believe on
 the preaching of Elias; but, moreover, he here says that the rest of
 the people should be found alive on the coming of the Lord. And the
 Lord says in the Gospel: "Then let them which are in Judea flee to the
 mountains;" [2301] that is, as many as should be gathered together in
 Judea, let them go to that place which they have ready, and let them be
 supported there for three years and six months from the presence of the
 devil.

 14. "Two great wings"] are the two prophets--Elias, and the prophet who
 shall be with him.

 15. "And the serpent cast out of his mouth after the woman water as a
 flood, that he might carry her away with the flood."] He signifies by
 the water which the serpent cast out of his mouth, the people who at
 his command would persecute her.

 16. "And the earth helped the woman, and opened her mouth, and
 swallowed up the flood which the dragon cast out of his mouth."] That
 the earth opened her month and swallowed up the waters, sets forth the
 vengeance for the present troubles. Although, therefore, it may signify
 this woman bringing forth, it shows her afterwards flying when her
 offspring is brought forth, because both things did not happen at one
 time; for we know that Christ was born, but that the time should arrive
 that she should flee from the face of the serpent: (we do not know)
 that this has happened as yet. Then he says:--

 7-9. "There was a battle in heaven: Michael and his angels fought with
 the dragon; and the dragon warred, and his angels, and they prevailed
 not; nor was their place found any more in heaven. And that great
 dragon was cast forth, that old serpent: he was cast forth into the
 earth."] This is the beginning of Antichrist; yet previously Elias must
 prophesy, and there must be times of peace. And afterwards, when the
 three years and six months are completed in the preaching of Elias, he
 also must be cast down from heaven, where up till that time he had had
 the power of ascending; and all the apostate angels, as well as
 Antichrist, must be roused up from hell. Paul the apostle says: "Except
 there come a falling away first, and the man of sin shall appear, the
 son of perdition; and the adversary who exalted himself above all which
 is called God, or which is worshipped." [2302]

 [2298] [No hint here that this was a manifestation of the Blessed
 Virgin, the modern fiction of Rome. See vol. vi, [218]p. 355, this
 series.]

 [2299] [A noteworthy testimony to primitive interpretation.]

 [2300] [Compare Tertullian, De Fuga, vol. iv. [219]p. 117, this
 series.]

 [2301] Luke xxi. 21.

 [2302] 2 Thess. ii. 3, 4.

 from the thirteenth chapter. [2303]

 1. "And I saw a beast rising up from the sea, like unto a leopard."]
 This signifies the kingdom of that time of Antichrist, and the people
 mingled with the variety of nations.

 2. "His feet were as the feet of a bear."] A strong and most unclean
 beast, the feet are to be understood as his leaders.

 "And his mouth as the mouth of a lion."] That is, his mouth armed for
 blood is his bidding, and a tongue which will proceed to nothing else
 than to the shedding of blood.

 * * * * * * * *

 18. "His number is the name of a man, and his number is Six hundred
 threescore and six."] As they have it reckoned from the Greek
 characters, they thus find it among many to be teitan, for teitan has
 this number, which the Gentiles call Sol and Phoebus; and it is
 reckoned in Greek thus: t three hundred, e five, i ten, t three
 hundred, a one, n fifty,--which taken together become six hundred and
 sixty-six. For as far as belongs to the Greek letters, they fill up
 this number and name; which name if you wish to turn into Latin, it is
 understood by the antiphrase DICLUX, which letters are reckoned in this
 manner: since D figures five hundred, I one, C a hundred, L fifty, V
 five, X ten,--which by the reckoning up of the letters makes similarly
 six hundred and sixty-six, that is, what in Greek gives teitan, to wit,
 what in Latin is called DICLUX; by which name, expressed by
 antiphrases, we understand Antichrist, who, although he be cut off from
 the supernal light, and deprived thereof, yet transforms himself into
 an angel of light, daring to call himself light. [2304] Moreover, we
 find in a certain Greek codex antemos, which letters being reckoned up,
 you will find to give the number as above: a one, n fifty, t three
 hundred, e five, m forty, o seventy, s two hundred,--which together
 makes six hundred and sixty-six, according to the Greeks. Moreover,
 there is another name in Gothic of him, which will be evident of
 itself, that is, genserikos, which in the same way you will reckon in
 Greek letters: g three, e five, n fifty, s two hundred, e eight, r a
 hundred, i ten, k twenty, o seventy, s also two hundred, which, as has
 been said above, make six hundred and sixty-six.

 11. "And I saw another beast coming up out of the earth."] He is
 speaking of the great and false prophet who is to do signs, and
 portents, and falsehoods before him in the presence of men.

 "And he had two horns like a lamb--that is, the appearance within of a
 man--and he spoke like a dragon."] But the devil speaks full of malice;
 for he shall do these things in the presence of men, so that even the
 dead appear to rise again.

 13. "And he shall make fire come down from heaven in the sight of
 men."] Yes (as I also have said), in the sight of men. Magicians do
 these things, by the aid of the apostate angels, even to this day. He
 shall cause also that a golden image of Antichrist shall be placed in
 the temple at Jerusalem, and that the apostate angel should enter, and
 thence utter voices and oracles. Moreover, he himself shall contrive
 that his servants and children should receive as a mark on their
 foreheads, or on their right hands, the number of his name, lest any
 one should buy or sell them. Daniel had previously predicted his
 contempt and provocation of God. "And he shall place," says he, "his
 temple within Samaria, upon the illustrious and holy mountain that is
 at Jerusalem, an image such as Nebuchadnezzar had made." [2305] Thence
 here he places, and by and by here he renews, that of which the Lord,
 admonishing His churches concerning the last times and their dangers,
 says: "But when ye shall see the contempt which is spoken of by Daniel
 the prophet standing in the holy place, let him who readeth
 understand." [2306] It is called a contempt when God is provoked,
 because idols are worshipped instead of God, or when the dogma of
 heretics is introduced in the churches. But it is a turning away
 because stedfast men, seduced by false signs and portents, are turned
 away from their salvation.

 [2303] [The Edinburgh edition seems to follow the confusion of MSS.,
 introducing here the seventeenth chapter, out of place.]

 [2304] [But see Irenæus, vol. i. [220]p. 559.]

 [2305] Dan. xi. 45.

 [2306] Matt. xxiv. 15; Dan. ix. 27.

 from the fourteenth chapter.

 6. "And I saw an angel flying through the midst of heaven."] The angel
 flying through the midst of heaven, whom he says that he saw, we have
 already treated of above, as being the same Elias who anticipates the
 kingdom of Antichrist in his prophecy.

 8. "And another angel following him."] The other angel following, he
 speaks of as the same prophet who is the associate of his prophesying.
 But that he says,--

 15. "Thrust in thy sharp sickle, and gather in the grapes of the
 vine,"] he signifies it of the nations that should perish on the advent
 of the Lord. And indeed in many forms he shows this same thing, as if
 to the dry harvest, and the seed for the coming of the Lord, and the
 consummation of the world, and the kingdom of Christ, and the future
 appearance of the kingdom of the blessed.

 19, 20. "And the angel thrust in the sickle, and reaped the vine of the
 earth, and cast it into the wine-press of the wrath of God. And the
 wine-press of His fury was trodden down without the city."] In that he
 says that it was cast into the wine-press of the wrath of God, and
 trodden down without the city, the treading of the wine-press is the
 retribution on the sinner.

 "And blood went out from the wine-press, even unto the horse-bridles."]
 The vengeance of shed blood as was before predicted, "In blood thou
 hast sinned, and blood shall follow thee." [2307]

 "For a thousand and six hundred furlongs."] That is, through all the
 four parts of the world: for there is a quadrate put together by fours,
 as in four faces and four appearances, and wheels by fours; for forty
 times four is one thousand six hundred. Repeating the same persecution,
 the Apocalypse says:--

 [2307] Ezek. xxxv. 6

 from the fifteenth chapter.

 1. "And I saw another great and wonderful sign, seven angels having the
 seven last plagues; for in them is completed the indignation of God."]
 For the wrath of God always strikes the obstinate people with seven
 plagues, that is, perfectly, as it is said in Leviticus; and these
 shall be in the last time, when the Church shall have gone out of the
 midst.

 2. "Standing upon the sea of glass, having harps."] That is, that they
 stood stedfastly in the faith upon their baptism, and having their
 confession in their mouth, that they shall exult in the kingdom before
 God. But let us return to what is set before us.

 from the seventeenth chapter.

 1-6. "There came one of the seven angels, which have the seven bowls,
 and spake with me, saying, Come, I will show thee the judgment of that
 great whore who sitteth upon many waters. And I saw the woman drunk
 with the blood of the saints, and with the blood of the martyrs."] The
 decrees of that senate are always accomplished against all, contrary to
 the preaching of the true faith; and now already mercy being cast
 aside, itself here gave the decree among all nations.

 3. "And I saw the woman herself sitting upon the scarlet-coloured
 beast, full of names of blasphemy."] But to sit upon the scarlet beast,
 the author of murders, is the image of the devil. Where also is treated
 of his captivity, concerning which we have fully considered. I
 remember, indeed, that this is called Babylon also in the Apocalypse,
 on account of confusion; and in Isaiah also; and Ezekiel called it
 Sodom. In fine, if you compare what is said against Sodom, and what
 Isaiah says against Babylon, and what the Apocalypse says, you will
 find that they are all one. [2308]

 9. "The seven heads are the seven hills, on which the woman sitteth."]
 That is, the city of Rome.

 10. "And there are seven kings: five have fallen, and one is, and the
 other is not yet come; and when he is come, he will be for a short
 time."] The time must be understood in which the written Apocalypse was
 published, since then reigned Cæsar Domitian; but before him had been
 Titus his brother, and Vespasian, Otho, Vitellius, and Galba. These are
 the five who have fallen. One remains, under whom the Apocalypse was
 written--Domitian, to wit. "The other has not yet come," speaks of
 Nerva; "and when he is come, he will be for a short time," for he did
 not complete the period of two years.

 11. "And the beast which thou sawest is of the seven."] Since before
 those kings Nero reigned.

 "And he is the eighth."] He says only when this beast shall come,
 reckon it the eighth place, since in that is the completion. He
 added:--

 "And shall go into perdition."] For that ten kings received royal power
 when he shall move from the east, he says. He shall be sent from the
 city of Rome with his armies. And Daniel sets forth the ten horns and
 the ten diadems. And that these are eradicated from the former
 ones,--that is, that three of the principal leaders are killed by
 Antichrist: that the other seven give him honour and wisdom and power,
 of whom he says:--

 16. "These shall hate the whore, to wit, the city, and shall burn her
 flesh with fire."] Now that one of the heads was, as it were, slain to
 death, and that the stroke of his death was directed, he speaks of
 Nero. For it is plain that when the cavalry sent by the senate was
 pursuing him, he himself cut his throat. Him therefore, when raised up,
 God will send as a worthy king, but worthy in such a way as the Jews
 merited. And since he is to have another name, He shall also appoint
 another name, that so the Jews may receive him as if he were the
 Christ. Says Daniel: "He shall not know the lust of women, although
 before he was most impure, and he shall know no God of his fathers: for
 he will not be able to seduce the people of the circumcision, unless he
 is a judge of the law." [2309] Finally, also, he will recall the
 saints, not to the worship of idols, but to undertake circumcision,
 and, if he is able, to seduce any; for he shall so conduct himself as
 to be called Christ by them. But that he rises again from hell, we have
 said above in the word of Isaiah: "Water shall nourish him, and hell
 hath increased him;" who, however, must come with name unchanged, and
 doings unchanged, as says the Spirit.

 [2308] [Apparently in conflict with what our author says supra, pp.
 [221]352 and [222]355.]

 [2309] Dan. xi. 37.

 from the nineteenth chapter.

 11. "And I saw heaven opened, and behold a white horse; and he that sat
 upon him was called Faithful and True."] The horse, and He that sits
 upon him, sets forth our Lord coming to His kingdom with the heavenly
 army. Because from the sea of the north, which is the Arabian Sea, even
 to the sea of Phoenice, and even to the ends of the earth, they will
 command these greater parts in the coming of the Lord Jesus, and all
 the souls of the nations will be assembled to judgment.

 from the twentieth chapter.

 1-3. "And I saw an angel come down from heaven, having the key of the
 abyss, and a chain in his hand. And he held the dragon, that old
 serpent, which is called the Devil and Satan, and bound him for a
 thousand years, and cast him into the abyss, and shut him up, and set a
 seal upon him, that he should deceive the nations no more, till the
 thousand years should be finished: after this he must be loosed a
 little season."] Those years wherein Satan is bound are in the first
 advent of Christ, even to the end of the age; and they are called a
 thousand, according to that mode of speaking, wherein a part is
 signified by the whole, just as is that passage, "the word which He
 commanded for a thousand generations," [2310] although they are not a
 thousand. Moreover that he says, "and he cast him into the abyss," he
 says this, because the devil, excluded from the hearts of believers,
 began to take possession of the wicked, in whose hearts, blinded day by
 day, he is shut up as if in a profound abyss. And he shut him up, says
 he, and put a seal upon him, that he should not deceive the nations
 until the thousand years should be finished. "He shut the door upon
 him," it is said, that is, he forbade and restrained his seducing those
 who belong to Christ. Moreover, he put a seal upon him, because it is
 hidden who belong to the side of the devil, and who to that of Christ.
 For we know not of those who seem to stand whether they shall not fall,
 and of those who are down it is uncertain whether they may rise.
 Moreover, that he says that he is bound and shut up, that he may not
 seduce the nations, the nations signify the Church, seeing that of them
 it itself is formed, and which being seduced, he previously held until,
 he says, the thousand years should be completed, that is, what is left
 of the sixth day, to wit, of the sixth age, which subsists for a
 thousand years; after this he must be loosed for a little season. The
 little season signifies three years and six months, in which with all
 his power the devil will avenge himself under Antichrist against the
 Church. Finally, he says, after that the devil shall be loosed, and
 will seduce the nations in the whole world, and will entice war against
 the Church, the number of whose foes shall be as the sand of the sea.
 [2311]

 4, 5. "And I saw thrones, and them that sat upon them, and judgment was
 given unto them; and I saw the souls of them that were slain on account
 of the testimony of Jesus, and for the word of God, and which had not
 worshipped the beast nor his image, nor have received his writing on
 their forehead or in their hand; and they reigned with Christ for a
 thousand years: the rest of them lived not again until the thousand
 years were finished. This is the first resurrection."] There are two
 resurrections. But the first resurrection is now of the souls that are
 by the faith, which does not permit men to pass over to the second
 death. Of this resurrection the apostle says: "If ye have risen with
 Christ, seek those things which are above." [2312]

 6. "Blessed and holy is he who has part in this resurrection: on them
 the second death shall have no power, but they shall be priests of God
 and Christ, and they shall reign with Him a thousand years."] I do not
 think the reign of a thousand years is eternal; or if it is thus to be
 thought of, they cease to reign when the thousand years are finished.
 But I will put forward what my capacity enables me to judge. The
 tenfold number signifies the decalogue, and the hundredfold sets forth
 the crown of virginity: for he who shall have kept the undertaking of
 virginity completely, and shall have faithfully fulfilled the precepts
 of the decalogue, and shall have destroyed the untrained nature or
 impure thoughts within the retirement of the heart, that they may not
 rule over him, this is the true priest of Christ, and accomplishing the
 millenary number thoroughly, is thought to reign with Christ; and truly
 in his case the devil is bound. But he who is entangled in the vices
 and the dogmas of heretics, in his case the devil is loosed. But that
 it says that when the thousand years are finished he is loosed, so the
 number of the perfect saints being completed, in whom there is the
 glory of virginity in body and mind, by the approaching advent of the
 kingdom of the hateful one, many, seduced by that love of earthly
 things, shall be overthrown, and together with him shall enter the lake
 of fire.

 8-10. "And they went up upon the breadth of the earth, and compassed
 the camp of the saints about, and the beloved city; and fire came down
 from God out of heaven, and devoured them. And the devil who seduced
 them was cast into the lake of fire and brimstone, where both the beast
 and the false prophet shall be tormented day and night for ever and
 ever."] This belongs to the last judgment. And after a little time the
 earth was made holy, as being at least that wherein lately had reposed
 the bodies of the virgins, when they shall enter upon an eternal
 kingdom with an immortal King, as they who are not only virgins in
 body, but, moreover, with equal inviolability have protected
 themselves, both in tongue and thought, from wickedness; and these, it
 shows, shall dwell in rejoicing for ever with the Lamb.

 [2310] Ps. cv. 8.

 [2311] [Compare vol. v. pp. [223]207, [224]215, caps. 15 and 54.]

 [2312] Col. iii. 1.

 from the twenty-first and twenty-second chapters.

 16. "And the city is placed in a square."] The city which he says is
 squared, he says also is resplendent with gold and precious stones, and
 has a sacred street, and a river through the midst of it, and the tree
 of life on either side, bearing twelve manner of fruits throughout the
 twelve months; and that the light of the sun is not there, because the
 Lamb is the light of it; and that its gates were of single pearls; and
 that there were three gates on each of the four sides, and that they
 could not be shut. I say, in respect of the square city, he shows forth
 the united multitude of the saints, in whom the faith could by no means
 waver. As Noah is commanded to make the ark of squared beams, [2313]
 that it might resist the force of the deluge, by the precious stones he
 sets forth the holy men who cannot waver in persecution, who could not
 be moved either by the tempest of persecutors, or be dissolved from the
 true faith by the force of the rain, because they are associated of
 pure gold, of whom the city of the great King is adorned. Moreover, the
 streets set forth their hearts purified from all uncleanness,
 transparent with glowing light, that the Lord may justly walk up and
 down in them. The river of life sets forth that the grace of spiritual
 doctrine flowed through the minds of the faithful, and that manifold
 flourishing forms of odours germinated therein. The tree of life on
 either bank sets forth the Advent of Christ, according to the flesh,
 who satisfied the peoples wasted with famine, that received life from
 One by the wood of the Cross, with the announcement of God's word. And
 in that he says that the sun is not necessary in the city, he shows,
 evidently, that the Creator as the immaculate light shines in the midst
 of it, whose brightness no mind has been able to conceive, nor tongue
 to tell.

 In that he says there are three gates placed on each of the four sides,
 of single pearls, I think that these are the four virtues, [2314] to
 wit, prudence, fortitude, justice, temperance, which are associated
 with one another. And, being involved together, they make the number
 twelve. But the twelve gates we believe to be the number of the
 apostles, who, shining in the four virtues as precious stones,
 manifesting the light of their doctrine among the saints, cause it to
 enter the celestial city, that by intercourse with them the choir of
 angels may be gladdened. And that the gates cannot be shut, it is
 evidently shown that the doctrine of the apostles can be separated from
 rectitude by no tempest of contradiction. Even though the floods of the
 nations and the vain superstitions of heretics should revolt against
 their true faith, they are overcome, and shall be dissolved as the
 foam, because Christ is the Rock [2315] by which, and on which, the
 Church is founded. [2316] And thus it is overcome by no traces of
 maddened men. Therefore they are not to be heard who assure themselves
 that there is to be an earthly reign of a thousand years; who think,
 that is to say, with the heretic Cerinthus. [2317] For the kingdom of
 Christ is now eternal in the saints, although the glory of the saints
 shall be manifested after the resurrection.

 [2313] Gen. vi. 14, LXX.

 [2314] [Called the philosophical virtues. Vol. ii. [225]note 7, p.
 502.]

 [2315] [From a Western theologian of the date of our author. This is
 emphatic.]

 [2316] [Compare vol. v. [226]p. 561, Elucidation VII.]

 [2317] [Here is evidence that Cerinthus (see vol. i. [227]351, 352) and
 other heretics had disgusted the Church even with the less carnal views
 of the Millenium entertained by the better "Chiliasts," such as
 Commodian. See vol. iv. pp. [228]212 and [229]218.]

 GENERAL NOTES BY THE AMERICAN EDITOR

 1. The whole subject of the Apocalypse is so treated, [2318] in the
 Speaker's Commentary, as to elucidate many questions suggested by the
 primitive commentators of this series, and to furnish the latest
 judgments of critics on the subject. It is so immense a matter,
 however, as to render annotations on patristic specialties impossible
 in a work like this. Every reader must feel how apposite is the
 sententious saying of Augustine: "Apocalypsis Joannis tot sacramenta
 quot verba."

 2. The seven spirits, [230]p. 344, ver. 4. That is, the one Spirit in
 His seven-fold gifts. He now fulfills the promise of Christ, "He shall
 show you things to come." Without this complement the Church would lack
 assurance that her great Head upon the throne has ordered and limited
 the whole course of this world for her conflicts and her final triumph
 by the Spirit's power. St. John's rapture was the Spirit's work: "I was
 in the Spirit on the Lord's day." [2319] The whole Apocalypse is an
 Easter sermon (on the text, i. 18) and an Easter song (vers. 9-14, and
 passim). It supplements the appearances of the risen Redeemer for
 identification, by a manifestation, which is the Church's assurance of
 His glorification, and of His perpetual work in her and for her, as
 well as of His presence with her, by the Spirit.

 3. Seven golden candlesticks, [231]p. 344, ver. 12. The symbol of the
 seven-fold Spirit in the Church. On the Arch of Titus this symbol had
 just been set up as proof of its removal from the Mosaic Church. It is
 now found to be transferred to the "seven churches," a symbol of the
 Catholic Church [2320] or the "communion of saints." The threatening of
 removal from particular churches derives force from the (then) recent
 removal out of Jerusalem.

 4. All the Saints shall assemble, [232]p. 345, ver. 15. Our author
 clings to the purer Chiliasm of Commodian, to which Augustine had now
 given the death-blow by his famous retraction. [2321]

 5. New forms of prophesying, [233]p. 347, ver.17. A retrospective
 glance at Montanism, and a caveat against the mistakes of Tertullian.

 6. I will vomit thee, [234]p. 347, ver. 17. Bishop Wordsworth suggests,
 that, if the canon of Scripture compiled by the church of Laodicea
 lacks the Apocalypse, its terrible reproof of that church may have
 influenced its unwillingness to accept it. Accordingly she was vomited,
 and perished in the Saracen invasion.

 7. That is the Spirit, [235]p. 348, ver. 1. Christ's divine nature as
 distinguished from his flesh. [2322] "In a word," says Professor
 Milligan, [2323] "pneuma is a short expression for our Lord's
 resurrection state." A truth, but based on the distinction between the
 flesh of Christ and His spiritual nature as the Word. See Tertullian,
 [2324] vol. iii. p. 609, [236]note 5, and p. 610, [237]note 5: also 2
 Cor. iii. 17-18.

 8. The genealogy of Mary, [238]p. 348, vers. 7-10. It is remarkable
 that St. Matthew should be credited with this, and not St. Luke, who in
 the sixteenth century [2325] began to be regarded as giving the
 ancestry of Mary. See Africanus [2326] on the subject, and my
 elucidation, [2327] in which I followed Wordsworth. Though I had
 already prepared the pages of Victorinus for the press, I failed to
 note at that time this modification of the general truth, that
 antiquity regards both genealogies as those of Joseph.

 9. Dan himself, [239]p. 349, ver. 8. Here is a touch of Chiliasm again,
 i.e., of the better sort. Even Dan is promised a restoration: and the
 use of Gen. xlix. 16 for that intent is noteworthy, as compared with
 Rev. vii. 5-8, where Dan is omitted. But Hippolytus takes a very
 different view of the same text. [2328]

 10. Hades, [240]p. 351. "A region withdrawn from punishment and fires,"
 says our author. He identifies it with paradise, and shows that in his
 day the Latin churches knew of no purgatorial fires. He knows of
 nothing but a place for those "who die in the Lord," and a place for
 the wicked. It is perpetually overlooked, that, in the fiction of
 "purgatory," it is only the righteous who are entitled to it: none but
 those dying in full communion with the Church having any portion in it,
 or any title to Masses for their repose. Of all this our author had no
 conception. [2329]

 11. To take the book and eat it up, [241]p. 353, ver. 10. We must not
 fail to note with this the passage Jer. xv. 16, where the Revised
 Version pedantically sacrifices the Septuagint reading, ho logos sou,
 (which is followed by the Vulgate), distinguishing "sermones tui" from
 "Verbum tuum." The Seventy have testified to this distinction in their
 day, and their copies of the Hebrew must have supported it. So
 understood, what riches in the text of Jeremiah!

 12. Thessalonians, [242]p. 354, ver. 7. On which much that is
 suggestive is said by St. Augustine, though he confesses, concerning
 what St. Paul had said to the Thessalonians, "Ego prorsus quid dixerit
 me fateor ignorare." See De Civ. Dei, lib. xx. cap. 19, p. 685, ed.
 Migne.

 13. The woman, [243]p. 355, ver. 1. Compare vol. vi. p. 337, [244]note
 4, and Elucidation II. [245]p. 355. It is quite important to observe
 the voice of antiquity on a matter which, in our own times, has been
 made a stumbling-block to souls by a wanton, personal act of the Bishop
 of Rome and his dogma of the "Immaculate Conception."

 14. The hope of those that sleep, [246]p. 355, ver. 1. To make our
 author consistent with himself (see note 10, supra), we should read
 thus: "But they have in their darkness a light (some think) such as the
 moon." Here, however, it seems to me, he is giving his mind to "the
 Church of Fathers and Prophets" exclusively, in which its "saints and
 apostles" were for a time waiting and looking for the Man-child. Even
 that Church of the Hebrews had, in Hades, light "like that of the
 moon," where they reposed in Abraham's bosom; but Christ removed them
 into a fairer region, i.e., Paradise, when He illuminated Hades, and
 then became "the first-fruits of them that slept." Such seems to be the
 sense.

 15. In a certain Greek codex, [247]p. 357, ver. 18. Can antemos here be
 a reference to Anthemius, of the kindred of Julian (d. a.d. 472)? His
 history, mixed up with that of Ricimer, connects with Genseric, who
 died a.d. 477.

 16. Sea of the north, [248]p. 358, ver. 11. The Mediterranean, near
 Mount Carmel, is "the sea of Phoenice," I suppose: but how the Arabian
 Gulf can be called the sea of the north, I do not comprehend. As Routh
 says, the manuscripts must have been much corrupted.

 17. Two resurrections, [249]p. 359, ver. 5. Here our author, who is
 supposed to be the contemporary of St. Augustine, accepts his final
 judgment. [2330] But Victorinus was a Chiliast of the better sort,
 according to St. Jerome. This confirms the corruption of the mss.
 Indeed, if the Victorinus mentioned by Jerome be the same as our
 author, the mention of Genseric proves the subsequent interpolation of
 his works.

 18. It is evident that the fragment which is here preserved, if,
 indeed, it be the work of Caius Marius Victorinus, surnamed Afer, is
 full of the corrections of some pious disciple of St. Augustine who
 lived much later. The reader must consult Lardner, [2331] and compare
 Routh, whose notes on this treatise are indeed few. He does not think
 the reference to abbots [2332] of any consequence in determining its
 age, because he finds albatorum elsewhere sustained as the true
 reading, i.e., those "made white in the blood of the Lamb." But the
 great probability that there were two authors of the name living in
 different ages seems more than suspected by the learned. Dupin, who
 calls him Marius without the Caius (changed to Fabius by the English
 translator), leaves one yet more in a mist as to the identity of our
 author with the one he writes about.

 [2318] By William Lee, D.D., archdeacon of Dublin.

 [2319] The Lord's day is here the Paschal feast, "the Great Sunday,"
 probably. See Eichhorn in Rosenmüller, Scholia, tom. v. p. 626.

 [2320] P. 345, sec. 16.

 [2321] Civ. Dei, xx. cap. 7, p. 667, ed. Migne.

 [2322] See vol. iii. note 5, pp. 624, 630.

 [2323] Ut supra, p. 249, note 15.

 [2324] See Kaye's Tertullian, p. 530, for a brief comment on this and
 its supposed scriptural base.

 [2325] Virtually in the fifteenth, as Annius published his theory in
 1502, and wrote, no doubt, before that century began. Vol. vi. [250]p.
 139.

 [2326] Vol. vi. [251]p. 126, this series.

 [2327] Vol. vi. [252]p. 139.

 [2328] Vol. v. [253]p. 207, this series.

 [2329] Compare vol. iii. [254]p. 428, Elucidation VIII.

 [2330] See p. 360, note 2.

 [2331] Credib., vol. iv. p. 254.

 [2332] P. 344, note 6, supra.


 Dionysius.


  INTRODUCTORY NOTICE

 TO

DIONYSIUS, BISHOP OF ROME.

 [a.d. 259-269.] Dionysius is no exception to the rule that Latin
 Christianity had no place in Rome till after the Nicene Council. He was
 a Greek by birth, and reflects the spirit and orthodoxy of the Greek
 Fathers; and what we have from him is written in the Greek language. We
 find it in Athanasius, where, remarks Waterland, [2333] its genuineness
 cannot be suspected, because "Athanasius did not entirely approve of
 it, and would certainly never have forged an interpretation different
 from his own." He concurred with the Easterns in the discipline of Paul
 of Samosata. Waterland says of the following fragment: "It is of
 admirable use for showing the doctrine of the Trinity as professed by
 the Church of Christ at that time."

 The purely receptive character of the Roman See during the Ante-Nicene
 period must be sufficiently apparent to the possessors of the volumes
 of this series. Until after the Council of Nice, as a Roman pontiff has
 testified, she was unfelt in the churches as a teaching church. [2334]
 Irenæus has justly stated her case: as the focus of the empire, she was
 the natural center of exchange and social commerce among all nations.
 Thither all Christians converged, and there at all times might be found
 representatives of all the churches,--those of Gaul and Britain; those
 of Asia Minor and Syria; those of Alexandria and Egypt; those of North
 Africa, where Latin Christianity had begun to exist, and where it had
 reached a vigorous maturity at the Nicene period. Hence, from all these
 churches came into Rome a Catholic testimony, which was thus preserved
 at the metropolis by the pressure from without.

 This is the fact which gives importance to the earliest dogmatic
 testimony proceeding from the See of Rome. [2335] Dionysius has the
 great distinction of sustaining the orthodoxy which Hippolytus and
 other comprovincial bishops had established against the heresy of two
 of his predecessors; and this little essay, embedded in the works of
 Athanasius, comes forth as a genuine "bee" out of his precious amber,
 sweet with the honey of truth, and pungent with the sting of an acute
 and piercing testimony against error.

 For the necessary preface to this essay or synodical letter, the reader
 must turn to the history of Dionysius of Alexandria, surnamed the
 Great, and to the letters he wrote to his namesake of Rome. [2336] For
 a complete view of the whole matter, and for the originals of both
 these great prelates, the student will not fail to consult Routh.
 [2337] Athanasius, the touchstone of orthodoxy, does not altogether
 commend the idioms of either; but he sustains the essential orthodoxy
 of both with that vast sweep of genius which could insist upon Nicene
 idioms after the council, but sustain those who, in defective language,
 fought previously for essential truth.

 For a just view of Novatian and of the orthodoxy of Rome in the times
 of Dionysius, as that unhappy but competent witness sets it forth, the
 reader would do well to consult Dr. Waterland. [2338] For a vindication
 of the Alexandrian Dionysius, to whom his contemporaries gave the
 surname Magnus, see the same lucid expounder of antiquity. [2339] For a
 sententious statement of the subordination of the Son, on which so much
 hinges in these inquiries, consult the same theologian. [2340]

 I might have suffixed this essay to the works of the great Dionysius
 but for several important considerations: (1) I was glad to give due
 prominence to this exceptional voice from old Rome, and to place
 Dionysius with due dignity before the reader; (2) as the Bishop of Rome
 was without a hearing at Nicæa, I was anxious to show what good
 Sylvester would have said had he been able to attend the council; (3) I
 was not willing, therefore, to hide this writer's light under the
 bushel of the pages devoted to the Alexandrian school; (4) I was
 anxious to close this important volume by a just exhibition of the
 Ante-Nicene doctrine, previous to the compilation of the Great Symbol;
 (5) I considered it judicious to elucidate Dionysius by the doctrines
 of Athanasius, to whom we owe the preservation of the fragment itself;
 and (6) I felt that here was the place to record the "Athanasian
 Confession" (so called), which, apocryphal though it be, as a "creed"
 under his name is allowed to embody the principles for which the whole
 life of Athanasius was a contest unparalleled in the history of
 Christianity.

 [2333] Works, vol. iii. p. 318

 [2334] Vol. iv. [255]p. 170, this series. Compare Irenæus, vol. i. pp.
 [256]415-460, this series.

 [2335] Novatian (vol. v. [257]p. 607, this series) must not be
 overlooked, but he is valued merely as a personal witness.

 [2336] See pp. [258]78 and [259]92, vol. vi., this series.

 [2337] Reliqu. Sac.; vol. iii. pp. 221-250.

 [2338] Works, vol. iii. pp. 57, 119, 139, 214, 274, 454-459.

 [2339] Ib., pp. 43, 111, 274.

 [2340] Works, iii. p. 23.


  Against the Sabellians. [2341]

 1 Now truly it would be just to dispute against those who, by dividing
 and rending the monarchy, which is the most august announcement of the
 Church of God, into, as it were, three powers, and distinct substances
 (hypostases), and three deities, destroy it. [2342] For I have heard
 that some who preach and teach the word of God among you are teachers
 of this opinion, who indeed diametrically, so to speak, are opposed to
 the opinion of Sabellius. For he blasphemes in saying that the Son
 Himself is the Father, and vice versa; but these in a certain manner
 announce three gods, in that they divide the holy unity into three
 different substances, absolutely separated from one another. For it is
 essential that the Divine Word should be united to the God of all, and
 that the Holy Spirit should abide and dwell in God; and thus that the
 Divine Trinity should be reduced and gathered into one, as if into a
 certain head--that is, into the omnipotent God of all. For the doctrine
 of the foolish Marcion, which cuts and divides the monarchy into three
 elements, is assuredly of the devil, and is not of Christ's true
 disciples, or of those to whom the Saviour's teaching is agreeable. For
 these indeed rightly know that the Trinity is declared in the divine
 Scripture, but that the doctrine that there are three gods is neither
 taught in the Old nor in the New Testament.

 2 But neither are they less to be blamed who think that the Son was a
 creation, and decided that the Lord was made just as one of those
 things which really were made; whereas the divine declarations testify
 that He was begotten, as is fitting and proper, but not that He was
 created or made. It is therefore not a trifling, but a very great
 impiety, to say that the Lord was in any wise made with hands. For if
 the Son was made, there was a time when He was not; but He always was,
 if, as He Himself declares, [2343] He is undoubtedly in the Father. And
 if Christ is the Word, the Wisdom, and the Power,--for the divine
 writings tell us that Christ is these, as ye yourselves
 know,--assuredly these are powers of God. Wherefore, if the Son was
 made, there was a time when these were not in existence; [2344] and
 thus there was a time when God was without these things, which is
 utterly absurd. But why should I discourse at greater length to you
 about these matters, since ye are men filled with the Spirit, and
 especially understanding what absurd results follow from the opinion
 which asserts that the Son was made? The leaders of this view seem to
 me to have given very little heed to these things, and for that reason
 to have strayed absolutely, by explaining the passage otherwise than as
 the divine and prophetic Scripture demands. "The Lord created me the
 beginning of His ways." [2345] For, as ye know, there is more than one
 signification of the word "created;" and in this place "created" is the
 same as "set over" the works made by Himself--made, I say, by the Son
 Himself. But this "created" is not to be understood in the same manner
 as "made." For to make and to create are different from one another.
 "Is not He Himself thy Father, that hath possessed thee and created
 thee?" [2346] says Moses in the great song of Deuteronomy. And thus
 might any one reasonably convict these men. Oh reckless and rash men!
 was then "the first-born of every creature" [2347] something made?--"He
 who was begotten from the womb before the morning star?" [2348] --He
 who in the person of Wisdom says, "Before all the hills He begot me?"
 [2349] Finally, any one may read in many parts of the divine utterances
 that the Son is said to have been begotten, but never that He was made.
 From which considerations, they who dare to say that His divine and
 inexplicable generation was a creation, are openly convicted of
 thinking that which is false concerning the generation of the Lord.

 3 That admirable and divine unity, therefore, must neither be separated
 into three divinities, nor must the dignity and eminent greatness of
 the Lord be diminished by having applied to it the name of creation,
 but we must believe on God the Father Omnipotent, and on Christ Jesus
 His Son, and on the Holy Spirit. Moreover, that the Word is united to
 the God of all, because He says, "I and the Father are one;" [2350]
 and, "I am in the Father, and the Father is in Me." [2351] Thus
 doubtless will be maintained in its integrity the doctrine of the
 divine Trinity, and the sacred announcement of the monarchy.

 elucidations.

 I.

 The Confession, improperly called the "Creed of Athanasius," is
 acknowledged to embody the (Athanasian) doctrine of the Nicene Council;
 and I append it here as an index to the state of theology at the period
 which is the limit of our series. Nothing is properly a "creed" which
 has never been accepted as such by the whole Church, and the Greeks
 knew no other creed than that called Nicene. The Anglo-American Church
 has ceased to recite this Confession in public worship, but does not
 depart from it as doctrine. The "Reformed" communion in America [2352]
 retains it among her liturgical forms, and I suppose the same is true
 of the Lutherans. It is a Western Confession, and, like the Te Deum, is
 a hymn rather than a symbol, though breathing the spirit of the Creed.

 Usher adopts a.d. 447 as its date, and Beveridge assigns it to the
 fourth century. Dupin gives it a later origin than Usher, and a
 considerable number of eminent authorities agree with him in the date
 a.d. 484.

 What are called the anathemas are the enacting clauses (so to speak),
 and, like the same in the Nicene Creed, may be regarded as no part of
 the Confession itself. If they have disappeared from the Great Symbol
 itself, as unsuitable to liturgical recitation, why not apply the same
 rule here?

 confession of our christian faith, commonly called the creed of st.
 athanasius.

 Quicunque vult.

 ¶ Whosoever will be saved: before all things it is necessary that he
 hold the Catholick Faith. Which Faith except everyone do keep whole and
 undefiled: without doubt he shall perish everlastingly.

 i.

 And the Catholick Faith is this: That we worship one God in Trinity,
 and Trinity in Unity;

 Neither confounding the Persons: nor dividing the Substance.

 For there is one Person of the Father, another of the Son: and another
 of the Holy Ghost.

 But the God-head of the Father, of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost, is
 all one: the Glory equal, the Majesty co-eternal.

 Such as the Father is, such is the Son: and such is the Holy Ghost.

 The Father un-create, the Son un-create: and the Holy Ghost un-create.

 The Father incomprehensible, the Son incomprehensible: and the Holy
 Ghost incomprehensible.

 The Father eternal, the Son eternal: and the Holy Ghost eternal.

 And yet they are not three eternals: but one eternal.

 As also there are not three incomprehensibles, nor three un-created:
 but one un-created, and one incomprehensible.

 So likewise the Father is Almighty, the Son Almighty: and the Holy
 Ghost Almighty.

 And yet they are not three Almighties: but one Almighty.

 So the Father is God, the Son is God: and the Holy Ghost is God.

 And yet they are not three Gods: but one God.

 So likewise the Father is Lord, the Son is Lord: and the Holy Ghost is
 Lord.

 And yet not three Lords: but one Lord.

 For like as we are compelled by the Christian verity: to acknowledge
 every Person by Himself to be God and Lord;

 So we are forbidden by the Catholick Religion: to say, there be three
 Gods, or three Lords.

 The Father is made of none: neither created, nor begotten.

 The Son is of the Father alone: not made, nor created, but begotten.

 The Holy Ghost is of the Father and of the Son: [2353] neither made,
 nor created, nor begotten, but proceeding.

 So there is one Father, not three Fathers; one Son, not three Sons: one
 Holy Ghost, not three Holy Ghosts.

 And in this Trinity none is afore, or after other: none is greater, or
 less than another;

 But the whole three Persons are co-eternal together: and co-equal.

 So that in all things, as is aforesaid: the Unity in Trinity, and the
 Trinity in Unity, is to be worshipped.

 ¶ He therefore that will be saved: must thus think of the Trinity.

 ii.

 Furthermore, it is necessary to everlasting salvation: that he also
 believe rightly the Incarnation of our Lord Jesus Christ.

 For the right Faith is, that we believe and confess; that our Lord
 Jesus Christ, the Son of God, is God and Man;

 God, of the Substance of the Father, begotten before the worlds: and
 Man, of the Substance of His Mother, born in the world;

 Perfect God, and perfect Man: of a reasonable soul and human flesh
 subsisting;

 Equal to the Father, as touching His God-head: and inferior to the
 Father, as touching His Manhood.

 Who although He be God and Man: yet He is not two, but one Christ;

 One; not by conversion of the God-head into flesh: but by taking of the
 Manhood into God;

 One altogether; not by confusion of Substance: but by unity of Person.

 For as the reasonable soul and flesh is one man: so God and Man is one
 Christ;

 Who suffered for our Salvation: descended into hell, rose again the
 third day from the dead.

 He ascended into heaven, He sitteth on the right hand of the Father,
 God Almighty: from whence He shall come to judge the quick and the
 dead.

 At whose coming all men shall rise again with their bodies: and shall
 give account for their own works.

 And they that have done good shall go into life everlasting: and they
 that have done evil into everlasting fire.

 ¶ This is the Catholick Faith: which except a man believe faithfully,
 he cannot be saved.

 ii.

 It is with regret that I am forced to take exception to the most useful
 Ecclesiastical History of the learned Professor Schaff, in this
 connection. I quote from that work [2354] as follows:--

 "He, Dionysius, maintained distinctly, in (a) controversy with
 Dionysius of Alexandria, at once the unity of essence and the real
 personal distinction, etc., . . . and avoided tritheism, Sabellianism,
 and (b) subordination, with the instinct of orthodoxy, and also with
 the art of anathematizing, (c) already familiar to (d) the popes."

 Such a paragraph must convey to the youthful student a great confusion
 of ideas; all the greater, because the same valuable work elsewhere
 invites him to conclusions quite the reverse. Thus, (a) there was no
 controversy whatever between the two Dionysii; with a holy jealousy
 they entered into fraternal explanations of the same truth, held by
 each, but by neither very technically elucidated. The mere reader would
 probably infer that the greater of the two was guilty of tritheism or
 Sabellianism, although that is not the meaning of these unguarded
 expressions. But (b) the "subordinationism" which he repudiated was the
 doctrine of the subjection of the Son, not of the subordination, which
 orthodoxy has always maintained. Again, (c) I see no such
 "anathematizing" in the letter of Dionysius as is here charged; indeed,
 it contains no anathema [2355] whatever, much less the artificial
 cursing of the Papacy which is thus assumed. And last, (d) what can be
 meant by the expression, "already familiar to the popes?" The learned
 pages of the same author sufficiently prove that there were no such
 things [2356] as "popes" till a much later period of history; and, as
 to the "art of anathematizing," if it existed at all in those days, we
 find it much more freely exemplified by the Greek Fathers than by
 bishops of Rome. I say, if it existed at all, because the primitive
 anathema was a purely scriptural enforcement of St. Paul's great canon
 (Gal. i. 8, 9); while the "art of anathematizing," so justly credited
 to "the popes," was a vindictive and monstrous assertion, at a later
 date, of prerogatives which they impiously arrogated to themselves,
 against other churches.

 [2352] Commonly called "the Dutch Church;" i.e., the Church of Holland.

 [2353] The words italicized have never been accepted by the whole
 Church.

 [2354] Vol. ii. p. 570.

 [2355] "Culpandi sunt" is quite strong enough for the original,
 katamemphoito. Routh, R. S., iii. p. 374.

 [2356] The word existed, but then, and long afterwards, was universally
 applied to all bishops.

 [2341] A fragment of an epistle or treatise of Dionysius, bishop of
 Rome. [From the epistle of St. Athanasius, De Decretis Nicænæ Synodi,
 cap. xxvi. p. 231, ed. Benedict.]

 [2342] Athan., Ep. de decret. Nic. Syn., 4. 26.

 [2343] John xiv. 11. [See vol. v. Elucidation V. [260]p. 156.]

 [2344] [He quotes the formula, afterwards notorious, he hote ouk en.]

 [2345] Prov. viii. 22

 [2346] Deut. xxxii. 6

 [2347] Col. i. 15 [See vol. v. Elucidation XI. p. 159.]

 [2348] Ps. cx. 3, LXX.

 [2349] Prov. viii. 25.

 [2350] John x. 30.

 [2351] John xiv. 10.


  THE TEACHING OF THE TWELVE APOSTLES.


  Introductory Notice

 To

The Teaching of the Twelve Apostles.


 The interest so generally excited in the learned world by the
 ("Bryennios") discovery of a very primitive document, rendered it
 indispensable that this republication should be enriched by it, in
 connection with the Apostolic Constitutions (so called), which had been
 reserved for the concluding volume of the series. The critics were
 greatly divided as to the genuineness of the Bryennios ms ; and, in
 order to gain time, I had relegated the Constitutions, with this
 document as its sequel or its preface, to a place with the Apocrypha
 Dissatisfied with my own impressions and conjectures, I soon decided
 that the task of editing the Teaching, as the Bryennios document is
 entitled, must be entrusted to an "expert," and that, if possible, it
 should be taken in hand with the Constitutions In order to give
 sufficient time, I entrusted the task, a year ago, to the
 well-qualified head and hands of Professor Riddle of Hartford, who most
 kindly accepted my proposals, and who now enables me to present his
 completed work to the public with the volume to which it properly
 belongs. It will be hailed by literary men generally as a timely
 reviewal of the whole subject, nor should I be surprised to find Dr.
 Riddle's estimate of the Teaching accepted as the most important
 contribution yet made to the literature of inquiry touching its worth
 and character. Appearing, as it does in this place, in close relations
 with the Constitutions, and with the editorial comparisons so
 felicitously introduced by the learned annotator, the student will find
 himself in a position to weigh and to decide for himself all the
 questions that have been raised in previous examinations of the case.
 Without risking any judgment of my own upon the decisions which have
 been reached by Dr. Riddle in the exercise of his great critical skill,
 I cannot withhold an expression of gratitude for the impartiality and
 scientific conscientiousness with which he has handled the matter.
 Uninfluenced by prepossessions, he presents the case with judicial
 calmness and with due consideration of what others have suggested. I am
 gratified to find that impressions of my own are strengthened by his
 conclusions. In an early notice of the Bryennios discovery, contributed
 to a leading publication, I stated my surmise that the Teaching, and
 its parallels in the Constitutions and other primitive writings, would
 prove to be based upon some original document, common to all. Even
 Lactantius, in his Institutes, shapes his instructions to Constantine
 by the Duoe Vioe, which seem to have been formulated in the earliest
 ages for the training of catechumens. The elementary nature and the
 "childishness" of the work are thus accounted for, and I am sure that
 the "mystagogic" teaching of Cyril receives light from this view of the
 matter. This work was "food for lambs:" it was not meant to meet the
 wants of those "of full age." It may prove, as Dr. Riddle hints, that
 the Teaching as we have it, in the Bryennios document, is tainted by
 the views of some nascent sect or heresy, or by the incompetency of
 some obscure local church as yet unvisited by learned teachers and
 evangelists. It seems to me not improbably influenced by views of the
 charismata, which ripened into Montanism, and which are illustrated by
 the warnings and admonitions of Hermas. [2357]

 [2357] The reader has observed that all my notes, except the "General
 Notes," are bracketed when they illustrate any other text except that
 of my own original prefaces, elucidations, etc. This rule will apply to
 Professor Riddle's work, as well as to that of the Edinburgh
 translator's.


  Introductory Notice by Professor M. B. Riddle, D.D.


 section 1.--the discovery of the codex, and its contents.

 In 1873 Philotheos Bryennios, then Head Master of the higher Greek
 school at Constantinople, but now Metropolitan of Nicomedia, discovered
 a remarkable collection of manuscripts in the library of the Jerusalem
 Monastery of the Most Holy Sepulchre at Constantinople. This collection
 is bound in one volume, and written by the same hand. It is signed
 "Leon, notary and sinner," and bears the Greek date of 6564 = a.d.
 1056. There is no reason to doubt the age of the manuscripts. The
 documents have been examined by Professor Albert L. Long of Robert
 College, Constantinople; [2358] and some of the pages, reproduced by
 photography, were published by the Johns Hopkins University, Baltimore,
 April, 1885. The jealousy of its guardians does not imply any lack of
 confidence in the age and value of the Codex. The contents of the 120
 folios (240 pp.) are as follows:--

 I.

 Synopsis of the Old and New Testaments, by St. Chrysostom (fol. 1-32).

 II.

 The Epistle of Barnabas (fol. 33-51b).

 III.

 The two Epistles of Clement to the Corinthians (fol. 51b-76a).

 IV.

 The Teaching of the Twelve Apostles (fol. 76a-80).

 V.

 The Epistle of Mary of Cassoboli to Ignatius (fol. 81-82a).

 VI.

 Twelve Epistles of Ignatius (fol. 82a-120a).

 The last part of fol. 120a contains the signature and date; then
 follows an account of the genealogy of Joseph, continued on the other
 page of the leaf.

 Schaff (p. 6) gives a facsimile of fol. 120a.

 Of these, I. supplies some unpublished portions, and furnishes matter
 for textual criticism. II. gives the second Greek copy of Barnabas,
 also furnishing new readings. III. is very valuable; the text of both
 Epistles is now complete. Two-fifths of that of the second was
 previously unknown. [2359] The value for purposes of textual criticism
 is also great. IV. is the Teaching, the value of which is discussed
 below. V. and VI. both belong to the Ignatian literature, and furnish
 new readings, which have already appeared in the editions of Funk
 (Opera Patr. Apost., ii., Tübingen, 1881) and Lightfoot (Epistles of
 St. Ignatius, London and Cambridge, 1885).

 [2358] See New-York Independent, July 31, 1884.

 [2359] See this volume, infra, the Second Epistle of Clement, so
 called.

 section 2.--publication of the discovered works: the effect.

 In 1875 Bryennios, who had been chosen Metropolitan of Serræ during his
 absence at the Old Catholic conference in Bonn, published at
 Constantinople the two Epistles of Clement, with prolegomena and notes;
 giving the text found in the Jerusalem Codex, as he termed it. All
 patristic scholars welcomed his work, which bore every mark of care and
 learning; showing the results of his contact, as a student, with German
 methods. Bishop Lightfoot and many others at once made use of this new
 material. The remaining contents of the Codex were named in the volume
 of Bryennios, and some interest awakened by the mention of the
 Teaching. The learned Metropolitan furnished new readings from other
 parts of the Codex to German scholars. At the close of 1883 he
 published in Constantinople the text of the Teaching, with prolegomena
 and notes. A copy of the volume was received in Germany in January,
 1884; was translated into German, and published Feb. 3, 1884;
 translated from German into English, and published in America, Feb. 28,
 1884; Archdeacon Farrar published (Contemporary Review) a version from
 the Greek in May, 1884. Before the close of the year the literature on
 the subject, exclusive of newspaper articles, covered fifty titles
 (given by Schaff) in Western Europe and America. [2360]

 [2360] See Bibliography at the close of vol. viii., this series.

 section 3.--contents of teaching, and relation to other works.

 In the Babel of conflicting opinions, it is best to notice first the
 obvious internal phenomena. The first part of the Teaching (now
 distinguished as chaps. i.-vi.) sets forth the duty of the Christian;
 in chaps. vii.-x., xiv., we find a directory for worship; chaps.
 xi.-xiii., xv., give advice respecting church officers, extraordinary
 and local, and the reception of Christians; the closing chapter (xvi.)
 enjoins watchfulness in view of the coming of Christ, which is then
 described.

 The amount of matter is not so great as that of the Sermon on the
 Mount.

 The peculiarities of language are marked, but can only be indicated
 here in footnotes. They point to a period of transition from
 New-Testament usage to that of ecclesiastical Greek. The citations from
 the Scriptures resemble those of the Apostolic Fathers. The Gospel of
 Matthew is most frequently used, especially chaps. v.-vii. and xxiv.;
 but some of the passages fairly imply a knowledge of the Gospel of
 Luke. There are some remarkable correspondences with expressions and
 thoughts found in the Gospel of John, while there is good reason for
 inferring the writer's acquaintance with all the groups of Pauline
 Epistles. His allusions to the other New-Testament books are less
 marked. There is nothing to prove that he did not know all of our
 canonical books. If an early date is accepted, the tone of the whole
 opposes the tendency-theory of the Tübingen school.

 The most striking internal phenomena are, however, the correspondences
 of this document with early Christian writings, from a.d. 125 to the
 fourth century. With the so-called Epistle to Barnabas, chaps.
 xviii.-xx., the resemblances are so marked as to demand a critical
 theory which can account for them. A few passages in the Shepherd of
 Hermas show some resemblance; but only two sentences, in Commandment
 Second, are verbally the same. There is a still greater agreement with
 the so-called Apostolical Church Order, of Egyptian origin, probably as
 old as the third century. It is now known in the Coptic (Memphitic),
 and also in Arabic and Greek. [2361] The first thirteen canons
 correspond quite closely, both in order and words, with chaps. i.-iv.
 of the Teaching

 Most noteworthy, however, is the parallel with the Apostolic
 Constitutions, vii. 1-32, which contain more than half the Teaching, in
 precisely the same order, with very close verbal resemblances. The
 parts omitted are in most cases such as had lost their pertinence in
 the fourth century, while they seem appropriate to a much earlier
 period. The details will be found in the footnotes to the Teaching in
 this volume. These phenomena have called forth voluminous discussions,
 and are the most important facts in determining the authenticity and
 age of the Teaching

 [2361] The Church Order is to be distinguished from the Ethiopic
 collection of Apostolic canons; see Introductory Notice to Apostolic
 Constitutions.

 section 4.--authenticity.

 By this is meant, in this case, the substantial identity of the
 recently discovered document with the work known and referred to by
 early Christian writers under the same (or a similar) title. Of
 apostolic origin no one should presume to speak, since the text of the
 document makes no such claim, and internal evidence is obviously
 against such a suggestion. On the other hand, there is no reason for
 doubting the age of the Codex, or the accuracy of the edition published
 by Bryennios.

 Eusebius (d. 340) of Cæsarea, in the famous passage of his history
 (iii. 25) which treats of the canonical books of the New Testament,
 names among the "spurious" works (nothoi) "the so-called Teachings of
 the Apostles" (ton aposto'lon hai lego'menai didachai'). The plural
 form does not forbid a reference to the work under discussion, since
 Athanasius (d. 373) has a notice clearly pointing to the same writing,
 in which he uses the singular (Festal Epistle, 39). Rufinus (d. 410)
 speaks of a brief work called The Two Ways, or The Judgment of Peter;
 and this fact, in view of the contents of the Teaching, furnishes one
 of the most important data for the critical discussion. The last notice
 of the Teaching was made by Nicephorus (d. 828) more than two hundred
 years before Leon made this copy. Clement of Alexandria (d. circa 216)
 and Irenæus (mart. 202) use expressions that may indicate an
 acquaintance with this writing. The more extended correspondences with
 Barnabas and later disciplinary works are noticed above (sec. 3). The
 existence of an old Latin translation of the Teaching, of the tenth
 century, a fragment of which has been preserved, furnishes general
 evidence to the authenticity of the Greek copy, but by its variations
 suggests the presence of many textual corruptions. Its closer
 correspondence with Barnabas has led to the theory that the translator
 used both documents. Others suppose that its form points to a document
 which was the common source of the Greek form of the Teaching and of
 Barnabas.

 The various theories based on the above facts cannot even be stated.
 The following positions seem, on the whole, most tenable:--

 1. The Greek Codex presents substantially the writing referred to by
 Eusebius and Athanasius.

 2. Owing to an absence of other copies, we cannot determine the purity
 of the text; but there is every probability of many minor corruptions.

 3. This probability calls for care that we do not infer too much from
 verbal resemblances.

 4. The resemblances to book vii., Apostolic Constitutions, are,
 however, of such a character as establish, not only a literary
 connection between the two works, but also the priority of the Teaching

 5. In the case of Barnabas, the resemblances can be accounted for (a)
 by accepting the priority of the Teaching, or (b) by assuming a common
 (earlier and unknown) source, or (c) by accepting the priority of
 Barnabas, and assuming such corruptions in the Greek copy of the
 Teaching as will account for the supposed marks of its priority.
 Despite the general adoption of (a), there remains a strong probability
 that (b) is the correct solution of the problem.

 6. The Duæ Viæ, spoken of by Rufinus, may be the common source. We have
 no positive evidence, but the "two ways" form so prominent a topic in
 most of these documents which indicate literary relationship, as to
 encourage this theory. If there was a common source, it probably
 contained only matter similar to chaps. i.-v., which was variously used
 by the subsequent compilers. Here a number of theories have been
 suggested. [2362] None of them, however, necessarily call for a very
 late date of the Teaching, or compel us to deny that Eusebius and
 Athanasius referred to substantially the same work as that now existing
 in the Codex at Constantinople. Many resemblances have been noticed in
 other works. Probably in the course of a few years all the data will
 have been collected, and a well-defined result based upon them. But,
 even in this period of discussion, there is remarkable agreement among
 critics in regard to the main question of authenticity.

 [2362] Compare the detailed discussions of Harnack, Holtzmann,
 Warfield, and most recently McGiffert, Andover Review, vol. v. pp.
 430-442.

 section 5.--time and place of composition.

 Granting the general authenticity of the Greek work, the time of
 composition must be at least as early as the first half of the second
 century. If the Teaching is older than Barnabas, then it cannot be
 later than a.d. 120. If both are from a common source, the interval of
 time was probably not very great. [2363] The document itself bears many
 marks of an early date:--

 (1) Its simplicity, almost amounting to childishness, not only
 discountenances all idea of forgery, but points to the sub-apostolic
 age, during which Christianity manifested this characteristic. The fact
 is an important one in the discussion of the canon of the New
 Testament.

 (2) The undeveloped Christian thought, as well as the indications of
 undeveloped heresy, [2364] confirms this position. Christianity was at
 first a life, for which the Apostles furnished a basis of revealed
 thought. But the Christians of the sub-apostolic age had not
 consciously assimilated the thought to any large extent, while their
 ethical striving was stimulated by the gross sins surrounding them.
 [2365]

 (3) The Church polity indicated in the Teaching is less developed than
 that of the genuine Ignatian Epistles, and shows the existence of
 extraordinary travelling teachers ("Apostles" and "Prophets," chap.
 xi.). This points to a date not later than the first half of the second
 century, probably as early as the first quarter. [2366]

 Most of these phenomena would, however, consist with a date as late as
 that of the Ignatian Epistles on the theory that the Teaching was
 written for a community of Christians in some obscure locality. But
 this theory must admit that there existed for a long time great variety
 of Church polity and worship. [2367] Of this there is, indeed,
 considerable evidence. The undeveloped form of the doctrinal elements
 of the work constitutes the most serious objection to the theory of a
 late origin. On the other hand, it seems on many accounts improbable
 that the work, in its present form, was written earlier than the
 beginning of the second century: (1) Such a document would not be
 penned during the lifetime of any of the Apostles. (2) There is no
 allusion in chap. xvi. to the destruction of Jerusalem. If the author
 was a Jewish Christian, as seems most probable, such silence implies an
 interval of at least one generation. (3) The position of the document
 in the Codex is after the Clementine Epistles, and before the Ignatian.
 This probably marks the chronological position. (4) The extreme
 simplicity scarcely consists with the view that the author was nearly
 contemporary with the Apostles.

 Bryennios and Harnack assign, as the date, between 120 and 160;
 Hilgenfeld, 160 and 190; English and American scholars vary between
 a.d. 80 and 120. Until the priority to Barnabas is more positively
 established, the two may be regarded as of the same age, about 120,
 although a date slightly later is not impossible. All attempts to
 discover the author are, with our present lack of data, necessarily
 futile. Even the region in and for which it was composed cannot be
 determined. Jewish-Christian tendencies are not sufficiently indicated
 to warrant the assumption of a polemical aim. [2368] The document has
 been assigned to Alexandria, to Antioch, to Jerusalem; indeed, many
 other places have been named. In favour of the Syrian origin is the
 literary connection with the Apostolic Constitutions, while the
 correspondences with the Epistle to Barnabas suggest Egypt as the
 locality. If the Teaching and Barnabas have a common basis, e.g., the
 Duæ Viæ, the last may be assigned to Egypt, and the Teaching, in its
 present form, to Syria. The Palestinian origin is urged by those who
 lay stress upon the absence of Pauline doctrine in the Teaching [If
 meant for catechumens only, this fact is sufficiently accounted for.]

 The question is still an open one.

 As regards the doctrine, polity, usages, and ethics expressed and
 implied in the Teaching, the reader can judge for himself. The writer
 is of the opinion that the work represents, on many of these points,
 only a very small fraction of the Christians during the second century,
 and that, while it casts some light upon usages of that period, it
 cannot be regarded as an authoritative witness concerning the universal
 faith and practice of believers at the date usually assigned to it. The
 few notices of it, and its early disappearance, confirm this position.
 The theory of a composite origin also accords with this estimate of the
 document as a whole.

 The version of the Teaching here given is that of Professor Isaac H.
 Hall and Mr. John T. Napier, which first appeared in the Sunday-School
 Times (Philadelphia), April 12, 1884. It is now republished by
 permission of the editor of that periodical and of the joint authors. A
 few slight changes have been made, some of them in accordance with
 suggestions from Professor Hall, others to indicate correspondences
 with book vii. of Apostolic Constitutions.

 The division of verses agrees with that of Harnack as given by Schaff.
 The headings to the chapters have been inserted by the editor. The
 Scripture references have been selected and verified. The notes have
 been kept within narrow limits. They serve to indicate the relation of
 the matter to that in other early writings, mainly the Apostolic
 Constitutions, and to give various readings and renderings.
 Occasionally explanations and comments have been inserted. In dealing
 with this, as with most other books, the best method of study is
 historico-exegetical. To read the book intelligently is better than to
 read about it. The editor has sought to furnish some help in this
 method.

 [2363] For the various dates, see p. 375.

 [2364] [Note this mark of a possibly corrupted source.]

 [2365] [See Apostolic Fathers, passim.]

 [2366] [Compare Rev. ii. 2 and 9.]

 [2367] [In obscure regions such an admission is clearly consistent with
 apostolic experience. Compare 1 Cor. iv. 16, 17, xi. 34; Gal. iv. 9.]

 [2368] [Compare 1 John iv. 1; Titus i. 10.]


  The Teaching of the Twelve Apostles.

 The Lord's Teaching Through the Twelve Apostles to the Nations. [2369]

 Chapter I.--The Two Ways; The First Commandment.

 1. There are two ways, [2370] one of life and one of death; [2371] but
 a great difference between the two ways. 2. The way of life, then, is
 this: First, thou shalt love God [2372] who made thee; second, thy
 neighbour as thyself; [2373] and all things whatsoever thou wouldst
 should not occur to thee, thou also to another do not do. [2374] 3. And
 of these sayings [2375] the teaching is this: Bless them that curse
 you, and pray for your enemies, and fast for them that persecute you.
 [2376] For what thank is there, if ye love them that love you? Do not
 also the Gentiles do the same? [2377] But do ye love them that hate
 you; and ye shall not have an enemy. [2378] 4. Abstain thou from
 fleshly and worldly lusts. [2379] If one give thee a blow upon thy
 right cheek, turn to him the other also; [2380] and thou shalt be
 perfect. If one impress thee for one mile, go with him two. [2381] If
 one take away thy cloak, give him also thy coat. [2382] If one take
 from thee thine own, ask it not back, [2383] for indeed thou art not
 able. 5. Give to every one that asketh thee, and ask it not back;
 [2384] for the Father willeth that to all should be given of our own
 blessings (free gifts). [2385] Happy is he that giveth according to the
 commandment; for he is guiltless. Woe to him that receiveth; for if one
 having need receiveth, he is guiltless; but he that receiveth not
 having need, shall pay the penalty, why he received and for what, and,
 coming into straits (confinement), [2386] he shall be examined
 concerning the things which he hath done, and he shall not escape
 thence until he pay back the last farthing. [2387] 6. But also now
 concerning this, it hath been said, Let thine alms sweat [2388] in thy
 hands, until thou know to whom thou shouldst give.

 [2370] This phrase connects the book with the Duæ Viæ; see Introductory
 Notice. Barnabas has "light" and "darkness" for "life" and "death."

 [2371] Deut. xxx. 15, 19; Jer. xxi. 8; Matt. vii. 13, 14

 [2372] Comp. Deut. vi. 5, which is fully cited in Apostolic
 Constitutions, vii. 2, though the verb here is more exactly cited from
 LXX.

 [2373] Lev. xix. 18; Matt. xxii. 37, 39. Comp. Mark xii. 30, 31

 [2374] Comp. Tobit iv. 15; and Matt. vii. 12; Luke vi. 31

 [2375] These Old-Testament commands are thus taught by the Lord.

 [2376] Matt. v. 44. But the last clause is added, and is of unknown
 origin; not found in Apostolic Constitutions

 [2377] Matt. v. 46, 47; Luke vi. 32. The two passages are combined.

 [2378] So Apostolic Constitutions. Comp. 1 Pet. iii. 13

 [2379] 1 Pet. ii. 11. The Codex has somatikon, "bodily;" but editors
 correct to kosmikon

 [2380] Matt. v. 39; Luke vi. 29.

 [2381] Matt. v. 41

 [2382] Matt. v. 40; Luke vi. 29

 [2383] Luke vi. 30. The last clause is a peculiar addition: "art not
 able," since thou art a Christian; otherwise it is a commonplace
 observation.

 [2384] Luke vi. 30. The rest of the sentence is explained by the
 parallel passage in Apostolic Constitutions, which cites Matt. v. 45.

 [2385] Bryennios finds a parallel (or citation) in Hermas, Commandment
 Second, [261]p. 20, vol. i. Ante-Nicene Fathers. The remainder of this
 chapter has no parallel in Apostolic Constitutions.

 [2386] Gr. en sunoche. Probably = imprisonment; see next clause.

 [2387] Matt. v. 26.

 [2388] Codex: idrotato, which in this connection is unintelligible.
 Bryennios corrects into idrosato, rendered as above. There are various
 other conjectural emendations. The verse probably forbids
 indiscriminate charity, pointing to an early abuse of Christian
 liberality.

 Chapter II. [2389] --The Second Commandment: Gross Sin Forbidden.

 1. And the second commandment of the Teaching; 2. Thou shalt not commit
 murder, thou shalt not commit adultery, [2390] thou shalt not commit
 pæderasty, [2391] thou shalt not commit fornication, thou shalt not
 steal, [2392] thou shalt not practice magic, thou shalt not practice
 witchcraft, thou shalt not murder a child by abortion nor kill that
 which is begotten. [2393] Thou shalt not covet the things of thy
 neighbour, [2394] 3. thou shalt not forswear thyself, [2395] thou shalt
 not bear false witness, [2396] thou shalt not speak evil, thou shalt
 bear no grudge. [2397] 4. Thou shalt not be double-minded nor
 double-tongued; for to be double-tongued is a snare of death. [2398] 5.
 Thy speech shall not be false, nor empty, but fulfilled by deed. [2399]
 6. Thou shalt not be covetous, nor rapacious, nor a hypocrite, nor evil
 disposed, nor haughty. Thou shalt not take evil counsel against thy
 neighbour. [2400] 7. Thou shalt not hate any man; but some thou shalt
 reprove, [2401] and concerning some thou shalt pray, and some thou
 shalt love more than thy own life. [2402]

 [2389] The chapter, except this opening sentence and part of verse 7,
 is found in Apostolic Constitutions, vii. 2-5; but the precepts are
 separated and enlarged upon.

 [2390] Ex. xx. 13, 14.

 [2391] Or, "corrupt boys," as in the version of Apostolic
 Constitutions.

 [2392] Ex. xx. 15.

 [2393] Comp. Ex. xxi. 22, 23. The Codex reads gennethenta, which Schaff
 renders "the new-born child." Bryennios substitutes gennethen, which is
 accepted by most editors, and rendered as above.

 [2394] Ex. xx. 17.

 [2395] Matt. v. 34.

 [2396] Ex. xx. 16.

 [2397] Rendered "nor shalt thou be mindful of injuries" in version of
 Apostolic Constitutions.

 [2398] So Barnabas, xix.

 [2399] Verse 5, except the first clause, occurs only here.

 [2400] Latter half of verse 6 in Barnabas, xix.

 [2401] Lev. xix. 17; Apostolic Constitutions.

 [2402] Or, "soul." The last part of the clause is found in Barnabas;
 but "and concerning some...pray, and some" has no parallel. An
 interesting verse in its literary history.

 Chapter III. [2403] --Other Sins Forbidden.

 1. My child, [2404] flee from every evil thing, and from every likeness
 of it. 2. Be not prone to anger, for anger leadeth the way to murder;
 neither jealous, nor quarrelsome, nor of hot temper; for out of all
 these murders are engendered. 3. My child, be not a lustful one; for
 lust leadeth the way to fornication; neither a filthy talker, nor of
 lofty eye; for out of all these adulteries are engendered. 4. My child,
 be not an observer of omens, since it leadeth the way to idolatry;
 neither an enchanter, nor an astrologer, nor a purifier, nor be willing
 to took at these things; for out of all these idolatry is engendered.
 5. My child, be not a liar, since a lie leadeth the way to theft;
 neither money-loving, nor vainglorious, for out of all these thefts are
 engendered. 6. My child, be not a murmurer, since it leadeth the way to
 blasphemy; neither self-willed nor evil-minded, for out of all these
 blasphemies are engendered. 7. But be thou meek, since the meek shall
 inherit the earth. [2405] 8. Be long-suffering and pitiful and
 guileless and gentle and good and always trembling at the words which
 thou hast heard. [2406] 9. Thou shalt not exalt thyself, [2407] nor
 give over-confidence to thy soul. Thy soul shall not be joined with
 lofty ones, but with just and lowly ones shall it have its intercourse.
 10. The workings that befall thee receive as good, knowing that apart
 from God nothing cometh to pass. [2408]

 [2403] About one-half of the matter of this chapter is to be found, in
 well-nigh the same order, scattered through Apostolic Constitutions,
 vii. 6 -8. The precepts are aimed at minor sins, and require no
 particular comment. This chapter has the largest number of Greek words
 not found in the New Testament.

 [2404] The address "my child" does not occur in the parallel passages.

 [2405] Matt. v. 5.

 [2406] Isa. lxvi. 2, 5; Apostolic Constitutions, vii. 8.

 [2407] Comp. Luke xviii. 14.

 [2408] Ecclus. ii. 4. So Bryennios. Comp. last part of Apostolic
 Constitutions vii. 8.

 Chapter IV. [2409] --Various Precepts.

 1. My child, him that speaketh to thee the word of God remember night
 and day; and thou shalt honour him as the Lord; [2410] for in the place
 whence lordly rule is uttered, [2411] there is the Lord. 2. And thou
 shalt seek out day by day the faces of the saints, in order that thou
 mayest rest upon [2412] their words. 3. Thou shalt not long for [2413]
 division, but shalt bring those who contend to peace. Thou shalt judge
 righteously, thou shalt not respect persons in reproving for
 transgressions. 4. Thou shalt not be undecided whether it shall be or
 no. [2414] 5. Be not a stretcher forth of the hands to receive and a
 drawer of them back to give. [2415] 6. If thou hast aught, through thy
 hands thou shalt give ransom for thy sins. [2416] 7. Thou shalt not
 hesitate to give, nor murmur when thou givest; for thou shalt know who
 is the good repayer of the hire. 8. Thou shalt not turn away from him
 that is in want, but thou shalt share all things with thy brother, and
 shalt not say that they are thine own; for if ye are partakers in that
 which is immortal, how much more in things which are mortal? [2417] 9.
 Thou shalt not remove thy hand from thy son or from thy daughter, but
 from their youth shalt teach them the fear of God. [2418] 10. Thou
 shalt not enjoin aught in thy bitterness upon thy bondman or
 maidservant, who hope in the same God, lest ever they shall fear not
 God who is over both; [2419] for he cometh not to call according to the
 outward appearance, but unto them whom the Spirit hath prepared. 11.
 And ye bondmen shall be subject to your [2420] masters as to a type of
 God, in modesty and fear. [2421] 12. Thou shalt hate all hypocrisy and
 everything which is not pleasing to the Lord. 13. Do thou in no wise
 forsake the commandments of the Lord; but thou shalt keep what thou
 hast received, neither adding thereto nor taking away therefrom. [2422]
 14. In the church [2423] thou shalt acknowledge thy transgressions, and
 thou shalt not come near for thy prayer [2424] with an evil conscience.
 [2425] This is the way of life. [2426]

 [2409] This chapter, with the exception of a few clauses and words, is
 found in Apostolic Constitutions, vii. 9-17. There are verbal
 variations, but the order is exact. In Barnabas not so much of the
 matter is found. There is, however, even greater verbal agreement in
 many cases, though the order is quite different. Two important clauses
 (verses 8, 14) find an exact parallel only in Barnabas. One phrase is
 peculiar to the Teaching; see ver. 14.

 [2410] Comp. Heb. xiii. 7. In Apostolic Constitutions there is a
 transposition of words.

 [2411] Schaff: "The Lordship is spoken of." Apostolic Constitutions,
 "where the doctrine concerning God is," etc.

 [2412] Or, "acquiesce in" (Apostolic Constitutions).

 [2413] Some read poieseis, "make," as in Apostolic Constitutions and
 Barnabas, instead of potheseis, Codex.

 [2414] Comp. Ecclus. i. 28. The verse occurs in Barnabas; and in
 Apostolic Constitutions "in thy prayer" is inserted, which is probably
 the sense here.

 [2415] Ecclus. iv. 31. The Greek word suspon occurs here and in
 Barnabas, but not in Apostolic Constitutions.

 [2416] Apostolic Constitutions adds, in explanation, Prov. xvi. 6.

 [2417] Comp. Acts iv. 32; Rom. xv. 27. The latter half of the verse is
 in Barnabas (not in Apostolic Constitutions), but with the substitution
 of "incorruptible" and "corruptible."

 [2418] Comp. Eph. vi. 4.

 [2419] Comp. Eph. vi. 9; Col. iv. 1.

 [2420] Codex reads "our;" editors correct to "your. "

 [2421] Comp. Eph. vi. 5; Col. iii. 22.

 [2422] Deut. xii. 32.

 [2423] "In the congregation;" i.e., assembly of believers. This phrase
 is omitted in both Barnabas and Apostolic Constitutions. Comp. Jas. v.
 16.

 [2424] Or, "to thy place of prayer" (Schaff).

 [2425] So Barnabas; but Apostolic Constitutions, "in the day of thy
 bitterness."

 [2426] So Apostolic Constitutions; but Barnabas, "the way of light."
 See note on chap. i. 1.


 Chapter V. [2427] --The Way of Death.

 1. And the way of death [2428] is this: First of all it is evil and
 full of curse: [2429] murders, [2430] adulteries, lusts, fornications,
 thefts, idolatries, magic arts, witchcrafts, rapines, false
 witnessings, hypocrisies, double-heartedness, deceit, haughtiness,
 depravity, self-will, greediness, filthy talking, jealousy,
 over-confidence, loftiness, boastfulness; 2. persecutors of the good,
 [2431] hating truth, loving a lie, not knowing a reward for
 righteousness, not cleaving [2432] to good nor to righteous judgment,
 watching not for that which is good, but for that which is evil; from
 whom meekness and endurance are far, loving vanities, pursuing
 requital, not pitying a poor man, not labouring for the afflicted, not
 knowing Him that made them, murderers of children, destroyers of the
 handiwork of God, turning away from him that is in want, afflicting him
 that is distressed, advocates of the rich, lawless judges of the poor,
 utter sinners. [2433] Be delivered, children, from all these. [2434]

 [2427] This chapter finds nearly exact parallels in Barnabas, xx., and
 Apostolic Constitutions, vii. 18, but with curious variations.

 [2428] Barnabas has "darkness," but afterwards "way of eternal death."

 [2429] Not in Apostolic Constitutions, and no exact parallel in
 Barnabas.

 [2430] Of the twenty-two sins named in this verse, Barnabas gives
 fourteen, in differing order, and in the singular; Apostolic
 Constitutions gives all but one (upsos, "loftiness" "haughtiness"), in
 the same order, and with the same change from plural to singular.

 [2431] This verse appears almost word for word in Barnabas, with two
 additional clauses.

 [2432] The Apostolic Constitutions give a parallel from this point;
 verbally exact from the phrase, "not for that which is good."

 [2433] The word panthamartetoi occurs only here, and in the parallel
 passage in Barnabas (rendered in this edition "who are in every respect
 transgressors," vol. i. [262]p. 149), and in Apostolic Constitutions
 (rendered "full of sin"). A similar term occurs in the recently
 recovered portion of 2 Clement, xviii., where Bishop Lightfoot renders,
 as above, "an utter sinner."

 [2434] Found verbatim in Apostolic Constitutions, not in Barnabas: with
 the latter there is no further parallel, except a few phrases in chap.
 xvi. 2, 3 (which see).

 Chapter VI. [2435] --Against False Teachers, and Food Offered to Idols.

 1. See that no one cause thee to err [2436] from this way of the
 Teaching, since apart from God it teacheth thee. 2. For if thou art
 able to bear all the yoke [2437] of the Lord, thou wilt be perfect; but
 if thou art not able, what thou art able that do. 3. And concerning
 food, [2438] bear what thou art able; but against that which is
 sacrificed to idols [2439] be exceedingly on thy guard; for it is the
 service of dead gods. [2440]

 [2435] Of this chapter, two phrases and one entire clause are found in
 Apostolic Constitutions, vii. 19-21.

 [2436] Comp. Matt. xxiv . 4 (Greek); Revised Version, "lead you
 astray:" Apostolic Constitutions, vii. 19.

 [2437] Or, "the whole yoke." Those who accept the Jewish-Christian
 authorship refer this to the ceremonial law. It seems quite as likely
 to mean ascetic regulations. Of these there are many traces, even in
 the New-Testament churches.

 [2438] Apostolic Constitutions, vii. 20, begins with a similar phrase,
 but is explicitly against asceticism in this respect. The precepts here
 do not indicate any such spirit as that opposed by Paul.

 [2439] Comp. Acts xv. 20, 29; 1 Cor. viii. 4, etc., x. 18, etc. (Rom.
 xiv. 20 refers to ascetic abstinence.) This prohibition had a necessary
 permanence; comp. Apostolic Constitutions, vii. 21.

 [2440] Comp. the same phrase in 2 Clement, iii. This chapter closes the
 first part of the Teaching, that supposed to be intended for
 catechumens. The absence of doctrinal statement does not necessarily
 prove the existence of a circle of Gentile Christians where the Pauline
 theology was unknown. If such a circle existed, emphasizing the ethical
 side of Christianity to the exclusion of its doctrinal basis, it
 disappeared very soon. From the nature of the case, that kind of
 Christianity is intellectually weak and necessarily short-lived.

 Chapter VII.--Concerning Baptism.

 1. And concerning baptism, [2441] thus baptize ye: [2442] Having first
 said all these things, baptize into the name of the Father, and of the
 Son, and of the Holy Spirit, [2443] in living water. [2444] 2. But if
 thou have not living water, baptize into other water; and if thou canst
 not in cold, in warm. 3. But if thou have not either, pour out water
 thrice [2445] upon the head into the name of Father and Son and Holy
 Spirit. 4. But before the baptism let the baptizer fast, and the
 baptized, and whatever others can; but thou shalt order the baptized to
 fast one or two days before. [2446]

 [2441] Verse 1 is found, well-nigh entire, in Apostolic Constitutions
 vii. 22, but besides this only a few words of verses 2 and 4. The
 chapter has naturally called out much discussion as to the mode of
 baptism.

 [2442] [Elucidation I.]

 [2443] Matt. xxviii. 19.

 [2444] Probably running water.

 [2445] The previous verses point to immersion; this permits pouring in
 certain cases, which indicates that this mode was not unknown. The
 trine application of the water, and its being poured on the head, are
 both significant.

 [2446] The fasting of the baptized is enjoined in Apostolic
 Constitutions, but that of the baptizer (and others) is peculiar to
 this document.

 Chapter VIII. [2447] --Concerning Fasting and Prayer (the Lord's Prayer).

 1. But let not your fasts be with the hypocrites; [2448] for they fast
 on the second and fifth day of the week; but do ye fast on the fourth
 day and the Preparation (Friday). [2449] 2. Neither pray as the
 hypocrites; but as the Lord commanded in His Gospel, [2450] thus pray:
 Our Father who art in heaven, hallowed be Thy name. Thy kingdom come.
 Thy will be done, as in heaven, so on earth. Give us to-day our daily
 (needful) bread, [2451] and forgive us our debt as we also forgive our
 debtors. And bring us not into temptation, but deliver us from the evil
 one (or, evil); for Thine is the power and the glory for ever. [2452]
 3. Thrice in the day thus pray. [2453]

 [2447] The entire chapter is found almost verbatim in Apostolic
 Constitutions, vii. 23, 24.

 [2448] Comp. Matt. vi. 16.

 [2449] The reasons for fasting on Wednesday and Friday are given in
 Apostolic Constitutions (the days of betrayal and of burial). Monday
 and Thursday were the Jewish fast-days. The word "Preparation" (day
 before the Jewish sabbath) occurs in Matt. xxvii. 62, etc., and for
 some time retained a place in Christian literature.

 [2450] Matt. vi. 5, 9-13. This form of the Lord's Prayer is evidently
 cited from Matthew, not from Luke. The textual variations are slight.
 The citation is of importance as proving that the writer used this
 Gospel, and that the liturgical use of the Lord's Prayer was common.

 [2451] On this phrase, comp. Revised Version, Matt. vi. 11; Luke xi. 3
 (text, margin, and American appendix).

 [2452] The variation in the form of the doxology confirms the judgment
 of textual criticism, which omits it in Matt. vi. 13. All early
 liturgical literature tends in the same direction; comp. Apostolic
 Constitutions, vii. 24.

 [2453] This is in accordance with Jewish usage. Dan. vi. 10; Ps. lv.
 17. Comp. Acts iii. 1, x. 9.

 Chapter IX. [2454] --The Thanksgiving (Eucharist).

 1. Now concerning the Thanksgiving (Eucharist), thus give thanks. 2.
 First, concerning the cup: [2455] We thank thee, our Father, for the
 holy vine of David Thy servant, [2456] which Thou madest known to us
 through Jesus Thy Servant; to Thee be the glory for ever. 3. And
 concerning the broken bread: [2457] We thank Thee, our Father, for the
 life and knowledge which Thou madest known to us through Jesus Thy
 Servant; to Thee be the glory for ever. 4. Even as this broken bread
 was scattered over the hills, [2458] and was gathered together and
 became one, so let Thy Church be gathered together from the ends of the
 earth into Thy kingdom; [2459] for Thine is the glory and the power
 through Jesus Christ for ever. 5. But let no one eat or drink of your
 Thanksgiving (Eucharist), but they who have been baptized into the name
 of the Lord; for concerning this also the Lord hath said, Give not that
 which is holy to the dogs. [2460]

 [2454] The eucharistic prayers of this and the following chapter are
 only partially reproduced in Apostolic Constitutions, vii. 25, 26; that
 of verse 2 has no parallel.

 [2455] This is a variation from the order of the New Testament and of
 all liturgies: probably this led to its omission in Apostolic
 Constitutions. The word "for" may be substituted for "concerning" here
 and in verse 3. [Possibly a response for recipients.]

 [2456] Peculiar to this passage, but derived from a common scriptural
 figure and from the paschal formula. Comp. especially John xv. 1; Matt.
 xxvi. 29; Mark xiv. 25.

 [2457] The word kla'sma is found in the accounts of the feeding of the
 multitude (Matt. xiv. 20, xv. 37, and parallels); it was naturally
 applied to the broken bread of the Eucharist.

 [2458] This reference to "hills," or "mountains," is used as an
 argument against the Egyptian origin of the Teaching.

 [2459] This part of the verse is found in Apostolic Constitutions.
 Schaff properly calls attention to the distinction here made between
 "Thy Church" and "Thy kingdom."

 [2460] Matt. vii. 6.

 Chapter X. [2461] --Prayer After Communion.

 1. But after ye are filled, [2462] thus give thanks: 2. We thank Thee,
 holy Father, for Thy holy name which Thou didst cause to tabernacle in
 our hearts, and for the knowledge and faith and immortality, which Thou
 madest known to us through Jesus Thy Servant; to Thee be the glory for
 ever. 3. Thou, Master almighty, didst create all things for Thy name's
 sake; Thou gavest food and drink to men for enjoyment, that they might
 give thanks to Thee; but to us Thou didst freely give spiritual food
 and drink and life eternal through Thy Servant. [2463] 4. Before all
 things we thank Thee that Thou art mighty; to Thee be the glory for
 ever. 5. Remember, Lord, Thy Church, to deliver it from all evil and to
 make it perfect in Thy love, and gather it from the four winds,
 sanctified for Thy kingdom which Thou hast prepared for it; [2464] for
 Thine is the power and the glory for ever. 6. Let grace come, and let
 this world pass away. [2465] Hosanna to the God (Son) [2466] of David!
 If any one is holy, let him come; if any one is not so, let him repent.
 [2467] Maran atha. [2468] Amen. 7. But permit the prophets to make
 Thanksgiving as much as they desire. [2469]

 [2461] This post-communion thanksgiving is f ound in Apostolic
 Constitutions, vii. 26, but with many omissions, alterations, and
 additions. Still, the correspondence in thought and language is very
 remarkable. Schaff cites a similar prayer at the Passover (after the
 Hallel cup).

 [2462] "After the participation" (Apostolic Constitutions) points to a
 distinct Eucharistic service. Here the Lord's Supper is evidently
 connected with the Agape [a noteworthy suggestion]; comp. 1 Cor. xi.
 20-22, 33. This is an evidence of early date; comp. Justin Martyr,
 Apol. i. chaps. 64-66, where the Lord's Supper is shown to be distinct
 (Ante-Nicene Fathers, i. pp. [263]185, 186).

 [2463] This last clause has no parallel in Apostolic Constitutions, and
 points to an earlier and more spiritual conception of the Eucharist.
 Verse 4 also is peculiar to this passage.

 [2464] The above rendering follows Bryennios; that of Harnack (formerly
 accepted by Hall and Napier) is: "Gather it, sanctified, from the four
 winds, into Thy kingdom," etc. The phrase "from the four winds" recalls
 Matt. xxiv. 31.

 [2465] This is peculiar; but comp. 1 Cor. vii. 31 for the last clause.

 [2466] The Codex reads to ueo, which Bryennios alters to to uio. The
 former is the more difficult reading, and is defended by Harnack.

 [2467] This exhortation indicates a mixed assembly; comp. Apostolic
 Constitutions. [If so, it belongs to the Agape.]

 [2468] Cor. xvi. 22, Revised Version, margin: "That is, our Lord
 cometh." Comp. Rev. xxii. 20.

 [2469] A limitation as compared with 1 Cor. Xiv. 29, 31, and yet
 indicating a combination of extemporaneous devotion with the liturgical
 form. The verse prepares the way for the next chapter.

 Chapter XI. [2470] --Concerning Teachers, Apostles, and Prophets.

 1. Whosoever, therefore, cometh and teacheth you all these things that
 have been said before, receive him. [2471] 2. But if the teacher
 himself turn [2472] and teach another doctrine to the destruction of
 this, hear him not; but if he teach so as to increase righteousness and
 the knowledge of the Lord, receive him as the Lord. 3. But concerning
 the apostles and prophets, according to the decree of the Gospel, thus
 do. 4. Let every apostle that cometh to you be received as the Lord.
 [2473] 5. But he shall not remain except one day; but if there be need,
 also the next; but if he remain three days, he is a false prophet. 6.
 And when the apostle goeth away, let him take nothing but bread until
 he lodgeth; [2474] but if he ask money, he is a false prophet. 7. And
 every prophet that speaketh in the Spirit [2475] ye shall neither try
 nor judge; for every sin shall be forgiven, but this sin shall not be
 forgiven. [2476] 8. But not every one that speaketh in the Spirit is a
 prophet; but only if he hold the ways of the Lord. Therefore from their
 ways shall the false prophet and the prophet be known. 9. And every
 prophet who ordereth a meal [2477] in the Spirit eateth not from it,
 except indeed he be a false prophet; 10. and every prophet who teacheth
 the truth, if he do not what he teacheth, is a false prophet. 11. And
 every prophet, proved true, [2478] working unto the mystery of the
 Church in the world, [2479] yet not teaching others to do what he
 himself doeth, shall not be judged among you, for with God he hath his
 judgment; for so did also the ancient prophets. But whoever saith in
 the Spirit, Give me money, or something else, ye shall not listen to
 him; but if he saith to you to give for others' sake who are in need,
 let no one judge him.

 [2470] The Apostolic Constitutions (vii. 27) present scarcely any
 parallel to this chapter, which points to an earlier period, when
 ecclesiastical polity was less developed, and the travelling "Apostles"
 and "Prophets" here spoken of were numerous. [Elucidation II.]

 [2471] This refers to all teachers, more fully described afterwards.

 [2472] Lit. "being turned:" i.e. turned from the truth, perverted.

 [2473] Matt. x. 40. The mention of apostles here has caused much
 discussion, but there are many indications that travelling evangelists
 were thus termed for some time after the apostolic age. Bishop
 Lightfoot has shown, that, even in the New Testament, a looser use of
 the term applied it to others than the Twelve. Comp. Rom. xvi. 7; 1
 Cor. xv. 5, 7 (?); Gal. i. 19; 1 Thess. ii. 6: also, as applied to
 Barnabas, Acts xiv. 4, 14.

 [2474] Reach a place where he can lodge.

 [2475] Under the influence of the charismatic gift spoken of in 1 Cor.
 xii. 3, xiv. 2. Another indication of an early date.

 [2476] Probably a reference to the sin against the Holy Spirit. Matt.
 xii. 31, 32; Mark iii. 29, 30.

 [2477] Probably a love-feast, commanded by the prophet in his peculiar
 utterance.

 [2478] alethinos, "genuine."

 [2479] poion eis musterion kosmikon ekklesias, "working unto a worldly
 mystery of (the) Church," or "making assemblies for a worldly mystery."
 Either rendering is grammatical: neither is very intelligible. The
 paraphrase in the above version presents one leading view of this
 difficult passage: the mystery is the Church, and a worldly one,
 because the Church is in the world. The other leading view joins
 ekklesias (as accusative) with poion, "making assemblies for a worldly
 mystery." So Bryennios, who regards the worldly mystery as a symbolical
 act of the prophet. Others suggest, as the mystery for which the
 assemblies are called, revelation of future events, celibacy, the
 Eucharist, the ceremonial law. It seems, at all events, to point to
 incipient fanaticism on the part of the prophets of those days.
 [Elucidation III.] This was likely to take the form either of
 asceticism or of extravagant predictions and mystical fancies about the
 Church in the world. Did we know the place and the time more
 accurately, we might decide which was meant. This caution was evidently
 needed: Let God judge such extravagances.

 Chapter XII. [2480] --Reception of Christians.

 1. But let every one that cometh in the name of the Lord be received,
 [2481] and afterward ye shall prove and know him; for ye shall have
 understanding right and left. 2. If he who cometh is a wayfarer, assist
 him as far as ye are able; but he shall not remain with you, except for
 two or three days, if need be. 3. But if he willeth to abide with you,
 being an artisan, let him work and eat; [2482] but if he hath no trade,
 4. according to your understanding see to it that, as a Christian,
 [2483] he shall not live with you idle. 5. But if he willeth not to do,
 he is a Christ-monger. [2484] Watch that ye keep aloof from such.

 [2480] Verse 1 is almost identical with the beginning of Apostolic
 Constitutions, vii. 28; the remaining verses have no parallel.

 [2481] All professed Christians are meant.

 [2482] Comp. 2 Thess. iii. 10.

 [2483] The term occurs only here in the Teaching.

 [2484] "Christ-trafficker." The abuse of Christian fellowship and
 hospitality naturally followed the remarkable extension of
 Christianity. This expressive term was coined to designate the class of
 idlers who would make gain out of their professed Christianity. It
 occurs in the longer form of the Ignatian Epistles (Trallians, vi.) and
 in literature of the fourth century.

 Chapter XIII. [2485] --Support of Prophets.

 1. But every true prophet that willeth to abide among you [2486] is
 worthy of his support. [2487] 2. So also a true teacher is himself
 worthy, as the workman, of his support. [2488] 3. Every first-fruit,
 therefore, of the products of wine-press and threshing-floor, of oxen
 and of sheep, thou shalt take and give to the prophets, for they are
 your high priests. [2489] 4. But if ye have not a prophet, give it to
 the poor. 5. If thou makest a batch of dough, take the first-fruit and
 give according to the commandment. 6. So also when thou openest a jar
 of wine or of oil, take the first-fruit and give it to the prophets; 7.
 and of money (silver) and clothing and every possession, take the
 first-fruit, as it may seem good to thee, and give according to the
 commandment.

 [2485] A large part of this chapter is found in Apostolic
 Constitutions, vii. 28, 29, but with modifications and additions
 indicating a later date.

 [2486] "Who will settle among you" (Hitchcock and Brown). The itinerant
 prophets might become stationary, we infer. Chaps. xi.-xv. point to a
 movement from an itinerant and extraordinary ministry to a more settled
 one.

 [2487] Lit., "nourishment," "food."

 [2488] Matt. x. 10; comp. Luke x. 7.

 [2489] This phrase, indicating a sacerdotal view of the ministry, seems
 to point to a later date than that claimed for the Teaching. Some
 regard it as an interpolation: others take it in a figurative sense. In
 Apostolic Constitutions the sacerdotal view is more marked. [1 Pet. ii.
 9. If the plebs = "priests," prophets = "high priests."] Here the term
 is restricted to the prophets: compare Schaff in loco.

 Chapter XIV. [2490] --Christian Assembly on the Lord's Day.

 1. But every Lord's day [2491] do ye gather yourselves together, and
 break bread, and give thanksgiving after having confessed your
 transgressions, [2492] that your sacrifice may be pure. [2493] 2. But
 let no one that is at variance [2494] with his fellow come together
 with you, until they be reconciled, that your sacrifice may not be
 profaned. 3. For this is that which was spoken by the Lord: In every
 place and time offer to me a pure sacrifice; [2495] for I am a great
 King, saith the Lord, and my name is wonderful among the nations.
 [2496]

 [2490] Verses 1 and 3 are given substantially in Apostolic
 Constitutions, vii. 30. This chapter would seem to belong more properly
 before chap. viii.; but the same order of topics is followed in
 Apostolic Constitutions,--a remarkable proof of literary connection.

 [2491] Comp. Rev. i. 10. Here the full form is kata kuriaken de Kurion.
 If the early date is allowed, this verse confirms the view that from
 the first the Lord's Day was observed, and that, too, by a eucharistic
 celebration.

 [2492] Comp chap. iv. 14. No parallel in Apostolic Constitutions.

 [2493] On this spiritual sense of "sacrifice," comp. Rom. xii. 1; Phil.
 ii. 17; Heb. xiii. 15; 1 Pet. ii. 5.

 [2494] "That hath the (or, any) dispute" (amphibolian); comp. Matt. v.
 23, 24.

 [2495] [See Mal. i. 11. See Irenæus, cap. xvii. 5, vol. i. [264]p.
 484.]

 [2496] Mal. i. 11, 14. Quoted in Apostolic Constitutions and by several
 Ante-Nicene Fathers, with the same reference to the Eucharist.

 Chapter XV. [2497] --Bishops and Deacons; Christian Reproof.

 1. Appoint, therefore, for yourselves, bishops and deacons worthy of
 the Lord, men meek, and not lovers of money, [2498] and truthful and
 proved; for they also render to you the service [2499] of prophets and
 teachers. 2. Despise them not therefore, for they are your honoured
 ones, together with the prophets and teachers. 3. And reprove one
 another, not in anger, but in peace, as ye have it in the Gospel;
 [2500] but to every one that acts amiss [2501] against another, let no
 one speak, nor let him hear aught from you until he repent. 4. But your
 prayers and alms and all your deeds so do, as ye have it in the Gospel
 of our Lord. [2502]

 [2497] The larger part of verse 1, and a clause from verses 2, 3,
 respectively, are found in Apostolic Constitutions, vii. 31. Verses 1,
 2, both in the use of terms and in the Church polity indicated, point
 to an early date: (1) There are evident marks of a transition from
 extraordinary to ordinary ministers. (2) The distinction between
 bishops and elders does not appear [1 Pet. v. 1. Vol. i. [265]p. 16,
 this series], and yet it is found in Ignatius. (3) The word cheirotoneo
 is here used in the sense of "elect" or "appoint" (by show of hands),
 and not in that of "ordain" (by laying on of hands). The former is the
 New Testament sense (Acts xiv. 23; 2 Cor. viii. 19), also in Ignatius;
 the latter sense is found in Apostolic Canons, i. (4) The choice by the
 people also indicates an early period.

 [2498] Comp. 1 Tim. iii. 4.

 [2499] Or, "ministry." This clause and the following verse indicate
 that the extraordinary ministers were as yet more highly regarded.

 [2500] Comp. Matt. xviii. 15-17.

 [2501] The word astocheo, occurring here, means "to miss the mark;" in
 New Testament, "to err" or, "swerve." See 1 Tim. i. 6, vi. 21; 2 Tim.
 ii. 18.

 [2502] The reference here is probably to the Sermon on the Mount: Matt.
 v.-vii., especially to chap. vi.


 Chapter XVI. [2503] --Watchfulness; The Coming of the Lord.

 1. Watch for your life's sake. [2504] Let not your lamps be quenched,
 nor your loins unloosed; [2505] but be ye ready, for ye know not the
 hour in which our Lord cometh. [2506] 2. But often shall ye come
 together, seeking the things which are befitting to your souls: for the
 whole time of your faith will not profit you, [2507] if ye be not made
 perfect in the last time. 3. For in the last days [2508] false prophets
 and corrupters shall be multiplied, and the sheep shall be turned into
 wolves, and love shall be turned into hate; [2509] 4. for when
 lawlessness increaseth, they shall hate and persecute and betray one
 another, [2510] and then shall appear the world-deceiver [2511] as the
 Son of God, [2512] and shall do signs and wonders, [2513] and the earth
 shall be delivered into his hands, and he shall do iniquitous things
 which have never yet come to pass since the beginning. 5. Then shall
 the creation of men come into the fire of trial, [2514] and many shall
 be made to stumble and shall perish; but they that endure in their
 faith shall be saved [2515] from under the curse itself. [2516] 6. And
 then shall appear the signs of the truth; [2517] first, the sign of an
 out-spreading [2518] in heaven; then the sign of the sound of the
 trumpet; and the third, the resurrection of the dead; 7. yet not of
 all, but as it is said: The Lord shall come and all His saints with
 Him. [2519] 8. Then shall the world see the Lord coming upon the clouds
 of heaven. [2520]

 [2503] The resemblance between this chapter and Apostolic
 Constitutions, vii. 31, 32, is mainly in order of topics and in the
 identity of some phrases and terms. Verses 3 and 4 (to the word
 "world-deceiver") are reproduced almost verbatim. That the writer of
 the Teaching used Matt. xxiv. is extremely probable, but the connection
 of Apostolic Constitutions, with this passage is evident. In Barnabas,
 iv., there are a few corresponding phrases.

 [2504] Or, "over your life;" the clause occurs verbatim in Apostolic
 Constitutions.

 [2505] Comp. Luke xii. 35, which is exactly cited in Apostolic
 Constitutions.

 [2506] Matt. xxiv. 42.

 [2507] Here Barnabas, iv., furnishes a parallel.

 [2508] This reference to the last days as present or impending is an
 evidence of early date; comp. Barnabas, iv., and many passages in the
 New Testament. The mistake has been in measuring God's prophetic
 chronology by our mathematical standard of years.

 [2509] Comp. Matt. xxiv. 11, 12.

 [2510] Comp. Matt. xxiv. 10.

 [2511] ho kosmoplanos, found only here and in Apostolic Constitutions,
 vii. 32. Comp. 2 Thess. ii. 3, 4, 8; Rev. xii. 9.

 [2512] Not found in Apostolic Constitutions. The expression plainly
 implies the belief that Jesus Christ was Son of God.

 [2513] Comp. Matt. xxiv. 24. The rest of the verse has no parallel.

 [2514] Comp. 1 Pet. iv. 12. where purosis also occurs.

 [2515] Comp. Matt x. 22 and similar passages; none of them directly
 cited here.

 [2516] hup' autou tou katathematos, "from under the curse itself:"
 namely, that which has just been described. Bryennios and others render
 "by the curse Himself;" that is, Christ, whom they were tempted to
 revile. All other interpretations either rest on textual emendations or
 are open to grammatical objections. Of the two given above, that of
 Hall and Napier seems preferable.

 [2517] "Truth" might refer to Christ Himself, but the personal advent
 is spoken of in verse 8; it is better, then, to refer it to the truth
 respecting the parousia held by the early Christians. For this belief
 they were mocked, and hence dwelt upon it and the prophecies respecting
 it. The verse is probably based upon Matt. xxiv. 30, 31; but some find
 here, as in verse 4, an allusion to Paul's eschatological statements in
 the Epistles to the Thessalonians.

 [2518] Professor Hall now prefers to render ekpetaseos, "outspreading,"
 instead of "unrolling," as in his version originally. Hitchcock and
 Brown, Schaff, and others, prefer "opening;" that is, the apparent o
 pening in heaven through which the Lord will descend. "Outspreading" is
 usually explained (so Professor Hall) as meaning the expanded sign of
 the cross in the heavens, the patristic interpretation of Matt. xxiv.
 30. Bryennios and Farrar refer it to the flying forth of the saints to
 meet the Lord. There are other interpretations based on textual
 emendations. As the word is very rare, it is difficult to determine the
 exact sense. "Opening" seems lexically allowable and otherwise free
 from objection.

 [2519] Zech. xiv. 5. This citation is given substantially in Apostolic
 Constitutions. As here used, it seems to point to the first
 resurrection. Comp. 1 Thess. iv. 17; 1 Cor. xv. 23; Rev. xx. 5.
 Probably it is based upon the Pauline eschatology rather than upon that
 of the Apocalypse. At all events, there is no allusion to the
 millennial statement of the latter. Since there was in the early
 Church, in connection with the expectation of the speedy coming of
 Christ, a marked tendency to Chiliasm, the silence respecting the
 millennium may indicate that the writer was not acquainted with the
 Apocalypse. This inference is allowable, however, only on the
 assumption of the early date of the Teaching.

 [2520] Comp. Matt. xxiv. 30. The conclusion is abrupt, and in Apostolic
 Constitutions the New-Testament doctrine of future punishment and
 reward is added. The absence of all reference to the destruction of
 Jerusalem would indicate that some time had elapsed since that event.
 An interval of from thirty to sixty years may well be claimed.

 Elucidations.

 I

 (Thus baptize ye, p. 379.)

 If we compare this chapter with the corresponding one in the Apostolic
 Constitutions, the Teaching seems to me to be a somewhat abridged form
 of a common original. This being designed for the catechumens, there is
 an omission of what they are afterwards to know. A form originally
 drawn up for clergy and people has been very inartificially expurgated
 for the instruction of young disciples. This appears from the ninth
 chapter (p. 380), where only certain receptive or responsive forms are
 given. The liturgy of the Apostolic Constitutions, book viii., embodies
 what was studiously kept from all but the te'leioi, i.e., those "of
 full age."


 II

 (Concerning Apostles, p. 380, note 16.)

 The reference to "apostles," probably itinerant, in Rev. ii. 2,
 corresponds with this. There were officers known in the Apostolic day
 (compare 2 Cor. viii. 23, Greek) as apo'stoloi ekklesion, for the
 pseud-apostles of the Apocalypse could not have pretended what they did
 had it been otherwise. Neither would it have been needful to "try those
 who said they were apostles," in that case: the mere assertion of such
 a pretence would have sufficiently convicted them.

 The very childish directions (suited to mere catechumens) given in the
 text illustrates Rev ii. 2, and is, so far, evidence of the very early
 origin of the Teaching.

 The name apostles was made technical by Christ Himself: "He named them
 Apostles" (Luke vi. 13). And the word is never used in the loose way
 which Bishop Lightfoot hazardously suggests, as I must venture to
 believe.

 III

 (Incipient fanaticism, p. 381, note 25.)

 Unquestionably, for even in St. Paul's day his admonitions imply
 nothing less. See 1 Cor. cap. xiv., passim. But, as in the Introductory
 Notice [2521] I hinted my suspicions of incipient Montanism in the
 Teaching, so I am strengthened in this idea by the learned critic to
 whose note I venture to append this remark for the purpose of asking a
 reference to my annotations of Hermas in vol. ii. of this series. May I
 also ask a reference to the same volume, pp. [266]4, 5, and 6? The
 "meal" (note 23, p. 380) of the Teaching is doubtless the Agape, which
 had been abused at so early a day, that St. Peter [2522] himself was
 forced to denounce the "false prophets" who polluted this feast of
 charity.

 [2521] P. 371, supra.

 [2522] 2 Pet. ii. 13. Compare 1 John iv. 1.

 [2369] The longer title is supposed to be the original one; the
 shorter, a popular abridgment. The latter has no real connection with
 Acts ii. 42. Many hold that the term "nations" (or "Gentiles") points
 to a Jewish Christian as the author (so Bryennios), though this is
 denied by others (so Brown). A similar diversity of opinion exists as
 to the class of readers; but, if the early date is accepted, the more
 probable theory is, that the first part at least of the manual was for
 the instruction of catechumens of Gentile birth (so Bryennios, Schaff).
 Others extend it to Gentile Christians.


Constitutions of the Holy Apostles. [2523]

 [Edited, with Notes, by James Donaldson, D.D.]


  Introductory Notice

 to

Constitutions of the Holy Apostles.


 Having learned from the erudite Beveridge what I long supposed to be a
 just view of the Constitutions, I have found in the recent literature
 of the subject not a little to increase my confidence in the general
 conclusions to which he was led by all that could be known in his
 times. The treatise of Krabbe guided me to some results of more modern
 investigations; and Dr. Bunsen, though not apart from his critics, has
 enabled me still further to correct some of my impressions. But, in
 connection with the late discovery of Bryennios, the field of
 discussion and inquiry has been so much enlarged, that I have felt it
 due to the readers and students of this republication to invoke the aid
 of Professor Riddle, who is able to enrich the work with the results of
 genuine learning and much patient research. Whatever may be my own
 convictions on some subordinate points, I have been glad to secure the
 judgment of a critical scholar who, I am persuaded, aims to shed upon
 the subject the colourless light of scientific investigation. This is
 all I can desire, anxious only to see facts clearly established and
 historic truth illustrated, no matter to what results they may seem to
 point. Where the professor's decisions coincide with my own
 impressions, I am naturally gratified by his valued and independent
 corroboration: where the case is otherwise, I am hardly less gratified
 to present my indulgent readers with opinions deserving of their
 highest respect, and by which they will be stimulated, as well as
 influenced, in forming convictions for themselves.

 The Constitutions are so full of material on which it is well for one
 in my position not to speak very freely in such a work as this, that I
 rejoice all the more to confide the task of annotation almost
 exclusively to another and to one from whom American Christians must
 ever be glad to hear on subjects requiring in an almost equal degree
 the skill of an expert critic and the candour of a conscientious
 Christian.

 I prefix Professor Riddle's Preface to the Introductory Notice of the
 Edinburgh editor, as follows:--


 New interest has been awakened in the Apostolic Constitutions by the
 discovery of an ancient manuscript in Constantinople. [2524] While it
 does not contain the Constitutions, it affords much material for
 discussion respecting the sources and authorship of this compilation.
 The so-called Teaching of the Twelve Apostles, found in the Codex at
 Constantinople, and published by Bryennios in 1883, is recognised as
 the basis of the seventh book of the Constitutions. The verbal
 coincidences, the order of topics, and other obvious phenomena, leave
 little room for reasonable doubt on this point. That the reader may be
 in possession of the main facts, the corresponding portions have been
 indicated both in book vii. of the Constitutions and in the version of
 the Teaching inserted in this volume. This literary connection has some
 bearing on the discussion as to the age of the Constitutions. If the
 Teaching is substantially the early work bearing that name, then some
 of the references by early writers which have been applied to the
 larger work must now be regarded as pointing to the Teaching; still,
 this only bears against the theory of a date as early as the third
 century. The new critical material furnished by the Bryennios
 manuscript for the Ignatian controversy has a bearing on the question
 respecting the work before us. The opinion has been strengthened (see
 below), that the same hand enlarged the Ignatian Epistles and adapted
 earlier matter (such as the Teaching) for the Apostolic Constitutions.

 We may accept as established the following positions:--

 1. The Apostolic Constitutions are a compilation, the material being
 derived from sources differing in age.

 2. The first six books are the oldest; the seventh, in its present
 form, somewhat later, but, from its connection with the Teaching,
 proven to contain matter of a very ancient date. The eighth book is of
 latest date.

 3. It now seems to be generally admitted that the entire work is not
 later than the fourth century, although the usual allowance must be
 made for later textual changes, whether by accident or design.

 Dr. Von Drey [2525] regards the first six books as of Eastern origin
 (mainly Syrian), and to be assigned to the second half of the third
 century. The seventh and eighth were more recent, he thinks, but united
 with the others before a.d. 325. With this, Schaff (in his Church
 History, vol. ii, rev. ed., [267]p. 185) substantially agreed; but, in
 his later work on the Teaching, seems to assign the completion of the
 compilation to a date somewhat later. This is the view of Harnack, who,
 "by a critical analysis and comparison, comes to the conclusion [2526]
 that pseudo-Clement, alias pseudo-Ignatius, was a Eusebian, a
 semi-Arian, and rather worldly-minded anti-ascetic Bishop of Syria, a
 friend of the Emperor Constantius between 340 and 360; that he enlarged
 and adapted the Didascalia of the third and the Didache of the second
 century, as well as the Ignatian Epistles, to his own view of morals,
 worship, and discipline, and clothed them with Apostolic authority."
 [2527]

 This is, at all events, a more reasonable view than that of Krabbe, who
 assigns the first six books to the end of the third century, and the
 eighth to the beginning of the fifth. The latter, it is true, he
 regards a compilation from older sources. The purpose of the whole, in
 his view, was to confirm the episcopal hierarchy, and to establish the
 unity of the Catholic Church on the basis of the unity of the
 priesthood, etc. But it is now generally held that the purpose of the
 compilation was merely to present a manual of instruction, worship,
 polity, and usage for both clergy and laity. Had it been designed to
 further some ecclesiastical tendency, it would be far less valuable,
 since it would less fairly reproduce the ecclesiastical life of the age
 or ages in which it originated. Bishop Beveridge at first attributed
 the Constitutions to Clemens Alexandrinus (end of second century), but
 afterwards accepted the third century as the more probable date. The
 views now prevalent do full justice to his opinions, but seem to be
 better sustained in detail.

 The collection of Canons at the close of the Constitutions is
 undoubtedly a compilation. Some are evidently much more ancient than
 others, and there is every evidence that various collections or
 recensions existed. That of Dionysius (about a.d. 500), in Latin,
 contained fifty canons; that of John (Scholasticus) of Antioch (about
 a.d. 565) contained eighty-five canons: and "it is undeniable that the
 Greek copy which Dionysius had before him belonged to a different
 family of collections from that used by John Scholasticus, for they
 differ frequently, if not essentially, both in text and in the way of
 numbering the canons." [2528]

 Bishop Beveridge sought to trace these to the synods of the first two
 centuries, while Daillé held that the collection was made as late as
 the fifth century. The latter view is not generally accepted, though
 the existence of a variety of collections tells against some of the
 views of Bishop Beveridge. [2529] It is impossible to enter into a full
 discussion here. It seemed better to annotate the Canons from the
 results of Drey and Hefele, two most candid and scholarly
 Roman-Catholic investigators. [2530] The brief notes indicate the
 sources according to these authors. The reader will at once perceive
 from the views thus suggested, as well as from the contents of the
 Canons, that, while some canons are presumably quite ancient, a number
 belong to the fourth century, and that, as a complete collection, they
 cannot antedate the compilation of the Apostolic Constitutions. Indeed,
 Drey, who accepts the latter as Ante-Nicene (see above), thinks five of
 the canons (30, 67, 74, 81, 83) were derived from the canons of the
 Fourth OEcumenical Council at Chalcedon, a.d. 451, and quite a number
 of others he traces to synods and councils of the fourth century.
 Hefele doubts the positions taken by Drey in regard to most of these.
 He does not, however, insist that the collection is Ante-Nicene, while
 he traces the origin of many of the canons to the Apostolic
 Constitutions.

 [The following is Dr. Donaldson's Introductory Notice:--]


 There has always existed a great diversity of opinion as to the author
 and date of the Apostolical Constitutions Earlier writers were inclined
 to assign them to the apostolic age, and to Clement; but much
 discussion ensued, and the questions to which they give rise are still
 unsettled.

 The most peculiar opinion in regard to them is that of Whiston, who
 devoted a volume (vol. iii.) of his Primitive Christianity Revived to
 prove that "they are the most sacred of the canonical books of the New
 Testament;" for "these sacred Christian laws or constitutions were
 delivered at Jerusalem, and in Mount Sion, by our Saviour to the eleven
 apostles there assembled after His resurrection."

 Krabbe, who wrote an elaborate treatise on the origin and contents of
 the Apostolical Constitutions, tried to show that the first seven books
 were written "towards the end of the third century." The eighth book,
 he thinks, must have been written at the end of the fourth or beginning
 of the fifth.

 Bunsen thinks that, if we expunge a few interpolations of the fourth
 and fifth centuries, "we find ourselves unmistakeably in the midst of
 the life of the Church of the second and third centuries." [2531] "I
 think," he says, "I have proved in my analysis, more clearly than has
 been hitherto done, the Ante-Nicene origin of a book, or rather books,
 called by an early fiction Apostolical Constitutions, and consequently
 the still higher antiquity of the materials, both ecclesiastical and
 literary, which they contain. I have shown that the compilers made use
 of the Epistle of Barnabas, [2532] which belongs to the first half of
 the second century; that the eighth is an extract or transcript of
 Hippolytus; and that the first six books are so full of phrases found
 in the second interpolation of the Ignatian Epistles, that their last
 compiler, the author of the present text, must either have lived soon
 after that interpolation was made, or vice versa, or the interpolator
 and compiler must have been one and the same person. [2533] This last
 circumstance renders it probable that at least the first six books of
 the Greek compilation, like the Ignatian forgeries, [2534] were the
 produce of Asia Minor. Two points are self-evident--their Oriental
 origin, and that they belong neither to Antioch nor to Alexandria. I
 suppose nobody now will trace them to Palestine." [2535]

 Modern critics are equally at sea in determining the date of the
 collections of canons given at the end of the eighth book. Most believe
 that some of them belong to the apostolic age, while others are of a
 comparatively late date. The subject is very fully discussed in Krabbe.

 Bovius first gave a complete edition of the Constitutions (Venice,
 1563), but only in a Latin form. The Greek was first edited by the
 Jesuit Turrianus (Venice, 1563). It was reprinted several times.
 Cotelerius gave it in his Apostolical Fathers. In the second edition of
 this work, as prepared by Clericus (1724), the readings of two Vienna
 manuscripts were given. These V. mss. and Oxford ms. of book viii. are
 supposed by Bunsen to be nearer the original than the others, alike in
 what they give and in what they omit. The Constitutions have been
 edited by Ültzen (1853), and by Lagarde in Bunsen's Analecta
 Ante-Nicoena, vol. ii. (1854). Lagarde has partially introduced
 readings from the Syriac, Arabic, Æthiopic, and Coptic forms of the
 Constitutions. Whiston devoted the second volume of his Primitive
 Christianity to the Constitutions and Canons, giving both the Greek and
 English. It is his translation which we have republished, with
 considerable alterations. We have not deemed it necessary to give a
 tithe of the various readings, but have confined ourselves to those
 that seem important. We have also given no indication of the Syriac
 form of the first six books. We shall give this form by itself. The
 translation of Whiston was reprinted by Irah Chase, D.D., very
 carefully revised, with a translation of Krabbe's Essay on the Origin
 and Contents of the Constitutions, and his Dissertation on the Canons
 (New York, 1848). [2536]

 [2524] See the brief account prefixed to the version of the Teaching,
 [268]p. 372, supra.

 [2525] Neue Untersuchungen über die Constitut. u. Kanones der Ap.,
 Tübingen, 1832. Hefele (Conciliengeschichte, i., Freiburg, 1855, 2d
 ed., 1873, Edinb. trans., 1871, p. 449) speaks of this as the best work
 on the subject.

 [2526] [Needless to say that this seems to me utterly inconsistent with
 admitted facts.]

 [2527] Schaff, The Teaching of the Twelve Apostles, New York, 1885, pp.
 134, 135. Comp. Harnack on the Teaching in Texte und Untersuchungen, u.
 s. w., ii. pp. 246-268, Leipzig, 1884. Bishop Lightfoot (Epistles of
 St. Ignatius, London and Cambridge, 1885), differs from Harnack, who
 further discusses the topic in the Expositor, January, 1886.

 [2528] Hefele, History of Councils, i. p. 460.

 [2529] The Ethiopic form of these Canons has recently appeared in an
 English translation (Journal of Society of Biblical Literature and
 Exegesis, 1885, pp. 63-72). Professor George H. Schodde, Ph D., the
 translator, has made use of the edition of Winand Fell (Cologne, 1871)
 with a Latin version. The Canons in this form contain most of the
 matter given in the Edinburgh version from the Greek, and in the same
 order. But the number is only fifty-seven, in many cases several Greek
 canons being combined as one in the Ethiopic. Some modifications are
 found, but very little that differs materially from the Greek. This
 collection is not part of the Apostolical Church Order published by
 Tattam, Lagarde, Harnack, and others. Comp. Schaff, Teaching, pp.
 237-247.

 [2530] [However candid, even Hefele, unquestionably learned, has been
 enslaved to "Infallibility," and was never a freeman.]

 [2531] Christianity and Mankind, vol. ii. p. 405.

 [2532] [Evidently the Teaching must now be substituted for the Epistle
 of Barnabas.--R.]

 [2533] [So Harnack, most decidedly; but Bishop Lightfoot opposes this
 view.--R,]

 [2534] [Bunsen's magisterial views on many subjects are swept away by
 the recent work of Bishop Lightfoot on the Ignatian lierature.]

 [2535] Christianity and Mankind, vol. ii. p. 418.

 [2536] [A valuable work, apart from many of Dr. Chase's personal ideas
 not generally received by critics.]


constitutions of the holy apostles. [2537]

  Book I.

  Concerning the Laity.

 Sec. I.--General Commandments.

 The apostles and elders to all those who from among the Gentiles have
 believed in the Lord Jesus Christ; grace and peace from Almighty God,
 through our Lord Jesus Christ, be multiplied unto you in the
 acknowledgment of Him.

 The Catholic Church is the plantation of God and His beloved vineyard;
 [2538] containing those who have believed in His unerring divine
 religion; who are the heirs by faith of His everlasting kingdom; who
 are partakers of His divine influence, and of the communication of the
 Holy Spirit; who are armed through Jesus, and have received His fear
 into their hearts; who enjoy the benefit of the sprinkling of the
 precious and innocent blood of Christ; who have free liberty to call
 Almighty God, Father; being fellow-heirs and joint-partakers of His
 beloved Son: hearken to this holy doctrine, you who enjoy His promises,
 as being delivered by the command of your Saviour, and agreeable to His
 glorious words. Take care, ye children of God, to do all things in
 obedience to God; and in all things please Christ our Lord. [2539] For
 if any man follows unrighteousness, and does those things that are
 contrary to the will of God, such a one will be esteemed by God as the
 disobedient heathen.

 Concerning Covetousness.

 I. Abstain, therefore, from all unlawful desires and injustice. For it
 is written in the law, "Thou shalt not covet thy neighbour's wife, nor
 his field, nor his man-servant, nor his maid-servant, nor his ox, nor
 his ass, nor anything that is thy neighbour's;" [2540] for all coveting
 of these things is from the evil one. For he that covets his
 neighbour's wife, or his man-servant, or his maid-servant, is already
 in his mind an adulterer and a thief; and if he does not repent, is
 condemned by our Lord Jesus Christ: through whom [2541] glory be to God
 for ever, Amen. For He says in the Gospel, recapitulating, and
 confirming, and fulfilling the ten commandments of the law: "It is
 written in the law, Thou shalt not commit adultery: but I say unto you,
 that is, I said in the law, by Moses. But now I say unto you myself,
 Whosoever shall look on his neighbour's wife to lust after her, hath
 committed adultery with her already in his heart." [2542] Such a one is
 condemned of adultery, who covets his neighbour's wife in his mind. But
 does not he that covets an ox or an ass design to steal them? to apply
 them to his own use, and to lead them away? Or, again, does not he that
 covets a field, and continues in such a disposition, wickedly contrive
 how to remove the landmarks, and to compel the possessor to part with
 somewhat for nothing? For as the prophet somewhere speaks: "Woe to
 those who join house to house, and lay field to field, that they may
 deprive their neighbour of somewhat which was his." [2543] Wherefore he
 says: "Must you alone inhabit the earth? For these things have been
 heard in the ears of the Lord of hosts." And elsewhere: "Cursed be he
 who removeth his neighbour's landmarks: and all the people shall say,
 Amen." [2544] Wherefore Moses says: "Thou shalt not remove thy
 neighbour's landmarks [2545] which thy fathers have set." [2546] Upon
 this account, therefore, terrors, death, tribunals, and condemnations
 follow such as these from God. But as to those who are obedient to God,
 there is one law of God, simple, [2547] true, living, which is this:
 "Do not that to another which thou hatest another should do to thee."
 [2548] Thou wouldst not that any one should look upon thy wife with an
 evil design to corrupt her; do not thou, therefore, look upon thy
 neighbour's wife with a wicked intention. Thou wouldst not that thy
 garment should be taken away; do not thou, therefore, take away
 another's. Thou wouldst not be beaten, reproached, affronted; do not
 thou, therefore, serve any other in the like manner.

 That We Ought Not to Return Injuries, Nor Revenge Ourselves on Him that Does
 Us Wrong.

 II. But if any one curse thee, do thou bless him. For it is written in
 the book of Numbers: "He that blesseth thee is blessed, and he that
 curseth thee is cursed." [2549] In the same manner it is written in the
 Gospel: "Bless them that curse you." [2550] Being injured, do not
 avenge yourselves, but bear it with patience; for the Scripture speaks
 thus: "Say not thou, I will avenge myself on my enemy for what injuries
 he has offered me; but acquiesce under them, that the Lord may right
 thee, and bring vengeance upon him who injures thee." [2551] For so
 says He again in the Gospel: "Love your enemies, do good to them that
 hate you, and pray for them which despitefully use you and persecute
 you; and ye shall be the children of your Father which is in heaven:
 for He maketh His sun to shine on the evil and on the good, and raineth
 on the just and unjust." [2552] Let us therefore, beloved, attend to
 these commandments, that we may be found to be the children of light by
 doing them. Bear, therefore, with one another, ye servants and sons of
 God.

 [2538] Isa. v. 7, 2.

 [2539] The reading of the V. mss. The others read, "Christ our God."

 [2540] Ex. xx. 17.

 [2541] "To whom" in V. mss., and "to God" is omitted.

 [2542] Matt. v. 28

 [2543] Isa. v. 8

 [2544] Deut. xxvii. 17.

 [2545] Deut. xix. 14.

 [2546] Omitted in V. mss.

 [2547] Omitted in V. mss.

 [2548] Tob. iv. 16.

 [2549] Num. xxiv. 9.

 [2550] Luke vi. 28.

 [2551] Prov. xx. 22.

 [2552] Matt. v. 44, 45.

 Sec. II.--Commandments to Men.

 Concerning the Adornment of Ourselves, and the Sin Which Arises from Thence.

 Let the husband not be insolent nor arrogant towards his wife; but
 compassionate, bountiful, willing to please his own wife alone, [2553]
 and treat her honourably and obligingly, endeavouring to be agreeable
 to her; (III.) not adorning thyself in such a manner as may entice
 another woman to thee. For if thou art overcome by her, and sinnest
 with her, eternal death will overtake thee from God; and thou wilt be
 punished with sensible and bitter torments. Or if thou dost not
 perpetrate such a wicked act, but shakest her off, and refusest her, in
 this case thou art not wholly innocent, even though thou art not guilty
 of the crime itself, but only in so far as through thy adorning thou
 didst entice the woman to desire thee. For thou art the cause that the
 woman was so affected, and by her lusting after thee was guilty of
 adultery with thee: yet art thou not so guilty, because thou didst not
 send to her, who was ensnared by thee; nor didst thou desire her.
 Since, therefore, thou didst not deliver up thyself to her, thou shalt
 find mercy with the Lord thy God, who hath said, "Thou shalt not commit
 adultery," and, "Thou shalt not covet." [2554] For if such a woman,
 upon sight of thee, or unseasonable meeting with thee, was smitten in
 her mind, and sent to thee, but thou as a religious person didst refuse
 her, [2555] if she was wounded in her heart by thy beauty, and youth,
 and adorning, and fell in love with thee, thou wilt be found guilty of
 her transgressions, as having been the occasion of scandal to her,
 [2556] and shalt inherit a woe. [2557] Wherefore pray thou to the Lord
 God that no mischief may befall thee upon this account: for thou art
 not to please men, so as to commit sin; but God, so as to attain
 holiness of life, and be partaker of everlasting rest. That beauty
 which God and nature has bestowed on thee, do not further beautify; but
 modestly diminish it before men. Thus, do not thou permit the hair of
 thy head to grow too long, but rather cut it short; lest by a nice
 combing thy hair, and wearing it long, and anointing thyself, thou draw
 upon thyself such ensnared or ensnaring women. Neither do thou wear
 over-fine garments to seduce any; neither do thou, with an evil
 subtilty, affect over-fine stockings or shoes for thy feet, but only
 such as suit the measures of decency and usefulness. Neither do thou
 put a gold ring upon thy fingers; for all these ornaments are the signs
 of lasciviousness, which if thou be solicitous about in an indecent
 manner, thou wilt not act as becomes a good man: for it is not lawful
 for thee, a believer and a man of God, to permit the hair of thy head
 to grow long, and to brush it up together, nor to suffer it to spread
 abroad, nor to puff it up, nor by nice combing and platting to make it
 curl and shine; since that is contrary to the law, which says thus, in
 its additional precepts: "You shall not make to yourselves curls and
 round rasures." [2558] Nor may men destroy the hair of their beards,
 and unnaturally change the form of a man. For the law says: "Ye shall
 not mar your beards." [2559] For God the Creator has made this decent
 for women, but has determined that it is unsuitable for men. But if
 thou do these things to please men, in contradiction to the law, thou
 wilt be abominable with God, who created thee after His own image. If,
 therefore, thou wilt be acceptable to God, abstain from all those
 things which He hates, and do none of those things that are unpleasing
 to Him.

 That We Ought Not to Be Over-Curious About Those Who Live Wickedly, But to
 Be Intent Upon Our Own Proper Employment.

 IV. Thou shalt not be as a wanderer and gadder abroad, rambling about
 the streets, without just cause, to spy out such as live wickedly. But
 by minding thy own trade and employment, endeavour to do what is
 acceptable to God. And keeping in mind the oracles of Christ, meditate
 in the same continually. For so the Scripture says to thee: "Thou shalt
 meditate in His law day and night; when thou walkest in the field, and
 when thou sittest in thine house, and when thou liest down, and when
 thou risest up, that thou mayest have understanding in all things."
 [2560] Nay, although thou beest rich, and so dost not want a trade for
 thy maintenance, be not one that gads about, and walks abroad at
 random; but either go to some that are believers, and of the same
 religion, and confer and discourse with them about the lively oracles
 of God:--

 What Books of Scripture We Ought to Read.

 V. Or if thou stayest at home, read the books of the Law, of the Kings,
 with the Prophets; sing the hymns of David; and peruse diligently the
 Gospel, which is the completion of the other.

 That We Ought to Abstain from All the Books of Those that are Out of the
 Church.

 VI. Abstain from all the heathen books. For what hast thou to do with
 such foreign discourses, or laws, or false prophets, which subvert the
 faith of the unstable? For what defect dost thou find in the law of
 God, that thou shouldest have recourse to those heathenish fables? For
 if thou hast a mind to read history, thou hast the books of the Kings;
 if books of wisdom or poetry, thou hast those of the Prophets, of Job,
 and the Proverbs, in which thou wilt find greater depth of sagacity
 than in all the heathen poets and sophisters, because these are the
 words of the Lord, the only wise God. If thou desirest something to
 sing, thou hast the Psalms; if the origin of things, thou hast Genesis;
 if laws and statutes, thou hast the glorious law of the Lord God. Do
 thou therefore utterly abstain from all strange and diabolical books.
 Nay, when thou readest the law, think not thyself bound to observe the
 additional precepts; though not all of them, yet some of them. Read
 those barely for the sake of history, in order to the knowledge of
 them, and to glorify God that He has delivered thee from such great and
 so many bonds. Propose to thyself to distinguish what rules were from
 the law of nature, and what were added afterwards, or were such
 additional rules as were introduced and given in the wilderness to the
 Israelites after the making of the calf; for the law contains those
 precepts which were spoken by the Lord God before the people fell into
 idolatry, and made a calf like the Egyptian Apis--that is, the ten
 commandments. But as to those bonds which were further laid upon them
 after they had sinned, do not thou draw them upon thyself: for our
 Saviour came for no other reason but that He might deliver those that
 were obnoxious thereto from the wrath which was reserved far them, that
 [2561] He might fulfil the Law and the Prophets, and that He might
 abrogate or change those secondary bonds which were superadded to the
 rest of the law. For therefore did He call to us and say, "Come unto
 me, [2562] all ye that labour and are heavy laden, and I will give you
 rest." [2563] When, therefore, thou hast read the Law, which is
 agreeable to the Gospel and to the Prophets, read also the books of the
 Kings, that thou mayest thereby learn which of the kings were
 righteous, and how they were prospered by God, and how the promise of
 eternal life continued with them from Him; but those kings which went
 a-whoring from God did soon perish in their apostasy by the righteous
 judgment of God, and were deprived of His life, inheriting, instead of
 rest, eternal punishment. Wherefore by reading these books thou wilt be
 mightily strengthened in the faith, and edified in Christ, whose body
 and member thou art. Moreover, when thou walkest abroad in public, and
 hast a mind to bathe, make use of that bath which is appropriated to
 men, lest, by discovering thy body in an unseemly manner to women, or
 by seeing a sight not seemly for men, either thou beest ensnared, or
 thou ensnarest and enticest to thyself those women who easily yield to
 such temptations. [2564] Take care, therefore, and avoid such things,
 lest thou admit a snare upon thy own soul.

 Concerning a Bad Woman.

 VII. For let us learn what the sacred word says in the book of Wisdom:
 "My son, keep my words, and hide my commandments with thee. Say unto
 Wisdom, Thou art my sister; and make understanding familiar with thee:
 that she may keep thee from the strange and wicked woman, in case such
 a one accost thee with sweet words. For from the window of her house
 she looks into the street, to see if she can espy some young man among
 the foolish children, without understanding, walking in the
 market-place, in the meeting of the street near her house, and talking
 in the dusk of the evening, or in the silence and darkness of the
 night. A woman meets him in the appearance of an harlot, who steals
 away the hearts of young persons. She rambles about, and is dissolute;
 her feet abide not in her house: sometimes she is without, sometimes in
 the streets, and lieth in wait at every corner. Then she catches him,
 and kisses him, and with an impudent face says unto him, I have
 peace-offerings with me; this day do I pay my vows: therefore came I
 forth to meet thee; earnestly I have desired thy face, and I have found
 thee. I have decked my bed with coverings; with tapestry from Egypt
 have I adorned it. I have perfumed my bed with saffron, and my house
 with cinnamon. Come, let us take our fill of love until the morning;
 come, let us solace ourselves with love," etc. To which he adds: "With
 much discourse she seduced him, with snares from her lips she forced
 him. He goes after her like a silly bird." [2565] And again: "Do not
 hearken to a wicked woman; for though the lips of an harlot are like
 drops from an honey-comb, which for a while is smooth in thy throat,
 yet afterwards thou wilt find her more bitter than gall, and sharper
 than any two-edged sword." [2566] And again: "But get away quickly, and
 tarry not; fix not thine eyes upon her: for she hath thrown down many
 wounded; yea, innumerable multitudes have been slain by her." [2567]
 "If not," says he, "yet thou wilt repent at the last, when thy flesh
 and thy body are consumed, and wilt say, How have I hated instruction,
 and my heart has avoided the reproofs of the righteous! I have not
 hearkened to the voice of my instructor, nor inclined mine ear to my
 teacher. I have almost been in all evil." [2568] But we will make no
 more quotations; and if we have omitted any, be so prudent as to select
 the most valuable out of the Holy Scriptures, and confirm yourselves
 with them, rejecting all things that are evil, that so you may be found
 holy with God in eternal life.

 [2553] Omitted in V. mss.

 [2554] Ex. xx. 14, 17.

 [2555] The V. mss. add: "didst abstain from her, and didst not sin
 against her."

 [2556] Matt. xviii. 7.

 [2557] Not in V. mss.

 [2558] Lev. xix. 27, xxi. 5

 [2559] Lev. xix. 27, xxi. 5

 [2560] Josh. i. 8; Deut. vi. 7.

 [2561] Omitted in V mss.

 [2562] Omitted in V mss.

 [2563] Matt. xi. 28.

 [2564] Omitted in V mss.

 [2565] Prov. vii. 1, etc.

 [2566] Prov. v. 3, 4

 [2567] Prov. vii. 25, 26

 [2568] Prov. v. 11, etc.

 Sec. III.--Commandments to Women.

 Concerning the Subjection of a Wife to Her Husband, and that She Must Be
 Loving and Modest.

 VIII. Let the wife be obedient to her own proper husband, because "the
 husband is the head of the wife." [2569] But Christ is the head of that
 husband who walks in the way of righteousness; and "the head of Christ
 is God," even His Father. Therefore, O wife, next after the Almighty,
 our God and Father, the Lord of the present world and of the world to
 come, the Maker of everything that breathes, and of every power; and
 after His beloved Son, our Lord Jesus Christ, through whom [2570] glory
 be to God, do thou fear thy husband, and reverence him, pleasing him
 alone, rendering thyself acceptable to him in the several affairs of
 life, that so on thy account thy husband may be called blessed,
 according to the Wisdom of Solomon, which thus speaks: "Who can find a
 virtuous woman? for such a one is more precious than costly stones. The
 heart of her husband doth safely trust in her, so that she shall have
 no need of spoil: for she does good to her husband all the days of her
 life. She buyeth wool and flax, and worketh profitable things with her
 hands. She is like the merchants' ships, she bringeth her food from
 far. She riseth also while it is yet night, and giveth meat to her
 household, and food to her maidens. She considereth a field, and buyeth
 it; with the fruit of her hands she planteth a vineyard. She girdeth
 her loins with strength, and strengtheneth her arms. She tasteth that
 it is good to labour; her lamp goeth not out all the whole night. She
 stretcheth out her arms for useful work, and layeth her hands to the
 spindle. She openeth her hands to the needy; yea, she reacheth forth
 her hands to the poor. Her husband takes no care of the affairs of his
 house; for all that are with her are clothed with double garments. She
 maketh coats for her husband, clothings of silk and purple. Her husband
 is eminent in the gates, when he sitteth with the elders of the land.
 She maketh fine linen, and selleth it to the Phoenicians, and girdles
 to the Canaanites. She is clothed with glory and beauty, and she
 rejoices in the last days. She openeth her mouth with wisdom and
 discretion, and puts her words in order. The ways of her household are
 strict; she eateth not the bread of idleness. She will open her mouth
 with wisdom and caution, and upon her tongue are the laws of mercy. Her
 children arise up and praise her for her riches, and her husband joins
 in her praises. Many daughters have obtained wealth and done worthily,
 but thou surpassest and excellest them all. May lying flatteries and
 the vain beauty of a wife be far from thee. For a religious wife is
 blessed. Let her praise the fear of the Lord: [2571] give her of the
 fruits of her lips, and let her husband be praised in the gates."
 [2572] And again: "A virtuous wife is a crown to her husband." [2573]
 And again: "Many wives have built an house." [2574] You have learned
 what great commendations a prudent and loving wife receives from the
 Lord God. If thou desirest to be one of the faithful, and to please the
 Lord, O wife, do not superadd ornaments to thy beauty, in order to
 please other men; neither affect to wear fine broidering, garments, or
 shoes, to entice those who are allured by such things. For although
 thou dost not these wicked things with design of sinning thyself, but
 only for the sake of ornament and beauty, yet wilt thou not so escape
 future punishment, as having compelled another to look so hard at thee
 as to lust after thee, and as not having taken care both to avoid sin
 thyself, and the affording scandal to others. But if thou yield thyself
 up, and commit the crime, thou art both guilty of thy own sin, and the
 cause of the ruin of the other's soul also. Besides, when thou hast
 committed lewdness with one man, and beginnest to despair, thou wilt
 again turn away from thy duty, and follow others, and grow past
 feeling; as says the divine word: "When a wicked man comes into the
 depth of evil, he becomes a scorner, and then disgrace and reproach
 come upon him." [2575] For such a woman afterward being wounded,
 ensnares without restraint the souls of the foolish. Let us learn,
 therefore, how the divine word triumphs over such women, saying: "I
 hated a woman who is a snare and net to the heart of men worse than
 death; her hands are fetters." [2576] And in another passage: "As a
 jewel of gold in a swine's snout, so is beauty in a wicked woman."
 [2577] And again: "As a worm in wood, so does a wicked woman destroy
 her husband." [2578] And again: "It is better to dwell in the corner of
 the house-top, than with a contentious and an angry woman." [2579] You,
 therefore, who are Christian women, do not imitate such as these. But
 thou who designest to be faithful to thine own husband, take care to
 please him alone. And when thou art in the streets, cover thy head; for
 by such a covering thou wilt avoid being viewed of idle persons. Do not
 paint thy face, which is God's workmanship; for there is no part of
 thee which wants ornament, inasmuch as all things which God has made
 are very good. But the lascivious additional adorning of what is
 already good is an affront to the bounty of the Creator. Look downward
 when thou walkest abroad, veiling thyself as becomes women.

 That a Woman Must Not Bathe with Men.

 IX. Avoid also that disorderly practice of bathing in the same place
 with men; for many are the nets of the evil one. And let not a
 Christian woman bathe with an hermaphrodite; for if she is to veil her
 face, and conceal it with modesty from strange men, how can she bear to
 enter naked into the bath together with men? But if the bath be
 appropriated to women, let her bathe orderly, modestly, and moderately.
 But let her not bathe without occasion, nor much, nor often, nor in the
 middle of the day, nor, if possible, every day; and let the tenth hour
 of the day be the set time for such seasonable bathing. For it is
 convenient that thou, who art a Christian woman, shouldst ever
 constantly avoid a curiosity which has many eyes.

 Concerning a Contentious and Brawling Woman.

 X. But as to a spirit of contention, be sure to curb it as to all men,
 but principally as to thine husband; lest, if he be an unbeliever or an
 heathen, he may have an occasion of scandal or of blaspheming God, and
 thou be partaker of a woe from God. For, says He, "Woe to him by whom
 My name is blasphemed among the Gentiles;" [2580] and lest, if thy
 husband be a Christian, he be forced, from his knowledge of the
 Scriptures, to say that which is written in the book of Wisdom: "It is
 better to dwell in the wilderness, than with a contentious and an angry
 woman." [2581] You wives, therefore, demonstrate your piety by your
 modesty and meekness to all without the Church, whether they be women
 or men, in order to their conversion and improvement in the faith. And
 since we have warned you, and instructed you briefly, whom we do esteem
 our sisters, daughters, and members, as being wise yourselves,
 persevere all your lives in an unblameable course of life. Seek to know
 such kinds of learning whereby you may arrive at the kingdom of our
 Lord, and please Him, and so rest for ever and ever. Amen.

 [2569] 1 Cor. xi. 3.

 [2570] "To whom be glory," V. mss.

 [2571] [The incorrect rendering of the LXX. is here cited, as given in
 the text.--R.]

 [2572] Prov. xxxi. 10, etc.

 [2573] Prov. xii. 4

 [2574] [A.V., "Every wise woman buildeth her house."--R.] Prov. xiv. 1.

 [2575] Prov. xviii. 3.

 [2576] Eccles. vii. 26.

 [2577] Prov. xi. 22.

 [2578] Prov. xii. 4 in LXX.

 [2579] Prov. xxi. 9, 19

 [2580] Isa. lii. 5

 [2581] Prov. xxi. 19

 [2537] [On the titlepage of the Edinburgh edition is subjoined: "by
 Clement, bishop and citizen of Rome."]


constitutions of the holy apostles

  Book II.

  Of Bishops, Presbyters, and Deacons.

 Sec. I.--On Examining Candidates for the Episcopal Office.

 That a Bishop Must Be Well Instructed and Experienced in the Word.

 I. But concerning bishops, we have heard from our Lord, that a pastor
 who is to be ordained a bishop for the churches in every parish, must
 be unblameable, unreprovable, free from all kinds of wickedness common
 among men, not under fifty years of age; for such a one is in good part
 past youthful disorders, and the slanders of the heathen, as well as
 the reproaches which are sometimes cast upon many persons by some false
 brethren, who do not consider the word of God in the Gospel: "Whosoever
 speaketh an idle word shall give an account thereof to the Lord in the
 day of judgment." [2582] And again: "By thy words thou shalt be
 justified, and by thy words thou shalt be condemned." [2583] Let him
 therefore, if it is possible, be well educated; but if he be
 unlettered, let him at any rate be [2584] skilful in the word, and of
 competent age. But if in a small parish one advanced in years is not to
 be found, [2585] let some younger person, who has a good report among
 his neighbours, and is esteemed by them worthy of the office of a
 bishop,--who has carried himself from his youth with meekness and
 regularity, like a much elder person,--after examination, and a general
 good report, be ordained in peace. For Solomon at twelve years of age
 was king of Israel, [2586] and Josiah at eight years of age reigned
 righteously, [2587] and in like manner Joash governed the people at
 seven years of age. [2588] Wherefore, although the person be young, let
 him be meek, gentle, and quiet. For the Lord God says by Esaias: "Upon
 whom will I look, but upon him who is humble and quiet, and always
 trembles at my words?" [2589] In like manner it is in the Gospel also:
 "Blessed are the meek: for they shall inherit the earth." [2590] Let
 him also be merciful; for again it is said: "Blessed are the merciful:
 for they shall obtain mercy." [2591] Let him also be a peacemaker; for
 again it is said: "Blessed are the peacemakers: for they shall be
 called the sons of God." [2592] Let him also be one of a good
 conscience, purified from all evil, and wickedness, and
 unrighteousness; for it is said again: "Blessed are the pure in heart:
 for they shall see God." [2593]

 What Ought to Be the Characters of a Bishop and of the Rest of the Clergy.

 II. Let him therefore be sober, prudent, decent, firm, stable, not
 given to wine; no striker, but gentle; not a brawler, not covetous;
 "not a novice, lest, being puffed up with pride, he fall into
 condemnation, and the snare of the devil: for every one that exalteth
 himself shall be abased." [2594] Such a one a bishop ought to be, who
 has been the "husband of one wife," [2595] who also has herself had no
 other husband, "ruling well his own house." [2596] In this manner let
 examination be made when he is to receive ordination, and to be placed
 in his bishopric, whether he be grave, faithful, decent; whether he
 hath a grave and faithful wife, or has formerly had such a one; whether
 he hath educated his children piously, and has "brought them up in the
 nurture and admonition of the Lord;" [2597] whether his domestics do
 fear and reverence him, and are all obedient to him: for if those who
 are immediately about him for worldly concerns are seditious and
 disobedient, how will others not of his family, when they are under his
 management, become obedient to him?

 In What Things a Bishop is to Be Examined Before He is Ordained.

 III. Let examination also be made whether he be unblameable as to the
 concerns of this life; for it is written: "Search diligently for all
 the faults of him who is to be ordained for the priesthood." [2598]

 [2582] Matt. xii. 36.

 [2583] Matt. xii. 37.

 [2584] The words in italics occur only in the V. mss.

 [2585] The V. mss. read: "But if in a small parish one advanced in
 years is not to be found whom his neighbours testify to be worthy of
 the office of bishop, and wise enough to be appointed to it, and if
 there be a young man who has carried," etc.

 [2586] 1 Kings xii. (LXX.).

 [2587] 2 Kings xxii. 1.

 [2588] 2 Chron. xxiv. 1; 2 Kings xi. 3, 4.

 [2589] Isa. lxvi. 2.

 [2590] Matt. v. 5.

 [2591] Matt. v. 7.

 [2592] From the V. mss.; Matt. v. 9.

 [2593] Matt. v. 8.

 [2594] 1 Tim. iii. 6; Luke xiv. 11.

 [2595] 1 Tim. iii. 2.

 [2596] 1 Tim. iii. 4.

 [2597] Eph. vi. 4.

 [2598] Lev. xxi. 17, etc.

 Sec. II.--On the Character and Teaching of the Bishop.

 On which account let him also be void of anger; for Wisdom says: "Anger
 destroys even the prudent." [2599] Let him also be merciful, of a
 generous and loving temper; for our Lord says: "By this shall all men
 know that ye are my disciples, if ye love one another." [2600] Let him
 be also ready to give, a lover of the widow and the stranger; ready to
 serve, and minister, and attend; resolute in his duty; and let him know
 who is the most worthy of his assistance.

 That Charitable Distributions are Not to Be Made to Every Widow, But that
 Sometimes a Woman Who Has a Husband is to Be Preferred: and that No
 Distributions are to Be Made to Any One Who is Given to Gluttony,
 Drunkenness, and Idleness.

 IV. For if there be a widow who is able to support herself, and another
 woman who is not a widow, but is needy by reason of sickness, or the
 bringing up many children, or infirmity of her hands, let him stretch
 out his hand in charity rather to this latter. But if any one be in
 want by gluttony, drunkenness, or idleness, he does not deserve any
 assistance, or to be esteemed a member of the Church of God. For the
 Scripture, speaking of such persons, says: "The slothful hideth his
 hand in his bosom, and is not able to bring it to his mouth again."
 [2601] And again: "The sluggard folds up his hands, and eats his own
 flesh." [2602] "For every drunkard and whoremonger shall come to
 poverty, and every drowsy person shall be clothed with tatters and
 rags." [2603] And in another passage: "If thou give thine eyes to
 drinking and cups, thou shalt afterwards walk more naked than a
 pestle." [2604] For certainly idleness is the mother of famine.

 That a Bishop Must Be No Accepter of Persons in Judgment; That He Must
 Possess a Gentle Disposition, and Be Temperate in His Mode of Life.

 V. A bishop must be no accepter of persons; neither revering nor
 flattering a rich man contrary to what is right, nor overlooking nor
 domineering over a poor man. For, says God to Moses, "Thou shalt not
 accept the person of the rich, nor shalt thou pity a poor man in his
 cause: for the judgment is the Lord's." [2605] And again: "Thou shalt
 with exact justice follow that which is right." [2606] Let a bishop be
 frugal, and contented with a little in his meat and drink, that he may
 be ever in a sober frame, and disposed to instruct and admonish the
 ignorant; and let him not be costly in his diet, a pamperer of himself,
 given to pleasure, or fond of delicacies. Let him he patient and gentle
 in his admonitions, well instructed himself, meditating in and
 diligently studying the Lord's books, and reading them frequently, that
 so he may be able carefully to interpret the Scriptures, expounding the
 Gospel in correspondence with the prophets and with the law; and let
 the expositions from the law and the prophets correspond to the Gospel.
 For the Lord Jesus says: "Search the Scriptures; for they are those
 which testify of me." [2607] And again: "For Moses wrote of me." [2608]
 But, above all, let him carefully distinguish between the original law
 and the additional precepts, and show which are the laws for believers,
 and which the bonds for the unbelievers, lest any should fall under
 those bonds. Be careful, therefore, O bishop, to study the word, that
 thou mayest be able to explain everything exactly, and that thou mayest
 copiously nourish thy people with much doctrine, and enlighten them
 with the light of the law; for God says: "Enlighten yourselves with the
 light of knowledge, while we have yet opportunity." [2609]

 That a Bishop Must Not Be Given to Filthy Lucre, Nor Be a Surety Nor an
 Advocate.

 VI. Let not a bishop be given to filthy lucre, especially before the
 Gentiles, rather suffering than offering injuries; not covetous, nor
 rapacious; no purloiner; no admirer of the rich, nor hater of the poor;
 no evil-speaker, nor false witness; not given to anger; no brawler; not
 entangled with the affairs of this life; not a surety for any one, nor
 an accuser in suits about money; not ambitious; not double-minded, nor
 double-tongued; not ready to hearken to calumny or evil-speaking; not a
 dissembler; not addicted to the heathen festivals; not given to vain
 deceits; not eager after worldly things, nor a lover of money. For all
 these things are opposite to God, and pleasing to demons. Let the
 bishop earnestly give all these precepts in charge to the laity also,
 persuading them to imitate his conduct. For, says He, "Do ye make the
 children of Israel pious." [2610] Let him be prudent, humble, apt to
 admonish with the instructions of the Lord, well-disposed, one who has
 renounced all the wicked projects of this world, and all heathenish
 lusts; let hint be orderly, sharp in observing the wicked, and taking
 heed of them, but yet a friend to all; just, discerning; and whatsoever
 qualities are commendable among men, let the bishop possess them in
 himself. For if the pastor be unblameable as to any wickedness, he will
 compel his own disciples, and by his very mode of life press them to
 become worthy imitators of his own actions. As the prophet somewhere
 says, "And it will be, as is the priest, so is the people;" [2611] for
 our Lord and Teacher Jesus Christ, the Son [2612] of God, began first
 to do, and then to teach, as Luke somewhere says: [2613] "which Jesus
 began to do and to teach." [2614] Wherefore he says: "Whosoever shall
 do and teach, he shall be called great in the kingdom of God." [2615]
 For you bishops are to be guides and watchmen to the people, as you
 yourselves have Christ for your guide and watchman. Do you therefore
 become good guides and watchmen to the people of God. For the Lord says
 by Ezekiel, speaking to every one of you: "Son of man, I have given
 thee for a watchman to the house of Israel; and thou shalt hear the
 word from my mouth, and shalt observe, and shalt declare it from me.
 When I say unto the wicked, Thou shalt surely die; if thou dost not
 speak to warn the wicked from his wickedness, that wicked man shall die
 in his iniquity, and his blood will I require at thine hand. But if
 thou warn the wicked from his way, that he may turn from it, and he
 does not turn from it, he shall die in his iniquity, and thou hast
 delivered thy soul." [2616] "In the same manner, if the sword of war be
 approaching, and the people set a watchman to watch, and he see the
 same approach, and does not forewarn them, and the sword come and take
 one of them, he is taken away in his iniquity; but his blood shall be
 required at the watchman's hand, because he did not blow the trumpet.
 But if he blew the trumpet, and he who heard it would not take warning,
 and the sword come and take him away, his blood shall be upon him,
 because he heard the trumpet and took not warning. But he who took
 warning has delivered his soul; and the watchman, because he gave
 warning, shall surely live." [2617] The sword here is the judgment; the
 trumpet is the holy Gospel; the watchman is the bishop, who is set in
 the Church, who is obliged by his preaching to testify and vehemently
 to forewarn [2618] concerning that judgment. If ye do not declare and
 testify this to the people, the sins of those who are ignorant of it
 will be found upon you. Wherefore do you warn and reprove the
 uninstructed with boldness, teach the ignorant, confirm those that
 understand, bring back those that go astray. If we repeat the very same
 things on the same occasions, brethren, we shall not do amiss. For by
 frequent hearing it is to be hoped that some will be made ashamed, and
 at least do some good action, and avoid some wicked one. For says God
 by the prophet: "Testify those things to them; perhaps they will hear
 thy voice." [2619] And again: "If perhaps they will hear, if perhaps
 they will submit." [2620] Moses also says to the people: "If hearing
 thou wilt hear the Lord God, and do that which is good and right in His
 eyes." [2621] And again: [2622] "Hear, O Israel; the Lord our God is
 one Lord." [2623] And our Lord is often recorded in the Gospel to have
 said: "He that hath ears to hear, let him hear." [2624] And wise
 Solomon says: "My son, hear the instruction of thy father, and reject
 not the laws of thy mother." [2625] And, indeed, to this day men have
 not heard; for while they seem to have heard, they have not heard
 aright, as appears by their having left the one and only true God, and
 their being drawn into destructive and dangerous heresies, concerning
 which we shall speak again afterwards.

 [2599] Prov. xv. 1 (LXX.).

 [2600] John xiii. 35.

 [2601] Prov. xix. 24.

 [2602] Eccles. iv. 5.

 [2603] Not in V. mss. Prov. xxiii. 21.

 [2604] Prov. xxiii. 31 (LXX.). The word translated "pestle" has also
 been rendered "upper room," and some suppose it corrupt.

 [2605] Lev. xix. 15; Ex. xxiii. 3.

 [2606] Deut. i. 17, xvi. 20.

 [2607] John v. 39.

 [2608] John v. 46.

 [2609] Hos. x. 12.

 [2610] Lev. xv. 31.

 [2611] Hos. iv. 9.

 [2612] Not in V. mss.

 [2613] Acts i. 1.

 [2614] Not in V. mss.

 [2615] Matt. v. 19.

 [2616] Ezek. xxxiii. 7, etc.

 [2617] Ezek. xxxiii. 2, etc.

 [2618] Not in V. mss.

 [2619] Jer. xxvi.

 [2620] Ezek. ii. 7, iii. 11.

 [2621] Ex. xv. 26.

 [2622] Not in V. mss.

 [2623] Deut. vi. 4; Mark xii. 29.

 [2624] Matt. xi., xiii.

 [2625] Prov. i. 8.

 Sec. III.--How the Bishop is to Treat the Innocent, the Guilty, and the
 Penitent.

 What Ought to Be the Character of the Initiated.

 VII. Beloved, be it known to you that those who are baptized into the
 death of our Lord Jesus are obliged to go on no longer in sin; for as
 those who are dead cannot work wickedness any longer, so those who are
 dead with Christ cannot practice wickedness. We do not therefore
 believe, brethren, that any one who has received the washing of life
 continues in the practice of the licentious acts of transgressors. Now
 he who sins after his baptism, unless he repent and forsake his sins,
 shall be condemned to hell-fire.

 Concerning a Person Falsely Accused, or a Person Convicted.

 VIII. But if any one be maliciously prosecuted by the heathen, because
 he will not still go along with them to the same excess of riot, let
 him know that such a one is blessed of God, according as our Lord says
 in the Gospel: "Blessed are ye when men shall reproach you, or
 persecute you, or say all manner of evil against you falsely, for my
 sake. Rejoice and be exceeding glad, for your reward is great in
 heaven." [2626] If, therefore, any one be slandered and falsely
 accused, such a one is blessed; for the Scripture says, "A man that is
 a reprobate is not tried by God." [2627] But if any one be convicted as
 having done a wicked action, such a one not only hurts himself, but
 occasions the whole body of the Church and its doctrine to be
 blasphemed; as if we Christians did not practice those things that we
 declare to be good and honest, and we ourselves shall be reproached by
 the Lord, that "they say and do not." [2628] Wherefore the bishop must
 boldly reject such as these upon full conviction, unless they change
 their course of life.

 That a Bishop Ought Not to Receive Bribes.

 IX. For the bishop must not only himself give no offence, but must be
 no respecter of persons; in meekness instructing those that offend. But
 if he himself has not a good conscience, and is a respecter of persons
 for the sake of filthy lucre, and receiving of bribes, and spares the
 open offender, and permits him to continue in the Church, he disregards
 the voice of God and of our Lord, which says, "Thou shalt exactly
 execute right judgment." [2629] "Thou shalt not accept persons in
 judgment: thou shalt not justify the ungodly." [2630] "Thou shalt not
 receive gifts against any one's life; for gifts do blind the eyes of
 the wise, and pervert the words of the righteous." [2631] And elsewhere
 He says: "Take away from among yourselves that wicked person." [2632]
 And Solomon says in his Proverbs: "Cast out a pestilent fellow from the
 congregation, and strife will go out along with him." [2633]

 That a Bishop Who by Wrong Judgment Spares an Offender is Himself Guilty.

 X. But he who does not consider these things, will, contrary to
 justice, spare him who deserves punishment; as Saul spared Agag, [2634]
 and Eli [2635] his sons, "who knew not the Lord." Such a one profanes
 his own dignity, and that Church of God which is in his parish. Such a
 one is esteemed unjust before God and holy men, as affording occasion
 of scandal to many of the newly baptized, and to the catechumens; as
 also to the youth of both sexes, to whom a woe belongs, add "a
 mill-stone about his neck," [2636] and drowning, on account of his
 guilt. For, observing what a person their governor is, through his
 wickedness and neglect of justice they will grow sceptical, and,
 indulging the same disease, will be compelled to perish with him; as
 was the case of the people joining with Jeroboam, [2637] and those
 which were in the conspiracy with Corah. [2638] But if the offender
 sees that the bishop and deacons are innocent and unblameable, and the
 flock pure, he will either not venture to despise their authority, and
 to enter into the Church of God at all, as one smitten by his own
 conscience: or if he values nothing, and ventures to enter in, either
 he will be convicted immediately, as Uzza [2639] at the ark, when he
 touched it to support it; and as Achan, [2640] when he stole the
 accursed thing; and as Gehazi, [2641] when he coveted the money of
 Naaman, and so will be immediately punished: or else he will be
 admonished by the pastor, and drawn to repentance. For when he looks
 round the whole Church one by one, and can spy no blemish, neither in
 the bishop nor in the people who are under his care, he will be put to
 confusion, and pricked at the heart, and in a peaceable manner will go
 his way with shame and many tears, and the flock will remain pure. He
 will apply himself to God with tears, and will repent of his sins, and
 have hope. Nay, the whole flock, at the sight of his tears, will be
 instructed, because a sinner avoids destruction by repentance.

 How a Bishop Ought to Judge Offenders.

 XI. Upon this account, therefore, O bishop, endeavour to be pure in thy
 actions, and to adorn thy place and dignity, which is that of one
 sustaining the character of God among men, as being set over all men,
 over priests, kings, rulers, fathers, children, teachers, and in
 general over all those who are subject to thee: and so sit in the
 Church when thou speakest, as having authority to judge offenders. For
 to you, O bishops, it is said: "Whatsoever ye shall bind on earth shall
 be bound in heaven; and whatsoever ye shall loose on earth shall be
 loosed in heaven." [2642]

 Instruction as to How a Bishop Ought to Behave Himself to the Penitent.

 XII. Do thou therefore, O bishop, judge with authority like God, yet
 receive the penitent; for God is a God of mercy. Rebuke those that sin,
 admonish those that are not converted, exhort those that stand to
 persevere in their goodness, receive the penitent; for the Lord God has
 promised with an oath to afford remission to the penitent for what
 things they have done amiss. For He says by Ezekiel: "Speak unto them,
 As I live, saith the Lord, I would not the death of a sinner, but that
 the wicked turn from his evil way, and live. Turn ye therefore front
 your evil ways; for why will ye die, O house of Israel?" [2643] Here
 the word [2644] affords hope to sinners, that if they will repent they
 shall have hope of salvation, lest otherwise out of despair they yield
 themselves up to their transgressions; but that, having hope of
 salvation, they may he converted, and may address to God with tears, on
 account of their sins, and may repent from their hearts, and so appease
 His displeasure towards them; so shall they receive a pardon from Him,
 as from a merciful Father.

 That We Ought to Beware How We Make Trial of Any Sinful Course.

 XIII. Yet it is very necessary that those who are yet innocent should
 continue so, and not make an experiment what sin is, that they may not
 have occasion for trouble, sorrow, and those lamentations which are in
 order to forgiveness. For how dost thou know, O man, when thou sinnest,
 whether thou shalt live any number of days in this present state, that
 thou mayest have time to repent? For the time of thy departure out of
 this world is uncertain; and if thou diest in sin, there will remain no
 repentance for thee; as God says by David, "In the grave who will
 confess to Thee?" [2645] It behoves us, therefore, to be ready in the
 doing of our duty, that so we may await our passage into another world
 without sorrow. Wherefore also the Divine Word exhorts, speaking to
 thee by the wise Solomon, [2646] "Prepare thy works against thy exit,
 and provide all beforehand in the field," [2647] lest some of the
 things necessary to thy journey be wanting; as the oil of piety was
 deficient in the five foolish virgins [2648] mentioned in the Gospel,
 when they, on account of their having extinguished their lamps of
 divine knowledge, were shut out of the bride-chamber. Wherefore he who
 values the security of his soul will take care to be out of danger, by
 keeping free from sin, that so he may preserve the advantage of his
 former good works to himself. Do thou, therefore, so judge as executing
 judgment for God. For, as the Scripture says, "the judgment is the
 Lord's." [2649] In the first place, therefore, condemn the guilty
 person with authority; afterwards try to bring him home with mercy and
 compassion, and readiness to receive him, promising him salvation if he
 will change his course of life, and become a penitent; and when he does
 repent, and has submitted to his chastisement, receive him: remembering
 that our Lord has said, "There is joy in heaven over one sinner that
 repenteth." [2650]

 Concerning Those Who Affirm that Penitents are Not to Be Received into the
 Church. That a Righteous Person, Although He Converse with a Sinner, Will
 Not Perish with Him. That No Person is Punished for Another, But Every One
 Must Give an Account of Himself. That We Must Assist Those Who are Weak in
 the Faith; And that a Bishop Must Not Be Governed by Any Turbulent Person
 Among the Laity.

 XIV. But if thou refusest to receive him that repents, thou exposest
 him to those who lie in wait to destroy, forgetting what David says:
 "Deliver not my soul, which confesses to Thee, unto destroying beasts."
 [2651] Wherefore Jeremiah, when he is exhorting men to repentance, says
 thus: "Shall not he that falleth arise? or he that turneth away, cannot
 he return? Wherefore have my people gone back by a shameless
 backsliding? and they are hardened in their purpose. [2652] Turn, ye
 backsliding children, and I will heal your backslidings." [2653]
 Receive, therefore, without any doubting, him that repents. Be not
 hindered by such unmerciful men, who say that we must not be defiled
 with such as those, nor so much as speak to them: for such advice is
 from men that are unacquainted with God and His providence, and are
 unreasonable judges, and unmerciful brutes. These men are ignorant that
 we ought to avoid society with offenders, not in discourse, but in
 actions: for "the righteousness of the righteous shall be upon him, and
 the wickedness of the wicked shall be upon him." [2654] And again: "If
 a land sinneth against me by trespassing grievously, and I stretch out
 my hand upon it, and break the staff of bread upon it, and send famine
 upon it, and destroy man and beast therein: though these three men,
 Noah, Job, and Daniel, were in the midst of it, they shall only save
 their own souls by their righteousness, saith the Lord God." [2655] The
 Scripture most clearly shows that a righteous man that converses with a
 wicked man does not perish with him. For in the present world the
 righteous and the wicked are mingled together in the common affairs of
 life, but not in holy communion: and in this the friends and favourites
 of God are guilty of no sin. For they do but imitate "their Farther
 which is in heaven, who maketh His sun to rise on the righteous and
 unrighteous, and sendeth His rain on the evil and on the good;" [2656]
 and the righteous man undergoes no peril on this account. For those who
 conquer and those who are conquered are in the same place of running,
 but only those who have bravely undergone the race are where the
 garland is bestowed; and "no one is crowned, unless he strive
 lawfully." [2657] For every one shall give account of himself, and God
 will not destroy the righteous with the wicked; for with Him it is a
 constant rule, that innocence is never punished. For neither did He
 drown Noah, nor burn up Lot, nor destroy Rahab for company. And if you
 desire to know how this matter was among us, Judas was one of us, and
 took the like part of the ministry which we had; and Simon the magician
 received the seal of the Lord. Yet both the one and the other proving
 wicked, the former hanged himself, and the latter, as he flew in the
 air in a manner unnatural, was dashed against the earth. Moreover, Noah
 and his sons with him were in the ark; but Ham, who alone was found
 wicked, received punishment in his son. [2658] But if fathers are not
 punished for their children, nor children for their fathers, it is
 thence clear that neither will wives be punished for their husbands,
 nor servants for their masters, nor one relation for another, nor one
 friend for another, nor the righteous for the wicked. But every one
 will be required an account of his own doing. For neither was
 punishment inflicted on Noah for the world, nor was Lot destroyed by
 fire for the Sodomites, nor was Rahab slain for the inhabitants of
 Jericho, nor Israel for the Egyptians. For not the dwelling together,
 but the agreement in their sentiments, alone could condemn the
 righteous with the wicked. We ought not therefore to hearken to such
 persons who call for death, and hate mankind, and love accusations, and
 under fair pretences bring men to death. For one man shall not die for
 another, but "every one is held with the chains of his own sins."
 [2659] And, "behold, the man and his work is before his face." [2660]
 Now we ought to assist those who are with us, [2661] and are in danger,
 and fall, and, as far as lies in our power, to reduce them to sobriety
 by our exhortations, and so save them from death. For "the whole have
 no need of the physician, but the sick;" [2662] since "it is not
 pleasing in the sight of your Father that one of these little ones
 should perish." [2663] For we ought not to establish the will of
 hard-hearted men, but the will of the God and Father of the universe,
 which is revealed to us by Jesus Christ our Lord, to whom be glory for
 ever. Amen.

 For it is not equitable that thou, O bishop, who art the head, shouldst
 submit to the tail, that is, to some seditious person among the laity,
 to the destruction of another, but to God alone. For it is thy
 privilege to govern those under thee, but not to be governed by them.
 For neither does a son, who is subject by the course of generation,
 govern his father; nor a slave, who is subject by law, govern his
 master; nor does a scholar govern his teacher, nor a soldier his king,
 nor any of the laity his bishop. For that there is no reason to suppose
 that such as converse with the wicked, in order to their instruction in
 the word, are defiled by or partake of their sins, Ezekiel, as it were
 on purpose preventing the suspicions of ill-disposed persons, says
 thus: "Why do you speak this proverb concerning the land of Israel? The
 fathers have eaten sour grapes, and the children's teeth are set on
 edge. As I live, saith the Lord God, ye shall not henceforth have
 occasion to use this proverb in Israel. For all souls are mine, in like
 manner as the soul of the father, so also the soul of the son is mine:
 the soul that sinneth, it shall die. But the man who is righteous, and
 does judgment and justice" (and so the prophet reckons up the rest of
 the virtues, and then adds for a conclusion, "Such a one is just"), "he
 shall surely live, saith the Lord God. And if he beget a son who is a
 robber, a shedder of blood, and walks not in the way of his righteous
 father" (and when the prophet had added what follows, he adds in the
 conclusion), "he shall certainly not live: he has done all this
 wickedness; he shall surely die; his blood shall be upon him. Yet they
 will ask thee, Why? Does not the son bear the iniquity of the father;
 or his righteousness, having exercised righteousness and mercy himself?
 And thou shalt say unto them, The soul that sinneth, it shall die. The
 son shall not bear the iniquity of the father, and the father shall not
 bear the iniquity of the son. The righteousness of the righteous shall
 be upon him, and the wickedness of the wicked shall be upon him."
 [2664] And a little after he says: "When the righteous turneth away
 from his righteousness, and committeth iniquity, all his righteousness,
 by reason of all his wickedness which he has committed, shall not be
 mentioned to him: in his iniquity which he hath committed, and in his
 sin which he hath sinned, in them shall he die." And a little after he
 adds: "When the wicked turneth away from his wickedness which he hath
 committed, and doth judgment and justice, he hath preserved his soul,
 he hath turned away from all his ungodliness which he hath done; he
 shall surely live, he shall not die." And afterwards: "I will judge
 every one of you according to his ways, O house of Israel, saith the
 Lord God."

 That a Priest Must Neither Overlook Offences, Nor Be Rash in Punishing Them.

 XV. Observe, you who are our beloved sons, how merciful yet righteous
 the Lord our God is; how gracious and kind to men; and yet most
 certainly "He will not acquit the guilty:" [2665] though He welcomes
 the returning sinner, and revives him, leaving no room for suspicion to
 such as wish to judge sternly and to reject offenders entirely, and to
 refuse to vouchsafe to them exhortations which might bring them to
 repentance. In contradiction to such, God by Isaiah says to the
 bishops: "Comfort ye, comfort ye my people, ye priests: speak
 comfortably to Jerusalem." It therefore behoves you, upon hearing those
 words of His, to encourage those who have offended, and lead them to
 repentance, and afford them hope, and not vainly to suppose that you
 shall be partakers of their offences on account of such your love to
 them. Receive the penitent with alacrity, and rejoice over them, and
 with mercy and bowels of compassion judge the sinners. For if a person
 was walking by the side of a river, and ready to stumble, and thou
 shouldest push him and thrust him into the river, instead of offering
 him thy hand for his assistance, thou wouldst be guilty of the murder
 of thy brother; whereas thou oughtest rather to lend thy helping hand
 as he was ready to fall, lest he perish without remedy, that both the
 people may take warning, and the offender may not utterly perish. It is
 thy duty, O bishop, neither to overlook the sins of the people, nor to
 reject those who are penitent, that thou mayst not unskilfully destroy
 the Lord's flock, or dishonour His new name, which is imposed on His
 people, and thou thyself beest reproached as those ancient pastors
 were, of whom God speaks thus to Jeremiah: "Many shepherds have
 destroyed my vineyard; they have polluted my heritage." [2666] And in
 another passage: "My anger is waxed hot against the shepherds, and
 against the lambs shall I have indignation." [2667] And elsewhere: "Ye
 are the priests that dishonour my name." [2668]

 Of Repentance, the Manner of It, and Rules About It.

 XVI. When thou seest the offender, with severity command him to be cast
 out; and as he is going out, let the deacons also treat him with
 severity, and then let them go and seek for him, and detain him out of
 the Church; and when they come in, let them entreat thee for him. For
 our Saviour Himself entreated His Father for those who had sinned, as
 it is written in the Gospel: "Father, forgive them; for they know not
 what they do." [2669] Then order the offender to come in; and if upon
 examination thou findest that he is penitent, and fit to be received at
 all into the Church when thou hast afflicted him his days of fasting,
 according to the degree of his offence--as two, three, five, or seven
 weeks--so set him at liberty, and speak such things to him as are fit
 to be said in way of reproof, instruction, and exhortation to a sinner
 for his reformation, that so he may continue privately in his humility,
 and pray to God to be merciful to him, saying: "If Thou, O Lord,
 shouldest mark iniquities, O Lord, who should stand? For with Thee
 there is propitiation." [2670] Of this sort of declaration is that
 which is said in the book of Genesis to Cain: "Thou hast sinned; be
 quiet;" [2671] that is, do not go on in sin. For that a sinner ought to
 be ashamed for his own sin, that oracle of God delivered to Moses
 concerning Miriam is a sufficient proof, when he prayed that she might
 be forgiven. For says God to him: "If her father had spit in her face,
 should she not be ashamed? Let her be shut out of the camp seven days,
 and afterwards let her come in again." [2672] We therefore ought to do
 so with offenders, when they profess their repentance,--namely, to
 separate them some determinate time, according to the proportion of
 their offence, and afterwards, like fathers to children, receive them
 again upon their repentance.

 That a Bishop Must Be Unblameable, and a Pattern for Those Who are Under His
 Charge.

 XVII. But if the bishop himself be an offender, how will he be able any
 longer to prosecute the offence of another? Or how will he be able to
 reprove another, either he or his deacons, if by accepting of persons,
 or receiving of bribes, they have not all a clear conscience? For when
 the ruler asks, and the judge receives, judgment is not brought to
 perfection; but when both are "companions of thieves, and regardless of
 doing justice to the widows," [2673] those who are under the bishop
 will not be able to support and vindicate him: for they will say to him
 what is written in the Gospel, "Why beholdest thou the mote that is in
 thy brother's eye, but considerest not the beam that is in thine own
 eye?" [2674] Let the bishop, therefore, with his deacons, dread to bear
 any such thing; that is, let him give no occasion for it. For an
 offender, when he sees any other doing as bad as himself, will be
 encouraged to do the very same things; and then the wicked one, taking
 occasion from a single instance, works in others, which God forbid: and
 by that means the flock will be destroyed. For the greater number of
 offenders there are, the greater is the mischief that is done by them:
 for sin which passes without correction grows worse and worse, and
 spreads to others; since "a little leaven infects the whole lump,"
 [2675] and one thief spreads the abomination over a whole nation and
 "dead flies spoil the whole pot of sweet ointment;" [2676] and "when a
 king hearkens to unrighteous counsel, all the servants under him are
 wicked." [2677] So one scabbed sheep, if not separated from those that
 are whole, infects the rest with the same distemper; and a man infected
 with the plague is to be avoided by all men; and a mad dog is dangerous
 to every one that he touches. If, therefore, we neglect to separate the
 transgressor from the Church of God, we shall make the "Lord's house a
 den of thieves." [2678] For it is the bishop's duty not to be silent in
 the case of offenders, but to rebuke them, to exhort them, to beat them
 down, to afflict them with fastings, that so he may strike a pious
 dread into the rest: for, as He says, "make ye the children of Israel
 pious." [2679] For the bishop must be one who discourages sin by his
 exhortations, and sets a pattern of righteousness, and proclaims those
 good things which are prepared by God, and declares that wrath which
 will come at the day of judgment, lest he contemn and neglect the
 plantation of God; and, on account of his carelessness, hear that which
 is said in Hosea: "Why have ye held your peace at impiety, and have
 reaped the fruit thereof?" [2680]

 That a Bishop Must Take Care that His People Do Not Sin, Considering that He
 is Set for a Watchman Among Them.

 XVIII. Let the bishop, therefore, extend his concern to all sorts of
 people: to those who have not offended, that they may continue
 innocent; to those who offend, that they may repent. For to you does
 the Lord speak thus: "Take heed that ye offend not one of these little
 ones." [2681] It is your duty also to give remission to the penitent.
 For as soon as ever one who has offended says, in the sincerity of his
 soul, "I have sinned against the Lord," the Holy Spirit answers, "The
 Lord also hath forgiven thy sin; be of good cheer, thou shalt not die."
 [2682] Be sensible, therefore, O bishop, of the dignity of thy place,
 that as thou hast received the power of binding, so hast thou also that
 of loosing. Having therefore the power of loosing, know thyself, and
 behave thyself in this world as becomes thy place, being aware that
 thou hast a great account to give. "For to whom," as the Scripture
 says, "men have entrusted much, of him they will require the more."
 [2683] For no one man is free from sin, excepting Him that was made man
 for us; since it is written: "No man is pure from filthiness; no, not
 though he be but one day old." [2684] Upon which account the lives and
 conduct of the ancient holy men and patriarchs are described; not that
 we may reproach them from our reading, but that we ourselves may
 repent, and have hope that we also shall obtain forgiveness. For their
 blemishes are to us both security and admonition, because we hence
 learn, when we have offended, that if we repent we shall have pardon.
 For it is written: "Who can boast that he has a clean heart? and who
 dare affirm that he is pure from sin?" [2685] No man, therefore, is
 without sin. Do thou therefore labour to the utmost of thy power to be
 unblameable; and be solicitous of all the parts of thy flock, lest any
 one be scandalized on thy account, and thereby perish. For the layman
 is solicitous only for himself, but thou for all, as having a greater
 burden, and carrying a heavier load. For it is written: "And the Lord
 said unto Moses, Thou and Aaron shall bear the sins of the priesthood."
 [2686] Since, therefore, thou art to give an account of all, take care
 of all. Preserve those that are sound, admonish those that sin; and
 when thou hast afflicted them with fasting, give them ease by
 remission; and when with tears the offender begs readmission, receive
 him, and let the whole Church pray for him; and when by imposition of
 thy hand thou hast admitted him, give him leave to abide afterwards in
 the flock. But for the drowsy and the careless, do thou endeavour to
 convert and confirm, and warn and cure them, as sensible how great a
 reward thou shalt have for doing so, and how great danger thou wilt
 incur if thou beest negligent therein. For Ezekiel speaks thus to those
 overseers who take no care of the people: "Woe unto the shepherds of
 Israel, for they have fed themselves; the shepherds feed not the sheep,
 but themselves. Ye eat the milk, and are clothed with the wool; ye slay
 the strong, ye do not feed the sheep. The weak have ye not
 strengthened, neither have ye healed that which was sick, neither have
 ye bound up that which was broken, neither have ye brought again that
 which was driven away, neither have ye sought that which was lost; but,
 violently ye chastised them with insult: and they were scattered,
 because there was no shepherd; and they became meat to all the beasts
 of the forest." And again: "The shepherds did not search for my sheep;
 and the shepherds fed themselves, but they fed not my sheep." And a
 little after: "Behold, I am against the shepherds, and I will require
 my sheep at their hands, and cause them to cease from feeding my sheep,
 neither shall the shepherds feed themselves any more; and I will
 deliver my sheep out of their hands, and they shall not be meat for
 them." And he also adds, speaking to the people: "Behold, I will judge
 between sheep and sheep, and between rams and rams. Seemed it a small
 thing unto you to have eaten up the good pasture, and to have trodden
 down with your feet the residue of your pasture, and that the sheep
 have eaten what was trodden down with your feet? "And a little after He
 adds: "And ye shall know that I am the Lord, and you the sheep of my
 pasture; ye are my men, and I am your God, saith the Lord God." [2687]

 That a Shepherd Who is Careless of His Sheep Will Be Condemned, and that a
 Sheep Which Will Not Be Led by the Shepherd is to Be Punished.

 XIX. Hear, O ye bishops; and hear, O ye of the laity, how God speaks:
 "I will judge between ram and ram, and between sheep and sheep." And He
 says to the shepherds: "Ye shall be judged for your unskilfulness, and
 for destroying the sheep." That is, I will judge between one bishop and
 another, and between one lay person and another, and between one ruler
 and another (for these sheep and these rams are not irrational, but
 rational creatures): lest at any time a lay person should say, I am a
 sheep and not a shepherd, and I am not concerned for myself; let the
 shepherd look to that, for he alone will be required to give an account
 for me. For as that sheep that will not follow its good shepherd is
 exposed to the wolves, to its destruction; so that which follows a bad
 shepherd is also exposed to unavoidable death, since his shepherd will
 devour him. Wherefore care must be had to avoid destructive shepherds.

 How the Governed are to Obey the Bishops Who are Set Over Them.

 XX. As to a good shepherd, let the lay person honour him, love him,
 reverence him as his lord, as his master, as the high priest of God, as
 a teacher of piety. For he that heareth him, heareth Christ; and he
 that rejecteth him, rejecteth Christ; and he who does not receive
 Christ, does not receive His God and Father: for, says He, "He that
 heareth you, heareth me; and he that rejecteth you, rejecteth me; and
 he that rejecteth me, rejecteth Him that sent me." [2688] In like
 manner, let the bishop love the laity as his children, fostering and
 cherishing them with affectionate diligence; as eggs, in order to the
 hatching of young ones; or as young ones, taking them in his arms, to
 the rearing them into birds: admonishing all men; reproving all who
 stand in need of reproof; reproving, that is, but not striking; beating
 them down to make them ashamed, but not overthrowing them; warning them
 in order to their conversion: chiding them in order to their
 reformation and better course of life; watching the strong, that is,
 keeping him firm in the faith who is already strong; feeding the people
 peaceably; strengthening the weak, that is, confirming with exhortation
 that which is tempted; healing that which is sick, that is, curing by
 instruction that which is weak in the faith through doubtfulness of
 mind; binding up that which is broken, that is, binding up by
 comfortable admonitions that which is gone astray, or wounded, bruised,
 or broken by their sins, and put out of the way; leasing it of its
 offences, and giving hope: by this means restore it in strength to the
 Church, bringing it back into the flock. Bring again that which is
 driven away, that is, do not permit that which is in its sins, and is
 cast out by way of punishment, to continue excluded; but receiving it,
 and bringing it back, restore it to the flock, that is, to the people
 of the undefiled Church. Seek for that which is lost, that is, do not
 suffer that which desponds of its salvation, by reason of the multitude
 of its offences, utterly to perish. Do thou search for that which is
 grown sleepy, drowsy, and sluggish, and that which is unmindful of its
 own life, through the depth of its sleep, and which is at a great
 distance from its own flock, so as to be in danger of falling among the
 wolves, and being devoured by them. Bring it back by admonition, exhort
 it to be watchful; and insinuate hope, not permitting it to say that
 which was said by some: "Our impieties are upon us, and we pine away in
 them; how shall we then live?" [2689] As far as possible, therefore,
 let the bishop make the offence his own, and say to the sinner, Do thou
 but return, and I will undertake to suffer death for thee, as our Lord
 suffered death for me, and for all men. For "the good shepherd lays
 down his life for the sheep; but he that is an hireling, and not the
 shepherd, whose own the sheep are not, seeth the wolf coming, that is,
 the devil, and he leaveth the sheep, and fleeth, and the wolf seizes
 upon them." [2690] We must know, therefore, that God is very merciful
 to those who have offended, and hath promised repentance with an oath.
 But he who has offended, and is unacquainted with this promise of God
 concerning repentance, and does not understand His long-suffering and
 forbearance, and besides is ignorant of the Holy Scriptures, which
 proclaim repentance, inasmuch as he has never learned them from you,
 perishes through his folly. But do thou, like a compassionate shepherd,
 and a diligent feeder of the flock, search out, and keep an account of
 thy flock. Seek that which is wanting; [2691] as the Lord God our
 gracious Father has sent His own Son, the good Shepherd and Saviour,
 our Master Jesus, and has commanded Him to "leave the ninety-nine upon
 the mountains, and to go in search after that which was lost, and when
 He had found it, to take it upon His shoulders, and to carry it into
 the flock, rejoicing that He had found that which was lost." [2692] In
 like manner, be obedient, O bishop, and do thou seek that which was
 lost, guide that which has wandered out of the right way, bring back
 that which is gone astray: for thou hast authority to bring them back,
 and to deliver those that are broken-hearted by remission. For by thee
 does our Saviour say to him who is discouraged under the sense of his
 sins, "Thy sins are forgiven thee: thy faith hath saved thee; go in
 peace." [2693] But this peace and haven of tranquillity is the Church
 of Christ, into which do thou, when thou hast loosed them from their
 sins, restore them, as being now sound and unblameable, of good hope,
 diligent, laborious in good works. As a skilful and compassionate
 physician, heal all such as have wandered in the ways of sin; for "they
 that are whole have no need of a physician, but they that are sick. For
 the Son of man came to save and to seek that which was lost." [2694]
 Since thou art therefore a physician of the Lord's Church, provide
 remedies suitable to every patient's case. Cure them, heal them by all
 means possible; restore them sound to the Church. Feed the flock, "not
 with insolence and contempt, as lording it over them," [2695] but as a
 gentle shepherd, "gathering the lambs into thy bosom, and gently
 leading those which are with young." [2696]

 That It is a Dangerous Thing to Judge Without Hearing Both Sides, or to
 Determine of Punishment Against a Person Before He is Convicted.

 XXI. Be gentle, gracious, mild, without guile, without falsehood; not
 rigid, not insolent, not severe, not arrogant, not unmerciful, not
 puffed up, not a man-pleaser, not timorous, not double-minded, not one
 that insults over the people that are under thee, not one that conceals
 the divine laws and the promises to repentance, not hasty in thrusting
 out and expelling, but steady, not one that delights in severity, not
 heady. Do not admit less evidence to convict any one than that of three
 witnesses, and those of known and established reputation; inquire
 whether they do not accuse out of ill-will or envy: for there are many
 that delight in mischief, forward in discourse, slanderous, haters of
 the brethren, making it their business to scatter the sheep of Christ;
 whose affirmation if thou admittest without nice scanning the same,
 thou wilt disperse thy flock, and betray it to be devoured by wolves,
 that is, by demons and wicked men, or rather not men, but wild beasts
 in the shape of men--by the heathen, by the Jews, and by the atheistic
 heretics. For those destroying wolves soon address themselves to any
 one that is cast out of the Church, and esteem him as a lamb delivered
 for them to devour, reckoning his destruction their own gain. For he
 that is "their father, the devil, is a murderer." [2697] He also who is
 separated unjustly by thy want of care in judging will be overwhelmed
 with sorrow, and be disconsolate, and so will either wander over to the
 heathen, or be entangled in heresies, and so will be altogether
 estranged from the Church and from hope in God, and will be entangled
 in impiety, whereby thou wilt be guilty of his perdition: for it is not
 fair to be too hasty in casting out an offender, but slow in receiving
 him when he returns; to be forward in cutting off, but unmerciful when
 he is sorrowful, and ought to be healed. For of such as these speaks
 the divine Scripture: "Their feet run to mischief; they are hasty to
 shed blood. Destruction and misery are in their ways, and the way of
 peace have they not known. The fear of God is not before their eyes."
 [2698] Now the way of peace is our Saviour Jesus Christ, who has taught
 us, saying: "Forgive, and ye shall be forgiven. Give, and it shall be
 given to you;" [2699] that is, give remission of sins, and your
 offences shall be forgiven you. As also He instructed us by His prayer
 to say unto God: "Forgive us our debts, as we forgive our debtors."
 [2700] If, therefore, you do not forgive offenders, how can you expect
 the remission of your own sins? Do not you rather bind yourselves
 faster, by pretending in your prayers to forgive, when you really do
 not forgive? Will you not be confronted with your own words, when you
 say you forgive and do not forgive? For know ye, that he who casts out
 one who has not behaved himself wickedly, or who will not receive him
 that returns, is a murderer of his brother, and sheds his blood, as
 Cain did that of his brother Abel, and his "blood cries to God," [2701]
 and will be required. For a righteous man unjustly slain by any one
 will be in rest with God for ever. The same is the case of him who
 without cause is separated by his bishop. He who has cast him out as a
 pestilent fellow when he was innocent, is more furious than a murderer.
 Such a one has no regard to the mercy of God, nor is mindful of His
 goodness to those that are penitent, nor keeping in his eye the
 examples of those who, having been once great offenders, received
 forgiveness upon their repentance. Upon which account, he who casts off
 an innocent person is more cruel than he that murders the body. In like
 manner, he who does not receive the penitent, scatters the flock of
 Christ, being really against Him. For as God is just in judging of
 sinners, so is He merciful in receiving them when they return. For
 David, the man after God's own heart, in his hymns ascribes both mercy
 and judgment to Him.

 That David, the Ninevites, Hezekiah, and His Son Manasseh, are Eminent
 Examples of Repentance, the Prayer of Manasseh King of Judah.

 XXII. It is also thy duty, O bishop, to have before thine eyes the
 examples of those that have gone before, and to apply them skilfully to
 the cases of those who want words of severity or of consolation.
 Besides, it is reasonable that in thy administration of justice thou
 shouldest follow the will of God; and as God deals with sinners, and
 with those who return, that thou shouldest act accordingly in thy
 judging. Now, did not God by Nathan reproach David for his offence? And
 yet as soon as he said he repented, He delivered him from death,
 saying, "Be of good cheer; thou shalt not die." [2702] So also, when
 God had caused Jonah [2703] to be swallowed up by the sea and the
 whale, upon his refusal to preach to the Ninevites, when yet he prayed
 to Him out of the belly of the whale, He retrieved his life from
 corruption. And when Hezekiah had been puffed up for a while, yet, as
 soon as he prayed with lamentation, He remitted his offence. But, O ye
 bishops, hearken to an instance useful upon this occasion. For it is
 written thus in the fourth book of Kings and the second book of
 Chronicles: "And Hezekiah died; and Manasseh his son reigned. He was
 twelve years old when he began to reign, and he reigned fifty and five
 years in Jerusalem; and his mother's name was Hephzibah. And he did
 evil in the sight of the Lord: he did not abstain from the abominations
 of the heathen, whom the Lord destroyed from the face of the children
 of Israel. And Manasseh returned and built the high places which
 Hezekiah his father had overthrown; and he reared pillars for Baal, and
 set up an altar for Baal, and made groves, as did Ahab king of Israel.
 And he made altars in the house of the Lord, of which the Lord spake to
 David and to Solomon his son, saying, Therein will I put my name. And
 Manasseh set up altars, and by them served Baal, and said, My name
 shall continue for ever. [2704] And he built altars to the host of
 heaven in the two courts of the house of the Lord; and he made his
 children pass through the fire in a place named Ge Benennom; [2705] and
 he consulted enchanters, and dealt with wizards and familiar spirits,
 and with conjurers and observers of times, and with teraphim. And he
 sinned exceedingly in the eyes of the Lord, to provoke Him to anger.
 And he set a molten and a graven image, the image of his grove, which
 he made in the house of the Lord, wherein the Lord had chosen to put
 His name in Jerusalem, the holy city, for ever, and had said, I will no
 more remove my foot from the land of Israel, which I gave to their
 fathers; only if they will observe to do according to all that I have
 commanded them, and according to all the precepts that my servant Moses
 commanded them. And they hearkened not. And Manasseh seduced them to do
 more evil before the Lord than did the nations whom the Lord cast out
 from the face of the children of Israel. And the Lord spake concerning
 Manasseh and concerning His people by the hand of His servants the
 prophets, saying, Because Manasseh king of Judah has done all these
 wicked abominations in a higher degree than the Amorite did which was
 before him, and hath made Judah to sin with his idols, thus saith the
 Lord God of Israel, Behold, I bring evils upon Jerusalem and Judah,
 that whosoever heareth of them, both his ears shall tingle. And I will
 stretch over Jerusalem the line of Samaria, and the plummet of the
 house of Ahab; and I will blot out Jerusalem as a table-book is blotted
 out by wiping it. And I will turn it upside down; and I will give up
 the remnant of my inheritance, and will deliver them into the hands of
 their enemies, and they shall become a prey and a spoil to all their
 enemies, because of all the evils which they have done in mine eyes,
 and have provoked me to anger from the day that I brought their fathers
 out of the land of Egypt even until this day. Moreover, Manasseh shed
 innocent blood very much, till he had filled Jerusalem from one end to
 another, beside his sins wherewith he made Judah to sin in doing evil
 in the sight of the Lord. And the Lord brought upon him the captains of
 the host of the king of Assyria, and they caught Manasseh in bonds, and
 they bound him in fetters of brass, and brought him to Babylon; and he
 was bound and shackled with iron all over in the house of the prison.
 And bread made of bran was given unto him scantily, and by weight, and
 water mixed with vinegar but a little and by measure, so much as would
 keep him alive; and he was in straits and sore affliction. And when he
 was violently afflicted, he besought the face of the Lord his God, and
 humbled himself greatly before the face of the Lord God of his fathers.
 And he prayed unto the Lord, saying, O Lord, almighty God of our
 fathers Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, and of their righteous seed, who
 hast made heaven and earth, with all the ornament thereof, who hast
 bound the sea by the word of Thy commandment, who hast shut up the
 deep, and sealed it by Thy terrible and glorious name, whom all men
 fear and tremble before Thy power; for the majesty of Thy glory cannot
 be borne, and Thine angry threatening towards sinners is insupportable.
 But Thy merciful promise is unmeasurable and unsearchable; for Thou art
 the most high Lord, [2706] of great compassion, long-suffering, very
 merciful, and repentest of the evils of men. Thou, O Lord, according to
 Thy great goodness, hast promised repentance and forgiveness to them
 that have sinned against Thee, and of Thine infinite mercy hast
 appointed repentance unto sinners, that they may be saved. Thou
 therefore, O Lord, that art the God of the just, has not appointed
 repentance to the just as to Abraham and Isaac and Jacob, which have
 not sinned against Thee; but Thou hast appointed repentance unto me
 that am a sinner: for I have sinned above the number of the sands of
 the sea. My transgressions, O Lord, are multiplied; my transgressions
 are multiplied, and I am not worthy to behold and see the height of
 heaven for the multitude of mine iniquity. I am bowed down with many
 iron bands; for I have provoked Thy wrath, and done evil before Thee,
 setting up abominations, and multiplying offences. Now, therefore, I
 bow the knee of mine heart, beseeching Thee of grace. I have sinned, O
 Lord, I have sinned, and I acknowledge mine iniquities; wherefore I
 humbly beseech Thee, forgive me, O Lord, forgive me, and destroy me not
 with mine iniquities. Be not angry with me for ever, by reserving evil
 for me; neither condemn me into the lower part of the earth. For Thou
 art the God, even the God of them that repent, and in me Thou wilt show
 Thy goodness; for Thou wilt save me that am unworthy, according to Thy
 great mercy. Therefore I will praise Thee for ever all the days of my
 life; for all the powers of the heavens do praise Thee, and Thine is
 the glory for ever and ever. Amen. And the Lord heard his voice, and
 had compassion upon him. And there appeared a flame of fire about him,
 and all the iron shackles and chains which were about him fell off; and
 the Lord healed Manasseh from his affliction, and brought him back to
 Jerusalem unto his kingdom: and Manasseh knew that the Lord He is God
 alone. And he worshipped the Lord God alone with all his heart, and
 with all his soul, all the days of his life; and he was esteemed
 righteous. And he took away the strange gods and the graven image out
 of the house of the Lord, and all the altars which he had built in the
 house of the Lord, and all the altars in Jerusalem, and he cast them
 out of the city. And he repaired the altar of the Lord, and sacrificed
 thereon peace-offerings and thank-offerings. And Manasseh spake to
 Judah to serve the Lord God of Israel. And he slept in peace with his
 fathers; and Amon his son reigned in his stead. And he did evil in the
 sight of the Lord according to all things that Manasseh his father had
 done in the former part of his reign. And he provoked the Lord his God
 to anger." [2707]

 Ye have heard, our beloved children, how the Lord God for a while
 punished him that was addicted to idols, and had slain many innocent
 persons; and yet that He received him when he repented, and forgave him
 his offences, and restored him to his kingdom. For He not only forgives
 the penitent, but reinstates them in their former dignity.

 Amon May be an Example to Such as Sin with an High Hand.

 XXIII. There is no sin more grievous than idolatry, for it is an
 impiety against God: and yet even this sin has been forgiven, upon
 sincere repentance. But if any one sin in direct opposition, and on
 purpose to try whether God will punish the wicked or not, such a one
 shall have no remission, although he say with himself, "All is well,
 and I will walk according to the conversation of my evil heart." Such a
 one was Amon the son of Manasseh. For the Scripture says: "And Amon
 reasoned an evil reasoning of transgression, and said, My father from
 his childhood was a great transgressor, and repented in his old age;
 and now I will walk as my soul lusteth, and afterwards I will return
 unto the Lord. And he did evil in the sight of the Lord above all that
 were before him. And the Lord God soon destroyed him utterly from His
 good land. And his servants conspired against him, and slew him in his
 own house, and he reigned two years only."

 That Christ Jesus Our Lord Came to Save Sinners by Repentance.

 XXIV. Take heed, therefore, ye of the laity, lest any one of you fix
 the reasoning of Amon in his heart, and be suddenly cut off, and
 perish. In the same manner, let the bishop take all the care he can
 that those which are yet innocent may not fall into sin; and let him
 heal and receive those which turn from their sins. But if he is
 pitiless, and will not receive the repenting sinner, he will sin
 against the Lord his God, pretending to be more just than God's
 justice, and not receiving him whom He has received, through Christ;
 for whose sake He sent His Son upon earth to men, as a man; for whose
 sake God was pleased that He, who was the Maker of man and woman,
 should be born of a woman; for whose sake He did not spare Him from the
 cross, from death, and burial, but permitted Him to die, who by nature
 could not suffer, His beloved Son, God the Word, the Angel of His great
 council, that he might deliver those from death who were obnoxious to
 death. Him do those provoke to anger who do not receive the penitent.
 For He was not ashamed of me, Matthew, who had been formerly a
 publican; and admitted of Peter, when he had through fear denied Him
 three times, but had appeased Him by repentance, and had wept bitterly;
 nay, He made him a shepherd to His own lambs. Moreover, He ordained
 Paul, our fellow-apostle, to be of a persecutor an apostle, and
 declared him a chosen vessel, even when he had heaped many mischiefs
 upon us before, and had blasphemed His sacred name. He says also to
 another, a woman that was a sinner: "Thy sins, which are many, are
 forgiven, for thou lovest much." [2708] And when the elders had set
 another woman which had sinned before Him, and had left the sentence to
 Him, and were gone out, our Lord, the Searcher of the hearts, inquiring
 of her whether the elders had condemned her, and being answered No, He
 said unto her: "Go thy way therefore, for neither do I condemn thee."
 [2709] This Jesus, O ye bishops, our Saviour, our King, and our God,
 ought to be set before you as your pattern; and Him you ought to
 imitate, in being meek, quiet, compassionate, merciful, peaceable,
 without passion, apt to teach, and diligent to convert, willing to
 receive and to comfort; no strikers, not soon angry, not injurious, not
 arrogant, not supercilious, not wine-bibbers, not drunkards, not vainly
 expensive, not lovers of delicacies, not extravagant, using the gifts
 of God not as another's, but as their own, as good stewards appointed
 over them, as those who will be required by God to give an account of
 the same.

 [2626] Matt. v. 11, 12.

 [2627] This passage is not found in Scripture. Some compare Jas. i. 12
 and Heb. xii. 8.

 [2628] Matt. xxiii. 3.

 [2629] Deut. xvi. 20, i. 17.

 [2630] Ex. xxiii. 7, LXX.

 [2631] Ex. xxiii. 8.

 [2632] Deut. xxvii. 25, xvi. 19, xvii. 7.

 [2633] Prov. xxii. 10.

 [2634] 1 Sam. xv.

 [2635] 1 Sam. ii.

 [2636] Matt. xviii. 6, 7.

 [2637] 1 Kings xii.

 [2638] Num. xvi.

 [2639] 2 Sam. vi.

 [2640] Josh. vii.

 [2641] 2 Kings v.

 [2642] Matt. xviii. 18.

 [2643] Ezek. xxxiii. 11.

 [2644] Not in V. mss.

 [2645] Ps. vi. 5.

 [2646] Not in V. mss.

 [2647] Prov. xxiv. 27.

 [2648] Matt. xxv.

 [2649] Deut. i. 17.

 [2650] Luke xv. 7.

 [2651] Ps. lxxiv. 19.

 [2652] Jer. viii. 4, 5.

 [2653] Jer. iii. 22.

 [2654] Ezek. xviii. 20.

 [2655] Ezek. xiv. 13, 14.

 [2656] Matt. v. 45.

 [2657] 2 Tim. ii. 5.

 [2658] A various reading gives: "Ham, one of his sons, who alone was
 found wicked, received punishment."

 [2659] Prov. v. 22.

 [2660] Isa. lxii. 11.

 [2661] One V. ms. reads: "those who are sick. "

 [2662] Matt. ix. 12.

 [2663] Matt. xviii. 14.

 [2664] Ezek. xviii. 2, etc.

 [2665] Nah. i. 3.

 [2666] Jer. xii. 10.

 [2667] Zech. x. 3.

 [2668] Mal. i. 6.

 [2669] Luke xxiii. 34.

 [2670] Ps. cxxx. 3.

 [2671] Gen. iv. 7, LXX.

 [2672] [Num. xii. 14.--R.]

 [2673] Isa. i. 23.

 [2674] Luke vi. 41.

 [2675] Gal. v. 9.

 [2676] Eccles. x. 1.

 [2677] Prov. xxix. 12.

 [2678] Matt. xxi. 13.

 [2679] Lev. xv. 31.

 [2680] Hos. x. 13, LXX.

 [2681] Matt. xviii. 10.

 [2682] 2 Sam. xii. 13.

 [2683] Luke xii. 48.

 [2684] Job xiv. 4, LXX.

 [2685] Prov. xx. 9.

 [2686] Num. xviii. 1.

 [2687] Ezek. xxxiv. 2, etc.

 [2688] Luke x. 16.

 [2689] Ezek. xxxiii . 10.

 [2690] John x. 11, 12.

 [2691] Matt. xviii. 12.

 [2692] Luke xv. 4, etc.

 [2693] Luke v. 20; Matt. ix. 2; Mark v. 34.

 [2694] Matt. ix. 12; Luke xix. 10.

 [2695] Ezek. xxxiv. 4.

 [2696] Matt. xx. 25; Isa. xl. 11.

 [2697] John viii. 44.

 [2698] Prov. i. 16; Isa. lix. 7, 8; Ps. xxxvi. 1; Rom. iii. 15.

 [2699] Luke vi. 37, 38.

 [2700] Matt. vi. 12.

 [2701] Gen. iv. 10.

 [2702] 2 Sam. xii. 13.

 [2703] Jonah i. 17, and ii.

 [2704] From "said" to "ever" is not in Scripture.

 [2705] Taken from 2 Chron. xxiii. 3, LXX., instead of the reading of
 the mss. "Gebanai."

 [2706] Not in mss.

 [2707] Kings xx., xxi.; 2 Chron. xxxii., xxxiii.

 [2708] Luke vii. 47.

 [2709] John viii. 11.

 Sec. IV.--On the Management of the Resources Collected for the Support of
 the Clergy, and the Relief of the Poor.

 Let the bishop esteem such food and raiment sufficient as suits
 necessity and decency. Let him not make use of the Lord's goods as
 another's, but moderately; "for the labourer is worthy of his reward."
 [2710] Let him not be luxurious in diet, or fond of idle furniture, but
 contented with so much alone as is necessary for his sustenance.

 Of First-Fruits and Tithes, and After What Manner the Bishop is Himself to
 Partake of Them, or to Distribute Them to Others.

 XXV. Let him use those tenths and first-fruits, which are given
 according to the command of God, as a man of God; as also let him
 dispense in a right manner the free-will offerings which are brought in
 on account of the poor, to the orphans, the widows, the afflicted, and
 strangers in distress, as having that God for the examiner of his
 accounts who has committed the disposition to him. Distribute to all
 those in want with righteousness, and yourselves use the things which
 belong to the Lord, but do not abuse them; eating of them, but not
 eating them all up by yourselves: communicate with those that are in
 want, and thereby show yourselves unblameable before God. For if you
 shall consume them by yourselves, you will be reproached by God, who
 says to such unsatiable people, who alone devour all, "Ye eat up the
 milk, and clothe yourselves with the wool;" [2711] and in another
 passage, "Must you alone live upon the earth"? [2712] Upon which
 account you are commanded in the law, "Thou shalt love thy neighbour as
 thyself." [2713] Now we say these things, not as if you might not
 partake of the fruits of your labours; for it is written, "Thou shalt
 not muzzle the mouth of the ox which treadeth out the corn;" [2714] but
 that you should do it with moderation and righteousness. As, therefore,
 the ox that labours in the threshing-floor without a muzzle eats
 indeed, but does not eat all up; so do you who labour in the
 threshing-floor, that is, in the Church of God, eat of the Church:
 which was also the case of the Levites, who served in the tabernacle of
 the testimony, which was in all things a type of the Church. Nay,
 further, its very name implied that that tabernacle was fore-appointed
 for a testimony of the Church. Here, therefore, the Levites also, who
 attended upon the tabernacle partook of those things that were offered
 to God by all the people,--namely, gifts, offerings, and first-fruits,
 and tithes, and sacrifices, and oblations, without disturbance, they
 and their wives, and their sons and their daughters. Since their
 employment was the ministration to the tabernacle, therefore they had
 not any lot or inheritance in the land among the children of Israel,
 because the oblations of the people were the lot of Levi, and the
 inheritance of their tribe. You, therefore, O bishops, are to your
 people priests and Levites, ministering to the holy tabernacle, the
 holy Catholic Church; who stand at the altar of the Lord your God, and
 offer to Him reasonable and unbloody sacrifices through Jesus the great
 High Priest. You are to the laity prophets, rulers, governors, and
 kings; the mediators between God and His faithful people, who receive
 and declare His word, well acquainted with the Scriptures. Ye are the
 voice of God, and witnesses of His will, who bear the sins of all, and
 intercede for all; whom, as you have heard, the word severely threatens
 if you hide the key of knowledge from men, who are liable to perdition
 if you do not declare His will to the people that are under you; who
 shall have a certain reward from God, and unspeakable honour and glory,
 if you duly minister to the holy tabernacle. For as yours is the
 burden, so you receive as your fruit the supply of food and other
 necessaries. For you imitate Christ the Lord; and as He "bare the sins
 of us all upon the tree" at His crucifixion, the innocent for those who
 deserved punishment, so also you ought to make the sins of the people
 your own. For concerning our Saviour it is said in Isaiah, "He bears
 our sins, and is afflicted for us." [2715] And again: "He bare the sins
 of many, and was delivered for our offences." [2716] As, therefore, you
 are patterns for others, so have you Christ for your pattern. As,
 therefore, He is concerned for all, so be you for the laity under you.
 For do not thou imagine that the office of a bishop is an easy or light
 burden. As, therefore, you bear the weight, so have you a right to
 partake of the fruits before others, and to impart to those that are in
 want, as being to give an account to Him, who without bias will examine
 your accounts. For those who attend upon the Church ought to be
 maintained by the Church, as being priests, Levites, presidents, and
 ministers of God; as it is written in the book of Numbers concerning
 the priests: "And the Lord said unto Aaron, Thou, and thy sons, and the
 house of thy family, shall bear the iniquities of the holy things of
 priesthood." [2717] "Behold, I have given unto you the charge of the
 first-fruits, from all that are sanctified to me by the children of
 Israel; I have given them for a reward to thee, and to thy sons after
 thee, by an ordinance for ever. This shall be yours out of the holy
 things, out of the oblations, and out of the gifts, and out of all the
 sacrifices, and out of every trespass-offering, and sin-offerings; and
 all that they render unto me out of all their holy things, they shall
 belong to thee, and to thy sons: in the sanctuary shall they eat them."
 [2718] And a little after: "All the first-fruits of the oil, and of the
 wine, and of the wheat, all which they shall give unto the Lord, to
 thee have I given them; and all that is first ripe, to thee have I
 given it, and every devoted thing. Every first-born of man and of
 beast, clean and unclean, and of sacrifice, with the breast, and the
 right shoulder, all these appertain to the priests, and to the rest of
 those belonging to them, even to the Levites." [2719]

 Hear this, you of the laity also, the elect Church of God. For the
 people were formerly called "the people of God," [2720] and "an holy
 nation." [2721] You, therefore, are the holy and sacred "Church of God,
 enrolled in heaven, a royal priesthood, an holy nation, a peculiar
 people," [2722] a bride adorned for the Lord God, a great Church, a
 faithful Church. Hear attentively now what was said formerly: oblations
 and tithes belong to Christ our High Priest, and to those who minister
 to Him. Tenths of salvation are the first letter of the name of Jesus.
 Hear, O thou Holy Catholic Church, who hast escaped the ten plagues,
 and hast received the ten commandments, and hast learned the law, and
 hast kept the faith, and hast believed in Jesus, and hast known the
 decad, and hast believed in the iota which is the first letter of the
 name of Jesus, [2723] and art named after His name, and art
 established, and shinest in the consummation of His glory. Those which
 were then the sacrifices now are prayers, and intercessions, and
 thanksgivings. Those which were then first-fruits, and tithes, and
 offerings, and gifts, now are oblations, which are presented by holy
 bishops to the Lord God, through Jesus Christ, who has died for them.
 For these are your high priests, as the presbyters are your priests,
 and your present deacons instead of your Levites; as are also your
 readers, your singers, your porters, your deaconesses, your widows,
 your virgins, and your orphans: but He who is above all these is the
 High Priest.

 According to What Patterns and Dignity Every Order of the Clergy is
 Appointed by God.

 XXVI. The bishop, he is the minister of the word, the keeper of
 knowledge, the mediator between God and you in the several parts of
 your divine worship. He is the teacher of piety; and, next after God,
 he is your father, who has begotten you again to the adoption of sons
 by water and the Spirit. He is your ruler and governor; he is your king
 and potentate; he is, next after God, your earthly god, who has a right
 to be honoured by you. For concerning him, and such as he, it is that
 God pronounces, "I have said, Ye are gods; and ye are all children of
 the Most High." [2724] And, "Ye shall not speak evil of the gods."
 [2725] For let the bishop preside over you as one honoured with the
 authority of God, which he is to exercise over the clergy, and by which
 he is to govern all the people. But let the deacon minister to him, as
 Christ does to His Father; [2726] and let him serve him unblameably in
 all things, as Christ does nothing of Himself, but does always those
 things that please His Father. Let also the deaconess be honoured by
 you in the place of the Holy Ghost, and not do or say anything without
 the deacon; as neither does the Comforter say or do anything of
 Himself, but gives glory to Christ by waiting for His pleasure. And as
 we cannot believe on Christ without the teaching of the Spirit, so let
 not any woman address herself to the deacon or bishop without the
 deaconess. Let the presbyters be esteemed by you to represent us the
 apostles, and let them be the teachers of divine knowledge; since our
 Lord, when He sent us, said, "Go ye, and make disciples of all nations,
 baptizing them in the name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the
 Holy Ghost: teaching them to observe all things whatsoever I have
 commanded you." [2727] Let the widows and orphans be esteemed as
 representing the altar of burnt-offering; and let the virgins be
 honoured as representing the altar of incense, and the incense itself.

 That It is a Horrible Thing for a Man to Thrust Himself into Any Sacerdotal
 Office, as Did Corah and His Company, Saul and Uzziah.

 XXVII. As, therefore, it was not lawful for one of another tribe, that
 was not a Levite, to offer anything, or to approach the altar without
 the priest, so also do you do nothing without the bishop; [2728] for if
 any one does anything without the bishop, he does it to no purpose. For
 it will not be esteemed as of any avail to him. For as Saul, when he
 had offered without Samuel, was told, "It will not avail for thee;"
 [2729] so every person among the laity, doing anything without the
 priest, labours in vain. And as Uzziah the king, [2730] who was not a
 priest, and yet would exercise the functions of the priests, was
 smitten with leprosy for his transgression; so every lay person shall
 not be unpunished who despises God, and is so mad as to affront His
 priests, and unjustly to snatch that honour to himself: not imitating
 Christ, "who glorified not Himself to be made an high priest;" [2731]
 but waited till He heard from His Father, "The Lord sware, and will not
 repent, Thou art a priest for ever, after the order of Melchizedek."
 [2732] If, therefore, Christ did not glorify Himself without the
 Father, how dare any man thrust himself into the priesthood who has not
 received that dignity from his superior, and do such things which it is
 lawful only for the priests to do? Were not the followers of Corah,
 even though they were of the tribe of Levi, consumed with fire, because
 they rose up against Moses and Aaron, and meddled with such things as
 did not belong to them? And Dathan and Abiram went down quick into
 hell; and the rod that budded put a stop to the readiness of the
 multitude, and demonstrated who was the high priest ordained by God.
 [2733] You ought therefore, brethren, to bring your sacrifices and your
 oblations to the bishop, as to your high priest, either by yourselves
 or by the deacons; and do you bring not those only, but also your
 first-fruits, and your tithes, and your free-will offerings to him. For
 he knows who they are that are in affliction, and gives to every one as
 is convenient, that so one may not receive alms twice or oftener the
 same day, or the same week, while another has nothing at all. For it is
 reasonable rather to supply the wants of those who really are in
 distress, than of those who only appear to be so.

 Of an Entertainment, and After What Manner Each Distinct Order of the Clergy
 is to Be Treated by Those Who Invite Them to It.

 XXVIII. If any determine to invite elder women to an entertainment of
 love, or a feast, as our Saviour calls it, [2734] let them most
 frequently send to such a one whom the deacons know to be in distress.
 But let what is the pastor's due, I mean the first-fruits, [2735] be
 set apart in the feast for him, even though he be not at the
 entertainment, as being your priest, and in honour of that God who has
 entrusted him with the priesthood. But as much as is given to every one
 of the elder women, let double so much be given to the deacons, in
 honour of Christ. Let also a double portion be set apart for the
 presbyters, as for such who labour continually about the word and
 doctrine, upon the account of the apostles of our Lord, whose place
 they sustain, as the counsellors of the bishop and the crown of the
 Church. For they are the Sanhedrim and senate of the Church. If there
 be a reader there, let him receive a single portion, in honour of the
 prophets, and let the singer and the porter have as much. Let the
 laity, therefore, pay proper honours in their presents, and utmost
 marks of respect to each distinct order. But let them not on all
 occasions trouble their governor, but let them signify their desires by
 those who minister to him, that is, by the deacons, with whom they may
 be more free. For neither may we address ourselves to Almighty God, but
 only by Christ. In the same manner, therefore, let the laity make known
 all their desires to the bishop by the deacon, and accordingly let them
 act as he shall direct them. For there was no holy thing offered or
 done in the temple formerly without the priest. "For the priest's lips
 shall keep knowledge, and they shall seek the law at his mouth," as the
 prophet somewhere says, "for he is the messenger of the Lord Almighty."
 [2736] For if the worshippers of demons, in their hateful, abominable,
 and impure performances, imitate the sacred rules till this very day
 (it is a wide comparison indeed, and there is a vast distance between
 their abominations and God's sacred worship), in their mockeries of
 worship they neither offer nor do anything without their pretended
 priest, but esteem him as the very mouth of their idols of stone,
 waiting to see what commands he will lay upon them. And whatsoever he
 commands them, that they do, and without him they do nothing; and they
 honour him, their pretended priest, and esteem his name as venerable in
 honour of lifeless statues, and in order to the worship of wicked
 spirits. If these heathens, therefore, who give glory to lying
 vanities, and place their hope upon nothing that is firm, endeavour to
 imitate the sacred rules, how much more reasonable is it that you, who
 have a most certain faith and undoubted hope, and who expect glorious,
 and eternal, and never-failing promises, should honour the Lord God in
 those set over you, and esteem your bishop to be the mouth of God!

 What is the Dignity of a Bishop and of a Deacon.

 XXIX. For if Aaron, because he declared to Pharaoh the words of God
 from Moses, is called a prophet; and Moses himself is called a god to
 Pharaoh, on account of his being at once a king and a high priest, as
 God says to him, "I have made thee a god to Pharaoh, and Aaron thy
 brother shall be thy prophet;" [2737] why do not ye also esteem the
 mediators of the word to be prophets, and reverence them as gods?

 After What Manner the Laity are to Be Obedient to the Deacon.

 XXX. For now the deacon is to you Aaron, and the bishop Moses. If,
 therefore, Moses was called a god by the Lord, let the bishop be
 honoured among you as a god, and the deacon as his prophet. For as
 Christ does nothing without His Father, so neither does the deacon do
 anything without his bishop; and as the Son without His Father is
 nothing, so is the deacon nothing without his bishop; and as the Son is
 subject to His Father, so is every deacon subject to his bishop; and as
 the Son is the messenger and prophet of the Father, so is the deacon
 the messenger and prophet of his bishop. Wherefore let all things that
 he is to do with any one be made known to the bishop, and be finally
 ordered by him.

 That the Deacon Must Not Do Anything Without the Bishop.

 XXXI. Let him not do anything at all without his bishop, nor give
 anything without his consent. For if he gives to any one as to a person
 in distress without the bishop's knowledge, he gives it so that it must
 tend to the reproach of the bishop, and he accuses him as careless of
 the distressed. But he that casts reproach on his bishop, either by
 word or deed, opposes God, not hearkening to what He says: "Thou shalt
 not speak evil of the gods." [2738] For He did not make that law
 concerning deities of wood and of stone, which are abominable, because
 they are falsely called gods, but concerning the priests and the
 judges, to whom He also said, "Ye are gods, and children of the Most
 High." [2739]

 That the Deacon Must Not Make Any Distributions Without the Consent of the
 Bishop, Because that Will Turn to the Reproach of the Bishop.

 XXXII. If therefore, O deacon, thou knowest any one to be in distress,
 put the bishop in mind of him, and so give to him; but do nothing in a
 clandestine way, so as may tend to his reproach, lest thou raise a
 murmur against him; for the murmur will not be against him, but against
 the Lord God: and the deacon, with the rest, will hear what Aaron and
 Miriam heard, when they spake against Moses: "How is it that ye were
 not afraid to speak against my servant Moses?" [2740] And again, Moses
 says to those who rose up against him: "Your murmuring is not against
 us, but against the Lord our God." [2741] For if he that calls one of
 the laity Raka, [2742] or fool, shall not be unpunished, as doing
 injury to the name [2743] of Christ, how dare any man speak against his
 bishop, by whom the Lord gave the Holy Spirit among you upon the laying
 on of his hands, by whom ye have learned the sacred doctrines, and have
 known God, and have believed in Christ, by whom ye were known of God,
 by whom ye were sealed with the oil of gladness and the ointment of
 understanding, by whom ye were declared to be the children of light, by
 whom the Lord in your illumination testified by the imposition of the
 bishop's hands, and sent out His sacred voice upon every one of you,
 saying, "Thou art my son, this day have I begotten thee?" [2744] By thy
 bishop, O man, God adopts thee for His child. Acknowledge, O son, that
 right hand which was a mother to thee. Love him who, after God, is
 become a father to thee, and honour him.

 After What Manner the Bishops are to Be Honoured, and to Be Reverenced as
 Our Spiritual Parents.

 XXXIII. For if the divine oracle says, concerning our parents according
 to the flesh, "Honour thy father and thy mother, that it may be well
 with thee;" [2745] and, "He that curseth his father or his mother, let
 him die the death;" [2746] how much more should the word exhort you to
 honour your spiritual parents, and to love them as your benefactors and
 ambassadors with God, who have regenerated you by water, and endued you
 with the fulness of the Holy Spirit, who have fed you with the word as
 with milk, who have nourished you with doctrine, who have confirmed you
 by their admonitions, who have imparted to you the saving body and
 precious blood of Christ, who have loosed you from your sins, who have
 made you partakers of the holy and sacred eucharist, who have admitted
 you to be partakers and fellow-heirs of the promise of God! Reverence
 these, and honour them with all kinds of honour; for they have obtained
 from God the power of life and death, in their judging of sinners, and
 condemning them to the death of eternal fire, as also of loosing
 returning sinners from their sins, and of restoring them to a new life.

 That Priests are to Be Preferred Before Rulers and Kings.

 XXXIV. Account these worthy to be esteemed your rulers and your kings,
 and bring them tribute as to kings; for by you they and their families
 ought to be maintained. As Samuel made constitutions for the people
 concerning a king, [2747] in the first book of Kings, and Moses did so
 concerning priests in Leviticus, so do we also make constitutions for
 you concerning bishops. For if there the multitude distributed the
 inferior services in proportion to so great a king, ought not therefore
 the bishop much more now to receive of you those things which are
 determined by God for the sustenance of himself and of the rest of the
 clergy belonging to him? But if we may add somewhat further, let the
 bishop receive more than the other received of old: for he only managed
 the affairs of the soldiery, being entrusted with war and peace for the
 preservation of men's bodies; but the other is entrusted with the
 exercise of the priestly office in relation to God, in order to
 preserve both body and soul from dangers. By how much, therefore, the
 soul is more valuable than the body, so much the priestly office is
 beyond the kingly. For it binds and looses those that are worthy of
 punishment or of remission. Wherefore you ought to love the bishop as
 your father, and fear him as your king, and honour him as your lord,
 bringing to him your fruits and the works of your hands, for a blessing
 upon you, giving to him your first-fruits, and your tithes, and your
 oblations, and your gifts, as to the priest of God; the first-fruits of
 your wheat, and wine, and oil, and autumnal fruits, and wool, [2748]
 and all things which the Lord God gives thee. And thy offering shall be
 accepted as a savour of a sweet smell to the Lord thy God; and the Lord
 will bless the works of thy hands, and will multiply the good things of
 the land. "For a blessing is upon the head of him that giveth." [2749]

 That Both the Law and the Gospel Prescribe Offerings.

 XXXV. Now you ought to know, that although the Lord has delivered you
 from the additional bonds, and has brought you out of them to your
 refreshment, and does not permit you to sacrifice irrational creatures
 for sin-offerings, and purifications, and scapegoats, and continual
 washings and sprinklings, yet has He nowhere freed you from those
 oblations which you owe to the priests, nor from doing good to the
 poor. For the Lord says to you in the Gospel: "Unless your
 righteousness abound more than that of the scribes and Pharisees, ye
 shall by no means enter into the kingdom of heaven." [2750] Now herein
 will your righteousness exceed theirs, if you take greater care of the
 priests, the orphans, and the widows; as it is written: "He hath
 scattered abroad; he hath given to the poor; his righteousness
 remaineth for ever." [2751] And again: "By acts of righteousness and
 faith iniquities are purged." [2752] And again: "Every bountiful soul
 is blessed." [2753] So therefore shalt thou do as the Lord has
 appointed, and shalt give to the priest what things are due to him, the
 first-fruits of thy floor, and of thy wine-press, and sin-offerings, as
 to the mediator between God and such as stand in need of purgation and
 forgiveness. For it is thy duty to give, and his to administer, as
 being the administrator and disposer of ecclesiastical affairs. Yet
 shalt thou not call thy bishop to account, nor watch his
 administration, how he does it, when, or to whom, or where, or whether
 he do it well or ill, or indifferently; for he has One who will call
 him to an account, the Lord God, who put this administration into his
 hands, and thought him worthy of the priesthood of so great dignity.

 The Recital of the Ten Commandments, and After What Manner They Do Here
 Prescribe to Us.

 XXXVI. Have before thine eyes the fear of God, and always remember the
 ten commandments of God,--to love the one and only Lord God with all
 thy strength; to give no heed to idols, or any other beings, as being
 lifeless gods, or irrational beings or dæmons. Consider the manifold
 workmanship of God, which received its beginning through Christ. Thou
 shalt observe the Sabbath, on account of Him who ceased from His work
 of creation, but ceased not from His work of providence: it is a rest
 for meditation of the law, not for idleness of the hands. Reject every
 unlawful lust, everything destructive to men, and all anger. Honour thy
 parents, as the authors of thy being. Love thy neighbour as thyself.
 Communicate the necessaries of life to the needy. Avoid swearing
 falsely, and swearing often, and in vain; for thou shalt not be held
 guiltless. Do not appear before the priests empty, and offer thy
 free-will offerings continually. Moreover, do not leave the church of
 Christ; but go thither in the morning before all thy work, and again
 meet there in the evening, to return thanks to God that He has
 preserved thy life. Be diligent, and constant, and laborious in thy
 calling. Offer to the Lord thy free-will offerings; for says He,
 "Honour the Lord with the fruit of thy honest labours." [2754] If thou
 art not able to cast anything considerable into the Corban, [2755] yet
 at least bestow upon the strangers one, or two, or five mites. "Lay up
 to thyself heavenly treasure, which neither the moth nor thieves can
 destroy." [2756] And in doing this, do not judge thy bishop, or any of
 thy neighbours among the laity; for if thou judge thy brother, thou
 becomest a judge, without being constituted such by anybody, for the
 priests are only entrusted with the power of judging. For to them it is
 said, "Judge righteous judgment;" [2757] and again "Approve yourselves
 to be exact money-changers." [2758] For to you this is not entrusted;
 for, on the contrary, it is said to those who are not of the dignity of
 magistrates or ministers: "Judge not, and ye shall not be judged."
 [2759]

 [2710] Luke x. 7.

 [2711] Ezek. xxxiv. 3.

 [2712] Isa. v. 8.

 [2713] Lev. xix. 18.

 [2714] Deut. xxv. 4; 1 Cor. ix. 9.

 [2715] Isa. liii. 4.

 [2716] Isa. liii. 12.

 [2717] Num. xviii. 1.

 [2718] Num. xviii. 8, etc.

 [2719] Num. xviii. 12, etc.

 [2720] Ex. xix. 5, 6.

 [2721] Heb. xii. 23.

 [2722] 1 Pet. ii. 9.

 [2723] Inserted from V. mss.

 [2724] Ps. lxxxii. 6.

 [2725] Ex. xxii. 28.

 [2726] The V. mss. read, "as the powers do to God," which, Ültzen
 remarks, is an orthodox correction of an Arian opinion.

 [2727] Matt. xxviii. 19.

 [2728] One V. ms. reads "priest."

 [2729] 1 Sam. xiii. 13.

 [2730] 2 Chron. xxvi.

 [2731] Heb. v. 5.

 [2732] Ps. cx. 4.

 [2733] Num. xvi.

 [2734] Luke xiv. 13.

 [2735] [Compare Teaching, chap. xiii. [269]p. 381.--R.]

 [2736] Mal. ii. 7.

 [2737] Ex. vii. 1.

 [2738] Ex. xxii. 28.

 [2739] Ps. lxxxii. 6.

 [2740] Num. xii. 8.

 [2741] Ex. xvi. 8.

 [2742] Matt. v. 22.

 [2743] Capellius reads, "the law of Christ."

 [2744] Ps. ii. 7.

 [2745] Ex. xx. 12.

 [2746] Ex. xxi. 17.

 [2747] 1 Sam. viii.

 [2748] One V. ms. reads "olives" instead of "wool."

 [2749] Prov. xi. 26.

 [2750] Matt. v. 20.

 [2751] Ps. cxii. 9.

 [2752] Prov. xvi. 6.

 [2753] Prov. xi. 25.

 [2754] Prov. iii. 9.

 [2755] The V. mss. read: "Casting into the treasury whatever you can
 bestow."

 [2756] Matt. vi. 20.

 [2757] Deut. i. 16, xvi. 18.

 [2758] Zech. vii. 9.

 [2759] Luke vi. 37 .

 Sec. V.--On Accusations, and the Treatment of Accusers.

 Concerning Accusers and False Accusers, and How a Judge is Not Rashly Either
 to Believe Them or Disbelieve Them, But After an Accurate Examination.

 XXXVII. But it is the duty of the bishop to judge rightly, as it is
 written, "Judge righteous judgment;" [2760] and elsewhere, "Why do ye
 not even of yourselves judge what is right?" [2761] Be ye therefore as
 skilful dealers in money: for as these reject bad money, but take to
 themselves what is current, in the same manner it is the bishops's duty
 to retain the unblameable, but either to heal, or, if they be past
 cure, to cast off those that are blameworthy, so as not to be hasty in
 cutting off, nor to believe all accusations; for it sometimes happens
 that some, either through passion or envy, do insist on a false
 accusation against a brother, as did the two elders in the case of
 Susanna in Babylon, [2762] and the Egyptian woman in the case of
 Joseph. [2763] Do thou therefore, as a man of God, not rashly receive
 such accusations, lest thou take away the innocent and slay the
 righteous; for he that will receive such accusations is the author of
 anger rather than of peace. But where there is anger, there the Lord is
 not; for that anger, which is the friend of Satan--I mean that which is
 excited unjustly by the means of false brethren--never suffers
 unanimity to be in the Church. Wherefore, when you know such persons to
 be foolish, quarrelsome, passionate, and such as delight in mischief,
 do not give credit to them; but observe such as they are, when you hear
 anything from them against their brother: for murder is nothing in
 their eyes, and they cast a man down in such a way as one would not
 suspect. Do thou therefore consider diligently the accuser, [2764]
 wisely observing his mode of life, what, and of what sort it is; and in
 case thou findest him a man of veracity, do according to the doctrine
 of our Lord, [2765] and taking him who is accused, rebuke him, that he
 may repent, when nobody is by. But if he be not persuaded, take with
 thee out or two more, and so show him his fault, and admonish him with
 mildness and instruction; for "wisdom will rest upon an heart that is
 good, but is not understood in the heart of the foolish." [2766]

 That Sinners are Privately to Be Reproved, and the Penitent to Be Received,
 According to the Constitution of Our Lord.

 XXXVIII. If, therefore, he be persuaded by the mouth of you three, it
 is well. But if any one hardens himself, "tell it to the Church: but if
 he neglects to hear the Church, let him be to thee as an heathen man
 and a publican;" [2767] and receive him no longer into the Church as a
 Christian, but reject him as an heathen. But if he be willing to
 repent, receive him. For the Church does not receive an heathen or a
 publican to communion, before they every one repent of their former
 impieties; for our Lord Jesus, the Christ of God, has appointed place
 for the acceptance of men upon their repentance.

 Examples of Repentance.

 XXXIX. For I Matthew, one of those twelve which speak to you in this
 doctrine, am an apostle, having myself been formerly a publican, but
 now have obtained mercy through believing, and have repented of my
 former practices, and have been vouchsafed the honour to be an apostle
 and preacher of the word. And Zacchæus, whom the Lord received upon his
 repentance and prayers to Him, was also himself in the same manner a
 publican at first. And, besides, even the soldiers and multitude of
 publicans, who came to hear the word of the Lord about repentance,
 heard this from the prophet John, after he had baptized them: "Do
 nothing more than that which is appointed you." [2768] In like manner,
 life is not refused to the heathen, if they repent and cast away their
 unbelief. Esteem, therefore, every one that is convicted of any wicked
 action, and has not repented, as a publican or an heathen. But if he
 afterward repents, and turns from his error, then, as we receive the
 heathen, when they wish to repent, into the Church indeed to hear the
 word, but do not receive them to communion until they have received the
 seal of baptism, and are made complete Christians; so do we also permit
 such as these to enter only to hear, until they show the fruit of
 repentance, that by hearing the word they may not utterly and
 irrecoverably perish. But let them not be admitted to communion in
 prayer; and let them depart after the reading of the law, and the
 prophets, and the Gospel, that by such departure they may be made
 better in their course of life, by endeavouring to meet every day about
 the public assemblies, and to be frequent in prayer, that they also may
 be at length admitted, and that those who behold them may be affected,
 and be more secured by fearing to fall into the same condition.

 That We are Not to Be Implacable to Him Who Has Once or Twice Offended.

 XL. But yet do not thou, O bishop, presently abhor any person who has
 fallen into one or two offences, nor shalt thou exclude him from the
 word of the Lord, nor reject him from common intercourse, since neither
 did the Lord refuse to eat with publicans and sinners; and when He was
 accused by the Pharisees on this account, He said: "They that are well
 have no need of the physician, but they that are sick." [2769] Do you,
 therefore, live and dwell with those who are separated from you for
 their sins; and take care of them, comforting them, and confirming
 them, and saying to them: "Be strengthened, ye weak hands and feeble
 knees." [2770] For we ought to comfort those that mourn, and afford
 encouragement to the fainthearted, lest by immoderate sorrow they
 degenerate into distraction, since "he that is fainthearted is
 exceedingly distracted." [2771]

 After What Manner We Ought to Receive a Penitent; How We Ought to Deal with
 Offenders, and When They are to Be Cut Off from the Church.

 XLI. But if any one returns, and shows forth the fruit of repentance,
 then do ye receive him to prayer, as the lost son, the prodigal, who
 had consumed his father's substance with harlots, who fed swine, and
 desired to be fed with husks, and could not obtain it. This son, when
 he repented, and returned to his father, and said, "I have sinned
 against Heaven, and before thee, and am no more worthy to be called thy
 son;" [2772] the father, full of affection to his child, received him
 with music, and restored him his old robe, and ring, and shoes, and
 slew the fatted calf, and made merry with his friends. Do thou
 therefore, O bishop, act in the same manner. And as thou receivest an
 heathen after thou hast instructed and baptized him, so do thou let all
 join in prayers for this man, and restore him by imposition of hands to
 his ancient place among the flock, as one purified by repentance; and
 that imposition of hands shall be to him instead of baptism: for by the
 laying on of our hands the Holy Ghost was given to believers. And in
 case some one of those brethren who had stood immoveable accuse thee,
 because thou art reconciled to him, say to him: "Thou art always with
 me, and all that I have is thine. It was meet to make merry and be
 glad: for this thy brother was dead, and is alive again; he was lost,
 and is found." For that God does not only receive the penitent, but
 restores them to their former dignity, holy David is a sufficient
 witness, who, after his sin in the matter of Uriah, prayed to God, and
 said: "Restore unto me the joy of Thy salvation, and uphold me with Thy
 free Spirit." [2773] And again: "Turn Thy face from my sins, and blot
 out all mine offences. Create in me a clean heart, O God, and renew a
 right spirit in my inward parts. Cast me not away from Thy presence,
 and take not Thy Holy Spirit from me." Do thou therefore, as a
 compassionate physician, heal all that have sinned, making use of
 saving methods of cure; not only cutting and searing, or using
 corrosives, but binding up, and putting in tents, and using gentle
 healing medicines, and sprinkling comfortable words. If it be an hollow
 wound, or great gash, nourish it with a suitable plaister, that it may
 be filled up, and become even with the rest of the whole flesh. If it
 be foul, cleanse it with corrosive powder, that is, with the words of
 reproof. If it have proud flesh, eat it down with a sharp plaister--the
 threats of judgment. If it spreads further, sear it, and cut off the
 putrid flesh, mortifying him with fastings. But if, after all that thou
 hast done, thou perceivest that from the feet to the head there is no
 room for a fomentation, or oil, or bandage, but that the malady spreads
 and prevents all cure, as a gangrene which corrupts the entire member;
 then, with a great deal of consideration, and the advice of other
 skilful physicians, cut off the putrefied member, that the whole body
 of the Church be not corrupted. Be not therefore ready and hasty to cut
 off, nor do thou easily have recourse to the saw, with its many teeth;
 but first use a lancet to lay open the wound, that the inward cause
 whence the pain is derived being drawn out, may keep the body free from
 pain. But if thou seest any one past repentance, and he is become
 insensible, then cut off the incurable from the Church with sorrow and
 lamentation. For: "Take out from among yourselves that wicked person."
 [2774] And: "Ye shall make the children of Israel to fear." [2775] And
 again: "Thou shalt not accept the persons of the rich in judgment."
 [2776] And: "Thou shalt not pity a poor man in his cause: for the
 judgment is the Lord's." [2777]

 That a Judge Must Not Be a Respecter of Persons.

 XLII. But if the slanderous accusation be false, and you that are the
 pastors, with the deacons, admit of that falsehood for truth, either by
 acceptance of persons or receiving of bribes, as willing to do that
 which will he pleasing to the devil, and so you thrust out from the
 Church him that is accused, but is clear of the crime, you shall give
 an account in the day of the Lord. For it is written: "The innocent and
 the righteous thou shalt not slay." [2778] "Thou shalt not take gifts
 to smite the soul: for gifts blind the eyes of the wise, and destroy
 the words of the righteous." [2779] And again: "They that justify the
 wicked for gifts, and take away the righteousness of the righteous from
 him." [2780] Be careful, therefore, not to condemn any persons
 unjustly, and so to assist the wicked. For "woe to him that calls evil
 good, and good evil; bitter sweet, and sweet bitter; that puts light
 for darkness, and darkness for light." [2781] Take care, therefore,
 lest by any means ye become acceptors of persons, and thereby fall
 under this voice of the Lord. [2782] For if you condemn others
 unjustly, you pass sentence against yourselves. For the Lord says:
 "With what judgment ye judge, ye shall be judged; and as you condemn,
 you shall be condemned." [2783] If, therefore, ye judge without respect
 of persons, ye will discover that accuser who bears false witness
 against his neighbour, and will prove him to be a sycophant, a spiteful
 person, and a murderer, causing perplexity by accusing the man as if he
 were wicked, inconstant in his words, contradicting himself in what he
 affirms, and entangled with the words of his own mouth; for his own
 lips are a dangerous snare to him: whom, when thou hast convicted him
 of speaking falsely, thou shalt judge severely, and shalt deliver him
 to the fiery sword, and thou shalt do to him as he wickedly proposed to
 do to his brother; for as much as in him lay he slew his brother, by
 forestalling the ears of the judge. [2784] Now it is written, that "he
 that sheddeth man's blood, for that his own blood shall be shed."
 [2785] And: "Thou shalt take away that innocent blood, which was shed
 without cause, from thee." [2786]

 After What Manner False Accusers are to Be Punished.

 XLIII. Thou shalt therefore cast him out of the congregation as a
 murderer of his brother. Some time afterwards, if he says that he
 repents, mortify him with fastings, and afterwards ye shall lay your
 hands upon him and receive him, but still securing him, that he does
 not disturb anybody a second time. But if, when he is admitted again,
 he be alike troublesome, and will not cease to disturb and to quarrel
 with his brother, spying faults out of a contentious spirit, cast him
 out as a pernicious person, that he may not lay waste the Church of
 God. For such a one is the raiser of disturbances in cities; for he,
 though he be within, does not become the Church, but is a superfluous
 and vain member, casting a blot, as far as in him lies, on the body of
 Christ. For if such men as are born with superfluous members of their
 body, which hang to them as fingers, or excrescences of flesh, cut them
 away from themselves on account of their indecency, whereby the
 unseemliness vanishes, and the man recovers his natural good shape by
 the means of the surgeon; how much more ought you, the pastors of the
 Church (for the Church is a perfect body, and sound members; of such as
 believe in God, in the fear of the Lord, and in love), to do the like
 when there is found in it a superfluous member with wicked designs, and
 rendering the rest of the body unseemly, and disturbing it with
 sedition, and war, and evil-speaking; causing fears, disturbances,
 blots, evil-speaking, accusations, disorders, and doing the like works
 of the devil, as if he were ordained by the devil to cast a reproach on
 the Church by calumnies, and mighty disorders, and strife, and
 division! Such a one, therefore, when he is a second time cast out of
 the Church, is justly cut off entirely from the congregation of the
 Lord. And now the Church of the Lord will be more beautiful than it was
 before, when it had a superfluous, and to itself a disagreeable member.
 Wherefore henceforward it will be free from blame and reproach, and
 become clear of such wicked, deceitful, abusive, unmerciful, traitorous
 persons; of such as are "haters of those that are good, lovers of
 pleasure," [2787] affecters of vainglory, deceivers, and pretenders to
 wisdom; of such as make it their business to scatter, or rather utterly
 to disperse, the lambs of the Lord.

 [2760] John vii. 24.

 [2761] Luke xii. 57.

 [2762] Hist. Susanna.

 [2763] Gen. xxxix.

 [2764] The mss. read, "the accused."

 [2765] Matt. xviii. 15.

 [2766] Prov. xiv. 32.

 [2767] Matt. xviii. 17.

 [2768] Luke iii. 13.

 [2769] Matt. ix. 12.

 [2770] Isa. xxxv. 3.

 [2771] Prov. xiv. 29, LXX.

 [2772] Luke xv. 21.

 [2773] Ps. li.

 [2774] Deut. xvii. 7.

 [2775] Lev. xv. 31.

 [2776] Deut. i. 17; Lev. xix. 15.

 [2777] Ex. xxiii. 3.

 [2778] Ex. xxiii. 7, 8.

 [2779] Deut. xxvii. 25, xvi. 19.

 [2780] Isa. v. 23.

 [2781] Isa. v. 20.

 [2782] This sentence follows the passage from Isa. v. 23 in most mss.
 One V. ms. has the order adopted In the text.

 [2783] Matt. vii. 2; Luke vi. 37.

 [2784] Deut. xix. 19.

 [2785] Gen. ix. 6.

 [2786] Deut. xix. 13.

 [2787] 2 Tim. iii. 3, 4.

 Sec. VI.--The Disputes of the Faithful to Be Settled by the Decisions of the
 Bishop, and the Faithful to Be Reconciled.

 Do thou therefore, O bishop, together with thy subordinate clergy,
 endeavour rightly to divide the word of truth. For the Lord says: "If
 you walk cross-grained to me, I will walk cross-grained to you." [2788]
 And elsewhere: "With the holy Thou wilt be holy, and with the perfect
 man Thou wilt be perfect, and with the froward Thou wilt be froward."
 [2789] Walk therefore holily, that you may rather appear worthy of
 praise from the Lord than of complaint from the adversary.

 That the Deacon is to Ease the Burden of the Bishops, and to Order the
 Smaller Matters Himself.

 XLIV. Be ye of one mind, O ye bishops, one with another, and be at
 peace with one another; sympathize with one another, love the brethren,
 and feed the people with care; with one consent teach those that are
 under you to be of the same sentiments and to be of the same opinions
 about the same matters, "that there may be no schisms among you; that
 ye may be one body and one spirit, perfectly joined together in the
 same mind and in the same judgment," [2790] according to the
 appointment of the Lord. And let the deacon refer all things to the
 bishop, as Christ does to His Father. But let him order such things as
 he is able by himself, receiving power from the bishop, as the Lord did
 from His Father the power of creation and of providence. But the
 weighty matters let the bishop judge; but let the deacon be the
 bishop's ear, and eye, and mouth, and heart, and soul, that the bishop
 may not be distracted with many cares, but with such only as are more
 considerable, as Jethro did appoint for Moses, and his counsel was
 received. [2791]

 That Contentions and Quarrels are Unbecoming Christians.

 XLV. It is therefore a noble encomium for a Christian to have no
 contest with any one; [2792] but if by any management or temptation a
 contest arises with any one, let him endeavour that it may be composed,
 though thereby he be obliged to lose somewhat; and let it not come
 before an heathen tribunal. Nay, indeed, you are not to permit that the
 rulers of this world should pass sentence against your people; for by
 them the devil contrives mischief to the servants of God, and occasions
 a reproach to be cast upon us, as though we had not "one wise man that
 is able to judge between his brethren," or to decide their
 controversies.

 That Believers Ought Not to Go to Law Before Unbelievers; Nor Ought Any
 Unbeliever to Be Called for a Witness Against Believers.

 XLVI. Let not the heathen therefore know of your differences among one
 another, nor do you receive unbelievers as witnesses against
 yourselves, nor be judged by them, nor owe them anything on account of
 tribute or fear; but "render to Cæsar the things that are Cæsar's, and
 unto God the things that are God's," [2793] as tribute, taxes, or
 poll-money, as our Lord by giving a piece of money was freed from
 disturbance. [2794] Choose therefore rather to suffer harm, and to
 endeavour after those things that make for peace, not only among the
 brethren, but also among the unbelievers. For by suffering loss in the
 affairs of this life, thou wilt be sure not to suffer in the concerns
 of piety, and wilt live religiously, and according to the command of
 Christ. [2795] But if brethren have lawsuits one with another, which
 God forbid, you who are the rulers ought thence to learn that such as
 these do not do the work of brethren in the Lord, but rather of public
 enemies; and one of the parties will be found to be mild, gentle, and
 the child of light; but the other unmerciful, insolent, and covetous.
 Let him, therefore, who is condemned be rebuked, let him be separated,
 let him undergo the punishment of his hatred to his brother.
 Afterwards, when he repents, let him be received; and so, when they
 have learned prudence, they will ease your judicatures. It is also a
 duty to forgive each other's trespasses--not the duty of those that
 judge, but of those that have quarrels; as the Lord determined when I
 Peter asked Him, "How oft shall my brother sin against me, and I
 forgive him? Till seven times?" He replied, "I say not unto thee, Until
 seven times, but until seventy times seven." [2796] For so would our
 Lord have us to be truly His disciples, and never to have anything
 against anybody; as, for instance, anger without measure, passion
 without mercy, covetousness without justice, hatred without
 reconciliation. Draw by your instruction those who are angry to
 friendship, and those who are at variance to agreement. For the Lord
 says: "Blessed are the peacemakers, for they shall be called the
 children of God." [2797]

 That the Judicatures of Christians Ought to Be Held on the Second Day of the
 Week.

 XLVII. Let your judicatures be held on the second day of the week, that
 if any controversy arise about your sentence, having an interval till
 the Sabbath, [2798] you may be able to set the controversy right, and
 to reduce those to peace who have the contests one with another against
 the Lord's day. Let also the deacons and presbyters be present at your
 judicatures, to judge without acceptance of persons, as men of God,
 with righteousness. When, therefore, both the parties are come,
 according as the law says, [2799] those that have the controversy shall
 stand severally in the middle of the court; and when you have heard
 them, give your votes holily, endeavouring to make them both friends
 before the sentence of the bishop, that judgment against the offender
 may not go abroad into the world; knowing that he has in the court the
 Christ of God as conscious of and confirming his judgment. But if any
 persons are accused by any one, and their fame suffers as if they did
 not walk uprightly in the Lord, in like manner you shall hear both
 parties--the accuser and accused; but not with prejudice, nor with
 hearkening to one part only, but with righteousness, as passing a
 sentence concerning eternal life or death. For says God: "He shall
 prosecute that which is right justly." [2800] For he that is justly
 punished and separated by you is rejected from eternal life and glory;
 he becomes dishonourable among holy men, and one condemned of God.

 That the Same Punishment is Not to Be Inflicted for Every Offence, But
 Different Punishments for Different Offenders.

 XLVIII. Do not pass the same sentence for every sin, but one suitable
 to each crime, distinguishing all the several sorts of offences with
 much prudence, the great from the little. Treat a wicked action after
 one manner, and a wicked word after another; a bare intention still
 otherwise. So also in the case of a contumely or suspicion. And some
 thou shalt curb by threatenings alone; some thou shalt punish with
 fines to the poor; some thou shalt mortify with fastings; and others
 thou shalt separate according to the greatness of their several crimes.
 For the law did not allot the same punishment to every offence, but had
 a different regard to a sin against God, against the priest, against
 the temple, or against the sacrifice; from a sin against the king, or
 ruler, or a soldier, or a fellow-subject; and so were the offences
 different which were against a servant, a possession, or a brute
 creature. And again, sins were differently rated according as they were
 against parents and kinsmen, and those differently which were done on
 purpose from those that happened involuntarily. Accordingly the
 punishments were different: as death either by crucifixion or by
 stoning, fines, scourgings, or the suffering the same mischiefs they
 had done to others. Wherefore do you also allot different penalties to
 different offences, lest any injustice should happen, and provoke God
 to indignation. For of what unjust judgment soever you are the
 instruments, of the same you shall receive the reward from God. "For
 with what judgment ye judge ye shall be judged." [2801]

 What are to Be the Characters of Accusers and Witnesses.

 XLIX. When, therefore, you are set down at your tribunal, and the
 parties are both of them present (for we will not call them brethren
 until they receive each other in peace), examine diligently concerning
 those who appear before you; and first concerning the accuser, whether
 this be the first person he has accused, or whether he has advanced
 accusations against some others before, and whether this contest and
 accusation of theirs does not arise from some quarrel, and what sort of
 life the accuser leads. Yet, though he be of a good conscience, do not
 give credit to him alone, for that is contrary to the law; but let him
 have others to join in his testimony, and those of the same course of
 life. As the law says: "At the mouth of two or three witnesses
 everything shall be established." [2802] But why did we say that the
 character of the witnesses was to be inquired after, of what sort it
 is? Because it frequently happens that two and more testify for
 mischief, and with joint consent prefer a lie; as did the two elders
 against Susanna in Babylon, [2803] and the sons of transgressors
 against Naboth in Samaria, [2804] and the multitude of the Jews against
 our Lord at Jerusalem, [2805] and against Stephen His first martyr.
 [2806] Let the witnesses therefore be meek, free from anger, full of
 equity, kind, prudent, continent, free from wickedness, faithful,
 religious; for the testimony of such persons is firm on account of
 their character, and true on account of their mode of life. But as to
 those of a different character, do not ye receive their testimony,
 although they seem to agree together in their evidence against the
 accused; for it is ordained in the law: "Thou shalt not be with a
 multitude for wickedness; thou shalt not receive a vain report; thou
 shalt not consent with a multitude to pervert judgment." [2807] You
 ought also particularly to know him that is accused; what he is in his
 course and mode of life; whether he have a good report as to his life;
 whether he has been unblameable; whether he has been zealous in
 holiness; whether he be a lover of the widows, a lover of the
 strangers, a lover of the poor, and a lover of the brethren; whether he
 be not given to filthy lucre; whether he be not an extravagant person,
 or a spendthrift; whether he be sober, and free from luxury, or a
 drunkard, or a glutton; whether he be compassionate and charitable.

 That Former Offences Do Sometimes Render After Accusations Credible.

 L. For if he has been before addicted to wicked works, the accusations
 which are now brought against him will thence in some measure appear to
 be true, unless justice do plainly plead for him. For it may be, that
 though he had formerly been an offender, yet that he may not be guilty
 of this crime of which he is accused. Wherefore be exactly cautious
 about such circumstances, and so render your sentences, when pronounced
 against the offender convicted, safe and firm. And if, after his
 separation, he begs pardon, and falls down before the bishop, and
 acknowledges his fault, receive him. But neither do you suffer a false
 accuser to go unpunished, that he may not calumniate another who lives
 well, or encourage some other person to do like him. Nor, to be sure,
 do ye suffer a person convicted to go off clear, lest another be
 ensnared in the same crimes. For neither shall a witness of mischiefs
 be unpunished, nor shall he that offends be without censure.

 Against Judging Without Hearing Both Sides.

 LI. We said before that judgment ought not to be given upon hearing
 only one of the parties; for if you hear one of them when the other is
 not there, and so cannot make his defence to the accusation brought
 against him, and rashly give your votes for condemnation, you will be
 found guilty of that man's destruction, and partaker with the false
 accuser before God, the just Judge. For "as he that holdeth the tail of
 a dog, so is he that presides at unjust judgment." [2808] But if ye
 become imitators of the elders in Babylon, who, when they had borne
 witness against Susanna, unjustly condemned her to death, you will
 become obnoxious to their judgment and condemnation. For the Lord by
 Daniel delivered Susanna from the hand of the ungodly, but condemned to
 the fire those elders who were guilty of her blood, and reproaches you
 by him, saying: "Are ye so foolish, ye children of Israel? Without
 examination, and without knowing the truth, have ye condemned a
 daughter of Israel? Return again to the place of judgment, for these
 men have borne false witness against her." [2809]

 The Caution Observed at Heathen Tribunals Before the Condemnation of
 Criminals Affords Christians a Good Example.

 LII. Consider even the judicatures of this world, by whose power we see
 murderers, adulterers, wizards, robbers of sepulchres, and thieves
 brought to trial; and those that preside, when they have received their
 accusations from those that brought them, ask the malefactor whether
 those things be so. And though he does not deny the crimes, they do not
 presently send him out to punishment; but for several days they make
 inquiry about him with a full council, and with the veil interposed.
 And he that is to pass the final decree and suffrage of death against
 him, lifts up his hands to the sun, and solemnly affirms that he is
 innocent of the blood of the man. Though they be heathens, and know not
 the Deity, nor the vengeance which will fall upon men from God on
 account of those that are justly condemned, they avoid such unjust
 judgments.

 That Christians Ought Not to Be Contentious One with Another.

 LIII. But you who know who our God is, and what are His judgments, how
 can you bear to pass an unjust judgment, since your sentence will be
 immediately known to God? And if you have judged righteously, you will
 be deemed worthy of the recompenses of righteousness, both now and
 hereafter; but if unrighteously, you will partake of the like. We
 therefore advise you, brethren, rather to deserve commendation from God
 than rebukes; for the commendation of God is eternal life to men, as is
 His rebuke everlasting death. Be ye therefore righteous judges,
 peacemakers, and without anger. For "he that is angry with his brother
 without a cause is obnoxious to the judgment." [2810] But if it happens
 that by any one's contrivance you are angry at anybody, "let not the
 sun go down upon your wrath;" [2811] for says David, "Be angry and sin
 not;" [2812] that is, be soon reconciled, lest your wrath continue so
 long that it turn to a settled hatred, and work sin. "For the souls of
 those that bear a settled hatred are to death," [2813] says Solomon.
 But our Lord and Saviour Jesus Christ says in the Gospels: "If thou
 bring thy gift to the altar, and there rememberest that thy brother
 hath ought against thee, leave there thy gift before the altar, and go
 thy way; first be reconciled to thy brother, and then come and offer
 thy gift to God." [2814] Now the gift to God is every one's prayer and
 thanksgiving. If, therefore, thou hast anything against thy brother, or
 he has anything against thee, neither will thy prayers be heard, nor
 will thy thanksgivings be accepted, by reason of that hidden anger. But
 it is your duty, brethren, to pray continually. Yet, because God hears
 not those which are at enmity with their brethren by unjust quarrels,
 even though they should pray three times an hour, it is our duty to
 compose all our enmity and littleness of soul, that we may be able to
 pray with a pure and unpolluted heart. For the Lord commanded us to
 love even our enemies, and by no means to hate our friends. And the
 lawgiver says: "Thou shalt not hate any man; thou shalt not hate thy
 brother in thy mind. Thou shalt certainly reprove thy brother, and not
 incur sin on his account." [2815] "Thou shalt not hate an Egyptian, for
 thou wast a sojourner with him. Thou shalt not hate an Idumæan, for he
 is thy brother." [2816] And David says: "If I have repaid those that
 requited me evil." [2817] Wherefore, if thou wilt be a Christian,
 follow the law of the Lord: "Loose every band of wickedness;" [2818]
 for the Lord has given thee authority to remit those sins to thy
 brother which he has committed against thee as far as "seventy times
 seven," [2819] that is, four hundred and ninety times. How oft,
 therefore, hast thou remitted to thy brother, that thou art unwilling
 to do it now, when thou also hast heard Jeremiah saying, "Do not any of
 you impute the wickedness of his neighbour in your hearts?" [2820] But
 thou rememberest injuries, and keepest enmity, and comest into
 judgment, and art suspicious of His anger, and thy prayer is hindered.
 Nay, if thou hast remitted to thy brother four hundred and ninety
 times, do thou still multiply thy acts of gentleness more, to do good
 for thy own sake. Although he does not do so, yet, however, do thou
 endeavour to forgive thy brother for God's sake, "that thou mayest be
 the son of thy Father which is in heaven," [2821] and when thou
 prayest, mayest be heard as a friend of God.

 That the Bishops Must by Their Deacon Put the People in Mind of the
 Obligation They are Under to Live Peaceably Together.

 LIV. Wherefore, O bishop, when you are to go to prayer after the
 lessons, and the psalmody, and the instruction out of the Scriptures,
 let the deacon stand nigh you, and with a loud voice say: Let none have
 any quarrel with another; let none come in hypocrisy; that if there be
 any controversy found among any of you, they may be affected in
 conscience, and may pray to God, and be reconciled to their brethren.
 For if, upon coming into any one's house, we are to say, "Peace be to
 this house," [2822] like sons of peace bestowing peace on those who are
 worthy, as it is written, "He came and preached peace to you that are
 nigh, and them that are far off, whom the Lord knows to be His," [2823]
 much more is it incumbent on those that enter into the Church of God
 before all things to pray for the peace of God. But if he prays for it
 upon others, much more let himself be within the same, as a child of
 light; for he that has it not within himself is not fit to bestow it
 upon others. Wherefore, before all things, it is our duty to be at
 peace in our own minds; for he that does not find any disorder in
 himself will not quarrel with another, but will be peaceable, friendly,
 gathering the Lord's people, and a fellow-worker with him, in order to
 the increasing the number of those that shall be saved in unanimity.
 For those who contrive enmities, and strifes, and contests, and
 lawsuits, are wicked, and aliens from God.

 An Enumeration of the Several Instances of Divine Providence, and How in
 Every Age from the Beginning of the World God Has Invited All Men to
 Repentance.

 LV. For God, being a God of mercy from the beginning, called every
 generation to repentance by righteous men and prophets. He instructed
 those before the flood by Abel and Sem, and Seth, also by Enos, and by
 Enoch that was translated; those at the flood by Noah; the inhabitants
 of Sodom by hospitable Lot; those after the flood by Melchizedek, and
 the patriarchs, and Job the beloved of God; the Egyptians by Moses; the
 Israelites by him, and Joshua, and Caleb, and Phineas, and the rest;
 those after the law by angels and prophets, and the same by His own
 incarnation [2824] of the Virgin; those a little before His bodily
 appearance by John His forerunner, and the same by the same person
 after Christ's birth, saying, "Repent ye, for the kingdom of heaven is
 at hand;" [2825] those after His passion by us, the twelve apostles,
 and Paul the chosen vessel. We therefore, who have been vouchsafed the
 favour of being the witnesses of His appearance, together with James
 the brother of our Lord, and the other seventy-two disciples, and his
 seven deacons, have heard from the mouth of our Lord Jesus Christ, and
 by exact knowledge declare "what is the will of God, that good, and
 acceptable, and perfect will" [2826] which is made known to us by
 Jesus; that none should perish, but that all men with one accord should
 believe in Him, and send unanimously praise to Him, and thereby live
 for ever.

 That It is the Will of God that Men Should Be of One Mind in Matters of
 Religion, in Accord with the Heavenly Powers.

 LVI. For this is that which our Lord taught us when we pray to say to
 His Father, "Thy will be done, as in heaven, so upon earth;" [2827]
 that as the heavenly natures of the incorporeal powers do all glorify
 God with one consent, so also upon earth all men with one mouth and one
 purpose may glorify the only, the one, and the true God, by Christ His
 only-begotten. It is therefore His will that men should praise Him with
 unanimity, and adore Him with one consent. [2828] For this is His will
 in Christ, that those who are saved by Him may be many; but that you do
 not occasion any loss or diminution to Him, nor to the Church, or
 lessen the number by one soul of man, as destroyed by you, which might
 have been saved by repentance; and which therefore perishes not only by
 its own sin, but also by your treachery besides, whereby you fulfil
 that which is written, "He that gathereth not with me, scattereth."
 [2829] Such a one is a disperser of the sheep, an adversary, an enemy
 of God, a destroyer of those lambs whose Shepherd was the Lord, and we
 were the collectors out of various nations and tongues, by much pains
 and danger, and perpetual labour, by watchings, by fastings, by lyings
 on the ground, by persecutions, by stripes, by imprisonments, that we
 might do the will of God, and fill the feast-chamber with guests to sit
 down at His table, that is, the holy and Catholic Church, with joyful
 and chosen people, singing hymns and praises to God that has called
 them by us to life. And you, as much as in you lies, have dispersed
 them. Do you also of the laity be at peace with one another,
 endeavouring like wise men to increase the Church, and to turn back,
 and tame, and restore those which seem wild. For this is the greatest
 reward by His promise from God, "If thou fetch out the worthy and
 precious from the unworthy, thou shalt be as my mouth." [2830]

 [2788] Lev. xxvi. 27, 28.

 [2789] Ps. xviii. 26.

 [2790] 1 Cor. i. 10; Eph. iv. 4.

 [2791] Ex. xviii.

 [2792] 1 Cor. vi. 1, etc.

 [2793] Matt. xxii. 21.

 [2794] Matt. xvii. 24, etc.

 [2795] One V. ms. reads "God" instead of "Christ."

 [2796] Matt. xviii. 21, 22.

 [2797] Matt. v. 9.

 [2798] [i.e., Saturday.]

 [2799] Deut. xix. 17.

 [2800] Deut. xvi. 20.

 [2801] Matt. vii. 2.

 [2802] Deut. xix. 15.

 [2803] Susanna 28.

 [2804] 1 Kings xxi.

 [2805] Matt. xxvi.

 [2806] Acts vi. and vii.

 [2807] Ex. xxiii. 2.

 [2808] Prov. xxvi. 17.

 [2809] Susanna 48.

 [2810] Matt. v. 22.

 [2811] Eph. iv. 26.

 [2812] Ps. iv. 4.

 [2813] Prov. xii. 28, LXX.

 [2814] Matt. v. 23, 24.

 [2815] Lev. xix. 17.

 [2816] Deut. xxiii. 7.

 [2817] Ps. vii. 4.

 [2818] Isa. lviii. 6.

 [2819] Matt. xviii. 22.

 [2820] Zech. viii. 17.

 [2821] Matt. v. 45.

 [2822] Matt. x. 12.

 [2823] Isa. lvii. 19; Eph. ii. 17; 2 Tim. ii. 19.

 [2824] One V. ms. inserts, "of the Holy Spirit and."

 [2825] Matt. iii. 2.

 [2826] Rom. xii. 2.

 [2827] Matt. vi. 10.

 [2828] "And adore him with one consent" is omitted in one V. ms.

 [2829] Matt. xii. 30.

 [2830] Jer. xv. 19.

 Sec. VII.--On Assembling in the Church.

 An Exact Description of a Church and the Clergy, and What Things in
 Particular Every One is to Do in the Solemn Assemblies of the Clergy and
 Laity For Religious Worship.

 LVII. But be thou, O bishop, holy, unblameable, no striker, not soon
 angry, not cruel; but a builder up, a converter, apt to teach,
 forbearing of evil, of a gentle mind, meek, long-suffering, ready to
 exhort, ready to comfort, as a man of God.

 When thou callest an assembly of the Church as one that is the
 commander of a great ship, appoint the assemblies to be made with all
 possible skill, charging the deacons as mariners to prepare places for
 the brethren as for passengers, with all due care and decency. And
 first, let the building be long, with its head to the east, with its
 vestries on both sides at the east end, and so it will be like a ship.
 In the middle let the bishop's throne be placed, and on each side of
 him let the presbytery sit down; and let the deacons stand near at
 hand, in close and small girt garments, for they are like the mariners
 and managers of the ship: with regard to these, let the laity sit on
 the other side, with all quietness and good order. And let the women
 sit by themselves, they also keeping silence. In the middle, let the
 reader stand upon some high place: let him read the books of Moses, of
 Joshua the son of Nun, of the Judges, and of the Kings and of the
 Chronicles, and those written after the return from the captivity; and
 besides these, the books of Job and of Solomon, and of the sixteen
 prophets. But when there have been two lessons severally read, let some
 other person sing the hymns of David, and let the people join at the
 conclusions of the verses. Afterwards let our Acts be read, and the
 Epistles of Paul our fellow-worker, which he sent to the churches under
 the conduct of the Holy Spirit; and afterwards let a deacon or a
 presbyter read the Gospels, both those which I Matthew and John have
 delivered to you, and those which the fellow-workers of Paul received
 and left to you, Luke and Mark. And while the Gospel is read, let all
 the presbyters and deacons, and all the people, stand up in great
 silence; for it is written: "Be silent, and hear, O Israel." [2831] And
 again: "But do thou stand there, and hear." [2832] In the next place,
 let the presbyters one by one, not all together, exhort the people, and
 the bishop in the last place, as being the commander. Let the porters
 stand at the entries of the men, and observe them. Let the deaconesses
 also stand at those of the women, like shipmen. For the same
 description and pattern was both in the tabernacle of the testimony and
 in the temple of God. [2833] But if any one be found sitting out of his
 place, let him be rebuked by the deacon, as a manager of the foreship,
 and be removed into the place proper for him; for the Church is not
 only like a ship, but also like a sheepfold. For as the shepherds place
 all the brute creatures distinctly, I mean goats and sheep, according
 to their kind and age, and still every one runs together, like to his
 like; so is it to be in the Church. Let the young persons sit by
 themselves, if there be a place for them; if not, let them stand
 upright. But let those that are already stricken in years sit in order.
 For the children which stand, let their fathers and mothers take them
 to them. Let the younger women also sit by themselves, if there be a
 place for them; but if there be not, let them stand behind the women.
 Let those women which are married, and have children, be placed by
 themselves; but let the virgins, and the widows, and the elder women,
 stand or sit before all the rest; and let the deacon be the disposer of
 the places, that every one of those that comes in may go to his proper
 place, and may not sit at the entrance. In like manner, let the deacon
 oversee the people, that nobody may whisper, nor slumber, nor laugh,
 nor nod; for all ought in the church to stand wisely, and soberly, and
 attentively, having their attention fixed upon the word of the Lord.
 After this, let all rise up with one consent, and looking towards the
 east, after the catechumens and penitents are gone out, pray to God
 eastward, who ascended up to the heaven of heavens to the east;
 remembering also the ancient situation of paradise in the east, from
 whence the first man, when he had yielded to the persuasion of the
 serpent, and disobeyed the command of God, was expelled. As to the
 deacons, after the prayer is over, let some of them attend upon the
 oblation of the Eucharist, ministering to the Lord's body with fear.
 Let others of them watch the multitude, and keep them silent. But let
 that deacon who is at the high priest's hand say to the people, Let no
 one have any quarrel against another; let no one come in hypocrisy.
 Then let the men give the men, and the women give the women, the Lord's
 kiss. But let no one do it with deceit, as Judas betrayed the Lord with
 a kiss. After this let the deacon pray for the whole Church, for the
 whole world, and the several parts of it, and the fruits of it; for the
 priests and the rulers, for the high priest and the king, and the peace
 of the universe. After this let the high priest pray for peace upon the
 people, and bless them, as Moses commanded the priests to bless the
 people, in these words: "The Lord bless thee, and keep thee: the Lord
 make His face to shine upon thee, [2834] and give thee peace." [2835]
 Let the bishop pray for the people, and say: "Save Thy people, O Lord,
 and bless Thine inheritance, which Thou hast obtained with the precious
 blood of Thy Christ, and hast called a royal priesthood, and an holy
 nation." [2836] After this let the sacrifice follow, the people
 standing, and praying silently; and when the oblation has been made,
 let every rank by itself partake of the Lord's body and precious blood
 in order, and approach with reverence and holy fear, as to the body of
 their king. Let the women approach with their heads covered, as is
 becoming the order of women; but let the door be watched, lest any
 unbeliever, or one not yet initiated, come in. [2837]

 Of Commendatory Letters in Favour of Strangers, Lay Persons, Clergymen, and
 Bishops; And that Those Who Come into the Church Assemblies are to Be
 Received Without Regard to Their Quality.

 LVIII. If any brother, man or woman, come in from another parish,
 bringing recommendatory letters, let the deacon be the judge of that
 affair, inquiring whether they be of the faithful, and of the Church?
 whether they be not defiled by heresy? and besides, whether the party
 be a married woman or a widow? And when he is satisfied in these
 questions, that they are really of the faithful, and of the same
 sentiments in the things of the Lord, let him conduct every one to the
 place proper for him. And if a presbyter comes from another parish, let
 him be received to communion by the presbyters; if a deacon, by the
 deacons; if a bishop, let him sit with the bishop, and be allowed the
 same honour with himself; and thou, O bishop, shalt desire him to speak
 to the people words of instruction: for the exhortation and admonition
 of strangers is very acceptable, and exceeding profitable. For, as the
 Scripture says, "no prophet is accepted in his own country." [2838]
 Thou shalt also permit him to offer the Eucharist; but if, out of
 reverence to thee, and as a wise man, to preserve the honour belonging
 to thee, he will not offer, at least thou shalt compel him to give the
 blessing to the people. But if, after the congregation is sat down, any
 other person comes upon you of good fashion and character in the world,
 whether he be a stranger, or one of your own country, neither do thou,
 O bishop, if thou art speaking the word of God, or hearing him that
 sings or reads, accept persons so far as to leave the ministry of the
 word, that thou mayest appoint an upper place for him; but continue
 quiet, not interrupting thy discourse, nor thy attention. But let the
 brethren receive him by the deacons; and if there be not a place, let
 the deacon by speaking, but not in anger, raise the junior, and place
 the stranger there. And it is but reasonable that one that loves the
 brethren should do so of his own accord; but if he refuse, let him
 raise him up by force, and set him behind all, that the rest may be
 taught to give place to those that are more honourable. Nay, if a poor
 man, or one of a mean family, or a stranger, comes upon you, whether he
 be old or young, and there be no place, the deacon shall find a place
 for even these, and that with all his heart; that, instead of accepting
 persons before men, his ministration towards God may be well-pleasing.
 The very same thing let the deaconess do to those women, whether poor
 or rich, that come unto them.

 That Every Christian Ought to Frequent the Church Diligently Both Morning
 and Evening.

 LIX. When thou instructest the people, O bishop, command and exhort
 them to come constantly to church morning and evening every day, and by
 no means to forsake it on any account, but to assemble together
 continually; neither to diminish the Church by withdrawing themselves,
 and causing the body of Christ to be without its member. For it is not
 only spoken concerning the priests, but let every one of the laity
 hearken to it as concerning himself, considering that it is said by the
 Lord: "He that is not with me is against me, and he that gathereth not
 with me scattereth abroad." [2839] Do not you therefore scatter
 yourselves abroad, who are the members of Christ, by not assembling
 together, since you have Christ your head, according to His promise,
 present, and communicating to you. [2840] Be not careless of
 yourselves, neither deprive your Saviour of His own members, neither
 divide His body nor disperse His members, neither prefer the occasions
 of this life to the word of God; but assemble yourselves together every
 day, morning and evening, singing psalms and praying in the Lord's
 house: in the morning saying the sixty-second Psalm, and in the evening
 the hundred and fortieth, but principally on the Sabbath-day. And on
 the day of our Lord's resurrection, which is the Lord's day, meet more
 diligently, sending praise to God that made the universe by Jesus, and
 sent Him to us, and condescended to let Him suffer, and raised Him from
 the dead. Otherwise what apology will he make to God who does not
 assemble on that day to hear the saving word concerning the
 resurrection, on which we pray thrice standing in memory of Him who
 arose in three days, in which is performed the reading of the prophets,
 the preaching of the Gospel, the oblation of the sacrifice, the gift of
 the holy food?

 The Vain Zeal Which the Heathens and Jews Show in Frequenting Their Temples
 and Synagogues is a Proper Example and Motive to Excite Christians to
 Frequent the Church.

 LX. And how can he be other than an adversary to God, who takes pains
 about temporary things night and day, but takes no care of things
 eternal? who takes care of washings and temporary food every day, but
 does not take care of those that endure for ever? How can such a one
 even now avoid hearing that word of the Lord, "The Gentiles are
 justified more than you?" [2841] as He says, by way of reproach, to
 Jerusalem, "Sodom is justified rather than thou." For if the Gentiles
 every day, when they arise from sleep, run to their idols to worship
 them, and before all their work and all their labours do first of all
 pray to them, and in their feasts and in their solemnities do not keep
 away, but attend upon them; and not only those upon the place, but
 those living far distant do the same; and in their public shows all
 come together, as into a synagogue: in the same manner those which are
 vainly called Jews, when they have worked six days, on the seventh day
 rest, and come together into their synagogue, never leaving nor
 neglecting either rest from labour or assembling together, while yet
 they are deprived of the efficacy of the word in their unbelief, nay,
 and of the force of that name Judah, by which they call
 themselves,--for Judah is interpreted Confession,--but these do not
 confess to God (having unjustly occasioned the suffering on the cross),
 so as to be saved on their repentance;--if, therefore, those who are
 not saved frequently assemble together for such purposes as do not
 profit them, what apology wilt thou make to the Lord God who forsakest
 His Church, not imitating so much as the heathen, but by such thy
 absence growest slothful, or turnest apostate, or actest wickedness? To
 whom the Lord says by Jeremiah: "Ye have not kept my ordinances; nay,
 ye have not walked according to the ordinances of the heathen, and you
 have in a manner exceeded them." [2842] And again: "Israel has
 justified his soul more than treacherous Judah." [2843] And afterwards:
 "Will the Gentiles change their gods which are not gods? [2844]
 Wherefore pass over to the isles of Chittim, and behold, and send to
 Kedar, and observe diligently whether such things have been done. For
 those nations have not changed their ordinances; but," says He, "my
 people has changed its glory for that which will not profit." [2845]
 How, therefore, will any one make his apology who has despised or
 absented himself from the church of God?

 That We Must Not Prefer the Affairs of This Life to Those Which Concern the
 Worship of God.

 LXI. But if any one allege the pretence of his own work, and so is a
 despiser, "offering pretences for his sins," let such a one know that
 the trades of the faithful are works by the by, but the worship of God
 is their great work. Follow therefore your trades as by the by, for
 your maintenance, but make the worship of God your main business; as
 also our Lord said: "Labour not for the meat which perishes, but for
 that which endureth unto everlasting life." [2846] And again: "This is
 the work of God, that ye believe on Him whom He hath sent." [2847]
 Endeavour therefore never to leave the Church of God; but if any one
 overlooks it, and goes either into a polluted temple of the heathens,
 or into a synagogue of the Jews or heretics, what apology will such a
 one make to God in the day of judgment, who has forsaken the oracles of
 the living God, and the living and quickening oracles, such as are able
 to deliver from eternal punishment, and has gone into an house of
 demons, or into a synagogue of the murderers of Christ, or the
 congregation of the wicked?--not hearkening unto him that says: "I have
 hated the congregation of the wicked, and I will not enter with the
 ungodly. I have not sat with the assembly of vanity, neither will I sit
 with the ungodly." [2848] And again: "Blessed is the man that hath not
 walked in the counsel of the ungodly, nor stood in the way of sinners,
 and hath not sat in the seat of the scornful; but his delight is in the
 law of the Lord, and in His law will he meditate day and night." [2849]
 But thou, forsaking the gathering together of the faithful, the Church
 of God, and His laws, hast respect to those "dens of thieves," calling
 those things holy which He has called profane, and making such things
 unclean which He has sanctified. And not only so, but thou already
 runnest after the pomps of the Gentiles, and hastenest to their
 theatres, being desirous to be reckoned one of those that enter into
 them, and to partake of unseemly, not to say abominable words; not
 hearkening to Jeremiah, who says, "O Lord, I have not sat in their
 assemblies, for they are scorners; but I was afraid because of Thy
 hand;" [2850] nor to Job, who speaks in like manner, "If I have gone at
 any time with the scornful; for I shall be weighed in a just balance."
 [2851] But why wilt thou be a partaker of the heathen oracles, which
 are nothing but dead men declaring by the inspiration of the devil
 deadly things, and such as tend to subvert the faith, and to draw those
 that attend to them to polytheism? Do you therefore, who attend to the
 laws. of God, esteem those laws more honourable than the necessities of
 this life, and pay a greater respect to them, and run together to the
 Church of the Lord, "which He has purchased with the blood of Christ,
 the beloved, the first-born of every creature." [2852] For this Church
 is the daughter of the Highest, which has been in travail of you by the
 word of grace, and has "formed Christ in you," of whom you are made
 partakers, and thereby become His holy and chosen members, "not having
 spot or wrinkle, or any such thing; but as being holy and unspotted in
 the faith, ye are complete in Him, after the image of God that created
 you." [2853]

 That Christians Must Abstain from All the Impious Practices of the Heathens.

 LXII. Take heed, therefore, not to join yourselves in your worship with
 those that perish, which is the assembly of the Gentiles, to your
 deceit and destruction. For there is no fellowship between God and the
 devil; for he that assembles himself with those that favour the things
 of the devil, will be esteemed one of them, and will inherit a woe.
 Avoid also indecent spectacles: I mean the theatres and the pomps of
 the heathens; their enchantments, observations of omens, soothsayings,
 purgations, divinations, observations of birds; their necromancies and
 invocations. For it is written: "There is no divination in Jacob, nor
 soothsaying in Israel." [2854] And again: "Divination is iniquity."
 [2855] And elsewhere: "Ye shall not be soothsayers, and follow
 observers of omens, nor diviners, nor dealers with familiar spirits. Ye
 shall not preserve alive wizards." [2856] Wherefore Jeremiah exhorts,
 saying: "Walk ye not according to the ways of the heathen, and be not
 afraid of the signs of heaven." [2857] So that it is the duty of a
 believer to avoid the assemblies of the ungodly, of the heathen, and of
 the Jews, and of the rest of the heretics, lest by uniting ourselves to
 them we bring snares upon our own souls; that we may not by joining in
 their feasts, which are celebrated in honour of demons, be partakers
 with them in their impiety. You are also to avoid their public
 meetings, and those sports which are celebrated in them. For a believer
 ought not to go to any of those public meetings, unless to purchase a
 slave, and save a soul, [2858] and at the same time to buy such other
 things as suit their necessities. Abstain, therefore, from all
 idolatrous pomp and state, all their public meetings, banquets, duels,
 and all shows belonging to demons.

 [2831] Deut. xxvii. 9.

 [2832] Deut. v. 31.

 [2833] Deut. xxiii. 1. "And in the temple of God" is omitted in one V.
 ms.

 [2834] One V. ms. inserts, "and pity thee: the Lord lift His
 countenance upon thee."

 [2835] Num. vi. 24, etc.

 [2836] Ps. xxviii. 9; Acts xx. 28; 1 Pet. i. 19, ii. 9.

 [2837] [Note all this as bearing upon the ceremonial of the Latin Mass,
 which reverses these primitive precepts in divers points.]

 [2838] Luke iv. 24; John iv. 44 .

 [2839] Matt. xii. 30.

 [2840] Matt. xxviii. 20. [Compare vol. i. pp. [270]185, 186, this
 series.]

 [2841] Ezek. xvi. 52.

 [2842] Ezek. v. 7, xvi. 47.

 [2843] Jer. iii. 11.

 [2844] One V. ms. inserts here, "and elsewhere through another."

 [2845] Jer. ii. 11, 10.

 [2846] John vi. 27.

 [2847] John vi. 29.

 [2848] Ps. xxvi. 5, 4.

 [2849] Ps. i. 1, 2.

 [2850] Jer. xv. 17.

 [2851] Job xxxi. 5, 6.

 [2852] Vid. Acts xx. 28; Col. i. 15.

 [2853] Eph. v. 27.

 [2854] Num. xxiii. 23.

 [2855] 1 Sam. xv. 23, LXX.

 [2856] Lev. xix. 26; Deut. xviii. 10.

 [2857] Jer. x. 2. [Slaves were bought to be baptized. Elucid., p. 425.]

 [2858] Jer. x. 2. [Slaves were bought to be baptized. Elucid., p. 425.]

 Sec. VIII.--On the Duty of Working for a Livelihood.

 That a Christian Who Will Not Work Must Not Eat, as Peter and the Rest of
 the Apostles Were Fishermen, But Paul and Aquila Tentmakers, Jude the Son of
 James an Husbandman.

 LXIII. Let the young persons of the Church endeavour to minister
 diligently in all necessaries: mind your business with all becoming
 seriousness, that so you may always have sufficient to support
 yourselves and those that are needy, and not burden the Church of God.
 For we ourselves, besides our attention to the word of the Gospel, do
 not neglect our inferior employments. For some of us are fishermen,
 some tentmakers, some husbandmen, that so we may never be idle. So says
 Solomon somewhere: "Go to the ant, thou sluggard; consider her ways
 diligently, and become wiser than she. For she, having neither field,
 overseer, nor ruler, prepareth her food in the summer, and layeth up a
 great store in the harvest. Or else go to the bee, and learn how
 laborious she is, and her work how valuable it is, whose labours both
 kings and mean men make use of for their health. She is desirable and
 glorious, though she be weak in strength, yet by honouring wisdom she
 is improved, etc. How long wilt thou lie on thy bed, O sluggard? When
 wilt thou wake out of thy sleep? Thou sleepest awhile thou liest down
 awhile, thou slumberest awhile, thou foldest thy hands on thy breast to
 sleep awhile. Then poverty comes on thee like an evil traveller, and
 want as a swift racer. But if thou beest diligent, thy harvest shall
 come as a fountain, and want shall fly from thee as an evil runagate."
 [2859] And again: "He that manageth his own land shall be filled with
 bread." [2860] And elsewhere he says: "The slothful has folded his own
 hands together, and has eaten his own flesh." [2861] And afterwards:
 "The sluggard hides his hand; he will not be able to bring it to his
 mouth." [2862] And again: "By slothfulness of the hands a floor will be
 brought low." [2863] Labour therefore continually; for the blot of the
 slothful is not to be healed. But "if any one does not work, let not
 such a one eat" [2864] among you. For the Lord our God hates the
 slothful. For no one of those who are dedicated to God ought to be
 idle.

 [2859] Prov. vi. 6, etc., LXX.

 [2860] Prov. xii. 11.

 [2861] Eccles. iv. 5.

 [2862] Prov. xix. 24.

 [2863] Eccles. x. 18.

 [2864] 2 Thess. iii. 10.

 Elucidation.

 (To purchase a slave, and save a soul, [271]p. 424.)

 The calm and patient course of the Church in gradually obliterating
 slavery has been well defended by the pious Spanish Ultramontane writer
 Jacques Balmès. [2865] Of course, he imagines that "the Catholic
 Church," which wrought the change, was his own Tridentine Communion,
 [2866] Lecky's remarks on the gladiators and slavery as the product of
 famines and distress are worthy of note, and even he is forced to
 recognise the ameliorating influences of Christianity from the
 beginning. [2867] He says:--

 "Christianity for the first time made charity a rudimentary virtue,
 giving it a foremost place in the moral type and in the exhortations of
 its teachers. Besides its general influence in stimulating the
 affections, it effected a complete revolution in this sphere, by
 representing the poor as the special representatives of the Christian
 founder, and thus making the love of Christ rather than the love of man
 the principle of charity. Even in the days of persecution, collections
 for the relief of the poor were made at the Sunday meetings. The agapæ,
 or feasts of love, were intended mainly for the poor; and food that was
 saved by the fasts was devoted to their benefit. A vast organization of
 charity, presided over by the bishops, and actively directed by the
 deacons, soon ramified over Christendom, till the bond of charity
 became the bond of unity, and the most distant sections of the
 Christian Church corresponded by the interchange of mercy. [2868] Long
 before the era of Constantine it was observed that the charities of the
 Christians were so extensive--it may perhaps be said so excessive--that
 they drew very many impostors to the Church; and, when the victory of
 Christianity was achieved, the enthusiasm for charity displayed itself
 in the erection of numerous institutions that were altogether unknown
 to the pagan world."

 [2865] See his chapter (xvii.) Moyens employés par l'église affranchir
 les esclaves, Civilisation Européene, vol. i. p. 222, Paris, 1851.

 [2866] The countrymen of Balmès, on the contrary, were the authors of
 the negro slavery of modern times.

 [2867] History of European Morals, vol. ii. p. 84.

 [2868] See also Elucidation XII. vol. v. p. 563.


constitutions of the holy apostles

  Book III.

 Sec. I.--Concerning Widows.

 The Age at Which Widows Should Be Chosen.

 I. Choose your "widows not under sixty years of age," [2869] that in
 some measure the suspicion of a second marriage may be prevented by
 their age. But if you admit one younger into the order of widows, and
 she cannot bear her widowhood in her youth, and marries, she will
 procure indecent reflections on the glory of the order of the widows,
 and shall give an account to God; not because she married a second
 time, but because she has "waxed wanton against Christ," [2870] and not
 kept her promise, because she did not come and keep her promise with
 faith and the fear of God. [2871] Wherefore such a promise ought not to
 be rashly made, but with great caution: "for it is better for her not
 to vow, than to vow and not to pay." [2872] But if any younger woman,
 who has lived but a while with her husband, and has lost him by death
 or some other occasion, and remains by herself, having the gift of
 widowhood, she will be found to be blessed, and to be like the widow of
 Sarepta, belonging to Sidon, with whom the holy prophet of God, Elijah,
 [2873] lodged. Such a one may also be compared to "Anna, the daughter
 of Phanuel, of the tribe of Aser, which departed not from the temple,
 but continued in supplications and prayers night and day, who was
 fourscore years old, and had lived with an husband seven years from her
 virginity, who glorified the coming of Christ, and gave thanks to the
 Lord, and spake concerning Him to all those who looked for redemption
 in Israel." [2874] Such a widow will have a good report, and will be
 honoured, having both glory with men upon earth, and eternal praise
 with God in heaven.

 That We Must Avoid the Choice of Younger Widows, Because of Suspicion.

 II. But let not the younger widows be placed in the order of widows,
 lest, under pretence of inability to contain in the flower of their
 age, they come to a second marriage, and become subject to imputation.
 But let them be assisted and supported, that so they may not, under
 pretence of being deserted, come to a second marriage, and so be
 ensnared in an unseemly imputation. For you ought to know this, that
 once marrying according to the law is righteous, as being according to
 the will of God; but second marriages, after the promise, are wicked,
 not on account of the marriage itself, but because of the falsehood.
 Third marriages are indications of incontinency. But such marriages as
 are beyond the third are manifest fornication, and unquestionable
 uncleanness. For God in the creation gave one woman to one man; for
 "they two shall be one flesh." [2875] But to the younger women let a
 second marriage be allowed after the death of their first husband, lest
 they fall into the condemnation of the devil, and many snares, and
 foolish lusts, which are hurtful to souls, and which bring upon them
 punishment rather than rest.

 What Character the Widows Ought to Be Of, and How They Ought to Be
 Supported by the Bishop.

 III. But the true widows are those which have had only one husband,
 having a good report among the generality for good works; widows
 indeed, sober, chaste, faithful, pious, who have brought up their
 children well, and have entertained strangers unblameably, which are to
 be supported as devoted to God. Besides, do thou, O bishop, be mindful
 of the needy, both reaching out thy helping hand and making provision
 for them as the steward of God, distributing seasonably the oblations
 to every one of them, to the widows, the orphans, the friendless, and
 those tried with affliction.

 That We Ought to Be Charitable to All Sorts of Persons in Want.

 IV. For what if some are neither widows nor widowers, but stand in need
 of assistance, either through poverty or some disease, or the
 maintenance of a great number of children? It is thy duty to oversee
 all people, and to take care of them all. For they that give gifts do
 not of their own head give them to the widows, but barely bring them
 in, calling them free-will offerings, that so thou that knowest those
 that are in affliction mayest as a good steward give them their portion
 of the gift. For God knows the giver, though thou distributest it to
 those in want when he is absent. And he has the reward of well-doing,
 but thou the blessedness of having dispensed it with a good conscience.
 But do thou tell them who was the giver, that they may pray for him by
 name. For it is our duty to do good to all men, not fondly preferring
 one or another, whoever they be. For the Lord says: "Give to every one
 that asketh of thee." [2876] It is evident that it is meant of every
 one that is really in want, whether he be friend or foe, whether he be
 a kinsman or a stranger, whether he be single or married. For in all
 the Scripture the Lord gives us exhortations about the needy, saying
 first by Isaiah: "Deal thy bread to the hungry, and bring the poor
 which have no covering into thine house. If thou seest the naked, do
 thou cover him; and thou shalt not overlook those which are of thine
 own family and seed." [2877] And then by Daniel He says to the
 potentate: "Wherefore, O king, let my counsel please thee, and purge
 thy sins by acts of mercy, and thine iniquities by bowels of compassion
 to the needy." [2878] And He says by Solomon: "By acts of mercy and of
 faith iniquities are purged." [2879] And He says again by David:
 "Blessed is he that has regard to the poor and needy; the Lord shall
 deliver him in the evil day." [2880] And again: "He hath dispersed
 abroad, he hath given to the needy, his righteousness remaineth for
 ever." [2881] And Solomon says: "He that hath mercy on the poor lendeth
 to the Lord; [2882] according to his gift it shall be repaid him
 again." [2883] And afterwards: "He that stoppeth his ear, that he may
 not hear him that is in want, he also shall call himself, and there
 shall be none to hear him." [2884]

 That the Widows are to Be Very Careful of Their Behavior.

 V. Let every widow be meek, quiet, gentle, sincere, free from anger,
 not talkative, not clamorous, not hasty of speech, not given to
 evil-speaking, not captious, not double-tongued, not a busybody. If she
 see or hear anything that is not right, let her be as one that does not
 see, and as one that does not hear. And let the widow mind nothing but
 to pray for those that give, and for the whole Church; and when she is
 asked anything by any one, let her not easily answer, excepting
 questions concerning the faith, and righteousness, and hope in God,
 remitting those that desire to be instructed in the doctrines of
 godliness to the governors. Let her only answer so as may tend to the
 subversion of the error of polytheism, and let her demonstrate the
 assertion concerning the monarchy of God. But of the remaining
 doctrines let her not answer anything rashly, lest by saying anything
 unlearnedly she should make the word to be blasphemed. For the Lord has
 taught us that the word is like "a grain of mustard seed," [2885] which
 is of a fiery nature, which if any one uses unskilfully, he will find
 it bitter. For in the mystical points we ought not to be rash, but
 cautious; for the Lord exhorts us, saying: "Cast not your pearls before
 swine, lest they trample them with their feet, and turn again and rend
 you." [2886] For unbelievers, when they hear the doctrine concerning
 Christ not explained as it ought to be, but defectively, and especially
 that concerning His incarnation or His passion, will rather reject it
 with scorn, and laugh at it as false, than praise God for it. And so
 the aged women will be guilty of rashness, and of causing blasphemy,
 and will inherit a woe. For says He, "Woe to him by whom my name is
 blasphemed among the Gentiles." [2887]

 That Women Ought Not to Teach, Because It is Unseemly; And What Women
 Followed Our Lord.

 VI. We do not permit our "women to teach in the Church," [2888] but
 only to pray and hear those that teach; for our Master and Lord, Jesus
 Himself, when He sent us the twelve to make disciples of the people and
 of the nations, did nowhere send out women to preach, although He did
 not want such. For there were with us the mother of our Lord and His
 sisters; also Mary Magdalene, and Mary the mother of James, and Martha
 and Mary the sisters of Lazarus; Salome, and certain others. For, had
 it been necessary for women to teach, He Himself had first commanded
 these also to instruct the people with us. For "if the head of the wife
 be the man," [2889] it is not reasonable that the rest of the body
 should govern the head. Let the widow therefore own herself to be the
 "altar of God," and let her sit in her house, and not enter into the
 houses of the faithful, under any pretence, to receive anything; for
 the altar of God never runs about, but is fixed in one place. Let,
 therefore, the virgin and the widow be such as do not run about, or gad
 to the houses of those who are alien from the faith. For such as these
 are gadders and impudent: they do not make their feet to rest in one
 place, because they are not widows, but purses ready to receive,
 triflers, evil-speakers, counsellors of strife, without shame,
 impudent, who being such, are not worthy of Him that called them. For
 they do not come to the common station of the congregation on the
 Lord's day, [2890] as those that are watchful; but either they slumber,
 or trifle, or allure men, or beg, or ensnare others, bringing them to
 the evil one; not suffering them to be watchful in the Lord, but taking
 care that they go out as vain as they came in, because they do not hear
 the word of the Lord either taught or read. For of such as these the
 prophet Isaiah says: "Hearing ye shall hear, and shall not understand;
 and seeing ye shall see, and not perceive: for the heart of this people
 is waxen gross, [2891] and they hear heavily with their ears." [2892]

 What are the Characters of Widows Falsely So Called.

 VII. In the same manner, therefore, the ears of the hearts of such
 widows as these are stopped, that they will not sit within in their
 cottages to speak to the Lord, but will run about with the design of
 getting, and by their foolish prattling fulfil the desires of the
 adversary. Such widows, therefore, are not affixed to the altar of
 Christ: for there are some widows which esteem gain their business; and
 since they ask without shame, and receive without being satisfied,
 render the generality more backward in giving. For when they ought to
 be content with their subsistence from the Church, as having moderate
 desires, on the contrary, they run from one of their neighbours' houses
 [2893] to another, and disturb them, heaping up to themselves plenty of
 money, and lend at bitter usury, and are only solicitous about mammon,
 whose bag is their god; who prefer eating and drinking before all
 virtue, saying, "Let us eat and drink, for to-morrow we die;" [2894]
 who esteem these things as if they were durable and not perishing
 things. For she that uses herself to nothing but talking of money,
 worships mammon instead of God,--that is, is a servant to gain, but
 cannot be pleasing to God, nor resigned to His worship; not being able
 to intercede with Him continuously on account that her mind and
 disposition run after money: for "where the treasure is, there will the
 heart be also." [2895] For she is thinking in her mind whither she may
 go to receive, or that a certain woman her friend has forgot her, and
 she has somewhat to say to her. She that thinks of such things as these
 will no longer attend to her prayers, but to that thought which offers
 itself; so that though sometimes she would pray for anybody, she will
 not be heard, because she does not offer her petition to the Lord with
 her whole heart, but with a divided mind. But she that will attend to
 God will sit within, and mind the things of the Lord day and night,
 offering her sincere petition with a mouth ready to utter the same
 without ceasing. As therefore Judith, most famous for her wisdom, and
 of a good report for her modesty, "prayed to God night and day for
 Israel;" [2896] so also the widow who is like to her will offer her
 intercession without ceasing for the Church to God. And He will hear
 her, because her mind is fixed on this thing alone, and is not disposed
 to be either insatiable, or covetous, or expensive; when her eye is
 pure, and her hearing clean, and her hands undefiled, and her feet
 quiet, and her mouth prepared for neither gluttony nor trifling, but
 speaking the things that are fit, and partaking of only such things as
 are necessary for her maintenance. So, being grave, and giving no
 disturbance, she will be pleasing to God; and as soon as she asks
 anything, the gift will come to her: as He says, "While thou art
 speaking, I will say, Behold, I am here." [2897] Let such a one also be
 free from the love of money, free from arrogance, not given to filthy
 lucre, not insatiable, not gluttonous, but continent, meek, giving
 nobody disturbance, pious, modest, sitting at home, singing, and
 praying, and reading, and watching, and fasting; speaking to God
 continually in songs and hymns. And let her take wool, and rather
 assist others than herself want from them; being mindful of that widow
 who is honoured in the Gospel with the Lord's testimony, who, coming
 into the temple, "cast into the treasury two mites, which make a
 farthing. And Christ our Lord and Master, and Searcher of hearts, saw
 her, and said, Verily I say unto you, that this widow hath cast into
 the treasury more than they all: for all they have cast in of their
 abundance, but this woman of her penury hath cast in all the living
 that she had." [2898]

 The widows therefore ought to be grave, obedient to their bishops, and
 their presbyters, and their deacons, and besides these to the
 deaconesses, with piety, reverence, and fear; not usurping authority,
 nor desiring to do anything beyond the constitution without the consent
 of the deacon: as, suppose, the going to any one to eat or drink with
 him, or to receive anything from anybody. But if without direction she
 does any one of these things, let her be punished with fasting, or else
 let her be separated on account of her rashness.

 That the Widows Ought Not to Accept of Alms from the Unworthy No More Than
 the Bishop, or Any Other of the Faithful.

 VIII. For how does such a one know of what character the person is from
 whom she receives? or from what sort of ministration he supplies her
 with food, whether it does not arise from rapine or some other ill
 course of life? while the widow does not remember that if she receives
 in a way unworthy of God, she must give an account for every one of
 these things. For neither will the priests at any time receive a
 free-will offering from such a one, as, suppose, from a rapacious
 person or from a harlot. For it is written, "Thou shalt not covet the
 goods that are thy neighbour's;" [2899] and, "Thou shalt not offer the
 hire of an harlot to the Lord God." [2900] From such as these no
 offerings ought to be accepted, nor indeed from those that are
 separated from the Church. Let the widows also be ready to obey the
 commands given them by their superiors, and let them do according to
 the appointment of the bishop, being obedient to him as to God; for he
 that receives from such a one who is worthy of blame, or from one
 excommunicated, and prays for him, while he purposes to go on in a
 wicked course, and while he is not willing at any time to repent, holds
 communion with him in prayer, and grieves Christ, who rejects the
 unrighteous, and confirms them by means of the unworthy gift, and is
 defiled with them, not suffering them to come to repentance, so as to
 fall down before God with lamentation, and pray to Him.

 That Women Ought Not to Baptize, Because It is Impious, and Contrary to
 the Doctrine of Christ.

 IX. Now, as to women's baptizing, we let you know that there is no
 small peril to those that undertake it. Therefore we do not advise you
 to it; for it is dangerous, or rather wicked and impious. For if the
 "man be the head of the woman," [2901] and he be originally ordained
 for the priesthood, it is not just to abrogate the order of the
 creation, and leave the principal to come to the extreme part of the
 body. For the woman is the body of the man, taken from his side, and
 subject to him, from whom she was separated for the procreation of
 children. For says He, "He shall rule over thee." [2902] For the
 principal part of the woman is the man, as being her head. But if in
 the foregoing constitutions we have not permitted them to teach, how
 will any one allow them, contrary to nature, to perform the office of a
 priest? For this is one of the ignorant practices of the Gentile
 atheism, to ordain women priests to the female deities, not one of the
 constitutions of Christ. For if baptism were to be administered by
 women, certainly our Lord would have been baptized by His own mother,
 and not by John; or when He sent us to baptize, He would have sent
 along with us women also for this purpose. But now He has nowhere,
 either by constitution or by writing, delivered to us any such thing;
 as knowing the order of nature, and the decency of the action; [2903]
 as being the Creator of nature, and the Legislator of the constitution.

 That a Layman Ought Not to Do Any Office of the Priesthood: He Ought
 Neither to Baptize, Nor Offer, Nor Lay on Hands, Nor Give the Blessing.

 X. Neither do we permit the laity to perform any of the offices
 belonging to the priesthood; as, for instance, neither the sacrifice,
 nor baptism, nor the laying on of hands, nor the blessing, whether the
 smaller or the greater: for "no one taketh this honour to himself, but
 he that is called of God." [2904] For such sacred offices are conferred
 by the laying on of the hands of the bishop. But a person to whom such
 an office is not committed, but he seizes upon it for himself, he shall
 undergo the punishment of Uzziah. [2905]

 That None But a Bishop and Presbyter, None Even of the Inferior Ranks of
 the Clergy, are Permitted to Do the Offices of the Priests; That
 Ordination Belongs Wholly to the Bishop, and to Nobody Else.

 XI. Nay, further, we do not permit to the rest of the clergy to
 baptize,--as, for instance, neither to readers, nor singers, nor
 porters, nor ministers,--but to the bishops and presbyters alone, yet
 so that the deacons are to minister to them therein. But those who
 venture upon it shall undergo the punishment of the companions of
 Corah. [2906] We do not permit presbyters to ordain deacons, or
 deaconesses, or readers, or ministers, or singers, or porters, but only
 bishops; for this is the ecclesiastical order and harmony.

 The Rejection of All Uncharitable Actions.

 XII. Now, as concerning envy, or jealousy, or evil-speaking, or strife,
 or the love of contention, we have said already to you, that these are
 alien from a Christian, and chiefly in the case of widows. But because
 the devil, who works in men, is in his conduct cunning, and full of
 various devices, he goes to those that are not truly widows, as
 formerly to Cain (for some say they are widows, but do not perform the
 injunctions agreeable to the widowhood; as neither did Cain discharge
 the duties due to a brother: for they do not consider how it is not the
 name of widowhood that will bring them to the kingdom of God, but true
 faith and holy [2907] works). But if any one possesses the name of
 widowhood, but does the works of the adversary, her widowhood will not
 be imputed, but she will be thrust out of the kingdom, and delivered to
 eternal punishment. For we hear that some widows are jealous, envious
 calumniators, and envious at the quiet of others. Such widows as these
 are not the disciples of Christ, nor of His doctrine; for it becomes
 them, when one of their fellow-widows is clothed by any one, or
 receives money, or meat, or drink, or shoes, at the sight of the
 refreshment of their sister to say:--

 How the Widows are to Pray for Those that Supply Their Necessities.

 XIII. Thou art blessed, O God, who hast refreshed my fellow-widow.
 Bless, O Lord, and glorify him that has bestowed these things upon her,
 and let his good work ascend in truth to Thee, and remember him for
 good in the day of his visitation. And as for my bishop, who has so
 well performed his duty to Thee, and [2908] has ordered such a
 seasonable alms to be bestowed on my fellow-widow, who was naked, do
 Thou increase his glory, and give him a [2909] crown of rejoicing in
 the day of the revelation of Thy visitation. In the same manner, let
 the widow who has received the alms join with the other in praying for
 him who ministered to her.

 That She Who Has Been Kind to the Poor Ought Not to Make a Stir and Tell
 Abroad Her Name, According to the Constitution of the Lord.

 XIV. But if any woman has been good, let her, as a prudent person,
 conceal her own name, not sounding a trumpet before her, that her alms
 may be with God in secret, as the Lord says: "Thou, when thou doest
 thine alms, let not thy left hand know what thy right hand cloth, that
 thine alms may be in secret." [2910] And let the widow pray for him
 that gave her the alms, whosoever he be, as being the holy altar of
 Christ; [2911] and "the Father, who seeth in secret, will render to him
 that did good openly." But those widows which will not live according
 to the command of God, are solicitous and inquisitive what deaconess it
 is that gives the charity, and what widows receive it. And when she has
 learned those things, she murmurs at the deaconess who distributed the
 charity, saying, Dost not thou see that I am in more distress, and want
 of thy charity? Why, therefore, hast thou preferred her before me? She
 says these things foolishly, not understanding that this does not
 depend on the will of man, but the appointment of God. For if she is
 herself a witness that she was nearer, and, upon inquiry, was in
 greater want, and more naked than the other, she ought to understand
 who it is that made this constitution, and to hold her peace, and not
 to murmur at the deaconess who distributed the charity, but to enter
 into her own house, and to cast herself prostrate on her face to make
 supplication to God that her sin may be forgiven her. For God commanded
 the deaconess who brought the charity not to proclaim the same, and
 this widow murmured because she did not publish her name, that so she
 might know it, and run to receive; nay, did not only murmur, but also
 cursed her, forgetting Him that said: "He that blesseth thee is
 blessed, and he that curseth thee is cursed." [2912] But the Lord says:
 "When ye enter into an house, say, Peace be to this house. And if the
 son of peace be there, your peace shall rest upon it; but if it be not
 worthy, your peace shall return to you." [2913]

 That It Does Not Become Us to Revile Our Neighbours, Because Cursing is
 Contrary to Christianity.

 XV. If, therefore, peace returns upon those that sent it, nay, upon
 those that before had actually given it, because it did not find
 persons fit to receive it, much rather will a curse return upon the
 head of him that unjustly sent it, because he to whom it was sent was
 not worthy to receive it: for all those who abuse others without a
 cause curse themselves, as Solomon says: "As birds and sparrows fly
 away, so the curse causeless shall not come upon any one." [2914] And
 again he says: "Those that bring reproaches are exceeding foolish."
 [2915] But as the bee, a creature as to its strength feeble, if she
 stings any one, loses her sting, and becomes a drone; in the same
 manner you also, whatsoever injustice you do to others, will bring it
 upon yourselves. "He hath graven and digged a pit, and he shall fall
 into the same ditch that he has made." [2916] And again: "He that
 diggeth a pit for his neighbour, shall fall into it." [2917] Wherefore
 he that avoids a curse, let him not curse another; for "what thou
 hatest should be done to thee, do not thou to another." [2918]
 Wherefore admonish the widows that are feeble-minded, strengthen those
 of them that are weak, and praise such of them as walk in holiness. Let
 them rather bless, and not calumniate. Let them make peace, and not
 stir up contention.

 [2869] Vid. 1 Tim. v. 9.

 [2870] 1 Tim. v. 11.

 [2871] Not in one V. ms.

 [2872] Eccles. v. 5.

 [2873] 1 Kings xvii. 9.

 [2874] Luke ii. 36, etc.

 [2875] Gen. ii. 24.

 [2876] Luke vi. 30

 [2877] Isa. lviii. 7

 [2878] Dan. iv. 27

 [2879] Prov. xvi. 6

 [2880] Ps. xli. 1

 [2881] Ps. cxii. 9.

 [2882] Instead of "Lord," one V. ms. reads "God."

 [2883] Prov. xix. 17.

 [2884] Prov. xxi. 13.

 [2885] Matt. xiii. 31.

 [2886] Matt. vii. 6.

 [2887] Isa. lii. 5.

 [2888] 1 Cor. xiv. 34.

 [2889] 1 Cor. xi. 3.

 [2890] "On the Lord's day" not in one V. ms.

 [2891] Isa. vi. 9, 10.

 [2892] Inserted from one V. ms.

 [2893] Probably the reading should be, "they go round the houses of the
 rich."

 [2894] Isa. xxii. 13; 1 Cor. xv. 32

 [2895] Matt. vi. 21

 [2896] Judith ix. 1, etc.

 [2897] Isa. lviii. 9

 [2898] Mark xii. 42; Luke xxi. 3, 4

 [2899] Ex. xx. 17

 [2900] Deut. xxiii. 18

 [2901] 1 Cor. xi. 3

 [2902] Gen. iii. 16.

 [2903] ["The eternal fitness of things."]

 [2904] Heb. v. 4.

 [2905] 2 Chron. xxvi.

 [2906] Num. xvi.

 [2907] Instead of "holy," one V. ms. reads "divine."

 [2908] Not in one V. ms.

 [2909] Not in one V. ms.

 [2910] Matt. vi. 3, 4.

 [2911] Instead of "Christ," one V. ms. reads "of God."

 [2912] Gen. xxvii. 29.

 [2913] Luke x. 5, 6; Matt. x. 12, 13.

 [2914] Prov. xxvi. 2.

 [2915] Prov. x. 18.

 [2916] Ps. vii. 15.

 [2917] Prov. xxvi. 27.

 [2918] Tob. iv. 16.

 Sec. II.--On Deacons and Deaconesses, the Rest of the Clergy, and on
 Baptism.

 Let not therefore either a bishop, or a presbyter, or a deacon, or any
 one else of the sacerdotal catalogue, defile his tongue with calumny,
 lest he inherit a curse instead of a blessing; and let it also be the
 bishop's business and care that no lay person utter any curse: for he
 ought to take care of all,--of the clergy, of the virgins, of the
 widows, of the laity. For which reason, O bishop, do thou ordain thy
 fellow-workers, the labourers for life and for righteousness, such
 deacons as are pleasing to God, such whom thou provest to be worthy
 among all the people, and such as shall be ready for the necessities of
 their ministration. Ordain also a deaconess who is faithful and holy,
 for the ministrations towards women. For sometimes he cannot send a
 deacon, who is a man, to the women, on account of unbelievers. Thou
 shalt therefore send a woman, a deaconess, on account of the
 imaginations of the bad. For we stand in need of a woman, a deaconess,
 for many necessities; and first in the baptism of women, the deacon
 shall anoint only their forehead with the holy oil, and after him the
 deaconess shall anoint them: [2919] for there is no necessity that the
 women should be seen by the men; but only in the laying on of hands the
 bishop shall anoint her head, as the priests and kings were formerly
 anointed, not because those which are now baptized are ordained
 priests, but as being Christians, or anointed, from Christ the
 Anointed, "a royal priesthood, and an holy nation, the Church of God,
 the pillar and ground of the marriage-chamber," [2920] who formerly
 were not a people, but now are beloved and chosen, upon whom is called
 His new name [2921] as Isaiah the prophet witnesses, saying: "And they
 shall call the people by His new name, which the Lord shall name for
 them." [2922]

 Concerning the Sacred Initiation of Holy Baptism.

 XVI. Thou therefore, O bishop, according to that type, shalt anoint the
 head of those that are to be baptized, whether they be men or women,
 with the holy oil, for a type of the spiritual baptism. After that,
 either thou, O bishop, or a presbyter that is under thee, shall in the
 solemn form name over them the Father, and Son, and Holy Spirit, and
 shall dip them in the water; and let a deacon receive the man, and a
 deaconess the woman, that so the conferring of this inviolable seal may
 take place with a becoming decency. And after that, let the bishop
 anoint those that are baptized with ointment.

 What is the Meaning of Baptism into Christ, and on What Account Everything
 is There Said or Done.

 XVII. This baptism, therefore, is given into the death of Jesus: [2923]
 the water is instead of the burial, and the oil instead of the Holy
 Ghost; the seal instead of the cross; the ointment is the confirmation
 of the confession; the mention of the Father as of the Author and
 Sender; the joint mention of the Holy Ghost as of the witness; the
 descent into the water the dying together with Christ; the ascent out
 of the water the rising again with Him. The Father is the God over all;
 Christ is the only-begotten God, the beloved Son, the Lord of glory;
 the Holy Ghost is the Comforter, who is sent by Christ, land taught by
 Him, and proclaims Him.

 Of What Character He Ought to Be Who is Initiated.

 XVIII. But let him that is to be baptized be free from all iniquity;
 one that has left off to work sin, the friend of God, the enemy of the
 devil, the heir of God the Father, the fellow-heir of His Son; one that
 has renounced Satan, and the demons, and Satan's deceits; chaste, pure,
 holy, beloved of God, the son of God, praying as a son to his father,
 and saying, as from the common congregation of the faithful, thus: "Our
 Father, which art in heaven, hallowed be Thy name; Thy kingdom come;
 Thy will be done on earth, as it is in heaven; give us this day our
 daily bread; and forgive us our debts, as we forgive our debtors; and
 lead us not into temptation, but deliver us from the evil one: for
 Thine is the kingdom, and the power, and the glory, for ever. Amen."
 [2924]

 What are the Characters of a Deacon.

 XIX. Let the deacons be in all things unspotted, as the bishop himself
 is to be, only more active; in number according to the largeness of the
 Church, that they may minister to the infirm as workmen that are not
 ashamed. And let the deaconess be diligent in taking care of the women;
 but both of them ready to carry messages, to travel about, to minister,
 and to serve, as spake Isaiah concerning the Lord, saying: "To justify
 the righteous, who serves many faithfully." [2925] Let every one
 therefore know his proper place, and discharge it diligently with one
 consent, with one mind, as knowing the reward of their ministration;
 but let them not be ashamed to minister to those that are in want, as
 even our "Lord Jesus Christ came not to be ministered unto, but to
 minister and to give His life a ransom for many." [2926] So therefore
 ought they also to do, and not to scruple it, if they should be obliged
 to lay down their life for a brother. For the Lord and our Saviour
 Jesus Christ did not scruple to "lay down His life," as Himself says,
 "for His friends." [2927] If, therefore, the Lord of heaven and earth
 underwent all His sufferings for us, how then do you make a difficulty
 to minister to such as are in want, who ought to imitate Him who
 underwent servitude, and want, and stripes, and the cross for us? We
 ought therefore also to serve the brethren, in imitation of Christ. For
 says He: "He that will be great among you, let him be your minister;
 and he that will be first among you, let him be your servant." [2928]
 For so did He really, and not in word only, fulfil the prediction of,
 "serving many faithfully." [2929] For "when He had taken a towel, He
 girded Himself. Afterward He puts water into a bason; and as we were
 sitting at meat, He came and washed the feet of us all, and wiped them
 with the towel." [2930] By doing this He demonstrated to us His
 kindness and brotherly affection, that so we also might do the same to
 one another. If, therefore, our Lord and Master so humbled Himself, how
 can you, the labourers of the truth, and administrators of piety, be
 ashamed to do the same to such of the brethren as are weak and infirm?
 Minister therefore with a kind mind, not murmuring nor mutinying; for
 ye do not do it on the account of man, but on the account of God, and
 shall receive from Him the reward of your ministry in the day of your
 visitation. It is your duty who are deacons to visit all those who
 stand in need of visitation. And tell your bishop of all those that are
 in affliction; for you ought to be like his soul and senses--active and
 attentive in all things to him [2931] as to your bishop, and father
 [2932] and master.

 That a Bishop Ought to Be Ordained by Three or by Two Bishops, But Not by
 One; For that Would Be Invalid.

 XX. We command that a bishop be ordained by three bishops, or at least
 by two; but it is not lawful that he be set over you by one; for the
 testimony of two or three witnesses is more firm and secure. But a
 presbyter and a deacon are to be ordained by one bishop and the rest of
 the clergy. Nor must either a presbyter or a deacon ordain from the
 laity into the clergy; but the presbyter is only to teach, to offer, to
 baptize, to bless the people, and the deacon is to minister to the
 bishop, and to the presbyters, that is, to do the office of a
 ministering deacon, but not to meddle with the other offices.

 [2919] [Compare Jas. v. 14.]

 [2920] 1 Pet. ii. 9; 1 Tim. iii. 15.

 [2921] The words from "upon whom" to the end of the chapter are omitted
 in one V. ms.

 [2922] Isa. lxii. 2

 [2923] Vid Rom. vi. 3

 [2924] Matt. vi. 9, etc.

 [2925] Isa. liii. 11, LXX.

 [2926] Matt. xx. 28.

 [2927] John xv. 13.

 [2928] Matt. xx. 26, 27.

 [2929] Isa. liii. 11.

 [2930] John xiii. 4, 5.

 [2931] The portions in italics are not in one V. ms.

 [2932] The portions in italics are not in one V. ms.


constitutions of the holy apostles

  Book IV.

 Sec. I.--On Helping the Poor.

 Those Who Have No Children Should Adopt Orphans, and Treat Them as Their
 Own Children.

 I. When any Christian becomes an orphan, whether it be a young man or a
 maid, it is good that some one of the brethren who is without a child
 should take the young man, and esteem him in the place of a son; and he
 that has a son about the same age, and that is marriageable, should
 marry the maid to him: for they which do so perform a great work, and
 become fathers to the orphans, and shall receive the reward of this
 charity from the Lord God. But if any one that walks in the way of
 man-pleasing is rich, and therefore is ashamed of orphans, the Father
 of orphans and Judge of widows will make provision for the orphans, but
 himself shall have such an heir as will spend what he has spared; and
 it shall happen to him according as it is said: "What things the holy
 people have not eaten, those shall the Assyrians eat." As also Isaiah
 says: "Your land, strangers devour it in your presence." [2933]

 How the Bishop Ought to Provide for the Orphans.

 II. Do you therefore, O bishops, be solicitous about their maintenance,
 being in nothing wanting to them; exhibiting to the orphans the care of
 parents; to the widows the care of husbands; to those of suitable age,
 marriage; to the artificer, work; to the unable, commiseration; to the
 strangers, an house; to the hungry, food; to the thirsty, drink; to the
 naked, clothing; to the sick, visitation; to the prisoners, assistance.
 Besides these, have a greater care of the orphans, that nothing may be
 wanting to them; and that as to the maiden, till she arrives at the age
 of marriage, and ye give her in marriage to a brother: to the young man
 assistance, that he may learn a trade, and may be maintained by the
 advantage arising from it; that so, when he is dextrous in the
 management of it, he may thereby be enabled to buy himself the tools of
 his trade, that so he may no longer burden any of the brethren, or
 their sincere love to him, but may support himself: for certainly he is
 a happy man who is able to support himself, and does not take up the
 place of the orphan, the stranger, and the widow.

 Who Ought to Be Supported According to the Lord's Constitution.

 III. Since even the Lord said: "The giver was happier than the
 receiver." [2934] For it is again said by Him: "Woe to those that have,
 and receive in hypocrisy; or who are able to support themselves, yet
 will receive of others: for both of them shall give an account to the
 Lord God in the day of judgment." But an orphan who, by reason of his
 youth, or he that by the feebleness of old age, or the incidence of a
 disease, or the bringing up of many children, receives alms, such a one
 shall not only not be blamed, but shall be commended: for he shall be
 esteemed an altar to God, and be honoured by God, because of his
 zealous and constant prayers for those that give to him; not receiving
 idly, but to the uttermost of his power recompensing what is given him
 by his prayer. Such a one therefore shall be blessed by God in eternal
 life. But he that hath, and receives in hypocrisy or through idleness,
 instead of working and assisting others, shall be obnoxious to
 punishment before God, because he has snatched away the morsel of the
 needy. [2935]

 Of the Love of Money.

 IV. For he that has money and does not bestow it upon others, nor use
 it himself, is like the serpent, which they say sleeps over the
 treasures; and of him is that scripture true which says, "He has
 gathered riches of which he shall not taste;" [2936] and they will be
 of no use to him when he perishes justly. For it says, "Riches will not
 profit in the day of wrath." For such a one has not believed in God,
 but in his own gold; esteeming that his God, and trusting therein. Such
 a one is a dissembler of the truth, an accepter of persons, unfaithful,
 cheating, fearful, unmanly, light, of no value, a complainer, ever in
 pain, his own enemy, and nobody's friend. Such a one's money shall
 perish, and a man that is a stranger shall consume it, either by theft
 while he is alive, or by inheritance when he is dead. "For riches
 unjustly gotten shall be vomited up." [2937]

 With What Fear Men Ought to Partake of the Lord's Oblations.

 V. We exhort, therefore, the widows and orphans to partake of those
 things that are bestowed upon them with all fear, and all pious
 reverence, and to return thanks to God who gives food to the needy, and
 to lift up their eyes to Him. For, says He, "Which of you shall eat, or
 who shall drink without Him? For He openeth His hand, and filleth every
 living thing with His kindness: giving wheat to the young men, and wine
 to the maidens, and oil for the joy of the living, grass for the
 cattle, and green herb for the service of men, flesh for the wild
 beasts, seeds for the birds, and suitable food for all creatures."
 [2938] Wherefore the Lord says: [2939] "Consider the fowls of heaven,
 [2940] that they sow not, neither do they reap nor gather into barns,
 and your Father feedeth them. Are not ye much better than they? Be not
 therefore solicitous, saying, What shall we eat? or what shall we
 drink? For your Father knoweth that ye have need of all these things."
 [2941] Since ye therefore enjoy such a providential care from Him, and
 are partakers of the good things that are derived from Him, you ought
 to return praise to Him that receives the orphan and the widow, to
 Almighty God, through His beloved Son Jesus Christ our Lord; through
 whom [2942] glory be to God in spirit and truth for ever. Amen.

 Whose Oblations are to Be Received, and Whose Not to Be Received.

 VI. Now the bishop ought to know whose oblations he ought to receive,
 and whose he ought not. For he is to avoid corrupt dealers, and not
 receive their gifts. "For, a corrupt dealer shall not be justified from
 sin." [2943] For of them it was that Isaiah reproached Israel, and
 said, "Thy corrupt dealers mingle wine with water." [2944] He is also
 to avoid fornicators, for "thou shall not offer the hire of an harlot
 to the Lord." [2945] He is also to avoid extortioners, and such as
 covet other men's goods, and adulterers; for the sacrifices of such as
 these are abominable with God. Also those that oppress the widow and
 overbear the orphan, and fill prisons with the innocent, and abuse
 their own servants wickedly, I mean with stripes, and hunger, and hard
 service, nay, destroy whole cities; do thou, O bishop, avoid such as
 these, and their odious oblations. Thou shalt also refuse rogues, and
 such pleaders that plead on the side of injustice, and idol-makers, and
 thieves, and unjust publicans, and those that deceive by false balances
 and deceitful measures, and a soldier who is a false accuser and not
 content with his wages, but does violence to the needy, a murderer, a
 cut-throat, and an unjust judge, a subverter of causes, him that lies
 in wait for men, a worker of abominable wickedness, a drunkard, a
 blasphemer, a sodomite, an usurer, and every one that is wicked and
 opposes the will of God. For the Scripture says that all such as these
 are abominable with God. For those that receive from such persons, and
 thereby support the widows and orphans, shall be obnoxious to the
 judgment-seat of God; as Adonias the prophet, in the book of Kings,
 when he disobeyed God, and both "eat bread and drank water in the place
 which the Lord had forbid him," [2946] because of the impiety of
 Jeroboam, was slain by a lion. For the bread which is distributed to
 the widows from labour is better, though it be short and little, than
 that from injustice and false accusation, though it be much and fine.
 For the Scripture says: "Better is a little to the righteous, than much
 riches of the sinners." [2947] Now, although a widow, who eats and is
 filled from the impious, pray for them, she shall not be heard. For
 God, who knows the heart, with judgment has declared concerning the
 impious, saying, "If Moses and Samuel stand before my face in their
 behalf, I will not hear them;" [2948] and, "Pray thou not for this
 people, and do not ask mercy for them, and do not intercede with me for
 them, for I will not hear thee." [2949]

 That the Oblations of the Unworthy, While They are Such, Do Not Only Not
 Propitiate God, But on the Contrary Provoke Him to Indignation.

 VII. And not these only, but those that are in sin and have not
 repented, will not only not be heard when they pray, but will provoke
 God to anger, as putting Him in mind of their own wickedness. Avoid
 therefore such ministrations, as you would the price of a dog and the
 hire of an harlot; for both of them are forbidden by the laws. For
 neither did Elisha receive the presents which were brought by Hazael,
 [2950] nor Ahijah those from Jeroboam; [2951] but if the prophets of
 God did not admit of presents from the impious, it is reasonable, O
 bishops, that neither should you. Nay, when Simon the magician offered
 money to me Peter and John, [2952] and tried to obtain the invaluable
 grace by purchase, we did not admit it, but bound him with everlasting
 maledictions, because he thought to possess the gift of God, not by a
 pious mind towards God, but by the price of money. Avoid therefore such
 oblations to God's altar as are not from a good conscience. For says
 He: "Abstain from all injustice, and thou shalt not fear, and trembling
 shall not come nigh thee." [2953]

 That It is Better to Afford, Though It Be Inconsiderable and Few,
 Contributions to the Widows from Our Own Labours, Than Those Which are
 Many and Large Received from the Ungodly; For It is Better to Perish by
 Famine Than to Receive an Oblation from the Ungodly.

 VIII. But if ye say that those who give alms are such as these, and if
 we do not receive from them, whence shall we administer to the widows?
 And whence shall the poor among the people be maintained? Ye shall hear
 from us, that therefore have ye received the gift of the Levites, the
 oblations of your people, that ye might have enough for yourselves, and
 for those that are in want; and that ye might not be so straitened as
 to receive from the wicked. But if the churches be so straitened, it is
 better to perish than to receive anything from the enemies of God, to
 the reproach and abuse of His friends. For of such as these the prophet
 speaks: "Let not the oil of a sinner moisten my head." [2954] Do ye
 therefore examine such persons, and receive from such as walk holily,
 and supply the afflicted. But receive not from those that are
 excommunicated, until they are thought worthy to become the members of
 the Church. But if a gift be wanting, inform the brethren, and make a
 collection from them, and thence minister to the orphans and widows in
 righteousness.

 That the People Ought to Be Exhorted by the Priest to Do Good to the
 Needy, as Says Solomon the Wise.

 IX. Say unto the people under thee what Solomon the wise says: "Honour
 the Lord out of thy just labours, and pay thy first-fruits to Him out
 of thy fruits of righteousness, that thy garners may be filled with
 fulness of wheat, and thy presses may burst out with wine." [2955]
 Therefore maintain and clothe those that are in want from the righteous
 labour of the faithful. And such sums of money as are collected from
 them in the manner aforesaid, appoint to be laid out in the redemption
 of the saints, the deliverance of slaves, and of captives, and of
 prisoners, and of those that have been abused, and of those that have
 been condemned by tyrants to single combat and death on account of the
 name of Christ. For the Scripture says: "Deliver those that are led to
 death, and redeem those that are ready to be slain, do not spare."
 [2956]

 A Constitution, that If Any One of the Ungodly by Force Will Cast Money to
 the Priests, They Spend It in Wood and Coals, But Not in Food.

 X. But if at any time you be forced unwillingly to receive money from
 any ungodly person, lay it out in wood and coals, that so neither the
 widow nor the orphan may receive any of it, or be forced to buy with it
 either meat or drink, which it is unfit to do. For it is reasonable
 that such gifts of the ungodly should be fuel for the fire, and not
 food for the pious. And this method is plainly appointed by the law,
 [2957] when it calls a sacrifice kept too long a thing not fit to be
 eaten, and commands it to be consumed with fire. For such oblations are
 not evil in their nature, but on account of the mind of those that
 bring them. And this we ordain, that we may not reject those that come
 to us, as knowing that the common conversation of the pious has often
 been very profitable to the ungodly, but religious communion with them
 is alone hurtful. And so much, beloved, shall suffice to have spoken to
 you in order to your security.

 [2933] Isa. i. 7.

 [2934] Acts xx. 35.

 [2935] [The early Church had a constant struggle with professional
 paupers. This entire book is a valuable contribution to social ethics.
 The problems of to-day confronted the Church then. Few wiser counsels
 have been recorded.--R.]

 [2936] Job xx. 18, LXX.; Prov. xi. 4.

 [2937] Job xx. 15, LXX.

 [2938] Eccles. ii. 25, LXX.; Ps. cxlv. 16; Zech. ix. 17, LXX.; Ps. civ.
 14, 15.

 [2939] One V. ms. reads, "Thus also did the Lord exhort His disciples,
 saying."

 [2940] The words in italics are not in one V. ms.

 [2941] Matt. vi. 26, 31, 32.

 [2942] One V. ms. reads, "with whom be glory to Him, with the Spirit."

 [2943] Ecclus. xxvi. 29

 [2944] Isa. i. 22

 [2945] Deut. xxiii. 18.

 [2946] 1 Kings xiii.

 [2947] Ps. xxxvii. 16.

 [2948] Jer. xv. 1.

 [2949] Jer. vii. 16.

 [2950] 2 Kings viii. [Offerings to God are privileges of saints.]

 [2951] 1 Kings xiv.

 [2952] Acts viii.

 [2953] Isa. liv. 14.

 [2954] Ps. cxli. 5

 [2955] Prov. iii. 9., etc

 [2956] Prov. xxiv. 11

 [2957] Lev. xix. 6

 Sec. II.--On Domestic and Social Life.

 Of Parents and Children.

 XI. Ye fathers, educate your children in the Lord, bringing them up in
 the nurture and admonition of the Lord; and teach them such trades as
 are agreeable and suitable to the word, lest they by such opportunity
 become extravagant, and continue without punishment from their parents,
 and so get relaxation before their time, and go astray from that which
 is good. Wherefore be not afraid to reprove them, and to teach them
 wisdom with severity. For your corrections will not kill them, but
 rather preserve them. As Solomon says somewhere in the book of Wisdom:
 "Chasten thy son, and he will refresh thee; so wilt thou have good hope
 of him. Thou verily shalt smite him with the rod, and shall deliver his
 soul from death." [2958] And again, says the same Solomon thus, "He
 that spareth his rod, hateth his son;" [2959] and afterwards, "Beat his
 sides whilst he is an infant, lest he be hardened and disobey thee."
 [2960] He, therefore, that neglects to admonish and instruct his own
 son, hates his own child. Do you therefore teach your children the word
 of the Lord. Bring them under with cutting stripes, and make them
 subject from their infancy, teaching them the Holy Scriptures, which
 are Christian and divine, and delivering to them every sacred writing,
 "not giving them such liberty that they get the mastery," [2961] and
 act against your opinion, not permitting them to club together for a
 treat with their equals. For so they will be turned to disorderly
 courses, and will fall into fornication; and if this happen by the
 carelessness of their parents, those that begat them will be guilty of
 their souls. For if the offending children get into the company of
 debauched persons by the negligence of those that begat them, they will
 not be punished alone by themselves; but their parents also will be
 condemned on their account. For this cause endeavour, at the time when
 they are of an age fit for marriage, to join them in wedlock, and
 settle them together, lest in the heat and fervour of their age their
 course of life become dissolute, and you be required to give an account
 by the Lord God in the day of judgment.

 Of Servants and Masters.

 XII. But as to servants, what can we say more than that the slave bring
 a good will to his master, with the fear of God, although he be impious
 and wicked, [2962] but yet not to yield any compliance as to his
 worship? And let the master love his servant, although he be his
 superior. Let him consider wherein they are equal, even as he is a man.
 And let him that has a believing master [2963] love him both as his
 master, and as of the same faith, and as a father, but still with the
 preservation of his authority as his master: "not as an eye-servant,
 but as a lover of his master; as knowing that God will recompense to
 him for his subjection." [2964] In like manner, let a master who has a
 believing servant love him as a son or as a brother, on account of
 their communion in the faith, but still preserving the difference of a
 servant.

 In What Things We Ought to Be Subject to the Rulers of This World.

 XIII. Be ye subject to all royal power and dominion in things which are
 pleasing to God, as to the ministers of God, and the punishers of the
 ungodly. [2965] Render all the fear that is due to them, all offerings,
 all customs, all honour, gifts, and taxes. [2966] For this is God's
 command, that you owe nothing to any one but the pledge of love, which
 God has commanded by Christ. [2967]

 Of Virgins.

 XIV. Concerning virginity we have received no commandment; [2968] but
 we leave it to the power of those that are willing, as a vow: exhorting
 them so far in this matter that they do not promise anything rashly;
 since Solomon says, "It is better not to vow, than to vow and not pay."
 [2969] Let such a virgin, therefore, be holy in body and soul, as the
 temple of God, [2970] as the house of Christ, as the habitation of the
 Holy Spirit. For she that vows ought to do such works as are suitable
 to her vow; and to show that her vow is real, and made on account of
 leisure for piety, not to cast a reproach on marriage. Let her not be a
 gadder abroad, nor one that rambles about unseasonably; not
 double-minded, but grave, continent, sober, pure, avoiding the
 conversation of many, and especially of those that are of ill
 reputation. [2971]

 [2958] Prov. xxix. 17, xix. 18, xxiii. 14

 [2959] Prov. xiii. 24

 [2960] Ecclus. xxx. 12

 [2961] Ecclus. xxx. 11

 [2962] See Eph. vi. 5; 1 Pet. ii. 18.

 [2963] Col. iv. 1. See 1 Tim. vi. 2.

 [2964] Eph. vi. 6; Col. iii. 22, 24.

 [2965] See 1 Pet. ii. 13; Tit. iii. 1.

 [2966] Rom. xiii. 1, 4, 7.

 [2967] Rom. xiii. 8.

 [2968] See 1 Cor. vii. 25.

 [2969] Eccles. v. 5.

 [2970] 1 Cor. vii. 34.

 [2971] [The absence of any marked ascetic tone in this passage is in
 sharp contrast with the pseudo-Clementine Epistles concerning
 virginity. See vol. viii.--R.]


constitutions of the holy apostles

  Book V.

 Sec. I.--Concerning the Martyrs.

 That It is Reasonable for the Faithful to Supply the Wants of Those Who
 are Afflicted for the Sake of Christ by the Unbelievers, According to the
 Constitution of the Lord.

 I. If any Christian, on account of the name of Christ, and love and
 faith towards God, be condemned by the ungodly to the games, to the
 beasts, or to the mines, do not ye overlook him; but send to him from
 your labour and your very sweat for his sustenance, and for a reward to
 the soldiers, that he may be eased and be taken care of; that, as far
 as lies in your power, your blessed brother may not be afflicted: for
 he that is condemned for the name of the Lord God is an holy martyr, a
 brother of the Lord, the son of the Highest, a receptacle of the Holy
 Spirit, by whom every one of the faithful has received the illumination
 of the glory of the holy Gospel, by being vouchsafed the incorruptible
 crown, and the testimony of Christ's sufferings, and the fellowship of
 His blood, to be made conformable to the death of Christ for the
 adoption of children. For this cause do you, all ye of the faithful, by
 your bishop, minister to the saints of your substance and of your
 labour. But if any one has not, let him fast a day, and set apart that,
 and order it for the saints. But if any one has superfluities, let him
 minister more to them according to the proportion of his ability. But
 if he can possibly sell all his livelihood, and redeem them out of
 prison, he will be blessed, and a friend of Christ. For if he that
 gives his goods to the poor be perfect, supposing his knowledge of
 divine things, much more is he so that does it on account of the
 martyrs. For such a one is worthy of God, and will fulfil His will by
 supplying those who have confessed Him before nations and kings, and
 the children of Israel; concerning whom our Lord declared, saying:
 "Whosoever shall confess me before men, him will I also confess before
 my Father." [2972] And if these be such as to be attested to by Christ
 before His Father, you ought not to be ashamed to go to them in the
 prisons. For if you do this, it will be esteemed to you for a
 testimony, because the real trial was to them a testimony; and your
 readiness will be so to you, as being partakers of their combat: for
 the Lord speaks somewhere to such as these, saying: "Come, ye blessed
 of my Father, inherit the kingdom prepared for you from the foundation
 of the world. For I was an hungry, and ye gave me meat; I was thirsty,
 and ye gave me drink; I was a stranger, and ye took me in; naked, and
 ye clothed me; I was sick, and ye visited me; I was in prison, and ye
 came unto me. Then shall the righteous answer, and say, Lord, when saw
 we Thee an hungered, and fed Thee? or thirsty, and gave Thee drink?
 When saw we Thee naked, and clothed Thee? or sick, and visited Thee?
 When saw we Thee a stranger, and took Thee in? or in prison, and came
 unto Thee? And He will answer and say unto them, Inasmuch as ye have
 done it unto one of the least of these my brethren, ye have done it
 unto me. And these shall go away into life everlasting. Then shall He
 say unto them on His left hand, Depart from me, ye cursed, into
 everlasting fire, prepared for the devil and his angels. For I was
 hungry, and ye gave me no meat; I was thirsty, and ye gave me no drink;
 I was a stranger, and ye took me not in; naked, and ye clothed me not;
 sick, and in prison, and ye visited me not. Then shall they also answer
 and say, Lord when saw we Thee hungry, or thirsty, or a stranger, or
 naked, or sick, or in prison, and did not minister unto Thee? Then
 shall He answer and say unto them, Verily I say unto you, Inasmuch as
 ye have not done it unto one of the least of these, neither have ye
 done it unto me. And these shall go away unto everlasting punishment."
 [2973]

 That We are to Avoid Intercourse with False Brethren When They Continue in
 Their Wickedness.

 II. But if any one who calls himself a brother is seduced by the evil
 one, and acts wickedness, and is convicted and condemned to death as an
 adulterer, or a murderer, depart from him, that ye may be secure, and
 none of you may be suspected as a partner in such an abominable
 practice; and that no evil report may be spread abroad, as if all
 Christians took a pleasure in unlawful actions. Wherefore keep far from
 them. But do you assist with all diligence those that for the sake of
 Christ are abused by the ungodly and shut up in prison, or who are
 given over to death, or bonds, or banishment, in order to deliver your
 fellow-members from wicked hands. And if any one who accompanies with
 them is caught, and falls into misfortune, he is blessed, because he is
 partaker with the martyr, and is one that imitates the sufferings of
 Christ; for we ourselves also, when we oftentimes received stripes from
 Caiaphas, and Alexander, and Annas, for Christ's sake, "went out
 rejoicing that we were counted worthy to suffer such things for our
 Saviour." [2974] Do you also rejoice when ye suffer such things, for ye
 shall be blessed in that day. [2975]

 That We Ought to Afford an Helping Hand to Such as are Spoiled for the
 Sake of Christ, Although We Should Incur Danger Ourselves.

 III. Receive also those that are persecuted on account of the faith,
 and who "fly from city to city" [2976] on account of the Lord's
 commandment; and assist them as martyrs, rejoicing that ye are made
 partakers of their persecution, as knowing that they are esteemed
 blessed by the Lord; for Himself says: "Blessed are ye when men shall
 reproach you, and persecute you, and say all manner of evil against you
 falsely, for my sake. Rejoice, and be exceeding glad, because your
 reward is great in heaven: for so persecuted they the prophets which
 were before us." [2977] And again: "If they have persecuted me, they
 will also persecute you." [2978] And afterwards: "If they persecute you
 in this city, flee ye to another. For in the world ye have tribulation:
 for they shall deliver you into the synagogues; and ye shall be brought
 before rulers and kings for my sake, and for a testimony to them."
 [2979] And, "He that endureth unto the end, the same shall be saved."
 [2980] For he that is persecuted for the sake of the faith, and bears
 witness in regard to Him, Christ, and endures, is truly a man of God.

 That It is an Horrible and Destructive Thing to Deny Christ.

 IV. But he that denies himself to be a Christian, that he may not be
 hated of men, and so loves his own life more than he does the Lord, in
 whose hand his breath is, is wretched and miserable, as being
 detestable and abominable, who desires to be the friend of men, but is
 the enemy of God, having no longer his portion with the saints, but
 with those that are accursed; choosing instead of the kingdom of the
 blessed, that eternal fire which is prepared for the devil and his
 angels: not being any longer hated by men, but rejected by God, and
 cast out from His presence. For of such a one our Lord declared,
 saying: "Whosoever shall deny me before men, and shall be ashamed of my
 name, I also will deny and be ashamed of him before my Father which is
 in heaven." [2981] And again He speaks thus to us ourselves, His
 disciples: "He that loveth father or mother more than me, is not worthy
 of me; and he that loveth son or daughter more than me, is not worthy
 of me; and he that taketh not his cross, and followeth after me, is not
 worthy of me. He that findeth his life, shall lose it; and he that
 loseth his life for my sake, shall find it. For what is a man profited,
 if he shall gain the whole world, and lose his own soul? or what shall
 a man give in exchange for his soul?" [2982] And afterwards: "Fear not
 them that kill the body, but are not able to kill the soul; but rather
 fear Him who is able to destroy both soul and body in hell." [2983]

 That We Ought to Imitate Christ in Suffering, and with Zeal to Follow His
 Patience.

 V. Every one therefore who learns any art, when he sees his master by
 his diligence and skill perfecting his art, does himself earnestly
 endeavour to make what he takes in hand like to it. If he is not able,
 he is not perfected in his work. We therefore who have a Master, our
 Lord Jesus Christ, why do we not follow His doctrine?--since He
 renounced repose, pleasure, glory, riches, pride, the power of revenge,
 His mother and brethren, nay, and moreover His own life, on account of
 His piety towards His Father, and His love to us the race of mankind;
 and suffered not only persecution and stripes, reproach and mockery,
 but also crucifixion, that He might save the penitent, both Jews and
 Gentiles. If therefore He for our sakes renounced His repose, was not
 ashamed of the cross, and did not esteem death inglorious, why do not
 we imitate His sufferings, and renounce on His account even our own
 life, with that patience which He gives us? For He did all for our
 sakes, but we do it for our own sakes: for He does not stand in need of
 us, but we stand in need of His mercy. He only requires the sincerity
 and readiness of our faith, as the Scripture says: "If thou beest
 righteous, what doest thou give to Him? or what will He receive at thy
 hand? Thy wickedness is to a man like thyself, and thy righteousness to
 a son of man." [2984]

 That a Believer Ought Neither Rashly to Run into Danger Through Security,
 Nor to Be Over-Timorous Through Pusillanimity, But to Fly Away for Fear;
 Yet that If He Does Fall into the Enemy's Hand, to Strive Earnestly, Upon
 Account of the Crown that is Laid Up for Him.

 VI. Let us therefore renounce our parents, and kinsmen, and friends,
 and wife, and children, and possessions, and all the enjoyments of
 life, when any of these things become an impediment to piety. For we
 ought to pray that we may not enter into temptation; but if we be
 called to martyrdom, with constancy to confess His precious name, and
 if on this account we be punished, let us rejoice, as hastening to
 immortality. When we are persecuted, let us not think it strange; let
 us not love the present world, nor the praises which come from men, nor
 the glory and honour of rulers, according as some of the Jews wondered
 at the mighty works of our Lord, yet did not believe on Him, for fear
 of the high priests and the rest of the rulers: "For they loved the
 praise of men more than the praise of God." [2985] But now, by
 confessing a good confession, we not only save ourselves, but we
 confirm those who are newly illuminated, and strengthen the faith of
 the catechumens. But if we remit any part of our confession, and deny
 godliness by the faintness of our persuasion, and the fear of a very
 short punishment, we not only deprive ourselves of everlasting glory,
 but we shall also become the causes of the perdition of others; and
 shall suffer double punishment, as affording suspicion, by our denial
 that that truth which we gloried in so much before is an erroneous
 doctrine. Wherefore neither let us be rash and hasty to thrust
 ourselves into dangers, for the Lord says: "Pray that ye fall not into
 temptation: the spirit indeed is willing, but the flesh is weak."
 [2986] Nor let us, when we do fall into dangers, be fearful or ashamed
 of our profession. For if a person, by the denial of his own hope,
 which is Jesus the Son of God, should be delivered from a temporary
 death, and the next day should fall dangerously sick upon his bed, with
 a distemper in his bowels, his stomach, or his head, or any of the
 incurable diseases, as a consumption, or gangrene, or looseness, or
 iliac passion, or dropsy, or colic, and has a sudden catastrophe, and
 departs this life; is not he deprived of the things present, and loses
 those eternal? Or rather, he is within the verge of eternal punishment,
 "and goes into outer darkness, where is weeping and gnashing of teeth."
 [2987] But let him who is vouchsafed the honour of martyrdom rejoice
 with joy in the Lord, as obtaining thereby so great a crown, and
 departing out of this life by his confession. Nay, though he be but a
 catechumen, let him depart without trouble; for his suffering for
 Christ will be to him a more genuine baptism, because he does really
 die with Christ, but the rest only in a figure. Let him therefore
 rejoice in the imitation of his Master, since is it thus ordained: "Let
 every one be perfect, as his Master is." [2988] Now his and our Master,
 Jesus the Lord, was smitten for our sake: He underwent reproaches and
 revilings with long-suffering. He was spit upon, He was smitten on the
 face, He was buffeted; and when He had been scourged, He was nailed to
 the cross. He had vinegar and gall to drink; and when He had fulfilled
 all things that were written, He said to His God and Father, "Into Thy
 hands I commend my spirit." [2989] Wherefore let him that desires to be
 His disciple earnestly follow His conflicts: let him imitate His
 patience, knowing that, although he be burned in the fire by men, he
 will suffer nothing, like the three children; [2990] or if he does
 suffer anything, he shall receive a reward from the Lord, believing in
 the one and the only true God and Father, through Jesus Christ, the
 great High Priest, and Redeemer of our souls, and rewarder of our
 sufferings. To whom be glory for ever. Amen.

 Several Demonstrations Concerning the Resurrection, Concerning the Sibyl,
 and What the Stoics Say Concerning the Bird Called the Phoenix.

 VII. For the Almighty God Himself will raise us up through our Lord
 Jesus Christ, according to His infallible promise, and grant us a
 resurrection with all those that have slept from the beginning of the
 world; and we shall then be such as we now are in our present form,
 without any defect or corruption. For we shall rise incorruptible:
 whether we die at sea, or are scattered on the earth, or are torn to
 pieces by wild beasts and birds, He will raise us by His own power; for
 the whole world is held together by the hand of God. Now He says: "An
 hair of your head shall not perish." [2991] Wherefore He exhorts us,
 saying: "In your patience possess ye your souls." [2992] But as
 concerning the resurrection of the dead, and the recompense of reward
 for the martyrs, Gabriel speaks to Daniel: "And many of them that sleep
 shall arise out of the dust of the earth, some to everlasting life, and
 some to shame and everlasting contempt. And they that understand shall
 shine as the sun, and as the firmament, and as the stars." [2993]
 Therefore the most holy Gabriel foretold that the saints should shine
 like the stars: for His sacred name did witness to them, that they
 might understand the truth. Nor is a resurrection only declared for the
 martyrs, but for all men, righteous and unrighteous, godly and ungodly,
 that every one may receive according to his desert. For God, says the
 Scripture, "will bring every work into judgment, with every secret
 thing, whether it be good or whether it be evil." [2994] This
 resurrection was not believed by the Jews, when of old they said, "Our
 bones are withered, and we are gone." [2995] To whom God answered, and
 said: "Behold, I open your graves, and will bring you out of them; and
 I will put my Spirit into you, and ye shall live: and ye shall know
 that I the Lord have spoken it, and will do it." And He says by Isaiah:
 "The dead shall rise, and those that are in the graves shall be raised
 up. And those that rest in the earth shall rejoice, for the dew which
 is from Thee shall be healing to them." [2996] There are indeed many
 and various things said concerning the resurrection, and concerning the
 continuance of the righteous in glory, and concerning the punishment of
 the ungodly, their fall, rejection, condemnation, shame, "eternal fire,
 and endless worm." [2997] Now that, if it had pleased Him that all men
 should be immortal, it was in His power, He showed in the examples of
 Enoch and Elijah, while He did not suffer them to have any experience
 of death. Or if it had pleased Him in every generation to raise those
 that died, that this also He was able to do He hath made manifest both
 by Himself and by others; as when He raised the widow's son [2998] by
 Elijah, and the Shunammite's son [2999] by Elisha. But we are persuaded
 that death is not a retribution of punishment, because even the saints
 have undergone it; nay, even the Lord of the saints, Jesus Christ, the
 life of them that believe, and the resurrection of the dead. Upon this
 account, therefore, according to the ancient practice, for those who
 live in the great city, after the combats He brings a dissolution for a
 while, that, when He raises up every one, He may either reject him or
 crown him. For He that made the body of Adam out of the earth will
 raise up the bodies of the rest, and that of the first man, after their
 dissolution, (to pay what is owing to the rational nature of man; we
 mean the continuance in being through all ages. He, therefore, who
 brings on the dissolution, will Himself procure the resurrection. And
 He that said, "The Lord took dust from the ground, and formed man, and
 breathed into his face the breath of life, and man became a living
 soul," [3000] added after the disobedience, "Earth thou art, and unto
 earth shalt thou return;" [3001] the same promised us a resurrection
 afterwards. [3002] ) For says He: "All that are in the graves shall
 hear the voice of the Son of God, and they that hear shall live."
 [3003] Besides these arguments, we believe there is to be a
 resurrection also from the resurrection of our Lord. For it is He that
 raised Lazarus, when he had been in the grave four days, [3004] and
 Jairus' daughter, [3005] and the widow's son. [3006] It is He that
 raised Himself by the command of the Father in the space of three days,
 who is the pledge of our resurrection. For says He: "I am the
 resurrection and the life." [3007] Now He that brought Jonas [3008] in
 the space of three days, alive and unhurt, out of the belly of the
 whale, and the three children out of the furnace of Babylon, and Daniel
 out of the mouth of the lions, [3009] does not want power to raise us
 up also. But if the Gentiles laugh at us, and disbelieve our
 Scriptures, let at least their own prophetess Sibylla [3010] oblige
 them to believe, who says thus to them in express words:--


 "But when all things shall be reduced to dust and ashes,

 And the immortal God who kindled the fire shall have quenched it,

 God shall form those bones and that ashes into a man again,

 And shall place mortal men again as they were before.

 And then shall be the judgment, wherein God will do justice,

 And judge the world again. But as many mortals as have sinned through
 impiety

 Shall again be covered under the earth;

 But so many as have been pious shall live again in the world.

 When God puts His Spirit into them, and gives those at once that are
 godly both life and favour,

 Then shall all see themselves." [3011]

 If, therefore, this prophetess confesses the resurrection, and does not
 deny the restoration of all things, and distinguishes the godly from
 the ungodly, it is in vain for them to deny our doctrine. Nay, indeed,
 they say they can show a resemblance of the resurrection, while they do
 not themselves believe the things they declare: for they say that there
 is a bird single in its kind which affords a copious demonstration of
 the resurrection, which they say is without a mate, and the only one in
 the creation. They call it a phoenix, and relate that every five
 hundred years it comes into Egypt, to that which is called the altar of
 the sun, and brings with it a great quantity of cinnamon, and cassia,
 and balsam-wood, and standing towards the east, as they say, and
 praying to the sun, of its own accord is burnt, and becomes dust; but
 that a worm arises again out of those ashes, and that when the same is
 warmed it is formed into a new-born phoenix; and when it is able to
 fly, it goes to Arabia, which is beyond the Egyptian countries. If,
 therefore, as even themselves say, a resurrection is exhibited by the
 means of an irrational bird, wherefore do they vainly disparage our
 accounts, when we profess that He who by His power brings that into
 being which was not in being before, is able to restore this body, and
 raise it up again after its dissolution? For on account of this full
 assurance of hope we undergo stripes, and persecutions, and deaths.
 Otherwise we should to no purpose undergo such things if we had not a
 full assurance of these promises, whereof we profess ourselves to be
 the preachers. As, therefore, we believe Moses when he says, "In the
 beginning God made the heaven and the earth;" [3012] and we know that
 He did not want matter, but by His will alone brought those things into
 being which Christ was commanded to make; we mean the heaven, the
 earth, the sea, the light, the night, the day, the luminaries, the
 stars, the fowls, the fishes, and four-footed beasts, the creeping
 things, the plants, and the herbs; so also will He raise all men up by
 His will, as not wanting any assistance. For it is the work of the same
 power to create the world and to raise the dead. And then He made man,
 who was not a man before, of different parts, giving to him a soul made
 out of nothing. But now He will restore the bodies, which have been
 dissolved, to the souls that are still in being: for the rising again
 belongs to things laid down, not to things which have no being. He
 therefore that made the original bodies out of nothing, and fashioned
 various forms of them, will also again revive and raise up those that
 are dead. For He that formed man in the womb out of a little seed, and
 created in him a soul which was not in being before,--as He Himself
 somewhere speaks to Jeremiah, "Before I formed thee in the womb I knew
 thee;" [3013] and elsewhere, "I am the Lord who established the heaven,
 and laid the foundations of the earth, and formed the spirit of man in
 him," [3014] --will also raise up all men, as being His workmanship; as
 also the divine Scripture testifies that God said to Christ, His
 only-begotten, "Let us make man after our image, and after our
 likeness. And God made man: after the image of God made He him; male
 and female made He them." [3015] And the most divine and patient Job,
 of whom the Scripture says that it is written, that "he was to rise
 again with those whom the Lord raises up," [3016] speaks to God thus:
 "Hast not Thou milked me like milk, and curdled me like cheese? Thou
 hast clothed me with skin and flesh, and hast fenced me with bones and
 sinews. Thou hast granted me life and favour, and Thy visitation hath
 preserved my spirit. Having these things within me, I know that Thou
 canst do all things, and that nothing is impossible with Thee." [3017]
 Wherefore also [3018] our Saviour and Master Jesus Christ says, that
 "what is impossible with men is possible with God." [3019] And David,
 the beloved of God, says: "Thine hands have made me, and fashioned me."
 [3020] And again: "Thou knowest my frame." [3021] And afterward: "Thou
 hast fashioned me, and laid Thine hand upon me. The knowledge of Thee
 is declared to be too wonderful for me; it is very great, I cannot
 attain unto it." [3022] "Thine eyes did see my substance, being yet
 imperfect; and all men shall be written in Thy book." [3023] Nay, and
 Isaiah says in his prayer to Him: "We are the clay, and Thou art the
 framer of us." [3024] If, therefore, man be His workmanship, made by
 Christ, by Him most certainly will he after he is dead be raised again,
 with intention either of being crowned for his good actions or punished
 for his transgressions. But if He, being the legislator, judges with
 righteousness; as He punishes the ungodly, so does He do good to and
 saves the faithful. And those saints who for His sake have been slain
 by men, "some of them He will make light as the stars, and make others
 bright as the luminaries," [3025] as Gabriel said to Daniel. All we of
 the faithful, therefore, who are the disciples of Christ, believe His
 promises. For He that has promised it cannot lie; as says the blessed
 prophet David: "The Lord is faithful in all His words, and holy in all
 His works." [3026] For He that framed for Himself a body out of a
 virgin, is also the Former of other men. And He that raised Himself
 from the dead, will also raise again all that are laid down. He who
 raises wheat out of the ground with many stalks from one grain, He who
 makes the tree that is cut down send forth fresh branches, He that made
 Aaron's dry rod put forth buds, [3027] will raise us up in glory; He
 that raised Him up that had the palsy whole, [3028] and healed him that
 had the withered hand, [3029] He that supplied a defective part to him
 that was born blind from clay and spittle, [3030] will raise us up; He
 that satisfied five thousand men with five loaves and two fishes, and
 caused a remainder of twelve baskets, [3031] and out of water made
 wine, [3032] and sent a piece of money out of a fish's mouth [3033] by
 me Peter to those that demanded tribute, will raise the dead. For we
 testify all these things concerning Him, and the prophets testify the
 other. We who have eaten and drunk with Him, and have been spectators
 of His wonderful works, and of His life, and of His conduct, and of His
 words, and of His sufferings, and of His death, and of His resurrection
 from the dead, and who associated with Him forty days after His
 resurrection, [3034] and who received a command from Him to preach the
 Gospel to all the world, and to make disciples of all nations, [3035]
 and to baptize them into His death by the authority of the God of the
 universe, who is His Father, and by the testimony of the Spirit, who is
 His Comforter,--we teach you all these things which He appointed us by
 His constitutions, before "He was received up in our sight into
 heaven," [3036] to Him that sent Him. And if you will believe, you
 shall be happy; but if you will not believe, we shall be found
 innocent, and clear from your incredulity.

 Concerning James the Brother of the Lord, and Stephen the First Martyr.

 VIII. Now concerning the martyrs, we say to you that they are to be had
 in all honour with you, as we honour the blessed James the bishop, and
 the holy Stephen our fellow-servant. For these are reckoned blessed by
 God, and are honoured by holy men, who were pure from all
 transgressions, immoveable when tempted to sin, or persuaded from good
 works, without dispute deserving encomiums: of whom also David speaks,
 "Precious in the sight of the Lord is the death of His holy ones;"
 [3037] and Solomon says, "The memory of the just is with encomiums:"
 [3038] of whom also the prophet speaks, "Righteous men are taken away."
 [3039]

 Concerning False Martyrs.

 IX. These things we have said concerning those that in truth have been
 martyrs for Christ, but not concerning false martyrs, concerning whom
 the oracle speaks, "The name of the ungodly is extinguished." [3040]
 For "a faithful witness will not lie, but an unjust witness inflames
 lies." [3041] For he that departs this life in his testimony without
 lying, for the sake of the truth, is a faithful martyr, worthy to be
 believed in such things wherein he strove for the word of piety by his
 own blood.

 [2972] Matt. x. 32.

 [2973] Matt. xxv. 34, etc. Portions of the passage from Matthew are
 omitted in one V. ms.; and the conclusions beginning with "Then shall
 they also," is entirely omitted. [The citation is quite accurate; ver.
 46 is divided, doubtless for the sake of emphasis, and slightly
 modified.--R.]

 [2974] Acts iv. 6; v. 40, 41.

 [2975] Vid. Luke vi. 22, 23.

 [2976] Matt. x. 23.

 [2977] Matt. v. 11, 12.

 [2978] John xv. 20.

 [2979] Matt. x. 23, 17; John xvi. 33.

 [2980] Matt. x. 22.

 [2981] Matt. x. 33; Luke ix. 26.

 [2982] Matt. x. 37, xvi. 26.

 [2983] Matt. x. 28.

 [2984] Job xxxv. 7, 8. One V. ms. reads "piety," instead of
 "wickedness," in the last sentence.

 [2985] John xii. 43.

 [2986] Matt. xxvi. 41. [See De Fuga, vol. iv. [272]p. 119.]

 [2987] Matt. viii. 12.

 [2988] Luke vi. 40.

 [2989] Luke xxiii. 46.

 [2990] Dan. iii.

 [2991] Luke xxi. 18.

 [2992] Luke xxi. 19.

 [2993] Dan. xii. 2, 3.

 [2994] Eccles. xii. 14.

 [2995] Ezek. xxxvii. 11, etc.

 [2996] Isa. xxvi. 19.

 [2997] Isa. lxvi. 24.

 [2998] 1 Kings xvii.

 [2999] 2 Kings iv.

 [3000] Gen. ii. 7.

 [3001] Gen. iii. 19.

 [3002] The part within parentheses is not in one of the V. mss.

 [3003] John v. 25.

 [3004] John xi.

 [3005] Mark v.

 [3006] Luke vii.

 [3007] John xi. 25.

 [3008] Jonah ii.

 [3009] Dan. iii., vi

 [3010] [Compare [273]pp. 256, 257, supra.]

 [3011] Orac. Sibyl., , l. iv. in fin. [See [274]p. 324, supra.]

 [3012] Gen. i. 1.

 [3013] Jer. i. 5.

 [3014] Zech. xii. 1.

 [3015] Gen. i. 26, 27.

 [3016] In fin. Job in LXX.

 [3017] Job x. 10.

 [3018] The words from "Wherefore also" to "possible with God" are
 omitted in one V. ms., and noticed as spurious in the other.

 [3019] Luke xviii. 27.

 [3020] Ps. cxix. 73.

 [3021] Ps. ciii. 14.

 [3022] Ps. cxxxix. 5, 6.

 [3023] Ps. cxxxix. 16.

 [3024] Isa. lxiv. 8.

 [3025] Dan. xii. 3.

 [3026] Ps. cxlv. 17.

 [3027] Num. xvii. 8

 [3028] Matt. ix. 2, etc.

 [3029] Mark iii. 1, etc.

 [3030] John ix. 1, etc.

 [3031] Matt. xiv. 17, etc.

 [3032] John ii. 3, etc.

 [3033] Matt. xvii. 24, etc.

 [3034] Acts i. 3.

 [3035] Matt. xxviii. 19.

 [3036] Acts i. 9.

 [3037] Ps. cxvi. 15.

 [3038] Prov. x. 7.

 [3039] Isa. lvii. 1, LXX.

 [3040] Prov. x. 7.

 [3041] Prov. xiv. 5.

 Sec. II.--All Association with Idols is to Be Avoided.

 A Moral Admonition, that We are to Abstain from Vain Talking, Obscene
 Talking, Jesting, Drunkenness, Lasciviousness, and Luxury.

 X. Now we exhort you, brethren and fellow-servants, to avoid vain talk
 and obscene discourses, and jestings, drunkenness, lasciviousness,
 luxury, unbounded passions, with foolish discourses, since we do not
 permit you so much as on the Lord's days, which are days of joy, to
 speak or act anything unseemly; for the Scripture somewhere says:
 "Serve the Lord with fear, and rejoice unto Him with trembling." [3042]
 Even your very rejoicings therefore ought to be done with fear and
 trembling: for a Christian who is faithful ought neither to repeat an
 heathen hymn nor an obscene song, because he will be obliged by that
 hymn to make mention of the idolatrous names of demons; and instead of
 the Holy Spirit, the wicked one will enter into him.

 An Admonition Instructing Men to Avoid the Abominable Sin of Idolatry.

 XI. You are also forbidden to swear by them, or to utter their
 abominable names through your mouth, and to worship them, or fear them
 as gods; for they are not gods, but either wicked demons or the
 ridiculous contrivances of men. For somewhere God says concerning the
 Israelites: "They have forsaken me, and sworn by them that are no
 gods." [3043] And afterwards: "I will take away the names of your idols
 out of their mouth." [3044] And elsewhere: "They have provoked me to
 jealousy with them that are no gods; they have provoked me to anger
 with their idols." [3045] And in all the Scriptures these things are
 forbidden by the Lord God.

 That We Ought Not to Sing an Heathen or an Obscene Song, Nor to Swear by
 an Idol; Because It is an Impious Thing, and Contrary to the Knowledge of
 God.

 XII. Nor do the legislators give us only prohibitions concerning idols,
 but also warn us concerning the luminaries, not to swear by them, nor
 to serve them. For they say: "Lest, when thou seest the sun, and the
 moon, and the stars, thou shouldest be seduced to worship them." [3046]
 And elsewhere: "Do not ye learn to walk after the ways of the heathen,
 and be not afraid of the signs of heaven." [3047] For the stars and the
 luminaries were given to men to shine upon them, but not for worship;
 although the Israelites, by the perverseness of their temper,
 "worshipped the creature instead of the Creator," [3048] and acted
 insultingly to their Maker, and admired the creature more than is fit.
 And sometimes they made a calf, as in the wilderness; [3049] sometimes
 they worshipped Baalpeor; [3050] another time Baal, [3051] and Thamuz,
 [3052] and Astarte of Sidon; [3053] and again Moloch and Chamos; [3054]
 another time the sun, [3055] as it is written in Ezekiel; nay, and
 besides, brute creatures, as among the Egyptians Apis, and the
 Mendesian goat, and gods of silver and gold, as in Judea. On account of
 all which things He threatened them, and said by the prophet: "Is it a
 small thing to the house of Judah to do these abominations which they
 have done? For they have filled the land with their wickedness, to
 provoke me to anger: and, behold, they are as those that mock. And I
 will act with anger. Mine eye shall not spare, neither will I have
 mercy; and they shall cry in mine ears with a great voice, and I will
 not hearken unto them." [3056] Consider, beloved, how many things the
 Lord declares against idolaters, and the worshippers of the sun and
 moon. Wherefore it is the duty of a man of God, as he is a Christian,
 not to swear by the sun, or by the moon, or by the stars; nor by the
 heaven, nor by the earth, by any of the elements, whether small or
 great. For if our Master charged us not to swear by the true God, that
 our word might be firmer than an oath, nor by heaven itself, for that
 is a piece of heathen wickedness, nor by Jerusalem, nor by the
 sanctuary of God, nor the altar, nor the gift, nor the gilding of the
 altar, nor one's own head, [3057] for this custom is a piece of Judaic
 corruption, and on that account was forbidden; and if He exhorts the
 faithful that their yea be yea, and their nay, nay, and says that "what
 is more than these is of the evil one," how much more blameable are
 those who appeal to deities falsely so called as the objects of an
 oath, and who glorify imaginary beings instead of those that are real,
 whom God for their perverseness "delivered over to foolishness, to do
 those things that are not convenient!" [3058]

 [3042] Ps. ii. 11.

 [3043] Jer. v. 7.

 [3044] Zech. xiii. 2.

 [3045] Deut. xxxii. 21

 [3046] Deut. iv. 19

 [3047] Jer. x. 2

 [3048] Rom. i. 25

 [3049] Ex. xxxii. 4

 [3050] Num. xxv. 3

 [3051] Judg. ii. 13

 [3052] Ezek. viii. 14.

 [3053] 1 Kings xi. 5.

 [3054] 1 Kings xi. 7.

 [3055] Ezek. viii. 16.

 [3056] Ezek. viii. 17, 18.

 [3057] Matt. v. 34, xxiii. 16.

 [3058] Rom. i. 28.

 Sec. III.--On Feast Days and Fast Days.

 A Catalogue of the Feasts of the Lord Which are to Be Kept, and When Each
 of Them Ought to Be Observed.

 XIII. Brethren, observe the festival days; and first of all the
 birthday which you are to celebrate on the twenty-fifth of the ninth
 month; after which let the Epiphany be to you the most honoured, in
 which the Lord made to you a display of His own Godhead, and let it
 take place on the sixth of the tenth month; after which the fast of
 Lent is to be observed by you as containing a memorial of our Lord's
 mode of life and legislation. But let this solemnity be observed before
 the fast of the passover, beginning from the second day of the week,
 and ending at the day of the preparation. After which solemnities,
 breaking off your fast, begin the holy week of the passover, fasting in
 the same all of you with fear and trembling, praying in them for those
 that are about to perish.

 Concerning the Passion of Our Lord, and What Was Done on Each Day of His
 Sufferings; And Concerning Judas, and that Judas Was Not Present When the
 Lord Delivered the Mysteries to His Disciples.

 XIV. For they began to hold a council against the Lord on the second
 day of the week, in the first month, which is Xanthicus; and the
 deliberation continued on the third day of the week; but on the fourth
 day they determined to take away His life by crucifixion. And Judas
 knowing this, who for a long time had been perverted, but was then
 smitten by the devil himself with the love of money, although he had
 been long entrusted with the purse, [3059] and used to steal what was
 set apart for the needy, yet was he not cast off by the Lord, through
 much long-suffering; nay, and when we were once feasting with Him,
 being willing both to reduce him to his duty and instruct us in His own
 foreknowledge, He said: "Verily, verily, I say unto you, that one of
 you will betray me;" and every one of us saying, "Is it I?" [3060] And
 the Lord being silent, I, who was one of the twelve, and more beloved
 by Him than the rest, arose up from lying in His bosom, and besought
 Him to tell who it should be that should betray Him. Yet neither then
 did our good Lord declare His name, but gave two signs of the betrayer:
 one by saying, "he that dippeth with me in the dish;" a second, "to
 whom I shall give the sop when I have dipped it." Nay, although he
 himself said, "Master, is it I?" the Lord did not say Yes, but, "Thou
 hast said." And being willing to affright him in the matter, He said:
 "Woe to that man by whom the Son of man is betrayed! good were it for
 him if he had never been born. Who, when he had heard that, went his
 way, and said to the priests, What will ye give me, and I will deliver
 Him unto you? And they bargained with him for thirty pieces of silver."
 [3061] And the scripture was fulfilled, which said, "And they took
 [3062] the thirty pieces of silver, the price of Him that was valued,
 whom they of the children of Israel did value, and gave them for the
 house of the potter." [3063] And on the fifth day of the week, when we
 had eaten the passover with Him, and when Judas had dipped his hand
 into the dish, and received the sop, and was gone out by night, the
 Lord said to us: "The hour is come that ye shall be dispersed, and
 shall leave me alone;" [3064] and every one vehemently affirming that
 they would not forsake Him, I Peter adding this promise, that I would
 even die with Him, He said, "Verily I say unto thee, Before the cock
 crows, thou shall thrice deny that thou knowest me." [3065] And when He
 had delivered to us the representative mysteries of His precious body
 and blood, Judas not being present with us, He went out to the Mount of
 Olives, near the brook Cedron, where there was a garden; [3066] and we
 were with Him, and sang an hymn according to the custom. [3067] And
 being separated not far [3068] from us, He prayed to His Father,
 saying: "Father, remove this cup away from me; yet not my will, but
 Thine be done." [3069] And when He had done this thrice, while we out
 of despondency of mind were fallen asleep, He came and said: "The hour
 is come, and the Son of man is betrayed into the hands of sinners. And
 behold Judas, and with him a multitude of ungodly men," [3070] to whom
 he shows the signal by which he was to betray Him--a deceitful kiss.
 But they, when they had received the signal agreed on, took hold of the
 Lord; and having bound Him, they led Him to the house of Caiaphas the
 high priest, wherein were assembled many, not the people, but a great
 rout, not an holy council, but an assembly of the wicked and council of
 the ungodly, who did many things against Him, and left no kind of
 injury untried, spitting upon Him, cavilling at Him, beating Him,
 smiting Him on the face, reviling Him, tempting Him, seeking vain
 divination instead of true prophecies from Him, calling Him a deceiver,
 a blasphemer, a transgressor of Moses, a destroyer of the temple, a
 taker away of sacrifices, an enemy to the Romans, an adversary to
 Cæsar. And these reproaches did these bulls and dogs [3071] in their
 madness cast upon Him, till it was very early in the morning, and then
 they lead Him away to Annas, who was father-in-law to Caiaphas; and
 when they had done the like things to Him there, it being the day of
 the preparation, they delivered Him to Pilate the Roman governor,
 accusing Him of many and great things, none of which they could prove.
 Whereupon the governor, as out of patience with them, said: "I find no
 cause against Him." [3072] But they bringing two lying witnesses,
 wished to accuse the Lord falsely; but they being found to disagree,
 and so their testimony not conspiring together, they altered the
 accusation to that of treason, saying, "This fellow says that He is a
 king, and forbids to give tribute to Cæsar." [3073] And themselves
 became accusers, and witnesses, and judges, and authors of the
 sentence, saying, "Crucify Him, crucify Him;" [3074] that it might be
 fulfilled which is written by the prophets concerning Him, "Unjust
 witnesses were gathered together against me, and injustice lied to
 itself;" [3075] and again, "Many dogs compassed me about, the assembly
 of the wicked laid siege against me;" [3076] and elsewhere, "My
 inheritance became to me as a lion in a wood, and has sent forth her
 voice against me." [3077] Pilate therefore, disgracing his authority by
 his pusillanimity, convicts himself of wickedness by regarding the
 multitude more than this just person, and bearing witness to Him that
 He was innocent, yet as guilty delivering Him up to the punishment of
 the cross, although the Romans had made laws that no man unconvicted
 should be put to death. But the executioners took the Lord of glory and
 nailed Him to the cross, crucifying Him indeed at the sixth hour, but
 having received the sentence of His condemnation at the third hour.
 After this they gave to Him vinegar to drink, mingled with gall. Then
 they divided His garments by lot. Then they crucified two malefactors
 with Him, on each side one, that it might be fulfilled which was
 written: "They gave me gall to eat, and when I was thirsty they gave me
 vinegar to drink." [3078] And again: "They divided my garment among
 themselves, and upon my vesture have they cast lots." [3079] And in
 another place: "And I was reckoned with the transgressors." [3080] Then
 there was darkness for three hours, from the sixth to the ninth, and
 again light in the evening; as it is written: "It shall not be day nor
 night, and at the evening there shall be light." [3081] All which
 things, [3082] when those malefactors saw that were crucified with Him,
 the one of them reproached Him as though He was weak and unable to
 deliver Himself; but the other rebuked the ignorance of his fellow and
 turning to the Lord, as being enlightened by Him, and acknowledging who
 He was that suffered, he prayed that He would remember him in His
 kingdom hereafter. [3083] He then presently granted him the forgiveness
 of his former sins, and brought him into paradise to enjoy the mystical
 good things; who also cried out about the ninth hour, and said to His
 Father: "My God! my God! why hast Thou forsaken me?" [3084] And a
 little afterward, when He had cried with a loud voice, "Father, forgive
 them, for they know not what they do," [3085] and had added, "Into Thy
 hands I commit my spirit," He gave up the ghost, [3086] and was buried
 before sunset in a new sepulchre. But when the first day of the week
 dawned He arose from the dead, and fulfilled those things which before
 His passion He foretold to us, saying: "The Son of man must continue in
 the heart of the earth three days and three nights." [3087] And when He
 was risen from the dead, He appeared first to Mary Magdalene, and Mary
 the mother of James, then to Cleopas in the way, and after that to us
 His disciples, who had fled away for fear of the Jews, but privately
 were very inquisitive about Him. [3088] But these things are also
 written in the Gospel.

 Of the Great Week, and on What Account They Enjoin Us to Fast on Wednesday
 and Friday.

 XV. He therefore charged us Himself to fast these six days on account
 of the impiety and transgression of the Jews, commanding us withal to
 bewail over them, and lament for their perdition. For even He Himself
 "wept over them, because they knew not the time of their visitation."
 [3089] But He commanded us to fast on the fourth and sixth days of the
 week; the former on account of His being betrayed, and the latter on
 account of His passion. But He appointed us to break our fast on the
 seventh day at the cock-crowing, but to fast on the Sabbath-day. Not
 that the Sabbath-day is a day of fasting, being the rest from the
 creation, but because we ought to fast on this one Sabbath only, while
 on this day the Creator was under the earth. For on their very
 feast-day they apprehended the Lord, that oracle might be fulfilled
 which says: "They placed their signs in the middle of their feast, and
 knew them not." [3090] Ye ought therefore to bewail over them, because
 when the Lord came they did not believe on Him, but rejected His
 doctrine, judging themselves unworthy of salvation. You therefore are
 happy who once were not a people, but are now an holy nation, delivered
 from the deceit of idols, from ignorance, from impiety, who once had
 not obtained mercy, but now have obtained mercy through your hearty
 obedience: for to you, the converted Gentiles, is opened the gate of
 life, who formerly were not beloved, but are now beloved; a people
 ordained for the possession of God, to show forth His virtues,
 concerning whom our Saviour said, "I was found of them that sought me
 not; I was made manifest to them that asked not after me. I said,
 Behold me, to a nation which did not call upon my name." [3091] For
 when ye did not seek after Him, then were ye sought for by Him; and you
 who have believed in Him have hearkened to His call, and have left the
 madness of polytheism, and have fled to the true monarchy, to Almighty
 God, through Christ Jesus, and are become the completion of the number
 of the saved--"ten thousand times ten thousand, and thousands of
 thousands;" [3092] as it is written in David, "A thousand [3093] shall
 fall beside thee, and ten thousand at thy right hand;" [3094] and
 again, "The chariots of God are by tens of thousands, and thousands of
 the prosperous." [3095] But unto unbelieving Israel He says: "All the
 day long have I stretched out mine hands to a disobedient and
 gainsaying people, which go in a way that is not good, but after their
 own sins, a people provoking me before my face." [3096]

 An Enumeration of the Prophetical Predictions Which Declare Christ, Whose
 Completion Though the Jews Saw, Yet Out of the Evil Temper of Their Mind
 They Did Not Believe He Was the Christ of God, and Condemned the Lord of
 Glory to the Cross.

 XVI. See how the people provoked the Lord by not believing in Him!
 Therefore He says: "They provoked the Holy Spirit, and He was turned to
 be their enemy." [3097] For blindness is cast upon them, by reason of
 the wickedness of their mind, because when they saw Jesus they did not
 believe Him to be the Christ of God, who was before all ages [3098]
 begotten of Him, His only-begotten Son, God the Word, whom they did not
 own through their unbelief, neither on account of His mighty works, nor
 yet on account of the prophecies which were written concerning Him. For
 that He was to be born of a virgin, they read this prophecy: "Behold, a
 virgin shall be with child, and shall bring forth a Son, and they shall
 call His name Emanuel." [3099] "For to us a Child is born, to us a Son
 is given, whose government is upon His shoulders; and His name is
 called the Angel of His Great Council, the Wonderful Counsellor, the
 Mighty God, the Potentate, the Prince of Peace, the Father of the
 Future Age." [3100] Now, that because of their exceeding great
 wickedness they would not believe in Him, the Lord shows in these
 words: "Who hath believed our report? and to whom hath the arm of the
 Lord been revealed?" [3101] And afterward: "Hearing ye shall hear, and
 shall not understand; and seeing ye shall see, and shall not perceive:
 for the heart of this people is waxed gross." [3102] Wherefore
 knowledge was taken from them, because seeing they overlooked, and
 hearing they heard not. But to you, the converted of the Gentiles, is
 the kingdom given, because you, who knew not God, have believed by
 preaching, and "have known Him, or rather are known of Him," [3103]
 through Jesus, the Saviour and Redeemer of those that hope in Him. For
 ye are translated from your former vain and tedious mode of life and
 have contemned the lifeless idols, and despised the demons, which are
 in darkness, and have run to the "true light," [3104] and by it have
 "known the one and only true God and Father," [3105] and so are owned
 to be heirs of His kingdom. For since ye have "been baptized into the
 Lord's death," [3106] and into His resurrection, as "new-born babes,"
 [3107] ye ought to be wholly free from all sinful actions; "for you are
 not your own, but His that bought you" [3108] with His own blood. For
 concerning the former Israel the Lord speaks thus, on account of their
 unbelief: "The kingdom of God shall be taken from them, and given to a
 nation bringing forth the fruits thereof;" [3109] that is to say, that
 having given the kingdom to you, who were once far estranged from Him,
 He expects the fruits of your gratitude and probity. For ye are those
 that were once sent into the vineyard, and did not obey, but these they
 that did obey; [3110] but you have repented of your denial, and you
 work therein now. But they, being uneasy on account of their own
 covenants, have not only left the vineyard uncultivated, but have also
 killed the stewards of the Lord of the vineyard, [3111] --one with
 stones, another with the sword; one they sawed asunder, [3112] another
 they slew in the holy place, "between the temple and the altar;" [3113]
 nay, at last they "cast the Heir Himself out of the vineyard, and slew
 Him." [3114] And by them He was rejected as an unprofitable stone,
 [3115] but by you was received as the corner-stone. Wherefore He says
 concerning you: "A people whom I knew not have served me, and at the
 hearing of the ear have they obeyed me." [3116]

 How the Passover Ought to Be Celebrated.

 XVII. It is therefore your duty, brethren, who are redeemed by the
 precious blood of Christ, to observe the days of the passover exactly,
 with all care, after the vernal equinox, lest ye be obliged to keep the
 memorial of the one passion twice in a year. Keep it once only in a
 year for Him that died but once.

 Do not you yourselves compute, but keep it when your brethren of the
 circumcision do so: keep it together with them; and if they err in
 their computation, be not you concerned. Keep your nights of watching
 in the middle of the days of unleavened bread. And when the Jews are
 feasting, do you fast and wail over them, because an the day of their
 feast they crucified Christ; and while they are lamenting and eating
 unleavened bread in bitterness, do you feast. [3117] But no longer be
 careful to keep the feast with the Jews, for we have now no communion
 with them; for they have been led astray in regard to the calculation
 itself, which they think they accomplish perfectly, that they may be
 led astray on every hand, and be fenced off from the truth. But do you
 observe carefully the vernal equinox, which occurs on the twenty-second
 of the twelfth month, which is Dystros (March), observing carefully
 until the twenty-first of the moon, lest the fourteenth of the moon
 shall fall on another week, and an error being committed, you should
 through ignorance celebrate the passover twice in the year, or
 celebrate the day of the resurrection of our Lord on any other day than
 a Sunday.

 A Constitution Concerning the Great Passover Week.

 XVIII. Do you therefore fast on the days of the passover, beginning
 from the second day of the week until the preparation, and the Sabbath,
 six days, making use of only bread, and salt, and herbs, and water for
 your drink; but do you abstain on these days from wine and flesh, for
 they are days of lamentation and not of feasting. Do ye who are able
 fast the day of the preparation and the Sabbath-day entirely, tasting
 nothing till the cock-crowing of the night; but if any one is not able
 to join them both together, at least let him observe the Sabbath-day;
 for the Lord says somewhere, speaking of Himself: "When the bridegroom
 shall be taken away from them, in those days shall they fast." [3118]
 In these days, therefore, He was taken from us by the Jews, falsely so
 named, and fastened to the cross, and "was numbered among the
 transgressors." [3119]

 Concerning the Watching All the Night of the Great Sabbath, and Concerning
 the Day of the Resurrection.

 XIX. Wherefore we exhort you to fast on those days, as we also fasted
 till the evening, when He was taken away from us; but on the rest of
 the days, before the day of the preparation, let every one eat at the
 ninth hour, or at the evening, or as every one is able. But from the
 even of the fifth day till cock-crowing break your fast when it is
 daybreak of the first day of the week, which is the Lord's day. From
 the even till cock-crowing keep awake, and assemble together in the
 church, watch and pray, and entreat God; reading, when you sit up all
 night, the Law, the Prophets, and the Psalms, until cock-crowing, and
 baptizing your catechumens, and reading the Gospel with fear and
 trembling, and speaking to the people such things as tend to their
 salvation: put an end to your sorrow, and beseech God that Israel may
 be converted, and that He will allow them place of repentance, and the
 remission of their impiety; for the judge, who was a stranger, "washed
 his hands, and said, I am innocent of the blood of this just person:
 see ye to it. But Israel cried out, His blood be on us, and on our
 children." [3120] And when Pilate said, "Shall I crucify your king?
 they cried out, We have no king but Cæsar: crucify Him, crucify Him;
 for every, one that maketh himself a king speaketh against Cæsar." And,
 "If thou let this man go, thou art not Cæsar's friend." [3121] And
 Pilate the governor and Herod the king commanded Him to be crucified;
 and that oracle was fulfilled which says, "Why did the Gentiles rage,
 and the people imagine vain things? The kings of the earth set
 themselves, and the rulers were gathered together against the Lord, and
 against His Christ;" [3122] and, "They cast away the Beloved, as a dead
 man, who is abominable." [3123] And since He was crucified on the day
 of the Preparation, and rose again at break of day on the Lord's day,
 the scripture was fulfilled which saith, "Arise, O God; judge the
 earth: for Thou shalt have an inheritance in all the nations;" [3124]
 and again, "I will arise, saith the Lord; I will put Him in safety, I
 will wax bold through Him;" [3125] and, "But Thou, Lord, have mercy
 upon me, and raise me up again, and I shall requite them." [3126] For
 this reason do you also, now the Lord is risen, offer your sacrifice,
 concerning which He made a constitution by us, saying, "Do this for a
 remembrance of me;" [3127] and thenceforward leave off your fasting,
 and rejoice, and keep a festival, because Jesus Christ, the pledge of
 our resurrection, is risen from the dead. And let this be an
 everlasting ordinance till the consummation of the world, until the
 Lord come. For to Jews the Lord is still dead, but to Christians He is
 risen: to the former, by their unbelief; to the latter, by their full
 assurance of faith. For the hope in Him is immortal and eternal life.
 After eight days let there be another feast observed with honour, the
 eighth day itself, on which He gave me Thomas, who was hard of belief,
 full assurance, by showing me the print of the nails, and the wound
 made in His side by the spear. [3128] And again, from the first Lord's
 day count forty days, from the Lord's day till the fifth day of the
 week, and celebrate the feast of the ascension of the Lord, whereon He
 finished all His dispensation and constitution, and returned to that
 God and Father that sent Him, and sat down at the right hand of power,
 and remains there until His enemies are put under His feet; who also
 will come at the consummation of the world with power and great glory,
 to judge the quick and the dead, and to recompense to every one
 according to his works. And then shall they see the beloved Son of God
 whom they pierced; [3129] and when they know Him, they shall mourn for
 themselves, tribe by tribe, and their wives apart. [3130]

 A Prophetic Prediction Concerning Christ Jesus.

 XX. For even now, on the tenth day of the month Gorpiæus, when they
 assemble together, they read the Lamentations of Jeremiah, in which it
 is said, "The Spirit before our face, Christ the Lord was taken in
 their destructions;" [3131] and Baruch, in whom it is written, "This is
 our God; no other shall be esteemed with Him. He found out every way of
 knowledge, and showed it to Jacob His son, and Israel His beloved.
 Afterwards He was seen upon earth, and conversed with men." [3132] And
 when they read them, they lament and bewail, as themselves suppose,
 that desolation which happened by Nebuchadnezzar; but, as the truth
 shows, they unwillingly make a prelude to that lamentation which will
 overtake them. But after ten days from the ascension, which from the
 first Lord's day is the fiftieth day, do ye keep a great festival: for
 on that day, at the third hour, the Lord Jesus sent on us the gift of
 the Holy Ghost, and we were filled with His energy, and we "spake with
 new tongues, as that Spirit did suggest to us;" [3133] and we preached
 both to Jews and Gentiles, that He is the Christ of God, who is
 "determined by Him to be the Judge of quick and dead." [3134] To Him
 did Moses bear witness, and said: "The Lord received fire from the
 Lord, and rained it down." [3135] Him did Jacob see as a man, and said:
 "I have seen God face to face, and my soul is preserved." [3136] Him
 did Abraham entertain, and acknowledge to be the Judge, and his Lord.
 [3137] Him did Moses see in the bush; [3138] concerning Him did he
 speak in Deuteronomy: "A Prophet will the Lord your God raise up unto
 you out of your brethren, like unto me; Him shall ye hear in all
 things, whatsoever He shall say unto you. And it shall be, that every
 soul that will not hear that Prophet, shall be destroyed from among his
 people." [3139] Him did Joshua the son of Nun see, as the captain of
 the Lord's host, in armour, for their assistance against Jericho; to
 whom he fell down, and worshipped, as a servant does to his master.
 [3140] Him Samuel knew as the "Anointed of God," [3141] and thence
 named the priests and the kings the anointed. Him David knew, and sung
 an hymn concerning Him, "A song concerning the Beloved;" [3142] and
 adds in his person, and says, "Gird Thy sword upon Thy thigh, O Thou
 who art mighty in Thy beauty and renown: go on, and prosper, and reign,
 for the sake of truth, and meekness, and righteousness; and Thy right
 hand shall guide Thee after a wonderful manner. Thy darts are
 sharpened, O Thou that art mighty; the people shall fall under Thee in
 the heart of the king's enemies. Wherefore God, Thy God, hath anointed
 Thee with the oil of gladness above Thy fellows." Concerning Him also
 spake Solomon, as in His person: "The Lord created me the beginning of
 His ways, for His works: before the world He founded me, in the
 beginning before He made the earth, before the fountains of waters
 came, before the mountains were fastened; He begat me before all the
 hills." [3143] And again: "Wisdom built herself an house." [3144]
 Concerning Him also Isaiah said: "A Branch shall come out of the root
 of Jesse, and a Flower shall spring out of his root." And, "There shall
 be a root of Jesse; and He that is to rise to reign over the Gentiles,
 in Him shall the Gentiles trust." [3145] And Zechariah says: [3146]
 "Behold, thy King cometh unto thee, just, and having salvation; meek,
 and riding upon an ass, and upon a colt, the foal of an ass." [3147]
 Him Daniel describes as "the Son of man coming to the Father," [3148]
 and receiving all judgment and honour from Him; and as "the stone cut
 out of the mountain without hands, and becoming a great mountain, and
 filling the whole earth," [3149] dashing to pieces the many governments
 of the smaller countries, and the polytheism of gods, but preaching the
 one God, and ordaining the monarchy of the Romans. Concerning Him also
 did Jeremiah prophesy, saying: "The Spirit before His face, Christ the
 Lord, was taken in their snares: of whom we said, Under His shadow we
 shall live among the Gentiles." [3150] Ezekiel also, and the following
 prophets, affirm everywhere that He is the Christ, the Lord, the King,
 the Judge, the Lawgiver, the Angel of the Father, the only-begotten
 God. Him therefore do we also preach to you, and declare Him to be God
 the Word, who ministered to His God and Father for the creation of the
 universe. By believing in Him you shall live, but by disbelieving you
 shall be punished. For "he that is disobedient to the Son shall not see
 life, but the wrath of God abideth on him." [3151] Therefore, after you
 have kept the festival of Pentecost, keep one week more festival, and
 after that fast; for it is reasonable to rejoice for the gift of God,
 and to fast after that relaxation: for both Moses and Elijah fasted
 forty days, and Daniel for "three weeks of days did not eat desirable
 bread, and flesh and wine did not enter into his mouth." [3152] And
 blessed Hannah, when she asked for Samuel, said: "I have not drunk wine
 nor strong drink, and I pour out my soul before the Lord." [3153] And
 the Ninevites, when they fasted three days and three nights, [3154]
 escaped the execution of wrath. And Esther, and Mordecai, and Judith,
 [3155] by fasting, escaped the insurrection of the ungodly Holofernes
 and Haman. And David says: "My knees are weak through fasting, and my
 flesh faileth for want of oil." [3156] Do you therefore fast, and ask
 your petitions of God. We enjoin you to fast every fourth day of the
 week, and every day of the preparation, and the surplusage of your fast
 bestow upon the needy; every Sabbath-day excepting one, and every
 Lord's day, hold your solemn assemblies, and rejoice: for he will be
 guilty of sin who fasts on the Lord's day, being the day of the
 resurrection, or during the time of Pentecost, or, in general, who is
 sad on a festival day to the Lord. For on them we ought to rejoice, and
 not to mourn.

 [3059] John xii. 6.

 [3060] Matt. xxvi. 21, 22; John xiii. 21, etc.

 [3061] Matt. xxvi. 15.

 [3062] The words from "And they took" to "house of the potter" are
 wanting in one V. ms. The other reads "field" of the potter, instead of
 "house."

 [3063] Matt. xxvii. 9, 10.

 [3064] John xvi. 32; Matt. xxvi. 31.

 [3065] Luke xxii. 34.

 [3066] John xviii. 1.

 [3067] Matt. xxvi. 30.

 [3068] "Not far," the reading of the V. mss. The others read: "And
 being separated from us, He prayed earnestly."

 [3069] I.uke xxii. 42; Matt. xxvi. 39, 42.

 [3070] Luke xxii. 47; Matt. xxvi. 47.

 [3071] Ps. xxii. 12, 16.

 [3072] Luke xxiii. 14; John xviii. 38.

 [3073] Luke xxiii. 2.

 [3074] Luke xxiii. 21.

 [3075] Ps. xxvii. 12.

 [3076] Ps. xxii. 16.

 [3077] Jer. xii. 8.

 [3078] Ps. lxix. 21.

 [3079] Ps. xxii. 18.

 [3080] Isa. liii. 12.

 [3081] Zech. xiv. 7. The V. mss. read: "On that day there will not be
 light, but there will be cold and frost for one day."

 [3082] The words from "All which things" to "mystical good things" are
 omitted in one V. ms.

 [3083] Luke xxiii. 39, etc.

 [3084] Matt. xxvii. 46

 [3085] Luke xxiii. 34

 [3086] Luke xxiii. 46

 [3087] Matt. xii. 40

 [3088] Mark xvi. 9; John xx. 11, etc.; Luke xxiv. 18; Mark xvi. 14

 [3089] Luke xix. 44

 [3090] Ps. lxxiv. 4

 [3091] Isa. lxv. 1

 [3092] Dan. vii. 10.

 [3093] The words from "A thousand" to "of the prosperous" are not in
 the V. mss.

 [3094] Ps. xci. 7.

 [3095] Ps. lxviii. 17.

 [3096] Isa. lxv. 2.

 [3097] Isa. lxiii. 10.

 [3098] One V. ms. omits "ages," and the other "begotten of Him."

 [3099] Isa. vii. 14; Matt. i. 23

 [3100] Isa. ix. 6 [Justin Martyr, p. 236, [275]n. 8, vol. i., this
 series.]

 [3101] Isa. liii. 1

 [3102] Isa. vi. 9, 10

 [3103] Gal. iv. 9

 [3104] John i. 9.

 [3105] John xvii. 3.

 [3106] Rom. vi. 3.

 [3107] 1 Pet. ii. 2.

 [3108] 1 Cor. vi. 19, 20.

 [3109] Matt. xxi. 43.

 [3110] Matt. xxi. 28, etc.

 [3111] Matt. xxi. 35

 [3112] Heb. xi. 37

 [3113] Matt xxiii. 35

 [3114] Matt. xxi. 39

 [3115] Matt. xxi. 42.

 [3116] Ps. xviii. 43, 44.

 [3117] This italicized passage does not occur in the mss., but is taken
 from Epiphanius. It is believed to be genuine, in which case what
 follows must be regarded as the work of the interpolator. [See
 Epiphanius, tom. iv. p. 29, ed. Oehler, 1861.]

 [3118] Matt. ix. 15; Mark ii. 20; Luke v. 35.

 [3119] Isa. liii. 12.

 [3120] Matt. xxvii. 24, 25.

 [3121] John xix. 15, 6, 12.

 [3122] Ps. ii. 1, 2.

 [3123] Isa. xiv. 19.

 [3124] Ps. lxxxii. 8.

 [3125] Ps. xii. 5.

 [3126] Ps. xli. 10.

 [3127] Luke xxii. 19.

 [3128] John xx. 25.

 [3129] Zech. xii. 10; John xix. 37.

 [3130] The words "and their wives apart" are not in one V. ms.

 [3131] Lam. iv. 20.

 [3132] Bar. iii. 35-37.

 [3133] Acts ii. 4.

 [3134] Acts x. 42.

 [3135] Gen. xix. 24.

 [3136] Gen. xxxii. 30

 [3137] Gen. xviii. 25, 27

 [3138] Ex. iii. 2

 [3139] Deut. xviii. 15.

 [3140] Josh. v. 14.

 [3141] 1 Sam. xii. 3.

 [3142] Ps. xlv.

 [3143] Prov. viii. 22-25.

 [3144] Prov. ix. 1.

 [3145] Isa. xi. 1, 10.

 [3146] One V. ms. inserts: "Rejoice greatly, O daughter of Zion."

 [3147] Zech ix. 9

 [3148] Dan. vii. 13

 [3149] Dan. ii. 34

 [3150] Lam. iv. 20

 [3151] John iii. 36.

 [3152] Ex. xxxiv. 28; 1 Kings xix. 8; Dan. x. 2, 3.

 [3153] 1 Sam. i. 15.

 [3154] Jonah iii. 5.

 [3155] Esth. iv. 16; Judith viii. 6

 [3156] Ps. cix. 24


constitutions of the holy apostles

  Book VI.

 Sec. I.--On Heresies.

 Who They Were that Ventured to Make Schisms, and Did Not Escape
 Punishment.

 I. Above all things, O bishop, avoid the sad and dangerous and most
 atheistical heresies, eschewing them as fire that burns those that come
 near to it. Avoid also schisms: for it is neither lawful to turn one's
 mind towards wicked heresies, nor to separate from those of the same
 sentiment out of ambition. For some who ventured to set up such
 practices of old did not escape punishment. For Dathan and Abiram,
 [3157] who set up in opposition to Moses, were swallowed up into the
 earth. But Corah, and those two hundred and fifty who with him raised a
 sedition against Aaron, were consumed by fire. Miriam also, who
 reproached Moses, was cast out of the camp for seven days; for she said
 that Moses had taken an Ethiopian to wife. [3158] Nay, in the case of
 Azariah and Uzziah, [3159] the latter of which was king of Judah, but
 venturing to usurp the priesthood, and desiring to offer incense, which
 it was not lawful for him to do, was hindered by Azariah the high
 priest, and the fourscore priests; and when he would not obey he found
 the leprosy to arise in his forehead, and he hastened to go out,
 because the Lord had reproved him.

 That It is Not Lawful to Rise Up Either Against the Kingly or the Priestly
 Office.

 II. Let us therefore, beloved, consider what sort of glory that of the
 seditious is, and what their condemnation. For if he that rises up
 against kings is worthy of punishment, even though he be a son or a
 friend, how much more he that rises up against the priests! For by how
 much the priesthood is more noble than the royal power, as having its
 concern about the soul, so much has he a greater punishment who
 ventures to oppose the priesthood, than he who ventures to oppose the
 royal power, although neither of them goes unpunished. For neither did
 Absalom nor Abdadan [3160] escape without punishment; nor Corah and
 Dathan. [3161] The former rose against David, and strove concerning the
 kingdom; the latter against Moses, concerning pre-eminence. And they
 both spake evil; Absalom of his father David, as of an unjust judge,
 saying to every one: "Thy words are good, but there is no one that will
 hear thee, and do thee justice. Who will make me a ruler?" [3162] But
 Abdadan: "I have no part in David, nor any inheritance in the son of
 Jesse." [3163] It is plain that he could not endure to be under David's
 government, of whom God spake: "I have found David the son of Jesse, a
 man after my heart, who will do all my commands." [3164] But Dathan and
 Abiram, and the followers of Corah, said to Moses: "Is it a small thing
 that thou hast brought us out of the land of Egypt, out of a land
 flowing with milk and honey? And why hast thou put out our eyes? And
 wilt thou rule over us?" And they gathered together against him a great
 congregation; and the followers of Corah said: "Has God spoken alone to
 Moses? Why is it that He has given the high-priesthood to Aaron alone?
 Is not all the congregation of the Lord holy? And why is Aaron alone
 possessed of the priesthood?" [3165] And before this, one said: "Who
 made thee a ruler and a judge over us?" [3166]

 Concerning the Virtue of Moses and the Incredulity of the Jewish Nation,
 and What Wonderful Works God Did Among Them.

 III. And they raised a sedition against Moses the servant of God, the
 meekest of all men, [3167] and faithful, and affronted [3168] so great
 a man with the highest ingratitude; him who was their lawgiver, and
 guardian, and high priest, and king, the administrator of divine
 things; one that showed as a creator the mighty works of the Creator;
 the meekest man, freest from arrogance, and full of fortitude, and most
 benign in his temper; one who had delivered them from many dangers, and
 freed them from several deaths by his holiness; who had done so many
 signs and wonders from God before the people, and had performed
 glorious and wonderful works for their benefit; who had [3169] brought
 the ten plagues upon the Egyptians; who had divided the Red Sea, and
 had separated the waters as a wall on this side and on that side, and
 had led the people through them as through a dry wilderness, [3170] and
 had drowned Pharaoh and the Egyptians, and all that were in company
 with them; [3171] and had made the fountain sweet for them with wood,
 and had brought water out of the stony rock for them when they were
 thirsty; [3172] and had given them manna out of heaven, and had
 distributed flesh to them out of the air; [3173] and had afforded them
 a pillar of fire in the night to enlighten and conduct them, and a
 pillar of a cloud to shadow them in the day, by reason of the violent
 heat of the sun; [3174] and had exhibited to them the law of God,
 engraven from the mouth, and hand, and writing of God, in tables of
 stone, the perfect number of ten commandments; [3175] "to whom God
 spake face to face, as if a man spake to his friend;" [3176] of whom He
 said, "And there arose not a prophet like unto Moses." [3177] Against
 him arose the followers of Corah, and the Reubenites, [3178] and threw
 stones at Moses, who prayed, and said: "Accept not Thou their
 offering." [3179] And the glory of God appeared, and sent some down
 into the earth, and burnt up others with fire; and so, as to those
 ringleaders of this schismatical deceit which said, "Let us make
 ourselves a leader," [3180] the earth opened its mouth, and swallowed
 them up, and their tents, and what appertained to them, and they went
 down alive into hell; but he destroyed the followers of Corah with
 fire.

 [3157] Num. xvi

 [3158] Num. xii. 1

 [3159] 2 Chron. xxvi.

 [3160] 2 Sam. xviii.-xx.

 [3161] Num. xvi.

 [3162] 2 Sam. xv. 3.

 [3163] 2 Sam. xx. 1.

 [3164] Acts xiii. 22.

 [3165] Num. xvi. 13, xii. 2, xvi. 3.

 [3166] Ex. ii. 14.

 [3167] Num. xii. 3.

 [3168] The words from "and affronted" to "by his holiness" are not in
 one V. ms.

 [3169] The words from "who had" to "Egyptians" are not in one V. ms.

 [3170] Ex. vii., etc.

 [3171] Ex. xiv. 28

 [3172] Ex. xvii. 6

 [3173] Ex. xvi

 [3174] Ex. xiii. 21

 [3175] Ex. xxxi., etc.

 [3176] Ex. xxxiii. 11

 [3177] Deut. xxxiv. 10

 [3178] Num. xiv. 10

 [3179] Num. xvi. 15

 [3180] Num. xiv. 5

 Sec. II.--History and Doctrines of Heresies.

 That Schism is Made, Not by Him Who Separates Himself from the Ungodly,
 But Who Departs from the Godly.

 IV. If therefore God inflicted punishment immediately on those that
 made a schism on account of their ambition, how much rather will He do
 it upon those who are the leaders of impious heresies! Will not He
 inflict severer punishment on those that blaspheme His providence or
 His creation? But do you, brethren, who are instructed out of the
 Scripture, take care not to make divisions in opinion, nor divisions in
 unity. For those who set up unlawful opinions are marks of perdition to
 the people. In like manner, do not you of the laity come near to such
 as advance doctrines contrary to the mind of God; nor be you partakers
 of their impiety. For says God: "Separate yourselves from the midst of
 these men, lest you perish together with them." [3181] And again:
 "Depart from the midst of them, and separate yourselves, says the Lord,
 and touch not the unclean thing, and I will receive you." [3182]

 Upon What Account Israel, Falsely So Named, is Rejected by God,
 Demonstrated from the Prophetic Predictions.

 V. For those are most certainly to be avoided who blaspheme God. The
 greatest part of the ungodly, indeed, are ignorant of God; but these
 men, as fighters against God, are possessed with a wilful evil
 disposition, as with a disease. For from the wickedness of these
 heretics "pollution is gone out upon all the earth," [3183] as says the
 prophet Jeremiah. For the wicked synagogue is now cast off by the Lord
 God, and His house is rejected by Him, as He somewhere speaks: "I have
 forsaken mine house, I have left mine inheritance." [3184] And again,
 says Isaiah: "I will neglect my vineyard, and it shall not be pruned
 nor digged, and thorns shall spring up upon it, as upon a desert; and I
 will command the clouds that they rain no rain upon it." [3185] He has
 therefore "left His people as a tent in a vineyard, and as a garner in
 a fig or olive yard, and as a besieged city." [3186] He has taken away
 from them the Holy Spirit, and the prophetic rain, and has replenished
 His Church with spiritual grace, as the "river of Egypt in the time of
 first-fruits;" [3187] and has advanced the same "as an house upon an
 hill, or as an high mountain; as a mountain fruitful for milk and
 fatness, wherein it has pleased God to dwell. For the Lord will inhabit
 therein to the end." [3188] And He says in Jeremiah: "Our sanctuary is
 an exalted throne of glory." [3189] And He says in Isaiah: "And it
 shall come to pass in the last days, that the mountain of the Lord
 shall be glorious, and the house of the Lord shall be upon the top of
 the mountains, and shall be advanced above the hills." [3190] Since,
 therefore, He has forsaken His people, He has also left His temple
 desolate, and rent the veil of the temple, and took from them the Holy
 Spirit; for says He, "Behold, your house is left unto you desolate."
 [3191] And He has bestowed upon you, the converted of the Gentiles,
 spiritual grace, as He says by Joel: "And it shall come to pass after
 these things, saith God, that I will pour out of my Spirit upon all
 flesh; and your sons shall prophesy, and your daughters shall see
 visions, and your old men shall dream dreams." [3192] For God has taken
 away all the power and efficacy of His word, and such like visitations,
 from that people, and has transferred it to you, the converted of the
 Gentiles. For on this account the devil himself is very angry at the
 holy Church of God: he is removed to you, and has raised against you
 adversities, seditions, and reproaches, schisms, and heresies. For he
 had before subdued that people to himself, by their slaying of Christ.
 But you who have left his vanities he tempts in different ways, as he
 did the blessed Job. [3193] For indeed he opposed that great high
 priest Joshua the son of Josedek; [3194] and he oftentimes sought to
 sift us, that our faith might fail. [3195] But our Lord and Master,
 having brought him to trial, said unto him: "The Lord rebuke thee, O
 devil; and the Lord, who hath chosen Jerusalem, rebuke thee. Is not
 this plucked out of the fire as a brand?" [3196] And who said then to
 those that stood by the high priest, "Take away his ragged garments
 from him;" and added, "Behold, I have taken thine iniquities away from
 thee;" He will say now, as He said formerly of us when we were
 assembled together, "I have prayed that your faith may not fail."
 [3197]

 That Even Among the Jews There Arose the Doctrine of Several Heresies
 Hateful to God.

 VI. For even the Jewish nation had wicked heresies: for of them were
 the Sadducees, who do not confess the resurrection of the dead; and the
 Pharisees, who ascribe the practice of sinners to fortune and fate; and
 the Basmotheans, who deny providence, and say that the world is made by
 spontaneous motion, and take away the immortality of the soul; and the
 Hemerobaptists, who every day, unless they wash, do not eat,--nay, and
 unless they cleanse their beds and tables, or platters and cups and
 seats, do not make use of any of them; and those who are newly risen
 amongst us, the Ebionites, who will have the Son of God to be a mere
 man, begotten by human pleasure, and the conjunction of Joseph and
 Mary. There are also those that separate themselves from all these, and
 observe the laws of their fathers, and these are the Essenes. These,
 therefore, arose among the former people. And now the evil one, who is
 wise to do mischief, and as for goodness, knows no such good thing, has
 cast out some from among us, and has wrought by them heresies and
 schisms.

 Whence the Heresies Sprang, and Who Was the Ringleader of Their Impiety.

 VII. Now the original of the new heresies began thus: the devil entered
 into one Simon, of a village called Gitthæ, a Samaritan, by profession
 a magician, and made him the minister of his wicked design. [3198] For
 when Philip our fellow-apostle, [3199] by the gift of the Lord and the
 energy of His Spirit, performed the miracles of healing in Samaria,
 insomuch that the Samaritans were affected, and embraced the faith of
 the God of the universe, and of the Lord Jesus, and were baptized into
 His name; nay, and that Simon himself, when he saw the signs and
 wonders which were done without any magic ceremonies, fell into
 admiration, and believed, and was baptized, and continued in fasting
 and prayer,--we heard of the grace of God which was among the
 Samaritans by Philip, and came down [3200] to them; and enlarging much
 upon the word of doctrine, we laid our hands upon all that were
 baptized, and we conferred upon them the participation of the Spirit.
 But when Simon saw that the Spirit was given to believers by the
 imposition of our hands, he took money, and offered it to us, saying,
 "Give me also the power, that on whomsoever I also shall lay my hand,
 he may receive the Holy Ghost;" [3201] being desirous that as the devil
 [3202] deprived Adam by his tasting of the tree of that immortality
 which was promised him, so also that Simon might entice us by the
 receiving of money, and might thereby cut us off from the gift of God,
 [3203] that so by exchange we might sell to him for money the
 inestimable gift of the Spirit. But as we were all troubled at this
 offer, I Peter, with a fixed attention on that malicious serpent which
 was in him, said to Simon: "Let thy money go with thee to perdition,
 because thou hast thought to purchase the gift of God with money. Thou
 hast no part in this matter, nor lot in this faith; for thy heart is
 not right in the sight of God. Repent therefore of this thy wickedness,
 and pray to the Lord, if perhaps the thought of thine heart may be
 forgiven thee. For I perceive thou art in the gall of bitterness and
 the bond of iniquity." [3204] But then Simon was terrified, and said:
 "I entreat you, pray ye to the Lord for me, that none of those things
 which ye have spoken come upon me." [3205]

 Who Were the Successors of Simon's Impiety, and What Heresies They Set Up.

 VIII. But when we went forth among the Gentiles to preach the word of
 life, then the devil wrought in the people to send after us false
 apostles to the corrupting of the word; and they sent forth one
 Cleobius, and joined him with Simon, and these became disciples to one
 Dositheus, whom they despising, put him down from the principality.
 Afterwards also others were the authors of absurd doctrines: Cerinthus,
 and Marcus, and Menander, and Basilides, and Saturnilus. Of these some
 own the doctrine of many gods, some only of three, but contrary to each
 other, without beginning, and ever with one another, and some of an
 infinite number of them, and those unknown ones also. And some reject
 marriage; and their doctrine is, that it is not the appointment of God;
 and others abhor some kinds of food: some are impudent in uncleanness,
 such as those who are falsely called Nicolaitans. And Simon meeting me
 Peter, first at Cæsarea Stratonis (where the faithful Cornelius, a
 Gentile, believed on the Lord Jesus by me), endeavoured to pervert the
 word of God; there being with me the holy children, Zacchæus, who was
 once a publican, and Barnabas; and Nicetas and Aquila, brethren of
 Clement the bishop and citizen of Rome, who was the disciple of Paul,
 our fellow-apostle and fellow-helper in the Gospel. I thrice discoursed
 before them with him concerning the true Prophet, and concerning the
 monarchy of God; and when I had overcome him by the power of the Lord,
 and had put him to silence, I drove him away into Italy.

 How Simon, Desiring to Fly by Some Magical Arts, Fell Down Headlong from
 on High at the Prayers of Peter, and Brake His Feet, and Hands, and
 Ankle-Bones.

 IX. Now when he was in Rome, he mightily disturbed the Church, and
 subverted many, and brought them over to himself, and astonished the
 Gentiles with his skill in magic, insomuch that once, in the middle of
 the day, he went into their theatre, and commanded the people that they
 should bring me also by force into the theatre, and promised he would
 fly in the air; and when all the people were in suspense at this, I
 prayed by myself. And indeed he was carried up into the air by demons,
 and did fly on high in the air, saying that he was returning into
 heaven, and that he would supply them with good things from thence. And
 the people making acclamations to him, as to a god, I stretched out my
 hands to heaven, with my mind, and besought God through the Lord Jesus
 to throw down this pestilent fellow, and to destroy the power of those
 demons that made use of the same for the seduction and perdition of
 men, to dash him against the ground, and bruise him, but not to kill
 him. And then, fixing my eyes on Simon, I said to him: "If I be a man
 of God, and a real apostle of Jesus Christ, and a teacher of piety, and
 not of deceit, as thou art, Simon, I command the wicked powers of the
 apostate from piety, by whom Simon the magician is carried, to let go
 their hold, that he may fall down headlong from his height, that he may
 be exposed to the laughter of those that have been seduced by him."
 When I had said these words, Simon was deprived of his powers, and fell
 down headlong with a great noise, and was violently dashed against the
 ground, and had his hip and ankle-bones broken; and the people cried
 out, saying, "There is one only God, whom Peter rightly preaches in
 truth." And many left him; but some who were worthy of perdition
 continued in his wicked doctrine. And after this manner the most
 atheistical heresy of the Simonians was first established in Rome; and
 the devil wrought by the rest of the false apostles [3206] also.

 How the Heresies Differ from Each Other, and from the Truth.

 X. Now all these had one and the same design of atheism, to blaspheme
 Almighty God, to spread their doctrine that He is an unknown being, and
 not the Father of Christ, nor the Creator of the world; but one who
 cannot be spoken of, ineffable, not to be named, and begotten by
 Himself; that we are not to make use of the law and the prophets; that
 there is no providence and no resurrection to be believed; that there
 is no judgment nor retribution; that the soul is not immortal; that we
 must only indulge our pleasures, and turn to any sort of worship
 without distinction. Some of them say that there are many gods, some
 that there are three gods without beginning, some that there are two
 unbegotten gods, some that there are innumerable Æons. Further, some of
 them teach that men are not to marry, and must abstain from flesh and
 wine, affirming that marriage, and the begetting of children, and the
 eating of certain foods, are abominable; that so, as sober persons,
 they may make their wicked opinions to be received as worthy of belief.
 And some of them absolutely prohibit the eating of flesh, as being the
 flesh not of brute animals, but of creatures that have a rational soul,
 as though those that ventured to slay them would be charged with the
 crime of murder. But others of them affirm that we must only abstain
 from swine's flesh, but may eat such as are clean by the law; and that
 we ought to be circumcised, according to the law, and to believe in
 Jesus as in an holy man and a prophet. But others teach that men ought
 to be impudent in uncleanness, and to abuse the flesh, and to go
 through all unholy practices, as if this were the only way for the soul
 to avoid the rulers of this world. Now all these are the instruments of
 the devil, and the children of wrath.

 [3181] Num. xvi. 21

 [3182] 2 Cor. vi. 17

 [3183] Jer. xxiii. 15

 [3184] Jer. xii. 7

 [3185] Isa. v. 6.

 [3186] Isa. i. 8.

 [3187] See Ecclus. xxiv. 25.

 [3188] Ps. lxviii. 16.

 [3189] Jer. xvii. 12.

 [3190] Isa. ii. 2.

 [3191] Matt. xxiii. 38.

 [3192] Joel ii. 28.

 [3193] Job i., etc.

 [3194] Zech. iii. 1.

 [3195] Luke xxii. 31

 [3196] Zech. iii. 2, etc.

 [3197] Luke xxii. 32.

 [3198] Acts viii.

 [3199] [Either an ignorant error or a peculiar use of a technical word
 ([276]p. 383, supra) to signify a missionary. See the note, book viii.
 sec. 3, cap. 17, infra.]

 [3200] [Were sent, rather. See Acts viii. 14.]

 [3201] Acts viii. 19.

 [3202] "The devil:" this reading is adopted from the V. mss.

 [3203] The V. mss. insert here: "Simon, therefore, being moved by the
 devil, brought the money."

 [3204] Acts viii. 20, etc.

 [3205] Acts viii. 24.

 [3206] [2 Cor. xi. 13. See [277]p. 457, infra.]

 Sec. III.--The Heresies Attacked by the Apostles.

 An Exposition of the Preaching of the Apostles.

 XI. But we, who are the children of God and the sons of peace, do
 preach the holy and right word of piety, and declare one only God, the
 Lord of the law and of the prophets, the Maker of the world, the Father
 of Christ; not a being that caused Himself, or begat Himself, as they
 suppose, but eternal, and without original, and inhabiting light
 inaccessible; not two or three, or manifold, but eternally one only;
 not a being that cannot be known or spoken of, but who was preached by
 the law and the prophets; the Almighty, the Supreme Governor of all
 things, the All-powerful Being; the God and Father of the
 Only-begotten, and of the First-born of the whole creation; one God,
 the Father of one Son, not of many; the Maker of one Comforter by
 Christ, the Maker of the other orders, the one Creator of the several
 creatures by Christ, the same their Preserver and Legislator by Him;
 the cause of the resurrection, and of the judgment, and of the
 retribution which shall be made by Him: that this same Christ was
 pleased to become man, and went through life without sin, and suffered,
 and rose from the dead, and returned to Him that sent Him. We also say
 that every creature of God is good, and nothing abominable; that
 everything for the support of life, when it is partaken of righteously,
 is very good: for, according to the Scripture, "all things were very
 good." [3207] We believe that lawful marriage, and the begetting of
 children, is honourable and undefiled; for difference of sexes was
 formed in Adam and Eve for the increase of mankind. We acknowledge with
 us a soul that is incorporeal and immortal,--not corruptible as bodies
 are, but immortal, as being rational and free. We abhor all unlawful
 mixtures, and that which is practised by some against nature as wicked
 and impious. We profess there will be a resurrection both of the just
 and unjust, and a retribution. We profess that Christ is not a mere
 man, but God the Word, and man the Mediator between God and men, the
 High Priest of the Father; nor are we circumcised with the Jews, as
 knowing that He is come "to whom the inheritance was reserved," [3208]
 and on whose account the families were kept distinct--"the expectation
 of the Gentiles," Jesus Christ, who sprang out of Judah, [3209] the Son
 from the branch, the flower from Jesse, whose government is upon His
 shoulder. [3210]

 For Those that Confess Christ, But are Desirous to Judaize.

 XII. But because this heresy did then seem the more powerful to seduce
 men, and the whole Church was in danger, [3211] we the twelve assembled
 together at Jerusalem (for Matthias was chosen to be an apostle in the
 room of the betrayer, and took the lot of Judas; as it is said, "His
 bishopric [3212] let another take"). We deliberated, together with
 James the Lord's brother, what was to be done; and it seemed good to
 him and to the elders to speak to the people words of doctrine. For
 certain men likewise went down from Judea to Antioch, and taught the
 brethren who were there, saying: "Unless ye be circumcised after the
 manner of Moses, and walk according to the other customs which he
 ordained, ye cannot be saved." [3213] When, therefore, there had been
 no small dissension and disputation, the brethren which were at
 Antioch, when they knew that we were all met together about this
 question, sent out unto us men who were faithful and understanding in
 the Scriptures to learn concerning this question. And they, when they
 were come to Jerusalem, declared to us what questions were arisen in
 the church of Antioch,--namely, that some said men ought to be
 circumcised, and to observe the other purifications. And when some said
 one thing, and some another, I Peter stood up, and said unto them: "Men
 and brethren, ye know how that from ancient days God made choice among
 you that the Gentiles should hear the word of the Gospel by my mouth,
 and believe; and God, which knoweth the hearts, bare them witness.
 [3214] For an angel of the Lord appeared on a certain time to
 Cornelius, [3215] who was a centurion of the Roman government, and
 spake to him concerning me, that he should send for me, and hear the
 word of life from my mouth. He therefore sent for me from Joppa to
 Cæsarea Stratonis; and when I was ready to go to him, I would have
 eaten. And while they made ready I was in the upper room praying; and I
 saw heaven opened, and a vessel, knit at the four corners like a
 splendid sheet, let down to the earth, wherein were all manner of
 four-footed beasts, and creeping things of the earth, and fowls of the
 heaven. And there came a voice out of heaven to me, saying, Arise,
 Peter; kill, and eat. And I said, By no means, Lord: for I have never
 eaten anything common or unclean. And there came a voice a second time,
 saying, What God hath cleansed, that call not thou common. And this was
 done thrice, and the vessel was received up again into heaven. But as I
 doubted what this vision should mean, the Spirit said to me, Behold,
 men seek thee; but rise up, and go thy way with them, nothing doubting,
 for I have sent them. [3216] These men were those which came from the
 centurion, and so by reasoning I understood the word of the Lord which
 is written: Whosoever shall call on the name of the Lord shall be
 saved.' [3217] And again: All the ends of the earth shall remember, and
 turn unto the Lord, and all the families of the heathen shall worship
 before Him: for the kingdom is in the Lord's, and He is the governor of
 the nations.' [3218] And observing that there were expressions
 everywhere concerning the calling of the Gentiles, I rose up, and went
 with them, and entered into the man's house. And while I was preaching
 the word, the Holy Spirit fell upon him, and upon those that were with
 him, as it did upon us at the beginning; and He put no difference
 between us and them, purifying their hearts by faith. And I perceived
 that God is no respecter of persons; but that in every nation he that
 feareth Him, and worketh righteousness, will be accepted with Him. But
 even the believers which were of the circumcision were astonished at
 this. Now therefore why tempt ye God, to lay an heavy yoke upon the
 neck of the disciples, which neither we nor our fathers were able to
 bear? But by the grace of the Lord, we believe we shall be saved, even
 as they. [3219] For the Lord has loosed us from our bonds, and has made
 our burden light, and has loosed the heavy yoke from us by His
 clemency." While I spake these things, the whole multitude kept
 silence. But James the Lord's brother answered and said: "Men and
 brethren, hearken unto me; Simeon hath declared how God at first
 visited to take out a people from the Gentiles for His name. And to
 this agree the words of the prophets; as it is written: Afterwards I
 will return, and will raise again and rebuild the tabernacle of David,
 which is fallen down; and I will rebuild its ruins, and will again set
 it up, that the residue of men may seek after the Lord, and all the
 nations upon whom my name is called, saith the Lord, who doth these
 things.' [3220] Known unto God are all His works from the beginning of
 the world. Wherefore my sentence is, that we do not trouble those who
 from among the Gentiles turn unto God: but to charge them that they
 abstain from the pollutions of the Gentiles, and from what is
 sacrificed to idols, and from blood, and from things strangled, and
 from fornication; which laws were given to the ancients who lived
 before the law, under the law of nature, Enos, Enoch, Noah,
 Melchizedek, Job, and if there be any other of the same sort." [3221]
 Then it seemed good to us the apostles, and to James the bishop, and to
 the elders, with the whole Church, to send men chosen from among our
 own selves, with Barnabas, and Paul of Tarsus, the apostle of the
 Gentiles, and Judas who was called Barsabbas, and Silas, chief men
 among the brethren, and wrote by their hand, as follows: "The apostles,
 and elders, and brethren, [3222] to the brethren of Antioch, Syria, and
 Cilicia of the Gentiles, send greeting: Since we have heard that some
 from us have troubled you with words, subverting your souls, to whom we
 gave no such commandment, it has seemed good to us, when we were met
 together with one accord, to send chosen men to you, with our beloved
 Barnabas and Paul, men that have hazarded their lives for our Lord
 Jesus Christ, by whom ye sent unto us. We have sent also with them
 Judas and Silas, who shall themselves declare the same things by mouth.
 For it seemed good to the Holy Ghost, and to us, to lay no other burden
 upon you than these necessary things; that ye abstain from things
 offered to idols, and from blood, and from things strangled, and from
 fornication: from which things if ye keep yourselves, ye shall do well.
 Fare ye well." [3223] We accordingly sent this epistle; but we
 ourselves remained in Jerusalem many days, consulting together for the
 public benefit, for the well ordering of all things.

 That We Must Separate from Heretics.

 XIII. But after a long time we visited the brethren, and confirmed them
 with the word of piety, and charged them to avoid those who, under the
 name of Christ and Moses, war against Christ and Moses, and in the
 clothing of sheep hide the wolf. For these are false Christs, and false
 prophets, and false apostles, deceivers and corrupters, portions of
 foxes, the destroyers of the herbs of the vineyards: "for whose sake
 the love of many will wax cold. But he that endureth stedfast to the
 end, the same shall be saved." [3224] Concerning whom, that He might
 secure us, the Lord declared, saying: "There will come to you men in
 sheep's clothing, but inwardly they are ravening wolves. Ye shall know
 them by their fruits; take care of them. For false Christs and false
 prophets shall arise and shall deceive many." [3225]

 Who Were the Preachers of the Catholic Doctrine, and Which are the
 Commandments Given by Them.

 XIV. On whose account also we, who are now assembled in one
 place,--Peter and Andrew; James and John, sons of Zebedee; Philip and
 Bartholomew; Thomas and Matthew; James the son of Alphæus, and Lebbæus
 who is surnamed Thaddæus; and Simon the Canaanite, [3226] and Matthias,
 who instead of Judas was numbered with us; and James the brother of the
 Lord and bishop of Jerusalem, and Paul the teacher of the Gentiles, the
 chosen vessel, having all met together, have written to you this
 Catholic doctrine for the confirmation of you, to whom the oversight of
 the universal Church is committed: wherein we declare unto you, that
 there is only one God Almighty, besides whom there is no other, and
 that you must worship and adore Him alone, through Jesus Christ our
 Lord, in the most holy Spirit; [3227] that you are to make use of the
 sacred Scriptures, the law, and the prophets; to honour your parents;
 to avoid all unlawful actions; to believe the resurrection and the
 judgment, and to expect the retribution; and to use all His creatures
 with thankfulness, as the works of God, and having no evil in them; to
 marry after a lawful manner, for such marriage is unblameable. For "the
 woman is suited to the man by the Lord;" [3228] and the Lord says: "He
 that made them from the beginning, made them male and female; and said,
 For this cause shall a man leave his father and his mother, and shall
 cleave unto his wife: and they two shall be one flesh." [3229] Nor let
 it be esteemed lawful after marriage to put her away who is without
 blame. For says He: "Thou shalt take care to thy spirit, and shalt not
 forsake the wife of thy youth; for she is the partner [3230] of thy
 life, and the remains of thy spirit. I and no other have made her."
 [3231] For the Lord says: "What God has joined together, let no man put
 asunder." [3232] For the wife is the partner of life, united by God
 unto one body from two. But he that divides that again into two which
 is become one, is the enemy of the creation of God, and the adversary
 of His providence. In like manner, he that retains her that is
 corrupted is a transgressor of the law of nature; since "he that
 retains an adulteress is foolish and impious." [3233] For says He, "Cut
 her off from thy flesh;" [3234] for she is not an help, but a snare,
 bending her mind from thee to another. Nor be ye circumcised in your
 flesh, but let the circumcision which is of the heart by the Spirit
 suffice for the faithful; for He says, "Be ye circumcised to your God,
 and be circumcised in the foreskin of your heart." [3235]

 That We Ought Not to Rebaptize, Nor to Receive that Baptism Which is Given
 by the Ungodly, Which is Not Baptism, But a Pollution.

 XV. Be ye likewise contented with one baptism alone, that which is into
 the death of the Lord; not that which is conferred by wicked heretics,
 but that which is conferred by unblameable priests, "in the name of the
 Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost:" [3236] and let not that
 which comes from the ungodly be received by you, nor let that which is
 done by the godly be disannulled by a second. For as there is one God,
 one Christ, and one Comforter, and one death of the Lord in the body,
 so let that baptism which is unto Him be but one. But those that
 receive polluted baptism from the ungodly will become partners in their
 opinions. For they are not priests. For God says to them: "Because thou
 hast rejected knowledge, I will also reject thee from the office of a
 priest to me." [3237] Nor indeed are those that are baptized by them
 initiated, but are polluted, not receiving the remission of sins, but
 the bond of impiety. And, besides, they that attempt to baptize those
 already initiated crucify the Lord afresh, slay Him a second time,
 laugh at divine and ridicule holy things, affront the Spirit, dishonour
 the sacred blood of Christ as common blood, are impious against Him
 that sent, Him that suffered, and Him that witnessed. Nay, he that, out
 of contempt, will not be baptized, shall be condemned as an unbeliever,
 and shall be reproached as ungrateful and foolish. For the Lord says:
 "Except a man be baptized of water and of the Spirit, he shall by no
 means enter into the kingdom of heaven." [3238] And again: "He that
 believeth and is baptized shall be saved; but he that believeth not
 shall be damned." [3239] But he that says, When I am dying I will be
 baptized, lest I should sin and defile my baptism, is ignorant of God,
 and forgetful of his own nature. For "do not thou delay to turn unto
 the Lord, for thou knowest not what the next day will bring forth."
 [3240] Do you also baptize your infants, and bring them up in the
 nurture and admonition of God. For says He: "Suffer the little children
 to come unto me, and forbid them not." [3241]

 Concerning Books with False Inscriptions.

 XVI. We have sent all these things to you, that ye may know our
 opinion, what it is; and that ye may not receive those books which
 obtain in our name, but are written by the ungodly. For you are not to
 attend to the names of the apostles, but to the nature of the things,
 and their settled opinions. For we know that Simon and Cleobius, and
 their followers, have compiled poisonous books under the name of Christ
 and of His disciples, and do carry them about in order to deceive you
 who love Christ, and us His servants. And among the ancients also some
 have written apocryphal books of Moses, and Enoch, and Adam, and
 Isaiah, and David, and Elijah, and of the three patriarchs, pernicious
 and repugnant to the truth. The same things even now have the wicked
 heretics done, reproaching the creation, marriage, providence, the
 begetting of children, the law, and the prophets; inscribing certain
 barbarous names, and, as they think, of angels, but, to speak the
 truth, of demons, which suggest things to them: whose doctrine eschew,
 that ye may not be partakers of the punishment due to those that write
 such things for the seduction and perdition of the faithful and
 unblameable disciples of the Lord Jesus.

 Matrimonial Precepts Concerning Clergymen.

 XVII. We have already said, that a bishop, a presbyter, and a deacon,
 when they are constituted, must be but once married, whether their
 wives be alive or whether they be dead; and that it is not lawful for
 them, if they are unmarried when they are ordained, to be married
 afterwards; or if they be then married, to marry a second time, but to
 be content with that wife which they had when they came to ordination.
 [3242] We also appoint that the ministers, and singers, and readers,
 and porters, shall be only once married. But if they entered into the
 clergy before they were married, we permit them to marry, if they have
 an inclination thereto, lest they sin and incur punishment. [3243] But
 we do not permit any one of the clergy to take to wife either a
 courtesan, or a servant, or a widow, or one that is divorced, as also
 the law says. Let the deaconess be a pure virgin; or, at the least, a
 widow who has been but once married, faithful, and well esteemed.
 [3244]

 An Exhortation Commanding to Avoid the Communion of the Impious Heretics.

 XVIII. Receive ye the penitent, for this is the will of God in Christ.
 Instruct the catechumens in the elements of religion, and then baptize
 them. Eschew the antheistical heretics, who are past repentance, and
 separate them from the faithful, and excommunicate them from the Church
 of God, and charge the faithful to abstain entirely from them, and not
 to partake with them either in sermons or prayers: for these are those
 that are enemies to the Church, and lay snares for it; who corrupt the
 flock, and defile the heritage of Christ, pretenders only to wisdom,
 and the vilest of men; concerning whom Solomon the wise said: "The
 wicked doers pretend to act piously." For, says he, "there is a way
 which seemeth right to some, but the ends thereof look to the bottom of
 hell." [3245] These are they concerning whom the Lord declared His mind
 with bitterness and severity, saying that "they are false Christs and
 false teachers;" [3246] who have blasphemed the Spirit of grace, and
 done despite to the gift they had from Him after the grace of baptism,
 "to whom forgiveness shall not be granted, neither in this world nor in
 that which is to come;" [3247] who are both more wicked than the Jews
 and more atheistical than the Gentiles; who blaspheme the God over all,
 and tread under foot His Son, and do despite to the doctrine of the
 Spirit; who deny the words of God, or pretend hypocritically to receive
 them, to the affronting of God, and the deceiving of those that come
 among them; who abuse the Holy Scriptures, and as for righteousness,
 they do not so much as know what it is; who spoil the Church of God, as
 the "little foxes do the vineyard;" [3248] whom we exhort you to avoid,
 lest you lay traps for your own souls. "For he that walketh with wise
 men shall be wise, but he that walketh with the foolish shall be
 known." [3249] For we ought neither to run along with a thief, nor put
 in our lot with an adulterer; since holy David says: "O Lord, I have
 hated them that hate Thee, and I am withered away on account of Thy
 enemies. I hated them with a perfect hatred: they were to me as
 enemies." [3250] And God reproaches Jehoshaphat with his friendship
 towards Ahab, and his league with him and with Ahaziah, by Jonah the
 prophet: "Art thou in friendship with a sinner? Or dost thou aid him
 that is hated by the Lord?" [3251] "For this cause the wrath of the
 Lord would be upon thee suddenly, but that thy heart is found perfect
 with the Lord. For this cause the Lord hath spared thee; yet are thy
 works shattered, and thy ships broken to pieces." [3252] Eschew
 therefore their fellowship, and estrange yourselves from their
 friendship. For concerning them did the prophet declare, and say: "It
 is not lawful to rejoice with the ungodly," [3253] says the Lord. For
 these are hidden wolves, dumb dogs, that cannot bark, who at present
 are but few, but in process of time, when the end of the world draws
 nigh, will be more in number and more troublesome, of whom said the
 Lord, "Will the Son of man, when He comes, find faith on the earth?"
 [3254] and, "Because iniquity shall abound, the love of many shall wax
 cold;" and, "There shall come false Christs and false prophets, and
 shall show signs in the heaven, so as, if it were possible, to deceive
 the elect:" [3255] from whose deceit God, through Jesus Christ, who is
 our hope, will deliver us. For we ourselves, as we passed through the
 nations, and confirmed the churches, curing some with much exhortation
 and healing words, restored them again when they were in the certain
 way to death. But those that were incurable we cast out from the flock,
 that they might not infect the lambs, which were found with their
 scabby disease, but might continue before the Lord God pure and
 undefiled, sound and unspotted. And this we did in every city,
 everywhere through the whole world, and have left to you the bishops
 and to the rest of the priests this very Catholic doctrine worthily and
 righteously, as a memorial or confirmation to those who have believed
 in God; and we have sent it by our fellow-minister Clement, our most
 faithful and intimate son in the Lord, together with Barnabas, and
 Timothy our most dearly beloved son, and the genuine Mark, together
 with whom we recommend to you also Titus and Luke, and Jason and
 Lucius, and Sosipater. [3256]

 [3207] Gen. i. 31.

 [3208] Gen xlix. 10.

 [3209] Gen. xlix. 9

 [3210] Isa. xi. 1, ix. 6

 [3211] Acts xv

 [3212] Ps. cix. 8; Acts i. 20. [The name common to apostles and
 elders.]

 [3213] Acts xv. 1.

 [3214] Acts. xv. 7, 8.

 [3215] Acts x.

 [3216] Acts x. 13, etc.

 [3217] Joel ii. 32

 [3218] Ps. xxii. 27, 28

 [3219] Acts xi. 15, x. 34, 35, 45, xv. 9, 10

 [3220] Amos ix. 11

 [3221] Acts xv. 13, etc.

 [3222] [Compare Elucidation III. vol. v. [278]p. 411, this series.]

 [3223] Acts xv. 23, etc.

 [3224] Matt. xxiv. 12, 13.

 [3225] Matt. vii. 15, xxiv. 24.

 [3226] Matt. x. 2.

 [3227] One V. ms. reads as follows: "And our Lord Jesus Christ, and the
 most holy Spirit."

 [3228] Prov. xix. 14.

 [3229] Matt. xix. 4, 5.

 [3230] The words from "for she is the partner" to "made her" are
 omitted in one V. ms.

 [3231] Mal. ii. 15, 14

 [3232] Matt. xix. 6

 [3233] Prov. xviii. 22

 [3234] Ecclus. xxv. 26

 [3235] Jer. iv. 4

 [3236] Matt. xxviii. 19.

 [3237] Hos. iv. 6. [Compare vol. v. [279]p. 565, this series.]

 [3238] John iii. 5.

 [3239] Mark xvi. 16.

 [3240] Ecclus. v. 7; Prov. xxvii. 1, iii. 28.

 [3241] Matt. xix. 14.

 [3242] 1 Tim. iii. 2, 12; Tit. i. 6.

 [3243] [See Elucidation XIII. vol. v. [280]p. 160, this series.]

 [3244] Lev. xxi. 7, 14; 1 Tim. v. 9.

 [3245] Prov. xiv. 12.

 [3246] Matt. xxiv. 24.

 [3247] Matt. xii. 32.

 [3248] Vid. Cant. ii. 15.

 [3249] Prov. xiii. 20

 [3250] Ps. cxxxix. 21, 22

 [3251] 2 Chron. xix. 2

 [3252] 2 Chron. xx. 37

 [3253] Vid Isa. lvii. 21

 [3254] Luke xviii. 8.

 [3255] Matt. xxiv. 12, 24.

 [3256] Rom. xvi. 21.

 Sec. IV.--Of the Law.

 By whom also we exhort you in the Lord to abstain from your old
 conversation, vain bonds, separations, observances, distinction of
 meats, and daily washings: for "old things are passed away; behold, all
 things are become new." [3257]

 To Those that Speak Evil of the Law.

 XIX. For since ye have known God through Jesus Christ, and all His
 dispensation, as it has been from the beginning, that He gave a plain
 law to assist the law of nature, [3258] such a one as is pure, saving,
 and holy, in which His own name was inscribed, [3259] perfect, which is
 never to fail, being complete in ten commands, unspotted, converting
 souls; [3260] which, when the Hebrews forgot, He put them in mind of it
 by the prophet Malachi, saying, "Remember ye the law of Moses, the man
 of God, who gave you in charge commandments and ordinances." [3261]
 Which law is so very holy and righteous, that even our Saviour, when on
 a certain time He healed one leper, and afterwards nine, said to the
 first, "Go, show thyself to the high priest, and offer the gift which
 Moses commanded for a testimony unto them;" [3262] and afterwards to
 the nine, "Go, show yourselves to the priests." [3263] For He nowhere
 has dissolved the law, as Simon pretends, but fulfilled it; for He
 says: "One iota, or one tittle, shall not pass from the law until all
 be fulfilled." For says He, "I come not to dissolve the law, but to
 fulfil it." [3264] For Moses himself, who was at once the lawgiver, and
 the high priest, and the prophet, and the king, and Elijah, the zealous
 follower of the prophets, were present at our Lord's transfiguration in
 the mountain, [3265] and witnesses of His incarnation and of His
 sufferings, as the intimate friends of Christ, but not as enemies and
 strangers. Whence it is demonstrated that the law is good and holy, as
 also the prophets.

 Which is the Law of Nature, and Which is that Afterwards Introduced, and
 Why It Was Introduced.

 XX. Now the law is the decalogue, which the Lord promulgated to them
 with an audible voice, [3266] before the people made that calf which
 represented the Egyptian Apis. [3267] And the law is righteous, and
 therefore is it called the law, because judgments are thence made
 according to the law of nature, which the followers of Simon abuse,
 supposing they shall not be judged thereby, and so shall escape
 punishment. This law is good, holy, and such as lays no compulsion in
 things positive. For He says: "If thou wilt make me an altar, thou
 shalt make it of earth." [3268] It does not say, "Make one," but, "If
 thou wilt make." It does not impose a necessity, but gives leave to
 their own free liberty. For God does not stand in need of sacrifices,
 being by nature above all want. But knowing that, as of old, Abel,
 beloved of God, and Noah and Abraham, and those that succeeded, without
 being required, but only moved of themselves by the law of nature, did
 offer sacrifice to God out of a grateful mind; so He did now permit the
 Hebrews, not commanding, but, if they had a mind, permitting them; and
 if they offered from a right intention, showing Himself pleased with
 their sacrifices. Therefore He says: "If thou desirest to offer, do not
 offer to me as to one that stands in need of it, for I stand in need of
 nothing; for the world is mine, and the fulness thereof." [3269] But
 when this people became forgetful of that, and called upon a calf as
 God, instead of the true God, and to him did ascribe the cause of their
 coming out of Egypt, saying, "These are thy gods, O Israel, which have
 brought thee out of the land of Egypt;" [3270] and when these men had
 committed wickedness with the "similitude of a calf that eateth hay;"
 and denied God who had visited them by Moses [3271] in their
 afflictions, and had done signs with his hand and rod, and had smitten
 the Egyptians with ten plagues; who had divided the waters of the Red
 Sea into two parts; who had led them in the midst of the water, as a
 horse upon the ground; who had drowned their enemies, and those that
 laid wait for them; who at Marah had made sweet the bitter fountain;
 who had brought water out of the sharp rock till they were satisfied;
 who had overshadowed them with a pillar of a cloud on account of the
 immoderate heat, and with a pillar of fire which enlightened and guided
 them when they knew not which way they were to go; who gave them manna
 from heaven, and gave them quails for flesh from the sea; [3272] who
 gave them the law in the mountain; whose voice He had vouchsafed to let
 them hear; Him did they deny, and said to Aaron, "Make us gods who
 shall go before us;" [3273] and they made a molten calf, and sacrificed
 to an idol;--then was God angry, as being ungratefully treated by them,
 and bound them with bonds which could not be loosed, with a mortifying
 burden and a hard collar, and no longer said, "If thou makest," but,
 "Make an altar," and sacrifice perpetually; for thou art forgetful and
 ungrateful. Offer burnt-offerings therefore continually, that thou
 mayest be mindful of me. For since thou hast wickedly abused thy power,
 I lay a necessity upon thee for the time to come, and I command thee to
 abstain from certain meats; and I ordain thee the distinction of clean
 and unclean creatures, although every creature is good, as being made
 by me; and I appoint thee several separations, purgations, frequent
 washings and sprinklings, several purifications, and several times of
 rest; and if thou neglectest any of them, I determine that punishment
 which is proper to the disobedient, that being pressed and galled by
 thy collar, thou mayest depart from the error of polytheism, and laying
 aside that, "These are thy gods, O Israel," [3274] mayest be mindful of
 that, "Hear, O Israel, the Lord thy God is one Lord;" [3275] and mayest
 run back again to that law which is inserted by me in the nature of all
 men, "that there is only one God in heaven and on earth, and to love
 Him with all thy heart, and all thy might, and all thy mind," and to
 fear none but Him, nor to admit the names of other gods into thy mind,
 nor to let thy tongue utter them out of thy mouth. He bound them for
 the hardness of their hearts, that by sacrificing, and resting, and
 purifying themselves, and by similar observances, they might come to
 the knowledge of God, who ordained these things for them.

 That We Who Believe in Christ are Under Grace, and Not Under the Servitude
 of that Additional Law.

 XXI. "But blessed are your eyes, for they see; and your ears, for they
 hear." [3276] Yours, I say, who have believed in the one God, not by
 necessity, but by a sound understanding, in obedience to Him that
 called you. For you are released from the bonds, and freed from the
 servitude. For says He: [3277] "I call you no longer servants, but
 friends; for all things that I have heard of my Father have I made
 known unto you." [3278] For to them that would not see nor hear, not
 for the want of those senses, but for the excess of their wickedness,
 "I gave statutes that were not good, and judgments whereby they would
 not live;" [3279] they are looked upon as not good, as burnings and a
 sword, and medicines are esteemed enemies by the sick, and impossible
 to be observed on account of their obstinacy: whence also they brought
 death upon them being not obeyed.

 That the Law for Sacrifices is Additional, Which Christ When He Came Took
 Away.

 XXII. You therefore are blessed who are delivered from the curse, For
 Christ, the Son of God, by His coming has confirmed and completed the
 law, but has taken away the additional precepts, although not all of
 them, yet at least the more grievous ones; having confirmed the former,
 and abolished the latter, and has again set the free-will of man at
 liberty, not subjecting him to the penalty of a temporal death, but
 giving laws to him according to another constitution. Wherefore He
 says: "If any man will come after me, let him come." [3280] And again:
 "Will ye also go away?" [3281] And besides, before His coming He
 refused the sacrifices of the people, while they frequently offered
 them, when they sinned against Him, and thought He was to be appeased
 by sacrifices, but not by repentance. For thus He speaks: "Why dost
 thou bring to me frankincense from Saba, and cinnamon from a remote
 land? Your burnt-offerings are not acceptable, and your sacrifices are
 not sweet to me." [3282] And afterwards: "Gather your burnt-offerings,
 together with your sacrifices, and eat flesh. For I did not command
 you, when I brought you out of the land of Egypt, concerning
 burnt-offerings and sacrifices." [3283] And He says by Isaiah: "To what
 purpose do ye bring me a multitude of sacrifices? saith the Lord. I am
 full of the burnt-offerings of rams, and I will not accept the fat of
 lambs, and the blood of bulls and of goats. Nor do you come and appear
 before me; for who hath required these things at your hands? Do not go
 on to tread my courts any more. If you bring me fine flour, it is vain:
 incense is an abomination unto me: your new moons, and your Sabbaths,
 and your great day, I cannot bear them: your fasts, and your rests, and
 your feasts, my soul hateth them; I am over-full of them." [3284] And
 He says by another: "Depart from me; the sound of thine hymns, and the
 psalms of thy musical instruments, I will not hear." [3285] And Samuel
 says to Saul, when he thought to sacrifice: "Obedience is better than
 sacrifice, and hearkening than the fat of rams. For, behold, the Lord
 does not so much delight in sacrifice, as in obeying Him." [3286] And
 He says by David: "I will take no calves out of thine house, nor
 he-goats out of thy flock. If I should be hungry, I would not tell
 thee; for the whole world is mine, and the fulness thereof. Shall I eat
 the flesh of bulls, or drink the blood of goats? Sacrifice to God the
 sacrifice of praise, and pay thy vows to the Most High." [3287] And in
 all the Scriptures in like manner He refuses their sacrifices on
 account of their sinning against Him. For "the sacrifices of the
 impious are an abomination with the Lord, since they offer them in an
 unlawful manner." [3288] And again: "Their sacrifices are to them as
 bread of lamentation; all that eat of them shall be defiled." [3289]
 If, therefore, before His coining He sought for "a clean heart and a
 contrite spirit" [3290] more than sacrifices, much rather would He
 abrogate those sacrifices, I mean those by blood, when He came. Yet He
 so abrogated them as that He first fulfilled them. For He was both
 circumcised, and sprinkled, and offered sacrifices and whole
 burnt-offerings, and made use of the rest of their customs. And He that
 was the Lawgiver became Himself the fulfilling of the law; not taking
 away the law of nature, but abrogating those additional laws that were
 afterwards introduced, although not all of them neither.

 How Christ Became a Fulfiller of the Law, and What Parts of It He Put a
 Period To, or Changed, or Transferred.

 XXIII. For He did not take away the law of nature, but confirmed it.
 For He that said in the law, "The Lord thy God is one Lord;" [3291] the
 same says in the Gospel, "That they might know Thee, the only true
 God." [3292] And He that said, "Thou shalt love thy neighbour as
 thyself," [3293] says in the Gospel, renewing the same precept, "A new
 commandment I give unto you, that ye love one another." [3294] He who
 then forbade murder, does now forbid causeless anger. [3295] He that
 forbade adultery, does now forbid all unlawful lust. He that forbade
 stealing, now pronounces him most happy who supplies those that are in
 want out of his own labours. [3296] He that forbade hatred, now
 pronounces him blessed that loves his enemies. [3297] He that forbade
 revenge, now commands long-suffering; [3298] not as if just revenge
 were an unrighteous thing, but because long-suffering is more
 excellent. Nor did He make laws to root out our natural passions, but
 only to forbid the excess of them. [3299] He who had commanded to
 honour our parents, was Himself subject to them. [3300] He who had
 commanded to keep the Sabbath, by resting thereon for the sake of
 meditating on the laws, has now commanded us to consider of the law of
 creation, and of providence every day, and to return thanks to God. He
 abrogated circumcision when He had Himself fulfilled it. For He it was
 "to whom the inheritance was reserved, who was the expectation of the
 nations." [3301] He who made a law for swearing rightly, and forbade
 perjury, has now charged us not to swear at all. [3302] He has in
 several ways changed baptism, sacrifice, the priesthood, and the divine
 service, which was confined to one place: for instead of daily
 baptisms, He has given only one, which is that into His death. Instead
 of one tribe, He has appointed that out of every nation the best should
 be ordained for the priesthood; and that not their bodies should be
 examined for blemishes, but their religion and their lives. Instead of
 a bloody sacrifice, He has appointed that reasonable and unbloody
 mystical one of His body and blood, which is performed to represent the
 death of the Lord by symbols. Instead of the divine service confined to
 one place, He has commanded and appointed that He should be glorified
 from sunrising to sunsetting in every place of His dominion. [3303] He
 did not therefore take away the law from us, but the bonds. For
 concerning the law Moses says: "Thou shalt meditate on the word which I
 command thee, sitting in thine house, and rising up, and walking in the
 way." [3304] And David says: "His delight is in the law of the Lord,
 and in His law will he meditate day and night." [3305] For everywhere
 would he have us subject to His laws, but not transgressors of them.
 For says He: "Blessed are the undefiled in the way, who walk in the law
 of the Lord. Blessed are they that search out His testimonies; with
 their whole heart shall they seek Him." [3306] And again: "Blessed are
 we, O Israel, because those things that are pleasing to God are known
 to us." [3307] And the Lord says: "If ye know these things, happy are
 ye if ye do them." [3308]

 That It Pleased the Lord that the Law of Righteousness Should Be
 Demonstrated by the Romans.

 XXIV. Nor does He desire that the law of righteousness should only be
 demonstrated by us; but He is pleased that it should appear and shine
 by means of the Romans. For these Romans, believing in the Lord, left
 off their polytheism and injustice, and entertain the good, and punish
 the bad. But they hold the Jews under tribute, and do not suffer them
 to make use of their own ordinances.

 How God, on Account of Their Impiety Towards Christ, Made the Jews
 Captives, and Placed Them Under Tribute.

 XXV. Because, indeed, they drew servitude upon themselves voluntarily,
 when they said, "We have no king but Cæsar;" [3309] and, "If we do not
 slay Christ, all men will believe in Him, and the Romans will come and
 will take away both our place and nation." [3310] And so they
 prophesied unwittingly. For accordingly the nations believed on Him,
 and they themselves were deprived by the Romans of their power, and of
 their legal worship; and they have been forbidden to slay whom they
 please, and to sacrifice when they will. Wherefore they are accursed,
 as not able to perform the things they are commanded to do. For says
 He: "Cursed be he that does not continue in all things that are written
 in the book of the law to do them." [3311] Now it is impossible in
 their dispersion, while they are among the heathen, for them to perform
 all things in their law. For the divine Moses forbids both to rear an
 altar out of Jerusalem, and to read the law out of the bounds of Judea.
 [3312] Let us therefore follow Christ, that we may inherit His
 blessings. Let us walk after the law and the prophets by the Gospel.
 Let us eschew the worshippers of many gods, and the murderers of
 Christ, and the murderers of the prophets, and the wicked and
 atheistical heretics. Let us be obedient to Christ as to our King, as
 having authority to change several constitutions, and having, as a
 legislator, wisdom to make new constitutions in different
 circumstances; yet so that everywhere the laws of nature be immutably
 preserved.

 [3257] 2 Cor. v. 17.

 [3258] Isa. viii. 20, LXX.

 [3259] Deut. xii. 5

 [3260] Ps. xix. 7

 [3261] Mal. iv. 4

 [3262] Matt. viii. 4; Mark i. 44.

 [3263] Luke xvii. 14.

 [3264] Matt. v. 18, 17.

 [3265] Luke ix. 30

 [3266] Ex. xx

 [3267] Ex. xxxii.

 [3268] Ex. xx. 24

 [3269] Ps. l. 12

 [3270] Ex. xxxii. 4

 [3271] Ex. iv., etc.

 [3272] Num. xi. 31

 [3273] Ex. xxxii. 1

 [3274] Ex. xxxii. 4

 [3275] Deut. vi. 4

 [3276] Matt. xiii. 16.

 [3277] One V. ms. reads: "Thus also said the Lord to us His disciples."

 [3278] John xv. 15.

 [3279] Ezek. xx. 25.

 [3280] Matt. xvi. 24.

 [3281] John vi. 67.

 [3282] Jer. vi. 20.

 [3283] Jer. vii. 21, 22.

 [3284] Isa. i. 11, etc.

 [3285] Amos v. 23

 [3286] 1 Sam. xv. 22

 [3287] Ps. l. 9, 12, etc.

 [3288] Prov. xxi. 27

 [3289] Hos. ix. 4

 [3290] Ps. li. 10, 17

 [3291] Deut. vi. 4

 [3292] John xvii. 3.

 [3293] Lev. xix. 18.

 [3294] John xiii. 34.

 [3295] Matt. v. 22.

 [3296] Acts xx. 35.

 [3297] Matt. v. 7.

 [3298] Matt. v. 43.

 [3299] Matt. v. 38.

 [3300] Luke ii. 51.

 [3301] Gen. xlix. 10.

 [3302] Matt. v. 33.

 [3303] Ps. cxiii. 3; Mal. i. 11

 [3304] Deut. vi. 6

 [3305] Ps. i. 2

 [3306] Ps. cxix. 1, 2.

 [3307] Bar. iv. 4.

 [3308] John xiii. 17.

 [3309] John xix. 15.

 [3310] John xi. 48.

 [3311] Deut. xxvii. 26; Gal. iii. 10

 [3312] Deut. xii. [See on Liturgies, infra.]

 Sec. V.--The Teaching of the Apostles in Opposition to Jewish and Gentile
 Superstitions, Especially in Regard to Marriage and Funerals.

 That We Ought to Avoid the Heretics as the Corrupters of Souls.

 XXVI. Do you therefore, O bishops, and ye of the laity, avoid all
 heretics who abuse the law and the prophets. For they are enemies to
 God Almighty, and disobey Him, and do not confess Christ to be the Son
 of God. For they also deny His generation according to the flesh; they
 are ashamed of the cross; they abuse His passion and His death; they
 know not His resurrection; they take away His generation before all
 ages. Nay, some of them are impious after another manner, imagining the
 Lord to be a mere man, supposing Him to consist of a soul and body. But
 others of them suppose that Jesus Himself is the God over all, and
 glorify Him as His own Father, and suppose Him to be both the Son and
 the Comforter; than which doctrines what can be more detestable?
 Others, again, of them do refuse certain meats, and say that marriage
 with the procreation of children is evil, and the contrivance of the
 devil; and being ungodly themselves, they are not willing to rise again
 from the dead on account of their wickedness. Wherefore also they
 ridicule the resurrection, and say, We are holy people, unwilling to
 eat and to drink; and they fancy that they shall rise again from the
 dead demons without flesh, who shall be condemned for ever in eternal
 fire. Fly therefore from them, lest ye perish with them in their
 impieties.

 Of Some Jewish and Gentile Observances.

 XXVII. Now if any persons keep to the Jewish customs and observances
 concerning the natural emission and nocturnal pollutions, and the
 lawful conjugal acts, [3313] let them tell us whether in those hours or
 days, when they undergo any such thing, they observe not to pray, or to
 touch a Bible, or to partake of the Eucharist? And if they own it to be
 so, it is plain they are void of the Holy Spirit, which always
 continues with the faithful. For concerning holy persons Solomon says:
 "That every one may prepare himself, that so when he sleeps it may keep
 him, and when he arises it may talk with him." [3314] For if thou
 thinkest, O woman, when thou art seven days in thy separation, that
 thou art void of the Holy Spirit, then if thou shouldest die suddenly
 thou wilt depart void of the Spirit, and without assured hope in God;
 or else thou must imagine that the Spirit always is inseparable from
 thee, as not being in a place. But thou standest in need of prayer and
 the Eucharist, and the coming of the Holy Ghost, as having been guilty
 of no fault in this matter. For neither lawful mixture, nor
 child-bearing, nor the menstrual purgation, nor nocturnal pollution,
 can defile the nature of a man, or separate the Holy Spirit from him.
 Nothing but impiety and unlawful practice can do that. For the Holy
 Spirit always abides with those that are possessed of it, so long as
 they are worthy; and those from whom it is departed, it leaves them
 desolate, and exposed to the wicked spirit. Now every man is filled
 either with the holy or with the unclean spirit; and it is not possible
 to avoid the one or the other, unless they can receive opposite
 spirits. For the Comforter hates every lie, and the devil hates all
 truth. But every one that is baptized agreeably to the truth is
 separated from the diabolical spirit, and is under the Holy Spirit; and
 the Holy Spirit remains with him so long as he is doing good, and fills
 him with wisdom and understanding, and suffers not the wicked spirit to
 approach him, but watches over his goings. Thou therefore, O woman, if,
 as thou sayest, in the days of thy separation thou art void of the Holy
 Spirit, thou art then filled with the unclean one; for by neglecting to
 pray and to read thou wilt invite him to thee, though he were
 unwilling. For this spirit, of all others, loves the ungrateful, the
 slothful, the careless, and the drowsy, since he himself by ingratitude
 was distempered with evil mind, and was thereby deprived by God his
 dignity; having rather chosen to be a devil than an archangel.
 Wherefore, O woman, eschew such vain words, and be ever mindful of God
 that created thee, and pray to Him. For He is thy Lord, and the Lord of
 the universe; and meditate in His laws without observing any such
 things, such as the natural purgation, lawful mixture, child-birth, a
 miscarriage, or a blemish of the body; since such observations are the
 vain inventions of foolish men, and such inventions as have no sense in
 them. Neither the burial of a man, nor a dead man's bone, nor a
 sepulchre, nor any particular sort of food, nor the nocturnal
 pollution, can defile the soul of man; but only impiety towards God,
 and transgression, and injustice towards one's neighbour; I mean
 rapine, violence, or if there be anything contrary to His
 righteousness, adultery or fornication. Wherefore, beloved, avoid and
 eschew such observations, for they are heathenish. For we do not
 abominate a dead man, as do they, seeing we hope that he will live
 again. Nor do we hate lawful mixture; for it is their practice to act
 impiously in such instances. For the conjunction of man and wife, if it
 be with righteousness, is agreeable to the mind of God. "For He that
 made them at the beginning made them male and female; and He blessed
 them, and said, Increase and multiply, and fill the earth." [3315] If,
 therefore, the difference of sexes was made by the will of God for the
 generation of multitudes, then must the conjunction of male and female
 be also acceptable to His mind.

 Of the Love of Boys, Adultery, and Fornication.

 XXVIII. But we do not say so of that mixture that is contrary to
 nature, or of any unlawful practice; for such are enmity to God. For
 the sin of Sodom is contrary to nature, as is also that with brute
 beasts. But adultery and fornication are against the law; the one
 whereof is impiety, the other injustice, and, in a word, no other than
 a great sin. But neither sort of them is without its punishment in its
 own proper nature. For the practisers of one sort attempt the
 dissolution of the world, and endeavour to make the natural course of
 things to change for one that is unnatural; but those of the second
 sort--the adulterers--are unjust by corrupting others' marriages, and
 dividing into two what God hath made one, rendering the children
 suspected, and exposing the true husband to the snares of others. And
 fornication is the destruction of one's own flesh, not being made use
 of for the procreation of children, but entirely for the sake of
 pleasure, which is a mark of incontinency, and not a sign of virtue.
 All these things are forbidden by the laws; for thus say the oracles:
 "Thou shalt not lie with mankind as with womankind." [3316] "For such a
 one is accursed, and ye shall stone them with stones: they have wrought
 abomination." [3317] "Every one that lieth with a beast, slay ye him:
 he has wrought wickedness in his people." [3318] "And if any one defile
 a married woman, slay ye them both: they have wrought wickedness; they
 are guilty; let them die." [3319] And afterwards: "There shall not be a
 fornicator among the children of Israel, and there shall not be an
 whore among the daughters of Israel. Thou shalt not offer the hire of
 an harlot to the Lord thy God upon the altar, nor the price of a dog."
 [3320] "For the vows arising from the hire of an harlot are not clean."
 [3321] These things the laws have forbidden, but they have honoured
 marriage, and have called it blessed, since God has blessed it who
 joined male and female together. [3322] And wise Solomon somewhere
 says: "A wife is suited to her husband by the Lord." [3323] And David
 says: "Thy wife is like a flourishing vine in the sides of thine house;
 thy children like olive-branches round about thy table. Behold, thus
 shall the man be blessed that feareth the Lord." [3324] Wherefore
 "marriage is honourable" [3325] and comely, and the begetting of
 children pure, for there is no evil in that which is good. Therefore
 neither is the natural purgation abominable before God, who has ordered
 it to happen to women within the space of thirty days for their
 advantage and healthful state, who do less move about, and keep usually
 at home in the house. Nay, moreover, even in the Gospel, when the woman
 with the perpetual purgation of blood [3326] touched the saving border
 of the Lord's garment in hope of being healed, He was not angry at her,
 nor did complain of her at all; but, on the contrary, He healed her,
 saying, "Thy faith hath saved thee." When the natural purgations do
 appear in the wives, let not their husbands approach them, out of
 regard to the children to be begotten; for the law has forbidden it,
 for it says: "Thou shalt not come near thy wife when she is in her
 separation." [3327] Nor, indeed, let them frequent their wives' company
 when they are with child. [3328] For they do this not for the begetting
 of children, but for the sake of pleasure. Now a lover of God ought not
 to be a lover of pleasure.

 How Wives Ought to Be Subject to Their Own Husbands, and Husbands Ought to
 Love Their Own Wives.

 XXXIX. Ye wives, be subject to your own husbands, and have them in
 esteem, and serve them with fear and love, as holy Sarah honoured
 Abraham. For she could not endure to call him by his name, but called
 him lord, when she said, "My lord is old." [3329] In like manner, ye
 husbands, love your own wives as your own members, as partners in life,
 and fellow-helpers for the procreation of children. For says He,
 "Rejoice with the wife of thy youth. Let her conversation be to thee as
 a loving hind, and a pleasant foal; let her alone guide thee, and be
 with thee at all times: for if thou beest every way encompassed with
 her friendship, thou wilt be happy in her society." [3330] Love them
 therefore as your own members, as your very bodies; for so it is
 written, "The Lord has testified between thee and between the wife of
 thy youth; and she is thy partner, and another has not made her: and
 she is the remains of thy spirit;" and, "Take heed to your spirit, and
 do not forsake the wife of thy youth." [3331] An husband, therefore,
 and a wife, when they company together in lawful marriage, and rise
 from one another, may pray without any observations, and without
 washing are clean. But whosoever corrupts and defiles another man's
 wife, or is defiled with an harlot, when he arises up from her, though
 he should wash himself in the entire ocean and all the rivers, cannot
 be clean.

 [3313] Lev. xv.

 [3314] Prov. vi. 22.

 [3315] Matt. xix. 4; Gen. i. 28.

 [3316] Lev. xviii. 22

 [3317] Lev. xx. 13

 [3318] Ex. xxii. 19

 [3319] Lev. xx. 10; Deut. xxii. 22

 [3320] Deut. xxiii. 17, 18

 [3321] Prov. xix. 13, LXX.

 [3322] Gen. i. 28

 [3323] Prov. xix. 14

 [3324] Ps. cxxviii. 3, 4

 [3325] Heb. xiii. 4

 [3326] Matt ix. 22

 [3327] Lev. xviii. 19; Ezek. xviii. 6.

 [3328] [But if this be otherwise done, it may be well to compare
 Lactantius as to a question of actual crime. See p. 190, n. 1, supra.]

 [3329] 1 Pet. iii. 6

 [3330] Prov. v. 18, etc.

 [3331] Mal. ii. 14, 15, 16

 Sec. VI.--Conclusion of the Work.

 That It is the Custom of Jews and Gentiles to Observe Natural Purgations,
 and to Abominate the Remains of the Dead; But that All This is Contrary to
 Christianity.

 XXX. Do not therefore keep any such observances about legal and natural
 purgations, as thinking you are defiled by them. Neither do you seek
 after Jewish separations, or perpetual washings, or purifications upon
 the touch of a dead body. But without such observations assemble in the
 dormitories, reading the holy books, and singing for the martyrs which
 are fallen asleep, and for all the saints from the beginning of the
 world, and for your brethren that are asleep in the Lord, and offer the
 acceptable Eucharist, the representation of the royal body of Christ,
 both in your churches and in the dormitories; and in the funerals of
 the departed, accompany them with singing, if they were faithful in
 Christ. For "precious in the sight of the Lord is the death of His
 saints." [3332] And again: "O my soul, return unto thy rest, for the
 Lord hath done thee good." [3333] And elsewhere: "The memory of the
 just is with encomiums." [3334] And, "The souls of the righteous are in
 the hands of God." [3335] For those that have believed in God, although
 they are asleep, are not dead. For our Saviour says to the Sadducees:
 "But concerning the resurrection of the dead, have ye not read that
 which is written, I am the God of Abraham, and the God of Isaac, and
 the God of Jacob? God, therefore, is not the God of the dead, but of
 the living; for all live to Him." [3336] Wherefore, of those that live
 with God, even their very relics are not without honour. For even
 Elisha the prophet, after he was fallen asleep, raised up a dead man
 who was slain by the pirates of Syria. [3337] For his body touched the
 bones of Elisha, and he arose and revived. Now this would not have
 happened unless the body of Elisha were holy. And chaste Joseph
 embraced Jacob after he was dead upon his bed; [3338] and Moses and
 Joshua the son of Nun carried away the relics of Joseph, [3339] and did
 not esteem it a defilement. Whence you also, O bishops, and the rest,
 who without such observances touch the departed, ought not to think
 yourselves defiled. Nor abhor the relics of such persons, but avoid
 such observances, for they are foolish. And adorn yourselves with
 holiness and chastity, that ye may become partakers of immortality, and
 partners of the kingdom of God, and may receive the promise of God, and
 may rest for ever, through Jesus Christ our Saviour.

 To Him, therefore, who is able to open the ears of your hearts to the
 receiving the oracles of God administered to you both by the Gospel and
 by the teaching of Jesus Christ of Nazareth; who was crucified under
 Pontius Pilate and Herod, and died, and rose again from the dead, and
 will come again at the end of the world with power and great glory, and
 will raise the dead, and put an end to this world, and distribute to
 every one according to his deserts: to Him that has given us Himself
 for an earnest of the resurrection; who was taken up into the heavens
 by the power of His God and Father in our sight, who ate and drank with
 Him for forty days after He arose from the dead; who is sat down on the
 right hand of the throne of the majesty of Almighty God upon the
 cherubim; to whom it was said, "Sit Thou on my right hand, until I make
 Thine enemies Thy footstool;" [3340] whom the most blessed Stephen saw
 standing at the right hand of power, and cried out, and said, "Behold,
 I see the heavens opened, and the Son of man standing at the right hand
 of God," [3341] as the High Priest of all the rational orders,--through
 Him, worship, and majesty, and glory be given to Almighty God, both now
 and for evermore. [3342] Amen.

 [3332] Ps. cxvi. 15.

 [3333] Ps. cxvi. 7.

 [3334] Prov. x. 7.

 [3335] Wisd. iii. 1.

 [3336] Ex. iii. 6; Luke xx. 38.

 [3337] 2 Kings xiii. 21

 [3338] Gen. l. 1

 [3339] Ex. xiii. 19; Josh. xxiv. 32.

 [3340] Ps. cx. 1.

 [3341] Acts vii. 56.

 [3342] One V. ms. reads: "to Him be worship, and majesty, and glory,
 along with the Father and the co-eternal Spirit, for ever and ever.
 Amen."


constitutions of the holy apostles

  Book VII.

  Concerning the Christian Life, and the Eucharist, and the Initiation into
  Christ.

 Sec. I.--On the Two Ways, [3343] --The Way of Life and the Way of Death.

 That There are Two Ways,--The One Natural, of Life, and the Other
 Introduced Afterwards, of Death; And that the Former is from God, and the
 Latter of Error, from the Snares of the Adversary.

 I. The lawgiver Moses said to the Israelites, "Behold, I have set
 before your face the way of life and the way of death;" [3344] and
 added, "Choose life, that thou mayest live." [3345] Elijah the prophet
 also said to the people: "How long will you halt with both your legs?
 If the Lord be God, follow Him." [3346] The Lord Jesus also said
 justly: "No one can serve two masters: for either he will hate the one,
 and love the other; or else he will hold to the one, and despise the
 other." [3347] We also, following our teacher Christ, "who is the
 Saviour of all men, especially of those that believe," [3348] are
 obliged to say that there are two ways--the one of life, the other of
 death; [3349] which have no comparison one with another, for they are
 very different, [3350] or rather entirely separate; and the way of life
 is that of nature, but that of death was afterwards introduced,--it not
 being according to the mind of God, but from the snares of the
 adversary. [3351]

 Moral Exhortations of the Lord's Constitutions Agreeing with the Ancient
 Prohibitions of the Divine Laws. The Prohibition of Anger, Spite,
 Corruption, Adultery, and Every Forbidden Action.

 II. The first way, therefore, is that of life; and is this, [3352]
 which the law also does appoint: "To love the Lord God with all thy
 mind, and with all thy soul, who is the one and only God, besides whom
 there is no other;" [3353] "and thy neighbour as thyself." [3354] And
 whatsoever thou wouldest not should be done to thee, that do not thou
 to another." [3355] "Bless them that curse you; pray for them that
 despitefully use you." [3356] "Love your enemies; for what thanks is it
 if ye love those that love you? for even the Gentiles do the same."
 [3357] "But do ye love those that hate you, and ye shall have no
 enemy." For says He, "Thou shalt not hate any man; no, not an Egyptian,
 nor an Edomite;" [3358] for they are all the workmanship of God. Avoid
 not the persons, but the sentiments, of the wicked. "Abstain from
 fleshly and worldly lusts." [3359] "If any one gives thee a stroke on
 thy right cheek, turn to him the other also." [3360] Not that revenge
 is evil, but that patience is more honourable. For David says, "If I
 have made returns to them that repaid me evil." [3361] "If any one
 compel thee to go a mile, go with him twain." [3362] And, "He that will
 sue thee at the law, and take away thy coat, let him have thy cloak
 also." [3363] "And from him that taketh thy goods, require them not
 again." [3364] "Give to him that asketh thee, and from him that would
 borrow of thee do not shut thy hand." [3365] For "the righteous man is
 pitiful, and lendeth." [3366] For your Father would have you give to
 all, who Himself "maketh His sun to rise on the evil and on the good,
 and sendeth His rain on the just and on the unjust." [3367] It is
 therefore reasonable to give to all out of thine own labours; for says
 He, "Honour the Lord out of thy righteous labours," [3368] but so that
 the saints be preferred. [3369] "Thou shalt not kill;" [3370] that is,
 thou shalt not destroy a man like thyself: for thou dissolvest what was
 well made. Not as if all killing were wicked, but only that of the
 innocent: but the killing which is just is reserved to the magistrates
 alone. "Thou shalt not commit adultery:" for thou dividest one flesh
 into two. "They two shall be one flesh:" [3371] for the husband and
 wife are one in nature, in consent, in union, in disposition, and the
 conduct of life; but they are separated in sex and number. "Thou shall
 not corrupt boys:" [3372] for this wickedness is contrary to nature,
 and arose from Sodom, which was therefore entirely consumed with fire
 sent from God. [3373] "Let such a one be accursed: and all the people
 shall say, So be it." [3374] "Thou shall not commit fornication:" for
 says He, "There shall not be a fornicator among the children of
 Israel." [3375] "Thou shalt not steal:" for Achan, when he had stolen
 in Israel at Jericho, was stoned to death; [3376] and Gehazi, who
 stole, and told a lie, inherited the leprosy of Naaman; [3377] and
 Judas, who stole the poor's money, betrayed the Lord of glory to the
 Jews, [3378] and repented, and hanged himself, and burst asunder in the
 midst, and all his bowels gushed out; [3379] and Ananias, and Sapphira
 his wife, who stole their own goods, and "tempted the Spirit of the
 Lord," were immediately, at the sentence of Peter our fellow-apostle,
 struck dead. [3380]

 The Prohibition of Conjuring, Murder of Infants, Perjury, and False
 Witness.

 III. Thou shalt not use magic. [3381] Thou shalt not use witchcraft;
 for He says, "Ye shall not suffer a witch to live." [3382] Thou shall
 not slay thy child by causing abortion, nor kill that which is
 begotten; for "everything that is shaped, and has received a soul from
 God, if it be slain, shall be avenged, as being unjustly destroyed."
 [3383] "Thou shalt not covet the things that belong to thy neighbour,
 as his wife, or his servant, or his ox, or his field." "Thou shalt not
 forswear thyself; for it is said, "Thou shalt not swear at all." [3384]
 But if that cannot be avoided, thou shalt swear truly; for "every one
 that swears by Him shall be commended." [3385] "Thou shalt not bear
 false witness;" for "he that falsely accuses the needy provokes to
 anger Him that made him." [3386]

 The Prohibition of Evil-Speaking and Passion, of Deceitful Conduct, or
 Idle Words, Lies, Covetousness, and Hypocrisy.

 IV. Thou shall not speak evil; [3387] for says He, "Love not to speak
 evil, lest thou beest taken away." Nor shalt thou be mindful of
 injuries; for "the ways of those that remember injuries are unto
 death." [3388] Thou shall not be double-minded nor double-tongued; for
 "a man's own lips are a strong snare to him," [3389] and "a talkative
 person shall not be prospered upon earth." [3390] Thy words shall not
 be vain; for "ye shall give an account of every idle word." [3391] Thou
 shalt not tell lies: for says He, "Thou shalt destroy all those that
 speak lies." [3392] Thou shalt not be covetous nor rapacious: for says
 He, "Woe to him that is covetous towards his neighbour with an evil
 covetousness." [3393]

 The Prohibition of Malignity, Acceptation of Persons, Wrath, Malice, and
 Envy.

 V. Thou shalt not be an hypocrite, lest thy "portion be with them."
 [3394] Thou shalt not be ill-natured nor proud: for "God resisteth the
 proud." [3395] "Thou shalt not accept persons in judgment; for the
 judgment is the Lord's." "Thou shalt not hate any man; thou shalt
 surely reprove thy brother, and not become guilty on his account;"
 [3396] and, "Reprove a wise man, and he will love thee." [3397] Eschew
 all evil, and all that is like it: for says He, "Abstain from
 injustice, and trembling shall not come nigh thee." [3398] Be not soon
 angry, nor spiteful, nor passionate, nor furious, nor daring, lest thou
 undergo the fate of Cain, and of Saul, and of Joab: for the first of
 these slew his brother Abel, because Abel was found to be preferred
 before him with God, and because Abel's sacrifice was preferred; [3399]
 the second persecuted holy David, who had slain Goliah the Philistine,
 being envious of the praises of the women who danced; [3400] the third
 slew two generals of armies--Abner of Israel, and Amasa of Judah.
 [3401]

 Concerning Augury and Enchantments.

 VI. Be not a diviner, for that leads to idolatry; [3402] for says
 Samuel, "Divination is sin;" [3403] and, "There shall be no divination
 in Jacob, nor soothsaying in Israel." [3404] Thou shalt not use
 enchantments or purgations for thy child. Thou shall not be a
 soothsayer nor a diviner by great or little birds. Nor shalt thou learn
 wicked arts; for all these things has the law forbidden. [3405] Be not
 one that wishes for evil, for thou wilt be led into intolerable sins.
 Thou shalt not speak obscenely, nor use wanton glances, nor be a
 drunkard; for from such causes arise whoredoms and adulteries. Be not a
 lover of money, lest thou "serve mammon instead of God." [3406] Be not
 vainglorious, nor haughty, nor high-minded. For from all these things
 arrogance does spring. Remember him who said: "Lord, my heart is not
 haughty, nor mine eyes lofty: I have not exercised myself in great
 matters, nor in things too high for me; but I was humble." [3407]

 The Prohibition of Murmuring, Insolence, Pride, and Arrogance.

 VII. Be not a murmurer, remembering the punishment which those
 underwent who murmured against Moses. Be not self-willed, be not
 malicious, be not hard-hearted, be not passionate, be not
 mean-spirited; for all these things lead to blasphemy. But be meek, as
 were Moses and David, [3408] since "the meek shall inherit the earth."
 [3409]

 Concerning Long-Suffering, Simplicity, Meekness, and Patience.

 VIII. Be slow to wrath; for such a one is very prudent, since "he that
 is hasty of spirit is a very fool." [3410] Be merciful; for "blessed
 are the merciful: for they shall obtain mercy." [3411] Be sincere,
 quiet, good, "trembling at the word of God." [3412] Thou shalt not
 exalt thyself, as did the Pharisee; for "every one that exalteth
 himself shall be abased," [3413] and "that which is of high esteem with
 man is abomination with God." [3414] Thou shalt not entertain
 confidence in thy soul; for "a confident man shall fall into mischief."
 [3415] Thou shalt not go along with the foolish, but with the wise and
 righteous; for "he that walketh [3416] with wise men shall be wise, but
 he that walketh with the foolish shall be known." [3417] Receive the
 afflictions that fall upon thee with an even mind, and the chances of
 life without over-much sorrow, knowing that a reward shall be given to
 thee by God, as was given to Job and to Lazarus. [3418]

 That It is Our Duty to Esteem Our Christian Teachers Above Our
 Parents--The Former Being the Means of Our Well-Being, the Other Only of
 Our Being.

 IX. Thou shalt honour him that speaks to thee the word of God, and be
 mindful of him day and night; and thou shalt reverence him, [3419] not
 as the author of thy birth, but as one that is made the occasion of thy
 well-being. For where the doctrine concerning God is, there God is
 present. Thou shalt every day seek the face of the saints, that thou
 mayest acquiesce in their words.

 That We Ought Not to Divide Ourselves from the Saints, But to Make Peace
 Between Those that Quarrel, to Judge Righteously, and Not to Accept
 Persons.

 X. Thou shalt not make schisms among the saints, but be mindful of the
 followers of Corah. [3420] Thou shalt make peace between those that are
 at variance, as Moses did when he persuaded them to be friends. [3421]
 Thou shalt judge righteously; for "the judgment is the Lord's." [3422]
 Thou shalt not accept persons when thou reprovest for sins; but do as
 Elijah and Micaiah did to Ahab, and Ebedmelech the Ethiopian to
 Zedekiah, and Nathan to David, and John to Herod. [3423]

 Concerning Him that is Double-Minded and Desponding.

 XI. Be not of a doubtful mind in thy prayer, whether it shall be
 granted or no. For the Lord said to me Peter upon the sea: "O thou of
 little faith, wherefore didst thou doubt?" [3424] "Be not thou ready to
 stretch out thy hand to receive, and to shut it when thou shouldst
 give." [3425]

 Concerning Doing Good.

 XII. If thou hast by the work of thy hands, give, that thou mayest
 labour for the redemption of thy sins; for "by alms and acts of faith
 sins are purged away." [3426] Thou shalt not grudge to give to the
 poor, nor when thou hast given shalt thou murmur; for thou shalt know
 who will repay thee thy reward. For says he: "He that hath mercy on the
 poor man lendeth to the Lord; according to his gift, so shall it be
 repaid him again." [3427] Thou shalt not turn away from him that is
 needy; for says he: "He that stoppeth his ears, that he may not hear
 the cry of the needy, himself also shall call, and there shall be none
 to hear him." [3428] Thou shall communicate in all things to thy
 brother, and shall not say thy goods are thine own; for the common
 participation of the necessaries of life is appointed to all men by
 God. Thou shalt not take off thine hand from thy son or from thy
 daughter, but shalt teach them the fear of God from their youth; for
 says he: "Correct thy son, so shall he afford thee good hope." [3429]

 How Masters Ought to Behave Themselves to Their Servants, and How Servants
 Ought to Be Subject.

 XIII. Thou shall not command thy man-servant, or thy maid-servant, who
 trust in the same God, with bitterness of soul, lest they groan against
 thee, and wrath be upon thee from God. And, ye servants, "be subject to
 your masters," [3430] as to the representatives of God, with attention
 and fear, "as to the Lord, and not to men." [3431]

 Concerning Hypocrisy, and Obedience to the Laws, and Confession of Sins.

 XIV. Thou shalt hate all hypocrisy; and whatsoever is pleasing to the
 Lord, that shalt thou do. By no means forsake the commands of the Lord.
 But thou shalt observe what things thou hast received from Him, neither
 adding to them nor taking away from them. "For thou shalt not add unto
 His words, lest He convict thee, and thou becomest a liar." [3432] Thou
 shalt confess thy sins unto the Lord thy God; and thou shalt not add
 unto them, that it may be well with thee from the Lord thy God, who
 willeth not the death of a sinner, but his repentance.

 Concerning the Observance Due to Parents.

 XV. Thou shalt be observant to thy father and mother as the causes of
 thy being born, that thou mayest live long on the earth which the Lord
 thy God giveth thee. Do not overlook thy brethren or thy kinsfolk; for
 "thou shalt not overlook those nearly related to thee." [3433]

 Concerning the Subjection Due to the King and to Rulers.

 XVI. Thou shalt fear the king, knowing that his appointment is of the
 Lord. His rulers thou shalt honour as the ministers of God, for they
 are the revengers of all unrighteousness; to whom pay taxes, tribute,
 and every oblation with a willing mind.

 Concerning the Pure Conscience of Those that Pray.

 XVII. Thou shalt not proceed to thy prayer in the day of thy
 wickedness, before thou hast laid aside thy bitterness. This is the way
 of life, in which may ye be found, through Jesus Christ our Lord.

 That the Way Which Was Afterward Introduced by the Snares of the Adversary
 is Full of Impiety and Wickedness.

 XVIII. But the way of death [3434] is known by its wicked practices:
 for therein is the ignorance of God, and the introduction of many
 evils, and disorders, and disturbances; whereby come murders,
 adulteries, fornications, perjuries, unlawful lusts, thefts,
 idolatries, magic arts, witchcrafts, rapines, false-witnesses,
 hypocrisies, double-heartedness, deceit, pride, malice, insolence,
 covetousness, obscene talk, jealousy, confidence, haughtiness,
 arrogance, impudence, persecution of the good, enmity to truth, love of
 lies, ignorance of righteousness. For they who do such things do not
 adhere to goodness, or to righteous judgment: they watch not for good,
 but for evil; from whom meekness and patience are far off, who love
 vain things, pursuing after reward, having no pity on the poor, not
 labouring for him that is in misery, nor knowing Him that made them;
 murderers of infants, destroyers of the workmanship of God, that turn
 away from the needy, adding affliction to the afflicted, the flatterers
 of the rich, the despisers of the poor, full of sin. May you, children,
 be delivered from all these.

 That We Must Not Turn from the Way of Piety Either to the Right Hand or to
 the Left. An Exhortation of the Lawgiver.

 XIX. See that no one seduce thee [3435] from piety; for says He: "Thou
 mayst not turn aside from it to the right hand, or to the left, that
 thou mayst have understanding in all that thou doest." [3436] For if
 thou dost not turn out of the right way, thou wilt not be ungodly.

 [3343] [See pp. 377, etc., supra]

 [3344] Deut. xxx. 15

 [3345] Deut. xxx. 19

 [3346] 1 Kings xviii. 21.

 [3347] Matt. vi. 24.

 [3348] 1 Tim. iv. 10.

 [3349] [See Teaching, i. 1.--R.]

 [3350] [Teaching, i. 1.--R.]

 [3351] The Greek words properly mean: "Introduced was the way of death;
 not of that death which exists according to the mind of God, but that
 which has arisen from the plots of the adversary."

 [3352] [The larger half of chap. i., Teaching, is found in the first
 half of this chapter; but the matter peculiar to each is of about the
 same extent.--R.]

 [3353] Deut. vi. 5; Mark xii. 32

 [3354] Lev. xix. 18

 [3355] Tob. iv. 15.

 [3356] Matt. v. 44.

 [3357] Luke vi. 32; Matt. v. 46, 47.

 [3358] Deut. xxiii. 7

 [3359] 1 Pet. ii. 11

 [3360] Matt. v. 39; Luke vi. 29

 [3361] Ps. vii. 4.

 [3362] Matt. v. 41.

 [3363] Matt. v. 40; Luke vi. 29.

 [3364] Luke vi. 30.

 [3365] Matt. v. 42.

 [3366] Ps. cxii. 5.

 [3367] Matt. v. 45.

 [3368] Prov. iii. 9

 [3369] Gal. vi. 10

 [3370] [Ex. xx. 13 Five brief precepts, of which this is the first, are
 common to Teaching, ii. 2, and the rest of this chapter.--R.]

 [3371] Gen. ii. 24.

 [3372] Lev. xviii. 22.

 [3373] Gen. xix.

 [3374] Deut. xxvii.

 [3375] Deut. xxiii. 17.

 [3376] Josh. vii.

 [3377] 2 Kings v.

 [3378] John xii. 6.

 [3379] Matt. xxvii. 5; Acts i. 18.

 [3380] Acts v.

 [3381] [Seven brief clauses of Teaching, ii. 2, 3, are found in this
 chapter.--R.]

 [3382] Ex. xxii. 18

 [3383] Ex. xxi. 23., LXX.

 [3384] Matt. v. 34.

 [3385] Ps. lxiii. 11.

 [3386] Prov. xiv. 31.

 [3387] [Chap. iv. also contains seven clauses found in Teaching (ii.
 3-6), while chap. v. has but five and a verbal resemblance; chap. ii.
 of the Teaching is, however, almost entirely given in these
 passages.--R.]

 [3388] Prov. xii. 28., LXX.

 [3389] Prov. vi. 2.

 [3390] Ps. cxl. 11.

 [3391] Matt. xii. 36; Lev. xix. 11.

 [3392] Ps. v. 6.

 [3393] Hab. ii. 9.

 [3394] Matt. xxiv. 51

 [3395] 1 Pet. v. 5

 [3396] Deut. i. 17; Lev. xix. 17

 [3397] Prov. ix. 8

 [3398] Isa. liv. 14

 [3399] Gen. iv

 [3400] 1 Sam. xvii., xviii

 [3401] 2 Sam. iii., xx

 [3402] [Chaps. vi.-viii. contain passages parallel to nearly one-half
 of chap. iii., Teaching, and in the same order.--R.]

 [3403] 1 Sam. xv. 23.

 [3404] Num. xxiii. 23.

 [3405] Lev. xix. 26, 31; Deut. xviii. 10, 11.

 [3406] Matt. vi. 24.

 [3407] Ps. cxxxi. 1.

 [3408] Num. xii. 3; Ps. cxxxi. 1.

 [3409] Matt. v. 5.

 [3410] Prov. xiv. 29., LXX.

 [3411] Matt. v. 7.

 [3412] Isa. lxvi. 2.

 [3413] Luke xviii. 14.

 [3414] Luke xvi. 15.

 [3415] Prov. xiii. 17., LXX.

 [3416] The words from "for he that walketh" to "be known" are omitted
 in one V. ms.

 [3417] Prov. xiii. 20.

 [3418] Job xlii.; Luke xvi.

 [3419] [Chaps. ix.-xvii. contain nearly every clause of Teaching, chap.
 iv., in the same order, and with every appearance of a designed
 enlargement of that passage.--R.]

 [3420] Num. xvi

 [3421] Ex. ii. 13

 [3422] Deut. i. 17

 [3423] 1 Kings xviii., xxi., xxii.; 2 Sam. xii.; Matt. xiv.

 [3424] Matt. xiv. 31.

 [3425] Ecclus. iv. 31.

 [3426] Prov. xvi. 6; Dan. iv. 27.

 [3427] Prov. xix. 17.

 [3428] Prov. xxi. 13.

 [3429] Prov. xix. 18.

 [3430] Eph vi. 5.

 [3431] Eph. vi. 7.

 [3432] Prov. xxx. 6.

 [3433] Isa. lviii. 7.

 [3434] [For the remarkable agreement of this chapter with Teaching,
 chap. v., see the latter; comp. also Barnabas, xx.--R.]

 [3435] [Chaps. xix.-xxi. have few parallels with the Teaching.--R.]

 [3436] Deut. v. 32

 Sec. II.--On the Formation of the Character of Believers, and on Giving of
 Thanks to God.

 That We Ought Not to Despise Any of the Sorts of Food that are Set Before
 Us, But Gratefully and Orderly to Partake of Them.

 XX. Now concerning the several sorts of food, the Lord says to thee,
 "Ye shall eat the good things of the earth;" [3437] and, "All sorts of
 flesh shall ye eat, as the green herb;" [3438] but, "Thou shalt pour
 out the blood." [3439] For "not those things that go into the mouth,
 but those that come out of it, defile a man;" [3440] I mean
 blasphemies, evil-speaking, and if there be any other thing of the like
 nature. [3441] But "do thou eat the fat of the land with
 righteousness." [3442] For "if there be anything pleasant, it is His;
 and if there be anything good, it is His. Wheat for the young men, and
 wine to cheer the maids." For "who shall eat or who shall drink without
 Him?" [3443] Wise Ezra [3444] does also admonish thee and say: "Go your
 way, and eat the fat, and drink the sweet, and be not sorrowful."
 [3445]

 That We Ought to Avoid the Eating of Things Offered to Idols.

 XXI. But do ye abstain from things offered to idols; [3446] for they
 offer them in honour of demons, that is, to the dishonour of the one
 God, that ye may not become partners with demons.

 A Constitution of Our Lord, How We Ought to Baptize, and into Whose Death.

 XXII. Now concerning baptism, [3447] O bishop, or presbyter, we have
 already given direction, and we now say, that thou shalt so baptize as
 the Lord commanded us, saying: "Go ye, and teach all nations, baptizing
 them in the name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost
 (teaching them to observe all things whatsoever I have commanded you):"
 [3448] of the Father who sent, of Christ who came, of the Comforter who
 testified. But thou shalt beforehand anoint the person with the holy
 oil, and afterward baptize him with the water, and in the conclusion
 shall seal him with the ointment; that the anointing with oil may be
 the participation of the Holy Spirit, and the water the symbol of the
 death of Christ, and the ointment the seal of the covenants. But if
 there be neither oil nor ointment, water is sufficient both for the
 anointing, and for the seal, and for the confession of Him that is
 dead, or indeed is dying together with Christ. But before baptism, let
 him that is to be baptized fast; for even the Lord, when He was first
 baptized by John, and abode in the wilderness, did afterward fast forty
 days and forty nights. [3449] But He was baptized, and then fasted, not
 having Himself any need of cleansing, or of fasting, or of purgation,
 who was by nature pure and holy; but that He might testify the truth to
 John, and afford an example to us. Wherefore our Lord was not baptized
 into His own passion, or death, or resurrection--for none of those
 things had then happened--but for another purpose. Wherefore He by His
 own authority fasted after His baptism, as being the Lord of John. But
 he who is to be initiated into His death ought first to fast, and then
 to be baptized. For it is not reasonable that he who has been buried
 with Christ, and is risen again with Him, should appear dejected at His
 very resurrection. For man is not lord of our Saviour's constitution,
 since one is the Master and the other the servant.

 Which Days of the Week We are to Fast, and Which Not, and for What
 Reasons.

 XXIII. But let not your fasts be with the hypocrites; [3450] for they
 fast on the second and fifth days of the week. But do you either fast
 the entire five days, or on the fourth day of the week, and on the day
 of the Preparation, because on the fourth day the condemnation went out
 against the Lord, Judas then promising to betray Him for money; and you
 must fast on the day of the Preparation, because on that day the Lord
 suffered the death of the cross under Pontius Pilate. But keep the
 Sabbath, and the Lord's day festival; because the former is the
 memorial of the creation, and the latter of the resurrection. But there
 is one only Sabbath to be observed by you in the whole year, which is
 that of our Lord's burial, on which men ought to keep a fast, but not a
 festival. For inasmuch as the Creator was then under the earth, the
 sorrow for Him is more forcible than the joy for the creation; for the
 Creator is more honourable by nature and dignity than His own
 creatures.

 What Sort of People Ought to Pray that Prayer that Was Given by the Lord.

 XXIV. Now, "when ye pray, be not ye as the hypocrites;" [3451] but as
 the Lord has appointed us in the Gospel, so pray ye: "Our Father which
 art in heaven, hallowed be Thy name; Thy kingdom come; Thy will be
 done, as in heaven, so on earth; give us this day our daily bread; and
 forgive us our debts, as we forgive our debtors; and lead us not into
 temptation, but deliver us from evil; for Thine is the kingdom for
 ever. Amen." [3452] Pray thus thrice in a day, preparing yourselves
 beforehand, that ye may be worthy of the adoption of the Father; lest,
 when you call Him Father unworthily, you be reproached by Him, as
 Israel once His first-born son was told: "If I be a Father, where is my
 glory? And if I be a Lord, where is my fear?" [3453] For the glory of
 fathers is the holiness of their children, and the honour of masters is
 the fear of their servants, as the contrary is dishonour and confusion.
 For says He: "Through you my name is blasphemed among the Gentiles."
 [3454]

 A Mystical Thanksgiving.

 XXXV. Be ye always thankful, as faithful and honest servants; and
 concerning the eucharistical thanksgiving say thus: [3455] We thank
 Thee, our Father, for that life which Thou hast made known to us by
 Jesus Thy Son, by whom Thou madest all things, and takest care of the
 whole world; whom Thou hast sent to become man for our salvation; whom
 Thou hast permitted to suffer and to die; whom Thou hast raised up, and
 been pleased to glorify, and hast set Him down on Thy right hand; by
 whom Thou hast promised us the resurrection of the dead. Do thou, O
 Lord Almighty, everlasting God, so gather together Thy Church from the
 ends of the earth into Thy kingdom, as this corn was once scattered,
 and is now become one loaf. We also, our Father, thank Thee for the
 precious blood of Jesus Christ, which was shed for us and for His
 precious body, whereof we celebrate this representation, as Himself
 appointed us, "to show forth His death." [3456] For through Him glory
 is to be given to Thee for ever. Amen. Let no one eat of these things
 that is not initiated; but those only who have been baptized into the
 death of the Lord. But if any one that is not initiated conceal
 himself, and partake of the same, "he eats eternal damnation;" [3457]
 because, being not of the faith of Christ, he has partaken of such
 things as it is not lawful for him to partake of, to his own
 punishment. But if any one is a partaker through ignorance, instruct
 him quickly, and initiate him, that he may not go out and despise you.

 A Thanksgiving at the Divine Participation.

 XXVI. After the participation, [3458] give thanks in this manner: We
 thank thee, O God and Father of Jesus our Saviour, for Thy holy name,
 which Thou hast made to inhabit among us; and that knowledge, faith,
 love, and immortality which Thou hast given us through Thy Son Jesus.
 Thou, O Almighty Lord, the God of the universe, hast created the world,
 and the things that are therein, by Him; and hast planted a law in our
 souls, and beforehand didst prepare things for the convenience of men.
 O God of our holy and blameless fathers, Abraham, and Isaac, and Jacob,
 Thy faithful servants; Thou, O God, who art powerful, faithful, and
 true, and without deceit in Thy promises; who didst send upon earth
 Jesus Thy Christ to live with men, as a man, when He was God the Word,
 and man, to take away error by the roots: do Thou even now, through
 Him, be mindful of this Thy holy Church, which Thou hast purchased with
 the precious blood of Thy Christ, and deliver it from all evil, and
 perfect it in Thy love and Thy truth, and gather us all together into
 Thy kingdom which Thou hast prepared. Let this Thy kingdom come. [3459]
 "Hosanna to the Son of David. Blessed be He that cometh in the name of
 the Lord" [3460] --God the Lord, who was manifested to us in the flesh.
 If any one be holy, let him draw near; but if any one be not such, let
 him become such by repentance. Permit also to your presbyters to give
 thanks.

 A Thanksgiving About the Mystical Ointment.

 XXVII. Concerning the ointment give thanks in this manner: We give Thee
 thanks, O God, the Creator of the whole world, both for the flagrancy
 of the ointment, and for the immortality which Thou hast made known to
 us by Thy Son Jesus. For Thine is the glory and the power for ever.
 Amen. Whosoever comes to you, [3461] and gives thanks in this manner,
 receive him as a disciple of Christ. But if he preach another doctrine,
 different from that which Christ by us has delivered to you, such a one
 you must not permit to give thanks; for such a one rather affronts God
 than glorifies Him.

 That We Ought Not to Be Indifferent About Communicating.

 XXVIII. But whosoever comes to you, let him be first examined, and then
 received: for ye have understanding, and are able to know the right
 hand from the left, [3462] and to distinguish false teachers from true
 teachers. But when a teacher comes to you, supply him with what he
 wants with all readiness. And even when a false teacher comes, you
 shall give him for his necessity, but shall not receive his error. Nor
 indeed may ye pray together with him, lest ye be polluted as well as
 he. Every true prophet or teacher [3463] that comes to you is worthy of
 his maintenance, as being a labourer in the word of righteousness.
 [3464]

 A Constitution Concerning Oblations.

 XXIX. All the first-fruits of the winepress, the threshing-floor, the
 oxen, and the sheep, shalt thou give to the priests, [3465] that thy
 storehouses and garners and the products of thy land may be blessed,
 and thou mayst be strengthened with corn and wine and oil, and the
 herds of thy cattle and flocks of thy sheep may be increased. Thou
 shalt give the tenth of thy increase to the orphan, and to the widow,
 and to the poor, and to the stranger. All the first-fruits of thy hot
 bread, of thy barrels of wine, or oil, or honey, or nuts, or grapes, or
 the first-fruits of other things, shalt thou give to the priests; but
 those of silver, and of garments, and of all sort of possessions, to
 the orphan and to the widow.

 How We Ought to Assemble Together, and to Celebrate the Festival Day of
 Our Saviour's Resurrection.

 XXX. On the day of the resurrection of the Lord, [3466] that is, the
 Lord's day, assemble yourselves together, without fail, giving thanks
 to God, and praising Him for those mercies God has bestowed upon you
 through Christ, and has delivered you from ignorance, error, and
 bondage, that your sacrifice may be unspotted, and acceptable to God,
 who has said concerning His universal Church: "In every place shall
 incense and a pure sacrifice be offered unto me; for I am a great King,
 saith the Lord Almighty, and my name is wonderful among the heathen."
 [3467]

 What Qualifications They Ought to Have Who are to Be Ordained.

 XXXI. Do you first ordain bishops worthy of the Lord, [3468] and
 presbyters and deacons, pious men, righteous, meek, free from the love
 of money, lovers of truth, approved, holy, not accepters of persons,
 who are able to teach the word of piety, and rightly dividing the
 doctrines of the Lord. [3469] And do ye honour such as your fathers, as
 your lords, as your benefactors, as the causes of your well-being.
 Reprove ye one another, not in anger, but in mildness, with kindness
 and peace. Observe all things that are commanded you by the Lord. Be
 watchful for your life. [3470] "Let your loins be girded about, and
 your lights burning, and ye like unto men who wait for their Lord, when
 He will come, at even, or in the morning, or at cock-crowing, or at
 midnight. For at what hour they think not, the Lord will come; and if
 they open to Him, blessed are those servants, because they were found
 watching. For He will gird Himself, and will make them to sit down to
 meat, and will come forth and serve them." [3471] Watch therefore, and
 pray, that ye do not sleep unto death. For your former good deeds will
 not profit you, if at the last part of your life you go astray from the
 true faith.

 A Prediction Concerning Futurities.

 XXXII. For in the last days false prophets shall be multiplied, and
 such as corrupt the word; and the sheep shall be changed into wolves,
 and love into hatred: for through the abounding of iniquity the love of
 many shall wax cold. For men shall hate, and persecute, and betray one
 another. And then shall appear the deceiver of the world, the enemy of
 the truth, the prince of lies, [3472] whom the Lord Jesus "shall
 destroy with the spirit of His mouth, who takes away the wicked with
 His lips; and many shall be offended at Him. But they that endure to
 the end, the same shall be saved. And then shall appear the sign of the
 Son of man in heaven;" [3473] and afterwards shall be the voice of a
 trumpet by the archangel; [3474] and in that interval shall be the
 revival of those that were asleep. And then shall the Lord come, and
 all His saints with Him, [3475] with a great concussion above the
 clouds, with the angels of His power, [3476] in the throne of His
 kingdom, to condemn the devil, the deceiver of the world, and to render
 to every one according to his deeds. "Then shall the wicked go away
 into everlasting punishment, but the righteous shall go into life
 eternal," [3477] to inherit those things "which eye hath not seen, nor
 ear heard, nor have entered into the heart of man, such things as God
 hath prepared for them that love Him;" [3478] and they shall rejoice in
 the kingdom of God, which is in Christ Jesus. Since we are vouchsafed
 such great blessings from Him, let us become His suppliants, and call
 upon Him by continual prayer, and say:--

 A Prayer Declarative of God's Various Providence.

 XXXIII. Our eternal Saviour, the King of gods, who alone art almighty,
 and the Lord, the God of all beings, and the God of our holy and
 blameless fathers, and of those before us; the God of Abraham, and of
 Isaac, and of Jacob; who art merciful and compassionate,
 long-suffering, and abundant in mercy; to whom every heart is naked,
 and by whom every heart is seen, and to whom every secret thought is
 revealed: to Thee do the souls of the righteous cry aloud, upon Thee do
 the hopes of the godly trust, Thou Father of the blameless, Thou hearer
 of the supplication of those that call upon Thee with uprightness, and
 who knowest the supplications that are not uttered: for Thy providence
 reaches as far as the inmost parts of mankind; and by Thy knowledge
 Thou searchest the thoughts of every one, and in every region of the
 whole earth the incense of prayer and supplication is sent up to Thee.
 O Thou who hast appointed this present world as a place of combat to
 righteousness, and hast opened to all the gate of mercy, and hast
 demonstrated to every man by implanted knowledge, and natural judgment,
 and the admonitions of the law, how the possession of riches is not
 everlasting, the ornament of beauty is not perpetual, our strength and
 force are easily dissolved; and that all is vapour and vanity; and that
 only the good conscience of faith unfeigned passes through the midst of
 the heavens, and returning with truth, takes hold of the right hand of
 the joy [3479] which is to come. And withal, before the promise of the
 restoration of all things is accomplished, the soul itself exults in
 hope, and is joyful. For from that truth which was in our forefather
 Abraham, when he changed his way Thou didst guide him by a vision, and
 didst teach him what kind of state this world is; and knowledge went
 before his faith, and faith was the consequence of his knowledge; and
 the covenant did follow after his faith. For Thou saidst: "I will make
 thy seed as the stars of heaven, and as the sand which is by the
 seashore." [3480] Moreover, when Thou hadst given him Isaac, and
 knewest him to be like him in his mode of life, Thou wast then called
 his God, saying: "I will be a God to thee, and to thy seed after thee."
 [3481] And when our father Jacob was sent into Mesopotamia, Thou
 showedst him Christ, and by him speakest, saying: "Behold, I am with
 thee, and I will increase thee, and multiply thee exceedingly." [3482]
 And so spakest Thou to Moses, Thy faithful and holy servant, at the
 vision of the bush: "I am He that is; this is my name for ever, and my
 memorial for generations of generations." [3483] O Thou great protector
 of the posterity of Abraham, Thou art blessed for ever.

 A Prayer Declarative of God's Various Creation.

 XXXIV. Thou art blessed, O Lord, the King of ages, who by Christ hast
 made the whole world, and by Him in the beginning didst reduce into
 order the disordered parts; who dividedst the waters from the waters by
 a firmament, and didst put into them a spirit of life; who didst fix
 the earth, and stretch out the heaven, and didst dispose every creature
 by an accurate constitution. For by Thy power, O Lord, the world is
 beautified, the heaven is fixed as an arch over us, and is rendered
 illustrious with stars for our comfort in the darkness. The light also
 and the sun were begotten for days and the production of fruit, and the
 moon for the change of seasons, by its increase and diminutions; and
 one was called Night, and the other Day. And the firmament was
 exhibited in the midst of the abyss, and Thou commandedst the waters to
 be gathered together, and the dry land to appear. But as for the sea
 itself, who can possibly describe it, which comes with fury from the
 ocean, yet runs back again, being stopped by the sand at Thy command?
 For Thou hast said: "Thereby shall her waves be broken." [3484] Thou
 hast also made it capable of supporting little and great creatures, and
 made it navigable for ships. Then did the earth become green, and was
 planted with all sorts of flowers, and the variety of several trees;
 and the shining luminaries, the nourishers of those plants, preserve
 their unchangeable course, and in nothing depart from Thy command. But
 where Thou biddest them, there do they rise and set for signs of the
 seasons and of the years, making a constant return of the work of men.
 Afterwards the kinds of the several animals were created--those
 belonging to the land, to the water, to the air, and both to air and
 water; and the artificial wisdom of Thy providence does still impart to
 every one a suitable providence. For as He was not unable to produce
 different kinds, so neither has He disdained to exercise a different
 providence towards every one. And at the conclusion of the creation
 Thou gavest direction to Thy Wisdom, and formedst a reasonable creature
 as the citizen of the world, saying, "Let us make man after our image,
 and after our likeness;" [3485] and hast exhibited him as the ornament
 of the world, and formed him a body out of the four elements, those
 primary bodies, but hadst prepared a soul out of nothing, and
 bestowedst upon him his five senses, and didst set over his sensations
 a mind as the conductor of the soul. And besides all these things, O
 Lord God, who can worthily declare the motion of the rainy clouds, the
 shining of the lightning, the noise of the thunder, in order to the
 supply of proper food, and the most agreeable temperature of the air?
 But when man was disobedient, Thou didst deprive him of the life which
 should have been his reward. Yet didst Thou not destroy him for ever,
 but laidst him to sleep for a time; and Thou didst by oath call him to
 a resurrection, and loosedst the bond of death, O Thou reviver of the
 dead, through Jesus Christ, who is our hope.

 A Prayer, with Thanksgiving, Declarative of God's Providence Over the
 Beings He Has Made.

 XXXV. Great art thou, O Lord Almighty, and great is Thy power, and of
 Thy understanding there is no number. Our Creator and Saviour, rich in
 benefits, long-suffering, and the bestower of mercy, who dost not take
 away Thy salvation from Thy creatures: for Thou art good by nature, and
 sparest sinners, and invitest them to repentance; for admonition is the
 effect of Thy bowels of compassion. For how should we abide if we were
 required to come to judgment immediately, when, after so much
 long-suffering, we hardly get clear of our miserable condition? The
 heavens declare Thy dominion, and the earth shakes with earthquakes,
 and, hanging upon nothing, declares Thy unshaken stedfastness. The sea
 raging with waves, and feeding a flock of ten thousand creatures, is
 bounded with sand, as standing in awe at Thy command, and compels all
 men to dry out: "How great are Thy works, O Lord! in wisdom hast Thou
 made them all: the earth is full of Thy creation." [3486] And the
 bright host of angels and the intellectual spirits say to Palmoni,
 [3487] "There is but one holy Being;" [3488] and the holy seraphim,
 together with the six-winged cherubim, who sing to Thee their triumphal
 song, cry out with never-ceasing voices, "Holy, holy, holy, Lord God of
 hosts! heaven and earth are full of Thy glory;" [3489] and the other
 multitudes of the orders, angels archangels, thrones, dominions,
 principalities, authorities, and powers cry aloud, and say, "Blessed be
 the glory of the Lord out of His place." [3490] But Israel, Thy Church
 on earth, taken out of the Gentiles, emulating the heavenly powers
 night and day, with a full heart and a willing soul sings, "The chariot
 of God is ten thousandfold thousands of them that rejoice: the Lord is
 among them in Sinai, in the holy place." [3491] The heaven knows Him
 who fixed it as a cube of stone, in the form of an arch, upon nothing,
 who united the land and water to one another, and scattered the vital
 air all abroad, and conjoined fire therewith for warmth, and the
 comfort against darkness. The choir of stars strikes us with
 admiration, declaring Him that numbers them, and showing Him that names
 them; the animals declare Him that puts life into them; the trees show
 Him that makes them grow: all which creatures, being made by Thy word,
 show forth the greatness of Thy power. Wherefore every man ought to
 send up an hymn from his very soul to Thee, through Christ, in the name
 of all the rest, since He has power over them all by Thy appointment.
 For Thou art kind in Thy benefits, and beneficent in Thy bowels of
 compassion, who alone art almighty: for when Thou willest, to be able
 is present with Thee; for Thy eternal power both quenches flame, and
 stops the mouths of lions, and tames whales, and raises up the sick,
 and overrules the power of all things, and overturns the host of
 enemies, and casts down a people numbered in their arrogance. Thou art
 He who art in heaven, He who art on earth, He who art in the sea, He
 who art in finite things, Thyself unconfined by anything. For of Thy
 majesty there is no boundary; for it is not ours, O Lord, but the
 oracle of Thy servant, who said, "And thou shalt know in thine heart
 that the Lord thy God He is God in heaven above, and on earth beneath,
 and there is none other besides Thee:" [3492] for there is no God
 besides Thee alone, there is none holy besides Thee, the Lord, the God
 of knowledge, the God of the saints, holy above all holy beings; for
 they are sanctified by Thy hands. Thou art glorious, and highly
 exalted, invisible by nature, and unsearchable in Thy judgments; whose
 life is without want, whose duration can never alter or fail, whose
 operation is without toil, whose greatness is unlimited, whose
 excellency is perpetual, whose habitation is inaccessible, whose
 dwelling is unchangeable, whose knowledge is without beginning, whose
 truth is immutable, whose work is without assistants, whose dominion
 cannot be taken away, whose monarchy is without succession, whose
 kingdom is without end, whose strength is irresistible, whose army is
 very numerous: for Thou art the Father of wisdom, the Creator of the
 creation, by a Mediator, as the cause; the Bestower of providence, the
 Giver of laws, the Supplier of want, the Punisher of the ungodly, and
 the Rewarder of the righteous; the God and Father of Christ, and the
 Lord of those that are pious towards Him, whose promise is infallible,
 whose judgment without bribes, whose sentiments are immutable, whose
 piety is incessant, whose thanksgiving is everlasting, through whom
 [3493] adoration is worthily due to Thee from every rational and holy
 nature.

 A Prayer Commemorative of the Incarnation of Christ, and His Various
 Providence to the Saints.

 XXXVI. O Lord Almighty Thou hast created the world by Christ, and hast
 appointed the Sabbath in memory thereof, because that on that day Thou
 hast made us rest from our works, for the meditation upon Thy laws.
 Thou hast also appointed festivals for the rejoicing of our souls, that
 we might come into the remembrance of that wisdom which was created by
 Thee; how He submitted to be made of a woman on our account; [3494] He
 appeared in life, and demonstrated Himself in His baptism; how He that
 appeared is both God and man; He suffered for us by Thy permission, and
 died, and rose again by Thy power: on which account we solemnly
 assemble to celebrate the feast of the resurrection on the Lord's day,
 and rejoice on account of Him who has conquered death, and has brought
 life and immortality to light. For by Him Thou hast brought home the
 Gentiles to Thyself for a peculiar people, the true Israel beloved of
 God, and seeing God. For Thou O Lord, broughtest our fathers out of the
 land of Egypt, and didst deliver them out of the iron furnace, from
 clay and brick-making, and didst redeem them out of the hands of
 Pharaoh, and of those under him, and didst lead them through the sea as
 through dry land, and didst bear their manners in the wilderness, and
 bestow on them all sorts of good things. Thou didst give them the law
 or decalogue, which was pronounced by Thy voice and written with Thy
 hand. Thou didst enjoin the observation of the Sabbath, not affording
 them an occasion of idleness, but an opportunity of piety, for their
 knowledge of Thy power, and the prohibition of evils; having limited
 them as within an holy circuit for the sake of doctrine, for the
 rejoicing upon the seventh period. On this account was there appointed
 one week, and seven weeks, and the seventh month, and the seventh year,
 and the revolution of these, the jubilee, which is the fiftieth year
 for remission, that men might have no occasion to pretend ignorance.
 [3495] On this account He permitted men every Sabbath to rest, that so
 no one might be willing to send one word out of his mouth in anger on
 the day of the Sabbath. For the Sabbath is the ceasing of the creation,
 the completion of the world, the inquiry after laws, and the grateful
 praise to God for the blessings He has bestowed upon men. All which the
 Lord's day excels, [3496] and shows the Mediator Himself, the Provider,
 the Lawgiver, the Cause of the resurrection, the First-born of the
 whole creation, God the Word, and man, who was born of Mary alone,
 without a man, who lived holily, who was crucified under Pontius
 Pilate, and died, and rose again from the dead. So that the Lord's day
 commands us to offer unto Thee, O Lord, thanksgiving for all. [3497]
 For this is the grace afforded by Thee, which on account of its
 greatness has obscured all other blessings.

 A Prayer Containing the Memorial of His Providence, and an Enumeration of
 the Various Benefits Afforded the Saints by the Providence of God Through
 Christ.

 XXXVII. Thou who hast fulfilled Thy promises made by the prophets, and
 hast had mercy on Zion, and compassion on Jerusalem, by exalting the
 throne of David, Thy servant, in the midst of her, by the birth of
 Christ, who was born of his seed according to the flesh, of a virgin
 alone; do Thou now, O Lord God, accept the prayers which proceed from
 the lips of Thy people which are of the Gentiles, which call upon Thee
 in truth, as Thou didst accept of the gifts of the righteous in their
 generations. In the first place Thou did respect the sacrifice of Abel,
 [3498] and accept it as Thou didst accept of the sacrifice of Noah when
 he went out of the ark; [3499] of Abraham, when he went out of the land
 of the Chaldeans; [3500] of Isaac at the Well of the Oath; [3501] of
 Jacob in Bethel; [3502] of Moses in the desert; [3503] of Aaron between
 the dead and the living; [3504] of Joshua the son of Nun in Gilgal;
 [3505] of Gideon at the rock, and the fleeces, before his sin; [3506]
 of Manoah and his wife in the field; of Samson in his thirst before the
 transgression; [3507] of Jephtha in the war before his rash vow; of
 Barak and Deborah in the days of Sisera; [3508] of Samuel in Mizpeh;
 [3509] of David in the threshing-floor of Ornan the Jebusite; [3510] of
 Solomon in Gibeon and in Jerusalem: [3511] of Elijah in Mount Carmel;
 [3512] of Elisha at the barren fountain; [3513] of Jehoshaphat in war;
 [3514] of Hezekiah in his sickness, and concerning Sennacherib; [3515]
 of Manasseh in the land of the Chaldeans, after his transgression;
 [3516] of Josiah in Phassa; [3517] of Ezra at the return; [3518] of
 Daniel in the den of lions; [3519] of Jonah in the whale's belly;
 [3520] of the three children in the fiery furnace; [3521] of Hannah in
 the tabernacle before the ark; [3522] of Nehemiah at the rebuilding of
 the walls; [3523] of Zerubbabel; of Mattathias and his sons in their
 zeal; [3524] of Jael in blessings. Now also do Thou receive the prayers
 of Thy people which are offered to Thee with knowledge, through Christ
 in the Spirit.

 A Prayer for the Assistance of the Righteous.

 XXXVIII. We give Thee thanks for all things, O Lord Almighty, that Thou
 hast not taken away Thy mercies and Thy compassions from us; but in
 every succeeding generation Thou dost save, and deliver, and assist,
 and protect: for Thou didst assist in the days of Enos and Enoch, in
 the days of Moses and Joshua, in the days of the judges, in the days of
 Samuel and of Elijah and of the prophets, in the days of David and of
 the kings, in the days of Esther and Mordecai, in the days of Judith,
 in the days of Judas Maccabeus and his brethren, and in our days hast
 Thou assisted us by Thy great High Priest, Jesus Christ Thy Son. For He
 has delivered us from the sword, and hath freed us from famine, and
 sustained us; has delivered us from sickness, has preserved us from an
 evil tongue. For all which things do we give Thee thanks through
 Christ, who has given us an articulate voice to confess withal, and
 added to it a suitable tongue as an instrument to modulate withal, and
 a proper taste, and a suitable touch, and a sight for contemplation,
 and the hearing of sounds, and the smelling of vapours, and hands for
 work, and feet for walking. And all these members dost Thou form from a
 little drop in the womb; and after the formation dost Thou bestow on it
 an immortal soul, and producest it into the light as a rational
 creature, even man. Thou hast instructed him by Thy laws, improved him
 by Thy statutes; and when Thou bringest on a dissolution for a while,
 Thou hast promised a resurrection. Wherefore what life is sufficient,
 what length of ages will be long enough, for men to be thankful? To do
 it worthily it is impossible, but to do it according to our ability is
 just and right. For Thou hast delivered us from the impiety of
 polytheism, and from the heresy of the murderers of Christ; Thou hast
 delivered us from error and ignorance; Thou hast sent Christ among men
 as a man, being the only begotten God; Thou hast made the Comforter to
 inhabit among us; Thou hast set angels over us; Thou hast put the devil
 to shame; Thou hast brought us into being when we were not. Thou takest
 care of us when made; Thou measurest out life to us; Thou affordest us
 food; Thou hast promised repentance. Glory and worship be to Thee for
 all these things, through Jesus Christ, [3525] now and ever, and
 through all ages. Amen. Meditate on these things, brethren; and the
 Lord be With you upon earth, and in the kingdom of His Father, who both
 sent Him, and has "delivered us by Him from the bondage of corruption
 into His glorious liberty;" [3526] and has promised life to those who
 through Him have believed in the God of the whole world.

 [3437] Isa. i. 19

 [3438] Gen. ix. 3

 [3439] Deut. xv. 23

 [3440] Matt. xv. 11

 [3441] Mark vii. 22

 [3442] Zech. ix. 17

 [3443] Eccles. ii. 25, LXX.

 [3444] The words from "Wise Ezra" to "sorrowful" are not in one V. ms.

 [3445] Neh. viii. 10.

 [3446] 1 Cor. x. 20.

 [3447] [Comp., with this chapter, Teaching, chap. vii.--R.]

 [3448] Matt. xxviii. 19.

 [3449] Matt. iii., iv.

 [3450] [Comp. the few but remarkable resemblances of Teaching, chap.
 viii., with chaps. xxiii., xxiv., here.--R.]

 [3451] Matt. vi. 5

 [3452] Matt. vi. 9,. etc.

 [3453] Mal. i. 6.

 [3454] Isa. lii. 5.

 [3455] [See the eucharistic prayer in Teaching, chap. ix. The
 correspondences and divergences are alike interesting.--R.]

 [3456] 1 Cor. xi. 26.

 [3457] 1 Cor. xi. 59.[See Elucidation I. p. 382, supra.]

 [3458] [Comp. Teaching, chap. x.--R.]

 [3459] ["Maran atha," as in Teaching.--R.]

 [3460] 1 Cor. xvi. 22; Matt. xxi. 9; Mark xi. 10 [Comp. John xii.
 13.--R.]

 [3461] [Comp. Teaching, chap. xi., where, however, only a few phrases
 correspond. R.]

 [3462] [This sentence is found in Teaching, chap. xii.--R.]

 [3463] [Part of this sentence has a parallel in Teaching, chap. xiii.,
 but there is an obvious difference of circumstances. Chap. xxix.
 presents more parallel passages.--R.]

 [3464] Matt. x. 41.

 [3465] Num. xviii.

 [3466] [The resemblance to Teaching, chap. xiv., is marked.--R.]

 [3467] Mal. i. 11, 14.

 [3468] [Comp. text and notes, Teaching, chap. xv.--R.]

 [3469] 2 Tim. ii. 15.

 [3470] [This clause is found verbatim in Teaching, chap. xvi. There is
 a resemblance also, in order of topics, from this point down to the
 phrase "above the clouds;" see chap. xxxii. No further correspondences
 appear.--R.]

 [3471] Luke xii. 35, 37; Mark xiii. 35.

 [3472] 2 Thess. ii.

 [3473] Isa. xi. 4; Matt. xxiv.

 [3474] 1 Thess. iv. 16.

 [3475] [Zech. xiv. 5.--R.]

 [3476] Matt. xvi. 27.

 [3477] Matt. xxv. 46.

 [3478] 1 Cor. ii. 9.

 [3479] A conjecture of Cotelerius is adopted. The mss. read
 "nourishment" instead of "joy."

 [3480] Gen. xiii. 16, xxii. 17.

 [3481] Gen. xxvi. 3.

 [3482] Gen. xvii. 7, xxviii. 15, xlviii. 4.

 [3483] Ex. iii. 14, 15.

 [3484] Job xxxviii. 11.

 [3485] Gen. i. 26.

 [3486] Ps. civ. 24.

 [3487] [i.e., "the wonderful Numberer;" Eng., marg.]

 [3488] Dan. viii. 13. [Not according to Heb. nor LXX. as now.]

 [3489] Isa. vi. 3.

 [3490] Ezek. iii. 12.

 [3491] Ps. lxvii. 17.

 [3492] Deut. iv. 39.

 [3493] One V. ms. reads, "with whom."

 [3494] Prov. viii. 22, LXX.

 [3495] Lev. xxiii., xxv.

 [3496] [Vol. vi. p. 149, [281]note 8, this series.]

 [3497] [Justin Martyr, vol. i. [282]p. 186, this series.]

 [3498] Gen. iv.

 [3499] Gen. viii.

 [3500] Gen. xii.

 [3501] Gen. xxvi

 [3502] Gen. xxxv

 [3503] Ex. iii

 [3504] Num. xvi.

 [3505] Josh. v.

 [3506] Judg. vi., viii.

 [3507] Judg. xiii., xv., xvi.

 [3508] Judg. xi., iv.

 [3509] 1 Sam. vii.

 [3510] 1 Chron. xxi.

 [3511] 1 Kings iii., viii.

 [3512] 1 Kings xviii.

 [3513] 2 Kings ii.

 [3514] 2 Chron. xviii.

 [3515] 2 Kings xx., xix. [Curiously enough, the chronological order,
 according to the best recent authorities, is that indicated above; the
 sickness (2 Kings xx.) preceded the invasion of Sennacherib (chap.
 xix.). Monumental evidence confirms this view.--R.]

 [3516] 2 Chron. xxxiii.

 [3517] 2 Chron. xxxv. Cotelerius conjectures "in his Passover," instead
 of "in Phassa." [A very probable textual emendation.--R.]

 [3518] Ezra viii.

 [3519] Dan. vi. 16.

 [3520] Jonah ii.

 [3521] Dan. iii.

 [3522] 1 Sam. i.

 [3523] Neh. iii

 [3524] 1 Macc. i.,. etc.

 [3525] One V. ms. reads, "with Christ and the Holy Spirit."

 [3526] Rom. viii. 21.

 Sec. III.--On the Instruction of Catechumens, and Their Initiation into
 Baptism.

 Now, after what manner those ought to live that are initiated into
 Christ, and what thanksgivings they ought to send up to God through
 Christ, has been said in the foregoing directions. But it is reasonable
 not to leave even those who are not yet initiated without assistance.

 How the Catechumens are to Be Instructed in the Elements.

 XXXIX. Let him, therefore, who is to be taught the truth in regard to
 piety be instructed before his baptism in the knowledge of the
 unbegotten God, in the understanding of His only begotten Son, in the
 assured acknowledgment of the Holy Ghost. Let him learn the order of
 the several parts of the creation, the series of providence, the
 different dispensations of Thy laws. Let him be instructed why the
 world was made, and why man was appointed to be a citizen therein; let
 him also know his own nature, of what sort it is; let him be taught how
 God punished the wicked with water and fire, and did glorify the saints
 in every generation--I mean Seth, and Enos, and Enoch, and Noah, and
 Abraham and his posterity, and Melchizedek, and Job, and Moses, and
 Joshua, and Caleb, and Phineas the priest, and those that were holy in
 every generation; and how God still took care of and did not reject
 mankind, but called them from their error and vanity to the
 acknowledgment of the truth at various seasons, reducing them from
 bondage and impiety unto liberty and piety, from injustice to
 righteousness, from death eternal to everlasting life. Let him that
 offers himself to baptism learn these and the like things during the
 time that he is a catechumen; and let him who lays his hands upon him
 adore God, the Lord of the whole world, and thank Him for His creation,
 for His sending Christ His only begotten Son, that He might save man by
 blotting out his transgressions, and that He might remit ungodliness
 and sins, and might "purify him from all filthiness of flesh and
 spirit," [3527] and sanctify man according to the good pleasure of His
 kindness, that He might inspire him with the knowledge of His will, and
 enlighten the eyes of his heart to consider of His wonderful works, and
 make known to him the judgments of righteousness, that so he might hate
 every way of iniquity, and walk in the way of truth, that he might be
 thought worthy of the laver of regeneration, to the adoption of sons,
 which is in Christ, that "being planted together in the likeness of the
 death of Christ," [3528] in hopes of a glorious communication, he may
 be mortified to sin, and may live to God, as to his mind, and word, and
 deed, and may be numbered together in the book of the living. And after
 this thanksgiving, let him instruct him in the doctrines concerning our
 Lord's incarnation, and in those concerning His passion, and
 resurrection from the dead, and assumption.

 A Constitution How the Catechumens are to Be Blessed by the Priests in
 Their Initiation, and What Things are to Be Taught Them.

 XL. And when it remains that the catechumen is to be baptized, let him
 learn what concerns the renunciation of the devil, and the joining
 himself with Christ; for it is fit that he should first abstain from
 things contrary, and then be admitted to the mysteries. He must
 beforehand purify his heart from all wickedness of disposition, from
 all spot and wrinkle, and then partake of the holy things; for as the
 skilfullest husbandman does first purge his ground of the thorns which
 are grown up therein, and does then sow his wheat, so ought you also to
 take away all impiety from them, and then to sow the seeds of piety in
 them, and vouchsafe them baptism. For even our Lord did in this manner
 exhort us, saying first, "Make disciples of all nations;" [3529] and
 then He adds this, "and baptize them into the name of the Father, and
 of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost." Let, therefore, the candidate for
 baptism declare thus in his renunciation: [3530] --

 The Renunciation of the Adversary, and the Dedication to the Christ of
 God.

 XLI. I renounce Satan, and his works, and his pomps, and his worships,
 and his angels, and his inventions, and all things that are under him.
 And after his renunciation let him in his consociation say: And I
 associate myself to Christ, and believe, and am baptized into one
 unbegotten Being, the only true God Almighty, the Father of Christ, the
 Creator and Maker of all things, from whom are all things; and into the
 Lord Jesus Christ, His only begotten Son, the First-born of the whole
 creation, who before the ages was begotten by the good pleasure of the
 Father, by whom all things were made, both those in heaven and those on
 earth, visible and invisible; who in the last days descended from
 heaven, and took flesh, and was born of the holy Virgin Mary, and did
 converse holily according to the laws of His God and Father, and was
 crucified under Pontius Pilate, and died for us, and rose again from
 the dead after His passion the third day, and ascended into the
 heavens, and sitteth at the right hand of the Father, and again is to
 come at the end of the world with glory to judge the quick and the
 dead, of whose kingdom there shall be no end. And I am baptized into
 the Holy Ghost, that is, the Comforter, who wrought in all the saints
 from the beginning of the world, but was afterwards sent to the
 apostles by the Father, according to the promise of our Saviour and
 Lord, Jesus Christ; and after the apostles, to all those that believe
 in the Holy Catholic Church; into the resurrection of the flesh, and
 into the remission of sins, and into the kingdom of heaven, and into
 the life of the world to come. And after this vow, he comes in order to
 the anointing with oil.

 A Thanksgiving Concerning the Anointing with the Mystical Oil.

 XLII. Now this is blessed by the high priest for the remission of sins,
 and the first preparation for baptism. For he calls thus upon the
 unbegotten God, the Father of Christ, the King of all sensible and
 intelligible natures, that He would sanctify the oil in the name of the
 Lord Jesus, and impart to it spiritual grace and efficacious strength,
 the remission of sins, and the first preparation for the confession of
 baptism, that so the candidate for baptism, when he is anointed may be
 freed from all ungodliness, and may become worthy of initiation,
 according to the command of the Only-begotten.

 A Thanksgiving Concerning the Mystical Water.

 XLIII. After this he comes to the water, and blesses and glorifies the
 Lord God Almighty, the Father of the only begotten God; [3531] and the
 priest returns thanks that He has sent His Son to become man on our
 account, that He might save us; that He has permitted that He should in
 all things become obedient to the laws of that incarnation, to preach
 the kingdom of heaven, the remission of sins, and the resurrection of
 the dead. Moreover, he adores the only begotten God Himself, after His
 Father, and for Him, giving Him thanks that He undertook to die for all
 men by the cross, the type of which He has appointed to be the baptism
 of regeneration. He glorifies Him also, for that God who is the Lord of
 the whole world, in the name of Christ and by His Holy Spirit, has not
 cast off mankind but has suited His providence to the difference of
 seasons: at first giving to Adam himself paradise for an habitation of
 pleasure, and afterwards giving a command on account of providence, and
 casting out the offender justly, but through His goodness not utterly
 casting him off, but instructing his posterity in succeeding ages after
 various manners; on whose account, in the conclusion of the world, He
 has sent His Son to become man for man's sake, and to undergo all human
 passions without sin. Him, therefore, let the priest even now call upon
 in baptism, and let him say: Look down from heaven, and sanctify this
 water, and give it grace and power, that so he that is to be baptized,
 according to the command of Thy Christ, may be crucified with Him, and
 may die with Him, and may be buried with Him, and may rise with Him to
 the adoption which is in Him, that he may be dead to sin and live to
 righteousness. And after this, when he has baptized him in the name of
 the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost, he shall anoint him
 with ointment, and shall add as follows:--

 A Thanksgiving Concerning the Mystical Ointment.

 XLIV. O Lord God, who art without generation, and without a superior,
 the Lord of the whole world, who hast scattered the sweet odour of the
 knowledge of the Gospel among all nations, do Thou grant at this time
 that this ointment may be efficacious upon him that is baptized, that
 so the sweet odour of Thy Christ may continue upon him firm and fixed;
 and that now he has died with Him, he may arise and live with Him. Let
 him say these and the like things, for this is the efficacy of the
 laying on of hands on every one; for unless there be such a recital
 made by a pious priest over every one of these, the candidate for
 baptism does only descend into the water as do the Jews, and he only
 puts off the filth of the body, not the filth of the soul. After this
 let him stand up, and pray that prayer which the Lord taught us. But,
 of necessity, he who is risen again ought to stand up and pray, because
 he that is raised up stands upright. Let him, therefore, who has been
 dead with Christ, and is raised up with Him, stand up. But let him pray
 towards the east. [3532] For this also is written in the second book of
 the Chronicles, that after the temple of the Lord was finished by King
 Solomon, in the very feast of dedication the priests and the Levites
 and the singers stood up towards the east, praising and thanking God
 with cymbals and psalteries, and saying, "Praise the Lord, for He is
 good; for His mercy endureth for ever." [3533]

 A Prayer for the New Fruits.

 XLV. But let him pray thus after the foregoing prayer, and say: O God
 Almighty, the Father of Thy Christ, Thy only begotten Son, give me a
 body undefiled, a heart pure, a mind watchful, an unerring knowledge,
 the influence of the Holy Ghost for the obtaining and assured enjoying
 of the truth, through Thy Christ, by whom [3534] glory be to Thee, in
 the Holy Spirit, for ever. Amen. We have thought it reasonable to make
 these constitutions concerning the catechumens.

 [3527] 2 Cor. vii. 1.

 [3528] Rom. vi. 5.

 [3529] Matt. xxviii. 19.

 [3530] [Compare Justin Martyr, vol. i. [283]p. 183, this series.]

 [3531] One V. ms. has "Son" instead of "God." Cotelerius remarks that
 this change was made in the interests of orthodoxy; for the expression
 "only begotten God" had become common with the Arians. [Comp. John i.
 18., where the most weighty ancient authorities read monogenes theos
 instead of ho monogenes uios; see Revised Version, margins in
 loco.--R.]

 [3532] [Compare vol. ii. [284]p. 535 and vol. iii. [285]p. 31.]

 [3533] 2 Chron. v. 13.

 [3534] One V. ms. reads, "with whom glory be to Thee, along with the
 Holy Spirit."

 Sec. IV.--Enumeration Ordained by Apostles.

 Who Were They that the Holy Apostles Sent and Ordained?

 XLVI. Now concerning those bishops which have been ordained in our
 lifetime, we let you know that they are these:--James the bishop of
 Jerusalem, the brother of our Lord; [3535] upon whose death the second
 was Simeon the son of Cleopas; after whom the third was Judas the son
 of James. Of Cæsarea of Palestine, the first was Zacchæus, who was once
 a publican; after whom was Cornelius, and the third Theophilus. Of
 Antioch, Euodius, ordained by me Peter; and Ignatius by Paul. Of
 Alexandria, Annianus was the first, ordained by Mark the evangelist;
 the second Avilius by Luke, who was also an evangelist. Of the church
 of Rome, Linus the son of Claudia was the first, ordained by Paul;
 [3536] and Clemens, after Linus' death, the second, ordained by me
 Peter. [3537] Of Ephesus, Timotheus, ordained by Paul; and John, by me
 John. Of Smyrna, Aristo the first; after whom Stratæas the son of Lois;
 [3538] and the third Aristo. Of Pergamus, Gaius. Of Philadelphia,
 Demetrius, by me. Of Cenchrea, Lucius, by Paul. Of Crete, Titus. Of
 Athens, Dionysius. Of Tripoli in Phoenicia, Marathones. Of Laodicea in
 Phrygia, Archippus. [3539] Of Colossæ, Philemon. [3540] Of Borea in
 Macedonia, Onesimus, once the servant of Philemon. [3541] Of the
 churches of Galatia, Crescens. [3542] Of the parishes of Asia, Aquila
 and Nicetas. Of the church of Æginæ, Crispus. These are the bishops who
 are entrusted by us with the parishes in the Lord; whose doctrine keep
 ye always in mind, and observe our words. And may the Lord be with you
 now, and to endless ages, as Himself said to us when He was about to be
 taken up to His own God and Father. For says He, "Lo, I am with you all
 the days, until the end of the world. Amen." [3543]

 [3535] [An incidental proof of the early origin of this compilation is
 furnished by the clear distinction it makes between James the son of
 Alphæus and James the brother of our Lord. The theory of Jerome, which
 identifies them, was later.--R.]

 [3536] 2 Tim. iv. 21.

 [3537] [Noteworthy, and to be recalled hereafter. See vol. iii. [286]p.
 258.]

 [3538] 2 Tim. i. 5.

 [3539] [Comp. Col. iv. 16, 17., whence this is probably derived.--R.]

 [3540] Philem. 1.

 [3541] [Philem. 10.--R.]

 [3542] [Comp. 2 Tim. iv. 10.--R.]

 [3543] Matt. xxviii. 20.

 Sec. V.--Daily Prayers.

 A Morning Prayer.

 XLVII. "Glory be to God in the highest, and upon earth peace, good-will
 among men." [3544] We praise Thee, we sing hymns to Thee, we bless
 Thee; we glorify Thee, we worship Thee by Thy great High Priest; Thee
 who art the true God, who art the One Unbegotten, the only inaccessible
 Being. For Thy great glory, O Lord and heavenly King, O God the Father
 Almighty, O Lord God, [3545] the Father of Christ the immaculate Lamb,
 who taketh away the sin of the world, receive our prayer, Thou that
 sittest upon the cherubim. For Thou only art holy, Thou only art the
 Lord Jesus, the Christ of the God of all created nature, and our King,
 by whom glory, honour, and worship be to Thee.

 An Evening Prayer.

 XLVIII. "Ye children, praise the Lord: praise the name of the Lord."
 [3546] We praise Thee, we sing hymns to Thee, we bless Thee for Thy
 great glory, O Lord our King, the Father of Christ the immaculate Lamb,
 who taketh away the sin of the world. Praise becomes Thee, hymns become
 Thee, glory becomes Thee, the God and Father, [3547] through the Son,
 in the most holy Spirit, for ever and ever. Amen. "Now, O Lord, lettest
 Thou Thy servant depart in peace, according to Thy word; for mine eyes
 have seen Thy salvation, which Thou hast prepared before the face of
 all people, a light for the revelation to the Gentiles, and the glory
 of Thy people Israel." [3548]

 A Prayer at Dinner.

 XLIX. Thou art blessed, O Lord, who nourishest me from my youth, who
 givest food to all flesh. Fill our hearts with joy and gladness, that
 having always what is sufficient for us, we may abound to every good
 work, in Christ Jesus our Lord, through whom [3549] glory, honour, and
 power be to Thee for ever. Amen.

 General notice

 Comparing the Teaching with chapters xxv. and xxvi. of these
 Constitutions, it seems to me that the nature of the eucharistic
 (thanksgiving) prayers becomes apparent. They presuppose the formulas
 to be found in the eighth book of the Constitutions, [3550] and are
 such instructions as were imparted only to catechumens; the part
 peculiar to presbyters being withheld, of course, as esoteric
 mysteries, until further knowledge was canonically appropriate. See
 Elucidation IV. vol. vi. [287]p. 236; and in this volume, Elucidation
 I. [288]p. 382. The Bryennios ms. is cleared from nearly all
 difficulties by Dr. Riddle's lucid notes, when compared with
 corresponding passages in the Constitutions, or illustrated by such as
 are supplementary.

 [3544] Luke ii. 14.

 [3545] One V. ms. gives a more orthodox form to this prayer: "O Lord,
 only begotten Son, and Holy Spirit, Lord God, the Lamb of God, the Son
 of the Father, who takest away the sins of the world, receive our
 prayer. Thou who sittest at the right hand of the Father, have mercy
 upon us, for Thou only art holy; Thou only art Christ, Jesus Christ, to
 the glory of God the Father. Amen."

 [3546] Ps. cxiii. 1.

 [3547] One V. ms. omits "the God and;" then reads, "to Father, Son, and
 Holy Ghost."

 [3548] Luke ii. 29., etc.

 [3549] One V. ms. reads, "with whom."

 [3550] Beginning [289]p. 479, infra.


constitutions of the holy apostles.

  Book VIII.

  Concerning Gifts, and Ordinations, and the Ecclesiastical Canons.

 Sec. I.--On the Diversity of Spiritual Gifts.

 On Whose Account the Powers of Miracles are Performed.

 I. Jesus Christ, our God and Saviour, delivered to us the great mystery
 of godliness, and called both Jews and Gentiles to the acknowledgment
 of the one and only [3551] true God His Father, [3552] as Himself
 somewhere says, when He was giving thanks for the salvation of those
 that had believed, "I have manifested Thy name to men, I have finished
 the work Thou gavest me;" [3553] and said concerning us to His Father,
 "Holy Father, although the world has not known Thee, yet have I known
 Thee; and these have known Thee." [3554] With good reason did He say to
 all of us together, when we were perfected concerning those gifts which
 were given from Him by the Spirit: "Now these signs shall follow them
 that have believed in my name: they shall cast out devils; they shall
 speak with new tongues; they shall take up serpents; and if they drink
 any deadly thing, it shall by no means hurt them: they shall lay their
 hands on the sick, and they shall recover." [3555] These gifts were
 first bestowed on us the apostles when we were about to preach the
 Gospel to every creature, and afterwards were of necessity afforded to
 those who had by our means believed; not for the advantage of those who
 perform them, but for the conviction of the unbelievers, that those
 whom the word did not persuade, the power of signs might put to shame:
 for signs are not for us who believe, but for the unbelievers, both for
 the Jews and Gentiles. For neither is it any profit to us to cast out
 demons, but to those who are so cleansed by the power of the Lord; as
 the Lord [3556] Himself somewhere instructs us, and shows, saying:
 "Rejoice ye, not because the spirits are subject unto you; but rejoice,
 because your names are written in heaven." [3557] Since the former is
 done by His power, but this by our good disposition and diligence, yet
 (it is manifest) by His assistance. It is not therefore necessary that
 every one of the faithful should cast out demons, or raise the dead, or
 speak with tongues; but such a one only who is vouchsafed this gift,
 for some cause which may be advantage to the salvation of the
 unbelievers, who are often put to shame, not with the demonstration of
 the world, but by the power of the signs; that is, such as are worthy
 of salvation: for all the ungodly are not affected by wonders; and
 hereof God Himself is a witness, as when He says in the law: "With
 other tongues will I speak to this people, and with other lips, and yet
 will they by no means believe." [3558] For neither did the Egyptians
 believe in God, when Moses had done so many signs and wonders; [3559]
 nor did the multitude of the Jews believe in Christ, as they believed
 Moses, who yet had healed every sickness and every disease among them.
 [3560] Nor were the former shamed by the rod which was turned into a
 living serpent, nor by the hand which was made white with leprosy, nor
 by the river Nile turned into blood; nor the latter by the blind who
 recovered their sight, nor by the lame who walked, nor by the dead who
 were raised. [3561] The one was resisted by Jannes and Jambres, the
 other by Annas and Caiaphas. [3562] Thus signs do not shame all into
 belief, but only those of a good disposition; for whose sake also it is
 that God is pleased, as a wise steward of a family, to appoint miracles
 to be wrought, not by the power of men, but by His own will. Now we say
 these things, that those who have received such gifts may not exalt
 themselves against those who have not received them; such gifts, we
 mean, as are for the working of miracles. For otherwise there is no man
 who has believed in God through Christ, [3563] that has not received
 some spiritual gift: for this very thing, having been delivered from
 the impiety of polytheism, and having believed in God the Father
 through Christ, [3564] this is a gift of God. And the having cast off
 the veil of Judaism, and having believed that, by the good pleasure of
 God, His only begotten Son, who was before all ages, [3565] was in the
 last time born of a virgin, [3566] without the company of a man, and
 that He lived as a man, yet without sin, and fulfilled all that
 righteousness which is of the law; and that, by the permission of God,
 He who was God the Word endured the cross, and despised the shame; and
 that He died, and was buried, and rose within three days; and that
 after His resurrection, having continued forty days with His apostles,
 and completed His whole constitutions, He was taken up in their sight
 to His God and Father, who sent Him: he who has believed these things,
 not at random and irrationally, but with judgment and full assurance,
 has received the gift of God. So also has He who is delivered from
 every heresy. Let not, therefore, any one that works signs and wonders
 judge any one of the faithful who is not vouchsafed the same: for the
 gifts of God which are bestowed by Him through Christ are various; and
 one man receives one gift, and another another. For perhaps one has the
 word of wisdom, and another the word of knowledge; [3567] another,
 discerning of spirits; another, foreknowledge of things to come;
 another, the word of teaching; another, long-suffering; another,
 continence according to the law: for even Moses, the man of God, when
 he wrought signs in Egypt, did not exalt himself against his equals:
 and when he was called a god, he did not arrogantly despise his own
 prophet Aaron. [3568] Nor did Joshua the son of Nun, who was the leader
 of the people after him, though in the war with the Jebusites he had
 made the sun stand still over against Gibeon, and the moon over against
 the valley of Ajalon, [3569] because the day was not long enough for
 their victory, insult over Phineas or Caleb. Nor did Samuel, who had
 done so many surprising things, disregard David the beloved of God: yet
 they were both prophets, and the one was high priest, and the other was
 king. And when there were only seven thousand holy men in Israel who
 had not bowed the knee to Baal, [3570] Elijah alone among them, and his
 disciple Elisha, were workers of miracles. Yet neither did Elijah
 despise Obadiah the steward, who feared God, but wrought no signs; nor
 did Elisha despise his own disciple when he trembled at the enemies.
 [3571] Moreover, neither did the wise Daniel who was twice delivered
 from the mouths of the lions, nor the three children who were delivered
 from the furnace of fire, [3572] despise the rest of their
 fellow-Israelites: for they knew that they had not escaped these
 terrible miseries by their own might; but by the power of God did they
 both work miracles, and were delivered from miseries. Wherefore let
 none of you exalt himself against his brother, though he be a prophet,
 or though he be a worker of miracles: for if it happens that there be
 no longer an unbeliever, all the power of signs will thenceforwards be
 superfluous. For to be pious is from any one's good disposition; but to
 work wonders is from the power of Him that works them by us: the first
 of which respects ourselves; but the second respects God that works
 them, for the reasons which we have already mentioned. Wherefore
 neither let a king despise his officers that are under him, nor the
 rulers those who are subject. For where there are none to be ruled
 over, rulers are superfluous; and where there are no officers, the
 kingdom will not stand. Moreover, let not a bishop be exalted against
 his deacons and presbyters, nor the presbyters against the people: for
 the subsistence of the congregation depends on each other. For the
 bishops and the presbyters are the priests with relation to the people;
 and the laity are the laity with relation to the clergy. And to be a
 Christian is in our own power; but to be an apostle, or a bishop, or in
 any other such office, is not in our own power, but at the disposal of
 God, who bestows the gifts. And thus much concerning those who are
 vouchsafed gifts and dignities.

 Concerning Unworthy Bishops and Presbyters.

 II. We add, in the next place, that neither is every one that
 prophesies holy, nor every one that casts out devils religious: for
 even Balaam the son of Beor the prophet did prophesy, [3573] though he
 was himself ungodly; as also did Caiaphas, the falsely-named high
 priest. [3574] Nay, the devil foretells many things, and the demons,
 about Him; and yet for all that, there is not a spark of piety in them:
 for they are oppressed with ignorance, by reason of their voluntary
 wickedness. It is manifest, therefore, that the ungodly, although they
 prophesy, do not by their prophesying cover their own impiety; nor will
 those who cast out demons be sanctified by the demons being made
 subject to them: for they only mock one another, as they do who play
 childish tricks for mirth, and destroy those who give heed to them. For
 neither is a wicked king any longer a king, but a tyrant; nor is a
 bishop oppressed with ignorance or an evil disposition a bishop, but
 falsely so called, being not one sent out by God, but by men, as
 Ananiah and Samoeah in Jerusalem, and Zedekiah and Achiah the false
 prophets in Babylon. [3575] And indeed Balaam the prophet, when he had
 corrupted Israel by Baal-peor, suffered punishment; [3576] and Caiaphas
 at last was his own murderer; and the sons of Sceva, endeavouring to
 cast out demons, were wounded by them, and fled away in an unseemly
 manner; [3577] and the kings of Israel and of Judah, when they became
 impious, suffered all sorts of punishments. It is therefore evident how
 bishops and presbyters, also falsely so called, will not escape the
 judgment of God. For it will be said to them even now: "O ye priests
 that despise my name, [3578] I will deliver you up to the slaughter, as
 I did Zedekiah and Achiah, whom the king of Babylon fried in a
 frying-pan," as says Jeremiah the prophet. [3579] We say these things,
 not in contempt of true prophecies, for we know that they are wrought
 in holy men by the inspiration of God, but to put a stop to the
 boldness of vainglorious men; and add this withal, that from such as
 these God takes away His grace: for "God resisteth the proud, but
 giveth grace to the humble." [3580] Now Silas and Agabus prophesied in
 our times; [3581] yet did they not equal themselves to the apostles,
 nor did they exceed their own measures though they were beloved of God.
 Now women prophesied also. Of old, Miriam the sister of Moses and
 Aaron, [3582] and after her Deborah, [3583] and after these Huldah
 [3584] and Judith [3585] --the former under Josiah, the latter under
 Darius. The mother of the Lord did also prophesy, and her kinswoman
 Elisabeth, and Anna; [3586] and in our time the daughters of Philip;
 [3587] yet were not these elated against their husbands, but preserved
 their own measures. [3588] Wherefore if among you also there be a man
 or a woman, and such a one obtains any gift, let him be humble, that
 God may be pleased with him. For says He: "Upon whom will I look, but
 upon him that is humble and quiet, and trembles at my words?" [3589]

 [3551] The words "one and only" are omitted in the Syriac and Coptic.

 [3552] One V. ms. omits "His Father." The Syriac amd Coptic have "the
 only Father."

 [3553] John xvii. 6, 4.

 [3554] John xvii. 11, 25.

 [3555] Mark xvi. 17, 18.

 [3556] The Coptic reads "our God."

 [3557] Luke x. 20.

 [3558] Isa. xxviii. 11; 1 Cor. xiv. 21.

 [3559] Ex. vii. and iv.

 [3560] Deut. xviii. 15, etc.

 [3561] Matt. xi. 5

 [3562] 2 Tim. iii. 8

 [3563] Instead of "Christ," the Coptic reads, "through His Holy Son."

 [3564] The Coptic reads, "and in Christ and the Holy Spirit."

 [3565] The Coptic reads, "and His only begotten Son, who was with the
 Father and the life-giving Holy Spirit before all the ages."

 [3566] The Coptic reads, "spotless virgin."

 [3567] 1 Cor. xii. 8

 [3568] Ex. vii. 1

 [3569] Josh. x

 [3570] 1 Kings xix. 18; Rom. xi. 4.

 [3571] 2 Kings vi.

 [3572] Dan vi. 16, iii.

 [3573] Num. xxiii; xxiv.

 [3574] John xi. 51. [See on the Sibyllina, passim.]

 [3575] Jer. xxviii; xxix

 [3576] Num. xxv; xxxi

 [3577] Acts xix. 14

 [3578] Mal. i. 6

 [3579] Jer. xxix. 22

 [3580] 1 Pet. v. 5

 [3581] Acts [xi. 28;] xv. 32, xxi. 10

 [3582] Ex. xv. 20.

 [3583] Judg. iv. 4.

 [3584] 2 Kings xxii. 14.

 [3585] Judith viii..

 [3586] Luke i. and ii.

 [3587] Acts xxi. 9.

 [3588] [The compiler has forgotten that few of these had husbands, at
 least at the time when they are reported to have prophesied.--R.]

 [3589] Isa. lxvi. 2.

 Sec. II.--Election and Ordination of Bishops: Form of Service on Sundays.

 That to Make Constitutions About the Offices to Be Performed in the
 Churches is of Great Consequence.

 III. We have now finished the first part of this discourse concerning
 gifts, whatever they be, which God has bestowed upon men according to
 His own will; and how He rebuked the ways of those who either attempted
 to speak lies, or were moved by the spirit of the adversary; and that
 God often employed the wicked [3590] for prophecy and the performance
 of wonders. But now our discourse hastens as to the principal part,
 that is, the constitution of ecclesiastical affairs, that so, when ye
 have learned this constitution from us, ye who are ordained bishops by
 us at the command of Christ, may perform all things according to the
 commands delivered you, knowing that he that heareth us heareth Christ,
 and he that heareth Christ heareth His God and Father, [3591] to whom
 be glory for ever. Amen.

 Concerning Ordinations.

 IV. Wherefore we, the twelve apostles of the Lord, who are now
 together, give you in charge those divine constitutions concerning
 every ecclesiastical form, there being present with us Paul the chosen
 vessel, our fellow-apostle, and James the bishop, and the rest of the
 presbyters, and the seven deacons. [3592] In the first place,
 therefore, I Peter say, [3593] that a bishop to be ordained is to be,
 as we have already, all of us, appointed, unblameable in all things, a
 select person, [3594] chosen by the whole people, who, when he is named
 and approved, let the people assemble, with the presbytery and bishops
 that are present, on the Lord's day, and let them give their consent.
 And let the principal of the bishops ask the presbytery and people
 whether this be the person whom they desire for their ruler. And if
 they give their consent, let him ask further whether he has a good
 testimony from all men as to his worthiness for so great and glorious
 an authority; whether all things relating to his piety towards God be
 right; whether justice towards men has been observed by him; whether
 the affairs of his family have been well ordered by him; whether he has
 been unblameable in the course of his life. And if all the assembly
 together do according to truth, and not according to prejudice, witness
 that he is such a one, let them the third time, as before God the
 Judge, and Christ, the Holy Ghost being also present, as well as all
 the holy and ministering spirits, ask again whether he be truly worthy
 of this ministry, that so "in the mouth of two or three witnesses every
 word may be established." [3595] And if they agree the third time that
 he is worthy, let them all be demanded their vote; and when they all
 give it willingly, let them be heard. And silence being made, let one
 of the principal bishops, together with two others, stand near to the
 altar, the rest of the bishops and presbyters praying silently, and the
 deacons holding the divine Gospels open upon the head of him that is to
 be ordained, and say to God thus [3596] :--

 The Form of Prayer for the Ordination of a Bishop.

 V. O Thou the great Being, O Lord God Almighty, who alone art
 unbegotten, and ruled over by none; who always art, and wast before the
 world; who standest in need of nothing, and art above all cause and
 beginning; who only art true, who only art wise; who alone art the most
 high; who art by nature invisible; whose knowledge is without
 beginning; who only art good, and beyond compare; who knowest all
 things before they are; who art acquainted with the most secret things;
 who art inaccessible, and without a superior; the God and Father of Thy
 only begotten Son, of our God and Saviour; the Creator of the whole
 world by Him; whose providence provides for and takes the care of all;
 the Father of mercies, and God of all consolation; [3597] who dwellest
 in the highest heavens, [3598] and yet lookest down on things below:
 Thou who didst appoint the rules of the Church, by the coming of Thy
 Christ in the flesh; of which the Holy Ghost is the witness, by Thy
 apostles, and by us the bishops, who by Thy grace are here present; who
 hast fore-ordained priests from the beginning for the government of Thy
 people--Abel in the first place, Seth and Enos, and Enoch and Noah, and
 Melchisedec and Job; who didst appoint Abraham, and the rest of the
 patriarchs, with Thy faithful servants Moses and Aaron, and Eleazar and
 Phineas; who didst choose from among them rulers and priests in the
 tabernacle of Thy testimony; who didst choose Samuel for a priest and a
 prophet; who didst not leave Thy sanctuary without ministers; who didst
 delight in those whom Thou chosest to be glorified in. Do Thou, by us,
 pour down the influence of Thy free Spirit, through the mediation of
 Thy Christ, which is committed to Thy beloved Son Jesus Christ; which
 He bestowed according to Thy will on the holy apostles of Thee the
 eternal God. Grant by Thy name, O God, who searchest the hearts, that
 this Thy servant, whom Thou hast chosen to be a bishop, may feed Thy
 holy flock, and discharge the office of an high priest to Thee, and
 minister to Thee, unblameably night and day; that he may appease Thee,
 and gather together the number of those that shall be saved, and may
 offer to Thee the gifts of Thy holy Church. Grant to him, O Lord
 Almighty, through Thy Christ, the fellowship of the Holy Spirit, that
 so he may have power to remit sins according to Thy command; to give
 forth lots according to Thy command; to loose every bond, according to
 the power which Thou gavest the apostles; that he may please Thee in
 meekness and a pure heart, with a stedfast, unblameable, and
 unreprovable mind; to offer to Thee a pure and unbloody sacrifice,
 which by Thy Christ Thou hast appointed as the mystery of the new
 covenant, for a sweet savour, through Thy holy child Jesus Christ, our
 God and Saviour, through whom [3599] glory, honour, and worship be to
 Thee in the Holy Spirit, now and always, and for all ages. And when he
 has prayed for these things, let the rest of the priests add, Amen; and
 together with them all the people. And after the prayer let one of the
 bishops elevate the sacrifice upon the hands of him that is ordained,
 and early in the morning let him be placed in his throne, in a place
 set apart for him among the rest of the bishops, they all giving him
 the kiss in the Lord. [3600] And after the reading of the Law [3601]
 and the Prophets, and our Epistles, and Acts, and the Gospels, let him
 that is ordained salute they Church, saying, The grace of our Lord
 Jesus Christ, the love of God and the Father, and the fellowship of the
 Holy Ghost, be with you all; and let them all answer, And with Thy
 Spirit. And after these words let him speak to the people the words of
 exhortation; and when he has ended his word of doctrine (I Andrew
 [3602] the brother of Peter speak), all standing up, let the deacon
 ascend upon some high seat, and proclaim, Let none of the hearers, let
 none of the unbelievers stay; and silence being made, let him say:--

Oxford Ms. [3603]

 V. God and Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, the Father of mercies and
 the God of all consolation, who knowest all things before they take
 place; Thou who didst appoint the rules of the Church through the word
 of Thy grace; who didst appoint beforehand the race righteous from the
 beginning that came from Abraham to be rulers, and didst constitute
 them priests, not leaving Thy sanctuary without ministers; who from the
 foundation of the world didst delight in those whom Thou chosest to be
 glorified in; and now pour down the influence of Thy free Spirit, which
 through Thy beloved Son Jesus Christ Thou hast bestowed on Thy holy
 apostles, who set up the Church in the place of the sanctuary, to
 unending glory and praise of Thy name: O Thou, who knowest the hearts
 of all, grant that this Thy servant whom Thou hast chosen to the holy
 office of Thy bishop, may discharge the duty of a high priest to Thee,
 and minister to Thee unblameably night and day; that he may appease
 Thee unceasingly, and present to Thee the gifts of Thy holy Church, and
 in the spirit of the high-priesthood have power to remit sins according
 to Thy commandment, to give lots according to Thy injunction, to loose
 every bond according to the power which Thou hast given to the
 apostles, and be well-pleasing to Thee, in meekness and a pure heart
 offering a smell of sweet savour through Thy Son Jesus Christ our Lord,
 with whom to Thee be glory, power, and honour, along with the Holy
 Spirit, now and for ever. Amen.

 The Divine Liturgy, Wherein is the Bidding Prayer for the Catechumens.

 VI. Ye catechumens, pray, and let all the faithful pray for them in
 their mind, saying: Lord, have mercy upon them. And let the deacon bid
 prayers for them, saving: Let us all pray unto God for the catechumens,
 that He that is good, He that is the lover of mankind, will mercifully
 hear their prayers and their supplications, and so accept their
 petitions as to assist them and give them those desires of their hearts
 which are for their advantage, and reveal to them the Gospel of His
 Christ; give them illumination and understanding, instruct them in the
 knowledge of God, teach them His commands and His ordinances, implant
 in them His pure and saving fear, open the ears of their hearts, that
 they may exercise themselves in His law day and night; strengthen them
 in piety, unite them to and number them with His holy flock; vouchsafe
 them the laver of regeneration, and the garment of incorruption, which
 is the true life; and deliver them from all ungodliness, and give no
 place to the adversary against them; "and cleanse them from all
 filthiness of flesh and spirit, and dwell in them, and walk in them, by
 His Christ; bless their goings out and their comings in, and order
 their affairs for their good." [3604] Let us still earnestly put up our
 supplications for them, that they may obtain the forgiveness of their
 transgressions by their admission, and so may be thought worthy of the
 holy mysteries, and of constant communion with the saints. Rise up, ye
 catechumens, beg for yourselves the peace of God through His Christ, a
 peaceable day, and free from sin, and the like for the whole time of
 your life, and your Christian ends of it; a compassionate and merciful
 God; and the forgiveness of your transgressions. Dedicate yourselves to
 the only unbegotten God, through His Christ. Bow down your heads, and
 receive the blessing. But at the naming of every one by the deacon, as
 we said before, let the people say, Lord, have mercy upon him; and let
 the children say it first. And as they have bowed down their heads, let
 the bishop who is newly ordained bless them with this blessing: O God
 Almighty, unbegotten and inaccessible, who only art the true God, the
 God and Father of Thy Christ, Thy only begotten Son; the God [3605] of
 the Comforter, and Lord of the whole world; who by Christ didst appoint
 Thy disciples to be teachers for the teaching of piety; do Thou now
 also look down upon Thy servants, who are receiving instruction in the
 Gospel of Thy Christ, and "give them a new heart, and renew a right
 spirit in their inward parts," [3606] that they may both know and do
 Thy will with full purpose of heart, and with a willing soul. Vouchsafe
 them an holy admission, and unite them to Thy holy Church, and make
 them partakers of Thy divine mysteries, through Christ, who is our
 hope, and who died for them; by whom glory and worship be given to Thee
 in the Holy Spirit for ever. Amen. And after this, let the deacon say:
 Go out, ye catechumens, in peace. And after they are gone out, let him
 say: Ye energumens, afflicted with unclean spirits, pray, and let us
 all earnestly pray for them, that God, the lover of mankind, will by
 Christ rebuke the unclean and wicked spirits, and deliver His
 supplicants from the dominion of the adversary. May He that rebuked the
 legion of demons, and the devil, the prince of wickedness, [3607] even
 now rebuke these apostates from piety, and deliver His own workmanship
 from his power, and cleanse those creatures which He has made with
 great wisdom. Let us still pray earnestly for them. Save them, O God,
 and raise them up by Thy power. Bow down your heads, ye energumens, and
 receive the blessings. And let the bishop add this prayer, and say:--

 For the Energumens.

 VII. Thou, who hast bound the strong man, and spoiled all that was in
 his house, who hast given us power over serpents and scorpions to tread
 upon them, and upon all the power of the enemy; [3608] who hast
 delivered the serpent, that murderer of men, bound to us, as a sparrow
 to children, whom all things dread, and tremble before the face of Thy
 power; [3609] who hast cast him down as lightning from heaven to earth,
 [3610] not with a fall from a place, but from honour to dishonour, on
 account of his voluntary evil disposition; whose look dries the
 abysses, and threatening melts the mountains, and whose truth remains
 for ever; whom the infants praise, and sucking babes bless; whom angels
 sing hymns to, and adore; who lookest upon the earth, and makest it
 tremble; who touchest the mountains, and they smoke; who threatenest
 the sea, and driest it up, and makest all its rivers as desert, and the
 clouds are the dust of His feet; who walkest upon the sea as upon the
 firm ground; [3611] Thou only begotten God, [3612] the Son of the great
 Father, rebuke these wicked spirits, and deliver the works of Thy hands
 from the power of the adverse spirit. For to Thee is due glory, honour,
 and worship, and by Thee to Thy Father, in the Holy Spirit, for ever.
 Amen. And let the deacon say: Go out, ye energumens. And after them,
 let him cry aloud: Ye that are to be illuminated, pray. Let all us, the
 faithful, earnestly pray for them, that the Lord will vouchsafe that,
 being initiated into the death of Christ, they may rise with Him, and
 become partakers of His kingdom, and may be admitted to the communion
 of His mysteries; unite them to, number them among, those that are
 saved in His holy Church. Save them, and raise them up by Thy grace.
 And being sealed to God through His Christ, let them bow down their
 heads, and receive this blessing from the bishop:--

 For the Baptized.

 VIII. Thou who hast formerly said by Thy holy prophets to those that be
 initiated, "Wash ye, become clean," [3613] and hast appointed spiritual
 regeneration by Christ, do Thou now also look down upon these that are
 baptized, and bless them, and sanctify them, and prepare them that they
 may become worthy of Thy spiritual gift, and of the true adoption of
 Thy spiritual mysteries, of being gathered together with those that are
 saved through Christ our Saviour; by whom glory, honour, and worship be
 to Thee, in the Holy Ghost, for ever. Amen. And let the deacon say: Go
 out, ye that are preparing for illumination. And after that let him
 proclaim: Ye penitents, pray; let us all earnestly pray for our
 brethren in the state of penitence, that God, the lover of compassion,
 will show them the way of repentance, and accept their return and their
 confession, and bruise Satan under their feet suddenly, [3614] and
 redeem them from the snare of the devil, and the ill-usage of the
 demons, and free them from every unlawful word, and every absurd
 practice and wicked thought; forgive them all their offences, both
 voluntary and involuntary, and blot out that handwriting which is
 against them, [3615] and write them in the book of life; [3616] cleanse
 them from all filthiness of flesh and spirit, [3617] and restore and
 unite them to His holy flock. For He knoweth our frame. For who can
 glory that he has a clean heart? And who can boldly say, that he is
 pure from sin? [3618] For we are all among the blameworthy. Let us
 still pray for them more earnestly, for there is joy in heaven over one
 sinner that repenteth, [3619] that, being converted from every evil
 work, they may be joined to all good practice; that God, the lover of
 mankind, will suddenly accept their petitions, will restore [3620] to
 them the joy of His salvation, and strengthen them with His free
 Spirit; [3621] that they may not be any more shaken, [3622] but be
 admitted to the communion of His most holy things, and become partakers
 of His divine mysteries, that appearing worthy of His adoption, they
 may obtain eternal life. Let us all still earnestly say on their
 account: Lord, have mercy upon them. Save them, O God, and raise them
 up by Thy mercy. Rise up, and bow your heads to God through His Christ,
 and receive the blessings. Let the bishop then add this prayer:--

 Imposition of Hands; Prayer for PenItents.

 IX. Almighty, eternal God, Lord of the whole world, the Creator and
 Governor of all things, who hast exhibited man as the ornament of the
 world through Christ, and didst give him a law both naturally implanted
 and written, that he might live according to law, as a rational
 creature; and when he had sinned, Thou gavest him Thy goodness as a
 pledge in order to his repentance: Look down upon these persons who
 have bended the neck of their soul and body to Thee; for Thou desirest
 not the death of a sinner, but his repentance, that he turn from his
 wicked way, and live. [3623] Thou who didst accept the repentance of
 the Ninevites, who willest that all men be saved, and come to the
 acknowledgment of the truth; [3624] who didst accept of that son who
 had consumed his substance in riotous living, [3625] with the bowels of
 a father, on account of his repentance; do Thou now accept of the
 repentance of Thy supplicants: for there is no man that will not sin;
 for "if Thou, O Lord, markest iniquities, O Lord, who shall stand? For
 with Thee there is propitiation." [3626] And do Thou restore them to
 Thy holy Church, into their former dignity and honour, through Christ
 our God and Saviour, by whom glory and adoration be to Thee, in the
 Holy Ghost, for ever. Amen. Then let the deacon say, Depart, ye
 penitents; and let him add, Let none of those who ought not to come
 draw near. All we of the faithful, let us bend our knee: let us all
 entreat God through His Christ; let us earnestly beseech God through
 His Christ.

 The Bidding Prayer for the Faithful.

 X. Let us pray for the peace and happy settlement of the world, and of
 the holy churches; that the God of the whole world may afford us His
 everlasting peace, and such as may not be taken away from us; that He
 may preserve us in a full prosecution of such virtue as is according to
 godliness. Let us pray for the Holy Catholic and Apostolic Church which
 is spread from one end of the earth to the other; that God would
 preserve and keep it unshaken, and free from the waves of this life,
 until the end of the world, as founded upon a rock; and for the holy
 parish in this place, that the Lord of the whole world may vouchsafe us
 without failure to follow after His heavenly hope, and without ceasing
 to pay Him the debt of our prayer. Let us pray for every episcopacy
 which is under the whole heaven, of those that rightly divide the word
 of Thy truth. And let us pray for our bishop James, [3627] and his
 parishes; let us pray for our bishop Clement, and his parishes; let us
 pray for our bishop Euodius, and his parishes; let us pray for our
 bishop Annianus, and his parishes: that the compassionate God may grant
 them to continue in His holy churches in health, honour, and long life,
 and afford them an honourable old age in godliness and righteousness.
 And let us pray for our presbyters, that the Lord may deliver them from
 every unreasonable and wicked action, and afford them a presbyterate in
 health and honour. Let us pray for all the deacons and ministers in
 Christ, that the Lord may grant them an unblameable ministration. Let
 us pray for the readers, singers, virgins, widows, and orphans. Let us
 pray for those that are in marriage and in child-bearing, that the Lord
 may have mercy upon them all. Let us pray for the eunuchs who walk
 holily. Let us pray for those in a state of continence and piety. Let
 us pray for those that bear fruit in the holy Church, and give alms to
 the needy. And let us pray for those who offer sacrifices and oblations
 to the Lord our God, that God, the fountain of all goodness, may
 recompense them with His heavenly gifts, and "give them in this world
 an hundredfold, and in the world to come life everlasting;" [3628] and
 bestow upon them for their temporal things, those that are eternal; for
 earthly things, those that are heavenly. Let us pray for our brethren
 newly enlightened, that the Lord may strengthen and confirm them. Let
 us pray for our brethren exercised with sickness, that the Lord may
 deliver them from every sickness and every disease, and restore them
 sound into His holy Church. Let us pray for those that travel by water
 or by land. Let us pray for those that are in the mines, in
 banishments, in prisons, and in bonds, for the name of the Lord. Let us
 pray for those that are afflicted with bitter servitude. Let us pray
 for our enemies, and those that hate us. Let us pray for those that
 persecute us for the name of the Lord, that the Lord may pacify their
 anger, and scatter their wrath against us. Let us pray for those that
 are without, and are wandered out of the way, that the Lord may convert
 them. Let us be mindful of the infants of the Church, that the Lord may
 perfect them in His fear, and bring them to a complete age. Let us pray
 one for another, that the Lord may keep us and preserve us by His grace
 to the end, and deliver us from the evil one. and from all the scandals
 of those that work iniquity, and preserve us unto His heavenly kingdom.
 Let us pray for every Christian soul. Save us, and raise us up, O God,
 by Thy mercy. Let us rise up, and let us pray earnestly, and dedicate
 ourselves and one another to the living God, through His Christ. And
 let the high priest add this prayer, and say:--

 The Form of Prayer for the Faithful.

 XI. O Lord Almighty, the Most High, who dwellest on high, the Holy One,
 that restest among the saints, without beginning, the Only Potentate,
 who hast given to us by Christ the preaching of knowledge, to the
 acknowledgment of Thy glory and of Thy name, which He has made known to
 us, for our comprehension, do Thou now also look down through Him upon
 this Thy flock, and deliver it from all ignorance and wicked practice,
 and grant that we may fear Thee in earnest, and love Thee with
 affection, and have a due reverence of Thy glory. Be gracious and
 merciful to them, and hearken to them when they pray unto Thee; and
 keep them, that they may be unmoveable, unblameable, and unreprovable,
 that they may be holy in body and spirit, not having spot or wrinkle,
 or any such thing; but that they may be complete, and none of them may
 be defective or imperfect. O our support, our powerful God, who dost
 not accept persons, be Thou the assister of this Thy people, [3629]
 which Thou hast redeemed with the precious blood of Thy Christ; be Thou
 their protector, aider, provider, and guardian, their strong wall of
 defence, their bulwark and security. For "none can snatch out of Thy
 hand:" [3630] for there is no other God like Thee; for on Thee is our
 reliance. "Sanctify them by Thy truth: for Thy word is truth." [3631]
 Thou who dost nothing for favour, Thou whom none can deceive, deliver
 them from every sickness, and every disease, and every offence, every
 injury and deceit, "from fear of the enemy, from the dart that flieth
 in the day, from the mischief that walketh about in darkness;" [3632]
 and vouchsafe them that everlasting life which is in Christ Thy only
 begotten Son, our God and Saviour, through whom glory and worship be to
 Thee, in the Holy Spirit, now and always, and for ever and ever. Amen.
 And after this let the deacon say, Let us attend. And let the bishop
 salute the church, and say, The peace of God be with you all. And let
 the people answer, And with thy spirit; and let the deacon say to all,
 Salute ye one another with the holy kiss. And let the clergy salute the
 bishop, the men of the laity salute the men, the women the women. And
 let the children stand at the reading-desk; and let another deacon
 stand by them, that they may not be disorderly. [3633] And let other
 deacons walk about and watch the men and women, that no tumult may be
 made, and that no one nod, or whisper, or slumber; and let the deacons
 [3634] stand at the doors of the men, and the sub-deacons at those of
 the women, that no one go out, nor a door be opened, although it be for
 one of the faithful, at the time of the oblation. But let one of the
 sub-deacons bring water to wash the hands of the priests, which is a
 symbol of the purity of those souls that are devoted to God.

 The Constitution of James the Brother of John, the Son of Zebedee.

 XII. And I James, [3635] the brother of John, the son of Zebedee, say,
 that the deacon shall immediately say, Let none of the catechumens, let
 none of the hearers, let none of the unbelievers, let none of the
 heterodox, stay here. You who have prayed the foregoing prayer, depart.
 [3636] Let the mothers receive their children; let no one have anything
 against any one; let no one come in hypocrisy; let us stand upright
 before the Lord with fear and trembling, to offer. When this is done,
 let the deacons bring the gifts to the bishop at the altar; and let the
 presbyters stand on his right hand, and on his left, as disciples stand
 before their Master. But let two of the deacons, on each side of the
 altar, hold a fan, made up of thin membranes, or of the feathers of the
 peacock, or of fine cloth, and let them silently drive away the small
 animals that fly about, that they may not come near to the cups. Let
 the high priest, therefore, together with the priests, pray [3637] by
 himself; and let him put on his shining garment, and stand at the
 altar, and make the sign of the cross upon his forehead with his hand,
 [3638] and say: The grace of Almighty God, and the love of our Lord
 Jesus Christ, and the fellowship of the Holy Ghost, be with you all.
 And let all with one voice say: And with thy spirit. The high priest:
 Lift up your mind. All the people: We lift it up unto the Lord. The
 high priest: Let us give thanks to the Lord. All the people: It is meet
 and right so to do. Then let the high priest say: It is very meet and
 right before all things to sing an hymn to Thee, who art the true God,
 who art before all beings, "from whom the whole family in heaven and
 earth is named;" [3639] who only art unbegotten, and without beginning,
 and without a ruler, and without a master; who standest in need of
 nothing; who art the bestower of everything that is good; who art
 beyond all cause and generation; who art alway and immutably the same;
 from whom all things came into being, as from their proper original.
 For Thou art eternal knowledge, everlasting sight, unbegotten hearing,
 untaught wisdom, the first by nature, and the measure of being, and
 beyond all number; who didst bring all things out of nothing into being
 by Thy only begotten Son, but didst beget Him before all ages by Thy
 will, Thy power, and Thy goodness, without any instrument, the only
 begotten Son, God the Word, the living Wisdom, "the First-born of every
 creature, the angel of Thy Great Counsel," [3640] and Thy High Priest,
 but the King and Lord of every intellectual and sensible nature, who
 was before all things, by whom were all things. For Thou, O eternal
 God, didst make all things by Him, and through Him it is that Thou
 vouchsafest Thy suitable providence over the whole world; for by the
 very same that Thou bestowedst being, didst Thou also bestow
 well-being: the God and Father of Thy only begotten Son, who by Him
 didst make before all things the cherubim and the seraphim, the æons
 and hosts, the powers and authorities, the principalities and thrones,
 the archangels and angels; and after all these, didst by Him make this
 visible world, and all things that are therein. For Thou art He who
 didst frame the heaven as an arch, and "stretch it out like the
 covering of a tent," [3641] and didst found the earth upon nothing by
 Thy mere will; who didst fix the firmament, and prepare the night and
 the day; who didst bring the light out of Thy treasures, and on its
 departure didst bring on darkness, for the rest of the living creatures
 that move up and down in the world; who didst appoint the sun in heaven
 to rule over the day, and the moon to rule over the night, and didst
 inscribe in heaven the choir of stars to praise Thy glorious majesty;
 who didst make the water for drink and for cleansing, the air in which
 we live for respiration and the affording of sounds, by the means of
 the tongue, which strikes the air, and the hearings which co-operates
 therewith, so as to perceive speech when it is received by it, and
 falls upon it; who madest fire for our consolation in darkness, for the
 supply of our want, and that we might be warmed and enlightened by it;
 who didst separate the great sea from the land, and didst render the
 former navigable and the latter fit for walking, and didst replenish
 the former with small and great living creatures, and filledst the
 latter with the same, both tame and wild; didst furnish it with various
 plants, and crown it with herbs, and beautify it with flowers, and
 enrich it with seeds; who didst ordain the great deep, and on every
 side madest a mighty cavity for it, which contains seas of salt waters
 heaped together, [3642] yet didst Thou every way bound them with
 barriers of the smallest sand; [3643] who sometimes dost raise it to
 the height of mountains by the winds, and sometimes dost smooth it into
 a plain; sometimes dost enrage it with a tempest, and sometimes dost
 still it with a calm, that it may be easy to seafaring men in their
 voyages; who didst encompass this world, which was made by Thee through
 Christ, with rivers, and water it with currents, and moisten it with
 springs that never fail, and didst bind it round with mountains for the
 immoveable and secure consistence of the earth: for Thou hast
 replenished Thy world, and adorned it with sweet-smelling and with
 healing herbs, with many and various living creatures, strong and weak,
 for food and for labour, tame and wild; with the noises of creeping
 things, the sounds of various sorts of flying creatures; with the
 circuits of the years, the numbers of months and days, the order of the
 seasons, the courses of the rainy clouds, for the production of the
 fruits and the support of living creatures. Thou hast also appointed
 the station of the winds, which blow when commanded by Thee, and the
 multitude of the plants and herbs. And Thou hast not only created the
 world itself, but hast also made man for a citizen of the world,
 exhibiting him as the ornament of the world; for Thou didst say to Thy
 Wisdom: "Let us make man according to our image, and according to our
 likeness; and let them have dominion over the fish of the sea, and over
 the fowls of the heaven." [3644] Wherefore also Thou hast made him of
 an immortal soul and of a body liable to dissolution--the former out of
 nothing, the latter out of the four elements--and hast given him as to
 his soul rational knowledge, the discerning of piety and impiety, and
 the observation of right and wrong; and as to his body, Thou hast
 granted him five senses and progressive motion: for Thou, O God
 Almighty, didst by Thy Christ plant a paradise in Eden, [3645] in the
 east, adorned with all plants fit for food, and didst introduce him
 into it, as into a rich banquet. And when Thou madest him, Thou gavest
 him a law implanted within him, that so he might have at home and
 within himself the seeds of divine knowledge; and when Thou hadst
 brought him into the paradise of pleasure, Thou allowedst him the
 privilege of enjoying all things, only forbidding the tasting of one
 tree, in hopes of greater blessings; that in case he would keep that
 command, he might receive the reward of it, which was immortality. But
 when he neglected that command, and tasted of the forbidden fruit, by
 the seduction of the serpent and the counsel of his wife, Thou didst
 justly cast him out of paradise.

 Yet of Thy goodness Thou didst not overlook him, nor suffer him to
 perish utterly, for he was Thy creature; but Thou didst subject the
 whole creation to him, and didst grant him liberty to procure himself
 food by his own sweat and labours, whilst Thou didst cause all the
 fruits of the earth to spring up, to grow, and to ripen. But when Thou
 hadst laid him asleep for a while, Thou didst with an oath call him to
 a restoration again, didst loose the bond of death, and promise him
 life after the resurrection. And not this only; but when Thou hadst
 increased his posterity to an innumerable multitude, those that
 continued with Thee Thou didst glorify, and those who did apostatize
 from Thee Thou didst punish. And while Thou didst accept of the
 sacrifice of Abel [3646] as of an holy person, Thou didst reject the
 gift of Cain, the murderer of his brother, as of an abhorred wretch.
 And besides these, Thou didst accept of Seth and Enos, [3647] and didst
 translate Enoch: [3648] for Thou art the Creator of men, and the giver
 of life, and the supplier of want, and the giver of laws, and the
 rewarder of those that observe them, and the avenger of those that
 transgress them; who didst bring the great flood upon the world by
 reason of the multitude of the ungodly, [3649] and didst deliver
 righteous Noah from that flood by an ark, [3650] with eight souls, the
 end of the foregoing generations, and the beginning of those that were
 to come; who didst kindle a fearful fire against the five cities of
 Sodom, and "didst turn a fruitful land into a salt lake for the
 wickedness of them that dwelt therein," [3651] but didst snatch holy
 Lot out of the conflagration. Thou art He who didst deliver Abraham
 from the impiety of his fore-fathers, and didst appoint him to be the
 heir of the world, and didst discover to him Thy Christ; who didst
 aforehand ordain Melchisedec an high priest for Thy worship; [3652] who
 didst render Thy patient servant Job the conqueror of that serpent who
 is the patron of wickedness; who madest Isaac the son of the promise,
 and Jacob the father of twelve sons, and didst increase his posterity
 to a multitude, and bring him into Egypt with seventy-five souls.
 [3653] Thou, O Lord, didst not overlook Joseph, but grantedst him, as a
 reward of his chastity for Thy sake, the government over the Egyptians.
 Thou, O Lord, didst not overlook the Hebrews when they were afflicted
 by the Egyptians, on account of the promises made unto their fathers;
 but Thou didst deliver them and punish the Egyptians. [3654] And when
 men had corrupted the law of nature, and had sometimes esteemed the
 creation the effect of chance, and sometimes honoured it more than they
 ought, and equalled it to the God of the universe, Thou didst not,
 however, suffer them to go astray, but didst raise up Thy holy servant
 Moses, and by him didst give the written law for the assistance of the
 law of nature, [3655] and didst show that the creation was Thy work,
 and didst banish away the error of polytheism. Thou didst adorn Aaron
 and his posterity with the priesthood, and didst punish the Hebrews
 when they sinned, and receive them again when they returned to Thee.
 Thou didst punish the Egyptians with a judgment of ten plagues, and
 didst divide the sea, and bring the Israelites through it, and drown
 and destroy the Egyptians who pursued after them. Thou didst sweeten
 the bitter water with wood; Thou didst bring water out of the rock of
 stone; Thou didst rain manna from heaven, and quails, as meat out of
 the air; Thou didst afford them a pillar of fire by night to give them
 light, and a pillar of a cloud by day to overshadow them from the heat;
 Thou didst declare Joshua to be the general of the army, and didst
 overthrow the seven nations of Canaan by him; [3656] Thou didst divide
 Jordan, and dry up the rivers of Etham; [3657] Thou didst overthrow
 walls without instruments or the hand of man. [3658] For all these
 things, glory be to Thee, O Lord Almighty. Thee do the innumerable
 hosts of angels, archangels, thrones, dominions, principalities,
 authorities, and powers, Thine everlasting armies, adore. The cherubim
 and the six-winged seraphim, with twain covering their feet, with twain
 their heads, and with twain flying, [3659] say, together with thousand
 thousands of archangels, and ten thousand times ten thousand of angels,
 [3660] incessantly, and with constant and loud voices, and let all the
 people say it with them: "Holy, holy, holy, Lord of hosts, heaven and
 earth are full of His glory: be Thou blessed for ever. Amen." [3661]
 And afterwards let the high priest say: For Thou art truly holy, and
 most holy, the highest and most highly exalted for ever. Holy also is
 Thy only begotten Son our Lord and God, Jesus Christ, who in all things
 ministered to His God and Father, both in Thy various creation and Thy
 suitable providence, and has not overlooked lost mankind. But after the
 law of nature, after the exhortations in the positive law, after the
 prophetical reproofs and the government of the angels, when men had
 perverted both the positive law and that of nature, and had cast out of
 their mind the memory of the flood, the burning of Sodom, the plagues
 of the Egyptians, and the slaughters of the inhabitant of Palestine,
 and being just ready to perish universally after an unparalleled
 manner, He was pleased by Thy good will to become man, who was man's
 Creator; to be under the laws, who was the Legislator; to be a
 sacrifice, who was an High Priest; to be a sheep, who was the Shepherd.
 And He appeased Thee, His God and Father, and reconciled Thee to the
 world, and freed all men from the wrath to come, and was made of a
 virgin, and was in flesh, being God the Word, the beloved Son, the
 first-born of the whole creation, and was, according to the prophecies
 which were foretold concerning Him by Himself, of the seed of David and
 Abraham, of the tribe of Judah. And He was made in the womb of a
 virgin, who formed all mankind that are born into the world; He took
 flesh, who was without flesh; He who was begotten before time, was born
 in time; He lived holily, and taught according to the law; He drove
 away every sickness and every disease from men, and wrought signs and
 wonders among the people; and He was partaker of meat, and drink, and
 sleep, who nourishes all that stand in need of food, and "fills every
 living creature with His goodness;" [3662] "He manifested His name to
 those that knew it not;" [3663] He drave away ignorance; He revived
 piety, and fulfilled Thy will; He finished the work which Thou gavest
 Him to do; and when He had set all these things right, He was seized by
 the hands of the ungodly, of the high priests and priests, falsely so
 called, and of the disobedient people, by the betraying of him who was
 possessed of wickedness as with a confirmed disease; He suffered many
 things from them, and endured all sorts of ignominy by Thy permission;
 He was delivered to Pilate the governor, and He that was the Judge was
 judged, and He that was the Saviour was condemned; He that was
 impassible was nailed to the cross, and He who was by nature immortal
 died, and He that is the giver of life was buried, that He might loose
 those for whose sake He came from suffering and death, and might break
 the bonds of the devil, and deliver mankind from his deceit. He arose
 from the dead the third day; and when He had continued with His
 disciples forty days, He was taken up into the heavens, and is sat down
 on the right hand of Thee, who art His God and Father.

 Being mindful, therefore, of those things that He endured for our
 sakes, we give Thee thanks, O God Almighty, not in such a manner as we
 ought, but as we are able, and fulfil His constitution: "For in the
 same night that He was betrayed, He took bread" [3664] in His holy and
 undefiled hands, and, looking up to Thee His God and Father, "He brake
 it, and gave it to His disciples, saying, This is the mystery of the
 new covenant: take of it, and eat. This is my body, which is broken for
 many, for the remission of sins." [3665] In like manner also "He took
 the cup," and mixed it of wine and water, and sanctified it, and
 delivered it to them, saying: "Drink ye all of this; for this is my
 blood which is shed for many, for the remission of sins: do this in
 remembrance of me. For as often as ye eat this bread and drink this
 cup, ye do show forth my death until I come." Being mindful, therefore,
 of His passion, and death, and resurrection from the dead, and return
 into the heavens, and His future second appearing, wherein He is to
 come with glory and power to judge the quick and the dead, and to
 recompense to every one according to his works, we offer to Thee, our
 King and our God, according to His constitution, this bread and this
 cup, giving Thee thanks, through Him, that Thou hast thought us worthy
 to stand before Thee, and to sacrifice to Thee; and we beseech Thee
 that Thou wilt mercifully look down upon these gifts which are here set
 before Thee, O Thou God, who standest in need of none of our offerings.
 And do Thou accept them, to the honour of Thy Christ, and send down
 upon this sacrifice Thine Holy Spirit, the Witness of the Lord Jesus'
 sufferings, that He may show this bread to be the body of Thy Christ,
 and the cup to be the blood of Thy Christ, that those who are partakers
 thereof may be strengthened for piety, may obtain the remission of
 their sins, may be delivered from the devil and his deceit, may be
 filled with the Holy Ghost, may be made worthy of Thy Christ, and may
 obtain eternal life upon Thy reconciliation to them, O Lord Almighty.
 We further pray unto Thee, O Lord, for thy holy Church spread from one
 end of the world to another, which Thou hast purchased with the
 precious blood of Thy Christ, that Thou wilt preserve it unshaken and
 free from disturbance until the end of the world; for every episcopate
 who rightly divides the word of truth. We further pray to Thee for me,
 who am nothing, who offer to Thee, for the whole presbytery, for the
 deacons and all the clergy, that Thou wilt make them wise, and
 replenish them with the Holy Spirit. We further pray to Thee, O Lord,
 "for the king and all in authority," [3666] for the whole army, that
 they may be peaceable towards us, that so, leading the whole time of
 our life in quietness and unanimity, we may glorify Thee through Jesus
 Christ, who is our hope. We further offer to Thee also for all those
 holy persons who have pleased Thee from the beginning of the
 world--patriarch, prophets, righteous men, apostles, martyrs,
 confessors, bishops, presbyters, deacons, sub-deacons, readers,
 singers, virgins, widows, and lay persons, with all whose names Thou
 knowest. We further offer to Thee for this people, that Thou wilt
 render them, to the praise of Thy Christ, "a royal priesthood and an
 holy nation;" [3667] for those that are in virginity and purity; for
 the widows of the Church; for those in honourable marriage and
 child-bearing; for the infants of Thy people, that Thou wilt not permit
 any of us to "become castaways." We further beseech Thee also for this
 city and its inhabitants; for those that are sick; for those in bitter
 servitude; for those in banishments; for those in prison; for those
 that travel by water or by land; that Thou, the helper and assister of
 all men, wilt be their supporter. We further also beseech Thee for
 those that hate us and persecute us for Thy name's sake; for those that
 are without, and wander out of the way; that Thou wilt convert them to
 goodness, and pacify their anger. We further also beseech Thee for the
 catechumens of the Church, and for those that are vexed by the
 adversary, and for our brethren the penitents, that Thou wilt perfect
 the first in the faith, that Thou wilt deliver the second from the
 energy of the evil one, and that Thou wilt accept the repentance of the
 last, and forgive both them and us our offences. We further offer to
 Thee also for the good temperature of the air, and the fertility of the
 fruits, that so, partaking perpetually of the good things derived from
 Thee, we may praise Thee without ceasing, "who gavest food to all
 flesh." [3668] We further beseech Thee also for those who are absent on
 a just cause, that Thou wilt keep us all in piety, and gather us
 together in the kingdom of Thy Christ, the God of all sensible and
 intelligent nature, our King that Thou wouldst keep us immoveable,
 unblameable, and unreprovable: for to Thee belongs all glory and
 worship, and thanksgiving, honour and adoration, the Father, with the
 Son, and to the Holy Ghost, both now and always, and for everlasting,
 and endless ages for ever. And let all the people say, Amen. And let
 the bishop say, "The peace of God be with you all." And let all the
 people say, "And with thy spirit." And let the deacon proclaim again:--

 The Bidding Prayer for the Faithful After the Divine Oblation.

 XIII. Let us still further beseech God through His Christ, and let us
 beseech Him on account of the gift which is offered to the Lord God,
 that the good God will accept it, through the mediation of His Christ,
 upon His heavenly altar, for a sweet-smelling savour. Let us pray for
 this church and people. Let us pray for every episcopate, every
 presbytery, all the deacons and ministers in Christ, for the whole
 congregation, that the Lord will keep and preserve them all. Let us
 pray "for kings and those in authority," that they may be peaceable
 toward us, "that so we may have and lead a quiet and peaceable life in
 all godliness and honesty." [3669] Let us be mindful of the holy
 martyrs, that we may be thought worthy to be partakers of their trial.
 Let us pray for those that are departed in the faith. Let us pray for
 the good temperature of the air, and the perfect maturity of the
 fruits. Let us pray for those that are newly enlightened, that they may
 be strengthened in the faith, and all may be mutually comforted by one
 another. [3670] Raise us up, O God, by Thy grace. Let us stand up, and
 dedicate ourselves to God, through His Christ. And let the bishop say:
 O God, who art great, and whose name is great, who art great in counsel
 and mighty in works, the God and Father of Thy holy child Jesus, our
 Saviour; look down upon us, and upon this Thy flock, which Thou hast
 chosen by Him to the glory of Thy name; and sanctify our body and soul,
 and grant us the favour to be "made pure from all filthiness of flesh
 and spirit," [3671] and may obtain the good things laid up for us, and
 do not account any of us unworthy; but be Thou our comforter, helper,
 and protector, through Thy Christ, with whom glory, honour, praise,
 doxology, and thanksgiving be to Thee and to the Holy Ghost for ever.
 Amen. And after that all have said Amen, let the deacon say: Let us
 attend. And let the bishop speak thus to the people: Holy things for
 holy persons. And let the people answer: There is One that is holy;
 there is one Lord, one Jesus Christ, blessed for ever, to the glory of
 God the Father. Amen. "Glory to God in the highest, and on earth peace,
 good-will among men. Hosanna to the son of David! Blessed be He that
 cometh in the name of the Lord," being the Lord God who appeared to us,
 "Hosanna in the highest." [3672] And after that, let the bishop
 partake, then the presbyters, and deacons, and [3673] sub-deacons, and
 the readers, and the singers, and the ascetics; and then of the women,
 the deaconesses, and the virgins, and the widows; then the children;
 and then all the people in order, with reverence and godly fear,
 without tumult. And let the bishop give the oblation, saying, The body
 of Christ; and let him that receiveth say, Amen. And let the deacon
 take the cup; and when he gives it, say, The blood of Christ, the cup
 of life; and let him that drinketh say, Amen. [3674] And let the
 thirty-third psalm be said, while the rest are partaking; and when all,
 [3675] both men and women, have partaken, let the deacons carry what
 remains into the vestry. And when the singer has done, let the deacon
 say:--

 The Bidding Prayer After the Participation.

 XIV. Now we have received the precious body and the precious blood of
 Christ, let us give thanks to Him who has thought us worthy to partake
 of these His holy [3676] mysteries; and let us beseech Him that it may
 not be to us for condemnation, but for salvation, to the advantage of
 soul and body, to the preservation of piety, to the remission of sins,
 and to the life of the world to come. Let us arise, and by the grace of
 Christ let us dedicate ourselves to God, to the only unbegotten God,
 and to His Christ. And let the bishop give thanks:--

 The Form of Prayer After the Participation.

 XV. O Lord God Almighty, the Father of Thy Christ, Thy blessed Son, who
 hearest those who call upon Thee with uprightness, who also knowest the
 supplications of those who are silent; we thank Thee that Thou hast
 thought us worthy to partake of Thy holy mysteries, which Thou hast
 bestowed upon us, for the entire confirmation of those things we have
 rightly known, for the preservation of piety, for the remission of our
 offences; for the name of thy Christ is called upon us, and we are
 joined To Thee. O Thou that hast separated us froth the communion of
 the ungodly, unite us with those that are consecrated to Thee in
 holiness; confirm us in the truth, by the assistance of Thy Holy
 Spirit; reveal to us what things we are ignorant of, supply what things
 we are defective in, confirm us in what things we already know,
 preserve the priests blameless in Thy worship; keep the kings in peace,
 and the rulers in righteousness, the air in a good temperature, the
 fruits in fertility, the world in an all-powerful providence; pacify
 the warring nations, convert those that are gone astray, sanctify Thy
 people, keep those that are in virginity, preserve those in the faith
 that are in marriage, strengthen those that are in purity, bring the
 infants to complete age, confirm the newly admitted; instruct the
 catechumens, and render them worthy of admission; and gather us all
 together into Thy kingdom of heaven, by Jesus Christ our Lord, with
 whom glory, honour, and worship be to Thee, in the Holy Ghost, for
 ever. Amen. And let the deacon say: Bow down to [3677] God through His
 Christ, and receive the blessing. And let the bishop add this prayer,
 and say: O God Almighty, the true God, to whom nothing can be compared,
 who art everywhere, and present in all things, and art in nothing as
 one of the things themselves; who art not bounded by place, nor grown
 old by time; who art not terminated by ages, nor deceived by words; who
 art not subject to generation, and wantest no guardian; who art above
 all corruption, free from all change, and invariable by nature; "who
 inhabitest light inaccessible;" [3678] who art by nature invisible, and
 yet art known to all reasonable natures who seek Thee with a good mind,
 and art comprehended by those that seek after Thee with a good mind;
 the God of Israel, Thy people which truly see, and which have believed
 in Christ: Be gracious to me, and hear me, for Thy name's sake, and
 bless those that bow down their necks unto Thee, and grant them the
 petitions of their hearts, which are for their good, and do not reject
 any one of them from Thy kingdom; but sanctify, guard, cover, and
 assist them; deliver them from the adversary and every enemy; keep
 their houses, and guard "their comings in and their goings out." [3679]
 For to Thee belongs the glory, praise, majesty, worship, and adoration,
 and to Thy Son Jesus, Thy Christ, our Lord and God and King, and to the
 Holy Ghost, now and always, for ever and ever. Amen. And [3680] the
 deacon shall say, Depart in peace. [3681] These constitutions
 concerning this mystical worship, we, the apostles, do ordain for you,
 the bishops, presbyters, and deacons.

 [3590] We have adopted the reading of one V. ms., apecharesato. It
 means more than is in the text--that God used the wicked in a way in
 which they would not be naturally used; lit., "abused," or "misused."
 The other mss. and the Coptic read apecharisato, "gave His gifts to the
 wicked for prophecy." Whiston has tried to make sense by giving a new
 meaning to apecharisato, "taking away His grace from the wicked."

 [3591] Luke x. 16.

 [3592] The Coptic and one V. ms. omit from the commencement of the
 chapter to "deacons." The V. ms. has: "Peter, the chief of the
 apostles, proclaimed the Gospel to Pontus, Galatia, Cappadocia, Asia,
 Bithynia, and finally in Rome, where he was crucified by the prefect in
 the reign of Nero, and where also he is buried."

 [3593] From this to the end of ch. xxvi., only small portions of what
 is now in the received text occur in the Coptic version. The Oxford ms.
 is also deficient. It has only a portion of the fifth, nothing of ch.
 vi. to xvi., and only a single sentence in ch. xxii. The portions in
 Coptic are printed in italics.

 [3594] Omitted in one V. ms.

 [3595] Matt. xviii. 16.

 [3596] The Coptic has, "let the bishop pray for him."

 [3597] 2 Cor. i. 3.

 [3598] Ps. cxiii. 5.

 [3599] One V. ms. reads, "with whom."

 [3600] The Coptic inserts, "let the holy Gospels be read."

 [3601] The Coptic reads "Gospel" instead of "Law."

 [3602] One V. ms. has the following note: "Andrew the brother of Peter
 preaches the Gospel to the Scythians, Sogdiani, and Thracians, who on
 account of preaching Christ is crowned with the martyrdom of the cross
 by Ægæa the proconsul, and was buried in Patræ. Afterwards he was
 removed to Constantinople by the Emperor Constantine."

 [3603] The Oxford ms. has this chapter in an abbreviated form as in the
 parallel columns.

 [3604] 2 Cor. vii. 1, vi. 6; Ps. cxxi. 8.

 [3605] One V. ms. has proboleus, "the sender forth," or "producer,"
 instead of "God."

 [3606] Ps. li. 10.

 [3607] Mark v. 9; Zech. iii. 2.

 [3608] Matt. xii. 29; Luke x. 19.

 [3609] Job xl. 24, LXX.

 [3610] Luke x. 18

 [3611] Ps. cvi. 9; Isa. li. 10; Ps. xcvii. 5; Isa. lxiv. 1, Ps. cxvii.
 2, viii. 2, xcvii. 4, civ. 32; Nah. i. 4, 3; Job ix. 8, LXX.

 [3612] [Comp. note 1, p. 477, book vii. chap. xliii.--R.]

 [3613] Isa. i. 16.

 [3614] Rom. xvi. 20.

 [3615] Col. ii. 13, 14.

 [3616] Phil. iv. 3.

 [3617] 2 Cor. vii. 1.

 [3618] Prov. xx. 9.

 [3619] Luke xv. 7.

 [3620] The V. mss. read, "restore them to their former position, and
 give then the joy," etc.

 [3621] Ps. li. 12.

 [3622] The V. mss. add, "in their footsteps, but may be deemed worthy
 to be admitted," etc.

 [3623] Ezek. xviii. and xxxiii.

 [3624] Jonah iii.; 1 Tim. ii. 4.

 [3625] Luke xv.

 [3626] [Ps. cxxx. 3, 4.--R.]

 [3627] [This is "James, the Lord's brother;" Gal. i. 19. An incidental
 proof of the Eastern and Ante-Nicene origin of book viii. also.--R.]

 [3628] Matt. xix. 29.

 [3629] The V. mss. insert, "whom Thou hast selected out of myriads."

 [3630] John x. 29.

 [3631] John xvii. 17.

 [3632] Ps. lxiv. 1; xci. 5, 6.

 [3633] The meaning in Coptic seems to be uncertain.

 [3634] The Coptic reads, "sub-deacons."

 [3635] One V. ms. gives the following note: "James the son of Zebedee,
 brother of John, preached the Gospel in Judea, was slain with the sword
 by Herod the tetrarch, and lies in Cæsarea."

 [3636] [N.B.--No non-communicating attendance permitted.]

 [3637] The Coptic adds, "over the oblation, that the Holy Spirit may
 descend upon it, making the bread the body of Christ, and the cup the
 blood of Christ; and prayers being ended." It then goes on with the
 words in italics in ch. xiii.

 [3638] The common text has, "before all the people," omitted by one V.
 ms.

 [3639] Eph. iii. 15.

 [3640] Col. i. 15; Isa. ix. 6, LXX.

 [3641] Gen. i.; 4 Esd. xvi. 60; Ps. civ. 2.

 [3642] Job xxxviii.

 [3643] Jer. v. 22.

 [3644] Gen. i. 26.

 [3645] Gen. ii. 8.

 [3646] Gen. iv.

 [3647] Ecclus. xlix. 16.

 [3648] Gen. iv. and v.

 [3649] Gen. vi. and vii.

 [3650] 1 Pet. iii. 20.

 [3651] Gen. xix.; Wisd. x. 6; Ps. cvii. 34

 [3652] Gen. xii., etc.

 [3653] Gen. xlvi. 27, LXX.

 [3654] Ex. 1, etc.

 [3655] See Isa. viii. 20, LXX.

 [3656] Josh. iii. 10, etc.

 [3657] Ps. lxxiv. 15

 [3658] Josh. vi

 [3659] Isa. vi. 2

 [3660] Dan. vii. 10

 [3661] Isa. vi. 3; Rom. i. 25.

 [3662] Ps. cv. 16.

 [3663] John xvii. 6, 4.

 [3664] 1 Cor. xi. 23.

 [3665] Matt. xxvi.; Mark xiv.; Luke xxii.

 [3666] 1 Tim. ii. 2.

 [3667] 1 Pet. ii. 9.

 [3668] Ps. cxxxvi. 25.

 [3669] 1 Tim. ii. 2.

 [3670] This is not a fair translation of the Greek which, as the text
 stands, does not make sense. One V. ms. reads, "Let us beseech in
 behalf of one another."

 [3671] 2 Cor. vii. 1.

 [3672] Luke ii. 14; Matt. xxi. 9.

 [3673] The Coptic adds, "the rest of the clergy in their order."

 [3674] The Coptic has, "and let them sing psalms during the
 distribution, until the whole congregation has received it."

 [3675] The Coptic has, "let all the women receive it also."

 [3676] The Coptic, "these His holy and immortal mysteries, which are
 numbered in heaven."

 [3677] The Coptic has, "the Lord."

 [3678] 1 Tim. vi. 16.

 [3679] Ps. cxxi. 8.

 [3680] The Coptic adds: "And let the presbyters and deacons watch the
 few fragments that are left, that they may perceive that there is
 nothing superfluous; lest they fall into the great judgment, like the
 sons of Aaron and Eli, whom the Holy Spirit destroyed, because they did
 not refrain from despising the sacrifice of the Lord: how much more
 those who despise the body and blood of the Lord, thinking that to be
 merely material food which they receive, and not spiritual!"

 [3681] The Coptic inserts, "when they have been blessed."

 Sec. III.--Ordination and Duties of the Clergy.

 Concerning the Ordination of Presbyters--The Constitution of John, Who Was
 Beloved by the Lord.

 XVI. Concerning the ordination of presbyters, I [3682] who am loved by
 the Lord make this constitution for you the bishops: When thou
 ordainest a presbyter, O bishop, lay thy hand upon his head, in the
 presence of the presbyters and deacons, [3683] and pray, saying: O Lord
 Almighty, our God, who hast created all things by Christ, and dost in
 like manner take care of the whole world by Him; for He who had power
 to make different creatures, has also power to take care of them,
 according to their different natures; on which account, O God, Thou
 takest care of immortal beings by bare preservation, but of those that
 are mortal by succession--of the soul by the provision of laws, of the
 body by the supply of its wants. Do Thou therefore now also look down
 upon Thy holy Church, and increase the same, and multiply those that
 preside in it, and grant them power, that they may labour both in word
 and work for the edification of Thy people. Do Thou now also look down
 upon this Thy servant, who is put into the presbytery by the vote and
 determination of the whole clergy; and do Thou replenish him with the
 Spirit of grace and counsel, to assist and govern Thy people with a
 pure heart, in the same manner as Thou didst look down upon Thy chosen
 people, and didst command Moses to choose elders, whom Thou didst fill
 with Thy Spirit. [3684] Do Thou also now, O Lord, grant this, and
 preserve in us the Spirit of Thy grace, that this person, being filled
 with the gifts of healing and the word of teaching, may in meekness
 instruct Thy people, and sincerely serve Thee with a pure mind and a
 willing soul, and may fully discharge the holy ministrations for Thy
 people, through Thy Christ, with whom glory, honour, and worship be to
 Thee, and to the Holy Ghost, for ever. Amen.

 Concerning the Ordination of Deacons--The Constitution of Philip.

 XVII. Concerning the ordination of deacons, I Philip [3685] make this
 constitution: Thou shalt ordain a deacon, O bishop, by laying thy hands
 upon him in the presence of the whole presbytery, and of the deacons,
 and shall pray, and say:--

 The Form of Prayer for the Ordination of a Deacon.

 XVIII. O God Almighty, the true and faithful God, who art rich unto all
 that call upon Thee in truth, who art fearful in counsels, and wise in
 understanding, who art powerful and great, hear our prayer, O Lord, and
 let Thine ears receive our supplication, and "cause the light of Thy
 countenance to shine upon this Thy servant," who is to be ordained for
 Thee to the office of a deacon; and replenish him with Thy Holy Spirit,
 and with power, as Thou didst replenish Stephen, who was Thy martyr,
 and follower of the sufferings of Thy Christ. [3686] Do Thou render him
 worthy to discharge acceptably the ministration of a deacon, steadily,
 unblameably, and without reproof, that thereby he may attain an higher
 degree, through the mediation of Thy only begotten Son, with whom
 glory, honour, and worship be to Thee and the Holy Spirit for ever.
 Amen.

 Concerning the Deaconess--The Constitution of Bartholomew.

 XIX. Concerning a deaconess, I Bartholomew [3687] make this
 constitution: O bishop, thou shalt lay thy hands upon her in the
 presence of the presbytery, and of the deacons and deaconesses, and
 shall say:--

 The Form of Prayer for the Ordination of a Deaconess.

 XX. O Eternal God, the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, the Creator of
 man and of woman, who didst replenish with the Spirit Miriam, and
 Deborah, and Anna, and Huldah; [3688] who didst not disdain that Thy
 only begotten Son should be born of a woman; who also in the tabernacle
 of the testimony, and in the temple, didst ordain women to be keepers
 of Thy holy gates,--do Thou now also look down upon this Thy servant,
 who is to be ordained to the office of a deaconess, and grant her Thy
 Holy Spirit, and "cleanse her from all filthiness of flesh and spirit,"
 [3689] that she may worthily discharge the work which is committed to
 her to Thy glory, and the praise of Thy Christ, with whom glory and
 adoration be to Thee and the Holy Spirit for ever. Amen.

 Concerning the Sub-Deacons--The Constitution of Thomas.

 XXI. Concerning the sub-deacons, I Thomas [3690] make this constitution
 for you the bishops: [3691] When thou dost ordain a sub-deacon, [3692]
 O bishop, thou shalt lay thy hands upon him, and say: O Lord God, the
 Creator of heaven and earth, and of all things that are therein; who
 also in the tabernacle of the testimony didst appoint overseers and
 keepers of Thy holy vessels; [3693] do Thou now look down upon this Thy
 servant, appointed a sub-deacon; and grant him the Holy Spirit, that he
 may worthily handle the vessels of Thy ministry, and do Thy will
 always, through Thy Christ, with whom glory, honour, and worship be to
 Thee and to the Holy Spirit for ever. Amen.

 Concerning the Readers--The Constitution of Matthew.

 XXII. Concerning readers, [3694] I Matthew, also called Levi, who was
 once a tax-gatherer, make a constitution: Ordain a reader by laying thy
 hands upon him, and pray unto God, and say: O Eternal God, who art
 plenteous in mercy and compassions, who hast made manifest the
 constitution of the world by Thy operations therein, and keepest the
 number of Thine elect, do Thou also now look down upon Thy servant, who
 is to be entrusted to read Thy Holy Scriptures to Thy people, and give
 him Thy Holy Spirit, the prophetic Spirit. Thou who didst instruct
 Esdras Thy servant to read Thy laws to the people, [3695] do Thou now
 also at our prayers instruct Thy servant, and grant that he may without
 blame perfect the work committed to him, and thereby be declared worthy
 of an higher degree, through Christ, with whom glory and worship be to
 Thee and to the Holy Ghost for ever. Amen.

 Concerning the Confessors--The Constitution of James the Son of Alpheus.

 XXIII. And I James, the son of Alphæus, make a constitution in regard
 to confessors: A confessor is not ordained; for he is so by choice and
 patience, and is worthy of great honour, as having confessed the name
 of God, and of His Christ, before nations and kings. But if there be
 occasion, he is to be ordained [3696] either a bishop, priest, or
 deacon. But if any one of the confessors who is not ordained snatches
 to himself any such dignity upon account of his confession, let the
 same person be deprived and rejected; for he is not in such an office,
 since he has denied the constitution of Christ, and is "worse than an
 infidel." [3697]

 The Same Apostle's Constitution Concerning Virgins.

 XXIV. I, the same, make a constitution in regard to virgins: A virgin
 is not ordained, for we have no such command from the Lord; [3698] for
 this is a state of voluntary trial, not for the reproach of marriage,
 but on account of leisure for piety.

 The Constitution of Lebbæus, Who Was Surnamed Thaddæus, Concerning Widows.

 XXV. And I Lebbæus, [3699] surnamed Thaddæus, make this constitution in
 regard to widows: A widow is not ordained; yet if she has lost her
 husband a great while, and has lived soberly and unblameably, and has
 taken extraordinary care of her family, as Judith [3700] and Anna
 [3701] --those women of great reputation--let her be chosen into the
 order of widows. But if she has lately lost her yokefellow, let her not
 be believed, but let her youth be judged of by the time; for the
 affections do sometimes grow aged with men, if they be not restrained
 by a better bridle.

 The Same Apostle Concerning the Exorcist.

 XXVI. I the same make a constitution in regard to an exorcist. An
 exorcist is not ordained. For it is a trial of voluntary goodness, and
 of the grace of God through Christ by the inspiration of the Holy
 Spirit. For he who has received the gift of healing is declared by
 revelation from God, the grace which is in him being manifest to all.
 But if there be occasion for him, he must be ordained [3702] a bishop,
 or a presbyter, or a deacon.

 Simon the Canaanite Concerning the Number Necessary for the Ordination of
 a Bishop.

 XXVII. [3703] And I Simon the Canaanite [3704] make a constitution to
 determine by how many a bishop ought to be elected. Let a bishop be
 ordained by three or two bishops; but if any one be ordained by one
 bishop, let him be deprived, both himself and he that ordained him. But
 if there be a necessity that he have only one to ordain him, because
 more bishops cannot come together, as in time of persecution, or for
 such like causes, let him bring the suffrage of permission from more
 bishops.

 The Same Apostle's Canons Concerning Bishops, Presbyters, Deacons, and the
 Rest of the Clergy.

 XXVIII. Concerning [3705] the canons I the same make a constitution. A
 bishop blesses, but does not receive the blessing. He lays on hands,
 ordains, offers, receives the blessing from bishops, but by no means
 from presbyters. A bishop deprives any clergyman who deserves
 deprivation, excepting a bishop; for of himself he has not power to do
 that. A presbyter blesses, but does not receive the blessing; yet does
 he receive the blessing from the bishop or a fellow-presbyter. In like
 manner does he give it to a fellow-presbyter. He lays on hands, but
 does not ordain; he does not deprive, yet does he separate those that
 are under him, if they be liable to such a punishment. A deacon does
 not bless, does not give the blessing, but receives it from the bishop
 and presbyter: he does not baptize, he does not offer; but when a
 bishop or presbyter has offered, he distributes to the people, not as a
 priest, but as one that ministers to the priests. But it is not lawful
 for any one of the other clergy to do the work of a deacon. A deaconess
 does not bless, nor perform anything belonging to the office of
 presbyters or deacons, but only is to keep the doors, and to minister
 to the presbyters in the baptizing of women, on account of decency. A
 deacon separates a sub-deacon, a reader, a singer, and a deaconess, if
 there be any occasion, in the absence of a presbyter. It is not lawful
 for a sub-deacon to separate either one of the clergy or laity; nor for
 a reader, nor for a singer, nor for a deaconess, for they are the
 ministers to the deacons.

 [3682] One V. ms. has this note: "John the evangelist, the brother of
 James, was banished by Domitian to the island of Patmos, and there
 composed the Gospel according to him. He died a natural death, in the
 third year of Trajan's reign, in Ephesus. His remains were sought, but
 have not been found."

 [3683] The Coptic adds: "While you pray, he is ordained; and thou shalt
 ordain the deacon also according to this constitution alone."

 [3684] Ex. xviii., , xxviii

 [3685] One V. ms. has the following note: "Philip having proclaimed the
 life-giving word to the Asiatic diocese, has been buried in Hierapolis
 of Phrygia along with his daughters, having been crowned with martyrdom
 in the reign of the Emperor Domitian. Philip, who has the daughters, is
 one of the seven; it was he also who baptized the eunuch."

 [3686] Acts vi. and vii.

 [3687] One V. ms. has the following note: "Bartholomew preached the
 Gospel according to Matthew to the Indians, who also has been buried in
 India."

 [3688] Ex. xv. 20; Judg. iv. 4; Luke ii. 36; 2 Kings xxii. 14.

 [3689] 2 Cor. vii. 1.

 [3690] One V ms. has the following note: "Thomas preached to the
 Parthians, Medes, Persians, Germans, Hyrcanians, Bactrians, Bardians,
 who also, having been a martyr, lies in Edessa of Osdroene."

 [3691] The words "for you the bishops" are omitted in the Oxford ms.

 [3692] [See vol. v. Elucidation XIV. [290]p. 417.]

 [3693] Num. iii.; 1 Chron. vi.

 [3694] The Oxford ms. has no part of this chapter. It reads: "A reader
 is appointed when the bishop gives him a book; for there is no
 imposition of hands."

 [3695] Neh. viii.

 [3696] The Coptic reads, "let him be ordained."

 [3697] 1 Tim. v. 8.

 [3698] 1 Cor. vii. 25.

 [3699] The two V. mss. have the following note: "Thaddæus, also called
 Lebbæus, and who was surnamed Judas the Zealot, preached the truth to
 the Edessenes and the people of Mesopotamia when Abgarus ruled over
 Edessa, and has been buried in Berytus of Phoenicia."

 [3700] Judith xvi. 21, 23

 [3701] Luke ii. 36, etc.

 [3702] The Coptic has, "let him be ordained."

 [3703] Ch. xxvii., xxviii., xxx.-xxxiv., and ch. xlii.-xlvii., occur in
 Syriac and Coptic, as well as in the Greek mss.

 [3704] One V. ms. has the following note: "Simon the Canaanite,
 preacher of the truth, is crowned with martyrdom in Judea in the reign
 of Domitian."

 [3705] The words from "concerning" to "constitution" are omitted in the
 Oxford ms., in Syriac, and Coptic.

 Sec. IV.--Certain Prayers and Laws.

 Concerning the Blessing of Water and Oil--The Constitution of Matthias.

 XXIX. [3706] Concerning the water and the oil, I Matthias make a
 constitution. Let the bishop bless the water, or the oil. But if he be
 not there, let the presbyter bless it, the deacon standing by. But if
 the bishop be present, let the presbyter and deacon stand by, and let
 him say thus: O Lord of hosts, the God of powers, the creator of the
 waters, and the supplier of oil, who art compassionate, and a lover of
 mankind, who hast given water for drink and for cleansing, and oil to
 give man a cheerful and joyful countenance; [3707] do Thou now also
 sanctify this water and this oil through Thy Christ, in the name of him
 or her that has offered them, and grant them a power to restore health,
 to drive away diseases, to banish demons, and to disperse all snares
 through Christ our hope, with whom glory, honour, and worship be to
 Thee, and to the Holy Ghost, for ever. Amen.

 The Same Apostle's Constitution Concerning First-Fruits and Tithes.

 XXX. I [3708] the same make a constitution in regard to first-fruits
 and tithes. Let all first-fruits be brought to the bishop, and to the
 presbyters, and to the deacons, [3709] for their maintenance; but let
 all the tithe be for the maintenance of the rest of the clergy, and of
 the virgins and widows, and of those under the trial of poverty. For
 the first-fruits belong to the priests, and to those deacons that
 minister to them.

 The Same Apostle's Constitutions Concerning the Remaining Oblations.

 XXXI. I the same make a constitution in regard to remainders. Those
 eulogies which remain at the mysteries, let the deacons distribute them
 among the clergy, according to the mind of the bishop or the
 presbyters: to a bishop; four parts; to a presbyter, three [3710]
 parts; to a deacon, two [3711] parts; and to the rest of the
 sub-deacons, or readers, or singers, or deaconesses, one part. For this
 is good and acceptable in the sight of God, that every one be honoured
 according to his dignity; for the Church is the school, not of
 confusion, but of good order.

 Various Canons of Paul the Apostle Concerning Those that Offer Themselves
 to Be Baptized--Whom We are to Receive, and Whom to Reject.

 XXXII. I also, Paul, [3712] the least of the apostles, do make the
 following constitutions for you, the bishops, and presbyters, and
 deacons, concerning canons. Those that first come to the mystery of
 godliness, let them be brought to the bishop or to the presbyters by
 the deacons, and let them be examined as to the causes wherefore they
 come to the word of the Lord; and let those that bring them exactly
 inquire about their character, and give them their testimony. Let their
 manners and their life be inquired into, and whether they be slaves or
 freemen. And if any one be a slave, let him be asked who is his master.
 If he be slave to one of the faithful, let his master be asked if he
 can give him a good character. If he cannot, let him be rejected, until
 he show himself to be worthy to his master. But if he does give him a
 good character, let him be admitted. But if he be household slave to an
 heathen, let him be taught to please his master, that the word be not
 blasphemed. If, then, he have a wife, or a woman hath an husband, let
 them be taught to be content with each other; but if they be unmarried,
 let them learn not to commit fornication, but to enter into lawful
 marriage. But if his master be one of the faithful, and knows that he
 is guilty of fornication, and yet does not give him a wife, or to the
 woman an husband, let him be separated; but if anyone hath a demon, let
 him indeed be taught piety, but not received into communion before he
 be cleansed; yet if death be near, let him be received. If any one be a
 maintainer of harlots, let him either leave off to prostitute women, or
 else let him be rejected. If a harlot come, let her leave off whoredom,
 or else let her be rejected. If a maker of idols come, let him either
 leave off his employment, or let him be rejected. If one belonging to
 the theatre [3713] come, whether it be man or woman, or charioteer, or
 dueller, or racer, or player of prizes, or Olympic gamester, or one
 that plays on the pipe, on the lute, or on the harp at those games, or
 a dancing-master or an huckster, [3714] either let them leave off their
 employments, or let them be rejected. If a soldier come, let him be
 taught to "do no injustice, to accuse no man falsely, and to be content
 with his allotted wages:" [3715] if he submit to those rules, let him
 be received; but if he refuse them, let him be rejected. He that is
 guilty of sins not to be named, a sodomite, an effeminate person, a
 magician, an enchanter, an astrologer, a diviner, an user of magic
 verses, a juggler, a mountebank, one that makes amulets, a charmer, a
 soothsayer, a fortune-teller, an observer of palmistry; he that, when
 he meets you, observes defects in the eyes or feet of the birds or
 cats, or noises, or symbolical sounds: let these be proved for some
 time, for this sort of wickedness is hard to be washed away; and if
 they leave off those practices, let them be received; but if they will
 not agree to that, let them be rejected. Let a concubine, who is slave
 to an unbeliever, and confines herself to her master alone, be
 received; [3716] but if she be incontinent with others, let her be
 rejected. If one of the faithful hath a concubine, if she be a
 bond-servant, let him leave off that way, and marry in a legal manner:
 if she be a free woman, let him marry her in a lawful manner; if he
 does not, let him be rejected. Let him that follows the Gentile
 customs, or Jewish fables, either reform, or let him be rejected. If
 any one follows the sports of the theatre, their huntings, or
 horse-races, or combats, either let him leave them off, or let him be
 rejected. Let him who is to be a catechumen be a catechumen for three
 years; but if any one be diligent, and has a good-will to his business,
 let him be admitted: for it is not the length of time, but the course
 of life, that is judged. Let him that teaches, although he be one of
 the laity, yet, if he be skilful in the word and grave in his manners,
 teach; for "they shall be all taught of God." [3717] Let all the
 faithful, whether men or women, when they rise from sleep, before they
 go to work, when they have washed themselves, pray; but if any
 catechetic instruction be held, let the faithful person prefer the word
 of piety before his work. Let the faithful person, whether man or
 woman, treat servants kindly, as we have ordained in the foregoing
 books, and have taught in our epistles. [3718]

 Upon Which Days Servants are Not to Work.

 XXXIII. I Peter and Paul do make the following constitutions. Let the
 slaves work five days; but on the Sabbath-day and the Lord's day let
 them have leisure to go to church for instruction in piety. We have
 said that the Sabbath is on account of the creation, and the Lord's day
 of the resurrection. Let slaves rest from their work all the great
 week, and that which follows it--for the one in memory of the passion,
 and the other of the resurrection; and there is need they should be
 instructed who it is that suffered and rose again, and who it is
 permitted Him to suffer, and raised Him again. Let them have rest from
 their work on the Ascension, because it was the conclusion of the
 dispensation by Christ. Let them rest at Pentecost, because of the
 coming of the Holy Spirit, which was given to those that believed in
 Christ. Let them rest on the festival of His birth, because on it the
 unexpected favour was granted to men, that Jesus Christ, the Logos of
 God, should be born of the Virgin Mary, [3719] for the salvation of the
 world. [3720] Let them rest on the festival of Epiphany, because on it
 a manifestation took place of the divinity of Christ, for the Father
 bore testimony to Him at the baptism; and the Paraclete, in the form of
 a dove, pointed out to the bystanders Him to whom testimony was borne.
 Let them rest on the days of the apostles: for they were appointed your
 teachers to bring you to Christ, and made you worthy of the Spirit. Let
 them rest on the day of the first [3721] martyr Stephen, and of the
 other holy martyrs who preferred Christ to their own life.

 At What Hours, and Why, We are to Pray.

 XXXIV. Offer up your prayers in the morning, at the third hour, the
 sixth, the ninth, the evening, and at cock-crowing: in the morning,
 returning thanks that the Lord has sent you light, that He has brought
 you past the night, and brought on the day; at the third hour, because
 at that hour the Lord received the sentence of condemnation from
 Pilate; at the sixth, because at that hour He was crucified; [3722] at
 the ninth, because all things were in commotion at the crucifixion of
 the Lord, as trembling at the bold attempt of the impious Jews, and not
 bearing the injury offered to their Lord; in the evening, giving thanks
 that He has given you the night to rest from the daily labours; at
 cock-crowing, because that hour brings the good news of the coming on
 of the day for the operations proper for the light. But if it be not
 possible to go to the church on account of the unbelievers, thou, O
 bishop, shalt assemble them in a house, that a godly man may not enter
 into an assembly of the ungodly. For it is not the place that
 sanctifies the man, but the man the place. And if the ungodly possess
 the place, do thou avoid it, because it is profaned by them. For as
 holy priests sanctify a place, so do the profane ones defile it. If it
 be not possible to assemble either in the church or in a house, let
 every one by himself sing, and read, and pray, or two or three
 together. For "where two or three are gathered together in my name,
 there am I in the midst of them." [3723] Let not one of the faithful
 pray with a catechumen, no, not in the house: for it is not reasonable
 that he who is admitted should be polluted with one not admitted. Let
 not one of the godly pray with an heretic, no, not in the house. For
 "what fellowship hath light with darkness?" [3724] Let Christians,
 whether men or women, who have connections with slaves, either leave
 them off, or let them be rejected.

 The Constitution of James the Brother of Christ Concerning Evening Prayer.

 XXXV. I James, [3725] the brother of Christ according to the flesh, but
 His servant as the only begotten God, and one appointed bishop of
 Jerusalem by the Lord Himself, and the Apostles, do ordain thus: When
 it is evening, thou, O bishop, shall assemble the church; and after the
 repetition of the psalm at the lighting up the lights, the deacon shall
 bid prayers for the catechumens, the energumens, the illuminated, and
 the penitents, as we have formerly said. But after the dismission of
 these, the deacon shall say: So many as are of the faithful, let us
 pray to the Lord. And after the bidding prayer, which is formerly set
 down, he shall say:--

 The Bidding Prayer for the Evening.

 XXXVI. Save us, O God, and raise us up by Thy Christ. Let us stand up,
 and beg for the mercies of the Lord, and His compassions, for the angel
 of peace, for what things are good and profitable, for a Christian
 departure out of this life, an evening and a night of peace, and free
 from sin; and let us beg that the whole course of our life may be
 unblameable. Let us dedicate ourselves and one another to the living
 God through His Christ. And let the bishop add this prayer, and say:--

 The Thanksgiving for the Evening.

 XXXVII. O God, who art without beginning and without end, the Maker of
 the whole world by Christ, and the Provider for it, but before all
 [3726] His God and Father, the Lord [3727] of the Spirit, and the King
 of intelligible and sensible beings; who hast made the day for the
 works of light, and the night for the refreshment of our
 infirmity,--for "the day is Thine, the night also is Thine: Thou hast
 prepared the light and the sun," [3728] --do Thou now, O Lord, Thou
 lover of mankind, and Fountain of all good, mercifully accept of this
 our evening thanksgiving. Thou who hast brought us through the length
 of the day, and hast brought us to the beginnings of the night,
 preserve us by Thy Christ, afford us a peaceable evening, and a night
 free from sin, and vouchsafe us everlasting life by Thy Christ, through
 whom glory, honour, and worship be to Thee in [3729] the Holy Spirit
 for ever. Amen. And let the deacon say: Bow down for the laying on of
 hands. And let the bishop say: O God of our fathers, and Lord of mercy,
 who didst form man of Thy wisdom a rational creature, and beloved of
 God more than the other beings upon this earth, and didst give him
 authority to rule over the creatures upon the earth, and didst ordain
 by Thy will rulers and priests--the former for the security of life,
 the latter for a regular worship,--do Thou now also look down, O Lord
 Almighty, and cause Thy face to shine upon Thy people, who bow down the
 neck of their heart, and bless them by Christ; through whom Thou hast
 enlightened us with the light of knowledge, and hast revealed Thyself
 to us; with whom worthy adoration is due from every rational and holy
 nature to Thee, and to the Spirit, who is the Comforter, for ever.
 Amen. And let the deacon say: "Depart in peace." In like manner, in the
 morning, after the repetition of the morning psalm, and his dismission
 of the catechumens, the energumens, the candidates for baptism, and the
 penitents, and after the usual bidding of prayers, that we may not
 again repeat the same things, let the deacon add after the words, Save
 us, O God, and raise us up by Thy grace: Let us beg of the Lord His
 mercies and His compassions, that this morning and this day may be with
 peace and without sin, as also all the time of our sojourning; that He
 will grant us His angel of peace, a Christian departure out of this
 life, and that God will be merciful and gracious. Let us dedicate
 ourselves and one another to the living God through His Only-begotten.
 And let the bishop add this prayer, and say:--

 The Thanksgiving for the Morning.

 XXXVIII. O God, the God of spirits and of all flesh, who art beyond
 compare, and standest in need of nothing, who hast given the sun to
 have rule over the day, and the moon and the stars to have rule over
 the night, do Thou now also look down upon us with gracious eyes, and
 receive our morning thanksgivings, and have mercy upon us; for we have
 not "spread out our hands unto a strange God;" [3730] for there is not
 among us any new God, but Thou, the eternal God, who art without end,
 who hast given us our being through Christ, and given us our well-being
 through Him. Do Thou vouchsafe us also, through Him, eternal life; with
 whom glory, and honour, and worship be to Thee and to the Holy Spirit
 for ever. Amen. And let the deacon say: Bow down for the laying on of
 hands. And let the bishop add this prayer, saying:--

 The Imposition of Hands for the Morning.

 XXXIX. O God, who art faithful and true, who "hast mercy on thousands
 and ten thousands of them that love Thee," [3731] the lover of the
 humble, and the protector of the needy, of whom all things stand in
 need, for all things are subject to Thee; look down upon this Thy
 people, who bow down their heads to Thee, and bless them with spiritual
 blessing. "Keep them as the apple of an eye," [3732] preserve them in
 piety and righteousness, and vouchsafe them eternal life in Christ
 Jesus Thy beloved Son, with whom glory, honour, and worship be to Thee
 and to the Holy Spirit, now and always, and for ever and ever. Amen.
 And let the deacon say: "Depart in peace." And when the first-fruits
 are offered, the bishop gives thanks in this manner:--

 The Form of Prayer for the First-Fruits.

 XL. We give thanks to Thee, O Lord Almighty, the Creator of the whole
 world, and its Preserver, through Thy only begotten Son Jesus Christ
 our Lord, for the first-fruits which are offered to Thee, not in such a
 manner as we ought, but as we are able. For what man is there that can
 worthily give Thee thanks for those things Thou hast given them to
 partake of? The God of Abraham, and of Isaac, and of Jacob, and of all
 the saints, who madest all things fruitful by Thy word, and didst
 command the earth to bring forth various fruits for our rejoicing and
 our food; who hast given to the duller and more sheepish sort of
 creatures juices--herbs to them that feed on herbs, and to some flesh,
 to others seeds, but to us corn, as advantageous and proper food, and
 many other things--some for our necessities, some for our health, and
 some for our pleasure. On all these accounts, therefore, art Thou
 worthy of exalted hymns of praise for Thy beneficence by Christ,
 through whom [3733] glory, honour, and worship be to Thee, in the Holy
 Spirit, for ever. Amen. Concerning those that are at rest in Christ:
 After the bidding prayer, that we may not repeat it again, the deacon
 shall add as follows:--

 The Bidding Prayer for Those Departed.

 XLI. Let us pray for our brethren that are at rest [3734] in Christ,
 that God, the lover of mankind, who has received his soul, may forgive
 him every sin, voluntary and involuntary, and may be merciful and
 gracious to him, and give him his lot in the land of the pious that are
 sent into the bosom of Abraham, and Isaac, and Jacob, with all those
 that have pleased Him and done His will from the beginning of the
 world, whence all sorrow, grief, and lamentation are banished. Let us
 arise, let us dedicate ourselves and one another to the eternal God,
 through that Word which was in the beginning. And let the bishop say: O
 Thou who art by nature immortal, and hast no end of Thy being, from
 whom every creature, whether immortal or mortal, is derived; who didst
 make man a rational creature, the citizen of this world, in his
 constitution mortal, and didst add the promise of a resurrection; who
 didst not suffer Enoch and Elijah to taste of death: "the God of
 Abraham, the God of Isaac, and the God of Jacob, who art the God of
 them, not as of dead, but as of living persons: for the souls of all
 men live with Thee, and the spirits of the righteous are in Thy hand,
 which no torment can touch;" [3735] for they are all sanctified under
 Thy hand: do Thou now also look upon this Thy servant, whom Thou hast
 selected and received into another state, and forgive him if
 voluntarily or involuntarily he has sinned, and afford him merciful
 angels, and place him in the bosom of the patriarchs, and prophets, and
 apostles, and of all those that have pleased Thee from the beginning of
 the world, where there is no grief, sorrow, nor lamentation; but the
 peaceable region of the godly, and the undisturbed land of the upright,
 and of those that therein see, the glory of Thy Christ; by whom [3736]
 glory, honour, and worship, thanksgiving, and adoration be to Thee, in
 the Holy Spirit, for ever. Amen. And let the deacon say: Bow down, and
 receive the blessing. And let the bishop give thanks for them, saying
 as follows: "O Lord, save Thy people, and bless Thine inheritance,"
 [3737] which Thou hast purchased with the precious blood of Thy Christ.
 Feed them under Thy right hand, and cover them under Thy wings, and
 grant that they may "fight the good fight, and finish their course, and
 keep the faith" [3738] immutably, unblameably, and unreprovably,
 through our Lord Jesus Christ, Thy beloved Son, with whom glory,
 honour, and worship be to Thee and to the Holy Spirit for ever. Amen.

 How and When We Ought to Celebrate the Memorials of the Faithful Departed,
 and that We Ought Then to Give Somewhat Out of Their Goods to the Poor.

 XLII. Let the third day of the departed be celebrated with psalms, and
 lessons, and prayers, on account of Him who arose within the space of
 three days; and let the ninth day be celebrated in remembrance of the
 living, and of the departed; and the fortieth [3739] day according to
 the ancient pattern: for so did the people lament Moses, and the
 anniversary day in memory of him. [3740] And let alms be given to the
 poor out of his goods for a memorial of him. [3741]

 That Memorials or Mandates Do Not at All Profit the Ungodly Who are Dead.

 XLIII. These things we say concerning the pious; for as to the ungodly,
 if thou givest all the world to the poor, thou wilt not benefit him at
 all. For to whom the Deity was an enemy while he was alive, it is
 certain it will be so also when he is departed; for there is no
 unrighteousness with Him. For "the Lord [3742] is righteous, and has
 loved righteousness." [3743] And, "Behold the man and his work." [3744]

 Concerning Drunkards.

 XLIV. Now, when you are invited to their memorials, do you feast with
 good order, and the fear of God, as disposed to intercede for those
 that are departed. For since you are the presbyters and deacons of
 Christ, you ought always to be sober, both among yourselves and among
 others, that so you may be able to warn the unruly. Now the Scripture
 says, "The men in power are passionate. But let them not drink wine,
 lest by drinking they forget wisdom, and are not able to judge aright."
 [3745] Wherefore [3746] both the presbyters and the deacons are those
 of authority in the Church next to God Almighty and His beloved Son.
 [3747] We say this, not they are not to drink at all, otherwise it
 would be to the reproach of what God has made for cheerfulness, but
 that they be not disordered with wine. For the Scripture does not say,
 Do not drink wine; but what says it? "Drink not wine to drunkenness;"
 and again, "Thorns spring up in the hand of the drunkard." [3748] Nor
 do we say this only to those of the clergy, but also to every lay
 Christian, upon whom the name of our Lord Jesus Christ is called. For
 to them also it is said, "Who hath woe? who hath sorrow? who hath
 uneasiness? who hath babbling? who hath red eyes? who hath wounds
 without cause? Do not these things belong to those that tarry long at
 the wine, and that go to seek where drinking meetings are?" [3749]

 Concerning the Receiving Such as are Persecuted for Christ's Sake.

 XLV. Receive ye those that are persecuted [3750] on account of the
 faith, and who fly from city to city, [3751] as mindful of the words of
 the Lord. For, knowing that though "the spirit be willing, the flesh is
 weak," [3752] they fly away, and prefer the spoiling of their goods,
 that they may preserve the name of Christ in themselves without denying
 it. Supply them therefore with what they want, and thereby fulfil the
 commandment of the Lord.

 [3706] This chapter is not found in the Coptic and Syriac. One V. ms.
 has the following note: "Matthew (probably a mistake for Matthias)
 taught the doctrines of Christ in Judea, and was one of the seventy
 disciples. After the ascension of Christ he was numbered with the
 twelve apostles, instead of Judas, who was the betrayer. He lies in
 Jerusalem."

 [3707] Ps. civ. 15.

 [3708] The Oxford ms. reads: "I the same, Simon the Canaanite, make a
 constitution."

 [3709] "Deacons" omitted in Oxford ms. and in Coptic.

 [3710] "Two," Oxford ms.

 [3711] "One," Oxford ms.

 [3712] One V. ms. has the following instead of the title: "Paul, the
 teacher of the Gentiles, having proclaimed the Gospel of Christ to the
 Gentiles from Jerusalem even to Illyricum, was cut off in Rome while
 teaching the truth, by Nero and King Agrippa, being beheaded, and has
 been buried in Rome itself."

 [3713] [Note this uniform testimony of antiquity against theatricals in
 all forms ]

 [3714] [Purveyors to the play-house.]

 [3715] Luke iii. 14.

 [3716] [Compare vol. v. p. 130, [291]note 1.]

 [3717] John vi. 45.

 [3718] Eph. vi.; Col. iv.; Philem.

 [3719] The Coptic adds, "the holy mother of God."

 [3720] [Compare vol. iii. pp. [292]164, [293]352.]

 [3721] One V. ms., Coptic, and Syriac omit "first."

 [3722] The Syriac and Coptic add: "and His side being wounded, blood
 and water came forth."

 [3723] Matt. xviii. 20. [A token that much of these constitutions is
 truly primitive.]

 [3724] 2 Cor. vi. 14. [Compare p. 483, supra: Energumens?]

 [3725] The words from "I, James" to "ordain thus" are omitted in the V.
 mss., and the following words are given instead in the two V. mss.:
 "James, the brother of the Lord, has been killed with stones (the other
 ms. reads, with sticks') by the Jews in Jerusalem on account of the
 doctrines of Christ." Ch. xxxv.-xli. are omitted in the Oxford ms., and
 in Syriac and Coptic.

 [3726] "Before all" is omitted in one V. ms.

 [3727] One V. ms. reads "sender forth" instead of "Lord."

 [3728] Ps. lxxiv. 16.

 [3729] One V. ms. reads "with" instead of "in."

 [3730] Ps. xliv. 20.

 [3731] Ex. xxxiv. and xx.

 [3732] Ps. xvii. 8.

 [3733] One V. ms. reads, "with whom," and "with the Holy Spirit."

 [3734] [They are "at rest." Yet this prayer, and wherefore? See St.
 Augustine, Confessions (ed. Migne), p. 765, Nebridius.]

 [3735] Matt. xxii. 32; Wisd. iii. 1.

 [3736] "With whom," one V. ms.

 [3737] Ps. xxviii. 9.

 [3738] 2 Tim. iv. 7.

 [3739] The Syriac and a Greek marginal reading give "the thirtieth."

 [3740] Deut. xxxiv. 8. [Comp. Aug., Confess. (ed. Migne), p. 778.]

 [3741] [The "month's mind" was anciently of this sort, with no
 reference to purgatorial penalties. "Credo jam feceris quod
 rogo."--Aug.]

 [3742] The Syriac and the Oxford ms. read "God" instead of "Lord."

 [3743] Ps. xi. 7.

 [3744] Isa. lxii. 11.

 [3745] Prov. xxxi. 4, LXX.

 [3746] The Syriac, the Coptic, and the Oxford ms. add, "the bishops."
 The Coptic omits "the deacons."

 [3747] The Coptic adds, "Jesus Christ and the Holy Spirit."

 [3748] Prov. xxiii.; Ecclus. xxxi. 25-31; Eph. v. 18; Prov. xxvi. 9.

 [3749] Prov. xxiii. 29, 30.

 [3750] [A token of the early origin of what is genuine in these
 interpolated Constitutions.]

 [3751] Matt. x. 23.

 [3752] Matt. xxvi. 41.

 Sec. V.--All the Apostles Urge the Observance of the Order of the Church.

 That Every One Ought to Remain in that Rank Wherein He is Placed, But Not
 Snatch Such Offices to Himself Which are Not Entrusted to Him.

 XLVI. Now this we all in common do charge you, that every one remain in
 that rank which is appointed him, and do not transgress his proper
 bounds; for they are not ours, but God's. For says the Lord: "He that
 heareth you, heareth me; and he that heareth me, heareth Him that sent
 me." And, "He that despiseth you, despiseth me; and he that despiseth
 me, despiseth Him that sent me." [3753] For if those things that are
 without life do observe good order, as the night, the day, the sun, the
 moon, the stars, the elements, the seasons, the months, the weeks, the
 days, and the hours, and are subservient to the uses appointed them,
 according to that which is said, "Thou hast set them a bound which they
 shall not pass;" [3754] and again, concerning the sea, "I have set
 bounds thereto, and have encompassed it with bars and gates; and I said
 to it, Hitherto shalt thou come, and thou shalt go no farther;" [3755]
 how much more ought ye not to venture to remove those things which we,
 according to God's will, have determined for you! But because many
 think this a small matter, and venture to confound the orders, and to
 remove the ordination which belongs to them severally, snatching to
 themselves dignities which were never given them, and allowing
 themselves to bestow that authority in a tyrannical manner which they
 have not themselves, and thereby provoke God to anger (as did the
 followers of Corah and King Uzziah, [3756] who, having no authority,
 usurped the high-priesthood without commission from God; and the former
 were burnt with fire, and the latter was struck with a leprosy in his
 forehead); and provoke Christ Jesus to anger, who has made this
 constitution; and also grieve the Holy Spirit, and make void His
 testimony: therefore, foreknowing the danger that hangs over those who
 do such things, and the neglect about the sacrifices and eucharistical
 offices which will arise from their being impiously offered by those
 who ought not to offer them; who think the honour of the
 high-priesthood, which is an imitation of the great High Priest Jesus
 Christ our King, to be a matter of sport; we have found it necessary to
 give you warning in this matter also. For some are already turned aside
 after their own vanity. We say that Moses the servant of God ("to whom
 God spake face to face, as if a man spake to his friend;" [3757] to
 whom He said, "I know thee above all men;" to whom He spake directly,
 and not by obscure methods, or dreams, or angels, or riddles),--this
 person, when he made constitutions and divine laws, distinguished what
 things were to be performed by the high priests, what by the priests,
 and what by the Levites; distributing to every one his proper and
 suitable office in the divine service. And those things which are
 allotted for the high priests to do, those might not be meddled with by
 the priests; and what things were allotted to the priests, the Levites
 might not meddle with; but every one observed those ministrations which
 were written down and appointed for them. And if any would meddle
 beyond the tradition, death was his punishment. And Saul's example does
 show this most plainly, who, thinking he might offer sacrifice without
 the prophet and high priest Samuel, [3758] drew upon himself a sin and
 a curse without remedy. Nor did even his having anointed him king
 discourage the prophet. But God showed the same by a more visible
 effect in the case of Uzziah, [3759] when He without delay exacted the
 punishment due to this transgression, and he that madly coveted after
 the high-priesthood was rejected from his kingdom also. As to those
 things that have happened amongst us, you yourselves are not ignorant
 of them. For ye know undoubtedly that those that are by us named
 bishops, and presbyters, and deacons, were made by prayer, and by the
 laying on of hands; and that by the difference of their names is showed
 the difference of their employments. For not every one that will is
 ordained, as the case was in that spurious and counterfeit priesthood
 of the calves under Jeroboam; [3760] but he only who is called of God.
 For if there were no rule or distinction of orders, it would suffice to
 perform all the offices under one name. But being taught by the Lord
 the series of things, we distributed the functions of the
 high-priesthood to the bishops, those of the priesthood to the
 presbyters, and the ministration under them both to the deacons; that
 the divine worship might be performed in purity. For it is not lawful
 for a deacon to offer the sacrifice, or to baptize, or to give either
 the greater or the lesser blessing. Nor may a presbyter perform
 ordination; for it is not agreeable to holiness to have this order
 perverted. For "God is not the God of confusion," [3761] that the
 subordinate persons should tyrannically assume to themselves the
 functions belonging to their superiors, forming a new scheme of laws to
 their own mischief, not knowing that "it is hard for them to kick
 against the pricks;" [3762] for such as these do not fight against us,
 or against the bishops, but against the universal Bishop and the High
 Priest of the Father, Jesus Christ our Lord. [3763] High priests,
 priests, and Levites were ordained by Moses, [3764] the most beloved of
 God. By our Saviour [3765] were we apostles, thirteen in number,
 ordained; and by the apostles I James, and I Clement, and others with
 us, were ordained, that we may not make the catalogue of all those
 bishops over again. And in common, presbyters, and deacons, and
 sub-deacons, and readers, were ordained by all of us. The great High
 Priest therefore, who is so by nature, is Christ the only begotten; not
 having snatched that honour to Himself, but having been appointed such
 by the Father; who being made man for our sake, and offering the
 spiritual sacrifice to His God and Father, before His suffering gave it
 us alone in charge to do this, although there were others with us who
 had believed in Him. But he that believes is not presently appointed a
 priest, or obtains the dignity of the high-priesthood. But after His
 ascension we offered, according to His constitution, the pure and
 unbloody sacrifice; and ordained bishops, and presbyters, and deacons,
 seven in number: one of which was Stephen, [3766] that blessed martyr,
 who was not inferior to us as to his pious disposition of mind towards
 God; who showed so great piety towards God, by his faith and love
 towards our Lord Jesus Christ, as to give his life for Him, and was
 stoned to death by the Jews, the murderers of the Lord. Yet still this
 so great and good a man, who was fervent in spirit, who saw Christ on
 the right hand of God, and the gates of heaven opened, does nowhere
 appear to have exercised functions which did not appertain to his
 office of a deacon, nor to have offered the sacrifices, nor to have
 laid hands upon any, but kept his order of a deacon unto the end. For
 so it became him, who was a martyr for Christ, to preserve good order.
 But if some do blame Philip [3767] our deacon, and Ananias [3768] our
 faithful brother, that the one did baptize the eunuch, and the other me
 Paul, these men do not understand what we say. For we have affirmed
 only that no one snatches the sacerdotal dignity to himself, but either
 receives it from God, as Melchisedec and Job, or from the high priest,
 as Aaron from Moses. Wherefore Philip and Ananias did not constitute
 themselves, but were appointed by Christ, the High Priest of that God
 to whom no being is to be compared.

 [3753] Luke x. 16; Matt. x. 40; John xiii. 20.

 [3754] Ps. civ. 9.

 [3755] Job xxxviii. 10, 11.

 [3756] Num. xvi.; 2 Chron. xxvi.

 [3757] Num. xii. 7, 8; Ex. xxxiii. 11, 17

 [3758] 1 Sam. xiii

 [3759] 2 Chron. xxvi.

 [3760] 1 Kings xiii. 33.

 [3761] 1 Cor. xiv. 33. [See p. 500, note 6, infra.]

 [3762] Acts ix. 5. [See Acts xxvi. 14, where the clause is genuine. In
 ix. 5 it is a later interpolation of the Vulgate and Erasmus.--R.]

 [3763] The Coptic adds, "the Son of God, and true God."

 [3764] Ex. xxviii. and xxix.

 [3765] The Coptic adds "God."

 [3766] Acts vi. and vii.

 [3767] One V. ms. has the following note: "That he who baptized the
 Ethiopian eunuch was not the Apostle Philip, but one of those who were
 chosen along with St. Stephen to be deacons, and who also had four
 daughters, as says Luke in the Acts." [See pp. [294]452, [295]492,
 supra.]

 [3768] Acts viii. and ix.

 The Ecclesiastical Canons of the Same Holy Apostles. [3769]

 XLVII.1. Let a bishop be ordained by two or three bishops.

 2. A presbyter by one bishop, as also a deacon, and the rest of the
 clergy. [3770]

 3. If any bishop or presbyter, otherwise than our Lord has ordained
 concerning the sacrifice, offer other things at the altar of God, as
 honey, milk, or strong beer instead of wine, any necessaries, or birds,
 or animals, or pulse, otherwise than is ordained, let him be deprived;
 excepting grains of new corn, or ears of wheat, or bunches of grapes in
 their season. [3771]

 4. For it is not lawful to offer anything besides these at the altar,
 and oil for the holy lamp, and incense in the time of the divine
 oblation.

 5. But let all other fruits be sent to the house of the bishop, as
 first-fruits to him and to the presbyters, but not to the altar. Now it
 is plain that the bishop and presbyters are to divide them to the
 deacons and to the rest of the clergy.

 6. Let not a bishop, a priest, or a deacon [3772] cast off his own wife
 under pretence of piety; but if he does cast her off, let him be
 suspended. If he go on in it, let him be deprived.

 7. Let not a bishop, a priest, or deacon undertake the cares of this
 world; but if he do, let him be deprived. [3773]

 8. If any bishop, or presbyter, or deacon shall celebrate the holiday
 of the passover before the vernal equinox with the Jews, let him be
 deprived. [3774]

 9. If any bishop, or presbyter, or deacon, or any one of the catalogue
 of the priesthood, when the oblation is over, does not communicate, let
 him give his reason; and if it be just, let him be forgiven; but if he
 does not do it, let him be suspended, as becoming the cause of damage
 to the people, and occasioning a suspicion against him that offered, as
 of one that did not rightly offer. [3775]

 10. All those of the faithful that enter into the holy church of God,
 and hear the sacred Scriptures, but do not stay during prayer and the
 holy communion, must be suspended, as causing disorder in the church.

 11. If any one, even in the house, prays with a person excommunicate,
 let him also be suspended.

 12. If any clergyman prays with one deprived as with a clergyman, let
 himself also be deprived.

 13. If any clergyman or layman who is suspended, or ought not to be
 received, [3776] goes away, and is received in another city without
 commendatory letters, let both those who received him and he that was
 received be suspended. But if he be already suspended, let his
 suspension be lengthened, as lying to and deceiving the Church of God.

 14. A bishop ought not to leave his own parish and leap to another,
 although the multitude should compel him, unless there be some good
 reason forcing him to do this, as that he can contribute much greater
 profit to the people of the new parish by the word of piety; but this
 is not to be settled by himself, but by the judgment of many bishops,
 and very great supplication.

 15. If any presbyter or deacon, or any one of the catalogue of the
 clergy, leaves his own parish and goes to another, and, entirely
 removing himself, continues in that other parish without the consent of
 his own bishop, him we command no longer to go on in his ministry,
 especially in case his bishop calls upon him to return, and he does not
 obey, but continues in his disorder. However, let him communicate there
 as a layman.

 16. But if the bishop with whom they are undervalues the deprivation
 decreed against them, and receives them as clergymen, let him be
 suspended as a teacher of disorder.

 17. He who has been twice married after his baptism, or has had a
 concubine, cannot be made a bishop, or presbyter, or deacon, or indeed
 any one of the sacerdotal catalogue. [3777]

 18. He who has taken a widow, or a divorced woman, or an harlot, or a
 servant, or one belonging to the theatre, cannot be either a bishop,
 priest, or deacon, or indeed any one of the sacerdotal catalogue.

 19. He who has married two sisters, or his brother's or sister's
 daughter, cannot be a clergyman.

 20. Let a clergyman who becomes a surety be deprived.

 21. Let an eunuch, if he be such by the injury of men, or his virilia
 were taken away in the persecution, or he was born such, and yet is
 worthy of episcopacy, be made a bishop.

 22. Let not him who has disabled himself be made a clergyman; for he is
 a self-murderer, and an enemy to the creation of God. [3778]

 23. If any one who is of the clergy disables himself, let him be
 deprived, for he is a murderer of himself.

 24. Let a layman who disables himself be separated for three years, for
 he lays a snare for his own life. [3779]

 25. Let a bishop, or presbyter, or deacon who is taken in fornication,
 or perjury, or stealing, be deprived, but not suspended; for the
 Scripture says: "Thou shall not avenge twice for the same crime by
 affliction." [3780]

 26. In like manner also as to the rest of the clergy.

 27. Of those who come into the clergy unmarried, we permit only the
 readers and singers, if they have a mind, to marry afterward. [3781]

 28. We command that a bishop, or presbyter, or deacon who strikes the
 faithful that offend, or the unbelievers who do wickedly, and thinks to
 terrify them by such means, be deprived, for our Lord has nowhere
 taught us such things. On the contrary, "when Himself was stricken, He
 did not strike again; when He was reviled, He reviled not again; when
 He suffered, He threatened not." [3782]

 29. If any bishop, or presbyter, or deacon who is deprived justly for
 manifest crimes, does venture to meddle with that ministration which
 was once entrusted to him, let the same person be entirely cut off from
 the Church.

 30. If any bishop obtains that dignity by money, or even a presbyter or
 deacon, let him and the person that ordained him be deprived; and let
 him be entirely cut off from communion, as Simon Magus was by me Peter.
 [3783]

 31. If any bishop makes use of the rulers of this world, and by their
 means obtains to be a bishop of a church, let him be deprived and
 suspended, and all that communicate with him.

 32. If any presbyter despises his own bishop, and assembles separately,
 and fixes another altar, when he has nothing to condemn in his bishop
 either as to piety or righteousness, let him be deprived as an
 ambitious person; for he is a tyrant, and the rest of the clergy,
 whoever join themselves to him. And let the laity be suspended. But let
 these things be done after one, and a second, or even a third
 admonition from the bishop. [3784]

 33. If any presbyter or deacon be put under suspension by his bishop,
 it is not lawful for any other to receive him, but for him only who put
 him under suspension, unless it happens that he who put him under
 suspension die.

 34. Do not ye receive any stranger, whether bishop, or presbyter, or
 deacon, without commendatory letters; and when such are offered, let
 them be examined. And if they be preachers of piety, let them be
 received; but if not, supply their wants, but do not receive them to
 communion: for many things are done by surprise.

 35. The bishops of every country ought to know who is the chief among
 them, and to esteem him as their head, and not to do any great thing
 without his consent; but every one to manage only the affairs that
 belong to his own parish, and the places subject to it. But let him not
 do anything without the consent of all; for it is by this means there
 will be unanimity, and God will be glorified by Christ, in the Holy
 Spirit.

 36. A bishop must not venture to ordain out of his own bounds for
 cities or countries that are not subject to him. But if he be convicted
 of having done so without the consent of such as governed those cities
 or countries, let him be deprived, both the bishop himself and those
 whom he has ordained.

 37. If any bishop that is ordained does not undertake his office, nor
 take care of the people committed to him, let him be suspended until he
 do undertake it; and in the like manner a presbyter and a deacon. But
 if he goes, and is not received, not because of the want of his own
 consent, but because of the ill temper of the people, let him continue
 bishop; but let the clergy of that city be suspended, because they have
 not taught that disobedient people better.

 38. Let a synod of bishops be held twice in the year, and let them ask
 one another the doctrines of piety; and let them determine the
 ecclesiastical disputes that happen--once in the fourth week of
 Pentecost, and again on the twelfth of the month Hyperberetæus.

 39. Let the bishop have the care of ecclesiastical revenues, and
 administer them as in the presence of God. But it is not lawful for him
 to appropriate any part of them to himself, or to give the things of
 God to his own kindred. But if they be poor, let him support them as
 poor; but let him not, under such pretences, alienate the revenues of
 the Church.

 40. Let not the presbyters and deacons do anything without the consent
 of the bishop, for it is he who is entrusted with the people of the
 Lord, and will be required to give an account of their souls. Let the
 proper goods of the bishop, if he has any, and those belonging to the
 Lord, be openly distinguished, that he may have power when he dies to
 leave his own goods as he pleases, and to whom he pleases; that, under
 pretence of the ecclesiastical revenues, the bishop's own may not come
 short, who sometimes has a wife and children, or kinsfolk, or servants.
 For this is just before God and men, that neither the Church suffer any
 loss by the not knowing which revenues are the bishop's own, nor his
 kindred, under pretence of the Church, be undone, or his relations fall
 into lawsuits, and so his death be liable to reproach. [3785]

 41. We command that the bishop have power over the goods of the Church;
 for if he be entrusted with the precious souls of men, much more ought
 he to give directions about goods, that they all be distributed to
 those in want, according to his authority, by the presbyters and
 deacons, and be used for their support with the fear of God, and with
 all reverence. He is also to partake of those things he wants, if he
 does want them, for his necessary occasions, and those of the brethren
 who live with him, that they may not by any means be in straits: for
 the law of God appointed that those who waited at the altar should be
 maintained by the altar; since not so much as a soldier does at any
 time bear arms against the enemies at his own charges.

 42. Let a bishop, or presbyter, or deacon who indulges himself in dice
 or drinking, either leave off those practices, or let him be deprived.
 [3786]

 43. If a sub-deacon, a reader, or a singer does the like, either let
 him leave off, or let him be suspended; and so for one of the laity.

 44. Let a bishop, or presbyter, or deacon who requires usury of those
 he lends to, either leave off to do so, or let him be deprived.

 45. Let a bishop, or presbyter, or deacon who only prays with heretics,
 be suspended; but if he also permit them to perform any part of the
 office of a clergyman, let him be deprived. [3787]

 46. We command that a bishop, or presbyter, or deacon who receives the
 baptism, or the sacrifice of heretics, be deprived: "For what agreement
 is there between Christ and Belial? or what part hath a believer with
 an infidel?" [3788]

 47. If a bishop or presbyter rebaptizes him who has had true baptism,
 or does not baptize him who is polluted by the ungodly, let him be
 deprived, as ridiculing the cross and the death of the Lord, and not
 distinguishing between real priests and counterfeit ones.

 48. If a layman divorces his own wife, and takes another, or one
 divorced by another, let him be suspended. [3789]

 49. If any bishop or presbyter does not baptize according to the Lord's
 constitution, into the Father, the Son, and the Holy Ghost, but into
 three beings without beginning, or into three Sons, or three
 Comforters, let him be deprived. [3790]

 50. If any bishop or presbyter does not perform the three immersions of
 the one admission, but one immersion, which is given into the death of
 Christ, let him be deprived; for the Lord did not say, "Baptize into my
 death," but, "Go ye and make disciples of all nations, baptizing them
 into the name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost." Do
 ye, therefore, O bishops, baptize thrice into one Father, and Son, and
 Holy Ghost, according to the will of Christ, and our constitution by
 the Spirit. [3791]

 51. If any bishop, or presbyter, or deacon, or indeed any one of the
 sacerdotal catalogue, abstains from marriage, flesh, and wine, not for
 his own exercise, but because he abominates these things, forgetting
 that "all things were very good," [3792] and that "God made man male
 and female," [3793] and blasphemously abuses the creation, either let
 him reform, or let him be deprived, and be cast out of the Church; and
 the same for one of the laity. [3794]

 52. If any bishop or presbyter does not receive him that returns from
 his sin, but rejects him, let him be deprived; because he grieves
 Christ, who says, "There is joy in heaven over one sinner that
 repenteth." [3795]

 53. If any bishop, or presbyter, or deacon does not on festival days
 partake of flesh or wine, let him be deprived, as "having a seared
 conscience," [3796] and becoming a cause of scandal to many.

 54. If any one of the clergy be taken eating in a tavern, let him be
 suspended, excepting when he is forced to bait at an inn upon the road.
 [3797]

 55. If any one of the clergy abuses his bishop unjustly, let him be
 deprived; for says the Scripture, "Thou shall not speak evil of the
 ruler of thy people." [3798]

 56. If any one of the clergy abuses a presbyter or a deacon, let him be
 separated.

 57. If any one of the clergy mocks at a lame, a deaf, or a blind man,
 or at one maimed in his feet, let him be suspended; and the like for
 the laity.

 58. Let a bishop or presbyter who takes no care of the clergy or
 people, and does not instruct them in piety, be separated; and if he
 continues in his negligence, let him be deprived. [3799]

 59. If any bishop or presbyter, when any one of the clergy is in want,
 does not supply his necessity, let him be suspended; and if he
 continues in it, let him be deprived, as having killed his brother.
 [3800]

 60. If any one publicly reads in the Church the spurious books of the
 ungodly, as if they were holy, to the destruction of the people and of
 the clergy, let him be deprived. [3801]

 61. If there be an accusation against a Christian for fornication, or
 adultery, or any other forbidden action, and he be convicted, let him
 not be promoted into the clergy.

 62. If any one of the clergy for fear of men, as of a Jew, or a
 Gentile, or an heretic, shall deny the name of Christ, let him be
 suspended; but if he deny the name of a clergyman, let him be deprived;
 but when he repents, let him be received as one of the laity. [3802]

 63. If any bishop, or presbyter, or deacon, or indeed any one of the
 sacerdotal catalogue, eats flesh with the blood of its life, or that
 which is torn by beasts, or which died of itself, let him be deprived;
 for this the law itself has forbidden. [3803] But if he be one of the
 laity, let him be suspended. [3804]

 64. If any one of the clergy be found to fast on the Lord's day, or on
 the Sabbath-day, excepting one only, let him be deprived; but if he be
 one of the laity, let him be suspended. [3805]

 65. If any one, either of the clergy or laity, enters into a synagogue
 of the Jews or heretics to pray, let him be deprived and suspended.
 [3806]

 66. If any one of the clergy strikes one in a quarrel, and kills him by
 that one stroke, let him be deprived, on account of his rashness; but
 if he be one of the laity, let him be suspended. [3807]

 67. If any one has offered violence to a virgin not betrothed, and
 keeps her, let him be suspended. But it is not lawful for him to take
 another to wife; but he must retain her whom he has chosen, although
 she be poor. [3808]

 68. If any bishop, or presbyter, or deacon, receives a second
 ordination from any one, let him be deprived, and the person who
 ordained him, unless he can show that his former ordination was from
 the heretics; for those that are either baptized or ordained by such as
 these, can be neither Christians nor clergymen. [3809]

 69. If any bishop, or presbyter, or deacon, or reader, or singer, does
 not fast the fast of forty days, or the fourth day of the week, and the
 day of the Preparation, let him be deprived, except he be hindered by
 weakness of body. But if he be one of the laity, let him be suspended.
 [3810]

 70. If any bishop, or any other of the clergy, fasts with the Jews, or
 keeps the festivals with them, or accepts of the presents from their
 festivals, as unleavened bread or some such thing, let him be deprived;
 but if he be one of the laity, let him be suspended. [3811]

 71. If any Christian carries oil into an heathen temple, or into a
 synagogue of the Jews, or lights up lamps in their festivals, let him
 be suspended.

 72. If any one, either of the clergy or laity, takes away from the holy
 Church an honeycomb, or oil, let him be suspended, and let him add the
 fifth part to that which he took away. [3812]

 73. A vessel of silver, or gold, or linen, which is sanctified, let no
 one appropriate to his own use, for it is unjust; but if any one be
 caught, let him be punished with suspension. [3813]

 74. If a bishop be accused of any crime by credible and faithful
 persons, it is necessary that he be cited by the bishops; and if he
 comes and makes his apology, and yet is convicted, let his punishment
 be determined. But if, when he is cited, he does not obey, let him be
 cited a second time, by two bishops sent to him. But if even then he
 despises them, and will not come, let the synod pass what sentence they
 please against him, that he may not appear to gain advantage by
 avoiding their judgment. [3814]

 75. Do not ye receive an heretic in a testimony against a bishop; nor a
 Christian if he be single. For the law says, "In the mouth of two or
 three witnesses every word shall be established." [3815]

 76. A bishop must not gratify his brother, or his son, or any other
 kinsman, with the episcopal dignity, or ordain whom he pleases; for it
 is not just to make heirs to episcopacy, and to gratify human
 affections in divine matters. For we must not put the Church of God
 under the laws of inheritance; but if any one shall do so, let his
 ordination be invalid, and let him be punished with suspension. [3816]

 77. If any one be maimed in an eye, or lame of his leg, but is worthy
 of the episcopal dignity, let him be made a bishop; for it is not a
 blemish of the body that can defile him, but the pollution of the soul.
 [3817]

 78. But if he be deaf and blind, let him not be made a bishop; not as
 being a defiled person, but that the ecclesiastical affairs may not be
 hindered.

 79. If any one hath a demon, let him not be made one of the clergy.
 Nay, let him not pray with the faithful; but when he is cleansed, let
 him be received; and if he be worthy, let him be ordained. [3818]

 80. It is not right to ordain him bishop presently who is just come in
 from the Gentiles, and baptized; or from a wicked mode of life: for it
 is unjust that he who has not yet afforded any trial of himself should
 be a teacher of others, unless it anywhere happens by divine grace.
 [3819]

 81. We have said that a bishop ought not to let himself into public
 administrations, but to attend on all opportunities upon the necessary
 affairs of the Church. [3820] Either therefore let him agree not to do
 so, or let him be deprived. For, "no one can serve two masters," [3821]
 according to the Lord's admonition. [3822]

 82. We do not permit servants to be ordained into the clergy without
 their masters' consent; for this would grieve those that owned them.
 For such a practice would occasion the subversion of families. But if
 at any time a servant appears worthy to be ordained into an high
 office, such as our Onesimus appeared to be, and if his master allows
 of it, and gives him his freedom, and dismisses him from his house, let
 him be ordained. [3823]

 83. Let a bishop, or presbyter, or deacon, who goes to the army, and
 desires to retain both the Roman government and the sacerdotal
 administration, be deprived. For "the things of Cæsar belong to Cæsar,
 and the things of God to God." [3824]

 84. Whosoever shall abuse the king [3825] or the governor unjustly, let
 him suffer punishment; and if he be a clergyman, let him be deprived;
 but if he be a layman, let him be suspended.

 85. Let the following books be esteemed venerable and holy by you, both
 of the clergy and laity. Of the Old Covenant: the five books of
 Moses--Genesis, Exodus, Leviticus, Numbers, and Deuteronomy; one of
 Joshua the son of Nun, one of the Judges, one of Ruth, four of the
 Kings, two of the Chronicles, two of Ezra, one of Esther, one of
 Judith, three of the Maccabees, one of Job, one hundred and fifty
 psalms; three books of Solomon--Proverbs, Ecclesiastes, and the Song of
 Songs; sixteen prophets. And besides these, take care that your young
 persons learn the Wisdom of the very learned Sirach. But our sacred
 books, that is, those of the New Covenant, are these: the four Gospels
 of Matthew, Mark, Luke, and John; the fourteen Epistles of Paul; two
 Epistles of Peter, three of John, one of James, one of Jude; two
 Epistles of Clement; and the Constitutions dedicated to you the bishops
 by me Clement, in eight books; which it is not fit to publish before
 all, because of the mysteries contained in them; and the Acts of us the
 Apostles. [3826]

 Let these canonical rules be established by us for you, O ye bishops;
 and if you continue to observe them, ye shall be saved, and shall have
 peace; but if you be disobedient, you shall be punished, and have
 everlasting war one with another, and undergo a penalty suitable to
 your disobedience.

 Now, God who alone is unbegotten, and the Maker of the whole world,
 unite you all through His peace, in the Holy Spirit; perfect you unto
 every good work, immoveable, unblameable, and unreprovable; and
 vouchsafe to you eternal life with us, through the mediation of His
 beloved Son Jesus Christ our God and Saviour; with whom glory be to
 Thee, the God over all, and the Father, in the Holy Spirit the
 Comforter, now and always, and for ever and ever. Amen.

 The end of the Constitutions of the Holy Apostles by Clement, which are
 the Catholic doctrine.

 [3769] [The brief notes on these canons have been mainly derived from
 the text and notes appended to Hefele's History of Christian Councils,
 vol. i. pp. 450-492, Edinburgh translations.--R.]

 [3770] [Comp. Apostolic Constitutions, iii. 20, viii. 4, 27, on these
 two canons.--R.]

 [3771] [This canon, and the two following ones, which explain it, point
 to some early heretical customs The Apostolic Constitutions furnish no
 exact parallel. Canon 4 was joined with 3 in the Greek text. Dionysius
 divided them: hence a variation in number exists from this point.--R.]

 [3772] [Dionysius omits aut diaconus.--R.]

 [3773] Comp. Apostolic Constitutions, ii. 6.--R.]

 [3774] This points to a discussion in the third century.--R.]

 [3775] [Canons 9-16 agree with those of the Council of Antioch, a.d.
 341; but there is a difference of opinion on the question of priority.]

 [3776] Dionysius Exiguus translates "communicans," in which case the
 Greek reading must be dektos, or, "who can be received."

 [3777] [Canons 17, 18, 20, agree with Apostolic Constitutions, vi.. 17,
 ii. 6.--R.]

 [3778] [After Origen. Comp. Melito, [296]vol. viii., this series.]

 [3779] [Canons 21-24 agree with the first of the Nicene Council
 (Hefele, Christian Councils, i. pp. 375, 376). Some hold that canon to
 refer to these, others find in the enlarged application of Canon 24 a
 proof of the later date of this collection.--R.]

 [3780] Nah. i. 9. [Canons 25, 26, are referred to by Basil the Great
 (Ad Amphilochium, iii.). In the Greek collection 26 is joined with
 25.--R.]

 [3781] [Apostolic Constitutions, vi. 17.--R.]

 [3782] 1 Pet. ii. 23. [This canon seems of late origin, probably from
 Synod of Constantinople, a.d. 394.--R.]

 [3783] [The closing clause points to a comparatively late date, as do
 the contents of Canon 31.--R.]

 [3784] [Canons 32-41 also agree with those of Antioch; see note on
 Canon 9. Some of the regulations have, however, an earlier date:
 whether they existed in this form before that time, is open to
 discussion.--R .]

 [3785] [This canon is divided by most editors of the Greek text;
 forming, in their enumeration, Canons 38 and 39.--R.]

 [3786] [Hefele and others regard Canons 42-44 as among the most ancient
 of this collection, and of unknown origin.--R.]

 [3787] [The substance of this canon is very ancient, Hefele thinks; but
 Drey derives it from Canons 9, 33, 34, of the Synod of Laodicea, about
 a.d. 363.--R.]

 [3788] 2 Cor. vi. 5. [Drey regards this as very ancient; but Hefele
 derives it and the following one from the Apostolic Constitutions, vi.
 15.--R.]

 [3789] [Very ancient, of unknown origin; repeated in canons of Elvira
 and Arles.--R.]

 [3790] From Apostolic Constitutions, vi. 11, 26.--R]

 [3791] [This canon, the last of those in the collection of Dionysius,
 is regarded as among the most recent. Of unknown origin.--R.] At the
 end of this canon, in the collection of John of Antioch, the following
 words are added: "Let him that is baptized be taught that the Father
 was not crucified, nor endured to be born of man, nor indeed that the
 Holy Spirit became man, or even endured suffering, for He was not made
 flesh; but the only begotten Son ransomed the world from the wrath
 which lay upon it: for He became man through His love of man, having
 fashioned a body for Himself from a virgin. For Wisdom built a house
 for herself as a Creator; but He willingly endured the cross, and
 rescued the world from the wrath that lies on it, namely, those who are
 baptized into the name of the Father, and the Son, and the Holy Spirit.
 But let those who do not thus baptize be suspended, as being ignorant
 of the mystery of piety." The same collection gives the following as
 Canon 51: "He who says that the Father suffered is more impious than
 the Jews, nailing along with Christ the Father also. He who denies that
 the only begotten Son was made flesh for us, and endured the cross,
 fights with God, and is an enemy of the saints. He that names the Holy
 Spirit Father or Son, is ignorant and foolish; for the Son is Creator
 along with the Father, and has the same throne, and is Lawgiver along
 with Him, and Judge, and the cause of the resurrection; and the Holy
 Spirit is the same in substance: for the Godhead has three Persons, the
 same in substance. For in our day Simon the magician gave forth his
 doctrines, drawing the speechless, delusive, unstable, and wicked
 spirit to himself, and babbling that there is one God with three names,
 and sometimes erasing the passion and birth of Christ. Do you, then,
 most beloved ones, baptize into one Father, and Son, and the Holy
 Spirit as third, according to the will of the Lord, and our
 constitution made in the spirit."

 [3792] Gen. i. 31.

 [3793] Gen. i. 26.

 [3794] [Canons 51-53 are from the Apostolic Constitutions: the first
 from vi. 8, 10, 26; the second from ii. 12, 13; the third from v.
 20.--R.]

 [3795] Luke xv. 7.

 [3796] 1 Tim. iv. 2.

 [3797] [Canons 54-57 are of unknown origin; the first is deemed
 ancient, while the conduct forbidden in the others points to a more
 recent date. Drey thinks the distinctions of the clergy also point to a
 later date.--R.]

 [3798] Ex. xxii. 28.

 [3799] [Canon 58 is supposed to refer to the absence of bishops at the
 imperial city, which prevailed in the middle of the fourth
 century.--R.]

 [3800] [Canon 59 resembles the twenty-fifth canon of Synod of Antioch;
 see on Canon 9.--R.]

 [3801] [Of doubtful origin, but resembling Apostolic Constitutions vi.
 16, though probably of later date.--R.]

 [3802] [Canons 61, 62, are of unknown origin.--R.]

 [3803] Gen. ix.; Lev. xvii.

 [3804] [Canon 63 is regarded as very ancient.--R.]

 [3805] [Canon 64 is numbered as 66 In Hefele's edition, being preceded
 by Canons 65 and 66 as given above. It is from Apostolic Constitutions,
 v. 20.--R.]

 [3806] [Canon 65 is from Apostolic Constitutions, ii. 61.--R.]

 [3807] [Of unknown but probably late origin.--R.]

 [3808] [Drey makes this one of the most recent canons of the
 collection.--R.]

 [3809] [Of unknown origin, probably recent.--R.]

 [3810] [Drey considers Canon 69 to be very ancient, but also intimates
 that it and Canon 70 were taken from the pseudo-Ignatian Epistle to the
 Philippians; see the same, chap. xiii., latter half, vol. i. [297]p.
 119, of this series.--R.]

 [3811] [With Canons 70, 71, compare Synod of Elvira (a.d. 305 or 306),
 Canons 49, 50, in Hefele, vol. i. pp. 158, 159. Drey, however, derives
 them from Canons 37-39 of Laodicea (a.d. 363).--R.]

 [3812] Lev. v. 16. [It is argued from the theft forbidden that this
 canon is more recent; its origin is unknown.--R.]

 [3813] [The wealth here implied points to a comparatively late origin;
 Hefele assigns it to the second half of the third century, but Drey
 gives a later date.--R.]

 [3814] [Hefele thinks both this and the following canon to be later
 than the Nicæan Council. Drey, however, derives Canon 74 from the
 council at Chalcedon (a.d. 451), a view opposed by both Bickell and
 Hefele.--R.]

 [3815] Deut xix. 15. [According to Drey this canon is from the Council
 of Constantinople (sixth canon), in a.d. 381.--R.]

 [3816] [Drey derives this from Canon 23, Synod of Antioch, a.d.
 341.--R.]

 [3817] [Hefele: "The Canons 77-79, inclusive, belong to the first three
 centuries of the Church; their origin is unknown."--R.]

 [3818] [Comp. Apostolic Constitutions, viii. 32, p. 495, from which
 this may have been taken.--R.]

 [3819] [Drey regards Canon 80 as an imitation of the second canon of
 Nicæa, which is, however, much fuller; comp. Hefele, i. p. 377. On the
 principle, comp. 1 Tim. iii. 6 and similar passages.--R.]

 [3820] Can. iv. prius.

 [3821] Matt. vi. 24.

 [3822] [The contents of this canon point to a late date. Drey regards
 it as an abridgment of the third canon of Chalcedon (a.d. 451).--R.]

 [3823] [Of unknown origin and date.--R.]

 [3824] Matt. xxii. 21. [This also Drey traces to the Council of
 Chalcedon, a.d. 451 (Canon 7); but Hefele opposes this view here, as in
 the case of the other canons (30, 67, 74, 81) which Drey derives from
 that source.--R.]

 [3825] [Or rather, "the emperor" (basilea having that sense). Hefele
 refers this to the time of the Arian struggle, when the emperors were
 involved in ecclesiastical controversies.--R.]

 [3826] [Hefele: "This is probably the least ancient canon in the whole
 collection." With this opinion there is general concurrence, since the
 mention of the Constitutions among the canonical books indicates the
 hand of the last compiler of that collection of writings. Whoever he
 was, he was not Clement of Rome.--R.]

 Elucidations.

 I.

 (The Bidding Prayer, etc., [298]p. 485.)

 The Pauline Norm. [3827]

 1. Supplications.

 2. Prayers, Psalms, Hymns, and Spiritual Songs.

 3. Intercessions.

 4. General Thanksgiving. The Kiss of Peace.

 5. Anaphora. [3828]

 The Lord Jesus the same night in which He was betrayed took bread:

 And when He had given thanks, He brake it,

 And said, Take, eat: this is my Body, which is broken for you:

 This do in remembrance of Me.

 After the same manner also He took the cup, when He had supped,

 Saying, This cup is the New Testament in my Blood:

 This do ye, as oft as ye drink it, in remembrance of Me.

 For as often as ye eat this Bread, and drink this Cup, ye do show the
 Lord's death till He come.

 6. Our Father, etc. [3829]

 7. Communion.

 Let us note also that the Apostle had "delivered" unto the Corinthians
 (1 Cor. xi. 23), as doubtless to others (1 Cor. vii. 17), certain
 institutions which he ordained in all the churches, and for departing
 from which he censures the Corinthians in this place (ver. 17 compared
 with ver. 2) in certain particulars. In chap. xiv. at ver. 40, he
 refers to these ordinances as a ta'xis, in the performance of which
 they were to proceed (kosmi'os) with due order, becomingly; not with
 mere decency, but with a beautiful decorum of service.

 Finally, let me suggest that there are fragments of the Apostle's
 (para'doseis) instructions everywhere scattered through his Epistles,
 such as the minute canon [3830] concerning the veiling of women in acts
 of worship, insisting upon it with a length of argument which in one of
 the Apostolic Fathers would be considered childish. He also insisted
 that his ta'xis is from the Lord.

 Fragments of the primitive hymns are also scattered through the
 Apostles' writings, as, e.g.,--


 'Egeirai ho katheu'don,

 kai` ana'sta ek ton nekron

 kai` epiphau'sei soi o Christo's. [3831]

 Of such passages the formula (dio` le'gei) "It saith" seems to be a
 frequent index.

 May we not conclude also that the sublime prayer and doxology of Eph.
 iii. 14-21 is a quotation from the Apostle's own eucharistic ta'xis for
 the whole state of Christ's Church militant?

 Might not the same be more constantly used in our days as an
 intercession for the whole flock of the one Shepherd?

 II.

 (Fulfil His constitution, [299]p. 489.)

 The Pauline Norm being borne in mind, we shall best comprehend this
 Clementine liturgy, as to its primitive claims, by taking the testimony
 of Justin, writing in Rome to the Antonines a. d.160. Referring to the
 Apology in our first volume, we observe that the order kept up in his
 day was this:--

 1. Prayers for all estates of men.

 2. The kiss of peace.

 3. Oblation of bread and wine.

 4. Thanksgiving.

 5. Words of institution.

 6. The prayer ending with Amen.

 7. Communion.

 Now, a century later, we may suppose the original of this Clementine to
 have taken a fuller shape; of which still later this Clementine is the
 product. [3832]

 Bear in mind that the early Roman use was (Greek) borrowed wholly from
 the East; [3833] and, comparing the testimony of Justin with the
 Pauline Norm, may we not suppose that this norm in Rome was augmented
 by the Eastern uses, and so preserves a true name in that of the first
 Bishop of Rome, who accepted it from Jerusalem or Antioch?

 III.

 (That He may show this bread, etc., [300]p. 489.)

 From a recent essay by Dr. Williams, the erudite bishop of Connecticut,
 I am permitted to cite, as follows:--


 Compare the original texts thus:--

 Clementine. [3834]

 Irenæus. [3835]


 opos apophene toon arton touton soma tou Christou sou kai` to`
 pote'rion touton aima tou Christou sou ina hoi metalabontes, k.t.l.

 hopos apophene te`n thusi'an tau'ten, kai` to`n a'rton soma tou
 Christou, kai` to` pote'rion to` aima tou Christou ina hoi
 metalabo'ntes, k.t.l.


 Bishop Williams then proceeds to inquire:--

 "How is this striking agreement to be explained? Does Irenæus quote
 from the Clementine, or the Clementine from him? Or is it not much more
 likely that they are independent witnesses to primitive uses, going
 back to the period of the persecutions, and extending far beyond the
 limits of Syria or Palestine'?" [3836]

 I shall recur to these passages in the elucidations to Early Liturgies
 (infra): but here I beg the reader to consult Pfaff, to whom we owe the
 discovery of the fragment cited from Irenæus; also Grabe, in the same
 volume of Pfaff, whom I have already introduced to the reader. [3837]

 Postscript.

 The American editor had been promised the aid of his beloved friend the
 Rev. Dr. Hobart in the elucidation of the liturgies; but a sudden and
 almost fatal prostration of his health has deprived the reader of the
 admirable comments with which he would have enriched these pages, had
 Providence permitted.

 [3827] 1 Tim. II. 1. Compare (poieisthai) the Greek here with that of
 the LXX. in Ex. xxix. 36, 38, 39, 41; also Ex. x. 25, and so throughout
 the Old Testament. Note also Eph. v. 19 and Col. iii. 16; and the kiss,
 1 Cor. xvi. 20.

 [3828] 1 Cor. xi. 23. To me there is great significance in the fact
 that the Apostle received this as an original Gospel from the Lord
 Himself. Truly (2 Cor. xi. 5) he was not "a whit behind," even that
 chief Apostle who reclined in the bosom of the Great High Priest and
 adorable Lamb of God as He instituted the feast.

 [3829] Matt. vi. 9. For this we have the important testimony of Gregory
 the Great, as preserved to his day: that the Apostles (SS. Peter and
 Paul must have been primarily in his mind, of course) delivered no
 other "custom" to the churches (i.e., as essential) than the words of
 Institution and the Lord's Prayer. He says:--"Orationem Dominicam, mox
 post precem, dicimus, quia mos Apostolorum erat, ad ipsam solummodo
 orationem oblationis hostiam consecrare."--Epist. ad Joann. Episc.
 Syrac., lib. ix. Ep. xii., Opp., tom. id. p. 958, ed. Migne. Now, for
 the sense of post precem in the above, we have Justin Martyr for a
 primitive witness of Roman usage. He speaks of the words of Institution
 expressly (vol. i. cap. lxvi. [301]p. 185) as "the Prayer of the Logos"
 (di' euches Logou), in the use of which he makes the essential act of
 the Oblation to consist. Liturgic fulness may or may not require more,
 but the essentials are thus simple. So far, the Roman Missal to this
 day sustains the words of Gregory. It is overloaded with ceremonial,
 but does not include the noble features on which the Greeks lay so
 great stress: i.e., the conjoint Oblation and Invocation. See 1 Pet.
 ii. 5.

 [3830] 1 Cor. xi. 5, 6. Here men are equally enjoined not to follow the
 Jewish rite of covering their heads in prayer.

 [3831] Eph. v. 14.

 [3832] See the Greek in Hammond, p. 3, and the learned Introduction, p.
 lxx.

 [3833] Hammond, Introduction, p. lxix.

 [3834] See translation, [302]p. 489, supra.

 [3835] See translation, vol. i. (Fragment xxxvii.) [303]p. 574, this
 series.

 [3836] For purposes of comparison on many points connected with this
 inquiry, see the Fragment of an Ancient East-Syrian Liturgy in
 Hammond's Appendix, published separately, Oxford, 1879.

 [3837] Concerning Pfaff, see [304]p. 536, infra, and vol. i. p. 574,
 [305]note 5, this series.

 [2523] [On the title page of the Edinburgh edition is subjoined: "by
 Clement, bishop and citizen of Rome."]


 AN ANCIENT HOMILY,

 COMMONLY STYLED

THE SECOND EPISTLE OF CLEMENT.


  Introductory Notice

 to the Homily Known as

  the Second Epistle of Clement.

 It is gratifying that our series is marked by tokens of critical
 progress, and not less cheering tokens of scientific research. The
 clearing-up of much that has perplexed us about Hermas; the Bryennios
 discovery; and, not least, the completion of this fragment, which has
 long been a scandal to patristic inquiry,--are surely such tokens. They
 enrich the reader with definite ideas on many collateral subjects. May
 they not stimulate American scholarship and American affluence to fresh
 enterprises of the same character for the advancement of learning, and
 the glory of the world's Redeemer and Illuminator?

 The very early date to which this homily is now assigned makes its
 slightest allusions to the New-Testament canon of very great
 importance. I have ventured to indicate a few such, even where they may
 be mere allusions, not textual quotations: as, e.g., on p. 517, at
 notes 20 and 22, slight indications of a reference to the Second
 Epistle of St. Peter and to the Apocalypse. [3838]

 I shall have occasion to refer to this work in the elucidation of the
 Liturgies which are to follow. If it be, as Bishop Lightfoot supposes,
 a homily of the second century, it may lend important retrospective aid
 to the student of these volumes in other particulars; but, having
 entrusted this interesting relic to the editorial care of a most
 competent scholar, I shall not presume to anticipate his judgment in
 any matter.

 [3838] If this reference to 2 Pet. iii. 9 be probable, it is one of the
 earliest testimonies to the genuine character of that Epistle. The true
 Clement has two references to the same (pp. [306]8 and [307]11, vol.
 i., this series), and Justin also (vol. i. [308]p. 240) is credited
 with a similar reference to 2 Peter and the Apocalypse. See Lardner,
 Credib., vol. ii. p. 123 et seq.

  Introductory Notice by Professor M. B. Riddle, D.D.

 section 1.--text.

 In this volume, pp. [309]372-376, will be found a brief account of the
 Codex discovered by Bryennios, now Metropolitan of Nicomedia. It
 remains in the library of the Jerusalem Monastery of the Holy Sepulchre
 at Constantinople. While the publication of the Greek text of the
 Teaching awakened unusual interest, the recovery of that document has
 not been the only valuable result of this important discovery. The
 Codex, as was speedily known, contains the only complete copy of the
 Greek text of the two Epistles of Clement. The lacunæ previously
 existing in the genuine Epistle were not extensive; but, as now
 appears, the Alexandrian manuscript contains only three-fifths of the
 second Epistle. The entire Greek text of both Epistles was given to the
 public by Bryennios [3839] in 1875.

 This at once led to a revision of some recent editions, notably those
 of Hilgenfeld, [3840] and of Gebhardt and Harnack. [3841] Many
 monographs soon appeared. But the discovery of a new (Syriac) source
 for the text in 1876, while not affecting the general problem, gave to
 patristic scholars more abundant critical material. Bishop Lightfoot's
 Appendix [3842] contains the most convenient and accessible collation
 of this material, as well as the most clear statements on all points
 affected by the two discoveries. The Syriac manuscript, containing a
 version of the two Epistles of Clement, was purchased by the Cambridge
 University Library in 1876, from the collection of "the late Oriental
 scholar M. Jules Mohl of Paris" (Lightfoot). It embraces the entire New
 Testament, except the Apocalypse, in the Harkleian recension of the
 Philoxenian (or later) Syriac version; but the scribe has inserted the
 two Epistles of Clement (entire) between the Catholic and Pauline
 Epistles. The value of the manuscript for New-Testament criticism is
 great, and the phenomena it presents interesting, as bearing on the
 discussion of the New-Testament canon; but the paucity of sources for
 the text of the Clementine Epistles gives special importance to the
 discovery of a version of these writings so soon after the recovery of
 the entire Greek text. A discussion of the textual questions is
 forbidden by the limits of this Introductory Notice, but a few points
 may be stated:--

 1. A comparison of the three authorities (the Alexandrian, the
 Constantinopolitan, and the Syriac), in the parts they in common
 contain, shows that the first is most trustworthy, and that the Syriac
 is usually more correct than the Constantinopolitan.

 2. Hence, in the recovered portions, the authority of the Syriac is
 very valuable in correcting the obvious blunders of the Greek copy.
 This should teach caution in accepting the text of the Teaching, where
 the same Greek manuscript is our only authority.

 3. The genuine Epistle of Clement, which stands next in age to the
 canonical books of the New Testament, now stands next in accuracy of
 text also. Doubt in regard to textual questions decreases as the
 critical material increases.

 section 2.--place and date of composition; author.

 The recovery of the entire text of the Second Epistle settles the
 question as to the purpose of the work. As was previously surmised, it
 is a homily (comp. chaps. xvii., xix., xx.); moreover, it was "read" by
 the author at public worship after the Scripture lesson (see Chap.
 xix). But as to place, date, and author, there is still diversity of
 opinion. The three questions are closely related. The view of Bishop
 Lightfoot seems, on the whole, most tenable. He regards the homily as
 of Corinthian origin, delivered, in all probability, between a. d. 120
 and 140, but the work of an unknown author, who seems to have been one
 of the presbyters of the church,--possibly the bishop. The allusions to
 the athletic games are in favour of Corinth. On this theory the title
 is thus accounted for: The genuine Epistle of Clement was addressed to
 the Corinthians, and read in the church of that city from time to time.
 This homily was probably read in the same manner, and at length united
 in a manuscript copy with the other. Each was "to the Corinthians:"
 hence it was gradually inferred that both were Epistles of Clement. Of
 this succession or movement Lightfoot finds some indications in the
 manuscript authorities.

 The internal evidence of an early date has been increased by the
 discovery of the concluding portion, but there is nothing to determine
 the exact time of composition. The distinction made in Chap. xiv.
 between the Old and New Testaments, as well as the use of the Gospel of
 the Egyptians (at the close of chap. xii.), taken in connection with
 the unmistakeable citations of New-Testament passages as of Divine
 authority, point to the first half of the second century as the
 probable period. The absence of all direct opposition to Gnosticism
 points to an origin within the same limits. All these considerations
 make against the view of Hilgenfeld, who attributes the homily to
 Clement of Alexandria, thus assigning it to the latter half of the
 second century.

 In regard to the author, nothing further is learned from the newly
 recovered portion, except the fact that he was a preacher. Even this
 does not determine his ecclesiastical position, since at that early
 date much freedom of utterance was permitted in Christian assemblies.
 It is, however, very probable that the author was a presbyter; and it
 is not improbable that he was the chief presbyter, or local bishop.

 The homily is still attributed to a person named Clement, but there are
 three theories as to what Clement. (1) Bryennios stands almost alone in
 claiming that the document is the work of Clemens Romanus. The internal
 evidence against this view was quite sufficient before the full text of
 the two Epistles was known; now it is to be regarded as abundantly
 conclusive. Even the English version of the two writings will suggest
 to the intelligent reader the points of difference. (2) As intimated
 above, Hilgenfeld regards Clement of Alexandria as the author; but this
 places the homily too late. Moreover, the writings of the Alexandrian
 Father stand immensely above this feeble, commonplace, and chaotic
 production. Even the citation from the Gospel of the Egyptians, common
 to both, [3843] is differently used by the two authors; Clement of
 Alexandria opposing the interpretation favoured in this homily, as well
 as objecting to the authority of that apocryphal Gospel. Hilgenfeld's
 argument from the word philosophein in chap. xix., is invalidated by
 the improbability of that reading; see note in loco. (3) The most
 plausible view, as Bishop Lightfoot admits, is that of Harnack. He
 assigns the homily to a third Clement, referred to, as he supposes, in
 the Shepherd of Hermas, [3844] and living somewhat later than Clement
 of Rome. In favour of this may be urged: some similarity to the
 Shepherd of Hermas, the probability that at the date of the later
 writing Clement of Rome was not living, and the easy explanation it
 affords of the traditional title. But, while a third Clement may have
 lived at Rome, we have no evidence other than the doubtful hint in the
 Shepherd. The allusion in that work seems far more appropriate to the
 well-known Clement of Rome. The argument from the later date of the
 Shepherd proves very little; not only is the date uncertain, but the
 visions are placed quite early. The editor of this series, while
 accepting a. d. 160 as the probable date of the Shepherd, regards it as
 a compilation, introducing "Hermas and Clement to identify the times
 which are idealized in his allegory." [3845] The view of Bishop
 Lightfoot, therefore, seems to be the safest.

 section 3.--character and contents.

 The style of the homily is poor. It abounds in connectives, which link
 unconnected ideas; its thought is feeble, its theology peculiar though
 not false, its arrangement confused. While it furnishes some historical
 data for practical theology, it is, in homiletical method and matter,
 in sharp contrast with the Apostolic writings and with the homilies of
 Origen. Though referring to Scripture, it has none of the virtues of
 the expository discourse; though hortatory in tone, it has little of
 the unity and directness of better sermons of that class. Its chief
 excellence is its brevity.

 It is difficult to make an analysis of the contents. The theme is the
 duty of fulfilling the commands of Christ.

 (1) This obedience is the true confession of Christ, answering to the
 greatness of His salvation; mainly in chaps. i.-iv.

 (2) Thus the Christian shows his opposition to the world; chaps.
 v.-viii.

 (3) This obedience will be rewarded in the future world; chaps.
 ix.-xvii.

 (4) The conclusion: the preacher's confession (xviii.), justification
 of his exhortation (xix.); concluding word of consolation, with
 doxology (xx.). But the treatment is not strictly logical, nor are the
 parts clearly distinguished.

 The theology shows no traces of heresy, nor does it sharply oppose any
 false doctrinal views. It lacks the dogmatic precision of a later age,
 but emphasizes rigid views of the relation of the sexes. "Repentance
 and good works seem to be the main articles of its creed. Of
 regeneration there seems to be no definite idea: to be called is the
 same as to be saved. The Church is pre-existent; the kingdom of God is
 in the future; no worth is left to this world or to the life in it. The
 principal argument urged in favour of standing firm in faith is the
 good issue of it in the next life" (C. J. H. Ropes).

 The hints given in regard to public worship agree with the famous
 description of Justin Martyr, [3846] and there are indications that the
 early freedom of exhortation had not yet disappeared. Bishop Lightfoot
 aptly concludes his dissertation with these words: "the homily itself,
 as a literary work, is almost worthless. As the earliest example of its
 kind, however, and as the product of an important age of which we
 possess only the scantiest remains, it has the highest value. Nor will
 its intellectual poverty blind us to its true grandeur, as an example
 of the lofty moral earnestness and the triumphant faith which subdued a
 reluctant world, and laid it prostrate at the foot of the cross."
 [3847]

 section 4.--the version in this volume.

 Greater unity would have been secured by a new translation of the
 entire work. Since, however, this was not possible, the aim of the
 editor has been to give the reader, as far as practicable, the benefit
 of the light shed upon the whole by the recently discovered
 authorities. The portion already translated in the Edinburgh volume has
 been supplied with critical annotations, and a few exegetical points
 have been treated. The recent editions of the Greek text have, of
 course, been consulted. The newly recovered portion has been
 re-translated. Bishop Lightfoot's version is so excellent that the
 temptation to use it was very great. It has, of course, influenced the
 editor in many places. But the following version differs from it mainly
 in two respects: (1) An effort has been made to preserve the verbal
 correspondences between the language of the homily and that of the New
 Testament: hence the English word used in the Revised Version as an
 equivalent of a Greek term is given here as a similar equivalent. (2)
 The view of the Greek tenses indicated in Lightfoot's renderings does
 not always accord with that of the editor.

 It may be added, that Professor C. J. H. Ropes of Bangor, Me., kindly
 sent, for use in the preparation of the Epistle for this volume, his
 manuscript translation and notes. These have been very helpful, and are
 entitled to this acknowledgment. It will be found that the American
 translation is less paraphrastic than the Edinburgh. The new portions,
 both text and notes, have been printed without brackets when they are
 the work of the editor. The rare additions of the general editor are
 always bracketed, that the reader may readily recognise to whom the
 literary responsibility in each case properly belongs.


 The following is the Edinburgh Introductory Notice:--


 The first certain reference which is made by any early writer to this
 so-called Epistle of Clement is found in these words of Eusebius (Hist.
 Eccl., iii. 38): "We must know that there is also a second Epistle of
 Clement. But we do not regard it as being equally notable with the
 former, since we know of none of the ancients that have made use of
 it." Several critics in modern times have endeavoured to vindicate the
 authenticity of this Epistle. But it is now generally regarded as one
 of the many writings which have been falsely ascribed to Clement.
 Besides the want of external evidence, indicated even by Eusebius in
 the above extract, the diversity of style clearly points to a different
 writer from that of the first Epistle. A commonly accepted opinion
 among critics at the present day is, that this is not an Epistle at
 all, but a fragment of one of the many homilies falsely ascribed to
 Clement. There can be no doubt, however, that in the catalogue of
 writings contained in the Alexandrian ms. it is both styled an Epistle,
 and, as well as the other which accompanies it, is attributed to
 Clement. As the ms. is certainly not later than the fifth century, the
 opinion referred to must by that time have taken firm root in the
 Church; but in the face of internal evidence, and in want of all
 earlier testimony, such a fact goes but a small way to establish its
 authenticity.

 [3839] The full title of his edition, in English form, is as follows:
 "The two Epistles of our holy father Clement Bishop of Rome to the
 Corinthians; from a manuscript in the Library of the Most Holy
 Sepulchre in Fanar of Constantinople; now for the first time published
 complete, with prolegomena and notes, by Philotheos Bryennios,
 Metropolitan of Serræ. Constantinople, 1875."

 [3840] Novum Test. extra canonem receptum (2d ed., Leipzig, 1876). Pp.
 xliv.-xlix., 69-106, contain prolegomena, text, and notes, 2 Clement.

 [3841] Patrum Apost. Opera, 2d ed., Leipzig, 1876.

 [3842] St. Clement of Rome An Appendix containing the newly recovered
 portions, with introductions, notes, and translations. London, 1877.
 The original volume, London, 1869.

 [3843] See chap. xii., and Clem. Alex., Stromata, iii. 13, vol. ii. p.
 398.

 [3844] See Vision II. 4, vol. ii. p. 12.

 [3845] See vol. ii. p. 4; and comp. Lightfoot, Appendix, pp. 316, 317.

 [3846] First Apology, ch. lxvii. (vol. i. [310]p. 186).

 [3847] St. Clement, Appendix, p. 317.

  The Homily. [3848]

 Chap. i.--we ought to think highly of christ.

 Brethren, it is fitting that you should think of Jesus Christ as of
 God,--as the Judge of the living and the dead. And it does not become
 us [3849] to think lightly [3850] of our salvation; for if we think
 little [3851] of Him, we shall also hope but to obtain little from Him.
 And those of us [3852] who hear carelessly of these things, as if they
 were of small importance, commit sin, not knowing whence we have been
 called, and by whom, and to what place, and how much Jesus Christ
 submitted to suffer for our sakes. What return, then, shall we make to
 Him? or what fruit that shall be worthy of that which He has given to
 us? For, [3853] indeed, how great are the benefits [3854] which we owe
 to Him! He has graciously given us light; as a Father, He has called us
 sons; He has saved us when we were ready to perish. What praise, then,
 shall we give to Him, or what return shall we make for the things which
 we have received? [3855] We were deficient [3856] in understanding,
 worshipping stones and wood, and gold, and silver, and brass, the works
 of men's hand; [3857] and our whole life was nothing else than death.
 Involved in blindness, and with such darkness [3858] before our eyes,
 we have received sight, and through His will have laid aside that cloud
 by which we were enveloped. For He had compassion on us, and mercifully
 saved us, observing the many errors in which we were entangled, as well
 as the destruction to which we were exposed, [3859] and that we had
 [3860] no hope of salvation except it came to us from Him. For He
 called us when we were not, [3861] and willed that out of nothing we
 should attain a real existence. [3862]

 Chap. ii.--the church, formerly barren, is now fruitful.

 "Rejoice, thou barren that bearest not; break forth and cry, thou that
 travailest not; for she that is desolate hath many more children than
 she that hath an husband." [3863] In that He said, "Rejoice, thou
 barren that bearest not," He referred to us, for our Church was barren
 before that children were given to her. But when He said, "Cry out,
 thou that travailest not," He means this, that we should sincerely
 offer up our prayers to God, and should not, like women in travail,
 show signs of weakness. [3864] And in that He said, "For she that is
 desolate hath many more children than she that hath an husband," He
 means that [3865] our people seemed to be outcast from God, but now,
 through believing, have become more numerous than those who are
 reckoned to possess God. [3866] And another Scripture saith, "I came
 not to call the righteous, but sinners." [3867] This means that those
 who are perishing must be saved. For it is indeed a great and admirable
 thing to establish, not the things which are standing, but these that
 are falling. Thus also did Christ desire [3868] to save the things
 which were perishing, [3869] and has saved many by coming and calling
 us when hastening to destruction. [3870]

 Chap. iii.--the duty of confessing christ.

 Since, then, He has displayed so great mercy towards us, and especially
 in this respect, that we who are living should not offer sacrifices to
 gods that are dead, or pay them worship, but should attain through Him
 to the knowledge of the true Father, [3871] whereby shall we show that
 we do indeed know Him, [3872] but by not denying Him through whom this
 knowledge has been attained? For He Himself declares, [3873] "Whosoever
 shall confess Me before men, him will I confess before My Father."
 [3874] This, then, is our reward if we shall confess Him by whom we
 have been saved. But in what way shall we confess Him? By doing what He
 says, and not transgressing His commandments, and by honouring Him not
 with our lips only, but with all our heart and all our mind. [3875] For
 he says [3876] in Isaiah, "This people honoureth Me with their lips,
 but their heart is far from Me." [3877]

 Chap. iv.--true confession of christ.

 Let us, then, not only call Him Lord, for that will not save us. For He
 saith, "Not every one that saith to Me, Lord, Lord, shall be saved, but
 he that worketh righteousness." [3878] Wherefore, brethren, let us
 confess Him by [3879] our works, by loving one another, by not
 committing adultery, or speaking evil of one another, or cherishing
 envy; but being continent, compassionate, and good. We ought also to
 sympathize with one another, and not be avaricious. By such [3880]
 works let us confess Him, [3881] and not by those that are of an
 opposite kind. And it is not fitting that we should fear men, but
 rather God. For this reason, if we should do such wicked things, the
 Lord hath said, "Even though ye were gathered together to Me [3882] in
 My very bosom, yet if ye were not to keep My commandments, I would cast
 you off, and say unto you, Depart from Me; I know you not whence ye
 are, ye workers of iniquity." [3883]

 Chap. v.--this world should be despised.

 Wherefore, brethren, leaving willingly our sojourn in this present
 world, let us do the will of Him that called us, and not fear to depart
 out of this world. For the Lord saith, "Ye shall be as lambs in the
 midst of wolves." [3884] And Peter answered and said unto Him, [3885]
 "What, then, if the wolves shall tear in pieces the lambs?" Jesus said
 unto Peter, "The lambs have no cause after they are dead to fear [3886]
 the wolves; and in like manner, fear not ye them that kill you, and can
 do nothing more unto you; but fear Him who, after you are dead, has
 power over both soul and body to cast them into hell-fire." [3887] And
 consider, [3888] brethren, that the sojourning in the flesh in this
 world is but brief and transient, but the promise of Christ is great
 and wonderful, even the rest of the kingdom to come, and of life
 everlasting. [3889] By what course of conduct, then, shall we attain
 these things, but by leading a holy and righteous life, and by deeming
 these worldly things as not belonging to us, and not fixing our desires
 upon them? For if we desire to possess them, we fall away from the path
 of righteousness. [3890]

 Chap. vi.--the present and future worlds are enemies to each other.

 Now the Lord declares, "No servant can serve two masters." [3891] If we
 desire, then, to Serve both God and mammon, it will be unprofitable for
 us. "For what will it profit if a man gain the whole world, and lose
 his own soul?" [3892] This world and the next are two enemies. The one
 urges to [3893] adultery and corruption, avarice and deceit; the other
 bids farewell to these things. We cannot therefore be the friends of
 both; and it behoves us, by renouncing the one, to make sure [3894] of
 the other. Let us reckon [3895] that it is better to hate the things
 present, since they are trifling, and transient, and corruptible; and
 to love those which are to come, as being good and incorruptible. For
 if we do the will of Christ, we shall find rest; otherwise, nothing
 shall deliver us from eternal punishment, if we disobey His
 commandments. For thus also saith the Scripture in Ezekiel, "If Noah,
 Job, and Daniel should rise up, they should not deliver their children
 in captivity." [3896] Now, if men so eminently righteous [3897] are not
 able by their righteousness to deliver their children, how can we hope
 to [3898] enter into the royal residence [3899] of God unless we keep
 our baptism holy and undefiled? Or who shall be our advocate, unless we
 be found possessed of works of holiness and righteousness? [3900]

 Chap. vii.--we must strive in order to be crowned.

 Wherefore, then, my brethren, let us struggle [3901] with all
 earnestness, knowing that the contest is in our case close at hand, and
 that many undertake long voyages to strive for a corruptible reward;
 [3902] yet all are not crowned, but those only that have laboured hard
 and striven gloriously. Let us therefore so strive, that we may all be
 crowned. Let us run the straight [3903] course, even the race that is
 incorruptible; and let us in great numbers set out [3904] for it, and
 strive that we may be crowned. And should we not all be able to obtain
 the crown, let us at least come near to it. We must remember [3905]
 that he who strives in the corruptible contest, if he be found acting
 unfairly, [3906] is taken away and scourged, and cast forth from the
 lists. What then think ye? If one does anything unseemly in the
 incorruptible contest, what shall he have to bear? For of those who do
 not preserve the seal [3907] unbroken, the Scripture saith, [3908]
 "Their worm shall not die, and their fire shall not be quenched, and
 they shall be a spectacle to all flesh." [3909]

 Chap. viii.--the necessity of repentance while we are on earth.

 As long, therefore, as we are upon earth, let us practice repentance,
 for we are as clay in the hand of the artificer. For as the potter, if
 he make a vessel, and it be distorted or broken in his hands, fashions
 it over again; but if he have before this cast it into the furnace of
 fire, can no longer find any help for it: so let us also, while we are
 in this world, repent with our whole heart of the evil deeds we have
 done in the flesh, that we may be saved by the Lord, while we have yet
 an opportunity of repentance. For after we have gone out of the world,
 no further power of confessing or repenting will there belong to us.
 Wherefore, brethren, by doing the will of the Father, and keeping the
 flesh holy, and observing the commandments of the Lord, we shall obtain
 eternal life. For the Lord saith in the Gospel, "If ye have not kept
 that which was small, who will commit to you the great? For I say unto
 you, that he that is faithful in that which is least, is faithful also
 in much." [3910] This, then, is what He means: "Keep the flesh holy and
 the seal undefiled, that ye [3911] may receive eternal life." [3912]

 Chap. ix.--we shall be judged in the flesh.

 And let no one of you say that this very flesh shall not be judged, nor
 rise again. Consider ye [3913] in what state ye were saved, in what ye
 received sight, [3914] if not while ye were in this flesh. We must
 therefore preserve the flesh as the temple of God. For as ye were
 called in the flesh, ye shall also come to be judged in the flesh. As
 Christ [3915] the Lord who saved us, though He was first a Spirit,
 [3916] became flesh, and thus called us, so shall we also receive the
 reward in this flesh. Let us therefore love one another, that we may
 all attain to the kingdom of God. While we have an opportunity of being
 healed, let us yield ourselves to God that healeth us, and give to Him
 a recompense. Of what sort? Repentance out of a sincere heart; for He
 knows all things beforehand, and is acquainted with what is in our
 hearts. Let us therefore give Him praise, [3917] not with the mouth
 only, but also with the heart, that He may accept us as sons. For the
 Lord has said, "Those are My brethren who do the will of My Father."
 [3918]

 Chap. x.--vice is to be forsaken, and virtue followed.

 Wherefore, my brethren, let us do the will of the Father who called us,
 that we may live; and let us earnestly [3919] follow after virtue, but
 forsake every wicked tendency [3920] which would lead into
 transgression; and flee from ungodliness, lest evils overtake us. For
 if we are diligent in doing good, peace will follow us. On this
 account, such men cannot find it, i.e., peace, as are [3921] influenced
 by human terrors, and prefer rather present enjoyment to the promise
 which shall afterwards be fulfilled. For they know not what torment
 present enjoyment incurs, or what felicity is involved in the future
 promise. And if, indeed, they themselves only did such things, it would
 be the more tolerable; but now they persist in imbuing innocent souls
 with their pernicious doctrines, [3922] not knowing that they shall
 receive a double condemnation, both they and those that hear them.

 Chap. xi.--we ought to serve god, trusting in his promises.

 Let us therefore serve God with a pure heart, and we shall be
 righteous; but if we do not serve Him, because we believe not the
 promise of God, we shall be miserable. For the prophetic word also
 declares, "Wretched are those of a double mind, and who doubt in their
 heart, who say, All these things have we heard even in the times of our
 fathers; but though we have waited day by day, we have seen none of
 them accomplished. Ye fools! compare yourselves to a tree; take, for
 instance, the vine. First of all it sheds its leaves, then the bud
 appears; after that the sour grape, and then the fully-ripened fruit.
 So, likewise, my people have borne disturbances and afflictions, but
 afterwards shall they receive their good things." [3923] Wherefore, my
 brethren, let us not be of a double mind, but let us hope and endure,
 that we also may obtain the reward. For He is faithful who has promised
 that He will bestow on every one a reward according to his works. If,
 therefore, we shall do righteousness in the sight of God, we shall
 enter into His kingdom, and shall receive the promises, "which ear hath
 not heard, nor eye seen, neither have entered into the heart of man."
 [3924]

 Chap. xii.--we are constantly to look for the kingdom of god.

 Let us expect, therefore, hour by hour, the kingdom of God in love and
 righteousness, since we know not the day of the appearing of God. For
 the Lord Himself, being asked by one when His kingdom would come,
 replied, "When two shall be one, and that which is without as that
 which is within, and the male with the female, neither male nor
 female." [3925] Now, two are one when we speak the truth one to
 another, and there is unfeignedly one soul in two bodies. And "that
 which is without as that which is within" meaneth this: He calls the
 soul "that which is within," and the body "that which is without." As,
 then, thy body is visible to sight, so also let thy soul be manifest by
 good works. And "the male with the female, neither male nor female,"
 this [3926] ...


 [The newly recovered portion follows: ] [3927] --


 ... meaneth, [3928] that a brother seeing a sister should think nothing
 [3929] about her as of a female, nor she [3930] think anything about
 him as of a male. If ye do these things, saith He, [3931] the kingdom
 of my Father shall come.

 Chap. xiii.--disobedience causeth god's name to be blasphemed. [3932]

 Therefore, brethren, [3933] let us now at length repent; let us be
 sober unto what is good; for we are full of much folly and wickedness.
 Let us blot out from us our former sins, and repenting from the soul
 let us be saved; and let us not become [3934] men-pleasers, nor let us
 desire to please only one another, [3935] but also the men that are
 without, by our righteousness, that the Name [3936] be not blasphemed
 on account of us. [3937] For the Lord also saith "Continually [3938] My
 name is blasphemed among all the Gentiles," [3939] and again, "Woe
 [3940] to him on account of whom My name is blasphemed." Wherein is it
 blasphemed? In your not doing what I desire. [3941] For the Gentiles,
 when they hear from our mouth the oracles of God, [3942] marvel at them
 as beautiful and great; afterwards, when they have learned that our
 works are not worthy of the words we speak, they then turn themselves
 to blasphemy, saying that it is some fable and delusion. For when they
 hear from us that God saith, [3943] "There is no thank unto you, if ye
 love them that love you; but there is thank unto you, if ye love your
 enemies and them that hate you;" [3944] when they hear these things,
 they marvel at the excellency of the goodness; but when they see that
 we not only do not love them that hate us, but not even them that love
 us, they laugh us to scorn, and the Name is blasphemed.

 Chap. xiv.--the living church is the body of christ.

 Wherefore, [3945] brethren, if we do the will of God our father, we
 shall be of the first Church, that is, spiritual, that hath been
 created before the sun and moon; [3946] but if we do not the will of
 the Lord, we shall be of the scripture that saith, "My house was made a
 den of robbers." [3947] So then let us choose to be of the Church of
 life, [3948] that we may be saved. I do not, however, suppose ye are
 ignorant that the living Church is the body of Christ; [3949] for the
 scripture saith, "God made man, male and female." [3950] the male is
 Christ, the female is the Church. And the Books [3951] and the Apostles
 plainly declare [3952] that the Church is not of the present, but from
 the beginning. [3953] For she was spiritual, as our Jesus also was, but
 was manifested in the last days that He [3954] might save us. Now the
 Church, being spiritual, was manifested in the flesh of Christ, thus
 signifying to us that, if any of us keep [3955] her in the flesh and do
 not corrupt her, he shall receive her again [3956] in the Holy Spirit:
 for this flesh is the copy of the spirit. No one then who corrupts the
 copy, shall partake of the original. [3957] This then is what He
 meaneth, "Keep the flesh, [3958] that ye may partake of the spirit."
 But if we say that the flesh is the church and the spirit Christ,
 [3959] then he that hath shamefully used the flesh hath shamefully used
 the Church. Such a one then shall not partake of the spirit, which is
 Christ. Such life and incorruption this flesh [3960] can partake of,
 when the Holy Spirit is joined to it. No one can utter or speak "what
 the lord hath prepared" for his elect. [3961]

 Chap. xv.--faith and love the proper return to god.

 Now I do not think I have given you any light counsel concerning
 self-control, [3962] which if any one do he will not repent of it, but
 will save both himself and me who counselled him. For it is no light
 reward to turn again a wandering and perishing soul that it may be
 saved. [3963] For this is the recompense [3964] we have to return to
 God who created us, if he that speaketh and heareth both speaketh and
 heareth with faith and love. Let us therefore abide in the things which
 we believed, righteous and holy, that with boldness we may ask of God
 who saith, "While thou art yet speaking, I will say, Lo, I am here."
 [3965] For this saying is the sign of a great promise; for the Lord
 saith of Himself that He is more ready to give than he that asketh to
 ask. [3966] [3967] Being therefore partakers of so great kindness, let
 us not be envious of one another [3968] in the obtaining of so many
 good things. For as great as is the pleasure which these sayings have
 for them that have done them, so great is the condemnation they have
 for them that have been disobedient.

 Chap. xvi.--the excellence of almsgiving.

 Wherefore, brethren, having received no small occasion [3969] for
 repentance, while we have the opportunity, [3970] [3971] let us turn
 unto God that called us, while we still have Him as One that receiveth
 us. For if we renounce [3972] these enjoyments and conquer our soul in
 not doing these its evil desires, we shall partake of the mercy of
 Jesus. But ye know that the day of judgment even now "cometh as a
 burning oven," [3973] [3974] and some "of the heavens shall melt," and
 all the earth shall be as lead melting on the fire, [3975] [3976] and
 then the hidden and open works of men shall appear. Almsgiving
 therefore is a good thing, as repentance from sin; fasting is better
 than prayer, but almsgiving than both; [3977] [3978] "but love covereth
 a multitude of sins." [3979] [3980] But prayer out of a good conscience
 delivereth from death. Blessed is every one that is found full of
 these; for alms-giving lighteneth the burden of sin. [3981] [3982]

 Chap. xvii.--the danger of impenitence.

 Let us therefore repent from the whole heart, that no one of us perish
 by the way. For if we have commandments that we should also practice
 this, [3983] to draw away men from idols and instruct them, how much
 more ought a soul already knowing God not to perish! Let us therefore
 assist one another that we may also lead up those weak as to what is
 good, [3984] in order that all may be saved; and let us convert and
 admonish one another. [3985] [3986] And let us not think to give heed
 and believe now only, while we are admonished by the presbyters, but
 also when we have returned home, [3987] [3988] remembering the
 commandments [3989] of the Lord; and let us not be dragged away by
 worldly lusts, but coming [3990] more frequently let us attempt to make
 advances in the commandments of the Lord, that all being of the same
 mind [3991] we may be gathered together unto life. For the Lord said,
 "I come to gather together all the nations, tribes, and tongues."
 [3992] This He speaketh of the day of His appearing, when He shall come
 and redeem us, each one according to his works. [3993] And the
 unbelievers "shall see His glory," and strength; and they shall think
 it strange when they see the sovereignty [3994] of the world in Jesus,
 saying, Woe unto us, Thou wast He, [3995] and we did not know and did
 not believe, and we did not obey the presbyters when they declared unto
 us concerning our salvation. And "their worm dieth not, and their fire
 is not quenched, and they shall be for a spectacle unto all flesh."
 [3996] He speaketh of that day of judgment, when they shall see those
 among us [3997] that have been ungodly and acted deceitfully with the
 commandments of Jesus Christ. But the righteous who have done well and
 endured torments and hated the enjoyments of the soul, when they shall
 behold those that have gone astray and denied Jesus through their words
 or through their works, how that they are punished with grievous
 torments in unquenchable fire, shall be giving glory to God, saying,
 There will be hope for him that hath served God with his whole heart.

 Chap. xviii.--the preacher confesseth his own sinfulness.

 Let us also become of the number of them that give thanks, that have
 served God, and not of the ungodly that are judged. For I myself also,
 being an utter sinner, [3998] [3999] and not yet escaped from
 temptation, but still being in the midst of the engines [4000] of the
 devil, give diligence to follow after righteousness, that I may have
 strength to come even near it, [4001] fearing the judgment to come.

 Chap. xix.--he justifieth his exhortation.

 Wherefore, brethren and sisters, [4002] after the God of truth hath
 been heard, [4003] I read to you an entreaty [4004] that ye may give
 heed to the things that are written, in order that ye may save both
 yourselves and him that readeth among you. For as a reward I ask of you
 that ye repent with the whole heart, thus giving to yourselves
 salvation and life. For by doing this we shall set a goal [4005] for
 all the young who are minded to labour [4006] on behalf of piety and
 the goodness of God. And let us not, unwise ones that we are, be
 affronted and sore displeased, whenever some one admonisheth and
 turneth us from iniquity unto righteousness. For sometimes while we are
 practising evil things we do not perceive it on account of the
 double-mindedness and unbelief that is in our breasts, and we are
 "darkened in our understanding" [4007] by our vain lusts. Let us then
 practice righteousness that we may be saved unto the end. Blessed are
 they that obey these ordinances. Even if for a little time they suffer
 evil in the world, [4008] they shall enjoy the immortal fruit of the
 resurrection. Let not then the godly man be grieved, if he be wretched
 in the times that now are; a blessed time waits for him. He, living
 again above with the fathers, shall be joyful for an eternity without
 grief.

 Chap. xx.--concluding word of consolation. doxology.

 But neither let it trouble your understanding, that we see the
 unrighteous having riches and the servants of God straitened. Let us
 therefore, brethren and sisters, be believing: we are striving in the
 contest [4009] of the living God, we are exercised by the present life,
 in order that we may be crowned by that to come. No one of the
 righteous received fruit speedily, but awaiteth it. For if God gave
 shortly the recompense of the righteous, straightway we would be
 exercising ourselves in business, not in godliness; for we would seem
 to be righteous, while pursuing not what is godly but what is gainful.
 And on this account Divine judgment surprised a spirit that was not
 righteous, and loaded it with chains. [4010]

 To the only God invisible, [4011] the Father of truth, who sent forth
 to us the Saviour and Prince of incorruption, [4012] through whom also
 He manifested to us the truth and the heavenly life, to Him be the
 glory for ever and ever. Amen. [4013]

 [3848] No title, not even a letter, is preserved in the ms. [In C (=
 ms. at Constantinople found by Bryennios) the title is Kle'mentos pro`s
 Korinthi'ous B', corresponding to that of the First Epistle. In S (=
 Syriac ms. at Cambridge) there is a subscription to the First Epistle
 ascribing it to Clement, then these words: "Of the same the second
 Epistle to the Corinthians." At the close this subscription occurs:
 "Here endeth the Second Epistle of Clement to the Corinthians."--R.]

 [3849] [C has here, and in many other places, humas instead of hemas.
 This substitution of the second person plural is one of its marked
 peculiarities.--R.]

 [3850] [Literally, "little things;" Lightfoot, "mean things."--R.]

 [3851] [Literally, "little things;" Lightfoot, "mean things."--R.]

 [3852] [Lightfoot follows the Syriac, and renders: "And they that
 listen, as concerning mean things, do wrong; and we ourselves do wrong,
 not knowing," etc. But the briefer reading of the Greek mss. is lectio
 difficilior --R.]

 [3853] [Only S has ga'r. A has de', which the Edinburgh translators
 have rendered "for." So twice in chap. iii.--R.]

 [3854] Literally, "holy things."

 [3855] Comp. Ps. cxvi. 12.

 [3856] Literally, "lame."

 [3857] Literally "of men." [Compare Arnobius, vol. vi. p. 423.]

 [3858] Literally, "being full of such darkness in our sight."

 [3859] Literally, "having beheld in us much error and destruction."

 [3860] [C, S (apparently), and recent editors have hechontas, "even
 when we had," instead of hechontes (A), as above paraphrased.--R.]

 [3861] Comp. Hos. ii. 23; Rom. iv. 17, ix. 25.

 [3862] Literally, "willed us from not being to be." [Comp. n. 4, p.
 365.]

 [3863] Isa. liv. 1; Gal. iv. 27. [R. V., "the husband."--R.]

 [3864] Some render, "should not cry out, like women in travail." The
 text is doubtful. [Lightfoot: "Let us not, like women in travail, grow
 weary of offering up our prayers with simplicity to God."--R.]

 [3865] [epei, "since;" hence Lightfoot renders, "He so spake,
 because."--R.]

 [3866] It has been remarked that the writer here implies he was a
 Gentile.

 [3867] Matt. ix, 13; Luke v. 32. [The briefer form given above is that
 of the correct text in Matthew and Mark (ii. 17), not Luke.--R.]

 [3868] [ethe'lese, "willed."--R.] [Noteworthy. 2 Pet. iii. 9.]

 [3869] Comp. Matt. xviii. 11. [Luke xix. 10.--R.]

 [3870] Literally, "already perishing." [Rev. iii. 2.]

 [3871] [Literally, "the Father of the truth." The best editions have a
 period here.--R.]

 [3872] Literally, "what is the knowledge which is towards Him." [C,
 with Bryennios. Hilgenfeld reads tes alethei'as, "what is the knowledge
 of the truth," instead of he pro`s auto'n, A, S, Lightfoot, and earlier
 editors.--R.]

 [3873] [le'gei de` kai` auto's, "Yea, He Himself saith,"
 Lightfoot.--R.]

 [3874] Matt. x. 32.

 [3875] Comp. Matt. xxii. 37.

 [3876] ["Now He saith also."--R.]

 [3877] Isa. xxix. 13.

 [3878] Matt. vii. 21, loosely quoted.

 [3879] [Literally, "in."--R.]

 [3880] [A defect in A was thus supplied, but "these" is now accepted;
 so C, S.--R.]

 [3881] Some read "God." ["Him" is correct.--R.]

 [3882] Or, "with Me." [This is the more exact rendering of met'
 emou.--R.]

 [3883] The first part of this sentence is not found in Scripture; for
 the second, comp. Matt. vii. 23, Luke xiii. 27. [The first part is not
 even identified as a citation from an apocryphal book.--R.]

 [3884] Matt. x. 16.

 [3885] No such conversation is recorded in Scripture. [Comp. note
 13.--R.]

 [3886] Or, "Let not the lambs fear."

 [3887] Matt. x. 28; Luke xii. 4, 5.

 [3888] Or, "know."

 [3889] The text and translation are here doubtful. [All doubt has been
 removed; the above rendering is substantially correct.--R.]

 [3890] [More exactly, "the righteous path," tes hodou tes
 dikai'as.--R.]

 [3891] Matt. vi. 24; Luke xvi. 13.

 [3892] Matt. xvi. 26. [The citation is not exactly according to any
 evangelist. Literally, "For what advantage is it, if any one gain the
 whole (Comits whole') world, but forfeit his life," or "soul."--R.]

 [3893] Literally, "speaks of." [So Lightfoot.--R].

 [3894] Or, "enjoy." [Lightfoot: "but must bid farewell to the one and
 hold companionship with the other;" thus preserving the correspondence
 with the preceding sentence.--R.]

 [3895] The ms. has, "we reckon." [So C and S, but Lightfoot retains the
 subjunctive.--R.]

 [3896] Ezek. xiv. 14, 20.

 [3897] [Literally, "But if even such righteous men."--R.]

 [3898] Literally, "with what confidence shall we."

 [3899] Wake translates "kingdom," as if the reading had been
 basilei'an; but the ms. has basi'leion, "palace." [Lightfoot gives the
 former rendering, though accepting basi'leion.--R.]

 [3900] [Literally, "holy and righteous works."--R.]

 [3901] [agonisometha, "let us strive," as in the games.--R.]

 [3902] Literally, "that many set sail for corruptible contests,"
 referring probably to the concourse at the Isthmian games.

 [3903] Or, "Let us place before us." [The latter rendering is that of
 the reading found in A and C, and now accepted by many editors
 (thomen); but Lightfoot adheres to the'omen (so S), and holds the
 former reading to be a corruption.--R.]

 [3904] Or, "set sail."

 [3905] Literally, "know."

 [3906] Literally "if he be found corrupting."

 [3907] Baptism is probably meant. [See Eph. i. 13 and Acts xix. 6.]

 [3908] [Or, "He saith;" "unbroken" is not necessary.--R.]

 [3909] Isa. lxvi. 24.

 [3910] Comp. Luke xvi. 10-12.

 [3911] ms. has "we," which is corrected by all editors as above. [The
 newly discovered authorities have the second person; most recent
 editors, however, adopt the first person, as lectio difficilior. So
 Lightfoot; but Hilgenfeld restores apola'bete in his second
 edition.--R.]

 [3912] Some have thought this a quotation from an unknown apocryphal
 book, but it seems rather an explanation of the preceding words.

 [3913] [Editors differ as to the punctuation. Lightfoot: "Understand
 ye. In what were ye saved? In what did ye recover your sight? if ye
 were not in the flesh." Hilgenfeld puts a comma after gnote (understand
 ye), and a period after eso'thete (saved).--R.]

 [3914] Literally, "looked up." [Both senses of anable'pein occur in New
 Testament.--R.]

 [3915] The ms. has heis, "one," which Wake follows, but it seems
 clearly a mistake for hos. [Lightfoot reads ei, with a Syriac fragment;
 both C and S have heis--R.]

 [3916] [C has here the curious reading lo'gos instead of pneuma, but
 all editors retain the latter.--R.]

 [3917] [A reads "eternal," and C, S, "praise;" Lightfoot and others
 combine the two, "eternal praise,"--R.]

 [3918] Matt. xii. 50.

 [3919] Literally, "rather."

 [3920] Literally, "malice, as it were, the precursor of our sins." Some
 deem the text corrupt.

 [3921] Literally, according to the ms., "it is not possible that a man
 should find it who are"--the passage being evidently corrupt. [The
 evidence of C and S does not clear up the difficulty here, the reading
 of these authorities being substantially that of A. Lightfoot renders:
 "For for this cause is a man unable to attain happiness, seeing that
 they call in the fears of men," etc. Hilgenfeld (2d ed.) assumes here a
 considerable gap in all the authorities, and inserts two paragraphs,
 cited in other authors as from Clement. The first and longer passage is
 from John of Damascus, and it may be accounted for as a loose citation
 from chap. xx. in the recovered portion of this Epistle. The other is
 from pseudo-Justin (Questions to the Orthodox, 74) This was formerly
 assigned by both Hilgenfeld and Lightfoot (against Harnack) to the
 First Epistle of Clement, lviii., in that portion wanting in A. But the
 recovered chapters (lviii.-lxiii.) contain, according to C and S, no
 such passage. Lightfoot thinks the reference in pseudo-Justin is to
 chap. xvi. of this homily, and that the mention of the Sibyl in the
 same author is not necessarily part of the citation from Clement. Comp.
 Lightfoot, pp. 308, 447, 448, 458, 459, and Hilgenfeld, 2d ed., pp.
 xlviii., 77.--R.]

 [3922] [Lightfoot, more literally, "but now they continue teaching evil
 to innocent souls."--R.]

 [3923] The same words occur in Clement's first epistle, chap. xxiii.

 [3924] 1 Cor. ii. 9.

 [3925] These words are quoted (Clem. Alex., Strom., iii. 9, 13) from
 the Gospel according to the Egyptians, no longer extant.

 [3926] Thus ends the ms., but what followed will be found in Clem.
 Alex. as just cited.

 [3927] For details respecting the version here given, see Introductory
 Notice, [311]pp. 514, 515.

 [3928] Or, more correctly, both here and above, "by this He meaneth."

 [3929] All editors read oude`n phrone, but C has phronei which is
 ungrammatical. In this clause, after hina we would expect meden; but as
 Lightfoot suggests, oude`n may be combined as a substantive idea with
 theluko'n; comp. the use of ou with participles.

 [3930] For mede' (so C) Gebhardt would substitute med' hede, while S
 supplies in full, quum soror videbit fratrem, an obvious
 interpretament.

 [3931] This seems to be an explanation of the saying above referred to,
 and not a citation; similar cases occur in the homily.

 [3932] The headings to the chapters have been supplied by the editor,
 but in so rambling a discourse they are in some cases necessarily
 unsatisfactory.

 [3933] Hilgenfeld reads mou instead of houn; so S apparently. The
 chapters are usually introduced with houn (nine times) or oste (five
 times).

 [3934] gino'metha; Lightfoot, "be found."

 [3935] Literally, "ourselves," heautois; but the reciprocal sense is
 common in Hellenistic Greek, and is here required by the context.

 [3936] Comp. Acts v. 41, where the correct text omits au`tou. The
 Revised Version properly capitalizes "Name" in that passage.

 [3937] C here, and in many other cases, reads humas; comparison of mss.
 shows that it is a correction of the scribe.

 [3938] Lightfoot renders dia` panto's, "every way;" but the temporal
 sense is common in Hellenistic Greek, and here required by the Hebrew.

 [3939] Isa. lii. 5, with pasin inserted.

 [3940] Lightfoot reads, kai pa'lin Ouai', following the Syriac. C has
 kai Dio'. There is difficulty in identifying this second quotation:
 comp. Ezek. xxxvi. 20-23. Lightfoot thinks it probable that the
 preacher used two different forms of Isa. lii. 5.

 [3941] This sentence is not part of the citation, but an explanation,
 the words being used as if spoken by God. The Syriac text seeks to
 avoid this difficulty by reading, "by our not doing what we say."

 [3942] Here ta` lo'gia tou Theou is used of the Scriptures, and with
 distinct reference to the New Testament; see next note.

 [3943] In view of the connection, this must mean "God in His oracles;"
 a significant testimony to the early belief in the inspiration of the
 Gospels.

 [3944] Luke vi. 27, 32, freely combined; comp. Matt. v. 44, 46. The use
 of cha'ris uemin shows that the quotation is from the former Gospel.

 [3945] oste, as at the beginning of chs. vii., x.

 [3946] Comp. Ps. lxxii. (LXX. lxxi.) 5, 17.

 [3947] Jer. vii. 11. Comp. Matt. xii. 13; Mark xi. 17; Luke xix. 46.

 [3948] Harnack says, "The Jewish synagogue is the church of death."
 Lightfoot, more correctly, accepts a contrast "between mere external
 membership in the visible body and spiritual communion in the celestial
 counterpart."

 [3949] Comp. Eph. i. 23 and many similar passages.

 [3950] Gen. i. 27; comp. Eph. v. 31-33.

 [3951] The reference is here is probably to the Old-Testament "books,"
 while the term "Apostles" may mean the New Testament in whole or part.
 The more direct reference probably is to Genesis and Ephesians.

 [3952] Lightfoot inserts in brackets legousin, delon, rendering as
 above. Hilgenfield suggests phasin oidate, "Ye know that the books,
 etc., say that." Byrennios joins this sentence to the preceding, taking
 the whole as dependent on agnoein. Ropes renders accordingly, making a
 parenthesis from "for the Scripture" to "the Church." In any case a
 verb of saying must be supplied, as in the Syriac.

 [3953] anothen has a local and a temporal sense; the latter is
 obviously preferable here.

 [3954] "Jesus" is the subject of the latter part of the sentence.

 [3955] "Keep her pure;" comp. chap. viii. Lightfoot renders terein,
 "guard," here and elsewhere.

 [3956] The verb corresponds with that rendered "partake" in what
 follows.

 [3957] "Copy," antitupos, antitupon. Comp. Heb. ix. 24; 1 Pet. iii. 21.
 Our use of "antitype" is different. The antithesis here is authentikon,
 the original, or archetype. This mystical interpretation has a Platonic
 basis.

 [3958] Comp. the close of chap. viii.

 [3959] Lightfoot calls attention to the confusion of metaphors; but
 there is also evidence of that false exegesis which made "flesh" and
 "spirit" equivalent to "body" and "soul,"--an error which always leads
 to further mistakes.

 [3960] Here the word "flesh" is used in an ambiguous sense.

 [3961] 1 Cor. ii. 9.

 [3962] peri` enkratei'as, "temperance" in the wide New-Testament sense.
 Lightfoot, "continence;" in these days the prominent danger was from
 libidinous sins.

 [3963] Comp. Jas. v. 19, 20, with which our passage has many verbal
 correspondences.

 [3964] "A favorite word with our author, especially in this
 connection."--Lightfoot.

 [3965] Isa. lviii. 9, LXX.

 [3966]

 [3967] ei's to` dido'nai tou ai'tountos; the sense of the elliptical
 construction is obviously as above.

 [3968] heautois. Here again in the reciprocal sense; comp. chap. xiii.

 [3969] aphormen labo'ntes, as in Rom. vii. 8, 11.

 [3970]

 [3971] kairo`n echontes, "seeing that we have time" (Lightfoot). But
 "opportunity" is more exact.

 [3972] apotaxo'metha, "bid farewell to;" comp. chap. vi.

 [3973]

 [3974] Comp. Mal. iv. 1.

 [3975]

 [3976] Comp. Isa. xxxiv. 4, which resembles the former clause, and 2
 Pet. iii. 7, 10, where the same figures occur. The text seems to be
 corrupt: tines ("some") is sustained by both the Greek and the Syriac,
 but this limitation is so peculiar as to awaken suspicion; still, the
 notion of several heavens might have been in the author's mind.

 [3977]

 [3978] Comp. Tobit xii. 8, 9; but the position given to almsgiving
 seems to be contradicted by the next sentence. Lightfoot seems to
 suspect a corruption of text here also, but in the early Church there
 was often an undue emphasis placed upon almsgiving.

 [3979]

 [3980] 1 Pet. iv. 8. Comp. Prov. x. 12; Jas. v. 20.

 [3981]

 [3982] Literally, "becometh a lightener (kou'phisma) of sin;" comp.
 Ecclus. iii. 30.

 [3983] Lightfoot, with Syriac, reads hina kai` touto pra'ssomen. Comits
 hina, and reads pra'ssomen, "If we have commandments and practise
 this."

 [3984] Here Lightfoot thinks a verb has probably fallen out of the
 text.

 [3985] Bryennios thus connects: "in order that all may be saved, and
 may convert," etc.

 [3986]

 [3987] "This clearly shows that the work before us is a sermon
 delivered in church" (Lightfoot). The preacher is himself one of "the
 presbyters;" comp. chap. xix. It is possible, but cannot be proven,
 that he was the head of the presbyters, the parochial bishop.

 [3988]

 [3989] entalma'ton, not the technical word for the commandments of the
 Decalogue (entolai).

 [3990] Syriac, "praying," which Lightfoot thinks may be correct; but
 prosercho'menoi might very easily be mistaken for proseucho'menoi. The
 former means coming in worship: comp. Heb. x. 1, 22.

 [3991] 2 Cor. xiii. 11; Phil. ii. 2.

 [3992] Isa. lxvi. 18. But "tribes" is inserted; comp. Dan. iii. 7. The
 phrase "shall see His glory" is from the passage in Isaiah, The
 language seems to be put into the mouth of Christ by the preacher.

 [3993] This implies various degrees of reward among these redeemed.

 [3994] to` basi'leion; not exactly "the kingdom," rather "the kingly
 rule." en to 'Iesou is rightly explained by Lightfoot, "in the hands,
 in the power, of Jesus;" xenisthesontai is rendered above "shall think
 it strange," as in 1 Pet. iv. 4, 12.

 [3995] "He" is properly supplied as frequently in the Gospels. There
 seems to be a reminiscence of John viii. 24 and similar passages.

 [3996] Isa. lxvi. 24; comp. chap. vii. above.

 [3997] C reads humin, as often, for hemin, Syriac, accepted by all
 editors.

 [3998]

 [3999] panthamartolo's; occurring only here; but a similar word,
 parthama'rtetos, occurs in the Teaching, v. 2, Apostolical
 Constitutions, vii. 18, and Barnabas, xx.

 [4000] tois orga'nois; comp. Ignat., Rom., iv., Ante-Nicene Fathers, i.
 [312]p. 75, where the word is rendered "instruments," and applied to
 the teeth of the wild beasts in the amphitheatre. Here Lightfoot
 renders "engines," regarding the metaphor as military.

 [4001] The phrase kan hengus auetes implies a doubt of attaining the
 aim, in accord with the tone of humility which obtains in this chapter.

 [4002] Comp. the opening sentence of Barnabas, "Sons and daughters,"
 Ante-Nicene Fathers, i. [313]p. 137; see also chap. xx.

 [4003] If any doubt remained as to the character of this writing, it
 would be removed by this sentence. The passage is elliptical, meta`
 to`n theo`n tes alnthei'as, but there is no doubt as to the meaning.
 The Scripture was read, and listening to it was regarded as hearing the
 voice of God, whose words of truth were read. Then followed the sermon
 or exhortation; comp. Justin, First Apology, chap. lxvii. (vol. i.
 [314]p. 186). That lessons from some at least of the New Testament were
 included at the date of this homily, seems quite certain; comp. the
 references to the New Testament in chaps. ii., iii., iv., and
 elsewhere. It is here implied that this homily was written and "read."

 [4004] The word enteuzis, here used, means intercession, or
 supplication, to God (comp. 1 Tim. ii. 1, iv. 5) in early Christian
 literature: but the classical sense is "entreaty:" so in the opening
 sentence of Justin, First Apology (vol. i. p. 163, where it is rendered
 "petition").

 [4005] Lightfoot, with Syriac and most editors, reads skopo'n; but C
 has ko'pon, so Bryennios.

 [4006] C had originally philosophein (accepted by Hilgenfeld), but was
 corrected to philoponein. The latter is confirmed by the Syriac, and
 now generally accepted, though Hilgenfeld uses the other reading to
 support his view that Clement of Alexandria was the author.

 [4007] Eph. iv. 18.

 [4008] C inserts tou'to; so Bryennios, Hilgenfeld, and others.
 Lightfoot omits, with Syriac. The punctuation above given is that of
 Bryennios and Lightfoot. Hilgenfeld joins this clause with what
 precedes.

 [4009] peiran athloumen; the construction is classical, and the figure
 common in all Greek literature.

 [4010] The verbs here are aorists, and have been rendered by the
 English past tense; the present participle (me` on di'kaion) describing
 the character of the "spirit" must, according to English usage, conform
 to the main verbs. Lightfoot says, "The aorist here has its common
 gnomic sense;" and he therefore interprets the passage as a general
 statement: "Sordid motives bring their own punishment in a judicial
 blindness." But this gnomic sense of the aorist is not common. C reads
 desmo's, which yields this sense: "and a chain weighed upon him."
 Hilgenfeld refers the passage to those Christians who suffered
 persecution for other causes than those of righteousness. Harnack
 thinks the author has in mind Satan, as the prince of avarice, and
 regards him as already loaded with chains. If the aorist is taken in
 its usual sense, this is the preferable explanation; but the meaning is
 obscure.

 [4011] 1 Tim. i. 17.

 [4012] Acts iii. 15, v. 31; comp. Heb. ii. 10.

 [4013] The doxology is interesting, as indicating the early custom of
 thus closing a homily. The practice, fitting in itself, naturally
 followed the examples in the Epistles.


  Nicene Council

The Nicene Creed.

 The Creed

 As set forth at Nicoea, [4014] a.d. 325.

 We believe in one God, the Father Almighty, Maker of all things,
 visible and invisible:

 And in one Lord Jesus Christ, the Son of God, begotten of the Father,
 only begotten, that is, of the substance of the Father;

 God of God; Light of light; very God of very God; begotten, not made;
 being of one substance with the Father,

 By whom all things were made, both things in heaven and things in
 earth:

 Who for us men and for our salvation came down, and was incarnate, and
 was made man:

 He suffered, and rose again the third day:

 And ascended into heaven:

 And shall come again to judge the quick and the dead.

 And in the Holy Ghost, etc. [4015]

 The Ratification.

 And those who say There was a time when He was not, or that Before He
 was begotten He was not, or that He was made out of nothing; or who say
 that The Son of God is of any other substance, or that He is changeable
 or unstable,--these the Catholic and Apostolic Church anathematizes.

 Addenda,

 As Authorized at Constantinople, a.d. 381.

 (a) Of heaven and earth.

 (b) Begotten of the Father before all worlds.

 (c) By the Holy Ghost of the Virgin Mary.

 (d) Was crucified also for us, under Pontius Pilate,

 (e) And was buried.

 (f) Sitteth on the right hand of the Father,

 (g) Whose kingdom shall have no end.

 (h) The Lord, the Giver of life,

 Who proceedeth from the Father; [4016]

 Who with the Father and the Son together is worshipped and glorified;

 Who spake by the prophets:

 In one Holy Catholic and Apostolic Church.

 We acknowledge one baptism for the remission of sins.

 We look for the resurrection of the dead,

 And the life of the world to come. Amen.


 This Nicæno-Constantinopolitan Creed was solemnly ratified by the
 Council of Ephesus (a.d. 431) with the decree [4017] that "No one
 [4018] shall be permitted to introduce, write, or compose any other
 faith, [4019] besides that which was defined by the holy Fathers
 assembled in the city of Nice, with the presence of the Holy Ghost."


 [4014] It was the old Creed of Jerusalem slightly amended, and made the
 liturgic symbol of Christendom, and the exponent of Catholic orthodoxy.
 Compare the Creed of Cæsarea, Burbidge, p. 334. But see this whole
 subject admirably illustrated for popular study by Burbidge, Liturgies
 and Offices of the Church, p. 330, etc., London, Bells, 1885.

 [4015] Here the k.t.l. is to be understood, as in the liturgies where a
 known form is begun and left imperfect. The clauses (see Cyril of
 Jerusalem, Catechet., lect. xviii.) are found in the Creed of
 Jerusalem, thus: "In one baptism of repentance for the remission of
 sins, and in one Holy Catholic Church; and in the resurrection of the
 flesh; and in eternal life."

 [4016] The addition of the Filioque, in the West, is theologically
 true, but of no authority here. See Pearson, On the Creed.

 [4017] Canon vii.

 [4018] No one. This re-affirms the action of Nicæa itself, and forbids
 the imposition of anything novel as a creed by any authority whatever.
 Nothing, therefore, which has not been set forth by Nicene authority
 (or by the supplementing and co-equal councils of the whole Church,
 from the same primitive sources) can be a creed, strictly speaking. It
 may be an orthodox confession, like the Quicunque Vult, but cannot be
 imposed in terms of communion, any more than the Te Deum

 [4019] Any other faith. The composition and setting north of another
 faith, as terms of communion, by Pius IV., bishop of Rome, a.d. 1564,
 and its acceptance, with additional dogmas, at the opening of the
 Vatican Council (so-called), a.d. 1869, brought the whole Papal
 communion under this anathema of Ephesus.


 Early Liturgies.


Introductory Notice

 to

the Early Liturgies.

 It is in curious contrast with the work of Brett and others like-minded
 that we have in these Edinburgh translations a reflection from the
 minds of divines who are unused to liturgies, and who have no interest
 in their elucidation. For the mere reader this is not an advantage; but
 the student who goes to the originals will find that it affords at
 times no inconsiderable help. These translations are "inartificially
 drawn," as the lawyers say. They are so much Greek and Latin rendered
 grammatically by competent scholars, who have no theories to sustain,
 and who are equally devoid of technique and of a disposition to exhibit
 it for the support of preconceptions. Not infrequently one gets a new
 view of certain stereotyped expressions from the way in which they are
 here handled. The liturgiologist finds his researches freshened by
 etymologies he had hardly thought of, here literally rendered. Of
 course, these are mere specimens, and no one can use them for argument,
 except by comparison with the Greek, or the Latin of Renaudot, or the
 originals in Syriac or Coptic; but they will prove very useful in many
 ways. The whole science is in its infancy; and we have no specimen of a
 primitive liturgy unless it be the Clementine, so called. The specimens
 here given are like cloth of gold (Ps. xlv. 13), moth-eaten and
 patched, and spangled over with tinsel; and the true artist has only
 the one object in view,--to restore it, that is, to the king's
 daughter, as it was aforetime.

 The following is the announcement of the Messrs. Clark in the Edinburgh
 edition: "The Liturgy of St. James has been translated by William
 Macdonald, M.A.; that of the Evangelist Mark by George Ross Merry,
 B.A.; and that of the Holy Apostles by Dr. Donaldson."

 It will be observed that the translations are given in the Edinburgh
 series with hardly a line of comment, and with no editorial helps to
 the reader whatever. These have been scantily supplied, here and there,
 where the case seemed to require some elucidation; and in a few
 instances I have ventured to reduce a word or two in the rendering to
 liturgical phraseology.

 The interest which has recently been awakened in liturgiology, and
 which exists among the learned so generally, will justify me in stating
 somewhat at large the considerations which are prerequisites to an
 intelligent study of these compilations. I shall not depart from my
 rule, nor formulate my personal convictions; but I must indicate
 sources of information not mentioned by the Edinburgh editors, only
 remarking, that, while they have cited the learned and excellent Dr.
 Neale, with others who advance untenable claims in some instances, I
 shall refer to writers of a more moderate school, such as have taken a
 less narrow and more historic view of the whole matter. By claiming too
 much, and by reading their own ideas back into the ancient exemplars,
 many good and learned men have overdone their argument, and confused
 scriptural simplicity with the artificial systems of post-Nicene ages.
 Earnest and worthy of respect as they are, I must therefore prefer a
 class of writers who breathe the spirit of the ante-Nicene Fathers as
 better elucidating the primitive epoch and its principles, alike in
 doctrine and worship.

 Hippolytus, in a few terse sentences, has pointed out the epoch of
 David, in its vast import, as the dawning of Christianity itself.
 [4020] [4021] More elaborately, a recent writer of great erudition has
 expounded the same historic fact, and given us the pivot of Hebrew
 history on which turns the whole system of that "goodly fellowship of
 prophets" who heralded the Sun of righteousness as successive
 constellations rise before the day. The learned Dean Payne-Smith, more
 minutely than Hippolytus, identifies Samuel, the master of David, as
 the great instrument of God in shaping the institutions of Moses to be
 a prelude to the Advent; in other words, transforming a local and
 tribal religion into that of Catholicity. The value of the Dean's
 condensed and luminous elaboration of this cardinal truth can hardly be
 overstated.

 But, to go behind even the Dean's stand-point, we shall better
 comprehend the era of which, under God, Samuel was the author, by
 noting the immense importance of that specific Mosaic ordinance which
 not only made it possible, but which proves that an all-wise prolepsis
 governed the whole law of Moses. We generally conceive of the Mosaic
 system as one of unlimited hecatombs and burnt-offerings. On the
 contrary, it was a system restricting and limiting the unsystematized
 primeval institution of sacrifice, which had done its work by passing
 into the universal religions and rituals of Gentilism. [4022] When the
 seminal idea of expiation, atonement, and the blood of innocence as a
 propitiation for guilt, was communicated to all the families of the
 earth, the Mosaic institutions limited sacrifices for the faithful, and
 localized them with marvellous significance. Previously the faithful
 everywhere had imitated the sacrifices of their fathers, Noah and
 Abraham, who reared their altars everywhere, as Job also did,--wherever
 they dwelt or sojourned. Now mark the first step towards a more
 spiritual worship, based, nevertheless, on the fundamental principle of
 sacrifice. Moses ordains as follows:--


 1. "When ye go over Jordan, and dwell in the land which the Lord your
 God giveth you,...then there shall be a place which the Lord your God
 shall choose to cause His name to dwell there; thither shall ye bring
 all that I command you, your burnt-offerings," etc. [4023]

 2. "Take heed to thyself that thou offer not thy burnt-offerings in
 every place that thou seest; but in the place which the Lord shall
 choose in one of the tribes, there thou shalt offer thy
 burnt-offerings, and there thou shalt do all that I command thee."
 [4024]

 3. "If the place which the Lord thy God hath chosen to put His name
 there, be too far from thee" [i.e., for frequent sacrifices; observe,
 nevertheless, the law as to the sanctity of blood in thy common use of
 meats, and forbear to sacrifice, till the opportunity comes], "only thy
 holy things which thou hast, and thy vows, thou shalt take, and go unto
 the place which the Lord shall choose; and thou shalt offer thy
 burnt-offerings, the flesh and the blood, upon the altar of the Lord
 thy God." [4025]

 4. "Three times in a year shall all thy males appear before the Lord
 thy God, in the place which He shall choose." [4026]

 5. "Thou mayest not sacrifice The Passover within any of thy
 gates;...but at the place which the Lord thy God shall choose to place
 His name in, there thou shalt sacrifice the Passover."


 Note, further, that all this provision and prevision was part of the
 great Messianic system, which reached its crisis in the time of David,
 as prophetic of "the Son of David."

 It was the office of Samuel to take the Mosaic ordinances just there,
 and to shape them for the advent of the Lamb of God, for His sacrifice
 upon Calvary, and for the setting-up of His universal kingdom.

 The Institutions of Samuel, therefore, were in essence institutions for
 the Gospel-day, and they were completed by the anointing of David as
 king, and by his prophetic mission to provide the Psalter (of which
 more, by and by); then the Ark came out of curtains, and the Lord chose
 and appointed the place of which Moses had spoken,--none other than the
 spot where Abraham had rehearsed in type the Sacrifice and Resurrection
 of Christ, according as it was written: [4027] "Jehovah-Jireh...in the
 mount of the Lord it shall be seen." Thus, all sacrifice acceptable to
 God was shown to have reference to the Paschal Lamb, who on that mount
 of the Lord should be sacrificed, and rise again, as was accomplished
 in a figure aforetime. [4028]

 And next, the Psalmist commemorates the putting away of the migratory
 Tabernacle, and the rest of the Ark of the Covenant in the place
 designed for the grand accomplishment of redemption ("the sure mercies
 of David"), as follows: [4029] --

 "He refused the tabernacle of Joseph, and chose not the tribe of
 Ephraim: but chose the tribe of Judah, the Mount Zion which He loved.
 And He built His sanctuary like high palaces, like the earth which He
 hath established for ever."

 Thus, localized sacrifice was made to designate the spot where the one
 propitiatory sacrifice should be offered, "for the sins of the whole
 world;" and that spot in turn interpreted the great canon of
 redemption, [4030] --


 "Without shedding of blood is no remission:"

 and all this, being accomplished in the Messiah, passed away for ever.
 The veil of the Temple was rent when Jesus cried, "It is finished."

 And now let us note the "Institutions of Samuel." The localizing of the
 Temple-worship made way for the clearer revelation of spiritual
 sacrifices: the Temple itself was to be supplied with an expository
 liturgy. Moreover, a liturgical system, revolving about the central
 worship of the Temple, was to be brought to every man's door by the
 establishment of the synagogue for the villages of Israel. [4031] The
 synagogue-worship became, therefore, the education and preparation of
 the faithful for the simple and spiritual worship of the new law. This
 our Lord Himself expounded in the grand Catholicity of His words to the
 outcast Samaritans:--


 "The hour cometh, when ye shall neither in this mountain, nor yet at
 Jerusalem, worship the Father....But the hour cometh, and now is, when
 the true worshippers shall worship the Father in spirit and in truth,"
 [4032] etc.

 We have seen that the hour promised by Malachi was supposed by the
 Ante-Nicene Fathers to be here intended: "My name shall be great among
 the Gentiles; and in every place incense shall be offered unto My name,
 and a pure offering." [4033]

 The student of this series must have observed that the primitive
 writers were universally impressed with these principles, [4034] and
 they are essential to the study of the liturgies here introduced into
 the series by the Edinburgh editors. For other purposes, expounding the
 prophetic system, on a text of St. Peter, Dean Payne-Smith has
 incidentally elucidated these ideas so fully, and with such
 originality, that I leave the student to consult his pages, [4035] with
 only the following important hints to those who may fail to see them:--

 1. We find the prophet Samuel instituting "Schools of the Prophets,"
 out of which grew the synagogue system supplying the Rabbinical
 education to Israel, and furnishing chiefs to the synagogues. See Acts
 iii. 24; and compare 1 Sam. x. 5, xix. 20, and 1 Chron. ix. 22. [4036]

 2. We find the institution of choral worship and the chanting of
 hymns--e.g., of Moses and Miriam, and Hannah (Samuel's mother)--in full
 operation under Samuel.

 3. We find David at this juncture inspired, as "the sweet singer of
 Israel," to supply the Psalter, which in divers arrangements has
 continued among Christians to be the marrow of public worship "in every
 place," and throughout the world.

 4. The reading of the law and the prophets was now set in order; and
 not only was the Temple supplied with teachers, but also the villages
 in every tribe. [4037]

 5. Thus the Christian Church was provided with a system of worship from
 the hour of its institution, [4038] the synaxis succeeding the
 synagogue; the "ministration of the word" being enriched by Gospels and
 Epistles, by psalms and hymns and spiritual songs, and by "the prayers"
 (based upon the Shemone esre) [4039] which now began to be composed and
 multiplied in the churches. Touching "free prayer" as exemplified in
 the first ages, see St. Cyprian's Epistles more especially: [4040] "Let
 us pray for the lapsed," etc.

 6. It is most significant, that, as St. Paul was not present at the
 institution of the Lord's Supper, he was, nevertheless, "not behind the
 chiefest of the Apostles," even in this. He also "received" the whole
 knowledge of the institution, and became, in so far, the author of an
 original Gospel in his details of Christ's great oblation of Himself.
 Hereupon, he adds the sacrificial expositions [4041] of the Epistle to
 the Hebrews, and "delivered the ordinances" to every church [4042]
 (kata` ta'xin), providing for order and decorum in divine offices.

 This he seems to have done as "Liturge" and "Hierurge," or evangelical
 priest, [4043] "ministering in sacrifice [4044] the Gospel of God,"
 etc.

 Compare, then, with the Scriptures, Justin Martyr's account of the
 early worship of Christians; and after consulting the (so-called)
 "Clementine Liturgy," [4045] the student will be qualified to form an
 enlightened judgment upon the primitive and the interpolated elements
 of the following liturgies. For we must bear in mind that they are
 reflected from mss., not one of which has any claim to represent the
 Ante-Nicene period. To purify them, therefore, by Scripture, and the
 truly primitive testimonies of this series, is a task yet remaining to
 be accomplished, and one which may well invoke the most conscientious
 and patient labours of the most learned in the land.

 Here follows the Edinburgh Introductory Notice:--


 The word Liturgy has a special meaning as applied to the following
 documents. It denotes the service used in the celebration of the
 Eucharist.

 Various liturgies have come down to us from antiquity; and their age,
 authorship, and genuineness have been matter of keen discussion. In our
 own country two writers on this subject stand specially prominent: the
 Rev. William Palmer, M.A., who in his Origines Liturgicæ [4046] gave a
 dissertation on Primitive Liturgies; and the Rev. J. Mason Neale, who
 devoted a large portion of his life to liturgies, edited four of them
 in his Tetralogia Liturgica, [4047] five of them in his Liturgies of
 St. Mark, St. James, St. Clement, St. Chrysostom, and St. Basil, [4048]
 and discussed them in a masterly manner in several works, but
 especially in his General Introduction to a History of the Holy Eastern
 Church [4049]

 Ancient liturgies are generally divided into four families,--the
 Liturgy of the Jerusalem Church, [4050] adopted throughout the East;
 the Alexandrian, [4051] used in Egypt and the neighbouring countries;
 and the Roman and Gallican Liturgies. To these Neale has added a fifth,
 the Liturgy of Persia or Edessa.

 There is also a liturgy not included in any of these families--the
 Clementine. It seems never to have been used in any public service. It
 forms part of the eighth book of the Apostolical Constitutions. [4052]

 The age ascribed to these documents depends very much on the
 temperament and inclination of the inquirer. Those who have great
 reverence for them think that they must have had an apostolic origin,
 that they contain the apostolic form, first handed down by tradition,
 and then committed to writing, but they allow that there is a certain
 amount of interpolation and addition of a date later than the Nicene
 Council. Such words as "consubstantial" and "mother of God" bear
 indisputable witness to this. Others think that there is no real
 historical proof of their early existence at all,--that they all belong
 to a late date, and bear evident marks of having been written long
 after the age of the apostles. [4053]

 There can scarcely be a doubt that they were not committed to writing
 till a comparatively late day. Those who think that their origin was
 apostolic allow this. "The period," says Palmer, [4054] "when liturgies
 were first committed to writing is uncertain, and has been the subject
 of some controversy. Le Brun contends that no liturgy was written till
 the fifth century; but his arguments seem quite insufficient to prove
 this, and he is accordingly opposed by Muratori and other eminent
 ritualists. It seems certain, on the other hand, that the liturgy of
 the Apostolical Constitutions was written at the end of the third or
 beginning of the fourth century; and there is no reason to deny that
 others may have been written about the same time, or not long after."

 Neale [4055] sums up the results of his study in the following words:
 "I shall content myself therefore with assuming, (1) that these
 liturgies, though not composed by the Apostles whose names they bear,
 were the legitimate development of their unwritten tradition respecting
 the Christian Sacrifice; the words, probably, in the most important
 parts, the general tenor in all portions, descending unchanged from the
 apostolic authors. (2) That the Liturgy of St. James is of earlier
 date, as to its main fabric, than a.d. 200; that the Clementine Office
 is at least not later than 260; that the Liturgy of St. Mark is nearly
 coeval with that of St. James; while those of St. Basil and St.
 Chrysostom are to be referred respectively to the saints by whom they
 purport to be composed. In all these cases, several manifest insertions
 and additions do not alter the truth of the general statement."

 1. The Roman Liturgy. The first writer who is supposed to allude to a
 Roman Liturgy is Innocentius, in the beginning of the fifth century;
 but it may well be doubted whether his words refer to any liturgy now
 extant. [4056] Some have attributed the authorship of the Roman Liturgy
 to Leo the Great, who was made bishop of Rome in a.d. 451; some to
 Gelasius, who was made bishop of Rome in a.d. 492; and some to Gregory
 the First, who was made bishop of Rome in a.d. 590. Such being the
 opinions of those who have given most study to the subject, we have not
 deemed it necessary to translate it, though Probst, in his Liturgie der
 drei ersten christlichen Jahrhunderte, [4057] probably out of affection
 for his own Church, has given it a place beside the Clementine and
 those of St. James and St. Mark.

 2. The Gallican has still less claim to antiquity. In fact, Daniel
 marks it among the spurious. [4058] Mabillon tries to prove that three
 ecclesiastics had a share in the authorship of this liturgy: Musæus,
 presbyter of Marseilles, who died after the middle of the fifth
 century; Sidonius, bishop of Auvergne, who died a.d. 494; and Hilary,
 bishop of Poictiers, who died a.d. 366. [4059] Palmer strives to show
 with great ingenuity that it is not improbable that the Gallican
 Liturgy may have been originally derived from St. John; but his
 arguments are merely conjectures.

 3. The Liturgy of St. James, the Liturgy of the Church of Jerusalem.
 Asseman, Zaccaria, Dr. Brett, Palmer, Trollope, and Neale, think that
 the main structure of this liturgy is the work of St. James, while they
 admit that it contains some evident interpolations. Leo Allatius, Bona,
 Bellarmine, Baronius, and some others, think that the whole is the
 genuine production of the apostle. Cave, Fabricius, Dupin, Le Nourry,
 Basnage, Tillemont, and many others, think that it is entirely
 destitute of any claim to an apostolic origin, and that it belongs to a
 much later age. [4060]

 "From the Liturgy of St. James," says Neale, "are derived, on the one
 hand, the forty Syro-Jacobite offices: on the other, the Cæsarean
 office, or Liturgy of St. Basil, with its offshoots; that of St.
 Chrysostom, and the Armeno-Gregorian." [4061]

 There are only two manuscripts of the Greek Liturgy of St. James,--one
 of the tenth, the other of the twelfth century,--with fragments of a
 third. [4062] The first edition appeared at Rome in 1526. In more
 recent times it has been edited by Rev. W. Trollope, M.A., [4063] Neale
 in the two works mentioned above, and Daniel in his Codex Liturgicus
 Bishop Rattray edited the Anaphora, [4064] and attempted to separate
 the original from the interpolations, "though," says Neale, "the
 supposed restoration is unsatisfactory enough." Bunsen, in his Analecta
 Ante-Nicæna, [4065] has tried to restore the Anaphora to the state in
 which it may have been in the fourth century, "as far as was
 possible--quantum fieri potuit "

 4. The Liturgy of St. Mark, the liturgy of the church of Alexandria.
 The same difference of opinion exists in regard to the age and
 genuineness of this liturgy as we found existing in regard to that of
 St. James, and the same scholars occupy the same relative position.

 The offshoots from St. Mark's Liturgy are St. Basil, St. Cyril, and St.
 Gregory, and the Ethiopic Canon or Liturgy of All Apostles. In regard
 to the Liturgy of St. Cyril, Neale says that it is "to all intents and
 purposes the same as that of St. Mark; and it seems highly probable
 that the Liturgy of St. Mark came, as we have it now, from the hands of
 St. Cyril, or, to use the expression of Abu'lberkat, that Cyril
 perfected' it." [4066]

 There is only one manuscript of the Liturgy of St. Mark, probably
 belonging to the twelfth century. The first edition appeared at Paris
 in 1583. The liturgy is given in Renaudot's Liturgiarum Orientalium
 Collectio, tom. i. pp. 120-148, [4067] in Neale's two works, and in
 Daniel's Codex Liturgicus

 5. The Liturgy of the Apostles Adæus and Maris. This liturgy has been
 brought prominently forward by Neale, who says: "It is generally passed
 over as of very inferior importance, and Renaudot alone seems to have
 been prepared to acknowledge in some degree its great antiquity."
 [4068] He thinks that it is "one of the earliest, and perhaps the very
 earliest, of the many formularies of the Christian Sacrifice." [4069]
 It is one of the three Nestorian liturgies, the other two being that of
 Nestorius and that of Theodore the interpreter.

 A Latin translation of it is given in Renaudot's Collectio, [4070]
 which is reprinted in Daniel's Codex Liturgicus It is from this version
 that our translation is made. Several prayers and hymns are indicated
 only by the initial words, and the rubrical directions are probably of
 a much later date than the text.

 The Liturgies are divided into two parts,--the part before "Lift we up
 our hearts," and the part after this. The first is termed the
 Proanaphoral Part, the second the Anaphora.

 Trollope describes what he conceives to be the form of worship in the
 early Church, thus: [4071] "The service of this day divided itself into
 two parts; at the latter of which, called in the Eastern churches
 Liturgia mystica, and in the Western Missa fidelium, none but perfect
 and approved Christians were allowed to be present. To the Missa
 Catechumenorum, or that part of the service which preceded the prayers
 peculiar to communicants only, not only believers, but Gentiles, were
 admitted, in the hope that some might possibly become converts to the
 faith. After the Psalms and Lessons with which the service commenced,
 as on ordinary occasions, a section from the Acts of the Apostles or
 the Epistles was read; after which the deacon or presbyter read the
 Gospel. Then followed an exhortation from one or more of the
 presbyters; and the bishop or president delivered a Homily or Sermon,
 explanatory, it should seem, of the Scripture which had been read, and
 exciting the people to an imitation of the virtues therein exemplified.
 When the preacher had concluded his discourse with a doxology in praise
 of the Holy Trinity, a deacon made proclamation for all infidels and
 non-communicants to withdraw; then came the dismissal of the several
 classes of catechumens, energumens, competents, and penitents, after
 the prayers for each respectively, as on ordinary days; and the Missa
 fidelium commenced. This office consisted of two parts, essentially
 distinct: viz., of prayers for the faithful, and for mankind in
 general, introductory to the Oblation; and the Anaphora or Oblation
 itself. The introductory part varied considerably in the formularies of
 different churches; but in the Anaphora all the existing liturgies so
 closely agree, in substance at least, if not in words, that they can
 only be reasonably referred to the same common origin. [4072] Their
 arrangement, indeed, is not always the same; but the following
 essential points belong, without exception, to them all:--1. The Kiss
 of Peace; 2. The form beginning, Lift up your hearts; 3. The Hymn,
 Therefore with angels, etc.; 4. Commemoration of the words of
 Institution; 5. The Oblation; 6. Prayer of Consecration; 7. Prayers for
 the Church on Earth; 8. Prayers for the Dead; 9. The Lord's Prayer; 10.
 Breaking of the Bread; 11. Communion."

 Neale gives a more minute account of the different parts of the
 service. He divides the Proanaphoral portion into parts in the
 following manner: [4073] --


 "Liturgy (or Missa) of the Catechumens.

 I.

 The Preparatory Prayers.


 II.

 The Initial Hymn or Introit.


 III.

 The Little Entrance.


 IV.

 The Trisagion.


 V.

 The Lections.


 VI.

 The Prayers after the Gospel, and expulsion of the Catechumen.


 "Liturgy (or Missa) of the Faithful.

 I.

 The Prayers for the Faithful.


 II.

 The Great Entrance.


 III.

 The Offertory.


 IV.

 The Kiss of Peace.


 V.

 The Creed."

 The Anaphora he divides into four parts in the following manner: [4074]
 --

 "The great Eucharistic Prayer.

 I.

 The Preface.


 II.

 The Prayer of the Triumphal Hymn.


 III.

 The Triumphal Hymn.


 IV.

 Commemoration of Our Lord's Life.


 V.

 Commemoration of Institution.


 "The Consecration.

 VI.

 Words of Institution of the Bread.


 VII.

 Words of Institution of the Wine.


 VIII.

 Oblation of the Body and Blood.


 IX.

 Introductory Prayer for the Descent of the Holy Ghost.


 X.

 Prayer for the Sanctification of Elements.


 "The great Intercessory Prayer.

 XI.

 General Intercession for Quick and Dead.


 XII.

 Prayer before the Lord's Prayer.


 XIII.

 The Lord's Prayer.


 XIV.

 The Embolismus.


 "The Communion.

 XV.

 The Prayer of Inclination.


 XVI.

 The Holy Things for Holy Persons.


 XVII.

 The Fraction.


 XVII.

 The Confession.


 XIX.

 The Communion.


 XX.

 The Antidoron: and Prayers of Thanksgiving."

 The whole subject is discussed by Mr. Neale with extraordinary
 minuteness, fulness of detail, and perfect mastery of his subject; and
 to his work we refer those who wish to prosecute the study of the
 subject. [4075]


 General Note by the American Editor.

 I Have found a few less noted works most useful in my own studies,
 which began with Palmer's Origines on their first publication, followed
 up by Brett, and then by Renaudot. The publications of Drs. Neale and
 Littledale are sufficiently referred to elsewhere; and I purposely omit
 the mention of many purely Anglican authorities, as well as costly
 works from other European sources.

 1. Freeman's Principles of Divine Service, etc. [4076] A work of
 incomparable utility to those who would comprehend the Jewish ritual
 and its preparations for Christian worship.

 2. Badger's Nestorians and their Rituals [4077]

 3. Warren's Liturgy and Ritual of the Celtic Church; [4078] replete
 with information hitherto inaccessible.

 4. Scudamore's Notitia Eucharistica; [4079] Anglican, but full of
 general information.

 5. Trevor's Catholic Doctrine of Sacrifice, etc.; [4080] a candid and
 learned study of this subject, and free from fanatical or visionary
 conceptions.

 6. Hammond's Liturgies, etc., [4081] elsewhere spoken of.

 7. Burbidge, Liturgies and Offices, [4082] of which I have only lately
 discovered the value.

 8. Field's Apostolic Liturgy and the Ep. to the Hebrews; [4083] open to
 some objections, but full of valuable and suggestive information.

 9. Pfaffius, Christ. Math. His invaluable Dissertatio de Oblatione,
 etc. [4084] A high Lutheran authority of great learning.

 10. Marriott's Testimony of the Catacombs; [4085] learned and
 instructive.


 [4020]

 [4021] Vol. v. [315]note 2, p. 170.

 [4022] Vol. vi. [316]p. 542, Elucidation VI.

 [4023] Deut. xii. 6.

 [4024] Deut. xii. 24.

 [4025] Deut. xii. 21, xiv. 24.

 [4026] Exod. xxiii. 17; Deut. xvi. 16.

 [4027] Gen. xxii. 14.

 [4028] Heb. xi. 19.

 [4029] Ps. lxxviii. 67-69.

 [4030] Heb. ix. 22.

 [4031] Ps. lxxxiii. 12, lxxiv. 6.

 [4032] John iv. 21-23.

 [4033] Mal. i. 11.

 [4034] This series passim; but, e.g., vol. i. pp. 138, 482, and v. p.
 290, note 8.

 [4035] As above mentioned in his work on Prophecy. See p. 530.

 [4036] See also Cruden on the word "school" in his Concordance

 [4037] Dean Smith, Prophecy, etc., p. 124.

 [4038] Acts i. 4 (Greek), 14, ii. 1, 42, iv. 24.

 [4039] Vol. v. Elucidation III. [317]p. 559.

 [4040] Ibid., Elucidation VI. [318]p. 412.

 [4041] See Field, Epistle to the Hebrews, London, Rivingtons, 1882.

 [4042] 1 Cor. vii. 17, xi. 2, 25, 33, etc., xiv. 34-40.

 [4043] See vol. v. [319]p. 409.

 [4044] Revised Version of 1881.

 [4045] See Apostolic Constitutions, [320]p. 489, supra.

 [4046] Oxford, 1832.

 [4047] London, 1849.

 [4048] Second ed. London, 1868.

 [4049] London, 1850.

 [4050] [Or of St. James, so called.]

 [4051] [Called the Liturgy of St. Mark.]

 [4052] [It is most valuable, and indicates the usages of a period near
 the age of Justin Martyr. It is typical of an original from which the
 Liturgy of St. James itself is derived. It was probably used in Gaul,
 if not also in Rome.]

 [4053] [A fair view of their origin is to be found in Sir William
 Palmer's Origines Liturgicæ, Oxford, 1832.]

 [4054] Origines Liturgicæ, p. 11.

 [4055] General Introduction to the History of the Holy Eastern Church,
 p. 319.

 [4056] [If Justin Martyr describes the liturgy used in Rome, when he
 lived there under the Antonines, then it was nearly identical with the
 "Clementine," and had reached them from the East. See vol. i. [321]p.
 185, this series.]

 [4057] Tübingen, 1870.

 [4058] no'thoi. Codex Liturgicus, vol. iv. p. 35, note.

 [4059] Palmer, vol. i. p. 144.

 [4060] [Here the weight of authorities is clearly on this side.]

 [4061] General Introd., p. 317.

 [4062] [Palmer gives proof of its currency at an early period in some
 details. O. S., vol. i. p. 42.]

 [4063] Edinburgh, T. & T. Clark, 1848.

 [4064] London, 1744.

 [4065] Vol. iii. [Grabe also attempted this.]

 [4066] General Introd., p. 324. [From the poverty of ms. authority, we
 can only form a judgment by comparison with the Clementine and with
 other more fully represented originals.]

 [4067] Editio secunda correctior. Francofurti ad Moenum, 1847.

 [4068] General Introd., p. 319.

 [4069] Ibid., p. 323.

 [4070] Tom. ii. pp. 578-592, ed. sec.

 [4071] Introduction, p. 11.

 [4072] [Hence the value of these liturgies is to be sought in the
 points of their agreement and their comparative concord with the
 Clementine.]

 [4073] General Introduction, p. 359.

 [4074] Ibid., p. 463.

 [4075] [A very fair reviewal of Neale's theoretical statements may be
 found in Hammond's Liturgies, Eastern and Western, Oxford, 1878.]

 [4076] Oxford, Parker, 1855.

 [4077] London, Masters, 1852.

 [4078] Oxford, University Press, 1881.

 [4079] London, Rivingtons, 1872.

 [4080] Oxford, Parker, 1876.

 [4081] Oxford, University Press, 1878. Also Ancient Liturgy of Antioch,
 Oxford, 1879.

 [4082] London, Bells, 1885.

 [4083] London, Rivingtons, 1882.

 [4084] The Hague, Scheurler, 1715. Let me give the title of this rare
 book more fully, thus: S. Irenæi Fragmenta Anecdota, etc., quæ
 illustravit, denique Liturgia Græca Jo. Ern. Grabii, et dissertatione
 de præjudiciis theologicis auxit Christoph. Matth. Pfaffius Of whom see
 Lardner, Credib., i. 17. See vol. i. p. 574, [322]note 5.

 [4085] London, Hatchards, 1870. Valuable for its study of the "Autun
 Inscription."

EARLY LITURGIES. [4086]

  The Divine Liturgy of James the Holy Apostle and Brother of the Lord.

 i.

 The Priest. [4087]

 I O Sovereign Lord our God, contemn me not, defiled with a multitude of
 sins: for, behold, I have come to this Thy divine and heavenly mystery,
 not as being worthy; but looking only to Thy goodness, I direct my
 voice to Thee: God be merciful to me, a sinner; I have sinned against
 Heaven, and before Thee, and am unworthy to come into the presence of
 this Thy holy and spiritual table, upon which Thy only-begotten Son,
 and our Lord Jesus Christ, is mystically set forth as a sacrifice for
 me, a sinner, and stained with every spot. Wherefore I present to Thee
 this supplication and thanksgiving, that Thy Spirit the Comforter may
 be sent down upon me, strengthening and fitting me for this service;
 and count me worthy to make known without condemnation the word,
 delivered from Thee by me to the people, in Christ Jesus our Lord, with
 whom Thou art blessed, together with Thy all-holy, and good, and
 quickening, and consubstantial [4088] Spirit, now and ever, and to all
 eternity. Amen.

 Prayer of the standing beside the altar.

 II Glory to the Father, and to the Son, and to the Holy Spirit, the
 triune light of the Godhead, which is unity subsisting in trinity,
 divided, yet indivisible: for the Trinity is the one God Almighty,
 whose glory the heavens declare, and the earth His dominion, and the
 sea His might, and every sentient and intellectual creature at all
 times proclaims His majesty: for all glory becomes Him, and honour and
 might, greatness and magnificence, now and ever, and to all eternity.
 Amen.

 Prayer of the incense at the beginning. [4089]

 III Sovereign Lord Jesus Christ, O Word of God, who didst freely offer
 Thyself a blameless sacrifice upon the cross to God even the Father,
 the coal of double nature, that didst touch the lips of the prophet
 with the tongs, and didst take away his sins, touch also the hearts of
 us sinners, and purify us from every stain, and present us holy beside
 Thy holy altar, that we may offer Thee a sacrifice of praise: and
 accept from us, Thy unprofitable servants, this incense as an odour of
 a sweet smell, and make fragrant the evil odour of our soul and body,
 and purify us with the sanctifying power of Thy all-holy Spirit: for
 Thou alone art holy, who sanctifiest, and art communicated to the
 faithful; and glory becomes Thee, with Thy eternal Father, and Thy
 all-holy, and good, and quickening Spirit, now and ever, and to all
 eternity. Amen.

 Prayer of the commencement.

 IV O beneficent King eternal, and Creator of the universe, receive Thy
 Church, coming unto Thee through Thy Christ: fulfil to each what is
 profitable; lead all to perfection, and make us perfectly worthy of the
 grace of Thy sanctification, gathering us together within Thy holy
 Church, which Thou hast purchased by the precious blood of Thy
 only-begotten Son, and our Lord and Saviour Jesus Christ, with whom
 Thou art blessed and glorified, together with Thy all-holy, and good,
 and quickening Spirit, now and ever, and to all eternity. Amen.

 The Deacon.

 V Let us again pray to the Lord.

 The Priest, prayer of the incense at the entrance of the congregation.

 God, who didst accept the gifts of Abel, the sacrifice of Noah and of
 Abram, the incense of Aaron and of Zacharias, accept also from the hand
 of us sinners this incense for an odour of a sweet smell, and for
 remission of our sins, and those of all Thy people; for blessed art
 Thou, and glory becomes Thee, the Father, and the Son, and the Holy
 Spirit, now and ever.

 The Deacon.

 Sir, pronounce the blessing. [4090]

 The Priest prays.

 Our Lord and God, Jesus Christ, who through exceeding goodness and love
 not to be restrained wast crucified, and didst not refuse to be pierced
 by the spear and nails; who didst provide this mysterious and awful
 service as an everlasting memorial for us perpetually: bless Thy
 ministry in Christ the God, and bless our entrance, and fully complete
 the presentation of this our service by Thy unutterable compassion, now
 and ever, and to all eternity. Amen.

 The responsive prayer from the Deacon.

 VI. The Lord bless us, and make us worthy seraphically to offer gifts,
 and to sing the oft-sung hymn of the divine Trisagion, by the fulness
 and exceeding abundance of all the perfection of holiness, now and
 ever.

 Then the Deacon begins to sing in the entrance. [4091]

 Thou who art the only-begotten Son and Word of God, immortal; who didst
 submit for our salvation to become flesh of the holy God-mother, [4092]
 and ever-virgin Mary; who didst immutably become man and wast
 crucified, O Christ our God, and didst by Thy death tread death
 underfoot; who art one of the Holy Trinity glorified together with the
 Father and the Holy Spirit, save us.

 The Priest says this prayer from the gates to the altar.

 VII God Almighty, Lord great in glory, who hast given to us an entrance
 into the Holy of Holies, through the sojourning among men of Thy
 only-begotten Son, our Lord, and God, and Saviour Jesus Christ, we
 supplicate and invoke Thy goodness, since we are fearful and trembling
 when about to stand at Thy holy altar; send forth upon us, O God, Thy
 good grace, and sanctify our souls, and bodies, and spirits, and turn
 our thoughts to piety, in order that with a pure conscience we may
 bring unto Thee gifts, offerings, and fruits for the remission of our
 transgressions, and for the propitiation of all Thy people, by the
 grace and mercies and loving-kindness of Thy only-begotten Son, with
 whom Thou art blessed to all eternity. Amen.

 After the approach to the altar, the Priest says:--

 VIII. Peace be to all.

 The People.

 And to thy spirit.

 The Priest.

 The Lord bless us all, and sanctify us for the entrance and celebration
 of the divine and pure mysteries, giving rest to the blessed souls
 among the good and just, by His grace and loving-kindness, now and
 ever, and to all eternity. Amen.

 Then the Deacon says the bidding prayer. [4093]

 IX. In peace let us beseech the Lord.

 For the peace that is from above, and for God's love to man, and for
 the salvation of our souls, let us beseech the Lord.

 For the peace of the whole world, for the unity of all the holy
 churches of God, let us beseech the Lord.

 For the remission of our sins, and forgiveness of our transgressions,
 and for our deliverance from all tribulation, wrath, danger, and
 distress, and from the uprising of our enemies, let us beseech the
 Lord.

 Then the Singers sing the Trisagion Hymn.

 Holy God, holy mighty, holy immortal, have mercy upon us.

 Then the Priest prays, bowing.

 X. O compassionate and merciful, long-suffering, and very gracious and
 true God, look from Thy prepared dwelling-place, and hear us Thy
 suppliants, and deliver us from every temptation of the devil and of
 man; withhold not Thy aid from us, nor bring on us chastisements too
 heavy for our strength: for we are unable to overcome what is opposed
 to us; but Thou art able, Lord, to save us from everything that is
 against us. Save us, O God, from the difficulties of this world,
 according to Thy goodness, in order that, having drawn nigh with a pure
 conscience to Thy holy altar, we may send up to Thee without
 condemnation the blessed hymn Trisagion, together with the heavenly
 powers, and that, having performed the service, well pleasing to Thee
 and divine, we may be counted worthy of eternal life.

 (Aloud.)

 Because Thou art holy, Lord our God, and dwellest and abidest in holy
 places, we send up the praise and the hymn Trisagion to Thee, the
 Father, and the Son, and the Holy Spirit, now and ever, and to all
 eternity.

 The People.

 Amen.

 The Priest.

 XI. Peace be to all.

 The People.

 And to thy spirit.

 The Singers.

 Alleluia.

 Then there are read in order [4094] the holy oracles of the Old
 Testament, and of the prophets; and the incarnation of the Son of God
 is set forth, and His sufferings and resurrection from the dead, His
 ascension into heaven, and His second appearing with glory; and this
 takes place daily in the holy and divine service. [4095]

 After the reading and instruction the Deacon says:--

 XII. Let us all say, Lord, be merciful. [4096]

 Lord Almighty, the God of our fathers;

 We beseech Thee, hear us.

 For the peace which is from above, and for the salvation of our souls;

 Let us beseech the Lord.

 For the peace of the whole world, and the unity of all the holy
 churches of God;

 Let us beseech the Lord.

 For the salvation and help of all the Christ-loving people;

 We beseech Thee, hear us.

 For our deliverance from all tribulation, wrath, danger, distress, from
 captivity, bitter death, and from our iniquities;

 We beseech Thee, hear us.

 For the people standing round, and waiting for the rich and plenteous
 mercy that is from Thee;

 We beseech Thee, be merciful and gracious.

 Save Thy people, O Lord, and bless Thine inheritance.

 Visit Thy world in mercy and compassion.

 Exalt the horn of Christians by the power of the precious and
 quickening cross.

 We beseech Thee, most merciful Lord, hear us praying to Thee, and have
 mercy upon us.

 The People (thrice).

 Lord, have mercy upon us.

 The Deacon.

 XIII. For the remission of our sins, and forgiveness of our
 transgressions, and for our deliverance from all tribulation, wrath,
 danger, and distress, let us beseech the Lord.

 Let us all entreat from the Lord, that we may pass the whole day,
 perfect, holy, peaceful, and without sin.

 Let us entreat from the Lord a messenger of peace, a faithful guide, a
 guardian of our souls and bodies.

 Let us entreat from the Lord forgiveness and remission of our sins and
 transgressions.

 Let us entreat from the Lord the things which are good and proper for
 our souls, and peace for the world.

 Let us entreat from the Lord, that we may spend the remaining period of
 our life in peace and health.

 Let us entreat that the close of our lives may be Christian, without
 pain and without shame, and a good plea at the dread and awful
 judgment-seat of Christ.

 The Priest.

 XIV. For Thou art the gospel and the light, Saviour and keeper of our
 souls and bodies, God, and Thy only-begotten Son, and Thy all-holy
 Spirit, now and ever.

 The People.

 Amen. [4097]

 The Priest

 God, who hast taught us Thy divine and saving oracles, enlighten the
 souls of us sinners for the comprehension of the things which have been
 before spoken, so that we may not only be seen to be hearers of
 spiritual things, but also doers of good deeds, striving after
 guileless faith, blameless life, and pure conversation.

 (Aloud.)

 In Christ Jesus our Lord, with whom Thou art blessed, together with Thy
 all-holy, good, and quickening Spirit, now and always, and for ever.

 The People.

 Amen.

 The Priest.

 XV. Peace be to all.

 The People.

 And to Thy spirit.

 The Deacon.

 Let us bow our heads to the Lord.

 The People.

 To Thee, Lord.

 The Priest prays, saying:--

 O Sovereign giver of life, and provider of good things, who didst give
 to mankind the blessed hope of eternal life, our Lord Jesus Christ,
 count us worthy in holiness, and perfect this Thy divine service to the
 enjoyment of future blessedness.

 (Aloud.)

 So that, guarded by Thy power at all times, and led into the light of
 truth, we may send up the praise and the thanksgiving to Thee, the
 Father, the Son, and the Holy Spirit, now and ever.

 The People.

 Amen.

 The Deacon.

 XVI. Let none remain of the catechumens, none of the unbaptized, none
 of those who are unable to join with us in prayer. Look at one another.
 [4098] The door.

 All erect: [4099] let us again pray to the Lord.

 II [4100]

 The Priest says the prayer of incense.

 Sovereign Almighty, King of Glory, who knowest all things before their
 creation, manifest Thyself to us calling upon Thee at this holy hour,
 and redeem us from the shame of our transgressions; cleanse our mind
 and our thoughts from impure desires, from worldly deceit, from all
 influence of the devil; and accept from the hands of us sinners this
 incense, as Thou didst accept the offering of Abel, and Noah, and
 Aaron, and Samuel, and of all Thy saints, guarding us from everything
 evil, and preserving us for continually pleasing, and worshipping, and
 glorifying Thee, the Father, and Thy only-begotten Son, and Thy
 all-holy Spirit, now and always, and for ever.

 And the Readers begin the Cherubic Hymn.

 Let all mortal flesh be silent, and stand with fear and trembling, and
 meditate nothing earthly within itself:--

 For the King of kings and Lord of lords, Christ our God, comes forward
 to be sacrificed, and to be given for food to the faithful; and the
 bands of angels go before Him with every power and dominion, the
 many-eyed cherubim, and the six-winged seraphim, covering their faces,
 and crying aloud the hymn, Alleluia, Alleluia, Alleluia.

 The Priest, bringing in the holy gifts, [4101] says this prayer:--

 XVII. O God, our God, who didst send forth the heavenly bread, the food
 of the whole world, our Lord Jesus Christ, to be a Saviour, and
 Redeemer, and Benefactor, blessing and sanctifying us, do Thou Thyself
 bless this offering, and graciously receive it to Thy altar above the
 skies:

 Remember in Thy goodness and love those who have brought it, and those
 for whom they have brought it, and preserve us without condemnation in
 the service of Thy divine mysteries: for hollowed and glorified is Thy
 all-honoured and great name, Father, and Son, and Holy Spirit, now and
 ever, and to all eternity.

 The Priest.

 Peace be to all.

 The Deacon.

 Sir, pronounce the blessing.

 The Priest.

 Blessed be God, who blesseth and sanctifieth us all at the presentation
 of the divine and pure mysteries, and giveth rest to the blessed souls
 among the holy and just, now and always, and to all eternity.

 The Deacon.

 XVIII Let us attend in wisdom.

 The Priest begins.

 I believe in one God, Father Almighty, Maker of heaven and earth, and
 in one Lord Jesus Christ, the Son of God: and the rest of the Creed.

 Then he prays, bowing his neck.

 XIX. God and Sovereign of all, make us, who are unworthy, worthy of
 this hour, lover of mankind; that being pure from all deceit and all
 hypocrisy, we may be united with one another by the bond of peace and
 love, being confirmed by the sanctification of Thy divine knowledge
 through Thine only-begotten Son, our Lord and Saviour Jesus Christ,
 with whom Thou art blessed, together with Thy all-holy, and good, and
 quickening Spirit, now and ever, and to all eternity. Amen.

 The Deacon.

 XX. Let us stand well, let us stand reverently, let us stand in the
 fear of God, and with compunction of heart. In peace let us pray to the
 Lord.

 The Priest.

 For God of peace, mercy, love, compassion, and loving-kindness art
 Thou, and Thine only-begotten Son, and Thine all-holy Spirit, now and
 ever.

 The People.

 Amen.

 The Priest.

 Peace be to all.

 The People.

 And to thy spirit.

 The Deacon.

 Let us salute one another with an holy kiss. [4102] Let us bow our
 heads to the Lord.

 The Priest bows, saying this prayer:--

 XXI. Only Lord and merciful God, on those who are bowing their necks
 before Thy holy altar, and seeking the spiritual gifts that come from
 Thee, send forth Thy good grace; and bless us all with every spiritual
 blessing, that cannot be taken from us, Thou, who dwellest on high, and
 hast regard unto things that are lowly.

 (Aloud.)

 For worthy of praise and worship and most glorious is Thy all-holy
 name, Father and Son and Holy Spirit, now and always, and to all
 eternity.

 The Deacon.

 Sir, pronounce the blessing.

 The Priest.

 The Lord will bless us, and minister with us all by His grace and
 loving-kindness.

 And again.

 The Lord will bless us, and make us worthy to stand at His holy altar,
 at all times, now and always, and for ever.

 And again.

 Blessed be God, who blesseth and sanctifieth us all in our attendance
 upon, and service of, His pure mysteries, now and always, and for ever.

 The Deacon makes the Universal Litany.

 XXII In peace let us pray to the Lord.

 The People.

 O Lord, have mercy.

 The Deacon.

 Save us, have mercy upon us, pity and keep us, O God, by Thy grace.

 For the peace that is from above, and the loving-kindness of God, and
 the salvation of our souls;

 Let us beseech the Lord.

 For the peace of the whole world, and the unity of all the holy
 churches of God;

 Let us beseech the Lord.

 For those who bear fruit, and labour honourably in the holy churches of
 God; for those who remember the poor, the widows and the orphans, the
 strangers and needy ones; and for those who have requested us to
 mention them in our prayers;

 Let us beseech the Lord.

 For those who are in old age and infirmity, for the sick and suffering,
 and those who are troubled by unclean spirits, for their speedy cure
 from God and their salvation;

 Let us beseech the Lord.

 For those who are passing their days in virginity, and celibacy, and
 discipline, and for those in holy matrimony; and for the holy fathers
 and brethren agonizing in mountains, [4103] and dens, and caves of the
 earth;

 Let us beseech the Lord.

 For Christians sailing, travelling, living among strangers, and for our
 brethren in captivity, in exile, in prison, and in bitter slavery,
 their peaceful return;

 Let us beseech the Lord.

 For the remission of our sins, and forgiveness of our transgressions,
 and for our deliverance from all tribulation, wrath, danger, and
 constraint, and uprising against us of enemies;

 Let us beseech the Lord.

 For favourable weather, peaceful showers, beneficent dews, abundance of
 fruits, the perfect close of a good season, and for the crown of the
 year;

 Let us beseech the Lord.

 For our fathers and brethren present, and praying with us in this holy
 hour, and at every season, their zeal, labour, and earnestness;

 Let us beseech the Lord.

 For every Christian soul in tribulation and distress, and needing the
 mercy and succour of God; for the return of the erring, the health of
 the sick, the deliverance of the captives, the rest of the fathers and
 brethren that have fallen asleep aforetime;

 Let us beseech the Lord.

 For the hearing and acceptance of our prayer before God, and the
 sending down on us His rich mercies and compassion.

 Let us beseech the Lord. [4104]

 And for the offered, precious, heavenly, unutterable, pure, glorious,
 dread, awful, divine gifts, and the salvation of the priest who stands
 by and offers them;

 Let us offer supplication to God the Lord.

 The People.

 O Lord, have mercy.

 (Thrice.)

 Then the Priest makes the sign of the cross on the gifts, [4105] and,
 standing, speaks separately thus:--

 XXIII Glory to God in the highest, and on earth peace, good-will among
 men, etc.

 (Thrice.)

 Lord, Thou wilt open my lips, and my mouth shall show forth Thy praise.

 (Thrice.)

 Let my mouth be filled with Thy praise, O Lord, that I may tell of Thy
 glory, of Thy majesty, all the day.

 (Thrice.)

 Of the Father. Amen. And of the Son. Amen. And of the Holy Spirit.
 Amen. Now and always, and to all eternity. Amen.

 And bowing to this side and to that, [4106] he says:

 XXIV. Magnify the Lord with me, and let us exalt His name together.

 And they answer, bowing:--

 The Holy Ghost shall come upon thee, and the power of the Highest shall
 overshadow thee. [4107] [4108]

 Then the Priest, at great length:--

 O Sovereign Lord, who hast visited us in compassion and mercies, and
 hast freely given to us, Thy humble and sinful and unworthy servants,
 boldness to stand at Thy holy altar, and to offer to Thee this dread
 and bloodless sacrifice for our sins, and for the errors of the people,
 look upon me Thy unprofitable servant, and blot out my transgressions
 for Thy compassion's sake; and purify my lips and heart from all
 pollution of flesh and spirit; and remove from me every shameful and
 foolish thought, and fit me by the power of Thy all-holy Spirit for
 this service; and receive me graciously by Thy goodness as I draw nigh
 to Thy altar.

 And be pleased, O Lord, that these gifts brought by our hands may be
 acceptable, stooping to my weakness; and cast me not away from Thy
 presence, and abhor not my unworthiness; but pity me according to Thy
 great mercy, and according to the multitude of Thy mercies pass by my
 transgressions, that, having come before Thy glory without
 condemnation, I may be counted worthy of the protection of Thy
 only-begotten Son, and of the illumination of Thy all-holy Spirit, that
 I may not be as a slave of sin cast out, but as Thy servant may find
 grace and mercy and forgiveness of sins before Thee, both in the world
 that now is and in that which is to come.

 I beseech Thee, Almighty Sovereign, all-powerful Lord, hear my prayer;
 for Thou art He who workest all in all, and we all seek in all things
 the help and succour that come from Thee and Thy only-begotten Son, and
 the good and quickening and consubstantial Spirit, now and ever.

 XXV. O God, who through Thy great and unspeakable love didst send forth
 Thy only-begotten Son into the world, in order that He might turn back
 the lost sheep, turn not away us sinners, laying hold of Thee by this
 dread and bloodless sacrifice; for we trust not in our own
 righteousness, but in Thy good mercy, by which Thou purchasest our
 race.

 We entreat and beseech Thy goodness that it may not be for condemnation
 to Thy people that this mystery for salvation has been administered by
 us, but for remission of sins, for renewal of souls and bodies, for the
 well-pleasing of Thee, God and Father, in the mercy and love of Thy
 only-begotten Son, with whom Thou art blessed, together with Thy
 all-holy and good and quickening Spirit, now and always, and for ever.
 [4109]

 XXVI. O Lord God, who didst create us, and bring us into life, who hast
 shown to us ways to salvation, who hast granted to us a revelation of
 heavenly mysteries, and hast appointed us to this ministry in the power
 of Thy all-holy Spirit, grant, O Sovereign, that we may become servants
 of Thy new testament, ministers of Thy pure mysteries, and receive us
 as we draw near to Thy holy altar, according to the greatness of Thy
 mercy, that we may become worthy of offering to Thee gifts and
 sacrifices for our transgressions and for those of the people; and
 grant to us, O Lord, with all fear and a pure conscience to offer to
 Thee this spiritual and bloodless sacrifice, and graciously receiving
 it unto Thy holy and spiritual altar above the skies for an odour of a
 sweet spiritual smell, send down in answer on us the grace of Thy
 all-holy Spirit.

 And, O God, look upon us, and have regard to this our reasonable
 service, and accept it, as Thou didst accept the gifts of Abel, the
 sacrifices of Noah, the priestly offices of Moses and Aaron, the
 peace-offerings of Samuel, the repentance of David, the incense of
 Zacharias. As Thou didst accept from the hand of Thy apostles this true
 service, so accept also in Thy goodness from the hands of us sinners
 these offered gifts; and grant that our offering may be acceptable,
 sanctified by the Holy Spirit, as a propitiation [4110] for our
 transgressions and the errors of the people; and for the rest of the
 souls [4111] that have fallen asleep aforetime; that we also, Thy
 humble, sinful, and unworthy servants, being counted worthy without
 guile to serve Thy holy altar, may receive the reward of faithful and
 wise stewards, and may find grace and mercy in the terrible day of Thy
 just and good retribution.

 Prayer of the veil. [4112]

 XXVII. We thank Thee, O Lord our God, that Thou hast given us boldness
 for the entrance of Thy holy places, which Thou hast renewed to us as a
 new and living way through the veil of the flesh [4113] of Thy Christ.
 We therefore, being counted worthy to enter into the place of the
 tabernacle of Thy glory, and to be within the veil, and to behold the
 Holy of Holies, cast ourselves down before Thy goodness:

 Lord, have mercy on us: since we are full of fear and trembling, when
 about to stand at Thy holy altar, and to offer this dread and bloodless
 sacrifice for our own sins and for the errors of the people: [4114]
 send forth, O God, Thy good grace, and sanctify our souls, and bodies,
 and spirits; and turn our thoughts to holiness, that with a pure
 conscience we may bring to Thee a peace-offering, the sacrifice of
 praise:

 (Aloud.)

 By the mercy and loving-kindness of Thy only-begotten Son, with whom
 Thou art blessed, together with Thy all-holy, and good, and quickening
 Spirit, now and always:

 The People.

 Amen.

 The Priest.

 Peace be to all.

 The Deacon.

 Let us stand reverently, let us stand in the fear of God, and with
 contrition: let us attend to the holy communion service, to offer peace
 to God.

 The People.

 The offering of peace, the sacrifice of praise.

 The Priest [A veil is now withdrawn from the oblation of bread and
 wine.]

 And, uncovering the veils that darkly invest in symbol [4115] this
 sacred ceremonial, do Thou reveal it clearly to us: fill our
 intellectual vision with absolute light, and having purified our
 poverty from every pollution of flesh and spirit, make it worthy of
 this dread and awful approach: for Thou art an all-merciful and
 gracious God, and we send up the praise and the thanksgiving to Thee,
 Father, Son, and Holy Spirit, now, and always, and for ever.

 III.

 The Anaphora.

 Then he says aloud:--

 XXVIII. The love of the Lord and Father, the grace of the Lord and Son,
 and the fellowship and the gift of the Holy Spirit, be with us all.

 The People.

 And with thy spirit.

 The Priest.

 Let us lift up our minds and our hearts. [4116]

 The People.

 It is becoming and right.

 Then the Priest prays.

 Verily it is becoming and right, proper and due to praise Thee, to sing
 of Thee, to bless Thee, to worship Thee, to glorify Thee, to give Thee
 thanks, Maker of every creature visible and invisible, the treasure of
 eternal good things, the fountain of life and immortality, God and Lord
 of all:

 Whom the heavens of heavens praise, and all the host of them; the sun,
 and the moon, and all the choir of the stars; earth, sea, and all that
 is in them; Jerusalem, the heavenly assembly, and church of the
 first-born that are written in heaven; spirits of just men and of
 prophets; souls of martyrs and of apostles; angels, archangels,
 thrones, dominions, principalities, and authorities, and dread powers;
 and the many-eyed cherubim, and the six-winged seraphim, which cover
 their faces with two wings, their feet with two, and with two they fly,
 crying one to another with unresting lips, with unceasing praises:

 (Aloud.)

 With loud voice singing the victorious hymn of Thy majestic glory,
 crying aloud, praising, shouting, and saying:--

 The People.

 Holy, holy, holy, O Lord of Sabaoth, the heaven and the earth are full
 of Thy glory. Hosanna in the highest; blessed is He that cometh in the
 name of the Lord. Hosanna in the highest. [4117]

 The Priest, making the sign of the cross [4118] on the gifts, says:--

 XXIX. Holy art Thou, King of eternity, and Lord and giver of all
 holiness; holy also Thy only-begotten Son, our Lord Jesus Christ, by
 whom Thou hast made all things; holy also Thy Holy Spirit, which
 searches all things, even Thy deep things, O God: holy art Thou,
 almighty, all-powerful, good, dread, merciful, most compassionate to
 Thy creatures; who didst make man from earth after Thine own image and
 likeness; who didst give him the joy of paradise; and when he
 transgressed Thy commandment, and fell away, didst not disregard nor
 desert him, O Good One, but didst chasten him as at merciful father,
 call him by the law, instruct him by the prophets; and afterwards didst
 send forth Thine only-begotten Son Himself, our Lord Jesus Christ, into
 the world, that He by His coming might renew and restore Thy image;

 Who, having descended from heaven, and become flesh of the Holy Spirit
 and Virgin Godmother [4119] Mary, and having sojourned among men,
 fulfilled the dispensation for the salvation of our race; and being
 about to endure His voluntary and life-giving death by the cross, He
 the sinless for us the sinners, in the night in which He was betrayed,
 nay, rather delivered Himself up for the life and salvation of the
 world,

 Then the Priest holds the bread in his hand, and says:--

 XXX. Having taken the bread in His holy and pure and blameless and
 immortal hands, lifting up His eyes to heaven, and showing it to Thee,
 His God and Father, He gave thanks, and hallowed, and brake, and gave
 it to us, [4120] His disciples and apostles, saying:--

 The Deacons say: [4121]

 For the remission of sins and life everlasting.

 Then he says aloud:--

 Take, eat: this is my body, broken for you, and given for remission of
 sins.

 The People.

 Amen.

 Then he takes the cup, and says:--

 In like manner, after supper, He took the cup, and having mixed wine
 and water, lifting up His eyes to heaven, and presenting it to Thee,
 His God and Father, He gave thanks, and hollowed and blessed it, and
 filled it with the Holy Spirit, and gave it to us His disciples,
 saying, Drink ye all of it; this is my blood of the new testament shed
 for you and many, and distributed for the remission of sins.

 The People.

 Amen.

 The Priest.

 This do in remembrance of me; for as often as ye eat this bread, and
 drink this cup, ye do show forth the Lord's death, and confess His
 resurrection, till He come.

 The Deacons say:--

 We believe and confess:

 The People.

 We show forth Thy death, O Lord, and confess Thy resurrection.

 The Priest (Oblation).

 XXXI. Remembering, therefore, His life-giving sufferings, His saving
 cross, His death and His burial, and resurrection from the dead on the
 third day, and His ascension into heaven, and sitting at the right hand
 of Thee, our God and Father, and His second glorious and awful
 appearing, when He shall come with glory to judge the quick and the
 dead, and render to every one according to His works; even we, sinful
 men, offer unto Thee, O Lord, this dread and bloodless sacrifice,
 praying that Thou wilt not deal with us after our sins, nor reward us
 according to our iniquities;

 But that Thou, according to Thy mercy and Thy unspeakable
 loving-kindness, passing by and blotting out the handwriting against us
 Thy suppliants, wilt grant to us Thy heavenly and eternal gifts (which
 eye hath not seen, and ear hath not heard, and which have not entered
 into the heart of man [4122] ) that thou hast prepared, O God, for
 those who love Thee; and reject not, O loving Lord, the people for my
 sake, or for my sin's sake:

 Then he says, thrice:--

 For Thy people and Thy Church supplicate Thee.

 The People.

 Have mercy on us, O Lord our God, Father Almighty.

 Again the Priest says (Invocation):--

 XXXII. Have mercy upon us, O God Almighty.

 Have mercy upon us, O God our Saviour.

 Have mercy upon us, O God, according to Thy great mercy, and send forth
 on us, and on these offered gifts, Thy all-holy Spirit.

 Then, bowing his neck, he says:--

 The sovereign and quickening Spirit, that sits upon the throne with
 Thee, our God and Father, and with Thy only-begotten Son, reigning with
 Thee; the consubstantial [4123] and co-eternal; that spoke in the law
 and in the prophets, and in Thy New Testament; that descended in the
 form of a dove on our Lord Jesus Christ at the river Jordan, and abode
 on Him; that descended on Thy apostles in the form of tongues of fire
 in the upper room of the holy and glorious Zion on the day of
 Pentecost: this Thine all-holy Spirit, send down, O Lord, upon us, and
 upon these offered holy gifts;

 And rising up, he says aloud:--

 That coming, by His holy and good and glorious appearing, He may
 sanctify this bread, and make it the holy body of Thy Christ. [4124]

 The People.

 Amen.

 The Priest.

 And this cup the precious blood of Thy Christ.

 The People.

 Amen.

 The Priest by himself standing.

 XXXIII. That they may be to all that partake of them for remission of
 sins, and for life everlasting, for the sanctification of souls and of
 bodies, for bearing the fruit of good works, for the stablishing of Thy
 Holy Catholic Church, which Thou hast founded on the Rock of Faith,
 [4125] that the gates of hell may not prevail against it; delivering it
 from all heresy and scandals, and from those who work iniquity, keeping
 it till the fulness of the time.

 And having bowed, he says:--

 XXXIV. We present them to Thee also, O Lord, for the holy places, which
 Thou hast glorified by the divine appearing of Thy Christ, and by the
 visitation of Thy all-holy Spirit; especially for the glorious Zion,
 the mother of all the churches; [4126] and for Thy Holy, Catholic, and
 Apostolic Church throughout the world: even now, O Lord, bestow upon
 her the rich gifts of Thy all-holy Spirit.

 Remember also, O Lord, our holy fathers and brethren in it, and the
 bishops in all the world, who rightly divide the word of Thy truth.

 Remember also, O Lord, every city and country, and those of the true
 faith dwelling in them, their peace and security.

 Remember, O Lord, Christians sailing, travelling, sojourning in strange
 lands; our fathers and brethren, who are in bonds, prison, captivity,
 and exile; who are in mines, and under torture, and in bitter slavery.
 Remember, O Lord, the sick and afflicted, and those troubled by unclean
 spirits, their speedy healing from Thee, O God, and their salvation.

 Remember, O Lord, every Christian soul in affliction and distress,
 needing Thy mercy and succour, O God; and the return of the erring.

 Remember, O Lord, our fathers and brethren, toiling hard, and
 ministering unto us, for Thy holy name's sake.

 Remember all, O Lord, for good: have mercy on all, O Lord, be
 reconciled to us all: give peace to the multitudes of Thy people: put
 away scandals: bring wars to an end: make the uprising of heresies to
 cease: grant Thy peace and Thy love to us, O God our Saviour, the hope
 of all the ends of the earth.

 Remember, O Lord, favourable weather, peaceful showers, beneficent
 dews, abundance of fruits, and to crown the year with Thy goodness; for
 the eyes of all wait on Thee, and Thou givest their food in due season:
 thou openest Thy hand, and fillest every living thing with gladness.

 Remember, O Lord, those who bear fruit, and labour honourably in the
 holy [4127] of Thy Church; and those who forget not the poor, the
 widows, the orphans, the strangers, and the needy; and all who have
 desired us to remember them in our prayers.

 Moreover, O Lord, be pleased to remember those who have brought these
 offerings this day to Thy holy altar, and for what each one has brought
 them or with what mind, and those persons who have just now been
 mentioned to Thee.

 Remember, O Lord, according to the multitude of Thy mercy and
 compassion, me also, Thy humble and unprofitable servant; and the
 deacons who surround Thy holy altar, and graciously give them a
 blameless life, keep their ministry undefiled, and purchase for them a
 good degree, that we may find mercy and grace, with all the saints that
 have been well pleasing to Thee since the world began, to generation
 and generation--grandsires, sires, patriarchs, prophets, apostles,
 martyrs, confessors, teachers, saints, and every just spirit made
 perfect in the faith of Thy Christ.

 XXXV. [4128] Hail, Mary, highly favoured: the Lord is with Thee;
 blessed art thou among women, and blessed the fruit of thy womb, for
 thou didst bear the Saviour of our souls. [4129]

 The Deacons.

 XXXVI. Remember us, O Lord God.

 The Priest, bowing, says:--

 Remember, O Lord God, the spirits and all flesh, of whom we have made
 mention, and of whom we have not made mention, who are of the true
 faith, from righteous Abel unto this day: unto them do Thou give rest
 there in the land of the living, in Thy kingdom, in the joy of
 paradise, in the bosom of Abraham, and of Isaac, and of Jacob, our holy
 fathers; whence pain, and grief, and lamentation have fled: there the
 light of Thy countenance looks upon them, and enlightens them for ever.
 [4130]

 Make the end of our lives Christian, acceptable, blameless, and
 peaceful, O Lord, gathering us together, O Lord, under the feet of
 Thine elect, when Thou wilt, and as Thou wilt; only without shame and
 transgressions, through Thy only-begotten Son, our Lord and God and
 Saviour Jesus Christ: for He is the only sinless one who hath appeared
 on the earth.

 The Deacon.

 And let us pray:--

 For the peace and establishing of the whole world, and of the holy
 churches of God, and for the purposes for which each one made his
 offering, or according to the desire he has: and for the people
 standing round, and for all men, and all women:

 The People.

 And for all men and all women. (Amen.)

 The Priest says aloud:--

 Wherefore, both to them and to us, do Thou in Thy goodness and love:

 The People.

 Forgive, remit, pardon, O God, our transgressions, voluntary and
 involuntary: in deed and in word: in knowledge and in ignorance: by
 night and by day: in thought and intent: in Thy goodness and love,
 forgive us them all.

 The Priest.

 Through the grace and compassion and love of Thy only-begotten Son,
 with whom Thou art blessed and glorified, together with the all-holy,
 and good, and quickening Spirit, now and ever, and to all eternity.

 The People.

 Amen.

 The Priest.

 XXXVII. Peace be to all:

 The People.

 And to thy spirit.

 The Deacon.

 Again, and continually, in peace let us pray to the Lord.

 For the gifts to the Lord God presented and sanctified, precious,
 heavenly, unspeakable, pure, glorious, dread, awful, divine;

 Let us pray.

 That the Lord our God, having graciously received them to His altar
 that is holy and above the heavens, rational and spiritual, for the
 odour of a sweet spiritual savour, may send down in answer upon us the
 divine grace and the gift of the all-holy Spirit;

 Let us pray.

 Having prayed for the unity of the faith, and the communion of His
 all-holy and adorable Spirit;

 Let us commend ourselves and one another, and our whole life, to Christ
 our God:

 The People.

 Amen.

 The Priest prays.

 XXXVIII. God and Father of our Lord and God and Saviour Jesus Christ,
 the glorious Lord, the blessed essence, the bounteous goodness, the God
 and Sovereign of all, who art blessed to all eternity, who sittest upon
 the cherubim, and art glorified by the seraphim, before whom stand
 thousand thousands and ten thousand times ten thousand hosts of angels
 and archangels: Thou hast accepted the gifts, offerings, and fruits
 brought unto Thee as an odour of a sweet spiritual smell, and hast been
 pleased to sanctify them, and make them perfect, O good One, by the
 grace of Thy Christ, and by the presence of Thy all-holy Spirit.

 Sanctify also, O Lord, our souls, and bodies, and spirits, and touch
 our understandings, and search our consciences, and cast out from us
 every evil imagination, every impure feeling, every base desire, every
 unbecoming thought, all envy, and vanity, and hypocrisy, all lying, all
 deceit, every worldly affection, all covetousness, all vainglory, all
 indifference, all vice, all passion, all anger, all malice, all
 blasphemy, every motion of the flesh and spirit that is not in
 accordance with Thy holy will:

 (Aloud.)

 And count us worthy, O loving Lord, with boldness, without
 condemnation, in a pure heart, with a contrite spirit, with unshamed
 face, with sanctified lips, to dare to call upon Thee, the holy God,
 Father in heaven, and to say,

 The People.

 Our Father, which art in heaven: hollowed be Thy name; and so on to the
 doxology.

 The Priest, bowing, says (the Embolism [4131] ):--

 And lead us not into temptation, Lord, Lord of Hosts, who knowest our
 frailty, but deliver us from the evil one and his works, and from all
 his malice and craftiness, for the sake of Thy holy name, which has
 been placed upon our humility:

 (Aloud.)

 For Thine is the kingdom, the power, and the glory, Father, Son, and
 Holy Spirit, now and for ever.

 The People.

 Amen.

 The Priest.

 XXXIX. Peace be to all.

 The People.

 And to thy spirit.

 The Deacon.

 Let us bow our heads to the Lord.

 The People.

 To Thee, O Lord.

 The Priest prays, speaking thus:--

 To Thee, O Lord, we Thy servants have bowed our heads before Thy holy
 altar, waiting for the rich mercies that are from Thee.

 Send forth upon us, O Lord, Thy plenteous grace and Thy blessing; and
 sanctify our souls, bodies, and spirits, that we may become worthy
 communicants and partakers of Thy holy mysteries, to the forgiveness of
 sins and life everlasting:

 (Aloud.)

 For adorable and glorified art Thou, our God, and Thy only-begotten
 Son, and Thy all-holy Spirit, now and ever.

 The People.

 Amen.

 The Priest says aloud:--

 And the grace and the mercies of the holy and consubstantial, and
 uncreated, and adorable Trinity, shall be with us all. [4132]

 The People.

 And with thy spirit.

 The Deacon.

 In the fear of God, let us attend.

 The Priest says secretly:-- [4133]

 O holy Lord, that abidest in holy places, sanctify us by the word of
 Thy grace, and by the visitation of Thy all-holy Spirit: for Thou, O
 Lord, hast said, Ye will be holy, for I am holy. O Lord our God,
 incomprehensible Word of God, one in substance with the Father and the
 Holy Spirit, co-eternal and indivisible, accept the pure hymn, in Thy
 holy and bloodless sacrifices; with the cherubim, and seraphim, and
 from me, a sinful man, crying and saying:--

 He takes up the gifts and saith aloud:--

 XL. The holy things unto holy.

 The People.

 One only is holy, one Lord Jesus Christ, to the glory of God the
 Father, to whom be glory to all eternity.

 The Deacon.

 XLI. For the remission of our sins, and the propitiation of our souls,
 and for every soul in tribulation and distress, needing the mercy and
 succour of God, and for the return of the erring, the healing of the
 sick, the deliverance of the captives, the rest of our fathers and
 brethren who have fallen asleep aforetime;

 Let us all say fervently, Lord, have mercy:

 The People (twelve times).

 Lord, have mercy. [4134]

 Then the Priest breaks the bread, and holds the half in his right hand,
 and the half in his left, and dips that in his right hand in the
 chalice, saying:--

 The union of the all-holy body and precious blood of our Lord and God
 and Saviour, Jesus Christ.

 Then he makes the sign of the cross on that in his left hand: then with
 that which has been signed the other half: then forthwith he begins to
 divide, and before all to give to each chalice a single piece,
 saying:--

 It has been made one, and sanctified, and perfected, in the name of the
 Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Spirit, now and ever.

 And when he makes the sign of the cross on the bread, he says:--

 Behold the Lamb of God, the Son of the Father, that taketh away the sin
 of the world, sacrificed for the life and salvation of the world.

 And when he gives a single piece to each chalice he says:--

 A holy portion of Christ, full of grace and truth, of the Father, and
 of the Holy Spirit, to whom be the glory and the power to all eternity.

 Then he begins to divide, and to say:--

 XLII. The Lord is my Shepherd, I shall not want. In green pastures, and
 so on. [4135]

 Then,

 I will bless the Lord at all times, and so on. [4136]

 Then,

 I will extol Thee, my God, O King, and so on. [4137]

 Then,

 O praise the Lord, all ye nations, and so on. [4138]

 The Deacon.

 Sir, pronounce the blessing.

 The Priest.

 The Lord will bless us, and keep us without condemnation for the
 communion of His pure gifts, now and always, and for ever.

 And when they have filled, [4139] the Deacon says:--

 Sir, pronounce the blessing.

 The Priest says:--

 The Lord will bless us, and make us worthy with the pure touchings of
 our fingers to take the live coal, and place it upon the mouths of the
 faithful for the purification and renewal of their souls and bodies,
 now and always.

 Then,

 O taste and see that the Lord is good; who is parted and not divided;
 distributed to the faithful and not expended; for the remission of
 sins, and the life everlasting; now and always, and for ever.

 The Deacon.

 In the peace of Christ, let us sing:

 The Singers.

 O taste and see that the Lord is good.

 The Priest says the prayer before the communion.

 O Lord our God, the heavenly bread, the life of the universe, I have
 sinned against Heaven, and before Thee, and am not worthy to partake of
 Thy pure mysteries; but as a merciful God, make me worthy by Thy grace,
 without condemnation to partake of Thy holy body and precious blood,
 for the remission of sins, and life everlasting. [4140]

 XLIII. Then he distributes to the clergy; and when the deacons take the
 disks [4141] and the chalices for distribution to the people, the
 Deacon, who takes the first disk, says:--

 Sir, pronounce the blessing.

 The Priest replies:--

 Glory to God who has sanctified and is sanctifying us all.

 The Deacon says:--

 Be Thou exalted, O God, over the heavens, and Thy glory over all the
 earth, and Thy kingdom endureth to all eternity. [4142]

 And when the Deacon is about to put it on the side-table [4143] the
 Priest says:--

 Blessed be the name of the Lord our God for ever.

 The Deacon.

 In the fear of God, and in faith and love, draw nigh.

 The People.

 Blessed is He that cometh in the name of the Lord. [4144]

 And again, when he sets down the disk upon the side-table, he says:--

 Sir, pronounce the blessing.

 The Priest.

 Save Thy people, O God, and bless Thine inheritance.

 The Priest again. [4145]

 Glory to our God, who has sanctified us all.

 And when he has put the chalice back on the holy table, the Priest
 says:--

 Blessed be the name of the Lord to all eternity.

 The Deacons and the People say:--

 Fill our mouths with Thy praise, O Lord, and fill our lips with joy,
 that we may sing of Thy glory, of Thy greatness all the day.

 And again:--

 We render thanks to Thee, Christ our God, that Thou hast made us worthy
 to partake of Thy body and blood, for the remission of sins, and for
 life everlasting. Do Thou, in Thy goodness and love, keep us, we pray
 Thee, without condemnation.

 The prayer of incense at the last entrance.

 XLIV. We render thanks to Thee, the Saviour and God of all, for all the
 good things Thou hast given us, and for the participation of Thy holy
 and pure mysteries, and we offer to Thee this incense, praying: Keep us
 under the shadow of Thy wings, and count us worthy till our last breath
 to partake of Thy holy rites for the sanctification of our souls and
 bodies, for the inheritance of the kingdom of heaven: for Thou, O God,
 art our sanctification, and we send up praise and thanksgiving to Thee,
 Father, Son, and Holy Spirit.

 The Deacon begins in the entrance.

 Glory to Thee, glory to Thee, glory to Thee, O Christ the King,
 only-begotten Word of the Father, that Thou hast counted us, Thy sinful
 and unworthy servants, worthy to enjoy thy pure mysteries for the
 remission of sins, and for life everlasting: glory to Thee. [4146]

 And when he has made the entrance, the Deacon begins to speak thus:--

 XLV. Again and again, and at all times, in peace, let us beseech the
 Lord.

 That the participation of His Holy rites may be to us for the turning
 away from every wicked thing, for our support on the journey to life
 everlasting, for the communion and gift of the Holy Spirit;

 Let us pray.

 The Priest prays.

 Commemorating our all-holy, pure, most glorious, blessed Lady, the
 God-Mother and Ever-Virgin Mary, [4147] and all the saints that have
 been well-pleasing to Thee since the world began, let us devote
 ourselves, and one another, and our whole life, to Christ our God:

 The People.

 To Thee, O Lord.

 The Priest.

 XLVI. O God, who through Thy great and unspeakable love didst
 condescend to the weakness of Thy servants, and hast counted us worthy
 to partake of this heavenly table, condemn not us sinners for the
 participation of Thy pure mysteries; but keep us, O good One, in the
 sanctification of Thy Holy Spirit, that being made holy, we may find
 part and inheritance with all Thy saints that have been well-pleasing
 to Thee since the world began, in the light of Thy countenance, through
 the mercy of Thy only-begotten Son, our Lord and God and Saviour Jesus
 Christ, with whom Thou art blessed, together with Thy all-holy, and
 good, and quickening Spirit: for blessed and glorified is Thy
 all-precious and glorious name, Father, Son, and Holy Spirit, now and
 ever, and to all eternity.

 The People.

 Amen.

 The Priest.

 Peace be to all.

 The People.

 And to thy spirit.

 The Deacon.

 XLVII. Let us bow our heads to the Lord.

 The Priest.

 O God, great and marvellous, look upon Thy servants, for we have bowed
 our heads to Thee. Stretch forth Thy hand, strong and full of
 blessings, and bless Thy people. Keep Thine inheritance, that always
 and at all times we may glorify Thee, our only living and true God, the
 holy and consubstantial [4148] Trinity, Father, Son, and Holy Ghost,
 now and ever, and to all eternity.

 (Aloud.)

 For unto Thee is becoming and is due praise from us all, and honour,
 and adoration, and thanksgiving, Father, Son, and Holy Spirit, now and
 ever.

 The Deacon.

 XLVIII. In the peace of Christ let us sing:

 And again he says:--

 In the peace of Christ let us go on:

 The People.

 In the name of the Lord. Sir, pronounce the blessing. [4149]

 Dismission prayer, spoken by the Deacon.

 Going on from glory to glory, we praise Thee, the Saviour of our souls.
 Glory to Father, and Son, and Holy Spirit now and ever, and to all
 eternity. We praise Thee, the Saviour of our souls.

 The Priest says a prayer from the altar to the sacristy.

 XLIX. Going on from strength to strength, and having fulfilled all the
 divine service in Thy temple, even now we beseech Thee, O Lord our God,
 make us worthy of perfect loving-kindness; make straight our path: root
 us in Thy fear, and make us worthy of the heavenly kingdom, in Christ
 Jesus our Lord, with whom Thou art blessed, together with Thy all-holy,
 and good, and quickening Spirit, now and always, and for ever.

 The Deacon.

 L. Again and again, and at all times, in peace let us beseech the Lord.

 Prayer said in the sacristy after the dismissal.

 Thou hast given unto us, O Lord, sanctification in the communion of the
 all-holy body and precious blood of Thy only-begotten Son, our Lord
 Jesus Christ; give unto us also the grace of Thy good Spirit, and keep
 us blameless in the faith, lead us unto perfect adoption and
 redemption, and to the coming joys of eternity; for Thou art our
 sanctification and light, O God, and Thy only-begotten Son, and Thy
 all-holy Spirit, now and ever, and to all eternity. Amen.

 The Deacon.

 In the peace of Christ let us keep watch.

 The Priest.

 Blessed is God, who blesseth and sanctifieth through the communion of
 the holy, and quickening, and pure mysteries, now and ever, and to all
 eternity. Amen.

 Then the prayer of propitiation.

 O Lord Jesus Christ, Son of the living God, Lamb and Shepherd, who
 takest away the sin of the world, who didst freely forgive their debt
 to the two debtors, and gavest remission of her sins to the woman that
 was a sinner, who gavest healing to the paralytic, with the remission
 of his sins; forgive, remit, pardon, O God, our offences, voluntary and
 involuntary, in knowledge and in ignorance, by transgression and by
 disobedience, which Thy all-holy Spirit knows better than Thy servants
 do:

 And if men, carnal and dwelling in this world, have in aught erred from
 Thy commandments, either moved by the devil, whether in word or in
 deed, or if they have come under a curse, or by reason of some special
 vow, I entreat and beseech Thy unspeakable loving-kindness, that they
 may be set free from their word, and released from the oath and the
 special vow, according to Thy goodness.

 Verily, O Sovereign Lord, hear my supplication on behalf of Thy
 servants, and do Thou pass by all their errors, remembering them no
 more; forgive them every transgression, voluntary and involuntary;
 deliver them from everlasting punishment: for Thou art He that hast
 commanded us, saying, Whatsoever things ye bind upon earth, shall be
 bound in heaven; and whatsoever things ye loose upon earth, shall be
 loosed in heaven: for, thou art our God, a God able to pity, and to
 save and to forgive sins; and glory is due unto Thee, with the eternal
 Father, and the quickening Spirit, now and ever, and to all eternity.
 Amen.

 [4086] [This title is misleading, as we have no copies of the originals
 of these liturgies, and they are encrusted with the ideas of later
 ages. I shall distinguish between the interpolations legitimately made
 by councils and the manifest corruptions which contradict Scripture and
 ancient authors. N.B.: I print the deacon's parts as such.]

 [4087] [A Lavabo: he prepares himself by the prayer for purification.

 [4088] [Here is a token of theological but legitimate interpolation.]

 [4089] [On the lawful and unlawful additions to these additions to
 these liturgies, see Hickes' Christian Priesthood (Oxford, 1847), p.
 151.]

 [4090] This is addressed to the priest. Some translate, "O Lord, bless
 us." [This latter is the more primitive idea.]

 [4091] [The Lesser Entrance with the Holy Gospels.]

 [4092] [The Theotoce or Deipara Of course, added after the Council of
 Chalcedon.]

 [4093] [See a specimen of the unlimited capacity for extension of these
 prayers, in vol. v. [323]p. 412, Elucidation VI., this series.]

 [4094] [At great length. Cf. Justin Martyr, vol. i. [324]p. 186, this
 series.]

 [4095] [The reading of the Scriptures in the common tongue is a very
 precious part of the daily offices in the East.]

 [4096] [Frequent Amens are to be supposed.]

 [4097] [Here there is an evident interpolation, not Mariolatrous, yet
 not primitive, as follows:]-- The Priest. Commemorating with all
 the holy and just, our all-holy, pure, most glorious Lady, the
 God-mother, and ever-virgin Mary, let us devote ourselves, and one
 another, and our whole life, to Christ our God. The People. To
 Thee, Lord.

 [4098] [So as to be sure no enemy was among the faithful.]

 [4099] These clauses are elliptical. After "prayer" supply "remain;"
 the door is for "shut the door;" and "all erect," for "stand all
 erect."

 [4100] [Here begins the Liturgy of the Faithful.]

 [4101] [Here is the Great Entrance, or bringing-in of the unconsecrated
 elements. It has a symbolical meaning (Heb. i. 6) now forgotten; and
 here, instead of the glorified Christ, no doubt the superstitious do
 adore bread and wine in ignorance.]

 [4102] [The sexes sat apart, the salutations of each confined to its
 own: an apostolic feature. 1 Pet. v. 14 et alibi; and see Clementine,
 [325]p. 486, supra. [Note that beautiful tribute of Augustine to the
 purity of primitive rites, "Honesta utrinsque sexus discretione," Civ.
 Dei, lib. ii. cap. xxviii. p. 77, ed. Migne.] See vol. ii. 291 and iii.
 686, this series.]

 [4103] [A token of the Ante-Nicene age, though some think of the later
 asceticism.]

 [4104] [Here an interpolation as follows: "Let us commemorate our
 all-holy, pure, most glorious, blessed lady, God-mother, and
 ever-virgin Mary, and all the holy and just, that we may all find mercy
 through their prayers and intercessions." On which, and like
 interpolations (the Clementine free from all this), see Scudamore, p.
 381.]

 [4105] [Strongly censured by Hickes as a superstitious innovation (p.
 153), with other evils introduced after the pseudo-Council of Nice a.d.
 787, of which this is the least.]

 [4106] [The Gospel and the Epistle sides.]

 [4107]

 [4108] ["And Mary said, My soul doth magnify," etc.]

 [4109] [In such places Amens are to be supposed.]

 [4110] [Propitiation, not expiation.]

 [4111] [See vol. v. [326]pp. 222-223.]

 [4112] [See Field on "the meaning of the veil," p. 294, where he
 differs from authors who make it a late innovation; also pp. 448, 449.]

 [4113] [This great primitive thought has been frittered away by
 references to the veil covering the oblation.]

 [4114] [Based on Heb. v. 1-3.]

 [4115] [See more on the veil in Field, p. 492.]

 [4116] [The Sursum corda, found in all liturgies.]

 [4117] [See Hammond's Lit. of Antioch, etc., p. 15, note 29.]

 [4118] [Compare the Clementine, [327]p. 488; and note differences.]

 [4119] [A token of Post-Nicene origin. Vol. v. [328]p. 259, Elucid. I.]

 [4120] [Supposed by some to be a relic of the original formula as the
 Apostles delivered it. On the synaxis, see vol. v. [329]p. 259. Elucid.
 II.].

 [4121] [These abrupt interjections of the deacon are made while the
 priest proceeds. This logically follows what the priest subjoins.]

 [4122] To conceive. [A feeble interpolation in the Edinburgh edition.]

 [4123] [Post-Nicene, but legitimate.]

 [4124] [Understood mystically and spiritually down to a late period,
 even in the West. See Ratramni De Corpore et Sanguine, Oxon., 1838.
 Note the inference as to time of sanctification.]

 [4125] [See vol. v. Elucidation VII. [330]p. 561.]

 [4126] [An honorary title conceded to Jerusalem by the Second General
 Council: tes de' ge metro`s hapason to n ekklesion.]

 [4127] Services. [Otherwise, "who do good works in Thy holy churches."]

 [4128] [The Angelical Salutation is here an evident interpolation,
 marring the grand unities of the liturgy.]

 [4129] [I place in a note what follows:]-- Then the Priest says
 aloud:-- Hail in the highest, our all-holy, pure, most blessed,
 glorious lady, the God-mother and ever-virgin Mary. The Singers.
 Verily it is becoming to bless Thee, the God-bearing, the ever-blessed,
 and all-blameless, and mother of our God, more honourable than the
 cherubim, and incomparably more glorious than the seraphim: thee, who
 didst bear with purity God the Word, thee the true God-mother, we
 magnify. And again they sing:-- In thee, highly favoured, all
 creation rejoices, the host of angels, and the race of men; hallowed
 temple, and spiritual paradise, pride of virgins, of whom God was made
 flesh and our God, who was before eternity, became a little child: for
 He made Thy womb His throne, and Thy bowels more capacious than the
 heavens. In thee, O highly favoured one, all creation rejoices: glory
 unto thee.

 [4130] [A prayer entirely corresponding with the primitive ideas. See
 vol. vi. [331]p. 488, and elucidation, p. 541.]

 [4131] [In all early liturgies always following the Lord's Prayer, to
 accentuate the petition against the evil one. It hurls back his "fiery
 darts," as it were; whence this name.]

 [4132] [Duplicated, with other parts, in the Greek copies.]

 [4133] [The taking-up of the gifts is here erroneously introduced in
 the Edinburgh edition.]

 [4134] [The publican's prayer, adapted to the Christian worship:
 ila'stheti' moi, is the plea for mercy through propitiation. Luke
 xviii. 13.]

 [4135] Ps. xxiii.

 [4136] Ps. xxxiv.

 [4137] Ps. cxlv.

 [4138] Ps. cxvii.

 [4139] [Here the chalice is filled for participation.]

 [4140] [Here the presbyter receives.]

 [4141] Or patens.

 [4142] [Here are difficulties explained by Drs. Neale and Littledale in
 their Translation, etc., p. 60.]

 [4143] [The side-table or credence.]

 [4144] [Here the laity are communicated.]

 [4145] [Compare Neale's Tetralogia Liturgica, p. 192.]

 [4146] [Here are confusions; but see Neale and Littledale, p. 62, note
 20.]

 [4147] [Interpolated, but not Mariolatrous; the Theotoce is
 commemorated, not adored.]

 [4148] [A legitimate addition, according to the primitive laws.]

 [4149] [Which must here be given.]


  The Divine Liturgy of the Holy Apostle and Evangelist Mark, [4150] The
  Disciple of the Holy Peter. [4151]

 The Priest.

 I. Peace be to all.

 The People.

 And to thy spirit.

 The Deacon.

 Pray.

 The People.

 Lord, have mercy; Lord, have mercy; Lord, have mercy.

 The Priest prays secretly: [4152] [4153]

 We give Thee thanks, yea, more than thanks, O Lord our God, the Father
 of our Lord and God and Saviour Jesus Christ, for all Thy goodness at
 all times and in all places, because Thou hast shielded, rescued,
 helped, and guided us all the days of our lives, and brought us unto
 this hour, permitting us again to stand before Thee in Thy holy place,
 that we may implore forgiveness of our sins and propitiation to all Thy
 people. We pray and beseech Thee, merciful God, to grant in Thy
 goodness that we may spend this holy day [4154] and all the time of our
 lives without sin, in fulness of joy, health, safety, holiness, and
 reverence of Thee. But all envy, all fear, all temptation, all the
 influence of Satan, all the snares of wicked men, do Thou, O Lord,
 drive away from us, and from Thy Holy Catholic and Apostolic Church.
 Bestow upon us, O Lord, what is good and meet. Whatever sin we commit
 in thought, word, or deed, do Thou in Thy goodness and mercy be pleased
 to pardon. Leave us not, O Lord, while we hope in Thee; nor lead us
 into temptation, but deliver us from the evil one and from his works,
 through the grace, mercy, and love of Thine only-begotten Son.

 (In a loud voice.)

 Through whom and with whom be glory and power to Thee, in Thy most
 holy, good, and life-giving Spirit, now, henceforth, and for evermore.

 The People.

 Amen.

 The Priest.

 II. Peace be to all.

 The People.

 And to thy spirit.

 The Deacon.

 Pray for the king. [4155]

 The People.

 Lord, have mercy; [4156] Lord, have mercy; Lord, have mercy.

 The Priest prays.

 O God, Sovereign Lord, the Father of our Lord and God and Saviour Jesus
 Christ, we pray and beseech Thee to grant that our king may enjoy
 peace, and be just and brave. Subdue under him, O God, all his
 adversaries and enemies. Gird on thy shield and armour, and rise to his
 aid. Give him the victory, O God, that his heart may be set on peace
 and the praise of Thy holy name, that we too [4157] in his peaceful
 reign [4158] may spend a calm and tranquil life in all reverence and
 godly fear, through the grace, mercy, and love of Thine only-begotten
 Son:

 (In a loud voice.)

 Through whom and with whom be glory and power to Thee, with Thy most
 holy, good, and life-giving Spirit, now, henceforth, and for evermore.

 The People.

 Amen.

 The Priest.

 III. Peace be to all.

 The People.

 And to thy spirit.

 The Deacon.

 Pray for the papas [4159] and the bishop.

 The People.

 Lord, have mercy; Lord, have mercy; Lord, have mercy.

 The Priest.

 O Sovereign and Almighty God, the Father of our Lord, God, and Saviour
 Jesus Christ, we pray and beseech Thee to defend in Thy good mercy our
 most holy and blessed high priest our Father in God D, and our most
 reverend Bishop D. Preserve them for us through many years in peace,
 while they according to Thy holy and blessed will fulfil the sacred
 priesthood committed to their care, and dispense aright the word of
 truth; with all the orthodox bishops, elders, deacons, sub-deacons,
 readers, singers, and laity, with the entire body of the Holy and only
 Catholic Church. Graciously bestow upon them peace, health, and
 salvation. The prayers they offer up for us, and we for them, do Thou,
 O Lord, receive at Thy holy, heavenly, and reasonable altar. But all
 the enemies of Thy Holy Church put Thou speedily under their feet,
 through the grace, mercy, and love of Thine only-begotten Son:

 (Aloud.)

 Through whom and with whom be glory and power to Thee, with Thy
 all-holy, good, and life-giving Spirit, now, henceforth, and for
 evermore.

 The People.

 Amen.

 The Priest.

 IV. Peace be to all.

 The People.

 And to thy spirit.

 The Deacon.

 Stand [4160] and pray.

 The People.

 Lord have mercy (thrice).

 The Priest offers up the prayer of entrance, [4161] and for incense.

 The Priest.

 O Sovereign Lord our God, who hast chosen the lamp of the twelve
 apostles with its twelve lights, and hast sent them forth to proclaim
 throughout the whole world and teach the Gospel of Thy kingdom, and to
 heal sickness and every weakness among the people, and hast breathed
 upon their faces and said unto them, Receive the Holy Spirit the
 Comforter: whosesoever sins ye remit, they are remitted unto them; and
 whosesoever sins ye retain, they are retained: Breathe also Thy Holy
 Spirit upon us Thy servants, who, standing around, are about to enter
 on Thy holy service, [4162] upon the bishops, elders, deacons, readers,
 singers, and laity, with the entire body of the Holy Catholic and
 Apostolic Church.

 From the curse and execration, from condemnation, imprisonment, and
 banishment, and from the portion of the adversary;

 O Lord, deliver us.

 Purify our lives and cleanse our hearts from all pollution and from all
 wickedness, that with pure heart and conscience we may offer to Thee
 this incense for a sweet-smelling savour, and for the remission of our
 sins and the sins of all Thy people, through the grace, mercy, and love
 of Thine only-begotten Son:

 (Aloud.)

 Through whom and with whom be the glory and the power to Thee, with Thy
 all-holy, good, and life-giving Spirit, now, henceforth, and for
 evermore.

 The People.

 Amen.

 The Deacon.

 V. Stand.

 They sing:--

 Only-begotten Son and Word, [4163] etc.

 The Gospel is carried in, and the Deacon says:--

 Let us pray.

 The Priest.

 Peace be to all.

 The People.

 And to thy spirit.

 The Deacon.

 Let us pray.

 The People.

 Lord, have mercy.

 The Priest says the prayer of the Trisagion.

 O Sovereign Lord Christ Jesus, the co-eternal Word of the eternal
 Father, who wast made in all things like as we are, but without sin,
 for the salvation of our race; who hast sent forth Thy holy disciples
 and apostles to proclaim and teach the Gospel of Thy kingdom, and to
 heal all disease, all sickness among Thy people, be pleased now, O
 Lord, to send forth Thy light and Thy truth. Enlighten the eyes of our
 minds, that we may understand Thy divine oracles. Fit us to become
 hearers, and not only hearers, but doers of Thy word, that we, becoming
 fruitful, and yielding good fruit from thirty to an hundred fold, may
 be deemed worthy of the kingdom of heaven.

 (Aloud.)

 Let Thy mercy speedily overtake us, O Lord. For Thou art the bringer of
 good tidings, the Saviour and Guardian of our souls and bodies; and we
 offer glory, thanks, and the Trisagion to Thee, the Father, Son, and
 Holy Ghost, now, henceforth, and for evermore.

 The People.

 Amen. Holy God, holy mighty, holy immortal. Holy, holy, holy, [4164]
 etc.

 VI. After the Trisagion the Priest makes the sign of the cross over the
 people, and says:--

 Peace be to all.

 The People.

 And to thy spirit.

 Then follow the Let us attend; [4165] The Apostle and Prologue of the
 Hallelujah. [4166] The Deacons, after a prescribed form, say:--

 Lord, bless us. [4167]

 The Priest says:--

 May the Lord [4168] in His mercy bless and help us, now, henceforth,
 and for evermore.

 The Priest, before the Gospel is read, offers incense, [4169] and
 says:--

 Accept at Thy holy, heavenly, and reasonable altar, O Lord, the incense
 we offer in presence of Thy sacred glory. Send down upon us in return
 the grace of Thy Holy Spirit, for Thou art blessed, and let Thy glory
 encircle us.

 VII. The Deacon, when he is about to read the Gospel, says:--

 Lord, bless us.

 The Priest.

 May the Lord, who is the blessed God, bless and strengthen us, and make
 us hearers of His holy Gospel, now, henceforth, and for evermore. Amen.

 The Deacon.

 Stand and let us hear the holy Gospel.

 The Priest.

 Peace be to all.

 The People.

 And to thy spirit.

 VIII. The Deacon reads the Gospel, and the Priest says the prayer of
 the Collect. [4170]

 Look down in mercy and compassion, O Lord, and heal the sick among Thy
 people.

 May all our brethren who have gone or who are about to go abroad,
 safely reach their destination in due season.

 Send down the gracious rain upon the thirsty lands, and make the rivers
 [4171] flow in full stream, according to Thy grace.

 The fruits of the land do Thou, O Lord, fill with seed and make ripe
 for the harvest.

 In peace, courage, justice, and tranquillity preserve the kingdom of
 Thy servant, whom Thou hast deemed worthy to reign over this land.

 From evil days, from famine and pestilence, from the assault of
 barbarians, defend, O Lord, this Christ-loving city, lowly and worthy
 of Thy compassion, as Thou didst spare Nineveh of old.

 For Thou art full of mercy and compassion, and rememberest not the
 iniquities of men against them.

 Thou hast said through Thy prophet Isaiah,--I will defend this city, to
 save it for mine own sake, and for my servant David's sake.

 Wherefore we pray and beseech Thee to defend in Thy good mercy this
 city, for the sake of the martyr and evangelist Mark, who has shown us
 the way of salvation through the grace, mercy, and love of Thine
 only-begotten Son.

 (Aloud.)

 Through whom and with whom be glory and power to Thee, with Thy
 all-holy, good, and life-giving Spirit.

 The Deacon.

 IX. Begin.

 Then they say the verse. [4172] The Deacon says--The three. [4173]

 The Priest.

 O Sovereign and Almighty God, the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, we
 pray and beseech Thee to fill our hearts with the peace of heaven, and
 to bestow moreover the peace of this life. Preserve for us through many
 years our most holy and blessed Papas D, [4174] and our most pious
 Bishop D, while they, according to Thy holy and blessed will,
 peacefully fulfil the holy priesthood committed to their care, and
 dispense aright the word of truth, with all the orthodox bishops,
 elders, deacons, sub-deacons, [4175] readers, singers, with the entire
 body of the holy Catholic and Apostolic Church. Bless our meetings, O
 Lord. Grant that we may hold them without let or hindrance, according
 to Thy holy will. Be pleased to give to us, and Thy servants after us
 for ever, houses of praise and prayer. Rise, O Lord, and let Thine
 enemies be scattered. Let all who hate Thy holy name be put to flight.
 Bless Thy faithful and orthodox people. Multiply them by thousands and
 tens of thousands. Let no deadly sin prevail against them, or against
 Thy holy people, through the grace, mercy, and love of Thine
 only-begotten Son.

 (Aloud.)

 Through whom and with whom be glory and power to Thee, with Thy
 all-holy, good, and life-giving Spirit.

 The People.

 Amen.

 The Priest.

 Peace be to all.

 The People.

 And to thy spirit.

 The Deacon.

 Take care that none of the catechumens [4176] --

  II.

 Then they sing the Cherubic hymn. [4177]

 X. The Priest offers incense at the entrance, [4178] and prays:--

 O Lord our God, who lackest nothing, accept this incense offered by an
 unworthy hand, and deem us all worthy of Thy blessing, for Thou art our
 sanctification, and we ascribe glory to Thee.

 The holy things are carried to the altar, and the Priest prays thus:--

 O holy, highest, awe-inspiring God, who dwellest among the saints,
 sanctify us, and deem us worthy of Thy reverend priesthood. Bring us to
 Thy precious altar with a good conscience, and cleanse our hearts from
 all pollution. Drive away from us all unholy thoughts, and sanctify our
 souls and minds. Grant that, with reverence of Thee, we may perform the
 service of our holy fathers, and propitiate Thy presence through all
 time; for Thou art He who blesseth and sanctifieth all things, and to
 Thee we ascribe glory and thanks.

 The Deacon.

 XI. Salute one another.

 The Priest says the prayer of salutation.

 O Sovereign and Almighty Lord, look down from heaven on Thy Church, on
 all Thy people, and on all Thy flock. Save us all, Thy unworthy
 servants, the sheep of Thy fold. Give us Thy peace, Thy help, and Thy
 love, and send to us the gift of Thy Holy Spirit, that with a pure
 heart and a good conscience we may salute one another with an holy
 kiss, without hypocrisy, and with no hostile purpose, but guileless and
 pure in one spirit, in the bond of peace and love, one body and one
 spirit, in one faith, even as we have been called in one hope of our
 calling, that we may all meet in the divine and boundless love, in
 Christ Jesus our Lord, with whom Thou art blessed.

 Then the Priest offers the incense, and says:--

 The incense is offered to Thy name. Let it ascend, we implore Thee,
 from the hands of Thy poor and sinful servants to Thy heavenly altar
 for a sweet-smelling savour, and the propitiation of all Thy people.
 For all glory, honour, adoration, and thanks are due unto Thee, the
 Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, now, henceforth, and for evermore. Amen.

 After the Salutation, [4179] the Deacon in a loud voice says:--

 XII. Stand and make the offering duly. [4180]

 The Priest, making the sign of the cross over the disks and chalices,
 says in a loud voice (the Nicene Creed):--

 I believe in one God, etc.

 The Deacon.

 Stand for prayer.

 The Priest.

 Peace be to all.

 The Deacon.

 Pray for those who present the offering.

 The Priest says the prayer of the Oblation. [4181]

 O Sovereign Lord, Christ Jesus the Word, who art equal in power with
 the Father and the Holy Spirit, the great high priest; the bread that
 came down from heaven, and saved our souls from ruin; who gavest
 Thyself, a spotless Lamb, for the life of the world....

 We pray and beseech Thee, O Lord, in Thy mercy, to let Thy presence
 rest upon this bread and these chalices [4182] on the all-holy table,
 while angels, archangels, and Thy holy priests stand round and minister
 for Thy glory and the renewing of our souls, through the grace, mercy,
 and love of Thine only-begotten Son, through whom and with whom be
 glory and power to Thee.

 And when the People say,

 And from the Holy Spirit was He made flesh;

 The Priest makes the sign of the cross, [4183] and says:--

 And was crucified for us.

 The Priest makes the sign of the cross again, [4184] and says:--

 And to the Holy Spirit.

  III.

 XIII. [4185] In like manner also, as after the Creed, [4186] he makes
 the sign of the cross upon the People, and says aloud:--

 The Lord be with all.

 The People.

 And with thy spirit.

 The Priest.

 Let us lift up our hearts.

 The People.

 We lift them up to the Lord.

 The Priest.

 Let us give thanks to the Lord.

 The People.

 It is meet and right. [4187]

 The Priest begins the Anaphoral prayer.

 O Lord God, Sovereign and Almighty Father, truly it is meet and right,
 holy and becoming, and good for our souls, to praise, bless, and thank
 Thee; to make open confession to Thee by day and night with voice,
 lips, and heart without ceasing;

 To Thee who hast made the heaven, and all that is therein; the earth,
 and all that is therein; The sea, fountains, rivers, lakes, and all
 that is therein;

 To Thee who, after Thine own image and likeness, hast made man, upon
 whom Thou didst also bestow the joys of Paradise;

 And when he trespassed against Thee, Thou didst neither neglect nor
 forsake him, good Lord,

 But didst recall him by Thy law, instruct him by Thy prophets, restore
 and renew him by this awful, life-giving, and heavenly mystery.

 And all this Thou hast done by Thy Wisdom and the Light of truth, Thine
 only-begotten Son, our Lord, God, and Saviour Jesus Christ, Through
 whom, thanking Thee with Him and the Holy Spirit,

 We offer this reasonable and bloodless sacrifice, which all nations,
 from the rising to the setting of the sun, from the north and the
 south, present to Thee, O Lord; for great is Thy name among all
 peoples, and in all places are incense, sacrifice, and oblation offered
 to Thy holy name. [4188]

 XIV. We pray and beseech Thee, O lover of men, O good Lord, [4189]
 remember in Thy good mercy the Holy and only Catholic and Apostolic
 Church throughout the whole world, and all Thy people, and all the
 sheep of this fold. [4190] Vouchsafe to the hearts of all of us the
 peace of heaven, but grant us also the peace of this life.

 Guide and direct in all peace the king, [4191] army, magistrates,
 councils, [4192] peoples, and neighbourhoods, and all our outgoings and
 incomings.

 O King of Peace, grant us Thy peace in unity and love. May we be Thine,
 O Lord; for we know no other God but Thee, and name no other name but
 Thine. Give life unto the souls of all of us, and let no deadly sin
 prevail against us, or against all Thy people.

 Look down in mercy and compassion, O Lord, and heal the sick among Thy
 people. Deliver them and us, O Lord, from sickness and disease, and
 drive away the spirit of weakness.

 Raise up those who have been long afflicted, and heal those who are
 vexed with unclean spirits.

 Have mercy on all who are in prison, or in mines, or on trial, or
 condemned, or in exile, or crushed by cruel bondage or tribute. Deliver
 them, O Lord, for Thou art our God, who settest the captives free; who
 raisest up the downtrodden; who givest hope to the hopeless, and help
 to the helpless; who liftest up the fallen; who givest refuge to the
 shipwrecked, and vengeance to the oppressed.

 Pity, relieve, and restore every Christian soul that is afflicted or
 wandering.

 But do Thou, O Lord, the physician of our souls and bodies, the
 guardian of all flesh, look down, and by Thy saving power heal all the
 diseases of soul and body.

 Guide and prosper our brethren who have gone or who are about to go
 abroad. Whether they travel by land, or river, or lake, by public road,
 or in whatever way journeying, bring them everywhere to a safe and
 tranquil haven. Be pleased to be with them by land and sea, and restore
 them in health and joy to joyful and healthful homes.

 Ever defend, O Lord, our journey through this life from trouble and
 storm.

 Send down rich and copious showers on the dry and thirsty lands.

 Gladden and revive the face of the earth, that it may spring forth and
 rejoice in the raindrops.

 Make the waters of the river flow in full stream.

 Gladden and revive the face of the earth with the swelling waters.

 Fill all the channels of the streams, and multiply the fruits of the
 earth.

 Bless, O Lord, the fruits of the earth, and keep them safe and
 unharmed. Fill them with seed, and make them ripe for the harvest.

 Bless even now, O Lord, Thy yearly crown of blessing for the sake of
 the poor of Thy people, the widow, the orphan, and the stranger, and
 for the sake of all of us who have our hope in Thee and call upon Thy
 holy name; for the eyes of all are upon Thee, and Thou givest them
 bread in due season.

 O Thou who givest food to all flesh, fill our hearts with joy and
 gladness, that at all times, having all sufficiency, we may abound to
 every good work in Christ Jesus our Lord.

 O King of kings and Lord of lords, defend the kingdom of Thy servant,
 our orthodox and Christ-loving sovereign, [4193] whom Thou hast deemed
 worthy to reign over this land in peace, courage, and justice.

 Subdue under him, O Lord, every enemy and adversary, whether at home or
 abroad. Gird on Thy shield and armour, and rise to his aid. Draw Thy
 sword, and help him to fight against them that persecute him. Shield
 him in the day of battle, and grant that the fruit of his loins may sit
 upon his throne.

 Be kind to him, O Lord, for the sake of Thy Holy and Apostolic Church,
 and all Thy Christ-loving people, that we too in his peaceful reign may
 live a calm and tranquil life, in all reverence and godliness.

 O Lord our God, give peace to the souls of our fathers and brethren who
 have fallen asleep in Jesus, remembering our forefathers of old, our
 fathers, patriarchs, prophets, apostles, martyrs, confessors, bishops,
 and the souls of all the holy and just men who have died in the Lord.

 Especially remember those whose memory we this day celebrate, and our
 holy father Mark, [4194] the apostle and evangelist, who has shown us
 the way of salvation. [4195]

 The Deacon.

 Lord, bless us.

 The Priest.

 The Lord will bless thee in His grace, now, henceforth, and for
 evermore.

 The Deacon reads the record of the dead. [4196]

 The Priest bows and prays.

 XV. Give peace, O Sovereign Lord our God, to the souls of all who dwell
 in the tabernacles of Thy saints. Graciously bestow upon them in Thy
 kingdom Thy promised blessing, which eye hath not seen, and ear hath
 not heard, nor has it entered into the heart of man what Thou, O God,
 hast prepared for those who love Thy holy name. Give peace to their
 souls, and deem them worthy of the kingdom of heaven. [4197]

 Grant that we may end our lives as Christians, acceptable unto Thee and
 without sin, and be pleased to give us part and lot with all Thy
 saints.

 Accept, O God, by Thy ministering archangels at Thy holy, heavenly, and
 reasonable altar in the spacious heavens, the thank-offerings of those
 who offer sacrifice and oblation, and of those who desire to offer much
 or little, in secret or openly, but have it not to give.

 Accept the thank-offerings of those who have presented them this day,
 as Thou didst accept the gifts of Thy righteous Abel:

 The Priest offers incense, and says: [4198] --

 As Thou didst accept the sacrifice of our father Abraham, the incense
 of Zacharias, the alms of Cornelius, and the widow's two mites, accept
 also the thank-offerings of these, and give them for the things of time
 the things of eternity, and for the things of earth the things of
 heaven. Defend, O Lord, our most holy and blessed Papas [4199] D, whom
 Thou hast fore-ordained to rule over Thy Holy Catholic and Apostolic
 Church, and our most pious Bishop D, that they through many years of
 peace may, according to Thy holy and blessed will, fulfil the sacred
 priesthood committed to their care, and dispense aright the word of
 truth.

 Remember the orthodox bishops everywhere, the elders, deacons,
 sub-deacons, readers, singers, monks, [4200] virgins, widows, and
 laity.

 Remember, O Lord, the holy city [4201] of our God, Jesus Christ; and
 the imperial city; [4202] and this city of ours, and all cities and all
 lands, and the peace and safety of those who dwell therein in the
 orthodox faith of Christ.

 Be mindful, O Lord, of the return of the back-sliding, and of every
 Christian soul that is afflicted and oppressed, and in need of Thy
 divine mercy and help.

 Be mindful, O Lord, of our brethren in captivity. Grant that they may
 find mercy and compassion with those who have led them captive.

 Be mindful also of us, O Lord, Thy sinful and unworthy servants, and
 blot out our sins in Thy goodness and mercy.

 Be mindful also of me, Thy lowly, sinful, and unworthy servant, and in
 Thy mercy blot out my sins. Be with us, O Lord, who minister unto Thy
 holy name.

 Bless our meetings, O Lord.

 Utterly uproot idolatry from the world. [4203]

 Crush under our feet Satan, and all his wicked influence.

 Humble now, as at all times, the enemies of Thy Church.

 Lay bare their pride.

 Speedily show them their weakness.

 Bring to naught the wicked plots they contrive against us.

 Arise, O Lord, and let Thine enemies be scattered, and let all who hate
 Thy holy name be put to flight.

 Do Thou bless a thousand times ten thousand Thy faithful and orthodox
 people while they do Thy holy will.

 The Deacon.

 Let those who are seated stand.

 The Priest says the following prayer:--

 Deliver the captive; rescue the distressed feed the hungry; comfort the
 faint-hearted, convert the erring; enlighten the darkened; raise the
 fallen; confirm the wavering; heal the sick; and guide them all, good
 Lord, into the way of salvation, and into Thy sacred fold. Deliver us
 from our iniquities; protect and defend us at all times.

 The Deacon.

 Turn to the east.

 The Priest bows and prays.

 For Thou art far above all principality, and power, and might, and
 dominion, and every name that is named, not only in this world, but in
 that which is to come. Round Thee stand ten thousand times ten
 thousand, and thousands of thousands of holy angels and hosts of
 archangels; and Thy two most honoured creatures, the many-eyed cherubim
 and the six-winged seraphim. With twain they cover their faces, and
 with twain they cover their feet, and with twain they do fly; and they
 cry one to another for ever with the voice of praise, and glorify Thee,
 O Lord, singing aloud the triumphal and thrice-holy [4204] hymn to Thy
 great glory:--

 Holy, holy, holy, Lord God of Sabaoth. Heaven and earth are full of Thy
 glory.

 (Aloud.)

 Thou dost ever sanctify all men; but with all who glorify Thee, receive
 also, O Sovereign Lord, our sanctification, who with them celebrate Thy
 praise, and say:--

 The People.

 Holy, holy, holy Lord.

 The Priest makes the sign of the cross over the sacred mysteries.

 XVI. For truly heaven and earth are full of Thy glory, through the
 manifestation of our Lord and God and Saviour Jesus Christ. Fill, O
 God, this sacrifice with Thy blessing, through the inspiration of Thy
 all-holy Spirit. For the Lord Himself, our God and universal King,
 Christ Jesus, reclining at meat the same night on which He delivered
 Himself up for our sins and died in the flesh for all, took bread in
 His holy, pure, and immaculate hands, and lifting His eyes to His
 Father, our God, and the God of all, gave thanks; and when He had
 blessed, hallowed, and broken the bread, gave it to His holy and
 blessed disciples and apostles, saying:--

 (Aloud.)

 Take, eat.

 The Deacon.

 Pray earnestly.

 The Priest (aloud).

 For this is my body, which is broken for you, and divided for the
 remission of sins.

 The People.

 Amen.

 The Priest prays.

 After the same manner also, when He had supped, He took the cup of wine
 mingled with water, and lifting His eyes to Thee, His Father, our God,
 and the God of all, gave thanks; and when He had blessed and filled it
 with the Holy Spirit, gave it to His holy and blessed disciples and
 apostles, saying:--

 (Aloud.)

 Drink ye all of it.

 The Deacon.

 Pray earnestly again.

 The Priest (aloud).

 For this is my blood of the new testament which is shed for you and for
 many, and distributed among you for the remission of sins.

 The People.

 Amen.

 The Priest prays thus:--

 This do ye in remembrance of me; for as often as ye eat this bread and
 drink this cup, ye do show forth my death and acknowledge my
 resurrection and ascension until I come. O Sovereign and Almighty Lord,
 King of heaven, while we show forth [4205] the death of Thine
 only-begotten Son, our Lord, God, and Saviour Jesus Christ, and
 acknowledge His blessed resurrection from the dead on the third day, we
 do also openly declare His ascension into heaven, and His sitting on
 the right hand of Thee, God and Father, and await His second terrible
 and dreadful coming, in which He will come to judge righteously the
 quick and the dead, and to render to each man according to his works.

 XVII. O Lord our God, we have placed before Thee what is Thine from
 Thine own mercies. We pray and beseech Thee, O good and merciful God,
 to send down from Thy holy heaven, from the mansion Thou hast prepared,
 and from Thine infinite bosom, the Paraclete Himself, [4206] holy,
 powerful, and life-giving, the Spirit of truth, who spoke in the law,
 the apostles, and prophets; who is everywhere present, and filleth all
 things, freely working sanctification in whom He will with Thy good
 pleasure; one in His nature; manifold in His working; the fountain of
 divine blessing; of like substance [4207] with Thee, and proceeding
 from Thee; sitting with Thee on the throne of Thy kingdom, and with
 Thine only-begotten Son, our Lord and God and Saviour Jesus Christ.
 Send down upon us also and upon this bread and upon these chalices Thy
 Holy Spirit, that by His all-powerful and divine influence He may
 sanctify and consecrate them, and make this bread the body. [4208]

 The People.

 Amen.

 The Priest (aloud).

 And this cup the blood of the new testament, of the very Lord, and God,
 and Saviour, and universal King Christ Jesus.

 The Deacon.

 Deacons, come down.

 The Priest (aloud).

 That to all of us who partake thereof they may tend unto faith,
 sobriety, healing, temperance, sanctification, the renewal of soul,
 body, and spirit, participation in the blessedness of eternal life and
 immortality, the glory of Thy most holy name, and the remission of
 sins, that Thy most holy, precious, and glorious name may be praised
 and glorified in this as in all things.

 The People.

 As it was and is.

 The Priest.

 XVIII. Peace be to all.

 The Deacon.

 Pray.

 The Priest prays in secret.

 O God of light, Father of life, Author of grace, Creator of worlds,
 Founder of knowledge, Giver of wisdom, Treasure of holiness, Teacher of
 pure prayers, Benefactor of our souls, who givest to the faint-hearted
 who put their trust in Thee those things into which the angels desire
 to look: O Sovereign Lord, who hast brought us up from the depths of
 darkness to light, who hast given us life from death, who hast
 graciously bestowed upon us freedom from slavery, who hast scattered
 the darkness of sin within us, through the presence of Thine
 only-begotten Son, do Thou now also, through the visitation of Thy
 all-holy Spirit, enlighten the eyes of our understanding, that we may
 partake without fear of condemnation of this heavenly and immortal
 food, and sanctify us wholly in soul, body, and spirit, that with Thy
 holy disciples and apostles we may say this prayer to Thee: Our Father
 who art in heaven, etc.

 (Aloud.)

 And grant, O Sovereign Lord, in Thy mercy, that we with freedom of
 speech, without fear of condemnation, with pure heart and enlightened
 soul, with face that is not ashamed, and with hollowed lips, may
 venture to call upon Thee, the holy God who art in heaven, as our
 Father, and say:--

 The People.

 Our Father who art in heaven, etc.

 The Priest prays: [4209] --

 Verily, Lord, Lord, lead us not into temptation, but deliver us from
 evil; for Thy abundant mercy showeth that we through our great
 infirmity are unable to resist it. Grant that we may find a way whereby
 we may be able to withstand temptation; for Thou hast given us power to
 tread upon serpents, and scorpions, and all the power of the enemy.

 (Aloud.)

 For Thine is the kingdom and power.

 The People.

 Amen.

 The Priest.

 XIX. Peace be to all.

 The Deacon.

 Bow your heads to Jesus. [4210]

 The People.

 Thou, Lord.

 The Priest prays.

 O Sovereign and Almighty Lord, [4211] who sittest upon the cherubim,
 and art glorified by the seraphim; who hast made the heaven out of
 waters, and adorned it with choirs of stars; who hast placed an
 unbodied host of angels in the highest heavens to sing Thy praise for
 ever; before Thee have we bowed our souls and bodies in token of our
 bondage. We beseech Thee to repel the dark assaults of sin from our
 understanding, and to gladden our minds with the divine radiance of Thy
 Holy Spirit, that, filled with the knowledge of Thee, we may worthily
 partake of the mercies set before us, the pure body and precious blood
 of Thine only-begotten Son, our Lord and God and Saviour Jesus Christ.
 Pardon all our sins in Thy abundant and unsearchable goodness, through
 the grace, mercy, and love of Thine only-begotten Son: [4212]

 (Aloud.)

 Through whom and with whom be glory and power to Thee, with the
 all-holy, good, and life-giving Spirit.

 The Priest.

 XX. Peace be to all.

 The Deacon.

 With the fear of God.

 The Priest prays.

 O holy, highest, awe-inspiring God, who dwellest among the saints,
 sanctify us by the word of Thy grace and by the inspiration of Thy
 all-holy Spirit; for Thou hast said, O Lord our God, Be ye holy; for I
 am holy. O Word of God, past finding out, consubstantial [4213] and
 co-eternal with the Father and the Holy Spirit, and sharer of their
 sovereignty, accept the pure song which cherubim and seraphim, and the
 unworthy lips of Thy sinful and unworthy servant, sing aloud.

 The People.

 Lord, have mercy; Lord, have mercy; Lord, have mercy.

 The Priest (aloud).

 Holy things for the holy. [4214]

 The People.

 One Father holy, one Son holy, one Spirit holy, in the unity of the
 Holy Spirit. Amen. [4215]

 The Deacon.

 For salvation and help.

 The Priest makes the sign of the cross upon the people, and saith in a
 loud voice:--

 The Lord be with all.

 The Priest breaks the bread, and saith:--

 Praise ye God.

 The Priest divides it among those present, and saith:--

 The Lord will bless and help you through His great mercy.

 The Priest says:--

 Command.

 The Clergy say:--

 The Holy Spirit commands and sanctifies.

 The Priest.

 Lo, they are sanctified and consecrated.

 The Clergy.

 One holy [4216] Father, etc. (thrice).

 The Priest says:--

 The Lord be with all.

 The Clergy.

 And with thy spirit.

 The Priest says:--

 The Lord Himself hath blessed it.

 The Priest partakes, and prays.

 According to Thy loving-kindness, [4217] etc.

 Or,

 As the hart panteth after the water-brooks, [4218] etc.

 When he gives the bread to the clergy, he says:--

 The holy body.

 And when he gives the chalice, he says:--

 The precious blood of our Lord, and God, and Saviour.

  IV.

 After the service is completed, the Deacon says:--

 XXI. Stand for prayer. [4219]

 The Priest.

 Peace be to all.

 The Deacon.

 Pray.

 The Priest says the prayer of thanksgiving.

 O Sovereign Lord our God, we thank Thee that we have partaken of Thy
 holy, pure, immortal, and heavenly mysteries, which Thou hast given for
 our good, and for the sanctification and salvation of our souls and
 bodies. We pray and beseech Thee, O Lord, to grant in Thy good mercy,
 that by partaking of the holy body and precious blood of Thine
 only-begotten Son, we may have faith that is not ashamed, love that is
 unfeigned, fulness of holiness, power to eschew evil and keep Thy
 commandments, provision for eternal life, and an acceptable defence
 before the awful tribunal of Thy Christ:

 In a loud voice.

 Through whom and with whom be glory and power to Thee, with Thy
 all-holy, good, and life-giving Spirit.

 The Priest then turns to the people, and says:--

 XXII. O mightiest King, co-eternal with the Father, who by Thy might
 hast vanquished hell and trodden death under foot, who hast bound the
 strong man, and by Thy miraculous power and the enlightening radiance
 of Thy unspeakable Godhead hast raised Adam from the tomb, send forth
 Thy invisible right hand, which is full of blessing, and bless us all.

 Pity us, O Lord, and strengthen us by Thy divine power.

 Take away from us the sinful and wicked influence of carnal desire.

 Let the light shine into our souls, and dispel the surrounding darkness
 of sin.

 Unite us to the all-blessed assembly that is well-pleasing unto Thee;
 for through Thee and with Thee, all praise, honour, power, adoration,
 and thanksgiving are due unto the Father and the Holy Spirit, now,
 henceforth, and for evermore.

 The Deacon.

 Depart in peace:

 The People.

 In the name of the Lord.

 The Priest (aloud).

 XXIII. The love of God the Father; the grace of the Son, our Lord Jesus
 Christ; the communion and gift of the All-holy Spirit, be with us all,
 now, henceforth, and for evermore.

 The People.

 Amen. Blessed be the name of the Lord.

 The Priest prays in the sacristy, and says:--

 O Lord, Thou hast given us sanctification by partaking of the all-holy
 body and precious blood of Thine only-begotten Son; give us the grace
 and gift of the All-holy Spirit. Enable us to lead blameless lives; and
 guide us unto the perfect redemption, and adoption, and the everlasting
 joys of the world to come. For Thou art our sanctification, and we
 ascribe glory unto Thee, the Father, and the Son, and the All-holy
 Spirit, now, henceforth, and for evermore.

 The People.

 Amen.

 The Priest.

 Peace be to all.

 The People.

 And to thy spirit.

 The Priest dismisses them, and says:--

 May God bless, who blesseth and sanctifieth, who defendeth and
 preserveth us all through the partaking of His holy mysteries; and who
 is blessed for ever. Amen.

 [4150] [The only authority for this valuable relic is a single codex of
 the twelfth century, i.e., the Codex Rossanensis, found at Rossano, in
 Calabria. It was deposited in the Basilian monastery at Rome, and first
 published a.d. 1583, at Paris. See Hammond, pp. xlv., li.]

 [4151] [[332]Elucidation I.]

 [4152]

 [4153] [i e., mustikos = arcane.--Hederic.]

 [4154] [This implies that the Eucharist was not (originally) celebrated
 every day, as a rule. See Justin Martyr, vol. i. [333]note 1, p. 186.]

 [4155] Rather "for the emperor," says Renaudot; and the word basileu's
 will stand this meaning.

 [4156] The (ku'rie ele'eson) Kyrie Eleëson.]

 [4157] [According to 1 Tim. ii. 2.]

 [4158] [Suits the first years of Diocletian.]

 [4159] The Patriarch of Alexandria is meant. The word pa'pas was used
 at first to designate all bishops; but its application gradually became
 more restricted, and so here the Patriarch of Alexandria is called
 pa'pas, as being superior to the bishops of his patriarchate. [See vol.
 v. [334]p. 154, and vol. vi., Introd.]

 [4160] [See vol. iii. [335]p. 689, this series.]

 [4161] This is the Little Entrance. [The priest and deacon come from
 the prothesis bearing the Gospels. See [336]p. 538, supra.]

 [4162] [Bestowing what is meet.] The text here is defective. Some
 suppose that a sentence has been lost.

 [4163] Given in full in chap. vi. of the Liturgy of James, [337]p. 538,
 supra. [It is so worded that it must be dated later than the Council of
 Ephesus, a.d. 431.]

 [4164] [The Trisagion is found in all the liturgies, which proves a
 common source and original.]

 [4165] pro'schomen.

 [4166] [The Apostle means that the Epistle is read, and there is a
 prayer said (mustikos), followed by the outburst of Hallelujah.]

 [4167] See note 1, p. 538. ["Sir, bless us" (in ordinary renderings) is
 a Western form.]

 [4168] [Here, the deacon's words having been correctly given, the
 blessing of the priests shows the force of his expression.]

 [4169] [I have frequently noted the Ante-Nicene ignorance of this rite
 among Christians, in order to illustrate these later usages as without
 apostolic warrant. See Irenaus, note 9, p. 484.]

 [4170] te`n suna'pten.

 [4171] [The waters of the river, rather, with reference to the Nile.]

 [4172] [The anthem probably.]

 [4173] Probably by the three are meant three prayers. [See Hammond,
 note 1, p. 177.]

 [4174] Patriarch.

 [4175] [Vol. v. [338]p. 417, Elucidation XIV.]

 [4176] Some such word as remain is intentionally omitted. [See [339]p.
 540, supra.]

 [4177] [See [340]p. 540, supra.]

 [4178] The Great Entrance; [341]p. 540, supra.]

 [4179] [See p. 541 , supra.]

 [4180] [i.e., in due order; in your turn.]

 [4181] tes protheseos.

 [4182] [e`pi to`n arton touton kai` epi` ta` pote'ria tauta. Most
 note-worthy language in this place.]

 [4183] [Two after the Creed and one before.]

 [4184] [Two after the Creed and one before.]

 [4185] [The Anaphora.]

 [4186] [I have supposed the adverb hosper (as) in this place for
 obvious reasons. It is implied in the text.]

 [4187] [See [342]p. 543, supra. Here the Edinburgh inserts: "The
 Deacon...."]

 [4188] [The reference to Mal. i. 11, always noteworthy. Vol. i. [343]p.
 484.]

 [4189] [Here I supply an omission, in italics.]

 [4190] [kai pa'nton ton poimni'on sou John x. 16.]

 [4191] Or emperor. [See p. 551, notes 5, 7.]

 [4192] boula's, senates.

 [4193] [Evidently after Constantine.]

 [4194] [[344]Elucid. II. Such passages indicate, of course, how St.
 Mark's name came to be given to this liturgy. Here is interpolated:]--
 Hail! thou art highly favoured; the Lord is with thee; blessed art
 thou among women, and blessed is the fruit of thy womb, because thou
 hast brought forth the Saviour of our souls. Aloud. Especially
 remember our all-holy, pure, and blessed Lady, Mary the Virgin Mother
 of God.

 [4195] [Hammond's note is important, p. 182; and see [345]Elucid. II.]

 [4196] ta` di'ptucha. [See the note of Hammond, Glossary, p. 378.]

 [4197] [See Burbidge, p. 34 and passim to p. 253.]

 [4198] [Burbidge, p. 185.]

 [4199] The Patriarch.

 [4200] [Subsequent to Antony Vol. vi. [346]p. 279.]

 [4201] [Jerusalem: a token of antiquity.]

 [4202] [Rome, no doubt.]

 [4203] [Agrees with the partial triumphs of a.d. 325.]

 [4204] The Trisagion.

 [4205] [The Oblation, kat' exoche`n ]

 [4206] [The Invocation.]

 [4207] [On all this, see Hammond, notes 1 and 2, p. 187.]

 [4208] [The Invocation.]

 [4209] [The Embolisms = ejaculations.]

 [4210] [Phil. ii. 10. See Hammond, note 1, p. 48.]

 [4211] [Prayer of Humble Access.]

 [4212] [Compare Hammond, p. 79.]

 [4213] [Post-Nicene.]

 [4214] [[347]Elucidation III.]

 [4215] Perhaps the Triad is meant at note 10, p. 553.]

 [4216] [See [348]p. 567, infra.]

 [4217] [Ps. xlii.]

 [4218] [Ps. xlii. 1.]

 [4219] [Post-Communion.]


  The Liturgy of the Blessed Apostles.

 Composed by St. adæus and St. Maris, Teachers of the Easterns. [4220]

 I. [4221] First: Glory to God in the highest, etc. Our Father which art
 in heaven.

 Prayer.

 Strengthen, O our Lord and God, our weakness through Thy mercy, that we
 may administer the holy mystery which has been given for the renovation
 and salvation of our degraded nature, through the mercies of Thy
 beloved Son the Lord of all.

 On common days.

 Adored, glorified, lauded, celebrated, exalted, and blessed in heaven
 and on earth, be the adorable and glorious name of Thine ever-glorious
 Trinity, O Lord of all.

 On common days they sing the Psalm (xv.), Lord, who shall dwell in Thy
 tabernacle? entire with its canon, [4222] of the mystery of the
 sacraments.

 (Aloud.)

 Who shall shout with joy? etc.

 Prayer.

 II. Before the resplendent throne of Thy majesty, O Lord, and the
 exalted and sublime throne of Thy glory, and on the awful seat of the
 strength of Thy love and the propiatory altar which Thy will hath
 established, in the region of Thy pasture, [4223] with thousands of
 cherubim praising Thee, and ten thousands of seraphim sanctifying Thee,
 we draw near, adore, thank, and glorify Thee always, O Lord of all.

 On commemorations and Fridays.

 Thy name, great and holy, illustrious and blessed, the blessed and
 incomprehensible name of Thy glorious Trinity, and Thy kindness to our
 race, we ought at all times to bless, adore, and glorify, O Lord of
 all.

 Responsory [4224] at the chancel, as above.

 Who commanded, etc.

 To the priest, etc.

 Prayer.

 How breathes in us, O our Lord and God, the sweet fragrance of the
 sweetness of Thy love; illumined are our souls, through the knowledge
 of Thy truth: may we be rendered worthy of receiving the manifestation
 of Thy beloved from Thy holy heavens: there shall we render thanks unto
 Thee, and, in the meantime, glorify Thee without ceasing in Thy Church,
 crowned and filled with every aid and blessing, because Thou art Lord
 and Father, Creator of all.

 III. Prayer of Incense.

 We shall repeat the hymn to Thy glorious Trinity, O Father, Son, and
 Holy Ghost.

 On fast-days.

 And on account, etc.

 At the commemoration of saints.

 Thou, O Lord, art truly the raiser up of our bodies: Thou art the good
 Saviour of our souls, and the secure preserver of our life; and we
 ought to thank Thee continually, to adore and glorify Thee, O Lord of
 all.

 At the lessons. [4225]

 Holy art Thou, worthy of praise, mighty, immortal, who dwellest in the
 holies, and Thy will resteth in them: have regard unto us, O Lord; be
 merciful unto us, and pity us, as Thou art our helper in all
 circumstances, O Lord of all.

 IV. At the apostle. [4226]

 Enlighten, O our Lord and God, the movements of our meditations to hear
 and understand the sweet listenings to Thy life-giving and divine
 commands; and grant unto us through Thy grace and mercy to gather from
 them the assurance of love, and hope, and salvation suitable to soul
 and body, and we shall sing to Thee everlasting glory without ceasing
 and always, O Lord of all.

 On fast-days.

 To Thee, the wise governor, etc.

 V. Descending, he shall salute the Gospel, saying this prayer before
 the altar.

 Thee, the renowned seed of Thy Father, and the image of the person of
 Thy Father, who wast revealed in the body of our humanity, and didst
 arise to us in the light of Thy annunciation, Thee we thank, adore,
 etc.

 And after the proclamation: [4227] --

 Thee, O Lord God Almighty, we beseech and entreat, perfect with us Thy
 grace, and pour out through our hands Thy gift, the pity and compassion
 of Thy divinity. May they be to us for the propitiation of the offences
 of Thy people, and for the forgiveness of the sins of the entire flock
 of Thy pasture, through Thy grace and tender mercies, O good friend of
 men, O Lord of all.

 VI. The Deacons say:--

 Bow your heads.

 The Priest says this secret prayer in the sanctuary: [4228] --

 O Lord God Omnipotent, Thine is the Holy Catholic Church, inasmuch as
 Thou, through the great passion of Thy Christ, didst buy the sheep of
 Thy pasture; and from the grace of the Holy Spirit, who is indeed of
 one nature with Thy glorious divinity, are granted the degrees of the
 true priestly ordination; and through Thy clemency Thou didst
 vouchsafe, O Lord, to make our weakness spiritual members in the great
 body of Thy Holy Church, that we might administer spiritual aid to
 faithful souls. Now, O Lord, perfect Thy grace with us, and pour out
 Thy gift through our hands: and may Thy tender mercies and the clemency
 of Thy divinity be upon us, and upon the people whom Thou hast chosen
 for Thyself.

 (Aloud.)

 And grant unto us, O Lord, through Thy clemency, that we may all
 together, and equally every day of our life, please Thy divinity, and
 be rendered worthy of the aid of Thy grace to offer Thee praise,
 honour, thanksgiving, and adoration at all times, O Lord.

 VII. And the Deacons ascend to the altar, and say:--

 He who has not received baptism, etc. [4229]

 And the Priest begins the responsory of the mysteries, [4230] and the
 Sacristan and Deacon place the disk and the chalice upon the altar. The
 Priest crosses his hands, and says: [4231] --

 We offer praise to Thy glorious Trinity at all times and for ever.

 And proceeds:--

 May Christ, who was offered for our salvation, and commanded us to
 commemorate His death and His resurrection, Himself receive this
 sacrifice from the hands of our weakness, through His grace and mercies
 for ever. Amen.

 And proceeds:--

 Laid are the renowned holy and life-giving mysteries upon the altar of
 the mighty Lord, even until His advent, for ever. Amen.

 Praise, etc.

 Thy memory, etc.

 Our Father, etc.

 The apostles of the Father, etc.

 Upon the holy altar, etc.

 They who have slept, etc.

 Matthew Mark, Luke, etc. [4232]

 THE CREED. [4233]

 VIII. The Priest draws near to celebrate, and thrice bows before the
 altar, the middle of which he kisses, then the right and the left horn
 of the altar; and bows to the Gospel side, and says:--

 Bless, O Lord, etc.

 Pray for me, my fathers, brethren, and masters, that God may grant unto
 me the capability and power to perform this service to which I have
 drawn near, and that this oblation may be accepted from the hands of my
 weakness, for myself, for you, and for the whole body of the Holy
 Catholic Church, through His grace and mercies for ever. Amen.

 And they respond:--

 May Christ listen to thy prayers, and be pleased with thy sacrifice,
 receive thy oblation, and honour thy priesthood, and grant unto us,
 through thy mediation, [4234] the pardon of our offences, and the
 forgiveness of our sins, through His grace and mercies for ever.

 Presently he bows at the other side, uttering the same words; and they
 respond in the same manner: then he bows to the altar, and says:--

 God, Lord of all, be with us through His grace and mercies for ever.
 Amen.

 And bowing towards the Deacon, who is on the left (Epistle side), he
 says:--

 God, the Lord of all, confirm thy words, and secure to thee peace, and
 accept this oblation from my hands for me, for thee, for the whole body
 of the Holy Catholic Church, and for the entire world, through His
 grace and mercies for ever.

 He kneels at the altar, and says in secret:--

 IX. O our Lord and God, look not on the multitude of our sins, and let
 not Thy dignity be turned away on account of the heinousness of our
 iniquities; but through Thine unspeakable grace sanctify this sacrifice
 of Thine, and grant through it power and capability, so that Thou
 mayest forget our many sins, and be merciful when Thou shalt appear at
 the end of time, in the man whom Thou hast assumed from among us, and
 we may find before Thee grace and mercy, and be rendered worthy to
 praise Thee with spiritual [4235] assemblies.

 He rises, and says this prayer in secret:--

 We thank Thee, O our Lord and God, for the abundant riches of Thy grace
 to us:

 And he proceeds:--

 Us who were sinful and degraded, on account of the multitude of Thy
 clemency, Thou hast made worthy to celebrate the holy mysteries of the
 body and blood of Thy Christ. We beg aid from Thee for the
 strengthening of our souls, that in perfect love and true faith we may
 administer Thy gift to us.

 Canon.

 And we shall ascribe to Thee praise, glory, thanksgiving, and
 adoration, now, always, and for ever and ever.

 He signs himself with the sign of the cross, and they respond:--

 Amen.

 X. And he proceeds:--

 Peace be with you:

 They respond:--

 With thee and with thy spirit.

 And they give the (kiss of) peace to each other, and say:--

 For all: [4236]

 The Deacon says:--

 Let us thank, entreat, and beseech.

 The Priest says this prayer in secret:--

 O Lord, mighty God, help my weakness through Thy clemency and the aid
 of Thy grace; and make me worthy of offering before Thee this oblation,
 as for the common aid of all, and to the praise of Thy Trinity, O
 Father, Son, and Holy Ghost.

 Another prayer. [4237]

 O our Lord and God, restrain our thoughts, that they wander not amid
 the vanities of this world. O Lord our God, grant that I may be united
 to the affection of Thy love, unworthy though I be. Glory be to Thee, O
 Christ.

 Ascend into the chamber of Thy renowned light, O Lord; sow in me the
 good seed of humility; and under the wings of Thy grace hide me through
 Thy mercy. If Thou wert to mark iniquities, O Lord, who shall stand?
 Because there is mercy with Thee.

 [The Priest says the following prayer in secret: [4238] --

 O mother of our Lord Jesus Christ, beseech for me the only-begotten
 Son, who was born of thee, to forgive me my offences and my sins, and
 to accept from my feeble and sinful hands this sacrifice which my
 weakness offers upon this altar, through thy intercession for me, O
 holy mother.]

 XI. When the Deacon shall say, With watchfulness and care, etc.,
 immediately the Priest rises up and uncovers the sacraments, taking
 away the veil with which they were covered: he blesses the incense, and
 says a canon with a loud voice:--

 The grace of our Lord Jesus Christ, and the love of God the Father, and
 the communion of the Holy Ghost, be with us all, now, etc. [4239]

 He signs the sacraments, and they respond:--

 Amen.

 The Priest proceeds:--

 Lift up your minds:

 They respond:--

 They are towards Thee, O God of Abraham, Isaac, and Israel, O glorious
 King.

 The Priest.

 The oblation is offered to God, the Lord of all.

 They respond:--

 It is meet and right.

 The Deacon.

 Peace be with you.

 The Priest puts on the incense, and says this prayer:--

 O Lord, Lord, grant me an open countenance before Thee, that with the
 confidence which is from Thee we may fulfil this awful and divine
 sacrifice with consciences free from all iniquity and bitterness. Sow
 in us, O Lord, affection, peace, and concord towards each other, and
 toward every one.

 And standing, he says in secret: [4240] --

 Worthy of glory from every mouth, and of thanksgiving from all tongues,
 and of adoration and exaltation from all creatures, is the adorable and
 glorious name of Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, who created the world
 through His grace, and its inhabitants through His clemency, who saved
 men through His mercy, and showed great favour towards mortals. Thy
 majesty, O Lord, thousands of thousands of heavenly spirits, and ten
 thousand myriads of holy angels, hosts of spirits, ministers of fire
 and spirit, bless and adore; with the holy cherubim and the spiritual
 seraphim they sanctify and celebrate Thy name, crying and praising,
 without ceasing crying unto each other.

 They say with a loud voice:--

 Holy, holy, holy, Lord God Almighty; full are the heavens and the earth
 of His glory.

 The Priest in secret:--

 Holy, holy, holy art Thou, O Lord God Almighty; the heavens and the
 earth are full of His glory and the nature of His essence, as they are
 glorious with the honour of His splendour; as it is written, The heaven
 and the earth are full of me, saith the mighty Lord.

 Holy art Thou, O God our Father, truly the only one, of whom the whole
 family in heaven and earth is named. Holy art Thou, Eternal Son,
 through whom all things were made. Holy art Thou, Holy, Eternal Spirit,
 through whom all things are sanctified.

 Woe to me, woe to me, who have been astonied, because I am a man of
 polluted lips, and dwell among a people of polluted lips, and my eyes
 have seen the King, the mighty Lord. How terrible to-day is this place!
 For this is none other than the house of God and the gate of heaven;
 because Thou hast been seen eye to eye, O Lord.

 Now, I pray, may Thy grace be with us, O Lord; purge away our
 impurities, and sanctify our lips; unite the voices of our
 insignificance with the sanctification of seraphim and archangels.
 Glory be to Thy tender mercies, because Thou hast associated the
 earthly with the heavenly. [4241]

 And he proceeds, saying in secret this prayer, in a bowing posture:--

 XII. And with those heavenly powers we give Thee thanks, even we, Thine
 insignificant, pithless, and feeble servants; because Thou hast granted
 unto us Thy great grace which cannot be repaid. For indeed Thou didst
 take upon Thee our human nature, that Thou mightest bestow life on us
 through Thy divinity; Thou didst exalt our low condition; Thou didst
 raise our ruined state; Thou didst rouse up our mortality; Thou didst
 wash away our sins; Thou didst blot out the guilt of our sins; Thou
 didst enlighten our intelligence, and Thou didst condemn our enemy, O
 Lord our God; and Thou didst cause the insignificance of our pithless
 nature to triumph.

 Here follow the words of institution, [4242] after which:--

 Through the tender mercies of Thy grace poured out, O clement One,
 pardon our offences and sins; blot out my offences in the judgment. And
 on account of all Thy aids and Thy favours to us, we shall ascribe unto
 Thee praise, [4243] honour, thanksgiving, and adoration, now, always,
 and for ever and ever.

 The Priest signs the sacraments. The response is made.

 Amen.

 The Deacon.

 In your minds. Pray for peace with us.

 The Priest says this prayer [4244] bowing, and in a low voice:--

 O Lord God Almighty, accept this oblation for the whole Holy Catholic
 Church, and for all the pious and righteous fathers who have been
 pleasing to Thee, and for all the prophets and apostles, and for all
 the martyrs and confessors, and for all that mourn, that are in
 straits, and are sick, and for all that are under difficulties and
 trials, and for all the weak and the oppressed, and for all the dead
 that have gone from amongst us; then for all that ask a prayer from our
 weakness, and for me, a degraded and feeble sinner. O Lord our God,
 according to Thy mercies and the multitude of Thy favours, look upon
 Thy people, and on me, a feeble man, not according to my sins and my
 follies, but that they may become worthy of the forgiveness of their
 sins through this holy body, which they receive with faith, through the
 grace of Thy mercy for ever and ever. Amen.

 The Priest says this prayer of inclination in secret:--

 XIII. Do Thou, O Lord, through Thy many and ineffable mercies, make the
 memorial good and acceptable with that of [4245] all the pious and
 righteous fathers who have been pleading before Thee in the
 commemoration of the body and blood of Thy Christ, which we offer to
 Thee upon Thy pure and holy altar, as Thou hast taught us; and grant
 unto us Thy rest all the days of this life.

 He proceeds with the Great Oblation:--

 O Lord our God, bestow on us Thy rest and peace all the days of this
 life, that all the inhabitants of the earth may know Thee, that Thou
 art the only true God the Father, and Thou didst send our Lord Jesus
 Christ, Thy Son and Thy beloved; and He Himself our Lord and God came
 and taught us all purity and holiness. Make remembrance of prophets,
 apostles, martyrs, confessors, bishops, doctors, priests, deacons, and
 all the sons of the Holy Catholic Church who have been signed with the
 sign of life, of holy baptism. We also, O Lord:

 He proceeds:--

 We, Thy degraded, weak, and feeble servants who are congregated in Thy
 name, and now stand before Thee, and have received with joy the form
 which is from Thee, praising, glorifying, and exalting, commemorate and
 celebrate this great, awful, holy, and divine mystery of the passion,
 death, burial, and resurrection of our Lord and Saviour Jesus Christ.

 And may Thy Holy Spirit come, O Lord, [4246] and rest upon this
 oblation of Thy servants which they offer, and bless and sanctify it;
 and may it be unto us, O Lord, for the propitiation of our offences and
 the forgiveness of our sins, and for a grand hope of resurrection from
 the dead, and for a new life in the kingdom of the heavens, with all
 who have been pleasing before Him. And on account of the whole of Thy
 wonderful dispensation towards us, we shall render thanks unto Thee,
 and glorify Thee without ceasing in Thy Church, redeemed by the
 precious blood of Thy Christ, with open mouths and joyful countenances:

 Canon.

 Ascribing praise, [4247] honour, thanksgiving, and adoration to Thy
 holy, loving, and life-giving name, now, always, and for ever.

 The Priest signs the mysteries with the cross, and they respond:--

 Amen.

 The Priest bows himself and kisses the altar, first in the middle, then
 at the two sides right and left, and says this prayer: [4248] --

 Have mercy upon me, O God, down to the words, and sinners shall be
 converted unto Thee: and unto Thee lift I up mine eyes, [4249] down to
 have mercy upon us, O Lord, have mercy upon us. Also stretch forth Thy
 hand, and let Thy right hand save me, O Lord; may Thy mercies remain
 upon me, O Lord, for ever, and despise not the works of Thy hands.
 [4250]

 Then he says this prayer:--

 XIV. O Christ, peace of those in heaven and great rest of those below,
 [4251] grant that Thy rest and peace may dwell in the four parts of the
 world, [4252] but especially in Thy Holy Catholic Church; grant that
 the priesthood with the government may have peace; cause wars to cease
 from the ends of the earth, and scatter the nations that delight in
 wars, [4253] that we may enjoy the blessing of living in tranquillity
 and peace, in all temperance and fear of God. Spare the offences and
 sins of the dead, through Thy grace and mercies for ever.

 And to those who are around the altar he says:--

 Bless, O Lord. Bless, O Lord.

 And he puts on the incense with which he fumes himself, and says:--

 Sweeten, O Lord our God, the unpleasing savour [4254] of our souls
 through the sweetness of Thy love, and through it cleanse me from the
 stains of my sin, and forgive me my offences and sins, whether known or
 unknown to me.

 A second time he takes the incense with both hands, and censes the
 mysteries; presently he says:--

 The clemency of Thy grace, O our Lord and God, gives us access to these
 renowned, holy, life-giving, and divine mysteries, unworthy though we
 be.

 The Priest repeats these words once and again, and at each interval
 unites his hands over his breast in the form of a cross. He kisses the
 altar in the middle, and receives with both hands the upper oblation;
 and looking up, says:--

 Praise be to Thy holy name, O Lord Jesus Christ, and adoration to Thy
 majesty, always and for ever. Amen.

 For He is the living and life-giving bread which cometh down from
 heaven, and giveth life to the whole world, of which they who eat die
 not; and they who receive it are saved by it, and do not see
 corruption, and live through it for ever; and Thou art the antidote of
 our mortality, [4255] and the resurrection of our entire frame. [4256]

 XV. [4257] * * *

 XVI. Praise to Thy holy name, O Lord. (As above.)

 The Priest kisses the host [4258] in the form of a cross; in such a
 way, however, that his lips do not touch it, but appear to kiss it; and
 he says:--

 Glory to Thee, O Lord; glory to Thee, O Lord, on account of Thine
 unspeakable gift to us, for ever.

 Then he draws nigh to the fraction of the host, [4259] which he
 accomplishes with both his hands, saying:--

 We draw nigh, O Lord, with true faith, and break with thanksgiving and
 sign through Thy mercy the body and blood of our Life-giver, Jesus
 Christ, in the name of the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost.

 And, naming the Trinity, he breaks the host, [4260] which he holds in
 his hands, into two parts: and the one which is in his left hand he
 lays down on the disk; with the other, which he holds in his right
 hand, he signs the chalice, saying:--

 The precious blood is signed with the holy body of our Lord Jesus
 Christ. In the name of the Father, and the Son, and the Holy Ghost for
 ever.

 And they respond:--

 Amen.

 Then he dips it even to the middle in the chalice, and signs with it
 the body which is in the paten, saying:--

 The holy body is signed with the propitiatory blood of our Lord Jesus
 Christ. In the name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy
 Ghost for ever.

 And they respond:--

 Amen.

 And he unites the two parts, the one with the other, saying:--

 Divided, sanctified, completed, perfected, united, and commingled have
 been these renowned, holy, life-giving, and divine mysteries, the one
 with the other, in the adorable and glorious name of Thy glorious
 Trinity, O Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, that they may be to us, O Lord,
 for the propitiation of our offences and the forgiveness of our sins;
 also for the grand hope of a resurrection from the dead, and of a new
 life in the kingdom of the heavens, for us and for the Holy Church of
 Christ our Lord, here and in every place whatsoever, now and always,
 and for ever.

 XVII. In the meantime he signs the host [4261] with his right thumb in
 the form of a cross from the lower part to the upper, and from the
 right to the left, and thus forms a slight fissure in it where it has
 been dipped in the blood. He puts a part of it into the chalice in the
 form of a cross: the lower part is placed towards the priest, the upper
 towards the chalice, so that the place of the fissure looks to the
 chalice. He bows, and rising, says:--

 Glory be to Thee, O Lord Jesus Christ, who hast made me, unworthy
 though I be, through Thy grace, a minister and mediator of Thy renowed,
 holy, life-giving, and divine mysteries: through the grace of Thy
 mercy, make me worthy of the pardon of my offences and the forgiveness
 of my sins.

 He signs himself with the sign of the cross an his forehead, and does
 the same to those standing round him. [4262]

 The Deacons approach, and he signs each one of them on the forehead,
 saying:--

 Christ accept thy ministry: Christ cause thy face to shine: Christ save
 thy life: Christ make thy youth to grow.

 And they respond:--

 Christ accept thy oblation.

 XVIII. All return to their own place; and the Priest, after bowing,
 rises and says, in the tone of the Gospel:--

 The grace of our Lord Jesus Christ, and the love of God the Father, and
 the communion of the Holy Ghost, be with us all.

 The Priest signs himself, and lifts up his hand over his head, so that
 it should be in the air, and the people be partakers in the singing:--

 The Deacon says:--

 We all with fear, etc.

 And at these words:--

 He hath given to us His mysteries:

 The Priest begins to break [4263] the body, and says:--

 Be merciful, O Lord, through Thy clemency to the sins and follies of
 Thy servants, and sanctify our lips through Thy grace, that they may
 give the fruits of glory and praise to Thy divinity, with all Thy
 saints in Thy kingdom.

 And, raising his voice, he says:--

 And make us worthy, O Lord our God, to stand before Thee continually
 without stain, with pure heart, with open countenance, and with the
 confidence which is from Thee, mercifully granted to us: and let us all
 with one accord invoke Thee, and say thus: Our Father, etc.

 The People say:--

 Our Father, etc.

 The Priest. [4264]

 O Lord God Almighty, O Lord and our good God, who art full of mercy, we
 beg Thee, O Lord our God, and beseech the clemency of Thy goodness;
 lead us not into temptation, but deliver and save us from the evil one
 and his hosts; because Thine is the kingdom, the power, the strength,
 the might, and the dominion in heaven and on earth, now and always.

 He signs himself, and they respond:--

 Amen.

 XIX. And he proceeds:--

 Peace be with you.

 They respond:--

 With thee and with thy spirit.

 He proceeds:--

 It is becoming that the holy things should be to the holy in
 perfection.

 And they say:--

 One holy Father: one holy Son: one Holy Ghost. Glory be to the Father,
 and to the Son, and to the Holy Ghost, for ever and ever. Amen.

 The Deacon.

 Praise ye.

 And they say the responsory. And when the Deacon comes to carry the
 chalice, he says:--

 Let us pray for peace with us.

 The Priest says:--

 The grace of the Holy Ghost be with thee, with us, and with those who
 receive Him. And he gives the chalice to the Deacon.

 The Deacon says:--

 Bless, O Lord.

 The Priest.

 The gift of the grace of our Life-giver and Lord Jesus Christ be
 completed, in mercies, with all.

 And he signs the people with the cross. In the meantime the
 responsories are said.

 Brethren, receive the body of the Son, cries the Church, and drink ye
 His chalice with faith in the house of His kingdom.

 On feast-days.

 Strengthen, O Lord, etc.

 On the Lord's day.

 O Lord Jesus Christ, etc.

 Daily.

 The mysteries which we have received, etc.

 The responsories being ended, the Deacon says:--

 All therefore, etc.


 And they respond:--

 Glory be to Himself on account of His ineffable gift.

 The Deacon.

 Let us pray for peace with us.

 The Priest at the middle of the altar says this prayer: [4265] --

 XX. It is meet, O Lord, just and right in all days, times, and hours,
 to thank, adore, and praise the awful name of Thy majesty, because Thou
 hast through Thy grace, O Lord, made us, mortal men possessing a frail
 nature, worthy to sanctify Thy name with the heavenly [4266] beings,
 and to become partakers of the mysteries of Thy gift, and to be
 delighted with the sweetness of Thy oracles. And voices of glory and
 thanksgiving we ever offer up to Thy sublime divinity, O Lord.

 Another.

 Christ, our God, Lord, King, Saviour, and Life-giver, through His grace
 has made us worthy to receive His body and His precious and
 all-sanctifying blood. May He grant unto us that we may be pleasing
 unto Him in our words, works, thoughts, and deeds, so that that pledge
 which we have received may be to us for the pardon of our offences, the
 forgiveness of our sins, and the grand hope of a resurrection from the
 dead, and a new and true life in the kingdom of the heavens, with all
 who have been pleasing before Him, through His grace and His mercies
 for ever.

 On ordinary days.

 Praise, O Lord, honour, blessing, and thanksgiving we ought to ascribe
 to Thy glorious Trinity for the gift of Thy holy mysteries, which Thou
 hast given to us for the propitiation of our offences, O Lord of all.

 Another.

 Blessed be Thy adorable honour, from Thy glorious place, O Christ, the
 propitiator of our offences and our sins, and who takest away our
 follies through Thy renowned, holy, life-giving, and divine mysteries.
 Christ the hope of our nature always and for ever. Amen.

 Obsignation or final benediction.

 May our Lord Jesus Christ, to whom we have ministered, and whom we have
 seen and honoured in His renowned, holy, life-giving, and divine
 mysteries, Himself render us worthy of the splendid glory of His
 kingdom, and of gladness with His holy angels, and for confidence
 before Him, that we may stand at His right hand.

 And on our entire congregation may His mercies and compassion be
 continually poured out, now and always, and ever.

 On the Lord's day and on feast-days.

 May He Himself who blessed us with all spiritual blessings in the
 heavens, through Jesus Christ our Lord, and prepared us for His
 kingdom, and called us to the desirable good things which neither cease
 nor perish, as He promised to us in His life-giving Gospel, and said to
 the blessed congregation of His disciples--Verily, verily I say unto
 you, that every one who eateth my body and drinketh my blood, abideth
 in me, and I in him, and I will raise him up at the last day; and he
 cometh not to judgment, but I will make him pass from death to eternal
 life:

 May He Himself now bless this congregation, and maintain our position,
 and render glorious our people who have come and rejoiced in receiving
 His renowned, holy, life-giving, and divine mysteries; and may ye be
 sealed and guarded by the holy sign of the Lord's cross from all evils,
 secret and open, now and always.

 [4220] [Here the Edinburgh editors give the following title from their
 copy, without stating whence it is: "The Liturgy of the Holy Apostles,
 or Order of the Sacraments."]

 [4221] [I have made slight corrections, after Renaudot, as given in
 Hammond, from Litt. Orient. Coll., tom. ii. pp. 578-592.]

 [4222] Suicer says that a canon is a psalm or hymn (canticum) wont to
 be sung on certain days, ordinarily and as if by rule. He quotes
 Zonaras, who says that a canon is metrical and is composed of nine
 odes. See Sophocles, Glossary of Byzantine Greek, Introduction, § 43.
 The canon of the Nestorian Church is somewhat different. See Neale,
 General Introduction to the History of the Eastern Church, p. 979.

 [4223] [Rev. v. 6. The Apocalypse saturates these liturgies.]

 [4224] "The psalm, or verses of a psalm, sung after the Epistle, was
 always entitled gradual, from being chanted on the steps (gradus) of
 the pulpit. When sung by one person without interruption, it was called
 tractus; when chanted alternately by several singers, it was termed
 responsory."--Palmer, Origines Liturgicæ, vol. ii. p. 46, note.

 [4225] i.e., while the lesson from the Old Testament is read. [But the
 Malabar Liturgy and Dr. Badger's translation insert before this,
 according to Hammond, the Sanctus Deus, Sanctus fortis, etc.]

 [4226] i.e., while the lesson from the Apostolical Epistles is read.

 [4227] Renaudot understands by the proclamation the reading aloud of
 the Gospel. [According to Hammond, the deacon's bidding prayer, during
 which, in Dr. Badger's translation the Offertory is said also.]

 [4228] Bema.

 [4229] The Malabar Liturgy fills up, "let him depart."

 [4230] [Here begins the Liturgy of the Faithful.]

 [4231] [The Offertory.]

 [4232] [Here the Edinburgh editors insert the title of this liturgy
 given on [349]p. 561, supra, and add: "In the Syriac copy, 70,
 Biblioth. Reg., this title does not occur, the service going forward
 without interruption--Etheridge." See [350]Elucidation IV.]

 [4233] [According to Badger.]

 [4234] [2 Cor. v. 19, 20.]

 [4235] Intellectualibus. [This prayer not well rendered.]

 [4236] i.e., Catholics. But the word Catholics is omitted in most mss.

 [4237] Which is said also in the Liturgy of Nestorius.

 [4238] In another ms. [Evidently corrupt and mediæval.]

 [4239] [Here begins the Anaphora.]

 [4240] [The Preface.]

 [4241] Spiritualibus. [Note 3, p. 545, supra.]

 [4242] [See Hammond, p. 274.]

 [4243] Hymnum.

 [4244] In another ms. that prayer begins thus:-- O Lord God Almighty,
 hear the voice of my cry before Thee at this time. Give ear, O Lord,
 and hear my groanings before Thy majesty, and accept the entreaty of
 me, a sinner, with which I call upon Thy grace, at this hour at which
 the sacrifice is offered to Thy Father. Have mercy on all creatures;
 spare the guilty; convert the erring; restore the oppressed; on the
 disquieted bestow rest; heal the weak; console the afflicted; and
 perfect the alms of those who work righteousness on account of Thy holy
 name. Have mercy on me also, a sinner, through Thy grace. O Lord God
 Almighty, may this oblation be accepted for the entire Holy Catholic
 Church; and for priests, kings, princes, and the rest as above.

 [4245] [Italics mine, conjecturally.]

 [4246] [The Invocation.]

 [4247] Hymnum.

 [4248] In another ms., says the Psalm li.

 [4249] Ps. cxxiii.

 [4250] [From Ps. cxxxviii. 7, 8.]

 [4251] i.e., the dead.

 [4252] [The first words of Dr. Butler's Ancient Geography teaches that
 the ancients knew but three; but see [351]p. 555, lines 7, 8.]

 [4253] Lit. "wish for wars."

 [4254] [So the true reading (Badger), though Edinburgh editors follow
 the illogical emendation (jucundum) of Renaudot.]

 [4255] [The reference to John vi. 32-40 is clear.]

 [4256] Ps. cxxiii.

 [4257] In the ms. of Elias, which we have followed, there is a defect,
 seeing that the whole recitation of the words of Christ is omitted
 through the fault of the transcriber, or because these ought to have
 been taken from another source, namely, from the Liturgy of Theodorus
 or Nestorius. In that which the Patriarch Joseph wrote at Rome, 1697,
 that entire passage is remodelled according to the Chaldean missal
 published at Rome, as in the mass, a translation of which was edited by
 Alexius Menesius. Since there were no other codices at hand, in this
 place it seemed good to place asterisks to indicate the defects.

 [4258] [Renaudot supplies the Latin word hostiam It is not the early
 patristic word, much less is it scriptural for thusi'a ]

 [4259] [Renaudot supplies the Latin word hostiam It is not the early
 patristic word, much less is it scriptural for thusi'a ]

 [4260] [Renaudot supplies the Latin word hostiam It is not the early
 patristic word, much less is it scriptural for thusi'a ]

 [4261] [Ut supra, note 4, this page; also Burbidge, p. 95, note 2.]

 [4262] In another ms.:-- He signs his forehead with the sign of the
 cross, and says:-- Glory to Thee, O Lord, who didst create me by Thy
 grace. Glory to Thee, O Lord, who didst call me by Thy mercy. Glory to
 Thee, O Lord, who didst appoint me the mediator of Thy gift; and on
 account of all the benefits to my weakness, ascribed unto Thee be
 praise, honour, thanksgiving, and adoration, now, etc.

 [4263] [Not klan, but me'lizein. The second fraction for communicating
 the faithful with the Humble Access.]

 [4264] [Adds the Embolisms.]

 [4265] [Beginning the Post-Communion.]

 [4266] Spiritualibus.

 ELUCIDATIONS.

 I.

 (Disciple of the holy Peter, [352]p. 551.)

 The early use of the originals of this liturgy in the Alexandrian
 patriarchate accounts for its bearing the name of St. Mark,--"sister's
 son to Barnabas," as St. Paul calls him. [4267] That he was St. Peter's
 pupil may be inferred from that Apostle's language, [4268] --"Marcus,
 my son." See Clement's testimony concerning him (with Eusebius) in vol.
 ii. [353]pp. 579, 580, this series. That he founded the "Evangelical
 See," though resting on great historic authority, [4269] seems to be
 doubted in our times by some.

 II.

 (Our holy father Mark, [354]p. 556.)

 While St. Mark could not have written this, it may, of course, have
 been added at a very early date. [4270] This most touching prayer bears
 marks of great antiquity, the reference to our "Christ-loving
 sovereign" comporting better with the early enthusiasm inspired by
 Constantine's conversion than with the disappointments incurred under
 his Arianizing or apostate successors. Now, this commemoration of St.
 Mark would of itself attach his name to the liturgy.

 But here is the place to note the principles of these primitive prayers
 for saints departed. (1) They could only be offered in behalf of the
 holy dead who had fallen asleep in full communion with Christ and His
 Church; (2) They were not prayers for their deliverance out of one
 place into another; (3) They recognised the repose (not yet the
 triumph) of the faithful departed as incomplete, and hence (4) invoked
 for them a blessed consummation of peace and joy in the resurrection.

 Now, all this is fatal to the Roman dogmas and usages, because (1) they
 thus include St. Mark and the Blessed Virgin in these commemorations;
 while Rome teaches, not only that these great saints went immediately
 to the excellent glory, and there have reigned with Christ ever since
 they died, but (2) that on this very ground, and that of their
 supererogatory merits, the Pontiff holds a purse [4271] of their
 excessive righteousness to dispense to meaner Christians.

 St. Augustine speaks of his dear Nebridius as in Abraham's bosom,
 [4272] but finds comfort in commemorating him and Monica his mother,
 "because it is so comfortable." This is his idea, in a word: "Et credo
 jam feceris quod te rogo, sed (Ps. cxix. 108) voluntaria oris mei,
 approba, Domine."

 III.

 (Holy things for the holy, [355]p. 559.)

 Bingham [4273] has so fully elucidated this by quotations from
 Chrysostom (Hom. vii.) and others, that one might think it useless to
 attach to it any other meaning than that which Chrysostom understands
 in it; viz., "Holy things for holy persons." It occurs just before the
 communicating of the faithful, and has nothing whatever to do with the
 "elevation of the host,"--a Western ceremony of the fourteenth century.
 [4274] Yet, in an otherwise (generally) useful manual of liturgies, an
 attempt is made to give it this meaning; and the preceding prayer of
 "Intense Adoration," addressed to the Great High Priest in the heavens,
 is debased to eke out the weak idea. Nothing could be more averse to
 the primitive principle of worship; [4275] but it is sufficient to note
 the fact that the "elevation of the host" revolutionized the
 eucharistic worship of the West as soon as it was established. (1) It
 abolished the Eucharist practically as the synaxis, or communion of the
 faithful, and made it only a sacrifice for them in their behalf; (2)
 not to be eaten and received, but to be gazed at; (3) not for all the
 faithful at all times, excluding even catechumens from beholding it,
 but to be displayed to all eyes in pompous ceremonials, carried through
 the streets, and dispensed only in half-communion, once a year, to the
 individual communicant. All these ancient liturgies, corrupted as they
 are in all the mss. we possess, are yet liturgies for communicating the
 faithful, in their turns, [4276] one and all; and, so far, they are
 true to the Scriptures and the precepts of Christ and His Apostles. But
 well does the pious Hirscher exclaim, with reference to the Mass, as he
 was obliged to celebrate it in his own gorgeous cathedral at Freiburg
 in the Breisgau: "What would an Apostle think we were doing, should he
 enter during our ceremonies?" Also, "I know all that can be said in
 their favour. I know just as well that by them the spirit is turned
 apart from internal godliness, and borne away; and that, with such
 appeals to sense, withdrawal from things of sense becomes
 impossible....God is a Spirit: He looks to be adored in spirit and in
 truth, and all ceremonial which dulls the adoration [4277] of the
 spirit is odious to God. To glorify self, as His minister, before the
 King of kings, before the majesty of the Creator, before His Christ,
 naked and crucified,--is it not an absurdity, a ceremony of
 contradictions? The people no longer comprehend the ceremonial...to see
 them satisfied by mere corporal attendance, is it not deplorable? They
 do not understand Latin. Is it not melancholy that they take no real
 part in the touching offices of the Holy Week? Is not a deplorable
 indifference the result; in France, for example? Nay, at Rome also?"
 [4278]

 His remonstrances were vain; he was cruelly censured, yet he died in
 the Papal communion. Dear Hirscher! The venerable man kissed me when I
 parted from him in 1851, [4279] and gave me his blessing with a
 primitive spirit of Christian charity. I gratefully quote him here.

 In Germany a passing stranger often sees the pious peasantry at Mass,
 singing with all their hearts their beautiful German hymns. It
 misleads, however. They are not attending to the Mass, but consoling
 themselves by spiritual songs, while it goes on without their
 assistance. The bell rings: they adore the host, but that is all their
 relation to the worship of the Christian liturgies. Hirscher loved
 their hymns, but bewailed the utter loss of their liturgic communion,
 once common to the faithful. [4280]

 IV.

 (Teachers of the Easterns, etc., [356]p. 561.)

 The apostle Thaddeus is called Addai in Syriac. Maris is said to have
 been one of the seventy disciples, but his name is not on the list
 ascribed to Hippolytus. He was the first bishop of the people now
 called "Nestorians," but whom Dr. Badger [4281] prefers to call "the
 Christians of Assyria."

 We have this liturgy in another form in Dr. Badger's important work,
 Nestorians and their Rituals. He selects that called "the Liturgy of
 Nestorius" from three which are in use among the Assyrians, but
 criticises the translation of Renaudot as not entirely faultless. It is
 selected by Dr. Badger because of its reputed Nestorianism; while
 Hammond gives us what is here translated, in Renaudot's Latin. [4282]
 We must bear in mind, that, since the Ephesine Council (a.d. 431),
 these Christians have been separated from the communion of Eastern
 orthodoxy.

 The Malabar Liturgy should be carefully compared with this by the
 student. A convenient translation of it is to be found in Neale and
 Littledale. A most important fact, by the way, is noted in their
 translation; [4283] viz., that in this Malabar "the invocation of the
 Holy Ghost, contrary to the use of every other Oriental liturgy,
 preceded the words of institution;" that is to say, in the work of the
 Portuguese revisers, a work from which Dr. Neale and his colleague feel
 justified in making "a considerable alteration" as to the order of the
 prayers.

 The words of institution are found in the Malabar, and suggest that
 they belong not less to this Liturgy of the Assyrians, though, ex summa
 verecundia, [4284] they are omitted from the transcript, as the Lord's
 Prayer is omitted in the Clementine.

 The normal form of this corrupted liturgy is credited with extreme
 antiquity by Dr. Neale. To his learned and cogent reasoning on the
 subject the student should by all means refer. [4285]

 V.

 (For all the prophets and confessors, [357]p. 565.)

 These commemorations of the dead, it will be noted, are in behalf of
 the most glorious apostles and saints, and for martyrs who go straight
 to glory. Obviously, as Usher has said, [4286] for whatever purpose,
 then, the departed were commemorated, it was not to change their estate
 before the resurrection, much less to relieve them from purgatorial
 penalties. This comes out in the "Liturgy of St. Chrysostom" (so
 called), where it is said: "We offer to Thee this reasonable service
 for those who have fallen asleep in faith,...patriarchs, apostles,
 evangelists, martyrs,...and every just one made perfect in the faith:
 especially our all-holy, undefiled, most blessed Lady, Theotokos and
 ever-virgin Mary," etc. But she, they tell us, was assumed into glory,
 like Christ Himself, and reigns with Him as "Queen of Angels," etc. See
 Elucidation II. p. 569.

 VI.

 (The propitiatory blood, etc., [358]p. 566.)

 The peril of confounding the early use of this idea of propitiation
 with the mediæval theory, which is quite another, is well pointed out
 and enforced by Burbidge. [4287] The primitive writers and the ancient
 liturgies "do not regard the Eucharist as being itself a propitiatory
 offering," but it is the perpetual pleading of the blood of
 propitiation once offered. Thus St. Chrysostom: "We do not offer
 another sacrifice, but always the same." So far, his words might be
 quoted to favour the Middle-Age doctrine; but he guards himself, and
 adds: [4288] "or, rather, we make a memorial of the sacrifice."

 The rhetoric of the liturgies and of the Fathers was unhappily made
 into the logic of the Schoolmen, and hence the stupendous system of
 propitiatory Masses, with Masses for the dead, and that traffic in
 Masses which so fearfully defiles the priesthood of Western Europe and
 the Spanish and Portuguese colonies in America. In vain does the pious
 Hirscher complain: [4289] "The rich, then, are the happy sinners in
 this respect: they can buy innumerable Masses, and establish them in
 perpetuity; their privileges have no limit, and their advantages over
 the poor extend through all eternity." His book was put into the Index
 (Acts xvi. 19, xix. 27), but it was never answered.

 VII.

 Let me now recur to Elucidation III. on [359]p. 507, to which I would
 here add the following from Bishop Williams, as there quoted:--

 "In both the Mozarabic and the Gallican Liturgies there was an
 invocation as well as an oblation. Irenæus [4290] says (and he, writing
 at Lyons, must have in mind the Gallican Liturgy), The bread which is
 of the earth, having received the invocation of God, is no longer
 common bread, but the Eucharist.' The word translated invocation' is
 epi'klesin; and it is worthy of notice that Basil and Cyril of
 Jerusalem use the same word in evidently the same technical sense
 (Harvey's Irenæus, vol. ii. pp. 205-207 and notes). In another passage
 Irenæus [4291] speaks even more distinctly: We offer to God the bread
 and the cup of blessing, giving thanks to Him for that He hath
 commanded the earth to bring forth these fruits for our nourishment;
 and, having finished the offering, we invoke the Holy Spirit that He
 may exhibit (or declare, apophe'ne) this sacrifice and bread the body
 of Christ, and the cup the blood of Christ, that they who shall receive
 these antitypes may obtain remission of sins and everlasting life'
 (Harvey's Irenæus, vol. ii. p. 502). This passage is a remarkable one.
 It proves beyond question, that, in the time of Irenæus (d. a.d. 202 or
 208), the Liturgy of Gaul contained an invocation of the Holy Ghost
 following the oblation of the bread and cup. Moreover, when we compare
 the words of Irenæus with those of the Clementine Liturgy, their
 agreement is too clear and precise to be explained as a mere
 chance-matter. The liturgy reads, Send down Thy Holy Spirit on this
 sacrifice, the witness of the sufferings of the Lord Jesus, that He may
 exhibit (apophe'ne) this bread, the body of Thy Christ, and this cup,
 the blood of Thy Christ, that they who shall receive,' [4292] etc.
 Irenæus says as above, using the same word (apophe'ne), a word which is
 found, it is believed, in no liturgy but the Clementine."

 Now I humbly suggest that Justin Martyr and Irenæus concur in giving us
 evidence that the Clementine Liturgy is substantially that which was
 used in Rome and Gaul in their times. The latter may have received it
 from Polycarp. The use of the Roman and the Greek churches was uniform
 in his day, as may be inferred from the intercourse of Polycarp and
 Victor. [4293]


 [4267] Col. iv. 10.

 [4268] Compare Acts xii. 12. St. Peter may have baptized him then.

 [4269] Lardner's quotations from Jerome, Credib., vol. iv. p. 442 et
 alibi.

 [4270] As with Moses, Exod. xxxiv. 5.

 [4271] Bellarmine, De Indulg., i. 2.

 [4272] Confessions, ix. 3. 12, et alibi

 [4273] Antiq., book i. cap. iv. Sec. 5; book xiii. cap. vi. sec. 7;
 book xv. cap. iii. sec. 31.

 [4274] See Roman Mass, Hammond, p. 334.

 [4275] As illustrated in Freeman's important work. See p. 536, note 2.

 [4276] See Apostolic Constitutions, pp. [360]490, [361]548, supra.

 [4277] The "Intense Adoration" of the liturgies.

 [4278] Die Christlichen Zustände der Gegenwart, Frieburg, 1850. My
 translation appeared in Oxford in 1852, and is often advertised in old
 book catalogues as Sympathies of the Continent; or, Proposals for a New
 Reformation.

 [4279] On St. Bartholomew's Day.

 [4280] See his Study of the Eucharist. He tried to revive primitive
 views of the Eucharist in this excellent work on the subject.

 [4281] See his contribution to the Liverpool Church Congress of 1869.
 Bartlett & Co., London.

 [4282] P. 267.

 [4283] P. 165, ed. of 1869.

 [4284] Hammond, p. lx., Introduction.

 [4285] General Introduction, etc., vol. i. p. 319, etc., ed. of 1850.

 [4286] See vol. vi. Elucidation IV. [362]p. 541, this series.

 [4287] Liturgies, etc., p. 11.

 [4288] Opp., tom. xii. p. 131, ed. Migne

 [4289] Christliche Zustände, etc., p. 74.

 [4290] See vol. i. p. 486, [363]note 6, this series.

 [4291] Fragment xxxviii. vol. i. [364]p. 574, this series.

 [4292] See [365]p. 489, supra.

 [4293] Fragment iii. vol. i. [366]p. 568, this series.

 Indexes

Index of Scripture References

 Genesis

 [367]1 [368]1 [369]1 [370]1:1 [371]1:16-17 [372]1:26
 [373]1:26 [374]1:26 [375]1:26-27 [376]1:27 [377]1:28
 [378]1:28 [379]1:31 [380]1:31 [381]2 [382]2:7 [383]2:8
 [384]2:10 [385]2:24 [386]2:24 [387]3:16 [388]3:17 [389]3:19
 [390]3:24 [391]4 [392]4 [393]4 [394]4 [395]4:7 [396]4:10
 [397]4:15 [398]5 [399]6 [400]6:3 [401]6:11 [402]6:14
 [403]7 [404]7:2 [405]8 [406]9 [407]9 [408]9:3 [409]9:6
 [410]9:6 [411]9:23 [412]9:25 [413]10:32 [414]12 [415]12
 [416]13:16 [417]14:13 [418]17:7 [419]18:25 [420]18:27
 [421]19 [422]19 [423]19:24 [424]22:14 [425]22:17 [426]26
 [427]26:3 [428]27:29 [429]28:15 [430]32 [431]32:29 [432]35
 [433]39 [434]46:27 [435]48:4 [436]49 [437]49:8-9 [438]49:10
 [439]49:10 [440]49:16 [441]49:16 [442]49:29-31 [443]50:1

 Exodus

 [444]1 [445]2:13 [446]2:14 [447]3 [448]3 [449]3:2
 [450]3:6 [451]3:14-15 [452]4 [453]4 [454]7 [455]7
 [456]7:1 [457]7:1 [458]10:25 [459]12 [460]13:19 [461]13:21
 [462]14:28 [463]15:20 [464]15:20 [465]15:26 [466]16
 [467]16:8 [468]17:6 [469]18 [470]18 [471]19 [472]19:5-6
 [473]20 [474]20 [475]20:12 [476]20:13 [477]20:13-14
 [478]20:14 [479]20:15 [480]20:16 [481]20:17 [482]20:17
 [483]20:17 [484]20:17 [485]20:24 [486]21:17 [487]21:22-23
 [488]21:23 [489]22:9 [490]22:12 [491]22:18 [492]22:19
 [493]22:28 [494]22:28 [495]22:28 [496]23:2 [497]23:3
 [498]23:3 [499]23:7 [500]23:7-8 [501]23:8 [502]23:17
 [503]23:20 [504]24 [505]24:7-8 [506]25:2 [507]28 [508]29
 [509]29:36 [510]29:38 [511]29:39 [512]29:41 [513]31 [514]32
 [515]32:1 [516]32:4 [517]32:4 [518]32:4 [519]33:11
 [520]33:11 [521]33:17 [522]34 [523]34:5 [524]34:28

 Leviticus

 [525]5:16 [526]8 [527]15 [528]15:31 [529]15:31 [530]15:31
 [531]17 [532]18:19 [533]18:22 [534]18:22 [535]19:6
 [536]19:11 [537]19:15 [538]19:15 [539]19:17 [540]19:17
 [541]19:17 [542]19:18 [543]19:18 [544]19:18 [545]19:18
 [546]19:26 [547]19:26 [548]19:27 [549]19:27 [550]19:31
 [551]20:10 [552]20:13 [553]21:5 [554]21:5 [555]21:7
 [556]21:14 [557]21:17 [558]23:18 [559]26:27-28

 Numbers

 [560]3 [561]6:24 [562]11:31 [563]11:31 [564]12:1 [565]12:2
 [566]12:3 [567]12:3 [568]12:7-8 [569]12:8 [570]12:14
 [571]13:8 [572]13:16 [573]14:5 [574]14:10 [575]16 [576]16
 [577]16 [578]16 [579]16 [580]16 [581]16 [582]16 [583]16:3
 [584]16:13 [585]16:15 [586]16:21 [587]16:41 [588]17 [589]18
 [590]18:1 [591]18:1 [592]18:8 [593]18:12 [594]23 [595]23
 [596]23:19 [597]23:23 [598]23:23 [599]24 [600]24:9
 [601]24:16-19 [602]24:17 [603]24:17 [604]25 [605]25:3 [606]31

 Deuteronomy

 [607]1:16 [608]1:17 [609]1:17 [610]1:17 [611]1:17 [612]1:17
 [613]4:17 [614]4:19 [615]4:39 [616]5:31 [617]5:32 [618]6:4
 [619]6:4 [620]6:4 [621]6:5 [622]6:5 [623]6:6 [624]6:7
 [625]12 [626]12:5 [627]12:6 [628]12:21 [629]12:24
 [630]12:32 [631]15:1 [632]15:23 [633]16:16 [634]16:20
 [635]16:20 [636]17:7 [637]18 [638]18:10 [639]18:10-11
 [640]18:15 [641]18:17-19 [642]19:13 [643]19:14 [644]19:15
 [645]19:15 [646]19:17 [647]19:19 [648]22:22 [649]23
 [650]23:1 [651]23:7 [652]23:7 [653]23:17 [654]23:17-18
 [655]23:18 [656]25:4 [657]27 [658]27 [659]27 [660]27:9
 [661]27:25 [662]27:25 [663]28:66 [664]28:66 [665]30:6
 [666]30:15 [667]30:15 [668]30:19 [669]30:19 [670]32
 [671]32:6 [672]32:8 [673]34:8 [674]34:10

 Joshua

 [675]1:8 [676]3:10 [677]5 [678]5:2 [679]5:14 [680]6
 [681]6 [682]6:4 [683]7 [684]7 [685]10 [686]24

 Judges

 [687]2:13 [688]4:4 [689]4:4

 1 Samuel

 [690]1 [691]1:15 [692]2 [693]2:35 [694]7 [695]8 [696]10:5
 [697]12:3 [698]13 [699]13:13 [700]15 [701]15:22 [702]15:23
 [703]15:23 [704]16:7

 2 Samuel

 [705]6 [706]7:4-5 [707]7:12 [708]12 [709]12:13 [710]15:3
 [711]18 [712]20:1

 1 Kings

 [713]9:6-9 [714]9:7-9 [715]11:5 [716]11:7 [717]12 [718]12
 [719]13 [720]13:33 [721]14 [722]17 [723]17:9 [724]18
 [725]18 [726]18:28 [727]19:8 [728]19:16 [729]19:18 [730]21

 2 Kings

 [731]2 [732]4 [733]5 [734]5 [735]6 [736]8 [737]11:3-4
 [738]13 [739]20 [740]22:1 [741]22:14 [742]22:14 [743]25

 1 Chronicles

 [744]6 [745]7:19-22 [746]9:22 [747]15:21 [748]21

 2 Chronicles

 [749]5:13 [750]16:9 [751]18 [752]19:2 [753]20:37 [754]23:3
 [755]24:1 [756]26 [757]26 [758]26 [759]26 [760]26 [761]33
 [762]35

 Ezra

 [763]1:2 [764]8

 Nehemiah

 [765]3 [766]8 [767]8:10 [768]9:26

 Esther

 [769]4:16

 Job

 [770]1 [771]9:8 [772]10:10 [773]14:4 [774]20:15 [775]20:18
 [776]31:5-6 [777]31:6 [778]35:7-8 [779]38 [780]38:10-11
 [781]38:11 [782]40:24 [783]42

 Psalms

 [784]1:1 [785]1:1-2 [786]1:2 [787]1:5 [788]2:1-2 [789]2:7
 [790]2:7 [791]2:11 [792]3:5 [793]3:14 [794]4:2 [795]4:4
 [796]4:4 [797]4:4 [798]4:9 [799]4:14-15 [800]4:15 [801]4:24
 [802]5:6 [803]5:8 [804]5:16 [805]6:1 [806]6:5 [807]6:9
 [808]7 [809]7:4 [810]7:4 [811]7:11 [812]7:15 [813]8
 [814]9:6 [815]9:8 [816]9:24 [817]10:1 [818]10:1 [819]10:1
 [820]10:3 [821]10:3-4 [822]10:4 [823]11:7 [824]12 [825]12
 [826]12:5 [827]12:5 [828]12:9 [829]13 [830]13:1 [831]13:5
 [832]15:5 [833]16:7 [834]16:10 [835]16:10 [836]16:12
 [837]16:15 [838]16:15 [839]17 [840]17:2 [841]17:8 [842]17:8
 [843]18:26 [844]18:43 [845]18:43-44 [846]19:1-2 [847]19:7
 [848]19:73 [849]19:108 [850]21:8 [851]21:8 [852]22:12
 [853]22:16 [854]22:16 [855]22:16-18 [856]22:16-18 [857]22:18
 [858]22:27-28 [859]23 [860]23 [861]23 [862]26:4 [863]26:5
 [864]27:1 [865]27:12 [866]28:3-4 [867]28:4-5 [868]28:9
 [869]28:9 [870]30:3 [871]30:3-4 [872]31:1 [873]31:1
 [874]32:7 [875]33 [876]33:6 [877]33:6 [878]34 [879]35:15-16
 [880]35:15-16 [881]36:1 [882]36:25 [883]37:16 [884]38:7-8
 [885]39:5-6 [886]39:16 [887]39:21-22 [888]40:11 [889]41:1
 [890]41:5 [891]41:10 [892]42 [893]42:1 [894]44:20 [895]45
 [896]45 [897]45:1 [898]45:1 [899]45:6-7 [900]45:13
 [901]45:16 [902]45:17 [903]48:6 [904]50:9 [905]50:12
 [906]50:12 [907]50:23 [908]50:23 [909]51 [910]51 [911]51:10
 [912]51:10 [913]51:12 [914]51:17 [915]55:17 [916]62:11
 [917]63:11 [918]64:1 [919]67:17 [920]68:13 [921]68:16
 [922]68:17 [923]69:21 [924]69:21 [925]69:21 [926]72
 [927]72:1 [928]72:1-2 [929]72:6-7 [930]74:4 [931]74:15
 [932]74:16 [933]74:19 [934]78:24 [935]78:67-69 [936]82:6
 [937]82:6 [938]82:8 [939]83:12 [940]85:12 [941]90:2
 [942]90:4 [943]90:4 [944]91:5-6 [945]91:7 [946]94:21-22
 [947]97:5

 Proverbs

 [948]1:8 [949]1:16 [950]3:9 [951]3:9 [952]3:9 [953]3:28
 [954]5:3-4 [955]5:11 [956]5:18 [957]5:22 [958]6:2 [959]6:6
 [960]6:22 [961]7:1 [962]7:25-26 [963]8:20 [964]8:22
 [965]8:22 [966]8:22-25 [967]8:22-31 [968]8:25 [969]9:1
 [970]9:8 [971]9:10 [972]10:7 [973]10:7 [974]10:7 [975]10:12
 [976]10:18 [977]11:1 [978]11:4 [979]11:22 [980]11:25
 [981]11:26 [982]12:4 [983]12:4 [984]12:11 [985]12:28
 [986]12:28 [987]13:17 [988]13:20 [989]13:20 [990]13:24
 [991]14:1 [992]14:5 [993]14:12 [994]14:29 [995]14:29
 [996]14:31 [997]14:32 [998]15:1 [999]16:6 [1000]16:6
 [1001]16:6 [1002]16:6 [1003]18:3 [1004]18:22 [1005]19:13
 [1006]19:14 [1007]19:14 [1008]19:17 [1009]19:17 [1010]19:18
 [1011]19:18 [1012]19:24 [1013]19:24 [1014]20:9 [1015]20:9
 [1016]20:22 [1017]21:9 [1018]21:13 [1019]21:13 [1020]21:19
 [1021]21:19 [1022]21:27 [1023]22:10 [1024]23 [1025]23:14
 [1026]23:21 [1027]23:29-30 [1028]23:31 [1029]24:11
 [1030]24:27 [1031]26:2 [1032]26:9 [1033]26:17 [1034]26:27
 [1035]27:1 [1036]29:12 [1037]29:17 [1038]30:4 [1039]30:6
 [1040]31:4 [1041]31:10

 Ecclesiastes

 [1042]2:25 [1043]2:25 [1044]3:18-21 [1045]4:5 [1046]4:5
 [1047]5:5 [1048]5:5 [1049]7:26 [1050]10:1 [1051]10:18
 [1052]12:7 [1053]12:10 [1054]12:14

 Song of Solomon

 [1055]2:15

 Isaiah

 [1056]1:2-3 [1057]1:7 [1058]1:8 [1059]1:11 [1060]1:13-14
 [1061]1:16 [1062]1:18 [1063]1:19 [1064]1:22 [1065]1:23
 [1066]2:2 [1067]4:1 [1068]4:1 [1069]5:2 [1070]5:6 [1071]5:7
 [1072]5:8 [1073]5:8 [1074]5:20 [1075]5:23 [1076]5:23
 [1077]6:2 [1078]6:3 [1079]6:3 [1080]6:9-10 [1081]6:9-10
 [1082]7:14 [1083]7:14 [1084]7:14 [1085]8:20 [1086]8:20
 [1087]9:6 [1088]9:6 [1089]9:6 [1090]9:6 [1091]11:1
 [1092]11:1 [1093]11:1-2 [1094]11:2 [1095]11:2-3 [1096]11:4
 [1097]11:4 [1098]11:10 [1099]11:10 [1100]14:19 [1101]19:20
 [1102]19:20 [1103]22:13 [1104]26 [1105]28:11 [1106]29:13
 [1107]34:4 [1108]35:3 [1109]35:3-6 [1110]40:3 [1111]40:11
 [1112]42:6-7 [1113]42:6-7 [1114]44:6 [1115]45:1-3 [1116]45:8
 [1117]45:14 [1118]45:14-16 [1119]45:14-16 [1120]45:15
 [1121]50:5 [1122]50:5-6 [1123]51:10 [1124]52:5 [1125]52:5
 [1126]52:5 [1127]52:5 [1128]52:5 [1129]52:7 [1130]52:14
 [1131]53:1 [1132]53:1-6 [1133]53:4 [1134]53:7 [1135]53:7
 [1136]53:8 [1137]53:8-10 [1138]53:11 [1139]53:11 [1140]53:12
 [1141]53:12 [1142]53:12 [1143]54:1 [1144]54:14 [1145]54:14
 [1146]55:4 [1147]57:1 [1148]57:19 [1149]57:21 [1150]58:6
 [1151]58:6-7 [1152]58:7 [1153]58:7 [1154]58:9 [1155]58:9
 [1156]59:7-8 [1157]59:9 [1158]62:2 [1159]62:11 [1160]62:11
 [1161]63:10 [1162]63:10 [1163]63:10 [1164]64:1 [1165]64:8
 [1166]65:1 [1167]65:2 [1168]66:2 [1169]66:2 [1170]66:2
 [1171]66:2 [1172]66:5 [1173]66:18 [1174]66:18 [1175]66:18-19
 [1176]66:24 [1177]66:24 [1178]66:24

 Jeremiah

 [1179]1:5 [1180]1:5 [1181]1:5 [1182]2:10 [1183]2:11
 [1184]2:13 [1185]3:11 [1186]3:22 [1187]4:3-4 [1188]4:4
 [1189]5:7 [1190]5:22 [1191]6:20 [1192]7:11 [1193]7:16
 [1194]7:21-22 [1195]8:4-5 [1196]8:7-9 [1197]10:2 [1198]10:2
 [1199]10:2 [1200]11:18-19 [1201]11:19 [1202]12:7 [1203]12:7-8
 [1204]12:7-8 [1205]12:8 [1206]12:10 [1207]15:1 [1208]15:9
 [1209]15:9 [1210]15:16 [1211]15:17 [1212]15:19 [1213]17:9
 [1214]17:12 [1215]21:8 [1216]22:19 [1217]23:15 [1218]25:4-6
 [1219]26 [1220]28 [1221]29 [1222]29:22 [1223]31:31-32
 [1224]39

 Lamentations

 [1225]4:20 [1226]4:20

 Ezekiel

 [1227]2:7 [1228]3:12 [1229]5:7 [1230]8 [1231]8:16
 [1232]8:17-18 [1233]14:13-14 [1234]14:14 [1235]14:20
 [1236]16:52 [1237]18 [1238]18:2 [1239]18:6 [1240]18:7
 [1241]18:20 [1242]20:25 [1243]33 [1244]33:2 [1245]33:7
 [1246]33:11 [1247]34:2 [1248]34:3 [1249]34:4 [1250]35:6
 [1251]36:20-23 [1252]37:11 [1253]41

 Daniel

 [1254]2:34 [1255]2:47 [1256]3 [1257]3 [1258]3:7 [1259]4:27
 [1260]4:27 [1261]6:3 [1262]6:10 [1263]6:16 [1264]6:16
 [1265]6:25 [1266]7 [1267]7:7 [1268]7:10 [1269]7:10
 [1270]7:13 [1271]7:13 [1272]7:13 [1273]7:13-14 [1274]7:23
 [1275]8:13 [1276]9 [1277]9:25 [1278]9:27 [1279]10:2-3
 [1280]11:37 [1281]11:45 [1282]12 [1283]12:2 [1284]12:2-3
 [1285]12:3

 Hosea

 [1286]2:23 [1287]4:6 [1288]4:9 [1289]6:2 [1290]6:2
 [1291]9:4 [1292]10:12 [1293]10:13 [1294]13:13 [1295]13:13-14
 [1296]13:14

 Joel

 [1297]2:28 [1298]2:32

 Amos

 [1299]5:23 [1300]8:9-10 [1301]8:9-10 [1302]9:11

 Jonah

 [1303]1:17 [1304]2 [1305]2 [1306]3 [1307]3:5

 Micah

 [1308]4:2-3 [1309]5:5-6

 Nahum

 [1310]1:3 [1311]1:9

 Habakkuk

 [1312]2:9

 Haggai

 [1313]2:7

 Zechariah

 [1314]3:1 [1315]3:1-8 [1316]3:2 [1317]3:2 [1318]4:2
 [1319]4:10 [1320]4:10 [1321]4:10 [1322]4:14 [1323]7:9
 [1324]8:17 [1325]9:9 [1326]9:17 [1327]9:17 [1328]10:3
 [1329]12:1 [1330]12:10 [1331]12:10 [1332]12:10 [1333]13:1
 [1334]13:2 [1335]14:5 [1336]14:5 [1337]14:7

 Malachi

 [1338]1:5 [1339]1:6 [1340]1:6 [1341]1:6 [1342]1:6
 [1343]1:10-11 [1344]1:10-11 [1345]1:11 [1346]1:11 [1347]1:11
 [1348]1:11 [1349]1:11 [1350]1:11 [1351]1:14 [1352]1:14
 [1353]2:7 [1354]2:14 [1355]2:14-16 [1356]2:15 [1357]4:1
 [1358]4:4 [1359]4:5-6

 Matthew

 [1360]1:1 [1361]1:23 [1362]1:23 [1363]3:2 [1364]3:15
 [1365]3:17 [1366]5 [1367]5:5 [1368]5:5 [1369]5:5 [1370]5:7
 [1371]5:7 [1372]5:7 [1373]5:8 [1374]5:9 [1375]5:9
 [1376]5:11-12 [1377]5:11-12 [1378]5:17 [1379]5:18 [1380]5:19
 [1381]5:20 [1382]5:22 [1383]5:22 [1384]5:22 [1385]5:23-24
 [1386]5:23-24 [1387]5:23-24 [1388]5:26 [1389]5:28 [1390]5:33
 [1391]5:34 [1392]5:34 [1393]5:34 [1394]5:38 [1395]5:39
 [1396]5:39 [1397]5:40 [1398]5:40 [1399]5:41 [1400]5:41
 [1401]5:42 [1402]5:43 [1403]5:44 [1404]5:44 [1405]5:44
 [1406]5:44 [1407]5:44-45 [1408]5:45 [1409]5:45 [1410]5:45
 [1411]5:45 [1412]5:46 [1413]5:46-47 [1414]5:46-47 [1415]6:3-4
 [1416]6:5 [1417]6:5 [1418]6:9 [1419]6:9 [1420]6:9 [1421]6:9
 [1422]6:9 [1423]6:10 [1424]6:11 [1425]6:12 [1426]6:13
 [1427]6:16 [1428]6:20 [1429]6:21 [1430]6:24 [1431]6:24
 [1432]6:24 [1433]6:24 [1434]6:26 [1435]6:31 [1436]6:32
 [1437]7:2 [1438]7:2 [1439]7:6 [1440]7:6 [1441]7:6 [1442]7:6
 [1443]7:12 [1444]7:13-14 [1445]7:15 [1446]7:15 [1447]7:21
 [1448]7:23 [1449]8 [1450]8 [1451]8:12 [1452]9:2 [1453]9:2
 [1454]9:12 [1455]9:12 [1456]9:12 [1457]9:15 [1458]9:22
 [1459]9:33 [1460]10:2 [1461]10:10 [1462]10:12 [1463]10:12-13
 [1464]10:16 [1465]10:16 [1466]10:17 [1467]10:22 [1468]10:22
 [1469]10:23 [1470]10:23 [1471]10:23 [1472]10:28 [1473]10:28
 [1474]10:32 [1475]10:32 [1476]10:33 [1477]10:34 [1478]10:37
 [1479]10:40 [1480]10:40 [1481]10:41 [1482]11:5 [1483]11:28
 [1484]12:5 [1485]12:13 [1486]12:29 [1487]12:30 [1488]12:30
 [1489]12:31-32 [1490]12:32 [1491]12:36 [1492]12:36
 [1493]12:37 [1494]12:40 [1495]12:50 [1496]13:16
 [1497]13:27-30 [1498]13:31 [1499]13:51-52 [1500]14 [1501]14
 [1502]14:17 [1503]14:20 [1504]14:24 [1505]14:31 [1506]15:11
 [1507]16:24 [1508]16:26 [1509]16:26 [1510]16:27 [1511]17:24
 [1512]17:24 [1513]17:27 [1514]18:6-7 [1515]18:7 [1516]18:7
 [1517]18:10 [1518]18:11 [1519]18:12 [1520]18:14 [1521]18:15
 [1522]18:15-17 [1523]18:16 [1524]18:17 [1525]18:18
 [1526]18:20 [1527]18:21-22 [1528]18:21-35 [1529]18:22
 [1530]19:4 [1531]19:4-5 [1532]19:6 [1533]19:14 [1534]19:27-28
 [1535]19:29 [1536]20:25 [1537]20:26-27 [1538]20:28 [1539]21
 [1540]21:9 [1541]21:9 [1542]21:13 [1543]21:28 [1544]21:35
 [1545]21:39 [1546]21:42 [1547]21:43 [1548]22:21 [1549]22:21
 [1550]22:32 [1551]22:37 [1552]22:37 [1553]22:39 [1554]23:3
 [1555]23:16 [1556]23:35 [1557]23:38 [1558]24 [1559]24
 [1560]24 [1561]24:10 [1562]24:11-12 [1563]24:12
 [1564]24:12-13 [1565]24:15 [1566]24:24 [1567]24:24
 [1568]24:24 [1569]24:24 [1570]24:30 [1571]24:30
 [1572]24:30-31 [1573]24:31 [1574]24:42 [1575]24:51 [1576]25
 [1577]25:34 [1578]25:35 [1579]25:46 [1580]25:46 [1581]26
 [1582]26 [1583]26:15 [1584]26:21-22 [1585]26:29 [1586]26:30
 [1587]26:31 [1588]26:39 [1589]26:41 [1590]26:41 [1591]26:42
 [1592]26:47 [1593]27:5 [1594]27:9-10 [1595]27:24-25
 [1596]27:46 [1597]27:62 [1598]28 [1599]28:19 [1600]28:19
 [1601]28:19 [1602]28:19 [1603]28:19 [1604]28:19 [1605]28:20
 [1606]28:20

 Mark

 [1607]1:3 [1608]1:44 [1609]2:20 [1610]3:1 [1611]3:29-30
 [1612]4 [1613]4:33 [1614]4:38 [1615]5 [1616]5:9 [1617]5:34
 [1618]6 [1619]7:22 [1620]11:10 [1621]11:17 [1622]12:29
 [1623]12:30-31 [1624]12:32 [1625]12:42 [1626]13:18-20
 [1627]13:27 [1628]13:35 [1629]14 [1630]14:8-9 [1631]14:25
 [1632]16:9 [1633]16:14 [1634]16:16 [1635]16:17-18

 Luke

 [1636]1 [1637]1:5 [1638]2 [1639]2 [1640]2:14 [1641]2:14
 [1642]2:29 [1643]2:36 [1644]2:36 [1645]2:36 [1646]2:51
 [1647]3:13 [1648]3:14 [1649]4:24 [1650]5:20 [1651]5:32
 [1652]5:35 [1653]6:13 [1654]6:22-23 [1655]6:27 [1656]6:28
 [1657]6:28 [1658]6:29 [1659]6:29 [1660]6:29 [1661]6:29
 [1662]6:30 [1663]6:30 [1664]6:30 [1665]6:30 [1666]6:31
 [1667]6:32 [1668]6:32 [1669]6:32 [1670]6:32-34 [1671]6:37
 [1672]6:37 [1673]6:37-38 [1674]6:40 [1675]6:41 [1676]7
 [1677]7:47 [1678]8 [1679]9 [1680]9:26 [1681]9:30 [1682]10:3
 [1683]10:5-6 [1684]10:7 [1685]10:7 [1686]10:16 [1687]10:16
 [1688]10:16 [1689]10:18 [1690]10:19 [1691]10:20 [1692]11:3
 [1693]12:4-5 [1694]12:35 [1695]12:35 [1696]12:37 [1697]12:48
 [1698]12:57 [1699]13:27 [1700]14 [1701]14:11 [1702]14:13
 [1703]15 [1704]15:4 [1705]15:7 [1706]15:7 [1707]15:7
 [1708]15:21 [1709]16 [1710]16:10-12 [1711]16:13 [1712]16:15
 [1713]17:1 [1714]17:14 [1715]18 [1716]18:13 [1717]18:14
 [1718]18:14 [1719]18:27 [1720]19:10 [1721]19:10 [1722]19:42
 [1723]19:44 [1724]19:44 [1725]19:46 [1726]20:38 [1727]21:3-4
 [1728]21:10-11 [1729]21:18 [1730]21:19 [1731]21:21 [1732]22
 [1733]22:15 [1734]22:19 [1735]22:25 [1736]22:31 [1737]22:32
 [1738]22:34 [1739]22:47 [1740]23:2 [1741]23:14 [1742]23:21
 [1743]23:34 [1744]23:34 [1745]23:39 [1746]23:46 [1747]23:46
 [1748]24:18

 John

 [1749]1:1 [1750]1:1-3 [1751]1:1-3 [1752]1:9 [1753]1:9
 [1754]1:18 [1755]2:3 [1756]2:19-20 [1757]2:19-21 [1758]3:5
 [1759]3:29 [1760]3:34-35 [1761]3:36 [1762]4:21-23 [1763]4:44
 [1764]5:22 [1765]5:25 [1766]5:28-29 [1767]5:29 [1768]5:39
 [1769]5:46 [1770]6 [1771]6:27 [1772]6:29 [1773]6:32-40
 [1774]6:45 [1775]6:67 [1776]7:22 [1777]7:24 [1778]8:11
 [1779]8:24 [1780]8:34 [1781]8:44 [1782]9:1 [1783]9:9
 [1784]10:11-12 [1785]10:16 [1786]10:29 [1787]10:30
 [1788]10:30 [1789]11 [1790]11:25 [1791]11:48 [1792]11:51
 [1793]11:51-52 [1794]12 [1795]12:6 [1796]12:6 [1797]12:13
 [1798]12:25 [1799]12:43 [1800]12:48 [1801]13:4-5 [1802]13:17
 [1803]13:20 [1804]13:21 [1805]13:34 [1806]13:35 [1807]14:6
 [1808]14:10 [1809]14:11 [1810]14:13 [1811]15:1 [1812]15:13
 [1813]15:15 [1814]15:20 [1815]16:32 [1816]16:33 [1817]17:3
 [1818]17:3 [1819]17:3 [1820]17:3 [1821]17:3 [1822]17:4
 [1823]17:4 [1824]17:6 [1825]17:6 [1826]17:11 [1827]17:17
 [1828]17:25 [1829]18:1 [1830]18:38 [1831]19:6 [1832]19:12
 [1833]19:15 [1834]19:15 [1835]19:36 [1836]19:37 [1837]20:11
 [1838]20:25

 Acts

 [1839]1:1 [1840]1:3 [1841]1:4 [1842]1:9 [1843]1:9
 [1844]1:18 [1845]1:20 [1846]2:4 [1847]2:33 [1848]2:42
 [1849]3:1 [1850]3:15 [1851]3:24 [1852]4:6 [1853]4:32
 [1854]5 [1855]5:40-41 [1856]5:41 [1857]6 [1858]6 [1859]6
 [1860]6:3 [1861]6:3 [1862]7 [1863]7 [1864]7:56 [1865]8
 [1866]8 [1867]8 [1868]8 [1869]8:14 [1870]8:19 [1871]8:20
 [1872]9 [1873]9:5 [1874]9:5 [1875]10 [1876]10:13
 [1877]10:34-35 [1878]10:42 [1879]10:45 [1880]11:15
 [1881]11:28 [1882]12:12 [1883]12:23 [1884]13:10 [1885]13:22
 [1886]14:4 [1887]14:14 [1888]14:23 [1889]15 [1890]15:1
 [1891]15:7-8 [1892]15:9-10 [1893]15:10 [1894]15:13
 [1895]15:20 [1896]15:23 [1897]15:29 [1898]15:32 [1899]16:19
 [1900]16:37-38 [1901]17:18 [1902]17:28 [1903]17:28 [1904]19:6
 [1905]19:13 [1906]19:14 [1907]19:27 [1908]20:28 [1909]20:28
 [1910]20:35 [1911]20:35 [1912]21:9 [1913]21:10 [1914]24:15
 [1915]24:15 [1916]26:6 [1917]26:14 [1918]28:22

 Romans

 [1919]1:19-21 [1920]1:21-23 [1921]1:22 [1922]1:22 [1923]1:25
 [1924]1:25 [1925]1:28 [1926]2:14-15 [1927]3:15 [1928]4:17
 [1929]5:9-10 [1930]6:3 [1931]6:3 [1932]6:5 [1933]6:9
 [1934]6:16-17 [1935]7:8 [1936]7:11 [1937]7:15 [1938]8:21
 [1939]11:4 [1940]12:1 [1941]12:2 [1942]12:14 [1943]12:19
 [1944]13:8 [1945]14:20 [1946]15:27 [1947]16:7 [1948]16:20
 [1949]16:21 [1950]16:25

 1 Corinthians

 [1951]1:10 [1952]1:20-22 [1953]1:21 [1954]2:7 [1955]2:9
 [1956]2:9 [1957]2:9 [1958]2:9 [1959]2:14 [1960]3:11-15
 [1961]3:13-15 [1962]4:4 [1963]4:16-17 [1964]6:1 [1965]6:19-20
 [1966]7:2 [1967]7:2-7 [1968]7:17 [1969]7:17 [1970]7:17
 [1971]7:25 [1972]7:25 [1973]7:31 [1974]7:34 [1975]8:4
 [1976]9:9 [1977]10:20 [1978]11:1-2 [1979]11:3 [1980]11:3
 [1981]11:3 [1982]11:3 [1983]11:5 [1984]11:5-6 [1985]11:19
 [1986]11:20-22 [1987]11:23 [1988]11:23 [1989]11:23
 [1990]11:26 [1991]11:59 [1992]12:3 [1993]12:8 [1994]12:28
 [1995]14:21 [1996]14:29 [1997]14:33 [1998]14:34 [1999]14:40
 [2000]15:5 [2001]15:7 [2002]15:19 [2003]15:23 [2004]15:32
 [2005]15:45-47 [2006]15:53 [2007]16:20 [2008]16:22

 2 Corinthians

 [2009]1:3 [2010]3:17-18 [2011]4:4 [2012]4:4 [2013]4:6
 [2014]5:17 [2015]5:19-20 [2016]6:5 [2017]6:14 [2018]6:16
 [2019]6:17 [2020]7:1 [2021]7:1 [2022]7:1 [2023]7:1
 [2024]7:1 [2025]8:19 [2026]8:23 [2027]11:5 [2028]11:13
 [2029]13:11

 Galatians

 [2030]1:8-9 [2031]1:19 [2032]1:19 [2033]3:10 [2034]3:20
 [2035]4:9 [2036]4:9 [2037]4:27 [2038]5:9 [2039]6:10
 [2040]6:14

 Ephesians

 [2041]1:9-10 [2042]1:13 [2043]1:23 [2044]2:12 [2045]2:17
 [2046]3:14-21 [2047]3:15 [2048]4:4 [2049]4:18 [2050]4:24
 [2051]4:26 [2052]4:26 [2053]4:26 [2054]5:14 [2055]5:18
 [2056]5:19 [2057]5:27 [2058]5:31-33 [2059]6 [2060]6:4
 [2061]6:4 [2062]6:5 [2063]6:5 [2064]6:5 [2065]6:6 [2066]6:7
 [2067]6:9

 Philippians

 [2068]2:2 [2069]2:9-10 [2070]2:10 [2071]2:17 [2072]3:11
 [2073]3:20 [2074]3:21 [2075]4:3 [2076]4:8 [2077]12:2

 Colossians

 [2078]1:15 [2079]1:15 [2080]1:15 [2081]1:18 [2082]1:26-27
 [2083]2:8 [2084]2:13-14 [2085]3:1 [2086]3:2 [2087]3:5
 [2088]3:10 [2089]3:16 [2090]3:22 [2091]4 [2092]4:1
 [2093]4:1 [2094]4:10 [2095]4:16-17

 1 Thessalonians

 [2096]2:6 [2097]4:14 [2098]4:16 [2099]4:17

 2 Thessalonians

 [2100]2 [2101]2 [2102]2:3-4 [2103]2:3-4 [2104]2:7
 [2105]2:7-9 [2106]2:8 [2107]2:8 [2108]2:10 [2109]2:11
 [2110]3:10 [2111]3:10

 1 Timothy

 [2112]1:6 [2113]1:17 [2114]2:1 [2115]2:1 [2116]2:2
 [2117]2:2 [2118]2:2 [2119]2:4 [2120]2:5 [2121]3:2 [2122]3:2
 [2123]3:4 [2124]3:4 [2125]3:6 [2126]3:6 [2127]3:12
 [2128]3:15 [2129]3:15 [2130]4:2 [2131]4:10 [2132]5:8
 [2133]5:9 [2134]5:9 [2135]5:11 [2136]6:2 [2137]6:8-10
 [2138]6:11 [2139]6:16

 2 Timothy

 [2140]1:5 [2141]2 [2142]2:5 [2143]2:15 [2144]2:18
 [2145]2:19 [2146]3:3-4 [2147]3:8 [2148]4:7 [2149]4:10
 [2150]4:21

 Titus

 [2151]1:6 [2152]1:10 [2153]2:12 [2154]3:1

 Philemon

 [2155]1:1 [2156]1:10

 Hebrews

 [2157]1:2 [2158]1:3 [2159]1:6 [2160]1:7 [2161]2 [2162]2:10
 [2163]4:8 [2164]5 [2165]5:1-3 [2166]5:4 [2167]5:5
 [2168]5:14 [2169]7:3 [2170]8:2 [2171]8:13 [2172]9:22
 [2173]9:24 [2174]10:1 [2175]10:22 [2176]10:30 [2177]11:19
 [2178]11:37 [2179]11:37 [2180]12:8 [2181]12:23 [2182]13:4
 [2183]13:7 [2184]13:15

 James

 [2185]1:9-10 [2186]1:12 [2187]2:1-8 [2188]3:2 [2189]5:14
 [2190]5:16 [2191]5:19-20 [2192]5:20

 1 Peter

 [2193]1:19 [2194]1:19 [2195]2:2 [2196]2:5 [2197]2:5
 [2198]2:5 [2199]2:9 [2200]2:9 [2201]2:9 [2202]2:9
 [2203]2:11 [2204]2:11 [2205]2:13 [2206]2:18 [2207]2:23
 [2208]3:6 [2209]3:13 [2210]3:20 [2211]3:21 [2212]4:4
 [2213]4:8 [2214]4:12 [2215]4:12 [2216]5:1 [2217]5:5
 [2218]5:5 [2219]5:14

 2 Peter

 [2220]3:9

 1 John

 [2221]1:22-23 [2222]3:1-8 [2223]4:1 [2224]4:1 [2225]4:8
 [2226]4:15

 Revelation

 [2227]1:3 [2228]1:10 [2229]1:10 [2230]1:11 [2231]1:13
 [2232]1:22 [2233]2 [2234]2:2 [2235]2:2 [2236]2:29 [2237]3:2
 [2238]4:4 [2239]4:5 [2240]4:5 [2241]4:6 [2242]5:6 [2243]5:6
 [2244]7:5-8 [2245]8 [2246]11 [2247]12:9 [2248]13
 [2249]19:12 [2250]20:5 [2251]21:7 [2252]22:20

 Tobit

 [2253]4:15 [2254]4:15 [2255]4:16 [2256]4:16 [2257]12:8-9

 Judith

 [2258]8 [2259]8 [2260]9:1 [2261]16:21 [2262]16:23

 Wisdom of Solomon

 [2263]2:12-22 [2264]2:12-22 [2265]3:1 [2266]3:1 [2267]10:6
 [2268]11:20

 Baruch

 [2269]3:35-37 [2270]3:35-37 [2271]3:35-37 [2272]4:4

 Susanna

 [2273]1:28 [2274]1:48

 1 Maccabees

 [2275]1 [2276]2:31-41

 Sirach

 [2277]1:28 [2278]2:4 [2279]3:30 [2280]4:31 [2281]4:31
 [2282]5:7 [2283]24:5-7 [2284]24:25 [2285]25:26 [2286]26:29
 [2287]30:11 [2288]30:12 [2289]31:25-31 [2290]49:16

Index of Scripture Commentary

 Revelation

 [2291]1:1 [2292]1:4 [2293]1:5 [2294]1:6 [2295]1:7
 [2296]1:12 [2297]1:13 [2298]1:14 [2299]1:15 [2300]1:15
 [2301]1:16 [2302]1:16 [2303]1:16 [2304]2:2 [2305]2:4-5
 [2306]2:6 [2307]2:9 [2308]2:10 [2309]2:11 [2310]2:14-16
 [2311]2:17 [2312]2:24 [2313]2:25-26 [2314]2:28 [2315]3:2
 [2316]3:8 [2317]3:10 [2318]3:12 [2319]3:15 [2320]3:16
 [2321]3:18 [2322]4:1 [2323]4:2 [2324]4:3 [2325]4:5
 [2326]4:6 [2327]4:7-10 [2328]4:8 [2329]4:10 [2330]5:1
 [2331]5:2-3 [2332]5:4 [2333]5:5 [2334]5:8-9 [2335]6:1-2
 [2336]6:3-4 [2337]6:5 [2338]6:6 [2339]6:7-8 [2340]6:9
 [2341]6:12 [2342]6:13 [2343]6:14 [2344]7:2 [2345]7:9
 [2346]8:1 [2347]8:13 [2348]9:13-14 [2349]10:1-2 [2350]10:3
 [2351]10:10 [2352]10:11 [2353]11:1 [2354]11:2 [2355]11:3
 [2356]11:4 [2357]11:5 [2358]11:7 [2359]11:8 [2360]11:19
 [2361]12:1 [2362]12:3 [2363]12:4 [2364]12:5 [2365]12:6
 [2366]12:7-9 [2367]12:14 [2368]12:15 [2369]12:16 [2370]13:1
 [2371]13:2 [2372]13:11 [2373]13:13 [2374]13:18 [2375]14:6
 [2376]14:8 [2377]14:15 [2378]14:19-20 [2379]15:1 [2380]15:2
 [2381]16:9 [2382]17:1-6 [2383]17:3 [2384]17:10 [2385]17:11
 [2386]17:16 [2387]19:11 [2388]20:1-3 [2389]20:4-5 [2390]20:6
 [2391]20:8-10 [2392]21:16

Index of Citations

 * cont. Ath: [2393]1 [2394]2 [2395]3
 * in Relation to the Messiah: [2396]1
 * Æn.: [2397]1 [2398]2 [2399]3 [2400]4 [2401]5 [2402]6 [2403]7
 [2404]8 [2405]9 [2406]10 [2407]11 [2408]12 [2409]13 [2410]14
 [2411]15 [2412]16 [2413]17 [2414]18
 * Æneid: [2415]1 [2416]2 [2417]3 [2418]4 [2419]5 [2420]6 [2421]7
 [2422]8 [2423]9 [2424]10 [2425]11 [2426]12 [2427]13 [2428]14
 [2429]15 [2430]16
 * . Irenæi Fragmenta Anecdota, etc., quæ illustravit, denique
 Liturgia Græca Jo. Ern. : [2431]1
 * A Hundred Enigmas: [2432]1
 * Acad.: [2433]1
 * Acta Sanctorum: [2434]1
 * Ad Amphilochium: [2435]1
 * Address to the Assembly of the Saints: [2436]1
 * Adelphi: [2437]1
 * Alcibiad: [2438]1
 * Analecta Ante-Nicæna: [2439]1
 * Analecta Ante-Nicoena: [2440]1
 * Anaphora: [2441]1 [2442]2
 * Ancient Geography: [2443]1
 * Ancient Liturgy of : [2444]1
 * And.: [2445]1
 * Andover Review: [2446]1
 * Andr.: [2447]1
 * Ante-Nicene Fathers: [2448]1 [2449]2 [2450]3 [2451]4
 * Antioch: [2452]1
 * Antiq.: [2453]1
 * Apocrypha: [2454]1
 * Apol.: [2455]1
 * Apologies: [2456]1
 * Apology: [2457]1 [2458]2 [2459]3
 * Apos. Const.: [2460]1
 * Apostolic Canons: [2461]1
 * Apostolic Constitutions: [2462]1 [2463]2 [2464]3 [2465]4 [2466]5
 [2467]6 [2468]7 [2469]8 [2470]9 [2471]10 [2472]11 [2473]12 [2474]13
 [2475]14 [2476]15 [2477]16 [2478]17 [2479]18 [2480]19 [2481]20
 [2482]21 [2483]22 [2484]23 [2485]24 [2486]25 [2487]26 [2488]27
 [2489]28 [2490]29 [2491]30 [2492]31 [2493]32 [2494]33 [2495]34
 [2496]35 [2497]36 [2498]37 [2499]38 [2500]39 [2501]40 [2502]41
 [2503]42 [2504]43 [2505]44 [2506]45 [2507]46 [2508]47 [2509]48
 [2510]49 [2511]50 [2512]51 [2513]52 [2514]53 [2515]54 [2516]55
 [2517]56 [2518]57 [2519]58 [2520]59 [2521]60 [2522]61 [2523]62
 [2524]63 [2525]64 [2526]65 [2527]66 [2528]67 [2529]68 [2530]69
 [2531]70 [2532]71 [2533]72 [2534]73 [2535]74 [2536]75 [2537]76
 [2538]77 [2539]78 [2540]79 [2541]80 [2542]81 [2543]82 [2544]83
 [2545]84 [2546]85 [2547]86 [2548]87 [2549]88 [2550]89
 * Apostolic Constitutions,: [2551]1
 * Apostolic Fathers: [2552]1
 * Apostolic Liturgy and the Ep. to the Hebrews: [2553]1
 * Apostolical Church Order: [2554]1
 * Apostolical Constitutions: [2555]1 [2556]2 [2557]3 [2558]4 [2559]5
 [2560]6
 * Apostolical Fathers: [2561]1
 * Appendix: [2562]1 [2563]2
 * Arat.: [2564]1
 * Attic Nights: [2565]1
 * Barnabas: [2566]1 [2567]2 [2568]3
 * Benedicite: [2569]1
 * Bet-ha-Midrash: [2570]1
 * Bibliothèque Ancienne et Mod.: [2571]1
 * Biblioth. Reg.: [2572]1
 * Book of Laws: [2573]1
 * Book of Nature: [2574]1
 * Bryennios: [2575]1
 * Bryennios Manuscript: [2576]1
 * Bucol.: [2577]1 [2578]2
 * Canons: [2579]1 [2580]2 [2581]3 [2582]4 [2583]5 [2584]6
 * Carm.: [2585]1 [2586]2 [2587]3
 * Cat.: [2588]1
 * Catal.: [2589]1 [2590]2
 * Catechet.: [2591]1
 * Catholic Doctrine of Sacrifice: [2592]1
 * Catiline: [2593]1
 * Cato Major: [2594]1
 * Christ of History: [2595]1
 * Christian Councils: [2596]1
 * Christian Priesthood: [2597]1
 * Christianity and Mankind: [2598]1 [2599]2
 * Christliche Zustände: [2600]1
 * Chronicon: [2601]1
 * Chronicon Paschale: [2602]1
 * Chronographia: [2603]1
 * Chronological Introduction to Church History: [2604]1
 * Church History: [2605]1
 * Church Order: [2606]1
 * Civ. Dei: [2607]1 [2608]2
 * Codex Liturgicus: [2609]1 [2610]2 [2611]3 [2612]4
 * Codex Pseudepigr. : [2613]1
 * Collectio: [2614]1
 * Comic Metres: [2615]1
 * Commentar. in ep. ad Gal.: [2616]1
 * Complete Treatise: [2617]1
 * Comus: [2618]1
 * Conciliengeschichte: [2619]1
 * Concordance: [2620]1
 * Confess.: [2621]1
 * Confessions: [2622]1 [2623]2 [2624]3
 * Connections: [2625]1
 * Consolation: [2626]1 [2627]2 [2628]3 [2629]4 [2630]5 [2631]6
 * Constitutions: [2632]1 [2633]2 [2634]3 [2635]4 [2636]5 [2637]6
 [2638]7 [2639]8 [2640]9 [2641]10 [2642]11 [2643]12 [2644]13
 [2645]14 [2646]15 [2647]16 [2648]17 [2649]18 [2650]19 [2651]20
 * Contemporary Review: [2652]1
 * Conversion of the : [2653]1
 * Council of Chalcedon: [2654]1
 * Credib: [2655]1
 * Credib.: [2656]1 [2657]2 [2658]3 [2659]4 [2660]5 [2661]6 [2662]7
 * Credibility of the Gospel History, Works: [2663]1
 * Curcul.: [2664]1
 * D. and F.: [2665]1
 * Daniel: [2666]1
 * De Civ. Dei: [2667]1
 * De Civit. Dei: [2668]1
 * De Civitate Dei: [2669]1 [2670]2
 * De Corpore et Sanguine: [2671]1
 * De Decretis Nicænæ Synodi: [2672]1
 * De Finibus: [2673]1 [2674]2
 * De Fuga: [2675]1 [2676]2 [2677]3
 * De Indulg.: [2678]1
 * De Leg.: [2679]1 [2680]2 [2681]3
 * De Legibus: [2682]1 [2683]2 [2684]3
 * De Nat. : [2685]1 [2686]2
 * De Nat. Deor.: [2687]1 [2688]2 [2689]3 [2690]4 [2691]5 [2692]6
 [2693]7 [2694]8
 * De Nat. Rer.: [2695]1
 * De Nat. deor.: [2696]1
 * De Natura Deorum: [2697]1 [2698]2
 * De Off.: [2699]1
 * De Offic.: [2700]1 [2701]2 [2702]3 [2703]4 [2704]5 [2705]6 [2706]7
 [2707]8 [2708]9 [2709]10 [2710]11 [2711]12 [2712]13
 * De Officiis: [2713]1 [2714]2 [2715]3 [2716]4 [2717]5 [2718]6
 * De Opificio Dei: [2719]1
 * De Republ.: [2720]1
 * De Republica: [2721]1
 * De Rer. Nat.: [2722]1 [2723]2
 * De Rerum Natura: [2724]1 [2725]2 [2726]3
 * De Resurrectione: [2727]1
 * De Temporibus: [2728]1
 * De Viris Illus.: [2729]1
 * Deaths of Persecutors: [2730]1 [2731]2
 * Deor.: [2732]1 [2733]2
 * Dialogue with Trypho: [2734]1
 * Diarium Italicum: [2735]1
 * Dictionary of Greek and Roman Antiquities: [2736]1
 * Dictionary of Greek and Roman Biography: [2737]1 [2738]2
 * Didache: [2739]1
 * Didascalia: [2740]1
 * Die Christlichen Zustände der Gegenwart: [2741]1
 * Discourse to Caligula: [2742]1
 * Dissertatio de Oblatione: [2743]1
 * Dissertation on the Canons: [2744]1
 * Dissertations: [2745]1
 * Div. Legat.: [2746]1
 * Divine Institutes: [2747]1
 * Divine Institutions: [2748]1
 * Duæ Viæ: [2749]1 [2750]2 [2751]3
 * Duoe Vioe: [2752]1
 * Early Liturgies: [2753]1
 * Easter: [2754]1
 * Ecclesiastical History: [2755]1
 * Ep.: [2756]1
 * Ep. de decret. Nic. Syn.: [2757]1
 * Epist.: [2758]1
 * Epist. ad Joann. Episc. Syrac: [2759]1
 * Epistle: [2760]1
 * Epistle of Barnabas: [2761]1
 * Epistle of Hermas: [2762]1
 * Epistle to : [2763]1
 * Epistle to the Hebrews: [2764]1
 * Epistle to the Thessal.: [2765]1
 * Epistles: [2766]1
 * Epistles of St. Ignatius: [2767]1 [2768]2
 * Epitome: [2769]1
 * Essay on the Origin and Contents of the Constitutions: [2770]1
 * Exhortations: [2771]1 [2772]2
 * Expositor: [2773]1
 * Fanatic: [2774]1
 * Fasti: [2775]1 [2776]2 [2777]3 [2778]4 [2779]5
 * Festal Epistle: [2780]1
 * First Apology: [2781]1 [2782]2 [2783]3
 * First Epistle of Clement: [2784]1
 * Fragment of an Ancient East-Syrian Liturgy: [2785]1
 * General Introd.: [2786]1 [2787]2 [2788]3
 * General Introduction: [2789]1 [2790]2
 * General Introduction to a History of the Holy Eastern Church:
 [2791]1
 * General Introduction to the History of the Eastern Church,: [2792]1
 * General Introduction to the History of the Holy Eastern Church:
 [2793]1
 * Georg.: [2794]1 [2795]2 [2796]3 [2797]4 [2798]5 [2799]6 [2800]7
 [2801]8 [2802]9 [2803]10 [2804]11 [2805]12 [2806]13 [2807]14
 [2808]15
 * Georgic: [2809]1
 * Georgics: [2810]1 [2811]2
 * Glossary of Byzantine Greek: [2812]1
 * Grabii, et dissertatione de præjudiciis theologicis auxit
 Christoph. Matth. Pfaffius: [2813]1
 * Heautont.: [2814]1
 * Heautontim.: [2815]1
 * Hermas: [2816]1
 * Hist. Eccl.: [2817]1 [2818]2
 * History of Christian Councils: [2819]1
 * History of Councils: [2820]1
 * History of European Morals: [2821]1
 * History of the Christian Church in the First Ten Centuries: [2822]1
 * Hortensius: [2823]1
 * Iliad: [2824]1 [2825]2
 * In Laude Virginum: [2826]1
 * In Verrem: [2827]1
 * Independent: [2828]1
 * Inst.: [2829]1
 * Instit.: [2830]1 [2831]2 [2832]3 [2833]4 [2834]5 [2835]6
 * Institutes: [2836]1 [2837]2 [2838]3 [2839]4
 * Institutions: [2840]1 [2841]2 [2842]3 [2843]4
 * Introd.: [2844]1
 * Introduction: [2845]1 [2846]2 [2847]3 [2848]4
 * Introduction to True Religion: [2849]1
 * Irenæus: [2850]1 [2851]2
 * Journal of Society of Biblical Literature and Exegesis: [2852]1
 * Justin Martyr: [2853]1
 * Lectures on the Life of Christ: [2854]1
 * Lit. of Antioch: [2855]1
 * Litt. Orient. Coll.: [2856]1
 * Liturgiarum Orientalium Collectio: [2857]1
 * Liturgie der drei ersten christlichen Jahrhunderte: [2858]1
 * Liturgies: [2859]1 [2860]2
 * Liturgies and Offices: [2861]1
 * Liturgies and Offices of the Church: [2862]1
 * Liturgies of St. Mark, St. James, St. Clement, St. Chrysostom, and
 St. Basil: [2863]1
 * Liturgies, Eastern and Western: [2864]1
 * Liturgy and Ritual of the Celtic Church: [2865]1
 * Maxim. Victorin. de carmine heroico.: [2866]1
 * Med. Dict.: [2867]1
 * Memor.: [2868]1
 * Memorabilia: [2869]1
 * Messias Judæorum: [2870]1
 * Metam: [2871]1 [2872]2
 * Metam.: [2873]1 [2874]2 [2875]3
 * Metamorph: [2876]1
 * Metamorphosis: [2877]1
 * Minor Prophets: [2878]1
 * Miscellanea: [2879]1
 * Modern Science: [2880]1
 * Moral Character of the Monkey: [2881]1
 * Moyens employés par l'église affranchir les esclaves, Civilisation
 Européene: [2882]1
 * Muratorii Antiquit. Ital. med. æv.: [2883]1
 * Nat. Deor: [2884]1 [2885]2 [2886]3 [2887]4
 * Nat. Deor.: [2888]1 [2889]2
 * Natura Deor.: [2890]1
 * Nestorians: [2891]1
 * Nestorians and their Rituals: [2892]1 [2893]2
 * Neue Untersuchungen über die Constitut. u. Kanones der Ap.,:
 [2894]1
 * Nineveh: [2895]1
 * Notitia Eucharistica: [2896]1
 * Nov. Org.: [2897]1
 * Novum Test. extra canonem receptum: [2898]1
 * O. S.: [2899]1
 * Octavius: [2900]1 [2901]2 [2902]3
 * Ode: [2903]1
 * Ode to Adversity: [2904]1
 * Odes: [2905]1
 * Of the Explanation of Pindar: [2906]1
 * On the Creed: [2907]1 [2908]2
 * On the Nature of the Gods: [2909]1
 * On the Persecutors: [2910]1
 * Opera Patr. Apost.: [2911]1
 * Opp: [2912]1
 * Opp.: [2913]1 [2914]2 [2915]3 [2916]4
 * Orac. Sibyl.: [2917]1
 * Origines: [2918]1
 * Origines Liturgicæ: [2919]1 [2920]2 [2921]3 [2922]4
 * Orphica: [2923]1 [2924]2
 * Passion of the Lord: [2925]1
 * Patrologia: [2926]1
 * Patrum Apost. Opera: [2927]1
 * Phoenix: [2928]1
 * Phenomena: [2929]1
 * Philalethes: [2930]1
 * Philippics: [2931]1
 * Phorm: [2932]1
 * Phorm.: [2933]1 [2934]2
 * Plato: [2935]1 [2936]2 [2937]3 [2938]4 [2939]5 [2940]6
 * Plato against the Atheists: [2941]1
 * Plato cont. Atheos: [2942]1
 * Plato contra Atheos: [2943]1
 * Pollio: [2944]1 [2945]2 [2946]3
 * Practical Christianity: [2947]1
 * Primitive Christianity: [2948]1
 * Primitive Christianity Revived: [2949]1
 * Principles of Divine Service: [2950]1
 * Pro Ligar.: [2951]1
 * Pro Marcello: [2952]1
 * Prophecy: [2953]1
 * Prophecy and History: [2954]1
 * Pseudepigrapha: [2955]1
 * Quæstt. in Exod.: [2956]1
 * Questions to the Orthodox: [2957]1
 * Quis Dives Salvetur: [2958]1
 * Reliqu. Sac.: [2959]1
 * Rep.: [2960]1
 * Repub.: [2961]1
 * Republic: [2962]1 [2963]2
 * Risen Lord: [2964]1
 * Rom.: [2965]1
 * Roman Empire: [2966]1
 * Roman Mass: [2967]1
 * Rome: [2968]1
 * Sat: [2969]1
 * Sat.: [2970]1 [2971]2 [2972]3 [2973]4 [2974]5
 * Satire: [2975]1
 * Scholia: [2976]1
 * Second Epistle: [2977]1
 * Shepherd: [2978]1 [2979]2 [2980]3
 * Shepherd of Hermas: [2981]1 [2982]2 [2983]3
 * Sibyllina: [2984]1 [2985]2
 * Sibylline Oracles: [2986]1
 * Sinai and Palestine: [2987]1
 * Soirèes: [2988]1
 * Soirées: [2989]1 [2990]2
 * Speaker's Commentary: [2991]1
 * St. Clement of : [2992]1
 * St. Martin: [2993]1
 * Strom.: [2994]1
 * Stromata: [2995]1 [2996]2
 * Study of the Eucharist: [2997]1
 * Sunday-School Times: [2998]1
 * Sympathies of the Continent; or, Proposals for a New Reformation:
 [2999]1
 * Symposium: [3000]1
 * Synopsis: [3001]1
 * Task: [3002]1
 * Teaching: [3003]1 [3004]2 [3005]3 [3006]4 [3007]5 [3008]6 [3009]7
 [3010]8 [3011]9 [3012]10 [3013]11 [3014]12 [3015]13 [3016]14
 [3017]15 [3018]16 [3019]17 [3020]18 [3021]19 [3022]20 [3023]21
 [3024]22 [3025]23 [3026]24 [3027]25 [3028]26 [3029]27 [3030]28
 [3031]29 [3032]30 [3033]31 [3034]32 [3035]33 [3036]34 [3037]35
 [3038]36 [3039]37 [3040]38 [3041]39 [3042]40 [3043]41 [3044]42
 [3045]43 [3046]44 [3047]45 [3048]46 [3049]47 [3050]48 [3051]49
 [3052]50 [3053]51 [3054]52 [3055]53 [3056]54 [3057]55 [3058]56
 [3059]57 [3060]58 [3061]59 [3062]60 [3063]61 [3064]62 [3065]63
 [3066]64 [3067]65 [3068]66 [3069]67 [3070]68 [3071]69 [3072]70
 [3073]71 [3074]72
 * Teaching of the Twelve Apostles: [3075]1 [3076]2
 * Teachings of the Apostles: [3077]1
 * Tertullian: [3078]1
 * Testimony of the Catacombs: [3079]1
 * Tetralogia Liturgica: [3080]1 [3081]2
 * Texte und Untersuchungen, u. s. w.: [3082]1
 * The Anger of God: [3083]1
 * The Christian Institutions: [3084]1
 * The Formation of Man: [3085]1
 * The Golden Ass: [3086]1
 * The Historic Faith, Short Lectures: [3087]1
 * The Jewish Messiah: [3088]1
 * The Judgment of Peter: [3089]1
 * The Lapsed: [3090]1
 * The Perfect Word: [3091]1
 * The Resurrection of our Lord: [3092]1
 * The Task: [3093]1
 * The Two Ways: [3094]1
 * The Workmanship of God: [3095]1
 * Timæus: [3096]1 [3097]2
 * Timoeus: [3098]1
 * Trallians: [3099]1
 * Translation: [3100]1
 * Trinumm.: [3101]1
 * Tusc.: [3102]1
 * Tusc. Disp.: [3103]1 [3104]2
 * Tuscal. Quæst.: [3105]1
 * Tusculan Disputations: [3106]1 [3107]2 [3108]3
 * Tusculan Questions: [3109]1
 * Typology of Scripture: [3110]1
 * Vet. Test.: [3111]1
 * Vie des Grands Hommes: [3112]1
 * Virg. Georg.: [3113]1
 * Virgil: [3114]1
 * Works: [3115]1 [3116]2 [3117]3 [3118]4
 * Zoologica Ethica: [3119]1
 * a fortiori: [3120]1
 * lina: [3121]1
 * mart.: [3122]1
 * pro Milone: [3123]1
 * pseudo-Clementine : [3124]1

Index of Names

 * Clement: [3125]1
 * Pearson: [3126]1
 * Wordsworth: [3127]1
 * Æacus: [3128]1
 * Ægæa: [3129]1
 * Æneas: [3130]1 [3131]2 [3132]3 [3133]4 [3134]5
 * Æsculapius: [3135]1 [3136]2 [3137]3 [3138]4 [3139]5 [3140]6 [3141]7
 [3142]8 [3143]9 [3144]10 [3145]11 [3146]12 [3147]13 [3148]14
 [3149]15 [3150]16 [3151]17 [3152]18 [3153]19
 * Ültzen: [3154]1 [3155]2
 * Aaron: [3156]1 [3157]2 [3158]3 [3159]4 [3160]5 [3161]6 [3162]7
 [3163]8 [3164]9 [3165]10 [3166]11 [3167]12 [3168]13 [3169]14
 [3170]15 [3171]16 [3172]17 [3173]18 [3174]19 [3175]20
 * Aaron,: [3176]1
 * Abdadan: [3177]1 [3178]2
 * Abel: [3179]1 [3180]2 [3181]3 [3182]4 [3183]5 [3184]6 [3185]7
 [3186]8 [3187]9 [3188]10 [3189]11 [3190]12 [3191]13
 * Abel,: [3192]1
 * Abercius: [3193]1
 * Abercius Marcellus: [3194]1
 * Abercius of Hierapolis: [3195]1
 * Abgarus: [3196]1
 * Abia: [3197]1
 * Abiram: [3198]1 [3199]2 [3200]3
 * Abner: [3201]1
 * Abraham: [3202]1 [3203]2 [3204]3 [3205]4 [3206]5 [3207]6 [3208]7
 [3209]8 [3210]9 [3211]10 [3212]11 [3213]12 [3214]13 [3215]14
 [3216]15 [3217]16 [3218]17 [3219]18
 * Abram: [3220]1
 * Absalom: [3221]1 [3222]2
 * Abu'lberkat: [3223]1
 * Accius Navius: [3224]1
 * Acestes: [3225]1 [3226]2
 * Achan: [3227]1 [3228]2
 * Achiah: [3229]1 [3230]2
 * Achilles: [3231]1
 * Adæus: [3232]1
 * Adam: [3233]1 [3234]2 [3235]3 [3236]4 [3237]5 [3238]6 [3239]7
 [3240]8 [3241]9
 * Ades: [3242]1
 * Admetus: [3243]1 [3244]2
 * Adonias: [3245]1
 * Adonis: [3246]1
 * Africanus: [3247]1 [3248]2
 * Agabus: [3249]1 [3250]2
 * Agag: [3251]1
 * Agamemnon: [3252]1
 * Agathocles: [3253]1 [3254]2
 * Agesilaus: [3255]1
 * Aglaosthenes: [3256]1
 * Agrippa: [3257]1 [3258]2
 * Ahab: [3259]1 [3260]2 [3261]3
 * Ahaziah: [3262]1
 * Ahijah: [3263]1
 * Ajax: [3264]1
 * Alban: [3265]1
 * Albert L. Long: [3266]1
 * Albinus: [3267]1
 * Albunea: [3268]1
 * Alcestis: [3269]1
 * Alcibiades: [3270]1 [3271]2 [3272]3 [3273]4
 * Alcmena: [3274]1 [3275]2 [3276]3
 * Alex.: [3277]1
 * Alexander: [3278]1 [3279]2 [3280]3 [3281]4 [3282]5 [3283]6 [3284]7
 * Alexander of Macedon: [3285]1
 * Alexander the Great: [3286]1
 * Alexandria: [3287]1
 * Alexandrian Dionysius: [3288]1
 * Alexius Menesius: [3289]1
 * Amalthæa: [3290]1 [3291]2
 * Amalthea: [3292]1 [3293]2 [3294]3
 * Amasa: [3295]1
 * Ambraciot: [3296]1
 * Ambrose: [3297]1
 * Ammia: [3298]1 [3299]2
 * Amon: [3300]1 [3301]2 [3302]3 [3303]4
 * Amos: [3304]1 [3305]2
 * Amphitryon: [3306]1 [3307]2
 * Anacharsis: [3308]1
 * Anacharsis the Scythian: [3309]1
 * Anacreon: [3310]1 [3311]2
 * Ananiah: [3312]1
 * Ananias: [3313]1 [3314]2 [3315]3
 * Anaxagoras: [3316]1 [3317]2 [3318]3 [3319]4 [3320]5 [3321]6 [3322]7
 [3323]8 [3324]9 [3325]10
 * Anaximenes: [3326]1 [3327]2
 * Anchises: [3328]1
 * Anchises': [3329]1
 * Andrew: [3330]1 [3331]2 [3332]3
 * Androgynus: [3333]1
 * Aniceris: [3334]1
 * Annæus Seneca: [3335]1
 * Anna: [3336]1 [3337]2 [3338]3
 * Annas: [3339]1 [3340]2 [3341]3
 * Annianus: [3342]1 [3343]2
 * Annius: [3344]1
 * Anthemius: [3345]1
 * Antiochus: [3346]1
 * Antisthenes: [3347]1 [3348]2
 * Antonine: [3349]1
 * Antonines: [3350]1
 * Antoninus Pius: [3351]1
 * Antonius: [3352]1
 * Antonius Maximus: [3353]1
 * Antony: [3354]1 [3355]2
 * Apis: [3356]1
 * Apollinaris: [3357]1 [3358]2
 * Apollo: [3359]1 [3360]2 [3361]3 [3362]4 [3363]5 [3364]6 [3365]7
 [3366]8 [3367]9 [3368]10 [3369]11 [3370]12 [3371]13 [3372]14
 [3373]15 [3374]16 [3375]17 [3376]18 [3377]19 [3378]20 [3379]21
 [3380]22 [3381]23 [3382]24 [3383]25 [3384]26 [3385]27 [3386]28
 [3387]29 [3388]30
 * Apollo Didymæus: [3389]1
 * Apollo of Miletus: [3390]1
 * Apollodorus: [3391]1 [3392]2
 * Apollodorus the Erythræan: [3393]1
 * Apollonius: [3394]1 [3395]2 [3396]3 [3397]4 [3398]5 [3399]6 [3400]7
 [3401]8 [3402]9
 * Appius: [3403]1 [3404]2
 * Appius Claudius: [3405]1
 * Apuleius: [3406]1 [3407]2 [3408]3
 * Aquila: [3409]1 [3410]2 [3411]3
 * Aratus: [3412]1 [3413]2 [3414]3 [3415]4 [3416]5 [3417]6
 * Arcesilas: [3418]1 [3419]2 [3420]3 [3421]4 [3422]5 [3423]6 [3424]7
 [3425]8
 * Archimedes: [3426]1
 * Archippus: [3427]1
 * Archytas of Tarentum: [3428]1
 * Argus: [3429]1
 * Ariadne: [3430]1
 * Aristæus: [3431]1
 * Aristarchus: [3432]1 [3433]2
 * Aristides: [3434]1 [3435]2 [3436]3
 * Aristippus: [3437]1 [3438]2 [3439]3 [3440]4 [3441]5 [3442]6
 * Aristo: [3443]1 [3444]2 [3445]3
 * Aristo the Chian: [3446]1
 * Aristophanes: [3447]1 [3448]2
 * Aristotle: [3449]1 [3450]2 [3451]3 [3452]4 [3453]5 [3454]6 [3455]7
 [3456]8 [3457]9 [3458]10 [3459]11 [3460]12 [3461]13 [3462]14
 [3463]15 [3464]16 [3465]17 [3466]18 [3467]19
 * Aristoxenus: [3468]1 [3469]2 [3470]3
 * Arnobius: [3471]1 [3472]2 [3473]3 [3474]4 [3475]5 [3476]6 [3477]7
 [3478]8 [3479]9
 * Artorius: [3480]1
 * Asclepiades: [3481]1 [3482]2
 * Asclepius: [3483]1 [3484]2 [3485]3
 * Asseman: [3486]1
 * Astarte: [3487]1
 * Asterius: [3488]1 [3489]2 [3490]3 [3491]4 [3492]5
 * Asterius Urbanus: [3493]1 [3494]2 [3495]3 [3496]4 [3497]5
 * Atabyrius: [3498]1
 * Athan.: [3499]1
 * Athanasius: [3500]1 [3501]2 [3502]3 [3503]4 [3504]5 [3505]6 [3506]7
 [3507]8 [3508]9 [3509]10 [3510]11
 * Athenæus: [3511]1
 * Athene: [3512]1
 * Atinius: [3513]1
 * Atlas: [3514]1
 * Atropos: [3515]1
 * Atticus: [3516]1
 * Atticus,: [3517]1
 * Aug.: [3518]1
 * Augustine: [3519]1 [3520]2 [3521]3 [3522]4 [3523]5 [3524]6 [3525]7
 [3526]8 [3527]9 [3528]10 [3529]11 [3530]12 [3531]13 [3532]14
 [3533]15 [3534]16 [3535]17 [3536]18 [3537]19 [3538]20 [3539]21
 [3540]22
 * Augustus: [3541]1 [3542]2 [3543]3 [3544]4 [3545]5 [3546]6
 * Augustus Cæsar: [3547]1
 * Aulus Gellius: [3548]1
 * Aurelian: [3549]1
 * Autolycus: [3550]1 [3551]2
 * Aventinus: [3552]1
 * Avilius: [3553]1
 * Avircius: [3554]1
 * Aviricius: [3555]1 [3556]2
 * Aviricius Marcellus: [3557]1 [3558]2 [3559]3
 * Azariah: [3560]1 [3561]2
 * Baal: [3562]1
 * Baalpeor: [3563]1
 * Bacchus: [3564]1 [3565]2 [3566]3 [3567]4
 * Bacon: [3568]1
 * Badger: [3569]1 [3570]2 [3571]3 [3572]4 [3573]5 [3574]6 [3575]7
 [3576]8 [3577]9
 * Balaam: [3578]1 [3579]2 [3580]3 [3581]4 [3582]5 [3583]6 [3584]7
 [3585]8 [3586]9 [3587]10 [3588]11 [3589]12
 * Balak: [3590]1 [3591]2
 * Balbus: [3592]1
 * Baluz: [3593]1
 * Baluzius: [3594]1
 * Barak: [3595]1
 * Barnabas: [3596]1 [3597]2 [3598]3 [3599]4 [3600]5 [3601]6 [3602]7
 [3603]8 [3604]9 [3605]10 [3606]11 [3607]12 [3608]13 [3609]14
 [3610]15 [3611]16 [3612]17 [3613]18 [3614]19 [3615]20 [3616]21
 [3617]22 [3618]23 [3619]24 [3620]25 [3621]26 [3622]27 [3623]28
 [3624]29 [3625]30 [3626]31 [3627]32 [3628]33 [3629]34 [3630]35
 [3631]36 [3632]37 [3633]38 [3634]39 [3635]40 [3636]41 [3637]42
 * Barnabas,: [3638]1
 * Baronius: [3639]1
 * Barsabbas: [3640]1
 * Bartholomew: [3641]1 [3642]2 [3643]3
 * Basil: [3644]1 [3645]2
 * Basil the Great: [3646]1
 * Basilides: [3647]1
 * Basnage: [3648]1
 * Bebius: [3649]1
 * Bede: [3650]1
 * Bellarmine: [3651]1
 * Bellona: [3652]1 [3653]2 [3654]3
 * Belus: [3655]1 [3656]2 [3657]3
 * Beveridge: [3658]1 [3659]2 [3660]3 [3661]4
 * Beveridge.: [3662]1
 * Bias: [3663]1
 * Bickell: [3664]1
 * Bingham: [3665]1 [3666]2 [3667]3 [3668]4 [3669]5
 * Bishop Beveridge: [3670]1
 * Bishop Kaye: [3671]1 [3672]2
 * Bona: [3673]1
 * Bovius: [3674]1
 * Brett: [3675]1 [3676]2
 * Brouverius: [3677]1
 * Brown: [3678]1 [3679]2 [3680]3
 * Brutus: [3681]1 [3682]2 [3683]3
 * Bryennios: [3684]1 [3685]2 [3686]3 [3687]4 [3688]5 [3689]6 [3690]7
 [3691]8 [3692]9 [3693]10 [3694]11 [3695]12 [3696]13 [3697]14
 [3698]15 [3699]16 [3700]17 [3701]18 [3702]19 [3703]20 [3704]21
 [3705]22 [3706]23 [3707]24 [3708]25
 * Bunsen: [3709]1 [3710]2 [3711]3 [3712]4 [3713]5 [3714]6
 * Burbidge: [3715]1 [3716]2 [3717]3 [3718]4 [3719]5 [3720]6 [3721]7
 * Butes: [3722]1
 * Butler: [3723]1
 * Byrennios: [3724]1
 * Cæcilius: [3725]1 [3726]2
 * Cæsar Domitian: [3727]1 [3728]2
 * Coelus: [3729]1 [3730]2 [3731]3 [3732]4 [3733]5 [3734]6 [3735]7
 [3736]8 [3737]9
 * C. J. H. Ropes: [3738]1 [3739]2
 * Cabirus: [3740]1
 * Caca: [3741]1 [3742]2
 * Cadmus: [3743]1
 * Caiaphas: [3744]1 [3745]2 [3746]3 [3747]4 [3748]5 [3749]6 [3750]7
 * Cain: [3751]1 [3752]2 [3753]3 [3754]4 [3755]5 [3756]6 [3757]7
 * Caius: [3758]1 [3759]2 [3760]3 [3761]4 [3762]5
 * Caius Cæsar: [3763]1 [3764]2
 * Caius Cotta: [3765]1
 * Caius Curio: [3766]1
 * Caius Lælius: [3767]1
 * Caius Marius Victorinus: [3768]1
 * Caius Verres: [3769]1 [3770]2 [3771]3 [3772]4
 * Caleb: [3773]1 [3774]2 [3775]3
 * Caligula: [3776]1
 * Callipho: [3777]1 [3778]2
 * Callistus: [3779]1
 * Candidianus: [3780]1 [3781]2 [3782]3 [3783]4 [3784]5 [3785]6
 * Capellius: [3786]1
 * Carneades: [3787]1 [3788]2 [3789]3 [3790]4 [3791]5 [3792]6 [3793]7
 [3794]8 [3795]9 [3796]10 [3797]11 [3798]12
 * Cassius: [3799]1
 * Castor: [3800]1 [3801]2 [3802]3 [3803]4 [3804]5 [3805]6
 * Catiline: [3806]1
 * Cato: [3807]1 [3808]2 [3809]3 [3810]4 [3811]5 [3812]6 [3813]7
 [3814]8
 * Catulus: [3815]1 [3816]2
 * Cave: [3817]1
 * Cebes: [3818]1
 * Cecrops: [3819]1
 * Ceres: [3820]1 [3821]2 [3822]3 [3823]4 [3824]5 [3825]6 [3826]7
 [3827]8 [3828]9 [3829]10 [3830]11 [3831]12
 * Ceres of Catina: [3832]1
 * Ceres of Miletus: [3833]1
 * Cerinthus: [3834]1 [3835]2 [3836]3 [3837]4
 * Cervantes: [3838]1
 * Chalcenteros: [3839]1
 * Cham: [3840]1
 * Chamos: [3841]1
 * Chase: [3842]1
 * Chilo: [3843]1
 * Chiron: [3844]1 [3845]2
 * Chloris: [3846]1
 * Chrysippus: [3847]1 [3848]2 [3849]3 [3850]4 [3851]5 [3852]6 [3853]7
 [3854]8 [3855]9 [3856]10
 * Chrysostom: [3857]1 [3858]2 [3859]3 [3860]4 [3861]5 [3862]6 [3863]7
 * Cic.: [3864]1 [3865]2
 * Cicero: [3866]1 [3867]2 [3868]3 [3869]4 [3870]5 [3871]6 [3872]7
 [3873]8 [3874]9 [3875]10 [3876]11 [3877]12 [3878]13 [3879]14
 [3880]15 [3881]16 [3882]17 [3883]18 [3884]19 [3885]20 [3886]21
 [3887]22 [3888]23 [3889]24 [3890]25 [3891]26 [3892]27 [3893]28
 [3894]29 [3895]30 [3896]31 [3897]32 [3898]33 [3899]34 [3900]35
 [3901]36 [3902]37 [3903]38 [3904]39 [3905]40 [3906]41 [3907]42
 [3908]43 [3909]44 [3910]45 [3911]46 [3912]47 [3913]48 [3914]49
 [3915]50 [3916]51 [3917]52 [3918]53 [3919]54 [3920]55 [3921]56
 [3922]57 [3923]58 [3924]59 [3925]60 [3926]61 [3927]62 [3928]63
 [3929]64 [3930]65 [3931]66 [3932]67 [3933]68 [3934]69 [3935]70
 [3936]71 [3937]72 [3938]73 [3939]74 [3940]75 [3941]76 [3942]77
 [3943]78 [3944]79 [3945]80 [3946]81 [3947]82 [3948]83 [3949]84
 [3950]85 [3951]86 [3952]87 [3953]88 [3954]89 [3955]90 [3956]91
 [3957]92 [3958]93 [3959]94 [3960]95 [3961]96 [3962]97 [3963]98
 [3964]99 [3965]100 [3966]101 [3967]102 [3968]103 [3969]104
 [3970]105 [3971]106 [3972]107 [3973]108 [3974]109 [3975]110
 [3976]111 [3977]112 [3978]113 [3979]114 [3980]115 [3981]116
 [3982]117 [3983]118 [3984]119 [3985]120 [3986]121 [3987]122
 [3988]123 [3989]124 [3990]125 [3991]126
 * Cimon: [3992]1
 * Circe: [3993]1
 * Clark: [3994]1
 * Claudia: [3995]1 [3996]2 [3997]3 [3998]4
 * Cleanthes: [3999]1 [4000]2 [4001]3 [4002]4 [4003]5 [4004]6
 * Clem. : [4005]1
 * Clem. Alex.: [4006]1 [4007]2
 * Clemens: [4008]1
 * Clemens Alexandrinus: [4009]1
 * Clemens Romanus: [4010]1
 * Clement: [4011]1 [4012]2 [4013]3 [4014]4 [4015]5 [4016]6 [4017]7
 [4018]8 [4019]9 [4020]10 [4021]11 [4022]12 [4023]13 [4024]14
 [4025]15 [4026]16 [4027]17 [4028]18 [4029]19 [4030]20 [4031]21
 [4032]22 [4033]23 [4034]24 [4035]25 [4036]26 [4037]27 [4038]28
 * Clement of : [4039]1
 * Clement of Alexandria: [4040]1 [4041]2 [4042]3 [4043]4
 * Clement of Rome: [4044]1 [4045]2 [4046]3 [4047]4
 * Clementine: [4048]1
 * Cleobius: [4049]1 [4050]2
 * Cleobulus: [4051]1
 * Cleombrotus: [4052]1
 * Cleombrotus of Ambracia: [4053]1
 * Cleopas: [4054]1 [4055]2
 * Clericus: [4056]1
 * Cloacina: [4057]1 [4058]2
 * Clotho: [4059]1
 * Cnoeus Pompeius: [4060]1
 * Codrus: [4061]1
 * Comits: [4062]1 [4063]2
 * Commodian: [4064]1 [4065]2 [4066]3
 * Conington: [4067]1 [4068]2
 * Constan: [4069]1
 * Constantia: [4070]1
 * Constantine: [4071]1 [4072]2 [4073]3 [4074]4 [4075]5 [4076]6
 [4077]7 [4078]8 [4079]9 [4080]10 [4081]11 [4082]12 [4083]13
 [4084]14 [4085]15 [4086]16 [4087]17 [4088]18 [4089]19 [4090]20
 [4091]21 [4092]22 [4093]23 [4094]24 [4095]25 [4096]26 [4097]27
 [4098]28 [4099]29 [4100]30 [4101]31 [4102]32 [4103]33 [4104]34
 [4105]35 [4106]36 [4107]37 [4108]38 [4109]39 [4110]40 [4111]41
 [4112]42 [4113]43 [4114]44 [4115]45 [4116]46 [4117]47 [4118]48
 [4119]49 [4120]50 [4121]51 [4122]52 [4123]53 [4124]54 [4125]55
 [4126]56 [4127]57 [4128]58 [4129]59 [4130]60 [4131]61 [4132]62
 [4133]63 [4134]64 [4135]65 [4136]66 [4137]67 [4138]68 [4139]69
 [4140]70 [4141]71 [4142]72 [4143]73 [4144]74
 * Constantine Augustus: [4145]1
 * Constantius: [4146]1 [4147]2 [4148]3 [4149]4 [4150]5 [4151]6
 [4152]7 [4153]8 [4154]9 [4155]10 [4156]11 [4157]12 [4158]13
 [4159]14 [4160]15
 * Coprianus: [4161]1
 * Corah: [4162]1 [4163]2 [4164]3 [4165]4 [4166]5 [4167]6 [4168]7
 [4169]8 [4170]9 [4171]10 [4172]11
 * Coritus: [4173]1
 * Cornelius: [4174]1 [4175]2 [4176]3 [4177]4 [4178]5
 * Cornelius Nepos: [4179]1
 * Cornelius,: [4180]1
 * Cotelerius: [4181]1 [4182]2 [4183]3 [4184]4
 * Cotta: [4185]1 [4186]2 [4187]3
 * Cowper: [4188]1 [4189]2
 * Croesus: [4190]1
 * Crassus: [4191]1
 * Cratinus: [4192]1
 * Crescens: [4193]1
 * Crispus: [4194]1 [4195]2
 * Critias: [4196]1
 * Crito: [4197]1
 * Cronos: [4198]1
 * Cronus: [4199]1
 * Cruden: [4200]1
 * Cumæan Sibyl: [4201]1
 * Cumina: [4202]1
 * Cunina: [4203]1
 * Cupid: [4204]1 [4205]2 [4206]3 [4207]4 [4208]5
 * Curio: [4209]1
 * Curtius: [4210]1
 * Cybele: [4211]1 [4212]2 [4213]3
 * Cynocephalus: [4214]1
 * Cyprian: [4215]1 [4216]2 [4217]3 [4218]4 [4219]5 [4220]6 [4221]7
 [4222]8 [4223]9 [4224]10 [4225]11 [4226]12 [4227]13
 * Cyprian Jupiter: [4228]1
 * Cyprianus: [4229]1
 * Cyrene: [4230]1
 * Cyril: [4231]1 [4232]2 [4233]3 [4234]4
 * Cyril of Jerusalem: [4235]1 [4236]2
 * Cyrrha: [4237]1
 * Cyrus: [4238]1 [4239]2 [4240]3 [4241]4 [4242]5 [4243]6
 * Daia: [4244]1 [4245]2 [4246]3 [4247]4 [4248]5 [4249]6 [4250]7
 [4251]8 [4252]9 [4253]10 [4254]11 [4255]12 [4256]13 [4257]14
 [4258]15 [4259]16 [4260]17 [4261]18 [4262]19 [4263]20 [4264]21
 [4265]22 [4266]23 [4267]24 [4268]25 [4269]26 [4270]27 [4271]28
 [4272]29 [4273]30 [4274]31 [4275]32 [4276]33 [4277]34 [4278]35
 [4279]36 [4280]37 [4281]38 [4282]39 [4283]40 [4284]41 [4285]42
 [4286]43 [4287]44 [4288]45 [4289]46 [4290]47 [4291]48 [4292]49
 [4293]50 [4294]51 [4295]52 [4296]53 [4297]54 [4298]55 [4299]56
 [4300]57 [4301]58 [4302]59
 * Dan: [4303]1 [4304]2 [4305]3
 * Danae: [4306]1 [4307]2
 * Daniel: [4308]1 [4309]2 [4310]3 [4311]4 [4312]5 [4313]6 [4314]7
 [4315]8 [4316]9 [4317]10 [4318]11 [4319]12 [4320]13 [4321]14
 [4322]15 [4323]16 [4324]17 [4325]18 [4326]19 [4327]20 [4328]21
 [4329]22 [4330]23 [4331]24 [4332]25
 * Dardanus: [4333]1
 * Darius: [4334]1 [4335]2 [4336]3 [4337]4
 * Dathan: [4338]1 [4339]2 [4340]3 [4341]4
 * David: [4342]1 [4343]2 [4344]3 [4345]4 [4346]5 [4347]6 [4348]7
 [4349]8 [4350]9 [4351]10 [4352]11 [4353]12 [4354]13 [4355]14
 [4356]15 [4357]16 [4358]17 [4359]18 [4360]19 [4361]20 [4362]21
 [4363]22 [4364]23 [4365]24 [4366]25 [4367]26 [4368]27 [4369]28
 [4370]29 [4371]30 [4372]31 [4373]32 [4374]33 [4375]34 [4376]35
 [4377]36 [4378]37 [4379]38 [4380]39 [4381]40 [4382]41 [4383]42
 [4384]43 [4385]44 [4386]45 [4387]46 [4388]47 [4389]48 [4390]49
 [4391]50 [4392]51 [4393]52 [4394]53 [4395]54 [4396]55 [4397]56
 [4398]57 [4399]58 [4400]59 [4401]60 [4402]61 [4403]62 [4404]63
 [4405]64 [4406]65 [4407]66 [4408]67 [4409]68 [4410]69 [4411]70
 [4412]71 [4413]72 [4414]73 [4415]74 [4416]75 [4417]76 [4418]77
 [4419]78 [4420]79 [4421]80
 * David,: [4422]1
 * De Finibus: [4423]1
 * De Maistre: [4424]1 [4425]2 [4426]3
 * Deborah: [4427]1 [4428]2
 * Deborah,: [4429]1
 * Decius: [4430]1
 * Deianyra: [4431]1
 * Delitzsch: [4432]1
 * Delphian Apollo: [4433]1
 * Demetrianus: [4434]1 [4435]2 [4436]3 [4437]4
 * Demetrius: [4438]1
 * Democritus: [4439]1 [4440]2 [4441]3 [4442]4 [4443]5 [4444]6 [4445]7
 [4446]8 [4447]9 [4448]10 [4449]11 [4450]12 [4451]13 [4452]14
 [4453]15 [4454]16 [4455]17 [4456]18 [4457]19 [4458]20
 * Demophile,: [4459]1
 * Demosthenes: [4460]1 [4461]2 [4462]3
 * Deucalion: [4463]1 [4464]2
 * Diagoras: [4465]1
 * Diagoras of Melos: [4466]1
 * Diana: [4467]1 [4468]2 [4469]3 [4470]4
 * Dicæarchus: [4471]1 [4472]2 [4473]3 [4474]4 [4475]5
 * Dictionary of Biography: [4476]1
 * Didymus: [4477]1 [4478]2 [4479]3 [4480]4
 * Dinomachus: [4481]1 [4482]2
 * Diocles: [4483]1 [4484]2 [4485]3 [4486]4 [4487]5 [4488]6
 * Diocletian: [4489]1 [4490]2 [4491]3 [4492]4 [4493]5 [4494]6 [4495]7
 [4496]8 [4497]9 [4498]10 [4499]11 [4500]12 [4501]13 [4502]14
 [4503]15 [4504]16 [4505]17 [4506]18 [4507]19 [4508]20 [4509]21
 [4510]22 [4511]23 [4512]24 [4513]25 [4514]26 [4515]27 [4516]28
 [4517]29 [4518]30 [4519]31 [4520]32 [4521]33 [4522]34 [4523]35
 [4524]36 [4525]37 [4526]38 [4527]39 [4528]40 [4529]41 [4530]42
 [4531]43 [4532]44 [4533]45 [4534]46 [4535]47 [4536]48 [4537]49
 * Diodorus: [4538]1 [4539]2 [4540]3
 * Diogenes: [4541]1 [4542]2
 * Dionysius: [4543]1 [4544]2 [4545]3 [4546]4 [4547]5 [4548]6 [4549]7
 [4550]8 [4551]9 [4552]10 [4553]11 [4554]12 [4555]13 [4556]14
 [4557]15 [4558]16 [4559]17 [4560]18 [4561]19 [4562]20 [4563]21
 [4564]22 [4565]23
 * Dionysius Exiguus: [4566]1
 * Dionysius of Alexandria: [4567]1 [4568]2
 * Dionysus: [4569]1
 * Diphilus: [4570]1
 * Dispater: [4571]1
 * Dolabella: [4572]1
 * Domitian: [4573]1 [4574]2 [4575]3 [4576]4 [4577]5 [4578]6 [4579]7
 * Domitius: [4580]1
 * Donaldson: [4581]1 [4582]2
 * Donatus: [4583]1 [4584]2 [4585]3 [4586]4 [4587]5 [4588]6 [4589]7
 [4590]8
 * Dositheus: [4591]1
 * Drey: [4592]1 [4593]2 [4594]3 [4595]4 [4596]5 [4597]6 [4598]7
 [4599]8 [4600]9 [4601]10 [4602]11 [4603]12 [4604]13 [4605]14
 [4606]15 [4607]16
 * Drummond: [4608]1
 * Du Fresnoy: [4609]1
 * Dufresnoy: [4610]1
 * Dunglison: [4611]1
 * Dupin: [4612]1 [4613]2 [4614]3 [4615]4 [4616]5
 * Ebedmelech: [4617]1
 * Ebion: [4618]1
 * Edersheim: [4619]1 [4620]2
 * Egeria: [4621]1 [4622]2
 * Eichhorn: [4623]1
 * Eleazar: [4624]1
 * Eli: [4625]1 [4626]2
 * Elias: [4627]1 [4628]2 [4629]3 [4630]4 [4631]5 [4632]6 [4633]7
 [4634]8
 * Elias the Tishbite: [4635]1
 * Elijah: [4636]1 [4637]2 [4638]3 [4639]4 [4640]5 [4641]6 [4642]7
 [4643]8 [4644]9 [4645]10 [4646]11 [4647]12 [4648]13 [4649]14
 [4650]15
 * Elisabeth: [4651]1
 * Elisha: [4652]1 [4653]2 [4654]3 [4655]4 [4656]5 [4657]6 [4658]7
 [4659]8 [4660]9
 * Ellicott: [4661]1
 * Empedocles: [4662]1 [4663]2 [4664]3 [4665]4 [4666]5 [4667]6 [4668]7
 * Empedocles,: [4669]1
 * Ennius: [4670]1 [4671]2 [4672]3 [4673]4 [4674]5 [4675]6 [4676]7
 [4677]8
 * Enoch: [4678]1 [4679]2 [4680]3 [4681]4 [4682]5 [4683]6 [4684]7
 [4685]8 [4686]9 [4687]10 [4688]11
 * Enos: [4689]1 [4690]2 [4691]3 [4692]4 [4693]5 [4694]6
 * Epictetus: [4695]1
 * Epicurus: [4696]1 [4697]2 [4698]3 [4699]4 [4700]5 [4701]6 [4702]7
 [4703]8 [4704]9 [4705]10 [4706]11 [4707]12 [4708]13 [4709]14
 [4710]15 [4711]16 [4712]17 [4713]18 [4714]19 [4715]20 [4716]21
 [4717]22 [4718]23 [4719]24 [4720]25 [4721]26 [4722]27 [4723]28
 [4724]29 [4725]30 [4726]31 [4727]32 [4728]33 [4729]34 [4730]35
 [4731]36 [4732]37 [4733]38 [4734]39 [4735]40 [4736]41 [4737]42
 [4738]43 [4739]44 [4740]45 [4741]46 [4742]47 [4743]48 [4744]49
 [4745]50 [4746]51 [4747]52 [4748]53 [4749]54 [4750]55 [4751]56
 [4752]57 [4753]58
 * Epidaurus: [4754]1 [4755]2 [4756]3
 * Epiphanius: [4757]1 [4758]2
 * Erasmus: [4759]1
 * Eratineus: [4760]1
 * Eratosthenes: [4761]1
 * Erichthonius: [4762]1 [4763]2 [4764]3
 * Erythræan: [4765]1
 * Erythræan Sibyl: [4766]1 [4767]2 [4768]3 [4769]4 [4770]5 [4771]6
 [4772]7 [4773]8
 * Eryx: [4774]1
 * Esaias: [4775]1
 * Esdras: [4776]1 [4777]2
 * Esther: [4778]1 [4779]2
 * Etheridge: [4780]1
 * Euclid: [4781]1
 * Euhemerus: [4782]1 [4783]2 [4784]3 [4785]4 [4786]5 [4787]6 [4788]7
 [4789]8 [4790]9 [4791]10 [4792]11
 * Eunuchs: [4793]1 [4794]2
 * Euodius: [4795]1 [4796]2
 * Euphorbus: [4797]1 [4798]2 [4799]3 [4800]4
 * Euphranor: [4801]1
 * Eupolis: [4802]1
 * Euripides: [4803]1 [4804]2
 * Europa: [4805]1 [4806]2 [4807]3
 * Eurystheus: [4808]1
 * Eusebius: [4809]1 [4810]2 [4811]3 [4812]4 [4813]5 [4814]6 [4815]7
 [4816]8 [4817]9 [4818]10 [4819]11 [4820]12 [4821]13 [4822]14
 [4823]15 [4824]16 [4825]17 [4826]18 [4827]19
 * Eutyches: [4828]1
 * Eve: [4829]1 [4830]2
 * Ezekiel: [4831]1 [4832]2
 * Ezra: [4833]1 [4834]2 [4835]3 [4836]4 [4837]5
 * Fabricius: [4838]1 [4839]2
 * Fairbairn: [4840]1
 * Farrar: [4841]1 [4842]2 [4843]3
 * Father Liber: [4844]1
 * Fatua: [4845]1
 * Fatua Fauna: [4846]1 [4847]2
 * Faula: [4848]1 [4849]2
 * Faunas: [4850]1
 * Faunus: [4851]1 [4852]2 [4853]3 [4854]4 [4855]5 [4856]6 [4857]7
 [4858]8 [4859]9
 * Fausta: [4860]1 [4861]2 [4862]3
 * Faustulus: [4863]1 [4864]2
 * Felix: [4865]1 [4866]2 [4867]3
 * Fenestella: [4868]1 [4869]2 [4870]3
 * Field: [4871]1 [4872]2 [4873]3 [4874]4
 * Firmianus: [4875]1 [4876]2 [4877]3
 * Flaccinian: [4878]1
 * Flaccus: [4879]1 [4880]2 [4881]3
 * Flora: [4882]1 [4883]2 [4884]3
 * Fornacalia: [4885]1
 * Fornax: [4886]1 [4887]2
 * Fortuna: [4888]1
 * Fortuna Muliebris: [4889]1
 * Fortunatus: [4890]1
 * Fortune: [4891]1
 * Freeman: [4892]1 [4893]2
 * Fufius Geminus: [4894]1
 * Fulvius: [4895]1
 * Funk: [4896]1
 * Furius: [4897]1 [4898]2 [4899]3 [4900]4 [4901]5 [4902]6 [4903]7
 [4904]8
 * Furius Bibaculus: [4905]1
 * Fuscus: [4906]1
 * Gabius Bassus : [4907]1
 * Gabriel: [4908]1 [4909]2 [4910]3 [4911]4
 * Gaius: [4912]1
 * Galba: [4913]1 [4914]2
 * Galerius: [4915]1 [4916]2 [4917]3 [4918]4 [4919]5 [4920]6 [4921]7
 [4922]8 [4923]9 [4924]10 [4925]11 [4926]12 [4927]13 [4928]14
 [4929]15 [4930]16 [4931]17 [4932]18 [4933]19 [4934]20 [4935]21
 [4936]22 [4937]23 [4938]24 [4939]25 [4940]26 [4941]27 [4942]28
 [4943]29 [4944]30 [4945]31 [4946]32 [4947]33 [4948]34 [4949]35
 [4950]36 [4951]37 [4952]38 [4953]39 [4954]40 [4955]41 [4956]42
 [4957]43 [4958]44 [4959]45 [4960]46 [4961]47 [4962]48 [4963]49
 [4964]50 [4965]51 [4966]52 [4967]53 [4968]54 [4969]55 [4970]56
 [4971]57 [4972]58 [4973]59 [4974]60 [4975]61 [4976]62 [4977]63
 [4978]64 [4979]65 [4980]66 [4981]67 [4982]68 [4983]69 [4984]70
 [4985]71 [4986]72 [4987]73 [4988]74 [4989]75
 * Galerius Cæsar: [4990]1 [4991]2 [4992]3
 * Galli: [4993]1 [4994]2 [4995]3 [4996]4
 * Ganymede: [4997]1 [4998]2 [4999]3 [5000]4 [5001]5
 * Gavius: [5002]1 [5003]2
 * Gebhardt: [5004]1
 * Gehazi: [5005]1 [5006]2
 * Gelasius: [5007]1
 * Genseric: [5008]1 [5009]2
 * George H. Schodde: [5010]1
 * George Ross Merry: [5011]1
 * Germ. Cæs.: [5012]1
 * Germanicus Cæsar: [5013]1 [5014]2 [5015]3 [5016]4
 * Gibbon: [5017]1 [5018]2
 * Gideon: [5019]1
 * Glauca: [5020]1
 * Goliah: [5021]1
 * Grabe: [5022]1 [5023]2
 * Gracchi: [5024]1
 * Gratus: [5025]1
 * Gray: [5026]1
 * Gregory: [5027]1
 * Gregory of Tours: [5028]1
 * Gregory the First: [5029]1
 * Gregory the Great: [5030]1
 * Gresswell: [5031]1
 * Hadrian: [5032]1
 * Hall: [5033]1 [5034]2 [5035]3 [5036]4 [5037]5
 * Halley: [5038]1
 * Ham: [5039]1 [5040]2
 * Haman: [5041]1
 * Hammond: [5042]1 [5043]2 [5044]3 [5045]4 [5046]5 [5047]6 [5048]7
 [5049]8 [5050]9 [5051]10 [5052]11 [5053]12 [5054]13 [5055]14
 [5056]15 [5057]16 [5058]17 [5059]18 [5060]19
 * Hannah: [5061]1 [5062]2 [5063]3
 * Hannibal: [5064]1
 * Harkleian: [5065]1
 * Harmonia: [5066]1
 * Harnack: [5067]1 [5068]2 [5069]3 [5070]4 [5071]5 [5072]6 [5073]7
 [5074]8 [5075]9 [5076]10 [5077]11 [5078]12 [5079]13 [5080]14
 [5081]15
 * Harvey: [5082]1 [5083]2
 * Hazael,: [5084]1
 * Hector: [5085]1
 * Hefele: [5086]1 [5087]2 [5088]3 [5089]4 [5090]5 [5091]6 [5092]7
 [5093]8 [5094]9 [5095]10 [5096]11 [5097]12 [5098]13 [5099]14
 [5100]15 [5101]16 [5102]17 [5103]18 [5104]19 [5105]20
 * Helen: [5106]1
 * Henna: [5107]1 [5108]2 [5109]3
 * Hephzibah: [5110]1
 * Heraclides of Pontus: [5111]1
 * Heraclitus: [5112]1
 * Hercules: [5113]1 [5114]2 [5115]3 [5116]4 [5117]5 [5118]6 [5119]7
 [5120]8 [5121]9 [5122]10 [5123]11 [5124]12 [5125]13 [5126]14
 [5127]15 [5128]16 [5129]17 [5130]18 [5131]19 [5132]20 [5133]21
 [5134]22 [5135]23 [5136]24 [5137]25 [5138]26 [5139]27 [5140]28
 [5141]29
 * Herculius: [5142]1
 * Herillus: [5143]1 [5144]2
 * Hermaphroditus: [5145]1
 * Hermas: [5146]1 [5147]2 [5148]3 [5149]4 [5150]5
 * Hermes: [5151]1 [5152]2 [5153]3 [5154]4 [5155]5 [5156]6 [5157]7
 [5158]8 [5159]9 [5160]10 [5161]11
 * Herod: [5162]1 [5163]2 [5164]3 [5165]4 [5166]5 [5167]6 [5168]7
 [5169]8 [5170]9 [5171]10
 * Herod Antipas: [5172]1
 * Herod the Great: [5173]1
 * Herophile: [5174]1
 * Hesiod: [5175]1 [5176]2 [5177]3 [5178]4
 * Hesus: [5179]1
 * Heyne: [5180]1 [5181]2
 * Hezekiah: [5182]1 [5183]2 [5184]3 [5185]4
 * Hickes: [5186]1 [5187]2
 * Hierocles: [5188]1 [5189]2 [5190]3
 * Hieron.: [5191]1 [5192]2 [5193]3
 * Hieronymus: [5194]1 [5195]2 [5196]3 [5197]4
 * Hilary: [5198]1
 * Hilgenfeld: [5199]1 [5200]2 [5201]3 [5202]4 [5203]5 [5204]6 [5205]7
 [5206]8 [5207]9 [5208]10 [5209]11 [5210]12 [5211]13 [5212]14
 [5213]15 [5214]16 [5215]17
 * Hilgenfield: [5216]1
 * Hippolytus: [5217]1 [5218]2 [5219]3 [5220]4 [5221]5 [5222]6 [5223]7
 [5224]8 [5225]9 [5226]10 [5227]11
 * Hirscher: [5228]1 [5229]2 [5230]3 [5231]4
 * Hitchcock: [5232]1 [5233]2
 * Hobart: [5234]1
 * Holofernes: [5235]1
 * Holtzmann: [5236]1
 * Homer: [5237]1 [5238]2 [5239]3 [5240]4 [5241]5 [5242]6
 * Hor.: [5243]1 [5244]2
 * Horace: [5245]1 [5246]2 [5247]3 [5248]4 [5249]5 [5250]6
 * Horat: [5251]1
 * Horat.: [5252]1
 * Horatius: [5253]1
 * Hortensius: [5254]1 [5255]2 [5256]3
 * Hosea: [5257]1 [5258]2 [5259]3
 * Hosius: [5260]1
 * Huldah: [5261]1 [5262]2
 * Hyperberetæus: [5263]1
 * Hyperion: [5264]1
 * Hystaspes: [5265]1 [5266]2 [5267]3
 * Iapetus: [5268]1 [5269]2 [5270]3
 * Iasius: [5271]1
 * Ida: [5272]1
 * Idas: [5273]1
 * Ignat.: [5274]1
 * Ignatius: [5275]1 [5276]2 [5277]3 [5278]4
 * Inachus: [5279]1 [5280]2
 * Innocentius: [5281]1
 * Ino: [5282]1
 * Io: [5283]1 [5284]2
 * Irah Chase: [5285]1
 * Irenæus: [5286]1 [5287]2 [5288]3 [5289]4 [5290]5 [5291]6 [5292]7
 [5293]8 [5294]9 [5295]10 [5296]11 [5297]12
 * Irenaus: [5298]1
 * Isaac: [5299]1 [5300]2 [5301]3
 * Isaac H. Hall: [5302]1
 * Isaiah: [5303]1 [5304]2 [5305]3 [5306]4 [5307]5 [5308]6 [5309]7
 [5310]8 [5311]9 [5312]10 [5313]11 [5314]12 [5315]13 [5316]14
 [5317]15 [5318]16 [5319]17
 * Isis: [5320]1 [5321]2 [5322]3 [5323]4 [5324]5 [5325]6 [5326]7
 [5327]8
 * Israel: [5328]1
 * Iulus: [5329]1
 * Izaak Walton: [5330]1
 * J. A. Fabricius: [5331]1
 * J. Mason Neale: [5332]1
 * Jacob: [5333]1 [5334]2 [5335]3 [5336]4 [5337]5 [5338]6 [5339]7
 [5340]8
 * Jacques Balmès: [5341]1
 * Jael: [5342]1
 * Jahn: [5343]1
 * Jairus: [5344]1
 * Jambres: [5345]1
 * James: [5346]1 [5347]2 [5348]3 [5349]4 [5350]5 [5351]6 [5352]7
 [5353]8 [5354]9 [5355]10 [5356]11 [5357]12 [5358]13 [5359]14
 [5360]15 [5361]16 [5362]17 [5363]18
 * James Donaldson: [5364]1
 * James the brother of our Lord: [5365]1
 * James the son of Alphæus: [5366]1
 * Jannes: [5367]1
 * Janus: [5368]1 [5369]2 [5370]3
 * Jarvis: [5371]1 [5372]2 [5373]3 [5374]4
 * Jason: [5375]1
 * Jehoshaphat: [5376]1 [5377]2
 * Jellinek: [5378]1
 * Jephtha: [5379]1
 * Jeremiah: [5380]1 [5381]2 [5382]3 [5383]4 [5384]5 [5385]6 [5386]7
 [5387]8 [5388]9 [5389]10 [5390]11 [5391]12 [5392]13 [5393]14
 [5394]15 [5395]16 [5396]17 [5397]18
 * Jericho: [5398]1
 * Jeroboam: [5399]1 [5400]2 [5401]3
 * Jeroboam;: [5402]1
 * Jerome: [5403]1 [5404]2 [5405]3 [5406]4 [5407]5 [5408]6 [5409]7
 * Jesse: [5410]1 [5411]2 [5412]3
 * Jesus: [5413]1 [5414]2 [5415]3 [5416]4 [5417]5 [5418]6 [5419]7
 [5420]8 [5421]9 [5422]10 [5423]11 [5424]12 [5425]13 [5426]14
 [5427]15 [5428]16 [5429]17 [5430]18 [5431]19 [5432]20 [5433]21
 [5434]22 [5435]23 [5436]24 [5437]25 [5438]26 [5439]27 [5440]28
 [5441]29 [5442]30 [5443]31 [5444]32 [5445]33 [5446]34 [5447]35
 [5448]36 [5449]37 [5450]38 [5451]39 [5452]40 [5453]41 [5454]42
 [5455]43 [5456]44 [5457]45 [5458]46 [5459]47 [5460]48 [5461]49
 [5462]50 [5463]51 [5464]52 [5465]53 [5466]54 [5467]55 [5468]56
 [5469]57 [5470]58 [5471]59 [5472]60 [5473]61 [5474]62 [5475]63
 [5476]64 [5477]65 [5478]66 [5479]67 [5480]68 [5481]69 [5482]70
 [5483]71 [5484]72 [5485]73 [5486]74 [5487]75 [5488]76 [5489]77
 [5490]78 [5491]79 [5492]80 [5493]81 [5494]82 [5495]83 [5496]84
 [5497]85 [5498]86 [5499]87 [5500]88 [5501]89 [5502]90 [5503]91
 [5504]92 [5505]93 [5506]94 [5507]95 [5508]96 [5509]97 [5510]98
 [5511]99 [5512]100 [5513]101 [5514]102 [5515]103 [5516]104
 [5517]105 [5518]106 [5519]107 [5520]108 [5521]109 [5522]110
 [5523]111 [5524]112 [5525]113
 * Jesus Christ: [5526]1 [5527]2 [5528]3 [5529]4 [5530]5 [5531]6
 [5532]7 [5533]8 [5534]9 [5535]10 [5536]11 [5537]12 [5538]13
 [5539]14 [5540]15 [5541]16 [5542]17 [5543]18 [5544]19 [5545]20
 [5546]21 [5547]22 [5548]23 [5549]24 [5550]25 [5551]26 [5552]27
 [5553]28 [5554]29 [5555]30 [5556]31 [5557]32 [5558]33 [5559]34
 [5560]35 [5561]36 [5562]37 [5563]38 [5564]39 [5565]40 [5566]41
 [5567]42 [5568]43 [5569]44 [5570]45 [5571]46 [5572]47 [5573]48
 [5574]49 [5575]50 [5576]51 [5577]52 [5578]53 [5579]54 [5580]55
 [5581]56 [5582]57 [5583]58 [5584]59 [5585]60 [5586]61 [5587]62
 [5588]63 [5589]64 [5590]65 [5591]66 [5592]67 [5593]68 [5594]69
 [5595]70 [5596]71 [5597]72 [5598]73 [5599]74 [5600]75 [5601]76
 [5602]77 [5603]78 [5604]79 [5605]80 [5606]81 [5607]82 [5608]83
 [5609]84 [5610]85 [5611]86 [5612]87 [5613]88 [5614]89 [5615]90
 [5616]91 [5617]92 [5618]93 [5619]94 [5620]95 [5621]96 [5622]97
 [5623]98 [5624]99 [5625]100 [5626]101 [5627]102 [5628]103 [5629]104
 [5630]105 [5631]106 [5632]107 [5633]108 [5634]109 [5635]110
 [5636]111
 * Jesus Christ,: [5637]1
 * Jesus Christus: [5638]1
 * Jesus:: [5639]1
 * Jethro: [5640]1
 * Joab: [5641]1
 * Joash: [5642]1
 * Job: [5643]1 [5644]2 [5645]3 [5646]4 [5647]5 [5648]6 [5649]7
 [5650]8 [5651]9 [5652]10 [5653]11 [5654]12
 * Joel: [5655]1
 * John: [5656]1 [5657]2 [5658]3 [5659]4 [5660]5 [5661]6 [5662]7
 [5663]8 [5664]9 [5665]10 [5666]11 [5667]12 [5668]13 [5669]14
 [5670]15 [5671]16 [5672]17 [5673]18 [5674]19 [5675]20 [5676]21
 [5677]22 [5678]23 [5679]24 [5680]25 [5681]26 [5682]27 [5683]28
 * John (Scholasticus): [5684]1
 * John Philoponus: [5685]1
 * John Scholasticus: [5686]1
 * John T. Napier: [5687]1
 * John of Antioch: [5688]1
 * John of Damascus: [5689]1
 * John the Baptist: [5690]1 [5691]2
 * John,: [5692]1
 * Jonah: [5693]1 [5694]2 [5695]3
 * Jonas: [5696]1
 * Jones of Nayland: [5697]1
 * Josedech: [5698]1
 * Joseph: [5699]1 [5700]2 [5701]3 [5702]4 [5703]5 [5704]6 [5705]7
 [5706]8 [5707]9 [5708]10
 * Josephus: [5709]1
 * Joshua: [5710]1 [5711]2 [5712]3 [5713]4 [5714]5 [5715]6 [5716]7
 [5717]8 [5718]9 [5719]10 [5720]11 [5721]12 [5722]13 [5723]14
 * Josiah: [5724]1 [5725]2 [5726]3
 * Jove: [5727]1 [5728]2
 * Juba: [5729]1
 * Judah: [5730]1 [5731]2
 * Judas: [5732]1 [5733]2 [5734]3 [5735]4 [5736]5 [5737]6 [5738]7
 [5739]8 [5740]9 [5741]10 [5742]11 [5743]12 [5744]13 [5745]14
 [5746]15 [5747]16 [5748]17
 * Judas Maccabeus: [5749]1
 * Judas the Zealot: [5750]1
 * Judith: [5751]1 [5752]2 [5753]3
 * Judith,: [5754]1
 * Julia: [5755]1
 * Julian: [5756]1 [5757]2 [5758]3
 * Julius: [5759]1
 * Julius Africanus: [5760]1 [5761]2
 * Julius Proculus: [5762]1
 * Juno: [5763]1 [5764]2 [5765]3 [5766]4 [5767]5 [5768]6 [5769]7
 [5770]8 [5771]9 [5772]10 [5773]11 [5774]12 [5775]13 [5776]14
 [5777]15
 * Juno Moneta: [5778]1
 * Juno of Veii: [5779]1
 * Jupiter: [5780]1 [5781]2 [5782]3 [5783]4 [5784]5 [5785]6 [5786]7
 [5787]8 [5788]9 [5789]10 [5790]11 [5791]12 [5792]13 [5793]14
 [5794]15 [5795]16 [5796]17 [5797]18 [5798]19 [5799]20 [5800]21
 [5801]22 [5802]23 [5803]24 [5804]25 [5805]26 [5806]27 [5807]28
 [5808]29 [5809]30 [5810]31 [5811]32 [5812]33 [5813]34 [5814]35
 [5815]36 [5816]37 [5817]38 [5818]39 [5819]40 [5820]41 [5821]42
 [5822]43 [5823]44 [5824]45 [5825]46 [5826]47 [5827]48 [5828]49
 [5829]50 [5830]51 [5831]52 [5832]53 [5833]54 [5834]55 [5835]56
 [5836]57 [5837]58 [5838]59 [5839]60 [5840]61 [5841]62 [5842]63
 [5843]64 [5844]65 [5845]66 [5846]67 [5847]68 [5848]69 [5849]70
 [5850]71 [5851]72 [5852]73 [5853]74 [5854]75 [5855]76 [5856]77
 [5857]78 [5858]79 [5859]80 [5860]81 [5861]82 [5862]83 [5863]84
 [5864]85 [5865]86 [5866]87 [5867]88 [5868]89 [5869]90 [5870]91
 [5871]92 [5872]93 [5873]94 [5874]95 [5875]96 [5876]97 [5877]98
 [5878]99 [5879]100 [5880]101 [5881]102 [5882]103 [5883]104
 [5884]105 [5885]106 [5886]107 [5887]108 [5888]109 [5889]110
 [5890]111 [5891]112 [5892]113 [5893]114 [5894]115 [5895]116
 [5896]117 [5897]118 [5898]119 [5899]120 [5900]121 [5901]122
 [5902]123 [5903]124 [5904]125 [5905]126 [5906]127 [5907]128
 [5908]129 [5909]130 [5910]131 [5911]132 [5912]133 [5913]134
 [5914]135 [5915]136 [5916]137 [5917]138 [5918]139 [5919]140
 [5920]141 [5921]142
 * Jupiter Atabyrius: [5922]1
 * Jupiter Casius: [5923]1
 * Jupiter Labrandius: [5924]1
 * Jupiter Laprius: [5925]1
 * Jupiter Latialis: [5926]1
 * Jupiter Molion: [5927]1
 * Jupiter Pistor: [5928]1 [5929]2
 * Justin: [5930]1 [5931]2 [5932]3 [5933]4 [5934]5 [5935]6 [5936]7
 [5937]8 [5938]9 [5939]10 [5940]11 [5941]12 [5942]13 [5943]14
 [5944]15 [5945]16 [5946]17
 * Justin Martyr: [5947]1 [5948]2 [5949]3 [5950]4 [5951]5 [5952]6
 [5953]7 [5954]8 [5955]9 [5956]10 [5957]11 [5958]12 [5959]13
 * Juv.: [5960]1
 * Juvenal: [5961]1 [5962]2
 * Kaye: [5963]1
 * Klotz: [5964]1
 * Krabbe: [5965]1 [5966]2 [5967]3 [5968]4 [5969]5
 * Lælius: [5970]1 [5971]2 [5972]3 [5973]4 [5974]5 [5975]6 [5976]7
 [5977]8
 * Labrandius: [5978]1
 * Lacantius: [5979]1
 * Lachesis: [5980]1
 * Lactantius: [5981]1 [5982]2 [5983]3 [5984]4 [5985]5 [5986]6 [5987]7
 [5988]8 [5989]9 [5990]10 [5991]11 [5992]12 [5993]13 [5994]14
 [5995]15 [5996]16 [5997]17 [5998]18 [5999]19 [6000]20 [6001]21
 [6002]22 [6003]23 [6004]24 [6005]25 [6006]26 [6007]27 [6008]28
 [6009]29 [6010]30 [6011]31 [6012]32 [6013]33 [6014]34 [6015]35
 [6016]36 [6017]37 [6018]38 [6019]39 [6020]40 [6021]41 [6022]42
 [6023]43 [6024]44 [6025]45 [6026]46 [6027]47 [6028]48 [6029]49
 [6030]50 [6031]51 [6032]52 [6033]53 [6034]54 [6035]55 [6036]56
 [6037]57 [6038]58 [6039]59 [6040]60 [6041]61 [6042]62 [6043]63
 [6044]64 [6045]65 [6046]66 [6047]67 [6048]68 [6049]69 [6050]70
 [6051]71 [6052]72
 * Lagarde: [6053]1 [6054]2 [6055]3
 * Lais: [6056]1 [6057]2 [6058]3 [6059]4 [6060]5
 * Lamartine: [6061]1
 * Lampsacus: [6062]1
 * Laomedon: [6063]1 [6064]2 [6065]3 [6066]4
 * Lara: [6067]1
 * Lardner: [6068]1 [6069]2 [6070]3 [6071]4 [6072]5 [6073]6 [6074]7
 [6075]8 [6076]9 [6077]10 [6078]11 [6079]12
 * Lardner.: [6080]1
 * Larentina: [6081]1
 * Lares: [6082]1 [6083]2 [6084]3
 * Larunda: [6085]1
 * Latian Jupiter: [6086]1
 * Latinus: [6087]1
 * Latona: [6088]1 [6089]2
 * Launoy: [6090]1
 * Layard: [6091]1
 * Lazarus: [6092]1 [6093]2 [6094]3
 * Le Brun: [6095]1
 * Le Clerc: [6096]1
 * Le Nourry: [6097]1
 * Leæna: [6098]1
 * Lebbæus: [6099]1 [6100]2
 * Lebbæus,: [6101]1
 * Lecky: [6102]1
 * Leda: [6103]1 [6104]2
 * Leo Allatius: [6105]1
 * Leo Augustus: [6106]1
 * Leo the Great: [6107]1
 * Leontius: [6108]1
 * Lestocq: [6109]1
 * Leucippus: [6110]1 [6111]2 [6112]3 [6113]4
 * Leucothea: [6114]1
 * Levi: [6115]1 [6116]2
 * Lewis: [6117]1 [6118]2 [6119]3
 * Liber: [6120]1 [6121]2 [6122]3 [6123]4 [6124]5 [6125]6 [6126]7
 [6127]8 [6128]9 [6129]10 [6130]11 [6131]12 [6132]13 [6133]14
 [6134]15 [6135]16 [6136]17 [6137]18
 * Libera: [6138]1
 * Licinius: [6139]1 [6140]2 [6141]3 [6142]4 [6143]5 [6144]6 [6145]7
 [6146]8 [6147]9 [6148]10 [6149]11 [6150]12 [6151]13 [6152]14
 [6153]15 [6154]16 [6155]17 [6156]18 [6157]19 [6158]20 [6159]21
 [6160]22 [6161]23 [6162]24 [6163]25 [6164]26 [6165]27 [6166]28
 [6167]29 [6168]30 [6169]31 [6170]32 [6171]33 [6172]34 [6173]35
 [6174]36 [6175]37 [6176]38 [6177]39 [6178]40 [6179]41 [6180]42
 [6181]43 [6182]44
 * Lightfoot: [6183]1 [6184]2 [6185]3 [6186]4 [6187]5 [6188]6 [6189]7
 [6190]8 [6191]9 [6192]10 [6193]11 [6194]12 [6195]13 [6196]14
 [6197]15 [6198]16 [6199]17 [6200]18 [6201]19 [6202]20 [6203]21
 [6204]22 [6205]23 [6206]24 [6207]25 [6208]26 [6209]27 [6210]28
 [6211]29 [6212]30 [6213]31 [6214]32 [6215]33 [6216]34 [6217]35
 [6218]36 [6219]37 [6220]38 [6221]39 [6222]40 [6223]41 [6224]42
 [6225]43 [6226]44 [6227]45 [6228]46 [6229]47 [6230]48 [6231]49
 [6232]50 [6233]51 [6234]52 [6235]53 [6236]54 [6237]55 [6238]56
 [6239]57 [6240]58 [6241]59 [6242]60 [6243]61 [6244]62 [6245]63
 [6246]64 [6247]65 [6248]66 [6249]67
 * Linus: [6250]1 [6251]2
 * Littledale: [6252]1 [6253]2 [6254]3 [6255]4
 * Livia: [6256]1
 * Livy: [6257]1 [6258]2
 * Locrian Proserpine: [6259]1
 * Lois;: [6260]1
 * Lord Hailes: [6261]1
 * Lot: [6262]1 [6263]2 [6264]3 [6265]4
 * Lucan: [6266]1
 * Lucian: [6267]1
 * Lucilius: [6268]1 [6269]2 [6270]3 [6271]4 [6272]5 [6273]6 [6274]7
 [6275]8 [6276]9 [6277]10 [6278]11 [6279]12
 * Lucius: [6280]1 [6281]2
 * Lucius Cælius Firmianus Lactantius: [6282]1
 * Lucius Cæsar: [6283]1
 * Lucius Valerius: [6284]1
 * Lucret.: [6285]1 [6286]2
 * Lucretius: [6287]1 [6288]2 [6289]3 [6290]4 [6291]5 [6292]6 [6293]7
 [6294]8 [6295]9 [6296]10 [6297]11 [6298]12 [6299]13 [6300]14
 [6301]15 [6302]16 [6303]17 [6304]18 [6305]19 [6306]20 [6307]21
 [6308]22 [6309]23 [6310]24 [6311]25 [6312]26 [6313]27 [6314]28
 [6315]29 [6316]30 [6317]31 [6318]32 [6319]33 [6320]34 [6321]35
 [6322]36
 * Lucretuis: [6323]1
 * Luke: [6324]1 [6325]2 [6326]3 [6327]4 [6328]5 [6329]6
 * Lupa: [6330]1 [6331]2
 * Lytton: [6332]1 [6333]2
 * M. Aurelius: [6334]1
 * M. Jules Mohl: [6335]1
 * M. Tullius: [6336]1
 * Mabillon: [6337]1
 * Malabar: [6338]1 [6339]2
 * Malachi: [6340]1 [6341]2 [6342]3 [6343]4
 * Malala: [6344]1
 * Manasseh: [6345]1 [6346]2 [6347]3 [6348]4 [6349]5 [6350]6 [6351]7
 [6352]8 [6353]9 [6354]10 [6355]11 [6356]12 [6357]13 [6358]14
 * Mandates: [6359]1
 * Manoah: [6360]1
 * Marathones: [6361]1
 * Marcellus: [6362]1 [6363]2 [6364]3
 * Marcion: [6365]1 [6366]2 [6367]3 [6368]4
 * Marcus: [6369]1 [6370]2 [6371]3
 * Marcus Antonius: [6372]1
 * Marcus Cato: [6373]1
 * Marcus Cicero: [6374]1
 * Marcus Marcellus: [6375]1
 * Marcus Otacilius: [6376]1
 * Marcus Tullius: [6377]1 [6378]2 [6379]3 [6380]4 [6381]5 [6382]6
 [6383]7 [6384]8 [6385]9 [6386]10 [6387]11 [6388]12 [6389]13
 [6390]14 [6391]15 [6392]16 [6393]17 [6394]18 [6395]19 [6396]20
 [6397]21 [6398]22 [6399]23 [6400]24
 * Marcus Varro: [6401]1
 * Marica: [6402]1
 * Maris: [6403]1 [6404]2 [6405]3
 * Mark: [6406]1 [6407]2 [6408]3 [6409]4 [6410]5 [6411]6 [6412]7
 [6413]8 [6414]9 [6415]10 [6416]11 [6417]12 [6418]13 [6419]14
 [6420]15 [6421]16 [6422]17 [6423]18
 * Mark Antony: [6424]1 [6425]2
 * Maro: [6426]1 [6427]2 [6428]3 [6429]4 [6430]5 [6431]6
 * Marriott: [6432]1
 * Mars: [6433]1 [6434]2 [6435]3 [6436]4 [6437]5 [6438]6 [6439]7
 [6440]8 [6441]9 [6442]10 [6443]11 [6444]12
 * Martha: [6445]1
 * Mary: [6446]1 [6447]2 [6448]3 [6449]4 [6450]5 [6451]6
 * Mary Magdalene: [6452]1 [6453]2
 * Mary of Cassoboli: [6454]1
 * Mary the mother of James: [6455]1
 * Mattathias: [6456]1
 * Matthew: [6457]1 [6458]2 [6459]3 [6460]4 [6461]5 [6462]6 [6463]7
 [6464]8 [6465]9 [6466]10 [6467]11
 * Matthias: [6468]1 [6469]2 [6470]3 [6471]4 [6472]5 [6473]6
 * Matuta: [6474]1
 * Maxentius: [6475]1 [6476]2 [6477]3 [6478]4 [6479]5 [6480]6 [6481]7
 [6482]8 [6483]9 [6484]10 [6485]11 [6486]12 [6487]13 [6488]14
 [6489]15 [6490]16 [6491]17 [6492]18 [6493]19 [6494]20 [6495]21
 [6496]22 [6497]23
 * Maximian: [6498]1 [6499]2 [6500]3 [6501]4 [6502]5 [6503]6 [6504]7
 [6505]8 [6506]9 [6507]10 [6508]11 [6509]12 [6510]13 [6511]14
 [6512]15 [6513]16 [6514]17 [6515]18 [6516]19 [6517]20 [6518]21
 [6519]22 [6520]23 [6521]24 [6522]25 [6523]26 [6524]27 [6525]28
 [6526]29 [6527]30 [6528]31 [6529]32
 * Maximian Herculius: [6530]1 [6531]2 [6532]3 [6533]4 [6534]5 [6535]6
 [6536]7 [6537]8
 * Maximilla: [6538]1 [6539]2 [6540]3 [6541]4
 * Maximin: [6542]1 [6543]2 [6544]3
 * Maximin Daia: [6545]1 [6546]2
 * Maximus: [6547]1 [6548]2
 * Mede: [6549]1
 * Megara: [6550]1
 * Melchisedec: [6551]1 [6552]2 [6553]3 [6554]4 [6555]5 [6556]6
 * Melchizedek: [6557]1 [6558]2 [6559]3 [6560]4
 * Melicerta: [6561]1
 * Melissa: [6562]1 [6563]2 [6564]3
 * Melisseus: [6565]1 [6566]2 [6567]3 [6568]4
 * Melito: [6569]1
 * Menoeceus: [6570]1
 * Menander: [6571]1 [6572]2
 * Menelaus: [6573]1
 * Mercurius: [6574]1 [6575]2 [6576]3 [6577]4
 * Mercury: [6578]1 [6579]2 [6580]3 [6581]4 [6582]5 [6583]6 [6584]7
 [6585]8 [6586]9 [6587]10 [6588]11 [6589]12
 * Merivale: [6590]1
 * Micaiah: [6591]1
 * Michael: [6592]1
 * Migne: [6593]1 [6594]2 [6595]3 [6596]4 [6597]5 [6598]6 [6599]7
 [6600]8 [6601]9
 * Milesian Apollo: [6602]1 [6603]2 [6604]3
 * Milesian Ceres: [6605]1
 * Milligan: [6606]1 [6607]2
 * Miltiades: [6608]1 [6609]2 [6610]3
 * Minerva: [6611]1 [6612]2 [6613]3 [6614]4 [6615]5 [6616]6 [6617]7
 [6618]8 [6619]9 [6620]10 [6621]11
 * Minos: [6622]1 [6623]2
 * Minucius: [6624]1 [6625]2 [6626]3
 * Minucius Felix: [6627]1 [6628]2 [6629]3
 * Miriam: [6630]1 [6631]2 [6632]3 [6633]4 [6634]5 [6635]6
 * Moloch: [6636]1
 * Monica: [6637]1
 * Montanus: [6638]1 [6639]2 [6640]3 [6641]4 [6642]5 [6643]6 [6644]7
 [6645]8 [6646]9 [6647]10 [6648]11 [6649]12 [6650]13 [6651]14
 * Mordecai: [6652]1 [6653]2
 * Moses: [6654]1 [6655]2 [6656]3 [6657]4 [6658]5 [6659]6 [6660]7
 [6661]8 [6662]9 [6663]10 [6664]11 [6665]12 [6666]13 [6667]14
 [6668]15 [6669]16 [6670]17 [6671]18 [6672]19 [6673]20 [6674]21
 [6675]22 [6676]23 [6677]24 [6678]25 [6679]26 [6680]27 [6681]28
 [6682]29 [6683]30 [6684]31 [6685]32 [6686]33 [6687]34 [6688]35
 [6689]36 [6690]37 [6691]38 [6692]39 [6693]40 [6694]41 [6695]42
 [6696]43 [6697]44 [6698]45 [6699]46 [6700]47 [6701]48 [6702]49
 [6703]50 [6704]51 [6705]52 [6706]53 [6707]54 [6708]55 [6709]56
 [6710]57 [6711]58 [6712]59 [6713]60 [6714]61 [6715]62 [6716]63
 [6717]64 [6718]65 [6719]66 [6720]67 [6721]68 [6722]69 [6723]70
 [6724]71 [6725]72 [6726]73 [6727]74 [6728]75 [6729]76 [6730]77
 [6731]78 [6732]79 [6733]80 [6734]81 [6735]82 [6736]83 [6737]84
 [6738]85 [6739]86 [6740]87 [6741]88 [6742]89 [6743]90 [6744]91
 [6745]92 [6746]93 [6747]94 [6748]95 [6749]96 [6750]97 [6751]98
 [6752]99 [6753]100 [6754]101 [6755]102 [6756]103 [6757]104
 [6758]105 [6759]106 [6760]107
 * Moses,: [6761]1
 * Muratori: [6762]1
 * Musæus: [6763]1 [6764]2
 * Muta: [6765]1 [6766]2
 * Mutius: [6767]1
 * Nævius: [6768]1
 * Naaman: [6769]1
 * Naaman;: [6770]1
 * Naboth: [6771]1
 * Napier: [6772]1 [6773]2
 * Narseus: [6774]1 [6775]2 [6776]3
 * Nathan: [6777]1 [6778]2 [6779]3 [6780]4
 * Nave: [6781]1
 * Navius: [6782]1
 * Neale: [6783]1 [6784]2 [6785]3 [6786]4 [6787]5 [6788]6 [6789]7
 [6790]8 [6791]9 [6792]10 [6793]11 [6794]12 [6795]13 [6796]14
 [6797]15 [6798]16 [6799]17 [6800]18 [6801]19 [6802]20
 * Nebridius: [6803]1
 * Nebuchadnezzar: [6804]1 [6805]2 [6806]3
 * Nehemiah: [6807]1
 * Nemesis: [6808]1
 * Nepos: [6809]1
 * Neptune: [6810]1 [6811]2 [6812]3 [6813]4 [6814]5 [6815]6 [6816]7
 [6817]8 [6818]9 [6819]10 [6820]11 [6821]12 [6822]13
 * Neptunus: [6823]1 [6824]2
 * Nero: [6825]1 [6826]2 [6827]3 [6828]4 [6829]5 [6830]6 [6831]7
 [6832]8 [6833]9 [6834]10
 * Nerva: [6835]1 [6836]2 [6837]3
 * Nestorius: [6838]1 [6839]2 [6840]3 [6841]4
 * Nicanor: [6842]1
 * Nicephorus: [6843]1 [6844]2 [6845]3 [6846]4 [6847]5
 * Nicetas: [6848]1 [6849]2
 * Nicolaus: [6850]1
 * Noah: [6851]1 [6852]2 [6853]3 [6854]4 [6855]5 [6856]6 [6857]7
 [6858]8 [6859]9 [6860]10 [6861]11 [6862]12 [6863]13 [6864]14
 [6865]15 [6866]16 [6867]17 [6868]18 [6869]19 [6870]20
 * Novatian: [6871]1 [6872]2
 * Novatus: [6873]1
 * Numa: [6874]1 [6875]2
 * Numa Pompilius: [6876]1
 * O. F. Fritzsche: [6877]1
 * Obadiah: [6878]1
 * Octavius: [6879]1
 * Oehler: [6880]1
 * Olympian Jupiter: [6881]1 [6882]2
 * Omphale: [6883]1 [6884]2
 * Onesimus: [6885]1 [6886]2
 * Ops: [6887]1 [6888]2 [6889]3 [6890]4
 * Orcus: [6891]1 [6892]2
 * Origen: [6893]1 [6894]2 [6895]3 [6896]4
 * Orion: [6897]1
 * Ornan: [6898]1
 * Orpheus: [6899]1 [6900]2 [6901]3 [6902]4 [6903]5 [6904]6 [6905]7
 [6906]8 [6907]9
 * Osiris: [6908]1 [6909]2 [6910]3 [6911]4 [6912]5
 * Otho: [6913]1
 * Ovid: [6914]1 [6915]2 [6916]3 [6917]4 [6918]5 [6919]6 [6920]7
 [6921]8 [6922]9 [6923]10 [6924]11 [6925]12 [6926]13 [6927]14
 [6928]15 [6929]16 [6930]17
 * Père de Montfaucon: [6931]1
 * Palæmon: [6932]1
 * Pallas: [6933]1
 * Palmer: [6934]1 [6935]2 [6936]3 [6937]4 [6938]5 [6939]6 [6940]7
 * Pan: [6941]1 [6942]2
 * Panætius: [6943]1
 * Panætius the Rhodian: [6944]1
 * Paul: [6945]1 [6946]2 [6947]3 [6948]4 [6949]5 [6950]6 [6951]7
 [6952]8 [6953]9 [6954]10 [6955]11 [6956]12 [6957]13 [6958]14
 [6959]15 [6960]16 [6961]17 [6962]18 [6963]19 [6964]20 [6965]21
 [6966]22 [6967]23 [6968]24 [6969]25 [6970]26 [6971]27 [6972]28
 [6973]29 [6974]30 [6975]31 [6976]32 [6977]33 [6978]34 [6979]35
 [6980]36 [6981]37 [6982]38 [6983]39 [6984]40 [6985]41 [6986]42
 [6987]43 [6988]44 [6989]45 [6990]46 [6991]47 [6992]48 [6993]49
 [6994]50
 * Paul of Samosata: [6995]1
 * Paul;: [6996]1
 * Paulus: [6997]1 [6998]2 [6999]3 [7000]4
 * Paulus Æmilius: [7001]1
 * Payne-Smith: [7002]1 [7003]2
 * Pearson: [7004]1 [7005]2
 * Pelagius: [7006]1
 * Pelias: [7007]1
 * Pentadius: [7008]1 [7009]2 [7010]3
 * Periander: [7011]1
 * Perillus: [7012]1
 * Perseus: [7013]1
 * Persius: [7014]1 [7015]2 [7016]3 [7017]4 [7018]5 [7019]6 [7020]7
 [7021]8 [7022]9 [7023]10
 * Pescennius Festus: [7024]1
 * Peter: [7025]1 [7026]2 [7027]3 [7028]4 [7029]5 [7030]6 [7031]7
 [7032]8 [7033]9 [7034]10 [7035]11 [7036]12 [7037]13 [7038]14
 [7039]15 [7040]16 [7041]17 [7042]18 [7043]19 [7044]20 [7045]21
 [7046]22 [7047]23 [7048]24 [7049]25 [7050]26 [7051]27 [7052]28
 [7053]29 [7054]30 [7055]31 [7056]32 [7057]33 [7058]34 [7059]35
 [7060]36 [7061]37 [7062]38 [7063]39 [7064]40
 * Petilius: [7065]1
 * Pfaff: [7066]1 [7067]2 [7068]3
 * Pfaffius, Christ. Math: [7069]1
 * Phædo: [7070]1 [7071]2 [7072]3
 * Phalaris: [7073]1 [7074]2 [7075]3 [7076]4 [7077]5
 * Phanuel: [7078]1
 * Pharaoh: [7079]1 [7080]2 [7081]3
 * Pharsalia: [7082]1
 * Phenæ: [7083]1
 * Pherecydes: [7084]1 [7085]2
 * Phidias: [7086]1
 * Philemon: [7087]1 [7088]2 [7089]3
 * Philip: [7090]1 [7091]2 [7092]3 [7093]4 [7094]5 [7095]6 [7096]7
 [7097]8 [7098]9
 * Philo: [7099]1 [7100]2 [7101]3 [7102]4 [7103]5 [7104]6
 * Philoctetes: [7105]1
 * Philomela: [7106]1
 * Philostratus: [7107]1
 * Philotheos Bryennios: [7108]1 [7109]2
 * Phineas: [7110]1 [7111]2 [7112]3 [7113]4
 * Phlegon: [7114]1 [7115]2 [7116]3
 * Phlegon the Trallian: [7117]1
 * Picus: [7118]1 [7119]2
 * Pilate: [7120]1 [7121]2 [7122]3 [7123]4 [7124]5 [7125]6 [7126]7
 [7127]8 [7128]9
 * Pindar: [7129]1 [7130]2
 * Piso: [7131]1 [7132]2
 * Pittacus: [7133]1
 * Plato: [7134]1 [7135]2 [7136]3 [7137]4 [7138]5 [7139]6 [7140]7
 [7141]8 [7142]9 [7143]10 [7144]11 [7145]12 [7146]13 [7147]14
 [7148]15 [7149]16 [7150]17 [7151]18 [7152]19 [7153]20 [7154]21
 [7155]22 [7156]23 [7157]24 [7158]25 [7159]26 [7160]27 [7161]28
 [7162]29 [7163]30 [7164]31 [7165]32 [7166]33 [7167]34 [7168]35
 [7169]36 [7170]37 [7171]38 [7172]39 [7173]40 [7174]41 [7175]42
 [7176]43 [7177]44 [7178]45 [7179]46 [7180]47 [7181]48 [7182]49
 [7183]50 [7184]51 [7185]52 [7186]53 [7187]54 [7188]55 [7189]56
 [7190]57 [7191]58 [7192]59 [7193]60 [7194]61 [7195]62 [7196]63
 [7197]64 [7198]65 [7199]66 [7200]67 [7201]68 [7202]69 [7203]70
 [7204]71 [7205]72 [7206]73 [7207]74 [7208]75 [7209]76 [7210]77
 [7211]78 [7212]79 [7213]80 [7214]81 [7215]82 [7216]83 [7217]84
 [7218]85 [7219]86 [7220]87 [7221]88 [7222]89 [7223]90
 * Plautus: [7224]1 [7225]2 [7226]3
 * Pliny: [7227]1 [7228]2
 * Plutarch: [7229]1
 * Pluto: [7230]1 [7231]2 [7232]3 [7233]4
 * Pole: [7234]1 [7235]2
 * Polites: [7236]1
 * Pollux: [7237]1 [7238]2 [7239]3 [7240]4 [7241]5 [7242]6
 * Polycarp: [7243]1 [7244]2 [7245]3
 * Polycletus: [7246]1
 * Pompey: [7247]1
 * Pompilius: [7248]1 [7249]2 [7250]3
 * Pontius: [7251]1
 * Pontius Pilate: [7252]1 [7253]2 [7254]3 [7255]4 [7256]5 [7257]6
 [7258]7 [7259]8 [7260]9
 * Portumnus: [7261]1
 * Posidonius: [7262]1
 * Priam: [7263]1 [7264]2 [7265]3 [7266]4
 * Priapus: [7267]1 [7268]2 [7269]3 [7270]4 [7271]5 [7272]6 [7273]7
 [7274]8 [7275]9 [7276]10 [7277]11 [7278]12
 * Prideaux: [7279]1
 * Prisca: [7280]1 [7281]2 [7282]3
 * Priscilla: [7283]1
 * Priscillian: [7284]1
 * Probst: [7285]1
 * Probus: [7286]1 [7287]2 [7288]3
 * Prometheus: [7289]1 [7290]2 [7291]3 [7292]4 [7293]5 [7294]6 [7295]7
 [7296]8
 * Propertius: [7297]1
 * Proserpine: [7298]1 [7299]2 [7300]3 [7301]4
 * Protagoras: [7302]1 [7303]2
 * Ptolemy Philadelphus: [7304]1
 * Publius Clodius: [7305]1
 * Publius Gabinius: [7306]1
 * Publius Vatienus: [7307]1
 * Pusey: [7308]1 [7309]2
 * Pyrrhus: [7310]1
 * Pythagoras: [7311]1 [7312]2 [7313]3 [7314]4 [7315]5 [7316]6 [7317]7
 [7318]8 [7319]9 [7320]10 [7321]11 [7322]12 [7323]13 [7324]14
 [7325]15 [7326]16 [7327]17 [7328]18 [7329]19 [7330]20
 * Quadratus: [7331]1 [7332]2
 * Queen Esther: [7333]1
 * Queen of Sheba: [7334]1
 * Quintilian: [7335]1 [7336]2 [7337]3
 * Quintus Catulus: [7338]1
 * Quintus Petilius: [7339]1
 * Quirinus: [7340]1 [7341]2 [7342]3 [7343]4 [7344]5
 * Rahab: [7345]1 [7346]2
 * Ratramni: [7347]1
 * Rattray: [7348]1
 * Regulus: [7349]1
 * Remus: [7350]1
 * Renaudot: [7351]1 [7352]2 [7353]3 [7354]4 [7355]5 [7356]6 [7357]7
 [7358]8 [7359]9 [7360]10 [7361]11 [7362]12 [7363]13
 * Rhadamanthus: [7364]1 [7365]2
 * Rhea: [7366]1 [7367]2 [7368]3
 * Rhodon: [7369]1
 * Ricimer: [7370]1
 * Riddle: [7371]1 [7372]2 [7373]3 [7374]4 [7375]5 [7376]6 [7377]7
 [7378]8 [7379]9
 * Robinson: [7380]1
 * Romula: [7381]1
 * Romulus: [7382]1 [7383]2 [7384]3 [7385]4 [7386]5 [7387]6 [7388]7
 [7389]8
 * Ropes: [7390]1
 * Rosenmüller: [7391]1
 * Routh: [7392]1 [7393]2 [7394]3 [7395]4 [7396]5
 * Ruberius Geminus: [7397]1
 * Rufinus: [7398]1 [7399]2 [7400]3 [7401]4
 * Sabellius: [7402]1
 * Sallust: [7403]1 [7404]2
 * Sallustius: [7405]1
 * Salome: [7406]1
 * Samoeah: [7407]1
 * Samson: [7408]1
 * Samuel: [7409]1 [7410]2 [7411]3 [7412]4 [7413]5 [7414]6 [7415]7
 [7416]8 [7417]9 [7418]10 [7419]11 [7420]12 [7421]13 [7422]14
 [7423]15 [7424]16 [7425]17 [7426]18 [7427]19
 * Sancus: [7428]1
 * Sanderson: [7429]1
 * Sapores: [7430]1 [7431]2
 * Sapphira: [7432]1
 * Sarah: [7433]1
 * Saturn: [7434]1 [7435]2 [7436]3 [7437]4 [7438]5 [7439]6 [7440]7
 [7441]8 [7442]9 [7443]10 [7444]11 [7445]12 [7446]13 [7447]14
 [7448]15 [7449]16 [7450]17 [7451]18 [7452]19 [7453]20 [7454]21
 * Saturnilus: [7455]1
 * Saturnus: [7456]1 [7457]2 [7458]3 [7459]4 [7460]5 [7461]6 [7462]7
 [7463]8 [7464]9 [7465]10 [7466]11 [7467]12 [7468]13 [7469]14
 [7470]15 [7471]16 [7472]17 [7473]18 [7474]19 [7475]20 [7476]21
 [7477]22 [7478]23 [7479]24 [7480]25 [7481]26 [7482]27 [7483]28
 [7484]29 [7485]30
 * Saturnus,: [7486]1
 * Saul: [7487]1 [7488]2 [7489]3 [7490]4 [7491]5
 * Scaurus: [7492]1
 * Sceva: [7493]1
 * Schaff: [7494]1 [7495]2 [7496]3 [7497]4 [7498]5 [7499]6 [7500]7
 [7501]8 [7502]9 [7503]10 [7504]11 [7505]12 [7506]13 [7507]14
 * Scipio: [7508]1
 * Scudamore: [7509]1 [7510]2
 * Sem: [7511]1
 * Seneca: [7512]1 [7513]2 [7514]3 [7515]4 [7516]5 [7517]6 [7518]7
 [7519]8 [7520]9 [7521]10 [7522]11 [7523]12 [7524]13 [7525]14
 [7526]15 [7527]16 [7528]17 [7529]18 [7530]19 [7531]20 [7532]21
 [7533]22 [7534]23 [7535]24 [7536]25 [7537]26
 * Sennacherib: [7538]1
 * Sennacherib;: [7539]1
 * Septimius Tertullianus: [7540]1
 * Serapis: [7541]1
 * Seth: [7542]1 [7543]2 [7544]3 [7545]4
 * Severianus: [7546]1 [7547]2
 * Severus: [7548]1 [7549]2 [7550]3 [7551]4 [7552]5 [7553]6 [7554]7
 [7555]8 [7556]9 [7557]10 [7558]11 [7559]12 [7560]13 [7561]14
 [7562]15 [7563]16
 * Sextus Claudius: [7564]1
 * Sibyl: [7565]1 [7566]2 [7567]3 [7568]4 [7569]5 [7570]6 [7571]7
 [7572]8 [7573]9 [7574]10 [7575]11 [7576]12 [7577]13 [7578]14
 [7579]15 [7580]16 [7581]17 [7582]18 [7583]19 [7584]20 [7585]21
 [7586]22 [7587]23 [7588]24 [7589]25 [7590]26 [7591]27 [7592]28
 [7593]29 [7594]30 [7595]31 [7596]32 [7597]33 [7598]34 [7599]35
 [7600]36 [7601]37 [7602]38 [7603]39 [7604]40 [7605]41 [7606]42
 [7607]43 [7608]44 [7609]45 [7610]46 [7611]47 [7612]48 [7613]49
 [7614]50 [7615]51 [7616]52 [7617]53 [7618]54 [7619]55 [7620]56
 [7621]57 [7622]58 [7623]59 [7624]60 [7625]61 [7626]62 [7627]63
 [7628]64 [7629]65 [7630]66 [7631]67
 * Sibylla: [7632]1
 * Sidonius: [7633]1
 * Silanus: [7634]1
 * Silas: [7635]1 [7636]2 [7637]3 [7638]4
 * Silenus: [7639]1 [7640]2 [7641]3
 * Simeon: [7642]1 [7643]2
 * Simon: [7644]1 [7645]2 [7646]3 [7647]4 [7648]5 [7649]6 [7650]7
 [7651]8 [7652]9 [7653]10 [7654]11 [7655]12 [7656]13 [7657]14
 [7658]15 [7659]16 [7660]17 [7661]18 [7662]19 [7663]20
 * Simon Magus: [7664]1
 * Simon the Canaanite: [7665]1 [7666]2 [7667]3
 * Sisera;: [7668]1
 * Sisinnius Capito: [7669]1
 * Sminthian Apollo: [7670]1
 * Smith: [7671]1 [7672]2
 * Socrates: [7673]1 [7674]2 [7675]3 [7676]4 [7677]5 [7678]6 [7679]7
 [7680]8 [7681]9 [7682]10 [7683]11 [7684]12 [7685]13 [7686]14
 [7687]15 [7688]16 [7689]17 [7690]18 [7691]19 [7692]20 [7693]21
 [7694]22 [7695]23 [7696]24 [7697]25 [7698]26 [7699]27 [7700]28
 [7701]29 [7702]30 [7703]31 [7704]32 [7705]33 [7706]34 [7707]35
 [7708]36 [7709]37 [7710]38 [7711]39 [7712]40 [7713]41 [7714]42
 [7715]43 [7716]44 [7717]45 [7718]46 [7719]47
 * Solomon: [7720]1 [7721]2 [7722]3 [7723]4 [7724]5 [7725]6 [7726]7
 [7727]8 [7728]9 [7729]10 [7730]11 [7731]12 [7732]13 [7733]14
 [7734]15 [7735]16 [7736]17 [7737]18 [7738]19 [7739]20 [7740]21
 [7741]22 [7742]23 [7743]24 [7744]25 [7745]26 [7746]27 [7747]28
 [7748]29 [7749]30 [7750]31 [7751]32 [7752]33 [7753]34 [7754]35
 [7755]36
 * Solon: [7756]1 [7757]2
 * Sophocles: [7758]1
 * Sosipater: [7759]1
 * Sotion: [7760]1
 * St.: [7761]1
 * St. Augustine: [7762]1 [7763]2
 * Stanley: [7764]1
 * Stephen: [7765]1 [7766]2 [7767]3 [7768]4 [7769]5 [7770]6
 * Stercutus: [7771]1 [7772]2
 * Stratæas: [7773]1
 * Straton: [7774]1
 * Suicer: [7775]1
 * Sulla: [7776]1
 * Sulmo: [7777]1
 * Susanna: [7778]1 [7779]2 [7780]3 [7781]4
 * Sylvester: [7782]1
 * Syncellus: [7783]1 [7784]2
 * T. Lewis: [7785]1 [7786]2
 * Tages: [7787]1
 * Tarquin the Proud: [7788]1
 * Tarquinius: [7789]1 [7790]2
 * Tarquinius Priscus: [7791]1 [7792]2
 * Tarquinius Superbus: [7793]1 [7794]2
 * Tarquitius: [7795]1 [7796]2
 * Tatius: [7797]1 [7798]2
 * Tattam: [7799]1
 * Tayler Lewis: [7800]1 [7801]2 [7802]3 [7803]4 [7804]5
 * Taylor Lewis: [7805]1
 * Tellus: [7806]1 [7807]2 [7808]3
 * Ter.: [7809]1 [7810]2
 * Terence: [7811]1 [7812]2 [7813]3 [7814]4 [7815]5 [7816]6 [7817]7
 * Terent.: [7818]1 [7819]2 [7820]3
 * Terminus: [7821]1 [7822]2 [7823]3 [7824]4 [7825]5
 * Terra: [7826]1
 * Tertullian: [7827]1 [7828]2 [7829]3 [7830]4 [7831]5 [7832]6 [7833]7
 [7834]8 [7835]9 [7836]10 [7837]11 [7838]12 [7839]13 [7840]14
 [7841]15 [7842]16 [7843]17 [7844]18 [7845]19 [7846]20 [7847]21
 [7848]22 [7849]23 [7850]24
 * Teucer: [7851]1 [7852]2
 * Teutas: [7853]1
 * Thaddæus: [7854]1 [7855]2 [7856]3
 * Thaddeus: [7857]1
 * Thales: [7858]1 [7859]2 [7860]3 [7861]4
 * Thales of Miletus: [7862]1 [7863]2 [7864]3
 * Thallus: [7865]1 [7866]2 [7867]3
 * Thamuz: [7868]1
 * Themis: [7869]1
 * Themison: [7870]1 [7871]2
 * Themiste: [7872]1 [7873]2
 * Themistoclea: [7874]1
 * Theodore: [7875]1 [7876]2
 * Theodorus: [7877]1 [7878]2 [7879]3
 * Theodotus: [7880]1 [7881]2 [7882]3
 * Theonas: [7883]1
 * Theophilus: [7884]1 [7885]2 [7886]3 [7887]4
 * Theophrastus: [7888]1 [7889]2
 * Thersites: [7890]1
 * Theseus: [7891]1
 * Thetis: [7892]1 [7893]2
 * Thomas: [7894]1 [7895]2 [7896]3 [7897]4 [7898]5
 * Thoth: [7899]1
 * Tiberinus: [7900]1
 * Tiberius: [7901]1
 * Tiberius Atinius: [7902]1
 * Tiberius Cæsar: [7903]1 [7904]2
 * Tillemont: [7905]1 [7906]2 [7907]3
 * Timon: [7908]1 [7909]2
 * Timotheus: [7910]1
 * Timothy: [7911]1 [7912]2
 * Titan: [7913]1 [7914]2 [7915]3 [7916]4
 * Titus: [7917]1 [7918]2 [7919]3
 * Tityus: [7920]1
 * Trajan: [7921]1 [7922]2 [7923]3
 * Trevor: [7924]1
 * Triphylian Jupiter: [7925]1
 * Tris: [7926]1
 * Trismegistus: [7927]1 [7928]2 [7929]3 [7930]4 [7931]5 [7932]6
 [7933]7 [7934]8 [7935]9 [7936]10 [7937]11 [7938]12 [7939]13
 [7940]14 [7941]15 [7942]16 [7943]17 [7944]18 [7945]19
 * Trismegistus Hermes: [7946]1
 * Trollope: [7947]1 [7948]2
 * Tuditanus: [7949]1 [7950]2
 * Tullius: [7951]1 [7952]2 [7953]3 [7954]4 [7955]5 [7956]6 [7957]7
 [7958]8 [7959]9
 * Tullus Hostilius: [7960]1 [7961]2
 * Tully: [7962]1 [7963]2 [7964]3 [7965]4 [7966]5 [7967]6 [7968]7
 [7969]8 [7970]9 [7971]10 [7972]11 [7973]12 [7974]13
 * Turrianus: [7975]1
 * Turullius: [7976]1
 * Tutinus: [7977]1
 * Tyndarus: [7978]1 [7979]2 [7980]3
 * Ufens: [7981]1
 * Ulysses: [7982]1
 * Uranus: [7983]1 [7984]2 [7985]3 [7986]4 [7987]5 [7988]6 [7989]7
 [7990]8 [7991]9
 * Uriah: [7992]1
 * Usher: [7993]1 [7994]2
 * Uzza: [7995]1
 * Uzziah: [7996]1 [7997]2 [7998]3
 * Uzziah,: [7999]1 [8000]2
 * Valentinus: [8001]1 [8002]2
 * Valeria: [8003]1 [8004]2 [8005]3 [8006]4 [8007]5 [8008]6 [8009]7
 [8010]8 [8011]9 [8012]10 [8013]11 [8014]12
 * Valerian: [8015]1 [8016]2 [8017]3 [8018]4
 * Vallars: [8019]1
 * Varro: [8020]1 [8021]2 [8022]3 [8023]4 [8024]5 [8025]6 [8026]7
 [8027]8 [8028]9 [8029]10 [8030]11 [8031]12 [8032]13 [8033]14
 [8034]15 [8035]16 [8036]17 [8037]18 [8038]19 [8039]20 [8040]21
 [8041]22 [8042]23
 * Venantius: [8043]1
 * Venantius Honorianus Clementianus Fortunatus: [8044]1
 * Venantius Honorius: [8045]1
 * Venenata: [8046]1
 * Venus: [8047]1 [8048]2 [8049]3 [8050]4 [8051]5 [8052]6 [8053]7
 [8054]8 [8055]9 [8056]10 [8057]11 [8058]12 [8059]13 [8060]14
 [8061]15
 * Venus Calva: [8062]1
 * Verres: [8063]1 [8064]2 [8065]3 [8066]4 [8067]5 [8068]6 [8069]7
 [8070]8 [8071]9
 * Verrius: [8072]1 [8073]2
 * Vespasian: [8074]1 [8075]2 [8076]3 [8077]4
 * Vesta: [8078]1 [8079]2 [8080]3 [8081]4 [8082]5 [8083]6 [8084]7
 [8085]8
 * Victor: [8086]1
 * Victorinus: [8087]1 [8088]2 [8089]3 [8090]4 [8091]5 [8092]6 [8093]7
 * Virbius: [8094]1 [8095]2
 * Virg: [8096]1
 * Virg.: [8097]1 [8098]2 [8099]3 [8100]4 [8101]5 [8102]6 [8103]7
 [8104]8 [8105]9 [8106]10 [8107]11 [8108]12 [8109]13 [8110]14
 [8111]15 [8112]16 [8113]17 [8114]18 [8115]19 [8116]20 [8117]21
 [8118]22 [8119]23 [8120]24 [8121]25 [8122]26 [8123]27 [8124]28
 [8125]29 [8126]30 [8127]31 [8128]32 [8129]33 [8130]34 [8131]35
 [8132]36 [8133]37 [8134]38
 * Virgil: [8135]1 [8136]2 [8137]3 [8138]4 [8139]5 [8140]6 [8141]7
 [8142]8 [8143]9 [8144]10 [8145]11 [8146]12 [8147]13 [8148]14
 [8149]15 [8150]16 [8151]17 [8152]18
 * Virgin Mary: [8153]1 [8154]2 [8155]3
 * Virtus: [8156]1
 * Vitellius: [8157]1
 * Von Drey: [8158]1
 * Vulcan: [8159]1 [8160]2 [8161]3 [8162]4 [8163]5 [8164]6 [8165]7
 [8166]8 [8167]9 [8168]10 [8169]11
 * W. Trollope: [8170]1
 * Wake: [8171]1
 * Walchii: [8172]1
 * Walchius: [8173]1
 * Warburton: [8174]1
 * Warfield: [8175]1
 * Warren: [8176]1
 * Waterland: [8177]1 [8178]2
 * Waterland.: [8179]1
 * Wescott: [8180]1
 * Whiston: [8181]1 [8182]2 [8183]3 [8184]4
 * William Fletcher, D.D: [8185]1
 * William Macdonald: [8186]1
 * William Palmer: [8187]1 [8188]2
 * William Wilberforce: [8189]1
 * Williams: [8190]1 [8191]2
 * Winand Fell: [8192]1
 * Wordsworth: [8193]1 [8194]2 [8195]3 [8196]4 [8197]5
 * Xenocrates: [8198]1
 * Xenophanes: [8199]1 [8200]2
 * Xenophon: [8201]1 [8202]2 [8203]3
 * Xerxes: [8204]1 [8205]2
 * Young: [8206]1
 * Zaccaria: [8207]1
 * Zacchæus: [8208]1 [8209]2 [8210]3
 * Zachariah: [8211]1
 * Zacharias: [8212]1 [8213]2 [8214]3 [8215]4
 * Zechariah: [8216]1 [8217]2 [8218]3 [8219]4 [8220]5
 * Zedekiah: [8221]1 [8222]2 [8223]3 [8224]4
 * Zen: [8225]1
 * Zeno: [8226]1 [8227]2 [8228]3 [8229]4 [8230]5 [8231]6 [8232]7
 [8233]8 [8234]9 [8235]10 [8236]11 [8237]12 [8238]13 [8239]14
 [8240]15 [8241]16 [8242]17 [8243]18 [8244]19 [8245]20 [8246]21
 [8247]22
 * Zeno of Citium: [8248]1
 * Zeno of Elea: [8249]1
 * Zeno the Epicurean: [8250]1
 * Zephyrinus: [8251]1
 * Zephyrus: [8252]1
 * Zerubbabel: [8253]1
 * Zeus: [8254]1 [8255]2 [8256]3
 * Zonaras: [8257]1
 * Zoroaster: [8258]1
 * Zoticus: [8259]1
 * Zoticus Otrenus.: [8260]1
 * adæus: [8261]1
 * robert ernest wallis: [8262]1
 * stin Martyr: [8263]1
 * tine: [8264]1

Index of Greek Words and Phrases

 * [: [8265]1
 * adra: [8266]1
 * ana: [8267]1
 * andra: [8268]1
 * anengei: [8269]1
 * anoe: [8270]1
 * apau: [8271]1
 * ape: [8272]1
 * apo: [8273]1
 * apola: [8274]1
 * aposto: [8275]1
 * archai: [8276]1
 * haplo: [8277]1
 * allous: [8278]1
 * anthos: [8279]1
 * anthropos: [8280]1 [8281]2 [8282]3
 * handres: [8283]1
 * hanthoopos: [8284]1
 * hano: [8285]1
 * ekklesio: [8286]1
 * en: [8287]1 [8288]2
 * ena: [8289]1
 * eno: [8290]1
 * exana: [8291]1
 * exemukterisan: [8292]1
 * es: [8293]1
 * esme: [8294]1
 * edoken: [8295]1
 * ethe: [8296]1
 * he: [8297]1
 * hem: [8298]1
 * iero: [8299]1
 * ippoi: [8300]1
 * hopla: [8301]1
 * humin: [8302]1
 * ulupo: [8303]1
 * hos: [8304]1
 * ops: [8305]1
 * o: [8306]1
 * Ga: [8307]1
 * Dio: [8308]1
 * Zeu: [8309]1
 * Ze: [8310]1
 * Ta: [8311]1
 * Phu: [8312]1
 * a: [8313]1 [8314]2 [8315]3 [8316]4
 * hai: [8317]1
 * autou: [8318]1 [8319]2
 * aupsou: [8320]1
 * aigio: [8321]1
 * an: [8322]1
 * antemos: [8323]1
 * api: [8324]1
 * as: [8325]1
 * bebe: [8326]1
 * bete: [8327]1
 * g: [8328]1
 * gar: [8329]1
 * gasma: [8330]1
 * ge: [8331]1
 * genserikos: [8332]1
 * gonon: [8333]1
 * gos: [8334]1 [8335]2
 * d: [8336]1
 * dai: [8337]1
 * didachai: [8338]1
 * do: [8339]1
 * doseis: [8340]1
 * do: [8341]1
 * e: [8342]1 [8343]2 [8344]3
 * eis: [8345]1 [8346]2
 * eis: [8347]1
 * epithumi: [8348]1
 * e: [8349]1
 * theos: [8350]1
 * i: [8351]1 [8352]2 [8353]3
 * k: [8354]1 [8355]2
 * kai: [8356]1 [8357]2
 * kai pa'nton ton poimni'on sou: [8358]1
 * kake: [8359]1
 * kata: [8360]1
 * kataste: [8361]1
 * ke: [8362]1
 * kei: [8363]1
 * kibdelon: [8364]1
 * kopri: [8365]1
 * kosmi: [8366]1
 * kratei: [8367]1
 * kuriako: [8368]1
 * kophou: [8369]1
 * l: [8370]1
 * lamen: [8371]1
 * lego: [8372]1
 * leioi: [8373]1
 * leui: [8374]1
 * lo: [8375]1 [8376]2
 * lon: [8377]1
 * m: [8378]1
 * marture: [8379]1
 * mat: [8380]1
 * me: [8381]1 [8382]2
 * menai: [8383]1
 * mesi: [8384]1 [8385]2
 * meta: [8386]1
 * monas: [8387]1
 * mou: [8388]1
 * mukterismon: [8389]1
 * n: [8390]1 [8391]2 [8392]3 [8393]4 [8394]5 [8395]6 [8396]7 [8397]8
 [8398]9 [8399]10 [8400]11 [8401]12
 * nothoi: [8402]1
 * nde: [8403]1
 * nema: [8404]1 [8405]2
 * nthropos: [8406]1
 * nos: [8407]1
 * nou: [8408]1
 * ntion: [8409]1
 * xes: [8410]1
 * xin: [8411]1
 * xis: [8412]1 [8413]2
 * o: [8414]1 [8415]2
 * on: [8416]1 [8417]2
 * ou: [8418]1
 * pa: [8419]1
 * paidi: [8420]1
 * para: [8421]1
 * peri: [8422]1
 * pion: [8423]1
 * plege: [8424]1
 * po: [8425]1
 * pode: [8426]1
 * polloi: [8427]1
 * presbuteri: [8428]1
 * pro: [8429]1
 * proto: [8430]1
 * po: [8431]1 [8432]2
 * r: [8433]1 [8434]2
 * rata: [8435]1
 * res: [8436]1
 * rois: [8437]1
 * rume: [8438]1
 * s: [8439]1 [8440]2 [8441]3 [8442]4 [8443]5 [8444]6 [8445]7 [8446]8
 [8447]9 [8448]10 [8449]11 [8450]12 [8451]13 [8452]14 [8453]15
 [8454]16 [8455]17 [8456]18 [8457]19 [8458]20
 * s: [8459]1
 * sasi: [8460]1
 * sin: [8461]1 [8462]2
 * sis: [8463]1
 * smata: [8464]1
 * stasis: [8465]1
 * ste: [8466]1
 * stoloi: [8467]1
 * straptai: [8468]1
 * schein: [8469]1
 * sopon: [8470]1
 * t: [8471]1 [8472]2 [8473]3 [8474]4
 * ta: [8475]1 [8476]2 [8477]3
 * tau: [8478]1
 * te: [8479]1
 * teitan: [8480]1 [8481]2 [8482]3
 * tes: [8483]1
 * te: [8484]1
 * tes: [8485]1 [8486]2
 * to: [8487]1
 * toi: [8488]1 [8489]2 [8490]3
 * tou: [8491]1 [8492]2 [8493]3
 * tous: [8494]1
 * tre: [8495]1 [8496]2
 * to: [8497]1 [8498]2
 * phanon: [8499]1
 * phro: [8500]1 [8501]2
 * pho: [8502]1 [8503]2 [8504]3 [8505]4 [8506]5
 * choio: [8507]1
 * chresto: [8508]1
 * christou: [8509]1
 * psuche: [8510]1
 * o: [8511]1
 * os: [8512]1

Index of Latin Words and Phrases

 * Quindecemviri.: [8513]1
 * Sed neque mulier virtutem pudicitiæ caperet, si peccare non posset.
 Nam quis mutum animal pudicum esse dixerit, quod suscepto foe tu
 mari repugnat? Quod ideo facit, quia necesse est in dolorem atque
 in periculum veniat, si admiserit. Nulla igitur laus est, non
 facere quod facere non possis. Ideo autem pudicitia in homine
 laudatur, quia non naturalis est, sed voluntaria. Servanda igitur
 fides ab utroque alteri est: immo exemplo continentia: docenda
 uxor, ut se caste gerat. Iniquum est enim, ut id exigas, quod præ
 stare ipse non possis. Quæ iniquitas effecit profecto, ut essent
 adulteria, foe minis ægre ferentibus præ stare se fidem non
 exhibentibus mutuam charitatem. Denique nulla est tam perditi
 pudoris adultera, quæ non hanc causam vitiis suis præ tendat;
 injuriam se peccando non facere, sed referre. Quod optime
 Quintilianus expressit: Homo, inquit, neque alieni matrimonii
 abstinens, neque sui custos, quæ inter se natura. connexa sunt. Nam
 neque maritus circa corrumpendas aliorum conjuges occupatus potest
 vacare domesticæ sanctitati; et uxor, cum in tale incidit
 matrimonium, exemplo ipso concitara, out imitari se putat, out
 vindicari.: [8514]1
 * a vinculo pietatis esse deductum, quod hominem sibi Deus : [8515]1
 * auctoritas in unâ vilissimâ tunicâ.: [8516]1
 * diem decimam,: [8517]1
 * diem decimum,: [8518]1
 * dierum, : [8519]1
 * et Aristoteles sic fieri arbitrantur. Aiunt non tantum maribus
 inesse semen, verum etiam foeminis, et inde plerumque matribus
 similes procreari; sed earum semensanguinem esse purgatum, quod si
 recte cum virili mixture sit, utraque concreta et simul co-agulata
 informari: et primum quidem cor hominis effingi, quod in eo sit et
 vita omnis et sapientia; denique totum opus quadragesimo die
 consummari. Ex abortionibus hæ c fortasse collecta sunt. In avium
 tamen foetibus primurn oculos fingi dubium non est, quod in ovis sæ
 pe deprehendimus. Unde fieri non posse arbitror quin fictio a
 capite sumat exordium.: [8520]1
 * etc.] : [8521]1
 * ex : [8522]1
 * falsitas.: [8523]1
 * frequentia: [8524]1
 * gratia, : [8525]1
 * hominem: [8526]1
 * inquam infelici et ærumnoso, qui nunquam istam potestatem viderat
 comparabatur.: [8527]1
 * interpretatur) a mollitie, immutata et detracta littera, velut :
 [8528]1
 * memoriam hominum, tanquam deorum, colerent.: [8529]1
 * patefiunt. Sed illa dexterior masculinum continet semen,
 sinisterior foemininum; et omnino in toto corpore pars dextra
 masculina est, sinistra veto foeminina. Ipsum semen quidam putant
 ex medullis tantum, quidam : [8530]1
 * potuit habere nullo dante?: [8531]1
 * præstiterit,: [8532]1
 * prole.: [8533]1
 * sumus.: [8534]1
 * sunt dicti : [8535]1
 * sunt illi.: [8536]1
 * verberibus. : [8537]1
 * vocant quæ perversitas est naturam potius quam Deum nominare. :
 [8538]1
 * !: [8539]1
 *  [: [8540]1
 * Ædoniæ,: [8541]1
 * Æqualis.: [8542]1
 * Æquatur.: [8543]1
 * Æternæ: [8544]1
 * Æterna morte damnatur.: [8545]1
 * Æthera: [8546]1
 * Æthera.: [8547]1
 * æque fieri,: [8548]1
 * ) corporibus.: [8549]1
 * ,: [8550]1 [8551]2
 * , : [8552]1
 * , Dominus noster : [8553]1
 * , Judæi Christum cruci affixerunt.: [8554]1
 * , a Judæis cruciatus est : [8555]1
 * , duobus Geminis consulibus.: [8556]1
 * , ex : [8557]1 [8558]2
 * , passim.: [8559]1
 * , tamquam a : [8560]1
 * , ut : [8561]1
 * , ventres pigri.: [8562]1
 * ; cui suscepto foetu, cum partus appropinquare jam coepit,
 turgescentes mammæ dulcibus succis distenduntur, et ad nutrimenta
 nascentis fontibus lacteis foecundum pectus exuberat. Nec enim
 decebat aliud quam ut sapiens animal a corde alimoniam duceret.
 Idque ipsum solertissime comparatum est, ut candens ac pinguis
 humor teneritudinem novi corporis irrigaret, donec ad capiendos
 fortiores cibos, et dentibus instruatur, et viribus roboretur. Sed
 redeamus ad propositum, ut cæ tera, quæ supersunt, breviter
 explicemus.: [8563]1
 * A corpore: [8564]1
 * A religendo.: [8565]1
 * Aëdoniæ voces.: [8566]1
 * Ab aliquo imperito doctore fundati.: [8567]1
 * Ab uxoris congressione.: [8568]1
 * Abdicati: [8569]1
 * Abdicati.: [8570]1
 * Abdicato et exhæredato.: [8571]1
 * Abest ab iis fides.: [8572]1
 * Abjectum.: [8573]1
 * Aboleret.: [8574]1
 * Abrogo: [8575]1 [8576]2
 * Acer.: [8577]1
 * Acerbitates et amaritudines.: [8578]1
 * Ad circumscribendos oculos. : [8579]1
 * Ad confundendos.: [8580]1
 * Ad justitiam. : [8581]1
 * Ad lusum gestiunt.: [8582]1
 * Ad præsens.: [8583]1 [8584]2
 * Ad ruinam.: [8585]1
 * Ad tradendam.: [8586]1
 * Ad victimam.: [8587]1
 * Addico: [8588]1
 * Addicti et servientes voluptatibus.: [8589]1
 * Addicti.: [8590]1
 * Addixerunt.: [8591]1
 * Adhuc: [8592]1
 * Adjudicaverunt.: [8593]1
 * Adversa.: [8594]1
 * Affectavit divinitatem. : [8595]1
 * Afficiet.: [8596]1
 * Afficit: [8597]1
 * Affluentes.: [8598]1
 * Agger: [8599]1
 * Albanum egregium fecunda Britannia profert,: [8600]1
 * Alienigenis.: [8601]1
 * Alienum.: [8602]1
 * Alii legunt: [8603]1
 * Aliquâ ratione.: [8604]1
 * Aliter.: [8605]1
 * Alius novas populus.: [8606]1
 * Alteque jubebis: [8607]1
 * Altiores se...faciebant.: [8608]1
 * Altrinsecus.: [8609]1
 * Alumnum veritatis.: [8610]1
 * Ambire.: [8611]1
 * Ambitu.: [8612]1
 * Ambureretur.: [8613]1
 * Amissi ac recepti luminis vicibus.: [8614]1
 * Anaphora.: [8615]1
 * Anguimanus: [8616]1
 * Animam: [8617]1
 * Animi sui complicitam notionem evolvere.: [8618]1
 * Annuntiavimus coram ipso sicut pueri;: [8619]1
 * Ante obitum nemo,: [8620]1
 * Antistes. : [8621]1
 * Antitheus: [8622]1
 * Aperta Olympi: [8623]1
 * Apparitors.: [8624]1
 * Appositione.: [8625]1
 * Appropinquante sæculorum fine.: [8626]1
 * Arbitrantur: [8627]1
 * Aristas.: [8628]1
 * Ars: [8629]1
 * Artificium.: [8630]1
 * Aspersos maculis: [8631]1
 * Aspiratio. : [8632]1
 * Assiduis: [8633]1
 * Assumptio: [8634]1
 * Auctor.: [8635]1
 * Aucupari. : [8636]1
 * Aura.: [8637]1
 * Auseris: [8638]1
 * Aversus est.: [8639]1
 * Avocamenta.: [8640]1
 * Beneficii foeneratio.: [8641]1
 * Bestiarios: [8642]1
 * Bestias malas. : [8643]1
 * Bipartito.: [8644]1
 * Boves Lucas.: [8645]1
 * Brachia.: [8646]1
 * Cædis amore furor.: [8647]1
 * Cæmenta: [8648]1
 * Coelestis arcani.: [8649]1
 * Coelo.: [8650]1
 * Coelum potius quàm coelata. : [8651]1
 * Calculi: [8652]1
 * Caligaret.: [8653]1
 * Campus Serenus: [8654]1
 * Caninam: [8655]1
 * Canna: [8656]1
 * Caput obvolutum.: [8657]1
 * Cariosis.: [8658]1
 * Carnificina: [8659]1
 * Carnificinam. : [8660]1
 * Cautum est.: [8661]1
 * Cavendum igitur, ne occasionem vitiis nostra intemperantia demus:
 sed assuescant invicem mores duorum, et jugum paribus animis
 ferant. Nos ipsos in altero cogitemus. Nam fere in hoc justitiæ
 summa consistit, ut non facias alteri, quidquid ipse ab altero pati
 nolis. Hæc sunt quæ ad continentiam præ cipiuntur a Deo. Sed tamen
 ne quis divina præ cepta circumscribere se putet posse, adduntur
 ilia, ut omnis calumnia, et occasio fraudis removeatur, adulterum
 esse, qui a marito dimissam duxerit, et eum qui præ tercrimen
 adulterii uxorem dimiserit, ut alteram ducat; dissociari enim
 corpus et distrahi Deus noluit. Præ terea non tanturn adulterium
 esse vitandum, sed etiam cogitationem; ne quis aspiciat alienam, et
 animo concupiscat: adulteram enim fieri mentem, si vel imaginem
 voluptatis sibi ipsa depinxerit. Mens est enim profecto quæ peccat;
 quæ immoderata: libidinis fructum cogitatione complectitur; in hac
 crimen est, in hac omne delictum. Nam etsi corpus nulla sit lobe
 maculatum, non constat tamen pudicitiæ ratio, si animus incestus
 est; nec illibata castitas videri potest, ubi conscientiam
 cupiditas inquinavit. Nec verb aliquis existimet, difficile esse
 fræ nos imponere voluptati, eamque vagam et errantem castitatis
 pudicitiæ que limitibus includere, cum propositum sit hominibus
 etiam vincere, ac plurimi beatam atque incorruptam corporis
 integritatem retinuerint, multique sint, qui hoc coe lesti genere
 vitæ felicissime perfruantur. Quod quidem Deus non ira fieri præ
 cepit, tanquam astringat, quia generari homines oportet; sed
 tanquam sinat. Scit enim, quantam his affectibus imposuerit
 necessitatem. Si quis hoc, inquit, facere potuerit, habebit eximiam
 incomparabilemque mercedem. Quod continentiæ genus quasi fastigium
 est, omniumque consummatio virtutum. Ad quam si quis eniti atque
 eluctari potuerit, hunc servum dominus, hunc discipulum magister
 agnoscet; hic terrain triumphabit, hic erit consimilis Deo, qui
 virtutem Dei cepit. Hæc quidem difficilia videntur; sed de eo
 loquimur, cui calcatis omnibus terrenis, iter in coelum paratur.
 Nam quia virtus in Dei agnitione consistit, omnia gravia sunt, dum
 ignores; ubi cognoveris, facilia: per ipsas difficultates nobis
 exeundum est, qui ad summum bonum tendimus.: [8662]1
 * Cedetne huic impune.: [8663]1
 * Centeno reditu.: [8664]1
 * Cerneret: [8665]1
 * Certis stationibus: [8666]1
 * Certum.: [8667]1
 * Cessit.: [8668]1
 * Ceu: [8669]1
 * Chrestus: [8670]1
 * Cidarim: [8671]1
 * Ciere.: [8672]1
 * Ciliorum.: [8673]1
 * Circumscribere.: [8674]1
 * Circumscriptione.: [8675]1
 * Circumscriptiones.: [8676]1
 * Circumvallavit: [8677]1
 * Citra.: [8678]1
 * Clarum insigne: [8679]1
 * Claudicare.: [8680]1
 * Clientis.: [8681]1
 * Coagmentari.: [8682]1
 * Coagmentationem.: [8683]1
 * Coeuntibus aquis: [8684]1
 * Cohæreat sibi.: [8685]1
 * Coiisse.: [8686]1
 * Colit.: [8687]1
 * Colles faucium.: [8688]1
 * Collige.: [8689]1
 * Commendat.: [8690]1
 * Commotio.: [8691]1
 * Communis culpæ.: [8692]1
 * Communitatem.: [8693]1
 * Comparari.: [8694]1
 * Comparem.: [8695]1
 * Complodunt.: [8696]1
 * Comprehensibile.: [8697]1
 * Conceptum igitur : [8698]1
 * Conciliata sunt.: [8699]1
 * Conciliatricem sui. : [8700]1
 * Concinnet.: [8701]1
 * Concisa. : [8702]1
 * Concordiam.: [8703]1
 * Concreta esse.: [8704]1
 * Concretum.: [8705]1
 * Confert cum Deo vultum et rationem ratio cognoscit.: [8706]1
 * Confirmabo te: [8707]1
 * Confitetur.: [8708]1
 * Conflat.: [8709]1
 * Confusa est et maledicta.: [8710]1
 * Conglobare: [8711]1
 * Conglobatam.: [8712]1
 * Conjunctiores, quòd animis, quàm quòd: [8713]1
 * Conscium. : [8714]1
 * Consequetur.: [8715]1
 * Consignatam teneri.: [8716]1
 * Consors: [8717]1
 * Constat.: [8718]1
 * Consummas.: [8719]1
 * Consummaturum: [8720]1
 * Contra fas omne.: [8721]1
 * Contrahetur. : [8722]1
 * Contrarium.: [8723]1
 * Contrectari.: [8724]1
 * Contumacibus.: [8725]1
 * Converteret: [8726]1
 * Cophini.: [8727]1
 * Corporaliter.: [8728]1
 * Corporis. : [8729]1
 * Corporum exuviis.: [8730]1
 * Corpusculum.: [8731]1
 * Corrupit.: [8732]1
 * Corrupta esse omnia.: [8733]1
 * Cothurnata scelera.: [8734]1
 * Cratis: [8735]1
 * Cretenses semper mendaces : [8736]1
 * Criminis est.: [8737]1
 * Criminosa.: [8738]1
 * Crustam marmoris.: [8739]1
 * Crux, : [8740]1
 * Cui fuerat assensus.: [8741]1
 * Cujusvis hominis est errare: [8742]1
 * Cultum.: [8743]1
 * Cum Deo communis est. : [8744]1
 * Cum bene vernales reddidit annus opes.: [8745]1
 * Cum corpore: [8746]1
 * Cum corpore curto: [8747]1
 * Cum modo: [8748]1
 * Cum primus coepit adolescere.: [8749]1
 * Cum ratione. : [8750]1
 * Cum trepidatione mobili.: [8751]1
 * Curta: [8752]1
 * De Tactus Voluptate Et Libidine, Atque de Matrimonio Et
 Continentiâ.: [8753]1
 * De manu inferorum.: [8754]1
 * De suis spiritibus.: [8755]1
 * De te: [8756]1
 * De terrenâ concretione.: [8757]1
 * De transverso jugulasset.: [8758]1
 * De tunicâ et pallio.: [8759]1
 * De utero quoque et conceptione, quoniam de internis loquimur, dici
 necesse est, ne quid præ terisse videamur; quæ quamquam in operto
 latent, sensum tamen atque intelligentiam latere non possunt. Vena
 in maribus, quæ seminium continet, duplex est, paulo interior, quam
 illud humoris obscoeni receptaculum. Sicut enim renes duo sunt,
 itemque testes, ita et venæ seminales duæ, in una tamen compage
 cohæ rentes; quod videmus in corporibus animalium, cum interfecta:
 [8760]1
 * Decii: [8761]1
 * Decursis septem spatiis: [8762]1
 * Decurso temporum spatio.: [8763]1
 * Decurso...spatio.: [8764]1
 * Deduxit ad nihilum.: [8765]1
 * Deest illis inspirata patientia.: [8766]1
 * Defloruerat.: [8767]1
 * Deliquium solis.: [8768]1
 * Deliramenta.: [8769]1
 * Deliramenta. : [8770]1
 * Delirant.: [8771]1
 * Delirare posset.: [8772]1
 * Demerentur: [8773]1
 * Demulcent.: [8774]1
 * Denuo: [8775]1
 * Deo subjacet. : [8776]1
 * Dependit. : [8777]1
 * Depingere: [8778]1
 * Depravati sunt.: [8779]1
 * Deprecatus esse dicitur. : [8780]1
 * Deriserunt me derisu.: [8781]1
 * Descriptio.: [8782]1
 * Designati.: [8783]1
 * Desperati: [8784]1
 * Destructilia.: [8785]1
 * Determinat. : [8786]1
 * Deus homines pro liberis habet sed corruptos.: [8787]1
 * Deus, igitur, machinator constitutorque rerum: [8788]1
 * Diabolus: [8789]1
 * Dies iræ, dies illa,... : [8790]1
 * Disceptator.: [8791]1
 * Discolor unde auri per ramos aura refulsit.: [8792]1
 * Discors concordia.: [8793]1
 * Dissipari.: [8794]1
 * Distrahi: [8795]1
 * Distruitur: [8796]1 [8797]2
 * Diverticula.: [8798]1
 * Divinent.: [8799]1
 * Divinitate.: [8800]1
 * Divino spiritu hausto.: [8801]1
 * Diximus nomen : [8802]1
 * Doctrina pacis nostræ: [8803]1
 * Donum: [8804]1
 * Duæ Viæ: [8805]1 [8806]2
 * Duæ Viæ.: [8807]1 [8808]2 [8809]3
 * Dum ad descendentem occursu suo redit.: [8810]1
 * Dum descendentem reddit.: [8811]1
 * Dum disputant: [8812]1
 * Dum volunt sanare, vitiaverunt. : [8813]1
 * Duplicitas.: [8814]1
 * Ea enim visa est aptior victima, quæ ipsi, cui mactatur,
 magnitudine virilis obsceni posset æquari.: [8815]1
 * Editio secunda correctior. Francofurti ad Moenum: [8816]1
 * Effectum: [8817]1
 * Efficere : [8818]1
 * Ego vindicabo in eum.: [8819]1
 * Elephantiaci: [8820]1
 * Eliquaverit.: [8821]1
 * Elucere potest.: [8822]1
 * Emereri: [8823]1
 * Eminere: [8824]1
 * Enervatus exstinguitur.: [8825]1
 * Ennius: [8826]1
 * Eoque fieri non potest.: [8827]1
 * Eos ipsos: [8828]1
 * Epilogus.: [8829]1
 * Errantia.: [8830]1
 * Erutam.: [8831]1
 * Et Deum colere: [8832]1
 * Et Jovis in regno, coelique in parte resedit.: [8833]1
 * Et citra hoc opus homo resistit. : [8834]1
 * Et qui fuerint aversi, redeant.: [8835]1
 * Et sociat myrrhæ pascua grata nimis: [8836]1
 * Eum.: [8837]1
 * Evadat ad bonam frugem.: [8838]1
 * Evigilat.: [8839]1
 * Ex : [8840]1
 * Ex ætheris oris.: [8841]1
 * Ex Deo.: [8842]1
 * Ex mortibus.: [8843]1
 * Ex omnibus.: [8844]1
 * Ex parte somnii constiterunt.: [8845]1
 * Ex rebus.: [8846]1
 * Ex responso.: [8847]1
 * Ex utroque genere permistum.: [8848]1
 * Examinis.: [8849]1
 * Excogitabit.: [8850]1
 * Exinde tetrarchas habuerunt usque ad Herodem, qui fuit sub imperio
 Tiberii Cæsaris: cujus anno quinto decimo, id est duobus Geminis
 consulibus, : [8851]1
 * Expectanda dies homini est; dicique beatus : [8852]1
 * Expedita: [8853]1
 * Exponit.: [8854]1
 * Expugnaret.: [8855]1
 * Exquisitis: [8856]1
 * Exquisitis cruciatibus.: [8857]1
 * Exquisitis.: [8858]1
 * Exsulantur.: [8859]1
 * Exsurget homo ex : [8860]1
 * Extollent.: [8861]1
 * Extremis temporibus Tiberii Cæsaris, : [8862]1
 * Exuberat in sentes: [8863]1
 * Exutum.: [8864]1
 * Exuviæ corporis.: [8865]1
 * Exuvias suas.: [8866]1
 * Exuviis: [8867]1
 * Foetu: [8868]1
 * Fabrica. : [8869]1
 * Fabulam.: [8870]1
 * Fabulosus. : [8871]1
 * Facinorosi.: [8872]1
 * Familia: [8873]1
 * Familiam. : [8874]1
 * Fatigata est Ægyptus.: [8875]1
 * Fatis urgentibus: [8876]1
 * Favent.: [8877]1
 * Februis: [8878]1
 * Ficto.: [8879]1
 * Fidelem: [8880]1
 * Fidem consequetur: [8881]1
 * Figmenta.: [8882]1
 * Figmentum.: [8883]1
 * Figuram gerebant.: [8884]1
 * Figuram gerebat,: [8885]1
 * Figuram.: [8886]1
 * Fili: [8887]1
 * Filioque: [8888]1
 * Filios genui et exaltavi. : [8889]1
 * Fines inhabitabiles.: [8890]1
 * Fingendi.: [8891]1
 * Fistulas.: [8892]1
 * Fit: [8893]1
 * Flabile. : [8894]1
 * Flagella: [8895]1
 * Flandi et spirandi.: [8896]1
 * Floribus: [8897]1
 * Florigero sereno.: [8898]1
 * Flos.: [8899]1
 * Foliorum crine revulso: [8900]1
 * Foras molliter explicavit.: [8901]1
 * Foras tota promineat.: [8902]1
 * Foratu: [8903]1
 * Fortem: [8904]1
 * Fossos.: [8905]1
 * Fragilem. : [8906]1
 * Frontem.: [8907]1
 * Frugalitatis. : [8908]1
 * Frugi.: [8909]1
 * Fundati: [8910]1
 * Funditus: [8911]1
 * Gemmea cuspis.: [8912]1
 * Generandi ministrum.: [8913]1
 * Genitali: [8914]1
 * Genua determinant.: [8915]1
 * Germanitas: [8916]1
 * Gignentium.: [8917]1
 * Gradus.: [8918]1
 * Graium,: [8919]1
 * Gratia.: [8920]1
 * Gratificatio.: [8921]1
 * Gratum: [8922]1
 * Gravem: [8923]1
 * Gurgite.: [8924]1
 * Hæredibus abdicatis.: [8925]1
 * Hac in nocte brevi.: [8926]1
 * Hactenus operata est.: [8927]1
 * Hauriendis: [8928]1
 * Haustum.: [8929]1
 * Herbidæ fruges.: [8930]1
 * Herbis: [8931]1
 * Hiat.: [8932]1
 * Hic: [8933]1
 * Hierosolyma.: [8934]1
 * His obscoenitatibus animas, ad sanctitatem genitas, velut in coeni
 gurgite demersit, pudorem extinxit, pudicitiam profligavit. Idem
 etiam mares maribus admiscuit; et nefandos coitus contra naturam
 contraque institutum Dei machinatus est: sic imbuit homines, et
 armavit ad nefas omne. Quid enim potest esse sanctum iis, qui
 ætatem imbecillam et præsidio indigentem, libidini suæ depopulandam
 foedandamque substraverint? Non potest hæc res pro magnitudine
 sceleris enarrari. Nihil amplius istos appellare possum, quam
 implos et parricidas, quibus non sufficit sexus a Deo datus, nisi
 eliare suum profane ac petulanter illudant. Hæc tamen apud illos
 levia, et quasi honesta sunt. Quid dicam de iis, qui abominandam
 non libidinem, sod insaniam potius exercent! Piget dicere: sed quid
 his fore credamus, quos non piget facere? et tamen dicendum est,
 quia fit. De istis loquor, quorum teterrima libido et execrabilis
 furor ne capiti quidem parcit. Quibus hoc verbis, aut qua
 indignatione tantum nefas prosequar? Vincit officium linguæ
 sceleris magnitudo. Cum igitur libido hæc edat opera, et hæc
 facinora designer, armandi adversus earn virtute maxima sumus.
 Quisquis affectus illos frænare non potest, cohibeat eos intra præ
 scriptum legitimi tori, ut et illud, quod avide expetat,
 consequatur, et tamen in peccatum non incidat. Nam quid sibi
 homines perditi volunt? Nempe honesta opera voluptas sequitur: si
 ipsam per se appetunt, justa et legitima frui licet.: [8935]1
 * Hoc vinculo pietatis obstricti Deo et : [8936]1
 * Hominum conscientiam fallere.: [8937]1
 * Hominum prave religiosorum.: [8938]1
 * Hominum.: [8939]1
 * Homo: [8940]1
 * Homo ab humo.: [8941]1
 * Homo in plagâ positus.: [8942]1
 * Honesta utrinsque sexus discretione: [8943]1
 * Horarum splendor, scriptula, puncta fovent.: [8944]1
 * Horarum splendor, stridula cuncta favent. : [8945]1
 * Hospitium: [8946]1
 * Humanis visibus.: [8947]1
 * Humanitas.: [8948]1
 * Humilia.: [8949]1
 * Hunc pietatis affectum. : [8950]1
 * Hyacinthos: [8951]1
 * Idoneis. : [8952]1
 * Ignivomus.: [8953]1
 * Ignoraverunt.: [8954]1
 * Iidem sunt doctores sapientiæ qui et De. sacerdotes.: [8955]1
 * Illæsibilis est.: [8956]1
 * Ille: [8957]1
 * Ille autem mense conceptum et passum esse Christum, et Paschæ
 observatio et dies ecclesiis notissimus Nativitatis ejus ostendit.
 Qui enim mense nono natus est octavo kalendas Janvarias profecto
 mense primo conceptus est circa octavum kalendas Aprilis, quod
 tempus passionis ejus fuit.: [8958]1
 * Illis non quadrare rationem.: [8959]1
 * Illustris.: [8960]1
 * Imaginibus.: [8961]1
 * Imaginum incursione.: [8962]1
 * Immania: [8963]1
 * Immobilem: [8964]1
 * Immobilem. : [8965]1
 * Immutatæ sunt.: [8966]1
 * Impedimentis.: [8967]1
 * Implebit eum spiritus timoris Dei.: [8968]1
 * In altum se abdiderit.: [8969]1
 * In aram Dei.: [8970]1
 * In cicutæ modum. : [8971]1
 * In cogitationem.: [8972]1
 * In conspectu meo.: [8973]1
 * In eloquium sermonemque solvebat.: [8974]1
 * In eloquium solvit.: [8975]1
 * In eo enim summa omnis et cardo religionis pietatisque versatur.:
 [8976]1
 * In eo promerendo.: [8977]1
 * In focum.: [8978]1
 * In formam conglobat.: [8979]1
 * In ipso cardine.: [8980]1
 * In lavacris celebrandis.: [8981]1
 * In manu patris.: [8982]1
 * In memoriam scripta.: [8983]1
 * In nihilum resolvi.: [8984]1
 * In perditionem et improperium.: [8985]1
 * In remissionem.: [8986]1
 * In sæculi hujus consummatione.: [8987]1
 * In signo.: [8988]1
 * In solido puteum demitti: [8989]1
 * In solido.: [8990]1
 * In talique toro: [8991]1
 * In tempestate: [8992]1
 * In terram dejecerit.: [8993]1
 * In testamentum generis mei.: [8994]1
 * In traductionem cogitationum nostrarum. Traductio: [8995]1
 * In usu suo non est.: [8996]1
 * Inanem.: [8997]1
 * Inania: [8998]1
 * Incassum facta est metatura falsa, scribæ confusi sunt.: [8999]1
 * Incondita: [9000]1
 * Incorruptus.: [9001]1
 * Incutere.: [9002]1
 * Inde: [9003]1
 * Indicium sui professos putes: [9004]1
 * Indu: [9005]1
 * Induerat.: [9006]1
 * Induforo.: [9007]1
 * Ineluibiles sibi maculas inusserunt.: [9008]1
 * Inerat huic virtuti.: [9009]1
 * Inerrabiles.: [9010]1
 * Inexpugnabile: [9011]1
 * Inextricabilis: [9012]1
 * Infanda: [9013]1
 * Inferos resignaret.: [9014]1
 * Infirmatus est.: [9015]1
 * Ingentes oculi: [9016]1
 * Ingurgitat coeno: [9017]1
 * Innocentem: [9018]1
 * Inoffensum tenorem: [9019]1
 * Insinuabat auditum.: [9020]1
 * Inspiravit ad vitam.: [9021]1
 * Institutorum miracula.: [9022]1
 * Integris abutendum est. : [9023]1
 * Integrum.: [9024]1
 * Intenta discurrit.: [9025]1
 * Inter deum et hominem medius factus. : [9026]1
 * Inter doctos homines.: [9027]1
 * Intercidit.: [9028]1
 * Interfusio.: [9029]1
 * Intermicantibus astrorum luminibus.: [9030]1
 * Interpatet.: [9031]1
 * Interpres.: [9032]1
 * Interpretatæ sunt: [9033]1
 * Interpretatus est.: [9034]1
 * Intervallum.: [9035]1
 * Intima: [9036]1
 * Intras: [9037]1
 * Intus inclusam.: [9038]1
 * Inureret: [9039]1
 * Inurit: [9040]1
 * Involutum.: [9041]1
 * Ipsa duplicitate.: [9042]1
 * Ipse præceptis suis fidem detrahat.: [9043]1
 * Ipsum.: [9044]1
 * Irrecitabiliter.: [9045]1
 * Irrepere.: [9046]1
 * Israel: [9047]1
 * Ista caduca sæcula.: [9048]1
 * Iste: [9049]1
 * Ita leviter odoratos.: [9050]1
 * Jacet.: [9051]1
 * Jacuerunt.: [9052]1
 * Jam emergente atque illustratâ veritate.: [9053]1
 * Judæis, quorum cophinus, foenumque supellex.: [9054]1
 * Jumenta: [9055]1
 * Jure humanitatis.: [9056]1
 * Justitiam sequi.: [9057]1
 * Juvenescere.: [9058]1
 * Læsio.: [9059]1
 * Labilis orbis amicos sensus.: [9060]1
 * Laborare.: [9061]1
 * Lacerti: [9062]1
 * Lactrocinari.: [9063]1
 * Lapsos.: [9064]1
 * Late: [9065]1
 * Latius: [9066]1
 * Latrant.: [9067]1
 * Legatus.: [9068]1
 * Lenia: [9069]1
 * Leves.: [9070]1
 * Liberum esse.: [9071]1
 * Libidinis finis est.: [9072]1
 * Licentiâ.: [9073]1
 * Lignorum.: [9074]1
 * Limina: [9075]1
 * Linguæ sinu.: [9076]1
 * Lingua: [9077]1
 * Lit. "wish for wars.": [9078]1
 * Litant: [9079]1
 * Livore ejus nos sanati sumus. : [9080]1
 * Lubrica.: [9081]1
 * Ludibriis.: [9082]1
 * Luminis ore.: [9083]1
 * Luscis.: [9084]1
 * Lutulentum: [9085]1
 * Moesia: [9086]1
 * Mactant.: [9087]1
 * Magalia.: [9088]1
 * Magisterio: [9089]1
 * Magistri Dei.: [9090]1
 * Magniciem.: [9091]1
 * Male.: [9092]1
 * Malefici: [9093]1
 * Malitia: [9094]1
 * Malitiosi et astuti.: [9095]1
 * Mancipo.: [9096]1
 * Materia: [9097]1
 * Materia rerum.: [9098]1
 * Materia.: [9099]1 [9100]2 [9101]3
 * Maturius funditur.: [9102]1
 * Maturius sopiatur.: [9103]1
 * Mella.: [9104]1
 * Mentis impos: [9105]1
 * Mentiuntur.: [9106]1
 * Meorum.: [9107]1
 * Mereamur. : [9108]1
 * Metatura.: [9109]1
 * Metitur: [9110]1
 * Mimi: [9111]1
 * Mimos agi. : [9112]1
 * Mimus corruptelarum disciplina est.: [9113]1
 * Minas patitur.: [9114]1
 * Minutis seminibus conglobatis.: [9115]1
 * Mobilitas anni, mensum, lux alma dierum : [9116]1
 * Mobilitas.: [9117]1
 * Mobilitatis.: [9118]1
 * Moles operose laboret.: [9119]1
 * Monumenta. : [9120]1
 * Moremque civilem.: [9121]1
 * Multo absurdior.: [9122]1
 * Multo clarior sol est, quàm hic. : [9123]1
 * Multo clarius sole est, quàm hic: [9124]1
 * Multo magis: [9125]1
 * Mundus una Dei domus.: [9126]1
 * Munera.: [9127]1
 * Nare: [9128]1
 * Naturalem.: [9129]1
 * Ne audire quidem patiuntur: [9130]1
 * Ne illi vitium concederet etiam virtutis fecit expertem.: [9131]1
 * Ne morte quidem simplici dignum putetis.: [9132]1
 * Ne plenum quidem. : [9133]1
 * Ne ullo corporis dolore frangatur et oblivionem sui non anima, sed
 mens patiatur: [9134]1
 * Negaverunt: [9135]1
 * Negaverunt.: [9136]1
 * Neglexi: [9137]1
 * Nesciunt, quia malum est nocere. : [9138]1
 * Nihil moderati aut pensi habent.: [9139]1
 * Nihil opere et manu factum.: [9140]1
 * Nimio: [9141]1
 * Nisi lacessitus injuria.: [9142]1
 * Nisi quòd. : [9143]1
 * Nobilitas anni, mensum decus, : [9144]1
 * Nocentes.: [9145]1
 * Nodi. : [9146]1
 * Non bene conveniunt igitur legibus divinis quæ supradicta sunt
 auctore nostro: [9147]1
 * Non est fidem consecuta,: [9148]1
 * Non est tibi frons ficta, nec in alienam voluptatem sermo
 compositus, nec cor involutum.: [9149]1
 * Non exanimes, sed dementes vocantur.: [9150]1
 * Non mortalitate. : [9151]1
 * Non vacaret.: [9152]1
 * Nondum omnia castitatis officio exsecutus sum: quam Deus fion modo
 intra privatos parietes, sed etiam præ scripto lectuli terminat; ut
 cum quis hobeat uxorem, neque servam, neque liberam habere insuper
 velit, sed matrimonio fidem server. Non enim, sicut juris publici
 ratio est, solo mulier adultera est, quæ habet allure, maritus
 outem, etiam si plures habeat, a crimine adulterii solutus est. Sed
 divina lex ira duos in matrimonium, quod est in corpus unum, pari
 jure conjungit, ut adulter habeatur, quisquis compagem corporis in
 diversa distraxerit. Nec ob aliam cansam Deus, cam cæteras
 animantes suscepto foetu maribus repugnare voluisset, solam omnium
 mulierem patientem viri fecit; scilicet ne foeminis repugnantibus,
 libido cogeret viros aliud appetere, eoque facto, castitatis
 gloriam non tenerent.: [9153]1
 * Nonnunquam: [9154]1
 * Nos ad justitiam esse natos.: [9155]1
 * Noster.: [9156]1
 * Nostræ sectæ.: [9157]1
 * Nostri: [9158]1
 * Notio. : [9159]1
 * Nuda.: [9160]1
 * Nugaces.: [9161]1
 * Nullum numen abest.: [9162]1
 * Nullum numen habes.: [9163]1
 * Ob virtutem.: [9164]1
 * Objectis aggeribus.: [9165]1
 * Oblatrantem atque obstrepentem veritati.: [9166]1
 * Oblevit ea intrinsecus crassiore succo.: [9167]1
 * Oblidere.: [9168]1
 * Obsit.: [9169]1
 * Obsolescit.: [9170]1
 * Obstructâ meandi facultate.: [9171]1
 * Obtineat. : [9172]1
 * Obtulerunt eum: [9173]1
 * Occiduis rebus.: [9174]1
 * Oculi: [9175]1
 * Officiosa: [9176]1
 * Officium.: [9177]1
 * Olympum: [9178]1
 * Omnes enim suis ex se pilis.: [9179]1
 * Omnibus notiora. : [9180]1
 * Omnibus numeris absoluta.: [9181]1
 * Omnis.: [9182]1
 * Omnium excusationum vias.: [9183]1
 * Operans in salutem hominum: [9184]1
 * Operationis.: [9185]1
 * Opportunitates temporum.: [9186]1
 * Otiosus.: [9187]1
 * Poenale.: [9188]1
 * Poene: [9189]1
 * Poenitentiâ factorum.: [9190]1
 * Pabulum.: [9191]1
 * Palpitatio.: [9192]1
 * Paradiso.: [9193]1
 * Parcere.: [9194]1
 * Parcus Deorum cultor et infrequens:: [9195]1
 * Pari voce.: [9196]1
 * Parricidam.: [9197]1
 * Particulatim.: [9198]1
 * Pastos: [9199]1
 * Pater familias: [9200]1
 * Paterfamilias: [9201]1
 * Pateris vitæ auctor: [9202]1
 * Pati.: [9203]1
 * Patientia: [9204]1
 * Patientia.: [9205]1
 * Pecudes: [9206]1
 * Pedibus mare ingressus.: [9207]1
 * Pedum vitio afflictos.: [9208]1
 * Penetrale: [9209]1
 * Pensa quæ faceret. : [9210]1
 * Pensum: [9211]1
 * Per dimotum populum.: [9212]1
 * Per diversa regionum.: [9213]1
 * Per figuram nominis.: [9214]1
 * Per figuram.: [9215]1
 * Per illam teneritudinem.: [9216]1
 * Per imaginem.: [9217]1
 * Per patibulum.: [9218]1
 * Per singula tempora mensum.: [9219]1
 * Per successiones.: [9220]1
 * Perciti enim perferuntur...furore.: [9221]1
 * Perfusione.: [9222]1
 * Pergitur enim...furore.: [9223]1
 * Pergrave pondus: [9224]1
 * Perpetuitas.: [9225]1
 * Perpetuo: [9226]1
 * Perstringentur igni atque amburentur.: [9227]1
 * Persuasiove: [9228]1
 * Phoenice rarior.: [9229]1
 * Philosophia non potuit invenire.: [9230]1
 * Philosophiam in oculos impingit.: [9231]1
 * Pietas.: [9232]1
 * Pietatis.: [9233]1
 * Pignoribus.: [9234]1
 * Pius.: [9235]1 [9236]2
 * Plana erit: [9237]1
 * Planitie: [9238]1
 * Planus et communis.: [9239]1
 * Plena terroris.: [9240]1
 * Pluens.: [9241]1
 * Pollicitam: [9242]1
 * Ponderat.: [9243]1
 * Populari levitate ducti: [9244]1
 * Portentificas.: [9245]1
 * Posita sunt omnia.: [9246]1
 * Post Tartara.: [9247]1
 * Postliminio.: [9248]1
 * Poteram nunc ego ipsorum quoque genitalium membrorum mirificam
 rationem tibi exponere, nisi me pudor ab hujusmodi sermone
 revocaret: itaque a nobis indumento verecundiæ, quæ sunt pudenda
 velentur. Quod ad hanc rem attinet, queri satis est, homines impios
 ac profanos summum nefas admittere, qui divinum et admirabile Dei
 opus, ad propagandam successionem inexcogitabili ratione provisum
 et effectum, vel ad turpissimos quæ stus, vel ad obscoenæ libidinis
 pudenda opera convertunt, ut jam nihil aliud ex re sanctissima
 petant, quam inanem et sterilem voluptatem.: [9249]1
 * Potissimum.: [9250]1
 * Præcepta sua factis adimplendo.: [9251]1
 * Præcursor: [9252]1
 * Prædonum.: [9253]1
 * Præfert.: [9254]1
 * Præfigurat: [9255]1
 * Præpostere: [9256]1
 * Præposterus: [9257]1
 * Præscriptionem. : [9258]1
 * Præsentaneâ.: [9259]1
 * Præsenti opere convincat. : [9260]1
 * Præsenti virtute.: [9261]1
 * Præsentibus factis.: [9262]1
 * Præsentibus poenis: [9263]1
 * Præsentibus.: [9264]1
 * Præstare. : [9265]1
 * Prævaleat.: [9266]1
 * Prævaricator: [9267]1
 * Prævaricatores.: [9268]1
 * Prævius.: [9269]1
 * Prater infantiam: [9270]1
 * Pravum.: [9271]1
 * Pressuræ verberibus.: [9272]1
 * Pressura et contritio.: [9273]1
 * Pretium mundi.: [9274]1
 * Primam terræ faciem: [9275]1
 * Princeps. : [9276]1
 * Principe. : [9277]1
 * Pro fide.: [9278]1
 * Pro moribus.: [9279]1
 * Pro personâ.: [9280]1
 * Pro pietate suâ: [9281]1
 * Pro qualitate numinis sui. : [9282]1
 * Prodigiis.: [9283]1
 * Profani a sacramentis.: [9284]1
 * Professi Dei. : [9285]1
 * Profligati jacent.: [9286]1
 * Profundo.: [9287]1
 * Promereri.: [9288]1
 * Promptas.: [9289]1
 * Proniora sunt.: [9290]1
 * Propria.: [9291]1
 * Proprie.: [9292]1
 * Proprietatem. : [9293]1
 * Proprios.: [9294]1
 * Proprius.: [9295]1
 * Propter exiguum compendium sublatorum malorum.: [9296]1
 * Propter humanitatem.: [9297]1
 * Propter miraculum virtutis.: [9298]1
 * Propter quem homines fecisse dicatur Deus.: [9299]1
 * Prosecrârant.: [9300]1
 * Protegebat.: [9301]1
 * Protulit.: [9302]1
 * Providentia. : [9303]1
 * Providere.: [9304]1
 * Prudentiæ: [9305]1
 * Ps. cxxiii.: [9306]1
 * Pugillo.: [9307]1
 * Punicei coloris.: [9308]1
 * Purpuream: [9309]1
 * Purpurei metuunt tyranni: [9310]1
 * Purpureum.: [9311]1
 * Pusilli animi.: [9312]1
 * Quà: [9313]1
 * Quæ : [9314]1
 * Quæ summum fastigium imponerent.: [9315]1
 * Quæ, nisi in metu cohibetur.: [9316]1
 * Quòd si ratio ei quadraret.: [9317]1
 * Quadrat.: [9318]1
 * Quadrupes.: [9319]1
 * Quam : [9320]1
 * Quantos secum cibos gestarent.: [9321]1
 * Quare non est dubium quin religio nulla sit ubicunque simulacrum
 est. : [9322]1
 * Quare tremunt.: [9323]1
 * Quasi mugiens.: [9324]1
 * Quasi mutuo adversoque fulta nisu consistere. : [9325]1
 * Quasi odore quodam veritatis.: [9326]1
 * Quem croceum.: [9327]1
 * Quem propter homines: [9328]1
 * Quem rectum rectè sortitus est. : [9329]1
 * Qui: [9330]1
 * Qui autem omnia quæ ad cultum deorum pertinerent, diligentes
 retractarent et tamquam : [9331]1
 * Qui sunt principes omnis disciplinæ. : [9332]1
 * Quia non egent.: [9333]1
 * Quia oculis manuque tractabile est.: [9334]1
 * Quid fiat.: [9335]1
 * Quid potestatis.: [9336]1
 * Quid sit Deus. : [9337]1
 * Quidam cæcis mentibus viri.: [9338]1
 * Quietus.: [9339]1
 * Quis autem nesciat plus esse momenti in paucioribus doctis, quam in
 pluribus imperitis?: [9340]1
 * Quo moderante: [9341]1
 * Quoad fieri potest. : [9342]1
 * Quod carne indui haberet in terrâ.: [9343]1
 * Quod ignorantes Deum facere non possunt. : [9344]1
 * Quod si Deum : [9345]1
 * Quod si aliqua necessitas prohibebit tum vero maxima adhibenda
 virtus erit, ut cupiditati continentia reluctetur. Nec tanturn
 alienis, quæ attingere non licet, veriun etiam publicis vulgatisque
 corporibus abstinendum, Deus præcepit; docetque nos, cum duo inter
 se corpora fuerint copulata, unum corpus efficere. Ita qui se coeno
 immerserit, coeno sit oblitus necesse est; et corpus quidem cito
 ablui potest: mens autem contagione impudici corporis inquinata non
 potest, nisi et longo tempore, et multis bonis operibus, ab ea quæ
 inhæ serit colluvione purgari. Oportet ergo sibi quemque proponere,
 duorum sexuum conjunctionem generandi causa datam esse viventibus,
 eamque legera his affectibus positam, ut successionera parent.
 Sicut autem dedit nobis oculos Deus, non ut spectemus,
 voluptatemque capiamus, sed ut videamus propter eos actus, qui
 pertinent ad vitæ necessitatem, ita genitalem corporis partem, quod
 nomen ipsum docet, nulla alia causa nisi efficiendæ sobolis
 accepimus. Huic divinæ legi summa devotione parendum est. Sint
 omnes, qui se discipulos Dei profitebuntur, ita morati et
 instituti, ut imperare sibi possint. Nam qui voluptatibus
 indulgent, qui libidini obsequuntur, ii animam suam corpori
 mancipant, ad mortemque condemnant: quia se corpori addixerunt, in
 quod habet mors potestatem. Unusquisque igitur, quantum potest,
 formet se ad verecundiam, pudorem colat, castitatem conscientia et
 mente tueatur; nec tantum legibus publicis pareat: sed sit supra
 omnes leges, qui legem Dei sequitur. Quibus : [9346]1
 * Quoniam.: [9347]1
 * Quorum cæcis mentibus lux negatur.: [9348]1
 * Quorum præsens et admirabilis fuerit eventus. : [9349]1
 * Rapiunt.: [9350]1
 * Rarum: [9351]1
 * Ratio virtutis.: [9352]1
 * Ratio virtutum.: [9353]1
 * Ratio.: [9354]1 [9355]2 [9356]3
 * Rationale.: [9357]1
 * Rationem: [9358]1
 * Rationem hominis.: [9359]1
 * Rationem.: [9360]1
 * Rebus communibus.: [9361]1
 * Reciprocâ vicissitudine.: [9362]1
 * Reddit.: [9363]1
 * Redit et Virgo: [9364]1
 * Redundent.: [9365]1
 * Reficit obtutum.: [9366]1
 * Refulgentes.: [9367]1
 * Regeneratus est.: [9368]1
 * Religionum: [9369]1
 * Religionum.: [9370]1
 * Remotus.: [9371]1
 * Rerum summa.: [9372]1
 * Rerum usus.: [9373]1
 * Resedit.: [9374]1
 * Reseravit.: [9375]1
 * Resignasse: [9376]1
 * Resignata est: [9377]1
 * Resipiscendi.: [9378]1
 * Resipiscentiam.: [9379]1
 * Resolvat.: [9380]1
 * Restricti.: [9381]1
 * Retentio.: [9382]1
 * Retinaculis.: [9383]1
 * Revelari: [9384]1
 * Reverentiam.: [9385]1
 * Revoca sursum.: [9386]1
 * Revolvantur.: [9387]1
 * Revolvuntur in planum.: [9388]1
 * Rigidum.: [9389]1
 * Roseus: [9390]1
 * Rudem.: [9391]1
 * Rupe vetante.: [9392]1
 * Ruptis exuviis.: [9393]1
 * S: [9394]1
 * Sacramenta Dei: [9395]1
 * Sacramenti.: [9396]1
 * Sacramento: [9397]1 [9398]2 [9399]3
 * Sacramentum: [9400]1
 * Sacramentum.: [9401]1 [9402]2
 * Sacrario: [9403]1
 * Sacrilegio. : [9404]1
 * Saginam: [9405]1
 * Salutaris, sive Salvator.: [9406]1
 * Sanctum animal.: [9407]1
 * Sanguinem suum.: [9408]1
 * Sapientem pascere barbam,: [9409]1
 * Satis me vixisse arbitrabor, et officium hominis implesse, si labor
 meus aliquos homines ab erroribus liberatos, ad iter coeleste
 direxerit: [9410]1
 * Satisfaciat: [9411]1
 * Saturavit.: [9412]1
 * Scipiones,: [9413]1
 * Se exhibet: [9414]1
 * Se insinuare.: [9415]1
 * Se insinuaret.: [9416]1
 * Se substernet.: [9417]1
 * Secesserat: [9418]1
 * Secutus.: [9419]1
 * Sed earum modum non tenent.: [9420]1
 * Sed ego id in eo jure ab ancipiti vindico.: [9421]1
 * Sed.: [9422]1
 * Sedendi vehiculum.: [9423]1
 * Sedeor: [9424]1
 * Semina principalia.: [9425]1
 * Seminaret: [9426]1
 * Senescit.: [9427]1
 * Sensus.: [9428]1
 * Sentiente: [9429]1
 * Sepulcra: [9430]1
 * Sequela.: [9431]1
 * Si ab omnibus in legem Dei conjuraretur.: [9432]1
 * Si vero masculinum in dexteram, foemininum in sinistram pervenerit,
 utrosque foetus recte provenire; ut et foeminis per omnia naturæ
 suæ decus constet, et maribus tam mente, quam corpore robur virile
 servetur. Istud vero ipsum quam mirabile institutum Dei, quod ad
 conservationem generum singulorum, duos sexus maris ac foeminæ
 machinatus est; quibus inter se per voluptatis illecebras
 copulatis, successiva soboles pareretur, ne omne genus viventium
 conditio mortalitatis extingueret. Sed plus roboris maribus
 attributum est, quo facilius ad patientiam jugi maritalis foeminæ
 cogerentur. Vir itaque nominatus est, quod major in eo vis est,
 quire in foemina; et hinc virtus nomen accepit. Item mulier (ut :
 [9433]1
 * Si vita est optanda sapienti profecto nullam aliam ob causam vivere
 optaverim, quam ut aliquid efficiam quod vita dignum sit: [9434]1
 * Sibi illam dedit.: [9435]1
 * Sibi tantum conciliata sit.: [9436]1
 * Siccaverunt: [9437]1
 * Sicut pueri: [9438]1
 * Significatio.: [9439]1
 * Significatione.: [9440]1
 * Siler: [9441]1
 * Similitudines autem in corporibus filiorum sic fieri putant. Cum
 semina inter se permixta coalescunt, si virile superaverit, patri
 similem provenire, seu marem, seu foeminam; si muliebre præ
 valuerit, progeniem cujusque sexus ad imaginem respondere maternam.
 Id autem præ valet e duobus, quod fuerit uberius; alterum enim
 quodammodo amplectitur et includit: hinc plerumque fled, ut unius
 tantum lineamenta præ tendat. Si vero æqua fuerit ex pari semente
 permixtio, figuras quoque misceri, ut soboles illa communis aut
 neutrum referre videatur, quia totum ex altero non habet; aut
 utrumque, quia partem de singulis mutuata est. Nam in cor-poribus
 animalium videmus aut confundi parentum colores, ac fieri tertium
 neutri generantium simile; aut utriusque sic exprimi, ut
 discoloribus membris per omne corpus concors mixtura varietur.
 Dispares quoque naturæ hoc modo fieri putantur. Cum forte in læ vam
 uteri partem masculinæ stirpis semen inciderit, marem quidem gigni
 opinatio est; sed quia sit in foeminina parte conceptus, aliquid in
 se habere foemineum, supra quam decus virile patiatur; vel formam
 insignem, vel nimium candorem, vel corporis levitatem, vel artus
 delicatos, vel staturam brevem, vel vocem gracilem, vel animum
 imbecillum, vel ex his plura. Item, si partem in dextram semen
 foeminini sexus influxerit, foeminam quidem procreari; sed quoniam
 in masculina parte concepta sit, habere in se aliquid virilita-tis,
 ultra quam sexus; ratio permittat; aut valida membra, aut
 immoderatam Iongitudinem, aut fuscum colorem, aut hispidam faciem,
 aut vulture indecorum, aut vocem robustam, aut animum audacem, aut
 ex his plura.: [9442]1
 * Simplex: [9443]1
 * Simulacris.: [9444]1
 * Simulacrum: [9445]1
 * Simulavit: [9446]1
 * Sine cujusquam suspicione.: [9447]1
 * Sine delectu.: [9448]1
 * Sine fuco.: [9449]1
 * Sine malitiâ.: [9450]1
 * Sine nutu et adminiculo animi.: [9451]1
 * Singularis.: [9452]1
 * Singulis ratio non quadravit. : [9453]1
 * Societate alterius.: [9454]1
 * Sol: [9455]1
 * Solidam et expressam.: [9456]1
 * Solidamenta corporis.: [9457]1
 * Solidum.: [9458]1
 * Solveret: [9459]1
 * Sopiantur: [9460]1
 * Sopiatur.: [9461]1
 * Sopitur.: [9462]1
 * Sopitus.: [9463]1
 * Sordida.: [9464]1
 * Sordidum.: [9465]1
 * Spatia: [9466]1
 * Spatiis.: [9467]1
 * Speciem gerere.: [9468]1
 * Species.: [9469]1
 * Speravimus: [9470]1
 * Spiritualibus.: [9471]1
 * Stellantia lumina florum.: [9472]1
 * Studio renascendi.: [9473]1
 * Stultitiam.: [9474]1
 * Stultitiam. : [9475]1
 * Sub ambage: [9476]1
 * Sub cortice lævi: [9477]1
 * Sub prætextu.: [9478]1
 * Subinde,: [9479]1
 * Subjaceret. : [9480]1
 * Sublimes ad auras. : [9481]1
 * Substantiæ: [9482]1
 * Substricta.: [9483]1
 * Suffixus.: [9484]1
 * Suis attemperat organa cannis.: [9485]1
 * Sumere: [9486]1
 * Summa.: [9487]1 [9488]2
 * Summam. : [9489]1
 * Super me: [9490]1
 * Superstites, et superstitiosi.: [9491]1
 * Supervacuam: [9492]1
 * Sus ille lutulentus.: [9493]1
 * Sus lota in volutabro luti.: [9494]1
 * Suscepta publicè sacra.: [9495]1
 * Suspicio.: [9496]1
 * Suspicione.: [9497]1
 * Suspiciunt: [9498]1
 * Sustentatio sui.: [9499]1
 * Tabe corporis.: [9500]1
 * Tantæ affluentiæ ubertate.: [9501]1
 * Tanta: [9502]1
 * Tanta rerum magnitudo.: [9503]1
 * Tanti ad miracula visus.: [9504]1
 * Tanti est...ne.: [9505]1
 * Temperandum.: [9506]1
 * Temporalem.: [9507]1
 * Temporalis.: [9508]1
 * Temporariæ.: [9509]1
 * Teneritudinem domicilii.: [9510]1
 * Tensa: [9511]1
 * Tenues: [9512]1
 * Tenuia nec lanæ per coelum vellera ferri.: [9513]1
 * Tenuis: [9514]1
 * Tenuis.: [9515]1 [9516]2
 * Teretes.: [9517]1
 * Terram petens.: [9518]1
 * Terrea progenies duris caput extulit arvis.: [9519]1
 * Terrea.: [9520]1
 * Terriculas.: [9521]1
 * Testamentum: [9522]1
 * Teste : [9523]1
 * Testudine.: [9524]1
 * Thure soluto.: [9525]1
 * Tineæ.: [9526]1
 * Tituli: [9527]1
 * Toto venerabilis ævo: [9528]1
 * Tractabilis. : [9529]1
 * Tribus rebus animantium vita tenetur, cibo, potione, spiritu.:
 [9530]1
 * Triplex igitur: [9531]1
 * Trisagion. : [9532]1
 * Tuba spargens mirum sonum.: [9533]1
 * Tunica talaris: [9534]1
 * Tutela.: [9535]1
 * Uberius.: [9536]1
 * Ubertas animorum.: [9537]1
 * Ulla.: [9538]1
 * Ultima semper : [9539]1
 * Umbrâ et imaginibus.: [9540]1
 * Umbram et extrema lineamenta. : [9541]1
 * Umbratico et imaginario præceptori.: [9542]1
 * Undique quadrat.: [9543]1
 * Unica: [9544]1
 * Unus.: [9545]1
 * Usque ad unum. : [9546]1
 * Ut cedat.: [9547]1
 * Ut errores hominibus immittant.: [9548]1
 * Ut infinita et perpetua potestate dominos se dici velint universi
 generis humani. : [9549]1
 * Ut naturæ immortali quidquam decederet.: [9550]1
 * Ut supra: [9551]1
 * Uteri terram radicibus apti.: [9552]1
 * Utrumne illis ratio subsistat. : [9553]1
 * Vagus.: [9554]1
 * Vaniloquentia.: [9555]1
 * Varia.: [9556]1
 * Variis.: [9557]1
 * Vates: [9558]1
 * Vector: [9559]1
 * Vegetetur: [9560]1
 * Velamentum.: [9561]1
 * Vellera: [9562]1
 * Venerabilis.: [9563]1
 * Venia: [9564]1
 * Venio nunc ad eam, quæ percipitur ex tactu, voluptatem: qui sensus
 est quidem totius corporis. Sed ego non de ornamentis, aut
 vestibus, sed de solâ libidine dicendum mihi puto; quæ maxime
 coercenda est, quia maxime nocet. Cure excogitasset Deus duorum
 sexuum rationero, attribuit iis, ut se invicem appeterent, et
 conjunctione gauderent. Itaque ardentissimam cupiditatem cunctorum
 animantium corporibus admiscuit, ut in hos affectus avidissime
 ruerent, eaque ratione propagari et multiplicari genera possent.
 Quæ cupiditas et appetentia in homine vehementior et acrior
 invenitur; vel quia hominum multitudinem voluit esse majorem, vel
 quoniam virtutem soli homini dedit, ut esset laus et gloria in
 coercendis voluptatibus, et abstinentia sui. Seit ergo adversarius
 ille noster, quanta sit vis hujus cupiditatis, quam quidam
 necessitatem dicere maluerunt; eamque a recto et bono, ad malum et
 pravum transfert. Illicita enim desideria immittit, ut aliena
 contaminent, quibus habere propria sine delicto licet. Objicit
 quippe oculis irritabiles formas, suggeritque fomenta, et vitiis
 pabulum subministrat: tum intimis visceribus stimulos omnes
 conturbat et commovet, et naturalem illum incitat atque inflammat
 ardorem, donee irretitum hominem implicatumque decipiat. Ac ne quis
 esset, qui poenarum metu abstineret alieno, lupanaria quoque
 constituit; et pudorem infelicium mulierum publicavit, ut ludibrio
 haberet tam eos qui faciunt, quam quas pati necesse est.: [9565]1
 * Ventri ac gulæ ingeras.: [9566]1
 * Verba: [9567]1
 * Veri peritus ac sciens.: [9568]1
 * Verisimilia: [9569]1
 * Verisimilitudine: [9570]1
 * Versutus: [9571]1
 * Vertibula.: [9572]1
 * Vetus vitium: [9573]1
 * Vexabilibus.: [9574]1
 * Vexationes.: [9575]1
 * Vexillum.: [9576]1
 * Vid.: [9577]1
 * Viduis.: [9578]1
 * Virtus divitiis pretium persolvere posse;: [9579]1
 * Virtus id dare quod re ipsa debetur honori.: [9580]1
 * Virtus quærendæ rei finem scire, modumque;: [9581]1
 * Virtutem in se recipere.: [9582]1
 * Viscera.: [9583]1
 * Visceribus.: [9584]1 [9585]2
 * Vitiosum.: [9586]1
 * Vivam præsentemque legem.: [9587]1
 * Vivificare.: [9588]1
 * Vivum cruorem.: [9589]1
 * Vivum.: [9590]1
 * Voluminum flexiones.: [9591]1
 * Voluntate. : [9592]1
 * abdicare: [9593]1
 * abuti: [9594]1
 * accensus: [9595]1
 * ad : [9596]1
 * ad foetum seminis instar habent.: [9597]1
 * addicti.: [9598]1
 * adhuc nocte brevi.: [9599]1
 * adversus parentes impio,: [9600]1
 * adversus.: [9601]1
 * afficit.: [9602]1
 * affixerunt,: [9603]1
 * affligit: [9604]1
 * agitetur.: [9605]1
 * alma: [9606]1
 * altiores cæteris...fulgebant.: [9607]1
 * ante: [9608]1
 * ante diem septimam Calendarum Aprilium: [9609]1
 * apud Mysiam Phrygiæ: [9610]1
 * apud Phrygiam Mysiæ civitatem: [9611]1
 * ara maxima.: [9612]1
 * arbitrabantur: [9613]1
 * arcam: [9614]1
 * arridentque oculis.: [9615]1
 * aures: [9616]1
 * aurum...insigneque.: [9617]1
 * aut ab illis fortitudinis, aut,: [9618]1
 * aut plane terrores.: [9619]1
 * bonis si assueverit, jam pudebit eum ad deteriora desciscere: modo
 placeant recta et honesta, quæ melioribus jucundiora sunt quam
 prava et inhonesta pejoribus.: [9620]1
 * coelando.: [9621]1
 * coelum: [9622]1
 * canticum: [9623]1
 * cedit.: [9624]1
 * cilleo,: [9625]1
 * circumscriptio: [9626]1
 * cliens: [9627]1
 * cogitatione.: [9628]1
 * colere.: [9629]1
 * compatari.: [9630]1
 * concors,: [9631]1
 * conjuro: [9632]1
 * consolandos.: [9633]1
 * cor: [9634]1
 * corona: [9635]1
 * corona presbyterii: [9636]1
 * corona tibi et judices defuerunt.: [9637]1
 * creduntur.: [9638]1
 * crux: [9639]1
 * cultu.: [9640]1
 * cum bene vernarit; reddit et annus opes.: [9641]1
 * cum tempore certo.: [9642]1
 * custodierunt.: [9643]1
 * de nova: [9644]1
 * deberet: [9645]1
 * dejiciendum: [9646]1
 * deliget: [9647]1
 * derogo: [9648]1 [9649]2
 * detrahi. : [9650]1
 * detur et,: [9651]1
 * diligendo diligentes: [9652]1
 * dissimulavit: [9653]1
 * dum dissipant.: [9654]1
 * eam: [9655]1
 * elegantes: [9656]1
 * elephantiasis,: [9657]1
 * eligendo: [9658]1
 * endo: [9659]1
 * et: [9660]1
 * et alibi: [9661]1
 * et eum, qui : [9662]1
 * et immundum.: [9663]1
 * et qui fugerunt, universi redeant.: [9664]1
 * et seq. : [9665]1
 * et sociam myrrhæ vim, Panachaia tuæ.: [9666]1
 * et tetræ.: [9667]1
 * evincet et deliget validas nationes: [9668]1
 * ex moribus.: [9669]1
 * ex omni corpore ad venam genitalem confluere, ibique concrescere.
 Sed hoc, humana mens, quomodo fiat, non potest comprehendere. Item
 in foeminis uterus in duas se dividit partes, quæ in diversum
 diffussæ ac reflexæ, circumplicantur, sicut arietis cornua. Quæ
 pars in dextram retorquetur, masculina est; quæ in sinistram,
 foeminina.: [9670]1
 * ex parte somniis constituerunt.: [9671]1
 * ex persona.: [9672]1
 * exhæredati,: [9673]1
 * expelluntur,: [9674]1
 * expolient.: [9675]1
 * exsolantur,: [9676]1
 * extrema: [9677]1
 * exultantur.: [9678]1
 * fæcunditatem variam generandi.: [9679]1
 * familia.: [9680]1
 * ferrea: [9681]1
 * fibris: [9682]1
 * foramen: [9683]1
 * forte,: [9684]1
 * gradus: [9685]1
 * gutturis canna,: [9686]1
 * humus: [9687]1
 * hysteron-proteron: [9688]1
 * ignoravi: [9689]1
 * illâ: [9690]1
 * illa sibi illam dedit: [9691]1
 * ille,: [9692]1
 * imago.: [9693]1
 * imprudentiæ.: [9694]1
 * in loco: [9695]1
 * in orbem,: [9696]1
 * in te.: [9697]1
 * inconstans.: [9698]1
 * incutiens amorem.: [9699]1
 * indoctos homines: [9700]1
 * inenarrabiles: [9701]1
 * infra: [9702]1 [9703]2 [9704]3 [9705]4 [9706]5 [9707]6 [9708]7
 [9709]8 [9710]9 [9711]10 [9712]11 [9713]12 [9714]13 [9715]14
 [9716]15 [9717]16 [9718]17 [9719]18
 * infra.: [9720]1
 * instabile: [9721]1
 * intelligendo intelligentes.: [9722]1
 * intempestâ nocte.: [9723]1
 * intersecta.: [9724]1
 * intra.: [9725]1
 * ira, cupiditas, libido.: [9726]1
 * juvo: [9727]1
 * læsio: [9728]1
 * lævia,: [9729]1
 * lactens: [9730]1
 * lacunæ: [9731]1
 * latrunculi.: [9732]1
 * ligando.: [9733]1
 * livor: [9734]1
 * majestatem.: [9735]1
 * malæ bestiæ: [9736]1
 * mater,: [9737]1
 * mediorum officiorum: [9738]1
 * mentis compos.: [9739]1
 * metæ: [9740]1
 * mimus: [9741]1
 * minimus,: [9742]1
 * mollier: [9743]1
 * multo minus: [9744]1
 * nares,: [9745]1
 * naturam: [9746]1
 * ne,: [9747]1
 * necaverunt: [9748]1
 * necaverunt,: [9749]1
 * nisi quos: [9750]1
 * nominis umbra: [9751]1
 * nostro e corpore nasci.: [9752]1
 * novissima: [9753]1
 * nuncupatur.: [9754]1
 * nunquam non,: [9755]1
 * obrogo: [9756]1 [9757]2
 * occulere,: [9758]1
 * oculos.: [9759]1
 * odor: [9760]1
 * omnium: [9761]1
 * operis,: [9762]1
 * oppositione.: [9763]1
 * orbis.: [9764]1
 * organum,: [9765]1
 * osier: [9766]1
 * palæstra.: [9767]1
 * pallium: [9768]1
 * palpebræ,: [9769]1
 * parricides: [9770]1 [9771]2
 * pasach: [9772]1
 * pascha: [9773]1
 * passim: [9774]1 [9775]2 [9776]3
 * passim.: [9777]1
 * pastor.: [9778]1
 * patens.: [9779]1
 * patienter.: [9780]1
 * patris novas auctor.: [9781]1
 * patronus.: [9782]1
 * peccatum originis.: [9783]1
 * pellibus texit.: [9784]1
 * pellibus.: [9785]1
 * per Moysen,: [9786]1
 * per grave pondus,: [9787]1
 * persuasione: [9788]1
 * perversâ religione: [9789]1
 * philosophia.: [9790]1
 * philosophiam nemo potuit invenire.: [9791]1
 * pietatis: [9792]1
 * planè.: [9793]1
 * planta.: [9794]1
 * plenè,: [9795]1
 * polleo,: [9796]1
 * pollex: [9797]1
 * popularis aura.: [9798]1
 * positis exuviis.: [9799]1
 * post: [9800]1
 * post diem decimum kalendarum Aprilis: [9801]1
 * posuit Deus omnia.: [9802]1
 * prænomen: [9803]1
 * prænomen.: [9804]1
 * prætor: [9805]1
 * presbyter : [9806]1
 * pressura: [9807]1
 * principem angelorum: [9808]1
 * pro : [9809]1
 * pro viribus,: [9810]1
 * professi Deum.: [9811]1
 * propter infans: [9812]1
 * prosecârant: [9813]1
 * providentia.: [9814]1
 * pyra.: [9815]1
 * quàm materiâ providentiam conglobatam.: [9816]1
 * quæ capitur ex foeminei corporis copulatione: [9817]1
 * quæ moderata.: [9818]1
 * quæ sunt principes omnium disciplinæ: [9819]1
 * quam,: [9820]1
 * quaternion: [9821]1
 * qui: [9822]1
 * qui : [9823]1
 * qui de Deo patre omnia, et de filio locutus est multa;: [9824]1
 * quid faciat.: [9825]1
 * quo et nos jam non sumus.: [9826]1
 * quo nos etiamnum sumus.: [9827]1
 * quod: [9828]1
 * quod fieri potest.: [9829]1
 * recte: [9830]1
 * refuso.: [9831]1
 * relegendo: [9832]1
 * relegerent: [9833]1
 * religarit: [9834]1
 * religati: [9835]1
 * religio: [9836]1
 * religionis: [9837]1
 * religiosi: [9838]1
 * reservavit: [9839]1
 * resistit: [9840]1
 * resolvantur.: [9841]1
 * roseo honore.: [9842]1
 * rostra: [9843]1
 * sationibus: [9844]1
 * scholium: [9845]1
 * scholium.: [9846]1
 * sciente.: [9847]1
 * se probat.: [9848]1
 * sectare justitiam: [9849]1
 * sed hæc verba de naturâ muliebri minime imperita, esse videntur.:
 [9850]1
 * seu.: [9851]1
 * sigilla. : [9852]1
 * simulacra.: [9853]1
 * simulo: [9854]1
 * sine maculâ,: [9855]1
 * sit.: [9856]1
 * sollicitam.: [9857]1
 * solus: [9858]1
 * sophia: [9859]1
 * sparsim: [9860]1 [9861]2 [9862]3 [9863]4 [9864]5
 * spatiis vergentibus.: [9865]1
 * spatium: [9866]1
 * sperabimus.: [9867]1
 * spiritus: [9868]1
 * stabilis est: [9869]1
 * statio: [9870]1
 * sub sidere cæli.: [9871]1
 * summum bonum: [9872]1
 * superstite: [9873]1
 * superstitem: [9874]1
 * supra: [9875]1 [9876]2 [9877]3 [9878]4 [9879]5 [9880]6 [9881]7
 [9882]8 [9883]9 [9884]10 [9885]11 [9886]12 [9887]13 [9888]14
 [9889]15 [9890]16 [9891]17 [9892]18 [9893]19 [9894]20 [9895]21
 [9896]22 [9897]23 [9898]24 [9899]25 [9900]26 [9901]27 [9902]28
 [9903]29 [9904]30 [9905]31 [9906]32 [9907]33 [9908]34 [9909]35
 [9910]36 [9911]37 [9912]38 [9913]39 [9914]40 [9915]41 [9916]42
 [9917]43 [9918]44 [9919]45 [9920]46 [9921]47 [9922]48 [9923]49
 [9924]50 [9925]51 [9926]52 [9927]53 [9928]54 [9929]55 [9930]56
 [9931]57 [9932]58 [9933]59 [9934]60 [9935]61 [9936]62 [9937]63
 * supra.: [9938]1 [9939]2 [9940]3 [9941]4 [9942]5 [9943]6 [9944]7
 [9945]8 [9946]9 [9947]10 [9948]11 [9949]12 [9950]13 [9951]14
 [9952]15 [9953]16 [9954]17 [9955]18 [9956]19 [9957]20 [9958]21
 [9959]22
 * synaxis: [9960]1
 * tanta: [9961]1 [9962]2
 * teneri.: [9963]1
 * terricolas.: [9964]1
 * testamentum: [9965]1
 * toles,: [9966]1
 * tractus: [9967]1
 * transversum: [9968]1
 * tribunus ambustus. : [9969]1
 * tunica: [9970]1
 * tunica proprior pallio.: [9971]1
 * umbra: [9972]1
 * uno spiritu.: [9973]1
 * ut scriptum legimus: [9974]1
 * ut supra: [9975]1 [9976]2 [9977]3
 * uti.: [9978]1
 * vanis.: [9979]1
 * veluti primogenitum prophetiæ ipsorum.: [9980]1
 * ventura: [9981]1
 * verbero,: [9982]1
 * verius,: [9983]1
 * vide : [9984]1
 * video.: [9985]1
 * vim: [9986]1
 * vitalique toro,: [9987]1

Index of Pages of the Print Edition

 [9988]i  [9989]iii  [9990]iv  [9991]v  [9992]1  [9993]2  [9994]3
 [9995]4  [9996]5  [9997]6  [9998]7  [9999]8  [10000]9  [10001]10
 [10002]11  [10003]12  [10004]13  [10005]14  [10006]15  [10007]16
 [10008]17  [10009]18  [10010]19  [10011]20  [10012]21  [10013]22
 [10014]23  [10015]24  [10016]25  [10017]26  [10018]27  [10019]28
 [10020]29  [10021]30  [10022]31  [10023]32  [10024]33  [10025]34
 [10026]35  [10027]36  [10028]37  [10029]38  [10030]39  [10031]40
 [10032]41  [10033]42  [10034]43  [10035]44  [10036]45  [10037]46
 [10038]47  [10039]48  [10040]49  [10041]50  [10042]51  [10043]52
 [10044]53  [10045]54  [10046]55  [10047]56  [10048]57  [10049]58
 [10050]59  [10051]60  [10052]61  [10053]62  [10054]63  [10055]64
 [10056]65  [10057]66  [10058]67  [10059]68  [10060]69  [10061]70
 [10062]71  [10063]72  [10064]73  [10065]74  [10066]75  [10067]76
 [10068]77  [10069]78  [10070]79  [10071]80  [10072]81  [10073]82
 [10074]83  [10075]84  [10076]85  [10077]86  [10078]87  [10079]88
 [10080]89  [10081]90  [10082]91  [10083]92  [10084]93  [10085]94
 [10086]95  [10087]96  [10088]97  [10089]98  [10090]99  [10091]100
 [10092]101  [10093]102  [10094]103  [10095]104  [10096]105  [10097]106
 [10098]107  [10099]108  [10100]109  [10101]110  [10102]111  [10103]112
 [10104]113  [10105]114  [10106]115  [10107]116  [10108]117  [10109]118
 [10110]119  [10111]120  [10112]121  [10113]122  [10114]123  [10115]124
 [10116]125  [10117]126  [10118]127  [10119]128  [10120]129  [10121]130
 [10122]131  [10123]132  [10124]133  [10125]134  [10126]135  [10127]136
 [10128]137  [10129]138  [10130]139  [10131]140  [10132]141  [10133]142
 [10134]143  [10135]144  [10136]145  [10137]146  [10138]147  [10139]148
 [10140]149  [10141]150  [10142]151  [10143]152  [10144]153  [10145]154
 [10146]155  [10147]156  [10148]157  [10149]158  [10150]159  [10151]160
 [10152]161  [10153]162  [10154]163  [10155]164  [10156]165  [10157]166
 [10158]167  [10159]168  [10160]169  [10161]170  [10162]171  [10163]172
 [10164]173  [10165]174  [10166]175  [10167]176  [10168]177  [10169]178
 [10170]179  [10171]180  [10172]181  [10173]182  [10174]183  [10175]184
 [10176]185  [10177]186  [10178]187  [10179]188  [10180]189  [10181]190
 [10182]191  [10183]192  [10184]193  [10185]194  [10186]195  [10187]196
 [10188]197  [10189]198  [10190]199  [10191]200  [10192]201  [10193]202
 [10194]203  [10195]204  [10196]205  [10197]206  [10198]207  [10199]208
 [10200]209  [10201]210  [10202]211  [10203]212  [10204]213  [10205]214
 [10206]215  [10207]216  [10208]217  [10209]218  [10210]215  [10211]220
 [10212]221  [10213]222  [10214]223  [10215]224  [10216]225  [10217]226
 [10218]227  [10219]228  [10220]229  [10221]230  [10222]231  [10223]232
 [10224]233  [10225]234  [10226]235  [10227]236  [10228]237  [10229]238
 [10230]239  [10231]240  [10232]241  [10233]242  [10234]243  [10235]244
 [10236]245  [10237]246  [10238]247  [10239]248  [10240]249  [10241]250
 [10242]251  [10243]252  [10244]253  [10245]254  [10246]255  [10247]256
 [10248]257  [10249]258  [10250]259  [10251]260  [10252]261  [10253]262
 [10254]263  [10255]264  [10256]265  [10257]266  [10258]267  [10259]268
 [10260]269  [10261]270  [10262]271  [10263]272  [10264]273  [10265]274
 [10266]275  [10267]276  [10268]277  [10269]278  [10270]279  [10271]280
 [10272]281  [10273]282  [10274]283  [10275]284  [10276]285  [10277]286
 [10278]287  [10279]288  [10280]289  [10281]290  [10282]291  [10283]292
 [10284]293  [10285]294  [10286]295  [10287]296  [10288]297  [10289]298
 [10290]299  [10291]300  [10292]301  [10293]302  [10294]303  [10295]304
 [10296]305  [10297]306  [10298]307  [10299]308  [10300]309  [10301]310
 [10302]311  [10303]312  [10304]313  [10305]314  [10306]315  [10307]316
 [10308]317  [10309]318  [10310]319  [10311]320  [10312]321  [10313]322
 [10314]323  [10315]324  [10316]325  [10317]326  [10318]327  [10319]328
 [10320]329  [10321]330  [10322]331  [10323]332  [10324]333  [10325]334
 [10326]335  [10327]336  [10328]337  [10329]338  [10330]339  [10331]340
 [10332]341  [10333]342  [10334]343  [10335]344  [10336]345  [10337]346
 [10338]347  [10339]348  [10340]349  [10341]350  [10342]351  [10343]352
 [10344]353  [10345]354  [10346]355  [10347]356  [10348]357  [10349]358
 [10350]359  [10351]360  [10352]361  [10353]362  [10354]363  [10355]364
 [10356]365  [10357]366  [10358]367  [10359]368  [10360]369  [10361]370
 [10362]371  [10363]372  [10364]373  [10365]374  [10366]375  [10367]376
 [10368]377  [10369]378  [10370]379  [10371]380  [10372]381  [10373]382
 [10374]383  [10375]384  [10376]385  [10377]386  [10378]387  [10379]388
 [10380]389  [10381]390  [10382]391  [10383]392  [10384]393  [10385]394
 [10386]395  [10387]396  [10388]397  [10389]398  [10390]399  [10391]400
 [10392]401  [10393]402  [10394]403  [10395]404  [10396]405  [10397]406
 [10398]407  [10399]408  [10400]409  [10401]410  [10402]411  [10403]412
 [10404]413  [10405]414  [10406]415  [10407]416  [10408]417  [10409]418
 [10410]419  [10411]420  [10412]421  [10413]422  [10414]423  [10415]424
 [10416]425  [10417]426  [10418]427  [10419]428  [10420]429  [10421]430
 [10422]431  [10423]432  [10424]433  [10425]434  [10426]435  [10427]436
 [10428]437  [10429]438  [10430]439  [10431]440  [10432]441  [10433]442
 [10434]443  [10435]444  [10436]445  [10437]446  [10438]447  [10439]448
 [10440]449  [10441]450  [10442]451  [10443]452  [10444]453  [10445]454
 [10446]455  [10447]456  [10448]457  [10449]458  [10450]459  [10451]460
 [10452]461  [10453]462  [10454]463  [10455]464  [10456]465  [10457]466
 [10458]467  [10459]468  [10460]469  [10461]470  [10462]471  [10463]472
 [10464]473  [10465]474  [10466]475  [10467]476  [10468]477  [10469]478
 [10470]479  [10471]480  [10472]481  [10473]482  [10474]483  [10475]484
 [10476]485  [10477]486  [10478]487  [10479]488  [10480]489  [10481]490
 [10482]491  [10483]492  [10484]493  [10485]494  [10486]495  [10487]496
 [10488]497  [10489]498  [10490]499  [10491]500  [10492]501  [10493]502
 [10494]503  [10495]504  [10496]505  [10497]506  [10498]507  [10499]508
 [10500]509  [10501]510  [10502]511  [10503]512  [10504]513  [10505]514
 [10506]515  [10507]516  [10508]517  [10509]518  [10510]519  [10511]520
 [10512]521  [10513]522  [10514]523  [10515]524  [10516]525  [10517]526
 [10518]527  [10519]528  [10520]529  [10521]530  [10522]531  [10523]532
 [10524]533  [10525]534  [10526]535  [10527]536  [10528]537  [10529]538
 [10530]539  [10531]540  [10532]542  [10533]543  [10534]544  [10535]545
 [10536]546  [10537]547  [10538]548  [10539]549  [10540]550  [10541]551
 [10542]552  [10543]553  [10544]554  [10545]555  [10546]556  [10547]557
 [10548]558  [10549]559  [10550]560  [10551]561  [10552]562  [10553]563
 [10554]564  [10555]565  [10556]566  [10557]567  [10558]568  [10559]569
 [10560]570  [10561]571  [10562]572

 This document is from the Christian Classics Ethereal
 Library at Calvin College, http://www.ccel.org,
 generated on demand from ThML source.

References
