COMMON-SENSE IN LAW

By  PAUL  VINOGRADOFF /CyuLcC /j^<^

D.C.L.. '  L.D., D.HIST., DR.JUR., F.B.A.  / Q  ^ ^''


London
WILLIAMS & NORGATE


HENRY HOLT  & Co.,  New York
Canada  :  WM.  BRIGGS,  Toronto
India  :  R.  &  T.  WASHBOURNK,  Ltd.


J.  PETER  MAYER

LinPARY


HOME

UNIVERSITY

LIBRARY

OF

MODERN  KNOWLEDGE

Editors  :
HERBERT  FISHER,  M.A.,  F.B.A  ,  LL.D.

Prof. GILBERT MURRAY, D.LlTT.,

LL.D.,  F.a.A,
Prof.  J. ARTHUR THOMSON,  M.A.,

LL.D.
Prof. WllXL^M  T. BREWSTER,  M..\.

(Colombia  University,  U.S.A.)


NEW YORK

HENRY HOLT  AND COMPANY


COMMON-SENSE

IN  LAW

BY

PAUL VINOGRADOFF

D.C.L.,  LL.D., D.HIST.,  DR.JUR.,  F.B.A.

CORPUS PROFESSOR OF JURISPRODEN'CE
IN THE UNIVERSITY OF OXFORD


LONDON

WILLIAMS  AND NORGATE


Richard  Clav  &  Sons,  Limited,

bronswick  3trbkt,  stamford  btrhet,  8.e.

and  bukqav,  suffolk.


3


LIBRARY

UNIVERSITY  OF  CALIFORiMA

SANTA  BARBARA


CONTENTS


CHAP.
I

SOCIAL RULES

PAGE

7

II

LEGAL RULES

. 28

III

LEGAL RIGHTS AND DUTIES

. 61

IV

FACTS AND ACTS IN LAW

. 87

V

LEGISLATION ....

. 116

VI

CUSTOM

. 148

VII

JUDICIAL PRECEDENTS

. 169

VI 11

EQUITY

. 208

IX

THE LAW OF NATURE

. 234

BIBLIOGRAPHICAL NOTE .

. 249

INDEX OF CASES

. 250

GENERAL INDEX

. 253

The  following  volumes  of  kindred  interest  have  already
been  published  in  this  Library  :

30. Elements  of  English  Law. By  Prof.  W.  M.  Geldart.

33. The  History  of  England :  A  Study  in  Political  Evolution.
By  Prof.  A.  F.  Pollard.

42. Rome. By  W.  Warde  Fovrler,  MA.

1. Parliament. By  Sir  C.  P.  Ilbert.


COMMON-SENSE IN LAW

CHAPTER  I

SOCIAL RULES

1.  When  Blackstone  began  his  Oxford
lectures  on  English  law  (1753),  he  felt  him-
self under  the  obligation  of  justifying  a
new  academic  venture.  "  Advantages  and
leisure,"  he  said,  "  are  given  to  gentlemen
not  for  the  benefit  of  themselves  only,  but
also  of  the  public,  and  yet  they  cannot,  in
any  scene  of  life,  discharge  properly  their
duty  either  to  the  public  or  to  themselves,
without  some  degree  of  knowledge  in  the
laws."

Things  have  moved  fast  since  Blackstone's
day,  and  significant  changes  have  certainly
occurred  in  the  educational  aspects  of  law.
To  begin  with,  the  circle  of  "  gentlemen  "
who  ought  to  give  some  thought  to  laws
has  been  greatly  widened  :  it  comprises  now
all  educated  persons  called  upon  to  exercise
the  privileges  and  to  perform  the  duties  of
7


8  COMMON-SENSE IN LAW

citizenship.  One  need  not  be  a  barrister  or
a  solicitor,  a  member  of  parliament,  a  justice
of  the  peace,  or  even  an  elector,  to  take  an
interest  in  and  feel  responsibilities  towards
laws  :  all  those  who  pay  taxes  and  own
property  of  any  kind,  who  hire  and  supply
labour,  who  stand  on  their  rights  and  en-
counter the  rights  of  others,  are  directly
concerned  with  laws,  whether  they  realize
it  or  not.  Sometimes  a  knowledge  of  law
may  help  directly  in  the  matter  of  claiming
and  defending  what  belongs  to  one ;  on  other
occasions  it  may  enlighten  a  juror  or  an
elector  in  the  exercise  of  his  important
functions;  in  any  case,  every  member  of  the
community  takes  his  share  in  the  formation
of  public  opinion,  which  is  one  of  the  most
potent  factors  in  producing  and  modifying  law.
Again,  we  must  try  nowadays  not  only  to
acquire  some  knowledge  of  the  legal  rules  ob-
taining in  England,  but  also  to  understand  the
aims  and  means  of  law  in  general,  to  obtain
some  insight  into  the  processes  by  which  it  is
formed  and  administered :  for  it  is  only  in
this  way  that  the  meaning  of  enactments  can
be  realized  in  a  rational  and  comprehensive
manner.  Nobody  would  think  it  possible  to
obtain  a  reasonable  view  of  the  causes  and


SOCIAL RULES  9

conditions  which  govern  economic  facts  with-
out some  knowledge  of  economic  theory.
And  similarly  it  would  be  preposterous  to
reason  on  juridical  subjects  without  some
insight  into  jurisprudence.

In  view  of  these  obvious  considerations,  I
should  like  to  explain  as  briefly  and  simply
as  possible  the  main  principles  which  underlie
legal  arrangements.  Although  the  details  of
legal  rules  are  complicated  and  technical,  the
operations  of  the  mind  in  the  domain  of
law  are  based  on  common  sense,  and  may  be
followed  without  difficulty  by  persons  of
ordinary  intelligence  and  education.  Juris-
prudence may  be  likened  in  this  respect  to
political  economy,  which  also  is  developed
from  simple  general  principles  and  yet  re-
quires a  great  deal  of  special  knowledge  when
it  comes  to  particulars.

In  order  to  realize  the  aims  and  character-
istics of  jurisprudence,  it  may  be  useful  to
consider,  in  the  first  instance,  what  place  it
occupies  as  a  branch  of  study.  Now  study  is
knowledge  co-ordinated  by  reflection,  and
as  such  it  is  peculiar  to  mankind;  for  the
most  fundamental  difference  between  man
and  animals  consists  in  man's  power  of  reflec-
tion. A  dog  feels  pain  and  pleasure,  is  moved


10  COMMON-SENSE IN LAW

to  anger  and  joy,  remembers  blows  and
caresses,  may  exercise  cunning  in  achieving
its  ends,  e.g.  in  opening  a  gate  or  in  pursuing
game.  But  its  notions,  desires  and  acts
spring  directly  from  its  emotions  or  from
their  association  by  memory.  With  man  it
is  different.  We  also  are  subject  to  the
direct  impulses  of  our  emotional  nature,  but
by  the  side  of  this  direct  driving  apparatus
in  our  mind  we  are  conscious  of  an  entirely
different  mental  process.  We  are  always,  as
it  were,  holding  up  the  mirror  to  our  emotions,
ideas  and  resolves,  and  as  a  result  of  such
self-consciousness  we  are  living  through  the
events  and  actions  of  our  existence  not  only
in  their  direct  sequence,  but  also  as  through
a  reflected  series.  In  a  direct  way  the  chords
of  our  spirit  are  touched  from  the  outside
by  the  various  impressions  made  by  the  ob-
jects we  meet  on  our  way,  as  well  as  by
the  physiological  and  spiritual  happenings
of  our  own  organism.  The  process  of  reflec-
tion makes  it  possible  for  us  to  rearrange  our
stores  of  impressions  and  memories,  to  co-
ordinate them  in  accordance  with  conscious
aims  and  deliberately  selected  standards.  It
is  from  this  reflective  element  that  men  draw
their  immense  superiority  over  animals,  that


SOCIAL  RULES  11

speech,  religion,  art,  science,  morality,  political
and  legal  order  arise.

This  observation,  drawn  from  the  experience
of individuals,  is no less  apparent in the
experience  of  societies,  as  recorded  by  history.
Even  the  most  primitive  of  savages,  e.g.  the
Veddas  of  Ceylon,  or  the  Patagonians,  manifest
a  good  deal  of  reflection  in  their  habits  when
compared  with  apes  or  dogs  :  only  by  such
means  can  they  build  up  some  rude  forms
of speech, some notions of supernatural
guidance,  some  account  of  the  order  of  the
surrounding  world,  some  customs  of  mutual
intercourse. Yet the connecting links of
their reflection hardly reach beyond the
immediate needs and promptings of their
rudimentary life. With other tribes the
accumulation  of  knowledge,  and  its  rearrange-
ment and  co-ordination  by  reflection,  are  the
results  of  a  long  and  arduous  struggle  in  the
course  of  barbaric  epochs. It  is  only  com-
paratively late,  in  a  civilized  state  of  society,
that reflective speculation masters every
branch  of  knowledge  by  the  help  of  science
and harmonizes the different sciences by
comprehensive  philosophy. And  as  a  primi-
tive savage  infinitely  excels  animals  through
rudimentary  reflection,  civilized  man  stands


12  COMMON-SENSE IN  LAW

high  above  the  savage  by  the  help  of  scientific
and  philosophical  speculation.  Instead  of
naively  responding  to  primary  needs,  he
surveys  and  summarizes  the  experience  of
innumerable  lives  of  toil  and  wisdom.  The
barbarian  works  out  the  forms  of  speech  in
order  to  communicate  with  his  neighbours ;
the  modern  linguist  analyzes  the  structure
of  language  and  the  laws  of  its  formation ;
the  barbarian  worships  mysterious  agencies  in
nature ;  the  modern  student  of  religion  tries  to
account  for  the  evolution  of  myth  and  sacrifice,
for  the  mutual  influence  of  creed  and  morals,
for  the  growth  of  Church  organization.

In  the  same  way,  in  contrast  to  the  simple
rules  and  divisions  of  positive  law  which
stretch  across  the  history  of  all  nations,
there  arises  a  science  of  law,  a  jurisprudence
which  aims  at  discovering  the  general  prin-
ciples underlying  legal  enactments  and  judicial
decisions.  It  speculates  on  the  processes  of
thought  which  take  place  in  the  minds  of
legislators,  judges,  pleaders  and  parties.  This
theory  of  law  enables  men  to  frame  and  use
their  laws  deliberately  and  scientifically,
instead  of  producing  them  more  or  less  at
random  under  the  stress  of  circumstances.
The  study  of  jurisprudence  is  therefore  by


SOCIAL RULES  13

no  means  a  mere  expedient  of  the  schools,
contrived  in  order  to  introduce  beginners  to
the  terms  and  principal  distinctions  of  their
art,  though  of  course  jurisprudence  does  help
in  this  respect  while  on  its  way  towards  the
solution  of  scientific  problems.  Nor  does
our  study  exist  chiefly  for  the  purpose  of
classifying  and  cataloguing  scattered  notices
as  to  rules  and  remedies  :  the  most  perfectly
systematized  chapters  and  paragraphs  of  a
code  would  not  render  a  general  theory  of
law  superfluous,  for  the  prime  consideration  is
not  so  much  to  establish  the  sequence  of  laws
as  to  discover  their  rational  interdependence
and  ultimate  significance.  For  the  intricate
maze  of  a  common  laAv  which,  like  the  Anglo-
American,  is  based  on  judicial  decisions,  the
help  rendered  by  jurisprudential  classification
is  especially  welcome,  nay,  necessary;  but
even  apart  from  that,  a  theory  of  jurisprudence
is  needed  to  strengthen  and  complete  scat-
tered arguments  by  treating  them  as  parts  of  a
coherent  body  of  legal  thought.  Observations
and  rules  which  may  seem  casual  and  arbitrary
when  memorialized  for  practice  obtain  their
justification  or  call  forth  criticism  when  ex-
amined in  the  light  of  a  general  theory.
2.  It  is  usual  for  writers  on  jurisprudence


14  COMMON-SENSE IN LAW

to  begin  with  a  definition  of  the  topic  they
propose  to  discuss,  namely,  law.  But  such
definitions  given  at  the  very  outset  have
this  inconvenience,  that  they  are,  as  it  were,
imposed  on  the  readers,  who  as  yet  have
only  vague  ideas  on  the  subject  and  therefore
are  bound  to  accept  more  or  less  passively
what  is  told  them  in  a  dogmatic  manner.
Moreover,  a  definition  of  law  is  by  no  means
easy  to  give :  many  have  been  suggested
from  time  to  time,  and  it  is  only  after  careful
consideration  that  one  is  justified  in  selecting
from  the  number.  It  seems  more  advisable
to  proceed  in  a  different  manner — ^to  clear
the  way  for  a  definition  by  narrowing  gradu-
ally the  scope  of  the  inquiry,  first  determining
the  class  to  which  the  subject  belongs,  and
then  marking  the  particulars  of  the  species
under  discussion.

It  is  evident  that  legal  arrangements  are
a  variety  of  social  organization,  and  that
therefore  jurisprudence  is  one  of  the  branches
of  social  science.  Man  is  an  essentially
social  being.  Social  intercourse  is  to  him  a
dictate  of  nature,  because  he  cannot  satisfy
his  wants  as  an  isolated  individual ;  if  left
to  himself,  he  is,  as  Aristotle  has  put  it,
not self-sufficient. By joining a wife he


SOCIAL RULES  15

raises  a  family;  by  joining  his  neighbours
in  the  union  of  the  village  he  provides
for  the  simple  requirements  of  economic
co-operation;  by  joining  fellow-citizens  he
helps  to  build  up  a  state  which  protects  him
against  enemies  and  enables  him  to  achieve
intellectual  and  moral  progress.  We  can
go  a  step  further  :  if  social  intercourse  is  a
requirement  of  men's  nature,  order  of  some
kind  is  a  necessary  condition  of  social  inter-
course. If  a  man  profits  at  the  expense  of
his  neighbour  by  snatching  away  his  bread,  it
^vill  be  difficult  to  establish  a  community
of  interests  or  any  amicable  intercourse
between  them.  It  is  only  when  certain  rules
of  conduct  intervene  to  settle  the  normal
behaviour  of  men  in  the  exchange  of  com-
modities, in  the  relations  of  the  sexes,  or
in  the  regulation  of  services,  that  social  inter-
course becomes  regular  and  continuous.

There  are  thus  certain  initial  requirements
set  to  those  who  take  part  in  the  association  ;
they  ought  not  to  hurt  each  other,  to  take  un-
due advantage  of  each  other,  to  act  as  if  their
private  wills  and  pleasures  were  everything
and  the  wills  and  interests  of  their  neighbours
nothing.  Even  when  two  persons  join  socially
for  the  simple  purpose  of  playing  a  game  of


16  COMMON-SENSE IN LAW

tennis  or  of  chess,  they  must  conform  to
certain  rules  in  their  contest  if  they  wish
to  achieve  their  immediate  end.  The  skill
or  force  displayed  constitutes  the  substantive
or  material  part  of  the  game;  the  rules  as  to
moves  and  scoring  constitute  the  formal
frame  of  this  kind  of  intercourse.  As  regards
married  |>eople,  or  the  shareholders  of  a
joint  stock  company,  or  the  citizens  of  a
state,  the  relations  involved  are  much  more
complex  and  enduring,  but  they  are  substan-
tially of  the  same  kind.

It  is  evident  that  laws  take  their  place
among  the  rules  of  conduct  which  ensure
social  order  and  intercourse.  Therefore  juris-
prudence appears  among  social  sciences  within
the  section  of  so-called  moral  science.

3.  Human  thought  may  take  up  one  of  two
possible  attitudes  in  regard  to  facts  observed
by  it :  it  may  either  watch  their  relations  from
the  outside  and  tryto  connect  them  with  each
other  as  causes  and  effects,  or  else  it  may
consider  them  in  relation  to  man's  conscious
action,  and  estimate  the  connection  between
ends  and  means.  The  first  point  of  view  is
that  of  natural  science.  The  second  point  of
view  is  peculiar  to  moral  science.  Let  us
develop  this  distinction  somewhat  more  fully.


SOCIAL RULES  17

As  soon  as  we  turn  our  attention  to  moral
science,  we  perceive  two  fundamental  notions
which  form  the  peculiar  character  of  this
sphere  of  study  and  place  it  in  distinct
opposition  to  our  conceptions  of  surrounding
external  nature,  namely,  the  notions  of  will
and  of  reasonable  aim.  Every  one  of  us  is
conscious  that  his  acts  are  produced  by  his
will,  in  the  sense  that  he  has  to  make  up
his  mind  to  choose  one  of  many  possible
courses  of  action ;  and  this  internal  experience
is  opposed  to  the  other  way  of  looking  at
events  as  governed  by  the  binding  necessity
of  natural  laws.  If  a  connection  is  established
between  positive  and  negative  electric  ele-
ments, a  current  will  be  produced,  and  this
event  will  appear  as  the  application  of  a  law
of  cause  infallibly  working  under  certain
given  conditions.  But  when  an  engineer  sets
about  to  arrange  an  electric  battery,  every
one  of  his  acts  in  the  process  is  the  result  of
conscious  volition,  and  may  be  directed  to  a
different  end  or  withheld  altogether  at  any
particular  moment  :  the  will  of  the  engineer
is,  of  course,  influenced  by  certain  causes  in
a  definite  direction,  but  every  single  act  of
this  will  presents  itself  as  the  expression  of
conscious  choice.

B


18  COMMON-SENSE IN LAW

Though  the  electric  current  is  caused  by  a
certain  combination  of  chemical  elements,
it  is  brought  about  as  an  end  by  a  series  of
conscious  volitions  in  the  engineer's  mind.
The  consciousness  of  a  moral  man  is  further
characterized  by  its  being  reasonable,  that
is,  by  its  submission  to  judgment  according
to  logical  and  moral  standards.  The  applica-
tion of  the  logical  standard  does  not  admit  of
any  doubt  or  dispute.  Whatever  may  be
my  likings  and  wishes,  I  have  to  conform  to
certain  logical  rules  in  judging  of  facts.  No
amount  of  selfish  appetite  will  change  four
apples  into  forty  for  me,  or  alter  the  rule
that  two  and  two  make  four.  But  reasonable
consciousness  goes  deeper.  No  amount  of
selfish  desire  can  conceal  from  my  reason  that
what  is  objectionable  to  me  is  objectionable
to  my  neighbour,  that  it  is  as  bad  to  kill  or
rob  as  to  be  killed  or  robbed.  There  is  a
story  that  a  savage,  on  being  asked  what
was  the  difference  between  right  and  wrong,
answered  :  "  It  is  right  when  I  take  my  neigh-
bour's wife,  but  it  is  wrong  when  he  takes
mine."  I  cannot  help  suspecting  that  this
statement  of  fact  is  incorrect  and  unfair  to
the  intelligence  of  the  savage.  No  doubt
rules  which  we  hold  sacred  when  we  ourselves


SOCIAL RULES  19

are  concerned  are  often  infringed  by  us  :  but
those  who  violate  such  rules  become  conscious
of  an  antagonism  between  their  reason,  which
condemns  the  act,  and  their  passions,  which
prompted  it.  A  case  of  conscience  arises,
and  this  contradiction  between  what  happens
and  what  ought  to  happen  is  at  the  bottom
of  all  human  morality.  "  The  ought  expresses
a  kind  of  necessity,  a  kind  of  connection  of
actions  with  their  grounds  or  reasons,  such
as  is  to  be  found  nowhere  else  in  the  whole
natural  world.  For  of  the  natural  world
our  understanding  can  know  nothing  except
what  is,  what  has  been,  or  what  will  be.
We  cannot  say  that  anything  in  it  ought  to
be  other  than  it  actually  was,  is,  or  will  be.
Li  fact,  so  long  as  we  are  considering  the
course  of  nature,  the  ought  has  no  meaning
whatever.  We  can  as  little  inquire  what  ought
to  happen  in  nature  as  we  can  inquire  what
properties  a  circle  ought  to  have  "  (Kant).

4.  The  object  of  laws  is  primarily  to  supply
rules  of  conduct,  rules  as  to  what  ought  to
be  done  and  what  ought  to  be  abstained  from.
Laws  are,  of  course,  not  the  only  rules  of
conduct  which  govern  men's  actions.  People
conform  also  to  fashions,  to  manners  and
customs,  to  conventional  standards,  to  pre-


20  COMMON-SENSE IN  LAW

cepts  of  morality.  A  man  nowadays  would
hardly  care  to  wear  a  powdered  wig  and  a
three-cornered  hat,  though  he  is  not  positively
forbidden  to  do  so.,  A  lady  usually  puts  on
mourning  after  the  death  of  her  husband  :
she  considers  the  black  attire  and  the  veil
to  be  prescribed  to  her  by  public  opinion  :
and  if  she  chose  to  disregard  the  sentiments
of  others,  unpleasant  consequences  would
follow — ^reprobation,  hostile  comments,  and
perhaps  the  snapping  of  social  ties  with
friends  and  relations.  As  for  social  custom,
it  may  not  be  absolutely  necessary  to  greet
your  acquaintances  when  you  meet  them  in  the
street,  or  to  call  on  them  occasionally,  but
it  is  customary  to  do  so,  and  a  person  careless
or  casual  in  such  matters  is  sure  to  meet
with  some  retribution.  Conventional  stan-
dards are  chiefly  set  up  in  connection  with
the  habits  and  manners  of  certain  classes
and  professions ;  they  are  narrower  than  the
common  code  of  morality,  but  they  are
intended  to  be  followed  by  the  members  of
the  particular  groups  concerned.  Lawyers
and  medical  men  recognize  special  obligations
in  regard  to  professional  secrets  and  pro-
fessional conduct ;  mediaeval  chivalry  imposed
on  members of  the  noblesse  very  stringent


SOCIAL RULES  21

rules  of  courtesy ;  and  even  in  our  democratic
age  the  code  of  gentlemanly  behaviour  and
honour  demands  a  considerably  greater  refine-
ment than  the  ordinary  rules  of  honest3%
Honesty  itself,  as  well  as  truthfulness,  kind-
ness, pity,  etc.,  are  moral  obligations  enforced
partly  by  public  opinion  and  partly  by  con-
science. They  are  clear  expressions  of  the
notion  of  duty,  the  precept  of  the  "  ought,"
and  a  person  known  to  be  a  liar  or  a  ruffian
is  certain  to  excite  feelings  of  repulsion  and
hostility  among  his  fellow-men.

The  rules  just  described  present  a  kind  of
scale  in  which  each  of  the  steps  supposes
stricter  obligations  than  that  preceding  it.
Customary  usage  is  more  pressing  than
fashion;  a  conventional  standard  is  more
imperative  than  customary  usage ;  and  rules
of  morality  are  more  absolute  than  rules
suggested  by  a  conventional  standard.  Lastly,
legal  duties  may  be  said  to  be  more  obligatory
than  moral  duties.  We  notice  also  various
combinations  of  personal  conscience,  instinc-
tive obedience  and  outside  pressure.  In
fashion,  the  element  of  personal  taste  is  still
very  prominent  and  the  sanction  of  outside
pressure  relatively  slight,  evidently  because
the  aim  to  be  attained  by  following  its  dictates


22  COMMON-SENSE IN LAW

is  not  of  great  importance. People  want  to
look  like  everybody  else,  or  like  the  better
sort,  or  a  trifle  finer  still ;  but  even  if  they  do
not  succeed  the  failure  is  not  very  damaging  :
in  such  cases,  people  wear,  as  it  were,  a  self-
imposed  uniform,  and  the  characteristic  trait
exhibited  is  the  kind  of  mimicry  which  induces
men  to  select  the  colours  and  the  cut  of  their
clothes  not  in  an  individual,  but  in  a  gregari-
ous way. Customary  usage  goes  further  :  it  is
not  a  question  of  looks,  but  of  behaviour,  an
expression  of supposed  feelings, of  respect,
friendliness,  affection,  protection  and  the  like.
There  is  an  aim  in  all  these  practices  :  they
are  intended  to  make  the  wheels  of  social
intercourse  run  easily,  to  smoothe  the  rela-
tions of  acquaintances,  friends,  superiors  and
inferiors by benevolence and mutual con-
sideration; they have to be acquired by
teaching  and  habit,  but  ultimately  they  be-
come almost instinctive. In the case of
conventional standards the aims set by a
community  are  very  conspicuous  :  the  chief
object is to fence off a particular group
from  outsiders,  and  to  impress  certain  duties
on its members. Conventional notions of
this  kind  may  grow  to  be  a  kind  of  secret
doctrine, e.g.  in  freemasonry. Outside  pres-


SOCIAL RULES  23

sure  increases  correspondingly.  A  person
disregarding  the  rules  of  the  group  will
eventually  be  expelled  from  it.  As  to  moral
duties,  their  social  importance  is  manifest ;
clearly  if  the  whole  or  the  majority  of  a
given  society  should  be  made  up  of  liars
and  robbers  there  would  be  small  chance
for  credit,  security  and  well-being.  On  the
other  hand,  however  coarse  a  man's  moral
nature  may  be,  he  generally  recognizes  moral
rules  in  so  far  as  they  are  likely  to  guarantee
his  own  interests;  and  it  is  very  difficult  to
suppose  that  one  who  is  in  the  habit  of  pro-
tecting his  own  property  against  thieves
would  himself  turn  to  stealing  without  an
uneasy  sense  of  contradiction  in  his  conscience.
5.  The  close  relationship  between  moral  and
legal  notions  is  striking.  No  wonder  ancient
thinkers,  Aristotle  for  example,  included  the
discussion  of  the  elements  of  law  in  their
treatment  of  ethics;  and  for  Socrates  and
Plato  the  analysis  of  right  was  inseparable
from  the  idea  of  justice.  Nor  is  it  a  mere
chance  that  in  all  European  languages,  except
the  English,  the  terms  for  law  and  right
coincide — jus,  Recht,  droit,  diritto,  derecho,
pravo — all  mean  legal  order,  general  rule  of
law, notion of  right on one side, and  the


24  COMMON -SENSE IN LAW

concrete  right  asserted  by  an  individual  on
the  other.  In  English,  law  is  distinguished
from  right,  but  rights  are  based  on  law,  while
on  the  other  hand  the  opposition  of  right
to  wrong  accentuates  the  ethical  aspect  of
the  notion.  Right  is  that  which  we  find
correct,  adequate  to  a  certain  standard  set
up  by  our  judgment ;  wrong  is  that  which
is  opposed  to  it.  The  proposition  that  two
and  two  make  five  is  wrong  according  to  an
arithmetical  standard;  to  repay  a  benefactor
by  ingratitude  is  wrong  according  to  a  moral
standard ;  to  refuse  wages  to  a  labourer  may
be  wrong  according  to  a  legal  standard,  and
is  certainly  wrong  from  a  moral  point  of
view,  that  is,  in  the  judgment  of  unprejudiced
men  and  of  one's  own  conscience.

Thus  it  is  certain  that  law  cannot  be
divorced  from  morality  in  so  far  as  it  clearly
contains,  as  one  of  its  elements,  the  notion
of  right  to  which  the  moral  quality  of  justice
corresponds.  This  principle  was  recognized
by  the  great  Roman  jurist,  Ulpian,  in  his
famous  definition  of  justice  :  "  To  live  honour-
ably, not  to  harm  your  neighbour,  to  give
every one  his due."  ^ All three  rules are,

^  Honeste  vivere,  alterum  non  Icedere,  suum  cuiqice
tribuere.


SOCIAL RULES  25

of  course,  moral  precepts,  but  they  can  all
be  made  to  apply  to  law  in  one  way  or  an-
other. The  first,  for  instance,  which  seems
pre-eminently  ethical,  inasmuch  as  it  lays
down  rules  for  individual  conduct,  implies
some  legal  connotation.  A  man  has  to  shape
his  life, in  an  honourable  and  dignified  manner
— one  might  add,  as  a  tmthful  and  law-abiding
citizen.  The  juridical  counterparts  of  ethical
rules  are  still  more  noticeable  in  the  last  two
rules  of  the  definition.  The  command  not  to
harm  one's  fellow-men  may  be  taken  to  be
a  general  maxim  for  the  law  of  crime  and
tort,  while  the  command  to  give  every  one
his  due  may  be  considered  as  the  basis  of
private  law.  And  this  last  precept  is  cer-
tainly not  concerned  with  morals  alone  :  the
individual  is  not  required  merely  to  confer
a  benefit  upon  his  neighbour,  but  to  render
to  him  that  which  belongs  to  him  as  a  matter
of  right.

The  real  difficulty  arises  when  we  try  to
draw  a  definite  line  of  divison  between  moral
and  legal  rules,  between  ethical  and  juridical
standards.  There  are  those  who  would  co-
ordinate the  two  notions  on  the  pattern  of
the  relation  between  end  and  means.  They
look  upon  ethical  rules  as  determining  social


26  COMMON-SENSE IN LAW

ideals,  the  principles  of  goodness,  virtue,
honour,  generosity,  for  which  men  ought  to
strive  in  their  personal  conduct,  and  the  aims
of  development,  civilization,  progress,  per-
fection, which  society  at  large  ought  to  set
before  itself.  Law  and  laws  according  to
this  theory  would  be  the  conditions  devised
for  the  attainment  of  such  ideals.  But  such
a  definition  becomes  so  wide  that  it  includes
potentially  every  case  where  social  influence
can  be  exerted,  and  one  loses  the  thread  of
distinction  between  moral  and  legal  rules.
Other  jurists  have  therefore  based  a  dis-
tinction on  the  contrast  between  theory  and
practice,  or  rather  between  the  practicable
and  the  impracticable.  In  their  views  law
is  morality  so  far  as  morality  can  be  enforced
by  definite  social  action ;  in  other  words,  it
is  the  minimum  of  morality  formulated  and
adopted  by  a  given  society.

This  again  is  not  satisfactory.  Many  legal
rules  have  nothing  to  do  with  moral  precepts.
If,  as  the  result  of  the  law  of  inheritance,  the
eldest  son  should  have  his  father's  estate  and
the  younger  brother  be  cut  off  with  a  scanty
equipment ;  or  if  a  statute  makes  the  sale
of  tobacco  a  state  monopoly  :  such  laws  are
certainly  not  suggested  by  ethical  motives.


SOCIAL RULES  27

Besides,  even  when  legal  rules  are  connected
directly  or  indirectly  with  an  appeal  to  right,
it  does  not  follow  that  they  are  necessarily
framed  in  consequence  of  moral  impulses.
The  laws  as  to  bills  of  exchange  or  pay-
ment of  rent  are  dictated  by  commercial
practice  or  by  established  vested  interests
rather  than  by  moral  considerations.  In
short,  numberless  aims  foreign  to  the  ethical
standard  play  a  part  in  legislation  and  in
legal  evolution :  national  interests,  class  in-
fluences, considerations  of  political  efficiency,
and  so  forth.  It  would  be  a  one-sided  con-
ception indeed  to  regard  laws  as  the  minimum
of  moral  precepts.

One  thing  seems  clear  at  the  outset :  in  the
case  of  legal  obligations,  we  have  to  deal  with
precepts  of  a  stricter  and  more  compulsory
nature  than  moral  duties.  It  is  obvious
that  in  many  cases  the  breach  of  a  moral
obligation  does  not  directly  involve  material
retribution,  except  perhaps  in  the  form  of
loss  of  good  opinion.  Many  a  rascal  takes  his
way  through  life  without  being  made  to  answer
for  his  sins  if  he  takes  care  not  to  infringe  the
prescriptions  of  the  law.  It  remains  to  be
seen  on  what  grounds  this  narrower  sphere  of
iegal  compulsion  is  marked  off.


CHAPTER II

LEGAL RULES

1.  When  we  speak  of  a  minimum  of  moral
order  and  of  moral  rules  as  contents  of  law,
we  imply  a  principle  which  has  been  widely
used  for  the  purpose  of  defining  law,  namely,
the  principle  of  coercion.  If  a  minimum  of
duties  is  considered  as  necessary  for  the
existence  of  society,  it  must  be  obtained  at
all  costs,  and,  if  necessary,  by  the  exertion  of
force.  Many  jurists  hold  therefore  that  law
is  an  enforceable  rule  of  conduct,  in  opposition
to  ethical  rules  of  conduct,  which  are  based
on  voluntary  submission.  This  line  of  dis-
tinction has  the  merit  of  being  simple  and
clear  :  let  us  see  whether  it  leads  to  an  ex-
haustive delimitation.  The  doctrine  asserts,
when  stated  more  fully,  that  every  legal  rule
falls  into  two  parts  :  first,  a  command,  stating
the  legal  requirement;  second,  a  sanction
providing  that  if  the  command  is  not  obeyed,
force  will  be  employed  against  the  recalcitrant
person.  Force  may  be  used  in  different  ways  :
sometimes  in  the  form  of  execution  ;  here  the

28


LEGAL RULES  29

act  which  the  individual  refuses  to  perform
is  done  against  his  will  by  the  executive
officers  of  the  law  :  thus  if  a  man  refuses  to
pay  a  debt,  the  sheriff  will  take  his  money
or  his  furniture  to  satisfy  the  creditor.  Some-
times instead  of  a  direct  recovery  or  execution,
the  person  injured  is  allowed  to  claim  damages^
as  in  the  case  of  a  breach  of  promise  of
marriage  or  of  injury  to  reputation  through
libel.  Sometimes  the  sanction  operates  by
way  of  punishment ;  a  person  who  has  stolen
a  purse  or  broken  into  a  house  and  abstracted
valuable  property  will  be  put  into  prison
whether  the  objects  stolen  or  abstracted  are
recoverable  or  not.  Lastly,  the  sanction  may
consist  in  the  fact  that  unless  certain  rules
are  observed,  an  intended  result  cannot  be
achieved.  If  a  person  desires  to  make  a
will,  but  disregards  the  law  which  requires
that  such  an  instrument,  to  be  valid,  must  be
attested  by  at  least  two  witnesses,  his  wishes
as  to  the  disposal  of  his  property  after  death
will  have  no  legal  effect.  It  may  be  said,
therefore,  that  this  legal  rule  is  supported  by
the  sanction  of  nullity.

If  the  object  of  law  is  to  coerce  people  into
submission  to  certain  rules,  the  question
inevitably  arises  :  who  is  to  wield  the  power


30  COMMON-SENSE IN LAW

of  coercion  and  to  formulate  rules  provided
with  the  sanction  of  force  ?  An  attempt  to
answer  this  question  is  supplied  by  a  com-
monly accepted  definition  of  law,  which  mns
thus  :  A  law  is  a  rule  of  conduct  imposed  and
enforced  by  the  sovereign.  This  definition
proceeds  historically  from  the  famous  teaching
of  Hobbes.  He  contended  that  men  are  by
nature  enemies  one  to  another,  and  that  the
original  state  of  mankind  was  a  war  of  every
one  against  every  one  else.  The  intolerable
violence  and  anxiety  of  such  a  state  was
removed  by  a  complete  renunciation  on  the
part  of  all  individuals  of  their  personal
freedom  of  action  and  by  the  creation  of  an
artificial  being,  i.e.  the  State,  the  Leviathan
in  whose  body  every  one  is  merged  as  a
particle  or  member,  and  whose  sovereign  will
governs  every  individual  with  unrestricted
authority.  Hobbes  lived  at  the  time  of  the
great  rebellion  of  the  seventeenth  century,
and  the  fierce  conflicts  of  the  Civil  War
imbued  him  with  a  craving  for  order  at  any
price.  He  thought  the  best  means  of  securing
this  order  was  to  submit  to  the  despotic  rule
of  a  monarch.  But  the  absolute  power  of  a
Parliament  could  be  made  to  satisfy  the
definition  equally  well. It  has,  for  instance,


LEGAL RULES  31

been  said  of  the  Parliament  of  England  that
it  may  do  anything  except  tm'n  a  man  into
a  woman,  or  vice  versa.  It  is  not  the  manner
in  which  laws  are  elaborated,  but  their  origin
in  the  will  of  the  persons  possessed  of  public
authority  that  is  material  to  the  theory  in
question.  Hobbes'  teaching  was  accepted  by
Austin,  and,  through  Austin,  by  most  English
jurists.  Nor  are  Continental  writers  wanting
to  support  it.  As  for  customary  law,  which
is  generally  supposed  to  grow  slowly  out  of
public  opinion,  jurists  who  follow  Hobbes  and
Austin  account  for  it  by  saying  that  so  far
as  it  has  any  legal  application  custom  must
be  accepted  by  the  State.  The  objection  that
English  common  law  is  to  a  great  extent
created  not  by  direct  commands  of  the
government,  but  by  pronouncements  of  the
judges,  has  been  met  by  a  modification  of
Austin's  formula  :  "  Law  is  the  aggregate  of
rules  recognized  and  acted  on  by  courts  of
justice."  But  this  modification  does  not
change  the  fundamental  principle  of  the
doctrine,  since  it  is  clear  that  courts  of
justice  derive  their  binding  force  from  the
State.  The  direct  purpose  for  which  judges
act  is,  after  all,  the  application  of  law,  and
therefore they cannot be said to exercise


S->  COMMON-SENSE IN LAW

independent  legislative  functions.  A  defini-
tion of  law  starting  from  their  action  would
therefore  be  somewhat  like  the  definition  of
a  motor-car  as  a  vehicle  usually  driven  by  a
chauffeur.  The  difference  between  the  decree
of  an  absolute  monarch,  a  statute  elaborated
by  Parliament,  and  a  legal  principle  formulated
by  judges,  is  technical  and  not  fundamental  :
all  three  proceed  from  the  authority  of  a
sovereign.  We  shall  have  to  treat  of  the
action  of  the  courts  at  some  length  when  we
come  to  consider  the  sources  of  law.

Let  us  now  turn  back  to  the  original  and
simpler  definition  :  "  Law  is  a  rule  of  conduct
imposed  and  enforced  by  the  sovereign."  The
application  of  the  theory  may  be  illustrated
as  follows  :

There  is  my  individual  will,  A,  which  I
should  naturally  follow  if  left  entirely  free.
But  as  there  are  numbers  of  other  individual
wills,  B,  C,  D,  etc.,  some  one  predominant
will  must  intervene  to  regulate  all  these
divergent  tendencies.  A  general  compromise
must  be  effected  and  one  sovereign  will,  say
X,  set  up.  It  may  be  that  I  am  in  a  position
to  occupy  this  vantage-ground,  and  in  so  far
my  will,  A,  will  be  equal  to  X :  thus  the  will
of  a  Cromwell  or  of  a  Napoleon  was  the  will


LEGAL RULES  83

of  the  State  to  which  all  other  private  wills
had  to  conform.  It  is  to  be  noted  that  the
theory  approaches  law  only  from  its  formal
side.  It  does  not  admit  of  any  examination
of  the  contents  of  legal  propositions  or  of
any  inquiry  into  the  character  of  the  political
power  assumed  to  be  the  sovereign  authority
in  the  State.  Law  is  a  vehicle  which  may
carry  any  kind  of  goods.  A  harsh,  unjust
enactment  is  as  valid  a  rule  as  the  most
righteous  law.

2.  It  is  not  difficult  to  discern  the  weak
points  of  this  doctrine.  Surely,  as  has  been
urged  by  Sir  H.  Maine,  the  legal  process
cannot  wait  until  a  community  has  definitely
established  sovereign  authority  before  it  will
recognize  the  existence  of  laws.  There  have
been  and  there  still  are  many  political  com-
binations among  barbaric  or  half-civilized
nations  in  which  it  would  be  impossible  to
ascertain  exactly  where  sovereignty  resides
and  whether  we  have  to  deal  with  a  state,
a  tribe,  a  society  under  religious  authority,
or  a  society  under  concurrent  authorities.
How  shall  we  apply  Austin's  formula  to  the
Jews  ruled  by  the  Talmud,  or  to  the  mediaeval
nations  of  Western  Europe  distracted  by  their
allegiance  to  King  or  Emperor  on  the  one


34  COMMON-SENSE IN LAW

side,  and  to  the  Pope  on  the  other  ?  It  will
not  help  us  to  seek  refuge  in  the  contention
that  all  these  antiquities  are  of  small  moment
in  comparison  with  the  great  scientific  juris-
prudence of  the  modern  State.  Some  of  the
most  fundamental  of  our  laws — e.g.  those
which  regulate  marriage,  succession,  testa-
ments, land  tenure,  etc. — were  evolved  during
this  very  period  :  that  is  why  legal  historians
have  so  much  to  do  with  the  study  of  antiquity.
Indeed,  I  wonder  what  meaning  ought  to  be
attached,  from  the  Austinian  point  of  view,
to  a  body  of  rules  like  the  Canon  Law — surely
a  sufficiently  important  department  of  legal
study  ?  We  cannot  disregard  the  roots  of
legal  institutions  merely  because  they  happen
to  be  embedded  in  antiquity.  But  it  is  not
only  in  ancient  societies  that  we  find  legal
rules  which  cannot  be  considered  as  the  com-
mands of  a  political  sovereign  :  the  same  is
often  true  to-day.  For  instance,  it  would
be  rather  difficult  to  say  where  sovereignty,
in  the  sense  of  habitual  predominance,  resides
in  a  modern  commonwealth  like  that  of  the
United  States  of  America.  Not  in  Congress,
because  its  enactments  may  be  overruled  by
the  Supreme  Court  as  being  contrary  to  the
Constitution. Not in the Supreme Court,


LEGAL RULES  35

because  its  decisions  are  judicial  and  not
governmental.  Not  in  the  people  at  large,
because  it  is  not  a  juridical,  but  a  social  and
historical  entity.  Not  in  the  Conventions
for  the  reform  of  the  Constitution,  because
they  operate  only  on  very  exceptional  occasions
and  are  fettered  in  making  their  decisions  by
very  restrictive  rules  as  to  majorities  :  and  a
sovereign  trammelled  in  this  way  would  be  a
contradiction  in  terms.  The  truth  seems  to
be  that  the  basis  of  law  is  provided  not
by  one-sided  command,  but  by  agreement.
Again,  there  exist  within  states  many  social
bodies  which  possess  a  certain  autonomy.
Since  the  Reformation  and  the  partial  separa-
tion of  Church  and  State,  political  sovereigns
have  to  a  great  extent  been  obliged  to  accept
the  legal  organization  of  Churches  as  estab-
lished facts.  The  Church  of  England  has
been  reformed  outwardly  by  Acts  of  Parlia-
ment, but  he  would  be  a  bold  man  who  would
assert  that  its  external  organization  is  entirely
due  to  the  decrees  of  the  political  sovereign.
English  ecclesiastical  institutions  certainly
owe  a  great  deal  both  to  the  Canon  Law  of
Catholicism  and  to  the  Church  organizations
of  Luther  and  Calvin.  And  what  of  the
religious  groups  which  do  not  "  conform  "  ?


86  COMMON-SENSE IN LAW

Is  their  position  to  be  defined  merely  from
the  point  of  view  of  legal  tolerance  ?  As  a
matter  of  fact  concessions  have  been  made
repeatedly  to  communities  which  have  exerted
the  strongest  possible  discipline  over  their
members,  who  have  strenuously  maintained
it  even  in  opposition  to  the  commands  of  the
political  sovereign.  The  formation  of  autono-
mous spheres  of  law  within  the  Churches  is
only  one  example  of  a  widespread  process.
Local  circles  as  well  as  professional  unions
may  create  separate  rules  of  law ;  the  mediaeval
law  of  Germany,  for  instance,  was  particularly
wealthy  in  examples  of  such  growths  :  there
were  special  laws  of  the  peasantry,  of  the
townspeople,  of  crafts  and  guilds,  of  feudal
societies,  etc.,  and  the  dependence  of  all  these
formations  on  the  superior  law  of  principalities
and  of  the  empire  was  very  lax.  In  England,
such  particularistic  tendencies  never  got  the
upper  hand,  but  still  the  customs  of  rural
townships  and  boroughs  arose  from  a  kind  of
municipal  autonomy  and  had  to  be  recognized
to  a  large  extent  by  early  common  law.
Nowadays  municipal  by-laws,  statutes  and
customs  of  corporations,  associations  and
trade  unions  of  all  sorts  arise  in  abundance.
They  are,  of  course,  subordinated  to  the  laws


LEGAL RULES  37

of the kingdom as interpreted by royal
courts, but the  hierarchy of legal validity
does not affect  their  origin and  contents  ;
they  are  produced  not  by  the  Commonwealth,
but  by  societies included  in  it ;  they  have
their own sanctions (fines, curtailment of
privileges,  exclusion) ;  and  the  ultimate  com-
promise with  the  law  of  the  Commonwealth
is  at  bottom  the  outcome  of  a  struggle  for
power  between  central  and  local  authorities.
The  results  may  differ  in  various  epochs,  and!
it  is  by  no  means  certain  that  after  a  period  f
of  gradual  centralization  of  law  by  the  State, !
a  movement  in  the  opposite  direction  of  local  |
and  professional  autonomy  may  not  set  in. |

If  the  notion  of  sovereignty  contained  in
Austin's  definition  does  not  bear  close  scrutiny,
no  more  does  the  rule  of  conduct,  as  under-
stood by  him  and  by  his  followers.  It  is
essentially  a  command  ;  and  it  may  well  be
asked  whether  law  is  binding  only  on  persons
who  receive  the  command  or  on  those  who
give  it  as  well.  The  second  part  of  every
legal  rule,  its  sanction,  is  an  appeal  to  force.
In  the  forging  of  the  links  of  a  chain  of
sanctions,  it  is  contended,  we  must  come  to
a  point  when  arbitrary  power  remains  master
of  the  ground. A  Parliament  is  manifestly  not


38  COMMON-SENSE IN LAW

subject  to  the  punitive  action  of  the  Courts ;
and  in  the  same  way  in  any  monarchical
country,  the  King  is  not  amenable  to  law,
"  can  do  no  wrong."  If  coercion  be  the
essence  of  law,  then  law  is  binding  only  on
subjects  and  on  subordinates,  while  the
highest  persons  in  the  State  are  above  and
outside  the  law\

But  if  this  is  so,  why  should  common
opinion  lay  so  much  stress  on  the  opposi-
tion between  right  and  might  ?  And  why
should  jurists  trouble  about  Constitutional
Law  ?  Evidently  what  is  binding  on  the
subject  by  the  strength  of  ultimate  physical
coercion  seems  to  be  binding  on  the  sovereign
by  the  strength  of  a  moral  sanction  :  even  if
the  King  can  do  no  wrong  in  the  sense  that
he  is  not  amenable  to  punishment  by  his  own
Courts,  yet  he  is  bound  to  respect  the  laws,
because  he  has  recognized  them  and  pledged
his  faith  to  follow  them.

The  German  Emperor,  for  instance,  is
enjoined  by  el.  17  of  the  Constitution  of  the
Empire  to  promulgate  laws  enacted  by  the
Reichstag  and  confirmed  by  him;  he  is
forbidden  by  el.  II,  2  to  declare  war  without
the  consent  of  the  Reichstag ;  he  is  bound  by
cl.  12  and  13  to  summon  the  Reichstag  every


LEGAL RULES  39

year,  etc.  But  suppose  he  neglected  to  pro-
mulgate a  law,  or  declared  war  on  his  own
authority,  or  declined  to  summon  the  Reich-
stag to  its  yearly  session.  All  these  acts
would  obviously  be  done  in  infringement  of
legal  rules,  and  yet  there  would  be  no  direct
coercion  available  against  the  head  of  the
State.

These  objections  ought  to  make  us  realize
that  law  has  to  be  considered  not  merely  from
the  point  of  view  of  its  enforcement  by  the
Courts  :  it  depends  ultimately  on  recognition.
Such  recognition  is  a  distinctly  legal  fact,
although  the  enforcement  of  a  recognized
rule  may  depend  on  moral  restraint,  the  fear
of  public  opinion,  or,  eventually,  the  fear  of
a  popular  rising.

Another  difficulty  arises  from  the  position
of  international  law.  There  is  a  set  of  rules
recognized  by  the  most  powerful  and  civilized
commonwealths  of  mankind  and  productive
of  innumerable  consequences  in  practice :  and
yet  the  element  of  direct  coercion  is  absent
from  them.  There  is  no  other  coercive  force
to  ensure  the  maintenance  of  the  rule  that
the  Geneva  Cross  protects  a  hospital  from
destruction,  or  that  Dum-dum  bullets  cannot
be  used  in  warfare,  than  the  respect  of  civilized


40  COMMON-SENSE IN LAW

coninmnities  for  public  opinion  and  for  their
own  honour,  as  far  as  it  is  pledged  by  the  fact
of  their  having  signed  certain  conventions.  It
may  even  happen  that  when  very  material  in-
terests intervene,  many  obvious  rules  and  cus-
toms of  international  law  are  infringed ;  thus
the  rule  that  a  state  should  not  attack  powers
vnih  whom  it  is  at  peace  was  infringed  by
Great  Britain  when  Copenhagen  was  bom-
barded in  1807  for  fear  that  the  Danish  fleet
should  be  used  by  Napoleon.  Again,  Austria-
Hungary  the  other  day  turned  the  occupation
of  Bosnia  and  Herzegovina  into  annexation
without  obtaining  leave  from  the  signatories
of  the  Treaty  of  Berlin.  By  reason  of  this
absence  of  coercive  sanction  some  jurists
refuse  to  international  law  the  attributes  of
law  properly  so-called,  and  look  upon  it
merely  as  a  form  of  positive  morality.  This
is,  however,  going  much  too  far ;  international
legal  rules  carry  a  great  weight  of  practical
authority;  and  in  their  actual  content,  they
are  exactly  similar  to  ordinary  laws,  and  in
many  cases  have  nothing  to  do  with  ethics.
Take  the  rule  that  a  state  exercises  juris-
diction over  the  high  seas  within  three  miles
from  its  shores  :  how  does  this  differ  from
an ordinary rule of constitutional law?


LEGAL RULES  41

Clearly  not  in  its  essence,  though  perhaps  in
the  manner  of  its  formulation  and  enforcement.
The  inference  seems  to  be  that  international
law  is  truly  a  department  of  law  so  far  as  law
is  a  declaration  of  right,  but  that  it  is  peculiar
as  regards  the  element  of  sanction.  Li  this
respect  it  may  be  called  imperfect,  or  less  than
perfect  law.

One  more  characteristic  feature  should  be
mentioned  in  this  connection.  As  regards
the  enforcement  of  civil  liabilities,  law  is
powerless  to  provide  a  sanction  so  complete
as  to  amount  to  a  guarantee  against  injury
and  loss  :  it  can  do  no  more  than  intervene
on  behalf  of  the  party  claiming  a  right,  but
whether  the  claim  can  be  satisfied  or  not  will
in  numberless  cases  depend  on  circumstances
over  which  law  has  no  control.  Suppose  a
Court  has  awarded  heavy  damages  as  the
result  of  a  collision  in  the  road  by  which  you
have  suffered  bodily  injury ;  the  party  against
whom  the  decision  is  awarded  turns  out  to  be
a  person  of  small  means  entirely  incapable  of
paying  the  compensation.  Is  not  the  legal
rule  provided  with  incomplete  sanction  ?  Or
take  the  instance  of  the  responsibility  of
agents  of  a  Trade  Union  for  damages  inflicted
by  illegal  interference  with  your  right  to  hire


42  COMMON-SENSE IN LAW

workmen ;  are  you  sure  their  personal  liability
would  be  an  adequate  guarantee  against  your
suffering  heavy  losses  in  the  event  of  a  strike  ?
Hardly;  and  yet  the  rules  laid  down  by  law
in  such  cases  would  be  emphatic  and  clear,
though  provided  with  insufficient  sanction.

The  upshot  of  this  discussion  of  the  element
of  direct  coercion  seems  to  be  that,  though
commonly  present,  it  is  not  absolutely  neces-
sary to  constitute  a  legal  rule ;  and  that  while
we  may  look  upon  it  as  the  most  convenient
means  for  enforcing  law,  we  cannot  regard  it
as  the  essence  of  legal  relations.  Clearly  it
has  to  be  supplemented  by  restraints  based
on  personal  recognition  and  on  public  opinion.
Therefore  it  is  impossible  to  confine  laAv
within  the  terms  of  such  a  purely  formal
definition  as  is  involved  in  its  consideration
as  a  set  of  commands,  quite  apart  from  any
contents.  Law  aims  at  right  and  justice,
however  imperfectly  it  may  achieve  this  aim
in  particular  cases.  If  we  omitted  this
attribute  from  our  definition,  we  should  find
it  very  difficult  to  draw  the  line  between  a
law  and  any  kind  of  arbitrary  order  as  to
conduct,  e.g.  the  levying  of  regular  black-
mail by  a  criminal  association.  There  must
be a certain balance between justice and


LEGAL RULES  43

force  in  every  system  of  law;  and  therefore
it  is  impossible  to  give  a  definition  of  law
based  exclusively  on  coercion  by  the  State.

3.  An  important  step  is  made  when  atten-
tion is  turned  from  the  means  to  the  end,
from  compulsion  to  the  substance  of  legal
rules.  What  is  the  end  for  the  sake  of  which
human  beings  submit  to  constraint  ?  Kant
came  to  the  conclusion  that  the  aim  of  law
is  freedom,  and  that  the  fundamental  process
of  law  is  the  adjustment  of  one's  freedom  to
that  of  every  other  member  of  the  community.
This  principle  was  expressed  by  him  in  the
famous  sentence  :  "  Act  in  such  a  way  that  your
liberty  shall  accord  with  that  of  all  and  of  each
one."  The  notion  of  freedom,  however,  was
not  happily  selected,  since  it  is  obvious  that
the  adjustment  effected  by  law  must  consist
in  the  curtailment  of  individual  freedom,  and
freedom,  as  usually  understood,  merely  opens
the  way  for  possible  action,  but  does  not
indicate  the  course  action  should  take.

One of the leading nineteenth century

jurists,  Ihering,  found  the  end  of  law  in  the

delimitation  of  interests?- Freedom  to exert

^  Ihering  himself  was  mainly  concerned  with  the  nature
of  rights  :  as  to  legal  rules,  the  consequences  of  his  doctrine
have  been  summarized  by  Korkunov,  The  Theory  of  Law
(Hastings'  translation,  p.  52).


44  COMMON-SENSE IN LAW

one's  will  seemed  meaningless  to  him :  all
our  actions  are  suggested  by  a  striving
towards  some  kind  of  value,  either  physical
or  moral,  and  the  responsible  task  of  the
law  supported  by  the  State  is  to  apportion
individual  spheres  of  interests  and  to  uphold
the  repartition  thus  effected.  It  seems,  how-
ever, that  by  making  the  State  a  judge  of
conflicting  interests,  Ihering  has  saddled  it
with  a  heavy  responsibility  which  is  not
necessarily  implied  in  the  notion  of  law,  and
is  easily  liable  to  misconception.  Neither  the
State  nor  its  law  can  assume  the  impossible
task  of  influencing  all  the  interests  involved
in  social  life  and  of  guiding  individuals  in
the  selection  and  management  thereof.  The
State  may  for  various  reasons  pick  out  some
particular  spheres  of  interests  for  special
supervision — say  public  health  or  education.
But  it  is  not  bound  to  do  so  in  all  directions
merely  because  it  wields  the  force  of  law.
What  it  is  bound  to  do  is  to  see  that  the  wills
of  the  members  of  the  community  do  not
clash  while  striving  towards  the  attainment
of  their  ends.  It  has,  as  it  were,  to  lay  down
and  enforce  the  rule  of  the  road  on  which
individuals  are  moving.  Some  civilized  states
have never gone further than this ; other


LEGAL RULES  45

governments  have  undertaken  to  solve  or  to
assist  in  solving  economic  and  cultural  prob-
lems ;  but  such  an  extension  of  aim  does  not
commit  us  to  a  definition  of  law  which  would
make  social  policy  the  essential  element  of
legal  arrangements.  An  energetic  social  policy-
is,  after  all,  only  a  manifestation  of  the  will
of  the  State  as  a  political  corporation  and,  as
such,  it  constitutes  one  of  the  objects  for  legal
delimitation  and  protection — but  only  one
among  many.  It  is  true  that  in  some  in-
stances— e.g.  minors,  idiots,  spendthrifts —
law  steps  in  to  protect  the  interests  of  the
individual,  while  at  the  same  time  it  recog-
nizes that  his  will  is  insufficient  to  make  his
acts  legally  valid.  But  is  not  this  another
way  of  saying  that  the  individual  will,  before
it  can  claim  recognition  and  protection  from
the  law  of  the  State,  has  to  justify  itself  as
one  which  is  independent,  reasonable  and
complete?  When  one  of  these  attributes  is
lacking,  law  has  to  supply  substitutes  or
complements  in  the  shape  of  guardians  and
curators,  just  as  it  may  have  to  recognize
representatives  and  trustees.  It  still  remains
true  that  the  decision  as  to  interests  is  left
to  some  will  or  other,  either  natural  or
artificial.


46  COMMON-SENSE IN LAW

4.  Let  us,  then,  start  from  Ihering's  definition
and  carry  it  one  step  further  by  substituting
volition  for  interest.  We  may  take  it  for
granted  that  human  wills  pursue  their  several
interests  when  free  to  exert  themselves.  The
problem  consists  in  allowing  such  an  exercise
of  each  personal  will  as  is  compatible  with  the
exercise  of  other  wills.  As  soon  as  a  rule  of
the  road  is  established  to  prevent  collisions
between  persons  moving  in  the  same  thorough-
fare, a  legal  rule  comes  into  existence  :  it  may
be  reached  by  agreement  or  by  custom,  or
imposed  by  higher  authority,  but  its  legal
essence  consists  in  the  fact  that  it  is  recognized
as  a  rule  of  conduct  by  the  travellers  on  the
road.  The  fact  that  it  may  sometimes  be
ignored  or  infringed  does  not  abolish  it  if  it
is  usually  respected.  Notice  that  it  is  not  a
rule  of  morality,  but  of  convenience.  It
spring's  not  from  kindness,  or  generosity,  or
honesty,  but  from  the  view  that  one's  own
interests  are  connected  with  those  of  others.
It  may  assume  all  the  aspects  of  a  law  im-
posed by  the  State  and  serve  as  a  basis  for
the  award  of  damages  and  the  punishment
of  negligence  :  but  in  its  simplest  expression
it  is  an  agreement  to  drive  to  the  left  or  to
the  right,  as  the  case  may  be,  when  meeting


LEGAL RULES  47

another  vehicle ;  in  other  words,  it  is  a  limita-
tion of  one's  freedom  of  action  for  the  sake
of  avoiding  collision  with  others.  The  rule
of  the  road  leaves  every  person  moving  under
its  direction  severely  to  himself,  but  in  social
life,  as  we  know,  men  have  not  only  to  avoid
collisions,  but  to  arrange  co-operation  in  all
sorts  of  ways,  and  the  one  common  feature
of  all  these  forms  of  co-operation  is  the
limitation  of  individual  wills  in  order  to
achieve  a  common  purpose.  Now,  what  is
limitation  for  one  will  is  power  for  another.
When  I  restrict  my  range  of  action  out  of
consideration  for  another  person,  or  for  a
body  of  men,  or  for  a  common  undertaking,
I  concede  power  to  this  other  person,  or  to
the  body  of  men,  or  to  the  managers  of  the
common  undertaking,  and  increase  their  range
of  actions  and  the  power  of  their  wills.  And
in  reality  the  whole  of  society  is  built  up  by
such  combinations  of  social  power  under  the
direction  of  legal  rules.  I  think  we  maj'  say
that  the  aim  of  law  is  to  regulate  the  attribution
and  exercise  of  power  over  persons  and  things
in  social  intercourse.

Let  us  dwell  for  a  moment  on  the  meaning
of  the  term  "  power."  The  word  is  of  course
used  sometimes  in  the  material  sense  :  when


48  COMMON-SENSE IN LAW

we  speak  of  water-power  or  electric-power  or
horse-power,  we  think  of  forces  of  nature  as
far  as  they  can  be  subordinated  to  human
voHtion;  but  any  combination  creating  social
forces  is  also  commonly  described  as  power.
In  this  sense,  we  speak  not  only  of  political
authority,  but  of  all  forms  of  juridical  com-
pulsion. The  "  power "  conferred  on  an
attorney  or  a  plenipotentiary,  for  example,
appears  as  a  delegation  within  a  specified
range  of  the  influence  exerted  by  the  principal.
Or  we  may  take  an  illustration  of  the  use  of
the  term  "  power  "  in  the  sense  of  a  legal
range  of  action  from  the  practice  of  "  testa-
mentary disposition  " — i.e.  the  making  of
wills.  When  a  person  makes  a  will  in  accord-
ance \vith  the  rules  established  by  law,  he
expresses  wishes  which  will  be  upheld  by  the
community  at  a  time  when  he,  the  testator,
will  be  dead  and  unable  to  exercise  any
physical  power  whatever.  In  this  way,  the
attribution  of  power  to  a  testator  is  clearly
dependent  on  the  authority  of  the  law-making
community.  Thus  it  may  be  said  that  all
forms  of  social  combination  are  set  in  motion
by  power  distributed  according  to  a  certain
order.  If  the  limitations  of  will  which  con-
dition power  are  something  more  than  casual


LEGAL RULES  49

devices,  and  are  determined  in  a  constant
manner,  rules  arise  which  are  legal  in  their
essence,  even  apart  from  the  amount  of  con-
straint which  they  may  contain.  When  two
persons  sit  down  to  play  a  game  of  cards,  they
subordinate  their  individual  wills  to  the  rules
of  the  game,  and  if  one  of  the  players  chooses
to  disregard  those  rules,  the  other  will  remon-
strate and  perhaps  abandon  the  game.  From
the  technical  point  of  view  this  result  may  be
considered  as  an  instance  of  the  sanction  of
nullity.  The  presence  of  a  superior  authority
is  not  necessary  for  the  existence  of  such  a
rule,  and  the  same  may  be  said  of  the  rules
governing  many  other  social  groups.

In  defining  law  we  have  to  start  from  a  given
society,  not  necessarily  from  a  state,  because
every  human  society  is  bound  to  set  up
certain  laws  in  order  that  the  individuals
composing  it  should  not  go  each  his  own  way
instead  of  co-operating  towards  the  formation
of  a  higher  unity.  A  casual  concourse  of
individuals — a  group  of  passers-by  listening
to  a  preacher  in  Hyde  Park — is  not  a  society.
But  if  a  number  of  persons  agree  to  act  in  a
certain  way  when  they  meet,  say  to  assemble
on  certain  days  to  worship  together,  they
form  a  society  for  a  definite  purpose, and


50  COMMON-SENSE IN LAW

must  submit  to  certain  rules  laid  down  in  one
way  or  another  if  they  wish  to  achieve  that
purpose.  The  individual  ceases  to  be  quite
free,  and  has  to  co-ordinate  his  actions  with
those  of  his  fellows,  while  the  purpose  for
which  the  union  is  formed  provides  the  whole
community  with  an  aim  which  has  to  be
achieved  by  decisions  similar  to  the  acts  of
will  of  a  live  being.  This  collective  will  is,
so  far  as  the  society  is  concerned,  superior
to  the  will  of  any  individual  member.  A
joint  stock  company,  a  learned  society,  a
city  corporation,  a  county,  a  Free  Church,
or  the  Catholic  Church,  are  societies  with
corporate  aims  and  wills.  They  enact  laws
regulating  the  conduct  of  their  members.
A  state  is  a  society  of  the  same  kind,  although
its  aims  are  more  complex — protection  of
citizens,  dominion  over  territory,  judicial
power,  economic  or  cultural  policy,  etc.  The
government  and  the  laws  of  a  commonwealth,
although  towering  over  all  other  forms  of
association  and  possibly  regulating  and  re-
stricting them,  are  still  essentially  of  the  same
kind  as  the  rules  which  hold  together  a  private
union  or  a  local  body.

Lav,'s  are  made  to  be  obeyed  and  enforced.
The  wills  and  actions  of  members  of  a  society


LEGAL RULES  51

are  not  regulated  merely  by  convenience,  or
voluntary  resolve,  or  habit,  or  inclination,
or  sense  of  duty,  but  by  social  necessity.
Unless  the  wills  and  actions  of  the  members
fit  together  like  the  cogs  of  a  machine,  or
rather  like  the  organs  of  a  living  body,  the
society  cannot  exist.  A  certain  amount  of
irregularity  may  have  to  be  tolerated  in  any
human  contrivance,  but  should  every  member
allow  himself  to  act  as  if  his  adhesion  were
merely  casual  and  voluntary,  the  association
would  not  work,  and,  instead  of  promoting
its  distinctive  aims,  would  be  distracted  by
the  vagaries  of  its  members.  As  far  as  these
aims  go,  the  will  of  the  community  is  a
superior  authority,  and  therefore  the  rules
imposed  by  it  ought  to  have  a  binding  force.
That  is  why  in  most  cases  such  rules  are
provided  with  sanctions,  with  threats  of
unpleasant  consequences  in  case  of  infringe-
ment :  fines,  payment  of  damages,  temporary
or  perjDetual  exclusion,  deprivation  of  spiritual
boons  {e.g.  of  the  Sacrament),  excommunica-
tion or  curse  in  the  case  of  religious  com-
munities, imprisonment  or  even  death  in
case  of  the  infringement  of  laws  of  a  state.
The  enforcement  of  laws  by  execution  or  by
the  infliction  of  punishment  is  not,  however.


52  COMMON-SENSE IN LAW

indispensable  for  the  constitution  of  a  legal
rule.  It  is  sufficient  that  a  sanction  should
be  present  in  most  cases,  though  on  excep-
tional occasions  there  may  be  a  miscarriage
of  justice  in  this  respect :  a  debtor  may  be
insolvent,  a  criminal  may  escape.  Certain
laws  again  would  lack  direct  sanction  and
would  depend  for  their  observance  on  recog-
nition by  the  persons  concerned.  Altogether
we  must  remember  that  sooner  or  later  we
come  to  a  point  where  law  is  obeyed  not  on
account  of  material  compulsion,  but  for  other
reasons — in  consequence  of  reasonable  accept-
ance or  instinctive  conformity,  or  habit,
or  absence  6x  organized  resistance.  If  it
were  not  so,  how  could  commonwealths  and
legal  systems  exist  ?  The  number  of  people
who  can  resort  to  command  and  coercion  is
generally  infinitesimal  in  comparison  with  the
number  of  those  who  have  to  be  led  and
eventually  coerced.  It  is  only  as  long  as
criminals  are  in  a  minority  and  as  long  as
the  nation  at  large  remains  law-abiding  that
law  can  have  its  way.  This  means  that  it
is  not  the  material  possibility  of  coercion  so
much  as  the  mental  habit  of  recognizing  rules
imposed  by  social  authority  that  is  decisive
in  regard  to  the  existence  of  laws.


LEGAL RULES  58

5.  Laws  are  rules,  but  what  is  a  rule  in  the
juridical  sense  ?  A  rule  may  be  defined  as  a
direction  as  to  conduct.  Each  of  these  terms
requires  special  examination.

{a)  A  direction  is  not  necessarily  a  com-
mand :  it  includes  a  declaration  of  what  is
right  and  what  is  wrong.  A  signpost  on
your  way  does  not  command  you  to  go  to
the  right  or  to  the  left,  but  it  tells  you  that
if  you  go  to  the  right  you  will  reach  place  A,
which  we  may  suppose  to  be  your  destination ;
if  you  go  to  the  left  you  will  reach  place  B,
that  is,  you  will  go  wTong  as  far  as  your  aim
is  concerned.  Even  so  in  law  :  there  are  a
number  of  legal  rules  which  do  not  go  further
than  to  state  the  conditions  which  society
considers  to  be  necessary  if  a  person  wishes
to  give  effect  to  a  certain  purpose.  If  I
want  to  sell  my  house,  I  have  to  do  it  by
means  of  a  -wTitten  instrument  couched  in  a
certain  form.  Should  I  attempt  to  sell  it  in
another  way,  say  by  delivering  it  to  the
purchaser  before  witnesses,  the  transaction
will  have  no  legal  effect  and  I  shall  not  be
able  to  claim  the  price  agreed  upon.  I  ought
to  have  followed  the  declaration  of  the  Statute
of  Frauds,  s.  4,  which  is  a  law  provided  with
a  sanction  of  nullity. On  the other  hand.


54  COMMON-SENSE IN LAW

there  arc  many  laws  which  carry  a  punitive
sanction.  This  means  that  the  society  which
imposes  them  considers  them  binding  not  only
in  regard  to  the  mutual  relations  of  its  mem-
bers, but  also  in  regard  to  its  own  interests
directly  or  indirectly.  If  a  person  who  has
made  an  invalid  sale  insists  on  keeping  money
on  the  assumption  that  the  sale  was  a  regular
one,  the  State  will  take  this  money  from  him
and  eventuall}'  punish  him  for  defying  the
authority  of  a  declaration  made  by  the
legislative  organ  of  the  State.  A  citizen
submits  to  a  legal  rule  not  as  to  an  arbitrary
command,  but  as  to  a  declaration  or  right
which  is  supported  by  the  authority  of  the
Commonwealth  or  of  a  given  association.

{b)  Legal  rules  are  intended  to  direct  the
conduct  of  men,  that  is,  their  actions  and
outward  behaviour  :  they  do  not  aim  at
controlling  men's  thoughts  and  desires.  Tlie
object  of  law  is  to  ensure  social  order,  and
therefore  it  has  to  regulate  the  relations
between  men,  and  not  their  inner  conscious-
ness. The  latter  task  has  been  attempted
sometimes,  e.g.  in  prosecutions  for  heresy,
but  the  motives  in  such  cases  have  not  been
legal.  What  is  wrong  from  our  present  point
of  view  in  such  prosecutions  is  not  the  fact


LEGAL RULES  55

of  proceeding  against  opinions  considered  to  be
false,  but  the  manner  in  which  such  proceed-
ings were  taken.  A  Church  has  a  perfect
right  to  condemn  opinions  which  it  deems  to
be  false  or  immoral ;  it  may  proceed  against
the  holders  of  such  opinions  by  its  own
peculiar  means — by  spiritual  penances  and
ultimately  by  excommunication.  But  the
extradition  of  the  culprit  to  the  secular  arm,
the  attempt  to  enforce  right  creed  by  the
help  of  the  police  and  of  the  hangman,  are
unjustifiable  from  our  present  point  of  view.
At  the  same  time  conduct  in  more  or  less
advanced  societies  is  not  considered  as  a
series  of  purely  external  phenomena.  It  is
not  the  same  kind  of  occurrence  as  the  fall
of  a  stone  or  a  stroke  of  lightning.  It  is  the
product  of  will,  and  the  will  is  called  into
action  by  motives.  This  being  so,  modern
jurisprudence  takes  care  to  distinguish
whether  conduct  is  the  result  of  ordinary
consciousness  and  reason,  or  is  brought  about
by  agencies  Avhich  deprive  it  of  this  de-
liberate character.  Lunatics  kill  men  every
now  and  then,  and  are  tried  for  homicide;
but  if  examination  has  shown  the  deed  to
be  the  result  of  a  disordered  mind,  it  is
considered  in  the  same  light  as  a  phenomenon


56 common-sf:nse  in  law

of  nature,  and  does  not  involve  criminal  re-
sponsibility. The  slayer  will  be  sent  to  an
asylum  or  otherwise  put  under  restraint,
but  this  is  a  measure  of  prceaution,  not  of
punishment;  it  may  happen  that  he  will  be
set  at  liberty  again  after  recovery.  In  the
same  way  an  action  that  would  be  a  misdeed
if  done  by  an  adult  is  merely  a  misfortune
when  done  by  a  child  :  a  boy  under  seven
could  not  be  found  guilty  of  arson  for  setting
fire  to  a  haystack.

Then  again,  certain  actions  are  judged
differently  by  law  according  to  the  intention
behind  them  :  wilful  homicide  is  legally  very
different  from  manslaughter,  and  the  burning
down  of  a  house  through  negligence  does  not
involve  the  same  consequences  to  the  person
responsible  for  it  as  premeditated  arson.
Thus  we  perceive  that  legal  doctrine  con-
siders conduct  as  the  product  of  a  reasonable
will,  or  rather  of  a  will  guided  by  normal
reason.  The  interference  of  the  law  may  be
called  for,  however,  not  merely  after  the
event,  when  a  misfortune  has  happened  :
preventive  measures  are  also  contemplated
by  law ;  insane  people  are  not  only  put  under
supervision  and  restraint  in  order  that  they
may  not  do  damage  to  their  neighbours,  but


LEGAL RULES  57

they  are  provided  with  curators  in  order  that
they  shall  not  squander  their  fortune  or  employ
it  in  an  unreasonable  way.  The  further
development  of  these  views  belongs  to  the
doctrines  of  responsibility,  liability,  civil
capacity,  etc.  :  I  merely  wish  for  the  present
to  show  that  the  will  and  the  mind  are  not
left  outside  the  consideration  of  law,  but  that
its  rules  take  them  into  account  for  the  sake
of  estimating  conduct  and  only  in  so  far  as
they  influence  conduct.

The  above  simple  illustrations  afford  a  clue
which  will  be  found  useful  in  another  set  of
cases,  namely,  those  in  which  legal  rules  aim
at  giving  effect  to  the  intention  of  the  in-
dividual. Apart  from  the  question  of  rights
and  duties  created  by  an  obligation,  it  is
necessary  in  modern  law  that  the  obligation
should  be  a  matter  of  consent,  that  is,  of  free-
will. Intimidation,  corruption,  fraud,  in  some
cases  mistake  as  to  facts,  will  invalidate  a
formally  complete  obligation.  In  the  same
way  important  inquiries  as  to  freedom  of
resolve  and  soundness  of  mind  arise  in  caees
of  testamentary  dispositions.  In  every  way
human  conduct  is  estimated  in  connection
with  the  will  expressed  in  it,  though  it  is
the  conduct  and  not  the  inner  consciousness


58  C031M0N-SENSE IN LAW

of  man  that  the  law  takes  as  its  starting-
point.

6.  To  sum  lip :  we  have  seen  that  legal
niles  contain  declarations  as  to  right  and
wrong  conduct,  formulated  in  accordance
with  the  will  of  a  society  and  intended  to
direct  the  wills  of  its  members.  Such  declara-
tions will  be  supported  by  all  means  at  the
disposal  of  the  society  which  has  laid  them
down,  ranging  from  physical  coercion  to
nullification  and  exclusion.  This  being  so,
law  is  clearly  distinguishable  from  morality.
The  object  of  law  is  the  submission  of  the
individual  to  the  will  of  organized  society,
while  the  tendency  of  morality  is  to  subject
the  individual  to  the  dictates  of  his  own
conscience.  The  result  has  to  be  achieved
in  the  former  case  by  a  combination  of  wills,
co-ordinating  them  with  each  other.  At  the
same  time  it  is  clear  that  in  every  healthy
society  laws  regulating  the  attribution  of
power  ought  to  be  in  harmony  with  recog-
nized moral  precepts :  and  substantial  dis-
crepancies in  this  respect  are  sure  to  produce
mischief  in  the  shape  of  divided  opinions  and
uncertainty  of  conduct.

Within  the  aggregate  produced  by  this
combination of wills each component will


LEGAL RULES  59

must have its range of play and power.
Therefore  law  may  be  defined  as  a  set  of  rules
imposed  and  enforced  by  a  society  with  regard
to  the  attribution  and  exercise of  power  over
persons  and  things. A  certain  hierarchy  of  wills
has  to be  established  : taking  the  simplest
case,  one  person  obtains  power  over  another
in  the  sense  that  he  can  direct  the  will  of  the
other  and  make  it  serve  his  own  ends,  or  a
common end. Such ends may be exceed-
ingly various, comprising,  for instance,  the
use  of  land  or  goods, services, profits, etc.
The  common  feature,  however,  in  all  these
cases  would  be  the  power  of  a  certain  will  to
bind  others. The  proposed  definition  of  law
seems  to  fit  the  different  historical  stages  of
development. It  covers  the  case  of  primitive
legal  rules  which  had  to  be  largely  enforced  by
self-help,  as  well  as  that  of  the  highly  complex
commonwealths of the present day which
strive  to  provide  complete  systems  of  legal
remedies and  State  sanctions. It  embraces
the  working  of  by-laws,  customs  and  autono-
mous ordinances, as well as that of the
common  law  and  of  elaborate  parliamentary
enactments. It  makes  room  for  the  binding
force  of  Constitutional  and  of  International
Law. It  takes  account  of  criminal and  of


60  COMMON-SENSE IN LAW

private  law,  of  punishment  and  of  nullit)^
Its  principal  title  to  recognition  consists  in
the  fact  that  it  lays  stress  on  the  purpose
of  law  rather  than  on  the  means  by  which
law  is  enforced.


CHAPTER III

LEGAL RIGHTS AND DUTIES

1.  We  have  already  noticed  the  highly
significant  fact  that  in  most  European  lan-
guages the  term  for  law  is  identical  with  the
term  for  right.  The  Latin  jus,  the  German
Recht,  the  Italian  diritto,  the  Spanish  derecho,
the  Slavonic  pravo  point  both  to  the  legal
rule  which  binds  a  person  and  the  legal  right
which  every  person  claims  as  his  own.  Such
coincidences  cannot  be  treated  as  mere  chance,
or  as  a  perversion  of  language  likely  to  obscure
the  real  meaning  of  words.  On  the  contrary,
they  point  to  a  profound  connection  between
the  two  ideas  implied,  and  it  is  not  difficult
to  see  why  expressions  like  jus  and  Recht  face
both  ways  :  it  may  be  said  that  on  the  one
hand  all  private  rights  are  derived  from  legal
order,  while,  on  the  other  hand,  legal  order
is  in  a  sense  the  aggregate  of  all  the  rights
co-ordinated  by  it.  We  can  hardly  define  a
right better  than by  saying  that it is  the

61


C)2  COMMON-SENSE IN LAW

range  of  action  assigned  to  a  particular  will  within
the  social  order  established  by  latv.  Just  because
every  person  under  the  rule  of  law  divests
himself  of  an  unlimited  liberty  of  action,  a
certain  liberty  of  action  limited  in  extent
and  direction  is  conceded  and  guaranteed  to
him  by  right.  A  right  thcrcCore  supposes  a
potential  exercise  of  power  in  regard  to  things
or  persons.  It  enables  the  subject  endowed
with  it  to  bring,  with  the  approval  of  organized
society,  certain  things  or  persons  within  the
sphere  of  action  of  his  will.  When  a  man
claims  something  as  his  right,  he  claims  it  as
his  own  or  as  due  to  him.  Naturally  enough,
his  first  claims  concern  his  own  life  and  limbs,
and  the  Commonwealth  concedes  the  claim
by  pledging  itself  to  protect  his  person.  It
has  not  always  been  so  :  in  ancient  times,  the
claim  led  only  to  a  declaration  of  right  on
the  part  of  a  tribal  society,  while  for  actual
protection  a  freeman  had  to  look  to  his  own
strength  and  to  that  of  his  kinsmen  or  fellows.
Next  comes  the  claim  to  personal  freedom
from  arbitrary  imprisonment  or  interference
with  one's  movements.  Closely  connected
with  this  is  the  right  to  be  protected  from
unauthorized  intrusion  into  one's  home.  It
is  well  known  what  historical  struggles  have


LEGAL RIGHTS AND DUTIES 63

been  produced  by  these  elementary  claims,
and  how  imperfectly  they  are  realized  even
nowadays  in  some  communities  which  deem
themselves  civilized.  Rights  to  free  thought,
free  conscience,  free  belief  and  free  speech
are  asserted  on  the  same  ground  of  personal
freedom,  though  they  are  often  counteracted
by  considerations  of  public  safety  and  public
morality.  And  besides  the  protection  of
material  existence,  in  more  or  less  advanced
communities  men  claim  as  by  right  protection
of  their  reputation  and  honour  :  law  gradually
displaces  self-help  in  preventing  and  punishing
insult  and  slander.

"While  this  first  group  of  rights  clusters
round  the  idea  of  'personality,  a  second  group
is  formed  round  the  idea  of  property.  We
consider  as  our  own  not  only  our  body,  our
home  and  our  honour,  but  also  the  proceeds
of  conquest  and  labour  (including  mental
work,  e.g.  of  authors,  inventors,  artists,  etc.).
It  rests  with  the  State  to  determine  the  rules
as  to  the  accumulation,  disposal  and  protec-
tion of  property.  One  of  the  most  important
developments  of  the  right  to  property  con-
sists in  the  transfer  of  this  right  to  successors.

No  human  being  stands  entirely  isolated  in
this  world ;  every  one  is  more  or  less  affected


€4  COMMON-SENSE IN LAW

by  the  ties  of  the  family  and  of  the  State,
and  perhaps  of  many  intermediate  organiza-
tions. The  exercise  of  the  will  in  these
relations  leads  to  various  rights  of  authority
and  corresponding  duties.  It  is  obvious  that
the  rights  of  a  father,  of  a  husband,  of  a
guardian,  and  also  their  duties  in  regard  to
children,  wives,  wards,  etc.,  arise  from  this
source.  The  status  of  the  citizen,  denizen,
eivil  officer,  soldier,  foreigner,  also  give  rise
to  rights  and  duties  of  a  personal  character.

A  fourth  group  is  formed  by  the  rights
derived  from  obligations  based  on  agreements
between  persons  possessed  of  the  capacity  to
enter  into  such  agreements ;  a  fifth  by  rights
arising  out  of  wrongs  committed  by  other
persons,  for  instance,  rights  to  compensation
for  damage  inflicted  by  trespassers,  etc.  And
lastly  there  appears  the  complex  system  of
rights  exercised  by  the  State  and  its  officers
in  their  public  capacity,  the  rights  giving
power  to  judges,  magistrates,  administrative
officers,  commanders,  and  embracing  both
their  executive  functions  and  their  jurisdiction
in  criminal  and  civil  cases.

The  above  enumeration  is  intended  merely
to  give  a  general  view  of  the  powers  claimed
under  the  sway  of  legal  rules  by  the  members


LEGAL RIGHTS AND DUTIES 65

of  the  Commonwealth  in  their  divers  capacity
and  combinations.

2.  Let  us  now  pass  to  a  closer  analysis  of
the  notion  of  legal  right  and  of  its  counter-
part, legal  duty.  The  best  way  to  realize
the  nature  of  rights  is  to  observe  their  exercise
in  social  intercourse.  Legal  intercourse  runs
parallel  to  social  intercourse  :  one  cannot  be
thought  of  without  the  other.  In  social
intercourse  most  varied  relations  are  created
and  dissolved  every  moment ;  men  love  and
hate,  help  and  hinder,  educate  and  exploit
each  other,  join  in  conversation,  in  business,
in  literary  and  scientific  work.  But  in  the
legal  forms  of  this  intercourse,  relations  assume
always  one  aspect ;  they  are  varieties  of  the
fundamental  correspondence  between  right
and  duty  which  constitutes  legal  power.
Men  either  claim  or  ozve  in  their  legal  relations.
For  example,  A  exerts  a  right,  that  is,  A
legally  has  the  power  to  require  from  B,  or
from  B,  C,  D,  etc.,  that  he  or  they  shall  act
or  forbear  to  act  in  a  certain  way.  If  A  is
entitled  to  assert  such  a  right,  B,  C,  D,  etc.,
or  any  one  of  them,  is  bound  to  discharge
certain  duties — to  do  something,  or  to  abstain
from  doing  something.  To  give  one  or  two
concrete  instances  :  A,  being  the  master,  has


66  COMMON-SENSE IN LAW

a  right  over  B,  the  servant,  in  regard  to  X,
certain  services.  The  relation  may  be  ex-
pressed in  a  typical  formula.  A  (subject)
requires  (predicate)  certain  services  from  B
(object).  Or,  if  we  turn  the  sentence  from
the  active  to  the  passive,  B  (subject  of  duty)
owes  (predicate)  certain  services  to  A  (object).
In  legal  relations  of  this  kind  A  and  B  are
both  subjects  :  one  of  a  right,  the  other  of
a  duty,  which  may  be  construed  as  the  passive
side  of  a  right.  The  predicate  in  active
sentences  is  "  requires  "  :  in  passive  sentences
"  owes,  is  bound  to."  Lastly,  the  service
required  appears  as  the  material  contents  of
the  right  and  of  the  duty ;  grammatically  and
juridically  they  are  the  object  of  the  pre-
dicate, providing  it  with  a  concrete  sub-
stratum. There  can  be  no  empty  rights  and
no  indefinite  duties.  Still,  it  is  to  be  noticed
that  according  to  our  analysis  the  introduction
of  the  thing  required  is  merely  a  means  to
provide  the  relations  between  A  and  B  with
some  material  :  it  does  not  create  a  relation
between  A  and  X  (service)  or  between  B
and  X;  the  legal  relation  exists  exclusively
between  A  and  B.

A similar relation is expressed in the
sentence  : "  B,  the  servant,  requires A,  the


LEGAL RIGHTS AND DUTIES 6T

master,  to  pay  his  wages."  When  inverted
the  relation  would  be  expressed  by  the-
sentence  :  "  A  (the  master),  owes  wages  to  B
(the  servant)."

A  different  type  is  presented  by  a  sentence
like  this  :  A  (the  landowner),  requires  B^
C,  D,  etc. — every  one — to  abstain  from  inter-
ference with  a  piece  of  land  (Y).  Here  the
subject  of  the  duty  is  not  one  determinate
person,  but  any  person  likely  to  interfere
with  A's  right.  A  is  sometimes  said  to
exercise  his  right  "against  all  the  world";
as  it  is  expressed  in  Roman  legal  terminology,
A  has  a  "  right  over  the  thing  "  {jus  in  rem)..
This  way  of  treating  the  relation  is  quite-
acceptable  from  one  point  of  view,  but  it  is
not  the  only  possible  nor  the  necessary  one..
The  case  lends  itself  quite  as  well  to  the^
construction  already  adopted  by  us.  The
right  of  A  in  regard  to  an  estate  of  land  may
be  conveniently  analysed  as  a  legal  relation
between  A  and  B,  C,  D  and  an  indefinite
number  of  other  persons,  who  are  excluded
by  the  exercise  of  A's  right  from  interfering
with  the  estate.  Their  duty  is  one  of  ab-
stention ;  A's  right  is  one  of  prohibition,  which
makes  him  exclusive  owner  and  enables  him
to  use  the  estate  as  he  chooses. The  advantage


68  COMMON-SENSE IN LAW

of  such  a  construction  of  the  right  is  that  it
enables  us  to  treat  it  from  the  point  of  view
of  the  personal  relations  between  the  members
of  a  society,  which  are  at  bottom  the  only
relations  the  law  can  regulate.  The  notion
of  property  or  exclusive  ownership  which  we
have  to  fit  into  the  legal  frame  in  the  case
under  discussion  is,  after  all,  a  notion  entirely
produced  by  the  regulation  of  intercourse
between  citizens.  It  is  not  a  natural  function
in  itself,  like  tilling  or  depasturing  soil  or
building  on  land.  Therefore  the  right  of
ownership  is,  strictly  speaking,  quite  as  much
a  personal  right — the  right  of  one  person
against  other  persons — as  a  right  to  service,
or  a  lease.  It  may  be  convenient  for  certain
purposes  to  speak  of  rights  over  things,  but
in  reality  there  can  be  only  rights  in  respect
of  things  against  persons,  in  the  same  way
as  there  are  rights  in  respect  of  the  use  of
one's  labour  or  in  respect  of  the  use  of  some-
body else's  labour.  Relations  and  intercourse
arise  exclusively  between  live  beings;  but
goods  as  well  as  ideas  are  the  object  and  the
material  of  such  relations;  and  when  a  right
of  ownership  in  a  watch  or  a  piece  of  land  is
granted  to  me  by  law,  this  means  not  only
that  the  seller  has entered  into  a  personal


LEGAL RIGHTS AND DUTIES 69

obligation  to  deliver  those  things  to  me,  but
also  that  every  other  person  will  be  bound
to  recognize  them  as  mine — an  artificial  notion
created  and  insisted  upon  for  the  sake  of  legal
intercourse.

It  is  also  to  be  noticed  as  a  peculiarity  of
the  second  type  of  juridical  relations  that  the
subject  of  right  cannot  be  converted  into  a
subject  of  duty  and  vice  versa,  as  in  the  first
type.  But  the  right  conceded  to  the  indi-
vidual in  this  case  is  matched  by  similar  rights
vested  in  other  members  of  the  community.
If  A  excludes  B,  C  and  D  from  his  property,
B  has  the  same  power  of  exclusion  in  regard
to  A,  C  and  D,  C  in  regard  to  A,  B  and  D,
etc.

A  third  type  of  juridical  relation  is  con-
stituted by  the  rights  of  the  Commonwealth
itself  as  expressed  in  its  legal  rules.  The
Commonwealth,  A,  is  the  subject  of  the  right
in  this  relation ;  it  requires  (predicate)  the
obedience  of  citizens  to  its  laws  (object) ;  this
obedience  provides  the  conception  of  duty
with  material  contents,  and  therefore  forms
the  object  of  right.  If  the  relation  is  de-
scribed from  the  point  of  view  of  duty,  the
citizens  would  evidently  appear  as  subjects
of  the  duty,  with  corresponding  changes  in


70  COMMON-SENSE IN LAW

predicate  and  object.  The  inverted  or  passive
statement  of  the  relation  would  be,  the  citizens
(B)  owe  obedience  to  the  Commonwealth  in
respect  of  its  laws.

Thus  the  aggregate  of  legal  rules  imposed
by  a  state  or  other  society  appears  as  the
material  complement  or  object  of  the  society's
right  to  the  obedience  of  its  members.  Every
single  legal  rule  may  be  thought  of  as  one  of
the  bulwarks  or  boundaries  erected  by  society
in  order  that  its  members  shall  not  collide
with  each  other  in  their  actions.  Not  to
speak  of  such  fundamental  guarantees  as  the
commandments  "  Thou  shalt  not  kill,"  "  Thou
shalt  not  steal,"  "  Thou  shalt  not  commit
adultery,"  every  legal  rule  appears  as  a
necessary  adjunct  to  some  relation  of  social
intercourse,  and  it  is  often  difficult  to  say
whether  the  rule  precedes  the  rights  and
duties  involved  in  the  relation,  or  vice  versa.
From  the  historical  point  of  view,  the  latter
alternative  seems  the  more  probable.  When
merchants  land  on  a  coast  inhabited  by  a
savage  tribe  and  barter  beads  for  ivory,
customs  of  exchange  develop  before  there  is
any  authority  capable  of  framing  rules  as  to
the  contract  of  barter.  Dying  persons  must
have  often  disposed  of  their  goods  on  their


LEGAL RIGHTS AND DUTIES 71

death-bed  before  the  law  of  testamentary
succession  took  shape.  But  we  are  not
engaged  now  in  tracing  historical  sequences
in  the  development  of  rights  and  rules.  It
may  suffice  to  notice  that  both  these  sides  of
law  stand  in  constant  cross -relations  one  to
another.  In  a  full  survey  of  the  matter,
equal  stress  ought  to  be  laid  on  rights  and
duties  :  but  in  practice,  rights  are  chiefly
insisted  upon  in  private  law,  duties  in  public
law.

3.  The  subjects  of  rights  and  duties  in
modern  law  are  necessarily  persons,  that  is,
living  human  beings.  As  soon  as  such  a
being  is  conceived  the  law  recognizes  its
personality  and  assigns  certain  rights  to  it.
Even  the  embryo  in  its  mother's  womb  is
protected  in  its  existence  :  to  destroy  it  is  a
criminal  offence;  certain  rights  of  property
may  be  affected  by  its  existence,  e.g.  if  the
father  be  deceased  intestate,  the  succession
may  be  regarded  as  destined  for  it  when
it  comes  to  life  :  and  if  it  comes  to  life  only
for  a  moment,  the  further  course  of  intestate
succession  will  depend  on  that  fact,  though
the  sole  indication  of  actual  life  has  been  a
faint  cry  or  a  momentary  palpitation  of  the
heart. In  such  a  case  it  is  by  legal  process


72  COMMON-SENSE IN LAW

that  personality  is  recognized  and  endowed
with  rights,  and  the  intention  of  the  law  is
clear  :  it  wishes  to  make  sure  that  the  possi-
bilities offered  by  nature  to  a  living  being
shal  be  protected  to  the  utmost  against
accident  and  foul  play.  On  the  other  hand
law  takes  good  care  that  the  rights  with
which  it  endows  such  embryonic  beings  shall
remain  latent  or  shall  be  exercised  only  by
proxy  until  personality  attains  maturity  of
free  will.  Hence  the  well-known  restrictions
placed  upon  persons  under  age — wardship,
etc.  Even  persons  over  age  are  not  always
considered  as  possessed  of  full  powers  in  the
exercise  of  their  rights.  Custody  of  the
madman  and  the  spendthrift  was  not  un-
known even  to  ancient  law.  These  facts
have  afforded  material  for  a  theory  to  which
I  have  already  referred,  namely,  that  the
object  of  law  is  the  protection  of  interests
(Ihering).  It  is  urged  that  it  is  the  interests
and  not  the  will  of  the  infant  or  of  the  feeble-
minded which  are  taken  care  of.  But  a
little  reflection  shows  that  law  does  not  deal
indiscriminately  with  all  sorts  of  wills  and
minds,  but  with  the  normal  will  and  mind  of
the  average  person.  When,  for  some  reason
such  as  disease  or  old  age,  the  average  is  not


LEGAL RIGHTS AND DUTIES 78

reached,  the  law  provides  substitutes  and
supports,  but  certainly  does  not  destroy  the
cardinal  qualification  of  free  will.  On  the
contrary,  it  sets  up  reasonable  standards  to
which  free  wills  have  to  conform.  In  any
case,  the  notion  of  free  personality  must  be
regarded  as  a  most  important  element  in  the
construction  of  rights  :  for  on  it  depend  the
relations  between  subjects  and  predicates  in
the  legal  sense.

4.  A  subject  of  right  must  be  a  living
person,  but  need  not  be  one  person.  A
plurality  of  persons  may  act  as  a  subject  of
right  as  well  as  a  single  individual.  It  is  not
unusual  for  a  house  to  be  owned  by  several
co-heirs.  The  occupants  of  houses  surround-
ing a  square  may  enjoy  the  right  of  walking
in  the  square  in  the  same  way  as  every  one
of  them  enjoys  the  right  of  walking  in  his
own  garden.

Here  personality  is  ascribed  to  a  plurality
of  unconnected  individuals;  but  it  may  also
be  ascribed  to  a  definitely  constituted  associa-
tion of  individuals ;  thus  in  the  last  example,
the  right  to  use  the  square  may  depend  on
the  fact  that  certain  householders  are  members
of  an  association  for  keeping  up  that  particular
square,  and  their  rights  and  duties  belong  to


74  COMMON-SENSE IN LAW

them  only  in  so  far  as  they  take  part  in  this
association.  Persons  forming  an  association
of  this  kind  may  either  act  jointly  or  in
common,  that  is,  they  may  appear  as  partners
with  strictly  defined  shares,  or  else  as  par-
ticipants ^vith  undetermined  rights;  a  com-
mercial firm  may  serve  as  an  instance  of  the
first  kind,  a  club  whose  members  have  the
use  of  certain  furnished  premises  of  the  other.
In  many  cases,  however,  the  collective  per-
sonality created  by  the  association  of  a  number
of  individuals  for  a  certain  purpose  consists
in  a  more  or  less  complicated  partnership,
that  is  to  say,  a  contractual  relation  which
results  in  a  certain  unity  of  action  as  regards
outsiders;  but  when  looked  at  from  the
inside,  the  association  consists  of  a  number
of  independent  persons  who  have  agreed  to
act  together.

But  we  have  also  to  reckon  in  law  with  the
existence  of  bodies  or  unions  which  develop
a  distinct  personality  of  their  own,  not  a
combination  formed  out  of  the  individual
personalities  of  partners,  and  not  dissolved  by
the  secession  of  individual  members.  We
cannot  plunge  into  the  intricate  details  of
doctrines  as  to  corporations  and  associations  :
what  I  wish  to  show  is  the  effect  of  the  legal


LEGAL RIGHTS AND DUTIES 75

recognition  of  personality  in  aggregate  bodies
which,  though  composed  of  individuals,  are
considered  as  being  one  and  undivided  in  them-
selves. Organic  unity  is  often  supplied  to  such
corporations  by  a  grant  from  the  State  :  but
in  such  cases  the  Commo  wealth  generally
confirms  and  recognizes  what  has  been  already
prepared  by  social  intercourse.  For  example,
historical  corporations  like  towns  or  churches
do  not  depend  for  their  formation  on  express
agreement  or  grant,  but  on  a  constant  aim
or  purpose,  such  as  the  organization  of
municipal  life  or  spiritual  exercises  in  a
certain  place.

The  existence  of  corporations  gives  rise  to
an  interesting  juridical  problem.  We  began
the  discussion  as  to  subjects  of  right  by  saying
that  they  must  be  live  human  beings.  How
will  this  apply  to  such  bodies  as  the  City  of
Oxford,  or  Corpus  Christi  College  ?  In  some
respects  they  act  like  individuals  :  they  hold
property,  contract  loans,  pay  salaries,  take
care  of  buildings,  carry  on  certain  definite
work,  such  as  the  sanitation  of  the  town,  or
the  teaching  of  undergraduates ;  nor  can  they
be  dissolved  at  pleasure  by  their  members.

It  clearly  would  not  do  to  consider  the
existence  of a  corporation  like  the City  of


76  COMMON-SENSE IN LAW

Oxford  as  a  contractual  association  of  its
inhabitants.  But  it  would  not  do  either  in
the  case  of  a  corporation  like  a  college.  It
would  be  absurd  to  resolve  the  life  of  Corpus
Christi  College  into  the  constituent  elements
of  the  lives  of  the  President  and  the  Fellows
of  each  particular  year,  or  month,  or  week.
Tlie  really  important  point  evidently  is
that  the  institution  remains  one  and  dis-
tinct in  spite  of  the  constant  change  of
individuals  who  from  time  to  time  act  as
its  members.  We  are  met  by  the  fact  that
a  social  organization  of  this  kind,  although
necessarily  embodied  in  certain  individual
persons  for  the  time  being,  yet  leads  a  life
of  its  own,  as  a  higher  being  provided  with
its  own  will,  its  own  aims  and  an  appropriate
organization  to  exercise  the  will  and  achieve
the  aims.  What  has  been  said  of  corporations
like  a  city  or  a  college  is  also  true  of  organic
bodies  like  a  commonwealth  or  a  church,
which  are  formed  not  by  express  agreement,
but  by  the  force  of  circumstances.  A  variety
modelled  on  the  pattern  of  such  organic  cor-
porations is  presented  by  corporate  bodies
which  have  been  created  by  an  express  grant
of  the  State.  Tlie  numerous  chartered  com-
panies of  English  Law  belong  to  this  species.


LEGAL RIGHTS AND DUTIES 77

The  characteristic  trait  of  these  organic
societies  is  thus  their  double  Hf  e,  the  combined
existence  of  the  juridical  organization  and  of
the  members  filling  its  frame  at  each  particular
moment.  The  existence  of  a  distinct  per-
sonality may  be  illustrated  by  a  kind  of
conundrum.  If  there  are  a  hundred  people
assembled  in  a  room  to  work  out  a  decree
of  the  University  of  Oxford,  how  many
persons  are  there  in  the  room  ?  Not  a
hundred,  certainly,  but  a  hundred  and  one  :
because,  besides  the  individuals,  there  is  the
corporate  personality  whose  will  has  to  be
expressed.  Is  the  existence  of  such  more
than  human  organizations  a  mere  legal
fiction,  contrived  for  the  purpose  of  linking
certain  persons  together  and  introducing  a
principle  of  continuity  into  their  acts  and
dealings  ?  jMany  jurists  have  thought  so,  and
the  theory  has  led  to  most  important  con-
clusions in  practice,  for  example,  the  doctrine
that  a  corporation  cannot  commit  tortious  acts.
This  legal  doctrine  has  been  widely  held  by
Continental  authorities,  and  appears  also  in
English  cases.  Thus  in  Abrath  v.  North  Eastern
Railway  Co.  (188G),  Lord  Bramwell  said  :

"  I  am  of opinion  that  no  action  for  a


78  COMMON-SENSE IN LAW

malicious  prosecution  will  lie  against  a  cor-
poration. ...  To  maintain  an  action  for
malicious  prosecution  it  must  be  shown  that
there  was  an  absence  of  reasonable  and
probable  cause,  and  that  there  was  malice
or  some  indirect  and  illegitimate  motive  in
the  prosecutor.  A  corporation  is  incapable
of  malice  or  of  motive.  If  the  whole  body
of  shareholders  were  to  meet  and  in  so  many-
words  to  say,  '  prosecute  A  not  because  we
believe  him  guilty,  but  because  it  will  be  for
our  interest  to  do  it,'  no  action  would  lie
against  the  corporation,  though  it  would  lie
against  the  shareholders."

But  judges  who  had  to  decide  similar  cases
later  on  were  driven  to  abandon  Lord  Bram-
well's  doctrine,  and  this  for  good  reasons.
In  a  1904  case,  Citizen's  Life  Assurance
Company  v.  Brown,  proceedings  arose  out  of
a  libel  contained  in  a  circular  addressed  by
the  agent  of  a  rival  company  to  several
persons  assured  in  the  appellant  Company.
Lord  Lindley  on  appeal  remarked  :

"  The  question  raised  by  this  appeal  is
whether  a  limited  Company  is  responsible
for  a  libel  published  by  one  of  its  officers.
.  .  ." [The facts showed (shortly)  that


LEGAL RIGHTS AND DUTIES 7^

Fitzpatrick,  in  reply  to  the  action  of
Brown,  who  had  endeavoured  to  induce
policy-holders  in  the  Citizen's  Life  Assur-
ance Company  to  join  another  in  which
he  was  interested,  sent  out  a  circular  letter
to  these  persons  which  was  plainly  de-
famatory ;  it  contained  statements  which
Fitzpatrick  knew  not  to  be  true.  There  was
evidence  of  express  malice  on  the  part  of
Fitzpatrick.  It  was  contended  that  the
malice  with  which  he  wrote  could  not  be
imputed  to  the  Company].

"If  it  is  once  granted  that  corporations
are  for  civil  purposes  to  be  regarded  as
persons,  i.e.  as  principals  acting  by  agents
and  servants,  it  is  difficult  to  see  why  the
ordinary  doctrines  of  agency,  and  of  master
and  servant,  are  not  to  be  applied  to  cor-
porations as  well  as  to  ordinary  individuals^

"  These  doctrines  have  been  so  applied  in
a  great  variety  of  cases,  in  questions  arising^
out  of  contracts,  and  in  questions  arising  out
of  torts  and  frauds ;  and  to  apply  them  to
one  class  of  libels  and  to  deny  their  applica-
tion to  another  class  of  libels  on  the  ground
that  malice  cannot  be  imputed  to  a  body
corporate  appears  to  their  lordships  to  be
contrary  to  sound  legal  principles."


80  COMMON-SENSE IN LAW

In  keeping  witli  this  view,  Mr.  Justice
Darling,  in  Cornjord  v.  Carlton  Bank  (1900)
remarked  :

"  I  am  satisfied  the  prosecution  was  with-
out reasonable  and  probable  cause,  and  that
the  defendants  were  acting  with  malice,  in
the  sense  that  the}'  were  actuated  by  such
motives  as  would  be  malice  in  law,  were
they  the  motives  of  a  private  person."

This  means  that  in  modern  English  law
the  "  personal  "  existence  of  a  corporation  is
regarded  not  as  a  fiction,  but  as  a  reality.
Thus  a  body  corporate  has  been  held  to  be  a
"  respectable  and  responsible  person  "  within
the  meaning  of  the  usual  proviso  in  a  lease
limiting  a  lessor's  right  to  object  to  an  assign-
ment by  the  lessee  [Willmott  v.  London  Road
Car  Co.  (1910)].  Though  composed  of  many
individuals,  a  "  corporation  aggregate  "  is
deemed  to  be  a  distinct  person  by  itself
animated  by  the  purpose  which  it  pursues
and  embodies  in  the  organization  which  has
been  framed  for  it.

Besides  corporations  expressly  acknowledged
by  law,  there  is  a  considerable  number  of  social
formations  which,  as  it  were,  hover  on  the
borderland  of  corporate  existence  and  present


LEGAL RIGHTS AND DUTIES 81

some  difficulties  to  legal  analysis.  Trade
unions  are  a  conspicuous  instance.  They  hold
and  administer  property,  they  pursue  a  per-
manent end  distinct  from  the  business  aims
of  their  members,  they  are  organized  to
exercise  influence  both  on  their  own  members
and  on  outsiders.  Yet  they  are  not  corpora-
tions, and  refuse  to  be  treated  as  such  :  and
hence  the  problem  of  liability  discussed  in
regard  to  corporations  has  arisen  with  peculiar
force  in  connection  with  the  activity  of  trade
unions.

It  is  well  known  that  recent  legislation  on
the  subject  of  trade  disputes  (Act  1906)  was
partly  prompted  by  a  desire  to  amend  the
state  of  the  law  as  declared  in  the  famous
Taff  Vale  case.^  A  Railway  Company  sought
an  injunction  against  the  Amalgamated
Society  of  Railway  Servants,  agents  and
members  of  w^hich,  it  was  complained,  had
been  picketing  and  besetting  workmen  who
were  likely  to  be  employed  by  the  Railway.
It  is  needless  for  us  to  examine  the  facts  of
the  case,  but  we  have  to  remember  that  the
highest  legal  authority  of  the  kingdom,  the
House  of  Lords,  came  to  the  conclusion  that

^  Ta§  Vale  Railway  v.  Amalgamated  Society  of  Railtoay
Servants  {\m\).
F


82  COMMON-SENSE IN LAW

if  tortious  acts  had  been  committed,  the
responsibihty  for  them  would  fall  on  the
Trade  Union  itself.

This  view  is  in  accord  with  what  has  been
said  before  on  the  status  of  corporations,  but
Parliament  in  1906  altered  the  law  to  the
effect  that  Trade  Unions  were  not  to  be  held
liable  in  such  cases.  This  implies  that  in  view
of  their  special  aims  unions  of  this  kind  are
given  a  privileged  position  in  trade  disputes  :  ^
for  otherwise  their  action  in  the  defence  of
labour  would  be  hampered.  These  are  quasi-
corporations.

Another  species  of  artificial  persons  arises
when  certain  aggregates  of  rights  have  been
instituted  for  a  definite  purpose  but  not
attributed  to  any  definite  subject  of  right.
Charities  are  in  this  position.  If  money  has
been  left  to  provide  for  the  education  of  poor
children,  or  for  the  maintenance  of  a  ward  at
a  hospital,  English  law  furnishes  the  machinery
of  administration  by  the  institution  of  trustees,
who  act  as  subjects  of  the  right,  although  they
are  responsible  to  the  Commonwealth  for  the
exercise  of  this  right  in  the  manner  provided
by  the  benefactor  or  testator.  In  Continental
law  the  case  is  somewhat  more  complicated :
1  See  below,  pp.  97,  126.


LEGAL RIGHTS AND DUTIES 83

the  charity  is  treated  as  a  kind  of  union  lor
a  definite  purpose,  although  the  elements  of
association  are  wanting.  Here  the  adminis-
trators of  the  charity  are  the  subjects  of  the
right  :  but  the  exercise  of  right  is  strictly
determined  by  the  document  of  foundation,
and  the  administrators  embody  the  will  of
the  juridical  unit  as  far  as  it  is  free  to  act  in
accordance  with  the  provisions  of  this  docu-
ment. Limitations  do  not  affect  in  any  way
the  fundamental  character  of  the  right.  Con-
tinental jurists  have  felt  some  difficulties  as
to  the  position  of  the  persons  who  benefit  by
the  trust  :  but  English  law,  with  its  doctrine
of  trusts,  makes  this  position  easy  to  under-
stand; the  sick  or  the  children  whom  the
charity  helps  for  the  time  being  may  be
likened  to  the  "  cestui  que  trust  "  for  whose
sake  the  trustee  administers  the  trust  :  they
are  beneficiaries  protected  by  the  State,  but
certainly  not  subjects  of  right.

When  the  subject  is  not  expressly  defined,,
when,  for  instance,  a  right  of  way  is  opened
for  use  to  every  passer-by,  we  have  the  same
type  of  legal  relation  as  when  every  man  is
deemed  to  be  the  subject  of  a  duty,  e.g.  every
man  is  obliged  to  respect  a  right  of  ownership.
Any  one,  B,  C,  D,  may  in  such  a  case  exercise


84  COMMON-SENSE IN LAW

the  right  and  assert  the  corresponding  claims,
as  often  happens  in  regard  to  rights  of  way.
But  it  is  not  impossible  to  make  the  public
at  large,  or  the  State  as  its  representative,  the
subject  of  such  rights.

5.  The  objects  of  rights  and  duties  may  be
of  two  kinds,  either  things,  that  is,  material
bodies  which  persons  seek  to  appropriate  and
to  use,  as  land,  cattle,  money,  furniture,  etc.,
or  abstract  interests,  that  is,  claims  in  regard
to  human  forces  and  activities,  e.g.  services,
contractual  obligations  of  all  kinds,  the  good-
will of  a  firm,  literary  or  artistic  productions.
In  a  wider  sense  it  may  be  said  that  material
things  are  also  not  directly  objects  of  rights
and  duties,  but  indirectly,  as  far  as  interests
in  them  are  allowed  or  recognized  by  law.
Thus  it  is  not  actually  the  house  which  forms
the  object  of  a  householder's  right,  but  the
interest  he  has  in  it,  the  ownership  or  the
possession  of  the  house.  On  the  other  hand,
it  is  usual  to  class  abstract  interests  as
incorporeal  things,  just  as  we  classify  under
the  same  grammatical  head  abstract  nouns
like  courage,  faith,  science,  and  concrete  nouns
like  chair,  sword,  tree.  Either  one  or  the
other  basis  of  classification  may  be  used,
provided  it  is  followed  consistently. I  prefer


LEGAL RIGHTS AND DUTIES 85

to  speak  of  things  and  abstract  realities  or
interests,  because  this  terminology  lays  stress
on  the  fundamental  reason  why  every  legal
relation  has  to  be  constructed  with  the  help
not  only  of  subjects  of  rights  and  duties,  but
also  of  objects.  If  it  is  not  to  be  a  mere
empty  form,  it  must  be  directed  to  some
human  interest  as  its  object.

From  this  point  of  view  the  right  of  an
individual  over  his  own  personality  is  in
essence  a  right  directed  towards  an  abstract
interest.  Every  person  has  a  right  to  his
life,  to  his  honour  and  good  repute,  to  freedom
of  action,  of  speech,  of  conscience.  The
corresponding  duties  lie,  firstly,  on  the  world
at  large,  that  is,  on  all  members  of  a  society,
as  well  as  of  other  societies  which  are  at  peace
with  it;  secondly,  the  subject  of  the  corre-
sponding duty  may  be  the  society  or  common-
wealth itself,  in  so  far  as  it  may  be  prevented
by  public  law  from  curtailing  the  life,  liberty,
or  reputation  of  its  subjects.

In  so  far  as  objects  of  rights  may  be  regarded
as  possessing  marketable  value  they  are  called
"  property."  Not  every  object  of  right  admits
of  such  an  estimate;  a  person's  honour  or
reputation,  for  instance,  cannot  be  appraised
either  for  consumption  or  for  sale,  although


86  COMMON-SENSE IN LAW

heavy  damages  may  be  awarded  for  a  wanton
or  malicious  attack  on  it.  On  the  other  hand
not  only  concrete  things  like  estates,  houses,
furniture,  but  also  abstract  interests,  such  as
the  goodwill  of  a  firm  or  the  copyright  of  a
novel,  have  a  value  in  the  market  and  therefore
form  items  of  property  in  the  special  sense  of
the  word.

A  term  peculiar  to  English  law  is  chose  in
action :  it  means  the  right  of  a  person  to
recover  from  another  by  legal  proceedings  any
money  or  property.  The  "  thing "  in  this
case  is  the  material  interest  involved  in  the
success  of  the  action.


CHAPTER IV

FACTS AND ACTS IN LAW  j

1.  A  NETWORK  of  legal  rules  stretches  over
social  life,  the  events  of  which  are  constantly
crossed  by  the  lines  of  juridical  rights  and
obligations  :  most  circumstances  of  any  im-
portance assume  a  certain  legal  aspect.  Thus
as  against  the  various  facts  and  acts  of  busi-
ness, intellectual  intercourse  and  social  re-
lations, rises  a  series  of  facts-  and  acts-in-law
on  which  depend  the  changes  and  evolution  of
rights.  It  is  hardly  necessary  to  point  out
that  these  juridical  facts  and  acts  do  not
simply  reflect  their  counterparts  in  ordinary
life  :  they  have  special  attributes  of  their
own,  as  the  layman  is  often  made  to  feel.

Let  us  begin  with  an  examination  of  facts-
in-law.  The  word  fact  as  opposed  to  law  is
sometimes  used  by  lawyers  of  circumstances
which  have  a  bearing  on  the  decision  of  a
legal  problem.  The  production  and  sifting
of  evidence  has  to  deal  with  facts  in  this
sense. In  so  far  every  minute  peculiarity  of

87


88  COMMON-SENSE IN LAW

a  thing,  of  a  person  or  of  a  process  may  prove
of  value,  e.g.  footprints  or  fingerprints  may
be  of  the  greatest  importance  in  identifying
a  criminal. On  the  other  hand  it  is  clear  that
a  detective  or  a  counsel  collecting  evidence  to
establish  guilt will do  well  not  to  drag  in
circumstances  which  have  no  importance  for
the prosecution and which would merely
confuse  the  problem  in  hand. Indeed,  the
judge  may  object  in  the  course  of  an  examina-
tion of  witnesses  to  irrelevant  questions  and
to  the  bringing  in  of  unnecessary  material.
In  this  case,  however,  although  certain  legal
forms  make  themselves  felt,  the  aim  of  the
process is  the settlement of a  question  of
fact  as  opposed  to  a  question  of  law — has  a
murder  been  committed  or  not  ? or  is  it  a
case  of  manslaughter  ? or  of  a  brawl  which
led  to  the  infliction  of  a  fatal  wound  ? has
this  particular  man,  the  prisoner,  committed
the  crime? did  he  do  it  of  his  own  motion
or  at  the  instigation  of  another  ? In  so  far,
the  examination  turns  on  matters  of  ordinary
social  experience  : and  therefore  the  decision
of  all  such  questions  is  commonly  left  to  a
jury composed of laymen,  for whom the
questions  at  issue  have  to  be  put  clearly  and
carefully  by  the  Court, But suppose  these


FACTS AND ACTS IN LAW 89

questions  have  been  answered  in  one  way  or
another  :  suppose  the  jury  has  brought  in
the  verdict  that  A  was  slain  in  a  quarrel  by
a  companion  who  was  drunk  at  the  time.  As
soon  as  this  has  been  established,  we  have
to  deal  with  facts-in-law.  The  fact  of  acci-
dental death  in  consequence  of  an  unpre-
meditated assault,  and  the  fact  that  the
slayer  was  intoxicated,  lead  to  legal  conse-
quences :  a  sentence  will  be  pronounced  by
the  Court,  which  will  formulate  these  conse-
quences in  the  particular  case  according  to
certain  legal  rules  provided  with  a  sanction.
As  far  as  the  judicial  decision  is  concerned,
the  whole  story  of  the  quarrel,  with  its  minute
incidents  and  details,  will  have  faded  away^
leaving  the  verdict  as  its  one  result.  In  this
verdict  the  rule  and  rights  set  in  operation
by  the  Court  will  still  depend  on  facts :  but
these  will  be  "  facts-in-law,"  the  mere  skele-
ton, as  it  were,  of  the  event  itself,  from  which
all  irrelevant  circumstances  have  been  re-
moved. The  slayer  may  have  been  a  rather
sympathetic,  though  hot-headed  person,  the
slain  obnoxious  and  contemptible;  but  these
features  will  disappear  from  the  fact-in-Iaw
as  irrelevant  :  for  the  law  cannot  draw  such
distinctions, and the right of a worthless


90  COMMON-SENSE IN LAW

person  to  be  protected  in  life  and  limb  is  as
sacred  as  the  right  of  the  noblest  of  citizens.
Just  as  the  fact  appears  in  a  kind  of  schematic
outline,  so  does  the  person  slain  become  a  man
in  general,  a  man  in  law,  if  one  may  use  the
expression,  bereft  of  all  attributes  except  the
one  essential  quality  of  being  possessed  of  a
full  right  to  have  his  life  protected  by  the
State.  Again,  intoxication  may  become  an
important  fact  from  the  point  of  view  of  law.
It  will  not  be  relevant  to  point  out  that  the
wine  consumed  was  bad  in  quality  or  that  the
criminal  was  apt  to  be  irritable  and  violent
when  drunk.  The  judges,  while  taking  the
fact  into  consideration  as  an  important  con-
dition in  the  settlement  of  legal  consequences,
will  fix  their  attention  strictly  on  one  feature
of  intoxication — the  one  relevant  feature  from
the  legal  point  of  view,  that  is,  the  effect  of
liquor  on  the  mind  of  the  criminal  and  the
consequent  increase  or  decrease  of  responsi-
bility.

To  sum  up,  we  must  recognize  two  entirely
different  kinds  of  facts,  which  indeed  exist
not  only  in  juridical  theory,  but  in  actual
technical  distinctions  of  law.  Thus  in  the
law  of  evidence  there  are  on  the  one  side  the
*'  facts which prove  " — the  materials which


FACTS AND ACTS IN LAW 91

help  to  establish  the  "  fact  in  issue  "  :  and  on
the  other  side,  the  "  facts  which  are  to  be
proved  " — those  things  which  as  soon  as  they
have  been  established  by  evidence,  become
definite  facts-in-law.

A  curious  example  of  the  kind  of  legal
problems  which  arise  in  this  connection  may
be  given  from  an  American  case,  the  State  of
Iowa  V.  Bell  (1870).  A  man  was  found  at
night  hiding  in  a  room  of  a  neighbour's  house,
to  which  he  had  obtained  access  by  stealth.
It  would  have  been  a  clear  case  of  attempted
burglary  if  the  evidence  had  not  shown,
fortunately  for  the  accused,  that  he  was
drunk  at  the  time.  The  inference  suggested
by  the  judge  and  accepted  by  the  jury  was,
that  the  prisoner  did  not  realize  at  the  time
that  he  had  betaken  himself  to  a  strange
house.  It  would,  however,  be  very  unsafe
to  rely  on  intoxication  as  a  mitigating  circum-
stance in  an  English  or  American  Court  in  a
case  of  murder  or  manslaughter.  Far  from
that,  it  has  been  repeatedly  laid  down  by
judges  that  the  fact  of  intoxication  need  not
entitle  a  criminal  to  lenient  treatment.

Similar  questions  as  to  fact  would  arise  in
estimating  the  amount  of  moral  pressure
exerted on a person making a will or a


92  COMMON-SENSE IN LAW

contract,  or  in  ascertaining  the  degree  of  care
or  negligence  shown  by  a  person  to  whose  keep-
ing somebody  else's  goods  have  been  entrusted.
Sometimes  the  Court  will  have  to  probe  very
deep  into  social  and  moral  conceptions  of
the  time,  or  of  a  certain  social  environment,
in  order  to  disentangle  the  facts-in-law  on
which  legal  consequences  of  rights  and  duties
depend.  In  any  case  a  process  of  sifting
evidence  from  real  life  is  necessary  in  order
to  obtain  even  a  comparatively  small  number
of  facts-in-law.

2.  We  must  also  notice  that  law  sometimes
has  to  build  up  its  pronouncements  as  to
rights  and  duties  on  the  strength  not  of  real,
though  select  facts,  but  of  presumptions  of
facts  as  they  appear  in  the  aspect  officially
recognized  by  law.  The  old  doctrine  of
evidence  was  prolific  in  artificial  rules  in  this
respect.  Bentham  used  to  inveigh  violently
against  the  phantoms  produced  by  this
artificial  treatment  of  evidence  and  the
travesty  of  right  which  was  often  produced
by  it.  His  philippics  were  not  in  vain,  and
a  great  many  simplifications  and  improve-
ments have  been  achieved  since  his  time.
Even  now,  however,  our  law  is  not  entirely  free
from artificial rules which may  sometimes


FACTS AND ACTS IN LAW 93

endanger  the  dispensing  of  strict  justice.  My
readers  will  doubtless  remember  the  case  of
the  murderer  Crippen.  A  specially  damning
piece  of  evidence  against  the  accused  con-
sisted in  the  finding  of  a  portion  of  his  pyjamas
under  the  floor  of  the  house  with  the  remains
of  the  body  of  his  victim.  Now  this  piece  of
evidence  had  not  been  produced  originally
by  the  prosecution,  and  it  was  employed  only
by  wa}'^  of  rebutting  certain  allegations  made
by  the  accused.  Its  introduction  at  the
eleventh  hour  supplied  Crippen's  counsel  with
a  gi'ound  for  trying  to  have  the  verdict  quashed
in  the  Court  of  Criminal  Appeal. ^  "  Rebutting
evidence,"  it  was  pleaded,  "  which  could  have
been  given  in  chief  as  part  of  the  case  for  the
prosecution,  cannot  be  given  to  strengthen
the  case  for  the  prosecution  after  the  evidence
on  both  sides  has  been  closed."

The  reason  for  these  restrictions  is  not
difficult  to  see;  the  intention  of  the  law  is
that  the  prosecution  shall  not  be  able  to  keep
back  material  arguments  till  the  last  stages
of  the  trial  in  order  to  produce  them  at  un-
expected moments,  when  counsel  for  the
accused  is  not  prepared  to  meet  them.  But
it  is  clear  that  the  rigid  application  of  the  rule
1  R.  V.  Crijypm  (1910).


94  COMMON-SENSE IN LAW

might  have  had  deplorable  elTects  in  Crippen's
case,  inasmuch  as  it  might  have  removed  from
the  consideration  of  the  jury  the  question  as
to  the  year  when  the  pyjamas  were  made,
which  was  very  material  to  the  issue.  Fortun-
ately the  Court  was  able  to  exercise  its
discretion  in  the  matter.  But  there  are  many
cases  in  which  evidence  very  valuable  in  sub-
stance has  to  be  ruled  out  on  formal  grounds.
Besides  these  rules  of  evidence,  Courts  are
sometimes  bound  to  accept  certain  well-
established  legal  presumptions  and  artificial
facts-in-law  instead  of  real  and  ascertainable
facts.  It  is  an  accepted  rule,  for  instance,
that  children  born  in  wedlock  are  presumed
to  be  the  legitimate  offspring  of  the  father,
even  if  it  should  be  possible  to  prove  that  the
mother  at  the  time  of  conception  actually
cohabited  with  another  person.  The  rule  is
intended  to  prevent  anybody  attempting,
except  on  indisputable  evidence,  to  raise  the
intricate  questions  connected  with  illegiti-
macy ;  but  it  is  clear  at  the  same  time  that
it  may  often  lead  to  the  suppression  of  truth.
The  Courts  have  to  be  content  in  this  matter
with  presumed  instead  of  actual  facts.  In
this  way,  the  legal  rules,  although  they  usually
serve  some  clearly  reasonable  purpose,  may


FACTS AND ACTS IN LAW 95

in  some  instances  obscure  the  real  truth  of
the  case  under  consideration.  But  this  is
perhaps  inevitable :  for  law  is  framed  to
suit  average  conditions  and  may  fail  to  dis-
entangle exceptional  circumstances.

3.  Here,  as  in  many  other  cases,  it  is
evident  that  the  methods  of  law  aim  only  at
approximations  :  and  since  this  is  so,  there
are  many  important  elements  which  cannot
receive  explicit  treatment  by  the  Courts.
For  instance,  it  is  often  difhcult  to  satisfy
by  legal  means  our  natural  craving  for  m^oral
retribution  :  and  not  infrequently  the  way  in
which  law  approaches  problems  of  individual
responsibility  seems  inadequate  from  the
point  of  view  of  moral  feelings.  This  in-
sufficiency of  method,  however,  is  the  result
not  of  callousness  on  the  part  of  tribunals,
but  of  the  fact  that  it  is  impossible  to  probe
psychological  situations  by  the  means  of
strict  legal  standards.  Take,  for  instance,
the  treatment  of  seduction  in  English  law.
The  strict  theory  is  that  if  a  girl  over  sixteen
has  been  seduced,  damages  are  recoverable
from  her  seducer  only  for  the  actual  loss  of
services  sustained  by  her  parent  or  master.
At  the  same  time,  it  is  often  evident  that  in
assessing  damages  a  jury  will  be  actuated  by


96  COMMON-SENSE IN LAW

its  reprobation  of  the  defendant's  conduct;
and  this  attitude  is  not  discouraged  by
judges.  It  was  once  observed  by  Lord
Chancellor  Eldon  :

"  Although  in  point  of  form  the  action
[for  seduction]  only  purports  to  give  a
recompense  for  loss  of  service,  we  cannot
shut  our  eyes  to  the  fact  that  it  is  an  action
brought  by  a  parent  for  an  injury  to  her
child,  and  the  jury  may  take  into  their
consideration  all  that  she  may  feel  from  the
nature  of  the  loss.  They  may  look  upon
her  as  a  parent  losing  the  comfort  as  well
as  the  service  of  her  daughter,  in  whose
virtue  she  can  feel  no  consolation;  and  as
the  parent  of  other  children  whose  morals
may  be  corrupted  by  her  example."  ^

It  is  clear  that  the  method  of  strict  law  is
inadequate  to  embrace  all  the  real  elements  of
the  case,  and  it  might  be  urged  that  perhaps
a  more  stringent  treatment  is  necessary  for  the
seduction  itself  :  but  it  is  easy  to  see  what
difficulties  would  arise  if  the  law  attempted
to  apply  exact  methods  to  such  questions.

4.  The  expression  fact  is  sometimes  ex-
tended in  English  legal  usage  to  all  questions
1  Bedford  v.  McKowl  (1800).


FACTS AND ACTS IN LAW 97

examined  and  decided  by  Courts  \vitliout
reference  to  established  rules  of  law.  It  may-
happen  that  there  is  no  rule  bearing  directly
on  points  raised  in  a  trial  :  the  Court  has,
however,  to  take  a  definite  stand  as  to  the
problem.  Such  matters  are  sometimes  termed
points  of  fact,  although  by  their  consideration
in  the  given  case  a  basis  of  law  would  be
established  and  they  would  then  pass  from
the  domain  of  fact  into  that  of  law.

Thus  in  cases  where  the  terms  of  a  statute
are  in  dispute  and  no  authoritative  decision
as  to  their  interpretation  has  yet  been  given,
a  Court  will  interpret  the  terms  in  accordance
with  the  facts  of  the  particular  case,  and  will
give  a  decision  as  to  those  facts,  which  on
subsequent  occasions  will  be  appealed  to  as  a
matter  of  law.  In  a  recent  case  [Dallimore  v.
Williams  (1912)]  the  plaintiff  engaged  certain
musicians  to  perform  at  a  concert  for  a  fixed
rate  of  remuneration;  the  defendants,  who
were  officials  of  the  Amalgamated  Musicians'
Union,  objected  to  the  rate  of  pay,  and  by
means  of  circulars,  picketing  and  threats,
induced  some  of  the  musicians  to  break  their
contract  with  the  plaintiff.  Now  to  induce  a
breach  of  contract  by  such  means  is,  under
ordinary circumstances,  a  wrong  for which

G


98  COMMON-SENSE IN LAW

damages  may  be  recovered  :  but  by  the  Trade
Disputes  Act,  1906,  a  trade  union  inducing  a
breach  of  contract  in  furtherance  of  a  trade
dispute  is  exempt  from  hability. The  ques-
tion therefore  was  whether  in  this  case  the
dispute  was  technically  a  "  trade  dispute  "  :
if  so,  the  officials  of  the  union  could  not  be
made  liable. At  the  trial,  the  judge  directed
the  jury  that  a  "  trade  dispute  "  was  one  either
between  an  employer  and  his  employees,  or
among  employees  themselves. A  verdict  was
returned  for the plaintiff, from which the
defendants  appealed. The  Court  of  Appeal
held  that  too  narrow  an  interpretation  had
been  placed  upon  the  term  "trade  dispute  "
by  the  judge  in  the  court  below,  and  that  it
might  be  made  to  cover  a  dispute  between  an
employer  and  a  trade  union,  such  as  existed
in  the  present  case.^ In  so  deciding,  the  Court
expressly  stated that its decision was not
governed  by  any  definite  authority  as  to  the
interpretation  of  the  term,  for  the  principal
case  relied on by  the  plaintiff [Conway  v.
Wade  (1909)]  was  held  to  have  been  decided
on  other  grounds, and  therefore  not  to  be

^  A  new  trial  was  ordered :  at  the  second  trial  the
plaintiff  was  awarded  £350  damages.  See  The  Times,
June  18th-20th,  1913.


FACTS  AND  ACTS  IN  LAW 99

binding  in  the  present  instance. Thus  the  |
Court  was  really  deciding  a  question  of  fact,
which,  however,  in  all  future  cases  where  the
same  point  arises  will,  on  the  strength  of  this
decision,  be  treated  as  a  question  of  law.

But  I  am  bound  to  say  that  this  peculiar
use  of  the  term  "  fact  "  is  subject  to  criti-
cism from  a  jurisprudential  standpoint.  It
may  be  inconvenient  to  speak  of  law  where
there  is  no  legal  rule  to  meet  the  case,  but  it
is  still  less  appropriate  to  speak  of  fact  where
the  point  at  issue  does  not  touch  either  the
circumstances  of  the  trial  or  the  material  con-
ditions on  which  the  application  of  a  rule
depends.  One  might  class  such  instances  as
matters  for  judicial  decision  or  interpretation,
or  for  legal  consideration  and  decision.  From
a  wider  point  of  view  they  would  certainly
belong  to  law  in  so  far  as  they  affect  the
aggregate  of  principles  on  which  social  order
depends.

5.  It  has  been  made  clear  by  the  above
remarks  that  the  principal  importance  of
establishing  facts-in-law  consists  in  supplying
necessary  links  between  the  circumstances
and  events  of  ordinary  life  and  the  rules  of
law.  In  order  to  manifest  legal  rules  in
concrete  cases,  the  exact  points  at  which  the


100 COMMON-SENSE IN LAW

rules  apply  have  to  be  ascertained,  and  it  is
in  these  points  that  facts-in-law  are  located.
They  have  a  double  aspect :  they  are  ex-
tracted from  reality,  and  they  serve  as  con-
ditions for  the  application  of  rules  and  the
creation  or  modification  of  rights  and  duties.
Let  us  take  one  or  two  instances.  I  pick  up
a  shell  by  the  seashore;  my  doing  so  is  a
fact-in-law :  it  creates  for  me  a  right  of
property  in  the  shell,  and  sets  in  motion  the
rule  that  a  thing  not  belonging  to  any  par-
ticular individual  belongs  to  the  first  person
who  appropriates  it.  Should  a  passer-by
snatch  the  shell  from  my  hand,  a  second  fact-
in-law  would  arise :  it  would  be  a  delict
against  property  on  his  part  and  he  would
become  the  subject  of  a  duty  to  restore  the
shell  or  its  worth  to  me,  possibly  to  pay  a
fine  for  the  infringement  of  order,  while  I
should  have  an  action  and  a  claim  of  right
against  him  in  tort.  Or  again,  A  is  the  owner
of  a  house,  of  some  furniture,  of  money  at
the  bank.  He  dies  without  leaving  a  will.
His  death  is  a  fact-in-law  which  calls  into
operation  the  rules  as  to  intestate  succession.
His  solicitor  advertises  for  heirs.  A  distant
cousin  appears  and  asserts  his  right  to  the
inheritance. Besides  the  fact-in-law — i.e.  the


FACTS AND ACTS IN LAW 101

death  of  A — which  has  opened  the  succession,
the  claimant  would  have  to  produce  other
facts -in-law,  a  certified  pedigree,  eventually
witnesses  to  establish  his  own  descent,  perhaps
the  death  or  legal  disappearance  of  other
relations,  and  so  forth.  It  might  be  said  that
among  the  innumerable  facts  of  actual  life
some  become  accentuated  as  links  in  the
formation,  modification,  or  assertion  of  rights.
These  are  facts -in-law.

6.  Another  group  of  legal  counterparts  to
events  of  real  life  consists  of  "  acts -in-law."
An  act -in-law  is  necessarily  personal  because
it  requires  a  subject.  Its  essence  is  the
exercise  of  a  will.  It  also  requires  an  object,
because  the  act  of  a  person  is  always  directed
towards  some  definite  aim.  Such  objects
vary  widely,  but  they  have  one  attribute  in
common  :  they  are  all  varieties  of  right.
The  proposition  expressing  an  act  of  law  may
be  stated  in  the  following  typical  manner  :
I  (subject),  create,  modify,  abolish,  or  transfer
(predicate),  a  right  (object).  The  difference
from  an  ordinary  act  is  evident.  Ordinary
acts  admit  of  all  kinds  of  predicates,  wath  or
without  juridical  consequences  {e.g.  I  eat  a
cake,  I  write  a  letter,  I  write  a  book),  while
the  predicates  in  sentences  expressing  acts  of


102 COMMON-SENSE IN LAW

law  take  the  shape  either  of  the  constitution,
aboHtion,  transfer,  or  modification  of  a  right.
Therefore  the  sentence  *'  I  ride  my  bicycle"
does  not  refer  to  an  act -in-law,  although  it  un-
doubtedly refers  to  the  exercise  of  a  right.  But
the  sentence  "  I  give  my  bicycle  to  you  "  does
refer  to  an  act-in-law,  namely,  to  the  transfer
of  my  right  to  another  person.  Lastly,  there
is  a  difference  as  to  objects,  since  the  objects
of  acts-in-law  are  rights,  while  the  objects  of
ordinary  acts  are  as  multifarious  as  the  realities
of  the  material  or  the  spiritual  world.

An  act-in-law  is  similar  to  an  act  of  legis-
lation. The  latter  is  effected  by  society,  the
former  by  members  of  society;  the  latter
creates  and  abolishes  rules,  the  former  creates
and  abolishes  rights — in  so  far,  of  course,  as
an  individual  member  is  allowed  by  society
to  create  and  to  abolish  rights.  In  a  sense
it  may  be  said  that  representatives  of  society
itself,  such  as  judges  or  administrative  officers,
may  act  in  law  when  their  action  or  direction
consists  in  the  concrete  attribution  of  rights.
A  judgment  conferring  on  the  plaintiff  a  right
of  possession  which  has  been  wrongly  exercised
by  the  defendant  may  be  said  to  constitute  an
act-in-law.  The  action  of  justices  of  the
peace,  conferring  a  licence  on  the  owner  of  a


FACTS  AND  ACTS  IN  LAW 103

public-house,  is  an  act-in-law.  In  another
sense  crimes  and  torts  are  acts-in-law  in  so
far  as  they  produce  legal  consequences  and
create  rights  and  duties  as  to  compensation.
But  in  the  first  case  the  judges  and  officers
act  as  mouthpieces  of  the  State,  though  it
may  not  always  be  easy  to  distinguish  between
the  elements  of  law-making  on  the  one  hand
and  of  government  and  the  attribution  of
rights  on  the  other;  in  fact,  the  latter  is
derived  from  the  former.  In  the  second  case
the  principle  of  the  action  creating  rights  is
exactly  the  reverse  of  that  which  is  embodied
in  acts  of  law  conforming  to  substantive  rules.
The  subject  creates  legal  consequences  against
his  will;  it  is  the  reaction  from  his  intended
act  which  constitutes  rights.  Therefore  both
administrative  acts  and  delicts  had  better
be  kept  by  themselves  as  distinct  groups  of
actions  constituting  rights.

The  technical  term  "  act-in-law,"  which  is
more  familiar  to  Continental  than  to  English
lawyers  in  its  equivalent  forms,  negotkim,
Rechtsgeschaft,  acte  juridique,  applies  primarily
to  actions  of  individual  citizens  intentionally
constituting  or  modifying  rights.  We  should
perhaps  mention  here  the  subdivision  of  acts-
in-law  into  two  classes,  unilateral  and  bilateral.


104 COMMON-SENSE IN LAW

A  testament  or  donation  may  serve  as  an
example  of  a  unilateral  act  :  here  it  is  only
the  intention  of  one  person — ^the  testator  or
the  donor — which  is  material  (although  the
act  is  complicated  by  the  requirement  of
acceptance  on  the  part  of  the  devisee  or
donee).  Bilateral  acts-in-law  require  the
consensus  of  two  or  more  wills,  as  may  be
seen  in  the  familiar  cases  of  sale,  lease,  or
bailment.

7.  When  I  speak  of  the  intentional  consti-
tution or  modification  of  rights,  I  do  not
mean  that  the  subject  of  the  act-in -law  is
bound  to  realize  clearly  and  fully  the  legal
consequences  of  his  action.  Very  often  lay-
men effect  acts-in-law  without  a  clear  know-
ledge of  their  legal  consequences.  Thus  an
undergraduate  hires  furnished  rooms  for  the
academic  term  :  he  knows,  of  course,  that  he
is  making  an  agreement  which  binds  him  to
pay  rent  and  not  to  damage  the  furniture,
while  the  landlady  is  obliged  to  let  him  stay
in  the  rooms  for  some  eight  weeks.  But  I
doubt  whether  the  ordinary  undergraduate
realizes  when  he  makes  the  agreement  how
far  an  unexpected  event,  say  a  contagious
illness  in  the  house,  would  relieve  him  from
his  obligations,  or  to  what  extent  the  landlady


FACTS AND ACTS IN LAW 105

has  a  right  of  entering  the  rooms  against  his
will  or  a  right  of  ejectment  if  rent  be  in
arrear,  and  the  like.  I  presume  that  even
students  reading  law  would  find  it  hard  to
answer  all  questions  as  to  the  possible  legal
consequences  of  this  contract.  Yet  the  under-
graduate who  takes  lodgings  undoubtedly
effects  an  act-in-law.  His  general  purpose
is  directed  towards  the  creation  of  rights  and
obligations,  and  therefore  his  resolve  to  take
the  rooms  is  construed  as  an  act-in-law  with
all  its  premeditated  and  unpremeditated  legal
consequences.  In  the  same  way  in  ordering
a  suit  from  a  tailor  a  person  acts  in  law,
although  he  may  not  be  aware  of  the  precise
legal  rules  which  govern  the  transaction.
Similarly  a  person  may  suppose  himself  un-
able to  perform  certain  acts-in-law,  and  yet
may  be  held  by  a  Court  to  have  performed
them  and  to  be  legally  responsible  for  them.
Thus  in  Chappie  v.  Cooper  (1844),  Mr.  Cooper's
widow  was  sued  by  an  undertaker  for  the
expenses  of  her  husband's  funeral.  She  was
under  age  at  the  time  of  her  husband's  death,
and  therefore  pleaded  that  she  was  not  bound
by  the  contract,  since  she  was  an  infant  at
the  time  it  was  made.  Now  it  is  a  rule  of
law  that  while  an  infant  is  generally  unable


106 COMMON-SENSE IN LAW

to  make  valid  contracts,  he  may  do  so  for
necessaries  and  for  things  which  are  clearly
for  his  benefit.  The  question  therefore  was
whether  the  burial  of  a  spouse  was  a  "  neces-
sary "  within  the  meaning  of  the  rule.  The
Court  held  that  it  was  both  "  a  personal
advantage,  and  reasonably  necessary."  Now
it  is  clear  that  Mrs.  Cooper  certainly  did  not
realize  the  legal  consequences  of  her  act  when
she  arranged  with  the  undertaker,  but  that
did  not  prevent  the  Court  from  drawing  in-
ferences from  her  contract  and  holding  her
bound  by  it.

8.  What  is  needed,  therefore,  is  a  general
intention  to  constitute  or  to  acquire  rights,
to  constitute  or  to  assume  obligations.  In
the  simplified  psychology  of  legal  doctrine
intention  is  ascribed  to  the  will  as  such  and
called  the  element  of  free  will.

In  order  to  ascertain  whether  a  person  really
meant  to  exert  his  will  by  an  act -in-law,  one
of  two  methods  may  be  followed.  In  ancient
times  an  act-in-law  had  to  be  clothed  with
elaborate  forms  which  were  not  only  intended
to  serve  as  proof  of  the  transaction,  but  also
helped  to  show  that  the  subject  of  the  act
had  had  the  deliberate  intention  of  performing
it. Under  feudal law, a person making a


FACTS  AND  ACTS  IN  LAW 107

grant  of  land  was  obliged  to  go  through  a
ceremony  of  investiture  of  which  the  sur-
render of  a  flag,  stick,  sod,  or  the  like  formed
the  principal  part.  Disputes  might  often
arise  as  to  whether  the  ceremony  had  been
precisely  followed,  and  a  valid  conveyance
effected.  In  course  of  time  the  formalities
were  simplified  and  made  subservient  to  the
general  intention.  The  motives  which  led
to  the  transitions  are  well  shown  in  a  seven-
teenth-century case,^  in  which  it  was  said
that,  "  although  most  properly  livery  of
seisin  {i.e.  formal  conveyance)  is  made  by
delivery  of  a  twig  or  turf  of  the  land  itself,
whereof  livery  of  seisin  is  to  be  given ;  and  so
it  is  good  to  be  observed ;  yet  a  delivery  of  a
turf  or  twig  growing  upon  other  land;  of  a
piece  of  gold  or  silver,  or  other  thing  upon  the
land  in  the  name  of  seisin  is  sufficient,  and
when  the  feoffor  is  upon  the  land,  his  words
without  any  act  are  sufficient  to  make  livery
of  seisin ;  as  if  he  saith,  '  I  deliver  seisin  of  this
land  to  you  in  the  name  of  all  the  land  con-
tained in  this  deed  ' ;  or  such  other  words,
without  any  ceremony  or  act  done."  Even
at  the  present  day,  however,  certain  survivals
keep  up  the  memory  of  old  forms  :  thus  when
^  Thoroughgood' s  Case  (1612),  as  reported  by  Coke.


108 COMMON-SENSE IN LAW

a  person  making  a  lease  places  his  finger  on  a
wafer  representing  a  seal,  and  pronounces  the
sacramental  words,  "  I  deliver  this  as  my  act
and  deed,"  he  is  performing  an  act  suggested
by  the  long  history  of  formal  conveyance.

But  modern  jurisprudence  is  generally
averse  from  such  formalism,  which  it  considers
not  so  much  a  guarantee  of  certainty  as
a  possible  trap  for  the  unwary.  The  existence
of  a  free  will  generating  the  act -in-law  is
usually  ascertained  by  direct  investigation,
which  may  be  difficult  to  carry  out,  but  which
satisfies  the  more  developed  sense  of  justice
better  than  mere  form.  A  signed  document
would  still  be  required  in  important  cases,
e.  g.  for  the  purpose  of  conveying  land,  but
precautions  are  taken  that  such  documents
should  not  be  obtained  by  intimidations  or
fraud.  A  party  may  plead  in  rescission  of  a
formally  correct  sale  that  he  was  made  to
sign  the  deed  under  duress,  or  that  a  draft
which  had  been  prepared  and  signed  for  future
delivery  subject  to  certain  conditions  had
been  surreptitiously  appropriated  by  the  other
party.  Or  again,  a  party  to  a  contract  may
maintain  and  bring  evidence  to  prove  that  the
agreement  was  entered  into  on  the  strength  of
fraudulent  misrepresentations.


FACTS AND ACTS IN LAW 109

Here,  as  in  many  other  cases,  the  law
has  only  very  imperfect  means  of  determining
the  element  of  free  resolve  in  the  subjects  of
acts-in-law.  Too  often  presumption  takes
the  place. of  conviction  established  by  cogent
proof.  But  this  drawback  is  rather  due  to
the  legal  treatment  of  typical  transactions
than  to  any  special  failing  of  the  theory  of
acts-in-law.  It  is  exceedingly  difficult  to
take  hold  of  intentions  by  the  help,  as  it
were,  of  legal  pincers,  and  we  have  to  be
content  in  law  with  approximations.  The
law  sets  up  a  standard  of  reasonable  conduct,
which  ought  to  fit  the  requirements  of  average
persons.  It  assumes  that  in  certain  given
circumstances  a  reasonable  man  will  normally
act  in  a  certain  way.  For  example,  it  assumes
that  when  a  man  makes  the  promise  of  a
benefit  to  another,  he  generally  does  so  in
consideration  of  some  benefit  to  himself  :
therefore  it  is  a  rule  of  English  law  that  in
any  agreement  not  embodied  in  a  formal
deed  under  seal,  there  must  be  some  "  valuable
consideration,"  that  is,  an  actual  benefit  to
the  promisee,  or  an  actual  detriment  to  the
promisor :  and  if  a  man  makes  a  purely
gratuitous  and  informal  promise,  he  may  in
law  repudiate  it  at  any  moment,  though  he


no COMMON -SENSE IN LAW

may  be  under  the  strongest  moral  obligation
to  redeem  it.  At  one  time  it  was  held  by
Lord  Mansfield  that  a  moral  obligation  would
constitute  sufficient  consideration  in  law :
but  this  view  never  met  with  general  accept-
ance, and  in  modern  theory  consideration
must  have  some  actual  material  value.  Thus
in  Thomas  v.  Thomas  (1842)  a  promise  by  a
person  to  grant  a  cottage  to  the  widow  of
his  brother  deceased  was  held  not  to  be
supported  by  the  "  moral  consideration  "
of  pious  respect  for  the  wishes  of  the
deceased  :  but  inasmuch  as  the  widow  had
promised  a  rent  of  £l  and  the  expense  of
repairs,  that  was  held  to  be  sufficient  "  valu-
able consideration  "  to  make  the  agreement
binding.

Very  difficult  problems  arise  from  the  fact
that  obligations  are  sometimes  entered  into
on  the  strength  of  misrepresentations.  The
Court  has  to  decide  how  far  the  person  induced
by  such  misrepresentations  to  perform  an  act-
in-Iaw  has  been  deprived  of  the  exercise  of  his
free  will.  Very  often  it  is  not  easy  to  make
a  distinction  between  an  error  of  judgment,
which  the  Courts  are  not  called  on  to  rectify,
and  a  misconception  induced  by  fraud,  which
from  the  point  of  view  of  law  entitles  the


FACTS AND  ACTS  IN  LAW HI

person  deceived  to  a  remedy.  I  will  give  one
case  in  illustration  of  the  difficulties  of  the
position,  and  the  means  by  which  a  Court
may  solve  them.

In  Redgrave  v.  Hurd  (1881)  R.,  a  solicitor,
advertised  that  he  had  a  moderate  practice
with  extensive  connections  and  was  shortly
retiring,  and  would  take  as  partner  an  efficient
lawj^er  who  would  not  object  to  purchase  R.'s
suburban  residence,  valued  at  £1600.  H.
answered  and  asked  for  an  interview^  at
w^hich  R.  said  the  practice  brought  in  an
income  of  about  £300.  H.,  after  a  rather
careless  inspection  of  the  books,  thought  that
the  practice  might  be  worth  not  £300  as  was
stated  by  R.,  but  about  £200 ;  and  thereupon
signed  an  agreement  to  purchase  the  house,
without  having  a  reference  to  the  practice
inserted  in  the  agreement.  He  entered  into
possession,  and  finding  that  in  fact  the  practice
was  worthless,  refused  to  complete  the  pur-
chase of  the  house.  R.  then  brought  action
to  compel  him  to  do  so.  H.  resisted  on  the
ground  of  misrepresentation  as  to  the  value
of  the  practice,  and  the  Court  decided  in  his
favour.  One  of  the  grounds  of  decision  was
stated  by  Sir  George  Jessel  in  the  following
terms  :


112 COMMON-SENSE IN LAW

"  If  a  man  is  induced  to  enter  into  a  con-
tract by  a  false  representation,  it  is  not  a
sufficient  answer  to  him  to  say  that  if  he
had  used  due  diligence,  he  could  have  found
out  that  the  statement  was  not  true.

"  One  of  the  most  familiar  instances  is
where  men  issue  a  prospectus  in  which  they
make  false  statements  of  the  contracts
entered  into  before  the  formation  of  a  com-
pany, and  then  say  that  the  contracts  them-
selves may  be  inspected  at  the  solicitor's
offices.  It  has  always  been  held  that  those
who  accepted  those  false  statements  as  true
are  not  debarred  from  their  remedy  because
they  neglected  to  look  at  the  contracts."

9.  Besides  the  analysis  of  the  act-in-law  as
an  expression  of  free  will,  it  has  to  be  examined
from  the  point  of  view  of  its  conformity  with
accepted  rules.  Of  course,  an  individual
citizen  or  an  association  cannot  aspire  to  the
power  of  creating  rights  or  dealing  with  rights
in  a  way  forbidden  by  the  law  of  the  State  to
which  they  belong.  Their  activity  in  pro-
ducing rights  is  necessarily  subordinated  to
the  legal  framework  established  by  the
commonwealth.  It  would  be  idle,  for  in-
stance, to  bequeath  money  to  a  church,  say


FACTS AND ACTS IN  LAW 113

to  the  Roman  Catholic  Cathedral  in  London,
for  the  purpose  of  saying  Masses  for  the  soul
of  the  testator.  Such  an  act-in-law,  which
would  be  perfectly  valid  in  Spain  or  in  Italy,
would  be  void  in  England  by  a  Statute  of
1547,  which  forbids  "superstitious  practices."

The  necessity  for  the  act-in-law  to  conform
with  received  rules  goes  further  :  it  is  ad-
mitted that  acts  in  law  which  clash  with  re-
ceived notions  of  morality  or  public  policy
are  legally  void.  The  institution  of  a  prize
for  the  purpose  of  remunerating  the  most
artful  deceit  performed  within  the  last  year
would  not  be  upheld  by  any  tribunal,  although
it  might  be  unimpeachable  in  form  and  the
cases  of  deceit  admitted  for  competition
might  keep  clear  of  criminal  prosecution.  It
has  been  held  that  a  bequest  made  on  the
condition  that  a  person  should  not  enter  the
army  or  navy  is  void  at  law  because  the  con-
dition is  clearly  against  public  policy  [In  re
Beard:  Beard  v.  Hall  (1908)].

In  a  recent  case  which  has  attracted  some
attention  through  its  quaint  setting,  a
theatrical  manager  had  entered  into  a  con-
tract with  a  theatrical  agent  to  arrange  a
certain  sensational  incident  for  the  purpose
of advertisement. Two ladies,  engaged by


114 COMMON-SENSE IN LAW

the  agent,  entered  the  stalls  in  extravagantly
large  hats  which  they  refused  to  remove,
whereupon  they  were  ejeetcd  by  the  manager.
Subsequently  they  took  proceedings  for
assault,  but  the  magistrate  found  that  the
manager  was  within  his  right  in  removing
them  from  the  theatre.  When  Mr.  Dann,
the  agent,  claimed  the  fee  agreed  upon  for
arranging  this  interlude  and  fictitious  trial,
the  theatre  manager,  Mr.  Curzon,  refused  to
pay,  and  the  Court  had  to  decide  whether  the
act- in-law  was  of  such  a  nature  as  to  be  binding
on  the  parties.  It  was  held  that  it  was  not.
The  judges  thought  that  the  simulated  offence
and  purpose  of  advertisement  for  which  it
was  enacted  showed  a  disrespect  for  the
function  of  justice  and  were  in  so  far  directed
against  public  utility.  Therefore  in  spite  of
the  clear  consent  of  the  parties  in  formulating
their  agreement  this  act -in-law  was  declared
void  [Dann  v.  Curzon  (1910)].

In  these  cases,  the  contracts  were  contrary
to  "  public  policy."  But  the  law  goes  even
further,  and  refuses  to  uphold  any  contract
which  is  based  on  private  immorality.  On
the  principle  "  Ecc  turpi  causa  non  oritur
actio,'^  it  refuses  to  recognize  the  validity  of
any  contract  the  purpose  of  which  is  clearly


FACTS AND ACTS IN LAW 115

immoral.  Thus  in  a  recent  case  [Upfill  v.
Wright  (1911)]  the  defendant  was  sued  for  the
rent  of  a  flat  in  Southampton  Row.  It  was
shown  in  evidence  that  the  plaintiff's  agent,
at  the  time  when  he  executed  the  lease,  knew
that  the  defendant  was  the  mistress  of  a
certain  man  who  visited  her  constantly  at  the
flat.  The  Court  therefore  found  that  the
plaintiff,  through  his  agent,  deliberately  let
the  premises  for  an  immoral  purpose,  and
that  he  was  unable  to  recover  the  rent.  The
principle  is  clearly  stated  by  Mr.  Justice
Bucknill  :  "If  a  woman  takes  a  house  in
order  to  live  in  it  as  the  mistress  of  a  man
and  to  use  it  for  that  purpose,  and  the  land-
lord at  the  time  when  the  lease  is  executed
knows  that  it  is  taken  for  that  purpose,  the
landlord  cannot  recover  the  rent."


CHAPTER V

LEGISLATION

1.  Turning  now  to  a  special  consideration
of  rules  of  law,  we  have  to  ask  from  what
sources  they  are  derived.  The  expression
"  sources  "  may  be  used  in  different  ways.
We  may  talk  of  Bracton's  treatise  or  of  the
Year  Book  as  sources  of  English  mediaeval
Law,  meaning  that  we  derive  a  considerable
part  of  our  knowledge  of  English  mediaeval
law  from  them.  Similarly  students  of  history
speak  of  the  sources  for  the  history  of  Eliza-
beth's reign,  meaning  the  various  contem-
porary narratives  and  documents.  But  we
are  not  now  using  the  word  "  source "  in
such  a  general  sense.  We  are  inquiring  by
what  processes  rules  of  law  may  be  evolved,
and  whether  these  processes  point  to  certain
kinds  of  authority  as  the  sources  from  which
such  rules  are  technically  derived.  It  is  not
difficult  to  see  that  in  spite  of  all  the  variety
of  legal  systems  in  force  in  different  countries
116


LEGISLATION  117

and  at  different  ages,  legal  rules  emanate  from
a  certain  limited  number  of  authoritative
sources,  and  that  in  the  process  of  their  elabora-
tion they  follow  certain  grooves  according  to
the  character  of  their  origin.

To  begin  with,  it  seems  clear  that  a  law
may  be  either  made  in  advance  for  the  express
purpose  of  regulating  future  events,  or  else
declared  by  Courts  of  Justice  in  the  exercise
of  their  jurisdiction.  Herein  is  the  funda-
mental distinction  between  legislation  and
judge-made  law.

An  Act  of  the  Parliament  of  Great  Britain
may  serve  as  an  example  of  a  law  enacted  by
legislators.  Codification  aiming  at  the  re-
duction of  separate  and  discrepant  laws  to
one  system  appears  merely  as  one  of  the
modes  of  legislation,  e.g.  the  Code  Napoleon
in  France,  or  the  new  Civil  Code  {Burgerliches
Gesetzbuch)  in  Germany.

As  for  judge-made  law,  it  may  assume  one
of  three  aspects  :

(1)  Customary  law,  which  comprises  legal
rules  based  on  traditional  usage  and
declared  in  popular  courts  :  the  cus-
toms observed  in  the  borough  courts
of  Southampton or  of Nottingham,


118 COMMON-SENSE IN LAW

for  instance,  or  the  custom  of  gavel-
kind succession  in  Kent.

(2)  Judicial  decisions  form  the  basis  of  rules

evolved  by  judges,  and  serve  in  their
aggregate  as  material  for  the  case
law  of  which  the  English  and  Anglo-
American  common  laAV  are  such
conspicuous  instances.

(3)  Equity  in its jurisprudential sense is

derived  from  the  discretion  of  judges
or  arbitrators  in  applying  general
considerations  of  justice  and  fairness
to  the  decision  of  legal  conflicts.

The  law  of  nature  or  of  reason  has  been
regarded  by  some,  but  by  no  means  by  all
jurists,  as  a  set  of  rules  dictated  to  man  by
nature  itself  and  therefore  obligatory  for  all
commonwealths .

The  sources  mentioned  may  be  examined
ill  different  order  in  accordance  with  the  main
purpose  which  the  student  has  in  view.  I
will  take  them  in  the  order  of  my  enumera-
tion not  because  it  is  the  order  correspond-
ing to  the  probable  historical  sequence  in
which  they  arose,  but  because  it  is  the
most  convenient,  as  it  seems  to  me,  for
the  purpose  of  exposition,  since  it  proceeds


LEGISLATION  119

from  simpler  to  more  complex  forms  of  law-
making.

2.  An  Act  of  Parliament,  or  statute,  aims
emphatically  at  the  formulation  of  legal
rules  in  a  definite  manner.  English  Acts
commonly  use  side  by  side  expressions  which
have  the  same  or  nearly  the  same  meaning,
in  order  to  prevent  attempts  at  evading  a
law  on  the  pretence  that  some  particular
term  of  phraseology  does  not  occur  in  it.
Observe,  for  example,  the  abundance  of
synonym  in  the  following  passage  (Gaming
Act,  1845,  s.  17)  :

"  Every  person  who  shall,  by  any  fraud,
or  unla^vlul  device,  or  ill -practice  in  playing
at  or  with  cards,  dice,  tables,  or  other  game,
or  in  bearing  a  part  in  the  stakes,  wagers,
or  adventures,  or  in  betting  on  the  sides  or
hands  of  them  that  do  play,  or  in  wagering
on  the  event  of  any  game,  sport,  pastime,
exercise,  win  from  any  other  person  to
himself  or  any  other  or  others,  any  sum  of
money  or  valuable  thing,  shall  be  deemed
guilty  of  obtaining  such  money  or  valuable
thing  from  such  other  person  by  a  false
pretence,  with  intent  to  cheat  or  defraud
such person of the same, and, being


120 COMMON-SENSE IN LAW

convicted  thereof,  shall  be  punished  accord-
ingly."

If  there  be  a  wTitten  constitution  which
requires  a  special  process  for  modification  or
amplification,  laws  made  by  legislative  bodies
are  subject  to  revision  from  the  point  of
view  of  their  conformity  to  this  constitution.^
A  notable  example  is  seen  in  the  legal  system
of  the  United  States,  where  the  Supreme  Court
has  power  to  determine  the  "  constitution-
ality "  of  laws  passed  by  Congress  and  ratified
by  the  President,  as  well  as  those  passed  by
different  States  of  the  Union.  Thus  in  1801
a  certain  Marbury  was  appointed  by  the
President  to  the  Office  of  Justice  of  the  Peace
in  the  district  of  Columbia.  The  appoint-
ment was  confirmed  by  the  Senate,  and  a
commission  made  out,  signed  and  sealed,
but  not  transmitted  to  Marbury.  At  the
last  moment,  circumstances  came  to  light
which  made  the  appointment  undesirable,
and  Madison,  the  then  Secretary  of  State,  re-
fused to  deliver  the  commission.  Marbury,
however,  contended  that  his  title  was  com-
plete, since the office was not subject to

^  In  this  case  the  constitution  appears  as  a  fundamental
law  to  which  all  other  laws  have  to  be  subordinated.


LEGISLATION  121

removal  by  the  President;  he  therefore
applied  to  the  Supreme  Court,  under  s.  13
of  the  Judiciary  Act,  1789,  for  a  writ  of
mandamus,  which  is  an  order  to  compel  the
executive  officer  to  act  in  accordance  with  the
legal  claim.  The  application  was  refused  on
the  ground  stated  by  Chief  Justice  Marshall  :
"  That  the  provision  of  the  Judiciary  Act
purporting  to  give  the  Supreme  Court  juris-
diction, in  a  proceeding  original  and  not
appellate,  to  issue  writs  of  mandamus  to
public  officers  was  not  warranted  by  the
Constitution,  and  was  therefore  inoperative
and  void  "  [Marbury  v.  Madison  (1803)].

3.  It  is  clear  that  when  a  competent  legis-
lature has  made  a  law  in  accordance  with  the
Constitution,  the  Courts  cannot  overrule  it
and  are  bound  to  give  effect  to  it.  It  would
be  wrong,  however,  to  suppose  that  statutes,
however  carefully  formulated,  reduce  the
application  of  the  law  to  a  mere  mechanical
process  of  bringing  a  given  case  under  a  given
section.  It  is  plain  that  however  explicit  the
words  of  a  statute  may  be,  a  Court  must
determine  the  exact  meaning  of  the  phrase-
ology before  it  can  apply  the  law.  Attempts
have  sometimes  been  made  to  get  rid  of
this  necessity  of  judicial  interpretation :  for


122 COMMON-SENSE IN LAW

example,  the  introduction  to  the  Prussian
Code  of  1794  went  so  far  as  to  forbid  all  inter-
pretation as  distinct  from  direct  application,
and  ordered  that  tribunals  should  lay  all
cases  of  doubt [ul  verbal  meaning  before  a
special  committee  of  jurists  and  statesmen.^
This  device,  however,  proved  entirely  unsuc-
cessful, for  it  was  found  impossible  to  draw  a
precise  line  between  application  and  interpre-
tation, and  to  reduce  a  Court  to  the  functions
of  a  mere  sorting-machine.  Statute  law  or
codified  law  necessarily  consists  of  sentences,
the  words  of  which  may  be  differently  under-
stood by  different  people;  and  the  first  duty
of  a  Court  is  therefore  one  of  literal  interpre-
tation. The  law-reports  abound  with  ex-
amples of  this  necessity,  which  is  perpetually
imposed  upon  tribunals,  and  which  often
gives  rise  to  difficult  problems.  Let  us  take
an  example  from  one  of  the  Workmen's
Compensation  cases,  which  have  been  so
numerous  of  recent  years  and  have  raised
so  many  points  of  literal  interpretation.  Li
Nisbet  V.  Rayne  and  Burn  (1910)  the  facts
were  that  one  Nisbet  had  been  employed  as
a  cashier  by  the  defendants,  a firm  of  coal-

^  Sees.  47  and  48  of  Introductien  to  the  Prussian  Land-
recJit,  repealed  in  1798,


LEGISLATION  123

owners  :  and  it  was  part  of  his  duties  to  take
every  week  from  the  office  to  the  colliery  the
cash  out  of  which  the  wages  of  the  employees
at  the  colliery  were  paid.  While  so  engaged,
he  was  robbed  and  murdered.  Now  under  the
Workmen's  Compensation  Act,  1906  (s.  1),
when  a  workman  has  met  his  death  by  an
accident  "  arising  out  of,  and  in  the  course
of  his  employment,"  his  widow  may  claim
compensation  from  the  employers.  Nisbet's
widow  claimed  under  the  section  :  but  one
of  the  questions  in  the  case  was  whether  a
murder  could  be  considered  an  "  accident  '-
within  the  meaning  of  the  Act.  It  was  con-
tended for  the  defendants  that  "  accident  *'
essentially  implies  the  absence  of  intention;
whereas  a  murder  is  clearly  a  deliberate  and
intentional  act  on  the  part  of  the  criminal.
But  the  Court  held  otherwise.  Lord  Justice
Farweil  said  :

"  The  intention  of  the  murderer  is  im-
material :  so  far  as  any  intention  on  the
part  of  the  victim  is  concerned,  his  death
was  accidental ;  and  although  it  is  true
that  one  would  not  in  ordinary  parlance
say,  for  example,  that  Desdemona  died  by
accident,  this  is  because  the  horror  of  the


124 COMMON-SENSE IN LAW

crime  dominates  the  imagination  and  com-
pels the  expression  of  the  situation  in  terms
relating  to  the  crime  and  the  criminal
alone;  it  would  be  quite  natural  to  say
that  a  man  who  died  from  the  bite  of  a
dog  or  the  derailment  of  a  train  caused
by  malicious  persons  putting  an  obstacle
on  the  line,  died  by  accident."

And  Lord  Justice  Kennedy  said  :

"  An  historian  who  described  the  end  of
Rizzio  by  saying  that  he  met  with  a  fatal
accident  in  Holyrood  Palace  would  fairly,
I  suppose,  be  charged  with  a  misleading
statement  of  fact.  .  .  .  But  whilst  the
description  of  death  by  murderous  violence
as  an  '  accident '  cannot  honestly  be  said
to  accord  with  the  common  understanding
of  the  word,  wherein  is  implied  a  negation
of  wilfulness  and  intention,  I  conceive  it  to
be  my  duty  rather  to  stretch  the  meaning
of  the  word  from  the  narrower  to  the  wider
sense  of  which  it  is  inherently  and  etymo-
logically  capable,  that  is,  '  any  unforeseen
and  untoward  event  producing  personal
harm,'  than  to  exclude  from  the  operation
of  this  section  a  class  of  injury  which  it  is


LEGISLATION  125

quite  unreasonable  to  suppose  that  the
Legislature  did  not  intend  to  include  within
it."

Sometimes  the  interpretation  of  a  term
may  be  complicated  by  the  fact  that  a  word
has  changed  in  meaning  since  the  enactment
of  the  statute  in  which  it  is  employed.  An
example  of  this  change  or  extension  in  the
meaning  of  a  word  is  provided  by  a  recent
case  [Pollard  v.  Turner  (1912)],  in  which  the
appellant  had  employed  a  boy  to  deliver
bread,  which  was  carried  from  door  to  door
in  a  basket  affixed  to  a  bicycle.  The  Bread
Act,  1836,  enacts  that  any  person  who  carries
bread  for  delivery  in  a  "  cart  or  carriage  '*
shall  be  provided  with  scales  and  weights
with  which  the  bread  may  be  weighed  on
demand  by  any  purchaser.  The  boy  did  not
carry  scales  and  weights,  and  his  master  was
charged  under  the  Act.  The  question  was
whether  a  bicycle  could  be  considered  a
"  cart  or  carriage  "  within  the  meaning  of
an  Act  which  was  passed  before  bicycles  were
known.  The  Court  of  Appeal  held  that  it
might  be  so  considered,  and  the  conviction
was  affirmed.

Sometimes  the  respect of judges for  the-


12C COMMON-SENSE IN LAW

actual  words  of  a  statute  may  be  so  great  that
they  will  consider  themselves  bound  by  the
exact  phraseology,  even  though  the  effect
of  so  doing  may  be  to  produce  awkward  conse-
quences in  the  law.  This  principle  of  literal
interpretation  is  well  illustrated  by  a  recent
trade  union  case  which  has  attracted  con-
siderable attention  [Vacher  v.  London  Society
of  Comjjositors  (1912)].  An  action  of  libel
and  conspiracy  to  publish  libels  was  brought
by  plaintiffs,  a  company  of  printers,  against
defendants,  who  were  the  trade  union  of
compositors.  There  is  a  provision  in  tlie
l>ade  Disputes  Act,  1906  (s.  4,  subsec.  1)
to  this  effect  :  "  An  action  against  a  trade
unioiTk' ...  in  respect  of  any  tortious  act
alleged  to  have  been  committed  by  or  on
behalf  of  the  trade  union  shall  not  be  enter-
tained by  any  court."  Libel  and  conspiracy
to  publish  libels  are,  of  course,  torts  at  com-
mon law ;  the  defendants  did  not  dispute  the
torts,  but  claimed  immunity  under  the  section
cited.  Now  in  all  other  sections  of  the  Act
in  which  immunity  for  wrongful  acts  is  given,
the  wrongful  acts  are  specified  as  being  done
"  in  contemplation  or  furtherance  of  a  trade
dispute  "  :  and  it  was  argued  that,  although
these words were not contained in s. 4,


LEGISLATION  127

sub-sec.  1,  the  Legislature  meant  them  to  be
understood  :  for  this,  it  was  said,  was  an
inference  to  be  drawn  from  the  construction
of  the  whole  enactment .  The  Court  of  Appeal,
however  (Lord  Justice  Farwell  dissenting),
refused  to  read  the  words  into  the  section,
and  held  the  defendants  exempt.  The  effect
of  this  judgment  is,  to  quote  Lord  Justice
Farwell,  practically  to  give  trade  unions  "  a
licence  to  commit  torts  (in  plain  English,  to
injure  their  neighbours)  wdth  impunity,  and
to  inflict  losses  and  misery  on  all  or  any  of
his  Majesty's  subjects  as  long  as  they  please,
without  responsibility  "  :  and  it  was  argued
that  the  Legislature  could  not  have  intended
anything  which  was  so  clearly  contrary  to
public  policy;  but  Lord  Justice  Kennedy
said  :  "  I  decline  to  speculate  in  regard  to  any
statutory  enactment  which  it  becomes  my
duty  to  interpret  as  to  what  was  the  policy
to  which  the  Legislature  thought  it  was  giving
the  effect  of  the  law."  The  House  of  Lords
upheld  the  decision  of  the  majority  of  the
Court  of  Appeal,  and  expressly  approved
the  judgment  of  Lord  Justice  Kennedy.
The  Lord  Chancellor  (Viscount  Haldane)
said  that  he  did  not  propose  to  specu-
late  concerning the motive of Parliament.


128 COMMON-SENSE IN LAW

The  topic  was  one  on  which  judges  could  not
profitably  or  properly  enter.  Their  province
was  the  very  different  one  of  construing  the
language  in  which  the  legislature  had  finally
expressed  its  conclusions,  and  if  they  were  to
undertake  the  other  province,  they  were  in
danger  of  going  astray  in  a  labyrinth  to  the
character  of  which  they  had  no  sufficient
guide.

4.  Another  group  of  problems  arises  in
connection  with  what  may  be  called  technical
inter'pretation.  Very  often  a  statute  is  con-
cerned not  merely  with  general  principles  of
social  order  which  are  more  or  less  intelligible
to  everybody,  but  with  the  regulation  of  some
highly  technical  matter  which  requires  special
knowledge.  In  these  cases,  the  Court  has  not
merely  to  determine  the  general  meaning  of  a
word,  but  the  peculiar  technical  significance
which  the  Legislature  intended  to  convey.

Such  technical  points  may  arise  in  cases
which  at  first  sight  seem  quite  straight-
forward. In  JJnwin  v.  Hanson  (1891)  the
plaintiff  claimed  damages  for  the  cutting  and
mutilation  of  certain  trees.  Under  the  High-
ways Act,  1835,  if  a  man's  trees  are  growing  so
as  to  exclude  light  and  air  from  the  highway
he  may  be  ordered  to  "  prune  or  lop  "  them  :


LEGISLATION  129

and  if  he  fail  to  do  so,  the  surveyor  of  high-
ways, on  the  authority  of  two  Justices  of  the
Peace,  may  enter  and  "  prune  or  lop  "  the
trees.  An  order  under  this  Act  was  issued
against  the  plaintiff,  and,  as  he  failed  to
comply  with  it,  the  defendant  (surveyor  of
highways)  entered,  and,  among  other  things,
cut  the  tops  off  two  fir  trees.  The  plaintiff
claimed  that  he  had  no  statutory  power  to  do
this.  Evidence  was  given  at  the  trial  to  show
that  the  term  "  lop  "  is  used  in  agriculture
and  forestry  of  cutting  off  branches  laterally,
while  the  technical  term  for  cutting  off  the  tops
of  trees  is  to  "  top."  The  Court  therefore  held
that  the  surveyor  had  exceeded  his  statutory
powers.  "  If  the  Act,"  said  Lord  Esher,
"  is  one  passed  with  reference  to  a  par-
ticular trade,  business,  or  transaction,  and
words  are  used  which  everybody  conversant
with  that  trade,  business  or  transaction,  knows
and  understands  to  have  a  particular  meaning
in  it,  then  the  words  are  to  be  construed  as
having  that  particular  meaning,  though  it
may  differ  from  the  common  or  ordinary
meaning  of  the  words.  For  instance,  the
'  waist  '  or  '  skin  '  are  well-known  terms  as
applied  to  a  ship,  and  nobody  would  think
of  their  meanine  the  waist  or  skin  of  a  person


130 COMMON-SENSE IN LAW

when  they  are  used  in  an  Act  of  ParUament
dealing  with  ships."

It  is  not  to  be  expected  that  judges  will
be  experts  in  all  the  multifarious  technical
matters  with  which  statute  law  deals  :  and
therefore  they  have  often  to  look  for  the
explanation  of  a  term  or  a  precept  to  technical
information  supplied  by  specialists.  Un-
fortunately, however,  it  happens  only  too
often  that  experts  will  give  conflicting  opinions
or  vague  indications  which  it  is  not  easy  to
put  into  juristic  shape.  Take  the  following
clause  of  the  German  Civil  Code  :  ^  "A
person  may  lose  the  power  of  disposing  of
his  property,  if  he  cannot  attend  to  his  busi-
ness affairs  on  account  of  mental  disease  or
mental  debility."  What  is  mental  disease
and  what  mental  debility  from  the  scientific
point  of  view  ?  What  abnormal  conditions
of  the  mind  justify  a  court  in  decreeing  that
a  person  should  be  put  under  curatorship
or  forbidden  to  dispose  of  his  property  ?  How
are  limits  to  be  drawn  between  states  of
health  justifying  complete  and  partial  loss
of  the  power  of  disposition  ?  Medical  science
will  supply  lay  inquirers  with  rather  vague
and  contradictory  answers  to  these  questions.
1  S.  6,  1. Cf.  8.  104,  3  and  s.  114.


LEGISLATION  131

It  will  probably  tell  them  that  the  relation
between  mental  disease  and  mental  debility
is  not  easy  to  discover  from  the  medical  point
of  view,  and  that  it  would  be  quite  out  of
the  question  to  connect  the  full  loss  of  dis-
positive power  with  disease  and  the  partial
loss  of  it  with  mental  debility.  It  is  not  easy  to
utilize  such  advice  for  the  purpose  of  deciding
a  case.  The  Court  will  have  to  fall  back  on
common  sen^e  or  legal  tradition  in  most
instances  of  this  kind.  I  should  like  to  give
one  example  of  the  perplexing  problems  which
are  sometimes  set  to  judges  and  juries.
Though  the  case  I  am  about  to  cite  deals  with
the  construction  of  a  common  law  rule  and
not  of  a  statutory  clause,  it  will  sufficiently
illustrate  the  problems  of  interpretation  to
which  I  refer.  In  Regina  v.  Burton  (1863),
the  prisoner,  a  youth  of  eighteen,  was  indicted
for  the  murder  of  a  boy.  It  appeared  that
the  deceased  boy  had  been  playing  on  the
Lines,  a  public  place  at  Chatham,  where  the
prisoner  saw  him,  and  was  seen  near  him.
Some  hours  afterwards,  the  child's  dead  body
was  found  on  the  Lines.  The  throat  was  cut,
and  there  were  marks  of  a  violent  struggle.
The  police  were  engaged  in  prosecuting  their
inquiries,  when  the  prisoner  gave  himself  up.


132 COMMON-SENSE IN LAW

and  admitted  the  act,  recounting  all  the  cir-
cumstances with  perfect  intelligence.  He
added :  "I  knew  the  boy,  and  knew  his
mother,  but  I  had  no  particular  ill-feeling
against  the  boy;  only  I  had  made  up  my
mind  to  murder  somebody."  A  doctor  de-
posed that  the  prisoner's  mother  had  twice
been  to  a  lunatic  asylum  and  his  brother  was
of  weak  intellect.  .  .  .  The  witness  had  at-
tended the  prisoner  himself  on  two  occasions,
and  believed  he  was  labouring  under  what,
in  the  profession,  would  be  considered  as
"moral  insanity,"  that  is,  he  knew  perfectly
well  what  he  was  doing  but  had  no  control
over  himself.

Mr.  Justice  Wightman,  in  summing  up  the
case,  said  that  as  there  was  no  doubt  about
the  act,  the  only  question  was  whether  the
prisoner,  at  the  time  he  committed  it,  was  in
such  a  state  of  mind  as  not  to  be  responsible
for  it.  In  M'Naughten's  Case  (1843),  the
judges  laid  down  the  rule  to  be  that  there
must,  to  raise  the  defence,  be  a  defect  of
reason  from  disease  of  the  mind,  so  as  that
the  person  did  not  know  the  nature  and  quality
of  the  act  he  committed,  or  did  not  know  whether
it  was  right  or  wrong.  Now  to  apply  this  rule
to  the  present  case  would  be  the  duty  of  the


LEGISLATION  133

jury.  It  was  not  mere  eccentricity  of  con-
duct which  made  a  man  legally  irresponsible
for  his  acts.  The  medical  man  called  for
the  defence  defined  homicidal  mania  to  be
a  propensity  to  kill;  and  described  moral
insanity  as  a  state  of  mind  under  which  a
man,  perfectly  aware  that  it  was  wrong  to
do  so,  killed  another  under  an  uncontrollable
impulse.  This  would  appear  to  be  a  most
dangerous  doctrine  and  fatal  to  the  interests
of  society  and  to  security  of  life.  The
question  was  whether  such  a  theory  was  in
accordance  with  law.  The  rule  laid  down  by
the  judges  was  quite  inconsistent  with  such
a  view ;  for  it  was  that  a  man  was  responsible
for  his  actions  if  he  knew  the  difference  between
right  and  wrong.

The  jury,  on  this  interpretation  of  the  law,
found  the  prisoner  guilty,  and  he  was  executed.

The  case  illustrates  an  important  principle
of  technical  interpretation  :  it  will  be  seen
that  although  expert  opinion  was  given  in
the  case,  it  was  subject  to  searching  judicial
review.  Thus,  even  in  matters  of  the  most
technical  nature,  the  ultimate  opinion  must
rest  with  the  Court.

5.  Sometimes  the  best  way  to  ascertain  the
meaning  of  a  clause  will  be  to  consider  the


134 COMMON-SENSE IN LAW

actual  elaboration  of  the  enactment.  Minutes
of  committees'  debates  in  Parliament,  drafts
of  documents  and  of  examinations  of  witnesses,
may  enable  us  to  revive,  as  it  were,  the  state
of  mind  and  the  process  of  reasoning  in
legislators  or  negotiators  of  treaties.  French
Jurisprudence  especially  has  made  great  use
of  this  method  of  historical  interpretation  in
construing  Napoleon's  Code  in  the  sense  in
which  its  clauses  were  drafted  in  the  Conseil
d'etat  in  1804.

An  interesting  example  of  the  same  method
has  recently  been  before  the  public  in  this
country.  When  a  Bill  was  introduced  in  the
Congress  of  the  United  States  of  America  for
the  regulation  of  traffic  through  the  Panama
Canal,  and  it  became  apparent  that  a  dis-
crimination as  to  rates  would  be  made  be-
tween ships  belonging  to  the  United  States
and  those  of  other  countries.  Great  Britain
entered  a  protest  against  such  discrimination
on  the  ground  that  it  infringed  Clause  111  of
the  Hay-Pauncefote  Treaty  of  1901.  The
clause  reads  :

"  Art.  Ill,  1  :  The  canal  shall  be  free  and
open  to  the  vessels  of  commerce  and  of  war
of  "all  nations  observing  these  rules,  on  terms


LEGISLATION  135

of  entire  equality,  so  that  there  shall  be  no
discrimination  against  any  such  nation,  or
its  citizens  or  subjects,  in  respect  of  the  con-
ditions or  charges  of  traffic,  or  otherwise.
Such  conditions  and  charges  of  traffic  shall
be  just  and  equitable."

On  the  side  of  the  United  States  it  was
contended  that  the  clause  forbids  discrimina-
tion not  between  all  Powers  without  excep-
tion, but  between  all  Powers  using  the  canal
with  the  exception  of  the  United  States,  who
are  building  the  canal  and  will  administer  it
when  completed.  Should  we  limit  our  con-
sideration of  the  clause  to  its  actual  words,
the  question  would  hardly  admit  of  a  con-
clusive solution.  Each  side  might  support
its  interpretation  by  plausible  arguments  ;
but,  as  was  urged  by  European  jurists,  the
matter  assumes  a  different  aspect  if  one  recalls
the  circumstances  and  negotiations  which  led
up  to  the  Hay-Pauncefote  Treaty.  Firstly,
it  was  always  assumed  that  the  administration
of  the  canal  would  be  organized  on  the  lines
of  the  Declaration  of  Constantinople,  which
regulated  the  use  of  the  Suez  Canal  :  and  in
that  document  no  preference  was  given  in
regard  to  rates  to  any  Power. Secondly,  it


136 COMMON-SENSE IN LAW

was  pointed  out  that  the  Hay-Pauncefote
Treaty  was  substituted  for  the  Clayton-Bulwer
Treaty  of  1850,  which  contained  among  other
provisions  a  clause  ^  which  was  thus  inter-
preted by  Mr.  Blaine  (Secretary  of  State  under
Cleveland)  in  a  dispatch  to  Lowell  (United
States  Ambassador  at  the  Court  of  St.  James) :
"  The  United  States  did  not  seek  any  exclusive
or  narrow  commercial  privileges.  It  agrees,
and  will  proclaim,  that  the  same  rights  and
privileges,  the  same  tolls  and  obligations,  for
the  use  of  the  canal  shall  apply  with  absolute
impartiality  to  the  merchant  marine  of  every
nation  of  the  globe."

It  is  not  our  purpose  here  to  consider  the
merits  of  the  rival  contentions  in  this  case,
but  it  is  probable  that  if  it  ever  came  before
the  Hague  Tribunal,  the  method  of  historical
interpretation  of  the  disputed  clause  would
not  be  disregarded.

The  method  is  evidently  quite  appropriate
in  order  to  discover  the  intentions  of  law-
givers or  negotiators  of  treaties.  But  it  has
never  been  much  in  favour  in  the  practice  of
English  Courts  ;  and  even  on  the  Continent  it  is
recognized  more  and  more  that  circumstances
may  have  changed  so  much  since  the  time
1  Art.  VIII.


LEGISLATION  137

of  the  original  promulgation  that  it  would  be
preposterous  to  bind  the  Courts  strictly  to  the
views  which  obtained  at  that  time.

6.  A  very  important  group  is  formed  by
the  interpretation  of  clauses  in  which  the
words  and  terms  are  not  difficult  to  under-
stand, but  the  rule  itself  is  so  general  and
vague,  or  so  antiquated,  that  the  Court  has
to  add  limitations  or  subdivisions  of  its  own
to  supply  gaps  or  to  modernize  the  applica-
tion of  the  rule.  In  such  cases  the  interpreta-
tion is  not  merely  literal,  but  may  be  called
widening  interpretation.  In  its  capacity  of
interpreter  the  Court  is,  strictly  speaking,
precluded  from  introducing  new  principles
and  from  modifying  or  correcting  the  existing
law  :  but,  as  we  have  seen  in  connection  with
literal  interpretation,  a  court  cannot  be  limited
to  mere  mechanical  functions,  and  this  is
especially  so  when  judges  are  called  on  to
determine  not  merely  the  exact  significance
of  a  particular  term,  but  the  general  aim  and
effect  of  a  statutory  provision.  Here  it  is
often  necessary  for  Courts  to  interpret  clauses
by  somewhat  complicated  methods,  and  not
infrequently  the  effect  of  this  wider  interpre-
tation is  to  supply  gaps  in  existing  laws.
An  instance  is  furnished  by  the  Statute  of


138 COMMON-SENSE IN LAW

Frauds,  which  in  its  fourth  section  provides
that

"No  action  shall  be  brought  whereby
to  charge  .  .  .  any  person  .  .  .  upon  any
contract  or  sale  of  lands  tenements  or  here-
ditaments or  any  interest  in  or  concerning
them,  or  upon  any  agreement  that  is  not
to  be  performed  within  the  space  of  one
year  from  the  making  thereof  unless  the
agreement  upon  which  such  action  shall
be  brought  or  some  memorandum  or  note
thereof  shall  be  in  writing  and  signed  by
the  party  to  be  charged  therewith  or  some
other  person  thereunto  by  him  la^vfully
authorized."

But  on  the  fringe  of  the  clause,  as  it  were,
there  remained  several  doubtful  points  which
have  required  much  judicial  interpretation  :  for
example,  the  important  question  whether  the
course  of  the  year  mentioned  in  the  clause  is
to  be  reckoned  for  both  parties  or  only  for  the
defendant :  and  thus  it  has  been  necessary  for
the  omissions  in  a  single  section  of  this  Act
to  be  filled  up  by  a  long  and  laborious  process
of  judicial  interpretation — ^which,  indeed,  is
even  now  far  from  complete.


LEGISLATION  139

An  interesting  instance  of  interpretation
which  supplies,  as  it  were,  the  place  of  a
provision  missing  from  a  statute,  is  to  be
found  in  the  judgment  of  the  Privy  Council
in  a  Canadian  case  [The  Attorneys-General
of  the  Provinces  of  Ontario  and  others  v.  The
Attorney-General  for  Canada  (1912)].  The
point  raised  was  whether  or  not  an  Act  of
the  Dominion  Parliament  authorizing  the
putting  of  questions  either  of  law  or  of  fact
to  the  Supreme  Court  and  requiring  the
judges  of  that  Court  to  answer  them  on  the
request  of  the  Governor  in  Council,  was  a
valid  enactment  within  the  powers  of  that
Parliament.  It  was  argued  by  the  Provinces
that  "  no  Legislature  in  Canada  has  the
right  to  pass  an  Act  for  asking  such  questions
at  all."  The  power  to  ask  questions  of  the
Supreme  Court,  sought  to  be  bestowed  upon
the  Dominion  Government  by  the  Act  im-
pugned, was  so  wide  in  its  terms  as  to  admit
of  a  gross  interference  with  the  judicial  char-
acter of  that  Court,  and  was  therefore  of  grave
prejudice  to  the  rights  of  the  Provinces  and  of
individual  citizens.  Any  question,  whether
of  law  or  fact,  it  was  urged,  could  be  put  to
the  Supreme  Court,  and  they  would  be  re-
quired to  answer  it  with  their  reasons. Though


140 COMMON-SENSE IN LAW

no  immediate  effect  was  to  result  from  the
answer  so  given,  and  no  right  or  property
was  thereby  to  be  adjudged,  yet  the  indirect
result  of  such  a  proceeding  might  and  would
be  most  fatal.  When  the  opinion  of  the
highest  Court  of  Appeal  for  all  Canada  had
once  been  given  upon  matters  both  of  law
and  of  fact,  it  was  said,  it  was  not  in  human
nature  to  expect  that,  if  the  same  matter
were  again  raised  upon  a  concrete  case  by  an
individual  litigant  before  the  same  Court,  its
members  could  divest  themselves  of  their  pre-
conceived opinions ;  and  thus  there  might
ensue  not  merely  a  distrust  of  their  freedom
from  prepossession,  but  actual  injustice,  in-
asmuch as  they  would  in  fact,  however
unintentionally,  be  biassed.

The  Judicial  Committee,  however,  decided
against  these  contentions,  and  gave  the
following  reasons,  among  others,  for  their
decision  ;

"  In  the  interpretation  of  a  completely
self-governing  Constitution  founded  upon
a  written  organic  instrument,  such  as  the
British  North  America  Act,  if  the  text  is
explicit  the  text  is  conclusive,  alike  in  what
it  directs  and  what  it  forbids. When  the


LEGISLATION  141

text  is  ambiguous  .  .  .  recourse  must  be  had
to  the  context  and  scheme  of  the  Act.  Again,
if  the  text  says  nothing  expressly,  then  it  is
not  to  be  presumed  that  the  Constitution
withholds  the  power  altogether.  On  the
contrary,  it  is  to  be  taken  for  granted  that
the  power  is  bestowed  in  some  quarter,  un-
less it  be  extraneous  to  the  statute  itself  (as,
for  example,  a  power  to  make  laws  for  some
part  of  his  Majesty's  Dominions  outside  of
Canada)  or  otherwise  is  clearly  repugnant  to
its  sense.  .  .  .

"  Is  it  then  to  be  said  that  a  power  to
place  upon  the  Supreme  Court  the  duty  of
answering  questions  of  law  or  fact  when  put
by  the  Governor  in  Council  does  not  reside
in  the  Parliament  of  Canada  ?  This  par-
ticular power  is  not  mentioned  in  the  British
North  America  Act,  either  explicitly  or  in
ambiguous  terms.  In  the  91st  section,  the
Dominion  Parliament  is  invested  with  the
duty  of  making  laws  for  the  peace,  order,
and  good  government  of  Canada,  subject  to
expressed  reservations.  In  the  101st  section,
the  Dominion  is  enabled  to  establish  a
Supreme  Court  of  Appeal  from  the  Provinces.
And  so  when  the  Supreme  Court  was  estab-
lished it  had  and  has  jurisdiction  to  hear


142 COMMON-SENSE IN LAW

appeals  from  the  Provincial  Courts.  But  of
any  power  to  ask  the  Court  for  its  opinion,
there  is  no  word  in  the  Act.  All  depends
upon  whether  such  a  power  is  repugnant  to
that  Act."

The  Judicial  Committee  came  to  the  con-
clusion that  it  was  not  repugnant.  They
observed  that  the  right  of  putting  questions
to  the  law  courts  as  to  the  state  of  the  law
had  been  exerted  and  was  still  extant  under
the  Constitution  of  Great  Britain,  that  the
Dominion  Parliament  had  made  use  of  this
right  six  times  without  its  actions  being
challenged,  and  that  the  Provinces  actually
exercised  that  right  in  regard  to  their  own
Courts.  Under  these  circumstances,  the
Judicial  Committee  thought  that  there  was
no  juridical  ground  for  declaring  the  Act
passed  by  the  Dominion  Parliament  to  be
invalid.

Striking  instances  of  widening  interpret-
ation are  afforded  by  the  problems  set  to  the
ingenuity  of  the  judges  of  the  Supreme  Court
of  the  United  States  by  the  necessity  of
subordinating  the  expansion  of  modern  civil-
ization to  the  provisions  of  a  constitution
framed  in  1788. Any  attempt  on  the  part


LEGISLATION  143

of  legislators  to  make  laws  excessively  rigid
must  inevitably  compel  tribunals  to  put  as
wide  a  construction  as  possible  on  their
power  of  interpretation  :  and  this  result  has
undoubtedly  been  produced  by  the  obstacles
which  the  Constitution  of  the  United  States
has  opposed  to  its  own  amendment. ^

Article  I,  s.  8,  of  the  Constitution  of  the
United  States  contains  a  number  of  clauses
conferring  on  the  Federal  Legislature  the
power  to  make  laws  for  the  Union  in  regard
to  certain  specified  matters.  One  of  the  sub-
sections of  s.  8  empowers  Congress  to  coin
money  and  to  regulate  its  value,  while  another
confers  upon  it  the  power  to  regulate  com-
merce with  foreign  countries  and  between
different  States.  Both  sub-sections  gave  rise
to  contradictory  interpretation.  Under  s.  8
Congress  declared  the  paper  notes  issued  by
the  United  States  legal  tender  for  the  pay-
ment of  debts,  in  spite  of  the  fact  that  the

^  As  is  well  known,  an  amendment  can  only  be  initiated
by  a  majority  of  two-thirds  of  both  Houses  of  Congress,
or  two-thirds  of  the  legislatures  of  individual  states;  it
can  only  be  carried  with  the  consent  of  a  majority  of
three-fourths  of  the  legislatures  or  of  the  Constitutional
Conventions.  Tliese  provisions  make  the  process  of
amendment  practically  unworkable — except  by  political
convulsions  like  that  of  the  Civil  War,  which  led  to  the
passing  of  Articles  13,  14  and  15.


144 COMMON-SENSE IN LAW

paper  money  brought  a  much  lower  price  in
the  market  than  the  gold  and  silver  coins  to
which  its  units  nominally  correspond.  When
the  Legal  Tender  Law  was  enacted  in  1870,
private  individuals  refused  to  accept  notes
at  their  face  value  in  payment  for  debts,
and  when  the  cases  came  up  for  decision,
the  Supreme  Court  began  by  giving  a  strict
interpretation  to  the  clause  of  the  Consti-
tution and  invalidated  the  law  passed  by
Congress  as  unconstitutional,  because  there
was  no  mention  in  the  clause  of  a  power  to
give  notes  an  artificial  value  as  against  coined
money.  In  consequence  of  changes  in  the
composition  of  the  Supreme  Court,  however,
this  interpretation  was  overruled  as  early  as
1871,  and  the  Legal  Tender  Law  was  admitted
to  be  within  the  power  conferred  by  clause  8.
Another  difficulty  arises  under  this  clause
with  regard  to  the  regulation  of  commerce.
The  power  of  Congress  to  regulate  interstate
commerce  implies,  of  course,  that  commerce
within  each  State  is  to  be  regulated  by  the
authorities  of  the  State.  Yet  the  inter-
dependence of  the  various  departments  of
commerce  is  very  great,  and  it  was  found
impossible  to  assign  jurisdiction  strictly
according  to  territorial  divisions. As  one  of


LEGISLATION  145

the  judges  of  the  Supreme  Court  (Justice
Moody)  put  it :  "  It  is  said  that  Congress  has
never  before  enacted  legislation  of  this  nature
for  the  government  of  interstate  commerce
by  land.  .  .  .  The  fundamental  fallacy  of
this  argument  is  that  it  misunderstands  the
nature  of  the  Constitution  .  .  .  and  forgets
that  its  unchanging  provisions  are  adaptable
to  the  infinite  variety  of  the  changing  con
ditions  of  our  national  life.  ...  It  is  not
too  much  to  say  that  the  large  needs  of  the
factory  and  the  household  are  no  longer  de-
pendent on  the  resources  of  the  locality,  but
are  largely  supplied  by  the  products  of  other
states."  As  regards  the  transport  of  goods,
it  was  held  that  the  Federal  Government  had
authority  even  when  certain  parts  of  the
transport  service  were  in  the  hands  of  carriers
within  the  limits  of  a  particular  State.  In
the  case  of  the  Daniel  Ball,  a  steamer  plying
within  the  State  of  Michigan,  the  Supreme
Court  stated  the  doctrine  for  the  first  time :

"  If  the  authority  of  the  United  States
Government  does  not  extend  to  an  agency
in  such  commerce  when  that  agency  is
confined  within  the  limits  of  a  State,  its
entire  authority  may  be  defeated. Several

K


146 COMMON-SENSE IN LAW

agencies  combining,  each  taking  up  the
commodity  transported  at  the  bomidary
hne  at  one  end  of  a  state,  and  leaving  it
at  the  boundary  Hne  at  the  other  end,
the  federal  jurisdiction  would  be  entirely
ousted,  and  the  constitutional  provision
would  become  a  dead  letter."

The  principle  was  naturally  extended  to
transport  by  land.  On  the  other  hand,  the
Supreme  Court  has  insisted  hitherto  on  draw-
ing a  line  of  delimitation  between  commerce
and  manufacturing  industry,  treating  the  first
as  an  interstate  concern  even  when  a  particular
firm  of  merchants  is  established  in  some
single  State,  but  refusing  to  extend  the  same
view  to  factories.  In  1906  Congress  passed
a  law  providing  "  that  every  carrier  engaged
in  such  commerce  should  be  liable  to  any  of
its  employees  for  all  damages  caused  by  the
negligence  of  any  of  its  officers,  and  that  the
fact  that  the  employee  was  guilty  of  con-
tributory negligence  should  not  of  itself  bar
recovery  " ;  but  the  Supreme  Court  declared
this  Act  of  Congress  to  be  unconstitutional,
because  it  "  applied  in  terms  to  any  of  the
employees  of  a  firm  and  thus  affected  em-
ployees not  engaged  in  interstate  and  foreign


LEGISLATION  147

commerce."  It  is  very  difficult,  however,  to
uphold  strictly  this  line  of  cleavage,  and  the
Supreme  Court  will  probably  be  constrained
to  widen  its  interpretation  of  the  clause.

7.  As  a  result  of  all  these  observations  we
are  entitled  to  say,  I  think,  that  legislation  as
a  source  of  law  is  inseparable  from  a  process
of  interpretation  by  the  Courts,  which  in  itself
amounts  to  a  subordinate  source  of  law.  It
is  impossible  to  curtail  the  freedom  of  judges
in  analysing  cases  and  applying  general  rules
in  ways  not  indicated  in  the  rule  and  not
premeditated  by  the  legislators.  Thus  in  the
simplest  and  most  emphatic  expression  of
the  law-making  power  of  societies,  we  find
that  another  factor  asserts  itself  by  the  side
of  that  of  deliberate  prospective  commands,
namely,  the  force  of  public  opinion  and  of
professional  opinion  as  manifested  in  the
action  of  judges.  They  are  undoubtedly
persons  in  authority,  but  their  voice  has  a
decisive  Aveight  in  such  questions  not  merely  on
account  of  this  external  authority,  but  chiefly
by  reason  of  the  necessities  imposed  by  logic,
by  moral  and  by  practical  considerations.


CHAPTER VI

CUSTOM

1.  Custom  as  a  source  of  law  comprises  legal
rules  which  have  neither  been  promulgated
by  legislators  nor  formulated  by  profession-
ally trained  judges,  but  arise  from  popular
opinion  and  are  sanctioned  by  long  usage.
The  word  "  custom "  may  mean  a  great
deal  besides  this ;  it  may,  for  instance,  denote
the  usual  behaviour  of  men  in  certain  circum-
stances ;  thus  in  the  inquiry  into  the  Titanic
disaster,  attempts  were  made  to  ascertain
whether  or  not  it  was  customary  for  captains
of  ships  to  reduce  speed  when  near  icebergs.
The  apportionment  of  responsibility  for  torts
and  crime,  as  well  as  the  interpretation  of
contracts,  often  turns  on  the  consideration  of
such  habits  and  presumptions.  But  these
inquiries  into  habitual  behaviour  have  nothing
to  do  with  what  is  termed  customary  law  or
legal  customs.  The  latter  is  restricted  to
rules  regulating  rights  when  those  rules  are
established  not  by  legislators  or  by  professional
148


CUSTOM  149

lawyers,  but  by  popular  practice.  Primitive
law  is  to  a  large  extent  based  on  such  customs,
while  with  the  progress  of  society  they  tend
to  be  displaced  by  express  legislation  and  by
rules  elaborated  by  lawyers.  The  historical
school  led  by  Savigny  attached  the  greatest
importance  to  this  source  of  law  :  it  was  in
their  view  the  unsophisticated  sense  of  the
nation  in  regard  to  questions  of  right.  Being
based  on  national  character  and  on  the
opinions  of  the  people,  custom  was  regarded
by  them  as  the  outward  expression  of  latent
principles  which  were  sure  to  be  more  in
keeping  with  the  notions  of  justice  ingrained
in  a  given  society  than  the  artificial  creations
of  statecraft  or  of  scientific  jurisprudence.
They  pointed  out  how  such  artificial  super-
structures were  often  doomed  to  destruction
on  account  of  the  latent  hostility  with  which
they  were  received  by  the  people  for  whom
they  had  been  built  up  :  how  powerless  purely
rationalistic  contrivances  are  apt  to  be  when
brought  in  contact  with  realities  governed
by  entirely  different  psychological  tendencies  :
and  they  contended  that  the  surest  method
for  rearing  a  durable  and  imposing  edifice  of
positive  law  was  to  build  it  up  on  foundations
supplied by national custom  and  historical


150 COMMON-SENSE IN LAW

usage.  But  the  enthusiasm  for  this  particular
source  of  law  has  cooled  down  a  great  deal,
and  the  teaching  of  the  historical  school  has
been  subjected  to  most  searching  and  hostile
criticism.

Laws  and  legal  customs  are  undoubtedly
coloured  by  historical  circumstances,  and
depend  to  a  great  extent  on  the  complex
result  which  may  be  described  as  national
character  or  national  spirit.  Germans  treat
questions  of  law  and  right  in  a  very  different
way  from  Frenchmen  or  Englishmen.  But
they  also  write  poetry  and  paint  pictures  in
a  different  way,  and  yet  no  one  would  think
of  defining  poetry  or  painting  as  the  ex-
pression of  national  ideas  in  literature  or  art.
We  are  asking  what  law,  literature,  art  mean,
and  not  how  they  are  affected  by  national
character.

The  leaders  of  the  historical  school  always
spoke  of  legal  custom  as  the  creation  of  a
people  at  large  :  while  in  reality  most  customs
arise  from  local  usage,  and  legal  customs  like
those  of  mediaeval  Germany  or  mediaeval
France  present  a  bewildering  variety  of  pro-
vincial, municipal,  manorial  and  professional
rules  :  and  it  is  only  by  State  legislation  and
by  the  centralizing  work  of  Royal  Courts  that


CUSTOM  151

national  unity  is  gradually  evolved.  A
striking  example  of  the  growth  of  custom
and  its  incorporation  into  the  common  law
is  provided  in  England  by  the  Law  Merchant.
Originally  the  rules  governing  mercantile
intercourse  grew  up  by  usage,  and  were
recognized  among  merchants  themselves  as
possessing  binding  authority.  These  customs
in  England  were  throughout  a  long  period  a
definite  body  of  special  rules  administered  by
local  courts  with  the  help  of  professional
experts  :  but  in  course  of  time,  and  luider  the
influence  of  great  lawyers  like  Lord  Mansfield,
they  became  absorbed  into  the  common  law.
This  body  of  particular  customary  law  is,  as
was  said  in  a  well-known  case,  "  neither  more
nor  less  than  the  usages  of  merchants  and
traders  .  .  .  ratified  by  the  decisions  of
courts  of  laAv,  which,  upon  such  usages
being  proved  before  them,  have  adopted
them  as  settled  law  "  :  ^  and  at  the  present
day  most  of  the  rules  are  to  be  found  em-
bodied in  the  Sale  of  Goods  Act,  1893.

The mystic talk about popular convic-
tion as  to  law  originates  to  a  great  extent
in  a  confusion  between  opinion  and  positive
rules,  while  at  the  same  time  special  wisdom
1  Goodwin  v.  Eobarta  (1875).


152 COMMON-SENSE IN LAW

is  often  assumed  in  cases  in  which  it  would
have  been  equally  wise  to  go  either  to  the
right  or  to  the  left,  and  custom  merely
testifies  to  a  more  or  less  casual  choice  between
two  or  three  equally  expedient  courses.  Why
should  two  witnesses  be  required  to  make  a
will  and  not  three,  or  why  should  it  be  neces-
sary to  summon  a  party  three  times  before
claiming  the  intervention  of  an  official  to  help
to  bring  the  recalcitrant  opponent  to  trial  ?
As  a  matter  of  abstract  wisdom,  two  or  four
times  would  do  equally  well.

Lastly,  if  popular  custom  is  natural  and
characteristic  in  early  stages  of  legal  history,
as  a  child-like  speech  and  manners  are  natural
and  characteristic  of  infancy,  it  would  be  as
preposterous  to  try  to  fetter  advanced  civiliza-
tion by  rudimentary  customs  as  it  would  be
to  dress  a  grown-up  man  in  a  child's  clothes.
A  stage  is  necessarily  reached  by  any  pro-
gressive community  when  naive  and  tradi-
tional notions  of  right  must  give  way  before
sharper  dialectics  and  systematized  learning.
The  fact  that  law  becomes  more  and  more  the
special  province  of  professional  lawyers  is
neither  strange  nor  regrettable.

2.  In  spite  of  these  criticisms,  perfectly
justified  in  themselves,  there  is  a  core  of  sound


CUSTOM  153

reason  in  the  study  of  custom  as  one  of  the
sources  of  law.  Even  highly  developed
systems  do  not  pretend  to  fix  every  particular
of  legal  arrangements  by  central  agencies,
but  leave  a  considerable  margin  in  the  adjust-
ment of  local  interests  not  only  for  bye-laws,
but  also  for  traditional  customs.  Readers  of
Mr.  Eden  Phill potts'  interesting  novel,  The
Portreeve,  will  remember  the  description  of  the
antique  customs  of  the  Duchy  of  Cornwall
which  govern  pastoral  pursuits  on  Dartmoor.
Moor-men  who  possess  Venville  Rights  are
entitled  to  depasture  their  beasts  on  the
common  of  the  Moor ;  and  in  order  to  insure
that  these  rights  are  not  arrogated  by  "  for-
eigners," the  curious  ceremony  of  the  colt-
drift  is  performed.  The  appointed  day  for
the  drift  is  kept  a  secret,  so  that  the  "  for-
eigners "  may  be  taken  unawares  and  fined  for
their  presumption  ;  and  when  the  time  comes,
all  the  ponies  on  the  common  are  "  rounded
up  "  into  the  pound,  and  there  marked  for
future  identification.  The  ceremony  is  the
more  interesting  because  it  probably  goes
back  to  practices  even  more  ancient  than  the
feudal  period — in  any  case  unconnected  with
manorial  arrangements.  A  great  deal,  too,
of  the  law  of  copyhold  is  based  simply  on


154 COMMON-SENSE IN LAW

manorial  custom  :  although  under  the  Copy-
hold Act,  1894,  this  form  of  tenure  is  subject
to  compulsory  enfranchisement,  and  there  is
consequently  a  tendency  for  it  to  disappear,
yet  so  long  as  it  continues  in  existence,  there
are  many  points  connected  with  individual
estates  which  are  referable  only  to  the  "  cus-
tom of  the  manor  "  :  and  thus  the  usages  of
a  feudal  society  are  often  of  the  highest
importance  to  the  rights  of  individuals  in  the
twentieth  century.

3.  It  must  not  be  supposed  that  custom  is
a  valid  source  of  English  law  merely  because
it  has  in  fact  been  recognized  and  acted  upon.
Before  it  can  become  part  of  the  law  of  the
land  it  has  first  to  pass  certain  judicial  tests.
Thus  before  a  custom  can  have  validity  in
law  it  must  be  shown  to  be  both  certain  and
continuous :  and  besides  these  elementary
requirements,  it  must  have  an  existence  from
immemorial  time.  The  period  of  "  legal
memory  "  is  supposed  in  English  law  to  run
from  the  accession  of  Richard  I  (1189);  but
in  practice,  it  is  not  necessary  to  prove  the
continuous  existence  of  custom  from  that
time.  The  legal  requirements  in  this  respect
are  well  summarized  by  Cockburn,  C.J.,  in
Dalton  V. Angus (1881). In  that case  the


CUSTOM  155

question  at  issue  concerned  what  is  legally
termed  the  "  right  of  lateral  support."  The
general  rule  of  law  is  that  a  man  is  entitled  to
lateral  support  for  his  land — i.  e.  if  A  and  B
are  adjoining  landowners,  A  cannot  excavate
his  own  land  in  such  a  way  as  to  undermine
B's.  But  this  right  of  support  does  not  in
general  extend  to  buildings  upon  the  land;
and  the  question  in  this  case  was  whether  the
right  might  be  acquired  for  buildings  by
prescription.

The  Chief  Justice,  dealing  with  the  history
of  the  limitations  of  the  legal  prescriptive
period,  used  certain  expressions  which  apply
generally  to  the  judicial  interpretation  of
"  legal  memory."  Having  mentioned  that
the  Statute  of  Westminster  (1275),  as  applied
by  the  Courts,  fixed  the  limit  of  the  period
at  the  accession  of  Richard  I,  he  continued  :

"  As  might  have  been  foreseen,  as  time
went  on,  the  limitation  thus  fixed  became
attended  with  the  inconvenience  arising
from  the  impossibility  of  carrying  back
the  proof  of  possession  or  enjoyment  to  a
period,  which,  after  a  generation  or  two,
ceased  to  be  within  the  reach  of  evidence.
But here  again,  the  legislature  not inter-


156 COMMON-SENSE IN LAW

vening,  the  judges  provided  a  remedy  by
holding  that  if  the  proof  was  carried  back
as  jar  as  living  memory  would  go,  it  should
be  presumed  that  the  right  claimed  had
existed  from  time  of  legal  memory,  that
is  to  say,  from  the  time  of  Richard  I."

Again,  in  modern  English  Courts  custom
must  pass  the  test  of  reasonableness:  that  is
it  must  be  reasonable  in  its  application  to  the
circumstances  of  individual  cases.  It  does  not
follow,  however,  that  because  a  custom  in  one
particular  locality  runs  counter  to  a  general  rule
of  common  law,  it  will  therefore  be  held  to
be  unreasonable.  In  Wigglesworth  v.  Dallison
(1778)  the  plaintiff  was  a  leaseholder  and
the  defendant  his  landlord.  After  the  plain-
tiff's lease  had  expired,  the  defendant  entered
upon  the  land  and  took  away  the  grooving
crop  :  whereupon  the  leaseholder  brought  an
action  of  trespass.  The  defendant  relied  on
the  contention  that  the  land  was  his  property
in  freehold,  and  that  after  the  lease  had
expired  he  had  a  right  to  resume  possession
and  take  the  growing  crop,  since  it  was  a
general  rule  of  law  that  a  tenant  could  not
claim  a  crop  which  was  sown  by  him  before
the  determination  of  his  lease,  and  which  he


CUSTOM  157

knew  would  be  ripe  for  cutting  after  the
lease  had  expired.  The  plaintiff,  however,
set  up  as  against  this  general  rule  a  local
custom  that  the  tenant  should  take  the
"  way-going "  crop.  The  Court  found  this
custom  proved,  and  Lord  Mansfield  said  :
"  We  have  thought  of  this  case,  and  we  are
all  of  opinion  that  the  custom  is  good.  It
is  just,  for  he  who  sows  ought  to  reap,  and
it  is  for  the  benefit  and  encouragement  of
agriculture.  It  is,  indeed,  against  the  general
rule  of  law  concerning  emblements  {i.  e.
growing  crops),  which  are  not  allowed  to
tenants  who  know  when  their  term  is  to
cease,  because  it  is  held  to  be  their  fault  or
folly  to  have  sown,  when  they  knew  their
interest  would  expire  before  they  could  reap.
But  the  custom  of  a  particular  place  may
rectify  what  otherwise  would  be  imprudence
or  folly."

On  the  other  hand,  a  custom  which  can  be
shown  to  be  of  great  antiquity  will  some-
times be  repudiated  by  the  Courts  if  its
rigid  application  to  modern  circumstances
would  be  so  harsh  and  inconvenient  that  it
would  be  unreasonable  to  enforce  it.  This
point  is  suggested  by  the  fact  that,  in  spite
of  all  their  reverence  for  ancient  usages  and


158 COMMON-SENSE IN LAW

forms,  English  Courts  find  it  necessary  not  to
yield  to  custom  on  purely  formal  grounds.
Things  of  immemorial  gro^vth  may  be  tainted
by  very  backward  conceptions  of  right  and
of  public  duty.  In  MeHens  v.  Hill  (1901),
Mertens  sued,  as  lord  of  the  manor  and  soke  of
Rothley,  which  had  belonged  to  King  Edward
the  Confessor  and  William  the  Conqueror,  to
recover  from  defendant  a  customary  fine  of
one  shilling  in  the  pound  in  respect  of  a  piece
of  land  recently  conveyed  to  him,  and  alleged
to  be  within  the  ambit  of  the  manor  and  soke.
Rolls  of  courts  in  the  possession  of  the  lord  of
the  manor,  and  dating  from  1575,  were  pro-
duced. A  manorial  custom  in  a  manor  of
ancient  demesne  to  exact  a  fine  on  alienation
to  a  foreigner  was  held  bad,  under  the  Statute
Qida  Emptores  (1290)  and  on  other  grounds,
as  being  a  restriction  on  the  right  of  a  freeman
to  alienate.  The  Court  was  clearly  led  to  its
decision  by  the  view  that  it  would  be  un-
reasonable and  unjust  to  keep  up  the  anti-
quated customs  which  prevailed  for  centuries
in  manors  of  ancient  demesne  in  respect  of  the
alienation  of  land.  For  modern  lawyers,  such
rates  and  fines  as  were  inflicted  on  the  free-
holders of  the  soke  of  Rothley  were  absurd,
and  it  is  in  this  conflict  of  the  modern  principle


CUSTOM  159

of  free  trade  with  feudal  customs  that  the
real  reason  for  the  decision  must  be  sought.
The  appeal  to  the  Statute  Quia  Emptores  was,
in  fact,  a  historical  misapprehension ;  this
enactment  was  never  meant  to  regulate  the
sale  of  land  within  such  an  estate  as  the  soke
of  Rothley,  and  as  a  matter  of  fact  fmes  on
alienation  were  levied  in  different  ways  for
many  centuries  after  the  statute  had  been
passed.  But  the  objection  to  the  custom,
though  it  may  have  been  bad  from  a  historical
point  of  view,  was  a  weighty  one  from  the
point  of  view  of  modern  legal  and  economic
principles.

4.  But  it  is  clear  that  if  custom  has  once
been  legally  recognized,  it  cannot  be  judged
by  modern  standards  alone.  To  some  extent
ancient  standards  will  have  to  be  recognized
even  in  modern  surroundings  :  and  it  will
sometimes  happen  that  although  a  custom
has  quite  lost  its  original  significance,  it  will
still  be  upheld  in  modern  times.  Certain
customs  connected  with  land-tenures  may
have  been  amply  justified  by  feudal  conditions,
but  will  be  quite  incongruous  in  a  modern
civilization  :  yet  they  may  be  enforced  by  the
Courts.  Copyhold  tenure  affords  a  curious
example  in  the  custom  of  heriot. In  mediaeval


160 COMMON-SENSE IN LAW

times  it  was  usual  for  a  lord  to  provide
the  outfit  for  his  tenant ;  for  military  fol-
lowers, this  outfit  would  be  war-equipment,
part  of  which  fell  back  to  the  lord  as  a  heriot
at  the  death  of  the  tenant.  For  peasants,  the
equipment  would  be  agricultural,  and  a  similar
heriot  was  exacted  in  the  shape  of  the  best
beast  (or  best  chattel).  On  copyhold  lands
similar  customs  are  recognized  even  in  modern
times.  In  itself  the  custom  of  heriot  certainly
cannot  be  justified  by  reasonable  considera-
tions nowadays  :  indeed,  as  long  ago  as  1709
it  was  declared  by  a  Lord  Chancellor  ^  to  be,
from  the  point  of  view  of  equity,  "  unreason-
able, the  loss  a  family  sustains  thereby  being
aggravated  "  :  and  yet  customs  of  heriot  are
often  upheld  at  the  present  time,  chiefly  on
copyhold  tenements.  Thus  in  Harrison  v.
Powell  (1894)  the  defendant  was  lord  of  a
manor,  and  on  the  death  of  a  certain  tenant,
entered  on  the  land,  which  was  in  occupation
of  the  deceased's  executors,  and  marked  two
horses  and  a  cow  :  and  later  on,  again  entered,
took  away  the  beasts,  and  sold  them.  The
executors  claimed  damages  for  trespass  and
for  seizure  of  the  cattle.  The  records  of  the
manor  were  carefully  examined;  the  Court
^  Wirty  V.  Pemberton.


CUSTOM  161

came  to  the  conclusion  that  a  heriot  custom
was  proved,  and  that  the  defendant  was
therefore  perfectly  entitled  to  enter  and  take
the  beasts.

English  Courts  have  not  only  to  consider
the  operation  of  ancient  customs  in  modern
conditions,  but  also  to  understand,  and  often
to  respect,  the  customs  of  other  civilizations.
It  would  be  the  grossest  travesty  of  justice  if
English  judges,  in  considering  the  custom  of
(say)  India  or  Burmah,  were  guided  solely  by
European  conceptions  of  right  and  wrong.
The  jurisprudence  of  the  Judicial  Committee
of  the  Privy  Council  affords  many  signal
instances  of  a  respectful  treatment  of  foreign
popular  customs.

In  a  case  of  1906 — Musammat  Lali  v.  Murli
Dhar — the  question  at  issue  was  one  of  dis-
puted succession.  The  respondent  claimed
the  property  not  only  as  the  adopted  son  of
the  deceased,  but  under  a  will  contained  in  a
wajib-ul-arz.  This  word  means  literally  "  that
which  it  is  necessary  to  record  or  state."  It
is  really  a  "  record  of  rights,"  which,  besides
registering  the  rights  of  individuals  in  various
proprietary  or  possessory  relations,  records
many  village  customs — e.  g.  in  regard  to
market-tolls,  local  usages  connected  with  land-

L


162 COMMON-SENSE IN LAW

tenure — in  fact,  all  matters  relating  to  village
administration.  It  was  highly  important  in
the  case  that  the  Court  should  consider  the
nature  and  effect  of  the  document,  and  it  was
admitted  that  as  a  record  of  purely  customary
institutions,  the  wajih-ul-arz  was  legal  evidence
which  an  English  Court  was  bound  to  consider.
The  peculiarity  in  such  cases  is  that  European
lawyers  have  to  make  an  effort  to  assume  a
point  of  view  which  is  foreign  to  their  own
minds,  but  which  has  directed  the  thought  of
the  native  parties.  For  example,  in  a  case
before  the  Privy  Council  in  1906 — Kannepalli
Suryanarayana  v.  Pucha  Venkataramana — &
husband  had  authorized  his  wife  to  adopt  to
him  a  son.  Twenty-four  years  after  her  hus-
band's death,  she  adopted  a  boy,  but  the  child
died  a  few  months  afterwards.  Thirteen  years
later  she  adopted  another  son.  The  question
was  whether  this  second  adoption  was  valid.
Clearly  it  was  contrary  to  the  most  elementary
English  legal  and  social  ideas ;  but  the  two
objects  of  the  deceased  husband — "  to  secure
spiritual  benefit  to  himself  and  to  continue
his  line  " — were  held  "  meritorious  in  the  view
of  Hindu  law,"  and  therefore  deserving  of
recognition  by  an  English  Court.

5.  In  order  to  study  the  operation  of  custom


CUSTOM  163

in  all  its  significance  and  bearings,  it  is  best
to  turn  to  earlier  periods  of  legal  history.  By
observing  the  peculiarities  of  the  process  of
law-making  during  these  earlier  periods  we
obtain  clues  which  may  be  found  valuable
even  in  regard  to  later  developments.  The
first  thing  to  be  noticed  is  that  legal  customs
often  arise  independently  of  any  litigation,
by  the  gro\\i;h  of  definite  views  as  to  rights
and  duties.  Familial  authority  was  regulated
chiefly  by  such  views  as  were  adapted  to
economic  requirements  and  social  conditions.
Monogamy,  polygamy,  polyandry,  group
marriage,  began  as  usages  of  daily  life  before
they  took  shape  as  legal  customs.  So  did
marital  authority,  emancipation,  succession
to  goods  and  succession  to  land.  The  history
of  intestate  succession  is  rich  in  examples  of
interesting  changes  in  the  formulation  of  rules,
and  all  these  changes  were  originally  produced
by  the  operation  of  non- litigious  custom.
Whether  all  the  children  had  to  share  in  the
succession  of  the  father,  or  whether  sons
inherited  land  to  the  exclusion  of  daughters,
or  whether  the  eldest  or  the  youngest  came  to
the  hearth  and  landed  estate :  these  and  simi-
lar rules  were  certainly  not  commands  of
authorit}',  nor  rules  primarily  evolved  in  the


164 COMMON-SENSE IN LAW

course  of  trials,  but  practical  arrangements
of  the  interested  persons,  approved  by  the
opinion  of  their  neighbours  and  gradually
ripening  into  customary  rules  which  could  be
appealed  to  in  case  of  litigation.  The  fact  is
worth  notice,  because  the  rules  in  question  are
by  no  means  unimportant  and  certainly
cannot  be  accounted  for  on  the  Austinian
theory  of  State  command.  In  the  same  way
the  English  law  of  real  property  grew  up  with
constant  reference  to  important  rules  created
by  the  usage  of  the  country-side,  e.g.  rules  as  to
cultivation  of  open  fields,  the  use  of  meadows
and  pastures,  the  delimitation  of  boundaries,
and  so  forth.  Or  take  the  law  of  persons,  and
notice  the  growth  of  rules  as  to  serfdom  and
gentle  birth.

It  is  impossible  to  construe  customary  law
purely  on  the  principle  of  instinctive  or
conscious  repetition  of  the  same  rules,  as  some
jurists  have  attempted  to  do,  or  to  explain  it
by  prescription,  as  the  doctors  of  Canon  Law
were  fond  of  doing ;  both  elements  contribute
greatly  to  uphold  customary  rules  once  they
are  formed,  but  they  cannot  account  for  their
origin  and  growth.  Mechanical  repetition
may  serve  to  explain  the  formation  of  usages —
e.  g.  rights  of  way — but  how  does  it  apply  in


CUSTOM  165

the  case  of  fundamental  legal  institutions  like
marriage,  succession,  contract,  etc.  ?  Obvi-
ously it  does  not  :  and  we  are  thus  driven  to
assume,  in  spite  of  the  obscurity  with  which
such  early  institutions  are  necessarily  sur-
rounded, that  there  was  a  conscious  activity
of  elders,  priests,  judges,  witans,  or  experts
of  some  kind  directed  towards  the  discovery
and  declaration  of  what  is  right  and  just  :  a
process  of  discovery  which,  however  mystically
imagined  and  solemnly  presented,  must  really
have  consisted  in  the  formulation  of  rules  as
emergency  required  in  accordance  with  popular
conceptions  of  right.  Fortunately  we  are
not  left  without  direct  evidence  as  to  this
process  of  discovery  and  declaration.  It  is
expressly  described  in  Germanic  legal  history
as  the  "  finding  and  manifestation  of  law  "
{das  Recht  finden,  das  Recht  weisen).  The
assessors  of  a  Frankish  tribunal  had  to
"  find  the  law  "  for  parties  who  had  challenged
them  by  a  solemn  formula  {tangano)  to  do  so.
The  Schoffen  of  mediaeval  German  law  had  to
formulate  decisions  (Urtheile)  at  every  step
of  a  trial,  in  order  to  solve  the  string  of
questions  of  law  and  fact  which  were  put  to
them.  The  lagmen  of  Scandinavian  courts,
who  at  a  later  period  were  not  unknown  in


IGC COMMON-SENSE IN LAW

the  Danish  districts  of  England,  also  held  the
position  of  judicial  authorities  declaring  the
law.  What  their  functions  were  in  this
respect  may  be  gathered  from  the  fact  that
the  ancient  provincial  laws  of  Sweden  con-
sisted of  pronouncements  by  these  authorities.
This  institution  assumed  a  most  peculiar  shape
in  Iceland,  where  we  find  a  kind  of  judicial
professor  (loegsoegumadhr)  who  delivered  be-
fore the  general  assembly  consecutive  courses
of  instruction  on  the  law  to  be  applied  in
Iceland.

In  Saxon  England  the  wise-men  (witan)  in
the  county  courts  and  in  the  central  assembly
of  the  kingdoms  held  similar  functions,  and
later  on  the  mediaeval  Parliament  came  to
be  considered  as  the  chief  organ  for  the
declaration  of  law.

6.  One  consequence  of  the  organic  character
of  this  process  of  law-making  is  shown  in  the
fact  that  it  may  still  be  resorted  to  in  our  own
times  if  there  arises  the  problem  of  regenerat-
ing a  given  system  by  appeal  to  national
traditions  and  popular  ideas,  as  opposed  to
foreign  infiuence  and  artificial  enactments.
A  striking  instance  of  this  kind  is  presented
by  German  law,  which  for  centuries  was
flooded  by  the  conceptions  of  a  professional


CUSTOM  167

jurisprudence  reared  on  Roman  law  and  rely-
ing on  Justinian's  Corpus  Juris  as  the  principal
source  of  legal  rules.  The  revival  of  German-
istic  jurisprudence  which  we  have  witnessed
within  the  last  fifty  years  is  connected  with
an  ardent  study  of  legal  antiquities  and  of
customary  law.  This  remarkable  process
found  expression  in  the  writings  of  numerous
lawyers  and  historians  of  the  law  who  formed
the  group  of  so-called  Germanists.  It  reacted
also  on  the  compilation  of  the  new  German
Code.  The  first  draft  of  this  Statute  book
was  elaborated  by  a  commission  composed
chiefly  of  jurists  brought  up  on  Roman  law  :
but  when  this  draft  was  published,  it  called
forth  the  violent  opposition  and  criticisms  of
the  Germanistic  school.  Consequently,  it  had
to  be  recast,  and  in  its  present  shape  it  affords
a  curious  compromise  between  conflicting
tendencies.  It  would  be  impossible  to  review
the  numerous  and  important  peculiarities
imported  into  it  by  the  study  of  German  legal
history  and  custom,  but  I  should  like  to  point
out  a  few  instances  in  which  the  influence  of
Germanistic  ideas  is  especially  conspicuous.
The  doctrine  of  ownership  is  conceived  in  a
much  less  absolute  and  abstract  manner  than
in  the  sources of Roman Law: the more


168 COMMON-SENSE IN LAW

concrete  view  of  property  right  is  derived  to
a  great  extent  from  the  historical  notion  of
Germanistic  possession  (Gewere),  which  may-
be briefly  characterized  as  a  presumption  of
title,  in  contrast  with  the  sharp  opposition
between  property  and  possession  obtaining  in
Roman  Law.  Again,  the  doctrine  of  corpora-
tions, instead  of  starting  from  the  fiction  of
unity,  is  developed  on  the  basis  of  a  dualism
between  the  life  of  the  union  and  of  its  com-
ponent members.  As  regards  the  acquisition
of  property,  the  chief  stress  is  laid  on  "  good
faith,"  and  property  once  acquired  in  good
faith  is  protected  even  against  the  claim  of  a
rightful  owner.  Such  are  a  few  of  the  features
of  Germanistic  legal  theory,  which  may  be
paralleled  by  many  others.

In  fine,  we  may  say  that  customary  law
appears  as  the  judge-made  law  of  periods
when  the  judges  are  still  intimately  connected
with  the  people  they  represent,  and  feel  bound
to  declare  popular  legal  lore  rather  than  to
supply  links  in  a  system  of  learning.


CHAPTER  VII

JUDICIAL PRECEDENTS

1.  The  force  of  judicial  opinion,  which
asserts  itself  clearly  in  the  working  of  promul-
gated law  and  of  custom,  acts  as  an  indepen-
dent source  of  law  when  there  is  no  legislation
bearing  on  particular  points  which  arise  in
practice.  In  countries  where  codified  and
enacted  law  prevails,  such  points  will  occur
on  account  of  the  gaps  left  by  statutes  and  the
clauses  of  a  code.  But  there  are  countries
in  which  statutes  cover  only  part  of  the
ground,  while  most  of  the  current  litigation
is  met  by  decisions  of  the  Courts  based  on  the
considered  opinion  of  judges.  I  need  not
remind  my  readers  that  Anglo-American
common  law  is  pre-eminently  judge-made
law.  Such  law  may  also  be  called  case-law,
because  it  is  formulated  not  in  general  pro-
spective enactments,  but  in  pronouncements
called  forth  by  particular  cases.  This  process
of  formulation  involves  several  characteristic

consequences.

169


170 COMMON-SENSE IN LAW

To  begin  with,  no  sharp  distinction  can
be  drawn  between  customary  and  common
law.  The  latter  is  historically  the  ordinary
and  customary  law  of  the  kingdom,  while
the  domain  of  custom  proper  is  more  or  less
restricted  to  the  practice  of  local  and  popu-
lar Courts.  Gavelkind  succession — i.e.  equal
division  of  inheritance  in  land  among  sons —
was  the  custom  of  Kent  and  of  some  other
localities,  while  primogeniture  and  the  taking
of  inheritance  by  daughters  as  joint  co-heirs
was  reputed  to  be  the  common  law  of  England
as  regards  military  tenures.  This  latter  cus-
tom, however,  only  became  part  of  the  common
law  because  it  had  been  declared  and  ap-
proved by  the  Courts  of  the  kingdom  :  no
one  could  have  said  when  and  by  whom  it  had
been  established  in  the  first  instance.  It  was
deemed  to  be  derived  from  customary  practice
as  to  fiefs  and  sergeanties ;  it  had  been  used
more  or  less  in  all  the  feudal  Courts :  but  its
actual  formulation  as  a  rule  of  law  was  the
work  of  the  King's  judges.  In  this  way  many
of  the  fundamental  principles  of  common  law
may  be  traced  to  mediaeval  custom.

But  if  in  this  way  legal  origins  were  some-
times hidden  in  the  twilight  of  feudal  and
Anglo-Saxon  institutions,  in  other  instances


JUDICIAL PRECEDENTS 171

common  law  principles  were  asserted  spon-
taneously on  important  occasions  by  the
Bench  of  a  High  Court  on  the  strength  of
general  notions  of  justice  or  of  some  doctrine
suggested  perhaps  by  foreign  learning.  For
example  :  originally  there  was  no  action  to
protect  a  leaseholder  against  ejectment  by  his
landlord  :  but  about  1235  the  King's  Bench,
on  the  initiative  of  William  Raleigh,  began  to
entertain  actions  brought  by  tenants  for  a
term  of  years  against  landowners  who  had
ejected  them  before  the  completion  of  their
term.  Bracton,  in  his  famous  treatise  on  the
Laws  of  England,  was  quite  right  in  comparing
this  new  departure  of  judge-made  2aw  with  the
great  reform  of  Henry  II's  which  provided  the
freeholder  with  remedies  against  dispossession.
It  is  evident  that  Raleigh's  doctrine  was  not
prompted  by  precedent,  but  suggested  by  the
necessities  of  justice  and  possibly  by  the  study
of  Civil  Law.

The  beginnings  of  common  law  have  neces-
sarily to  be  traced  to  those  pronouncements
in  which  the  opinion  of  judges  was  as  yet
unfettered  by  the  weight  of  previous  decisions,
and  the  Year  Books  show  conclusively  that  in
the  early  stages  of  legal  evolution  principles
of  law  were  declared  and  developed  with  a


172 COMMON-SENSE IN LAW

great  deal  of  independence,  and  there  were
many  contradictions  in  the  views  expressed
by  leading  judges  on  different  occasions.  In
the  fifteenth  century,  for  instance,  the  au-
thorities of  the  Bench  wavered  for  a  long
time  before  they  settled  once  for  all  that  if
a  person  promise  to  perform  certain  acts,  and
if  the  promise  is  made  in  view  of  a  benefit
to  himself,  or  involves  a  loss  to  the  promisee,
then  he  is  liable  to  damages  not  only  if  he
performs  them  badly,  but  also  if  he  fails
altogether  to  perform  them.

Gradually,  however,  the  search  for  pre-
cedents assumes  great  importance.  In  the
absence  of  a  statute,  a  Court  before  whom  a
dispute  is  tried  informs  itself  whether  similar
cases  have  been  decided  before,  and  if  so,  how
the  decision  has  gone.  If  exactly  similar
cases  have  occurred  before,  the  judges  in
subsequent  cases  have  an  easy  task.  They
usually  appeal  to  the  former  decision  and
frame  their  own  on  its  pattern.  In  some
instances  they  are  even  obliged  to  do  so.  In
England,  in  particular,  a  certain  hierarchy  of
the  Courts  makes  it  impossible  for  a  lower
Court  to  deviate  from  the  course  indicated  by
a  decision  of  a  superior  Court.  A  County
Court  is  bound  to  accept  as  law  a  decision  of  the


JUDICIAL PRECEDENTS  173

High  Court;  the  High  Court  is  bound  to
follow  decisions  of  the  Court  of  Appeal,  and
the  Court  of  Appeal  cannot  overrule  a  decision
of  the  House  of  Lords,  which  is  the  highest
judicial  authority  in  the  kingdom  :  and  the
House  of  Lords  cannot  overrule  its  own
decisions.  When  Courts  stand  on  the  same
level,  or  when  the  precedent  has  to  be  drawn
from  the  jurisdiction  of  an  inferior  Court,  such
precedents  are  not  absolutely  binding,  though
they  are  generally  treated  with  respect.

Circumstances  may  arise  in  which  it  is
necessary  to  restrict  or  even  overrule  a
previous  decision.  The  following  case  pro-
vides an  example,  and  serves  to  show  how
decisively  the  judgment  of  an  authoritative
Court  will  sometimes  be  overruled.  In  Rex
V.  Russell,  the  defendant,  in  order  to  facilitate
his  business,  had  erected  some  staiths  in
the  river  Tyne,  and  the  question  in  the
case  was  whether  they  were  an  impediment
to  navigation.  Mr.  Justice  Bayley,  in  charg-
ing the  jury,  took  the  view  that  the  erection
did  not  merely  give  a  private  advantage
to  the  defendant  in  the  way  of  his  business
but  was  a  public  benefit,  inasmuch  as  it
was  a  means  of  bringing  coals  to  market  at
a  lower  price  and  in  better  condition  than


174 COMMON-SENSE IN LAW

would  otherwise  have  been  possible  :  and  this
so-called  public  benefit  would,  in  the  opinion
of  the  learned  judge,  countervail  any  slight
public  inconvenience  which  might  arise  from
the  presence  of  the  obstruction  in  the  river.
This  view  was  afterwards  upheld  by  a  Court
consisting of the trial judge (Mr. Justice
Bayley),  Mr.  Justice  Holroyd,  and  Lord  Chief
Justice  Tenterden. In  1873  similar  circum-
stances arose  in  Attorney-General  v. Terry,
where  the  defendant  enclosed  part  of  the  river
Stour, and proposed to  erect  a scaffolding
which,  it  was  contended,  would  be  a  public
obstruction  to  navigation. Counsel  for  the
defendant  relied  on  Rex  v.  Russell,  admitting
that a  slight obstruction  would  be  created,
but  urging  that  this  was  counterbalanced  by
the  "  public  benefit  "  to  trade. The  Court,
however,  refused  to  follow  the  previous  case.
Sir  George  Jessel,  Master  of  the  Rolls,  held
that  in  such  cases  "  the  public  "  must  be  con-
sidered not  as  the  public  at  large,  but  as  the
public  {i.  e.  the  majority  of  individuals)  of  a
particular  -place : and  it  was  too  remote  a
benefit  to  say  that  the  encouragement  of  a
single  individual's  trade  was  a  benefit  to  "  the
public." With  regard  to  Rex  v.  Russell,  he
made this emphatic statement  : "  Now I


JUDICIAL PRECEDENTS  175

must  say  that  Rex  v.  Russell  in  my  opinion  is
not  law,  and  it  is  right  to  say  so  in  the  clearest
terms,  because  it  is  not  well  that  cases  should
continue  to  be  cited  which  have  been  virtually
overruled,  although  judges  have  not  said  so
in  express  terms."

It  sometimes  happens  that,  for  somewhat
inscrutable  reasons,  a  more  or  less  irrational
doctrine  will  be  set  up  by  a  superior  Court,
and  will  continue  to  be  binding  authority  on
inferior  Courts  until  some  tribunal  of  high
standing  definitely  pronounces  against  it.
One  of  the  most  interesting  examples  of  this
kind  is  the  so-called  "  Doctrine  of  Identifica-
tion." It  used  to  be  held  that  if  a  man  were
travelling  in  some  conveyance,  and  an  accident
occurred  through  the  negligence  of  another,
and  the  passenger  was  injured  thereby  :  and  if
the  person  controlling  the  conveyance  in  which
the  passenger  was  travelling  had  been  guilty
of  contributory  negligence:  then  the  passen-
ger must  be  considered  as  so  far  "  identified  "
with  the  driver  that  he  could  not  claim
damages  against  the  other  negligent  person.
The  leading  authority  for  this  doctrine  was
Thorogood  v.  Bryan,  decided  in  1849.  In  that
case,  a  claim  was  made  by  a  widow  under
Lord  Campbell's  Act  :  her  husband  had  been


176 COMMON-SENSE IN LAW

travelling  in  an  omnibus,  and  when  stepping
off  it  had  been  knocked  down  and  killed  by
another  omnibus.  It  was  shown  that  both
drivers  were  at  fault :  and  the  widow's  claim
was  refused  on  the  ground  stated  by  Mr.  Justice
Maule,  that  "the  deceased  must  be  considered
as  identified  with  the  driver  of  the  omnibus  in
which  he  voluntarily  became  a  passenger,  and
the  negligence  of  the  driver  was  the  negligence
of  the  deceased."  It  does  not  require  much
reflection  to  show  that  this  doctrine  is  con-
trary both  to  justice  and  to  common  sense  :
it  was  frequently  criticized  by  judges  :  yet
it  remained  binding  on  inferior  Courts,  until
in  1887  the  Court  of  Appeal  emphatically
overruled  it  in  the  case  of  The  Bernina,  the
opinion  of  the  Court  being  summed  up  in  the
unequivocal  words  of  Lord  Justice  Lopes :
"The  theory  ...  is,  in  my  opinion,  a  fallacy
and  a  fiction,  contrary  to  sound  law  and
contrary  to  every  principle  of  justice."

Thus  former  judgments  are  from  time  to
time  overruled  by  superior  and  co-ordinate
Courts ;  but  this  is  done  with  the  greatest  cau-
tion in  England,  because  it  is  recognized  that
it  is  not  only  important  to  find  the  right
solutions  of  legal  problems,  but  also  to  keep
to  solutions  once  obtained  in  order  not  to


JUDICIAL PRECEDENTS  177

confuse  the  public  and  the  legal  profession.
Indeed  it  has  been  said  with  some  exaggera-
tion that  in  law  certainty  is  more  important
than  justice.

It  may  be  added,  however,  that  the  doctrine
as  to  the  binding  force  of  precedents  is  not
a  necessary  consequence  of  the  theory  of  case-
law.  It  does  not  obtain,  e.g.  in  the  juris-
prudence of  the  Privy  Council  in  England  and
of  the  Supreme  Court  in  the  United  States.
As  we  have  already  seen  (p.  143)  the  first  de-
cision as  to  the  Legal  Tender  Act  was  reversed
later  on.  Besides,  even  in  English  conunon
law  the  systematic  use  of  precedents  is  a  com-
paratively late  development,  and  as  late  as
the  nineteenth  century,  the  keystone  of  the
whole  structure — ^the  uniformity  of  practice
in  the  House  of  Lords — was  not  yet  estab-
lished. About  1850  such  legal  authorities
as  Lord  St.  Leonards  and  Lord  Campbell  held
opposite  views  on  the  matter.^  The  first  said,
in  Bright  v.  Ilutton  (1852) :

"Although  you  are  bound  by  your  own
decisions  as  much  as  any  Court  would  be
bound,  so  that  you  could  not  reverse  your
decision  in  a  particular  case,  yet  you  are

^  See  Pollock,  First  Book  of  Jurisprudence,

M


178 COMMON-SENSE IN LAW

not  bound  by  any  rule  of  law  you  may  lay
down,  if  upon  subsequent  occasion  you  find
reason  to  differ  from  that  rule ;  that  is,  that
this  court,  like  every  court  of  justice,  pos-
sesses an  inherent  power  to  correct  an  error
into  which  it  may  have  fallen."

This  was  contested  by  Lord  Campbell,  who
often  had  occasion  to  assert  what  became  the
received  view  on  the  subject.

Still,  it  is  only  under  this  system  of  binding
precedents  that  the  necessary  continuity  and
certainty  inherent  in  the  conception  of  law
can  be  achieved  on  the  basis  of  judicial
decisions.

2.  Cases  are  seldom  exactly  similar.  Cer-
tain differences  in  the  circumstances  may  make
it  a  matter  of  difficulty  to  apply  precisely  an
existing  standard.  When  a  Court  refers  to
precedent,  it  generally  has  to  use  reasoning  in
order  to  show  that  in  spite  of  minor  differences
a  principle  stated  in  a  former  case  can  be
applied  to  a  later  one;  and  sometimes  this
can  only  be  done  by  means  of  rather  compli-
cated argument.  Such  instances  bring  into
strong  relief  the  fact  that  what  is  important
in  the  precedent  is  not  the  actual  decision,
but  the  principle  on  which  it  is  grounded,  or.


JUDICIAL PRECEDENTS 179

as  it  is  technically  called,  the  ratio  decidendi.
This  may  either  be  explicitly  stated  by  the
Court  in  deciding  the  case,  or  may  have  to  be
discovered  by  close  examination  of  the  judg-
ment. In  either  case,  it  will  be  regarded  as
authoritative  in  subsequent  cases.  It  may
be  said,  therefore,  that  a  judge  who  formu-
lates a  principle  of  decision  in  a  dispute,  if  he
does  not  simply  repeat  what  has  been  estab-
lished by  a  predecessor  on  a  similar  occasion,
formulates  a  rule  of  law.

A  peculiar  difficulty  in  English  and  Ameri-
can cases  arises  from  the  fact  that  the  decision
is  formulated  by  each  member  of  the  Court
separately,  and  not  by  the  Court  as  a  whole.
Therefore,  although  the  concrete  question  at
issue  is  always  definitely  decided,  the  principle
of  the  decision  may  be  differently  expressed,,
and  even  differently  conceived,  by  the  various
members  of  the  Court.  Let  us  take  an  ex-
ample from  a  recent  and  a  famous  case.^  It
is  well  known  that  Osborne,  a  member  of  the
Amalgamated  Society  of  Railway  ServantSr
refused  to  contribute  to  the  political  funds
collected  by  this  trade  union,  as  well  as  by
others,  for  the  maintainance  of  the  Labour

^  Osborne  v.  Amalgamated  Society  of  Railway  Servants
(1910).


180 COMMON-SENSE IN LAW

Party  in  Parliament.  When  the  case  came
up  in  due  course  before  the  House  of  Lords,
such  levies  for  political  purposes  by  trade
unions  were  declared  illegal  :  but  the  reason
for  this  declaration  was  not  formulated
definitely  by  the  Court,  and  as  a  matter  of
fact,  the  five  lords  who  sat  in  this  case  came
to  the  ultimate  conclusion  on  different  grounds.
Two,  Lord  Halsbury  and  Lord  Macnaghten,
clearly  based  their  decision  on  the  view  that
the  objects  of  a  trade  union  are  restricted
to  the  three  mentioned  in  clause  16  of  the
Trade  Unions  Act  of  1876  :  that  the  political
pressure  exerted  by  a  trade  union  on  members
of  Parliament  was  not  among  them,  and
could  not  be  treated  as  an  incidental  and
subordinate  aim.  On  the  other  hand.  Lord
Shaw  and  Lord  James  of  Hereford  expressed
the  opinion  that  the  above-mentioned  clause
could  not  be  treated  as  an  exhaustive  enu-
meration of  the  objects  of  a  trade  union.  In
their  view,  the  illegality  consisted  in  the
pledge  imposed  on  members  of  Parliament  to
follow  a  certain  line  prescribed  by  the  Labour
Party.  Lord  Atkinson  agreed  in  substance
with  Lord  Halsbury  and  Lord  Macnaghten  :
and  if  it  had  been  necessary  to  summarize  the
considerations  of  the  judges  in  a  single  decision.


JUDICIAL PRECEDENTS 181

there  would  have  been  a  majority  of  three
against  two  in  regard  to  the  principle  that  the
action  described  was  beyond  the  powers  of
the  union  as  formulated  in  the  Act  of  1876.
As  a  matter  of  fact,  the  decision  of  the  Court
was  not  reduced  to  such  a  unity  of  principle,
and  the  different  members  were  left,  in  this
case  as  in  so  many  others,  to  give  a  varying
colour  to  their  common  decision.  This  peculi-
arity of  English  law  makes  it  somewhat  difficult
to  evolve  the  principles  of  decision  in  many
cases;  but  of  course  it  does  not  fundamen-
tally alter  the  process  by  which  such  decisions
are  arrived  at.  Sometimes,  however,  hard-
ship is  inflicted  on  litigants,  and  an  unsatis-
factory and  contradictory  state  of  the  law
produced,  by  a  division  of  judicial  opinion.
For  instance,  in  the  case  of  Jolly  v.  Kine
(1907),  an  important  point  arose  in  connection
with  certain  ancient  lights  :  in  the  Court  of
Appeal,  judgment  went  against  the  appellant,
but  only  by  majority,  Lord  Justice  Romer
dissenting ;  in  the  House  of  Lords,  the  Court
consisted  of  four  Lords  only  :  the  Lord  Chan-
cellor (Lord  Loreburn)  and  Lord  James  of
Hereford  were  in  favour  of  dismissing  the
appeal,  while  Lord  Robertson  and  Lord  Atkin-
son were  for  allowing  it. In  such  cases  of


182 COMMON-SENSE IN LAW

equal  division,  the  practice  of  the  Court  is  to
dismiss  the  appeal  (though  without  costs)  ;
and  thus  the  appellant  might  not  unreason-
ably have  said  that  he  had  probably  lost  his
case  for  no  other  reason  than  that  the  Court
in  the  House  of  Lords  happened  to  consist  of
an  even  number  of  members;  and  not  only
this,  but  a  decision  was  established  under
these  unsatisfactory  circumstances  which,  if
the  point  arises  again,  may  be  hard  to  recon-
cile with  a  very  important  authority  [Colls  v.
Home  and  Colonial  Stores  (1904)].

3.  The  principles  formulated  in  precedents
correspond  in  a  system  of  case-law  to  the
clauses  of  a  statute  in  enacted  law.  In  both
cases  the  problem  for  the  judges  may  be
compared  to  the  process  of  logical  deduction
which  leads  to  a  so-called  syllogism — the
process  of  reasoning  which  is  illustrated  by
the  well-known  example,  "  All  men  are
mortal  (major  premise) :  Socrates  is  a  man
(minor  premise)  :  therefore  Socrates  is  mortal
(conclusion),"  In  enacted  law,  the  major
premise  of  the  syllogism  is  given  in  a  statutory
clause,  and  the  problem  is  to  formulate  the
minor  premise  from  which  the  conclusion  is
to  be  drawn — that  is,  to  analyze  the  case  in
hand  in  such  a  way  as  to  bring  it  under  the


JUDICIAL PRECEDENTS 183

operation  of  the  major  premise  contained  in
the  clause.  The  process  of  bringing  the
minor  premise  under  the  major  premise —
that  is  to  say,  of  bringing  the  particular  facts
of  a  case  within  a  general  rule — is  technically
called  subsumption.

The  application  of  the  Workmen's  Compen-
sation Act  by  the  Courts  provides  many
illustrations  of  this  process.  A  major  premise
is  the  rule  of  the  Act  that  workmen  or  their
families  are  to  be  compensated  for  accidents
arising  out  of  and  in  the  course  of  the  employment.
It  is  not  always  easy  to  fit  the  minor  to  the
major  premise  in  order  to  reach  the  conclusion
that  the  employer  is  liable  to  compensate.

Suppose,  for  example,  that  a  sailor,  while
returning  to  his  ship  from  the  shore,  falls  from
the  ladder  at  the  ship's  side  and  is  drowned.
Do  the  facts  warrant  the  subsumption  of  this
case  under  the  major  premise  of  the  above-
mentioned  rule  ?  In  Moore  v.  Manchester
Liners  (1910)  in  the  House  of  Lords,  three  of
the  judges  held  that  they  did,  because  "  the
danger  of  falling  from  a  ladder  which  gave
the  only  access  to  the  ship  is  incidental  to  the
service  of  a  seaman,"  and  because  a  sailor
returning  from  leave  does  so  "in  the  course
of his employment." Two authoritative


184 COMMON-SENSE IN LAW

judges,  Lord  Macnaghten  and  Lord  Mersey,
were,  however,  of  a  different  opinion,  because
they  thought  that  the  course  of  employment
had  been  interrupted  by  the  man  going  ashore
*'  on  his  own  business."

To  take  another  example  :  in  the  case  of
Nisbet  V.  Rayne,  to  which  we  have  already
referred  (p.  122),  it  was  held  that  the  accident
arose  "  out  of  and  in  the  course  of  "  the  de-
ceased man's  employment,  because  a  mur-
derous attack  was  a  risk  peculiarly  incident
to  the  duties  of  a  cashier  who  was  in  the  habit
of  carrying  large  sums  of  money  on  his  person.
A  later  case  provides  an  interesting  contrast.
In  Mitchinson  v.  Day  (1913),  a  carter,  seeing
a  drunken  man  about  to  interfere  with  his
horse,  warned  him  that  he  might  be  injured
by  the  animal  :  the  drunken  man  then  turned
upon  his  would-be  benefactor,  assaulted  and
killed  him.  The  Court  held  that  though  the
accident  arose  in  the  course  of  the  deceased's
employment,  it  did  not,  as  in  the  former  case,
arise  out  of  it,  for  the  danger  of  assault  by  an
intoxicated  ruffian  was  in  no  sense  incident
to  the  calling  of  a  carter.  It  is  further  in-
teresting to  note,  as  an  example  of  the  force
of  judicial  interpretation,  that  the  construc-
tion placed  upon the  word "  accident  " in


JUDICIAL PRECEDENTS  185

Nisbet  V.  Rayne  was  accepted  as  binding
authority  in  the  later  case,  and  it  was  never
doubted  tliat  the  assault  and  homicide  con-
stituted an  "  accident  "  within  the  meaning
of  the  Act.  Thus  the  case  really  resolved
itself  into  a  question  of  subsumption.

The  above  case  may  serve  to  show  how  the
Courts  bring  the  minor  premise  of  a  particular
case  under  the  major  premise  of  a  statute.
Very  often  the  major  premise  to  which  the
circumstances  of  a  case  are  to  be  applied  is
a  rule,  not  of  legislative  enactment,  but  of
common  law.  For  example,  it  is  a  rule  of
common  law  that  there  can  be  no  theft  of
wild  animals  (including  wild  birds).  Let  us
take  an  instance  of  the  application  of  this  rule.
In  Regina  v.  Cory  (1864),  the  prisoner  was
indicted  for  stealing  eighty  tame  pheasants,
which  had  been  hatched  by  a  common  hen,
and  which,  as  it  appeared  in  evidence,  were
intended  to  be  turned  loose  when  they  were
of  an  age  to  leave  the  hen.  Now  there  was  no
doubt  that  pheasants  were  "  wild  animals  "
in  law,  and  in  their  wild  state  could  not  be
the  subjects  of  larceny  :  but  the  question  was
whether  these  particular  birds,  being  kept
under  the  control  of  the  prosecutor,  could  be
considered  "  tame  "  in  the  circumstances  of


186 COMMON-SENSE IN LAW

this  case.  Baron  Channell,  in  directing  the
jury,  said  :  "  As  a  matter  of  law,  I  have  no
difficulty  whatever  in  telling  you  that  these
pheasants,  having  been  hatched  by  hens,
and  reared  in  a  coop,  were  tame  pheasants  at
the  time  they  were  taken,  whatever  might
have  been  their  destiny  afterwards.  Being
thus,  the  prosecutor  had  such  a  property  in
them  that  they  would  become  the  subjects  of
larceny."  Thus  the  judge  brought  the  case
within  the  major  premise  of  common  law  :
and  it  is  worth  noting  that  this  application  of
the  major  premise  by  a  single  judge  in  a
direction  to  the  jury  was  adopted  by  a  superior
Court  (the  Court  of  Crown  Cases  Reserved)
in  the  later  and  important  case  of  Regina  v.
Shickle  (1868).

Thus  we  see  that  in  the  process  of  case-law
judges  have  often  to  bring  the  minor  premise
of  a  particular  case  within  a  well-defined
major  premise  either  of  statute  or  of  common
law.  But  sometimes  their  task  is  more
difficult.  They  have  to  discover  the  major
premise  itself  before  they  can  determine  the
rule  under  which  the  case  falls.  Suppose  I
keep  on  my  land  a  very  large  accumulation
of  water  which,  if  it  escapes,  is  practically
certain  to  do  damage  to  others. If  it  does  in


JUDICIAL PRECEDENTS 187

fact  escape,  and  an  action  is  brought,  the
major  premise  is  not,  or  rather  was  not,
altogether  clear.  The  question  is  whether  I
shall  be  liable  only  if  the  water  escapes  through
my  negligence  :  or  whether,  having  taken  the
responsibility  of  keeping  a  particularly  danger-
ous object  on  my  land  for  my  own  purposes,
I  must  be  held  liable  whether  its  escape  was
due  to  my  negligence  or  not.  This  was  the
problem  which  faced  the  Court  in  the  cele-
brated case  of  Rylands V.Fletcher  (1868).  The
facts  of  the  case  may  be  given  in  the  words
of  Lord  Moulton  in  a  recent  judgment  ^ :

"  The  defendants  .  .  .  had  constructed  a
reservoir  on  their  and  to  collect  and  hold
water  for  the  purpose  of  working  their  mill.
Under  that  land  were  situated  underground
workings  of  an  abandoned  coal  mine,  the
existence  of  which  was  unknown  to  every-
body. After  the  reservoir  had  been  filled,
the  water  found  its  way  down  to  those
underground  workings  through  some  old
shafts,  and  escaping  through  them  flooded
the  plaintiff's  colliery.  The  defendants  had
been  guilty  of  no  negligence  either  in  the
construction  or  the  use  of  the  reservoir,  and

^  Bickards  v.  Lothian  (1913),  A.C.  at  p.  275.


188 COMMON-SENSE IN LAW

they  contended  that  in  the  absence  of
neghgence  they  were  not  Hable.  The  plain-
tiff contended  on  the  other  hand  that  the
defendants,  having  brought  and  stored  the
water  upon  their  land  for  their  own  purposes,
were  bound  to  keep  it  safely  there,  and  that
if  it  escaped  to  adjoining  lands  and  did
damage  the  defendants  were  liable  for  the
breach  of  this  duty  whether  or  not  it  was
due  to  negligence."

The  Court  had  to  discover  the  major  premise
under  which  the  case  should  be  brought:  it
had  to  reason  by  analogy  from  the  liability
for  other  kinds  of  dangerous  things,  e.g.
wild  animals  :  and  finally  it  set  up  the
principle  (in  the  words  of  Mr.  Justice  Black-
burn, subsequently  approved  by  the  House  of
Lords)  that  "  the  person  who  for  his  own
purposes  brings  on  his  lands  and  collects  and
keeps  there  anything  likely  to  do  mischief  if
it  escapes,  must  keep  it  in  at  his  peril,  and  if
he  does  not  do  so,  is  prima  facie  answerable
for  all  the  damage  which  is  the  natural  con-
sequence of  its  escape."  In  other  words,  the
Court  set  up  the  major  premise  of  what  is
generally,  though  not  universally,  recognized
as  the  "  doctrine  of  absolute  liability."


JUDICIAL PRECEDENTS 189

4.  When  a  new  principle  has  been  formu-
lated by  the  judges,  their  decision  on  the  case
assumes  authority,  and  if  this  authority  is
followed  on  subsequent  occasions  the  case  is
called  a  leading  case.  I  will  borrow  an  example
from  a  recent  writer  on  Jurisprudence  ^  :

"  In  the  year  1620,  the  Court  of  King's
Bench  decided  the  famous  case  of  Pells  v.
Broxvn.  It  was  this  :  Land  was  devised  to
Thomas  Brown  and  his  heirs,  but  if  he  died
without  issue  in  the  lifetime  of  his  brother
William,  the  land  was  to  go  to  William  and
his  heirs;  that  is,  Thomas  took  an  estate  in
fee  simple,  with  an  executory  devise,  as  it  is
called,  over  to  W^illiam,  in  case  Thomas  should
die  in  the  lifetime  of  William  without  issue.
Thomas  parted  with  the  land  by  a  conveyance,
.  .  .  and  the  question  was  whether  Edward
Pells,  who  claimed  the  land  under  this  con-
veyance, held  it  subject  to  the  executory
devise  to  William  or  free  from  it,  or,  in  other
words,  whether  an  executory  devise  after  a
fee  simple  is  destructible  by  the  holder  of  the
fee.

"  The  Court,  by  three  judges  to  one,  decided
that  the  executory  devise  continued,  that
Pells  took  the  land  subject  to  it,  that  Thomas
1  J.  C.  Gray.


190 COMMON-SENSE IN LAW

could  not  destroy  it ;  and  so  the  law  has  been
held  ever  since.  Therefore,  in  England  and
America  future  contingent  interests  can  be
validly  created  by  will.  This  is  by  no  means
a  necessary  state  of  things.  In  Germany,  in
France,  in  Louisiana,  and  generally,  I  believe,
where  the  Civil  Law  prevails,  future  contingent
interests  are  allowed,  if  at  all,  only  to  a  very
limited  extent."

5.  In  a  series  of  cases  connected  with  some
particular  legal  principle,  it  often  happens
that  the  original  authority  is  gradually  modi-
fied by  practice  :  it  is  expanded  or  contracted
according  to  the  coming  in  of  new  circum-
stances, and  also  by  the  influence  of  new
considerations  arising  out  of  the  progress  of
opinion  both  among  the  public  at  large  and
among  the  professional  class  of  lawyers.  All
these  features  are  of  such  importance  both
practically  and  theoretically  that  I  should  like
to  call  attention  to  one  or  two  characteristic
instances.

Lawyers  are  exceedingly  averse  from  treat-
ing original  principles  as  entirely  new  or
invented  rules.  It  is  only  in  the  sphere  of
the  equity  jurisdiction  of  Chancery,  which  for
historical  reasons  has  been  less  trammelled
by  precedents  than  that  of  the  common  law


JUDICIAL PRECEDENTS  191

Courts,  that  the  process  of  invention  has  been
distinctly  avowed.  But  it  is  evident  that
the  same  process  has  really  been  operating  in
the  history  of  common  law  as  in  equity  :  for
how  could  the  huge  body  of  common  law
doctrines  have  been  evolved  if  the  judges  had
not  had  power  to  formulate  legal  rules  when
the  statutory  law  of  the  country  did  not
provide  express  legislation  ?  The  study  of
the  actual  practical  course  of  English  legal
development  leads  to  the  same  conclusion.

Not  long  ago  the  following  case  was  tried
at  the  Manchester  Assizes.^  The  action  was
brought  by  an  infant  of  the  age  of  four  years,
suing  by  his  father  as  his  next  friend,  to
recover  damages  for  personal  injuries  alleged
to  have  been  caused  by  the  negligence  of  a
servant  of  the  defendant  corporation.  An
automatic  gas-meter  in  the  house  of  the  plain-
tiff's father  having  got  out  of  order  in  conse-
quence of  a  coin  being  jammed  in  it,  a  postcard
was  sent  to  the  town  hall  complaining  of  the
defect  and  asking  that  some  one  might  be
sent  to  put  it  right.  By  some  mistake  this
complaint  was  not  attended  to,  but  the
plaintiff's  nurse  seeing  in  the  street  a  man
named  Ford,  who  was  an  inspector  of  gas-
^  Fersyth  v.  Manchester  Corporation  (1912).


192 COMMON-SENSE IN LAW

fittings  in  the  employment  of  the  defendant
corporation,  and  was  wearing  the  uniform  of
the  gas  department,  asked  him  to  come  and
look  at  the  meter.  Ford  accordingly  went  in
and  attempted  to  remedy  the  defect  by  the
use  of  his  pocket-knife.  Failing  in  this,  he
went  out  to  get  some  proper  tools,  and  left
the  knife  open  somewhere  in  the  room  which
contained  the  meter.  While  he  was  absent  the
plaintiff  played  with  the  knife  and  ran  it  into
his  eye,  which  ultimately  had  to  be  removed.
The  plaintiff's  case  was  that  in  leaving  the
knife  where  the  child  had  access  to  it  Ford  had
been  guilty  of  negligence,  and  that,  the  negli-
gence having  been  committed  in  the  course  of
his  employment,  the  corporation  was  liable  in
damages.  The  defendants  alleged  that  Ford,
in  doing  what  he  did  was  not  acting  within
the  scope  of  his  authority,  he  being  an  in-
spector of  gas-fittings  and  not  a  repairer  of
meters.  The  jury  found  Ford  guilty  of
negligence  while  acting  in  the  course  of  his
employment,  and  awarded  £125  damages.
The  judge,  however,  ordered  judgment  to  be
entered  for  the  defendants,  being  of  opinion
that  there  was  no  evidence  to  support  the
finding  that  Ford  was  acting  in  the  course
of  his  employment. The  plaintiff  naturally


JUDICIAL PRECEDENTS 193

appealed,  but  the  Court  of  Appeal  upheld
the  decision  of  the  Court  below.  Lord  Justice
Vaughan  Williams  said,  among  other  things,
that  in  his  judgment  it  was  quite  plain  that  the
duty  of  this  inspector  was  merely  to  inspect
and  report,  and  there  was  no  evidence  what-
ever that  in  attempting  to  remove  with  his
knife  the  coin  which  was  jammed  in  the  meter
he  was  acting  within  the  scope  of  his  authority.
It  seemed  to  him  that  this  attempt  was
nothing  more  than  a  piece  of  volunteer
kindness.

This  case  may  be  taken  as  characteristic
of  the  present  state  of  the  doctrine  of  the
responsibility  of  masters  for  the  acts  of  their
employees.  Now,  this  doctrine  must  be
traced  historically  through  a  series  of  stages
from  a  time  when  the  common  law  of  the
kingdom  considered  the  question  from  a
point  of  view  opposite  to  that  which  is  accep-
ted now.  All  through  the  mediaeval  period,
as  reflected  in  the  Year  Books,  the  view  pre-
vailed that  a  master  is  responsible  for  any
wrongs  committed  by  his  servant  in  the
course  of  his  employment.  In  the  sixteenth
century  the  Courts  began  to  recognize  that  it
was  unfair  to  put  such  a  wide  construction  on
the  liability  of  the  master,  and  the  doctrine


194 COMMON-SENSE IN LAW

of  general  employment  was  modified  by  the
requirements  of  particular  authority  on  the
part  of  the  master.  This  means  that  "  the
master  in  order  to  be  Hable  must  have  com-
manded the  very  act  in  which  the  wrong  con-
sisted." Towards  the  end  of  the  seventeenth
century  a  reaction  set  in.  "  The  nation  was
reaping  in  commercial  fields  the  harvest  of
prosperity  sown  in  the  Elizabethan  age  and
destined  to  show  fullest  fruition  in  the  age
of  Anne.  The  conditions  of  industry  and
commerce  were  growing  so  complicated,  and
the  original  undertaker  and  employer  might
now  be  so  far  separated  from  the  immediate
doer,  that  the  decision  of  questions  of  masters'
liability  must  radically  affect  the  conduct  of
business  affairs  in  a  way  now  for  the  first  time
particularly  appreciated  "  (J.  H.  Wigmore).

It  came  to  be  assumed  that  masters  and
employers  were  responsible  for  the  acts  of
their  servants  and  employees  in  so  far  as  the
latter  could  be  held  to  have  acted  by  their
express  or  implied  command.  This  is  the
view  followed  by  the  Courts  under  the  influence
of  judgments  of  Lord  Holt  and  Lord  Hard-
wicke  in  the  eighteenth  century.  In  order  to
meet  the  complicated  requirements  of  growing
industry  and  commerce,  the  chief  stress  was


JUDICIAL PRECEDENTS  195

laid  on  determining  how  far  an  agent  was
acting  for  his  master's  business  or  benefit;
this  became  the  test  of  an  implied  command,
and  the  master's  responsibility  for  torts
committed  by  the  agent  was  co-extensive
with  the  authority  which  he  was  deemed  to
have  given.  Lastly,  about  1800  the  doctrine
assumed  its  modern  shape,  chiefly  through  the
action  of  Lord  Kenyon  as  Chief  Justice  of
the  King's  Bench.  The  test  of  responsibility
came  to  be  expressed  in  the  words  "  within
the  scope  of  the  employment,"  the  very  words
which  were  used  in  the  recent  judgment  at
Manchester.  Thus  we  see  that  the  law  as  to
the  responsibility  of  masters  and  employers
has  passed  through  four  stages  of  development,
and  that  it  was  elaborated  by  means  of
decisions  of  the  Courts  under  the  influence  of
changing  conditions  and  opinions.^

Altogether,  the  gradual  modification  of  rules
once  accepted  as  conclusive  authority  affords
an  interesting  insight  into  the  cross-currents
of  public  opinion  and  legal  doctrine.  The
class  of  lawyers,  and  especially  the  judges
who  assume  the  direct  responsibility  for  the

^  On  the  whole  subject  see  J.  H.  Wigmore  :  Responsi-
bility for  Tortious  Acts,  in  Anglo- Americayi  Essays  in  the
History  of  English  Law,  pp.  520  ff.


196 COMMON-SENSE IN LAW

settlement  of  disputes  involving  immense  prac-
tical interests,  cannot  afford  to  disregard  the
change  of  views  taking  place  in  the  ranks  of
society  at  large  in  regard  to  fundamental
problems  of  law.  Such  questions,  for  in-
stance, as  the  extent  of  criminal  responsibility,
the  modes  and  degrees  of  punishment,  the
civil  rights  of  married  and  unmarried  women,
the  position  of  children  under  the  disciplinary
power  of  parents,  are  sure  to  excite  a  great
deal  of  feeling  among  the  public,  and  the
results  of  conflicting  views  are  bound  to  vary
a  great  deal  from  age  to  age.  The  movement
of  judicial  case-law  is  bound  to  follow  to  some
extent  these  currents  of  opinion,  although
they  will  in  some  degree  be  moderated  by  the
conservative  traditions  of  tribunals :  as  it
has  been  wittily  put  by  Professor  Dicey,  the
views  of  judges  are  apt  to  correspond  to  the
opinions  of  the  day  before  yesterday.

6.  The  conservative  and  traditional  leanings
of  the  lawyer's  mind  are  expressed,  even  in
such  cases,  by  the  fact  that  the  Courts  lean
in  the  absence  of  direct  precedent  on  state-
ments of  doctrine  in  books,*  and  on  maxims,

1  For  example  :  In  Mr.  Justice  Walton's  judgment  in
Prested  Miners'  Gas  Indicating  Electric  Lamp  Company  v.
Gardner  (1910),  the  view  that  s.  4  of  Statute  of  Frauds


JUDICIAL PRECEDENTS 197

that  is,  on  general  propositions  of  law  derived
from  treatises,  lectures,  pronouncements  of
foreign  jurists,  etc.  It  is  to  a  great  extent  in
this  indirect  way  that  Roman  Law  has  come
to  exercise  a  strong  influence  on  the  develop-
ment of  English  Law.  Counsel  did  not  quote
the  Corpus  Juris,  and  Courts  never  grounded
their  decision  on  clauses  from  the  Digest  or
the  Codex;  but  general  propositions  evolved
from  the  study  of  Roman  Law  were  con-
stantly circulated  in  the  course  of  trials,  and
sometimes  endorsed  and  construed  by  the
judges.  It  was,  for  example,  a  maxim  of
Roman  Law  that  no  action  will  lie  on  any
agreement  entered  into  for  immoral  purposes
{ex  injusta  causa  non  oritur  actio),^  and  we  see
this  principle  reproduced  in  English  Law.  In
Scott  V.  Brown  (1892)  an  action  was  brought
by  the  plaintiff  against  the  defendants,  who
were  stockbrokers,  for  the  rescission  of  a  con-
tract to  purchase  shares  in  a  certain  company
which,  at  the  time  of  the  making  of  the  con-
tract, had not been brought out, and to


may  apply  to  the  sale  of  goods  was  set  up  largely  on  the
strength  of  opinions  expressed  in  Smith's  Leading  Cases
and  in  Leake's  Contracts.

^  Dig.  II,  14,  2  :  Pacta  quae  turpem  causam  continent  non
sunt  obseriamla.


198 COMMON-SENSE IN LAW

recQi'er  money  paid  to  the  defendants  for  the
saii^hares,  on  thegrou  nd  that  the  defendants
while  acting  as  the  plaintiff's  brokers  had
delivered  their  own  shares  to  him  instead  of
purchasing  them  on  the  Stock  Exchange  at  a
premium  in  accordance  with  the  agreement ;
the  object  of  this  transaction  being  to  induce
the  public  to  believe  that  there  were  buyers
of  such  shares  at  a  premium  on  the  Stock
Exchange,  when  in  fact  there  were  none  but  the
plaintiff.  In  the  Court  of  Appeal,  Lord  Justice
Lindley  said  that  the  maxim  eoc  turpi  causa
non  oritur  actio  (an  action  cannot  arise  from  an
immoral  consideration)

"  expresses  a  clear  and  good  legal  principle
which  is  not  confined  to  indictable  offences.
No  Court  ought  to  enforce  an  illegal  contract
or  allow  itself  to  be  made  a  means  of  en-
forcing such  obligations  alleged  to  arise  out
of  a  contract  or  transaction  which  is  illegal,
if  the  illegality  is  duly  brought  to  the  notice
of  the  Court,  and  if  the  person  invoking  the
aid  of  the  Court  is  himself  implicated  in
the  illegality."  [The  plaintiff  shows  that  he
\vished  to  deceive  the  public.  His  purchase
was  an  actual  purchase.]  "  Under  these
circumstances  the  plaintiff  must  look  else-


JUDICIAL PRECEDENTS 199

where  than  in  a  court  of  justice  for  such
assistance  as  he  may  require  if  the  claim
to  such  assistance  is  based  on  his  illegal
contract."

Eventually  a  body  of  conveniently  stated
rules  arose  which  could  not  always  be  traced
directly  either  to  Roman  Law  or  to  pre-
cedent, but  which  served  as  a  guide  for  parties
and  judges  in  litigation.  Of  course  their
legal  authority  has  to  be  distinguished  care-
fully from  their  doctrinal  or  literary  history  :
legal  authority  could  be  imparted  to  them
only  by  their  recognition  in  the  courts  for
the  purpose  of  formulating  the  principle  of
the  decision  {ratio  decidendi)  in  given  cases.

7.  The  literary  treatment  of  legal  topics  by
writers  who  desire  either  to  state  and  explain
existing  rules,  or  to  systematize  them,  or  to
offer  criticisms  and  suggest  alterations  or  to
discuss  particular  problems  and  cases,  cannot
in  itself  constitute  a  source  of  law.  Its  aim
is  the  expression  of  ideas  entertained  by  one
or  the  other  jurist,  but  not  the  promulgation
of  rules  obligatory  for  any  one  else.  But  there
may  be  and  there  have  actually  been  cases
when  the  opinions  of  experts  who  were  neither
legislators  nor  judges  was  appealed  to,  and


200 COMMON-SENSE IN LAW

obtained  authoritative  force.  The  most  con-
spicuous instance  of  this  is  afforded  by  the
consultations  of  authorities  in  the  juris-
prudence {responsa  prudentium)  of  Roman
Law.  In  difficult  cases  Roman  magistrates
of  the  early  period  consulted  the  pontifices  as
to  legal  rules,  and  later  on  asked  famous
lawyers  for  their  advice.  Parties  to  a  suit
also  obtained  private  consultations,  which
were  sometimes  accepted  as  authoritative  by
a  tribunal.  From  the  time  of  Augustus  the
right  to  give  such  consultations  {jus  respon-
dendi)  began  to  be  conferred  officially  by  the
Emperor  on  certain  leading  jurists.  In  course
of  time  not  only  direct  responsa  in  a  given
case,  but  responsa  obtained  in  former  cases
and  passages  from  the  writings  of  famous
jurisconsults  began  to  be  quoted  as  authori-
ties. It  is  not  quite  clear,  however,  in  what
way  conflicts  of  opinion  were  solved  in  the
earlier  empire.  Valentinian  III  tried  to
settle  difficulties  arbitrarily  by  selecting
five  especially  authoritative  jurists  whose
^vritings  and  opinions  were  to  prevail,  and  by
allowing  a  kind  of  casting  vote  to  Papinian
among  these  five.  But  obviously  such  an
expedient  was  insufficient  to  get  rid  of  all
difficulties. Papinian  might  be  silent  on  the


JUDICIAL PRECEDENTS 201

very  question  in  dispute,  and  opinions  of
deceased  writers  could  not  always  be  mechani-
cally arrayed  against  each  other.  It  is  clear
that  the  judgment  and  discretion  of  the
judges  before  whom  the  actual  case  was  tried
must  have  played  a  considerable  part  in  the
selection  of  suitable  authorities.  Justinian
tried  to  find  a  way  out  of  confusion  by  reducing
the  opinions  of  legal  writers  to  a  compendium
in  his  digest.  It  cannot  be  said  that  this
enterprise  was  altogether  a  success,  for  all  sorts
of  obscurities  and  contradictions  were  still  left
to  be  cleared  up.  But  the  Digest  in  any  case
marks  the  close  of  a  period  when  writers  on
jurisprudence  were  referred  to  as  authorities
for  the  formulation  of  legal  rules  and  the
collection  of  fragments  from  their  books  took
the  shape  of  clauses  in  a  code.  It  is  the  pre-
ceding period  that  is  chiefly  of  interest  for  our
purpose.  The  peculiarity  of  the  method  lies
in  the  fact  that  the  judges,  instead  of  formula-
ting legal  rules  by  the  help  of  their  own
minds,  as  in  judge-made  law,  turn  to  the
assistance  of  winters  or  consulting  jurists.
The  latter  perform  the  same  kind  of  mental
operations  as  a  Court  would  have  to  perform
when  settling  case-law ;  but  there  is  a  division
between  jurisprudential  and  judicial  authority,


202 COMMON-SENSE IN LAW

though  the  boundary  between  the  two  is  not
clearly  traced,  at  least  as  regards  the  decision
of  the  concrete  case.  And  the  doctrinal
analysis  assumes  the  character  of  a  legal
source  not  by  its  own  weight,  but  because  it
is  adopted  in  one  way  or  another  by  the
Emperor  or  by  the  magistrate.  It  must
therefore  be  regarded  as  preparing  either  of
case-law  or  of  legislation,  according  to  its
contents  and  the  circumstances  in  which  it
was  given.

The  use  of  the  gloss  to  the  Corpus  Juris

dxiring  the  later  Middle  Ages  as  well  as  during

the  sixteenth  and  seventeenth centuries is

another  instance  of  the  direct  authority  of

jurisprudential  doctrine. The  proverb  "  Che

non  ha  Azzo  non  vade  al  palazzo,''  ^  may  be

taken  as  a  practical  hint  as  to  the  best  manual

of  positive  law ;  but  there  is  also  the  doctrine

"  What  is  not  received  in  the  commentary  of

the  glossators  is  not  received  by  the  tribunal  "

("  quod non agnoscit glossa non agnoscit

forum "), which shows that the ordinary

commentary to the Corpus, the glossa of

Accursius,  which  was  a  kind  of  compendium

of  the  writings  of  glossators,  was  used  as  a

1  "  He  who  has  not  a  copy  of  Azzo's  books  need  not
go  to  the  Courts  of  Justice.'*


JUDICIAL PRECEDENTS 203

means  to  limit  to  some  extent  the  body  of
rules  which  could  be  pleaded  in  the  Courts  of
Italy  and  Germany,  where  references  to  Civil
Law  were  admitted.  In  a  sense  the  Corpus
Juris  itself,  as  the  basis  of  the  so-called
common  law  received  in  Germany  before  the
introduction  of  the  new  Civil  Code  of  that
country,  was  a  law  of  the  learned  :  and  this
explains  the  curious  practice,  much  followed
by  Courts,  of  sending  up  the  documents  of  a
case  to  the  Law  Faculty  of  a  University  of
some  standing — Halle,  Greifswald,  Jena — in
order  to  obtain  a  consultation  as  to  the  proper
decision.  This  appeal  to  private  authority  is
in  a  great  measure  akin  to  the  submission  of
parties  to  private  arbitration.  It  testifies  to
a  rather  helpless  state  of  the  Courts  themselves,
and  must  be  considered  exceptional.

8.  Case-law  cannot  be  brought  under  the
operation  of  a  famous  doctrine  proclaimed  for
enacted  law,  namely,  that  it  ought  not  to  have
retroactive  application.  This  principle  has
been  emphatically  asserted  in  the  Constitution
of  the  United  States,  and  has  given  rise  to
decisions  of  the  Supreme  Court  which  invali-
date laws  passed  by  single  States  and  even  by
Congress.  Conspicuous  instances  of  this  kind
occur  in  connection  with  the  Civil  War  in  the


204 COMMON-SENSE IN LAW

'sixties.  In  Cummings  v.  Missouri,  the  State
of  Missouri  had  passed  a  clause  in  its  Consti-
tution in  1865  requiring  from  all  who  held  or
took  certain  specified  offices  and  honours  an
oath  to  the  effect  that  the  taker  of  it  had  never
been  hostile,  or  supported  those  hostile,  to  the
United  States  or  to  the  Government.  Cum-
mings, a  Roman  Catholic  priest,  was  indicted
under  this  law  for  teaching  and  preaching
without  having  taken  the  necessary  oath.  He
was  fined  and  committed  to  jail  until  the  fine
was  paid.  In  due  course  his  case  came  up
before  the  Supreme  Court  of  the  United
States,  which  decided  by  majority  that  the
law  was  invalid  as  inflicting  penalties  for  acts
which  at  the  time  they  were  committed  were
not  illegal  :  in  other  words,  it  was  in  effect  an
"  ex  'post  facto  "  law  prohibited  by  the  federal
constitution.

In  a  similar  way  in  Ex  parte  Garland  (1866),
the  Supreme  Court  invalidated  a  law  of  Con-
gress in  consequence  of  which  an  advocate
was  prevented  from  pleading  before  the
Supreme  Court  because  he  had  taken  part  in
the  rebellion.

It  is  impossible  to  apply  this  doctrine  to
judge-made  law  without  resorting  to  a  fiction,
for  if  a  case  is  material for  an  enunciation


JUDICIAL PRECEDENTS  205

of  law,  the  application  of  this  very  law  to
this  very  case  is  necessarily  retroactive.  The
parties  could  not  know  what  the  law  was
before  the  decision  was  given,  and  it  is  the
exact  knowledge  which  makes  all  the  differ-
ence in  a  dispute  :  no  one  would  willingly
expose  himself  to  defeat  and  heavy  costs  if  he
knew  for  certain  that  the  law  was  against  him.
The  most  bitter  criticism  of  the  uncertainty
of  the  methods  of  English  common  law  has
been  offered  by  Bentham  :

"  On  the  question  what  the  law  is,  so  long
as  the  rule  of  action  is  kept  in  the  state  of
common,  alias  unwritten,  alias  imaginary  law,
authority  is  everything.  The  question  is
what  on  a  given  occasion  A  (the  judge)  is
likely  to  think  :  wait  till  your  fortune  has  been
spent  in  the  inquiry,  and  you  will  know ;  but
forasmuch  as  it  is  naturally  a  man's  wish  to
be  able  to  give  a  guess  on  what  the  result  will
eventually  be,  before  he  has  spent  his  fortune
...  he  applies,  through  the  medium  of  B  (an
attorney)  for  an  opinion  to  C  (a  counsel),  who,
considering  what  D  (a  former  judge)  has  said
or  been  supposed  to  say,  deduces  therefrom
his  guess  as  to  what,  when  the  time  comes,
judge  A,  he  thinks,  will  say  "  (VIII,  397).


206 COMMON-SENSE IN LAW

Without  putting  the  case  in  this  caustic  way,
we  have  to  recognize  that  sometimes  on  very
important  points  of  law  the  highest  authorities
will  take  opposite  views.

Sometimes  the  uncertainty  as  to  the  state
of  the  common  law  may  be  so  great  that
some  of  the  judges  may  dissent  from  the
decision  of  their  colleagues,  and  a  Court  below
may  pronounce  its  judgment  in  one  sense
while  a  Court  above  may  come  to  exactly  the
opposite  conclusion.  Thus  in  the  Taff  Vale
case  already  mentioned  (p.  81),  Mr.  Justice
Farwell  held  the  trade  union  to  be  liable  for
torts  committed  by  its  agents  :  the  Court  of
Appeal  held  the  opposite  opinion;  but  ulti-
mately the  House  of  Lords  laid  down  that
the  trade  union  should  be  put  on  the  footing
of  a  corporation  and  should  therefore  be  liable.

This  is  an  unavoidable  consequence  of  the
case-law  system,  but  it  has  a  deeper  meaning
than  may  appear  at  first  sight.  It  is  a  result
of  the  fact  that  in  the  process  of  the  making
of  law  by  judges,  the  law  appears  not  as
the  formulation  of  a  command  followed  by
execution,  but  as  a  declaration  of  existing
right  obtained  through  the  wisdom  and  learn-
ing of  the  judges.  The  material  rather  than
the  formal  side  of  legal  rules  comes  to  the  fore.


JUDICIAL PRECEDENTS  207

It  is  not  absolutely  necessary  for  the  settle-
ment of  disputes  that  prospective  commands
should  have  been  given,  but  it  is  absolutely
necessary  that  there  should  be  means  of
ascertaining  what  is,  in  the  opinion  of  persons
provided  with  judicial  authority,  the  way  to
settle  the  difficulty  in  a  manner  most  conso-
nant with  right  and  justice.  In  other  words,  ^
the  decision,  before  it  can  become  an  au- i  {^*^
thority,  must  be  a  definite  declaration  of  right  \  f

This  by  itself  should  be  sufficient  to  show  the
defective  character  of  the  current  Austinian
definition,  and  it  is  surprising  that  this  truth
has  not  been  realized  more  fully  by  English
jurists ;  for  the  common  law,  with  which  they
have  principally  to  deal,  stands  or  falls  with
the  admission  of  legal  principles  obtained  not
by  command,  but  by  retrospective  estimates
of  right  and  justice.


CHAPTER VIII

EQUITY

1.  We  have  discovered  by  this  time  how
large  a  part  in  the  formulation  of  law  is
played  by  judicial  declarations  of  right  in
the  process  of  interpretation  of  statutes  as
well  as  in  the  formation  of  custom  and  of
case-law.  But  there  is  a  fourth  legal  source
in  which  the  creative  power  of  Courts  is  even
more  conspicuous,  because  it  has  to  be
exercised  to  a  great  extent  in  opposition  to
recognized  legal  rules.  This  is  Equity,  or
fairness.  The  equity  I  am  speaking  of  now
is  not  the  modern  equity  jurisdiction  of
English  tribunals,  which  has  been  combined
with  common  law  by  the  Judicature  Acts
of  1873-5,  and  which  even  for  some  hundred
and  fifty  years  before  that  event,  since  the
times  of  Lords  Chancellors  Nottingham,  Hard-
wicke  and  Eldon,  had  assumed  the  character
oi'  a  legal  system  as  technical  as  common  law
itself,  although  sometimes  conflicting  with
the  common  law  in  a  curious  way.
208


EQUITY  209

Modern  English  equity  is  interesting  for
our  purpose  only  in  so  far  as  its  peculiar
course  has  been  shaped  historically  by  the
operation  of  principles  distinct  from  ordinary
legal  rules.  But  it  is  in  the  earlier  history
of  this  branch  of  English  law,  in  the  period
ranging  roughly  from  the  fourteenth  to  the
eighteenth  centuries,  that  we  get  the  best
material  for  a  study  of  equity  as  a  distinct
principle.  Roman  history  and  the  observa-
tion of  the  legal  institutions  of  the  Greeks,
the  Germans,  and  other  nations  also  give
excellent  illustrations  of  the  process  under
discussion.

One  important  point  was  noticed  and
explained  by  Aristotle  :  he  calls  attention  to
the  fact  that  legal  rules  are  necessarily
general,  while  the  circumstances  of  every  case
are  particular,  and  that  it  is  beyond  the
power  of  human  insight  and  science  to  lay
down  in  advance  rules  which  will  fit  all
future  variations  and  complications  of  practice.
Therefore  law  must  be  supplemented  by
equity  {epieikeia);  there  must  be  a  power  of
adaptation  and  flexible  treatment,  some-
times suggesting  decisions  which  will  be  at
variance  with  formally  recognized  law,  and
yet will turn out to be intrinsically just.


210 COMMON-SENSE IN LAW

The  same  principle  has  been  put  forward  in
very  distinct  terms  in  the  Introduction  to
the  French  Code  of  1804.

In  the  practice  of  Roman  law  during  the
last  centuries  of  the  Republic  and  the  early
period  of  the  empire,  we  often  hear  of
an  opposition  between  the  spirit  and  the
letter  of  the  law.  Cicero's  speeches  furnish  us
with  an  excellent  example  of  a  struggle  be-
tween equitable  and  formalistic  interpretation
in  the  process  between  Caecina  and  Aebutius.
There  was  a  dispute  between  two  Romans  of
high  rank,  A.  Caecina  and  L.  Aebutius,  about
a  certain  estate.  As  a  step  in  the  legal
procedure  appropriate  to  the  case,  it  was
necessary  for  Caecina  to  make  a  formal
entry  upon  the  land;  this  he  attempted  to
do,  but  was  prevented  by  Aebutius,  who
opposed  him  with  a  force  of  armed  men.
Without  trying  conclusions  by  force,  Caecina
brought  an  action  against  Aebutius  in  the
form  of  a  so-called  interdict  {unde  vi  armata).
This  interdict  applied  to  the  violent  dis-
possession of  a  landowner,  and  was  framed
as  follows  :  "  In  the  place  whence  thou  or  thy
slaves  or  agent  hast  this  year  violently  ousted
him  or  his  slaves  or  agent  from  possession
.  in  that  place  do  thou  reinstate  him  in


EQUITY  211

possession."  When  the  case  came  up  for  trials
the  defendant  objected,  among  other  things,
that  as  a  matter  of  fact  there  had  been  no
ejectment  and  no  violence.  Cicero,  as  comisel
for  the  plaintiff,  retorted  by  ridiculing  the
view  that  the  law  did  not  apply  except  in
cases  of  actual  ejectment  and  violence  in
the  literal  sense  of  the  words.  "  It  is  as  if  the
defendant  said,"  he  urged,  "  '  Yes,  I  have  done
these  things,  and  you  have  no  means  of
proceeding  against  me  by  civil  action  before
the  Praetor.'  When  our  ancestors  were  men
of  such  diligence  and  prudence  as  to  estab-
lish every  requisite  law  not  only  for  such
important  cases  as  this,  but  for  even  the
most  trivial  matters,  will  you  hold  that
they  overlooked  this  class  of  cases,  the  most
important  of  all,  so  that,  if  people  had
compelled  me  to  depart  from  my  home  by
force  of  arms,  I  should  have  had  a  right  of
action,  but  as  they  only  prevented  me  from
entering  my  home,  I  have  none?  Shall  that
man  gain  his  cause  before  your  tribunal,  who
defends  himself  by  this  argument,  '  I  drove
you  away  with  armed  men,  but  I  did  not  drive
you  out"i"

Turning  to  the  question  of  actual  violence,
Cicero  continues  : "  Aebutius  is  not  touched


212 COMMON-SENSE IN LAW

by  this  interdict,  because  violence  was  not
offered  to  Caecina.  Can  you  then,  Aebu-
tius,  say  that  it  was  not  violence  which
hindered  him,  when  by  reason  of  an  armed
force  he  was  unable  to  come  to  a  place,  when
he  wished  to  come  there  and  had  gone  out
with  that  intention?  What  then  shall  we
say?  If  he  had  been  there,  and  if  under
the  influence  of  fear  he  had  fled  from  that
place  when  he  saw  the  armed  men,  would
you  then  say  that  he  had  been  driven  away  ?
I  think  so.  Will  you  judges,  then,  who
decide  disputes  with  such  care  and  such
subtlety,  by  expressions  and  not  by  equity,
you  who  interpret  laws  ...  by  their  letter,
will  you  be  able  to  say  that  a  man  has  been
driven  away,  who  has  never  been  touched  ?
What !  Will  you  say  that  he  has  been
thrust  out  from  his  place?  For  that  was
the  word  that  the  Praetors  formerly  used  in
their  interdicts.  Can  any  one  be  thrust  out
who  is  not  touched  ?  Must  we  not  if  we  abide
by  the  strict  letter,  understand  that  that  man
only  is  thrust  out  on  whom  hands  are  laid  ?
What  law,  what  resolution  of  the  Senate,
what  treaty  cannot  be  invalidated  and  torn
to  pieces  if  we  choose  to  bend  facts  to  words
and  leave  out  of  the  question  the  intention


EQUITY  213

and  design  and  authority  of  those  who  wrote
them?"

Again,  the  requirements  of  the  ever  grow-
ing Imperial  jurisdiction  of  Rome  led  to  the
development  of  a  special  system  of  law  for
the  relations  of  subjects  who  were  not  Roman
citizens.  The  foreign  praetor  {praetor  pere-
grinus)  and  the  proconsuls  had  to  elaborate
and  to  apply  legal  principles  different  from
those  which  were  current  between  citizens,
and  thus  the  jus  gentium  arose  by  the  side
of  the  national  jus  civile  as  a  body  of  general
rules  of  law  suggested  by  fairness,  common
sense,  knowledge  of  the  world  and  some
acquaintance  with  foreign  law.  The  magis-
trates who  were  entrusted  with  jurisdiction
in  these  cases  based  their  decisions  and  the
prospective  rules  of  their  edicts  on  general
considerations  of  equity  and  utility  {ex  bono
et  aequo).

The  recognition  of  the  value  of  these
principles  in  regard  to  foreigners  reacted
powerfully  on  the  situation  of  the  citizens
themselves.  It  was  not  to  be  expected  that
Romans  would  continue  to  submit  to  narrow
and  rigid  forms  when  a  wider  and  wiser
treatment  of  legal  problems  had  been  evolved
for  their  subjects. And  as  a  matter  of  fact


214 COMMON-SENSE IN LAW

the  jurisdiction  of  the  city  praetor  was  soon
modified  in  the  same  direction  as  that  of
the  'praetor  peregrinus  and  of  the  provincial
governors.

One  of  the  fundamental  principles  which
governed  the  rules  of  succession  in  the  strict
law  of  Rome  was  agnation,  that  is,  relation-
ship based  either  on  kinship  through  the
male  stock,  or  on  artificial  adoption  into  the
family  according  to  prescribed  legal  forms.
The  usual  successor  to  an  estate  came  from
the  class  of  so-called  "  own  heirs,"  or  members
of  the  family  under  the  immediate  "  power  ''
of  the  father.  In  a  case  of  intestacy,  these
"  own  heirs  "  were  first  entitled  to  the  inherit-
ance ;  after  them  came  the  nearest  agnatic
relative  of  the  deceased.  The  rigid  application
of  these  rules  imposed  material  hardships  on
persons  who  came  to  be  considered  as  having  a
natural  right  to  share  in  the  property  of  the
deceased ;  and  the  praetor  therefore  mitigated
the  severity  of  their  operation  by  applying
the  principles  of  the  law  of  nations.  This  he
effected  by  developing  the  doctrine  of  "  pos-
session of  the  estate  "  {bonorum  possessio) ,
He  did  not  override  or  abrogate  the  rules
of  the  strict  law,  nor  did  he  destroy  the  legal
title  of  the  heir;  but  by  the  employment  of


EQUITY  215

fictions  and  summary  remedies  he  placed  "  in
the  position  of  heir  "  a  person  whom  he  con-
sidered to  have  a  natural  claim.  In  cases
of  intestacy  he  supplemented  the  principle
of  agnation  by  the  wider  principle  of  cognation,
or  blood  kinship  in  the  modern  sense,  includ-
ing, of  course,  relationship  on  the  female  side.
Preference  was  given  firstly  to  legitimate
children  of  the  deceased;  secondly,  to  those
entitled  by  the  strict  legal  rules  of  succession ;
thirdly,  to  nearest  kindred  in  blood;  and
fourthly,  to  the  widow  or  widower  of  the
deceased.

2.  An  analogous  process  took  place  in
English  law  when  the  writ  procedure  and
substantive  common  law  had  attained  to
their  full  development  in  the  course  of  the
thirteenth  century  and  early  half  of  the
fourteenth.  The  beneficial  effects  of  a  tech-
nically developed  law  had  been  inestimable
for  England,  securing  for  her  a  considerable
superiority  in  civil  order  over  Germany  and
even  France.  But,  towards  the  middle  of
the  fourteenth  century,  the  common  law
was  in  danger  of  becoming  entangled  in
professional  technicalities  and  losing  touch
with  the  social  requirements  of  the  nation.
The  free  handling  of  legal institutions, the


216 COMMON-SENSE IN LAW

creative  power  of  leading  judges  in  framing
and  developing  rules  of  law,  began  to  de-
generate; the  rigid  framing  of  the  writs  and
the  sophistic  methods  of  pleading  hampered
the  great  progressive  movement  which  had
given  birth  to  the  remarkable  jurisprudence
of  the  Courts  of  Henry  III  and  of  Edward  I.
The  "  actions  on  the  case  "  inaugurated  by
the  Statute  Westminster  II  had  not  quite
borne  the  fruits  which  might  have  been
expected  from  this  form  of  procedure.  It
was  at  this  critical  period  that  the  Court  of
Chancery  came  forward  with  fresh  impulses,
under  the  influence  of  the  foreign  learning
of  Canon  and  of  Roman  law,  and  supported
by  the  recognition  of  conscience  as  one  of
the  sources  of  legal  action.  I  need  not  go
into  details  of  the  interesting  history  of
Chancery  jurisdiction.  It  played  a  decisive
part  in  modifying  the  status  of  servile
peasantry  and  of  the  villeins,  in  creating
trusts  and  in  protecting  informal  agreements.
It  is  sufficient  for  my  present  purpose  to
call  attention  to  the  first  of  these  points.
Mediaeval  peasants,  the  so-called  villeins,  had
been  deprived  of  protection  by  the  State
in  their  dealings  with  their  lords.  If  any
of  them complained of  being ejected from


EQUITY  217

his  tenure,  or  of  being  oppressed  by  arbitrary-
exactions  on  the  part  of  the  lord,  he  was  met
by  the  answer  that  the  King's  Courts  did
not  interfere  in  matters  concerning  the  rela-
tions between  lords  and  villeins.  Now  this
state  of  affairs  was  altered  in  consequence
of  a  change  of  views  in  the  Courts.  Some
time  during  the  fifteenth  century,  royal
judges  began  to  entertain  suits  brought  by
peasants  against  their  lords.  The  problem
is  when  and  how  this  change  was  brought
about.  We  know  now  that  it  was  initiated
by  the  exercise  of  equity  in  the  Court  of
Chancery.  In  the  fifteenth  century  a  con-
siderable number  of  cases  came  before  the
Court  of  Chancery.  In  the  sixteenth  century
the  same  business,  which  in  view  of  the
number  of  copyholders  must  have  been  a
lucrative  one,  came  before  the  common  law
Courts.^

From  1439  onwards  a  stream  of  equitable
jurisdiction  flows  out  from  the  Chancery  to
secure  the  title  of  the  very  class  which  has
hitherto  had  no  legal  title  at  all.  Tenure  in
villeinage  becomes  copyhold.

3.  It  is  unnecessary  in  a  sketch  of  general

^  See  Tawney,  Agrarian  Problem  in  the  Sixteenth  Century,
pp.  310,  etc.


218 COMMON-SENSE IN LAW

jurisprudence  to  trace  the  stages  of  the
momentous  conflict  between  the  Courts  of
common  law  and  the  Courts  of  Equity.
This  subject  belongs  properly  to  the  history
of  English  law.  But  what  I  should  like  to
point  out  in  this  connection  is  the  fact  that
in  spite  of  modern  attempts  to  harmonize
equitable  and  legal  jurisdiction,  and  in  spite
of  the  compromise  effected  after  centuries
of  rivalry,  it  has  not  always  been  easy  to
co-ordinate  the  action  of  both  principles.
In  a  general  way  it  was  assumed  that  "  equity
follows  the  law,"  and  that  the  novelties
which  it  admits  are  derived  from  the  fact
that  it  provides  remedies  in  cases  where  the
common  law  does  not  grant  them.  This
view  was,  for  instance,  fully  explained  by
Lord  Hardwicke  in  Garth  v.  Cotton  (1753).
Sometimes,  however,  an  antagonism  between
the  Courts  actually  found  expression  in  pro-
nouncements of  judges.  In  Dixon  v.  Gay  fere
(1853)  the  Court  of  Chancery  took  a  line  in
regard  to  the  legal  effects  of  possession  which
was  avowedly  opposed  to  a  doctrine  admitted
in  common  law  Courts.  The  King's  Bench
retorted  in  Asher  v.  Whitlock  (1865)  with  a
declaration  of  Chief  Justice  Cockburn  that  the
decision  of  the  Master  of  the  Rolls  in  Dixon  v.


EQUITY  219

Gayfere,  however  right  in  equity,  was  not
right  in  law.  The  Judicature  Acts  (1873-5)
have  put  an  end  to  this  antagonism,  but
the  difference  in  the  methods  of  juridical
reasoning  are  still  existent  and  represent,  as
it  were,  the  opposite  poles  of  practical  juris-
prudence.

The  antagonism  we  have  noticed  is  to  be
attributed  not  merely  to  a  difference  of
personal  opinions,  or  to  a  rivalry  of  institu-
tions, but  rather  to  a  fundamental  difference
of  methods.  In  one  system  the  centre  of
gravity  lies  in  the  formulated  rule,  and  there-
fore there  is  a  strong  tendency  to  sacrifice
the  particular  to  the  general,  justice  to  cer-
tainty :  while  in  the  other  there  is  a  more
direct  quest  after  right  and  a  wide  discre-
tionary power  on  the  part  of  the  judge  to
draw  on  his  own  notions  of  what  is  fair  and
just.

Sir  G.  Jcssel,  Master  of  the  Rolls,  has  said
[Re  HalleVs  Estate  (1880)] :

"  The  rules  of  Equity  are  not,  like  the
rules  of  the  common  law,  supposed  to  be
established  from  time  immemorial.  It  is
perfectly  well  known  that  they  have  been
established from time  to time  —  altered.


220 COMMON-SENSE IN LAW

improved  and  refined  from  time  to  time.
In  many  cases  we  know  the  names  of  the
Chancellors  who  invented  them.  No  doubt
they  were  invented  for  the  purpose  of
securing  the  better  administration  of  jus-
tice, but  still,  they  were  invented.  Take
such  things  as  these — the  separate  use  of  a
■^married  woman,  the  restraint  on  alienation,
the  modern  rule  against  perpetuities,  and
the  rules  of  equitable  waste.  We  can  name
the  Chancellor  who  first  invented  them,  and
state  the  date  when  they  were  first  intro-
duced into  equity  jurisprudence ;  and  there-
fore in  cases  of  this  kind  the  older  prece-
dents have  very  little  value.  The  doctrines
are  progressive,  refined  and  improved,  and
if  we  want  to  know  what  the  rules  of
Equity  are,  we  must  look,  of  course,  rather
to  the  more  modern  than  the  more  ancient
cases."

As  there  are  few  enacted  laws  in  primitive
societies,  and  the  binding  tradition  of  case-
law  is  not  much  developed  on  account  of
the  difficulty  of  recording  precedents  and
the  lack  of  professional  training  of  the  lawyers,
the  province  of  discretionary  justice  is  natur-
ally very  extensive,  and  legal  progress  consists


EQUITY  221

in  a  great  measure  in  the  substitution  of
fixed  rules,  either  legislative  or  judge-made,
for  this  fluctuating  state  of  the  law  But
it  would  be  wrong  to  conclude  from  this
process  that  the  sphere  of  legal  rules  is  con-
stantly growing  at  the  expense  of  the  sphere
of  discretionary  justice.  A  movement  in  the
opposite  direction  is  also  noticeable  in  all
healthy  communities  possessed  of  a  strong
feeling  for  living  law.  Strict  legal  rules  are
supplemented  by  allowing  a  wide  margin  of
discretion  to  the  judges  for  their  construction^
development,  adaptation  to  circumstances,
and  even  for  their  gradual  organic  modifica-
tion. Thus  equity  appears  not  only  as  the
most  ancient  but  also  as  the  most  modern
form  of  legal  action.  The  German  Civil  Code
of  1900  very  often  employs  general  state-
ments of  various  legal  principles,  with  a  view
to  their  differentiation  by  practice.  It  com-
monly refers,  for  instance,  to  good  faith
{Treu  und  Glauben),  business  practice,  etc.
Any  attempt  to  get  rid  of  this  contradictory
tendency  in  the  evolution  of  law  would
speedily  reduce  legal  systems  to  hopeless
formalism  and  intolerable  pedantry.  The
great  problem  consists  in  keeping  the  func-
tion of this important element of flexible


222 COMMON-SENSE IN LAW

equity  proportionate  to  the  elements  of
certainty  and  stable  tradition  which  are
characteristic  of  the  purely  legal  side  of  the
evolution.  A  capricious  treatment  of  statutes
and  leading  precedents  by  the  Courts  would
prove  quite  as  destructive  of  Justice  as  a
^  rigid  application  of  obsolete  rules.  The  sense
^  caution  in  this  respect  is  sometimes
strongly  expressed  by  jurists.  Application
of  law  in  this  as  in  so  many  other  cases  is
a  matter  not  only  of  exact  knowledge,  but
of  art  :  all  depends  on  the  sense  of  due  pro-
portion in  a  wise  combination  of  two  distinct
tendencies.

4.  I  should  like  in  conclusion  to  illustrate
my  view  by  examples  borrowed  from  Roman
and  modern  English  law  regarding  the  three
principal  functions  of  equity — the  help  afforded
by  the  powers  of  individualization,  the  supple-
menting of  gaps  in  law  and  the  correction
of  harsh  consequences  of  legal  rules.^  The
most  remarkable  instances  of  equitable  in-
dividualization— that  is,  the  adaptation  of  a
general  rule  to  particular  circumstances — are
given  by  the  responsa  of  the  great  Roman  jurists
of  the  second  century  b.c.  To  what  far-reach-
ing consequences  this  power  of  adaptation
^  Jits  adjuvandi,  jus  supplendi,  jus  corrigendi.


EQUITY  22a

may  lead  can  be  seen  from  the  interpretation
of  testaments  and  contracts.  Roman  Law-
had  by  the  end  of  the  RepubUc  reached  the
stage  when  the  intention  of  the  testator  and
of  the  contracting  party  is  assumed  to  be
the  principal  factor  in  the  constitution  of
the  testament  and  of  the  contract.  But  in
connection  with  this  principle  peculiar  diffi-
culties arise  as  regards  the  right  interpretation
of  such  intentions.  The  ancient  formal  rule
w^as  that  the  testator's  or  contracting  party's
actual  words  formed  the  basis  of  the  law  in
the  particular  case.i  But  this  rule,  con-
venient and  simple  though  it  appears,  could
not  always  be  applied.  Words  might  be
obscure  and  ambiguous;  the  jurists  had  to
look  for  their  sense,  and  in  doing  this  they
had  to  be  guided  by  two  sets  of  considerations*
To  begin  with,  they  might  try  to  ascertain
by  an  attentive  study  of  the  context  and  of
probable  intentions  what  the  testator  or
contracting  partj-^  had  wanted  to  say.  Or
else  they  might  try  to  discover  what  in  the
given  circumstance  the  testator  or  contract-
ing party  might  be  reasonably  supposed  to
have  intended  or  ordained.  Their  minds
had  to  work  in  one  of  these  two  directions
1  Uti  lingua  nuncupasset  ita  ius  esto.


224 COMMON-SENSE IN LAW

either  by  reconstructing  the  intention  of  the
party,  or  by  imputing  to  him  reasonable
motives.

An  interesting  case  occurred  in  Rome  about
A.D.  150.  One  Valerius  Nepos  had  made  a
will  in  which,  according  to  law,  he  had  insti-
tuted a  certain  person  his  heir,  and  added  a
number  of  legacies  to  various  friends,  as
well  as  a  direction  that  certain  slaves  should
be  emancipated.  After  a  time,  however,  he
changed  his  mind  and  struck  out  the  name
of  the  heir.  At  law,  this  invalidated  the
whole  will,  and  the  property  of  the  deceased
was  claimed,  in  the  absence  of  kindred,  by
the  Treasury.  The  case  came  up  for  decision
before  the  tribunal  of  the  Emperor  himself,
the  great  Antoninus  Pius.  At  first  sight,
there  seemed  to  be  no  reason  for  resisting
the  claim  of  the  Treasury  :  but  the  various
parties  interested  in  the  will  were  represented
by  advocates,  and  the  following  discussion  is
recorded  to  us  :

"  Zeno  :  '  I  beg.  Lord  Emperor,  that  you
will  hear  me  with  patience  :  what  is  your
decision  with  regard  to  the  legacies  ?  '  The
Emperor  :  '  Do  you  think  that  if  he  struck
out  the  names  of  the  heirs  he  could  have


EQUITY  225

desired  the  will  to  stand  ?  '  Priscianus,
counsel  for  Leo  [evidently  one  of  the
beneficiaries  under  the  will]  :  '  It  was  only
the  heirs  Avhose  names  were  struck  out.'
Longinus,  counsel  for  the  Treasury :  '  No
will  which  does  not  appoint  an  heir  can
be  held  valid.'  Priscianus  :  '  The  testator
did  actually  emancipate  some  of  his  slaves
and  bequeath  certain  legacies.'  The  Em-
peror commanded  everybody  to  leave  the
room  in  order  that  he  might  consider  the
question.  When  the  parties  were  read-
mitted, he  said  :  '  This  seems  to  be  a  case
for  humane  interpretation;  we  hold  there-
fore that  Nepos  wished  to  annul  only  those
directions  which  he  actually  struck  out.'  "

It  is  clear  from  the  narrative  that  the
Emperor  was  moved  to  give  his  decision  by
two  considerations.  He  thought  that  it  had
been  the  intention  of  the  testator  to  remove
the  name  of  the  instituted  heir,  but  to  retain
the  dispositions  in  respect  of  legacies  and
emancipations.  But  there  was  another  point :
the  enlightened  opinion  of  the  time  was
"  in  favour  of  liberty,"  and  the  Emperor
was  anxious  that  the  freedmen  should  «not
be disappointed. Accordingly, after some


226 COMMON-SENSE IN LAW

hesitation,  he  resolved  to  overlook  the  flaw  in
the  form  of  the  will,  and  to  interpret  it  in
the  spirit  of  a  "  humane  "  equity.

In  another  characteristic  set  of  cases
ordinary  rules  were  individualized  by  Roman
lawyers  on  the  principle  that  in  case  of  too
vague  an  indication  by  the  law,  parties  were
to  act  in  regard  to  each  other  as  befits
"  honourable  men  "  {ut  inter  honos  viros  agi
oporteret).

5.  The  second  case  in  which  judges  have  to
step  in  and  apply  considerations  of  equity
and  justice  arises  when  there  are  obvious
gaps  in  the  law.  Such  cases  will  often
occur  in  any  system  of  law,  and  we  are  by
no  means  insured  against  them  by  our
civilization  and  the  complexity  of  our  legal
arrangements,  because  new  and  entirely  un-
foreseen circumstances  arise  every  day  in
connection  with  the  immense  advance  of
technical  invention  and  of  social  changes,
A  great  deal  of  statute  law  has  been,  of
course,  enacted  after  the  introduction  of
modern  scientific  improvements,  but  statutes
come  generally  a  long  while  after  the  track
for  them  has  been  cleared  by  business,  and
collisions  of  interests  which  occur  before
their  promulgation  have  to  be  decided  on  the


EQUITY  227

strength  of  general  considerations.  Courts
are  naturally  inclined,  when  they  meet  with
gaps  in  the  law,  to  fill  them  up  by  the  help
of  a  logical  extension  of  existing  doctrines;
but  this  method  does  not  lead  far  in  the
case  of  entirely  new  departures,  and  progress
is  often  achieved  in  such  circumstances  only
after  a  good  deal  of  groping  in  the  dark.  In
the  'nineties,  there  was  an  attempt  by  English
judges  to  assimilate  motors  to  traction-
engines  for  the  purposes  of  law  :  they  had
nothing  to  guide  them  in  the  treatment  of
cases  concerning  motors  but  the  rules  in
regard  to  traction-engines,  and  even  after
the  Locomotives  Act  of  1898  motor-car  traffic
was  subjected  to  rules  as  to  speed  and  manage-
ment which  were  very  ill-suited  to  it.  In  this
way,  before  the  passing  of  the  Motor  Cars  Act,
1903,  magistrates  were  thrown  very  much  on
their  discretion  in  regard  to  motor-car  traffic.
6.  Lastly,  we  have  to  consider  cases  when
equity  takes  up  a  standpoint  which  leads
to  downright  alterations  of  existing  bad  law;
that  is,  when  it  acts  therefore  as  a  factor
of  correction.  The  history  of  Roman  Law
again  gives  conspicuous  instances  of  the
gradual  amelioration  of  grossly  unjust  law
by  the  conscious  and  consistent  interference


228 COMMON-SENSE IN LAW

of  the  Courts.  Some  of  the  famous  fictions
which  counteracted  the  application  of  obsolete
rules  were  produced  in  this  way.  In  strict
law  a  Roman  spinster  had,  in  default  of  a
testamentary  guardian,  to  be  under  the
guardianship  of  her  father  or  of  the  nearest
agnate,  i.  e.  of  the  nearest  male  relation  in
the  male  line.  This  meant  that  in  effect
she  never  came  of  age  and  could  not  deal
with  her  property  as  she  chose.  But  in
time  it  was  realized  by  public  opinion  that
such  a  state  of  things  produced  great  hard-
ship. The  Courts  managed  to  modify  the
law  without  formally  abrogating  the  rule.
They  achieved  this  result  by  protecting
women  who  had  contracted  a  fictitious
marriage  with  some  old  man  from  any
attempt  on  the  part  of  this  fictitious  husband
to  exercise  his  rights  in  practice.  It  came
to  this,  that  the  woman  got  rid  of  the  guardian-
ship of  agnates  by  means  of  the  marriage
and  was  not  allowed  by  the  Courts  to  lapse
into  subjection  to  the  husband.  A  similar
process  took  place  in  the  history  of  English
law  as  regards  the  property  of  married
women.  At  common  law  "  Marriage  was
an  assignment  of  a  wife's  property  rights  to
her  husband  during  the  latter' s  life." Public


EQUITY  229

opinion  became  alive  to  the  unfairness  and
harshness  of  this  rule  in  the  eighteenth
century.  The  Court  of  Chancery  used  its
doctrines  of  trusts  to  modify  the  obnoxious
rules  and  to  enable  "  a  married  woman  to  t
hold  property  independently  of  her  husband,
and  to  exert  over  this  property  the  rights
which  could  be  exercised  by  a  man  or  an
unmarried  woman."

This  success  was  achieved,  after  the  manner
of  the  best  judge-made  law,  by  the  systematic
and  ingenious  development  of  one  simple
principle,  namely,  that  even  though  a  person
might  not  be  able  to  hold  property  of  his
own,  it  might  be  held  for  his  benefit  by  a
trustee,  whose  sole  duty  it  was  to  carry  out
the  terms  of  the  trust.  Hence,  as  regards
the  property  of  married  women,  came  the
following  results,  which  were  attained  only
by  degrees.

Property  given  to  a  trustee  for  the  "  separate
use  "  of  a  woman,  whether  before  or  after
marriage,  is  her  separate  property,  that  is,
it  is  property  which  does  not  in  any  way
belong  to  the  husband.  At  common  law,
indeed,  it  is  the  property  of  the  trustee,  but
it  is  property  which  he  is  bound  in  equity
to  deal  with  according  to  the  terms  of  the


230 COMMON-SENSE IN LAW

trust,  and  therefore  in  accordance  with  the
wishes  or  directions  of  the  woman.  Here
we  have  constituted  the  "  separate  property,"
or  the  "  separate  estate "  of  a  married
woman.

If,  as  might  happen,  property  was  given
to  or  settled  upon  a  woman  for  her  separate
use,  but  no  trustee  were  appointed,  then  the
Court  of  Chancery  further  estabhshed  that
the  husband  himself,  just  because  he  was  at
common  law  the  legal  owner  of  the  property,
must  hold  it  as  trustee  for  his  wife.  The
Court  of  Chancery  having  thus  created
separate  property  for  a  married  woman,  by
degrees  worked  out  to  its  full  result  the  idea
that  a  trustee  must  deal  with  the  property
of  a  married  woman  in  accordance  with  her
directions.  Thus  the  Court  gave  her  the
power  to  give  away  or  sell  her  separate
property,  as  also  to  leave  it  to  whomsoever
she  wished  by  will,  and  further  enabled  her
to  charge  it  with  her  contracts.  But  equity
lawyers  came  to  perceive,  somewhere  towards
the  beginning  of  the  nineteenth  century,  that
though  they  had  achieved  all  this,  they  had
not  given  quite  sufficient  protection  to  the
settled  property  of  a  married  woman.  Her
very  possession  of  the  power  to  deal  freely


EQUITY  231

with  her  separate  property  might  thwart  the
object  for  which  that  separate  property  had
been  created;  for  it  might  enable  a  husband
to  get  her  property  into  his  hands.  Who
could  guarantee  that  Barry  Lyndon  might  not
persuade  or  compel  his  wife  to  make  her
separate  property  chargeable  with  his  debts,
or  to  sell  it  and  give  him  the  proceeds  ?
This  one  weak  point  in  the  defences  which
equity  had  thrown  up  against  the  attacks
of  the  enemy  was  rendered  unassailable  by
the  astuteness,  as  it  is  said,  of  Lord  Thurlow.^
He  invented  the  provision,  introduced  con-
stantly since  his  time  into  marriage  settle-
ments or  wills,  which  is  known  as  the  "  re-
straint on  anticipation."  This  clause,  if  it
forms  part  of  the  document  settling  property
upon  a  woman  jor  her  separate  use,  makes  it
impossible  for  her  during  marriage  either  to
alienate  the  property  or  to  charge  it  with  her
debts.  Whilst  she  is  married  she  cannot
in  short,  in  any  way  anticipate  her  income,
though  in  every  other  respect  she  may  deal
with  the  property  as  her  own.

Eventually  in  this,  as  in  many  other  cases,
the  working  out  of  equitable  remedies  pre-
pared the  way  for  definite  legislation,  which

^  See  Dicey,  Law  and  Opinion  in  England,  p.  375  seq.


232 COMMON-SENSE IN LAW

was  effected  by  the  Married  Women's  Property
Acts,  1882  and  1893.

We  may  sum  up  by  saying  that  equity  as  a
method  of  judicial  discretion  is  inseparable
from  a  complex  and  efficient  system  of  law.
It  is  not  necessary  that  it  should  be  exercised
by  special  courts,  and  it  does  not  disappear
when  special  tribunals  of  equity  are  merged
by  a  comprehensive  reform  of  the  Judicature.
The  method  will  retain  its  value  and  will  have
to  be  exercised  in  order  to  supplement  the
rigidity  of  prospective  general  rules.

We  have  now  examined  each  of  the  four
sources  of  positive  law — legislation,  custom,
judicial  precedents  and  equity.  In  practice,
important  questions  may  arise  as  to  the  way
in  which  these  different  sources  have  to  be
co-ordinated.  A  general  du-ection  as  to  the
principles  which  should  govern  this  process
is  to  be  found  in  the  following  clause  (cl.  1)
of  the  Swiss  Civil  Code  of  1907 — in  many
respects  the  best  of  modern  codes.  "  Legal
enactments  govern  all  subjects  which  they
concern  either  in  express  words  or  by  inter-
pretation. When  there  is  no  statutory  rule
applicable  to  the  case,  the  judge  ought  to
decide  according  to  customary  law. In  the


EQUITY  233

absence  of  a  custom  bearing  on  the  point  he
ought  to  decide  in  conformity  with  a  rule
which  he  would  have  formulated  if  he  had
been  a  lawgiver.  In  doing  so  he  ought  to
follow  the  views  established  by  jurisprudence
and  legal  precedents."


CHAPTER IX

THE LAW OF NATURE

1.  All  legal  rules  are  supposed  to  be
reasonable  and  natural;  even  the  worst
have  probably  some  considerations  of  reason
to  support  them,  and  the  more  important
doctrines  of  a  legal  system  generally  corre-
spond to  some  deeply-rooted  requirements
of  society.  Even  slavery  was  justified  by
the  Greeks  on  grounds  of  the  natural  in-
feriority of  barbarians  and  of  vanquished
nations.  In  this  way  it  may  be  rightly
said  that  important  rules  have  a  twofold
justification,  as  legal  commands  and  as
reasonable  propositions.  But  by  saying  so
much  we  do  not  mean  that  there  can  be  a
proper  system  of  law  constructed  on  the
basis  of  pure  reason  or  of  "  human  nature,"
as  opposed  to  law  produced  by  legislation,
judicial  decisions  or  custom.  Yet  this  view
has  been  put  forward  again  and  again  in  the
course  of  history,  and  it  has  had  a  great
influence  in  shaping  the  development  of  law.
234


THE LAW OF NATURE  235

It  has  been  said  rather  contemptuously  that
the  law  of  nature  is  "  jurisprudence  in  the
air  "  :  and  the  definition  need  not  be  repudi-
ated by  supporters  of  this  kind  of  law,  for
after  all  the  air  constitutes  one  of  the  most
important  elements  of  life,  both  for  good  and
for  evil.

The  Greeks  were  struck  by  the  great  variety
of  positive  laws,  and  asked  themselves  whether
justice  and  right  were  only  casual  arrange-
ments changing  with  circumstances  and  times^
or  whether  behind  this  confusing  variety  there
existed  perennial  notions  of  right  and  wrong,
justice  and  injustice.  While  sophists  and
sceptics  held  the  first  view,  idealistic  philo-
sophers from  the  time  of  Socrates,  Plato  and
Aristotle  maintained  the  second.  In  contrast
with  shifting  positive  rules,  they  spoke  of
unwritten  law  ingrained  in  the  heart  of  man,
of  a  common  law  recurring  among  different
tribes,  of  a  law  of  nature  which  reasonable
creatures  were  everywhere  bound  to  recognize ;
and  in  Xenophon's  reminiscences  of  Socrates
we  read  that  the  family  relations  between
man  and  wife,  parents  and  children,  were
cited  as  concrete  examples  of  these  ever-
recurring  rules  of  the  law  of  nature.

These  were  speculations  of  philsophers,  but


236 COM^ION-SENSE IN LAW

the  great  practitioners  of  law  in  Rome  en-
dorsed them  with  their  authority.  They  had
to  deal  with  numberless  legal  enactments  and
customs  over  which  their  tribunals  exercised
sovereign  authority.  It  was  not  a  speculative,
but  an  actual  problem  for  their  praetors  and
proconsuls  to  reduce  this  heterogeneous  mass
to  unity  and  reasonable  order.  In  this  way
the  question  of  the  moral  background  to
changing  laws  arose  in  full  force,  and  the
Romans  eagerly  took  up  the  threads  of  Greek
doctrine  about  a  law  of  nature,  as  the  reason-
able basis  of  all  particular  laws  and  more
especially  of  the  common  law  of  the  empire.
Ulpian  was  inclined  to  widen  the  boundaries
of  this  law  of  nature  so  as  to  include  even
animals  :  perhaps  he  took  his  clue  in  this
respect  from  the  teaching  of  the  Pythagoreans,
for  whom  there  was  no  gulf  between  animals
and  man.^  Others  contented  themselves  with
building  on  the  foundations  of  the  rational
nature  of  man,  and  from  this  point  of  view
treated  a  number  of  legal  rules  as  necessary
deductions  from  reason.

The jurist  Paul  remarks  : "As  leases  are
suggested  by  nature  itself  and  are  to  be  found

^  A  passage  in  Xenophon's  Reminiscences  of  Socrates
may  have  suggested  his  examples  to  him.


THE LAW OF NATURE  237

in  the  law  of  all  nations,  a  particular  form
of  words  is  not  necessary  for  their  validity,
but  only  consent.  The  same  holds  good  in
regard  to  sale."  Wardship,  again,  is  char-
acterized by  Gaius  {circ.  a.d.  150)  as  an
institution  founded  on  natural  reason,  while
the  compilers  of  the  Institutes  under  Justinian
also  speak  of  natural  law  in  this  case.  (Gaius,
I,  189  : Inst.  I,  20,  6.)

The  tendency  of  the  doctrine  was,  however,
not  suggested  merely  by  practical  considera-
tions :  its  strongest  elements  were  derived
from  philosophical  ethics.  Men  like  Papinian
and  Paul,  Antoninus  Pius,  Marcus  Aurelius,
were  under  the  sway  of  stoicism  :  they  saw
and  worshipped  the  rule  of  nature  in  the  world
at  large;  little  wonder  that  they  were  con-
vinced that  reason  and  right  were  also  the
voice  of  nature,  the  clearest  manifestation  of
divine  power  in  the  world.

In  another  setting,  the  same  idealistic
construction  is  observed  in  mediaeval  juris-
prudence where  it  arose  under  the  influence
of  Christianity  and  of  the  Church.  Though
according  to  the  teaching  of  St.  Augustine,
the  City  of  God  is  in  heaven  and  the  city  of
the  world  is  a  creation  of  robbers,  yet  the
road  to  the  City  of  God  lay  through  this  world,


238 COMMON-SENSE IN LAW

and  mankind  had  to  prepare  itself  for  future
life  by  making  the  best  of  the  time  of  trial
on  earth.  God  has  not  forsaken  mankind  in
this  trial :  He  has  revealed  His  law  to  them
and  implanted  it  in  their  hearts  as  conscience
and  reason.  The  Commonwealths  of  the
earth  build  up  laws  of  their  own  which  partly
serve  the  purpose  of  the  moral  education  of
men  and  partly  reflect  the  selfish  and  sinful
purposes  of  rulers,  but  in  case  of  conflict
men  ought  to  conform  to  the  eternal  law  of
nature  of  which  the  Church  is  the  principal
interpreter.

Again,  after  the  revival  of  learning  and  of
secular  culture,  in  the  sixteenth,  seventeenth,
and  eighteenth  centuries,  philosophers  de-
duced a  theory  of  law  from  a  few  principles
of  reason,  in  the  same  way  as  they  con-
structed systems  of  metaphysics  and  ethics,
of  politics  and  of  natural  philosophy.  With
Kant  the  theory  of  the  law  of  reason  reached
its  highest  point.

2.  Sometimes  attempts  have  been  made  to
recognize  reason  as  a  source  of  positive  law
both  in  ancient  and  modern  times.  The
Austrian  Code  (1811),  for  examie,p  contains
the  following  clause  :  "  When  a  case  cannot
be decided in accordance either with the


THE LAW OF NATURE  239

words  or  the  spirit  of  a  law,  the  Court  shall
take  into  consideration  similar  cases  decided
by  law,  as  well  as  the  motives  which  suggested
other  laws  of  the  same  kind.  Should  the  case
still  remain  doubtful,  it  shall  be  decided  in
accordance  with  the  law  of  nature,  and  with
due  regard  to  the  circumstances  of  the
case  diligently  collected  and  thoroughly
considered."

Attempts  of  this  kind  to  give  the  theory
of  the  law  of  nature  a  direct  bearing  on  the
practice  of  Courts  have  not  been  successful,
while,  on  the  other  hand,  the  indirect  influence
of  such  theories  in  affecting  the  opinions  of
judges  and  legislators  has  been  very  great.
The  mitigation  of  slavery  in  the  Roman
Empire,  e.g.  may  be  traced  to  a  change  of
views  expressed,  among  other  things,  in  the
proposition  that  men  are  free  by  nature  and
that  slavery  was  introduced  by  the  jus
gentium,  the  positive  law  common  to  most
nations  (as  distinct  from  the  jus  naturale,  or
natural  law).

In  the  same  way  doctrines  based  on  the
law  of  nature  have  had  a  powerful  influence
on  the  formation  of  International  Law,  on
the  reforms  of  public  law  in  a  democratic
direction  effected  by  means  of  the  notion  of


240 COMMON-SENSE IN LAW

contract,  and  on  the  radical  alteration  of  the
law  of  status  by  the  doctrine  of  equality  before
the  law.

There  can  be  no  doubt,  for  instance,  that
doctrines  about  the  "  rights  of  man,"  what-
ever may  be  thought  of  their  concrete  formu-
lation, have  exerted  a  potent  influence  on
contemporary  legal  conceptions,  and  have
themselves  been  derived  from  speculative
doctrines  of  natural  jurisprudence.

In  English  courts,  references  to  the  law  of
nature  have  never  been  favourably  con-
sidered :  but  the  indirect  influence  of  doctrines
based  on  it  has  been  felt.  In  the  famous  case
of  the  negro  slave  Somersett,  which  was  de-
cided in  1771  (shortly  before  the  secession  of
the  colonies),  the  slave  was  claimed  by  his
master,  a  Virginian  planter,  while  in  England.
Hargrave,  counsel  for  Somersett,  directed
part  of  his  argument  against  the  assumption
that  slavery  could  be  justified  by  the  law
of  nature.  He  adopted  Locke's  reasoning
that  contract  could  not  be  the  origin  of
slavery,  because  a  man  cannot  divest  himself
of  his  right  to  life  or  to  personal  freedom.
In  regard  to  conquest  and  punishment  as
possible  origins  of  slavery,  Hargrave  main-
tained that  at  the  utmost  they  might  justify


THE LAW OF  NATURE 241

the  enslaving  of  criminals  and  of  vanquished
enemies.  But  on  no  account  were  they
sufficient  to  explain  slavery  inherited  by
birth.  In  giving  the  judgment  which  de-
barred the  planter  from  asserting  a  right  of
mastery  over  the  slave,  Lord  Mansfield  de-
clared that  "  slavery  ...  is  so  odious,  that
nothing  can  be  suffered  to  support  it,  but
positive  law.  Whatever  inconveniences,"  he
continued,  "  may  follow  from  the  decision,  I
cannot  say  this  case  is  allowed  or  approved
by  the  law  of  England;  and  therefore  the
black  must  be  discharged."

Another  case  in  which  the  atmosphere  of
enlightened  rationalism  characteristic  of  the
eighteenth  century  is  strongly  felt  is  Omychund
V.  Barker  (1744),  in  which  Lord  Hardwicke
laid  it  down  that  heathens  might  take  a  legally
valid  oath  according  to  the  ceremonies  of
their  religion,  because  the  essence  of  an  oath
is  the  belief  in  a  Supreme  Being  capable
of  rewarding  and  punishing,  and  not  the
particular  forms  prescribed  by  Christian
confessions.

Thus  the  law  of  nature  or  reason  has
operated  as  a  literary,  but  not  as  a  direct,
source  of  law.  It  is  a  creation  of  juris-
prudence and  philosophy. It  is  no  more  a


242 COMMON-SENSE IN LAW

source  of  law  in  the  technical  sense  of  the
term  than  the  teaching  of  pandectists  or  of
modern  exponents  of  legal  rules.  The  fact
that  it  has  been  a  most  powerful  ferment  in
the  evolution  of  legal  ideas  does  not  make  it
a  code  to  the  clauses  of  which  judges  can  turn
in  the  administration  of  justice.

It  cannot  be  treated  as  a  code  for  this  simple
reason,  amongst  others,  that  it  is  not  constant.
In  reviewing  the  course  of  its  history,  we  can
easily  perceive  that  in  all  matters  bearing  on
concrete  problems  of  law  it  is  subject  to
changes  quite  as  important,  if  not  so  frequent
and  casual,  as  the  changes  of  positive  law.
Can  one  speak,  for  instance,  of  a  family  law
based  on  nature  or  reason  ?  Would  it  be
based  on  polygamy,  or  on  strict  monogamy
as  in  the  Canon  Law,  or  on  contractual  mono-
gamy, as  at  present,  or  on  free  selection  of
mates,  as  may  conceivably  be  the  case  two
or  three  centuries  hence,  or  on  eugenic
selection  by  public  authority,  as  some  very
advanced  sociologists  are  urging  ?  And  is
the  relation  between  parents  and  children
clearly  prescribed  by  the  law  of  nature  ?
Children  have  been  in  charge  of  their  mothers
and  under  the  absolute  sway  of  their  fathers,
and  at  the  educational  disposal  of  the  city


THE LAW OF NATURE  243

state,  and  in  the  temporary  care  of  both
parents.  Who  knows  whether  the  social
element  may  not  again  prevail  over  the  private
organization  of  education  ?  Is  property  likely
to  prove  an  institution  of  a  perennial  law  of
nature  ?  The  origins  of  property  have  been
communistic;  in  its  further  history  it  has
been  treated  more  and  more  from  the  private,
the  individualistic  point  of  view;  it  cannot
be  disputed  that  socialistic  ideas  are  rapidly
gaining  ground  in  regard  to  it,  that  organized
society  claims  a  larger  and  increasing  share  in
its  distribution  and  use;  can  it  be  main-
tained that,  say,  the  nationalization  of  the
land  or  the  monopoly  of  means  of  production
by  the  State  would  be  against  the  law  of
nature  ?  People  may  consider  such  measures
wrong,  dangerous  or  mischievous,  but  they
cannot  be  rejected  by  a  simple  appeal  to
eternal  tenets  of  the  law  of  reason.  Again,
punishment  has  certainly  been  regarded  as  a
natural  sequel  to  crime  by  all  commonwealths,
although  most  exalted  moralists  would  have
preferred  to  reserve  punishment  to  God  and
to  treat  crime  as  a  sin.  But  even  in  the
actual  practice  of  the  law,  are  people  agreed
about  the  aim  and  scope  of  punishment?
Is  it  a  means  of  repression  and  amputation


244 COMMON-SENSE IN LAW

(Plato)  ?  Is  it  a  measure  of  educational
discipline  (Aristotle)  ?  Is  it  principally  a
deterrent  (Bentham)  ?  Is  it  a  necessary-
moral  atonement  (Kant)  ?  Is  it  a  measure
of  medical  treatment  (Lombroso)  ?  In  a  word,
one  has  not  to  go  far  to  perceive  that  the
contents  of  the  law  of  nature  are  shifting,
and  that  it  would  be  impossible  to  reduce  it
to  a  unified  and  permanent  code.

Does  this  mean  that  the  law  of  nature  or
reason  is  a  fanciful  and  absurd  misconcep-
tion ?  I  am  afraid  the  absurdity  lies  in
supposing  that  a  doctrine  which  has  played
such  a  part  in  the  history  of  the  world,  which
has  appealed  to  minds  of  men  of  widely  con-
trasting dispositions  in  entirely  different  cir-
cumstances, does  not  rest  on  solid  foundations.
Nor  is  it  difficult  to  see  what  these  foundations
are.  The  law  of  nature  is  an  appeal  from
Caesar  to  a  better  informed  Caesar.  It  is  an
appeal  by  society  at  large,  or  by  the  best
spirits  of  a  given  society,  not  against  single
decisions  or  rules,  but  against  entire  systems
of  positive  law.  Legislators  are  called  in  to
amend  law  by  separate  statutes ;  judges  may
do  a  great  deal  in  amending  the  law  by  de-
cisions in  individual  cases,  but  the  wisdom  of
legislators  and  the  equity  of  judges  are  by


THE LAW OF NATURE  245

themselves  powerless  against  systems,  because
they  start  from  a  recognition  of  the  authority
of  positive  law  in  general.  And  yet  law.
being  a  human  institution,  ages  not  only  in
its  single  rules  and  doctrines,  but  in  its  national
and  historical  setting,  and  the  call  for  puri-
fication and  reform  may  become  more  and
more  pressing  with  every  generation.  Public
opinion,  then,  turns  from  reality  to  ideals-
Speculation  arises  as  to  the  essentials  of  law
as  conceived  in  the  light  of  justice.  Of  course
these  conceptions  of  justice  are  themselves
historical,  but  they  are  drawn  not  from  the
complicated  compromises  of  positive  law  but
from  the  simpler  and  more  scientific  teaching
of  philosophical  doctrine.  Thus  the  contents
of  the  law  of  nature  vary  with  the  ages,  but
their  aim  is  constant,  it  is  justice ;  and  though
this  species  of  law  operates  not  in  jDOsitive
enactments,  but  in  the  minds  of  men,  it  is
needless  to  urge  that  he  who  obtains  com-
mand over  minds  will  in  the  end  master  their
institutions.

Reform  and  revolution  cannot  be  produced
by  mere  doctrines :  material  forces  and
circumstances  have  to  be  taken  into  account
as  well :  moral  lethargy  may  prove  too  great,
the  body  politic  too  decrepit  or  too  corrupt


246 COMMON-SENSE IN LAW

for  sweeping  changes.  But  the  spread  of
doctrine  claiming  to  pronounce  judgment  on
positive  law  for  the  sake  of  justice  is  surely
a  force  not  to  be  disregarded  or  slighted  by
practical  men.

It  is  significant  that  we  are  witnessing  a
revival  of  appeals  to  the  law  of  nature  in  our
own  time.  It  comes  from  two  sides.  On  the
one  hand  there  is  a  widely  spreading  con-
viction that  existing  systems  of  law  are
getting  out  of  touch  with  fundamental  re-
quirements of  modern  society.  It  is  not
necessary  nowadays  to  be  a  socialist  in  order
to  feel  that  the  existing  systems  of  positive
law,  which  have  sprung  into  being  under  the
influence  of  feudal  conceptions  and  of  theories
of  free  contract,  will  have  to  be  largely  trans-
formed in  order  to  meet  the  requirements  of
rising  democracy.  Schemes  of  reform  and
attempts  at  remedial  legislation  are  being
initiated  everywhere;  and  though  it  would
be  out  of  the  question  for  us  to  review  such
schemes  and  attempts  in  detail,  we  may
notice  that  their  growth  undoubtedly  testifies
to  a  change  in  the  leading  conceptions  of  law.

There  is  another  more  modest  contention,
the  admission  of  which,  however,  would  un-
doubtedly strengthen  the  hands  of  partisans


THE LAW OF NATURE  247

of  reform.  It  is  represented  conspicuously
by  certain  modern  followers  of  Kant,  headed
by  Stammler.  Though  granting  that  a  law
of  nature  as  a  set  of  perennial  rules  does  not
exist,  they  contend  that  every  age  ought  to
have  its  own  law  of  nature,  or  rather  its  own
"  right-law  "  by  the  side  of  its  positive  law.
That  is,  they  maintain  that  rules  of  positive
law  have  to  justify  their  existence  by  reference
to  standards  set  up  by  the  philosophical
doctrine  of  the  age.  If  laws  are  found  wanting
from  this  point  of  view,  they  ought  to  be
corrected  either  by  legislation  or  by  judicial
practice.  Stammler's  own  attempt  to  formu-
late four  standards  by  which  "  right-law "
ought  to  be  estimated  cannot  be  said  to  be
successful.  It  is  heavily  dogmatic,  and  leads
to  mere  scholasticism.  But  the  main  view
that  in  an  enlightened  age  positive  law  has
to  be  estimated  by  the  standard  of  moral
ideals  seems  to  be  incontestable.

I  may  add  that  in  thus  pleading  for  wider
equity  and  greater  latitude  in  interpreting
and  applying  law,  Stammler  does  not  stand
by  any  means  alone.  His  view  is  sub-
stantiated by  the  spirit  and  acceptation  of
modern  codes.  The  precise  codification  of  laws
might  be  expected  to  repress  the  growth  of


248 COMMON-SENSE IN LAW

equity  :  but  as  a  matter  of  fact,  the  promulga-
tion of  Codes  seems  to  have  given  a  new
impetus  to  the  development  of  a  critical
and  reforming  spirit  among  Continental
jurists.

We  tread  here  on  ground  which  does  not
belong  properly  to  the  law  of  nature  in  the
original  meaning  of  the  term.  But  the  less
ostentatious  teaching  as  to  "  right-law  "  and
"  equitable  "  law  goes  much  further  than  the
discretion  of  judges  recognized  at  present  by
English  Courts  would  warrant.  Appeals  to
reason  and  to  the  essence  or  nature  of  legal
relations  aim  at  systematic  reforms  of  the
law  which  may  help  to  avoid  social  revolution.


'Hu '  j\4<A.M<


BIBLIOGRAPHICAL  NOTE

There  is  a  vast  literature  on  the  subject  of  Jurisprudence  in
English  as  well  as  in  foreign  languages.  For  beginners  and
those  interested  in  the  general  problems  of  law  and  not  in  it«
technical  doctrines,  the  most  suitable  books  are  :

Sir  William  Markby,  Elements  of  Law  (6th  edition,  Oxford,
1905).  The  theory  of  Austin,  which  has  played  a  very  gi-eat
part  in  the  development  of  English  Jurisprudence,  is  summarily
stated  by  Professor  Jethro  Brown's  Atistinian  Theory  of  Law
(John  Murray,  1906).  Professor  J.  C.  Gray's  Nature  and  Sources
of  Law  (Columbia  University  Press,  1909)  approaches  the  subject
from  a  different  point  of  view,  and  lays  special  stress  on  the
teachings  of  the  Common  Law.  The  theories  of  Continental
jurists  are  well  characterized  in  Korkunov's  Theory  of  Lew
trans.  Hastings  ;  Boston  Book  Co.,  1909).


249


INDEX  OF CASES


Abrath  v.  N.E.  Railway  Co.,  (1886)  11  Ap  p.  Cas.  247
A.-G.  V.  Terry,  (1874)  30  L.T.  215 . '  . .

A.-G. of Ontario, etc.  v.  A.-G. of Canada, etc.,

(1912)  A.C.  571

Asher  v.  Whitlock,  (1865)  L.R.  1  Q.B.  1  .

Beard,  In  re,  Beard  v.  Hall,  (1908)  1  Ch.  383 .
Bedford  v.  McKowl,  (1800)  3  Esp.  119 .
Bemina,  The  (Mills  v.  Arm,  (1887)  12  P.D.  58

Bright  V.  Hutton,  (1852)  3  strong).  341 .

TT  T  C
Chappie  V.  Cooper,  (1844)  13  m!  and  W.  252 .
Citizen's  Life  Assurance  Co.  i;.  Brown,  (1904)  A.C.  423
Colls  V.  Home  and  Colonial  Stores,  (1904)  A.C.  179 .
Conway  v.  Wade,  (1909)  A.C.  506 .
Cornford  v.  Carlton  Bank,  (1900)  1  Q.B.  22 .
Cummings  v.  State  of  Missouri,  (1866)  4  Wall.  277  .

Dallimore v. Williams, 29 T.L.R. 67; and The

Times,  June  18th  to  20th  (1913)
Dalton  V.  Angus,  (1881)  6  App.  Cas.  740
Daniel  Ball,  The,  10  Wall.  557
Dann  v.  Curzon,  27  T.L.R.  163
Dixon  V.  Gayfere,  (1853)  17  Beavan  421

Forsyth  v.  Manchester  Corporation,  29  T.L.R.  15

Garland,  Ex  p.,  (1886)  4  Wall.  333  .
Garth  v.  Cotton,  (1763)  3  Atk.  757  .
Goodwin  v.  Robarts,  (1875)  L.R.  10  Ex.  337 .


Hallett's  Estate,  Re,  (1880)  13  Ch.D.
Harrison  v.  Powell,  10  T.L.R.  271 .
2.50


696


PAOE

77
174

139
218

113

96

176

177

105
78

182
98
80

204


97
154
145
114
218

191

204
218
151

219
160


INDEX OF CASES


251


Iowa,  State  of,  v.  Bell,  (1870)  29  Stiles  316

Jolly  V.  Kine,  (1907)  A.C.  1 . . .

Kannepalli  v.  Pucha,  22  T.L.R.  670

IVIarbury  v.  Madison,  (1803)  1  Cranch  49  .
Mertens  v.  Hill,  (1901)  1  Ch.  842 .
Mitchinaon  v.  Day,  (1913)  1  K.B.  603
Moore  v.  Manchester  Liners,  (1910)  A.C.  498
Musammat  Lali  v.  Murli  Dhar,  22  T.L.R.  460

Nisbet  V.  Rayne  et  al.,  (1910)  2  K.B.  689

Omychund  v.  Barker,  (1744)  1  Atk.  21 .
Osbom  V.  Amalgamated  Society  of  Railway Ser-
vants, (1910)  A.C.  87 ' . ; , / ..  J -  -.  '  .}.-J-  ,  ,-439

Pells  V.  Brown,  (1620)  Cro.  Jac.  590
Pollard  V.  Turner,  29  T.L.R.  34
Prested  Miners',  etc.,  Co.  v.  Gardner,  (1910)  2  K.B
776  (1911):  1  K.B.  425 .


91

. 181

. 162

.  120

.  158

.  184

.  183

.  161

122,  184

241


R


772


V.  Burton,  (1863)  3  F.  and  F.

V.  Cory,  (1864)  10  Cox  23 . . .

V.  Crippen,  (1910)  5  Cr.  App.  R.  255  .

V.  M'Naughten,  (1843)  10  CI.  and  F.  200

V.  Russell,  (1827)  6  B.  and  C.  566

V.  Shickle,  (1868)  L.R.  1  C.C.R.  159 .
Redgrave  v.  Hurd,  (1881)  20  Ch.D.  1
Rickards  v.  Lothian,  (1913)  A.C.  263
Rylands  v.  Fletcher,  (1868)  L.R.  3  H.L.  330

Scott  V.  Brown,  (1892)  2  Q.B.  724  .
Somersett's  Case,  (1771)  20  S.T.  31  .

Taff  Vale Railway  Co. v.  Amalgamated  Railway

Servants,  (1901)  A.C.  426.  .  .  .  81,206
Terry,  A.-G.  t\,  (1874)  30  L.T.  215  .  .  .  .  174
Thomas  v.  Thomas,  (1842)  2  Q.B.  851  .  .  ^  /HO
Thorogood  v.  Bryan,  (1849)  8  C.B.  115  (J^C/lf^-tui^TS
Thoroughgood's  Case,  (1612)  9  Co.  Rep.  136 . . 107


189
125

196

131

185

93

132

173rt>«t^M«^
186
111
187
187

197
240


252  INDEX OF CASES


PAGE


Unwin  v.  Hanson,  (1891)  2  Q.B.  115 . . .128
Upfill  V.  Wright,  (1911)  1  K.B.  506  . . . .115

Vacher  v.  London  Society  of  Compositors,  (1912)  3

K.B.  547;  (1913)  A.C.  107 . . . .126

Wigglesworth  v.  Dallison,  (1778)  1  Sm.  L.C.  (11  Edn.)

545 156

Willmott  V.  Loudon  Road  Car  Co.,  (1910)  2  Ch.  525  80

Wirty  V.  Pemberton,  (1709)  2  Eq.  Cas.  Abr.  279 .  160


GENERAL INDEX


Absolcte  Liability,  Doctrine

of

Accursius ....

Acts  :  —
Ainerican  :
Judiciary,  17S9


121


Legal  Tender,  1870  . 144,  177
English  :
Bread,  1836,  6  &  7  Wm.

IV.  c.  37 . . . . 125
British North America,

1867, 30 & 31 Vict.

c.  3  .... 140

Campbell'8, Lord, 1846,

9  &  10  Vict.  c.  93  . . 175
Copyhold, 1894,  57  &  58

Vict.  c.  46 . . . 154
Frauds, Statute of, 29

Car.  II.  c.  3 . 53,  138,  196
Gaming,  1845,  8  &  9  Vict.

c.  109 . . . . 119
Highways, 1835, 5 & 6

Wm.  IV.  c.  50 . . 128
Judicature,  1873,  36  &  37

Vict.  c.  66 . . 208,  219
Locomotives,  1898,  61  &62

Vict.  c.  29 . . . 227
Married Women's Pro-
perty, 1882-^3,  45  &  46

Vict. c.  75; 50 & 57

Vict.  c.  63 . . . 232
Motor-Cars,  1903,  3  Edw.

VII.  c.  36 . , . 227
Quia  Emptoro,  Statute  of,

12'.>0,  18  Edw. I . 158,  159
Sale  of  Goods,  1893,  57  &

57  Vict.  c.  71  . . . 151
Superstitious Practices,

1547,  1  Edw.  VI.  c.  14 . 113
Trade Disputes, 1906, 6

Edw.  VII.  c.  47  81,82,97,120
Trade  Unions,  1876,  39  &

40  Vict.  c.  22  . . . 180
Westminster,  Statute  of,

II, 1275, 13 Edw. 1.

.St.  1 . . . 155,216


PAGE

Acts  {rontinuid) ; —
English  :
Workmen's  Compensation,
1906, 6  Edw.  VI  I.  c.  58, 123, 183
Act-in-law,  Nature  of . . 101
may  be  effected  uncon-
sciously . . . 104  ff.

,  an  expression of free

wiU . . . 106  ff.

,  conformity  to  legal  rules 112

,  to  moraUty . . 113  ff.

,  unilateral  and  bilateraL

See  s.v.
Action  on  the  case  . . . 216
Administrative  Acts . . 102
Aebutius,  and  Caecina,  Case

of 210

Agination. Set  Roman  Law.
Antoninus  Pius . . 224,  237
Aristotle  . .  14,  23,  209,  235,  244
Atkinson,  Lord . . ISO,  181
Augustine,  St.  ... 237

Aurelius,  Marcus  .  .  .  237
Austin,  ITieory  of . . .31

,  objections  to  35  ff.,  164,  207

Austria,  Annexation  of  Bosnia

by 40

,  Code  of .  . - 238

Authoritv,  Rights  of  ,  .64
Azzo. " 202

Bayley,  J 173

Bentham.  .  .  92,205,244
Bilateral  Acts  .  .  .  .103
Bills  of  Exchange ... 27

Blackburn,  J 188

Blackatone  ....  1
Blaine,  Secretary  of  State  .  136
Bonorum  posses.iio .  . 214

Bosnia .  . ' .40

Bracton  .  .  .  '  116,  171
Bramwell,  Lord  .  '  .  "7
Bucknill,  J. . . . .115

Caecina,  and  Aebutius,  Case

of 210

263


25 1


GENERAL INDEX


PAOR

Calvin 3',

Campbell,  Lord  .  .  .  177
Canada,  Constitution  of  .  13!)
Canon  Law  34,  35,  lO-l,  21C>,  242
Chancery. . . 210  ff.,  229

Channell,  B 18H

Ohai  ities  . . . .  82  ff.

Chose  inaction  ...  80
Church,  Sanction  in . 35,  55

Cicero 210

Clayton-Bulwer  Treaty  . . 130
Cockburn,  C.  J. . . 154,  218
Cognation. See  Roman  Law.
Common  Law,  as  case-law . 160

,  relation  to  custom  . . 170

,  development  of . .171

,  retroactive . . 203  S.

,  uncertain

,  conflict with Equity.

Equity.
Companies,  Chartered .
Conseil  d'l^tat  ....
Consideration,  Doctrine  of
Constantinople,  Oeolaratioii  of
Constitutions,  Written .
Contingent  interests,  created

by  will ....
Contract  in  Roman  law. See

Roman  Law.
Convention,  Standards  of 20  ff.

Copyhold 154

Corporations  .  .  .  .  74  ff.
Corpoieal and Incorporeal

Things. See  Things.
Custom,  Social.

,  nature  of

■ ,  theories  of

,  as  a  source  of  law


2i')5
Stc


134
100
135
120

100


-,  te.sts  of .
-,  manorial .
-,  growth  of
-,  relation  to  Common  Law
See  Common  Law.


148  ff.
140  ff.
31,  117,
152  fif.
104  ff.
.  158
103  ff.


Damages,  Sanction  of . .20

Darling,  J 80

Dartmoor,  Customs  of  .  .  153
Denmark,  British  attack  on  . 40

Ejectment,  Action  of  .  .171
Eldon,  L.C.  .  .  .  00,  208
Emplciyers'  liability  .  93  ff.
Epkikcia  .....  200
Equity,  as  judge-made  law  .  118
• ,  influence  on  procedure 215


Kquitv,  conflict  with  common

law.

. 218

,  invention  in .

. 219

,  individualizatiim  by

. 222

siipplcmentary  to  law

. 220

corrective  of  law

. 227

E.sher,  Lord,  M.U.  .

. 129

Kvidence,  Rules  of .

. 90

,  expert .

130  ff.

Execution,  Sanction  of  .

. 28

Fact-iu-law,  Nature  of .

. 87

as  evidence

88

,  presumptions  of .

.  02  ff.

in  law  of  evidence  .

. 90

of questions decided
without reference to
legal  rules ... 96
Far  well,  L.J..  . 123,  127,  206

Fasliion,  Rules  of  .  .  .  19  ff.
Feudal  law.  Ceremonies  of  .  107
Fiction.s  in  Roman  Law. See

Roman  Law.
France,  Medieval . . .150


G.aius ....
Gavelkind  succession
Gennanistic  School
Germany,  Mediaeval  law.

,  Emperor.

,  Constitution  .

,  Civil  Code 117,  ISO,

,  Mediseval  customs .

Ocicere ....
Gray,  J.  C,  quoted.
Guardians


118,


107,


237
170
107
36
38
38
221
150
108
ISO


Ilaldane,  L.C.
Halsbury,  Lord
Hardwicke,  L  C
Ilaigrave  .

Ilay-Pauncefote  Treaty
Heriot

Herzegovina .
Hobbes .


127
180


104,  208,  218,  241
.  240
134  ff.
.  100
.  40
30


Uolt,  L.C 194

Iceland,  Ancient  law  of  .  .  100
Mentiflcation,  Doctrine  of  .  175
Ihering  ...  .43,  72
Inheritance,  Law  of  .  170,214
Insanity,  in  law  .  .  130  ff.
Intention,  in  law  .  .  .  56
Interdict,  iinde  vi  armata  .  210
Internation.allaw,  Sanction  of  39
,  Law  of  Nature  in .  239


GENERAL INDEX


255


PAGE

Interpretation,  literal .

. 122

,  technical.

. 128

,  historical

. l:;4

,  widening

. IbT

Intoxication,  in  law

90,  01

James  of  Hereford,  Lord ISO,

Jessel,  Sir  G.,  M.R. Ill,  174,

Jurisconsults.  See  responsa
prudentiv.m.

Jurisprudence,  basis  in  re-
flection .

,  a  social  science

,  a  moral  science

Jus  (uljuvandi  .

corrigendi.

gentium .

naturale .

supplendi .

Justinian . .  16'


213.


201,


16
222
222
23<)
239
222
237


Kant  . -.  19,  48,  23S,  244,  247

Kennedy,  L.J.  . . 124,  127

Kent. See  Gavelkind.
Kenyon,  Lord,  C.J. . . 193
Korkunov .... 43

Lagmen 165

Law,  a  rule  of  conduct 19,  53  fi.
,  connection  with  moral-
ity . ...  24  ff.

distinguished  from  right 24

,  sanction . . .  28  ff.

,  incomplete  sanction . 41

,  conclusion as to  sane-


tion

42  ff.

,  recognition  of

39

,  imperfect

41

,  aim  of .

42  ff.

- — -  defined .

59

,  sources  of,  nature  .

116

,  a  declaration  of

right

206

Law  Merchant

151

Leading  ca-ses,  Authority  of

189

Legal  Memory. Hce  Memory

Legislation,  a  formulation  o:

rule

119

, interpretation

of.' 6><

Interi^retation.

Legitimac}-,  Presumj

tion  of  .

94

Lindley,  Lord  .

198

Locke

240

Loegsoegumadhr

166

Lombroso

244

Lopes,  L.J.

176

Lorebum,  I>.C.

181

PAGE

Lowell,  U  S.A.  Ambassador  .  136
Lunatics .  .  .  .  55,  72
Luther 35

Macnaghten,  Lord . . 180,184

Maine 33

Mansfield,  Lord  110,  151,  152,  241
Married  Women,  in  English

law  .  .  .  .229
— — ,  in  Roman  law  .  .  228
Marshall,  C.J.  . . .121

Maule,  J.  .... 176


JIaxims,  Legal
Memory,  Legal
Jlerchant,  Law. See  Law.
Mersey,  Lord  ....

Minors

Jlisrepresentation  .

Moody,  J. ....

Morality, Relation to Law.

See  Law.
in  acts-ill-law. S^'eActs-

in-law.
Motor-Cars,  Law  as  to .
Moulton,  Lord


197

154

184
45
110
145


227

187


Napoleon,  Code  .  .  117,  134
Nations, Law of. See Jus

gent  in  m.
Nature,  Law  of . . llS,  23

,  Greek  view  of . , 235

,  Roman  view  of . . 236

,  early  Christian  view  of  . 237

,  philosophic  view  of . 238

,  effect  on  positive  law . 238

not  a  technical  source  of

law .... 242

,  foundations  of . 242  ff.

at  the  present  day  . 210  ff.

Nottingham,  Custom  of .  .  117
Nottingham,  L.C.  .  .  .  208
Nullity,  Sanction  of . .29

Oath,  in  Engli.sli  law  .  .  241
Obligations, Rights arising

from  ....  64
Order,  a  social  necessity  .  15
Overruling . . . 173  fif.

Panama  Canal.  .  .  134  ff.
Papinian  .  .  .  200,  237
Parliamint,  English  .  .  30
Patagonians  ....  11
Paul,  the  jurist  .  .  236,  237
Personality,  rights  of  .  .62
plurality  of


256


GENERAL  INDEX


I


rornonality. A  nd  see  Corpora-
tions.
Phillpotts,  Eden . . . l.^'S
Plato ... 23,  235,  244
Power,  Social  . . . 47  flf.,  59
Praetor  pereynnus  . . . 213
Precedents. See  Common  Law.
Presumptions . . . 92,  94
Primogeniture . . . 170
Properly,  Rights  of 03,  67  ff.,  85
Prussian  Code  . . . 122

Public  Policy  .  .  .  .113
Punishment,  Sanction  of . 29

and  Law  of  Nature . 243

Pythagoreans .... 236

Raleigh,  William  .  .  .171
Katio  decidendi  .  .  179,  199
Reason  and  will . .  17  fif .

Rent 27

Restraint  on  anticipation . 231

Rights,  Nature  of  ...  61
,  defined .... 62

,  classification  of . .03  ff .

,"  rights  of  man " . . 240

.  And  see  Authority,  Obli-
gations, Wrongs.

Robertson,  Lord

Roman law, influence on
English  law  .

,  influence  on  Germany  .

Tesponsa prudentiuvi

in . . . . 200,  222

in  the  Middle  Ages

,  equity  in  _

,  agnation  in

,  cognation  in  .

,  fictions  in

,  intention  in .

,  contract  in

,  wardships  in  .

,  testament  in  .

Romer,  L.J. .

St.  Leonards,  Lord
Sanction. See  Law.
Savigny .
Saxon  Law
Scandinavian  Custom

Schijfen

Science,  Natural  as  opposed

to  Moral
Seduction . . _ _
Sei>arato  estate.  See  Married

Women.

Bliaw,  Lord . . . .180
Slavery,  Greek  view  of  . . 234


181


197
203


202
210  ff.
.  214
.  215
.  215
.  223
.  223
228,  237
223  ff.
. 181

. 177

.  149
.  166
165
165


PAGE

Slavery  and  Jus  grnliuiii  , 239

,  English  view  of .  . 241

Society,  Nature  of  * .  .49

,  tribal . . .  . 33

Socrates ....  23,  235

Southampton,  Custom  of  . 117
Sovereignty. See  Law.

Si)endthrifts ...  45,  72

Stammler . . •  .247

State,  Rights  of . .  64,  69
Statutes. See  Acts.

Stoicism 237

Subsumption  . . .  183  ff.

Suez  Canal . . .  .135

Superstitious  Practices  .  . 113

Sweden,  Ancient  laws  of  . 166

Swiss  Civil  Code . .  . 232

Talmud 83

Tangano 1'''

Tenterden,  Lord,  C.J.  .  .  174
Testaments,  in  Roman  Law.

See  Roman  Law.
Text-writers,  Authority  of . 196
Things,  Corporeal  and  Incor-
poreal . . . .84
Tliurlow,  Lord . . .231
Trade  Union . . 41,  81,  206
Tribal  society. See  Society.
Trusts 229

Ulpian  ....  24,236
Unilateral  acts  .  .  .  103
United  States,  Sovereignty  in 34

,  Constitution  of 120, 143,  203

and  Panama  Canal . 134  ff .

Urtheile . . . . • 1<J5

200

224

11

216

161
196


Valentinian  III

Valerius  Nepos,  Case  of

Veddas

Villeins,  Status  of .

Wajib-ul-arz .

Walton,  J.

Wardship. See  Roman

Wightman,  J.

Wigmore,  J.  H.,  quoted

Will,  in  moral  science

Will,  power  to  make

Williams,  Vaughan,  L.J.

Witan

Writ  procedure

Wrongs,  Rights  arising  from


132
194

17  ff.

48

, 193

. 166

215

64


Xenophon
Year  Books  .


. 235
116,  171, 193


Richard  Clay  <fc  Sons,  Limited,  London  and  Bungay.


The

Home University


Library


of Modern
Knowledge


Jl  Comprehensive  Series  of  New
and Specially Written ^ooJ^s


EDITORS :

Prof.  GILBERT  MURRAY,  D.Liu.,  LL.D.,  F.B.A.
HERBERT  FISHER,  LL.D.,  F.B.A.
Prof.  J.  ARTHUR  THOMSON,  M.A.
Prof.  WM.  T.  BREWSTER,  M.A.


1/-  net
in  cloth


256  Pages


2/6  net
in  leather


History  and  Qeography


3.  THE  FRENCH  REVOLUTION

By  HiLAiRE  Belloc,  M.A.  (With  Maps.)  "  It  is  coloured  with  all
the  militancy  of  the  author's  temperament." — Daily  News.

4.  HISTORY  OF  WAR  AND  PEACE

By  G.  H.  Ferris.  The  Rt.  Hon.  James  Brvce  writes:  "I  have  read  it
with  much  interest  and  pleasure,  admiring  the  skill  with  which  you  have
managed  to  compress  so  many  facts  and  views  into  so  small  a  volume."

8.  POLAR  EXPLORATION

ByDrW.  S.Bruce,  F.R.S.E.,  Leader  of  the  "Scotia  "Expedition.  (With
Maps.) "A  very  fresldy  written  and  interesting  narrative." — The  Times.

12.  THE  OPENING-UP  OF  AFRICA

By  Sir  H.  H.Johnston,  G.C.M.G.,F.Z.S.  (With  Maps.)  "The  Home
University  Library  is  much  enriched  by  this  excellent  work. " — Daily  Mail.

13.  MEDIAEVAL  EUROPE

By  H.  W.  C.  Davis,  M.A.  (With  Maps.)  "One  more  illustration  of  the
fact  that  it  takes  a  complete  master  of  the  subject  to  write  briefly  upon
it." — Manchester  Guardian.


14- THE  PAPACY  Ss'  MODERN  TIMES  (1303- 1870)

By  William  Barry,  D.D.  "  Dr  Barry  has  a  wide  range  of  knowledge
and  an  artist's  power  of  selection." — Manchester  Guardian.

23.  HISTORY  OF  OUR  TIME  (1885-1911)

By  G.  P.  GooCH,  M.A.  "  Mr  Gooch  contrives  to  breathe  vitality  into  his  story,
and  to  t;ive  us  the  flesh  as  well  as  the  bones  of  recent  happenings."— Oi^^OT^r,

25. THE  CIVIL/SATJON  OF  CHINA

By  H.  A.  Giles,  LL.D.,  Professor  of  Chinese  at  Cambridge.  "In  all  the
mass  of  facts.  Professor  Giles  never  becomes  dull.  He  is  always  ready  with  a
ghost  story  or  a  street  adventure  for  the  reader's  recreation." — Spectator.

29. THE  DA  WN  OF  HISTORY

By  J.L.  Myres,  M.A.,  F.S.A.,  Wykeham  Professor  of  Ancient  History,  Oxford.
"There  is  not  a  page  in  it  that  is  not  suggestive." — Manchester  Guardian.

33.  THE  HISTORY  OF  ENGLAND
A  Study  in  Political  Evolution

By  Prof.  A.  F.  Pollard,  M.A.  With  a  Chronological  Table.  "It  takes  its
place  at  once  among  the  authoritative  works  on  English  history." — Observer.

34.  CANADA

By  A.  G.  Bradley. "  The  volume  makes  an  immediate  appeal  to  the  man  who
wants  to  know  something  vivid  and  true  about  Canada. " — Canadian  Gazette.

37.  PEOPLES  &^  PROBLEMS  OF  INDIA

By  Sir  T.  W.  Holderness,  K.C.S.I.,  Permanent  Under-Secretary  of  State
of  the  India  Office.  "  Just  the  book  which  newspaper  readers  require  to-day,
and  a  marvel  of  comprehensiveness." — Pall  Mall  Gazette.

42.  ROME

By  W.  Warde  Fowler,  M.A.  "  A  masterly  sketch  of  Roman  character  and
of  what  it  did  for  the  world." — The  Spectator.

48.  THE  AMERICAN  CIVIL WAR


By  F.  L.  Paxson,  Professor  of  American  History,  Wisconsin  University.
(With  Maps.) "  A  stirring  study." — The  Guardian.

SI. IV A RFA RE  IN  BRI TA IN

By  Hilaire  Belloc,  M.A.  "  Rich  in  suggestion  for  the  historical  student."
— Edinburgh  Evening  News.

55.  MASTER  MARINERS

By  J.  R.  Spears.  "Acontinuous  story  of  shipping  progress  and  adventure.  . .
It  reads  like  a  romance." — Glasgow  Herald.

61.  NAPOLEON

By  Herbert  Fisher,  LL.D.,  F.B.A.,  Vice-Chancellor  of  Sheffield  University.
(With  Maps.)  The  story  of  the  great  Bonaparte's  youth,  his  career,  and  his
downfall,  with  some  sayings  of  Napoleon,  a  genealogy,  and  a  bibliography.

66.  THE  NAVY  AND  SEA  POWER

By  David  Hannay.  The  author  traces  the  growth  of  naval  power  from  early
tiraes,and  discusses  its  principlesand  effects  upon  the  history  of  theWestern  world.

71.  GERMANY  OF  TO-DAY

By  Charles  Tower.  "It  would  be  difficult  to  name  any  better  summary."—
Daily  News.

82.  PREHISTORIC  BRITAIN

By  Robert  Munro,  M.A.,  M.D.,  LL.D.,  F.R.S.E. (Illustrated.)
2


Literature  and  <Art


2.  SHAKESPEARE

By  John  Masefield.  "  The  book  is  a  joy.  We  have  had  half-a-dozen  more
learned  books  on  Shakespeare  in  the  last  few  years,  but  not  one  so  wise." —
Manchester  Guardian.

27.  ENGLISH  LITERATURE:  MODERN

By  G.  H.  Mair,  M.A. "Altogether a  fiesh  and  individual  \iO(^."— Observer.

35.  LANDMARKS  IN  FRENCH  LITERA  TURE

By  G.  L.  Strachey.  "  It  is  difficult  to  imagine  how  a  better  account  of
French  Literature  could  be  given  in  250  small  pages." — The  Times.

39.  ARCHITECTURE

By  Prof.  W.  R.  Lethaby.  (Over  forty  Illustrations.)  "  Popular  guide-books
to  architecture  are,  as  a  rule,  not  worth  much.  This  volume  is  a  welcome  excep-
tion."— Building  News. "  Delightfully  bright  reading." — Christian  World.

43-  ENGLISH  LITERATURE:  MEDIEVAL

By  Prof.  W.  P.  Ker,  M.A.  "  Prof.  Ker,  one  of  the  soundest  scholars  in  English
we  have,  is  the  very  man  to  put  an  outline  of  English  Mediaeval  Literature
before  the  uninstructed  public.  His  knowledge  and  taste  are  unimpeachable,
and  his  style  is  effective,  simple,  yet  never  dry." — The  Athcnceum.

45-  THE  ENGLISH  LANGUAGE

By  L.  Pearsall  Smith,  M.A.  "A  wholly  fascinating  study  of  the  different
streams  that  went  to  the  making  of  the  great  river  of  the  English  speech." —
Daily  News.

52.  GREAT  WRITERS  OF  AMERICA

By  Prof.  J.  Erskine  and  Prof.  W.  P.  Trent.  "An  admirable  summary,  from
Franklin  to  Mark  Twain,  enlivened  by  a  dry  humour." — Athentpuni.

63.  PAINTERS  AND  PAINTING

By  Sir  Frederick  Wedmore.  (With  16  half-tone  illustrations.)  From  the
Primitives  to  the  Impressionists.

64.  DR  JOHNSON  AND  HIS  CIRCLE

By  John  Bailey,  M.A. "A  must  delightful  essay."— Christian  World.

65.  THE  LITERATURE  OF  GERMANY

By  Professor  J.  G.  Robertson,  M.A.,  Ph.D.  "Under  the  author's  skilful
treatment  the  subject  shows  life  and  continuity.  ' — Athenaum.

70. THE  VICTORIAN  AGE  IN  LITERATURE

By  G.  K.  Chesterton.  "  The  book  is  everywhere  immensely  alive,  and  no
one  will  put  it  down  without  a  sense  of  having  taken  a  tonic  or  received  a  series
of  electric  shocks." — The  Titr.es.

73.  THE WRITING  OF  ENGLISH.

By  W.  T.  Brewster,  A.M.,  Professor  of  English
"  Sensible  in  its  teaching,  and  not  over-rigidly  conv(
Manchester  Guardian.

75.  ANCIENT  ART  AND  RITUAL.

By  Jane  E.  Harrison,  LL.D.,  D.Litt.  "  Charming  in  style  and  learned  in
manner." — Daily  News.


By  W.  T.  Brewster,  A.M.,  Professor  of  English  in  Columbia  University.
"  Sensible  in  its  teaching,  and  not  over-rigidly  conventional  in  its  manner." —
Manchester  Guardian.


76.  EURIPIDES  AND  HIS  AGE

By  Gii.isEKr  Murray,  D.  Litt.,  LL.D.,  F.B.A.,  Regius  Professor  of  Greek  at
Oxford.  "  A  bcautilul  piece  of  work.  .  .  .  Just  in  the  fulness  of  time,  and
exactly  in  the  right  place.  .  .  .  Euripides  has  come  into  his  own."— 7'/rif  7Wi/;(?«.


7-  MODERN  GEOGRAPHY

By  Dr  Marion  Newbigin.  (Illustrated.)  "Geography,  again  :  what  a  dull,
tedious  study  that  was  wont  to  be  !  .  .  .  But  Miss  I\Iarion  Newbigin  invests  its
dry  bones  with  the  flesh  and  blood  of  romantic  interest." — Daily  Telegraph,

9. THE  EVOLUTION  OF  PLANTS

By  Dr  D.  H.  Scott,  M.  A.,  F.  R.S.,  late  Hon.  Keeper  of  the  Jodrell  Laboratory,
Kew.  (Fully  illustrated.)  "The  information  is  as  trustworthy  as  first-hand
knowledge  can  make  it.  .  .  .  Dr  Scott's  candid  and  familiar  style  makes  the
difficult  subject  both  fascinating  and  easy." — Gardeners'  Chronicle.

17.  HEALTH  AND  DISEASE

By  W.  Leslie  Mackenzie,  M.D.,  Local  Government  Board,  Edinburgh.
"  Dr  Mackenzie  adds  to  a  thorough  grasp  of  the  problems  an  illuminating  style,
and  an  arresting  manner  of  treating  a  subject  often  dull  and  sometimes
unsavoury." — Economist.

1 8.  INTRODUCTION  TO  MATHEMATICS

Bj-A.  N.  Whitehead,  Sc.D.,  F.R.S.  (With  Diagrams.)  "Mr  Whitehead
has  discharged  with  conspicuous  success  the  task  he  is  so  exceptionally  qualified
to  undertake.  For  he  is  one  of  our  great  authorities  upon  the  foundations  of
the  science." — IVestminsier  Gazette.

19.  THE  ANIMAL  WORLD

By  Professor  F.  W.  Gamble,  D.Sc,  F.R.S.  With  Introduction  by  Sir  Oliver
Lodge.  (Many  Illustrations.)  ' '  A  delightful  and  instructive  epitome  of  animal
(and  vegetable)  life.  ...  A  fascinating  and  suggestive  survey." — Morning  Post.

20.  EVOLUTION

By  Professor  J.  Arthur  Thomson  and  Professor  Patrick  Geddes.  "A
many-coloured  and  romantic  panorama,  opening  up,  like  no  other  book  we
know,  a  rational  vision  of  world-development." — Belfast  News-Letter.

22.  CRIME  AND  INSANITY

By  Dr  C.  A.  Mercier.  "  Furnishes  much  valuable  information  from  one
occupying  the  highest  position  among  medico-legal  psychologists." — Asylum
News.

28.  PSYCHICAL  RESEARCH

By  Sir  W.  F.  Barrett,  F.R.S.,  Professor  of  Physics,  Royal  College  of
Science,  Dublin,  1873-1910.  "What  he  has  to  say  on  thought-reading,
hypnotism,  telepathy,  crystal-vision,  spiritualism,  divinings,  and  so  on,  will  be
read  with  avidity." — Dundee  Courier.

31.  ASTRONOMY

By  A.  R.  HiNKS,  M.A.,  Chiel  Assistant,  Cambridge  Observatory.  "Original
in  thought,  eclectic  in  substance,  and  critical  in  treatment.  .  .  .  No  better
little  book  is  available." — School  World.


32.  INTRODUCTION  TO  SCIENCE

By  J.  Arthur  Thomson,  ]M.  A.,  Regius  Professor  of  Natural  History,  Aberdeen
University.  "Professor  Thomson's  delightful  literary  style  is  well  known  ;  and
here  he  discourses  freshly  and  easily  on  the  methods  of  science  and  its  relations
with  philosophy,  art,  religion,  and  practical  life." — Aberdeen  Journal.

36.  CLIMATE  AND  WEATHER

By  Prof.  H.  N.  Dickson,  D.Sc.Oxon.,  M.A.,  F.R.S.E.,  President  of  the
Royal  Meteorological  Society.  (With  Diagrams.)  "The  author  has  succeeded
in  presenting  in  a  very  lucid  and  agreeable  manner  the  causes  of  the  movements
of  the  atmosphere  and  of  the  more  stable  winds." — Manchester  Guardian.

41.  ANTHROPOLOGY

By  R.  R.  Marett,  M.A.,  Reader  in  Social  Anthropology  in  Oxford  University.
"An  absolutely  perfect  handbook,  so  clear  that  a  child  could  understand  it,  so
fascinating  and  human  that  it  beats  fiction  '  to  a  frazzle.'" — Morning  Leader.

44.  THE  PRINCIPLES  OF  PHYSIOLOGY

By  Prof.  J.  G.  McKendrick,  M.D.  "  It  is  a  delightful  and  wonderfully
comprehensive  handling  of  a  subject  which,  while  of  importance  to  all,  does
not  readily  lend  itself  to  untechnical  explanation.  .  .  .  Upon  every  page  of  it
is  stamped  the  impress  of  a  creative  imagination." — Glasgow  Herald.

46.  MATTER  AND  ENERGY

By  F.  SoDDY,  M.A.,  F.R.S.  "Prof.  Soddy  has  siiccessfully  accomplished
the  very  difficult  task  of  making  physics  of  absorbing  interest  on  popular
lines." — .Nature.

49.  PSYCHOLOGY,  THE  STUDY  OF  BEHAVIOUR

By  Prof.  W.  McDougai.l,  F.R.S. ,  M.B.  "A  happy  example  of  the  non-
technical handling  of  an  unwieldy  science,  suggesting  rather  than  dogmatising.
It  should  whet  appetites  for  deeper  study." — Christian  TVorld.

53.  THE  MAKING  OF  THE  EARTH

By  Prof.  J.  W.  Gregory,  F.R.S.  (With  38  Maps  and  Figures.)  "A
fascinating  little  volume.  .  .  .  Among  the  many  good  things  contained  in  the
series  this  takes  a  high  place." — The  AtliencEum.

57.  THE  HUMAN  BODY

By  A.  Keith,  M.D.,  LL.D.,  Conservator  of  Museum  and  Huuterian  Professor,
Royal  College  of  Surgeons.  (Illustrated.)  "  It  literally  makes  the  'dry  bones"
to  live.  It  will  certainly  take  a  high  place  among  the  classics  of  popular
science." — Manchester  Guardian.

58.  ELECTRICITY

By  Gisbert  Kapp,  D.Eng.,  Professor  of  Electrical  Engineering  in  the  Univer-
sity of  Birmingham.  (Illustrated.)  "  It  will  be  appreciated  greatly  by  learners
and  by  the  great  number  of  amateurs  who  are  interested  in  what  is  one  of  the
most  fascinating  of  scientific  studies." — Glasgow  Herald.

62.  THE  ORIGIN  AND  NA  TURE  OF  LIFE

By  Dr  Benjamin  Mooke,  Professor  of  Bio-Chemistry,  University  College,
Liverpool. "  Stimulating,  learned,  lucid." — Liverpool  Courier.

67.  CHEMISTRY

By  Raphael  Meldola,  F.R.  S.  ,  Professor  of  Chemistry  in  Finsbury  Technical
College,  London.  Presents  clearly,  without  the  detail  demanded  by  the
expert,  the  way  in  which  chemical  science  has  developed,  and  the  stage  it  has
reached.

72.  PLANT  LIFE

By  Prof.  J.  B.  Farmer,  D.Sc,  F.R.S.  (Illustrated.)  "  Professor  Farmer  has
contrived  to  convey  all  the  most  vital  facts  of  plant  physiology,  and  also  to
present  a  good  many  of  the  chief  problems  which  confront  investigators  to-day
in  the  realms  of  morphology  and  of  heredity."— .^/orw/w^  Post.

5


78.  THE  OCEAN

A  General  Account  of  the  Science  of  the  Sea.  By  Sir  John  Murray,  K.C.  B.  ,
F.R.S.  (Illus.)  "A  life's  experience  is  crowded  into  this  volume.  A  very  use-
ful feature  is  the  ten  pages  of  illustrations  and  coloured  maps  at  the  end." —
Gloucester  fournal,

79.  NERVES

By  Prof.  D.  Fkaser  Harris,  M.D.,  D.Sc.  (Illustrated.)  A  description,  in
non-technical  language,  of  the  nervous  system,  its  intricate  mechanism  and  the
strange  phenomena  of  energy  and  fatigue,  with  some  practical  reflections.


Philosophy  and  T^ligion


15.  MOHAMMEDANISM

By  Prof.  JJ.  S.  IVIargoliouth,  M.A.,  D.Litt.  "This  generous  shilling's
worth  of  wisdom.  ...  A  delicate,  humorous,  and  most  responsible  tractate
by  an  illuminative  professor." — Daily  Mail.

40. THE  PROBLEMS  OF  PHILOSOPHY

By  the  Hon.  Bertrand  Russell,  F.R.S.  "A  book  that  the  'man  in  the
street '  will  recognise  at  once  to  be  a  boon.  .  .  .  Consistently  lucid  and  non-
technical throughout." — Christian  World.

47.  BUDDHISM

By  Mrs  Rhys  Davids,  M.A.  "  The  author  presents  very  attractively  as  well
as  very  learnedly  the  philosophy  of  Buddhism  as  the  greatest  scholars  of  the
day  interpret  it." — Daily  News.

50.  NONCONFORMITY:  Its  ORIGIN  and  PROGRESS

By  Principal  W.  B.  Selbie,  M.A.  ''The  historical  part  is  brilliant  in  its
insight,  clarity,  and  proportion;  and  in  the  later  chapters  Dr  Selbie  proves  him-
self to  be  an  ideal  exponent  of  sound  and  moderate  views." — Christian  World.

54.  ETHICS

By  G.  E.  Moore,  M.A.,  Lecturer  in  Moral  Science  in  Cambridge  University.
"A  very  lucid  though  closely  reasoned  outline  of  the  logic  of  good  conduct."
—Christian  World.

56.  THE  MAKING  OF  THE  NEW  TESTAMENT

By  Prof.  B.  W.  Bacon,  LL.D.,  D.D.  "Professor  Bacon  has  boldly,  and
wisely,  taken  his  own  line,  and  has  produced,  as  a  result,  an  extraordinarily
vivid,  stimulating,  and  lucid  book." — Manchester  Guardian.

60.  MISSIONS:  THEIR  RISE  and  DEVELOPMENT

By  Mrs  Creighton.  "  Very  interestingly  done.  ...  Its  style  is  simple,
direct,  unhackneyed,  and  should  find  appreciation  where  a  more  fervently
pious  style  of  writing  repels." — Methodist  Recorder.

68.  COMPARATIVE  RELIGION

ByProf.J.EsTLiNCARPENTER,D.Litt.,PrincipalofManchesterCollege,Oxford.
"  Puts  into  the  reader's  hand  a  wealth  of  learning  and  independent  thought."
— Christian  World.  ,„

74.  A  HISTORY  OF  FREEDOM  OF  THOUGHT

By  J.  B.  Bury,  Litt.D.,  LL.D.,  Regius  Professor  of  Modern  History  at
Cambridge.  "A  little  masterpiece,  which  every  thinking  man  will  enjoy."
—  The  Observer.

84.  LITERATURE  OF  THE  OLD  TESTAMENT

'  By  Prof.  George  Moore,  D.D.,  LL.D.,  of  Harvard. A  detailed  examinatiou
of  the  books  of  the  Old  Testament  in  the  light  of  the  most  recent  research.

6


Social  Science


I.  PARLIAMENT

Its  History,  Constitution,  and  Practice.  By  Sir  Courtenay  P.  Ilbert,
G.C.B.,  K.C.S.I.,  Clerk  of  the  House  of  Commons.  "The  best  book  on  the
history  and  practice  of  the  House  of  Commons  since  Bagehot's  'Constitution.'"
— Yorkshire  Pest.

5.  THE  STOCK  EXCHANGE

By  F.  W.  Hirst,  Editor  of  "  The  Economist."  "To an  unfinancial mind  must
be  a  revelation.  .  .  .  The  book  is  as  clear,  vigorous,  and  sane  as  Bagehot's '  Lom-
bard Street,'  than  which  there  is  no  higher  compliment." — Morning  Leader.

6.  IRISH  NATIONALITY

By  Mrs  J.  R.  Green.  "  As  glowing  as  it  is  learned.  No  book  could  be  more
timely." — Daily  News.

10.  THE  SOCIALIST  MOVEMENT

By  J.  Ramsay  MacDonald,  M.P. "Admirably  adapted  for  the  purpose  of

exposition." — The  Times.

II.  CONSERVATISM

By  Lord  Hugh  Cecil,  M.A.,  M.P.  "  One  of  those  great  little  books  which
seldom  appear  more  than  once  in  a  generation." — Morning  Post.

16. THE  SCIENCE  OF  WEALTH

By  J.  A.  HoBSON,  M.A.  "  Mr  J.  A.  Hobson  holds  an  unique  position  among
living  economists.  .  .  .  Original,  reasonable,  and  illuminating." — The  Nation.

21.  LIBERALISM

By  L.  T.  HOBHOUSE,  M.A.,  Professorof  Sociology  in  the  University  of  London.
"  A  book  of  rare  quality.  .  .  .  We  have  nothing  but  praise  for  the  rapid  and
masterly  summaries  of  the  arguments  from  first  principles  which  form  a  large
part  of  this  book." — Westminster  Gazette.

24.  THE  EVOLUTION  OF  INDUSTRY

By  D.  H.  Macgregor,  M.A.,  Professor  of  Political  Economy  in  the  University
of  Leeds.  "  A  volume  so  dispassionate  in  terms  may  be  read  with  profit  by  all
interested  in  the  present  state  of  unrest." — Aberdeen  Journal.

26.  AGRICULTURE

By  Prof.  W.  Somerville,  F.L.S.  "It  makes  the  results  of  laboratory  work
at  the  University  accessible  to  the  practical  farmer." — Athenceum.

30.  ELEMENTS  OF  ENGLISH  LA  W

By  W.  M.  Geldart,  M.A.,  B.C.L.,  Vinerian  Professor  of  English  Law  at
Oxford.  "  Contains  a  very  clear  account  of  the  elementary  principles  under-
lying the  rules  of  English  Law." — Scots  Law  Times.
38.  THE  SCHOOL :  An  Introduction  to  the  Study  of  Edtuation.
By  J.  J.  FiNDi.AY,  M.A.,  Ph.D.,  Professor  of  Education  in  Manchester
University.  "  An  amazingly  comprehensive  volume.  ...  It  is  a  remarkable
performance,  distinguished  in  its  crisp,  striking  phraseology  as  well  as  its
mclusiveness  of  subject-matter." — Morning  Post.

59.  ELEMENTS  OF  POLITICAL  ECONOMY

By  S.  J.  Chapman,  M.A.,  Professor  of  Political  Economy  in  Manchester
University.  "  Its  importance  is  not  to  be  measured  by  its  price.  Probably
the  best  recent  critical  exposition  of  the  analytical  method  in  economic
science." — Glasgow  Herald.


69- THE  NEWSPAPER By  G.  Binnev  Dibblee,  M.A. (Illus-

; trateil.) The  best  account  extant  of  the

organisation  of  the  newspaper  press,  at  home  and  abroad.

TJ.  SHELLEY,  GODWIN,  AND  THEIR  CIRCLE

By  H.  N.  Bkailsforl),  M.A.  "  Mr  lirailsford  sketches  vividly  the  influence  of
the  French  Revolution  on  Shelley's  and  Godwin's  Eni;Uind;  and  tlie  cliarm  and
strenRlli  of  his  style  make  his  book  an  authentic  contribution  to  literature." —
The  Bookman,

80.  CO-PARTNERSHIP AND PROFIT-SHARING

By  A  NEURIN  Williams,  M.A. — "A  judicious  but  enthusiastic  history,  with  much
interesting  speculation  on  the  future  of  Co-partnership." — Christian  World.

8 1.  PROBLEMS  OF  VILLAGE  LIFE

By  E.  N.  BENNitTT,  M.A. Di.scusses  the  leading  aspects  of  the  British  land

problem,  including  housing,  small  holdings,  rural  credit,  and  the  minimum  wage.

83. COMMON-SENSE  IN  LAW By  Prof.  p.  Vinogradoff,

85. UNEMPLOYMENT By  Prof.  A.  C.  PiGOU,  M.A.

In  Preparation

ANCIENT  EGYPT. By  F.  Ll.  Griffith,  M.A.

THE  ANCIENT  EAST. By  D.  G.  Hogarth,  M.A.,  F.B.A.

A  SHORT  HISTORY  OF  EUROPE. By  Herbert  Fisher,LL.D.

THE  BYZANTINE  EMPIRE. By  Norman  H.  Baynes.

THE  REFORMA  TION. By  President  Lindsay,  LL.D.

A  SHOR  T  HISTORY  OF  R USSIA. By  Prof.  Milyoukov.

MODERN  TURKEY. By  D.  G.  Hogarth,  M.A.

FRANCE  OF  TO-DAY. By  Albert  Thomas.

HISTORY  OF  SCOTLAND. By  Prof.  R.  S.  Rait,  M.A.

LA  TIN  AMERICA. By  Prof.  W.  R.  Shepherd.

HISTORY  AND  LITERATURE  OF  SPAIN. By  J. Fitzmaurice-

Kelly,  F.B.A.,  Litt.D.
LA  TIN  LITER  A  TURE. By  Prof.  J.  S.  Phillimore.
THE  RENAISSANCE. By  Miss  Edith  Sichel.
ITALIAN  ART  OF  THE  RENAISSANCE. By  Roger  E.  Fry.
LITERARY  TASTE. By  Thomas  Seccombe.
CHAUCER  AND  HIS  TIME. By  Miss  G.  E.  Hadow.
WILLIAM  MORRIS  AND  HIS  CIRCLE. By  A.  Glutton  Brock.
SCANDINA  VIAN  HISTORY  &=  LITER  A  TURE. By  T.C.  Snow.
THE  MINERAL  WORLD. By  Sir  T.  H.  Holland,  K.C.I. E.,  D.Sc.
SEX. By  Prof.  J.  A.  Thomson  and  Prof.  Patrick  Geddes.
THE  GROWTH  OF  EUROPE. By  Prof.  Grenville  Cole.
BETWEEN THE OLD AND NEW TESTAMENTS. By Canon

R.  H.  Charles,  D.D.
A  HISTORY  OF  PHILOSOPHY. By  Clement  Webb,  M.A.
POLITICAL THOUGHT IN  ENGLAND: From Bacon to Locke.

By  G.  P.  GoocH,  M.A.
POLITICAL THOUGHT  IN  ENGLAND: From  Bentham to  J. S.

Mill. By  Prof.  W.  L.  Davidson.
POLITIC AL THOUGHT IN  ENGLAND: From Herbert Spencer

to  To-day. By  Ernest  Barker,  M.A.
THE  CRIMINAL  AND  THE  COMMUNITY. By  Viscount  St.  Cyres.
THE  CIVIL  SERVICE. By  Graham  Wallas,  M.A.
THE  SOCIAL  SETTLEMENT. By  Jane  Addams  and  R.  A.  Woods.
GREA  T  INVENTIONS. By  Prof.  J.  L.  Myres,  M.A.,  F.S.  A.
TOWN  PLANNING. By  Raymond  Tj'nwin.

London: WILLIAMS  AND  NORGATE

And  of  all  Bookshops  arid  Bookstalls,


*V4>u/VA^\^^^  . \ X.j"^


V5


THE  LIBRARY
UNIVERSITY  OF  CALIFORNIA

Santa  Barbara


THIS  BOOK  IS  DUE  ON  THE  LAST  DATE
STAMPED  BELOW.


MAY  3i~1 1965


r®K  .jiArfl'67


50m-l.'63(D4T43s8)4T6


if


til  I;
