i


THE  GROWTH  OF  THE
MANOR


BY


PAUL VINOGRADOFF,
M.A.,  Hon.  D.C.L.,  LL.D.,  Dr.  Hist.,  Dr.  jur.,  F.B.A.

Corpus  Professor  of  Jurisprudence  in  the  University  oi  Oxford,


SECOND, REVISED EDITION,


LONDON
GEORGE ALLEN &  COMPANY, LTD.

NEW YORK: THE MACMILLAN COMPANY.
1911


I


First  Edition,  December  1904.
Second  Edition  (Revised),  May  191;


PREFACE

Some  twelve  years  ago  I  attempted  to  treat  the  difficult
subject  of  viliainage  in  a  volume  which  was  intended  to
pave  the  way  towards  a  discussion  of  the  origins  of  the
Manorial  System.  Various  professional  duties  have  pre-
vented me  hitherto  from  foUowmg  up  the  thread  of  my
investigations,  and,  now  that  I  am  free  to  return  to  these
studies,  I  find  that  their  ground  has  been  to  a  great  extent
shifted  by  the  remarkable  work  achieved  in  the  mean  time
by  Enghsh  scholars.  Professor  Maitland,  Mr.  Seebohm,
Mr.  Round  and  others  have  approached  the  problem  from
new  points  of  view,  have  brought  to  bear  on  it  a  vast  amount
of  new  evidence,  and  have  sifted  the  materials  at  our  dis-
posal with  admirable  skill.  If  I  still  beg  leave  to  be  heard
on  the  subject,  I  may  plead  in  excuse  the  nature  of  the
problem  and  the  stage  at  which  the  inquiry  has  arrived
at  the  present  moment.  In  a  study  of  such  magnitude
and  complexity  there  are,  and  will  be  for  a  long  while  yet,
insufficiently  explored  fields  awaiting  labourers.  I  may
point  out,  for  example,  the  analysis  of  Domesday,  and  the
study  of  the  "Danelaw,"  as  parts  of  the  inquiry  which
will,  according  to  the  best  authorities,  yield  fair  results  to
conscientious  explorers.  Indeed,  it  is  my  hope  to  be  able
to  pubhsh  in  no  very  distant  future  a  second  volume  of
the  "Essays  in  Enghsh  Mediaeval  History,"  of  which
"  Villainage  in  England  "  was  the  first  instalment.^

But  there  is  also  another  aspect  from  which  new  attempts
to  approach  the  questions  at  issue  seem  warranted.  If  I
am  not  mistaken,  the  very  success  of  modern  special  in-
vestigations has  rather  disarranged  our  conceptions  of
Enghsh  social  development,  and  the  want  of  co-ordination

1  "Villainage  in  England.  Essays  in  English  Medieval  History."
Oxford  University  Press.

V

223121


PREFACE


of  results makes itself  felt  more and  more. We  were
clearer  m  our  mind  before  recent  researches  had  laid  bare
the  many  hidden  pitfaUs  which  underlay  our  hasty  gene-
rahsations. We  shaU  be  able  to  bring  order  into  our  ideas
once  more  when  the  balance  of  our  newest  acquisitions  has
been  carefully  drawn,  and  latest  discoveries  assigned  their
proper  place  m  the  general  course  of  inquiry.
T  ^°,Vf  ^'^^^""^Sement  of  eminent  scholars,  on  whose  work
I  shall  have  to  rely  all  along,  but  in  order  to  give  a  more
concrete  appHcation  to  my  general  contention,  I  should  like
to  suggest  at  the  very  outset  that  the  principal  achievements
of  later  years  may  become  the  starting  points  of  further
reflection  and  inquiry. No  one  has  done  more  than  Pro-
fessor Maitland  to  unravel  the  mysteries  of  legal  antiquities
m  the  light  of  mediaeval  Common  Law  and  modern  common
sense  ;  no  one  has  subjected  to  a  more  searching  analysis
the  organismg  influence  of  kinship,  the  conceptions  of  med-
iaeval  communalism, the speculations as to hide earlv
manor etc. But in some cases people with a  hopeful
turn  of  mmd  may  venture  on  reconstruction  where  his
subtle  scepticism  has  dissolved  ;  and  perhaps  in  the  end
we  may  get  a  better  insight  into  historical  pecuharities  of
tnouglit  and  social  arrangement.

Mr.  Round  has  been  specially  conspicuous  as  a  past
master  m  the  arts  of  social  calculus  which  are  so  necessary
to  exponents  of  Domesday  and  other  fiscal  documents
But  as,  after  aU,  no  society  can  depend  entirely  on  sym-
metrical computations,  and  no  government  has  ever  suc-
ceeded in  mastering  organic  growth,  the  clues  given  bv  the
arificial  terminology  and  the  neat  numbers  of  the  surveys
wiU  have  to  be  adjusted  to  the  requirements  of  actual
husbandry  and  landholding.

Mr.  Seebohm's  researches  have  been  always  distinguished
by  their  grasp  of  reality  and  their  synthetic  aims  ;  but  he
has  been  attracted  in  turn  by  one  element  of  medieval
hfe  after  the  other,-  first,  by  the  servile  community  and
then  by  the  tribe,  by  the  freedmen  after  the  slaves  by
Roman  culture  and  Celtic  influence.  No  wonder  'that
the  very  energy  with  which  he  urges  his  points  prevents


111  _


PREFACE  yu

him  from  attending  sufficiently  to  the  equihbrium  of  the
whole.

Altogether,  the  clash  of  opinions  and  arguments  seems
to  call  for  harmonising  combinations,  for  a  summing  up
of  results,  for  estimates  of  the  manner  in  which  recent
researches  counteract  and  limit,  or  supplement  and  support
each  other,  for  attempts  to  trace  the  general  course  of  social
evolution.  Such  attempts  are  especially  needed,  not  so
much  by  scholars  engaged  in  current  controversies,  who
have  their  hands  full  with  their  particular  investigations,
as  by  students  of  general  history  and  the  public  at  large,
who  have  a  right  to  know  what  the  labour  of  searchers  has
achieved  in  the  way  of  results.

Such  are  the  considerations  that  have  prompted  the
present  work.  I  have  tried  to  present  an  outhne  of  the
growth  of  the  Manor,  as  a  social  institution  passing  through
all  the  stages  of  English  history.  Dwelling  only  on  the
main  facts  and  the  decisive  moments,  I  do  not  pretend  to
start  an  entirely  new  theory  on  the  subject,  but  I  have  had
to  choose  my  way  between  conflicting  theories  and  argu-
ments and  to  set  forth  as  clearly  as  possible  the  leading
ideas  to  which,  according  to  the  best  of  my  knowledge,
details  have  to  conform.  I  shall  address  myself  primarily
to  students  of  general  history  and  try  to  make  my  sketch
intelligible  to  them,  but  it  would  be  misleading  not  to  state
shortly  the  reasons  for  taking  up  this  or  the  other  position,
and  I  hope  the  notes  at  the  close  of  each  chapter  may  be
deemed  sufficient  for  this  purpose.

It  is  hardly  necessary  to  dwell  on  the  importance  and
interest  of  the  subject,  and  I  will  merely  venture  to  state
the  chief  reasons  for  the  personal  fascination  it  has  exercised
over  me.

When  observing  the  classical  world,  we  are  apt  to  fix
our  attention  on  the  city,  "  civitas,"  "  TroXi?,"  as  the
most  complete  expression  of  ancient  society.  If  we  look
out  for  something  as  marked  and  as  peculiar  in  mediaeval
life,  it  is  impossible  to  choose  anything  but  the  Manor  as  the
subject  of  discourse.  As  in  the  case  of  the  Classical  City,
economic,  social  and  political  institutions  and  ideas  are  con-


centrated  in  its  mould.  It  has  not  been  devised  or  arranged
by  any  one  in  particular,  but  slowly  evolved  by  the  needs  of
generations.  If  the  direct  intercourse  of  the  city,  the  active
participation  of  citizens  in  its  corporate  life,  gives  its  peculiar
stamp  to  ancient  life,  the  rural  work  of  the  Manor,  the  custo-
mary constitution  of  its  lordship,  the  curious  intermixture  of
local  interests  and  rights  in  the  position  of  its  tenants  form
the  social  nucleus  of  mediaeval  life.  Then  again,  the  Manor
in  its  special  framework  appears  as  a  thoroughly  English
institution,  and  at  the  same  time  it  affords  the  best  example
of  the  feudal  organisation  which  extended  its  sway  over  the
whole  of  Western  Europe.  It  may  be  said,  in  a  sense,  that
by  the  strong  constitution  and  the  customary  self-govern-
ment of  its  Manorial  system  England  has  got  quite  as  much
the  start  of  her  continental  neighbours  in  point  of  social
development,  as  she  obtained  political  precedence  over  them
by  the  early  consolidation  of  her  parhamentary  institutions.
And  at  the  same  time  there  is  so  much  affinity  between  the
English  "  Manor,"  the  French  "  Seigneurie,"  and  the
German  "  Grundherrschaft,"  that  a  careful  study  of  every
one  of  them  is  sure  to  throw  light  on  the  development  of
the  others,  and  so  one  of  the  best  modes  of  checking  theories
as  to  the  growth  of  any  of  the  three  consists  in  applying
these  theories,  with  due  allowance  for  the  difference  of
circumstances,  to  the  kindred  cases.

All  periods  of  English  history  have  had  their  bearing  on
the  life  of  the  Manor.  Some  germs  of  manorial  institutions
may  be  found  in  the  Celtic  age  ;  the  Roman  occupation
of  the  island  had  undoubtedly  a  powerful  influence  on
its  economic  arrangements ;  the  Old  Enghsh  period  is
marked  by  the  full  development  of  the  rural  township  ;
the  feudal  epoch  finds  the  Manor  at  its  height ;  the  dis-
solution of  the  Manor  forms  one  of  the  processes  by  which
modern  commercial  intercourse  was  brought  about,  and
survivals  of  the  Manorial  system  and  of  its  component
elements  may  still  be  observed  all  over  England^  More
is  known,  of  course,  about  later  than  about  ancient  times,
and  this'wiU  make  it  necessary  on  many  occasions  to  turn
to  well  ascertained  later  facts  in  order  to  form  a  judgment


PREFACE  IX

about  ancient  conditions.  But  it  is  not  necessary  to
invert  the  sequence  of  epochs  in  the  sketch  of  historical
development,  and  by  following  the  chronological  order
we  may  guard  against  carrying  into  the  distant  past  con-
ceptions of  comparatively  modern  growth.  It  is  not  so
much  the  fact  of  studying  later  stages  before  the  earher
that  constitutes  the  method  of  investigation  from  the
known  to  the  unknown,  as  the  careful  distinction  between
evidence  and  inference,  and  the  systematic  use  of  both.

I  am  deeply  indebted  to  several  friends  who  have  kindly
read  through  the  proofs  of  this  book  and  given  me  the  benefit
of  their  advice.  To  Prof.  Rhys  and  Prof.  Anwyl  I  owe  many
valuable  suggestions  on  Celtic  questions,  while  Mr.  Haver-
field  and  Prof.  Pelham  have  warned  me  against  dangers  in
my  survey  of  the  Roman  period,  and  the  Rev.  C.  Plummer
has  given  me  invaluable  assistance  in  regard  to  the  Old
EngUsh  portion  of  the  work.  From  Mr.  F.  Seebohm  I  have
received  weighty  advice  on  the  general  conceptions  of  the
book  as  well  as  on  many  details,  and  Mr.  T.  Darlington  has
done  everything  in  his  power  to  supply  my  deficiencies  in
point  of  language  and  style.  My  friend  and  pupil,  Mr.
A.  Savine,  has  kindly  compiled  the  index  to  this  volume.
Altogether,  if  this  book  has  not  turned  out  more  satis-
factory, it  is  certainly  not  the  fault  of  my  friends  and
advisers.  I  may  add  that  the  essays  now  published  as
a  book  have  formed  the  basis  of  lectures  deUvered  in  Oxford
in  the  Summer  term  of  1904.


Prefatory  Note  to  Second  Edition

In  submitting  the  second  edition  of  The  Growth  of  the  Manor
to  the  judgment  of  the  public,  I  have  tried,  besides  correcting
misprints  and  mistakes,  to  bring  the  book  up  to  date  by-
noticing  briefly  the  chief  contributions  to  the  subject  made
in  the  course  of  the  last  five  years.  I  did  not  find  it  necessary
to  modify  my  conclusions  or  the  general  line  of  my  argu-
ment, but  several  points  of  detail  had  to  be  reconsidered
and  stated  afresh.  I  hope  these  alterations  may  prove  to
be  improvements.

P.  VINOGRADOFF.
Oxford,

January,  1911.


CONTENTS


FACE

Preface  iii

BOOK  I.— THE  PRE-ENGLISH  PERIOD

CHAP.

I Celtic  Tribal  Arrangements  ..... 3
n Roman  Influence  37


BOOK  II.— THE  OLD  ENGLISH  PERIOD

I  The  English  Conquest

n  The  Grouping  of  the  Folk

m  The  Shares  in  the  Township  .

IV  The  Open-field  System .

V  The  History  of  the  Holding

VI  Manorial  Origins .


135
150
165

200
212


y


BOOK  III.  THE  FEUDAL  PERIOD

I The  Principles  of the  Domesday  Survey . ,291

II Ownership  xstd  Husbandry «...  307

in Social  Classes .......  332

Notes  to  Book  I 88

Notes  to  Book  II 236

Notes  to  Book  III 366

Index 381


ii


First Book
PRE-ENGLISH PERIOD


CHAPTER I.

CELTIC TRIBAL  ARRANGEMENTS.

I.  Kinship.

The  most  ancient  society  on  British  soil  about  which
we  can  form a more or less definite notion is Celtic

society.  We  know  indeed  that  the  Celtic
the  History  race  was  preceded  in  the  British  islands  by
of  Celtic  earlier inhabitants, but as to the culture

of  the  latter  we  can  guess  only  very  little.^
Even  as  to  the  Celtic  epoch  a  good  deal  depends  on  infer-
ences and  probabilities,  but  for  these  there  is  a  solid  and
extensive  foundation.  We  are  not  restricted  to  half-
legendary  narratives  ;  there  is  a  vast  store  of  materials
in  ascertained  facts  of  later  times.  We  can  use  legal
enactments  of  the  Welsh,  the  Irish,  and,  in  a  lesser  degree
of  the  Scotch  people,  which  have  come  down  from  the
tenth,  eleventh,  and  twelfth  centuries.  There  are  Welsh
surveys  which,  though  not  earher  than  the  fourteenth
century,  present  customs  and  arrangements  bridging
over  the  Conquest  and  dating  from  the  period  of  the
independence  of  Wales  imder  its  native  princes.  We
hear  a  good  deal  of  the  peculiar  institutions  of  Ireland
and  Scotland  in  the  seventeenth  and  eighteenth  centuries
when  these  institutions  were  partly  arrested  in  their  pro-
gress, and  partly  destroyed  by  the  impact  of  the  English.
Even  now  there  may  be  noticed  customs  in  the  life  of  Irish,
Welsh,  and  Highland  societies  which  are  best  explained  by
the  peculiarities  of  their  remote  history.  And  even  in
French  Brittany,  and  in  the  records  of  the  Celtic  tribes  on
the  continent  there  may  be  found  some  illustrations  of  habits
which  prevailed among the Celtic population  of Great


4  ,'•',;:••:  ;••:  '...TkB  .ccbdVth  of  the  manor

Britain We  have  the  right  to  use  these  materials,  scattered
through  many  lands  and  many  centuries,  because,  notwith-
standing all  the  variety  of  detaHs,  they  present  a  remark-
able unity  of  fundamental  arrangement  and  a not  less
remarkable  contrast with the institutions  of neighbour-
ing races. This  unity  and  this  contrast  are  so  striking
by  reason  of  a  common and ancient  origin of institu-
tions, and  to  that  common and  ancient  origm  we  may
attempt  to  trace  them  back  in  a  spkit  akin  to  that  which
prompts  the  students  of  compararive  philology  when  they
try  to  trace  the  observable  affinities  of  dialects  to  common
stems  and  original  forms. Needless  to  say  that  this  kind
of  work  requires  great  precautions,  the  neglect  of  which
actuaUy  explams  a  good  many  current  errors  and  misap-
prehensions. Everybody  understands  that  it  would  not
do  to  carry  back  into  pre-Roman  Britain  all  the  features
described  m  the  Welsh  surveys  of  Edward  I.,  every  trait
noticed m the Ufe of a Scottish clan foUowing the
Pretender  or  of  an  Irish  sept  as  described  by  the  lawyers  of
James  I but  much  disagreement  may  arise  as  to  the  extent
to  which  one  may  be  aUowed  to  borrow  traits  from  these
later  pictures  in  order  to  reconstitute  the  eariier  one A
good  deal  will  always  depend  on  the  individual  sense  of  the
apt  and  the  probable,  but  some  general  guiding  considera-
tions had  better be stated at the outset in the hope
that  they  may  prove  useful  in  the  course  of  the  inquiir
Some  of  them  are  negative,  others  positive,  and,  as  usual  it
is  more  easy  to  perceive  the  negative  points

We  must,  evidently,  take  special  precautions  againstcarry-
mgmto  old  Celtic  domain  facts  connected  with  demonstrably
Precautions  to  ^^*^''  conditions;  it  will  not  do,  for  example,
rfuSl^iTh*"*  ^^^"""^^  *^^*  agricultural  arrangements of

Materials  *  *'^^ ^^^n agriculture had become the

mainstay  of  economy,  are  to  be  considered  as
representative  of  agrarian  origins,  or  that  the  powers  of
territorial  lords  granted  by  the  English  Crown  point  to
the  methods  in  which  lordships  were  organised,  when  the
tnbes  were  independent.  Another  warning  may,  perhaps,
be formulated m the  following manner; even features


CELTIC  TRIBAL  ARRANGEMENTS  6

connected  with  very  peculiar  Celtic  institutions  must  not
be  thought  to  have  been  as  completely  developed  at  the
time  when  Celtic  civilisation  was  a  unity  by  itself  ;  it
must  be  borne  in  mind,  that  if  these  features  are  borrowed
from  later  history,  they  are  sure  to  bear,  to  some  extent,
the  stamp  of  later  history  ;  in  other  words,  that  they  are,
as  it  were,  hardened  and  sharpened  even  in  those  parts
which  remain  true  to  the  original  cast — hardened  and  sharp-
ened, because  the  life  of  the  people  has  been  proceeding  for
long  periods  in  the  same  peculiar  groove.  The  elaborate
arrangement  of  a  Higliland  clan,  for  instance,  is  certainly
very  characteristic  of  the  principle  of  patriarchal  organis-
ation, and  must  be  used  to  illustrate  and  to  demonstrate
the  strength  of  this  principle.  But  it  would  be  wrong  to
assume  that  in  the  Celtic  Britain  of  Cunobeline,  or  even  in
the  Ireland  of  the  tenth  century,  the  clan  had  reached  the
stage  described  by  eighteenth  century  observers  of  clan
customs.  I  am  inclined  to  submit  one  more  negative  propo-
sition :  we  must  guard  carefully  against  the  tempting  idea
that  a  state  of  a  society,  even  of  an  ancient  one,  may  be
treated  as  a  system.  It  appeals,  undoubtedly,  to  our
sense  of  order  and  wish  for  clearness  to  reconstruct  in  our
mind  the  fabric  of  a  by-gone  society  as  if  it  were  a  bee-hive,
the  cells  of  which  are  formed  and  repeated  in  one  and  the
same  way,  according  to  unfailing  processes,  so  that  one  clue
will  lead  us  through  the  whole  labyrinth.  It  would  be  im-
possible to  enumerate  the  instances  when  such  convenient
simplifications  have  suggested  false  solutions  of  difficulties,
or  when  the  dislike  to  admit  the  concurrent  influence  of  more
than  one  main  principle  has  blocked  the  way  towards  right
solutions.  I  will  venture  to  point  out,  as  an  instance,  that
if  we  were  to  construct  an  ancient  society  purely  on  the
ground  of  relationship  through  mothers,  the  system  would
exclude  the  possibility  of  a  rise  of  the  opposite,  or  patriarchal
system,  quite  as  much  as  a  construction  on  the  basis  of  the
latter  would  not  explain  the  various  facts  which  indicate
the  social  influence  of  the  conception  of  maternity.  In  fact
I  a  system  is  a  system  only  as  long  as  it  excludes  other
I  systems, and in real life such exclusion is impossible


6  THE GROWTH  OF  THE MANOR

because  life  is  movement.  We  have  no  other  means  of
explaming  life  than  by  shewing  its  inherent  contradictions
and  transitions.

The  warnings  contained  in  these  negative  considerations
may  suggest  some  hints  as  to  the  direction  in  which  positive
Hints  as  to  results  are  to  be  sought.  As  we  have  to  take
meinoos  o^r  facts  mostly  from  later  periods,  and  from

periods,  too,  which  lie  on  different  historical  planes,  our
endeavours  ought  to  be  directed  as  much  as  possible  to-
wards getting  hold  of  the  peculiar  conditions  which  have
mfluenced  the  earlier  stages  of  development  in  comparison
with  the  later.  We  must,  for  example,  make  out  by  what
means  people  got  their  living  at  the  time  when  the  Celtic
tribes  formed  their  distinctive  arrangements  of  society,
and  m  what  respects  their  economic  pursuits  are  to  be
distinguished  from  other  and  later  modes  of  husbandry.
Then  again,  we  must  be  careful  to  note  with  what  kind  of
political  conceptions  we  have  to  reckon  at  that  stage,  and
m  what  respects  these  political  conceptions  differed  from
those  of  a  feudal  and  of  a  modern  state.

A  second  indication  is  afforded  by  the  necessity  of  making
a  considerable  allowance,  even  in  the  recognised  pecuUarities
of  Celtic  development,  for  the  graduaUy  increasing  onesided-
ness  and  artificially  elaborate  character  of  arrangements
which  have  been  going  on  for  a  long  time  in  a  special  groove
Our  endeavours  ought  to  be  directed  not  so  much  towards
reproducing  the  actual  structure  of  these  earlier  stages— an
attempt  hardly  likely  to  be  successful— as  towards  formula-
ting the  types  and  tendencies  of  development  of  Celtic
society.  The  Highland  clan  may  not  serve  as  an  example
of  what  the  old  Celtic  sub-section  of  a  tribe  may  have
been,  but  it  certainly  shews  that  we  have  to  look  to
the  gathering  of  agnatic  relations  as  to  the  fundamental
bond  of  that  old  Celtic  society  from  which  the  varieties
of  Welsh,  Irish,  and  Highland  tribal  organisation  have
sprung.

And  lastly,  if  we  are  unwilling  to  admit  that  every  trait
of  social  life  ought  to  be  explained  in  reference  to  one
nilmg  standard,  we  must  have  our  eyes  open  to  the  possi-


CELTIC TRIBAL  ARRANGEMENTS  7

bility,  that,  alongside  of  customs  and  institutions  derived
I  from  one  stem,  there  may  have  existed  customs  and  institu-
'^  tions  claiming  other  origins,  either  as  competing  forces,  or  as
survivals,  or  as  germs.  Our  study  will,  in  fact,  concern
itself,  not  only  with  the  task  of  bringing  the  facts  under  the
organising  rule  of  prevailing  principles,  but  also  of  showing
in  what  combinations  such  principles  stand  to  each  other,
and  in  what  direction  such  combinations  were  undergoing
change.

Need  I  remark  that  I  am  putting  forward  these  general
considerations  with  a  view,  not  of  giving  an  exhaustive
statement  as  to  methods,  but  rather  of  exemplifying  the
difficulties  one  has  to  contend  with  in  actual  work  ? My
readers  may,  perhaps,  think  that  in  a  short  and  popular
account  of  the  phenomena  of  social  history,  it  is  not  necessary
to  enter  into  such  questions,  inasmuch  as  the  actual  work
of  mvestigation  wiU,  to  a  great  extent,  remain  concealed
from  the  eyes. But,  in  my  view,  this  is  rather  an  ad-
ditional reason  for  making  clear  to  the  reader  the  character
of  the  statements  he  wiU  have  to  deal  with. I  may  add,
before  starting  on  our  review  of the  subject,  that  though
I  have  made  some  use  of  Irish  and  Scotch  evidence  in
as  far  as  the  best  modem  books  enabled  me  to  do  so,  it
is  especially  to  Welsh  conditions  that  I  have  tried  to  draw
the  attention  of  the  reader,  and  this  for  two  reasons—
because  the  Welsh  material  has  been  shown  lately  to  be
especially  suggestive  and  complete,  and  because  the  Welsh
facts  are  more  characteristic  of  Celtic  society  on  English
BoU  than  the  Scotch  or  the  Irish. Besides,  Celtic  evidence
helps  to  explain  Germanic  facts  of  tribal  custom.

There  can  be  no  doubt  as  to  the  ruUng  principle  according
to  which  Celtic  society  was  arranged  :  it  was  the  union  of
Agnatic  persons  descended,  or  supposed  to  be  descended.

Principle  from  the  same  ancestor  through  males,  the  union

of  agnatic  relations.  This  was  expressed  in  Scotland  by  the
weU-known  "  clann,"  which  means  children  or  descendants,
but  is  made  to  apply  in  a  special  way  to  the  descendants  by
males.2 Walter  Scott's  novels  have  made  everybody  famUiar


8  THE GROWTH OF THE MANOE

with  the  general  character  of  this  grouping  of  society.
What  effect  the  stretching  of  agnatic  organisation  outside
the  bounds  of  the  natural  family  produced  may  be  illus-
trated, for  instance,  by  a  fact  which  occurred  well  within
observation  of  responsible  witnesses  in  1606.  A  whole
kindred  of  Grames  was  moved  by  the  English  government
from  Cumberland,  where  it  was  troublesome,  to  Ros-
common.^ It  consisted  of  thirty-three  families,  and  in-
cluded one  hundred  and  twenty -four  members,  all  bearing
the  name  of  Grame  from  the  chief,  the  "  gude  man  of
Netherby,"  down  to  the  servants.  What  seems  to  be
especially  worthy  of  notice  is  the  social  completeness
of  the  arrangement :  chieftain  and  followers,  warriors  and
workers,  masters  and  servants,  are  all  included  in  the  same
organic  group,  all  related  to  each  other  and  separated  from
strangers  by  blood.

The  same  arrangement  meets  us  when  we  look  at  the
condition  of  Wales  and  Ireland,  and  indeed  we  gather
from  these  regions  significant  details,  ascertained  by
documents  of  more  ancient  date  than  those  which  have
been  preserved  for  the  Highlands  of  Scotland.  Four-
teenth century  extents  of  Welsh  manors  disclose  a  state
of  things  very  different  from  English  manorial  practice.
The  Record  of  Carnarvon,  drawn  up  in  1354,  and  the
extents  of  North  Welsh  manors  of  1335,  mention  con-
stantly the  holding  of  land  by  communities  of  joint  ten-
ants called  weles  (gwelys),^  a  word  meaning  "  beds "
(lecta).  The  extent  of  the  honour  of  Denbigh,  of  1335,
gives  a  very  full  enumeration  of  the  persons  forming  such
beds,  shewing  them  to  be  sets  of  agnates  descended  from  the
same  ancestor,^  and  the  Welsh  laws  trace  the  influence  of
agnatic  relationship  in  some  cases  up  to  the  ninth  generation,
that  is  to  sixth  cousins.*  In  Ireland,  the  Brehon  laws,
besides  bearing  testimony  to  a  development  of  septs  and
tuaths  akin  to  the  Highland  clans  and  tribes,  disclose  an
inner  kernel  of  the  arrangement  in  their  regulations  as  to
nearest  relations.  These  form  the  Fine  which  stretches
according  to  certain  rules  and  gradations  over  the  sixteen
nearest  agnates  of  a  person,  and  connects  them  into  a


CELTIC TRIBAL ARRANGEMENTS  9

specially  close  union  in  regard  to  defence  and  inheritance,
but  at  the  same  time  provides  for  a  further  connection
between  this  narrow  community  and  the  larger  tribe  by
the  passage  of  supernumerary  members  out  of  the  inner
circle  into  the  outer,  and  vice  versa.''

As  I  say,  there  can  be  no  manner  of  doubt  as  to  the  pre-
valence of  the  agnatic  clan  arrangement  among  the  Celts
of  historical  times. This  fact  does  not  exclude
Relationship ^ certain influence of different and earlier
through  systems. On  the  contrary,  there  are  distinct

traces  of  an  older  mode  of  reckoning  relation-
ship among  the  Celts  :  the  rule  of  so-called  Pictish  succession
which  prevailed,  according  to  the  testimony  of  Bede  (i.  c.  i.)
in  regard  to  the  devolution  of  the  Crown  among  the  Picts  of
Scotland,  gave  precedence  to  the  claims  of  maternal  kin,
and  there  are  many  traits  in  the  Irish  legends  and  in  ancient
Gaehc  inscriptions  which  point  the  same  way.®  Caesar  tells
of  another  custom  which,  though  not  implying  a  construction
of  a  relationship  of  cognates  or  persons  allied  by  maternity,
still  points  to  a  state  of  tribal  organisation  which  does  not
admit  of  the  establishment  of  agnatic  pedigrees.  He  mentions
the  fact  that  among  the  Celtic  people  in  Britain,  polyandry
was  common,  several  brothers  having  the  same  wife  {De
Bello  Gallico,  v.  12).  But  all  such  traits  belong  either  to
earher  stages  of  social  development,  to  which  it  is  not  only
difficult  but  needless  for  our  purpose  to  seek  access,  or  else
they  represent  stray  survivals  of  these  older  stages,  and
do  not  alter  the  main  fact  that  in  all  the  branches  of  the
Celtic  people  on  British  soil  we  come  across  the  formation  of
agnatic  clans  resembling  the  gentes  and  yevTj  of  the  classical
world  and  the  patriarchal  tribes  of  the  Hebrews.  This
arrangement  had,  in  historical  times,  become  the  dominant
fact  of  social  organisation.  It  would  be  wrong  to  assume
that  the  predominance  of  agnatic  organisation  necessarily
implied  a  denial  of  all  other  modes  of  relationship,  and  that
it  always  led  to  a  complete  subjection  of  the  married  women
to  the  sway  of  their  husbands.  The  recognition  both  of
relationship  through  females  and  of  independent  rights  of
women  could  exist  in  agnatic  groups  as  subsidiary  facts. We


10  THE  GROWTH  OP  THE  MANOR

find,  indeed,  that  every  tribesman  was  conscious  not  only
of  the  ties  which  bound  him  to  his  father's  kin,  but  also  of
those  which  connected  him  with  the  relatives  of  his  mother.
The  prevailing  agnatic  union  did  not  exclude  the  existence
of  feelings  and  interests  derived  from  relationship  through
females.  To  begin  with,  separate  property  was  al-
lowed to  the  wife,  and  therefore  a  separate  inheritance
proceeded  from  her  to  her  children  and  eventually  to  members
of  her  personal  kin.^  She  was  by  no  means  at  the  mercy
of  her  husband,  and  not  entirely  separated  from  her  father's
house  and  from  his  relations  even  after  marriage.  On
very  important  occasions,  when  a  man  had  to  look  for  de-
fence and  revenge  to  his  relations,  or  to  rely  on  their  sup-
port when  called  upon  to  satisfy  claims,  he  did  not  lean
exclusively  on  his  agnatic  relations,  but  also  sought  support
from  his  mother's  kinsmen.^''  But  though,  in  the  case  of
a  settlement  of  claims  in  regard  to  the  murdered  man's
"  galanas,"  the  portions  assigned  to  single  individuals  de-
pended mostly  on  the  degrees  of  relationship  in  which  they
stood  to  the  victim,  the  blood  feud  groups  which  enforced
the  payment  of  the  fines,  and  bore  the  feud  in  case  fines
were  not  paid,  were  permanently  organised  clans  or  kindreds,
and  not  associations  formed  on  different  lines  in  every  single
case.  These  are  facts  well  established  in  Irish  and  in
Welsh  law,  and  sufficiently  indicated  in  Highland  custom,
and  as  facts  stand  against  facts  on  both  sides  it  is  impossible
to  get  rid  of  one  or  of  the  other  set.  It  would  not  help  to
argue  that  the  predominance  of  agnatic  relationship  must
have  entailed  the  rightlessness  of  women,  and  the  exclusion
of  all  relationship  through  women,  or  vice  versa,  that  the
recognition  of  rights  proceeding  through  women  is  to  be
considered  a  bar  to  any  working  arrangement  of  agnatic
kinship.^  ^

After  all,  the  compromises  which  have  to  be  effected  between
the  two  sets  of  rights  and  obligations  are  not  so  artificial  or
Compromises  in  intricate  as  to  make  it  impossible  to  unravel
the  organisation  their  meaning.  In  one  way,  the  close  connec-
of  Kindred  ^^^^^  q£  ^^  woman  with  her  own  kin  even  after

marriage  may  be  even  considered  as  a  direct  outcome  of  the


CELTIC TRIBAL ARRANGEMENTS  11

principle  of  agnatic  union.  The  taking  of  a  wife  in  those
old  times  was  by  no  means  always  a  taking  by  force,  a  rape
and  a  conquest.  Without  going  far  into  ethnological  in-
quiries, we  may  simply  point  to  the  fact  that  marriage  by  a
contract  between  two  kins  of  more  or  less  evenly  balanced
strength  was  quite  as  much  a  possibility  as  a  marriage  by
violence,  and  that,  even  apart  from  the  influence  of  Christian-
ity, the  fact  of  getting  a  wife  whose  life  and  rights  were
protected  by  powerful  kinsmen  led  to  a  union  of  a  higher
order  than  the  violent  acquisition  of  a  woman  who  might
be  treated  as  a  slave.^^  The  existence  side  by  side  in
a  settled  social  order  of  powerful  agnatic  associations
was  the  best  guarantee  against  an  arbitrary  treatment  of
married  women  and  of  their  recognised  offspring  ;  no  wonder
that  certain  acknowledged  legal  ties  proceeded  from  it,  that
the  wife  could  sometimes  seek  refuge  from  ill-treatment  at
the  hands  of  the  husband  in  her  father's  house,  or  under  the
protection  of  her  brother,  that  her  murder  was  avenged
primarily  by  her  own  kinsfolk,  who  had  to  receive  fines  for
her  death,  that  she  had  some  private  property  which  could
not  be  encroached  upon  by  the  husband  and  his  people.
Altogether  we  may  say  that  the  strong  stress  laid  on
the  woman's  agnatic  ties  even  after  marriage  does  not
weaken  the  impression  that  agnatic  kinship  was  of  first  rate
importance  in  social  life.^^

This  involves  a  series  of  consequences  for  the  offspring
of  contractual  marriages.  Though,  at  the  first  period  of
their  life,  they  were  exposed  to  rejection,  and  even  exter-
mination by  the  father,  once  accepted,  they  grew  up  to
stand  in  distinct  relation  not  only  to  their  father's  but
also  to  their  mother's  kin,  and  in  the  most  important
matter  of  social  protection  could  appeal  to  both  sides.  But
here  again  we  need  not  develop  the  divergence  of  protecting
ties  to  the  extent  of  assuming  that  no  agnatic  organisation
mattered  because  there  mattered  two  or  possibly  more.
It  was  a  case  of  bringing  to  bear  as  much  protecting  in-
fluence as  possible  from  all  available  sides,  and  the  Celtic
law  expresses  it  very  pertinently  by  the  rule  that  apart
from specified  payments to helpers of divers kinds  —


12  THE  GROWTH  OF  THE  MANOR

adoptive  children,  foster-brothers  and  the  like,  two-thirds
of  the  fine  for  murder  were  to  be  paid  to  the  father's  agnatic
relations  and  one -third  to  the  mother's.^*  Let  it  be  noted
that  this  rule  does  not  lead  to  a  computation  of  the  eventual
shares  of  relatives  in  their  personal  positions  in  regard  to
the  murdered  man ;  it  is  an  arrangement  for  adjusting
the  claims  of  two  organised  and  allied  bodies.  The
organised  existence  and  the  predominant  importance  in
practice  of  the  agnatic  group  were  guaranteed  by  the  rule
that  women  did  not  inherit  land  and  that  the  territorial  basis
for  applying  all  the  advantages  accruing  from  the  possession
of  immoveables  was  originally  bound  up  with  agnatic
relationship.^^  Two  powerful  factors  make  in  this  way  for
agnatism :  the  natural  preponderance  of  strength  accruing
to  the  armed  sex  in  primitive  communities,  and  the  settle-
ment in  separate  households  which  led  to  permanent
marriages  and  to  the  establishment  of  patriarchal  adminis-
tration within  the  hmits  of  the  household,  and  on  the  basis
of  the  land  assigned  to  it.

The  cross  influences  which  arose  from  such  a  recognition
of  different  sources  of  affinity  are,  of  course,  not  to  be  con-
sidered in  the  light  of  a  standing,  weU  balanced  compromise
in  which  the  acting  forces  were  so  united  as  to  ensure
a  permanent  combination.  It  is  clear  that,  in  real  life,
there  was  not  only  room  for  many  collisions,  but  that  there
existed  permanent  germs  of  discord  and  disruption.  Apart
from  the  fact  that  there  were  divergent  interests  to  be
adjusted,  changes  in  the  general  conditions  of  life  might
indirectly  loosen  and  explode  the  combination.  When,
for  instance,  the  development  of  private  property  reached
a  stage  in  which  women  were  allowed  to  inherit  land —
such  a  change  was  bound  to  react  in  a  very  disturbing
manner  on  the  territorial  distinctness  of  agnatic  groups,
and  thereby  on  their  very  existence.  Then,  again,  the
rise  of  individuality,  and  the  weakening  of  the  political
attributions  of  the  clans,  might  lead  to  the  gradual
substitution  of  the  idea  of  an  all-round  relationship  to  the
conception  of  membership  in  a  distinct  agnatic  association


I


CELTIC TRIBAL ARRANGEMENTS  13

supplemented  by  ties  in  other  similar  groups.  But  these
possibilities  and  eventualities  ought  not  to  be  treated  as
if  they  were  an  immediate  consequence  to  be  drawn  from
accepted  premises,  which  rendered  all  compromise  and
combination  impossible  at  the  very  outset.  As  a  matter
of  fact,  a  working  combination  of  the  conflicting  ten-
dencies existed  for  many  centuries  under  the  prevailing
influence  of  agnatic  kinship,  and  it  is  with  this  combina-
tion that  we  have  mostly  to  do  in  the  domajin  of  early
Celtic  law.

Nothing  could  be  clearer  than  the  Welsh  evidence
The  Gwely  as  to  the  gradual  development  of  higher
agnatic  units  from  the  family  household,  and  as  to  the
passage  from  the  primary  family  to  the  joint  family  and
from  thence  to  the  kindred.  Mr.  Seebohm  has  elucidated
this  matter  with  great  abundance  of  detail.^'  His  Den-
bigh documents  shew  us  how  the  household  of  Lau-
warghe  ap  Kendalyk  or  of  Vaughan  ap  Asser  spreads  into
a  gavell  in  which  the  three  sons  of  Lauwarghe  or  the  four
sons  of  Rand  hold  together  as  a  joint  family  united  in
its  work,  rights  and  duties,  and  the  grandsons  have  to  wait
till  all  the  sons  are  dead  before  coming  forward  with  their
claims  as  to  full  and  equal  rights.  Further,  in  the  third
generation  we  see  gavells  of  grandsons  springing  up  within
the  hed  (wele  or  gwely)  of  Lauwarghe  or  Vaughan,  and  on  the
one  hand  combining  for  purposes  of  husbandry,  on  the
other  hand  vouching  for  an  eventual  redivision  of  rights,  on
the  passage  of  the  land  to  the  next  generation.  And
when  the  third  generation  has  died  off,  the  descendants  of
Lauwarghe  become  a  progenies  in  which  the  beds  and  gavells
represented  by  second  cousins  still  keep  together  as  a
political  and  economic  union.  Recorded  Welsh  law  breaks
off  the  nominative  reckoning  at  this  stage,  that  is  at  the
fourth  generation,  but  the  obligation  of  joining  in  the  pay-
ment and  receipt  of  galanas  is  carried  expressly  to  the
seventh  generation,  and  expected  even  of  those — who
do  not  stand  further  than  the  ninth  generation — sixth
cousins.

Li  Irish  law,  as  we  have  seen,  the  express  reckoning  is


^*  THE  GEOWTH  OF  THE MANOR

foUowed  to  the  fifth  generation,  but  there  also  it  is  probable
that  the  hmitations  were  not  more than expedients for
simpHfying  the  legal  apphcation  of  the  principle  of  agnatic
sohdarity. As  a  matter  of  custom  and  tradition,  all  the
hundreds  and  thousands  of  O'KeUys  were  considered  as  more
or  less  distant  relations,  and could  be  stirred  to  common
action by the wrongs or the prowess of one  of  them
In  such  cases,  undoubtedly,  a  point of  first rate  impor-
tance was material proximity, community of local
mterests and a distinct territory to help and uphold
the  sense  of  relationship. In  the  Wales  of  the  fourteenth
century  we abeady  notice the  disruption  of  these  local
foundations,  and,  in  connection  with  this,  a  weakening  of
the  tribal  ties. Beneath  the  mail-Hnks  of  English  feudal-
ism, it  is  not  possible  to  reconstitute  the  old  divisions  into
local  tribes  and  septs. It  is  only  in  the  lower  units  that  the
agnatic  grouping  makes  itself  felt,  and  even  there  the  beds
and  kindreds  stretch  from  one  place  to  another.  But  in  the
Highlands,  and  in  Ireland,  the  country  was,  until  late  times
actuaUy  divided  between  the  kindreds,  septs  and  clans so
that  the  territorial  basis  of  the  agnatic  arrangements  'be-
comes very  conspicuous. In  the  country  of  the  Campbells
it  is  natural  that  the  pedigree  of  the  CampbeUs  should  be
looked  to  as  the  chief  direction  in  the  apportionment  of
nghts,  dignity,  and  power,  and  even  in  Wales,  on  a  low^r
scale.  It  was  primarily  to  the  members  of  the  households
included  m  the  gwely  and  not  to  cognates  however  near
but  belonging  to  other  local  unions,  that  any  descendants
of  a  progenies  had  to  look  for  support  and  co-operation.
if  we  now  ask,  in  what  way  that  support  and  co-operation
was  provided,  it  seems  that  it  is  hardly  necessary  to  dweU
at  great  length  on  the  point  of  co-operation  for  mutual
defence,  because  this  point  is  very  obvious, and  only in-
directly connected  with  the  vicissitudes  of  the  economic
arrangements  which  form  the  direct  object  of  our  study.
It  may  be  sufficient  to  say  that  the  system  of  mutual  defence"
as  embodied  in  the  rules  of  revenge  and  composition,  of
legal  support  and  participation  in  claiming  and  paying  fines,
was  certainly  an  institution  as  to  the  vital  importance  of  which


CELTIC TRIBAL ARRANGEMENTS  15

it  is  hardly  possible  to  form  an  exaggerated  opinion.  In
those  days  of  violence,  the  mutual  insurance  of  powerful
combinations  of  kindred  was  not  only  the  means  of  check-
ing, to  a  certain  extent,  lawlessness  and  greed,  but,  as  we
can  judge  at  a  glance  from  any  barbaric  code,  it  provided
a  machinery  which  was  constantly  in  motion,  and  which
impressed  the  mind  of  the  people  more  than  any  other
institution.  But  there  is  another  side  of  co-operation
which  we  have  to  examine  more  carefully,  as  it  had  a  direct
bearing  on  the  development  of  landed  property  and  on
agrarian  questions  in  later  days.  I  mean  the  land  settle-
ment, as  it  appears  in  Celtic  parts.


n.  Landholding

It  has  been  pointed  out  that  in  the  very  mode  of  con-
structing houses,  as  it  is  described  in  the  Welsh  Codes,  we
Homesteads  i^aay  perceive  a  trace  of  the  powerful  tendency
and  Hamlets  of  Celtic  families  to  keep  together  as  long  as
possible.  The  house  of  the  tribal  king,  and,  in  a  smaller
degree,  that  of  the  better  tribesman,  the  "uchelwr,"  is  not
meant  to  be  the  dwelling-place  of  a  small  family  household
surrounded  by  a  certain  number  of  dependents.  It  is  adapted
for  the  joint  occupation  of  a  number  of  tribesmen  living
together.  The  great  hall,  opening  between  trees,  the  boughs
of  which  met  to  form  the  roof  of  the  house,  was  the  common
room  and  the  dining  hall  of  the  whole  household,  and  in
the  aisles  on  the  right  and  left  of  it  lay  the  beds  or  com-
partments of  the  families  which  constituted  it.^^  This  mode
of  building  answers  weU  to  the  indications  of  the  laws  and
extents  as  to  the  joint  management  of  affairs  by  mem-
bers of  gwelys.  The  more  usual  course  was  however  to
provide  a  young  man  when  he  married  with  a  tyddyn,  a
separate  dwelling  of  modest  size  and  light  construction.^*
These  tyddyns  sometimes  lay  in  proximity  to  each  other,
and  were  grouped  into  small  hamlets  or  villages  ^^  (trevs),
in  which  the  inhabitants  clustered  according  to  their  dis-


16  THE  GROWTH  OF  THE  MANOR

tribution  in  kindreds  and  "  beds."  In  other  instances
the  tyddyns  were  set  up  in  the  centre  of  allotments  made
to  the  different  families,  and  moved  in  the  case  of  important
redivisions.  This  would  account  for  the  scattering  of  farms
over  the  territory  of  Ireland.  In  the  more  mountainous
districts  of  Wales,  and  of  the  Highlands,  this  scattering
was  rendered  necessary  by  the  very  conformation  of  the
soil.  There  is,  however,  no  reason  for  laying  too  much
stress  on  this  feature,  and  especially  for  turning  it  into  a
kind  of  distinctive  Celtic  arrangement.^"  The  pecuharities
of  Celtic  agrarian  occupation  could  be  met  in  all  three
cases.  In  aU,  the  strong  influence  of  'the  agnatic
group  on  the  arrangement  of  the  rights  of  its  component
households  is  making  itself  felt — by  settlement  in  tribal
houses,  by  the  clustering  of  dwelling-houses  into  villages
and  hamlets,  and  by  the  scattering  of  them  for  the  pur-
pose of  their  pastoral  occupations.

All  our  sources  of  information  as  to  Celtic  antiquities
show  us  the  people  Hving  chiefly  on  the  produce  of  their
Pastoral  herds. Every  household,  even  that  of  the  low-

Pursuits  standing  Welsh  taeog,  is  supposed  to  possess

cows.  Sheep,  pigs,  and  goats  are  also  constantly  men-
tioned, and  the  careful  distinctions  drawn  between  animals
of  different  age  and  quality  show  a  minute  acquaintance
with  their  species  and  habits.  The  tariffs  of  compositions
are  all  fixed  in  cows.  The  occupations  and  products  of
dairy -farming,  the  use  of  milk,  the  making  of  cheese,
the  salting  of  bacon,  etc.,  are  a  subject  of  constant  attention
and  description.^^  By  the  side  of  this  chief  calling  appear
pursuits  connected  with  the  forest  and  the  stream — hunting,
fishing,  tending  of  bees.  It  would  be  impossible  to  say
when  the  cultivation  of  the  soil  arose,  and  to  what  extent
it  was  carried  on.  No  statement  can  be  made  in  this  respect
beyond  the  very  general  one,  that  the  cultivation  of  arable
is  already  mentioned  in  the  case  of  the  Biitish  Celts  of
Caesar's  time,^^  but  that  it  played  everywhere  a  more  or
less  subsidiary  part  in  contrast  with  the  prevailing
grazing  husbandry.  This  statement  is  not  unimpor-
tant because it prepares us to find that individual


CELTIC TRIBAL ARRANGEMENTS  17

property  in  land  was  not  much  developed  in  Celtic  parts.
It  is  not  necessary,  and  it  is  even  mischievous,  for  communi-
ties of  graziers  to  divide  strictly  the  area  on  which  their
herds  pasture.  As  no  artificial  cultivation  has  to  be  carried  on,
and  no  particular  implements  or  capital  have  to  be  provided
to  make  use  of  the  grass  freely  growing  in  the  open,  the  most
appropriate  distribution  of  land  in  such  communities  is
the  parcelHng  into  large  tracts  for  the  convenience  of  the
great  divisions  of  the  people — the  tribes,  clans,  septs  or
kindreds — and  the  intercommoning  of  the  herds  of  each
division  within  its  boundaries,  according  to  certain  rules.
In  view  of  such  a  state  of  aflfairs,  we  may  expect  to  find,
and  we  do  find,  rough  but  marked  boundaries  between
the  territories  of  clans  and  kindreds,  and  a  great  deal  of
shifting  and  redistribution  between  the  families  and  house-
holds which  go  to  form  the  kindreds  or  septs.  Perhaps
the  most  striking  example  of  that  arrangement  is  to  be
found  LQ  Ireland,  where  the  land  is  divided  from  immemorial
time,  very  symmetrically,  into  districts  (bailies)  and
quarters  (cartrons),  by  ditches  and  fences,  the  object  of
which  is  primarily  to  guard  against  the  trespassing  of
foreign  cattle,  while  the  area  within  the  cartron  admits  of
frequent  changes  of  settlements.^^  In  Scotland,  the  larger
part  of  a  village  territory  was  occupied  by  grazing  tracts
outside  the  herd  fence  marking  off  the  area  of  agricultural
cultivation  in  outfield  and  infield.^*  Ancient  Welsh  docu-
ments dwell  frequently  on  a  feature  which  seems  to  have
been  common  to  aU  Celtic  districts  in  mountainous  country,
namely,  on  the  summer  migrations  of  the  herds  and  herds-
men, and  the  erection  of  summer  dwellings  on  the  slopes
of  the  mountains,  in  regions  where  the  soU  was  not  sub-
divided for  private  occupation  by  individuals,  but  kept
the  common  property  of  the  tribes,  while  made  use  of  accord-
ing to  the  pasturing  requirements  of  the  several  households.^^
If  the  notion  that  the  soil  was  only  the  common  basis  of
rights  of  usage  within  the  septs  is  especially  conspicuous
in  regard  to  the  chief  economic  pursuit —
"  the  grazing  of  cattle,  the  methods  of  agricul-

ture, and  the  treatment  of the arable  point  with certain

c


18  THE  GROWTH  OF  THE  MANOR

modifications  the  same  way.^^  The  communalistic  origin
of  property  in  land  has  been  lately  much  contested.  But
in  so  far  as  agriculture  is  historically  developed  out  of
pastoral  husbandry,  there  seems  to  be  hardly  anything
more  certain  in  the  domain  of  archaic  law  than  the  theory
that  the  soil  was  originally  owned  by  groups  and  not  by
individuals,  and  that  its  individual  appropriation  is  the
result  of  a  slow  process  of  development.  In  the  case  of  the
land  reserved  for  crops,  the  distribution  of  labour  and  of
claims  takes  necessarily  the  shape  of  a  deUmitation  of
the  soil,  and  that  delimitation  may  be  lasting  if  the
labour  and  capital  appHed  bring  about  a  thorough -going
change,  extending,  with  its  indirect  results  long  over  the
removal  of  the  harvest :  such  is  evidently  the  case  when
complicated  systems  of  rotation  of  crops  come  in,  when  the
soil  is  systematically  manured,  when  improvements  of  any
kind  get  sunk  into  the  soil.  Or  else,  tillage  being  super-
ficial, application  of  capital  slight,  and  natural  conditions
more  or  less  equal,  the  apportionment  of  the  soil  lends
itself  to  frequent  readjustment  in  the  interest  of  the  com-
munity which  had  to  provide  for  an  appropriate  outfit  of
its  members  out  of  the  common  land  fund.  Even  in  later
days  the  processes  of  agriculture  in  Celtic  parts  were  charac-
terised by  their  very  extensive  character,  and  the  shght
appHcation  of  labour  and  capital.  Such  manuring  as  there
was  came  chiefly  from  letting  the  cattle  and  sheep  remain
on  the  stubble.  The  only  considerable  outlay  in  the  way
of  providing  implements  was  entailed  by  the  starting  of
ploughteams — big,  clumsy,  and  costly  concerns,  to  which
four  or  even  eight  oxen  had  to  be  yoked.  The  treatment
of  arable  was  in  keeping  with  these  premises  :  the  so-called
run-rig  system  seems  to  have  been  widely  employed.
It  is  attested  by  customs  which  have  been  preserved
even  to  our  times,  and  indicated  by  many  passages  of
ancient  records.  The  point  in  this  system  was  that  the
,  soil  was  not  allotted  once  for  all  to  particular  owners,
but  remained  in  the  ownership  of  the  tribal  community,
while  its  use  for  agricultural  purposes  was  apportioned
according  to  certain  rules  to  the  component households,


i


CELTIC TRIBAL  ARRANGEMENTS  19

strips  for  cultivation  being  assigned  by  lot.''  The
Welsh  laws  disclose  an  even  more  communalistic  practice,
namely,  the  distribution  of  strips  in  the  open  field  between
the  several  members  of  an  association  formed  for  keeping
a  plough,  each  receiving  the  use  of  a  strip,  according  to  his
share  in  the  undertaking,  one  for  providing  the  ploughshare,
another  for  acting  as  a  ploughman,  a  third  for  driving  the
oxen,  a  fourth,  fifth,  sixth,  seventh,  and  so  on,  for  contribut-
ing the  oxen.^^  In  later  times  these  unions  for  coaration
are  treated  as  free  contractual  associations  and  there  are
rules  in  the  laws  to  meet  such  cases,  but  there  can  be  no
doubt  that  originally  they  were  the  outcome  of  the  verjr
close  ties  of  settlement  and  co-operation  between  members
of  the  large  households  of  which  we  have  already  given  some
account.  People  living  in  the  same  tribal  house,  gathered
in  some  tribal  trev,  or  even  holding  together  as  members  of
the  same  tribal  grazing  community,  were  evidently  the
most  hkely  to  join  in  those  processes  of  cultivation  which,
in  opposition  to  our  present  ideas  on  the  subject,  entailed
a  good  deal  of  co-operation,  and  very  little  individual  labour,
and  it  would  be  difficult  to  understand  the  assignation  of
erws  on  any  other  principle.

The  communalistic  management  of  property  in  land  is
very  definitely  described  in  the  Welsh  documents. ^^ The

extents  present  to  us  two  varieties  of  village
Trcv£Yvriv  •

organisation, the trevgevery (trevgyvriv) or

holding  by  joint  account,  and  the  treweloghe  (trev  and  tir-
gwehaug)  or  holding  by  gwelys.^"  The  Codes  accordingly
describe  two  modes  of  acquiring  land,  by  allotment  of  strips
and  by  dadenhudd  or  succeeding  to  one's  father  in  a  gwely.
There  is  this  marked  dijfference  between  the  two  modes  of
getting  and  holding  land,  that  in  the  first  case  each  full-
aged  inhabitant  of  the  village  is  entitled  to  an  equal  share
in  the  land  occupied  by  the  village,  irrespectively  of  his
genealogical  position,^^  so  that  if  there  are  twenty  men  in
"tbie  village  each  will  have  one-twentieth  share  in  the  land
allotted  to  him  in  a  certain  number  of  strips,  certain  rights
and  duties  as  to  coaration,  pasturing,  hunting,  fishing,  etc.
If  two  of the  twenty  die,  the  share  of  every  survivor  will


20  THE  GROWTH  OP  THE  MANOR

be  increased  and  become  one -eighteenth  of  the  whole  ;  if,
on  the  contrary,  two  members  are  added  to  the  group,
say  by  the  coming  of  age  of  two  youths,  there  will
be  twenty -two  shares  in  the  whole.  If  there  remain  but
one  of  the  shareholders  in  the  trev,  his  will  be  all  the  land,
and  he  wiU  have  to  perform  all  the  duties  incumbent  on  it.
In  this  system  there  is  no  difference  in  regard  to  rights
between  father  and  son,  uncle  and  nephew,  if  they  are  full-
bodied  men  :  they  rank  equally  as  sharers.  The  amount
of  land  actually  held  may  be,  of  course,  different  in  different
cases,  but  it  was  considered  that  a  plain  freeman,
in  order  to  get  a  sufficient  living,  ought  to  be  entitled  to
not  less  than  four  or  fiveerws  (strips),  while  joining  accord-
ing to  strength  in  coaration  and  other  common  usages.  For
a  man  of  higher  standing  eight  erws  was  assumed  to  be
the  required  minimum,  and  we  have  to  infer  that  if  there
was  no  room  for  locating  all  the  necessary  erws,  the  vil-
lage had  to  seek  additional  means  of  meeting  the  require-
ments of  population  by  reclaiming  land,  starting  a  colony,
and  the  hke.  In  the  extents,  holding  by  tre vgy vriv  is
restricted  to  the  so-called  native  trevs,  the  villages  in
which  the  dependent  peasantry  was  settled.  But  legal
maxims  speak  of  allotment  of  strips  to  free  and  privileged
tribesmen,  and  the  descriptions  of  Irish  gavelkind  imply
constant  allotments  and  redivisions  amongst  freemen.^^

The  other  arrangement,  the  coming  to  land
by  dadenhudd,  (Uterally  "  the  uncovering
of  the  hearth ")  though  less  equalising  and  more
adapted  to  genealogical  reckonings,  was,  nevertheless,
based  on  the  same  communaKstic  assumption  that  there
ought  to  be  land  for  every  tribesman.^^  The  character-
istic feature  of  dadenhudd  lay  in  the  idea  that  every
head  of  a  household  ought  to  be  put  on  an  equal
footing  with  the  men  of  his  generation  within  the  gwely.
Theoretically  the  founder  of  the  gwdy  was  considered  as
if  he  had  effected  the  first  settlement  on  the  land,  and
taken  possession  of  the  whole  of  that  land.  At  his  death
each  of  his  sons  got  an  equal  share  with  his  brothers  :
if, for example,  there  were  four  sons, four  shares  were


CELTIC TRIBAL ARRANGEMENTS  21

formed  in  the  gwely ;  if  after  a  time  one  of  the  sharers,  sa\
A,  died,  leaving  two  sons,  these  last  entered  provisionally
as  half  sharers  ^*  for  the  part  which  their  father  had  held,  so
that  mstead  of  four  shares  there  were  henceforth  three  full
shares  and  two  half  shares  (§,  *,  b,  c,  d).  Suppose  B
died  leaving  three  sons,  and  C,  leaving  four,  as  long  as
D  was  ahve  the  division  would  be  into  one  full  share,  two
half  shares,  three  thirds  and  four  fourths  (§,  §,  ^,  ^,  |,
I,  I,  I,  I,  d).  But  on  D  dying  and  leaving,  say,  one  son,
the  whole  apportionment  would  be  readjusted,  each  of  the
cousins  forming  the  third  generation  taking  one-tenth
share  in  the  whole  guely.  By  the  same  process  the  shares
of  the  great  grandsons  of  the  founder  would  be  formed  inside
their  father's  lots  as  long  as  there  was  a  single  member  of
the  third  generation  alive,  but  on  the  death  of  the  last
grandson,  the  second  cousins  would  redivide  the  whole
into,  say,  twenty  equal  shares.  If,  however,  one  of  the
grandsons  had  died  before  that  redistribution  of  the  fourth
generation  his  sons  could  seemingly  not  inherit  full  shares
with  their  uncles,  and  were  precluded  for  ever  from
taking  part  in  the  redistribution  on  a  footing  of  equahty
with  their  contemporaries,  the  third  cousins  of  the
jSfth  generation.  The  appeal  to  the  gwely  of  the
original  founder  was  barred  after  the  fourth  generation,
the  process  of  equalisation  going  on  nevertheless,  but
starting  theoretically  not  from  the  first  founder  but  from
every  one  of  his  sons  ;  though  in  practice  many  of  the  gwelys
must  have  held  out  longer.  Of  course,  in  order  to  carry  out
such  a  system  people  had  to  reclaim  new  land  and  to  send
out  the  surplus  of  the  population  when  the  conditions  of
settlement  got  tight.  As  a  matter  of  fact,  redivisions
in  "  gavelkind,"  as  the  English  writers  termed  the  arrange-
ment, tended  towards  a  pulverisation,  if  not  of  the  holdings,
at  any  rate  of  the  shares,  and  the  inevitable  result  is  noted
by  later  observers.^^  Originally,  as  is  fully  established  by
the  surveys,  attributions  of  real  allotments  were  not
practised,  and  would  have  been  absurd  even  in  the  case
of  treweloghe,  not  to  speak  of  trevgyvriv :  what  was
meant  was  the  admission  of  more  or  "  fewer  "  persons  into  a


22  THE  GROWTH  OF  THE  MANOR

community,  and  the  appreciation  of  their  respective  ideal
shares  in  the  concern  :  only  the  settlement  in  the  tyddyn
had  to  be  necessarily  real.^^  But  in  course  of  time  the
eventuality  of  real  partition  had  to  be  considered  more  and
more  often  ;  indeed,  the  Codes  express  the  sound  opinion
that  nobody  is  bound  to  hold  in  joint  tenancy  if  he  refuses
to  do  so,  and  provide  for  cases  when  objects  came  into
partition  which  did  not  admit  of  real  division.^^

Let  us  notice  the  very  important  fact,  that  the  unity  of
the  gwely,  which  is  so  strongly  exemplified  by  the  process
Familial  described,  is  emphatically  the  union  of  a  corn-

Communities  munity  of  joint  tenants.  The  Codes  do  not
mention  any  one  who  acts  as  a  chief  of  the  gwely,  not  to
speak  of  any  one  who  has  a  right  of  property  in  it  in  opposi-
tion to  rights  of  maintenance  claimed  by  the  rest.^^  In  all
the  free  gwely s  and  in  those  native  villages  where  the  bond-
men held  according  to  treweloghe,  the  shareholders,  the
fathers  of  households,  are  on  an  equal  footing,  and  if  some
enactments  seem  to  suggest  a  claim  of  the  elder  brother
to  the  whole,  as  taking  precedence  of  the  claims  of  younger
brothers,  a  comparison  with  the  numerous  paragraphs  testify-
ing to  an  equal  distribution  of  rights  between  brothers  shows
that  the  elder  brother  plays  a  peculiar  part,  not  as  an  only  or
privileged  inheritor,  but  as  the  representative  of  the  gwely
as  a  whole.  This  representation  had  of  course  considerable
consequences  in  practice,  inasmuch  as  on  many  occasions
the  members  of  the  gwely  had  to  act  as  a  whole,  and  to  sup-
port each  other  by  oaths  and  goods,  as  the  law  terms  it.^*
But  there  is  no  question  of  exclusive  ownership  or  even
chieftainship  in  this  case.  The  penteulu  mentioned  in  some
enactments  does  not  belong  to  this  connection  at  all :  he
is  either  the  chief  of  the  Royal  household,  a  kind  of  major
domus,  or  a  simple  householder  (father  of  a  family).*"  Of
the  chief  of  the  kindred  and  of  the  landlord  we  shall  have
to  speak  later  on,  but  they  are  certainly  not  chiefs  of  gwelys
and  indeed  I  do  not  find  any  chief  of  wele  in  the  Welsh
codes.  Normally  it  was  a  community  of  second  cousins,
numbering  some  12  to  15  households,  and  probably  some
50  to 60  members,  but  it  did  not  necessarily  coincide  with


CELTIC TRIBAL ARRANGEMENTS  23

a  kindred,  and  when  it  coincided  the  part  it  played  as  a
kindred  was  distinct  from  the  legal  arrangement  of  property
and  inheritance  described  by  the  codes.  I  lay  stress  on
this  point  not  because  I  want  to  minimise  the  effect  of  these
pecuHar  arrangements,  but  because  it  is  necessary  to  make
clear  that  the  Welsh  tribal  arrangements  are  not  to  be
construed  on  the  basis  of  a  sole  ownership  in  land  of  the
"patriarch."  They  are  based  on  gavelkind  in  both
their  main  developments,  and  both  systems  are  directed
towards  an  equalisation  of  shares  as  to  land,  though  in
one  case  this  is  achieved  in  a  more  complete  fashion,
vhile  in  the  other  the  attribution  of  shares  is  adapted
\o  the  relative  position  of  men  according  to  pedigree.
Ve  have  to  add  that  the  often  recurring  claim  to  land  by
kia  and  descent  is  a  distinct  form  of  pleading.  A  man  had
to  claim  kin  and  descent,  if  he  could  not  rely  on  dadenhudd
("  u-icover  the  hearth  "),  that  is  establish  a  definite  position
through  father,  grandfather  and  so  forth  in  a  particular
gwely  and  within  the  fourth  generation.  By  claiming  kin
and  descent  he  contended  either  that  the  persons  who
were  holding  him  out  of  the  possession  of  land  were  either
strangers  to  the  land,  usurpers  who  had  no  kin  and  descent  to
fall  back  upon,  or  else  that  there  was  no  one  in  the  kindred
nearer  him,  though  he  himself  did  not  belong  to  the
close  community  of  the  four  generations.  If  they  were
settled  according  to  dadenhudd  kin  and  descent  gave
no  claim  against  them.*°*  This  seems  very  clear  in  the
documents,  and  there  is  nowhere  an  indication  of  a
double  title  to  land — one  by  dadenhudd  in  the  ordinary
course  of  inheritance,  and  the  other  by  kin  and  descent  as
flowing  from  a  claim  to  maintenance.  In  fact  I  cannot
discover  any  special  right  of  maintenance  of  the  free  tribes-
men in  distinction  from  their  right  as  actual  or  potential
shareholders  in  the  land  which  came  to  them  by  reason
of  their  taking  part  in  one  of  the  tribal  communities
or  of  the  settlement  of  their  forefathers  in  a  particular
trev.

Does  this  lead  us  to  the  conclusion  that  Celtic  tribal  society
was  entirely  actuated  by  democratic  ideas,  and  that  special


24  THE  GROWTH  OF  THE  MAI^OR

care  was  taken  in  it  to  place  all  men  on  an  equal  footing  ?
Aristocracy  and  Nothing  of  the  sort.  The  fact  that  land  was
Democracy  considered  primarily  to  be  the  common  pro-
perty of  clans,  septs  or  gwelys,  does  not  preclude  in  the  least
that  other  commodities  were  distributed  without  any  regard
to  the  allotment  of  shares,  and  that  very  marked  ranks  and
privileges  were  built  upon  this  foundation  as  well  as  upon
special  forms  of  landownership.  It  remains  to  be  seen
how  far  the  communaUstic  ideas  acting  on  one  side  counter-
balanced or  did  not  counterbalance  the  individuahstic  and
aristocratic  leanings  in  other  respects.  Hitherto  we  have
only  treated  of  the  relation  of  tribesmen  to  land  in  agnatic
communities.  The  communalism  we  noted  was  produced
by  a  conception  of  the  value  and  the  use  of  land  very  different
from  our  own,  or  from  the  feudal  one  for  that  matter.  It
was  connected  with  the  necessity  of  considering  ihc
welfare  and  the  feelings  of  tribal  warriors  which  vere
the  most  important  element  of  that  society,  important  not
only  for  themselves,  but  also  as  impersonating  the  strength
of  the  tribe  and  its  political  capabilities.**  The  armed,  free
tribesman  was  undoubtedly  endowed  with  a  rough  av^erage
of  rights,  though  the  recognition  of  his  social  status  had
nothing  to  do  with  modem  democratic  theories.

Let  us  now  turn  to  the  aristocratic  elements  of  the  pro-
blem. In  order  to  realise  their  strength  one  has  to
Slaves  and  ^^^e  into  account  the  dependent  classes.
Taeogs  Tribal  society  did  not  merely  consist  of  free

tribesmen.  Besides  those,  there  were  slaves  {cadhs)  vil-
lains— taeogs,  aillts,  etc.,  and  there  were  strangers,  alUvdo.
Attending  to  the  first  of  these  classes,  we  may  notice  that
the  element  of  personal  bondage,  the  notion  that  a  caeih
is  a  thing,  is  sometimes  expressly  put  forward :  the
king  may  not  have  any  fine  for  the  killing  of  the  bond-
men belonging  to  another  person  ;  that  is  a  fact  which
entirely  concerns  the  owner,  for  a  person  has  the  pro-
perty of  his  bondman  "  as  of  his  animal."*^  There  is  such
a  gulf  between  a  freeman  and  a  bondman  (caeth)  that  if  the
first  strikes  the  latter,  he  has  to  pay  twelve  pence  ;  but
should  the  latter  strike  a  freeman,  he  loses  his  arm.*^ In


CELTIC TRIBAL ARRANGEMENTS  26

Ireland  the  cumal,  the  female  slave,  appears  as  a  standard
article  of  trade  and  a  unit  in  reckoning.  As  for  the  taeogs,
they  appear  as  nativi,  as  serfs,  settled  on  the  land,
bound  to  perform  certain  duties  and  pay  certain  rents  ;  but
holding  personal  property  and  following  fixed  customs  in
their  daily  life,  and  their  relations  to  each  other  or  to  their
lords.  There  are  taeogs  of  the  king  and  taeogs  belonging
to  private  persons.  The  bulk  of  the  nativi  evidently  came
from  the  remnants  of  the  aboriginal  population  which
held  the  country  before  its  invasion  by  Celtic  tribes.
We  find  the  recognition  of  this  fact  in  Irish  accounts/*
Even  if  no  such  recognition  were  forthcoming  we  should
have  to  surmise  something  of  the  kind,  as  there  is
ample  anthropological  evidence  of  strong  pre -Celtic
elements  in  the  composition  of  the  Welsh,  Irish,  and  High-
land Scotch  people  ;  and  we  should  have  to  assign  to  these
pre-Celtic  elements,  in  accordance  with  the  usual  course
of  events  in  history,  the  lowest  place  in  social  organisation.
Economic  I* seems natm-al to suppose, with the

Subjection  authors  of  the  book  on  the  Welsh  people,
that  the  Celtic  conquerors  formed  the  upper  layer  of
society,  and  not  even  a  very  voluminous  one,  and  made
use  of  their  poHtical  superiority  to  throw  on  the  ab-
origines the  burden  of  tedious  farm  work,  and  make
drudges  of  them.*^  Such  an  account  would  altogether  seem
to  be  more  in  keeping  with  the  latest  fashion  of  understand-
ing ancient  society  *^  than  any  idea  which  might  be  con-
strued as  carrying  back  modern  notions  of  democratic
freedom  into  these  ancient  times.  It  seems  almost  pre-
posterous on  my  part  to  contest  the  adequacy  of  such  a
reading  in  regard  to  Celtic  history,  but  I  venture  to  submit
that  there  are  other  combinations  to  be  reckoned  with
than  the  two  of  free  democracy  and  of  an  association  of
idle  conquerors  living  on  the  work  of  natives,  and  that  the
Celtic  arrangements  do  not  fall  either  under  one  or  under
the  other  of  these  heads.  The  clearest  view  of  these  matters
is  presented  in  the  Welsh  documents.  Looking  at  the
extents,  we  find  that  the  population  is  not  unevenly  divided
into  freemen  and  natives,  and  that  each  class  is  grouped  in


26  THE  GROWTH  OF  THE  MANOR

separate  trevs.*^  Exceptional  instances,  when  in  the  same
trev  one  part  of  the  inhabitants  are  free  and  the  rest  villains,
confirm  the  rule  as  to  the  division  of  both  classes,  because
the  free  and  the  serfs  are  placed  on  the  same  level,  the  first
holding  some  of  the  gavells  of  the  trev,  and  the  second  the
others.*^  Both  the  free  and  the  unfree  tenants  are  bound
to  perform  certain  duties  and  pay  rents  ;  and  though  these
duties  are  not  identical,  it  is  material  that  both  kinds  are
directed  to  the  use  of  the  chief's  household,  and  the  taeogs
are  not,  as  a  rule,  subordinated  in  their  work  and  payments
,  to  the  jree}^  In  this  manner  we  see  that  the  very  numerous
free  population  stands  by  the  side  of  the  unfree  population,
and  is  not  supported  by  it.  The  registration  of  the  personnel
in  the  Denbigh  extents  especially  is  so  careful,  and  the  num-
bers of  the  freeholders  in  treweloghe  so  large,  that  it  would
be  out  of  the  question  to  suppose  a  kind  of  two-storeyed
occupation  in  free  trevs  in  contrast  to  a  single -storeyed  one
in  unfree  trevs.^''  The  15  or  16  freemen  concentrated  in
a  gavell,  the  50-60  forming  a  gwely  are  evidently  taken
to  be  the  holders  of  the  gavell  and  of  the  gwely,  and
if  they  are  taken  to  be  so  in  the  half-feudal  fourteenth
century  extent,  it  is  difficult  to  make  out  that  their
ancestors  were  anything  different  in  the  time  of  indepen-
dent tribal  Wales.  If  we  turn  to  the  Codes,  we  find  a
curious  description  of  the  division  of  a  cymwd  into  50
trevs,  of  which  two  are  reserved  for  cultivation  as  royal
board  land,  eight  are  set  apart  as  office  land  for  the  use  of
domanial  officers,  sixteen  are  entered  as  trevs  held  by  taeogs,
and  the  rest,  twenty-four,  belong  to  free  tribesmen.^^  It
may  be  argued  that  the  arrangement  could  not  have  been
carried  out  with  this  arithmetical  precision  and  symmetry  ;
but  undoubtedly  the  passage  gives  us  an  insight  into  the
usueJ,  the  normal  distribution  of  villages  and  groups  of
tenants  in  ordinary  cymwds,  and  such  a  distribution
certainly  does  not  resemble  in  the  least  the  arrangement
of  the  feudal  districts  of  England  :  there  is  no  attempt  to
build  up  a  system  in  which  the  natives  would  be  made  to  do
work  and  to  act  as  drudges  for  the  free.  Both  are  harnessed
to  the  same  yoke,  although  the  natives  had  to  draw  a


I


CELTIC TRIBAL ABRANOEMENTS  27

heavier  burden,  as  we  shall  see  by -and -bye.  Looking  back
from  these  ascertained  facts  to  a  period  when  the  tribal
organisation  was  in  full  work,  and  not  yet  complicated  by
English  feudal  influences,  we  may  suppose,  with  some
certainty,  that  the  way  the  conquered  aboriginal  popula-
tion was  treated  in  Wales  was  not  the  reduction  of  it  into
slavery  or  a  serfdom  intended  to  provide  the  conquerors
with  the  working  men  necessary  for  the  cultivation  of
their  holdings,  but  its  subjection  into  a  tributary  state  in  I
regard  to  the  clans  and  their  chiefs.  The  natives  were
grouped  in  some  parts  of  the  country,  while  room  was  made
for  the  tribesmen  in  other  parts  ;  some  slaves  these  latter
undoubtedly  had,  but  these  were  not  many,  and  did  not
enable  their  proprietors  to  live,  as  a  rule,  on  the  produce
of  servile  work  and  to  dispense  with  work  of  their  own.  It
may  be  found,  on  reflection,  that  such  a  situation  was  not
unhkely  to  arise  in  a  country  with  predominant  grazing  and
hunting  pursuits,  very  scanty  cultivation,  most  imperfect
ways  of  communication,  poor  markets,  and  weak  State
control.  It  appears  that  the  arrangement  of  society  on
1  the  basis  of  slavery  or  of  serfdom  is  not  so  easily  carried  out
i  as  many  suppose,  and  that  it  is,  perhaps,  a  more  complex
'  result  of  historical  development  than  even  primitive
democracy.  In  order  to  emploj^^^  slaves  extensively  one
ought  to  be  able  not  only  to  get  them,  but  also  to  feed,  to
keep,  and  to  supervise  them ;  in  order  to  use  profitably  the
labour  of  serfs,  one  ought  to  be  able  to  organise  it  and  to
apply  its  produce  regularly  to  home-consumption  and  to
sale.  If  these  conditions  of  regularitj^  could  not  be
attained,  the  employment  of  slaves  and  of  serfs  might  turn  \
out  to  be  a  burden,  and  it  was  more  natural  for  the  con-  l
querors  to  impose  tribute  on  the  subject  households  and  to  I
leave  the  more  intensive  employment  of  servfle  labour  to
the  few  people  in  a  position  to  make  profitable  use  of  it —
to  the  kings,  chieftains  and  other  highly  privileged  persons.
With  the  rest  of  the  inhabitants  of  Scotch  and  Welsh
mountain  valleys  and  of  Irish  bogs,  slaves  might  be  an  ex-
ceptional commodity,  female  slaves  might  even  be  specially
sought  for  different  purposeT;  but  there  could  be  no  slave-


28  THE  GROWTH  OF  THE  MANOR

holding  husbandry  arrangements.  The  pasturing  of  herds,
the  work  of  the  dairy  farms,  the  collection  and  preparation
of  honey,  even  the  ploughing  and  harrowing  operations,
were  mainly  performed  by  members  of  the  free  households
themselves,  with  such  occasional  help  as  they  might  find
from  dependants  of  different  kinds — domestic  servants,
strangers,  clients.  It  must  be  added  that  the  possession
of  taeogs  not  being  common  and  usual,  it  must  have  given
special  prominence  to  those  who  were  able  to  dispose  of
them,  and,  as  it  was  coupled  with  privilege,  must  have
served  to  enhance  that  privilege.  The  owners  of  slaves
and  serfs  naturally  get  ascendancy  among  the  free.

If  we  now  turn  to  the  repartition  of  duties  to  the  tribe
between  the! freemen  and  the  taeogs,  we  find  that  the
Services  and  ^^^t  had  to  act  primarily  as  mihtary  men,  to
Re^ts  serve in the hosting, to follow feacht and

sluaged,^^  as  they  said  in  Ireland,  and  to  attend  the  courts
as  assessors.^^  The  mihtary  obligations  of  the  free  were
graduated  according  to  their  personal  status,  no  one  being
required  to  serve  on  horseback  (as  a  marchog)  if  he  was
not  the  chief  of  a  family,  if  he  had  not  ascended  to  the
state  of  his  father.  The  taeogs  also  came  to  the  host,
but  only  as  hatchet  men,  to  help  to  erect  camps.  For  the
erection  and  the  keeping  up  of  castles  both  classes  were
called  up.  The  taeogs  were  assessed  differently  when
they  were  settled  in  Maer  trevs,  that  is  in  villages  under  the
management  of  stewards,  and  when  they  Uved  in  tributary
villages  in  trevgivriv,  or  in  treweloghe.  In  the  first
instance  they  had  to  perform  all  the  necessary  agricultural,
pastoral,  and  carrying  work  for  the  demesne ;  but  these  cases
are  exceptional,  and  testify  more  to  the  gradual  rise  of
demesne  cultivation  on  the  land  of  the  chieftains  than  to  the
general  condition  of  the  country.^*  As  a  rule,the  villages  of  the
natim  were  left  to  manage  their  own  affairs,  but  were  bound
to  pay  certain  rents  in  food-stuffs,  and  to  provide  the  king's
servants  and  strangers  under  his  protection  with  lodging
and  maintenance  (dovraeth).^^  As  to  the  king  himself,
when  he  went  on  progress  he  had  to  be  feasted  by  his  free
subjects,  and  the  villains  or  taeogs  were  called  up  chiefly  to


CELTIC TRIBAL ARRANGEMENTS  29

"  raise  "  houses  for  him,  with  the  exception,  however,  of  two
great  annual  progresses,  which  fell  as  a  burden  on  the  taeogs
as  well  as  on  the  free.^^  The  feasting  and  the  provision  of
food  was  the  most  characteristic  and  profitable  part  of  this
system  of  assessment.  It  did  not  require  any  very  close
supervision  or  frequent  intrusion  into  the  life  of  the
dependent  people,  and  it  dispensed  with  an  intricate  arrange-
ment of  domanial  husbandry.  This  barbarous  system  of
exploitation  was  not  burdensome,  because  it  lacked  the
organisation  and  continuity  of  purpose  to  make  it  burden-
some, but  the  strain  it  put  on  the  tenant  in  extraordinary
cases  shows  that  it  was  not  rendered  easy  out  of  considera-
tion for  the  tenants.  One  curious  method  of  drawing  income
trom  taeogs  was  to  let  the  maer  fasten  on  them  in  turn,
going  from  one  to  the  other  every  year  in  order  to  avoid
the  complete  ruin  of  the  bondmen  concerned.^^  Another
mode  of  exploitation  was  to  quarter  on  the  taeogs  youths
who  were  to  be  fostered  according  to  their  requirements  and
condition,  and  even  received  a  claim  to  a  son's  portion  of
the  inheritance  of  the  taeog,  but  might  be  useful  to  him
later  on  by  giving  him  protection  or  material  help.^^
It  must  be  added  that  as  the  food  rents  and  feasting  were
to  a  great  extent  exacted  from  the  free  people  as  well  as
from  the  taeogs,  both  had  to  contribute  to  the  tunc  pound,
the  money  tax  which  was  laid  on  the  land  in  commutation
for  the  food  rents.^^

A  second  element  of  dependence  with  which  one  has  to
reckon  in  ancient  Celtic  society  arises  from  the  position  of
Strangers  in  strangers  in  blood,  of  alltuds.  They  might
B'oo''  have come  from  over the border, or  they

might  be  kin-shattered  men  who,  for  some  reason — a
quarrel,  a  murder,  economic  difficulties — had  had  to  forsake
their  home  and  kindred.  Their  personal  freedom  was
recognised,  and  if  they  took  care  to  move  from  one  place  to
the  other,  and  to  seek  protection  with  different  people,  they
remained  quite  distinct  from  the  aillts  or  taeogs.  But  their
position  was  very  difficult  in  a  society  in  which  security  was
guaranteed  primarily  by  the  help  of  relations  and  friends.
As  they  had  no  relations,  they  had  to  seek  friends  at  any


30  THE  GROWTH  OF  THE  MANOR

price,  and  this  price  could  be  no  other  than  the  surrendering
of  a  part  of  their  independence  and  earnings.  Gradually  a
kindred  might  grow  up  around  a  family  of  aUtuds,  and  if
this  family  had  succeeded  in  keeping  its  personal  freedom
through  three  generations,  in  the  fourth  it  might  take  rank
with  the  free-born  Welshmen  of  the  Wyrion  gwelys.^°  But  if,
as  was  even  more  likely,  the  fourth  generation  found  the
alltud  family  sitting  on  the  same  land,  and  under  the  same
protection  which  its  great-grandfather  had  obtained,  it
lapsed  into  perpetual  dependence,  and  it  is  not  unlikely
that  some  of  the  settlements  of  nativi  had  had  no  other
origin.*^

Thirdly,  personal  dependence  might  be  the  consequence
of  economic  processes  going  on  in  the  midst  of  the  free
Patrons  and  communities  themselves.  The  economic
Clients  balance of  households  chiefly  dependent  on

pastoral  or  semi -pastoral  pursuits  is  even  more  easily  dis-
turbed than  the  economy  of  agriculturists,  and  notwith-
standing the  precautions  which  were  taken  to  give  aH  the
free  tribesmen  a  fair  start  in  life,  it  often  happened  that
some  got  ruined  in  consequence  of  murrain,  bad  seasons,
war,  fire,  and  the  like.  Even  apart  from  that,  there  must
have  been  constant  inducements  to  one  or  the  other  among
the  people  to  speculate  on  larger  profits  by  getting  an
additional  outfit  of  stock.  Loans  of  cattle  are  most  com-
monly mentioned,  but  loans  of  agricultural  implements  and
seed  occurred  also,  and  the  consequences  of  these  operations
were  pecuhar.  The  Irish  laws  give  the  fullest  description
of  the  degree  of  personal  dependence  which  was  incurred
by  free  householders  who  had  been  reduced  to  take  loans
from  chiefs  or  from  more  prosperous  neighbours.  It  is
not  to  be  wondered  at  that  interest  was  high,  and  the
conditions  for  repayment  hard,  as,  evidently,  there  was
no  accumulation  of  capital  to  speak  of,  and  the
security  of  such  transactions  could  not  be  great.  And  so
the  debtor  sank  easily,  and  often  passed  from  the  position  of
a  free  dependent  {saer  ceile)  to  that  of  a  bond  one  {daer
ceile)P  In  any  case  these  operations  in  cattle  and  agri-
cultural outfit  produced something very different from


CELTIC TRIBAL ARRANGEMENTS  31

personal  indebtedness  :  they  led  to  dependence,  to  a  position
of  clients  in  regard  to  great  men  which,  without  actually
destroying  the  free  status  of  the  debtors,  still  reduced  their
social  value,  and,  on  the  other  hand,  helped  to  create  aristo-
cratic positions  and  pretensions.  It  is  obvious  that  Caesar
had  something  of  the  kind  in  view  when  he  spoke  of  the
factions  in  the  tribes  of  Gaul,  and  of  the  dependence  of
Client es  and  Obcerati  on  a  few  leaders.

In  this  way  we  observe  in  the  development  of  Celtic
society  two  distinct  currents,  one  produced  by  the  hier-
archical organisation  of  tribal  society,  the  other  by  various
causes  favouring  inequahty  among  the  people  and  the
personal  influence  of  powerful  men.  We  are  led  to  the
same  general  conclusion  by  observing  the  different  manners
in  which  leadership  appears  in  Celtic  documents.  There
are  two  terms  expressing  authority  with  which  one  has  to
deal  in  Welsh  evidence — pencenedl,  the  chief  of  kindred  ;
and  argluyd,  the  lord.^^

If  we  turn  to  the  opposition  between  the  chieftain  and
the  lord,  we  shall  have,  evidently,  to  take  into  account  that
Chieftain  and  ^^^  ^^^^  ^^  these  authorities  is  the  more  archaic
Lord  one,  as  it  comes  from  the  agnatic  arrangement  of

society,  which  answered  to  the  original  half -pastoral  state  of
the  folk,  w^hereas  the  second  connects  itself  with  those
personal  influences  making  towards  economic  inequahty
and  privilege,  which  tended  to  modify  the  tribal  arrange-
ment. Looking  at  the  Welsh  laws,  one  finds  the  chieftain
often  mentioned,  but  not  many  functions  are  distinctly
attributed  to  him  :  he  appears  mainly  in  the  act  of  admitting
or  refusing  admission  to  those  who  claim  to  be  members
of  the  kindred,  and  who  have  not  had  a  father  to  admit
them,  a  ceremony  which  was  certainly  very  material  to  the
constitution  of  that  body  and  to  the  establishment  of  claims
on  the  basis  of  pedigree.  It  may  be  noted  that  it  is  sup-
posed that  in  each  case  the  chieftain  does  not  act  alone,  but
in  agreement  with  his  kinsmen,  and  even  his  kinswomen —
this  last  probably  because  cases  occurred  when  the  father
was  dead  or  a  stranger,  and  the  mother  had  to  testify  to
the  link  of  blood -relationship. In  disputed cases  which


32  THE  GROWTH  OF  THE  MANOR

ended  in  a  refusal,  the  chieftain  appears  with  six  kins-
men to  help  him ;  and  the  eventuahty  of  a  kindred
without  chief  is  distinctly  recognised.  In  this  last  case
the  kindred  is  represented  by  twenty-one  best  men  in
Gwynedd  ;  while  in  Powis  fifty  men  are  required  to  take
part  in  the  decree.^*  Apart  from  this  we  find  the  chief-
tain concerned  with  paying  rents  and  performing  duties  in
regard  to  the  king.  But  in  Ireland  and  in  the  Highlands
the  chieftain  of  the  sept  or  of  the  clan  appears  as  the
principal  authority  over  tribesmen.  They  are  ranged
under  him  in  all  concerns  of  life  ;  they  look  up  to  him  as  the
miHtary  commander,  the  judge  and  the  regulator  of  claims
as  to  land.  As  late  as  in  1724  an  acute  and  trustworthy
observer  of  Highland  customs  described  the  life  of  the  High-
landers as  bound  up  with  the  organisation  of  branches  of
kindred  of  some  fifty  or  sixty  men  standing  under  the
arbitrary  authority  of  chieftains,  who  acted  not  as  land-
lords, but  as  patriarchs.^"  Still,  it  would  be  hardly  right
to  represent  the  Highland  chieftain  as  an  absolute  ruler
and  the  rights  of  the  clan  as  vested  in  his  person.  Such
positions  are  not  governed,  of  course,  by  strict  constitutional
limitations  ;  but  custom  and  the  natural  authority  of  the
elders  and  heads  of  famihes  exerted  certainly  a  good  deal
of  influence,  and  kept  a  chieftain  within  bounds.  We  hear
occasionally  of  meetings  of  tribesmen  to  arrange  their
affairs  (Nabacs,  Mods)  in  Scotland,^^  and  from  Ireland  we
get  curious  information  as  to  customary  limitations  to  the
authority  of  the  chieftain  and  as  to  its  occasional  expan-
sion. The  chief  of  the  Mac  Guires,  for  instance,  is  said  to
be  restricted  to  a  comparatively  modest  position  in  time  of
peace  ;  he  owns  only  four  baihes  of  land  out  of  the  fif ty-one-
and-a-half,  which  belong  to  the  tribe,  and  cultivates  only
one  baihe  as  demesne  in  connection  with  his  castle  at
Inniskillen ;  besides  this  he  gets  a  tribute  of  240  beeves
from  seven  baihes.  In  time  of  war,  however,  his  rule
becomes  arbitrary ;  he  makes  himself  seK-owner  of  all,  and
burdens  the  country  with  whatever  dues  he  Hkes  in  order
to  carry  on  mihtary  operations."  The  passage  from  the
authority  of  a  chief  to  that  of  a  feudal  lord  is  very  simple  in


CELTIC TRIBAL ARRANGEMENTS  33

Scotland  :  it  was  unmistakably  the  result  of  influence  from
without,  of  pressure  brought  to  bear  by  the  governments
to  which  Scotland  was  subjected.  As  to  the  Higlilands
the  transformation  was  achieved  by  the  break-up  of  the
clans  after  the  rising  of  1745,  and  the  compulsion  of  the
inhabitants  of  the  Islands  and  Highlands  to  "  show  their
holdings,"  ^^  that  is,  to  exchange  their  tribal  occupation  for
modern  land-tenancy.  In  the  Lowlands  the  same  process
had  been  going  on  under  feudal  influences,  even  from  the
formation  of  the  thanages  under  the  first  dynasty  of
Scottish  kings  to  the  seventeenth  century.  But  apart
from  that  process  of  political  feudahsation  may  be  noticed
the  conclusion  of  contracts  of  manred,  by  which  men
became  tenants  under  weU-to-do  landowners,  paid  rents
and  gave  calp,  i.e.  one  of  their  best  beasts,  on  a  change
of  tenantship. ^^  In  Ireland  the  way  towards  analogous
results  was  paved  by  the  specialisation  of  Church  land  and
Royal  offices  on  the  one  hand,  and  the  process  of  com-
mendation through  cattle-ownership  and  land-tenancy  on  the
other.  The  Aires  rose  from  the  tribe  as  owners  and  lenders  of
cattle,  and  then  of  reclaimed  and  privately  appropriated
land.  Very  interesting  and  circumstantial  evidence  may  be
gathered  from  Welsh  documents.  The  argluyd,  the  lord,
is  not  only  often  mentioned  by  the  side  of  the  penkenedl
in  the  Welsh  codes,  but  he  is  sometimes  treated  as  his
superior.  The  chieftain  has  to  pay  rent  to  him,  and  if  he
grants  some  office  within  the  kindred,  a  fine  of  one  pound
is  to  be  given  to  the  lord.^°  The  lord  appears  on  other
occasions  as  the  president  of  a  court  composed  of  freeland-
owners,  of  gwrdas.''^  He  conducts  the  proceedings,  and
execution  is  done  in  his  name,  although  the  decision  comes
from  the  judges  and  the  free  assessors  of  the  court.  As  the
courts  of  which  these  paragraphs  treat  are  the  courts  of
the  cantrev  and  of  the  cymwd — the  hundred  and  the  half-
hundred — the  lord  must  be  considered  as  a  magnate  who
has  received  from  the  king  the  office  of  chief  of  a  cymwd
or  a  cantrev,  a  kind  of  thane,  Hke  those  of  whom  we  hear  in
Scotland  in  the  eleventh  and  thirteenth  centuries,  a
hereditary  official  holding  by  feudal  tenure  from  the  king.

D


34  THE  GROWTH  OF  THE  MANOR

but  deriving  his  popular  authority,  to  a  great  extent,  from
his  being  the  successor  of  the  traditional  tribal  princes  of
old.  Although  the  connection  of  Welsh  lords  with  tribal
chieftainship  remains  a  matter  of  inference,  it  seems  the
most  natural  explanation  of  their  position  at  the  head  of
the  great  divisions  of  the  country,  and  of  the  subjection
of  the  chiefs  of  kindred  to  them.

At  the  same  time  there  is  an  element  of  personal  patronage
in  the  influence  exercised  by  the  argluyds. A  free  Welsh-
man usually ioins  an  argluyd  at  the  age of
Comitatus ,.  j i,  .  ?ni. t  i,- 72 4.1.

14, and he gets an outfit from him, the

gift  of  some  da,  some  cattle  or  other  chattels,  after  the
taking  of  which  he  becomes  personally  pledged  to  fidelity
to  his  chief.  We  hear  even  that  land  is  usually  conferred
by  the  chief  on  a  follower  who  has  reached  the  age
of  21,'^^  though  this  looks  hke  a  later  development  of  the
original  maxim  about  the  gift  of  the  da.  As  the  relation
is  a  personal  one,  the  election  of  an  argluyd  seems  to
have  been  optional,  and  the  patron  in  such  a  case  would
not  be  necessarily  the  head  of  the  cymwd  where  the  youth
was  bom,  or  of  any  other ;  any  great  man  with  ample  means
may  have  done  ;  and  in  regard  to  means,  the  ownership  of
a  good  deal  of  land  in  private  or  official  property  must  have
been  one  of  the  conditions  enabhng  a  man  to  gather
followers.  At  any  rate,  we  get  a  glimpse  of  relations  which
stand  in  marked  contrast  to  the  ordinary  grouping  of  the
population  into  kindreds  and  gwelys.  We  have  again  an  ex-
ample of  competition  between  institutions  which,  if  developed
in  a  one-sided  manner,  would  have  excluded  each  other.
On  the  one  hand  stands  the  grouping  according  to  pedigree
and  the  association  of  free  tribesmen  in  the  gwely,  the
kindred,  the  sept,  and  clan  ;  on  the  other, — the  formation
of  voluntary  ties  of  patronage  and  command  around  men
of  exceptional  authority  and  wealth.  Lastly,  we  have  to
take  into  account  the  imposition  of  political  authority
from  above,  by  the  influence  of  kingship,  and  the  con-
sequent arrangement  of  local  subdivisions  for  the  pur-
pose of  administering  justice,  collecting  revenue,  and  organ-
ising the  host.


CELTIC TRIBAL ARRANGEMENTS  35

In  consequence  of  the  action  of  these  various  causes,  we
find  tribal  society  differentiated  into  classes.  The  Irish
laws  present  an  exceptionally  comphcated  series  of  grada-
tions, according  to  property  and  patronage/*
The  Welsh  system  is  much  simpler.  The
free  tribesmen  are  either  uchdwrs  (breyrs)  or  innate
honeddigs,^^  and  the  distinction  between  those  ranks  is
expressed  among  other  things  in  their  galanas  or  wergeld  :
where  an  uchelwr  is  paid  for  by  126  cows,  a  boneddig  is
only  worth  sixty -three  cows.  Sometimes  the  father  of  a
family  is  estimated  at  a  somewhat  higher  price  than  the
unmarried  boneddig,  namely,  at  eighty-four  cows.''^  The
dignity  of  an  uchelwr  became  hereditary  and  depended  on
high  birth,  patronage,  wealth,  or  an  office.  There  is  nothing
to  show,  however,  that  the  position  of  an  uchelwr  was
widely  different  from  that  of  common  tribesmen,  or  imphed
necessarily  a  lordship  over  them.  In  any  case  the  aristo-
cracy proceeds  from  an  internal  process  of  development
within  the  mass  of  free  tribesmen.  The  typical  freeman
is  still  the  boneddig,  and  in  the  extents  we  lose  sight  of  the
division ;  both  classes  are  merged  into  the  one  of  free
tenants.

If  we  now  consider  Celtic  society  from  the  point  of  view
of  its  relation  to  the  coming  manorial  system,  we  shall
notice,  without difficulty, that it contained
some  of  the  elements  which  went  towards  the
formation  of  the  manor,  but  that  these  elements  were  in  an
incomplete  and  disconnected  state,  and  overshadowed  by
the  influence  of  other  principles. Landownership  began  to
.  be  recognised  as  a  force,  but  there  was  as  yet  no  regular
\  organisation  of  the  estate  in  which  dependent  labour  would
i  be gathered round an economic centre ; many serfs
hved  by  the  side  of  free  proprietors  and  free  tenants  ;  but
i  they  formed  separate  communities,  and  were  not  arranged
I  to  bear  the  burden  of  work  for  the  benefit  of  the  free  people.
'  Both  serfs  and  free  were  subjected  to  food  tribute,  and
providing  maintenance  for  the  chiefs  and  kings  ;  but  other-
wise their  position  was  that  of  independent  householders.
There were  many  aristocratic  ranks and degrees  in  the


36  THE GROWTH OF THE MANOR

folk,  but  the  passage  from  one  to  the  other  was  easy,  and
the  differences  of  pedigree,  wealth  and  influence  which  led
to  their  formation  were  constantly  shifting,  so  that  there
could  be  no  question  of  a  settled  system  of  hierarchical  privi-
lege and  patronage.  The  segregation  of  pohtical  power,  as
distinct  from  tribal  authority,  had  begun,  and  had  produced
some  attempts  to  arrange  society  into  rough,  symmetrical
compartments  ;  but  for  the  chief  purposes  of  defence  and
of  economic  organisation  the  tribal  grouping  still  remained
the  principal  scheme  of  society.  The  ideas  underljing
tribal  order,  affinity  in  blood  and  association  through  origin
from  one  and  the  same  household,  contributed  powerfully
towards  keeping  up  a  spirit  of  co-operation  and  safe-
guarding the  interests  of  every  bom  tribesman  as  member
of  a  kindred.  I  should  like  to  say,  in  conclusion,  that  the
value  of  these  Celtic  facts  does  not  only  consist  in  their
possible  connexion  with  traits  of  the  manorial  system.
They  are  important  also,  because  they  help  us  to  under-
stand the  conditions  of  tribal  society  in  its  simpler  forms.
The  observations  made  in  regard  to  them  will  have  to  be
taken  into  account  when  we  come  to  treat  of  the  more
complex  and  contradictory  arrangements  of  Old  EngUsh
Society.


CHAPTER  II.

ROMAN  INFLUENCE

I.  Romans  and  Celts  in  Britain

In  the  case  of  Britain,  as  well  as  in  that  of  Gaul  and  Ger-
many, the  process  of  spontaneous  social  evolution  was  in-
.  terrupted  and  modified  by  the  intrusion  of  a

powerful  foreign  element — Roman  civilisation.
How  far  did  it  extend,  and  what  features  of  the  life  of  Rome
were  transplanted  to  British  soil  ?  It  is  easier  to  answer  the
second  of  these  questions  than  the  first,  but  it  is  necessary
to  form  an  opinion  as  to  both.

It  seems  pretty  clear  that  the  conquest  of  Britain  by  the
Romans  did  not  produce  the  same  thorough  Romanisation
of  the  people  as  was  achieved  by  the  conquest  of  Gaul  or
Spain.  England  has  not  grown  to  be  a  Romance  country
with  a  people  speaking  a  language  directly  proceeding
from  Latin,  and  whatever  our  subsequent  opinion  as  to  the
efifect  of  the  German  settlement  may  be,  we  must  in  the  first
instance  look  for  an  explanation  of  the  fact  in  the
comparatively  shght  impression  produced  by  Roman
dominion  on  the  Celtic  population  of  the  British  Isles.
There  are  many  signs  to  show  that  the  absorption  of
Celtic  nationality  by  Roman  culture  was  by  no  means  con
plete,  and  had  not  even  been  carried  very  far,  when  thf
Saxons  broke  in,  and  Roman  rule  collapsed.  Even  the
general  aspect  of  Roman  remains  in  Britain  is  different
from  that  which  they  present  in  other  provinces  of  the  West.
As  one  of  the  authorities  on  the  subject  has  expressed
it — most  of  the  objects  and  inscriptions  found  in  Britain
bear  a  mihtary  stamp  on  them  :  they  refer  either  to  the
mihtary  occupation  of  the  island,  or  to  the  material  and


38  THE  GROWTH  OF  THE  MANOR

religious  life  of  the  people  connected  with  this  military
occupation.^  The  traces  of  the  road  system  point,  of  course,
to  work  which  facilitated  intercourse  and  commercial
development,  but  they  are  primarily  explained  by  strategic
and  administrative  requirements.  Although  some  thirty-
Ijf  three  town  settlements  of  various  forms  and  degrees  are
noticed  in  Roman  times,  the  vestiges  of  municipal  life  which
form  such  a  conspicuous  element  in  other  provinces  are  insig-
nificant— in  fact  not  a  single  municipal  inscription  of  any
importance  has  come  down  to  us  from  Britain.  There  are
many  remnants  of  Roman  houses  and  villas,  and  they
point  incontestably  to  the  existence  of  a  numerous  well-to-
do  class  used  to  the  ways  and  comforts  of  Roman  life,
and  thus  the  account  given  by  Tacitus  of  the  captivating
influence  of  Roman  blandishments  on  the  natives,  gets
substantiated  by  remains  of  objects  which  have  been  in
actual  use.  But  such  remains  do  not  necessarily  indicate
an  influence  stretching  wide  and  deep  through  the  country  :
in  fact,  they  are  grouped  across  it,  as  it  were,  in  patches.

The  South  Coast  on  one  side  and  the  Wall  of  Hadrian  on
the  other  present,  of  course,  the  most  remarkable  traces
of  connected  occupation,  and  behind  those
outer  lines  some  districts  appear  to  have
been  rather  thickly  studded  by  Roman  settlements.
Gloucestershire  and  Lincolnshire  may  be  pointed  out  as
instances,  and  it  is  not  unlikely  that  their  considerable
Romanisation  may  be  accounted  for  by  their  forming,  as  it
were,  feeding  centres  which  supported  the  military  concen-
trations in  the  West  and  in  the  North.  But  by  the  side  of
such  districts  appears  the  Midland  region,  in  which  Roman
remains  are  very  slightly  represented,  and  in  the  very  centre
of  thickly  populated  and  strongly  Romanised  Kent  and
Sussex  there  stretched  a  vast  forest  tract,  the  Weald,  which
remained  a  wilderness  right  into  the  middle  ages.^

Without  venturing  into  details  as  to  explorations  of  villas
I  may  just  point  out  that  they  testify  to  curious  contrasts
between  an  exotic  culture  of  a  very  high  order  and  a  ver-
nacular culture  of  a  very  primitive  kind. Let  us  take  the


ROMAN mFLUENCE  39

remains  of  the  villa  in  Brading,  Isle  of  Wight,  as  an  instance.
The  mosaic  pavements  are  remarkable  :  they  remind  one  of
Pompeii.  But  the  Orpheus  in  the  hall  looks  at  us  with
Southern  eyes,  and  the  very  choice  of  the  subject  for  this
picture,  though  not  uncommon,  has  an  emblematic  signifi-
cance which  hardly  testifies  to  a  thorough  blending  of  Roman
and  native  elements.  Orpheus  has  indeed  succeeded  in
charming  the  animals  around  him  by  the  civilised  strains
of  his  lyre,  but  the  monkey,  the  peacock  and  the  coot,
though  tamed,  are  animals  after  all.  And  as  for  the  elabor-
ate provisions  for  heating  the  rooms  by  hypocausts,  they  are
too  much  in  advance  even  of  modern  civilisation  to  be  attri-
buted to  anything  but  a  dehcate  exotic  varnish.

At  the  other  end  of  the  ladder  stand  the  remnants  of
village  dwellings  of  Roman  Britain,  as  illustrated  by  the
finds  of  General  Pitt-Rivers  in  Cranbourne  Chase  on  the '
border  of  Wiltshire  and  Dorsetshire.  The  remnants  of  Roman
pottery,  ornaments  and  coins  speak  of  Roman  influence,
though  the  excavated  villages  are  of  the  same  type  as  that
of  Standlake  in  Oxfordshire,  where  only  stone  implements
were  found.  Again  we  come  across  rude  heatmg  apparatus
constructed  of  stones,  but  some  of  those  seem  to  have  been
used  for  boiling  meat  by  the  rude  expedient  of  throwing
red-hot  stones  into  the  cauldron.  And  the  village  itseK  was
built  in  a  most  primitive  fashion,  the  dwellings  being  con-
nected with  pits  used  as  storage-rooms,  refuse  sinks  and
burial  places,  in  a  very  strange  promiscuity  of  needs  of  the
living  and  of  the  dead.  The  corpses  are  often  found  crouch-
ing in  positions  which  were  never  adopted  in  Roman  burials,
and  correspond  to  the  habits  of  inliumation  of  primitive
tribes.  Altogether  Roman  civilisation  does  not  seem  to  \
have  altered  much  in  the  modes  of  life  of  the  lower  classes,  ')
as  illustrated  by  these  pit  villages.^

There  is  also  other evidence of the  fact that Celtic

elements  were  still  quite alive, and  capable of emerging

from  their  subordinate  position  at  any  given
Celtic  Revival

opportunity. There can be no dispute as

to  the  permanence of  Celtic  language  and  culture  in  the

North  and  in  the  West  of  the  island. Not  to  speak  of  the


40  THE  GROWTH  OF  THE  MANOR

country  beyond  Hadrian's  wall,  which  was  given  up  to  the
Caledonian  tribes  after  Septimius  Severus,  the  shires  which
formed  the  southern  part  of  Strathclyde  (Cumberland,
Westmorland,  Lancashire) ,  the  whole  of  Wales,  Devon,  and
Cornwall  are  vindicated  for  Celtic  nationahty  by  their
well  known  later  history,  and  notwithstanding  the
garrisons  in  Chester  and  Caerleon,  and  the  Roman  roads
cutting  through  the  mountains  and  reaching  the  coast,  the
removal  of  Roman  official  rule  disclosed  in  those  parts  a
population  still  hving  according  to  old  Celtic  habits,  and
still  possessed  of  peculiar  economic  and  political  institutions.*
It  would  not  do  to  ascribe  the  tribal  customs  of  Wales
and  the  clear  traces  of  Celtic  life  to  the  mere  influence  of
a  late  revival,  as  the  very  width  of  the  Celtic  zone  and
the  traditional  peculiarity  of  Celtic  customs  point  to  their
continuous  and  firmly  rooted  existence.  The  Celtic  trevs
and  kindreds  are  not  likely  to  have  been  constructed
anew  by  emigrants  from  a  few  outlying  districts  on  soil
where  they  had  been  previously  eradicated.  This  is  a
fact  of  primary  importance,  because  it  shows  that  the
Romans  did  not  attempt  to  uproot  these  customs  and
institutions  in  the  western  part  of  Britain,  but  had
to  be  satisfied  with  very  superficial  allegiance.  And  even
in  the  rest  of  the  country  the  great  mass  of  the  population
must  have  remained  true  to  Celtic  speech  and  therefore
to  Celtic  traditions,  notwithstanding  the  influx  of  Latin
and  Romanising  influences.  Only  on  this  assumption
can  we  account  for  some  well-established  facts.  There  is
firstly,  the  marked  reappearance  of  the  Celtic  element  in
the  protracted  struggle  with  the  Northern  and  Eastern  inva-
ders during  the  fifth  and  sixth  centuries  :  let  me  just  remind
my  readers  that  the  Saxons  and  Angles  are  described  as
fighting  and  conquering  British  Celts  :  the  admixture  of
Roman  provincialism  at  this  time  is  not  entirely  absent,  but
disappears  with  significant  rapidity.  The  second  and  even
more  characteristic  fact  is  that  during  these  same  fifth  and
sixth  centuries,  in  the  general  turmoil  of  migration  and  in-
vasion, the  population  of  Great  Britain  plays  not  only  a
passive  but also an  active part, and not only  defends


ROMAN  INFLUENCE  41

itself  against  Saxons,  Angles  and  Picts,  but  also  comes
forward  in  a  powerful  offensive  movement  against  the
French  shore,  occupying  Brittany  and  a  good  deal  of  the
adjoining  country  along  the  Loire.  The  point  is  that  this
wave  of  immigrants  rushing  from  Great  Britain  to  the
Armorican  shore  is  strongly  Celtic,  and  to  that  extent  alien
to  Roman  sentiment  and  institutions  that  it  actually  de-
stroys them  in  the  GaUo-roman  districts  it  appropriates.
Latin  is  stamped  out  and  replaced  by  the  dialects  of  the
Dumnonii,  Cornubii,  and  other  Britons  which  came  over
in  those  troubled  times  ^  ;  and  the  influx  of  these  Celtic
elements  is  so  powerful  that  it  has  held  its  own  against
the  general  course  of  French  history  even  to  the  present
day,  maintaining  the  well-known  peculiarities  of  Breton
speech  and  custom  in  the  so-called  Bretagne  hretonnante.^
The  people  who  brought  about  this  result  certainly  did
not  speak  Latin  or  submit  to  Romanisation  in  the  country
from  which  they  came,  if  they  acted  in  this  manner  in  their
new  home.  It  is  impossible  for  us  nowadays  to  realise  with
anything  like  precision  the  shades  and  variations  which
led  from  the  considerable  Romanisation  of  parts  Hke  Kent
or  Hertfordshire  to  the  mihtant  Celticism  of  the  West.
But  one  thing  seems  clear  :  there  is  not  the  slightest  pro-
babihty  that  the  marked  assertion  of  Celtic  speech  and
nationality  both  at  home  and  abroad  in  the  course  of
the  fifth  and  sixth  centuries  proceeded  entirely  and  ex-
clusively from  those  parts  of  Wales  or  Devon  and  Corn-
wall which  had  been  left  more  or  less  untouched  by  Roman
occupation,  although  the  poHtical  and  intellectual  leaders
in  the  struggle  against  the  Saxons  and  in  the  movement
of  emigration  which  brittanised  Armorica  seem  to  have
come  chiefly  from  these  parts.^  At  a  time  when  Celtic
traditions  came  to  the  fore  and  the  most  thoroughly  Celtic
regions  became  the  strongholds  and  centres  of  action  against
an  invasion  from  the  East,  Wales  and  "West-Wales"
obtained  naturally  a  leading  position,  and  supplied  chiefs
and  organisation  to  the  moveme-it  of  Celtic  revival  at  home
and  abroad.  But  the  strength  of  that  revival  lays  claim
to a  broader  basis, and implies  a  more superficial hold


42  THE  GROWTH  OF  THE  MANOR

of  the  Romans  on  the  whole  province  than  has  been  sup-
posed by  those  who  have  argued  from  the  traces  of  Roman
architecture  and  coinage  to  a  more  or  less  complete  trans-
formation of  the  vernacular  elements.

It  may  be  supposed  that  the  emigrants  to  Armorica,
though  led  on  most  occasions  by  Welshmen  and  Dum-
nonians,  consisted  to  a  great  extent,  if  not  mainly,  of  people
who  had  been  driven  from  their  homes  in  central  and
eastern  Britain  by  the  Saxon  and  Pictish  invaders  and,
after  collecting  in  a  shattered  condition  in  the  West,  be-
came organised  there,  and  carried  Bryttonic  speech  and
manners  over  the  Channel  into  Brittany.  By  the  side  of
the  Cambrians  and  Dumnonians  the  Cornovii  appear  as  a
tribe  which  took  a  great  part  in  organising  the  advance,
and  this  brings  us  already  on  soil  occupied  now  by  purely
English  counties,  as  the  territory  of  these  Cornovii  seems
to  have  covered  the  region  stretching  from  Chester  and
Hereford  in  the  west  to  Warwick  in  the  east.^  Some  bands
may  even  have  had  leaders  from  the  district  adjoining  the
Roman  waU.^

From  our  special  point  of  view  it  seems  pretty  clear  that,
as  the  great  wave  of  Celtic  immigration  which  turned
Survey  of  *^^  Armorican  peninsula  from  its  Romanised

Roman  state  to definitely  Bryttonic  condition  came

Occupation  ^^.^^  q^.^^^  Britain,  it  testifies  to  the  pre-
valence of  Celtic  speech  and  customs  in  the  Great  Britain
of  the  fifth  and  sixth  centuries.^"  In  short,  only  by
^admitting  a  strong  under-current  of  Celtic  life  may  we
■  account  for  the  powerful  Celtic  revival  of  the  fifth  and
sixth  centuries.  One  has  to  keep  this  weU  in  mind
from  the  very  beginning  while  drawing  up  an  estimate  of
Roman  influence  on  Britain.  That  Roman  influence  must
have  been  considerable  in  any  case  is  not  a  point  which
need  be  disputed.  But  in  order  to  speak  of  it  rightly  we
must  remember  that  the  Romanisation  of  outlying  pro-
vinces is  at  the  same  time  the  barbarisation  of  Rome.  In
consequence  of  the  swallowing  up  of  so  many  nations  in  a
primitive  state  of  culture  the  Empire  had  necessarily  to  lower
in  every  respect  its  standard  of  culture,  and  it  is  not  only


ROMAN INFLUENCE  43

on  account  of  defeats,  of  an  intolerable  strain  on  the  re-
sources of  society,  and  of  the  enervating  influence  of  poUtical
despotism  that  the  achievements  of  Imperial  civihsation  in
politics,  science,  arts,  economics,  in  the  very  use  of  language,
appear  in  such  a  miserable  form  in  the  third,  fourth  and  fifth
centuries  as  compared  with  its  work  in  the  first  and  third :
we  have  to  deal  in  this  lower  period  with  a  barbarous
Rome,  with  a  degenerating  coinage,  as  it  were,  in  which  the  alloy
of  baser  metals  is  more  and  more  driving  out  the  gold  it  pre-
tends to  be  in  name."  I  shall  try  in  the  following  pages  to
make  this  clear  ;  but  one  warning  as  to  the  treatment  of
this  subject  must  be  given  beforehand.  We  have  not  the
means  to  draw  a  complete  picture  of  Roman  social
institutions  as  they  existed  in  the  special  case  of  Great
Britain.  Archaeological  study  enables  us  to  form  an
opinion  as  to  the  character  of  material  civilisation  and
as  to  its  spread  over  the  country.  But  it  does  not  tell
us  what  institutions,  political  and  social,  were  brought
by  the  Romans  and  what  compromises  were  effected
between  these  imported  forms  and  vernacular  traditions.
Even  if  we  knew  all  about  the  topography  of  Roman
villas  and  all  the  details  of  their  construction  and  decora-
tion, we  should  still  be  in  the  dark  in  regard  to  the  legal
and  economic  organisations  to  which  they  belonged.""
In  fact  any  attempt  to  describe  these  with  anything  like
precision  must  consist  mainly  in  inferences  from  facts
ascertained  in  regard  to  other  provinces  and  to  the  Empire
in  general.  Such  a  method  has  certainly  to  leave  a
margin  for  doubts  as  to  how  far  such  observations  fit
the  particular  case.  Still,  no  one  will  dispute  that  a  care-
ful survey  of  the  conditions  which  prevailed  in  the  more
backward  parts  of  the  Empire,  and  especially  of  the
processes  of  Romanisation  of  Gaulish  tribes  affords  the
nearest  approach  to  direct  information  about  Roman  Britain.
Even  from  the  cursory  descriptions  of  historians  and
hterary  men,  we  may  gather  that  the  country  had  made '
Material  great  progress in  point of material culture

Progress  from  the  time  of Caesar  to  the  time of Con-

stantine. Instead  of  being  the  dwelling-place  of  pastoral


44  THE  GROWTH  OF  THE  MANOR

and  hunting  tribes,  vsdth  a  small  fringe  of  agricultural
occupation  on  the  south-eastern  border,  it  is  extolled  as
an  area  of  prosperous  farming,  and  it  certainly  played  a
part  in  keeping  the  troops  on  the  German  frontier  supplied
with  com.-^^  The  Bryttonic  language,  which  has  to  be
taken  as  the  strongest  proof  of  independent  Celtic  vitality,
presents  a  vast  number  of  words  which  testify  to  the  in-
fluence of  Rome  in  domestic  economy  and  cultivation.
Such  words  as  solium  (Welsh  sail,  Eng.  threshold),  paries
parwed,  wall) ,  cultellus  (cullell,  knife) ,  caseus  ( caws,  cheese) ,
culter  (cwlltr,  ploughshare),  catena  (cadwyn,  chain),
soccus  (swcch),  stipula  (sofl,  stubble),  furca  (fforch,
fork),  scala  (yscol,  ladder),  fustis  (ffust,  flail),  funis  (ffun,
rope),  stabellum  (ystafell,  stable),  cella  (cell),  major
(maer,  steward),  grex  (gre,  stud),  admissus  (emys,
stallion),  catta  (cath,  cat),  porcellus  (suckling  pig,
porchell),  soldus  (swllt,  shilling),  pagus  (pau,  a  district),
and  many  others  of  the  same  kind,  not  to  speak  of  mili-
tary and  scientific  terms,  show  conclusively  that  Roman
expressions  permeated  to  no  inconsiderable  extent  the
Celtic  every-day  speech  even  of  the  most  backward
portions  of  the  population.^ ^  It  has  to  be  added  at
once,  however,  that  by  themselves  these  facts  do  not
prove  a  complete  transformation  of  the  manners  or
institutions  of  the  people  :  the  like  and  perhaps  more
may  be  shown  in  regard  to  the  German  tribes,^*  which  cer-
tainly did  not  lose  their  individuahty,  notwithstanding  such
borrowings.  In  regard  to  the  use  of  the  most  important
agricultural  implement,  the  plough,  an  implement  which
has  played  the  part  not  only  of  a  technical,  but  one  may
say  of  a  social  agent  in  history,  it  was  of  the  same  kind  in
Britain  and  in  Germany — the  big  plough  with  large  iron
ploughshare  mostly  drawn  by  four  oxen  and  more.^^  This
was  certainly  not  the  ItaUan  two-oxen  plough,  but  a  con-
trivance particularly  adapted  to  the  soil  and  the  methods  of
work  north  of  the  Alps  :  in  northern  parts,  cultivation  had
to  reckon  with  heavy  soil,  a  plentiful  supply  of  cattle,  and
a  lack  of  untiring  individual  energy  in  the  labouring  men.
Whether  the  big  plough  was  Celtic  or  even  pre -Celtic in


ROMAN INFLUENCE  45

its  origin  we  cannot  tell;  it  was  certainly  not  specifically  Teu-
tonic, and  it  is  very  probable  that  intelligent  Roman  agricul-
turists did  a  good  deal  to  propagate  its  use  in  the  barbarous
parts  of  Britain,  Germany  and  northern  Gaul.*^  Neither
can  it  be  doubted  that  the  handicrafts  of  masons,  wall-
paiuters,  mosaic -workers,  and  other  artisans  as  represented
by  the  manifold  remnants  of  town  houses  and  villas,  mostly
owed  their  rise  and  development  to  the  immigration  and  the
teaching  of  Romanised  workmen  from  Gaul,  Italy,  and,
perhaps,  other  parts  of  the  Empire.

Taking  our  stand  on  these  characteristic  traits  of  material
conditions,  we  may  assume  safely  that  the  Britain  of  the
Roman  Policy  ^ODa^^ns  was  by  no  means  a  homogeneous
In  regard  to  con- and  thoroughly  centrahsed  body.  On  the
quered  Nations  contrary,  we  may  be  prepared  to  find  on  its
soil  all  the  varieties  of  social  arrangements  of  the  time,  from
the  most  rudimentary  tribal  customs  to  the  most  complete
specimens  of  urban  and  rural  Romanism.  Everything  we
know  of  the  general  policy  of  Rome  on  conquered  soil
points  in  the  same  direction.  The  Romans,  as  we  are
taught  by  our  authorities,  never  attempted  to  introduce
their  own  ideas  and  institutions  by  means  of  a  direct  and
sudden  centralisation.  On  the  contrary,  after  providing
for  undisputed  sway  and  financial  exploitation,  they  were
content  with  throwing  the  seeds  of  town  life  and  rural  life
into  the  new  soil,  leaving  those  seeds  to  bear  fruit  under
the  propitious  influence  of  the  advantages  connected
with  high  civilisation  and  the  prestige  of  the  conquerors  of
the  world.  Romanisation  became  in  this  manner  more  an  or-
ganic process  than  a  mechanical  contrivance  for  administra-
tive purposes.  In  private  law  the  customs  of  the  vanquished
were  tolerated  as  long  as  they  did  not  stand  in  the  way  of
some  recognised  doctrine  of  the  predominant  law  and  did
not  claim  more  than  a  local  acceptance.^ ^  And  as  to
social  order,  the  typical  Roman  arrangement  of  the  city,
with  its  resident  burgesses  administering  the  country
around  them,  was  not  and  could  not  be  transplanted  into
barbarous  countries  by  a  stroke  of  the  pen  ; it  had  to  grow


46  THE  GROWTH  OF  THE  MANOR

as  gradually  as  circumstances  permitted,  and  to  put  up  with
much  obstruction  and  conflicting  tendencies  in  proportion
to  the  strength  and  vitality  of  native  arrangements.  It  is
the  more  characteristic  of  the  strength  of  this  local  opposi-
tion that  the  goal  towards  which  Imperial  policy  tended
presented  undoubtedly  a  position  of  conspicuous  privilege —
the  rights  of  Roman  citizenship  were  bestowed  on  those
who  were  ripe  for  municipal  organisation.  But  still  even
at  the  time  of  Caracalla,  who  proclaimed  the  principle  that
every  municipal  citizen  in  the  Empire  was  to  be  considered
a  citizen  of  Rome,  numbers  of  Roman  subjects  remained
outside  the  pale  of  the  measure  because  they  had  not  reached
the  stage  of  municipal  organisation,  but  stuck  to  tribal  and
cantonal  arrangements  in  their  modes  of  life.^®  We  know
for  instance,  that  the  Romans  never  succeeded  in  breaking
up  the  native  clans  of  the  Berber  and  Moorish  tribes  in
Mauritania  and  Numidia  :  five  hundred  and  sixteen  clans
are  mentioned,  ruled  by  their  chiefs.^^  Even  in  the  time
of  Augustine  there  were  people  in  Africa  who  continued
to  speak  dialects  of  Phoenician.  In  Spain,  Macedonia,
and  Pannonia  are  also  to  be  found  survivals  of  tribal
organisations.^"  But  the  most  interesting  case  for  our
purpose  is  that  of  the  continental  Celts,  as  their  original
institutions  had  been  the  same  as  those  of  the  island  Celts
and  the  processes  of  Romanisation  applied  to  them  were
evidently  of  the  same  kind  as  those  which  were  brought  to
bear  on  the  Britons.  It  must  be  added  that,  as  the  influx
of  southern  population,  material  culture  and  ideas  was  much
more  prolonged  and  stronger  on  the  Continent  than  on  the
island,  it  is  not  so  much  in  the  latter  as  in  the  earUer  stages
of  the  development  of  Gaul  that  we  have  to  look  for  illum-
inating analogies  to  the  history  of  Britain.

Now  it  is  an  acknowledged  fact  that  the  social  constitu-
tion of  the  Celts,  their  territorial  divisions,  the  grouping  of
Peculiarities  of  *^^^  population,  the  character  of  their  organ-
the  Celtic  ising centres, were for  a  long time vastly

Districts  different  from  the  Roman  local  arrangements  of

the  same  period.  Instead  of  the  preponderating  part  played
by  city  life  with  its  bodily  concentration  of  landowners  in


ROMAN INFLUENCE  47

the  towns,  its  subordination  of  rural  districts  to  the  town
authorities,  its  complete  dependence  of  rural  population
upon  the  wiU  and  the  interest  of  lu-ban  masters,  we  find
people  scattered  in  hamlets  over  the  whole  territory  of  the
district,  coming  to  town  only  to  transact  exceptional
affairs,  to  seek  defence  and  justice,  to  buy  and  sell,  to  trans-
act some  business  with  the  few  merchants  and  craftsmen
of  the  town,  or  to  meet  other  inhabitants  of  the  district  for
the  settlement  of  some  common  affair,  etc.  ;  in  connection
with  this,  we  see  institutions  for  organising  the  district  as
a  whole,  and  its  component  parts  as  villages  or  clusters  of
hamlets. ^^  And  the  Celtic  land  system  was  not  only  opposed
to  the  Roman  city,  but  held  its  own  stubbornly  after  the  -
conquest.  It  may  be  easily  understood  how  difficult  it
was  to  bring  the  people  not  merely  to  recognise  the  pohtical
sway  and  the  superiority  of  culture  of  the  conquerors,  but  ,
to  alter  their  habits  as  to  places  of  residence,  interests,  and  )
occupations,  and  their  habitual  relations  between  neighbours.  '
As  a  matter  of  fact,  the  Romans  never  attempted  to  turn
everything  upside  down  at  once,  and  actually  recognised  the
land  districts  of  the  Celts  and  the  peculiarities  of  their  group-
ing on  the  land,  merely  introducing  the  city  as  the  head  and
centre  of  the  land  district.^^  They  trusted  that  the  cities
would  gradually  attract  the  better  people,  and  in  this  way
would  come  to  dominate  over  the  lesser  people  left  in  the
villages,  and  they  were  not  mistaken  on  the  whole,  but  two
significant  facts  have  to  be  noted,  nevertheless,  in  connection
with  this  process  of  Romanising  municipalisation.  During
the  first  periods  of  Roman  sway,  it  went  on  most  energeti-
cally although  it  had  to  meet  vernacular  formations  of  very
definite  shape  and  tenacious  strength,  but  it  not  only
slackened  in  the  latter  period,  especially  in  the  third  and
fourth  centuries,  but  even  gave  way  to  a  movement  of
recoil  created  by  the  growing  importance  of  rural  life  and
its  striving  towards  independent  organisation.  When  the
time  of  the  undisturbed  Roman  peace  was  over,  the  powerful
intercourse  of  trade,  with  its  concomitants  in  the  applica-
tion of  capital,  the  considerable  division  of  labour,  and  the
varied  forms  of  husbandry  based  on  money  exchanges,  was


48  THE  GROWTH  OP  THE  MANOR

rendered  insecure,  and  the  rural  elements  came  forward  in
every  respect  as  more  adapted  to  primitive  forms  of  natural
husbandry .^^  On  the  other  hand,  there  can  be  no  doubt
that  even  when  the  city  system  was  introduced,  it  had  to  be
compromised  with  many  survivals  of  former  institutions,  and
that  the  further  we  proceed  from  south  to  north,  the  more
marked  and  considerable  these  survivals  become.  Originally
the  rise  of  the  central  city  was  both  artificial  and  super-
ficial ;  the  older  units  of  population  continued  to  exist,  and
it  could  be  said,  for  instance,  that  a  district  included  two
chief  towns  and  nineteen  other  townships  of  a  lower  kind,
or  that  it  was  treated  as  an  adjimct  of  an  important  munici-
pahty  although  it  possessed  twenty -four  towns  of  its  own.^*
When  natural  features  of  the  country  helped  to  keep  up
those  peculiarities,  as  in  the  Alps,  the  national  type  be-
came particularly  accentuated.^^

Sometimes  we  get  a  ghmpse  of  the  agnatic  organisations,
of  the  clans  which  were  historically  at  the  root  of  this  group-
ing into  districts  :  clans,  (gentilitates)  are,  for  instance,  men-
tioned on  Spanish  soil.^^  But,  as  a  rule,  the  characteristic
territorial  divisions  of  the  Celts  are  termed  pagi  as  the  land
districts  into  which  the  civitates  were  divided.  By  pagus  was
meant  both  a  territory  forming  a  certain  whole  for  geogra-
phical or  historical  reasons,  and  the  association  of  the
land-people  settled  in  it.^^  The  members  of  the  pagus,
the  pagani,  the  BrifMo^i  in  Greek  provinces,  form  the  coun-
terpart to  the  plebeii  in  the  towns  ;  their  association  was
not  only  recognised  for  the  sacral  purpose  of  upholding  the
ancient  rites  of  local  deities :  it  was  also  a  social  one"^  :
they  owned  property,  erected  and  kept  in  repair  buildings,
elected  common  magistrates  {magistri  pagi,  cediles),  and  had
to  manage  such  interests  as  must  arise  between  country
neighbours — questions  about  the  maintenance  of  vicinal
roads,  rights  of  way,  common  rights  in  regard  to  undivided
and  waste  lands,  the  settlement  and  preservation  of
boundaries. ^^  There  can  be  no  doubt  that  this  organisa-
tion of  the  land-folk,  which  showed  such  a  vitaUty  in
Gaul  and  even  Italy,  must  have  played  a  large  part  ia  the


ROMAN INFLUENCE  49

history  of  Britain.  To  judge  from  Wales  and  West  Wales,
its  features  must  have  held  on  long  in  backward  regions,
whereas  in  more  advanced  parts  of  the  country  the
organisation  of  the  'pagi  had  to  adapt  itself  to  Hues  more
resembling  those  of  Roman  municipaUties  with  meetings
of  members  and  elective  magistrates.

The  provinces  of  the  Empire,  which  through  the
pecuharities  of  their  rural  organisation  had  succeeded  in
preserving  their  native  districts  in  opposition
to  the  prevailing  municipal  system,  naturally
show  a  further  grouping  of  population  in  lower  and  more
intimate  stages  of  life,  I  mean  the  grouping  into  villages
{vici).  Even  apart  from  the  actual  distribution  of  dwellings
in  large  accumulations,  small  clusters  or  single  farms —
there  was  a  call  for  a  village  organisation  of  some  kind  in
all  cases  when  the  owners  of  the  land  were  spread  about
the  country  and  not  concentrated  in  the  cities.  The  pagus,
in  fact,  could  not  do  without  the  viciis  to  support  it  for  the
settlement  of  all  immediate  neighbourly  concerns.  If  the
peasantry  and  the  owners  were  actually  congregated  in
rural  centres,  such  an  organisation  must  necessarily  have
assumed  the  form  of  village  meetings  and  of  village  elder-
ship of  some  kind.  But  even  if  the  dwellers  in  the  open
country  did  not  live  close  by  each  other,  they  had  stUl
many  interests  in  common  and  were  drawn  together  for
civil  purposes  into  a  kind  of  civU  parish,  as  they  certainly
■were  around  common  temples  or  churches  in  rural
colleges  or  parishes.  The  process  of  social  organisation
we  are  mapping  out  is  not  a  product  of  guesswork  or  imagina-
tion :  from  all  sides  of  the  Empire  comes  evidence  as  to  the
existence  and  activity  of  organised  villages  (vici).  They
are  the  more  significant  as  from  the  legal  point  of  view  the
"  vicus,^*  as  a  rural  community,  with  an  independent  organi-
sation, forming  the  medium  between  the  individual  and  the
city,  did  not  exist  for  the  Romans.  A  village  was  considered
by  the  Romans  on  their  own  soil  merely  as  a  matter-of-fact
agglomeration  of  buildings  which  had  to  look  for  organisa-
tion to  the  city  on  whose  territory  it  was  situated.  To  say
that  anybody  was  born  in  a  village  was  the  same  as  to  say


50  THE  GROWTH  OF  THE  MANOR

that  he  was  born  a  citizen  of  the  city  to  which  the  village
formed  an  adjunct.^^  But  in  conquering  the  world,  the
Romans  came  across  people  who  had  other  conceptions
and  other  institutions,  and  they  accepted  these  heterogeneous
elements  more  or  less  in  the  same  spirit  as  they  accepted
foreign  deities,  joining  them  on,  in  a  sort  of  compromise,  to
their  own  municipal  institutions.  Festus  speaks  distinctly
of  villages  which  form  commonwealths  and  unities  of
jurisdiction,  and  of  others  which,  though  not  so  city-like,
have  still  to  be  considered  as  economic  bodies,  and,  e.g.,
hold  their  own  fairs  and  enjoy  a  special  administrative
organisation.^"  Indeed,  we  come  across  village  magis-
trates, and  find  that  the  villages  hold  property,  bear  ex-
penses, and,  consequently  levy  rates. ^^  From  the  point
of  view  of  strict  Roman  law,  these  independent  organi-
sations had  to  claim  their  powers  as  corporations,  colleges
of  private  law  invested  with  sacral  attributions  and
rehgious  sanctioh.^^  But  it  would  hardly  be  safe  to  trust
too  much  or  too  long  to  such  a  construction.  Certainly
the  point  of  view  of  the  analogy  with  the  commonwealth  of
a  city  and  of  the  participation  in  its  powers,  taken  up  by
Festus,  does  not  favour  such  a  narrow  interpretation.  As
is  often  the  case  in  the  domain  of  local  institutions,  it  is
impossible  to  carry  out  to  their  ultimate  consequences
rigid  attempts  to  restrict  the  local  units  to  mere  subordina-
tion to  higher  powers,  and  to  bereave  them  of  all  poUtical
significance.  In  those  provinces  where  the  vicus  was  a
historical  pre-Roman  growth,  and  sprang  naturally  from
the  rural  basis  of  social  life,  it  had  to  be  accepted  as
a  small  self-governing  unit  and  fitted  into  the  system
of  local  institutions  either  in  connection  with  the  pagus,
or  as  an  adjunct  to  the  city,  or  under  cover  of  the
extra -municipal  organisation  of  a  lordship,  a  private
saltus.  These  observations  are  not  affected  by  the  fact
that,  as  in  the  case  of  other  seK -governing  units,  the
Emperors  sometimes  subjected  the  villages  to  the  tute-
lage of  nominated  managers  :  that  occurred  in  the  same
way  in  municipahties,  but  even  these  cases  did  not  result
in  the  complete  destruction  of  all  self-government  in  the


ROMAN INFLUENCE  51

village.'^  In  a  word,  though  we  hear  very  little  of  the  daily
life  and  the  humble  affairs  of  these  villages  of  the  Roman
Empire,  we  know  enough  of  their  organisation  to  warrant
the  assumption  that  they  were  associations  of  small  land-
owners or  tenants  closely  connected  with  each  other  in
agricultural  matters,  managing  their  concerns  mostly  by
means  of  elective  officers  and  meetings  of  the  more  impor-
tant villagers,  and  capable  on  many  occasions  of  seeking
redress  of  grievances  and  affording  protection  to  those  of
their  numbers  who  suffered  wrong.  The  position  of  these
villagers  was  different  according  to  the  eventuahties  of  their
hving  on  their  own,  or  on  the  Emperor's,  or  on  great  people's
land,  but  in  any  case  it  was  neither  defenceieas  nor  broken
up  into  isolated  interests.  We  happen  to  know  more  defi-
nitely of  conflicts  between  rural  corporations  on  imperial
domains  and  stewards  of  these  domains  because  the  high
intervention  of  Majesty  gave  especial  pubHcity  to  these
conflicts,  but  there  are  many  glimpses  of  similar  assertions
of  rights  and  measures  of  redress  and  protection  in  regard  to
communities  of  free  peasants,  and  there  can  be  no  doubt
that  the  law  of  the  Empire  gave  to  these  last  and  to  the
tenants  of  private  landlords  even  a  better  legal  standing  in
the  tribunals  than  to  the  occupiers  of  the  imperial  domains.^*
However,  it  is  too  early  yet  to  speak  of  these  relations  from
the  point  of  view  of  civil  law  and  of  economics  :  what
concerns  us  now  is  to  show  that  there  existed  all  over
the  Empire  rural  communities  with  a  modest  but  definite
measure  of  self-government ;  and  that  these  bodies  did  not
give  way  either  before  the  spread  of  municipal  civihsation
or  before  the  developement  of  private  ownership  with  its
individuahsing  tendencies.  It  is  not  meant  thereby  that
this  state  of  things  was  the  only  one  possible,  or  that,  in  the
case  of  dependent  villages  growing  up  on  private  soil,  no  other
organisation  was  possible.  On  the  contrary,  it  is  evident
that  there  were  strong  forces  acting  on  the  side  of  individual-
ism, and  that,  in  many  cases,  great  landowners  and  their  agents
had  it  their  own  way.^^  But  such  was  not  the  course  of
events  everywhere,  and  though  no  statistics  can  be  given,
the  numerous testimonies to the activity of rural self-


52  THE  GROWTH  OF  THE  MANOR

govemment  must  be  noted  and  considered  carefully,  especi-
ally in  instances  when  the  pre-Roman  antecedents  certainly
worked  that  way.  It  would  be  preposterous  to  picture  the
settlements  of  barbarian  Iceti  on  the  frontiers  and  even  of
barbarian  coloni  in  the  interior  of  the  Empire  on  lines  of
complete  subjection  to  the  will  of  landlords  and  stewards.
Indeed,  some  form  of  rural  community  would  have  to  be
postulated  for  these  frequent  and  symptomatic  cases. ^^
But,  apart  from  them,  have  we  not  the  right  to  ask  whether
the  Celtic  tribes  when  they  came  under  Roman  sway  broke
up  unresistingly  into  numbers  of  isolated  individuals
connected  with  each  other  merely  by  municipal  ties  or  by
relations  of  private  contract,  or  whether  there  are  indica-
tions to  show  that  some  of  them,  at  any  rate,  preserved
and  developed  village  organisations  ?  When  the  Helvetes
came  under  the  observation  of  Caesar,  they  were  divided
into  four  hundred  vici,  which  have,  no  doubt,  to  be  taken
as  the  territorial  equivalents  of  as  many  kindreds.  All
that  we  learn  of  their  subsequent  life  in  Switzerland  under
Roman  sway  speaks  for  the  continuance  of  such  local
divisions,  though  settlements  of  the  Roman  type — towns
and  villas — break  in  and  spread  to  a  certain  extent  among
them.  The  same  may  be  shown  in  regard  to  other  Alpine
tribes.  In  Gaul  the  Romans  were  more  successful  in  most
cases  but  in  Britain  the  distance  from  the  Roman  centre
and  the  comparative  shortness  of  its  occupation  may  have
had  much  the  same  effect  as  in  Switzerland.  In  any  case,  the
Welsh  trevs,  and  the  flou's  of  Armorica,  testify  to  the
vitality  of  village  organisations  which  have  bridged  over
the  period  of  the  Roman  conquest  from  the  times  of  purely
tribal  arrangements  ;  ^^  and  the  vestiges  of  municipal  organi-
sation in  Britain  are  too  sparse  to  admit  of  a  complete
administrative  arrangement  of  the  country  under  the  rule
of  cities.

II.  Private  Property  in  Land  and  Taxation

One  very  important  result  of  the  Roman  occupation
was  undoubtedly  its  powerful  influence  in  furthering  private


ROMAN INFLUENCE  63

property  and  private  appropriation  of  land.  Tlie  Roman
Soread  of  Pri-  ^^^'  ^^  represented  by  the  jurisprudence  of
vate  Property  the  imperial  jurists,  was  conspicuously  a  law
in  Land  based on individualistic conceptions. The

new  field  opened  to  the  transactions  of  Roman  capitalists
was  opened  at  the  same  time  to  the  spirit  of  private  enter-
prise, private  speculation,  private  right. ^^  The  fact  that
Roman  jurisprudence  had  a  fully  developed  apparatus
for  the  management  of  corporate  interests  and  for  the
creation  of  corporate  associations  did  not  seem,  at  first
sight,  at  any  rate,  to  alter  this  fundamental  position,
because  the  societies  of  Roman  law  sprang  from  free  private
agreement  or  from  direct  institution  by  the  State  and
entered  into  the  general  arrangement  of  private  property
as  modifications  of  private  persons — as  fictitious  persons.
All  these  notions  and  rules  were  carried  into  the  provinces,
not  merely  by  the  appearance  of  Roman  people  and  imperial
tribunals,  but  also  by  the  systematic  operations  necessary
to  establish  and  to  regulate  the  financial  burdens  of  the
State.  The  general  census  of  the  Empire  was  planned  and
begun  by  Augustus,  carried  out  by  the  time  of  Trajan,
modified  and  supplemented  by  very  important  measures
in  the  reign  of  Diocletian,  and  the  operations  of  the  census
necessitated  delimitation  of  the  territory  of  the  State,  the
overhauling  of  all  its  landed  property  with  a  corresponding
determination  of  claims  to  meet  the  assessment,  a  valuation
of  the  advantages  connected  with  the  land  and  of  the  forces
employed  on  it.  Of  course,  all  these  processes  must  have
worked  powerfully  to  put  an  end  to  the  uncertainties  and
variations  resulting  from  other  and  less  civilised  arrange-
ments, and  to  assimilate,  as  far  as  possible,  the  peculiarities
of  provincial  land-tenure  to  the  standards  of  Roman  posses-
sion even  in  those  cases  when  the  provincial  customs  had
not  given  way  at  once  before  the  superior  merits  of  Roman
notions  and  methods.  A  general  tendency  in  this  direction
cannot  be  disputed,  and  has  to  be  recognised  as  a  powerful
factor  of  social  transformation.^^  But  too  much  attention
has  perhaps  been  paid  to  this  striving  towards  centrahsation
and  uniformity,  and  not  enough  to  the  recoil  in  the  direction


54  THE GROWTH OF THE MAlfOR

of  provincial  peculiarities,  a  recoil  which  was  the  more
marked  the  less  a  particular  province  was  drawn  into  the
general  current  of  imperial  life,  and  the  further  and  less
inviting  it  appeared  from  the  point  of  view  of  political
rulers,  commercial  speculators,  and  enterprising  pioneers  of
civilisation.

Let  us  notice  some  characteristic  hmitations  to  that  level-
ling process  of  economic  and  juridical  develop-
ment. Several  operations  have  to  be  taken
into  account  :  the  surveying  of  the  territory,  the  determina-
tion of  title  and  tenure,  the  valuation  of  property,  the  pro-
cedure of  assessment,  the  collection  of  taxes.  In  each
respect  we  find  that  there  was  left  quite  a  considerable
margin  for  adaptation  to  provincial  circumstances,  and
very  wide  loopholes  for  the  introduction  of  social  pecuUari-
ties.

The  Roman  treatises  on  surveying  and  on  agrarian
disputes  give  us  a  very  accurate  insight  into  the  main
points  and  even  into  the  details  of  the  first  operation
connected  with  the  census  —  the  dehmitation  of  the
territory.  And  they  start  with  the  sharp  contrast  between
several  modes  of  dehmitation,  the  highly  pecuHar  centuria-
tion  in  rectangles  being  confined  to  strictly  Roman  soil,
including  the  Roman  colonies,  but  excluding  all  other
varieties  of  municipal  or  rural  organisation.*"  Even  the
modification  implied  by  the  division  uito  strips  {per  scamna
et  strigas)  was  to  be  found  only  on  soil  which  was  very
similar  to  that  of  the  assignated  territories,  namely,  on
soil  held  directly  from  the  State  by  private  possessions
paying  rent.*^  But  then  come  two  other  categories  of
limitation  or  rather  two  varieties  of  the  same  category,
namely,  the  agri  arcifinii  and  the  agri  per  extremitatem
mensura  comprehensi.  The  first  are  not  measured  at  all,  but
described  in  their  frontiers  according  to  the  national
features  of  the  country — rivers,  ditches,  hills,  villages,
trees  of  striking  appearance.  The  second  method  impUes
a  certain  measurement  which,  however,  does  not  go  into
details,  but  only  aims  at  giving  the  rough  and  general
extent of the country surveyed.*^ We leam further


ROMAN INFLUENCE  55

that  these  modes  of  delimitation  were  employed  when  land
was  held  by  provincial  possessors  under  the  eminent
ownership  of  the  Empire  and  when  it  was  surrendered  to
cities  as  a  whole  under  the  condition  of  their  paying  a
certain  tribute.  Thus  on  provincial  soil  we  come  across
two  classes  of  land  in  the  hmitation  of  which  all  direct
transfer  of  strictly  Roman  methods  of  surveying  is  renoimced,
and  this  accounts  for  two  striking  facts — namely,  for  the
aU  but  complete  absence  of  traces  of  centuriation  outside
Italy,  and  for  the  constant  recurrence  of  vernacular  measures
on  provincial  soil  :  let  us  just  recall  to  mind  the  Greek
plethra,  the  Gallic  aripennis  and  the  innumerable  varieties
of  local  acres.*^  We  may  thus  safely  assume  that  the  work
of  the  surveyors  started  by  Augustus  and  Agrippa  did  not
aim  at  or  amount  to  a  measuring  up  of  the  whole  Empire
acording  to  Roman  measures  and  Roman  methods  of  agra-
rian hmitation.  Indeed,  it  would  have  been  absurd  to
attempt  under  cover  of  an  operation  of  inquiry  as  to  size
a  remodelling  of  the  agrarian  divisions.  It  was  already  a
big  task  to  ascertain,  even  by  the  help  of  local  measures
and  with  constant  reference  to  local  usage,  the  actual
size  and  shape  of  the  existing  territorial  divisions,  even
when  in  some  cases  the  process  did  not  go  into  details
and  left  those  to  the  settlement  of  the  people  locally  in-
terested.

The  adoption  of  local  measures  and  the  necessary  recog-
nition of  actual  pecuharities  in  the  division  and  use  of
the  land  leads  us  to  the  inference  that  in  questions  of
T"tl  t  Land  *^*^^  *^^°  *^®  Romans  were  not  likely  to  up-
set all  previous  arrangements,  but  contented
themselves  with  pressing  them  into  a  shape  more  or  less
approximating  to  the  famiHar  rubrics  of  their  law.  It  is
certainly  not  to  be  supposed  that  they  understood  or  cared
to  adapt  themselves  to  the  uncertain  aspects  of  clan
ownership  with  its  complex  conception  of  the  communal
property,  the  hereditary  claims  of  Celtic  gavelkind,  the
rights  of  free  tribesmen  to  contingent  shares  and  the  right
of  chieftains  and  elders  to  regulate  those  shares.  And,
although  they  did  not  want  to  upset  by  force  such  customary


56  THE GROWTH  OP  THE MANOR

arrangements  as  did  not  directly  clash  with  their  laws,  they
wanted  to  know  who  had  to  be  responsible  for  the  taxes
of  the  land,  and  consequently  who  had  to  be  considered  its
owner  or  tenant.  There  were  several  exits  out  of  the  diffi-
culty in  this  respect :  the  assignation  of  portions  of  the
soil  to  recognised  local  bodies — cities,  pagi  or  villages —
which  would  be  held  responsible  for  the  tribute,  but  would
be  left  to  manage  the  questions  and  claims  of  customary
title  in  their  own  way,  and  the  provincial  practices  of
delimitation  held,  as  we  have  seen,  that  exit  open
for  the  provincial  authorities.  The  other  possibility
was  to  recognise  one  particular  kind  of  title  to  the  land
as  accepted  by  Roman  law,  and  to  subordinate  all  other
claims  to  this  privileged  title.  The  territory  of  a  clan
might,  from  this  point  of  view,  become  the  property  of
its  chieftain,  and  aU  the  clansmen  would  be  looked  upon  as
his  tenants — more  or  less  as  was  done  in  Scotland  when
the  ancient  tribal  arrangements  were  broken  up  in  favour
of  the  common  law  of  Scotland.  Or  else  all  the  house-
holders might  be  recognised  as  independent  private  owners,
a  contingency  which  is  supported  by  the  example  of  Gaul,
where  the  great  bulk  of  fundi  appear  originally  as  smaU  and
middle-sized  plots,  and  coalesce  into  latifundia  and  massae
only  by  being  joined  to  each  other.**  Or  again  the  property
of  a  corporation,  of  a  pagus,  a  town,  or  a  village  might  be
taken  as  the  foundation  of  possessory  claims.  This  even-
tuaUty  has  been  less  considered  than  the  first  two,  but  there
is  nothing  to  be  said  against  it  from  the  point  of  view  of
Roman  law,  and  if  we  revert  to  the  copious  evidence  as  to
the  existence  of  rural  groups  with  corporative  constitution
and  rights  we  shall  not  be  inclined  to  treat  this  settlement
of  the  problem  as  an  impossible  or  an  unlikely  one.  There
can  be  hardly  any  doubt,  if  one  considers  the  conditions
of  the  case,  that  aU  these  expedients  were  actually
adopted — with  the  result  that  the  native  organisations
were  indeed  much  shaken,  disturbed  and  dispersed,  but
that  they  did  not  disappear  completely  :  they  were  rather
welded  into  a  number  of  compromises  and  hybrid  shapes
in  which  the traditions  of  the  soil  lingered obstinately


ROMAN  INFLUENCE  67

though  disguised  and  hidden  by  Roman  legal  forms.  We
need  not  therefore  feel  astonished  at  the  fact  that  a  study
of  the  details  of  rural  arrangements  discloses  a  good  many
points  to  which  it  would  be  hard  to  apply  the  ready  con-
ceptions of  individual  o^vnersllip  and  private  interest.

As  regards  the  processes  of  valuation  and  assessment,  we
are  confronted  by  two  facts  which  seem  to  mihtate  strongly
against the theory which has been pro-
^*^  pounded  just  now  in  regard  to  the  adjustment

of  title.  We  are  told  that  the  taxable  quahty  of  landed
property  was  defined  in  a  very  circumstantial  manner  in
the  register  of  the  census,  the  name  of  the  plot  as  well  as
that  of  the  neighbouring  plots,  the  quantity  of  arable
meadow,  wood,  vineyard  and  pasture,  the  number  of  heads
of  cattle  and  the  coloni  connected  with  it.*^  Specimens  of
descriptions  drawn  up  in  accordance  with  this  scheme  have
been  actually  preserved.  Then,  again,  we  hear  that  the
gist  of  Diocletian's  reform  consisted  in  dividing  the  whole
taxable  area  into  a  certain  number  of  fiscal  units  called
juga,  capita,  millenae,  centuriae,  in  the  different  provinces
and  supposed  to  represent  approximately  equal  shares  of
landed  property  with  all  its  belongings  in  soil,  animals,  and
cultivators,  the  labourers  and  craftsmen  not  attached  to
particular  holdings  being  grouped  into  corresponding  units
representing  incomes  similar  to  those  embodied  in  the  juga.
One  may  well  ask  whether  such  attempts  at  exact  assess-
ment of  values  and  incomes  do  not  prove  that  the  whole
territory  of  the  Empire  was  partitioned  in  fundi,  in  estates
of  the  same  kind,  among  wliich  the  capita,  the  heads  of
the  land-tax,  had  to  be  distributed  in  accordance  with
relative  fiscal  strength,  and  in  this  case  what  would  become
of  the  districts  not  attributed  to  particular  "  fundi  "  and
not  taxed  in  detail  by  the  central  government  ?  In  other
words,  would  it  be  possible  to  carry  on  both  assumptions
at  the  same  time,  the  apportionment  of  territory  and  taxa-
tion to  large  groups  with  hberty  for  them  to  manage  the
land  tenure  and  distribute  taxation  according  to  their
notions  and  habits,  and  the  detailed  appreciation  of  property
and  population  according  to  fixed  standards  of  value  ?


58  THE  GROWTH  OF  THE  MANOR

These  questions  turn  out  not  to  be  so  perplexing  as  they
look  at  first  glance,  when  we  come  to  a  closer  examination
of  the  evidence.  The  passages  of  Ulpianus  and  Hyginus
giving  the  general  form  of  the  census  read  as  very  absolute
prescriptions  meant  to  be  executed  in  a  uniform  manner
everywhere,  but  a  Uttle  consideration  will  show  that  they
could  not  be  executed  in  this  uncompromising  manner  all
over  the  Empire.  They  give  the  ordinary  formula  of  cen-
sual  description  used  in  most  cases  in  Italy,  Gaul,  Greece,
Asia  Minor,  Africa,  and  the  Uke  ;  but  surely  the  cases  of
mountainous  districts,  of  moors,  of  unreclaimed  waste,  of
extensive  common  pastures,  of  half-nomad  populations,
of  settled  barbarians,  of  frontier  settlers,  required  material
modifications  ;  they  did  not  admit  in  the  same  way  either
of  exhaustive  enumerations  and  measurements,  or  of  the
clear  division  of  rights  of  ownership,  or  of  a  definite  loca-
tion of  settlement,  or  of  certainty  in  regard  to  neighbours.
The  formula  had  to  be  very  much  altered,  partly  simphfied,
partly  comphcated,  to  meet  such  cases,  if  it  was  meant  to
give  anj^hing  Uke  a  trustworthy  description  of  the  state
of  things.  It  has  to  be  noted,  secondly,  that  the  census
alluded  to  by  Ulpian  and  Hygin  was  a  record  of  population
and  property  meant  to  serve  as  a  basis  for  the  imposition  of
the  tributum,  a  land-tax  in  money  which  was  laid  on  the
provinces  in  certain  fixed  sums  and  then  distributed  among
the  cities  and  other  districts  which  had  to  assess  their
citizens  according  to  their  means,  the  burden  of  each  being
heavier  or  lighter  in  proportion,  not  only  to  his  relative
fiscal  strength,  but  also  to  the  general  sum  decreed  as  tribute.
The  repartition,  in  fact,  went  from  top  to  bottom,  as  it
were,  and  the  censual  description  of  the  means  of  each  pro-
prietor was  necessary  to  enable  the  government  to  form  an
estimate  of  the  sum  which  could  be  imposed,  and  for  the
magistrates  and  bodies  entrusted  with  the  repartition  in
order  to  distribute  the  burden  with  equity  and  not  to  over-
strain some  individuals  while  favouring  others.  This  being
so,  and  the  intermediate  bodies,  especially  the  cities,  being
collectively  responsible  for  the  payment  of  the  tribute,  the
attempt  at  levying  a  "  cadastre  "  of  the  Empire  did  not


ROMAN INFLUENCE  59

preclude  all  sorts  of  allowances  in  view  of  peculiar  conditions
in  the  provinces.

The  departure  taken  at  the  time  of  Diocletian  seems
at  first  sight  to  initiate  an  entirely  different  system,  inso-
much as  fiscal  units  are  formed,  and  the  composition  of
each  fiscal  unit  settled  in  a  definite  manner  in  regard  to
land  of  different  kinds.  In  such  a  case  the  individual
equation  drawn  between  so  much  capita  and  this  or  that
particular  estate,  containing  so  many  jugera  of  best,  or
middling,  or  indifferent  arable,  so  many  stocks  of  vine  or
oHvetrees,withsomanyheadof  cattle  and  so  many  labourers
attached  to  them,*^  seems  to  present  a  constant  basis  which
will  have  to  support  more  or  less  tribute,  in  a  definite  ratio
to  the  neighbouring  properties  equated  with  proportionate
numbers  of  units.  This  scheme  seems  to  render  the  action
of  the  intermediate  bodies  superfluous,  and  pictures  the
Government  as  drawing  directly  on  the  resources  of  the  indi-
viduals. But,  as  a  matter  of  fact,  the  taxation  of  the  fourth
century  was  not  more  and  probably  less  individualistic
than  that  of  the  second.  Even  if  we  leave  out  of  account
the  fact  that  Diocletian's  system  was  devised  for  the  levying
of  tribute  in  kind  (annona),  while  the  money  contribution
followed  in  the  old  way,*''  many  traits  show  to  what  ex-
tent there  was  room  for  local  variations  and  for  the
introduction  of  elements  connected  with  social  arrange-
ments which  are  very  different  from  the  hard  and  fast
distribution  of  individual  property.  The  Sjrrian  law-
book, from  which  we  glean  the  definite  scrap  about  the
assessment  of  arable,  vineyard  and  ohve  plantations,
leaves  out  of  the  general  reckoning  mountain  land  and
pastures,  and  prescribes  rules  for  their  assessment  which
have  nothing  to  do  with  the  apportionment  by  capita.
Then,  the  labouring  population  is  not  mentioned,  nor
the  farmers,  the  coloni,  and  we  are  left  to  surmise
that  they  were  either  reckoned  and  taxed  outside  the
scheme  of  the  capita,  or  else  formed  "  heads  "  of  popu-
lation by  themselves.  A  similar  observation  may  be  made
in  regard  to  the  cattle.*^  But,  apart  from  these  dis-
crepancies and  queries,  we  find  that  the  meaning  of  the


60  THE  GROWTH  OF  THE  MANOR

fiscal  units  varied  materially  in  the  different  provinces:
in  one  case,  only  the  land  was  taken  into  account,  in  another
the  land  and  the  people  on  it,  in  a  third  mainly  the  people.
The  very  names  of  the  units  are  different  in  connection  with
these  alterations  of  meaning ;  sometimes  it  is  jugum,
sometimes  caput,  then  again  centuria,  meaning  a  couple  of
hundred  jugera,  sometimes  millena.^^  Then,  again,  though
the  establishment  of  heads  of  taxation  seems  to  be  a  step
further  in  its  individuahsation,  collective  Hability  is  rather
increased  than  lessened  in  the  Empire  of  Diocletian  and
C!onstantine  ;  people  are  made  not  only  to  pay  for  their
insolvent  fellow -citizens,  but  even  to  take  upon  themselves
the  responsibihty  for  the  taxes  of  the  land  which  had  been
vacated  by  their  neighbours  (eTri^oXt]).^'^  The  attempt  to
reduce  the  varieties  of  taxed  property  to  a  certain  number
of  units  of  assessment  turns  out  in  this  way  to  have  been
consistent  with  an  astonishing  amount  of  provincial  and
local  varieties.  And  last,  but  not  least,  it  is  evident  from
the  practice  of  general  remissions  of  so  many  juga  or  capita  to
entire  provinces  that  the  system  of  apportioning  the  jtiga
was  not  merely  the  outcome  of  a  careful  enumeration  of
assessable  objects.  It  is  clear  that  this  last  chiefly  remained
as  in  the  second  century,  a  means  of  ascertaining  the  fiscal
capabilities  of  districts  and  of  apportioning  the  fiscal  lia-
bflities  of  the  population,  but  it  did  not  work  automatically
in  this  sense,  that  so  many  acres  of,  say,  middling  land  were
always  reckoned  to  constitute  so  many  jtiga.  The  letting
off  of  so  many  juga  shows  that  already,  in  these  later
Roman  times,  there  existed  in  matters  of  taxation  the  curious
combination  of  appraising  property  on  the  strength  of  its
individual  features  and  of  treating  the  units  of  taxation  as
something  laid  on  from  above  to  be  distributed  according  to
circumstances  known  to  the  local  authorities  and  bodies.
The  idea  of  privileged  capitation  is  the  only  one  which  can
reconcile  these  contrasts.  The  property  in  a  district  may
have  been  assessed  at  32,000  capita,  but  the  annona  from
it  may  have  been  indicted  as  from  25,000,  and,  in  this  case
the  local  authorities  could  single  out  for  total  or  partial
exemption  some  properties  worthy  of  exemption  on  account


ROMAN rNFLUENCB  61

of  a  weakening  of  their  resources,  or  of  an  increase  of  private
liabilities  or  of  services  rendered  to  the  State  or  district  and
the  like.  And,  if  a  great  mishap  visited  the  country  in  the
shape  of  a  famine  or  of  an  incursion  of  barbarians,  etc.,
and,  say,  5,700  juga  were  taken  off  by  the  grace  of  the
Emperor,  it  was  possible  not  only  to  strike  off  the  roll  those
who  had  been  actually  destroyed  as  economic  units,  but  to
reckon  as  half  or  three-quarters  those  who,  from  a  formal
point  of  view,  might  have  been  taken  as  entire  units. ^^  The
extreme  roughness  of  classification,  and  the  absence  from  it
of  very  material  factors  in  the  shape  of  an  appraisement  of
capital,  of  industrial  and  commercial  adjuncts,  of  profitable
easements,  etc.,  made  such  rough  corrections  necessary,
and  at  the  same  time  disturbed  the  simphcity  and  uni-
formity of  the  formulas  devised  for  the  purpose  of  taxation.
The  net  result  of  these  considerations  seems  to  be  that
we  must  not  lay  too  much  stress  on  the  systems  of  tabu-
lated estimates  which  were  practised  by  the  bureaucracy
of  the  Empire.  They  do  not  imply,  as  they  seem  to  do,
a  very  close  attention  to  the  particulars  of  each  case,  and
a  very  exact  rendering  of  social  conditions.  On  the  contrary,
they  introduce  a  method  of  fictitious  reckoning  of  values  m*
which,  though  expressed  in  concrete  agrarian  terms,  presents,
in  truth,  something  between  a  repartition  of  totals  into
particular  grooves  of  Hability  and  the  natural  outcome  of
assessment  according  to  ascertained  means.

The unit  of land from  which the  normal
"  cadastre  " starts is the fundus. It is


described  as  containing  so  many  jugera  of  every  kind
of  soil,  so  many  useful  trees  or  stocks,  and  as  provided
with  so  many  head  of  cattle  and  so  many  labourers  or
farmers  to  cultivate  it ;  in  fact,  it  forms  a  complete  and
self-sufficient  agrarian  organism.  On  the  other  hand,
it  is  private  property,  or,  at  least,  in  most  cases,  in
private  possession  of  an  individual  or  of  a  corporation,
it  is  inscribed  under  the  name  of  an  owner,  though  it
is  not  the  changing  present  owner  that  is  meant,  but
either  the  original  organiser  of  the  fundus  or  else  the
one  under  whose  name  it  was  registered  the  first  time  in  the


62  THE  GROWTH  OF  THE  MANOR

roll  of  the  fiscal  survey  or  "  cadastre."  ^^  Such  a  mode  of  de-
scription is  very  characteristic ;  it  means  that,  as  a  rule,  the
Roman  financial  administration  considered  the  cultivated
land  to  be  divided  into  private  estates,  great,  middling,  and
small,  and  fastened  its  arrangements  for  taxation  to  these
estates.  This  is,  undoubtedly,  a  very  important  point,  both
as  a  symptom  of  the  prevailing  mode  of  holding  land  and
as  a  factor  which  must  have  worked  powerfully  to  modify
in  that  particular  direction,  arrangements  which,  by  them-
selves, did  not  well  fit  into  it.  The  practical  importance
of  the  scheme  has  been  well  illustrated,  not  merely  by  the
couple  of  instances  in  which  fragments  of  actual  census  de-
scriptions have  come  down  to  us,  but  also  by  the  interesting
fact  brought  to  light  by  French  scholars,  that  a  great  number
of  the  names  of  present  French  villages  are  derived  from
names  of  fundi  either  in  their  Roman  form,  as  Savigny —
fundus  Sabinianus — or  in  a  form  slightly  celticised  by  the
adjunct  of  a  Gaulish  suffix  as  PoUgnac — Pauliniacus — or
in  some  cases,  as  it  were,  translated  into  Frankish  by  the
substitution  of  the  name  of  a  German  owner  or  a  mediaeval-
saint,  as  Thionville — Theodonis  villa.

The  private  estate,  entirely  dependent  on  the  disposition
of  the  master,  and  with  a  population  of  labourers  subordin-
ated to  this  master,  seems  to  be  firmly  estabhshed  by
these  facts  as  the  foundation  of  land-tenure  and  land-law
in  the  provinces  of  the  Empire.  But  the  matter  requires
a  Httle  more  attention,  and  is  not  so  simple  after  all.  It  is
not  difficult  to  see  that  the  arrangement  is,  to  a  great  extent,
an  artificial  and  a  fictitious  one.  The  fundus  appears  as
an  indestructible  unity  on  the  rolls  of  the  cadastre,  although,
as  a  matter  of  fact,  it  is  the  very  reverse  of  indestructible
just  because  it  is  private  property.  The  very  name-giving
has  to  be  taken  as  a  fiscal  expedient  and  not  a  natural
process  :  one  could  understand  the  immutabihty  of  the
name,  if  it  arose  from  the  natural  agency  of  tradition — a
name  once  given  to  a  place  or  to  an  estate  is  not  Ukely  to  be
changed  often,  easily,  or  at  will.  But,  as  a  matter  of  fact,
the  name  of  the  fundus  must  in  many,  if  not  in  the  majority
of  instances,  have  arisen  at  the  moment  of  the  inscrip-


ROMAN INFLUENCE  63

tion  on  the  rolls,  detaching  itself  in  this  case  from  the  time-
honoured  name  under  which  the  place  had  been  known
before,  in  the  mouth  of  the  people,  or  even  driving  away
that  ancient  local  name.  Mappaha  Siga  would  thus  be-
come Villa  Magna  Variana.  Even  apart  from  the  con-
sideration that  a  number  of  these  personal  names  must  have
been  produced  by  the  inscription  to  the  census  and  by  no-
thing else,  it  is  impossible  to  beheve  that  even  all  the  places
furnished  with  names  of  fundi  in  aniis  and  acus  never  had
had  any  other  designations  drawn  from  local  features  and
provided  with  a  more  distinct  Celtic  stamp.  And  so  it
looks  as  if  the  place  nomenclature  of  the  Empire  had,  in-
deed, been  very  strongly  affected  by  the  procedure  of  the
census,  but  as  if  this  result  had  been  achieved  in  a  whole-
sale and  artificial  manner,  and,  in  fact,  right  across  the
natural  hnes  of  development.

Another  artificial  trait  is  disclosed  by  the  tenacity  of  the
inscription  under  one  and  the  same  heading  and  as  one  fiscal
unit  of  estates  which  in  the  course  of  time  had  been  sub-
jected to  a  complete  transformation  as  agrarian  unity.
A  fundus  Julianv^  gets  first  described  and  enrolled  as
the  property  managed  by  Juhus  in  the  time  of  Claudius,
when  the  first  census  roll  was  drawn  up.  It  will  stand  as
fundus  Julianus  on  the  rolls  of  Marcus  AureUus,  although,
as  a  matter  of  fact,  it  may  consist  now  of  six  distinct  pro-
perties, held  partly  by  descendants  of  the  original  JuKus,
and  partly  by  people  who  had  married  his  granddaughters,
or  even  by  strangers  who  had  bought  some  of  the  shares.
And  so  we  come  to  the  combinations  of  the  Ravenna
charters  when  one  person  is  described  as  holding  -^  oi  o.
fundus,  another  -^  of  the  same  fundus, ^^  etc.  It  is  proved
by  the  description  of  boundaries  that  in  such  cases  no  real
imity  is  left  in  the  management  and  organisation  of  the  land,
although  the  fiscal  unity  is  still  asserted.^*  The  converse
case  is  recorded  as  weU,  and  is  quite  as  striking.  The  fundi,
as  originally  inscribed,  may  be  large,  middle-sized,  or  quite
small.  But  in  the  interval  between  two  censuses,  some  may
have  been  concentrated  in  the  hands  of  one  owner  and  en-
tirely transformed  in their  economic aspect  and  plan of


64  THE GROWTH OF THE MA2^0R

management,  may  have  become  large  grazing  farms,  for
instance,  instead  of  small  agriciiltural  holdings  ;  stiU  they
will  be  entered,  not  as  a  new  whole,  but  as  a  combina-
tion of  old  ones,  as  a  massa  (fundorum),  in  regard  to
which  the  old  names  will  still  be  kept  for  no  other  reason
than  that  of  the  formal  continuity  of  official  tradition.

This  being  so,  we  may  well  ask  whether  the  deeply  indivi-
dualising character  of  the  census  inscription  vouches  for
the  disappearance  of  ingrown  peculiarities  of  husbandry
and  local  arrangements  in  the  provinces.  One  point  has
been  very  much  discussed  of  late.  Are  the  villages  of  Gaul
to  be  taken  as  created  by  the  management  of  private  owners
of  fundi,  as  so  many  of  their  names  seem  to  imply,  or  did
they  exist  in  a  number  of  cases  as  units  by  them-
selves for  administrative  and  possibly  economic  purposes
which  did  not  coincide  with  the  fundi,  and  were  left  aside
by  the  fiscal  administration,  inasmuch  as  they  did  not  fall
within  the  lines  of  the  official  formula  of  description  ?  ^^  In
view  of  aU  that  has  been  said  of  the  tenacious  pecuharities
of  Celtic  rural  organisation,  it  seems  hardly  proper  to
decide  in  the  first  sense.  Indeed,  it  has  been  shown  that,  in
a  number  of  cases,  the  argument  from  the  names  does  not
apply,  as  there  is  a  sufiicient  number  of  instances  when  the
fundus  nomenclature  did  not  impose  itseK.  And,  what  is
more  important,  even  in  many  cases  when  it  did  impose
itself,  it  would  be  rash  to  argue  that  the  village  did  not  exist
as  a  real  unit  by  the  side  of  the  fundus,  or  above  it.  If
there  ran,  as  it  were,  two  threads  of  nomenclatiu-e  through
the  country,  they  must  have  overlapped  constantly,  and  the
fact  that  the  official  designation  so  often  got  the  better  of  the
one  drawn  from  the  features  of  local  grouping  does  not  do
away  with  this  latter.  Floriac  as  a  village  may  have  been
much  more  than  the  fundus  Floriacus,  though  it  drew  its
name  from  that  fundus  in  connection  with  one  or  the  other
circumstance  in  the  census  of  the  locality.

We  may  even  safely  go  further,  I  think,  and  point  out
that  the  individualistic  stamp  given  to  the  census  entries
by  the  notion  of  the  fundus  must  not  blind  us  to  the  existence
in  the  actual  world  of  many  non-individualistic  features.


ROMAN INFLUENCE  65

We  know,  in  fact,  that  the  division  of  the  ground  into  plots
and  estates  in  private  property  was  supplemented  every-
where, even  in  Italy,  by  numerous  patches  and  tracts  of
land  of  which  the  use  was  common  to  several  adjoining
proprietors.  The  subseciva  (or  subcesiva)  were  often  used  in
this  manner  where  there  was  centuriation  or  hmitation  "  per
strigas  et  scamna.^^  Besides,  agri  compascui  are  mentioned  fre-
quently, and  certainly  formed  an  important  item  in  husban-
dry, especially  in  the  husbandry  of  districts  in  which  pastoral
pursuits  played  a  great  part.'^  And  here  we  come  to  a
point  which  ought  to  be  taken  into  consideration  over  and
over  again.  It  must  be  borne  in  mind  that,  quite  apart
from  minor  economic  varieties,  there  ran  one  very  marked
line  of  cleavage  between  the  systems  of  husbandry  of  the
Empire,  at  least  of  its  western  half.  There  was  the  inten-
sive cultivation  of  the  south,  as  most  strikingly  exemplified
by  the  horticulture  around  Rome,  the  culture  of  the  vine
and  of  the  olive,  but  not  less  characteristic  in  its  methods
of  raising  crops  by  the  unsparing  energy  of  tillage,
the  strong  manuring  of  the  fields,  the  small  holdings,  short
furrows  (the  actiis  of  the  jugerum)  and  small  handy  ploughs
of  two  oxen,  and  the  very  subordinate  part  played  by
cattle-farming  in  connection  with  it.  Cato's  precept  for
the  farmer  was  agrum  bene  colere,  arare,  etc.  This  is  the
picture  presented  by  the  rural  Ufe  of  the  centuriated  fields
of  Italy,  but  also,  with  some  differences  in  degree,  of
the  agricultural  parts  of  Spain,  Africa  and  southern  GauU
and  to  this  management  the  census  description,  with  its
prominence  of  the  fundus  and  its  reference  to  the
individual  management  of  the  estate,  seems  perfectly
adapted.  If  there  existed  exceptional  traits  and  com-
plications, as  of  course  there  were,  they  could  be  worked
out  without  much  difficulty  by  modifying  the  main  for-
mula. But  things  were  very  different  in  the  north,  where
the  climate  was  rough,  the  forests,  moors,  and  other  waste
lands  considerable,  the  labourers  not  numerous  and  not
accustomed  to  hard  work.  Cultivation  on  an  extensive
scale,  making  as  much  use  as  possible  of  natural  pro-
and  not  relying  particularly  on  the  energy  of  man,.


66  THE  GROWTH  OF  THE  MANOB

was  inevitable  in  these  northern  latitudes.  And  we  find,
accordingly,  everywhere  in  those  parts,  as  soon  as  we  get
to  know  anything  about  their  economic  aspect,  systems
of  cultivation  in  which  grazing  plays  a  large,  and  some-
times the  largest,  part,  while  tillage  appears  as  a  sort  of
adjunct  and  long  remains  superficial,  varying  from  occa-
sional occupation  of  the  waste  in  the  Celtic  tribal  districts
and  in  the  earlier  days  of  German  migration,  through
reckless  occupation  of  tracts  fertihsed  by  burning  down
of  woods  and  grass,  to  open  field  culture  with  a  two-course
and  three-course  rotation  of  crops.®^  Even  the  big  plough
of  the  northern  parts,  with  its  long  furrows,  seems  to
be  a  rural  implement — which  goes  well  with  systems  in
which  oxen  could  be  used  unsparingly,  whUe  human  labour
was  deficient  in  quaUty  and  in  quantity.  The  great  cleav-
age seems  thus  to  lie  between  southern  arrangements  with
individualistic  bent  and  northern  arrangements  with  a
communalistic  bent.  I  say  communalistic  and  not  collectiv-
istic,  because  it  is  not  the  necessity  of  co-operation  which
strikes  one  so  much  in  the  northern  treatment  of  the  land  as
the  difiiculty  of  an  individuahstic  apportionment  of  rights.
The  question  of  how  far  the  people  who  held  the  land  would
be  bound  or  would  find  it  profitable  to  work  together  and
to  appropriate  the  produce  jointly,  is  different  from  the
question  how  far  it  was  expedient  for  them  to  partition  the
land  on  which  their  herds  were  moving  and  their  crops  were
raised,  and  in  this  latter  respect  it  is  hardly  necessary  to
point  out  that  extensive  open-field  cultivation  and  pastoral
requirements  made  for  forms  of  occupation  in  common  and
sets  of  usages  adapted  to  communalistic  rather  than  to
individualistic  arrangements.  The  question  now  is  :  are  we
to  suppose  that  the  Romans,  when  they  came  to  those
northern  parts  and  obtained  supremacy  over  the  different
barbarian  tribes  which  lived  in  them,  made  it  their  aim  to
override  all  these  natural  leanings,  and  to  cast  northern  hus-
bandry into  the  individuahstic  mould  of  their  fundi  as  known
in  Italy  and  southern  Gaul  ?  It  would  hardly  be  reasonable
to  assume  this  on  a  priori  grounds,  and  it  would  be  impossible
to  do  so  in  face  of  the  fact  that  extensive  cultivation,  half


BOMAN  INFLUENCE  67

pastoral  habits,  and  commimalistic  arrangements  of  posses-
sion actually  prevailed  in  the  northern  provinces  after  the
occupation  by  Romans  as  well  as  before  it,  and  this  quite
apart  from  the  nationality  of  the  barbarians  who  were  con-
quered in  the  different  instances.  We  find  these  extensive
commimaUstic  and  open-field  practices  in  Wales  as  well  as
in  Flanders,  in  Norfolk  as  well  as  in  Brittany,  in  the  Agri
Decumates  as  well  as  in  the  territory  of  Chartres.*®  There
seems  to  be  hardly  any  other  explanation  of  the  fact  than
the  assumption  that  the  barbarian  populations  of  these
districts  were  very  like  each  other  in  their  habits,  whether
Celt  or  Teuton,  Goidhel  or  Briton,  and  that  the  influence  of
Rome  went  to  further  the  economic  development  of  these
parts  without  altering  the  fundamental  cast  of  extensive
husbandry  and  communaUstic  arrangements  in  the  occupa-
tion and  distribution  of  the  land.

It  would  be  impossible  to  state  definitely  in  what  ways
allowance  was  made  for  these  features  in  the  cadastre  and
the  taxation  of  northern  provinces.  Whether  the  formula
itself  was  modified  or  the  usual  items  stretched  to  cover  the
pecuharities  arising  from  the  differences  spoken  of,  in
one  way  or  another  the  survey  had  to  conform  to  altered
reahties,  and  possibly  some  inscription  may  be  discovered
by-and-by  which  will  acquaint  us  with  some  particulars.
The  parting  of  the  ways  between  extensive  and  intensive
husbandry  on  large  estates  is  clearly  illustrated  even  by
extant  evidence  in  the  contrast  between  the  fundus  and
latifundium  on  one  hand,  and  the  saltus  on  the  other.

III.  The  Estates

Great  and  small  It  would  be  wrong  to  picture  to  ourselves
Estates  ^^^e Roman Empire as composed exclu-

sively or  even  chiefly  of  large  estates.  Recent  researches
have  shown  that  small  proprietors  were  to  be  found  every-
where, and  formed  in  the  latter  times  of  the  Empire,  the
numerous  and  socially  important  classes  of  possessors  and
of  vicani.^^  The  weU-known  jeremiads  about  the  ruin  of  Italy
and  of  the  provinces  by  the  growth  of  estates  are based


68  THE  GROWTH  OF  THE  MANOR

on  some  exaggeration."''  Certainly  there  were  powerful
causes  making  for  the  concentration  of  property.  In
the  prosperous  period  of  the  Empire  small  owners  lost
ground  because  they  were  bought  out  by  speculators
against  whose  power  of  money  and  methods  of  trade
and  agriculture  they  could  not  compete.  The  poUcy
of  strengthening  the  stock  of  small  proprietors  by
distributing,  again  and  again,  land  to  soldiers  who  had  con-
cluded their  term  of  service  did  not  succeed.  The  veterans
were  badly  equipped  as  landowners,  inadequately  provided
and  especially  deficient  in  interest,  in  the  knowledge  and
the  habits  necessary  to  make  a  good  use  of  their  allot-
ments. Their  plots  became  an  easy  prey  of  those  who
speculated  in  land."^  But  it  was  much  more  difficult  to
uproot  the  stock  of  those 'small  owners  and  peasant  culti-
vators who  had  sat  on  the  soil  for  generations  ;  in  all  the
provinces,  we  find  a  good  many  of  them  ;  they  formed
probably  the  great  majority  of  the  landed  class  of  the
Empire,  as  the  normal  conduct  of  municipal  business  and
the  levying  of  taxes  was  connected  with  their  existence  and
activity.®"  There  is  every  reason  to  suppose  that  in  pro-
vinces newly  reclaimed  from  barbarism,  hke  Britain,  their
number  must  have  been  especially  large.  The  Romans
never  considered  it  good  policy  to  dispossess  the  lower
orders  ;  on  the  contrary,  some  measures  were  taken  to
strengthen  small  proprietorship,  and  the  social  causes  which
made  for  concentration  of  property,  the  appUcation  of  capital
and  the  organisation  of  traffic  on  a  large  scale,  and  the
pohtical  influence  of  privileged  people,  had  not  had  time  to
act  for  a  lengthened  period.  Indeed,  we  are  not  left  with-
out some  direct  evidence  as  to  the  traditional  position  of
the  free  peasantry  and  the  efforts  of  the  government  to
keep  it  up.®^

Although  there  is  thus  no  reason  to  suppose  that  the
Roman  power  divided  Britain,  as  by  the  stroke  of  a  magic
wand,  into  a  number  of  great  estates,  or  that  even  at  its
close  these  estates  had  attained  to  a  crushing  superiority —
either  in  regard  to  their  number  or  to  the  development
of  their  internal  structure, archaeological  finds  show,  in


ROMAN INFLUENCE  69

many  places  in Britain, as  well  ■  tlur j^rovinoe'*.

remains  of  large,  carefully -built  and  decorated  country  house
villas,  which  evidently  were  erected  as  seats  of  great  people,
and  must  have  acted  as  centres  of  culture  and  husbandry
in  the  several  districts  in  which  they  were  situated.  It
has  been  pointedly  said  about  Africa  that  there  were  some
private  persons  there  whose  estates  were  as  large  as  the
territories  of  entire  cities,  and  that  their  villas  were  sur-
rounded on  every  side  by  villages  of  their  dependants  as
by  bulwarks.^*  Britain  was  very  far  from  offering  the
same  inducements  to  great  landlords  as  Africa,  with  its
wealth  of  sub -tropical  products  of  vegetation.  But  in
Britain,  too,  the  villas  at  Bignor,  Woodchester,  Andover,
etc.,  present  striking  examples  of  arrangements  for  a  life
on  a  great  scale  ;  and  there  can  be  no  doubt,  on  the  strength
of  their  evidence,  that  there  lived  a  good  many  Roman
or  Romanised  magnates  in  those  parts  of  the  island,  which
were  within  easy  approach  of  Roman  stations  and  cities  ;
and  that  we  have  to  reckon  with  this  element  of  rural
aristocracy  in  forming  an  estimate  of  the  social  situation
of  Britain  under  the  Empire .^^

The  great  estate  appears  in  our  sources  in
two  different  aspects — as  a  latifuTidium  or
massa,  and  as  a  saltus.  In  the  first  instance  we  have  to
do  with  an  agglomeration  of  fundi,  which  goes  back  his-
torically to  separate  smaller  properties  thrown  together
in  course  of  time ;  they  may  continue  to  be  separate
economic  organisations,  or  they  may  have  coalesced  into
one  larger  organisation.  The  latter  must  have  been  fre-
quently the  case  for  purely  economic  reasons,  such  as
the  influence  of  capitalism  and  the  advantages  of  produc-
tion on  a  large  scale.  But  it  would  be  wrong  to  assume
that  whenever  we  hear  of  a  latifundium,  or  can  trace
vestiges  of  a  large  property,  we  must  at  once  think  of  an
estate  managed  systematically  from  a  centre,  ^vith  an
organised  population  of  labourers  around  it.  Some  of
the  latifundia  were  real  estates,  others  merely  massce  of
casually  collected  smaller  properties,  the  component  parts
of  which  may  have  presented  many  varieties  of  legal  and


70  THE vIROWTH OF THE MAIiOR

economic  structure  "'  The  saltus  is  taken  in  opposition
to  the  fundus,  as  a  territory  of  difficult  access  and  of  back-
ward culture,  mostly  consisting  of  mountain  slopes,  forest
and  pasture  land.^^  It  is  often  kept  outside  the  jurisdiction
and  taxation  of  the  cities,  and  may  be  measured  by  less
careful  methods  than  those  apphed  on  municipal  territory.
The  saltus  we  know  of  belonged  chiefly  to  the  Emperor,
but  great  landowners  of  senatorial  rank  were  also  possessed
of  them.^^  It  is  evident  that  the  primitive  condition  of
Britain,  the  processes  of  colonisation  on  its  soil,  the
gradual  social  transformation  of  its  aborigines  as  well  as
the  peculiar  conditions  of  the  extensive  husbandry  suit-
able to  this  province,  must  have  made  it  especially  adapted
to  the  formation  of  saltus,  whereas  the  fundus  had  hardly  a
sufficient  basis  in  its  conditions  of  life.  It  may  be  even
supposed,  on  the  strength  of  some  indications  from  other
provinces,  that  the  mapping  out  of  large  districts  as
Imperial  saltus  may  have  presented  a  convenient  form
for  bringing  under  legal  classification  and  administrative
subordination  many  parts  of  the  country  which  were  rather
backward  in  their  life.  This  method  must  have  presented
especial  facilities  for  introducing  Roman  elements  without
roughly  disturbing  inveterate  habits  :  by  its  help  Roman
politicians  were  able  to  avoid  the  ridiculous  and  dangerous
pedantry  of  treating  the  population  of  backwoods  and
pastoral  tracts  as  if  it  was  composed  of  citizens  of  civilised
cities,  accustomed  to  all  the  incidents  of  Roman  govern-
mental methods.  Of  course,  if  we  consider  the  saltus  from
this  point  of  view,  we  must  be  prepared  to  find  it  anything
but  a  model  estate  with  an  energetically  centralised
administration,  and  submissive  and  rightless  labourers
acting  the  part  of  economic  machinery.

Before  we  proceed  to  inquire  into  the  condi-
tions  which  regulated  the  management  of  estates,
let  us  look  somewhat  closer  at  the  process  which
determined  their  increase  in  number  and  in  power.  A
very  prominent  feature  of  the  life  of  the  later  Empire  is
its  inabihty  to  perform  directly  by  its  own  strength  and
through  its own functionaries  the  divers  poHtical func-


ROMAN INFLUENCE  71

tions  incumbent  upon  it.  It  is  all  it  can  do  to  look
to  the  external  safety  of  the  Empire  by  guarding  its
frontier,  to  put  down  open  rebellion,  to  collect  in  its
hands  the  necessary  financial  means  for  general  adminis-
tration, and  to  conduct  the  work  of  the  higher  tribunals  :
it  has  not  the  time  nor  the  wish  to  follow  up  thet*
details  of  local  administration  and  justice.  This  latter
power,  which  carries  httle  pomp  with  it,  but  is  in  reality,
perhaps,  the  most  important  of  all,  inasmuch  as  on  it
depends  the  everyday  life  of  a  countless  population
it  is  constrained  to  delegate  to  municipal  corporations,
to  men  of  mark  and  position,  to  the  great  landowners.®*
Looking  at  these  last,  which  concern  us  most,  we  find  that
by  the  time  of  Constantine  they  are  allowed  a  special
standing  in  regard  to  taxation,  their  estates  ranking  apart
from  the  rest  on  the  rolls  of  the  tax-gatherer  and  the
proprietors  being  entrusted  with  the  power  of  municipal
decurions  in  regard  to  the  collection  of  taxes  from  their
dependants,  as  well  as  being  responsible  for  the  payment
of  them, — a  tremendous  power  and  responsibility  consider-
ing the  importance  these  fiscal  functions  had  assumed
in  the  Hfe  of  the  Empire.'^"  In  the  same  way  we  find  the
landlords  entrusted  with  the  calling  up  of  recruits  for  the
army,  and  endowed  with  extensive  patronage  in  regard
to  the  appointment  of  priests,  and  even  bishops,  on  their
estates.  It  is  to  them,  again,  that  the  courts  and  the
police  have  to  turn  for  the  production  of  persons  accused
or  summoned  to  appear  in  Htigation  before  the  judges.^^
This  means  that  they  have  eventually  the  power  and  the
right  to  employ  force,  and  that  they  are  made  responsible
for  the  escape  of  such  people  from  appearing  at  the  trial.
Indeed,  the  power  of  coercing  the  labourers  and  farmers
of  the  domains  is  expressly  mentioned,  and  it  is  clear  that
it  was  employed  not  only  in  cases  where  the  Government
was  interested  and  caUed  for  the  support  of  the  landlord,
but  also  in  cases  where  the  private  interests  of  the  latter
were  at  stake,  for  the  enforcement  of  work  and  distraints
in  cases  when  tenants  or  labourers  were  remiss  in  per-
forming whatever  duties  were  incumbent on  them. In


72  THE  GROWTH  OP  THE  MANOR

fact,  the  proprietor  and  his  stewards  acted  in  a  way
as  justices  of  the  peace  for  the  settlement  of  petty  disputes
between  tenants  and  the  punishment  of  petty  misdemeanours
on  their  part.  If  the  estate  was  leased,  the  leaseholder
entered  into  aU  the  rights  of  the  owners,  and  in  practice  the
stewards  on  large  estates  exercised  wide -reaching  powers  of
a  political  kind  which  were  the  more  pronounced  on  the
domains  of  the  Crown.  The  stewards  of  these  estates,  mostly
freedmen,  commonly  behaved  as  if  they  were  regular  magis-
trates, and  were  not  sparing  in  appealing  to  the  help  of
armed  force  for  the  execution  of  their  orders.''^  No
wonder  that  in  the  shadow  of  these  wide  privileges  private
advantages  grew  up  :  we  find  already  on  these  Roman
estates  the  tenants  paying  fines  on  the  occasion  of  the
marriage  of  their  daughters,'^  The  surrender  of  govern-
mental influence  to  private  individuals  expressed  in  these
various  traits  created  a  very  doubtful  position,  and  as
often  led  to  encroachments  and  lawlessness  as  to  useful
support  on  the  part  of  the  magnates.  The  emperors  often
refer  to  these  evils  and  make  fruitless  attempts  to  check
them  ;  but  the  policy  of  fitting  out  the  landed  aristocracy
with  political  power  over  their  tenants  and  even  over  their
neighbours  goes  on  developing  nevertheless,  and  is  cer-
tainly produced  quite  as  much  by  the  unavoidable  necessities
of  the  period  as  by  a  mistaken  pohcy  of  this  or  that  par-
ticular statesman.  In  the  Celtic  districts  there  was  a  special
stimulus  for  its  development  in  the  tenacious  traditions
of  clientship,'*  and  we  may  be  sure  that  in  Britain  par-
ticularly the  action  of  great  men  in  administering  justice
and  protection,  calling  up  to  answer  charges  and  inflicting
punishment  was  not  deemed  strange  or  unusual :  it  would
merely  appear  as  the  continuation  of  a  similar  action  on  the
part  of  clan -chieftains.  However  this  may  be,  the  growth  of
political  privileges  of  the  great  landowners,  and  the  influence
of  this  growth  on  the  development  of  their  private  rights,
appear  as  two  of  the  best  established  facts  of  the  later
history  of  the  Empire.

These  observations  have  been  taken  to  mean  that  the
system  of  territorial  lordship  had  been  formed  by  the  later


ROMAN INFLUENCE  73

Empire,  and  had  only  to  be  borrowed  by  the  barbarians
when  they  took  up  the  inheritance  of  Rome.  But  that  is
going  a  good  deal  too  fast,  and,  indeed,  at  the  same  time
when  we  notice  a  considerable  increase  of  the  pohtical
influence  of  great  men,  we  have  to  record  their  very
characteristic  helplessness  in  economic  matters  ;  and  as  the
outcome  of  these  two  tendencies  which  counteract  each
other — a  process  of  readjustment  of  rural  relations  which
yielded  results  as  yet  very  different  from  those  which  ob-
tained in  the  feudal  ages.

To  prevent  any  misunderstanding,  let  me
Economic  say  again  that  the  growth  of  patronage  of  great
Peasantry  men,  as  fostered  by  the  Empire  and  as  di-
rected against  its  Government,  is  a  pheno-
menon of  first-rate  importance  ;  it  gives  expression  to  the
fact  that  society  was  getting  disintegrated  into  local  units
after  the  strain  and  glory  of  existence  as  a  huge,  highly-
organised  whole.  People  seek  protection  where  they  find
force,  and  they  look  for  efficient  force  near  at  hand  rather
than  in  the  exalted  institutions  of  the  Empire. ^°  But  this
same  regressive  process  of  the  formation  of  new  local  bodies
has  another  aspect  in  which  not  the  great  men  but  the
small  people  appear  as  the  necessary  agents  in  the  work
of  rescuing  society  from  ruin.  It  is  not  only  protection  and
some  order  that  are  needed,  but  also  cultivation,  the  work
of  feeding  society  and  keeping  up  its  material  intercourse.
And  in  this  direction  the  great  landowners,  and  even  the
government,  can  do  very  Uttle  by  themselves,  in  spite  of  the
apparatus  of  laws  and  decrees,  of  soldiers  and  pohce,  of
exactions  and  prisons.  The  evidence  of  the  fourth  and  fifth
centuries  is  unanimous  in  showing  us  a  great  economic  and
social  crisis,  a  State  armed  with  all  the  resources  of  enact-
ment and  coercion,  and  powerless  to  check  depopulation,  dere-  )
fiction  of  duties,  fraud  and  concealment  in  evading  public  bur-  /
dens,  to  fight  against  the  squalor  and  barrenness  of  deserted
soil  and  ruined  husbandry.^^  What  had  most  to  do  in
producing  these  results — whether  it  was  the  harrying  by
barbarians,  the  exhausting  taxation,  the  drain  of  con-
scription on  productive  population,  the  heartless  methods


74  THE  GEOWTH  OF  THE  MANOR

of  mechanical  bureaucracy,  the  sense  of  insecurity  and  the
despair  called  forth  by  the  fruitless  toil  of  generations,
the  moral  enfeeblement  of  people  who  had  lost  the  fibre  of
manliness,  the  transference  of  hope  and  faith  to  another
realm  which  is  not  of  this  world — it  is  impossible  to
estimate  with  exactitude  ;  but  the  results  stare  us  in  the
face  on  every  page  of  the  Theodosian  Code,  not  to  speak
of  historical  narratives.  And  in  this  connection  arose
another  great  movement :  by  the  side  of  the  growth  of
political  patronage  in  favour  of  the  great  goes  the
growth  of  economic  seK -government  in  favour  of  the  small.
I  use  the  expression  "  self-government  "  on  purpose,  be-
cause not  independence,  but  a  power  of  directing  efforts
and  seeking  profits  by  the  energy  and  insight  of  the
labourers  themselves,  rather  than  by  management  from
above,  appears  as  the  only  anchor  of  safety  in  this  time  of
great  diflSiculties.

Scholars  who  have  made  a  special  study  of  the  condition
of  the  later  Empire  have  come  from  different  points  of  view
to  the  same  conclusion,  namely,  that  the  great  landowners
were  quite  as  much  hampered  in  their  power  over  their  tenants
as  the  Empire  itself  was  hampered  in  its  power  over  land-
owners. It  was  not  sufficient  to  have  aU  manner  of
legally-established  rights  and  powers  when  the  ability  to
put  all  these  rights  and  powers  into  practice  was
paralysed  by  the  lack  of  vital  energy  in  the  local  body.
The  great  landowner  owed  the  thriving  condition  of  his
estate  not  so  much  to  the  fulness  of  his  control  over
it  and  of  his  authority  over  his  dependants,  as  to  the
number  of  these  dependants,  the  steadiness  of  their  work,
and  their  energy  in  prosecuting  the  economic  advantages
springing  from  local  conditions,  on  the  possibihty  of  apply-
ing capital  to  cultivation  with  a  sufficient  guarantee  of
interest,  and  on  the  possibihty  of  appealing  to  resources
outside  the  estate  in  case  the  resources  of  the  estate  failed.
The  position  got  awkward  and  uncomfortable,  when  one
had  to  depend  almost  entirely  on  the  local  supply  of  labour
and  materials,  when  there  was  very  Uttle  guarantee  as  to
the  proceeds  of  any  capital  sunk  into  tlie  land,  when  taxation


ROMAN  INFLUENCE  76

was  at  the  highest  pitch,  and  the  available  number  of
cultivators  very  small  by  reason  of  unsatisfactory  political
circumstances  and  physical  depopulation.  All  the  weight
had  to  be  thrown  on  the  quality  of  the  work  of  the  labouring
population.  There  could  be  no  hope  of  great  profits  ;  in
fact  between  the  necessity  of  treating  his  dependants  fairly
and  paying  heavily  to  the  government,  the  rent  of  the  land-
owner must  have  been  very  low.^^  And  undoubtedly  it  was
not  the  great  estates  but  the  smaller  possessions  which  had
the  better  chance  of  weathering  the  storm,  because  they
were  more  modest  in  their  aims,  nearer  to  actual  life  in  their
employmentof  capital  and  labour,  more  fitted  to  call  forth  the
untiring  and  unflinching  energy  of  the  labouring  household.''^
In  accordance  vnth.  these  initial  facts  we  notice  characteristic
deviations  in  the  course  of  development  of  Roman  law
itself,  curious  attempts  to  modify  it  under  the  pressure  of
overwhelming  financial  and  economic  difficulties.  Wonder-
fully hybrid  forms  of  possession  arise.  The  '£xi;8oXr/  provides
for  the  compulsory  distribution  of  deserted  and  uncultivated
land  among  those  who  hold  estates  that  are  still  in  cultiva-
tion. It  is  enacted  that  if  anybody  takes  upon  himself  to
manage  a  farm  which  has  been  left  by  the  former  owner,  and
assumes  the  payment  of  taxes  for  it,  even  the  occupation
of  a  couple  of  years  will  carry  the  right  of  possession  with
it.^^  Different  practices  which  resulted  in  the  legisla-
tion in  regard  to  ejucpuTeua-ig,  the  betterment  of  land  and
the  privileged  occupation  of  it,  and  which  were  accom-
pained  by  remissions  of  rents  and  taxes,  arose  on  the  soil
of  Imperial  domains,  and  then  spread  into  the  possessions
of  private  lords. ^^  And  there  can  be  no  doubt  that  these
practices  were  more  efficient  in  fostering  cultivation  in  sick
spots,  if  one  may  use  the  expression,  than  the  methods  of
mere  compulsion  mapped  out  by  the  Codes.  The  most
important  corollary  of  this  practice  of  melioration  was  that
it  tended  to  strengthen  small  proprietors.  It  worked  in  the
same  direction  with  the  increasing  difficulty  of  living  under
the  immediate  pressure  of  fiscal  and  administrative  exaction
in  the  cities.  There  is  a  marked  reflux  of  "  plebeian  "
population  from  town  to  village,  and  a  marked  increase  of


76  THE  GROWTH  OF  THE  MANOR

the  class  of  "  vicani  "  holding  small  plots  as  "  if  they  were
proprietors  "  {quasi  domini).^^

But  the  most  important  and  significant  feature  of
this  process  is  the  rise  and  development  of  the  col-
onate.  This  institution  has  drawn  upon  itself  the  attention
of  several  generations  of  scholars,  and  has  been  subjected
to  a  most  searching  and  controversial  enquiry.  Still  there
is  an  aspect  of  it  which,  though  not  entirely  overlooked,
has  remained  as  it  were  in  the  background  by  the  side  of
other  elements,  and,  from  our  point  of  view,  it  is  the  aspect
which  merits  most  attention.  The  coloni  are  farmers,  origin>\
ally  free  farmers,  bound  by  agreement,  and  free  to  recede  \
from  that  agreement  after  having  satisfied  its  conditions  ;  ]
ultimately  farmers  attached  to  the  soil,  which  they  cultivate^'
in  consequence  of  a  permanent  and  hereditary  tie,  although
protected  by  law  in  their  personal  status,  the  use  of  their
holding,  and  the  fixity  of  their  rent.®^  The  work  of  modern
investigators  has  been  for  some  time  chiefly  directed  to  show
in  what  way  and  for  what  reasons  the  State  altered  the
condition  of  free  contract  underlying  the  institution  into  a
condition  of  hereditary  dependence. ^^  Then  the  economic
processes  by  which  the  legislative  changes  of  the  fourth
century  were  prepared  in  the  course  of  the  second  and  third
centuries  came  to  be  discussed,  and  the  dependence  of  small
farmers  on  capitalists,  of  settlers  in  great  estates  on  regula-
tions laid  down  by  owners,  especially  in  the  case  of  Imperial
domains,  was  analysed.^*  But  there  is  a  third  aspect  of  this
process  which  also  deserves  careful  study — it  is  the  part
played  by  the  colonate  as  a  meliorative  institution,  as  a  means
to  keep  up  and  to  improve  agriculture  in  the  Empire.  This
point  of  view  has  been  to  a  certain  extent  made  use  of  when
the  passage  from  slavery  to  the  ascription  of  rural  serfs  to
the  glebe  had  to  be  considered,  although  even  in  this  respect
attention  was  chiefly  drawn  to  the  public  side  of  the
process,  the  inscription  on  the  census  roll.^^  Still,  it  was
understood  and  explained  that  there  was  a  gradual  change
from  work  in  gangs  under  the  supervision  of  overseers  using
the  whip  and  the  irons  to  enforce  obedience  to  their  orders,  to
the  state  of  a  domiciled  serf  {servus  casatus)  endowed  with


ROMAN INFLUENCE  77

interests  and  a  peculium  of  his  own,  and  with  time  to  look
after  them,  and  that  this  great  revolution  was  a  necessary
consequence  of  the  need  in  which  the  landowners  stood  to
heighten  the  personal  concern  of  labourers  in  their  work
and  well-being.  The  compulsory  methods  were  not  entirely
rejected,  and  the  margin  of  personal  authority  over  the
serf  by  no  means  got  rid  of.  But  the  emphasis  came  to  lay
on  the  conciliation  of  labourers  by  a  direct  and  per-
sonal share  in  the  cultivation  of  the  land :  it  was  not  a
question  of  humanity  or  even  of  best  poUcy  —  it  be-
came a  question  of  necessity  in  face  of  the  great  crisis
which  threatened  the  political  existence  of  the  Empire  as
well  as  the  continuance  of  its  economic  basis — the  cultiva-
tion of  the  land.  But  the  enormous  extension  of  the
colonate,  as  an  institution  of  free  farmers  and  free  labourers,
the  probable  prevalence  of  coloni  over  the  domiciled  serfs
(casati)  in  regard  to  the  cultivation  of  the  land,®^  show  that
it  was  not  less  necessary  to  conciliate  the  free  cultivators
than  to  conciliate  the  slaves,  and  here  current  historical
theories  have  mostly  failed  to  account  for  the  course  of
events,  and  it  is  only  lately  that  what  may  be  called  the
emphyteutic  aspect  of  the  colonate  has  begun  to  be  realised.
It  has  been  urged  in  a  rather  one-sided  manner  that  the
status  of  free  cultivators  was,  as  it  were,  lowered  to  meet
that  of  the  rising  slaves,  and  that  out  of  the  upheaval  of  one
class  and  t^e  decadence  of  the  other  the  intermediate  condi-
tion of  the  Roman  colonus  and  of  the  mediaeval  villain  was
evolved.  Now  this  does  not  seem  to  square  well  with  the
initial  observations  in  regard  to  the  desperate  agricultural
crisis,  the  allowances  which  had  to  be  made  to  cultivators  of
servile  stock,  and  the  incitements  to  cultivation  expressed
in  the  treatment  of  desert  and  emphyteutic  lands.  Why
are  we  to  suppose  that  the  farmers  and  the  free  labourers
were  the  only  class  which  had  to  be  kept  to  their  work  by
bare  force,  whUe  advantages  had  to  be  found  for  everybody
else  ?  ®^  I  believe  that  the  frequent  enactments  about  the
pursuit  and  the  penalties  of  runaway  coloni,  and  the
undoubted  extension  of  the  poHce  authority  of  landowners,
have  more  or  less  blinded  investigators  to  the  fact  that  free


78  THE  GROWTH  OF  THE  MANOR

labourers  could  not  be  drawn  and  kept  on  the  lands  of  great
men  merely  by  highhanded  treatment  and  compulsion,  but
had  to  be  conciliated  by  substantial  advantages  as  weU.
They  got  land,  and  the  patronage  under  which  they  had  to
place  themselves  was  probably  rather  a  boon  than  a  burden
to  them :  it  had  come  to  be  preferable  to  look  to  the  protection
and  police  of  a  great  man  in  the  neighbourhood  than  to  the
far-off  power  of  the  Emperor  and  to  the  cumbersome  but
exacting  action  of  his  officials — an  inference  not  very  com-
plimentary to  Imperial  administration,  but  hardly  to  be
avoided  in  the  face  of  the  evidence.

The  balance  of  profit  for  which  we  have  to  look  in  the  case
of  free  tenants  is  the  more  necessary  to  explain  the  situation,
as  the  stringent  compulsion  brought  into  view  by  the  legisla-
tion of  the  fourth  and  fifth  centuries  must  have  been  very
shortUved  in  the  West,  the  Empire  itself  having  collapsed  at
the  end  of  the  fifth  century,  and  in  some  cases,  as  notably
in  Britain,  even  at  the  very  beginning  of  it.  And  still  the
colonate  condition  did  not  disappear  :  on  the  contrary,  it  de-
veloped, though  there  were  no  tribunals  to  uphold  the  laws
of  Constantine  and  Valentinian  as  to  runaway  coloni  and  as
to  landlords  who  had  exceeded  their  powers  in  regard  to
fixed  rent.^''*  It  seems  also  clear  from  this  point  of  view
that  the  institution  was  formed  and  prospered,  not  through
the  devices  of  "  gross  "  legislation,  as  one  of  the  investigators
expresses  himself,**^  but  through  an  economic  advance  in  the
condition  of  the  free  peasantry  on  great  men's  estates,  which
made  it  worth  their  while  trying  to  keep  up  cultivation  in
spite  of  overwhelming  odds — of  the  constant  harrjdng  of  the
country  in  times  of  war,  and  of  the  excruciating  burden  of
taxation  in  time  of  peace.  There  could  be  no  less  propitious
time  for  the  assertion  of  the  claims  of  great  landowners  and
the  constructive  or  organising  activity  of  great  property
than  the  fourth  and  fifth  centuries.  The  field  belonged  to
the  small  farmers  and  peasants  in  so  far  as  there  was  any
field  at  all,  and  the  constant  decrees  against  their  going
away  and  leaving  their  houses  and  work  must  be  taken
primarily  to  mean,  not  that  the  time  had  come  to  bereave
them  of  their  legal  rights,  but  that  it  was  exceedingly  difficult


ROMAN INFLUENCE  79

to  carry  on  productive  agriculture  under  given  conditions — so
difficult  that  it  got  to  be  a  matter  of  common  occurrence  for
the  peasants  to  disregard  not  only  the  rights  of  the  landlords
but  even  their  own  interests,  in  so  far  as  these  were  bound
up  with  their  houses  and  farms. And  there  is  hardly  any
room  for  doubt  as  to  the  meaning  of  this  revival  of  cultiva-
tion under  the  influence  of  the  colonate  at  the  very  time  when
the  coloni  were  losing  the  private  rights  they  had  been
enjoying as Roman citizens :  as neither the barbarian
rover  nor  the  tax  collector  are  likely  to  have  altered  their
behaviour,  the  peasants  must  have  been  compensated  by
considerable allowances  at  the  hands  of  those  very  land-
owners to  whom  they  were  to be subjected. Low rents,
economic  self-government  in  the  management  of  their  farms,  , A^
and  ejfficient  protection  and help in case  of need, must  I
have  been  the  attractions  which  had  more  to  do  with  their  ,
holding  out  on  the  land  than  threats  of  fines  and  imprison
ment.

Concrete  facts  are  not  wanting  in  support  of
these  general  considerations.  Among  the  oldest
records  which  have  been  rightly  taken  to  bear  on  the  ques-
tion of  the  transition  from  separate  contracts  between  land-
lords and  single  tenants  to  a  system  of  holdings  based  on
general  settlements  and  custom,  are  the  inscriptions  of  the
African  saltus,  and  in  these  the  peculiarities  of  the  privi-
leged position  of  the  coloni,  the  wish  on  the  part  of  the
owners  to  conciliate  and  to  attract  them,  appear  on
every  line.  Two  of  those  documents  are  emphatically
based  on  the  poHcy  of  melioration  which  reached  its
climax  in  emphyteutical  legislation.  The  inscription  of
Henchir  Mettich  embodies  regulations  revised  in  the  reign
of  Trajan,  for  an  estate  which  had  been  a  private  saltus
and  subsequently  passed  into  the  hands  of  the  Emperor.®^
The  main  point  of  these  regulations  is  that  the  owners  do
not  find  it  advantageous  to  manage  their  lands  on  the  system
of  a  general  lease  to  a  "  conductor,"  and  let  them  to  a
number  of  farmers.  The  husbandry  methods  are  evidently
calculated  on  a  scale  of  extensive  cultivation  with  a  mini-
mum appliance  of  labour  to  carry  it  on. The  rent  is  paid


80  THE GROWTH OF THE MAl^OR

as  a  part  of  the  produce,  mostly  one-third,  which  leaves  a
very  moderate  net  rent  for  the  landlord,  about  one-
seventh,  because,  as  far  as  one  can  make  out,  one-fifth
was  swallowed  by  the  tax.  The  eventuaUties  of  meUor-
ation  of  culture  are  especially  considered  with  many
details,  and  in  each  case  considerable  bounties  granted
in  the  shape  of  remitting  the  rent  for  some  years,  usually
five.  The  occupation  of  waste  and  deserted  land  for  pur-
poses of  cultivation  gives  rise  to  a  possessory  right,  a  jus
colendi^  on  the  part  of  the  occupant.  Work  on  the  home
farm  is  mentioned,  but  it  is  restricted  to  very  few  days  in
the  year,  six  days  in  fact.  So  that  it  is  quite  clear  that
the  coloni  in  question  were  anything  but  overworked  or
overburdened,  and  that  the  home  farm  did  not  depend  to
any  considerable  extent  on  their  work.  It  was  not  large,  it
seems,  and  slaves  must  have  been  kept  for  its  cultivation.
This  is  a  very  important  point.  The  coloni  of  the  third
and  second  centuries  are  farmers  holding  for  a  money
rent  or  a  share  in  the  produce,  and  this  second  species
of  tenure  seems  to  have  acquired  more  and  more  import-
ance in  course  of  time.®^  The  prevalence  of  these  two
kinds  of  leases  points  to  self-sufficient  and  separate  farm-
ing and  to  a  very  slight  connection  between  the  tributary
farms  and  the  demesne  farm.  This  latter  must  have
consisted  sometimes  in  a  counting  house  {mensa)  and
stores. ^^

When  it  was  found  that  African  inscriptions  mentioned
six  and  in  some  cases  twelve  days  of  work  of  the  coloni
on  the  demesne  farm  it  was  tempting  to  jump  to  the  con-
clusion that  the  manorial  system  of  dependent  servile
holdings  supporting  the  home  farm  was  already  in  force
in  Roman  times.^^  But  some  reflection  on  the  number
of  workdays  shows  that  either  there  was  hardly  any
demesne  farm  to  support,  or  that  it  supported  itseK,
independ^itly  of  the  customary  labour  of  coloni.  The
plan  was,  for  ages,  to  start  separate  self-sufficient
holdings  of  coloni,  and  to  get  money  or  produce  from  them,
not  to  organise  cultivation  on  the  home  farm  by  help  of
labourers  drawn  from  them. It  is  remarkable  that  even


ROMAN INFLUENCE  81

in  the  Codes,  which  bear  witness  to  the  practice  of  the
fourth  and  fifth  centuries,  customary  work  (operce)  is
mentioned  only  once.^*  We  get  another  glimpse  of
the  same  system  of  melioration  through  the  creation  of
small  free  farms  on  advantageous  terms,  in  the  fragments
of  an  inscription  found  on  an  altar  in  Am  Ouassel,  which
contained  a  statute  of  Hadrian  on  the  occupation  of
wild  and  derelict  soil  {Lex  Hadriana  de  rudibtis  agris).
The  coloni  who  take  up  the  cultivation  of  such  soil
are  promised  different  privileges,  and  we  may  surmise
that  their  rents  were  hght  and  their  status  well  pro-
tected.®* Of  course,  notwithstanding  this  consistent
poUcy  in  favour  of  raising  and  strengthening  a  stock  of
free  peasant  farmers,  frequent  transgressions  and  oppres-
sions were  inevitable  on  the  part  of  conductor es  and  stewards,
and,  on  private  ground,  on  the  part  of  the  lords  themselves.
But  the  peasants  were  by  no  means  inclined  to  endure  such
oppression  passively.  We  know  nothing  of  the  actual  law-
suits which  they  may  have  had  with  their  private  lords,  but
several  notices  exist  as  to  their  standing  by  their  rights
and  customs  in  the  way  of  complaints  on  Imperial  demesnes
The  rescripts  of  Commodus  found  at  Souk  el  Khmis  and  Gasr-
Mezuar  testify  to  the  extension  of  the  characteristic  status
of  customary  coloni  on  large  tracts  of  land  in  Africa,  and
to  their  successful  vindication  of  their  usages  against
the  Imperial  stewards  ;  ®^  and  recent  discoveries  show  us
a  similar  population  on  Imperial  estates  ^'^  in  Asia  Mi-
nor, while  the  rescripts  of  Philippus  for  Araguene  in  Phrygia
and  of  Cordianus  for  Scaptaparene  in  Thracia  disclose  the
same  readiness  and  ability  on  the  part  of  the  peasants  to
defend  their  cause  against  encroachments  and  abuses.*^
It  has  been  conjectured  with  great  felicity  by  Professor
Ramsay  that  the  very  name  of  one  of  the  Rural  colonies
on  Asiatic  domains — Hadriana — must  have  been  drawn
from  the  application  to  the  spot  of  Hadrian's  enactment
de  rudibus  agris.  The  point  is  not  without  meaning,
because  it  shows  that  the  phenomena  described  were
by  no  means  confined  to  this  or  that  particular  locality,
but  extended in analogous  forms all over the Empire.

a


82  THE  GROWTH  OF  THE  MANOR

Besides  the  equitable  character  of  the  settlement,  and  its
avowed  object  of  carrying  through  an  amelioration  of  agri-
culture by  an  improvement  of  economic  conditions,  one
feature  strikes  the  observer  very  forcibly  in  these  arrange-
ments. If  the  standpoint  of  private  settlement  between
landlord  and  tenant  gets  abandoned  in  favour  of  regional
and  hereditary  custom,^®  individual  claims  had  to  be
merged  into  common  claims,  and  many  of  the  advantages
derived  from  communal  associations  accrued  in  this  way
to  the  peasantry  of  the  extra-municipal  lordships.  There
are  many  traces  not  only  of  organisation  for  the  manage-
ment of  local  affairs  by  the  rural  settlements  within  the
territories  of  the  Saltus,^'^^  but  also  of  economic  intercourse
on  the  lines  of  the  so-called  open  field  system.  It  was  the
natural  result  of  the  ties  of  neighbourhood,  frequent  co-opera-
tion, common  management  of  pasture  and  wood,  and  com-
mon interests  in  upholding  the  same  standard  of  customs. ^°^
The  coloni  act  and  complain  as  a  body,  the  repUes  and
decrees  of  the  Emperors  are  addressed  to  them  aU,  We
may  even  get  a  glimpse  of  a  commonwealth  of  farmers  and
labourers  which  enters  into  a  compact  with  a  neighbouring
city  in  order  to  prosecute  its  petition  at  the  Imperial  court.
It  would  be  rash  to  attempt  to  define  the  precise  degree
and  meaning  of  this  evident  growth  of  rural  associations,
but  as  one  finds  such  associations  unmistakably  aUve,  the
extant  evidence  may  at  any  rate  be  taken  to  prove  that  the
spread  of  the  colonate  was  by  no  means  accompanied  with
a  complete  surrender  of  rights  on  the  part  of  free  settlers
as  regards  the  landowner.  Even  if  it  amounted  to  an
increase  in  the  legal  fixity  of  their  condition  and  of  the
influence  of  private  patronage  or  lordship,  it  must  have
carried  many  redeeming  features  with  it,  especially  a  fair
assessment  of  rents  and  the  welding  of  the  separate  farms
into  rural  associations  with  definite  customary  rights  and
usages.  This  seems  to  be  the  fitting  complement  to  the
great  modification  of  society  brought  about  by  the  substitu-
tion of  innumerable  holdings  of  coloni  for  great  and  smaU
«state8,^°^  and  to  furnish,  as  it  were,  the  key  to  many  phe-
nomena which  otherwise  would  have  remained  a  matter  of


BOMAN  ENFLUBNCE  83

unfruitful  contention  between  representatives  of  different
nationalistic  leanings.

In  looking  back  on  the  rural  arrangements
which  probably  obtained  in  Britain,  we  have,
as  it  seems  to  me,  to  think  of  the  process  of  Romanisation  in
this  field  neither  as  of  a  thorough  remodelling  of  life  and
institutions  nor  as  of  the  superimposition  of  a  layer  of  Roman
culture  of  varying  depth  over  a  subdued  Celtic  population.
I  should  like  to  compare  it  rather  to  the  influence  of  a
stream  which  makes  its  way  in  several  channels  through  the
country,  fertiUsing  the  plain  around  it  and  materially  in-
fluencing the  immediate  surroundings,  but  not  succeeding  in
entirely  altering  its  general  aspect.  Behind  the  protecting
lines  of  miUtary  occupation  there  was  room  for  all  sorts  of
conditions,  from  almost  exact  copies  of  Roman  municipal  cor-
porations and  ItaHan  country  houses  to  tribal  arrangements
scarcely  coloured  by  a  thin  sprinkling  of  Imperial  administra-
tive formulae.  An  agricultural  settlement  had  been  undoubt-
edly effected,  or,  rather,  the  germs  of  an  agricultural  settle-
ment already  existent  in  the  southern  shore  of  tribal  Britain
have  developed  into  a  considerable  growth,  and  have  been
brought  near,  as  much  as  possible,  to  the  example  of  Gaul,
but  this  settlement  had  stiU  to  conform  in  different  degrees
to  primitive  conditions  in  the  distribution  of  population,
and  in  its  vernacular  habits.

The  country  was  to  some  extent  rendered  vertebrate
by  towns,  villas  and  high  roads.  The  individualistic
southern  system  of  single  farms,  with  a  more  or  less  self-
sufficient  course  of  husbandry  and  separate  plots,  was
especially  inappropriate  in  the  conditions  of  Britain.  How
far  the  settlement  in  large  villages  had  progressed  already
during  the  Imperial  era  it  would  be  difficult  to  say  :  it
is  not  unlikely  that  it  made  its  appearance  in  places  where
there  existed  special  attractions  for  the  gathering  of  people  :
in  the  neighbourhood  of  cities,  by  the  stations  on  the  roads,
in  connexion  with  the  villas,  and  there  can  be  no  doubt
that  it  began  to  spread  earlier  in  the  level  east  than  in  the
hiUy  west.  But  although  there  is  no  reason  for  making
this  mode  of  settlement  peculiarly  and exclusively  Teu-


84  THE  GROWTH  OF  THE  MANOR

tonic  it  had  hardly  yet  attained  any  wide  difEusion/"'  Its
proper  development  falls  into  a  later  period.  However
this  may  be,  one  thing  is  sure  :  the  prevailing  husbandry
of  the  period  was  constructed  on  lines  which  did  not  admit
of  an  energetic  cultivation  of  the  soil,  and  therefore  pre-
cluded a  strong  organising  pressure  from  above  on  the
cultivators.  It  has  been  said  rightly  that  the  Italian  field
system,  as  connected  with  the  fundus,  is  individualistic  in
its  cast.  Its  most  complete  expression  is  that  astonishing
building  up  of  a  rectangle  cutting  right  through  natural
accidents  of  the  soil,  and  almost  independent  in  their
mainstay  on  the  plans  and  management  of  neighbour-
ing rectangles. ^°*  The  same  ideas  of  absolute  ownership
were  embodied  in  a  more  pHable  form  in  the  provin-
cial delimitations  of  the  fundus.  In  its  essence  the  fundus
ought  to  be  a  self-sufficient  private  property  described
and  enrolled  as  such  in  the  cadastre.  The  great  formal
value  of  the  inscription  did  not  consist  merely  in  the
fact  that  it  serves  as  a  basis  for  the  repartition  of  fiscal
burdens,  but  also  in  the  notion  that  the  fundus  was  self-
sufficient  and  did  not  depend  in  its  main  characteristics
on  any  connection  with  other  bodies  of  the  same  kind.
But  these  views  as  to  property,  taxation,  and  husbandry
were  quite  unsuitable  to  regions  where  it  would  have  been
ridiculous  to  keep  on  obstinately  ploughing  and  manuring
in  particular  places,  where  waste  stretched  all  round,  in-
viting people  to  appropriate  it  by  an  easier  grasp,  where
pastoral  pursuits  yielded  better  profits  and  could  be  conJ^-
bined  with  agriculture  by  simpler  methods,  where  labour
was  not  expected  to  be  persistent  or  skilled.  In  such
circumstances  systems  of  extensive  cultivation  arise  of
themselves  ;  they  have  been  called  rather  inaccurately  open
field  systems.  The  most  important  points  to  be  noticed  are
the  primitive  rotation  of  crops  dependent  on  the  fact  that
the  fields  have  hardly  begun  to  emerge  permanently  from
the  waste,  the  importance  of  pasture  on  the  stubble,  the
intermixture  of  strips  of  neighbouring  claims,  the  dependence
of  the  cultivation  of  every  share  on  the  general  require-
ments of  the  whole  in  regard  to  communication  over  the


EOMAN INFLUENCE  86

fields,  the  time  and  the  place  for  raising  the  different  crops,
the  modes  of  depasturing  the  different  kinds  of  animals,
the  regulation  of  uses  of  the  waste  of  wood  and  water.
All  these  forms  of  co-operation  and  eventualities  of  dispute
appear  to  some  extent  in  the  settlements  by  hamlets,  but
greatly  increase  in  importance  in  settlements  by  villages.
In  both  cases,  but  especially  in  the  cases  of  villages,  they
must  have  led  to  some  kind  of  organisation  on  the  basis
of  the  multifarious  communalistic  incidents  of  rural  life.
And  so  communal  usages,  as  distinct  from  the  clan  or  the
private  estate,  arise,  not  as  the  outcome  of  a  definite  national
current  or  the  production  of  the  organising  power  of  the
landlord,  but  from  the  requirements  of  extensive  agricul-
tural settlement,  and  in  a  variety  of  shades  and  forms —
both  in  Celtic  and  in  Romanised  districts,  as,  later  on,  in
Germanised  regions,  in  free  groups  of  settlers  as  well  as
in  gatherings  of  servile  population,  among  farmers  and
peasants,  under  the  immediate  supervision  of  municipaH-
ties  as  well  as  under  the  protectorate  of  the  Emperor
and  of  magnates,  or  in  districts  where  old  tribal  forms  still
prevailed.^^^  According  to  these  eventual  varieties  many
traits  might  be  different  in  these  communities — the  part
played  by  the  home  farm,  the  amount  of  mutual  depen-
dence or  independence  of  adjoining  plots,  the  forms  of  co-
operation and  administration,  the  strength  of  tribal  mo-
tives and  arrangements,  etc.,  varied  undoubtedly  from
case  to  case,  and  altogether  the  forms  of  development
were  as  yet  very  flexible  and  plastic.  But  some  funda-
mental features  went  through  the  whole — the  extensive
haK -pastoral  character  of  the  agricultural  settlement,  the
barbarian  habits  of  the  labouring  population,  the  social
claims  inherited  from  a  tribal  system  based  on  personal
freedom,  the  necessity  for  providing  rural  self-government
for  the  co-operating  and  conflicting  elements  tied  up  in  the
social  knot  of  the  village  settlement.  Let  us  not  forget
that  the  forces  at  the  disposal  of  Rome  in  the  far-off
province  of  Britain  were  of  a  very  peculiar  conformation,
and  that,  as  time  went  on,  it  became  more  and  more  difficult
to  conduct  business  on  the basis of private enterprise


86  THE  GROWTH  OF  THE  MANOR

and  effort,  while  the  necessities  of  culture  threw  more  and
more  weight  into  the  scale  of  economic  seK-government  and
on  the  conciliation  of  labouring  masses.  The  part  played
by  lordships  and  villas  must  not  be  overlooked,  as,  in
conjunction  with  old  traditions  of  chieftainship  and  cHent-
ship  on  the  one  hand,  official  and  unofficial  practices  of
patronage  on  the  other,  these  elements  must  have  provided
natural  and  powerful  centres  to  the  process  of  settlement
and  organisation.  But  it  must  not  be  overrated  either  :
the  process  is  neither  called  forth  nor  entirely  guided  by
private  lordship,  being  in  fact  a  general  movement  towards
agricultural  colonisation  ;  many  factors  have  to  be  taken
into  consideration  in  regard  to  its  progress  besides  that  of
private  sway,  especially  the  acute  agrarian  crisis  and  the
peculiarities  of  the  barbaric  material  from  which  rural
organisation  had  to  be  constructed.  It  seems  pretty  clear
from  what  has  been  said,  that  at  that  time  rural  affairs
were,  to  say  the  least,  much  more  complicated  than  theories
which  would  account  for  the  facts  by  the  establishment  of
a  simple  domanial  or  manorial  system  would  lead  one  to  sup-
pose. The  explanation  mapped  out  for  Gaul  by  Fustel  de
Coulanges  and  his  followers  hardly  suits  the  case  of  Gaul
and  certainly  does  not  suit  the  case  of  Britain.  The  organis-
ing absolutism  of  the  landlord  is  a  fiction,  dangerous  in  the
sense,  that  it  blinds  the  observer  to  the  powerful  counter-
influences  of  tribal  habits,  of  the  great  variety  and  frequent
incompleteness  in  the  application  and  the  exploitation  of
labour  to  the  soil,  of  the  growth  of  half-dependent  culture
on  a  small  scale.  The  assumption  that  there  was  no  other
tie  between  the  inhabitants  of  villages  than  the  will  of  the
lord  and  the  command  of  his  stewards  is  at  variance
with  evidence  as  to  the  activity  of  village  associations.^"'
Altogether  it  is  as  rash  to  suppose,  on  the  strength  of  the
usual  division  of  great  estates  into  the  parts  of  the  lord
and  of  the  tenants,  that  the  relations  between  lord  and
tenants  were  already  thrown  into  a  mould  resembling  later
villainage,  as  it  is  to  contend  that  the  legal  institutions  of
the  later  Roman  Empire  are  to  be  constructed  on  the
clear  lines  of  individualistic  jurisprudence. The  theory  of


ROMAN INFLUENCE  87

Mr.  Seebohm's  early  book  seems  also  one-sided  inasmuch
as  it  starts  from  the  idea  of  a  complete  and  unique  organisa-
tion of  the  Roman  villa,  which  is  made  to  repeat  itself
through  the  ages  like  the  "  hexagonal  cells  "  of  the  beehive/"
But  this one-sided  theory  has  undoubtedly brought  into
strong  relief  the  points  of  similarity  and  of  contact  between
the  British  and  the  continental  development  on  the  one
hand,  and  EngUsh  institutions  and  their  Roman  antecedents
on  the  other. Besides,  the  same  writer,  who  began  with
an  exaggerated  simpHfication  of  the  historical  process,  has
provided  us  in  his  subsequent  works  with  materials  ,and
observations  which  go  far  to  supplement  his  earUer  theories
— I mean, of course, his remarkable analysis of Celtic
arrangements  in  the  light  of  Welsh  custom. On  the  whole,.'
and  to  put  it  shortly,  the  rural  arrangements  of  the  Roman  ji
period  seem  to  have  been  to  a  great  extent  determined  by
Celtic antecedents. They were much  less absolute andi
individualistic  than  the  formulae  of  Roman  law  would  lead^
one  to  suppose,  and  under  cover  of  the  extensive  lordships |
of  the  Emperor,  of  senatorial  magnates,  and  of  central  cities,
a crop of vernacular peculiarities and communalistic
practices came up which prepared the ground for the
coming  in  of  new  barbarian  tides.


NOTES
CHAPTER  I

1.  EUon,  "  Origins  of  English  History  "  (2nd  edition,  1890),  has
done  most  to  draw  attention  to  pre-Celtic  antiquities.  The  contrtist
of  two  ethnological  types  in  Wales  speaks  powerfully  to  the  eye.
See  the  photograph  of  the  big  Celt  and  of  the  small  Iberian  given
by  Mr.  0.  M.  Edwards  in  "  Social  England,"  edited  by  H.  D.  Traill
and  J.  S.  Mann,  i.  2.  The  reconstruction  of  Iberian  or  Pictish
institutions  and  manners  is,  however,  a  thorny  task,  and  leads  to
doubtful  results.  Few  scholars  will  follow  Mr.  Gomme  ia  his  attempt
at  delineating  the  local  influence  of  pre- Aryan  arrangements  in
England  ("  Village  Commimity,"  1890,  69  ff.).  A  more  cautious
attempt  to  disengage  pre-Celtic  facts  is  made  by  Rhys  and  Brynmor
Jones,  "  The  Welsh  People."

2.  Skene,  "  Celtic  Scotland,"  iii.  331.  Women  are  in  the  clan,
but  their  position  is  derived  from  the  standing  of  the  men  by  whom
they  have  to  be  represented  and  protected,  fathers,  sons,  brothers,
husbands,  uncles,  cousins,  etc.

3.  "Calendar  of  State  Papers"  (Ireland),  1603-6,  p.  554  and
1606-8,  p.  492.  The  fact  is  quoted  by  Seebohm,  "  Village  Commu-
nity," 219.

4.  For  example :  Carnarvon  Extents,  Record  Comm.,  1  :
Glodeyth.  Eadem  villa  hbera  est  et  sunt  in  eadem  viUa  tres  Wele,
vidihcet  Wele  vocatum  Wele  Jorwerth  ap  Madoc,  Wele  Blethyn
ap  Madoc,  et  Wele  Gwyn  ap  Madoc  Et  stmt  heredes  predicte
Wele  de  Wele  Blethin  ap  Madoc  Lewelyn  Wheith  et  Kenwricke  ap
Madoc  ap  Heihn  et  alii  coheredes  sui  etc.  All  the  population
of  Glodeyth  traces  its  pedigree  to  a  certain  Madoc,  and  it  falls
into  three  communities  of  kinsmen  which  claim  descent  from  the
three  Sons  of  Madoc. — The  descriptions  of  the  Bangor  extents
(following  the  Carnarvon  Extents)  differ  somewhat  in  details,  but
point  to  the  same  system.  For  instance,  p.  97  :  Lannistyn,  Libere
tenentes  ;  Primus  lectus :  Meuric  ap  lorwerth,  Lywehn  ap  Madoc,
Meilir  ap  lorwerth,  lorwerth  ap  Ade,  Philip  ap  lorwerth,  Cade
ap  Heilin,  Lywehn  eius  frater,  luore  ap  lorwerth,  HeUin  ap  Madoc,
Jeueran  ap  Lywelin,  Gweulle  fiUus  Gruff,  Gorun  ap  Made,  Nest
uxor  Gruff,  Howel  ap  Tenerin,  Gweulle  filivis  Eynon,  Kynoc  ap
PhiUp,  lorwerth  ap  Lywarch,  Madoc  eius  frater  tenent  20  mesuagia
et  6  bouatas  terre,  etc.


NOTES  89

6.  For  instance :  Seebohm,  "  Tribal  System  in  Wales,"  app.  61  :
Et  sciendum  est  quod  est  quedam  progenies  liberorum  tenencium
in  isto  Commoto  que  vocatur  progenies  Rand'  Vaghan  ap  Assere,
que  quidem  progenies  tenent  in  diuersis  villis  istius  Commoti ;  et
tenuerimt  tempore  principum  ante  conquestuni,  videlicet  totana
vUlatam  de  Dennante,  totam  vUlam  de  Grugor,  totam  villam  de
Quilbreyn,  totam  villam  de  Penplogor  et  totam  villam  de  Pennauelet,
medietatem  ville  de  Hendreuennythe,  terciam  partem  ville  de
Prestegot,  terciam  decimam  partem  ville  de  Petrual.  Et  omnes
Ulas  viUatas  et  parceUas  villatarum  predictarum  tenuerunt  in
quatuor  lectis,  videlicet  Wele  Ruathlon  ap  Rand',  Wele  Idenerthe
ap  Rand,  Wele  Daniel  ap  Rand,  et  Wele  Kewret  ap  Rand,  unde
primum  Wele  diuisum  est  in  quatuar  gauellas,  videlicet  Gauel
Guyon  ap  Ruatlilon,  Gauel  Blethyn  ap  Ruathlon,  Gauel  Kewi'et  ap
Ruathlon  et  Gauel  Madoke  ap  Ruathlon.  Secundum  Wele  diuiditur
in  quatuor  Gaiiellas,  vidilicet  Gauel  ap  lorwerth  ap  Idenerth,
Gauel  IMadoc  ap  Idenerthe,  Gauel  Allot  ap  Idenertlie,  et  Gauel  ap
Tegwarat  ap  Idenerthe.  Tercium  Wele  diuiditxir  in  duas  gauellas,
vidLUcet  Gauel  Eignon  ap  Daniel,  Gauel  Cadok  ap  Daniel,  Et  quar-
tum  lectum,  quod  est  ultimum,  diuiditur  in  duas  Gauellas  videlicet
Gauel  Grifiri  ap  Kewret  et  Gauel  Kenewrecke  ap  Daniel.  And  still
further  :  Villata  de  Dennante.  Kenwrecke  ap  Blethyn  Vaghan,  lor-
werth ap  Lewelyn  ap  Blethyn,  Kenwrecke  ap  Lewelyn  ap  Blethyn,
Ken  ap  Blethyn  Loyd,  et  Howel  ap  Blethyn  Loyd  tenent  inter  se  duas
gauelas  de  primo  lecto  integro,  videlicet  Gauel  Guyon  ap  Ruathlon
et  Gauel  BlethjTi  ap  Ruathlon. — The  commentary  on  these  entries  is
given  by  Seebohm,  o.c.  33  if,  43  ff,  who  has  been  the  first  to  utilise  these
remarkable  data  for  the  proper  understanding  of  tribal  organisation.
I  may  point  out,  however,  in  regard  to  the  example  just  quoted,  that
the  kin  of  Rand'  Vaghan  ap  Asser  is  termed  a  progenies  and  not  a
gwely,  that  the  lecta  or  gwely  are  reckoned  from  his  sons,  and  that
the  actual  holders  are  partly  his  descendants  in  the  fifth  generation
(for  instance  :  lorwerth  ap  Lewelyn  ap  Blethyn  ap  Ruathlon  ap
Rand').  We  shall  have  to  speak  of  these  degrees  by  and  by.  At
present  I  want  only  to  show  to  what  extent  the  whole  arrangement
of  society  was  governed  by  relationship  and  descent.

6.  Seebohm,  "  Tribal  System  in  Wales,"  78,  79.

7.  Arhois  de  Juhainville,  "  Etudes  sur  le  droit  Celtique,"  185  ff.
Skene,  "Celtic  Scotland,"  iii.  177,  181,  183;  Atkinson,  "Glossary
to  the  Brehon  Laws,"  s.v.  Fine.  The  Fine  seems  to  comprise
a  man  and  his  sixteen  nearest  relatives.  This  being  so,  the  fine
corresponds  to  the  circles  of  relationships  formed  within  the
clan  and  its  subdivisions  around  every  member  of  it,  which  are
especially  conspicuous  in  cases  of  blood  feud.  The  gwely,  on
the  other  hand,  is  one  of  those  objective  subdivisions.  The
formation  of  personal  relationship  is  not  rendered  superfluous
by  the  fact  that  social  organisation  is  buUt  up  on  the  basis  of  kinship.


90  THE  GROWTH  OP  THE  MANOE

The  recognition  of  this  fact  might  have  removed  some  of  Heusler's
and  Maitland's  doubts.

8.  Rhys  and  Brynmor  Jones,  "  The  Welsh  People,"  51.

9.  For  example :  "  Ancient  Laws  of  Ireland,"  ii.  356,  380.
390.

10.  Seebohm,  "  Tribal  Custom  in  Anglo-Saxon  Law,"  68  S.

11.  I  lay  stress  on  this  point,  because,  on  the  one  hand,  it  has
become  almost  customary  to  treat  the  agnatic  arrangement  as  if
it  precluded  all  rights  on  the  part  of  women  and  all  transmission
of  right  through  them  :  it  is  described  in  this  way,  for  instance,
in  the  well-known  construction  of  Greek  and  Roman  family  law  in
Fustel  de  Coulanges's  "  Cite  Antique."  On  the  other  hand,  German
scholars,  more  especially  Jtdius  Ficker,  in  his  "  Untersuchungen  zvir
Germanischen  Rechtsgeschichte,"  and  Andr.  Heusler,  in  "  Institu-
tionen  des  Deutschen  Privatrechts,"  have  argued  that  the  admission
of  juridical  eSects  of  relationship  through  women  and  of  rights,
guaranteed  to  married  women,  necessarily  dissolves  the  agnatic
organisation.  Prof.  Maitland  has  adopted  this  view  as  to  Teutonic
antiquities  {Pollock  and  Maitland,  "  History  of  English  Law,"  ii.  7),
and  urged  it  even  in  regard  to  Celtic  customary  law  in  a  review
of  Seebohm' s  "  Tribal  System  in  Wales,"  in  the  "  Economic
Journal,"  v.  His  position  is  tersely  summarised  in  the  words  :
"  When  we  see  that  the  wives  of  the  members  of  one  clan  are  them-
selves members  of  other  clans,  we  ought  not  to  talk  of  clans  at  all."
("  History  of  English  Law,"  2nd  edition,  ii.  239).  It  is  best  to  clear  up
this  point  when  it  meets  us  in  the  light  of  the  circumstantial  Celtic
evidence  as  to  clans.

12.  Scandinavian  laws  make  a  fundamental  distinction  between
children  born  in  lawful  wedlock  originating  in  agreement  (maldagi)
and  the  offspring  of  irregular  unions.  The  first  are  privileged  in
every  way  as  Arborenn,  rightly  born,  and  their  better  status  depends
on  the  treaty  between  the  two  kins  to  which  their  father  and  their
mother  belong  (see,  for  example,  Gulathingslov,  25,  27,  115).
In  Celtic  society  marriage  arrangements  must  have  been  often
facilitated  by  endogamy  within  the  same  clan,  as  clans  were  very
large,  but  the  contractual  element  in  marriage  is  very  conspicuous.
Seebohm,  "  Tribal  Custom,"  32.

13.  Compare  the  review  of  a  new  edition  of  Skene,  in  "Revue
Celtique,"  1902,  358  ff.

14.  Seebohm,  "  Tribal  System  in  Wales," 104.

15.  The  tenants  mentioned  in  the  Welsh  Surveys  as  active
members  of  the  tribal  community  are  nearly  all  men.  The  Welsh  laws
recognise  maternity  "  as  transmitting  inheritance  in  land  "  only  in
exceptional  cases,  more  especially  in  the  case  of  a  marriage  of  a
Welsh  tribeswoman  with  a  stranger,  i'  Vened.  Cod."  ii.  15,  §  1 :  "  Ac-
cording to  the  men  of  Gwynedd  a  woman  is  not  to  have  patrimony
(inheritance  from  her  father),  because  two  rights  £ire  not  to  centre


NOTES  91

in  the  same  person,  these  are  the  patrimony  of  her  husband  and  hor
own  (they  would  have  centred  in  her  son)  ;  and  since  she  is  not  to
have  patrimony,  she  is  not  to  be  given  in  marriage,  except  where
her  sons  can  obtain  patrimony  (a  share  by  their  fatlier's  riglit)  ;
and  if  she  be  given  (in  marriage  to  a  man  bereft  of  rights  on  his
father's  side),  her  sons  are  to  have  maternity."  As  separate
property  in  moveables  was  certainly  allowed  to  women,  patrimony
applies  here  evidently  to  rights  in  land.  The  claim  in  land  by
maternity  arises  only  when  the  father  is  a  stranger.  "  Vened."
ii.  c.  1,  §  59.  The  Gwentian  custom  already  recognises,  in  a  general
way,  claims  as  to  land  on  the  part  of  the  mother,  but  postpones  them
to  the  claims  of  aU  males  in  regard  to  the  principal  homesteads.
"  Gwentian  Code,"  ii.  31,  §  6.

16.  "  Tribal  System  in  Wales,"  31  ff.

17.  Seebohm,  "  Village  Commvmity,"  239,  240  ;  Meitzen,  "  Wan-
deningen,  Anbau  und  Agrarrecht,"  i.  184  f.

18.  Giraldus  Cambren&is,  "  Descriptio  Walliae,"  i.  17.

19.  Many  enactments  of  the  Welsh  laws  can  be  explained  only
on  the  supposition  that  several  tyddyns  were  clustered  together  in
some  of  the  villages.  We  hear  of  the  smithy  of  a  hamlet  standing
at  nine  paces  from  it,  of  a  hamlet's  kiln  and  of  a  hamlet's  bull.  If
a  fire  breaks  out  in  a  hamlet  by  accident,  only  the  first  two  houses
on  both  sides  of  the  street  have  to  be  paid  for.  "  Dimetian  Code,"
ii.  1,  §  12  ;  8,  §  33,  §  36.

20.  Meitzen,  "  Wanderungen,"  etc.,  i.  sees  in  the  ''  Einzelhof  "
a  national  featiu-e  of  Celtic  history.  It  cannot  be  denied  that  Celtic
settlements  might  be  locally  recognisable  by  this  trait  in  contrast
with  Teutonic  settlements,  for  instance,  on  the  border  of  Wales,  or
in  Westphaha,  but  the  fact  of  living  in  separate  homesteads  is  not
necessarily  characteristic  of  the  Celtic  race,  wherever  it  went,
nor  incompatible  with  Teutonic  colonisation  ;  it  does  not  proceed
from  ethnological  peculiarities  at  all,  but  from  topographical
conditions  and  traditions  of  local  Instory.  Among  Scandinavians,
the  Norwegians  settle  in  "  gaards,''  or  separate  homesteads,  and  the
Danes  in  "  by's,"  or  villages.

21.  See,  for  instance,  "  Vened.  Cod.,"  i.  c.  43,  §§  6,  7  ;  "  Dimetian
Cod.,"  ii.  8,  §§  1,  2,  3.  Compare  Seebohm,  "  Tribal  System  in  Wales,"
45,  46.

22.  CcBsar,  "  De  Bello  Gallico,"  v.  12.

23.  Seefeo/im,  "  Village  Conmiunity,"  221  S.  Meitzen.  "Wander-
ungen," i.  192  ff.

24.  Skene,  "  Celtic  Scotland,"  iii.  369.

25.  For  instance,  Carnarvon  Extents,  10  Doloythelan.  Et  sunt  in
eadem  villa  10  havotri,  vocata  havot  Penenmeyno,  Partheosk,
Havot  Boyth,  etc.  Et  predicta  hauotrev  de  havot  Penenmeyno
vult  sustentari  per  annum  120  animalia.  Et  predicta  havotri  de
Partheosk  60  animalia,  etc. The  mode  of using  these  moimtain


92  THE  GROWTH  OF  THE  MANOR

pastures  and  summer  hamlets  (havotrevs)  may  be  illustrated  by
the  practices  of  Alpine  Sennhiitten  and  of  the  Sseters  in  Norway.

26.  Cf.  Pollock  and  Maitland,  "  Hist,  of  English  Law,"  ii.  242.

27.  Skene,  "Celtic  Scotland,"  iii.  379,  380;  Gomme,  "Village
Commxmity,"  144  ;  Meitzen,  i.  208  ff.

28.  "  Vened.  C,"  ii.  c.  24,  and  the  commentary  of  Mr,  Seebohm,
"Village  Community,"  120  ff.  Comp.  ''Vened.,"  ii.  22,  1  ;  iii.  24,1;

22.  In  the  typical  instance,  adduced  in  note  5,  the  progenies  of
Rand  Vaughan  ap  Asser  is  said  to  hold  (tenent  et  tenuerunt)
the  villages  and  fractions  of  villages  described  in  the  "  Extent."
All  the  persons  emmierated  as  holders  in  the  lower  divisions,  the  gwelys
and  gauels,  are  said  to  hold  as  "  Coheredes,"  in  want  of  a  better  ex-
pression. "  If  a  tribe-stock  be  adjudged  to  lose  land,  and  some  of  its
members  be  in  a  border  county,  and  they  be  not  awaited  for  law,
they  are  entitled  to  law  after  they  return"  ("  Gwent."  ii.  30,  11).
"  Bangor  Extents,"  98,  Abererch.  leueran  ap  lorwerth  et  83  aHi,
tenent  libere  12  carucatas  terrae  in  communi  99  :  Lannbedrok
Eynon  ap  Tegen  (et  14  alii)  in  uno  alio  lecto.  Et  tenent  in  com-
muni in  villenagio  8  bovatas  terre.  The  commvmalistic  character
of  the  tenure  is  noted  in  the  same  way  aU  tlirough  the  Denbigh
extent.  How  easy  it  was  for  clergy  and  lawyers  accustomed  to
English  feudal  practices  to  sHde  from  such  an  accurate  description
to  vaguer  terms  may  be  exemplified  from  the  Record  of  Carnarvon.
It  mostly  omits  the  name  of  all  but  the  elder  tenant  in  each  sub-
division, but  mentions  coheredes.  Then  instances  occur  when  only
the  one  elder  tenant  is  named,  and  if  we  were  not  so  copiously  in-
formed as  to  the  constitution  of  the  gwely,  we  might  be  easUy  led  into
considering  him  to  be  the  only  tenant  and  to  attribute  to  him  a
private  right  to  the  land.  The  process  of  transforming  the  rights
of  elders  or  chieftains  into  private  lordships  and  single  tenancies
is  naively  described  by  Sir  John  Davies  in  a  letter  to  the  Earl  of
Salisbury  {Seebohm,  "  Village  Community,"  218) ;  cf.  Maine,  "  Village
Communities  of  the  East  and  West,"  157.

30.  A  good  deal  of  confusion  seems  to  have  been  created  by
Aneurin  Owen's  translation  of  trev  gevery,  as  "registered
trev."  Trevgyvrjrv  means  "  joint  account  "  village,  as  I  am  told
by  Prof.  Anwyl.

31.  I  may  point  to  the  following  enactments  to  illustrate  the
meaning  of  tir  gyvriv.  Lgg.  "Walliae,"  ix.  32,  §  1  (Miscellaneous
laws) :  "there  is  to  be  no  joint  possession  in  any  place,  except  in  a
gyffriff  trev,"  and  in  such  a  trev  "  every  man  is  to  have  as  much
as  another,  yet  not  of  equal  value."  "And  in  such  a  trev  sons  are
entitled  to  land  in  lifetime  of  their  father,  but  the  yoxmgest  son
is  to  abide  the  death  of  his  father,  because  he  is  to  settle  in  his  father's
place,"  V.  2,  §  52.  '*  There  is  one  son  who  is  not  necessitated  to  wait
the  death  of  his  father  to  be  invested  with  his  inlieritance,  the  son
of  a  man  upon tir  kfyrif ;  " since  his  share  of  the erw of "  his


K0TE3  93

father  is  not  more  than  that  of  the  most  distant  man  in  the  trev.
The  youngest  son,  liowever,  must  wait,  since  he  is  to  take  his  father's
place,"  Ix.  32  §  2.  "Any  person  who  shall  demand  land  in  tref  goffry;
is  to  choose  his  tyddyn  in  any  vacant  place  he  may  wisli,  whicli
has  not  a  house  thereon  ;  and  after  that  to  possess  jointly  with
the  others,  xiv.  32,  2.  A  claim  of  equality  only  takes  place  in  a
"  tref  gj^frif,"  for  every  one  is  to  equalise  with  another,  as  if  they  were
brothers,  §3.  The  law  of  "tyr  cyfrif  "  is,  that  no  one's  share
is  to  be  greater  than  that  of  another  ;  and  therefore,  there  is  no
extinguished  erw  therein,  for  each  is  to  have  as  much  as  another,  6.
There  a  son  is  to  have  land  while  his  father  is  ahve,  and  that  is  the
reason  his  brother  no  more  shares  land  with  him  than  the  farthest  in
the  trev,  §  8.  No  one  in  a  "  tir  cyfrif"  is  to  go  from  his  tyddyn  if
there  be  sufficiency  of  land  in  the  trev  to  locate  the  claimant.

32.  The  question  as  to  the  relation  between  trev-gyvriv  and
trev-veloghe  is  obscure,  because  there  are  no  means  of  distinguishing
clearly  between  later  and  earUer  customs  in  this  respect.  We  find,
for  instance,  that  the  extents,  which  date  from  the  time  after  the
English  Conquest,  e.g.  "  the  Record  of  Carnarvon,"  mention
trevgifrif  only  as  an  incident  of  trevs  peopled  by  villains,  and
though  there  is  a  vast  difference  between  the  position  of  the  Welsh
villains  or  taeogs  and  that  of  their  Enghsh  compeers,  it  seems  that  the
admission  to  rights  in  the  land  of  all  members  of  a  tribal  com-
munity on  equal  terms  was  more  adapted  to  practices  where  the
power  of  the  lord  and  the  decisions  of  his  maer  or  steward  played  a
great  part,  Cf.  Seebohm,  "Tribal  System,"  18,  20.  But  Trev-
gwehaug  is  not  peculiar  to  free  tenure,  and  is  frequently  to  be
found  on  villain  land.  Comp.  "  Record  of  Carnarvon,"  40  (Oest.)
with  25  (Bodellock).  And  there  is  nothing  in  the  arrangement
itself  to  make  the  try  kivriv  peculiar  to  taeogs.  On  the  contrary,  it
is  treated  as  a  mode  of  holding  in  which  persons  of  any  condition  may
be  interested.  In  this  general  sense  it  would  occur  even  in  cases
of  dadenhudd  or  hereditary  claim.  Comp.  Seebohm,  "Tribal  System,"
67,  68  and  73,  74,  92.  The  course  of  development  seems  to  have
been  that  originally  a  tribesman  cotdd  claim  settlement  (a  tj'ddyn)
and  a  certain  share  in  the  common  management  of  such  agriculture
as  there  was,  and  of  pastoral  rights  according  to  the  standard  of  4,
5,  8  or  12  erws  or  strips  to  join  in  cultivation  and  grazing  pur-
suits. In  course  of  time,  as  land  became  more  scarce  and  more
valuable,  hereditary  rights  sprang  up  in  regard  to  it  which,  though
they  did  not  destroy  the  communal  basis  of  ownership,  led  to
restrictions  and  gradations  in  its  working ;  people  got  their
shares  in  the  use  of  the  land  not  so  much  according  to  standard
requirements  of  condition,  but  according  to  organic  rights  of  suc-
cession. As  I  said,  we  cannot  argue  for  more  than  probabUity  in
this  respect,  but  what  is  above  dispute  and  very  material  is  the
fact  that  both  modes  of  holding  land  described  M  laws  and  8*xrvey8,


94  THE  GROWTH  OF  THE  MANOR

whatever  their  historical  relations  may  have  been,  present  two  variations
of  communal  ownership  on  the  basis  of  agnatic  groups.

33.  "  Gwentian  Code,"  ii.  30,  §  8  :  A  dadenhudd  is  the  tilling
by  a  person  of  land  tilled  by  his  father  before  him,  Cf.  "  Venedotian
Code,"  ii.  14  §  1  ;  "  Dimetian  Code,"  ii.  8,  §  107;  "  by  three  modes
is  a  sviit  of  dadenhudd  to  be  resolved  between  heirs — if  heirs  of
equal  degree  come  together,  such  as  brothers,  in  respect  to  their
fathers'  land,  or  cousins,  or  second  cousins,  in  respect  to  their
fathers'  land,  which  their  fathers  held  unshared,  in  succession,  until
they  died."  All  the  cases  of  tir  gweliaug,  the  most  common  tenure
in  the  extents,  arise  out  of  dadenhudd.  The  chief  enactments  on
the  shares  in  tir  gweUauc  are  Venedoin  C,  i.  12,  and  Dimetian  C,  i.  23,

34.  Dim.  ii.  23,  §  19  ;  after  there  shall  have  been  a  sharing
of  land  acqviiesced  in  by  co-inheritors,  no  one  of  them  has  a  claim
on  the  share  of  the  other,  he  having  issue,  except  for  a  sub-share,
when  the  time  shall  arrive.

35.  Comp.  the  interesting  description  of  Irish  gavelkind  by  Sir
John  Davies.  Fermanagh,  the  County  of  the  Maguires,  was  a  classical
place  for  it,  the  greatest  part  of  the  inhabitants  claiming  to  be  free-
holders, and  holding  not  at  Common  law,  but  by  the  custom
of  tanistry,  the  eldest  claiming  chiefry  over  the  sept,  and  the
inferior  sort  dividing  their  possessions  according  to  gavelkind.
Almost  every  acre  had  a  several  owner,  who  termed  himself  a  lord
and  his  portion  of  the  land  his  covmtry.  Skene,  "  Celtic  Scotland,"
iii.  186,  196  ;  Meitzen,  "  Wanderimgen,"  i. 183,  205.

36.  "  Dimetian,"  ii.  23,  14.  If  there  be  land  in  a  family  unshared
(gwelygord),  and  they  should  all  die  excepting  one  person,  the
person  is  to  have  aU  the  land  in  common.  Cf.  "  Record  of  Carnarvon,"
25,  40.  Mr.  Seebohm  looks  on  the  subject  in  the  same  way,  and
his  opinion  is  conclusively  proved  by  the  manner  in  which  escheats
are  apportioned.  "  Tribal  System,"  41.  The  Denbigh  Extent
sometimes  expressly  mentions  that  the  tenants  of  a  wele  hold  their
land  "  ad  invicem,"  See  e.g.  the  description  of  the  villa  de  Kel-
kenneys  in  the  MS.  of  the  Extent  in  Mr.  Seebohm's  possession.

37.  Lgg.  Walhae  (MisceU.  laws),  v.  2.  §  131.

38.  The  right  of  maintenance,  coupled  with  the  sole  ownership
of  the  chief  of  the  household,  plays  a  conspicuous  part  in  Mr,  See-
bohm's theory  in  regard  to  Welsh  land  tenure,  a  theory  which  has
been  accepted  by  Messrs.  Rhys  and  Brynmor  Jones.

39.  "Gwentian  Code,"  ii.  31,  §  2.  "  Dimetian  Code,"  ii.  21,  §4,
goes  the  length  of  calhng  the  eldest  brother  the  sole  proprietor,  but
this  extreme  statement  is  counter-balanced  by  the  descriptions  of  the
Extents  and  by  such  passages  as  "  Gwentian  Code,"  ii.  30,  §  8,  etc.
In  the  stage  of  a  tribal  community  coupled  with  the  assignment  of
shares  according  to  gavelkind  the  elder  would  be  the  tanist  of  the
wele,  but  not  the  only  heir  to  it  in  the  usual  sense.  Comp.  Pavl


NOTES  96

Viollet,  de  la  Tanistry,  "  Mdmoires  de  TAcad^mie  des  inscriptions,"

xxxii,  275  ff.

40.  I  cannot  agree  with  Seebohm  as  to  the  position  of  the
penteulu — "  Tribal  System,"  91  ff.,  and  Rhys  and  Brynmor
Jones,  195.  The  penteulu  as  major  domus  appears,  e.g.,
"  DLmetian  C,"  i.  8,  §  1  where  his  saraad  is  equated  to  a  third
of  the  King's  saraad.  In  regard  to  the  penteulu,  as  father  of  a
family,  see  n.  76.  Mr.  Seebohm  is  constrained  to  go  back  to  the
ancestor  of  a  wele  (Lauwarghe  ap  Kandelik)  to  substantiate  his
contention  as  to  the  patriarchal  chief  and  sole  proprietor  of  the  wele.
But  Lauwarghe  must  have  been  dead  long  ago  when  his  great
grandsons  held  the  land,  and  there  is  nothing  to  show  that  anyone
in  particular  had  taken  his  place.

40o.  E.g.,  Misc.  laws,  xi.  5,  §  7,  land  that  shall  be  sued  by  kin
and  descent  from  the  original  share  onward,  is  to  be  determined  in
the  sovereign  court,  but  into  the  third  descent  land  is  to  be  sued  for
in  the  Court  to  whicli  all  the  land  pertains,  as  between  brothers,
cousins,  and  second  covisins.  Cf.  xii.  1;  "  Gwent.,"  ii.  31,  §  23.
The  third  descent  leads  to  the  fourth  generation  and  the  land  to  be
shared  between  brothers,  cousins  and  second  cousins  is  tyr  gwelyaug
held  by  dadenhudd,  which  thus  obtains  precedence  over  claims  by
kin  and  descent.

41.  Giraldus  Carnbrensis,  who  knew  Wales  so  weU  and  has  left
us  such  interesting  descriptions  of  its  condition  in  the  twelfth
century,  points  repeatedly  to  the  intimate  connection  between
military  and  social  arrangements  in  this  coimtry.  Two  pas-
sages from  his  "  Description  of  Wales "  are  especially  worth
quoting.

I,  8  : — Grcns  armis  dedita  tota.  Non  enim  nobiles  hie  solum,  sed
totus  populus  ad  arma  paratus  tuba  sonanti,  non  segnius  ab  aratro
ruricola,  quam  aulicvis  ab  aula  prorumpit  ad  arma.  Non  enim  hie,  ut
alibi — "Redit  agricolis  labor-actus  in  orbem."  Solum  quippe  Martio
et  April  i  solum  semel  aperivmt  ad  avenas :  nee  bis  in  aestate,
tertioque  in  hieme,  ad  tritici  trituram  terras  vertendo  laborant.
Totus  propemodimi  popiilus  armentis  pascitur  et  avenis,  lacte,
caseo  et  butyro.  Came  plenius,  pane  parsim  vesci  solent.  II.  8.
Kambri  nimirum,  quia  nee  laboriosis  oneribus  oppremuntur,  nee
servilibus  operibus  atteruntur,  nee  dominorum  exactionibus  uUis
molestantur,  hinc  eis  ad  propiilsandas  injurias  ceruix  erecta,  hinc
ad  patriae  tutelam  audacia  tanta,  hinc  armis  semper  et  rebeUionibus
gens  parata.  Nihil  estenim  quod  adeo  corda  virorvun  ad  probi-
tatem  excitet  erigat  et  invitet  ut  hbertatis  hilaritas,  nihil  adeo
deprimit  et  deterret  ut  servitutis  oppressio. — Every  trait  in
these  paragraphs,  which  remind  one  of  Tacitus'  "  Germania,"
ought  to  be  studied  carefully.  There  is  some  glamour  of  rhetoric
about  them,  but  minute  observation  has  provided  the  author
with  their  foundation  of  fact. A  nation  always  ready  to  take  up


96  THE  GROWTH  OF  THE  MANOR


because  not  bowed  down  by  heavy  agricultural  drudgery ;
no  deep  contrast  between  toiling  villains  and  military  nobles  ;  a
rude  spirit  of  liberty,  engendered  by  the  fighting  condition  of  the
mass  ;  on  the  other  hand  a  participation  of  the  warriors  in  such
pastoral  and  agricultural  work  as  had  to  be  performed.  This  is  a
picture  of  primitive  conditions  which  does  not  quite  correspond
to  some  modern  ideas  about  the  monotony  of  primeval  serfdom.

42.  "  Gwentian  Code,"  ii.  40,  §  23.

43.  "  Gwentian  Code,"  ii.  5,  §  31,  32.

44.  Skene,  "  Celtic  Scotland,"  iii.  139.

45.  Rhys  and  Brynmor  Jones,  "  The  Welsh  People,"  13,  39.

46.  Hildehrand,  Knapp  and  Wittich  have  tried  to  show  that  any
attempt  to  represent  ancient  Teutonic  Society  as  constructed  on
a  democratic  basis  would  lead  to  misunderstanding  barbarian
Ufe  and  misinterpreting  the  account  of  Tacitus  ;  in  their  view,
barbarian  warriors  do  not  work  and  live  by  the  labour  of  their
dependents  ;  ancient  society  is  based  on  the  leadership  of  a  few
chiefs  and  landowners  and  not  on  any  supposed  rights  of  common
freemen.  Fustel  de  Coukinges  has  spent  much  energy  and  ingenuity
in  France  in  trying  to  explode  notions  which  in  his  mind  gave
too  honourable  a  place  in  history  to  Teutonic  invaders.  Seebohm
has  tlirust  into  the  foreground  in  England  the  idea  of  manorial
lordship  as  the  organising  institution  of  the  Middle  Ages,  and  has
transplanted  it  partly  into  the  domain  of  Celtic  tribal  antiquities
by  assigning  to  the  chiefs  of  households  the  position  of  landowners
and  allowing  other  tribesmen  only  rights  of  maintenance.  (Cf.
"Tribal  System,"  88,  91).  Messrs.  Rhys  and  Brynmor  Jones
(e.g.  397),  and  Palmer  see  the  necessary  substratum  for  Celtic
aristocracy  in  a  numerous  class  of  non-British  villains  toiling  for
them.

47.  Weles  of  free  priodarii  or  landowners  interchange  with  weles
and  communities  in  trevgevery  of  taeogs  or  nativi  and  it  would  be
difficult  to  say  which  were  more  numerous.  In  the  Black  Book  of
St.  David's,  the  free  tenantry  are  left  alone  on  the  scene.  (See  its
recent  edition  by  Mr.  Willis  Bund).  Surely,  a  mere  look  at  a
Welsh  Survey  is  sufficient  to  show  that  we  have  in  them  some-
thing entirely  different  from  the  English  feudal  arrangement,  or
from  any  system  based  on  the  superimposition  of  a  free  class  on  a
population  of  servile  labourers.  The  picture  of  a  society  in  which
the  people  are  divided  into  two  sets,  both  paying  tribute  to  the  princes
and  chiefs,  is  as  clearly  before  us  as  could  be  wished.  The  taeogs
and  aUlts  (not  to  be  confused  with  the  aUtuds),  are  often  consi-
dered not  in  their  individual  capacities,  but  as  the  dwellers  of
distinct  trevs.  E.g.  "  Gwentian  Code,"  ii.  35,  §  5,  "  Dimetian
Code,"  ii.  8,  28.  Very  often  the  free  trevs  are  designated  as
trevs  of  Grandsons  "  Werion."  E.g.,  *'  Carnarvon  Ext.,"  22.
Dynihle. "  In eadem villa sunt septem wele Hbere, vocate


NOTES  97

'  Wele  Werion  Eignon,'  '  Wele  Werion  Moiirgene,'  *  WeJe
Werion  Rand,'  "  etc.  C£.  "  Record  of  Carnarvon,"  p.  i.  "  Penruyn.
Eadem  villa  libera  est  et  de  natura  Werion  Eden."  Even  in
the  highly  manorialised  estate  of  Aberffrau,  which  ought  to  stand
not  as  a  typical  example  but  as  an  extreme  instance  of  the  in-
fluence of  territorial  lordships,  the  taeog-trevs  are  kept  apart
from  the  free  trevs.

48.  "  Denbigh  Extents "  (Appendix  to  Seebohm's  "  Tribal
System"),  75:  de  duabus  partibus  Wele  quod  uocatur  Pridithe
Mough  non  fit  nisi  una  gauella  hberorvun  .  .  .  Et  de  tercia  parte
ejusdem  Wele,  que  constitit  in  tenura  Nativorvun  inferius  inter
Natiuos.

49.  Taeogs  of  uchelwrs  occur  in  the  Codes  and  in  the  Extents.
E.g.  "  Record  of  Carnarvon,"  3  (Cf.  Palmer,  "  Land  Tenure  in
Wales,"  101).  But  these  last  show  that  as  a  rule,  the  Taeogs  stood
directly  under  the  princes  and  the  great  lords  who  in  English
time  had  taken  up  tlie  position  of  the  old  tribal  kings  and  chieftains.

50.  I  will  just  quote  a  few  passages  (f.  180)  from  the  MS.  of  the
Denbigh  Extent,  which  I  had  occasion  to  study  tlxrough  the  courtesy
of  Mr.  Seebohm  :  Villa  de  Petrual  continet  1170  acras,  consistit
in  13  lectis  liberorum.  Priodarii  de  progenie  Raud  Vaughan
quonim  nomina  patent  in  Deunant  (cf.  n.  5)  tenent  hie  t«,ntam
partem  in  5  lectis,  quantum  tenent  superius  in  Deunant  tE  tenent
hie  quasi  pro  uno  lecto  quod  vocatur  Wele  Wiryon  Raud  terciam
decimam  partem  istius  Ville — Villata  de  Hundregeda,  que  con-
tinet 1,299  acras  terre  consistit  in  tenura  liberorum  in  2  lectis,
Unde  liberum  lectum  partitur  in  six  gauellas,  que  quid-
em  gauellae  partite  sunt  inter  progenies  fratrum,  de  quorum
nominibus plenius patebit in posterum.

51.  "  Venedotian  C,"  ii.  c.  18,  §  12,  12,  Rhys  and  Brynmor  Jones,
"The  Welsh  People,"  218.  The  territorial  subdivisions  mentioned
in  the  Laws  are  very  artificial  {See  e.g.  Gwentian,  c.  ii.  33,  §  4.
There  asre  to  be  thirteen  trevs  in  every  maenol,  and  the  thirteenth
is  the  supernumerary  trev,  §  5  ;  in  each  free  trev,  there  are  four
randirs,  three  for  occupancy,  and  the  fourth  pasturage  for  the
three  randirs  ;  §  6,  there  are  two  randirs  in  the  taeog  trev  ;  there
are  three  taeogs  in  each  of  the  two,  and  third  pasturage  for  the  two  ;
§  7  :  there  are  seven  trevs  in  the  maenol  of  the  taeog  trevs.
"  Dimetian  C,"  ii.  20,  §  9 :  there  are  to  be  7  trevs  in  a
lowland  maenol  and  13  trevs  in  an  upland  maenol."  The
grouping  into  maenols  is  evidently  a  later  one  and  contrived
for  the  distribution  of  the  tung  ground  tax.  (Seebohm,  "  Tribal
system,  159,  160).  Similar  artificial  subdivisions  of  territory
are  reported  from  Ireland,  where  184  Tricha-ceds  were  reckoned
to  comprise  the  whole  coimtry,  each  Tricha-ced  consisting  of
thirty  bailebiataghs,  the  baUebiatagh  falling  into  twelve  plough-
gates, and the seisrigh, or ploughgate containing 120 acres.

H


98  THE  GROWTH  OF  THE  MANOR

Skene,  Celtic  Scotland,  iii.  154.  Cf.  Arhois  de  Jubainville,
"  Coiirs  de  literature  celtique,"  vii.  101.  In  both  the  Welsh
and  the  Irish  cases  we  come  in  this  way  across  attempts  of
central  authorities  to  estimate  and  to  arrange  the  natural  divisions
for  the  repartition  of  taxes  and  other  burdens.  But,  apart
from  that,  tribal  arrangements  always  suppose  a  good  deal  of
artificial  tinkering  within  the  natural  groups  themselves — admisson
and  adoption  of  strangers,  alltuds,  to  make  up  full  numbers
in  groups  which  for  some  reasons  had  suffered  a  decrease  in  their
personnel,  and  reclaiming  of  land,  splitting  up  into  parts,  and  emigra-
tion in  cases  where  the  groups  were  overburdened  with  population.
Symmetric  schemes  are,  altogether,  very  characteristic  of  tribal
Society.  Compare  the  elaborate  Athenian  and  Roman  schemes
of  gentes. See  also  Meitzen,  "  Wanderungen,"  etc.,  i.  187.

52.  Bangor  Extents,  109  :  Maclure.  Et  nota  quod  omnes  recog-
noscimt  quod  debent  esse  cum  principe  in  exercitu  suo  pro  domino
Episcopo  exceptis  Clericos.  Dimetian  C,  ii.  23,  §  9  :  If  an  owner
of  land  have  an  heir  without  bodily  blemish,  and  another  who
is  blemished,  the  ixnblemished  is  to  be  heir  to  the  whole  land,
whether  he  be  legitimate  or  illegitimate,  for  no  one  who  is  blemished
can  fully  accomplish  the  service  of  the  land  due  to  the  king  in
the  courts  and  in  the  armies. — We  find  instances  where  villains
are  mentioned  as  bound  to  go  to  the  war  and  to  do  suit  of
court,  but  probably  the  term  villain  is  used  in  such  cases  not  for
mere  taeogs,  but  for  tribesmen  who  had  got  into  subjection  in
consequence  of  the  English  conquest.  Bangor  Extents,  99.  Lann,
bedrok,  Eynon  ap  Tegwaret  (et  alii)  in  alio  lecto.  Et  tenent  in
commmii  in  villenagio  8  bovatas  terre.  Et  debent  ire  in  exer-
citum  domini  et  facere  sectam.  Cf.  Rhys  and  Brynmor  Jones,
"  The  Welsh  People,"  445  ;  Skene,  "  Celtic  Scotland,"  iii.  151,  188.

53.  The  assessors  of  the  Welsh  local  courts  are  gwrdas,  free
householders.

54.  In  the  normal  scheme  of  the  cymwd  mentioned  above  only
ten  treys  out  of  the  fifty  are  described  as  set  apart  for  demesne
cultivation.  Maertreys  occur  seldom  in  the  extents.  Record
of  Carnarvon,  2,  Gannow.  Eadem  Villa  est  de  Natura  de  Mayr-
dreue. "  Venedotian  C,"  ii.  20,  §  9.

55.  The  gwestva  of  the  king  or  chief  is  described  at  length  in
the  "  Vendotian  Code,"  ii.  21,  1  ;  26,  27.  Seebohm,  "  Tribal  System,"
160,  161.  "  Venedotian  C,"  ii.  19,  5  :  Neither  maer  nor  canghellor
is  to  be  imposed  on  a  free  maenoL,  nor  progress,  nor  dovraeth,  nor
youths,  except  the  great  progress  of  the  household  in  winter.
"Dimetian  C,"  ii.  11,  §  9:  The  minstrels  of  another  county  are
to  have  a  progress  among  the  king's  villains,  while  waiting  for
their  gifts  from  the  king,  if  he  give  any.

56.  "  Vened.,"  ii.  19,  §  9  :  The  aillts  of  the  king  are  not  to  support
him,  nor  to  support  his  household,  and  since  they  are  not  to  support


NOTES  99

him,  they  are  not  to  retain  their  com,  nor  their  fish,  but  are  to  send
them  to  the  king's  court  ;  and  he  may,  if  he  will,  make  weirs  upon
their  waters,  and  take  their  lines. — The  meaning  of  the  enactment
seems  to  be  that  the  food  tribute  of  the  aillts  or  taeogs  is  to  be
sent  to  the  central  offices,  and  not  to  be  spent  on  the  spot  in  the
feasting  of  the  king  during  his  progresses.

57.  "  Dimetian  C,"  ii.  11,  §  7  :  If  it  chance  that  a  maer  shall
not  be  able  to  maintain  a  house,  let  him  take  any  taeog  he  will  in
his  maer-ship  for  a  yeaj,  and  let  him  enjoy  the  milk  of  that  taeog
during  summer,  and  his  corn  at  harvest,  and  his  swine  in  winter,
and  when  the  villian  quit  the  maer,  let  him  leave  him  four  large
sows  with  a  boar,  and  all  the  other  live  stock,  eight  erws  of  spring
tilth  and  four  erws  of  winter  tilth.  The  second  year  and  the  third
let  the  maer  act  in  like  manner  with  other  villains,  and  afterwards
let  him  support  himself  dvu"ing  three  other  years  upon  liis  own
property  ;  and  then  let  the  king  relieve  him  by  gi\ang  him  other
villains  in  the  same  mode. Cf.  "  Gwentian  C,"  i.  35,  §  13.

58.  Seebohm,  "  Trihal  System,"  127;  Rhys  and  Brynmor  Jones,
"  The  Welsh  People,"  207  ;  -SA:en€,  "  Celtic  Scotland,"  iii.  190,
321,  322.

59.  Seebohm,  "Tribal  System,"  168.

60.  "  Misc.  Laws,"  v.  2,  §  123.  Alltuds  and  aillts  are  not
sufficiently  distinguished  by  Seebohm,  o.l.  121.  Cf.  Rhys  and
Brynmor  Jones,  124.  The  villains  de  advocaria  and  hospites  de
advocaria  of  Bangor  Extent,  98,  99,  are  \indoubtedly  alltuds.

61.  "  Misc.  Laws,"  v. 2, 126, 144.

62.  Sir  Henry  Maine,  "  Early  History  of  Institutions,"  157  ;
Skene,  o.c.  iii.  146,  172,  173  ;  "  Arbois  de  JubainvUle,"  vii.  124,  126.

63.  "  Vened.  C,"  ii.  18,  8  ;  "  Dimetian  C,"  ii.  23,  §  34.  He  is
described  as  the  leader  of  the  kindred  to  the  9th  degree  by
"Misc.  Laws,"  xiii.  c.  2,  but  this  seems  only  a  later  and  artificial
limitation.  "Vened.  C,"  ii.  18,  18;  "Dimetian  C,"  ii.  23,  §34;
"  Vened.  C,"  ii.  19,  §  2,  3  ;  31,  §  18.

64.  "  Vened.  C,"  ii.  31,  §  19,  20.

65.  Skene,  o.c.  iii.  324.

66.  Skene,  iii.  390.

67.  Skene,  iii.  169,  cf.  161.

68.  As  to  the  way  clan  holdings  were  turned  into  feudal  holdings
in  Scotland,  see  Cos.  Innes,  "  Lectures  on  Scottish  Legal  An-
tiquities," 157.

69.  Skene,  iii.  319.

70.  Dimetian  C,  ii.  23,  §  55.

71.  Dimetian  C,  ii.  8,  §  15,  §  110,  114.

72.  Seebohm,  Trib.  system,  65.

73.  Misc.  Laws,  viii.  11,  §  34.

74.  Arbois  de  Jubainville,  vii  105  ff. Skene,  iii.  142c


100  THE  GROWTH  OF  THE  MANOR

75.  Rhys  and  Br.  Jones,  191  ;  Seebohm,  107.

76.  Venedot.  C,  iii.  1,  §  29,  30,  etc.  The  separate  position
of  the  man  with  a  family — gm*-ar-teylu  (deulu) — has  to  be  well
noticed,  but  it  is  a  very  different  matter  from  the  supposed  posi-
tion of  a  penteulu  enjoying  the  patriarchal  rights  of  the  chief  of  a
wele  and  the  sole  proprietorship  of  its  land.  Seebohm,  "  Tribal
System,"  90.

CHAPTER II

1.  Hubner,  "  Das  romische  Heer  in  Britannien,  Hermes,  xvi."  Cf.
Jung,  "  Die  romanischen  Landschaften  des  romischen  Reichs,"  301.
Similar  observations  have  been  made  in  a  very  instructive  article
in  regard  to  Eastern  Switzerland  by  F.  Keller  :  "  Die  romischen
Ansiedelungen  in  der  Ostschweiz,"  Abhandlungen  der  Gesellschaft
fiir  Erforschimg  vaterlandischer  Alterthiimer,  Ziirich,  XV.  53,  57.

2.  Prof.  F.  Haverfield,  though  drawing  a  more  favoxirable  general
estimate  as  to  the  strength  of  Roman  influence  ("  Romanization
of  Roman  Britain,  Proceedings  of  the  British  Academy,"  II,  192,
193),  has  repeatedly  insisted  on  this  point,  e.g.,  "  Victoria  County
History  of  Worcestershire,"  p.  201.  "  Edinburgh  Review,"  1899,
April,  "  County  History  of  Warwickshire,"  article  on  "  Roman
remains."  Cf.  the  description  of  the  southern  hundreds  of  Surrey,
especially  of  the  hundred  of  Godley,  in  the  Victoria  History  of  Surrey.

3.  Pitt-Rivers,  Excavations  in  Cranborne  Chase,  near  Rushmore,
1887-1898.  Professor  Haverfield  remarks  in  his  paper  on  the
Romanization  of  Britain  that  similar  customs  have  left  traces  in
Italy.  The  barbarism  of  backward  Italian  settlements  can  hardly
be  made  an  argument,  however,  against  the  derivation  of  barbaric
customs in Britain from primitive Celtic Ufe.

4.  Even  Somerset,  Dorset  and  Wiltshire  form  a  part  of  the
Welsh  region  in  the  time  of  Alfred,  if  one  may  judge  from  his
locating  his  estates  in  these  counties  in  "  Wealhcynne."  Alfred's
will,  Thorpe,  "  Diplom.,"  488.

5.  De  Courzon,  "  Prolegomenes  a  Cartulaire  de  Redon,"  XIV,
XVIII,  CCXXVII.  Loth,  "  Emigration  bretonne  en  Armorique,"
71,  183,  191-4.  "Mots  Latins  dans  les  langues  brittoniques,"  21.
De  la  Borderie,  "  Histoire  de  Bretagne,"  i.  288.  This  last  writer
is  not  inclined  to  admit  a  violent  conquest,  but  is  at  one  with  De
Courzon  and  Loth  as  to  the  thorough  change  effected  by  the  influx
of  emigrants  from  Great  Britain.  As  to  the  Romanization  of
Armorica  before  the  overflow  from  Great  Britain  cf.  Desjardins,
"  Geographic  historique  de  la  Gaule."

6.  It  may  be  noted  as  a  significant  fact  that  a  whole  crop  of
Christian  sepulchral  inscriptions,  written  in  Latin,  but  character-
istically Celtic  in  the  shape  of  the  monuments  and  in  the  names  of
the  people  mentioned  in  them,  appears  after  the  lapse  of  the  Roman
power  in  those  very  parts  of  the  island  from  which  Latin  inscriptions


NOTES  101

of  the  Imperial  period  are  all  but  absent. Hiihner,  "  Inscriptiones
BritanniEe  Christianse,  Introduction,"  vii.

7.  Procopius,  iv.  20,  gives  the  Imperial  version  of  these  events,
ascribing  them  to  over-population.  It  is  clear  from  his  account
that  the  emigrants  left  the  island  every  year  in  largo  parties  with
women  and  children.  The  Uves  of  the  Breton  saints  show  that
the  exiles  often  came  over  under  the  guidance  not  of  military  chiefs,
but  of  ecclesiastics  and  monks.  All  the  numerous  saints  of  Brit-
tany except  five  hail  from  Great  Britain.  The  chief  epochs  of
the  emigration  correspond  to  the  turning  points  of  the  Saxon  Con-
quest. There  is  especially  a  great  overflow  in  consequence  of
the  Saxon  raid  along  Watling  Street  after  Natanleag  (511)  and  after
the  victory  of  Cerdicesford  (519).  La  Borderie,  i.  216,  255,  337  ;
Loth, "  Emigration," 163, 168, 169.

8.  According  to  M.  de  la  Borderie,  the  territory  of  the  Osismii
in  Brittany  was  colonised  by  Cornovii,  "  Histoire  de  Bretagne,"
i.  309.  Cf.  Loth,  "  Emigration,"  158,  165.  It  is  not  impossible,
nevertheless,  that  in  later  documents,  such  as  the  lives  of  Breton
saints,  Cornovii  means  simply  emigrants  from  Cornwall.

9.  La  Borderie  (310)  makes  St.  Brieuc  come  from  Valentia,  and
thinks  that  Quimper  (Corisopitum)  was  colonised  by  people  from
Corisopitum-Corbridge,  near  Newcastle.  It  may  be  remembered
in  this  connection  that  in  Celtic  tradition  Cunedda  is  made  to  come
from  the  country  adjoining  the  Wall.  We  need  not,  however,
attach  too  much  importance  to  such  identifications.  The  general
theory  can  afford  to  dispense  with  them.

10.  Monimsen  has  indeed  expressed  his  belief  that  if  in  modem
England,  apart  from  Wales  and  Cimiberland,  the  old  native  lan-
guage has  disappeared,  it  has  given  way  not  to  the  speech  of
Angles  and  Saxons,  but  to  the  Roman  idiom.  "  The  Roman
Provinces  "  (Engl,  trans.),  194.  Preface  to  "  Gildas,"  9,  10.  In  cor-
roboration of  this  thesis,  Herr  Pogatsher  has  tried  to  show  that  the
Latin  words  borrowed  by  the  Saxons  from  their  predecessors  on
the  island  have  been  affected  by  the  phonetic  changes  which
characterise  Vulgar  Latin,  and  that,  therefore,  these  Romance
loans  testify  to  an  extensive  use  of  Latin  among  British  natives.
("Zur  Lautlelire  der  griechischen,  lateinischen  imd  romanischen
Lehnworte  in  Altenglischen,"  Strassburg,  1888.)  But  there  seema
to  be  but  slight  foundation  for  these  assertions.  If  Bede  (ii.  1,
iii.  6)  mentions  Latin  as  one  of  the  languages  spoken  in  Britain,
nothing  could  be  more  accurate,  as  it  was  the  language  of  the
numerous  clerical  class  ;  but  the  same  remark  would  have  applied
to  Bede's  own  time,  as  is  shown  by  his  very  writings.  And  when
Gildas  inveighs  against  British  chiefs,  he  is  bound  to  give  somewhat
awkward  Latin  renderings  of  their  vernacular  names.  (Cf.  De  La
Borderie,  i.  269).  As  for  Vulgar  Latin,  according  to  French
scholai-s, the reverse of Pogatsher's contention would be true.


102  THE  GROWTH  OF  THE  MANOR

Thr'je  is  no  trace  in  the  words  borrowed  by  the  Teuton  conquerors
fiom  their  British  predecessors,  either  of  assibilation  or  of  the
weakening  of  tenues  between  two  vowels  which  are  characteristic
of  the  Vulgar  Latin  of  the  fifth  and  sixth  centuries.  And  some  of
the  topographical  names  which  have  come  over  from  the  pre-
Saxon  period  testify  rather  to  the  prevalence  among  the  British
population  of  Celtic  speech  than  of  Vulgar  Latin.  Kent,  for
example,  proceeds  from  Caution,  which  is  Celtic,  and  not  from
Cancion  (pronounced  Cantsion),  as  it  would  have  been  in  Vulgar
Latin.  The  name  of  the  River  Trent  supposes  an  elUpsis  of  the
original  s  in  Trisanton,  and  an  intermediate  form,  "Treanta,"  is
actually  given  by  Bede  in  conformity  with  Celtic  phonetic  habits,
whereas  people  using  Vulgar  Latin  would  have  kept  the  s  and
probably  spoken  of  the  Trisant.  Such  observations,  if  they  are
correct,  would  tend  to  show  that  Latin  was  not  spoken  by  many
on  the  island,  and  that  the  bulk  of  the  population  kept  on  speaking
Celtic  dialects,  while  no  Vulgar  Latin  of  the  same  Idnd,  as  that
which  spread  on  the  Continent  gained  firm  ground.  Loth,  "  Les
mots  latins  dans  les  langues  brittoniques,  20  ff.,  29  ff.

11.  The  juridical  aspect  pf  the  degeneration  of  Rome  is  well  illus-
trated by  Blumenstock,  "  Entstehung  des  ImmobiUareigenthums."

11a.  Professor  Haverfield's  interesting  paper  on  the  Romaniza-
tion  of  Britain  seems  deficient  in  this  respect,  and  yet  the  legal  aspect
of  life  can  hardly  be  disregarded  in  Roman  history.

12.  Mommsen,  "  The  Roman  Provinces,"  192 ;  Yung,  "  Die
romanischen  Landschaften,"  298.

13.  Loth,  "  Les  mots  latins,"  39  f?.  Loth's  Ust  must  be  checked
by  a  comparison  with  Rhys,  "  Archaeologia  Cambrensis,"  iv.  series,
vols.  iv.  V.  vi.  Cf.  Pedersen,  Vergleichende  Grammatik  der
Keltischen,  Sprachen,  pp.  20  ff.

14.  Kluge  in  "  Paul's  Grundriss  der  Germanischen  Philologie,"  i.  309.

15.  "  Giraldus  Cambrensis,"  i.  17,  says  of  the  Welsh  ploughing  :
boves  autem  ad  aratra  vel  plaustra  binos  quidem  jimgunt  rarius,
sed  quaternos  frequentius  ;  stimlatore  perambulo,  sed  retrogrado.
The  Welsh  laws,  as  we  have  seen,  speak  of  the  ploughteam  of  eight
oxen.  As  to  the  four-  and  eight-oxen  ploughs  in  use  in  Saxon
England,  see  Seebohm,  "  Village  Community,"  62,  74.  The  Rhaetian
big  plough,  described  by  Pliny,  "  Hist.  Natur.,"  xviii.  48,  was  a
combination  of  a  plough  and  a  cart  {plaustraratrum  has  been  sug-
gested as  a  probable  correction  for  the  plaumorati  of  the  MS.).

16.  Roman  agriculture  was  characterised  by  a  lavish  expendi-
ture of  human  energy.  Mommsen,  "  Roman  History,"  Dick-
son's transL,  i.  24 ;  iii.  77.  Meitzen,  "  Wanderungen,"  i.  276.
Meitzen's  attempt  to  fasten  on  the  big  plough  as  an  invention
characteristic  of  Teutonic  psychology  is  not  Ukely  to  carry  convic-
tion, o.c.  i.  281  ff.  Peisker,  "  Zeitschrift  fiir  Social  imd  Wirtschafts-
geschichte,"  v.  18  ff.  has  given  a  most  learned  description  of  ploughs
in  ijse  in  Central  and  Eastern  Europe. He  comes  to  the  conclusion


NOTES  103

that  '^he  big  plough  with  broad  ploughshare  and  a  "  sech  "
(boc)  was  borrowed  by  the  Germanic  tribes  from  the  Slavs.
Thou^  h  he  cannot  be  said  to  have  proved  this  contention,
he  has  shown  convincingly,  eis  it  seems  to  me,  that  the  development
of  the  big  plough  was  chiefly  produced  by  the  requirements  of  soil
and  of  husbandry,  and  not  by  national  traditions.  See  especially
pp.  29,  31,  82,  Victoria  County  History  of  Siu-rey.

17.  Mitteia,  "  Reichsrecht  und  Volksrecht  im  romischen  Kaiser-
reich,"  i  ;  Blumenstock,  "  Entstehung  des  Immobiliareigenthums
im  romischen  Reich,"  31,  95.

18.  M'->Ti>7isen,  "  Schweizer  Nachstudien,"  Hermes,  xvi.  474  ;  Blu-
menstock, 99.

19.  Kuhn,  "  Stadtische  und  biirgerliche  Verfassxing  des  romischen
Reichs,"  ii.  451.  There  was  in  Africa  a  procurator  Augusti  ad
curam  geoMum,  Renier,  "  Inscr.  Afr.,"  4033,  and  we  hear  of  native
chiefs,  prir.ces,  a.p)(pvTt<:,  Kuhn,  O.  C,  ii.  453.

20.  Kvhn,  O.  C,  ii.  245.

21.  Mommsen,  "  Schweizer  Nachstudien,"  479,  485.  In  the
history  of  Italy  itself  the  transition  from  country  divisions  to
cities  wa*^  but  gradual,  but  we  are  especially  concerned  with  the
r-ontrast  between  the  city  of  civilized  Rome  and  the  rviral  settle-
rae;-is  of  barbarians.  The  fact  that  the  Romans  could  draw  on
ItaUan  examples  to  define  it  does  not  alter  the  main  point,
which  is  that  the  Roman  conquest  did  not  do  away  with  the
customary  grouping  and  institutions  of  conquered  tribes.

22.  Mommsen,  "  Romisches  Staatsrecht,"  ui.  f.  21  ;  Blumenstock^
52,  116,  117,  130.

23.  On  the  movement  from  the  cities  to  the  villages,  TFe6er,
"  Agrargescliichte  Roms,"  263,  264.

24.  Plinitis,  "  Hist.  Nat.,"  iii.  4,  37  ;  Vocontiorum  civitatis
foederatse  duo  capita  Vasio  et  Lucus,  oppida  vero  ignobilia  xix,
sicut  xxiv  Nemausensibvis  attribuita.  Mommsen,  "  Romisches
Staatsrecht,"  iii.  719.

25.  Jung,  "  Ueber  Rechtsstellung  und  Organisation  der  alpinen
Civitates  in  der  romischen  Kaiserzeit,"  Wiener  Studien,  xii.  99  fi.
Salvioli,  "  Sulla  distribuzione  della  proprieta  fondiaria,"  Archivio
Giuridico,  N.  Ser.  iii.  225.

26.  Schulten,  "  Die  Landgemeinden  im  Romischen  Reich,"  Philo-
logus,  liii.  634  ;  C.T.L.  ii.  2632.

27.  Schulten,  "  Landgemeinden,"  635,  642.

27o.  Mr.  Haverfield  has  published  in  the  Athenaeum  (26  Sept.,  1903)
a  most  interesting  fragment  of  an  inscription  from  Caerwent  drawn
up  "  ex  decreto  ordinis  respubl(icae)  civitatis  Silurum."  It  shows
that  the  Tribe  of  the  Silures  continued  its  life  as  a  civitas  and  was
administered  by  an  ordo — probably  by  sessions  of  the  chief  men  of
the  tribe  held  in  Caerwent.

28.  Respublica Pagi  : Orelli Henzen, iii. 5215  ; Blumenstock,


104  THE  GROWTH  OF  THE  MANOR

132; cf. 118  J Schulten,  "  Landgemeinden," 645; Kuhn,  ii.  279.
Flach, "  Origines  de  rancienne  France,"  ii. 37.

29.  "  Ulpianus  Dig.  L.,"  i.  30  :  qui  ex  vico  ortiis  est  earn  jtatriam
intelligitTir  habere,  cui  reipublicae  vicus  ille  respondet.  Blumenstock,
114.

30.  "  Festus  sub  voce  victis  :  Ex  vicis  partim  habent  remptiblicam
et  jus  dicitur,  partim  nihil  eorum,  et  tamen  ibi  nundinae  aguntur
negotii  gerendi  causa  et  magistri  vici  quotannuis  fiunt."

31.  Oaius  :  vicis  legata  perinde  hcere  capere,  atque  civitatibvis,
Blumenstock,  120-3.  Curiales  of  vici  are  mentioned  ;  for  instance,
"  Cod.  Theod.,"  xi.  24,  6,  5  ;  Salvianus,  "  De  gubernatione  Dei,"
X. 18.

32.  SchuUen,  "  Landgemeinden,"  657,  658.  The  population  of
the  Saltus  Burunitanus  is  grouped,  for  instance,  into  a  sacral
community,  which  acts  as  substitute  for  a  social  and  poUtical
commune.  Mommsen,  "Das  Dekret  des  Commodus  fiir  den  Saltus
Burunitanus,"  Hermes,  xv.  393  ;  W.  Ramsay,  "  Geography  of  Asia
Minor,"  178  ff.

33.  Schulten,  Libello  dei  Coloni  d'un  domani  imperiale  in  Asia,
**  Mittheilungen  des  deutschen  archseologischen  Instituts  in  Rom,"
xiii.  226.  W.  Ramsay,  "  Geography  of  Asia  Minor,"  173.  The
Trpoayoiv  of  Hellenistic  districts  corresponds  to  the  praepositus
of  Romanised  provinces.

34.  The  inhabitants  of  the  Saltus  Btirunitanus  had  obtained  a
redress  of  their  grievances  from  Commodus,  and  it  is  to  this  successful
opposition  to  the  exactions  of  the  procurator  that  we  owe  the  cele-
brated inscription  of  Souk-el-IChmis.  C.  T.  L.  viii.  10570.  For
the  cormnentary  to  it,  see  Mommsen,  "  Das  Dekret  des  Commodus,"
Hermes,  xv.,  and  Fustel  de  Coulanges,  "  Recherches  sur  quelques
problemes  d'histoire,"  25.

35.  As  to  the  functions  of  Imperial  procurators  and  of  con-
ductores,  farming  Imperial  estates,  W.  Ramsay,  "  Cities  and  Bishop-
rics of  Phrygia,"  i.  281.  The  administration  of  the  estates  of  the
Church  of  Rome,  as  described  in  the  correspondence  of  Pope  Gregory
the  Great,  is  based  on  a  powerful  bureaucratic  organisation.
Mommsen,  "  Zeitschrift  fiir  Social  und  Wirthschaftsgeschichte,"  i.

36.  Schulten,  "  Landgemeinden,"  630  ;  Blumenstock,  188.

37.  The  Breton  plou  comes  from  plebs,  and  indicates  the  civil
parish,  whereas  lann  means  the  ecclesiastical  colony  and  parish.
The  use  of  the  Romance  derivation  (plebs-plou)  is  significant ;  it
shows  that  the  village  districts  or  civU  parishes  existed  among  the
Armorican  population  in  Roman  times.  La  Borderie,  "  Histoire  de
Bretagne,"  282  ; Loth,  "  Emigration  Bretonne,"  228,  229.

38.  Gierke, "  Deutsches Genossenschaftsrecht,"  iii.  134  ff.

39.  Beaudoin,  "  Les  grands  domaines  dans  I'Empire  Romain,"
Nouvelle  revue  historique  de  droit,  1898,  82.

40.  Weber, "  Agrargeschichte Roms," 22 ff.  ; PauU-Wissotva,


NOTES  105

♦•  Realencyclopaedie  des  KJassischen  Alterthiims,"  s.v.  Ager.

41.  Paul-lVisso7va,  voce  Ager; Blutneiistock,  177.

42.  Weber, "  Agrargeschichte," 43.

43.  Blumenstock,  71.

44.  Daremberg  et  Saglio,  "  Dictionnaire  des  Antiquit^s,"  s.v.
Latifiindia  (L^crivain).

45.  "Ulpianus,"  Dig.  L.  15,  4:  Forma  censuali  cavetur,  ut  agri
sic  in  censum  referantur  ;  Nomen  fundi  cuj  usque  ;  et  in  qua  civitate
et  in  quo  pago  sit  ;  et  quos  duos  vicinos  proximos  habeat.  Et
arvum,  quod  in  decern  annos  proximos  satum  erit,  quot  jugerum  sit :
vinea,  quot  vites  habeat :  olivae,  quot  jugerum  et  quot  arbores
habeant,  pratvun,  quot  intra  decern  annos  proximos  sectum  erit,
quot  jugerum  ;  pascua,  quot  jugerum  esse  videantur  ;  it-em  silvae
caeduae.  Omnia  ipse  qui  defert,  aestimet.  Hyginus,  Gromatici
scriptores,  p.  205  :  certa  enim  praetia  agris  eonstituta  sunt,  ut  in
Pannonia  arui  primi,  ami  secvmdi,  prati,  siluae  glandiferae,  silufie
vulgares,  pascuae.

46.  "  SjTisch-Romisches  Rechtsbuch  aus  dem  v  Jahrhundert,"
ed.  by  Bruns  and  SacJuni,  37  :  5  jugera  of  vineland  were  equated  to
20  jugera  of  best  arable,  40  jugera  of  second-class  arable,  and  60
jugera  of  third-class  of  the  same.

47.  Seeck,  "  Die  Schatzungsordnung  des  Diokletian,"  Zeitschrift
fiir  Social  und  Wirthschaftsgeschichte,  iv.  338.

48.  Seeck,  277.  Cf.  Arbois  de  Jubainville,  "  Fimdus  et  villa,"
Revue  historique  de  droit  for  1900,  213,

49.  Seeck,  280, 1282.

50.  "  Cod.  Justinianus,"  xi.  59  :  de  omni  agro  deserto  et  quando
steriles  fertihbus  imponuntiu",  especially  5,  8,  9.

51.  Eumenius,  gratiarvun  actio,  11  :  septem  millia  capitum
remisisti,  quartam  ampUus  partem  nostro.  Eum  censuvun  remis-
sione  ista  septem  milUum  capitxmi  viginti  quinque  millibus  dedisti
vires,  dedisti  opem,  dedisti  salutem.  Cf.  Sidonius  Apollinaris,
*'  Carm."  xiii.  19  ;  "  Cod.  Theod.,"  xi.  28,  13  ;  "  Nov.  Valentiniani."
iii.  33,  2;  Marquardt,  "  Staatsverwaltung "  (2nd  ed.),  ii.  230  ff.
Sometimes  the  alleviation  could  be  effected  by  reducing  the  taxation
of  every  single  jugum.  Ammianus  Marcellinus,  xvi.  5,  on  the
lessening  of  the  taxes  of  Gaul  by  Juhan.

52.  "  Dictionnaire  des  Antiqmtes,"  s.v.  fimdus.  P.  Viollet,
"  Histoire  du  droit  fran^ais,"  i.  39,  n.  2.  Block,  in  Lavisse,  "  His-
toire  de  France,"  i.  437.  The  chief  work  on  the  fundi  is  Arbois  de
Jubainville,  "  Origines  du  droit  de  propriete."  But  one  must  also
take  careful  note  of  the  criticism  of  his  theory  by  Flach,  "  Origines
de  I'ancienne  France."  I  need  not  say  that  the  fundus  plays  a
great  part  in  F.  de  Coulange's  thoroughly  individualistic  theory,
e.g., "  L'alleu  et  le  don-rsine  rural,"  17  ff.

53.  Flach,  "  Fimdus,  villa  et  village,"  in  Revue  Historique  de
droit  for  1900,  p.  385  ff.


106  THE GROWTH OF THE MAJSfOE

54.  Lecrivain,  "  Melanges  de  I'ecole  de  Rome,"  v.

55.  Flach,  "  Origines  de  rancienne  France,"  ii.  32.

56.  Weber,  "  Agrargeschichte  Roms,"  120  ff.  Voigt,  "  Ueber  die
Agri  Compascui,^'  Abhandlungen  der  K.  sachsischen  Akademie  Phil.
hist.  Classe  X.

57.  Hansen,  "  Agrarhistorische  Untersuchungen,  i  ;  zur  Geschichte
der  Feldsysteme."

58.  Mr.  Seebohm  has  devoted  to  the  subject  of  the  aflfinity  be-
tween the  open  field  practices  of  England  and  France  an  interesting
paper,  read  before  the  Cymrodorion  Society,  but  hitherto  unpub-
lished. He  traces  those  common  practices  to  Celtic  antecedents
as  well  as  to  Roman  influence,  and  I  can  but  follow  his  lead  in  this
respect.  It  seems  to  me  that  not  so  much  the  unity  of  Roman
influence  fashioning  barbarian  agriculture,  but  also  the  close
resemblance  of  the  primitive  agrarian  habits  of  northern  barbarians,
be  they  Celts,  Germans  or  Slavs,  has  to  be  insisted  upon  in  order
to  explain  the  features  of  the  so-called  open-field  system.

59.  Salvioli,  "  Sulla  distribuzione  della  proprieta  fondiaria,"  iii.
503  ; Mommsen,  "  Ostgothische  Studien,"  494.

60.  Mommsen  was  the  first  to  point  out  their  exaggeration  in  an
article  on  the  "  Italische  Bodentheilung,"  Hermes,  xix.  393  ff.

61.  Salvioli,  iii.  221,  231  ;  Seeck,  "  Schatzvmgsordmmg,"  288.
The  provision  made  for  starting  the  veteran  as  a  landed  proprietor
is  mentioned  in  C.  Th.  vii.  20,  38.

62.  Block,  in.  Lavisse,  "  Histoire  de  France,"  440 ;  Salvioli,  iii.
502.

63.  The  Codex  Theodosianus  gives  a  whole  series  of  enactments
calculated  to  protect  independent  communities  of  peasants.  The
most  remarkable  apply  to  eastern  Metrocomiae,  "C.  Th.,"  xi.  24,
6  ;  i.  16,  12  ;  viii.  5,  35.

64.  Frontimis,  "  De  controversiis  agrorum,"  p.  53  (Lachmann)  ;
frequenter  in  provinciis  .  .  .  habent  autem  in  saltibus  privati  non
exiguum  pop\ilum  plebeium  et  vicos  circa  villam  in  modum  muni-
tionum.

65.  On  the  Roman  villa  and  its  dependencies,  see  Lecrivain,
"  Latifimdium "  in  the  "  Dictionnaire  des  Antiquit6s  grecques  et
romaines,"  ii.  p.  2962  ;  Meitzen,  "  Wanderungen,"  i.  352.  As  to
Britan  in  particular,  Mommsen,  "  Roman  Provinces,"  i.  94.  I
need  hardly  mention  that  an  appreciation  of  their  probable  social
influence  forms  one  of  the  chief  aims  of  F.  Seebohm's  "  EngUsh
Village  Community,"  78; Lecrivain,  "Latifundium,"  957.

66.  Varro,  "  De  lingua  latina,"  v.  36 :  quos  agros  non  colebant
propter  silvas  aut  id  genus,  ubi  pecus  possit  pasci,  et  possi  debant,
ab  usu  salvo  saltus  nominarunt.  Aulus  Gellius,  "  De  verborum
significatione  ap.  Festum,"  320,  b,  20  ;  saltus  est,  ubi  sUvae  et
pastionee  sunt,  quoriim  caxisa  casae  quoque.  Si  qua  particula  in
eo  saltu  pastorum  aut  custodvun  causa  aratur,  ea  res  non  peremit


NOTES  107

nomen  saltui,  non  magis  quam  fundi,  qui  est  in  sgro  cultoet  ejus
causa  habet  adificium,  si  qua  particula  in  eo  habet  silvam. — Ulpian
is  still  coupling  the  saltus  with  pastures:  saltus  pastiones  que  (20  eid
Sabinum  D.  xxxiii.  f.  8,  §  1).  See  on  the  subject  M.  Voigt,  "  Ueber
die  agri  compascui  und  die  staatsrechtliche  possessio  der  romischen
Republik  in  the  Abhandlungen  der  Sachsischen  Gesellschaft
der  Wissenschaften,"  Historisch  -  Philologische  Classe,  x.  225.
Mommsen,  "  Das  Dekret  des  Commodus,"  Hermes,  xv.  409.  The
original  sense  of  saltus  was  gradually  extended,  and  the  expression
may  have  been  employed  in  a  looser  way  to  indicate  all  manner  of
great  estates  concurrently  vn%\\  latifundium.  But  the  meaning  of  ex-
empted territory  was  technically  characteristic  of  it,  and  as  a  matter
of  fact,  most  saltus  mast  have  been  tracts  of  primitive  and  insuffi-
cient cultivation.

67.  SchuUen,  "  Die  Grossen  Grundherschaften  der  romischen
Kaiserzeit  "  ;  Rostoictzew,  "  Die  Kaiserliche  Patrimonial- Verwaltung
in  Aegypten,"  Philologus,  Ivii. 565.

68.  Beaudoin,  "  Les  grands  domaines  dans  rEmpire  romain,"
Nouvelle  Revue  de  Droit,  1897,  555  ;  Lecrivain,  "  Latifundium,"
958,  962.  Pelham,  "The  Imperial  Domains  and  the  Colonate,"  lays
stress  on  the  rise  of  special  agrarian  customs  such  as  the  Colonate
on  the  estates  of  the  emperors,  and  on  their  gradual  spread  to  the
practice  of  private  estates.  It  seem  most  likely  that  Imperial
domains  did  play  a  leading  part  in  the  evolution  of  social  customs
and  of  social  legislation,  but  it  must  not  be  forgotten  that  the  effect
of  their  influence  as  leading  examples  must  have  depended  chiefly
on  the  fact  that  their  condition  was  very  much  like  that  of  any
private  salttts.  Cf.  Seeck,  "  Die  Pachtbestimmungen  eines  rom-
ischen Gutes,"  Zeitschrift  fiir  Social  und  Wirthschaftsg.,  vi.  334.  As
to  Gaul,  Blumenstock,  94.  Our  best  information  as  to  the  manage-
ment of  saltus  is  drawn  from  African  and  Asiatic  inscriptions,  and
this  may  be  explained  by  two  considerations.  To  begin  with,
Africa  and  the  Eastern  Hellenistic  provinces  are  particularly  rich  in
inscriptions,  and  the  output  of  Britain  in  this  respect  is  insignificant
when  compared  with  them  ;  evidently  it  was  more  the  fashion  in
Germany  and  Britain  to  trust  to  unwritten  custom.  Secondly,
Asiatic,  and  possibly  Egyptian,  evidence  points  to  the  maintenance
in  those  parts  of  ancient  traditions  as  to  the  treatment  of  rural
districts  administered  as  royal  and,  later  on,  imperial  estates.  I
shall  have  to  come  back  to  the  peculiarities  of  their  condition,  and
it  may  be  sufficient  at  present  to  refer  the  reader  in  regard  to  the
estates  of  Pergamene  kings  converted  into  imperial  saltus,  to
Ramsay,  "  Geography  of  Asia  Minor,"  178  ;  "  Cities  and  Bishoprics
of  Phrygia,"  284  ;  Rostoivtzew.  Studien  zur  Geschichte  des  Kolonatea
(1910).  As  to  Egypt,  P.  Meyer,  "  Philologus,"  Ivii.  ;  and  from
another  point  of  view,  Rostowtzew,  op.  cit.,  cf.  De  Zulueta  in  my
•'  Oxford  Studies  in  Social  and  Legal  History,"  i. Traces  of  rural


108  THE  GROWTH  OF  THE  MANOR

holdings  and  buildings  probably  connected  with  saltus  are  not
wanting,  however,  in  the  western  half  of  the  Empire,  f  .i.  Schumacher,
"  Roniische  Meierhofe  im  Limesgebiet,"  Westdeutsche  Zeitsehrift,
1896,  1  ff.  17.  J.  Naher,  "  Die  bauliclien  Anlagen  der  Romer  in  dem
Zehntlanden  Karlsruhe,"  1883.  Saltus  are  sometimes  mentioned  in
inscriptions  of  the  Germanic  provinces.  See  C.  T.  L.  xii.  2250,  2251,
2272,  2604,  Pdham,  "  The  Imperial  Domains  and  the  Colonate  "
S1890),  p.  27.

69.  Beaudoin,  "  Les  grands  domaines  dans  I'Empire  romain,"
N.  Revue  historique  de  droit,  1898,  90,  95,  550.  Henri  Monnier,
"  Etudes  sixr  le  droit  byzantin,"  Revue  histor.  de  droit,  1900,  87  ff.

70.  Blumenstock,  124  ;  Seeck,  "  Schatzungsordniang  Diocletians,"
317.

71.  Lecrivain,  "  Latifundivun," 965,  966.

72.  Beaudoin,  "  Les  grands  domaines,"  Nouvelle  Revue  hist,  de
droit,  1897,  596,  599  ; 1898,  104.

73.  Beaudoin, 1898,  211.

74.  Blumenstock,  53.

75.  The  practice  of  illegal  patronage  (patrocinia)  is  growing  fast,
and  calls  forth  a  number  of  prohibitive  enactments,  H.  Monnier,
1.  c.

76.  Salvioli  and  Seeck  have  laid  especial  stress  on  this  aspect
of  historical  development.

77.  Seeck,  "  Die  Pachtbestimmungen  eines  romischen  Gutes,  on
the  Lex  Manciana,"  iv.  37-40.

78.  Salvioli,  "  Distribuzione,"  533,  534  ff.

79.  Blumenstock,  152,  184 ;  Seeck,  "  Schatzungsordnung  Diocle-
tians," 287.

80.  Salvioli,  "  Distribuzione,"  509.  It  would  be  difficidt  to
exaggerate  the  social  importance  of  "  emphyteutic  "  practices  and
customs  at  this  jioncture  of  the  world's  history.  We  must  not
merely  hold  on  to  the  technical  ifKJjvTevm?  as  sanctioned  by
Zeno  and  Justinian,  but  also  take  into  accovmt  the  crop  of  emphy-
teutic tendencies  in  the  constitution  of  hereditary  and  privileged
tenant-right  in  return  for  colonisation  and  cultivation  of  the  soU,  in
regard  to  small  farmers  and  peasants."  Miiteis,  "  Zur  Geschichte
der  Erbpacht  im  Alterthum,"  31  47,  61.

81.  Salvioli,  "  Distribuzione,"  508,  512,  518.

82.  Some  of  the  legal  enactments  as  to  the  status  of  coloni  are
collected  in  C.  Just.  xi.  48.  I  have  treated  this  subject  at  some  length
in  a  Russian  work  on  the  "  Origins  of  Feudalism  in  Lombard
Italy," Petersburg, 1881.

83.  This  side  of  the  question  has  been  mainly  discussed  by
Savigny,  "  Ueber  das  Colonat"  (Kleinere  Schriften,  i.);  Huschke,
"  Ueber  den  Census  des  Augustus "  ;  Kuhn,  "  Stadtische  und
birrgerliche  Verfassung  Roms,"  i.  ;  Rodhertus,  "  Ueber  die  Adscrip-
titier, Colonen  und  Inquihnen in  the  Jahrbiicher fiir National-


NOTES  ID'J

okonomie  und  Statistik,"  ii.  ; Heisterbergk,  "  Entstehung  des  Colo-

nats."

84.  Fustel  de  Coulanges,  "  Le  colonat  "  in  the  Recherches  sur
quelques  problemes  d'histoire ;  Mojnmsen,  "  Das  Dekret  des
Commodus,"  Hermes,  xv.  408  ;  Beaudoin,  "  Les  grands  domaines,"
i.  693  ff. ;  Pelham,  "  The  Imperial  Domains  and  the  Colonate,"  1891  ;
Schulten,  "  V,  colonatus  "  in  the  Dizzionario  epigrafico  of  Ruggioro  ;
and  Seeck,  "  Colonatus  in  Pauly-Wissowa,  "  Real-Encyclopaedio  des
Klassischen  Alterthimis.

85.  These  points  of  view  have  been  especially  urged  by  Rodbertus,
op.  cit.

86.  Block,  in  Lamsse's  "  Histoire  de  France,"  i. 444.

87.  In  a  sense  the  ascription  of  the  coloni  to  the  glebe  was
only  one  side  of  the  universal  process  of  ascription  of  the  dif-
ferent classes  of  society  to  their  callings  and  duties,  as  carried
on  by  the  later  Empire.  See  especially  Kuhn,  "  Stadtische  und
Biirgerliche  Verfassung  Roms."

87a. Cf.  my  paper.

88.  Seeck,  "  Die  Pachtbestimmungen  eines  romischen  Gutes
in  Afrika,"  Zeitsch.  f.  Soc,  und  W.g.,  vi.  368.

89.  Commentaries  on  these  most  interesting  inscriptions,  first
published  by  M.  Toutain  ("  Revue  liistorique  de  droit,"  1897,
and  "  Memoires  de  1' Academic  des  Inscriptions,"  i.  Serie  xi.
I  ff.),  are  given  by  Schulten,  "  Abhandlungen  der  Gottingener
Gesellschaft  der  Wissenschaften,"  Ph.H.Kl.,  ii.  ;  Beaudoin,  "  Les
grands  domaines  de  I'empire  Remain  "  ;  Seeck,  "  Die  Pachtbestim-
mungen eines  romischen  Gutes  in  Africa,"  and  Cuq,  "  Le  colonat
partiaire  en  Afrique,"  Memoires  de  1' Academic  des  inscriptions,  is.
xi.  87  ff.  Cf.  Mitteis'  "  Zur  Geschichte  der  Erbpacht  im  Alter-
thum,"  29.  Cf.  now  the  inscription  of  Ain-el  Djemala.  Rostoivzew,
"  Studien  zur  Geschichte  des  romischen  Kolonates."  Corcopino,
"Melanges  de  I'ecole  do  Rome,"  1906,  and  Klio,  1908  ;  Mispoulet,
"  Nouv.  Rev  d'hist.  de  droit,"  1907.

91.  M.  Cuq  has  made  this  out  convincingly  against  Fustel  de
Coulanges,  who  tried  to  show  that  the  partiarius  was  a  peasant
settled  on  the  land  without  agreement,  and  legally  at  the  mercy  of
his  lord.  Mem.  de  I'A.  des  Inscr.,  ser.  xi.  p.  117.  The  coloni  of  the
African  inscriptions  are  certainly  leaseholders,  though  their  lease
may  be  formed  by  the  very  fact  of  their  living  on  the  land  of  the
emperor  or  of  a  great  man,  and  thereby  submitting  to  the  rule  of
the  "  lex  saltus,"  the  "  perpetua  forma,"  which  was  decreed  for
the  cultivators  ^f  this  land.  The  passage  from  explicit  agreement
to  tacit  acquiescence  in  a  condition  to  which  one  succeeded  by
inheritance,  and  with  which  all  one's  means  of  subsistence  were
bound  up,  seems  to  have  been  the  intermediate  step  between  free
leases  and  ascription  to  the  glebe,  and  it  is  in  this  sense  that  I
should  like  to  interpret  the  suggestion  that  it  is  on  the  imperial


110  THE GROWTH  OF  THE MAIifOR

estates  that  the  first  germs  of  a  colonate  fixed  to  the  soil  appear.
From  the  legal  point,  the  colonus  of  a  great  estate,  eis  is  shown,  for
instance,  by  the  Gasr  Mezuar  case  (C.T.L.  viii.  Suppl.  14,  428),  had
a  lease,  and  was  originally  free  to  leave.  In  reality  he  submit-
ted to  a  condition  which  was  framed  for  him  and  for  his  successors
once  for  all,  unless  they  preferred  to  commit  a  kind  of  economic
suicide,  and  thus  he  became  gradually  the  subject  of  the
landowner,  whether  emperor  or  a  great  man,  or  a  city,  and
this  condition  was  legalised  by  general  enactments  in  the  fourth
century.

92.  SchuUen,  "  Libello  dei  coloni  d'un  domanio  imperiale  in  Asia,"
MittheUungen  des  deutschen  archaeologischen  Instituts  in  Rom,
xiii.  (1898),  p.  227.

93.  Fttstel  de  Coulanges,  "  Recherches  sur  quelques  problemes
d'histoire,"  129  :  Le  proprietaire  n'a  pas  distribu6  le  domaine  entier.
II  a  fait  de  ce  domaine  deux  parts  :  I'une  qu'U  a  concedee  aux  colons,
r  autre  qu'il  s'est  reservee.  La  part  des  colons  est  subdivis6  en
petits  lots  que  chacun  exploite  pour  son  compte.  La  part  reserv6e
aux  proprietaire  est  cultivee  a  I'aide  des  bras  de  ces  memes  colons  "
L'alleu  et  le  domaine  rural,  85,  87.

94.  "De  colonis  Illyricianis,"  C.  Just.  xi.  53  (a.d.  371).  Comp.
Seeck,  "  Pachtbestimmxmgen,"  Z.S.W.g.,  vi.  on  iv.  23-27  of  the
Lex  Manciana  ;  Weber,  "  Agrargeschichte,"  supposes  that  in  the
fovirth  and  fifth  centuries  there  took  place  a  general  change  from
payments  in  money  and  kind  to  services  (Frohnden),  but  there  is  so
little  evidence  to  support  that  suggestion  that  he  is  obliged  to  go
back  to  a  passage  of  Coltunella  de  re  rust. ,  who  advises  the  landlords
to  look  more  sharply  after  the  performance  of  work  by  the  coloni
than  after  rents.  But  Colimiella's  work  belongs  to  the  very  period
when  rents  in  money  and  in  kind  were  the  rule,  and  it  is  hardly
proper  to  draw  arguments  from  him  as  to  a  modification  of  the
conditions  of  tenure  which  is  thought  to  have  taken  place  in  the
fourth  and  fifth  centuries.  Besides,  what  Columella  had  in  view
must  have  been  a  stringent  supervision  of  the  whole  husbandry  of
the  coloni,  who  had  to  deliver  part  of  the  produce  to  the  landlord.
As  a  matter  of  fact,  such  a  supervision  had  to  be  carried  on  systema-
tically. Roman  landlords  did  not  take  up  the  point  of  view  that  the
farmer's  self-interest  was  a  svifficient  guarantee  for  the  proper  man-
agement of  their  plots,  and  the  consequent  profits  of  the  land-
owner. They  \ised  custodes  and  exactores  to  supervise  the  coloni
of  their  estates"  {Plinius,  "  Epist."  ix.  37;  "Lex  Manciana,"  ui.
15-17  ;  Cuq,  op.  cit.  114).  Altogether  the  question  as  to  the  time
when  the  passage  from  farming  for  rent  to  cultivation  burdened
with  labour  services  was  effected  must  remain  open,  but  in  making
conjectiires  on  this  subject  we  must  not  forget  that  a  system  based
on  the  employment  of  semi-servUe  labour  has  two  sides.  If  it
corresponds  to  an  overbearing  power  of  the  lord  over  his  subjects


NOTES  111

and  a  state  of  natural  husbandry  on  the  one  hand,  it  entails  tl»e  risa
of  very  extended  and  complex  home-farm  organisations  on  the  other.
Mommsen,  with  his  usual  profound  insight,  has  in  passing  noticed  the
fact  and  the  reason  in  his  article  on  the  management  of  the  estates
of  the  Roman  See  under  Pope  Gregory  I.'in  the  "  Zeitschrift  fiir  Social-
und  Wirthschaftsgeschichte,"  i.  59.  Gregory's  correspondence
gives  us  a  welcome  clue  to  the  economic  system  on  Italian  soil  at
the  close  of  the  sixth  century.  And  the  main  feature  is  quite  clear
— the  land  is  parcelled  out  to  small  farmers  for  rents  in  money  and
in  kind  :  labour  services  do  not  play  any  part  in  the  arrangement.
Of  course,  it  would  be  wrong  to  generalise  this  instance  and  to
apply  it  to  Roman  countries  in  general.  But  it  would  not  be  less
wrong  to  generaUse  the  few  indications  there  are  in  regard  to
labour  services  in  Roman  times.  The  transition  to  services  and
home-farm  cultivation  must  have  been  effected  at  an  earlier  date
north  than  south  of  the  Alps,  as  is  shown,  for  instance,  by  the  enact-
ments of  the  Bavarian  law.  But  even  there  it  does  not  seem  likely
that  a  general  advance  towards  the  formation  of  great  home  farms
was  made  at  a  time  when  economic  culture  and  public  order  were
rapidly  sinking,  and  landowners  had  to  use  all  sorts  of  inducements
to  keep  up  cultivation  anyhow.  It  seems  more  probable  that  the
tremendous  social  change  involved  in  the  process  described  was
mostly  achieved  in  the  epoch  of  gradual  reconstruction  of  European
society  which  began  with  the  Carolingian  and  kindred  reforms,  and
culminated  in  the  feudal  system,  although  in  that  work  of  economic
organisation  leading  institutions,  such  as  the  Church  and  Monarchy,
largely  drew  on  examples  and  traditions  going  back  to  the  time  of
Imperial  Rome.  Cf.  Gummerus,  Die  Frohnden  der  Kolonin.  Helsing-
fors,  1906.

95.  C.J.L.  vui.  Suppl.  1487.  Brunns-Mommsen,  "  Fontes  juris
Romani  Antiqui  "  (sixth  ed.),  382.  Commentary  of  SchuUen,  "  Die
Lex  Hadriana  de  rudibus  agris,"  Hermes,  xxix.  Comp.  Seeck,  "  Die
Pachtbestimmungen,"  Z.S.W.g.  vi.  or  iv.  15-22  of  the  L.  Manciana.

96.  C.J.L.  viii.  10,570.  viii.  Suppl.  14,428.

97.  W.  Ramsay,  "  The  Historical  Geography  of  Asia  Minor,"
173  ff.  as  to  Ormeleis  and  the  Cyllanean  Estates  in  Phrygia.  Re-
script of  PhiUppus  to  the  kolvov  twv  ' Apayovrjvwv  vapotKOiV  koL  yempyoiv
Tu)v  vfxerepwv.  J.  G.  C.  Anderson,  "  Journal  of  Hellenic  Studies,"  xvii.
418  ;  Schulten,  "  Libello  di  coloni  d'un  domanio  Imperiale  in  Asia,
Mittheilungen  des  deutschen  Archaeologischen  Institutes  in  Rom,
xui.  225  ff.  ;  Haussoulier,  "  Revue  de  philologie,"  1901,  18  ff.
It  is  out  of  the  question  in  a  book  treating  of  English  social  history
to  go  at  any  length  into  the  remarkable  but  complex  investigations
of  Rostowzew  (see  more  especially  his  "  Studien  zur  Geschichte  des
romischen  Kolanates,  1910).  It  may  be  pointed  out,  however,
that  they  establish  conclusively  the  importance  of  Hellenistic  pre-
cedents in  the  history  of  the  colonate. The  author  shows,  to  begin


112  THE GROWTH OF THE IVIANOR

with,  a  large  population  of  half-servile  tenants  (Xaot  ^acnXiKol)
on  the  domains  of  the  Ptolomies  in  Egypt  and  of  the  Seleucida?
in  Asia  Minor.  He  traces,  secondly,  the  practice  of  compeUing
agriculturists  to  abide  in  their  tSt'a,  their  place  of  origin  to  fiscal
and  administrative  measures  of  these  Hellenistic  rulers.  But  it  is
hardly  necessary  to  point  out  that  we  have  to  do  in  such  a  case
only  with  one  of  the  currents  which  made  for  serfdom  during  the
Imperial  period.  A  study  of  the  Digest,  especially  of  D.  XIX,  2,
shows  that  the  lawyers  of  the  second  and  third  century  a.d.  con-
sidered the  conditions  of  the  coloni  as  governed  in  the  main  by  the
law  of  leases  (locatio  conductio),  and  therefore  the  problems  as  to  the
passage  from  free  contract  to  servile  status  in  the  course  of  these
and  subsequent  centuries  still  holds  good.  The  process  on  private
estates  must  have  been  influenced  by  the  evolution  on  the  estates
of  the  Emperor,  but  it  was  not  subordinated  to  the  latter,  and  we
have  to  account  for  it  in  connection  with  many  other  causes  besides
Hellenistic  precedents.  These  and  similar  limitations  do  not  detract,
of  course,  in  any  way  from  the  value  of  Professor  Rostowzew's
investigations.

98.  The  coloni  of  Araguene  complained  against  fiscal  officials
(KaLcrapiavoi),  soldiers  and  city  magnates,  who  seem  to  have
worried  them  by  quartering  themselves  on  them,  and  exacting
carriage  services.  SchuUen,  "  Un  UbeUo,"  243  ff.  The  vicani  of
Scaptaparene  in  Thracia  seek  redress  in  an  exactly  similar  case
through  a  certain  Pyrrhus,  miles  compossessor.  "  Zeitschrift  der
Savigny,  Stiftung  fiir  Richtsgeschichte,  Romanistische  Abtheilung,"
xii.  p.  246.  It  is  curious  to  hear  that  they  openly  threaten  the
patrimonial  administration  with  a  wholesale  exodus  :  eTrei  ovv  ovKert
Svi'd/xeda  (f>epeLV  to.  I3a.pr]  Kal  ws  a.\-)]$w<s  KivSwevofjiev  virep  ol  Xoittol  roSe
Kal  rjiJ.€L'S  TrpoXtTretv  tov<s  TrpoyovTKovs  OefxeXiovi  .  .  .  "Eav  ye  fiapoy/xeOa,
<li€v$6fJLeOa  aTTOToiv  oiKct'tov  koI  jxeyicrrav  $r]fXLav  to  TaixiiLOVTrepLfiXrjdrjcrerai.

99.  Fustel  de  Coulanges,  Recherches,  40 ;  SchuUen,  s.  v.  colonatus
in  Ruggiero's  "  Dizionario  epigrafico."

100.  SchuUen,  "  Libello  dei  coloni,"  232.  The  kolvov  twv  ^Apayovrj-
vwv  yeojpywv  kol  irapoLKOiv  has  already  been  mentioned.  The  villagers
of  the  Cyllanean  estates  in  Phrygia  formed  colleges  for  the  worship  of
Z«i's  2a/3ao-tos,  and  it  is  not  hkely  that  these  associations  should
have  been  restricted  to  purely  sacral  pvirposes.  SchuUen,  "  Libello,"
239  ;  Ramsay,  "  Cities  and  Bishroprics  of  Phrygia,"  i.  283.  In  the
light  of  these facts.the  statement  of  Beaudoin,"  Les  grands  domaines,"
N.  R.  Revue  de  droit,  1897,  566  :  "  la  plebs  saltus  ne  possede  aucune
constitution  municipale  ni  magistraux  locaux,"  seems  inadequate.
Comp.  1898,  p.  745.  The  elected  local  magistrates  were  called
magistri  in  the  West,  and  Trpoayovres in  the  East.

101.  Siculus  Flaccus,  "  De  conditione  agroriim,"  157,  9  :  com-
pascua,  quod  est  genus  quasi  subsecivorimi  sive  loca,  quae  proximi-
quique vicini, id est qui eorum contingimt pascua communiter


NOTES  113

habent.  Id.  150,  12  :  quorundam  vicinorum  aliquas  silvas  quasi
publicas,  immo  proprias  quasi  vicinorum  esse  coiniieriinus,  nequo
quisquam  in  els  cedendi  pascendique  jus  habere,  nisi  vicinos,  quorum
stint.  Isidor,  "  Origines,"  xv.  13,  9  :  compascuus  ager  dictus,  qui
a  divisionibus  agrorum  relictus  est  ad  pascendum  communiter
vicinis.

102.  Cod.  Theod.  quoted  in  n.  63.  Considerable  stress  has  been
laid  in  the  history  of  the  Eastern  Empire  on  a  supposed  contrast
between  the  settlement  of  individual  coloni  (irdpoLKoi)  in  the  VI.
century,  as  exemplified  by  the  Novelise  of  Justinian,  and  the  com-
munal organisation  of  the  peasantry,  as  recognised  by  the  NJ/xos
ycwpytKo'e  of  the  Iconoclast  Emperors  and  by  later  charters.  Russian
scholars  have  tried  to  explain  this  change  by  the  influx  of  Slavonic
tribes.  Ouspensky,  "  On  the  Slavonic  Community  in  the  Byzantine
Empire."  Journ.  of  Ministry  of  Public  Instr.  vol.  225,  p.  30.  More
moderately  Vassilievsky,  on  the  "  Agrarian  legislation  of  the
Iconoclasts,"  Jo'xrnal  of  the  Ministry  of  PubUc  Instruction,  vol.  199,
p.  258  (Russian).  "  Materials  for  the  Social  History  of  the  Byzantine
Empire,"  ibid.,  vol.  202,  p.  160.  Comp.  Zacharice  von  Lingenthal,
"  Gescliichte  des  griechisch-romischen  Rechts."  The  vici  of  the
Code  Theodosianvis  and  the  recent  discoveries  as  to  the  organisation
of  the  Asiatic  salttis  shows  that  in  this  case,  as  in  the  western  in-
stances, communal  institutions  arose  independently  of  ethnographic
causes  on  the  soil  of  Roman  provinces  as  well  as  on  soU  conquered
or  colonised  by  Germans  and  Slavs.  These  institutions  were
generated  by  several  facts  which  recur  in  all  the  instances  of
which  we  have  been  speaking  :  tribal  survivals,  extensive  semi-
pastoral  methods  of  husbandry,  settlements  which  involved  a  good
deal  of  intermixture  of  rights,  the  necessity  for  territorial  lords  to
organise  their  districts  and  possessions,  not  on  the  principle  of  the
steward's  absolute  rule,  but  on  that  of  tributary  self-government.
No  need  to  add  that  there  were  many  varieties  and  gi-adations  in
these  communal  arrangements,  but  it  would  be  difficult  to  attempt
precise  definitions  and  distinctions  in  regard  to  their  obscure  origins.
Enough,  if  we  may  discern  the  general  direction  of  development.
Cf.  De  Zulueta,  Patronage  in  the  later  Roman  Empire  in  my
"Oxford  Studies  in  Social  and  Legal  History,"  I, 1909.

103.  The  traces  of  hamlet  settlements  are  still  visible  on  the
EngUsh  maps  of  western  counties.  Maitland,  "  Domesday  and
Beyond,"  16.  These  clusters  are  especially  characteristic  of  Wales
and  Cornwall,  or  of  parts  freshly  conquered  from  the  Celts.  See,
for  example,  the  description  of  the  Welsh  strip  in  the  border
of  Gloucestershire,  "  Domesday,"  i.  162.  Comp.  Taylor,  "  The
Domesday  of  Gloucestershire," 202.

104.  Meitzen,  "  Wanderungen,"  etc.  i.  288  ff.  320.  See  the  map
of  the  neighbourhood  of  Brescia,  given  and  explained  by  Schulten,
"  Romische Flureintheilung," Abhandlungen der K. Gesellschaft

I


114  THE GROWTH OF THE MANOR

der Wissenschaften in Gottingen, Phil. hist. Klasse, N. F.
ii.  7.

105.  To  illustrate  the  manner  in  which  such  institutions  and
customs  are  formed  by  the  force  of  circumstances,  in  surroundings
where  it  would  be  impossible  to  trace  any  marked  influence  of
Teutonism,  I  should  like  to  point  to  the  very  remarkable  case  of
land  arrangements  in  the  Koussillon.  They  have  been  described
with  great  fulness  and  exactitude  by  M.  Brutails.  Communal  rights
and  institutions  arise,  as  it  were,  by  themselves  for  the  regulation
of  a  husbandry  and  of  a  land-holding  largely  dependent  on  pastoral
pursuits  and  the  temporary  occupation  of  waste.  See  especially  pp.
243-253.  Comp.  262  :  les  moeurs  agricoles  du  temps,  la  multi-
pHcite  des  troupeaux,  les  complications  resultant  du  droit  de  vaine
pature  devaient  entrainer  journellement  des  differends  au  sujet  des
dommages  causes  par  les  bestiaux  dans  les  proprietes  particulieres,
sur  les  berges  des  ruisseaux,  aux  arbres,  aux  haies,  etc.  Ce  fut
pendant  de  longs  siecles,  c'est  encore  de  nos  jours  dans  les  mon-
tagnes,  la  source  de  la  plupart  des  proces.  Comp.  Brutail's  remarks
on  the  popular  institutions,  termed  svhreposats  de  la  horta.

106.  For  example,  "  L'alleu  et  le  domaine  rural,"  438  :  *'  le  droit
du  proprietaire  est  sans  limites  et  sans  reserves.  Ni  la  foret,  ni  le
marais,  ni  le  sol  inculte  ne  lui  echappent,"  172.  "  Pas  une  seule
ligne  qui  mentionne  vm  usage  commun  de  terres  ou  une  communeaut6
de  village.  Pas  une  seule  fois  avant  le  x.  siecle  un  mot  qui  signifie
communeaute.  Pas  une  seule  fois  vous  ne  voyez  les  gens  d'un
village  se  reunrr  spontanement,  deliberer  entre  eux,  prendre  une
decision  quelconque."  I  can  but  endorse  the  remarks  of  Blumen-
stoek,  47,  when  he  points  out  the  "  Kritiklosigkeit  von  Fustel  de
Coulanges  iiberall,  wo  es  sich  um  Bodenrechtsverhaltnisse  handelt,
die  sich  von  dem  sogenannten  vollen  Eigenthum  durch  irgend  etwas
unterscheiden."  The  celebrated  French  savant  directed  a  furious
onslaught  against  the  attempts  of  German  scholars  to  vindicate
a  village  commtmity  introduced  into  mediaeval  Europe  by  the
Teutonic  invasion,  but  he  would  have  certainly  resented  even  more
the  notion  that  village  communities  were  living  or  forming  them-
selves under  Roman  rule.  He  was  clear  in  his  mind  about  the  origin
of  all  property  in  land  from  private  ownership.

107.  Special  quotations  are  not  needed,  as  the  whole  book  on
the  "  English  Village  Community"  is  devoted  to  that  theme.  I
will  just  point  to  pp.  267-269.  The  stress  is  laid  on  the  power
of  organisation  of  the  lord,  which  cuts  short  the  assertion  of
individual  rights,  and  welds  the  peasantry  into  a  servile  or  semi-
servile  community  for  the  purposes  of  the  cultivation  of  the  domain
and  of  the  imposition  of  burdens.


Second Book
THE OLD  ENGLISH PERIOD


CHAPTER  I^

THE  ENGLISH  CONQUEST

I. General  View  of  English  Settlement

The  settlement  of  Saxons,  Angles,  Jutes  and  Frisians
in  Great  Britain  modified  considerably  the  history  of  this
The  Course  of  country.  It  could  not  do  away  with  all
the  Invasions  the  acquirements  of  the  Roman  period,
it  did  not  lead  to  a  wholesale  destruction  or  flight
of  the  provincial  population  and  to  the  formation  of
Teutonic  communities  on  a  clean  slate.  But  no  more
Ukelihood  is  there  that  the  appearance  on  the  scene  of  this
powerful  new  factor  produced  only  a  modification  of  the
upper  stratum  of  society  or  the  substitution  of  a  few  Ten-
tonic  masters  for  a  few  Romanised  masters  over  the  heads
of  the  British  population,  and  that  it  did  not  interrupt  the
continuity  of  provincial  institutions,  and  especially  of  the
Roman  estates.  There  are  many  indications  of  a  very
thorough  change  in  the  habits  and  conditions  of  life  and  of
a  very  pecuhar  course  of  development  at  this  historical
juncture.  The  main  facts  have  been  pointed  out  so  often
that  it  will  suffice  for  our  purpose  to  recall  them  in  a  general
way  to  the  mind  of  the  reader.  It  is  clear  that  the  influx
of  people  of  Teutonic  blood  must  have  been  considerable.
The  best  warranty  for  such  a  conclusion  Hes,  on  one  hand,
in  the  complete  victory  of  Teutonic  speech  over  Romanoe__
and  Celtic,  a  victory  especially  striking  in  regard  to  local
nomenclature,^  on  the  other,  in  the  extant  historical  inform-
ation as  to  the  protracted  struggle  and  the  very  gradual
progress  of  the  conquerors.  The  onsets  of  pirates  against
the  Saxon  shore  in  the  third  and  fourth  centuries  must  al-
ready have  left  certain  deposits  of  foreign  settlers  behind


118  THE GROWTH OF THE IVIANOR

them,  in  the  same  way  as  the  analogous  attacks  of  Franks,
Goths,  Burgundians,  etc.,  on  Gaul  introduced  Iceti  and
federated  barbarians  into  the  province  long  before  the
Roman  Government  gave  way.  Still,  these  preHminary
colonies  did  not  play  an  important  part  in  the  history
of  the  island  just  because  it  was  an  island,  and  the
silver  streak  rendered  the  wholesale  introduction  of
entire  tribes  more  difficult.  But  after  the  withdrawal
of  the  legions,  a  real  immigration  began.  The  invaders
had  again  and  again  to  draw  on  the  support  of  their
kinsmen  on  the  continent,  and,  on  the  other  hand,  the
northern  Germanic  tribes,  which  had  stood  too  far  back
to  take  an  active  part  in  the  looting  and  the  land -grabbing
in  the  West  and  South,  poured  in  one  population  wave  after
the  other  into  the  opening  which  presented  itself  in  the
north-western  corner  of  the  Empire.  It  has  been  conjec-
tured that  women  and  children  were  often  brought  over ;
and  it  is  significant,  in  regard  to  the  number  of  the  invaders
and  the  character  of  the  movement,  that  Bede  mentions
specifically  that  the  home  of  the  Angles  on  the  continent
was  left  desolate  and  empty  in  consequence  of  the  migration
of  its  population  to  Britain.^  This  remark,  although
certainly  not  based  on  careful  census  returns,  gives  testi-
mony which  is  sufficiently  weighty  and  definite  for  our
purpose :  it  shows  that  our  best  informed  and  almost
contemporary  witness  considered  the  invasions  in  the
light  of  a  migration  of  entire  tribes,  and  not  as  the  founda-
tion of  stray  colonies  by  reckless  adventurers.  Nor  can
there  be  any  doubt  that  there  occurred  much  direct  destruc-
tion of  property  and  uprooting  of  institutions.  The
Chronicle  preserves  traditions  of  several  cases  of  sacks  of
towns,  which  ended  in  their  complete  ruin  for  a  time  or  even
permanently :  the  cases  of  Anderida,  Uriconium,  are  well
known,  and  the  ruins  of  Roman  walls  and  houses  on  the  sites
of  Verulam,  Rochester,  Lincoln,  York,  etc.,  speak  as  loudly
as  the  chance  entries  of  the  Chronicle.^  It  has  been  noticed,
also,  that  in  most  cases  when  Roman  villas  come  to  Hght,
traces  of  fires  show  that  they  had  been  ruthlessly  destroyed
and  pillaged. And,  apart  from  the  direct  damage  done  to


THE ENGLISH CONQUEST  119

the  products  of  Roman  life  and  civilisation,  we  have  to
take  even  more  into  account  the  indirect  effect  produced
by  such  inroads  and  catastrophes,  the  loosening  of  social
ties  consequent  upon  them,  the  decay  of  institutions  which
had  sprung  into  being  in  an  entirely  different  atmosphere,
and  required  some  order  to  fulfil  their  destination.  It  was
not  easier  to  uphold  an  advanced  cultivation  of  the  soil  and
intricate  relations  between  landlords  and  coloni  than  it  was
to  proceed  with  a  satisfactory  coinage,  lively  trade  inter-
course, or  fine  literature.  It  has  been  noticed  already  that
the  political  strain  of  the  later  Empire  made  itself  felt
in  a  universal  lowering  of  standards  on  all  sides,  in  a  very
perceptible  barbarisation  of  Rome  and  of  the  provinces.*
There  can  be  no  doubt  that  the  actual  downfall  of  the
Imperial  power  and  the  effect  of  the  appearance  of  bar-
barian conquerors  and  settlers  led  to  a  rapid  reduction  of
the  requirements  and  means  of  culture.  And,  if  it  is  rightly
urged,  on  the  other  hand,  that  the  barbarians  had  not  the
power  nor  the  interest  to  destroy  entirely  the  commodities
accumulated  in  the  provinces  and  that,  on  the  contrary,
they  must  have  tried  to  possess  themselves  of  goods  and
men,  of  capital  and  machinery,  of  useful  arrangements
and  skilled  labour,  this  observation  wiU  go  to  explain
the  passage  from  one  period  to  the  other,  but  will
not  lessen  the  importance  of  the  catastrophe  itself;
because,  quite  apart  from  ill  will,  brutahty,  and  wanton
destruction,  the  disruption  of  the  old  order  of  things
was  an  indirect  consequence  of  the  change  in  the  main  facts
on  which  political  and  social  existence  depended.  It  is
not  necessary  to  burn  a  man  in  order  to  kill  him  :  a  thrust
through  some  vital  part  of  his  body  may  be  sufficient  to
destroy  an  organism,  and  the  social  dismemberment  conse-
quent on  the  invasions  was  by  itself  fatal  to  ancient  institu-  >
tions,  and  necessitated  new  departures  :  people  had  to  go
back,  as  it  were,  to  a  more  primordial  condition  of  society.  <
Again,  the  fact  on  which  we  have  been  laying  stress  in  the
preceding  chapter — the  fact  of  the  very  incomplete
Romanisation  of  the  Britons — must  have  played  an  im-
portant part in determining subsequent development.


120  THE  GROWTH  OF  THE  MANOR

Instead  of  having  to  cope  with  a  society  which  was  romanised
to  the  core,  and  which  no  amount  of  disruption  could
bereave  of  its  Romance  character,  the  EngUsh  conquerors
fell  upon  a  mass  of  people  many  of  whom  still  talked  Celtic,
still  kept  up  many  Celtic  views  on  kinship  and  clanship,
on  the  appropriation  of  land  and  the  modes  of  its  cultiva-
tion, on  tribute,  etc.

The  result  was  a  much  more  thorough  predominance  of
barbarian  customs  and  institutions  than  that  which  obtained

■r  *  •  e*-  -  in  neighbouring  Gaul.  We  shall  never  learn  to
Teutonic  stamp  °  ,_,,.,  „ i i  •

of  Old  English what  extent  the Enghsh  race,  as  rounded  in

History  those  days,  is  in  actual  descent  by  blood  the

product  of  Teutonic  or  of  Celtic  forefathers,  any  more  than
we  can  say  in  what  precise  proportion  the  blood  of
Teutons,  of  Slavonic  Wends,  of  Lithuanian  Prussians,
and  Baltic  Finns  is  mixed  in  the  bodies  of  the  present
citizens  of  Prussia.  It  would  be  also  a  hopeless  task  to
trace  in  what  way  the  psychological  traits  of  the  Enghsh
people  have  been  affected  by  the  mixture  of  its  component
parts  in  one  mould.  Happily,  these  unprofitable  disquisi-
tions are  not  necessary  to  understand  that  in  the  beginning
of  the  Old  Enghsh  period  the  predominating  population  of
the  island  was  very  much  ahke  in  its  habits  and  institutions  to
the  tribes  of  Germany  on  the  right  bank  of  the  RhinCj^^and
that  it  was  gradually  drawn  away  from  them  on  a  new  and
independent  course,  not  so  much  by  the  admixture  of  Celtic
and  Roman  blood,  as  by  the  pecuHar  aims  and  conditions  of
its  history.  Renouncing  speculations  as  to  the  number  of
Britons  which  survived  under  the  sway  of  the  Saxons  and
Angles,  we  may  rest  satisfied  with  the  undoubted  fact  that
they  increased  in  numbers  towards  the  West  and  were
most  numerous  in  the  territories  acquired  by  the  West
Saxons  in  the  seventh  and  eighth  centuries  and  in  Strath-
clyde.  Let  us  merely  take  note  that  the  England  of  the
eighth  century  is  a  Teutonised  country,  forming  a  marked
contrast  with  Gaul,  which,  though  conquered,  was  develop-
ing Romance  speech  and  true  to  many  Roman  customs.^
In  both  countries  the  downfall  of  Imperial  power  and  of  the
centralised  and  powerful  bureaucracy  proceeding  from  it


THE ENGLISH CONQUEST  121

led  to  the  subversion  of  the  financial  system,  which  had
played  such  a  prominent  part  in  the  life  of  the  provinces  :
it  came  to  be  paralyzed  if  not  actually  abolished  in  the
hands  of  the  barbarians.  At  the  same  time,  the  confusion
of  political  and  private  interests,  and  the  introduction  of
numerous  institutions  of  public  and  private  law  peculiar
to  the  barbarians,  produced  profound  changes  and  necessi-
tated a  thorough  remodelhng  of  society.  But  the  stamp
of  the  Teutons  is  laid  in  a  very  marked  manner  on  the
language  of  England,  on  her  political  and  legal  institutions,
even  on  her  ecclesiastical  hfe,  in  which  Christianity  had  to
be  engrafted  afresh  after  the  cataclysm  of  the  invasions.
No  more  likehhood  is  there  that  in  the  economic  arrange-
ments of  society  the  traditions  of  the  Empire  should  have
flowed  on  without  disturbance,  though  one  may  be  pre-
pared to  come  across  all  kinds  of  remnants  and  survivals
of  them.

Besides all the facts which may be adduced from
the sources of the early English  period  in  support  of

the above conception of the Anglo-Saxon
Danish  Invasion .  ,,  i ui • j ,l  .

mvasion  there  are  valuable  mdications  as  to

its  character  to  be  obtained  from  later  occurrences,
if  they  are  interpreted  with  sufficient  caution.  The
invasions  and  settlements  of  the  Angles,  Saxons,
Jutes,  and  Frisians  had  hardly  ceased  when  a  new
series  of  migrations  began — the  migrations  of  tribes  coming
from  stUl  more  northern  parts — from  Jutland,  the  Danish
isles,  and  Norway.  The  raids  and  settlements  of  these
people  in  the  eighth,  ninth,  and  tenth  centuries  do  not
seem  to  have  differed  materially  from  those  of  their  prede-
cessors of  the  fifth,  sixth,  and  seventh  centuries.  If  any-
thing, they  were  less  obstinate  and  less  successful.  But
still  their  course  and  results  disclose  not  chance  onslaughts
or  successes  of  stray  adventurers,  but  a  continuous  flow  of
Scandinavian  immigrants  and  settlements,  which  trans-
formed the  social  aspect  of  the  north-east  of  England.
As  the  difference  in  speech  and  customs  between  English
and  Danes  was  not  great,  they  amalgamated  easily  into
one  whole,  which  showed  no  discordant  features  and  no


122  THE  GROWTH  OF  THE  MANOR

violent  change.  But  there  cannot  be  any  talk  in  regard  to
the  tract  of  the  Five  burghs,  or  even  of  the  wider  Danelaw,
of  a  mere  substitution  of  one  set  of  lords  for  another  and
of  a  sHght  modification  of  the  surface  of  society,  leaving
untouched  its  deeper  layers  of  economic  organisation  and
working  populations.*  Even  less  reason  is  there  to  assume
such  unruffled  continuity  in  the  case  of  the  more  thorough
inroads  of  the  Angles  and  Saxons.


n. Ranks  and  Classes


The  first  question  which  requires  consideration  in  regard
to  early  English  society  applies  to  the  distinctions  to  be
drawn  between  its  classes.  We  must  try  to  make  out  in
what  relation  the  conquerors  of  Britain  stood  to  each
other  and  came  to  stand  to  the  conquered  population  ;
whether  there  arose  an  aristocracy  among  them,  and,  if  so,
on  what  lines  ?  On  the  other  hand,  what  indications
are  there  as  to  the  position  of  subjected  and  dependent
people  ?

A  very  valuable  glimpse  as  to  the  initial  arrangement  of
Anglo-Saxon  society  is  afforded  by  the  laws  of  ^Ethelberht,
of  Kent,  the  king  who  took  the  first  step  to
introduce  Christianity  among  the  heathen
invaders.  These  laws,  though  directly  appljdng  merely
to  one,  or  possibly  to  two,  of  the  little  States  created  on
British  soil  by  the  invading  tribes,  reflect  a  condition
of  things  which  may  be  fairly  taken  as  an  example  of
similar  arrangements  in  the  neighbouring  tribal  States,  if
details  are  left  out  of  the  account.

This  statement  of  Kentish  customary  law  of  the  close  of
the  sixth  century  records  a  division  of  the  people  which
falls  in  a  striking  manner  into  hne  with  the  recorded
characteristics  of  German,  especially  Low  German,  legal
custom.  In  this  State,  containing  a  mixed  population  of
Jutes  and  Saxons,  we  find  a  threefold  division  of  the  people


THE ENGLISH CONQUEST  123

into  earls,  ceorls,  Icets,  besides  the  slaves,  a  division  exactly
corresponding  to  the  threefold  division  which  formed  a
distinctive  feature  of  the  Saxon,  Frisian,  and  Thiiringian
system  on  the  Continent,  in  contrast  with  the  Frankish  and
the  High  German  (Bavarian,  Alemannic).  The  three  orders
were  termed  in  the  vernacular  German  dialects  ethelingi,
frilingi,  lazzi7  The  privileged  position  of  the  aristocratic
class  in  Kent  was  expressed  by  the  fact  that  fines  for
transgression  against  them  were  twofold  in  comparison
with  those  of  the  free,^  while  the  price  paid  if  an  earl
was  killed  seems  to  have  been  three  times  greater  than  that
of  a  freeman  :  the  ceorl  of  Kent  was  paid  for  with  100  gold
solidi  to  his  kindred  and  the  earl  with  300  solidi,  at  least  at
the  end  of  the  seventh  century.'

This  reminds  one  most  of  the  Frisian  scheme,  in  which
the  noble,  however,  got  only  twice  as  much  as  the  free-
man all  through,  and  of  the  Thuringian,  where  he  got  a
threefold  wergeld.  Besides  the  price  paid  to  the  kin-
dred, there  was  a  fine  for  the  infraction  of  peace  {fredus)
rendered  to  the  king,  and  in  the  case  of  the  freeman  it
amounted  to  one  half  of  the  payment  to  the  kindred  and
to  one  third  of  the  whole  wergeld,  exactly  as  with  the
Franks,  bringing  up  the  entire  wergeld  to  150  solidi  in
.gold.-^*'  Within  these  chief  distinctions  of  rank  there  were
many  grades,  three  varieties  of  laets  being  mentioned
expressly,  while  there  is  also  some  indication  of  several
degrees  among  the  ceorls.^^  This  feature  may  again
be  illustrated  by  a  reference  to  the  Alemannic  and  Lom-
bard codes,  which  divide  the  free  tribesmen  into  several
subdivisions,  as  best,  medium,  and  minor  men ;  ^^  in
this  way  we  get  instructive  indications  of  the  attempt
of  the  barbarians  to  appraise  as  exactly  as  possible  differ-
ences of  birth,  wealth,  and  influence  noticeable  among
their  kindreds.

The  typical  freeman  of  the  Kentish  laws  is  the  ceorl,  the
man  who  has  no  special  distinction  to  claim,  but  stands  in
the  middle  rank  of  society  :  he  is  referred  to  when  general
rules  are  laid  down.^^  Without  carrying  any  modern
notions  of  democratic  freedom  into  the  description  of  this


124  THE GROWTH OF THE MAJifCR

main  class,  we  may  well  surmise  that  it  owed  its  independent
and  important  position  to  the  fact  that  the  bulk  of  the
warriors  who  had  conquered  the  Kentish  s^hore  belonged  to
it,  that  it  formed  the  mainstay  of  the  tribe  in  the  struggle
with  the  neighbouring  states  and  tribes.  Of  the  earls  we
cannot  tell  much,  unless  we  borrow  our  characteristics
from  the  analogous  cases  on  the  Continent,  where  we  find
the  etheUngs  to  be  a  tribal  nobility,  risen  to  the  top  of  society
through  the  predominant  position  of  leading  kindreds  in
regard  to  government  and  rehgion.^*  The  Icets  form  a
very  interesting  item  in  this  social  arrangement,  and,
although  mentioned  only  in  a  couple  of  enactments,  present
several  well-established  traits  which  are  worth  attending  to.
The  name  speaks  for  itself.  It  was  applied  concurrently
with  litiis,  lazzus  and  aldio  to  the  descendants  of  conquered
tribes  which  retained  personal  freedom  and  certain  tribal
rights,  but  were  reduced  to  the  position  of  tributary  depen-
dants of  the  conquerors.  Some  of  them  may  have  come
from  over  the  sea  with  the  freemen  and  ethehngs,  but  we
have  also  evidently  to  look  to  that  class  to  find  the  place
of  the  remnants  of  the  Romano -Celtic  population  of  Kent.
It  must  be  noticed  that  some  of  these  people  appear  to  have
held  a  very  tolerable  position,  as  we  find  them  provided
with  the  substantial  wergeld  of  80  shillings.  These  were,
however,  the  best  among  them ;  and  by  the  side  of  these
we  find  representatives  of  the  same  order,  marked  by  the
modest  prices  of  60  and  40  shillings.^ ^

Altogether,  the  whole  system,  with  its  various  social
degrees,  gathered  into  three  main  divisions,  appears  pri-
marily as  an  arrangement  for  estimating  personal  rank
and  tribal  qualifications  :  we  do  not  perceive  in  it  any
distinct  elements  of  landed  property,  or  special  connection
with  royalty.

Later  laws  present  many  memories  and  survivals  of  the
arrangements  discovered  at  starting  :  it  may  even  happen
West  Saxon  and  *^^*  ^  ^^^'  speaking  in  general  words  of  his
Mercian  people, still  refers  to them as ceorls and

Wergelds  earls  — the free and the noble. ^« In the

laws  of  Alfred  the  ceorl  is  still  taken  throughout  as  the


THE ENGLISH CONQUEST  126

typical  freeman,"  and  when  wergelds  and  fines  arc  men-
tioned without  any  direct  reference  to  the  rank  of  the
person  whose  claims  they  are  meant  to  satisfy,  they  apply
primarily  to  freemen  in  the  simplest  signification  of  the
term,  and  to  the  lowest  rank,  namely,  to  the  ceorls.  A  mere
reference  to  an  increase  of  fines,  according  to  the  rise  in
social  status,  may  have  been  deemed  sufficient  to  guide  the
wise  men  of  the  courts  in  regard  to  other  cases.'^  But  the
usual  practice  is  to  differentiate  society  into  three  classes,
of  which  the  two  superior  may  be  gathered  into  one  main
division.  These  classes  are  :  ceorls,  common  freemen,  with
a  were  of  200  silver  shillings,  sithcundmen,  with  a  were  of  600
shillings,  and  king's  thegns,  with  a  were  of  1,200  shillings.'^
The  sums  are  given  for  Wessex  and  Mercia,  and  the  actual
value  of  the  fines  varies  according  to  the  difference  of
currency  between  these  provinces,  while  Kent  remains
apart,  with  its  ancient  system  based  on  gold  currency,  but
the  enactments  of  Ine  and  Alfred  represent  undoubtedly
a  later  development  of  customary  law  than  those  of
iEthelberht,  and  are  chiefly  interesting  in  that  respect.^"
The  new  element  introduced  into  the  estimates  of  social'
condition  is  on  the  very  face  of  it  the  element  of  patronage  : ;
it  takes  the  place  of  tribal  nobility,  and  creates  an  aristo-
cracy of  its  own.  Both  the  twelvehyndman  and  the
sixhyndman  are  gesiihcundmen,  followers  of  chiefs,  and
enjoy  their  privileged  position  in  regard  to  were  and  wite,
and  in  other  respects,  by  reason  of  the  exalted  patronage
bestowed  on  them.  These  classes  are  commonly  divided
accorchng  to  their  very  different  appreciation,  and.
of  course,  it  is  important  to  know  why  they  are  divided.
It  has  been  suggested  that  the  sixhyndman  is  in  truth  a
man  of  the  same  status  as  the  twelvehyndman,  that  is,  a
king's  thane,  but  a  Welsh  one  or  of  Welsh  extraction,
while  the  highest  were  is  reserved  to  the  thanes  of  Englisli
l^Eth."  This  may  have  been  one  of  the  cases  in  which
600  ikeye  arose,  but  hardly  the  only  one.  The  600  shillings
division  is  mostly  mentioned  in  connection  with  a  scale  of
weres which starts from the purely Enghsh wergeld of


126  THE  GBOWTH  OF  THE  MANOE

200  shillings  for  the  ceorl,  omitting  the  Welsh  wergeld  of
120  shillings,  so  that  we  are  led  to  suppose  that  the  higher
rungs  of  the  ladder  are  not  meant  in  these  cases  for  Welsh
people,  but  for  English.  And  there  seem  to  be  several
classes  which  are  naturally  indicated  for  this  position,
namely,  thanes,  military  followers  of  lesser  rank  than  the
vassals  of  the  king,  on  the  one  hand ;  the  sons  and  rela-
tions gathered  round  both,  on  the  other — this  last  neces-
sarily a  rather  numerous  class ;  and  the  laws  give  us  some
indications  that  this  was  so.^^  The  Icets  mentioned  in  the
laws  of  ^thelberht  disappear,  but,  instead  of  them,  we  hear
of  wealhs  of  different  rank,  the  successors  of  the  provincial
population,  of  which  those  of  lower  degree  took  up  a  posi-
tion not  unlike  the  one  formerly  held  by  the  Kentish  Isets.^^
The  remodelling  of  society  under  the  influence  of  patron-
age is  certainly  a  most  characteristic  and  important  process,
and  it  is  well  worth  while  to  point  out  the
a  ronage  traits  bearing  on  its  course  and  origins. We*

find  the  mutual  tie  of  protection  and  service  spreading  inj
all  parts  of  society,  among  common  people  and  among
powerful  people.  On  the  one  hand,  the  hlaford,  the  private
lord,  becomes  an  almost  necessary  protector  in  the  case
oi  freemen  of  lower  degree,  especially  of  those  who  do  not
own  land  :  a  definite  part  of  the  fine  in  case  of  murder  is
reserved  to  him  by  the  side  of  the  fine  to  the  kindred,  and
he  is  looked  upon  in  this  way  as  supplementing  the  kindred
for  the  defence  of  individuals  against  violence,**  He
appears  also  to  help  them  in  case  of  htigation,  but,  on  the
other  hand,  he  is  made  to  look  after  pohce  and  is  bound  to
support  the  Government  in  watching  the  conduct  of  his
chents,  and  producing  them,  if  need  be,  before  the  courts
of  justice.*^  It  is  also  clear  that  some  service,  either
personal  or  pecuniary,  has  to  be  rendered  by  the  clients  in
return  for  the  protection  and  authority  of  the  hlaford.*^
In  hke  manner,  in  the  higher  regions  of  life,  kings  and  great
men  look  for  the  provision  of  effective  military  and  ad-
ministrative service,  not  only  and  not  so  much  to  the
ordinary  obligations  of  the  fyrd  and  of  suit  of  court,  but  to
the  special  connections  formed  by  patronage,  to  the  service


THE ENGLISH CONQUEST  127

of  their  followers,  their  gesiths  and  thanes.  In  principle
the  tie  is  a  personal  one ;  the  follower  may  often  live  with
his  lord  or  the  king,  take  his  meal  in  his  hall,  ride  forth  on
his  expeditions,  and  fulfil  his  errands  as  a  personal  attendant,
provided  for  in  regard  to  arms,  horses,  and  other  requirements
of  knightly  existence.  But  as  this  kind  of  service  becomes
more  important  and  systematic,  the  followers  receive
land  on  conditions  closely  resembling  the  continental  prac-
tices of  beneficiary  endowment,  and,  on  the  other  hand,
those  who  hold  land  in  larger  quantity  get  drawn,  whether
they  will  or  not,  into  the  class  of  followers,  which  develops
gradually  into  a  professional  organisation  of  officials  and
knights.  Besides  the  necessities  of  administration,  the
marked  changes  in  the  methods  of  warfare  had  much  to  do
with  this  process.  The  specially  equipped  warrior,  com-
pletely armed,  expert  in  riding  and  ready  to  serve  for
longer  periods,  was  taking  the  chief  place  in  warfare,  while
the  levy  of  the  fyrd  became  more  and  more  cumbersome
and  inappropriate  for  pitched  battles  and  protracted
expeditions.  The  freemen,  of  whom  the  bulk  of  the  fyrd
was  composed,  had,  in  consequence  of  the  increase  of  the
population  and  the  permanent  settlement  on  the  land,  be-
come small  householders  encumbered  with  large  families,
and  by  necessity  more  bent  on  tiUing  their  fields  than  on
"  earning  wounds  "  and  seeking  booty  in  war.  No  wonder
that  a  special  well-equipped  force  became  necessary  to
stiffen  the  unwieldy  and  unsoldierly  gatherings  of  the
fyrd.  The  rise  of  the  professional  military  class  from
the  large  body  of  freemen  is  actually  dealt  with  in  a  sys-
tematic spirit  in  enactments  and  customary  law.  Again
and  again  we  come  across  statements  that  the  rise  in
social  prosperity,  the  "  thriving  "  of  a  person  leads  from
the  condition  of  the  common  freeman,  the  ceorl,  to  that  of
the  sithcundman  and  king's  thane,  and  the  following  stages
may  be  marked  in  this  process.^''  The  wealh  gets  to  equal
the  ceorl  if  he  owns  a  hide,  the  normal  family  holding,  for
which  he  pays  the  king's  tribute  (gafol).^^  His  were  still  re-
mains less  than  that  of  an  English  ceorl  (120  shillings  instead
of  200),  but  the  condition  of  "  gafol  gelder,"  of  the  man


128  THE  GROWTH  OF  THE  MANOR

paying  tribute  from  his  land  to  the  king,  and  bound  to
come  to  the  f3n'd,  the  national  levy,  seems  to  be  common
to  both.^^  The  next  main  division  is  marked  off  by
the  holding  of  five  hides,  which  entitles  the  EngUshman
to  a  were  of  1,200  shillings,  and  the  Welshman  to  one  of
600  shillings,  and  places  them  in  the  position  of  mihtary
followers  connected  with  the  king  by  the  ties  of  direct  or
indirect  patronage. ^°  The  case  of  the  lesser  wergeld  of
600  shillings  is  not  presented  with  sufficient  clearness  in
regard  to  bom  Englishmen,  but  must  be  assumed  to  have
formed  a  kind  of  minor  subdivision  within  the  group.
The  Estate  of  The  relation  of  both  classes  to  the  land
the  Soldier  was  a  matter  of  first-rate  importance,  not
only  for  themselves,  but  also  for  the  government  of
those  times,  such  as  it  was.  The  laws  of  Ine  give
interesting  gUmpses  of  the  internal  life  of  the  social
group  formed  by  the  estate  of  the  professional  soldier.
He  is  considered  as  a  pioneer  of  economic  progress  and
colonisation  as  well.  When  he  gets  his  land  he  is  not
merely  looked  to  by  the  king  for  mihtary  support,  the
maintenance  of  order,  and  the  collection  of  such  tribute
as  might  be  incumbent  on  the  hides  passed  to  him,  but  he  is
made  responsible  for  the  success  of  agricultural  management
on  his  estate.  His  land  is  more  than  a  commodity  for
himself  :  it  is  also  the  groundwork  of  poUtical  duties,  and
therefore  not  to  be  considered  simply  in  the  hght  of  private
ownership.  As  a  matter  of  fact,  it  may  probably  be  loaned
by  customary  process,  perhaps  even  booked  according  to
stricter  and  more  solemn  rules,  but  its  possession  carries
with  it  for  the  thane  an  obligation  to  settle  it,  to  pro-
vide it  with  tenants  for  efficient  cultivation,  and  certain
conditions  are  laid  down,  which  make  neglect  to  attain
this  aim  an  offence  against  the  king,  who  gave  the  land.
If  a  thane  has  received  20  hides  of  land,  he  ought  not  to
leave  this  benefice  of  his  without  showing  that  at  least
twelve  of  them  were  provided  with  tenants,  were  settled  ;
if  he  had  but  three,  one  and  a  half  at  least  had  to  be  given
back  as  settled.^^

The  same  laws  go  further,  and  give  some  directions  as  to


THE ENGLISH CONQUEST  129

the mode of treating  peasant  settlers on  such estates ;
Ceorlsand  naturally  enough,  as  the  thane  appears  only

Gebu'rs  in the light of a conditional occupier of

land,  and  the  settlement  itself  is  effected  not  merely  for  his
private  profit,  but  also  in  the  lasting  interest  of  the  king.
In  this  connection  remarkable  rules  are  laid  down,  which
distinguish  between  two  classes  of  coloni  on  those  royal
estates:  those  who  hold  dependent  land,  but  are  not
provided  with  the  very  homesteads  in  which  they  have,
to  live  are  to  pay  rent,  while  those  who  get  their  dwell-/
ings  from  the  lord,  are  also  to  perform  work.^^  Froni
other  sources  we  may  surmise  that  the  people  who  had
to  take  yardlands,  generally  quarters  of  a  hide,  and
to  settle  on  them,  the  gebiirs,  as  they  were  often  called,
became  gradually  attached  to  their  holdings,  not  only  by
the  fact  that  they  received  a  place  of  abode  and  land  for  til-
lage, but  also  because  the  stock  they  had  to  start  with  in
their  farming  was  often  provided  for  them.^^  But  their
relation  to  the  lord  as  described  in  Ine's  enactments  is  one
of  contract,  and  is  placed  under  the  direct  supervision  of
the  government.  AH  these  details  are  full  of  interest  and
meaning  :  they  show  that  on  the  one  hand  the  soil  of  the
kingdom  was  being  pieced  out  in  large  patches  to  provide
for  lay-thanes  and  mass-thanes,  for  people  of  the  military  and  ^
administrative  profession,  and  for  people  of  the  ecclesiasti- '
cal  profession.^*  The  land-books  supply  evidence  that  in
consequence  of  these  loans  and  grants  vast  numbers  of  free-
men who  had  held  their  land  directly  under  the  king,  had
paid  tribute  to  him  and  attended  the  fyrd  with  his  ealdor-
men  and  sheriffs,  came  to  be  placed  under  the  intermediate
lordship  of  mihtary  or  ecclesiastical  magnates,^^  while  other
freemen,  who  had  no  land  of  their  own,  or  sat  crowded
on  their  own  land,  entered  into  different  arrangements  with
the  great  landowners  as  dependent  tenants.  It  would  be
wrong,  however,  to  generalise  these  observations,  which  dis-
close the  working  of  important  processes,  but  do  not  warrant
any  exhaustive  classification  of  ranks.  Neither  the  existence
of  thanes  and  churches,  which  owned  land  by  scores  of
hides,  nor  the  occurrence  of  coloni,  who,  though  personally

K


130  THE GROWTH OF THE MAJ^OR

free,  are  placed  in  a  condition  of  indebted  dependants  on
great  men's  land,  make  it  certain  or  probable  that  the
ceorls  as  independent  but  small  landowners  burdened  with
public  tribute  had  disappeared,  or  that  the  legal  status  of
the  ceorl  as  the  common  freeman,  with  rights  analogous  to
those  of  the  noble  or  of  the  royal  follower,  though  smaller
in  amount,  had  become  an  anachronism.^^  On  the  con-
trary, even  the  administrative  enactments  that  have  been
handed  down  to  us  in  Ine's  code  testify  in  many  ways  to
the  elements  of  freedom  and  citizenship  in  the  life  of  those
portions  of  the  peasantry  which  are  directly  concerned  in
the  precepts  as  to  the  settlements  of  colonists.  The  dis-
tricts mentioned  are  and  remain  virtually  royal,  and  one  of
the  aims  of  the  series  of  enactments  is  to  connect  the  peasants
with  the  estates,  and  to  place  them  out  of  reach  of
arbitrary  exactions  and  sudden  personal  changes  of  the
lords  to  whom  the  estates  had  been  entrusted.  A  second
feature  has  also  to  be  noted,  namely,  that  one  important
class  of  tenants  is  composed  of  men  who  do  not  get  their
dwellings  and,  probably,  their  outfit,  from  the  lord.
Evidently  people  are  meant  who  Hve  in  their  own  "  flets  "
though  their  land  has  been  subjected  to  a  neighbouring
thane's  superiority.  Of  course,  such  transitional  con-
ditions are  apt  to  develop,  and  their  development  may
lead  far  ;  but  what  we  witness  in  the  laws  of  Ine  is  not  the
goal,  but  the  beginnings,  of  such  a  development ;  and  by  the
side  of  the  gehur  who  has  taken  a  yardland  by  contract,  and
of  the  ceorl  who  has  to  pay  rent  to  a  lord,  we  have  to  keep
in  mind  the  existence  of  the  ceorl  as  a  free  husbandman
holding  a  hide,  and  cultivating  it  with  the  help  of  his
family  and  slaves,  paying  tribute  only  to  the  king,
and  fully  able  to  thrive  to  the  possession  of  several
hides  and  to  the  dignity  of  a  thane.  The  difference  in  his
original  position  and  in  that  of  the  gehur  and  of  the
dependent  ceorl  would  not  be  reflected  in  the  wergeld,  as
all  would  be  paid  for  with  200  shillings,  but  this  is  merely
a  proof  that  even  the  ceorl  who  had  fallen  into  dependency
had  come  from  a  free  stock  and  retained  very  important
characteristics  of  his  descent.


THE ENGLISH  CONQUEST  131

The  effect  of  this  process  is  illustrated  in  a  remarkable
Effect  of  Norse  manner  by  the  third  stage  reached  by
Invasion  class distinctions,  a stage characteristic of

what  may  be  termed  the  Danish  period  of  English  history,
ranging  from  the  close  of  the  ninth  to  the  beginning
of  the  eleventh  century,  and  culminating  in  the  rule  of
Canute.

The  terrible  struggle  with  the  Norsemen  undoubtedly
contributed  to  deepen  dijtiiictions_  and  to  develop  the
pecuhar  attributes  of  the  classes,  because  both  tribute  and
professional  military  service  became  obligations  of  primary
importance,  which  had  to  be  enforced  at  all  costs,  and
came  to  be  regarded  as  the  main  features  of  social  organiza-
tion."

Already  in  the  undated  laws  of  the  North  people,  which
most  probably  belong  to  Half  dan's  kingdom  of  York,  a
characteristic  attempt  is  made  to  bring  Northmen  and
Englishmen  together  under  the  operation  of  one  wergeld
tariff ;  and  the  arrogant  superiority  of  tJie  Northern  con-
querors expresses  itself  in  the  fact  that  whereas  the  chief
English  ranks  are  appreciated  in  the  usual  manner  in
Northumbrian  cuirency  (thrymsas),  the  Northern  Hauldr
is  reckoned  to  be  worth  twice  as  much  as  the  English  secular
or  ecclesiastical  thane  (4,000  thrymsas  instead  of  2,000,
or  in  Wessex  shillings  2,000  instead  of  1,200).  Thus  a
special  distinction  is  created  for  the  North  people  which
towers  over  all  other  ranks. ^^  The  treaty  between  Alfred
and  Guthrum  is  more  modest,  in  so  far  as  it  places
the  Northmen  on  the  same  footing  with  the  English
twelvehyndmen,  that  is  the  men  of  highest  degree,  the
mihtary  and  ecclesiastical  followers  of  the  king.  Still,  the
main  idea,  that  even  the  simplest  Danish  soldier  is  worth
as  much  as  an  Englishman  of  high  rank  is  quite  clear.^"
Apart  from  the  sense  of  national  superiority,  the  reason
for  such  an  exalted  estimate  consisted  in  the  fact  that  the
Dane  as  member  of  the  "  Army  "  (here)  was  certainly  not
less  a  professional  soldier  than  the  West  Saxon  thane,
although  he  was  not  provided  for  in  the  same  way  :  he
had  to  rely  not  on  land-endowment  and settled capital.


132  THE  GROWTH  OF  THE  MANOR

but  on  the  power  of  exaction  and  domination  which  was
exercised  by  the  army  as  a  whole.  But  this  equahsation
of  the  professional  soldiers  on  both  sides  led  to  curious
consequences  in  regard  to  the  internal  class-divisions
of  both  nations.  All  the  free  Northmen  taking  part  in
the  army  are  assumed  to  be  equal  and  Jmulds,  although
in  their  home  in  Scandinavia  there  were  quite  a  number  of
distinct  social  groups,  and  the  invaders  certainly  belonged  to
very  different  sets.  The  "  army  "  and  victory  had  made  them
equals  and  raised  them  to  the  highest  standing,  but  as  no
amount  of  victorious  arrogance  could  achieve  an  equahty  in
wealth  and  consideration,  it  is  quite  clear  that  most  of  these
Jiaulds  with  four  mark  wergelds  were  in  truth  petty  people,
and  Hkely  to  shrink  even  more  when  the  army  came  to  be  dis-
banded. On  the  other  hand,  the  social  distinctions  which
had  grown  on  the  soU  of  old  custom  among  Enghsh
folk  had  to  be  rearranged  in  accordance  with  the  rough
contrasts  imposed  by  the  treaties,  and  we  find  that  the
intermediate  shades  of  sixhyndmen  and  wealhs  are  dis-
j  regarded,  and  one  main  distinction  left  standing :  the
I  professional  class  on  the  one  hand  with  its  1,200  shillings
j  were,  and  the  tribute-paying  peasant  on  the  other  with  a
200  shillings  were.  These  last  are  termed  ceorls  sitting
on  tributary  land,  and  freedmen,  leysings,  are  equated  with
them.  The  arrangement  is  a  very  rough  one.  and  it  would
not  do  to  argue  too  much  from  it  in  regard  to  the  position
of  particular  sections  of  the  community.  It  is  not  clear,
for  example,  how  the  120  shilhng  and  the  80  or  20  shilling
wealhs  would  henceforth  be  taxed  ;  it  is  more  than  probable
that  of  the  pesantry  some  would  be  raised  to  the  value  of
twelvehyndmen,  at  least  in  cases  of  reckoning  with  Danes,
while  others  would  be  placed  on  the  footing  of  tributary
ceorls.  But  the  general  tendency  to  make  a  broad  distinction
between  warriors  and  peasants  is  unmistakable,  and  cannot
but  be  regarded  as  an  ominous  sign  of  the  times  and  a  power-
ful factor  in  the  process  of  social  differentiation.  It  is
kept  up  in  later  enactments.  The  compact  between
JEthelred  and  Olaf  Trj-ggvason  (993)  makes  all  free  English
and  Norse  people  alike  worth  twenty -five  pounds,  that  is,


THE ENGLISH CONQUEST  133

gives  them  all  the  high  were  of  1,200  shillings,  but  does  not
even  mention  the  peasantry.  Canute  is  more  explicit :
he  addresses  his  people  of  different  nationality,  as  all
the  twelvehynd  and  all  the  twyhyndmen  of  his  kingdom,
in  this  way  insisting  on  the  lines  drawn  by  the  former
treaties.***

It  should  be  noted  that  the  more  we  advance  in  point  of
time,  the  less  pregnant  the  meaning  of  the  weres  and
wites  becomes.  On  the  one  hand,  tribal  relations  and
kinship  are  more  and  more  disarranged  :  the  enforce-
ment of  fines  and  the  HabiUty  to  take  part  in  paying  or
craving  them  get  more  and  more  uncertain  and  incon-
venient, and  even  legislation  itself  sometimes  turns  its
enactments  against  the  fundamental  principles  of  the
system.  King  Edmund,  for  instance,*^  enters  the  lista
against  the  practice  of  obhgatory  participation  of  kinsmen
in  the  payment  of  weres ;  and  as  weres  were  never  designed
to  be  paid  by  single  individuals,  the  loosening  of  the
responsibihty  of  the  kindred  meant  nothing  less  than  the
decay  of  the  system  of  pecuniary  compensation.  On  the
other  hand,  capital  and  corporal  punishment,  imprison-
ment, exile,  personal  amercements  and  fines  imposed  on
bodies  of  men  knitted  together  in  frank-pledge  or
territorial  joint  responsibihty  develop  and  increase  with
the  rise  of  poHce  supervision  on  the  part  of  the  Government.
And  in  the  case  of  the  Norsemen  themselves,  whatever  their
condition  may  have  been  at  home,  it  would  have  been  very
difl&cult  to  arrange  them  according  to  were -paying  and
were-craving  kindreds  in  England.  In  this  way  the  high
price  came  to  be  a  terroristic  measure  and  not  a  genuine
estimate.

In  consequence  of  the  remarkable  transformation  of
which  we  have  been  speaking,  new  terms  arise  and  new
definitions  are  sought  for  the  different  social  groups.  The
sixhyndman  disappears  entirely,  as  I  have  already  said.
The  ancient  name  of  ceorl  becomes  rarer,  while  gre6itr  often
takes  its  place,  to  indicate  the  dependent  cultivator  of  the
great  man's  land.  And  a  famous  expression  of  the  feudal
age  makes  its  appearance. Tunesman  points  to  the  ceorl


134  THE  GROWTH  OF  THE  MANOR

as  member  of  the  village  community ,*2  in  opposition  to
the  landowner  moving  in  another  and  a  higher  sphere,
the  sphere  of  the  king's  court  and  of  the  king's  riding
followers.  The  position  of  these  various  classes  and  their
actual  importance  in  the  general  economy  of  the  country,
however,  will  become  apparent  only  after  we  have  ex-
amined the  grouping  of  the  population  round  certain
centres,  and  its  organisation  for  different  purposes  of  social
Ufe.


CHAPTER  II
THE  GROUPING  OF  THE  FOLK

I. The  Kindred

In  any  order  of  society  the  individual  cannot  live  entirely
by  himself,  is  not  self  sufficient,  but  has  to  rely  in  many
respects  on  the  support  and  help  of  his
fellows  ;  and  though  the  forms  of  co-opera-
tion were  not  so  varied  and  did  not  produce  so  many
results  in  ancient  as  in  modern  times,  the  existing
groups  were  more  powerful  in  their  action.  J?he  single
man  was  weaker,  in  proportion  to  the  deficiencies  of  his
knowledge  and  skill,  on  the  one  hand,  and  to  the  scanty
development  of  the  State,  on  the  other.  It  would  be
wrong  to  assume  that  communalistic  and  co-operative
factors  entirely  subordinated  individuaHty  :  it  certainly
had  many  opportunities  and  openings  for  asserting  itself,
but  the  share  of  natural  groups,  of  associations  arising  and
growing  by  themselves,  apart  from  direct  arrangement  and
contract,  was  very  powerful  in  the  Ufe  of  the  people.

The  most  inevitable  and  natural  association  of  the  kind
was  provided  by  the  kindred  spreading  from  the  family^
The  kindred  of  the  German  tribes  was  more  loosely  con-
stituted than  that  of  the  Celts,  the  Romans,  or  the  Greeks  ;
it  did  not  develop  so  consistently  on  the  rigid  Unes  of
agnatic  clan  organisation  ;  we  do  not  see  it  on  British  soil
under  distinct  leaders  or  acknowledged  elders.  Still  it
entailed  a  powerful  cohesion  of  individuals,  and  far-reaching
limitations  of  their  freedom  of  action  in  many  important
respects.  It  was  agnatic  in  its  main  constitution.  Every
person  belonged  to  his  father's  kindred  ;  even  the  lawfully
married  wife  was  not  separated  from  it  from  the  point  of


136  THE  GROWTH  OP  THE  MANOR

view  of  social  responsibility  and  protection,  though  her
marriage  had  brought  her  into  a  new  economic  sphere.
Her  chief  avengers  and  helpers  in  trouble  were  still  her
father  and  her  own  agnatic  relations,  not  those  of  her  hus-
band/ Again,  though  a  man  expected  support  in  case  of
aggression  and  trouble  from  different  quarters,  calling  his
lord  and  the  fellows  of  his  craft  as  well  as  his  maternal  kins-
men, sworn-brothers,  foster-brothers,  etc.,  to  his  assistance,
his  mainstay  for  the  exaction  and  the  payment  of  fines,  for
the  swearing  of  oaths,  provision  in  case  of  destitution,  and
watching  over  the  interests  of  his  offspring  after  his
death,  was  found  in  his  paternal  kindred.^  In  the  most
striking  instance  of  co-operation,  in  the  payment  and  recep-
tion of  the  were,  the  relative  importance  of  the  support  was
expressed  in  Anglo-Saxon  as  in  Celtic  law  by  the  expedient
of  allotting  two  thirds  of  the  wergeld  to  the  paternal  kindred
and  only  one  third  to  the  maternal.  The  maternal  kindred,
we  have  to  bear  in  mind,  was  an  allied  organised  unit,
and  not  chance  helpers  drawn  from  all  sides  by  relationship
through  sisters,  cousins,  aunts,  or  nieces.  It  is  true  that,
as  time  goes  on,  the  idea  of  relationship,  of  ties  spreading
from  individual  to  individual  in  aU  directions,  tends  to
substitute  itself  for  the  idea  of  an  alliance  of  organised  units  ;
but  though  we  certainly  witness  a  gradual  dissolution  of  the
groups,  there  is  no  reason  for  assuming  that  they  were  dissolved
or  did  not  exist  at  the  very  beginning  ;  and  there  are  many
facts  even  in  the  course  of  this  process  of  dissolution  which
point  to  an  increasing  sohdarity  of  grouping  in  proportion
as  we  get  back  to  earlier  times.  Even  in  the  time  of  ^thel-
stan  special  provisions  had  to  be  made  for  cases  where  the
kindred  of  great  men  or  of  peasants  were  so  powerful
that  it  was  hard  to  get  justice  done  in  regard  to  their
members.^  The  Anglo-Saxon  laws-jof-weigeld  do  not  go
into  the  minute  details  presented  by  Norse  laws  in  regard
to  the  ramifications  of  kinship  and  the  sections  into  which
it  was  divided,  but  the  wergelds  were  of  the  same  kind
and  approximately  of  the  same  amount,  and  there  is  every
reason  to  believe  that  the  grouping  of  kinsmen  went  on
analogous  hnes^ This  being  the  case,  we  must  try  to  realise


TnE GROUPING OF THE FOLK  137

what  it  means  when  we  hear  in  Norse  law  of  most  elaborate
provisions  made  for  gathering  and  estimating  the  interests
and  forces  of  men  within  the  degree  of  sixth  cousinsy
grouped  around  a  central  agnatic  kernel  of  second  cousins
(the  visendr  of  the  Frostathingslov,  the  baugamenn  of
other  Norse  laws).  These  indications  ought  not  to  be
made  hght  of  ;  they  were  not  invented  at  random,  and  they
point  to  a  state  of  society  where  the  people,  though  not  so
neatly  divided  into  gwelys  and  clans  as  with  the  Welsh,  still
settled  closely  enough  together  to  maintain  the  idea  of  soh-
darity  of  wide  groups  constructed  on  the  basis  of  far-reach-
ing genealogical  reckonings.  Any  one  may  try  to  gauge
the  difference  between  relationship,  as  it  exists  at  present,
and  the  ties  of  the  ancient  kindred,  by  trying  to  ascertain
who  his  kinsmen  are  up  to  the  degree  of  sixth  cousin,  and
what  practical  effect  such  relationship  may  have.  And  if
we  take  into  account  that  in  regard  to  early  German  society
we  learn  expressly  that  kinship  regulated  the  arrangements
of  the  host,  the  protection  of  a  person  in  regard  to  life,
limbs,  and  honour,  the  responsibihty  for  misdeeds,  the
participation  in  all  important  family  affairs  like  marriage,
wardship,  inheritance,  land  settlement,  management  of
property,*  and  provision  in  cases  of  extreme  need,  we  shall
get  a  dim  notion  of  the  extent  to  which  a  man  was  impHcated
in  the  life  of  his  kindred  in  those  days.  And  in  realising
it  we  ought  to  think  more  of  the  power  of  such  a  natural
association  than  of  the  possibihty  of  dissolving  it  into
individual  degrees  of  relationship.  The  importance  and
bearing  of  these  ties  was  well  understood  by  the
Germanic  tribes,  as  we  can  surmise  from  the  very
solemn  and  circumstantial  enactments  in  regard  to  ad-
mission into  the  kindred  and  to  dereUction  of  it  which  have
been  preserved  to  us  in  the  Norse  and  in  the  Germanic  laws,
as  well  as  from  the  rules  on  the  growth  of  the  kindred.*
It  formed  in  this  manner  a  whole  and  not  a  mere  plurality
of  persons  ;  the  genealogia,  the  fara,  the  mcegth  were  recog-
nised associations  for  social  purposes  of  all  kinds,  and  not
indefinite  numbers  of  relatives,  like  our  modern  Smiths
and  Browns.*


138  THE  GROWTH  OF  THE  MANOR

In  regard  to  the  special  Old  English  term,  mgegth,  it
has  to  be  noted  that  it  is  characteristically  used  not  only
for  the  kindred  but  also  for  the  tribe  and  for
*^  the  province, that is,  for  groups which are

treated  primarily  as  ethnographic  and  territorial  units  and
do  not  admit  of  being  dissected  into  a  number  of  persons  7
In  the  compound  term  mceg-burg  the  unity  of  the  msegth
also  finds  adequate  expression,  and  stress  is  emphatically
laid  in  it  on  the  borgh,  the  association  for  protection  and
joint  responsibility.^

How  far  was  the  msegth  organised  ?  Some  organisation
was  a  necessity ;  and  we  find  traces  of  organisation  among
the  Germanic  peoples,  though,  in  accordance  with  the  very
varying  and  pHable  conditions  of  their  existence,  in  very
different  stages.  Not  to  speak  of  the  closely  united  Frisian
tribes,  which  in  the  case  of  the  Dithmarschen  develop  a
complete  system  of  clans  ,^  we  find  traces  of  organised
kindreds  among  the  ancient  tribes  of  inner  Gergxany  as
well  as  among  the  Scandinavians.  Later  on,  and  especi-
ally in  England,  there  are  no  signs  of  a  recognised  chieftain-
ship or  ealdormanship  of  the  maegth,  and  the  many  occa-
sions when  it  had  to  transact  business  were  evidently  dealt
with  by  meetings  of  its  members  or  of  its  elders.  We  hear
often  of  such  occasions,  though  we  are  left  without  precise
information  as  to  the  modes  of  action  involved  in  them.^"*
The  silence  of  our  sources  in  this  respect  is  by  no  means
unusual  :  in  how  many  cases  are  we  not  left  to  make  infer-
ences on  the  strength  of  a  stray  word  or  two  in  regard  to
the  most  important  institutions  of  those  times  ?  And  it
has  to  be  noted  that  the  assumption  of  some  permanent
organisation  is  not  in  any  way  disturbed  by  the  right  of
every  single  individual  to  claim  support  for  the  exaction
and  execution  of  payments  according  to  varying  degrees
of  relationship.  There  is  no  inherent  opposition  between
this  practice  and  the  settled  organisation  of  kindred,  be-
cause this  last  exists  not  for  the  apportionment  of  claims
but  for  enforcing  them  by  the  authority  and  action  of  the
whole.  As  in  the  case  of  claims  for  damages  by  English
citizens  against China, the payments  would  fall  to the


THE GROUPING OF THE FOLK  139

aggrieved  parties  and  to  their  relations,  although  the
enforcement  of  the  claim  has  been  achieved  and  could  not
but  be  achieved  by  the  power  of  the  British  Empire  ;  so
the  way  to  bring  home  the  claims  of  some  Billing  or  some
Hocking  was  to  raise  the  Billings  and  the  Hockings
to  action  as  a  body,  the  sohdarity  of  which  was  fitted
to  support  all  possible  claims,  and  not  this  or  that
suit  in  particular,  with  its  eventual  bearing  on  the  in-
terests of  men  standing  on  different  rungs  of  the  ladder
of  relationship/^

Scholars  have  been  disputing  a  good  deal  about  the
juridical  character  of  the  Sippe  or  the  mcegth  ;  is  it  a  cor-
poration ?  Is  it  an  association  based  on  the  union  of  indi-
viduals ?  Is  it  something  between  these  two  ?  Is  it  a  formless
chain  of  relationship  shaping  itself  differently  in  accordance
with  each  particular  case  ?  ^^  It  seems  almost  as  if  these
enquiries  had  been  conducted  with  an  exaggerated  sharp-
ness of  juridical  definition  and  construction,  and  a  certain
disregard  of  the  peculiar  setting  given  to  juridical  problems
by  place  and  time.  Already,  on  the  strength  of  what  has
been  brought  forward  hitherto,  it  may  be  suggested,  I
think,  that  the  mcegth  was  not  merely  a  chain  of  links  of
relationship,  or  a  web  of  rights  and  claims  stretching  from
a  given  individual  in  all  possible  directions  ;  it  was  a  definite
body.  Although  every  single  person  belonging  to  it  was
in  a  way  connected  with  the  msegth  of  his  mother,  and  this
double  connection  admitted  of  complications  and  conflicts,
still  the  preponderance  of  agnatic  connection  was  sufficiently
clear,  and  made  possible  the  formation  of  groups  of  kindred,
in  contrast  with  indefinite  relationship.  The  permanence  of
a  common  aim  and  will  ruling  over  the  decisions  and  interests
of  single  members  has  been  declared  to  be  the  test  of  the
corporate  character  of  associations,  and  the  maegth  we  are
describing  possessed  to  some  extent  this  quahfication.  It
was  a  body  of  natural  growth  and  not  of  mutual  consent ;
aTbody  excluding  strangers  by  blood  and  keeping  access  to  its
membership  difficult  and  dependent  on  certain  stringent
formalities  ;  a  body  which  could  not  be  dissolved,  and  could
not  be  forsaken  without  a  special  and  abnormal  renunciation


140  THE  GROWTH  OF  THE  MANOR

of  rights.  Its  aim  was  mainly  political — protection  and
joint  responsibility,  and  the  carrying  out  of  this  aim  involved
some  organisation  and  the  possibiUty  of  taking  decisions
and  putting  them  into  execution.  In  this  way,  though  it
left  a  large  margin  for  the  action  of  every  individual,  of
households  and  other  forms  of  association,  it  had  a  distinct
and  most  important  range  of  action  of  its  own.

But  besides  this  poHtical  hfe  the  maegth  and  the  famihes
into  which  it  was  divided  had  a  good  deal  to  do  and  say  in
Settlement  of  regard  to  the  settlement  of  property  and  the
Kindreds  conduct  of  economic  affairs. It  is  clear  from

the  place-names  that  the  settlement  of  the  Jutes,  the
Saxons,  and  the  Angles  in  Britain  was  largely  effected
on  the  principle  of  allotment  of  territory  to  msegths.  If
we  value  the  researches  of  Mr.  D'Arbois  de  JubainviUe  in
regard  to  the  tradition  of  the  names  of  private  fundi  in  the
topographical  nomenclature  of  France,  no  less  should  we
value  the  conclusive  argument  drawn  by  Kemble  from
the  patronymic  names  of  English  villages,  an  argument  the
more  remarkable,  as  it  points  to  Kent,  Sussex,  and  the
East  Anghan  shires  as  the  special  homes  of  settlement  by
maegths.  We  should  have  expected  so  much  from  a  priori
considerations,  because  these  counties  were  the  abodes  of
the  first  settlers^fronGL  Teutonic  shores,  of  those  who  were
more  crowded  in  their  tracts  of  debarkation,  and  able  to
transmit  the  pecuHarities  of  their  previous  constitution  in  a
purer  and  more  thorough  form.^^  The  iEscings,  Effings,
Getings,  Hoppings,  Tootings,  Wokings,  Bletchings,  Ken-
nings,  etc.,  of  Surrey,  for  example,  have  left  a  marked  imprint
on  the^soil ;  and  the  constant  recurrence  of  these  forms
is  sufficient  to  convince  us  that  even  where  the  names  are
drawn  from  the  pecuharity  of  the  site,  the  occupation
must  have  been  effected  largely  on  the  principle  of  connect-
ing the  territorial  division  with  a  kindred.^*  This  fact
went  a  long  way  to  provide  each  kindred  with  a  realBasis  for
its  existence.  If  the  kindred  succeeded  in  keeping  together"\
for  several  generations  in  a  particular  place  its  ties  would/
become  more  and  more  close  and  exclusive.  The  territory,
occupied  by  the  kindred  was  subdivided  between  house-]


THE GROUPING OF THE FOLK  141

holds  wliicli  were  intended  to  hold  together  and  to  stave  off

divisions  by  common  management and by  emigration or

new  settlement.

The unit of landed  property  is  characteristically  the

land  of  a  family,  the  hiwisc,  hiwship,  hide,  as  applied  to

^ „. land. Tliese  famous  tern"vs  have  been  chiefly

Terra  Familiae  •  i ,  ,  ,  . „ .  ,  "^

considered  from  the  pomt  of  view  of  taxation

and of the repartition of the duties incumbent upon

the  land. But  they  are  first  evidence  in  themselves  as  to

the  character  of  landownership  in  the  early  period  of  Saxon

occupation. It  is  not  the  individual  who  comes  forward

here  with  his  rights,  but  the  family. The  term  family  land

and  the  old  Enghsh  hivnsc,  hiwship,  which  correspond  to  it,

are  so  peculiar  that  there  can  be  no  question  of  a  borrowing

of  foreign  names,  and  still  less  of  foreign  notions. ^^ Even

the  tributarius,  the  manens,  and  the  casatus  assume  a  peculiar

signification  in  Enghsh  charters  :  they  are  not  to  be  taken

as  pointing  to  the  status  of  servile  tenants, they  apply

primarily  to  settlers  endowed  with  normal  rights  and  bound

to  perform  the  normal  duties  of free householders  in  this

early  period  of  Enghsh  history.^ ^ Wealhs may  also  be

placed  on  the  same  footing  by  being  recognised  as  free

gafolgelders  of  the  king  and  being  connected  with  a  family

land,  a  hide  of  their  own,  though  their  personal  estimation

will  not  reach  that  of  Enghshmen  of  equal  social  standing.'^

This  possible  equation  with  the  wealhs  gives  us  also  a  clue  as

to  the  probable  constitution  of  the  family  settled  on  the

land. The equation could  hardly  have been  effected  if

the  mode  of  ownership  in  both  cases  had  been  entirely

different  ;  and  so  we  are  led  to  infer  that  the  Welsh  gwely,

as  the  settlement  of free  gwrdas,  and  the  Saxon  Jutish,

Enghsh  family  holding,  were  probably  not  unlike  each  other.^ '

This  conclusion  finds  support  in  the  well-known  peculiarity

of  the  ancient  tenure  of  gavelkind  which,  though  it  was

sometimes  contended  in  later  times  to  be  distinctly  Kentish,

was  not  unknown  in  other  parts  of  the  country,  and  seems

to  represent  the  original mode of  hereditary  succession

of  free  folk. It  became  a  system  of  division,  and  so  did

the  succession  in  partible  socage, which  is  the  common


142  THE  GROWTH  OF  THE  MANOR

succession  applpng  originally  to  free  non-military  tenure.
Even  such  socage  was  sometimes  held  jointly,  however,
and  as  for  gavelkind,  its  tangled  intermixture  of  rights
of  ownership  speaks  loudly  for  the  original  preservation
of  the  unities  of  holding,  not  only  in  the  performance  of
duties,  but  also  in  cultivating  the  land.^^  Indeed,  gavel-
kind could  not  exist  in  a  time  of  extensive  agricultural
husbandry  without  the  corrective  of  the  household  com-
munity, which  is  also  implied  by  the  gwely.  It  would  be
going  too  far  to  suppose  that  the  special  feature  in  the
construction  of  the  gwely,  its  community  of  offspring  of
a  great  grandfather,  held  good  also  in  the  case  of  the
Anglo-Saxon  family  land  :  this  principle  and  the  conse-
quences of  it  are  marked  by  too  peculiar  traits  to  be
assumed  without  positive  evidence.  But  it  is  important
to  notice  that  the  family  holding  as  a  unity  did  play  a
prominent  part  in  the  occupation  of  the  soil  by  the  Enghsh  ;
and  not  only  is  there  nothing  to  show  that  these  holdings
are  mere  combinations  at  wiU,  hable  to  be  dissolved  by
the  wish  of  each  single  shareholder,  every  Ganerbe,  as  the
German  expression  goes,  but  the  continuance  of  these
holdings  among  free  settlers  through  centuries  is  a  con-
vincing proof  by  itself  that  the  disruptive  tendencies  of
hereditary  divisions  and  endowments  of  single  individuals
were  effectually  kept  in  check  by  custom.  Division  became
necessary  sometimes,  but  it  was  not  the  prevalent  and  ordin-
ary result  of  succession.  The  ordinary  result  must  have
been  the  keeping  together  of  the  holding  and  the  provision
for  unruly  and  dissatisfied  elements  in  side  settlements
and  side  calhngs/®

The  family  holdings,  as  units  of  property  or  tenancy
rising  above  the  individual  interests  of  single  members  of
Foikland  and  ^  family,  and  implying  a  kind  of  house-com-
Bookland  munity for purposes of cultivation  and  the

rendering  of  dues,  seem  to  extend  aU  over  England
in  its  Welsh  as  well  as  in  its  Anglo-Saxon  districts,
and  to  provide  for  the  elementary  grouping  of  society.
The  rules  which  governed  family  property  of  that  kind  were
rules  of  popular  custom,  of  folk-right,  and  the  land  which


THE GROUPING OF THE FOLK  143

came  under  the  action  of  these  rules  was  foldand-'^  as
opposed  to  land  which  had  been  exempted  from  them  through
the  influence  of  the  Church,  the  legislative  action  of  king
and  witan,  and  the  formal  testimony  of  charters  or  books —
to  boclarid^^  This  latter  class  of  land  was  growing
steadily ;  ^^  and  the  fact  that  it  was  based  on  express  privilege
and  described  in  the  books  has  made  us  well  acquainted
with  the  exceptional  conditions  of  its  existence,  while  the
ordinary  conditions  of  folk-right  remain  in  the  background.
Still,  it  is  not  difficult  to  get  at  some  of  the  more  important
rules  in  regard  to  them — partly  by  the  help  of  the  contrast
which  the  recorded  testimony  of  the  privileged  tenure
laj^s  stress  upon.  To  begin  ^vith,  folcland  was  not  to  be
ahenated  from  the  community  of  the  kindred,  and  even
when  through  the  spread  of  bocland  transactions  in  landed
property  came  into  use,  the  proper  course  was  to  obtain
the  consent  of  the  interested  relations  of  the  actual  holder,
if  it  had  to  be  given  or  sold,  and  still  more  if  it  had  to  be
devised  out  of  the  natural  course  of  succession."^  The
chief  feature  of  a  book,  on  the  contrary,  was  that  it  em-
powered its  owner  to  dispose  of  the  land  at  his  will,  to
give  or  sell  it,  or  to  institute  an  heir  to  it.-*  In  the
light  of  these  arrangements,  it  is  hardly  possible  to  consider
the  cwihes  or  donations  on  the  death-bed  otherwise  than
as  exceptional  proceedings  supported  by  the  Church,  and
intended  to  increase  the  custom  of  foLkright  by  the  strength
of  a  deed  or  by  the  testimony  of  ecclesiastics."^

It  is  through  the  books  and  cwi'&es  that  another  exception
to  the  common  land  law  asserts  itself,  namely,  that  women
are  introduced  to  the  holding  of  land.  As  far  as  Anglo-
Saxon  evidence  goes,  there  is  no  direct  prohibition  against
their  possessing  land  or  ancient  tenements  as  in  Frankish
and  Thuringian  law,**'  and  no  such  restrictions  as  in  the  case
of  Frisian  and  Norse  law  ;  ^^  but  there  can  be  hardly  a  doubt
that  Anglo-Saxon  law  started  also  from  the  exclusion  of
women,  and  that  it  was  by  the  help  of  the  Church  that  they
improved  their  position  in  this  respect."®  The  ground  for
this  exclusion  must  have  been  the  same  as  that  which  led
to  their  later  disabilities  in  regard  to  military  tenure — they


144  THE GROWTH OF THE MANOR

were  not  fighters  and  could  not  be  entrusted  with  the
defence  of  the  social  basis  of  family  rights  and  property  ;
even  in  respect  of  small  agricultural  plots  it  had  to  be  taken
into  account,  that  it  is  not  with  the  plough  and  the  oxen
a  woman  has  to  busy  herself,  but  with  dairy  work  and  house
industry.^®

There  is  nothing  strange  in  the  fact  that  the  weaker  sex
was  deprived  of  rights  in  two  different  periods  of  legal
history,  and  came  to  assert  them  in  two  distinct  periods
later  on  :  the  older  custom  excluding  women  from  land
inheritance  corresponds  to  a  mihtary  arrangement  of  society
as  well  as  the  feudal  one,  though  the  feudal  basis  was
narrower  than  the  ancient  one.  The  emancipation  from
restraints  came  in  both  cases  from  the  progress  of  industrial
ideas  of  society,  which  in  the  earlier  instance  were  transmit-
ted by  the  Church,  the  representative  of  Fwoman  industrial
culture,  whereas  feudal  notions  gave  way  before  modern
industrial  development.

However  this  may  be,  it  seems  clear  that  we  have  to
recognise  in  the  early  polity  of  the  EngHsh  in  Britain  a
marked  tendency  towards  the  arrangement  of
society  on  the  tribal  system.  The  households
and  the  msegths  are  the  groups  with  which  it  reckons  in
dividing  the  land  and  in  apportioning  rights  and  duties.
It  may  be  pointed  out  ultimately,  that  the  political  organisa-
tion of  the  territory  started  from  the  smallest  of  these  units
— the  household.  This  organisation  had  to  provide  for
three  main  functions  of  political  life — for  the  gathering  of
the  host,  for  the  collection  of  tribute,  and  for  the  adminis-
tration of  justice  ;  and  to  meet  these  three  main  require-
ments the  hundreds  arose  all  over  the  country.  Even
where,  as  in  the  Danish  shires,  wapentakes  and  wards  took
their  place,  the  original  English  division  must  have  been
one  into  hundreds,  and  the  significant  wapentake  itself
points  to  a  more  recent  form  of  the  gathering  of  the  armed
people  of  the  district. ^°  Now,  recent  researches  into  the
grouping  of  hundreds  and  hides  leave  no  doubt  as  to  the
fact  that  the  district  called  a  hundred  was  considered  as
a  group  of  a  hundred_households,  a  hundred  hiwiscs,


il


THE GROUPING OF THE FOLK  145

should  prefer  to  say,  in  order  to  escape  the  double  or  triple
meaning  of  the  word  "  hide."  ^^  As  a  matter  of  fact,  these
calculations  supposed  a  good  deal  of  rough  reckoning,
rounding  off,  exempting,  and  overburdening  of  the  actual
areas  ;  but  the  main  idea  runs  through  the  whole  of  Old
EngUsh  history,  and  the  frequent  remanipulation  of  the
map  of  the  hundreds  shows  that  the  aim  was  not  merely
to  provide  a  fiscal  fiction  without  relation  to  reality.^'
Certainly  the  households  counted  were  households  ad
waram  or  ad  geldum,  as  people  used  to  say  at  the  time  of
Domesday  ;  there  was  land  exempted  from  the  reckoning
and  there  was  land  where  the  separate  households  had
disappeared  to  make  room  for  larger  economic  bodies,  but
whatever  intricacies  the  system  may  present  in  its  fiscal
calculations,  it  may  be  taken  as  an  historical  document  of
the  first  magnitude.  Going  back  as  it  does  at  least  to  the
times  of  Bede,  it  testifies  to  the  attempts  of  the  EngUsh
invaders  to  build  up  their  society  by  joining  together  in
symmetric  order  the  households  of  their  warriors. ^^  No
wonder  that  these  households  turn  out  to  be  more  numerous
and  more  crowded  in  the  shires  which  had  been  the  first
vantage-ground  and  the  strategic  basis  of  the  conquerors,
sparse  and  arti^cial  in  newly  acquired  districts.  ^*

II. The  Township

The  settlers  had  soon  to  learn  that  the  material  used

for  the  framework  of  their  tribal society  was  in  many re-

._..-.  .  spects  inadequate,  and  must  be  supplemented

Artificial  ^  , ^ ^i, j  V ^u  ^  •  t^

Associations and  strengthened  by  other  contrivances. It

was  not  a  case  of  people  who,  like  the  Celtic
tribes,  had  come  over  to  their  places  of  abode  in  compact,
unbroken  masses,  and  had  remained  sheltered  from  dis-
turbing influences  by  their  remote  position  or  their  moun-
tains. The  Teutonic  invaders  came  over  by  sea,  in  small
batches,  had  to  fight  their  way  across  the  island  in  a  war
which  lasted  two  or  three  hundred  years,  and  got  mixed
up  among  themselves  and  with  the  conquered  population
in  an  endless,  tangled  strife,  if  one  may  use  the  expression.
Such  a history  strengthened their military  organisation

L


146  THE  GROWTH  OF  THE  MAI^OR

but  loosened  and  dissolved  the  ties  of  kindreds  and  house-
holds. The  latest  comers,  the  Danes  and  Norwegians,
though  they  came  from  countries  with  a  developed  tribal
organisation,  show  in  an  especially  striking  manner  the
prevalence  of  military  ties  and  the  scattering  of  families.^''
The  necessity  for  society  and  for  the  government  to  react
against  these  disintegrating  tendencies  manifests  itself  in
many  characteristic  facts  :  I  will  only  mention  the  forma-
tion of  volimtary  and  involuntary  associations  which  have
to  protect  individuals,  and  to  stand  pledge  for  their  be-
haviour ;  that  is,  to  assume  the  very  fimctions  which  formed
the  object  of  the  kindred  group. ^*  "^

These  phenomena  are  not  of  our  domain,  however,  and
interest  us  only  in  so  far  as  they  give  the  measure  of  the
breaking  up  of  old  ties,  and  of  the  necessity  of
providing  new  ones.  But  we  have  to  pay
special  attention  to  another  side  of  the  same  process,  namely
to  the  growth  of  the  tun  as  a  social  institution  which,  starting
at  least  in  part,  from  the  settlement  of  the  kindred,  developed
its  own  peculiar  character  and  organisation.  We  have  seen
that  among  the  Celtic  tribesmen  inhabiting  Britain  there
was  a  tendency  to  disperse  over  the  land  in  family  groups,
each  of  which  either  raised  its  common  dwelling-house
surrounded  by  sheds,  closes,  and  stables,  or  a  hamlet  of  a
few  houses,  a  trev,  formed  of  some  tyddyns  in  close  connection
with  each  other.  As  the  agnatic  family  group  grew  and
began  to  feel  cramped  in  its  original  district,  normally  after
a  succession  of  three  generations  and  on  the  coming  in
of  the  fourth  to  its  full  right,  the  original  trev  broke  up  or
swarmed  off  into  a  number  of  distinct  trevs  or  hamlets.  It
was  not  difficult  to  do  so,  because  the  husbandry  arrange-
ments were  chiefly  bound  up  with  hunting,  tending  of  bees,
and  pastoral  pursuits,  and  such  agriculture  as  there  was
did  not  make  people  strike  deep  roots  into  the  soil.  There
was  still  enough  of  wood  and  waste  land  to  enable  them
to  occupy  large  tracts  and  to  parcel  them  out  at  their  con-
venience ;  and  as  for  the  mode  of  building,  it  was  well
adapted  to  these  migrations  and  changes  of  abode  :  the
houses  were  hght  wooden  structures  which  did  not  require


THE GROUPING OF THE FOLK  147

much  capital,  care,  or  labour  for  their  erection.  The
periodical  swarming  of  the  population  from  old  hamlets
into  new  was  in  this  way  the  rule  in  Celtic  territory.  The
Roman  conquest  does  not  seem  to  have  brought  about  a
radical  change  in  the  dispersion  of  rural  population.  It
must  have  hampered,  and  perhaps  arrested,  the  practice
of  clan  redivisions.  Villas  appeared  as  centres  of  adminis-
tration and  cultivation.  Agriculture  progressed ;  the
hamlets  struck  permanent  foots,  and  in  many  cases  they
"grew  naturally  into  villages,  while  in  other  cases  large
settlements  may  have  spriing  up  in  connection  with  the
central  knots  of  the  system  <^f  roads  and  markets  ;  but  still
hamlets  and  separate  farms  continued  by  the  side  of  the
larger  agglomerations,  and  there  was  no  special  reason  for
giving  prevalence  to  the  one  or  to  the  other  mode  of  distribu-
tion of  dwellings  and  population — each  had  its  advantages,
and  each  held  its  owti  in  accordance  with  local  incidents
and  customs.

T^^|eutonic_invasions,  on  the  contrary,  hf^.d  a.  dpiP.iaivft
influence  in  bringing  abou,t_a>_concenlratiQil.-oLihe- people
jn  villagesT^^^ng.  The  new  settlers  were  bent  on  keeping
together,  for  purposes  of  cultivation  and  defence  ;  the
troubled  times  which  began  with  their  invasion  and  went  on
until  the  complete  organisation  of  feudal  monarchy  were
not  propitious  to  separate  homesteads  and  farms.  The
sway  of  the  military  class  over  the  agricultural  was  made
easier  by  the  gathering  of  masters,  foremen,  and  tillers  in
the  same  centres.  Quite  apart  from  the  question  whether  the
rural  agglomeration  was  organised  hierarchicaUy  around
one  lord,  or  composed  of  many  more  or  less  independent
holdings,,  the  tuns,  hams,  leys  and  thorpes  of  the  EngUsh
and  Northern  settlements  are  mainly  villages  and  not
hamlets,  groups  of  considerable  size,  and  it  is  with
this  prevalent  form  that  we  shall  have  to  deal  in
our  review  of  the  general  features  of  rural  life  in
Anglo-Saxon  times, ^^  though  it  has  to  be  recognised
that  there  were  still  many  hamlets  and  separate  farms  by
the  side  of  these  typical  Old  Enghsh  tuns.  The  Welsh
border,  and  the  counties  which  had  been  only  slowly  and


148  THE  GROWTH  OF  THE  MANOR

partially  reclaimed  from  the  Welsh,  presented  all  shades  of
transition  from  the  pure  Celtic  trev  or  hamlet  with  its
cluster  of  tyddyns,  to  the  large  congregations  of  homesteads
and  holdings  characteristic  of  the  midland  and  the  eastern
shires.  In  their  case  we  can  well  perceive  how  much
depended  for  the  maintenance  of  the  system  on  the
abundance  of  wood  and  waste.  And  we  find  something
of  the  same  kind,  namely  a  scattering  of  homesteads,  in
some  northern  districts,  where  the  clearance  of  the
wild  waste  was  carried  on  by  the  individual  efforts  of
scattered  settlers.^^  A  detailed  account  of  settlement
and  colonization  would  have  to  make  a  careful  estimate
of  all  these  variations  and  pecuHarities.  For  our  purpose
it  is  sufficient  to  note  that  the  prevalent  form  of  the  distribu-
tion of  dwellers,  dwellings,  and  holdings  in  the  Old  English
period  was  their  concentration  in  permanent  villages  of
considerable  size,  and  not  their  dispersion  in  hamlets  or  single
farms.  This  is  indirectly  implied  in  the  fact,  that  for
administrative  and  judicial  purposes  the  hamlets  are
ignored  and  thrown  together  into  villages  which,  though
they  are  artificial  composite  bodies,  point  to  real  villages  as
the  common  form  of  social  grouping.  The  fiction  becomes
appropriate  and  even  possible  merely  because  there  is  a
well-known  reality  by  the  side  of  it.  Rural  districts  com-
posed of  hamlets  or  farms  are  called  into  being  as  villages,
because  they  form  the  exception  alongside  of  villages  in
the  proper  sense  of  the  term.  And  it  has  to  be  noticed
at  the  outset  that  the  urban  district,  the  town  in  the  modern
sense  of  the  word,  appears  another  variety  of  the  tun.  The
fact  that  there  is  no  special  designation  for  the  latter,
before  the  borough  came  to  the  fore  as  a  special  form
of  town,  is  very  characteristic.  Evidently  there  is  no
fundamental  difference  in  social  composition  and  organi-
sation between  the  village  and  the  town  of  those  times.
London  is  a  "  wic  "  as  much  as  the  most  insignificant
"  herdwik  "  on  the  Welsh  border.  Therefore  we  need
not  draw  a  distinct  fine  of  demarcation  for  the  sake  of  sup-
posed clearness  where  there  was  none.


THE GROUPING OF THE FOLK  149

As the  present special use of "  town " debars us
from employing that otherwise convenient term, we
have  to  speak  of  tun  and  township  as  the  Old
Vill  English  did  when  speaking  of  the  units  of  rural

organisation  ;  while  village  can  only  appear  a
looser  designation  for  describing  the  rural  group.*"  "  Vill  "
does  not  do,  though  recommended  by  great  authorities,
because  it  is  Norman,  and  slurs  over  the  main  feature  in
the  history  of  local  institutions,  namely  the  primordial
Old  English  character  of  the  tun  settlement.  A  vill  is  the
tun  as  accepted  by  the  French  conquerors,  not  as  founded
or  resettled  by  English  colonists.  It  may  be  doubtful  in
regard  to  the  vill,  whether  it  should  not  be  regarded  as  the
product  of  the  manor,  or  of  an  artificial  system  of  fiscal  and
police  arrangements  ;  the  word  tun  is  sure  to  keep  well
before  our  eyes  the  archaic  character  of  the  institution  and
its  original  and  natural  meaning  of  settlement.  We  shall
have  so  much  to  do  with  artificial  arrangements  and  fiscal
uses  of  terms  and  things,  that  it  may  be  best  from  the  outset
to  get  hold  of  a  kind  of  totem  which  may  remind  us  that  the
world  does  not  primarily  exist  for  the  sake  of  fiscal  schemes,
nor  society  for  the  sake  of  poHce  arrangements.  With  this
preHminary  caution,  we  may  notice  that  the  tuns  and
the  later  vills  proceeding  from  them,  present  the  lowest
administrative  grouping  of  society,  the  hundred  and  the
shire  rising  over  them  as  higher  and  more  comprehensive
units.  Even  in  the  feudal  epoch  when  the  manors  had  in
so  many  respects  made  good  their  influence,  the  vill  remained
the  normal  territorial  division,*^  and  there  can  be  no  doubt
that  it  has  even  a  greater  claim  to  be  reckoned  with  as  a
tun  in  Old  English  times.**


CHAPTER ni
THE SHARES IN THE TOWNSHIP

I. The  Geld  Hide

The  proprietary  and  economic  arrangements  of  the
township  are  peculiar,  and  cannot  be  explained  either
on  the  well-known  lines  of  private  ownership
and  separate  management  of  private  interests,
nor  on  those  of  seignorial  sway,  nor  on  the  basis  of  strict
communalism,  treating  individuals  as  subservient  items,  nor
as  a  consequence  of  a  system  of  kinship.  It  is  an  arrange-
ment which  has  some  traits  in  common  with  every  one
of  those  we  have  mentioned,  but  remains  distinct  from
aU  of  them.  The  term  which  may  best  indicate  its  main
characteristic  would  perhaps  be  that  of  a  community  of
shareholders.  We  are  quite  familiar  with  companies  of
shareholders  now^adays,  and  the  notion  of  the  rights  and
duties  connected  with  a  share  maybe  illustrated  in  many
respects  even  from  the  present  practice  of  such  companies  ;
but  there  would  be  the  fundamental  difference  between
these  modem  companies  and  the  Old  EngHsh  township  that
the  rural  groups  of  which  we  are  speaking  are  communities
and  not  companies,  that  they  do  not  arise  from  a  definite
agreement  or  as  a  manifestation  of  the  free-will  of  those
who  join  them,  but  grow,  and  as  natural  growths  have
an  independent  existence  as  against  the  individuals
attached  to  them,  while  the  shares  are  not  formed  at
random  as  indifferent  arithmetical  parts  of  the  aggregate,
but  form  organic  units  and  stand  in  organic  relation  to  the
composite  unity  of  the  tun.  The  meaning  of  these  Hmita-
tions  and  attributes  will  be  more  clear  if  we  look  at  the
facts  in  which  the  rural  system  of  Old  England  is  expressed.


THE SHARES IN THE TOWNSHIP  151

A  tun  is  normally  a  social  organisation  composed  not  of
people  with  divers  proprietary  rights  and  economic  pursuits,
but  of  households  brought  into  definite  and  simple  relations
to  each  other  in  regard  to  rights  and  duties.  For  the  sake
of  simpHcity  we  may  suppose  that  it  consists  of  a  number
of  equal  shares  called  hiwiscs,  hides,  which  render  it  possible
and  easy  to  apportion  rights  and  duties  to  the  members  of
the  rural  society.  As  a  matter  of  fact  the  population  of
the  tiin  was  commonly  arranged  not  on  one  plane  as  holders
of  whole  shares  or  hides,  but  as  it  were  on  steps,  some
holding  hides,  some  half-hides,  some  quarters  of  hides  or
virgates,  and  half-virgates  or  bovates,  and  some  again
scattered  on  the  outskirts  of  the  system  with  cottages  and
crofts.  But  this  differentiation  of  the  arrangement  does
not  destroy  its  fundamental  idea — ^the  proportional  adjust-
ment of  rights  and  duties,  though  it  be  effected  not  on  a
uniform  but  on  a  graduated  scheme.^

The  hide  has  been  prominent  in  all  inquiries  as  to
Anglo-Saxon  social  arrangements,  because  it  is  constantly
mentioned  in  the  documents  ;  but  the  evidence
Measure  of  Land  ^  regard  to  it  has  not  been  construed  in  the
same  way  by  the  different  scholars  who  have
treated  it.  There  are  several  points  which  one  must  eluci-
date and  keep  well  in  view  in  order  to  understand  the  real
meaning  and  working  of  the  hide.  To  begin  with,  it  has
to  be  noticed  that  hides  are  not  measures,  though  often
expressed  in  measures.  We  often  hear  of  120  or  160  or  180
acres,  and  the  like,  in  the  hide,  or  of  parts  of  the  hide
measuring  thirty  acres,  etc.  ;  but  it  would  be  wrong  to  sup-
pose that  any  thirty  acres  would  form  a  virgate,  or  any  120
or  160  or  180  acres  a  hide,  as  one  might  say  that  so  many
acres  might  go  to  the  furlong  (quarentena)  or  to  the  leuga.^

It  could  not  even  be  said  that  the  hide  is  a  definite  measure
of  arable  land  to  which  proportionate  rights  not  defined  by
strict  measurement  were  appendant  in  the  use  of  pasture,
wood,  water,  etc.  Not  only  that  the  reckoning  of  rights
in  a  hide  may  have  started  from  the  possession  of  120  acres
of  arable  in  one  place  and  from  the  possession  of  160  in
the  neighbouring  village  ; '  in  one  and  the  same  village  the


152  THE  GROWTH  OF  THE  MANOR

allotment  in  the  arable  may  have  been  taken  to  be  one  of
120  acres  in  one  sense  and  of  144  acres  in  another  sense,
and  may  have  been  one  of  136  acres  up  to  a  certain  year  and
of  160  acres  from  that  year  to  the  next  step  in  development.*
The  hide,  the  carucate  and  the  sulung  were  evidently  too
elastic  quantities  to  be  regarded  as  measurements  ;  but
they  keep  all  through  their  characteristic  as  shares,  because
whatever  their  arithmetical  variations  they  are  always
equal  as  against  each  other  within  the  limits  of  one  and  the
same  tun  at  one  and  the  same  time.

The  second  point  to  be  mentioned  is  the  fact  that  our
documents  in  speaking  of  these  shares  attach  two  different

meanings  to  them.  In  Domesday,  in  the  Geld
Geld  and  Inquests,  in  the  Hundred  Rolls  and  other  docu-

ments  compiled  with  a  fiscal  purpose,  we  mostly
hear  of  them  as  fiscal  units,  as  units  for  taxation  and  for
the  apportionment  of  other  pubUc  duties.  This  is  certainly
a  most  important  aspect  of  the  case,  and  it  gives  rise  to
exceedingly  valuable  calculations  which  carry  approximately
the  weight  of  statistical  estimates,  and  present  a  most
welcome  opportunity  for  arithmetical  deductions  in  the
study  of  epochs  otherwise  so  barren  in  the  elements  of
quantitative  analysis.  But  the  value  of  these  quantitative
data  may  be  exaggerated  ;  nay,  they  may  even  lead  us  into
error,  if  we  use  them  too  confidently  for  our  guidance.  It
would  hardly  be  safe  to  picture  to  ourselves  the  real  world
in  exact  conformity  with  the  round  numbers,  the  rect-
angular areas,  and  the  neat  symmetrical  schemes  towards
which  these  fiscal  units  show  a  natural  gravitation  :  it  is
impossible  to  beheve  that  villages  should  be  founded  and
kept  developing  in  conformity  with  a  scheme  for  providing
them  with  ten  or  five  twelve-  or  six-plough  teams,^  notwith-
standing their  countless  varieties  of  position,  agrarian
advantages,  facilities  of  intercourse  and  the  Hke,  or  that
their  territories  should  stretch  over  the  land  in  squares
formed  by  so  many  miles  in  length  and  so  many  miles  in
breadth.'  Not  that  such  schemes  did  not  exist  or  that
they  had  no  relation  whatever  to  reality ;  some  connection
with  it  they  must  have  had,  but  this  connection  has  to


THE SHARES JH THE TOWNSHTP  153

be  ascertained  through  them  and  by  the  help  of  them  and
not  as  akeady  given  in  them  ;  almost  as  the  real  shape  of
a  continent  has  to  be  delineated  across  the  degree  of
the  map  and  not  along  them.

Indeed  the  documents  take  sufficient  care  to  warn  us
of  the  artificiahty  of  their  calculations.  They  constantly
speak  of  geld  hides  and  geld  carucates,  of  ware  acres  or
acre -wares,  implying  that  real  hides,  carucates  and  acres
are  not  identical  with  their  fiscal  namesakes.  The  object
of  these  last  is  to  "  defend  "  '  the  proprietary  units  in  regard
to  the  requirements  of  the  government,  and  the  assumption
of  round  numbers,  the  proportionate  increases  and  reduc-
tions are  as  natural  to  them  as  a  fidehty  to  the  natural
conditions  of  husbandry  and  to  legal  arrangements  are  a
necessary  element  in  the  constitution  of  real  hides.  One
might  almost  be  tempted  to  compare  these  fiscal  namesakes
of  the  agrarian  shares,  these  geld  hides,  geld  carucates
and  acre -wares  in  their  relation  to  field  hides,  field  carucates
and  field  acres,  to  the  mysterious  fylgias  of  northern  mytho-
logy— beings  bound  up  with  Hve  creatures,  but  lead-
ing a  separate  existence  as  their  weird  double.  These
"  doubles  "  bring  mischief,  especially  when  hidden  in  an
unaccountable  way  in  the  body  of  their  companions.  Even
so  the  hide  cannot  be  mistaken  in  its  bearing  when  the
document  frankly  tells  us  that  there  are  in  truth  a  hundred
hides  in  a  place,  but  that  it  will  defend  itself  only  as  one,^
or  if  it  is  expressly  mentioned  that  an  estate  pays  geld
for  one  virgate  although  it  contains  sufficient  land  for  five
ploughs.^  But  there  are  numbers  of  instances  in  which  the
discrepancy  between  geld  and  field  shares  is  not  so  clear,
and  the  inferences  drawn  from  documents  get  to  be  danger-
ous in  consequence.^"

The  first,  although  not  the  most  important,  set  of  ques-
tions which  have  to  be  put  and  answered  relates  to  the
fiscal  shares  in  the  geld  inquests.  They  are  undoubtedly
units  of  taxation  forming  the  basis  of  its  repartition.  By
burdening  a  certain  district  with  so  many  hides,  or  lightening
its  burden  of  hides,  the  government  placed  it  in  a  certain
position  in  regard  to  fiscal  requirements. It  had  to  perform


154  THE  GROWTH  OF  THE  MANOR

services  and  to  pay  more  or  less  in  comparison  with  other
districts.  It  could  be  said,  and  the  expression  was  actually
used  in  the  Norfolk  and  Suffolk  Domesday,  that  in  the  case
of  a  geld  of  twenty  shiUings  being  imposed  on  the  hundred
a  particular  tiin  had  to  contribute  sixpence  or  fourpence  to
it,"  but,  instead  of  saying  this  the  government  could  de-
mand two  or  six  shillings  from  the  hide  or  carucate  at
which  a  tun  was  taxed/^

We  hear  a  good  deal  of  the  consequences  of  this
system  of  rating  in  the  shape  of  resettlements  of  hidage,
e.g.  of  reductions  of  the  number  of  hides  in  some  districts,
and  of  an  increase  in  others.^  ^  The  larger  units  have  to
be  differentiated  into  fractions  in  order  to  appraise  fiscal
and  other  duties  with  some  detail.  Indeed,  we  see  that  the
geld  hide,  as  well  as  the  geld  carucate,  is  taken  to  correspond
to  a  certain  number  of  virgates  or  of  bovates,  and  these
resolve  themselves  generally  into  acres.  To  aU  these  sub-
divisions the  same  character  of  artificiality  is  attached  as  to
the  higher  units  :  the  geld  virgate  or  geld  bovate  repre-
senting, as  it  were,  a  certain  number  of  counters  as  against
other  counters,  may  turn  out  to  be  different  in  its  arithme-
tical composition  from  the  field  virgate  and  field  bovate  of
the  district,  while  the  acre  may  be  either  an  entirely
unreal  quotient,  an  arithmetical  fraction,  or  one  of  a  number
of  real  acres  on  which  taxes  and  duties  were  charged  while
other  acres  in  the  same  place  were  left  out  of  account.^*

Now,  it  would  be,  of  course,  important  to  discover
traces  of  any  constant  reckoning  as  to  the  relations  between
the  large  unit  and  the  fractional  units.  And  indeed,
though  in  field  practice  instances  of  six  virgates  to  the  hide,
and  the  like,  do  occur,^^  for  fiscal  purposes  the  hide  and
the  carcucate  generally  divide  into  four  virgates  or  into
eight  bovates,  and  the  sulung  into  four  yokes.^^  The
artificial  character  of  these  divisions  is  well  exemplified
when  the  virgate  falls  into  four  ferthings,  because  this
seems  to  be  the  unit  designed  to  be  at  the  bottom  of  the
scale  :  it  would  not  easUy  break  up  into  acres  according  to
the  usual  reckoning,  and  seems  to  render  the  division  into


THE SHARES IN  THE TOWNSHIP  155

acres  unnecessary,  as  it  produces  fractions  of  one -sixteenth
of  the  carcucate,  which  would  be  suflficient  for  all  ordinary
fiscal  purposes.^'  But  the  usual  thing  is  to  divide  hide,
carcucate,  and  sullung  into  acres  on  the  semblance  of  the  real
agrarian  shares.  It  is  generally  assumed  now  that  the  geld
hide,  the  geld  carucate,  and  the  geld  sulung  were  reckoned
uniformly  in  the  time  of  Domesday  at  one  hundred  and
twenty  acres,  and  that  this  reckoning  corresponded  to  the
main  tradition  of  agrarian  divisions.  Reserving  the  ques-
tion as  to  these  last,  I  must  point  out  that  the  case  does  not
look  so  cheerfully  simple  to  me,  even  though  scholars,  justly
celebrated  for  critical  acumen  and  for  the  power  of  reading
numbers,  have  expressed  themselves  emphatically  in  this
sense  .^^  Domesday  clearly  recognises  different  modes  of
valuation  even  in  regard  to  every  single  fiscal  term.  The  ex-
pression "  hide  "  of  Leicestershire  is  admittedly  taken  in  a
different  sense  from  the  hide  of  Cambridgeshire,^^  and  it
would  be  strange  to  suppose  that  the  hide  and  the  carucate,
which  mostly  exclude  each  other,  and  sometimes,  though
rarely,  meet  on  the  same  ground,^"  should  be  taken  to
imply  the  very  same  thing  and  to  divide  in  the  same  way.
As  to  the  sulung,  not  only  can  it  not  be  shown  that  it  was
reckoned  at  one  hundred  and  twenty  acres,  but  there  is
considerable  likelihood  that  it  was  not,  and  comprised  a
good  deal  more.^^  On  the  contrary,  the  repartition  of
hides  into  a  small  number  of  acres,  forty,  has  been  dis-
tinctly made  out  in  regard  to  the  south-western  counties. ^^
Those  who  assume  the  constant  division  of  the  hide  and  of
the  carucate  into  120  acres  have  to  admit  that  there  is  a  very
large  number  of  cases  which  do  not  conveniently  fit  into
this  equation  ;  and,  though  no  other  equation  exceeds  this
one  in  frequency ,^^  still,  in  view  of  the  many  aberra-
tions from  it,  there  can  be  no  question  of  its  acceptance
as  the  unique  hide  or  unique  carucate  of  Domesday  England.
It  may,  indeed,  have  been  before  the  eyes  of  the  Domesday
Commissioners  and  of  the  Royal  Exchequer  as  the  ideal
apportionment  of  the  carucate,  and  of  the  hide  when  an
equivalent  to  the  carucate,  and  this  view  must  have  re-
flected the  average  conditions  of  agrarian  distribution  ;  but


156  THE  GROWTH  OP  THE  MAHOB

if  there  is  any  point  in  Domesday  where  this  ideal  aspect
comes  primarily  to  the  fore,  it  is  not  in  the  divisions  of  the
fiscal  hide  and  the  geld  carucate,  but  in  the  appraisement
of  land  fit  for  the  plough.  There  the  ideal  measure  of  the
plough-land  could  be  conveniently  resorted  to,  and  has
indeed  been  made  to  play  a  part.^*  As  to  any  exact  relation
of  fractional  counters,  it  was  not  imposed  by  the  Treasury
of  the  Conqueror  as  a  uniform  standard  on  the  whole  of
England,  and  it  certainly  did  not  exist  before  the  Conquest.
The  Normans  were  as  yet  inexpert  in  needless  centralisation,
and  could  well  tolerate  different  modes  of  reckoning  the
fractions  of  their  geld-land,  as  is  shown  by  the  existence  of
the  East  Anghan  reckoning,  of  the  Leicestershire  combina-
tions, the  Devon  and  Cornwall  distribution,  the  Kentish
system,  the  south-western  reckoning,  etc.  From  their
fiscal  point  of  view  they  did  not  lose  anything  by  the  fact
that  a  particular  fraction  of  the  hide  was  represented  by
ten  acres  in  Wiltshire  and  by  thirty  acres  in  Cambridge-
shire, since  ten  is  quite  as  much  a  fourth  part  of  forty  as
thirty  is  the  fourth  part  of  120.

Of  course,  all  this  makes  a  very  considerable  difference
to  us,  as  it  discloses  an  even  more  confusing  variety  in  the
actual  conditions  than  we  are  accustomed  to  reckon  with,
and  renders  the  problem  of  getting  at  the  real  shares,  as
distinct  from  the  fiscal  shares,  considerably  more  complex ;
but  the  perplexities  of  future  antiquarians  have  not  been
taken  into  account  by  the  awkward  people  with  whom  we
have  to  deal.

If  we  look  at  the  Domesday  hide  as  an  artificial  unit
of  assessment,  which  has  diverged  considerably  from  the
team-land,  the  fact  that  it  was  often  or  even  mostly  sub-
divided into  120  fractions  called  acres,  and,  as  we  maintain,
sometimes  subdivided  into  forty  fractions,  or  perhaps  forty-
eight,  or  even  sixteen,  loses  a  good  deal  of  its  interest.  It
has  certainly  to  be  taken  notice  of  in  order  to  follow
and  sometimes  to  reconstruct  the  reckoning  operations  of
the  assessing  authorities,  but  it  does  not  give  the  real
acreage  of  counties  and  townships  or  the  true  size  of
holdings,  or  their  actual uniformity  or  diversity. North-


THE  SHARES IN THE TOWNSHIP  157

amptonshire,  for  instance,  appears  in  three  consecutive
valuations  as  containing  [3,200],  [2,663^]  and  [1,350]  hides.
The  reduction  of  its  hidage  is  an  important  point,  and  can
be  explained  as  a  consequence  of  more  exact  assessment
and  of  a  relative  alleviation  of  its  burden,"  but  it  would  be
very  difficult  to  argue  from  these  estimates  to  the  actual
size  and  aggregate  number  of  the  rural  holdings  contained
in  it.  The  relation  of  the  geld  units  to  the  actual  occupation
of  the  land  would  still  remain  a  matter  of  complex  inference.
The  necessity  for  such  inferences  is  indeed  clearly  expressed
in  the  general  method  of  collecting  evidence  followed  by
the  Domesday  Commissioners.  If  the  relation  of  the  hides,
carucates,  and  sulungsto  the  actual  occupation  of  the  soil
had  been  expressed  on  an  average  by  the  statement  that
hide,  carucate,  and  sulung  (solin)  contained  about  120  acres
of  arable,  it  would  not  have  been  necessary  to  make
elaborate  inquiries  about  the  number  of  plough-teams
which  might  be  kept  in  a  particular  place  and  which  actually
were  there  ;  or,  to  state  it  in  a  different  way,  about  the
extent  of  land  which  might  be  tilled  by  average  plough -
teams  in  distinction  from  that  which  was  actually  under
tillage.  This  method  of  inquiry,  which  runs  through  the
whole  of  the  Domesday  Inquest,  is  evidently  a  result  of  the
fact  that  the  geld-hides  and  the  carucates  of  the  Geld  Rolls
did  not  correspond  any  longer  to  the  actual  features  of  the
land  settlement.  Certainly,  the  carucate  and  the  sulung
had  been  originally  meant  as  plough  lands,  possibly  also
the  hide,  but  they  were  not  so  any  more  in  the  sense  in
which  they  were  used  for  the  assessment  and  the  fiscal
•^^  defence "  of  the  land  in  Domesday.  And  so,  if  we
want  to  use  that  record  directly  in  order  to  get  at  agra-
rian facts,  it  would  be  more  to  the  purpose  to  look,  not  to
the  carucatce  or  hidce,  but  to  the  entries  as  to  carucce  and
terrce  carucis, — ploughs  "  which  are  there  "  and  "  which
could  be  there,"  than  to  the  entries  as  to  hides,  carucates,
and  sulungs.  If  we  want  to  know  how  many  plough-teams
of  eight  oxen  were,  on  the  average,  used  for  tilling  the  land
in  England,  we  have  to  take  the  first  series  of  entries,  and
we  shall  get  at  the  approximate  number  of  full  plough-lands


158  THE GEOWTH OF THE SUlNOE

actually  provided  with  stock,  the  terra  vestita,  the  "  geset-
land,"  in.  England  at  the  time  immediately  after  the  Con-
quest, and  sometimes  at  the  time  immediately  before  it.
In  the  case  of  districts  which  had  suffered  great  devastation,
these  figures  may  serve  as  an  index  of  their  losses,  whereas
in  the  case  of  counties  where  the  commotions  of  that  period
had  been  less  violent,  the  number  of  the  teams  may  give
us  an  insight  into  the  constant  aspects  of  cultivation. ^^
If  we  want  to  know  what  was  the  quantity  which
could  be  used  as  arable,  apart  from  its  actual  stocking  and
direct  cultivation,  we  have  to  take  up  the  second  set
of  figures,  and  they  ought  to  tell  us  on  the  average  of  120
acres  per  plough-land,  how  many  acres  lay  in  the  shots
and  furlongs  of  the  rural  England  of  1086,  or  in  places  which
had  been  used  as  arable  within  hving  memory,  or  at
least  might  be  used  in  this  manner.  Such  questions  need
not  have  exercised  too  much  the  experience  of  jurors
thoroughly  conversant  with  the  features  of  the  husbandry  of
their  districts.  The  information  about  thenumber  of  hides,
carucates,  and  sulungs  came  in  as  third  item,  and  applied
to  the  units  of  assessed  land,  which  did  not  coincide  with
the  units  of  area  or  cultivation.  In  this  way  we  may  say
that  the  Domesday  inquiry  in  respect  to  land  was  directed
primarily  to  registering  the  extent  of  arable  in  general,  of
arable  stocked,  and  of  arable  assessed.


II. The  Field  Hide

As  for  the  assessment  itself,  there  can  be  no  doubt  that,

as  described  in  Domesday,  it  followed  a  course  of  repartition

from  above. The  whole  amount  of  the  geld

essmen  ^^^  divided  in  round  numbers  of hides  and

carucates  between  the  shires,  and  in  each  shire  between
the  hundreds  or  the  units  corresponding  to  them  ;  the  hides
of  the  hundred  again  were  assigned  to  the  different  town-
ships as  much  as  possible  according  to  a  scheme  in  which
the  larger  townships  got  ten  and  the  smaller  five  hides  (or
twelve and  six  carucates  respectively)  assigned to  them  ;


THE SHARES IN THE TOWNSHIP  159

the  separate  tenements  had  to  take  over  their  proportional
share  within  these  five-  and  ten-hide  groups  according  to
their  size  and  financial  capabihties,  and  their  fractions  were
appraised  in  hides,  virgates,  bovates,  and  acres,  or  in  some
other  similar  fractions. ^^ Similar  systems of repartition
of  hides,  as  units  for  fiscal  and  administrative  purposes,
have  left  traces  in  older  documents  distributing  the  hides
among  the  Anglo-Saxon  shires,  or  assigning  them  to  the
boroughs.^^ There is  even  a  hst  of  a  repartition  of  hides
between  the  tribes,  seemingly  of  Edwin's  time,  which  starts
from  the  same  principle  and  seems  to  embody  a  general
scheme,  meant  to  serve  as  a  basis  for  the  repartition  of
duties,  among  tribes  and  hundreds,  of  which  the  occasional
mentions  of  hides  in  Bede  present  the  application  to  single
instances. ^^ The working  of  such  a  system  leads  to  arti-
ficial equations  and  to  schemes  which  it  would  be  mis-
leading to  accept  as  descriptions  of  real  husbandry. Still,
the  reahties  of  life  could  not  but  be  reflected  even  in  these
symmetrical  schemes. In  two  respects  these  schemes  of
repartition  lead  necessarily  up  to  a  consideration  of  actual
agrarian  facts. Firstly,  as  the  assessment  was  to  be  pro-
portional, it  had  to  take  into  account  the  relative  economic
strength  of  the  different  districts  and  tenements. Secondly,
eveiy  tax  has  to  conform  to  the  actual  revenue  from  which
it  has  to  be  drawn,  and  must  start  from  an  approximate
valuation  of  this  revenue.^" But,  apart  from  these  obvious
connections  between  a  scheme  of  repartition  and  the  esti-
mate of  economic  condition  on  which  it  had  to  apply,  the
hides, carucates, virgates, bovates, acres, etc., were  not
merely  movable  assessment  counters,  but actual units of
land  assignation,  if  one  may  use  such  a  term. The  acre  was
primarily  used  not  as  a  fraction  of  an  imaginary  assessment
unit,  but  as  a  square  measure  and  a  division  in  the  field.
In  the  same  way,  the  bovate  was  not  invented  as  a  fancy
name  for  the  eighth  part  of  a  big  rating  unit,  but  as  the
share  in  the  fields  proportionate  to  the  labour  of  one  ox  in
the  team  of  a  plough, together  with  all  sorts  of  rights
appendent  to  this  share  in  pasture,  woods,  watercourses,
etc. And, although we sometimes have to take the


160  THE  GROWTH  OF  THE  MANOR

virgate  as  an  appropriate  expression  for  "  one  fourth  part,"
it  was  primarily  the  Norman  rendering  of  the  yard  of  land
(rood  of  land),  and  even  more  often  of  the  yard-land,  that
is,  of  the  holding  starting  from  a  rood  of  land  as  from  its
base.^^  Even  so  the  yoke  pointed  perhaps  to  the  four  oxen
abreast  in  a  plough  and  to  the  acres  tilled  by  them  or
apportioned  to  them  according  to  their  work  in  a  larger
team.^^  And  the  carucate  and  the  sulung  have  surely  to
be  considered  as  the  actual  land  allotments  carved  out  for
the  full  plough.  Lastly,  the  hide,  the  hiwisc  of  land,  though
sometimes  used  as  one  of  a  number  of  counters,  was
evidently  primarily  meant  to  represent  the  "  tenement  of
a  household."

As  a  matter  of  fact,  while  the  characteristic  names  of
things  may  point  in  our  case  to  their  more  or  less  obscure
origin,  they  are  not  mere  etymological  clues  for  recon-
structing bygone  conditions.  They  are  constantly  applied
in  their  obvious  and  primary  sense.  The  acre  was  more
naturally  a  field  measure  than  an  Exchequer  counter  ;  the
bovate  and  yard -land  actually  served  to  designate  the
holdings  of  the  peasantry  ;  and  the  hides  and  carucates
appear  as  actual  units  of  land  ownership.  Not  only  the
later  chartularies,  which  are  not  hkely  to  represent  a  new
arrangement  in  this  matter,  distinguish  clearly,  as  we
have  seen,  between  assessment  units  and  fractions,  on  the
one  hand,  and  real  holdings  and  measures,  on  the  other,  but
Domesday  has  itself  not  a  few  indications  as  to  the  differ-
ence between  the  two. ^^  The  proper  formula  for  the  assess-
ment unit  was  "  defendit  se  pro  una  hida,"  a  formula  in
which  the  fictitious  element  involved  in  the  taxing  operation
is  sufficiently  expressed.  Indeed,  as  we  have  seen,  the
terms  "  arable  land  "  {terra  carucis),  "  plough-land  "  {caru-
cata),  and  "household  land"  (hide),  represent  in  one  sense
three  stages  of  adaptation  of  the  requirements  of  the  State
to  the  conditions  of  the  country,  the  two  latter  appearing  in
turn  to  correct  the  discrepancies  which  had  arisen  in  the
course  of  time  between  the  primary  apportionment  and  the
actual  facts  of  ownership  and  husbandry.  The  estimate  of
the  amount  of  "  arable  "  was  rendered  necessary  even  where


THE SHARES IN THE TOWNSHIP  161

the  land  was  appraised  in  carucates,  because  these  geld
carucates  did  not  coincide  with  the  real  agrarian  units  ;
values  other  than  agrarian,  e.g.  salt-ponds,  fisheries,  markets,
mills,  were  brought  in  to  modify  it  ;  ^*  in  many  cases  special
favour  for  a  monastery  or  a  courtier,  the  encroachment  of  a
magnate  or  a  sheriff  tended  to  lessen  it ;  ^°  the  fiscal  habit
of  repartition  in  convenient  round  numbers,  and  the  political
habit  of  holding  on  as  long  as  possible  to  traditional  appor-
tionment in  spite  of  the  flow  of  life — all  these  causes  made
it  necessary  to  resort  to  a  new  estimate  of  the  amount  of
arable  and  of  the  stock  used  in  its  cultivation,  even  in  the
case  of  those  districts  which  had  been  apportioned  in
plough-land  some  200  years  before  Domesday.  The  dis-
crepancies were  even  more  flagrant  in  regard  to  the  more
ancient  form  of  assessment  by  hides  or  sulungs.  The
growth  of  fiction,  and  the  readjustment  of  it  in  great  emer-
gencies on  the  strength  of  rough  averages,  were  necessary
features  of  a  system  which  expressed  the  conditions  of  a
whole  country  in  the  course  of  centuries  in  more  or  less
symmetrical  numbers  of  fiscal  shares.

The  most  important  point  for  us,  however,  is  that  this
system  of  apportionment  of  taxes  and  duties  was  not  the
product  of  a  fanciful  plan ;  it  followed  the
arrangements  of  real  hfe  in  a  hmp  and  imper-
fect manner,  but  it  was  suggested  by  these  arrangements
and  was  dependent  on  them.  The  carucate  got  to  be  a  unit
of  taxation  because  the  chief  divisions  of  the  land  were
based  on  the  grouping  of  plough-lands ;  and  to  this  side
of  the  matter  we  have  now  to  turn  our  attention.

The  carucate,  the  sulung,  and  the  hide,  with  their  sub-
divisions, are  used  all  along  as  units  of  agrarian  occupation,
as  typical  holdings.^*  We  hear  of  hides  lying  in  certain
fields,  representing  certain  tracts  of  land,  limited  by  definite
boimdaries,  containing  a  certain  number  of  acres.  In
donations  and  sales  the  quantity  of  the  land  given  or  sold  is
expressed  in  numbers  of  hides,  or  sulungs,  or  carucates,
according  to  the  districts.^'  Inasmuch  as  all  these  units  are
more  or  less  intimately  connected  with  the  land  tilled  by
one  plough,  they  tend  to  an  average  size  of  120  acres  of

M


162  THE  GROWTH  OF  THE  MANOR

arable  per  piece,^^  but  in  later  descriptions  of  actual
economic  condition  we  constantly  come  across  larger  and
smaller  numbers,  according  to  local  custom  ;  ^^  and,  indeed,
a  little  reflection  will  show  that  the  120  acres  for  the  hide,
the  thirty  acres  for  the  virgate,  the  fifteen  for  the  bovate,
are  to  be  considered  merely  as  averages,  because,  apart
from  local  variations  in  the  quahty  of  the  soil  and  the  strength
of  the  teams  employed,  we  have  to  reckon  with  at  least  two
factors  of  first-rate  importance  which  modified  such  averages ;
namely,  the  diversity  between  the  two -course  and  the
three -course  system  of  agriculture,  and  the  difference  in
the  importance  of  agriculture  as  compared  with  pastoral
pursuits.  In  the  first  case  it  is  clear  that  the  three-course
system  necessitated  a  greater  size  of  the  holdings,  while
the  two-field  system  admitted  and  demanded  a  smaller
expanse.*"  This  may  partly  account  for  the  often  recur-
ring duplication  of  arable  land  as  against  actual  stocking
with  ploughs  in  the  north. *^  As  for  pastoral  pursuits,
they  were  still  prevalent  in  the  west  and  in  districts
covered  with  fens  and  marshes  in  the  east ;  and  as  the  hide
included  both  arable  and  pasture,  its  centre  of  gravity
shifted,  as  it  were,  in  the  case  of  such  regions  as  Devon,
Cornwall,  and  the  fens  ;  so  that  the  holdings  came  to  be
very  large  in  their  surface,  and  small  in  the  number  of
acres  of  arable  assigned  to  them.*^  Still,  the  average
reckoning  is  characteristic,  at  least  for  the  later  period
verging  on  the  Norman  conquest,  especially  as  it  estabhshes
a  connection  between  the  various  units  in  use  at  the  same
time,  and  may  serve  as  an  index  of  their  comparative
antiquity :  the  hide  being  least  in  agreement  with  it,  because
it  was  the  most  ancient  of  all  and  the  one  which  had  under-
gone the  greatest  number  of  rearrangements.*^  Besides,
the  hide  was  not  even  originally  designed  as  a  plough-land,
but  as  the  land  of  a  household  {terra  familice)  settled  on
the  land  {mansa,  manens,  cassatum)  and  Hable  to  tribute
[tributarii  terra).  There  are  traces  of  ancient  assessments
which  are  largely  different  from  the  later  practices  illustrated
by  Domesday  and  the  Geld  Inquests.  Bede  and  the  docu-
ment styled  the  Tribal  Hidage  speak  of  a  greater  number


THE SHARES IN THE TOWNSHIP  1G3

of  hides  than  there  were  in  the  time  of  Domesday  ;  and  this
evidence  which  points  to  the  existence  of  official  lists  of  hides
in  the  seventh  century,  leads  us  to  assume  that  the  country
was  divided  into  a  greater  number  of  political  shares,  and  that
in  some  well-known  districts  such  as  Kent,  more  particu-
larly the  Isle  of  Thanet,  in  the  Isle  of  Wight,  the  Isle  of  Ely,
in  Sussex,  the  land  was  assessed  in  much  smaller  units
than  those  in  use  at  a  later  period.**  The  discrepancy
between  the  general  numbers  is  striking,  but  there  is  hardly
any  ground  for  the  desperate  expedient  of  declaring  the
ancient  assessment  a  product  of  gross  exaggeration.  It  is
too  well  attested  for  that,  and  it  goes  too  much  into  detail.
It  seems  simpler  to  suppose  that  the  primary  repartition
went  really  by  the  number  of  households  and  not  by  the
number  of  big  plough -teams  provided  on  the  average  with
120  acres  each.  In  many  cases,  where  the  population  was
crowded  on  narrow  strips  of  territory,  this  must  have  pro-
duced a  considerable  excess  in  the  numbers  of  hides. *°
■?iie  decrease  in  the  total  number  and  in  the  repartition  of
hides  must  have  been  the  result  of  a  gradual  adaptation
to  the  standard  of  the  big  plough  and  of  a  corresponding
consohdation  of  fiscal  units.  Indeed,  it  would  be  strange
to  assume  that  the  Angles,  Saxons,  and  Jutes  from  the  very
first  arranged  their  settlements  on  a  uniform  pattern  and
started  everywhere  from  the  eight-oxen  team.  It  would
seem  more  natural  to  surmise  a  good  deal  of  variety  in  the
beginning  and  the  use  of  less  comphcated  implements.  As
a  matter  of  fact,  the  gUmpses  afforded  by  the  evidence  at
our  disposal  point  in  this  very  direction.*^

In  some  cases,  however,  it  can  be  shown  that  the  later  ap-
portionment of  hides  remains  identical  with  that  mentioned
in  early  land-books  ;  but  that  need  not  disturb  the  general
view,  that  the  hide  expanded  as  an  agricultural  unit,  and  that
the  number  of  hides  shrank,  the  instances  of  imdisturbed  con-
tinuity being  generally  derived  from  endowments  of  churches
and  monasteries,  which  led  to  the  most  enduring  and  secure
possession  of  those  times,  to  an  early  apphcation  of  high
farming  and  to  a  good  deal  of  colonising  enterprise.*^  No
wonder  that  the  big  plough  and  the  large  unit  appeared


164  THE  GROWTH  OF  THE  MANOR

there  at  an  early  period,  and  that  the  economic  tendency  in
such  cases  was  towards  comparatively  rapid  increase  and
progress,  while  the  fiscal  tendency  on  the  part  of  the
ecclesiastical  owners  to  which  the  government  must  have
to  a  great  extent  given  way,  went  towards  the  lessening
of  duties,  or,  at  any  rate,  towards  keeping  them  at  a
fixed  and  immovable  standard.  When  the  abbey  of
Crediton  got  a  district  which  comprised  more  than  an  entire
hundred,  only  twenty  hides  were  reckoned  in  it.  In  the
time  of  Domesday  it  had  to  submit  to  an  increased  assess-
ment, but  even  this  increase  could  hardly  have  corre-
sponded to  the  actual  increase  of  wealth  that  had  been
achieved  in  the  meantime.*^  And  if  the  sees  of  Winchester
and  of  Bath  went  on  estimating  their  possessions  and
contributing  towards  common  duties  according  to  the  old
standards  of  their  endowments,  this  expressed  not  only  the
traditional  continuity  of  their  rights,  but  also  the  increased
importance  of  their  estates  when  compared  with  the  shift-
ing units  of  ownership  and  taxation  around  them.*®

It  was  a  tedious  but  necessary  task  to  state  with  some
clearness  in  what  manner  the  handhng  of  fiscal  imits  by
Royal  commissioners  and  the  agrarian  distribution  under-
lying it  must  be  understood  by  us.  We  may  proceed  now
to  the  analysis  of  the  part  played  by  hides,  carucates,  vir-
gates,  bovates,  etc.,  as  units  in  the  actual  distribution  and
occupation  of  the  land.


CHAPTER IV

THE  OPEN-FIELD  SYSTEM

I. Agrarian  Arrangements

The  formation  of  hides  with  their  subdivisions  was  neither

a  mere  fiscal  expedient  nor  a  casual  distribution  of  the  soil

for  the  purpose  of  measurement. It  grew  up

Commons  ^^.^ .  ,  . . .  ,  ,  .  T

m  connection  with  agricultural  practices  which

made  it  necessary  to  apportion  the  rights  and  duties  of  th©
holders  of  land  in  a  system  which  involved  an  intricate
intermixture  of  claims  and  the  necessity  of  constant  co-op-
eration between  neighbours.  It  gave  the  measure  of  rights  in
dwelling  and  close,  in  arable  and  meadow,  in  pasture,  wood
and  water,  and  the  basis  for  the  co-operation  of  householders
in  rural  husbandry.  It  entailed  a  solidarity  of  the  members
of  each  household  within  the  unit.  Claims  by  the  govern-
ment and  pohtical  duties  of  all  kinds  were  apportioned
according  to  it.  Let  us  examine  these  different  aspects  of
shareholding  a  Uttle  closer.

We  may  start  from  the  following  general  outline  of  the
economic  position  of  the  households  of  a  township.  They
had  the  common  and  undivided  use  of  the  waste  land,  but
this  use  could  be  hmited  and  apportioned  by  the  community.
This  waste  land  stretched  usually  over  a  great  part  of  the
territory  assigned  to  the  township,  and  the  reclaiming  of
this  land  for  purposes  of  exclusive  cultivation  and  enjoy-
ment was  subjected  to  restrictive  rules  :  the  scarce  and
highly  valued  meadows  were  assigned  under  strict  rules  of
proportionate  division  and  redivision  ;  the  arable,  which
formed  the  most  important,  and  the  most  conspicuous  portion
of  the  whole,  lay  in  scattered  strips  in  the  various  fields
and  shots  of  the  village,  so  that  every  holding  presented  a


166  THE  GROWTH  OF  THE  MANOR

bundle  of  these  strips  equal  to  other  bundles  of  the  same
denomination ;  everybody  had  to  conform  to  the  same
rules  and  methods  in  regard  to  the  rotation  and  cultivation
of  crops,  and  when  these  had  been  gathered  the  strips
relapsed  into  the  state  of  an  open  field  in  common  use.
The  homesteads  and  closes  around  them  were  kept  under
separate  management,  but  had  been  allotted  by  the  com-
munity and  could  in  some  cases  be  subjected  to  reallotment.
If  this  is  a  correct  general  description  of  the  main  system
in  operation  in  the  course  of  the  thousand  years  from  500
till  1500  A.D.,  and  extending  many  of  its  incidents  to
even  later  times,  one  can  scarcely  escape  the  conclusion,
that  whatever  inroads  the  individual  and  the  State  may
have  made  upon  it,  and  whatever  bias  legal  theory  may
have  shown  towards  more  definite  and  individualistic  con-
ceptions, the  average  English  householder  of  the  middle  ages
lived  under  conditions  in  which  his  power  of  free  disposal
and  free  management  was  hemmed  in  on  all  sides  by  customs
and  rules  converging  towards  the  conceptions  of  a  community
of  interests  and  rights  between  all  the  household  shares  of  a
village.^

The  waste  included  an  enormous  quantity  of  land,  #f
the  extent  of  which  some  estimate  may  be  formed  by  looking
at  the  Domesday  entries  concerning  woods  and  pastures.
Their  area  is  generally  described  in  quaranteens  or
furlongs  and  leagues  with  vague  limits.  .  Indeed,  the
delimitation  of  this  space  was  so  rough  and  approximate
that  the  Domesday  commissioners  were  satisfied  with  jot-
ting down  the  size  in  rectangles  of  so  many  acres  or  furlongs
or  leagues  in  length  and  of  so  many  in  breadth,^  and  we  may
well  think  that  where  there  was  no  natural  boundary,  such
as  a  river  or  cultivated  land,  the  boundaries  between  these
waste  spaces  were  difficult  to  define.  Indeed,  in  districts
with  wide  stretches  of  soil  of  this  character  there  was  for  a
long  time  no  necessity  and  no  wish  to  determine  the  respec-
tive boundaries,  and  the  population  of  conterminous  town-
ships used  the  woods  or  the  marshes  concurrently.^  We
are  told  by  the  historian  of  the  parish  of  WhaUey  that  there
were  about  161  square  miles  in  it,  of  which  at  least  70  miles


THE OPEN-FIELD SYSTEM  167

formed  the  forests  of  Blackburnshire  claimed  by  no  town-
ship or  manor  in  particular,  while  about  33,000  acres  were
appropriated  as  pasture  and  woodland  by  the  different
townships,  only  3,500  being  cultivated  as  arable.*  The
documents  of  Peterborough  and  of  Ely  show  us  the  exten-
sive intercommoning'*  of  the  population  of  the  fen  districts,
and  it  has  been  lately  made  out  by  Mr.  Round  that  the
eastern  border  of  Essex  formed  a  sort  of  fringe  often
covered  by  the  w-ater,  with  no  distinct  delimitation  of  owner-
ship between  the  vUlages  adjoining  it,  and  used  by  them  as
common  ground  for  the  pasturing  of  sheep.^  There  is
hardly  any  need  to  mention  that  the  south-western  and
north-western  counties,  with  their  sparse  population,  pas-
toral traditions  and  exposure  to  the  inroads  of  the  Welsh,
were  particularly  adapted  to  that  kind  of  indiscriminate
use  of  the  waste  ;  but  there  are  distinct  traces  of  wide  tracts
of  woodland  apportioned  and  used  in  a  very  rudimentary
manner  in  the  south-east  itself.'  The  apportionment  of
claims,  regulation  of  usages  and  supervision  of  their  en-
forcement, were  especially  loose  and  superficial  in  these
eases ;  and  referred  chiefly  to  keeping  the  intercommoning
restricted  to  the  population  of  certain  places,^  to  the
performance  of  certain  necessary  operations  for  regulating
the  influx  of  water  by  ditches,  canals  and  dikes  ;  probably
at  an  early  period — before  the  lords  had  fastened  on  the
hunting  rights — to  some  provisions  as  to  the  seasons  and
modes  of  sport  .^  In  all  such  cases  the  necessity  for  a  more
careful  definition  of  rights  or  even  a  complete  division  of
them  might  arise  sooner  or  later.^°  The  parties  to  all
such  agreements,  customary  arrangements  and  delimi-
tations, were  often  townships  as  undivided  units,  and  thus
in  these  cases  of  intervillar  relations  the  unity  of  the  town-
ship clearly  asserts  itself.^^  There  is  no  sufficient  ground
on  the  other  hand  for  ascending  to  the  original  ownership
of  a  hundred.  In  some  cases  the  waste  not  appropriated
by  a  single  township  may  have  been  considered  as  apper-
taining to  the  hundred,  and  many  disputes  in  regard  to
it  may  have  been  decided  in  the  hundred  court.  But
there  are  also  instances  of  the  jurisdiction  of the shire  in


168  THE  GROWTH  OF  THE  MANOR

such  trials  ;  and  if  we  examine  the  concrete  examples  of
intercommoning  which  have  come  down  to  us,  we  see  that
in  most  cases  it  arose  between  two  or  three  contiguous
villages  by  reason  of  their  natural  position  on  the  border
of  a  large  moor  or  a  waste  thicket.^^  This  fact  has  a  cer-
tain importance  as  illustrating  the  original  vagueness  of
all  legal  distinctions  in  this  respect.  They  start  from  a
gradual  appropriation  of  the  soil,  and  proceed  step  by  step
to  clearly  defined  and  Umited  rights.

The  treatment  of  wood,  moor  and  pasture  becomes  more
interesting  when  their  quantity  gets  to  be  restricted,  and
floating  usages  have  to  be  "stinted"  according
Common  ^^  conceptions  of  proportionate  rights. A  com-

mon entry  in  Domesday  is  that  in  a  particular
place  there  is  sufficient  pasture  for  the  cattle  ;  sometimes,  but
more  rarely,  the  mention  of  sufficient  wood  also  occm-s.^^
In  these  cases  the  quantity  of  waste  land  was  not  even
practically  unlimited,  and  the  modes  of  appropriation  of
its  benefits  and  proceeds  had  to  be  devised  and  kept  up
for  the  sake  of  the  community  to  avoid  destruction  and  to
prevent  imfair  advantage  being  taken  by  some  of  the  par-
ticipants. In  this  connection  the  common  appears  as
included  in  the  territory  of  a  definite  rural  community,  and
the  right  to  use  it  is  said  in  later  legal  language  to  be
appendant  to  the  holdings  of  this  community,  nor  is  there
any  reasonable  ground  for  supposing  that  the  principles  on
which  these  rights  were  apportioned  and  regulated  were
altogether  different  in  earHer  times.  Without  vouching  for
details,  we  may  suppose  that  the  customary  jurisprudence
of  the  feudal  age  fairly  represents  the  main  ideas  which
prevailed  among  the  Saxons.

In  regard  to  woods,  it  would  be  difficult  to  say  how
far  the  pohce  regulations  about  the  feUing  of  great  and
valuable  trees,  which  we  find  in  practice  in  the  feudal  period,
were  already  in  use  in  Old  EngHsh  times  :  if  we  may  judge
from  the  legal  enactments  about  the  felling  and  burning  of
trees  in  private  woods,  some  kinds  of  these  were  of  sufficient
value  to  call  for  special  protection  ;  ^*  and  most  probably
there  arose  already  in  this  early  period  some  customary


THE OPEN-FIELD SYSTEM  169

jurisprudence  as  to  the  rights  of  householders  to  cut  trees
for  housebote  and  heybote,  that  is,  for  the  erection  and
repair  of  houses  and  hedges,  as  well  as  for  fuel,  although
we  have  no  direct  testimony  on  this  point  in  Old  English
documents.^^  Indeed,  the  woods  appear  in  the  older  evi-
dence chiefly  as  places  where  swine  get  their  food  !  When
estimates  of  their  value  are  given  in  Domesday  they  are
made  from  this  point  of  view,^*  and  the  trees  are  charac-
teristically appraised  in  Ine's  laws  according  to  their
abihty  to  give  shelter  to  swine.  If  the  use  of  common
woods  had  to  be  limited  in  this  respect,  every  tenement  had
to  be  entitled  to  send  a  certain  number  of  their  beasts  to
the  mast-bearing  wood.^^

We  hear  much  more  of  customs  in  regard  to  pasture
proper,  which  already  in  Domesday  times  seems  to  have
been  in  many  cases  rather  restricted.  The  rural  courts
decided  in  later  times  what  part  of  the  pasture  had  to  be
used  by  horned  cattle,  what  by  sheep,  and  where  goats  were
allowed  to  go.  The  seasons  when  this  was  to  be  done  had
also  to  be  determined  by  common  consent.  The  habits  of
all  these  animals  and  their  wants  had  to  be  taken  account
of,  and  as  for  the  concurrent  rights  of  the  villagers  they
might  be  determined  by  the  size  of  the  tenements.  Some-
times the  only  restriction  put  on  the  use  of  the  pasture
was  the  requirement  that  the  beasts  should  be  owned
by  the  villagers,  should  be  coiichant  et  levant,  as  was  said  by
the  Anglo-Normans,  on  the  tenement,  and  not  got  over  from
abroad  ;  but  there  are  many  traces  of  the  necessity  in  some
places  to  reduce  the  number  of  beasts  to  be  sent  to  the  com-
mon pasture  and  to  equalise  or  to  apportion  it  according
to  the  size  of  the  holdings.^^  The  same  may  be  said  about
the  use  of  waste  lands  for  other  purposes,  e.g.  for  cutting
turf  as  fuel  (common  of  turbary).  Altogether,  the  use  of
common  was  considered  as  appendant  to  the  holding,  and
determined  by  a  fair  appreciation  of  its  requirements  and
of  the  amount  of  commodities  at  hand.  There  can  be  no
doubt  that  the  idea  of  pasture  rights  as  a  valuable  appendix
to  the  arable  of  the  tenement,  and  as  commensurate  with  its
position  in  regard  to  other  tenements,  was  as  ancient  as


170  THE  GROWTH  OF  THE  MANOR

common  pasture  itself,  and  that  the  customs  of  later  cen-
turies in  this  respect,  though  they  may  have  varied  in  regard
to  details,  represented  in  the  main  the  same  treatment  of
these  questions  as  the  one  which  prevailed  in  Old  English
times.  And  it  is  important  to  take  note  that  the  rights  of
using  the  common  were  all  along  directed  and  restricted
by  the  regulative  power  of  the  tun  community.  Decisions
as  to  the  quantity  and  the  quahty  of  commonable  beasts,
the  putting  up  of  hedges  and  walls,  the  management  of
drainage,  regulations  as  to  the  cutting  of  grass,  had  to  be
made  by  the  community,  and  to  be  apportioned  according
to  the  shares  held  in  it  by  its  members.^'  Nor  ought  we  to
think  too  Hghtly  of  the  importance  of  the  rights  and  interests
involved  in  this  domain  of  rural  custom.  In  many  cases
where  pastoral  pursuits  were  still  much  to  the  fore,  this  side
of  life  was  hardly  less  important  than  agriculture  itself.
The  attempt  of  certain  sections  of  Domesday  to  register  the
numbers  of  the  different  animals  on  the  estates  points  con-
vincingly to  the  great  importance  of  the  subject.  Nor  must
we  forget  that  the  pasture  was  more  important  in  the  same
degree  as  the  habit  of  making  and  keeping  hay  was  less  pre-
valent. Altogether  it  has  constantly  to  be  borne  in  mind
that  the  hide  or  any  other  tenement  we  are  talking  of  is  by
no  means  a  measure  of  so  many  acres  of  arable,  say  of  120
acres  ;  but  a  quantity  of  arable  plus  the  pastoral  and  other
common  rights  appendant  to  it.

A  question  of  the  utmost  magnitude  arose  in  regard  to
the  common  waste  ;  namely,  the  question  of  reclaiming  part
Assarts  ^^  ^*  ^°^  cultivation. The  reclaiming  ("  assar-

and  ting  ")  of  land  went  on  from  the  very  first  set-

Inclosures  tlements  into  later  ages  as  one  of  the  most
powerful  processes  tending  to  form  society  and  to  extend  the
Umits  of  its  life.  The  struggle  against  the  waste  and  the
spread  of  cultivation  gave  rise  to  a  change  in  the  character  of
commodities  and  a  displacement  of  rights.  The  men  or  the
man  who  turned  portions  of  the  common  into  arable  fields
or  enclosed  them  as  private  pasture,  restricted  the  right
of  other  people  to  the  use  of  the  common,  and  sooner  or
later  these  encroachments  might  reach  a  point  where  the


THE OPEN-FIELD SYSTEM  171

&pread  of  cultivation  came  into  direct  opposition  witli  the
pastoral  interests  of  other  shareholders.  The  early  history
of  the  inevitable  struggle  is  as  obscure  as  it  is  interesting
and  important.  We  have  in  truth  one  great  landmark  in
the  setting  up  of  a  restraint  on  the  approving  tendencies
of  the  lords  of  manors  on  behalf  of  their  free  tenants :  later
jurisprudence  runs  almost  exclusively  in  the  groove  marked
by  the  celebrated  Statutes  of  Merton  and  of  Westminster
II.,  and  it  is  clear  that  these  statutes  leave  entirely  in  the
shade  a  whole  series  of  most  interesting  questions.  What
was  the  view  of  former  generations  on  the  rights  of  lords
to  approve  ?  Were  the  processes  of  colonisation  and
reclaiming  carried  on  entirely  at  random  in  former  days
or  were  they  shaped  by  some  order  and  custom,  etc.  ?  Still,
even  from  the  narrow  point  of  view  adopted  by  the  Statute
of  Merton  some  significant  facts  appear  which  throw  light
on  the  general  conception  of  the  commons  and  of  their  uses.
It  is  well  known  that  the  question,  mooted  in  the  thirteenth
century,  was  decided  in  the  sense  that  the  lords  had  the
faculty  of  approving  if  it  could  be  shown  that  sufficient  I'
pasture  remained  on  the  common  for  the  cattle  of  the  free
tenants.  Now  this  right  of  tenants  to  "  sufficient  pasture  "
is  highly  characteristic.  It  is  clear  that  it  was  taken  to  be
the  equivalent  of  that  part  of  the  share  owned  by  the  tenant
which  was  not  expressed  in  so  many  acres  of  arable,  but
consisted  in  the  pastoral  right  appendant  to  it  by  reason  of
its  being  a  share  in  a  pastoral  as  well  as  agricultural  commu-
nity. As  the  amount  of  this  pastoral  right  could  not  be  ex-
pressed in  acres,  and  yet  was  taken  to  represent  something
liable  to  legal  protection,  this  amount  had  to  be  made  out  in
each  case.  The  sufficiency  had  to  be  tested  by  the  custom  of
the  village  in  regard  to  the  kinds  and  the  number  of  beasts
allowed  to  take  advantage  of  the  common.  The  right  of
the  free  tenant,  formally  defensible  in  the  King's  Court
against  the  lord,  went  back  in  its  material  contents
to  the  custom  of  the  village  as  to  the  use  of  the  common
pasture,^°  a  custom  which  had  not  sprung  up  into  existence
in  consequence  of  the  Statute  of  Merton,  but  which  had
run  on  from  Old  English  times,  from  the  formation  of  the


172  THE GROWTH OF  THE MAifOR

settlements  themselves,  no  doubt  with  many  modifications
in  details,  but  with  the  one  main  idea  that  the  community
had  to  settle  and  to  keep  up  by  custom  and  decision  the
modes  of  making  good  the  general  right  of  its  shareholders
and  members  to  their  pastoral  and  other  undivided  rights.
And  it  is  clear  that  originally  these  regulations  did  not  have
in  view  any  particular  kind  of  tenant,  but  all  those  who
possessed  land  in  the  village,  whether  they  were  thanes  or
ceorls,  lords,  free  tenants,  socmen  or  villains.  In  this  way,
even  in  the  epoch  governed  by  the  feudal  jurisprudence  of
the  King's  courts,  recourse  was  necessarily  had  to  the
customs  of  a  self-governing  village  community  in  regard
to  the  estimate  of  the  minimum  of  pastoral  rights ;  though
of  course,  at  the  outset,  these  customs  did  not  arise  with  the
view  of  providing  such  a  minimum,  or  for  the  sake  of  watch-
ing over  the  interests  of  the  smallest  class  of  the  tenantry,
the  freeholders.  Behind  the  minimum  standard  contem-
plated by  the  Statute  of  Merton  lay  a  body  of  custom
devised  for  the  ordinary  routine  in  the  management  of  the
common,  and  this  ordinary  routine  applied  quite  as  much
to  the  tenants  in  villainage  as  to  the  freeholders,  and  must
have  apphed  even  more  uniformly  to  the  ceorls  of  a  Saxon
tun.  It  is  also  to  be  noticed  that  in  feudal  times  before  the
Statute  of  Merton,  the  opposition  of  the  tenantry  to  the
onesided  reclaimings  of  land  by  the  lord  evidently  went
further  and  hampered aU kind  of  "approvement,"  of  enclos-
ing the  land  for  private  cultivation,  whether  it  was  carried
to  the  verge  of  endangering  the  economic  welfare  of  the
free  tenantry  or  not.  The  Statute  stopped  so  wide  an
application  of  the  right  of  shareholding  tenants  in  the
common,  but  we  have  to  reckon  with  the  customary  tend-
ency towards  such  an  application  in  the  period  preceding
the  Merton  enactment,  and  this  by  itself  is  significant
I  enough.^^  The  Norman  lawyers  took  the  line  of  treating
I  the  whole  question  at  issue  as  a  conflict  between  the  indi-
!  vidual  right  of  the  free  tenant  in  the  use  of  the  common  and
the  individual  right  of  the  lord  in  the  ownership  of  the  waste.
But  it  would  be  hardly  safe  to  foUow  them  so  far  in  their
construction  of  the  opposing  rights  as  to  suppose  that  the


THE OPEN-FIELD SYSTEM  173

position  of  the  freeholder  and  of  the  manorial  owner  devel-
oped historically  on  a  purely  individualistic  basis,  and  was
rooted  in  undefined  individual  claims.  The  necessity  of
compromising  interests  and  keeping  some  order  in  tlie
regulation  of  such  an  important  right  as  the  right  of  approve-
ment must  have  been  felt  all  along,  and,  though  irregular
squatting  and  self-help  in  the  matter  of  assarting  may  have
been  of  usual  occurrence,  in  cases  of  stinted  common  custom
and  agreement  had  to  decide.  We  have  not  the  evidence  to
show  by  what  means  such  custom  had  the  power  to  curb
the  members  of  the  commimity  in  the  Old  English  period,
but  certainly  its  force  could  not  have  been  less  than  it  was
in  Norman  times,  when  we  see  constant  traces  of  popular
opposition  on  the  ground  of  custom  against  attempts  even
of  manorial  lords  to  override  the  customary  arrangement
and  to  reclaim  and  enclose  parts  of  the  common  for  tlieir
several  use."  A  natural  inference  lies  towards  a  more
stringent  application  of  the  communal  standpoint,  at  a  time
when  the  majority  of  peasant  holders  had  not  yet  been
juridically  disenfranchised,  and  the  law  had  not  yet  been
systematically  arranged  on  the  basis  of  contractual  obliga-
tion between  individual  parties.  We  may  well  suppose
that  in  the  case  of  wholesale  approvement  by  villages,
either  while  throwing  off  hamlets  or  while  enlarging  their
own  area  of  cultivation  by  the  opening  of  new  shots  or
fields,  common  decision  had  to  be  resorted  to  in  order  to
shape  the  course  to  be  adopted  in  detail.

In  regard  to  meadows,  communal  rights  are  as  conspicuous
as  in  the  case  of  waste  land,  although  the  motive  for  keeping
meadows  under  the  constant  and  direct  dis-
posal of  the  community  is  an  exactly  opposite
one.  In  one  case  communal  rights  naturally  arose  from  the
fact  that  there  was  a  great  deal  of  waste  land  and  the  drift
towards  individual  appropriation  was  slight.  In  the  other,
meadows  were  jealously  kept  in  the  hands  of  the  community
because  there  were  few  of  them,  and  the  best  provision  for
reconciling  conflicting  wishes  was  to  arrange  a  temporarily
and  strictly  regulated  occupation.  As  a  matter  of  fact,  we
find  that  the  usual  manner  of  making  use  of  village  meadows


174  THE  GROWTH  OF  THE  MANGE

was  to  put  them  under  prohibition  and  enclosure  until
Lammas -day,  and  to  distribute  portions  of  them  for  the
purpose  of  cutting  the  grass  and  making  hay  according  to
certain  rules,  either  by  lot  or  by  rotation  ;  every  household
taking  its  turn  in  regard  to  every  particular  strip,^^  When
the  grass  had  been  mowed  the  land  became  the  undivided
pasture  of  the  villagers.  The  one  clear  instance  in  which
land  owned  by  a  community  of  ceorls  is  mentioned  in  an
Old  English  legal  enactment  appHes  primarily  to  the
duties  of  parceners  in  keeping  up  hedges  for  the  protection
of  a  meadow,  and  to  the  habihties  of  those  who  had  been
remiss  in  keeping  them  up  for  damages  occasioned  by
animals.2*

In  the  important  paragraph  of  Ine's  laws  we  have  just
quoted,  the  meadow  stands  first,  but  along  with  it  other
Shiftine  "  ^^^^e-land  " (Gedal-land)  is mentioned, in

possession  which  it  is  not  difficult  to  recognise  the  strips
of  Arable  q£  ^^^  arable  which  have  to  be  protected  by

hedges  for  the  time  when  corn  grows  on  them,  in  the  same
way  as  grass  has  to  be  preserved  on  the  meadow  before  Lam-
mastide.  The  arable  portion  of  the  township  has  been  con-
sidered chiefly  as  representing  the  open  field  system,  and
it  has  a  right  to  the  name  inasmuch  as  there  are  only  balks,
thin  borders  of  turf,  to  separate  the  strips  assigned  to  the
different  house -holders,  while  hedges  are  raised  merely  as
temporary  enclosures  until  the  harvest  has  been  gathered,
and  taken  down  again  until  the  new  crop  shows  itself  in  the
spring.2^  There  are  even  cases  in  which  the  arable  "share-
land  "  gets  distributed  to  single  householders,  on  the  same
principles  of  rotation  and  assignment  by  lot  which  seem  to
have  been  the  rule  in  regard  to  meadows.  These  cases  of
shifting  occupation  of  strips  of  arable  by  members  of  the
community  occur  chiefly  in  regard  to  fields  belonging  to
urban  settlements. ^^  The  practical  reason  of  such  a  very
communalistic  treatment  must  have  been  that  the  fields  in
question  had  become  an  exceptional  commodity,  in  the
same  way  as  meadows  were  an  exceptional  commodity  in
ordinary  villages.  Most  Hkely  they  had  been  approved  by
communal  action  and  imder  communal  supervision  from  the


THE OPEN-FIELD SYSTEM  175

waste  land  surrounding  the  town,and  had  never  been  allowed
to  lapse  into  individual  ownership.  These  facts  are  not
without  importance,  because  most  of  the  urban  communities
developed  gradually  out  of  purely  agricultural  or  partly;
agricultural  settlements,  so  that  the  practices  adopted  by
them  in  regard  to  the  management  of  the  arable  were  hardly
shaped  on  a  model  entirely  foreign  to  the  life  of  villages
proper.  The  conception  of  communal  ownership  of  the
arable,  which  is  so  clearly  expressed  in  the  management  of
their  fields,  must  be  considered  as  the  common  stem  from
which  both  lines  of  management  diverged,  and  it  would  be
difficult  to  account  for  two  entirely  different  conceptions
of  ownership  in  the  two  cases. ^^  Indeed,  in  purely  rural
communities  shifting  occupation  of  strips  of  arable  is  not
unknown.  The  so-called  runrig  or  rundale  system,  which
may  be  best  illustrated  by  practices  in  Scotland,  is  based
on  it.  Although  it  may  very  probably  go  back  to  Celtic
practices  in  the  Highlands,  yet  it  is  to  be  found  in  opera-
tion in  Saxon  communities  in  the  Lowlands.  In  the
toAvnships  of  this  region  we  often  find  a  division  of  the
arable  into  two  parts — the  inner  part  cultivated  with  greater
intensity  and  with  the  employment  of  manure  and  other
capital  improvements  ;  and  the  outlying  parts,  which  are
tilled  in  a  more  perfunctory  manner.  The  better,  inner  land
is  sometimes  divided  into  strips,  which  are  given  over  in'
turn  to  the  several  husbandmen,  so  that  habits  of  constant
occupation  do  not  arise  in  regard  to  it.-^

But  undoubtedly  in  most  cases  which  come  under  our
notice  in  the  later  middle  ages  we  find  the  open  field  system,

coupled  with  a  hereditary  possession  of  the
of*Striiw*'"* strips  assigned  to  a  share  by  the  householder

to  whom  the  share  belongs.  The  120  acres,  or
any  other  number  of  acres  contained  in  the  hide,  lie  in  dif-
ferent places,  and  are  severed  from  the  acres  of  neighbours  by
thin  fringes  of  unploughed  turf,  the  so-called  balks.  Even
in  this  most  common  case  there  are  many  pecuharities
attached  to  the  tenure  of  these  strips.  The  aim  of  the
arrangement  does  not  seem  to  have  been  to  single  out
the  land  of  a  particular  individual  and  to  protect  it  from


176  THE  GROWTH  OF  THE  MANOR

encroachment  and  intrusion.  Such  precautions  as  are  taken
in  this  respect  are  very  sHght.  On  the  contrary,  the  close
union  of  the  different  holdings,  their  inclusion  in  one  and
the  same  system,  which  is  not  devised  by  the  will  and
plans  of  any  one  of  them  in  particular,  but  is  carried  on
by  the  whole  group,  is  expressed  in  a  variety  of  points.
The  possessions  are  intermixed  ;  allotments  are  made,
not  in  patches  set  apart  for  the  use  of  the  ^different  house-
holders, but  in  strips  assigned  to  every  one  in  each  of  the  shots
or  fields  occupied  for  tillage  by  the  community .'^^  It  is  a
remarkable  arrangement ;  the  more  remarkable  because
with  all  its  inconveniences  of  communication,  all  its  back-
wardness in  regard  to  improvements,  all  its  trammels  on
individual  enterprise  and  thrift,  all  its  awkward  dependence
of  the  individual  on  the  behaviour  of  his  neighbours,  it
repeats  itself  over  and  over  again  for  centuries  not  only  over
the  whole  of  England  but  over  a  great  part  of  Europe,
Powerful  influences  must  have  been  at  work  to  originate
and  to  support  it,  and  it  is  well  worth  while  to  dwell  a  Httle
longer  on  its  social  significance.  One  thing  seems  clear  :
although  this  system  was  not  by  any  means  the  best  for
furthering  the  progress  of  cultivation,  it  was  particularly
adapted  to  the  requirements  of  a  community  of  shareholders
who  were  closely  joined  together  in  the  performance  of  their
Work,  the  assertion  of  their  rights,  the  performance  of  their
duties  and  the  payment  of  their  dues.  On  the  supposition
that  the  basis  of  social  arrangements  was  to  be  a  repartition
of  rights  and  duties  according  to  the  shares  with  which
people  were  endowed  in  the  tenure  of  land,  the  complicated
open  fields,  intermixed  strips  and  graduated  holdings  of
the  tuns  would  suggest  themselves  naturally  ;  and  in  this
cumbrous  form  the  different  obligations  of  economic  and
political  life  would,  as  it  were,  strike  root  into  the  soil.  It
has  been  lately  a  matter  of  dispute  among  scholars  whether
the  scattering  of  strips  in  the  shots  of  the  open  field  system
was  to  be  accounted  for  by  a  wish  to  equahse  the  advan-
tages and  the  drawbacks,  the  conveniences  and  the  diffi-
culties of  every  economic  combination  between  the  share-
holders of  the  village. Some  of  our  authorities  hold  the  view


THE OPEN-FIELD SYSTEM  177

that  a  more  natural  explanation  of  the  chequered pro-
prietorship of  the  peasants  in  the open  fields,  would be
found in the  fact  that  the  shots and furlongs  were  not
occupied  at  once, but  reclaimed  gradually  as  the needs
of  the  settlers  increased,  so  that  a  householder  came  to
possess  widely  scattered  strips  in  the  fields  of  his  native
village  as  a  result  of  a  long  process  of  spreading  cultiva-
tion.^" But  the  proposed  explanation  does  not  seem  to  us
to  alter  materially  the  conclusions  \vhich  were  previously
admitted. It  is  irrelevant  whether  the  shareholders  A.  B.  C,
etc.,  are  thought  to  be  endowed  with  strips  lying  in  discon-
tinuous neighbourhood  to  each  other  in  three  or  in  thirteen
shots  or  furlongs. It  is  quite  possible  that  they  began  by
holding  in  three,  and  that  only  their  great-grandchildren
came  to  hold  in  thirteen. But  in  the  early  allotment  within
the  first  three  shots  and  on  subsequent  allotments  in  the
rest  the  strips  were  meted  out  in  such  a  manner  as  to  balance
each  other,  and  so  we  come,  after  a  historical  digression,  to
the  same  result,  namely,  that  it  was  thought  expedient  to
go  on  cutting  parallel  and  scattered  strips  under  approxi-
mately equal  conditions,  instead  of  turning  the  attention
and  the  interests  of  every  householder  to  one  part  of  the
j  soil  and  keeping  it  for  his  exclusive  use.^^ Moreover,  the
I  cloven  foot  of  rationalism  is  perhaps  most  apparent  in  the
attempt  to  account  for  all  the  varieties  in  the  construction
I  of  shots and strips by  the  growth  of  casual occupation
}  and  divisions  among  heirs. Nor does it  seem  very  likely
that  in  the case of migrations  of considerable  bodies  of
men  and  of  occupation  of  the  soil  in  close  groups  and  not
in  small  settlements,  even  the  first  colonists  could  avoid
cultivating in several furlongs at the same time, and
I  forming  the  holdings  from  strips  scattered  in  several  sub-
I  divisions  of  the  common  fields. And  it  is  to  such  occu-
[  pation  by  close  groups that  we  have  chiefly  to  look  in
;  the  case  of  Teutonic  settlements  in  England. What  the
[  exact  relation  of  these  modes  of  settlement  to  the  former
state  of  Celtic  and  Roman  agriculture  was  it  would  be  im-
possible to  tell ;  but  one  thing  is  certain — that  the  Teutonic
I conquerors  had  not  to  start  entirely  de  novo  in  cultivating


178  THE  GROWTH  OF  THE  MANOR

the  island,  and  that  therefore  then*  bundles  of  scattered
strips  in  the  fields  represented  not  so  much  a  gradual  adding
of  furlong  to  furlong  as  the  allotment  of  extant  arable  on
conditions  which  seemed  fair  and  equitable  to  them.  And
the  main  trait  in  these  conditions  was,  that  every  share,
whether  a  hide  or  virgate  or  bovate,  had  to  get  its  strips  in
the  shots  of  the  open  field  in  proportion  to  its  place  in  the
general  scheme  of  the  community.

A  very  graphic  and  instructive  description  of  the  process
of  allotment  is  afforded  by  a  narrative  of  occurrences  in  the
manorial  court  of  Wahull,  Bedfordshire,  preserved  in  a
cartulary  of  Dunstable  Priory.  The  proceedings  are  com-
paratively early — they  occurred  probably  in  the  time  of
Henry  II,  or  of  his  sons — and  notwithstanding  their  feudal
framework,  the  presence  of  the  lords  of  the  manor,  of  a
submanor  and  the  like,  the  communal  character  of  the
whole  process  is  well  preserved,  and  there  is  no  reason  to
suppose  that  these  things  were  done  very  differently  at  a
time  when  the  manorial  organisation  of  village  life  was  not
so  rigid  nor  so  complete.

In  the  time  of  the  war  (perhaps  the  rebeUion  of  1173)  the
eight  hides  in  Segheho  were  encroached  upon  and  appro-
priated unrighteously  by  many,  and  for  this  reason  a  general
revision  of  the  holdings  was  undertaken  before  Walter  de
Wahull  and  Hugh  de  Lege  in  full  Court  by  six  old  men ;  and  it
was  made  out  to  which  of  the  hides  the  several  acres  belonged.
At  that  time,  when  aU  the  tenants  in  Segheho  (knights,  free-
holders and  others)  did  not  know  exactly  about  the  land  of
the  village  and  the  tenements,  and  when  each  man  was  con-
tending that  his  neighbours  held  unrighteously  and  more
than  they  ought,  aU  the  people  decided  by  common  agree-
ment and  in  the  presence  of  the  lords  of  Wahull  and  de  Ir.
Lege,  that  everybody  should  surrender  his  land  to  be  mea-
sured anew  with  the  rod  by  the  old  men,  as  if  the  ground
were  being  occupied  afresh ;  every  one  had  to  receive  his  due
part  on  consideration  of  his  rights.  At  that  time  R.  F.
admitted  that  he  and  his  predecessors  had  held  the  area
near  the  castle  unrighteously.  The  men  in  charge  of  the
distribution  divided  the  area  into  sixteen  strips  (buttos),  and


THE OPEN-FIELD SYSTEM  179

these  were  distributed  as  follows  :  there  are  eight  hides  in
Segheho,  and  to  each  two  strips  were  apportioned.^^

Thus  the  possibility  of  re-divisions,  starting  from  the  idea
that  the  actual  holdings  in  the  fields  ought  to  be  com-
mensurate to  the  shares  which  they  represent  in  the
village  group,  was  not  excluded,  and  it  is  natural  enough
that  we  should  oftenerget  glimpses  of  such  re-arrangements
than  of  the  original  allotments  following  the  conquest  or
the  reclaiming  of  virgin  soU.  The  possibility  of  these
re-arrangements  on  the  basis  of  the  customary  law  of
rural  organisations  proves  the  existence  of  the  view
that  although  the  strips  of  arable  held  and  cultivated  by
the  different  households  were  usually  handed  over  from
generation  to  generation  and  could  form  the  object  of  legal
claims,  they  constituted  at  bottom  the  shares  of  the  house-
holds as  members  of  a  community,  and  could  be  shifted
bodily  from  one  place  to  the  other  provided  their  propor-
tionate value  was  maintained.  The  strongest  and  most
elaborate  expression  of  this  prmciple  is  found  in  Scandi-
navian legal  customs  ;  and  it  may  not  be  amiss  to  refer  here
to  its  rules,  inasmuch  as  occasional  instances  of  reallot-
ment  may,  as  we  have  seen,  be  supphed  from  purely  EngUsh
evidence,  while  the  deep-rooted  ideas  of  Scandinavian  folk
on  the  modes  of  land-settlement  cannot  have  been  without
influence  in  a  country  the  soU  of  which  is  thickly  studded
in  the  north  and  north-east  with  hys  of  Scandinavian
origin. ^^

Apart  from  the  processes  of  allotment  and  re-arrangement
and  of  the  intermixture  of  strips,  communal  features  in  the

management  of  the  arable  are  clearly  marked
Pasture'^'*' in  its  reversion  into  common  pastvu-e  after  the

harvest,  and  in  the  management  of  the  course  of
agriculture  by  common  and  not  by  individual  dispositions.
The  fact  that  the  field  became  a  united  whole  after  the
season  of  the  crops  is  one  of  the  most  conspicuous  traits  of
rural  hfe,  and  it  has  several  interesting  consequences.  Its
importance  lay,  firstly,  in  the  recurring  illustration  it  gave
every  year  of  the  limitation  of  individual  rights  in  the  fields
to  one  season  and  one  economic  process,  the  raising  of  the


180  THE  GROWTH  OF  THE  MANOR

crop  ;  while  the  right  of  the  community  re -asserted  itself  at
other  seasons  and  for  other  purposes.  There  were  certain
peculiarities  in  mediaeval  husbandry  which  gave  to  this
matter  more  than  a  theoretical  meaning.  Let  us  remember
that  it  was  conducted  on  the  principle  of  maintaining
local  balance  between  agricultural  and  pastoral  pursuits.
The  agriculturist  was  also  a  cattle  breeder  ;  as  a  rule  he
could  not  rely  on  foreign  or  distant  markets  to  supply  him
with  his  beasts  ;  he  had  to  look  for  their  maintenance
himself,  and  he  was  mainly  dependent  on  pasture  for
this  purpose,  because  the  cultivation  of  grass  and  even  the
making  of  hay  were,  as  we  have  seen,  exceptional.  The
cattle  fed  on  the  soil  in  a  hteral  and  natural  sense,  and  the
management  of  pasture  for  oxen  and  sheep  became  as
necessary  and  important  a  feature  as  the  ploughing  work
of  the  oxen  and  the  shearing  of  the  sheep.  Leaving  the
question  of  sheep -farming  in  its  relation  to  wool  trade  and
cloth  manufacture  on  one  side,  as  it  would  lead  us  too  far  out
of  our  way,  we  may  content  ourselves  with  dwelling  some-
what on  the  part  played  by  pasture  rights  in  the  usual
round  of  agricultural  work.  Not  only  was  it  necessary  to
get  sufficient  pasture,  but  it  was  exceedingly  important  to
get  it  close  at  hand  ;  the  pasturing  on  the  fallow  in  the
immediate  neighbourhood  of  the  village  saved  a  good  deal
of  supervision,  and  was  safer  than  the  sending  of  cattle  to
far  off  drifts  ;  a  momentous  consideration  in  those  troubled
times.  In  regard  to  the  plough-oxen  pasture  situated  near
at  hand  was  a  necessity  during  the  ploughing  seasons,
stretching  over  a  good  deal  of  the  year.  It  would  have  been
out  of  the  question  to  send  the  oxen  to  distant  pasturages  in
the  intervals  between  their  work-days  on  the  strips.  In  this
way  even  in  villages  where  the  three-field  course  of  agri-
culture was  in  use,  the  pasturing  on  the  fallow  was  a  most
important  concern,  and  had  to  be  looked  to  and  maintained
by  the  peasanty,  as  one  of  the  mainstays  of  their  welfare.
And  a  great  part  of  the  country,  though  it  is  not  known
exactly  how  much,  Uved  under  a  two-course  system,  reserv-
ing half  the  fields  for  pastoral  purposes.^*  In  some  places
we  come  across  even  a  greater  predominance  of  pasture


THE OPEN-FIELD SYSTEM  181

over  arable.  But  without  dwelling  on  these  last  more
exceptional  cases,  there  can  be  hardly  a  doubt  that  the
primary  importance  of  rights  of  pasture  must  have  been
one  of  the  reasons  which  gave  the  whole  husbandry  of  an
Old  English  village  a  decidedly  communalistic  bent.^'  We
must  not  fail  to  take  notice  of  the  other  side  of  the  arrange-
ment which  I  have  characterised  by  the  expression  local
balance  between  agricultural  and  pastoral  pursuits.  If  the
material  support  which  cattle-breeding  had  to  seek  in
pasture  rights  over  arable  land  has  to  be  insisted  on,  no
less  material  was  the  support  which  agriculture  found  in  the
practices  of  cattle-breeding.  The  fields  lying  fallow  were
not  only  the  most  convenient  pasture  land  in  the  village,
they  were  also  the  means  of  providing  the  soil  with  manure.
If  the  wild-growing  grass  was  almost  the  only  available
forage  for  the  village  cattle,  the  refuse  of  this  cattle  was
the  only  manure  which  was  used  for  the  improvement  of
the  soil.  And  thus  the  question  of  bringing  the  cattle  to
pasture  assumed  a  new  importance.  We  hear  a  good  deal
about  obligations  to  use  folds  for  sheep,  and  there  can
be  no  doubt  that  the  meaning  of  them  must  be  sought
in  the  value  of  the  manure.  ^^  The  free  man  of  Old
England  was  characteristically  described  as  fjTdworthy,
moteworthy  and  fold-worthy  :  ^^  this  expression  calls  for
comment  on  many  sides,  but  for  our  present  purpose  it  is
the  right  of  a  man  to  keep  his  cattle  in  his  own  fold  or
in  the  fold  of  the  village  that  has  to  be  noticed,  because
it  illustrates  the  part  played  by  the  manuring  question
in  rural  husbandry,  even  from  the  point  of  view  of  the
social  divisions  of  these  times.  And  it  is  the  more  signifi-
cant that  although  the  manuring  power  of  cattle  was  well
understood  and  carefully  made  use  of,  and  though  its
management  had  the  effect  of  drawing  the  cattle  as  much
as  possible  to  the  fallow  pasture,  considerations  of  private
interest  were  not  strong  enough  in  tliis  case  to  provide
for  a  division  of  the  strips  between  the  households  in
manuring  time.  The  fallow  pasture  remained  commimal,
though  the  fold  may  have  been  private  property  in  some
cases  ; and  if  we  may  judge  from  practices  followed  in  our


182  THE  GROWTH  OF  THE  MANOR

own  days,  one  of  the  duties  of  the  village  herdsmen  was  to
look  to  a  fairly  equable  driving  of  the  cattle  over  the  fallow,
so  that  no  one  householder  should  be  too  much  privileged
or  prejudiced  through  an  uneven  repartition  of  refuse  over
the  field.^^  These  are  not  trifling  questions  :  they  deal  with
interests  and  welfare,  and  it  is  not  of  second-rate  importance
that  they  were  managed  on  the  communal  and  not  on  the

individualistic  principle,  . - ^'

The  customary  and  compulsory  rotation  of  crops  gives
also  occasion  for  gauging  the  wide  difference  between  the
notions  and  habits  of  Old  English  agriculturists
of°*CroDS  ^^^  ^^^  present  ideas  on  the  conduct  of  rural

business.  I  have  already  spoken  of  the  prevalent
systems  of  cultivation ;  the  three-field  system  with  its
shift  of  winter  seed,  wheat,  spring-seed,  barley  or  oats  and
fallow  ;  the  two-field  system  with  its  alternate  change  from
crops  to  pasture  ;  the  system  of  occasional  cultivatior
with  its  temporary  occupation  of  patches  of  land  for  the
raising  of  a  series  of  crops  while  the  rest  remained  pasture  :
cultivation  in  closes  with  special  manuring  and  a  more
complex  rotation  of  crops. ^^  Of  these  systems  the  firsi
two  were  undoubtedly  the  most  usual  and  we  must  turr
our  attention  to  them.  The  main  point  about  them  was
that  the  plan  of  the  agricultural  operations  to  be  performed
the  seasons  for  the  commencement  and  the  interruptior'
of  work,  the  choice  of  th&^jrops  to  be  raised,  the  sequence  ir
which  the  different  shots  and  furlongs  had  to  be  used,  the
regulations  as  to  fencing  andjdrainage,  etc.,  were  not  £
matter  of  private  concern  and  decision,  but  were  to  b(
devised  and  put  in  force  by  the  community.  Such  was  the
general  practice  at  the  time  when  we  can  actually  observe
the  working  of  rural  arrangements  by  means  of  document!
and  descriptions,  and  there  cannot  be  the  slightest  doubi
that  the  same  was  the  case  at  the  time  when  the  husbandry
systems  of  Old  England  were  settled  on  the  chequerec
boards  which  the  maps  of  the  country  before  the  enclosures
present  to  us  with  such  abundance  of  detail.  And  it  if
evident  that  the  gradations  of  the  social  status  of  the
tenants do not make any difference in these respects


THE OPEN-FIELD SYSTEM  18:?

Whether  we  have  a  half -servile  community  under  a  lord,
or  a  village  of  socmen  or  other  free  people,  the  essential
features  of  the  map  do  not  vary,  and  the  customary  arrange-
ments are  made  and  enforced  by  the  community,  possibly
with  more  or  less  pressure  from  stewards  and  powerful
people,  but  in  the  main  on  communal  lines  ;  so  communal
indeed,  that  even  the  strips  of  the  lord's  shares  were  in
many  cases  intermixed  with  the  rest  and  thus  bound  to
submit  to  the  plan  of  management  and  the  rules  laid  down
by  the  common  consent  of  meetings  of  the  shareholders.

In  regard  to  the  house,  and  to  the  close  or  croft  adjoining
it,  the  householder  had  a  right  of  private  ownership  which

seems  at  first  sight  to  be  as  well  grounded  as  the
Crott*"''  freehold  property  of  the  present  day. Already

in  regard  to  the  ceorl,  the  Old  English  freeman
of  the  lowest  degree,  it  might  be  appropriately  said  that  an
Enghshman's  house  is  his  castle.  His  edor,  his  hedge,  was
protected  as  well  as  the  King's  or  the  thane's  burgh,  though
the  penalty  for  breaking  through  it  corresponded,  as  in  all
other  cases  of  infringement  of  private  rights,  to  his  personal
status.  Within  the  precincts  of  the  house,  the  f^t,  the  ceorl
had  pohce  authority  and  had  to  be  comi:)ensated  if
anybody  fought  there.*"  The  "  weorthig,"  the  homestead
surrounded  by  a  separate  close,  had  to  be  protected  against
the  inroads  of  strangers  and  animals  by  a  fence  which  was
kept  up  under  the  owner's  directions  and  by  his  personal
care.**  Still,  even  in  regard  to  house  and  close  there  was
a  superior  power  stretching  over  them  ;  not  merely  the
power  of  the  King,  as  chief  of  the  government,  or  of  the
nation  or  tribe  as  a  political  body,  bending  all  civil  rights
under  the  supreme  requirements  of  its  political  existence,
but  of  the  village  community  in  its  entirety  as  against  the
separate  households  as  its  component  members.  The  as-
sumption rests  in  this  case  on  inferences,  but  such  as  they
are,  they  have  to  be  considered  in  the  absence  of  direct
evidence  either  for  or  against.  We  know,  to  begin  with,  that
the  early  Teutonic  conception  of  the  homest<^ad  ranged  it
in  the  category  of  moveable  property,*'  and  gave  scope  for
frequent  displacements  in  coasequence  of  wars,  migrations


184  THE GROWTH OF THE MAISTOE

and  rearrangements  of  settlements.  On  all  such  occasions
the  allotment  of  homesteads  and  closes  as  well  as  of  other
elements  of  the  holding  was  effected  by  the  common  action
of  the  association  of  the  village,  and  could  be  modified  in
consequence  of  some  further  change  in  the  territorial  occu-
pation. Such  changes  must  have  been  especially  frequent
at  a  time  when  the  boundaries  between  the  tribes  were
constantly  shifting,  and  the  invading  Angles,  Saxons,
Jutes,  etc.,  pressed  forward  step  by  step  on  the  soil  of
Britain.  But  even  when  the  movement  of  conquest  had
more  or  less  ceased,  migrations  and  resettlements  of  rural
occupation  remaiued  frequent,  because  they  were  the
necessary  outcome  of  the  expansion  of  population  and  of
the  reclaiming  of  waste  land.  The  story  of  these  molecular
movements  has  never  been  told,  but  distinct  traces  of
them  exist  still  in  the  shape  of  recurring  names  which
may  be  found  all  over  the  country.  It  is  clear  that
Little  Over  is  a  colony  of  Mickle  Over  as  much  as
Lesser  Nailsworth  is  an  offspring  of  Great  Nailsworth,
although  we  have  no  means  of  judging  in  what  order  and
sequence  the  branches  grew  from  the  stem.*^  Now  the
formation  of  the  new  settlements  was,  of  course,  some-
times simply  the  outcome  of  the  squatting  of  single  settlers
in  wood  or  waste,  but  it  may  also  have  been  an  occupation
by  entire  bodies  of  men,  and  in  this  case  it  involved  a
division  of  allotments,  a  formation  of  homesteads  under
the  regulating  influence  of  the  community,  which  by  it-
self must  have  kept  present  and  ahve  the  ideas  and
practices  of  the  superior  entity  of  the  village  group.
And,  in  some  instances  at  least,  the  sending  forth  of
these  colonies  must  have  reacted  on  the  state  of  the  mother
settlements  themselves.  We  do  not  know  enough  about
the  conditions  under  which  the  swarming  off  from  an
established  village  was  begun  and  conducted,  and  we  need
not  speculate  about  its  definite  methods  ;  but  so  much  we
may  take  for  granted,  that  in  many  cases  the  disruption  of
the  old  group  must  have  led  to  a  remodeUing  of  the  old
tun,  as  well  as  to  the  formation  of  new  tuns.

Lastlv,  there  were  two  subjects,  which  demanded  a  good


THE OPEN-FIELD SYSTEM  185

deal  of  attention  and  common  action,  but  on  which,  not-
%vithstanding  their  importance,  we  have  scarcely  time  to
dwell.  I  mean  the  drawing  and  keeping  up  of  frontiers  and
the  management  of  village  streets,  roads,  ways  and  paths.
The  intermixture  of  strips,  and  the  scattering  of  the  bits  of
ground  to  which  people  had  to  find  access  in  the  course  of
their  farming  rendered  this  last  subject  especially  momen-
tous.**

II. Organisation  of  the  Township.

It  is  time  to  consider  by  what  means  this  far-reaching
and  complicated  shareholding  arrangement  was  carried  out.
The  documentary  evidence  at  our  disposal  does  not
enter  fully  into  the  matter,  and,  naturally  enough,  this  side
of  rural  Ufe  has  not  left  distinct  traces  on  the  ground  itself.
Again  and  again  the  student  of  these  everyday  occurrences
is  hampered  by  the  fact  that  information  about  affairs
which  did  not  stir  the  passions,  and  were  not  productive
of  sharply  defined  changes  in  law  and  government,  is  not
reflected  in  chronicles,  or  even  in  legal  documents  and
memorials.  Let.  us  remember  that  our  court  rolls  begin
to  run  only  from  the  end  of  the  thirteenth  century,  that
even  continuous  records  of  the  ICing's  Courts  have  come
down  merely  from  the  close  of  the  twelfth,  that  early
manorial  rolls  hardly  ever  condescend  to  make  entries  apply-
ing to  field  trespasses  and  economic  administration,  though
these  items  appear  conspicuously  in  later  rolls  ;  and  that
the  constitution  of  such  a  prominent  court  as  the  court
of  the  hundred  is  merely  glanced  at  in  an  enactment  of
Edgar,  while  for  a  somewhat  fuller  description  of  its  work-
ing, we  have  to  rely  on  the  late  and  private  compilation  of ,
the  so-called  laws  of  Henry  I.  Even  in  feudal  times  we  hear
more  of  the  fields  and  of  the  farming  than  of  the  agencies
by  which  the  latter  was  carried  on.  Still  there  ia  some
weighty  evidence  to  go  by,  if  we  supply  the  deficiencies  of
early  documents  by  information  cautiously  drawn  from
later  data,  and  if  we  allow  inferences  from  the  subject
matter  of  rural  life  to  its  formal  organisation.  It  seems
clear  from  this  latter  point  of  view  that  some  sort  of  constant


186  THE  GROWTH  OF  THE  MANOR

and  efificient  organisation  was  needed  to  settle  the  many-
questions  concerning  the  conduct  of  communal  business  in
the  fields,  woods  and  waste.  It  does  not  help  us  much  to
say  that  these  things  were  carried  on  automatically,  because
this  could  only  mean  that  they  were  left  to  take  care  of
themselves,  and  surely  it  is  to  men  and  not  to  things  that
we  have  to  look  for  the  making  of  plans,  the  settlement  of
difficulties  and  the  enforcement  of  rules.  Custom  is  a  great
force  when  it  has  been  set  going,  but  in  order  to  get  its
motion  it  must  start  from  arrangements  or  decisions  of  some
kind.  No  more  would  the  notion  of  "  reahty "  help  us
without  schemes  to  fasten  the  real  obhgations  on.  Because
"  reahty  "  is  only  a  name  for  a  more  or  less  constant  division
of  rights  and  duties  between  the  several  shareholders,  and
in  this  case,  as  in  others,  the  part  could  not  exist  without
the  whole,  the  customary  division  could  not  arise  without
some  premeditation  and  care  to  make  things  fit  and  to  keep
them  in  order.^^  Besides,  whatever  the  repetitions  and
memories  of  arrangements  may  have  been,  life  was  never-
theless a  growing  and  changeful  process,  and  never  more  so
than  at  a  time  when  people  were  looking  out  for  new  open-
ings and  struggling  for  conquest.  Surely  the  open  field
system  of  Old  England  had  not  yet  shrunk  to  the  mechanical
repetition  of  antiquated  ceremonies  and  hampering  arrange-
ments which  it  assumed  in  course  of  time,  when  the  real
progress  of  agriculture  got  to  depend  not  on  "  champion  "
practices  but  on  individualistic  farming.  The  very  tenacity
of  custom  in  the  shape  of  almost  meaningless  survivals
testifies  to  its  having  been  very  full  of  meaning  before.  It
would  hardly  have  been  needful  to  vindicate  and  explain
with  such  insistence  the  necessity  and  influence  of  by-laws,  of
village  regulations  for  the  carrying  on  of  the  affairs  of  the
rural  community,  if  we  had  not  been  advised  of  late  by  high
authority  not  to  value  too  greatly  their  legal  force  and  even
their  matter  of  fact  importance.  Now,  1  confess  to  being
unable  to  understand  how  the  whole  series  of  operations
of  which  we  have  been  speaking  could  have  been  conducted,
if  there  had  not  been  binding  rules  and  directions  and
managers  or  officers  to  look  after  them. Nor  are  we  left  in


THE OPEN-FIELD SYSTEM  187

the  dark  about  the  scope  and  action  of  by-laws.  We  find
every  point  of  village  husbandry  that  we  have  been  describ-
ing illustrated  by  rules  and  prohibitions  emanating  from
the  authority  of  village  courts."

Let  it  be  noted  that  the  authority  of  the  by-laws  is  some-
times, as,  for  example,  in  the  Durham  books,  expressly
deduced  from  the  common  decision  of  lue  members  of  the
village.  The  injunction  of  the  lord  may  appear  by  the
side  of  it,  but  it  is  not  necessary  to  establish  the  rule
which  comes  into  force  by  common  assent.*^  A  difficulty
seems  to  arise  in  connection  with  this  evidence.  May  we
draw  inferences  from  these  later  cases  to  the  working  of  rural
authorities  in  Old  English  times  ?  The  evidence  which  we
get  in  feudal  records  is  always  more  or  less  transfused  with
a  manorial  element.  It  is  not  the  court  rolls  of  the  villages
as  such,  but  the  court  rolls  of  manors  which  give  it ;  it  is]
not  the  meeting  of  the  village  people,  but  the  halimote  of  a
manor,  which  formulates  the  decisions  :  the  influence  of  the
lord  and  of  his  officers  makes  itself  felt  in  certain  for-
mulas, in  the  exaction  of  penalties,  in  the  claiuiwig  of
privileges.  To  meet  this  difficulty  we  have  to  lay  stress  once
more  on  the  fact  that  all  the  material  arrangements  which
made  the  working  of  the  courts  and  the  enactment  of  by-
laws necessary  stretch  right  up  to  the  epoch  of  the  first
occupation  of  the  land  by  the  early  English  settlers.  The
allotment,  reclaiming,  fencing  in,  ploughing,  harvesting,
pasturing  and  manuring  of  the  "  gedal-land  "  of  the  hides
could  not  be  carried  on  without  by-laws  similar  to  those
which  begin  to  be  enrolled  about  the  fourteenth  century  in
regard  to  manorial  land.  And  as  in  manors,  as  well  as  in
villages  occupied  by  free  settlers,  practices  connected  with
open  field  and  share-land  were  carried  on,  we  must  as-
sume the  making  of  by-laws  and  the  enforcement  of  agra-
rian pohce  regulations  for  the  free,  as  well  as  for  the
servile,  villages  ;  probably  even  more  for  the  first  than  for
the  last,  because  in  their  case  common  advice  and  common
authority  was  unavoidable,  and  one  does  not  see  what  else
could  have  curbed  the  individual  householders  to  the
observance  of  so  many  and  so  awkward  rules. The  by-


188  THE  GROWTH  OF  THE  MANOR

laws  were  indeed  a  body  of  rural  customary  law,  and  aU  the
people  in  the  village  had  to  conform  to  them,  although  the
means  of  enforcing  the  conformity  varied  according  to  times
and  according  to  different  classes  of  persons.  How  powerful
the  strength  of  the  common  grouping  was,  may  be  gathered
from  the  fact  that  the  free  tenants  of  feudal  times,  who
through  their  direct  connection  with  the  royal  courts  stood
in  one  sense  outside  the  manorial  organisation  of  the
village,  and  had  the  juridical  means  of  disputing  and  check-
ing its  influence,  were  nevertheless  as  a  rule  subject  to  the
operation  of  by-laws,  took  part  in  framing  them  and  could
be  forced  to  obey  them.  The  process  against  them  was  more
cumbersome  than  in  the  case  of  villains  :  they  had  to  be
distrained  with  some  caution  when  the  latter  were  punished
in  a  more  summary  way.  But  there  were  means  of  execution
igainst  them  on  the  basis  of  by-laws  ;  *^  and  when,  as  was
natural  in  their  position,  conflicts  arose  and  they  appKed
to  the  royal  com-ts,  these  last,  notwithstanding  their
individualistic  leaning  and  their  habit  of  drawing  a  Hne
between  the  law  of  the  royal  courts  and  the  customs  of
manorial  courts,  did  not  question  the  general  position  as
to  the  obligation  of  freeholders  to  follow  by-laws,  but
merely  reversed  what  they  regarded  as  exaggerated  asser-
tions of  the  power  of  these  subsidiary  and  self-imposed
laws.*^

The  regulations  imposed  on  the  villagers  were  of  a  two-fold
nature  :  they  might  be  the  result  of  exphcit  decision,  or
else  they  might  take  the  shape  of  custom.  The  action  of
the  community  in  these  two  cases  naturally  took  different
courses,  though  both  these  streams  of  rural  law  flowed
ultimately  from  the  same  foimt — the  lawgiving  power  of
the  community.  In  the  first  case  we  have  to  look  for  rules
elaborated  and  proclaimed  by  meetings  or  courts,  in  the
last  to  declarations  of  usage  made  by  people  who  were  held
to  be  versed  in  it,  and  to  particular  ruhngs  and  decisions  of
ofiicers  entrusted  with  the  carrying  out  in  practice  of  custom-
ary arrangements.  There  are  traces  of  both  varieties  of
rural  ordinances.  The  first  class  is  represented  by  the  by-
laws proper,  which  are  framed  by  manorial  courts  and  have


THE OPEN-FIELD SYSTEM  189

left  their  records  in  the  manorial  rolls,^"  or,  in  some  few-
instances,  have  come  down  to  us  from  villages  whose  organi-
sation was,  as  it  were,  extra-manorial,  and  managed  by
special  meetings  of  the  householders."  The  action  of  the
manorial  courts  in  themselves  is  characteristic  enough,  inas-
much as  it  represents  in  the  arrangement  of  rural  order,  not
the  interests  or  wishes  of  the  lord  and  his  stewards,  but  the
common  necessities  of  the  rural  group  in  its  peculiar  manage-
ment of  champion  farming.  On  the  other  hand,  it  is  quite
usual  for  vexed  questions  in  regard  to  village  atfairs  to  be
decided  by  an  appeal  to  custom,  to  immemorial  or  ancient
usage  ;  and  in  such  cases  sworn  experts  are  chosen  from
among  the  householders  and  by  them  in  order  to  declare
what  the  usage  exactly  is.^"  It  seems  fair  to  suppose  that
questions  of  detail  were  settled  by  the  officers  or  servants
who  had  to  attend  to  the  various  needs  of  rural  police  and
administration,  and  that  the  action  of  these  men  was  of
great  influence  in  practice  on  the  formation  and  inevitable
shifting  of  customs  ;  whereas  it  must  have  been  kept  in
check  and  made  liable  to  revision  and  correction  by  the
court  in  more  important  matters,  in  cases  of  conflict  and
protest.

And  so  we  are  led  to  ask  :  How  was  the  current  administra-
tion and  police  of  the  village  carried  on,  and  by  whom  ?
How  were  the  rules  of  the  community  and  the  orders  of  its
officers  and  servants  enforced,  and  by  whom  '<  In  both
cases  the  special  enquiry  which  we  are  now  carrying  on  as
to  the  state  of  these  arrangements  in  Old  English  times,  is
to  some  extent  obscured  by  the  fact  that  our  evidence  as  to
these  petty  affairs  comes  almost  exclusively  from  the  later
feudal  period  ;  and  as  to  administrative  and  police  arrange-
ments, we  have  to  suppose  a  good  deal  of  change  in  the  course
of  development  from  one  epoch  to  the  other.  We  have
nothing  else  to  do,  however,  but  to  put  together  the
shght  indications  which  have  come  down  to  us  from  Old
English  documents,  with  the  fuU  but  somewhat  distorted
details  of  the  manorial  age,  and  to  lay  especial  stress  amongst
these  latter  on  those  traits  in  which  the  stamp  of  manorialism
is  least  marked. Many  points  of  detail  must  remain  doubt-


190  THE  GROWTH  OF  THE  MANOR

ful,  but  perhaps  we  may  be  able  to  gather  some  guiding
principles  to  go  by.

In  regard  to  special  workers  required  in  village  Ufe  there
will  hardly  be  much  matter  for  controversy.  It  is  clear  that
the  herdsmen  ^^  who  had  to  attend  to  the  cattle  and  to  carry
out  the  various  regulations  as  to  the  use  of  pasture  in  its  dif-
ferent kinds,  were  by  the  very  nature  of  their  duties  more  or
less  in  the  same  position  in  the  manorial  and  in  the  non-
manorial  organisations ;  on  the  estates  of  great  men  and  in
villages  occupied  by  groups  of  free  ceorls.  The  shepherds  and
swineherds  with  their  attendants  had  much  the  same  thing
to  do  in  both  cases,  and  the  fact  that  the  manorial  servants
had  probably  to  attend  to  the  collection  of  dues,  such  as
pannage  and  grass-gafol,  does  not  materially  alter  their
position.  It  is  worth  notice,  however,  that  this  branch  of
village  work  might  assume  great  importance  and  call  forth
the  existence  of  special  overseers  of  pasture -land.  We  hear
of  "  greaves  "  of  moors,  officers  who  ordered  the  impound-
ing of  beasts  in  case  of  trespass,  managed  drainage,  and
probably  exercised  the  police  supervision  over  the  moor  dis-
trict. We  find  them  in  later  times  on  land  belonging  to
sokes  ;  that  is,  in  districts  occupied  by  very  free  tenants  ;
they  are  elected  by  some  assembly,  but  we  cannot  say  pre-
cisely in  what  way  they  were  distinguished  from  pettier
officers  in  charge  of  similar  duties  in  ordinary  villages.
Dyke  greaves  also  appear  in  regions  where  the  important
duty  of  protecting  the  shore  from  incursions  of  the  sea  had
to  be  attended  to.^*

In  the  same  way  the  "  woodwards  "  had  to  look  after
woods,  the  cutting  of  timber,  the  provision  of  housebote  and
heybote,  the  use  of  underwood,  the  gathering  of  brushwood,
the  supervision  of  wood-pasture,  etc.  The  office  of  the
"  heyward  "  was  also  devoted  to  a  kind  of  work  connected
with  the  incidents  of  the  open-field  system  in  all  its  varie-
ties :  the  setting  up  of  hedges,  and  the  removal  of  them  at
the  close  of  the  season,  was  a  consequence,  not  of  manorial
economy,  but  of  open-field  practices.^^  All  these  officers,
and  locally  perhaps  some  others,  were  elected  by  the  body
of  householders  of  a  village  ; and  sometimes,  as  in  the


THE OPEN-FIELD SYSTEM  191

case  of  large  moors  and  woods  in  which  several  villages
intercommoned,  by  group  meetings  of  these  villages  or  of
their  representatives.''^

All  these  branches  of  work  covered,  however,  only  the
outskirts  of  rural  life  and  some  of  its  special  applications.
We  may  safely  suppose  that  they  were  not  alwajrs
different iated  in  the  same  manner,  and  that  in  many  cases
the  differentiation  w^as  not  carried  very  far  ;  there  may  have
been  many  villages  where  a  common  herdsman  with  some
attendants  was  deemed  sufficient.  In  any  case  there  were
a  number  of  matters  in  which,  quite  apart  from  manorial
requirements,  the  village  had  to  be  represented  by  an  officer
for  the  carrying  on  of  its  economic  and  police  business.
There  were  meetings  to  be  called  and  their  resolutions
to  be  carried  out,  cattle  to  be  impounded,  petty  trans-
gressions in  the  fields  to  be  looked  after ;  the  authorities  of
the  hundred,  of  the  shire,  and  eventually  of  the  kingdom
to  be  communicated  with,  taxes  and  levies  to  be  gathered,
matters  of  local  police  in  street,  way  and  field  to  be  at-
tended to,  etc.  Later  on  we  find  some  of  these  functions
specialised.  We  hear  of  elected  coroners  in  especially  privi-
leged cases,  and  of  elected  constables  in  ordinary  cases,''
We  hear  also  of  elected  Borg-ealdors  in  Kent  which  seem
to  go  back  to  early  times,  and  of  tithing  men  as  police  repre-
sentatives of  townships  in  other  counties.^*  But  the  most
ancient  and  usual  rural  officer  was  undoubtedly  the  "  reeve  "
gerefa,  greave.  Just  because  he  was  the  general  and  prin-
cipal representative  of  the  village  he  came  in  later  times  to
be  much  exploited  by  manorial  administration  ;  his  office
got  to  be  a  downright  burden,  and  had  to  be  forced  on  the
villagers.  The  duty  of  serving  as  reeve  was  even  considered
in  some  local  customs  as  a  sign  of  serfdom.  But  it  could
not  have  been  so  from  the  very  beginning.  Even  if  we  had
no  direct  proof  to  the  contrary,  it  would  be  difficult  to
suppose  that  a  man  who  had  mostly  to  aot  as  a  petty
authority  was  meant  from  the  first  to  be  selected  from
the  lowest  order  of  the  peasantry,  although  that  peasantry
was  in  most  places  made  up  of  different  elements,  and
very  free in some. The fact that the "  gerefa " was


192  THE  GROWTH  OF  THE  MANOR

commonly  elected  in  feudal  times  does  not  necessarily
imply  a  high  position,  because  the  heavy  duties  incumbent
on  him  certainly  made  the  choice  not  a  favour  and  scarcely
an  honour.  But  in  all  cases  in  which  the  townships  were
called  upon  to  act  in  poHtical  affairs  the  reeves  appear  as
their  necessary  representatives.  Whether  the  village  appears
before  the  King's  com*t  or  the  commissioners  of  some  royal
inquest  by  four  or  by  six  representatives,  the  reeve  is  always
included  in  the  deputation,  and  his  closest  companion  is  the
priest,  surely  a  representative  of  no  servile  institution.^^
Moreover,  there  are  enough  incidental  mentions  which  show
that  the  reeves  were  by  no  means  always  servile  in  status
and  duties.^°  It  seems  that  in  Old  English  times  the  reeves
were  considered  from  two  points  of  view,  which  were  not
very  clearly  distinguished.  Sometimes  they  appear  in  a
special  connection  with  a  landlord,  as  stewards  managing
his  lands  and  the  dependent  population  on  them.^^  The
same  name  and  the  same  office  appear  to  apply  to  a  person
whose  duties  resulted  partly  from  the  concentration  of  the
open-field  group,  and  partly  from  the  exigencies  of  the  King
and  of  magnates;  In  a  sense  this  mixture  of  attributes  was
even  more  common  in  Old  English  than  in  Middle  English
times,  because  the  contrast  between  the  baiUff  and  steward
on  the  one  hand  and  the  reeve  on  the  other  had  not  been
fully  developed  as  yet ;  the  reeve  may  have  been  a  village
headman  and  a  steward  at  the  same  time  ;  though  he  was
not  necessarily  both.^^  Without  pretending  to  know  exactly
how  these  matters  were  arranged  in  the  different  stages  of
Old  English  history,  we  may  nevertheless  guess  that  the
reeveship  gained  in  importance  as  a  rural  agency  at  the  same
time  and  in  the  same  way  as  it  lost  in  point  of  social  status.
It  presented,  as  it  were,  the  knob,  by  which  every  kind  of
pressure  from  above  was  transmitted,  and  in  proportion  as
this  pressure  became  greater,  the  importance  of  the  factor
of  transmission  increased,  though  the  personality  of  the
holder  did  not  gain  by  his  enforced  intercourse  with  the
people  in  authority.  In  one  sense  we  may  even  suspect
that  the  reeveship  became  one  of  the  earliest  links  in  the
manorialising process, inasmuch as it had to represent


THE OPEN-FIELD SYSTEM  193

everywhere  the  requirements  of  the  King,  which  were  apt  to
assume  in  those  times  a  proprietary  tinge.  The  element  of
landlordism  came  still  more  to  the  front  in  the  later  half  of
the  Anglo-Saxon  period,  when  the  landrica  became  a  recog-
nised institution  ;  the  reeve  could  be  considered  as  the
steward  of  the  landrica,  and  we  are  unable  to  say  to  what
extent  these  two  varieties  of  the  office,  that  of  the  great
man's  steward  and  that  of  the  village  headman,  balanced
or  displaced  one  another.

The  reeve  appears  in  the  political  documents  of  the
Norman  age  and  of  the  constitution  of  the  hundred  as  one
of  five  or  six  representatives  of  the  township.  They  are
p£rors,  and  called  up  to  give  testimony  as  to  questions  of
local  custom,  local  affairs,  local  economic  conditions.  We
have  to  be  especially  thankful  for  the  notice  which
informs  us  of  the  presence  of  this  body  of  suitors  in  the
hundred  court,  because  it  sho\vs  the  use  of  such  deputa-
tions to  be  something  more  than  a  Norman  device.^^
The  elements  for  working  the  inquest  juries  and  the
hundred  court  were  evidently  in  existence,  and  more  or  less
in  shape,  before  the  day  when  King  Edward  was  ahve
and  dead.  This  suppHes  us  with  a  connecting  link  for  the
important  institution  of  wise  men  who  have  to  give  their
verdict  as  to  special  questions  addressed  to  them,  and  of
trustworthy  men  who  have  to  take  notice  of  facts  in  order
to  be  able  to  testify  to  them.  Tliis  institution,  or  rather  these
two  institutions  which  may  have  acted  either  jointlj'^  or  each
by  itself,  fit  remarkably  well  into  the  legal  practices  of  the
higher  regions  of  Old  English  life.  The  wise  men,  the  authori-
tative thanes  of  the  shiremote  and  of  the  witenagemot  have
commonly  to  express  their  views  as  to  the  customs  of  the  shire
or  of  the  folk,  and  the  testimony  of  such  men  is  taken  and
attested  as  a  means  of  settling  controversies  as  to  rights.
It  is  to  be  noted  as  a  significant  fact  that  there  were
not  only  occasional  deputations  to  the  hundred  court  as
well  as  to  other  higher  courts,  but  standing  committees
of  jurors  formed  for  purposes  of  presentment  and  declara-
tion of  customs  :  the  hundredors,  the  tenants  attendr
ing  at  the  court  of  the  hundred. An  interesting. ghmpse

O


194  THE  GROWTH  OF  THE  MANOB

into  the  working  of  this  machinery  is  afforded  to  ns  by
Edgar's  enactment  as  to  the  witnessing  of  sales  of  cattle.
Each  "  geburscipe,"  each  township,  has  to  provide  for  six
sworn  witnesses  of  such  sales,  and  the  "  hundred-ealdor,"
the  reeve  of  the  hundred,  has  to  apply  to  them  in  cases  of
doubt.  The  number  itself  is  not  without  significance  :  it  is
the  normal  number  of  village  jurors  including  the  town-
reeve  and  the  priest.^*

UnhappUy  our  Old  Enghsh  evidence  as  to  the  composition
and  organisation  of  the  township  moots  is  scanty,  though
we  cannot  wonder  at  the  indifference  and  reticence  of  our
sources  of  information  in  regard  to  their  humble  doings.
Still  there  are  not  a  few  traces  of  their  existence,  and  we
have  means  to  judge  of  the  general  character  of  their  work.
In  the  Domesday  Survey  we  come  across  mentions  of  moots
collected  by  reeves  for  purposes  of  local  management  in
different  parts  of  the  country.  There  can  be  no  doubt
that  the  halimotes,  composed  of  free  and  servile  suitors  and
transacting  all  kinds  of  local  affairs  which  we  find  every-
where in  feudal  times,  did  not  spring  up  into  existence  as
an  invention  of  Norman  landlords,  and  we  have  to  trace
them  in  most  cases  to  the  halls  which  form  the  centres  of
Domesday  manors.  The  grouping  according  to  townships,
and  the  connection  of  the  reeve,  the  priest  and  the  four
representative  villagers  with  townships,  would  lead  us  further
to  consider  the  town  moot  as  the  nucleus  of  rural  adminis-
tration.^^

Besides,  even  if  we  had  not  possessed  any  direct  informa-
tion in  regard  to  local  meetings,  the  many  affairs  in  which
they  had  to  exercise  their  influence  in  one  way  or  the  other,
either  by  direct  arrangement,  by  declaration  of  custom,  or
by  the  election  of  officers,  servants  and  jurors  to  mind  the
interests  of  the  village  people,  would  have  been  evidences
by  themselves  ;  to  understand  the  bearing  of  this  evidence
our  best  way  is  to  look  at  the  successors  of  the  Old  Enghsh
moots,  the  manorial  courts  of  the  feudal  age.  They  show
us,  if  not  the  exact  forms  in  which  the  old  moots  transacted
their  business,  at  least  the  general  drift  of  it,  and  this  seems
sufficient  for  the  rough  purpose  of  historical  understanding.®*


THE OPEN-FIELD SYSTEM  195

T  should  like  to  add  some  questions,  as  the  very  putting
of  them  may  help  us  to  look  a  Httle  more  closely  into  the
working  of  the  system,  and  to  suggest  some  additional
inferences  in  regard  to  it.  The  halimotes  of  the  Middle
English  period  were  not  merely  assemblies  or  meetings  for
the  sake  of  making  agreements,  but  regular  courts.  Not
only  was  their  economic  business  transacted  under  sub-
stantially the  same  formalities  as  the  juridical  one,  but
they  had  power  of  jurisdiction  in  regard  to  transgressions
and  infringements  of  their  regulations  and  prohibitions.'^
But  was  this  power  an  expression  of  the  communal  element
which  they  derived  from  the  contingencies  of  the  open-field
system  of  shareholding,  as  practised  from  Old  English
times  ;  or  was  it  imparted  to  the  courts  by  the  commanding
element  of  feudal  lordship  ?  Were  transgressors  punished,
fined,  distrained,  because  they  were  recalcitrant  or  offending
members  of  the  village  community,  or  because  they  were
subjects  and  possibly  serfs  of  the  manorial  lord  ?  There
are  no  direct  answers  to  these  questions,  but  there  seem  to
be  some  clues  for  answering  them.  We  have  seen  that  free-
holders were  subjected  to  the  operations  of  by-laws  and  of
their  restrictive  provisions,  though  the  process  of  enforcing
obedience  was  more  tortuous  and  uncertain  in  their  case,
because  of  their  eventual  recourse  to  the  King's  courts.
And  in  the  case  of  these  freeholders  it  seems  hardly  possible
to  derive  obligations  analogous  to  the  duties  of  less  privileged
tenants,  from  the  feudal  tie  of  tenure.  As  we  observe  in
their  case,  which  was  a  very  common  one  in  the  North  and
East  of  England,  a  kind  of  double  relation,  a  standing
ground  in  rural  jurisdiction  on  the  one  hand,  in  the  pubUc
courts  on  the  other,  so  we  might  be  led  to  suppose  that  in
the  period  before  the  Conquest  in  ordinary  and  petty  casee
the  folkmote  of  the  township  not  only  gave  its  economic
directions,  but  enforced  them  either  directly  through  judg-
ments and  verdicts,  or  indirectly  by  the  derived  authority
of  its  officers  and  servants.  But  then  there  was  the  other
eventuahty  ;  the  possibility  of  prolonged  protest,  dis-
obedience, resistance  ;  and  in  such  ca.ses  the  matter  must
have  gone  up  to  the  courts  of  the  hundred,  of  the  shire,  and


198  THE  GROWTH  OF  THE  MANOR

eventually  of  the  King  ;  which  could  always  act  in  such
cases  by  ehciting  declarations  of  trustworthy  local  men,
either  on  oath  or  without  it,  in  regard  to  local  customs  and
occurrences.^^

On  the  other  hand,  it  seems  quite  impossible  to  account
for  the  entire  conduct  of  the  open-field  affairs  of  the  town-
ships on  the  supposition  that  the  hundred  court  had  to  look
after  the  endless  and  minute  incidents  of  agrarian  prao-
tice.«9

III. Political  Duties

When  the  close  agrarian  grouping  of  the  shareholders  of
a  village  has  been  reahsed,  one  comes  to  understand
Scot  and  why  all  the  requirements  of  the  Government, :

^*  of  the  Church,  and  of  the  military  aristocracy ,

were  charged  to  the  townships,  and  why  the  repartition  and
collection  of  most  duties  remained  a  concern  of  the  town-
ships even  when  the  country  had  been  parcelled  out  into  i
Manors  and  Knight  fees. It  was  not  a  casual  expedient:
that  made  the  Kings  and  the  National  Councils  turn  to  the
townships  for  the  collection  of  various  dues  in  war  and  peace, ;
but  the  fact  that  they  were  natural  groups  kept  together '
not  by  the  external  pressure  of  threats  and  fines,  but  by  :
the  positive  interests  of  everyday  hfe. And  it  is  to  the  '
strong  vitaHty  of  these  interests  and  groups  that  the  revival  ■
of  England  after  the  Danish  scourge  and  its  firm  settlement  :
under the  rule of the Norman Exchequer and of the
Norman  courts  has  to  be  ascribed  more  than  to  the  vari-
ous  devices  for  exacting  contributions. The  shareholder
who  participated  in  the  common  husbandry  of  the  town-  .
ship was also a  participant  in  the  burdens  which  were
laid  on  it  by  the  powers  that  be. He  was  in  scot  and  in  lot  \
with  the  township,^^  and  he  had  to  face  the  township  in  regard
to  aU  sorts  of  requirements  as  the  township  faced  the  sheriff
and  the  Royal  Treasury. Tribute  was  imposed  from  above
on  the  shires,  then  subdivided  among  the  hundreds,  and
ultimately  partitioned  among  the  townships,  leaving  them
to  cope  with their  individual  sums.'^^ The hidage with


THE OPEN-FIELD SYSTEM  197

which  the  history  of  tribute  begins  was  imposed  in  this  way,
although  the  authorities  began  early  to  compound  with
privileged  persons  and  institutions  for  rearrangements  and
exemptions  ;  ""^  on  the  one  hand,  to  look  not  only  to  the
block  sums  imposed  on  the  districts,  but  also  to  the  rough
capabihties  of  these  districts  and  of  their  comj)onent  parts,
on  the  other.  Still,  both  the  hidage  and  the  Danegeld,
which  came  to  be  so  crushing  a  burden,  were  imposed
primarily  on  the  districts,  and,  what  is  more,  the  whole
district,  and  especially  its  lowest  units,  the  townships  in
town  and  village,  were  held  responsible  for  the  whole  amount
of  the  tax  under  the  joint  liability  and  reciprocal  guarantee
of  the  shareholders  in  scot  and  lot."  Changes  in  the
traditional  impositions  and  the  alleviation  of  customary
burdens  were  not  so  easy  to  effect,  though  they  were  effected
every  now  and  then  by  the  mere  force  of  circumstances,
which  even  the  harshest  and  most  unwieldy  of  govern-
ments have  to  recognise,  if  they  want  to  stop  short  of  un-
bearable requirements.  The  cry  for  alterations  testifies  as
much  to  the  persistency  of  customary  claims,  as  to  the
occasional  deviations  from  them.

It  is  needless  to  saj'  that  the  governmental  requirements
of  early  times  were  based  not  so  much  on  the  collection
The  TownshiD  °^  money,  though  the  Danish  exactions  show
in  Hundred  a  much  greater  stress  in  this  respect  than  we
and  Shire  niight  otherwise  have  suspected,  but  on  the

gathering  of  resources  of  natural  husbandry,  and  on  per-
sonal services.  The  administration  of  justice,  the  whole
conduct  of  business  in  the  higher  centres  of  the  hun-
dred, the  shire,  the  national  councUs  was  chiefly  bound
up  with  the  action  of  people  who  were  made  to  ap-
pear in  person,  to  do  suit,  as  the  feudal  term  was,  and
we  need  not  dwell  on  the  burdensome  character  of  these
enforced  wanderings  for  poUtical  purposes.  Originally
the  attendance  of  all  freemen  of  the  districts  was  required,'*
but  in  the  later  years  of  the  Old  English  period  we  see
already  the  beginning  of  a  system  which  reached  its  fullest
development  in  Nonnan  hands,  the  change  from  an  all-
round suit to a representative one,  and  the  localisation


198  THE  GROWTH  OF  THE  MANOR

of  this  last  into  certain  tenuresJ^  It  is  sufficient  for  our
immediate  purpose  to  point  to  the  representative  suit  of
the  township  at  the  hundred  court,  and  to  its  Uability
to  be  called  by  representatives  to  the  shire  or  any  especial
Royal  court  or  commission  of  inquiry.  As  a  matter  of
fact  it  is  found  that  the  hundred  suit  of  the  village  is  mostly
performed  by  certain  tenures,  or  more  exactly  by  the
tenants  possessed  of  them,  but  the  expedient  of  appor-
tioning the  suit  by  settling  it  permanently  on  certain  hold-
ings which  had  to  receive  a  corresponding  enfranchise-
ment in  other  respects  does  not  alter  the  principle  of  the
dutyJ^  The  reeve  and  four  men  come  as  the  repre-
sentatives of  the  township  as  a  whole,  and  the  township  is
responsible  for  their  appearance  because  they  are  within
its  scot  and  lot  territory.  The  enforcement  of  military
service,  of  the  gathering  of  the  fyrd,  and  of  its  substitutes,
is  more  complex.  So  much  is  clear,  however,  that  the
obligation  got  to  be  early  graduated  according  to  the  size
of  the  share  held  by  a  freeman  in  the  land  of  the  count^\^
and  in  this  way  it  was  not  quite  independent  of  the  town-
ship organisation.^'^  Still  we  have  no  direct  evidence
to  show  that  the  service  of  the  fyrd  was  enforced  through
the  medium  of  the  village  group  or  of  its  officers.  On
the  other  hand,  already  in  later  Saxon  times  the  town-
ship was  being  turned  into  a  poUce  unit  of  great  moment.
Whether  the  fact  depended  on  the  disruption  and  inter-
mixture of  the  associations  of  kindreds  or  not,  at  any
rate  in  the  period  of  the  last  kings  of  EngHsh  and
Danish  race  we  find  the  government  introducing  a  system
of  personal  frankpledge,  which  was  fitted  on  to  the  terri-
torial groups,  so  that  the  township  had  to  look  after  its
arrangement,  and  sometimes  even  to  perform  its  duties.'^
Besides  supporting  the  system  of  frankpledge,  the  town-
ships were  made  answerable  for  crimes  committed  within
their  territory  when  such  crimes  could  not  be  charged  to  dis-
tinct malefactors,  or  when  malefactors  were  not  properly
pursued.''^  In  an  analogous  manner  the  townships  were
made  the  chief  organs  for  the  collection  of  the  heavy
Church-scot.^** Altogether, the treatment of the town-


THE OPEN-FIELD SYSTEM  199

ship  as  a  united  group  to  which  State  and  Church  look
for  the  performance  of  social  duties  appears  as  a  natural
result  of  the  compact  build  of  the  township  as  an  economic
unit.


CHAPTER  V

THE HISTORY OF THE HOLDING

Hitherto  we  have  been  considering  the  township  as  a
combination  of  shareholders  endowed  with  rights  as  to
land,  carrying  on  a  peculiar  system  of  farming,  and
The  Ploueh-  subjected  to  a  set  of  duties  in  regard  to  the
land  and  its  State  and  to  the  Church.  But  our  survey
subdivisions  ^ould  be  not  only  incomplete,  but  misleading,
if  we  did  not  pay  attention  to  the  constitution  and  life  of
the  share  itself — of  the  single  holding  entering  as  a  unit
into  the  combination.  This  unit  presents  some  very  re-
markable traits.  To  begin  with,  the  shares  are  not  uniform
or  always  equal.  Not  only  did  the  acreage  and  the  relation
between  the  different  elements  of  the  share — close,  arable,
rights  as  to  meadows,  wood,  pasture,  water-courses,  etc.,
vary  a  good  deal  according  to  local  conditions,  but,  as  we
have  already  seen,  in  each  given  locahty  the  shares  were
arranged  as  full,  haK,  quarter  units,  etc.  These  fractions
were  not  arbitrary,  nor  left  to  the  casual  working  of  indi-
vidual wishes  and  chances.  They  arranged  themselves
according  to  certain  natural  degrees  and  divisions,  which
are  easily  grasped,  because  they  started,  in  most  cases,  from
the  natural  divisions  of  the  plough-team,  as  the  most  impor-
tant implement  of  a  rural  household.  Land  acquired  its
chief  value  as  cultivated  soil.  Of  course,  the  possibiHty
of  an  appreciation  of  land  on  other  than  agricultural  grounds
was  not  excluded  :  it  may  have  had  great  worth  as  a  sur-
face for  grazing  sheep,  or  as  containing  salt,  or  by  reason  of
fishery  rights  attached  to  it,  and  the  like.  But  the  usual  and
normal  mode  of  forming  shares  and  estimating  land  was
afforded  by  its  relation  to  active  agriculture  as  expressed  in


THE HISTORY OF THE HOLDING  201

the  work  of  a  plough-team  provided  with  the  requisite  num-
ber of  oxen  for  tilhige.  Now  the  normal  English  plough-
team  with  which  the  Domesday  Survey  reckoned  was  very
large.  It  worked,  on  an  average,  with  eight  oxen ;  though
the  possibility  of  using  smaller  teams  on  lighter  soil  or  in
exceptional  circumstances  is  by  no  means  excluded.  I  ndeed,
we  hear  of  smaller  teams,  and,  curiously  enough,  ancient
pictures  of  ploughs  represent  them  as  drawn  by  four  or  even
two  oxen/  But  there  is  ample  evidence  of  the  fact  that,  at
any  rate,  from  the  eighth  to  eleventh  centuries  the  eight-
oxen  team  was  considered  as  the  one  best  adapted  to
the  requirements  of  the  soil  and  to  the  shape  of  the  fields,
and  that  the  general  drift  of  farming  development  ran  in
the  direction  of  its  introduction  whenever  possible.^  It  is
not  easy  to  form  an  adequate  opinion  as  to  the  origin  and
merits  of  such  a  plough,  but  the  facts  are  there,  and  they
must  have  been  well  grounded  in  natural  conditions,  because
the  heavy  cumbersome  team  held  its  o\\ti  all  through  the
period  covered  by  champion  farming,  and  was  in  vogue  in
some  places  even  so  late  as  in  the  eighteenth  century.  It
seems  to  have  been  an  implement  which  supplied  the
deficiency  of  individual  exertion  and  skill  by  an  accumula-
tion of  animal  strength.  However  this  may  be,  the  fact  of
the  arrangement  itself  does  not  admit  of  doubt,  and  the
shares  were  graduated  according  to  the  main  standard  of  the
plough-team  and  of  its  natural  sub-divisions,  the  virgates
and  bovates.  Besides  these,  there  was  in  every  township
a  number  of  smaller  tenements  which  did  not  join  in  the  for-
mation of  plough-teams,  and  were  irregular  in  size,  but  the
main  agricultural  work  was  carried  on  by  the  regular  units
and  a  corresponding  social  importance  was  attached  to
them.^  Originally  the  normal  holding  of  the  free  mote-
worthy,  fyrdworthy  and  foldworthy  household  was  assumed
to  be  the  hide,  the  land  of  the  full  ])lough-team,  but  in  pro-
cess of  time  this  proportion  could  not  be  kept  up,  and  we
find  free  people  sometimes  possessing  more  and  sometimes
less  ;  in  any  case,  the  holding  of  virgates  and  bovates  became
quite  common  among  the  free  as  well  as  among  the  servile
peasantry.


202  THE  GROWTH  OF  THE  MANOR


I


Before  investigating  the  conditions  under  which  these
variations  in  the  size  of  holdings  were  effected,  we  must
PoDulation  ^^^^  *^  ^^^  composition  of  the  human  group
of  the  gathered  on  each  share. Although  one  per-

Holding  QQj^^  ^Yie  chief of the  household,  was  deemed

juridically  its  owner  or  tenant,  it  was  meant  to  supply  the
needs  of  several  people,  of  a  family  of  kinsmen  and  depen-
dants.

In  the  earlier  centuries  of  Old  EngHsh  rule  the  number  of
such  dependents  must  have  been  considerable,  even  on  the
restricted  shares  of  common  ceorls  :  there  were  undoubtedly
many  slaves,  prisoners  of  war  and  their  offspring,  people
bought  on  the  market  or  kidnapped  in  the  borderland  dis-
tricts, even  people  who  had  fallen  into  slavery  through  crime
or  insolvency  (wite-theows).*  Undoubtedly  most  of  these
were  to  be  found  among  the  domestics  and  rural  servants
of  the  magnates,  but  they  played  also  originally  a  part
in  the  economy  of  certain  of  the  freemen,  inasmuch  as
those  last  were  warriors  capable  of  obtaining  slaves  by
force  or  well-to-do  men  with  means  of  buying  and  keeping
bondmen.  Still,  even  in  the  earliest  stage  of  EngUsh  life,
it  could  not  be  said  that  English  society  was  a  slaveholding
one  in  the  sense  in  which  it  has  been  argued  sometimes
that  ancient  Teutonic  society  was  slaveholding.  The  lesser
people  had  very  soon  to  look  after  a  good  deal  of  agricultural
work  themselves,  and  it  was  evidently  not  thought  hu-
mihating  to  lead  a  plough  or  to  superintend  the  sheep-
farming  or  cattle-breeding  even  for  those  who  had  the  right
and  obUgation  of  carrying  arms  and  joining  in  the  fyrd.
Unfree  labourers  there  were,  but  farming  pursuits  and  work
were  not  restricted  to  them  or  speciahsed  by  them  ;  they
toiled  alongside  of  their  freebom  masters.^  Indeed,  we  have
to  notice  again,  as  in  the  case  of  the  Welsh,  that  slavery
turns  out  not  to  be  a  fit  economic  and  social  basis  for  a
primitive,  half  agricultural,  half  pastoral  society  :  the  slaves
are  difficult  to  keep  and  awkward  to  deal  with  ;  people  have
not  yet  learned  to  organise  their  work  and  to  supervise
it.  They  are  led  to  allow  the  slave  a  good  deal  of  Hberty  and
economic independence, they  prefer  turning  him  into  a


THE HISTORY OP THE HOLDING  203

Bubjected  freedman  and  a  tributary  householder  instead  of
exploiting  his  personaUty  thoroughly  and  completely.
Tacitus'  words  seem  remarkably  fitting  in  respect  of  the
the  slaves  of  Old  England  :  they  are  mostly  provided  with
small  households  of  their  own,  used  as  colo7ii,  rendering  rents
in  kind  and  very  often  hberated  from  the  stain  of  personal
slavery.*

A  striking  illustration  of  the  force  of  the  social  con-
siderations tending  this  way  is  afforded  by  the  fact,  that  the
Danish  invasions  and  conquests,  which  were  characterised
by  such  cruelty  and  reckless  treatment  of  the  vanquished,
did  not  lead  to  the  formation  of  any  considerable  class
of  slaves  in  the  Eastern  counties  occupied  by  the  Danes  :
such  vestiges  of  slavery  as  there  were  at  the  time  of  Domes-
day point  towards  the  West.'  The  fact  is  certainly  not  to
be  explained  by  a  greater  inclination  on  the  part  of  the  Saxons
for  enslaving  the  Welsh  than  there  was  in  the  case  of  Danes
in  regard  to  Saxons  ;  we  have  rather  to  attend  to  the  de-
velopment of  larger  complexes  of  property  in  the  West,
which  afforded  a  more  convenient  field  for  the  use  of  slave
labour  than  the  scattered  and  generally  small  households
of  the  Danes.  Such  slaves  as  there  were  within  these  last
were  distributed  in  small  batches  among  the  shareholders
of  the  by^s,  and  very  Ukely  were  not  recorded  in  the  survey
at  all.  On  the  contrary,  the  class  of  lysings,  or  freedmen,
is  very  noticeable  in  those  very  districts,  and  evidently  was
recruited  from  those  who  under  different  social  conditions
would  have  been  or  would  ha.ve  remained  slaves.^

The  point  which  we  have  to  insist  on  now  is,  that  the  serfs
employed  in  the  household  of  a  small  shareholder  were  not  I
the  economic  mainstay  of  this  household,  and  were  not  dis- 1
tinguished  by  the  quafity  of  their  work  from  its  freeborn
members.  How  far  and  in  what  cases  the  weaker  of  those  1
members  had  to  bear  the  brunt  of  productive  work,  and  the
stronger  were  able  to  indulge  in  loitering  and  military  adven-
tures, it  is  difficult  to  say  with  any  degree  of  certainty.  In  the
course  of  invasions  and  raids,  the  tendency  towards  burden-
ing the  weaker  people,  women,  old  people,  the  offspring  of
younger  brothers,  etc.,  with  more  than  their  proportion  of


204  THE  GROWTH  OF  THE  MANOR

work,  must  have  been  particularly  strong.  But,  when  all
this  has  been  said,  the  facts  remain,  that  the  original  hide
allotments  of  the  ceorls  were  meant  to  represent  the  needs
not  of  a  class  which  could  afford  to  exact  tribute,  to  abstain
from  work  and  to  specialise  on  miUtary  pursuits,  but  those
of  a  class  which  was  meant  to  face  both  ways,  to  sustain
the  iyrd  arrangement  of  military  policy,  and  at  the  same
time  to  perform  the  necessary  farming  labour  of  the  com-
munity largely  by  its  own  hands.  How  far  this  arrangement
was  tenable,  and  whether  it  was  not  doomed  to  degenerate  '
or  develop  into  something  else,  are  questions  which  will  have
to  be  approached  by  and  by.

If  a  system  of  shareholding  was  to  work  at  all,  some
means  had  to  be  devised  to  keep  up  the  unity  of  the
shares.  And  indeed,  as  the  shares  became  identified  with
Unity  of  ploughlands  or  with natural subdivisions of

the  Holding them, arrangements  were  evidently  at  work
which prevented the partition of holdings according  to
the  infinitely  varjdng  chances  of  inheritance. Of  course,  in  |
the  case of servile or colonary tenements the pressure  ■
of  the  lord's  power  could  regulate succession and  restrict
it by admitting only  one heir among many, the elder
brother,  or  the  younger  brother,  or  the  person  most  quahfied  '
in  the  eyes  of  the  lord.^ But  as  we  see  shareholding  in  ;
operation  among  free  people  and not  only  among serfs,  i
some  other  explanation  is  needed  to  account  for  the  unity  i
of  tenements.^** And  it  may  be  noticed  at  the  outset,  that
the  same  causes  which  prevented  irregular  partition  worked
evidently  in  checking  partitions  of  any  kind. The  economic
unity  of  the  hide  was  not  a  cunning  artifice,  it  was  an  organic
arrangement  based  on  a  combination  of  hve  beings. Tlie
ploughland  could  not  fall  into  any  given  number  of  pieces,
and  even  when  partitions  became  necessary  it  had  to  keep
to  the  simple  divisions  of  two,  four  and  eight  subshares,
while  "thirds,"  "  fifths,"  "  sevenths  "  would  have  been  impos-
sible fractions  ; even  so  it  could  not  go  further  than  the  sub-
share  represented  by  the  labour  of  one  ox  without  destroy-
ing the  ox,  or  in  other  words,  without  renouncing  the  essen-
tial condition  of  agricultural  husbandry. And  this  means


THE HISTORY OF THE HOLDING  205

that  if  there  were  more  than  eight  heirs  to  a  liide,  more  than
four  to  a  half-hide,  more  than  two  to  a  virgate.  more  than
one  to  a  borate,  something  had  to  be  done  to  satisfy  their
claims  without  destroying  the  value  and  even  the  meaning
of  the  inlieritable  tenement.  And  the  check  which  worked
with  such  power  in  these  cases,  was  felt  to  a  great  extent
even  in  the  case  of  other  combinations.  It  is  clear,  that  there
was  every  inducement  to  preserve  the  unity  of  a  larger  hold-
ing, say  of  a  hide  or  a  half-hide,  because  its  disruption,  even
if  not  amounting  to  physical  absurdity,  would  mean  the
break-up  of  a  customary  working  arrangement,  a  break-up
disadvantageous  in  most  cases,  and  simply  ruinous,  if  the
resettlements  and  subdivisions  should  follow  each  other
quickly  in  the  course  of  generations.

Indeed,  we  see  many  indications  as  to  the  expedients  in
use  to  counteract  the  harmful  influence  of  the  breaking  up
of  the  holdings.  In  Scandinavian  and  in  ancii  ;it  Teutonic
law  we  find  the  well  known  marked  disinclination  to  admit
women  to  the  inheritance  of  land,  which  goes  so  far  some-
times as  to  debar  them  from  any  inheritance  of  the  kind,  bul
more  often  puts  them  in  a  position  of  disadvantage  in  com-
parison with  brothers  and  even  more  remote  male  heirs.
This,  of  course,  was  primarily  meant  to  guarantee  economic
and  military  efficiency,  but  it  tended  also  to  diminish  the
number  of  possible  claimants,  and  it  seems  probable  that
the  older  rules  of  folcland  succession  in  England,  and  also
some  forms  of  artificial  bookland  succession,  adhered  to  this
course.  The  equaUty  by  right  between  male  heirs  of  the
same  degree  remained,  however,  and  in  this  respect  the  custo-
mary development  of  land  law  seems  to  have  proceeded  on
two  different  lines.  We  find  socage  tenure  in  the  early
feudal  law  both  partible  and  impartible  according  to  local
castom,^'  and  this  shows  that  different  rules  were  gradu-
ally elaborated  in  regard  to  it.

The  case  of  partiblity  is  best  represented  by  the  Kentish

tenure  of  gavelkind,  which  undoubtedly  goes  back  to  Saxon

usage and, while it became singular in the

feudal  epoch,  must  have  applied  to  a  great,  if

not  to  the  greater,  number  of  free  tenements  in  the  Old


206  THE  GROWTH  OF  THE  MANOR

English  period.  Now,  its  partibility  must  not  be  taken  to]
imply  a  constant  or  even  a  usual  practice  of  hereditary  par-
tition. It  amounts  to  a  possibiUty  of  partition  by  right
and  to  an  equality  of  claims  between  co-heirs  which  lead  to
the  admission  of  concurrent  interests  in  the  holding.  As  a
matter  of  fact,  the  holdings  remained  united  as  far  as  pos-
sible, but  every  one  of  them  was  saddled  with  a  certain  num-
ber of  rights,  which  had  to  be  harmonised  by  an  apportion-
ment of  proceeds  as  long  as  the  unity  lasted.^  ^  It  cannot  be
said  that  the  arrangement  was  a  convenient  one,  notwith-
standing efforts  to  get  rid  of  a  superfluity  of  claims  by  buying
out  claimants  and  making  provision  for  others  on  reclaimed
land  and  in  new  settlements.  The  Kentish  tenements,  as
they  are  described  in  later  surveys,  are  covered  with  an
intricate  network  of  rights  before  they  get  broken  up  into
irregular  and  sometimes  exceedingly  small  fractions.^^

In  regard  to  the  earher  period,  we  may  surmise  a  greater
freedom  in  finding  exits  for  the  surplus  of  population  and  a
slower  progress  in  its  growth.  But  the  main  drift  of  this
mode  of  development  consisted  undoubtedly  in  keeping  the
shares  united,  so  far  as  possible,  while  admitting  the
concurrent  claims.  It  was  a  system  resembling  the  practice
which  obtained  in  Germany  in  so-called  "  Ganerbschaften,"
unions  of  coheirs  carrying  on  husbandry  arrangements  on
shareland.^*  At  the  back  of  the  whole  system  hes  the  even-
tual recourse  to  real  partition,  although  we  are  unable  to
say  how  far  it  was  made  compulsory  on  the  claim  of  one,  of
several,  or  of  a  majority  of  co-heirs,  and  what  means  were
employed  to  guard  against  too  frequent  an  occurrence  of
such  partitions  besides  considerations  drawn  from  practical
expediency.  The  actual  working  and  the  importance  of
these  unions  of  coheirs  is  further  illustrated  by  the  frequent
occurrence,  before  the  Norman  Conquest,  of  tenure  in  parage.
It  mostly  occurs  in  the  case  of  thanes,  that  is,  privileged
landowners  standing  outside  the  village  communities,  but  they
had  the  same  interest  as  the  village  people  in  keeping  their
estates  together  even  when  equal  claims  were  conceded,  on
the  strength  of  OldEngHsh  custom,  to  heirs  of  the  same  grade. ^^
When  we  read  of  thirteen  thanes  holding  a  certain  estate


THE HISTORY OF THE HOLDING  207

in  paragio,  we  must  picture  to  ourselves  the  arrangement
as  a  union  for  the  purpose  of  the  management  of  the  estate,
but  -with  a  recognition  of  the  equal  position  of  all  in  regard
to  the  land.  What  is  especially  important,  such  unions
appear  not  only  as  private  and  economic  arrangements,  but
as  a  species  of  tenure  recognised  by  the  law  and  regulating  the
rights  and  obligations  of  the  holders.^*  The  demesne  of
peasant  proprietorship  presented  evidently  even  a  greater
scope  for  the  development  of  similar  unions.  The  best
proof  of  their  vitahty  and  importance  consists  in  the  fact,
that  the  system  of  shareholding  with  its  regular  units  did
actually  exist  all  over  England,  notwithstanding  the  pre-
valence through  a  great  part  of  it  of  the  rule  of  concurrent
inheritance.

At  the  same  time,  the  other  line  of  development  must  not
be  lost  sight  of.  It  seems  clear  that  even  before  the  advent
Consolidation  of  the  feudal  age  rules  of  primogeniture  and
of  Hoidings  junior  right  were  forming  themselves  on  the
basis  of  local  custom.  Their  practical  value  for  th^
maintenance  of  the  economic  strength  of  holdings  was
so  evident  that  it  seems  irrelevant  to  considei  whether
they  came  in  first  on  servile  tenements  and  by  considera-
tion of  the  interests  of  manorial  lords  or  were  developed
independently  on  both  sides — in  regard  to  free  owners  and  to
tenants  of  all  kinds.  In  any  case,  whether  through  parallel
adaptation  to  circumstances  or  through  a  subsequent
assimilation  of  free  holdings  to  holdings  of  coloni,  we  find
the  customs  of  single  succession  arising  in  regard  to  tenements
which  cannot  be  traced  either  to  a  servile  or  to  a  manorial
origin  ;  impartible  socage  and  many  varieties  of  burgage
tenure  are  founded  on  these  fines.  The  conception  of
service  may  count  for  a  good  deal  in  this  process  of  the  uni-
fication of  holdings  as  regards  succession,  but  it  is  not
sufficient  by  itself  to  explain  the  facts  of  the  case,  and  by  its
side,  working  in  the  same  direction,  stand  obvious  con-
siderations drawn  from  the  economic  efficiency  and  con-
venient management,  which  appfied  quite  as  much  to  free
as  to  dependent  shares  and  estates,  and  the  smaller  the  share
or  the  estate  the  stronger  must  have  been the tendency


208  THE  GROWTH  OF  THE  MANOR

against  divisions.  The  historical  result  of  this  struggle
between  the  two  tendencies  at  work — the  striving  towards
the  maintenance  of  united  shares  on  one  hand  and  the  growth
of  population,  on  the  other — is  clearly  expressed  in  the  gen-
eral fact  that,  though  the  idea  of  the  hide,  as  the  land  of
the  one  household,  had  to  be  given  up,  and  the  virgate  and
bovate  became  the  typical  household  units,  the  parcelling  up
of  property  generally  stopped  at  this,  and  the  system  of
shareholding  was  kept  up  in  the  shape  of  these  smaller
subdivisions  of  the  ploughland.  This  rough  result  is  very
characteristic  in  many  respects,  and  we  shall  have  to  revert
to  it  again  further  on.  At  present  we  must  lay  stress  on  the
fact  that  the  most  usual  arrangement  of  rural  land  tenure  at
the  time  of  Domesday,  whether  in  villainage  or  in  socage,  is
governed  by  the  grouping  into  virgates  and  bovates,  that
is,  by  an  arrangement  into  smaU  consolidated  shares.

Thus,  in  matters  of  hereditary  succession,  we  notice  a
customary  consohdation  of  shares  caUed  forth  and  kept  up
Alienation  of  ^J  farming  requirements.  A  second  question
Land  has to  be put in order to imderstand  the

bearing  of  ancient  law  on  land  holding.  How  far  was
the  household  share  a  commercial  commodity,  a  unit  of
value  to  be  sold  and  bought,  mortgaged  and  given  away,
either  as  a  whole  or  in  parts  ?  The  opposition  between
bookland  and  folkland  is  largely  based  on  the  treatment  of
this  question.  The  owner  of  a  popular  holding  in  ancient
law  was  undoubtedly  greatly  restricted  in  the  above  men-
tioned respects.  He  could  not  break  the  holding  up  at
pleasure,  give  it  away  or  seU  it  as  he  wished,  because  it  repre-
sented not  so  much  his  own  private  concern  as  the  allowance
of  his  family,  and  because  his  relations  had  expectant
hereditary  rights  in  regard  to  it.  In  fact,  he  was  ham-
pered by  family  considerations  in  this  matter  as  much  as  he
was  hampered  by  township  arrangements  in  the  matter  of
the  economic  disposal  of  the  holding.  But  it  was  difficult  to
preserve  the  standpoint  taken  up  by  ancient  law  in  regard
to  alienation.  There  were  powerful  forces  making  for  a
more  complete  private  disposition  as  to  land,  besides  the
natural  tendency  of  every  owner  to  get  rid  of  restrictions.


THE HISTORY OF THE HOLDING  209

besides  the  many  occasions  when  {\w  t4>mpta;tion  aro^
to  treat  land  as  having  a  commercial  valu«\  to  »)art«r  or  to
give  it  for  this  or  that  reason  ;  the  Caurch  appe  j,r,.(i  \vith  its
never-ceasing  claims,  and  the  King,  as  a  re»  n»sratative  of
government,  had  to  use  land  largely  in  r^imncration  for
services,  an  object  which  was  better  attf^ned  by  assigning
the  temporary  use  or  tiu'  condition>il  use  of  it  than  by
alienating  it  once  for  all.  '

A  certain  mobilisatioD.  of  laii  led  property  became,  as  a
matter  of  fact,  iaevitable,  and  it  was  effected  by  two  principal
methods.  The  bookland  theory  was  developed  in  a  sort  of
barbaric  imitation  of  Roman  law  practices.  There  arose
a  pp€cie-s  of  land  holding,  guaranteed  by  book  and  not  by  the
witness  of  the  shiirmote,  protected  by  ecclesiastical  anathe-
mas, royal  authority,  the  solemn  presence  of  witnesses  and
the  grudghigiy  given  consent  of  relations  against  attempts
to  traverse  or  to  destroy  deeds  of  alienation  to  strangers.
Land  dO  held  became  the  terra  testamentaUs,  the  terra  here-
ditaria, the  private  property,  which  one  could  give  and  sell,
and  sooner  or  later  the  same  practices  began  to  make  their
way  in  the  disposal  of  ordinary  folcland,  though  as  to  this
last  there  remained  more  occasions  for  contest  and  com-
plications.

The  second  way  by  which  landed  property  was  put  into

the  market  and  mobilised  was  the  formation  of loanlatid,

the  passage  of  a  piece  of  land  from  the  hands
Loanland  »,/  • . /i  r ^  ^r  i

of  the  owner  mto  those  of  a  tenant  for  a  number

of  years,  or  for  life,  or  for  several  lives,  or  in  hereditary  pos-
session in  consideration  of  stipulated  or  implied  services.
This  category  of  landholding  became  especially  important
at  a  time  when  the  simple  selling  of  land  was  not  very  usual
and  not  easily  effected,  and  when,  on  the  other  hand,  a  num-
ber of  great  landowners  had  at  their  disposal  vast  tracts  of
land  which  they  could  not  utilise  personally  and  directly.
Leases  with  a  tendency  towards  protracted  and  hereditary
tenant  right  appear  in  use  in  all  ranks  and  classes  of  society.
We  find  bishops  endowing  military  retainers  with  estates
in  hereditary  succession,  and  for  three  generations,"  kings
creating  tenancies  for  their  followers,  without  definite  time

p


210  THB  GEOWT OF  THE  MANOR

limitR  ap  t'  ^' e  use  of  t'  loldings/^  landowners  of  great
ana  sma.ii  ^^<^  pa.xoe*I..^g  ^^  parts  of  their  estates  among
rentpaj/ing  farmers,  and  starting  colonies  of  dependent  hus-
band n  in  consideration  of  dues  in  kind  and  of  labour
obligation" .^

Now,  all  tlie  processes  described  could  be  applied  to  shares
included  in  comiul^nal  groups  as  well  as  to  estates  em-
The  Share  bracing  *  n^^re  groups  or  to  land  not  occupied
and  the  by  any  groups  at  ail. But  in  the  c^^l  of  share-

Individual  land  the  direct  result  oi  these  transa^  j  .  was
neither  a  disruption  of  the  tu^.vnship  community,  noj
severance  of  the  ties  connecting  the  aheiiated  share  wi
the  neighbouring  allotments,  but  mere  '  a  change  of  its
personnel,  the  passing  from  the  hands  of  one  holder  and  one
household  into  the  hands  of  another.  The  sucul  ssor  had  to
submit  to  the  general  conditions  and  requirements  of  llie
community  in  the  same  way  as  the  ancestors,  the  buyer  a.
seller,  the  leaseholder  as  the  landlord.  The  system  of  reality
with  all  its  consequences  in  the  apportionment  of  rights  and
duties  acted  in  the  same  way  as  before,  or  ought  to  have
acted  as  before,  and  we  sometimes  hear  of  complaints  that
it  did  not.  In  this  way,  we  find  in  the  life  of  the  original
Old  English  settlements  a  curious  combination  of  two  prin-
ciples— the  individuaUstic  principle  in  personal  relations
and  the  conmiunaHstic  in  real  relations.  A  man  was  not
held  down  or  led  by  the  township  in  his  personal  fortune ;
he  could  freely  thrive  or  decay,  but  the  land  which  he  pos-
sessed was  fitted  into  the  obhgations  and  rights  of  the  com-
munity in  a  way  which  was  meant  to  be  permanent,  or  at
least  to  alter  only  with  the  general  growth  of  the  community.
I  mentioned  the  original  settlements  in  order  to  distinguish
the  townships  created  by  popular  occupation  from  the  large
number  of  those  which  grew  up  under  the  colonizing  in-
fluence of  the  King,  of  the  Church,  or  of  great  men  :  in  these
last  the  influence  of  private  will  and  disposition  was,  of
course,  very  prominent  from  the  very  first.

Of  course,  the  contrast  in  principle  between  these  two
conceptions  of  the  personal  and  of  the  real  arrangement  of
life  ought  not  to  be  exaggerated. They  necessarily  reacted


THE HISTORY OP THE HOLDING  211

on  each  other.  The  fetters  of  the  open-field  system  ham-
pered private  enterprise  and  made  it  dithcult  for  an  ordinary
villager  to  rise  by  mere  agricultural  industry  and  thrift.
On  the  other  hand,  when  the  pohtical  and  proprii'tary  fac-
tors outside  the  life  of  the  village  enabled  a  man  to  thrive,
they  might  sometimes  carry  him  altogether  out  of  his  class,
and  in  that  case  he  might  turn  to  be  a  very  awkward  member
for  the  village  community  to  deal  with.  But  still,  on  the
average,  the  system  served  to  make  the  two  ends  meet,  and
it  is  to  such  average  conditions  that  we  have  to  look  chiefly
in  the  general  review  of  the  subject  which  the  scanty  means
at  our  disposal  enable  us  to  make.


I


CHAPTER VI
MANORIAL  ORIGINS

The  laxity  of  organisation  which  is  characteristic  of  the

state  of  Old  English  society,  as  arranged  in  townships  and

hundreds,  gave  free  scope  to  the  play  of  indi-

Individualistic  vidual  forces  making  for  more  effective  economic
Tendencies  ^  , i i

management  and  more  consistent  legal  rules.

We  see  in  operation  a  set  of  causes  which  contributed
powerfully  to  the  spread  of  inequality  in  society.
They  may  be  summarised  under  the  heading  of  spread
of  patronage.  We  have  already  had  occasion  to  touch
on  some  of  the  phenomena  connected  with  it,  but  it  is
necessary  to  consider  them  vet  from  another  point  of
view.  One  of  the  most  strikmg  pohtical  features  of  the
time  is  the  insufficiency  of  central  power  for  the  discharge
of  its  governmental  duties,  and  the  consequent  necessity
for  its  subjects  to  seek  private  protection.  As  long  as  the
tribal  arrangement  with  its  far-reaching  family  ties  was  in
good  working  order,  the  supplementary  protection  was
afforded  by  the  famihes,  agnatic  and  cognatic  kindreds,
etc.,  which  encircled  the  individual  and  acted  as  political
groups  of  great  power  and  wide  responsibility.  But  the
influence  of  the  kindreds  soon  began  to  fade  in  the  new  and
complicated  conditions  of  English  life.  The  government
still  appealed  to  the  action  of  kindreds  in  settling  landless
men,  in  looking  after  people  who  had  left  their  ordinary
surroundings,^  etc.  But  it  had  more  and  more  to  take
into  account  the  shattered  state  of  these  primitive  institu-
tions, and  to  appeal  to  groupings  of  people  designed  to
replace  or  to  strengthen  them.  The  voluntary  association
of  the  guild  appears  as  a  powerful  substitute  for  kindreds  in
the  case  of  men  of  all  sorts,  of  traders,  artisans,  landowners,
etc.,  and  it  is  evident  that  what  is  sought  is  not  merely  or

212


MANORIAL ORKJINS  213

chiefly  social  intercourse,  but  mutual  guarantor  and jjfo-
tection  between  its  members."'

The  patronage  of  powerful  individuals  and  of  the  most
potent  of  social  forces — the  Ciiurch— has  to  bo  taken
into  account  even  more  than  the  rise  of  the  guilds.  The
lord  (the  hlaford)  becomes  at  an  early  time  an  important
agent  in  the  social  order.  A  definite  and  very  con-
siderable part  in  a  man's  wergeld  is  assigned  to  him  by  the
side  of  the  kindred.'  On  the  other  hand,  he  is  made
responsible  for  the  behaviour  of  his  client,  a  fact  which
imphes  a  certain  power  of  control  and  coercion.*  The
relation  of  patronage,  or  commendation,  as  it  is  called  in
later  sources,  is  originally  produced  by  free  agreement
and  may  be  dissolved  under  certain  conditions  by  any  one
of  the  parties,^  but  relations  of  mutual  support  could  not
be  trifled  with  and  lightly  thrown  over  ;  and,  on  the  other
hand,  the  hlaford  had  to  be  careful  how  he  treated  his
dependants,  if  he  wanted  to  keep  up  and  increase  his  social
influence  and  material  profits.  Such  relations,  once
•^tart^d,  tended  to  crystalSse  and  to  connect  themselves
with  all  sorts  of  material  obhgations — loans,  gifts,  endow-
ments, rents,  tenancies,  and  the  like.  Complicated
settlements  of  claims  were  necessary  in  such  cases,
and  the  government  insisted  on  a  certain  stability
in  these  relations,"  which  assisted  it  in  its  administrative
task.  In  fact,  by  the  side  of  voluntary  commendation  we
find  at  the  close  of  the  period  an  involuntary  one.  A  man
could  sometimes  go  with  his  land  where  he  pleased,  but
there  were  also  cases  when  he  could  not  ;  a  householder
commended  to  a  great  man  had  usually  to  stick  to  his
patron,  or  to  put  it  in  another  way,  patronage  had  a  ten-
dency to  strike  roots  and  to  develop  into  a  lasting  lordahip
over  free  men  and  their  land.^  /

Commendation  being  originally  a  purely  personal  relation,
did  not  necessarily  lead  to  the  subjection  of  whole  town-
ships or  districts  ; on  the  contrary,  it  resulted
Soke and jjj  g^  heterogeneous  position  of  divers  tenants  in
Sokemen  ,  , ,. « t» ,  . .  • .

the  same  locality. nut  there  was  another  knid

of  patronage  growing  up  on  Old  Enghsh  soil  which  assunud


214  THE  GROWTH  OF  THE  MANOR

naturally  a  territorial  cast.  I  mean  the  frequent  grants
of  private  jurisdiction  made  by  the  Anglo-Saxon  kings.
Public  justice  was  at  best  cumbersome  and  onerous  ;  in  a  i
sense,  it  was  a  source  of  profits  and  exactions.  Fines  had
to  be  imposed  and  levied,  local  means  provided  for  the
easy  discharge  of  petty  causes,  and  great  men  were  con-
sidered the  best  local  agents  for  enforcing  obedience  and
taking  up  the  settlement  of  local  disputes.  Small  people
were  freed,  on  their  side,  from  costly  peregrinations  and
processes,  while  great  people  obtained  new  sources  of  in-
come and  influence.  Many  interests  worked  together  in
this  way  for  the  institution  of  aristocratic  franchises  on  a
territorial  basis.

Even  in  the  earliest  history  of  Teutonic  settlements  in  ;
Great  Britain  germs  of  a  patrimonial  justice  are  discernible,  i
Every  householder  possessed  coercive  power  not  only  over  >
his  slaves,  but  also  over  other  subjects  (hiredman,  geneat,)
at  least  within  the  precincts  of  his  house  and  private  close,'
and  the  importance  of  these  rights  grew  in  proportion  as
the  subject  population  increased.  When  the  greater  part
of  the  English  rural  population  sank  down  into  the  con-
dition of  peasants,  the  settlements  of  disputes  among  them
and  the  infliction  of  punishments  for  petty  offences  came
to  form  by  itself  a  very  considerable  jurisdictional  area
and  in  connection  with  the  fact  that  the  geburs  or  villains
were  not  considered  as  mere  serfs,  but  presented  a  mixed
condition  both  in  point  of  rights  and  as  to  origin,  the
vast  domain  of  patrimonial  justice  and  police  assumed
an  importance  approaching  that  of  the  public  courts.  Be-
sides, the  application  of  patrimonial  jurisdiction  became
more  and  more  frequent  and  more  extended  by  virtue  of
the  direct  conferment  or  the  prescriptive  use  of  rights  of;
sake  and  soke  (cause  and  suit).  The  formulas  granting;
such  franchises  vary  in  their  wording,  mostly  dwelling,
besides  the  two  main  terms,  on  toll  and  theam,  infangene-
theof,  utfangenetheof,  and  flymen fyrmth,  but  sometimes
embracing  the  grave  cases  of  homefare,  forestall  and  rape.^°
When  the  trial  of  such  cases  was  made  over  to  a  private!
person,  a  court,  necessarily  grew  out  of  it ;  it  was  a  kind  of


MANORIAL ORIOINS  2 If)

chip  severed  from  the  block  of  the  public  courts  of  the
hundred,  county,  or  realm,  a  court  based  on  the  participa-
tion of  those  free  men  who  came  under  its  soke,  or  had
to  do  suit  {soke)  to  it.  Although  in  some  cases  personal
considerations  went,  as  it  were,  across  these  immunities,
keeping  some  people  out  of  them  and  joining  other  people
to  them  in  spite  of  their  place  of  abode,  on  the  whole  the
grants  of  sake  and  soke  embrace  districts  and  modify  the
position  of  the  population  of  these  districts  in  regard  to  the
ordinary  course  of  jurisdiction."

At  the  same  time,  there  were  generally  two  accessory
aspects  of  the  situation  created  by  the  franchises  :  freemen
were  indeed  given  over  to  patrimonial  courts,  but  in  regard
to  them  the  courts  of  sokes,  though  held  in  virtue  of  privat(>
grants,  were  still  considered  public  courts  and  liable  to  super-
vision, appeal  from  and  restriction  in  the  use  of  their  powers.
And  in  some  respects  these  freemen  still  had  to  sue  in  the
King's  courts,  and  formed  the  bulk  of  the  suitors  of  the  hun-
dredand  of  the  county.  In  this  way,  though  neighbours
of  the  villains  in  the  halimote  of  the  estate,  sokemen  were
still  kept  formally  apart  from  the  latter  as  members  of  the
soke,  and  were  called  up  to  the  hundred  and  to  the  shire  on
the  strength  of  their  personal  states.  In  fact,  the  very
designation  of  sokemen  is  broader  than  the  group  of  men
under  private  soke,  and  embraces  a  number  of  people  who
attend  the  regular  courts.  It  arose  seemingly  from  the
contrast  between  the  personal  suitors  of  hundred  and
shire  on  the  one  hand,  the  peasants  represented  by  the
reeve  and  four  men,  the  villains,  on  the  other.''  There  is
a  second  point  to  be  noticed  in  regard  to  this  group  :  namely,
that  jurisdictional  subjection  to  a  lord,  settled  as  it  waa  on
a  territorial  basis,  almost  by  necessity  led,  at  a  later  stage,
to  some  sort  of  economic  subjection.  The  freeman  under
soke  had  not  only  to  appear  in  certain  contingencies  at  the
lord's  court  as  an  assessor  or  a  suitor  and  to  pay  amercements
and  fines  to  it,  but  he  came  to  be  considered  as  a  paying
dependant,  and  indeed  as  a  rent-paying  tenant  of  the  lord.'*
This  last  turn  taken  by  the  subjection  of  men  under  soke
may  be  either  explained  by  the  fact  that  a  great  number


216  THE GROWTH OF THE MANOR

of  them  had  really  taken  up  tenancies  or  converted
their  independent  holdings  into  tenancies,  or  else  by  the
degradation  consequent  upon  the  surrender  of  public  rights
over  particular  districts  by  the  kings.  Those  dues
which  were  formerly  paid  to  the  King  as  tribute  became
rents  in  the  hands  of  private  lords  to  which  the  King  had
passed  his  subjects.  To  put  it  more  correctly,  we  should
nowadays  have  classified  such  dues  under  these  two  heads,
whereas  it  is  very  doubtful  whether  the  Old  English  govern-
ment and  folk  realised  fully  the  contrast  between  both.  At
any  rate,  kings  are  certainly  found  giving  away  powers  over
districts  as  if  they  were  granting  estates.  They  subject
free  families  to  dependence  on  lords  by  acts  which  are
framed  as  gifts,  and  carry  alienations  of  public  rights  with
them.  One  of  the  consequences  is  the  raising  of  interme-
diaries— the  lords  of  sokes — between  the  King  and  his
former  direct  subjects.

In  the  Danish  period  we  find  already  traces  of  a  concep-
tion which  reminds  one  of  the  celebrated  feudal  maxim,
"  nulle  terre  sans  seigneur.'^  There  have  come  down  to  us
many  enactments  worded  as  if  in  every  place  there  was  a
landrica  constituted  over  the  free  and  servile  population.^*
It  is  more  than  doubtful  that  such  an  exhaustive  parcelling
up  of  jurisdiction  among  private  lords  had  already  been
fully  carried  out  before  the  Norman  Conquest,  but  the
enactments  I  am  alluding  to  were  not  framed  at  random,
and  lead  to  the  assumption  that  about  the  year  1000  the
normal  Englishman  was  supposed  to  have  a  jurisdictional
lord  above  him,  though  in  many  cases  that  lord  may  have
been  the  King  himself,  in  his  capacity  as  a  great  land-
owner.

The  attempt  to  carry  out  such  a  scheme  shows  to  what
extent  the  necessity  of  an  aristocratic superstructure  to

the  social  order  was  realised  at  that  time.
Class"*  ""''"^'^^Such  tendencies  and  the  institutions arising

from  them  evidently  do  not  owe  their  ori-
gin to  superficial  and  arbitrary  measures  ;  deep  currents
must  have  moved  in  this  direction.  Some  of  these  currents
have  been  noticed already^-the  desire  for  protection  on


MANORIAL ORIGINS  217

the  part  of  the  weaker  members  of  the  community,  the
disruption  of  the  ties  of  kindred,  the  pohcy  of  a  government
conscious  of  its  ineflficiency  in  the  discharge  of  secondary
duties  and  of  its  inabihty  to  enforce  justice  and  poHce
in  local  matters.  But  other  currents  of  similar  magnitude
have  also  to  be  reckoned  with.  As  in  the  case  of  patri-
monial justice  and  commendation,  we  discern  from  the
very  beginning  in  the  life  of  Teutonic  tribes  the  germs  of
a  military  class.  They  are  formed  by  the  comilatus,  (Icfolge,
gasindi,  gesio.  Kings  and  chieftains  gathered  a  following
around  them  which  did  not  concern  itself  with  the  arts  of
peace,  but  lived  for  war  and  by  war./  It  did  not  coalesce
with  the  body  of  the  nation  in  arms,  the  host,  fyrd,  or  here,
but  remained  as  a  separate  organisation  partaking  of  the
characteristics  of  a  court,  a  guard  and  a  standing  division  of
the  army.  The  invasions  and  conquests  took  up  a  long
time,  as  we  know,  and  all  through  this  period  of  strife  the
military  followings  played  a  conspicuous  part.  But  even
when  the  country  became  more  or  less  pacified,  the  members
of  these  follo\vings,  although  they  were  mostly  endowed
with  land  instead  of  living  at  the  court  and  table  of  their
chief,  remained  in  close  touch  with  him  in  regard  to  military
service.  They  were  called  up  and  came  with  their  retinues
when  it  was  not  considered  necessary  or  possible  to  move
the  fyrd.  And  it  is  clear  that  this  natural  requirement  of
a  standing  military  establislmient  and  of  a  professional
class  to  support  it  grew  exceedingly  in  importance,  and  led
to  a  social  transformation  of  a  most  decisive  kind  when  the
offensive  war  ceased,  and  the  English  concjuerors  were
driven  into  a  position  of  constant  and  wearisome  defence
against  the  onslaught  of  barbarians  who  had  not  got  their
share  as  yet,  and  pressed  on  from  behind.  Positions
were  reversed.  Frankish,  Italian,  English  society,  instead
of  assailing  the  Roman  world,  had  to  desist  from  its  peaceful
work  in  order  to  repel  the  Arabs,  the  Avars  and  Magyars,
the  Saxons,  the  Slavs,  the  Northmen.  England  had  to
deal  with  those  last,  and  every  page  of  the  chronicles  of
this  time  testify  to  the  strain,  the  danger,  and  the  havoc  of
the  contest. People  had  to  fight,  to  work,  and  to  pay  in


218  THE GROWTH OF THE MANOR

face  of  inroads  which  brought  home  to  every  household  the
Qecessity  not  of  gain  or  conquest,  but  of  self-preservation.
The  fyrd  was  not  the  proper  institution  to  cany  on  such
warfare.  It  was  not  composed  of  invaders  seeking  booty,
but  of  householders  and  labourers  called  off  from  their
homework.  The  profound  change  was  expressed  in  the
very  fact  that  the  great  majority  of  its  members  did  not
possess  the  hide  holdings  considered  to  be  sufficient  to  pro-
vide for  a  household  and  to  maintain  a  warrior  at  the  same
time.  They  were  holders  of  virgates  and  bovates,  of  small
tenements  barely  sufficient  for  scanty  peasant  life.  The  fyrd
was  still  pressed  from  time  to  time  to  go  to  war,  but  it
had  mostly  to  act  by  local  divisions,  to  protect  the  more
immediate  neighbourhood  of  threatened  districts,  and
when  he  had  to  hobble  about  the  country  in  pursuit  of  the
"  here  "  of  the  Norsemen,  it  was  more  a  burden  to  the
people  than  a  protection  to  them.^°  Indeed,  the  necessity
for  a  more  efficient,  more  professional  and  better  equipped
force  made  itself  felt  in  every  respect,  and  the  materials
for  such  a  force  were  evidently  to  be  found  not  among
wretched  virgaters  with  their  bows  and  arrows,  but  in  the
military  foUowings  which  could  be  required  to  appear  on
horseback  with  helmets  and  coats  of  mail,  with  well  forged
swords  and  axes,  and  which  could  be  made  to  do  garrison
duty  in  fortresses.  Even  the  old  hide  holding  was
found  insufficient  to  enable  a  man  to  do  all  that,
and  five  hides  are  considered  by  custom  as  the  tenement
necessary  for  the  proper  outfit  of  a  knight,  that  is,  a  tene-
ment which  made  him  independent  of  township  arrange-
ments and  personal  work,  which  raised  him,  in  fact,  to  the
condition  of  a  squire  and  contrasted  him  with  the  peasant
virgaters  around  him.^^  This  contrast  between  the  five-
hide  estate  of  the  thane  and  the  virgate  of  the  peasant  is
highly  characteristic  of  the  time.  It  implies,  to  begin
with,  that  the  thane  was  to  find  means  of  sustenance
not  merely  for  himself,  but  for  his  retinue,^''  the  heavily
armed  warrior  being  as  a  rule  surrounded  by  a  few  Hghtly
armed  henchmen.  Secgndly,  the  distribution  of  thanes'
estates  and  the  corresponding  obhgation  of  ecclesiastical


MANORIAL 0RI0IN3  219

and  lay  magnates  to  maintain  fully  equipped  warriors
implied  more  and  more  the  subordination  of  the  common
people,  of  the  virgaters  and  holders  of  bovates  to  the
specialists  of  war,  the  growth  of  private  dues  and  duties  to
support  the  members  of  the  military  class.  Thirdly,  the
social  differentiation  between  the  two  layers  of  society  had
as  its  result  that  the  lower  freemen  lost  more  and  more  the
character  of  settled  warriors  and  assumed  the  position  of
coloni  and  labourers  ;  their  w^eapons  glide  out  of  their  hands,
as  it  were,  and  with  their  weapons  disappears  their  main
claim  to  freedom.  We  have  to  keep  in  mind  that  the  whole-
process  followed  its  course  by  slow  steps,  apart  from  anv
attempts  to  systematise  its  results  by  comprehensive
schemes.  No  knight  fee  theory  more  or  less  akin  to  that
which  found  so  complete  an  expression  in  the  documents
of  the  Red  Book  of  the  Exchequer  was  elaborated  as  yet.
the  land  was  not  parcelled  out  into  military  units  deemed
more  or  less  equal  and  forming  the  basis  of  governmental
claims  ;  this  part  of  its  process  was  left  to  be  achieved  by
the  Normans.^'  In  fact,  by  the  side  of  the  ordinary  endow-
ments of  five  hides  and  the  cumulative  agreements  ^ith
cities  and  great  landowners,  we  find  a  number  of  small
mihtary  tenancies  of  one  or  two  hides,  and  even  less,  whose
holders  are  characterised  as  thanes.  Two  explanations  of
this  fact  suggest  themselves.  In  the  Eastern  districts  the
large  number  of  small  freemen  testifies  to  the  recurrence
under  Danish  influence  of  a  state  of  things  similar  to  that
which  obtained  all  through  England  in  the  time  of  Saxon,
Anglian,  and  Jutish  conquests  ;  the  thanes  and  freemen
in  question  are  the  members  of  the  "  here  "  just  settled  on
the  land,  still  numerous  and  still  in  a  condition  which  may
be  termed  appropriate  for  light  troops  and  offensive  pur-
poses. As  we  have  seen,  the  members  of  the.se  hosts  are
formally  equated  by  the  treaties  in  point  of  wergeld  with
the  military  landowners  of  English  districts,  thougli  they
correspond  historically  to  the  ancestors  of  these  land-
owners. But  in  the  West  also  we  find  a  good  many  small
thanes,  and  in  this  case  we  have  to  think  apparently  of
single  soldiers  to  whom  small  endowments  had  been  as-


220  THE GROWTH OF THE MANOR

signed,  and  not  of  officers  with  small  retinues,  as  in  the  case
of  the  five-hide  thanes/"  Indeed,  in  accounting  for  the  rise
of  the  mihtary  class  we  should  go  wrong  if  we  lost  sight
even  for  one  moment  of  the  more  humble  representatives
of  it,  of  the  sergeants-at-arms  as  they  were  sometimes
called  during  the  feudal  period,  geneats,  rodknights,
as  they  were  termed  in  Old  English  phraseology,  drengs,
as  they  were  designated  by  the  Danes.""  This  class
is  an  important  one  from  the  manorial  point  of  view,
but  it  has  undoubtedly  its  mihtary  significance  too  :  the
rodknights,  riding  servants  provided  with  horses,  were  not
only  used  for  carrying  orders  and  summonses  :  these  geneat?
and  drengs  had  to  follow  their  lord  as  a  military
leader,  and  must  have  played  a  conspicuous  part  in  the
expeditions  of  the  professional  soldiery.  A  few  of  them
stood  in  direct  connection  with  the  government,  but  most
were  included  in  the  estates  of  great  men  and  thanes  and
recruited  for  military  purposes  through  the  medium  of  their
lords.  In  a  word,  though  the  system  of  knights'  fees  had
not  been  formed,  the  differentiation  of  the  military  class
from  the  labouring  class  was  already  carried  out  in  sub-
stance before  the  Norman  Conquest,  and  it  is  in  what  may
be  called,  for  want  of  a  better  word,  the  Danish  period  of
English  history  that  this  differentiation  has  to  be  located,
although  its  germs  appear  even  in  earlier  times. ^^

I  have  laid  stress  on  the  military  aspect  of  this  process
of  social  differentiation  because  it  is  a  very  important  one,
but,  of  course,  it  is  not  its  only  aspect.  The  thane  did  not
merely  act  as  an  officer  and  a  man-at-arms.  In  possession
of  a  special  military  position,  he  became  also  the  natural
representative  of  government.  The  people  around  him
were  made  to  support  him  by  payments  and  services,  and
this  meant  that  they  had  to  look  up  to  him  as  a  lord  in
greater  or  lesser  degree.  He  was  in  a  way  an  agent  of  the
central  government,  and  he  became  himself  a  small  potentate
through  the  fact  of  possessing  various  powers  delegated  or
derived  from  the  central  government.  He  had  to  rule  his
dependants  and  peasant  neighbours  in  matters  of  justice
and  police,  he  became  the  free  man  par  excelleTice,  while


.1 ,1,'V


MANORIAL ORIGINS  221

they  sank  into  the  position  of  villains  or,  at  best,  socmen.'
,His  estate  was  tending  to  become  a  unit  of  pohce  andf
jurisdiction  on  the  basis  of  governmental  claims.  In  this!
way  the  political  changes  which  followed  the  rise  of  the
military  class  and  the  extension  of  commendation  and
franchise  led  in  a  considerable  degree  to  the  formation
of  a  lordship  as  a  superstructure  of  the  township.  To
appreciate  this  last  process  in  all  its  bearings,  we  have  now
to  take  into  account  the  set  of  economic  inf,uences  making
for  it.

From  the  very  first  stages  of  the  English  occupation  of
the  island  we  have  to  reckon  not  merely  with  small  landowners

joining  in  townships  on  the  shareholding  system,
Es^tes "" ^^^  ^^^^  wit)i great  landowners, possessed  of

large  tracts  of  land  and  utilising  them  accord-,
ing  to  their  wishes  and  notions.  The  tradition  of  Roman
estates,  for  one  thing,  could  not  be  entirely  swept  away.  Not-
withstanding all  the  havoc  and  perturbations  brought  about
by  the  conquerors,  notwithstanding  the  tremendous  changes
in  habits  and  speech  as  testified  by  the  complete  alteration  •
of  local  nomenclature,  it  would  be  preposterous  to  suppose
that  Roman  landmarks  and  arrangements  were  wilfully
destroyed  and  no  advantage  taken  of  the  existing  stock
and  labour  arrangements.  There  is  happily  no  need  to  deny
the  survivals  in  many  places  of  practices  connected  with
Roman  estates  in  order  to  account  for  the  preponderating
Teutonic  stamp  of  rural  hfe  in  Old  England.  The  King  got
to  be  and  always  remained  a  great  landowner.  The  Church
with  its  various  institutions  and  corporations  soon  became  a
great  landowning  power,  and  borrowed  its  methods  to  a
great  extent  from  Roman  antecedents  and  continental
examples,  although  it  must  be  kept  in  mind  that  not
one  of  the  Enghsh  churches  could  trace  its  pedigree  as  a
land-owning  institution  from  the  time  before  the  English
Conquest.  Great  men  of  different  origin,  ealdormen  and
royal  reeves,  earls  and  thanes  came  forward  as  great  land-
owners who  had  to  deal  with  scores  of  townships,  wide  tracts
of  waste  and  numerous  serfs  and  clients  of  all  kind.  In
ordinary  husbandry  and  in  the  spread  of  colonisation  capital


222  THE  GROWTH  OF  THE  MANOB

was  needed,  and  c  apital  was  provided  by  the  wealthier  people,
with  the  consequence  that  those  who  accepted  help  fre-
quently lapsed  into  a  condition  of  dependency  on  the  bor-
rowers. An  estate,  as  well  as  a  holding,  did  not  consist
merely  of  land,  but  also  of  meat,  men  and  oxen  necessary
to  make  it  work.  As  we  know  more  definitely  about  the
plough -teams  of  eight  oxen,  the  mentions  of  the  correspond-
ing outfit  will  be  readily  made  out,  as,  e.g.,  in  the  case  of  a
legacy  by  Abba  the  reeve,  who  supplies  half  a  sulung  of  land
with  four  oxen.  But  cows,  sheep,  swine,  are  also  provided,
and  corn  to  start  with.  In  a  curious  document  of  the'
beginning  of  the  tenth  century,  bishop  Denewulf  tells  us
of  his  exertions  to  colonise  and  raise  the  value  of  an  estate
at  Bedhampton.  When  the  bishop  received  it  from  the
King  it  was  deserted  and  devoid  of  outfit,  but  he  succeeded
in  providing  stock  and  settling  farmers  in  all  its  holdings,  and
he  mentions  expressly,  that  after  the  last  severe  winter  there
were  420  swine  and  seven  slaves  and  ninety  sown  acres,
evidently  on  the  home  farm.^^  But  we  have  to  start  from
the  fact  that  the  lords  did  not  introduce  in  their  poHcy  views
and  methods  of  a  kind  entirely  different  from  those  which
.prevailed  in  the  case  of  free  settlements,  but  adapted  and
1  modified  the  same  methods  for  their  own  benefit.  A  town-
ship  created  on  ecclesiastical  land  was  not  materially  dif-
ferent in  regard  to  its  constitution,  in  the  arrangement  of  its
agriculture,  its  pastoral  rights,  its  treatment  of  the  waste
from  a  neighbom-ing  township  on  folcland,  nor  was  this  last
entirely  free  from  duties  and  dues  derived  from  the  occupa-
tion of  the  land,  though  these  duties  and  dues  were  exacted
by  the  King's  officers.  And  a  simple  act  of  the  King,  a
grant  attested  by  a  book,  could  place  the  freer  district  sub-
stantially in  the  position  of  a  private  estate,  and,  as  we
have  seen,  such  grants  became  very  usual  in  consequence  of
the  development  of  a  mihtary  and  governing  class.  Then
again  there  were  still  many  steps  between  the  heterogeneous
dependency  of  the  freeholders  of  a  township  on  various
lords  for  commendation  and  soke  and  the  unification  of  soke
and,  probably  later,  of  commendation  in  the  hands  of  one
lord.^^ In  fact,  the  arrangements  in  both  cases  followed


MANORIAL ORIGINS  '  '•-'y  ,^  223

the  accustomed  groove  of  an  open-field  commimity  with  a
system  of  dues  and  duties  superimposed  on  it.  This  funda-
mental resemblance  of  both  arrangements  in  regard  to  their
economic  basis  made  it  more  easy  to  slide,  as  it  were,  gra-
dually from  one  variety  into  the  other  and  to  combine
tenures  of  different  origin  and  different  degrees  of  depend-
ance  under  one  and  the  same  lordship.

The  development  of  the  manorial  system,  as  it  is  called
forth  by  economic  evolution,  presents  several  features  of
interest  and  importance.  It  is  chiefly  ex-
Feorm  pressed  in  the  growth  of  the  demesne  on  one

side,  of  rents  and  services  on  the  other.  Terri-
torial lordship  did  not  necessarily  imply  the  existence
of  a  demesne,  that  is  of  a  special  appropriation  of  one
part  of  the  soil  to  the  use  of  the  lord.  Not  only  is  it
possible  to  imagine  a  state  of  things  in  which  the  lord,  with-
out making  any  portion  of  the  soil  particularly  his  own,
would  come  or  send  to  a  district  or  township  to  levy  the
tribute  imposed,  but  we  actually  catch  glimpses  of  such
customs  in  many  places.  We  know  that  it  was  the  prevail-
ing system  for  the  collection  of  rents  in  kind  or  of  tribute
among  the  tribal  Celts.  Indeed  it  is  so  much  the  natural
organisation  of  tribute  in  a  tribal  state  of  incomplete  sub-
jection, that  we  find  similar  customs  among  many  other
nations  in  the  same  stage  of  development,  e.g.,  among  the
Scandinavian  folk.^*  A  chieftain  comes  with  his  retinue  to
feast  on  his  subjects  for  a  certain  number  of  nights  or  days ;
a  temporary  house  is  erected  for  him,  if  he  does  not  take  up
his  quarters  in  some  headman's  farm  ;  provisions  flow  in
from  the  district  according  to  a  customary  standard  ;  the
henchmen  of  the  chief,  his  horses  and  dogs  are  quartered
and  feasted  by  other  local  people.  We  still  find  examples
of  such  feasting  progresses  in  Saxon,^^  and  indeed  in  Norman
times,^^  and  there  is  hardly  any  room  for  doubt  that  these
customs  represent  the  most  ancient  forms  of  tributary  sub-
jection, running  in  an  uninterrupted  sequence  from  Celtic
tribal  arrangements.

Even  more  frequent  is  the  modification  of  these  feasting
dues which occurs when the provisions are not con-


224  THE  GROWTH  OF  THE  MANOR

sumed  by  the  chief  or  lord  in  the  course  of  his  customary
progress,  but  have  to  be  reserved  and  accumulated  for  his
use.  The  allowance  of  bread,  cheese,  honey,  ale,  flitches  of
bacon,  meat,  will  be  a  customary  one,  and  though  it  would
come  by  bits  from  a  number  of  tributary  households  the
lord  would  be  primarily  interested  in  getting  the  aggregate,
while  the  repartition  and  collection  of  dues  would  be  left  to
the  tributary  community.  It  will  be  reckoned  as  the  farm,
the  provender  of  a  night  or  half  a  night,  or  a  week,  as  might
be,  and  of  such  farms  we  hear  a  good  deal  both  on  royal
and  on  ecclesiastical  manors. ^^  >^

This  modification  of  the  crudity  of  the  feasting  immedi-
ately leads  to  some  material  consequences.  The  farm  will
Manorial  have  to  be  accumulated  in  some  central  place

Centres  which may be  properly called  a  dominical

house  or  mansion.  The  mansus  iadominicatus,  the  curtis
dominica  of  continental  customs,  appear  by  the  force  of
the  same  circumstances  in  English  surroundings.  The  bar-
ton ^^  and  the  berewick  ^^  are  settlements  connected  with
barns  for  the  collection  of  com  and  other  produce
with  no  special  agricultural  plots  attached  to  them.
The  herdwick^^  presents  another  variety  in  places  with
pastoral  pursuits ;  in  the  centre  of  dwellings  of  herds-
men and  the  storehouse  for  the  gathering  of  cheese,  butter
and  the  like.  It  need  not  be  provided  with  any
domanial  exploitation.  The  expressions  berwick  and
herd  wick  are  indeed  found  commonly  as  sub -divisions
of  manors,  as  subsidiary  centres  for  groups  of  holdings
under  manorial  sway,  but  there  is  nothing  in  this  sub-
sequent co-ordination  of  terms  which  need  astonish  us.  In
]nany  cases,  the  mansion  itself  may  not  mean  more  than  a
counting  house  or  a  storehouse, ^^  and  there  may  be,  on  the
other  hand,  a  piece  of  demesne  attached  to  the  barton  or
the  berewick.^^  Still  it  is  not  without  importance  to  note
the  varieties  of  arrangement  indicated  by  the  shades  in
terminology.

The  next  step  is  the  most  common  and  significant  one.
It  is  represented  by  a  domanial  farm  round  which  dependent
holdings  are  gathered. The  central  holding,  the  heafod-


MANORIAL ORIGINS  225

hotl,^^  becomes  a  hall  in  which  the  business  transactions
between  lord  or  steward,  on  the  one  side,  and  the  tenants,  on
the  other,  take  place,  and  in  immediate  connection  with  this
centre  of  organisation  stands  the  home  ia.Tm,domitiicum.^*
In  this  large  category  of  estates,  subdivisions  may  also  be
noticed  ;  the  case  of  a  domanial  close  cultivated  entirely  by
labourers  attached  to  it,  leading  its  separate  economic  life,
as  it  were,  and  dra^\^ng  from  its  environment  of  tributary
manses  only  or  chiefly  rents  in  money  and  in  kind,^'^  the
opposite  case  being  that  of  domanial  strips  scattered  among
those  of  the  tenants  and  cultivated  entirely  or  chiefly  by  the
peasantry,  while  the  produce  of  these  strips  is  gathered  for
the  benefit  of  the  lord  :  the  term  characteristic  of  this  varia-
tion is  "  gafolearth."  ^^  The  great  majority  of  instances  is
supphed  by  cases  when  a  separate  home  farm  with  some
servants  and  labourers  attached  to  it  is  supported  by  a
systematic  concentration  of  work  of  different  kinds  to  be
performed  by  the  tenants. ^^

Inland  and  Before  we  proceed  to  the  examination  of  the

Warland  rents  and  services  connected  with  these  demesne

arrangements,  we  must  glance  at  one  fundamental  distinction
which  covers  all  these  various  cases,  namely,  at  the  general
distinction  between  demesne  and  tenant  land,  as  expressed
in  our  sources.  It  is  rendered  in  Old  Enghsh  terminology  by
the  opposition  between  inland  and  warland.  Now,  this  term-
inological observation  leads  up  to  a  curious  complication  in  the
arrangement  itself.  Inland  by  itself  means  directly  the  inner
land — the  central  farm,  and  suggests  as  its  opposition  out-
land,^^  which  is  actually  used,  though  seldom,  at  least  in  the
sense  of  tenant  holdings.  Geneatland and  reevdand ^^  appeor
in  its  stead  with  the  very  meaning  required,  and  gesettland  **
alternates  with  geneatland  to  indicate  stocked  holdings,
dependent  tenancies  provided  with  cultivators  and  means
of  cultivation.  Then,  gevered  land  and  warland  appear,
and  there  is  a  considerable  number  of  instances  which  fix
the  meaning  of  these  terms.  Warland,  gevered  land  is  the
land  which  defends  itself  or  defends  some  local  division  in
regard  to  the  requirements  of  the  government,  more  especi-
ally in  regard  to  taxation. Inland  would  on  the  contrary

Q


220  THE GROWTH OF THE MANOR

be  land  freed  from  those  requirements  or  not  directly  sub-
jected to  them,  and  sometimes  this  is  expressed  in  as  many
words /^  Now  this  is  remarkable  : — we  are  led  to  the
conclusion  that  the  brunt  of  taxation  was  borne  by  the
land  of  the  tenants,  while  demesne  farms  were  as  a  rule
exempted  from  it.  Some  qualifying  remarks  have  to  be
added  to  prevent  misconceptions  and  to  meet  certain  pecu-
liarities of  our  information.  When  Norman  terminology
was,  as  it  were,  extended  over  the  EngUsh,  "  demesne  "  did
not  fit  exactly  with  inland.  The  first  term  was  mostly
used  in  a  narrow  sense,  it  did  not  cover  the  whole
portion  belonging  to  the  lord  of  the  manor  personally — as
inland  did — but  only  the  home  farm,  cultivated  for  the  use
of  the  lord  and  excluding  plots  which  may  have  been  leased
on  difierent  conditions  out  of  the  inland.*^  In  some  cases
the  term  "  inland "  was  apphed  to  those  very  leased  or
detached  plots  of  the  lord's  land  which  were  not  included  in
the  demesne — this  seems  to  be  the  narrower  sense  of  inland.*^
But  it  cannot  be  doubted  that  these  niceties  of  distinction
were  occasional,  and  that  broadly  inland  and  demesne  were
two  names  for  the  same  thing  in  the  two  languages  which
were  spoken  in  England  after  the  Norman  Conquest,  the
word  demesne  ascending  in  its  low  Latin  form  of  dominicum
even  to  earlier  Old  Enghsh  times,  when  inland  was  preva-
lent in  English  terminology.  There  is  sufficient  evidence
of  a  system  of  taxation  omitting  the  inland  and  bearing  with
all  its  weight  on  the  dependent  holdings,  but  this  system
could  not  be  kept  up  ;  and  the  demesne  lands  had  to  under-
take part  of  the  habihty,  probably  because  otherwise  the
burden  would  have  proved  quite  incommensurable  to  the
strength  of  the  dependent  population.  To  a  certain  extent,
the  settlement  of  the  wara  was  a  matter  of  private  arrange-
ment between  the  lord  and  his  dependants,  so  that  in  some
cases  he  may  have  taken  over  part  of  the  fiscal  liability  and
required  more  in  the  way  of  rent  and  labour,  and  in  other
cases  levied  lighter  dues  for  his  own  use  and  burdened  the
tenant  holdings  with  aU  the  responsibihty  in  regard  to
fiscal  exactions.**  But  still  the  settlement  of  this  question
was  not  entirely  left  by  the  government  to  private  interests.


MAJ^ORIAL ORIGINS  227

The  tenantry  and  the  demesne  came  to  answer  not  only
jointly  but  also  separately — we  hear  of  requirements  ad-
dressed directly  and  merely  to  the  villains  of  such  and  such  a
lord,  of  defaults  and  breach  of  duty  by  them,  and  the  fact
that  these  cases  are  not  concealed  from  our  view  by  the
guarantee  of  the  lord  shows  that  each  party  had  special  deal-
ings with  the  king's  officers/*  A  reasonable  explanation  of
the  original  exemption  of  inland  may  lie  in  the  idea  that  the
privileged  part  of  the  estate,  the  inland,  was  burdened  in
another  way ;  as  the  particular  endowment  of  the  upper  class
it  had  to  bear  the  primary  responsibility  for  the  work  of
government,  the  professional  miUtary  organisation  and  the
spiritual  care  of  the  Church.*^  This  explanation,  if  accepted,
would  bring  into  stronger  relief  the  decisive  influence  of  the
pohtical  reorganisation  of  the  country  on  an  aristocratic  basis
in  the  course  of  the  Danish  period  and  in  connection  with  the
Danish  wars.  From  the  purely  fiscal  point  of  view  a  great
deal  seems  to  speak  for  such  a  reading  of  the  evidence.  The
geld  was  the  tremendous  burden,  with  which  people  had  to
reckon  in  these  arrangements,  and  the  geld  was  primarily
a  Danegeld  after  all.  There  is  no  likelihood  that  taxation
should  have  been  so  stringent  and  so  burdensome  in  the
earher  times  and  under  the  easier  sway  of  Saxon  and  Ang-
lian kings.  Indeed  the  history  of  all  barbaric  governments
begins  with  a  very  insufficient  organization  in  this  respect,
and  when  taxation  has  to  be  increased  and  becomes  a  corner-
stone of  policy,  a  point  is  reached  which  opens  a  vista  of  an
entirely  new  social  development.  The  hide,  the  land  of  the
household,  becomes  more  a  unit  of  taxation  than  an  agrarian
entity,  and  society  at  large  from  being  a  rather  loose  aggre-
gate of  more  or  less  independent  communities  and  indivi-
duals gets  to  be  arranged  in  view  of  stringent  and  even
crushing  mihtary  and  fiscal  obHgations.

Reverting  to  the  organisation  of  the  estate,  we  have  to
notice  on  its  home  farm  a  number  of  officers,  servants  and
Manorial  labourers,  who  have  to  take  care  of  the  lord's

Officers  interests,  to  perform  the  special  work  of  the

demesne,  supervise  the  services  and  to  exact  the  dues  from
the  peasant  population. We  have  met  them  already  in  the


228  THE  GROWTH  OF  THE  MANOR

character  of  an  executive  staff  in  independent  townships,
and  it  is  not  difficult  to  picture  to  ourself ,  how  their  position
would  be  affected  by  the  tacking  to  it  of  domanial  duties.
We  may  take  the  reeve  as  an  example,  because  we  know
most  about  him  and  there  is  even  a  special  treatise  on  his
office  dating  from  the  eleventh  century."

The  reeve  of  this  treatise,  though  his  office  is  termed
scire,  is  not  the  sheriff,  but,  as  we  can  judge  from  his  attri-
butions, the  steward  of  an  estate.  He  has  to  mind  and  to
direct  all  the  details  of  husbandry,  from  the  repairing  of
buildings  and  the  regulation  of  ploughing  and  harvest
down  to  the  setting  of  mouse -traps.  He  has  constantly
to  mind  his  lord's  interests,  and  to  carry  out  his  commands,
but,  characteristically  enough,  he  is  reminded  no  less  of
the  necessity  of  knowing  and  following  the  custom  of  the
folk,  as  it  is  expressed  and  kept  up  by  wise  men.  Thus
folk -right  has  to  be  combined  in  the  management  of  affairs
with  lord's  craft.  The  details,  the  economic  prescriptions
which  follow  on  the  general  exhortations  of  the  treatise,
embrace  the  routine  of  all  kinds  of  farm  work  :  ploughing,
sowing,  harvesting,  threshing,  manuring,  setting  up  of
hurdles  and  fences,  taking  care  of  cattle,  sheep  and  swine,
repairs  of  dwellings,  stables,  house  furniture  and  agri-
cultural implements,  etc.  The  supervision  of  the  different
services  performed  by  the  peasantry  is  not  expressly  men-
tioned, but  self- understood,  though  we  cannot  say  with
certainty  in  what  way  the  officers  employed  on  the  estate,
the  ivicneras*^  divided  the  different  tasks  between  them-
selves. Altogether  it  seems  clear  that  whenever  there  had
arisen  a  powerful  central  organisation,  one  of  the  regular
manors,  as  mentioned  in  Domesday,  the  life  and  the  work
of  the  peasantry  attached  to  it  came  to  depend  a  good  deal
on  the  views  and  habits  of  the  steward  of  the  estate.  At
the  same  time  we  must  not  lose  sight  of  the  facts  that
even  in  such  regular  or  average  manors  defending  them-
selves for  five  or  for  ten  hides,  the  usual  arrangement  of
husbandry  and  dues  was  not  a  matter  of  caprice  and
arbitrary  disposition,  but  very  much  the  outcome  of  popular
custom. And, secondly, it should  be  remembered,  that


MANORIAL  ORIGINS  229

there  are  innumerable  instances  when  the  manor  is  yet
rather  a  name  and  a  beginning  than  a  complete  arrange-
ment, and  that  in  these  cases  rural  affairs  must  have  been
regulated  by  agreements  and  meetings  between  parties  of
approximately  equal  strength  and  had  to  follow  in  ttie  time-
honoured  grooves  of  township  practice.  In  these  cases
we  cannot  find  a  proper  basis  for  the  display  of  such  craft
as  is  described  and  recommended  by  the  eleventh  century
treatise,  and  we  must  assume  that  the  gerefa  was  still
mainly  an  elective  local  officer,  a  headman,  possibly
dependant  on  the  landrica  of  the  district,  but  hardly  to
be  considered  merely  as  his  personal  steward.

Another important feature of the demesne orgam'sa-
tion  is  the  presence  of  a  certain  number  of  labourers  Hving

,  ^  on  the  home  farms  or  in  crofts  attached  to  it,

Labourers  on

the  Domain  and  forming,  as  it  were,  the  kernel  of  the  cul-
tivation of  that  part  of  the  estate  which  was
reserved  for  the  needs  of  the  lord.  There  can  be  no  doubt
that  these  labourers  were  mainly  slaves  to  begin  with,  and,
as  we  have  seen,  in  the  Old  English  charters  which  mention
the  stocking  of  estates  such  slaves  appear  by  the  side  of
the  oxen  and  the  outfit  in  seed.  Sometimes,  as  in  the  case
of  Selsea,''^  their  numbers  were  considerable,  But  in  course
of  time  a  number  of  free  people  appear  as  workmen  on  the
estates,  and  we  get  glimpses  of  a  resident  population  of  such
"  boor-bom  "  labourers  dwelling  on  the  land  of  great  lords
in  a  kind  of  hereditary  dependence.^"  Although  there  does
not  arise  a  special  legal  status  of  servitude  of  the  glebe
in  connection  with  such  arrangements,  a  current  of  economic
development  is  disclosed  which  leads  to  the  establishment
of  a  condition  very  similar  to  such  servitude  from  a  matter
of  fact  point  of  view.  There  was  plenty  of  material  for
the  formation  of  this  group  of  "  boor -born  "  labourers
among  the  numerous  "broken,  kin -shattered  "  men  who
were  constantly  thrown  out  of  the  ranks  of  society  by  war,
disaster  and  crimes,  and  indeed  the  documents  mention
expressly  "wite  theowas,"  as  one  of  the  elements  of  the
class.  Besides,  we  may  assume  that  the  increase  of  popu-
lation rendered it necessary for a  good  many younger


230  THE  GROWTH  OF  THE  MANOR

brothers  and  descendants  of  younger  brothers  to  seek
settlement  and  employment  on  the  land  of  well-to-do
neighbours.

The  rise  of  this  class  of  labourers  may  account  to  a
certain  extent  for  the  decrease  and  decay  of  slavery  and
pure  serfdom  on  the  estates.  As  the  wants  of  demesne
farms  in  respect  of  labourers  directly  managed  by  the
stewards  came  to  be  provided  for  by  the  "  boor  "  class,
there  was  less  call  for  the  employment  of  downright  slaves,
and  the  intermediate  status  of  economic  serfdom  with  some
Christian  and  legal  personality  recognised  in  the  labourer,
gained  ground  in  the  manorial  arrangement.  One  of
the  advantages  of  this  way  of  providing  workmen  for
the  demesne  consisted  in  the  fact  that  the  owner  of  the
estate  could  pay  some  of  the  men  employed  by  granting
them  plots  for  their  own  use  free  of  charge. ^^  As  there
was  more  land  than  money  or  provisions,  this  seemed  a
convenient  mode  of  hiring  labourers.  The  practice  spread
from  the  free  workmen  to  slaves,  and  we  often  hear  of
manumissions  accompanied  by  the  surrender  of  farms  for
the  use  of  manorial  workmen.®^

One  of  the  conditions  of  the  process  described  was  that
manorial  husbandry  could  draw  on  the  resources  of  depend-
ent holdings,  and  that  the  "  hall  "  became  the
economic  centre  around  which  virgates,  bovates
and  cottages  of  tributary  peasants  were  grouped,  as  satel-
lites around  a  central  planet.

Rentpaying  tenancies  are  exceptional  at  this  time.
Agreements  were  made  sometimes  about  "  loans  "  (laen)
of  land  to  people  of  some  position  "  on  the  basis  of  money
rents  ^^  and  censores,''^  ^*  rentpaying  peasants  are  men-
tioned sometimes,  but  these  practices  were  unusual  at  a
time  when  money  was  not  easily  procurable  and  such
as  there  was  flowed  into  the  royal  treasury  to  meet  the
requirements  of  the  war  establishment  and  of  heavy  pay-
ments to  the  Danes.  As  it  has  been  pointed  out  several
times,  and  from  different  points  of  view,  the  gafol  land  of
this  period  is  the  warland,  the  land  answerable  for  the
King's  gafol  and  the  geld.^® Of  course,  this  implied  a  dis-


I


MANORIAL ORIGINS  231

tribution  of  this  rent  between  the  townships,  manors  and
holdings,  and  probably  the  absorption  of  a  good  deal  in
the  way  of  money  by  the  intermediate  instances.  But
the  Old  English  period  is  still  pre-eminently  one  of  natural
husbandry,  and  it  is  to  the  incidents  of  such  husbandry
that  we  have  chiefly  to  look  in  order  to  explain  its  working.
Rents  in  kind  were  common  enough,  and  any  one  of  the
numerous  statements  as  to  the  collection  of  a  "  feorm  '*
tells  us  about  the  quantities  of  bread,  butter,  cheese,  eggs,
bacon,  fish,  honey  and  ale,  which  the  tributary  holding
had  to  send  in.'*  A  negative  point  to  be  considered  is,
that  cultivation  by  farmers  on  the  principle  of  sharing  the
produce  with  the  lord  is  never  mentioned — a  curious  con-
trast with  the  methods  of  Roman  landlords.  Produce  in
kind  is  estimated  in  fixed  quantities  and  not  in  shares  of
the  harvest.

The  most  striking  feature  of  the  manorial  system,  as  it
begins  to  form  itself,  is  the  concentration  of  tributary
services,  of  work  performed  by  the  villager  for
the  profit  of  the  lord.  Sometimes  the  special
obligations  are  not  expressly  described,  and  it  may  be  stated
that  two  or  three  days  per  week  are  required  for  such  work
as  may  be  wanted  and  ordered  by  the  steward.  But
customs  are  rapidly  forming  themselves  in  regard  to  the
quantity  and  the  quality  of  the  services  imposed  on  the
holdings,  and  in  their  aggregate  these  customs  cover  all
varieties  of  rural  work.

The  best  way  to  get  an  insight  into  the  organisation  of  an
Old  English  manor,  and  to  form  an  estimate  of  the  part
The  Manor  of  pl^J^^  by  the  different  classes  of  its  popula-
the  Rectitu-  tion,  is  to  analyse  the  description  given  in  the
*'""  so-called "  Rectitudines Singularum  person-

arum,"  and  to  compare  it  with  some  other  Anglo-Saxon
documents,  describing  rural  services  and  dues."  The
"  Rectitudines  "  belong  to  the  later  years  of  the  Old  Eng-
lish period,  and  have  been  drawn  up  presumably  some
time  in  the  eleventh  century,  perhaps  about  1025,  thus
disclosing  arrangements  which  lead  up  directly  to  the  statis-
tical data  of  the  Domesday  Survey  in  its  entries  devoted


232  THE  GROWTH  OF  THE  MANOB

to  Edward  the  Confessor's  time  (T.R.E.).  The  fulness  of
detail  and  the  wide  range  of  social  ranks  embraced  by
the  description  show  that  we  have  to  do  in  this  case  with
a  treatise  for  the  use  of  royal  stewards,  perhaps  of  sheriffs,**®
or  of  the  administration  of  some  bishop  or  secular  magnate.
The  lord  of  the  estates  on  which  the  classes  of  men  enumer-
ated in  the  treatise  are  dwelling  was,  in  any  case,  a  person
of  great  power  and  of  the  highest  standing,  but,  of  course,
the  indications  given  might  apply  in  a  certain  measure  to
manorialised  estates  of  different  size  and  kind.

The  treatise  starts  with  a  characteristic  of  the  thane,
thus  including  tenants  of  military  rank  dependent  on  a  great
lord,  for  the  King,  a  bishop,  or  a  secular  potentate  of  God-
wine's  or  Leofric's  stamp,  had  to  deal  with  many  military
tenants  of  this  kind.  The  thanes  are  supposed  to  hold
bocland  estates, as  a  rule, from  which  the  'Hrinoda  necessitas"
of  the  fyrd,  the  maintenance  of  fastnesses  (burghbote)  and
the  repair  of  bridges  is  still  due  ;  besides  various  forms  of
occasional  guard  duties,  the  keeping  of  fences  in  the  king's
hunts,  etc.  Special  mihtary  service  in  distinction  to  the
iyrd  is  not  mentioned,  and  this  means  that  the  measure  of
the  thane's  services  in  the  fyrd  was  given  by  the  size  of  his
estate  or,  to  put  it  differently,  by  the  number  of  hides  he
possessed.  He  was  called  up  more  often  and  went  in  better
armour  than  the  ordinary  ceorl  because  he  held  five  hides
or  more,  while  the  ceorl  had  one  or  less.

Next  comes  a  class  to  which  the  term  geneat  is  applied  in
the  Enghsh  original.  The  chief  incidents  of  its  tenure  are
the  payment  of  rent,  and  riding  services,
The  landgafol  stands  foremost,  and  no  further
distinction  is  drawn  between  tribute  due  to  the  King  as  an
original  tax  (cyninges  gafol,  the  gafol  rendered  from  folc-
land)  and  rents  as  an  outcome  of  private  agreement  or
private  subjection  :  the  tributary  character  of  the  land
(gafol  land)  is  the  one  point  attended  to.*°  Riding  and
carrying  services  and  errands  of  all  kind  are  also  conspicuous,
whereas  agricultural  work  is  only  occasional  and  consists  in
help  during  harvest,  in  mowing  or  reaping.  This  is  charac-
teristic of  a  well-known  class  of  tenants  on  later  estates — the


MANORIAL ORIGINS  233

drengs  and  radmen,  but  many  of  the  so-called  socmen  were
also  performing  services  of  the  same  kind.'"  Indeed,  if  we
are  to  judge  from  the  Latin  translation  which  renders  geneat
by  villains,  and  from  the  analogy  presented  by  the  ceorls
sitting  on  gafol-land,  we  should  say  that  for  those  of  the
twyhyndmen  who  had  been  converted  from  the  status  of
direct  subjection  to  the  King  to  that  of  tribute  paying  depen-
dants of  great  men,  the  geneat  class  of  the  Rectitudines
presents  the  most  natural  position.

Then  come  cottagers  (c-otsetle)  holding  plots  of  about  five
acres  each,  while  the  geneats  were  evidently  assumed  to
hold  ordinary  shares  on  the  plough  team  standard.  It  is
pointedly  noticed  that  the  cottagers  do  not  pay  land  gafol,
and  this  exemption  once  more  substantiates  the  intimate
connection  between  the  rent  and  the  normal  holdings  in
the  fields.  On  the  other  hand  weekwork  appears  as  a
feature  of  the  cottager's  condition.  They  have  to  work  one
day  in  the  week  for  their  small  tenements.  They  are  ex-
pressly stated  to  be  personally  free.

In  the  case  of  the  geburs  the  weekwork  gets  to  be  the
characteristic  trait  of  the  tenure. ^i  They  are,  as  a  rule,
peasants  possessed  of  yardlands,  and  the  outfit
of  their  yardlands  is  provided  for  them  by  the
lord.  It  consists  of  two  oxen,  i.e.  the  fourth  part  of  a
ploughteam,  one  cow,  six  sheep  and  seven  acres  of  sown
land.  This  last  seems  to  imply  that  a  case  of  cultivation  on
the  three-field  system  had  been  taken  as  a  pattern,  and
that  seven  acres  out  of  the  ten  which  would  come  under
winter  seed  in  a  virgate  of  thirty  acres  have  been  provided
with  seed  by  the  landowner,®^  w^hile  the  remaining  three  acres
represent  the  usual  "  gafolearth."  It  is  recommended
to  give  such  a  peasant  provided  with  land  by  the  lord,  a
horse  in  addition  to  the  ordinary  outfit  of  his  land,  but  this
was  evidently  a  recommendation  which  could  not  be  carried
out  in  all  cases,^^  whereas  it  was  one  of  the  chief  traits  in
the  condition  of  the  geneat  to  be  able  to  ride  and  to  drive.
The  peasant  in  the  condition  marked  off  by  the  term  gehur,
was  actually  a  colonus  who  had  brought  his  personal  strength
and  labour  on  the  land  and  had  received  his  outfit  as  well


234  THE  GROWTH  OF  THE  MANOR

as  holding  and  dwelling  from  the  lord.  After  his  death  the
property  found  on  the  holding  had  in  strict  law  to  go  back
to  the  lord  which  had  lent  the  outfit.  Still  there  could  be
some  "  free  "  property  along  with  the  stock  provided  by
the  landlord  and  this  did  not  fall  under  the  rule  of  resump-
tion after  the  death  of  the  tenant :  this  point  shows  that  the
precarious  and  burdensome  condition  of  the  gehur  is  to  be
explained  mainly  by  his  economic  dependence  on  the  land-
lord as  a  rural  capitalist,  and  that  even  this  overburdened
class  has  not  lost  all  vestiges  of  a  status  of  personal
freedom.

The  work  which  is  to  be  performed  in  consideration  of
the  farm  is  heavy  and  begins  to  assume  the  shape  of  the
ordinary  servhces  of  villains  as  described  in  later  surveys.
The  main  obhgation  is  the  "  weekwork,"  the  performance
of  labour  on  the  domain  of  the  lord  and  at  the  bidding  of
his  stewards  during  some  days  in  the  week.^*  The  chief
example  of  the  Rectitudines  "  is  taken  from  a  case  where
the  gebtir  has  to  work  two  days  in  the  week  for  most  part
of  the  year  and  three  days  during  the  spring  and  the  harvest
season.  The  choice  of  the  kind  of  work  to  be  done  is  left
to  the  steward.  Besides,  the  gebur  has  to  do  additional
ploughing  work  of  different  kinds — to  plough  one  acre  a
week  in  the  autumn,  three  acres  as  "  gafolearth,"  providing
the  seed  for  those  from  his  own  barn,  three  acres  as  "  ben-
earth,"  and  two  as  payment  for  making  hay.^"

It  may  be  said,  that  the  condition  of  the  Old  English
gebiir,  as  described  by  the  "  Rectitudines,"  compares  favour-
ably with  the  status  of  later  villains.  There
o*evofuti'on'^*  ^^  ^^  particular  no  trace  of  a  progression  from
an  unlimited  amount  of  work  to  a  restricted
amount.  It  is  clear  in  regard  to  the  gehurs  that  the  expres-
sion to  do  work  "  as  they  are  bid  "  refers  primarily  to  the
possibility  for  the  stewards  to  select  one  kind  of  service
instead  of  the  other,  the  number  of  work-days  remaining
fixed  nevertheless.  And  in  the  test  case  of  the  "  Rectitudines"
this  number  does  not  exceed  two  or  three  days  in  the  week,
while  later  on  it  was  sometimes  extended  to  four  or  five,
and  three  was  considered  as  quite  the  minimum. There


MANORIAL ORIGINS  235

WSLS  undoubtedly,  a  great  number  of  additional  duties,  but
these  also  did  not  get  less  on  later  manors.

The  clue  to  an  explanation  of  this  gradual  increase  in
lithe  burdens  of  the  peasantry  seems  to  lie  in  the  fact
that  the  class  from  which  villainage  arose  was  evidently
drawn  to  a  great  extent  from  an  originally  free  population.
If  we  were  right  in  assuming  that  old  English  society  was
not  a  slaveholding  society  in  its  main  composition  and  in
the  arrangement  of  its  labour,  the  line  taken  by  social
evolution  lay  chiefly  in  the  direction  of  a  spread  of  labour-
discipline  and  subjection  over  a  class  of  free  tribesmen,  as
their  means  of  sustenance  grew  smaller,  while  military  and
fiscal  requirements  became  heavier.  And  it  is  obvious  that
such  a  process  entailed  a  gradual  increase  of  burdens.

On  the  whole  we  are,  perhaps,  warranted  to  conclude,
firstly,  that  the  manorial  system  arises  at  the  end  of  the  Old
English  period  mainly  in  consequence  of  the  subjection  of
a  labouring  population  of  free  descent  to  a  military  and
capitalistic  class,  and,  secondly,  that  the  personal  authority
of  the  lord  of  the  manor  is  gradually  gaining  the  mastery  )
over  a  rural  community  of  ancient  and  independent  growth.


BOOK n
NOTES  TO CHAPTER I

1.  Celtic  names  seem  to  have  mostly  survived  in  the  greater,
eastern  half  of  England  ia  the  case  of  rivers  (Thames,  Usk,  Avon,
His,  etc.),  and  in  a  few  instances  of  ancient  town  centres,  like  London
itself.  There  are  also  many  traces  of  Welsh  nomenclatm-e  in  the
names  of  the  hundreds  in  Worcestershire,  Sliropshire,  Herefordshire,
Somersetshire,  etc.  Roman  traces  are  chiefly  visible  in  cesters  and
streets  (strata).  The  overwhelming  majority  of  names  of  settle-
ments is  Old  English.  W.  H.  Stevenson,  "  Engl.  Hist.  Rev.,"  iv.
(18S9),  356  S.

2.  Bede,  i. 15.

3.  Green,  "The  Making  of  England"  (edition  of  1900),  i  161,
162.

4.  Cf.  my  "  Roman  Law  in  Mediaeval  Europe," 1909.

4a.  Stubbs,  "  Constitutional  History  "  (Libr.  edition),  i.  11,  12,
Maitland,  "  Domesday  and  Beyond,"  222,  232,  327,  337.  I  need
hardly  mention  that  Freeman  was  an  ardent,  probably  too  ardent
an advocate of Teutonic influence in English history.

5.  In  this  sense  I  cannot  but  endorse  the  remarks  of  Mr.  Haver-
field  in  the  Antiquary  for  1897,  although  I  differ  from  him  as  to
the  previous  influence  of  Roman  civilisation,  and  plead  for  a
greater  affinity  and  continuity  between  Celtic  and  Teutonic  life  in
the  island.

6.  It  may  be  said  that  the  condition  of  North-eastern  England,
as  described  in  Domesday,  represents  a  more  primitive  formation
than  that  of  South-western  England.  This  enables  us  to  a  certain
extent  to  use  the  first  in  order  to  reconstruct  the  history  of  the
latter. Cf.  my  "  EngUsh  Society  in  the  Eleventh  Century,"  1908.

7.  I  have  treated  of  the  gradations  of  rank  in  the  continental
laws  of  the  tribes  in  an  article  on  "  Wergeld  und  Stand,"  in  the
"  Zeitschrift  der  Savignystiftung  fiir  Rechtsgeschichte,"  Germ.
Abth.  xxui.

8.  iEthelberht,  13,  14,  15.

9.  Hlothere  and  Eadric,  1,  3.  I  am  tmable  to  agree  with
SeebohirCs  explanation  of  these  texts.  ("  Tribal  Custom  in  Anglo-
Saxon  Law,"  468  ff.  and  462  ff.)  See  my  review  of  "  Tribal  Cus-
tom," in  the  "  Vierteljahrsschrift  fiir  Social-  vmd  Wirthschafts-
geschichte,"  i.  137.  Compare  Dr.  Liebermann's  rendering  of  the
passages in question in his edition of the Anglo-Saxon laws.

236


NOTES  237

Maurer,  "  Angelsachsische  Rechtsverhiiltnisse,  Kritische  Ueber-
hau,"  1853,  p.  60,  thought  that  the  payment  mentioned  by  the
kws  applied  to  the  half  of  the  wergeld  which  had  to  be  paid  by  the
iirderer  himself,  the  half  for  which  the  kindred  was  responsible
t  being  mentioned.  Haddan  and  Stubhs  translate  medume  by
half."  But  these  attempts  seem  to  have  been  prompted  by  the
wish  to  bring  up  the  Kentisii  common  wergeld  to  a  sum  of  200
shillings  in  order  to  make  it  correspond  to  the  West  Saxon  and
Mercian  payments.  This  consideration  falls  to  the  ground,  how-
ever, if  we  accept  Seebohm's  theory  that  the  Kentish  wergelds
were  reckoned  in  gold  and  the  West  Saxon  in  silver.

10.  There  would  be  the  fundamental  difference,  however,  that
the  Frankish  fine  is  a  fraction  of  the  whole  wergeld,  and  therefore
increases  and  diminishes  with  it,  while  the  Old  English  king's
fine  seems  to  have  been  constant.  The  svmi  itself,  160  solidi,  re-
minds one  of  the  Gothic  and  Burgundian  wergelds.

11.  .Dtheberht,  75;  27.  The  "medume"  leodgeld,  the  medivmi
or  average  wergeld,  seems  to  point  to  the  possibility  of  different
estimates  in  regard  to  ceorls.

12.  L.  Alamayxnorum,  "  Pactus,"  ii.  39  ; iii.  27. Liutprand,  62.

13.  Seebohm  draws  a  distinction  between  the  ceorl  and  the  free-
man. "Tribal  Custom," 483.

14.  Wergeld  imd  Stand,  178  ff.

15.  .Ethelberht,  26.

16.  Alfred,  4.

17.  Alfred,  35,  25,  etc.

18.  Alfred,  11,  77  ;  comp.  Ine,  35.  It  is  noteworthy  that  Ead-
ward  and  Guthrum,  7,  1,  use  frigman  in  opposition  to  theowman.

19.  Ine,  45,  30  ;  63  ; Alfred,  10,  18,  29,  39.

20.  Seebohm,  "  Tribal  Custom,"  361  ff.  His  observations  as  to
the  differences  between  the  currencies,  on  the  one  hand,  and  the  sums
of  wergelds  and  fines  on  the  other,  are  very  instructive,  but  his
attempt  to  draw  an  exact  equation  between  the  Kentish  ceorl  and
the  West  Saxon  twelvehjmdman  is  based  on  a  misconception,
as  it  seems  to  me.  The  very  passage  of  the  Leges  Henrici  I.  76,
which  notices  the  provincial  varieties  of  wergelds,  speaks  of  Kentish
viUani,  and  contrasts  them  with  the  barones.  There  is  no  reason
why  the  sums  should  coincide,  and  the  fiction  of  a  coincidence  is
merely  produced  by  a  strained  interpretation  of  the  texts  as  to
Kentish  wergelds  which  raises  that  of  a  common  freeman  to  200
shillings  in  gold.

21.  Seebohm,  "Tribal  Custom,"  397.

22.  Ine,  51,  draws  a  distinction  hetween  the  gesi^Jctindman  ktnd-
agende  paying  120  shillings  for  non-attendance  at  the  fyrd,  and
the  unlandagende,  who  gets  fined  with  60  shillings,  exactly  half
the  first ;  in  both  cases,  the  fines  are  one-tenth  of  the  wergeld.
The  landowner  loses  his  land  besides. Comp.  Ine,  35. There  can

i


238  THE  GROWTH  OF  THE  MANOR

be  hardly  a  doubt  that  twelvehyndmen  and  sixhyndmen  are  meant.
GresiSs  not  owning  land  might  exist  in  many  different  positions,
as  minor  followers  of  the  King,  who  had  not  been  endowed  with
land  ;  as  followers  of  high  thanes,  as  members  of  the  family  of  a
landowning  theme.  The  fragments  of  customary  laws  treating  of
the  "  thriving  "  to  higher  rank,  make  a  distinction  between  men
of  gesiScund  blood  and  actual  thanes.

23.  Ine,  32,  33,  etc. Comp.  Schmid's  "Glossar"  v.  Wealh.

24.  Ine,  63.

25.  Pollock  and  Maitland,  "  Hist,  of  Eng.  Law,"  i.  6,

26.  The  obligations  of  the  geneat,  the  follower,  towards  the  lord
are  stated  with  some  exaggeration  and  a  scriptural  tinge  in  Eadgar,
iv,  1,  1.

27.  This  seems  to  be  the  meaning  of  the  oft  quoted  text  as  to
the  thriving  of  a  ceorl  to  the  dignity  of  a  King's  thane  ;  "  and  gif
ceorl  ge]?eah  )>8et  he  hasfde  fullice  fif  hida  agenes  landes,  cirican  and
kycenan,  bellhus  und  burhgeat,  setl  and  sundernote  on  kjmges
healle,  ]?onne  waes  he  ]?ononfortS  ]?egenes  rihtes  weortSe."  (As  to  the
meaning  of  the  terms  burhgeat  and  setl,  Stevenson  in  "  Engl.  Hist.
Rev."  1897,  p.  489.)  The  version  in  the  North  People's  law  is  more
explicit  in  some  respects  :  9.  And  gif  ceorlisc  man  ge]?eo  J>8et  he
haebbe  5  hida  landes  to  cynges  utware  and  hine  man  ofslea,  forgUde
man  hine  mid  'Swam  Jpusend  )7rimsa.  10.  And  Jpeah  he  ge)?eo  Jpset  he
hsebbe  helm  and  byrnan  and  golde  faeted  sweord,  gif  Tie  ]?3et  land
nafad'  he  bi6  ceorl  swa  ]?eah.  11.  And  gif  his  sunu  and  his  sunu-
sunu  ]>set  geJ?eo'S  ]?8et  hi  siva  micel  landes  habban  bi'S  se  ofsprinc
gesi^cundes  cynnes  be  twam  Jjusendimi.  The  stress  lies  clearly
on  the  possession  of  5  hides  of  land,  though  Seebohm  has  tried  to
construe  these  paragraphs  to  mean  that  a  ceorl  had  no  full  kindred,
and  that  therefore  only  in  the  third  generation  would  his  de-
scendants become  thanes. "  Tribal  Custom,"  363,  369,  412.

28.  North  People's  ranks,  Liebermann,  i.  460.  And  gif  Wilisc
man  geJ?eo  ]?at  he  haebbe  hiwisc  landes  (another  version :  ]?at  he
hyred  and  eht  age)  and  maege  cyninges  gafol  for^bringan,  ))onne
big  his  wergeld  120  scill.  And  gif  he  ne  ge]?eo  buton  to  healfre
hide,  Jponne  si  his  wer  180  scill.  And  gif  he  aenig  land  naebbe  and
]?eah  freoh  sy,  forgUde  hine  man  mid  70  scill.  Cf.  Ine,  32  :  gif
Wylisc  mon  haebbe  hide  landes,  his  wer  biS  120  sciU.,  gif  he  ]?onne
haebbe  healfe  80  scill.,  gif  he  naenig  haebbe  60  scUl.

29.  Ine,  23:  Wealh  gafolgelda  120  scill.,  his  sunu  100.  The
position  of  gafolgelders  is  extended  to  English  geburs,  which  in  these
cases  appear  as  equivalent  to  ceorls,  by  Ine,  6  :  gif  hwa  on  ealdorman-
nes  hus  gef eoht  ojjjie  on  o'Sres  getJungenes  witan  60  sciU.  gebete  he
and  o6er  60  geselle  to  wite.  Gif  he  Iponne  on  gaf olgeldan  huse  o)?J?e
on  gebures  gefeohte  120  scUl.  to  wite  geselle  and  faem  gebure  6  sciQ.
It  is  not  quite  clear  why  the  wite  should  be  twofold  in  the  latter
case,  but  the  contrast  between  the  witan  in  high  authority  and


NOTES  239

the  geburs  and  gafolgelders  is  marked  and  supposes  an  exhaustive
classification  of  the  folk  ranging  the  twyhyndmen  or  ceorls  under
the  second  heading  as  people  who  had  to  till  the  land  (gebur  —
colonus)  and  to  pay  tax.  The  gafolgelder  would  be  the  English
for  tributarius,  which  we  see  so  often  mentioned  in  the  land  books,
and  which  points  originally  to  a  householder  charged  with  public
and  not  with  private  tribute,  with  cyninges  gafol  and  not  with
rcedegafol.

30.  The  5  hides  held  to  the  King's  utwaru  are,  as  we  shall  see
later  on,  taken  as  tributary  units  in  opposition  to  real  agrarian
meeisures.  It  would  be  tempting  to  take  the  King's  utwaru  as  a
miUtary  obhgation,  and  it  has  been  taken  in  this  sense  (e.g.,  by
Liebermann),  but  the  term  seems  clearly  connected  with  wara  and
gevered. It  corresponds  to  the  gafol  of  the  ceorls.

31.  Ine,  64  :  Se  ye  haefS  20  hida  se  sceal  taecnan  12  hida  gesettes
landes  ]?onne  he  faran  wiUe.  Cp.  65,  66.  Ine,  68,  provides  for
the  case  of  a  gesiScvmdman  being  driven  off  from  his  holding.
It  enacts  that  he  is  to  lose  his  botl,  his  dwelling,  but  not  his  setene.
This  last  expression  has  given  rise  to  many  comments.  Prof.
Maitland,  for  example,  thinks  that  the  personal  relations  which
the  gesiS  had  organised  around  him  were  to  remain  undisturbed.
But  if  this  had  been  so,  the  driving  off  would  amount  to  very  Uttle.
I  am  incUned  to  interpret  the  setene  of  tliis  paragraph  as  the  out-
fit, the  capital  of  the  gesiS  himself.  He  was,  after  all,  "  settled  "
by  the  King  quite  as  much  as  his  tenants  were  settled  by  him,  and
he  either  was  provided  with  an  outfit  by  the  King  or  brought  it
of  his  own  ;  in  both  cases  it  was  fair  that  it  should  be  guaranteed
to  him.

32.  Ine,  67 :  gif  mon  gepinga^  gyrde  landes  o\>ye  mere  to  rcede-
gafole  and  geere^,  gif  se  hlaford  him  wall  ]73et  land  arseran  to  weorce
and  to  gafole,  ne  J>arf  he  him  onfon,  gif  he  him  nan  botl  ne  selS,
and  J>olie  Jjara  secra.  The  thane  is  menaced  with  the  loss  of
his  authority  over  the  land  if  he  subverts  the  conditions  which
have  been  agreed  upon  with  the  peasant  farming  the  land  or  settled
on  the  land.

33.  Seebohm,  "Village  Community," 139.

34.  Bede's  letter  to  Archbishop  Egbert  of  York,  c.  11  :  quod
enim  turpe  est  dicere,  tot  sub  nomine  monasteriorum  loca  hi,  qui
monachicae  vitae  prorsus  sunt  expertes,  in  suam  dicionem  acce-
pervmt  .  .  .  ut  omnino  desit  locvis,  ubi  filii  nobilivim  aut  emeri-
torum  mHitum  possessionem  accipere  possunt.

35.  The  conversion  of  pubhc  tributarii  or  gafolgelders  into  hoxise-
holders  dependent  on  the  Churches  is  what  the  land  books  generally
tell  us  about.  Private  gafol  sprang  in  those  cases  from  public
tribute,  either  through  being  surrendered  by  the  kings  to  the
use  of  the  monasteries  and  of  sees,  or  by  growing  gradually  as  an


240  THE GROWTH OP THE MAlfOR

addition  to  the  original  public  biirden.  It  is  doubtful  whether
the  fundamental  change  in  the  condition  of  gafolgelders  was  rightly-
realised  in  the  begummg,  either  by  them  or  by  the  government
which  gave  them  away,  but  in  coixrse  of  time  it  came  to  mean  a  good
deal.  In  the  light  of  these  ecclesiastical  donations,  the  assignment
of  hides  to  secular  thanes  mentioned  in  the  enactments  of  Ine
almost  looks  hke  the  institution  of  hlafords  over  districts  rated  at
a  certain  number  of  hides  :  these  hlafords  were  answerable  for
a  certain  proportion  of  actual  settlers  on  the  land  they  had  re-
ceived ;  and  there  is  nothing  to  show  that  only  new  colonists
were  meant :  customary  gafolgelders  must  have  made  up  a  good
part  of  the  people  with  whom  the  hides  were  "  settled."  The
colonists  attracted  by  agreement,  by  rcBde-gafol,  in  contrast  to
cyninges  gafol,  appear  as  an  important  adjunct.  Comp.  Maitland,
"  Domesday  and  Beyond,"  232.

36.  Seebohm  has  repeatedly  tried  to  show  that  the  typical  ceorl
of  Alfred,  and  even  of  Ine's  time,  was  a  gafolgelder  (for  example,
"  Tribal  Custom,"  355,  373,  395),  and  I  should  have  nothing  to  say
against  it  if  gafolgelder  were  taken  as  the  trihutarius,  the  ceorl  house-
holder, rated  at  a  hide  for  public  obligations,  and  in  many  cases
surrendered  to  a  monastery  or  to  a  thane.  But  the  aim  of
Seebohm' s  explanation  is  different  ;  it  woiild  entirely  dispose  of
the  "  masterly  independence "  of  small  landowners  and  reduce
them  to  the  position  of  private  tenants  on  great  men's  land,  and
for  this  there  is  no  warrant  in  the  evidence,  and  no  likelihood  in
the  general  course  of  development.  The  ceorl  or  twyhyndman  is
stm  and  very  distinctly  the  small  freeman  of  Alfred's  laws,  I
should  like  in  this  connection  to  adduce  two  significant  passages
from  ^thelred's  laws,  vii,  2,  4  :  Si  quis  ieiunium  sutmi  infringat,
servus  corio  suo  componat,  liber  pauper  reddat  30  denarios  et  tainus
regis  120  solidos,  et  dividatur  haec  peciinia  pauperibus.  In  viii.  3,
there  is  an  English  rendering  of  the  terms  :  hunda  mid  30  pen.,
frsel  med  his  hide,  )?egn  mid  30  scUl.  Whatever  the  exact  sums  may
have  been,  and  notwithstanding  the  extraordinary  increase  of  the
fine  in  the  case  of  the  higher  order,  the  social  contrast  is  clearly  pre-
sented, and  the  hunda,  evidently  drawn  from  the  Norse  bonde,  is
valuable  as  an  indication  of  the  status  of  a  peasant  householder.

37.  As  to  the  tremendous  burden  of  the  Danegeld  and  its  influence
on  the  history  of  English  social  distinctions,  see  Maitland,  "  Domes-
day and  Beyond,"  4.

38.  "  North  People's  law,"  Schmid,  "  App."  ch.  2.  Comp.  Seebohm,
"  Tribal  Custom,"  363,  who,  however,  does  not  take  notice  of
this  preposterous  privilege  of  the  victorious  nation,  and  builds  his
theory  on  a  supposed  exact  parallel  between  Norse  and  English  ranks.

39.  Alfred  and  Guthrum,  2  :  eal  we  laetaS  8  healf  marc  Enghscne
and Denisce  ef en  dj^re,  buton  ]?am  ceorle  ]?e  on  gafol  lande  sit  and


N0TE3  24 1

heora  lyaingon,  f?a  syndon  eac  efen  dyre,  200  scill.  The  ceorl  keeps
his  ancient  wergeld  ;  he  is  still  a  twyhyndman.and  the  fact  of  his  Ijeing
equated  with  a  Danish  lysing  does  not  make  him  more  a  freed-
man,  than  tlie  fact  of  every  Danish  soldier  being  reputed  a  12  hynd-
man  renders  this  soldier  a  great  landowner.  As  for  the  Leges  Henrici.
I.  (i.  70,  6  ;  76),  of  course  their  liber  homo  is  the  thane  and  the
twelvehyndman,  while  the  ceorl  is  termed  villanus,  but  this  is
already  the  well-known  terminology  of  Norman  feudalism.

40.  The  heriot  laws  of  Canute  throw  light  on  the  gi-adations
of  the  official  aristocracy  (Can.  ii.  71).  His  enactment  of  1020
begins  :  Cnut  Cyning  gret  his  arcebiscopas,  his  leodbiscopas,  and
Thurcyl  eorl  and  eaUe  his  eorlaa  and  ealne  his  ]?eodscipe,  twelf-
hynde  and  twyhynde.

41.  Eadmimd, 1.

42.  Tunman  or  tunesman  is  very  rare,  however. — Eadg.  iv.
8,  13  are  the  chief  texts.


NOTES TO CHAPTER II

1.  Leges  Hem-ici,  I.  70,  §§  12,  13,  23,  and  the  fragment  on
marriage,  Schmid,  "  App."  vi.  §7.  In  the  "  History  of  the  English
Law,"  239  ff.  these  passages  are  made  the  starting  point  of  an
analysis  on  the  lines  of  Heusler's  and  Ficker's  theory,  which
dissolves  the  conception  of  the  msegth  as  an  organised  group.

2.  I  have  tried  to  illustrate  the  problems  of  ancient  Teutonic
kinship  from  Norse  law  in  an  article  on  "  Gesclilecht  und  Ver-
wandtschaft  im  Altnorwegischen  Recht,"  in  the  '*  Zeitschrift  fiir
Social  und  Wirthschaftsgeschichte,"  vii.

3.  ^thelstan,  vi.  8,  2  :  Gif  .  .  aenig  maegS  to  ]?an  Strang  sy  and
to  ]?am  mycel  .  .  .  xii  hynde  oS6e  twyhynde,  )7aet  us  xu-es  rihtes
wymen  and  j7one  ]?eof  foren  forstande  (of  the  London  Dooms).  The
Latin  versions  of  iii.  6  and  iv.  3,  render  maegth  by  parentela  and
cognatio.  The  text  (^thelstan,  vi.  8,  2),  is  instructive  in  yet
another  way,  as  showing  that  twyhynd  people  were  supposed  to  form
maegths,  and  occasionally  even  very  strong  maegths.

4.  Amira,  in  Paul's  "  Gnindriss  der  germanischen  Philologie,"
ii.2  \2S  E.  Brunner,  "Deutsche  Rechtsgeschichte,"  110  ff.  The
subject  of  the  mutual  obligations  of  the  members  of  a  kindred  is
treated  in  great  detail  and  with  clearness  in  Amira' s  "  Nordger-
manisches  Obligationsrecht."

5.  On  the  aettleiSing  of  Norwegian  law,  see  Gulathingslov,  58 ;
Frostatliingsl.  ix.  1.  Although  it  was  chiefly  used  as  a  means  of
legitimation  of  children  not  born  in  lawful  wedlock,  there  is  nothing
in  the  archaic ceremony described  to  restrict  it  primarily  to  that

R


242  THE  GROWTH OF  THE MANOR

particular  act.  In  old  Swedish  law  the  "  Aetlejpa  "  applies  chiefly
to  cases  of  introduction  of  freedmen  into  a  kindred.  "  Vest-
gothalag,"  Aiiy>3eT  B.  23  ;  "  Ostgothalag,"  JErfa  B.  20,  25.  As  to
leaving  the  kindred,  see  especially  Lex  Salica,  60,  De  eo  qui  se  de
DarentUla  tollere  viilt.

6.  Genealogiae  holding  land.  L.  Alamannorum,  "  Pactus,"  26.
Brunner,  "  Deutsche  Rechtsgeschichte,"  i.  84  ff.  Pollock  and  Mait-
land,  "  History  of  English  Law,"  ii.  242,  243  ;  Heusler,  "  Institu-
tionen,"  i.  260,  does  not  go  so  far  as  the  "  History  of  English  Law,"
but  ascribes  the  collegiate  character  of  genealogiae  and  farae  to  the
fact  of  their  being  communities  holding  land.

7.  Bseda,  iii.  20,  and  Plummer's  note  to  it,  ii.  174.

8.  Alfred,  41  :  Se  mon  se  Se  bocland  haebbe,  and  him  his
magas  laefden,  ]?onne  setton  we,  J?3et  he  hit  ne  moste  sellan  of  his
mcegburge,  gif  ^ser  bid  gewrit  o66e  gewitnes,  Sset  hit  'Sara  manra
forbod  wsere  Tpe  hit  on  fruman  gestrindon  and  ]?ara  )>e  hit  him
sealdon,  |>aet  he  swa  ne  mote,  and  paet  ]?onne  on  cyninges  and  on
biscopes  gewitnesae  gerecce  beforan  his  msegum.  An  interesting
case  of  a  msegth  claiming  land  is  mentioned  in  a  book  executed
by  Bishop  Werferth  of  Worcester  (872-915).  Thorpe,  "  Diplo-
matarium,"  167 :  Da  sefter  Eastmundes  forSside,  bereafode  seo
maegS  Jpses  Ucan  londes  ge  J?a  gastas  jpara  forSgewitenra  manna,
ge  )?one  bisceop  and  ]7a  cirecean  at  Weogornaceastre.  At  the  Witena-
gemot  at  Saltwich  the  bishop  craved  the  land  on  the  strength
of  the  testament  :  sprgec  ic  on  )?a  magas  mid  fe  erfegewrite,  and
wUnade  me  rihtes.  Da  beweddode  me  EadnoS,  and  Alfred,  and
^Ifstan  )?8et  hio  .  .  .  oSSe  hit  me  ageafon,  otSSe  on  hira  msegSe
]70ne  mon  fundon  Tpe  to  )>am  hade  fenge  and  to  lande.  .  .  .  Da
EadnoS  )7e  ]7set  land  hsefde  gebead  hit  ealre  J?aere  msegSe  hwseSer
hit  aenig  swa  gegan  wolde.  The  Church  had  eventually  to  sixr-
render  the  land  for  a  certain  rent  to  Eadno6,  as  the  representa-
tive of  the  msegth.

9.  The  chief  soTirces  for  a  study  of  these  curious  organisations
which  attracted  Niebuhr's  attention,  are  Neocorus,  "  Chronik  des
Landes  Ditmarschen,  hgg.  von  Dahlmann "  (Kiel.  1827)  ;  for
example,  pp.  206,  575,  619,  etc.  ;  and  Michelsen,  "  Sammlung
altditmarscher  Rechtsquellen "  (Altona,  1842)  ;  for  example,
"  Landrecht  von  1447,"  i.  §7,9,  69,  71,  72,  etc..  Ill,  112,  113,  146,
164, etc. "  Landrecht  von 1539," 81, 92.

10.  The  lawsuit  of  EadnoS's  maegth  with  the  See  of  Worcester
could  not  have  been  carried  out  without  several  meetings.  An
instance  where  common  action  and  decision  was  also  luiavoidable
is  presented  by  ^thelstan,  ii.  2,  cf.  8,  which  obliges  the  maegth  to
find  a  settlement  for  one  of  their  members  who  has  got  no  land,  and
to  provide  him  with  a  lord.  As  it  is  an  obUgation,  and  a  very  cumber-
some one,  the  mention  of  the  maegth,  as  a  body  (Jpaet  mon  beode  Saer
maegtSe,  ]?aet  hi  hine  to  f  olcryhte  gehametten  and  him  hlaf ord  finden


NOTES  243

on  folcgemote)  cannot  be  treated  £i8  vague  talk  about  relations.
The  unity  of  the  maegth  is  personified  in  a  certain  forspreca  in  the
constantly  recurring  and  important  case  of  the  settlement  of  a
marriage  contract  between  two  kindreds.  Schmid,  "  Anhang,"
vi.  1,  6.  Comp.  the  cases  arising  from  guardianship — Hlothere
€md  Eadric,  6  ; Ine,  38.

11.  The  preamble  of  the  Frostathingslov  speaks  of  blood  feuda
waged  between  whole  kindreds  and  producing  great  slaughter
among  the  cliief  men  of  the  kindreds,  quite  apart  from  their  degree
of  relationship  with  the  men  who  had  called  forth  the  feud.  The
Sagas  teU  us  that  a  common  expedient  was  to  pass  over  the  leader-
ship in  a  feud  to  a  chieftain.

12.  Pollock  and  Maitland, "  History  of  English  Law," ii. 243.

13.  Kemhle,  "Saxons  in  England."  Comp.  Green,  "Making  of
England,"  i.  46.

14.  It  has  been  suggested  that  the  place-names  in  ing  may  be
derived  from  the  personal  name  of  the  first  settler  or  of  the  person
to  whom  a  particular  place  was  eissigned  at  the  Conquest.  Steven-
son, "  Engl.  Hist.  Rev."  iv.,  in  a  review  of  Earle's  "  Land  Charters.
This  may  be  so  in  many  cases,  but  the  use  of  the  ing  suffix  for
the  formation  of  names  of  kindreds  and  tribes  is  so  well  estab-
lished and  so  widely  spread  among  Germanic  nations,  that  it
seems  hardly  likely  that  the  English  place-names  which  contain
this  suffix  should  go  back  in  most  cases  to  names  of  single  settlers.
The  Aescings  or  Getings  are  surely  patronymics  in  the  same  sense
as  the  Scyldings  or  Scylfings,  and  in  all  these  cases  the  dominant
idea  seems  to  be  that  a  number  of  persons  are  held  together  by
ascertained  or  supposed  descent  from  a  common  ancestor.  The
place-names  which  appear  as  mere  plurals,  without  the  adjunct  of
ton  or  ham,  are  especially  characteristic.

15.  The  personal  basis  of  the  hiwisc  is  very  clear  in  the
translations  from  Scripture.  For  example.  Exodus  xii.  3.  On  the
other  hand,  it  is  commonly  used  instead  of  hide  and  sometimes  hiw-
scip  appears  in  the  same  sense.  (E.g.  Da  onf6ng  h6o  aenes  hiwscipes
stowe. ) Higid  appears  as  the  fuller  form  of  hid.

16.  The  expression  terra  unius  familiae,  which  alternates  with
hide  and  hiunsc  in  the  Anglo-Saxon  charters  is  not  to  be  found  in  the
same  sense  in  continental  docimnents  ;  and  when  a  special  departure
has  to  be  sought  in  such  cut  and  dried  formulae  as  the  expressions  of
charters,  there  must  be  a  weighty  reason  for  such  a  deviation.  The
usual  mansus  of  continental  documents  must  have  been  deemed
insufficient  to  express  the  meaning  of  the  vernacular  term,  and
nothing  more  adequate  than  terra  familiae  could  be  found.  The
tributaritis  of  English  books  seems  to  me  not  so  much  the
equivalent  of  the  tributarius  of  the  Salic  law  as  a  translation  of
gafolgelda.  The  casatus  was  probably  accepted  as  corresponding
to  the  set  and  gewered  of  Anglo-Saxon  terminology.


244  THE  GROWTH  OF  THE  MANOR

17.  Hired  and  aeht  stand  characteristically  in  the  North  People's
law,  and  hide  in  Ine,  32.  Thus  the  intimate  connexion  of  the
hide  of  land  with  family  and  kindred  is  once  more  illustrated.

18.  As  to  the  means  by  which  the  imity  of  the  holding  might
be  preserved,  we  shall  have  to  speak  further  on.  I  would  only  call
attention  at  present  to  such  cases  of  voluntary  agreement  between
brothers  as  the  one  described  in  King  Alfred's  will.

19.  A  similar  tendency  is  manifested  in  the  customary  niles  as
to  otSal  succession  in  Norway.  Brandt,  "  Forlaesninger  om  Norske
Retshistorie,"  161.  Boden,  "Das  Odal  "  in  "  Zeitschrift  der  Sa-
vignystiftung  fiir  Rechtsgeschichte,"  Germ.  Abth.  xxii.

20.  The  three  well-known  instances  where  folcland  is  expressly
mentioned  are  Edw.  I.  2  ;  C.  D.  281,  and  C.  D.  317.  In  all  three
cases  folcland  is  opposed  to  bocland,  and  two  different  modes  of
holding  land  are  meant  ;  in  fact,  the  two  principal  modes.  This
is  made  clear  by  the  enactment  Edw.  I.  2.  To  these  in-
stances we  may  without  doubt  add  two  charters  of  Cenwulf
of  Mercia's  time  in  regard  to  estates  in  Kent,  described  as  "terrae
sui  propriae  puplicae  juris"  and  as  "  reipuplicae  [jurje  conditionis."
Thorpe,  "  Dipl.,"  57,  58  ;  and  Earle,  "  Landcharters  "  (C.  D.  199),
90.  The  facsimile  of  this  last  charter  has  been  published  in  the
"  Ordnance  Survey  Collection,"  i.  6.  The  terms  of  the  first  help
us  to  supply  almost  with  certainty  a  lacuna  of  three  letters  in  the
second  ;  and  there  can  be  hardly  any  doubt  that  we  get  here  a
Latin  rendering  of  folcland,  namely  terra  reipuhlicae  juris,  a  very
valuable  rendering,  as  it  lays  stress  on  the  main  characteristic  of
folcland — on  its  being  land  held  as  it  were  by  a  public  title,  pro-
ceeding from  the  folc,  under  special  obligations  to  the  State  and
to  the  King.  This  being  so,  we  may  well  suppose  that  in  most
cases,  where  grants  are  mentioned,  the  land,  which  became
bocland,  in  consequence  of  these  grants,  had  been  folcland  before.
In  this  connexion  one  very  remarkable  feature,  illustrated  by  the
deed  of  exchange  of  863  (C.  D.  281),  seems  interesting.  I  mean
the  fact  that  the  same  land,  while  it  is  folcland,  is  subjected  to  multi-
farious duties  in  regard  to  the  liing,  and  is  liberated  from  these
duties  when  it  gets  to  be  bocland.  It  has  already  been  mentioned
that  it  is  impossible  to  construe  most  of  the  early  donations  of  the
Codex  Diplomaticus,  otherwise  than  as  grants  of  superiority  and
profits.  The  point  of  view  which  I  am  trying  to  make  out  in  regard
to  folcland,  as  the  collective  designation  of  the  so-called  family
lands,  which  also  were  tributary  lands,  would  allow  us  to  widen
the  circle  of  our  observations  in  regard  to  folcland.  We  should  have
to  look  for  it  not  only  to  the  three  or  five  cases,  where  the  term  is
expressly  mentioned  or  clearly  translated,  but  to  the  whole  range
of  deeds  telling  of  the  subjection  of  ordinary  holdings,  which  used
to  be  called  ethel  by  the  old  school,  to  the  trinoda  necessitas,  the
King's  gafol,  the  obligations  as  to  Fsestingmen,  Royal  progresses,


NOTES  245

etc.  Wlien  folcland  was  turned  into  b6clnnd,  it  was  very  often
exempted  from  many,  and  in  some  rare  cases  from  all,  such  duties
towsirds  the  Iving,  and  liad  henceforward  to  serve  chiefly  or  entirely
the  Church  or  even  secular  grantees.  The  idea  underlying  these
exemptions  is  well  expressed  by  Bede,  iii.  24 :  Rex  Osuiu,
pro  conlata  sibi  victoria  gratias  Deo  referens  dedit  filiam  suam
Aelfledam,  quae  uixdvun  anni  aetatem  inpleuerat,  perpetua
ei  uirginitate  consecrandam ;  donatis  ins^iper  xii.  possessiun-
Qulis  terrartcm,  in  quibus  ahlato  studio  militiae  terrestria,  ad
exercendam  militiam  caelestem,  supplicandumque  pro  pace  gentia
eius  aeterna,  deuotioni  sedulae  monachorum  locus  facuUatesque  stip-
peteret.  The  Anglo-Saxon  version  has :  "  ]?a  twelf  bocland  him
gefriode  eor^lices  camphades  and  eorSlicre  hernesse  to  bigongenne
y>ora\e  heofonlican  camphad  and  to  munucstownira  gesette,"  etc.
JSJaldorman  Alfred's  will  (C.  D.  317)  discloses  anotlier  import-
ant peculiarity  of  folcland :  it  is  land  subject  to  a  course  of
succession  entirely  different  from  bookland.  Wliereas  the  boo-
lands  are  freely  given  away  by  the  Ealdorman  to  his  wife,
their  daughter  and  some  followers  or  friends,  the  folcland  is  not
included  in  this  testamentary  disposition,  but  has  to  go  by  right
to  a  son  whose  legitimacy  and  right  to  receive  this  part  of
the  inlieritance  is  not  incontestable  and  has  to  be  confirmed
by  the  King.  Should  there  arise  lawful  issue  from  the  legitimate
marriage  of  the  Ealdorman,  aU  other  dispositions  fall  to  the
ground.  The  same  conclusion  as  to  the  special  privileges  of  land
bestowed  by  book  is  supported  by  many  other  facts,  but  Ealdor-
man's  Alfred  will  has  to  be  especially  attended  to,  because  both
terms,  folcland  and  bocland,  occur  in  it.  On  folcland,  see  my
article  in  "  Engl.  Hist.  Rev.,"  1893,  January.  Maitland,  "  Domes-
day and  Beyond,"  244  ff.  Lodge's  paper  in  the  American  Essays  on
Anglo-Saxon  Law,  has  still  value  on  account  of  its  careful  analysis
of  the  charters,  although  some  points  in  it  are  out  of  date.

21.  It  is  hardly  necessary  to  make  special  quotations  as  to  the
constitution  of  bocland,  as  most  of  the  charters  of  our  diplomatic
collections  are  devoted  to  them.  I  will  just  point  out  Th.
"  Dipl.,"  54,  104,  148,  as  instructive  instances.  As  to  the  formu-
laries, their  development  and  significance,  see  especially  Brunner,
"  Zur  Rechtsgeschichte  der  romisch-germanischen  Urkunde,"
and  Maitland,  "  Domesday  and  Beyond."  But  I  should  Uke  to
call  the  attention  of  the  reader  to  some  especially  characteristic
and  important  points.  One  of  the  principles  of  the  Old  English
law  of  real  property  seems  to  have  been,  that  all  individual  pro-
perty as  opposed  to  the  customary  use  of  land  in  family  holdings,
must  have  been  b6cland  instituted  by  a  legislative  act.  This  is
60  much  the  case,  that  all  transactions  regarding  landowner-
ship  are  not  only  sanctioned  and  corroborated  by  books,
but the possession of the original grants or books establishes


246  THE  GROWTH  OF  THE  MANOR

a  presumption  as  to  ownership.  Books  are  given,  withheld,  stolen
and  forged,  in  order  to  establish  such  presumptions.  See,  for
instance,  the  curious  cases,  Th.  478  ;  40,  202,  207.  A  complete
set  of  books  going  up  to  the  original  grant  is,  of  course,  the
best  proof  of  title,  but  even  the  possession  of  one  or  other
link  in  the  chain  is  not  without  value  in  a  suit,  even  apart
from  its  tenor.  From  the  same  point  of  view,  the  legislative
machinery  of  King  and  witan  is  made  to  intervene  in  private
transactions  in  order  to  originate  the  privilege  of  bookland,  or  to
give  it  a  renewed  sanction.  A  bishop  may  be  brought  to  make  a
donation  of  land  to  a  powerful  magnate  from  his  own  land  ;  but
the  King  will  appear  on  the  scene  to  convert  the  land  into  bocland,
and  to  endow  the  owner  with  the  right  "  to  geofene  and  to  syllanne,
aer  daege  and  fefter  dsege,  sibban  o)?]?e  fremdan  J?aer  him  leofost  waere  "
{Th.  "Dipl."  375).  In  a  very  ancient  instance,  Kling  Ine  is  made
to  grant  to  a  monastery  land  which  the  previous  owner  wants  to
convey  to  it  (C.  D.  71  :  ego  Ini  rex  Saxonum  pro  remedio  anime
mee  aliquam  partem  terre  donans  impendo,  id  est  decem  cassatos,
Hengisti  abbati  .  .  .  consentiente  Baldredo  qui  hanc  terranx
donauit  ei  per  petitionem  Sergheris  ;  per  me  donatio  hee  imper-
petuum  sit  confirmata).  At  a  certain  period  the  legislative  char-
acter of  the  creation  of  bocland  is  expressed  in  a  formula  mention-
ing not  only  the  enactment  of  the  King,  but  the  consent  of  the
witan.  For  example,  Th.  "Dipl."  124,  128.  Maitland,  "Domes-
day and  Beyond,"  247.  It  may  be  added  that  under-kings
were  held  to  be  iinable  to  constitute  bocland.  But  the  most
striking  consequence  of  the  construction  of  bocland  as  land  en-
dowed with  express  privilege,  lies  in  the  fact  that  the  King  him-
self, although  the  chief  agent  in  the  creation  of  bocland,  cannot
dispense  with  express  enactments  in  regard  to  his  own  individual
or  private  property.  This  is  already  indicated  by  the  deed  of
exchange  of  863  (C.  D.  281),  in  which  the  bocland  of  the  King
is  turned  into  the  folcland  of  the  King,  and  vice  versa,  which  I
am  inclined  to  interpret  as  an  exchange  of  land  held  by  the  King
as  private  owner  against  land  which  had  been  subjected  to  him
as  sovereign,  with  the  right  of  craving  taxes  and  services  incum-
bent on  that  land.  Instances  of  boclands  held  by  kings,  and  disposed
of  by  them  in  their  capacity  of  private  owners,  are  common,  and
the  most  famous  are,  of  course,  those  in  King  Alfred's  will  {Th.
"Dipl."  487).  But  besides,  we  have  a  whole  group  of  charters  which
tell  us  of  proceedings  instituted  to  create  bocland  for  the  King.
An  excellent  instance  is  afforded  by  Archbishop  ^thelheard's  claims
(a.d.  798)  in  regard  to  Church  property  which  King  Offa  had  appro-
priated :  the  monastery  of  Cocham  is  said  to  have  been  held  all  along
"sine  litteris,"  and  to  have  been  left  toOffa's  heirs  absque  litter  arum
testimonio  ;  but  in  the  case  of  some  other  land,  he,  the  King,  had  taken
care  to  have  it  secured  to  him  and  to  his  heirs  by  book  (quas  scilicet


NOTES  247

terras  ibi  viventi  conscribere  fecit  suisque  horedibus  post  eum).  Th.
•♦Dipl."  42,  C.  D.  258.  is  a  charter  of  ^Ethelwulf  of  847,  booking  to
himself,  by  the  advice  and  leave  of  his  great  men  and  bishops,
20  hides  in  Dorset  as  inlaeritable  property  (cum  consensu  et  licontia
principum  et  episcoporum  meorum  aliquantulam  ruris  partem
viginti  manentium  mihi  in  hereditatem  propriam  describere
jussi).  A  charter  of  Eadward  the  Elder  (between  901-909,  Th.
"  Dip!."  157)  mentions  land  which  has  been  booked  to  the  King  by
!  the  West-Saxon  witan  in  private  inlieritance  (on  ece  erfe),
j  22.  The contrast between the five hides of folcland and the

I  inniunerable  bocland  estates  of  Ealdorman  Alfred  is  characteristic
enough.  Abba's  the  reeve's  will  is  also  interesting,  because  in  his
case  the  bocland  estates  had  probably  been  gathered  chiefly  by  his
own  exertions,  Th.  "Dipl."  469.  On  the  view  that  most  grants  of
bocland  did  away  with  the  direct  connexion  between  ceorls  sitting
on  folcland  and  the  King,  and  created  private  lordships,  the
spread  of  this  class  of  estates  gets  to  be  an  ominous  sign  of  social
transformation.

23.  We  have  to  rely  on  indirect  evidence  in  this  respect  as  a
downright  rule  forbidding  alienation  of  folcland  has  not  come
down  to  us.  Still  the  indirect  evidence  is  not  scarce,  nor,  as  it  seems
to  me,  obscure.  To  begin  with,  there  is  the  usage  of  introducing
relations  as  corroborative  witnesses  giving  their  consent  (Lodge,
"  Essays  on  Anglo-Saxon  Law,"  lays  great  stress  on  this).  Then,
we  find  that  there  is  a  constant  stream  of  feeling  and  custom  running
against  the  power  of  alienating  and  devising  land  out  of  the  kindred,
and  a  large  number  of  ceises  arise  wherever  the  best  established
bocland  rights  of  the  Church  and  of  devisees  are  attacked  by  maegths.
I  will  just  point  to  C.  D.  143,  156,  and  to  Th.  "Dipl."  96-98,  as
examples.  Indeed,  this  popular  opposition  is  so  strong  that  in
Alfred's  time  the  tendency  to  restrict  succession  to  the  kindred,
and  more  especially  to  the  father's  kindred,  gets  formulated  even
in  regard  to  bocland.  It  is  expressed  by  the  King,  with  certain
restrictions,  in  his  wUl,  and,  what  is  more,  it  is  made  the  subject
of  a  special  enactment :  bocland  which  has  been  inherited  from
kinsmen  ought  to  remain  in  the  kindred,  Alfred  41.  Th.  "Dipl."
491.  Brunner  has  rightly  recognised  in  these  bocland  entails
a  reflection  of  the  rules  holding  good  as  to  the  ethel,  that  is,
according  to  our  construction  as  to  folcland.  "  Urkunde,"  192.
Wliat  is  brought  forward  against  this  view  in  the  "  History  of
English  Law,"  does  not  convince  me.  I  fail  to  understand  in  what
way  family  ownership  has  to  bo  taken  as  the  outcome  and  not  the
origin  of  intestacy  ("H.E.L."  ii.  247).  The  same  problems  arise  all
over  Western  Europe,  and  everywhere  we  may  notice  the  gradual
and  awkward  process  of  development  from  family  ownership  to-
wards rights  of  private  ownership  and  power  of  individuals  to
alienate  and  to  devise. Blumenstock  has  devoted  to  this  theme


248  THE  GROWTH  OF  THE  MANOR

in  regard  to  Frankish  law  the  second  book  of  his  work  on  the  "  Ent-
stehiing  des  Immobiliareigenthums."  Cnut  ii.  79,  though  it  appUes
to  the  special  case  of  land  acquired  by  the  characteristic  process
of  paying  the  taxes  which  the  rightful  owner  did  not  pay,  seems
to  indicate  that  by  Cnut's  time  land  in  general  had  come  to  be
devisable  and  capable  of  being  given  and  sold.

24.  "  History  of  English  Law,"  ii.  252.  Bocland  was  sometimes
called  terra  hereditaria,  terra  testamentalis,  and  a  book  might  be
called  a  testamentum,  even  if  it  did  not  contain  any  immediate
disposition  as  to  inlieritance,  C.  D.  90  {Earle,  40),  Thorpe,  "  Dipl."
291.  The  term  erf  eland,  which  occurs  in  a  few  instances  {Th.
"Dipl."  475,  476),  seems  to  correspond  to  terra  hereditario  jure
possessa,  that  is,  to  bocland.

25.  The  action  of  the  Church  is  an  important  "  material "  factor
by  the  side  of  the  "  formal  "  enactments  of  kings  and  legislative
bodies  in  the  creation  of  bocland  and  of  cwiSes.  Maitland,
"  Domesday  and  Beyond,"  242.  The  cwiSe  was  not  boixnd  up
with  any  of  the  formalities  necessary  for  the  creation  of  bocland,
and,  indeed,  it  was  very  much  given  over  to  the  discretion  of  the
representatives  of  the  Chiirch.  A  priest  might  swear  that  a  dying
man  had  bequeathed  some  land  to  the  Church,  and  a  bishop  might
swear  for  more.  Brunner,  "  TJrkunde,"  201  ;  Pollock  and  Mait-
land, "  History  of  English  Law,"  ii.  315.  But  we  have  in  this
matter  a  curious  case  of  conflicting  legal  tendencies.  While  the
Church  strove  for  formless  testamentary  dispositions,  and  carried
her  point  in  many  cases  by  help  of  anathemas  and  by  her  influence
with  the  kings,  and  while  customary  feeling  spoke  strongly  against
the  disinheriting  of  kinsmen,  and  came  forward  as  a  social  force
with  which  even  the  Church  had  to  reckon,  there  was  a  third  line
of  legal  development  which,  as  it  were,  cut  the  two  others  at  angles —
I  mean  the  tendency  to  try  testamentary  dispositions  from  the
point  of  view  of  bocland  right.  From  this  point  of  view  a  man
might  freely  dispose  of  his  land  if  the  power  of  testamentary  dis-
positions had  been  granted  to  him  or  to  his  ancestors  by  book,
not  otherwise.  If  this  was  not  the  case,  or  if  the  case  was  doubtful
or  opposition  in  prospect,  it  was  safer  to  ask  the  Eang  that  one's
will  might  stand,  or  to  beg  him  to  make  one  worthy  of  devisiag
estate  by  will.  Th.  "Dipl."  499,  605,  512,  540,  562,  575.  A  very
full  formiila  in  regard  to  testamentary  disposition  is  given  in  a
charter  of  Edward  the  Confessor.  Th.  "Dipl."  576.  Cf.  PoUoch
and  Maitland,  "  History  of  English  Law,"  ii.  318.

26.  L.  Sal.  de  alodis  :  de  terra  vero  [salica]  nulla  mulieri  here-
ditas  non  pertinebit  sed  ad  virilem  sexum  quot  fratres  fuerint  tota
terra  perteneat.  L.  Rip.  substitutes  hereditas  a  viatica  for  terra
salica.  The  paragraphs  ought  to  be  considered  in  conjunction
with  Edictum  Chilperiei  3,  which  points  to  a  time  when  there  was
no  inheritance  except  the  direct  succession  of  sons,  failing  which


NOTES  249

the  land  reverted  to  the  village  community  (vicini).  The  Thxiringian
law  is  very  explicit  as  to  the  connexion  between  landholding  and
the  use  of  arms,  i.  6  :  ad  quem  hereditas  terrae  ad  eum  et  vestis
bellica,  id  est  lorica,  et  ultio  proximi  et  solutio  leudis  debet  pertinere.
Only  in  case  of  a  failure  of  heirs  male  in  the  sixth  generation,  the
land  may  lapse  from  the  spear  to  the  spindle.

27.  On  the  baugrygr,  see  my  article,  '•  Geschlocht  und  Verwandt-
schaft  im  Altnorwegischen  Recht,"  Zeitsch.  fiir  Social-  und  Wirth-
schaftsg.  vii.  Ficker,  "  Erbenfolge,"  has  started  the  idea  that  there
was  no  archaic  rule  against  women  owning  land,  and  the  "  History
of  Enghsh  Law "  has  adopted  his  theory  in  regard  to  English
legal  antiquities,  ii.  241.  But  Brunner  has,  as  it  seems  to  me,
presented  a  convincing  defence  of  the  common  doctrine  against
these  views.  "  Zum  Erbrecht  der  Weiber,"  in  "  Zeitsclu-ift  der
Savignystiftung  fiir  Rechtsgeschichte,"  Germ.  Abth.  xxi.  For  my
peurt  I  find  it  difficult  to  believe  that  the  exclusion  of  women
from  inheriting  and  holding  land  can  be  the  product  not  of
primitive  conditions  and  of  an  tmdeveloped  state  of  landholding,
but  of  a  gradual  restriction  of  women's  rights.  The  supposed  later
restrictions  would  appear  in  a  very  archaic  guise,  and  with  too
remarkable  a  concordance  among  nations  which  could  not  have
had  any  direct  influence  on  each  otlier.

28.  The  spear  and  spindle  distinction  seems  to  have  been  deeply
engrained  in  Old  English  usage,  to  judge  from  Iving  Alfred's  will.
Th.  491,  492.  Another  variation  of  this  same  view  meets  us  in
the  precedence  given  to  the  father's  over  the  mother's  kindred,
Th.  480-483.  In  course  of  time,  and  chiefly  through  privileged
legislation  in  regard  to  bocland  and  cwiSe,  woman-right  as  to  land  un-
doubtedly obtains  recognition.  See  Thorpe,  "  Dipl."  201,  288,  337,
459,  462,  465,  466,  524,  593.  Women  even  have  part  in  oaths  in
regard  to  land  ownership,  Thorpe,  "Dipl.,"  289.

29.  Compare  the  remarkable  ctistoms  in  regard  to  the  division
of  property  in  the  ancient  Germanic  laws.  The  proper  inlieritance
of  the  woman  is  her  gerade  (Gerath),  the  household  furniture.  Norse
law  puts  women  back  in  regard  to  land  inheritance,  and  points  to
"  loose  money,"  losa  ore,  as  a  natural outfit  for  them.

30.  Stubbs,  "  Constitutional  History,"  i.  107.  As  to  the  wapen-
take, see  especially  North  People's  law,  57  :  ^thelred,  ii.  32,  7 ;
Lgg.  Edw.  Conf.  30 ;  and  Vigfusson,  "  Icelandic  Dictionary,"  8. v.
Vapnatak.

31.  Corbett,  "Tribal  Hidage,"  Trans.  R.  Hist.  Soc,  xiv.  210.

32.  Pollock  and  Maitland,  *'  History  of  English  Law,"  i.  543  ff.
Comp.  Napier  and  Stevenson,  "  Crawford  Charters "  (Anecdota
Oxoniensia),  44.

33.  A  direct  enactment  in  regard  to  hundreds  appears  only  in
Edgar's  time,  Edg.  I.  1  (Comp.  Lgg.  Henr.  I.  70).  But  apart
from the fact that hundreds and haereds are too common


250  THE  GROWTH  OF  THE  MANOR

in  the  early  history  of  Western  and  Northern  Europe  to
be  considered  as  later  and  casual  expedients,  Alfred's  laws  can
hardly  have  meant  anything  but  the  hundreds  and  kindred  divi-
sions, when  they  speak  of  boldgetsel  (Alfred,  37),  a  general  term
admirably  adapted  to  the  reckoning  of  districts  by  round  numbers
of  settlers.  I  can  only  agree  with  Mr.  Corbett  when  he  insists  on  the
remarkable  concordance  between  Bede's  mode  of  estimating  land
and  the  round  nvunbers  of  the  so-called  "Tribal  Hidage,"  "Trans.
Host.  Soc,"  xiv.  191,  207  ff.  Instead  of  attributing  these  large
and  round  numbers  to  preposterous  exaggerations,  and  testing  them
by  the  120  acres  standard  drawn  from  Domesday  Book  {Maitland,
"  Domesday  and  Beyond"),  would  it  not  be  more  cautious  to  sup-
pose that  Bede  knew  what  he  meant,  and  that  his  estimates  of  the
different  districts  was  based  on  lists  of  the  boldgetcels  of  these  dis-
tricts ?  His  regional  estimates  may  all  be  reduced  to  hiindreds,  and
ovu*  uncertainty  as  to  the  identification  of  the  position  of  different
tribes,  or  as  to  the  reasons  why  the  estimates  do  not  conform  to  later
data  in  regard  to  the  size  and  importance  of  various  counties,  ought
not  to  interfere  with  a  recognition  of  the  importance  of  such  estimates
and  lists.  But,  of  course,  in  order  to  do  this  we  must  renounce  the
notion  that  the  terra  familise  (hiwisc,  hide)  is  everywhere,  and  at  all
times,  to  be  taken  as  approximately  120  acres  of  arable.  The
hiwisc  implies  merely  the  settlement  of  a  family  without  indicating
its  size,  and  the  boldgetcel  implies  a  reckoning  of  homesteads  without
deciding  as  to  their  agrarian  attributes.

34.  The  hundreds  are  smallest  in  Kent  and  most  extensive
in  Devon.  Stubbs,  "  Const.  Hist.,"  1.  c.  Napier  and  Stevenson,
"  Crawford  Charters,"  as  to  the  hundred  of  Crediton.

35.  A  Norseman  was  allowed  by  usage  to  have  two  wives,  one
at  home  and  the  other  in  the  land  where  he  lived  dviring  an  expe-
dition. How  many  wives  would  be  allowed  in  case  of  several
expeditions  we  cannot  tell.  In  any  case,  such  a  state  of  things
does  not  indicate  much  certainty  and  fixity,  at  least  in  regard  to
mother's  kin  and  "  nefgildi."

36.  The  gilds  are  an  interesting  subject  of  study.  The  part
they  played  may  be  gathered  from  Alfr.  27,  28  cf  the  statutes  collected
in  Thorpe^ s  "  Diplomatarium."  Their  history  woiild  have  to
be  made  out  in  connexion  with  the  interesting  facts  relating  to
Norse  gilds.  In  the  later  period,  which  may  be  called  Danish
for  the  sake  of  brevity,  the  institution  of  the  frankpledge  or  free-
borh  makes  its  appearance,  an  institution  which,  though  it  has
given  occasion  to  much  idle  talk  and  exaggerated  speculations,
still  is  of  an  incontestable  importance,  and  exddently  goes  back
to  Old  English  antecedents.  Comp.  Pollock  and  Maitland,  "  His-
tory of  English  Law,"  i.  544.  It  sprang  up  naturally  when  the
system  of  msegborh  had  spent  itself.

37.  Maitland,  "Domesday  and  Beyond," 16  £E.


NOTES  251

38.  Examples  of  "  nucleated  "  villages  are  very  common.  As
scattered  farms  or  homesteads  form  rather  the  exception,  a  few
instances  from  the  documents  at  our  disposal  may  illustrate  their
position.  On  the  fringe  of  Cheshire  bordering  on  Wales,  and  recently
acquired  from  it  at  the  time  of  William  the  Conqueror,  we  find,
for  example,  the  following  Domesday  descriptions.  Dd.  i.  269  :
Manerium  de  Roelent :  Ad  hoc  manerium  jacuerunt  hae  bere-
uichae  Dissaren,  Bodingam,  Chiluen  et  Mainmual.  In  his  est
terra  unius  carucae  tantum  et  silua  una  leuga  longa  et  dimidia
lata.  Ibi  unus  francigena  et  2  villani  habent  1  carucam.  Item
Widbulde,  Bloiat,  Dinmerieh  et  Brenuuen.  Terra  est  1  carucae
quam  habent  ibi  2  villani  et  1  serviens  comitis.  Altogether  the
269  folio  of  the  first  volume  of  "  Domesday  "  supplies  many  in-
stances of  small  settlements  scattered  among  forests  and  moors.
Dd.  iii.  221  (Cornwall)  :  Comes  habet  unum  mansum  quae  vocatur
Wescota  quam  tenuit  Ulnodus  die  quo  R.  E.  vivus  f\iit  et  mortuus —
1  fertinus  et  reddit  gildum  pro  dimidio  fertino.  As  to  Devon,
"  Crawford  Charters,"  71.  Some  of  the  Yorkshire  descriptions
in  Domesday  apply  also  evidently  to  scattered  hamlets.  For
instance,  Dd.  i.  324.  In  Aldenburg  habet  Ulf  9  carucatas  terrae
ad  geldum,  ubi  possunt  esse  10  carucae. — Ad  hoc  manerium  per-
tinet  soca  haec :  Wagene  1,  Melse  2,  Benincol,  Rugheton  2,
Scherle  4,  Duuetorp  3,  Meretone  1,  Fosham  1^,  Buirench  6,  Niuuetone
1,  Ringheburg  2  c.  5  b.,  Wassum  2  c.  2  b.,  Totele  5  c.  6  b.,  Ot-
rege  J  c.  Simul  adgeldum  41  carucata  terrae  ubi  possent  esse
40  carucae.  As  to  the  causes  which  might  determine  the  settle-
ment in  "  nucleated  "  villages  or  in  hamlets,  see  Flach,  in  "  Histoire
das  habitations  en  France,"  ii.  74  ;  and  "  Origines  de  I'ancienne
France,"  97. Comp.  Brutails,  "  Roussillon,"  34,  35.

39.  Maitland,  "  Domesday  and  Beyond,"  330.  This  point  has
to  be  kept  well  in  mind  when  we  want  to  form  an  idea  of  Old  English
local  institutions,  and  we  shall  have  to  revert  to  it  by  and  by.

40.  Bisliop  Stubbs  used  township,  and  the  American  practice
supports  such  an  employment  of  the  term,  while  it  is  not  diffi-
cult to  make  the  necessary  reservation,  that  tunscipe  or  gehur-
scipe  in  Old  English  was  taken  to  designate  the  population
of  the  town,  while  tun  was  used  for  the  settlement  and  the
district.

41.  This  has  been  brought  out  with  complete  clearness  by
Pollock  and  Maitland,  "  History  of  English  Law,"  i.  547  ff.  Cf.
Prof.  Maitland,  "Domesday,  and  Beyond,"  129  ff.

42.  I  need  not  repeat  that  I  am  considering  the  most  usual  and
prevailing  forms  of  villape  organ Lsation,  taking  notice  of  exceptions
only  in  so  far  as  they  illustrate  the  rules,  or  afford  a  substantial
modification  of  the  normal  state  of  things.  This  being  so,  we  shall
have  especially  to  deal  with  the  nucleated  village.  Settlements
in hamlets and scattered homesteads differed materially in


252  THE  GROWTH  OF  THE  MANOR

their  arrangements,  but  the  practices  which  obtained  in  them
do  not  indicate  the  prevailing  principles  of  rural  settlement  in
England.

CHAPTER III


1.  "VUlainage  in  England,"  237,  258,  340,  344.  Meitzen  has
dwelt  much  on  the  idea,  that  mediaeval  rural  arrangements  proceed
from  the  same  principles  as  those  embodied  in  the  share-holding
of  modern  joint  stock  companies,  but  his  construction  has  the
drawback  of  laying  too  much  stress  on  the  elements  of  artificial
association,  and  tlirowing  the  organic  growth  of  the  rural  com-
miinity  into  the  shade.  Starting  from  it,  we  would  be  naturally
led  to  deny  the  very  existence  of  a  village  community  as  a  natural
corporation  or,  at  any  rate,  to  minimise  its  influence  in  actual  life.
In  this  direction  lies  the  trend  of  thought  followed  by  Maitland.

2.  SeebohnCs  statement  in  "  Village  Community,"  395,  must
be  taken  with  a  corresponding  reservation.  Maitland,  "  Domes-
day and  Beyond,"  gives  an  instance  of  a  hide  reckoned  in  so  many
real  acres  and  roods,  from  the  Cambridgeshire  Hundred  RoU  (iL
575),  but  considers  it  a  late  and  isolated  case.  The  hide  is  made  to
contain  "  not  only  arable,  but  meadows,  pastures,  crofts,  gardens
and  messuages,"  which  certainly  looks  like  a  late  attempt  to  bring
order  into  the  conception  of  the  hide  by  making  it  a  measure  of
land.  StUl  tlxis  instance  is  not  without  meaning  and  value.
It  is  not  quite  isolated,  most  of  the  Cambridgeshire  descrip-
tions of  holdings  adjoining  this  following  a  similar  scheme.  Secondly,
it  is  clear  that  this  measured  hide  contained  much  less  than  120
acres  of  arable :  that  seems  odd  if  we  take  our  standing  ground  on
the  assumption  that  the  normal  holding  started  from  120  acres
of  arable  pliis  all  the  adjvmcts  in  meadows,  pastures,  crofts,  etc.
One  would  expect  the  measured  hide  in  such  a  case  to  be  one  of
200  acres,  like  the  Kentish  sulung,  or  180,  or  240,  or  something
of  the  kind.  If  the  hide  as  a  superficial  measure  covild  be  reckoned
at  120  acres,  the  hide  in  the  arable  fields  must  have  been  con
siderably  less.  Lastly,  it  should  be  noticed  that  only  the  "pastura
separalis "  can  have  been  included  in  the  reckoning  by  acres,
to  the  amount  of  only  six  acres  in  the  Lawston  instance.  The
common  pastures  remain  outside.  On  the  subject  of  the  hide  cf.
my  "  English  Society  in  the  Eleventh  Century  "  (1908)  pp.  148  ff.

3.  "ViU^inage  in  England,"  239.

4.  Ibid.  245.

5.  For  this  reason  Mr.  Round,  who  has  done  most  to  bring  out
the  principle  of  Domesday  assessment  by  re-partition  of  units  of
5  hides  and  of  6  carucates  between  the  villages,  considers  the  Domes-
day hide  merely  as  a  geld  hide,  and  strongly  insists  on its being


NOTES  253

entirely  independent  of  area  or  value.  "  Feudal  England,"  63.
Prof.  Maitland,  who  has  also  realised  the  artificial  character  of
many  fiscal  computations,  does  not,  however,  give  up  the  idea
of  an  average  relation  betw(>en  fiscal  hides  and  real  acres.  In
his  view  :  "  We  do  not  think  that  there  would  in  general  be  much
difficulty  in  finding  120  arable  acres  for  every  fiscal  liide  "  ("  Domes-
day and  Beyond,"  501).

6.  For  example,  Dd.  i.  302,  d  :  (Scirebume,  Yorkshire)  In  toto
manerio  350  a.  prati.  Silva  pastura  8  levas  longa  et  3  levas  lata ;
Silva  minuta  4  levas  longa  et  1  lata.  Terra  plana  5  levas  longa
et  1  lata  et  1  quarantena.  If  such  estimates  were  applied  to  the
United  States  of  North  America,  they  might  mean  that  the  land
was  divided  by  rectangles  on  the  map  ;  in  Norman  England  they
are  not  based  on  topogiapliical  divisions,  but  have  to  be  taken  as
approximate  valuations  of  the  size  of  the  manor  and  of  its  lands
lying  waste.  Wlien  it  came  to  fixing  boundaries,  people  were  either
careful  to  follow  natural  lines  of  streams,  moors,  hills,  etc.,  and
striking  local  indications,  such  as  old  trees,  rocks,  watch-towers,
etc.,  or  they  merely  indicated  rights  of  intercommoning  in  woods
and  pastures,  according  to  the  number  of  swine  to  be  sent  to  the
mast,  the  wagonloads  of  wood,  and  the  like.

7.  On  the  acreuxire,  "  Villainage  in  England,"  242.  They  are  the
awjres  which  count  in  the  fiscal  reckoning,  and  "  defend  "  them-
selves and  the  rest  of  the  land  in  regard  to  fiscal  requirements.  As
to  the  tixira  of  the  Burton  Cartulary,  which  is  certainly  connected
with  acreware,  we  shall  have  to  speak  hereafter.  Werian  for  de-
fetidere  in  the  sense  of  acquitting,  answering  for,  is  a  well  established
Old  English  term.  For  example,  C.  D.  1323  {Earle,  237,  a.d.
1035) :  Cnut  cyngc  .  .  .  ic  cyt5e  eow  6aet  ic  wylle  6aet  ^ESelnoS
arcebiscop  werige  his  landare  nu  ealswa  he  dyde  aer  ^gelric  waere
gerefa,  and  siSSan  he  gerefa  wses  forS  o6  6is,  CD.  1057  {Earle,  349) :
y>a^t  wais  ]?aet  mon  jelles  6ises  freolses  are  aefre  for  ane  hide  werian
scolde  A  curious  instance  of  a  transfer  by  deed  of  two
bovates  ad  geldum  Domini  Kegis  is  afforded  by  a  confirmation
by  H.  de  Scruby  in  1237,  of  a  donation  of  Ivo  de  Catrinesby,  his
grandfather,  in  a  Cartulary  of  Coton  Nunnery.  MSS.  "  Top.  Lincoln-
shire "  (Bodleian  Librarj').

8.  Th. "Dipl." 226  (Eadgar's  charter, 963-975).

9.  Dd.  i.  100  (Somerset)  :  Halgevilla,  quam  tenet  Brictricus  .  .  .
reddit  gildum  pro  1  virga,  et  banc  possunt  arare  5  caruce.

10.  Perhaps  tlie  most  remarkable  instance  of  intermixture  of
reckoning  by  geld  hides  and  geld  virgates  with  real  hides  and  vir-
gates  is  afforded  by  the  Middlesex  entries  in  Domesday.  The  sums
ewe  €  vidently  given  in  geld  hides,  while  the  particulars  point  seem-
ingly to  the  distribution  of  real  hides  and  virgates  among  the  tenants.
The  consequence  is  that  these  latter  items  when  added  up
usually  do  not  square  with  the  sums,  although  not  a  word  is  said


254  THE GROWTH OF THE MANOB

to  explain  the  divergence,  and  the  terms  used  are  identical  in  both
sets  of  numbers.  It  is  to  be  noted,  however,  that  in  some  instances,
for  example,  in  regard  to  Westminster,  the  numbers  are  concor-
dant (Dd.  i.  128).  This  would  serve  to  corroborate  the  idea
that  the  estimates  of  fiscal  hides  did  start  from  real  agrarian  occupa-
tion after  all,  but  commonly  swerved  from  it.

11.  Round,  "  Feudal  England,"  99  ;  Maitland,  "  Domesday  and
Beyond,  429."

12.  For  example,  Dd.  iii.  7  :  Warnerius  autem  retinuerat
geldvmi  1  hidae,  scilicet  6  solidos.  Turstinus  vero,  homo  G.  Maminot
retinuerat  geldum  3  virgarum,  scilicet  4  solidos  et  6  denarios.  I
take  this  typical  instance  from  the  Geld  inquests  of  1084  relating
to  the  south-western  covmties.  The  numbers  are  often  confused
in  these  docvunents,  and  therefore  it  would  be  difficult  to  use
them  for  statistical  purposes.  But  nevertheless  they  give  first-
rate  evidence  in  regard  to  the  terminology  of  those  times,  and
their  general  arrangement  is  sufficiently  clear.

13.  Maitland,  "Domesday  and  Beyond,"  450,  451;  Round,
"  Domesday  Studies,"  i.,  98  ff.  ;  "  Victoria  County  History  of
Surrey,"  277.

14.  For  instance,  Dd.  i.  272  (Derby) :  In  Asseforde  cvun  Bere-
uicis  Rex  Edwardus  habmt  22  carucatas  terrae  ad  geldmn  et
1  carucatam  terrae  sine  geldo.  Ibi  nunc  in  dominio  habet  Rex
4  carucas  et  18  villani  habent  5  carucas. Terra  22  carucarum,

15.  "  Villainage  in  England,"  239.

16.  Round,  "  Feudal  England,"  44.

17.  E.g.  Dd.  22b:  Bercheham.

18.  Seebohm,  Round  and  Maitland  support  this  view.

19.  Round,  "  Feudal  England,"  82.  As  to  Lancashire  and
Yorkshire  hides,  ibid.  86,  88.

20.  Maitland,  "  Domesday  and  Beyond,"  395.  On  French
carucates,  Guerard,  "  Prolegomenes  au  Polyptique  de  St.  Pere  de
Chartres,"  clxviii.  ;  Delisle,  "  Agriculture  et  classe  agricole  en
Normandie,"  538.

21.  My  paper  on  Sulung  and  hide,  "  Engl.  Hist.  Rev.,"  1904,
April.  The  sulung  of  200  acres  seems  to  have  originated  in  at-
tempts to  assign  a  definite  acreage  to  every  sulung,  including
messuages,  tofts,  and  perhaps  separate  pasture,  as  in  the  case  of
some  Cambridgeshire  hides.

22.  J.  A.  Tait,  "  Engl.  Hist.  Rev.,"  1902,  p.  280.

23.  Maitland,  "  Domesday  and  Beyond,"  393.

24.  The  ploughland  of  120  acres  has  been  chiefly  advocated
by  Eyton,  "  Domesday  of  Dorset,"  23  £E.  Maitland's  doubts
as  to  the  possibility  of  finding  the  necessary  soil  for  team?ands
of  120  acres  ("Domesday  and  Beyond,"  431)  are  connected
with  his  conception  of  the  terra  carucis  as  arable  which  had  been
under actual cultivation. It  seems  to  me,  however,  that even


NOTES  255

on  this  hypothesis  the  necessary  land  could  be  found  on  the  strength
of  the  figures  given  by  him.  Certainly  it  would  exceed  the
present  cultivated  area  ;  and  no  wonder  that  it  should,  if  we  take
into  reckoning  the  peasantless  condition  of  contemporary  England,
the  concentration  of  agriculture  in  the  hands  of  large  farmers,  tlie
spread  of  accommodation  for  industrial  undertakings,  and  the
large  areas  occupied  by  parks  and  sheep  pastiu-e.  But  we  are  not
even  reduced  to  this  one  explanation  in  regard  of  the  terra  carucis.
In  some  places  commissioners  and  local  jurors  may  have  under-
Btood  the  inquiry  as  to  land  sufficient  for  ploughteams  in  the  sense
of  a  direction  to  find  out  how  many  ploughlands  there  were  or
had  been  in  a  place,  apart  from  actual  tillage  by  existing  ploughs.
But  the  formula,  "  how  many  teams  there  might  be,"  admits  of  a
broader  construction,  and  seems  to  have  been  actually  understood
to  apply  to  all  the  land  which  could  be  turned  into  arable.  Should
this  be  conceded,  there  would  be  much  less  difficulty  in  locating
the  hypothetical  ploughteams.  I  may  aAd  that  this  part  of  the
enquiry  had  an  important  bearing  for  purposes  of  colonisation  and
melioration.

25.  Round,  "Feudal  England,"  153;  "  Eng,  Hist,  Rev.,"  1900,
p.  78  ff.

26.  For  instance,  Dd.  i.  299  :  In  Walesgref  (Yorkshire)  simt  ad
geldum  15  carucatae  terrae  quas  possunt  arare  8  carucae.  .  .  .
Sunt  ibi  villani  habentes  2  carucas.  .  .  .  T.R.E.  valuit  56  libras
modo  30  solidos.  .  .  .  Ad  hoc  manerium  pertinet  soca  .  .  .  inter
totiun  svmt  ad  geldum  84  carucatae  quas  possunt  arare  42  carucae.
In  his  fuerunt  108  sochemanni  cum  46  carucis,  modo  sunt  7  soche-
manni  et  15  villani  et  14  bordarii,  habentes  7  carucas  et  dimidiam.
Cetera  sunt  wasta. Cf.  ff.  300,  301,  passim.

27.  i2oMn<f,  "  Feudal  England,"  44,  71,  75;  "Victoria  County  His-
tory of  Worcestershire,"  236 ;  Maitland,  "Domesday  and  Beyond."

28.  "  Domesday and Beyond," 502.

29.  Ibid.,  507,  508.

30.  The  Domesday  mentions  of  Valet,  though  by  no  means
clear  to  us,  were  evidently  meant  to  sum  up  the  valuations  of  profits
for  the  Exchequer.  Pearson,  "  Early  and  Middle  Ages,"  has  made
a  special  study  of  them.

31.  Round,  "  Feudal  England,"  108  ;  Seebohm,  "  Village  Com-
munity, 36  ff."

32.  Seebohm,  "  Village  Community,"  120.

33.  We  sometimes  get  the  contrast  between  carucata  ad  geldum
and  carucata  ad  arandum. Round,  "Domesday  Studies,"  L  199  ff.

34.  Dd.  i.  10:  Ore.

35.  Maitland,  "  Domesday  and  Beyond,"  466.  Examples  of
arbitrary  proceedings  on  the  part  of  sheriffs  aboimd  in  the  state-
ments of  grievances.  I  will  refer  to  one  illustrating  the  meaning
of  hides  as  shares  in  fiscal  organisation. Dd.  i. 181 (Hereford):


256  THE GROWTH OF THE IVIANOR

In  Niware  sunt  2  hidae  et  dimidia  quae  in  Bremesese  hundred
conveniebant  et  operabantur,  sad  Rogerus  de  Pistes  divertit  Ulas
ad  Gloucestershire.

36.  Domesday  provides  many  instances  in  which  the  hide
appears  seemingly  as  an  expression  bo  and  up  with  the  levying
of  geld,  so  that  when  no  geld  is  paid  no  hides  exist.  For  example,
Dd.  i.  269  :  Nimquam  gelda\at  neque  hidatum  fuit  (Cheshire)  ;
iii.  29  :  has  tenuit  Rex  Eduardus  in  dominio  et  nescitur  quot  hidae
ibi  swat,  quia  non  reddiderunt  geldum,  T.  R.  E.  Dd.  i.  76  :  (Sher-
borne) nunquam  per  hidas  divisa  fuit  neque  geldavit.  Cf.  Round,
"  Domesday  Studies,"  i.  107  ff.  Sometimes  carucates  are  made  use
of  to  supply  the  absence  of  hides  on  estates  or  portions  of  estates
which  were  exempted  from  geld ;  Eyton,  "  Key  to  Domesday,"  18.
But  it  would  be  wrong  to  draw  too  sweeping  conclusions  from  this
use  of  expressions  in  Domesday.  By  the  side  of  them  appear  other
passages  mentioning  hides  and  virgates  which  do  not  pay  geld  and
yet  are  hides  and  virgates.  Altogether  the  independent  agrarian
value  of  these  terms  is  too  well  ascertained  to  admit  of  doubt.  In
this  way  the  true  meaning  of  such  Domesday  notices  as  those
quoted  above  seems  to  be,  that  certain  portions  of  territory  had  not
been  assessed  in  hides  for  the  payment  of  geld,  although  hides  in
the  sense  of  ploughlands  for  "  domestic  "  use — "  ad  inwaram  "  one
may  be  tempted  to  say — may  well  have  existed  there.  In  the
case  of  newly  conquered  or  newly  reclaimed  land,  the  ambiguous
term  hide  may  have  been  avoided  on  pvu^jose,  and  the  carucate  as
ploughland  may  naturally  have  been  substituted.

37.  It  is  so  important  to  realise  this  point  clearly,  that  I  take
leave  to  appeal  to  several  examples.  Cart.  Sax.  iii.  129  (a.d.  956)  :
Dis  sind  ]7a  landgemsera  ]7ara  20  hida  set  Hannige  J?e  Eadwig  cing
gebocede  ^Irice  his  msege  on  ece  yrue  (cf.  iii.  134).  p.  133  :  tet
Bitelanwyrthe  an  hiwisce  and  set  Bromleagean  hiwisce.  Earle,"  L.C.,"
234  (a.d.  1003-1023)  :  Dis  syndon  ]?3ere  halfu  hide  lond  gemseru
up  set  Tpscre  pirian.  C.  S.  iii.  139  :  ]?is  sint  j?3es  hywisces  land  gemseru
getUdding.  Crawford,  "  Ch.^^  20  :  aliquam  terre  particulam  .  .  .  i.e.
7  tributarionnxi  et  dimidii,  non  tamen  in  tmo  loco,  sed  in  tribus
uillulis,  etc.  Earle,  "L.  Ch."  322  (C.  D.  369):  Unam  mansam  ubi
rustici  uocabant  toppesham  .  .  .  ]?is  synd  jpsere  anre  gyrde  landge-
nisero  at  sese  hyrste  ^f>e  gebyraS  into  ]7sere  hyde  set  toppeshamme
(Cf.  Earle,  326,"  327).  Cart.  Sax.  iv.  38  :  Dis  is  Seere  twegra  hid
boc  and  anre  gyrde  set  Norrtune  andSafeowcr  secerasSserto  of  6se6e
styfycunge  (clearing)  into  Sam  twam  hidan  and  '5a  msede.  Thorpe,
"Diplom."  541:  ic  geanof  Purlea  into  Nutlea  healfre  hide  landeson
east  healf  straete.  "  Crawford,  Ch.  "  77,  boundaries  of  a  yardland
which  seems  to  lie  in  a  heap.  Thorpe,  "Dipl."  580  (a.d.  1050):
and  ic  an  Lefquene  15  acras  at  Palegr.  and  an  toft — and  Alfwald
habbe  mid  ton  ]9e  he  her  hauede  1 6  acres  mid  tof te  mid  aUe — Ulwine
and  his  brother  20  acres  at  Reydon. Cf.  Th.  590  (a.d. 1050).


NOTES  257

38.  Seehohm,  "  Village  Community,"  37  ff. ;  Mailland,  "  Domes-
day and  Beyond,"  490.  Once  a  hide  mentioned  in  an  Old  English
land  book  is  said  to  contain  120  acres.  Thorpe,  "  Dipl."  508
(a.d.  958) :  ic  ASelgeir  an  an  hide  lond  ]?es  So  Aeulf  hauede  be
hundtuelti  acren,  ateo  so  lie  wille.

39  "  Villainage  in  England,"  239,  240.

40.  The  treatise  on  husbandry  ascribed  to  Walter  of  Henley
makes  two  different  calculations  for  the  ploughland  on  the  two
course  and  on  the  three  course  system,  bringing  up  the  first  to  160
and  the  second  to  180  acres.  The  size  may  be  suggested  by  an
exaggerated  estimate  of  the  capabilities  of  a  ploughteam  {Maitland,
"  Domesday  and  Beyond,"  378),  but  the  method  is  characteristic
ineismuch  as  it  supposes  two  different  standards.  If  we  therefore
get  only  one  in  the  case  of  the  hide  of  120  acres,  we  must  either
take  it  as  an  average,  and  eissume  that  it  was  rather  less  than  a
threo-field  ploughland  and  rather  more  than  a  two-field  ploughland,
or  make  a  choice  between  the  two,  and  suppose  that  it  fitted  in
reaUty  only  the  cases  of  a  three-field  rotation  or  only  those  of  two-
field  rotation.  Mr.  Seebohm  seems  to  have  taken  it  to  apply  to  the
three-field  system,  although  the  problem  is  not  stated  clearly  by  him.

41.  Is.  Taylor  has  constructed  a  theory  on  the  foundation  of
instances  from  the  East  Riding  of  Yorkshire.  He  thinks  that
the  carucata  ad  gelduin  is  the  quantity  tilled  every  year  in  one
arable  field  by  one  plough.  *'  Domesday  Studies,"  i.  157.  Critics
have  rightly  protested  against  the  sweeping  character  of  his  con-
clusions (see,  e.g.,  Round,  "  Feudal  England,"  87  ff.),  but  there
seems  to  be  a  good  deal  of  weight  in  the  initial  observations
from  which  it  starts.  It  is  clear  that  there  could  be  no  attempt
to  subject  the  three-field  system  to  a  heavier  burden  of  taxation
than  the  two-field  system,  but  the  matter  of  fact  inquiry  by  the
Domesday  Commission  may  have  been  conducted  in  such  a  way
as  to  elicit  in  some  cases,  especially  in  the  North,  the  diversity
between  the  area  under  actual  cultivation  and  the  gross  extent  of
arable  land  estimated  as  land  for  the  ploughs,  while,  as  a  rule,
no  attempt  was  made  to  express  tliis  contrast.

42.  Seebohm,  "  Tribal  Custom,"  424.  We  hear  of  a  Cornish
acre  equated  with  64  English  acres. "Testa  de  Ncvill,"  185,  204.

43.  If  the  charter  C.  D.  18  {Earle,  "  L.  Ch."  281)  should  be  genuine
or  based  on  a  genuine  one,  the  documentary  evidence  as  to  hides
as  agrarian  units  would  go  back  to  the  time  of  Cjedualla  and  the
year  680  :  banc  libertatem  sub  estimatione  70tributariorum  taxaui-
mus  in  illo  loca  qui  dicitur  Pecgam  aliisque  locis  circumquaque
ewljacentibus.  The  statement  in  itself  tallies  exactly  with  Ikdo's
expressions.  Cf.  C.  D.  1006  :  de  terra  juris  mei  aliquantulam  por-
tionem  juxta  mensuram  scilicet  10  familiarum.  It  is  worth
notice  that  when  the  hiwiscs  and  sulungs  lie  in  separate  patches
they  f\re  called  lands,  and  get  their  names  from  possessive  patrony-


258  THE GROWTH OF THE MANOR

raics  as  the  villages.  For  instance,  C.  D.  195  {Earle,  82)  :  Donabo
terram  trium  aratrorum  mee  propriae  juris  in  regione  Easterege,  quae
inibi  ab  incolis  folcwinning  lond  uocatur  atque  iterum  in  eadem
regione  Easterege  meae  proprie  hereditatis  ruriculum  unius  aratri
illis  tribus  adhaerens  .  .  .  sed  illud  aratrum  unum  on  liminum
...  id  est  'Saet  wynnhearding  lond  and  babbinglond  and  an  iocled
on  uppan  ufre  etc.  Thorpe,  "  Dipl.,"  109  (a.d.  854).  .  .  .  cassati  in  loco
qui  dicitur  Heregeardinge  hiwisc.  Cf.  Proceedings  of  the  Suffolk
Archaeological  Institute,  iii.  (1860),  Extenta  de  Hadleghe,  Stiffolk,
pp.  232  ff.  :  liberae  terrae  Gloucestreslond,  Heestmanlond,  Bonleys-
lond,  Goddingefrelond,  Knaptonsland,  Edrichesfrelond,  Corsford-
eslond  .  .  .  (Custumarii)  Aldliamelond,  etc.  In  the  last  case,  as  will
be  noticed,  the  names,  with  a  few  exceptions,  have  nothing  to  do
with  persons  or  kindreds.

44.  Baeda,  i.  25  :  Tanatos  insula  non  modica  familiarum  sex-
centorum,  etc.  A.  S.  version — Donne  is  on  eastwardre  Cent  micil
island,  )7set  is  syx  hund  hida  micel  sefter  Angel  cynnes  aehte,  ii.  9 ;
iv.  16,  19  ;  iii.  4  :  neque  enim  magna  est  (lona)  sed  quasi  fanulia-
rum  quinque  iuxta  aestimationem  Anglorum.  In  some  cases  the
numbers  are  based  on  exact  and  local  knowledge.  For  example,
V.  19  (A.  Sax.  transl.  ed.  <Sc/ii23per,  662) :  Alcbfred  .  .  .  geafhehim
sona  and  sealde  tyn  hiwisca  landes  on  ]?3ere  stowe,  'ye  cweden  is
Stanford  and  aefter  .  .  ,  .  sealde  him  mynster  )7ritiges  hiwisca
on  stowe,  seo  is  gecyged  in  Hripum.  In  one  case  the  familiae
of  the  Latin  text  is  rendered  by  folc  in  the  Old  English  Version,
iii.  24  {Schipper,  p.  314).  Oswio  se  cyning  gef  and  sealde  fam
foresprecenan  Peadon,  Pendon  suna  )>8es  cyninges  .  .  .  Sut5-
mercna  rice,  Tpa  syndon,  j^ass  y>e  menn  cevej?a6,  fif  Jpusendo  f olces  (qui
sunt,  ut  dicunt,  famUiarum  quinque  millium).

45.  The  cases  of  Thanet  and  of  the  Isle  of  Wight  (iv.  16),  as  well
as  of  Kent  and  Sussex,  are  especially  conspicuous.  Cf.  Maitland,
"  Domesday and Beyond," 512.

46.  "  Domesday  and  Beyond,"  358.

47.  Ibid,,  494.

48.  "  Crawford  Charters,"  43.

49.  "  Domesday  and  Beyond,"  228,  229.

CHAPTER IV

1.  The  late  Professor  Maitland  admitted  that  the  economic  in-
terests and  affairs  of  the  householders  of  a  township  were  inextric-
ably intermixed,  but  he  thought  that  the  legal  consequences  of  this
intermixture  were  shght  and  that  there  was  not  much  of  a  village
community  to  speak  of.  "  Domesday  and  Beyond."  347  ff.  Cf.
"  History  of  English  Law,"  i.  691.  On  the  open  field  system  and
the  village  commimity,  cf.  "  English  Society  in  the  Eleventh
Century,"  pp.  277  ff.,  391  ff.


NOTES  259

2.  Cf,  "  Domesday  and  Beyond,"  371.

3.  Thorpe,  122  (a.d.  363),  .  .  .  et  4  carris  tranRductionem  in
Silba  regis  6  ebdomadeis  a  diis  Pentecosten,  et  ubi  alteri  liomines
silbam  cedunt,  hoc  est  in  regis  communione,  hec  sunt  pascua  por-
corum  que  nostra  lingua  Saxonica  denbera  nominamus,  hoc  est
Husneah,  EfreSingdenn,  Herbedingdenn,  VVafingdenn,  Widefet-
ingderm,  Bleccingdenn,  CD.  364  (Earle,  171)  .  .  .  tSissynt^a  den-
bera tSe  to  Sissum  londe  mid  rihte  behmpaS,  etc.

4.  Whitaker,  "  History  of  Whalley,"  i.  263.

5.  "  Liber  Ecclesiae  de  Burgo  "  (Society  of  Antiquaries),  192  ff.  ;
*•  Tilncliolt  est  peistura  Communis."  Cf.  Blomfield,  "  History  of
Norfolk,"  72.

6.  "  Victoria  County  History  of  Essex,"  369.

7.  Thorpe,  "  Dipl.,"  65  :  In  Ondrede  pastum  et  pascua  porcoruni
et  armentum  seu  caprarum.

8.  "Northumberland  Assizes,"  21  (40  Henry  III.):  juratores  di-
cunt,  quod  predictus  J.  disseisivit  pred.  R.  de  propria  communa
sua,  .  .  .  quia  ipse  antequam  Ric,  pater  predicti  Johannis  aliquam
terram  habuit  in  predicta  villa,  solebat  idem  R.  de  Buttleston  com-
munam  per  totum  annum  in  predicta  mora  (habere)  .  .  .  dicunt
quod  nunquam  tempore  ipse  Johannes  solebat  ibi  communare  nisi
tempore  aperto  et  post  blada  asportata,  scilicet  quando  vestitura
campi  ex  parte  illius  morae  asportatur.  "  Rot.  Hundr.,"  i.  519
(Suffolk)  :  Prior  de  Shuldham  .  .  .  appropriavit  sibi  quandam
pasturam  communera  in  Sh.  que  vocatur  Britliemorefrith,  que
debet  et  solet  esse  omnibus  communis  tempore  aperto,  et  capit  ibi
de  qualibet  bestia  ibi  veniente  unum  obolum.

9.  We  know  very  little  of  the  regulation  of  hunting  rights  in
Old  English  time,  as  the  only  authentic  Old  English  regulation  which
has  come  down  to  us  applies  to  woods  in  private  possession,  but  it
is  clear  that  the  stringent  regulations  favouring  private  landlords
were  mainly  the  product  of  Norman  legislation  and  usage  and  felt
to  be  a  grievance  from  the  point  of  view  of  previous  custom.

10.  A  good  example  is  supplied  by  the  accounts  of  trials  (a.d.  825)
at  the  Synod  of  Clovesho. Thorpe,  70,  and  a.d.  896,  Thorpe,  139.

11.  The  frequent  notices  in  documents  of  the  feudal  age,  though
dating  from  a  later  time,  are  very  characteristic  and  undoubtedly
go  back  to  old  customs.  For  example,  Dodsworth,  **  Yorkshire
Arch.  Journal,"  x.  367,  547.

12.  This  is  the  basis  of  what  was  termed  in  later  law  "Common
pur  cause  de  vicinage."  "Notebook  of  Bracton,"  1194;  Rot.
Hundr.  ii.  605.

13.  Dd.  i.  127,  128,  etc.  Silva  ad  faciem  das  domos,  i.  38b;
Silva  ad  clausulam,  i.  5,  16,  17,  etc.

14.  Ine,  43.  Thorpe,  "Dip!.,"  140.  Cf.  Andrews,  *' Old  Enghsh
Manor,"  225.

15.  "  Villainage  in  England."  276. Of  course,  the  origins  of  the  so-


280  THE  GROWTH  OF  THE  MANOR

called  common  of  estover  of  later  law  miist  also  be  sought  in  older
customs  which  arose,  as  it  were,  by  themselves  as  soon  as  this  defi-
nite appropriation  of  rights  in  the  woods  begins.

16.  Dd.  i.  Cf.  Bound,  in  the  "  Victoria  County  History  of  Essex,"
374 ;  "  Victoria  County  History  of  Surrey,"  291.  Cf.  C.  D.,  204
{Earle,  95).

17.  Thorpe,  "  Dipl.,"  70  :  "  hit  arseded  was  on  ^Selbaldes  daege
Jrim  hund  swina  maest."

18.  Thorpe,  "Dipl.,"  580  (a.d.  1050):  And  ic an Lefquene  mine
neue  and  J.  and  W.,  20  acres  at  Reydone  and  pe  mor  J?e  ic  and
Jjo  monekes  soken  ymbe  min  del,  fremannen  to  note  (for  the  use  of
freemen).  "Villainage  in  England,"  262:  In  support  of  the  conten-
tion that  the  usages  as  to  conmaon  are  prefeudal  in  their  main
principles,  it  may  be  pointed  out  that  the  individualism  of
mediaeval  Common  Law  makes  itself  felt  as  a  current  which
has  to  struggle  against  ideas  of  ancient  right  and  custom.  It  is
still  with  the  township  more  than  with  the  private  owner
or  the  single  tenant  that  we  have  to  reckon  in  this  respect  in
the  thirteenth  and  fourteenth  centuries,  although  Common  Law
begins  to  introduce  doctrines  of  individual  usage.  The  second  argu-
ment rests  on  the  notion  of  the  holding  as  a  centre  from  which  rights
in  all  the  different  spheres  of  rural  life  radiate,  as  it  were,  according
to  its  share  of  interest  in  the  whole.  In  short,  rights  of  common,
as  illustrated  by  later  practices,  must  have  originated  in  ancient
custom,  because  the  tun  and  the  hide,  with  which  they  are  cormected,
belong  to  ancient  custom.

19.  J.  Williams,  "  Rights  of  Common,"  37.

20.  "  Villainage  in  England,"  272  ff.  I  do  not  see  why  the  "  His-
tory of  English  Law  "  i,  612,  treats  the  supposed  original  rights  of  the
single  freeholder  to  oppose  approvement  and  enclosure  as  an  instance
of  extreme  individualism.  The  argument  which  is  put  in  his  mouth  in
support  of  his  claim  does  not  seem  to  suit  the  case.  The  imaginary
spokesman  of  individualism  is  supposed  to  defy  any  and  all  the  mem-
bers of  the  community  to  restrict  or  infringe  his  rights  to  the  use  of
the  common  wherever  it  stretched :  there  may  be  enough  land  for  all
purposes  and  you  may  be  all  agreed  to  approve  one  part  of  it,  but
I  intend  to  use  the  common  as  before,  and  oppose  any  attempt  to
restrict  or  localise  my  rights,  he  is  made,  in  substance,  to  say.  But
the  rights  of  the  free  tenants  were  asserted  not  against  the  commxinity
of  the  township  or  the  majority  of  the  townsmen,  but  against  the
will  of  the  lord,  which  is  altogether  a  different  matter,  and  there  is
no  evidence  nor  any  likelihood  that  a  single  member  of  the  com-
munity could  arrest  its  regularly  formulated  decisions  in  regard  to
approvement  or  enclosures.  I  may  remark  in  passing  that  the  sup-
port which  is  sought  in  the  chapter  De  migrantihus,  of  the  Lex  SaUca,
is  illuso^J^  This  celebrated  enactment  ("L.  Sa."xlv.)  treats  of  a
special  case,  namely  of  the  intrusion  of  a  stranger  in  the  territory  of  a


NOTES  2G 1

village  commtmity.  Against  such  an  intrusion  every  single  member
has  a  right  to  protest,  although  another  member  may  have  given
his  consent.  The  case  of  a  decision  to  admit  tlie  stranger  by  the
village  in  corpore  is  not  considered,  and  tliere  is  nothing  to  show
that  a  single  villager  could  override  a  decision  of  the  village  meeting
(eonventum)  or  defy  the  majority  of  its  members.  The  question
as  to  the  mode  of  formulating  such  decisions  and  of  the  respective
rights  of  majority  and  minority  in  these  ancient  assemblies  is  a
distinct  one  and  need  not  be  discussed  here.

21.  This  seems  to  lie  at  the  root  of  the  interesting  case  reported
and  annotated  in  the  "  Notebook  of  Bracton,"  16G2.

22.  For  example,  Eynsham  Cartulary  f.  74,  "  Villainage  in
England,"  260.

23.  Meadows  are  mentioned,  for  example,  C.D.  253,  "  Crawford
Charters,"  73.  The  practices  of  the  meting  out  of  Lammas  meadows
are  well  illustrated  by  the  Eynsham  case,  "  Villainage  in  England,"
259,  and  the  Aston  and  Cote  Case,  259 ;  Gomme,  "  Village  Com-
munity," 162.

24.  Ine,  42  :  Gif  ceorlas  gaerstun  haebben  gemaenne,  o66e  oj^er
gedalland  to  tynanne,  and  haebben  svune  getyned  heora  dael,  summe
naebben,  and  etten  hiora  gemaenan  aeceras  oS6e  gasrs,  gan  )?a  ]7onne
ye  €at  geat  agan,  and  gebete  )7am  oSrum,  ]?e  hiora  dael  getynedne
haebben,  ]7one  aewerdlan  )?e  oaer  gedon  sie  ;  abidden  him  aet  ]?am
ceape  STvylc  ryht  swylce  hit  kyn  sie.

25.  The  normal  condition  of  an  open  field  in  "  defence  ''  time,  pro-
tected by  light  hedges  is  further  illustrated  by  Ine,  42,  §  1  :  gif
')?omae  hrySera  hwelc  sie  Tpe  hegas  brece  and  ga  in  gehwaer,  and  se
hit  nolde  gehealdan,  se  hit  age,  o)?]?e  ne  maege,  nime  se  hit  on  his
aecere  mete  and  ofslea,  and  nime  se  agenfrigea  his  fel  and  flaesc,  and
J>olie  ]?as  aSres.

26.  Arable  open  fields  belonging  to  Malmesbury  are  described  by
Gomme,  "  Village  Commionity,"  188,  Arable  open  fields  belonging  to
Cambridge,  Maitland,  "  Township  and  Borough,"  55  f.

27.  Professor  Maitland  has  criticised  the  attempt  to  treat  these
instances  as  survivals  "  of  primitive  communalism."  "  Law
Quarterly  Review,"  ix.  Of  course,  there  is  a  special  feature
in  the  instances  quoted  by  Gomme  and  others — they  are  drawn
from  the  economic  practice  of  towns  which  utihsed  the  fields
in  their  immediate  neighbourhood  in  this  way  instead  of
letting  them  to  farmers,  and  do  not  seem  to  have  had  a  very
clear  conception  of  corporate  property.  Nor  is  it  admia-
sible  to  see  in  these  instances  typical  examples  of  the  general
management  of  open  field  arable  in  former  times.  But,
nevertheless,  several  characteristic  points  remain  which  ought
not  to  be  slurred  over.  The  fields  in  question  are  un-
doubtedly considered  the  property  of  the  town  community,  and
the notion of such corporate property is evidently derived


262  THE  GROWTH  OF  THE  MANOR

not  from  new  fangled  arrangements  but  from  ancient  custom ;
the  most  natural  accoxmt  of  the  peciiliar  repartition  of  the  strips  is
suggested  by  a  comparison  with  Lanunas  meadows  on  the  one  hand,
hereditary  shares  in  the  arable  on  the  other,  and  there  does  not
seem  to  be  a  need  or  a  probability  of  a  special  derivation  ;  the  tran-
sition from  town  to  village  conamunity  is  very  gradual  and,  indeed,
both  are  varieties  of  the  one  tun  or  township,  as  has  been  very  proper-
ly insisted  upon  by  Professor  Jas.  Tait,  "  E.  H.  R," 1897,  p.  774.

28.  Seebohm,  "  English  Village  Commimity,"  226,  439.

29.  The  Anglo-Saxon  charters  contain  numerous  references  to
practices  and  terms  connected  with  the  open-field  system.  For
example,  Earle,  "  Land  Ch.,"  208  : .  .  .  anbutan  ]?one  garan  (gore,
strip  stunted  into  a  triangular  shape),  eft  on  ]?one  weg,  of  J?sem  wege
a  be  ]73em  heafodlande  (headland,  strip  perpendicular  to  the  acres
of  a  shot  and  used  by  the  ploughmen  to  turn  back  their  teams  and
to  get  access  to  the  field),  eft  in  J^set  o]?er  heafodland  ane  hwile,
]?8enne  in  Tpa,  iuih,  )7set  and  long  iyrh  anbutan  ]?3et  heafodlond  )?aet  swa
on  Cyneburgelond  gemaere,  )?8et  andlong  gemaeres  on  J>get  heafodland,
of  ]?sem  heafodlonde  eft  on  ]?one  weg  on  hlydan  (?)  andlong
hlydan  on  )?one  heafodweg  ...  of  J>8ere  fyrh  a  be  J?3em
hcefdan  to  breoduninga  gemsere  ...  of  Jjgem  hcefdan  to  )?am
heafodlonde.  C.  D.  1276*  (Earle,  390).  Dis  sind  da  land  gemsero
to  Cyngestune  cBcer  onder  cecere  .  .  .  on  Sa  heafodceceras  ...  on
tone  ealdangdran.  Thorpe,  "  DipL,"  494  :  Londes  gemaero  to  Awel-
tune  .  .  .  ]?onne  on  J?am  gemcenan  garan  be  uton  'Saem  die  .  .  .
J>onne  and  lang  rode  on  ]?one  littlan  garan  middeweardne  .  .  .  and
se  hetffeld  eal  gemcene.  C.  D.,  Svo.  Earle,  "  L.  Ch.,"  394  :  Dis
sind  6a  landgemaera  to  Sandforde  on  t5am  gemdnnan  lande.  C.  D.,
658,  Earle,  363  :  j?onne  licgaj?  J>a  )»reo  gyrda  on  o)?aere  healfae  fromae
at  F.  on  gemcenum  lande.

30.  Knapp, "  Grundherrschaft  und  Rittergut,"  107.

31.  The  peculiarities  of  the  prevailing  arrangement  are  even
more  brought  into  light  by  the  fact  that  there  were  cases  and  regions
in  which  the  concentration  of  territory  was  aimed  at.  The  plough-
lands  (sulungs)  of  Kent  lay  originally  in  separate  patches,  as  is
evident  from  their  names,  and  the  advantages  of  concentration
are  well  expressed,  for  example,  in  the  following  document.  C.  D.
195  (Earle,  82):  insuper  etiam  addidi  on  Eostorege  quintum  aratrum
fratribus  nostris  concedendum,  quod  a  reacoluensae  ecclesiae  prius
transmotaveram,  quod  dunwalinglond  dicitur.  Has  itaque  terrulas
ideo  coUigere  et  simul  ita  in  ixnum  coniimgere  eximiae  caritatis
industria  curaui,  ut  facilius  elaborare  ac  desudare  sua  propria  in
illis  potuissent  quas,  adunati  unius  termine  intra  septa  conclusi.
This  applies  to  an  estate  of  several  ploughteams,  but  the  considera-
tions expressed  in  the  charter  would  hold  good  quite  as  much  in  the
case  of  small  holdings.  Cf.  "  Domesday  and  Beyond,"  338.  Meit-
zen,  i.  370. Seebohm,  "  Tribal  Custom,"  519.


NOTES  263

32.  MS.  Cart,  of  Dunstable  Priory  ;  Had.  MSS.  1<?S5,  f.  7,  d.
"Villainage  in  England,"  233  ff.  Cf.  E.  Bateson,  "History  of
Northiimberland,"  ii.  129.  Map  of  the  Manor  of  Rock  of  1599.
"  This  map  appears  to  have  been  made  to  illustrate  a  partial  division
of  the  township.  Before  the  division  the  township  seems  to  have
contained  a  parcel  of  demesne  (170  acres)  in  severalty,  a  separate
demesne  moor,  tliree  fields,  viz.  Arksley,  Rockley  and  Earsley  fields,
and  a  town  moor.  A  division  of  the  township  was  desired  by  both
lord  and  tenants.  The  lord  desired  to  throw  together  the  scattered
portions  of  the  demesne  which  lay  intermixed  with  the  tenants'
land,  and,  as  the  township  is  a  large  one,  the  tenantry  of  the  village
found  themselves  too  far  away  from  their  lands  in  the  north  of  the
township.  So  the  whole  was  divided  for  agricultural  purposes  into
two  parts,  as  had  been  done  at  Long  Houghton  about  forty
years  before.  There  were  twelve  farms,  and  each  consisted  of
approximately  83  acres  in  all,  i.e.  43  acres  of  arable  meadows
and  pasture,  and  40  acres  of  waste.  At  the  time  of  the  division
five  of  the  tenants  took  the  Arksley  field  and  the  old  demesne,
and  the  other  seven  took  the  remainder  of  Earsley  field  and  Rockley
field,  after  the  lord  of  the  manor  had  been  compensated  for  the
demesne.  .  .  .  Within  the  limits  of  each  half  township  the  common
field  system  probably  went  on  as  before.  There  is  nothing  on  the
map  or  schedule  to  suggest  that  land  was  allotted  to  every  farm  in
severalty,  but  an  effort  was  made  to  adapt  the  existing  boundary
to  the  new  state  of  things.  Each  of  the  new  half  townships  could
be  divided  by  the  existing  hedgerows  into  three  fields,  as  the  old
township  had  been."  Cf.  155  ff.  The  interest  of  such  instances
lies  in  the  fact  that  they  arise  from  an  assumption  of  original
equality.

33.  The  Danish  customary  law  of  which  the  Schleswig  agrarian
practices  present  one  variety,  recognised  four  different  modes  of
holding  land  :  (1)  common  land,  fcellesjord,  (2)  private  property
marked  off  by  definite  boundaries,  ornum,  stuf  ;  (3)  share  land,
held  on  the  ground  of  regular  assignation,  according  to  a  share  in
the  village,  rebdragen  jord,  with  the  uses  appendant  to  it,  and  (4)
land  held  by  occupation  without  formal  title,  gribsjord  (cf.  Haff,
"  Die  danischen  Gemeinderechte,"  Leipzig,  1909).  These  con-
trasted species  are  illustrated  by  the  following  documents  published
by  Stemann,  Schleswig's  "Reichs-  und  Gerichts-verfassung  im
XVII  Jahrhundert"  (Schleswig  und  Flensburg,  1855),  85,  p.  93.
"  Coldinger  Recess,"  28  :  gribsjord  (which  has  not  been  from  ancient
times  laid  out  in  a  holding)  p.  249,  gribsjord  in  contrast  with  "  Stuf
and  Saermark"  ;  iv.  24,  p.  108.  The  character  of  land  allotted  as  a
shtire  in  the  village  may  be  gathered  from  the  following  judgment
in  a  case  of  April  20,  1691  {Stemann,  o.l.  122,  p.  Ill)  :  enhver  sin  egen
lodschiffte  jord  herefter  selffver  at  minde,  haffve  og  beholde,  saa
vit  hannem  efter  sin  gaardspart  med  rette  tilkommen  eller  og  kand
lodde  og  tUfalde,  dog  bor  forst  for  grande  at  udlaegge  til  Foerte  og


264  THE  GROWTH  OF  THE  MANOR

Grade  (may  every  one  hencefoirward  use,  have  and  keep  for
himself  the  land  allotted  to  him  by  division  in  so  much  as
falls  to  him  according  to  the  share  of  his  holding  or  may
hereafter  fall  to  it  or  be  allotted  to  it,  but  firstly  the  com-
munity of  neighbours  must  get  its  \Tllage  green  and  ways).  The
process  of  occupation  and  assignation  is  well  described  in  Stemann's
document,  105,  p.  102  (March  24,  1684) :  6  Mand  udneffened  til
at  schiffte  Kollebye  March — ved  et  reb,  som  var  afmerket  til  8
Schar  afmaalet  og  dealt,  hvis  lord  som  for  det  forste  schal  ind-
tages  til  at  plouge  og  saw  udi,  eftersom  loddet  er  tUfalden  ;  Astrup
og  Synderias  msend  samt  G.P.  i  Hokn  at  haffue  ophofi  og  hgge  y
derst  paa  den  vesterside;  da  haffuer  de  gjort  offverslag  paa
den  Sonderwang,  udi  hvilcken  Vang  er  afmaalt  tU  30  Aggere
hver  Agger  8  Schar,  og  desforuden  4  Schar  aflagt  hil  Veien,  af
vilcheA.  og  S.  Mand  samt  G.P.  tager  forst  af  Vester  2  Reebs
Bredde  som  er  16  Scharjord,  og  de  Scherebech  Mand  det  tredie
Reebs  Brede  med  8  Schar.  (Six  men  appointed  to  divide
the  fields  of  KoUeby  by  a  Reeb  [cord],  which  was  marked
off  to  contain  eight  "Schar,"  meastired  and  divided,  whose
land  should  be  enclosed  to  begin  with  for  ploughing  and  reaping
according  to  the  fall  of  the  lot.  The  men  of  A.  and  S.  and  G.P.  in
Hokn  have  to  make  the  beginning  and  to  lie  farthest  to  the  West.
Thereupon  have  they  made  a  computation  in  regard  to  the  South-
shot,  in  which  shot  there  are  measured  30  field  strips  [cf.  acre-strips],
each  strip  of  8  schars,  and  besides  4  schar  are  marked  off  for  the  way,
of  which  the  men  of  A.  and  S.  as  well  as  G.  P.  take  first  from  tlie
west  to  the  width  of  2  Reebs,  that  is  land  to  the  extent  of  16  schar,
and  the  men  of  Scherebech  take  the  third  Reebs  width  with  8  schar.)
In  course  of  time  encroachments  and  disputes  might  arise  which
led  to  redivisions  on  the  basis  of  the  shares,  as  seen  in  No.  158,
p.  127  (March  3,  1710)  :  Lodseieme  udi  Bron  haver  varet  paa-
klagende,  at  deres  Agger  og  Eng  sampst  Tofftejord  er  urigtig  delt  og
deres  Mark  dog  er  en  reebt  Mark,  saa  enhver  efter  sin  Ottings  anpart
bor  at  have  lige  meget  (undtagen  hvad  Ornum  og  Stuf  er  angaaende,
det  beholder  enhver  ubeskaret)  ...  6  Mand  paa  hgning  giort  en
begyndelse  6  Allen  eller  2  skar  lang  overmaalt,  og  paa  54^  Ottinger,
som  udi  byen  findes,  fordelt.  ...  A.  Sorensen  osterst  til  Ophaf.  .  .  .
A.  Simonsen  vesterst  til  udfald  .  .  .  fordi  han  ligger  yderst  og
nest  til  veien,  saa  er  ham  samme  overlads  Jord  tillagt  til  aaboed.
Shareholders  in  Broris  have  been  complaining  that  their  arable  and
meadow  as  well  as  Toft-land  is  not  divided  properly,  although  their
fields  are  fields  allotted  by  the  Reeb  (cord)  in  such  away,  that  every-
one should  have  as  m\ich  as  everyone  else  according  to  his  Otting-
share  (the  share  of  his  holding),  with  the  exception  of  private  land
of  ancient  assignation  (ornum)  or  approved  land  (stuf)  .  .  .  Six  men
have  initiated  an  equalisation  of  the  shares  by  measuring  six  "Ells,"
equivalent  to  two  Skar  in  length,  and  distributing  strips  on  that


NOTES  265

scale  to  the  54^  Ottings  which  are  found  in  tlie  townsliip.  .  .  .  A.  S.
received  the  easternmost  strip  to  start  with.  .  .  ,  A.  S.  tlie  wostem-
most  to  close  up  ;  and  as  he  lies  at  the  fullest  extremity  towards
the  road,  the  land  in  excess  has  been  allotted  to  him).

As  an  example  of  by-laws  the  following  may  be  quoted
(Agreement  between  the  "  Grtinde  og  Naboer "  of  Branderup ;
No.  15,  p.  138,  A.D.  1672):  "They  have  decided  that  every  man
ehekH  go  out  to  mow  grass  on  St.  Waldborg's  Day,  and  that  it  should
be  laid  out  by  Ottings,  so  that  everything  should  be  done  in
accordance  with  right  and  equality.  2.  Every  year  before  the
breaking  up  of  the  soil,  they  shall  collect  the  stones,  each  on  his
field  and  remove  them  in  carts.  4.  All  the  men  of  the  township
(alle  mend  udi  by  en)  shall  appear  at  the  village  meeting  (grande-
BtefTne),  when  it  is  summoned,  and  whosoever  does  not  appear  will
be  at  once  fined  foiir  shillings.  6.  No  one  shall  go  on  his  strips  of
arable  or  meadow  to  reap  or  mow  before  they  have  held  a  meeting
about  it  and  settled  what  day  they  will  harvest,  etc.

A  description  may  be  found  in  the  "  Scriptores  rerum  Dani-
carum,"  viii.  p.  41,  inregard  toa  "  Solrebning  "  in  Oster  Hoisted  in
Schleswig  of  1513.  Firstly  the  areas  were  measured  out  for  the
tofts  on  an  average  of  40  roods  in  length  and  6  roods  in  breadth,
with  allowancee  to  make  up  for  casual  disadvantages.  Then  the
twelve  representatives  of  the  township  apportioned  everj-  share-
holding its  strips  in  the  fields,  "  in  the  damp  and  in  the  dry,"  in
meadow  and  in  pasture,  etc.  Tlie  principles  on  which  these  assig-
nations were  performed  are  clearly  expressed  in  the  Danish  provin-
cial laws  of  the  twelfth  century.  Jydske  lov,  i.  55,  and  Eriks  Sjael-
landske  lov,  II.  55,  56.  According  to  them  the  toft  appears  as  the
*'  mother  "  of  the  holding  in  the  fields,  and  the  strips  in  these  have
to  follow  the  order  in  which  the  house  tofts  are  situated  in  the
village  according  to  the  course  of  the  sun  (solskifte,  solrebning).
The  same  practices  are  found  to  have  obtained  in  Sweden  and
Finland.  Schlyter,  "  Sveriges  gamle  love,"  iii.  339  ;  iv.  337  ;
xiii.  257.  "  Upl.  Lag."  ib.  2  §1.  Schyhergson,  "  Finland's  Historia,"
ii,  198.  In  a  most  interesting  and  suggestive  paper  by  Laurid
sen  ("  Aarboger  for  Nordisk  Olakyndighed,"  II.  Series,  vol.  xi.
1896),  from  which  I  have  taken  the  last  references,  the  author
considers  the  enactments  and  instances  just  mentioned  to  apply  to
a  process  of  general  regulation  of  landholding  which  began  in  the
twelfth  century  or  even  earlier  and  went  on  spreading  from  west  to
east.  After  the  redivision  arable  and  tofts  became  private  property,
while  before  the  redivision  we  have  to  surmise  more  ancient  forms
of  settlement  and  customs  of  land-holding  (the  fomiskipt  of  Swedish
sources)  to  which  the  regular  arrangements  of  the  Solrebning  does
not  give  any  clue.  As  far  as  the  description  of  Solrebning  goes,  Mr.
LauridserCs  remarks  are  eminently  worthy  of  attention,  and  the  treat-
ment of  aU  questions  relating  to  the  disposition  of  the  hoixsetofts


266  THE  GROWTH  OF  THE  MANOR

and  the  plans  of  village  settlements  is  especially  good.  At  the
same  time  the  author  does  not  seem  to  have  quite  realised  the
importance  of  some  traits  which  he  mentions  in  passing  without
laying  much  weight  on  them.  To  begin  with,  though  the  distribu-
tion of  the  solskifte  was  undoubtedly  meant  to  be  a  lasting  one  and
any  attempt  at  redistribution  was  obstructed  by  the  necessity  of
unanimous  consent  on  the  part  of  the  villagers,  it  is  too  much  to
speak  of  a  passage  from  commvmal  ownership  to  private  ownership
in  this  case.  All  the  communal  practices  which  we  have  been  des-
cribing in  regard  to  open  fields  of  England — compulsory  rotation,
rights  of  common  pasture,  incidents  of  common  appendant,  of
approvement  on  common  land,  etc.,  continued  to  hold  good.  Be-
sides, the  very  fact  that  most  of  our  recorded  examples  of  Solrebning
date  from  the  sixteenth  and  seventeenth  centuries  testify  to  the
frequent  occurrence  of  redistributions  of  land  on  the  basis  of  ciisto-
mary  claims.  It  is  clear  that  the  assignation  of  the  thirteenth  and
foixrteenth  centuries  did  not  render  those  of  the  sixteenth  and
seventeenth  superfluous  or  impossible.  In  this  way  it  would  be
safer  to  speak  of  the  Reebning  as  fixing  in  a  definite  manner  the
claims  of  each  shareholder  instead  of  assxmiing  that  it  created
private  property.  The  second  thing  to  be  noted  is  that  although
the  details  of  agrarian  practices  preceding  solskifte  are  not  clear
to  us,  it  is  quite  certain  that  they  started  from  the  conception  of
equalised  shares  and  of  a  communal  overlordship  over  them.
Indeed  the  equalised  share,  the  b6l,  or  mansus,  is  quite  as  char-
acteristic of  ancient  Danish  landholding  as  the  hide  is  of
Old  English  landholding  (cf.  J.  Steenstrwp,  "  Studier  over
Kong  Valdemars  jordbog").  The  hols  lay,  in  some  cases,  in
separate  plots,  but  consisted  mostly,  as  in  England,  of  bundles  of
strips  apportioned  to  the  tofts  and  scattered  in  the  fields.  To
judge  from  indications  in  regard  to  Finlandish  practices,  the  original
mode  of  assignation  may  have  consisted  in  the  allotment  of  strips
in  yearly  possession  (Kreuger  ''  Studier  rorande  de  agrariske  for,
haellandenas  utvecklixng  i  Sverige,"  Lund,  1882,  p.  17,  quoted  by
Lauridsen).  However  this  may  have  been  in  Denmark,  the  whole
process  of  subsequent  division  by  Solrebning  starts  from  the  prin-
ciple that  all  the  bols  and  ottings  confer  on  their  owners  rights  of
equalised  shareholders.  And  the  communal  overlordship  has  to
be  taken  for  granted  in  order  to  explain  the  whole  process  of  redis-
tribution. Lastly,  the  Northern  practices,  ranging  as  they  do
through  the  whole  domain  of  Scandinavian  open-field  cxiltivation,
appear  as  a  forcible  illustration  of  the  idea  that  no  seignorial  com-
pulsion or  manorial  organisation  is  needed  in  order  to  produce  the
system  of  township  shareholding:  they  are  directed  by  the  action
of  strictly  communal  authorities.  It  is  evident  in  their  case  that
the  equilibrium  of  open-field  holdings  may  be  produced  by  the
concurrent  interests  of  peasant  neighbours  and  by  the  sense  of


NOTES  267

household  solidarity  on  one  hand,  of  township  organisation  on  the
other,  quite  apart  from  any  discipline  and  exploitation  carried  into
village  life  from  the  outside.  I  cannot  help  thinking  tliat  this  is
emphatically  a  case  for  comparative  study  and  for  checking  a  priori
assertions  in  regard  to  what  was  likely  to  happen  in  free  and  unfree
settlements.  The  German  sj^stem  of  Feldgemeinschaft  has  been
often  made  the  subject  of  comparison,  but  the  Scandinavian  evi-
dence seems  even  more  to  the  point.

34.  Andrews,  "  Old  English  Manor,"  117.  Cf.  Maitland,  "  Domes-
day and  Beyond,"  336.

35.  C.  S.  Taylor,  "  Analj'sis  of  Gloucestersliire  Domesday,"  and
Maitland,  "  Domesday  and  Beyond,"  436.  assume  a  very  marked
prevalence  of  agriculture  over  pastoral  pursuits,  at  letist  in  tlie
purely  English  counties,  and  compare  the  present  acreage  of  arable
land  with  the  Domesday  acreage,  not  to  the  advantage  of  our  times.
There  is  a  good  deal  to  be  said  in  favour  of  this  latter  observation
which,  after  all,  seems  a  consequence  of  the  fact  that  there  is,  pro-
perly speaking,  no  peasantry  in  modern  England,  while  in  the  time
of  Domesday  the  peasantry  was  the  most  numerous  and  economically
important  class.  But  the  calculations  on  the  basis  of  the  ploughteam
of  120  acres  are  not  safe,  because,  as  I  have  suggested  elsewhere,
the  terra  carucis  most  likely  included  land  which  had  never
been  under  tillage  but  was  considered  convenient  for  cultivation.
The  fact  that  pastures  belonging  to  townships  are  seldom  mentioned
in  the  "  Gloucestershire  Domesday  "  can  in  no  way  prove  that
there  were  none,  it  seems  that  by  one  of  the  many  unaccountable
local  aberrations  from  the  common  type  of  the  inquiry,  the  Domesday
commissioners  and  jurors  of  Gloucestershire  did  not  attend  to  this
matter  or  that  the  notices  bearing  on  it  were  left  out  during  the
process  of  compilation.  There  can  be  no  material  reason  for
the  contrast  which  is  presented  by  Gloucestershire  and  Somerset-
shire in  this  respect.

36.  Dd.,  ii.  181,  187,  188,  et  passim.

37.  Earle,  "  Land  Charters,"  343  (CD.  853).

38.  I  am  indebted  for  this  information  to  Mr.  Seebohm.

39.  Feudal  docvunents  speak  of  inhoc  {"  Villainage  in  England,"
226)  where  Old  English  charters  employ  the  term  haga.  Earle,
"  Landch."  97  ;  Thorpe,  46.

40.  ^thelbirht,  27.

41.  Ine  40 :  Ceorles  wor^ig  sceal  beon  wintres  and  sumerea
betyned  ;  gif  he  biS  tmtyned  and  rec6  his  neahgebures  ceap  in  on
his  agen  geat,  nah  he  aet  )?am  ceape  nan  wuht :  adrife  hine  ut  and
^olie  aefwerdlan.

42.  Amira  in  Paul's  "  Grundrisa  der  germ.  Philologie,"  2  ed.,  iii.
173.

43.  Maitland, "  Domesday  and  Beyond,"  365  S.

44.  Meitzen,  I,  66.


268  THE  GROWTH  OF  THE  MANOE

45.  E.g.  "  History of English Law," i.  609.

46.  I  will  just  refer  to  some  passages  from  "  Court-Rolls,"  contain-
ing economic  regulations.  Especially  valuable  for  the  vmderstand-
ing  of  the  working  of  the  open-field  system  and  of  its  importance  in
rural  life  are  the  Court  RoUs  of  Manors  belonging  to  the  Chapter  of
Durham.  They  date  from  the  fourteenth  centiiry  and  are  dis-
tinguished by  the  great  care  with  which  they  enrol  the  agrarian
transactions,  but  such  transactions  in  themselves  are,  of  course,
only  a  specimen  of  what  took  place  all  over  the  country,  and  there
can  be  no  reasonable  doubt  that  in  substance  they  were  as  ancient
as  the  open-field  system  itself.

Even  in  later  times,  however,  the  village  assembly  was  not  a
mere  ceremonial  performance,  as  may  be  gathered,  for  example,
from  the  Court  RoUs  of  Hitchin  printed  at  the  close  of  Mr.  Seebohni's
volimae  on  the  Village  Community.  Mr.  and  Mrs.  Sidney  Webb  have
given  many  illustrations  of  the  later  practices  of  village  and  town
communities  in  connection  with  the  Open  Field  system  ("  English
Local  Government." — ^The  Manor  and  the  Borough,  76  ff.).  Cf.
my  article  on  Great  Tew  in  the  "  Economic  Quarterly  Review."

"  Halmota  prioratus  Dvmelmensis,"  ed.  by  Longstaffe  and  Booth
(Surtees  Society,  vol.  82),  123  (a.d.  1374) :  iniunctimi  est  om-
nibus tenentibus  villae,  quod  quUibet  eorum  veniant  pro  frethis,
hirlaws  et  aliis  comodis  et  proficuis  dictae  villae  ponendis  ad  pra«-
municionem dictorum praepositorum,  p.  138  (a.d.  1377) :  injunctuna,
etc.,  quod  veniant  ad  praemonitionem  messoris  ad  loquendum  pro
comodo  domini  et  vicinorum.  Cf.  p.  70,  103  ;  p.  82  (a.d.  1370).
Ordinatum  est  commvmi  assensu  quod  quUibet  tenencium  veniat
ad  praemunicionem  praepositi  ad  tractandum  de  communibus
negociis  et  quod  teneat  hoc  quod  inter  eos  ordinatum  fuerit,  p.  17
(a.d.  1345).  Praeceptixm  est  omnibus  tenentibus  villae  quod  servent
frithes  in  bladis,  pratis,  pasturis  et  semitis  et  quod  nuUus  eorum
sit  contrarius  aut  rebellis  vicinis  suis,  p.  23  (a.d.  1358)  ;  ordi-
natvun  est  ex  commimi  assensu  quod  quilibet  tenencium  mundet
partem  suam  prati  quod  vocatur  Bradeenge,  p.  24  (a.d.  1358) :
ordinattun  est  quod  omnes  husbandi  non  depascant  pasturam
cotmannorum  cum  pluribus  averiis  quam  fecerunt  ante  mortalitatem,
et  quod  quilibet  cotmannus  habeat  partem  suam  pasturae  .  .  .
prout  tenet  p.  38  (a.d.  1368).  Ordinatum  est  ex  communi  assensu
quod  nullus  lavet  nee  alia  enormia  ponat  nee  faciat  infra  placeam
que  vocatur  Holowpoill  et  quod  reservatur  tantum  pro  aquacione
averiorum  et  ad  aha  necessaria  infra  domos  tenencium  facienda
p.  41  (a.d.  1365)  :  ordinatimi  est  ex  communi  assensu  quod  nullus
eorum  permittat  pullanos,  vitulos,  stickettos  seu  aliqua  averia  infra
campum  in  quo  firumentum  seminatur  a  festo  Natalis  Domini
usque  blada  sit  messa  et  asportata  sub  poena  dimidiae  marcae
solvendae  per  ilium  qui  in  defecto  reperitur,  p.  67  (a.d.  1368) :
injunctum  est  omnibus  tenentibus  villae  nequis  eorum  permittant
vitulos  exire  villam  sine  custodia  ad  depascenda  blada  ;  injunctum
est  omnibus  tenentibus  villae  quod  nequis  eorum  succidet  (sic)  les


NOTES  269

C  likes  citra  proximam  curiam,  p.  144  (a.d.  1378):  ordinatum  est
ex  communi  assensu  quod  nullus  husbandorum  vel  cotarioruin
haboat  plura  averia  pro  tenura sua  quam  ordinatum  fuit  ab  antique
seu  alibi  depascant  quam  antiquitus  depascere  consueverunt. — Ordi-
natiun  est  ex  communi  assensu  quod  ad  cornacionem  messoria
veniant  pro  collectione  pisas  et  cum  iterum  cornaverit  recedant
de  pisis  predict  is  sub  paena  6  den.  ;  et  eciam  quod  nullus  coUigat
nisi  in  pisis  suis  propriis  exceptis  pauperibus,  etc.,  etc.  p.  65  (a.d.
1367)  :  injunctum  est  .  .  .  quod  quilibet  eorum  faciat  arrare
exteriores  partes  campi  et  eciam  interiores  partes  p.  94  (a.d.
1370)  Ordinatum  est  .  .  .  quod  quilibet  tenens  veniat  ad
facturam  feni  communis  prati  cum  praemunitus  fuerit  sub  poena
amissionis  partis  sue  et  eciam  sub  poena  gravis  misericordiae,
p.  122  (a.d.  1373).  Ordinatum  .  .  .  quod  quilibet  eorum  tenet
terramsuam  inculturaita  quod  quilibet  seminat  terram  suam  prout
campi  jacent  et  warectat  in  campis  prout  antiqui  solebant.

W.  0.  Massingberd,  "  History  of  the  Parish  of  Ormsby-cum-
Ketsby  in  the  Himdrcd  of  Hill  and  the  county  of  Lincoln  "  (1899),
276  (a.d.  1410)  :  it  is  enjoynedto  all  the  tenants  of  the  towTiship
of  Ormsby  that  each  of  them  shaU  cause  a  certain  sewer,  called
Stercroft,  to  be  repaired  against  their  own  land. — Enjoined  to
all  the  tenants  of  O.  that  they  cause  to  be  repaired  all  the
ditches.

47.  Examples  of  the  interchanging  of  the  expressions  "  injunctum
eet  tenentibus  villae  "  and  "  ordinatum  est  ex  communi  consensu  "
in  exactly  similar  passages  have  been  given  in  the  preceding  note.
Sometimes  both  are  vmited  in  one  sentence,  as  for  example  33,  174.
There  does  not  seem  to  be  sufficient  groimd  for  the  distinction
drawn  by  the  "  History  of  English  Law,"  i.  615.

48.  "  Durham  Halmote  Books,"  23  (a.d.  1358) :  "  Presentatum  est
per  firmarios  molendini  quod  tam  libere  tenentes  quam  alii  depascunt
per  aucria  sua  quemdam  locum  qui  vocatur  le  milndam  quem  ipsi
firmarii  clamant  pertiner  et  esse  separale  domini.  Ideo  preceptum
est  eisdem  firmariis  quod  distringant  liberos  tenentes  illam  depas-
centes.  Et  eciam  injunctum  est  aliis  tenentibus  quod  non  depas-
cant sub  poena  IS*.  4d.,  p.  51  (a.d.  1366).  Praeceptum  est  dis-
tringere  omnes  liberos  tenentes  ad  coperiendum  molendinum  et
injunctum  est  omnes  alii  tenentes  quod  coperiantur  citra  proximam
curiam  praedictum  molendinum,  p.  61  (a.d.  1366)  ;  ordinatum  est
ex  communi  ;  assensu  tam  liberi  quam  alii  tenentes  domini  quod
nullus  intret  campum  pro  balkys  metendis  nee  permittant  equos,
porcos,  bidentes  nee  aliqua  averia  sua  exire  villam  sine  custodia.
p.  73  :  praeceptum  est  distringere  liberos  homines  ad  reparandum
molendinum  aquaticum  sicut  inpluribus  halmotis  eo  quod  husbandi
fecenmt  per  partem  suam.  Masaingherd,  "  Court  Rolls  of  Ingold-
mells,"  100  :  ordered  to  distrain  the  rector  of  the  Church  for  many
trespasses  made  on  the  lord,  also  because  he  entered  on  bond  land
of  the  lord  without  the  licence  of  the  Court.  Whereas  the  homage
at  the  preceding  Court  had  respite  concerning  a  wall  raised  by  the


270  THE  GROWTH  OF  THE  MANOR

same  rector,  now  comes  the  homage  and  says  that  the  said  rector
raised  the  said  wall  on  the  bond  land  of  the  lord  by  the  length
of  5  feet  and  the  breadth  of  IJ  foot,  therefore  the  rector  in
mercy.

49.  The  term  by-law  "  means  the  law  of  a  by,"  of  a  township.
In  "  The  History  of  English  Law,"  i.  613,  two  or  three  cases
on  the  application  of  by-laws  are  quoted,  with  the  remark  :  "  Some
smaU  power  of  regiilating  the  rights  of  common  belonging  to  free-
holders we  may  allow  to  the  manorial  Covirt  and  its  by-laws,  but  to
all  seeming  it  was  small,"  One  cannot  help  reflecting  on  the  relativity
of  expressions  like  "  small  "  and  "  great."  The  by-laws  deaUng  with
the  everyday  transactions  of  thousands  of  townships  may  be  a  small
matter  when  compared  with  the  "  great "  cases  which  came  before  the
Royal  Coiirts,  but  for  the  bulk  of  the  population,  including  the
freeholders  owning  land  within  reach  of  these  by-laws,  they  were
hardly  imimportant.  As  for  the  interesting  trial  reported  vol.  i.  623,
624,  it  shows  a  good  deal  of  attention  on  the  part  of  judges  in  regard  to
the  details  of  by-laws  and  a  great  latitude  of  local  custom  in  formu-
lating them.  The  fact  that  the  judges  recognised  a  sort  of  pre-
scription in  the  interest  of  the  parson  and  a  stretch  of  privilege  on
the  part  of  the  lord  in  destroying  ripe  com  does  not  militate  against
the  validity  of  reasonable  by-laws  enforced  at  the  proper  time  and  in  a
proper  manner.  I  may  add,  in  passing,  that  there  is  nothing  to  show
that  the  community  had  no  notion  of  communal  ctdtivation,  because
it  admitted  certain  rights  of  approvement  on  its  waste.  As  we
have  seen,  the  waste  was  treated  in  a  very  different  manner  from
the  land  in  the  fields  (terra  in  campis).  A  good  instance  of  the
recognition  of  executive  measures  taken  to  enforce  common  of
pasture  by  a  Royal  Covft-t  is  presented  by  Northumberland  Assize
Roll,  45 :  "  juratores  dicunt  quod  praedicta  placea  .  .  .  fuit
commune  pasturae  predicti  Roberti  et  alioriun,  et  venit  idem  Al.
de  C.  et  voluit  sibi  appropriare  60  acras  de  predicta  pastura,
et  fecit  fossare  ibidem.  Et  predictus  Robertus  et  alii  statim,
sine  aliqua  seisina  quam  idem  Alanus  inde  habuit,  pro-
strauerxmt  predictum  fossatum  et  utebantur  communa  sua.
Consideratum  est  quod  predictus  Robertus  et  alii  inde  sine  die.  Cf.
Massingberd,  "Court  Rolls  of  Ingoldmells,"  44.

50.  The  rules  quoted  in  notes  46  and  47  are  examples  of  by-laws
proper.  Most  extents  and  custumals  are  drawn  up  on  the  basis
of  verdicts  of  local  juries.  An  example  of  an  indenture  of  this  kind
is  given  by  the  Crondale  inquest  of  October  10,  1567  (p.  160).
The  late  date  does  not  detract  from  its  value,  as  it  only  follows  a
general  and  archaic  practice,

51.  The  regulations  in  regard  to  the  apportionment  of  meadows
in  the  combined  meeting  of  the  tenants  of  Aston  and  Cote  is  the
standard  case  in  point.  Besides,  as  it  has  been  so  con-
vincingly shown  by Professor Maitland in "  Domesday and


NOTES  271

Bej'ond,"  the  further  we  go  into  earher  periods  the  more  common
becomes  the  mixed  township,  consisting  of  freemen  standing  in
various  degrees  and  forms  of  dependence  on  great  men.  And  in
these  cases  the  management  of  the  thousand  and  one  questions
concerning  the  open  fields  had  to  be  transacted  by  extra-manorial
meetings.  \Vliat  must  have  been  very  common  before  the  feudal
epoch  became  the  exception  after  the  establishment  of  manorial
feudalism.  A  curious  instance  of  an  apportionment  of  pasturt>  by
agreement  between  three  baronies  represented  by  eight  men  is  given
in  Weir,  "  Historical  and  Descriptive  Sketches  of  the  Town  and
Soke  of  Homcastle  co.  Lincoln,"  1820,  p.  115.  On  regulations  as  to
Open  Fields,  cf.  my  "  English  Society  in  the  Xlth  century,"  578  ff.

52.  "  Durham  Halmote  Books,"  p.  82  a.d.  1369  :  "  Simt  electi
jurati  Willelmus  Ibbi  .  .  .,  et  Joharmes  Fermour  electi  sunt  ad
ordinandum  villae,  videlicet  de  fret  his  ponendis  et  ordinacionibus
pro  communitate  villae  et  ad  certificandum  curie  ad  proximum.  p.  11
(a.d.  1296)  [compertum]  est  per  juratam  quod  homines  de  Dalton  non
debent  habere  communam  ab  inferiori  parti  del  Welleleche  versus
fossatam  pomerii  (sed  ?)  aliquo  anno,  scilicet,  quolibet  tercio  anno
habebant  fugam  suam  cum  animalibus  suis  ad  moram.  Item
juratores  dicunt  quod  homines  de  D.  solebant  habere  communam
cum  animalibus  suis  a  porta  manerii  usque  viam  de  Hesilden.  Item
juratores  dicunt  quod  dicti  homines  solebant  habere  Communam  in
C.  Greenside  quando  terra  citrale  Grenside  jacuit  Warectata.  Item
dicunt  quod  dicti  homines  non  debent  habere  communam  in  le
Cotwallis  si  claudentur,  aut  sepe  uel  fossato  includentur.

53.  Andrews,  "  Old  English  Manor,"  206  ff.  ''  Durham  Halmote
Books,"  68  (a.d.  1368).  De  W.  J.  quia  noluit  pascere  commimam
porcariam,  prout  tumus  suus  postulabat ;  p.  103  (a.d.  1370)  in-
junctum  est  .  .  .  quod  convenient  ad  mandatum  prepositi  pro
comune  proficuio  et  quod  habeant  unum  communem  pastorem."
An  elective  smith and  an  elective  "  messor  "  are  also mentioned.

54.  Massingberd, "Court  Rolls  of  Ingoldmells,"  xix. 47.

55.  Andrews,  "  Old  English  Manor,"  231.

56.  The  Court  for  the  dens  of  the  lowy  (leucata)  of  Tonbridge,  the
ancient  wood  of  Andred,  was  of  that  character.  Twyaden,
quoted by  Kemble,  *'  Saxons  in  England,"  App.

67.  For  example  ''Rot.  Hundr."  i. 3.

58.  "Rot  Hundr."  i.  212. The  Kentish  borgh  was  a  local  body.

59.  Stubbs,  "  Constitutional  History,"  i.  Let  it  be  noted  that  the
reeve  and  priest  and  their  companions  represent  the  township  and
not  the  manor.  Cf.  The  characteristic  way  they  eire  entered  in
Domesday,  i.  133,  Begesford  (Herts),  R-esbiter  et  propositus
hujus  villae  cum  22  villanis  habent  15  carucas.  Tliis  is  one  of  the
indications  that  the  reeve  got  to  be  unfree  when  the  villain  was
transformed  from  a  free  ceorl  into  a  bondsman,  that  is  in  the  age
of  feudalism.

60.  "  Rot.  Hundr."  ii.  14 :  WUlelmus  prepositus  de  Apethorp,  soke-


272  THE  GROWTH  OF  THE  MANOR

mannus  domini  Regis.  Suckling,  "  History  of  Suffolk,"  i,  272
(Chistoms  of  Mutford,  temp.  Edw.  I.) :  Quidam  illorum  (soke-mau-
norum)  erunt  prepositi  per  tiirnum  suum.  .  .  .  Et  prepositi  eligentur
per  sokemannos  circa  festum  Sti  Petri  ad  Vinciila  per  turnum  ut
dictum  est.  Blomefield,  "  History  of  Norfolk,"  i.  171  ("  Customs  of
the  Manor  of  Gissing,"  a.d.  1327) :  The  praepositus  and  the  messor
are  chosen  from  the  tenants  without  distinction  of  classes.  Custom-
ary of  the  soke  of  Rothley,  "  Archaeologia,"  xlvii.  125:  Balliuus
domini  Regis  facit  prepositum  de  quocunque  voluerit  tam  de  Rol.
quam  de  omnibus  aliis  ville  soke,  nvJlo  excepto  preter  Stephanum
de  Rol.  It  is  qiiite  common  for  sokemen  to  undertake  some
of  the  duties  of  supervision  in  regard  to  agrarian  arrangements.
They  have  to  ride  with  their  staves  while  superintending  work  in  the
fields  ( "Villainage  in  England, "453).  They  are  also  called  up  for  police
duties.  For  example,  Survey  of  the  hundreds  of  West  Derby,  Lons-
dale and  Amoimderness  in  Lancashire  (three  Lancashire  documents
ed.  by  J.  Harland  ;  "Chetham  Soc."  Ixxiv.),  30.  Villata  de  Ditton.
.  .  .  ibvmt  cum  balliuis  comitatus  et  wapentaku  usque  ad  proximam
villatam  ad  testificand\im  districciones  quociens  per  cursum  suum
acciderint  cum  aUis  vicinis  suis.

61.  The  gerefa,  the  smith  and  the  child's  nurse  are  considered  by
Ine's  law,  23  to  be  personal  dependents  of  the  thane,  and  may  be
taken  with  him,  if  he  leaves  the  manor.  Testators  often  speak  of
their  reeves  in  their  wills  and  make  legacies  to  them,  Thorpe,
"  Dipl."  521,  581  ;  Earle,  "  Land  Charters,"  Cf.  Andrews,  "  Old
English  Manor,"  130.  The  tract  called  "  Gerefa,"  ed.  by  Lieber-
marui  (Anglia,  viii.,  now  published  in  "  Gesetze  der  Angelsachsen,"
I.)  has  the  personal  steward  in  view.

62.  The  "  gerefa  "  of  the  tract  just  mentioned  has  not  only  to  act
in  the  interest  of  his  lord,  but  to  mind  the  rights  and  obligations
imposed  by  "  folcright,"  that  is  the  customary  common  law.  Cf.
Andrews,  "  Old  English  Manor,"  140.

63.  "  History  of  English  Law,"  i.  346.

64.  Edgar,  I.  The  jurors  are  distinguished  in  later  times  from
other  vUlage  authorities.  "  Dixrham  Halimote  Books,"  p.  82
(a.d.  1369)  :  Johannes  Fermour  electus  est  in  praepositum
et  juratum.  Et  eciam  isti  sunt  electi  jurati ;  Willelmus  Ibbi,
Willelmus  Tut,  Willelmus  Randolf  et  Johannes  Teddi. — Ricardus  de
Heworth,  Thomas  Perkinson,  Willelmus  Randolf,  WiUelmus  Pouer,
Hugo  de  JoUton  et  Johannes  Fermoxir  electi  sunt  ad  ordinandxim
villas,  videlicet  de  f re  this  ponendis  et  ad  ordinacionibus  (sic)  pro  Com-
munitate  Villae,  et  ad  certificandum  Curie  ad  proximum.  It  may
be  noted  that  the  reeve,  John  Fermour,  appears  on  both  committees,
p.  155  ;  ordinatum  est  ex  commimi  assensu  tam  liberorum  quam
tenencitmi  domini  Prioris  quod  Willelmus  Pouer,  Gilbertus  Randolf,
Rogerus  Losse,  Johannes  Redworth,  WUlelmus  Tolson  et  Thomas
Parkinson  ad  ordinandum  et  ponendum  freth  et  omnia  pertinentia


NOTES  273

prtiedictae  villae.  sub  poena  dimidiae  marcae. — Whitnker,  "  HLstory
of  Whalley,"  265.  In  the  Court  of  tliree  Manors  in  Clitheroe  Castle,
the  "  greaves  ''  of  the  manor  make  return  of  jurors,  for  Worston
one,  for  Pendleton  two,  for  Chatham  tliree,  and  so  after  pro-
portion until  a  full  jury  be  returned.  *•  Court  rolls  of  tlxe  Honor
of  Clitheroe,"  ed.  by  Farrer,  1897.

65.  In  view  of  the  importance  of  the  subject  I  may  be  allowed  to
give  some  details.  The  duty  of  attending  local  moots  called  by  the
reeve,  and  distinguished  from  the  county  assemblies  and  the  hundred
courts,  is  expressly  mentioned.  Dd.  I.,  269,  6.  (Lancashire — between
the  Ribble  and  the  Mersey) :  qui  re  mane  bat  de  sciremot — per
10  solidos  emendabat.  Si  de  hundredo  remanebat,  aut  non  ibat  ad
placitum  ubi  prepositus  jubebat  per  5  solidos  emendabat.  Cf.  ib.
Si  constrictus  justitia  prepositi  alicui  debitum  solvebat,  et  si  ter-
minum  a  preposito  datum  non  attendebat  (one  of  the  six  cases
when  the  Lancashire  freemen  had  to  pay  customary  fines).  The
English  for  placitum  would  have  been  m6t,  and  it  is  clearly  con-
trasted as  such  with  meetings  of  the  shire  and  of  the  hundred.  In
the  light  of  this  terminology  we  come  to  understand  better  the
expressions  of  the  Confessor's  writ  to  the  Berkshire  thanes  in  favour
of  Abingdon  (CD.  870,  Earle,  *'  Landchart."  342)  ;  frigelice
habban  and  wealdan  Hornem^res  hundred  on  hyre  agenre  and-
wealde  .  .  .  and  swa  sSaet  nan  scjTgerefe  oHe  motgerefa  Sar  habban
aeni  socne  ot56e  gemot  buton  6es  abbudes  agen  hfese  and  unne  "
(nuUus  vicecomes  vel  'praepositus  ibi  habeant  aliquam  appropria-
tionem  vel  placitum).  The  entire  hundred  had  been  granted  to
the  Abbey,  but  it  consisted  of  two  large  manors — Comenore  of  50
hides  (T.R.E.),  and  Bertune  of  60  hides — and  it  seems  natural
to  suppose  that  at  least  the  meetings  of  these  manors  were  included
among  the  gemots  to  be  held  at  the  Abbot's  bidding,  while  the
praepositi  styled  motgerefas  must  have  been  both  himdred  reeves
and  local  reeves.  On  the  other  hand,  the  common  freeman  is
described  in  a  remarkable  passage  of  another  Old  English  charter
as  moteworthy,  fyrd-worthy,  and  fald-worthy.  (CD.  853,  Earle,
343.)  The  mention  of  the  fold  leaves  no  doubt  as  to  the  fact  that
local  standing  was  meant  as  well  as  participation  in  the  host.
The  motworthiness  certainly  included  the  meetings  of  shire,
hundred  and  wapentake  (Aethelred  iii.  3,  1),  but  it  must  have  in-
cluded also  the  rural  meetings  called  by  the  reeve.  The  King's  reeve
mentioned  in  connexion  with  the  folcgemdt  in  Aelfr.  31  as  a  "  m6t-
reeve,"  is  a  local  steward  of  the  King,  in  this  case  probably  one  ap-
pointed to  watch  over  his  interests  in  a  market  or  port  town.
But  the  machinery  was  similar  in  other  localities.  Again,  the  fre-
quent prohibitions  to  attend  gemots  on  Sundays  and  feast-days  (for
example,  Aethelred,  vi.  22),  evidently  applied  to  all  kinds  of  meetings
for  transacting  local  biLsiness  even  of  the  humblest  kind.  Cf.  Edgar.
i.  7 ; Sclimid,  App.  xi. To  return to  the  Domesday  Survey,  the

T


274  THE  GROWTH  OF  THE  MANOR

duty  of  tenants  and  sokemen  to  attend  moots  held  in  the  manors  of
great  men  is  not  unfrequently  mentioned  (Dd.,  i,  87  c  ;  105  b  ;  175).
The  geinot-hus  is  mentioned  in  a  charter  of  900/901 ;  Birch,  "  Cart.
Sax."  ii.  246.  {Andrews,"  Old  English  Manor,"  1 38.)  But,  what  is  more
interesting,  these  meetings  were  not  considered  to  be  necessarily
bound  up  with  the  halls  ;  indeed,  to  judge  from  one  entry,  at
least,  a  halimot  seems  to  have  been  rather  an  exception.  Dd.,  i.
265  b  ;  ("  Actune  ") :  hoc  manerium  habet  suum  placitum  in  aula
domini  sui.  The  village  meetings  were  probably  held  originally  in
the  open  air.  A  curious  survival  of  this  custom  is  afforded  by  the
interesting  fourteenth  century  Register  of  Stoneleigh.  The  Sokemen
of  Stoneleigh  held  their  cotirt  in  a  place  called  Mot-StowehiU,
"Villainage  in  England,"  430.  We  find  a  tunscipesmot  mentioned
in  a  charter  of  Richard  I. — Eyton,  Shropshire,  iii.  237,  quoted
by  Stubbs,  "  Const.  H.,"  i.  90.

66.  An  important  argument  in  this  connexion  is  to  be  derived  from
the  fact  that  the  original  halimote  is  not  differentiated  into  several
courts  for  the  needs  of  free  and  vmfree,  for  ordinary  business  and
criminal  or  police  purposes,  but  forms  one  whole  and  transacts  all
kinds  of  business.  {Maitland,  "  Introduction  to  Pleas  of  Manorial
Courts  "  (Selden  Society).  Cf.  Massingherd,  "  Court-rolls  of  Ingold-
mells,"  XV.  xvi.  Evidently  the  basis  of  the  co\xrt  is  the  meeting
of  villagers  who  have  to  settle  their  open-field  arrangements  ir-
respectively of  rank  in  society  and  personal  status.  This  does  not
exclude  the  notion  that  at  least  some  of  the  members  of  the  Court
were  to  be  freemen,  fully  moteworthy  men,  because  in  so  far  as  the
meetings  had  to  deal  with  legal  matters  this  element  of  freemen
formed  a  necessary  link  with  the  higher  Courts.  The  notion  is
well  authenticated  for  the  feudal  organisation  of  the  manor.

67.  For  an  example,  I  will  refer  to  the  entries  in  the  Court-rolls
of  Ingoldmells,  17,  27,  36,  44,  72,  etc.  "  Court-Rolls  of  the  Honour
of  Clitheroe,"  ed.  by  W.  Farrer  (1897),  6.  William  le  Barker  for  an
open  "  gappe  "  in  the  Bull's  stall,  contrary  to  the  by-law  (in  mercy),
7.  lb.  60  ;  The  jury  say,  that  ...CM....  exceed  their  stints
on  the  common  pasture  in  Chatbume,  that  Th.  Talior  does  not  repair
and  make  good  his  "Renghard"  (a  hedge).  Cf.  the  editor's  explanatory
note  with  a  reference  to  a  by-law  of  11  Henry  VII.  (Cf.  "East
Riding  Memorial  Rolls,"  published  by  Boulder  in  the  "  Yorkshire
Archaeological  and  Topographical  Journal,"  71.)

68.  Instances  of  cases  when  rural  transgressions  were  brought  to
the  notice  of  the  hundred  courts  and  of  the  htmdred  officers.  "  Rot.
Hundr."  i.  446.  Cf.  "Court-rolls  of  the  Hundred  and  Manor  of
Crondal,"  ed.  by  Baigent  (London,  1891),  142,  145,  146,  etc.

69.  This  is  the  solution  of  the  difficulty  suggested  by  Prof.
Meutland.

70.  The  terms  and  practices  alluded  to  are  best  illustrated  by
feudal  documents. For  example  "Rot.  Hundr.,"  i.  216:  Priorissa


NOTES  275

de  Scapeia  .  .  .  appropriavit  aibi  tenentes  suos  qui  solebant  locaro,
lottiare  et  scottare  ad  villatam  de  Middeltiin,  et  non  faciunt  ad
dampnum  patrie  per  annum  6  den,  i.  210  :  fratres  domus  Dei  de
Osperenge  .  .  .  subtraxerunt  se  de  scotto  et  lotto  que  facero  con-
sueverunt  ad  borgham  de  Satameleford  ad  dampnum  patrie  per
finnum  12  den. — Et  quod  tenentes  Templariorum  subtraxerunt  so
eodera  modo  de  scoto  et  lotto  ad  borgham  de  Esture — ad  grave
dampnum  istus  borghe.  Cf.  i.  238  (himdredum  de  Goscot,
Leicester),  i.  276  .  .  .  omnes  tenentes  de  villa  de  Spaldingc  debent
ad  reparacionem  pontis  illius,  quUibet  pro  rata  porcionis  terrae
sue  contribuere,  ita  quod  quaelibet  acra  erit  par  alterius,  i.  468  :
quidam  homines  manentes  in  Reydone  qui  svmt  de  homagio  de
Brisigham,  solebant  stare  in  communis  de  Reydone,  videlicet  ad
scot  et  lotte  et  ad  omnes  misas  domini  Regis,  et  extrahuntur  s
tempore  Wydon  le  Verdun  usque  nunc  ad  libertates  et  misas  de
Brisigham.  Gage,  "History  of  Thinghoe  Hundred"  (1838),  p.  85,
Gilbert  of  Clare  grants  to  the  monastery  of  St.  Edmund's  two
"  liberos  homines.  Ulwinum  .  .  .  et  Ulmanma  de  W.  cum  ter-
ris  suis  .  .  .  nee  aliqua  consuetudo  eis  alia  imponatur,  quam
soliti  erant  facere  qui  eas  sub  me  tenebat — excepto  scottum  regis
quod  solvant  emu  suis  vicinis  in  hundret,  quando  per  totam  Angliam
currit." — The  repartition  of  scot  and  lot  among  the  twelve  "letes,"
and  the  twenty-one  townships  of  the  hundred  of  Thinghowe  is  given
in  a  Survey  of  the  Hundred,  a.d.  1184  (V.C,  p.  xii.,  etc.).  The  English
terminology  and  the  apportionment  by  townships  leave  hardly  any
doubt  as  to  the  development  of  these  features  from  Old  English
origins.  Cf.  Thorpe,  "Dipl.,"  368  (Edward  the  Confessor  to  the
Oxfordshire  thanes,  A.r).  1053)  :  ic  habbe  gegifan  Cr.  et  S*'®  Petre
into  Westminster  ]?et  cotlif  Se  ic  waes  geboran  inne  .  .  .  and  ane
healfe  hide  aet  Mersce,  scotfre  and  gafolfreo.

71.  The  remark  that  the  villani  of  such  and  such  a  place — we
should  say  the  township — have  failed  to  make  their  joint  contribu-
tion, is  a  frequent  one  in  the  Geld-roU  of  1084,  which  is  certainly
based  on  earher  practice.  (Dd.,  ii.)  Thorpe,  305  (Canute — a.d.  1018) :
Swa  fela  sySe  swa  menn  gyldaS  heregyld  o65e  to  scip  gylde,  gylde  se
tunscipe  swa  swa  o$re  menn  dot5  to  )?aere  muneca  neode.  The
charter  is  spurious,  but  probably  almost  contemporaneous.  As
to  the  methods  of  subdividing  the  tax,  see  Round,  "  Feudal  England,"
49.  From  the  point  of  view  of  taxation  and  other  requirements,
a  place  might  be  termed  in  Norman  times  a  full  township,  plena
villa.  Liber  Niger  ecclesiae  de  Burgo  (Society  of  Antiquaries),
f. 167,  d.

72.  For  example,  Thorpe,  "  Dipl."  229,  Earle,  100  (CD.  216),
Earle,  272  "  Cart.  Sax."  iv.  23,  Ibid.,  ii.  27,  etc.

73.  This  point  is  clearest  in  later  dociunents,  "  Rot.  Hundr,"  i.  6  :
Cum  dicti  sokemen  omnes  teneantur  solvere  duas  marcos  annua-
tim  ad  tallagium conjunctim, et non divisim, uno vel duobus


276  THE  GROWTH  OF  THE  MANOR

per  domino  absolutis  a  predicta  solutione,  nihilominus  tota  peciinuii
integraliter  a  residuis  hominibus  exigitur.  "Rot.  Hvmdr.,"  ii.  8:
Prior  de  Dunstaple  impetravit  domui  sue  2  hidas  terre  et  dimidia
virgata — et  ab  illo  tempore  se  subtraxerunt  neque  modo  .  .  .  et  fuit
villa  amerciata  pro  evasione  ad  100  solidos,  et  collecta  fuit  predicta
pecunia  per  porciones  et  extentas  terrarum,  et  deberet  solvisse
dictus  prior  pro  porcione  2  hidarum  10  solidos,  nee  voluit  sicut  prius
usus  fuit,  et  ideo  veniunt  in  demanda  super  villam.  It  is  not  only
the  general  probability  that  these  customs  of  joint  liability  went
back  to  the  time  when  the  hidage  and  the  geld  system  were  estab-
lished that  we  have  to  plead  in  order  to  connect  these  feudal  descrip-
tions with  ancient  practices,  but  also  the  necessity  of  proceeding
in  this  manner  at  a  time  when  there  was  no  staff  of  collectors
appointed  by  central  authority  to  watch  over  the  incidents  of
taxation  in  regard  to  small  people.  AE  tribute  was  for  this
reason — ^not  to  speak  of  others — imposed  and  levied  by  repartition
of  lump  sums  from  above.  This  did  not  preclude  individual  exac-
tions and  individual  control  as  regards  conspicuous  and  wealthy
people.  The  lords  of  manors,  and  before  them  the  thanes,  were  not
merely  included  in  their  shires  and  hundreds,  but  made  individu-
ally responsible.  Wlien  the  Danish  exactions  were  at  their  height
possession  of  land  was  actually  made  dependent  on  the  payment
of  the  geld.  Cnut,  ii.  49.  Thorpe,  "  DipL,"  452.  Cf.  "  Crawford
Charters,"  76,  and  Thorpe,  "  Dipl.,"  452.

74.  Aetheked,  iii.  3,  1.  T.,  Lgg.  Henrici,  i.  T.  §  7.  Cf.  Liber
Eliensis  :  per  sacramentvun  vicecomitis  scire  et  omnium
baronum  .  .  .  et  tocius  centuriatus,  presbiteri,  propositi,  sex  vil-
lanorum  unius  cujusque  ville.  Thorpe,  "  Dipl.,"  383  (Edw.  Conf.,
A.D.  1060  *  Winebodesham  cum  hundredo  et  dimidio  ...  et
cum  64  socemannis  ad  himdredos  pertinentibus.  Even  in  later
times  the  suit  of  all  free  tenants,  or  even  of  all  freemen,  to  the
hundred  is  sometimes  required.  For  example,  Placita  Quo  Warranto,
428  :  omnes  tenentes  Abbatis  de  Burgho  St.  Petri  ...  in  vUlis
de  Scoter  etc.  .  .  .  Solebant  facere  sectam  ad  wapentake  domini
Regis  de  Coringham.  Ita  quod  quidam  illorum  solebant  facere
sectam  ad  wapentake  illud  de  tribus  septimanis  in  3  septimanas.
Et  quidam  eorum  solebant  venire  ad  presentaciones  faciendas
ad  Coromam  pertinentes.  p.  780 :  tres  radmanni  de  Wycton  alter
natim  faciunt  sectas  ad  hundreda  domini  Regis  de  Hunnesford
de  tribus  septimanis  in  tres  septimanas  pro  omnibus  predictis
villis  praeterquam  de  Erdinton.  Et  omnes  liberi  tenentes  de  Erdin-
ton  personaliter  facitmt  sectam  ad  predictum  hundredum  de  tribus
septimanis  in  tres  septimanas.  The  last  case  gives  a  good  in-
stance of  the  passage  from  an  all-round  suit  to  representative
suit.  The  usual  course  in  feudal  times  was  to  call  up  all  the  free-
men for  the  two  law  days  of  the  great  court  leet.

75.  "  Rot. Himdr., " i. 240 (Ketelby et Saxtenby)  ; Ibid.,


NOTES  277

I :  i.  362  (Abbas  de  Hachneby  in  Estbnrkeworyt).  Cf.  Pollock  and
;  '■  Maitland,  "  Historj'  of  English  Law,"  i.  527.  A  curious  conse-
quence of  this  locaUsation  of  suits  appears  in  tlie  sliape  of  tenements
called  hitndredlands.  Plac.  Q.W.  349  :  homines  qui  tcnent  dimi-
dium  hundredylond.  .  .  .  Tenentes  Henrici  de  Grey  .  .  .  qui
tenent  duo  hundredeslaunde,  etc.

76.  It  has  been  seen  that the  principle of representation  was
not  confined  in  tlie  feudal  period  to  the  tenantry in villainage.
On  the  other  hand,  it  would be difficult to draw sharply the
distinction  between  the  personal  suitors  of the  himdred  (the  cen-
turiatus)  and  the  bodies of villagers represented by  the reeve,
'  the  priest  and  the  four  men. It seems likely that it weis the
effect of the class distinctions enforced by the Normans that
led  to  a  consecjuent  development  of  contrasts  such  as  that  men-
tioned in  the  marginal  note  to  the  Phillips  MS.  of  Bracton. Pollock
and  Maitland,  "  History  of  English  Law,"  i.  534. Cf.  "  Rot.  Himdr.,"
,  i, 220  : Thomas  Malmeris  solebat  venire  ad  communitatem  hvm-
I  dredi  de  Ho  ad  audiendum  precepta  Domini  Regis  et  auxiliandum
1  judicivun  dare  de sanguine, vita  et  membris una ctun hxmdredo
'  predicto. Examples  of  the  methods  of  doing  suit  may  be  found
'  "Rot.  Hundr.," i.  205,  215,  361  ; Placita  Q.'Warr.,  293,  346. In
Kent,  where  no  villainage  at  common  law  was  recognized,  and  the
whole  tenantrj' was admitted  to hold  freely  in gavelkind,  the
system  of  representation  by  the  borgeldor  and  four  men  was  in
j  fuU  vigour.

I  77.  See,  for  example,  the  apportionment  of  service  and  nulitary
I  aid  by  hides  in  the  Domesday  Survey  of  Berkshire.
I  78.  Aethelstan,  vi.  ;  Canute,  u.  20.  A  germ  of  the  institution  of
j  compulsory  frankpledge  (freeborgh)  may  be  seen  in  the  voluntary
'  association  of  the  gegildan  of  Alfred's  law,  27.  Cf.  "  History  of
English  Law,"  i.  556.  The  intimate  connexion  between  the  terri-
;  torial  and  the  personal  arrangements  of  the  system  of  frankpledge
'  is  especially  worth  notice.  It  is  perhaps  clearest  in  Kentish
'  cases.  '•  Rot.  Hundr.,"  i.  215 :  villa  de  Nywendene  quondam
I  fiait  una  burgha  ad  himdredum  de  S.  et  subtracta  est  per  Ubertatem
!  archiepiscop.  lb.,  i.  220 :  in  hvmdredo  de  Hosunstres  borghe.
'  lb.,  i.  223 :  Dimidia  borgha  de  Westbrocton,  scilicet  tenentes  Wil-
!  lelmi  de  Montecanisio  subtrahuntvir  a  secta  dicti  hvmdredi  post
'  bellum  de  Lewes  .  .  .  Item  dimidium  quarter ium  unius  borghe
in  Hedji;on  subtrahitur  ab  eadem  secta.  Cf.  P.  Q.  Warr.  350  .  .  .
:  borgha  forinseca  .  .  .  iidem  tenentes  solebant  ...  in  ouinibuB
'  Scottis  et  Lottis  sustinere  tertiam  partem.
79.  "  History  of  Engbsh  Law,"  i.  551  ff.


278  THE GROWTH OF THE MANOR


CHAPTER  V

1.  A  picture  of  an  ancient  English  plough  worked  by  four  oxen
is  given  in  Larking,  "  Domesday  of  Kent,"  cf.  Peisker,  Zur  Geschichte
des  Pfluges,  "  Zeitschrift  fiir  Social  und  Wirthschaftsgeschichte,"  v.

2.  Tliis  point  has  been  best  elucidated  by  Seebohm,  "Village  Com-
munity."

3.  The  tenants  holding  land  in  campis  are  carefully  distinguished
from  the  cottarii,  cotsetle,  etc.

4.  The  early  Anglo-Saxon  laws  are  full  of  information  as  to  the
position  of  slaves.  See,  Schmid,  "  Glossar  "  to  his  "  Gesetze  der  Angel-
sachsen,"  sub.  v.  theow,  witetheow.  Aceorl's  "bireel"  is  mentioned
Aethelbirht,  16.  (Cf.  Jastrow,  "Die  Strafrechtliche  Stellimg  der
Sklaven  in  angels achsischem  Recht,"  in  Gierke's,  '•  Untersuchungen
zur  Rechtsgeschichte.")

5.  Agricultural  services  performed  by  socmen  are  very
common  in  the  early  surveys.  For  example,  Bound,  "  Feudal
England,"  30.

6.  The  peasants  on  an  estate  are  described  as  J^eowbserde  and  bur-
bserde  (CD.  1079).  The  conditions  and  frequency  of  manumission
are  well  illustrated  by  the  group  of  charters  and  entries  in  Church-
books  collected  hy  Thorpe,  "  Diplomatarium,"  under  the  heading  of
"  Manvunissions."

7.  On  the  percentage  of  slaves  in  the  different  counties  at  the
time  of  Domesday,  see  Seebohm,  "  Village  Community,"  map  to  84.

8.  They  are  equated  with  the  twyhynd  class  in  treating  with
the  Danes.

9.  Seebohm  traces  single  succession  in  regard  to  tenements  to  this
cause. "  Tribal  Custom,"  512.

10.  Most  of  the  smaller  free  tenantry  and  socmen  of  the  early
surveys  are  holding  virgates  and  bovates  in  the  same  way  as
villains,  and  even  if  we  do  not  pay  any  attention  to  the  free
elements  among  the  latter,  it  would  be  impossible  to  account
for  the  development  of  single  succession  among  socmen  by
the  influence  of  their  lords.  See,  for  example,  the  entries  in
regard  to  socmen  in  the  Black  Book  of  Peterborough  (Camden
Society).

11.  "  History  of  English  Law,"  ii.,  268.

12.  The  best  examples  of  the  distribution  of  sub-shares  in  gavel-
kind sulungs  are  given  in  the  still  vmpublished  Black  Book  of
St.  Augustine,  Cotton  MS.,  Faustina,  1.  Cf.  "  History  of  English
Law,"  ii.  271.  Seebohm,  "  Tribal  Custom  in  Anglo-Saxon  Law,"
515.  Gavelkind  in  Sussex.  Robinson,  "  Gavelkind,"  5th  ed.
(London,  1897),  pp.  33,  37.

13.  Heiisler,  "  Institutionen,"  i.  230  ff.


NOTES  279

14.  The  motives  for  holding  family  property  together  are
dearly  expressed  in  several  Old  Englisli  documents,  especially  in
King  Alfred's  will  (Thorpe,  48-4,  ff.)  and  in  Ketel  Alder's  will
{Thorpe,  581).

15.  For  example.  Dd.,  iii.,  95  :  Delvertana  .  .  .  Huie  mansioni  sunt
addite  2  hidae  terrae  dimidio  fertino  minus  quas  tenuerunt  13  taini
pariter  die  que  Rex  Edwardus  vivus  fuit  et  mortuus.  The  tenure
in  paragio  is  very  frequent  in  Domesday.

16.  Both  the  Domesday  examples  of  "  parage  "  and  the  passages  of
Glanville  and  Bracton  as  to  socage  imply  that  this  Old  English  law
of  succession  was  largely  shaped  by  local  custom.  This  is  one  of
the  points  which  ought  to  remind  us,  that  the  evolution  of  the
law  was  much  more  dependent  on  customary  development  and  local
variations  in  the  Old  English  and  early  Norman  epoch  than  our  ex-
perience of  the  influence  of  Royal  Courts  in  the  age  of  Common  Law
would  lead  us  to  suppose.

17.  "  Domesday  and  Beyond,"  331  ff.

18.  Konrad  Maurer,  "  Ueber  angelsachsische  Rechtsverhaltnisse,"
in  the  "Kritische  Ueberschau,"  1853  ff."


CHAPTER VI

1.  ^thelstan,  ii.  2,  8.

2.  The  Old  English  statutes  of  guilds  are  conveniently  collected
in  a  section  of  Thorpe's  "  Diplomatarium."

3.  The  man-bot :  Ine,  70,  76  ;  "  Lgg.  Henr.  L,"  69,  etc.

4.  Ine,  50.

5.  ^thelstan,  iii.  4 ;  iv.  5 ;  v.  1.

6.  For  example,  Ine,  39.

7.  Domesday  contrasts  the  man  who  could  go  with  his  land
where  he  pleased  with  those  who  could  not  do  so.  Sometimes  the
personal  obligation  is  separated  from  the  relation  in  regard  to
land  (Dd.  ii.  57  b;  71  b.).  On  this  subject  see  "Domesday
and  Beyond,"  69  ff.

8.  This  is  made  especially  clear  by  the  Cambridgeshire  In-
quest, in  which  the  entries  are  arranged  according  to  townships
and  not  according  to  manors. "  Domesday  and  Beyond,"  129  ff.

9.  i5^.thelred,  i.  1,  §  10  ;  vii.  App.  3  ;  Canute,  ii.  31  ;  Ine,  22.

10.  Toll  applies  to  the  right  of  levying  toll  from  objects  bought
and  sold  within  the  franchise.  Theam  means  the  perquisites  of
the  lord  in  cases  when  warranty  was  pleaded.  Infangenetheof  and
Utfangenetheof  refers  to  proceedings  against  thieves.  Hamfare
means  burglary  ;  foresteal,  the  crime  of  waylaying.  On  the  varia-
tions of  the  franchise  see  "  Domesday  and  Beyond,"  266.


280  THE  GEOWTH  OF  THE  MANOE

11.  The  attempt  to  assign  to  the  holders  of  sake  and  soke  merely
the  profits  of  jurisdiction  without  its  substance  does  not  lead  to
satisfactory  results.  It  supposes  too  artificial  a  division  between
two  sides  of  one  and  the  same  process,  and  is  not  supported  by  the
evidence.  The  whole  subject  is  treated  in  a  masterly  manner  in
"  Domesday  and  Beyond,"  259  £f,  282  fiE.

12.  Dd.  ii.  130,  b.  :  In  Fernella  jacet  saca  et  soca  T.R.E.  de
omnibus  qui  minus  habent  quam  30  acras.  De  illis  qui  habent  30
acras  jacet  soca  et  saca  in  hundredo.  The  thirty  acres  which  are
made  the  parting  line  between  the  suitors  of  the  manor  and  those  of
the  hundred  would  according  to  the  average  reckoning  make  up  a
virgate.  Sometimes  the  distinction  rests  on  the  custom  of  vising
and  not  vising  the  manorial  fold  ("  Domesday  and  Beyond,"  91).
Of  course,  these  facts  testify  already  to  the  violent  processes  of
simplification  and  encroachment  which  followed  the  Norman
Conquest,  and  the  terminology  became  definitely  settled  at  that
time,  but  there  can  be  no  doubt  that  the  social  contrasts  of
which  we  are  speaking  were  to  a  great  extent  prepared  by  previous
history.

13.  The  man  under  soke  of  Old  English  times  comes  to  be  the
free  tenant  of  Norman  times.  The  books  conveying  sake  and  soke
generally  grant  all  dues  and  profits  which  may  have  accrued  to  the
King  from  a  certain  district.  For  example,  Thorpe,  "  Diplom.,"
417  (Eadward  the  Confessor) :  ic  an  eke  fredomes  )>an  haligen  kinge
Seynt  Eadmtmde.  .  .  .  And  ic  wille  him  Jjat  so  fele  si6e  so  men
gilded  here  gilde  to  heregild  o^pev  to  schipgUd,  gUde  se  txmschipe
so  o]?ere  men  don  to  |>e  abbotes  nede  and  ]?ere  muneke  J?e  J>er  binnen
schulen  for  hus  seruen. — And  ic  an  ]?an  halegen  Kinge  jpat  lond  at
Mildenhale  mid  mete,  and  mid  manne,  and  mid  sokne,  so  it  me  on
hande  stod  and  ]?e  half  nigende  hundredes  sokne  into  Dinghowe.
And  ic  an  hem  al  here  tune  sokne  of  hale  here  londe. Cf.  Thorpe,  138.

14.  ^thelred,  iii.  3  ;  Canute,  i.  8,  etc.  The  fullest  treatment  of
the  subject  is  to  be  found  in  K.  Maurer^s  essay,  "  Ivritische  Ueber-
schau,"  ii.  41  ff. Cf.  "  Domesday  and  Beyond,"  286.

15.  The  trinoda  necessitas  is  well  known.  For  example,  Thorpe,
384.

16.  The  five-hide  unit  is  already  conspicuous  in  the  notices  on
the  "thriving"  to  the  rank  of  a  thane.  Cf.  CD.  116  (endorsed
by  Pilheard,  799,  802) :  thirty  hides  have  to  send  only  5  "  vires  "
to  the  war  (in  expeditionem  incessitatem.  Dd.,  i.  66,  d.
(Berks) :  Si  rex  mittebat  alicubi  exercitum  de  5  hidis  tantum  unus
miles  ibat  et  ad  ejxis  victum  uel  stipendium  de  unaquaque  hida
dabanturei  4  solidi  ad  2  menses.  Hos  vero  denarios  regi  non
mittebant,  sed  militi  dabantur.  This  reminds  one  very  much  of
the  Carolingian  scheme,  "  de  exercitu  promovendo."  Capitijlaria,
ed.  Boretius,  i.  134.

17.  The  cases  in  which  heriots  are  mentioned  show  what  the  techni-


NOTES  281

cal  requirements  were  in  respect  of  men  of  great  wealth  and  power.
They  are  very  instructive  as  to  tlie  outfit  of  warriors.  7'horpe,
•'Diplom.,"  499,  501,  605,  61*2.  Archbishop  .Klfric  boquoatlis  to
his  lord,  the  Iving,  liis  best  sliip  and  GO  helmets  and  (50  coats  of
mail.  In  Wulfric's  will  of  1002  we  hear  of  "  heriot  lajid  "  (Thorpe,
"  DipL,"  646). Cf.  Dd.  i.  56,  b.

18.  It  was  very  common  to  make  tin  arrangement  as  to  the  num-
ber of  knights  and  soldiers  required  from  certain  estates  or  tene-
ments. The  monastery  of  Abingdon  had  arranged  to  send  out
twelve  linights  (vassalli).  Thorpe,  64.  The  see  of  Worcester  had
also  entered  into  an  agreement  as  to  its  military  obligations.
"  Victoria  County  History  of  Worcestershire,"  256.  The  duties  of
the  Lagmen  of  Stamford.  "  Rot.  Himdr.,"  i.  352,  354.  An
example  of  a  convention  with  a  thane  bound  to  perform  mihtary
seirvice  is  given  by  Thorpe,  451  :  ea  tamen  conventione,  ut  pro
ea  ipse  ad  expeditionem  terra  marique  (quae  tunc  crebro  age-
batur)  monasterio  serviret,  pecuniaque  placabili,  sive  caballo,  ipsum
priorem  imoquoque  anno  recognosceret.  Cf.  "  Domesday  and
Beyond,"  156,  163,  295.  As  to  the  difference  between  those  obli-
gations and  the  later  system  of  knight's  fees.  Round,  "  Feudal
England,"  261.  On  knights'  fees,  cf.  "  English  Society  in  the
Eleventh  Century,"  pp.  41  ff.

19.  Example  from  the  Danelaw,  Dd.  i.  291  (Notts):  Wiche-
b\ime  .  .  .  duas  bovatas  de  hac  terra  tenuerunt  quinque  taini.
Unus  eonun  erat  senior  aUorium.  Example  from  the  West.
Dd.  i.  105  (Devon)  :  Brotone  .  .  .  Huic  manerio  sunt  adjunctae
tres  terrae  quas  libere  tenebant  tres  taini  T.R.E.,  pro  tribvis  maneriis
.  .  .  geldabant  pro  3  virgatis  terrae. Terra  est  7  carucis.

20.  Drengs  are  very  conspicuous  in  the  Boldon  book.  The
notice  about  Lanfranc  turning  the  drengs  of  the  see  of  Canterbury
into  knights  is  well  known.  Radmen  and  "  Radchenistres  "  are
frequently  mentioned  in  Domesday — for  example,  i.  38,  16.^,
172,  173,  187,  etc.  As  to  the  lex  equitandi  of  St  Oswald's  in  the
see  of  Worcester,  "  Domesday  and  Beyond,"  303.

21.  It  is  worth  while  to  compare  the  facts  of  this  evolution  of  a
military  class  with  similar  developments  on  the  Continent.  See
especialy  Brunner,  on  the  Reiterdienst,  "  Forschungen  zvir  franzo-
eischen  und  deutschen  Rechtsgeschichte "  (1894).

22.  "  Crawford  Charters,"  127  ;  Thorpe,  "  Dipl.,"  470  ;  cf.  312  ;
"Cart.  Sax.,"  1318  (iii.  653).  Bishop  Dene^\•ul^8  grant — Thorpe
162  :  its  interpretation  in  "  Domesday  and  Beyond,"  starts  from
the  untenable  supposition,  that  the  ninety  sown  acres  aj>ply  to
the  whole  of  the  estate  of  hundred  hides  ;  in  this  case  there
would  not  be  much  reason  for  gratification  at  the  success  of  the
colonising  pohcy  of  the  bishop.  But  as  he  says  expressly  that  all
the  holdings  were  "  gevered,"  that  is  defended  themselves  by  paying
the  customary  taxes,  the  express  mention  of  farm-stock  evidently
applies  to  the  home  farm. Earle,  "  Land  Charters,"  235  ;  Setbohm,


282  THE  GROWTH  OF  THE  MANOR

"  Village  Commimity,"  has  explained  in  a  suggestive  manner  the
passage  of  the  Rectitudines  in  regard  to  the  stocking  of  the  gebur's
farm.

23.  "  Domesday  and  Beyond,"  67  ff.

24.  The  veislur,  the  feasting  progresses  of  Norse  kings  and  of  their
ofl&cers  among  the  bondir,  the  free  householders  of  the  folk,  are  con-
stantly mentioned  and  fully  described  in  the  Sagas,  e.g.,  Olaf's
Saga  hins  helga,  61,  111,  etc.  K.  Lehmann,  "  Untersuchtmgen
zur  Rechtsgeschichte,  "  has  given  a  survey  of  the  subject.

25.  E.g.,  Earle,  "  Land  Ch.,"  100  (a.d.  822  ;  CD.  216) :  insuper
etiam  hanc  predictam  terram  liberabo  ab  omni  servitute  seculariimi
rerum,  a  pastu  regis  episcopi  principum,  seu  prefectixm  exactonun,
ducorum,  canorum,  nel  equorum  seu  accipitrum,  ab  refectione  et
habitu  iUoinim  omnium  qui  dicuntur  fsestingmen,  etc.  The  "  fsesting-
men  "  have  been  taken  as  a  designation  of  special  officers  entrusted
with  police  duties  {Earle,  "  Land  Ch.,"  glossary,  sub  voce  ;  Andrews,
"  Old  Engl.  Manor,"  96),  but  it  is  clear  that  the  faesting  indicates
the  duty  of  quartering  or,  as  it  were,  establishing  (faesting)  men  sent
by  the  Iving.  The  sense  is  shown  by  the  following  instance,  Thorpe,
"  Dipl.,"  114  (a.d.  855)  :  Monasterium,  quod  nominatxir  Bloccanlech,
liberabo  ...  a  pastu  et  ab  refectione  omnium  accipitrum  et  fal-
contmi  in  terra  Mercensium,  et  onmitmi  venatorum  regis  vel  prin-
cipis,  nisi  ipsorum  tantima  qui  in  provincia  Hwicciorum  sunt  ;  simi-
liter et  a  pastu  et  refectione  illorum  hominum  quos  Saxonice  nomi-
namus  Walilfsereld  and  heora  faesting,  and  ealra  Angelcynnes  manna
and  3el]7eodigra  raedefaestinge.  Cf.  Thorpe,  102  (a.d.  848)  :  ut  sit
liberatum  et  absolutum  illud  monasterium  ab  illis  causis  quas  cimi-
feorme  (feeding  strangers)  eteafor(?)vocitemus  .  .  .  nisi  istis  caiosis
quas  hie  nominamus  :  prsecones  si  trans  mare  venient  ad  regem
venturi,  vel  nuntii  de  gente  Occidentalium  Saxonum,  vel  de  gente
Nor]?anhymbrorum,  si  venirent  ad  horam  tertiam  diei,  debetur  els
prandium  ;  si  venirent  supra  nonam  horam,  time  dabitur  eis  noctis
pastum,  et  itermn  de  mane  pergant  in  viam  suam.

26.  Boldon  book  (Dd.  iii.),  566:  Villani  debent  facere  singulis
annis  in  operacione  sua,  si  opus  fuerit,  unam  domum,  longitudine
40  pedum  et  latitudine  15  pedum.

27.  The  farms  of  one  night,  half  a  night  and  several  nights  are  of
common  occurrence  in  Domesday.  E.g.,  i.  75,  86,  162,  b.  ;
i.  154,  b.  ;  ii.  7,  etc.  As  for  the  Saxon  Charters,  they  mention
constantly  arrangements  based  on  the  provision  of  food  and  drink
for  one  or  several  repasts.  E.g.,  C.  D.  143  ;  Thorpe,  460,  496,
498,  509,  etc.

28.  Barton  is  very  common  as  a  name  of  manors.  As  an  example
of  the  passage  from  its  appellative  sense  may  be  quoted  "  Rot.
Himdr.,"  i.  205  :  Magister  Ricardus  per  potestatem  officii  sui  occa-
sionavit  quendam  V/illelmum  filium  Johannis  de  Wenchepe  ut
faceret  evmi  prepositum  de  Berth ona  de  Westgate.


NOTES  283

29.  Earle,  "Land  Ch.,"  302  (Eadward  the  Confessor):  ic  dnn  ]:'et
S*°*  Peter  and  ]?a  gebrocSra  on  Westmynstre  hnbben  to  heora  beoli-
fan  cotlif  Stana,  mid  ]'ani  lande  Staeninga  haga  wiS  innon  lundone
(corr.  lande  ?),  and  fif  and  Jrittig  hida  sokne  J^asrtd,  mid  ealca  J?am
berwican. Cf "  Historical  Dictionary  of  English,"  s.v.  berwick.

Dd.  i.  269,  b.  :  In  Neweton  T.R.E.  fuerunt  5  hidae.  Ex
his  una  erat  in  dominio.  iEcclesia  ipsius  manerii  habobat  I  caruca-
tam  terrae,  et  Sanctus  Osuualdus  de  ipsa  villa  duaa  carncatas  terrae
habebat  quietas  per  omnia.  Hiijus  manerii  aliam  terram  15  homines
quos  drenchs  uocabant  pro  15  inaneriis  tenebant,  sed  hujus  Manerii
beruuiche  erant,  et  inter  omnes  30  solidos  reddebant. Cf .  Dd.  ii.  362.

30.  "Cartulary  of  Burton," 21.

31.  The  small  manors  of  Domesday,  as  e.g.,  Dd.  ii.  311,  b.  (in
eadem  villa  est  unus  liber  homo  de  40  acris  et  tenet  pro  manerio)
may  merely  imply  in  some  cases  that  the  land  in  question  was  con-
sidered as  standing  by  itself  outside  of  any  other  estate  organisation.
Tlierefore  the  term  manerium  may  alternate  with  the  colourless
terra.

32.  Examples  may  be  found  almost  on  every  page  of  Domesday,

33.  "Crawford  Ch.,"  123:  hcafodbotl  in  Purleigh.  Sometimes  a
"  haw  "  (haga)  is  mentioned  in  connexion  with  a  central  Iiam.
Earle,  194  :  Wulfric  ealdorman  grants  "  7  cassatos  " — and  se  haga
an  ham  tune  }>e  pserto  gehyret. Cf.  ib.,  246.

34.  Dd.  i.  285  :  in  Careltune  habuerunt  6  taini  quisque  aulam.
285,  b.  (Xormentone)  5  taini  quisque  habuerunt  aulam  suam  et
iinam  bovatum  terrae  et  5  partes  unius  bovata;  ad  geldum.  i.  283  :
in  dominio  aulae  sunt  10  bovatae  de  hac  terra. Reliqua  est  socha.

35.  Such  cases  are  rare  and  occur  mostly  in  the  earlier  period.
Bede's  narrative  of  the  grant  of  Selsea  mentions  87  hides  of  land
and  250  slaves  who  cultivate  them.  As  slaves  are  generally  fovmd
on  demesne  land,  the  district  must  have  consisted  of  small  estates
and  single  farms.

36.  This  would  fit  the  cases  in  Domesday  when  there  was  a  manor
in  a  place  but  no  hall.  E.g.,  Dd.  i.  286,  b.  (Fenton),  312  (Tori-
tun),  312,  b.  (Bruntone).

37.  This  being  the  ordinary  case,  any  page  of  Domesday  will
supply  examples.  On  types  of  manors,  cf.  "  English  Society  in  the
Eleventh  Century,"  pp.  305  ff.

38.  Thorpe,  "  Dipl.,"  502  :  of  two  brothers  one  gets  the  inland
and  the  other  the  outland.  The  instance  seems  a  parallel  one  to
Dd.  i.  26,  b.  (Bristelmistune)  where  of  three  alonrii  one  holds
the  hall,  while  the  land  of  the  two  others  is  lield  by  villains.

39.  The  direct  opposition  to  reeveland  is  thaneland.  One  species
comprises  land  which  stands  under  the  jurisdiction  of  the  reeve  and
is  occupied  by  peasant  cultivators,  the  villani  and  bordarii  of  Domes-
day. The  other  applies  to  the  demesneland  held  of  a  benefice  and
defended  by  the  militarj-  service  of  the  professional  soldier.  Thorpe,
ft69  :  and  Aylmer  habbe  ]?at  land  at  Stoneham  ]?e  ic  hym er to


284  THE GROWTH OF THE JIANOR

hande  let  to  reflandes.  Dd.  i.  181  :  (In  Getune)  Hugo  tenuit  ad
firmam  (unam  hidam  ad  geldrnn).  Haec  terra  fuit  tainland  T.R.E.
sed  postea  conversa  est  in  reveland,  et  ideo  dicunt  legali  Regis  quod
ipsa  terra  et  census  qui  inde  exit  furtim  aufertur  Regi. — While
thaneland,  the  hide  in  question  was  directly  dependant  on  the  liing,
whereas  as  reeveland  it  has  been  swallowed  by  the  estate  of  a  Norman
lord,  Humfrey  the  chamberlain.  The  heregeatland  of  Thorpe,  546
(a.d.  1002),  seems  to  be  only  another  term  for  the  demesneland  of  a
thane,  held  by  military  tenure.  As  to  geneatland,  Seebohm,  "  EngUsh
Village  Community,"  116.

40.  Earle,  "  Land  Charters,"  376  :  inland  as  demesne  in  contrast
with  gesettland  held  by  geneats  and  geburs.  In  many  cases  inland
is  opposed  to  the  soke  of  a  manor,  that  is  to  land  held  by  free  tenants.
E.g.,  Dd.  i.,  317,  336,  337,  338  b.

41.  This  is  very  clear  in  the  cases  of  the  Northamptonshire  geld
roll,  of  the  geld  rolls  of  South- Western-Counties  of  1084,  and  of  the
Burton  cartulary.  In  this  last  document  wara  is  nsed  in  the  sense
of  a  share  in  the  taxed  land.

42.  Round,  "Domesday  Studies,"  I,  93  ff.  who,  however,  does
not  take  sufficiently  into  consideration  the  cases  when  inland  and
demesne  coincide.

43.  E.  g.  "  Black  book  of  St.  Augustine,"  illi  de  halimoto  qui
tenent  hinnlonde.

44.  The  Domesday  Survey  constantly  mentions  demesne  farms
taxed  for  the  geld. Cf.  Maitland,  "  Domesday  and  Beyond,"  457.

45.  E.  g.  Dd.  iii.  59:  et  pro  i.  hida  quam  tenent  vUlani  odonis
fili  gamelini  non  habuit  rex  geldiim  sutun.

46.  From  this  point  of  view  the  warland  and  the  wara  of  early
Norman  Surveys  would  proceed  directly  from  the  Cyninges  utwaru
of  Anglo-Saxon  customary  law,  this  last  expression  pointing  not  to
the  military  service  due  from  the  demesne  of  a  thane,  but  to  the
fiscal  obhgations  of  his  subjects.  In  corroboration  of  this  view  I
should  like  to  quote  the  following  passages.  Earle,  "  Land  Charters,"
235  (a.d.  1017-1023) :  ^Ifwerd,  abbot  of  Abingdon,  makes  an  agree-
ment with  M^ekaasr  as  to  leasing  to  him  land  at  Norton  for  three
lives,  that  is  "  3  hida  to  inware  and  oSerhealf  to  utware,  swa  swa  hit
gebohte  ]?a  Sa  hit  weste  Iseg."  Dd.  i.  165,  b.  (Bertune) :  hoc
manerium  quiettun  fuit  semper  a  geldo  et  ab  omni  regali  servicio.
Cf.  FUntune  :  hoc  maneritmi  quietum  est  a  geldo  et  ab  omnis  forensi
servitio  praeter  ecclesiae  The  forense  servicium  is  evidently  the
"  utwaru "  comprising  aU  claims  of  the  government  as  to  the
estate,  while  the  "  inner "  service  is  due  to  the  Church  which
owns  the  estate.  In  this  sense  the  "  inwaru  "  would  naturally  be  wider
than  the  utwaru,  while  inland  would  be  applied  to  that  portion  of
the  land  which  was  not  subject  to  taxation  and  other  require-
ments and  might  be  contrasted  with  warland  as  the  rateable  land.

47 The  treatise has been  published  by Dr.  Liebermann,  first


NOTES  285

in the "  Anglia," and lately in his edition  of  "  Anglo-Saxon
Laws."

48.  This  is  the  collective  designation  of  the  staff  of  overseers
and  stewards. It  conies  from  wic  =  village.

49.  Bede.  iv.  13  : 250  "esnes  "  settled  on  87  hides.

50.  Peasants  on  the  estate  may  be  bi'irbaerde  or  theowbaerde.
There  are  records  of  hereditary  serfs  on  the  Hatfield  und  the  Spalding
estates,  and  the  people  mentioned  were  not  mere  slaves  but
geburs.

51.  E.g.,  Thorpe,  "Dipl."  585  (a.d.  1049-1054):  concessimus
autem  Lefwino  homini  nostro  virgatam  terre,  in  qua  mansmn  suum
habet,  in  vita  sua  quietam.

52.  Thorpe,  581  (a.d.  1050):  the  testator  sets,  "  alle  mine  men
fre,  and  ilk  habbe  his  toft,  and  his  metecu,  and  his  metecom.

53.  Thorpe,  147,  151,  517.  The  gafol  in  the  first  two  cases  is
expressly  stated  to  be  agreed  upon  (ared,  cf.  gerad).  In  the  third
ihe  tenant  is  said  to  pay  rent  (gafela),  but  there  were  some  other
duties  incumbent  on  him  (mid  anre  garan  ?).  There  is  a  well
known  enactment  of  Ine  directed  against  the  raising  of  work  service
from  tenements  which  were  bound  only  to  pay  rent,  and  Canute
had  also  to  legislate  against  additional  exactions  of  the  landlords
from  people  who  paid  in  their  ''feorm,"  or  rent  in  produce.
(Canute,  ii.  69,  1.)

54.  Dd.  i.  78  b. :  Tavistock.  The  English  equivalent  of  cen-
sores  must  have  been  mdlmen,  or,  possibly,  gavelmen.

55.  I  think  that  we  have  to  construe  in  this  sense  the  words  of
the  will  of  Wynflaed  (Thorpe,  536,  a.d.  995)  :  ]?enne  an  his  )?an
hiwum  ]?ara  gebura  Ipe  on  Ipara  gafollande  sittat5  and  ]?era  ]?ewrn
manna  hio  ann  hyre  syna  datter  Eadgyfe  :  The  slaves  are  be-
queathed to  a  niece,  but  the  "boors"  settled  on  land  paying  gafol
(the  warland)  go  to  the  abbey  of  Shaftesbury.  The  expression  is
identical  with  the  term  used  in  the  treaty  between  Alfred  and
Guthrum.  An  indirect  corroboration  of  the  idea  that  the  King's
u'afol  may  be  meant  may  be  drawn  from  the  sweeping  character  of
those  classifications.  Land  held  by  geburs,  or  later  villains  could
be  aptly  described  as  gafol-paying  land  from  the  point  of  view  of  gov-
ernmental taxation  including  geld,  but  it  would  have  been  strange
to  speak  of  holdings  performing  all  sorts  of  work  as  gafoUand.
When  a  tenant  may  be  described  as  rentpaying  he  is  taken  special
notice  of  as  a  malman,  a  gavelman,  or  a  censor  (censarius).

56.  Ine,  70,  1,  is  the  classical  instance  :  JEt  10  hidum  to  fostre
10  fata  hunies,  300  hlafa,  12  ambra  Wilisch  ealat5,  30  hlutres,  tu
eald  hriSru  o]?]?e  10  weSeras,  10  gees,  20  henna,  10  cesas,  amber
fulna  buteras,  5  leaxas,  20  pund  waega  fot5res  and  hundteontip
aela. Ine,  44,  §  1  ;  49,  3  ; 59,  1,  supply  other  details  as  to  rents  in  kind.

57.  The  principal  parallels  are  supplied  by  the  description  of
services  in  Tidenham  (CD.  App.  iii.  450)  and  in  Stoke  by  Hythe


286  THE  GROWTH  OF  THE  MANOR

bume  (CD.  1077).  It  is  impossible  to  use  these  descriptions  as  chrono-
logical landmarks  and  to  speak,  as  Mr.  Seebohm  does,  of  manorial
customs  of  the  time  of  Edwy,  and  of  the  time  of  Alfred  ("  English
Village  Conmiunity,"  157  ff. )  As  has  been  shown  by  Professor  Main-
land ("  Domesday  and  Beyond,"  334)  both  instances  belong  prob-
ably to  later  times  and  illustrate  the  practices  of  the  eleventh
century,  standing  thus  exactly  on  a  level  with  the  Rectitudines.  It
is  most  probable  that  many  of  these  customs  go  back  to  ancient
titnes,  but  how  many  and  which,  we  cannot  tell,  and,  especially,
there  is  no  warrant  for  looking  on  these  two  cases  as  representing
the  general  condition  of  English  landholding  in  the  age  of  King  Edwy
and  in  that  of  King  Alfred.

68.  The  one  "  who  holds  the  shire  "  of  §  iv.  6,  need  not  be  neces-
sarily a  sheriff :  the  steward  of  a  great  lord  could  be  meant  also.
Cf.  the  "  Gerefa,"  §  2.  Liebermann  translates  :  werdas  (Gutsvogtei)
Amt  inne  hat.

59.  The  geneats  of  Tidenham  are  also  rentpaying  tenants  burdened
with  riding  and  carrying  services  (ridan  and  averian,  lade  laedan,
etc.),  which  are  not  assessed  in  detaU,  exactly  as  in  the  case  of
the  Rectitudines.  It  is  impossible  to  take  the  "  wyrcan  swa
on  lande,  swa  of  lande,  hweberswa  him  man  byt  "  as  a  proof  that
the  geneat  was  completely  at  the  mercy  of  his  master.  The  only
possible  meaning  seems  to  me  that  the  various  errands  and  services
which  might  be  required  from  him  were  not  directly  specified.  (Cf.
the  fela  oSra  )>inga).  The  payment  of  gafol  has  to  be  supplied  from
the  term  gafolland  which  gets  to  be  opposed  to  inland  in  the  classi-
fication of  the  holdings.  The  ceorls  of  Stoke  by  Hyssebiirne  are
also  mainly  burdened  with  gafol  and  the  services  required  from
them  in  the  way  of  labour  take  the  shape  of  gafol  earth,  that  is  of
ploughing  and  sowing  some  acres  assigned  to  them  in  their  own
time  (on  heara  asgenre  hwUe).  There  is  a  mention  of  week- work
but  it  has  not  assumed  a  definite  shape  and  seems  to  apply  to  occa-
sional jobs  and  errands.  (And  jelce  wucan  wircen  Sset  him  maenhate
biitan  ]?rim,  etc.)

60.  Round,  "  Feudal  England,"  31.

61.  The  opposition  between  geneat  and'gre&tir  is  quite  clear  in  the
Rectitudines,  separated  as  they  [are  by  the  intermediate  group  of
cottagers  and  the  different  character  of  their  respective  duties.
Seebohm  thinks  otherwise,  "  Village  Commimity,"  130,  and  An-
drews, "  Old  English  Manor,"  is  inclined  to  follow  him.

62.  Seebohm  maJies  the  plausible  suggestion  that  the  three  remain-
ing acres  of  the  winter  field  were  let  off  the  first  year  because  they
represented  the  gafol-earth  ploughing  which  could  not  be  required
from  new  settlers  ("Village  Commimity,"  141).  An  interesting
parallel  may  be  drawn  from  the  practice  of  Glastonbury  Abbey.

63.  I  take  the  end  of  §  5  to  apply  to  all  kinds  of  geburs,  and  not
only  to  those  who  have  to  provide  honey.


I


NOTES  287

64.  The  gebiirs  of  the  Rectitudines  and  those  of  Tidonham  pay
some  gafol,  but  these  payments  are  of  a  quite  subordinate  order.
In  both  cases  the  "  operae."  the  week-work  are  evidently  the  most
important  part  of  the  services.

65.  The  gafol-earth,  ben-earth  and  graes-earth  ploughings  are  char-
acteristic of  a  stage  in  husbandry  which  Hes,  as  it  were,  between
the  tributary  arrangement  which  could  dispense  with  a  home  farm
and  the  manorial  arrangement  which  was  based  on  the  concentra-
tion of  dependent  labour  on  the  home  farm.  The  peasant  who  had
to  plough  gafolearth  had  also  to  sow  it  with  his  own  seed  and,  in
fact,  as  the  examples  of  the  Rectitudines  and  of  the  Glastonbury
Inquisition  of  1189  show,  the  gafolearth  was  simply  a  portion  of  hLj
own  holding,  three  acre  strips  out  of  thirty,  wliich  he  cultivated  in
the  interest  of  the  lord.  It  would  lie  intermixed  with  the  strips  of
other  peasants  and  there  would  not  be  any  separate  home  farm  to
speak  of,  if  the  whole  of  the  arable  in  the  domain  shoiild  be  distri-
buted on  this  system.  The  next  and  more  important  step  would  be  to
enclose  a  separate  home  farm  and  to  require  the  peasants  to  come
with  their  ploughs  so  many  times  a  week  to  do  work  on  this
separate  farm.  This  stage  is  the  most  common  one  in  feudal
times,  and  it  seems  to  have  been  reached  on  many  of  the  Old  English
manors,  if  we  are  to  take  more  or  less  literally  the  statements  of
Domesday  in  regard  to  the  demesne  land  of  manors  at  the  time  of
Edward  the  Confessor.


Third Book
THE FEUDAL PERIOD


CHAPTER  I
THE  PRINCIPLES  OF  THE  DOMESDAY  SURVEY

We  have  now  reached  the  point  when  the  Manor  became  the

prevailing  social  institution  and  all  the  main  facts  of  local

organisation  were  made  more  or  less  dependent

I The  subdivl- on  its  structure. We  may  speak  with  some

feudal  age  right  of  a  manorial  system  characteristic  of  the
feudal  age,  though  it  will  still  be  necessary  to
bear  in  mind  that  no  system  is  in  reality  perfectly  harmon-
ious and  well -balanced,  that  every  historical  system  is  preg-
nant with  contradictory  principles  and  various  possibiHties.

The  advent  of  the  manorial  epoch  is  roughly  marked
by  the  Norman  Conquest.  This  great  event,  or  rather,
series  of  events,  gave  the  final  touch  to  the  formation  of
a  military  aristocracy,  and  called  forth  a  more  or  less
systematic  settlement.  In  the  course  of  the  general
description  which  I  shall  endeavour  to  present,  it  will  be
impossible  to  attend  to  minor  features  of  historical  develop-
ment, but  even  a  general  description  must  reckon  with  the
fact  that  the  period  with  which  we  are  deaUng  falls  into  two
principal  subdivisions,  namely,  the  time  of  the  establish-
ment of  feudal  rule,  and  the  time  of  its  legal  elaboration.
The  estabUshment  of  feudal  society  was  achieved  under
the  first  Norman  kings,  WUham  the  Bastard,  WiUiam
Rufus  and  Henry  I,  and  the  interest  of  this  epoch  consists
in  the  struggle  between  the  principles  introduced  by  the
Conquerors,  and  earlier  traditions ;  the  final  success  of
Henry  II  may  be  considered  as  its  approximate  close.
With  the  legal  reforms  of  Henry  II,  the  second  half  of  the
period  begins,  and  its  achievements  are  chiefly  embodied
in  the  growth  of  central  jurisdiction  and  the  formation  of


292  THE  GROWTH  OF  THE  MANOR

Common  Law,  which  correspond  roughly  to  the  reigns  of
John,  Henry  III,  and  Edward  I.

The  very  documents  characteristic  of  these  two  sub-
divisions of  the  feudal  period  are  to  some  extent  difEerent
and  crave  a  different  treatment.  The  initiation  of  feudal
rules  is  reflected  chiefly  in  the  great  Inquest  of  Domesday,
Avith  its  various  satellites,  while  the  legal  elaboration  of
feudality  is  abundantly  represented  by  the  plea  rolls  and
court  rolls  on  the  one  hand,  and  by  the  fundamental
treatises  on  Common  Law  on  the  other,  the  material  of
chartularies  and  extents  runs  through  both  epochs,  and
provides  the  connecting  links  for  our  general  description.

At  the  very  outset  we  have  to  face  a  question  in  which
the  characteristic  traits  of  the  period,  as  well  as  the  pecuhar-

ities of its subdivisions, are appropriately
dalTproblems  illustrated. Among the aspects from  which

the  Domesday  inquest  surveyed  society,  one
of  the  most  important  is  the  attempt  to  consider  aU  social
relations  of  the  time  from  the  point  of  view  of  tenure,  to
reduce  them  to  varieties  of  conditional  land-holding.  The
inquest  had  primarily  in  view  to  collect  material  for  the
imposition  and  repartition  of  the  geld,^  but  it  was  some-
thing else  besides.  Though  the  necessary  facts  were  ascer-
tained by  communal  testimony  on  the  ancient  Hues  of  the
associations  of  shire,  hundreds  and  townships,^  they  were
recast  into  a  new  mould  of  manorial  hierarchy.  Now
this  recasting  of  the  evidence  has  not  only  added  a  difficulty
to  the  labours  of  modern  searchers  of  Domesday  ;  it  was,
as  it  seems  to  me,  more  than  a  matter  of  order  and  form,  and
we  stfll  can  see  what  pains  the  commissioners  took  in  re-
arranging the  entries  of  the  Cambridge  townships  so  as  to
bring  out  more  conveniently  what  the  fiefs  of  William  of
Warenne  or  of  Hardouin  de  Escalers  were.  Evidently,
besides  the  collection  of  the  geld,  one  of  the  purposes  of  the
inquest  was  to  provide  the  king's  officers  with  exact  clues
as  to  the  personal  nexus  of  the  different  tenements.  This
nexus  was  of  capital  importance  in  apportioning  political
and  administrative  responsibihty  and  enforcing  dues,
and  it  was  worth while  to go through  some additional


THE PRENCIPLES OF THE DOMESDAY SURVEY  293

operations  in  order  to  establish  it  in  a  firm  and  handy
manner.  Two  questions  naturally  arise  in  connexion
with  these  operations  of  the  Domesday  commissioners.
In  order  to  classify  the  material  on  the  principle  of
tenure,  it  was  necessary  to  assume  that  every  person
mentioned  in  Domesday  was  attached  to  some  land  in  one
way  or  another,  and  that  every  plot  of  land  to  which  the
man  in  question  was  attached,  was  a  tenement,  held  as  a
grant  from  another  person,  eventually  from  the  king.  It
was  necessary,  in  fact,  to  acknowledge  the  feudal  maxim —
"  niille  terre  sans  seigneur  " — and  we  may  well  ask  how  it  came
that  such  a  maxim  had  got  to  be  universally  acknowledged
in  England  ?  The  second  question  applies  to  those  who
held  under  the  chief  tenants  mentioned  by  Domesday.  If
the  king  was  following  a  set  policy  in  bringing  all  land  into
a  certain  relation  to  himself  by  tenurial  nexus,  did  not
his  vassals  act  in  a  similar  manner  in  regard  to  those  who
stood  below  them  ?  What  shape  did  this  subjection  of
undertenants  assume  ?

Let  us  turn  to  the  first  question,  to  begin  with.  All  land
in  England  is  described  in  Domesday  as  belonging  either
Tenurial  immediately  to  the  king,  or  to  his  vassals  of
nexus  different  degree,  or  to  churches  which  held  it
by  direct  grant  from  kings  and  from  persons  whose  grants
have  been  confirmed  by  kings,  or  to  burgesses  whose  tenure
though  peculiar,  still  appears  as  a  tenure,  a  form  of  con-
ditional ownership.  In  this  way,  the  rule  "  nnlle  terre  sans
seigneur/'  seems  to  fit  the  case  completely,  and  in  regard  to
every  particular  tenement  the  questions,  by  what  service  it
is  held  and  from  whom,  necessarily  arise.  But  does  this
all -pervading  rule  come  from  the  period  preceding  the  Con-
quest, or  from  the  Conquest  itself  ?  In  other  words,
is  the  feudal  conception  of  land-holding  to  be  carried  into
Old  English  society,  and,  if  so,  to  what  period  of  Old
Enghsh  social  history  did  it  apply  ?  Or  is  the  feudal  con-
ception a  generalisation  of  Norman  lawyers,  and,  in  this
case,  to  what  extent  had  it  been  prepared  by  older  pro-
cesses, and  to  what  extent  was  it  a  change  in  comparison
with  former  times  ?


294  THE  GROWTH  OF  THE  MANGE

At  first  glance,  the  feudal  rule  seems  to  be  fairly  grounded
in  Edward  the  Confessor's  time.  The  Domesday  inquisi-
tions generally  try  to  establish  the  precedents  for  tenure
in  the  conditions  of  the  day  when  King  Edward  was  aUve
and  dead.  But  a  closer  examination  will  show  at  once,  that
even  the  state  of  things  on  the  very  eve  of  the  Conquest  was
materially  different  from  what  took  place  after  it.  There
were  great  estates  before  the  Conquest,  there  were  land-
owners who  had  land  in  many  shires,  there  were  obUgations
to  send  armed  men  at  the  king's  bidding  from  particular
estates  and  places,  commendation  and  service  both  of  persons
and  of  plots  of  land  were  exceedingly  common,  But  all
these  facts  and  relations  had  not  been  reduced  to  the  com-
paratively simple  network  of  feudal  tenure  and  service  on
"  the  day  when  King  Edward  was  ahve  and  dead.*'  On  the
contrary,  they  were  intermixed  in  a  most  confusing  manner.
One  man  could  be  another  man's  personal  follower,  and  hold
his  land  from  a  third,  and  be  dependent  on  a  fourth  in  point
of  jurisdiction.^  The  numerous  sokemen  who  could  go  with
their  lands  wherever  they  pleased  were  not  tenants  of  any
particular  lord  in  a  feudal  sense.*  Indeed,  many  of  the
Saxon  landowners  still  held  their  land  by  the  witness  of  the
shire,  and  not  by  any  express  or  implied  feoffment.  And
even  those  who  had  books  claimed  a  privilege  made  out  for
them  in  regard  to  the  ownership  of  land,  and  not  to  a  condi-
tional tenancy  instituted  by  the  grant.

The  notion  of  service  was  not  necessarily  bound  up  with
the  notion  of  land-holding  in  the  feudal  sense,  namely,  in
the  sense  of  a  certain  quantity  of  service  corresponding  to  a
certain  grant.  Landownership  was  burdened  with  services,
and  might  be  exempted  from  them,  as  land  may  be  taxed
or  exempted  from  taxes  in  any  political  body.  But  the
element  of  mutual  obligation  inherent  in  the  nexus  of  feudal
tenure  was  not  in  any  way  a  general  condition  affecting
land-ownership.  And  although  it  was  of  common  occur-
rence that  kings  granted  land  and  people  settled  on  the  land,
these  grants  proceeded  rather  from  the  notion  of  a  sover-
eignty over  the  whole  territory  and  population  of  the  realm
than  from  the  idea  of  a  dominium  eminens,  a  supposed  right


THE PRINCIPLES OF THE DOMESDAT SURVBY  295

of  ownership  to  all  land  in  the  realm  from  which  all  other
private  rights  in  land  had  to  be  derived.

If  we  take  all  these  traits  into  account,  we  shall  be  able  to
estimate  the  import  of  the  change  brought  about  by  the
introduction  of  the  doctrine  "  nulle  terre  sans  seigneur.^' '  It
involves  the  reconsideration  and  resettlement  of  all  ties
and  relations  connected  with  the  land,  from  the  point  of
view  of  tenure  and  service,  and  though  Domesday  laid  stress
on  tenure  to  begin  with,  the  admeasurement  and  exaction
of  service  was  sure  to  follow.  In  regard  to  miUtary  service,
this  admeasurement  culminated  in  the  division  of  the  land
into  the  knight's  fees  tabulated  in  the  Red  Book  of  the  Ex-
chequer and  brought  into  system  under  Henry  11.'  And  in  a
less  conspicuous  way,  the  same  was  the  case  in  regard  to
sergeancies,  to  ecclesiastical  fiefs,  to  socage  tenements,  etc.
The  struggle  in  regard  to  the  services  and  customary  duties
of  ecclesiastical  establishment  has  been  rendered  especially
famous  by  the  collisions  between  men  of  the  stamp  of  Anselm
and  Thomas  Becket  with  Rufus,  Henry  I,  and  Henry  II.
We  may  remember  that  Rufus  strove  to  be  every  man's
heir,  that  is  that  he  asserted  his  right  as  feudal  over-
lord to  enter  into  every  man's  tenement  at  his  death,  or,
rather,  to  translate  the  rhetoric  of  aggrieved  chroniclers
into  the  prose  of  feudal  custom,  that  he  enforced  his  right
of  resumption  of  tenement  in  regard  to  his  tenants,  and
perhaps  in  regard  to  people  who  thought  they  were  not
his  tenants  at  all.  And  the  Domesday  description,  let  us
repeat,  shows  that  all  these  claims  were  advanced  on  the
morrow  of  Conquest  and  went  with  the  Conquest  settle-
ment.

This  being  so,  the  recasting  of  the  inquest  from  the  monld
of  communal  testimony  to  that  of  feudal  tenure  turns  out
to  be  a  process  threatening  wholesale  social  changes.  It
was  not  merely  a  matter  of  schedule,  or  even  of  a  generaU-
eation  of  services.  Conditions  which  did  not  quite  fit  in
with  the  standard  set  in  motion  by  the  Norman  commis-
sioners had  to  be  cut  right  in  accordance  with  this  standard.
And  a  number  of  people  who  could  go  with  their  land  where
they  pleased  disappear  accordingly, a  number  of  others


296  THE  GROWTH  OF  THE MANOB

who  owned  to  confusing  forms  of  dependency  on  personal
lords  and  lords  of  soke,  were  forced  under  the  one  or  the
other  of  the  convenient  headings  supplied  by  feudal  termin-
ology.^ A  few  allodiarii  were  suffered  to  linger  even  in  King
William's  days,*  but  this  characteristic  "  survival "  only
pointed  to  a  previous  epoch  when  conditions  which  Norman
lawyers  would  have  called  aUodial  were  anything  but  rare.
And,  of  course,  these  specimens  of  the  engulfing  tendencies
of  feudal  organisation  which  we  are  able  to  bring  forth
from  the  records  of  the  inquests,  though  they  have  the
priceless  merit  of  being  documentary  evidence,  make  us  think
of  the  much  more  numerous  facts  of  violence  and  encroach-
ment which  have  not  been  described  in  such  an  incontestable
manner.  And  what  is  perhaps  more  important  than  aU
single  facts  of  oppression  was  the  radical  change  in  the  basis
of  social  relations  :  people  had  now  to  look,  not  so  much  to
their  time-honoured  associations  in  township,  hundred  and
shire,  as  to  their  relations  of  personal  and  territorial
dependence.

And  now  we  come  to  the  second  of  those  questions  from
which  we  started  :  the  inquest  gives  names  and  definite  con-
sideration to  the  affairs  of  the  king's  tenants

lowef^classes^  ^  ^^^^^  ^^^  ^^  *^®  ^o^^  favoured  and  con-
siderable among  the  others.  The  rest  were
entered  in  numbers  and  under  general  headings.  What
was  their  treatment  likely  to  be,  if  in  regard  to  the  persons
expressly  named  such  a  change  of  conditions  was  taking
place  ?

It  is  obvious  that  a  similar  process  of  generaltsation  on
the  basis  of  conditional  subjection  was  going  on  in  aU  classes
of  society,  and  that  it  was  carried  on  even  in  a  more
sweeping  and  reckless  manner  in  regard  to  the  small
than  in  regard  to  the  great.  Its  effects  may  still  be
traced  in  two  directions :  the  notions  of  territorial
dependence  upon  a  lord  and  of  service  as  a  characteristic
of  tenure  are  coming  to  the  front ;  the  seat  of  the
great  man,  the  manor,  gets  to  be  the  centre  of  local  society,
and  economic  as  well  as  legal  relations  are  referred  to  it  as
much  as  possible. The  first  of  these  points  is  especially


I


THE PRINCIPLES OF THE DOMESDAY SURVEY  297

noticeable  in  the  treatment  of  status  by  the  thirteenth
century  law-books  and  plea  roUs.  The  position  of  a  person
is  determined  by  his  services.  We  need  not  speak  at  length
as  to  the  state  of  a  knight  or  a  clerk,  but  let  us  notice  a  fact
to  which  we  shall  have  to  revert  again  later  on,  namely,  that
the  personal  rank  of  a  free  man  and  of  a  villain  is  assigned
to  them  on  the  strength  of  their  services  :  the  services  of  the
villain  are  deemed  base  in  their  essence  and  uncertain  in
quantity,  the  services  of  the  free — devoid  of  any  debasing
tinge,  and  certain  as  to  quantity.  It  may  have  been  exceed-
ingly difficult  to  decide  in  the  concrete  what  extent  and  kind
of  agricultural  work  rendered  labour  services  base,  and  what
was  compatible  with  the  dignity  of  a  free  man,  but  this  had
to  be  decided  somehow  ;  the  stuii  of  which  society  was  made
up  had  to  be  cut  somewhere,  and  a  sharp  cut  severed  condi-
tions which  were  nearly  or  quite  identical,  and  assigned  them
henceforward  to  totally  dififerent  classes.  Our  point  now
is  to  show  that  this  particular  mode  of  classifying  society
was  chosen  by  the  rulers  and  lawyers  of  the  Conquest,
and  that  it  led  gradually  to  a  complete  rearrangement  of
society.  Traits  which  did  exist  before  the  advent  of  King
William,  but  were  not  considered  of  fundamental  import-
ance, became  the  chief  characteristic  of  status  ;  differences
which  were  made  much  of  in  King  Edward's  time  were
disregarded  now  as  of  second-rate  importance.  It  was
damaging  for  a  man  of  free  birth  to  perform  rural  services
for  his  holding,  and  it  might,  in  many  cases,  lead  him  into
servitude  ;  it  was  unsafe  to  be  a  person  entirely  taken  up
with  rural  work  and  might  be  construed  as  a  sign  of
rustic  condition  implying  rural  services  and  a  state  of
villainage.  Distinctions  might  be  drawTi  in  such  cases,
but  they  were  slender  and  not  to  be  much  relied  upon,  if
the  interests  of  strong  men  went  against  them.  On  the
other  hand,  a  clean  pedigree  of  free  descent  and  customary
participation  in  the  gatherings  of  the  free  in  shire  and  hun-
dred were  not  of  much  avail,  if  incidents  of  base  tenure  could
be  made  out  against  one.  As  I  have  said,  the  prominence
of  the  test  of  services  is  very  noticeable  in  the  full  records
of  the  thirteenth  century,  but  it  is  obvious  that  the  great


298  THE  GROWTH  OF  THE  MANOR

recasting  of  social  classification  on  their  basis  dates  from
the  Conquest  and  is  primarily  expressed  in  Domes-
day. Indeed,  what  is  the  object  of  the  new  departure  in
nomenclature  which  is  expressed  in  the  Domesday  classifica-
tion of  persons  ?  The  Norman  commissioners  make  an
attempt  to  put  the  people  engaged  in  rural  occupations,  as
villains,  bordarii  and  cotters,  on  one  side,  and  the  people
entirely  or  mainly  free  from  these  occupations  on  the  other  :
there  is  hardly  any  other  possible  basis  of  classification  to
be  found  ^^  but  this  very  rough  one.  The  thanes  and  ceorls,
the  twelfehyndmen  and  twyhyndmen  of  old  do  not  serve
the  purpose  for  an  exhaustive  arrangement  of  society.  The
test  of  wergeld  had  been  rendered  worthless  by  the  disrup-
tion of  kindreds,  the  intrusion  of  privileged  Scandinavians
with  their  fancy  weres,  the  confusion  between  small  free-
men, coloni,  and  freedmen  of  different  kinds.  And  the  very
names  adopted  by  the  Normans  were  significant — they
were  names  drawn  from  modes  of  rural  settlement,  from
the  connexion  with  the  township  (townman- villain),  from
the  separate  small  holding,  the  Norman  borda,  and  from  the
cottage,  all  names  pointing  to  village  life  and  easily  genera -
Hsed  under  the  common  designations  of  rustics,  villains  in
general.  To  what  extent  this  feature  of  rural  life  was  con-
sidered as  decisive  at  the  time  of  the  survey,  may  be  gathered,
amongst  other  things,  from  the  fact  that  the  Kentish  pea-
santry was  included  in  the  rank  of  villainage,  although  there
were  features  in  its  life  which  gave  it  a  pecuhar  place  among
the  population  of  England,  and  ultimately  helped  it  to  attain
a  more  favourable  social  position.  Still,  they  were  villains,
bordarii  and  cottagers  in  the  sense  of  being  peasant  share-
holders of  villages  and  settlers  holding  small  plots  of  land
and  separate  homesteads.  It  may  be  justly  observed  that,
at  this  stage  of  its  development,  terminology  speaks  directly';
of  occupations  and  not  yet  of  services.  This  is  Hterally
true,  and  leaves  some  margin  for  future  variations,  such  ag
that  which  occurred  in  the  very  case  of  Kentish  men.  But
on  the  whole,  the  villains,  bordarii  and  cottagers  of  Domes-
day are  taken  as  people  who  not  only  themselves,  five  bj
rural  work  on  their  tenements  but  who  support  other  people


THE  PRINCIPLES OF  THE DOMESDAY SURVEY  299

by  their  work  :  they  are  entered  as  members  of  manorial
groups,  and  thereby  subjected  to  such  services  as  were
appropriate  to  their  mode  of  life.  And  this  possibly  ex-
plains why,  by  the  side  of  the  general  classification  fitting
most  cases,  special  entries  as  to  freemen  and  socmen  appear.
Most  of  these  were  evidently  also  peasants,  but  they  had
succeeded  in  making  it  clear  to  the  compilers  of  the  survey
that  their  services  were  not  mainly  base  agricultural  work.
If  the  survey  had  been  taken  in  a  more  consistent  manner,
these  entries  of  small  freemen  might  have  been  more  numer-
ous ;  but,  dispersed  as  they  are,  they  bear  witness  to  the  fact
that,  already  at  the  time  of  Domesday,  the  tests  of  occupa-
tion and  services  were  applied  to  settle  questions  of  termin-
ology and  status.

Another  feature  by  which  the  Domesday  Survey,  when
construed in connection with  later  facts,  reflects  a  great

Spread  of  change  in  the  structure  of  society,  is  the  spread
manors  Qf  ^j^g  manor  as  the  organising  unit  of  property
and  population.  The  elements  of  the  manor  were,  as  we
have  seen,  all  elaborated  in  the  course  of  former  periods.
At  the  close  of  the  Old  Enghsh  epoch  we  already  find  a  great
number  of  estates  whose  owners  held  the  surroundings
population  in  economic  subjection  and  were  endowed  with
a  certain  amount  of  jurisdiction  over  it.  But  this  social
formation  was  by  no  means  uniformly  constituted  or  gener-
ally prevalent  all  over  England.  The  great  estates,  more
common  in  the  west  than  in  the  east,  were  everywhere
intermixed  with  smaller  properties,  and  intertwined  in  their
working  with  the  free  associations  of  the  townships  and  the
hundieds.  Indeed,  even  from  the  manorialising  description
of  the  state  of  England  a.d.  1086  given  by  Domesday,  we
can  gather  that  the  manors  were  as  yet  ungainly  combina-
tions, usually  straggling  over  the  fields  of  many  scattered
townships,  creations  of  haphazard  possession  as  well  as  of
economic  union."  And  the  reminiscences  as  to  the  time  of
King  Edward  disclose  even  a  greater  variety  of  forms,  rang-
ing from  mere  commendation  of  free  villagers  to  different
.protectors,  to  the  settlement  of  coloni  and  slaves  by  the
lord  on  the  soil  of  his  estate. When  we  compare  these


300  THE  GROWTH  OF  THE  MANOR

shades  of  subjection  to  the  well  rounded,  compact  manors,
of  the  Hundred  Rolls,  we  are  struck  by  the  progress
made  by  unification  and  subjection.  But  it  is  quite  possible
to  realise  in  a  similar  manner  the  great  advance  made  by
this  very  process  in  its  earlier  stage.  We  can  well  form  an
estimate  of  the  engulfing  and  organising  tendency  of  the
rising  manor,  e.g.,  by  an  attentive  study  of  the  Inquisition  of
Cambridgeshire  compared  with  Domesday  :  it  is  very  notice-
able how  small  estates,  and  entire  batches  of  free  sokemen
disappear  within  the  limits  of  some  manor,  and  how  the
personal  dependence  of  free  settlers  on  divers  protectors
gets  replaced  by  the  attraction  of  free  tenants  by  local
manorial  centres.^^

Indeed,  in  the  Ught  of  these  observations,  we  may  go
a  step  further  and  enquire  whether  in  many  cases  the
same  thing  was  meant  by  the  expression  manor  T.R.E.
and  T.R.W.  We  are  constantly  told  that  where  there
is  a  manor  at  the  time  of  the  Conqueror  there  was  one
at  the  time  of  the  Confessor  ;  or  else  that  there  were  two
and  perhaps  more.  But  are  we  sure  that  the  Norman
commissioners  and  the  juries  led  by  Norman  questioners
were  exact  in  these  equations  of  Old  English  and  Norman
arrangements  ?  Was  not,  in  this  retrospective  survey,  the
condition  of  the  Old  English  estate  often  only  supposed  or
made  up  to  be  the  equivalent  of  the  Norman  manor  ?  The
wish  of  Norman  organisers  to  see  manors  everywhere  may
well  have  been  productive  of  real  results  in  the  formation
of  manors,  and  incidentally  may  have  caused  a  good  deal
of  perplexity  to  modem  investigators,  who  try  to  con-
strue Domesday  expressions  in  too  rigid  a  sense.  It  has
been  maintained  with  considerable  ingenuity  that  the  manor
was  meant  at  that  time  to  be  the  place  where  the  tax-col-
lector applied  to  get  the  geld,^^  but  closer  examiaation  has
shown  that  such  a  reading  cannot  be  upheld.  To  begin
with,  the  tax -collector  had  primarily  in  view  the  hundred  and
the  viU  and  not  the  manor  ;  the  geld  had  a  history  of  ancient
assessment  behind  it  which  ran  through  the  channels  of  the
old  local  associations,  and  the  Normans  were  not  in  a  hurry  to
tamper  with  institutions  which  for  a  long  time  had  done  good
work  in  enforcing  fiscal  dues.^* Then  again we  find  that


THE PRINCIPLES OF THE DOMESDAY SURVEY 301

manor  freely  interchanges  with  such  vague  expressions  as
terra,  a  piece  of  land."  And  what  is  even  more  important  and
conclusive  to  my  mind,  there  is  the  evident  connection  of  the
term  with  two  sets  of  facts  which  run  through  very  long
periods  of  English  history,  both  before  and  after  Domesday.
On  the  one  hand,  we  find  the  hall,  the  grange  (comp.  barton)
and  the  berwick  as  constitutive  elements  and  adjuncts  of  the
manor,  and  this  shows  that  the  essence  of  the  manor  consisted
in  its  economic  organisation — it  was  an  estate  to  begin  with,
whatever  other  meanings  and  apphcations  the  term  may
have  had.  On  the  other  hand,  we  find  the  manor  definitely
used  as  a  unit  of  local  government  on  the  basis  of  an  estate —
such  is  the  feudal  meaning  of  the  term.^"  There  is  no  suffi-
cient reason  to  seek  for  an  entirely  special  departure  in  the
case  of  Domesday  terminology  which  tends  to  make
estates  units  of  local  government.  The  solution  of  diffi-
culties seems  thus  to  lie  in  the  idea  that  the  conquerors  not
only  found  manors  on  Engfish  soil  and  described  them  as
such  in  Domesday,  but  created  manors  where  they  were  not
as  yet  constituted,  and  described  as  manors  complexes  of
^Dperty  which  were  in  the  slightest  degree  similar  to  them.
An  estate  with  a  hall,  however  small,  a  district  with  a  grange
or  a  counting-house,  a  tract  of  land  in  a  single  person's
possession,  were  termed  manors  and  became  virtually  the
centres  of  attraction  of  tenure  and  services  if  they  were  not
so  before.^''  The  aim  of  the  conquerors  was,  from  this  point
of  view,  not  merely  to  record  the  data  for  the  exaction  of
the  geld,  or  even  to  collect  the  material  for  new  impositions
and  a  verification  of  the  old,  but  to  organise  the  country
and  to  obtain  a  hold  on  its  resources.  And  their  most
powerful  lever  of  organisation  was  the  notion  of  tenure  and
service,  as  the  notion  of  responsible  local  associations  had
been  the  organising  lever  of  old  English  society.  Not  that
the  new  notion  entirely  superseded  the  old  :  it  rather  tra-
versed and  modified  it,  but  it  is  as  material  to  grasp  the
motive  of  the  new  order  of  things,  as  to  remember  that  this
new  order  could  not  be  set  in  motion  without  taking  into
account  many  things  which  had  belonged  to  the  former  one.
The  division  of  England  into  manors  at  the  time  of  Domes-


302  THE  GROWTH  OF  THE  MANOR

day  is  a  fact  of  the  greatest  significance  and  importance  :
it  meant  that  the  new  government  wanted  to  supplement
the  old  scheme  of  local  administration  by  a  network  of
feudal  bodies  which  would  act  as  agencies  for  mihtary,
fiscal,  judicial  and  pohce  purposes.  Of  course,  their
policy  in  this  respect  was  also  dictated  by  the  fact,  that
England  had  been  conquered  not  by  a  popular  host,  but  by
an  army  of  knights  whose  claims  had  to  be  satisfied  in  the
first  place.  Anyhow,  without  losing  their  hold  on  the
ancient  divisions,  the  Normans  took  advantage  of  the  exist-
ing links  of  patronage  and  landownership  to  work  out  and
to  spread  a  new  feudal  scheme.  The  very  fact  that  the
Domesday  manors  are  not  all  in  a  state  of  perfect  readiness,
that  they  are,  in  truth,  in  all  stages  of  rudimentary  develop-
ment, speaks  volumes  for  the  conscious  stress  laid  on  their
organization.  As  much  as  governmental  measures  could
help  in  such  a  process,  the  policy  of  the  Norman  kings  did
help.  The  ofiicial  stamp  of  the  manor  was  often  set  in  a
hurry  on  formations  which  were  anything  but  ready  to
receive  it,  but  this  only  shows  how  intent  the  Norman  rulers
were  to  introduce  this  stamp  and  to  give  it  currency  all
over  the  country.^®  It  is  hardly  needful  to  repeat  that  the
manor  itself  was  not  a  newfangled  expedient,  that  it  was
growing  and  ripening  on  Saxon  soU,  but  it  is  only  the  whole-
sale settlement  on  feudal  lines  which  gave  it  the  complete-
ness and  the  predominance  which  characterise  it  in  the  age
of  Bracton.

The  best  commentary  on  Domesday,  from  this  point  of

view,  is  afforded  by  the  history  of  the  next  generations  after

the great inquest. This history is full of

Changes  in  the  details  as  to  the  systematic  simplification  and

of  manors elaboration of the hurried manorial scheme

into a comprehensive and national order.

Some  of  the  Domesday manors disappear — the tests of

actual hfe kill off  a  quantity of hybrid beings which

had no other real claim to act as centres of  tenurial

rights and of local government than the fiat of the

Domesday commissioners. Some others, without losing

their  independent  existence,  lapse  into  a  state  of  subin-


THE PRINCEPLES OF THE DOMESDAY SURVEY  303

feudation  in  regard  to  more  powerful  neighbours.  In  the
opposite  direction,  some  of  the  big  manorial  concerns  get
parcelled  up  and  breed  lesser  manors  by  subinfeudation.
In  some  extraordinary  cases,  a  greater  being  than  the  manor
itself — an  "  honour  " — may  arise. ^*  The  most  common  occur-
rence of  aU  is  that  one  of  the  manorial  bodies  attracts  and
swaUows  up  tenements,  plots  of  land,  and  even  other  manors
which  come  into  contact  with  it.  All  these  eventuahties
may  be  exemplified  by  numberless  cases  from  all  parts  of
England.^"  Something  of  the  same  kind  had  been  going  on
for  ages  in  Saxon  England  itself,  but  we  have  not  the  same
means  of  observing  the  facts,  and,  in  a  sense,  the  occurrences
of  the  Norman  epoch  were  more  decisive,  in  so  far  namely
as  they  brought  things  to  a  head  on  the  definite  lines  of  a
conscious  system  and  a  recognized  theory.  One  especially
characteristic  form  of  transition  from  Old  English  condi-
tions to  the  feudal  arrangement  may  be  noticed  in  the  case
of  so-called  sokes.  The  soke  is  an  Old  EngUsh  institution,
and  does  not  fit  well  into  the  scheme  of  feudal  dependency.
It  was  not  originally  a  congregation  of  tenants  around  an
economic  and  pohtical  centre,  as  the  manor  ought  to  be.  It  is
only  a  congregation  of  small  landowners  around  a  large  land-
ONvner  who  obtains  certain  pohtical  rights  over  them  ;  it  is
the  outcome  of  protection,  and  not  of  tenure.  The  feeling
of  a  distinct  difference  between  manor  and  soke  was  so
strong,  and  the  traditions  in  this  respect  so  much  ahve,  that
the  manorialisation  of  England  left  some  sokes  standing  by
the  side  of  the  manors.  The  tendency  was,  of  course,  to
assimilate  them  gradually.  In  some  instances,  a  soke  was
added  to  a  manor  without  a  very  definite  distinction  between
its  members  and  the  free  tenants  of  the  manor.  But  some
other  cases  remained  to  late  times  in  which  the  incomplete
organisation  of  the  soke  was  preserved.  Such,  for  example,
was  the  soke  of  Rothley  in  Leicestershire.^^

I  may  venture  to  point  out  that  these  instances  are  rem-
nants of  an  order  of  things  when  soke  and  sokemen  were
more  common,  even  though  I  should  incur  the  reproach
of  searching  after  survivals  — an  unpopular  business  now-a-
days.


304  THE  GROWTH  OF  THE  MANOR

A  very  remarkable  side  of  this  process  is  the  relation  of  the

results  obtained  by  it  to  the  ancient  social  organisation.  We

need  not  dwell  on  the  cross  influences  between

Township  ^^^  manor  on  one  side,  the  county  and  its
subdivisions  on  the  other.  But  most  per-
plexing problems  arise  from  the  fact  that  there  existed
J;ownships  with  economic  and  political  features  in  the  very
places  in  which  the  manor  appeared  with  its  economic  and
pohtical  organisation,  and  that  these  townships  were  not  ren-
dered useless  by  the  new  organisation.  We  have  already  had
occasion  to  point  out  that  the  townships  were  not  destroyed
or  superseded  by  the  manors  :  they  went  on  with  their  func-
tions, but  of  course  they  had  to  come  to  some  arrangement
with  the  newcomers.  The  natural  tendency  was  to  sub-
ordinate the  townships  to  the  manors  in  such  a  way  that  a
township,  or  even  several,  were  swallowed  up  in  their  en-
tirety by  the  higher  unit.  When  this  was  the  case,  and  such
a  result  was  commonly  achieved  after  a  good  deal  of  wrang-
ling and  encroachment,  it  was  comparatively  easy  to  work
the  combination.  The  viU  or  township  attended  to  its
police  duties,  made  its  presentments,  appeared  by  its  repre-
sentatives in  hundred,  shire  and  circuit,  and  transacted
economic  business  under  the  protection  and  the  guidance
of  the  manor,  while  this  latter  drew  its  suitors  and  dues,
managed  its  conveyancing,  organised  its  judicial  affairs,  by
the  help  of  the  viU.

In  fact,  such  a  combination  was  the  normal  one,  not  only
in  the  sense  of  most  cases  finding  their  solution  in  such
a  manner,  but  also  in  the  sense  that  this  solution  was  the
most  convenient  one.  It  brought  local  unity  with  it,  it
provided  the  manor  with  a  simple  and  compact  economic
basis,  while  the  organisation  of  the  vill  was  perfected  by  the
institution  of  a  court  which  could  try  offences  of  many  kinds
and  by  a  strong  showing  of  authority  in  the  action  of  the
lord.^^  It  is  to  those  normal  instances  that  we  are  mainly
looking  when  we  speak  of  the  fully  grown  manor  and  its
elements,  and  it  is  those  instances  which  are  mainly  illus-
trated by  court  rolls.  But  extents  and  cartularies  show
that  such  instances  were,  by  no  means,  the  only  possible


THE PBINCE?LES OF THE DOMESDAY SURVEY  305

outcome  of  the  process  of  manorialization.  There  was  no
sufficient  material  force  to  bring  over  to  this  simple  form
all  the  badly  constituted  stragghng  manors  of  Domesday.
In  numerous  cases,  the  vill  remained  a  body  by  itself  and
several  manors,  as  many  as  three  or  four,  perhaps,  had  to
share  their  influence  over  it.

How  were  such  cases  to  be  met  ?  To  begin  with,  the
advent  of  the  maucrial  arrangement  produced  of  necessity
the  result  that  thn  several  manors  quartered  on  the
single  vill  ut  composed  of  scattered  portions  of  vills,  came
to  hold  their  separate  courts,  and  this  meant  that  the  local
business  ci  ihe  vih  had  henceforth  to  be  largely  transacted
in  different  institutions.  No  wonder  that,  in  process  of
time,  this  led  to  a  disruption  of  originally  sohd  vills  into
several  minor  vills  with  distinct  names  and  courts.  Many
of  the  villages  with  distinctive  affixes  to  their  principal
names  must  have  originated  in  this  way.  Such  was  the
origin  of  the  Bampton  Poges  and  the  Bampton  Regis,  of
King's  Langley  and  Abbot's  Langley,^^  etc.  Sometimes
the  breaking  up  of  the  old  township  led  to  an  actual  separa-
tion of  the  village,  to  the  migration  of  one  part  of  the  popu-
lation and  the  rising  of  new  clusters  of  dwellings.  Some-
times the  adjoining  manors  went  on  using  the  commons
or  some  part  of  them  together,  and  in  such  cases  joint  meet-
ings of  the  tenants  or  even  of  the  courts  had  to  be  arranged
to  regulate  the  uses  and  inflict  penalties  for  transgressions.^*

One  expedient  which  may  have  been  in  use  was  the  re-
course to  a  court  on  a  higher  rung  of  the  ladder  of  infeudation,
if  the  manors  in  question  happened  to  have  common  lords.
But  as  this  was  not  always  the  case,  informal  meetings  for
the  formulation  of  agreements  must  have  been  often  resorted
to,  and  then  the  enforcing  of  the  customs  had  to  be  left  even-
tually to  decisions  of  the  pubHc  courts.  A  good  many
processes  arising  from  intercommoning  have  come  down  to
us,  and  part  of  them  evidently  goes  back  to  contiicts  ot
rights  between  different  manors  within  the  boundaries  of
one  and  the  same  vifl,  while  others  are  attributable  to  im-
divided  uses  of  waste  tracts  not  included  in  the  boundaries
of  any  particular  vill.  x


306  THE GROWTH OF THE M NOR

In  any  case,  the  tradition  of  the  anc  nt  unity  f  the  vill
was  kept  up  in  a  marked  manner  by  ad:ninistrativ  s  require-
ments. In  regard  to  frack  pledge,  lie  catch-
Administra-  jng  and  watching  of  felons,  the  responsi-
of  the  Vill  bihty  for  murder  comn  itted  in  t'le  fields,
the  repartition  of  taxes,  present  nents  of
neighbours,  sworn  inquests  and  the  lik  %  the  vills  continued
to  transact  business  which  formerly  h  d  fallen  t<  the  duty
of  townships,  and,  in  all  these  respect  if  the  vi  1  was  not
incorporated  as  a  whole  in  a  manor  an  ruled  as  :  whole  by
its  court,  there  must  have  been  meetinga  to  el  "ft  -.  jpresenta-
tives  and  arrange  for  the  discharge  of  duties.  The  auto-
matism and  reality  which  are  appealed  to  sometimes  do
not  go  far  enough  to  meet  possible  contingencies.  I  fail
to  see  how  a  distribution  of  duties  between  the  manors
taking  up  parts  of  a  vill  could  have  taken  place  without
some  definite  agreement  to  start  the  custom,  and  more
meetings  and  agreements  to  modify  it  in  the  course  of  time
and  events.  Nor  is  it  easy  to  understand  how  men  were
to  be  taxed,  watch  could  be  kept,  and  presentments  made
without  some  kind  of  organisation  for  entrusting  very
important  duties  to  suitable  people. ^^  All  these  villar  arrange-
ments, when  they  are  intermanorial,  remain  in  the  shade
because  there  is  no  permanent  institution  to  take  care  of
their  records,  while  public  and  manorial  institutions  remain
indifferent  to  such  transactions.


CHAPTER II

OWNERSHIP AND HUSBANDRY

As  we  pass  to a  closer  examiQation  of  the  manor  in  its

component  parts  and  in  its  working,  we  may  remind  the

reader  that  the  manorial  organisation  presents

Aspects  of  three  intimately  connected  aspects — the  pro-

manorial  . ^  ^,  -'. - J  ^,  ,.^. ,  mi.

arrangement  pnetary,  the  social  and  the  political  one.  ihe
manor  is  an  estate  surromided  by  tenures;
it  is  a  combination  of  ruling  and  dependent,  working  and
military  classes  ;  it  is  a  unit  of  local  government.  It  is  from
these  three  points  of  view  that  we  have  to  consider  the
subject.

The  proprietary  and  economic  aspect  of  manorial  organ-
isation is  ruled  by  the  main  consideration  that  it  is  directed
towards  two  distinct  aims  :  it  represents  and  formulates
the  interests  of  the  villagers,  and  it  acts  as  the  machinery
for  the  collection  of  duties  and  enforcement  of  services  on
behalf  of  the  lord.  In  this  way  it  is  a  standing  combination
between  the  township  and  the  home  farm  or  domain,  and  it
would  be  wrong  to  lose  sight  either  of  one  or  of  the  other
element  of  this  combination.  The  manor  does  not  exist  for
the  exclusive  use  of  the  lord  any  more  than  it  exists  for  the
exclusive  benefit  of  the  tenantry ;  it  has  to  reckon  with  both.

In  deahng  with  the  village  community  which  formed
the  basis  of  the  whole,  we  need  not  revert  to  the  description
of  its  shareholding  and  open-field  practices,  as  these  matters
go  back  to  Old  English  arrangements,  and  have  been
examined  at  length  in  the  preceding  chapter.  But  we
must  dwell  on  those  features  which  have  undergone  a  change


308  THE GROWTH OF THE IVIANOB

in  consequence  of  the  development  of  the  manorial  system.
All  the  main  traits  in  the  life  of  the  community  have  been
more  or  less  affected  by  this  development.

To  begiQ  with,  the  legal  theory  of  landownership  under-
goes a  complete  transformation.  Instead  of  treating  the
Landowner-  rights  of  the  several  dwellers  and  cultivators
ship  of  the  locaUty  as  originally  independent  and

combining  through  mutual  agreement,  or  as  derived  from
an  original  communal  ownership,  the  legal  theory  of  the
feudal  state  treats  them  as  derived  from  a  private  and
exclusive  ownership  of  the  lord.

The  lord's  ownership  itself  may  be  considered  as  a  depen-
dent tenure,  and  traced  ultimately  to  a  grant  of  the  king,
as  eminent  owner  of  the  whole  land  in  the  country.  But
if  we  turn  aside  from  this  hierarchical  conception,  and  remain
within  the  precincts  of  the  manor,  we  have  to  recognise
the  lord  as  the  exclusive  owner  and  to  derive  all  rights  and
customs  from  his  private  ownership.

The  freeholders  of  the  manor  are  his  tenants,  and  their
possession  of  land,  though  guaranteed  in  every  way,  resolves
itself  into  a  hereditary  feoffment.^  As  for  the  unfree
tenants,  they  have  no  rights  in  the  eye  of  the  law  but  to
follow  customs  by  the  sufferance  of  the  lord,  their  posses-
sion, as  far  as  it  exists  within  the  manor,  is  included  in
the  proprietary  rights  of  the  lord.^  Such  is  the  feudal
theory  clearly  formulated  by  Norman  courts  and  Norman
law  writers,  and,  of  course,  a  theory  of  so  absolute  a  charac-
ter is  productive  of  many  and  marked  consequences.  There
follows  from  it,  that  in  case  of  neglect  on  the  part  of  the
tenants  in  the  fulfilment  of  their  duties  towards  the  lord
the  tenement  may  be  ultimately  confiscated.^  This  holds
good  even  in  regard  to  free  tenants,  though,  of  course,  in
this  case,  confiscation  may  be  resorted  to  only  as  a  kind
of  ultima  ratio,  after  all  other  means  and  penalties  calcu-
lated to  bring  the  tenants  to  reason  have  been  exhausted.
Fines,  amercements,  distraints,  come  first,  but  the  possi-
bihty  of  confiscation  is  clearly  contemplated,,  and  some-
times it  is  actually  put  into  practice.*  Inasmuch  as  both
lord  and  tenant  are  freemen,  their  contentions  will  generally


OWNERSHIP AND HUSBANDRY  309

take  the  way  to  the  king's  court  :  there  are  writs  to  suit  the
needs  of  both,  e.g.  the  writs  quare  cessavit  for  the  benefit
of  the  lord,  the  writs  quare  exigit,  de  ingressu  for  the  benefit
of  the  tenant,  the  writs  of  novel  disseisin  and  of  common
of  pasture  for  both.  But  there  is  a  manorial  process  be-
sides which  may  be  resorted  to  if  the  parties  do  not  want
to  take  recourse  to  the  king's  court,**  and  though,  as  a  matter
of  fact,  most  of  the  suits  between  lord  and  freeholders  went
to  the  royal  courts,  this  was  merely  a  question  of  choosing
the  better  procedure,  of  obtaining  and  enforcing  conclu-
sive decisions.

Other  and  common  consequences  of  the  same  notion  were
the  right  of  the  lord  to  claim  escheated  tenements,  to  take
into  his  hands  the  wardship  of  his  tenants  under  age,  to
draw  profits  in  cases  of  the  marriage  of  heiresses,  and  to
exact  rehef  as  a  consequence  of  the  investiture  of  heirs,  all
well-known  and  very  realistic  incidents  of  feudal  tenure,
derived  from  the  idea  that  the  dominium  eminens  of  the
freeholders'  tenement  belonged  to  the  lord.®

As  to  villains,  all  these  traits  are  much  more  accentuated,
as  they  have  no  legal  standing  against  the  lord.  The  court
Customary  rolls  tell  us  currently  of  confiscations  as  a
tenure  penalty  for  offences,  of  escheats  in  the  lord's

hand  in  default  of  heirs,  of  stringent  forms  of  heriot  relief,
wardship  and  marriage,  of  which  more  will  have  to  be  said
when  we  come  to  questions  of  personal  status.'  A  charac-
teristic form,  suggested  by  the  quahty  of  the  lord  as  the
true  and  only  owner,  is  to  be  found  in  the  ceremony  of
surrender  and  admittance  by  which  every  transfer  of  land.'
from  the  hands  of  one  villain  to  those  of  another,  in  cases  of
donation,  exchange  and  sale,  had  to  be  accompanied.  No
tenant  in  villainage  had  power  directly  to  transmit  his  pre-
carious possession  to  another  person  by  his  own  will,  from
his  own  hands  and  by  pure  agreement  between  two  parties.
He  could  merely  give  up  his  tenement,  or  a  part  of  it,  to
the  lord  with  the  understanding  that  the  lord  should  grant
its  possession  to  the  person  intended.  In  most  cases,  the
proceeding  was  fictitious  in  so  much  as  both  acts  of  the  trans-
action had  been  arranged  beforehand. But  the  form  was,


310  THE GROWTH OF THE MANOR

nevertheless,  full  of  meaning  :  it  served  to  reassert  in  a  most
emphatic  manner  the  exclusive  ownership  of  the  lord.

Not  the  least  remarkable  trait  about  this  process  is  its
development  out  of  ancient  symbohc  customs  which  had
nothing  to  do  with  villainage  and  the  lord's  proprietary
right :  the  feudal  practice  has  a  precedent  in  Teutonic  usages
by  which  the  passage  of  property  out  of  the  ordinary  course
of  succession  was  guaranteed  and  sanctioned.  A  donation
or  a  sale  deprived  the  ordinary  heirs  of  a  person,  the  kins-
men who  had  a  potential  right  over  the  land,  of  their  claims
and  expectations.  No  wonder  that  complicated  formaHties
were  needed  to  establish  the  facts  of  the  case  beyond  dispute,
and  to  prepare  a  standing  ground  iu  case  of  a  tr^al.  The
means  to  attain  this  end  was  to  put  a  middle -man  between
donor  and  donee,  or  between  seller  and  buyer  :  the  surrender
of  rights  on  the  side  of  the  first  was  made  particularly  clear,
and  a  third  party  provided  to  stand  as  witness  and  warrant
of  the  transaction.  But  there  can  be  no  doubt  that  the
surrender  to  the  lord  had  yet  another  meaning  than  the
part  played  by  the  "salman,^  the  middle-man  of  ancient
custom."  The  lord  was  not  legally  bound  to  pass  over  the
land  he  had  taken  into  his  hand,  and  the  recurrence  of  his
particular  seisin  was  obligatory  and  not  a  matter  of  choice
on  the  part  of  the  donor  or  seller.  Nevertheless,  it  is  to  be
noticed  that  even  in  its  new  meaning  of  resumption  of
property  by  the  lord,  the  surrender  and  admittance  pro-
ceeding was  originally  in  use,  not  merely  in  the  case  of
villains,  but  also  in  that  of  free  tenants.  After  all,  the
tenure  of  these  latter  was  juridically  a  feoffment,  though
not  historically  created  in  all  cases  by  real  grants.  As  a
feoffment,  it  stood  on  a  common  ground  with  villain  tenure,
though  it  was  protected  in  a  different  way,^

In  yet  another  direction,  the  doctrine  of  the  lord's  owner-
ship of  the  soil  led  to  practical  results  of  first-rate  import-
Ownership  of  ance.  As  the  lord  was  supposed  to  be  the  ori-.
the  waste  ginal  owner  of  the  whole  territory  occupied  by

the  manor,  and  all  other  claims  had  to  be  established
by  special  leave  or  by  customary  repetition,  portions
of the territory which were not  occupied by anybody


OWNERSHIP AND HUSBANDRY  311

in  particular  were  taken  to  belong  primarily  to  the
lord/"  Now,  we  have  seen  what  part  the  waste  played  in
the  economy  of  rural  life.  It  was  largely  used  as  common
pasture,  common  wood,  common  turbary,  and  it  afforded  a
reserve  fund  on  which  the  rural  population  could  fall  back
for  purposes  of  colonisation  and  enlargement  of  existing
resources.

The  notion  of  the  lord's  private  right  ran  counter  to  all
notions  of  communal  property  which  were  bound  up  with
ancient  usages  as  to  the  waste.  Still,  as  these  contradictory
tendencies  had  to  be  reconciled  in  practice,  in  one  way  or
the  other,  the  compromise  took  the  shape  of  allowing  the
customary  rights  of  usage  of  commoners  to  go  on  "  when
there  was  no  express  call  to  disturb  them,  but  to  insist
upon  the  legal  doctrine  of  the  lord's  private  right  as  to
the  waste  and  to  put  it  into  practice  by  taxing  common
usages  ^^  and  by  asserting  exclusive  privileges  in  regard  to
enclosures  and  to  the  reclaiming  from  the  waste  for  cultiva-
tion.

Customary  payments  of  pannage  for  swine  and  cattle  graz-
ing on  the  waste,  customs  of  so-called  grass-earth  labour,
fines  for  cutting  down  trees,  and  especially  hunting  and
fishing  privileges  are  among  the  earliest  manifestations  of
manorial  lordship  over  tracts  of  waste  land,  and,  of  course,
they  get  more  and  more  elaborate  as  cultivation  and  social
progress  increase.  We  have  already  had  occasion  to  speak
of  the  right  of  approving.  It  is  only  necessary  to  add  now,
that  by  getting  a  firm  hold  on  this  branch  of  rural  economy,
the  lords  ensured  to  themselves  a  most  advantageous  posi-
tion as  regards  eventual  apportionments  of  claims.  It  was
evident  that  the  very  extensive  tracts  of  waste  land  still
abounding  in  England  had  to  be  utilised  sooner  or  later,  and
henceforth  the  lord's  will  and  pohcy  began  to  play  a  con-
spicuous part  in  this  utilisation.  The  people  chiefly  interested
in  maintaining  old  ideas  and  customs  in  regard  to  the  waste,
the  villains,  forming  the  majority  of  rural  populations,  had
no  legal  voice  in  the  matter.  They  were  reduced  to  the
condition  of  matter-of-fact  usagers,  and  the  express  claim
of  the  townships  to  rights  of  common  was  construed  to


312  THE  GROWTH  OF  THE  MAN  OB

mean  the  right  of  manorial  lords,  though  from  a  historical
point  of  view  nothing  could  be  more  inadequate  than  such
a  construction.  And  so  the  usages  went  on  by  sufferance
as  long  as  there  was  some  fear  of  getting  into  un-
pleasant compUcations  by  too  rough  a  handling  of  the
lord's  private  right,  and  as  long  as  there  were  no  strong
inducements  to  oust  the  commoners  for  the  purpose  of
enclosing  grazing  grounds  for  sheep -farming  on  an  extensive
scale,  or  of  starting  new  farms,  or  of  increasing  the  private
enterprises  of  the  demesne.  Freeholders  were  the  only
people  in  regard  to  whom  something  more  than  a  respect
for  traditions  and  self-imposed  restraint  were  needed.  And,
indeed,  they  asserted  their  claims  in  the  courts  as  often  as
the  villains  asserted  theirs  by  agrarian  riots.  The  outcome
of  the  struggle  were  the  Statutes  of  Merton  and  of  West-
minster ii.,  in  which  it  was  at  least  recognised  that  the
land  in  the  special  occupation  of  the  tenant  was  not  identical
with  the  land  measured  out  to  him  in  the  fields,  but  included
a  flexible  quantity  of  appendant  usage  in  undivided  terri-
tory. Still,  by  help  of  these  enactments  and  decisions,  the
lord  carried  off  aU  the  residue  which  remained  after  an
estimation  of  the  special  needs  of  existing  tenements  as  to
pasture,  wood,  etc.,  which  was  saying  a  good  deal.  In  a
way,  the  burden  of  proof  was  shifted  :  the  tenants  had
to  show  what  their  needs  were,  and  the  lord  got  hold  of  what
was  not  expressly  appropriated.

As  the  balance  of  claims  was  maintained  in  regard  to  the
use  of  commons  chiefly  by  considerations  of  matter  of  fact
Submission  to  interest  and  tradition,  even  so,  and  perhaps
customs  in  a  greater  degree,  the  open-field  system  of

cultivation  went  on  by  the  influence  of  custom,  although
it  hampered  aHke  lord  and  tenants  in  the  exercise  of  their
discretion  and  private  enterprise.  It  is  characteristic
of  the  power  of  deeply  rooted  ideas  and  habits,  that,
in  a  very  great  number  of  cases,  the  lord's  dominical  land
was  often  entangled  among  the  intermixed  strips,  and
that  the  lords  commonly  submitted  to  the  incidents  and
practices  as  expressed  in  the  by-laws  and  customary  rules
of  the  village  courts.^^ But  it  is  not  impossible  to  draw  the


OWNERSHIP  AND HUSBANDRY  313

demesne  land  out  of  the  customary  network,  and  we  find
more  and  more  often  that  culturae  separates,  plots  cultivated
in  severalty,  make  their  appearance  by  the  side  of  the  open-
field^*  shots,  furlongs  and  commons.

This  development  of  private  cultivation  is  not  yet  strong
enough,  however,  to  endanger  the  whole  fabric  of  the  open-
field  sj'stcm ;  the  latter  remains  predominant  in  the  fields,
and  testifies  by  its  vitaUty  and  strength  to  tlie  customary
hold  of  communalistic  practices  on  the  main  arrangements
of  village  life.

One  side  of  the  village  community  was  greatly  strength-
ened by  the  growth  of  the  manor,  namely,  the  arrangement
Consolidations of the holdings. Although the shares  were
•f  holdings formed  and  their  functions  aheady  developed
in  the Old English  system,  without  regard  for  the  differ-
ence  between free and unfree  tenements,  and although,
as  we  have  seen, there were strong economic induce-
ments for  the  free  holdings  to  keep their  unity  as  far  as
possible,  there  were  still  considerable  forces  which  acted  in
the  direction  of  dispersing  the  holdings  of  free  owners  and
of  disturbing  their  regularity. Occasional  divisions  among
heirs,  ahenations  by  sale  and  donation, concentration  of  many
tenements  in  one  hand,  could  not  be  altogether  prevented
while  the  owTiers  considered  themselves  to  be  perfectly  free
ia'regard  to  their  property. The  introduction  of  the  manor
brought  a  new  element  of  cohesion  into  play. The  holding
Itiad  to  be  kept united,  not  only  because  it  was  the  best
Jhieans  of  preserving  economic efficiency  and  sometimes,
in  the  case  of  smaller  plots,  the  only  means  of  keeping  up
the  necessary  stock  and  the  share  of  the  holding  in  the  field,
but  because  it  was  in  the  interest  of  the  lord  that  the  value
of  his  tenancies  should  not  be  diminished  or  endangered  by
iDulverising  processes  of  division.^^ The  whole  weight  of  his
I Siterest  tended  thus  in  the  direction  of  regularity  and  equality.
i /Regularity,  because  it  was  more  convenient  to  collect  the
\J  dues  from  holdings  of  one  type,  or,  at  least,  of  a  few  co-
''^ ordinated  types,  than  from  plots  formed  at  random.  Equality
j — because  he  had  to  look  to  the  general  condition  of  his  sub-
I jects  more  than  to  the  private  interests  of  particular  fami-


314  THE  GROWTH  OF THE MANOR

lies,  and  naturally  felt  inclined  to  exert  his  influence  in  a
levelling  direction.  A  good  landlord  was  like  a  good  gar-
dener, who  has  to  ply  the  axe  and  the  pruning-knife  in  order
to  rear  a  plantation  of  strong,  even  trees  which  must  neither
stifle  each  other  by  pressing  in  too  great  numbers  one  against
the  other,  nor  be  left  a  prey  to  a  few  exceptionally  powerful
specimens.  Manorial  instructions  make  it  the  duty  of
the  steward  to  see  to  a  proper  and  equable  distribution
of  holdings,  to  provide  with  land  people  who  stood  in
need  of  it,  and  not  to  allow  the  concentration  of  tenements
in  the  same  hands. ^^  Altogether,  the  holding,  whether  free
or  villain,  became,  as  a  rule,  indivisible.  Rules  of  succes-
sion and  possession  were  strengthened  which  favoured  the
tenement,  as  it  were,  at  the  expense  of  the  population  born
on  it,  and  gave  an  entirely  different  standing  to  brothers
according  to  tlieir  relation  to  the  tenement.  In  this  way
the  interest  of  the  owner  contributed  powerfully  towards
the  introduction  and  maintenance  of  standard  tenements.
And,  of  course,  this  tendeilCJ  was  not  less  conspicuous  in
the  case  of  peasant  holdings  than  in  the  case  of  higher  forms
of  possession.

Primogeniture  and  Borough  English,  -that  is,  the  suc-
cession of  the  youngest  son,  appear  as  comhif^n  expedients
Borough  for  securing the  unity of  peasant  .holdings.

English  Borough English deserves  a  few  more  wor^

and  attention,  because  the  peculiarities  of  this  remarkable
tenure  are  hardly  sufficiently  reahsed,  although  it  has  been
studied  so  often. ^'  The  passage  of  the  holding  to  the  youngest
son  has  been  often  explained  as  the  outcome  of  the  fact  that
the  youngest  remains  longest  in  his  father's  house,  whfle
the  elder  brothers  have  generally  opportunities  of  going
out  into  the  world,  at  a  time  when  the  father  is  still  alive
and  able  to  take  care  of  his  land.  Sometimes  the  reason-
of  the  custom  is  sought  in  the  consideration  that  the  succes-
sion of  the  youngest  put  a  longer  stretch  between  genera-
tions, and  was,  in  so  far,  advantageous  to  the  tenants,  as  it
exposed  them  more  seldom  to  the  heavy  dues  of  relief  and
heriot.  But  there  seems  to  be  a  good  deal  more  behind  this
custom. To  begin  with,  the  evident  favour  it  shows  to  the


OWNERSHIP AND HUSBANDRY  315

interests  of  the  tenant  makes  it  probable  that  it  arose  on
free  soil  as  one  of  those  customary  checks  on  division,  of
which  we  have  been  speaking  in  the  third  chapter,  and  not
as  a  distinct  outcome  of  manorial  villainage,  though  it  pro-
bably spread  under  the  latter  influence.  We  come  to  the
same  conclusion  when  we  draw  the  deeper  consequences  of
a  rule  which  supposed  that  elder  brothers  found  provision
outside  their  father's  household  and  in  his  lifetime.  This
savours  more  of  the  mobility  of  early  conditions  with  their
opportunities  for  emigration,  warfare,  colonisation,  new
settlements,  and  of  greater  importance  of  moveable  property
as  represented  by  cattle  and  sheep,  than  of  a  time  studiously
bent  on  immobilising  cultivation  and  land-ownership  as  much
as  possible.  The  Borough  Enghsh  rule  is  more  fit  for  enter-
prise than  for  customary  tradition.  A  last  feature  which
strikes  us  in  analysing  its  practical  meaning,  is  the  fact  that
it  was  surely  not  meant  for  large  families  or  family  com-
munities :  the  element  of  hierarchy  and  authority  is  com-
pletely absent  from  it.  The  holding  will  go  to  the  youngest
son  when  the  elder  brothers  and  their  offspring  are  re-
moved from  it,  and  the  youngest  in  the  family  is  certainly
not  the  fittest  person  to  represent  and  to  rule  anything  but
his  own  household.  This  shows  that  the  Borough  English
rule  came  up  among  people  Hving  in  small  households.  It
was  a  fit  rule  for  the  holder  of  a  bovate  and  possibly  of  a
virgate,  but  hardly  for  anybody  else.  In  this  way,  some
of  the  most  common  forms  of  manorial  custom  as  to  inherit-
ance point  to  a  state  of  society  characterised  by  a  break-up
of  the  larger  groups  into  the  smallest  possible  agrarian  units,
but  also  to  a  free  population  gathered  in  them.

The  customary  rules  of  inheritance  in  the  county  of
Kent  and  in  some  few  other  places  swerve  widely,  as
we  have  had  occasion  to  mention,  from  the  common
road  which  leads  towards  the  unification  of
holdings.  It  is  well  known  that  gavelkind
impUed  a  succession  on  equal  footing  of  all  brothers,  or,  to
put  it  more  properly,  of  all  members  of  the  same  generation
and  household.  The  unity  of  the  holding  was  not  given  up  :
it  was  maintained  in  the  form  of  communities  between  co-


316  THE GROWTH OP THE MANOR

heirs,  and  by  the  aUotment  of  ideal  shares  which  were  shifted
according  to  the  outfall  of  successive  divisions  of  rights
between  these  co-heirs.  These  facts  are  very  striking  and
interesting.  One  thing  which  we  see  clearly  is  that  they
stand  in  a  closer  relation  to  the  customs  of  tribal  divisions
than  to  feudal  practices.  They  are,  in  so  far,  more  Saxon
than  Norman  and  more  suitable  for  freeholders  than  for
tenants  in  villainage.  All  these  observations  are  weU  in
keeping  with  the  systematic  opposition  between  the  custom
of  Kent  and  that  of  adjoining  counties,  as  Kent  was  deemed
free  from  the  taint  of  villainage.

This  being  so,  we  might  suggest  that  the  motive  for  this
perplexing  abnormity  of  custom  arose  out  of  two  currents
of  facts  which  may  be  perceived  in  the  history  of  Kent.
Gavelkind,  succession  in  partible  socage,  was  insisted  upon,
and  worked  out  as  a  kind  of  badge  of  freedom  when  the
time  came  for  the  growth  of  villainage  and  for  the  conscious
striving  of  Kentish  men  against  it.  But  this  explanation,
which  lays  stress  on  the  strenuous  keeping  up  of  Saxon
tradition  in  this  particular  corner  of  England,  would  be
insufficient  by  itself,  as  it  is  clear  that  the  leaning  towards
gavelkind  must  have  made  itself  felt  even  before  the  Norman
Conquest  and  the  complete  victory  of  feudalism.  After  all,
gavelkind,  in  its  well-known  later  forms,  could  hardly  be
described  as  the  usual  condition  of  tenure  even  in  Saxon
times.

It  was  peculiar  in  so  far  as  it  did  not  admit  of  the  working
of  the  customary  checks  on  subdivision  which  were  in  use
in  Saxon  England  :  we  find  such  a  nimiber  of  recognised
claims,  such  minute  subdivisions  of  rights,  such  a  compU-
cated  network  of  ideal  shares,  and  so  many  allusions  to  real
divisions  among  co-heirs,  that  we  entirely  lose  sight  of  the
ploughteam  and  of  its  well-known  component  parts  which
form  the  framework  of  the  usual  system  of  holdings.  We
hear,  indeed,  of  the  sulung  and  of  the  yoke,  but,  at  least  in
later  times,  they  are  much  too  big  for  their  names,  including
two  hundred  acres,  and  fifty  acres,  respectively,^^  that  is,
agrarian  measures  which  even  the  fervid  imagination  of  a
Walter  of  Henley  would  not  dare  to  provide  with  real  exist-


OWNERSHIP AND HUSBANDRY  317

ence  in  the  fields.  And,  on  the  other  hand,  we  find  crowds
of  people  registered  within  sulungs  and  yokes,  and  some  of
those,  indeed,  most  of  those  are  endowed  with  very  few
acres,  a  couple  of  acres,  single  acres,  half  acres,  and  the  like,
xn  a  word  we  have  glaring  instances  of  the  pulverisation  of
big  holdings  which  have  lost  their  agrarian  significance  and
which  are  entirely  out  of  proportion  to  the  customary
plough-team  and  its  divisions.  All  this  shows  that  we  are
on  peculiar  soil,  not  only  from  the  legal,  but  also  from  the
economic  point  of  view.  We  find  on  the  lands  of  St.  Augus-
tine and  Christ  Church,  Canterbury,  not  compact  agrarian
tenements  joining  in  open-field  cultivation  according  to
ancient  practices,  but  an  individualistic  society  which  seeks
its  living  and  gains  behind  a  loose  screen  of  ancient  holdings,
by  a  more  intensive  individualistic  cultivation  of  the  soil,
sometimes  on  exceedingly  small  plots.  It  thrives,  never-
theless, partly  by  the  help  of  many  pursuits  which  were  any-
thing but  agrarian  and  which  were  opened  to  it  by  the  privi-
leged position  of  the  county  on  the  high-road  from  France
to  England,  and  partly  by  work  on  hire  on  the  estates  of
local  magnates  and  in  the  interest  of  merchants  engaged  in
the  lucrative  trade  of  London  and  of  the  Cinque  Ports.
From  this  point  of  view,  one  may  almost  feel  tempted  to
liken  the  conditions  of  Kent  to  those  of  Normandy  and
Italy,  more  than  to  those  of  Surrey  and  Essex.  It  lay  on
the  most  important  trade  route,  and  had,  at  a  very  early
time,  assumed  a  mobilised,  commercial,  pecuniary  aspect,
if  I  may  be  allowed  to  use  the  term.  Indeed,  it  is  worth
while  to  remember  that  this  early  time  of  the  close  of  the
Saxon  and  the  beginning  of  the  Norman  periods  was  in  truth
the  time  of  the  most  concentrated  importance  and  well-
being  for  Kent.  It  was  exceptionally  situated  in  regard
to  gavelkind  and  denial  of  villainage,  because  it  was
exceptionally  ahead  of  the  rest  of  the  country  in  point  of
commercial  development  and  emancipation  from  manorial
husbandry.  This  solution  of  the  problem  seems  to  be  appro-
priate in  yet  another  sense  :  it  provides  the  best  clue  to  the
otherwise  incomprehensible  fact  that  the  landowners  of
Kent,  its  lords  and  knights,  did  not,  in  any  way,  contest  or


318  THE  GROWTH  OF  THE  MANOR

hamper  the  declaration  of  "  the  rights  of  man  "  embodied
in  the  well-known  statement  of  Kentish  custom,  although
Domesday  might  have  given  them  seemingly  a  very  passable
standing-ground  for  opposing  it.  It  was  evidently  not  in
their  interest  to  oppose  this  early  emancipation,  and  their
reasonableness  and  fairness  may  be  best  accounted  for  by
the  fact  that  they  gained  too  much  from  the  privileged
mobility  and  commercial  pursuits  of  their  subjects,  to  be
very  anxious  to  reduce  them  to  the  strict  rule  of  villainage.
And,  as  this  commercial  turn  was  taken  in  Saxon  times,  no
wonder  that  the  individuaHstic  customs  of  Kent  are  per-
meated with  Saxon  reminiscences  and  engrafted  on  a  stock
of  Old  EngHsh  traditions.  In  short,  Kent  seems  to  have
proceeded  from  the  tribal  system  and  the  independent
village  system  directly  towards  commercial  husbandry,
without  going  through  the  intermediate  stage  of  manorial
husbandry  which  was  common  to  the  rest  of  England.^®

One  of  the  most  potent  factors  productive  of  communalism
is  the  joint  liability  of  members  of  a  village  in  regard  to

.....  ...... duties  primarily  imposed  on  every  single  one

Joint  liability ,  ..  ,^7 t,  ^.u  ^  ^i, •  •^•

of  them. We  have  seen  that  the  imposition

of  taxes  and  services  by  the  government  always  took  the
shape  of  wholesale  requirements  which  were  to  be  met  by
the  natural  associations  of  the  country,  so  that  deficiencies
in  the  bringing  up  of  the  necessary  fractions  in  one  quarter
might  be  made  up  by  extra  exertions  in  other  quarters.
The  county  would  have  to  make  up  deficiencies  in  the
hundreds,  the  hundreds  to  guarantee  the  completeness  of  a
whole  drawn  from  the  contributions  of  its  townships,  and
the  township  to  vouch  jointly  for  the  proper  performance  of
duties  by  its  shareholders.  This  did  not  exclude  a  reparti-
tion of  the  burden  between  the  parts  in  each  case,  and  such
a  repartition  was  effected,  as  we  have  seen,  by  assigning
to  every  component  part  or  member  a  constituent  share  in
the  whole.  And  a  considerable  decrease  in  the  strength
of  individual  shareholders  might  produce,  and  often  did
produce,  a  change  in  estimates,  in  repartition  and  in  whole-
sale requirements.  But  the  subsidiary  habihty  of  com-
munities stood  behind  the  scheme  and  helped  to  work  it.


OWNERSHIP AND HUSBANDRY  319

This  communal  liability  may,  indeed,  be  at  the  root  of  the
usual  description  of  all  organised  local  subdivisions  as  com-
mons or  communities.^"  However  this  may  be,  it  is  clear
that  a  similar  policy  was  followed  by  the  lords  in  regard
to  the  manorial  dues  and  services. ^^  The  shortcomings  of
individual  tenants  brought,  indeed,  penalties  and  fines
on  their  heads,^'  and  the  manorial  administration  did  not
only  look  to  the  coming  in  of  the  entire  bulk  of  rents  and
services,  but  went  into  all  details  and  addressed  its  require-
ments to  every  single  tax -payer  and  rated  household.  But
at  the  same  time,  there  is  the  idea  that  the  township  or  the
community  of  manorial  tenants  ought  to  make  up  as  much
as  possible  for  deficiencies  of  its  single  members,  and  it  is
curious  to  notice  that  these  two  divergent  tendencies  are  at
work  at  the  same  time.  A  plot  vacated  by  its  holder  may
be  put  on  the  responsibility  of  the  whole  township  or  may
be  taken  into  the  lord's  hands,  and  this  last  takes  place  not
only  when  it  seems  advantageous  to  increase  the  cultiva-
tion of  the  demesne,  but  also  when  the  township  is  so  weak
and  overburdened,  or  the  disappearance  of  settlers  becomes
so  frequent,  that  it  is  impossible  to  proceed  on  the  principle
of  joint  liability.  The  labour  services  of  the  tenantry,
again,  are  often  imposed  in  a  lump,  so  that  the  repartition
between  tenants  remains  their  private  afifair  while  the  lord
demands  the  performance  as  a  whole.  So  many  acres  have
to  be  ploughed  by  the  customers  of  the  township,  no  matter
which  of  them  has  to  plough  and  how  much."  The  position
of  the  reeve  and  other  elective  officers  of  the  manor  is  also
cormected  with  the  principle  of  joint  liability.  They  repre-
sent the  community  of  tenants  and  are  therefore  elected  by
them,  although  their  office  gets  to  be  mostly  concerned
with  the  collection  of  rents  and  the  organisation  of  services
for  the  lord.  The  centre  of  gravity  of  these  offices  is
moved,  as  it  were,  in  the  direction  of  manorial  authority.
And  the  tenants  who  elect  these  officers  are  responsible  for
their  good  conduct,  and  bound  to  make  good  any  losses
that  may  be  incurred  by  the  lord  through  the  mismanage-
ment or  dishonesty  of  the  reeve  or  other  elective  officers.^*
One  question  arises  in  this  respect  which  does  not  admit  of


320  THE  GEOWTH  OF  THE  MANOR

a  general  and  conclusive  solution,  namely,  the  question  as
to  the  extent  of  the  HabiHty  of  free  tenants.  Reeveship
becomes  a  mark  of  villainage  on  account  of  the  part  it  has
to  play  in  the  manorial  administration,  only  villains  are
bound  to  serve  as  reeves  and,  indeed,  to  serve  as  reeve  would
create  the  prejudice  that  the  person  who  has  taken  upon
himself  such  duties,  is  of  villain  condition.  And,  still,  the
reeve  has  to  represent  the  township  as  a  whole,  and  to  insist
on  the  lord's  interests  even  in  regard  to  freeholders.  Be-
sides, the  village  as  a  whole  is  called  upon  to  stand  pledge
for  his  good  behaviour  and  to  take  part  in  his  election.
These  are  contradictions  towards  the  solution  of  which  we
have  no  trustworthy  clue.  It  is  by  no  means  unlikely  that
customs  varied  in  these  respects  in  different  places.

A  most  conspicuous  instance  of  communal  habihty  and
communal  action  was  afforded  by  the  cases  when  a  town-
The  farm  of  ship  farmed  the  proceeds  of  manorial  authority,
the  vill  pledging  itself  to  pay  a  certain  sum  on  condi-

tion of  getting  the  amount  of  the  dues  fixed  and  of
taking  over  the  internal  administration  of  them.  Such
cases  were  by  no  means  uncommon,  and  were  exceed-
ingly important  from  the  point  of  view  of  the  peasants.  To
form  some  estimate  of  their  importance,  we  may  notice  the
fact  that  they  are  managed  on  the  same  lines  as  the  surrender
of  administration  by  the  lord  of  a  city,  a  walled  or  market
town.  The  first  step  towards  self-government  and  civil
Uberty  in  these  municipal  cases  was  the  establishment  of  a
firnuihjirgi  ;  the  farming  of  the  borough's  dues.^^  As  the
lord  was  mainly  interested  in  the  fiscal  proceeds  of  his  rights
and  did  not  much  care  personally  for  the  mere  exercise  of
power,  as  it  was  easy  to  perceive  that  an  amelioration  in
rights  and  modes  of  government  was  one  of  the  surest  way?
to  an  increase  in  wealth  and  pajdng  power,  the  rising  munici-
palities did  not  find  it  very  difficult  to  buy  self-government
by  bidding  high  for  the  farm  of  the  town's  dues.  And
there  can  be  no  doubt  that  sometliing  of  the  same  kind
went  on  among  the  rural  population.  Apart  from  the
fact  that,  as  we  have  assumed  all  along,  urban  town-
ships present  originally  only  a  higher  form of  the  same


OWNERSHIP AND HUSBANDRY  321

organisation  as  rural  townships,"  it  would  be  really
incredible  that  the  inhabitants  of  manorial  villages  should
strive  so  eagerly  and  sacrifice  so  much  to  get  the  farm  of
their  manor,  merely  to  obtain  leave  to  collect  their  own
dues.^^  Certainly,  by  getting  rid  of  the  baihff ,  they  freed
themselves  from  many  extortionate  practices  and  pretexts
for  oppression,  but  this  was  not  all.  The  farm  was  a  round
sum  which  was  paid  irrespectively  of  the  actual  amount
the  different  incidents  of  manorial  life  would  come  to.  It
was  a  speculation  on  the  part  of  the  township,  as  well  as  of
a  private  bailifif,  to  promise  such  a  payment  and  to  effect  it,
as  in  reahty  the  proceeds  of  rehefs,  heriots,  fines,  sales  might
turn  out  to  be  more  or  less.  But,  whereas  for  the  baiUff
there  was  a  direct  inducement  to  run  the  fines  and  amerce-
ments up  as  high  as  possible,  in  order  to  pocket  the  difference
between  their  aggregate  amount  and  the  corresponding
part  of  the  farm,  in  the  case  of  the  township  the  tendency
would  be  the  other  way,  namely,  towards  a  moderation  of
exactions  which  would  have  to  come  out  of  the  purse  of  the
farmers  themselves.  On  the  other  hand,  there  was  an
inducement  to  make  as  much  as  possible  out  of  the  econ-
omic advantages  of  the  farmed  demesne  and  out  of  the
labour  services  attached  to  it ;  there  would  be,  in  fact,  an
increase  of  economic  energy  hardly  to  be  matched  by  the
compulsory  work  organised  by  the  bailiff.  It  would  be
impossible  to  trace  the  material  changes  brought  about  by
the  farming  of  manors  by  the  townships  in  detail  ;  but  so
much  may  be  said,  that  even  if  radical  change  did  not  take
place  at  once,  farming  arrangements,  when  they  became
frequent  and  constant,  might  well  bring  about  consider-
able modifications  in  the  character  of  duties  and  services,
the  abolition  of  vexatious  and  unprofitable  services  and  a
more  flexible  economic  management.  We  have  to  notice
especially  that  the  farming  by  a  township  implied  a  thorough
apphcation  of  the  principle  of  joint  liability  and  a  corre-
sponding development  of  the  idea  of  communal  property
and  self-government.^"  The  farm  did  not  abolish  the  work-
ing of  the  demesne,  of  customary  services  and  of  manorial
courts,  but  it  took  away  the  personal  interest  of  the  lord

Y


322  THE GROWTH OF THE MAIfOB

in  the  details  of  this  machinery.  He  got  his  income  in  a
lump,  and  would  not  have  listened  to  complaints  about  a
bad  harvest,  a  scarcity  of  labourers  or  remissness  of  pay-
ments in  court.  But  if  the  township  had  to  come  up  any-
how to  meet  all  the  stipulated  requirements,  it  had  also  to
act  as  a  close  and  active  association  in  carrying  on  the
economic  and  jurisdictional  affairs  of  the  manor  it  had  taken
over  as  a  farmer.  We  do  not  know  in  what  way  the  require-
ments of  such  a  rural  union  were  met  and  how  the  eventual
proceeds  were  employed,  but  it  is  not  likely  that  the  farming
operations  of  townships  should  have  been  undertaken  and
carried  out  so  often  and  with  such  apparent  success,  if
the  township  did  not  start  from  the  very  beginning  from  a
powerful  communal  organisation.

It  may  be  said,  in  a  sense,  that  the  communal  govern-
ment of  a  self-farming  township  was  only  the  most  com-
The  manorial  P^®*®  ^^^  active  expression  of  a  union  which
vfll  as  a  com-  existed  all  along  under  the  cover  of  manorial
munity  authority. And  though  the theory  of cor-

porate rights  and  corporate  personahty  is  certainly  insuffi-
ciently developed  in  those  times,  and  it  would  be  im-
possible to  draw  clear  distinctions  between  the  attributions
of  the  corporate  body  and  of  its  members,  the  limits  of
property  of  the  community  and  of  individuals,  the  aims
of  the  whole  and  of  its  component  parts,  the  germs  of  co-
operative union  undoubtedly  exist  in  these  municipal  and
rural  institutions  as  well  as  the  terms, ^^  and  we  may  be
inclined  to  look  with  less  scepticism  on  their  modes  of  express-
ing themselves  if  we  take  into  account  that  a  similar  indis-
tinctness is  spread  over  the  working  of  many  individual
claims,  for  example,  of  the  notions  as  to  eminent  and
useful  demesne,  as  to  land-ownership  and  tenant-right,  as
to  customary  arrangements  and  legal  arrangements.

If  we  now  cast  a  glance  at  the  organisation  of  the  town-
ship as  a  whole  we  shall  not  wonder  that  it  was  considered
and  termed  a  community.  The  name  appears  constantly
in  the  Norman  documents  which  concern  themselves  with
rural  affairs,  and  there  are  many  details  which  show  that  the
name  was  not  given  at  random,  but  corresponded  to  a  very


•  OWNERSHIP AND HITSBANDRY  323

definite  position.  The  records  employ  it  mainly  on  two
occasions  :  when  a  township  is  called  up  to  perform  some
duty,  for  example,  to  do  help  at  harvest,  make  presentments,
to  attend  some  court,  to  watch  prisoners,  etc.,  and  when  it
was  amerced  for  the  non-performance  of  such  duties  or
for  some  transgression.^"  The  point  to  be  noticed,  a  point
which  becomes  very  conspicuous  in  the  second  case,  is  that
a  very  clear  distinction  is  made  between  transgressions  of
single  members  of  townships  and  ofiFences  which  were  laid
to  the  charge  of  the  townsliip  as  a  whole.  Free -fights,
cases  of  battery,  were,  of  course,  of  every  day  occurrence,
but  it  could  happen  that  a  whole  township  was  fined  for
maltreating  royal  or  manorial  officers,  and  the  juridical  dis-
tinction points  generally  to  cases  of  popular  resistance  to
governmental  exactions  or  oppression. ^^  People  are  con-
stantly fined  for  encroaching  on  highways,  on  the  king's
woods  and  pastures,  on  the  course  of  rivers,  etc.,  but  apart
from  those  cases  stand  others  when  whole  townships  are
made  responsible  for  the  encroachments,'^  and  knowing
what  we  do  about  the  arrangements  as  to  intercommoning
and  the  use  of  waste  land,  we  shall  not  hesitate  to  explain
those  instances  as  mostly  originating  in  some  confusion  or
misuse  of  communal  rights  or  to  uncertainties  of  delimitation.
On  the  other  hand,  it  frequently  happens  that  a  community  is
said  to  be  injured  in  its  rights  by  the  action  of  some  indivi-
dual or  of  another  community,  and  here  again  we  see  that
the  community  is  taken  as  a  holder  of  definite  proprietary
rights  and  is  capable  of  vindicating  them,^^  though  in  feudal
jurisprudence  the  process  will  mostly  take  the  course  of  an
action  carried  on  by  some  of  the  members  on  their  individual
responsibilities,  the  winning  or  losing  of  one  or  some  estab-
lishing a  prejudice  in  regard  to  all  the  rest.

Indeed  there  can  be  no  doubt  that  the  community  of  the
township  was  in  a  sense  a  juridical  person,  that  is  a  compact
group,  capable  of  holding  property  in  distinction  to  its
members,  of  acquiring  and  ahenating  it  and  of  taking
measures  for  ensuring  the  attainment  of  common  aims  and
the  protection  of  common  interests.^*  The  usual  object  of
such  property  claims  was  that  portion  of  the  land  which  was


324  THE GROWTH OF THE MANOR

not  hereditarily  occupied  by  individuals — the  waste,  the
meadows,  such  plots  as  remained  for  some  reason  ex-
empted from  individual  possession.  The  communal  right
in  these  occasions  may  be  obscured  and  complicated  in
the  later  law  of  rural  districts  by  the  intervention  of  the
manorial  element,  but  it  is  very  clear  in  the  case  of  urban
communities,  which  are  constantly  found  to  hold  land,  to
distribute  it  for  temporary  use,  to  sell  and  to  buy,  and
possess  jurisdictional  and  market  rights  which  could  not
exist  without  a  common  chest  and  a  jSscal  administration
of  some  kind.^^

This  leads  us  to  the  question  which  has  been  much  dis-
cussed by  German,  and,  of  late,  by  EngUsh  jurists,  as  to  the
theoretical  essence  of  the  village  community.  Have  we  to
apply  to  it  the  strict  Roman  idea  of  the  corporation  as  a
juridical  personahty,  excluding  other  personaUties  from  its
domain  and  proceeding  from  the  complete  unification  of
interests  and  rights  of  aU  its  members  for  certain  purposes  ?
Or  the  conception  of  joint-stock  enterprise  with  Umited
ends  and  determined  liabilities  of  members  leaving  them
for  the  rest  entirely  independent  in  their  actions  and  pro-
prietary rights  ?  Or  that  of  a  joint  ownership  which,
while  leading  to  common  action  and  common  assertions  of
right  by  agreement  of  the  participants,  has  no  legal  existence
apart  from  these  agreements  and  may  be  dissolved  in  case
of  disagreement  ?  ^°  Or  the  rather  indefinite  Germanistic
II  conception  of  a  community  mixed  up  with  individual
t  rights,  and  presenting  an  organic  combination  of  both
principles  ?  "

It  is  quite  clear  that  the  case  under  discussion  does
not  fit  the  strict  Roman  conception  of  a  corporation
or  juridical  person ;  the  rights  of  individual  share-
holders are  not  entirely  merged  into  it  nor  clearly  kept
apart  from  it  :  even  in  the  use  of  commons,  individual
interests  are  constantly  asserted  ;  in  the  arrangement  of
economic  affairs  it  would  be  difi&cult  to  distinguish  exhaus-
tively between  the  rights  of  the  whole  and  the  rights  of
single  members  as  to  the  arable  and  to  the  other  constituent
elements  of  the  holding. The  later  legal  process  starts  from


OWNERSHIP AND HUSBANDRY  326

the  assumption  of  individual  rights,  though  it  leads  to  the
filling  up  of  this  individualistic  form  with  contents  drawn
from  communaUstic  customs.  Altogether  the  materials
for  building  up  the  corporation  are  largely  composed  of
disparate  elements  and  lack  the  unity  of  will  which  is  neces-
sary to  the  idea  from  a  Roman  point  of  view.

The  joint-stock  theory  is  also  insufficient  in  many  respects.
The  shareholders  are  there  and  their  joining  together  is
directed  towards  certain  aims,  namely  to  the  management
of  a  complex  system  of  open-field  farming.  But  the  aims
are  so  general  that  they  resolve  themselves  into  a  common
management  of  life  under  certain  economic  and  juridical
conditions.  The  shares  play  a  great  part,  in  this  hfe,
though  not  so  much  for  the  creation  of  a  joint  will  as  for
the  apportionment  of  profits  and  duties.  The  possibiUty  for
the  shareholders  of  outgrowing  the  common  shell  and  of
living  a  life  of  separate  interests  outside  of  it  is  not  to  be
denied  and  has  to  be  taken  into  account,  but  there  is  no
clear  Umit  of  Uabihties  and  everything  depends  much  more
on  actual  forces  than  on  juridical  distinctions.

Already  in  analysing  the  joint-stock  conception  we  come  to
one  feature  of  the  arrangement  which  does  not  fit  at  all  into
the  idea  of  joint  ownership  (Miteigenthum,  Gesammte  Hand).
The  fabric  of  the  village  community,  or,  to  speak  more  gener-
ally and  correctly,  of  the  township  community,  is  sub-
stantially organic.  It  grows,  and  is  not  based  on  agree-
ment, people  cannot  accede  to  it  or  recede  from  it  without
being  admitted,  by  some  natural  process,  birth,  marriage,
adoption,  to  the  union  of  the  holdings,  and,  theoretically,
it  is  the  holdings  in  their  imconscious  and  unwilling  com-
bination which  form  the  group  and  define  its  aims.  Ex-
ternal forces — the  action  of  the  king,  the  intrusion  of  foreign
conquerors,  the  misdeeds  of  a  magnate  may  cut  through
this  customary  combination  and  modify  it  ;  it  may  grow
and  send  out  offshoots,  but  all  these  facts  will  not  be  the
results  of  any  artificial  agreement  binding  only  those  who
have  entered  it  imder  certain  conditions  :  the  reclaiming
of  new  fields,  the  extension  of  the  original  unit  and  its
shrinking  through  colonisation  are  events  which  proceed


326  THE  GROWTH  OF  THE  MANOR

from  the  organic  whole  or  from  outward  pressm-e  and  not
from  passing  agreements  of  certain  joint  owners.

The  fom-th  conception  is  wanting  in  precision  and  legal
neatness  ;  ^^  instead  of  defining  contrasts,  it  blends  them.
But  for  this  very  reason  it  may  be  serviceable  from  a
historical  point  of  view.  It  undoubtedly  corresponds  to  the
state  of  mind  of  people  who  are  less  accustomed  to  speculate
on  legal  abstractions,  than  to  solve  practical  problems  by  the
help  of  compromises  providing  against  exaggerations  of  prin-
ciple and  extreme  views.  As  a  matter  of  fact,  people  had
to  till  the  land  very  much  in  common  because  their  agri-
culture was  very  much  mixed  up  with  pastoral  pursuits,
because  they  settled  close  together  for  purposes  of  co-opera-
tion in  defence  and  economic  matters,  because  they  built
up  their  early  land  system  on  the  principle  of  a  commen-
surate allotment  of  households  worthy  of  folkright.^^  At
the  same  time  they  did  not  look  up  to  their  community  as  to
a  kind  of  sociaHstic  providence  watching  over  all  the  eventu-
alities of  birth  and  of  death,  of  chance  and  miscarriage,  crop-
ping the  allotments  according  to  the  supposed  requirements
of  the  seasons  :  not  equahty  and  redivision,  but  sharehold-
ing and  customary  tradition  were  the  results,  and  these  fun-
damental conceptions  opened  gaps  through  which  individual-
istic development  was  free  to  shoot  forth  in  a  rank  growth.
People  were  bound  up  in  scot  and  in  lot  with  their  township
in  more  than  one  sense,  but  they  were  nevertheless  allowed
to  thrive  in  their  own  way,  and  there  was  not  much  in  the
communal  arrangements  to  prevent  these  latter  from  decay,  if
they  could  not  hold  their  own  in  Ufe's  struggle.  To  such  a
state  of  things  a  rather  indistinct  theory  of  communal  share-
holding developing  on  organic  lines  seems  best  to  apply  in
spite  of  its  inherent  contradictions.

The  arrangement  of  services  and  rents  plays  a  very  pro-
minent part  in  the  economy  of  manorial  life.  One  might
fancy  the  whole  existence  of  the  lord  and  his
household  provided  for  by  the  services  of  the
tenants,  although  there  was  almost  always  a  nucleus  of  inde-
pendent husbandry  in  the  centre  of  the  system.  Still,  we
might  describe  the  work  performed  by  the  tenants  from  the


OWNERSHIP AND HUSBANDRY  327

point  of  view  of  the  lord's  household,  as  contrived  to  satisfy;
aU  requirements.  For  the  cultivation  of  the  arable,  the
peasant  holdings  will  send  their  ploughs  three  or  more  days  in
the  week,  with  a  full  complement  of  beasts  and  labourers,  to
work  from  sunrise  till  noon.  As  the  soil  gets  properly  tilled
according  to  the  usages  of  the  different  seasons,  the  peasants
will  send  their  harrows  to  break  up  the  sods  and  prepare
the  ground  for  the  seed.  This  part  of  the  arable,  cultivated
at  fixed  rates  by  help  of  the  week-work,  will  probably
be  sown  bj^  the  lord's  servants  and  with  his  own  corn.  But
another  part,  the  gafol-earth,  will  be  taken  over  as  so  many
acres  to  be  tilled,  harrowed  and  sown  by  the  tenantry.
When  the  ground  Ues  fallow,  it  will  be  ploughed  up  in  time
to  prepare  for  the  crop  season,  and  the  tenant's  cattle  and
sheep  will  be  sent  to  the  lord's  fields  and  will  have  to  use  liis
fold.  When  the  harvest  season  comes,  the  entire  population
of  the  village  will  have  to  turn  out  to  help  the  lord's  labourers
and  the  week- workmen  in  making  hay  and  cutting  com.,
A  sense  of  the  extra  value  of  such  work  is  expressed  by  the
fact  that  it  is  termed  "  precariae,"  which  means  that  it  is
not  supposed  to  be  due,  but  has  to  be  asked  for.  And  if
this  boon-work  has  to  be  repeated  several  times,  the  labourers
get  food  and  even  ale  from  the  manorial  economy  to  keep
them  in  good  humour.

The  hay  and  corn  harvest  will  be  removed  by  the  villagers
in  their  carts,  and  they  will  come  to  the  manorial  barn  to
thresh  the  lord's  corn.  As  for  the  grinding  of  it  to  flour,  it  will
be  performed  in  the  demesne  mill,  but  all  the  tenants  will
have  to  use  this  mill  for  grinding  their  own  corn,  a  very
important  source  of  profit  to  the  lord.  There  are  also  cases
when  the  baking  of  bread  gets  to  be  a  monopoly,  and  the
brewing  of  ale  and  beer  is  generally  subject  to  supervision
and  taxes.

Pastoral  pursuits  are  also  arranged  and  taxed  at  the  lord's
convenience  ;  though,  of  course,  the  exploitation  of  the  ten-
ants wiU  mainly  take  the  shape  of  dues  in  kind,  of  which  more
anon.  Still,  service  may  be  required  as  day-works,  for  exam-
ple for  shearing  and  washing  sheep,  and  fines  will  be  exacted
in  the  frequent  cases  of  trespass  and  impounding  of  cattle.


328  THE  GROWTH  OF  THE  MANOR

A  miscellaneous  array  of  services  is  connected  with  build-
ing and  keeping  up  of  dwellings  and  works  of  common
utility.  The  labour  of  the  villagers  will  be  used  not  only  for
the  construction  of  castles  and  fastnesses,  the  construction
and  repair  of  manor  houses  and  barns.but  also  for  the  erection
of  complete  summer  dwellings  for  the  hunting  season,  for
the  keeping  in  repair  of  bridges  and  roads.  The  erection
of  hedges,  the  management  of  drainage  in  fen  districts,  the
work  of  keeping  up  ditches,  canals  and  dikes  were  all  con-
sidered as  manorial  duties,  included  in  the  week -work  and
enforced  by  manorial  officers.

Another  subdivision  of  labour -services  was  formed  by
carriage  duties  of  all  kinds.  Of  the  removal  of  the  harvest
we  have  spoken  aheady.  Every  considerable  manor  was
provided  with  an  entire  system  of  riding  and  driving  services.
Riding  bailiffs,  servants,  and  sometimes  socmen,  had  to
carry  summonses,  orders  and  messages,  and  sometimes  to
inspect  workmen.  The  produce  of  the  farming  operations
of  the  manor  had  to  be  sent  to  markets  and  to  central  courts,
and  all  the  obhgations  attending  these  carriages  and  "  aver-
ages "  {averum,  affre — horse  used  for  carrying)  were  settled
with  the  greatest  attention  to  details.

A  last  class  of  services  was  formed  by  the  duty  of  acting
as  an  official  or  servant  of  the  lord,  as  reeve,  messor  or
ploughman,  for  example,  and  of  representing  the  township
in  the  royal  courts  and  inquests,  in  the  county  and  in  the
hundred.

All  these  services  could  be  imposed  both  on  villain  and
on  free  tenants  ;  although  the  burden  laid  on  the  first,  was
of  course,  greater,  and  especially  the  heavy  week -work
incumbent  on  them,  while  the  representation  of  the  manor
in  the  county  and  hundred  entitled  to  a  higher  considera-
tion, and  even  to  personal  or  tenurial  freedom.*"

As  to  rents,  there  were  still  numerous  cases  when  produce
was  sent  in  kind  ;  loaves  of  bread,  ale,  cheese,  honey,  salt,
fish,  eels,  etc.,  according  to  the  special  occupa-
tions of  the  district.  Products  of  industry
were  also  presented  to  the  lord,  when  such  industries  existed
within the manor. We  often  find  mention  of  rents  paid


OWNERSHIP AND HUSBANDRY  329

in  linen,  cloth,  iron  implements.  Of  the  combination  of
provender  rents  with  farms  of  rights  we  have  already  had
occasion  to  speak.  As  to  duties  involving  the  present-
ation of  animals  they  had  often  the  character  of  taking  a
certain  percentage  from  the  whole  stock  of  the  tenant.  A
nag  or  a  calf  had  to  be  given  from  a  certain  number  of
similar  animals,  ostensibly  for  leave  to  use  the  pasture.
In  the  case  of  small  rents,  a  symbolical  meaning  may  be
sometimes  traced.  Chickens  were  given,  for  instance,  as
an  acknowledgment  of  bondage,  eggs  represented  the  num-
ber of  acres  a  tenant  held  in  the  fields,"  etc.

Money  rents  occurred  frequently,  and  it  is  to  be  noticed
that  they  were  of  two  different  kinds.  Some  were  pay-
ments originally  imposed  on  the  tenants,  so-caUed  gafol,
others  were  paid  in  commutation  of  ser\ices  or  provender
dues,  and  were  called  mal  {inol)  ormail.*^  The  rent-paying
tenant  was  naturally  considered  to  be  freer  than  his  compeer
burdened  wth  services,  as  he  was  not  subjected  to  personal
interference  and  discipline  in  the  performance  of  his  duties,
and  there  was  a  constant  tendency  on  the  part  of  the
peasantry  to  obtain  the  commutation  of  payments  and
services."  This  tendency,  which  played  a  very  conspicuous
part  in  the  gradual  emancipation  of  the  peasantry,  was
however,  checked  during  the  feudal  period  by  the  scarcity
of  money.  Every  fact  facilitating  intercourse  and  money-
dealings  tended  indirectly  to  further  commutation.  In  many
of  the  manorial  extents,  especially  of  the  fourteenth  century,
it  is  usual  to  make  customary  estimations  of  the  equivalent
of  provender  dues  and  services  if  commuted  into  money.
These  mentions  do  not  imply  a  conclusive  transition  to
payments  in  money,  but  the  eventual  exaction  of  the  dues
in  one  or  the  other  manner.  They  are  characteristic,  of
the  binding  force  of  customary  rules  even  in  such  cases  as
these,  when  one  would  expect  a  good  deal  of  bargaining
and  oppression.

It  remains  to  be  noticed  that  the  fiscal  requirements  of
the  government  were  imposed  directly  on  the  working
classes,  an^were  not  left  to  be  gathered  by  the  lords.  The
hidage  and  geld  had  to  be  paid  by  the  hide  and,  as  we  have


330  THE  GROWTH  OF  THE  MANOR

already  seen  in the preceding chapter,  the geld units,

according  to  which  they  were  distributed,  fell  largely  on

the  land  of  the  villains. Taxes  on  chattels  had  also  to  be

paid  by  the  villain  landholders  themselves,  so  that  distinct

property  in  moveables  was  evidently  assumed  in  all  these

cases.**

If  we  look  to  the  demesne  land  of  the  manor,  we  shall  find

at  its  centre  the  hall,  with  barns,  stores,  mills,  stables,  folds

,^ ^  and,  possiblv,  rabbit-warrens  and  dove-cotes,

The  demesne . ^ ,.*^ -^.i, -4. t  ^i

m connection  with  it. In many  cases, the

arable  of  the  demesne  lay  intermixed  with  the  strips  of  the
tenants,  a  fact  which  by  itself  bears  testimony  to  the  gra-
dual rise  of  manorial  organisation  from  the  open-field  com-
munity. There  was  of  course  a  natural  tendency  of  the
demesne  to  obtain  a  position  of  severalty  and  to  enclose
itself.  If,  nevertheless,  a  great  part  of  the  demesne  land  of
the  manor  remains  lying  in  open  fields,  it  is  clear  that  it  was
entangled  in  the  champion  farming  by  tradition,  and  sub-
jected to  its  regulations  because  it  stood  originally  not  above
the  tillage  community  but  inside  it.

Enclosed  plots  of  arable  and  private  meadows,  pastures
and  woods  are  also  often  to  be  found,  and  they  occur
more  and  more  frequently  as  time  goes  on.  We  catch
glimpses  of  the  process  of  enclosure,  and  of  the  changes
brought  about  by  more  intense  and  perfect  husbandry.
New  sequences  of  crops  are  introduced,  the  soil  of  some
portions  of  the  demesne  gets  to  be  manured  and  cultivated
more  carefully  and,  to  protect  these  amehorations,  hedges
have  to  be  set  up,  "  intakes  "  are  formed  ;  and  these  intakes
represent  the  most  advanced  technical  progress  of  those
times.*^

Considerable  portions  of  the  demesne  were  leased  in
separate  plots  to  servants  and  farmers.  As  to  the  first,  they
often  got  their  remuneration  in  this  form
instead  of  getting  wages,  and  we  find  plough-
men holding  some  five  acres  of  land  for  this  reason.  But
besides  these,  farmers,  settlers  and  squatters  were  accom-
modated in  this  way  with  small  plots,  so-called  foHands.**
A  forland  was out of the ordinary  course of cultiva-


OWNERSHIP AND HUSBANDRY  331

;ion of  the  open-field  community,  and  was managed  in
I severalty  by  the  tenant  who  got  a  lease  for  term  of  years
, )r for life. Thus we  come again  across  a  current of
. Jidividualistic management derived from the demesne
ind  constantly  on  the  increase  during  the  period  under
^ observation. The  reclaiming  of  the  waste,  under  the  leader-
I, ihip and  by  the  license  of  the  manorial  administration,
" caostly  took  this  course. The  protection  of  the  lord  was
", sufficiently  strong  to  safeguard  such  enterprises,  and  colon -
^ isation now takes mostly  an individualistic turn,  while
* it  was communalistic during  the  preceding  period  : evi-
dently, there  was  more  demand  now  for  individual  energy
and capital than for co-operation, mutual defence and
responsibility. We  come across some remarkable  facts
in  this  direction  :  the  Earl  of  Warenne,  for  example,  was
empowered  by  Edward I  to  enclose  in  the  waste  so  much
land  as  was  necessary  to  give  him  a  revenue  of  £200. If
the  rent  is  estimated  at  about  id.  an  acre — a  very  usual
estimation  in  those  times — this  would  mean  that  the  earl
got  hcense  to  enclose  and  colonise  about  twelve  thousand
acres  in  the  most  favoured  part  of  England.*^

On the whole, however, the characteristic feature of
manorial  husbandry  consists  in  the  working  together  of  the ,
domain  and  of the  community  of the  tenants. In  the
normal  case,  there  is  no  distinction  between  this  community
and  the  township  of  old,  which  is  still  recognised  as  the
administrative subdivision of the hundred. The system Yjr^^
was  reasonably  balanced  when  the  soil  and  the  work  of  the  |
tenants  was  divided  in  such  a  way  as  to  afiford  sufficient  i
means  of  existence  for  the  demesne  of  the  lord  and  for  the  i
,  households  of  the  tenants. When  this  was  the  case,  the  j
peasants generally succeeded in laying by some capital
which  they  used  for  gradually  buying  out  their  dues,  while
the  lord  strove  to  enlarge  the  separate  husbandry  of  his
portion,  and  to  attract  settlers  for  rack-rents. Both  tenden-
cies were  directed  towards  aims  which  by  their  development
endangered  the  existence  of  the manorial  arrangement  and
prepared  a  new  departure  in  economic  and  social  organisation.


CHAPTER III

SOCIAL CLASSES

Let  us  now  turn  to  the  social  stratification  of  this  period — i
to  the  division  of  feudal  society  into  classes,  and  to  the
relations  between  these  classes.  We  notice
three  principal  orders  of  men  on  the  soU  of  a
mediaeval  manor  :  villains,  freeholders  and  manorial  servants. ;
We  have  already  had  occasion  to  speak  of  the  various
elements  of  which  the  class  of  villains  is  composed.  One
part  of  it  proceeded  from  downright  slavery,  from  the  stock
of  theows  or  esnes  of  Old  English  times  ;  but  it  is  significant
that  only  a  comparatively  small  number  of  servi  is  men-
tioned in  the  Domesday  Survey,^  and  that  the  class,  as
distinct  from  that  of  the  villains,  disappears  in  the  records
of  the  thirteenth  century.  These  facts  are  very  important,
and  have  to  be  looked  into  with  some  attention.  The
manumissions  of  the  Saxon  period  are  frequent,  and  we
find  hundreds  of  slaves  emancipated  by  their  owners  for
payments  in  money,  especially  in  wills.  Still,  it  is  certainly
not  philanthropy  or  the  influence  of  Christianity  that  have
reduced  slavery  to  the  modest  dimensions  it  holds  in  Domes-
day. Christianity  introduced  some  humanitarian  elements
into  the  treatment  of  the  slave,  recognised  in  him  a  being
with  a  soul  of  his  own,  and,  by  the  voice  of  councils  and
preachers,  proclaimed  some  regard  for  the  wretched  exist-
ence of  men  who  had  no  protection  in  law,  though  they
bore  the  likeness  of  God.  But  the  Christian  Church  was
very  chary  in  its  social  propaganda  :  it  did  not  contest  the
institution  of  slavery,  and  preached  meek  obedience  to  the
serfs  ; it  took  good  care  to  make  as  profitable  and  weU-


I  SOCIAL CLASSES  33:^

rdered  a  use  of  its  own  serfs  as  was  possible,  and  wo  know,
ven  from  our  own  experience,  how  easy  it  is  for  men  to
ompromise  with  their  conscience  when  their  interest  speaks
)udly  for  the  utility  of  compromise,  and  how  the  sanctifica-
ion  of  religion  may  be  appealed  to  in  the  case  of  most  shock -
ag  violence  and  despotism. Therefore  the  fact  that  so
aany  ecclesiastic  and  secular  owners  renounced  the  com-
!  (lete  property  of  their  slaves, and  that  slavery,  though
r  Qost  clearly  expressed  in  the  enactments  of  Old  English
aws,  became  obsolete  in  the  feudal  period  is  best  explained
)y  social  and  economic,  and  not  by  religious  or  humani-
arian  considerations. Indeed,  in  one  sense,  the  practices
)f  serfdom  did  not  cease,  but  went  on  and  even  spread  in
.heir  application,  as  villains  generally  came  to  be  considered
ind  designated  as  serfs  or  natives,  and  subjected  to  many
)f  the  most  characteristic  taints  of  slavery. Villains  could
je  bought  and  sold,  villains  were  manumitted  to  personal
■  reedom, villains  had  to "  buy  their  blood " when they
jUarried  their  daughters  and  even  their  sons. In  this  sense,
bondage  became more  general,  and  infected  classes  and
persons  wliich  had  originally  been  free  from  it.  2 But  these
,are  results  of  confusion  and  of  a  mixture  of  classes,  and  the
other  side  of  the  picture  is  afforded  by  the  fact  that  the
slave  or  serf  as  a  distinct  being  of  lowest  order  disappears.
Faint  attempts  may  be  traced  in  law  books,  law  decisions
,and  extents  to  keep  up  a  standard  of  basest  villainage  and
ito  characterise  it  by  especially  base  services,  such  as  scav^
engers'  work,  but  these  instances  are  rare  and  do  not  result
jin  constituting  a  distinct  class. And,  as  we  shall  presently  .
;see,  in the general law  of villainage there were  many .
[features  derived  from  the  status  of  freemen  as  well  as  from
[slavery — it  was,  in  fact,  a  complex  condition. The  servi  '
jof  Domesday,  of the  cartulary  of Burton  and  of  a  few
other  very  early  extents,  are,  in  this  way,  the  last  represen-
tatives of  slavery  in  Old  English  laws. The  personal  char-
^  acter  of  their  condition  is  illustrated,  among  other  things,,
by  the  mention  of  ancillae  in  the  Domesday  Survey  along-
side of  servi.^ They  are  not  connected  with  any  holdings,
but  are  reckoned  up  after  the  description  of  the  demesne,


334  THE  GROWTH  OF  THE  MANOR

SO  that  personal  bondmen,  living  in  the  domanial
court  and  working  as  labourers  under  the  direct  com-
mand of  the  manorial  stewards,  are  evidently  meant.*
There  is  no  reason  for  identifying  them  with  the  bovarii
mentioned  in  some  instances  as  dwellers  on  the  de-
mesne.^ The  bovarii  may  be  serfs  or  may  be  of  villain
stock,  but  the  allusions  to  women  slaves  ought  to  teach
us  that  the  expressions  were  not  equivalent.  There
could  be  other  servants  of  unfree  blood  on  the  demesne,
besides  the  drivers  of  plough-teams.  The  servi  are  men-
tioned so  casually  and  there  are  so  few  of  them  in  some
cases  that  it  is  not  impossible  that  the  entries  of  this  class,
which  was  not  attached  to  holdings,  may  have  been  incom-
plete. Still,  an  inference  must  be  drawn  from  the  fact  that
there  are  comparatively  many  serfs  in  the  manors  of  western
counties,  fewer  in  the  midlands,  and  hardly  any  in  the  east.'
In  conjunction  with  the  gradual  disappearance  of  the  class,
this  fact  goes  to  prove  that,  as  we  have  already  said,  the
dissolution  of  serfdom  was  produced  by  economic  causes.
All  through  the  regions  occupied  by  Teutonic  tribes  there
was  a  habit  of  treating  the  serfs  as  dependent  peasants,
or  villains  according  to  feudal  terminology,  while  there  was
no  proper  place  for  them  in  the  household  of  the  owner.
As  a  rule,  the  profits  drawn  from  serfs  were  provender  rents,
produce  in  kind,  and  as  for  the  ministeria,  the  duties  of  the
household,  they  were  performed,  not  by  slaves,  but  by  the
weaker  members  of  the  family,  the  old  and  younger  people,
the  women.  Of  course,  it  is  not  by  the  psychological  pecu-
liarities of  the  Teutons  that  such  arrangements  have  to  be
accounted  for,  but  as  in  the  similar  case  of  the  Celts,  by  the
cumbersome  character  of  domestic  slavery  and  by  the  appro-
priateness of  a  colonate  burdened  with  rents  in  kind  to  early
stages  of  society.  Matters  changed  to  some  extent  when
the  Teuton  conquerors  entered  into  the  inheritance  and
seized  upon  the  loot  of  the  provinces.  But  social  inter-
course soon  returned  to  slow  customary  processes,  and  the
leaning  towards  an  imperfect  and  easy-going  but  easily
administered  system  of  colonate  made  itself  felt  at  once.
Instead  of  constantly  watching  slaves  and  spending  care


Ivili


SOCIAL CLASSES  336

d  strength  in  organising  their  unwilHng  labour,  the  upper
lasses  of  mediaeval  society  levied  dues  and  services  from

lains  who  were  attached  to  the  soil  and  held  in  order  by
ibhe  interest  they  had  in  their  own  households.  This  was
jfche  secret  of  the  whole  labour  arrangement  of  the  manor,
(and  of  the  conspicuous  decrease  in  the  number  of  serfs  and
jin  the  amount  of  serfdom,  if  one  may  be  allowed  to  use  the
jexpressioJi,  .

In  connection  with  the  disappearance  of  personal  slavery,

!we  find  a  great  change  in  the  effects  and  character  of  manu  -

;„ , . mission. The  class  of  freedmen  is  always  very
[Manumission  ^ x i.  i  i ^ /

important  where  slavery  is  prevalent,  because

i freedmen  form  an  intermediate  link  between  slaves  bereft
I  of  all  rights  and  personahty,  and  complete  freemen.  Thus
[the  lihertini  of  the  classical  world  played  a  great  part  in  the
I  administration  of  property,  both  in  land  and  in  money.
iThey  were  left  in  a  certain  degree  under  the  authority  of
!  their  former  masters,  and  helped  them  so  much  in  then
business  deaUngs  that  the  money-market  was  almost  chiefly
in  their  hands.  In  a  similar  manner,  the  early  law  of  the
barbarian  tribes  recognised  a  kind  of  half -free  position  of
emancipated  slaves,  making  entire  freedom  a  rare  exception
and  allowing  freedmen  to  obtain  a  position  of  equahty  with
tribesmen  of  pure  blood  only  in  the  course  of  several  genera-
tions. Now,  although  the  practice  of  manumission  cer»
tainly  continues  during  the  feudal  age,  its  effects  are  much
more  restricted,  and  the  freedmen  as  a  class  disappear
entirely.  It  is  possible  that  a  remnant  of  them  may  be
found  in  the  coliberti^  who  are  found  rather  frequently  in
France  and  in  a  few  instances  in  England,  apparently  in  adap-
tation of  French  customs  and  terminology.  To  judge  by  the
prefix  in  their  name,  they  were  men  who  had  been  liberated
by  a  collective  act  and,  possibly,  held  together  in  some  way
either  by  their  settlement  or  by  their  common  manumission.^
They  were  certainly  accounted  half  free.  But,  whatever
we  make  of  this  condition,  it  is  a  very  exceptional  one,  at
least  in  England,  and  there  is  no  need  to  dwell  long
on  it.  As  for  manumissions  of  single  persons,  they
occurred frequently,  but  did  not make much change  in


336  THE GROWTH OF THE MANOR

the  condition  of  those  who  were  Uberated  by  them.
They  did  not  lead  to  the  formation  of  a  special  class.
of  men,  but  to  the  admitted  status  of  men  personally  free,
Free  men  though  holding  in  villainage.' This  certainly

holdjng  in  made  a  dijfference  as  to  the  possibiHty  for  the

villainage  tenants  of  leaving  the  holding  and  as  to  the

position  of  their  offspring  :  theoretically,  such  men  would
be  free  to  go  where  they  pleased,  and  may  in  many  cases
have  swelled  the  ranks  of  artisans  and  of  the  commercial
people  in  the  towns.  But,  on  the  one  hand,  it  was  not  so
easy  even  for  them  to  cut  themselves  adrift  from  their
households  and  native  associations,  and,  on  the  other  hand,
even  downright  nativi,  that  is  serfs,  might  often  run  away
from  their  masters  and  begin  life  afresh.  One  might  say
that  the  customary  life  of  the  manor  was  rigid,  and  held  in
fetters  even  those  who  were  nominally  free,  but  that,  on
the  contrary,  even  serfs  did  not  find  it  difficult  to  leap  out
of  their  fetters,  if  they  were  not  afraid  of  the  risk  of  leaving
their  customary  occupations  and  surroundings.  Thus
there  was  no  very  great  difference  between  freemen  holding
in  villainage  and  downright  villains  within  the  manors,  nor
between  emigrants  from  both  classes,  when  out  of  the  manor.
In  any  case,  the  traces  of  freedmen  disappear  as  well  as  the
traces  of  serfs,  and  in  feudal  records  we  never  come  across
the  numerous  instances  in  which  they  are  mentioned  in
former  epochs — we  do  not  hear  either  of  their  various  em-
ployments in  ordinary  circumstances  or  the  points  of  law
which  arose  out  of  trials  as  to  their  condition.  The  en-
franchisement from  villain  services  and  disabiUties  of  villain
tenure,  is,  of  course,  a  material  affair,  but  it  is  entirely
different  from  personal  manumission,  and  has  nothing  to
do  with  the  formation  of  a  class  of  freedmen.^"  The  con-
tingent of  manumitted  serfs  remained  within  the  state  of
villainage,  by  tenure  if  not  by  personal  subjection.

A  third  element  of  villainage  was  provided  by  ancient

freemen  who  had  sunk  into  a  practical  de-
Subjection  of  pendence  on  manorial  lords.  The  steps  of  this
freemen  ^  -,  «. ^  i u  j  •

process  were  different,  as  we  have  nad  occasion

to  notice.  A  ceorl  might  be  obHged  to  become  the  boor,  the


SOCIAL CLASSES  337

colonus  of  a  landowner,  because  he  had  no  land  of  his  own
and  got  a  tenement  from  the  owner  of  the  manor.  Or  else
he  might  be  constrained  to  surrender  his  land  because  he  had
no  capital  to  manage  it  with,  and  was  reduced  to  take  stock
from  a  neighbouring  lord  who  was  able  to  j)rovide  him  with
it.  The  ceorls  settled  on  gafol-land  are  best  explained  on
these  suppositions.  But  then  again,  there  were  people  who
tilled  their  own  land  and  went  on  with  their  cultivation,
but  had  to  seek  protection  and  to  commend  themselves  to
powerful  lords,  and  that  protection  might  easily  become
a  heavy  burden  :  beginning,  perhaps,  with  commendation
to  whomsoever  one  pleased,  and  then  getting  to  be  constant
subjection  of  one  who  could  not  go  with  his  land  where  he
pleased,  and  ending  by  a  registration  among  villains  at  the
time  of  the  Domesday  Inquest.  Even  a  subordination  to
soke  might,  through  oppression,  be  turned  into  villaii  ge,
and  the  Domesday  commissioners  have  brought  many  such
cases  to  our  notice,  leaving,  of  course,  many  more  in  the
dark.  Altogether,  the  Conquest,  with  its  violent  and  whole-
sale expropriation,  must  have  been  the  great  crisis  in  the
Ufa  of  small  people,  as  the  Normans  were  surely  not
more  careful  of  tradition  or  more  fair  in  their  dealings  with
their  subordinates  than  the  Bang  was  with  themselves.
Already,  the  comparison  drawn  by  the  inquest  between  the
state  of  the  smaller  tenantry,  T.R.E.  and  T.R.W.  shows  a
great  change  for  the  worse,  and  we  must  remember  that  even
the  description  of  the  supposed  state  of  affairs  T.R.E.  is  to  a
great  extent  a  fiction,  coloured  by  Norman  terminology.

Interesting  indications  as  to  the  history  of  the  peasant
class  are  supphed  by  the  terms  which  are  used  to  designate
Norman  term-  ^^^  subdivisions.  Most  of  the  expressions
inolog^y.  employed  are Norman-French  and Nornian-

Bordarii  Latin,  and  the  question  naturally  arises  :  did

they  fit  in  exactly  with  the  Enghsh  expressions  in  use  before
jthe  Conquest,  or  were  they  an  independent  growth  of  the
,  Norman  time  to  which  the  older  expressions  had  to  conform
ias  they  best  could.  There  can  be  no  doubt  that  the  latter
was  the  case. If  we  leave  the  cottawrs  and  the  soke  men


338  THE  GROWTH  OF  THE  MANOR

aside  to  begin  with,  as  terms  which  have  an  EngHsh  sense,
we  find  that  the  most  important  of  the  terms  used,  villani,
bordarii,  liberi  homines,  are  distinctly  Norman  and  do  not
find  any  entirely  corresponding  equivalents  in  Old  English
usage.

This  is  especially  clear  of  hordarii.  The  term  is  a  wide
generahsation,  it  covers  not  much  less  than  one-half  of
the  labouring  population  of  the  rural  districts  described
in  Domesday,  1^  and  it  turns  out  to  be  a  special  term
brought  in  by  Domesday  and  hardlj^  ever  used  either
before  or  after,  either  in  the  Old  Enghsh  or  in  the  feudal
age.  There  can  be  no  doubt  that  it  aims  at  describing
the  smaller  holdings  which,  without  being  mere  cottages,
do  not  amount  to  full  shares  in  the  fields. ^^  In  this  sense,
it  comes  from  the  Norman  bordarius  and  borda  (a  croft).
Later  on,  we  find  a  great  number  of  such  small  holdings,
but  they  are  ranged  either  as  villain  tenements  or  as  free
plots,  so  that  there  is  no  unity  of  condition  between  their
holders  who,  on  the  contrary,  belong  to  different  social
groups.  The  attempt  to  class  them  in  one  subdivision  must
be  explained,  partly  by  the  influence  of  Norman-French
conceptions  and  partly  by  the  wish  to  obtain  ia  the  Survey
not  so  much  a  record  of  legal  as  one  of  economic  condition.
It  was  material  for  fiscal  purposes  to  know  in  a  rough  way
how  many  normal  holdings  connected  with  plough -teams
there  were  in  a  particular  locahty,  and  how  many  small
tenements  cut  off  from  the  arrangement  into  plough-teams,
and,  for  this  purpose,  the  distinction  between  villanus  and
bordarius  was  material,  while  it  did  not  correspond  to  any
definite  legal  distinctions.  If  we  ask  ourselves  how  the  bordarii
were  called  in  Old  Enghsh  speech,  and  what  Old  Enghsh
groups  they  represent,  we  shaU  have  to  suppose  that  they
must  have  been  either  ceorls,  boors,  or  possibly  cotters
The  fact  that  there  were  cottsetWs  and  cottarii  by  the  side  |
of  them  is  evidently  the  outcome  of  some  local  distinctions  1
within  the  limits  of  the  group  of  small  tenants,  which  do  nol  |
affect  the  general  classification.  It  is  remarkable  that  then  [
are  comparatively  few  cotters  in  Domesday,  while  there  i  *
a  great  number  of  them  in  later  records,  so  that  a  goo( |


i


SOCIAL CLASSES  339

many  cottagers  must  have  been  entered  as  bordarii  by  the
Domesday  Inquest."

Similar  observations  will  occur  to  us,  when  we  come  to
consider  the  Domesday  class  termed  vUlani}*'  It  does  not
correspond  to  the  villain  class  of  later  feudal
records.  Not  only  does  Domesday  make  no
distinction  between  villains  born  and  freemen  holding  in
villainage,  so  that  the  villani  class  would,  in  any  case,  have
to  be  taken  as  the  aggregate  of  all  tenants  in  villainage  and
not  of  villains  by  birth,  but  it  is  certainly  meant  to  mark
off  a  large  group  of  tenants  whose  holdings  are  of  a  certain
size  and  quality,  namely,  villagers  who  hold  shares  in
the  township  according  to  fixed  relations  to  plough-
teams.  They  are  considered  as  members  of  the  township.
par  excellence,  and  termed  villani  for  this  reason.  Later
on  the  term  was  extended  to  all  people  in  a  certain  legal
condition  of  serfdom,  thus  including  more  and  less  than
the  Domesday  group  :  more,  because  the  greater  part  of
the  bordarii  and  cottar ii  came  to  be  villains  in  a  legal  sense,
less,  because  the  rough  and  ready  designation  of  villagers
must  have  embraced  a  good  many  people  who  were  members
of  the  plough-team  associations  of  the  township  without
being  unfree  at  the  time  of  the  Survey.  To  judge  by  the
Kentish  case,  a  number  of  people  who  were  not  even
technically  tenants  in  villainage  were  comprised  by  this
terminological  distinction  is  ;  a  dangerous  precedent  in  the
case  of  free  peasants.  When  the  term  had  come  to  imply
serfdom,  most  of  these  were  not  as  fortunate  as  the  Kentish
men,  and  did  not  recover  either  their  free  status  or  the  free
quahty  of  their  holdings.  The  same  sweeping  and-arabigu-
ous  treatment  of  the  villain  class  in  Domesday  is  shown  by
the  consideration  of  Old  Enghsh  terms  which  were  repre-
sented by  it.  No  single  term  apphes.  "  Tiinman,"  which
would  be  an  exact  equivalent,  occurs  now  and  then,  but  is
so  exceptional  that  there  can  be  no  question  of  taking  villamis
as  its  translation.^"  Though  the  Domesday  survey  is  very
categorical  in  its  afl&rmations  that  there  were  so  many
villains  in  such  and  such  a  manor,  temp.  Regis  Edivardi,
we  can  be  perfectly  sure  that  in  the  reign  of  Edward  the


340  THE GROWTH OF THE MANOR

Confessor  the  people  in  the  manors  were  either  "  ceorls  "
or  "  geburs,"  as  no  such  thing  as  a  villain  existed  in  later
Saxon  terminology.  The  Latin  versions  of  Old  Enghsh
laws,  although  belonging  to  the  early  Norman  period,  are
not  without  significance  in  this  respect  :  of  course  they  often
employ  the  term  villanus,  but  they  make  it  correspond  both
to  "  ceorl  "  and  to  "  gebiir,"  and  even  to  "  geneat,"  ^"^
which,  properly  speaking,  stands  for  the  "  follower,"  the
ministerialis.  As  to  "  ceorl  "  and  "  gebur,"  although  these
terms  had  become  more  or  less  vague  in  their  application,
there  is  nothing  to  show  .iiat  they  had  assumed  the  hard
and  fast  legal  sense  which  the  later  villanus  carried  with  it.
If  "  ceorl  "  had  to  be  rendered  by  villanus,  the  common
basis  which  made  such  a  translation  possible  was  evidently
in  the  sense  of  both  terms  indicating  villagers,  members  of
the  township  ;  and  as  for  the  common  basis  with  "  gebur,"
it  lay  in  the  affinity  of  villanus  with  colonus  which  is  the
exact  equivalent  of  "  gebur."  My  contention  is,  therefore,
that  the  terminology  of  Domesday  does  not  give  any  clue
to  legal  distinctions  between  classes  of  persons,  but  rather
applied  to  the  size  and  character  of  the  tenements,  whereas
both  the  Old  English  and  the  feudal  classification  start  from
legal  and  personal  distinctions.  The  indiscriminate  use
which  has  been  made  of  the  one  term  common  to  Domesday
and  to  the  later  classification,  namely  villanus,  has  been
the  origin  of  much  confusion ;  such  a  use  may  have
begun  very  early,  but  in  a  historical  account  of
social  evolution  we  must  be  careful  to  distinguish  between
three  sets  of  terms  :  the  "  ceorls  "  and  "  geburs  "  of  Saxon
times  which  included  both  free  and  unfree  peasants,  both
owners  and  tenants  ;  the  villani  and  hordarii  of  Domesday,
who  were  the  tenants  of  holdings  of  diverse  standing  in  the
township,  irrespectively  of  legal  condition  ;  and  the  "  vil-
lains "  of  feudal  records,  who  formed  a  distinct  legal
order  of  men.

.f  What  are  the  "  sokemen  "  and  the  liheri  homines  of
Domesday,  and  in  what  relation  do  they  stand  to  the  other
Domesday  soke- classes  ?  Here  again  we  come  upon  distinc-
■"*"  tions ''hich  have no proper equivalents in


SOCIAL CLASSES  341

the  period  preceding  the  Great  Survey  and  the  Norman
legislation,  although  Domesday  seems  to  imply  by  its
constant  references  to  the  numbers  of  "  sokemen "  and
liberi  homines  in  King  Edward's  time  that  they  were  com-
monly recognised  as  such  by  the  later  Saxon  classification
of  men.  The  form  "  sokemen  "  seems  at  any  rate  to  be
Old  English  in  its  derivation,  while  liber  homo  is  a  Latin
translation  or  a  Latin  generahsation  of  some  other  terms.
Beginning  with  "  sokeman,"  we  may  notice  that  besides
Domesday  it  occurs  in  Latin  versions  of  Old  English
law,  for  instance,  in  the  laws  of  Edward  the  Confessor
where  a  distinct  fine  is  mentioned  as  appertaining  to  the
villain  and  the  sokeman,  the  fine  of  12  shillings  for  breach  of
their  home  peace.^®  These  instances  show  to  my  mind  that
the  distinction  between  villain  and  sokeman  is  a  later
Norman  one,  and  that  originally  both  groups  belonged  to
the  same  class  of  "  twyhyndmen "  or  "  ceorls."  Why
should  otherwise  the  fine  be  identical  ?  It  is  appUed  to
two  subdivisions  which  appear  differentiated  only  in  Norman
documents.  There  was  no  call  for  a  differentiation  of  fines
in  the  time  of  Edward  the  Confessor,  because  both  the
ancestors  of  later  vUlains  and  those  of  later  sokemen  were
as  yet  merged  in  the  one  class  of  twyhynd  ceorls.

Why  did  the  Survey  and  Norman  jurisprudence  start
this  very  important  division,  and  afifirm  that  some
classification  of  the  same  kind  existed  in  fact  if  not  ia
name  in  the  time  of  Edward  the  Confessor  ?  Evidently
because  there  was  a  great  difference  of  economic  position
between  different  people  belonging  to  the  "  twyhynd "
class,  some  being  more  implicated  in  services  and  subjection
in  regard  to  the  neighbouring  lords  and  some  less,  though
even  these  last  were  to  a  certain  extent  under  authority  and
patronage.  The  departure  taken  by  Domesday  is  to  dis-
tinguish between  members  of  the  village  who  are  taken  to
be  under  manorial  authority,  and  members  of  the  soke  who
are  assumed  to  be  merely  under  jurisdictional  supremacy.
Some  attempts  in  this  direction  may  have  begun  already
in  later  Saxon  times,  but  the  terminological  distinctions  of
which  we  are  speaking  were  not  cleai  and  ready  even  at


342  THE  GROWTH  OF  THE  MANOR

the  time  of  the  survey.  We  find  the  greatest  number  of
sokemen  in  the  counties  of  the  Danelagh  and  the  adjoining
eastern  shires,  which  seem  in  some  degree  to  have  followed
the  example  of  Danish  districts  :  ^^  this  may  serve  as  a  con-
clusive proof  that  the  class  of  small  freeholders  with  a  very
independent  status  was  exceptionally  numerous  in  this  part
of  England,  though  we  shall  never  know  exactly  how  many
were  submerged  by  the  flood  of  the  Conquest.  But  it
would  hardly  be  safe  to  assume  that  the  total  absence  of
sokemen  in  the  enumerations  of  the  western  counties  testifies
to  a  complete  manorial  subjection  of  ceorls  in  those  parts
already  in  the  time  of  Edward  the  Confessor.  The  retro-
spective character  of  these  generalisations  does  not  entitle
us  to  put  too  definite  a  meaning  on  their  statements  in
regard  to  Old  English  customs  and  conditions.  The  same
upper  crust  of  the  twyhynd  class  which  was  catalogued
separately  under  the  heading  of  sokemen  in  the  east  may
have  been  included  in  the  general  order  of  villani  in  the  west.
The  fact  would  still  be  significant,  but  it  would  hardly  do
to  construe  it  too  sharply  and  to  assume  an  entirely  different
course  of  development  in  both  halves  of  the  kingdom.^"

What  are  the  liheri  homines  with  which  the  eastern
shires  are  studded  ?  Here  again  we  are  not  entitled  to
Liberi  homines  fasten  upon  any  single  term  as  an  Old
in  Domesday  English  equivalent  of  the  Latin  name.  There
are  some  remarkable  indications  as  to  the  direction  taken
by  Norman  terminology  in  this  case.  The  Latin  versions
of  later  Saxon  documents  translate  "  thane "  by  liber
Jiomo.^^  If  we  apply  this  observation  to  Domesday,  we
come  to  the  conclusion  that  twelve  hyndmen  were  entered
as  liberi  homines  in  the  Survey  :  the  only  difficulty  would
seem  to  lie  in  the  fact,  that  a  number  of  the  liberi  homines
in  Domesday  are  exceedingly  small  people. ^^  But  then  we
have  to  take  notice  that,  for  once,  thanes  also  are  not
always  big  men,  and  that  some  of  them  perform  very  humble
services  indeed,  and  own  tiny  plots  of  land.^^  It  has  also  to
be  remembered  that  in  consequence  of  the  treaties  with  the
Danse  the  quality  of  twelve -hyndmen  was  bestowed  on  aU
the  warriors  of  the  Danish  hosts  : they  were  all  reputed


SOCIAL CLASSES  343

"  holdar  "  and  "  twelfhyndmen."  Even  this  however  will  not
account  for  all  the  liberl  homines  of  East  Anglian  countieB,
and  in  their  case  two  inferences  would  be  probable  :  either
their  social  distinctions  were  affected  by  the  example  of
their  Danish  neighbours  in  respect  of  wergeld  as  well  as  of
patronage,  or  else  that  the  rendering  of  Saxon  terms  by
liberi  homines  was  more  loose  in  this  case,  possibly  including
not  only  those  who  are  called  "  drengs  "or  "  geneats  "  in
other  counties,  but  rent-paying  tenants  in  general,  free
from  servile  work.  This  is  a  distinction  towards  which
many  of  the  Latin  records  lead  and  it  is  by  no  means
impossible  that  it  may  have  been  applied  locally  by
some  of  the  Domesday  juries  and  sets  of  commissioners.^*
On  the  other  hand  we  should  not  like  to  argue  too  closely
from  the  scarcity  of  liberi  homines  and  liberi  tenentes  m
the  west,  that  all  kindred  groups  of  rent-paying  tenants
and  of  personally  free  followers  were  absent  there.  The
safer  inference  would  be,  that  the  upper  stratum
of  tenantry  did  not  obtain  the  same  recognition  of  its
better  position  at  the  hands  of  western  commissioners  and
jurymen.  The  contrasts  presented  by  dififerent  counties  in
regard  to  the  classes  of  their  population  ought  not  to  be
disregarded,  certainly,  but  these  contrasts  were  not  so  sharp
or  so  devoid  of  intermediate  shades  as  they  look,  when  we
subject  them  to  statistical  abstracts,  and  take  for  granted
that  all  terms  and  designations  were  read  and  employed
in  the  same  way  aU  over  England.  This  is  assuming  too
much  from  a  Survey  which  had  to  overcome  an  immense
number  of  local  difficulties,  and  had  no  clear  body  of  legal
distinctions  and  no  settled  legal  theory,  either  Saxon  or
Xorman,  to  start  from.

The  pictm-e  is  dififerent,  when  we  get  to  the  time  of
regular  jurisprudence,  the  time  of  Magna  Charta,  of
Villainage  In  the  King's  writs,  of  Bracton  and  Common
Common  Law  Law.  We  are  then  on  firm  ground  and  can
guide  ourselves  by  the  logical  deductions  of  royal  lawyers  ;
we-  may  even  try  to  draw  conclusions  in  their  stead  when
their  direct  testimony  forsakes  us. Nevertheless,  the  body  of


17


344  THE  GROWTH  OF  THE  MANOR

doctrine  they  present  to  us  is  not  free  from  contradictions
and  inconsistencies  :  and  no  wonder,  as  they  have  con-
trived to  throw  into  one  mould  three  or  four  conditions  of
men  which  meet  our  eye  even  in  Domesday,  not  to  speak
of  former  times  ;  namely,  the  slave,  the  servUe  labourer,
\  the  colonus  and  the  free  ceorl  under  manorial  sway.  There
Vj  are  no  more  "  theows,"  no  more  coloni  or  "  geburs,"  no
more  bordarii,  no  more  "  ceorls  "  : — there  are  only  villains
in  contrast  with  free  tenants,  and  these  villains  have
inherited  traits  from  their  various  ancestors.  We  find,
to  begin  with,  that  they  are  free  in  regard  to  everybody
but  their  lords.  ^^  They  are  responsible  for  their  acts,  and
the  criminal  law  does  not  concern  itself  with  any  of  the
puzzling  problems  which  arose  in  ancient  society  from  the
misdemeanors  of  slaves  f^  in  "  Crown  "  trials  the  expressions
freeman  and  villain  may  as  well  be  omitted,  they  are
almost  matters  of  courtesy  ;  a  new  departure  appears  only
when  benefice  of  clergy  is  pleaded.  Even  in  a  civil  suit
a  villain  may  stand  upon  his  right  against  any  one  but  his
lord,  and  all  the  assizes  will  proceed  in  regard  to  him  unless
the  specific  exception, — "  the  plaintiff  is  my  villain,  and  I
need  not  answer  him," — is  put  forward  by  the  defendant.
Still  third  persons  may  stumble  against  the  peculiarities
of  viUainage,  because,  though  they  cannot  avail  themselves
of  them,  these  peculiarities  may  be  brought  forward  as  a
screen  by  the  villain  himself  :  as  a  defendant  he  may  say
that  he  is  not  capable  of  answering  in  his  own  person  being
a  villain,  and  transfer  the  action  to  his  lord.^^  This  is  the
result  of  a  second  conception  which  is  very  different  from
the  one  that  a  villaia  is  free  against  everybody  but  his  lord,
of  the  conception,  namely,  that  a  villain  does  not  own
anything  himself,  but  only  possesses  as  much  as  his  lord
suffers  him  to  use  and  enjoy. ^®

In  this  way  we  are  led  to  a  second  aspect  of  villainage
as  a  condition  of  serfdom  devoid  of  any  proper  civil  rights.

,. The  lord  is  the  real  owner  of  everything  which

Civil  disabilities .,,  . ,  j  vc  ^i, i j i,  Z. 2.  ^

a  viUain  has,  and  if  the  lord  chooses  to  take

his  own,  the  villain  has  no  means  of  preventing  it. The

courts  will  not  listen  to  any  claim  or  complaint  of  a  villain


SOCIAL CLASSES  345

against  his  lord,  and  will  dismiss  the  plaintiff  without
entering  into  the  material  questions  raised  by  his  action.
on  the  formal  ground  of  an  "  exception  of  villainage." "
There  are  still  traces  of  a  different  view  in  feudal  juris-
prudence, there  still  exist  records  of  early  decisions  which
recognise  and  protect  at  least  some  rights  of  free  men
holding  in  villainage,  but  these  decisions  are  inspired  by
earlier  principles  which  are  losing  their  force  :  '°  they  do  not
prevail  against  the  main  current  of  jurisprudence  which
knows  no  more  of  free  ceorls  and  of  contractual  relations
between  the  rural  settler  and  the  landlord,  but  proceeds
from  the  assumption  that  villains  are  all  alike  and  have
no  actionable  rights  against  the  lord.

Consequences  of  a  third  conception  are  also  visible.  Villaiii»\^
by  condition  belong  to  the  lord  in  their  bodies  and  persons.
Personal  He  may  do  with  them  what  he  pleases  provided

villainage  \^q  (^qqq  j^ot  kill  or  maim  them.^^ They  have  no

leave  to  go  away  from  liim,  even  should  they  renounce  their
holding  or  be  without  holding.  He  may  use  them  as
labourers  and  servants ;  he  may  sell  them  the  right  of
leaving  the  manor  and  staying  abroad ;  ^^  they  will  have  to
buy  their  own  blood  when  they  marry  their  daughters.
It  is  true  that  all  these  traits  are  characteristic  of  personal
villainage,  and  should  not  hang  about  those  who  are  person-
ally free  though  holding  in  villainage.  But  it  is  very  difficult
to  keep  up  such  distinctions,  and  though  they  are  clearly
recognised  in  law,  we  see  from  the  Hundred  Rolls  that  the
tendency  of  social  evolution  was  to  make  all  villains  alike  ;
— hundred  after  hundred  appears  in  which  all  villains  pay
merchet  and  are  subjected  to  servile  customs,  and  thus
one  of  the  clues  to  a  distinction  between  the  two  classes
disappears.*^

Such  are  the  complex  foundations  of  the  law^of  villainage.
We  have  lost  sight  of  the  distinct groups  whch  went  to
the  making  of  the  class,  and  of  the  pecuhar  Domesday
estimates  of  the  tenements. What  we  have  before  us^is i
a  kind  of  serfdom  in  which  theoretical disabihties  are  miii- I'
gated  by  custom  and  practical  considerations.  ^ '

The  rightless  condition  of  the  villain  in  regard  to  the  lordll


346  THE  GROWTH  OF  THE  MANOR

is  the  juridical  basis  of  the  whole  construction.  It  would
be  wrong  to  define  it  as  praedial  servitude  or  ascription
to  the  glebe.  There  is  nothing  in  law  to  bind  a  villain  to
particular  plot  of  ground  :  he  may  be  transferred  to-morrow
to  another  plot,  he  may  be  sold  out  of  the  manor  or  bought
and  settled  in  the  manor  ;  he  may  be  deprived  of  one  part
of  his  tenement  or  of  the  whole  of  it,  he  may  be  "  com-
mandeered "  to  work  on  the  manorial  farm.^*  Even  if  we
take  into  account  the  customary  connexion  of  villains  with
their  holdings,  it  must  be  remembered  that  it  did  not  go
further  than  to  bind  the  chief  of  a  servile  household  to  a
tenement ;  all  other  members  of  his  household  were  Hable
even  by  custom  to  be  transferred  to  other  places,  and  -thus
"origin"  or  "nativity"  would  not  go  further  than  to
estabhsh  a  sort  of  connexion  between  them  and  a  particular
manor  where  they  had  been  hatched  ;  ^^  a  connexion  con-
venient for  the  purpose  of  proving  their  villain  status,  but
not  legally  binding  in  any  way.  As  a  matter  of  fact,  the
stafif  of  personal  attendants  and  manorial  servants  was
recruited  by  the  lord  from  among  his  villains  :  they  be-
longed to  him  as  persons,  and  were  not  merely  attached
to  land  which  belonged  to  him.  This  last  could  only  be
said  of  free  men  possessed  of  villain  tenements,  but  even
in  regard  to  those  the  idea  of  praedial  servitude  may  be
misleading.  Their  condition  can  be  described  as  praedial
servitude  in  so  far  as  their  duties  were  imposed  in  re-
spect of  the  holdings,  but  there  was  no  legal  tie  between
them  and  their  holdings,  though  there  certainly  was  an
economic  one  :  it  may  have  been  convenient  for  them  to
till  their  land  even  at  the  cost  of  villain  services,  but  they
could  throw  over  their  temu-e  if  they  pleased,  and  their
children  were  not  bound  legally  to  their  birthplace  ;  on
the  other  hand,  their  tenements  were  held  by  servile  cus-
toms and  under  servile  disabihties  quite  as  much  as  those
of  downright  villains.  Altogether,  the  attempts  which
have  been  sometimes  made  to  estabUsh  an  exact  equa-
tion between  villainage  and  the  colonate  of  the  later
Roman  empire  are  hardly  to  the  point.  They  do  not
take notice of the fundamental .  fact .  that the colonate


SOCIAL CLASSES  347

was  a  compulsory  institution  binding  both  sides,  binding
the  tiller  as  well  as  the  landowner,  and  guaranteed  in  its
conditions  by  the  State.

In  the  case  of  mediaeval  villains,  as  we  have  seen,  personal
subjection  was  expressed  by  exactions  of  various  kinds
Personal  which  had  no  foundation  in  the  use  of  the

exactions  tenement. Such was merchet, the fine on

the  marriage  of  the  daughter,  which  in  some  locahties  was
extended  to  sons.  This  extension  was  only  defensible
on  the  ground  that  the  lord  might  levy  a  tax  on  all  chief
occurrences  in  the  life  of  his  serfs,  but  the  ordinary  merchet
had  a  somewhat  different  colouring.  It  probably  originated
in  ancient  times  from  a  participation  by  the  lord  in  pay-
ments made  to  the  kindred  for  their  woman,  a  participation
which  ultimately  became  a  monopoly.  Besides,  the  merchet
got  a  special  extension  when  the  married  woman  went  out
of  the  manor,  the  lord  losing  his  rights  over  her  and  her
offspring  :  in  such  cases  merchet  was  a  kind  of  redemption
of  eventual  and  actual  rights,  and  was  accordingly  increased.
The  same  would  be  the  case  when  a  villain  was  made  a
clerk  and  thereby  emancipated.  Some  customs  curiously
couple  a  fine  paid  on  selling  a  calf  or  a  nag  with  the  merchet
for  marrjnng  a  daughter  ;  and  the  motive  may  be  the
same— a  transfer  of  property  out  of  the  range  of  the  lord's
power.  Another  characteristic  outcome  of  villain  tenure
was  the  payment  of  heriot  on  the  death  of  the  tenant.^*
This  exaction  was  quite  distinct  from  the  fine  paid  by  the
heir  on  entering  the  tenement,  the  so-called  reUef.  Heriot
arose  from  the  assumption  that  the  tenement  had  been
provided  with  stock  by  the  lord,  and  that  in  fact  all  the
chattels  belonging  to  a  villain  were  his  lord's,  and  liable
to  be  resumed  at  pleasure.  In  mitigation  of  such  a  practice
of  resumption  the  heriot  came  in,  implying  the  surrender
of  the  best  horse  or  ox.  In  feudal  times  the  heriot  was  a
servile  custom,  as  we  have  said,  but  it  was  not  servile  by
history  or  by  nature  :  it  had  grown  out  of  a  resumption
of  loaned  goods  which  might  have  taken  place  in  any  tene-
ment however  free.  We  know  of  the  "  Heregeatu "  of
Saxon earls and bishops consisting of warhorses and


348  THE  GROWTH  OF  THE  MANOR

armour  ;  and  this  once  more  reminds  us  that  the  law  of
tenure  had  common  roots  in  the  case  of  noble  and  of  base
tenements  :  there  was  the  element  of  precarious  grant  in
both.

Both  as  an  object  of  property,  and  as  a  subject  of  power
the  villain  could  be  taxed  at  the  lord's  will.^^  There  was
nothing  to  prevent  the  owner  of  the  manor  from  imposing
a  tax  on  the  villain  population  of  his  estate,  and  the  amount
of  the  tax  would  be  dictated  by  his  own  discretion.  And,
lastly,  the  duty  of  serving  as  a  reeve  at  the  lord's  command
was  also  deemed  a  mark  of  villainage,  because  such  an
office  took  up  much  time,  placed  the  holder  of  it  in  direct
intercourse  with  the  steward  and  exposed  him  to  all  sorts
of  unpleasant  and  unforeseen  requirements.

But  although  in  this  way  the  formula  of  disability  was
by  no  means  a  dead  letter  or  a  meaningless  fiction,  it  would
Custom  of  the  be  preposterous  to  look  to  it  as  the  one  regu-
manor  lating  factor  of  rural  life. The  very  root  of  >

villainage  lay  in  the  impossibility  for  owners  and  lords
to  work  their  dependents  at  their  will  and  pleasure.  Feudal
law  could  lay  as  much  stress  as  possible  on  the  idea  that
everything  a  villain  acquired  is  acquired  for  his  lord,  and
that  there  was  nothing  to  prevent  any  exactions  what-
soever on  the  part  of  a  lord  :  villains  were  in  the  ordinary
course  of  things  peacefully  possessed  of  their  lands,  moveables
and  money,  and  the  exactions  of  the  lord  assumed  a  fixed
customary  character  in  amount  and  in  kind.  Villains  buy
and  sell ;  sometimes  they  buy  their  own  emancipation
from  their  very  lord  with  what  is  theoretically  his  money. ^
They  are  taxed  by  the  Government  in  their  own  chattels.
They  transact  all  sorts  of  affairs  both  within  the  manor  and
out  of  it ;  and  the  laws  regulating  these  transactions,  even
when  manorial  and  customary,  are  similar  to  the  laws
practised  in  the  King's  courts.  Actions  in  the  nature
of  the  assizes  of  novel  disseisin  and  of  mort  d'ancestor,
of  writs  of  entry  and  of  common  of  pasture  are  sued  by
villains  in  the  manorial  courts  as  frequently  as  by  free
people  in  royal  courts^ ^^  and  these  minute  signs  of  legal
arrangement are significant proofs of the regularity


SOCIAL CLASSES  349

by  which  the  relations  of  the  villains  were  characterised.
There  is  no  question  of  the  arbitrary  rule  of  stewards  or  of
the  caprice  of  slaveowners.  Whatever  violence  and  op-
pression may  have  existed  in  single  cases,  the  daily  life
of  the  peasantry  followed  a  steady  and  orderly  course.
The  villain  has  also  another  name  which  describes  him  in
this  respect  :  he  is  called  a  customer — consuetudinarius—
and  nothing  is  so  important  in  this  particular  sphere  of
national  life  as  the  rule  of  custom.  The  medium  between
the  privileged  and  seemingly  autocratic  position  of  the
!i  ilitary  class  and  the  claims  of  the  working  class  to  a
tolerable  existence  is  found  for  a  time  in  the  reign  of  custom,
which  appropriates  a  good  deal  of  the  labourers'  work  for
the  benefit  of  their  master,  but  still  leaves  a  sufficient
margin  for  their  exertions  in  their  own  behalf.  Villains
are  not  admitted  to  prosecute  in  the  king's  courts,  but  their
standing  in  the  manorial  courts  is  anything  but  an  abject
and  rightless  one  :  a  body  of  customary  law  is  evolved  in
all  these  local  tribunals  which  keeps  in  close  touch  with  the
development  of  the  common  law,  and  paves  the  way  towards
the  ultimate  recognition  of  the  binding  character  of  customs.
At  no  time  was  the  tradition  and  authority  of  customary
arrangements  greater,  nor  directed  towards  so  close  a
regulation  of  all  the  details  of  rural  life  and  work,  than  in  the
epoch  of  the  theoretical  sway  of  the  lord's  will.  No
period  has  produced  such  records  of  customary  possession
and  customary  services  at  the  period  when  the  extents  and
custumals  of  manorial  administration  were  compiled.

The  ambiguous,  or  let  us  say  the  many-sided  character
of  villainage  is  expressed  not  only  in  the  contradictory
Tests  of  aspects  from  which  its  law  may  be  analysed,

villainage  but  also  in  the  evolution  of  the  decisive  tests

by  which  the  condition  was  established  and  recognized.*** '
The  question  of  the  tests  of  villainage  is  discussed  many  a  •
time  in  the  trials  as  to  status  and  tenure,  and  a  characteris-
tic confusion  is  noticeable  in  the  opinions  of  judges,  and  in
the  verdicts  of  inquests  as  to  this  matter.  Legal  learning
seemed  to  have  taken  hold  of  a  convenient  rule  by  putting
forward  the  theory  that  villainage  was  the  condition  of  a


350  THE  GROWTH  OF  THE  MANOR

peasant  whose  services  were  uncertain,  who  did  not  know
to-day  what  might  be  required  of  him  to-morrow,  who
could  be  ordered  about  at  the  pleasure  of  his  lord.  But  this
definition  was  in  truth  a  tautological  one  :  it  would  amount
to  saying  that  the  status  of  a  man  was  uncertain,  if
shown  to  be  uncertain.  Or  else  it  had  a  very  shght  prac-
tical value,  because,  whatever  may  have  been  the  talk  of
the  lawyers  and  the  exceptional  meddling  of  stewards,
a  villain  nearly  always  knew  exactly  what  he  was  to  do
to-morrow  and  next  week,  and  in  fact  in  all  the  weeks  of
the  year  ;  and  if  there  was  some  option  as  to  the  choice  of
requirements,  these  requirements  were  stUl  regulated  by
very  expHcit  and  minute  customary  rules.  In  truth  the  test
of  uncertainty  was  more  the  expression  of  the  possible
result  of  the  enquiry  than  of  the  clues  from  which  it  had
to  start.  As  a  clue,  it  would  have  fitted  slavery  and  may
have  been  suggested  by  a  theoretical  opposition  between
the  uncertaiQ  work  of  a  slave  and  the  certain  habilities
of  a  free  man,  which  remain  a  matter  of  agreement  even
when  base  and  unpleasant  ia  their  material  aspect.  Cases
could,  of  course,  be  decided  on  this  test,  if  an  express  agree-
ment could  be  proved,  or,  on  the  contrary,  if  it  could  be
shown  expressly  that  people  had  been  taxed  at  the  mercy
of 'the  lord  or  made  to  work  at  random.*^  But  what  was  to
be  done  in  the  vast  number  of  cases  when  the  relations
between  the  parties  were  traditional  and  not  formally
contractual ;  and  when,  on  the  other  hand,  there  was  no
distinct  swerving  from  customary  arrangements  ever  repeat-
ing themselves  in  the  same  way  ?  The  law  got  hold  of  two
/  other  clues  in  such  cases  :  it  tried  to  ascertain  whether  the
/  people  in  question  had  been  subjected  to  the  incidents  of
/  personal  villainage,  to  merchet,  the  payment  of  toll  on  the
'  sale  of  animals,  serving  as  reeve,  etc.  This  would  estabhsh
a  presumption  that  the  stock  of  the  men  concerned  in  the
trial  was  villain  by  blood.  But  the  very  fact  that  such
a  presumption  had  an  important  bearing  on  the  question
of  status  produced  a  very  undesirable  extension  of  these
incidents  to  people  who  were  originally  free  from  them  :
what  began  by  being  a  taint  of  particular  persons  came  to


SOCIAL CLASSES  361

be  a  feature  common  to  all  the  peasants  dwelling  in  certain
counties  and  hundreds.  The  other  eventuality  presented
itself  when  there  were  no  personal  incidents  to  go  by.
Men  might  be  free  from  paying  merchet  or  paying  fines  on
the  sale  of  their  nags,  and  still  might  be  implicated  in
villainage  by  reason  of  their  tenure.  Then  the  character-
istic test  of  services  was  applied  :  people  were  made  out
to  be  labourers  subjected  to  base  and  servile  work.  What
was  deemed  to  be  such  work  ?  Setting  aside  work  by
agreement,  villain  service  was  deemed  to  be  agricultural
service,  when  base  or  complete.  Work  with  the  fork  and
flail,  spreading  manure,  cleansing  drains  and  removing
refuse  were  deemed  forms  of  particularly  base  work  estab-
lishing a  presumption  of  villainage.  Week-work  in  agri-
cultural service  extending  to  a  regular  exploitation  of  a
peasant's  household  by  the  lord,  was  also  deemed  a  villain's
service.  Occasional  customs  of  agricultural  service,  such
as  were  quite  common  among  the  smaller  freemen  and
socmen,  were  not  sufficient  to  establish  villainage.  Still  the
inference  seems  to  be  that  after  the  Conquest,  in  the  time
of  Domesday  and  of  the  manorial  settlement,  a  treatment
of  such  questions  fatal  to  the  legal  standing  of  a  great  mass
of  the  peasantry  came  into  force.  Villainage  was  assumed,
and  its  consequences  in  regard  to  legal  disabihties  and
refusal  of  protection  by  the  courts  were  drawn  on  the
strength  of  the  general  idea  that  customary  tenure  burdened
with  agricultural  services  was  'prima  facie  villain  tenure.
Such  a  rule  must  have  played  havoc  with  many  men  who
had  been  considered  free  and  enjoyed  legal  protection  in
Old  Enghsh  times  ;  but  it  was  quite  in  keeping  with  the
main  principles  of  feudal  society,  which  placed  so  much
stress  on  the  character  of  services.

Roughly  speaking,  villains  were  peasants,  as  freemen  were
knights  or  rent-paying  tenants.  And,  after  all,  the  very
distinction  between  villains  born  and  freemen  holding  in
villainage  seems  to  point  to  the  same  train  of  thought.
It  was  not  so  much  personal  qualifications  or  disqualifica-
tions which  produced  villainage  :  it  did  exist  apart  from
the  personal  quaUfications  ;  its  root  was  tlie  possession  of


352  THE  GROWTH  OF  THE  MANOR

land  by  base  agricultural  services.  The  villain  was  primarily
a  peasant,  and  as  such  surrendered  by  feudal  conquest  to
the  discretion  of  his  lord  and  the  protection  of  local  custom.

We  must  not  leave  the  subject  of  villainage  without  taking
notice  of  the  fate  of  small  tenements  during  the  feudal  period.
In  law  there  was  nothing  to  distinguish  a
cottager  and  the  holder  of  a  croft  or  plot  from
a  virgater,  both  were  villains  or  freeholders  as  the  case  might
be,  and  in  the  numerous  trials  as  to  status  and  tenure  no
distinction  v/hatever  is  made  in  regard  to  the  size  of  the
tenement.  Most  cottagers  were,  in  fact,  villains  or  serfs.
As  to  the  hordarii  of  Domesday,  we  can  recognise  their
successors  both  among  the  villains  and  among  the  free
tenants  of  the  Hundred  Rolls  :  *^  a  number  of  these  small
holders  had  succeeded  in  emancipating  themselves.
But  the  progress  of  emancipation  seems  to  have  been  more
rapid  among  this  group  of  the  peasantry  than  among  the
shareholders  possessed  of  ploughteams  ;  nor  is  this  fact
an  astonishing  one,  as  the  customary  arrangement  of  the
manor  was  chiefly  built  up  on  the  basis  of  the  regular
plough  holdings  or  freeholdings  {terra  in  campis),  while
the  small  tenants  stood  in  a  loose  relation  to  it,  and  there
was  no  particular  reason  for  holding  them  to  villain  services.

The  remarkable  history  of  the  small  tenants  is  well  worth
consideration  in  many  respects,  though  it  has  been  hardly
appreciated  rightly  by  modern  scholars.  The  hordarii  class,
as  I  should  like  to  call  it  in  agreement  with  the  Domesday
inquest,  had  evidently  a  very  important  part  to  play  in  the
economic  life  of  the  manor,  although  no  distinct  legal  position
was  assigned  to  it.  The  crofters  and  holders  of  plots  repre-
sented two  requisites  of  first-rate  magnitude :  though  their
tenements  if  taken  singly  were  scattered  and  insignificant ;
they  furnished  the  chief  contingent  of  agricultural  labourers
and  their  situation  in  regard  to  the  cultivation  of  their
patches  of  land  was  an  individualistic  one.  These  observa-
tions follow  from  the  insufficient  size  of  their  tenements
and  from  their  being  cut  off  to  a  great  extent  from  the
advantages  appendant  to  the  plough-holdings.  They
could  seemingly  send  their  cattle  to  the  common  pasture


SOCIAL CLASSES  353

and  tht  y  were  entitled  to  use  wood  for  building,  repairs
and  fu.^l,  but  they  certainly  had  no  part  in  the  use  of
meado-vss,  and  it  is  doubtful  whether  they  could  make  use
of  the  tallow  pasture  in  the  fields  which  were  partitioned
among  their  neighbours.  However  that  may  be,  it  is  clear
that  a  patch  of  five  acres  was  a  poor  provision  for  a  household,
especially  as  its  holder  had  no  regular  means  of  joining  his
neighbours  in  the  formation  of  a  plough  team.  Nothing
was  left  for  a  hordarius,  if  he  was  not  merely  a  member
of  a  shareholder's  family  endowed  with  an  extra  plot  of
his  own,  but  to  cultivate  his  land  as  an  orchard  with  spade
and  hoe,  to  use  it  as  a  Uttle  dairy,  a  smithy,  and  to
look  out  for  hire  in  the  manor  and  out  of  it.  In  the
aggregate,  a  considerable  item  in  the  hfe  of  mediaeval  rural
society  was  formed  by  these  people  :  it  appears  that  around
the  regular  settlement  of  the  village  shareholders  a  good
many  scattered  householders  were  clustered  which  sent
their  hands  out  to  work  for  hire,  managed  the  accessory
industries  of  the  village,  and  carried  on  cultivation  by
individuahstic  processes  less  dependent  on  the  agrarian
oustoms  of  the  open  field  and  less  burdened  with  service
in  regard  to  the  manors.  No  wonder  that  this  class  is  con-
siderably ahead  in  point  of  economic  development,  though
not  settled  on  such  a  solid  basis  as  the  regular  plough -
holders.

Small  free  tenements  are  more  frequent  than  free
virgates,  and  the  services  of  bordarii  or  cottarii,  starting  from
mere  Monday  work,  get  commuted  into  money  rents  at  a
very  early  period.  At  the  same  time,  it  must  not  be  for-
gotten that  the  processes  which  went  on  among  the  small
tenants  reacted  from  all  sides  on  the  plough  peasants  and
vice  versa  ;  the  overflow  of  population  and  energy  from
the  plough -holdings  spent  itself  chiefly  in  the  formation
of  small  plots,  and  the  overflow  of  population  and  energy
from  the  small  plots  went  to  provide  the  plough -holdings
and  the  manorial  farm  with  the  hands  of  which  they  stood
in  need.*  Thus,  cross-currents  were  created  which  could  not
be  directly  reflected  in  the  instantaneous  photographs  of
extents  and  custumals,  but  which  left  conspicuous  results

A  A


354  THE  GROWTH  OF  THE  MANOR

after  them  hardly  to  be  explained  on  any  other  supj  osition.
Proceeding  with  our  description  of  classes,  we  como  across
a  social  group  whose  intermediate  position  is  characterised
by  its  very  name,  I  mean  the  group  of  villain
socmen.  The  law  writers  and  the  law  courts
of  the  thirteenth  century  were  careful  to  note  that  there
was  one  set  of  peasants  which  did  not  come  under  the  general
rule  that  villains  are  rightless  as  against  their  lords  :  such
villains  under  legal  protection,  termed  villain  socmen,
were  to  be  found  in  manors  which  had  belonged  to  the  Crown  i  ti
at  the  time  of  the  Conquest,  but  had  subsequently  passed  '
into  the  hands  of  private  lords.  The  conditions  on  which
the  privileges  of  Ancient  Demesne  depended  have  to  be
noted  carefully  :  neither  ancient  royal  manors  still  held
by  the  kings,  nor  manors  which  had  been  in  the  hands  of
the  kings  for  some  time  after  the  Conquest  and  then  have
passed  to  subjects,  are  Ancient  Demesne.*^  This  means  that,
on  the  one  hand,  the  King  did  not  want  to  bind  himself
by  fetters  from  which  his  subjects  were  free,  and  that,  on
the  other,  the  mere  fact  of  having  belonged,  at  any  time,
to  the  King,  was  not  sufficient  to  constitute  privileged  Crown
Demesne  :  there  had  to  be  a  pre-conquestual  element  in  it
in  any  case.  Before  offering  an  explanation  of  this  pheno-
menon, let  us  notice  that  the  exceptional  protection  bestowed
upon  the  tenants  in  Ancient  Demesne  was  of  a  pecuhar
kind.  They  were  admitted  to  the  pubUc  courts  for  the
settlement  of  disputes  with  their  lords,  but  they  were  not
admitted  to  the  benefit  of  actions  granted  to  freeholders.
They  could  not  use  against  their  lords,  the  Great  Writ  of
Right,  the  Assize  of  Novel  Decision,  the  Assize  of  Mort
d' Ancestor,  the  writ  Quare  exigit,  or  the  writ  De  communiiate
pasturae,  but  had  to  content  themselves  with  a  bill  or  plaint
to  the  King  and  with  the  grant  of  a  Little  Writ  of  Right,
or  a  writ  of  Monstraverunt.^^  These  technicaUties  had  a
definite  sense  :  they  meant  that  the  peasants  who  thought
themselves  aggrieved  by  their  lord  had  no  standing-ground
against  him  in  strict  and  common  law,  but  had  to  implore
one  from  the  equity  ai^  the  private  interest  of  the  King,
their  former  master. Having  obtained  a  favourable  hearing


SOCIAL CLASSES  366

of  their  complaint,  they  were  allowed  to  use  means  which
were  at  the  disposal  of  the  manorial  jurisdiction  of  the  King,
and  sued  for  redress  in  the  very  manorial  court  which  had
come  to  be  held  by  their  present  lord,  although  with  these
important  deviations  from  the  purely  manorial  course,
that  the  process  could  be  taken  up  to  the  public  courts  and
went  on  under  their  inspection,  and  that  even  in  the
manorial  stage  the  lord  appeared  as  a  defendant  in  his  own
court.  These  two  deviations  formed  the  dividing  line
between  a  trial  on  the  basis  of  villain  socage  and  the  examina-
tion of  complaints  against  stewards  and  officers  which  could
arise  in  the  court  of  any  royal  manor,  even  if  it  was  not
.\ncient  Demesne  in  the  sense  of  having  been  granted  to
a  private  lord."  The  case  being  such,  it  seems  at  first  glance
that  the  pecuhar  and  exceedingly  valuable  privilege  of
Ancient  Demesne  was  merely  the  outcome  of  the  special
grace  and  interest  taken  by  the  King  in  his  former  subjects.
But  the  second  qualification,  the  fact  that  merely  demesnes
of  Old  Enghsh  formation  were  admitted  to  it,  shows  that
there  was  yet  another  idea  underlying  this  institution.
This  idea  is  clearly  expressed  in  the  law  books,*®  and  fits  into
the  complexity  of  facts  which  have  come  down  to  us  from
the  social  evolution  of  those  centuries.  It  amounts  to  a
recognition  of  the  fact  that  it  would  be  a  hardship  to  deprive
the  tenants  of  manors  which  had  been  held  by  the  Crown
in  the  time  before  WiUiam  the  Conqueror,  of  the  recourse
to  pubhc  tribunals  in  the  settlement  of  disputes,  and  of  the
consequent  legal  guarantees  as  to  tenures  and  services
which  they  had  enjoyed  in  Old  English  times  :  they  ought
to  continue  in  the  same  state  as  their  ancestors,  and  the
courts  have  to  see  that  their  holdings  are  not  wrested  from
them,  nor  their  services  increased.  They  are  villains  by
nature  of  their  rural  services  and  manorial  subjection,  but
they  are  socmen  at  the  same  time  because  their  services
are  certain  and  safeguarded  by  law  courts.  In  this  way,
the  loss  of  legal  protection  which  is  so  characteristic  of
vUlainage  in  general,  is  arrested  in  the  case  of  these  privileged
villains  as  a  consequence  of  conAiest  which  ought  not  to
apply to the ancient tenants of the King. The whole


356  THE  GROWTH  OF  THE  MANOR

institution  is  interesting  from  several  points  of  view  :  it
professes  to  set  before  us  the  material  conditions  of  rural
life  as  they  existed  in  the  age  of  Edward  the  Confessor  ;  it
is  built  up  on  the  consideration  that  the  refusal  of  the  courts
to  interfere  in  disputes  between  lords  and  peasants  is  an
innovation  from  after  the  Conquest,  and  it  attaches  clearly
the  quahty  of  tenure  by  agricultural  work  to  villainage.

There  is  even  a  curious  train  of  reminiscences  of  the  fact
that  if  legal  interference  was  to  be  practised  in  regard  to
relations  between  lord  and  peasant,  it  had  to  distinguish
between  different  classes  of  the  peasantry,  and,  while  pro-
tecting the  villain  as  a  former  ceorl,  had  not  to  meddle
with  the  power  of  the  master  over  slaves.  Attempts  to
distinguish  between  these  classes  in  manors  of  Ancient  De-
mesne are  made  in  the  thirteenth  and  fourteenth  centuries,*'
but  they  are  lame  and  confused,  and  no  wonder,  as  the
ancient  divisions  had  been  mixed  up  in  the  mould  of  vil-
lainage.*^ Of  coiu-se,  the  privileges  of  Ancient  Demesne  were
so  conspicuous  and  great  that  there  are  constant  attempts
on  the  part  of  the  peasantry  of  all  sorts  of  manors  to  obtain
the  rights  of  villain  socage.

By  the  side  of  villain  socage,  stands  free  socage,  and
the  reason  for  distinguishing  it  from  ordinary  free  tenure
seems  to  be  historical.  Free  socmen,  or  socmen
without  any  adjunct,  are  customary  freeholders ,
who  have  obtained  their  position  and  name  by  tradition
of  free  stock  and  possession  without  any  expressed '
beginning  by  grant  and  feoffment,*^  and  with  the  idea-
that  they  were  free  owners  subjected  to  soke,  to  political
lordship,  and  not  tenants  or  settlers  on  a  landowner's
land.  In  this  sense,  those  very  persons  who  are  termed
villains  in  the  Domesday  of  Kent  are  sometimes  designated"
as  socmen  by  later  records.""  In  many  cases  they  are  bur-
dened with  some  rural  services,  although  their  obhgations
in  this  respect  appear  accessory  when  compared  with
the  work  imposed  on  villains  in  the  same  locaUties.  Any-
how, their  work  is  certain  because  their  tenure  has  been
recognised  and  protection  granted  by  the  courts,  and  as
to  the  motives  of  such  a  recognition,  besides  a  vague  tradi-


SOCIAL CLASSES  357

tion  and  a  name,  the  consideration  of  tlie  accessory  character
of  their  services  may  have  played  a  great  part.  The  line
between  them  and  the  villains  was  drawn  to  some  extent
in  an  arbitrary  manner,  and  it  is  only  too  hkely  that  people
of  substantially  the  same  condition  were  entered  right  and
left  of  this  hne  among  the  wolves  and  among  the  lambs.
But  such  is  the  nature  of  all  sharp  social  distinctions,  and
the  more  important  the  consequences  are,  the  more  relent-
lessly the  decisive  hne  has  to  be  drawn  at  some  fatal  moment
of  histor3^

That  the  difference  between  a  socman  and  a  freeholder
is  not  a  material  one  may  be  gathered,  among  other  circum-
stances, from  the  fact  that  the  tenure  of  the  socman,  socage,
was  also  the  main  tenure  of  the  freeholder.  It  has  only  to
be  said  that  free  tenure  is  wider  than  socage  as  it  includes,
besides,  burgage  tenure,  the  military  fief,  the  tenure  by
sergeanty,  and,  in  one  sense,  the  tenure  by  frank  almoign.
All  these  are  certain,  therefore  free,  and  protected  by
Magna  Charta  and  the  Common  Law.  But  the  other  forms
of  free  tenure  have  all  a  certain  special  adjunct  which  gives
them  their  pecuHar  cast :  they  are  comphcated  by  military
or  ecclesiastical  obhgations.'^  As  for  burgage,  it  is  only  a
variety  of  socage  and  distinguished  from  it  by  its  connexion
with  a  privileged  town,  a  borough.  Socage  remains  the
typical  free  tenure,  the  holding  in  which  the  services  are
certain,  whether  they  take  the  form  of  rent  or  of  services  in
kind.  In  this  sense,  socage  is  primarily  a  holding  by  contract,
by  definite  agreement.

Besides  these  cases  of  express  contract  and  the  tradition
of  socmen  as  free  members  of  a  soke  or  free  owners  under
soke,  it  is  interesting  to  notice  the  existence
of  a  deeply  rooted  view,  according  to  which
free  tenure  is  the  holding  by  rent  service.  It  is  quite
common  to  find  in  the  surveys  and  extents  that  tenants
paying  rent  are  described  as  more  free  or  even  simply  as
free,  in  contrast  with  tenants  who  have  to  work.'^  From
this  point  of  view,  molmen  are  freer  than  workmen,  and
this  is  no  mere  word-play,  because  the  necessity  of  performing
work  placed  the  person  burdened  with  it,  in  the  condition


358  THE GROWTH OF THE MANOR

of  a  subordinate  to  be  ordered  about  by  the  stewards  during
so  many  days  a  week  and  perhaps  half  the  year,  if  taken  all
round,  while  the  obligation  to  pay  a  rent  merely  meant  the
paying  in  of  the  charge  on  specified  days  without  any  further
personal  comphcations.  Besides,  buying  off  services  in
money  took  partly  the  shape  of  getting  rid  of  some  of
the  more  hateful  and  cumbersome  duties,  such  as  merchet,
for  instance,  and  thus  appeared  as  a  kind  of  emancipation
by  instalments..  These  observations  have  a  bearing  on  the
historical  evolution  of  peasant  holdings,  both  in  their  pas-
sage from  the  Old  Enghsh  age  to  the  feudal  period,  and
in  their  transition  from  the  feudal  period  to  later  times.
At  the  Conquest,  one  of  the  tests  for  classifying  tenures
as  free  or  unfree  seems  to  have  been  their  position  in  regard
to  rent  and  to  work,  and  in  the  fourteenth  century  one  of
the  most  potent  factors  which  brought  about  the  dissolution
of  villainage  was  the  commutation  of  services  for  money.

Another  feature  indirectly  connected  with  the  conception
of  villainage  as  the  workman's  tenure,  is  the  fact  that  persons
of  villain  condition  who  had  to  perform  duties  not  included
in  the  ordinary  routine  of  rural  work,  but  called  forth  by
requirements  of  the  government,  are  deemed  free.  Such
was  the  case  of  peasants  who  had  to  represent  the  township
in  the  hundred,  in  the  county  court  and  before  the  assizes.^^
This  representation  ^^  as  usually  a  thing  settled  once  for
all,  and  bound  up  with  the  possession  of  distinct  holdings.
The  hundreders  who  had  to  attend  on  aU  these  occasions,
were  said  to  defend  the  township  by  their  suit,  and  to  hold
their  tenements  by  suit  of  court.  They  were  deemed  and
called  free,  because  they  were  liberated  from  the  ordinary
drudgery  of  their  neighbours,  and  no  doubt  this  customary
freedom  would  estabhsh  a  presumption  for  their  being
treated  as  free  in  case  of  dispute  with  the  lord.  And  stiU,
historically,  these  men  came  of  the  same  stock  with  all  the
viUains  around  them.

AU  these  facts  point  in  one  direction,  namely,  to  the
conclusion  that  the  distinctions  between  free  and  unfree,
between  socage  and  villainage,  were  largely  a  creation  of
the  Conquest,  and  that  the  hard  and  fast  lines  drawn  by


SOCIAL CLASSES  36^

feudal  jurisprudence  between  the  people  living  under
manorial  customs,  and  the  people  under  the  direct  protection
of  the  King's  courts  have  produced  artificial  simplification
and  concentration  of  classes  which  had  been  developing  in
very  different  grooves;  although  the  basis  is  the  broad
economic  difference  between  people  burdened  by  agricul-
tural work  and  people  free  from  it.

There  remains  to  be  considered  one  more  group  of  the
population  of  the  manors,  namely,  the  officers  and  servants
Servants  and  of  the  lord.  This  administrative  staff  was  of
Stewards  great  importance  in  the  economic  arrangement

of  the  manorial  institutions,  although  it  was  not  recog-
nized as  a  separate  order  by  common  law.  Stewards
and  beadles  were  either  free  or  villains  in  their  per-
sonal status,  either  holding  in  villainage  or  holding  freely,
or  not  holding  at  all,  in  their  relations  to  land.  The
class  which  is  characterised  by  the  name  of  ministeriales  in
the  German  surveys  and  law  documents  does  not  legally
exist  in  England.  And,  nevertheless,  it  exists  economically
anc  plays  a  very  conspicuous  part  in  the  life  of  the  whole.^*
It  vas  necessary  to  provide  for  the  discipline,  tiie  control
of  libourers,  the  holding  and  auditing  of  accounts,  and
numerous  servants  drawTi  from  different  classes  are  engaged
in  tkis  work.  The  larger  the  manor,  the  more  powerful
the  tord  and  the  more  extensive  his  possessions,  the  more
complex  and  influential  his  administrative  staff  becomes.
We  have  already  spoken  of  the  divers  branches  of  office  into
whicL  this  staff  was  divided  to  meet  the  requirements  of  a
large  estate.  But  we  must  now  cast  a  glance  at  the  personal
conditions  in  which  it  was  placed  in  order  to  perform  its
work,  and  at  its  relations  to  other  groups  of  manorial
societj.  Occasional  labourers  were  generally  hired  and
the  price  of  their  board  and  lodging  was  subtracted  from
their  vages.  Permanent  servants  must  have  also  received
some  lemuneration  for  their  services,  though  their  wages
seem  to  have  been  very  small,  while  their  board  and  clothing
were  comparatively  good,  and  were  provided  at  the  expense
of  the  lord.  These  servants  were  usually  drawn  from  the
subject  population  of  the  manor  and  were  enlisted  to  do


360  THE  GROWTH  OP  THE  MANOR

their  work  by  command.  Skilled  artizans,  hunters  and
men-at-arms  had  to  be  often  engaged  from  other  places,
and  were  paid  high  wages  or  attracted  by  other  boons.  In
the  case  of  the  higher  servants,  officers  and  accountants,
a  very  common  expedient  was  to  provide  them  with  pbts
of  land,  and  even  with  regular  holdings,  from  which  they
could  draw  profits  in  remuneration  for  their  services.  We  find
ploughmen,  stewards,  porters,  smiths  among  the  tenants,
and  their  tenements  are  free,  in  so  much  as  they  are  un-
encumbered by  customary  work.^^  Sometimes  these  rela-
tions give  rise  only  to  temporary  leaves,  but  this  ma/  be
the  beginning  of  actual  free  tenure,  if  the  charge  and  the
tenement  remain  long  in  the  same  hand  or  even  go  by
hereditary  succession  ;  a  very  common  thing  in  those  :;imes.
The  riding  men  of  the  Old  English  period  go  naturally  over
into  Norman  times,  but  as  the  laws  of  mihtary  tenure  and
of  sergeanty  get  developed,  the  higher  standing  among
them  are  generally  enlisted  among  the  mfiitary  class  and
settle  on  definite  conditions  of  knight's  service,  whQe  Ihe
smaller  mostly  Hve  in  the  castles  with  their  lords,  and  a
few  are  quartered  in  separate  tenements  on  the  land
of  the  manor.  In  great  administrations,  a  complicited
feudahty  springs  up,  fees  of  the  kitchen,  of  the  cellar,  o!  the
gate  are  formed,  and  it  becomes  no  easy  matter  to  hold
this  presumptuous  and  grasping  population  in  awe  and
disciphne.  It  was  partly  in  the  lord's  own  interest  that  the
power  and  influence  of  the  administrative  staff  was  ma^^ched
by  hberties  and  customs  of  the  subject  population.  The
enrolments  and  the  surveys  made  on  the  strength  of  sworn
manorial  inquests  served  not  only  as  records  of  the  various
duties  exacted  by  the  lord  from  his  villains  and  free  tenants,
but  also  as  a  check  on  the  malversations  and  encroaclments
of  the  stewards  and  officers.  This  side  of  manorial  life
is  better  understood  when  examined  in  its  relation
to  political  organisation,  as  a  unit  of  local  government.

The  part  it  played  in  this  respect  comprises
ganisation  for  both  its  functions  as  a  representative  of  central
administrative government  in  the  locality,  and  the  expression

of  the  private  power  exercised  by  it  over  the


^


SOCIAL CLASSES  361

subject  population.  To  begin  with,  the  manorial
arrangement  was,  of  course,  taken  into  account  and  used
by  the  king  and  the  estates  in  order  to  enforce  the  common
needs  of  governments.  It  played  its  part  in  raihtary
organisation,  in  the  collection  of  taxes,  in  the  administration
of  justice  and  in  police.'*

It  is  characteristic  of  all  these  functions  of  the  manor
that,  with  the  exception  of  mihtary  service,  that  they  are
all  organised  on  a  collective  or  communal  basis.  In  most
cases  it  is  not  the  manor  itself  which  appears  on  the  scene,
but  the  township  or  vill  underlying  it.  The  local  unity  does
not  act  through  the  personality  of  the  lord  of  the  manor,
but  through  chosen  or  customary  representatives  of  a
community,  a  "  commune  "  of  its  members.  And  when  we
come  to  look  at  the  organisation  of  the  manor  for  its  own
home  purposes,  to  the  framing  of  enactments,  the  settlement
of  disputes  and  the  infliction  of  penalties,  we  find  the  same
communal  character  carried  out  in  all  minutest  details.
There  is  no  question  of  enforcing  the  rule  of  a  local  potentate,
of  an  absolute  ruler  and  owner  ;  there  are  not  even  excep-
tional attempts  to  manage  the  business  of  the  manor  on
the  principle  of  a  single  will  pervading  the  whole  and  of
secondary  administrative  powers  derived  from  it.  We
hear  often  of  confiscations  by  the  lord,  of  injunctions  made
in  his  name,  of  coercive  measures  taken  by  his  officers,  of
extortions  and  oppression  by  his  servants,  but  we  never
hear  of  a  single  manor  governed  as  an  estate  is  governed
nowadays  by  the  single  will  and  disposition  of  the  owner.
With  a  regularity  which  presents  the  exact  counterpart  of
the  consistent  parcelhng  up  of  the  country  into  manors,
the  chief  traits  of  the  customary  self-government  of  the
manorial  community  are  repeated  over  and  over  again  ;
surely  a  brilhant  expression  of  the  fact  that  we  have  to
deal,  not  with  the  varying  arrangements  of  private  owner-
ship, and  not  with  the  arbitrary  sway  of  local  despots,
but  with  local  forms  of  organisation,  which  are  worked
out  under  the  constant  pressure  and  control  of  a  central
government,  and  on  the  firm  ground  of  an  immemorial
tradition  of  communal  action. Before  proceeding  to  examine


362  THE GROWTH  OF  THE MAiifOR

single  points  I  cannot  help  dwelling  a  little  on  this  re-
markable phenomenon,  which  though  certainly  not  unknown
to  modem  investigators,  has  hardly  been  appreciated  at
its  full  value.  When  in  the  feudal  ages  we  find  the  country
cut  up  into  manors,  the  Domesday  survey  cataloguing  place
after  place  as  manors,  and  the  records  of  the  courts  treating
all  cases  of  ownership  from  the  point  of  view  of  the  free
tenement  in  a  manor,  we  are  struck  by  the  strength  of  the
idea  of  personal  ownership  pervading  such  an  arrangement,
and  feel  inclined  to  trace  it  back  as  far  as  possible,  to  assume
that  private  will  and  private  interest  are  the  deepest
foundations  of  social  life  in  England,  and  that  everything
else  is  only  a  modification  and  combination  of  private
wills  and  interests.  But  it  is  worth  while  to  reflect  a  little
on  the  astounding  spectacle  of  the  communal  structure
of  all  these  manorial  cells  which  look  so  individualistic
from  the  outside.  Why  did  the  landowner  never  try  to
establish  a  system  of  thoroughly  personal  government  ?
Why  did  the  courts  and  representative  institutions  recur
over  and  over  again  to  local  bodies  which  were  assumed
to  be  under  the  complete  sway  of  the  manorial  lord  ?  Local
custom  seems  to  obtain  in  this  respect  a  similar  force  of
uniform  organisation  to  that  which  feudal  jurisprudence
with  its  writs  and  decisions  exercised  in  the  royal  courts,
only  that  the  secret  of  its  power  and  of  its  consequent  action
is  more  difficult  to  unravel,  as  the  processes  by  which
uniformity  is  obtained  in  this  case  take  place  in  numberless
secluded  corners  of  England  where  petty  potentates  are
declared  to  be  owners  and  rulers.

In  two  important  respects  the  manorial  organisation
is  certainly  not  beyond  control :  as  a  centre
of  franchises,  jurisdiction  and  poUce  it  is
a  part  of  political  machinery  and  under  the  direct
influence  of  the  central  government  and  of  its  judges.
The  Hundred  Rolls  and  the  Placita  quo  warranto  testify
to  Royal  supervision  over  the  poUtical  attributions  of
manorial  lords. ^^  And  from  this  point  of  view  it  is
material  that  the  government  considers  a  communal
organisation  and  representative  institutions  as  a  constant
and  necessary  element  of  the  manor,  whose  administrative


1


SOCIAL CLASSES  363

structure  is  moulded  on  that  of  the  township  and  already
clearly  indicated  by  the  practice  of  the  hundred  and  county
court.  The  court  leet,  the  committee  of  five  or  six  hundredors,
and  the  twelve  representatives  of  an  urban  vill  proceed  from
political  arrangements  which  were  in  full  play  in  the  later
Saxon  age,  but  were  fitted  into  the  manorial  system  during
the  feudal  period.  A  manorial  lord  would  have  lost  most
lucrative  franchises,  if  he  was  not  able  to  show  that  he  had
sufficient  elements  for  the  constitution  of  a  leet,  for  the
judgment  and  punishment  of  certain  offenders  ;  and,  of
course,  no  royal  court  or  commission  of  enquiry  would  have
deemed  his  personal  interference  sufficient  in  ^uch  respect.
A  court  must  be  a  court  in  earnest,  and  the  first  factot  to
make  it  such  was  a  sufficient  number  of  suitors.^^

The  second  reason  which  imposed  a  customary  constitu-
tion on  every  lord  was  the  fact  that  he  was  not  a  mere
owner  of  serfs,  but  that  he  had  to  deal  with
free  tenants  as  well.  It  was  his  recognised
right  to  hold  a  court  for  the  settlement  of  their
disputes  amongst  one  another,  and  for  the  transaction  of
conveyancing  business  for  them  within  the  precincts  of
the  manor.  This  was  the  foundation  of  his  court  baron.
But  though  this  was  a  privilege  which  accrued  to  him  as
a  part  of  his  lordship,  it  could  be  set  in  motion  and  realized
only  on  the  condition  of  the  actual  or  virtual  participation
of  the  free  suitors  for  whom  the  court  was  held.  No  free-
holder would  have  submitted  to  personal  commands  and
arbitrary  decisions  of  a  lord  whose  free  tenants  were
his  peers,  and  stood  on  an  equal  footing  with  him  in  the
king's  courts.  The  court  baron  was  of  necessity  a  col-
legiate court,  as  the  court  leet  was  of  necessity  a  com-
mimal  court ;  the  first  for  feudal  reasons  and  the  second
for  pohtical  reasons.  And  when  this  point  is  reached  it
will  become  evident  that  the  theory  of  later  lawyers,  that
some  free  tenants  were  necessary  to  constitute  a  manor
is  not  without  its  reasonableness.'^  The  presence  of  free
tenants  made  the  arrangement  of  customary  self-govern-
ment not  only  optional  but  compulsory.  The  lord  had  no
hold  on  them  but  by  the  law  of  the  free,  and  had  to  submit


364  THE  GROWTH  OF  THE  MANOR


I


to  conditions  which  guaranteed  their  freedom  and  a  fair
representation  of  their  interests.

But  the  most  significant  item  in  this  manorial  arrange-
ment is  provided  by  the  fact  that  it  is  not  merely  when  the
Customary , manor  comes  into  direct  contact  with  the  state,

court  ^  or  when  it  deals  with  the  civil  affairs  of  its
free  tenants  that  it  forms  courts  and  acts  on  collegiate
and  communal  Hnes,  but  also  and  most  often  when  it
settles  questions  of  internal  economy  and  deals  with
the  requirements  and  offences  of  villains.  The  cus-
tomary court  is  quite  as  much  a  court  in  the  communal
sense  as  the  court  leet,  and  more  than  the  court  baron,
which  is  more  collegiate  than  communal.  It  is  true  that
the  lord,  or  his  alter  ego,  the  steward,  is  declared  to  be
judge  of  this  court,  but  he  is  never  single  judge,  he  acts  always
with  a  court  composed  of  free  and  villain  suitors  ;  customs
are  declared  by  these  and  not  by  him  ;  inquests  and  juries
'are  empanelled  from  among  them  ;  the  agrarian  business
\'of  the  customary  court  is  entirely  of  their  making  ;  and
'altogether  the  communal  life  of  the  township,  the  villata,
(appears  to  be  as  energetic  as  the  action  of  the  Old  Enghsh
township  had  been.*"  And  though  there  is  such  a  wide  dis-
tance in  point  of  right  between  villains  and  free  tenants,  they
appear  together  as  suitors  of  the  customary  courts,  and  take
part  in  the  management  of  affairs  as  members  of  the  same
community.  We  may  notice  how  the  free  tenants  work  out
separate  privileges  in  many  respects  ;  they  object  to  sittii^g
on  inquests,  they  act  sometimes  as  judges  when  villains
only  are  admitted  to  make  presentments ;  they  claim
separate  juries  to  try  their  cases  ;  they  are  privileged  in
regard  to  the  means  of  executing  manorial  judgments ;
they  refuse  to  act  as  permanent  manorial  officers,  though
their  acting  as  exceptional  overseers  is  often  noted.  StiU
both  elements  of  the  court  are  indissolubly  knitted  together,®^
and  indeed  the  differentiation  between  free  and  villain  suitors
appears  in  some  respects  to  be  a  later  one  ;  at  any  rate,  there
is  no  common  theory  as  to  differences  in  their  attributions,
and  such  differences  appear  in  various  modes  and  degrees
according  to  local  custom,  and  sometimes  do  not  appear


I  SOCIAL CLASSES  365

at  all.  Not  less  significant  is  the  fact,  that  the  various
manorial  courts  are  later  ramifications  of  the  one  halimote,
originally  the  only  meeting  for  the  arrangement  of  all  sorts
of  affairs.^^  Later  on  the  halimote  is  especially  taken  as  the
customary  court,  and  it  is  not  unimportant  that  such  should
be  the  case,  as  the  haUmote  certainly  includes  villains,  and
if  it  was  the  main  court  of  the  manor  the  customary  con-
stitution of  the  manor  must  be  traced  to  the  development
of  ideas  which  include  the  villains.  On  the  face  of  the  very
terminology  of  our  evidence  this  traditional  root  of  com-
munal action  is  afforded  by  the  township,  the  villata,
round  which  the  manor  clung  as  a  shell.

Thus  from  several  points  of  view  we  come  always  to  the
same  conclusions.  The  economic  development  of  mediaeval
rural  hfe  is  to  be  accounted  for  by  the  formation  in  Old
English  society  of  a  village  community  of  shareholders
which  cultivated  the  land  on  the  open-field  system,  and
treated  all  other  requisites  of  rural  life  as  appendant  to  it.
The  evolution  of  individualistic  husbandry  and  of  political
protection  produced  the  growth  of  lordships  which  culminated
after  the  Conquest  in  the  arrangement  of  the  manor,  a
complex  institution  partaking  of  the  character  of  an  estate
and  of  a  unit  of  local  government.  The  influence  of  the
Conquest  and  of  the  subsequent  formation  of  common
law  was  decisive  in  submitting  society  to  a  system  of  per-
sonal rights  and  relations  ;  but  underneath  this  system
ancient  principles  of  communal  action  and  communal
responsibihty  were  still  fully  aUve.


BOOK  m

NOTES  TO  CHAPTER  I

1.  "Domesday  and  Beyond,"  3.  Cf.  On  Legal  Principles  in  Domes-
day Book,  "English Society  in  the  Eleventh  Century,"  pp.  219  3.

2.  Round,  "  Feudal  England,"  44  ; "  Domesday  and  Beyond,"  11.

3.  Dd.  ii.  57,  b :  Et  haec  terra  quam  modo  tenet  G.  fuit  in
abbatia  de  Berchingis  .  .  .  sed  Hie  qui  tenuit  hanc  terram  fuit
tantummodo  homo  antecessoris  Goisfridi,  et  non  potuit  istam
terram  mittere  in  aliquo  loco  nisi  in  abbatia.  Dd.  ii.  250,  b:
huic  manerio  adjacent  semper  4  homines  de  omni  consuetudine,
et  alii  4  ad  socham  tantum.  Dd.  i.  249,  b  :  Medietas  istiiis  hominis
fuit  antecessoris  Bainguard  coramendationis  tantimi,  et  alia  medietas
S*'  Edmundi  cum  dimidia  terra.  Cf.  "  Domesday  and  Beyond,"
68  ff.

4.  Dd.  i.  58.  Pater  Tori  tenuit  T.R.E.  et  potuit  ire  quo
volmt,  sed  pro  sua  defensione  se  commisit  Hermanns  episcopo,  et
Tori  Osmiindo  episcopo  similiter.  Cf.  Round,  "  Feudal  England,"
28.

5.  The  earliest  attempts  to  establish  a  direct  relation  between
land  tenvu"e  and  service  are  connected  with  grants  of  loanland  for
term  of  years.  CD.,  1287.  Cf.  "  Domesday  and  Beyond,"
305  ff.

6.  Freeman,  "Norman  Conquest,"  iv.  25; v.  21.

7.  Round,  "  Feudal  England,"  295  ff.

8.  Dd.  ii.  163:  In  frainghes  unus  Hber  homo  20  acrarum  terra
et  valet  16  den.  De  hoc  habuit  suus  (WUlelmi  de  Warenne)  ante,
cessor  comendationem  tantima,  et  Stigandus  socam.  ii.,  124:
In  aUuertuna  2  liberi  homines  T.  R.  E.,  unus  et  dimidius  Alnoth,
et  dimidius  Alvu-edi  commendatus.  Has  tenuit  Rogerus  Comes
quando  se  forisfecit,  post  Godricus  in  manu  regis.  Modo  tenet
Aitartus,  homo  Rogeri  Bigot,  medietatem  imius,  et  15  reclamat  ad
feudmn  episcopi  Baiocensis.  Dd.  i.  36,  b :  In  Copededorne
hundredo  tenet  Seman  unam  virgatam  terre,  quam  tenuit  de  rege
Edwardo,  sed  ex  quo  venit  WUlelmus  rex  in  Angliam  seriiiuit
Osualdo  reddendo  ei  20  denarios.  Hie  se  potuit  vertere  quo  voluit
T.  R.  E.  Dd.  i.  210 :  In  Est  one  tenet  WiUelmus  de  Caron  dimidiam
hidam  et  dimidiam  virgatam  de  episcopo,  .  .  .  Hanc  terram  tenuit
Aluviinus  homo  episcopi  Lincolniensis,  et  quod  voluit  de  ea  facere
potuit. Soca tamen semper  episcopi  fuit. Dd.  ii.  287,  b: In


NOTES  367

brunestada  unus  liber  homo  15  acrarum,  et  in  Horseia  iinus  liber
homo  12acrarmn.  Ex  his  non  habuit  Ailwimis  suus  (llogeri  Bigot)
antecessor  etiam  commendationem  t.  r.  E.,  et  tamen  eos  reuocat
ad  suum  feudmu  ex  dono  Regis,  quia  ille  AUwinias  habuit  com-
mendationem ex  eis  t.  r.  W.

9.  Dd.,  i.  63,  b  ; i.  1,  etc.

11.  F.  W.  Maitlcmd  has  tried  to  establish  a  distinction  between
villains  and  socmen  on  the  basis  of  taxation  :  the  first  are  said  to
have  been  so  poor  that  the  Government  had  to  apply  to  their  lords
in  order  to  collect  dues  from  them,  whUe  the  latter  were  dealt  with  in
person  ("  Dd.  and  Beyond,"  141).  This  distinction  rests,  however,
on  the  doubtful  proposition,  that  the  taxes  of  villains  were  collected
by  their  lords,  and  cannot  be  upheld  if  we  come  to  the  conclusion
tliat  both  in  regard  to  assessment  and  to  collection  the  townships
were  in  direct  communication  with  the  sheriffs  and  the  Exchequer.

11.  "Domesday  and  Beyond," 396,

12.  See  e.g.  the  descriptions  of  Swaf ham  and  Dullingham,  Inquis.
Cantabrig. 12  ff. ;  17  f.

13.  "Domesday  and  Beyond,"  120.

U.  Prof.  Tait,  "  Engl.  Hist.  Rev.," 189, 7,  770  f.

15.  Bound,  "Engl.  Hist. Rev.,"  1900,  293  f.

16.  E.g.,  Dd.  i.  272:  In  Neuuebold  cum  6  Berewitis,  Witintune,
Brimintune,  Tapetime,  Cestrefeld,  Buitorp,  Echintune,  etc.  Cf.
i.  230  : huic  manerio  pertinent  subsequentia  membra.

17.  Istos  homines  posuit  Ingilricus  ad  suam  halam,  The  hall
is  the  centre  of  the  home  farm.  Cf.  i.  12  ;  Ipse  abbas  tenet  Setlingas
manerium  sine  halla,  quod  se  defendit  pro  6  solins.  Terra  est
XI  carucis.  Nichil  in  dominio.  Ibi  30  villani  habent  10  carucas.
Dd.  i.  285,  C :  Habuerunt  Elmer,  Elmis,  Osbern,  Grim,  Edric,
Stenulf  quisque  aulam  suam,  et  unusquisque  unam  bovatam  terrae,
i.  164:  In  Lindene  fecit  comes  Willelmus  unum  manerium  de  4
t«rris,  quas  ab  eorum  dominis  accepit.  ;  i.  208  :  Dicunt  .  .  .  terram
Aluuini  Chit  de  Westone  per  se  f  uisse  manerium  et  non  pertinuisse  ad
Kembaltone,  sed  tamen  eum  fuisse  hominem  Haroldi  comitis.  The
fact  that  a  manor  is  commonly  considered  as  an  organisation  of
labour  services  is  clearly  apparent  in  cases  when  there  was  some
notable  irregularity  in  the  arrangement  of  work,  e.g.,  Dd.  i.  182,  C
(ElmeUe,  Herefordshire)  :  Ibi  4  hidas  geldabUes.  Terra  est  8
carucis.  Alterius  villae  homines  laborant  in  hac  vUla  et  reddunt
37  solidos  et  8  denarios.  ;  i.  181  :  In  Niware  sunt  2  hidae  et  dimidia
quae  in  Bremesse  hundredo  conveniebant  et  operabantur.  What
can  the  manors  mean  but  small  estates  in  ceises  like  the  following  :
Dd.  i.  269,  5  (in  Blackeburne  hundred),  ad  hoc  manerium
adjacebant  28  liberi  homines,  tenentes  5J  hidaa  et  40carucatas  pro
28  maneriis.

18.  Examples — "Domesday  and  Beyond,"  116  f.


368  THE  GROWTH  OF  THE  MANOR

19.  Maiiland,  "  Manorial  Rolls  "  (Selden  Soc,  ii.),  49,  as  to  the
honoiir  of  Broughton  belonging  to  the  Abbey  of  Ramsey.  In
Domesday  Brougliton  is  entered  as  one  of  the  ordinary  manors  of
the  Abbey. Dd^  i.  204.

20.  Comp.,  e.g.,  the  description  of  Horseth,  Cambridgeshire  in
the  Rot.  Hundr.,  ii.  420  ff ;  with  Inqu.  Cantabr.  29  fE ;  and  Dd.  i.
103,  b;  198;  199,  b.

21.  Dd.  i.  230. Cf.  "  Domesday  and  Beyond,"'  115.

22.  In  these  cases  the  villata  or  township  appears  as  the  body  of
tenants  in  the  manor  in  contrast  with  the  lord  and  his  stewards.
Maitland,  "  Manorial  Rolls,"  36,  90,  98,  etc.

23.  "  Domesday  and  Beyond,"  367.

24.  The  Aston  and  Cote  case.  "  Villainage  in  Engl.,"  392,  450.
Maitland  "  Law  Quart.  Rev.,"  ix.  216  ff.

26.  "  History  of  English  Law,"  i.  599  ff.

NOTES  TO  CHAPTER  II

1.  Bracton,  f.  432,  C. "  History  of  Engl.  Law,"  i.  212  f¥.

2.  Britton,  ii.  13  :  Villenage  est  tenement  de  demeynes  de  chescun
seignur,  bailie  a  tenir  a  sa  volunt6  par  vileins  services  al  oes  le
seiernur.

3.  "  Hist.  Engl.  Law,"  i.  333.

4.  "  lb.,"  i.  335.

5.  Two  conflicting  currents  may  be  traced  in  the  law  on  tliis
subject :  the  feudal  and  the  public  one,  if  one  may  be  allowed  to
use  the  latter  expression.  The  writ  cessavit  per  hiennium,  although
suggested  in  form  by  Canon  law,  proceeds  in  substance  from  the
feudal  notion  that  a  fief  is  a  tenancy  held  under  certain  conditions
and  liable  to  forfeiture  if  these  conditions  are  not  fulfilled.  On
the  other  hand  the  Royal  Courts  were  apt  in  their  exercise  of  early
Common  Law  to  regard  the  holder  of  a  free  tenement  as  endowed
with  a  right  independent  of  the  feudal  nexus,  and  to  treat  the
enforcement  of  feudal  services  as  if  they  were  personal  obligations
guaranteed  by  a  gage.

6.  "  Hist.  Engl.  Law,"  i.  288,  299,  332.

7.  Maitland,  "  Manorial  Rolls,"  29,  39,  121,  122.

8.  "  Villainage  in  England,"  371.

9.  Madox,  "  Formtdare  Anglicanum,"  54.

10.  The  distinct  formulation  of  the  view  that  the  lord  is  the  real
owner  of  the  waste  belongs  to  the  later  half  of  the  feudal  period.

11.  The  lords  often  recognised  binding  customs,  even  when  they
seek  to  enforce  their  private  rights:  e.g.,  the  formulae  in  use  when
a  trespass  in  the  lord's  private  wood  was  brought  to  the  notice  of  a
manorial  coiu't  are  indirectly  characteristic  of  the  force  of  custom
in  regard  to  common  of  pasture  and  wood.  Maiiland,  "  Comt
Baron" (Selden Soc,  iv.), 43: des  arbres  coupes  en  le  boys  les


NOTES  369

seignur  ;  le  forester  ly  aresona  e  demanda  par  ky  counge  il  coupa
eel  cheyne  ;  e  il  y  respondit  et  dit  que  ben  ly  lust  cele  cheyne  couper
ou  autre  merine  illukes  prendre  ans  i  com  de  la  commune  que  est
appurtenant  a  son  franc  tenement ;  le  forester  ly  respondit  et
dit  que  ces  fu  le  seueral  boys  le  seignur.  lb.  41  :  de  bestes
pestes  en  le  pre  le  seignur — e  pur  ceo  a  tort,  que  la  ou  il  ad  suffi-
saunts  pasture  en  la  commune  de  a  taunt  de  bestes  et  de  animalz
com  il  ad  e  com  il  appent  de  auer  solom  le  fraunc  tenement  que
il  tent  de  ly  en  meme  la  ville.  In  both  cases  the  contention  is
between  a  lord  and  his  free  tenant,  but  it  starts  from  the  contrast
between  the  rights  of  the  lord  in  regard  to  land  held  in  severalty
and  his  position  as  to  commons  where  the  customary  apportionment
of  usages  holds  good.

12.  A  Domesday  example  of  pasnagivun  as  a  payment.  Dd.,  i.
154b.

13.  A  conspicuous  instance  may  be  found  in  the  account  of  a
trial  as  to  the  open  fields  of  Tilgerdesley,"  Villainage  in  England,"
230.

14.  Maitland,  "  Manorial  Courts,"  170  ;  Ricardus  juvenis  custos
porcorvun,  deputatus  per  totam  villatam  in  misericordia,  quia
pascebat  plures  porcos  quam  habere  debet  in  separedi  cmn  porcis
domini.

15.  Seebohm  considers  the  consolidation  of  the  holdings  as  a
specific  result  of  manorial  organisation.

16.  Cartulary  of  St.  Peter  of  Gloucester  (Rolls  Series), iii.  213.

17.  e.g.  Elton,  "  Origins  of  the  English  People  ;  "  Pollock,  "  Land
Laws,"  2  ed.,  148.

18.  See  my  paper  in  the  "  English  Historical  Review,"  April,  1904.

19.  "  Villainage  in  England,"  205  ; Hist.  Engl.  Law,"  i.  166.

20.  "  Hist.  Engl.  Law,"  i.  520.

21.  "  Hist.  Engl.  Law,"  i.  614.

j 22.  Maitland, "Manorial Courts," 167: Ricardus le  Fette in

I  misericordia, q\iia  accepit  . . .  garbas in autumpno per libera-

'  cionem  prepositi. Plegium  tocius  ville. Cf.  168.

'  23.  "Villainage  in  England,"  279;  Cf.  Dd.,  i.,  174,  b:  In  Bric-
stelmestvme  sunt  10  hidae.  Ibi  ;  10  villani  et  10  bordarii  cum
6  carucis,  et  arant  et  seminant  6  acras  de  proprio  semine.

24.  Maitland,  "  Manorial  Courts,"  168  :  dicunt  eciam  quod
i  Johannes  dictus  Lord  bonus  est  domino  messarius  ad  custodiendum
1  oves  matrices,  et  tota  villa  manucepit  pro  eo,  quod  bene  et  fideliter
!  et  cum  omnis  diligencia  eos  custodiet  et  respondebit  pro  eo.  Dicunt
I  eciam  quod  Johannes  fihus  JohannLs  atte  Grene  necessarius  est  ad
'■  custodiendum multones domini, et admissus  est, et tota  villa

manucepit  pro  eo.

25.  See  on  this  subject  Maclox,  Finna  burgi,  passim,  "  Hist.  Engl.
Law,"  i.  635.


370  THE  GROWTH  OF  THE  MANOR

26.  Tait,  in  his  remarkable  review  of  Domesday  and  beyond,
refers  to  the  example  of  Calne,  "Engl.  Hist.  Rev."  1897,  p.  774.  Cf.
Dd.,  i.  298  :  in  geldo  civitatis  sunt  84  carucatae  terrae,  et  unaquseque
geldabat  quantum  una  domus  civitatis.

27.  This  is  the  meaning  of  the  arrangement  as  understood  by
the  "  Hist.  Engl.  Law,"  i.,  618.  The  struggle  to  obtain  the  farm
may  be  illustrated  by  the  proceedings  which  took  place  in  Castor,
Lincolnshire.  Placita  Quo  Warranto,  411  :  presentatum  est
quod  cvrni  convenisset  inter  homines  qui  sunt  sokemanni  domini
Regis  de  soka  de  Castre  ex  una  parte  et  quosdam  P.M.  (et  aUos)  .  .
consokemannos  de  eodem  soka  ex  altera,  videlicet  quod  predictus
Petrus  et  alii  compromisertmt  et  se  obligaverunt  predictis  hominibus
quod  tantum  facerent  erga  dominum  Regem,  quod  dominus  Rex
faceret  eis  cartam  suam  quod  haberent  predictam  socam  ad  firniam,
per  quam  prius  ipsam  tenuerimt  habendum  et  tenendimi  ipsis
et  heredibus  suis  imperpetuxim  .  .  .  impetrarunt  cartam  ad  fii'mam
per  20  annos.  "Rot.  Hundr.,"  i.  265 :  Yongcastre,  soka  domini
Regis :  Dicimt,  quod  Yongcastre  est  dominicum  manerimn  domini
Regis,  et  est  in  manu  sua,  et  valet  per  annum  50  libra?,  tenetur
per  liberos  sokemannos.  Liberi  sokemanni  solebant  tenere  dictum
dominicum  manerium  in  capite  pro  38  libras  7  solidos  et  10
denarios  de  blanca  firma  ad  scakarium  domini  Regis  per  manum
eorundem  persolvenda,  et  modo  reddunt  pro  eadem  50  libras  per
scriptum  quod  habuerunt  de  domino  Rege  Henrico  ultimo,  patre
Regis  nunc.  "  Rot.  Hundr,"  i.,  354  :  vUla  de  Graham  tenetur
per  liberas  sokemannos  eodem  modo  quo  dominus  Johannes  Rex
Angliae  eam  tenuit.  Manors  held  by  villains  in  Siu-rey,  T.  R.  E.
and  T.  R.  W.,  "  Victoria  County  History,"  290,  291  (Dd.,  i.,  34,
36  b).  Dd.,  i.  127.  (Wellesdene)  :  hoc  manenmi  tenent  villani  ad
firmam  canonicorum  Cf.  Dd.  Ill,  5,  7,  67.

28.  "  Villainage  in  England,"  360.

29.  Maitland,  "Manorial  Courts,"  172:  Ad  istam  curiam  venit
tota  commixnitas  villanorum  de  Bristwalton  et  de  sua  mera  et
spontanea  volimtate  sursum  reddidit  domino  totum  jus  et  clamium
quod  idem  villani  habere  clamabant  racione  commune  in  bosco
domini  qui  vocatur  Hemele  et  landis  circumjacentibus,  ita  quod
nee  ipsi  villani  nee  aHqui  tenementa  sua  in  postenma  tenentes  aliquid
juris  vel  clamei  racione  commxuie  in  bosco  predicto  et  landis  circum-
jacentibus exigere,  vendicare  vel  habere  poterint  in  perpetuum.
Et  pro  hac  stu'sum  reddicione  remisit  eis  dominus  de  sua  gracia
speciaU  communam  quam  habuit  in  campo  qui  vocatur  Estfeld
qui  jacet  in  longitudinem  ad  viam  que  se  extendit  de  la  Rede  Putte
ad  boscvun  domini  qui  vocatur  Hamele.  Remisit  eciam  eisdem
communam  quern  habuit  in  bosco  eorundem  vUlanorima  qui  vocatur
Trendale,  ita  quod  de  cetero  idem  dominus  nulla  animalia  habeat
depascencia  in  communia  supradicta  sine  in  boscc  predicto.  Concessit


NOTES  371

eciam  dominus  quod  villani  quam  cicius  dominiis  tempore  pannagii
intret  boscxim  ad  pannagiandum  porcos  suos  in  bosco  suo  de  Hamele,
intrant  et  ipsi  cum  porcis  suis  usque  ad  diem  S.  Martini.  Prof.
Maitland  remarks  most  appropriately :  "  the  villains  of  Bright-
waltham,  men  who  were  reckoned  as  personally  unfree,  nevertheless
constituted  a  community  wliich  held  land,  whicli  was  capable  of
receiving  a  grant  of  land,  which  could  contract  with  the  lord,  which
could  make  exchange  with  the  lord."  Cf.  Petit  -  Dutaillis  "Studies
and  Notes  Supplementary  to  Stubbs'  Constitutional  History,"
translated  by  W.  E.  Rhodes,  Manchester,  1908,  pp.  4  ff.

30.  "Liber  Niger  de  Burgo  "  (Society  of  Antiquaries),  f.  191  :  tota
commvma  tocius  vilie  metit  una  die  in  principio  Augusti,  ita
scilicet  quod  quilibet  hominum  inveniet  ea  die  unum  hominem.
"  Rot.  Hundr.,"  i.  38-i  :  Thomas  ballivas  Regis  cepit  de  communitate
ville  de  HoUebeck  pro  eodem  felone  20  soL  "  Rot,  Hiuidr.,"  i.  275,
308,  -497,  etc. Cf. "  History  of  Enghsh  Law,"  i.  552.

31.  F.  ex.  "  Rot.  Hundr.,"  i.  54  :  ibivenit  baUivus  de  Kenet  .  .  .
et  tota  villata  dictima  Galfridum  et  Alanmn  verberaverunt,
vulneraverimt,  etc.

32.  "  Rot.  Hundr.,"  ii.  666.  Dicimt  quod  vUlata  de  Gomecestre
fecit  quamdam  purpresturam  super  regalem  viam  et  appropriavit
sibi  de  regali  via  ad  valenciam  tercias  partis  imius  rode.  Thomas
de  Berkele  inclusit  in  vUla  de  Enescerie  de  regali  via  et  de  communa
pasturi  ad  valenciam  tmius  rode.  Dicunt  quod  tota  villata  de
Eynesberia  fodit  in  regali  via  et  obstruxit  regalem  viam  ad  nocu-
mentum  tocius  patrie.  Pipe  Roll  of  12  Henry  II,  p.  49,  quoted
in  the  "  History  of  English  Law,"  i.  553  ;  the  township  of  Maltsby
owes  4  marks  for  having  ploughed  up  the  King's  highway.  The
authors  of  the  "History  of  English  Law"  think  that  the  fact  of
the  township  being  treated  as  an  amerciable  unit  may  have  been
produced  by  the  practice  of  fining  townships  for  neglect  of  police
duties.  But  in  the  end  all  these  references  woiild  still  lead  to  the
primary  position  that  the  township  was  a  real  unit  and  not  the
product  of casual  police  expedients.

33.  Massinrjherd,  "  Court  Rolls  of  Ingoldmells,"  43.  The  town-
ship presents  that  John  Mareis  has  injured  the  King's  way  to  the
detriment  of  the  whole  community.  A  certain  William  de  Boston
dug  a  certain  pit  tlirowing  the  land  upon  his  own  land,  injuring  the
common  way,  when  he  ought  to  have  thrown  it  upon  the  common
way.  "Rot.  Hundr.,"  i.,  386:  Prior  de  H.  inclusit  quandam
placeam  .  .  .  et  fecit  quoddam  conigearium  quod  solebat  esse
commune  tote  villate.

34.  "  History  of  English  Law,"  i.  622  :  the  community  is  not
incapable  of  suing,  but  it  rarely  sues,  because  it  has  nothing  to  sue
about.  The  fact  i)|  true,  but  the  explanation  hardly  adequate.
Each  community  had  a  variety  of  customary  rights  and
interests,  but  it  took  action  to  defend  them,  not  so  much  in  the
way  of  direct  litigation  before  the  Royal  Courts  as  by  manorial


372  THE  GROWTH  OF  THE  MANOR

procedure  (presentments,  distraints,  execution,  measures  against
fresh  intrusions  and  encroachments),  or  by  the  action  of  some
individuals  belonging  to  it,  or  by  that  of  its  lord.  These  were  the  most
convenient  ways  to  follow  in  view  of  the  individualistic  tendencies
of  the  Royal  Courts  and  the  customary  methods  of  manorial  courts.

35.  Placita  Quo  Warranto,  708.  Communitas  Villae  Salop  sum-
monita  fuit  ad  respondendum  quo  warranto  clamat  tenere  placita
corone  et  habere  retumimi  brevium  domini  Regis  et  wayf.  in
villa  Salop.  .  .  .  dominus  Henricus  pater  Regis  nunc  concessit
Burgens  ibus  Salop  quod  ipsi  habeant  omnia  placita  et  querelas
.  .  .  concessit  predictis  burgensibus  predictam  villam  ad  feodi-
firmam  (pro  44  marcis).

36.  Meitzen,  "  Wanderungen,"  etc.  Heusler,  "  Institutionen,  des
deutschen  Privatrechts,"  i.  266  ;  "  History  of  English  Law,"  i.
619  ; Maitland, "  Domesday  and  Beyond,"  350.

37.  Gierke,  "  Deutsches  Genossenschaftsrecht,"  ii.  68  ff.,  80  ff.,
90.

38.  Maitland, "  Domesday  and  Beyond," 341.

39.  The  juridical  and  historical  construction  given  to  these
matters  in  the  "  History  of  English  Law,"  and  in  Prof.  Maitland' s
"  Domesday  and  Beyond,"  starts  from  the  following  assimaptions  :
1.  The  economic  ties  of  open  field  cultivation  had  no  great  or  direct
importance  for  the  development  of  village  organisation.  2.  This
organisation  was  mainly  produced  by  seignorial  and  governmental
pressure.  3.  As  the  Common  Law  of  Royal  Courts  considers  society
mainly  from  the  point  of  view  of  individual  rights  and  relations
the  juridical  value  of  communal  ideas  and  institutions  is  very  small.
4.  The  phenomena  of  co-operation  disclosed  by  the  evidence  are
easily  accounted  for  on  the  principles  of  reality  and  automatism,
i.e.  of  a  constant  and  mechanical  repartition  of  duties  between
holders  of  certain  plots  of  land.  My  statement  of  the  details  of
township  organisation  proceeds  on  different  lines,  and  I  may  be
allowed  to  sum  up  its  main  features  in  the  following  manner.  L  The
basis  of  the  rights,  duties  and  organisation  of  the  township  is  to  be
found  in  the  economic  peculiarities  of  the  open  field  system.  2.
Seignorial  and  governmental  pressure  may  have  considerably
modified  and  hardened  the  township  organisation,  but  it  has  neither
produced  it  nor  can  it  account  for  manj'-  of  its  features.  3.  The
domain  of  manorial  legal  custom  has  as  much  to  be  reckoned
with  in  the  juridical  appreciation  of  the  village  community  as
that  of  the  Common  Law  of  Royal  Courts,  4.  Reality  and  auto-
matism may  account  for  a  great  deal  in  the  perpetuation  of  customs
and  practices,  but  they  are  entirely  unfit  to  explain  the  rise  and
changes  of  these  arrangements.  The  element  of  conscious  co-opera-
tion and  organisatioi^^,  cannot  be  eliminated  from  the  life  of  the
township. (Cf.  "  History  of  English  Law,"  i.,  677  ;  "  Domesday  and


NOTES  373

Beyond,"  142,  147,  149,  346,  350.)  It  is  not  without  interest  to
compare  the  EngUsh  evidence  with  similar  continental  cases.  The
comparison  with  the  German  Markgenossenschaft  has  been  often
made.  As  to  France,  see  Flach,  "  Origines  de  I'ancienne  France,"
103,  131,  137,  155,  332.

40.  "  ViUainage  in  England,"  279  ff.

41.  Ibid.,  288.

42.  Ibid.,  291.

43.  Ibid.,  307.

44.  Dd.,  iii.,  7  :  et  pro  10  hidis  de  terra  heraldi  quam  villani  regis
tenent  non  habet  R.  geldum. Cf.  19,  25,  67.

45.  "  Villainage  in  England,"  226.

46.  Ibid.,  328,  332.  Portions  of  the  demesne  conceded  to
small  tenants  were  sometimes  called  inlands  because  the  Old  English
for  demesne  had  been  inland.

47.  "  Abbreviatio  Rotulorum  Originalivmi,"  ii.  ;  5  Edw.  Ill,
Kanciae,  rot.  7,  p.  50.,  quoted  by  Prof.  Petrushevsky  in  his  "  History
of  Wat  Tyler's  Rebellion,"  ii.  181  (Russian).


NOTES  TO  CHAPTER  IH

1.  "  Domesday  and  Beyond,"  28  &.  Some  25,000  are  entered  in
Domesday.  On  Social  Classes  in  Domesday  Book,  cf.  "  English
Society  in  the  Eleventh  Century,"  pp.  403  ff.

2.  "Hist.  Engl.  Law,"  i.  413.

3.  Dd.,  i.  219b  (Nortone)  :  In  dominio  sxmt  7  hidae,  et  3  servi,
et  2  ancillae.

4.  Dd.,  i.  89  :  (Walintone)  .  .  .  de  ea  sunt  in  dominio  3  hidae,
et  ibi  4  carucae  et  31  servus,  et  53  villani  et  61  bordarius  cum
25  carucis.  Dd.,  i.,  61  (Hingepene)  :  in  dominio  sunt  4  carucae,
et  10  villani  et  15  bordarii  cum  7  carucis.  lb.  :  20  servi  et  molinum
de 12  solidonmi. Cf.  i.,  4,  b  ;  31b.

5.  Dd.,  i.  183  (Leine)  :  ibi  tres  serui  et  unus  liber  bouarius.
I.  183,  b  (Lenhole)  :  ibi  vmus  servuus  et  tres  bovarii  liberi.  Ibid.
(Alfetune)  :  ibi  4  hidae  geldabiles.  In  dominio  sunt  4  carucae  .  .  .
Ibi  6  ser\'i  et  5  bovarii.  The  last  example  shows  that  there  was  no
constant  ratio  between  the  number  of  bovarii  and  the  number  of
ploughs.  Round,  in  the  "  Victoria  County  History  of  Essex,"
i.  362.

6.  See  the  table  in /SeeJo^m's"  English  Village  Community."  There
are  no  servi  in  Yorkshire  or  in  Lincolnshire,  9  per  cent,  in  Kent,  but
24  per  cent,  in  Gloucestershire,  18  per  cent,  in  Devon.  The  reckon-
ing is  not  exact,  being  based  on  Ellis'  abstracts,  which  are  not
quite  trustworthy.  Still  the  figures  may  stand  for  purposes  of
general  comparison.  "  Victoria  County  History  of  Worcester-
Bhire,"  i.  276v


374  THE  GROWTH  OF  THE  MANOR

7.  Dd.,  i.j  38,  b.  (Brestone) :  ...  In  dominio  sunt  2  carucae,  et
1 1  bordarii  cum  4  carucis  et  dimidia.  Ibi  4  coliberti  et  3  molendina.
...  In  eodem  hundredo  est  Dene  quae  adjacet  huic  manerio. —
De  isto  manerio  (Brestone,  and  not  Dene,  as  Ellis  thought,  "  Intro-
duction," i.,  35)  habetur  in  Wallope  5  vUlani  et  tmus  servus,  et  unvun
moliniim  de  30  denariis,  et  2  carucae  in  dominio,  et  coliberti  (et
Bures),  ut  supra,  reddunt  consuetudinem  aliorum.  It  is  evident  that
the  coliberti  rendering  the  rest  of  the  dues  are  the  four  mentioned
in  Brestone.  They  are  connected  with  the  demesne  land,  as  the
serfs  in  other  instances,  and  the  gloss — buri,  geburs — describes  them
as  agricultural  labourers.  According  to  Ellis's  abstract,  858  coliberti
and  62  boors  are  mentioned  in  "  Domesday."

8.  The  emancipation  of  slaves  by  testament  took  mostly  the
shape  of  manumissions  of  whole  groups,  and  it  is  perhaps  to  this
practice  that  one  may  have  to  look  for  an  explanation  of  the  cohberti.

9.  Pollock,  Land-laws,  App.  202,

10.  "  Villainage  in  England,"  87.  Personal  manximission  comes
again  to  the  fore  in  the  fifteenth  and  sixteenth  centuries,  when
it  gets  to  be  the  means  of  drawing  profits  from  people  who  had
attained  a  tolerably  good  position  in  society.  Savine,  The  last  days
of  bondage,  "  Transactions  of  the  R.  Historical  Society,"  1903.

11.  Ellis,  "  Introduction  to  Domesday,"  gives  about  82,600
bordarii.

12.  Sometimes  the  bordarii  are  connected  with  the  demesne.
Dd.,  i.,  175,  b. :  In  Euesham  villa,  ubi  sedet  abbatia,  siint  et  fuerunt
semper  3  hidae  liberae.  Ibi  sunt  in  dominio  3  carucae,  et  27  bordarii
servientes  curiae,  et  habent  4  carucas.  i.,  173:  In  Tedford  habet
Rogerus  {Bigot)  in  dominio  quietam  ab  omni  consuetudine,  cui
adjacebant  t.  r.  E.  2  carucatae  terrae,  et  modo  similiter ;  semper
2  carucae  in  dominio,  20  bordarii,  2  servi,  1  molinum,  13  acrae
prati.  De  supradictis  bordariis  habet  Rex  scotum  de  suo  capite
tantum.  Cf.  "  Lgg.,  WUlelmi,"  17:  cil  ki  ad  aveir  champestre  30
den.  vaUant  dest  duner  le  den.  sein  Piere.  (Le  seignur  par  4d.
que  U  donrad,  si  erunt  quites  ses  bordiers  e  ses  bovers,  e  ses  serjanz).
The  survey  of  Middlesex,  which  assigns  hides  and  fractions  of
hides  to  the  divers  tenants,  gives  indications  as  to  the  state  of  the
bordarii  as  smaller  tenants,  e.g.,  Stibenhale — tenet  Hugo  de  Cemeres
subepiscopo  5  hidas  et  1  virgatam  terrae. — Ibi  unxis  villanus  de
dimidia  hida,  et  6  villani  de  3  virgatis,  et  2  bordarii  de  dimidia
virgata  et  3  cotarii  de  2  acris  et  dimidia.  In  eadem  vUla  tenet  Tixor
Brien — 1  villanus  de  dimidia  hide  .  .  .  et  alter  villanus  de  dimidia
hida  .  .  .  et  15  bordarii  de  10  acris.  In  eadem  viUa  tenet  Ranul-
fus  flambard  de  episcopo  3  hidas  et  dimidiam.  .  .  .  Ibi  in  dominio
2  carucae  et  3  carucae  villanorum.  Ibi  14  bordarii  de  1^  hida
(altogether).  ...  In  eadem  villa  tenet  Engelbricus  canonicus  de
episcopo  I  hidam  et  1  vergatam. Terra  est  1  carucae,  et  ibi  est


NOTES  375

in  dominio. Ibi  1  villanus  de  1  vergata  et  3  bordarii  quisque  de
7  acris. Cf.  Inquis.  Cantabrig.,  pp.  24,  51,  etc.

13.  About  5,070  cotarii  (or  coteri)  and  1,749  cotsets  according  to
EUis.  Dd.,  i.  127b :  In  Tuleham  22  cotarii  de  dimidia  hida
(altogether)  et  8  cotarii  de  suis  hortis.

14.  Ellis, "Introduction," 108,407  villani.

15.  "  Villainage  in  England,"  205  ff.

16.  In  the  famous  enactment  of  Edgar  (iv.,  8,  13),  as  to  the
witnessing  of  sales  of  cattle,  the  tunesmen  appear  as  members
of  the  township  in  general,  without  any  distinction  as  to  personal
status  or  size  of  holding.

17.  Ldebennann,  "  Gesetze  der  Angelsachsen,  Leges  Henrici,
i.,  70,  1  :  In  Westsexa  .  .  .  twyhindi.  id  est  villani,  wera  est  4
librae.  Quadripartitus,  Ine  18 :  Regis  geneat  (id  est  villanus
[colonus  fiscaUnus])  ;  22,  si  tuus  geneat,  id  est  [colonus  el]  vil-
lanus ;  Rectitudines,  2 :  Villani  (geneat)  rectum  est  varium  et
multiplex.

18.  Lgg.  Edw.  Conf.  12  :  Manbote  de  occisis  erga  dominos
quorum  homines  Lnterfecti  erant.  Manbote  in  Danelaga  de  villano  et
de  sokemanno  12  oras,  de  liberis  hominibus  3  marcas.

19.  According  to  Seebohm's  estimate  there  are  45%  of  soc-
men in  Lincolnshire,  16%  in  Norfolk,  5  %  in  Suffolk,  \  %
in  Kent,  none  in  the  Western  and  South-Western  counties.  The
imcertainty  in  the  use  of  these  terms  is  very  apparent  when  we
consider  the  sharp  contrasts  between  neighbouring  covmties  placed
in  substantially  the  same  conditions.  The  general  number  of  socmen
in  Domesday  is  about  23,000.

20.  The  relative  position  of  villains  and  of  socmen  at  an  early
period  is  best  seen  in  the  Black  Book  of  Peterborough  (Camden
Society).

21.  Lieberniann,  "  Gesetze  der  Angelsachsen,  Instituta  Cnuti
Canute,"  ii.  71,  3:  Liberalis  hominis  qui  habet  consuetudines  suas,
quem  Angli  dicunt  Ivinges  ]7egen  debitum  post  mortem  eius  (heregeat)
...  4  librae  ;  §  2  :  Mediocris  hominis,  quem  Angli  dicunt  Isesse  ]?egen
Ulius  heregeat  est  equus  et  arma,  aut  halsfang,  quod  est  10  solidi.

22.  Dd.,  ii.,  passim,  e.g.  f.  230,  b.  (Bertuna),  f.  272,  273  ;  Dd.,  iii.
99  (Hesterige)  r  In  ista  mansione  tenviit  quidam  liber  homo  9  agras
terre  et  2  agras  nemoris,  set  non  potuit  de  mansione  separari.

23.  E.g.  some  of  the  thanes  in  Yorkshire,  Dd.,  i.  330b,  or  in
Dorset,  i.  84b.  The  classical  example  of  thanes  burdened  with
some  work  is  the  Lancashire  one.  Dd.,  i.  269b.  The  Domesday
of  Lincolnsliire  supplies  a  curious  instance  of  socmen  thanes,  Dd.,  i.
337b  (Grantham).  Later  Anglo-Saxon  practice  admits  the
possibility  of  some  thanes  being  mere  twyhyndmen. See  Canute's


376  THE  GROWTH  OF  THE  MANOR

writ,  Thorpe,  "  Dipl.," 308 : ealle mine  )>egnas twelfhynde  and
twihynde. Cf.  Roundf "  Victoria  History  of  Essex," 357.

24.  Tiiere  is  a  remarkable  difference  between  Norfolk  and  Suffolk
in  this  respect.  The  Suffolk  Survey  in  Domesday  mentions  chiefly
liheri  homines  and  reckons  them  at  more  than  a  third  of  the  whole
number  of  tenants  (35  per  cent.),  whereas  in  Norfolk  we  find
rather  less  than  a  third  (32  per  cent.)  equally  divided  between  soc-
men and  liheri  homines.  The  entirely  different  treatment  of  these
classes  in  two  adjoining  counties  may  have  been  suggested  by
a  strong  admixture  of  Norsemen  in  Norfolk,  as  the  term  socman
is  chiefly  applied  in  coimties  where  the  Danish  invasion  had  left
conspicuous  traces.  According  to  Ellis's  computation  there  are
in  "  Domesday,"  10,097  hberi  homines,  and  1,287  homines  who
were  also  evidently  considered  free.  As  minor  varieties  of  free-
men the  censarii  and  the  riding  servants  must  be  mentioned.  E.g.
in  the  Glastonbury  Inquisitions  of  1189,  "  Villainage  in  England,"
167  ff.  Cf.  Dd.,  i.  298b.  (Sceltun,  Yorkshire)  :  De  hac  terra
tenuit  Torber  2  carucatas  cirni  halla  et  6  bovatas.  Ntmc  habet  sub
rege  unus  censorius,  et  stmt  ibi  duae  carucae  et  6  villani.  i.,  302,
b.  (Wiltone) :  Haec  tenuit  Eld  pro  uno  manerio.  Nunc  Thomas
habet  ibi  15  censores  habentes  7  carucas.  Dd.,  i.  174:b  (Poiwic) :
Ibi  fuerunt  8  radmans  .  .  .  habentes  inter  se  10  carucas  et  plures
bordarios  et  servos  cum  7  carucis.  .  .  .  Ipsi  radmans  secabant  vma
die  in  anno  in  pratis  domini  et  omne  servitium  quod  eis
jubebatur  faciebant.  As  to  radmen  or  rodknights,  see  "  Victoria
Coimty  History  of  Worcestershire,"  250,  251.  Some  of  the
tenants  entered  as  socmen  may  have  been  riding  servants.
Liber  ecclesiae  de  Burgo  (soc.  of  Antiquaries)  :  socomannus
facit  servicium  cum  equo  suo  pro  1  virgata.  Cf .  also  the  drenghs  in
Lancashire.  Dd.,  i.,  269,  b.  (Walinttme).  Ellis  reckons  369
radmen  in  Domesday  and  369  radchenistri.

25.  "  Villainage  in  England,"  64 ; "  Hist.  Engl.  Law,"  i,  404.

26.  Jastrow,  "Die  Strafrechthche  Stellung  der  Sklaven."

27.  "Villainage  in  England,"  68,  69.

28.  Ibid.  159; "Hist.  Engl.  Law,"  i.  404.

29.  "  Notebook  of  Bracton,"  pi.  1237 :  Dominus  Rex  non  vult
se  de  eis  intromittere. "  Villainage  in  England,"  46.

30.  "  Villainage  in  England,"  75  ff.

31.  "Notebook  of  Bracton,"  pi.  1041.  Maitland,  "Select  Pleaa
of  the  Crown  "  (Selden  Society),  pi.  3.

32.  "  Villainage  in  England," 157.

33.  Ibid.,  155 ; "  Hist.  Engl.  Law,"  i.  356.

34.  "  Gloucester  Cartulary  "  (Rolls  Series),  iv.  213,  214.

35.  "  Villainage  in  England,"  48  ff.

36.  Ibid.,  159.

37.  Ibid..  163.


NOTES  377

38.  Ibid.,  86,  87.

39.  Maiiland,  "Court  Baron"  (Selden  Soc.  iv.),  iii.  technical
formulas  of  procedure  in  use  in  the  King's  Court  employed  in  Manorial
Courts.  Prof.  Petrushevsky,  "  Wat  Tyler's  Rebellion  "  (Russian),
has  given  much  attention  to  tliis  feature  of  manorial  life.

40.  A  more  detailed  discussion  of  this  subject  may  be  found  in
my  paper  on  Agricultural  Services,  in  the  "  Economic  Review,"
1901.

41.  It  has  been  shown  already  that  the  formula  "  to  do  what
he  is  bid  "  does  not  necessarily  imply  an  uncertain  condition  of
servitude.  It  is  commonly  used  to  express  the  fact  of  being  at
tlie  lord's  disposal  as  to  tlie  quality  of  the  work  in  the  case  of  tenants
of  high  and  free  standing.  E.g.  Dd.,  i.,  174,  b. :  Willelmiis  f.
Corbuz  tenet  Dormestun.  Waland  tenuit  T.R.E.,  Ibi  5  hidae  et  in
Jominio  2  carucae,  et  2  villani  cvmi  14  bordariis  cum  3  carucis.
Predictus  Waland  secabat  prata  domini  et  omne  servitivma  quod
jubebatur  faciebat.  (Cf.  ib.  Poiwic).  i.,  219,  Rex  tenet  Lufenham
et  Scaletorp.  .  .  .  Ibi  sunt  12  sochemanni  et  16  bordarii  cum
presbytero  habentes  12  carucas. — Homines  operantur  opera  regis
quae  prepositus  jvisserit.

42.  Comp.,  e.g.,  the  description  of  Horningeseye,  Rot.  Hundr.,
ii.,  42,  with  Inqu.  Ehensis,  p.  103  (Hamilton).

43.  It  was  convenient  and  usual  to  inquire  whether  a  manor  htid
been  in  the  hands  of  the  Iving  at  the  time  of  the  Conquest  by  a
reference  to  Domesday.  Such  a  reference  did  not  create  a  title,
but  only  gave  the  means  of  ascertaining  it.  There  could  be  cases
like  that  of  King's  Ripton,  when  the  condition  of  Ancient  Demesne
may  have  been  established  by  other  methods  ("  Hist.  Engl.  Law,"
i.,  382).  But  in  one  way  or  the  other  the  claims  to  a  privileged
position  rested  entirely  on  the  status  of  the  tenantry  before  the
Conquest.

44.  "  Villainase  in  England,"  94  ff.

45.  Ibid.,  108^ ff.

46.  Bracton,  f.  7.

47.  "Villainage  in  England,"  114  ff.  The  Stoneleigh  Register
is  especially  instructive  in  the  distinctions  it  draws  between  the
different  classes  of  the  tenantry  in  Ancient  Demesne  manors.  I  take
this  occasion  to  protest  against  the  attempt  to  set  aside  the  evidence
of  this  survey  on  the  ground  of  its  being  a  late  fourteenth  century
document.  {Seebohm,  in  his  review  of  "  Villainage  in  England,"
"  English  Historical  Review,"  1893).  Though  compiled  in  the
second  half  of  the  fourteenth  century  the  Stoneleigh  Register  is
based  on  original  records  going  back  to  Henry  II's  time.  Its  infor-
mation agrees  well  with  other  evidence  on  the  subject  and  presents
some  features  of  ancient  demesne  in  a  very  clear  light.  As  far  as  I
am  able  to  judge  about  records  of  that  kind,  the  svu^ey  in  question


378  THE  GROWTH  OF  THE  MANOR

seems  to  me  to  be  one  of  the  most  valuable  documents  bearing  on  i
the  condition  of  mediaeval  peasantry,  and  it  is  only  to  be  wished  that
it  should  be  published.

48.  The  passage  of  "  Villainage  in  England  "  (p.  118),  in  which
I  ventured  to  criticize  the  motives  of  the  decision  of  Hengham  Ch.  J.
and  others  in  the  case  of  Tavistock,  has  called  forth  the  indigna-
tion of  Prof.  Ashley  and  of  Mr,  Leadam.  My  reviewers  have  not
taken  the  trouble  to  shew,  however,  why  we  have  to  reject  the
ruling  of  all  other  judges  in  similar  cases  in  order  to  maintain  the
authority  of  Hengham.  If  it  had  been  necessary  to  show  in
every  case  of  Ancient  Demesne  that  socmen  had  been  men-
tioned in  the  Domesday  descriptions  of  the  manors,  nine-tenths
of  the  Ancient  Demesne  trials  would  have  gone  against  the  tenants
claiming  the  privilege.  I  am  content  to  accept  the  reproof  for
imnecessary  severity  preferred  against  me  by  the  "  Hist.  Engl.
Law,"  i.,  382,  as  it  is  admitted  by  this  authority  that  the  reason
challenged  by  me  is  bad.

49.  "  Villainage  in  England," 198.

50.  "Rot.  Hundr.,"  i.,  201,  202.  "Notebook  of  Bracton,"
pi. 1334.

51.  Socage  is  termed  by  the  "  History  of  English  Law  "  the
residuary  tenure — quite  appropriately,  if  by  residue  is  meant  not
an  adjunct,  but  the  basis  from  which  other  more  complicated  con-
ditions proceed.

52.  "  Villainage  in  England,"  186,  187.

53.  lb.,  191.

54.  lb.,  319.

55.  "  Villainage  in  England,"  323.

56.  "  Hist.  Engl.  Law,"  i.  600.

57.  "Placita  Quo  Warranto,"  12:  Idem  comes  (Humfridus  de
Bohun)  cognoscit  quod  venire  faciat  decennarios  suos  extra  comita-
tum  Bedeford  usque  in  comitatum  Hertford  ad  presentandum
presentaciones  que  in  tumo  vicecomitis  et  in  visu  franci  plegii
presentari  debent,  quod  non  est  juri  consonum. Cf.  5,  7,  etc.

58.  "Rot.  Hundr.,"  i.,  205:  Mattsetis  de  Kingeslond  baUivus
Regis  noluit  tenere  hundredum  ad  deliberandum  quendam  pri-
sonem  nisi  haberet  dimidiam  marcam,  et  sic  evasit  a  prisona,  pro
qua  evasione  prior  ecclesiac  Xpi  Cantuariae  cepit  de  borgha  de  la
Leye  100  solidos,  et  pertinet  hujiismodi  ad  dominum  Regem.
"  Placita  Quo  Warranto,"  8  :  Abbatus  de  Waltham.  .  .  .  dicit  quod
revera  multociens  fuerimt  latrones  judicati  in  curia  sua  de  Alriches-
heye  et  suspensi  ad  fvu-cas  vicinorum,  quas  accommodaverunt,  et
post  ultimum  iter  evenit  quod  quidam  Thomas  latro  captus
fuit  cum  manuopere  .  .  .  et  in  curia  sua  judicatus,  et  pretextu
charte  Regis  in  qua  continetur  quod  habeat  Infangenetheof,  primo
tunc  levavit  furcas  sicut  eiene  Ucuit.


NOTES  379

59.  In  the  well  known  Domesday  case  of  socmen  borrowed  by
Count  Roger  from  Picot  the  sheriff  to  hold  pleas  (propter  placita
aaa  tenenda),  sua  may  stand  for  ejus,  or  for  eorum,  but  whether  it
be  the  first  or  the  latter,  the  existence  of  a  court  in  private  hands
has  to  be  surmised,  and  to  this  private  court  men  who  were  other-
wise entitled  to  go  to  the  public  coiirts  had  to  do  suit.

60.  "  Villainage  in  England," 368  ff.

61.  Massingherd,  "  Court  Rolls  of  Ingoldmells,"  Introduction.

62.  Maitland,  "  Manorial  Courts,"  163,  164.  Savine,  "The  English
Village  in  the  Age  of  the  Tudors,"  1904  (Russian),  thinks  that  the
(  ustomary  court  is  of  late  creation,  probably  coming  up  at  a  time
when  the  manorial  arrangement  was  going  to  pieces,  and  there
arose  the  necessity  of  settling  the  affairs  of  single  customary
tenants  in  places  where  there  were  no  free  tenants.  We  need
not  express  any  judgment  on  this  theory,  but  the  main  point  is
clear  :  whether  the  court  baron  or  the  customary  court  be  eli-
minated, there  remains  only  one  manorial  court,  besides  the  leet —
<^  court  which  deals  with  the  affairs  of  both  classes  of  tenants.


INDEX


Abbreviations: C. — Celtic; O.E. — Old  English; R. — Roman;

R.E. — Roman  Empire ; Dd. — Domesday  Survey.

The  nun^era  in  email  type  refer  to  the  rwtea.


Acreware,  153,  253

administrative  staff  of  manor,  35&-

360
aettleiding,  241-242
agnatic  principle  in  Celtic  society,

7-9.  10-11,  12-13

in  Teutonic  tribes,  135-137
agri  arcifinii,  54
agri  per  extremitatem  mensura  com-

prehensi,  57
agri  compascui  in  the  R.E.,  65
aillts,  24,  29

allotment  of  holdings,  176-178
alltuds,  29-30
arborenn,  90
argluyd,  33-34
artisans  in  R.  Britain,  45
assarts,  170-173,  260-261
assessment  in  the  R.E.,  57-61  ;  in

the  O.E.  and  feudal  period,  158-

161
automatism,  185-187,  306,  372-373
averagia,  3 28


'< Barton,  224,  282

( berewick,  224,  283

j b6cland,  142-144,  244-248,  209

; bol,  266

boldgetipl,  250

boneddig.  35

boon  works  (precariae),  327

bordarii,  337-338,  374,  352-353

borgaldor,  191,  271,  277

borgh,  138

Borough  English,  314-315

bovarii,  334,  373

bovate,  201,  208

bunda,  240

buri,  374

by-laws,  Scandinavian,  265  ; Eng-
lish, 185-189,  268-271


Caeth,  24-25

cartron,  17

carucate,  153-158,  252-255

casatus,  243

cattle  breeding,  1 80-1 81

Celtic  elements  in  R.  Britain,  39-42,

101-102
censores,  376
census,  57-58
centuriation,  54-55,  87
ceorl, Kentish, 123-124 ; West

Saxon  and  Mercian,  124-125,  130,

133  ; O.E.,  202,  278
chieftainship  in  C.  society,  31-34
clann  7-8

classes  of  C.  society,  35
chents,  C,  30-31
coaration,  19
coUberti,  335,  374
colonate  in  the  Eastern  provinces

of  the R.E., 81-82, 111-112,

113
colonate  in  R.  Africa,  79-81,  109-

iio
colonate,  general  character  of,  76-

79, 82-83
colonisation  in  the  feudal  period,

331
comitatus,  C,  34
common  appendant,  168
common  of  estover,  259-260
common  of  turbary,  169
commons,  166—170,  260
commimaHstic  origin  of  property  in

land,  18,  92
commutation,  329,  331,  353
Conquest, Anglo-Saxon, 117-120,

237
Conquest,  Norman,  291-292
cotsetle, 201, 278, 233, 338-339,

375
court  baron,  363-364,  379


382


INDEX


court,  customary,  364-365,  379
court  leet,  362-363,  378
cumal,  35

currency,  O.B.,  125,  237
.custom, manorial, 310-312, 368-
/ "369,  348-349,-361-362

custom  in  the  O.E. period, com-
munal, 171-173
cwide,  143,  248

Da,  34

dadenhudd,  22-23,  94

daer  ceile,  30

Danegeld,  227

demesne,  ancient,  354-356,  337-378

demesne  in  manor, 312-313,  369,

330-331
drengs,  220,  281,  376
dwellings,  tribal,  15

Earl,  O.E.,  124

ifKp^Tevcris,  25,  108

ctti/SoXt^, 60,  75

erfeland,  248

esne,  229,  285

estates in O.E. period, 221-223,

281-282,227-234
etheUng,  124

Feasting  duties,  223,  282

fine  7,  89

faellesjord,  263

folcland,  142-143,  244-245,  247

food rents, C, 28-29, 98-99

O.E.,  224,  282
forlands,  330-331
forspreca,  243
frankpledge,  250,  198,  277
fredus,  O.E.,  123,  237
freemen, economic condition of

Welsh,  25-28
fundi  in  the  R.E.,  61-65,  105,  86,

104  ; in  R.  Britain,  87,  1 14
fyrd,  127,  198,  217-218

Gafol,  232-233,  286

gafolearth,  225,  283,  233,  237,  286-

287,  327
gafolgelder,  127-128,  238,  240.
galanas,  10,  12
Ganerbschaften,  206
gavelkind, Irish, 20; O.E. and

Kentish,  141-142,  205-207,  278-

279;  315-318
gebur,  129-130,  133,  233-234
gedalland,  174


geneat,  238,  220,  232-233,  286
geneatland,  225
gerefa,  191-192,  272
gesithcundman, 125-126, 237-23^

128,  239,  217-218
gesettland,  225,  284
gUds,  O.E.,  146,  250,  212-213
gore,  262
greave,  190,  271
gribsjord,  263

Haga,  182,  267

haUmot,  365  .

hauldr,  131,  132  \

headland,  262

heafod  botl,  224-225,  283

herdsmen,  190,  271

herdwick,  224

heriot,  347-348

heywards,  communal,  190

hide as family holding, 141-142,

162-163
hide,  field,  161-164,  257-258
hide,  geld,  151-158,  252-255
hiwisc,  141-142,  250
hlaford,  126,  213
holdings,  alienation  of,  208-209
holdings,  single  succession  to,  207-

208
holdings, unity of, 204-205, 278,

313-315
hundred  courts,  O.E.,  193-194
hundreders,  358
hundredlands,  277
htmdreds,  O.E.,  144-145,  249-250
hunting  rights,  167,  259
husbandry,  general  character  of  C,

16-19

Immigration  into America,  Bryt-

tonic,  40-42,  100-10 1
inheritance  of  land,  12,  90^-91
inland,  225-227,  283-284,  373
intakes,  330
intermixture of strips, 175-179,

312-313
invasions, Anglo-Saxon, 117-120,

237,  145
invasions, Danish, 121-122, 131,

146,251
inware,  284

Jurisdiction,  O.E.,  private,  214r-216
jurors  of  the  hundred  coiirt,  O.E.,

193-194
jurors  of  the  vill,  193-194,  272-373


INDEX


383


Kin  and  descent,  23,  95

Labourers,  free,  220-230,  285

hvts.  O.E.,  124

landrica,  193,  216

latifundia,  69

Latin  words  in  Bryttonic,  44,  102

levsing,  132,  203

liberi  homines  in  Dd.,  299,  366-367,

342-343,  375-376
loanland,  O.E.,  209-210

Maeg-burg,  138

maegth,  138-141,  242-273

maer.  28,  29

maer  tref,  28,  38

maintenance,  right  of,  22-23,  94

manor  in  Dd.,  general  character  of,

299-302,  367
manor,  definition  of  feudal,  307
.  manors, O.E., 224-225, 282-283,

228-229,  231-234,  285-286
mammiission of O.E.  slaves,  203,

278,  332-333
manumission  of villaiiis,  335—336,

374  . ,

manure in medievEil agriculture,

181-182
marriages,  11,  90
massa,  64,  69
meadows,  173-174,  261
merchet,  347
methods  of  investigation  in  the  pre-

English  period, 3-7  ; in  the  B.

period,  43  ; in  the  O.E.  period,

185,  189,  194
molmen,  329,  357-358


Open  field  pasture,  179-182

open  field  system  in  R.E., 66-67

106,  84^85
open fields in medieval village

175-179,  263-267,  312-313
omum,  263
otting,  264,  266
ownership  seignorial,  308-312

Pagi  in  the  R.E.  C,  48-49,  103
paragium,  206-207,  279
pasture,  conununal,  169-170
patronage  in  the  R.E.,  70-73  ; in

the  O.E. period, 126-128, 12&-

130,212-213
pencenedl,  31-32
penteulu,  22,  95  .


pit  \'illages,  39

plou,  52,  104

plough,  R.  and  C,  44-45,  102-103

O.E.,  201,  2;>>.
priodaru,  96,  97
progenies,  13,  89

Radchenistres and radnaen, 220,

281,376
re-allotment  of  holdings, 178-179,

263-267
rebdragen  jord,  263
Reebning.  179,  263-267
reeve,  O.E.,  191-193,  271-272,  228-

229
reeve  of  the  feudal  period,  319-320,

369
reeveland,  225,  283-284
rents  in  kind,  O.E.,  231,  285,  32*-

329
rents,  O.E.,  money,  230
rents,  feudal,  money,  329
Romanisation of Britain, 37-38,

83-87,  221
Romanisation  of  continental  Celts,

4(i-48,  103
Romanisation  of  the  provinces,  46-

46
rotation  of  crops,  182-183
run  rig  system,  175
rural  life  in  the  R.E.,  47-48


Saer  ceile,  30

sake  and  soke,  214-216,  279-280

saltus,  70,  106-108

scot  and  lot,  196,  275

sept,  8

serfs  in  C.  society,  25-29

servi  casati  in  R'E..  76-77

servi  in  Dd.,  332-335

services  of  Celtic  freemen  "and  serfs,

28-29, 95
services  of  peasants  in  the  R.E.,  80,

IIO-III

services of tenants  in  the  feudal

manor,  326-328
^etene,  239
settlements, C, 16, 91  ; in R,

Britain, 85 ; in Anglo-Saxon

Britain, 140-142, 147-148,  184-

185
share  holding,  150-151
shifting  possession  of  arable, 174-

175, 261-262
sixhvndman,  125-126,  237-238
slaves,  C,  27-28; O.E.,  202-204,


384


INDEX


283,  229,  332-334  ; of  the  feudal
period,  332-335

small  proprietors  inR.E.,  67-68,  106
socage,  free,  356-357,  378
socmen  of  the  feudal  age,  356-357
soke,  215-216,  280,  303
Bokemen,  O.E., 215-216,  280  ; in
Dd.,  294,  299,  366-367,  341-342,

375
solskifte  or  solrebning,  265-266
subseciva,  65
sulimg,  155,  254,  262
surveying  in  R.E.,  54-55
systems  of  agriculture,  R.E.,  65-67  ;

O.E.,  180,  182

Taeog,  15,  25-29,  97
tenures  in  Dd.,  293-299
tenures,  free,  308-309,  368
--Htenures,  villain,  309-310

tenures  in  provinces  of  R.E.,  52-54,

55-57
terra  carucis  in  Dd.,  254-255,  156
terra  reipublicae  iuris,  244
terra  testamentalis,  209
terra  unius  familiae,  141,  243
territorial  subdi^dsions  of  C.  tribes,

26,  97-98
Teiitonic  elements  in  O.E.  history,

120-121
thane,  Scotch,  33  ; O.E.,  127,  128,

218-220,  280-281,  232; in  Dd.,

342, 375-376
thaneland,  283-284
township  and  taxation,  O.E.,  194-

196, 273-274
township  and  poUce,  198,  277
township  and  the  law  courts,  197-

198, 276-277
township moot, O.E., 194-196,

273-274
trev,  15

trevgyvriv,  19-20,  92-94
treweloghe,  20-22,  93-94
tribal  hidage,  250
tributarius,  243

fiin,  146-149,  251,  150-151,  252
tunc  pund,  29

tunesman,  133-134,  241,  339,  375
twelvehyndman,  125,  237-238
twyhyndman,  133,  241
tyddyn,  15


Uchelwr,  15
utwaru,  239,  284


Veislur,  282

vici,  49-52,  104,  82,  113

vill  as  a  community,  322-324

viU,  legal  constructions  of,  324-3i
372-373

vill,  farm  of  the,  320-322

viU  in  its  relation  to  the  manor,
304-306

vill,  solidarity  of  the  feudal,  318-
322, 362-365

village  community,  causes  of  for-
mation, 84-85

village  commimity,  general  charac-
ter of,  165-166,  258

village  courts  and  meetings, 187-
189, 268-271

villains  in  Dd.,  297-299,  367,  336-
337, 339-340,  375

villains, personal status of, 333,
I 344^348

vQlainage,  freemen  holding  in,  336,
I 345,  346
J  villainage,  legal  theory  of,  343-352,

377
villas  in  R.  Britain,  38-39,  69,  106
virgate,  201,  208


Wapentake,  144,  249

warland,  225-227,  284,  230,  285

waste, approvement of, 170-173,

260-261,  310-312,  368-369,  331
wealh,  126
week- work, O.E., 233-234, 286-

287  ;  feudal,  327-328
wele  (=gwely),  13,  20-22
weorthig,  183-184
wergelds, Kentish, 123, 236-237  ;

West  Saxon  and  Mercian, 125-

128,  237-238
wicneras,  228,  285
wite  theow,  202,  229
women  in  C.  society,  9-10,  90
women's  title  to  land  in  C.  society,

12,  90-91  ; in  O.E.  society,  143-

144,  248-249
woods,  168-169
woodwards,  190


Butler  &  Tanner,  The  Selwood  Printing  Works,  Frome,  and  London.


14  DAY  USE  _

LOAN  DEPT,


LD  2lA-60>n-3,re5
(F2336slO)476B


-f^--^g^^""


■111

CD3aSb236b
