OUTLINES  OF
HISTORICAL  JURISPRUDENCE

VOLUME  I
INTRODUCTION  -  TRIBAL  LAW


OUTLINES

OF

HISTORICAL
JURISPRUDENCE


BY


SIR  PAUL  VINOGRADOFF,  F.B.A.

CORPUS PROFESSOR OF JURISPRUDENCE IN THE
UNIVERSITY OF OXFORD


Volume  One
Introduction Tribal  Law


OXFORD UNIVERSITY PRESS

LONDON EDINBURGH GLASGOW NEW  YORK
TORONTO MELBOURNE CAPETOWN BOMBAY

HUMPHREY MILFORD
1920


Copyright,  1920

BY  OXFORD  UNIVERSITY  PRESS

AMERICAN  BRANCH


PRINTED IN THE UNITED STATES OF AMERICA


TO

ALBERT  VENN  DICEY

THIS  VOLUME  IS
DEDICATED

IN
ADMIRATION  AND  GRATITUDE


PREFACE

THE  introduction  to  this  work  has  grown  to  such  a
length  that  the  Preface  may  well  be  cut  short:  I  should
merely  like  to  explain  why  I  have  undertaken  a  most  com-
plicated task.  In  the  course  of  my  legal  and  historical
studies  one  great  problem  has  presented  itself  over  and  over
again — the  problem  of  the  relation  between  conditions  and
efforts,  between  aims  and  fate.  It  is  in  the  sphere  of  law
that  this  problem  assumes  its  most  definite  aspect.  Law,
both  customary  and  enacted,  is  intended  to  be  a  direction
of  conduct,  but  its  actual  application  is  a  compromise  be-
tween intentions  and  circumstances.  As  Aristotle  has
put  it,  we  have  to  take  account  in  human  affairs  both  of
what  is  desirable  and  of  what  is  possible.  From  this  point
of  view,  attempts  to  arrange  society  on  reasonable  lines
culminate  in  conceptions  of  jurisprudence,  while,  on  the
other  hand,  all  theories  of  jurisprudence  have  necessarily
to  start  from  some  basis  of  given  fact.  Some  knowledge  of
historical  jurisprudence  is  needed  by  historians,  because
it  helps  to  arrange  the  data  of  political  and  social  life  in
accordance  with  consistent  schemes  of  law.  For  lawyers
historical  jurisprudence  is  the  best  introduction  to  the
social  interpretation  of  the  innumerable  technical  rules
and  doctrines  of  their  profession.  Unfortunately  collabo-
ration between  jurists  and  historians,  though  highly  de-
sirable, is  not  often  achieved  in  practice.  Historians  have
not  yet  come  to  realize  that  private  law  may  be  more  im-
portant for  social  development  than  constitutional  arrange-
ments. And  as  for  lawyers,  they  often  have  to  be  content
with  the  stereotyped  statements  of  more  or  less  antiquated
textbooks.  There  is  nothing  for  it  but  to  step  into  the
breach  in  the  hope  of  reopening  the  discussion.  A  task
of  this  kind  is  naturally  beset  with  great  difficulties.  I
have  only  attempted  to  trace  its  outlines,  for  a  general

vii


PREFACE

survey  of  the  ground  seemed  primarily  wanted.  Many
particulars  may  have  to  be  rectified,  many  points  will  have
to  be  worked  out  in  greater  detail.  But  something  will
have  been  achieved,  if  readers  obtain  a  kind  of  bird's-
eye  view  of  the  subject.

It  is  to  be  hoped  that  a  second  volume,  on  the  Juris-
prudence of  the  Greek  City,  may  follow  without  much
delay.  Further  instalments,  though  contemplated,  are  not
yet  in  a  fit  state  to  be  mentioned  in  this  preface.

It  is  my  pleasant  duty  to  express  my  sincere  thanks  to
many  kind  friends  who  have  encouraged  and  supported
me  by  their  expert  advice.  I  am  especially  indebted  to
Professor  J.  A.  Smith  of  Oxford,  Professor  H.  D.  Hazel-
tine  of  Cambridge,  Miss  M.  A.  Czaplicka  of  Lady  Margaret
Hall,  Oxford,  Mr.  C.  K.  Allen  of  University  College,  Ox-
ford, Miss  Neilson  of  Mount  Holyoke  College,  Mass.  (U.  S.
A.),  and  Miss  M.  F.  Moor,  formerly  of  Somerville  College,
Oxford.


TABLE  OF  CONTENTS

INTRODUCTION
Part  I. Law  and  the  Sciences

CHAPTER

I. LAW  AND  LOGIC . . . .

II. LAW  AND  PSYCHOLOGY . . . . .  28

III.  LAW  AND  SOCIAL  SCIENCE ....  61

IV.  LAW  AND  POLITICAL  THEORY ....  84

Part  II. Methods  and  Schools  of  Jurisprudence

V. RATIONALISTS 103

VI. NATIONALISTS 124

VII. EVOLUTIONISTS 136

VIII. MODERN  TENDENCIES  IN  JURISPRUDENCE  . .  147

TRIBAL  LAW

Part  I. The  Elements  of  the  Family

I. SELECTION  OF  MATES 163

II. THE  MOTHER  AND  THE  FATHER . . .  188

III.  RELATIONSHIP  AND  MARRIAGE ....  203

Part  II. Aryan  Culture

IV.  ARYAN  ORIGINS 215

V. THE  PATRIARCHAL  HOUSEHOLD  ....  232

VI. THE  JOINT  FAMILY 262

VII. SUCCESSION  AND  INHERITANCE ....  274

Part  III. The  Clan  and  the  Tribe

VIII. THE  ORGANIZATION  OF  KINSHIP . . .  299

IX. LAND  TENURE 321

X. THE  LAW  OF  THE  TRIBAL  FEDERATION . .  344

ADDITIONAL  NOTE 370

LIST  OF  BOOKS  REFERRED  TO  IN  THE  VOLUME  373

INDEX  390


PAET  I
LAW  AND  THE  SCIENCES


CHAPTER  I
LAW  AND  LOGIC

WHY  should  there  be  a  special  study  of  jurisprudence?  JJy  ,a
Every  one  knows  why  there  should  be  a  study  of  law.  It  craft,
is  obvious,  for  instance,  that  in  order  to  draw  up  a  will,  or
to  enforce  claims  arising  out  of  an  agreement,  one  has  to
know  the  law.  Some  lawyers  will  say  that  they  must  attend
to  the  actual  rules  of  law  and  to  the  requirements  of  their
clients  and  have  no  time  to  read  books  on  general  topics.
But  the  craftsman's  point  of  view  can  hardly  be  carried
very  far.  Even  in  pleading  as  to  the  rescission  of  a  con-
tract you  may  have  to  rely  on  considerations  of  morality
and  of  public  utility.1  It  will,  I  suppose,  be  conceded
that  a  wide  range  of  culture  and  knowledge  is  desir-
able in  the  case  of  the  legislator  and  of  the  judge;
but  then  barristers  and  solicitors  prepare  the  way  for  judi-
cial decisions  and  deal  with  the  same  elements  of  right  as
the  judges,  although  their  arguments  are  presented  from
more  one-sided  points  of  view.  Some  practising  lawyers
will  nevertheless — as  Leslie  Stephen  has  put  it — consider
all  theory  of  law  with  "serene  indifference";  if  so,  they
will  have  to  be  left  to  their  own  devices.  Jurisprudence
addresses  itself  to  those  who  study  law  as  a  part  of  a  sys-
tem of  knowledge.

The  subject  has  an  interest  of  its  own  apart  from  any Theoretical
consideration  as  to  immediate  utility. Law  is  one  of  the  sciences.  e<
great  departments  of  human  thought  and  of  social  activity.
As  such,  it  claims  the  attention  not  only  of  the  jurist  but
of  the  student  of  social  science,  of  the  philosopher  and,  in
a  wider  sense,  of  every  educated  man. We  may  systematize
our  knowledge  of  the  world  from  two  different  points  of
view :  either  by  reducing  complex  phenomena  to  their  causes
and  ascertaining,  as  far  as  possible,  the  laws  of  their  recur-
rence, or  by  using  our  knowledge  as  a  guiding  light  for  our

1  An  interesting  survey  of  the  influence  of  othical  considerations
on  early  Common  Law  and  Equity  is  given  in  AMES'  lecture  on  Law
and  Morals,  Lectures  on  Legal  History  (Cambridge,  Mass,  1913),
pp  435 tf

3


4 INTRODUCTION:  PART  I: LAW  AND  THE  SCIENCES

actions.  In  the  first  direction,  when  we  study  things  as
they  are,  there  arise  theoretical  sciences,  such  as  mathe-
matics, physics,  economics.  In  the  other  direction,  when
we  study  the  means  of  making  things  as  we  want  them
to  be,  we  have  to  turn  to  applied  sciences,  such  as  engi-
neering, medicine,  law.  Comparing  laws  with  medicine,  we
may  say  that  both  aim  at  providing  a  rational  background
for  a  vast  body  of  practical  precepts;  both  are  indispens-
able for  the  intelligent  exercise  of  an  art;  both  derive
their  teaching  from  the  application  of  various  sciences  to
the  concrete  problems  of  health  and  disease,  of  civil  inter-
course and  crime.  The  physician  combines  for  a  specific
purpose  doctrines  of  physics  and  chemistry,  of  biology  and
psychology;  the  lawyer  draws  on  the  study  of  logic,  of
psychology  and  of  social  science  in  order  to  co-ordinate
and  explain  legal  rules  and  to  assert  rights.  Our  enumera-
tion of  the  sciences  on  which  the  lawyer  has  to  rely  may
seem  scanty  at  first  sight.  Why  is  ethics  not  mentioned
among  them,  why  not  history  and  philosophy  ?  As  to  ethi-
cal doctrines,  they  are,  of  course,  closely  related  to  juris-
prudence, but  they  present  themselves  to  jurists  chiefly  in
their  practical  aspect  as  influencing  conduct.1  In  this  sense
the  data  of  ethics  form  a  most  important  chapter  of  psy-
chology, as  the  operations  of  the  mind  bearing  on  conduct.
Of  the  connection  between  history  and  jurisprudence  we
shall  have  to  speak  on  many  occasions.  It  may  be  sufficient
to  state  now  that  history  cannot  be  contrasted  with  the
theoretical  study  of  law  because  it  provides  one  of  the
essential  elements  of  legal  method.  As  for  philosophy,  its
influence  is  all-pervading  and  is  bound  to  make  itself  felt
in  the  treatment  of  any  subject:  it  forms,  as  it  were,  the
atmosphere  for  all  scientific  studies.  At  the  same  time  it
cannot  and  ought  not  to  direct  the  investigation  of  any
particular  point,  for  the  very  reason  that  it  aims  at  a
synthesis  of  all.  Every  jurist  is  left  to  face  the  problems
of  law  in  his  own  way,  and  by  such  help  as  he  can  derive
from  those  branches  of  special  knowledge  which  have  a

i  Cf.  on  the  relation  between  morals  and  law,  LORD  HALDANE,
Higher  Nationality,  an  address  delivered  before  the  American  Bar
Association  in  Montreal  in  1913,  pp.  22  ft.


I: LAW  AND  LOGIC  5

direct  bearing  on  legal  questions. And  these  are  logic,
psychology  and  social  science.1  Fallacies

Logic  supplies  the  formal  framework  for  all  varieties  of
reasoning,  and  its  relation  to  legal  thought  is  obvious.  The
rules  of  reasoning  are  certainly  not  different  in  law  from
the  rules  recognized  in  the  ordinary  interchange  of  thoughts.
In  this  sense  the  usual  rules  as  to  concepts  and  conclusions
remain  in  full  force  as  regards  legal  deductions.  Indeed,
juries  attending  to  the  arguments  of  parties  have  to  be  care-
ful not  to  be  misled  by  fallacies.  Archbishop  Whateley,  for
instance,  has  very  appropriately  illustrated  the  sophistical
trick  called  ignoratio  elenchi  (irrelevant  conclusion)
from  its  frequent  use  by  barristers.2  This  sophism  consists
in  substituting  for  the  proposition  to  be  proved  some  other
proposition  irrelevant  to  the  problem  of  proof.  Another
fallacy  much  favoured  by  sharp  pleaders  is  the  substitution
of  the  absolute  affirmation  for  a  conditional  one  (a  dicto
secundum  quid  ad  dictum  simpliciter) .  In  an  amusing
little  book,  published  in  1588,  a  versifier  of  Spenser's  circle,
Abraham  Fraunce,  who  happened  also  to  be  a  barrister  of
Gray's  Inn,  treats  of  a  "lawyer's  logicke"  on  a  pattern
supplied  by  Pierre  la  RameVs  textbook  of  formal  logic.
He  illustrates  his  teaching  by  alternate  references  to  agri-
cultural practices,  or  other  occurrences  of  daily  life,  and  to
cases  from  the  Year  Books,  the  Abridgements,  Dyer  and
Plowden.  The  passage  concerning  the  secundum  quid  fal-
lacy is  worth  quoting : 3  the  legal  illustration  is  taken  from  a
trial  in  which  the  question  arose  whether  the  issue  of  a
man  was  entitled  to  inherit  property  granted  in  special  tail
to  a  man  and  his  wife  and  their  issue.  "A  double  clench
(sophism)  lurketh  in  this  place,  one  of  composition,  another
of  division,  for  composition  thus.  Humfrey  Crowther  is  a

1  WUNDT,  Logik,  II,  2,  p.  24.

2  MILL,  Logic,  II,  pp.  468,  469 :  "  If  any  one  has  pointed  out  the
extenuating  circumstances  in  some  particular  case  of  offence,  so  as
to show that it differs widely from the generality of the same
class,  the  sophist,  if  he  finds  himself  unable  to  disprove  these  cir-
cumstances, may  do  away  with  the  force  of  them,  by  simply  referring
the  action  to  that  very  class,  which  no  one  can  deny  that  it  belongs
to,  etc."

8  The  Lawyer's  Logicke,  p.  64.


6 INTRODUCTION:  PART  I:  LAW  AND  THE  SCIENCES

good  fiddler,  therefore  he  is  good.  And  this  fallacy  is  from
the  whole,  because  those  two  things  so  joined  together
seem  to  make  a  whole,  whereupon  afterwards  the  part  may
be  concluded,  as  though  in  this  example  Humfrey  Crowther
were  a  whole  integral  thing,  made  and  consisting  of  these
two  parts,  goodness  and  fiddlery.  Some  others  call  this
a  dicto  secundum  quid  ad  dictum  simpliciter,  when  we
apply  that  absolutely  and  generally  which  was  spoken  in
part  and  in  respect,  as  here  Humfrey  is  called  good,  not
generally,  for  his  good  conditions,  but  particularly  in
respect  of  his  gitterne.  In  9  Henry  VII  19a,  'he  who  is  heir
to  father  and  mother,  is  heir  to  the  father,  and  yet  to  say
that  the  issue  of  a  husband  from  his  second  wife  in  the
case  of  special  tail  is  heir  to  father  and  mother  generally
and  absolutely  would  not  follow,  because  the  father
could  have  had  a  son  by  his  first  wife.  Vavisor,  J.:  state
the  major  premise,  and  the  fallacy  will  be  apparent:  he,
who  is  heir  to  father  and  mother  joined  is  heir  to  father
and  mother  each  separately — and  this  is  false/  " l
Logical  Of  course,  it  is  not  only  sophistical  traps  that  may  be

studied  in  lawyer's  pleadings,  but  also  perfectly  justified
operations  of  reasoning.  Fraunce,  for  instance,  devotes
some  of  his  first  chapters  to  discussing  the  relation  between
cause  and  effect,  and  classifies  causes  according  to  the  best
approved  logical  patterns  of  his  time.2  Under  the  heading
" efficient  cause"  he  refers  to  a  curious  case  reported  in
Plowden's  Commentaries,  in  which  the  widow  of  a  man
who  had  committed  suicide  contested  the  forfeiture  of  his
estate  on  the  ground  that  a  dead  man  could  not  be  charged
with  felony.  The  reply  was  that  death  was  only  an  effect,
while  the  cause  of  death  consisted  in  the  felonious  act  com-
mitted during  lifetime.  "The  cause  efficient  either  maketh
or  destroyeth.  Maister  Plowden,  folio  262a.  They  said  that

ilssint  in  9  Henry  VII,  19a:  "  Cestuy  qe  est  heire  al  pere  et
mere,  est  heyre  al  pere,  mea  Tissue  del  baron  et  sa  seconde  feme
donees  in  special  1  tayle  est  heyre  al  pere  et  mere,  ergo  il  est  heyre
generalement  al  pere  et  mere  et  simpliciter,  non  sequitur,  car  le  pere
poet  aver  fils  par  le  primer  feme.  Vavisor  expone  mayorem  et
apparebit  fallacia.  Cestuy  qe  est  heyre  al  pere  et  mere  conjunctim
est  heyre  al  pere  diuisim,  or  ceo  est  false."

2  Lawyer's  Logicke,  p.  12.


I:  LAW  AND  LOGIC  7

the  forfeiture  would  be  connected  with  the  time  of  the  orig-
inal offence  which  caused  death,  and  this  is  the  putting  him
into  water,  and  this  was  done  in  his  lifetime,  and  this  was
a  felony.  .  .  .  Thus  Sir  James  Hales  being  alive  caused
the  death  of  Sir  James  Hales,  and  the  act  of  the  live  man
effected  the  death  of  the  dead  man. ' '  *

Although  every  rule  of  logic  may  be  illustrated  from
legal  practice,  on  the  other  hand  there  is  a  considerable
admixture  of  technical  requirements  which  differentiates
this  mode  of  thought  from  other  species  of  the  same
kind.

As  the  conclusions  of  legal  reasoning  are  directly  trans-
latable  into  practical  results,  and  as  they  influence  the
status,  rights,  reputation  and  possibly  the  existence  of
persons,  law  is  not  satisfied  with  the  general  guarantees  of
good  logic  against  fallacies  and  errors  of  judgment,  but
imposes  rules  devised  to  fit  the  average  requirements  of
fairness  and  common  sense,  even  at  the  risk  of  brushing
away  exceptional  claims  and  imposing  minor  hardships.
This  modification  of  the  logical  framework  is  very  notice-
able in  procedure.  The  history  of  Common  Law  pro-
cedure 2  presents  special  opportunities  for  watching  the
peculiar  combination  between  rules  of  logic  and  the  re-
quirements of  practical  life  as  conceived  and  formulated
by  lawyers.  The  reason  is  that  the  legal  profession  did
not  strive  in  this  country  to  construct  a  purely  technical
apparatus  for  conducting  trials,  but  built  up  its  adminis-
tration of  justice  as  a  compromise  between  the  professional
element  of  the  Bench  on  one  side,  and  the  popular  element
of  the  jury  on  the  other.  The  first  was  supposed  to  deal  ex-
clusively with  the  law  in  the  cases,  while  the  latter  was
called  up  originally  for  a  verdict  as  to  the  facts  of  the

1  Issint  que Sir  James Hales esteant  en vie  causa Sir James
Hales  estre  mort,  et  Tact  del  vive  home  fist  le  mort  del  mort  home.
Cf.  PLOWDEN,  Comm.,  cd.  of  1761,  Hales  v.  Petit,  Mich.  4/5  Eliz.  in
C.  B

2  An excellent introduction to  the  special treatment of logical
problems  in  Common  Law  is  provided  by  THAYEB,  A Preliminary
Treatise  on  Evidence  in  Common  Law. On  the  technical  rules  of
reasoning  in  Equity,  see  LANGDELL,  Summary  of  Equity  Pleading.
Cambridge,  Mass.,  1877.


8 INTRODUCTION:  PART  I: LAW  AND  THE  SCIENCES

trial.  Without  concerning  ourselves  with  the  rather  intri-
cate development  of  this  fundamental  opposition  between
law  and  fact,  let  us  notice  that  the  introduction  of  popular
opinion,  as  a  factor  in  deciding  the  trial,  made  it  necessary
for  the  judges  to  take  special  care  that  the  moves  of  the
opponents  in  the  legal  struggle  should  be  reduced  to  their
simplest  and  most  regular  expression.  It  was  impor-
tant in  a  contest  before  the  Court  that  the  parties  should
not  be  allowed  to  beat  about  the  bush  and  to  confuse
the  jury  by  irrelevant  assertions  and  arguments.  Histori-
cally the  growth  of  Common  Law  procedure  was  chiefly  di-
rected towards  keeping  pleadings  within  reasonable  bounds
and  conducting  them  along  definite  logical  avenues.  The
Year  Books  show  how  the  judges  of  the  fourteenth  and
fifteenth  centuries  gradually  developed  the  technical  frame-
work of  pleading,  a  framework  which  in  spite  of  a  certain
artificiality  and  rigidity  proved  an  excellent  school  for
conducting  disputes  in  an  orderly  way.  It  stood  the  test
of  practice  so  well  that  it  remained  in  force  until  the
middle  of  the  nineteenth  century,  and  towards  the  end
its  principles  found  an  admirable  exponent  in  Sergeant
Stephen.  His  textbook  on  pleading  deserves  attention  even
now,  though  a  great  part  of  the  technical  framework  has
been  removed  in  deference  to  the  unconventional  habits  of
discussion  in  our  democratic  age.1  The  principal  feature
of  this  system  was  the  joining  of  issue,  the  reduction  of
matters  in  dispute  to  a  definite  contradiction  between  asser-
tion and  denial,  between  yes  and  no.  If  A  claimed  the
payment  of  a  debt  from  B,  the  latter  could  traverse  the
plaintiff's  declaration  by  denying  that  he  owed  the  money.
Or  else  B  might  demur  and  challenge  a  decision  on  the
ground  that  the  claim  was  based  on  a  wagering  transaction
and  void  at  law.  A  third  possibility  would  arise  in  case
the  defendant  confessed  the  fact  alleged  by  the  plaintiff,
but  avoided  the  claim  arising  out  of  it  by  pleading  a  valid
exception:  e.g.,  A  brings  an  action  against  B  for  distraining
a  horse  of  his ;  B  confesses  the  distress,  but  pleads  that  the

i  On  modern  pleading  as  shaped  by  the  Acts  of  1834,  1852,  1873,
etc.,  see  ODGEBS  on  Pleading  (8th  ed 1918),  pp.  155,  171,  175.


I:  LAW  AND  LOGIC  9

horse  had  broken  into  his  close  and  was  grazing  there  to  his,
the  defendant's,  damage.

It  is  obvious  that  the  grouping  of  allegations  within  cer-
tain classes  by  traverse,  demurrer,  or  confession  and  avoid-
ance made  it  possible  for  the  Courts  to  proceed  with  great
regularity  and  logical  accuracy.  The  detailed  rules  as  to  the
application  of  demurrer,  traverse  and  avoidance  were  in
keeping  with  the  main  object  of  reducing  the  dispute  to
the  simplest  forms  of  logical  contradiction.  With  this
object  in  view  the  issue  was  allowed  to  be  taken,  according
to  strict  rule,  only  on  one  single  point,  although  in  many
cases  there  may  have  been  several  debatable  points  in  the
trial.  Yet,  in  order  not  to  confuse  the  mind  of  the  jury
by  a  multiplicity  of  issues,  one  of  these  points  had  to  be
selected  by  counsel  for  the  defence  for  a  special  issue.1

The  same  principle  of  regularity  in  the  struggle  underlies
such  rules  of  pleading  as  that  by  demurring  to  a  point  of
law  a  party  admits  the  truth  of  an  opponent's  allegations
as  to  fact,2  or  that  in  traversing  an  accusation  the  denial
must  be  a  denial  of  fact,  and  not  a  defence  on  the  ground
that  an  act  was  not  wrongful,3  or  again,  that  two  affirma-
tions do  not  make  a  good  issue.4  This  last  rule  looks
rather  cryptic  at  first  sight.  It  is  really  a  branch  of
another  and  wider  rule  prohibiting  argumentative  traverses,
that  is,  traverses  based  on  inference  instead  of  direct  denial.
For  instance,  if  it  were  alleged  by  the  plaintiff  in  a  trial
that  a  party  died  seised  in  tail  and  the  defendant  traversed
the  declaration  by  alleging  that  he  died  seised  in  fee,  this
would  not  be  good  issue,  because  the  denial  would  not  be  a
direct  one  but  based  on  the  inference  that  he  who  held  in
fee  did  not  hold  in  tail.

The  Acts  of  1852  and  1854  and  the  Judicature  Acts  of
1874  and  1876  have  freed  counsel  from  the  shackles  of
a  rigid  system  of  pleading.  This  has  made  litigation

iCoke  upon  Littleton,  126a,  note  4.  As  to  the  relation  between
general  and  special  issues,  see  WILLISTON'S  preface  to  his  edition  of
Stephen  on  Pleading,  pp.  4  ff.

2  Stephen  on  Pleading  (2nd  ed.),  pp.  176  f.

a  Ibid.,  p. 180.

*  Ibid.,  pp.  423  f.


10 INTRODUCTION:  PART  I:  LAW  AND  THE  SCIENCES

much  more  pliable  and  more  dependent  on  intuition  and
imagination — with  all  their  good  and  bad  characteristics.
On  the  whole,  these  changes  make  for  an  increase  in  sub-
stantial justice.  But  it  must  be  admitted  that  they  have
lessened  the  hold  of  pure  logic  on  the  administration  of
the  law,  in  as  much  as  they  have  removed  many  of  the  firm
pegs  from  which  compelling  deductions  could  be  started.
Evidence.  A  similar  process  may  be  observed  in  a  domain  closely

connected  with  pleading,  namely,  in  the  law  of  evidence.
As  a  result  of  the  preliminary  encounters  in  pleading  the
parties  have  sooner  or  later  to  fight  for  a  decision  on  some
issue  of  fact  or  law.  In  the  first  case  everything  would
depend  on  the  proofs  which  could  be  mustered  in  favour
of  the  contending  claims.  Now,  in  order  to  realize  the
peculiar  character  of  legal  proofs  one  must  keep  in  view
two  guiding  considerations:

(1)  The  two  litigants  in  a  trial  at  Common  Law  do  not
hold  a  position  of  equality. The  maxim — beati  possidentes
—has  a  wider  scope  than  the  protection  of  possession:  it
means  also  that  the  defendant  in  a  trial  can  take  advantage
of  the  previous  state  of  equilibrium  and  challenge  the  actor
or  plaintiff  to  overcome  the  inertia  of  existing  order  by
irrefutable  evidence.1

(2)  In  estimating  the  relative  value  of  evidence,  Courts
cannot  be  guided  by  the  methods  and  standards  of  criti-
cism which  obtain  in  daily  experience  or  in  historical  inves-
tigation. They  have,  to  be  sure,  certain  privileges  by  way
of examination and cross-examination which ordinary
persons  and  historians  are  debarred  from  using. On  the
other  hand,  the  practical  consequences  of  their  decisions

ITHAYER,  Cases  on  Evidence,  2nd  ed.,  1900,  p.  69:  "In  general,
he  who  seeks  to  move  a  court  in  his  favour  must  satisfy  the  court
of  the  truth  and  adequacy  of  his  claim,  both  in  point  of  fact  and
law.  But  he,  in  every  case,  who  is  the  true  reus  or  defendant,  holds,
of  course,  a  very  different  place  in  the  procedure.  He  simply  awaits
the  action  of  his  adversary,  and  it  is  enough  if  he  repel  him.  .  .  .
It  may  be  doubtful,  indeed  extremely  doubtful,  whether  he  is  not
legally  in  the  wrong  and  his  adversary  legally  in  the  right;  indeed
he  may  probably  be  in  the  wrong,  and  yet  he  may  gain  and  his
adversary  lose,  simply  because  the  inertia  of  the  court  has  not  been
overcome,  because  the  actor  has  not  carried  his  case  beyond  an
equilibrium  of  proof,  or  beyond  all  reasonable  doubt.  Hence  the
importance  of  assigning  the  burden  of  proof"


I:  LAW  AND  LOGIC  11

are  so  important,  that  they  must  draw  the  line  between  the
possible,  the  probable  and  the  certain  much  more  strictly
than  persons  responsible  merely  to  their  own  conscience,  or
guided  by  their  own  interest.  As  a  matter  of  fact,  the
treatment  of  evidence  by  historians  is  quite  different  from
its  treatment  by  lawyers:  writers  like  Gibbon  and  Macau-
lay  were  not  hampered  in  their  judgment  by  meticulous
rules  as  to  ascertained  evidence.

On  the  other  hand,  the  judge  has  to  take  care
not  only  of  the  appropriateness  of  his  decision  as  to
the  case  in  hand,  but  of  its  relation  to  former  and  future
cases,  of  the  soundness  of  the  principle  proclaimed
and  enforced  in  meeting  the  average  requirements  of  fair-
ness and  public  utility.  Hence  peculiar  standards  of
admission  and  exclusion  of  evidence,  devised  to  provide
firm  pegs  for  deductions  in  the  responsible  task  of  sifting
evidence.  This  leads,  among  other  things,  to  the  rules  as
to  admission  and  as  to  relevancy.

It  is  out  of  the  question  for  us  to  plunge  into  a  special  Burden
discussion  of  all  these  interesting  doctrines,  but  it  is  well
worth  while  to  point  to  some  characteristic  examples.  As
regards  the  burden  of  proof,  the  leading  notion  is  quite
simple  and  indisputable.1  He  who  is  allowed  in  the  course
of  procedure  to  make  an  affirmation  as  to  facts  is  called
upon  to  prove  it  by  sufficient  evidence.  This  means  that
in  the  ordinary  course  of  events,  the  burden  of  proof  rests
on  the  plaintiff  (demandant  or  claimant).

However,  in  cases  where  a  plea  of  confession  and  avoid-
ance is  put  forward,  it  is  the  defendant  who,  granting  the
facts  alleged  by  the  plaintiff,  seeks  to  put  them  in  a
different  light,  and  therefore  assumes  the  part  of  the  actor
and  with  it  the  burden  of  proof.  Another  apparent  shifting
of  the  burden  of  proof  arises  when  the  plaintiff  can  refer  in
support  of  his  attack  on  the  defendant's  position  to  some
general  assumption  of  the  law  bearing  on  a  whole  class
of  facts,  for  example  the  assumption  that  a  child  born  in
wedlock  is  the  legitimate  issue  of  the  husband  or  that  a
person  making  a  will  or  a  contract  is  presumed  to  be  sane

i  The  expression  may  be  taken  in  two  different  ways.  See  THAYEB
on  Evidence.


12 INTRODUCTION:  PART  I:  LAW  AND  THE  SCIENCES

unless  the  contrary  can  be  proved.  These  are  presump-
tions of  the  law  intended  to  obviate  wanton  attacks  on  the
reputation  and  welfare  of  families  and  individuals.  Now,
although  the  existence  of  such  a  presumption  provides
the  plaintiff  with  a  prima  facie  case  and  makes  it  incum-
bent on  the  defendant  to  produce  evidence  to  the  contrary,
it  cannot  be  said  that  the  principle  of  the  incidence  of
proof  as  regards  claimants  has  been  subverted.  The  use
of  the  presumption  is  in  itself  an  attempt  to  fall  back  on
general  admission  instead  of  particular  evidence,  and,  in
case  of  substantial  opposition  on  the  defendant's  side,  the
plaintiff  will  have  to  produce  particular  evidence  if  he  does
not  wish  to  lose  his  case.

As  an  example  of  the  importance  of  the  proper  treat-
ment of  the  matter  I  should  like  to  cite  the  case  of  Hinges-
ton  v.  Kelly.  "This  was  an  action  for  work  and  labour.
At  the  trial  before  Lord  Denman,  C.J.,  at  Dorchester  .  .  .
it  appeared  that  the  plaintiff  was  an  attorney,  and  .  .  .
acted  for  the  defendant  as  an  election  agent  in  a  contest  for
the  borough  of  Lyme  Regis.  ...  It  also  appeared  from
the  evidence  .  .  .  that  the  plaintiff  had  voted  for  the
defendant  at  the  election,  although  a  paid  agent  is  not  per-
mitted by  law  to  vote.  The  defendant  produced  evidence
to  show  that  it  was  agreed  that  the  plaintiff's  services  were
to  be  given  gratuitously.

His  lordship  in  summing  up  told  the  jury  that  the  plain-
tiff, having  proved  the  services  rendered,  was  prima  facie
entitled  to  be  paid,  and  that  they  should  find  for  the
plaintiff  unless  the  defendant  had  distinctly  proved  to  their
satisfaction  that  the  services  were  to  be  gratuitous,  in  which
case  they  ought  to  find  for  the  defendant.  The  jury  found
for  the  plaintiff.

A  rule  for  a  new  trial  was  obtained.

In  the  Court  of  Exchequer,  Parke,  B.,  stated  his  opinion :

'The  great  difficulty  in  my  mind  is  whether,  looking  to
Lord  Denman 's  summing  up,  the  jury  understood  that  the
burthen  of  proof  still  lay  on  the  plaintiff.  The  burthen
of  proof  was  never  altered.  The  plaintiff  being  a  pro-
fessional man,  and  performing  professional  services,  was


I:  LAW  AND  LOGIC  13

prima  facie  entitled  to  remuneration.  His  voting,  indeed,
was  an  act  which  amounted  to  a  statement  by  himself  that
he  was  not  to  be  paid.  Still,  if  the  case  had  rested  there,
the  jury,  notwithstanding  the  voting,  might  have  believed
that  the  contract  was  that  the  plaintiff  was  to  be  paid.
Then  came  the  evidence  for  the  defendant  to  show  that  the
plaintiff  should  not  be  paid.  After  this  was  given,  the
question  for  the  jury  still  remained,  whether  on  the  whole
evidence  the  plaintiff  had  made  out  his  title  to  remunera-
tion. I  think,  if  I  had  been  a  juryman,  that  in  the  facts
of  this  case  I  should  have  found  my  verdict  against  the
party,  whether  the  plaintiff  or  the  defendant,  on  whom  I
was  told  by  the  judge  that  the  burthen  of  proof  lay.

Alderson,  B.  If  the  case  was  left  in  doubt,  the  plaintiff
ought  not  to  succeed.

Bolfe,  B.  .  .  .  He  (Lord  Denman)  appears  to  have
said  that  the  plaintiff  has  proved  something  which  entitled
him  to  a  verdict,  unless  the  defendant  proves  a  discharge.
I  think  the  jury  must  have  understood  from  this,  that  it
lay  on  the  defendant  to  make  out  his  case.  There  must  be
a  new  trial.'1

As  regards  rules  restricting  the  admission  of  evidence,  Exclusion
their  object  is  not  merely  to  prevent  the  main  threads  Evidence,
of  argument  from  being  confused  by  the  introduction
of  matters  which  have  no  direct  bearing  on  the  case:
in  this  respect,  although  it  is  the  duty  of  the  judge
to  keep  the  course  of  the  trial  firmly  in  hand
and  to  stop  irrelevant  digression,  it  would  be  impos-
sible to  formulate  precise  general  rules.  There  are,
however,  certain  classes  of  statements  which  are  excluded
on  the  strength  of  such  general  rules,  because,  though  in
particular  instances  they  might  be  helpful  in  discovering
the  truth,  on  the  average  it  is  deemed  to  be  dangerous  and
mischievous  to  admit  the  corresponding  evidence.  A  well-
known  restriction  of  this  kind  consists  in  the  exclusion  of
hearsay  evidence,  and  the  reason  of  it  is  not  far  to  seek:
if  the  Courts  allowed  such  evidence  to  be  produced,  it

118  L.J.  (Exch.),  p.  360:  THAYER,  Cases  on  Evidence,  p.  76
(Exch.  1849).


14 INTRODUCTION:  PART  I:  LAW  AND  THE  SCIENCES

would  be  impossible  to  require  a  strict  examination  of  the
circumstances  under  which  the  original  testimony  had  been
obtained.

I  should  like  to  draw  special  attention  to  the  exclusion
of  evidence  as  to  former  offences  or  accusations  against
persons  on  their  trial.  A  characteristic  case  occurred  in
1851.1

The  defendant  was  indicted  for  felony,  at  the  Leeds
Borough  Sessions,  before  the  Recorder  of  Leeds.  The  first
count  charged  the  defendant  with  breaking  into  a  ware-
house and  stealing  on  the  3rd  of  March,  1851,  fifty  yards
of  woollen  cloth ;  the  second  count  charged  a  simple  larceny
on  the  same  day ;  the  third  count  charged  the  defendant  on
the  same  day  and  year  of  having  received  the  same  property
knowing  it  to  have  been  stolen.  The  counsel  for  the  prose-
cution proposed  to  prove  that  on  the  13th  of  December,
1850,  the  defendant  had  been  in  possession  of  four  other
pieces  of  stolen  cloth.  The  Recorder  admitted  the  evidence
and  told  the  jury,  on  the  summing  up,  not  to  apply  the  evi-
dence to  either  of  the  first  two  counts ;  but  he  told  them  that
it  was  evidence  of  guilty  knowledge  under  the  third  count.
The  jury  found  the  defendant  not  guilty  on  the  first  two
counts;  guilty  on  the  third  count.  The  defendant  was
sentenced  to  seven  years  transportation,  but  respited  until
the  question  as  to  whether  the  disputed  evidence  was  receiv-
able and  whether  the  direction  to  the  jury  was  correct
had  been  decided.  The  Court  held  that  the  evidence  ought
not  to  have  been  received.  In  the  course  of  the  trial  Lord
Campbell,  C.J.,  said:  "The  moral  weight  of  such  evidence
in  any  individual  case,  would  no  doubt  be  very  great;  but
the  law  is  a  system  of  general  rules,  and  it  does  not  admit
such  evidence  because  of  the  inconvenience  which  would
result  from  it."

In  delivering  his  decision  Lord  Campbell,  C.J.,  said:
"In  my  opinion  there  was  no  more  ground  for  admitting
the  evidence  under  the  third  count  than  there  was  under  the
first  and  second.  Under  the  two  latter,  it  would  have  been

i  Reg.  v.  Oddy  (1851) 2  Den.  G.  C.  264.


I:  LAW  AND  LOGIC  15

evidence  of  the  prisoner  being  a  bad  man,  and  likely  to
commit  the  offence  there  charged.  But  the  English  law
does  not  permit  the  issue  of  a  criminal  trial  to  depend  on
this  species  of  evidence.  So  under  the  third  count,  the
evidence  would  only  show  the  prisoner  to  be  a  bad  man;
it  would  not  be  direct  evidence  of  the  particular  fact  in
issue.  .  .  . ' '

Alderson,  B.  "I  am  also  of  the  opinion  that  this  evi-
dence was  inadmissible.  To  admit  of  such  evidence  in  the
present  case  would  be  to  allow  a  prosecutor  in  order  to
make  out  that  a  prisoner  had  received  property  with  a
guilty  knowledge,  which  had  been  stolen  in  March,  to  show
that  the  prisoner  had  in  the  December  previous  stolen
some  other  property  from  another  place  and  belonging  to
other  persons.  In  other  words,  we  are  asked  to  say  that  in
order  to  show  that  the  prisoner  had  committed  one  felony,
the  prosecutor  may  prove  that  he  committed  a  totally  dif-
ferent felony  some  time  before.  Such  evidence  cannot  be
admissible. ' '

To  sum  up,  the  rules  of  Common  Law  procedure,
although  based  on  logic,  disclose  in  their  technical  fram-
ing the  preoccupation  of  the  lawyers  to  fit  their  action
to  the  requirements  of  average  situations  and  prevailing
social  views,  even  though  many  solutions  based  on  proba-
bility may  have  to  be  rejected  in  the  process.

The  part  played  by  dialectics  in  the  elaboration  and  interpre-
application  of  substantive  law  is  not  less  conspicuous  than
its  share  in  procedure.  In  fact,  all  the  principal  operations
of  juridical  thought  necessarily  contain  elements  of  logical
analysis.  When  the  problem  has  to  be  solved  by  reference
to  a  legislative  enactment — a  statute,  the  clause  of  a  code,
a  regulation  or  by-law — the  correct  solution  generally  de-
pends on  interpretation,  that  is,  either  on  the  definition  of
terms  or  on  the  co-ordination  of  various  parts  of  the  law  in
such  a  way  that  they  are  logically  coherent.  In  the  case
of  definition,  a  peculiar  difficulty  arises  from  the  fact
that  legal  rules  are  conservative  in  their  essence,  while  the
terms  used  by  them  are  bound  to  be  affected  by  gradual


16 INTRODUCTION:  PART  I:  LAW  AND  THE  SCIENCES

changes  in  the  meaning  of  words.  Mill  deals  with  these
linguistic  changes  in  a  valuable  chapter  of  his  Logic.1

Interpretation  based  on  context,  and  on  ordination  of
various  clauses  and  rules  under  leading  points  of  view
may  be  illustrated  from  Attorney-General  v.  West  Rid-
ing  of  Yorkshire,  Ex  parte  Grenside.2  The  case  turned
on  the  meaning  to  be  attached  to  the  obligation  of  local
educational  authorities  under  the  Education  Act  of  1902
to  "maintain  and  to  keep  up  the  school  within  its  area
in  a  state  of  efficiency. "  The  West  Riding  County  Council
considered  the  words  from  the  point  of  view  of  the  twofold
grouping  of  schools  as  national  elementary  schools  on  the
one  hand  and  as  voluntary  schools  with  a  special  board  of
managers  under  trust  deeds  on  the  other,  and  contended
that  it  was  bound  to  provide  for  the  efficiency  of  both  kinds
of  schools  merely  in  those  respects  which  were  common  to
both,  namely,  for  general  secular  instruction,  while  leaving
all  care  and  charges  connected  with  denominational  teach-
ing to  the  denominational  boards  of  managers.  The  House
of  Lords  decided  otherwise:  by  combining,  among  other
things,  clause  76  with  clause  97,  of  the  Act  of  1902,  they
came  to  the  conclusion  that  the  maintenance  of  a  school  in
a  state  of  efficiency  included  provision  for  the  teaching  of
religion.  It  cannot  be  asserted  that  the  authoritative  inter-
pretation of  the  House  of  Lords  in  this  case  was  purely
the  result  of  superior  reasoning:  the  West  Riding  County
Council  was  not  guilty  of  a  palpable  logical  blunder,  and
the  Lords  were  certainly  actuated  by  their  general  view  as
to  the  policy  of  the  Act  of  1902.  But  they  were  bound  to
bring  this  conception  into  harmony  with  the  text  itself,
and  this  they  achieved  by  co-ordinating  the  clauses  round
the  conception  of  general  efficiency.

In  the  application  of  Common  Law  rules  the  process  of
interpretation  is  more  involved  and  requires  greater  skill
on  the  part  of  the  lawyer,  because  in  many  cases  it  is  not
only  the  application  and  interpretation  of  the  rule  that  is

1  MILL,  Logic,  II,  p.  144;  cf.  VINOGBADOFF,  Common  Sense  in  Law,
p.  125.

2  (1907)  A.C.  29  ff.


I:  LAW  AND  LOGIC  17

in  question,  but  its  very  formulation.  It  would  be  out  of
the  question  to  go  into  this  matter  in  detail,  as  it  forms
the  substance  of  a  great  part  of  the  Common  Law  develop-
ment. I  should  like,  however,  to  point  out  as  an  illustration
of  the  process  the  famous  Rule  in  Shelley's  Case,  by  which
it  was  laid  down  that  when  the  ancestor,  by  any  gift  or
conveyance,  takes  the  estate  of  freehold,  and  in  the  same
gift  or  conveyance  an  estate  is  limited  to  his  heirs  in  fee  or
in  tail,  the  term  heirs  constitutes  words  of  limitation  of  the
estate  of  the  ancestor,  making  it  fee  simple  or  fee  tail,  and
not  words  of  purchase  giving  a  separate  right  to  the  heirs.1

Even  apart  from  interpretation  every  case  before  the  Subsump-
courts  may  be  considered  from  the  point  of  view  of  the
dialectical  processes  which  underlie  the  arguments  and  the
decisions.  The  most  common  method  used  is  that  of  sw&-
sumption — the  bringing  of  the  facts  of  the  case  under  the
influence  of  some  recognized  rules.  Take  a  recent  case —
Macmillan  and  another  v.  London  Joint  Stock  Bank  Ltd.
(1917)  2  K.B.  439,  and  (1918)  A.C.  777.

A  clerk  of  a  London  publisher  had  taken  advantage  of
the  fact  that  he  had  been  entrusted  with  a  signed  cheque  in
which  the  space  for  the  words  had  been  left  blank,  though
the  figures  £2  had  been  written  at  the  bottom :  he  inserted
the  words  one  hundred  and  twenty  and  the  corresponding
figures.  The  bank  paid  the  money,  but  refused  to  assume
responsibility  for  the  payment  of  £118  in  excess  of  the
amount  intended  to  be  paid  by  the  firm.  "The  governing
principle  had  been  stated  by  the  plaintiff  to  be  that  a  man
could  not  take  advantage  of  his  own  wrong  ...  a  man
could  not  complain  of  the  consequences  of  his  own  default
against  a  person  who  had  been  misled  by  that  default  with-
out any  default  of  his  own."  It  cannot  be  said  that  the
decision  in  the  case  was  easy  to  find.  There  were  very
strong  grounds  for  the  argument  of  the  appellant,  who  tried
to  bring  the  facts  under  the  operation  of  the  rule  that  no

i  COKE,  I,  p.  233.  LIBBER,  Legal  and  Political  Hermeneutics  (Bos-
ton, 1839),  contains  many  interesting  observations  on  the  methods
of  Interpretation  in  English  Law.  THIBAUT'S  little  book,  Theorie
der  logischen  Auslegung  des  romischen  Rechts  (Altona,  1799),  is
still  the  most  thoughtful  and  clear  treatment  of  the  subject  as
regards  Roman  Law.

2231  B


18 INTRODUCTION:  PART  I:  LAW  AND  THE  SCIENCES

one  could  take  advantage  of  his  own  wrong, — in  this  case
the  careless  manner  in  which  the  employer  had  drawn  up
the  cheque.  The  Court  of  Appeals,  however,  took  another
view  of  the  rule  to  be  applied :  it  drew  a  distinction  between
the  proximate  or  effective  cause  of  the  loss  and  the  more  re-
mote circumstances  attending  the  issue  of  the  cheque.  In
the  opinion  of  the  Court  these  circumstances  did  not  suffice
to  shift  the  responsibility  from  the  forger  to  the  firm  in  whose
employment  he  had  been  acting.  "A  customer  owed  a
duty  to  his  banker  not  to  mislead,  but  such  duty  was  not
broken  by  negligently  drawing  a  cheque  in  such  a  manner
as  afforded  another  person  an  opportunity  of  misleading.
Negligence  in  order  to  estop  must  be  negligence  in  the  trans-
action itself,  and  the  proximate  cause  of  the  loss."  The
chain  of  reasoning  as  stated  by  Swinfen  Eady,  L.J.,  is
presented  in  plain  literary  language,  but  it  might  be  con-
verted by  a  pedantic  schoolman  into  a  sorites — a  sequence
of  syllogisms  in  accordance  with  Aristotle's  precepts.  Such
a  sequence  would  ultimately  rest  on  two  fundamental  syl-
logisms, a  negative  and  a  positive  one.  The  first  may  per-
haps be  expressed  in  the  following  words:  (1)  No  one  can
take  advantage  of  his  own  wrong.  (2)  The  incomplete
manner  in  which  the  cheque  was  drawn  up  by  the  principal
is  not  a  wrong  in  the  above  sense.  (3)  This  being  so  the
principal  is  not  responsible  for  the  fraud  of  the  clerk.  The
second  syllogism  may  be  stated  as  follows :  ( 1 )  The  risk  in
the  acceptance  of  a  fraudulent  cheque  falls  on  the  bank
which  accepts  it.  (2)  The  cheque  presented  to  the  bank
was  a  document  which  had  been  tampered  with  by  the  clerk.
(3)  Therefore  the  whole  matter  lies  between  the  bank  and
the  clerk.

The  Court  of  Appeal  pronounced  in  favour  of  the  pub-
lishing firm.  The  House  of  Lords,  however,  looked  at  the
matter  in  another  way.  The  Lord  Chancellor  (Lord
Finlay)  in  delivering  his  decision,  brought  the  case  under
the  operation  of  the  rule  as  to  negligence.  He  said  among
other  things:

"As  the  customer  and  the  banker  were  under  a  contrac-
tual relation  in  this  matter,  it  appeared  obvious  that  in


I:  LAW  AND  LOGIC  19

drawing  a  cheque  the  customer  was  bound  to  take  usual  and
reasonable  precautions  to  prevent  forgery.  Crime  was,  in-
deed, a  serious  matter,  but  every  one  knew  that  crime  was
not  uncommon.  If  the  cheque  was  drawn  in  such  a  way  as  to
facilitate  or  almost  to  invite  an  increase  in  the  amount  by
forgery  if  the  cheque  should  get  into  the  hands  of  a  dis-
honest person,  forgery  was  not  a  remote,  but  a  very  natural
consequence  of  negligence  of  this  kind.  Young  v.  Grote
was  decided  nearly  one  hundred  years  ago.  It  had  often
been  approved  of  by  many  of  the  greatest  judges,  and,  with
the  exception  of  a  recent  case  in  the  Privy  Council,  there
had  never  been  a  decision  inconsistent  with  it  but  for  that
now  under  appeal.

The  sole  ground  on  which  Young  v.  Grote  was  decided  by
the  majority  of  the  Court  of  Common  Pleas  was  that  Young
was  a  customer  of  the  bank  owing  to  the  bank  the  duty
of  drawing  his  cheque  with  reasonable  care,  that  he  had
delegated  the  performance  of  that  duty  to  his  wife,  that  she
had  been  guilty  of  gross  negligence  in  having  the  cheque
filled  up  in  such  manner  as  to  facilitate  an  increase  of  the
amount,  and  that  the  fraudulent  alteration  of  the  cheque
by  the  clerk  to  whom,  after  it  was  filled  up,  it  had  been
entrusted  by  her  for  the  purpose  of  getting  payment,  would
not  have  taken  place  but  for  the  careless  manner  in  which
the  cheque  was  drawn.  The  duty  which  the  customer  owed
to  the  bank  was  to  draw  the  cheques  with  reasonable  care
to  prevent  forgery,  and  if,  owing  to  neglect  of  this  duty,
forgery  took  place,  the  customer  was  liable  to  the  bank  for
the  loss.  As  the  negligence  of  the  customer  caused  the  loss,
he  must  bear  it."1

While  in  cases  similar  to  that  we  have  been  discussing  General!-
the  course  of  reasoning  runs  in  the  direction  of  subsump-
tion  to  a  certain  rule,  the  logical  process  may  also  develop
in  the  other  direction ;  the  problem  would  consist  in  such  a
case  in  combining  scattered  rules  or  decisions  under  more
comprehensive  principles.  Legal  reasoning  on  those  lines

*  In  Young  v.  Grote,  (1827)  4.  Bing.  253,  the  wife  of  the  plaintiff
had  ordered  a  clerk  to  insert  the  text  of  the  cheque  left  in  blank
by  her  husband  to  the  amount  oi  £60.  He  wrote  the  text  as  directed,


20 INTRODUCTION:  PART  I:  LAW  AND  THE  SCIENCES

leads  to  extensions  of  juridical  concepts,  or  to  their
co-ordination.  An  example  may  be  adduced  from  the  his-
tory of  the  action  of  assumpsit.  The  Year  Books  of  the
fifteenth  century  show  the  Lancastrian  lawyers  at  work  on
the  doctrine  of  liability  arising  out  of  implied  agreements.
They  were  busy  discussing  the  cases  of  a  doctor  harming
a  patient  by  mistaken  treatment,  of  a  smith  spoiling  a
horse  by  shoeing  it  wrongly,  etc.,  and  they  came  to  the
conclusion  that  malfeasance  in  carrying  out  the  under-
taking amounted  to  a  tort  and  entailed  liability  to  com-
pensation. But  how  about  a  carpenter  who  had  promised
to  build  a  house  and  had  failed  to  do  so?  The  millmaker
who  having  promised  to  construct  a  mill  by  an  appointed
day  had  not  finished  his  work  according  to  promise?  The
original  view  was  that  such  cases  of  nonfeasance  "sounded
in  covenant"  and  required  a  written  contract  to  protect  the
parties.  A  case  of  1425  shows  the  judges  of  the  Common
Bench  divided  in  opinion  on  this  point.  (Y.B.,  3  Henry
VI,  36).  Some  ten  years  later,  however,  a  more  com-
prehensive view  of  the  principle  of  assumpsit  prevailed,  as
is  shown  in  a  decision  by  Paston  and  Jeune  (Y.B.,  14  Henry
VI,  18,  58)  ;  liability  for  carrying  out  an  undertaking  was
extended  to  cases  of  nonfeasance  as  well  as  malfeasance.1

^e  l°gical  co-ordination  of  juridical  ideas  reaches  a  still
tion.  higher  level  when  the  object  is  not  to  interpret,  to  apply  or

to  formulate  a  rule,  but  to  set  up  a  doctrine,  that  is,  a
complex  of  mutually  dependent  rules.  Such  doctrines  are
apt  to  grow  out  of  the  settlement  of  particular  problems,
when  practice  or  reflection  induces  lawyers  to  survey  a
whole  section  of  their  subject:  the  influence  of  such  dog-
matic constructions  on  the  actual  administration  of  justice
can  hardly  be  exaggerated,  and  the  intellectual  subtlety
displayed  in  building  up  these  logical  schemes  is  often  very
remarkable.  I  should  like  to  point  out  as  an  example  the
treatment  of  contractual  obligation  in  modern  systems  of
law.  It  will  be  convenient  to  start  from  the  English

but  subsequently  made  use  of  spaces  left  blank  to  alter  the  sum
from  £50  to  £350.

i  W.  B ARBOUR,  History  of  Contract  in  Early  Equity,  pp  45  ff.,  in
VINOGRADOFF'S  Oxford  Studies  in  Social  and  Legal  History,  Vol.  IV
,(1914).


I:  LAW  AND  LOGIC  21

doctrine,  as  the  more  familiar  one.  The  keystone  of  this
doctrine  consists  in  the  requirement  of  a  valuable  consid-
eration in  cases  of  agreements  not  made  by  deed  under  seal.
"A  valuable  consideration  in  the  sense  of  the  law  may
consist  in  some  right,  interest,  profit,  or  benefit  accruing  to
one  party,  or  some  forbearance,  detriment,  loss,  or  respon-
sibility given,  suffered  or  undertaken  by  the  other. " 1  One
of  the  principal  consequences  of  this  doctrine  is  that  the
" liberal  intention"  of  one  of  the  parties  is  not  accepted
as  a  sufficient  ground  for  a  valid  promise.  There  must  be
an  inducement  to  the  promise  in  the  shape  of  some  val-
uable advantage,  unless  the  transaction  is  carried  out  as
a  deed.  The  strict  formulation  of  the  doctrine  was  not
achieved  without  misgivings.  Lord  Mansfield  was  in  favour
of  admitting  the  validity  of  promises  conditioned  by  moral
obligations.  But  Common  Law  eventually  settled  down  in
requiring  consideration  in  the  present  or  in  the  future.  "  A
promisor  cannot  be  sued  on  his  promise  if  he  made  it  merely
to  satisfy  a  motive  or  wish,  nor  can  he  be  sued  on  it  by
one  who  did  not  furnish  the  consideration  on  which  the
promise  is  based."2  To  be  sure  the  greatest  latitude  is
given  to  personal  opinion  in  matters  of  consideration.  As
Hobbes  has  expressed  it  (Leviathan,  pt.  1,  c.  75)  :  "  The
value  of  all  things  contracted  for  is  measured  by  the  appe-
tite of  the  contractors,  and  therefore  the  just  value  is  that
which  they  may  be  contented  to  give."3  Nevertheless  the
fundamental  idea  is  the  requirement  in  the  case  of
"parol"  agreements  of  some  equivalent  by  way  either
of  direct  acquisition  or  of  a  limitation  imposed  on  the
other  party.  A  distinction  between  consideration  and
motives  is  drawn  in  the  English  theory  in  the  sense  that
no  motives  are  recognized  except  those  derived  from
material  profit  and  loss.4

i-Currie  v.  Misa,  L.  R.  10  Exch.  162.  This  definition  is  not  quite
complete  in  so  far  as  it  does  not  take  note  of  the  fundamental  rule
that  consideration  moves  from  the  promisee.  A  more  exact,  but  ab-
stract definition  is  given  by  AMES,  Lectures  on  Legal  History  (Cam-
bridge, Mass.,  1913),  p.  323:  "Any  act  or  forbearance  or  promise  by
one  person  given  in  exchange  for  the  promise  of  another."

2  ANSON  on  Contract,  p.  104  (14th  ed.,  1917).

s  Cited  by  POLLOCK,  Principles  of  Contract,  p 171.

*  ANSON,  ibid.,  p.  102 :  "  Past  consideration  is  not  consideration,


22 INTRODUCTION:  PART  I:  LAW  AND  THE  SCIENCES

The  test  is  simple  and  effective,  but  it  cannot  be  said
that  it  gets  rid  of  difficulties :  the  weak  side  of  the  doctrine
becomes  apparent  in  the  inadequate  way  in  which  it  meets
the  cases  when  promises  are  given  and  obligations  under-
taken from  motives  of  disinterested  friendliness  and  affec-
tion. As  "gratuitous  liberality "  does  not  find  express
recognition,  its  natural  and  unavoidable  manifestations
have  to  be  disguised  under  fictitious  pretences  of  con-
sideration *  or  by  treating  agreements  in  the  nature  of  a
deposit  or  mandatum  as  exceptional  and  contriving  some
protection  for  them  under  rules  derived  from  kindred
doctrines.2

Continental  systems  have  treated  the  same  problem  of
agreement  from  the  opposite  point  of  view  in  so  far  as
they  have  allowed  a  wider  scope  for  motives.  Historically
and  theoretically  this  treatment  was  suggested  by  certain
features  of  Roman  law.  When  the  latter  ceased  to  con-
sider contracts  in  their  purely  formal  aspect  as  rela-
tions established  by  the  correct  performance  of  certain
solemn  acts,3  the  means  for  ascertaining  the  will  and  inten-
tion of  the  parties  naturally  assumed  a  primary  importance
for  the  recognition  and  enforcement  of  agreements.  Obliga-
tions which  could  not  be  referred  to  a  justa  causa  were
exposed  to  attack  and  revocation.  In  bilateral  contracts,
such  as  sale,  the  cause  of  the  obligation  of  each  party  was
easily  discernible  in  the  corresponding  obligation  of  the
other  party:  if  you  let  a  house,  the  rent  promised  to  you
in  return  is  the  cause  of  your  obligation  to  the  lessee.  In
agreements  such  as  donation,  gratuitous  deposit  or  man-
datum,  the  cause  was  recognized  in  the  liberal  intention  of
the  promisor  to  benefit  the  promisee.4

and  what  the  promisor  gets  in  such  a  case  is  the  satisfaction  of
motives  of  pride  and  gratitude."

1  In  Thomas  v.  Thomas,  ( 1842)  2  Q.  B.  851,  the  moral  motive  which
prompted  the  husband  in  providing  his  widow  with  a  home  was  not
recognized,  but  the  payment  of  a  nominal  rent  was  considered  to  be
sufficient  to  uphold  the  validity  of  the  agreement.

2  Cf.  Sir  W.  ANSON'S  remarks  on  gratuitous  bailment,  Contracts,
pp.  103  ff.

3  One  of  these  forms  was  "  verbal  "  but  not  in  the  sense  of  the
English  informal  "  parol  "  agreement. The  stipulation  was  consid-
ered a  binding  solemnity. Cf.  GIRARD,  Manuel  de  droit  romain,  3rd
ed.,  p.  452.

4  See  BBINZ,  Pandekten,  II,  §248,  note  28;  DEENBUEG,  Pandekten,


I:  LAW  AND  LOGIC  23

The  doctrine  was  worked  out  definitely  in  French  Law.1
Art.  1131  of  the  Code  Civil  lays  down  that:  An  obligation
devoid  of  cause,  or  provided  with  a  false  cause,  or  an  illicit
cause,  has  no  effect  whatever.  (Une  obligation  sans  cause,
ou  sur  une  fausse  cause,  ou  sur  une  cause  illicite  ne  pent
avow  aucun  effet.)

The  development  of  the  idea  and  its  co-ordination  with
other  rules  of  the  Code  gave  rise  to  an  interesting  dog-
matic construction.  One  of  the  consequences  drawn  from
the  requirement  of  a  causa  was  the  distinction  between
cause  and  motive.  An  attempt  had  to  be  made  to  draw  a
line  of  demarcation  between  the  two.2

But  the  distinction,  though  plain  enough  in  theory,
proved  to  be  difficult  to  apply  in  practice.  If  the  Courts
had  rigidly  followed  the  view  that  cause  is  the  professed
reason  of  a  contract,  they  would  have  been  obliged  to  lend
the  assistance  of  public  power  to  transactions  prompted  by
immoral  motives  if  these  motives,  though  sufficiently  ob-
vious, did  not  constitute  a  technical  element  of  the  contract.
Cases  in  point  arose,  for  instance,  when  Courts  were  asked
to  uphold  donations  made  to  concubines  for  the  purpose  of
keeping  up  immoral  intercourse.  The  Courts  refused  to  do
so  on  the  ground  of  Art.  1131,  but  that  meant  that  they
found  it  necessary  in  the  above-mentioned  cases  to  overlook
the  distinction  between  cause  and  motive.3

Other  difficulties  arose  from  the  necessity  of  harmonizing
Art.  1131  with  Art.  900.  The  latter  rule  lays  down  that
if  an  illegal  condition  has  been  set  to  a  promise,  the  promise
remains  valid  while  the  condition  is  annulled.  In  applying
Art.  900  the  French  Courts  inquire  whether  the  condition

§95,  p.  220,  7th  ed,  II,  §315,  applies  to  the  modernized  theory
of  Roman  Law  which  tends  towards  the  admission  of  "  abstract "
obligations  apart  from  any  causa.  WINDSCHEID,  Pandekten,  II,  §  319.

1  It  owes  its  origin  there  to  the  great  seventeenth-century  jurist
Domat  (Lots  Civiles,  Livre  1,  t.  1,  s.  1,  nn.  5,  6).

2  The  cause  is  the  aim  or  the  intention  inherent  in  the  contract
and  therefore known,  or supposed to  be  known, by  both parties.
The motive is the impulse that prompted the transaction. In
unilateral  contracts  the  cause  consists  either  in  a  former  service,
or  purely  and  simply  in  the  liberal  intention (BuFNOiB,  Cours  de
droit  civil,  II,  528. Cf.  COLIN  et  CAPITANT,  Cours  de  droit  civil
(1915),  II,  313.

3  BEUDANT,  Cours  de  droit  civil,  II,  p.  115.


24 INTRODUCTION:  PART  I: LAW  AND  THE  SCIENCES

in  question  is  so  substantial  as  to  form  the  cause  of  the
contract  or  whether  it  can  be  treated  as  a  mode,  admitting
of  alteration.  The  decision  in  each  case  depends  on  a
consideration  of  the  circumstances  of  the  case  and  must
therefore  be  regarded  as  a  point  of  fact.1

In  this  way  the  French  doctrine  tends  more  and  more  to
pass  from  a  conception  of  the  cause  as  the  professed  reason
of  agreement  to  a  view  which  makes  cause  equivalent  to
intention.

One  might  almost  feel  inclined  to  consider  the  com-
plete abandonment  of  the  requirement  of  a  cause  in  the
German  Civil  Code  as  the  final  result  of  the  development
of  continental  jurisprudence  which,  starting  from  the
formal  contracts  of  Roman  Law  and  clinging  for  some  time
to  the  abstract  notion  of  a  juridical  cause  as  distinguished
from  motive,  has  eventually  reached  a  stage  in  which  the
Law  deals  directly  with  intentions  and  consent,  and  has
abandoned  the  requirement  of  a  technical  cause.2  On  the
whole  it  may  be  said  that  the  English  doctrine,  insisting
on  a  tangible  justification  of  agreements,  has  been  obliged
to  seek  such  a  justification  in  valuable  consideration,  while
the  continental  doctrines  opposed  to  such  a  material  test
have  been  gradually  led  to  reject  altogether  the  technical
requirement  of  cause.  Thus  under  the  influence  of  a  logi-
cal deduction  distinctions  have  been  made  and  consequences
have  been  drawn  in  all  directions,  but  the  predominance
of  the  logical  method  has  led  to  a  one-sided  treatment  of
principles  and  to  conflicts  with  practical  requirements
which  arise  from  the  complications  of  actual  life.
Exasger-  English  law,  so  conspicuous  for  its  common  sense  and

attention  to  practical  needs,  is  probably  less  liable  than  any
other  to  have  its  rules  perverted  by  an  excess  of  abstract
dialectics.3

1  BUFNOIB,  Cours  de  droit  civil,  I,  p.  543; COLIN  et  CAPITANT,
Cours  de  droit  civil,  II,  p.  318.

2  Cf .  survey  of  the  fluctuations  of  German  Law  on  this  subject  in
R. HUBNER, Grundziige des deutschen Pnvatrechts (1908), pp.
493  ff. ;  SALEILLES,  De  I'obligation  en  droit  civil  allemand;  PLANIOL,
Cours  de  droit  civil,  II.

3  I  may  mention  that  the  notion  of  public  policy  is  bound  to  intro-
duce a  powerful  element  of  practical  reflection  restraining  abstract


I:  LAW  AND  LOGIC  25

Yet,  even  here,  matters  may  sometimes  assume  an  aspect
which  reduces  rules  to  absurdity.  Sir  F.  Pollock  gives  an
amusing  instance  in  connection  with  the  discharge  of
obligations.1  "It  is  the  rule  of  English  law  that  a  debt  of
£100  may  be  perfectly  well  discharged  by  the  creditor's
acceptance  of  a  beaver  hat  or  a  peppercorn,  or  of  a  negoti-
able instrument  for  a  less  sum  at  the  same  time  and
place  at  which  the  £100  are  payable,  or  of  10/-  at  an
earlier  day  or  at  another  place,  but  that  nothing  less  than
a  release  under  seal  will  make  his  acceptance  of  £99  in
money  at  the  same  time  and  place  a  good  discharge.  The
rule  in  PinneVs  Case,2  though  paradoxical,  is  not  anom-
alous. It  is  the  strictly  logical  result  of  carrying  out  a
general  principle  beyond  the  bounds  in  which  it  is  reason-
ably applicable."

The  danger  of  such  an  abuse  of  dogmatic  construction
is  much  greater  under  the  sway  of  continental  systems.
French  jurists  have  lately 3  entered  emphatic  protests
against  its  deadening  influence.

As  regards  Germany,  I  will  restrict  myself  to  a  reference
to  Ihering,  who,  himself  a  brilliant  dialectician,  has  ridi-
culed the  extravagant  use  of  dogmatic  construction  by
pedantic  colleagues.  A  few  extracts  from  his  ScJierz  und
Ernst  in  der  Jurisprudent  will  suffice :

"I  had  died.  A  form  of  light  met  my  soul  on  its  leaving
the  body.

"You  are  now  free  from  the  ties  of  the  senses  that
chained  your  spirit  to  the  body.  You  need  only  think  of
the  place  you  want  to  go  to  in  order  to  be  there.

"I  will  try.  Where  shall  I  put  myself  by  means  of  my
thought  ?

deductions.  On  the  meaning  of  public  policy,  see  Daviea  v.  Dames
(1886)  36  Ch.  D.  364.

i  Principles  of  Contract,  p.  179.

25  Coke's  Rep.  117.

sQtiNY,  Mtthode  ^interpretation,  p.  133:  "By  substituting  for  the
real  elements  of  juridical  life — for  the  moral,  psychological,  economic,
politic  and  social  motives — technical,  abstract,  cold  notions  deprived
of  fruitful  reality,  our  interpretation  of  law  has  created  a  system  of
pure  formulae  and  categories  which,  in  conjunction  with  the  exag-
gerated influence  attributed  to  a  modern  code,  has  rendered  the
scientific  practice  of  our  courts  not  only  sterile,  but  often  harmful."


26 INTRODUCTION:  PART  I:  LAW  AND  THE  SCIENCES

' '  As  you  are  a  student  of  Roman  Law  you  will  proceed  to
the  heaven  of  juridical  concepts. — Is  it  dark  there? — Quite
dark.  Here  is  the  apparatus  for  constructions.  It  is  nice
,  that  it  should  be  acting  just  now.  Let  us  see  what  is  the
object  of  the  spirit  who  is  working  it. — Mighty  spirit,
allow  us  to  ask  what  are  you  doing  just  now? — I  am  con-
structing contract. — Contract?  But  that  is  quite  a  simple
thing;  what  is  there  to  construct? — A  good  deal — just  be-
cause it's  simple. — But  then  what  will  happen  in  the  case
of  concepts  like  rights  as  to  rights,  the  Tiereditas  jacens,  the
gage  in  one's  own  property? — All  trifles!  I  have  finished
these  things  off  long  ago.  The  only  things  that  interest
me  beside  Contract,  are  Obligation  and  Direct  Representa-
tion.— May  I  ask  what  results  you  have  reached  as  regards
them? — As  to  Obligation — it  is  a  right  to  an  act  to  be  per-
formed by  the  debtor. — I  cannot  conceive  this  at  all.  As
long  as  an  act  has  not  been  performed,  it  does  not  exist:
therefore  there  can  be  no  right  concerning  it. — Exist!  One
sees  that  you  do  not  belong  to  our  set.  What  we  think — >
exists,  etc."

Logical  One  form  of  logical  exaggeration  has  played  a  particu-

LyaSwem  larly  important  part  in  the  history  of  juridical  thought — it

is  the  assumption  that  there  is  a  completeness  in  a  legal
system  which  enables  the  jurist  to  discover  legal  principles
and  to  formulate  rules  even  when  there  is  no  positive  basis
for  them  in  statutes  or  precedents.  According  to  this  view
there  are  no  gaps  in  a  rational  system  of  law — say  the
Roman,  the  French  or  the  English;  law,  even  if  not  ex-
pressed, is  latent  in  gremio  judicum  and  will  be  formulated
by  the  Courts  called  upon  to  produce  it.  This  doctrine  has
been  taught  by  German  jurists,  for  example  by  Brinz,  and
it  has  been  used  by  English  lawyers  to  support  the  fiction
that  there  is  no  such  thing  as  " judge-made  law"  and  that
Common  Law  is  the  logical  exposition  of  pre-existing  prin-
ciples. A  modern  writer  on  jurisprudence  has  attacked
this  fallacy  with  great  vigour.  "  The  whole  science  of
Jurisprudence  does  not  claim  to  be  anything  but  a  system
of  rules  for  the  guidance  of  the  judge,  for  surely  no  one  has
ever  been  foolish  enough  to  imagine  that  the  law  embodies


I: LAW  AND  LOGIC  27

a  complete  system  of  rules  whereby  the  course  of  human
action  in  all  possible  circumstances  can  be  settled  before-
hand. Jellinek  has  already  noticed  that  the  dogma  of  the
logical  completeness  of  our  legal  system  does  not  apply  to
public  law,  but  only  to  those  branches  of  the  law  in  which
the  final  decision  rests  with  the  judge.  The  case  does
not  differ  when  the  decision  does  rest  with  the  judge
...  He  is  obliged  to  discover  some  solution,  but  this  solu-
tion is  certainly  not  the  product  of  a  logical  legal  system
complete  in  itself.  The  only  practical  object  of  such  a
system  is  to  supply  the  judge  with  an  ample  provision  of
rules  to  aid  him  in  pronouncing  judgment  in  all  possible
cases."1

The  fictitious  character  of  the  doctrine  of  the  latent  com-
pleteness of  law,  let  us  add,  becomes  especially  apparent
when  one  reflects  that  its  consistent  application  would  lead
to  the  admission  that  our  existing  Common  Law  system  was,
apart  from  statutory  innovations,  in  existence  in  the  time
of  Bracton  and  of  Martin  of  Pateshull.  Those  who  shrink
from  such  a  paradox  have  to  make  room  somewhere  for
creative  innovation,  and  can  hardly  look  to  any  other
source  of  inspiration  for  the  law-making  judges  than  their
sense  of  practical  requirements.2

However,  exaggeration  in  the  use  of  an  effective  method
ought  not  to  obscure  the  value  of  the  method  when
applied  with  proper  caution.  When  all  has  been  said  about
the  barrenness  of  pedantic  logic,  it  must  be  remembered
that  what  we  have  to  deal  with  in  actual  reasoning  is  not
formal  exercises  in  school  logic,  but  the  dialectical  treat-
ment of  materials,  instinct  with  vital  problems  and  issues.
Utility,  public  interest,  morality,  justice,  are  constantly
claiming  their  share  in  the  thoughts  of  the  lawyer,  while
logic  provides  him  with  a  solid  framework  for  his  rea-
soning.

lEHRLiCH,  Orundlegung  der  Soziologie  des  Rechts,  p.  15.
2Cf.  J.  C.  GRAY,  Nature  and  Source  of  the  Law (1909),  §489,
p.  217.


CHAPTER  II


The

operation
of  will  in
testaments
and  agree-
ments.


LAW  AND  PSYCHOLOGY

THERE  is  an  aspect  of  law  which  brings  its  close  de-
pendence on  psychology  into  a  particularly  strong  light;
namely,  the  fact  that  law  deals  with  the  human  will.

Both  in  civil  and  in  criminal  proceedings  lawyers  are
constantly  confronted  by  this  mysterious  conception  of  the
will,  and  although  they  have  tried  to  simplify  the  subject
for  convenient  manipulation,  they  are  often  reminded  of
the  awkward  psychological  background  stretching  behind
their  conventional  formulae.

This  is  obviously  true  of  the  law  as  to  testaments.  From
the  most  remote  antiquity  the  principal  condition  imposed
on  testators  by  the  legislators  and  courts  is  the  requirement
that  the  testator  should  be  of  sound  mind  at  the  time  when
he  makes  his  will.  Not  only  downright  insanity  or  senile
debility,  but  morbid  submission  to  influence  is  considered
in  all  countries  to  be  a  reason  for  invalidating  a  will.
In  Athens,  leave  to  make  a  valid  testament  was  refused
to  the  insane,  to  people  who  had  fallen  into  dotage,
to  men  under  the  influence  of  women  (/ACXVIGOV,  i)  yepc&v,
?j  yvvainl  7r£i6d/*€vof).  No  wonder  the  law  reports  are
full  of  cases  turning  on  the  question,  What  is  to  be  under-
stood by  the  notion  of  a  "sound  mind"  in  relation  to  civil
incapacity? — and  one  cannot  but  feel  that  the  whole  subject
is  in  a  state  of  uncertainty  and  transition.  I  will  merely
refer  to  one  case  in  which  the  will  of  an  insane  person
supposed  to  have  been  made  during  a  lucid  interval  was
granted  probate,  although  the  same  person  had  been  pre-
viously refused  leave  to  execute  a  deed.  (Re  Walker,  Wat-
son and  others  v.  Treasury  Solicitor.)1  "The  deceased
suffered  from  delusions,  and  when  under  those  delu-
sions she  would  become  passionate,  violent,  and  even

i  (1912) 28  T.L.R.  466.


II:  LAW  AND  PSYCHOLOGY  29

dangerous.  Her  obsessions  were  entirely  recognized  by
herself  as  morbid  and  did  not  prevent  her  from  tak-
ing an  intelligent  interest  in  general  topics.  She  kept
up  a  correspondence  with  her  relatives  and  friends,  with  the
Visitors  in  Lunacy  and  the  Master  in  Lunacy,  and  in  other
respects  was  a  shrewd  and  clever  woman,  and  her  memory
was  excellent.'*  In  1904  she  executed  a  deed  creating  a
trust  for  the  benefit  of  some  relatives,  but  the  Master  in
Lunacy  refused  to  recognize  the  validity  of  the  deed  and
the  Court  of  Appeal  confirmed  his  decision  on  the  ground
that  the  interests  of  a  lunatic  so  found  by  inquisition  were
to  be  protected  by  the  Committee  in  Lunacy  under  the
Crown  and  that  the  creation  of  a  trust  would  lead  to  dual
control  and  a  conflict  of  authorities.  Nevertheless,  when
Mrs.  Walker  made  a  will  in  a  lucid  interval,  this  will  was
granted  probate.

It  is  even  more  difficult  to  come  to  a  conclusion  as  to
the  dependence  or  independence  of  mind  of  a  person,  who
is  not  a  recognized  lunatic.

One  of  the  leading  cases  on  this  matter  is  Norton  v.
Relly.1  It  originated  in  a  bill  against  Relly,  a  dissenting
preacher,  and  others,  as  trustees  in  a  deed  of  gift  executed
by  Mrs.  Norton,  granting  an  annuity  of  £50  a  year  to  the
defendant,  praying  that  it  might  be  delivered  up  to  be
cancelled.

The  Lord  Chancellor  in  giving  judgment  for  the  plaintiff
said:  "I  could  easily  have  told  what  by  the  proofs  of  his
cause,  and  his  own  letters  he  appears  to  be — a  subtle  sec-
tarian, who  preys  upon  his  deluded  hearers,  and  robs  them
under  the  mask  of  religion;  one  itinerant  who  propagates
his  fanaticism  even  in  the  cold  northern  countries,  where
one  should  scarcely  suppose  that  it  could  enter.  Shall  it
be  said  in  his  excuse,  that  as  to  this  lady  she  was  as  great
an  enthusiast  as  himself  when  he  first  became  acquainted
with  her  and  consequently  not  deluded  by  him  ?  It  appears
indeed  that  she  wrote  some  verses  'on  the  mystery  of  the

i  (1764)  2  Eden  286.  Cf.  Lyon  v.  Home,  6  Eq.,  pp.  655  ff.  (1868)  :
"  A  widow  of  seventy-five  was  induced  by  a  '  medium  '  to  adopt  him
and  to  make  various  gifts  and  a  will  in  his  favour.  The  relation  be-
tween them  implied  domination  over  her  mind."  The  rule  is  differ-
ent in  the  case  of  simple  contracts.


30 INTRODUCTION: PART  I: LAW  AND  THE  SCIENCES

union  of  the  Father,  the  Son  and  the  Holy  Spirit.'  It  is
true  that  it  appears  by  this  that  she  was  far  gone,  but  not
gone  far  enough  for  his  purpose.  She  advanced  step  by
step  till  she  became  quite  intoxicated,  if  I  may  use  the
expression,  with  his  madness  and  enthusiasm.  Inasmuch
as  the  deed  was  obtained  in  circumstances  of  the  greatest
fraud,  imposition  and  misrepresentation — the  defendant,
Relly,  shall  execute  a  release."

The  re-  Even  more  momentous  issues  are  involved  in  the  necessity

for  crime,  of  estimating  the  action  of  intellect  and  will  as  regards  the
responsibility  of  a  person  for  crime.  The  development  of
criminal  law  is  highly  characteristic  of  a  gradual  change
of  views  on  the  subject  of  individual  responsibility.  One
need  not  look  very  far  back  in  history  to  discover
an  appalling  barbarism  in  the  treatment  of  criminal  of-
fenders. Eighteenth-century  England,  whose  legal  system
was  described  and  extolled  by  Blackstone,  built  up  its  crim-
inal law  on  an  indiscriminate  application  of  the  death
penalty,  and  on  purely  external  tests  of  responsibility.  The
spread  of  humanitarian  doctrines  embodied  in  Beccaria's
famous  book,1  in  Howard's  activity  and  the  utilitarian  agi-
tation of  Bentham,  brought  about  great  changes  in  all
directions.  But  the  psychological  grounds  of  criminality
remained  unexplored  and  the  legal  tests  of  responsibility
were  still  of  the  most  rudimentary  kind  even  in  the  middle
of  the  nineteenth  century.  In  1843  a  pronouncement  of
the  judges  was  made  in  M'Naughten's  Case 2  with  re-
gard to  criminal  responsibility.  It  was  laid  down,  among
other  things,  that  to  establish  a  defence  on  the  ground  of
insanity,  it  must  be  clearly  proved  that  at  the  time  of  com-
mitting the  act  the  accused  was  labouring  under  such  a
defect  of  reason  from  a  disease  of  the  mind  as  not  to  know
the  nature  and  quality  of  the  act  he  was  doing,  or  if  he
did  know  it,  that  he  did  not  know  it  was  wrong.3

Up  to  quite  recent  times  the  legal  doctrines  applied  by  the
Courts  in  attributing  responsibility  even  in  the  case  of
mental  disease  did  not  go  further  than  the  admission  that

1  Dei  Delitti  e  delle  Pene  ( 1764) .

2  Reg.  v.  M'Naughten,  10  Cl.  &  F.  200.

3  J.  F.  STEPHEN,  History  of  Criminal  Law,  II,  p.  153.


II: LAW AND PSYCHOLOGY  31


a  person  incapable  of  distinguishing  between  right  and
wrong  could  not  be  punished  for  a  crime.  * '  Moral  insanity ' '
in  the  shape  of  uncontrollable  ideas  was  not  recognized  as
a  ground  for  sending  an  accused  person  to  an  asylum.

Take  the  case  of  Reg.  v.  Haynes*

"The  prisoner,  a  soldier,  was  charged  with  the  murder  of
Mary  MacGowan,  at  the  camp  of  Aldershot.  The  deceased
was  a  woman  with  whom  the  prisoner  had  been  on  the  most
friendly  terms  up  to  the  moment  of  the  commission  of  the
offence.  No  motive  was  assigned  for  the  perpetration  of
the  act.  .  .  .

"Bramwell,  B.,  in  summing  up  to  the  jury,  said:  'As  to
the  defence  of  insanity,  it  has  been  urged  for  the  prisoner
that  you  should  acquit  him  on  the  ground  that,  it  being
impossible  to  assign  any  motive  for  the  perpetration  of  the
offence,  he  must  have  been  acting  under  what  is  called  a
powerful  and  irresistible  influence,  or  homicidal  tendency.
But  I  must  remark  as  to  that,  that  the  circumstance  of  an
act  being  apparently  motiveless  is  not  a  ground  from  which
you  can  safely. infer  the  existence  of  such  an  influence.
Motives  exist  unknown  and  innumerable  which  might
prompt  the  act.  A  morbid  and  restless  (but  resistible)
thirst  for  blood  would  itself  be  a  motive  urging  to  such  a
deed  for  its  own  relief.  But  if  an  influence  be  so  powerful
as  to  be  termed  irresistible,  so  much  more  reason  is  there
why  we  should  not  withdraw  any  of  the  safeguards  tending
to  counteract  it.'  '

Later  on  English  law  has  shifted  its  point  of  view.2  Let
us  take  a  simple  case  which  started  in  the  assizes  in  Leeds.
(R.  v.  Jefferson.)3

In  the  Court  of  Criminal  Appeal,  an  appeal  was  brought
against  a  conviction  for  the  murder  of  a  woman.  It  was
proved  that  the  accused  cut  the  woman's  head  in  the
presence  of  witnesses  and  made  no  attempt  to  escape,  and
also  that  he  took  certain  articles  of  clothing  not  worth  a
penny  and  brought  them  away  with  him.  In  delivering

1  (1859)  1  F.  and  F.  666;  KENNY,  Cases  on  Criminal  Law,  pp.  52  f.
Cf.  VINOGRADOFF,  Common  Sense  in  Law,  pp.  131  f.

2  See  e.g.  Lord  Esher  in  Hcmbury  v.  Haribury  (1892),  8  T.L.R.  559.

3  (1908)  24  T.L.R.  877.


32 INTRODUCTION:  PART  I:  LAW  AND  THE  SCIENCES

judgment  Mr.  Justice  Lawrence  said  that  there  was  no
doubt  that  the  verdict  given  was  unsatisfactory,  and  in  his
judgment  it  ought  not  to  stand.  There  was  strong  evidence
called  before  the  jury  which  showed  that  the  man  was  not
in  such  a  state  of  mind  as  to  make  him  responsible  for  his
act.  The  sentence  must  be  quashed,  and  the  order  would
be  that  the  prisoner  should  be  detained  as  a  criminal  lunatic
during  His  Majesty's  pleasure.

The  general  principle  which  governs  the  subject  at  pres-
ent was  summarized  by  Mr.  Justice  Bray  in  R.  v.  Fryer.
(24  Cox  C.C.  403.)  The  circumstances  of  the  case  were
very  similar  to  those  in  Reg.  v.  Haynes.  A  soldier  had,
without  any  apparent  motive,  strangled  a  girl  who  had
been  engaged  to  him.  Bray,  J.,  said  in  his  charge  to  the
jury:  "For  the  purpose  of  to-day  I  am  going  to  direct
you  in  the  way  indicated  by  a  very  learned  judge,  Fitz-
james  Stephen, — if  it  is  shown  that  he  (the  accused)  is  in
such  a  state  of  mental  disease  or  natural  mental  infirmity
as  to  deprive  him  of  the  capacity  to  control  his  actions,  I
think  you  ought  to  find  him  what  the  law  calls  him —
*  insane.'  3

The  crucial  question  of  responsibility  has  to  be  decided
by  a  jury  guided  by  the  general  directions  of  the  presiding
judge.  In  this  way  a  small  body  of  laymen  representing
public  opinion  in  the  country  have  to  formulate  verdicts
as  to  innocence,  guilt  and  responsibility.  They  have  to
make  up  their  minds  not  only  as  to  the  evidence  of  wit-
nesses and  the  value  of  circumstantial  indications,  but  also
as  to  the  relative  importance  of  statements  by  experts,  such
as  doctors  in  cases  of  mental  disease  or  morbid  influence.
From  a  technical  point  of  view  such  a  method  is  open  to
objections,  and,  though  the  creation  of  the  Court  of  Crim-
inal Appeal  makes  it  possible  to  correct  flagrant  errors,  the
verdicts  of  juries  do  not  always  show  a  high  standard  of
perspicacity.

According  to  English  ideas,  however,  no  better  means
can  be  found  for  submitting  cases  to  the  opinion  of  the
community.  In  spite  of  all  its  failings,  the  jury  re-
presents public  opinion  and  gives  expression  to  the  com-


II: LAW AND PSYCHOLOGY  33

mon  sense  of  disinterested  citizens.  In  this  matter
as  in  many  others,  law  aims  not  at  perfection  or  re-
finement, but  at  a  definite  solution  on  considerations
which  appeal  to  average  members  of  the  community.  For
this  very  reason  it  is  immensely  important  that  popular
notions  should  be  brought  up  to  a  level  with  the  broad
results  of  scientific  study.  By  imperceptible  degrees  scien-
tific discoveries  are  making  their  way  into  popular  con-
sciousness, and  it  is  the  duty  of  those  who  are  in  closer
touch  with  progressive  thought — lawyers  as  well  as  scien-
tists— to  promote  by  all  available  means  the  spread  of  scientific

and  juridi-

knowledge  on  these  subjects.  maentreat"

•  People  are  often  shy  of  approaching  the  psychological
study  of  legal  phenomena,  especially  of  crime,  because  they
are  afraid  of  undermining  the  practical  premises  of  social
security  by  investigating  closely  the  psychological  motives
of  criminals.  This  apprehension  seems  based  on  a  pure  mis-
understanding:  the  principle  of  social  self-preservation
requires  adaptation  to  altered  scientific  views  rather  than
adherence  to  antiquated  theories  and  the  grappling  of
juries  in  every  single  case  with  the  perplexing  problem  of
responsibility.  Tarde  has  some  pertinent  remarks  on  the
subject.1

Measures  of  isolation  and  prevention  adopted  at  the  right
time  may  safeguard  society  from  dangerous  outbursts  on
the  part  of  degenerate  subjects.  In  any  case,  it  is  obvious
that  the  point  of  departure  of  any  thorough  analysis  of  the
mens  rea  must  be  sought  in  psychology.

On  the  other  hand  it  would  be  idle  to  contend  that
modern  psychologists  can  treat  such  problems  without
taking  heed  of  the  lawyers'  requirements  and  limitations.
For  one  thing,  the  latter  aim  not  at  discussion,  but  at
a  decision.  It  would  never  do  in  practice  to  dismiss  cases
as  insufficiently  ripe  for  a  verdict.  Social  justice  holds  the
accused  in  a  vice  and  must  direct  him  either  to  the  right

i "  A  medico-legal  expert,  Mendel,  has  published  a  work  intended
to  prove  that  his  colleagues,  in  answer  to  the  question  *  Was  the
accused  in  the  possession  of  his  faculties?'  should  refrain  from
giving  any  answer.  ...  It  becomes  more  and  more  easy  for  a
lawyer,  with  the  writings  of  alienists  at  his  disposal,  to  demonstrate
the  irresistible  nature  of  criminal  impulse  which  carried  his  client
off  his  feet."— Penal  Philosophy,  p.  15.
2231  C


34 INTRODUCTION:  PART  I:  LAW  AND  THE  SCIENCES *

or  to  the  left,  must  declare  him  either  guilty  or  not  guilty,
although  in  a  number  of  cases  there  may  be  great  doubts
on  the  point.  A  non  liquet  verdict  in  the  shape  of  a  dis-
agreement of  the  jury,  only  delays  final  decision  and  throws
the  responsibility  for  it  on  another  set  of  doomsmen.  Now
this  is  not  a  chance  peculiarity  nor  one  which  can  be  easily
improved  upon.  Even  in  a  system  like  the  Scotch,  where  a
"not  proven"  verdict  is  possible,  it  is  considered  as  an  ex-
ceptional occurrence,  and  the  aim  of  the  proceedings  is  to
reach  a  definite  yes  or  no  solution  of  the  dispute.

This  state  of  things  corresponds  to  the  fundamental  dif-
ference between  theoretical  investigation  and  practical
action:  the  first  strives  to  reflect  all  shades  and  niceties
of  the  material,  while  co-ordinating  them  as  far  as  possible
in  accordance  with  underlying  principles;  the  latter  steers
according  to  its  best  lights  towards  an  end,  however  incom-
plete and  contradictory  the  information  at  hand  may  be.
A  pilot  navigating  a  ship,  a  physician  attending  a  patient,
a  lawyer  conducting  a  case  cannot  break  off  their  operations
at  pleasure :  this  means  in  the  case  of  the  lawyer  that  he
frequently  has  to  be  content  with  average  estimates  and
approximate  truths,  sometimes  even  with  artificial  presump-
tions which  help  to  bridge  over  insoluble  difficulties  and
awkward  gaps.  Bearing  these  facts  in  mind,  we  shall  be  in
a  position  to  understand  the  peculiar  mixture  of  theoretical
and  practical  considerations  presented  by  law.  In  the
department  of  criminal  justice  from  which  we  started,  this
Definitions  mixed  character  is  especially  noticeable.

Modern  judges  and  juries  cannot  be  content  with  a  slav-
ish rehearsal  of  statutory  rules.  It  seems  out  of  the  question
at  present  to  adopt  Bentham's  definition  of  crime  as  an  act
which  it  is  deemed  necessary  to  forbid,1  and  yet  the  super-
ficial character  of  this  statement  is  still  traceable  in  the
definition  proposed  by  Austin  and  improved  upon  by  an
eminent  professor  of  English  law  in  our  days:  "Crimes
are  wrongs  whose  sanction  is  punitive,  and  is  remissible
by  the  Crown,  if  remissible  at  all."2  One  might  wonder

1  Works,  I,  p.  81. (Principles  of  Morals  and  Legislation,  ch.  xiv.)-

2  KENNY,  Outlines  of  Criminal  Law,  p.  15.


II:  LAW  AND  PSYCHOLOGY  35

why  the  possibility  of  remission  is  both  inserted  in  the
definition  and  declared  not  to  be  essential  to  it.  But  the
principal  objection  to  such  a  definition  seems  to  be,  that  it
is  purely  "extrinsic,"  and  that  to  that  extent  it  begs  the
question  it  is  supposed  to  answer.  We  start  from  the  fact
that  certain  acts  are  punished  by  the  State,  but  we  want  to
know  why  the  State  assumes  such  a  power  in  respect  of  its
citizens.  It  is  not  enough  to  point  to  certain  peculiarities
and  contradictions  of  positive  law,  as  it  has  been  shaped
in  the  course  of  history,  in  order  to  render  an  intrinsic
definition  unnecessary  or  impossible.  As  a  matter  of  fact,
the  principal  "intrinsic"  definitions  (among  them  those  of
Blackstone  and  of  Stephen)  are  not  so  widely  different  or
so  incomplete  as  it  might  seem  at  first  glance.  Crime  is
generally  understood  to  be  a  revolt  of  the  individual  against
society,  and  the  questions  as  to  the  methods  of  reacting
against  such  revolts  and  of  the  measure  of  sensitiveness  in
the  social  body  towards  them  are  subsidiary  questions  which
do  not  go  to  the  root  of  the  matter.1

It  is  out  of  the  question  to  review  all  the  theories  brought  JJJ^Jf Jg
forward  by  modern  psychologists:  we  have  to  leave  their  as  to  ideas,
discussion  to  specialists.  But  it  is  desirable  to  point  out
whom  we  intend  to  follow,  as  there  are  many  roads  towards
the  goal  and  a  jurist  has  to  make  up  his  mind  which  to  take.
The  teaching  as  to  the  association  of  ideas,  developed  by
Locke,  Hume,  J.  S.  Mill  and  Bain  may  serve  as  a  starting-
point.  It  showed  the  necessity  of  analysing  perceptions  in
a  way  entirely  different  from  the  logical  one,  and  to  explain
their  combinations  by  contact  in  the  course  of  experience
rather  than  by  subdivision  and  subsumption  under  abstract
categories.  The  associationists  dealt,  however,  in  a  one-
sided way  with  ideas  as  phenomena  of  cognition,  and  when
they  took  up  the  problems  of  emotion  and  volition,  they
approached  them  from  an  intellectualistic  point  of  view,
as  products  of  formulated  thought.2

iOn  the  literature  of  criminal  law  see,  e.g.,  BEEOLZHEIMER,
Strafrechts  Philosophic,  1907-

2  WUNDT,  on  "  Psychology,"  in  WINDELBAND'S  Philosophic  im
Beginn  dea  XX  Jahrhunderts,  p.  6:  "  In  Wolff's  Deutsche  Psychologie
and  in  the  writing  of  his  successors  we  find  the  meanings  of  the
words  '  to  think '  and  '  thought '  extended  in  a  remarkable  way  to


36 INTRODUCTION:  PART  I:  LAW  AND  THE  SCIENCES


Reflex  The  next  stage  was  reached  by  a  materialistic  synthesis

Energy.  on  a  physiological  basis,  as  represented  by  Fechner,  F.
Maudsley,  Ribot,  etc.  The  aim  was  to  establish  a  direct
dependence  of  the  mental  process  on  the  physical  one.  All
facts  of  consciousness  were  considered  as  epiphenomenal
reflexes  of  physiological  processes  stimulated  by  the  impact
of  outside  objects  on  the  receptive  organs  of  the  nervous
system.  From  this  point  of  view  ideas  could  be  compared
to  the  movements  of  the  meter  registering  the  pressure  of
steam  on  the  engine  —  not  productive  in  any  way,  but
merely  manifesting  the  organic  process.1  James,  Lange
and  others  have  carried  the  psycho-physiological  hypothesis
even  further  into  the  domain  of  feeling  and  of  volition.
In  their  view,  the  feelings  of  joy,  sorrow,  anger,  fear,  are
consequences  of  changes  produced  directly  by  impressions
from  the  outside  world.  These  impressions  call  forth
reflexes  in  the  shape  of  accelerated  action  of  the  heart,  a
stiffening  of  the  muscles,  tears  and  the  like;  the  sentiments
which  were  supposed  to  call  forth  these  physiological
changes  are  in  truth  only  consequential  emotions  produced
by  physiological  reflexes.2  In  the  same  way,  the  exertion
of  the  will  was  supposed  to  be  only  a  phenomenon  of  con-
sciousness, producing  a  mistaken  notion  of  activity  where
in  truth  there  is  a  passive  state  of  the  organism  reflecting
impulses  which  come  to  it  from  the  outside.  This  reversal
of  the  usual  meaning  of  terms  and  of  common-sense  ex-
periences is  not  called  for  by  the  necessities  of  analysis  and
leads  to  absurd  conclusions.  As  James  Ward  has  put  it:
'  '  Let  Professor  James  be  confronted  first  by  a  chained  bear
and  next  by  a  bear  at  large:  to  the  one  object  he  presents

all  kinds  of  psychic  values;  similarly  the  word  'idea*  is  used  in  the
works  of  English  and  French  psychologists  of  this  and  the  preceding
period  in  an  all-embracing  sense;  these  are  eloquent  and  tangible
proofs  of  the  tendency  to  resolve  all  actual  qualities  and  differences
in  one  and  the  same  medium  of  logical  reflection."

1  E.g.  RIBOT,  German  Psychology,  p.  215.

2  E.g. LANGE,  Les  Emotions,  trad,  par  G.  DUMAS, 1902,  p. 10:
"  Emotion  then is  the  outcome  on  the  one  hand  of  more  or less
localized  sensations,  on  the  other  of  vascular  and  muscular  states;
let  us  not  therefore speak  any  more  of  these  mysterious  entities
which  are  called  fear,  anger,  joy,  or,  if  we  speak  of  them,  let  us
clearly  recognize  that  they  express  the  ill-defined  consciousness  of
a  certain  number  of  movements. It  is  a  matter  of  pure  mechanism."


II:  LAW  AND  PSYCHOLOGY  37

a  bun,  and  to  the  other  a  clean  pair  of  heels.  Professor
James  would  remind  us  that  in  his  nomenclature  'it  is  the
total  situation  on  which  the  reaction  of  the  subject  is  made.7
But  there  is  just  a  world  of  difference  between  'object'^
stimulus  transformed  by  preorganized  mechanism  into  an
efferent  discharge,  and  '  object  '=  total  situation  to  which
the  subject  reacts.  '  '  *

Altogether  it  may  be  said  that  the  physiological  school  in
its  eagerness  to  establish  an  immediate  connection  between
mental  states  and  their  physiological  substrata  has  gone
beyond  the  mark.  It  is  not  necessary  and  not  admis-
sible to  eliminate  the  mental  process  in  order  to  assign  the
physical  process  its  due  share.  In  psychology  we  can  no
more  do  without  the  subjective  side  of  our  thoughts  and
emotions  than  we  can  do  without  their  objective  premises.
Consciousness  once  created  becomes  a  powerful  agent  in
itself  and  one  of  the  means  for  carrying  on  evolution.  This
has  been  emphasized  in  every  way  by  Alfred  Fouillee.2
Rightly  construed,  his  theory  of  ideas  as  forces  gets  rid  of
the  supposed  passivity  of  the  mind  and  lays  stress  on  the
most  elementary  form  of  its  conscious  reaction  against  the
outer  world.

In  the  present  stage  of  psychology,  its  most  influential  Mental
exponents  may  be  said  to  have  adopted  the  view  that  the  unity-
mental  process  presents  a  unity  (psychosis)  distinct  from
the  physiological  process,  though  intimately  connected  with
it.  In  its  relations  to  the  outside  world  the  mind
is  both  receptive  and  active,  receptive  in  so  far  as  it
receives  impressions,  and  is  excited  by  them  to  emotion;
active  in  so  far  as  it  transforms  its  impressions  and  emo-
tions by  reasoning  and  volition.  The  vital  knot  between
reception  and  activity  is  formed  by  attention,  that  is,  by  the
selection  of  certain  facts  for  mental  treatment.3

Such  a  view  excludes  the  old  subdivision  of  the  mental


.  Brit.  Art.  Psychology  (1st  ed.),  XXII,  p.  586.

2  A.  FOUILLEE,  L'tivolutionnisme  des  idees-  forces,  p.  196:  "This  de-
velopment of  energy  is  not  a  creation  of  energy,  nor  a  free  direction
of  energy;  physically  it  is  the  passing  of  one  kind  of  energy  into
another,  of  the  force  of  tension  into  the  force  of  translation;  psy-
chologically it  is  the  passing  of  a  conflict  of  ideas  and  of  desires  into
determination."  Cf.  WUNDT,  Logik,  I,  p  24.

a  J.  A.  WARD,  Psychological  Principles  (1918),  p.  57.


38 INTRODUCTION:  PART  I:  LAW  AND  THE  SCIENCES

current  into  faculties.  It  regards  consciousness  as  the  sub-
jective aspect  of  the  mental  process  itself  and  prepares  the
way  for  it  by  selective  attention.  James  (Principles  of
Psychology,  I.  400)  rightly  notices  the  insufficient  treatment
of  attention  by  rival  psychological  schools:  "Empiricists
ignore  selective  attention,  because  they  wish  to  account  for
all  products  of  experience  by  laws  of  association  which
cluster  things  together  independently  of  the  activity  of  the
subject,  and  idealists,  in  the  interests  of  the  ideal  order,
regard  experience  as  dictated  by  the  objective  selection  of
pure  thought. ' ' 1

The  fundamental  change  of  point  of  view  has  led  to  a
revision  of  all  the  principal  doctrines  as  to  the  functions
of  the  mind.  As  regards  the  intellect,  it  cannot  be  consid-
ered any  longer  as  the  predominant  partner  in  the  mental
process.  The  assumption  of  metaphysical  rationalism  and
of  empirical  intellectualism  about  ideas  as  primary  ele-
ments of  human  consciousness  have  been  shown  to  be  erron-
eous both  as  to  the  insoluble  character  of  these  supposed
elements  and  as  to  their  combinations.

We  have  now  to  guard  against  the  opposite  exaggeration.
We  understand  that  mental  processes  cannot  be  treated  as
mere  physiological  reflexes:  such  a  view  would  result  in
absurdity — in  denying  the  special  character  of  psychic
phenomena;  or  else  would  claim  for  these  phenomena  the
position  of  effects  without  causes.2  But  although  such  a
materialistic  conception  may  be  said  on  the  whole  to  have
been  abandoned  by  leading  psychologists,  a  tendency  to
dwell  chiefly  on  the  animal  processes  in  the  human  mind
is  still  very  prevalent.  It  has  its  natural  explanation  in
the  extensive  study  of  animal  societies  and  of  savage  tribes,
but  it  ought  to  be  balanced  by  considering  the  progressive

1  Wundt's theory of apperception brings into strong relief the
element  of  selective  activity,  but  contains  doubtful  points  from  the
philosophical point of view. See article on "  Apperception " in
HASTINGS'  Encyclopaedia  of  Ethics  and  Religion.

2  FOUILLEE,  op.  cit.,  p.  164:  "  When  consciousness  exists,  outside  the
conditions  of  unconscious  phenomena,  a  new  condition is  added  to
the  previous  ones,  the  condition  of  consciousness,  whatever  this  may
be; otherwise  this  would  be  a  case  of  an  effect  without  physical


II:  LAW  AND  PSYCHOLOGY  39

aspect  of  human  history  and  the  immense  difference  between
human  and  animal  development  taken  as  a  whole.  The
decisive  cleavage  in  this  respect  is  marked  by  language:
it  provides  the  human  race  with  an  instrument  for  mental
intercourse  and  reflection  to  which  there  is  no  equivalent
in  the  animal  world.  While  animals  possess  means  of
expressing  their  emotions  by  varied  cries,  man  alone  has
elaborated  speech  as  a  method  of  intellectual  formulation.
The  importance  of  language  in  logic  has  been  sufficiently
appreciated  and  explained  by  writers  on  the  subject.  But
its  importance  in  psychology  is  certainly  as  great.  It  makes
it  possible  for  the  individual  to  communicate  not  only  with
his  immediate  neighbours,  and  not  only  in  respect  of  ele-
mentary wants  and  feelings :  it  raises  individual  conscious-
ness to  social  consciousness  in  all  tribes  and  all  nations  of
the  world.  And  as  the  chief  operations  in  forming  lan-
guage are  logical  operations,  language  tends  necessarily  to
increase  the  share  of  the  intellectual  function  in  human  life
far  beyond  the  spiritual  range  common  to  man  and  the
animals.1  Once  this  step  in  the  growth  of  speech  has  been
achieved,  the  influence  of  reasoning  and  reflection  proceeds
in  human  development  with  ever-increasing  and  cumulative  ment
force.  Through  the  power  of  formulating  ideas  man  ob-
tains a  greater  control  over  the  unformulated  impulses  of
his  nature,  and  this  certainly  contributes  to  the  setting  up
and  to  the  enforcement  of  moral  standards;  reflection  as
well  as  imagination  find  vent  in  religious  beliefs  and
religious  worship.  Altogether,  the  evolution  of  human
civilization  is  unthinkable  without  the  guiding  thread  of
intellectual  intercourse  and  speculation.2

1  TARDE,  Psychologic  e"conomique,  1902,  p.  113:  "It  is  impossible  to
account  for  the  superior  designs  of  art,  luxury,  truth,  justice,  or
to  define  the  notions of  credit  or of value without invoking the
constant  interchange  between  human  sensibilities,  intelligences,  and
wills in their perpetually  changing  impressions. — They cross each
other's  lines  ceaselessly."

2  WUNDT,  Lectures  on  Human  and  Animal  Psychology (translated
by  Titchener,  1894),  p.  350: "It  seems  that  the  entire intellectual
life  of  animals  can  be  accounted  for  on  the  simple  laws  of  associa-
tion. Nowhere  do  we  find  the  characteristic  marks  of  a  true  reflec-
tion  of any active functioning of the imagination or the under-
standing— you  may  remember  the  story  in  Pliny's  Natural  History


40 INTRODUCTION:  PART  I:  LAW  AND  THE  SCIENCES

Emotions  This  principle  should  be  firmly  borne  in  mind  when  we

instincts.  come  to  consider  the  modern  aspect  of  the  theory  of
emotion.  It  was  recognized  long  ago  that  a  purely  in-
tellectualistic  interpretation  of  human  life  would  reduce
it  to  a  colourless  scheme  of  premises  and  conclusions.  Tone
and  rhythm  are  imparted  to  it  by  the  currents  of  appetite
and  satisfaction  which  run  through  every  moment  of  human
as  well  as  animal  existence.  And  the  discoveries  in  the
field  of  heredity  and  development  have  shown  that  these
emotional  currents  are  not  restricted  to  the  life  of  single
individuals.  In  combination  with  cognitive  processes  they
form  inheritable  tendencies,  habits  and  instincts  which
themselves  serve  as  stepping  stones  for  further  evolution.1
By  observing  the  animal  world,  this  feature  is  made
especially  clear  in  its  final  results  and  sometimes  in  its
gradual  stages.  We  all  know  what  remarkable  effects  the
accumulation  of  experience,  together  with  hereditary  trans-
mission, has  produced  in  the  habits  of  bees  and  ants,  and
it  is  a  legitimate  surmise  that  similar  processes  have  played
a  great  part  in  preparing  the  various  customs  of  human
tribes.2

of  the  elephant  who  was  punished  during  a  performance  for  his  bad
dancing,  and  who  secretly  set  to  work  to  practise  in  the  night  so
as  to  do  better  next  time?  Are  we  likely  to  accept  the  story  and  the
explanation?  "

P.  357 :  "  The  criterion  of  intelligent  associative  action  and  of
intelligent  action  proper  can  only  be  this — that  the  effect  of  associa-
tion does  not  go  beyond  the  connection  of  particular  ideas,  whether
directly  excited  by  sense  impressions,  or  only  reproduced  by  them,
while  intellectual  activity,  in  the  narrow  sense  of  the  word,  presup-
poses a  demonstrable  formation  of  concepts,  judgments  and  infer-
ences, or  an  activity  of  constructive  imagination."  Cf.  the  authori-
tative summing  up  of  BOAS,  The  Mind  of  Primitive  Man  (Annual
Report  of  the  Smithsonian  Institution,  1901,  pp.  451-60).  See  also
HOBHOUSE,  Mind  in  Evolution,  321  ff.

1  MACDOUGALL,  Introduction  to  Social  Psychology,  8th  ed. (1914),
p.  29:  "  [Instinct]  an  inherited  or  innate  psycho-physical  disposition
which  determines  its  possessor  to  perceive  and  to  pay  attention  to
objects  of a certain class, to  experience  an emotional excitement
of  a  particular  quality  on  perceiving  such  an  object,  and  to  act  in
regard  to  it  in  a  particular  manner,  or  at  least  to  experience  an
impulse  to  such  action." Another  definition  of  instinct  in  HOBHOUSE,
Mind  in  Evolution,  70  ff.

2  MACDOUGALL,  ibid.,  p. 7: "The  truth  is  that  men  are  moved
by  a  variety  of  impulses  whose  nature  has  been  determined  through
long  ages  of  the  evolutionary  process  without  reference  to  the  life
of  man  in  civilized  societies. The  problem  is,  how  can  one  account


II:  LAW  AND  PSYCHOLOGY  41

The  real  difficulty  arises  when  we  try  to  apportion  the
share  of  emotional  and  of  cognitive  functions  in  accounting
for  the  complex  results.  It  has  to  be  recognized,  to  begin
with,  that  it  is  impossible  to  make  a  clear  distinction  be-
tween instincts  as  such  and  inherited  habits  or  capacities:
one  variety  shades  off  imperceptibly  into  the  other,  and
their  fluid  differences  depend  entirely  on  the  greater  or  the
lesser  degree  of  unconscious  determination.  Cats  and  dogs
have  a  proverbial  repulsion  one  to  the  other,  and  yet  it
has  often  happened  that  kittens  and  puppies  have  been
brought  up  to  live  together  in  perfect  amity.  Gipsies  are
well  known  vagabonds  and  horse-thieves,  but  many  scions
of  the  gipsy  race  have  managed  to  live  the  life  of  ordinary
law-abiding  citizens.

Besides,  the  variety  of  combinations  of  nature  and  en-
vironment are  so  great  that  we  can  only  strive  to  mark  off
the  principal  tendencies  of  development,  but  not  their
innumerable  ramifications.  For  this  very  reason  it  is  mis-
leading to  attempt  a  permanent  tabulation  of  primitive
instincts  on  an  emotional  basis :  such  a  tabulation  is  bound
to  be  arbitrary  and  confused  at  the  same  time.  Is  there,
e.g.,  sufficient  reason,  for  surmising  a  primitive  instinct  of
self -abasement,  though  a  dog  generally  slinks  with  his  tail
between  his  legs  when  he  meets  a  redoubtable  specimen  of
his  kind  ?  Surely  the  instinct  of  self-preservation  with  its
natural  consequence  of  fear  is  sufficient  to  explain  such
occurrences.  Or  is  it  absolutely  necessary  to  tabulate  the
opposite  feeling  of  self-assertion  (pride,  vanity,  etc.)  as  a
special  primordial  instinct?  The  sentiment  of  self  is  wide
enough  to  embrace  this  and  other  expressions  of  an  egotistic
state  of  mind.  Curiosity  again  can  hardly  be  understood
without  introducing  the  element  of  cognition.1  The  only
motive  for  establishing  these  complicated  distinctions  seems
to  be  the  wish  to  reduce  the  forms  of  civilization  to  develop-
ments of  habits  common  to  men  and  animals.  But,  what-
ever may  be  our  speculations  as  to  the  connecting  links
between  apes  and  primitive  man,  there  is  after  all  the  vast

for  the  fact  that  men  so  moved  ever  come  to  act  as  they  ought,  or
morally  and  reasonably."

1  MAcDouoALL,  Social  Psychology,  pp.  49  ff.  holds  a  different  view
of  these  matters.


42 INTRODUCTION :  PART  I:  LAW  AND  THE  SCIENCES

world  of  experience  as  to  subsequent  stages  of  human  his-
tory to  be  accounted  for.1

Altogether,  it  seems  scarcely  scientific  to  build  up  an
edifice  of  more  or  less  differentiated  " instincts"  in  order
to  prove  the  influence  of  heredity  and  custom  on  social  life.
If,  however,  we  set  out  to  trace  hereditary  habits  to  their
ultimate  sources  we  shall  hardly  get  beyond  modifications  of
selfishness  and  altruistic  attraction  on  the  one  hand,  and  the
substitution  of  unpremeditated  reflexes  for  reasoned  action
on  the  other :  such  a  substitution  can,  of  course,  take  place
in  the  experience  of  an  individual — say,  in  learning  to
walk — as  well  as  in  that  of  a  hereditary  group,  e.g.,  in  the
formation  of  peculiarities  of  dialectic  speech.2

The  win.  The  idea  of  the  will  as  a  special  faculty  separated  from
cognition  and  feeling  has  been  abandoned  by  modern  psy-
chological analysis.  It  is  recognized  only  as  the  appetitive
side  of  the  mental  process  and,  as  such,  it  appears  in  the
germ  in  every  manifestation  of  feeling  whether  we  call  it
conation,  desire  or  appetite.  In  so  far  as  any  fact  of  atten-
tion is  conditioned  by  a  certain  stress  of  mental  activity,
the  will  takes  part  in  all  the  various  stages  of  the  process  of
cognition — in  perception,  reflection,  reasoning,  exertion  of
memory  and  imagination.  The  illusion  of  a  faculty  dis-
tinct from  the  intellect  and  from  feeling  is  created  by  the
fact  that  the  manifestation  of  the  will  being  a  final  act,
a  solution  of  the  previous  psychical  tension,  it  is  reflected
in  consciousness  as  a  movement  in  opposition  to  motives,
as  a  creative  act  in  opposition  to  its  preparation.3  This
reflection  of  the  will  in  self-consciousness  is  at  the  root  of
the  famous  controversy  between  the  upholders  of  a  free  will
and  the  determinists.  In  spite  of  self-consciousness,  no

i  MACDOUGALL,  op.  cit. Cf.  the  curious  explanation  of  self-con-
sciousness, pp.  247  f.

1  Ibid. Cf.  the  curious  explanation  of  self-consciousness,  pp.  247  f .

2  WUNDT,  Volkerpsychologie,  I,  1,  p.  11:  "The  domain  of  voluntary
actions  derived  from  considered  motives  lies  outside  the range of
social  psychology. The  latter  is  confined  to  the  domain  of  instinctive
action."

3  GIDDINGS,  Inductive  Sociology,  p.  269 :  "  Psychical  determination
is  the  free  exercise  of  will  not  the  exercise  of  free  will — in  so  far  as
volition is  the expression of one's own mental constitution — from
hereditary  tendency  and  present  sensations  to  reason  and  conscience.
It  is  an  internal  and  psychical  as  distinguished  from  external  and
physical  necessity."


II:  LAW  AND  PSYCHOLOGY  43

action  and  no  will  can  be  thought  to  be  causeless.  In  fact,
the  will  appears  as  the  last  link  in  an  endless  chain  of
causes  ranging  from  the  immediate  impulses  which  led  to
the  exertion  of  will-power — to  the  remote  conditions  shap-
ing character  and  circumstances.  In  this  way  it  may  be
taken  for  granted  that  every  act  of  a  man  is  pre-established
by  previous  states  and  events.  If,  however,  the  point  of
view  is  shifted  and  we  reflect  on  our  will  as  the  efficient
cause  of  change,  and  on  our  actions  as  springing  from  our
resolve,  we  are  conscious  of  this  resolve  as  of  a  choice
between  possibilities,  and  sometimes  we  may  watch  the  con-
flict of  motives  which  prompt  us  in  various  directions.  The
conception  of  free  will  is  therefore  a  fact  of  consciousness
in  which,  though  unable  to  ascertain  the  exact  combination
of  factors,  we  oppose  the  various  influences  preceding
action  to  the  resolve  which,  initiates  it.  The  appeal  to
reason  in  the  choice  of  possibilities  is  perfectly  justified,
and  the  formula  of  free  will  comes  to  mean  in  substance
that  men  do  not  follow  impulses  blindly,  but  are  normally
able  to  act  in  accordance  with  their  reason  and  morality.

The  discussion  as  to  free  will  has  brought  us  to  a  general  Moralists,
problem  which  has  been  the  subject  of  inquiry  ever  since
men  began  to  reflect  philosophically — namely,  to  the  prob-
lem of  the  origin  of  the  moral  ideas.  The  problem  is
undoubtedly  of  such  fundamental  importance  that  it  can-
not be  considered  exclusively  as  a  special  topic  of  psy-
chological investigation :  all  the  schools  of  human  thought
approach  it  in  connection  with  their  general  conceptions
of  the  world  and  of  the  destiny  of  man,  that  is,  under  the
direct  influence  of  their  systems  of  synthetic  philosophy.
For  our  purpose,  it  may  be  sufficient  to  treat  the  subject
as  a  necessary  premise  of  the  jurisprudential  doctrine  of
right  and  duty.  It  may  be  taken  for  granted  that  the
extreme  view  which  goes  to  deny  the  existence  of  any
but  selfish  motives  in  human  nature  must  lead,  if  consis-
tently developed,  to  a  revolt  against  all  social  conven-
tions.

The  diatribes  of  Nietzsche  are  eloquent  expressions  of
the  contempt  of  the  " superman"  for  the  human  herd:  he


44 INTRODUCTION:  PART  I: LAW  AND  THE  SCIENCES

deems  himself  a  god  and  an  animal  at  the  same  time.  These
views  do  not  only  account  in  a  striking  manner  for  present
development,  but  they  are  at  the  same  time  a  reduction  to
absurdity  of  the  struggle  for  power  in  the  moral  world.
It  may  be  appropriate  to  consider  some  pronounce-
ments of  the  prophet  of  natural  license.  "To  train  an
animal  that  may  make  promises — is  this  not  the  aim  which
nature  has  set  itself  as  regards  man?  We  find  as  the
ripest  fruit  of  the  tree  the  sovereign  personality — eman-
cipated from  customary  morality,  the  autonomous  super-
moral  personality — briefly,  the  man  endowed  with  his  own
independent,  far-reaching  will,  who  may  make  promises.
Being  such  a  free  man,  this  lord  of  his  free  will,  the
sovereign,  how  should  he  not  know  to  what  extent  he  is
superior  to  every  one  that  may  not  make  promises  and
affirmations  in  his  own  right?  The  free  man,  the  holder
of  a  far-reaching  indestructible  will,  has  his  own  standard
of  value;  looking  out  from  his  own  self  to  the  others,  he
treats  them  with  respect  or  contempt.  He  honours  his
equal,  the  strong,  the  trustworthy — but  he  will  kick  the
whining  curs  who  promise  without  leave,  and  he  will  flog
the  liar  who  breaks  his  word  at  the  very  moment  when  he
utters  it."  (Works,  VII,  343,  344:  Die  Genealogie  der
Moral,  2,  aph.  1,  2.)

"Naturalistic  morality,  that  is  healthy  morality,  is  ruled
by  the  instincts  of  life.  Unnatural  morality,  that  is
morality  as  it  has  been  almost  always  taught,  respected
and  preached  until  now,  is  directed  against  the  instincts
of  life,  it  is  a  condemnation  of  these  instincts,  either  a  con-
cealed or  an  open  and  impudent  condemnation."  (Works,
VII,  88:  Gotzendammerung,  Die  Moral  als  Widernatur,
aph.  4.)

"Selfishness  is  worth  what  the  person  manifesting  it  is
worth  from  a  physiological  point  of  view;  it  can  be  worth
a  great  deal  and  it  can  be  worthless  and  contemptible.
Each  individual  has  to  be  considered  as  the  representative
of  growing  or  of  waning  life.  Altruistic  morality,  a
morality  that  cripples  selfishness,  is  a  bad  sign  under  all
circumstances.  This  applies  to  the  individual.  It  applies


II:  LAW  AND  PSYCHOLOGY  45

even  more  to  nations." (Works,  VIII t  140,  142:  Gotzen-
dammerung,  Streifzilge  eines  Unzeitgemaszen,  aph.  33,  35.)

It  is  something  of  an  anticlimax  to  survey  the  pale  utilitarians.
statements  of  popular  utilitarians  after  having  caught
a  glimpse  of  the  fierce  glare  of  Nietzsche's  invec-
tives. The  utilitarian  doctrine  starts  with  a  charac-
teristic attempt  to  build  up  ethical  precepts  on  a  specu-
lation as  to  blessings  in  the  life  to  come.  Listen  to
Paley  (Moral  Philosophy,  ed.  1838,  III,  bk.  ii,  chap,
iii)  :  "Why  am  I  obliged  to  keep  my  word?  The  answer
will  be :  Because  I  am  urged  to  do  so  by  a  violent  motive,
namely,  the  expectation  of  being  after  this  life  rewarded,
if  I  do,  and  punished  for  it  if  I  do  not,  resulting  from  the
command  of  another,  namely,  of  God.  Therefore  private
happiness  is  our  motive,  and  the  will  of  God  is  our  rule."

"The  method  of  coming  at  the  will  of  God  concerning
any  action  by  the  light  of  nature,  is  to  inquire  into  the
tendency  of  that  action  to  promote  or  diminish  the  general
happiness"  (III,  bk.  ii,  ch.  v).

' '  Whatever  is  expedient,  is  right.  It  is  the  utility  of  any
moral  alone  which  constitutes  the  obligation  of  it"  (bk.  ii,
ch.  vi).

Hardly  more  satisfactory  are  the  modifications  of
"hedonistic"  doctrine  advocated  by  Bentham  and  his
school.  It  has  often  been  shown  that  the  notion  of  the
greatest  happiness  of  the  greatest  number  is  vague  in  all
its  elements.  The  calculus  of  happiness  could  not  be  ef-
fected on  anything  like  scientific  principles  even  if  we  had
made  up  our  minds  as  to  the  unit  of  measurement:  how
are  accumulations  of  welfare  in  some  cases  to  be  balanced
against  diminutions  of  welfare  in  other  cases?  And,  what
is  worse,  what  is  happiness  to  consist  of,  and  to  what  unit
are  ideas  of  happiness  to  be  reduced  in  order  to  apply  a
computation?  The  only  possible  unit  that  suggests  itself
to  Bentham  is  the  enjoyment  of  material  goods,  and  this  is
obviously  too  narrow  a  basis  in  the  case  of  the  moral  world.1
The  standard  of  success  suggested  by  the  "pragmatists"  is
not  of  a  more  abiding  nature.  What  is  success  in  social
life?  We  all  know  how  little  value  is  to  be  attached  to

i  Cf.  WUNDT,  Ethik,  p.  362.


46 INTRODUCTION: PART  I: LAW AND  THE  SCIENCES

external  prizes.  And  if  spiritual  benefits  and  achievements
have  to  be  taken  into  consideration,  then  the  question  arises
again,  what  is  the  unit  and  measure  of  success?

In  view  of  the  evident  failure  of  doctrines  derived  from
individual  egoism,  and  of  the  fact  that  selfishness  is  abso-
lutely inadequate  to  explain  the  existence  of  society,  the
utilitarian  doctrine  has  been  modified  in  two  directions:  on
the  one  hand  sympathy  has  been  claimed  as  a  basis  for
altruistic  behaviour,  on  the  other,  social  pressure  in  the
shape  of  various  forms  of  education  has  been  recognized  as
the  principal  factor  in  the  formation  of  moral  ideas.

The  original  conception  of  sympathy,  as  developed  by
Hume,  may  be  reduced  to  a  kind  of  derived  and  enfeebled
egoism ;  and  it  cannot  be  said  that  the  reproach  of  try-
ing to  counterbalance  strong  psychological  motives  by  weak
ones  can  be  removed  from  subsequent  developments  of
Hume's  theory.1

A  certain  modification  was  introduced  by  Adam  Smith,
who  laid  stress  on  objective  participation  in  the  feelings
and  suffering  of  our  fellow-men,  as  distinct  from  any  sub-
jective putting  of  oneself  into  one's  neighbour's  place.2

The  assumption  of  independent  emotions  of  affection  and
tenderness  certainly  contributes  to  a  fuller  understanding
of  human  thought  and  behaviour,  although  it  destroys  the
unity  and  simplicity  of  a  psychological  theory  of  morals.

1  HUME,  A Treatise  on  Unman  Nature, Pt. II,  Lect. II (cd by
Green  and  Grose,  1874,  II,  271)  :  "It  is  only  from  the  selfishness  of
man  and  the  scanty  provision  nature  has  made  for  his  wants,  that
justice  derives  its  origin Though  in  our  actions  we  may  frequently
lose  sight  of  that  interest  which  we  have  in  maintaining  order,  and
may follow a lesser and more present interest, we never fail to
observe the prejudice we receive either mediately or immediately
from  the  injustice  of  others . . , We  partake  of  their  uneasiness
by  sympathy. The  general  rule  reaches  beyond  those  instances  from
which it  arose, while  at the same time we naturally sympathise
with  others  in  the  sentiments  they  entertain  of  us  "

2  On  the  contrast  between  Hume's  and  Hutcheson's  conceptions  see
WUNDT, FAhik, p. 280: "According to Hume this sympathy
which  we  feel  for  actions  that  do  not  concern  us  personally,  springs
nevertheless  from  egoism,  because  we  should  not  feel  sympathetically
towards virtue if we did not  put  ourselves in the  place  of those
who  draw  an  advantage  from  their  virtuous  actions. Hume's  sym-
pathy is therefore a very different thing from those feelings of
benevolence  and  general  love  of  humanity  which  Hutcheson  has  made
the  basis  of  his  ethical  doctrines."


IT: LAW  AND  PSYCHOLOGY  47

In  order  to  get  rid  of  the  uncomfortable  contrast  between
egoism  and  altruism  and  to  reduce  the  two  sets  of  motives  lanlsm-
to  one  principle,  psychologists  have  been  led  to  social  utili-
tarianism. According  to  this  doctrine  altruistic  habits  and
feelings  are  produced  in  man,  as  well  as  in  animals,  by  the
growth  of  instincts  tending  to  the  conservation  and  the
success  of  the  species.  Mimicry  might  be  cited  as  a  biologi-
cal example  of  such  adaptation  promoting  the  success  of  a
group  in  the  struggle  for  existence,  namely,  the  mimicry
illustrated  by  the  survival  of  animals  which  assume  the
shape  and  colour  of  their  surroundings.  Even  more  signifi-
cant are  the  effects  of  combination:  birds  which  congre-
gate and  hold  together  have  a  better  chance  of  crossing  the
sea  in  their  migrations  than  those  which  do  not;  ants  and
bees  have  been  taught  by  experience  and  instinct  to  work
together  and  to  sacrifice  themselves  for  the  common  in-
terest of  the  ant  heap  or  of  the  beehive.1

The  history  of  man  from  this  point  of  view  presents
all  kinds  of  varieties  of  individual  adaptation  to  social
needs  and  requirements.  Such  adaptations  may  have
been  partly  intentional,  and  partly  unconscious  results  of
the  survival  of  individuals  endowed  with  qualities  con-
tributing to  success  in  the  struggle  for  life:  the  fierce  and
courageous,  the  wily  and  prudent,  would  have  advantages
which  are  transmitted  to  subsequent  generations  by  means
of  heredity.  Such  instances  are  most  obvious,  and,  of
course,  all  traits  making  for  closer  alliance,  for  mutual
support,  are  sure  to  contribute  to  success  in  the  competition
between  social  groups.  Still,  no  one  is  likely  to  maintain
that  motherly  care  or  the  affection  between  lovers  is  pri-
marily attributable  to  survivals  of  competitive  advantages.2

1  ESPINAS,  Des  Societ^s  animates,  p f>7: "Mankind  accomplishes
its  first  stage  of  evolution — in  the  individual  and  in  the  species —
invents  and  perfects  its  first  arts  without  manifesting  reason  in  its
analytic and explicit form. Why should not the animal do the
same  during  the  entire  course  of  its  evolution?  "

2  On the elementary altruistic impulses in human nature see
WUNDT, Ethik, p 229: "We have found [the psychological] ele-
ments [of  morality]  to  be  certain  moral  instincts  which  may  develop
on different lines and therefore manifest themselves with great
variety  in  practice,  but  remain intrinsically identical They have
produced  the  two  great  spheres  which  we  have  found  to  be  the  chief


48 INTRODUCTION:  PART  I:  LAW  AND  THE  SCIENCES

Education.  Tne  educational  aspect  of  social  utilitarianism  is  cer-
tainly of  great  importance.  The  point  has  been  urged  very
strongly  by  Ihering  in  regard  to  morals  as  well  as  to  law.
He  calls  attention  to  the  various  rules  imposed  by  social
groups  on  their  members  by  way  of  convention  and  custom,
all  tending  to  organize  and  discipline  individuals  for  the
sake  of  carrying  out  various  forms  of  common  under-
takings. The  habits  of  a  set  of  men  in  regard  to  cloth-
ing, forms  of  address,  etiquette,  fashion,  form  themselves
into  rules  of  conduct  which  single  persons  find  it  diffi-
cult to  transgress.1  Codes  of  honour  and  of  professional
behaviour  are  even  more  exacting.  Religious  bodies  enforce
conformity  with  their  confessional  tenets  and  with  their
moral  requirements.  The  State  formulates  its  claims  by
means  of  compulsory  laws.  Rules  of  moral  obligation  and
conceptions  of  moral  right  are  of  the  same  origin.  All
the  varieties  of  moral  restraint  are  originally  either  the
outcome  of  instincts  useful  to  the  species,  or  the  results  of
reflection  and  experience  on  the  part  of  social  groups  as  to
their  aims  and  requirements.  Such  reflection  and  experi-
ence carried  a  step  further  by  education  and  custom  form
a  body  of  rules  of  conduct  entirely  distinct  from  the  aspira-
tions of  individual  egoism  and  providing  the  necessary
checks  on  the  latter.2

There  is  a  good  deal  of  truth  in  these  observations,  but
they  do  not  constitute  the  whole  truth.  As  in  the  case
of  sympathetic  altruism,  we  are  confronted  in  the  case  of
social  requirements  with  a  principle  which,  in  itself,  could
be  regarded  only  as  supplementary  or  secondary  in
comparison  with  the  innate  force  of  selfishness.  People
may  be  drilled  into  docility  to  some  extent  by  the  associa-

and  never-failing  expressions  of  moral  life,  namely  religious  ideas
and  social  intercourse.

"Corresponding  to  1hrso  two  great,  universally  recognized,  groups
are  two  psychological  elementary  motives,  the  general  recognition  of
which  rests  on  the  constancy  with  which  they  are  active  in  human
consciousness,  namely  the  feelings  of  veneration  and  of  affection"
IITERING,  Zweck  'im  Recht,  II,  pp.  258  ff . ;  VINOGRADOFF,  Common
in  Laio,  pp.  10  ff.


-  IHERING,  Zireck  im  Recht,  T,  p.  43  (popular  ed.);  LISZT,  Straf-
rcchtliche  Aufsiitze,  I.  pp.  144  ff.;  DURKHEIM,  Les  regies  de  la
mcthode  sociologique,  IX,  p.  11.


II:  LAW  AND  PSYCHOLOGY  49

tion  of  ideas,  by  influence  and  custom,  as  animals  are
drilled  to  obey  their  tamer,  but  the  universal  prevalence
of  moral  restraints  must  have  its  roots  in  individual  nature
in  order  to  stand  the  strain  put  on  it  by  interests  and
desires.  It  is  only  when  a  starting-point  for  a  controlling
force  has  been  discovered  in  the  nature  of  every  individual
that  the  complicated  machinery  of  moral  ideas  can  be  set
in  motion  by  the  pressure  of  social  requirements.

The  solution  of  the  problem  was  supplied  long  ago  Conscience.
by  the  common  opinion  of  mankind:  it  lies  in  the  fact
that  man,  as  a  reflecting  being,  is  constrained  to  judge
his  own  acts  as  well  as  those  of  others.  Conscience  is  not
a  new  notion,  but  it  is  not  an  antiquated  notion  either.
Whatever  we  may  desire  and  do,  our  eyes  are  open  to  our
own  doings  and  we  estimate  them  more  or  less  explicitly
at  their  value  in  accordance  with  principles,  distinct  from
the  particular  motives  which  may  have  prompted  our
action.  This  necessity  of  reflection,  the  appeal  to  imper-
sonal verification,  holds  good  not  only  in  the  case  of  reason-
ing but  also  in  that  of  conduct.  Of  course,  men  sin  against
conscience,  as  they  err  against  logic:  the  modern  Attila
proclaimed  his  righteousness,  mercy  and  piety  at  the
very  time  when  he  plunged  the  world  into  a  hell  of  lawless-
ness and  cruelty.  But  sin  and  error  are  not  to  be  wiped
out  by  impudence.  Securus  judicat  orbis  t  err  arum!  Con-
science is  inherent  in  the  human  mind,  it  is  as  much  a
necessary  form  of  appreciation  of  actions  as  space  and
time  are  necessary  categories  of  our  experience  of  phe-
nomena. To  Kant  belongs  the  great  merit  of  having  ex-
pressed in  philosophical  terms  the  foundation  of  moral
ideas.  The  process  of  judgment  entailed  by  it  necessarily
takes  the  shape  of  a  comparison  between  the  given  act
and  the  ideal  act,  between  what  is  or  has  been  and  what
ought  to  be  or  ought  to  have  been,  between  the  concrete
achievement  and  the  general  rule.1  Where  there  is  judg-

i  SIMMEL,  Kant,  p.  54:  "If  we  recognize  as  a  fact  a  categorical
ought,  a  compelling  law  in  ourselves  above  our  will,  and  obedience
to  it  as  the  foundation  of  all  morality — how  can  we  reconcile  this
with  the  thought  that  freedom  is  the  greatest  of  all  values?  The
deepest  sense  of  Kant's  Ethics  lies  in  the  assertion  that  this

2231  D


50 INTRODUCTION:  PART  I: LAW  AND  THE  SCIENCES

ment  as  to  past  or  present,  there  are  imperative  obligations
as  to  the  present  or  the  future.  Such  obligations  are  cate-
gorical, because  free  reason  decides  not  on  the  arbitrary
choice  of  the  persons  concerned,  but  on  the  strength  of
universal  requirements.  The  fact  that  imperatives  of  this
kind  are  often  disregarded  does  not  in  any  way  alter  their
nature  as  rules  of  conduct.  The  general  direction  for  the
individual  in  connection  with  moral  problems  is  to  act  in
such  a  way  that  his  rule  of  conduct  may  be  accepted  as  a
law  of  universal  application.1

It  may  be  added  that  the  gradual  shading  off  from  judg-
ments of  conscience  on  a  high  level  of  human  development
to  rudimentary  forms  of  moral  reflection  in  children  and
animals,  is  in  no  way  an  argument  against  the  existence  of
the  category  of  duty  in  conscious  beings.  With  children
and  animals  the  working  of  the  mind  in  this  groove  is
usually  prompted  by  acquired  habits  or  by  inherited  in-
stincts, but  this  only  means  that  the  contents  of  their
moral  judgments  are  supplied  by  these  methods.  The  pos-
sibility of  providing  such  contents  is  conditioned  by  the
faculty  of  estimating  conduct.  This  faculty  cannot  but
differ  widely  in  the  case  of  different  species  and  of  various
individuals  within  each  species — a  familiar  instance  is
supplied  by  the  difference  in  this  respect  between  dogs
and  cats.  All  our  surmises  as  to  the  working  of  ani-
mals' minds  are  necessarily  hypothetical  in  the  extreme,
as  we  have  no  means  of  communicating  with  animals  in
the  same  way  as  we  do  with  our  fellow-men.  Our  observa-
tions of  the  self-sacrificing  devotion  of  bees  to  the  hive  com-
munity or  of  the  household  virtues  of  birds  are  merely
external  arid  devoid  of  the  background  of  psychological
introspection.  Under  these  circumstances  it  is  hardly
allowable  to  make  the  supposed  limitations  of  the  animal


contradiction  does  not  really  exist  .  .  .  Man  can  exert  his  free  will
only  according  to  an  absolutely  general  law  and  conversely  only  a
will  acting  according  to  the  categorical  'ought,'  can  be  called  free
It  is  Kant's  leading  strain  \Leitmotiv]  that  this  general  law  imposes
itself  on  every  one  from  within,  and  is  produced  in  the  very  well-
spring  of  personality  "

i  Cf .  CAIRO  on  Kant,  II,  pp 142  ff.


II:  LAW  AND  PSYCHOLOGY  51


mind  an  argument  against  the  development  of  conscience
in  man.

A  most  important  feature  of  the  "  subjective  idealism "
formulated  by  Kant,  and  taken  up  again  by  modern  thinkers  in  Morals-
who  do  not  wish  to  surrender  to  sensualism  and  rationalism,
is  the  distinction  between  the  formal  and  the  material
elements  in  morality.  The  imperative  of  duty  is  a  category
of  the  human  mind,  but  the  actual  precepts  as  to  duty  are
not  innate  in  any  sense.  They  are  suggested  by  historical
circumstances  in  the  widest  sense  of  the  term,  including
personal  surroundings,  inherited  habits,  social  customs,
educational  ideals,  laws.1  They  vary  from  age  to  age,  from
country  to  country,  from  school  to  school,  although  the
conditions  of  human  intercourse  and  the  similarity  of
fundamental  problems  ensure  a  good  deal  of  traditional
continuity  and  some  universality  of  principles.2  I  should
like  to  emphasize  at  this  point  that  although  historical
evolution  and  social  influence  come  fully  to  their  right  in
such  combinations,  it  would  be  erroneous  to  suppose  that
the  framing  of  moral  ideals  is  to  be  always  regarded  as  a
direct  response  to  social  requirements.  We  undoubtedly
have  to  recognize  the  power  of  national  consciousness
and  of  universal  sense  of  right  to  make  men  face  privations
of  all  kinds  and  give  their  lives  for  a  good  cause,  but  we
should  not  forget  that  most  powerful  moral  impulses  in  the
history  of  mankind  have  come  from  personalities  who  stood
not  for  the  common  agreements  of  their  contemporaries,
but  for  a  burning  ideal  of  truth  and  righteousness.  Moses
and  Buddha  did  not  receive  their  inspiration  from  the
Philistines  or  from  the  Sophists  of  their  day,  and  their
ideas  did  not  achieve  victory  by  the  help  of  the  ballot.

1  NATORP,  Sozialpadagogik,  p 39

2  BRUNO  BAUCH ( Windelband's  Philosophic  im  XX  Jahrhundert)  :
"  Evolutionist  morality  arrives  at  a  similar  conclusion  although it
does  not  lay  stress  on  the  necessary  connection  between  the  category
of  duty  and  the  concrete  duties." See,  for  example,  DURKHEIM,  Le
Suicide, p. 226: "All this super-physical life is awakened and
developed  not  by  cosmic  but  by  social  means It  is  the  action  of
society that  has  excited in  us  these  sentiments  of  sympathy and
solidarity  which incline  us  towards  one  another; this  it  is  which,
fashioning  us  after  its  image,  has  penetrated  us  with  these  beliefs,
religious,  political  and  moral,  which  govern  our  conduct." Cf.  p.  x.


52 INTRODUCTION:  PART  I: LAW  AND  THE  SCIENCES

This  does  not  mean  that  the  prophets  and  martyrs  are
detached  from  the  history  of  their  time:  on  the  contrary,
they  reveal  its  most  intimate  needs  and  aspirations.  But
they  have  to  break  through  the  crust  of  prejudices  and
recognized  interests,  and  to  give  shape  in  a  distinct  form
to  the  confused  cravings  of  nations.1  Prophetical  activity
may  be  said  not  only  to  discard  old  rules,  but  to  introduce
new  values,  in  as  much  as  it  obtains  currency  and  influence
for  new  ideas.  And  it  is  riot  only  in  such  exceptional  cases
that  the  freedom,  the  sovereignty  of  personal  spirit  over
surrounding  conditions  manifests  itself,  but  also  in  count-
less instances  when  smaller  men  obey  the  dictates  of  their
conscience  in  opposition  to  commands  imposed  by  social
authority :  the  three  youths  who  refused  to  worship  the
statue  of  the  King,  the  Christian  confessors  who  gave  their
lives  for  the  sake  of  their  faith,  the  assertors  of  free  thought
and  political  liberty  who  did  not  shrink  from  the  Inquisi-
tion, have  expressed  by  their  actions  the  claim  to  oppose
outside  pressure  in  the  name  of  conviction  and  conscience,
and  their  opposition  is  to  be  considered  as  much  a  social
fact  as  the  pressure  brought  to  bear  on  them,  quite  apart
from  its  success  or  failure  in  given  circumstances.

It  would  be  superfluous  to  point  out  the  close  connection
of  the  psychological  and  ethical  doctrines  just  mentioned
with  the  theory  of  law.  No  teaching  on  the  theory  of  law
can  afford  to  ignore  questions  as  to  the  interdependence
of  the  functions  of  the  mind,  the  analysis  of  instinct  and
passion,  the  study  of  the  will,  the  cross  currents  between
morality  and  law,  etc.  We  shall  have  to  revert  to  these
questions  again  and  again  when  we  come  to  examine  the
development  of  systems  of  jurisprudence.

i  CABLYLE,  On  Heroes  and  Hero  Worship  (The  People's  Library,
pp.  49,  50) ,  "  The  Hero  as  Prophet ":  "  .  .  .  Such  a  man  is  what  we
call  an  original  man;  he  comes  to  us  at  first-hand.  A  messenger
he,  sent  from  the  Infinite  Unknown  with  tidings  to  us  We  may
call  him  Poet,  Prophet,  God: — in  one  way  or  other,  we  all  feel  that
the  words  he  utters  are  as  no  other  man's  words.  ...  It  glares
in  upon  him.  Really  his  utterances,  are  they  not  a  kind  of  '  revela-
tion';— what  we  must  call  such  for  want  of  some  other  name?  It
is  from  the  heart  of  the  world  he  comes."


II:  LAW  AND  PSYCHOLOGY  53

Let  us  come  back  to  the  evolution  of  criminal  juris-  fhtgdevefop
prudence  and  look  at  it  in  the  light  of  modern  psychologi-
cal  research.  Although  crime  and  punishment  have  faced  Iaw-
one  another  right  through  history,  the  manner  in  which  the
two  notions  have  been  adjusted  as  regards  each  other  has
varied  in  a  significant  way.  In  the  beginning  of  civilization
punishment  was  a  violent  reaction  against  harmful  acts,  a
form  of  self-defence.  This  gave  rise  to  the  blood  feud  and  to
revenge  for  personal  injuries.  The  action  of  the  avenger
may  be  spontaneous,  or  induced  by  common  opinion,  but
the  correspondence  between  injury  and  the  recoil  is  obvious
in  both  eventualities.  In  a  second  stage  political  com-
munities of  various  kinds  assumed  judicial  authority  and
carried  out  retribution  in  the  name  of  the  government.  In
a  third  stage,  after  the  great  progress  achieved  by  human
individuality  with  its  lofty  ideals  of  freedom  and  justice,
the  problem  has  been  shifted  from  the  sphere  of  struggle
with  the  offender  into  the  sphere  of  justification  of  the
judge.  Instead  of  being  a  form  of  instinctive  self-defence
criminal  punishment  became  a  measure  of  social  educa-
tion.1

As  Liszt  has  very  properly  expressed  it,  punishment
gradually  comes  to  be  understood  as  a  means  towards  an
end,  the  end  being  to  counteract  criminality.2

The  new  developments  in  scientific  psychology  were
bound  to  affect  the  theory  of  crime  and  punishment,  and
they  are  beginning  to  react  on  penal  legislation.  Com-
missions instituted  to  review  the  field  of  prison  manage-
ment and  penal  servitude  have  come  to  the  conclusion  that
when  punishment  renders  the  persons  subjected  to  it  worse
than  they  were  before,  it  defeats  its  own  purpose.3  It  is
widely  recognized  both  in  England  and  on  the  Continent
that  the  present  system  of  a  machine-like  correspondence
between  abstract  entities  designated  as  crimes,  and  penalties
graduated  on  external  standards,  leads  to  a  formal  casuistry

1  On the general evolution of ideas as to criminal law, see
MAKABEVICZ,  Etnfiihrung  in  die  Philosophic  des  Strafrechts,  1906.

2  LISZT,  Strafrechtliche  Aufsatze,  p.  83.

3FEBBI,  Criminal  Sociology  (English  translation),  p.  xii.


54 INTRODUCTION: PART  I: LAW  AND  THE  SCIENCES

against  which  healthy  moral  feeling  and  social  experience
rise  in  revolt.1

^ne  °^  *ne  Italian  writers  who  have  done  so  much  of  late
crfmina1In  *°  throw  light  on  these  momentous  problems  has  described
law.  jn  striking  words  the  general  effect  of  the  fermentation

which  is  spreading  in  the  midst  of  society  at  large  in  con-
nection with  questions  of  criminal  responsibility.  "It  was
natural  to  suppose  that  by  means  of  the  condemnation  of
the  guilty  to  several  years  of  imprisonment,  society  was
sufficiently  protected  against  him  and  his  like.  But
when,  over  and  above  these  causes,  one  discovers  still
deeper  ones,  of  which  the  former  are  only  the  result,  when,
for  example,  one  is  concerned  with  the  perversity  of  the
thief's  predecessors,  his  education,  his  shameless  mendi-
cancy, the  petty  larcenies  which  were  his  apprenticeship
during  his  childhood,  his  shameful  loves,  and  his  sorry
associates  .  .  .  then  society  feels  less  secure  because  it
feels  itself  the  more  threatened.  On  the  whole,  free  will
being  denied,  society  understands  that  it  has  not  a  single
force,  accumulated  and  isolated  in  a  single  individual,  to
contend  with,  but  that  it  stands  face  to  face  with  a  com-
plexity of  forces  converging  in  an  individual ;  its  anger
against  him  becomes  less,  and  its  peril  is  thereby  in-
creased/'2

Yet  when  one  takes  stock  of  the  whole  range  of  modern

1  TARDE,  Penai  Philosophy,  p 30: "Penal law . . . was  degen-
erating into  a  sort  of  fictitious  casuistry,  where  the  classifying  of
entities  makes  us  lose  sight  of  realities,  and  where  we  are  engaged
with  offences,  with  the  manner  of  being  of  offences,  and  their  relation
to  penalties,  and  never  with  the  offenders  and  their  relation  to  good
people TTere  we  have  neither  psychology  nor  sociology,  nothing  but
ontology" Cf GAROFALO,  Criminology,  p.  55: "The  jurist  studies
crime  only in its  external form; he  makes  no  analysis from the
standpoint of experimental psychology. . . . What concerns him
is . . the classification of facts according  to the rights which
they  infringe — the  quest  for  the  punishment  which  proportionally,
and '  in abstract,' is a just punishment, not for the punishment
which experience has proved efficacious for the diminution of
crime in general  " The  change  of treatment in Great Britain is
reflected  among  other  things,  in  the  recent  legislation  as  to  penalties,
which  leaves  a  wide  scope  to  the  discretion  of  the  Court. See,  e  g ,
Criminal  Justice  Administration  Act,  1914 (4  and  5  Geo.  V,  c 58),
Cl 10,  12,  16,  etc.

2  CARNEVALE, Critica penale (Lipari, 1889), ref. to by TARDE,
Penal  Philosophy,  p.  15.


II:  LAW  AND  PSYCHOLOGY  55

criminological  inquiries,  one  finds  that  there  is  no  reason
for  disquietude  on  the  part  of  lawyers  or  of  the  public.
The  movement  is  certainly  part  of  a  great  crisis  which  has
come  over  the  civilized  world,  and  in  so  far  its  course  will
be  affected  by  the  progress  of  thought  in  all  the  higher
regions  of  human  speculation.  But,  apart  from  that  philo-
sophical atmosphere  which  is  common  to  all  branches  of
study,  the  specific  evolution  of  criminal  jurisprudence
does  not  present  insoluble  difficulties  and  fatal  contra-
dictions.

A  kind  of  panic  was  produced  by  the  discoveries  of
alienists  and  neuro-pathologists  such  as  Despine,  Morel,
Maudsley,  Krafft-Ebbing  on  the  one  hand,  by  Lombroso's
hypothesis  as  to  atavistic  relapses  into  savagery  on  the
other;  lastly  by  Liegeois'  observations  on  hypnotic  sug-
gestions as  a  source  of  crime.1  But  these  uncomfortable
manifestations  of  the  mysterious  background  of  unconscious
and  subconscious  influences  lurking  behind  healthy  and
well-ordered  life  have  been  reduced  to  their  true  propor-
tions,2 and,  while  necessitating  a  revision  of  rough-and-
ready  methods  of  attributing  criminal  responsibility,  they
are  entirely  unlikely  to  subvert  the  fundamental  notion  of
responsibility.

Some  conclusions  are  clearly  apparent  as  the  results  of  Kant's

teaching.

unprejudiced  investigation.  To  begin  with,  it  has  been
recognized  that  there  was  a  substantial  core  of  truth  in
older  theories  which  have  been  superseded  or  modified  in
recent  years.  The  idea  of  personal  expiation,  for  instance,
which  lies  at  the  root  of  religious  conceptions  of  criminal
retribution,  has  its  full  justification  in  cases  when  some
strong  moral  influence  brought  to  bear  on  the  culprit  or
some  powerful  revulsion  of  feeling  in  his  inner  self  has
produced  a  craving  for  regeneration  and  atonement.3
The  same  idea  lies  at  the  bottom  of  Kant's  much-decried


1  FERRI,  Criminal  Sociology,  p.  26;  GAROFALO,  Criminology,  p  xxx.

2  A  most  important  contribution  in  this  respect  has  been  made  by
COLOJANNI.

a  TARDE,  op.  tit.,  p.  42.


56 INTRODUCTION:  PART  I: LAW  AND  THE  SCIENCES

doctrine  of  retaliation.  Just  because  moral  life  centred  for
Karit  in  the  individual  consciousness  of  duty,  the  only  con-
ception of  punishment  consistent  with  individual  free-
dom was  the  idea  of  atonement  as  the  natural  consequence
of  crime.1  The  fataJ  objection  to  this  unlimited  idealism,
as  well  as  to  the  more  vulgar  forms  of  expiation  practised
by  the  Church,  lies  in  the  fact  that  while  transgression  and
remorse  are  individual,  punishment  and  purification  come
from  the  State  or  from  the  Church  in  the  shape  of  external
compulsion  and  external  purification.  Expiation  and  atone-
ment have  too  often  served  as  pretexts  for  suppression  and
traffic  in  indulgences.  And  yet  modern  penal  reformers
might  do  worse  than  take  to  heart  this  moral  tendency  of
old  theories  and  try  their  skill  at  the  creation  of  real  re-
formatories in  which  incipient  and  occasional  criminals
might  have  a  chance  of  retrieving  their  false  start  in  social
life  by  atonement.

reaction.  Another  train  of  thought  suggested  by  former  aspects

of  criminal  law  points  to  the  decisive  importance  of  social
reaction  against  acts  which  injure  the  commonwealth  either
directly  or  in  the  person  of  its  members.  The  feuds  of  for-
mer epochs  as  well  as  the  wars  of  the  present  are  states  of
conflict  with  enemies,  and  in  a  sense  each  criminal  is  an
enemy  threatening  the  safety  of  the  commonwealth.2  This
broad  ground  of  social  defence  is  so  incontestable  that  even
the  most  extreme  of  those  who  plead  for  extenuating  circum-
stances admit  the  necessity  of  adequate  measures  of  self-
preservation  on  the  part  of  society,  e.g.,  Ferri.8  It  is  more
interesting,  however,  to  watch  how  the  operation  of  this
principle  of  social  reaction  is  understood  and  traced  by  mod-
ern determinists  who  recognize  that  the  world  of  criminal
law  has  not  been  discovered  as  a  new  continent  by  the  disci-
ples of  Lombroso  and  Ferri,  but  existed  a  long  time  before,
although  its  maps  may  have  been  defective  in  important

1  CAIRO,  Kant,  II,  pp.  343,  377. The  moral  meaning  of  expiation  has
been  brought  home  to  all  those  who  care  to  read  by  TOLSTOY'S  Resur-
rection and  by  DOSTOIEVSKY'S  Crime  and  Punishment.

2  TARDE,  op cit.,  p.  57:  "The  'defensive  reaction*  of  a  society  is
always  the  same  thing  at  bottom,  whether  it  be  against  an  aggressor
from  within  or  one  from  without."

3  Sociologia  criminate.


II:  LAW  AND  PSYCHOLOGY  57

respects.  Garofalo,  for  instance,  points  to  the  moral  sense
of  the  community,  as  a  complex  of  inherited  feelings  of
sympathy  and  repulsion  which  the  criminal  finds  arrayed
against  him  in  consequence  of  his  act ; *  while  Tarde
rightly  remarks  that  the  feelings  in  question  are  themselves
a  consolidation  of  innumerable  social  experiences  which
settle  down  into  habits  and  instincts.  This  growth  of  social
ideas  and  habits,  again,  cannot  be  considered  merely  in
contrast  with  the  passions  which  have  prompted  the  crim-
inal to  infringe  the  existing  social  rules;  they  are,  in
another  sense,  part  and  parcel  of  the  consciousness  of  the
criminal  himself.2  This  suggests  Tarde 's  own  doctrine  of
responsibility  as  the  outcome  of  a  person 's  identity  and  the
similarity  of  his  mental  attitude  with  that  of  the  members
of  some  social  group.  This  doctrine,  though  somewhat
scholastic  in  its  wording,  expresses  the  great  truth  that
responsibility  for  crime  rests  on  the  attribution  of  a  set
of  recognized  rules  to  all  reasonable  members  of  a  com-
munity. The  exceptions  derived  from  anomalies  of  the
mind  or  from  anomalous  social  situations  serve  to  confirm
the  significance  of  the  main  principle.  According  to  a
leading  German  criminologist,  Liszt,  crime  is  the  result
of  two  factors — social  influences  and  individual  predispo-
sition. It  really  comes  to  this,  that  as  the  reasonable
individual  ought  to  follow  the  direction  of  moral  duty,
society  is  reasonably  bound  to  maintain  and  to  enforce  a
certain  number  of  positive  rules  which  safeguard  its  exist-
ence. On  the  other  hand,  there  is  no  necessity  to  keep
up  antiquated  forms  of  compulsion  and  punishment  when


1  GAROFALO, op.  cit., p. 102: "The  existence of  non-pathologic
anomalies,  and,  among  these,  the  absence  of  the  moral  sense,  must
be  taken  as  established. . . . The  expression '  moral insanity ' is
utterly  indefensible. . . . When  no  derangement  of  the  physiologic
functions  can  be  detected,  the  case  is  not  one  of  disease, however
great  may  be  the  incompatibility  of  the  individual  with  the  social
environment." P. 104:  "Criminal  anomaly  is  therefore  a  deviation
from  the  type  of  civilized  man;  in  this  it  differs  from  disease,  which
ia  an  anomaly  in  relation  to  the  human  species  as  a  whole."

2  TARDE, op cit., p. 107: "The  malefactor who, after  all, has
breathed  the  social  air  since  his  birth ... is  bound  logically,  after
having  blamed  such  and  such  a  criminal,  to  blame  himself,  in  the
commission  of  a  crime  of  a  similar  nature."


58 INTRODUCTION:  PART  I: LAW  AND  THE  SCIENCES

their inadequacy and corrupting influence have been
revealed  by  scientific  inquiry.

of°thems  ~^n  ^s  wav  the  immense  change  brought  about  by  the

Puni°syhment  exPer^men^al  study  of  criminals  raises  primarily  problems
of  legislation  as  to  penalties.  Undoubtedly,  the  spread  of
crime  in  definite  directions — say  as  regards  property  or  in
infringement  of  sexual  morality — ought  to  claim  the  atten-
tion of  students  of  social  science  as  well  as  of  legislators,
but  very  few  thinking  men  would  endorse  Ferri's  projects
of  unlimited  changes  in  law  and  civic  intercourse.1  Garo-
falo  is  certainly  right  in  his  criticism  of  these  Utopian  de-
clamations, when  he  points  out  that  it  would  be  hardly
practical  to  renounce  the  use  of  money  in  order  to  make
forgery  impossible,  or  to  abolish  marriage  in  order  to  put
an  end  to  bigamy.  Reforms  and  even  revolutions  have  to
deal  with  the  entire  body  of  society  and  must  take  into
account  the  whole  complexity  of  social  relations.  Penal
legislation  deals  with  moral  anomalies  and  must  be  directed
towards  the  best  means  of  restricting,  if  not  suppressing
them.

It  is  significant  that  some  of  the  most  thorough  students
of  penal  anthropology,  like  Garofalo  and  Calojanni,  advo-
cate measures  of  most  stringent  repression  on  the  strength
of  the  investigations  of  the  experimental  school.  Garofalo
is  not  only  in  favour  of  a  frequent  recourse  to  the  death
penalty  for  incorrigible  criminals,  but  he  recommends  swift
and  harsh  bodily  punishment  for  impulsive  and  brutal
criminals  and  elimination  by  deportation  of  recidivists
and  other  corrupt  subjects.2  His  theory  may  be  regarded
as  a  violent  reaction  against  a  sentimental  leniency  to  which
he  ascribes  the  increase  of  crime  in  European  society.3

Yet  reformers  are  not  more  likely  to  commit  themselves
to  a  revival  of  systematic  cruelty  than  to  be  carried  away
by  a  sympathy  towards  criminals,  which  would  make  honest
citizens  the  victims  of  violent  and  lawless  ruffians.  While
both  extremes  have  to  be  shunned,  the  general  trend  of
the  new  methods  is  becoming  more  and  more  clear  every

1  Sociologia  criminate,  pp.  215,  328.

2  Criminology,  pp.  191  ff.

.,  pp.  200  f.


II:  LAW  AND  PSYCHOLOGY  59

day.  As  crime  is  recognized  as  a  social  anomaly,  punish-
ment is  bound  to  take  the  shape  of  treatment  rather  than
of  retribution.  Treatment  is  a  term  which  reminds  one  both
of  medical  cure  and  of  the  precautions  against  infection.
Apart  from  the  weeding  out  of  cases  that  have  to  be  dealt
with  in  asylums  and  hospitals,  responsible  convicts  must
naturally  be  subjected  to  measures  of  isolation  and  disci-
pline. The  death  penalty  may  still  be  necessary  in  extreme
cases,  but  society  must  exercise  special  care  in  order  that
the  awful  power  of  putting  an  end  to  the  life  of  its  members
may  not  be  misused  in  application.  In  the  vast  majority
of  cases  the  most  effective  measures  indicated  by  modern
penology  are  (1)  material  reparation  of  the  injury  (in-
demnification), (2)  disciplinary  colonization,  and  (3)
variation  of  penalties  dependent  on  good  behaviour.  Of
all  methods  of  penalizing  culprits  the  one  most  usual  in  our
days,  imprisonment,  appears  to  be  the  most  unsatisfac-
tory.1 There  is  nothing  to  recommend  it  but  the  ease  of  its
application  to  large  numbers  of  delinquents.  It  has  been
described  by  all  competent  observers  as  an  active  incite-
ment to  further  wrong-doing,  and  it  is  to  be  hoped  that
the  difficulties  attending  other  methods  will  not  prevent
civilized  countries  from  introducing  and  carrying  out  im-
proved systems  of  penalties.  In  any  case,  the  fruitful
development  of  the  methods  advocated  by  reformers  is
dependent  on  the  recognition  of  one  great  principle — the
idea  of  the  individualization  of  the  penalty.2  This  means
that  the  punishment  has  to  fit  the  moral  case  of  the  criminal
as  the  drug  has  to  fit  the  pathologic  case  of  the  sick  man.
No  abstract  equations  will  do:  the  judge  stands  to  the
criminal  in  the  position  of  the  doctor  who  selects  his
remedy  after  diagnosing  the  disease  and  the  resources  of
the  patient's  organization.

Such  a  task  is  immensely  difficult  to  fulfil ;  but  is  it  not
the  blessing  as  well  as  the  curse  of  the  modern  student  that
he  is  conscious  of  being  confronted  on  all  sides  by  tremen-

1  F. LISZT, on Criminal Law, in P. HINNEBERG'S Kultur der
Qegenwart.

2  See  SALEILLES,  De  Vindividualisation  de  la  peine,  2  e"d  , 1909.
Cf.  Prevention  of  Crime  Act,  1908  (3  Edw.  VII,  c.  59,  si)


60 INTRODUCTION:  PART  I:  LAW  AND  THE  SCIENCES

dous  problems,  instead  of  facing  in  happy  ignorance  ob-
vious dangers  and  mistakes?  It  requires  courage  and
self-denial  to  approach  the  problems  of  crime,  but  the
problems  of  destitution,  of  education,  of  sexual  relations  are
no  less  perplexing.  In  any  case,  we  may  envy  the  blind
who  do  not  notice  them,  but  it  is  not  proper  for  those  who
see  to  shut  their  eyes  on  purpose.

*n  general>  tne  wider  range  obtained  by  modern
Siotivesf  psychology  in  considering  mental  movements  and,  more
especially,  the  importance  attached  to  emotions  in  explain-
ing conduct,  has  naturally  led  to  a  different  treatment  of
motives  of  action.  Professor  Petrazicki x  of  Petrograd
argues  that  it  would  be  wrong  to  suppose  that  all  conduct
is  directed  towards  definite  aims.  In  a  great  number  of
cases  it  is  not  the  aim,  but  the  cause  of  emotion  which
directs  the  appetite  and  the  will.  Altogether  the  "  solu-
tion" of  emotions  assumes  a  leading  part  in  the  psychology
of  behaviour.  Petrazicki  draws  a  distinction  between  two
currents  of  impulses  essential  to  the  explanation  of
morality  and  law.  Purely  selfish  motives  are  certainly  in-
sufficient to  explain  morality;  even  the  addition  of  sym-
pathy does  not  suffice  to  explain  the  growth  of  ethical  and
legal  systems.  By  the  side  of  the  two  classes  springing
from  egoism  and  sympathy  he  places  the  instinctive  re-
sponse to  calls  which  are  obeyed  automatically  as  a  result
of  habit  and  influence.  In  the  case  of  legal  rules  the  habit
of  obedience  is  usually  accompanied  by  the  recognition  of
obligations  and  the  attribution  of  rights.  The  customs  of
submission  on  the  part  of  subjects  are  matched  by  habits  of
command  on  the  part  of  rulers.  Whatever  we  may  think
of  the  share  assigned  to  these  various  feelings  and  of  their
co-ordination,  it  cannot  be  denied  that  habit,  custom  and
instinct  of  rule  and  submission  do  play  a  prominent  part  in
the  smooth  working  of  institutions.  "We  have  recently  wit-
nessed cases  when  these  bonds  have  snapped,  and  we  are
well  able  to  judge  how  difficult  it  is  to  reconstitute  author-
ity and  morality  by  means  of  appeals  to  reason  or  to
physical  compulsion.

i  In  his  Lectures  on  the  Theory  of  Law  and  Morality  (Russian).


CHAPTER  III
LAW  AND  SOCIAL  SCIENCE

THE  original  domain  of  psychology  is  confined  to  the
study  of  the  individual  mind  in  its  conscious,  subconscious
and  unconscious  life.  The  methods  of  this  study  are  intro-
spective  and  may  be  supplemented  by  observation  of  self
and  of  other  individuals  in  their  normal  and  abnormal  state,
and  in  various  stages  of  development,  as  well  as  by  experi-
ments concerning  mental  phenomena,  and  comparison  with
animal  life.  It  is  obvious,  however,  that  such  a  study,  if
centred  entirely  on  individuals  taken  singly,  would  be  in-
complete and  artificial.  The  essence  of  human  personality
has  been  correctly  defined  in  the  saying,  that  man  is  a
social  being.  Hence  scientific  psychology  is  bound  to  extend
towards  a  consideration  of  the  effects  of  relations  between
men,  while  social  science  is  bound  to  start  with  the  elements
of  social  intercourse  ingrained  in  human  nature.

A  particularly  energetic  assertion  of  the  claims  of  in-
dividual psychology  in  explaining  the  social  process  has
been  put  forward  by  G.  Tarde.  In  his  view,  social  life  has
to  be  explained  chiefly  by  "inter mentality,"  by  the  inter-
course between  minds,  and  the  most  important  of  such
processes  is  imitation.

The  most  obvious  examples  occur  in  the  case  of  the  com-
munication of  ideas  by  means  of  speech :  it  ensures  the
suggestion  of  ideas  by  one  person  to  another,  even  if  there
are  great  differences  in  the  respective  surroundings  of  the
two  persons.  It  is  needless  to  dwell  on  the  results  produced
by  conversation,  by  oratory,  by  lessons,  by  letters  and  books.
Nor  are  we  likely  to  minimize  the  effect  of  delivery,  of  tem-
peramental warmth,1  of  examples  of  moral  infection  or

i  TARDE,  Les  lois  de  limitation  (2  dd.,  1895),  p.  x:  "  To  say  that  the
distinctive  character  of  every  social  relationship  is  the  faculty  of

61


62 INTRODUCTION:  PART  I: LAW  AND  THE  SCIENCES

prestige.  In  the  case  of  hypnotic  phenomena  and  of  mor-
bid suggestion,  this  process  of  infection  reaches  an  extreme
stage,  but  ordinary  social  intercourse  is  permeated  with
transfers  of  the  same  kind  in  various  homely  and  atten-
uated forms.  Indeed,  no  analysis  of  social  life  based  on  the
consciousness  of  isolated  individuals  can  be  sound  or  pro-
ductive of  positive  results.  Social  intercourse  depends
essentially  on  ' ' intermental' '  cross  currents  of  attraction
and  opposition,  of  suggestion  and  submission.  Leaders
exert  their  authority  more  through  these  mental *  fluids
than  through  direct  command  or  by  force.  Followers  do
not  only  submit,  but  react  in  many  ways,  and  the  results
of  mutual  adaptation  produce  a  peculiar  fusion  of  elements
which  cannot  be  treated  as  a  heap  of  fragments,  but  as  a
manifestation  of  new  life:  just  remember  the  synthesis  of
Saxon  and  French  elements  in  English  speech  or  the  per-
meation of  German  law  by  the  reception  of  Roman  doc-
trines. Altogether  this  aspect  of  influence  and  imitation
is  quite  as  vital  for  legal  development  as  the  aspect
of  tradition  or  the  aspect  of  modification  by  circum-
stances.

Tarde's  brilliant  synthesis  culminates  in  the  sentence,
"society  is  imitation,  and  imitation  is  a  kind  of  somnam-
bulism." It  is  not  difficult  to  discover  the  weak  points  of
this  theory,  and  they  have  been  criticised  with  some
asperity,  for  example,  by  Tarde's  rival  in  France — Emile
Durkheim.  "Sometimes  all  that  is  not  original  invention
has  been  called  imitation.  On  this  reckoning,  it  is  clear
that  nearly  all  human  acts  are  facts  of  imitation,  for  inven-
tions properly  so-called  are  very  rare.  But  precisely  be-

imitation,  is  to  say  that  in  my  eyes  there  is  no  social  relation,  no
social  fact,  no  social  cause  other  than  imitation."

i  TARDE,  op.  cit.,  p.  xi:  "  These  social  relations,  thus  various,  gather
themselves  into  two  groups:  on  the  one  hand,  people  tend  to  transmit
from  man  to  man,  by  persuasion  or  by  authority,  a  belief,  and  on
the  other  hand  a  desire.  It  is  precisely  because  human  actions
when  imitated  have  this  dogmatic  or  imperious  character  that
imitation  is  a  social  bond,  for  it  is  dogma  or  power  that  binds  men.
Only  part  of  this  truth  has  been  perceived,  and  it  has  not  been
clearly  perceived,  when  it  has  been  held  that  the  characteristic  of
social'  bonds  was  constraint  or  force.  This  means  ignoring  the
spontaneous  elements  in  the  credulity  and  docility  of  the  masses  of
the  people."


II:  LAW  AND  SOCIAL  SCIENCE  63

cause  the  word  imitation  comes  to  designate  almost  every-
thing, it  designates  nothing  definite. ' ' 1

But  certainly  imitation,  although  not  possessing  the
properties  of  a  magic  formula  which  will  solve  all  social
problems,  undoubtedly  plays  a  great  part  in  the  formation
of  social  ties.

In  view  of  such  undeniable  influences,  where  can  we  place social

,..,.,. x.  • i •  i_ i  psychology.

the  dividing  line  between  social  science  and  psychology  Y

Societies  of  all  kinds  are  composed  of  individuals,  and
have  no  independent  existence  as  conscious  beings  in  the
same  sense  as  individual  persons  are  known  to  possess  con-
scious existence.  True,  historians,  philosophers  and  jurists
have  often  spoken  of  the  "soul  of  a  nation,"  of  the  "self-
consciousness  of  a  people,"  and  far-reaching  conclusions
have  been  drawn  from  such  expressions.  But,  in  common
sense,  it  would  be  preposterous  to  attribute  personal  life  to
social  bodies  in  the  same  way  as  to  individuals.  Society  is
constituted  by  a  complex  of  relations  and  not  by  physical
unity.  Its  consciousness  is  the  collective  result  of  social
intercourse  and  the  summing  up  of  innumerable  individual
beliefs,  desires  and  emotions.2

It  would  therefore  be  wrong  to  deny  the  importance  of
concentrating  the  investigation  of  the  nature  and  conditions
of  such  intercourse  into  a  special  department  of  scientific
study.  Such  attempts  have  sometimes  been  made  by  psy-
chologists, who  have  pleaded  for  an  extension  of  their
branch  of  study  to  social  phenomena  under  the  denomina-
tion of  national  or  social  psychology.3  . .

1  DURKHEIM,  Le  suicide,  p 114,  note.

2  PAUL, Prinzipien der Sprachgeschichte, p. 12: "It stands to
reason  that  we  cannot  operate  with  the  mind  of  the  community  and
with  elements  of  this  mind  of  the  community. The  'psychology  of
nations' can only consist in relations between individual minds
produced  by  their  reciprocal  action."

3  Ibid., p. 7 : "  Cultural science  is identical with social science.
Society  makes  culture  possible  and  makes  man]  an  historical  being.
A completely isolated human soul would certainly also have a
history  of  its  development,  including  relations  to  its  body  and  its
environment,  but  even  the  most  gifted  would  only  attain  very  primi-
tive culture  which  would  cease  with  death. Only  through  transmis-
sion of what  an individual has gained to other individuals, and
through  co-operation  of  several  individuals  towards  the  same  aims,
can  these  narrow  limits  be  extended. Not  only  economics,  but  every
kind  of  culture,  is  based  on  the  principle  of  division  and  co-operation


64 INTRODUCTION:  PART  I:  LAW  AND  THE  SCIENCES
Exaggera- There  are  thus  weighty  reasons  for  an  extension  of  the

tions  of  the


borderline  between  both  departments,  namely,  as  regards
ment,  *f  4. the  influence  of  social  factors  modifying  the  instincts,  habits

social  facts.

and  desires  of  individual  man:  such  modifications  have
begun  right  from  the  time  when  the  species  homo  sapiens
detached  itself  from  its  original  animal  stock,  and  they
are  going  on  unceasingly  in  the  process  of  recorded  history.
But  this  appropriation  by  the  psychologists  of  a  spe-
cial set  of  questions  on  the  borderland  of  both
studies  is  after  all  only  a  matter  of  convenience  and
should  certainly  not  lead  to  the  absorption  of  sociology
by  psychology.  And  yet  it  is  at  such  a  rectification
of  frontiers  that  the  more  ambitious  among  the
psychologists  are  aiming:  they  claim  the  right  to  subject
social  phenomena  and  relations  to  their  own  results  and
standards,  and,  for  the  purpose  of  such  an  annexation,  they
are  ready  to  discard  the  most  conspicuous  features  of  psy-
chological observation  —  introspection,  and  to  extend  the
definition  of  psychology  to  the  study  of  human  behaviour
in  all  its  aspects.  The  consequences  of  such  a  shifting  of
ground  cannot  be  said  to  justify  the  claims  of  the  initiators
of  social  psychology  in  this  wide  sense.  Social  creations,
like  language  or  religion,  are  approached  with  more  valour
than  discretion,  and  instead  of  a  critical  examination  of
data  and  of  careful  inferences,  we  are  treated  either  to
sweeping  assertions  about  instincts  or  to  a  restatement  of
facts  gleaned  from  occasional  linguistic,  mythological  or
folklore  studies.1

of  labour.  The  particular  study  of  cultural  principles  and  the  right
it  claims  to  co-ordination  with  other  sciences,  consists  therefore  in
the  investigation  of  the  intercourse  between  individuals;  it  presents
to  us  the  relation  of  the  one  to  the  many,  in  'give  and  take,'  in  in-
fluence and  being  influenced;  it  shows  the  younger  generations  enter-
ing into  the  inheritance  of  the  older."

Cf.  WUNDT,  Volkerpsychologie,  I,  1,  pp.  16  ff.

i  W.  MACDOUGALL,  Introduction  to  Social  Psychology  (8th  ed.,
1914),  p.  3:  "The  department  of  psychology  that  is  of  primary  im-
portance for  the  Social  Sciences  is  that  which  deals  with  the  springs
of  human  action,  the  impulses  and  motives  that  sustain  mental  and
bodily  activity  and  regulate  conduct."  P.  18:  "Social  psychology
has  to  show  how,  given  the  nature,  propensities,  and  capacities  of
the  individual  human  mind,  all  the  complex  mental  life  of  societies
is  shaped  by  them  and  in  return  reacts  upon  the  course  of  their
development  and  operation  in  the  individual."


II:  LAW  AND  SOCIAL  SCIENCE  65

The  fundamental  misunderstanding  at  the  root  of  this
aggressive  policy  seems  to  consist  in  the  fact  that  a  sufficient  theesoctafi
distinction  is  not  made  between  the  elements  of  individual  Process.
thought  from  which  all  spiritual  relations  spring,  and  the
social  synthesis  which  eventually  results  from  the  process
of  intercourse.  Social  formations  set  up  standards  of  their
own  and  require  for  their  scientific  study  peculiar  methods
in  keeping  with  the  subject  itself.  Before  one  can  specu-
late on  the  psychological  factors  of  language,  one  has  to
study  the  conformation  of  existing  languages  and  the  laws
of  their  development,  and  a  linguist  who  would  boldly
derive  the  laws  of  phonetics  from  imitation,  or  the  philo-
logical peculiarities  of  conjugation  from  inherited  habits
or  feelings,  would  remind  one  of  those  writers  on  natural
philosophy  who  deduced  light  and  sound  from  the  meta-
physical properties  of  matter.  One  of  the  most  famous
exponents  of  national  psychology,  Wundt,  did  to  a  great
extent  realize  the  necessity  of  starting  on  a  new  track  as
regards  social  relations.1  He  insisted,  at  any  rate,  on  the
heterogeneity  of  social  as  contrasted  with  individual  psy-
chology. The  "heterogeneity"2  pointed  out  by  him  may

^Volkerpsychologie,  I,  p.  1:  "Volkerpsychologie  is  based  on  the
fact  that  society  creates  independent  psychic  values  which  are  rooted
in  the  mental  characteristics  of  individuals,  but  are  themselves  of  a
specific  kind  and  provide  the  individual  life  with  its  most  important
content."

2E.  DURKHEIM,  Le  suicide,  p.  359:  "Either  morality  is  derived
ffrom  nothing  which  is  given  in  the  world  of  experience,  or  it  is
derived  from  society.  .  .  .  This  is  in  no  way  astonishing  for  the
student  who  has  recognized  the  heterogeneous  character  of  individual
and  social  states.  .  .  .  Doubtless  in  proportion  as  we  make  only
one  in  a  group  and  in  proportion  as  we  live  its  life,  we  are  open  to
their  influence;  but  conversely,  in  so  far  as  we  have  a  personality
distinct  from  its  personality,  we  rebel  against  the  group  and  try
to  escape.  And  every  one  leads  this  double  existence  at  the  same
time;  each  of  us  is  animated  at  the  same  instant  by  a  double
movement.  We  are  bound  by  the  social  sense  and  we  tend  to  follow
the  bent  of  our  nature.  The  rest  of  society  therefore  presses  upon
us  to  check  our  centrifugal  tendencies,  and  we  on  our  part  concur
in  pressing  upon  some  other  individual  to  neutralize  his."

Cf.  the  same,  Les  regies  de  la  methode  sociologique  (1895),
p.  124:  "  Since  the  essential  characteristics  of  sociological  phenomena
consist  in  the  power  which  they  have  of  exercising  pressure  from
without  upon  individual  consciousness,  they  are  not  derived  from
it,  and  thus  sociology  is  not  the  corollary  of  psychology."

P.  127 :  "  Society  is  not  simply  the  sum  of  individuals,  but  the
2231  E


66 INTRODUCTION: PART  I: LAW  AND  THE  SCIENCES

be  noticed  in  all  sorts  of  natural  processes.  The  sensation
of  "white"  is  not  original,  but  is  produced  by  the  fusion
of  the  various  fundamental  colours  of  the  spectrum,  and
yet  the  sum  of  the  blue,  yellow,  red  and  other  component
colours  is  not  felt  once  the  fusion  has  taken  place,  and
"white"  appears  with  its  own  distinctive  features.1  Again,
water  is  quite  distinct  in  its  properties  from  the  oxygen
and  hydrogen  which  go  to  the  making  of  it.  In  the  same
way,  social  intercourse,  though  arising  between  individuals,
develops  on  lines  of  its  own  and  does  not  simply  follow
the  promptings  of  individual  psychology.

sociology.  TO  gum  Up?  social  science  moves  in  a  department  which,
though  intimately  connected  with  psychology,  neverthe-
less requires  independent  methods  of  observation  and
generalization.2  If  we  turn  to  this  particular  field  of
social  science,  we  have  to  ask  ourselves,  first  of  all,  whether
it  can  be  treated  as  a  connected  whole  and  what  kinds  of
investigation  may  be  and  have  been  co-ordinated  under  this
generic  term.  It  is  hardly  necessary  to  state  that  the  con-
ception of  a  social  "science"  analogous  to  natural  science
like  physics,  chemistry,  biology,  has  been  evolved  within
very  recent  times,  chiefly  by  Comte  and  Spencer:  on
the  whole,  it  may  be  said  to  have  substantiated  its  right

system  formed  by  their  association  presents  a  specific  reality  which
has  its  own  character."

1  Cf.  SIGWART,  Logik,  transl.  by  Dendy,  III,  p. 124.

2  DURKHEIM, Le  suicide, p. ix: "The sociological method which
we  follow  rests  entirely  upon  this  fundamental  principle,  that  social
facts  ought  to  be  studied  as  things,  that  is  to  say,  as  realities  outside
the  individual. There  is  no  precept  which  has  been  more  contested
by our opponents, but there is none  more fundamental. For, in
short,  in  order  that  sociology  may  be  possible,  it  is  necessary  before
all  that  it  should  have  an  object  and  one  which  belongs  to  it  alone.
It  must  treat  of  a  reality  and  one  of  which  other  sciences  are  not
cognizant. But if there is nothing real outside particular con-
sciences, it  disappears  through  lack  of  matter  proper  to  itself. The
only  objects  to  which  observation  can  henceforward  be  applied  are
the  mental  states  of  the  individual,  since  nothing  else  exists. Now
these belong  to the province of psychology. From this point of
view, indeed,  all  that is substantial in marriage, for  example, in
the family or in religion, is the individual needs  to which these
institutions arc held to respond: it is paternal affection, sexual
appetite, what  has  been called the religious instinct, etc. As for
the  institutions  themselves  and  their  various  and  complex  historical
forms,  they  become  negligible  and  of  little  interest."


II:  LAW  AND  SOCIAL  SCIENCE  67

to  independent  existence.  The  more  special  studies  of
social  relations  are  older  in  order,  however;  it  is  enough
to  point  to  political  economy,  which  can  be  traced  a  long
way  back  to  the  physiocrats  and  Adam  Smith;  com-
parative religion  and  folklore  was  initiated  by  Vico;  com-
parative politics  and  comparative  law  may  even  be  said
to  start  with  Aristotle  and  to  have  been  rejuvenated  by
Macchiavelli  and  Montesquieu.  This  precedence  of  the
special  branches  has  great  significance  in  itself:  it  shows
that  it  is  in  the  field  of  such  particular  studies  that
original  and  fruitful  investigations  have  been  conducted
before  generalizations  could  be  framed  which  allowed
access  to  a  higher  plane  of  development,  namely,  to  an
attempt  to  construct  a  sociology,  or  general  science  of
society.  It  may  be  added,  perhaps,  that  even  now  the  ad-
vance in  the  special  branches  is  far  more  conspicuous  and
productive  of  greater  results.  This  has  been  emphasized
by  one  of  the  leading  sociologists  of  our  time,  Emile  Durk-
heim.1

In  special  studies  on  social  subjects  we  have  to  do  with
new  ideas  applied  to  concrete  facts  which  must  be  not  only
full  of  scientific  significance,  but  in  direct  touch  with
realities.  In  the  books  devoted  to  general  sociology  we

i  E.  DURKHEIM,  Le  suicide,  p.  v:  "  Unfortunately  there  is  a  good
reason  why  sociology  does  not  afford  us  this  spectacle  [of  progress] ;
it  is  because  in  most  cases  it  is  not  faced  with  definite  problems  It
has  not  got  beyond  the  period  of  construction  by  philosophic
synthesis  "

P.  vi :  "  Books  of  pure  sociology  can  scarcely  be  used  by  any  one
who  makes  it  a  rule  to  limit  himself  to  definite  questions,  for  the
greater  part  of  them  are  not  included  in  any  particular  framework
of  research,  and,  moreover,  they  are  too  poor  in  documents  of  any
authority."

Cf  Regies  de  la  mSthode  sociologique,  p.  96:  "It  seems  as  if  social
reality  could  only  be  the  subject  of  an  abstract  vague  philosophy  or
of  purely  descriptive  monographs."

Even,  more  pessimistic  is  the  pronouncement  of  JELLINEK,  Allge-
meine  Staatslehre,  I,  p.  90 :  "  Sociology  in  the  widest  sense  of  the
term  embraces  all  manifestations  of  human  society.  This  is  the
reason  why  sociological  researches  are  without  limitations  of  any
kind;  it  takes  away  the  possibility  of  a  healthy,  methodical  progress
directed  towards  attainable  aims.  The  material  of  facts  which
modern  Sociology  proposes  to  take  as  a  basis  for  its  doctrines,  is
a  screen  which  can  only  conceal  for  the  ignorant  the  fact  that
aprioristic  constructions  founded  on  incomplete  observation  are  lurk-
ing behind."


68 INTRODUCTION:  PART  I: LAW  AND  THE  SCIENCES

are  often  met  by  lifeless  abstractions  hardly  disguised  by
artificial  phraseology  and  scholastic  disquisitions.  Take,
e.g.,  the  definition  of  the  subject  in  Simmers  work
(Soziologie,  pp.  7  f.)  :  "It  seems  to  me  that  the  one  and  the
whole  possibility  of  creating  a  special  study  of  Sociology
is  to  detach  ideas  underlying  contents  from  the  forms  which
mutual  influences  in  social  life  assume,  and  look  at  them  as
a  whole  from  a  scientific  point  of  view.  Social  groups
which  are  in  substance  as  dissimilar  as  possible  neverthe-
less manifest  in  their  form  identical  influences  of  individ-
uals on  each  other.  Domination  and  submission,  competi-
tion, imitation,  division  of  labour,  formation  of  parties,
representation,  consolidation — internal  and  external — etc.,
manifest  themselves  in  political  as  well  as  in  religious  com-
munities, in  a  band  of  conspirators  as  well  as  in  trade-
unions,  in  a  school  as  well  as  in  family-life."

For  our  purpose,  however,  namely  for  establishing  the
connection  between  social  science  and  jurisprudence,  it  is
not  necessary  to  follow  prolix  variations  on  the  theme  of
the  contrast  between  matter  and  form,  or  to  construct
a  theory  of  cultural  science  round  the  supreme  conception
of  unity.'1

The  elaborate  terminological  exercises  of  De  Roberty,
the  painstaking  programmes  of  R.  Worms  and  De  Greef
sometimes  recall  to  one's  mind  Mephistopheles'  instructions
to  the  freshman:  "When  concepts  fail,  words  may  turn  out
of  good  avail."  ("Denn  eben  wo  Begriffe  felilen,  da  stellt
ein  Wort  zur  rechten  Zeit  sick  em.")  The  more  or  less
paradoxical  fancies  of  Lester  Ward  provide,  perhaps,  more
interesting  reading,  but  the  thought  which  suggests  itself
forcibly  in  the  perusal  of  this  writer 's  volumes  is  that  his
excursions  into  all  the  sciences  are  the  very  reverse  of  care-
ful scientific  inquiry:  why  should  such  random  disquisi-
tions pretend  to  be  contributions  to  a  new  science?

In  truth,  apart  from  the  well-known  achievements  of
the  great  pioneers  of  the  study — A.  Comte  as  to  the  classi-

i  E.g.  STAMMLEB,  Wirtschaft  und  Recht,  p.  13;  NATORP,  Soziale
Pddagogik,  p.  37.


II:  LAW  AND  SOCIAL  SCIENCE  69

ication  of  sciences  and  Herbert  Spencer  as  to  the  appli-
cation of  the  principles  of  physical  evolution  to  social
life,1 — the  best  contributions  to  general  sociology  have  been
obtained  by  applying  purposely  one-sided  theories  to  the
investigation  of  society.

I  have  already  had  occasion  to  speak  of  Tarde's  doctrine
of  imitation;  no  less  one-sided  in  its  way  is  the  treatment
of  the  subject  by  Durkheim,  who  opposes  social  pressure
and  compulsion  to  Tarde's  shibboleths  of  individual  inven-
tion and  imitation.  Giddings  rightly  pleads  for  a  com-
bination of  both  elements.  But  Giddings'  own  theory
of  the  "consciousness  of  Kind"  is  hardly  free  from
the  same  taint.  Surely  social  life  in  material  and
spiritual  intercourse  does  not  consist  exclusively  of  the
conflicts  and  cross-influences  of  socially  conscious  groups —
neither  economic  intercourse,  nor  religion  nor  science,  nor
literature  could  be  explained  on  these  lines.  However,
such  arguments  have  had  their  value  as  throwing  a
strong  light  on  one  or  another  feature  of  the  subject;
and  by  combining  the  various  explanations,  we  may  not
only  find  that  they  supplement  one  another,  but  even  some-
times that  they  result  in  mutual  corroboration.  For
example,  Durkheim 's  study  on  the  Division  of  Labour2
may  serve  as  an  introduction  to  Giddings'  teaching  as  to
consciousness  of  kind,  while,  on  the  other  hand,  Durkheim 's
monograph  on  elementary  forms  of  religious  life  3  presents,
in  a  way,  the  systematic  culmination  to  studies  of  group

1  For a good summing up of their main results, see BARTH,
Die  philosophic  der  Geschichte  als  Soziologie,  I,  and  GIDDINGS,  Prin-
ciples of  Sociology. Two  principles  formulated  by  Comte  and  Spen-
cer are  especially  worth  attention:  see  BARTH,  op.  tit.,  p.  34:  "Evo-
lution in  the  intellectual sphere  moves  side  by  side  with  that  in
the  social  sphere. Although  the  intellectual is  by nature  weaker
than  our  '  affective  capacities*  (IV,  pp.  387,  388;  V,  p.  28)  :  although
it  so  greatly  needs  the  incentive  supplied  by  the  appetites,  the  pas-
sions, and  the  feelings;  and  although  it  exists  in  order  to  modify
rather  than  to  dominate (pour  moderer,  non  pour  commander,  V,
p. 170; cf.  V,  pp.  219, 229): yet  it  is  the  leader,  and  the  other
activities  of  the  mind  are  subject  to  it. '  Reorganiser  d'alord  les
opinions,  pour  passer  aux  moeurs,  et  finalement,  aux  institutions '
(VI,  p.  521). (The  object  is,  first  to  organize  opinions,  then  cus-
toms, and  finally,  institutions.)"

2  La  division  du  travail (1902). SPENCER  develops  a  theory  of
natural  right  of  freedom — Social  Statics,  94  f .,  Man  versus  the  State
(ed.  1886),  p.  84  ff.

3  The  Elementary  Forms  of  the  Religious  Life,  trans,  by  J.  W.
Swain.


70 INTRODUCTION:  PART  I:  LAW  AND  THE  SCIENCES

psychology.  Indeed  Giddings  has  attempted  to  justify  the
extremely  one-sided  character  of  such  studies  in  general
sociology  by  the  requirements  of  scientific  monism,  the
necessity  of  co-ordinating  all  parts  of  the  scientific  inquiry
round  one  guiding  principle.  Undoubtedly  such  mono-
tony of  treatment  helps  to  make  an  inquiry  clear  and
coherent:  it  is  a  pity,  however,  that  in  subjects  like
sociology  there  is  such  a  variety  of  elements  and  such  a
wealth  of  possible  combinations  that  the  reduction  to  unity
of  principle  is  almost  certain  to  subject  the  facts  to  a
kind  of  Procrustean  mutilation.  Durkheim's  work  is
especially  characteristic  in  this  respect:  it  is  remarkable
for  incisive  and  suggestive  thought,  steeped  in  extensive
learning  and  presented  to  readers  with  great  skill  of  exposi-
tion. But  one  feels  all  along  the  pressure  of  a  heavy  dog-
matism, and  on  every  page  plain  truths  are  manipulated
in  an  artificial  manner  for  the  sake  of  theoretical  coherence.
However  much  we  may  concede  to  analytical  investigation,
the  subject  of  "Sociology"  at  large  is  synthetical  in  its
very  essence,  and  some  means  must  be  found  to  do  justice
to  this  characteristic  peculiarity.

statistics.  ^  necessary  supplement  and  correction  of  abstract
sociology  is  presented  by  statistical  investigation.  The
best  means  of  estimating  the  impression  produced  by  a
scientific  treatment  of  numbers  in  the  study  of  social  life
is  to  turn  to  the  work  and  outlook  of  the  first  pioneers  of
statistical  observations,  for  instance  Quetelet.  He  remarks
in  his  Physique  sociale  (1869)  on  the  heights  of  French
conscripts  recognized  as  proper  for  military  service:  "By
means  of  the  known  groups,  it  has  been  possible  to  calcu-
late a  priori  those  not  included.  I  have  thus  been  led
to  the  opinion  that  a  notable  fraud  has  been  perpetrated
in  rejecting  men  for  defect  of  height,  a  fraud  which  I  have
been  able  to  illustrate  by  a  table."

The  remarkable  regularity  observed  from  year  to  year
in  the  number  of  such  apparently  disconnected  cases  as
the  posting  of  letters  without  address  *  or  the  number  of

i BUCKLE,  History  of  Civilization  in  England  ("The  World's
Classics"),  I,  pp.  24,  27.


II:  LAW  AND  SOCIAL  SCIENCE  71

suicides,  suggested  to  Quetelet  and  to  his  disciples  the  view
that  individuals  in  society  become  grouped  round  certain
central  or  average  types  ( Quetelet 's  Tiomme  moyen)  whose
inclinations  and  character  produce  the  results  registered  in
the  statistical  tables.  This  explanation  had  to  be  modified
in  the  course  of  subsequent  researches.  Knapp,  for  instance,
arrived  at  the  following  conclusion :  ' '  The  observation  that
the  number  of  acts  of  the  same  kind  within  the  limits  of  a
given  district  is  subject  to  such  slight  variations  from  year
to  year,  finds  its  explanation  in  the  fact  that  men  are  very
much  alike  both  as  regards  the  motives  by  which  they  are
actuated  and  also  as  to  the  circumstances  of  their  environ-
ment from  which  motives  are  mainly  derived.  "*

The  fundamental  fact  remains  that  all  forms  of  social
activity  create  results  which,  when  amenable  to  enumera-
tion, present  an  incontestable  regularity  and  persistency.
As  Sir  E.  Giffen  has  expressed  it  (Statistics,  p.  3) :  "It
seems  to  be  quite  unnecessary  to  debate  whether  the  whole
field  of  statistics  thus  dealt  with  or  a  portion  of  it  can  be
treated  as  a  distinct  science.  There  are  people  who  think
that  the  study  of  man  in  societies  by  means  of  mass
observation  is  entitled  to  rank  as  a  distinct  and  separate
science,  which  they  call  Demography.  Others  vehemently
dispute  the  claim  thus  put  forward,  maintaining  that  the
method  of  statistics  is  useful  to  many  sciences,  and  espe-
cially to  sociology,  but  that  there  is  no  separate  science
entitled  to  the  name.  I  confess  that  controversies  like  this,
purely  verbal,  as  it  seems  to  me,  are  to  my  mind  devoid  of
interest.  It  is  not  disputed  that  there  are  great  masses  of
sociological  facts  which  must  be  treated  and  handled  by
statistical  methods,  and  that  there  is  a  group  of  scientific
facts  in  consequence  which  can  only  be  appreciated  by  those
who  follow  such  methods.  Hardly  anything  can  turn  upon
the  question  whether  we  give  the  name  of  a  distinct  science
to  such  groups  of  facts,  or  not.

In  a  general  way  it  is  certain  that  the  statistical  method
has  become  indispensable  to  social  studies  and  that  it  may

i  JahrMcher  fiir  Nationalokonomie  und  Statistik,  XVI  (1871),
245  ff.


72 INTRODUCTION: PART  I: LAW  AND  THE  SCIENCES

be  used  both  for  descriptive  purposes  in  order  to  char-
acterize a  situation  or  a  course  of  development,  and  for
analytical  purposes  in  order  to  ascertain  the  working  of
certain  factors,  when  the  fluctuations  in  their  working  can
History.  be  subjected  to  definite  observation.

Another  department  of  knowledge  intimately  connected
with  sociology  is  the  study  of  History.  It  presents,  as  it
were,  the  highroad  to  general  sociology,  in  as  much  as  it  is
directed  primarily  to  establishing  the  facts  of  social  de-
velopment.1 In  the  terminology  of  Spencer's  school  it  is
the  necessary  introduction  to  social  dynamics.  History,
however,  had  existed  for  ages  before  sociology  in  the
modern  sense  was  thought  of.  Historical  aims  and  methods
have  been  mapped  out  independently  of  any  direct  con-
nection with  social  laws  or  any  substitutes  for  them.  Let
us  notice  to  what  conclusions  the  historians  themselves  have
come  in  respect  of  these  aims  and  methods.

Natural  science  has  been  contrasted  by  modern  thinkers 2
with  cultural  science  based  on  history.  The  aim  of  natural
science  is  to  discover  laws,  that  is,  abstract  principles  to
which  the  actual  facts  may  be  subordinated  without  re-
siduum. The  aim  of  cultural  science  is  to  ascertain  what  is
important  in  the  concrete  and  the  individual.3  The  standard
in  this  case  is  not  the  standard  of  recurrence,  but  the  stand-
ard of  value.  The  course  of  history  is  said  to  be  the  strug-
gle for  cultural  values  in  economics,  politics,  literature,  art
and  religion.  The  Renaissance  or  the  sway  of  Napoleon  are
great  events  in  themselves,  quite  apart  from  their  place  in
the  scheme  of  social  evolution.  The  stress  falls  on  in-
dividualization  as  against  generalization.  How  is  such  a

1  BARTH,  Philosophic  der  Geschichte  als  Soziologie,  I.

2  WINDELBAND,  NaturivissenscJiaft  und  Geisterwissenschaft  Begriffs-
bildung; H. RICKERT, Die Grenzen der Naturwissenschaftlichen
Erkenntniss;  the  same,  Naturwissenschaft  und  Kulturwissenschaft.

s  In  the  view  of  RICKERT,  an  historical  event  cannot  be  isolated
from  its  circumstances,  none  of  which  will  ever  recur.  Cf.  GEO.
TREVELYAN,  Clio  (1013),  pp.  7,  12,  15:  "The  deeds  themselves
are  more  interesting  than  their  causes  and  effects  and  are  fortu-
nately ascertainable  with  much  greater  precision.  It  is  possible  that
when  Professor  Seely  said:  'Break  the  drowsy  spell  of  narrative.
Ask  yourself  questions,  set  yourself  problems/  he  may  have  been
serving  his  generation.  But  it  is  time  now  for  a  swing  of  the
pendulum."


II:  LAW  AND  SOCIAL  SCIENCE  73

view  to  meet  the  following  simple  question:  granted  that
history  has  to  deal  with  individual  states  and  events,  can
it  try  and  does  it  try  to  assign  causes  to  these  states  and
events?  And  how  can  one  assign  causes  to  effects  without
instituting  express  or  concealed  comparisons  with  similar
though  not  identical  combinations, — without  analysis  and
generalization?  The  force  of  these  queries  cannot  be  dis-
regarded, and  the  chief  exponent  of  the  above-mentioned
view,  Professor  Rickert,  cannot  help  reintroducing  the
element  of  generality  in  this  connection  after  expelling  it
from  the  domain  of  concrete  history.  It  cannot  be  said,  how-
ever, that  he  has  found  a  right  place  for  it,  and  writers  who
stand  very  close  to  him  in  other  respects,  for  example  Ed-
ward Meyer  and  Herman  Paul,  make  allowance  for  the  gen-
eralizing tendency  as  well  as  for  the  individualizing  one.

An  apt  and  incontrovertible  illustration  of  the  necessity
of  reckoning  with  scientific  generalization  as  well  as  with
artistic  individualization  in  historical  processes  is  pre-
sented by  the  history  of  language.

Considered  as  a  store  of  words  and  phrases  serving  the
purpose  of  expressing  various  meanings,  language  is  un-
doubtedly a  product  of  innumerable  acts  of  invention.  In
its  phonetic  aspect,  as  a  combination  of  sounds  and  in  its
grammatical  framework  of  forms  and  syntactic  rules,  it  is
amenable  to  generalization  and  to  scientific  treatment.  And
is  the  case  so  entirely  different  in  folklore,  in  myth,  in
religious  beliefs,  in  morals,  in  economic  arrangements,  in
political  institutions?  A  common-sense  summing  up  of
the  position  may  be  taken  from  Giddings'  syllabus  of
Inductive  Sociology.1

Yet  the  attacks  of  the  literary  and  cultural  school  are
not without a substratum of truth. They bring out
strongly  one  fundamental  peculiarity  of  historical  thought, history
It  is  primarily  synthetic  in  character:  so  far  as  it  deals

1  Op.  tit.,  p.  8:  "The  historian  has  seldom  attempted  to  dissociate
the  constant  elements  in  history  from  the  unique,  the  individual,  the
personal.  On  the  contrary,  he  very  properly  has  tried  to  grasp
history  in  its  concrete  entirety  and,  in  recording  the  life  of  any
people  or  age,  to  make  clear  the  vital  connection  between  those  things
that  are  universal  and  those  that  are  peculiar  or  distinguishing."


74 INTRODUCTION:  PART  I: LAW  AND  THE  SCIENCES

with  social  realities  it  has  to  treat  of  complex  states  and
complex  processes,  and  its  main  object  is  to  estimate  and
reflect  the  peculiar  concentration  of  various  elements  in
the  shape  of  individuals,  nations,  events.  In  any  case  it
must  pave  the  way  for  such  estimates  by  a  careful  examina-
tion of  evidence.  And  as  for  the  final  reconstruction,  it
will  depend  both  on  reflective  comparison  and  deduction,
and  on  artistic  intuition.

This  synthetic  outlook  of  history  gives  it  a  peculiar  value
in  combination  with  other  studies.  It  enlarges  the  field  of
personality  from  individual  life  to  that  of  social  bodies —
political,  national,  religious,  literary,  scientific.  History
opens  a  unique  vista  of  synthetic  treatment.  In  a  sense,
it  may  be  regarded  as  the  complement  of  general  sociology,
because  it  strives  to  represent  the  intimate  connection  be-
tween the  different  sides  of  social  life;  it  appears  in  this
way  as  a  continuous  illustration  of  the  interdependence  of
different  factors  which  constitute  Society  as  distinct  from
the  State  or  any  other  human  group.

There  is  another  side  of  historical  knowledge  that  seems
no  less  important.  Leslie  Stephen  has  remarked *  that
the  aversion  of  the  Utilitarians  for  history  has  vitiated
their  whole  system,  because  it  has  deprived  the  school  of
empirical  philosophy  of  the  main  material  of  social  experi-
ence, namely,  the  data  of  past  development.

There  is  profound  truth  in  this  remark.  It  would  be  a
sad  matter  if  we  were  debarred  from  using  historical  ex-
perience in  forming  judgments  on  the  problems  of  social
science  and  politics  which  surround  us.  I  do  not  suppose
any  one  is  likely  nowadays  to  question  the  immense  politi-
cal value  of  such  a  work  as  Tocqueville's  Ancien  regime.
Indeed  when,  under  passing  influences,  historical  data  have
been  disregarded  for  a  time,  as,  e.g.,  in  economics,  the  omis-
sion has  had  a  damaging  effect  on  the  whole  trend  of  the
inquiry.  In  this  sense  it  may  be  said  that  history,  besides
being  a  department  of  synthetic  knowledge  by  itself,  takes
a  place  as  a  method  in  the  development  of  all  branches  of
social  science  in  their  analytical  work.

iThe  English  Utilitarians,  I,  pp.  297-301.


II:  LAW  AND  SOCIAL  SCIENCE  75

From  our  point  of  view,  the  departments  of  social  studies
may  be  classified  into  five  principal  groups:  (1)  anthro-
pology,  (2)  the  study  of  cultural  intercourse,  (3)  economics,
(4)  politics  and  (5)  jurisprudence.  The  first  group  would
comprise:  (a)  geography  in  its  anthropological  aspect,  the
study  initiated  by  K.  Ritter  and  by  Ratzel  (anthropo-
geography),  (b)  ethnography,  as  a  review  of  racial  and
tribal  divisions,  and  (c)  physical  and  social  anthropology
and  prehistoric  archeology.  The  latter  finds  its  principal
place  in  this  first  group  because  its  scientific  treatment  is
dependent  on  its  intimate  connection  with  natural  sciences,
— especially  with  comparative  anatomy  and  geology — but  it
is  obvious  that  it  presents  at  the  same  time  connecting  links
with  the  treatment  of  origins  in  the  four  other  groups.

The  section  of  cultural  intercourse  embraces  comparative
philology,  religion  and  philosophy,  literature,  art  and  folk-
lore in  general.  The  place  of  the  other  sections  in  such
a  classification  is  sufficiently  indicated  by  their  names.
Now,  undoubtedly  both  primitive  institutions  and  cultural
studies,  e.g.,  the  study  of  religion,  have  a  bearing  on  the
development  of  law:  let  us  only  think  for  a  moment  of
Brahmanic  and  Mohammedan  jurisprudence.  Yet  we  may
leave  the  discussion  of  cross-currents  in  these  to  the
treatment  of  particular  problems.  It  is  different  with
economics  and  political  science.  These  branches  of  social
science  are  so  closely  allied  to  law  that  it  is  necessary  to
ascertain  from  the  start  in  what  way  they  react  on  juris-
prudence and  how  the  lines  of  demarcation  between  their
respective  domains  have  to  be  drawn.

The  position  of  political  economy  requires  special  atten-  political
tion  in  many  ways.  The  study  has  reached  a  high  scien-
tific level  and,  in  spite  of  many  controversies  and  doubtful
points,  presents  the  best  proof  of  the  possibility  of  bringing
social  phenomena  within  the  scope  of  exact  analysis  and  of
generalizing  reflection.  Such  results  have  been  achieved
primarily  through  the  isolation  of  one  set  of  facts  and  their
analytical  arrangement  under  the  sway  of  one  simple
motive — the  striving  towards  the  acquisition  of  material
goods.


76 INTRODUCTION: PART  I: LAW  AND  THE  SCIENCES

This  fictitious  simplification  enabled  the  classical  school
to  build  up,  with  the  help  of  deduction,  a  coherent  and  com-
prehensive doctrine;  the  dialectical  analysis  of  economic
concepts  such  as  value,  price,  capital,  wages,  rent,  has  been
used  as  the  chief  method  of  economic  investigation.  No
doubt,  it  has  yielded  rather  incomplete  results:  in  actual
life  the  motives  of  economic  action  are  far  more  complicated
— education,  customary  standards  of  welfare,  social  ideals,
and  feelings,  religious  impulses,  etc.,  have  exerted  and  are
exerting  their  influence  on  production,  distribution  and
exchange.  Even  within  the  special  range  of  economic
enterprise,  it  would  be  quite  wrong  to  reason  on  the  assump-
tion of  purely  mechanical  processes  of  competition  and
co-operation  between  individuals  supposed  to  be  equal
ono  to  another  in  quality,  in  will  power,  in  character,  in
aims.  And  yet  such  a  reduction  of  economic  society  to  a
collection  of  uniform  atoms,  led  by  the  same  forces  to
similar  aims,  has  formed  the  basis  of  political  economy  as
understood  and  taught  by  the  classical  school.  It  has
found  its  most  remarkable  exponent  in  Ricardo,  a  thorough
intellectualist  and  utilitarian,  who  set  the  stamp  of  his
mechanical  doctrines  on  the  English  and  continental  eco-
nomics of  the  first  half  of  the  nineteenth  century.

The  famous  disquisitions  on  rent,  wages  and  prices  are
certainly  tainted  by  mechanical  atomism.1  Yet,  it  must  be
said  emphatically  of  these  thinkers  that  once  you  grant
their  premises  you  are  bound  to  follow  them  to  their  con-
clusions, and  it  cannot  be  doubted  that  the  work  of  Adam
Smith,  Ricardo,  Malthas,  J.  S.  Mill  has  advanced  the  cause
of  social  science  more  than  any  other  line  of  study.  As,
after  all,  the  desire  of  acquisition  and  profit  does  act  as
one  of  the  principal  elements  in  economic  life,  the  analysis
of  its  working  is  bound  to  explain  a  great  deal  in  the
phenomena  of  production,  distribution  and  exchange.2  The

i  SCHUMPETER,  Literary  Survey  in  the  Grundriss  der  Sozial-
okonomik  (1914).  Epochen  der  Dogmen-  und  Methoden-geschichte,
I,  p.  G5.  Of.  E.  CANNAN,  Theories  of  Production  and  Distribution.

-A.  MARSHALL,  Principles  of  Economics  (6th  ed.,  1910),  p.  27:
"  They  deal  with  a  man,  who  is  largely  influenced  by  egoistic  motives
in  his  business  life.  Being  concerned  chiefly  with  those  aspects  of


II:  LAW  AND  SOCIAL  SCIENCE  77

peculiar  combination  of  deductive  reasoning  and  empirical
observation  has  made  it  possible  to  evolve  a  system  ade-
quate to  explain  real  facts  from  the  point  of  view  of  a
most  important  period — that  dominated  by  individualistic
liberalism.

Vital  defects  were  perceived  by  those  who  revolted
against  the  intellectualism  and  the  selfishness  of  this  eco-
nomic movement.  Not  only  reactionaries  and  romantics,
but  all  those  who  believed  mainly  in  intuition,  imagination,
organic  and  unconscious  or  half-unconscious  development,
criticized  the  narrow-mindedness  and  barrenness  of  the
classical  school  of  political  economy.  Carlyle  in  England,
A.  Comte  and  Le  Play  in  France  set  themselves  to  prove
that  the  life  of  society  even  in  its  economic  expressions
depends  on  many  feelings  and  tendencies  which  have  noth-
ing to  do  with  personal  greed  and,  in  fact,  that  it  is
impossible  to  build  up  a  society  by  the  action  of  selfish
motives.  In  political  economy  itself  the  standpoint  of  or-
ganic growth  was  represented  by  Roscher  and  that  of  the
"  heterogeneity "  of  elements  by  Knies,1  while  Schmoller's
school  became  a  centre  of  historical  research  opposed  to  the
dialectical  and  speculative  methods  of  classical  economists,
In  spite  of  many  compromises  and  much  overlapping,  the
students  in  this  department  grouped  themselves  in  a  char-
acteristic way  round  the  two  poles  of  abstract  doctrine
and  concrete  observation  as  to  development.2  It  is  im-
portant to  note  that  modern  progress  in  this  field  has  not
removed  this  polarization,  but  rather  accentuated  it.
Jevons  and  the  so-called  Austrian  and  American  schools
have  shifted  the  group  of  discussion  and  introduced  new
principles:  instead  of  concentrating  on  the  problems  of
value  in  exchange,  they  have  placed  in  the  foreground  the
problems  of  value  in  use  and  of  supply  and  demand.3  Yet

life  in  which  the  action  of  motive  is  so  regular  that  it  can  be
predicted,  and  the  estimate  of  motor  forces  can  be  verified  by  results,
they  have  established  their  work  on  a  scientific  basis."

1  Cf.  MAX  WEBER,  Roscher  und  Knies  in  Schmoller's  Jahrbucher
fitr  Gesetzgebung,  Verwaltung  und  Volkswirtschaft,  vol.  xxvii  ff .

2  SCHUMPETEB,  op.  tit.,  pp.  55,  62,  99.

s  JEVONS,  Theory  of  Political  Economy  (3rd  ed.,  1888),  p.  xxxii.
A.  MARSHALL,  op.  tit.,  p.  93:  "  Law.  of  satiable  wants  or  of  diminish-


78 INTRODUCTION:  PART  I:  LAW  AND  THE  SCIENCES

the  analytical  method  is  still  used  in  contrast  with  the
historical  as  the  natural  weapon  of  economic  theory.
Nothing  could  be  more  explicit  than  the  statement  of  one
of  the  leaders  of  the  new  school,  F.  von  Wieser.1  "The  con-
sciousness of  man  in  his  economic  capacity  presents  a  stage
of  experience  possessed  by  every  one  who  does  business  in
ordinary  life,  and  the  theorist  finds  it  ready  for  use  in
his  own  self  without  having  to  resort  to  special  means  for
collecting  it.  The  theory  of  national  economy  goes  as  far
as,  and  no  further  than,  common  experience.  The  theorist's
task  ends  with  the  general  experience.  But  where  science
has  to  collect  evidence  in  the  way  of  historical  or  statistical
work,  or  by  any  similar  accepted  method,  it  must  leave
studies  of  this  nature  to  those  working  in  other  depart-
ments of  economic  science,  who  are  able  by  means  of  their
method  to  throw  further  light  upon  the  results  of  their
researches.  He  will,  however,  not  be  able  to  get  away
from  the  relation  with  historical  development.  There  are
numerous  historical  economic  processes  which,  after  having
filled  decades  and  centuries,  are  still  unsettled,  and  which
become  clearer  in  the  light  of  common  experience.  Among
these  must  be  reckoned  the  development  of  the  division  of
labour,  or  the  accumulation  of  capital,  or  the  raising  of
ground  rents  or  even  the  superseding  of  natural  hus-
bandry by  cash-nexus. ' '  There  is  undoubtedly  a  great  deal
of  truth  in  this  frank  recognition  of  the  merits  of  an
analytical  isolation  of  the  elements  of  social  life  and  of
their  study  in  the  concentrated  light  of  typical  idealization.
The  combination  between  such  dialectical  treatment  and  the
study  of  concrete  facts  supplied  by  history  and  statistics
remains,  however,  a  vague  ''desideratum"  and  it  is  evi-
dent that  further  progress  must  depend  on  the  bridging
over  of  this  gulf.

ing  utility:  the  total  utility  of  a  thing  to  any  one  increases
with  every  increase  in  his  stock  of  it,  but  not  as  fast  as  his  stock
increases.  The  part  of  the  thing  which  he  is  only  just  induced  to
purchase  may  be  called  his  marginal  purchase.  The  utility  of  his
marginal  purchase  may  be  called  the  marginal  utility."

i  Theorie  der  Gesellschaftlichen  Wirtschaft  in  the  Grundriss  der
SozialokonomilCj  I),  p. 133.


II:  LAW  AND  SOCIAL  SCIENCE  79

A  daring  and  interesting  attempt  has  been  made  to  solve
this  fundamental  difficulty.  Karl  Marx  and  his  school  ism
have  not  been  content  with  appropriating  the  results  of
Ricardo's  teaching  on  value  and  wages  in  order  to  show
that  it  involves  a  profound  social  antagonism.  They  claim
to  have  established  a  direct  connection  between  dialectical
theory  and  historical  development  by  help  of  the  formula
of  "economic  materialism."

According  to  this  theory  the  phenomena  of  spiritual  life
in  the  history  of  mankind  are  nothing  but  reflected  images
of  economic  conditions.  Only  the  latter  are  the  true
realities  of  social  life.  "It  is  a  mistake" — asserts  the
materialistic  conception  of  history — "to  regard  ideas  as
independent  entities  and  as  existing  by  their  own  weight. "
The  social  materialist  compares  ideas  to  the  rainbow  which
is  not  a  substantial  phenomenon,  but  a  reflection,  attribut-
able to  the  passage  of  light  through  a  certain  milieu.  You
may  investigate  the  appearance  and  significance  of  social
conceptions  and  observe  the  birth  and  decline  of  ideas  and
their  influence  on  history:  but  you  must  clearly  realize
that  these  observations  do  not  represent  the  true  objects  or
the  laws  underlying  historical  movements.

While  you  believe  yourself  to  have  got  hold  of  ideas,
you  are  only  speaking  of  images,  not  of  the  real  objects
of  which  those  ideas  are  the  reflection.1

This  is  how,  for  instance,  Engels  explains  the  rise  of
Calvinism.

"Calvin's  creed  was  one  fit  for  the  boldest  bourgeoisie
of  his  time.  His  predestination  doctrine  was  the  religious
expression  of  the  fact  that  in  the  commercial  world  of  com-
petition success  or  failure  does  not  depend  upon  a  man's
activity  or  cleverness,  but  upon  circumstances  uncontrol-
lable by  him.  It  is  not  of  him  that  willeth  or  of  him  that
runneth,  but  of  the  mercy  of  unknown  superior  powers;
and  this  was  especially  true  at  a  period  of  economic  revo-
lution, when  all  old  commercial  routes  and  centres  were
replaced  by  new  ones,  when  India  and  America  were  opened

i  R.  STAMMLEB,  Wirtschaft  und  Recht,  p.  33.


80 INTRODUCTION:  PART  I: LAW  AND  THE  SCIENCES

to  the  world,  and  when  even  the  most  sacred  economic
articles  of  faith — the  value  of  gold  and  silver — began  to
totter  and  to  break  down. ' ' *

"Recognizing  the  futility  of  his  attempts  to  conquer
matter  by  his  own  labour,  the  human  being  is  wont  to
regard  nature's  resistance  in  the  light  of  a  hostile  force,
as  the  emanation  of  a  will  superior  to  his  own  which  by
prayers  and  offerings  he  seeks  to  render  propitious.  .  .  .
It  is  therefore  in  no  wise  strange  that  the  religious  senti-
ment is  thus  developed  as  the  psychological  product  of
isolated  and  co-actively  associated  labour."2

We  are  confronted  with  an  attempt  to  unite  economic
analysis  and  the  concrete  process  of  history  into  one  com-
prehensive scheme,  which,  once  recognized,  cannot  remain
a  mere  piece  of  learning,  but  ought  to  serve  as  a  direction
and  an  incitement  to  practical  action.  To  those  who  are
drawn  by  the  attraction  of  a  coming  change  the  formula  of
historical  materialism  appears  a  tempting  pronounce-
ment. If,  however,  we  do  not  surrender  to  the  vertige
of  a  popular  cataclysm,  but  inquire  fearlessly  into  the
symptoms  of  truth,  the  "dynamic"  formula  of  the  Marxists
discloses  both  positive  and  negative  features.  On  the  posi-
tive side  must  be  set  the  fact  that  in  its  treatment  of  history
it  leads  to  some  extent  to  the  same  kind  of  useful  isolation
which  modern  theory  has  assigned  to  the  analytical  method
in  economics.  It  considers  the  life  of  humanity  from  a
single  point  of  view — that  of  the  production  and  distribu-
tion of  the  means  of  existence ;  and  by  doing  so  it  undoubt-
edly throws  a  strong  light  on  the  importance  and  influence
of  the  economic  factor  in  the  process  of  evolution.  And
as  the  "means  of  existence"  is,  after  all,  the  most  general
and  the  simplest  requirement  of  life,  the  dialectical  work
performed  by  the  materialists  in  this  respect  has  had  a
far-reaching  influence  even  apart  from  their  peculiar  aims.
The  negative  side  is  no  less  obvious  to  all  unprejudiced
observers.  By  wilfully  curtailing  our  range  of  view,  by

1  Socialism:  Utopian  and  Scientific,  p xxi

2  A.  LOBIA,  The  Economic  Foundations  of  Society  (1907),  (transl.
by  L.  M.  Keasbey),  pp.  22.


II:  LAW  AND  SOCIAL  SCIENCE  81


following  one  train  of  thought  and  treating  all  other  in-
terests— political,  religious,  artistic,  scientific,  philosophical
—as  mere  adjuncts  and  reflexes,  the  Marxists  expose  them-
selves to  the  certainty  of  miscalculation  and  misinter-
pretation.
In  one  respect  such  miscalculation  is  especially  dangerous,  Material-

Isni  find

both  from  a  scientific  and  from  a  practical  point  of  view —  law.
I  mean  the  destruction  of  the  domain  of  law  by  the  Marx-
ists under  the  pretext  that  law  is  merely  a  reflex  mani-
festation of  the  preponderance  of  one  or  the  other  economic
class.  We  shall  often  have  to  come  back  to  the  close  con-
nection between  economics  and  law  in  the  life  of  societies,
but  it  is  advisable  to  enter  a  protest  from  the  very  begin-
ning against  the  one-sided  explanation  tendered  by  Marx's
school.  One  or  two  elementary  observations  may  help  to
show  how  little  it  corresponds  to  historical  reality.  The
regime  of  slavery  in  ancient  society  and  in  the  New  World
was  not  simply  the  result  of  economic  factors,  but  a  com-
bination of  economic  exploitation  with  moral  and  political
views  which  had  a  development  of  their  own  and  crystal-
lized in  a  definite  body  of  law.  It  gave  way  before  move-
ments of  mind  which  again  could  not  be  attributed
exclusively  to  material  considerations,  but  also  to  a  change
of  opinion  as  to  human  nature,  the  State,  the  duties  to-
wards fellow-men,  etc.  These  various  currents  of  thought
combined  to  produce  the  legal  changes  which  trans-
formed opinions  and  sentiments  into  rules  of  conduct.  Or
take  the  movement  towards  protection  and  development  of
national  industries  so  conspicuous  in  recent  times:  it  is
evident  that  its  motives  are  not  suggested  simply  by  the
interests  of  certain  influential  groups  and  persons,  but  pro-
duced to  a  large  extent  by  the  intensified  consciousness  of
national  unity  as  against  outside  interests,  although  the  free
play  of  these  interests  may  be  profitable  to  individual  citi-
zens as  consumers.  Altogether,  legal  rules,  by  which  all
social  intercourse  is  framed  and  contained,  cannot  be  treated
as  mere  corollaries  of  economic  stages.  Machinery,  organi-
zation, co-operation  have  their  own  requirements,  and  to
simplify  the  action  of  the  social  process  by  reducing  the  po-

2231  F


82 INTRODUCTION: PART  I: LAW  AND  THE  SCIENCES

litical  and  legal  factor  to  the  role  of  mere  consequences  of
class  struggle  would  be  about  the  same  as  eliminating  one
of  the  factors  in  accounting  for  a  process  of  multiplication.
Five  is  as  material  an  element  in  the  formation  of  thirty-
five  as  is  seven.

idealism  in  In  a  sense  it  is  strange  that  the  campaign  against  ideal-
movement,  ism  should  be  carried  on  so  strenuously  by  representatives
of  the  socialist  movement,  which,  after  all,  entirely  depends
on  the  spread  of  self-consciousness  and  on  the  propaganda
of  political  ideas  among  the  labouring  classes.1  As  far  as
numbers  are  concerned,  these  classes  have  always  been  pre-
ponderant, and  yet  the  huge  majorities  of  slaves  or  serfs
never  had  a  chance  against  their  masters  until  the  ad-
vance of  political  thought  taught  them  to  formulate  their
claims  and  to  organize;  while,  on  the  other  hand,  within
the  classes  superior  to  them  in  education  and  experience,
theories  favourable  to  the  recognition  of  the  claims  of
labour  have  been  initiated  and  developed  from  moral
sources — in  connection  with  ideals  of  justice  and  political
reconstruction.

The  error  of  materialistic  fatalism  does  not  merely
falsify  the  historical  and  scientific  theory  of  the  Marxists
It  threatens  the  policy  of  practical  socialism  with  a  reduc-
tion to  absurdity.  If  the  life  of  organic  evolution  tends
to  war  and  to  the  levelling  of  society  on  the  standard
of  the  lower  classes,  it  is  obvious  that  it  will  lead  to
degradation  in  all  respects  and  that  all  complex  tasks
requiring  skilful  handling  will  suffer  in  the  process.
Problems  of  engineering,  of  medicine,  of  law,  of  economics
cannot  be  solved  by  mere  appeals  to  communism.  You  do

i  Cf  B.  KIDD,  Social  Evolution  (1894),  p.  218:  "If  we  are  to
have  nothing  but  materialistic  selfishness  on  the  one  side  leagued
against  equally  materialistic  selfishness  on  the  other,  then  the  prop-
erty-holding classes  being  still  immeasurably  the  stronger,  would  be
quite  capable  of  taking  care  of  themselves,  and  would  indeed  be  very
foolish,  if  they  did  not  do  so.  Instead  of  enfranchising,  educating
or  raising  the  lower  classes  of  the  people  (as  they  are  now  doing,
as  the  result  of  a  development  which  Marx  has  not  taken  into
account),  they  would  know  perfectly  well,  as  they  have  always  done
in  the  past,  how  '  to  keep  the  people  in  their  places/  i.e.,  in  ignorance
and  political  disability.


II:  LAW  AND  SOCIAL  SCIENCE  83


not  build  a  railway  bridge  by  the  light  of  Marxist  doctrine.
We  have  lived  to  witness  the  blessings  of  the  rule  of
workmen  who  do  not  work  and  of  soldiers  who  do  not  fight
in  a  great  country  confronted  with  every  kind  of  difficulty
and  danger.  Let  us  hope,  at  any  rate,  that  the  catastrophe
of  the  Soviets  may  serve  as  an  object  lesson  to  illustrate
the  truth  that  it  is  not  by  discouraging  education,  industry
and  credit  in  favour  of  moral  license,  violence  and  cor-
ruption that  the  Socialists  can  hope  to  regenerate  the  world.
If  they  want  a  serious  trial  for  their  views,  they  ought,  like
every  other  great  movement  of  opinion,  to  strive  for  a
commanding  position  in  the  domain  of  thought,  and  to
justify  the  preponderance  of  the  working  class  by  its  educa-
tional achievements.


CHAPTER  IV
LAW  AND  POLITICAL  THEORY

and  La&w6  ^E  nave  now  ^°  consider  another  aspect  of  social  studies,
namely,  political  science,  in  the  sense  of  a  survey  of  insti-
tutions and  of  doctrines  concerning  public  life.  It  is
obvious  that  we  tread  here  on  ground  which  is  indissolubly
connected  with  the  operation  of  law.  It  is  not  the  par-
ticular problems  of  constitutional  law,  legislation,  judicial
organization,  state  interference  in  private  affairs,  that  we
need  discuss  now,  as  all  these  matters  will  appear  auto-
matically in  their  proper  places  when  the  legal  material
comes  to  be  examined  in  detail.  The  first  question  to  be
answered  at  this  juncture  concerns  the  relation  between
State  and  Law :  are  their  functions  combined,  and  in  what
respect  have  they  to  be  treated  separately  and  in  contrast
to  each  other?

I  may  start  with  an  explicit  affirmation  as  to  their  inter-
dependence. It  is  impossible  to  think  of  law  without  some
political  organization  to  support  it;  nor  is  it  possible  to
think  of  a  State  without  law.  The  first  alternative  is
absurd,  because-  law  requires  for  its  existence  and  appli-
cation an  organization  to  put  it  into  force.  The  action  of
such  an  organization  may  be  limited  to  recognizing  and
supporting  rules  framed  by  other  agencies,  say  by  priests,
or  by  jurisconsults,  or  by  experts  in  commerce  or  in  folk-
lore ;  in  other  cases  the  political  element  will  be  contributed
by  agreement  between  independent  states.  We  may,  again,
have  to  deal  with  more  or  less  autonomous  associations
subordinated  or  co-ordinated  to  the  State,  e.g.,  with
churches  or  with  local  bodies,  exercising  authority  over
their  members  for  the  purpose  of  carrying  out  specific  func-
tions. All  these  cases,  however,  resolve  themselves  into
varieties  of  the  ordinary  and  fundamental  position  in  which

84


IV:  LAW  AND  POLITICAL  THEORY  85

social  order  is  maintained  by  laws  enforced  in  the  last
resort  by  political  unions.  Although  from  a  wider  aspect
the  function  of  law  may  be  attributed  to  all  forms  of  social
organization,  it  cannot  exist  anywhere  without  leaning  di-
rectly or  indirectly  on  some  kind  of  political  union  acting
as  a  safeguard  of  social  order.  In  this  sense  law  requires
the  State  as  a  condition  of  its  existence.1

On  the  other  hand,  neither  the  State,  nor  any  other  polit-
ical or  quasi-political  body,  can  exist  apart  from  Law,  in
the  sense  of  a  set  of  rules  directing  the  relations  and
conduct  of  their  members. The  individuals  who  appear  in
the  last  resort  as  the  component  elements  of  these  political
bodies  are  not  welded  together  by  physical  forces,  and  have
therefore  to be  united by  psychical ties  ranging from
occasional  agreement  to  more  or  less  permanent  rules  of
conduct;  and  in  the  case  of  any  society  organized  as  a
political  union  these  ties  are  bound  to  take  the  shape  of
laws,  customary  or  enacted,  complete  or  imperfect,  but  all
tending  to  establish  order  and  to  apportion  rights  and
duties. When,  as  in  the  case  of  international  law,  the
basis  of  the  machinery  rests  on  agreement,  the  whole  struc-
ture is  undoubtedly  imperfect  and  shaky,  but  theoretically
it  is  intended  to  embody  rules  recognized  by  the  States
as  members  of  the  international  world,  and  therefore,  in
spite  of  flagrant  breaches  of  faith  and  trust,  it  has  a  stand-
ing claim  to  support  and  enforcement  by  the  common  action
of  the  political  bodies  which  have  taken  part  in  its  formu-
lation. In  short,  law  and  the  State  are  to  that  extent  inter-
dependent that  it  would  be  idle  to  derive  one  from  the
other. From  this  point  of  view  the  State  may  be  defined
as  a  juridically  organized  nation  or  a  nation  organized  for
action  under  legal  rules.2

Marxists  are  apt  to  speculate  on  a  complete  disappear-
ance of  State  and  Law.  Engels,  for  instance,  thinks  that
''as  soon  as  there  is  no  longer  any  social  class  to  be  held
in  subjection,  as  soon  as  class  rule  and  the  individual

i  GIERKE,  Johannes  Althusius.

*  GIERKE,  Orundbe griff e  des  Staats  in  the  Zeitschrift  fur  gesammte
Staataiviasenaohajt,  XXX,  p.  160.


86 INTRODUCTION:  PART  I:  LAW  AND  THE  SCIENCES

struggle  for  existence  based  upon  our  present  anarchy  in
production,  with  the  collisions  and  excesses  arising  from
these,  are  removed,  nothing  more  r&mains  to  be  repressed,
and  a  special  repressive  force,  the  State,  is  no  longer  neces-
sary. " 1  Is  this  scientific  or  Utopian  ?  More  practical
Socialists  do  not  share  these  illusions.  According  to
Sidney  Webb,  "The  necessity  of  the  constant  growth  and
development  of  the  social  organism  has  become  axiomatic/'  2
Might  and  The  necessary  alliance  between  State  and  Law  becomes
even  more  apparent  when  one  examines  each  of  these  con-
ceptions in  itself.  As  regards  the  nature  of  the  State,  three
principal  views  have  been  formulated  by  political  thinkers:
it  may  either  be  considered  as  the  embodiment  of  power,  or
as  an  organic  growth,  or  as  a  juridical  arrangement.  I
may  say  at  once  that  there  are  elements  of  truth  in  each
of  these  interpretations,  although  the  share  to  be  assigned
to  each  is  bound  to  vary  in  accordance  with  the  epoch  and
the  country.  Any  political  organization,  in  so  far  as  it
has  to  appeal  to  power  for  its  maintenance,  can  be  consid-
ered as  the  resultant  of  forces  seeking  to  obtain  sway  in
the  community :  when,  for  some  reason,  the  interests  repre-
sented by  these  forces  cannot  be  adjusted  or  reconciled,
conflict  may  assume  an  acute  form  and  lead  to  open  and

1  ENGELS,  Socialism :  Scientific  and  Utopian,  p.  76. Cf .  ACHILLE
LOEIA,  The  Economic  Foundations  of  Society (1907), p. 16: "In
order  to  prove  that  the  ethics  of  love  will  be  spontaneously  estab-
lished within  the  final  society,  it  is  not  necessary  to  suppose  with
Bellamy  and  other  Socialists, that  egoism will  cease  to be  active
under  this  final  economic  regime,  and  that  each  will  take  pleasure
in  working  for  others. This  would  only  be  admissible under the
supposition  that  the  final  society  would  succeed  in  changing  human
nature — a  thing  at  least  very  problematic. . . . We  have simply
to  take  account  of  the  fact  that,  within  an  economy  where  equality
prevails,  especially  if  it  be  associative  in  character,  respect  for  the
well-being  of  another  is  in  conformity  with  the  egoism  of  the  indi-
vidual,  because  every  injury  and  every  benefit  accorded to  others
reacts inevitably  to  the  disadvantage  or  advantage of the agent
himself."

2  Socialism  in  England (1890), p. 5: "The point  of view ex-
pressed in  the  text  explains  the  following  protest  against  criticism
by  individualistic  Liberals: When  the  higher  freedom  of  corporate
life  is  in  question,  they  become  angrily  reactionary,  and  denounce
and  obstruct  the  most  obvious  developments  of  common  action,  as
*  infringements  of  individual  liberty,  municipal  trading,'  or,  dreadest
of  all  words—'  bureaucracy.'  "


IV:  LAW  AND  POLITICAL  THEORY  87

violent  struggles  in  which  the  sovereignty  in  the  State
constitutes  the  spoils  of  victory.  I  need  hardly  recall  the
cynical  conclusions  drawn  from  such  observations  by
Sophists  or  their  pupils  (e.g.,  Plato  's  Thrasymachus  or
Callicles),  or  by  modern  worshippers  of  brute  force  like
Gumplovicz.1

It  is  more  important  to  notice  that  a  modification  of  the
doctrine  makes  it  more  acceptable  as  an  explanation  of
actual  facts.  The  most  famous  advocate  of  the  absolute
State,  Hobbes,  derived  it  not  from  an  assertion  of  brute
force,  but  from  the  recognition  of  a  sovereign  umpire  by
selfish  individuals.  The  notion  of  a  contract  of  subjection
is  out  of  date,  but  the  idea  of  the  suppression  of  strife  by
a  sovereign  umpire  is  reasonable  and  based  on  experience.
Let  us  go  one  step  further  and  notice  that  the  state  of
equilibrium  obtained  by  this  suppression  of  strife  is  the
normal  state  of  human  communities.  Of  course,  the  en-
forced peace  by  which  such  equilibrium  is  conditioned  does
not  prevent  competition  and  conflict  in  regularized  forms
between  individuals  and  social  groups  within  the  State,
and  therefore  the  equilibrium  obtained  cannot  be  described
as  a  stable  one,  but  rather  as  a  series  of  oscillations  round
a  common  centre.  Nevertheless  the  notions  of  peace  and
order  that  pervade  this  normal  arrangement  are  insepa-
rable from  ideas  of  compromise  and  adjustment.  The  rule
of  the  strong  when  it  ceases  to  be  a  conquest  or  a  revolution,
is  bound  to  settle  down  normally  into  a  rule  of  law.2

Another  way  of  considering  the  State  is  to  lay  stress  on The  state
its  continuity,  its  historical  development,  the  vital  con- ism?rg'
nection  between  its  aims  and  its  functions,  the  slow  and
partly  unconscious  growth  of  its  tissue  and  organs. These


Rasaenkampf,  1883.

2  MEBKEL,  Juristische  Encyclopddie  :  (par.  35)  "The  ascertaining
and  safeguarding  of  spheres  of  power  does  not  take  place  for  the  sake
of  justice,  but  the  aim  in  this  regard  is  only  achieved  through  jus-
tice. The  reason  is  to  be  found  in  the  mischief  of  the  struggle  .  .  .  ;
but  a  lasting  check  on  this  mischief  can  only  be  an  order  that  assigns
to  every  one  what  is  due  to  him  according  to  accepted  views."

(par.  40)  "The  contents  of  the  law  are  generally  in  the  nature  of
a  compromise  that  has  to  be  modified  and  revised  in  connection  with
changes  of  social  circumstances."


88 INTRODUCTION:  PART  I: LAW  AND  THE  SCIENCES

features  have  sometimes  suggested  elaborate  comparisons
with  biological  organisms.1

But  even  apart  from  such  analogies,  the  habit  of  ap-
proaching political  problems  as  manifestations  of  quasi-
organic  processes  has  had  a  profound  influence  on  the
thoughts  and  actions  of  statesmen  and  citizens.  In  Burke
and  Wordsworth,  for  instance,  this  estimate  of  the  sensi-
tiveness and  organic  transmission  of  social  life  produced
a  violent  reaction  against  the  reckless  manner  in  which  the
revolutionists  were  dissecting  and  resettling  living  nations.2
Law  comes  in  for  its  share  in  schemes  of  such  organic
interpretation,  in  as  much  as  its  evolution  could  be  shown
to  depend  on  profound  peculiarities  of  national  outlook
and  temper  and  is  not  amenable  to  sudden  and  arbitrary
changes.

In  this  way,  though  the  first  of  the  above-mentioned
theories  lays  stress  in  an  exaggerated  manner  on  the  cata-
strophes in  the  formation  of  States,  while  the  other  dwells
on  the  superindividual  life  of  national  units,  both  views
tend  towards  the  establishment  of  a  legal  frame  for  society :
the  formation  of  a  system  of  rules  and  rights  appears  in
any  case  as  one  of  the  characteristic  manifestations  of  the
process  of  government.

Naturally,  therefore,  political  doctrine  has  tried  to  ex-
tion?  press  in  juridical  formulae  the  nature  of  the  State  as  a

special  kind  of  society.  We  need  not  concern  ourselves
with  attempts  to  represent  the  State  as  the  agent  of  a
theocracy  or  as  the  object  of  princely  sway.  Two  other
solutions  deserve  greater  attention.  According  to  one  the
State  is  a  variety  of  the  juridical  concept  of  corporate
life.3

It  is  pointed  out  that  the  essence  of  a  State  organization

1  SCHAFFLE,  Bau  und  Leben  des  socialen  Korpers.

2  BURKE,  Reflections  on  the  Revolution  in  France,  p.  31 (Every-
man's Library) . "  Have  not  politics  founded  upon  hereditary  descent
the  merit  of  being  '  the  happy  effect  of  following  nature,  which  is
wisdom  without  reflection,  and  above  it'?"

SJELLINEK,  Allgemeine  Staatslehre,  pp.  162  ff.,  581.


IV:  LAW  AND  POLITICAL  THEORY  89

lies  in  the  fact  that  its  existence  surpasses  the  existence  and
interests  of  its  individual  members  while  forming  at  the
same  time  a  most  important  element  in  the  life  of  each  one
of  them.

As  Aristotle  said  long  ago,  man  is  a  "social  animal."  It
is  impossible  for  him  to  live  an  isolated  life:  he  is  bound
to  associate  with  his  fellow-men.  All  associations  created  by
.individuals  —  the  family,  the  local  group,  etc.,  —  tend  ulti-
mately toward  a  self-sufficient  union  called  the  Common-
wealth or  State.  Government  and  law  give  expression  to
the  corporate  will  and  mediate  between  the  corporation  and
its  members.  It  is  out  of  the  question  for  us  to  dwell  on
the  differences  between  various  exponents  of  the  doctrine
under  discussion,  especially  as  to  the  contrast  between  those
who  regard  the  corporation  as  an  artificial  or  fictitious  de-
vice for  systematizing  a  complex  of  legal  rules,  and  those
who  impart  to  corporations  in  general  and  to  the  State  in
particular  the  attribute  of  '  'reality.7'1

It  may  be  sufficient  to  note  that  the  conception  of  the
State  as  a  subject  of  right  may  sometimes  lead  to  mystic
views  which  it  would  be  difficult  to  reconcile  with  individual
"self-determination"  or  freedom.  It  is  not,  however,  such
extreme  forms  of  the  theory  that  interest  us  at  present,  but
the  general  idea  that  in  analysing  the  notion  of  the  State
we  ought  to  apply  to  it  the  juridical  attributes  of  the  cor-
poration and  of  the  subject  of  rights.  Undoubtedly  such
a  subsumption  of  the  species  "State"  under  the  genus
"Corporation"  is  helpful  and  suggestive  in  many  ways.

Even  in  its  moderate  forms  it  meets,  however,  the  resolute
opposition  of  a  group  of  thinkers  who  contend  that  the  key
to  any  reading  of  political  theory  has  to  be  sought  in  the
fundamental  fact  of  human  life  —  in  individual  personality.


Das  Wesen  der  menschlichen  Verbande  (1902),  pp.  17,
21,  22.  THALLER,  GE*NY  and  others,  L'ceuvre  juridique  de  R.  Saleilles,
p.  330:  "The  conception  of  reality  appears  to  us  as  the  only  con-
ception admitted  by  the  juridical  consciousness  of  the  masses,  and
interpreted  by  learned  men,  jurists  and  doctors.  Everywhere  the
capacity  and  personality  of  collective,  organized  groups  is  seen  to
impose  itself  as  a  fact  which  people  are  content  to  state,  and  not
as  a  refined  and  subtle  invention  whose  origin  is  artificial  or
statutory."


90 INTRODUCTION:  PART  I: LAW  AND  THE  SCIENCES


The  State
as  a  juri-
dical re-
lation.


Limits  of
analogies
from
private  law.


All  corporations  have  to  derive  their  existence  either  from
combined  action  by  their  founders  or  from  delegation  by
some  already  existing  authority,  and  the  State  cannot  pre-
tend to  another  origin.  If  it  exists  by  nature
it  is  not  a  corporation,  if  it  exists  by  agreement
it  has  to  be  deduced  from  the  will  of  individuals.  This
means  that  in  a  juridical  sense  the  dogmatic  construction
ought  to  fall  into  the  class  of  "relation"  and  not  into  that
of  "personality."  As  men  combine  for  commercial,  educa-
tional, or  religious  purposes,  so  they  combine  in  order  to
defend  themselves,  to  settle  disputes,  to  suppress  crime.
Their  combinations  in  the  latter  cases  are  naturally  more
lasting  and  complex  than  in  the  former,  but  they  are  of
the  same  kind,  and  it  is  only  by  realizing  the  vital  con-
nection between  the  rights  of  the  State  and  the  interests  of
individuals  that  we  can  hope  to  build  on  a  secure  political
foundation  and  to  further  social  progress  by  means  of  a
healthy  state  organization.1

It  would  be  difficult  to  make  a  decisive  choice  between
these  rival  claims.  The  competing  theories  present  at
bottom  figments  of  the  mind  intended  to  describe  and  to
summarize  actual  facts,  and  not  to  govern  them.  More  than
this;  in  so  far  as  these  formulae  draw  on  concepts  devised
originally  for  other  purposes,  they  are  merely  analogies,
and  cannot  be  taken  to  apply  to  all  the  conditions  and  con-
sequences which  are  to  be  observed  whether  in  the  case  of
corporations  or  in  that  of  legal  relations,  in  the  sense
attached  to  these  terms  by  private  law.  Such  analogies  are
most  useful,  as  they  suggest  inferences,  but  in  using  them
one  must  be  careful  to  remember  that  the  abstractions  of
public  law  brought  into  line  with  them  stand  on  their  spec-
ial basis.  It  is  obvious  that,  e.g.,  consent  cannot  play  in
constitutional  law  the  decisive  part  it  plays  in  the  private
law  treatment  of  legal  relations.  Again,  it  would  be  absurd
to  regard  citizenship  from  the  point  of  view  of  membership
in  a  corporation,  or  to  derive  sovereignty  from  the  function
of  management  of  corporate  interests.  As  for  the  doc-


i  DUGUTT,  fitudes  de  droit  public,  I,  pp.
worterbuch  der  Staatswissenschaften,  3rd


196,  258. LONING,  Hand-
ed., VII,  p.  701.


IV:  LAW  AND  POLITICAL  THEORY  91

trinal  idea  of  a  general  will,  it  has  been  the  stumbling-block
of  political  theories  which  have  attempted  to  work  out  the
notion  of  the  State  as  a  subject  of  right  too  closely  on  the
pattern  of  moral  personality.1  The  same  may  be  said  of
the  notion  of  natural  rights  as  the  basis  of  political  com-
bination.2

When  all  this  is  well  understood,  there  is  no  objection
to  using  both  juridical  doctrines — that  of  the  corpora-
tion and  that  of  the  legal  relation — to  illustrate  the  work-
ing of  the  State  in  its  different  aspects;  and,  in  practice,
these  analogies  have  contributed  greatly  to  elucidate  the
bearing  of  such  institutions  as  the  fiscus,  proceedings
against  the  Crown,  the  responsibility  of  officers,  the  line
of  demarcation  between  crime  and  delict,  the  problem  of
the  rights  of  the  individual,  etc.  In  fact,  any  topic  of
public  law  may  be  made  the  subject  of  interesting  exam-
ination either  from  the  point  of  view  of  the  doctrine  of
corporation  or  from  that  of  legal  relation.  The  detailed
discussion  of  this  point  must,  however,  be  left  to  students
of  public  law.  What  I  should  like  to  emphasize  in  conclu-
sion as  regards  the  general  relations  between  political
science  and  law,  are  the  following  two  points  derived  from


1  Cf.  DUGUIT,  Les  transformations  du  droit  public.

2  BENTHAM,  Traite  de  legislation,  ch.  xiii (Works, I,  p. 136):
"  To  maintain  that  there  is  a  natural  right  and  to  impose  it  as  a
limit  to  positive  laws,  to  say  that  law  cannot  go  against  natural
right,  to  recognize,  in  consequence,  a  right  which  attacks  law,  which
overturns  and  annuls  it, is  at  once  to  render  all  government  im-
possible  and to defy reason." "  Right is the creature of law "
(I,  p. 135 — Sophismes  anarchiques ) . Cf.  MICHEL,  L'idee  de  I'fitat,
pp.  83  ff. ;  THALLER  and  others,  L'ccuvre  juridique  de  R.  Saleillcs,
p. 333. Yet the notion returns in Spencer's teaching. BARTH,
Philosophie  der  Geschichte  als  Sociologie,  p.  116:  "This  [Spencer's]
law  of  nature  is  by  no  means  primitive  law,  nor  is  it  the  law  of
the  strongest  as  evolved  by  Nature  alone  and  without  the  admixture
of any  essentially human considerations. It is an ideal system,
built  up  by  means  of  philosophical  deduction,  and  claiming  freedom
and  equality  for  every  member  of  the  community. Nevertheless,
this  conception  of  natural  law  appears  to  furnish  Spencer  with  a
motive  for  maintaining  the sovereignty  of  nature in society. In
defiance  of  the  Utilitarians,  he  clings  to  natural  law  and  to  'natural
rights.'"  \8ocial  Statics,  ch.  v,  par.  3; The  Man  v.  the  State,  pp.
87  ff.] "  Every  human  being  has  a  right  to  develop,  in  perfect  lib-
erty, all  those  faculties  which  do  not  trespass  on  the  similar  liberty
appertaining  to  every  other  human  creature." [Social  Statics,  p.  94.]


92 INTRODUCTION:  PART  I:  LAW  AND  THE  SCIENCES

the  above  discussion.  (1)  The  attempt  to  define  the  nature
of  the  State  in  juridical  terms  is  not  a  quibble  of  the
lawyers.  It  is  an  obvious  consequence  of  the  view  that
State  and  government  in  a  civilized  country,  in  spite  of  all
their  might,  have  to  conform  to  a  rule  of  law,1  and  that  the
more  closely  their  functions  are  subjected  to  the  application
of  ordinary  legal  rules  and  methods,  the  better  will  be  the
guarantees  against  oppression,  corruption  and  arbitrary
measures.  (2)  On  the  other  hand,  as  the  permeation  of  the
State  with  juridical  principles  can  only  be  regarded  as  an
approximation  to  the  standards  of  law,  dependent  in  the
last  resort  on  conditions  of  fact  and  on  the  distribution  of
real  forces,  all  attempts  to  follow  the  possibilities  of  wrong,
resistance  and  conflict  to  their  ultimate  consequences  are
bound  to  transcend  the  framework  of  positive  law  and  of
regular  State  institutions.  Eventually  persons  and  nations
aggrieved  by  acts  of  State  have  to  appeal  to  extra-legal
means,  to  emigration,  to  passive  or  active  resistance,  to
revolution.  Apart  from  such  desperate  cases  they  can.
appeal,  and  they  do  appeal  constantly,  to  public  opinion —
by  way  of  the  press,  of  meetings,  of  public  and  secret
agitation.  In  this  form  we  have  the  stream  of  criticism
and  of  opposition  to  government  and  even  to  the  State
ever  flowing  in  front  of  us.  These  appeals  are  extra-legal,
though  not  necessarily  illegal.  They  are  addressed  to
society.  Just  because  the  State  is  so  intimately  bound  up
with  law,  it  is  unable  to  satisfy  the  pressure  of  the  varied
currents  of  economic,  religious,  cultural  aspirations  by  its
exclusive  action.  Even  in  its  own  sphere — in  the  domain
of  political  life — it  is  dependent  both  for  the  initiation  and
for  the  ultimate  defence  of  its  rules  and  institutions  on  the
action  of  society.  All  great  movements  of  reform  and
legislation  start  from  public  opinion,  and  obedience  to  law
and  government  could  not  be  enforced  for  a  moment  if
people  failed  to  support  them  or  stood  up  against  them.
It  has  been  often  pointed  out  that  public  order  in  the
broad  sense  of  the  word  is  maintained  not  by  a  few  police-

iCf.  DICEY,  Introduction  to  the  Law  of  the  Constitution,  6th  ed.,
pp.  180  ff.


IV:  LAW  AND  POLITICAL  THEORY  93

men,  but  by  the  more  or  less  explicit  approval  of  the  public
at  large.

Of  course  there  is  the  army.  But  what  would  become
even  of  the  mightiest  army,  if,  in  addition  to  external
discipline,  there  was  not  the  moral  resolve  of  the  soldiers
to  defend  the  country  and  to  uphold  its  laws?  The  Rus-
sian Army  of  1917  counted  its  soldiers  by  millions,  but  it
could  not  have  inscribed  the  epitaph  of  Thermopylae  on  the
tombs  of  its  dead.  Summing  up  this  discussion  as  to  the
nature  of  the  State,  we  may  say  that  it  is  an  organization
enforcing  social  order  by  means  of  legal  rules.

The  dependence  of  State  machinery  on  the  requirements, Aims  of  the

£ v  j • •  c •  x t,  State-Pro-

feehngs  and  opinions  of  society  becomes  even  more  apparent tection.
when  we  proceed  to  examine  the  aims  of  the  State. The
question  as  to  the  aim  of  the  State  is  a  necessary  comple-
ment to  the  question  concerning  the  nature  of  the  State.

It  may  be  said  at  once  that  the  aims  of  the  State  are  not
always  the  same.  It  is  only  the  minimum  requirements
that  recur  under  all  circumstances.  All  States  and  even
all  rudimentary  governments  aim  at  protecting  their
members  from  outsiders,  and  to  some  extent,  from  the  dis-
orderly conduct  of  fellow-citizens.  The  measure  of  that
protection  varies  greatly;  one  may  say  that  the  action  of
the  State  for  this  elementary  purpose  develops  on  the  line
of  a  spiral.  At  the  start  it  increases  with  the  progress  of
society  involving  more  complex  relations,  more  active  co-
operation and  better  methods  for  arranging  political
machinery  and  putting  it  into  motion ;  later  on,  it  generally
diminishes,  as  people  get  more  used  to  arranging  their
affairs  themselves,  develop  capacities  of  individual  enter-
prise and  begin  to  resent  government  interference.  Then,  it
may  increase  again  in  order  to  lessen  the  evils  of  bitter  com-
petition and  class  struggle.  The  tendency  towards  restrict-
ing the  State  is  essential  to  individualistic  liberalism  and
has  been  expressed  in  the  history  of  political  thought  by  the
laissez  faire  policy.  It  is  characterized  in  doctrine  by  pro-
nouncements like  that  of  Thomas  Paine,  that  government
is  a  necessary  evil.1

1SPENCEB, Man  versus the State (1884),  p. 33: "If, without


94 INTRODUCTION:  PART  I:  LAW  AND  THE  SCIENCES

Welfare.  Within  the  range  of  this  view  of  restricted  State  in-

fluence we  are  made  to  feel  that  the  solution  of  the  problem
depends  on  a  certain  conception  of  social  intercourse:  the
State  is  assigned  purely  negative  duties,  because  the  numer-
ous positive  requirements  of  human  life  ought  to  be  met  by
the  energy  of  individuals  and  by  their  co-operation  on  non-
political  lines.  In  practice,  however,  there  are  no  States
which  hold  themselves  strictly  within  the  limits  of  nega-
tive protection.  All  historical  commonwealths  attend  more
or  less  to  the  positive  requirements  of  their  subjects — to
their  welfare.  They  are  driven  to  it  even  by  considerations
of  finance :  taxpayers  have  to  be  shorn,  but  the  process  of
shearing  depends  largely  on  the  quality  and  quantity  of
wool,  in  other  words  on  resources  and  economic  conditions.
For  this  reason  the  care  of  the  people's  welfare  came  to  be
treated  as  a  distinct  aim  of  government  by  the  most  callous
of  " enlightened"  despots.  Frederick  II  of  Prussia  was  a
great  husbandman  of  his  kingdom,  efficient  not  only  in
pressing  unwilling  recruits  into  his  regiments,  but  in  the
thrifty  and  systematic  exploitation  of  his  subjects:  his
finance  was  based  on  State  protection  of  colonization  and
industry.  No  wonder  the  policy  of  welfare  developed  into
a  systematic  branch  of  knowledge  at  the  same  age  as  the
policy  of  security.1

The  liberal  movement  diverted  the  course  of  this  evo-
lution for  a  short  time,  but  State  interference  set  in  again
with  increased  strength  in  consequence  of  the  spread
of  socialistic  views.  It  is  no  longer  a  matter  of  theory
in  our  time.  German  State  socialism  sacrifices  liberty  to
the  ideal  of  State-controlled  well-being,  and  as  for  the  more
advanced  factions  of  social  democracy,  they  discard  the

option,  he  has  to  labour  for  the  society  and  receive  from  the
general  stock  such  portion  as  the  society  awards  him,  he  be-
comes a  slave  to  the  society.  Socialistic  arrangements  necessitate
an  enslavement  of  this  kind:  and  towards  such  an  enslavement
many  recent  measures,  and  still  more  the  measures  advocated  are
carrying  us."  An  interesting  formulation  of  the  restrictive  doctrine
as  regards  the  State  was  made  by  Wilhelm  v.  Humboldt  in  his
treatise,  Ideen  zu  einem  Versuch  die  Grenzen  der  Wirksamkeit  des
Staates  zu  bestimmen  (1792).  Cf.  HAYM,  Wilhelm  von  Humboldt,
pp.  46  ff.


IV:  LAW  AND  POLITICAL  THEORY  95


national  State  altogether,  but  agitate  for  a  social  organi-
zation which  will  place  private  life  under  the  constant
supervision  and  direction  of  an  organized  society  possess-
ing all  the  qualifications  of  a  sovereign  State.

It  is  characteristic  of  the  progress  of  the  social  functions
of  the  State  on  the  Continent  that  continental  political
science  has  been  gradually  shifting  its  ground  in  order  to
fit  in  its  teaching  with  the  various  attempts  and  meas-
ures to  organize  social  welfare.  Lorenz  Stein,  a  disciple
of  Hegel  and  a  rival  of  Marx,  made  the  contrast  between
government  and  society  the  basis  of  his  theory  of  public
law.  It  became  the  dominant  doctrine  in  German  univer-
sities, and  eventually  the  idea  of  a  cultural  guardianship
(Kulturpflege)  in  matters  of  religion,  of  literature,  of
science,  of  education  and  of  economics  led  to  the  growth  of
a  distinct  department  of  political  science  supported  by
special  administrative  institutions  and  a  specialized  branch
of  public  law.  It  is  not  without  interest  to  listen  to  the
programme  of  this  study  as  sketched  by  Professor  Edmund
Bernatzik  of  Vienna : 1  l  i  We  realize  nowadays  that  the
poor  must  be  protected  by  the  State  in  a  much  greater
measure  than  has  happened  up  to  now.  Among  other
things,  this  knowledge  has  made  necessary  far-reaching
changes  in  police  laws  and  measures  which  all  countries
have  started  according  to  their  respective  state  of  civiliza-
tion and  with  which  they  will  continue  far  into  the  twen-
tieth century.

"The  experiences  which  we  have  gathered  from  the  social
struggles  of  the  nineteenth  century,  have  taught  us  that
the  mere  issuing  of  laws  is  of  little  use  unless  their  obser-
vation is  entrusted  to  the  right  persons  and  carefully
watched.  During  the  period  of  liberalism  we  were  only  too
easily  content  with  merely  issuing  protective  police-laws.
It  was  a  cardinal  fault  in  the  judicial  organization  of
police  that,  while  there  was  ample  protection  against  too
much  police  activity,  there  was  hardly  any  against  inac-
tivity and  laxity,  from  which  the  poor  suffer  particularly.
The  second  half  of  the  last  century  is  characterized  by  the
iKultur  der  Gegenwart,  VIII,  pt  III,  p  396.


96 INTRODUCTION:  PART  I:  LAW,  AND  THE  SCIENCES

creation  of  departments  whose  special  function  it  is  to  see
to  the  carrying  out  of  the  social  public  laws,  namely,  the
so-called  'inspectorates'  (of  factories,  trades,  mines,  sani-
tation and  housing) .  The  extraordinary  importance  which
has  since  then  been  attached  to  statistics  is  closely  con-
nected with  this."

Modem  The  Western  democracies  are  fully  aware  by  this  time

inn England,  of  the  possibilities  and  character  of  State  action  and  control
in  social  matters.  The  new  orientation  of  social  studies  in
England  is,  for  instance,  illustrated  by  the  activities  and
writings  of  Sidney  and  Beatrice  Webb.  Their  works  on
trade  unions,  on  the  reform  of  the  Poor  Law,  and  on  Local
Government  are  meant  to  provide  not  only  theoretical  but
practical  instruction.  They  are  remote  from  the  Utopian
dreams  of  Stateless  mankind:  it  is  the  function  of
social  welfare  that  stands  in  their  foreground.  In  Indus-
trial Democracy  for  instance,  we  read:1  " Above  all  these,
stands  the  community  itself.  To  its  elected  representa-
tives and  trained  Civil  Service  is  entrusted  the  duty  of
perpetually  considering  the  permanent  interests  of  the
State  as  a  whole.  When  any  group  of  consumers  desires
something  which  is  regarded  as  inimical  to  the  public  well-
being  .  .  .  and  when  the  workers  concerned,  whether
through  ignorance,  indifference  or  strategic  weakness,  con-
sent to  work  under  conditions  which  impair  their  physique,
injure  their  intellect,  or  degrade  their  character,  the  com-
munity has,  for  its  own  sake,  to  enforce  a  National  Mini-
mum of  education,  sanitation,  leisure  and  wages.  We  see,
therefore,  that  industrial  administration  is,  in  the  demo-
cratic state,  a  more  complicated  matter  than  is  naively
imagined  by  the  old-fashioned  capitalist,  demanding  the
right  to  manage  his  own  business  in  his  own  way.  In
each  of  its  three  divisions,  the  interests  and  will  of  one
or  other  section  is  the  dominant  factor.  But  no  section
wields  uncontrolled  sway  even  in  its  own  sphere.  The
State  is  a  partner  in  every  enterprise.  In  the  interests  of
the  community  as  a  whole,  no  one  of  the  interminable  series
of  decisions  can  be  allowed  to  run  counter  to  the  consensus
i  SIDNEY  and  BEATRICE  WEBB,  Industrial  Democracy  (1902),  p.  822.


IV:  LAW  AND  POLITICAL  THEORY  97

of  expert  opinion  representing  the  consumers  on  the  one
hand,  the  producers  on  the  other,  and  the  nation  that  is
paramount  over  both."

It  is  not  our  business  to  discuss  the  merits  of  these  pro-
grammes. Our  object  is  merely  to  show  that  welfare  as
the  aim  of  the  State  supposes  the  closest  interdependence
between  political  and  social  organization.

It  is  not  necessary  to  take  sides  in  the  momentous  con-
troversies between  Individualism  and  Socialism,  between
syndicalism  and  State  doctrine,  in  order  to  feel  that  modern
jurisprudence  is  bound  to  take  stock  of  the  movements  of
opinion  and  of  the  collisions  of  interests  that  surround  it
on  all  sides.  The  Courts  constantly  have  to  pronounce
decisions  in  the  social  struggles  of  the  time  and  to  formu-
late rules  in  order  to  harmonize  and  to  define  conflicting
interests.  Nor  can  the  theory  of  law  remain  an  indifferent
onlooker  in  the  crisis.  It  becomes  more  and  more  evident
that  the  time-honoured  opposition  between  private  law  and
constitutional  law  is  not  appropriate  to  the  present  state
of  legal  thought.  Even  the  insertion  of  administrative  law
on  the  American  or  the  French  pattern  could  hardly  satisfy
the  requirements  of  contemporary  jurisprudence.  What  is
really  indicated  by  the  examples  of  the  treatment  of  the
subject  on  the  Continent  is  the  development  of  the  con-
ception of  Public  law  on  the  lines  of  a  comprehensive
treatment  of  the  rights  and  duties  of  various  social  organi-
zations— municipal,  ecclesiastical,  professional,  educational,
literary — that  have  stepped  in  between  the  individual  and
the  State  and  are  daily  growing  in  importance  in  their  task
of  organizing  scattered  individuals  into  conscious  and
powerful  groups.  The  specialization  of  such  a  department
of  law  is  rendered  necessary  by  the  fact  that  jurists  have
in  these  matters  to  operate  not  so  much  with  the  concepts
of  equity  and  of  direct  command,  but  with  the  concepts  of
public  utility  and  social  solidarity,  and  it  is  not  conducive
to  a  fair  and  broad-minded  treatment  of  these  subjects  to
entrust  it  exclusively  to  lawyers  brought  up  on  an  entirely
different  range  of  ideas.  The  great  traditions  of  English
Law  preclude  sudden  or  extreme  changes  in  this  respect,

2231  Q


98 INTRODUCTION:  PART  I:  LAW  AND  THE  SCIENCES

and  such  root  and  branch  changes  are  not  wanted.  What
is  wanted  is  the  growth  of  a  specialized  legal  theory,  of
differentiated  legal  teaching  and  of  corresponding  practice
of  Bar  and  Bench.

Sf°tne aims ^ne  more  asPect  °f  political  life  remains  to  be  considered,
state.  namely,  the  moral  aim  of  the  State. History  is  full  of

examples  of  measures  for  promoting  morality  and  virtue  by
laws  and  political  institutions.  This  aim  was  emphatically
put  forward  by  the  Greek  philosophers ;  it  was  the  root  of
many  measures  of  Roman  statecraft — the  cura  morum,  the
censorial  jurisdiction,  etc.  It  is  inherent  in  any  political
construction  under  the  influence  of  theocratical  ideas:
Catholicism,  Puritanism,  Islam,  Brahmanism,  Buddhism,
have  all  influenced  legislation  with  this  view.  In  our
secular  polity  it  manifests  itself  mainly  by  educational
experiments  and  by  the  conflicting  propaganda  of  political
theories.  There  is  one  side  of  this  ethical  aspect  of  the
State  which  deserves  special  notice  even  in  our  days,
namely,  the  tendency  to  regard  the  State  as  the  main  agent
in  raising  the  individual  from  the  selfishness  and  narrow-
ness of  his  private  existence  to  the  interests,  feelings  and
habits  of  an  enlarged  personality.1

The  idea  of  the  enlargement  of  personality  involved  in
social  life  is  a  profound  and  fruitful  idea.  Consciously
and  unconsciously  a  man  is  lifted  by  this  process  of  expan-
sion from  the  level  of  his  immediate  appetites  to  a  com-
prehension of  duties,  of  rights,  of  justice,  to  a  practice  of
self-control  and  self-sacrifice.  But  there  is  no  reason  for
assigning  this  momentous  evolution  exclusively  or  even
principally  to  the  domain  of  the  State.  The  process  in

i  See,  for  example,  the  idealistic  characterization  of  the  State
based  on  Hegel  and  Green's  teaching  in  BOSANQUET'S  Philosophical
Theory  of  the  State  (1910),  p.  150:  "The  State  is  not  only  the
political  fabric,  ...  it  includes  the  whole  hierarchy  of  institu-
tions by  which  life  is  determined,  from  the  family  to  the  trade,  and
from  the  trade  to  the  Church  and  the  University.  Pp.  187  f.t  "We
supposed  ourselves  prepared  to  do  and  suffer  anything  which  would
promote  the  best  life  of  the  whole.  .  .  .  The  means  of  action  at  our
disposal  as  members  of  a  State  are  not  in  pari  materia  with  the  end.
It  is  true  that  the  State  as  an  intelligent  system  can  appeal  by  rea-
soning and  persuasion  to  the  logical  will  as  such."


IV:  LAW  AND  POLITICAL  THEORY


99


question  is  the  social  process  at  large,  with  all  its  rami-
fications in  family  life,  in  social  co-operation,  in  educational
and  literary  intercourse,  in  religious  organization,  as  well
as  in  political  grouping.  Thus  we  are  led  again  from
political  doctrine  to  social  science  as  a  whole.1

As  a  result  of  this  survey  of  the  connection  between  social
science  and  law  it  may  be  stated  that,  apart  from  the  many
special  occasions  in  which  both  have  to  meet,  the  solution
of  two  great  problems  will  entirely  depend  on  an  active
co-operation  between  these  two  branches  of  knowledge:

(1)  the  problem  of  the  relation  of  State  and  Law  to  the
individual  and  his  sphere  of  interests,  rights  and  duties:

(2)  the  relation  of  State  and  Law  to  the  various  groups  in
which human solidarity finds expression — family, local
centre,  business  unions,  educational  institutions,  literary
circles,  churches,  states,  international  relations.

These  studies  ought  to  form  the  backbone  of  a  general
science  of  society,  of  the  sociology  discovered  by  Comte  and
Spencer.

i  IHEBINO,  Zweck  im  Recht,  I,  p.  67 ;  DUGUIT,  Transformations  du
droit  public,  xvii.


PART  II
METHODS  AND  SCHOOLS  OF  JURISPRUDENCE


CHAPTER  V
THE  RATIONALISTS

IT  is  time  to  enter  on  our  special  field  of  study  and  to The  main

currents  of

ask:  What  shape  have  the  aims  and  methods  of  Jurispru-  thought,
dence  assumed  under  the  influence  of  the  various  sciences
with  which  it  is  connected?  The  best  way  of  treating
the  matter  will  be  to  examine  the  most  important  con-
clusions arrived  at  by  leading  authorities  on  the  theory
of  law,  and  to  define  the  ground  we  consider  right  to  occupy
in  the  midst  of  conflicting  views.

There  can  be  no  question  of  following  in  detail  the  wind-
ings of  the  innumerable  controversies  on  the  subject  of
jurisprudence : 1  this  would  be  a  task  of  great  promise  and
interest  which  requires  special  treatment  in  a  history  of
juridical  literature.  I  must  restrict  myself  to  a  more
modest  scheme,  namely,  to  pointing  out  in  what  respects
contemporary  conceptions  of  jurisprudence  have  been  pre-
pared in  a  direct  way  by  previous  thinkers.  For  this  pur-
pose it  is  not  necessary  to  go  very  far  back  in  tracing  the
course  of  development,  although  the  Greeks,  the  Romans,
mediaeval  schoolmen  and  Renaissance  scholars  have  con-
tributed largely  to  laying  the  philosophical  and  technical
foundation  of  our  study.  But  the  vital  results  of  their

i  There  is  no  satisfactory  account  of  the  general  development
of  jurisprudence.  BERGBOHM,  Jurisprudent  und  Rechtsphilosophie,
(Leipzig,  1892)  teems  with  details,  but  is  confused  and  bewildering.
R.  POUND'S  survey  in  the  Harvard  Law  Review  may  help  to  trace
distinctions,  but  suffers  from  lack  of  perspective  and  of  organic
connection  between  the  parts.  An  excellent  treatment  of  the  German
literature  on  the  subject  is  presented  by  STINTZING  and  LANDSBERQ'S
Oeschichte  der  deutschen  Rechtswissenschaft  (3  volumes  in  5  parts,
1880-1910).  The  development  of  political  doctrines  in  France  is
well  traced  by  H.  MICHEL,  L'idte  de  VEtat  (1896).  The  methods
and  schools  of  Comparative  Jurisprudence  as  treating  the  origins
of  law,  are  characterized  by  P.  VINOGBADOFF  in  the  article  on  Com-
parative Jurisprudence  in  the  15th  volume  of  the  Encyclopedia
Britannica  (llth  ed.).  LESLIE  STEPHEN  on  the  English  Utilitarians
is  important  for  the  understanding  of  the  Rationalists.

103


104 INTRODUCTION:  PART  II:  METHODS  AND  SCHOOLS

doctrines  have  been  appropriated  and  digested  by  more
recent  inquirers.  We  shall  have  to  deal  with  these  results
in  the  shape  and  in  the  measure  in  which  they  have  been
"received"  by  leaders  of  thought  within  the  last  three
hundred  years.

Looking  back  on  the  glorious  efforts  of  European
philosophy  and  science,  one  certainly  has  not  to  fear  lack
of  material,  but  rather  to  guard  against  overcrowding  and
confusion.  In  the  case  of  a  theoretical  inquiry,  it  is  espec-
ially important  to  follow  clearly  defined  tracks  and  not  to
lose  the  guiding  threads  on  account  of  tempting  digressions.
There  are  conspicuous  landmarks  that  will  help  us  to
find  our  way  in  the  maze  of  doctrines:  broadly  speaking,
the  course  of  juridical  theory  has  proceeded  in  three  main
channels  formed  by  the  movements  of  general  European
thought :  it  started  with  the  predominance  of  rationalism  in
philosophy  and  science ;  a  decisive  Romantic  reaction  set  in
against  the  narrow  standards  of  the  rationalistic  methods
and,  eventually,  the  idea  of  evolution  spread  over  the  whole
field  of  natural  and  social  sciences.  Let  us  examine  the
characteristic  features  of  these  three  stages  of  development
and  conclude  by  noticing  the  main  threads  of  contemporary
jurisprudence.
Rational-  It  is  common  knowledge  that  the  remarkable  progress  of

ism  and

empiricism,  mathematical  and  natural  sciences  in  the  seventeenth  and
eighteenth  centuries  impressed  upon  the  minds  of  European
thinkers  the  conviction  that  facts  of  human  politics,  morals
and  law  could  be  and  ought  to  be  subjected  to  the  same
methods  of  observation  and  deductive  reasoning  as  the  facts
of  astronomy,  mechanics,  physics,  etc.,  and  that  analysis
and  systematization  on  scientific  lines  had  to  replace  state-
ments founded  on  authority  and  tradition.

In  the  " humane  studies"  the  rational  side  of  the  in-
quiry was  even  more  prominent  than  in  natural  science,
because  the  material  to  be  operated  upon  was  not  amenable
to  direct  observation  by  the  senses  in  the  same  way  as  the
planetary  system  or  the  phenomena  of  hydrostatics.

In  consequence,  it  was  not  so  much  observation  as  ratio-


V:  THE  RATIONALISTS  105

cination  (reasoning)  that  served  as  a  lever  in  the  inquiries
of  the  period  of  enlightenment.  "The  French  encyclo-
paedists of  the  eighteenth  century  imagined  they  were  not
far  from  a  final  explanation  of  the  world  by  physical  and
mechanical  principles ;  Laplace  even  conceived  a  mind  com-
petent to  foretell  the  progress  of  nature  for  all  eternity,
if  but  the  matter,  the  positions  and  the  initial  velocities
were  given.  The  world  conception  of  the  encyclopaedists
appears  to  us  as  a  kind  of  mechanical  mythology  in  con-
trast with  the  animistic  mythology  of  the  old  religions."1

Both  sides  of  the  scientific  process  are  represented  in  the
rationalistic  philosophy  and  science  of  these  times — the
mathematical  method  building  up  its  conclusions  on  the
basis  of  initial  postulates  by  evolving  consequences  and
relations  of  symbolic  concepts,  and  the  physical  method
discovering  the  properties  of  facts  ascertained  by  human
experience  and  co-ordinating  these  facts  as  causes  and
effects  under  scientific  laws.2

This  double  aspect  of  rationalistic  thought  has  to  be
clearly  realized  and  kept  in  view.  It  establishes  a  funda-
mental difference  between  abstract  reasoning  in  the  domain
of  the  "natural  philosophy"  of  the  age  of  enlightenment
and  the  activities  of  mediaeval  schoolmen,  who  were  also
masters  of  dialectical  reasoning,  but,  as  Bacon  had  shown
with  decisive  effect,  were  quite  unable  to  do  justice  to  ex-
perience as  the  great  storehouse  of  substantial  knowledge.

On  the  other  hand,  the  bold  attempt  to  obtain  an  intel-
lectual mastery  of  nature — physical  as  well  as  human-
forms  the  general  characteristic  of  the  period  even  though
it  was  embodied  in  two  distinct  currents — the  rationalistic
group  proper,  led  by  Descartes,  drawing  deductions  from  a
priori  principles:  and  the  empirical  group,  starting  with
Bacon  and  looking  to  experience  as  the  foundation  of
human  ideas.

Let  us  notice  more  particularly  that  the  representatives

i  A.  MACH,  quoted  by  Whetham,  The  Recent  Development  of
Mechanical  Science  (4th  ed.,  1909).  The  subject  is  discussed  in
detail  by  A.  S.  LAPPO-DANILEVSKY  in  the  Bulletin  of  the  Russian
Academy  of  Sciences  for  1918  (Russian).

2MERZ,  History  of  European  Thought,  I,  100,  314  ff.,  396  ff.


106 INTRODUCTION:  PART  II:  METHODS  AND  SCHOOLS

of  the  empirical  school — Locke,  Hume,  Adam  Smith,  Ben-
tham — were  themselves  rationalists  in  so  far  as  they
trusted  to  purely  intellectual  interpretation  of  the  facts  of
mind  and  society.

The  psychology  of  the  associationists,  the  political
economy  of  the  classical  school,  the  social  science  of  the
utilitarians  were  governed  by  rationalistic  conceptions.
This  is  strikingly  apparent  in  the  treatment  of  psychologi-
cal problems.  Locke's  and  Hume's  ideas  are  the  results
of  introspection  into  the  activity  of  the  intellect.  Feeling
is  hardly  sketched  by  this  psychology,  which  attempted  to
explain  the  working  of  the  human  mind  by  analysing  the
chance  combinations  of  ideas  called  forth  by  impressions
from  the  outside  world.

As  introspective  inquiry  was  concentrated  on  the  intel-
lectual side  of  the  associative  process,  it  did  not  lead  to
greater  results  in  the  field  of  psychology  than  those
achieved  by  the  purely  abstract  theory  of  ''faculties"  built
up  by  the  school  of  J.  Chr.  Wolff.  The  difference  between
the  two  branches  of  the  study  consisted  in  their  meta-
physical implications  and  in  the  manner  of  grouping  ideas
into  accidental  or  permanent  combinations,  more  than
in  a  fundamental  contrast  in  the  conception  of  mental
life.1
Educational  The  movement  of  moral  ideas  is  especially  characteristic

theories.

in  the  domain  of  education,  one  of  the  favourite  subjects  of

eighteenth  century  society. The  article  on  education  in

the  Encyclopaedia  of  Diderot  and  D'Alembert  is  composed

appuo?1 *n  a  sPir^  of  Purely  rationalistic  Sensualism.2 It  starts

tion.  from  the  axiom — je  sens,  done  j' exist  e. It  sets  its  faith  in

logic,  and  recommends  reasoning  as  the  unfailing  method

of  imparting  truth  to  pupils. It  prohibits  fables  and  fairy

1  LESLIE  STEPHEN,  The  English  Utilitarians,  II,  p.  290:  "  Philosophy-
is  by  some  people  supposed  to  start  from  truths,  and  thus  to  be  in
some  way  an  evolution  of logic. According  to  Mill it  must  start
from  facts,  and  therefore  from  something  not  given  by  logic. For
Mill  the  ultimate  facts  must  be  feelings. The  Penser  c'est  sentir  or
the doctrine that all '  ideas ' are transformed sensations is his
starting  point." For  a  transition  see  JAMES  MILL'S  Analysis  of  the
Human  Mind.

2  L' Encyclopedic;  dictionnaire  des  sciences,  des  arts  et  des  metiers


V:  THE  RATIONALISTS  107

tales.  The  prophet  of  the  second  half  of  the  century,
J.  J.  Rousseau,  on  the  contrary  scorns  pedantic  reasoning
and  appeals  to  emotion.  But  his  Simile  nevertheless  re-
mains a  product  of  intellectualistic  thought,  with  this  dif-
ference, that  instead  of  the  pupil,  it  is  the  instructor  who
proceeds  by  clearly  devised  plans  and  methods.  The  pupil
is  a  kind  of  lay  figure  in  which  impressions,  associations
and  sympathies  are  called  forth  by  a  skilful  master.1  Abstract

In  political  economy  the  influence  of  rationalistic  thought  f?0eiiticaiin
was  deeper  and  productive  of  greater  results.  The  sim-  '
plification  achieved  by  restricting  the  inquiry  to  the  work-
ing of  the  one  motive  of  seeking  profit  led  to  a  brilliant
display  of  dialectical  skill  and  to  many  important  generali-
zations. And  yet  even  here  the  cogency  of  argument  and
the  scientific  character  of  the  treatment  were  obtained  at
the  price  of  a  wilful  narrowing  of  the  range  of  observation
and  the  abstract  treatment  of  the  subject.2  Modern  stu-
dents of  economics  have  often  called  attention  to  Ricardo's
one-sided  but  powerful  analysis  as  the  most  characteristic
expression  of  the  rationalistic  frame  of  mind.3  Although
his  work  falls  into  the  first  half  of  the  nineteenth
century,  he  is  in  spirit  a  thorough-going  representative


(1775),  p.  402:  "It  is  Philosophy's  constant  axiom  that  our  thought
adds  nothing  to  what  the  objects  are  in  themselves.  .  .  .  Each
individual  perception  must  have  its  particular  cause  or  its  own
motive."

1  MOBLEY,  Rousseau,  II,  p.  213: "One  day  Emilius  comes  to  his
beloved  garden,  watering-pot  in  hand,  and  finds  to  his  anguish  and
despair  that  the  beans  have  been  plucked  up,  that  the  ground  has
been  turned  over,  and that  the spot is  hardly recognizable. The
gardener  comes  up,  and  explains  with  much warmth  that  he  had
sown  the  seed  of  a  precious  Maltese  melon  in  that  particular  spot
long  before  Emilius  had  come  with his  trumpery beans,  and that
therefore  it  was  his  land; that  nobody  touches  the  garden  of  his
neighbour,  in  order  that  his  own  may  remain  untouched;  and  that
if Emilius  wants  a  piece  of  garden, he  must  pay for it by sur-
rendering to  the  owner  half  the  produce. Thus,  says  Rousseau,  the
boy sees  how the  notion of property naturally goes back to the
right  of  the  first  occupant  as  derived  from  labour."

2  LESLIE  STEPHEN,  The  Science  of  Ethics,  pp.  14,  15:  "If  we  had
but  a  single  passion,  if  we  were  but  a  locomotive  stomach  like  a
polyp,  the  problem  would  be  simple. . . . Who  can  say  what  is  the
relative  importance  of  the  various  parties  in  the  little  internal  par-
liament which  determines  our  policy  from  one  moment  to  another?"

3  BRENTANO,  Die  klassische  Nationalokonomie,  4  ff .


108 INTRODUCTION:  PART  II:  METHODS  AND  SCHOOLS

of  the  deductive  method  originated  by  eighteenth  century
enlightenment.

In  social  science  the  method  of  rationalistic  reflection  was
equally  conspicuous,  although  much  more  difficult  of  ap-
plication, and  therefore  it  did  not  yield  scientific  results
similar  to  those  achieved  by  political  economy.

It  is  sufficient  to  mention  the  doctrine  of  the  "  state  of
nature"  which  has  inspired  so  many  ' ' Robinsonian ' '  specu-
lations of  eighteenth  century  philosophers  and  statesmen.
It  hinged  on  the  notion  that  the  natural  relations  between
a  man  and  his  fellows  could  be  discovered  by  careful  intro-
spection, freed  from  the  distortions  produced  by  prejudice
and  sinister  interests.1  Natural  law  had,  of  course,  to  be
reconstructed  on  lines  traced  by  reason.

Rational-  It  was  necessary  for  this  purpose  to  start  from  the  single

individual  and  to  build  up  society  as  a  combination  of
reasonable  beings.

The  fatal  tendency  of  rationalistic  thought  towards  the
simplification  of  experience  by  the  isolation  of  the  single
individual 2  explains  the  indifference  and  even  hostility
towards  the  principal  source  of  social  experience,  namely,
history.  The  latter  is  not  only  ignored,  but  treated  with
hatred  and  contempt,  as  a  source  of  superstition  and  mis-
chievous authority.3

IBENTHAM,  Principles  of  Judicial  Procedure,  ch.  ii  (Works;  ed.
Bowring,  1843).

Book  of  Fallacies,  Pt.  II,  ch.  ii  (Works,  II,  p.  420):  "  I  am  a
lawyer  [would  one  of  them  be  heard  to  say], — a  fee-fed  judge —
who,  considering  that  the  money  I  lay  up,  the  power  I  exercise,
and  the  respect  and  reputation  I  enjoy,  depend  on  the  undiminished
continuance  of  the  abuses  of  the  law,  the  factitious  delay,  vexation,
and  expense  with  which  the  few  who  have  money  enough  to  pay
for  a  chance  of  justice  are  loaded,  and  by  which  the  many  who
have  not,  are  cut  off  from  that  chance, — take  this  method  of
deterring  men  from  attempting  to  alleviate  these  torments  in  which
my  comforts  have  their  source."

2  LESLIE  STEPHEN,  The  English  Utilitarians,  III,  p.  315:  "A  diffi-
culty arises  from  the  defective  view  which  forces  Mill  to  regard  the
whole  process  as  taking  place  within  the  life  of  the  individual.  The
unit  is  then  a  being  without  moral  instincts  at  all,  and  they  have  to
be  inserted  by  the  help  of  the  association  machinery."

SBENTHAM,  The  Book  of  Fallacies,  Pt.  I,  ch.  ii  (Works,  II,  pp.
339,  400 )  :  "  On  no  one  branch  of  legislation  was  any  book  extant,
from  which,  with  regard  to  the  circumstances  of  the  then  present
times,  any  useful  instruction  could  be  derived:  distributive  law,


V:  THE  RATIONALISTS  109

Having  got  hold  of  the  individual  as  the  isolated  subject
of  analysis,  rationalistic  thought  proceeded  to  examine  the  selfishness,
guiding  motives  of  his  conduct  and  came  to  the  conclusion
that  all  these  various  motives  could  be  derived  from  one
main  principle — the  pursuit  of  happiness,  that  is,  the  striv-
ing for  pleasure  and  the  avoidance  of  pain.1

There  were  also  other  views,  but  they  did  not  obtain
anything  like  the  influence  achieved  by  the  doctrine  of
selfishness.  The  experience  of  life  transforms  selfishness
into  morality  as  regards  others.  The  leading  moralists
laid  stress  on  different  considerations  in  order  to  explain
the  transition  from  egoism  to  altruism:  the  derivation  of


penal  law,  international  law,  political  economy,  so  far  from  existing
as  sciences,  had  scarcely  obtained  a  name:  in  all  those  departments,
under  the  head  of  quid  faciendum,  a  mere  blank:  the  whole
literature  of  the  age  consisted  of  a  meagre  chronicle  or  two,  con-
taining short  memorandums  of  the  usual  occurrences  of  war  and
peace,  battles,  sieges,  executions,  revels,  deaths,  births,  processions,
ceremonies,  and  other  external  events,  but  with  scarce  a  speech  or  an
incident  that  could  enter  into  the  composition  of  any  such  work  as
a  history  of  the  human  mind — with  scarce  an  attempt  at  investiga-
tion into  causes,  characters,  or  the  state  of  the  people  at  large.
Even  when  at  last  little  by  little,  a  scrap  or  two  of  political  instruc-
tion came  to  be  obtainable,  the  proportion  of  error  and  mischievous
doctrine  mixed  up  with  it  was  so  great,  that  whether  a  blank
unfilled  might  not  have  been  less  prejudicial  than  a  blank  thus
filled  may  reasonably  be  a  matter  of  doubt."

Cf.  Principles  of  the  Civil  Code,  Pt.  I,  ch.  xv  (Works,  I,  p.  318)  :
"I  cannot  refrain  from  noticing  here  the  ill-effects  of  one  branch
of  classical  education.  Youth  are  accustomed  from  their  earliest
days  to  see,  in  the  history  of  the  Roman  people,  public  acts  of
injustice,  atrocious  in  themselves,  always  coloured  under  specious
names,  always  accompanied  by  a  pompous  eulogium  respecting
Roman  virtues.  .  .  .  The  history  of  the  Grecian  Republics  is  full
of  facts  of  the  same  kind,  always  presented  in  a  plausible  manner,
and  calculated  to  mislead  superficial  minds.  How  has  reasoning
been  abused,  respecting  the  division  of  the  lands  carried  into  effect
by  Lycurgus,  to  serve  as  a  foundation  to  his  warrior  institution,
in  which,  through  the  most  striking  inequality,  all  the  rights  were
on  one  side  and  all  the  servitude  on  the  other."

iHoBBES,  Elementorum  philosophiae,  sectio  tertia:  "De  Give,"
cap.  II,  i:  "Est  igitur  lex  naturalis  dictamen  rectae  rationis  circa
ea  quae  agenda  vel  omittenda  sunt  ad  vitae  membrorumque  con-
servationem  quantum  fieri  potest,  diuturnam."

Cf.  MORLEY,  Rousseau,  II,  p.  219:  "He  repeats  again  and  again
that  self  love  is  the  one  quality  in  the  youthful  embryo  of  character
from  which  you  have  to  work.  From  this,  he  says,  springs  the
desire  of  possessing  pleasure  and  avoiding  pain,  the  great  fulcrum
on  which  the  lever  of  experience  rests."


HO INTRODUCTION:  PART  II:  METHODS  AND  SCHOOLS

morality  from  utilitarian  motives  remains  common  ground
for  most  empirical  intellectualists.  It  is  highly  character-
istic that  none  of  the  older  utilitarians  attached  much  im-
portance to  the  educational  influence  of  social  surroundings
in  moulding  morality  and  transforming  individual  interests
into  social  habits  and  rules :  this  aspect  of  development  was
bound  to  attract  attention  when  historical  conditions  came
to  be  taken  into  consideration,  and  eventually  it  did  lead
to  the  formation  of  the  group  of  the  so-called  social  utili-
tarians.

But  history  had  no  value  for  the  rationalists  themselves,
and  as  social  development  was  for  them  merely  the  sum  of
individual  experiences,  the  entire  transformation  from  sel-
fishness to  morality  had  to  be  effected  by  means  of  the
calculus  of  utilities.1

Rationalistic  thought  reached  its  highest  point  in  Ben-
tham's  ideal  of  the  greatest  happiness  of  the  greatest
number,  an  ideal  which  in  its  quantitative  formulation
necessarily  tended  towards  an  accumulation  of  material
goods  for  equalized  individual  units.

Rationalistic  enlightenment  forms,  as  it  were,  the  back-
ground for  the  jurisprudence  of  the  utilitarian  stamp,
which  is  still  religiously  kept  up  in  the  law  schools  of
twentieth-century  England.

idea  of  Before  analysing  the  main  points  of  that  jurisprudential

doctrine,  let  us  mention  briefly  a  group  of  theories  which,
though  constructed  on  rationalistic  lines,  form  a  contrast
to  the  utilitarian  school.  It  may  be  said  on  the  whole
that  the  rival  views  are  in  conflict  because  one  takes  its
stand  on  the  principle  of  individual  liberty  while  the  other
starts  from  the  idea  of  State  coercion:  the  opposition  has
to  be  formulated  on  broad  lines  and  does  not  exclude  a
good  many  compromises  and  transitions,  but  I  do  not  think
the  general  drift  of  the  contending  schools  of  thought  can
be  mistaken.  What  may  be  called  the  liberal  orientation
is  represented  most  effectively  by  Locke,  Rousseau  and

i  Bentham's  position  in  this  respect  is  well  known.  But  it  should
be  noticed  that  utility  forms  the  keystone  not  only  of  the  classical
school  in  political  economy,  but  also  of  Jevons'  teaching.


V:  THE  RATIONALISTS  111

Kant.  Their  teaching  culminates  in  the  idea  of  contract,
as  the  basis  of  political  and  legal  organization.  It  is
sufficiently  known  how  the  compromise  settlement  of  the
English  revolutionary  period  found  its  theoretical  exponent
in  Locke  and  was  adapted  to  the  requirements  of  Common
Law  by  Blackstone.

It  may  be  worth  noticing  that  the  historical  foundations
of  that  course  of  development  were  wider  than  the  struggle
between  King  and  Parliament,  between  monarchical  dis-
cretion and  the  rule  of  traditional  law :  the  declarations  of
Right  of  the  American  Colonies  embodied  in  the  Consti-
tutions of  single  States  and  of  the  Union,  provide  eloquent
testimony  to  the  profound  meaning  of  the  struggle  for
individual  liberty  and  for  a  government  founded  and  sup-
ported by  agreement.1

Rousseau's  position  is  more  complex:  he  started  from
the  notions  of  natural  freedom  and  of  an  original  contract,
but  he  is  aware  of  the  difficulty  of  building  up  a  common-
wealth from  individualistic  materials;  and  in  his  attempt
to  distinguish  between  the  will  of  that  commonwealth
(volonte  generate)  and  the  aggregate  will  of  its  members
(volonte  de  tons)  he  was  driven  to  a  unification  of  the
State  in  the  shape  of  a  "moral  person,"2  endowed  with
absolute  control  over  its  component  parts.  In  the  last
resort  there  is  not  much  to  choose  between  Rousseau's  ideal
democracy  and  Hobbes'  ideal  monarchy.3

1  JELLINEK,  Erkldrung  der  Bilrgerrechte (1895).

2  BOSANQUET,  The  Philosophical  Theory  of  the  State,  pp.  98  ff . :
"  Each  individual  may  consider  the  moral  person  which  constitutes
the  State  as  an  abstraction (etre  de  raison),  because  it  is  not  a
man; he  would  enjoy  the  rights  of  the  citizen  without  consenting
to  fulfil  the  duties  of  a  subject — an  injustice,  the  progress  of  whieli
would  cause  the  ruin  of  the  body  politic. In  order  then  that  the
social pact may not be a vain formula, it tacitly includes the
covenant,  which  alone  can  confer  binding  force  on  the  others,  that
whoever  shall  refuse  to  obey  the  general  will,  shall  be  constrained
to  do  so  by  the  whole  body,  which  means  nothing  else  than  that
he  will  be  forced  to  be  free."

s  Cf .  HOBBES,  op.  cit.,  cap.  ii,  par.  2:  "  Actiones  omnium  a  suis
cujusque  opinionibus  reguntur.  Quare  illatione  riecessaria  et  evi-
denti  intelligitur  pacis  communis  interesse  plurimum,  ut  nonnullae
opiniones  vel  doctrinae  civibus  proponantur,  quibus  putent,  vel  se
jure  non  posse  legibus  civitatis  obtemperare,  vel  licitum  sibi  esse  ei
resistere,  vel  majorem  minore  sibi  neganti,  quam  praestanti,


112 INTRODUCTION: PART  II:  METHODS  AND  SCHOOLS

The  roots  of  the  dogmatic  construction  are  obviously  to
be  found  in  a  rationalistic  individualism  incapable  of  con-
ceiving any  other  motives  than  those  derived  from  personal
interest  and  therefore  incapable  of  making  room  in  a  social
life  for  any  power  but  that  of  a  strong  personality — either
individual  or  collective,
conscience  Kant  introduced  yet  another  factor.  He  was  much  im-

and  duty.

pressed  by  the  works  of  Rousseau.1  But  the  principal
factor  in  his  estimate  of  the  world  was  the  recognition  of
the  imperative  claim  of  individual  conscience.2  His  famous
ethical  formula  combines  the  idea  of  personal  duty  and  of
universal  law.  In  his  view  the  ultimate  sanction  of  social
order  and  of  its  rules  lies  in  its  justification  before  indi-
vidual reason.  In  so  far  as  freedom  appears  as  the  foun-
tain of  law  and  of  the  State  men  ought  to  obey  rules
because  they  are  free  to  set  them  up  in  accordance  with
their  reason  (Verstand).  Kant  was  not  very  successful  in
working  out  this  magnificent  principle  of  " self-determina-
tion" in  detail,3  but  his  speculations  were  anything  but
mere  professorial  exercises.  They  reflect  the  innermost
aspirations  of  continental  idealists  in  the  great  crisis  of
the  eighteenth  century.  The  Declaration  of  the  Bights  of
Man  of  1789  was  dictated  by  the  same  idea  of  freedom,  and
though  frustrated  on  many  occasions  by  harsh  realities,  it
has  remained  the  great  landmark  and  beacon  of  high-
minded  liberalism  in  the  world.4

obsequium.  Si  enim  unus  imperet  aliquid  facere  sub  paena  mortis
naturalis,  alius  vetet  sub  paena  mortis  aeternae  uterque  jure;
sequetur  non  tantum  cives,  etsi  innocentes,  puniri  jure  posse,  sed
penitus  dissolvi  civitatem.  Neque  enim  servire  quisquam  duobus
dominis  potest;  neque  is,  cui  obediendum  esse  credimus  metu  damna-
tionis,  minus  dominus  est,  quam  is  cui  obeditur  metu  metus  tempo-
ralis,  sed  potius  magis.  Unde  sequitur  erga  ilium  unum  .  .  .  eui
commissum  est  summum  in  civitate  imperium,  hoc  quoque  habere
juris,  ut  et  judicet  quae  opiniones  et  doctrinae  paci  inimicae  sunt,
et  vetet  ne  doceantur."

1  CAIRO  on  Kant. LANDSBERG,  Qeschichte  der  deutschen  Rechts*
wissenschaft  (1910).

2  The  categorical  imperative;  SIMMEL,  Kant,  p.  85.
s  LANDSBERG,  op.  cit.

*BEUDANT,  Cours  de  droit  civil,  Introduction  (1896),  p.  8:  "An
entirely  different  point  of  view  was  consecrated  by  a  famous  Act
of  the  French  Revolution:  The  Declaration  of  the  Rights  of  Man
[Oct.  2,  1789],  *  Right  is  a  property  inherent  in  human  nature;


V:  THE  RATIONALISTS  113

A  second  and  entirely  different  current  of  thought  must  Compulsion,
also  be  traced  from  the  troubled  times  of  the  wars  of
religion :  it  culminates  in  the  idea  of  authority  as  opposed
to  the  idea  of  freedom.  The  terrible  object  lessons  of  civil
dissensions  taught  Bodin  to  look  for  decisive  sovereignty,
as  the  pivot  of  political  and  legal  arrangements.1  The  idea
was  not  new:  it  had,  for  example,  inspired  Dante  in  his
appeal  for  a  monarchy  towering  over  the  feuds  of  mediaeval
Europe.2  With  Bodin  the  principle  struck  root  in  an  abid-
ing manner.  Hobbes  made  it  the  central  notion  of  his
political  system.  It  is  needless  to  rehearse  the  well-known
statements  of  his  famous  plea  for  the  uncontested  and
absolute  authority  of  the  sovereign  in  matters  of  law  and
opinion.3

It  is  perhaps  worth  while  to  point  out  that  Hobbes  was
by  no  means  isolated  in  his  contention  that  law  and  the
State  are  to  be  governed  by  a  sovereign  will  based  on  over-
whelming force.  The  great  Jewish  thinker,  Spinoza,  in  his
detachment  from  practical  strife,  came  to  a  similar  con-
clusion.*

As  rearranged  by  Samuel  Puffendorf,  Hobbes'  doctrine
became  the  gospel  of  enlightened  police  government  in
Europe.5

...  it  forms  a  part  of  human  nature,  and  it  is  only  the  outcome
and  application  of  it.  [Art  4.]  Liberty  consists  in  doing  every-
thing that  does  not  harm  another;  thus  the  only  limits  to  the  exer-
cise of  natural  rights  on  the  part  of  each  man  are  those  which
ensure  the  enjoyment  of  these  same  rights  for  other  members  of
society.  These  limits  can  be  determined  only  by  law.*  .  .  .  The
State  does  not  dispense  rights;  it  is  only  a  mechanism  constituted
for  their  protection.  This  is  the  modern  idea  of  right.  [Bossuet,
Cinquidme  avertissement  auac  protestants,  par.  32] :  *  There  is  no
right  against  right/  Human  right  is  before  the  law  and  is  above
the  laws."  Cf.  BEUDANT,  Le  droit  individuel  et  Vutat.

1  BAUDRILLART,  J.  Bodin  et  son  temps.

2  De  Monarchia.

3  Op.  cit,  par.  14 :  "  Neque  sibi  dare  aliquid  quisquam  potest,  quia
jam  habere  supponitur  quod  dare  sibi  potest,  neque  sibi  obligari:
nam  cum  idem  esset  oUigatus  et  obligans,  obligans  autem  possit
obligatum  liberare,  frustra  esset  sibi  obligari,  quia  liberare  se  ipsum
potest,  jam  actu  liber  est. Ex  quo  constat,  legibus  civilibus  non
teneri  ipsam  civitatem."

4  Tractatus  Theologico-politicus.

B  LANDSBERO, op. cit. LAPPO-DANILEVSKY, L'idee de VEtat, in
Essays  in  Legal  History,  ed.  VINOGRADOFF  (1913).
2231  ll


114 INTRODUCTION:  PART  II:  METHODS  AND  SCHOOLS

In  a  sense  its  greatest  triumph  was  achieved  by  the
Napoleonic  rule,  when  it  restored  order  in  France,  broke
the  bonds  of  the  feudal  privilege  in  central  Europe  and
settled  the  law  of  individualistic  society  in  the  Code  Civil.
Bentham.  As  regards  law,  the  doctrine  of  absolute  sovereignty  was
by  no  means  confined  to  purely  monarchical  States :  it  was
adapted  by  Bentham  to  the  requirements  of  industrial
democracy  in  England.  Hobbes  had  already  laid  down
that  the  form  of  government  was  not  material  in  itself:
monarchical  despotism  was  most  appropriate  for  the  sake  of
unity,  but  other  combinations  were  also  possible,  provided
the  uncontested  authority  of  government  over  the  subjects
was  maintained.  Bentham,  on  his  side,  held  that  demo-
cratic institutions  were  desirable,  but  emphasized  never-
theless the  absolute  power  of  compulsion  as  the  necessary
attribute  of  any  government  worthy  of  the  name.1

He  had  no  sympathy  whatever  with  the  vagaries  of  the
French  Revolution  and  strongly  condemned  all  measures
likely  to  produce  dissensions  and  a  decline  of  governmental
authority.2  But  he  advocated  a  rationalistic  recasting  of
the  laws  in  every  direction — in  private  law,  in  criminal  law,
in  the  judicial  and  administrative  system.  The  one  method
recognized  by  him  as  adequate  was  that  of  a  systematic  and
rational  legislation  culminating  in  a  Code.  The  historical
fabric  of  Common  Law  and  the  process  of  casuistic  ex-
pansion stood  condemned  as  products  of  sinister  interests
and  as  fatal  obstacles  to  a  rational  administration  of
justice.3

1  Constitutional  Code,  Bk.  I,  ch.  xv  (Works,  IX,  p.  96).

2  Anarchical Fallacies, Art. xvi (Works, II, p. 520): "Every
society  in  which  the  warranty  of  rights  is  not  assured  [toute  societ6
dans  laquelle  la.  garantie  des  droits  n'est  pas  assuree],  is,  it  must
be  confessed,  most  rueful  nonsense;  but  if  the  translation  were  not
exact,  it  would  be  unfaithful:  and  if  not  nonsensical,  it  would  not
be  exact.

"  Do  you  ask,  has  the  nation  I  belong  to  such  a  thing  as  a  con-
stitution belonging  to  it?  If  you  want  to  know,  look  whether  a
declaration  of  rights,  word  for  word  the  same  as  this,  forms  part  of
its  code  of  laws."

3  Papers  on  Codification,  No.  viii,  Letter  iv  (W,orks,  IV,  p.  483)  :
"  The  next  time  you  hear  a  lawyer  trumpeting  forth  his  common
law,  call  upon  him  to  produce  a  common  law :  defy  him  to  produce
so  much  as  any  one  really  existing  object,  of  which  he  will  have  the


V:  THE  RATIONALISTS  115

Bentham  was  not  content  with  a  general  revision  of  law
for  purposes  of  simplification  and  reduction  to  reasonable
forms:  he  supplied  a  material  aim  for  the  action  of  the
improved  machinery.  This  aim  was  indicated  by  the  doc-
trine of  utility,  which  played  so  conspicuous  a  part  in
empirical  philosophy.  Mere  forms  without  contents  had
no  meaning  for  him,  and  he  contrived  to  show  to  what
extent  the  enlightened  legislator  could  further  the  greatest
happiness  of  the  greatest  number.  In  criminal  law  he
tabulated,  limited  and  justified  the  sanctions  destined  to
deter  people  from  breaking  the  law.  His  teaching  on  the
subject,  as  well  as  legislation  for  simplifying  procedure,
has  undoubtedly  exerted  a  beneficial  influence  in  throwing
discredit  on  many  barbarous  practices  of  the  English  legal
system.  In  this  respect  he  worked  in  alliance  with  the
powerful  philanthropic  movement  represented  by  Beccaria,
Howard,  Haze,  Grelet.

But  he  approaches  this  problem  from  a  characteristic
point  of  view,  as  a  legislator  dispensing  carefully  devised
doses  of  painful  remedies  in  order  to  assure  the  sanitation
of  diseased  minds  and  to  prevent  healthy  ones  from  catch-
ing the  infection.  The  centre  of  operation  is  placed  en-
tirely in  various  forms  of  pressure  from  the  outside —
threats  of  condemnation  by  public  opinion,  threats  of
religion,  threats  of  physical  suffering,  threats  of  coercion
by  the  government.  The  treatment  of  private  law  is  less
interesting,  but  the  tabulation  of  motives  (security,  liberty,
etc.)  is  conceived  and  carried  out  in  a  truly  rationalistic
spirit.

Bentham  in  his  long  career  provided  the  living  link  be-  Austin,
tween  eighteenth-century  and  nineteenth-century  thought.
The  activity  of  his  successor  in  the  field  of  jurisprudence —
Austin — fell  into  the  first  half  of  the  nineteenth  century,
but  in  the  direction  of  his  mind  he  belongs  entirely  to
the  period  of  rationalistic  enlightenment.  He  did  not  con-
tribute any  new  ideas  to  the  creed  laid  down  by  HobbeS
and  Bentham,  but  elaborated  their  ideas  on  jurisprudence

effrontery  to  say,  that  that  compound  word  of  his  is  the  name. Let
him  look  for  it  till  doomsday,  no  such  object  will  he  find."


INTRODUCTION:  PART  II:  METHODS  AND  SCHOOLS

in  a  more  systematic  and  technical  form.  He  thought  him-
self that  he  ought  to  have  been  born  a  mediaeval  schoolman
or  a  German  professor.

Might,  as  Sovereignty,  is  for  him  the  characteristic  sign
of  the  State.  All  questions  as  to  justice  and  as  to  the  aims
of  law  are  consigned  to  the  domain  of  positive  morality.1
The  rigid  distinction  between  them  and  the  field  of  law
makes  it  possible  for  the  lawyer  to  dismiss  troublesome
inquiries  as  to  political  and  social  needs  and  claims.  The
general  halo  of  the  happiness  of  the  greatest  number  is
still  hovering  round  the  "province  of  jurisprudence,"
although  it  is  impossible  to  make  out  what  logical  connec-
tion exists  between  the  command  of  the  Sovereign  and  the
utilitarian  watchword.  Austin's  statements,  in  their  ex-
treme barrenness,  were  the  appropriate  vehicle  for  a  theory
of  law  in  the  sense  of  a  formal  machinery.  As  the  bailiff
serving  a  writ  or  the  policeman  effecting  an  arrest  is
formally  justified  by  his  warrant  and  would  meet  all
protests  and  complaints  by  a  reference  to  that  warrant,  so
the  judge  from  Austin's  point  of  view  is  merely  the  agent
of  the  Sovereign  who  has  appointed  him  and  who  guar-
antees the  execution  of  his  decisions.  It  is  not  of  his  office
to  consider  independently  the  justice  of  any  claims  except
those  expressly  reserved  by  law  or  logically  derived  from
existing  legal  rules.  It  is  curious  that  this  formalistic
doctrine  should  have  flourished  in  the  surroundings  of
English  Common  Law  in  spite  of  the  fact  that  the  best
traditions  of  that  system  are  bound  up  with  a  constant
striving  to  extend  substantial  justice  to  litigants,  and  to
take  into  account  as  far  as  possible  not  only  technical  for-
malities but  underlying  ideas  of  right.  In  England  the
cumbersome  practice  of  judge-made  law  has  been  constantly
and  rightly  defended  as  the  means  of  ensuring  a  progres-
sive adaptation  to  altered  conditions  combined  with  a  tradi-
tional continuity.  And  yet  Austin,  in  the  same  way  as
Bentham,  was  naturally  opposed  to  the  unsystematic  proc-
esses by  which  case  law  is  evolved.  His  rationalism  de-

i  Lectures  on  Jurisprudence  (3rd  ed.,  1869),  I,  pp.  89,  175  ff.,  183,
338.


V:  THE  RATIONALISTS  117

manded  direct  legislation  and  codification,  and  he  did
not  conceal  his  contempt  for  the  historical  traditions  of
Common  Law.1

In  one  of  the  modern  textbooks  based  mainly  on  the
Austinian  doctrine,  the  author  (Salmond)  finds  it  best  to
introduce  a  correction  by  modifying  the  famous  definition
of  law  as  a  command  of  the  Sovereign.  For  Salmond
laws  are  the  rules  followed  by  the  judges  in  the  adminis-
tration of  justice.2

This  modification  cannot  be  called  a  happy  one:  it  begs
the  question.  It  does  not  attempt  to  explain  the  relation
between  the  judges  and  statutory  enactments  or  the  func-
tion of  the  legislative  power  as  such,  but  merely  describes
the  function  of  the  judiciary  without  referring  it  to  any
definite  source.  It  could  be  maintained  only  if  the  judges
were  eo  ipso  legislators  or  the  legislators  judges.  Austin
was  not  guilty  of  such  confusion,  but  simply  declared  all

1  See,  e.g., his  severe  condemnation  of  Blackstone, written in a
style  worthy  of  Bentham  himself. "  He  owed  the  popularity  of  his
book  to  a  paltry  but  effectual artifice,  and to  a  poor, superficial
merit He  truckled  to  the  sinister  interests  and  to  the  mischievous
prejudices  of  power; and he flattered the  overweening  conceit of
their national or peculiar institutions, which then was devoutly
entertained  by  the  body  of  the  English  people, though  now it is
happily  vanishing  before the  advancement  of reason." Vol. I, p.
71. Cf.  vol.  II,  pp.  547  ff.,  670  ff. The  disparaging  estimate  of  the
function of judges is clearly indicated in the treatment of the
subject  by  the  leading  thinker  of  the  school : HOBBES,  Dialogue  be-
tween a  Philosopher  and  a  Student  of  the  Common  Law  of  England
(English  Works,  ed.  Molesworth,  1840):

P  "  It  is  not  wisdom  but  authority  that  makes  the  law.  Obscure
also  are  the  words  legal  reason.  There  is  no  reason  in  earthly  crea-
tures, but  human  reason.  But  I  suppose  he  means,  that  the  reason
of  a  judge,  or  of  all  the  judges  together  without  the  King,  is  that
summa  ratio  and  the  very  law  which  I  deny,  because  none  can  make
a  law,  but  he  who  has  the  legislative  power.

Lawyer.  To  the  gravity  and  learning  of  the  judges,  they  ought  to
have  added  in  the  making  of  laws  the  authority  of  the  King,  which
has  the  sovereignty.

P.  It  is  very  true,  and  upon  this  ground,  if  I  pretend  within  a
month  or  two  to  make  myself  able  to  perform  the  office  of  a  judge,
you  are  not  to  think  it  arrogant,  for  you  are  to  allow  to  me,  as
well  as  to  other  men,  my  pretence  to  reason,  which  is  the  common
law  (remember  this,  that  I  need  not  again  to  put  you  in  mind,  that
reason  is  the  common  law).

Lawyer.  We  agree  then  in  this  that  in  England  it  is  the  King,  who
makes  the  laws,  whoever  pens  them."

2  Jurisprudence. What should we  think of  the  definition  of  a
medicine  as  a  drug  prescrbed  by  a  doctor? But  though such  a


118 INTRODUCTION: PART  II:  METHODS  AND  SCHOOLS

the  acts  of  the  judges  to  be  applications  or  derivations  of
the  Sovereign's  commands.  And  so  they  are — from  a
formal  point  of  view.  In  order  to  get  rid  of  the  difficulty,
one  has  to  introduce  the  material  point  of  view  by  the  side
of  the  formal:  courts  of  law  apply  the  law  laid  down  by
legislators,  who  are  either  Sovereign  or  empowered  by  the
Sovereign,  but  they  also  administer  justice,1  that  is,  they
consider  conflicting  claims  in  their  substance  and  make  use
of  their  powers  of  formulation  and  application  to  supply
gaps,  to  prevent  miscarriages  of  justice,  to  remove  crying
abuses,  to  make  way  for  urgent  claims.2

And  what  the  judges  are  certainly  doing  in  the  restricted
sphere  left  open  for  their  action,  is  at  the  bottom  of  the
legislator's  action  in  framing  rules,  although  the  latter  are
prospective  while  decisions  are  retrospective.  This  being
so,  jurisprudence  cannot  disregard  the  material  aim  of  law
without  distorting  one  of  its  fundamental  characters — the
tendency  towards  justice,  and  substituting  for  it  a  mere
reference  to  the  machinery  created  for  the  attainment  of
this  aim.  Even  from  the  technical  point  of  view  such  a
treatment  would  be  inadequate  as  positive  law  does  take
cognizance  of  public  utility,  morality  (Gute  Sitten),  good
faith,  etc.  I  should  like  in  this  connection  to  refer  to
the  discussion  of  the  methods  of  judicial  interpretation
carried  on  recently  by  French  jurists:  starting  from  the
firmly  formulated  law  of  the  Code  Napoleon,  the  leading
representatives  of  French  legal  thought  urge  the  neces-
sity of  considering  social  aims  for  the  purpose  of  the
technical  application  of  law  and  denounce  the  purely  logi-
cal treatment  of  juridical  problems.3

It is clear, therefore, that the Austinian definition

sweeping  substitution  of  "  wisdom  "  for  authority  cannot  be  justified,
it  is  suggested  by  the  sound  feeling  that  law  exists  for  the  adminis-
tration of  justice  and  may  be  evolved  from  it.

Cf.  GRAY,  The  Nature  and  Sources  of  the  Law  (New  York,  1909).

1  MERKEL,  Jurist. Encyclopddie,  §  14.

2  DICEY,  Law  and  Public  Opinion  in  England,  pp.  374  ff

s  GE"NY, Methode ^interpretation. THALLER, GENY and others,
L'ceuvre  de  R.  Saleilles.


V:  THE  RATIONALISTS  119

of  law  *  is  inadequate  and  incomplete.  Laws  may  be  com-
mands  of  the  Sovereign  in  a  formal  sense,  but  law  is  not
the  aggregate  of  such  commands  but  the  aggregate  of  all
rules  directed  towards  ensuring  order  in  the  commonwealth,
whether  these  rules  are  made  by  legislators,  laid  down  by
judges  in  their  administration  of  justice  or  worked  out  by
customary  practice.  Law  exists  for  the  sake  of  order,  while
right  is  essentially  the  measure  of  power.  Hence  an  ade-
quate definition  of  law  is  bound  to  reckon  with  the  concepts
of  order  and  power.2

This  expansion  of  the  formal  definition  is  obviously  con-
nected with  the  necessity  of  giving  an  account  of  the
material  aim  of  law.  Order  in  the  commonwealth  has  to
be  ensured  by  delimitation  between  the  wills  and  interests
of  its  individual  members,  a  delimitation  designated  in
ordinary  speech  by  the  term  justice,  while  the  share  of
interest  and  power  claimed  by  the  Commonwealth  or  the
Sovereign  in  the  legal  arrangement  takes  into  account  the
element  of  public  policy.  It  is  unnecessary  to  pledge
ourselves  to  any  particular  form  of  rival  theory  in  order
to  recognize  that  in  one  way  or  another  room  must  be
found  in  analytical  jurisprudence  for  these  conceptions,
that  the  Austinian  definition  of  law  fails  to  account  for
them  and  that  it  is  illogical  to  reintroduce  them  by  the  back
door  of  positive  morality.

The  barrenness  of  the  rationalistic  method  is  equally  Sanctions,
apparent  when  we  analyse  the  teaching  as  to  compulsion.
Laws  are  formulated  in  order  to  be  enforced:  so  much  is
perfectly  true.  But  is  the  sanction  of  law  to  be  always
sought  in  coercion  by  the  Sovereign  ? 3  We  have  seen  that
such  coercion  is  in  any  case  not  the  ultimate  guarantee  of
legal  order:  it  requires  to  be  supplemented  by  the  express
or  tacit  acceptance  and  assistance  of  society  at  large,  be-

1  AUSTIN,  op  cit.,  pp.  88  ff .,  98.

2  Cf.  VINOGBADOFF,  Common  Sense  in  Law,  pp.  49  ff.

s  Besides  direct  coercion,  law  recognizes  the  sanction  of  nullity,
which  prevents  people  from  drawing  legal  consequences  from  illegal
acts.  This  kind  of  sanction  operates  in  theory  against  members  of
the  government  as  well  as  against  subjects.  But  its  practical  impor-
tance depends  entirely  on  social  support.


120 INTRODUCTION:  PART  II:  METHODS  AND  SCHOOLS

cause,  as  has  been  said  long  ago,  one  can  conquer  by
bayonets  but  one  cannot  sit  on  them.  The  hangman,  the
policeman  and  the  soldier  would  not  be  strong  enough  to
ensure  social  order  and  obedience  to  law  for  any  length  of
time  if  the  people  at  large  were  not  disposed  to  back  them.

Besides,  supposing  private  individuals  could  be  coerced
to  obey  the  law,  could  the  government  be  compelled  to  obey
it?  Are  we  to  agree  with  those  who  maintain  that  the  will
of  a  government  representing  sovereign  power  cannot  be
bound  by  law?  Austin's  position  leads  to  this  view,  which
was  expressly  discussed  and  accepted  by  Hobbes.  It  cer-
tainly does  not  constitute  a  satisfactory  solution,  however,
because  it  collides  with  the  existence  of  Constitutional
Law,  a  necessary  part  of  the  legal  order  in  civilized  coun-
tries. In  order  to  avoid  the  conflict,  the  theorists  of  coercion
by  the  Sovereign  are  driven  to  maintain  that  Constitutions
are  arrangements  of  government  adopted  by  the  Sovereign
for  considerations  of  expediency,  but  lacking  the  essential
character  of  legal  obligation  as  regards  the  Sovereign  him-
self.1

This  plea  of  "confession  and  avoidance"  can  hardly  be
considered  to  have  settled  the  difficulty,  because  although
it  very  properly  draws  a  distinction  between  government
and  the  Sovereign,  it  cannot  be  asserted  as  a  general  prin-
ciple that  a  Sovereign,  even  though  he  is  free  to  alter  con-
stitutional laws,  can  disregard  or  infringe  them  at  pleasure.
The  theoretical  solution  is  not  far  to  seek,  as  it  corresponds
with  common-sense  observation  of  what  takes  place  in  prac-
tice. Constitutional  law  creates  obligations  in  the  same
way  as  private  law,  but  its  sanctions,  as  to  persons  pos-
sessed of  political  power,  are  extra-legal :  revolution,  active
and  passive  resistance,  the  pressure  of  public  opinion.2  The
sanction  is  derived  from  the  threat  of  these  consequences.

The  ultimate  appeal  to  social  forces  in  the  background
is  more  strongly  accentuated  than  in  private  law.  And
this  is  still  more  true  of  international  law,  which  is  en-

1  SPINOZA,  Tractatus  Theologico-politicus  (Hamburg,  1670),  ch.  v,
p.  60;  ch.  xvii,  p.  178  ff. ;  AUSTIN,  Province  of  Jurisprudence.

2  BINDING,  Die  Normen  und  ihre  Ubertretung  (1890).


V:  THE  RATIONALISTS  121

tirely  formulated  by  agreement.  Formally  it  is  an  agree-
ment between  Sovereign  States,  and  therefore  the  parties
are,  according  to  the  Austinian  view,  not  to  be  bound
by  legal  obligation  to  the  Agreement.  As  there  is  no  com-
pelling sanction  derived  from  superior  authority,  the  rules
of  so-called  International  Law  would  be  rules  of  positive
morality.1

Such  a  conclusion  is,  however,  not  forced  on  us,  if  we
recognize  that  rules  may  be  statements  of  law  even  when
their  enforcement  depends  on  extra-legal  sanctions.  We
need  not  regard  the  treaty  guaranteeing  the  neutrality  of
Belgium  as  a  "scrap  of  paper"  conditioned  by  the  sense
of  expediency  on  the  part  of  Prussia  and  other  Sovereign
States.  We  may  deplore  the  " imperfect"  effect  of  an  obli-
gation devoid  of  the  sanction  of  superior  force,  but  this
need  not  prevent  us  from  insisting  on  the  legal  character
of  a  principle  recognized  by  a  solemn  agreement  between
parties.

The  third  fundamental  principle  of  rationalistic  juris- sovereignty,
prudence  is  the  notion  of  Sovereignty. Here  again  matters
are  simplified  to  such  an  extreme  extent  that  the  principle
becomes unworkable. The Sovereign is defined as  the
person  or  persons  wielding  supreme  power  in  the  State.2

Two  objections  have  to  be  urged  in  this  respect.  In  our
days  of  complicated  political  organization,  it  is  not  easy  to
distribute  the  members  of  a  commonwealth  into  the  two
classes  of  rulers  and  ruled  and  to  ascertain  who  wields
supreme  power  in  the  State  and  who  is  in  the  habit  of
obeying  commands.3  In  the  case  of  the  United  States,  for
instance,  it  is  certainly  not  the  President  or  Congress  who
can  assume  the  prerogative  of  Sovereignty.  This  preroga-
tive may  be  attributed  to  a  constitutional  convention  while
it  is  in  being,  but  what  of  the  normal  state  of  affairs
when  such  a  convention  is  not  in  being?  Have  we  to  say

1  HOLLAND,  Jurisprudence.

2  AUSTIN,  op.  cit.,  I,  pp.  226  ff,  236  ff.

a  DICEY  draws  a  distinction  between  political  and  legal  sov-
ereignty, but  it  is  evident  that  legal  sovereignty,  in  so  far  as  it  is
not  a  fiction  (as  in  the  triad — King,  Lords  and  Commons),  is  derived
from  the  political  balance  of  power.


122 INTRODUCTION:  PART  II:  METHODS  AND  SCHOOLS

that  the  Sovereign  in  the  United  States  is  the  people?  This
has  been  said  not  only  by  theorists,  but  by  the  United  States
themselves:  "We,  the  people  of  the  United  States,  etc."
If  this  formula  has  a  meaning,  the  quality  of  Sovereignty
should  be  attributed  not  to  any  person  or  group  of  persons
supreme  in  the  State,  but  to  a  social  entity — the  people
organized  by  a  historical  process  into  a  commonwealth.

The  second  objection  concerns  the  idea  of  finality  of
decision  involved  in  the  principle  of  Sovereignty.  Such
finality  implies  not  only  uncontested,  but  undivided  power.
But  again  there  are  numerous  Federated  States  in  the
world  in  which  Sovereign  power  is  distributed  in  one  way
or  another  between  the  compound  elements.  Each  State  of
the  North  American  Federation  or  in  the  Commonwealth  of
Australia  possesses  a  guaranteed  share  of  Sovereign  power,
and  the  Union  superior  to  all  these  fractional  authorities
is  not  a  physical  Sovereign  in  any  sense,  but  an  entity
of  Public  Law  supported,  as  we  saw  in  the  case  of  the  War
of  Secession,  by  a  possible  appeal  to  extra-legal  coercion
by  the  people,  that  is,  by  society  at  large.  Indeed,  cases  are
conceivable,  and  have  been  actually  observed,  when  political
power  within  the  State  was  divided  not  on  the  lines  of  local
concentration,  but  on  those  of  functional  differentiation.
This  has  often  taken  place  in  the  shape  of  an  opposition
between  Church  and  State;  both  are  powerful  .centres  of
political  attraction,  and  it  has  not  always  been  the  case  that
the  secular  government  has  succeeded  in  obtaining  the  final
supremacy.  Imperium  and  Sacerdotium  did  not  only
struggle  with  each  other  in  the  mediaeval  world,  but  had
to  combine  in  various  ways,  even  in  Protestant  countries.
The  cross-influences  of  the  Parliament  and  of  the  Kirk  in
Scotland  led  to  a  most  curious  constitutional  compromise
between  the  two  powers,  which  stood  the  trial  of  some  six-
teen years  wear  and  tear.1

It  cannot  be  said  that  such  experiments  are  the  best
means  of  arranging  political  society,  but  they  show  at  any
rate  that  the  notion  of  Sovereignty  ought  not  to  be  taken  as

i  DICEY,  in  Scottish  Historical  Review,  XIV,  No.  55.


V:  THE  RATIONALISTS


123


an  absolute  principle,  but  as  a  generalization  subject  to
various  contingencies.

Altogether,  critical  examination  of  the  results  obtained
by  rationalistic  jurisprudence  reveals  the  fact  that  its  solid
achievements  consist  in  the  analysis  of  certain  formal  con-
ceptions of  positive  law.  It  helps  to  explain  the  working
of  the  machinery  by  which  the  legislative  power  puts  the
rules  decreed  by  it  into  operation  by  means  of  Courts  of
Law  and  of  the  police.  It  does  not  solve  the  problems  of
the  origin  of  legal  rules  and  of  their  relation  to  the  life
of  society.


CHAPTER  VI
THE  NATIONALISTS

A  REMARKABLE  feature  in  the  formation  of  social  and
legal  doctrines  is  the  fact  that  the  principal  schools  of
andntl  thought  arise  and  displace  one  another  under  the  influence

les*  of  actual  changes  in  world  politics,  as  though  the  material
struggle  for  power  or  property  was  reflected  in  the  con-
sciousness of  thinkers  and  contributed  substantially  to
produce  change  in  the  orientation  of  thought.  The  inter-
dependence between  the  two  courses  of  development  may
also  be  considered  in  the  light  of  a  verification  of
ideals  by  their  practical  consequences.  Although  ideals
and  arguments  follow  their  own  dialectical  sequence,
whenever  they  are  put  into  practice,  their  practical  conse-
quences claim  a  place  in  the  process,  and  this  place  is  likely
to  be  important  indeed.  Thus  in  the  eighteenth  century
the  irritation  caused  by  obsolete  feudalism  contributed
powerfully  to  produce  rationalism,  more  particularly  ration-
alistic polities  and  a  rationalistic  jurisprudence.  On  the
other  hand,  the  reaction  against  the  idea  that  State  and  Law
can  be  deliberately  changed  according  to  considerations
of  pure  reason  was  reflected  in  the  world  of  thought  by  a
renewed  reverence  for  the  irrational,  the  unconscious  and
the  subconscious  elements  of  human  nature  and  social  life —
for  feeling,  instinct,  imagination,  tradition  and  mysticism.

The  disillusionment  brought  about  by  the  excesses  of  the
French  Revolution  obscured  for  a  time  the  historical  sig-
nificance of  the  upheaval  and  brought  discredit  on  the  cult
of  reason  as  preached  by  the  Terrorists.1

i  WORDSWORTH'S  Prelude,  XIII,  20  ff.:

I  have  been  taught  to  reverence  a  power
That  is  the  visible  quality  and  shape
And  image  of  right  reason;  that  matures
Her  processes  by  steadfast  laws;  gives  birth
124


VI:  THE  NATIONALISTS  125

The  invasion  of  progressive  militarism  as  represented  by
Napoleon's  Empire  was  stemmed  by  the  unexpected  vital-
ity of  backward  nations  like  the  Russians,  the  Spaniards,
the  Tyrolese,  by  the  tenacity  of  the  British  oligarchical
regime,  by  the  irrational  revival  of  religion  in  France  and
of  patriotism  in  Germany.  A  tide  of  romantic  reaction
set  in  towards  a  restoration  of  organic  ties  broken  by  the
sacrilegious  violence  of  rationalistic  reformers.1


To  no  impatient  or  fallacious  hopes,

No  heat  of  passion  or  excessive  zeal,

No  vain  conceits;  provokes  to  no  quick  turns

Of  self-applauding  intellect;  but  trains

To  meekness,  and  exalts  by  humble  faith;

Holds  up  before  the  mind  intoxicate

With  present  objects,  and  the  busy  dance

Of  things  that  pass  away,  a  temperate  show

Of  objects  that  endure;  and  by  this  course

Disposes  her,  when  over-fondly  set

On  throwing  off  incumbrances,  to  seek

In  man,  and  in  the  frame  of  social  life,

Whate'er  there  is  desirable  and  good

Of  kindred  permanence,  unchanged  in  form

And  function,  or,  through  strict  vicissitude

Of  life  and  death,  revolving.


XIII,  58  ff.:


The  promise  of  the  present  time  retired
Into  its  true  proportion ;  sanguine  schemes,
Ambitious  projects,  pleased  me  less;  I  sought
For  present  good  in  life's  familiar  face,
And  built  thereon  my  hopes  of  good  to  come.

With  settling  judgments  now  of  what  would  last
And  what  would  disappear;  prepared  to  find
Presumption,  folly,  madness,  in  the  men
Who  thrust  themselves  upon  the  passive  world
As  Rulers  of  the  world;  to  see  in  these,
Even  when  public  welfare  is  their  aim,
Plans  without  thought  or  built  on  theories
Vague  and  unsound,  etc.


iLANDSBERG,  "Pamphlet  of  1830,"  Geschichte  der  deutschen
Rechtswissenschaft  (3rd  Abt.),  p.  101:  "...  the  nineteenth  century,
begun  with  events  of  far-reaching  consequences,  and  bowed  down
under  the  load  of  foreign  oppression;  newly  awakened  patriotism,
raised  to  the  pitch  of  enthusiasm,  a  higher  sense  of  religion,  the
longing  for  national  independence  and  for  a  state  of  social  life  built
upon  loyalty  and  religion,  and  finally  the  conviction  that  a  philoso-


126 INTRODUCTION:  PART  II:  METHODS  AND  SCHOOLS


mantle0"  ^Q  literature  of  all  the  nations  of  Europe  bears  witness

Revival.  ^0  the  ardour  and  the  creative  force  of  the  Romantic
revival.1

The  movement  did  not  exhaust  itself  in  efforts  of  imag-
ination and  mystic  sentiment.  It  led  to  momentous  results
in  the  world  of  philosophical  speculation  and  scientific
method.  Schelling  tried  to  reconcile  the  two  polar  tend-
encies of  the  world  —  nature  and  thought  —  in  his  synthesis
of  identity.  Hegel  constructed  a  system  with  a  similar  ob-
ject, but  with  much  greater  success.  It  is  not  our  task  to
estimate  the  exact  shares  contributed  by  Rationalism  and
by  the  Romantic  revival  to  his  stupendous  synthesis.  It  is
sufficient  to  notice  the  necessary  connection  of  Hegel's
teaching  with  the  new  meaning  acquired  by  history.  The
idea  of  the  evolution  of  the  Spirit  in  the  world,  which
forms  the  key  to  Hegel's  system,  requires  an  embodiment
in  a  historical  sequence  which  has  to  take  account  of  his-
torical realities  in  their  organic  development:  it  substi-
tutes the  "  cunning"  of  a  Providence  which  operates
through  men's  passions  and  strivings  for  the  naive  schemes
of  deliberate  arrangement  propounded  by  rationalist  think-
ers and  reformers.2

In  the  domain  of  positive  knowledge  the  path  of  the
Romantic  movement  is  marked  by  the  rise  of  a  science  of
language,  of  comparative  folk-lore,  of  the  history  of  reli-
gion. The  unity  of  these  branches  of  study  is  perhaps  best
exemplified  by  the  stupendous  work  of  Jacob  Grimm  for
the  national  self-discovery  of  the  German  people.3

Cultural  consciousness  assumed  in  its  various  branches
the  shape  of  schemes  of  universal  scientific  value  and

phizing  charlatanism  in  law  and  politics  was  exercising  a  pernicious
influence,  fixed  the  eyes  of  all  patriots  upon  the  old  times  of  German
strength  and  independence,  and  produced  eager  research  in  history
which  extended  to  all  branches  of  scholarship  ;  at  times  it  produced
over-estimation  of  the  Middle  Ages,  mysticism  and  political  fanaticism,
but  in  the  main  it  laid  the  foundation  of  new  life  in  art  and  science
and  inaugurated  a  definite  stage  in  the  progress  of  the  human  mind
We  owe  the  school  of  historical  jurisprudence  also  to  this  move-
ment."

1  HAYM,  Die  romantische  Schule; BBANDES,  Hovedstromninger  i
Litteraturen  af  det  XIX  Aarhundrede,  II.

2  CROCO,  Filosofia  della  Pratica,  pp 319,  401.
s  LANDSBERG,  op.  cit.,  Ill,  pp.  2,  114ff.


VI:  THE  NATIONALISTS  127

acquired  a  firm  basis  in  appropriate  technical  methods.
Comparative  philology  became  the  leading  science  of  the
group,  revealing  as  it  does  the  marvellous  interplay  of
individual  invention  and  collective  thought,  of  logical  cate-
gories, physiological  factors  and  psychological  peculiarities,
of  tradition  and  progress.

All  these  investigations  were  equally  inspired  by  the
belief  in  the  expansion  of  personal  life  in  the  shape  of  a
wider  national  consciousness  requiring  a  psychology  of  its
own.1

Such  is  the  background  against  which  stands  out  the  rise The  His-

. torlcal

of  historical  jurisprudence. In  Italy  the  genius  of  Vico  spirit.
had  discovered  some  of  the  main  features  of  the  organic
process  in  history  almost  a  century  before  they  could  be
discovered  by  any  one  else.2

In  England  the  protest  against  a  reckless  reshuffling  of
State  and  of  law  was  sounded  in  clarion  notes  by  Burke.3

In  Prance  the  reaction  in  favour  of  history  found  a
remarkable  expression  in  St.  Simon  and  his  school.4


1  PAUL,  Prinzipien  der  Sprachwissenschaft.

2  CBOCE, The  Philosophy  of Vico (Eng. transl. by  Collingwood
1913),  p.  119:  "Poetry,  which  ought  to  represent  sense,  and  nothing
else,  came  to  represent  sense  already  intellectualized . . . Barbaric
civilization  became  a  kind  of  mythological,  allegorical  representation
of  the  ideal  phase  of  poetry,  and  primitive  tribes  were  transformed
into 'crowds of sublime poets,' just as in the ontogenesis cor-
responding to  this  phylogenesis  children  had  been  made  into  poets  "

3MORLEY,  Burke,  p.  240:  "To  him  [Burke]  there  actually  was  an
element  of  mystery  in  the  cohesion  of  men  in  societies,  in  political
obedience,  in  the  sanctity  of  contract;  in  all  that  fabric  of  law  and
charter  and  obligation,  whether  written  or  unwritten,  which  is  the
sheltering  bulwark  between  civilization  and  barbarism  When  reason
and  history  had  contributed  all  that  they  could  do  to  the  explana-
tion, it  seemed  to  him  as  if  the  vital  force,  the  secret  of  organization,
the  binding  framework,  must  still  come  from  the  impenetrable
regions  beyond  reasoning,  and  beyond  history."

*  MICHEL,  L'idee  de  VEtat,  pp.  187  ff.  ST.  SIMON,  (Euvres  choisis,
I,  pp.  146,  149  On  Le  Play,  MICHEL,  op.  cit.  pp.  529  ff  MORLEY,
Burke,  p.  229:  "  Comte  again  points  impressively  to  the  Revolution
as  the  period  which  illustrates  more  decisively  than  another  the  peril
of  confounding  the  two  great  functions  of  speculation  and  political
action:  and  he  speaks  with  just  reprobation  of  the  preposterous  idea
in  the  philosophic  politicians  of  the  epoch,  that  society  was  at  their
disposal,  independent  of  its  past  development,  devoid  of  inherent
impulses,  and  easily  capable  of  being  morally  regenerated  by  the
mere  modification  of  legislative  rules.'*


128 INTRODUCTION:  PART  II:  METHODS  AND  SCHOOLS

Sr?caiis"  **  was  *n  Germanv>  however,  that  the  Romantic  move-

Law001  °f  nient  in  political  thought  crystallized  in  its  most  influential
form.  It  is  represented  mainly  by  the  "Historical  School  of
Law"  initiated  by  Savigny.1  The  story  of  the  literary  con-
flict that  led  to  the  distinct  formulation  of  its  tenets  has
been  told  innumerable  times.  A  proposal  by  a  dis-
tinguished professor  of  Civil  Law,  Thibaut  of  Gottingen,
to  proceed  to  a  general  codification  of  the  statutes  and
customs  sf  the  various  German  States  in  a  logically  coher-
ent system  on  the  pattern  of  Roman  jurisprudence  and  of
the  Civil  Code  of  France,  called  forth  an  indignant  reply
from  Savigny,  in  which  he  contended  that  Law  is  as
much  a  part  of  national  inheritance  as  language  or  religion,
that  it  cannot  be  treated  as  dead  material  to  be  cast  and
recast  by  professional  jurists  and  statesmen  according  to
their  view  of  what  is  reasonable.  The  ground  for  codi-
fication had  to  be  prepared  by  a  careful  study  of  national
traditions  and  requirements  as  regards  law.  This  con-
flict between  prominent  representatives  of  rationalistic
and  of  historical  conceptions  of  jurisprudence  gave  rise
to  a  rapid  concentration  of  interests  and  capacities
for  the  purpose  of  the  historical  study  of  law.  The
directing  principles  of  the  new  school  were  well  repre-
sented by  a  new  periodical  publication,  the  Review  of  Legal
History,2  started  by  Savigny,  Eichhorn  and  their  friends.
The  programme  of  the  school  was  as  set  forth  in  the  first
number:  it  distinguished  two  principal  groups  of  jurid-
ical views  and  methods:  the  historical  and  the  non-his-
torical. The  latter  may  lay  the  greater  stress  either  upon
philosophy  and  the  law  of  nature  or  upon  so-called  common
sense.  It  takes  the  view  that  each  period  has  an
existence  and  a  world  of  its  own,  and  therefore  produces
its  own  laws  independently  and  arbitrarily  out  of  its  own


1  We  need  not  discuss  the  claims  of  Hugo  to  rank  as  the  pioneer
of  the  Historical  School  of  Law. He  was  a  precursor  of  Savigny
as  to  method,  but  he  did  not  achieve  or  contemplate  the  organization
of  legal  knowledge  characteristic  of  the  School. Cf.  LANDSBERG,  III,
2,  pp.  47  fi.\

2  Zeitschrift  fur  Rechtsgeschichte.


VI:  THE  NATIONALISTS  129

insight  and  strength.  History  can  only  serve  as  a  moral
and  political  collection  of  precedents.

'  *  The  historical  school  on  the  other  hand  starts  from  the
conviction  that  there  is  no  perfectly  detached  and  isolated
stage  of  human  existence.  The  present  existence  of  every
individual  and  that  of  the  State  develops  with  immanent
necessity  from  elements  furnished  by  the  past.  There  is
no  question  of  choice  between  good  and  bad,  in  the  sense
that  the  approval  of  a  given  thing  could  be  called  good,
the  rejection  bad,  but  that  the  latter  was  nevertheless
possible.

Rejection  of  what  is  given  is,  strictly  speaking,  an  im-
possibility; we  are  inevitably  dominated  by  it,  and  we  can
only  err  in  our  judgment,  but  not  change  the  fact  itself.

The  non-historical  school  holds  that  law  is  produced  on
the  spur  of  the  moment  and  in  an  arbitrary  manner  by
those  invested  with  the  powers  of  law-making,  independ-
ently of  the  course  of  law  in  past  times,  and  purely  accord-
ing to  the  best  of  the  convictions  arising  at  the  moment. ' '

The  new  departure  was  bound  to  lead  to  the  reconsidera- National

«i  .  ..  „..  T  -i  -IT conceptions

tion  of  the  mam  position  of  jurisprudence  as  understood  by of  right,
the  rationalists. Law  was  considered  primarily  not  in  its
formal  aspect  as  the  command  of  a  sovereign,  but  in  its
material  content  as  the  opinion  of  the  country  on  matters
of  right  and  justice  (RecJitsiiberzeugung) .

Instead  of  being  traced  to  the  deliberate  will  of  the
legislator,  its  formation  was  assigned  to  the  gradual  work-
ing of  customs,  the  proper  function  of  legislation  being
limited  to  the  declaration  of  an  existing  State  of  legal
consciousness,  and  not  as  the  creation  of  new  rules  by  indi-
vidual minds.  As  regards  the  State,  law  was  assumed  to
be  an  antecedent  condition,  not  a  consequence  of  its  activ-
ity. In  this  way  direct  legislation  was  thrust  into  the
background,  while  customary  law  was  studied  with  par-
ticular interest  and  regarded  as  the  genuine  manifestation
of  popular  consciousness.

Curiously  enough,  the  historical  school  of  law  was  con-
fronted from  the  very  outset  by  an  awkward  problem  of  Ger-

2231  I


130 INTRODUCTION: PART  II: METHODS  AND  SCHOOLS

man  legal  history;  if  law  was  a  spontaneous  manifestation
of  the  national  mind,  how  could  it  have  happened  that  the
German  people  had  renounced  a  great  part  of  its  vernacular
rules  and  customs  in  favour  of  the  Corpus  Juris  of  the  late
Roman  Empire,  compiled  on  foreign  soil  to  meet  conditions
of  social  life  entirely  different  from  those  obtaining  in  Ger-
many? The  founder  of  the  "Historical  School/'  Savigny,
attacked  the  problem  himself  in  his  monumental  work  on
Roman  Law  in  the  Middle  Ages.  He  did  not  reach  the  criti-
cal period  of  "reception"  in  the  fifteenth  century,  but  his
treatment  of  the  previous  epochs  shows  that  in  his  view
there  was  no  break  of  continuity  in  the  development  of
Roman  Law  at  any  time  between  the  fall  of  the  Western
Empire  and  the  rejuvenation  of  the  Corpus  Juris  in  the
fifteenth  century;  the  connecting  threads  are  to  be  found
in  the  transformation  of  Roman  legal  sources  and  rules  by
a  process  of  "vulgarization"  similar  to  that  which  led  to
the  formation  of  Romance  languages — Italian,  French,
Spanish — on  the  one  hand,  and  a  slow  revival  of  legal  learn-
ing in  the  Law  Schools  on  the  other.1

This  investigation  of  the  preliminaries  of  reception  was
not  sufficient  to  explain  the  wholesale  intrusion  of  Roman
doctrines  and  of  professional  civilians  in  a  field  which  had
been  cultivated  for  ages  by  the  popular  tribunals  of  the
Schoffen  and  made  to  yield  a  harvest  of  Germanistic
conceptions  and  rules.  The  question  was  treated  from
all  sides  by  later  writers,  who  dwelt  on  the  antagonism  be-
tween public  and  professional  opinion  in  this  respect  and,
though  recognizing  the  value  of  certain  improvements  in
technical  matters  and  the  helplessness  of  dispersed  local
customs  before  the  unified  body  of  the  "Common  Law  of
Rome"  as  practised  in  Germany  (Das  Gemeine  romiscTie
Reclit),  insisted  on  the  necessity  of  healing  the  grievous
wound  inflicted  on  the  German  people  by  the  introduction
of  a  body  of  foreign  law.2  The  controversy  was  by  no
means  confined  to  learned  dissertations  on  the  subject,  but
the  conflict  between  Romanistic  and  Germanistic  views

1  Cf .  VINOGRADOFF,  Roman  Law  in  Medieval  Europe.

2  Cf .  HUBNER,  Grundziige  des  deutschen  Privatrechts,


VI:  THE  NATIONALISTS  131

materialized  into  a  struggle  between  their  representatives
in  connection  with  a  task  of  immense  practical  value —
the  drawing  up  of  the  Civil  Code  of  the  German  Empire
(Burgerliches  Gesetzbuch)  which  came  into  force  on
January  1,  1900.  The  first  commission  to  which  the  elabo-  Conflict

between

ration  of  the  Code  had  been  entrusted,  worked  under  the Romanists

ana  (jJer-

prevailing  influence  of  Eomanistic  jurists,  with  Windscheid  manists.
at  their  head. The  result  of  their  labours  proved  to  be  an
adaptation  of  "Pandekten"  learning  to  the  conditions  of
modern  Germany. It  provoked  a  storm  of  indignation  on
the  part  of  the  "  Germanists. "

Beseler  had  already  called  attention  pointedly  to  a  con-
trast between  popular  law  and  lawyer's  law.  Now  Gierke
took  up  the  cudgels  against  "Windscheid  and  his  followers
and  formulated  many  concepts  which  in  his  view  were  in
contradiction  to  the  historically  recorded  views  of  the
German  people.1

These  protests  received  wide  support,  and  led  to  the
formation  of  a  second  commission  which  considerably  re-
vised the  work  of  the  first  and  concluded  its  labours  by  the
preparation  of  the  Code  in  its  present  shape.

The  importance  of  this  episode  in  the  history  of  modern
law-making  can  hardly  be  exaggerated.  It  shows  to  what
extent  theory  and  practice  are  intertwined  in  these  matters.
It  shows  also  that  the  foundations  laid  by  the  "historical
school  of  law"  in  Romantic  surroundings  were  by  no  means
obliterated  by  later  developments,  but  have  survived  in
certain  respects  up  to  our  own  times.  This  is  only  natural,
as  actual  schools  of  thought  cannot  be  separated  by  a  clean
cut  one  from  another,  but  necessarily  overlap  the  borders
of  the  doctrinal  changes  of  principles.

In  fact,  the  champion  of  Germanistic  codification,  Gierke, v-  GIerke-
stands  altogether  as  a  representative  of  the  tradition  of  the
"Historical  School  of  Law"  in  its  more  recent  and  im-
proved aspect. His  staunch  patriotism  is  both  the  reason
and  the  consequence  of  his  adherence  to  the  standard  of


i  P.  VINOGRADOPF,  Introduction  to  the  American  translation  of  R.
HUBNER'S  Qrundzilge  des  deutschen  Privatrechts.


132 INTRODUCTION:  PART  II:  METHODS  AND  SCHOOLS

national  consciousness  as  regards  legal  institutions  and
rules.  In  all  his  works  he  tries  to  bring  into  strong  relief
juridical  ideas  which  he  considers  to  be  peculiar  to  the
Teutonic  race  or,  in  a  more  narrow  sense,  to  the  German
people.1

An  especially  important  case  is  presented  by  his  theory
of  il associative"  development.2

From  the  point  of  view  of  Roman  Law  such  an  entity  as
a  town  corporation  is  not  a  real  person  but  a  legal  fiction
adopted  for  practical  purposes,  while  from  the  Germanistic
point  of  view  it  is  as  much  a  reality  as  property.  The
"association  theory"  (Genossenschaftstheorie)  in  the  ulti-
mate form  given  by  Gierke,  showed  that  the  two  Roman
categories  of  universitas  and  societas  do  not  make  intelli-
gible the  types  produced  by  the  Germanic  law  of  asso-
ciation. It  set  in  their  place,  by  the  side  of  corporate
association,  Germanistic  "communities  of  collective  hand,"
and  pointed  decisively  toward  the  conclusion  that  the  col-
lective person  possessed  an  actual  existence  in  all  the  forms
in  which  it  was  manifested.  It  has  sharpened  our

1  SALEILLES,  Introduction  au  droit  civil  allcmand,  28  ff.

2  ().  v.  GIERKE,  Das  Wesen  der  menschlichen  Verbande,  p.  21:  "We
deduce the  existence  of actively influential social ties uniting  us,
first  of  all  from  outer  experience. Observation  of  those  social  events
among  which we  pass  our lives,  and still more  the  study  of the
history  of  mankind,  show  that  nations  and  other  communities  them-
selves shape  the  world  of  circumstances  which  lend  them  power  and
produce material and spiritual culture. All this is effected by
individuals, because the  communities  are composed of individuals
But  individuals,  in  so  far  as  their  doings  concern  the  community,
are  determined  in  their  actions  by  physical  and  spiritual  influences
which  spring  from  the  ties  that  bind  them  together."

p.  22:  "What  outer  experience  teaches  us  is  confirmed  by  inner
experience,  because  the  reality  of  the  social  life  of  the  community
exists  also  in  our  consciousness.  It  is  an  inner  experience  for  us
to  find  the  place  for  our  Ego  in  a  highly  developed  social  life.  We
feel  ourselves  to  be  self-contained  units,  but  we  also  feel  that  we
are  part  of  a  whole  which  lives  and  acts  within  us.  Take  away  our
relation  to  nation  and  State,  to  religious  bodies  or  churches,  to  pro-
fession and  family  and  all  kinds  of  unions  and  guilds,  and  we  should
not  know  ourselves  in  the  miserable  remnant  that  would  remain
When  we  realize  this,  we  understand  that  all  these  things  do  not
mean  mere  chains  and  bonds  for  us,  but  that  they  represent  a  psychic
chain  of  experiences  affecting  our  innermost  life  and  forming  an
integral  part  of  our  being.  We  become  conscious  of  the  fact  that
part  of  the  impulses  directing  our  actions  emanates  from  the  sense
of  community  in  us,  and  that  we  are  living  the  life  of  social  beings."


VI:  THE  NATIONALISTS  133

discernment  of  the  fact  that  juridical  persons,  even  though
not  apparent  to  our  sight,  share  this  lack  of  physical  exist-
ence with  all  other  juridical  facts  and  concepts.  As  we
nevertheless  ascribe  reality  to  property  or  to  an  obligation,
so  too  the  State,  the  commune,  the  society  (Verein),  the
endowment  (Stiftung),  are  something  real,  not  merely  fic-
titious. If  this  realistic  theory  be  adopted  it  is  bound  to
lead  to  consequences  which  are  not  compatible  with  the
adoption  of  the  Roman  point  of  view,  for  the  corporation
will,  e.g.,  become  responsible  in  the  same  way  as  physical
persons  in  actions  of  tort:  though  malice  cannot  be  attrib-
uted to  a  fictitious  entity,  it  may,  of  course,  influence  the
conduct  of  unions  of  live  beings.  Again,  in  Roman
Law  the  property  of  the  association  is  quite  distinct
from  that  of  the  members,  but  in  the  realistic  con-
ception— which,  e.g.,  is  very  clear  in  regard  to  gilds —
there  can  be  no  clear  division  between  fictitious  and
ordinary  property,  and  the  rights  of  the  members  ex-
tend to  the  property  of  the  craft  as  such.  The  gild-
chamber,  the  gild  furniture,  the  capital  accumulated  by
contributions,  entrance  fees,  penalties  and  gifts,  served
not  only  the  ends  of  the  association,  but  also  the  economic,
social  and  other  purposes  of  the  members.  Every  associate
might,  for  example,  use  the  gild  house  for  his  convivial
pleasures,  each  could  demand  support  or  loans  from  the
capital  of  the  gild,  and  so  on.  These  benefits  were  not,
however,  indispensable  to  the  gild  members  in  the  same  way
as  the  use  of  the  "commons"  was  to  the  members  of  the
"Mark";  the  gild  property  was  devoted  in  a  far  greater
degree  to  the  whole  body  as  such.  From  the  beginning,  the
entire  body  of  gild  members  stood  opposed  to  the  individual
in  a  far  more  pronounced  manner  than  was  originally  the
case  in  Mark  associations ;  and  this  is  explained  by  the  fact
that  there  was  not  in  the  case  of  the  crafts,  as  there  was  in
the  case  of  rural  communities,  a  complete  coincidence  of  the
purpose  of  the  group  with  the  aims  of  its  members.  The
craft  was  not  designed  to  further  merely  the  interests  of
individuals, — it  was  precisely  in  the  older  period  that  it
had  to  serve  the  interests  of  the  association,  the  city,  and
the  purchasing  public.


134 INTRODUCTION:  PART  II:  METHODS  AND  SCHOOLS


Ihering's
criticism
and  new
departure.


Thus  a  moral  person  is  in  no  way  a  fictitious  being
devised  by  lawyers  in  order  to  facilitate  certain  business
operations:  it  is  a  real  union,  or  a  unit,  in  the  sense  that
its  existence  and  functions  form  a  necessary  part  of  the
life  of  the  group  of  live  persons  who  are  joined  as  its
members.  A  craft-gild,  a  city,  a  State,  are  real  beings,
who  live  in  the  life  of  their  members,  possess  a  distinct
consciousness  and  a  common  will,  although  their  existence
stretches  over  generations  and  is  not  interrupted  by  the
disappearance  of  particular  individuals  included  in  it  or
by  the  appearance  of  others.  This  being  so,  the  moral
person  is  not  only  a  necessary  complement  to  the  individual
lives  concerned,  but  it  ought  to  be  subjected  to  all  the  con-
sequences of  the  notion  of  real  personality.

All  these  features  are  attributed  to  the  "real"  corpora-
tion on  the  strength  of  a  Germanistic  tendency,  although  it
is  claimed  at  the  same  time  that  the  interpretation  of  the
juridical  person  has  a  basis  in  the  nature  of  man  and  of
society.1

The  work  of  the  "Historical  School  of  Law"  has  not  been
done  in  vain,  and  later  developments  did  not  simply  wipe
it  off  the  slate.  If  the  rationalistic  schools  had  cleared  up
the  logical  connection  between  the  formal  principles  of
positive  law,  the  Historical  School  and  the  Romantic  move-
ment have  established  once  for  all  the  view  of  the  organic
growth  of  institutions  and  rules  and  have  substituted  for
the  rationalistic  conceptions  of  the  period  of  enlightenment
a  wider  view  of  individual  and  social  psychology.  But  the
mystic  nationalism  of  the  Romantic  theory  has  not  stood  the
test  of  critical  examination  and  of  scientific  progress.  Na-
tions are  live  beings  in  a  certain  sense,  but  not  in  the  same
sense  as  individuals :  they  are  not  circumscribed  to  the  same
extent  in  their  development  by  unyielding  forms,  they  react
more  freely  against  circumstances  and  command  a  wider
range  of  adaptation.  Tradition  is  a  powerful  factor  in  their
life,  but  so  is  progress.  The  actual  course  of  European
history  did  not  remain  under  the  law  of  reaction  and

1 R.  SALEILLES,  La  personality  juridique  (1910),  passim,  espe-
cially p.  607.


VI:  THE  NATIONALISTS  135

conservatism :  after  taking  a  rest  for  a  generation  or  two,  it
started  again  on  the  track  of  reforms  and  change.  In  the
special  field  of  jurisprudence  we  have  already  noticed  some
of  the  deficiencies  of  a  rigidly  nationalistic  doctrine.  But
the  best  way  of  realizing  the  limitations  of  the  Historical
School  of  Law  is  to  listen  to  the  words  of  one  who  himself
began  as  an  adherent  of  the  school,  but  eventually  struck
out  a  line  of  his  own — I  mean  Ihering.  No  one  was  better
qualified  to  appreciate  the  value  of  a  historical  study  of
the  factors  influencing  law,  than  the  author  of  the  Spirit  of
Roman  Law.  But  he  felt  more  and  more  that  the  progress
of  law  is  not  merely  the  result  of  an  unconscious  growth
conditioned  by  innate  character  and  by  environment,  but
also  the  result  of  conscious  endeavours  to  solve  the  problems
of  social  existence.  More  perhaps  than  any  other  form  of
human  activity,  law  is  directed  towards  aims ;  it  receives  its
orientation  not  only  from  the  past  but  from  the  future.  It
may  miss  the  mark  or  attain  its  objects  in  particular
matters,  but  it  is  prospective  and  a  function  of  conscious-
ness in  its  very  essence.1

This  leading  idea  has  played  a  part  in  the  subsequent
development  of  jurisprudence,  and  we  shall  have  to  revert
to  it  by  and  by:  at  present  it  will  help  us  to  understand
why  the  teaching  of  the  Historical  School  of  Law  had  to
give  way  before  new  methods.

i  IHERING,  Oeist  des  romischen  Rechts,  III,  p.  206:  "Juridical
principles  .  .  .  arc  not  merely  logical  categories,  but  forms  for  the
concentration  of  material  rules,  and  rules  change  with  conditions  "


CHAPTER  VII
THE  EVOLUTIONISTS

No  event  in  the  history  of  scientific  thought  has  had  a
greater  influence  in  shaping  the  habits  of  mind  of  re-
searchers and  philosophers  than  the  rise  of  Darwinism.
The  biological  view  of  evolution  focussed  in  that  expression
has  come  to  dominate  not  only  natural  science,  but  also  the
study  of  man  and  of  society.

The  decisive  feature  of  the  Darwinian  synthesis  was  the
application  of  biological  evolution  to  animal  species;  a
further  step  led  to  the  application  to  social  groups  of  his
views  of  the  struggle  for  existence,  of  the  survival  of  the
fittest,  of  the  processes  of  selection,  of  adaptation  by  hered-
ity, of  the  unity  of  organic  life.  It  has  given  a  rude  shock
to  many  time-honoured  prejudices  and  has  naturally  called
forth  fierce  opposition.  By  the  side  of  the  supporters  of
confessional  dogmas  appeared  idealists  who  believed  that
the  spread  of  a  doctrine  starting  from  a  biological  basis
endangered  the  dignity  of  man  and  the  value  of  his
creative  power.1

Some  of  the  shafts  directed  against  Darwinian  views
struck  home,  but  they  reached  only  the  more  rash  among
his  followers,  who  had  come  to  regard  the  biological  for-
mulae as  rules  of  thumb  fit  for  automatic  application  to  all
problems  of  history,  ethics  or  social  science.

Such  pruning  of  the  branches  did  not,  however,  harm
the  roots  in  any  way.  The  main  principles  of  the  move-
ment have  proved  a  most  potent  ferment  in  the  develop-
ment of  social  studies.  Three  ideas  emerge  as  especially
powerful  in  this  respect :  the  idea  of  gradual  adaptation  to
circumstances,  the  idea  of  a  continuous  connection  between
the  lowest  and  the  highest  forms  of  animal  and  human  life,


i  MERZ,  History  of  European  Thought,  II,  624 ;  III,  394  if.
136


VII:  THE  EVOLUTIONISTS  137

and  the  idea  of  a  transformation  of  individual  faculties
through  the  life  of  social  groups.  In  their  combined  effect
these  three  leading  ideas  constitute  the  mainstay  of  the
doctrine  of  evolution  which  has  set  its  stamp  on  the  scien-
tific thought  of  the  last  seventy  years.  Needless  to  add,
neither  the  special  biological  tenets  nor  the  general
views  which  accompany  them  were  entirely  and  exclusively
the  personal  products  of  Darwin's  genius:  their  greatness
and  fruitfulness  depend,  of  course,  on  the  fact  that  they
focus  the  strivings  and  intuitions  of  a  whole  period  of
scientific  thought.

A  saying  of  Ihering's  may  be  taken  as  the  appropriate  Teleologlcal
epigraph  to  the  Evolutionist  movement  in  Social  Science:
"Law  is  not  less  a  product  of  history  than  handicraft,
naval  construction,  technical  skill :  as  Nature  did  not  pro-
vide Adam 's  soul  with  a  ready-made  conception  of  a  kettle,
of  a  ship  or  of  a  steamer,  even  so  she  has  not  presented  him
with  property,  marriage,  binding  contracts,  the  State.  And
the  same  may  be  said  of  all  moral  rules.  .  .  .  The  whole
moral  order  is  a  product  of  history,  or,  to  put  it  more
definitely,  of  the  striving  towards  ends,  of  the  untiring
activity  and  work  of  human  reason  tending  to  satisfy  wants
and  to  provide  against  difficulties."  *

The  teleology  of  the  legal  process  is  underlined  in  these
words  by  the  side  of  its  causality,  and  the  fact  that  law  is
striving  consciously  to  achieve  social  aims  makes  its  study
particularly  interesting  from  an  evolutionary  point  of  view.
To  be  sure,  political  and  jurisprudential  changes  often  lead
to  unforeseen  results — witness  the  frequent  cases  when  the
excess  of  discipline  has  produced  outbreaks  of  anarchy—
but,  apart  from  such  cases  of  "heterogeneity"  the  effect  of
laws  consists  to  a  large  extent  in  adaptation  to  conditions.
Both  invention  and  tradition  play  characteristic  parts  in
this  process.

In  the  long  history  of  civilization  the  first  steps  are  in Anthro-
many  respects  the  most  decisive. Indeed,  the  proper  ex-
pression  would  be  "early  stages"  rather  than  first  steps:

,  Zweck  im  Recht,  II,  p.  112.


138 INTRODUCTION:  PART  II:  METHODS  AND  SCHOOLS

when  first  steps  were  made,  there  was  as  yet  no  one  to  record
them  and  to  reflect  on  them,  and  the  scanty  material  rem-
nants of  prehistoric  archaeology  hardly  justify  the  sweeping
theories  which  have  sometimes  been  constructed  in  account-
ing for  them.

Nor  has  the  study  of  savage  races  led  to  the  discovery
of  primitive  tribes  immediately  related  to  the  higher  apes
which  are  supposed  to  be  our  nearest  cousins  among
animals.

Yet,  though  even  the  most  rudimentary  forms  of  culture
known  to  us  are  very  complex  and  replete  with  various
accomplishments,  we  are  justified  in  considering  them  at
early  stages  and  in  tracing  the  incipient  forms  of  social
organization  and  law  in  their  arrangements.  These  cul-
tural origins  supply  us  not  only  with  simpler  combinations
and  more  clearly  denned  natural  conditions,  but  they  pos-
sess the  inestimable  advantage  of  presenting  themselves  in
a  very  great  number  of  instances  and  varieties  which  shade
off  one  into  the  other  and  offer  welcome  opportunities  for
comparative  investigation.  This  is  so  much  the  case,  that
comparative  jurisprudence  has  almost  become  synonymous
with  a  study  of  primitive  societies,  although,  of  course,  such
a  connotation  is  by  no  means  rendered  necessary  by  the
aim  of  the  study.1

Maine.  The attention of  students  was directed  towards this

1 ' anthropological' '  origin  in  many  centres  at  the  same  time.
The  atmosphere  of  social  studies  was  literally  charged  in
the  second  half  of  the  nineteenth  century  with  anthropo-
logical inquiries.  It  is  sufficient  to  mention  Bachofen's
investigations  on  mother-right,  Morgan's  on  classificatory

1  VINOGRADOFF  in  the  Enc.  Brit,  on  Comparative  Jurisprudence;
THALLER,  G^NY  and  others,  L'ceuvre  juridique  de  R.  Saleilles,
p.  108:  "In  short,  it  [comparative  jurisprudence]  will  provide
the  jurisconsult  with  an  entirely  new  field  of  observation,  which
will  permit  him  to  prove  the  value  and  the  solidity  of  national
constructions,  to  modify  them,  and  even  to  make  innovations  among
them,  provided  that  the  latter  are  in  harmony  with  the  body  of
internal  law  and  do  not  interfere  with  its  economy.  If  the  result
of  the  teaching  of  comparative  law  is  that  the  same  idea  explains
the  juridical  regulation  of  an  institution  in  many  legislations,  will
not  this  conception  he  singularly  fortified  ?  "


VII:  THE  EVOLUTIONISTS  139

relationship,  McLennan 's  observation  on  exogamy,  Bas-
tian's  ethnographic  parallels.  Nor  were  the  excursions  of
anthropologists  restricted  to  particular  problems  of  social
intercourse.  General  surveys  of  evolution  and  attempts  at
formulating  empirical  laws  made  their  appearance  by  the
side  of  innumerable  monographs.  Among  these  a  most  con-
spicuous place  may  be  claimed  for  Maine's  work — not  only
in  Great  Britain,  but  among  all  students  of  legal  anthro-
pology in  Europe.

It  is  not  necessary  to  dwell  on  the  conditions  which  con-
tributed to  give  a  definite  direction  to  Maine's  thought  and
to  his  writings.  As  a  professor  of  Civil  Law  in  Oxford  he
acquired  interest  in  the  historical  formation  of  the  legal
system  of  Rome  and  presented  the  main  threads  of  Roman-
istic  study  as  an  example  of  ll Ancient  Law"  development
in  an  attractive  and  suggestive  book.1  But  Maine's  prin-
cipal contributions  to  jurisprudence  were  those  volumes  on
Village  Communities,  on  Early  Institutions,  on  Modern
Custom  and  Ancient  Law  which  were  written  after  his
return  from  India,  when  his  thoughtful  mind  had  been
awakened  to  the  social  aspects  of  law  in  its  organic  pro-
cesses of  adaptation  revealed  by  a  comparison  between  such
vastly  different  bodies  of  custom  as  those  of  the  Indian  and
Germanic  village  communities,  of  Slavonic  joint  families,
of  the  clans  and  clientships  of  the  Celts.  In  point  of
method  Maine  presented  the  greatest  possible  contrast  with
the  abstract  rationalism  of  Austin's  analysis:  he  expressed
his  disagreement  with  the  latter  in  a  remarkable  section
of  his  book  on  Early  Institutions.2  As  regards  the
Romantic  school,  he  never  took  occasion  to  state  an  opinion,
though  the  influence  of  Savigny  may  be  clearly  perceived
in  the  book  on  Ancient  Law;  his  method  became,  how-
ever, differentiated  from  that  of  the  "  Historical  School  of
Law"  in  his  later  writings.  No  stronger  contrast  could
be  imagined  than  his  treatment  of  Communities  and  that  of
Gierke:  while  the  latter  insists  on  the  Germanistic

1  Cf .  VINOGRADOFF,  The  Teaching  of  Sir  Henry  Maine.

2  Early  History  of  Institutions (1875),  pp 345  ff.


140 INTRODUCTION:  PART  II:  METHODS  AND  SCHOOLS


Spread  of
anthropo-
logical
jurispru-
dence.


peculiarities  of  the  Mark  and  of  the  craft-gild,  Maine  uses
v.  Maurer's  materials  in  order  to  impress  on  his  readers
the  idea  of  a  constantly-recurring  combination  which  is  no
more  German  in  essence  than  it  is  Indian  or  Slavonic,  a
combination  produced  by  an  undeveloped  sense  of  indi-
vidual right  and  natural  union  among  the  members  of  a
village  settlement.  His  interpretation  of  the  evidence  may
bo  right  or  wrong,  but  it  is  certainly  not  the  part  played  by
the  nationalistic  element  which  he  wants  to  emphasize,  but
the  similarity  in  the  methods  of  husbandry  and  land-
tenure  employed  by  different  nationalities  in  similar  con-
ditions. Maine  had  a  great  following  among  continental
writers — M.  Kovalevsky,  for  instance,  showed  his  adherence
to  Maine's  views  by  the  very  title  of  his  best  book.1

Other  students  took  up  the  same  task  without  standing  in
direct  connection  with  the  British  writer.  R.  Dareste 2
may  be  mentioned  on  account  of  his  excellent  sketches  of
legal  customs  and  institutions  from  all  parts  of  the  world.
Post 3  gathered  an  enormous  mass  of  material  from  the  life
of  savage  and  barbarian  tribes.

J.  Kohler,  besides  writing  copiously  himself  on  compara-
tive law  on  anthropological  lines,  has  formed  an  important
centre  of  study  in  his  Review  of  Comparative  Juris-
prudence.4

One  feature  of  these  works  illustrating  the  natural  his-
tory of  legal  customs  and  rules  by  comparison  and  analogy
has  been  the  attempt  to  formulate  generalizations  as  to
normal  sequences  of  development,  or  what  may  be  called
empirical  laws  of  jurisprudence.  We  read,  for  instance,
in  Maine's  Ancient  Law  that  the  course  of  this  development
proceeds  from  status  to  contract.5  A  favourite  scheme  of
social  evolution  starts  with  sexual  promiscuity  in  the
earliest  stage,  and  marks  the  advance  from  anarchy  to  the
horde,  then  to  the  clan,  then  to  the  family  household  which

1  Coutume  contemporaine  et  ancienne  loi  (1896).

2  titudes  de  I'histoire  du  droit (1882), Nouvelles  ttudes (1902,
1906).

3  Afrikanische  Jurisprudents,  etc.

*  Zeitschrift  fur  vergleichende  Rechtswissenschaft.
5  Ancient  Law,  ch.  v.


VII:  THE  EVOLUTIONISTS  141

itself  is  constructed  first  on  polygamic  and  later  on  mono-
gamic  lines.  Prom  an  economic  point  of  view  the  commonly
accepted  sequence  of  stages  consists  in  the  transition  from
a  society  of  hunters  and  fishers,  to  a  nomad  pastoral  organi-
zation, then  to  an  industrial  and  commercial,  ultimately  to
capitalistic  intercourse.1

These  references  may  be  sufficient  to  show  on  what  broad
lines  comparative  study  has  been  carried  out  and  from  what
different  points  of  view  legal  problems  have  been  ap-
proached by  it.  Marriage,  husbandry,  crime  and  punish-
ment, succession,  possession  and  contract  have  all  been
treated  by  the  anthropological  school  as  devices  to  meet
varying  social  conditions,  and  the  relative  character  of  the
solutions  obtained  has  been  as  much  to  the  fore  as  the
analogies  in  the  treatment  of  similar  problems  by  nations
and  tribes  situated  in  very  different  surroundings.

The  work  of  the  anthropological  school  as  regards  law
has  been  largely  descriptive  and  carried  on  rather  in  width
than  in  depth.  It  was  supplemented  by  another  line  of
inquiry,  akin  to  the  former  one  in  its  premises  and  aims,
but  altogether  different  in  technical  method.  I  mean  the
sociological  treatment  of  legal  facts  that  became  usual  in
the  second  half  of  the  nineteenth  century.  The  apostle  of
the  sociological  creed,  A.  Comte,  did  not  pay  much  attention
to  law;  it  was  absorbed  for  him  in  the  general  course  of
historical  development.2

Spencer  was  led  by  his  studies  in  descriptive  sociology
to  consider  customary  rules  and  institutions  among  the
materials  for  empirical  generalization,3  and  his  determined
attitude  in  the  controversy  between  the  State  and  the  indi-
vidual made  it  necessary  to  formulate  views  as  to  the  direc-
tion of  social  evolution  ("the  coming  slavery").  But  these
fragmentary  surveys  do  not  count  seriously  in  the  history
of  juridical  thought.  An  important  departure  was  made,  on
the  other  hand,  by  Ihering.  In  his  earlier  writings  he  had

1  K BiiCHER,  Entwickelung  der  Volksicirtschaft (1904),  pp 45,  54.

2  Cours  de  philosophic  positive,  IV,  pp.  275-282;  MICHEL,  op.  tit..
pp.  447,  448.

a  Principles  of  Sociology.


142 INTRODUCTION: PART  II: METHODS  AND  SCHOOLS

touched  on  several  vital  problems  of  general  jurisprudence.
He  had  contrasted  in  his  Spirit  of  Roman  Law  the  technical
methods  of  the  professional  lawyer  with  the  customary,
half-religious  formalism  and  the  common-sense  equity  of
popular  legal  lore,1  and  he  had  come  to  the  conclusion  that
both  methods  are  justified  in  their  time  and  place,  one  in
the  initial  stages  of  juridical  formation,  the  other  in  epochs
of  advanced  civilization  and  of  complex  intercourse.  These
observations  suggested  a  different  appreciation  of  national
and  international  factors  in  jurisprudence  and  positive  law :
while  in  early  periods, legal  rules  grow  more  or  less  organi-
cally, like  language  and  myth,  later  stages  are  characterized
by  universal  and,  as  it  were,  impersonal  conceptions,  which,
like  coins  of  standard  value,  circulate  without  difficulty
right  through  the  world.  In  the  Review  of  dogmatic  Pri-
vate Law  which  Ihering  conducted  with  Gerber,  he  gave
great  prominence  to  the  special  craft  of  the  lawyer  and
to  methods  of  dialectical  analysis  and  dogmatic  construc-
tion. But  he  insisted  energetically  on  the  social  aims  of
juridical  activity,  attacked  with  bitter  scorn  the  tendency
towards  the  self-satisfied  exercise  of  juridical  logic  divorced
from  practical  needs,2  and  represented  the  process  of  legal
formation  as  a  "struggle  for  right"  among  contending  in-
dividual and  social  claims.3  While  illustrating  forcibly  the
value  of  a  stubborn  assertion  of  the  concrete  will,  he  broke
with  the  abstract  conception  of  the  will  in  itself  (an  und
fiir  sich)  apart  from  aim  and  motive,  and  substituted  in
his  famous  definition  of  right  the  protected  interest  for  the
limited  will.4


*  Oeist  des  romischen  Rechts,  III,  p.  302:  "Let  us  break  the
charm,  the  illusion  which  holds  us  captive.  All  this  cult  of  logic
that  would  fain  turn  jurisprudence  into  legal  mathematics  is  an
error  and  arises  from  misunderstanding  law.  Life  does  not  exist
for  the  sake  of  concepts,  but  concepts  for  the  sake  of  life.  It  is
not  logic  that  is  entitled  to  exist,  but  what  is  claimed  by  life,  by
social  intercourse,  by  the  sense  of  justice — whether  it  be  logically
necessary  or  logically  impossible.  The  Romans  would  have  been
worthy  to  dwell  in  Abdera  if  they  had  ever  thought  otherwise,  if
they  had  sacrificed  the  interests  of  life  to  the  dialectic  of  the  school  ''

2  IHERING,  Scherz  und  Ernst  in  der  Jurisprudent. See  ante,  p.  25.

3  Kampf  urns  Recht,  p.  7.

4  Cf.  KORKUNOV,  Theory  of  Law,  transl.  by  Hastings.


VII:  THE  EVOLUTIONISTS  . 143

But  Ihering's  most  important  contribution  to  the  general
theory  of  law  is  given  in  his  Zweck  im  Recht  (the  "Aim  in
Law"),  a  work  which,  in  spite  of  its  absence  of  symmetry
and  occasional  lengthiness,  presents  one  of  the  principal
landmarks  in  the  history  of  jurisprudence.  It  traces
the  conditions  under  which  the  individual  and  society
co-operate  in  evolving  rules  of  conduct.  The  governing
ideas  are  that  all  human  conduct  being  directed  towards
aims,  these  aims  are  bound  to  be  determined  by  utility,  the
striving  towards  good  and  the  avoidance  of  evil.  The  secret
of  history  consists  in  the  fact  that  good  and  evil  are  esti-
mated in  their  values  not  by  individuals,  but  by  society,
and  that  social  aims  are  engrafted  on  individual  conscious-
ness by  the  educational  action  of  society  in  fashion,  in  con-
ventional rules,  in  moral  training  and  ethical  ideals,  lastly
and  most  effectually — in  law.  The  history  of  juridical  con-
ceptions and  institutions  is  devoted  to  tracing  the  evolution
of  this  social  education  conditioned  by  all  the  varying  in-
fluences of  race,  geographical  situation,  climate,  economic
arrangements,  political  organization,  relations  with  neigh-
bours, cross  currents  of  religious  and  scientific  ideas,  etc.,
but  ever  tending  towards  a  welfare  achieved  by  social
means.  In  the  light  of  this  orientation  one  comes  to  under-
stand the  meaning  of  the  protest  against  the  "Historical
School  of  Law,"  a  school  pledged  to  the  cult  of  rigid
national  personalities  dependent  on  the  past  and  barren
as  to  the  future.1

I  have  already  called  attention  to  the  revival  of  interest  juridical
in  juridical  analysis  and  in  juridical  construction  which
characterizes  Ihering's  work.  He  always  felt  and  spoke  as
a  jurist,  and  did  not  want  to  exchange  the  sharp  definitions
and  compelling  inferences  of  the  lawyer  for  the  hazy
descriptions  and  the  fluid  transitions  of  historians.  This
firm  attitude  of  trained  lawyers  is  very  noticeable  in

i  LANDSBERG,  Oeschichte  der  Rechtswissenschaft,  III,  p.  816:  "A
juridical  institution  stands  and  falls  with  the  achievement  of  its
aim.  It  arises  for  the  sake  of  aims,  in  the  consciousness  of  aims,
and  in  the  struggle  between  aims.  This  is  the  reason  why  law
cannot  be  explained  either  by  mechanical  processes  or  by  blind
growth  Its  justification  lies  in  its  ends,  as  a  means  for  their
realization."


144 INTRODUCTION: PART  II: METHODS  AND  SCHOOLS

other  works  on  sociological  jurisprudence.  I  will  select
two  as  examples  of  a  powerful  current  in  the  literature  of
the  end  of  the  nineteenth  century.  Jellinek's  writings  are
devoted  to  problems  of  constitutional  and  administrative
law.  The  book  which  immediately  concerns  us  now  is  his
General  Doctrine  of  the  State  (Allgemeine  StaatsleJire) ;  its
chief  aim  is  to  ascertain  the  relations  between  political  ar-
rangements dependent  on  social  conditions,  on  the  one  hand,
and  the  rules  which  constitute  the  positive  law  of  the  State
on  the  other.  Apart  from  a  valuable  discussion  of  various
theories  bearing  on  the  subject,  the  work  is  chiefly  interest-
ing on  account  of  the  light  it  throws  on  the  part  played  by
legal  rules  in  upholding  political  systems.1  It  must  be  added,
however,  that  the  element  of  systematic  construction  pre-
dominates over  the  exact  study  of  the  facts  in  such  a  way  as
sometimes  to  distort  the  true  meaning  and  perspective  of
institutions.  This  defect  is  very  noticeable  in  the  treat-
ment of  English  Law,  where  Jellinek's  rather  arbitrary
generalizations  compare  unfavourably  with  the  masterly
exposition  of  Dicey,  derived  from  an  intimate  and  pro-
found understanding  of  Common  Law.2

Another  significant  current  of  thought  connected  with

Modified the  evolutionist  movement  in  jurisprudence  may  be  seen  in

natural the  revival  of  a  modified  conception  of  the  law  of  nature —

riot  in  the  rationalistic  sense,  of  course,  but  in  that  of  a

striving  towards  ideals. If,  as  Ihering  put  it,  law  has  not

only  to  register  actual  rules  and  to  explain  their  origin,

but  also  to  aim  at  the  solution  of  social  problems,  it  is  not

1  Allgemeine  Staatslehre  (1905),  p.  47: "The  doctrine  of  a  trans-
formation directed  towards  aims  sheds  light  on  the  fundamental  error
of  the  view  that  social  phenomena  arise  and  develop  by  a  process  of
organic  growth We  ascribe  to  the  organic  process  the  facts  that
transcend  our  knowledge."

p.  176:  "The  critical  question  arising  in  regard  to  all  social
institutions:  Why  do  they  exist — springs  therefore  from  the  essence
of  our  reasoning  faculty  First  and  foremost  it  holds  good  with
regard  to  the  State.  Why  does  the  State  with  its  supreme  power
exist?  Why  must  the  individual  suffer  subjection  of  his  will  to
another;  why  and  to  what  extent  ought  he  to  sacrifice  himself  to
the  community?  "

2  DICEY,  The  Law  of  the  Constitution. In  the  work  of  Jellinek's
pupil,  HATSCHEK (Englisches  Staatsrecht) these  defects  are  magni-
fied tenfold.


VII:  THE  EVOLUTIONISTS  145

wrong  or  presumptuous  to  reflect  on  the  general  prin-
ciples which  in  the  present  state  of  civilization  we  ought  to
accept  as  the  guiding  lights  for  legislators  and  reformers,
and  as  the  critical  tests  for  approving  or  disapproving
existing  rules  of  positive  law.  The  idea  of  constructing  a
sociological  jurisprudence  has  been  embodied  recently  in  a
work  by  Professor  Eugen  Ehrlich  of  Graz.  He  defines  its
scope  in  the  following  words :  ' '  The  primary  and  most  im-
portant task  of  sociological  law  (law  on  a  sociological  basis)
is  therefore  to  separate  the  component  parts  of  the  law
ruling,  regulating  and  determining  human  society,  from
mere  decisions  in  individual  cases,  and  to  prove  their  organ-
izing nature.  This  was  recognized  first  in  Constitutional  and
Administrative  law.  Indeed,  no  one  doubts  nowadays  that
State  law  means  the  organization  of  the  State  and  does
not  exist  for  the  purpose  of  settling  quarrels  but  to  define
the  position  and  tasks  of  the  State-organs  and  the  rights
and  duties  of  State  officials.  But  the  State  is  first  and
foremost  a  social  union."  *  The  principles  of  law  are  bound
to  be  social  in  their  essence.

Such  principles  are  bound  to  be  broad  and  general,  but
they  cannot  be  universal  and  eternal:  they  appeal  to  the
nature  of  men,  not  in  the  abstract,  but  as  defined  by  cir-
cumstances. Every  age  will  have  its  own  ideals  in  this
respect,  although  such  ideals  are  bound  to  have  some  con-
nection with  each  other.  The  ancient  world  ended  by  con-
demning slavery  on  the  strength  of  the  law  of  nature,  the
mediaeval  polity  was  overthrown  when  serfdom  was  con-
demned as  being  against  nature,  and  present-day  society  is
condemning  ruthless  competition  as  being  against  the  law  of
nature.  The  appearance  of  such  watchwords  cannot  fail  to
be  ominous.  They  enlist  strong  sympathy  when  " there's
something  rotten  in  the  state  of  Denmark. ' '  In  this  sense  at-
tention may  be  called  to  such  works  as  Stammler's  Eight
Law  (Das  richtige  Recht)  which  has  been  hailed  with  ap-
probation by  many  thinkers  in  continental  countries,  for
example,  by  Saleilles,  who  accepted  it  as  "a  law  of  nature
with  variable  contents. ' ' 2

1  E.  EHRLICH,  Grundlegung  der  soziologischen  Rechtswissenschaft.

2  STAMMLER,  Das  richtige  Recht.
2231  J


146 INTRODUCTION:  PART  II:  METHODS  AND  SCHOOLS

A  similar  idea  is  expressed  in  a  suggestive  volume  by
Saleilles'  fellow-countryman  Charmont.1

As  in  the  case  of  Jellinek,  the  value  of  Stammler's  book
lies  in  the  leading  idea  of  the  author  and  in  the  method
advocated  by  him,  much  more  than  in  the  use  he  has  made
of  his  own  suggestions.  Instead  of  operating  within  the
limits  of  a  shifting  scheme  of  ideals,  Stammler  proceeded
to  lay  down  a  set  of  standard  formulae  devised  on  a
rationalistic  pattern  for  all  time.  His  four  standards  have
no  value  for  the  advancement  of  juridical  thought,  and  as
for  his  Theory  of  Law,2  with  the  pretentious  epigraph  "non
est  mortale  quod  opto,"  it  is  hardly  too  much  to  say  that
it  is  presented  in  such  a  pedantic  manner  that  it  is  almost
impossible  to  read  the  big  volume  dedicated  to  it,  and  quite
impossible  to  make  use  of  for  any  definite  purpose.  It  had
been  better  if  the  author  had  taken  to  heart  the  admirable
precepts  of  his  own  Right  Law.

On  the  whole,  there  can  be  no  doubt  that  the  idea  of
evolution  has  had  a  potent  influence  on  jurisprudential
studies.  It  has  not  only  supplied  jurists  with  a  suggestive
explanation  of  the  sequences  of  changes  through  which  all
systems  of  positive  law  pass  in  their  history,  but  it  has
indicated  a  proper  method  for  estimating  the  course  of
this  development:  we  all  recognize  now  that  law  has  grown
by  conscious  efforts  towards  the  solution  of  social  problems
conditioned  by  causes  which  spring  from  previous  stages  of
development  and  from  the  influence  of  surroundings.  At  the
same  time,  the  task  of  unravelling  the  sequence  of  evolution
in  law  and  right  lies  in  truth  at  the  source  of  all  juridical
activity.  Evolution  in  this  domain  means  a  constant
struggle  between  two  conflicting  tendencies — the  certainty
and  stability  of  legal  systems  and  progress  and  adapta-
tion to  circumstances  in  order  to  achieve  social  justice.

1  Renaissance  du  droit  naturel.

2  Theorie  der  Rechtswissenschaft.


CHAPTER  VIII
MODERN  TENDENCIES  IN  JURISPRUDENCE

RECENT  developments  in  the  domain  of  jurisprudence  critical
have  not  yet  assumed  a  sufficiently  distinctive  character  to tendency-
entitle  them  to  rank  as  a  new  epoch  in  the  history  of  that
science. Nevertheless  there  are  certain  features,  common
to  the  work  of  writers  of  the  beginning  of  the  twentieth
century,  which  deserve  attention  and  are  likely  to  advance
the  study  towards  new  vistas.

To  begin  with,  we  have  to  notice  a  strong  critical  tend-
ency :  instead  of  the  enthusiasm  called  forth  by  the  earlier
instalments  of  comparative  study,  an  attitude  of  scepticism
and  searching  investigation  has  been  assumed  by  leading
writers.  Jellinek,  for  example,  has  expressed  great  disap-
pointment as  to  the  results  achieved  by  anthropologists  in
their  comparative  surveys.1

Even  more  characteristic  are  the  critical  objections  of
the  most  brilliant  legal  historian  of  modern  England —
F.  "W.  Maitland.  He  was  a  decided  sceptic  as  regards  many
generalizations  proposed  by  Maine — not,  however,  because
of  any  opposition  to  relativism.  On  the  contrary,  he  fully
admitted  that  legal  as  well  as  social  and  political  phe-
nomena are  produced  by  the  flow  of  historical  circum-
stances, but  it  seemed  to  him  that  writers  had  been  guided
in  their  work  more  by  their  wish  to  prove  preconceived
theories  than  by  a  careful  consideration  of  the  evidence.
His  developed  sense  of  historical  criticism  rebelled  against
Maine's  assumptions  and  lack  of  careful  investigation  of
sources.2  As  regards  primitive  kindred,  for  instance,  Mait-
land lays  stress  on  the  difficulty  arising  from  the  fact  that
ancient  Anglo-Saxon  and  Germanic  law  recognized  rela-
tionship on  the  female  as  well  as  the  male  side.  In  his

1  Allgemeine  Staatslehre.

2  Collected  Papers,  I,  p.  285.

147


148 INTRODUCTION:  PART  II:  METHODS  AND  SCHOOLS

view,  there  can  therefore  be  no  question  of  grouping  the
corresponding  societies  into  patriarchal  clans,  which  stand
or  fall  with  the  conception  of  agnatic  relationship.  Again,
in  his  criticism  of  Maine 's  theory  of  the  village  community,
he  held  that  there  is  no  evidence  of  original  communalism.
Altogether,  the  theory  of  " stages "  seemed  unnecessary  and
misleading  to  him;  why  should  one  assume  that  "all  nations
are  constituted  on  the  same  lines  and  reproduce  the  same
characteristic  features  in  their  treatment  of  economic  and
social  problems?  For  Maitland,  on  the  contrary,  nations
manifest  such  great  differences  of  character  and  intellect
that  some  national  groups  would  be  bound  to  skip  certain
stages,  which  other  more  backward  units  might  pass
through.1  Obviously  such  criticism  might  be  directed  with
even  greater  justice  against  the  speculations  of  German
writers  like  Kohler,  than  against  the  theories  of  Maine.

It  is,  however,  important  to  notice  that  Maitland 's  oppo-
sition challenged  not  the  method  itself,  but  rather  the  indis-
criminate way  in  which  the  comparative  anthropologists
worked  out  their  ideals.  He  did  not  maintain  that  because
there  were  so  many  fallacious  analogies,  all  recourse  to
analogies  is  unsuitable.2

As,  however,  the  comparative  method  cannot  be  com-
F.  w.  pletely  discarded,  Maitland  himself  did  use  it  repeatedly,

and  the and,  in  fact,  he  has  shown  by  his  very  attacks  how  the

compara-

tive  method  same  problems  may  be  approached  by  a  similar  road  while
avoiding  the  pitfalls  into  which  the  former  votaries  of  the
school  had  stumbled.3  For  instance,  the  development  of  the
idea  of  a  corporation  in  England  was  studied  by  him  in
relation  to  German  theories,  and  it  was  for  this  purpose
that  he  translated  a  section  of  Gierke's  work.  In  his


1  History  of  English  Law,  II,  p.  237. Domesday  Book  and  Beyond,
p.  345.

2  Collected Papers, II, p. 4: "Only by a comparison of our
law  with  her  sisters  will some  of  the  most  remarkable traits  be
understood."

s  Op.  tit.,  II,  pp.  251,  312. History  of  English  Law,  I,  pp.  486
et  seq.;  II,  pp.  29-80.


VIII:  MODERN  TENDENCIES  OF  JURISPRUDENCE 149

analysis  of  kinship  he  protests  against  patriarchal  theories,
but  goes  a  long  way  towards  accepting  the  view  of  matri-
archal origins  of  the  process,  etc.

The  necessity  for  revising  the  comparative  method  is  one
of  the  lines  on  which  modern  jurisprudence  has  to  take  up
the  thread  of  investigation.  Inferences  must  be  preceded
by  a  careful  study  of  individual  cases,  and  in  this  study
juridical  analysis  ought  to  receive  more  attention  than  has
been  the  case  hitherto.  This  side  is  very  poorly  repre-
sented in  the  books  on  anthropological  jurisprudence,
which,  even  when  written  by  lawyers,  generally  suffer  from
a  tendency  to  put  together  things  which  are  in  reality
unconnected.

The  accumulation  of  somewhat  indiscriminately  collected
facts  like  those  presented  by  Post,  Kohler,  Kovalevsky,  etc.,
had  its  justification  in  the  necessity  of  preliminary  surveys
on  broad  lines.  What  is  wanted  now  is  to  take  our  stand
on  the  careful  analysis  of  one  or  the  other  rule,  relation  or
institution,  as  illustrated  in  its  formation,  development  and
decay  by  the  facts  of  comparative  jurisprudence.  Stein-
metz's  monograph  on  crime  and  punishment  in  primitive
society  may  serve  as  an  example  of  the  proper  application
of  such  a  method.1

By  the  side  of  the  critical  tendency,  there  are  signs  of  The  social

crisis.

the  appearance  of  a  new  constructive  point  of  view.  It  is
suggested  forcibly  by  the  great  social  crisis  on  which  the
world  is  evidently  entering  even  now.  The  individualistic
order  of  society  is  giving  way  before  the  impact  of  an  in-
exorable process  of  socialization,  and  the  future  will  depend
for  a  long  time  on  the  course  and  the  extent  of  this  process.
I  should  like  to  recall  some  remarkable  pages  by  a  German
economist,  who  in  1890  looked  on  Great  Britain  as  the  land
of  promise  for  a  "social  peace ":

"How  could  the  inheritance  which  represents  our  high-
est spiritual  and  moral  possessions  and  whose  guardians
we  are,  be  considered  entirely  secure?  If  the  move-
ment which  threatened  to  annihilate  it,  assimilates  it  in

i  Ethnologische  Studien  iiber  die  Entwickelung  der  Strafe  (1894).


150 INTRODUCTION:  PART  II:  METHODS  AND  SCHOOLS

such  a  way  as  (itself)  to  carry  it  towards  the  future;  if
instead  of  battling  against  existing  society,  it  helps  to
develop  it.  But  we  seem  farther  than  ever  from  such  a
solution ;  it  demands  an  almost  impossible  amount  of  in-
sight on  both  sides :  it  means  that  the  masses  should  under-
stand that  the  progress  of  mankind  can  only  be  gradual  and
peaceful,  for  it  means  indeed  not  the  education  of  a  few
but  of  all,  including  every  individual.  Is  it  not  thor-
oughly unscientific  to  advance  the  opinion  in  a  century
devoted  to  historical  research  and  the  doctrine  of  evolution,
that  an  ideal  state  of  society  could  be  attained  at  one  stroke,
by  means  of  external  changes,  and  that  progress  means
anything  else  than  the  development  of  what  already  exists?
But  the  understanding  demanded  from  the  upper  classes
is  not  less  hard,  namely,  to  own  that  new  times  with  new
demands  have  now  dawned  and  it  is  no  longer  possible
to  'put  new  wine  into  old  bottles/  Instead  of  such  in-
sight we  find  overbearing  behaviour  on  the  one  side  and
suspicion  and  hatred  on  the  other;  the  people  are  divided
into  two  nations,  out  of  contact,  and  without  understanding
for  each  other;  they  feel  and  think  discordantly  and,  as
Lord  Beaconsfield  said  of  his  country,  'they  are  as  much
strangers  to  each  other  as  if  they  had  been  born  in  different
hemispheres'."  *

It  cannot.be  expected  that  the  immense  changes  that  are
taking  place  in  the  domain  of  positive  law  should  be  accom-
panied by  an  easy  and  smooth  transformation  of  juris-
prudence. The  process  has,  however,  produced  some
remarkable  speculations  in  that  field,  and  they  are  distin-
guished in  a  characteristic  manner  as  much  by  negative
tendencies  as  by  constructive  features.  Duguit's  work  in
France  occupies  a  prominent  position  in  this  respect.2  He
sets  out  as  an  uncompromising  opponent  of  the  juridical
personality  of  the  State,  which  he  treats  as  a  mere  fiction,
devised  to  conceal  the  matter-of-fact  preponderance  of

1  G.  VON  SCHULTZE-GAEVERNITZ,  Zum  socialen  Frieden  (1890),  p.
viii

-  Etudes  de  droit  public;  Droit  constitntionnel ;  Transformation  du
droit  pnve;  Transformation  du  droit  public;  Droit  social.


VIII:  MODERN  TENDENCIES  OF  JURISPRUDENCE 151

particular  persons  or  groups.  Instead  of  this  "exploded"
view  he  desires  to  set  up  the  conception  of  social  solidarity
with  public  services  and  duties  corresponding  to  it.  It  is
not  difficult  to  perceive  that  this  change  of  attitude  has
been  inspired  by  a  general  hostility  to  the  State  constructed
on  the  lines  of  the  conceptions  of  personality  and
will.  It  is  more  than  doubtful,  however,  whether  the
author  has  succeeded  in  providing  his  nation  of  social  soli-
darity with  sufficiently  definite  attributes  to  enable  it  to
act  as  a  foundation  for  a  system  of  law.  We  may  extend
or  minimize  the  part  played  by  the  organized  common-
wealth in  the  life  and  conduct  of  its  individual  members,
but  it  is  difficult  to  see  how  even  a  socialistic  common-
wealth can  get  rid  of  the  contrast  between  the  personal  and
the  public,  the  social  and  the  individual.  As  a  society
organized  for  rule,  it  is  bound  to  assume  the  form  of  a
superphysical  person.

Duguit's  second  position  calls  forth  even  stronger  ob-
jections. He  denies  the  existence  of  right  as  distinguished
from  law,  the  existence  of  subjective  and  individual
claims  of  justice  as  distinct  from  objective  rules.1
(The  subjective  right,  Droit  subjectify  of  Continental
jurists.)  He  believes  that  men's  position  and  activity  in
society  are  sufficiently  defined  by  the  duties  im-
posed on  them  by  social  solidarity  and  points  to  the
frequent  cases  when  society  demands  the  curtailment  and
sacrifice  of  the  most  elementary  "  rights " — e.g.,  claims  to
property  and  even  to  life.  I  will  merely  refer  my  readers
to  the  pertinent  criticism  of  Saleilles,2  who,  while  recogniz-
ing the  cleverness  of  Duguit's  deductions,  rejected  them  as
subversive  of  the  very  essence  of  law.  As  long  as  society
is  made  up  of  live  individuals,  its  structure  and  order  are
bound  to  proceed  from  combinations  between  them,  and  if
rights  are  assigned  and  limited  by  law,  the  latter  appears,
on  the  other  hand,  as  a  product  of  compromises  and  agree-
ments which  assume  the  technical  shape  of  rights.  The
necessary  renunciations  and  sacrifices  are  at  bottom  meas-
ures of  expediency  and  of  self-defence,  and  their  apparent

1  Etudes  de  droit  public,  I,  ch i  and  ii.

2  (Euvre  de  Raymond  Saleilles,  p.  32.


152 INTRODUCTION:  PART  II:  METHODS  AND  SCHOOLS

opposition  to  individual  aspirations  is  in  truth  the  sur-
render of  casual  licence  for  the  sake  of  a  reasonable  assur-
ance.

Another  interesting  symptom  of  the  fermentation  in  the
domain  of  jurisprudence  is  presented  by  Professor  Eugen
Ehrlich's  book,  Elements  of  the  Sociology  of  Law.  The
writer  seeks  to  show  that  the  law  administered  by  the
courts  of  justice  is  only  a  small  part,  and  the  most  external
part,  of  the  juridical  process.  The  real  roots  of  law  rest
in  the  soil  of  everyday  intercourse,  of  social  custom,  and
the  greater  the  technical  severance  of  legal  rules  from  this
broad  social  basis,  the  worse  for  society  at  large.  All  the
misunderstandings,  the  encroachments,  the  pedantries  of
modern  legal  systems  may  be  traced  to  this  source.  We  are
reminded  of  the  arguments  urged  by  von  Billow  in  his
attack  on  the  logical  method  of  interpretation  in  Ger-
man law,  but  the  contributions  of  Ehrlich  are  stated  in
a  much  more  comprehensive  form,  and  connect  themselves,
in  the  past,  with  Puchta's  teaching,  while  they  point
in  the  future  to  a  recasting  of  legal  rules  and  institu-
tions to  fit  the  requirements  of  a  socialistic  development.
Subjective  "right"  has  to  suffer  again  in  the  process,
because  social  needs  and  conventions  are  assigned  the  pre-
ponderant role  in  the  forming  of  legal  rules.  Another  Aus-
trian, Professor  A.  Menger  of  the  University  of  Vienna,
has  taken  upon  himself  the  task  of  criticising  in  detail  the
rules  of  the  German  Civil  Code  from  a  socialistic  point  of
view,  and  has  sketched  the  outlines  of  a  socialistic  legis-
lation.1 But  his  work,  though  very  interesting,  belongs
rather  to  the  field  of  positive  law  than  to  that  of  juris-
prudence. There  can  be  no  doubt  in  any  case  that  the
socialistic  movement  cannot  content  itself  with  vague  and
sentimental  attacks  upon  the  existing  legal  order  and  the
jurisprudence  of  the  individualistic  State.  It  is  on  the  way
to  putting  forward  jurisprudential  theories  of  its  own.

We  may  like  it  or  not,  we  may  hail  the  recasting  of  social
values  or  deplore  it,  but  we  have  to  make  up  our  minds  that

i  ANTON  MENGER,  Neue  Staatslehre,  Jena,  1904.  It  would  be  out  of
the  question  to  estimate  in  any  way  the  possibilities  arising  out  of
the  idea  of  a  League  of  Nations.


VIII:  MODERN  TENDENCIES  OF  JURISPRUDENCE 153

the  transformation  is  taking  place  as  an  episode  of  histori-
cal evolution.  Let  us  remember  the  attitude  of  a  great
representative  of  an  aristocratic  civilization,  Alexis  de
Tocqueville,  before  the  advent  of  democracy.  Something
similar  may  be  witnessed  now  in  a  book  like  Dicey 's  Law
and  Opinion:  it  sets  before  us  in  a  concise  and  vivid
contrast  the  elemental  struggle  between  the  individualistic
tendencies,  .as  illustrated  by  Bentham,  and  the  rising  tide
of  socialistic  conceptions  resulting  in  a  crisis  of  English
juridical  thought  and  legislation.

From  our  point  of  view  these  ideas  are  expressive  not
only  of  the  social  anxieties  and  strivings  of  our  time,  but
also  of  a  scientific  movement.  Law  has  to  be  studied  in
constant  reference  to  the  movement  of  public  opinion  at
large,  because  it  is  not  only  technical,  but  broadly  histori-
cal :  philosophers,  naturalists,  economists,  students  of  polit-
ical science,  jurists,  have  all  been  thinking  and  talking  of
evolution.  Its  manifestations  have  been  studied  among
the  totem  groups  of  Australia,  the  clans  of  the  Celts,  the
communities  of  the  Indians  and  of  the  Slavs,  the  towns  of
mediaeval  Germany.  It  is  time  that  we  should  turn  to  the
evolutionary  crisis  in  which  we  are  ourselves  implicated
nowadays.  The  ground  is  shifting  under  our  feet  and  it
is  no  use  pretending  that  the  province  of  law  alone  remains
steady  and  immobile  in  the  midst  of  the  general  trans-
formation.

But  is  it  not  possible  to  put  together  a  certain  number  scope  of
of  fundamental  principles  of  jurisprudence  derived  from  jurispru-
the  universal  requirements  of  the  human  mind,  and  to  con-
stitute in  this  way  a  formal *•  theory  of  law,  independent
of  modifications  brought  about  by  national,  geographical,
political  peculiarities?  Such  is  really  the  claim  of  so-called
"general  jurisprudence.'*  It  may  be  observed  at  once,  that
such  a  claim  seems  rather  odd  on  the  part  of  writers  who
have  renounced  the  conception  of  a  law  of  nature  and
pin  their  faith  to  positive  law.  Though  Wolff  and  Kant
could  map  out  schemes  of  universal  jurisprudence,  Austin
and  Holland  have  no  right  to  do  so.  Nor  does  it  make  the

i  HOLLAND  on  "  Formal  Theory  of  Law,"  Jurisprudence,  p.  6.


154 INTRODUCTION:  PART  II:  METHODS  AND  SCHOOLS

attempt  less  inconsistent  on  the  part  of  these  latter  writers,
that  they  limit  their  province  of  jurisprudence  to  the  law
of  the  civilized  world.  What  is  the  civilized  world  ?  When
did  it  begin  to  exist  ?  Is  Christian  civilization  to  be  in-
cluded in  it?  Is  the  law  of  the  Roman  jurists  to  be  con-
sidered? Have  Plato  and  Aristotle  the  right  to  speak  on
the  philosophy  of  law?  Are  Mohammedan  and  Brahmanic
conceptions  to  be  excluded  from  consideration  ?  Is  it  irrele-
vant for  jurists  to  observe  the  beginnings  of  ideas  of  judi-
cial authority,  of  public  sanction,  of  private  right,  of
family  arrangements,  of  property,  of  possession,  of  co-
operation? It  would  be  difficult,  to  be  sure,  to  embrace
the  whole  range  of  human  development  by  ideas  of  univer-
sal jurisprudence,  but  if  we  have  to  cut  off  arbitrarily  parts
of  this  development  for  the  sake  of  unity  of  treatment,
this  surely  shows  that  a  scientific  treatment  of  the  subject
ought  to  aim  not  at  absolute  and  universal,  but  at  rela-
tive constructions.

And  when  we  examine  modern  textbooks  of  general  juris-
prudence in  detail,  we  do  find  that  the  universal  element  in
them  is,  at  bottom,  restricted  to  a  statement  of  queries  and
a  registration  of  disagreements.  The  setting  of  these
queries  is  not  accidental.  All  systems  of  law  have  to  deal
with  rules  and  rights.  All  have  to  classify  their  material
under  the  headings  of  public  and  private  law.  All  consider
delict  and  compensation,  crime  and  punishment.  All  treat
of  status  and  contract,  of  things  and  obligations,  etc.  But
suppose  that,  after  drawing  up  your  table  of  contents,  you
proceed  to  define  law  and  right  or  property  or  crime  ?  You
will  not  only  find  that  many  of  your  colleagues  disagree
with  you— this  is  inevitable  in  any  case — but  it  will  be
difficult  to  deny  that  the  ideas  of  the  Greeks  about  justice
as  the  end  of  law,  or  the  Roman  conception  of  absolute
property  (dominium)  or  the  view  of  Canonists  as  to  crime
and  sin,  do  not  coincide  with  the  teaching  of  modern  jurists
and  are  not  likely  to  coincide  with  the  doctrines  of  their
probable  successors.1

There  is  bound  to  be  more  substantial  agreement  as
IMEEKEL,  Juristische  Encyclopadie  (1885),  par,  35.


VIII:  MODERN  TENDENCIES  OF  JURISPRUDENCE 155

regards  methods  of  legal  thought  in  so  far  as  these  rest
on  an  application  of  logic,  because  formal  logic  is  built  upon
universally  accepted  rules  as  to  operations  of  reasoning.
But  in  this  department  also,  all  the  technical  elements  sup-
plied by  positive  law  as  regards  rules  of  presumption,  of
proof,  of  relevancy,  of  pleading,  etc.,  will  be  "municipal"
or  relative  and  not  universal  or  absolute.  To  sum  up,  the
"general  jurisprudence "  of  the  nineteenth  century  can
hardly  stand  for  anything  else  than  an  encyclopaedic  survey
of  the  juridical  principles  of  individualistic  society.  In
this  sense  it  deserves  full  attention,  because  it  expresses  the
tendency  of  the  legal  mind  to  co-ordinate  and  to  harmonize
its  concepts  into  a  coherent  and  reasonable  whole  on  a  given
basis — the  basis  of  individualism.

Dogmatic  or,  as  people  generally  say  in  England,  ana-  Legal  his
lytical  jurisprudence  cannot  claim  to  be  more  absolute  in  its  historical
tenets  than  the  other  departments  of  social  science.  It  is
conditioned  by  circumstances  and  therefore  historical  in  its
essence.  But,  of  course,  the  term  "circumstances"  may
mean  different  things.  It  may  point  to  the  ever-flowing
course  of  actual  history.  In  this  case  the  most  important
features  of  the  development  have  to  be  selected  from  the
sequence  of  innumerable  events  by  the  legal  historian.  But
the  aim  may  also  be  to  trace  the  life  of  juridical  ideas  in
their  action  and  reaction  on  conditions,  and  for  that
purpose  the  student  of  historical  jurisprudence  has  to  group
his  material  in  accordance  with  the  divisions  and  relations
of  ideas  rather  than  with  dates.  In  other  words,  the  order
followed  by  legal  history  is  chronological ;  that  followed  by
historical  jurisprudence  is  ideological.  The  significance  of
human  evolution  consists  in  the  fact  that  such  ideal  lines
can  be  traced  in  its  progress :  the  saying,  vis  consilii  expers
mole  ruit  sua,  does  not  apply  to  it.

The  problem  set  to  scientific  method  is  how  to  utilize  that
characteristic  feature  of  human  evolution.  Certain  indica-
tions in  this  respect  may  be  gathered  from  recent  attempts
in  the  study  of  political  economy,  which,  as  I  have  already
had  occasion  to  remark,  stands  for  obvious  reasons  in  the
forefront  of  social  research.  After  passing  through  the


156 INTRODUCTION: PART  II: METHODS  AND  SCHOOLS

stages  of  abstract  deduction  and  of  vague  historical  syn-
thesis, it  has  entered  at  present  into  a  stage  of  intensive
co-operation  between  the  two.

Interesting  suggestions  have  been  made  which  have  a
wider  bearing  than  the  solution  of  purely  economic  pro-
blems. For  instance,  in  a  series  of  articles  on  the  historical
school  in  economics,  as  founded  by  Roscher  and  Knies,  Max
Weber  pleads  for  a  study  of  types  of  economic  develop-
ment.1

As  an  illustration  of  the  manner  in  which  the  methodical
principle  of  what  may  be  called  an  ideological  study  of
types  may  be  applied,  we  may  refer  to  K.  Biicher's  contri-
butions towards  a  theory  of  economic  stages.2

The  use  of  the  ideological  method  undoubtedly  presents
great  difficulties  and  dangers :  it  is  especially  open  to  attack
on  the  part  of  professional  historians  accustomed  to  the
critical  study  of  sources  and  to  the  ranging  of  facts  within
exact  limits  of  time  and  place.  Biicher's  generalizations
have,  as  a  matter  of  fact,  called  forth  very  sharp  objections
from  a  leading  historian,  Edward  Meyer.3

But  this  seems  to  be  a  case  when  du  choc  des  opinions
jaillit  la  vcrite.  If  the  besetting  dangers  are  realized,  it  is
not  impossible  to  steer  clear  of  them,  and  in  any  case,  even
if  some  of  the  diagrammatic  simplifications  may  have
to  be  materially  supplemented,  their  sharply  cut  for-
mulas will  have  served  a  useful  purpose  by  concentrating
thought  and  starting  it  on  fresh  tracks.  Quite  apart  from
methodological  speculation,  we  can  point  to  a  certain
number  of  works  that  have  played  such  a  part  in  the  litera-
ture of  social  science.  Fustel  de  Coulanges'  Cite  Antique
may  be  cited  as  a  case  in  point.  The  deduction  of  all  the
details  of  civic  life  from  ancestor  worship  is  a  palpable
exaggeration  of  one  aspect  of  ancient  culture:  it  leads  to
a  distorted  perspective  of  the  interplay  of  social  functions.
And  yet  there  is  hardly  a  book  among  the  innumerable

1  Roscher  und  Knies (  SCHMOLLEB'S  Jahrliicher  fiir  Gesetzgebung,
Verwaltung  und  Volkswirtschaft  im  deutschen  Reich,  xxviii  [1903]).

2  Entwickelung  der  Volksioirtschaft,  pp.  102,  103

s  Kleine  Schriften  zur  Geschichtstheorie  und  zur  wirtschaftlichen
und  politischen  Geschichte  des  Altertums  (1910).


VIII:  MODERN  TENDENCIES  OF  JURISPRUDENCE 157

works  on  classical  antiquities  that  brings  home  in  such
a  powerful  manner  the  typical  grouping  of  the  classical
household  and  its  bearing  on  social  arrangements.

On  a  more  extensive  scale  the  same  estimate  may  be
applied  to  Mommsen's  grand  construction  of  Roman  con-
stitutional law  around  the  idea  of  the  imperium:  it  is
also  too  forcible  a  simplification  of  a  very  complicated  set
of  facts,  but  who  can  deny  that  the  energetic  elaboration
of  the  dominant  idea  has  illumined  a  maze  of  details  with
a  directive  light?

How  are  we  to  apply  these  methodological  considera-  stages  and

rypGS  or

tions  ft)  a  systematic  treatment  of  historical  jurisprudence  ?
It  seems  to  me  that  the  clue  is  to  be  found  in  the  very
attempts  to  build  up  a  general  jurisprudence  for  civilized
mankind.  Such  attempts  have  turned  out  to  be  in  truth
constructions  of  a  typical  jurisprudence  on  individualistic
lines.  Taken  in  this  sense  they  are  justified  and  worthy
of  careful  attention.  They  represent  a  concentration  of
the  leading  juridical  principles  in  various  departments  of
law  round  a  central  conception  derived  from  the  nature  of
the  social  tie — that  of  co-ordination  of  individual  wills.
Recent  discussions  make  it  abundantly  clear  that  if  indi-
vidualistic civilization  were  to  give  way  before  one  based
on  a  socialistic  conception  of  the  social  tie,  all  the  positions
of  jurisprudence  would  have  to  be  reconsidered.  Nor  is  it
doubtful  that  our  individualistic  jurisprudence  has  estab-
lished its  predominance  after  a  prolonged  struggle  with
feudal  and  theocratic  conceptions  derived  from  the  social
ties  of  human  fidelity  and  of  Divine  guidance.  Looking
still  further  back,  we  may  discern  a  great  period  of  civiliza-
tion in  which  the  type  of  jurisprudence  was  settled  by  the
social  tie  of  city  life.  Previously  to  the  antique  no\iS,  we
have  the  records  -of  tribal  arrangements :  they  did  not  result
in  philosophical  abstractions,  but  their  unity  and  dialectical
conferences  can  be  sufficiently  established  in  all  direc-
tions.1 And  let  us  note  that  even  a  more  primitive  typical
concentration  of  totemistic  society  has  been  discovered  by

i  Essays  in  Legal  History,  ed.  by  P.  Vinogradoff,  p.  10.


158 INTRODUCTION:  PART  II:  METHODS  AND  SCHOOLS

anthropological  science,  and  has  to  a  certain  extent  been
subjected  to  a  systematic  treatment  as  a  social  type,1  though,
naturally,  there  is  not  much  technical  law  at  that  stage.  It
might  be  tempting  to  tabulate  the  typical  constructions  of
historical  jurisprudence  in  the  following  manner :

1.  Origins  in  Totemistic  Society.

2.  Tribal  Law.

3.  Civic  Law.

4.  Mediasval  Law  in  its  combination  as  Canon  and  Feudal

Law.

5.  Individualistic  jurisprudence.

6.  Beginnings  of  socialistic  jurisprudence.

Such  a  scheme  does  not  attempt  to  cover  the  whole  ground.
It  leaves  aside  important  variations,  such  as  the  juridical
systems  of  Brahmanism,  of  Islam,  of  the  Talmud.  It  is
restricted  in  the  main  to  the  evolution  of  juridical  ideas
within  the  circle  of  European  civilization.  Yet  in
tracing  earlier  stages  it  is  bound  to  take  into  account
materials  collected  by  anthropological  inquiries  from  a
wider  range,  in  fact  from  all  inhabited  parts  of  the  world.
Only  by  this  means  can  the  complicated  problems  of  early
society  be  approached  with  any  hope  of  solution.  As  the
treatment  is  bound  to  be  ideological  and  not  chronological,
the  very  important  facts  of  Roman  Law  will  have  to  be
considered  under  various  points  of  view — they  help
us  to  understand  not  only  the  civic  state  of  the  republican
period,  but  also  the  archaic  rules  of  Tribal  law  on  the  one
hand,  and  the  individualistic  jurisprudence  of  the  Empire
on  the  other.  This  subject  has  received  so  much  attention
from  the  point  of  view  both  of  legal  history  and  of  dog-
matic study,  that  it  is  not  difficult  to  arrange  it  on  the
lines  of  historical  jurisprudence.  A  more  difficult  problem
is  presented  by  Mediaeval  Law.  It  might  be  theoretically
correct  to  oppose  as  extreme  contrasts  feudal  jurisprudence,
based  ultimately  on  the  economy  of  the  manor,  and  the
world-wide  expansion  claimed  for  Divine  guidance  of
i  For  example,  by  DURKHEIM,  Elementary  forms  of  religious  life.


VIII:  MODERN  TENDENCIES  OF  JURISPRUDENCE 159

Canon  Law.  The  sources  of  the  two  systems  are  undoubt-
edly distinct  and  to  a  great  extent  antagonistic.  But  it  is
not  a  mere  accident  that  the  two  laws — the  feudal  and  the
Canon — are  found  growing  on  the  same  soil.  Their  dual-
ism is  the  necessary  consequence  of  their  extreme  one-
sidedness.  Feudal  law  has  too  narrow  and  Canon  too  wide
a  basis :  one  starts  from  the  estate  and  the  other  from  man-
kind. Even  technically  the  one  cannot  exist  without  being
supplemented  by  the  other.  Feudal  law  has  not  attempted
to  develop  a  theory  of  justice,  of  equity,  of  crime.  On  the
other  hand,  the  Church  has  not  worked  out  a  system  of  land
law  or  of  status.  In  certain  fields — like  family  law,  suc-
cession, contract,  corporation, — the  two  influences  meet  in
conflict  and  in  compromise.  It  would  be  impossible  to  do
justice  to  this  important  period  of  juridical  thought  and
activity  by  separating  these  divergent  elements  of  the  real
world  or  by  trying  to  effect  a  complete  construction  of  the
juridical  system  on  the  strength  of  either  one  or  the  other
taken  by  itself.  There  is  nothing  left  but  to  treat  of  them
in  conjunction.

So  much  as  an  explanation  of  my  scheme. In  conclusion
I  should  like  to  submit  two  considerations  which  have  to  be

.  treatment.

borne  in  mind  by  any  one  who  wishes  to  follow  an  attempt
to  sketch  a  historical  jurisprudence  on  the  above-mentioned
lines.  When  we  treat  of  facts  and  doctrines  in  ideological
order  we  do  not  mean  for  a  moment  to  deny  or  to  disregard
the  conditions — geographical,  ethnological,  political,  cul-
tural— which  have  determined  the  actual  course  of  events.
Ideas  do  not  entirely  get  their  own  way  in  real  life ;  they  are
embodied  in  facts,  and  these  latter  appear  influenced  largely
by  material  necessities  and  forces.  It  is  not  without  impor-
tance for  the  development  of  legal  principles  whether  the
atmosphere  surrounding  them  is  that  of  a  pastoral,  an  agri-
cultural, or  an  industrial  community ;  it  is  certainly  of  im-
portance for  public  and  private  law  whether  a  nation  is
living  an  independent  life  or  has  had  to  submit  to  con-
quest, etc.  In  a  word,  the  chronological  process  of  history
cannot  fail  to  affect  the  ideological  deductions  from  a  social
type.  We  are  bound,  therefore,  to  make  due  allowance  for


160 INTRODUCTION:  PART  II:  METHODS  AND  SCHOOLS

the  various  cross-currents  produced  by  actual  condi-
tions.

The  second  consideration  is  equally  obvious,  but  perhaps
even  more  difficult  to  put  into  practice.  In  constructing  a
typical  theory  of  jurisprudence  we  are  bound  to  present
rules  and  institutions  in  a  state  of  logical  coherence  and
harmony,  to  establish  a  certain  equilibrium  between  con-
flicting tendencies,  to  apportion  rival  claims  as  normal  or
exceptional,  in  a  word,  to  consider  jurisprudence  from  a
static  point  of  view.  But  then  there  is  the  dynamic  one;
ideas'  are  mobile  entities,  passing  through  various  stages —
indistinct  beginnings,  gradual  differentiation,  struggles  and
compromises,  growth  and  decay.  It  is  not  easy  to  do
justice  equally  to  both  aspects  of  the  process,  and  each
individual  worker  will  necessarily  pay  more  attention  to
one  or  to  the  other.  But  we  need  not  feel  concerned  about
the  ultimate  outcome  of  such  more  or  less  inevitable  limi-
tations :  the  necessary  corrections  and  synthesis  are  sure  to
be  achieved  by  workers  coming  from  different  sides  and  con-
verging towards  a  common  aim.

The  essential  point  is  to  recognize  the  value  of  historical
types  as  the  foundation  of  a  theory  of  law.


PART  I
THE  ELEMENTS  OF  THE  FAMILY


2231


CHAPTER  I
SELECTION  OF  MATES

HISTORICAL  jurisprudence,  as  well  as  sociology,  has  to  Marital
start  from  the  axiom  that  man  is  a  social  animal


,  i.e.  that  social  intercourse  is  a  necessary  at-
tribute of  human  nature.  We  need  not  repeat  what  has
been  admirably  stated  on  the  subject  by  Aristotle.  Let  us
only  take  notice  of  the  fact  that  tribal  arrangements  are
the  first  application  of  this  dogma.  Ethnology  and
history  describe  numberless  tribes:  yet,  in  spite  of  all  the
variety  of  institutions  and  customs  that  pass  before
us,  one  fundamental  feature  asserts  itself  in  all  cases,  —
the  fact  that  the  earliest  tribal  moulds  of  society  are  based
on  conceptions  of  relationship  and  are  derived  from  some
form  of  family  organization.  As  society  expands,  imagina-
tion, fiction,  and  artificial  construction  supplement  and
modify  the  natural  ties  of  tribal  life,  but  the  notion  at  the
root  of  all  these  excrescences  is  the  notion  of  organic  rela-
tionship.

Our  survey  therefore  has  to  start  from  a  study  of  the
marital  union  as  the  initial  institution  which  brings  human
beings  together  and  provides  for  the  growth  of  society.
Whatever  else  men  may  become  as  tribesmen,  citizens,  land-
owners, traders,  craftsmen,  they  are  bound  to  be  the  off-
spring of  some  kind  of  union  between  a  father  and  a
mother,  and  the  circumstances  and  conditions  of  such
unions  necessarily  react  on  all  the  other  sides  of  social
organization  —  on  kinship,  succession,  property,  social
status,  etc.

In  considering  the  evidence  as  to  the  forms  and  rules  of
primitive  unions,  let  us  bear  in  mind  that  even  now,  in  our
civilized  society,  marriage  is  a  very  complex  institution,  not
to  be  explained  by  one  or  the  other  ruling  idea,  but  repre-
senting a  synthesis  of  several  :  consequently,  it  cannot  give

163


164 TRIBAL  LAW:  PART  I:  ELEMENTS  OF  THE  FAMILY

rise  to  one  perfectly  logical  set  of  rules.  It  is  not  only  an
institution  regulating  sexual  intercourse,  and  kept  up  by
conjugal  affection,  but  also  an  arrangement  for  the  bringing
up  of  children  and  a  partnership  for  economic  ends  and
social  co-operation.  Sometimes  one  side  and  sometimes
another  predominates.  Married  people  who  have  long
ceased  to  care  for  each  other  keep  up  the  family  tie  for
the  sake  of  their  children;  considerations  as  to  well-being
and  social  standing,  rather  than  sentimental  motives,  are
often  decisive  as  regards  the  formation  of  the  union.  No
wonder  that,  even  within  the  memory  of  modern  genera-
tions, great  changes  have  occurred  in  the  framing  of  the
law  on  the  subject  under  the  pressure  of  one  or  the  other
social  force.  In  technical  law,  we  can  point  out  some  very
recent  changes  in  the  institution  of  marriage.  Witness,  for
example,  the  great  alterations  effected  in  English  Law  as
to  the  property  rights  of  married  women  in  the  course  of
the  nineteenth  century,  or  the  transition  from  the  sacra-
mental indissolubility  of  marriage  in  the  law  of  the  Church
to  the  treatment  of  marriage  as  a  civil  institution  under  the
control  of  the  Courts.

If,  in  addition  to  this,  one  steps  aside  for  a  moment  from
the  main  track  of  European  civilization  and  considers,  for
example,  the  polygamy  allowed  in  the  Mohammedan  world,
two  considerations  seem  to  suggest  themselves  at  the  very
outset  of  our  inquiry :

1.  It  is  evident  that  marital  union  is  a  highly  malleable
institution ;

2.  It  is  very  improbable  that  one  rigid  course  was  fol-
lowed by  mankind  in  the  historical  development  of  mar-
riage law.

ofhtheies  ^  insist  on  the  second  consideration  even  more  than  on

of°mai-on the  ^rst'  because  it  nas  been  often  and  recently  disregarded

riage.  by  some  of  the  principal  writers  on  the  subject. Not  to

mention  minor  variations,  there  are  now  two  diametrically

opposed  views  as  to  the  evolution  of  marriage. According

to one set of thinkers, such as Bachofen, McLennan,

Morgan,  Kohler,  and  Frazer,  the  monogamous  marriage  of

modern  European  civilization  is  the  outcome  of  a  slow


I:  SELECTION  OF  MATES  165

progress  starting  from  a  state  of  sexual  promiscuity  or
from  irregular  unions,  which,  according  to  some  of  these
writers,  gave  way  to  group  unions,  the  men  of  a  group  be-
ing recognized  as  the  husbands  of  a  corresponding  group.
Then  comes  a  stage  when  families  emerged  from  the  group,
families  centred  round  the  mothers,  who  gathered  their
children  about  them,  but  maintained  only  loose  unions  with
the  fathers  of  these  children.  Then  the  patriarchal  system,
with  the  predominance  of  the  male  as  chief  of  the  house-
hold, made  its  appearance  and  paved  the  way  for  the
monogamic  marriage  to  which  we  are  accustomed  nowa-
days.1

In  sharp  contrast  with  this  sketch  of  development  stands
another  scheme,  outlined  lately  by  Westermarck,  Atkinson,
and  A.  Lang.  It  starts  from  the  position  that  primitive
man,  as  well  as  the  higher  apes,  was  "patriarchal"  through
sexual  jealousy  and  the  instinct  of  appropriation.  We  have
thus  to  start  not  from  a  state  of  sexual  promiscuity,  but
from  individual  pairing:  the  male  might  acquire  several
wives  when  he  had  a  chance,  but  he  jealously  guarded  his
mates  against  possible  competitors.  The  ' '  Cyclopaean  fam-
ily/* as  Mr.  Lang  terms  it,  was  built  up  on  the  despotic
sway  of  the  sire  over  his  wives  and  children,  which  in-
volved the  emigration  of  the  younger  males,  who  thereby  be-
came exogamous,  that  is,  had  to  seek  for  mates  outside  their
home.  It  is  only  by  slow  stages  that  these  "patriarchal"
methods  gave  way  before  more  complex  arrangements.2

1  See, e.g., KOHLEB, Zur Urgeschichte der Ehe, 1897; GIBAUD
TEULON,  Origines  du  mariage  et  de  la  famille,  1884;  M.  KOVALEVSKY,
Tableau  du  de"veloppement  de  la  famille  et  de  la  propriete,  1887.

2  WESTERMARCK,  History  of  Human  Marriage,  2nd  ed., 1894; A.
LANG,  Social  Origins,  and  ATKINSON,  Primal  Law, 1903. The  Cy-
clopaean theory  is  well  summarized  by  Mr N W.  THOMAS,  Kinship
Organization  and  Group  Marriage  in  Australia (1906),  p.  64:  "At
the  point  in  the  evolution  of  the  human  race  at  which  Mr.  Atkinson
takes  up  his  tale,  man,  or  rather  zoanthropos,  was,  according  to  his
conjecture,  organized,  if  that  term  can  be  applied  to  the  grouping
of the lower  animals, in bodies  consisting  of  one  adult  male,  an
attendant  horde  of  adult  females,  including,  probably,  at  any  rate
after  a  certain  lapse  of  time,  his  own  progeny,  together  with  the
immature  offspring  of both sexes. As  the  young  males came to
maturity,  they  would  be  expelled  from  the  herd,  as  is  actually  the
case  with  cattle  and  other  mammals,  by  their  sire,  now  become  their
foe."


166 TRIBAL  LAW:  PART  I:  ELEMENTS  OF  THE  FAMILY

arrange-0* Remembering  to  what  extent  solutions  of  the  marriage
meats.  problems  vary  nowadays,  shall  we  admit  as  likely  that

either  one  or  the  other  line  of  development  sketched  above
was  the  sole  highroad  of  evolution  for  all  human  tribes,
whether  scattered  in  the  icy  plains  of  the  Arctic  circle  or
clustering  round  the  streams  and  wells  of  the  desert,
whether  roaming  over  the  prairie  pastures  or  perched  in
the  recesses  of  some  mountain  range?  Considering  the
immense  variety  of  conditions  in  ancient  times,  it  is  im-
probable that  any  exclusive  theory  will  be  true  in  all  cases.
We  grant  that  there  is  some  evidence  that  the  institution  of
marriage  may  start  from  isolated  pairs.  A  case  which  looks
very  significant  in  this  respect  is  that  of  the  Veddas  of
Ceylon;  they  wander  through  the  forests  in  monogamous
pairs,  with  their  children  and  dogs,  the  father  exercising  a
strong  control  over  a  small  patriarchal  household.1  This
is  certainly  an  instance  of  primitive  isolation,  and  there
are  many  other  cases  in  which  the  tendency  is  the  same — as,
for  instance,  in  great  forest-lands,  where  the  population
naturally  spreads  out  in  isolated  homesteads.  But  is  the
soil  favourable  for  such  arrangements  where  the  population
is  drawn  together  by  the  influence  of  natural  environments
— for  instance,  by  the  scarcity  of  water,  or  by  mass  hunting
and  mass  fishing?2  Under  such  conditions  human  be-
ings naturally  tend  to  congregate  round  water-courses,
and  gregarious  instincts  are  bound  to  assert  themselves.  In
these  cases  it  would  be  difficult  if  not  impossible  to  arrange
families  on  the  Cyclopsean  pattern.  Witness,  for  example,
the  communistic  practices  among  the  Indians  of  North
America,  or  the  Malayans,  who  are  sometimes  gathered  to-
gether in  communal  houses  one  hundred  and  fifty  feet  or
more  in  length.3  We  must  be  prepared  to  find  materials
for  different  forms  of  the  marriage  institution,  as  well  as
for  the  feelings  and  customs  which  naturally  accompany


iC.  G.  and  B.  Z.  SELIQMAN,  The  Veddas (1911).

2  See,  e.g.,  C.  WISSLER,  American  Indians.

3  FALLAIZE  in  HASTINGS'S  Encyclopaedia  of  Religion  and  Ethics,
1917: C. HOSE  and W. McDouGALL, The Pagan Tribes  of  Borneo
(1912),  pp.  50-2; HiLL-TouT,  British  North  America,  I,  p.  51.


I:  SELECTION  OF  MATES  167

these  elements.  This  is  not  more  strange  than  the  fact  that
the  harem  and  the  Christian  household  exist  side  by  side
at  the  present  day.

This  being  so,  we  shall  not  attempt  to  trace  one  line  of  Sle!nf ?i\ai
normal  and  continuous  evolution  of  marriage.  We  must  unions-
begin  by  ascertaining  whether  certain  fundamental  ideas
recurring  in  various  combinations  may  be  traced  as  the
elements  of  the  institution.  If  such  elements  exist,  the
working  of  each  one  ought  to  be  analysed  as  far  as  possible
by  itself  before  the  ways  in  which  it  combines  with  other
elements  can  be  properly  studied.  The  materials  for  such
an  analysis  may  be  drawn  from  a  broad  and  comprehen-
sive collection  of  ethnological  data,  because  it  is  only  in
this  manner  that  we  can  make  sure  that  nothing  essential
has  escaped  our  observation;  the  conclusions  will  have
to  be  utilized  for  our  special  study  of  the  Aryan  tribal
system.

It  can  hardly  be  doubted  that  there  are  certain  funda-
mental ideas  which  assert  themselves  in  all  forms  of  human
marriage.  For  our  purpose  we  shall,  I  think,  have  to  con-
sider four  such  fundamental  ideas  or  elements.

1.  Marital  unions  are  the  outcome  of  sexual  selection  and
restrictions. Even  casual  intercourse  is  the  result  of  some
choice  of  mates,  and  involves  at  least  temporary  restrictions
on  other  individuals  of  the  same  species. When  more  or
less  permanent  unions  arise,  conditions  of  selection  and
restriction  become  very  important,  and  form  one  of  the
chief  elements  of  the  institution.

2.  The  second  elementary  fact  is  maternity:  although
sexual  intercourse  may  be  transitory  and  irregular, its
natural  consequences  are  not  casual,  and  it  may  be  said
that  a  mother  is  wedded  by  nature  to  her  children  even
before  she  is  wedded  by  law  to  her  husband.

3.  The  third  elementary  fact  is  supplied  by  the  physical
superiority  of  the  male,  that  enables  him  to  obtain  posses-
sion of  females,  to  treat  and  keep  them  and  their  offspring
as  subjects  to  his  rule.

4.  Every  marital  union  produces  not  only  offspring  but
relationships,  it  provides  points  of  contact  between  groups,


168 TRIBAL  LAW:  PART  I:  ELEMENTS  OF  THE  FAMILY

and  the  latter,  in  turn,  react  on  the  formation  and  regu-
larization  of  marital  unions.

nymopfex"  One  or  two  preliminary  observations  have  to  be  made

culture!*  before  we  proceed  to  make  use  of  the  vast  material  pro-
vided by  ethnographical  research.  Caution  has  to  be  exer-
cised in  our  treatment  of  these  data — especially  in  two
directions.  To  begin  with,  it  must  be  borne  in  mind  that
the  expressions,  primitive  culture,  primitive  society,  com-
monly used  by  anthropologists  and  ethnologists,  are  apt  to
be  misleading:  they  are  often  taken  to  mean  a  state  of
things  bordering  on  the  condition  of  animals  and  almost
undetermined  by  specific  social  habits  or  institutions.  Yet
such  a  state  of  things  is  not  to  be  found  anywhere  on  the
surface  of  the  earth,  for  the  simple  reason  that  the  human
race  has  been  in  existence  for  scores  of  thousands  of  years,
so  that  even  representatives  of  the  rudest  forms  of  civiliza-
tion, say  the  natives  of  the  Terra  del  Fuego,  or  the  extinct
aborigines  of  Tasmania,  have  had  an  exceedingly  long  series
of  generations  and  large  stores  of  customs  and  inherited
instincts,  complicated  by  various  influences  from  outside,
behind  their  present  moral  and  social  order.  They
may  be  living  in  the  conditions  of  the  Palaeolithic  age  as  far
as  their  arts  and  crafts  are  concerned,  and  their  ideas  and
morals  may  be  correspondingly  distant  from  our  own,  but,
in  a  sense,  their  " boomerang"  culture  is  the  product  of  the
accumulated  experience  of  generations,  quite  as  much  as
our  "steam  engine"  culture.  Heredity  and  adaptation
have  stamped  it  with  peculiar  traits  which  may  be  as
difficult  to  imitate  or  to  modify  as  in  the  case  of  modern
European  culture.  It  is  only  by  realizing  this  funda-
mental truth  that  one  comes  to  understand  certain  striking
facts  of  ethnology — for  example,  the  rapid  dying  out  of
many  aboriginal  nations  when  they  come  into  contact  with
European  settlers  or  traders.  Even  apart  from  the  ruth-
less methods  of  conquist adores  and  from  the  ravages  of
imported  diseases,  native  tribes  disappear  because  they  are
unable  to  accommodate  their  definitely  stamped  habits  of
life  to  new  requirements  and  new  conditions.  Another
result  of  the  same  process  of  specialization  may  be  noticed
in  the  exceedingly  complicated  institutions  that  may  arise


I:  SELECTION  OF  MATES  169

in  the  life  of  ' '  savage ' '  tribes  by  the  side  of  the  most  rudi-
mentary forms  of  husbandry  and  political  arrangement:
witness  the  confusing  ramifications  of  sexual  taboos  and
matrimonial  classes  in  Australia  and  among  the  North
American  Indians.  These  remarks  do  not  mean,  of  course,
that  there  is  no  difference  in  quality  and  quantity  between
the  social  lore  of  the  Hottentots  and  the  arts  of  European
nations,  but  rather  that  the  lore  of  the  Hottentots  is  the
organic  product  of  ages  and  therefore  follows  peculiar  lines
of  evolution  that  cannot  simply  be  wiped  off  the  slate  or
treated  as  "passed  viewpoints"  that  have  to  make  room
for  something  more  advanced  and  perfect.

Another  qualifying  proposition  must  be  derived  from  Migra-
observations  of  an  exactly  opposite  kind.  However  much  customs,
we  may  allow  to  the  formation  of  distinctive  psychological
and  social  peculiarities  of  human  races  and  tribes,  this
moulding  of  national  types  is  counterbalanced  in  history  by
various  processes  of  mixture  and  imitation.  It  would  be
unnecessary  to  dwell  on  the  important  results  of  conquest,
of  emigration,  of  intermarriage,  of  economic  penetration;
they  are  sufficiently  illustrated  by  common  experience.  It
is  less  realized,  however,  that  the  transmission  and  "recep-
tion" of  devices  and  institutions  of  all  kinds  is  constantly
modifying  the  course  of  social  evolution  in  all  its  stages.
It  is  not  only  Roman  law,  the  printing  press,  and  firearms
that  have  wandered  through  the  world  and  been  accepted
by  representatives  of  the  most  varied  cultures:  systems  of
script,  funeral  by  cremation,  the  erection  of  megalithic
monuments,  may  also  be  cited  as  cases  in  point.  Archaeolo-
gists and  ethnologists  have  been  very  active  lately  in  show-
ing the  remarkable  currents  of  cultural  influence  running
across  the  continents  of  the  Old  World  or  across  the  Pacific
Ocean.1

Hence  there  arose  a  very  important  complication  in  trac-
ing the  ways  and  methods  of  evolutionist  study.  Instead  of
looking  out  chiefly  for  the  natural  correspondences  between
social  results  and  environment,  investigators  have  had  to

iG.  ELLIOT  SMITH,  The  Migrations  of  Early  Culture  (Manches-
ter, Memoirs,  vol  lix,  no.  10,  1915)  ;  Primitive  Man,  in  Proceedings
of  British  Academy,  VII  (off-print),  pp.  37  ff.  Cf.  RIVERS,  Social
History  of  Melanesia.


170 TRIBAL  LAW: PART  I: ELEMENTS  OF  THE  FAMILY

take  careful  stock  of  the  possible  transmissions  from
abroad.  All  attempts  at  solving  social  problems  either
with  the  help  of  the  one  clue  of  adaptation  or
the  one  clue  of  imitation  are  sure  to  lead  to  one-sided
systems:  if  one  may  be  allowed  a  somewhat  unusual  com-
parison, the  safe  has  to  be  unlocked  with  two  keys.  How
and  when  each  of  these  keys  is  to  be  used,  is  a  delicate
question  that  must  be  decided  in  accordance  not  with  an
abstract  formula,  but  with  the  actual  evidence  in  each  con-
crete case.  Such  difficulties  are  indeed  familiar  to  the
unprejudiced  social  student,  and  there  is  nothing  for  it
but  to  meet  them  with  patience  and  attention  to  details.
One  guiding  principle  may,  however,  be  pointed  out  even
at  this  stage.  It  is  clear  that  the  more  artificial  and  com-
plicated the  affinities  between  compared  cases  come  to  be,
the  more  likelihood  there  is  that  the  resemblance  has  been
reached  by  influence  or  transmission.  Migrations  of  words,
of  technical  processes,  of  complicated  institutions  like  re-
presentative government,  are  easily  traceable  in  most  cases.
On  the  other  hand,  it  seems  against  common  sense  to
resort  to  the  suggestion  of  imitation  in  order  to  explain
the  solution  of  simple  and  pressing  problems  of  life ;  and
the  view  that  " inventions  are  made  only  once"  may  be
grossly  inappropriate  in  such  cases.  It  is  not  necessary  to
look  out  for  a  foreign  teacher  in  order  to  explain  the  build-
ing of  shelters,  or  the  construction  of  a  boat,  or  the  use  of
bows  and  arrows,  or  the  discovery  of  the  domestic  proper-
ties of  fire,  or  the  rules  of  sexual  avoidance,  though  in
some  instances  each  of  these  devices  may  disclose  peculiari-
ties suggestive  of  importation  from  abroad.  These  remarks
may  be  sufficient  as  a  preliminary  warning  against  one-
sided theories.  It  is  now  time  to  survey  the  actual  field
of  the  inquiry,
unstable  As  it  is  of  course  impossible  for  us  to  obtain  evidence  as

unions.

to  the  beginning  of  time,  we  cannot  say  with  certainty
whether  there  has  ever  been  a  definite  period  of  sexual
promiscuity.  What  we  can  say  is  that  in  no  society  that  we
know  of  at  the  present  day  or  in  well-recorded  history,  are
the  relations  of  the  sexes  marked  by  complete  and  unre-


I: SELECTION  OF  MATES  171

strained  promiscuity.  On  the  other  hand,  in  a  number  of
cases  unions  between  the  sexes  are  certainly  unstable:
sexual  passion  may  assert  itself  occasionally  without  much
restraint  and  lead  to  shifting  unions  between  persons  of  the
two  sexes,  while  in  other  cases  the  instinct  of  jealous  appro-
priation makes  itself  felt  in  attempts  on  the  part  of  the
strong  partner  to  ensure  the  exclusive  possession  of  wives.
Which  of  the  two  tendencies  obtains  the  upper  hand  for  a
time  depends  largely  on  material  circumstances — the  scat-
tering of  the  tribe  over  a  large  tract  of  territory,  or  its
concentration  for  a  festival  or  a  hunting  expedition.  "The
life  of  the  Australian  societies  passes  alternately  through
two  distinct  phases.  Sometimes  the  population  is  broken
up  into  little  groups  who  wander  about  independently  of
one  another,  in  their  various  occupations ;  each  family  lives
by  itself,  hunting  and  fishing,  and  in  a  word  trying  to
procure  its  indispensable  food  by  all  the  means  in  its
power.  Sometimes,  on  the  contrary,  the  population  con-
centrates and  gathers  at  determined  points  for  a  length
of  time  varying  from  several  days  to  several  months.  This
concentration  takes  place  when  a  clan  or  a  part  of  the  tribe
is  summoned  to  the  gathering,  and  on  this  occasion  they
celebrate  a  religious  ceremony,  or  else  hold  what  is  called  a
corrobbori  in  the  usual  ethnological  language.

"These  two  phases  are  contrasted  with  one  another  in  the
sharpest  way.  .  .  .  The  dispersed  condition  in  which  the
society  finds  itself  results  in  making  its  life  uniform,  lan-
guishing and  dull.  But  when  a  corrobbori  takes  place
everything  changes.  .  .  .  The  very  fact  of  the  concentra-
tion acts  as  an  exceptionally  powerful  stimulant.  .  .  .  They
are  so  far  removed  from  their  ordinary  conditions  of  life
.  .  .  that  they  feel  that  they  must  set  themselves  outside
of  and  above  their  ordinary  morals.  The  sexes  unite  con-
trarily  to  the  rules  governing  sexual  relations.  Men  ex-
change wives  with  each  other.  Sometimes  even  incestuous
unions  which  in  normal  times  are  thought  abominable  are
now  contracted  openly  and  with  impunity."  *

i  DURKHEIM,  The  Elementary  Forms  of  the  Religious  Life,  transl.
by  W.  Swain,  pp.  215  ff.  Cf.  Sir  H,  H,  RISLEY,  Tribes  and  Castes


172 TRIBAL  LAW:  PART  I:  ELEMENTS  OF  THE  FAMILY

It  would  be  wrong  to  regard  the  erotic  manifestations  of
tribe  orgies  as  something  exceptional  and  subordinate  in
the  life  of  a  primitive  people :  they  give  vent  to  one  of  the
most  powerful  instincts  of  human  nature  and,  as  Durkheim
rightly  points  out,  they  constitute  a  necessary  element  of
the  social  and  religious  psychology  of  savage  tribes.  In
a  more  specialized  form  the  sexual  passion  appears  in
connection  with  phallic  cults,  which  to  millions  of  men
represent  the  most  striking  manifestations  of  the  life  of
Nature.1

The  same  root  idea  is  apparent  in  the  sexual  licence  of
boys  and  girls  at  the  age  of  puberty,  which  may  lead  to  the
concentration  of  these  explosive  persons  in  separate
barracks.2

Such  practices,  in  their  universal  spread,  show  conclu-
sively how  little  our  ideas  of  chastity,  fidelity,  and  jealousy
fit  in  with  the  indistinct  notions  of  savages  as  to  these
matters.  The  elaborate  arguments  of  Westermarck  and
Malinowski  in  favour  of  the  patriarchal  family  and  of
individual  unions  supported  by  mutual  affection  seem  at


of  Bengal,  II,  p.  233:  "The  principal  festival  of  the  Santals  is  the
sohrai  or  harvest  festival  celebrated  in  the  month  of  Posh  (November-
December),  after  the  chief  rice  crop  of  the  year  has  been  got  in.
Public  sacrifices  of  fowls  are  offered  by  the  priest  in  the  sacred
grove;  pigs,  goats  and  fowls  are  sacrificed  by  private  families,  and
a  general  saturnalia  of  drunkenness  and  debauchery  prevails.  Chas-
tity is  in  abeyance  for  the  time,  and  all  unmarried  persons  may
indulge  in  promiscuous  intercourse.  This  licence,  however,  does
not  extend  to  adultery,  nor  does  it  cover  intercourse  between  persons
of  the  same  clan,  though  even  that  offence  committed  during  the
harvest  festival  is  punished  less  severely  than  at  other  times."

Cf.  Miss  CZAPLICKA,  Aboriginal  Siberia  (1914),  p.  293,  on  the
exchange  of  mates  at  the  ceremonies  dedicated  to  Keretkim  the  sea
god.

1  E.g.,  the  Semitic  cults  of  Moloch  and  Astaroth  and  the  South
Indian  Dravidian  cults.

2 "  A  Naga  village  or  town  will  sometimes  contain  as  many  as
eight  or  ten  communal  houses  or  pahs,  as  they  are  called  by  some
tribes,  for  the  bachelors,  and  four  or  five  such  houses  for  the  girls.
Where  the  institution  of  these  communal  houses  exists  for  the  un-
married youth,  the  most  complete  licence  is  reported  to  prevail
between  the  sexes  up  to  the  time  of  marriage,  and  this  licence  is
not  merely  connived  at,  it  is  recognized  by  public  opinion.  No
value  is  placed  on  youthful  chastity;  sexual  morality  in  our  sense
of  the  word  only  begins  with  marriage,  but  after  marriage  infidelity
is  said  to  be  very  rare"  (FBAZER,  Totemism,  IV,  p  300).


I:  SELECTION  OF  MATES  173

least  one-sided  l  when  applied  to  these  relations,  in  which
the  most  opposite  feelings  assert  themselves  side  by  side.
On  the  other  hand,  if  we  renounce  our  accustomed  stan-
dards in  order  to  seek  a  right  understanding  of  the  origins
of  family  life,  we  shall  be  less  astonished  to  find  whole
peoples  living  in  polyandry  like  the  Todas  or  the  Tibetans,
or  practising  wife-lending  as  a  form  of  hospitality.2

In  these  cases  we  reach  another  stage  in  the  development
of  the  subject.  Instead  of  undifferentiated  origins  char-
acterized by  irregular  manifestations  of  various  tendencies
of  human  nature,  we  have  to  deal  with  relations  unfamiliar
to  us,  but  consolidated  into  regular  custom.  An  even  more
striking  case  of  customary  development  as  the  basis  of
shifting  unions  is  presented  by  the  subsidiary  unions  among
the  natives  of  Australia.8  For  instance,  "Among  the
Dieri  and  kindred  tribes  there  are  two  forms  of  marriage :
there  is  the  marriage  of  a  man  of  one  class  to  a  woman  of
the  other  class,  which  may  be  spoken  of  as  'individual
marriage,'  or  for  convenience  as  'Noa  marriage/  using  the
Dieri  term,  which  is  equivalent  to  our  word  'spouse/  There
is  also  a  marital  relation  existing  between  a  man  and  a
number  of  women,  or  between  a  woman  and  a  number  of
men,  the  same  rule  as  to  the  classes  being  observed.  This
latter  connection  may  be  spoken  of  as  'group  marriage/  or
for  convenience  the  Dieri  word  for  the  practice  may  be
used,  speaking  of  it  as  'Pirauru  marriage.'  .  .  .  Neither

1  It  is  impossible  to  present  here  a  detailed  criticism  of their
arguments,  but  I  cannot  help  entering  a  protest  against  the  singular
method  of  counting  extracts  adopted  by  Dr.  Malinowski.

2  Cf. ROBERTSON  SMITH,  Kinship  and  Marriage  in  Early  Arabia
(1885),  pp.  116-17:  "In  old  Arabia  the  husband  was  so  indifferent

to  his  wife's  fidelity,  that  he  might  send  her  to  cohabit  with  another
man  to  get  himself  a  goodly  seed;  or  might  lend  her  to  a  guest,  as
the  'Aslr  did  up  to  the  time  of  the  Wahhabites  (BURCKHARDT,
Travels  in  Arabia,  8vo  ed.,  II,  p.  378),  and  as  people  of  Dhahaban
must  once  have  done  according  to  Ibn  Al-Moghiwir's  account  (circa
A.  H.  630)  ;  or  going  on  a  journey  might  find  a  friend  to  supply
his  place,  as  the  Yftm  did  in  the  time  of  Burckhardt  (op.  tit.,  II,
p.  386 )  ;  or  might  enter  into  a  partnership  of  conjugal  rights  with
another  man,  in  return  for  his  service  as  a  shepherd,  as  we  read  in
the  Fotuh  al-Shdm,  p.  238  sq."

Cf  CBAWLEY,  The  Mystic  Rose,  p.  478.

8  N.  W.  THOMAS,  Kinship  Organization  and  Group  Marriage  in
Australia  (1906),  pp.  130-3,  136;  RIVERS  in  the  Encyclopedia  of
Religion  and  Ethics,  VIII,  pp.  427-8,


174 TRIBAL  LAW:  PART  I: ELEMENTS  OF  THE  FAMILY

of  these  two  forms  of  marriage  is  permitted  between  persons
of  the  same  totem.  .  .  .  These  also  include  the  group  rela-
tions. ...  A  man  or  a  woman  becomes  'Noa'  to  each  other
by  the  woman  being  promised  to  him  during  her  infancy
by  her  father  or  by  being  allotted  specially  to  him  as  Noa  by
the  headman  and  the  great  council  of  the  tribe.  .  .  .  Be-
sides this  Noa  marriage  there  is  also  a  form  of  group  mar-
riage which  is  called  by  the  Dieri  Pirauru  .  .  .  the  heads
of  the  totems  and  the  elder  men  meet  in  council  and  after
deliberation  determine  which  of  the  people  shall  be  allotted
to  each  other  as  Pirauru.  .  .  .  This  time  is  one  of  festivity,
feasting  and  amusement.  .  .  .  Dancing  is  carried  on,  and
besides  this  there  is  for  about  four  hours  a  general  licence
in  the  camp  as  regards  the  Piraurus.  Moreover  the  Piraurus
are,  when  allotted  to  each  other,  always  in  that  relation  in
the  future,  and  as  a  new  allotment  takes  place  at  each  cir-
cumcision ceremony  it  follows  that  a  man  or  a  woman  may
after  a  time  come  to  have  a  number  of  Piraurus.  ...  A
man  may  always  exercise  marital  rights  towards  his  Pirauru
when  they  meet  if  her  Noa  be  absent,  but  he  cannot  take
her  away  from  him  unless  by  his  consent,  excepting  at
certain  ceremonial  times  when  general  licence  prevails  be-
tween the  intermarrying  classes.  .  .  .  The  consent  of  the
Noa  husband  is  seldom  withheld  from  the  male  Pirauru. ' ' 1
There  is  a  similar  practice  among  the  Urabunna  tribe,
where  "  every  man  has  one  or  more  of  these  nupa  women
who  are  especially  attached  to  him  and  live  with  him  in
his  own  camp,  but  there  is  no  such  thing  as  one  man  having
the  exclusive  right  to  one  woman;  the  elder  brothers  or
nuthi  of  the  woman,  who  decide  the  matter,  will  give  one
man  a  preferential  right,  but  at  the  same  time  they  will
give  other  men  of  the  same  group  to  which  he  belongs —
that  is,  men  who  stand  in  the  same  relationship  to  the
woman  as  he  does — a  secondary  right,  and  such  nupa
women  to  whom  a  man  has  the  legal  right  of  access  are
spoken  of  as  his  piraungaru.  A  woman  may  be  piraungaru

i  HOWITT,  The  Dieri  and  Other  Kindred  Tribes  of  Central  Aus-
tralia, in  the  Journal  of  the  Anthropological  Institute,  XX,  no.  1
(August,  1890),  pp.  53-7.


I:  SELECTION  OF  MATES  175

to  a  number  of  men  and,  as  a  general  rule,  men  and  women
who  are  piraungaru  to  one  another  are  to  be  found  living
together  in  groups.  As  we  have  said  before,  'individual
marriage  does  not  exist  either  in  name  or  in  practice
amongst  the  Urabunna  tribe. '  In  this  tribe  we  have :

"  (1)  A  group  of  men  all  of  whom  belong  to  one  moiety
of  the  tribe  and  are  regarded  as  the  nupas,  or  possible  hus-
bands, of  a  group  of  women,  who  belong  to  the  other  moiety
of  the  tribe.

"  (2)  One  or  more  women  especially  allotted  to  one  par-
ticular man,  each  standing  in  the  relationship  of  nupa  to
the  other,  but  no  man  having  exclusive  right  to  any  one
woman — only  a  preferential  right.

"(3)  A  group  of  men  who  stand  in  the  relationship  of
piraungaru  to  a  group  of  women,  selected  from  amongst
those  to  whom  they  are  nupa.  In  other  words,  a  group  of
women  of  one  designation  have,  normally  and  actually,
marital  relations  with  a  group  of  men  of  another  desig-
nation/71

These  cases  are  described  with  special  details  and  by
good  witnesses,  but  there  are  many  other  cases  in  which
similar  features  are  recognizable  in  less  precise  notices.

If  we  renounce  for  a  moment  the  conventional  phrase-
ology of  our  own  time,  we  may  discern  in  these  primitive
relations  between  the  sexes,  some  fundamental  facts  which
are  not  altogether  unlike  some  of  the  conditions  obtaining
in  our  own  society.  These  relations  even  now  fall  into  two
sharply  contrasted  classes:  the  regular  marriage  unions
between  older  men  capable  of  supporting  a  family  and
their  somewhat  younger  wives,  and  the  irregular  unions
between  younger  men  and  a  certain  number  of  women  who
have  lost  their  standing  in  society.  Ethnology  shows
us  a  similar  dualism,  with  the  difference  that  the  regular,
more  or  less  monogynic,  unions  of  the  savages,  the  appro-
priation of  young  women  by  older  men,  is  carried  some-
times to  the  exaggerated  form  of  acquisition  of  child  wives,

i  SPENCER  and  GILLEN,  The  Northern  Tribes  of  Central  Australia,
pp.  72  sq.  Cf.  The  Native  Tribes  of  Central  Australia,  p.  64:  "A
group  of  women  of  a  certain  designation  are  actually  the  wives  of
a  group  of  men  of  another  designation."


176 TRIBAL  LAW:  PART  I:  ELEMENTS  OF  THE  FAMILY

while  the  same  importance  is  not  attached  to  continence
and  chastity  in  the  case  of  the  girls,  who  are  often  allowed
to  indulge  in  the  same  licence  as  the  boys  without  lapsing
into  the  condition  of  habitual  prostitutes.

However  this  may  be,  we  may,  I  think,  sum  up  the  in-
formation on  the  subject  of  unstable  unions  in  the  view
that  there  is  plenty  of  evidence  from  all  parts  of  the  world
as  to  states  of  society  in  which  the  operations  of  the  sexual
instinct  are  not  firmly  restricted  by  regular  marriage  ar-
rangements, but  find  outlets  in  various  forms  of  sexual
licence  and  communalistic  custom.

In  spite  of  the  strength  of  the  sexual  instinct  and  of
the  disturbing  influence  it  exerts  in  various  forms  in  all
stages  of  civilization,  all  human  societies  have  striven  and
are  striving  to  counteract  these  disturbing  influences  and
to  regularize  the  working  of  the  sexual  cravings.  To  a
certain  extent  such  restrictive  rules  may  have  been  derived
from  another  powerful  and  primordial  instinct — that  of
appropriation;  but  this  latter  tendency,  if  taken  by  itself,
gives  rise  to  struggles,  and  thus  it  does  not  directly  guar-
antee peace  and  order.  In  one  way  or  another,  however,
either  through  deliberate  guidance,  or  indirectly  by  way
of  compromise  after  struggle,  human  communities  are
bound  to  formulate  and  do  actually  formulate  rules  in
respect  of  sexual  unions  intended  to  prevent  offence  and
conflict.

The  simplest  device  suggested  by  these  rules  is  that  of
avoidance — the  prohibition  of  ordinary  intercourse  between
members  of  the  different  sexes1  who  stand  in  some  recog-
nized form  of  relationship  to  each  other.  Among  the
Veddas  of  Ceylon,  this  form  of  avoidance  is  strictly  ob-
served. "If  a  man  met  his  mother-in-law  in  the  jungle  he
would  move  aside  off  the  track.  He  may,  however,  speak
to  her  in  the  presence  of  others,  though  if  he  found  her
alone  in  the  rock  shelter  he  would  not  enter  it  till  there
were  others  present.  Similarly,  though  a  man  may  eat  food

i  There  are  exceptional  cases  of  avoidance  between  persons  of  the
same  sex,  but  they  seem  results  of  the  not  unfrequent  process  of
extension  of  taboo  rules  by  analogy.


I:  SELECTION  OF  MATES  177

prepared  by  his  mother-in-law,  he  would  not  take  it  di-
rectly from  her,  it  would  be  passed  to  him  by  some  one
else,  most  probably  by  his  wife."  *  " Among  the  Tetons,  a
Siouan  or  Dacotan  tribe,  a  man  may  not  look  his  mother-
in-law  in  the  face,  nor  may  his  brother  do  so,  and  she  may
not  look  at  them.  If  a  man  sees  his  mother-in-law,  he  must
put  his  robe  over  his  head  and  shoulder  and  pass  by  on  the
other  side  of  the  road ;  also  he  must  sit  on  the  other  side  of
the  lodge.  In  like  manner  a  woman  dare  not  look  at  or
address  her  husband's  father."2

Customs  of  avoidance  exemplified  by  the  above-men-
tioned taboos  do  not  admit  of  any  other  interpretation  but
that  derived  from  a  moral  condemnation  of  sexual  union
between  persons  who  ought  to  be  bound  by  other  ties.  The
feeling  against  incest,  and  the  more  or  less  strict  prohibi-
tions against  it,  spring  from  the  same  cause,  and  it  is  easy
to  conceive  what  a  fertile  source  of  strife  and  degradation
the  removal  of  such  rules  would  be.

One  or  two  cases  of  complicated  restrictions  on  marriage
between  members  of  certain  communities  may  be  men-
tioned at  once:  they  enable  us  to  realize  the  social  im-
portance and  wide  diffusion  of  such  prohibitions.  Among
the  Omahas  "a  man  must  marry  outside  of  his  gens.  .  .  .
A  man  cannot  marry  any  of  the  women  of  the  gens  of  his
father,  as  they  are  his  grandmothers,  aunts,  sisters,  nieces,
daughters,  or  grandchildren.  He  cannot  marry  any  woman
of  the  subgens  of  his  father's  mother,  for  the  same  reason;
but  he  can  marry  any  woman  belonging  to  the  other  sub-
gentes  of  his  paternal  grandmother's  gens,  as  they  are  not
his  kindred.  The  women  of  the  subgens  of  his  paternal
grandmother's  mother  are  also  forbidden  to  him;  but  those
of  the  remaining  subgentes  of  that  gens  can  become  his
wives,  provided  they  are  such  as  have  not  become  his
mothers-in-law,  daughters,  or  grandchildren.  ...  A  man
cannot  marry  any  woman  of  his  mother's  gens,  nor  any  of
his  maternal  grandmother's  subgens,  nor  any  of  the  sub-
gens of  her  mother,  as  all  are  his  consanguinities.

i  SELIQMAN,  The  Veddos,  p.  68.
2FBAZEB,  Totemism,  III,  p.  112.
2231  L


178 TRIBAL  LAW:  PART  I: ELEMENTS  OF  THE  FAMILY

' '  A  man  cannot  marry  a  woman  of  the  subgens  of  the  wife
of  his  son,  nephew,  or  grandson ;  nor  can  he  marry  a  woman
of  the  subgens  of  the  husband  of  his  daughter,  niece  or
granddaughter.  A  man  cannot  marry  any  of  his  female
affinities  who  are  his  ikan,  because  they  are  the  real  or
potential  wives  of  his  fathers-in-law,  or  of  the  fathers-in-
law  of  his  sons,  nephews  or  grandchildren.  A  man  cannot
marry  any  woman  whom  he  calls  his  sister's  daughter.
He  cannot  marry  any  woman  whom  he  calls  his  grand-
child. This  includes  his  wife's  sister's  daughter's
daughter.

' '  He  cannot  marry  the  daughter  of  any  woman  who  is  his
ihanga,  as  such  a  daughter  he  calls  his  daughter.  .  .  .
He  cannot  marry  his  sister's  husband's  father's  brother's
daughter,  as  she  is  his  itucpa;  nor  can  he  marry  her
daughter  or  her  brother's  daughter,  for  the  same  reason.
He  cannot  marry  his  sister's  husband's  (brother's)
daughter,  as  she  is  his  sister's  potential  daughter,  and  he
calls  her  his  itijan.  .  .  .

"Were  it  not  for  the  institution  of  subgentes  a  man
would  be  compelled  to  many  outside  of  his  tribe,  as  all  the
women  would  be  his  kindred,  owing  to  previous  intermar-
riages between  the  ten  gentes.  But  in  any  gens  those  on
the  other  side  of  the  gentile  'unete,'  or  fire-place,  are
not  reckoned  as  full  kindred,  though  they  cannot  inter-
marry. ' ' 1

In  another  case,  "Each  moiety  is  divided  into  two  classes,
one,  which  we  will  call  moiety  A,  has  the  classes  Panunga
and  Bulthara,  the  other,  which  we  will  call  moiety  B,  has
the  classes  Purula  and  Kumara.  Every  individual  mem-
ber of  the  tribe  belongs  to  one  or  other  of  these  classes —
exactly  which  is  determined  by  his  father's  class.  .  .  .
For  example,  a  Panunga  man  marries  a  Purula  woman  and
their  children  are  Bulthara.  A  Kumara  man  marries  a
Bulthara  woman  and  their  children  are  Purula.  Amongst
Australian  aborigines  no  man  is  free  to  marry  just  whom  he

ij.  0.  DORSEY,  Omaha  Sociology  (Third  Annual  Report  of  the
Bureau  of  Ethnology  to  the  Secretary  of  the  Smithsonian  Institu-
tion, 1881-1882),  (1884),  pp.  255-8.


I:  SELECTION  OF  MATES  179

likes.  In  the  first  place  a  man  of  moiety  A  can  only
marry  a  woman  of  moiety  B  and  vice  versa,  and  further
still,  a  Panunga  man  can  only  marry  a  Purula  woman  and
vice  versa,  a  Bulthara  man  can  only  marry  a  Kumara
woman  and  vice  versa.  .  .  .  If  we  arrange  them  in  a  simple
table  the  matter  becomes  clearer.  Thus:

Panunga Purula

Moiety  \^/  Moiety

A  A  B


Bulthara Kumara


The  horizontal  lines  indicate  the  marriages  and  the
slanting  lines,  leading  from  the  woman's  class,  the  classes
into  which  the  children  fall. ' ' 1

These extensive prohibitions are connected with the Matri-

menial

arrangement  of  societies  into  matrimonial  classes.  Instead  ciassmca-
of  proceeding  by  a  gradual  extension  of  the  rule  against
incestual  intercourse,  they  start  from  large  tribal  divisions
and  combine  them  for  the  purpose  of  restriction  and  selec-
tion in  a  way  unfamiliar  to  us,  accustomed  as  we  are  to
tracing  relations  between  single  individuals  and  not  between
classes  or  groups.  Once  the  principle  of  allowing  unions
between  members  of  certain  groups  and  forbidding  them
between  other  groups  is  grasped,  the  details  become  intel-
ligible and  need  not  trouble  us  by  their  many  variations.
It  is  more  interesting*  to  try  to  discover  the  motives  which
prompt  all  these  primitive  communities  to  frame  their  rules
against  incest  by  processes  of  classification  and  not  by  indi-
vidualizing avoidance.

The  usual  explanation  is  derived  from  the  notion  of moula
exogamy. In  so  far  as  the  designation  is  used  to  charac- ]
terize  the  practice  of  seeking  brides  outside  the  social  group
of  the  bridegroom,  there  is  nothing  to  say  against  the  term,
but  the  fact  itself  would  still  require  an  explanation. If,

i  SPENCER  and  GILLEN,  Across  Australia  (1912),  p.  201.  Cf.
DUBKHEIM,  Organisation  matrimoniale  australienne,  in  L'Ann4e
sociologique,  VIII  (1905),  p.  124,  and  RIVEBS,  The  History  of
Melanesian  Society  (1914),  II,  p.  138,  Kinship  and  Social  Organiza^
tion,  pp.  61-2,  66.


180 TRIBAL  LAW:  PART  I:  ELEMENTS  OF  THE  FAMILY

on  the  other  hand,  exogamy  is  taken  to  mean  that  the
youths  have  to  look  out  for  brides  abroad,  because  their
" sires"  keep  the  women  of  their  own  group  to  themselves,
such  a  construction  cannot  be  supported  by  evidence.  The
Cyclopaean  family  can  in  no  way  be  considered  as  the
ordinary  arrangement  of  primitive  society,  nor  would  the
situation  as  conceived  by  Atkinson  and  Lang,  lead  to
avoidance  of  women  within  the  group,  but  rather  to  a
contrast  between  endogamous  seniors  and  exogamous
juniors.

Eptea-  The  facts,  as  we  have  them  before  us,  are  different.

practices.  They  point  to  general  restrictions  against  marriage  within
the  groups  and  might  be  ranged  under  the  term  of  epigamy,
as  well  as  under  that  of  exogamy.  We  are  not  yet  in  a
position  to  speak  definitely  about  the  nature  of  the  groups
that  are  separated  or  combined  by  these  prohibitions  and
directions.  One  thing  we  can  perceive,  however,  even  now,
namely,  that  marital  unions  are  allowed  or  forbidden  in
accordance  with  tribal  organization.  Three  explanations
may  be  suggested  for  such  systems,  and  it  is  very  likely  that
each  of  the  three  had  something  to  do  with  its  formation.
1.  To  begin  with,  there  is  an  undoubted  attraction  in  the
foreign,  the  unfamiliar,  an  additional  element  of  curiosity
and  desire,  which  may  be  illustrated  from  many  incidents
of  our  contemporary  life  and  from  numberless  stories  of
the  past.  Finnish  women  (Evens),  for  instance,  had  a
special  reputation  as  enchantresses  of  men  among  Nor-
wegians and  Swedes.  Arabian  tribesmen  prized  brides
acquired  by  conquest,1  and  the  world-wide  diffusion  of
capture  as  a  means  of  obtaining  wives  may  be  due  in  part
to  this  taste.2

There  are  sometimes  indications  that  the  leading  elders,

1  Cf .  ROBERTSON  SMITH,  Kinship,  p.  73 :  "  According  to  Ibn  'Abd
Rabbih  ('led.  Ill,  p.  296)  the  hajin,  that  is  the  son  of  an  'ajamiya,
or  non-Arab  woman,  did  not  inherit  in  the  Times  of  Ignorance;  but
there  was  no  such  disability  as  regarded  the  son  of  a  captive,  nay,
according  to  Arab  tradition  (llcd.  Ill,  p.  290)  the  best  and  stoutest
sons  are  born  of  reluctant  wives."

2  E.g.,  among  the  Wakelbura,  FBAZEB,  Totemism,  I,  p.  426;  among
the Araucanians, ibid., Ill, p. 582; and among the Tasmanians,
LING  ROTH,  The  Aborigines  of  Tasmania  (1890),  p.  123.


I:  SELECTION  OF  MATES  181

medicine  men,  shamams  or  priests,  perceive  the  bad  effects
of  in-breeding  which  are  recognized  by  our  scientists
and  doctors.  In  Hadith  it  is  said:  " marry  among
strangers,  thus  you  will  not  have  feeble  posterity. ' '  In  Abd
Rabtishi's  Kitabal  at  Ikdalfarod  (iii.  290),  "he  is  a  hero
not  born  by  the  cousin  (of  his  father) ;  he  is  not
weakly,  for  the  seed  of  relations  brings  forth  feeble
fruit."1

We  need  not  wonder  at  such  "eugenic"  considerations:
the  study  of  folk-lore  discloses  many  cases  in  which  tradi-
tional experience  and  close  acquaintance  with  nature  have
suggested  to  ancient  and  primitive  tribes  views  that
have  been  confirmed  by  elaborate  modern  research.  But
quite  apart  from  "eugenic"  manifestations  of  folk-
lore, the  attraction  of  foreign  women  may  be  quite  as
powerful  in  social  psychology  as  the  fear  of  the  "evil
eye."

2.  A  second  root  of  exogamic  unions  is  to  be  sought  in
considerations  bearing  on  internal  order,  which  must  have
asserted  themselves  in  every  society  -when  it  attained
continuous  existence.  If  some  form  of  political  order  is
truly  regarded  as  a  necessary  feature  in  the  life  of  any
human  community,  the  prevention  of  conflicts  arising  from
sexual  competition  must  have  formed  the  earliest  and  the
principal  object  for  the  action  of  tribal  authorities.  We
find  this  principle  expressed  in  as  many  words  by  Arab
commentators,  and  it  is  really  not  necessary  to  cite  chapter
and  verse  to  prove  its  cogency  and  obviousness.2  This
point  lies  at  the  root  of  the  Cyclopaean  theory  of  A.  Lang,
but  it  has  been  developed  by  him  and  by  his  followers  in
too  narrow  a  fashion.  It  was  not  only  between  fathers  and
sons  that  concord  in  this  respect  had  to  be  established,  but
between  brothers  and  other  contemporaries  as  well,  and
stories  of  exceptional  conflicts  within  families  may  serve
to  illustrate  the  cogency  of  the  taboos.  Cases  of  polyandry


1  GOLDZIHEB,  in  the  Academy,  XVIII  (1880),  p.  26.

2  Amr.  b. Kolthum's testament (Kitdb-al-aghdni, ed. Bfilak, IX,
185): "Do  not  marry in  your  own  family, for  domestic  enmity
arises  therefrom,"  quoted  by  GOLDZIHEB,  loc.  tit.


182 TRIBAL  LAW:  PART  I: ELEMENTS  OF  THE  FAMILY

are noted everywhere as astonishing products of local

custom.1

As  a  rule,  organized  society  guards  against  conflicts  of
jealousy  within  families  by  insisting  on  a  clear  separation
between  circles  of  near  relationship  and  circles  of  possible
sexual  union ;  and  one  of  the  most  important  facts  in  this
connection  is  that  it  is  not  only  by  alliances  and  com-
promises between  various  tribes  that  epigamy  is  arranged,
but  by  artificial  halving  of  complete  units.  The  veve  of
the  Australians,  the  matrimonial  classes  arranged  in  pairs,
fours  and  eights,  are  the  most  remarkable  expressions  of
this  principle.2  In  regard  to  these  matrimonial  classes
R.  H.  Matthews3  writes:  "In  an  article  contributed  to  this
society  in  1905,4  I  illustrated  the  sociology  of  the  Barkun-
jee tribe  as  comprising  only  two  divisions,  Mukunguna  and
Kilpunguna,  the  men  of  one  division  marrying  the  women
of  the  opposite  one.  In  studying  the  above  table,  we  observe
that  there  is  a  bisection  of  each  of  the  two  divisions  of  the
Barkunjee  so  that  in  the  Kurnu  there  are  four  divisions
of  the  community  instead  of  two.

"The  Kurnu,  like  the  Barkunjee,  possess  a  further  dis-
tinctive division  into  Muggulu  and  Ngipuru,  with  their
feminine  forms  Mugguluga  and  Ngipuruga,  meaning  slug-
gish or  heavy  blood  and  swift  or  light  blood  respectively.
Again,  like  the  Barkunjee,  the  Kurnu  are  divided  into
Nhune  and  Winggu,  the  Butt  and  the  Branch  shade.  A
man  of  the  Muggulu  blood  and  the  Butt  shade  usually  and
normally  marries  a  Ngipuruga  woman  of  the  Branch  shade,
subject  to  variations  explained  farther  on.  In  regard
to  the  offspring,  a  Mugguluga  mother  produces  Muggulu
children  who  take  their  mother's  shade.  A  Ngipuruga
mother  produces  Ngipuru  children  belonging  to  her  own
shade."

1  ROBERTSON SMITH, Kinship,  p. 133; FRAZER, Totemism, II,  p.
256 (among  the  Todas)  ; RIVERS,  on  Marriage,  in  the  Encyclopaedia
of  Religion  and  Ethics,  VIII,  p.  427 (among  the  Nayars).

2  FRAZER,  op.  cit.,  II,  p 70; THOMAS, Kinship  Organization  and
Group  Marriage  in  Australia,  p. 128.

3  In Notes  on  Some Native Tribes of  Australia, in the  Journal
and Proceedings  of the Royal Society of New  South Wales, XL<
(1906),  p.  96.

*lbid.,  XXXIX,  pp. 118, 119.


I:  SELECTION  OF  MATES  183

Nor  is  this  arranging  into  moieties  and  subdivisions  of
moieties  restricted  to  Australian  tribes.  It  is  to  be  found
in  the  Melanesian  Archipelago  and  seems  to  underlie
many  of  the  constructions  of  matrimonial  groups  in
America  and  South  Eastern  Asia.1

3. The  third  principle  to  be  taken  into  account  as  explain- uncer-

,  .  tainty  of

ing  exogamic  and  epigamic  practices  is  connected  with  the  father-
uncertainty  of  fatherhood  characteristic  of  most  primitive
tribes.  Whether  we  consider  the  effect  of  polyandric  cus-
tom, of  pirauru  unions,  of  youthful  licence  and  of  other
material  expressions  of  social  communism,  or  whether  we
merely  take  stock  of  the  mystic  views  as  to  procreation
current  among  the  Aruntas2  and  in  similar  cases,  it  is
obviously  impossible  in  such  cases  to  build  up  pedigrees
and  to  formulate  taboos  on  individualistic  lines,  while,  on

1  FRAZER,  op.  cit.,  II,  p.  68;  RIVERS,  Kinship  and  Social  Organiza-
tion, pp.  70,  72.

2  FRAZER,  op.  cit.,  I,  p.  188: "These  semi-human  ancestors,  en-
dowed with powers which are not possessed by their living
descendants,  roamed  about  the  same  country  which  is  still  inhabited
by  the  tribe,  and  in  their  wanderings  they  gave  rise  to  many  of
the  most  marked  features  of  the  landscape,  such  as  the  gaps  and
gorges  which  cleave  the  Macdonnell Ranges Each  troop  or band
of  these  semi-mythical  folk  consisted  of  members  of  one  particular
totem clan, whether the totem was the wild cat, the witchetty
grub,  the  kangaroo,  the  frog,  the  Hakea  flower,  or  what  not. And
every  man  and  woman  of  the  band  carried  about  with  him  or  her
one  or  more  of  the  sacred  stones  which  the  Arunta  call  churinga,
each  of  which  is  intimately  associated  with  the  spirit  part  of  some
individual man or woman. Either where they originated and
stayed  or  else  where,  during  their  wanderings,  they  camped for  a
time,  there  were formed what  the  natives  call oknanikilla, which
we  may  describe  as  local totem centres. At  each of  these  spots,
which  are  all  well  known  to  the  old  men,  who  hand  the  knowledge
down from generation to generation, a certain number of the
alcheringa  ancestors  went  into  the  ground,  each of  them carrying
his  sacred stone (churinga) with him. His  body  died, but  some
natural feature, such  as  a  rock or  tree, arose  to  mark  the spot,
while  his  spirit  part  remained  in  the  churinga.

"  Each  local  totem  centre  (oknanikilla)  is  tenanted  by  the  spirits
of  one  totem  only.  One  spot,  for  example,  is  haunted  by  spirits  of
the  wild  cat  totem;  another  by  spirits  of  the  emu  totem;  another
by  spirits  of  the  frog  totem;  and  so  on  through  all  the  totems

"The  natives  believe  that  every  living  member  of  the  tribe  is
the  reincarnation  of  one  of  these  spirits.  Each  of  these  disem-
bodied spirits  takes  up  its  abode  in  some  natural  object,  such  as  a
tree  or  rock,  at  its  own  local  totem  centre:  and  this  abode  of  the
spirit  is  called  its  nanja.  From  time  to  time,  when  a  woman
approaches  one  of  these  haunted  spots,  a  spirit  passes  from  it  into
her  body,  and  in  due  time  is  born  as  a  child."


184 TRIBAL  LAW:  PART  I:  ELEMENTS  OF  THE  FAMILY

the  contrary,  the  same  results  of  guarding  against  incest
and  strife  may  be  achieved  without  difficulty  by  drawing
lines  of  demarcation  between  groups.  This  is  what  actually
takes  place  among  the  "totemic"  tribes  of  Australia,
America,  Asia  and  Africa.  Although  it  is  wrong  to  speak
of  group  marriage *  in  the  proper  sense  of  the  word,
implying  actual  promiscuity  as  between  the  members  of  the
corresponding  groups,  the  notion  is  an  appropriate  one  as
indicating  the  correlation  of  possible  unions  and  the  manner
in  which  the  taboos  of  avoidance  were  drawn  up.  There  is
therefore  reality  in  the  notion;  it  is  not  a  mere  literary
fiction  devised  by  Morgan  and  popularized  by  his  school:
given  the  uncertainty  of  fatherhood,  order  as  to  sexual
matters  has  to  be  either  by  arbitrary  adoption,  as  in  the
case  of  the  Todas,  or  by  cleavage  between  groups,  classes
and  sub-classes,  as  with  the  Australian,  North  Americans
and  other  "totemic"  tribes.

In  the  much  discussed  case  of  the  Arunta  I  venture  to
suggest  that  the  belief  in  reincarnation  connected  with
certain  local  centres  is  not  produced  by  ignorance  as  to
physiological  processes,  but  by  the  uncertainty  of  tracing
descent  from  the  father  in  a  society  where  sexual  unions
are  unstable.  Even  if  savages  were  not  sufficiently  observ-
ant of  the  course  of  nature  in  the  breeding  of  men,  surely
kangaroos  and  dogs  must  have  supplied  them  with
sufficient  material  for  inferences  as  to  the  part  played  by
both  sexes  in  procreation.  But  it  was  not  more  unreason-
able on  their  part  to  speculate  on  the  spiritual  transmission
of -personality  than  it  was  in  the  case  of  the  Pythagoreans,
the  Brahmanists  or  any  other  believers  in  the  transmigra-
tion of  souls.  A  natural  substratum  for  such  views  was
provided  for  the  Aruntas  and  other  tribes  with  unstable
unions  in  the  uncertainty  of  descent  from  males,  an  uncer-
tainty removed  in  the  practice  of  the  Todas  by  the  cere-
mony of  pointing  the  arrow,  while  with  the  Aruntas  the
magic  rites  of  the  churinga  grew  up  on  a  similar  back-
ground.

i  RIVERS,  op.  cit.,  p.  84,  and  in  The  Encyclopedia  of  Religion  (md
Ethics,  VIII,  pp.  427-8.


I:  SELECTION  OF  MATES  185

In  the  examples  of  the  Urabunna  tribes  referred  to  above  x
the  marriageable  (nupa)  members  of  both  sexes  are  clearly
distinguished  from  the  rest  of  humanity  and  supposed  to
belong  to  two  classes  strictly  corresponding  one  to  the  other,
so  that  the  men  of  one  moiety  are  destined  to  marry  the
women  of  the  other  moiety,  and  vice  versa.  In  this  way
within  each  group  the  rule  of  exogamy  obtains,  but  is
matched  by  the  rule  of  epigamy  with  the  corresponding
class.  The  basis  for  such  rules  of  restriction  and  selec-
tion is  to  be  found  in  the  arrangement  of  these  societies
on  the  totemic  principle,  that  is,  conformity  with  religious
belief  in  a  mystic  solidarity  symbolized  by  the  animal  or
other  totem  of  the  group.  It  is  sufficient  for  our  purpose
to  take  note  of  the  fundamental  conception  which  lies  at
the  root  of  such  a  grouping,  without  joining  in  the  intricate
controversies  in  regard  to  details  of  classification  and  ritual.

One most important consequence of arrangement in
classes  is  that  it  admits,  within  its  broad  distinctions,  of
rapprochement  between  individuals,  who,  according  to  our
views,  would  be  very  closely  akin  to  each  other. Unions unions
between  persons  closely  related  by  consanguinity  are  pos- ?ndMdu-
sible  and  occur  often  under  these  regulations. It  may  be ciose0kin.
said that endogamy may be sometimes combined with
exogamy. It  is,  for  instance,  a  most  common  device  among
Australians,  to  obtain  wives  by  exchange  between  offspring
of  brother  and  sister. Cross-cousin  marriage  is  one  of  the
most  widely  spread  customs  among  primitive  tribes  of  all
the  continents.2

1  Ante,  p.  174.

2  RIVERS,  Kinship  and  Social  Organization,  p.  20: "I  propose  to
begin  with  a  long  familiar  mode  of  terminology  which  accompanies
that  widely  distributed  custom  known  as  the  cross-cousin  marriage.
In the  more frequent form  of this marriage a man marries the
daughter  of  either  his  mother's  brother  or  his  father's  sister;  more
rarely  his  choice  is  limited  to  one  of  these  relatives.

"  Such  a  marriage  will  have  certain  definite  consequences. Let
us  take  a  case  in  which  a  man  marries  the  daughter  of  his  mother's
brother,  as  is  represented  in  the  following  diagram :
B = a  A — b

I  !

C  ======= d  E  ~"f

One  consequence  of  the  marriage  between  C  and  d  will  be  that  A,
who  before  the  marriage  of  C  was  only  his  mother's  brother,  now


186 TRIBAL  LAW:  PART  I:  ELEMENTS  OF  THE  FAMILY

In  other  cases  the  policy  of  preventing  conflicts  within
the  tribe  prevails,  while  the  eugenic  consideration  gives
way  before  public  convenience.  Altogether  economic  tend-
encies and  motives  of  self-preservation  of  the  group  are
very  noticeable  in  instances  of  so-called  endogamy.1  In
these  cases  customs  require,  or  at  least  allow,  members  of
the  same  kindred  or  group  to  intermarry.  This  practice
may  be  illustrated  from  the  life  of  many  tribes.  It  is  very
common  among  Semitic  nations  even  in  the  form  of  mar-
riage between  half-brothers  and  half-sisters.  In  spite  of
the  close  degree  of  relationship  in  such  cases,  there  is  no
obstacle  to  marriage,  provided  that  the  contracting  parties
are  children  of  the  same  father,  but  they  must  be  from
different  mothers.  A  conspicuous  example  of  this  principle
is  to  be  found  in  the  Bible  2  :  Abraham,  it  will  be  remem-
bered, was  married  to  his  half-sister  Sarah.  While  they
were  travelling  together,  she  had  passed  as  his  sister,  but
when  she  is  wooed  by  a  stranger,  Abraham  has  to  explain
that  she  is  at  the  same  time  his  wife.  Although  they  are
born  of  the  same  father,  their  marriage  is  regular  and
legitimate.  Among  the  Egyptians  even  marriages  between
brothers  and  sisters  of  the  same  mother  occur,  at  any  rate
in  the  reigning  families  of  the  Pharaohs.

The  tendency  towards  marriages  within  a  narrow  circle
of  relations  is  clearly  traceable  to  considerations  of  self-
preservation,  when  there  is  a  danger  of  being  overwhelmed
by  outsiders,  or  when  circumstances  have  brought  about
feelings  of  enhanced  family  pride  and  honour.3

becomes  also  his  wife's  father,  while  b,  who  before  the  marriage  was
the  mother's  brother's  wife  of  C,  now  becomes  his  wife's  mother.
Reciprocally,  C,  who  before  his  marriage  had  been  the  sister's  son
of  A  and  the  husband's  sister's  son  of  b,  now  becomes  their  son-in-
law.  Further,  E  and  f,  the  other  children  of  A  and  b,  who  before
the  marriage  had  been  only  the  cousins  of  C,  now  become  his  wife's
brother  and  sister.  .  .  .  Through  the  cross-cousin  marriage  the
relationships  of  mother's  brother,  father's  sister's  husband  and
father-in-law  will  be  combined  in  one  and  the  same  person,  and  the
relationships  of  father's  sister,  mother's  brother's  wife  and  mother-
in-law  will  be  similarly  combined."

1  Cf.  ROBERTSON  SMITH,  Kinship,  p.  163.

2  Genesis,  cha xii  and  xx

3  Cf .  HILL-TOUT, British North  America,  I,  pp. 162-3: "In  one
of  the  coastal tribes, the Bella Coola, the  social organization was
in  some respects  peculiar, particularly in the  matter of  marriage


I:  SELECTION  OF  MATES  187

In  conclusion  I  should  like  to  emphasize  again  the  fact
that  endogamous  customs  do  not  stand  in  uncompromising
opposition  to  exogamic  ones.  These  practices  shade  off  from
one  variety  to  the  other  without  sudden  break.

regulations.  The  tribe  was  divided  into  a  number  of  local  com-
munes, each  of  which  was  very  jealous  of  its  own  traditions  and
crests,  and  its  rights  to  certain  ceremonial  dances,  songs,  etc.
So  highly  valued  and  jealously  guarded  were  these  that  it  led
apparently  to  the  establishment  of  endogamous  institutions  among
them.  The  members  of  each  community  were  obliged  by  customary
law  to  take  mates  only  from  among  themselves,  marriage  outside
the  commune  being  forbidden.  The  custom  would  seem  to  have
arisen  from  their  desire  to  guard  and  retain  within  the  limits  of
each  group  the  legends,  dances,  etc.  peculiar  to  that  group.

"  Under  the  common  Salish  rule  of  marriage  this  could  not  be
done,  a  daughter  not  unfrequently,  when  she  had  no  brothers,  con-
ferring upon  her  husband  her  father's  rank  and  privileges,  his
crests  and  family  legends;  so  to  guard  against  the  passage  of  these
beyond  the  commune  or  body  to  which  they  belonged,  they  would
seem  to  have  deliberately  established  endogamous  institutions,  mak-
ing it  unlawful  for  a  person  to  marry  outside  the  limits  of  his  or
her  own  community."


CHAPTER  II


THE  MOTHER  AND  THE  FATHER


The
mother
the  centre
of  the
household.


The  Mother.

IN  modern  systems  of  law  it  is  admitted  as  a  general
rule  that  illegitimate  children  follow  the  mother's  condi-
tion and  belong  to  the  mother's  family.  Children  whose
fathers  are  uncertain  are  illegitimate  according  to  our  view.
Now  in  many  primitive  societies  this  is  the  normal  state,  on
account  of  the  fact  that  sexual  unions  are  not  entirely
stable,  and  the  question  of  uncertainty  necessarily  domi-
nates the  whole  situation.  This  fact  by  itself  is  sufficient  to
explain  the  central  position  of  the  mother  which  we  find
expressed  in  many  tribal  organizations.  Strangely  enough,
this  fact  was  hardly  realized  by  the  learning  of  any  cen-
turies except  the  nineteenth  and  our  own.  It  was  only  in
the  middle  of  the  nineteenth  century  that  the  immense
importance  of  motherhood  as  the  centre  of  family  organi-
zation was  recognized.  As  often  happens  when  a  new  idea
comes  to  the  fore,  when  recognized  by  Bachofen,  Morgan,
and  McLennan,  the  importance  of  the  principle  was  exag-
gerated in  the  sense  that  they  spoke  glibly  of  matriarchal
institutions  and  pictured  a  society  in  which  the  family,
centred  round  the  mother,  was  ruled  by  women  on  the
pattern  of  an  Amazon  commonwealth.  It  was  soon  per-
ceived, however,  that  not  only  was  it  most  unlikely  that  the
rule  of  the  weaker  sex  should  prevail,  but  that  as  a  matter
of  observation  there  was  nothing  to  countenance  the  theory.
The  data  show  that  though  the  institutions  are  not  matri-
archal as  opposed  to  patriarchal,  the  women  occupy  a  posi-
tion of  great  importance  not  only  in  the  household  but  in
the  tribe  at  large.  The  Seri  of  California  are  one  in-
stance to  which  such  a  characterization  would  to  some  ex-
tent apply.  "The  matrons  participate  with  them  in  what
we  may  call  judicial  and  legislative  functions,  The  execu-

188


II:  THE  MOTHER  AND  THE  FATHER 189

tive  power  of  the  family  seems  to  be  exercised  by  the
mother's  brothers  in  order  of  seniority  only  through  or  in
conjunction  with  her.  And  when  she  is  a  shaman  of
repute  she  is  more  reverenced  than  any  man.  To  such  an
extent  is  this  reverence  carried  that  one  of  the  most  im-
portant considerations  in  the  selection  of  the  chief  of  a
band  is  his  consort 's  reputation  for  'shamanistic  potency.'
The  very  name  of  the  tribe  expresses  the  predominance  of
woman.  Seri  is  a  foreign  appellation — the  native  name  is
Kunkaak,  which  appears  to  mean  womanhood,  or  rather
motherhood.

"The  tribe  is  made  up  of  clans  defined  by  consanguinity
reckoned  only  in  the  female  line.  Each  clan  is  headed  by
an  elder  woman,  and  comprises  a  hierarchy  of  daughters,
granddaughters  and  (sometimes)  great-granddaughters,
collectively  incarnating  that  purity  of  uncontaminated
blood  which  is  the  pride  of  the  tribe.

"The  masculine  element  is  merely  supplementary  to  this.
The  huts  are  temporary  shelters  of  the  most  modest  kind.
However  rude  it  may  be,  both  the  hut  and  its  contents  be-
long exclusively  to  the  matron.  Her  brothers,  indeed,  are
entitled  to  places  in  it.  A  husband  has  in  comparison  with
them  no  rights  there.  If  there,  his  normal  place  is  the
outermost  in  the  group,  when  he  acts  as  a  sort  of  outer
guard  or  sentinel.  Marriage,  the  permanent  union  of  man
and  woman,  is  recognized.  The  candidate  for  a  lady's
hand,  when  provisionally  accepted,  after  lengthy  discus-
sions, by  the  girl  and  her  mother  and  matronly  relations,
is  required  to  submit  to  a  year's  probation  of  the  most
arduous  and  exacting  character.  He  must  give  proof  of  his
ability  and  success  in  the  chase.  While  himself  continent,
even  when  sharing  his  wife's  tent  and  sleeping  robe,  he
must  recognize  without  a  murmur  her  right  to  receive  the
most  intimate  attentions  from  his  clanfellows.  At  the  close
of  the  year,  if  still  approved,  he  provides  a  feast,  and  be-
comes a  permanent  guest  in  his  bride's  hut.  As  her  hus-
band, he  is  endowed  with  great  personal  privileges,  the
reward  of  his  constancy  and  of  his  efficiency  as  provider
and  protector,  but  in  regard  to  her  family  and  domestic


190 TRIBAL  LAW:  PART  I:  ELEMENTS  OF  THE  FAMILY


Modified
matri-
lineal
arrange-
ments.


affairs  he  is  wholly  subordinate,  without  any  authority
even  over  his  children.  Such  domestic  authority  as  a  man
possesses  relates  not  to  his  wife's  household,  but  to  that  of
his  mother  and  sisters. ' ' 1

This  is  a  somewhat  extreme  instance,  and  we  generally
find  modified  forms  in  which,  in  contradistinction  to
patriarchal  tribes  dwelling  side  by  side  with  matriarchal
tribes,  we  notice  the  more  important  position  of  women.
The  tribal  arrangements  presented  by  the  Iroquois,  who  are
most  reputed  for  prowess  in  war  and  hunting,  are  dis-
tinctly matrilineal  not  to  say  matriarchal.  Women  are
admitted  to  the  councils  and  consulted  in  all  important
matters.  Here  as  with  the  Seri  there  is  a  disposition  to
regard  women  as  more  likely  to  practise  magic  arts,  to
prophesy  and  to  give  wise  advice  in  the  councils  of  the
nations.2  This  extraordinary  position  of  women  is  found
not  only  among  primitive  people,  but  in  a  tribe  which  may
have  reached  an  advanced  state  of  society  and  stood  the  test
of  centuries  and  of  modern  conditions  of  life.  The  Nayars
of  the  Malabar  coast,  to  the  southwest  of  the  Indian  Penin-
sula, are  tribes  of  mixed  race,  chiefly  Dravidian,  but  with  a
possible  admixture  of  Aryan  elements.  They  form  a  pros-
perous and  industrial  community,  with  a  highly  developed

iE  S.  HAETLAND,  Matrilineal  Kinship  and  the  Question  of  its
Priority  (Memoirs  of  the  American  Anthropological  Association,  IV,
no.  1,  January-March,  1917),  p.  9;  also  Primitive  Paternity,  chs
iv  and  v.

2  Cf .  BBAZER,  Totemism,  III,  p.  15:  "Marriages  are  contracted  in
such  a  way  that  husband  and  wife  never  quit  their  own  family
and  their  own  house  to  make  one  family  and  one  house  by  them-
selves. Each  remains  in  his  or  her  own  home,  and  the  children
born  of  these  marriages  belong  to  the  women  who  bore  them;  they
are  reckoned  to  the  house  and  family  of  the  wife  and  not  to  those
of  the  husband.  The  husband's  goods  do  not  pass  to  his  wife's
house,  to  which  he  is  himself  a  stranger;  and  in  the  wife's  house
the  daughters  are  reckoned  the  heiresses  in  preference  to  the  males,
because  the  males  have  nothing  there  but  their  subsistence.  Hence
among  the  Iroquois  a  man's  son  was  perpetually  disinherited:  he
belonged  to  his  mother's  clan  and  tribe:  he  could  never  succeed  to
his  father's  property,  titles,  or  office.  If,  for  example,  an  Onondaga
man  of  the  Wolf  clan  married  an  Onondaga  woman  of  the  Deer
clan,  their  children  were  all  Deer,  not  Wolves.  If  a  Seneca  man
of  the  Bear  clan  married  a  Cayuga  woman  of  the  Beaver  clan,
the  children  were  all  Cayugas  and  Beavers,  not  Senecas  and  Bears.
The  same  rule  regulated  the  hereditary  transmission  of  the  sachem-
ehip  or  office  of  high  chief."


II:  THE  MOTHER  AND  THE  FATHER 191

class  of  landowners  and  soldiers,  in  which  the  recognized
centre  of  the  family  is  the  mother.  Real  property  is  held
by  her,  and  inheritance  in  regard  to  family  (tarwad)  prop-
erty passes  through  her.  The  son  belongs  to  the  family  of
his  mother.  When  his  father  dies,  he  does  not  wear  mourn-
ing nor  take  part  in  the  funeral,  but  if  his  mother  or  the
brother  of  his  mother  dies,  he  is  bound  to  wear  the  deepest
mourning  and  to  sit  in  ashes  for  weeks.  Their  pedigrees
are  like  ours,  and  may  be  compared  with  the  Roman
agnatic  family,  except  that  succession  is  from  female  to
female.  Because  the  son  marries  into  a  family  centring
round  another  mother,  property  descends  strictly  through
females.  A  taivazhi  is  formed  by  a  married  woman  and  her
descendants  either  direct  or,  if  indirect,  descended  from  her
through  females.  The  mother,  daughters  and  unmarried
sons  form  an  exact  counterpart  to  the  small  patriarchal
family,  save  that  the  daughters  are  more  prominent  than
the  sons.  Eventually  it  is  not  even  restricted  to  this  small
nucleus,  but  grows  into  a  large  joint  family.  This  system
is  quite  as  prominent  in  Malabar  as  in  the  settlements  of
patriarchal  India,  only  it  is  entirely  conditioned  by  matri-
lineal  descent.1

Nevertheless  a  definite  element  of  male  influence,  if  not The
of  rule,  is  represented  by  the  brother  of  the  mother. No
family  can  do  without  the  support  of  the  man,  for  economic standing

iCf.  FRAZER,  Totemism,  IV,  p.  243:  "If  a  man  die,  the  bulk  of  Protector-
his  property  goes  to  his  sister's  son,  not  to  his  son ;  the  reason
being  that  of  the  blood-relationship  of  the  nephew  there  can»  be  no
doubt,  but  the  descent  of  the  son  may  be  questioned  The  nephew
is,  therefore,  looked  on  as  a  nearer  relative  than  the  son,  and  he
is  the  heir,  and  should  he  die,  more  grief  is  felt  than  in  the  case
of  the  son  A  strange  exception  is  made  when  a  man  marries  a
slave  of  his:  the  son  then  ranks  first  in  this  case,  as  the  natives
say  that  he  is  not  only  presumably  the  next-of-kin  by  birth,  but
also  by  purchase,  as  the  mother  belonged  to  the  father  "  Similarly
among  the  Kimbunda  "  sons  begotten  in  marriage  are  regarded  as
the  property,  not  of  their  father,  but  of  their  maternal  uncle;  and
their  own  father,  even  so  long  as  they  are  minors  and  under  his
protection,  has  no  power  over  them  Also  the  sons  are  not  the
heirs  of  their  father  but  of  their  uncle,  and  the  latter  can  dispose
of  them  with  unlimited  authority,  even  to  the  extent  of  selling
them  in  case  of  necessity.  Only  the  children  born  of  slave  women
are  regarded  as  really  the  property  of  their  father  and  also  his
heirs  "

Cf K KBISHNAN  PANDALAI,  Succession  and  Partition  in  Ma^-u-
makkatayam  Law  (1914),  pp.  3-5,  29  ff.


192 TRIBAL  LAW:  PART  I:  ELEMENTS  OF  THE  FAMILY

purposes  and  the  performance  of  hard  tasks,  for  defence
and  for  protection  before  the  tribunals,  but  the  protector
need  not  in  all  cases  be  the  father.  The  standing  pro-
tector is  the  brother ;  the  mother  remains  in  her  own  family
and  looks  to  him  as  her  natural  helper.  This  is  recognized
in  law,  and  the  brother  is  bound  to  help  the  mother  in  legal
and  economic  matters  beyond  her  capacity.  When  we
renounce  our  set  ideas  about  the  relations  between  husband
and  wife,  it  is  not  difficult  to  realize,  without  any  sub-
version of  our  ideas  concerning  the  sexes,  that  the  woman
can  lean  on  her  brother  as  much  as  on  her  husband.  This
is  the  most  prominent  feature  of  the  situation,  and  when  the
arrangement  had  already  fallen  to  pieces  and  the  transition
to  the  patriarchal  system  was  taking  place,  survivals  of  the
matriarchal  system  might  still  be  seen  in  the  anomalous
position  of  the  brother  in  the  tribe.

In  Indian  society  the  authority  of  the  uncle  over  his
nephews  and  nieces  is  in  many  respects  greater  than  that
of  their  own  father.  Thus,  ' '  The  woman  is  the  head  of  the
Khasi  family.  So  long  as  a  man  remains  in  his  mother's
house,  whether  he  be  married  or  unmarried,  he  is  earning
for  his  Uur  (i.e.,  his  mother's  family),  and  his  property
goes  on  his  death  to  his  mother,  or,  failing  her,  to  his  grand-
mother. Should  the  latter  also  be  dead,  his  sisters  inherit,
and  next  to  them  his  sister's  children.  In  the  absence  of
any  of  the  above,  the  following  relatives  succeed  in  the
order  in  which  they  are  named,  viz.,  his  brothers,  aunts,
aunts'  children,  great-grandmother,  great-grandmother's
sister  or  children.  The  brother's  children  can  never  suc-
ceed, as  they  belong  to  a  different  clan.  When  a  Khasi  has
left  his  mother's  house,  and  gone  to  live  with  his  wife,  his
property  descends  to  her  and  her  children,  with  the  excep-
tion of  his  personal  ornaments  and  clothing,  which  go  to  his
own  brothers  and  sisters.  In  the  case  of  a  female,  the  rules
of  inheritance  are  similar  to  those  governing  the  descent
of  the  property  of  a  man  living  with  his  mother,  except
that  in  her  case  her  children  have  a  prior  claim  to  suc-
ceed. All  relationship  is  reckoned  through  the  woman.
The  child  takes  the  clan  of  the  mother,  and  even  the  Seim


II:  THE  MOTHER  AND  THE  FATHER 193

(chieftain)  is  followed  by  his  mother 's  or  sister's  child.
His  own  offspring  enter  the  clan  of  his  wife,  inherit  her
property  and  bear  her  family  name.  A  man  is  thus  in
practice  more  nearly  connected  with  his  sister's  children
than  with  his  own. J ' *

The  practice  is  the  same  among  the  North  American  In-
dians. For  example,  among  the  Choctaws,  if  a  boy  is  to  be
placed  at  school,  it  is  his  uncle  and  not  his  father  who  takes
him  to  the  school  and  makes  the  arrangements.  Among  the
Winnebagoes,  a  maternal  uncle  may  require  services  of  a
nephew  or  administer  correction  which  the  boy 's  own  father
would  neither  ask  nor  attempt.  Similarly  with  the  lowas
and  Ottoes  an  uncle  may  appropriate  to  his  own  use  his
nephew's  horse  or  gun  or  other  personal  property  without
being  questioned,  which  the  sufferer's  own  father  would
have  no  recognized  right  to  do.2

Thus  the  constitution  of  the  family  rests  on  the  fact  that
family  property  and  relationship  are  concentrated  round
the  mother.  At  first  sight  it  may  seem  odd  that  the  mother 's
brother  and  not  the  mother's  father  is  the  male  protector,
but  the  brother  is  the  contemporary  and  remains  when  the
older  generation,  in  the  person  of  the  father,  has  passed
away.

In  spite  of  the  fact  that  this  organization  leads  in  most
cases  to  the  very  independent  position  of  the  women,3  there
are  tribes  in  which  there  does  not  seem  to  be  any  difference
in  the  social  status  of  women  under  a  matrilineal  and
under  a  patrilineal  system.  For  example,  in  Australia

1  FBAZEB,  op.  cit.,  I,  p.  259;  GAIT,  Census  of  India,  1891.

2  FBAZEB,  Totemism,  III,  p.  25.

s  The  Nayar  women  show  great  independence  of  character  and
temper.  As  a  consequence  of  the  independent  position  of  women
in  tribes  practising  mother-kin,  we  find  cases  in  which  a  great
latitude  is  allowed  to  women  in  regard  to  the  dismissal  of  their
husbands,  e.g. :  "  In  Aghdnt,  XVI,  p.  106,  in  the  story  of  Hfttim  and
Hawlya,  we  read  as  follows.  '  The  women  in  the  Jahillya,  or  some
of  them,  had  the  right  to  dismiss  their  husbands,  and  the  form
of  dismissal  was  this.  If  they  lived  in  a  tent  they  turned  it  round,
so  that  if  the  door  had  faced  east  it  now  faced  west,  and  when
the  man  saw  this  he  knew  that  he  was  dismissed  and  did  not  enter.'
The  tent  therefore  belonged  to  the  woman,  the  husband  was  received
in  her  tent  and  at  her  good  pleasure." — ROBERTSON  SMITH,  Kinship,
etc.,  p.  65.

2231  M


194 TRIBAL  LAW:  PART  I:  ELEMENTS  OF  THE  FAMILY


Social
status of
women
under
matri-
archal and
patri-
archal
systems.


Influence
of  division
of occu-
pations.


neighbouring  tribes  follow  one  or  other  of  the  rules  of
descent,  and  yet  observers  have  found  the  women  in  the
same  condition  of  servants  of  all  work  and  of  beasts  of
burden  under  both  systems.1  This  is  due  to  the  fact
that  the  basis  of  society  is  the  scattered  household  and
the  tribes  congregate  only  for  hunting  and  fishing.
But  the  fundamental  position  is  not  to  be  shaken.  In  the
reaction  against  the  exaggerated  views  of  earlier  investi-
gators, Westermarck  and  Malinowski  have  maintained  that
there  is  no  matriarchal  arrangement,  only  matrilineal  de-
scent, and  that  the  family  is  always  patriarchal.  The
question  then  is,  how  are  we  to  harmonize  this  with  the  fact
that  the  male  sex  is  apt  to  exert  its  superior  strength  to
obtain  privileges  and  to  push  the  weaker  sex  into  the  back-
ground ?  The  development  of  the  matriarchal  system  is  not
merely  based  on  guesses,  for  we  can  see  what  makes  the
system  so  tenacious  and  why  it  can  stand  the  test  of  thou-
sands of  years  and  of  severe  industrial  competition.  It  is
the  effect  of  the  division  of  labour  that  makes  for  the
matriarchal  arrangement  of  the  household.  Men  are  by
nature  destined  for  outside  pursuits  and  women  for  house-
keeping and  inside  pursuits.  In  primitive  society  also  the
woman  not  only  cooks  and  carries,  but  manages  the  whole
rudimentary  culture  of  the  soil,  so  that  the  characteristic
implement  of  the  Australian  woman  is  the  digging  stick
with  which  she  digs  round  the  house  for  roots,  and  that
of  the  man  is  the  boomerang.  Even  when  the  culture  of
the  soil  becomes  less  primitive,  the  sowing  of  the  maize
is  regarded  as  women's  work,  and  the  women  and  children
hunt  small  animals  such  as  mice  and  opossums,  while  the
man  is  the  big  hunter,  of  the  kangaroo,  buffalo  and  deer.
The  women  rule  the  house,  because  the  men  do  not  care
to  meddle  with  small  domestic  matters.  Thus  the  position
of  the  mother  as  the  economic  centre  is  maintained  in  the


i  Cf.  the  situation  in  the  Shortland  Islands  of  the  Solomon
Group.  "  Although  the  system  of  mother-kin  prevails  in  respect  of
the  exogamous  classes,  Mr.  Ribbe  tells  us  that  all  the  rights  are
on  the  side  of  the  man.  The  woman  is  more  the  slave  and  beast
of  burden  than  the  mate  and  companion  of  her  husband." — FBAZEB,
Totemism,  II,  p.  117.


II:  THE  MOTHER  AND  THE  FATHER 195

altered  situation,  and  while  progress  strives  to  make  more
allowance  for  the  predominance  of  the  father,  instinct  and
custom  work  the  other  way.

Though  the  two  systems  seem  opposed  in  principle,  yet  Sonnbe~-
in  a  number  of  tribes  we  can  see  the  transitional  stages.  B^8etemsWO
As  a  rule  the  transition  to  the  patriarchal  system  is  an
easy  and  gradual  development.  The  main  fact  is  residence.
The  Senegalese  of  Kandy  follow  two  rules  of  marriage  and
inheritance.  In  a  Beena  marriage  the  descent  is  matri-
lineal,  because  it  is  constituted  between  a  wealthy  woman
and  a  poor  husband  who  lives  with  her  kindred.  But
wealth  is  relative,  and  a  brother  of  a  poor  husband  may  be
rich  compared  with  a  poor  wife  whom  he  has  married.  In
this  case  it  is  a  diga  marriage  and  the  descent  is  patri-
lineal,  as  the  residence  is  not  in  the  house  of  the  woman.
Hebrew  society  was  patriarchal,  but  the  fact  that  Jacob
lived  with  and  served  his  father-in-law  constituted  a  matri-
archal arrangement.  There  is  no  inherent  incompatibility
in  the  two  systems  and  it  is  possible  to  slide  from  one  to
the  other.1  The  question  is,  what  really  decided  the  ulti-
mate victory  of  the  patriarchal  or  the  matriarchal  system?
It  is  to  be  noticed  that  among  all  the  more  progressive
nations  the  patriarchal  system  prevailed.

The  Father.

It  is  unnecessary  to  cite  examples  of  the  general  aspect The
of  patriarchal  organization,  because  it  is  the  organization archai
familiar  to  us. It  obtains  among  most  nations  even  outside
the  circle  of  the  civilized  world. What  is  really  important
in an analytical survey is to ascertain the principal
conditions  leading  to  the  formation  of  the  patriarchal  or-

iCf.  FBAZEB,  Totemism,  I,  p.  72:  "Amongst  the  Banyai  on  the
Zambesi,  if  the  husband  gives  nothing,  the  children  of  the  mar-
riage belong  to  the  wife's  family;  but  if  he  gives  so  many  cattle  to
his  wife's  parents  the  children  are  his.  In  the  VVatubela  Islands
between  New  Guinea  and  Celebes  a  man  may  either  pay  for  his  wife
before  marriage,  or  he  may,  without  paying,  live  as  her  husband
in  her  parents'  house,  working  for  her  and  her  parents.  In  the
former  case  the  children  belong  to  him;  in  the  latter  they  belong
to  his  wife's  family,  but  he  may  acquire  them  subsequently  by
paying  the  price."

Cf  on  the  Lalungs  of  Assam,  Hid.,  II,  p 324.


196 TRIBAL  LAW:  PART  I:  ELEMENTS  OF  THE  FAMILY

ganization.  From  the  outset  one  consideration  is  clear.  It  is
evident  that  in  all  cases  when  violence  and  capture  played
a  part,  the  result  was  bound  to  be  coloured  by  the  superi-
ority of  the  husband,  the  captor.  Among  savage  and  primi-
tive tribes  and  in  the  early  ages  of  our  own  nations,  capture
led  to  the  greatest  number  of  marital  unions.  This  is
obvious,  but  another  consideration  deserves  greater  atten-
tion. In  the  case  of  capture,  as  the  union  is  a  one-sided
assertion  of  force,  there  is  no  contract,  though  later,  with
the  development  of  affection,  a  kind  of  contract  may  emerge.
Women  captured  when  their  husbands  or  fathers  have  been
slain  become  the  unwilling  wives  of  the  conqueror.  Sup-
pose that  no  direct  violence  is  employed,  how  are  these  mar-
riages managed  and  what  is  the  household  arrangement?
One  particular  circumstance  may  be  decisive  in  shap-
ing the  case  one  way  or  the  other.  The  important
question  is  that  of  residence  and  whether  the  house-
hold is  within  the  circle  of  influence  of  the  wife's  or
husband's  family.  In  this  question,  apart  from  the  casual
differences  of  wealth  and  power,  the  very  fact  of  settlement
is  bound  to  play  a  great  part.  In  a  primitive  society  where
the  settlements  are  connected  with  scattered  shelters,  father-
hood is  bound  to  assert  itself  with  overwhelming  force.
There  must  be  close  proximity  between  husband  and  wife,
and  the  wife  is  at  a  distance  from  her  brother,  who  might
otherwise  become  the  male  protector.  Among  the  Veddas,
who  are  called  patriarchal  and  monogynous,  the  isolated
household  makes  for  fatherhood.

influence  Even  among  nomads  there  is  a  tendency  to  fatherhood.

ment.tth  In  hunting  and  fishing  tribes  the  household  has  to  follow
the  prey  and  wander  about  in  pursuit  of  the  means  of
existence,  so  that  there  can  be  no  talk  of  isolated  settle-
ments; but  when  pasturage  is  the  important  point,  the
more  settled  existence  produces  clearer  legal  distinctions.
In  moderate  and  in  northern  climates  the  summer  and
winter  appropriation  of  ground  leads  to  a  clearer  map-
ping out  of  settlements  and  centres  of  residence.  With
an  agricultural  people  the  idea  of  the  settlement  growing
into  the  soil  is  a  basic  factor,  and  the  definite  ground  to


II:  THE  MOTHER  AND  THE  FATHER 197

till  and  to  live  on  becomes  the  essence  of  the  whole  hus-
bandry of  the  tribe.  Isolation  is  the  necessary  consequence,
and  with  the  progress  of  the  firm  and  isolated  settlement
fatherhood  is  sure  to  gain  ground.  A  minority  of  cases,
such  as  that  of  the  Nayars,  presents  the  curious  feature  of
the  survival  of  the  ancient  institutions  of  motherhood.  As
a  rule,  however,  in  the  competition  between  mother-kin  and
father-kin,  the  latter  eventually  survives  and  predominates
because  of  the  influence  of  force,  for  the  household  organ-
ized round  the  father  is  a  more  strongly  constituted  centre
of  law  and  a  more  effective  organization  than  is  the  more
complicated  arrangement  which  looks  to  the  mother's
brother  for  assistance.  In  the  operation  of  the  rule  of  the
survival  of  the  fittest,  the  more  simple  and  solid  patri-
archal organization  obtains  the  victory.

Since  this  is  the  general  course  of  the  development  of  Marriage
the  family,  the  next  question  is  as  to  what  shape  the  father-  property.
hood  principle  takes  in  the  hands  of  primitive  tribes.  It
centres  on  property,  for  the  law  of  marital  union  depends
less  on  the  law  of  relationship,  not  to  speak  of  affection,
than  on  the  law  of  property  and  authority.  The  authori-
tative rule  of  the  paterfamilias  is  self-evident,  but  it  is
less  easy  to  grasp  the  importance  of  the  fact  that  marriage
is  a  form  of  the  law  of  property.  Inasmuch  as  mar-
riage not  only  serves  the  purpose  of  sexual  intercourse  and
the  breeding  of  children,  but  is  constituted  on  the  lines  of
property,  it  may  be  compared  with  the  soil,  which  is  not
only  cultivated  for  the  raising  of  crops,  but  is  above  all
property.  In  all  cases  the  principle  obtains  that  the  chil-
dren belong  to  the  male  to  whom  the  wife  belongs.  In  the
mother's  case  generation  remains  the  dominant  fact,  but  the
relationship  between  father  and  child  is  ruled  by  the  fact
of  property,  and  procreation  is  subsidiary  in  a  way  we  have
almost  ceased  to  understand,  save  in  the  case  of  a  stepchild
who  does  not  belong  by  procreation  to  the  step-father.
The  working  of  the  principle  in  primitive  communities  that
it  is  immaterial  by  which  man  the  woman  taken  as  wife  is
pregnant,  is  illustrated  by  the  frequent  substitution  for  the
licence  of  unmarried  girls  of  the  restrictions  of  married


198 TRIBAL  LAW:  PART  I:  ELEMENTS  OF  THE  FAMILY


Recogm
tion of
father-
hood.


The
Lev  irate.


life.  It  is  also  admitted  that  if  the  father  of  the  family
(the  owner  of  the  wife)  is  sickly  and  unable  to  have  chil-
dren for  himself,  he  may  ask  a  stranger  to  procreate.
There  is  also  the  curious  custom  of  lending  wives  for
the  purposes  of  hospitality.  According  to  the  Arab
proverb:  " Children  belong  to  the  man  to  whom  the  bed
belongs. ' ' *

One  of  the  further  results  in  law  is  the  necessity  of
acknowledging  the  relationship  between  father  and  child
when  it  is  not  regarded  as  natural.  Primitive  tribes  de-
mand a  special  acknowledgement,  a  "seisin,"  of  the  child.
In  the  common  form  the  taking  up  of  the  child  by  the
father  directly  after  birth,  the  performance  of  some  cere-
mony connected  with  the  ancestral  hearth  and  the  giving
of  a  name,  constitute  the  establishment  of  the  legal  rela-
tionship. More  curious  is  the  extraordinary  custom  of  ficti-
tious birth  which  prevailed  in  all  parts  of  the  world.  The
"couvade"  has  been  found  among  the  Basques  of  south-
west France,  in  Guiana,  in  California,  and  among  the
Larkas  of  Bengal  and  many  African  tribes.  This  peculiar
ceremony  by  which,  when  a  child  is  to  be  born,  the  father
goes  into  child-bed  and  undergoes  a  fictitious  treatment,
can  have  only  one  meaning,  that  of  proving  the  right  of  the
father  in  the  child.  There  is  no  evidence  that  the  preva-
lence of  the  custom  is  the  result  of  migration  from  one
continent  to  another,  and  it  must  be  regarded  as  a  remark-
able instance  of  the  similarity  of  the  situation  and  thought
in  different  tribes.  As  fatherhood  was  not  a  fact  of  nature,
it  must  be  established  by  an  artificial  ceremony,  for  pro-
perty is  the  root  of  ancient  fatherhood.

The  Levirate,  the  practice  of  marriage  with  a  deceased
brother's  widow,  is  not  the  result  of  simple  appropriation,

i  ROBERTSON  SMITH,  Kinship,  pp  109-10:  "A  man  is  father
of  all  the  children  of  the  woman  by  whom  he  has  purchased  the
right  to  have  offspring  that  shall  be  reckoned  to  his  own  kin.
.  .  .  The  fundamental  doctrine  of  Mohammedan  law  [is  that]  the
son  is  reckoned  to  the  bed  on  which  he  is  born.  '

"  Among  the  Arab  customs  of  the  time  of  heathenism  we  find  a
usage  known  as  Nikah  al-istibada.  When  a  man  desired  a  goodly
seed  he  might  call  upon  his  wife  to  cohabit  with  another  man  till
she  became  pregnant  by  him.  The  child,  as  in  the  similar  case  in
Hindu  law,  was  the  husband's  son."


II:  THE  MOTHER  AND  THE  FATHER 199

but  is  the  outcome  of  the  fact  that  the  brother  is  under  an
obligation  to  take  care  of  the  widow  and  the  property  and
movables  connected  with  her  and  to  prevent  their  disper-
sion. This  is  at  the  root  of  many  customs  of  many  tribes,
To  take  one  example  from  the  Bible,  Ruth,  the  Moabitess,
widow  of  the  Hebrew,  Mahlon,  came  to  the  land  of  the
Jews  and  approached  Boaz,  the  cousin  of  her  deceased  hus-
band, asking  that  he  would  marry  her  and  take  up  the
inheritance.  Boaz  acknowledged  his  duty  as  a  kinsman :

* '  And  now  it  is  true  that  I  am  thy  near  kinsman :  how-
beit  there  is  a  kinsman  nearer  than  I"  (Ruth  iii,  12).  He
then  addressed  the  near  kinsman  and  the  elders :

"And  the  kinsman  said,  I  cannot  redeem  it  for  myself,
lest  I  mar  mine  own  inheritance :  redeem  thou  my  right  to
thyself;  for  I  cannot  redeem  it"  (iv,  6).  To  this  Boaz
agreed :

"Moreover  Ruth  the  Moabitess,  the  wife  of  Mahlon,  have
I  purchased  to  be  my  wife,  to  raise  up  the  name  of  the
dead  upon  his  inheritance,  that  the  name  of  the  dead  be
not  cut  off  from  among  his  brethren,  and  from  the  gate  of
his  place:  ye  are  witnesses  this  day"  (iv,  10). *

Where  polyandry,  which  is  entirely  contradictory  to  our polyandry,
own  ideas,  occurs  not  as  an  qccasional  practice  but  as  the
settled custom  of  regularly  established and constituted

i  On  marriage  with  several  sisters,  see  FBAZER,  Totemism,  IV,
p.  141 :  "  The  general  practice,  as  defined  by  L.  H.  Morgan,  is  that
when  a  man  marries  the  eldest  daughter  he  becomes,  by  that  act,
entitled  to  each  and  all  of  her  sisters  as  wives  when  they  severally
attain  the  marriageable  age.  The  option  rests  with  him,  and  he
may  enforce  the  claim,  or  yield  it  to  another."

As  to  the  Potawattamies,  we  are  informed  that  "  it  was  usual
for  them,  when  an  Indian  married  one  of  several  sisters,  to  conr
sider  him  as  wedded  to  all;  and  it  became  incumbent  upon  him  to
take  them  all  as  wives."

The  customs  of  the  Arapahoes  in  this  respect  are  especially  worthy
of  attention.  Amongst  them  "  a  wife's  next  younger  sister,  if  of
marriageable  age,  is  sometimes  given  to  her  husband  if  his  brother-
in-law  likes  him.  Sometimes  the  husband  asks  and  pays  for  his
wife's  younger  sister.  This  may  be  done  several  times  if  she  has
several  sisters.  If  his  wife  has  no  sister,  a  cousin  (also  called
"sister")  is  sometimes  given  to  him.  When  a  woman  dies,  her
husband  marries  her  sister.  When  a  man  dies,  his  brother  sometimes
marries  his  wife.  He  is  expected  to  do  so."


200 TRIBAL  LAW: PART  I: ELEMENTS  OF  THE  FAMILY

tribes,  it  must  not  be  treated  as  the  expression  of  loose
morality.  It  is  necessitated  by  something  in  the  life  of  the
tribes,  and  the  reason  for  it  is  clear.  It  is  due  to  poverty,
and  in  many  cases  brothers  form  a  "joint-stock  company"
for  the  possession  of  a  wife.

"The  Bahima  sometimes  practise  polyandry,  several
brothers  marrying  one  wife  and  enjoying  her  in  common.
When  a  man  is  poor,  when  his  herd  does  not  yield  milk
enough  to  support  a  wife,  or  he  cannot  afford  the  number
of  cows  required  for  a  marriage  dowry,  he  may  ask  one  or
more  of  his  brothers  to  join  him,  and  together  they  may
raise  the  requisite  tale  of  animals.  A  woman  will  readily
agree  to  such  an  arrangement  and  become  the  wife  of  two
or  three  brothers.  The  children  born  under  such  circum-
stances belong  to  the  elder  brother.  The  custom  of  polyan-
dry seems  to  be  rare  among  the  Bantu  peoples.  The  only
other  people  known  to  Mr.  Roscoe  who  practise  it  are  the
Baziba  to  the  south  of  Uganda. " l

"The  Todas  have  a  completely  organized  and  definite
system  of  polyandry,  and  in  the  vast  majority  of  polyan-
drous  marriages  the  husbands  are  own  brothers.  Indeed,
when  a  woman  marries,  it  is  understood  that  she  becomes
the  wife  of  his  brothers  at  the  same  time.  When  the  joint
husbands  are  not  own  brothers,  they  may  either  live  with
the  wife  in  one  family,  or  they  may  dwell  in  different  vil-
lages. In  the  latter  case  the  usual  custom  is  for  the  wife
to  reside  with  each  husband  in  turn  for  a  month.  When
a  child  is  born  in  a  family  of  this  sort,  all  the  brothers  are
equally  regarded  as  its  fathers;  though  if  a  man  be  asked
the  name  of  his  father,  he  will  generally  mention  one  man
of  the  group,  probably  the  most  prominent  or  important  of
them.

"When  the  joint  husbands  are  not  brothers,  they  arrange
among  themselves  who  is  to  be  putative  father  of  each  child
as  it  is  born,  and  the  chosen  one  accepts  the  responsibility
by  performing  a  certain  ceremony  called  pursutpimi,  'bow
(and  arrow)  we  touch/  because  it  consists  in  the  husband

IFBAZEB,  Totemism,  II,  p.  538.


II:  THE  MOTHER  AND  THE  FATHER 201

formally  presenting  his  wife  with  a  little  imitation  bow  and
arrow. ' ' *

The  holding  of  land  as  joint  property  by  a  joint  family
is  an  exceedingly  common  device  among  primitive  peoples,
and  these  polyandric  unions  stand  on  the  same  footing.
McLennan  has  made  a  special  study  of  them.  In  one  par-  influence
ticular  aspect  they  are  often  found  in  conjunction  with  fe-
male infanticide.  In  difficult  conditions  of  existence,  when
starvation  is  imminent,  the  sacrifice  of  daughters  is  not
uncommon.2  The  AgJidm  3  has  a  description  of  a  man  who
goes  to  the  desert  with  his  daughter  and  buries  her  alive.
This  practice  of  female  infanticide  results  in  the  scarcity  of
women  and  the  consequent  necessity  of  joint  marriages.
They  are  not  due  to  licence,  but  are  as  firmly  established
as  monogamous  marriages.

This  is  sufficient  to  illustrate  the  immense  importance  of
property  and  economic  considerations  in  the  development
of  fatherhood.  In  the  important  question  as  to  the  ele-
ments with  which  we  have  to  reckon  in  the  formation  of
family  life,  we  have  discussed  the  selection  of  mates,
mother-kin  and  the  part  played  by  generation,  fatherhood
and  the  facts  of  authority  and  property.  The  fourth  ques-
tion is,  why  has  marriage  in  its  historical  development

1  Op.  cit.,  II,  p.  256.

Cf.  ROBERTSON  SMITH,  Kinship,  p.  133,  on  the  practice  among
the  Iberians:  "  All  the  kindred  have  their  property  in  common,  the
eldest  being  lord ;  all  have  one  wife  and  it  is  first  come  first  served,
the  man  who  enters  to  her  leaving  at  the  door  the  stick  which  it
is  usual  for  every  one  to  carry;  but  the  night  she  spends  with
the  eldest.  Hence  all  are  brothers  of  all  [within  the  stock  of
avyyt ve ic ] ;  they  have  also  conjugal  intercourse  with  mothers;  and
adultery  is  punished  with  death;  an  adulterer  means  a  man  of
another  stock."

2  Cf ROBERTSON SMITH,  op. cit.,  p. 279 : "  The  practice  of  in-
fanticide  is spoken of and condemned by the prophet in several
places. . . . The  motive  which  he  assigns  is  poverty; the  parents
were  afraid  that  they  could  not  find  food  for  all  their  offspring"
Cf.  The  Koran,  transl.  by  Rodwell (Everyman's  Library),  Sura  vi,
141; xvi,  60-6: "For  when  the  birth  of  a  daughter  is  announced
to  any  one  of  them,  dark  shadows  settle  on  his  face,  and  he  is  sad.

"  He  hideth  him  from  the  people  because  of  the  ill-tidings;  shall
he  keep  it  with  disgrace,  or  bury  it  in  the  dust?"

Cf  Sura  Ixxxi,  8:  "And  when  the  female  child  that  has  been
buried  alive.  ..."  Sura  xvii,  33:  "Kill  not  your  children  for
fear  of  want."  vi,  152.

3  xii,  150 The  story  is  given  in  ROBERTSON  SMITH,  loc.  cit.


202 TRIBAL  LAW:  PART  I:  ELEMENTS  OF  THE  FAMILY

reached,  in  all  progressive  communities,  the  stage  beyond
that  of  casual  unions,  and  become  a  settled  combination
on  the  principle  of  agreement  with  actual  or  quasi-actual
contract?  We  touch  the  line  on  which  our  description  has
to  proceed  from  a  different  basis:  we  shall  have  to  deal
henceforth  with  marriage  as  an  institution.  The  foundation
of  this  development  lies  in  the  influence  of  the  group.


CHAPTER  III
RELATIONSHIP  AND  MARRIAGE

IT  is  clear  from  our  description  of  marital  unions  among  "  Marital
primitive  tribes  that  it  would  be  wrong  to  describe  them  as  not  the
marriages.  It  is  a  fundamental  fact  that  there  is  inherent  "  mar-f
in  our  connotation  of  the  term  "marriage"  an  idea  of
reciprocal  obligation  which  is  not  implied  in  "mating"  or
' '  marital  union. ' '  For  * '  marriage ' '  something  else  is  neces-
sary, and  even  in  savage  society  this  additional  element  is
sometimes  present.  The  question  to  be  answered  is,  how
and  in  what  surroundings  is  this  contractual  element  de-
veloped? In  the  previous  conditions  with  which  we  have
dealt  the  unions  were  polygynic,  that  is  to  say,  by  legal
custom — for  it  can  hardly  be  termed  law, — the  husband
attracts  as  many  mates  of  the  female  sex  as  he  can,  and
his  right  and  desire  to  do  so  are  limited  only  by  the  question
of  means.  This  is  not  even  polygamy,  for  that  involves  an
element  of  bilateral  relationship.  Among  the  Tasmanians
of  the  first  half  of  the  nineteenth  century,  who  have  since
disappeared,  but  who  were  then  an  exceedingly  primitive
people  in  the  palaeolithic  period  using  only  clipped  stone
implements,  Lloyd  "scarcely  ever  knew  an  instance  of  a
native,  having  but  one  gin.  On  the  contrary,  two  or  three
were  the  usual  allowance.  I  have  known  a  grey-headed  old
savage  to  possess  three  wives  of  the  respective  ages  of
thirty,  seventeen,  and  ten  years,  all  betrothed  to  him  from
childhood,  and  from  the  time  of  their  betrothal,  become
members  of  his  family  circle,  entirely  dependent  on  him
for  support. ' '  *  But  even  when  we  start  from  the  absolute
conception  of  appropriation,  the  working  of  psychical  and
emotional  intercourse  on  the  higher  plane  of  mutual  regard
may  involve  some  sort  of  reciprocal  arrangement  even  in

*  Quoted  by  H.  LING  ROTH,  The  Aborigines  of  Tasmania,  p.  124.

203


204 TRIBAL  LAW:  PART  I:  ELEMENTS  OF  THE  FAMILY


The  con
tractual
element  in
marriage
due  to  the
formation
of  rela-
tionships.


Three

systems.


polygynous  unions.  The  natural  attachment  of  the  man  to
his  wife  and  children  is  in  itself  insufficient,  and  the  de-
cisive and  most  interesting  fact  from  the  jurist's  point  of
view  is  that  the  obligation  of  marriage  as  a  bilateral
union  is  conditioned  by  the  law  of  relationship.  The  germ
of  marriage  lies  in  the  fact  that  marital  unions  lead  to  the
formation  of  circles  of  relationship  reacting  on  the  unions
and  tending  to  shape  them  in  a  less  one-sided  manner.
Under  the  influence  of  groups  of  relationship,  the  wife
becomes  less  a  "  thing. "

It  must  not  be  assumed  that  the  formation  of  the  rela-
tionship is  always  on  the  same  plan  and  as  it  now  is.  In
a  comparative  survey  of  the  collateral  relationships  de-
veloped from  marriage,  the  whole  immense  material  may
be  divided  into  three  groups.  In  the  first  place  there  is
the  relationship  of  blood,  consanguinity,  in  which  the  fact
of  procreation  is  translated  into  its  social  and  legal
consequences,  and  kinship  is  recognized  by  people  born  of
the  same  mother,  or,  when  the  circle  of  observation  is  en-
larged, of  the  same  mother  and  father.  This  is  the  cognatic
system.

The  second  important  influence  in  the  formation  of  rela-
tionship is  the  household,  composed  of  one  group  dwelling
together  under  one  family  name  and  tracing  descent  from
the  same  original  common  household.  This  is  the  agnatic
formation,  the  one-sided  relationship  which  follows  from
union  in  a  single  household.  Usually,  as  in  our  patriarchal
system  of  descent,  the  relationship  is  through  males,  but
logically  it  is  equally  right  to  build  up  the  household  system
through  females.

The  divergence  between  the  two  types  leads  to  important
social  results  which  may  be  expressed  graphically  thus.
The  cognatic  relationship  starts  from  a  pair  and  is  de-
veloped round  this  original  pair  in  a  kind  of  spider-web.
The  group  is  never  quite  compact,  for  at  the  beginning  it
starts  from  two,  each  of  which  is  the  offspring  of  two,  so
that  there  are  four  grandparents  and  eight  great-grand-
parents. The  apex  of  the  scheme  of  an  agnatic  relation-
ship, on  the  other  hand,  is  normally  the  paterfamilias.  The


Ill:  RELATIONSHIP  AND  MARRIAGE  205

tree  springs  from  one  root  and  its  branches  extend  in  dif-
ferent directions.  There  is  formed  therefore  a  compact
group  of  sons,  grandsons  and  nephews,  with  the  living
grandfather  at  the  top  and  all  under  his  household  potestas
below.1

Thirdly,  there  is  the  totemic  system  which  is  neither  en-
tirely agnatic  nor  entirely  cognatic,  being  based  neither  on
procreation  nor  purely  on  the  household,  but  on  a  religious
system.  It  is  found  in  all  parts  of  the  world  and  is  an
admission  of  kinship  between  locally  neighbouring  people,
associated  as  a  group  and  divided  from  other  groups  by
the  recognition  of  magic  descent  from  a  mythical  ancestor,
presented  as  an  animal,  a  plant,  or  a  meteorological  phe-
nomenon (e.g.,  cloud,  rain).  For  instance,  "Amongst  the
Black  Shoulder  (Buffalo)  clan  of  the  Omahas  a  dying  clans-
man was  wrapped  in  a  buffalo  robe  with  the  hair  out,  his
face  was  painted  with  the  clan  mark,  and  his  friends  ad-
dressed him  thus:  'You  are  going  to  the  animals  (the  buf-
faloes). You  are  going  to  rejoin  your  ancestors.  You  are
going,  or  your  four  souls  are  going,  to  the  four  winds.  Be
strong.'  Amongst  the  Hanga  clan,  another  Buffalo  clan  of
the  Omahas,  the  ceremony  was  similar,  and  the  dying  man
was  thus  addressed:  'You  came  hither  from  the  animals,
and  you  are  going  back  thither.  Do  not  face  this  way
again.  When  you  go,  continue  walking.'  "2

We  have  seen  how  among  the  Aruntas  the  local  associ-
ation differed  from  the  association  in  blood,  and  the  whole
system  rests  on  the  supposed  connection  between  the  locality
and  its  inhabitants.  Each  man  is  the  reincarnation  of  an
ancestor  whose  identity  is  sought  by  local  signs  and  magi-  '
cal  rites.  These  are  regarded  as  the  regular  and  actual
concrete  facts  of  relationship.  According  to  R.  H.  Matth-
ews, "In  the  Chau-an  as  well  as  in  all  the  other  tribes
reported  by  me,  in  the  Northern  Territory,  succession  of
the  totems  does  not  depend  upon  either  the  father  or  the
mother,  but  is  regulated  by  locality,  and  I  shall  now  en-

1  Cf .  RIVERS,  Kinship  and  Social  Organization,  p.  79 ;  and  HILL-
TOUT,  British  North  America,  I,  pp.  158-9.

2  FRAZER,  Totemism,  I,  p.  35.


206 TRIBAL  LAW:  PART  I: ELEMENTS  OF  THE  FAMILY

deavour  to  describe  how  this  is  carried  out.  The  folk-lore
of  these  people  is  full  of  fabulous  tales  respecting  the  pro-
genitors of  every  totem.  Some  of  them  were  like  the  men
and  women  of  our  own  time,  whilst  others  were  mythologic
creatures  of  aboriginal  fairyland.  In  these  olden  days,  as
at  present,  the  totemic  ancestors  consisted  of  families  or
groups  of  families,  who  had  their  recognized  hunting-
grounds  in  some  part  of  the  tribal  territory.  They  were
born  in  the  specific  locality,  and  occupied  it  by  virtue  of
their  birth-right.  Some  of  them  would  be,  let  us  say,
cockatoos,  others  dogs,  others  kangaroos,  others  snakes  and
so  forth.  The  members  of  these  family  groups  were  sub-
divided into  the  same  eight  sections  which  we  find  among
the  people  now.  .  .  .

"In  all  aboriginal  tribes  there  is  a  deeply  seated  belief  in
the  reincarnation  of  their  ancestors.  The  original  stock
of  spirits,  so  to  speak,  perpetually  undergo  reincarnation
from  one  human  being  to  another.  The  natives  are  quite
ignorant  of  the  natural  facts  of  procreation,  and  believe
that  conception  is  altogether  independent  of  sexual  inter-
course. When  a  woman  for  the  first  time  feels  the  move-
ment of  the  child  in  the  womb,  commonly  called  quicken-
ing, she  takes  particular  notice  of  the  spot  where  it  occurred
and  reports  it  to  the  people  present.1  It  is  believed  that  the
spirit  or  soul  of  some  deceased  progenitor  has  just  at  that
moment  entered  the  woman's  body.  The  entry  may  have
been  by  way  of  some  one  of  the  natural  openings,  or
through  any  part  of  the  skin,  the  mode  or  place  of  ingress
being  immaterial  to  these  ethereal  beings.  When  the  child
is  born  it  will  have  assigned  to  it  the  totemic  name  of  the
mythic  ancestor  belonging  to  the  particular  locality.*'2
Relation-  In  the  cognatic  system  it  is  possible  to  distinguish  between

fnd?viduai  two  phases,  the  archaic  and  the  modern.  Ancient  Roman
Law  was  agnatic,  but  the  cognatic  system  was  admitted  by
the  later  Prastorian  Law  and  is  now  practised  by  us.  This
is  not,  however,  the  ancient  cognatic  system,  and  there  is  a

1  See  ante,  p.  183  n.

2  Notes  on  Some  Native  Tribes  of  Australia, in the  Journal  and
Proceedings  of  the  Royal  Society  of  New  South  Wales,  XL (1906),
pp.  107,  110.


Ill:  RELATIONSHIP  AND  MARRIAGE  207

fundamental  difference  between  this  system  as  the  expres-
sion of  matrilineal  arrangements  and  as  the  expression  of
higher  civilization.  The  cognatic  system  does  not  always
point  to  ancient  matrilineal  arrangements,  and  it  is  a  fal-
lacy to  argue  that,  because  the  Germanic  system  is  cognatic,
it  must  have  been  so  from  the  beginning,  and  that  it  is
impossible  to  suppose  that  it  was  at  any  time  agnatic.
Both  the  Greek  and  Roman  systems  were  at  one  time
agnatic,  and  the  ancient  Athenian  matrilineal  arrange-
ments became  patrilineal ;  and  later,  with  increasing  civi-
lization, the  yevo?  was  broken  up  and  a  new  form  of
cognatic  system  emerged.  In  both  systems  we  can  trace
relationship  on  individual  lines  either  from  the  definite  and
concrete  fact  of  birth  or  from  membership  of  the  same
household.  In  the  totemic  formation,  however,  the  facts
are  different,  for  the  essence  of  the  reincarnation  principle
is  a  vague  mythical  idea.  As  we  have  here  the  notion  of
the  group  as  the  matrimonial  class,  it  is  impossible  to  con-
struct relationship  on  definite  individual  lines.  Relation-
ship is  formed  not  by  actual  marriage  between  single  in-
dividuals, but  by  potential  marriage  between  whole  groups.
A  peculiar  nomenclature,  foreign  to  our  ideas  but  evidenced
all  over  the  world,  has  arisen.  In  Australia,  for  instance:
"Like  all  other  Australian  tribes  about  whom  we  have
exact  information,  the  Dieri  have  the  classificatory  system
of  relationship.  For  example,  in  the  generation  above  his
own  a  man  applies  the  same  term  ngaperi  (appiri)  to  his
father  and  to  his  father's  brothers;  and  he  applies  the  same
term  ngandri  (andri)  to  his  mother  and  to  his  mother's
sisters.  In  his  own  generation  he  applies  the  same  term  negi
(nielli,  neyi)  to  his  elder  brothers,  to  the  sons  of  his
father's  brothers,  and  to  the  sons  of  his  mother's  sisters;
and  he  applies  the  same  term  kaku  to  his  elder  sisters,  to
the  daughters  of  his  father's  brothers,  and  to  the  daughters
of  his  mother's  sisters.  He  applies  the  same  term  noa  to
his  wife,  to  his  wife's  sisters,  and  to  his  brothers'  wives;
and  on  her  side  a  woman  applies  the  same  term  noa  to  her
husband,  to  her  husband's  brothers,  and  to  her  sisters'  hus-
bands. In  the  generation  below  his  own  a  man  applies  the


208 TRIBAL  LAW:  PART  I:  ELEMENTS  OF  THE  FAMILY

same  term  ngata  mura  (athamoora)  to  his  own  sons,  to  the
sons  of  his  brothers,  and  to  the  sons  of  his  wife's  sisters.
Thus  a  Dieri  man  may  have  many  'fathers'  who  never
begot  him,  many  'mothers'  who  never  bore  him,  many
'brothers'  and  'sisters'  who  are  the  children  of  neither
of  his  parents,  and  many  'sons'  whom  he  never  begot.  In
the  mouth  of  the  Dieri  these  terms  of  relationship,  while
they  include  the  relationships  which  we  designate  by  them,
also  include  many  more :  they  mark  the  relationship  of  the
individual  not  to  individuals  merely  but  to  groups.  It  has
already  been  pointed  out  that  such  classificatory  terms,
descriptive  of  group  relationships,  are  only  explicable  on
the  hypothesis  that  they  are  directly  derived  from  group-
marriage.  That  inference  has  long  been  rightly  drawn  by
Dr.  A.  W.  Howitt,  our  principal  authority  on  the  Dieri  and
other  tribes  of  south-eastern  Australia."1

In  the  same  way  among  the  Urabunna:  "Since  in  this
tribe  groups  of  women  are  thus  common  to  groups  of  men,
it  naturally  follows  that  the  children  born  of  such  unions
are  also  common  to  the  groups.  All  the  children  born  of
women  whom  a  man  might  marry,  whether  he  has  marital
relations  with  them  or  not,  call  him  'father'  (nia)  and
he  calls  them  'children'  (biaka).  Whilst  naturally  there
is  a  closer  tie  between  a  man  and  the  children  of  the
women  who  habitually  live  in  camp  with  him,  still  there  is
no  name  to  distinguish  between  the  children  of  his  own
wives  and  those  of  women  whom  he  might  marry  but  with
whom  he  has  no  sexual  relations.  All  children  of  the  men
who  are  at  the  same  level  in  the  generation  and  belong  to
the  same  class  and  totem  are  regarded  as  the  common  chil-
dren of  these  men,  and  similarly  the  men  are  regarded
collectively  by  the  children  as  their  fathers. ' ' 2

The  stages  in  the  Malayan  system  of  relationship  are,
according  to  Morgan :  1,  The  children  of  my  brothers  and
of  my  sisters  are  my  children.  2,  All  the  children  of  several
brothers  and  of  several  sisters  are  brothers  and  sisters  as
among  themselves.  3,  All  the  brothers  of  my  father  and  of

1  FBAZER,  Totemism,  I,  p.  362.

2  Ibid.,  pp. 309-10.


Ill:  RELATIONSHIP  AND  MARRIAGE


209


my  mother  are  my  fathers,  and  all  the  sisters  of  my  father
and  of  my  mother  are  my  mothers.  One  general  idea  pre-
vails throughout,  namely,  that  relationship  is  traced  not
through  individuals  but  through  groups.

The  system  is  based  on  potential,  not  actual  relationship.
The  uncertainty  of  procreation  is  in  the  background  and
reincarnation  takes  its  place.  Morgan,  who  was  the  first  to
interpret  this  class  relationship  and  its  nomenclature,  elabo-
rated a  theory  of  group  marriage  and  consequent  promis-
cuity between  groups.  This  conclusion  has  been  attacked,
for  no  such  promiscuity  has  been  found,  only  occasional
licence  and  subsidiary  intercourse.  The  dividing  lines  are
formed  on  class  association,  on  religious  lines.

The  next  question  is,  how  does  the  fact  that  every  marital
union  produces  groups  of  relationship  influence  the  institu-
tion of  marriage?  By-and-by  marriage  ceases  to  be  only
the  relation  between  mates,  and  in  all  systems  the  relations
are  interested  in  the  conclusion  of  right  marriages  and
exert  their  influence  to  make  marriage  a  legal  institution
instead  of  a  casual  sexual  union.  However,  the  forms
which  marriage  does  take  in  different  tribes  are  not  always
conducive  to  contractual  marriage.

In  archaic  times  the  practice  of  marriage  by  capture  was
exceedingly  prevalent.  In  all  forms  of  marriage  some
traces  of  this  may  be  found.  There  are,  for  instance,  vari-
ous ceremonies  and  customs,  such  as  that  of  parting  the
bride 's  hair  with  a  spear  or  of  lifting  her  over  the  threshold.
Capture  shades  off  into  elopement  on  one  side,  and  on  the
other  into  an  agreement  accompanied  by  simulated  capture,
a  compromise  with  real  capture.1  In  Serbia  at  the  begin-
ning of  the  nineteenth  century  there  were  raids  for  wives
at  which  real  fights  might  take  place,  and  the  following  ac-
count of  a  raid  in  the  Caucasus  is  given  by  B.  Rossler: 2


Marriage
by  capture
and  quasi
capture.


iCf.  H.  LING  ROTH,  The  Aborigines  of  Tasmania,  p.  123:  "It
was  rarely  the  custom  amongst  them  to  select  wives  from  their  own
tribes,  but  rather  to  take  them  furtively,  or  by  open  force,  from
neighbouring  clans."  (Quoting  MILLIGAN,  Beacon,  p.  29.)  Cf.
FBAZEB,  Totemism,  III,  p.  582.

2  Zeitschrift  fur  Ethnologic,  XXX (1898),  p.  324.
2231  N


210 TRIBAL  LAW:  PART  I:  ELEMENTS  OF  THE  FAMILY

' '  A  raid  had  certainly  taken  place :  but  on  this  occasion
it  had  been  directed,  not  against  the  cattle  of  the  villagers
(as  is  generally  the  case),  but  merely  against  a  girl!  Ac-
cording to  a  common  practice  among  the  Tartars,  the  con-
sent of  the  damsel  is  often  obtained  beforehand,  and  such
was  no  doubt  the  case  now.  For  if  two  lovers  agree,  the
bridegroom  waits  for  a  favourable  opportunity  to  abduct
the  lady  of  his  heart.  Having  informed  her  secretly  of  his
intention  he  appears  during  the  night  with  his  companions
near  the  house  of  his  beloved,  who  is  waiting  for  him.  He
lifts  her  on  to  his  horse  and  gallops  away  with  her.
Thereupon  the  parents  and  relatives  of  the  damsel  start
in  pursuit,  and  the  whole  village  is  roused.  The  chase
which  now  begins  is  either  feigned  or  genuine  according  as
to  whether  the  abductor  is  viewed  with  favour  or  disfavour
by  the  pursuers.  In  the  former  case,  the  main  object  of
the  comedy  is  amusement,  and  much  powder  is  expended  in
the  firing  of  shots:  in  the  latter,  the  bullets  of  course
sometimes  find  their  mark,  and  the  wedding  feast  becomes
a  funeral  banquet.  If,  however,  the  abduction  is  success-
fully carried  out,  the  wedding  takes  place  in  a  few  days;
there  is  a  general  reconciliation,  and  from  that  time  on-
wards peaceful  intercourse  prevails  between  the  newly  mar-
ried couple  and  their  relations. ' '

Marriage  In  other  cases  marriage  by  elopement  is  found. For  in-

menet.°p(  stance  among  the  Sikani,  of  the  Dene  tribe,  "when  a  man
has  made  up  his  mind  to  take  a  wife,  he  'proposes'  to  the
girl  of  his  choice  in  the  following  words:  'Will  you  pack
my  beaver  snares  for  me?'  This  is  tantamount  to  asking
her  to  be  his  wife,  and  is  understood  as  such  by  the  girl. ' ' 1
Marriage  by  purchase,  which  takes  the  form  of  acquisi-
tion of  a  thing,2  is  really  the  beginning  of  marriage  by

1  HILL-TOUT,  British  North  America,  I,  p.  182.

2  Cf .  ROBERTSON  SMITH,  Kinship,  p.  77: "A  woman  of  the  Banfl
'Amir  ibn  Sa'sa'a  married  among  the  Tayyi  says:

"  '  Never  let  sister  praise  brothers  of  hers : never  let  daughter

bewail  a  father's  death:

For  they  have  brought  her  where  she  is  no  longer  a  free
woman,  and  they  have  banished  her  to  the  farthest  ends
of  the  earth.'  "

In  regard  to  women,  the  word  "  possession "  is  used  in  the  same
sense  as  of  slaves.


Ill:  RELATIONSHIP  AND  MARRIAGE


211


Marriage
by  pur
chase  the
beginning
of  con-
tractual
marriage.


agreement.  Presents  are  sometimes  substituted  for  real
purchase.1  The  contract  of  purchase  opens  a  possibility  of
the  introduction  of  certain  conditions.  The  kin  of  the  bride
.still  keep  a  kind  of  authority  and  supervision  over  her  life.2
The  obligation  of  revenge  in  regard  to  her  remains  with
them.  If  the  husband  treats  his  wife  unjustly,  the  father
will  probably  wage  war  upon  him.  Possibly  an  agreement
between  the  two  kins  may  settle  the  extent  of  the  responsi-
bility on  both  sides.  This  double  allegiance  of  the  wife
which  leads  to  the  maintenance  of  her  relations  with  her
father  and  brother,  reacts  on  the  children  who  are  under
the  protection  of  the  tribe  of  the  mother  also.

It  may  be  appropriate  to  sum  up  briefly  the  principal summary,
results  of  the  analytical  survey of  primitive forms of
marriage.

(1)  It  is  not  only  impossible  to  trace  one  single  course
of  development  as  regards  family  institutions,  but  it  is  most
unlikely  that  such  a  single  course  could  have  been  followed
by  the  various  tribes  of  mankind.

(2)  There  is  no  evidence  as  to  general  sexual  promiscuity
in  any  instance  susceptible  of  exact  observation,  but  there
are  numberless  cases  of  occasional  and  seasonal  licence.

(3)  Exogamic  restrictions  in  the  selection  of  mates  can  be
traced  to  one  of  three  motives — the  attraction  of  contrast-
ing features  of  body  and  mind,  the  perception  of  eugenic
laws  as  to  cross-breeding,  the  policy  of  social  order.

(4)  Endogamy  is  to  be  accounted  for  by  the  wish  of  a
group  to  keep  together  as  against  outsiders,  and,  more
especially,  by  the  tendency  to  prevent  the  dispersion  of
family  property.

1  HILL-TOUT,  op.  cit.,  I,  p.  188.

2  ROBERTSON  SMITH,  op.  cit.,  pp.  101-2:  "The  strength  of  the  feel-
ings of  kinship  bettered  the  wife's  position,  whether  she  were  mar-
ried in  her  own  kin  or  to  an  alien,  unless  she  were  carried  far  out
of  the  reach  of  her  natural  protectors: in  Agh.,  IX,  150,  when  the
father  comes  to  his  daughter  and  says,  '  This  is  Htirith  ibn  'Auf
a  chieftain  of  the  Arabs  who  has  come  to  ask  thy  hand,  and  I  am
willing  to  give  thee  him  to  wife,  what  sayest  thou?'  the  reply  is,
'  No ! I  am  not  fair  of  face  and  I  have  infirmities  of  temper,  and
I  am  not  his  lint  'amm (tribeswoman) so  that  he  should  respect
my  consanguinity  with  him,  nor  does  he  dwell  in  thy  country  so
that  he  should  have  regard  for  thee;  I  fear 'then  that  he  may  not
care  for  me  and  may  divorce  me,  and  so  I  shall  be  in  an  evil  case.' "


212 TRIBAL  LAW:  PART  I:  ELEMENTS  OF  THE  FAMILY

(5)  The  position  of  the  mother  in  the  family  is  based  on
the  patent  fact  of  generation,  and  the  elemental  affection
between  mother  and  children.

(6)  Matrilineal  institutions  develop  under  the  influence
of  a  sharply  marked  division  of  labour  between  males  and
females.

(7)  In  matrilineal  arrangements  the  mother  of  the  family
leans  on  the  support  of  her  brother,  instead  of  leaning  on
the  support  of  her  husband.

(8)  The  father's  position  in  the  family  is  primarily  con-
nected with  appropriation  and  lordship.

(9)  The  transitions  from  matrilineal  to  patrilineal  insti-
tutions are  gradual  and  depend  to  a  great  extent  on  the
condition  of  settlement.

(10)  The  patriarchal  order  has  advantages  in  competi-
tion with  the  matriarchal,  on  account  of  its  greater  solidity
and  discipline.

(11)  The  institution  of  the  family  centre  determines  the
formation  of  systems  of  relationship  on  the  lines  of  affinity
by  blood  (cognation),  affinity  through  household  ties  (ag-
nation) and affinity by consciousness of reincarnation
(Totemism).

(12)  The  formation  of  groups  of  kinsmen  reacts  power-
fully on  the  evolution  of  matrimonial  unions  by  producing
certain  safeguards  for  contractual  marriage.


PART  II
ARYAN  CULTURE


CHAPTER  IV
ARYAN  ORIGINS

SINCE  the  days  (1816)  when  Bopp  traced  the  develop- Aryan
ment  of the verb among  various  nations of the  Indo- affinities0
European  race,  comparative  philology,  prehistoric  archae-
ology and  ethnology  have  made  great  strides:  it  is  possible
to  speak  of  Aryan  or  Indo-European  origins  with  much
more  precision, and  to  place  ascertained  facts  in  better
perspective,  although  most  important  problems  still  remain
unsolved,  and  new  problems  arise  in  the  course  of  inves-
tigation.

We  know  by  this  time  that  the  chasm  between  the  south-
eastern group  of  Aryan  nations  and  the  north-western  one
is  not  so  great  as  was  supposed  in  the  nineteenth  century:
ethnologists  and  linguists  have  to  reckon  seriously  not  only
with  Sanskrit  and  Avestic,  but  with  Armenian,  Tocharic,
North  Aryan,  with  Thracian  and  Illyrian,  as  intermediate
links  between  the  East  and  the  West.  What  is  even  more
important,  the  pedigree  scheme  of  linguistic  affinities
sketched  by  Schleicher  has  given  way  before  a  view  of
intercourse  extending  in  various  directions, — a  view  that
starts  from  the  fact  that  certain  terms  of  a  particular
language  are  common  to  it  and  to  its  eastern  or  north-
ern neighbours,  while  other  terms  of  the  same  language
connect  it  with  the  speech  of  western  or  southern  neigh-
bours. For  instance,  Slavonic  languages  border  on
Iranian  idioms  on  one  side,  on  Lithuanian  and  German  x  on
the  other.  This  theory,  again,  has  to  be  modified  to  some
extent  as  against  the  absolute  form  in  which  it  was  pro-
pounded by  Johannes  Schmidt  and  popularized  by  0.
Schrader,  and  recent  philologists  lay  stress  on  the  marked
interruptions  of  continuity  produced  by  consecutive  migra-
tions of  sections  of  the  Indo-European  group.  But,  when
allowance  has  been  made  for  gaps  and  stages,  the  general
view  of  the  fluid  relations  between  various  gatherings  of

1  SCHRADER, Sprachvergleichung und Urgeschichte, pp. 92  ff. on
Johannes  Schmidt's  theory.

215


216  TRIBAL  LAW:  PART  II:  ARYAN  CULTURE

the  Indo-European  ethnic  mass  still  holds  good  and  seems
necessary  in  order  to  explain  the  curious  cross-currents  of
linguistic  affinity  between  the  languages  of  the  group.
Epochs  of Some  idea  must  be  formed  concerning  the  approximate

AryflD  nil*

grations.  epochs  of  Aryan  migrations.  Starting  with  the  most  recent
historical  movements  of  these  peoples  we  have  to  notice  that
Pytheas  (350  B.C.)  testifies  to  the  settlement  of  Teutonic
tribes  on  the  shores  of  the  Baltic,  and  it  is  most  probable
that  about  the  same  time  the  Lithuanians  and  Slavs  moved
into  north-western  Russia  to  the  east  of  the  Teutons:  The
Celtic  invasion  of  central  and  western  Europe  manifested
itself  about  600  B.C.  The  Italians  cannot  have  reached
the  Apennine  peninsula  much  later  than  1000  B.C.  As
for  the  Greeks,  their  last  Dorian  migration,  recorded  as
having  taken  place  towards  1004  B.C.  must  have  developed
its  initial  stages  somewhat  earlier,  while  the  Achaean  oc-
cupation of  the  Balkan  Peninsula  and  of  the  J^gean  islands
is  synchronized  by  Mesopotamian  inscriptions  of  1275  B.C.,
mentioning  the  Danaiu,  and  inscriptions  of  Rameses  III  of
1234  B.C.,  mentioning  the  Achaeans  and  the  ^Eolians.
These  dates  suggest  that  the  union  of  the  north-western
group  of  the  race  can  hardly  be  placed  in  an  epoch  more
recent  than  1500-1200  B.C.  This  would  tally  with  the
facts  ascertained  concerning  the  movements  of  the  south-
eastern group.  While  the  Persians  and  Medes  begin  to
exert  a  preponderating  influence  only  late,  towards  the
second  quarter  of  the  first  millennium,  there  is  already
evidence  in  cuneiform  inscriptions  of  Boghazkeui  of  the
gods  Mitra,  Varuna  and  Indra  as  worshipped  by  tribes
of  invaders  in  Iran  about  1500  B.C. ;  the  Indian  conquest  of
the  Punjab  reflected  in  the  primitive  Vedic  language  and
lore  probably  took  place  about  2000  B.C.1  And  as  we
have  to  postulate  an  epoch  of  common  existence  preceding
the  disruption  of  the  two  great  branches  of  the  race,  the
south-eastern  and  the  north-western,  room  has  to  be  made
for  several  centuries,  perhaps  some  500-700  years,  of
Indo-European  union  in  the  interval  between  3000  and

1 1  follow  FEIST  in  this  matter.  PROFESSOR  MACDONELL  places  it
not  much  earlier  than  1200  B.C  MACDONELL  and  KEITH,  Vedic
Index,  VIII.


IV:  ARYAN  ORIGINS  217

2000  B.C.  Of  course,  the  fixing  of  definite  dates  is  merely
guess-work,  but  the  stages  of  development  and  expansion
must  have  followed  each  other  in  accordance  with  some  such
sequence.

It  is  even  more  difficult  to  come  to  definite  conclusions  as  Geograph-
to  the  geographical  localization  of  these  stages.  The  ques-  l0Cfalthenee
tion  as  to  the  original  home  of  the  race  cannot  be  considered  mlgra1
as  settled,  and  is  answered  in  entirely  different  ways  by
leading  antiquarians.  In  the  main,  opinions  may  be  ranged
in  two  rival  groups:  there  are  those  who  favour  the  view
that  the  home  of  the  race  is  to  be  sought  in  the  vast  plains
of  central  Asia  and  south-eastern  Russia,  and  there  are
those  who  contend  that  arclueological  and  linguistic  data
point  to  northern  Europe,  and  more  particularly  to  the
shores  of  the  Baltic,  as  the  place  of  concentration  of  the
European  branch  of  the  race.  I  may  say  that  the  version
of  the  steppes  theory  presented  recently  by  S.  Feist  appears
convincing  to  me.  Apart  from  the  discussion  of  details,  it
seems  the  only  hypothesis  that  can  account  for  the  close
relationship  of  the  European  nations  with  the  Indians  and
Persians.  A  period  of  union  in  some  central  part  of  the
old  Continent  has  to  be  assumed,  unless  we  are  prepared  to
assign  to  the  Asiatic  branches  an  entirely  subordinate  place
in  the  development  of  the  race.  It  is  in  this  connection  that
the  existence  of  the  intermediate  groups — the  N.  Aryan,
Tocharic,  Sogdian  and  Armenian, — becomes  very  impor-
tant. Is  it  conceivable  that  these  various  ethnic  bodies
should  have  been  formed  by  pushes  from  a  north  European
centre?  On  the  other  hand,  the  gradual  deflection  of  late-
comers from  the  central  plains  towards  the  north  is  easily
accounted  for,  and,  indeed,  would  have  to  be  postulated
a  priori.  A  significant  linguistic  trait  may  be  mentioned
here  at  once.  Expressions  like  mare  (Latin),  meer  (Ger-
man), mere  (Old  English),  morje  (Old  Bulgarian),1

i  The  parallels  are  chiefly  from  S.  FEIST,  Kultur,  Auslreitung
und  Herkunft  der  Indo-Oermanen  (Berlin,  1913).  There  are  special
references  to  H.  HIBT,  Die  Indogermanen  (Strassburg,  1905),  O.
SCHRADEB,  Reallexikon  der  indogermanischen  Altertumskunde
(Strassburg,  1901),  and  J.  HOOPS,  WaldMume  und  Kulturpflawzen
im  germanischen  Altertum  (Strassburg,  1905),  as  regards  additions
and  variations.


218


TRIBAL  LAW:  PART  II:  ARYAN  CULTURE


point  to  expanses  of  water  and  may  possibly  have  been
meant  for  lakes  and  marsh-land ;  the  specific  terms  for  sea,
navigation  and  fishing  are  specialized  in  various  languages
and  stand  quite  by  themselves  in  the  Celto-Germanic  group.
Names  of  trees  are  generic,  and  their  specific  meanings  are
differentiated  later  on.  Thus  "beech"  was  originally  any
big  tree,  not  necessarily  a  beech,  and  the  parallel  terms  are
as  follows:


Latin
fagus


Greek


Germanic
Buche


"pine"  we  have:


For

Sanskrit

pitu-daru

for  "oak"
Sanskrit
daru

Old  Irish
daur


Greek


Russian Kurdish
buk  buz

(buzina)

Latin
pinus


Avestic Greek Gothic Old  Slavonic
dauru 6pv$  (dopv) triu  drevo


for  "birch":

Sanskrit  Slavonic

bhurjas  breza


Lithuanian
berzas


Old  Icelandic
bjork


Linguistic
and

archaeologi-
cal  evi-
dence  as
to  Aryan
culture.


As  regards  the  general  standing  reached  by  the  Indo-
European  culture  when  the  Aryan  group  was  still  united,
there  are  curious  indications  in  language  and  archaeology.
It  is  clear  that  the  united  race  was  at  that  time  traversing
the  period  of  the  stone  age.  Their  implements  were  made
of  stone,  but,  chiefly  through  intercourse  with  neighbouring
nations,  they  were  acquainted  with  the  use  of  metals,  and
certain  objects  manufactured  from  different  metals  were
introduced  among  them.  That  the  basis  of  their  culture


HOOPS,  op.  cit.,  pp.  117  sq.


IV:  ARYAN  ORIGINS  219

was  stone  may  be  illustrated  by  the  characteristic  fact  that
the  root  word  for  " knife"  or  "axe"  was  "sax,"  the  same
word  as  the  Latin  "saxum,"  "rock."  x  These  stone  imple-
ments, especially  sacrificial  knives,  have  been  found  among
burial  remains.

With  the  appearance  of  metals  the  culture  of  the  out- Metals,
going  stone  and  the  beginning  of  the  bronze  period  is
reached. The  linguistic  parallels  for  "bronze"  are :

Sanskrit  Avestic  Latin  Gothic

ayas  ayo  aes  aiz

Old  English
ar

The  immense  importance  of  the  intercourse  with  the  nations
of  the  East  and  South  may  be  seen  in  the  word  "aes
Cyprium,"  the  bronze  of  Cyprus,  i.e.,  copper.  For
"copper"  the  parallels  are:

Latin Slavonic Old  Icelandic Sumerian Basque
raudus ruda  raudhe  urudu urraida


The  origin  of  these  terms  may  be  traced  to  the  Phoenician
trade,  and  the  use  of  the  metal  was  transferred  from  East  to
West,  even  when  the  West  was  in  the  hands  of  the  Iberian
predecessors  of  the  Aryans.  The  eastern  roots  of  the  words
are  clearly  marked  and  point  to  Sumerian — the  primordial
element  of  Babylonian  culture.  The  teachers  of  metallurgy
were  Babylonian,  Phoenician  and  possibly  Egyptian.  The
parallels  for  l '  gold ' '  are :

Sanskrit  Avestic  Gothic Old  Slavonic

hiranyam zaranya-  gulth  zlato

i  Old  Indian Greek Latin  Lithuanian Old  Icelandic

ksuras  fup^c saxum  skutu  sax

0.  H.  German  Old  English

mezzi-sahs  mete-seax


220


TRIBAL  LAW:  PART  II:  ARYAN  CULTURE


for  "silver":
Sanskrit
raj  at  am

Avestic
erezata

Tocharian
arkyant

Greek
apyvpoS

Latin
argentum

Gothic
silubr

Old  English
seolfor

Slavonic
serebro

for  "iron":
Sumerian
barzal

Assyrian
parzilla

Hebrew
barezel

Old  English
brass

pu?sniSt!te  In  the  same  wa^>  with  the  helP  of  linguistic  parallels,

something  may  be  discovered  of  the  general  condition  of
their  culture  and  economic  state.  When  we  ask  what  they
were  living  on,  we  may  conclude  that  they  were  a  pastoral
people  with  some  beginnings  of  agriculture.  The  principal
names  of  domestic  animals  are  common  to  the  whole  group.
Thus  we  have,  ' '  dog ' ' :


Sanskrit
swa

Old  Irish
cu

"horse":
Sanskrit
asvas

Old  Irish
ech

"sheep":
Old  Indian
avis


Avesta-Persian  Armenian
sun

Lithuanian
szu


Greek

HVGOV


Latin
canis


Gothic
hunds


Avestic
aspa-

Gothic
aihwa-


Greek
of?


Tocharian
yakwe


Russian  and  Polish
suka


Greek Latin
ITTTTOS equus


Old  Icelandic
jor

Latin
ovis


Old  High  German  Lithuanian Old  Slavonic
ouwi  avis  ovica


Old  English
eoh


Old  Irish
6i

English
ewe


1  HIKT,  op.  tit.,  p.  686,  and  SCHBADEK,  op.  cit.,  p.  178,  give:
Syrian  Assyrian  Hebrew

parzla.  parzillu  barzel


IV:  ARYAN  ORIGINS


221


wool":

Sanskrit Greek Latin
urna  \rjvos lana

Old  Slavonic Lithuanian
vulna  vilna


Old  Irish

olan


Gothic
wulla


Sanskrit
uksa


Avestic
uxsam-


Tocharian  B.
okso


Gothic

auhsa


Cymric
ych


Sometimes  the  same  word  is  represented  in  nearly  every
case,  but  sometimes  another  root  covers  another  whole  set
of  terms.


Greek Latin

ravpos taurus

Lithuanian

tauras


Gothic
stiur


Old  Icelandic
thjorr


Old  Slavonic
tur


Sanskrit
gaus


Avestic
gav-


Armenian
kov


Lettish
guws


0.  H.  German
chuo


Old  Slavonic
goved


while  "g"


is  changed  to  ' '  b  "  in :
Greek  Latin

/Sofa  bos


Old  Irish
bo


These  parallels  indicate  that  the  principal  pursuits  of
the  united  Indo-Europeans  were  pastoral,  but  the  curious
analogy  to  be  found  among  agricultural  terms  proves  that
they  were  not  entirely  nomadic,  but  were  settled  enough
to  carry  on  cultivation  from  season  to  season.  Thus  we
have  common  expressions  for  implements  of  ploughing,  as
"yoke":

Sanskrit Greek  Latin  Cymric  Gothic  Lithuanian  Slavonic
yugam Zvydr  iugum iau juk jungas igo


222  TRIBAL  LAW: PART  II:  ARYAN  CULTURE

There  are  some  indications  as  regards  the  ploughing  al-
ready practised.  The  small  original  plough  was  suggested
by  a  natural  implement,  the  big  branch  with  a  small  branch
projecting  like  a  horn.  The  original  small,  light  plough  was
drawn  by  one  horse  or  ox,  later  by  two,  the  yoke.  For  this
plough  we  have:

Old  0.  H.  Russian

Sanskrit Irish Gothic  German  Lithuanian and  Polish
sakha cecht hoha huohili szaka  socha

Then  came  the  heavier  plough,  probably  borrowed.  Pliny
refers  to  the  big  plough  of  the  Rhaetians,  of  east  Switzer-
land and  Illyria,  with  wheels,  drawn  by  several  heads  of
cattle,  ' '  aratrum ' ' ;  the  parallels  for  the  verb  are :

Greek Latin Irisli Gothic  Old  Slavonic Tocharian x
aro airim arja  oru  aren


For  "sowing"  we  have:
Greek Latin Gothic Old  Slavonic Lithuanian

fyf*i  sero  saia  seju  seju

The  parallels  for  grains  are :
"corn":

Sanskrit Latin Old  Irish Old  Slavonic Old  Prussian
jirnas granum gran  zerno  syrna

"wheat":

Sanskrit  Greek  Lithuanian

puras  Ttvpoz  purai

and  from  a  different  root : 2

Gothic Old  Norse Danish  0.  H.  German  Old  English
hwaiteis hveite hvede  weizzi  hwaate

"barley":

Latin Avestic Armenian Lettish 0.  H.  German
hordeum zars  gari  garsas  gerste

1  HOOPS,  op.  tit.,  p.  506,  gives:

0.  H.  German  Old  English

pfluog  ploe.

2  Ibid.,  p.  458.


IV:  ARYAN  ORIGINS  223

The  linguistic  parallels  are  matched  archaeologically  by
the  discovery  of  little  stone  hand-mills,  especially  in  north
Sweden  and  south  Russia.

The  Aryans  before  their  dispersion  therefore  possessed  a
fairly  high  standard  of  economic  culture  based  on  pastoral
pursuits  and  the  beginnings  of  agriculture.

The  fundamental  point  which  must  now  be  noticed  is  Relations
that  nowhere,  so  far  as  our  sources  of  information  reach,  races.0
does  the  Aryan  race  appear  pure  and  isolated.  It  is  never
found  by  itself,  but  always  on  ground  previously  occupied
by  some  other  race.  There  is  always  therefore  a  mixture
of  races,  and  we  have  to  take  into  account  such  elements  as
the  Iberians,  now  represented  by  the  Basques,  the  ancient
Etruscans,  the  small,  stout,  stumpy,  pre-Celtic  race  of
Wales,  and,  in  eastern  and  central  Europe,  the  Finns.
Often  a  population  that  from  a  political  point  of  view  seems
to  die,  survives  powerfully  in  language  and  the  physical
transmission  of  race.  For  example,  the  French  do  not
possess  the  physical  characteristics  of  the  Gauls,  the  tall,
fair-haired  Aryans,  but  everywhere  the  small,  dark,  wiry
type  preponderates.  The  "Welsh,  the  Irish,  and  the  High-
land Scots  are  thought  to  be  typically  Celtic,  and  yet  among
all  these  peoples  we  have  to  reckon  with  a  strong  infusion
of  pre-Aryan  elements.  Thus  among  the  inhabitants  of
Britain,  CaBsar  noticed  that  it  was  a  prevalent  custom  in  the
interior  of  the  island  for  several  brothers  to  have  a  common
wife.  Among  the  Picts  *  of  Scotland  and  Ireland  polyandry
and  descent  through  women  were  customary,  and  neither
polyandry  nor  matrilineal  institutions  can  be  traced  directly
to  Aryan  usages.  They  are  due,  not  to  slow  evolution  from
these,  but  to  contamination  arising  from  contact  between
an  Aryan  patriarchal  people  and  primitive  settlers  whose
construction  of  the  family  was  different.  The  many  stray
evidences  of  matrilineal  arrangements  within  the  sphere  of
Aryan  settlement  do  not  necessarily  imply  that  among  the
Aryans  the  matrilineal  slowly  developed  into  the  patrilineal


iThe  name  "  Picts,"  "  Picti,"  "  the  painted  "  is  the  Latin,  not  the
vernacular  name


224


TRIBAL  LAW:  PART  II:  ARYAN  CULTURE


Aryan
organiza-
tion patri-
archal.


system,  but  rather  that  there  has  been  a  collision  of  dif-
ferent tribes  and  that  the  influence  of  the  vanquished  has
been  asserted  among  the  conquerors.  The  Aryans  had
certainly  reached  the  patriarchal  stage  before  their  dis-
persion, and  the  few  relics  of  ancient  conditions,  and  of
the  influence  assigned  to  the  mother's  brother,  may  be
simply  traces  of  matrilineal  arrangements  belonging  to  the
older  Iberian,  Finnish  or  Dravidian  settlers.  The  first  dis-
coverer of  matrilineal  institutions  in  Europe  was  Bachofen,
and  he  lays  special  stress  on  a  passage  in  Herodotus  l  re-
ferring to  the  Lycians  of  Asia  Minor.  The  Lycians  had  a
curious  custom  of  taking  their  names  from  the  mothers  and
not  from  the  fathers.2  They  were  a  demonstrably  mixed
people,  containing  Aryan  and  non-Aryan  elements.  Matri-
lineal arrangements,  due  to  contamination,  not  to  slow
development,  were  found  also  among  the  population  in  the
neighbourhood  of  the  Black  Sea  (cf.  the  legend  of  the
Amazons) ,  among  the  people  of  Locris,  and  at  Athens  under
Kekrops.

The  central  fact  of  Aryan  culture  is  a  patriarchal  state
of  society.  The  nomenclature  of  parentage  shows  that  all
our  principal  expressions  for  members  of  the  family  were
in  existence  five  or  six  thousand  years  ago,  with  the  in-
teresting exception  that  there  is  no  common  name  for
"marriage."  Each  settlement  seems  to  have  adopted  a
different  expression,  that,  for  instance,  in  use  among  the
Indians  meaning  ''living  together,"  and  the  Slavonic  ex-
pression meaning  "family."  The  absence  of  any  common
term  is  noted  also  by  Aristotle.  Otherwise  all  the  prin-
cipal "relationships"  are  represented  in  common  in  the
Aryan  languages.  Thus  the  parallels  for  "father"  are:


Family
nomen-
clature.


Sanskrit Avestic
pita  pitar-


Latin
pater


Greek


Tocharian
pacar

Armenian
hair

Old  Irish
athir

Gothic
fadar

1  HERODOTUS,  I,  ch.  78.

2  BACHOFEN,  Das  Mutterrecht  (1861),  p.  1,


IV:  ARYAN  ORIGINS

"mother":
Sanskrit Avestic


mats, matar —


Tocharian Armenian
macar  mair


225

Greek


Latin 0.  H.  German . Old  Slavonic
mater  muotar  mati


Lettish
mate


Similar  words  are  found  even  outside  the  Aryan  races,
among  Mongols  and  Turanians.  There  is  another  word
also,  for  the  wife,  "the  female  head  of  the  household,'*  "she
who  has  given  birth  to  the  child* ':


Sanskrit
gna


Armenian
kin


Tocharian
sen

Old

Gothic English
qino cwen


Greek

(Boeotian) fiava
(Attic) yvvrj

Old  Old  Old

Irish Slavonic  Prussian
ben zena genna


The  parallels  for  "son"  are:

Old

Sanskrit Avestic  Tocharian  Gofhic  Lithuanian  Slavonic
sunus hunus ge sunus sunus  syn


"daughter":
Sanskrit
duhita

Avestic
dugedar

Tocharian
ckatfar

Greek
Bvyarrfp

Armenian
dustr

Gofhic
dauhtar

Old  Slavonian
dshder

Lithuanian
dukte

"brother":

Sanskrit

bhrata

Avestic

brata

Tocharian
pracar

Greek  *

* f

Latin Old  Irish Gofhic Old  Slavonic Lithuanian
frater brathir brothar  brat  broterelis


oc  =  Old  Indian,  sagarbhyas.
2231  O


226  TRIBAL  LAW:  PART  II:  ARYAN  CULTURE

"sister":
Sanskrit  Avestic Armenian  Tocharian


svasa


vahar


khoir


sar


Old  Old

Latin Gothic Old  Irish  Slavonic Lithuanian  Prussian
soror swistar siur sestra  sesu swestro


The  hearth
the  centre
and  sym-
bol of  the
united
household.


[Ancestor
worship
limited  to
agnatic
ancestors.


As  we  get  further  from  the  fundamental  notions  the
expressions  are  more  varied.  It  is  important  to  notice  that,
unlike  the  totemic  system,  there  is  no  indication  of  a
nomenclature  based  on  class.1

The  family  is  represented,  not  only  in  all  its  parts,  but
also  as  a  whole  whose  centre  is  the  hearth,  the  domestic
fire.  In  the  Vedic  hymns  there  is  mention  of  the  fire  on  the
heart — "agni"  (Latin,  ignis,  Slavonic,  ogon),  and  in
Wales,  "Whether  the  fire  were  of  wood  or  turf,  the
hearth  was  swept  out  every  night.  The  next  thing  was  to
single  out  one  particular  glowing  ember,  the  '  seed  of  fire, '
which  was  carefully  restored  to  the  hearth  and  covered  up
with  the  remaining  ashes  for  the  night.  The  morning
process  was  to  uncover  the  'seed  of  fire/  to  sweep  out  the
ashes  under  which  it  was  hid,  and  then  deftly  to  place  back
the  live  ember  on  the  hearth,  piling  over  it  the  fuel  for  the
new  day's  fire.  This  was  the  uncovering  of  the  fire,  which
thus  from  year  end  to  year  end  might  never  go  out."  2  The
hearth  fire,  therefore,  symbolized  the  life  of  the  generations,
the  worship  of  the  ancestors  of  the  household,  and  it  was  in
conformity  with  this  idea  that  the  Greek  colonists  carried
the  fire  from  the  mother-city  to  the  new  colony.  The  con-
nection between  the  cult  of  the  hearth  and  the  cult  of  the
ancestors  lies  in  the  fact  that  the  ancestors,  whose  tradi-
tional cult  forms  the  religious  background  of  the  family
worship,  are  not  taken  indiscriminately;  this  place  is  re-
served to  those  who  have  a  definite  connection  with  the

1  Cf.  DELBRUCK,  Die  indogermanischen  VerwandtscJiaftsnamen.

2  SEEBOHM,  The  Tribal  System  in  Wales (2nd  ed., 1904),  p.  92.
Cf.  Hymne  Orphique,  par.  84,  quoted  by  FUSTEL  DE  COULANGES,  CiU
Antique,  I,  ch.  iii.


IV:  ARYAN  ORIGINS  227

household,  that  is,  to  agnates.  The  agnatic  ancestors  take
the  first  place,  and  when  the  ancient  Aryan — 'Indian,
Greek  or  Roman, — made  sacrifices  and  offered  prayers  to
these  ancestors,  he  had  in  view,  let  us  say,  his  grand-
father and  great-grandfather  on  the  father's  side,  who  had
lived  and  died  by  the  house  hearth,  not  those  on  his
mother's  side,  though  these  were  equally  his  ancestors.
This  is  clear  when  we  consider  the  ancient  rules  concern-
ing tribal  sacrifices.  To  begin  with,  Indian  tribal  sacri-
fices assume  one  of  two  shapes.  Firstly  the  pitaras — the
ancestors  on  the  father's  side — have  to  be  propitiated  by
offerings  of  food  designated  Pindapitriyajna,  pinda,  mean-
ing "bun,"  "cake"  or  "dough."  Thus  the  Sapindas  are
the  community  of  kinsmen  bound  to  bring  offerings  of
buns.  In  the  second  place  there  are  the  samanodahas—
those  who  take  part  in  common  libations,  or  offerings  of
water  (udaka,  water),  which  are  made  to  the  ancestors
by  a  secondary  group.1  In  this  second  class  may  be  seen
the  beginning  of  the  recognition  of  the  ancestors  of  the
female  side.

The  essence  of  the  ancestral  cult  is  originally  the  propi-
tiation of  the  ancestors  of  the  household.  Among  the  Greeks
the  ofxos  has  to  be  kept  up  by  the  tradition  of  the  an-
cestors, and  thus  organized  on  agnatic  lines.  The  cognatic
kin  were  to  be  found  in  other  houses,  for  the  house  of  the
mother  was  not  that  into  which  she  had  married,  but  that
into  which  she  had  been  born.

In  connection  with  this  original  ancestor  worship  of  the
household,  there  were  some  curious  customs  among  the
Romans,  Lithuanians  and  Slavs.  The  Roman  cult  repre-
sented the  household  ancestry,  lares,  and  though  it  is  com-
monly pointed  out  that  the  manes  also  were  worshipped,
they  were  "good  ghosts"  in  general,  the  more  general  pro-
tectors of  the  household,  and  the  ancestors  requiring  the
ancestral  cult  were  the  lares  familiares.  Among  the  Lith-
uanians this  worship  was  visualized  in  the  fact  that  in  well-
settled  and  ancestral  households,  a  snake  was  kept  in  the

i  SARVADHIKABI,  Principles  of  the  Hindu  Law  of  Inheritance
(1882),  31  ff.


228  TRIBAL  LAW:  PART  II:  ARYAN  CULTURE

corner  and  was  deemed  to  represent  -  the  departed  ancestors.
The  paterfamilias,  the  representative  of  the  family  tra-
dition, brought  food  to  this  snake.1  As  regards  the  Ger-
manic peoples,  ancient  examples  are  to  be  found  on  the
linguistic  side.  For  instance,  in  Scandinavian  the  same
word,  erfa,  is  used  both  for  taking  up  an  inheritance
and  for  offering  funeral  prayers  and  rites,  and  erf
means  both  "succession"  and  ''funeral."  Among  the
Slavs  there  were  many  quaint  customs  pointing  to  the
fact  that  household  ancestors  were  objects  of  veneration.
Among  the  Russians  chwr  distinctly  indicated  the  house-
hold protector,  the  familiar  god,  the  ghost  of  the  ancestor.
CTiur  as  a  popular  exclamation  is  a  kind  of  appeal  for
protection  against  evil  spirits.  Cliur  mena  means  "  let
chur  protect  me."  Ancestor  worship  was  connected  with
the  boundaries  of  the  household  settlement;  at  the  cross-
ways,  at  Eome,  urns  containing  the  cinders  of  the  corpse
would  be  placed.  Among  the  Russians  it  was  customary  to
place  wooden  blocks,  churban,  as  boundaries.2  We  ought
not,  therefore,  to  speak  simply  of  "ancestor  worship,"  but
we  must  remember  that  Aryan  customs  point  to  the  worship
of  the  ancestors  in  the  male  line,  the  former  rulers  of  the
household.
Separate  Now  that  the  common  traits  of  the  united  Aryan  culture

Aryan

branches.  have  been  considered,  their  development  in  the  separate
races  must  be  investigated.  Our  researches  may  have  to  be
conducted  on  different  lines.  The  whole  history  of  the  sepa-
rate Aryan  branches  lies  before  us,  in  order  that  we  should
use  it  for  comparative  purposes.  Certain  precautions  are
necessary.  When  we  begin  to  compare  the  situation  be-
tween the  various  branches,  the  Indian,  Greek,  Roman,  Teu-
tonic and  so  on,  we  deal  in  turn  with  branches  of  the  Aryan
stock  which  have  each  taken  up  special  positions,  which
have  lived  in  particular  conditions,  unlike  those  of  the  other
branches.  Between  the  Indians,  Teutons,  Celts,  etc.,  there
are  differences  in  climate,  geography,  mixture  of  races,  con-
quests and  other  conditions,  and,  therefore,  their  develop-

i  SCHRADER,  Reallexikon,  B.V.  Ahnenkult.

2KLUCHEVSKY,  History  of  Russia,  I,  45 (Hogarth's  transl.).


IV:  ARYAN  ORIGINS  229

ment  was  bound  to  proceed  on  divergent  lines.  We  cannot
expect  identical  results,  and  we  must  always  take  into
account  the  special  conditions  of  economic,  geographical
and  political  development.  The  significant  fact  is  that,  in
spite  of  profound  differences  in  results,  we  do  observe
— especially  in  Family  Law,  and  in  that  of  Succession  and
Real  Property — principles  and  rules  that  are  varieties  of
the  same  leading  ideas.  There  is  a  traditional  and  dialectic
affinity,  and,  though  we  must  make  allowances  for  a  variety
of  instances,  we  can  yet  treat  the  subject  as  one  of  con-
nected development.

As  regards  the  Hindus,  three  periods  and  three  sources  of  aindus.
information  have  to  be  considered.

(1)  In  the  Vedic  period  the  Aryans  had  just  occupied  the
basin  of  the  Indus  and  the  Punjab,  and  had  not  yet  con-
quered the  rest  of  the  country. They  were  a  pastoral
people,  constantly  on  the  move,  very  primitive,  very  imag-
inative, expressing  their  religious  and  historical  concep-
tions in  the  Vedic  Hymns,  which  must  be  dated  at  about
2000  B.C.

(2)  The  Dharmasutras  supply  us  with  the  juridical  side
of  the  picture  and  are  commentaries  on  customary  law.
This  period  is  the  Middle  Ages  of  the  Hindus. They  had
moved  to  the  Ganges  and  southwards  and  had  conquered
most  of  south  India. The  conquest  of  a  population  of  dif-
ferent descent  had  resulted  in  a  mixture  of  races,  and  in
the  beginning  of  castes. The  differences  between  the  Arya-
varna  and  the  Dasya-varna  were  developed  in  a  rigid  system
of  caste.

As  for  the  Avesta-Iranians,  the  material  is  so  scattered
that  it  can  be  used  only  for  occasional  reference.

The  principal  fact  about  the  Greeks  and  Romans  is  that  Greeks
their  culture  was  a  city  culture,  based  on  slavery. On  this Romans,
basis  their  upper  class  was  established,  thus  forming  a
contrast  to  the  caste  system. There  were  profound  dif-
ferences in  character  and  development  between  the  Greeks
and  the  Romans,  the  former  being  sensitive,  imaginative
and  highly  poetical,  while  the  latter  were  logical  and  con-
servative by  temperament. Roman  Law  is  the  best  known


230


TRIBAL  LAW:  PART  II:  ARYAN  CULTURE


Celts.


Germanic
races.


Slavs.


part  of  Gragco-Italian  law,  but  it  is,  as  a  matter  of  fact,
not  really  representative  of  the  archaic  form  of  tribal  law.
In  early  times  it  was  apt  to  draw  extreme  and  rigid  con-
sequences from  principles,  while  later  on  it  became  the
mould  for  the  civil  law  of  the  world.  Its  origins  have
therefore  to  be  studied  in  constant  connection  with  Greek
Law.

The  Celtic  group  is  less  well  represented  in  ancient  tradi-
tion, but  some  information  can  be  gathered  from  classical
writers  such  as  Cassar  and  Strabo.  A  vast  body  of
mediaeval  custom  has  been  preserved  by  the  Welsh  Laws
and  the  Brehon  Tracts  of  Ireland.  Besides,  there  are  even
now  tribal  survivals  in  certain  Celtic  districts.  For  in-
stance, the  clans  of  the  Scottish  Highlands  still  show  ves-
tiges of  tribal  organization,  and  the  tribal  system  of  the
Welsh,  which  goes  back  to  very  early  times,  was  fully  de-
scribed by  the  English  conquerors  in  the  fourteenth
century.

Among  the  Germanic  races,  on  the  contrary,  tribal  ar-
rangements were  the  rare  exception,  for  when  these  tribes
appear  in  history,  they  are  constantly  on  the  move  and
intermix  with  Romanized  populations.

The  Slavs  present  excellent  materials  as  regards  the  tribal
system,  but  these  are  not  evenly  distributed  in  the  dif-
ferent branches.  The  western  Slavs,  Poles,  Czechs  and
Wends  were  drawn  into  the  vortex  of  Teutonic  migrations
and  much  disturbed  by  conquests.  They  present,  there-
fore, a  mixed  civilization  strongly  tinged  by  Roman  and
Germanic  influences.  The  eastern  and  southern  Slavs,  on
the  contrary,  present  excellent  examples  of  tribal  arrange-
ments. This  is  especially  true  of  the  southern  Slavs:  the
Serbians  especially  continued  to  live  under  a  tribal  organi-
zation up  to  the  nineteenth  century.  Their  settlements  of
tribal  clans  may  be  compared  with  those  of  the  Scottish
Highlands.  Settlements  in  a  mountainous  country  natur-
ally get  fixed,  and  a  small,  secluded,  easily  defended  valley
may  retain  stiff  tribal  customs  for  thousands  of  years.

The  Russians,  though  mixed  with  Finnish,  Turkish  and
Tartar  tribes,  are  predominantly  Slavonic,  and  in  the  an-


IV:  ARYAN  ORIGINS  231

cient  traits  of  their  land  law  show  traces  of  tribal  arrange-
ments.

All  these  peculiarities  will  have  to  be  taken  into  account
in  estimating  the  influence  of  tribal  principles  in  the  his-
tory of  Aryan  nations.


CHAPTER  V


THE  PATRIARCHAL  HOUSEHOLD


The

father  the
centre  of
the  Aryan
family.


Patria
poteatas.


OUR  analytical  survey  of  the  elements  of  family  life  was
necessary  to  prevent  misconception  and  must  be  regarded
as  an  introduction  to  the  questions  now  before  us.  We
shall  have  to  deal  now  with  a  synthetic  combination  of
these  elements  in  the  shape  of  the  Aryan  patriarchal
system.  The  centre  of  this  family  is  definitely  the  father,
the  "husband,"  in  the  ancient  sense  the  " householder. "
In  the  Roman  term,  paterfamilias,  the  ancient  genitive
in  as  indicates  that  the  word  has  been  preserved  in  an
archaic  form,  probably  current  about  1500  B.C.  The
power  of  the  father  (patria  potestas)  in  the  Roman  family
is  well  known:  according  to  Gaius  it  was  an  unbending,
absolute  rule,  so  that  the  father  could  even  put  his  son  to
death  (ius  vitce  et  necis).  His  power  over  property  was
equally  unlimited.  As  long  as  the  father  was  alive,  the
grown-up  son  was  not  sui  iuris  and  any  property  he
was  allowed  by  his  father  to  manage  was  regarded  as
peculium,  not  different  from  the  objects  possessed  on  suf-
ferance by  a  slave.  These  classical  traits  are  familiar  to
every  one,  but  as  presented  by  Roman  Law,  they  were
exaggerated  consequences  of  principles  admitting  of  a  more
liberal  application.  It  would  be  impossible  to  say  that  the
statements  of  ancient  writers  on  the  subject  are  untrue,  but
they  point  to  practices  which  were  not  in  force  among  other
branches  of  the  race.  The  paternal  authority  was  recog-
nized among  all  the  Aryans,  but  not  to  the  same  extent  as
among  the  Romans.  As  Gaius  puts  it,  fere  enim  nulli  alii
sunt  homines  qui  talem  in  filio>s  suos  Jiabent  potestatem
qualem  nos  Jiabemus*  With  the  Greeks  the  authority  of
the  father  is  said  to  have  been  curtailed  by  Solon,  Pittakos


il,  55.

232


V:  THE  PATRIARCHAL  HOUSEHOLD  233

of  Lesbos,  and  Charondas.1  Indeed  the  whole  conception  of
the  relationship  of  the  Greek  father  to  his  household  dif-
fered from  that  of  the  Romans.2  The  father  of  the  latter
may  be  compared  to  an  absolute  king,  while  the  former
acknowledged  the  reciprocal  rights  and  duties  of  a  consti-
tutional king.  The  Roman  father  had  also  to  recognize
moral  and  religious  duties  (Fas),  but  he  was  not  answer-
able to  any  secular  power  for  the  exercise  of  his  rule.
Reciprocity  was  characteristic  of  the  Greek  system,  and
this  has  found  emphatic  expression  in  later  law.  The  aged
parent  could  claim  support  from  the  son,  but  his  right  of
yrjporpocpia  could  be  established  only  if  he  had  given  the
son  a  proper  education.3  If  he  had  neglected  his  offspring
or  abused  his  rights,  he  could  not  claim  support.  From  the
Roman  point  of  view  such  a  reciprocity  as  regards  rights
and  duties  was  unthinkable.

Again,  as  to  emancipation,  even  in  later  Roman  Law  the
son  could  be  emancipated  only  by  the  death  or  by  the  volun-

i  DIONYSIUS  OF  HALICARNASSUS,  Antiq.  Romanarum  (Teubner),  II,
p.  26 :  "  What  therefore  was  to  the  advantage  of  women  Romulus
ordained  by  law  .  .  .  but  as  regards  respect  and  uprightness  on
the  part  of  children,  with  the  intention  that  they  should  reverence
their  fathers  and  do  and  say  everything  which  they  should  bid  .  .  .
there  was  a  great  divergence  from  our  laws.  For  the  founders
of  the  Greek  States  gave  instructions  that  for  a  certain  short
period  children  should  be  carefully  ruled  by  their  fathers,  some
until  they  were  two  years  beyond  the  time  of  reaching  manhood,
while  others  remained  youths  till  their  names  were  inscribed  in
the  registers  of  the  public  buildings,  as  I  understand  from  the
legislation  of  Solon,  Pittakos  and  Charondas.  ...  In  regard  to  the
punishment  of  the  children,  they  ordered  that,  if  they  disobeyed
their  fathers,  they  were  not  to  be  driven  from  home  .  .  .  and  not
to  be  disinherited.  .  .  .  The  Roman  lawgiver,  however,  gave  abso-
lute power  over  the  son  to  the  father  during  his  whole  lifetime,  even
to  the  extent  of  shutting  him  up,  flogging  him,  seizing  the  fruits  of
his  labour,  and  deliberately  choosing  to  put  him  to  death,  even  if  the
son  happened  to  be  occupied  in  public  business,  subjected  to  examina-
tion in  order  to  fill  the  highest  public  offices,  and  praised  for  his
public  distinction."

2Cf  ARISTOTLE,  Politics,  I,  p.  52  (p.  1259  b),  Jowett's  transl.:
"  A  husband  and  father  rules  over  his  wife  and  children,  both  free,
but  the  rule  differs ;  the  rule  over  his  children  being  a  royal,  over  his
wife  a  constitutional  rule.  .  .  .  The  rule  of  a  father  over  his  chil-
dren is  royal,  for  he  receives  both  love  and  respect  due  to  age,
exercising  a  kind  of  royal  power.  ...  A  king  is  the  natural
superior  of  his  subjects,  but  he  should  be  of  the  same  kin  or  kind
with  them,  and  such  is  the  relation  of  elder  and  younger,  of  father
and  son."  Cf.  BEAUCHET,  Droit  priv6  q,th6nien,  II,  pp.  76  ff.

s  LIPSIUS,  Recht  und  Rechtsverfahren,  p.  343.


234  TRIBAL  LAW:  PART  II:  ARYAN  CULTURE

tary  surrender  of  authority  on  the  part  of  the  father.  In
case  of  mental  derangement,  the  insane  or  spendthrift  could
be  put  under  a  curatorship,1  but  otherwise  the  authority  of
the  father  normally  ceased  with  his  life.  In  Greek  law  the
father's  authority  and  economic  sway  came  to  an  end  when
the  son  attained  his  civic  majority— at  eighteen  years  of
age,  on  his  enrolment  in  the  armed  force  of  the  Common-
wealth.2 Tacitus  mentions  a  similar  view  among  the  Ger-
manic tribes,  namely,  that  the  sons  became  members  of  the
republic  when  they  took  up  arms,  generally  at  about  the
age  of  twelve  or  fourteen.  They  were  then  no  longer  sub-
ject to  the  father's  authority.3

The  rule  appears  in  a  mitigated  form  in  the  history  of
other  nations,  but  there  is  a  characteristic  reminder  of  the
ancient  full  rule  in  the  father's  right  to  expose  a  child,
which  is  found  among  all  Aryans — Hindus,  Greeks,  Celts,
Teutons,  and  Slavs.  The  right  was  used  largely  in  the
case  of  daughters,  but  also,  though  less  frequently,  in  the
case  of  sons.  Thus  in  Sparta  the  Ephors  had  to  decide
whether  a  child  was  to  be  left  alive  or  to  be  exposed.
It  is  interesting  to  see  that  the  decision  had  come  to  rest
with  a  board  and  not  with  the  particular  parent.  In  the
Greek  system  generally  the  child  had  to  be  definitely  re-
cognized by  the  father  himself  who  performed  the  solemn
act  of  taking  it  up  (  drazpeffiS ) ,  and  carrying  it  round  the
hearth  (a^Kpidpo^ta).  After  that  ceremony  the  child  be-
came thereby  a  protected  member  of  the  household  and
could  not  be  exposed.

Treatment  Another  tendency,  not  derived  from  the  state  of  filial
parents.  dependence,  but  the  outcome  of  the  wish  to  organize  the
family  as  strongly  as  possible  under  the  natural  leadership
of  an  efficient  householder  runs  to  some  extent  counter  to
the  idea  of  patria  potestas.  What  happened  when  the
father  was  old,  decrepit,  incapable  ?  Such  old  people  either
retired  from  active  management  and  were  left  to  vegetate
until  they  died,  or  they  were  put  to  death.  In  the  Vedic

1  M.  VOIGT,  Die  Zwolf  Tafeln,  II,  p.  729.

2  DARESTE.  etc.,  Inscriptions  jurisdiques  grecques,  I,  p.  462.
a  Germania,  XIII.


V:  THE  PATRIARCHAL  HOUSEHOLD  235

Hymns  there  is  mention  of  a  father  exposed  by  his  chil-
dren.1 Even  in  Rome,  there  are  some  reminiscences  of  the
existence  of  a  category  of  old  men  doomed  to  destruction.
Festus  the  lexicographer,  mentions  that  a  man  of  sixty
was  incapable  of  any  useful  activity  and  should  be
thrown  into  the  river.2  The  expression  "de  ponte,"  was
understood  in  later  times  to  mean  ' '  Voting  Bridge, ' '  but  the
tradition  as  to  the  ' l  removal ' '  of  aged  parents  by  drowning
is  nevertheless  a  characteristic  trace  of  ancient  folklore.
There  is  widespread  evidence  of  a  similar  treatment  among
Celts,  Teutons,  Lithuanians  and  Slavs.  The  Baltic  Slavs,
or  Wends,  for  example,  got  rid  of  their  old  men  by  placing
them  on  a  piece  of  bark,  and  thrusting  them  down  into
ravines  in  winter  to  die  of  cold  and  starvation.  In  a  modi-
fied form  the  casting  off  of  the  authority  of  the  aged  parents
has  survived  among  the  Norwegians,  with  whom  a  special
house  or  room  is  constructed  for  the  "pensioned"  old
people.  Their  allowance  is  called  their  Ffideraad.  They
renounce  their  authority,  are  given  food,  and  live  in  retire-
ment, while  their  sons  take  over  the  command  and  ar-
rangement of  the  household.  These  customs  indicate  that
the  father's  authority  might  be  modified  by  considerations
of  household  expediency  by  extraordinary  measures.  It

1  Rig  Veda,  VIII, 51, 2.

2  P.  FESTI,  De  verborum  significatione  (Teubner),  p.  66: "  Depon-
tani series appellabantur, qui sexagenarii de ponte deiciebantur,"
and  p.  450,  Cf.  LEWIS  and  SHORT'S  Latin  Dictionary,  Sexagenarius  :
"  Men  sixty  years  of  age  were  no  longer  admitted  to  vote  in  the
saepta, and, if they attempted to enter, were thrust back from
the  bridge  leading  to  them;  whence  arose  the  proverb,  Sexagenaries
de  ponte. (Many  Romans,  at  an  early  period,  erroneously  referred
this  expression to  a  religious  usage, and even  to  original human
sacrifices.)  " Varro  ap.  Non,  523-21: "  Quum  in  quintum  gradum
pervenerunt,  atque  habebant  sexaginta  annos,  turn  denique  erant  a
publicis negotiis liberi atque otiosi. Ideo in proverbium quidam
putant  venisse  ut  diceretur, Sexagenaries  de  ponte  deici  oportere,
id  est,  quod  suffragium  non  f erant,  quod  per  pontem  ferebatur  " But
see  also  Ovid,  Fasti,  V,  621 :

"  Turn  quoque  priscorum  virgo  simulacra  virorum

Mittere  roboreo  scirpea  ponte  solet.
Corpora  post  decies  senos  qui  credidit  annos
Missa  neci,  sceleris  crimine  damnat  avos."

CICERO, Pro Sex. Roscio, 35 : "  Habeo  etiam  dicere quern contra
morem  maiorum  minorem  annis  Ix  de  ponte  in  Tiberim  deiecerit."


236  TRIBAL  LAW:  PART  II:  ARYAN  CULTURE

was  not  an  absolute  right,  but  a  means  towards  an  end,
namely,  the  maintenance  of  the  family.

afanus  The  power  of  the  husband  over  the  wife  was  not  essen-

tially different  from  that  of  the  father  over  the  children,
and  the  manus  mariti  also  expresses  the  fact  that  the  lord
of  the  household  was  considered  as  a  proprietor  as  well  as
a  ruler.  This  idea  of  appropriation  is  clearly  manifested  in
three  features.

owner-  The  first  of  these  is  the  Suttee. The  burning  of  the

shown  widow  with  the  deceased  husband  was  practised  in  India

suttee.  till  recent  times,  and  it  was  suppressed  only  by  the  inter-
ference of  the  British  Government.  The  notion  at  the  root
of  it  is  that  the  wife  so  belongs  to  her  husband  that  she
cannot  outlive  him,  but  must  follow  him  to  the  other  world.
It  is  sometimes  said  that  the  custom  is  the  result  of  an
exceedingly  strong  consciousness  of  the  moral  tie  between
husband  and  wife,  but  it  may  be  noticed  that  the  tie  was  not
regarded  as  reciprocal,  and  the  husband  never  died  with  the
wife.  The  practice  was  by  no  means  peculiar  to  Indians,
but  existed  among  other  branches  of  the  Aryan  race.
Herodotus  1  noted  it  among  the  Thracians  of  the  Danube
region,  where  wives  were  put  to  death  on  the  decease  of
their  husbands.  It  was  prevalent  also  among  Slavonic
tribes:  Bonifacius  in  the  eighth  century  in  a  letter  to  one
of  his  colleagues,  insisted  on  what  he  thought  a  proof  of
the  strong  moral  feeling  of  devotion  and  duty  on  the  part
of  the  Slavonic  Wends  who,  though  in  other  respects  a  cruel
people,  showed  an  amount  of  affection  and  devotion  between
husband  and  wife  that  might  serve  as  an  example  to  Chris-
tians.2 Further  evidence  comes  from  the  description  of

i  HERODOTUS,  V,  5,  Rawlinson's  translation  (1862),  III,  p.  178:
"  The  Thracians  observe  the  following  customs.  Each  man  among
them  has  several  wives;  and  no  sooner  does  a  man  die  than  a  sharp
contest  ensues  among  the  wives  upon  the  question,  which  of  them
all  the  husband  loved  most  tenderly;  the  friends  of  each  eagerly
plead  on  her  behalf,  and  she  to  whom  the  honour  is  adjudged,  after
receiving  the  praises  of  both  men  and  women,  is  slain  over  the
grave  by  the  hand  jf  her  next  of  kin,  and  then  burned  with  her
husband."

2MiGNE,  Patrologia,  series  II,  Ixxxix,  760:  "  Winedi,  quod  est
foedissimum  et  deterrimum  genus  hominum  .  .  .  mulier,  viro
proprio  mortuo,  vivere  recusat  .  .  .  ut  in  una  strue  pariter  ardeat
cum  viro  suo."


V:  THE  PATRIARCHAL  HOUSEHOLD  237

the  funeral  of  a  Russian  chief  which  was  attended  by  Ibn
Fadhlan,  an  Arab  traveller  who  visited  south  Russia  about
900  A.D.1  He  tells  us,  among  other  things,  that  when  the
pyre  was  constructed  and  the  dead  chief  laid  on  it,  one
of  his  wives  was  slain  and  placed  beside  him.

The  custom,  however,  was  not  the  absolute  consequence  of
the  idea  of  manus  mariti,  and  the  fluidity  of  the  institution
must  be  noticed.  Ancient  rules  and  customs  are  often  5?^°*
subject  to  oscillations  of  feeling.  In  the  beginning  they
are  more  indistinct  and  neutral,  but  later  they  get  settled
in  a  stricter  form.  For  instance,  there  is  proof  that  the
Suttee  in  India,  where  it  was  most  prevalent,  had  not
crystallized  in  Rig  Veda  times,  about  2000  B.C.,  but  was
still  only  in  formation.  One  of  the  Hymns  2  is  composed  of
incantations  and  prayers  connected  with  a  funeral:  the
brother  or  son  of  the  deceased  takes  the  lead  in  the  cere-
mony and  addresses  the  gods  and  the  community  around
him,  and  tells  the  widow  to  rise  from  the  funeral  pyre.
Thus,  although  the  widow  has  shown  her  grief  by  lying
down  by  the  side  of  her  husband,  she  is  not  actually  burned
with  him.

The  second  feature  in  which  we  find  the  ownership  of  the
husband  expressed,  is  the  fact  that  curious  habits  of  part-
nership as  regards  wives  are  recorded  in  Aryan  lands.
The  explanation  from  sexual  jealousy  does  not  apply :  that
feeling  is  counterbalanced  by  other  considerations.  As
regards  the  ancient  Slavs,  Christian  missionaries  and
writers  mention  with  horror  that  among  the  Baltic  Slavs
marriages  between  a  woman  and  a  father  and  his  son
were  frequent;  but  this  led  mostly  to  cohabitation  in  suc-
cession, so  that  the  wife  was  married  to  the  father  and  in-
herited like  property  by  the  son.3  Customs  exactly  analo-
gous to  this  passage  of  the  wife  by  inheritance  are  to  be
found  among  other  primitive  tribes.

Another  consequence  is  the  raising  of  progeny  by  substi-

iSee  post,  p.  275.

2  Rig  Veda,  X,  18,  8.

3  Codex  Diplom. (Stettin,  1748),  pp.  286,  290: a . . . Cum  enim
pater  aliquam  uxorem  de  communi  pecunia  sibi  et  filio  emerat,  sibi
pater  hactenus  servavit,  ut  mortuo  patre  uxor  eius  devolveretur  ad
filium,  sicut  alia  hereditas  de  bonis  communibus  eomparata,."


238  TRIBAL  LAW:  PART  II:  ARYAN  CULTURE

tution,  called  in  India,  Nyioga.  By  this,  when  the  wife  is
barren  or  the  husband  is  unable  to  produce  offspring,
it  is  possible,  and  right,  for  him  to  employ  a  substitute.
All  the  ancient  Indian  Law  Books,  the  Dharmasutras,1
admit  this,  and  a  protest  against  the  practice  is
found  only  in  Apastamba.2  Any  opposition  would  be
overborne  by  considerations  of  property  and  family
power.

One  more  fact  must  be  noticed.  In  the  Aryan  household
there  is  emphatically  no  idea  of  strict  monogamy.  The
Aryans  were  not  polygamous  as  a  rule,  because  the  keeping
of  several  wives  is  expensive,  but  they  had  no  objection  to
the  practice  when  economically  possible.  It  is  difficult  to
draw  a  definite  line  between  the  Mohammedan  practice  and
the  situation  among  the  Aryans  in  the  beginning  of  his-
tory: the  development  of  monogamy  was  gradual,  and  it
began  at  an  early  stage  among  those  who  had  small  means.
The  poor  regarded  a  wife  as  a  helper  and  beast  of  burden,
and  monogamy  was  imposed  on  them  by  economic  con-
siderations. However,  the  fact  that  the  rich  had  fuU
licence  to  take  many  wives  shows  that  there  was  noth-
ing in  the  juridical  essence  of  the  institution  to  pre-
vent polygamy.  Harald  Harfagr,  Vladimir  of  Russia,
Samo  of  Bohemia,  Meshko  of  Poland  are  all  credited
with  many  wives.3  In  the  Indian  codes  it  is  expressly
stated  that  any  number  up  to  ten  may  be  kept,  and
four  wives  are  attributed  to  a  king,  though  the  first  is


1  E.g.,  Ndrada,  XII,  55  ff.;  Mcmu,  IX,  31  ff.,  167.

2  Apastamba,  II, 10,  27,  2-5.

3  For the custom among the Persians see HERODOTUS, I, 135
(Rawlinson's translation, I, p. 221): "Each  of  them  has several
wives  and  a  still  larger  number  of  concubines."

The  Wends  renounced  polygamy  on  their  conversion  to  Chris-
tianity. Cf.  HERBORD,  Dial.  II,  p.  18:  "  Vos,  qui  usque  ad  haec
tempora  non  Christiani  sed  pagani  fuistis,  sacramentum  coniugii
non  habuistis,  quia  fidem  uni  thoro  non  servastis  sed  .  .  .  plures
habuistis  uxores.  Quod  deinceps  nobis  non  licebit.  Si  quis  ergo  in
vobis  est  qui  plures  habuerat  uxores  ante  baptismum,  nunc  unam
de  illis,  quae  sibi  magis  placet,  eligat."  Cf.  ibid,  p.  22:  Cod
Diplom.,  1249,  p.  290;  EBBO,  Vita  Ottonis,  II,  pp.  9,  12,  34.  "  Abdicta
coniugum  pluralitate."  For  the  custom  among  the  Thracians  see
STRABO,  VII,  297.


V:  THE  PATRIARCHAL  HOUSEHOLD  239

the  chief  one  and  in  the  ritual  of  household  prayer  and
sacrifice  the  Patni  is  mentioned,  as  a  rule,  in  the  sin-
gular. In  the  Germanic  custom  it  seems  to  have  been  un-
usual to  keep  several  wives,  but,  according  to  Tacitus,  the
nobles  were  proud  to  be  able  to  afford  two  or  three  wives.1
In  the  age  of  the  Norse  invasions  it  was  the  recognized  thing
for  Icelanders  to  have  two  wives,  one  at  home  and  one  on
their  travels.

In  the  beginning,  marriage  was  not  considered  a  tie
between  one  pair  of  conjoined  mates  only,  to  the  ex-
clusion of  other  relations,  at  any  rate  on  the  side  of
the  husband.  A  consequence  of  this  attitude  is  seen  in
the  law  of  adultery,  in  which  the  whole  stress  is  laid
on  the  rights  of  the  husband.2  This  conception,  indeed,
has  had  an  influence  which  has  continued  till  recent
and  even  present  times.  Even  now  the  husband  and
the  wife  do  not  stand  on  an  equal  footing  in  this  re-
spect.3

We  must  now  approach  the  interesting  problem  of  the  Evolution

.  .  of  contract

part  played  by  the  notion  of  contract  in  marriage:  on  in  mar-
this  point  there  are  still  many  misconceptions.  Is  mar-
riage as  constituted  in  Aryan  legal  custom  to  be  de-
scribed as  essentially  a  contract  between  husband  and
wife,  even  though  the  preponderance  is  given  to  the  hus-
band? The  answer  seems  to  be  that  contract  is  not  a
necessary  feature  of  Aryan  marriage  in  general,  but  that
it  was  gradually  evolved  from  loose  unions.  Indeed,  we
have  the  curious  spectacle  of  an  institution  which  begins
by  being  entirely  fluid,  but  settles  down  more  and  more
on  a  basis  of  contract  with  reciprocal  rights  and  duties.
The  process  is  illustrated  by  sufficient  evidence  and  the


1  Oermania,  XVII : "  Nam  prope  soli  barbarorum  singulis  uxori-
bus  content!  sunt,  exceptis  admodum  paucis,  qui  non  libidine  sed
ob  nobilitatem  plurimis  nuptiis  ambiuntur."

2  CATO  in  AULUS  GELLIUS,  Noctium  Atticarum  X,  23 (Teubner)  :
"  Verba Marci Catonis  ...  In adulterio uxorem tuam si pre-
hendisses,  sine  iudicio  impune  necares; ilia  te,  si  adulterares  sive
tu  adulterarere,  digito  non  auderet  contingere,  neque  ius  ost."

3  Adultery  on  the  part  of  the  husband  does  not  entitle  the  wife
to  claim  divorce, although adultery on the part of  the wife is
sufficient  ground  for  the  husband  to  claim  it.


240  TRIBAL  LAW:  PART  II:  ARYAN  CULTURE

causes  producing  the  evolution  may  be  discerned  without
difficulty.

The  first  point  to  notice  is  that  in  most  cases  we  have  to
deal  not  with  one  kind  of  marriage,  but  with  several  kinds.
Three  groups  of  peoples  may  be  especially  considered:  (1)
the  ancient  Russians  described  in  Nestor's  Chronicle
(twelfth  century) ;  (2)  the  Aryan  Indians  as  described  in
the  Dharmasutras  and  the  Commentaries;  (3)  the  ancient
Romans.

the  Among  (1)  In  such  questions  formal  chronology  is  of  no  im-
Rusilans.  portance,  and  we  may  begin  with  the  ancient  Russians.
Their  chronicler,  Nestor,  describes  a  most  archaic  state
of  things.  The  different  tribes  which  afterwards  formed
Russia  possessed  a  variety  of  customs  ranging  from  some
which  correspond  to  an  exceedingly  low  standard  of
culture  to  others  resembling  Christian  institutions.  The
Chronicler  says  that  the  Drevlians  lived  in  forests  like
animals.  They  knew  no  marriage,  but  cohabited  in  the
manner  of  beasts,  making  no  distinction  between  near
relations.  This  description  may  perhaps  be  superficial  and
exaggerated,  but  it  is  certainly  not  invented  at  random.
Among  the  tribes  of  the  Dnieper  basin,  the  Viaticzi,  the
Radimiczi,  the  Kriviczi,  and  the  Severians,  marriage  unions
were  somewhat  more  permanent,  but  still  very  informal.
When  the  youths  of  the  tribes  congregated  for  games  be-
tween the  villages,  they  captured  and  carried  off  the  girls.
Such  marriages  by  capture  in  connection  with  sports  and
festivities  often  develop  from  elopements,  and  may  be  pre-
arranged by  mutual  understanding.  The  Polians  followed
a  different  practice :  the  bride  was  not  fetched  by  the  bride-
groom, but  was  conducted  at  the  close  of  the  day  to  his
home,  and  next  morning  presents  were  brought  which  were
given  wifh  her,  according  to  one  reading,  or,  according  to
another,  for  her.  They  served  therefore  either  as  a  pur-
chase price  or  as  a  dowry,  but  the  main  point  is  that  there
was  already  an  established  understanding  not  only  between
the  bride  and  bridegroom,  but  between  the  kinsmen  of  the
parties.

(2)  The  forms  of  marriage  among  the  Indians  present  a


V:  THE  PATRIARCHAL  HOUSEHOLD  241

wide  range  of  possibilities.1 Eight  forms  are  mentioned  in $*  Amone
the  Sutras:2  Indians-

(i)  Kshastria  vi  vaha  (rakshasa  or  devil's  marriage)  was
specially  attributed  to  the  warriors  and  involved  violence
and  capture.

(ii)  Paisaca  vivaha  was  not  what  we  should  call  mar-
riage at  all,  but  rape  leading  to  marital  union.  Seduction
was  employed,  or  the  woman  might  be  drugged.  It  was
strongly  deprecated  by  Brahmins,  but  took  place  some-
times among  other  castes.

(iii)  Svayamvara  vivaha  was  also  chiefly  practised
among  the  warriors.  It  was  a  union  arranged  by  agree-
ment between  the  bride  and  bridegroom  as  a  result  of  a
competition  of  suitors.  The  epic  songs  give  graphic  de-
scriptions of  what  happened  in  such  a  case.  Sometimes  the
daughter  of  a  king  is  proclaimed  a  bride,  and  the  king
invites  her  suitors  to  present  themselves  and  to  bid  for
her  hand,  in  the  manner  of  the  suitors  in  "The  Merchant
of  Venice. ' '  There  might  be  competitions  in  solving  riddles,
or  jousting.  Personal  consent  was  much  to  the  fore  and
the  choice  of  the  girl  was  supported  by  her  parents.

(iv)  Gandharva  vivaha  is  a  love  match,  again  a  variety
of  personal  union  on  wider  grounds.  It  was  practised  not
only  by  warriors  and  princes  but  by  all  classes  and  castes.
The  union  sometimes  took  place  in  spite  of  obstacles,  and
commonly  involved  elopement.

All  these  four  forms  were  most  commonly  used  by  the
warriors,  while  the  following  two  were  devised  to  suit
priests :

(v)  the  Brahma  vivaJia  is  a  religious  marriage  in  which
the  stress  is  laid  on  prayers  and  sacrifices.

(vi)  Daiva  vivaha  is  a  particular  development  of  the
preceding  form.  In  this  case  the  priest  who  offers  sacri-
fice is  presented  with  a  girl  to  be  his  wife.

i  JOLLY,  Recht  und  Sitte,  pp.  51  if.

2Cf.  the  Laws  of  Manu,  III,  20-35.  Sacred  Books  of  the  East,
XXV  [1886],  pp.  79-82):  "The  rite  of  Brahman  (Brahma),  that
of  the  god8  (Daiva),  that  of  the  Rishis  (Arsha),  that  of  Pragapati
(Pragapatya),  that  of  the  Asuraa  (Asura),  that  of  the  Gandharvas
(Gandharva),  that  of  the  Rakshasas  (Rakshasa),  and  that  of  the
Pisakas  (Paisaka)."

2231  p


242  TRIBAL  LAW:  PART  II:  ARYAN  CULTURE

It  may  be  added  that  the  solemn  ritual  of  this  kind  of
marriage  spread  to  other  forms,  so  that  now  the  Brahmin
ceremonies  are  generally  used  in  a  ceremonial  marriage,  no
matter  what  the  caste  of  the  bride  and  bridegroom  may  be.

The  last  two  forms  are  evidently  meant  to  suit  less
important  people,  the  "plebs,"  as  it  were, — vaisyas  and
sudras — and  this  was  evidently  their  most  conspicuous
feature :

(vii)  Asura  vivaha  is  emphatically  marriage  by  purchase.
The  normal  price  of  the  bride  is  mentioned  as  a  yoke  of
oxen,  but  among  princes  and  nobles  it  might  be  increased,
and  a  hundred  cows  are  mentioned  sometimes  as  presented
to  the  parents.

(viii)  Pragapatya  vivaTia  closely  resembles  asura  vivalia,
but  in  this  case  it  is  the  bridegroom  himself  who  acts  in-
stead of  the  kinsmen.

The  Brahmins  were  opposed  to  these  last  two  forms,  but
they  were  so  strongly  rooted  in  popular  custom  that  they
could  not  be  abolished.

It  is  evidently  impossible  to  regard  all  these  forms  as
varieties  of  one  and  the  same  contract.  We  have  to  recog-
nize that  marriage  as  a  fluid  institution  shaped  very  dif-
ferently according  to  circumstances.  It  may  be  due  to  vio-
lence or  to  a  love  match,  or  to  a  transaction  on  the  part
of  the  parents  based  on  purchase.

(3)  Among (3) The  four  forms  practised  among  the  Komans  are
Romans. described  with  some  precision  by  Gaius :  *

(i)  the  confarreatio  marriage  may  be  compared  with  the
Brahma  vivaha  of  India.  It  was  the  usual  form  among
Patricians  and  involved  ceremonies  and  sacrifice.  Its  es-
sence was  the  transference  of  the  bride  from  one  household
and  cult  to  another  with  her  personal  consent.

(ii)  Coemptio  marriage  was  the  most  common  form
prevalent  among  the  people  and  centred  round  purchase.

(iii)  Marriage  usu  was  a  concubinate  which  by  the  pre-
scription of  a  year  and  a  day  became  recognized  and
established  as  a  permanent  union.  There  were  two  possi-
bilities, however;  the  marriage  might  be  accepted  and  con-
firmed on  the  same  lines  as  the  recognized  coemptio  form,

ii,  108-15.


V:  THE  PATRIARCHAL  HOUSEHOLD  243

or  the  wife  might  safeguard  her  personal  independence  by  ,
absenting  herself  from  the  house  for  three  nights.

(iv)  A  fourth  variety  was  constituted  by  marriage  with-
out manus:  it  seems  that  in  this  case  there  was  from  the
first  an  agreement  to  renounce  the  manus,  and  marriage
amounted  to  a  personal  arrangement  for  marital  union.

From  the  above  enumeration,  it  is  clear  that  it  was  J-£°ecubl-
difficult  to  draw  a  distinction  between  marriage  with-
out manus  and  concubinate.  The  legal  distinctions  be-
tween the  concubine  and  the  wife  were  chiefly  the  result
of  later  development.  There  was  indeed  no  reason  for
strict  distinction.  Certainly  the  Roman  matron  married
by  confarreatio  or  coemptio  was  not  a  concubine,  but  her
marriage  was  the  most  advanced  type  of  sacramental  mar-
riage recognized  by  Roman  Law.  On  the  other  hand,  the
woman  married  usu  before  the  year  and  a  day  was  com-
pleted, and  the  woman  married  without  manus  were  very
similar  to  concubines.  The  cases  in  which  concubinate
shades  off  into  marriage  are  important  and  interesting.
Valuable  evidence  comes  from  the  Greek  Law,  but  it  is
supported  by  customary  practices  which  may  be  observed
even  now  among  backward  Aryans.  For  instance,  the
Ossetes,  a  Caucasian  tribe  descended  from  the  Alani,  who
were  driven  into  the  mountains  by  the  Huns  in  the  fourth
century  A.D.,  even  now  have  a  curious  practice  of  legal
concubinate.  The  concubine  (Nomoulouss)  is  only  one
degree  lower  than  the  legitimate  wife.  A  definite  price  is
set  on  her  which,  however,  is  less  than  that  of  the  fully
qualified  wife.1

The  Greek  view  can  be  illustrated  in  a  fragment  of  an
ancient  law  assigned  to  Dracon  (lawgiver  of  Athens  about
621  B.C.)  which  has  been  preserved  to  us  in  a  speech  of
Demosthenes  (c.  Aristostrat.  §  55 ).2  This  law  enacts  that  a
person  who  slays  a  man  found  in  flagrant  adultery  with  the
wife  of  the  accused,  or  with  his  concubine  joined  to  him  for
the  purpose  of  rearing  free  children  rj  exl  Sa^apn  .  .  .  rj

iKovALEVSKY,  Coutume  contemporaine,  166.

2Cf.  Euktemon's  threat,  ISAEUS,  on  the  estate  of  Philoktemon,
§§  21,  22  (W.  WYSE,  The  Speeches  of  Isaeus  (1904),  Or.  vi).


244  TRIBAL  LAW:  PART  II:  ARYAN  CULTURE


enl  TfaXXanrj  rjv  av  en'  I\sv6epoi?  itaiG\v  £Xtf)>  could  not
be  punished,  for  though  he  had  committed  homicide,  he
had  done  so  under  the  greatest  provocation.  Thus  a  con-
cubine was  placed  next  to  a  wife  as  regards  fidelity  to  her
mate.

There  are  also  certain  facts  which  show  that  from  the
position  of  a  concubine  a  woman  could  be  raised  by  eco-
nomic ties  and  by  usage  to  the  actual  standing  of  a  wife.
As  we  have  already  seen,  the  matrimomum  usu,  as  de-
scribed by  Gaius,1  is  a  case  in  point.  It  implies  that  two
persons  who  have  cohabited  for  a  year  and  a  day  are  deemed
to  be  connected  by  marriage.  Evidently  the  economic
factor  was  most  important.  There  was  a  corresponding
Scandinavian  practice,  as  is  apparent  from  Valdemar's  law
of  Jutland,  according  to  which  three  winters  sharing  table
and  bed,  lock  and  key,  made  a  concubine  a  legitimate  wife
with  claims  to  property  ;  the  children  would  be  legitimate
in  this  case.2

From  the  north  of  England  and  Scotland  come  similar
cases,  which  open  up  a  most  interesting  prospect  in  com-
Handfast  parative  law.  Here  we  find  so-called  Jiandfast  marriages  in
marriages.  djrect  contradiction  to  marriage  in  Church.  The  cases
recorded  are  late,  but  are  not  less  interesting  on  that  ac-
count, for  they  show  how  far  the  primitive  customs  of
matrimonium  usu  had  struck  root  in  a  fairly  civilized  com-
munity, and  even  led  to  legal  decisions  fully  recorded  in
the  fifteenth  and  sixteenth  centuries.  For  instance,  in  1471
there  was  a  suit  3  between  a  person  claiming  the  earldom  of
Murray,  and  the  husband  of  a  lady  who  also  claimed  the
earldom  in  her  own  right.  Her  claim  rested  on  the  sup-
position that  there  were  no  legal  male  heirs.  From  the
feudal  and  from  the  ecclesiastical  point  of  view  there  was
no  doubt  as  to  the  absence  of  male  offspring  of  a  union  rec-
ognized by  the  Church.  The  rival  claim  came  from  a  man
who  claimed  in  right  of  a  marriage  celebrated  not  in  Church
but  in  the  customary  way  of  handf  asting  :  he  was  the  son  of

H,  ill.

2  Jyske  lov,  I,  ch.  27.

3  ROHERT  LINDSAY  OF  PITSCOTTTE,  The  History  and  Chronicles  of
Scotland  (Scottish  Text  Society,  1899),  I,  p.  64.


V:  THE  PATRIARCHAL  HOUSEHOLD  245

one  Isobel,  who  had  married  the  former  earl  (the  father
of  both  claimants)  by  a  handfast  marriage.  Troth  had
been  pledged  in  the  presence  of  witnesses,  and  the  trans-
action was  regarded  as  valid,  so  that  regular  cohabitation
ensued.  In  the  eyes  of  Church  and  Law  the  son  was
illegitimate  and  had  no  claim,  but  according  to  customary
law  he  was  the  fully  qualified  heir  by  handfast  marriage.

In  1509  the  earldom  of  Sutherland  was  involved  in  a
similar  suit.1  The  offspring  of  a  handfast  marriage,  Alex-
ander of  Sutherland,  claimed  the  earldom  "as  one  lawfully
descended  from  his  father  Earl  John  the  third;  because,
as  he  alleged,  his  mother  was  Tiandfasted  and  fianced  to  his
father. "  He  was  opposed  by  Adam  of  Gordon,  the  husband
of  his  sister,  who,  on  account  of  the  handfast  marriage,
did  not  dare  to  press  the  matter,  but  made  an  agreement
by  which  Alexander  was  bought  off  and  renounced  his
claim.2

The  marriage  between  the  Earl  of  Angus  and  Margaret
Tudor  of  England  seems  to  have  been  dissolved  on  the
ground  that  a  previous  union  by  handfasting  had  been
formed  between  Earl  Angus  and  the  Lady  of  Trackquayre.3

In  1482  an  indenture  was  made  between  "Lauchlane
M'yntossich  of  Galeway  and  Donalde  Angus  M'yntossich.
.  .  .  And  als  sone  as  ye  saide  castell  beys  tane  be  ye  saide
Donalde,  the  saide  Lauchlane  sal  gar  incontinent,  but  ony
langer  delay,  handfast  Margret,  his  saide  dochter,  with  the
saide  Donalde,  and  ly  with  him  as  scho  war  his  lauchfull
wiff;  Ande  als  sone  as  the  dispensacione  cumys  hame,  the
saide  Donalde  is  oblist  incontinent,  but  ony  langer  delay,
to  mary  and  spous  the  saide  Margret,  and  to  halde  her  in

i  SIB  ROBERT  GOBDON,  The  Genealogical  History  of  the  Earldom
of  Sutherland  (1813),  p.  95.

2 "  This  renunciation  was  maid  by  Alexander,  the  bastard,
judiciallie,  in  presence  of  the  shirreff  of  Inverness,  the  25th.  day
...  of  July,  the  forsaid  yeir  1509."  The  deed  of  renunciation
runs,  "...  quod  ipse  Alexander  iure  suo  in  et  ad  dictum  comi-
tatum  in  favprem  Elizabeth  Sutherland,  heredumque  suorum,  pro
certa  compositione  renunciaret,  salvo  tamen  sibi  Alexandro  iure
successionis,  si  contigerit  de  successione  heredum  Elizabeth  penitus
deficere."  (Quoted  by  Sir  W.  FBASEB,  The  Sutherland  Book  [1892],
III,  pp.  41-43.)

a  Calendar  of  Scottish  State  Papers,  I,  1547-63,  pp.  690,  694;  E.  W.
ROBEBTSON,  Historical  Essays,  p.  175,  "  Handfasting."


246  TRIBAL  LAW:  PART  II:  ARYAN  CULTURE

honour  and  worschip  at  all  his  power  as  his  weddit  wiff,
for  all  the  days  of  his  lyff."  *

We  are  told  by  Skene  that  among  chieftains  it  was  a  very
prevalent  custom  to  give  their  daughters  in  handfast  mar-
riage, which  "  consisted  in  a  species  of  contract  between
two  chiefs,  by  which  it  was  agreed  that  the  heir  of  the  one
should  live  with  the  heir  of  the  other  as  her  husband  for
twelve  months  and  a  day.  If  in  that  time  the  lady  became
a  mother,  or  proved  to  be  with  child,  the  marriage  became
good  in  law,  even  although  no  priest  had  performed  the
marriage  ceremony  in  due  form ;  but  should  there  not  have
occurred  any  appearance  of  issue,  the  contract  was  con-
sidered at  an  end,  and  each  party  was  at  liberty  to  marry
or  handfast  with  any  other. ' ' 2

In  a  description  of  Scotch  marriage  rites  given  by  Pen-
nant, we  notice  the  interesting  variation  that  the  contract
confirmed  by  joining  hands  is  made,  not  between  the  bride
and  the  bridegroom,  but  between  the  bride 's  father  and  the
bridegroom.3

Handfast  marriage  was  not,  however,  peculiar  to  Scot-
land, and  there  are  cases  of  it  in  the  charters  of  Ripon  and
the  records  of  the  courts  of  York  Cathedral.  It  was  the
secular  preliminary  to  Church  marriage,  and  definite
formulas  were  in  use.  In  a  Ripon  case  in  1471,  witnesses
told  exactly  what  happened.  A  certain  Margaret  per-
formed handfast  marriage  with  two  persons  in  one  year,
and  a  trial  for  the  possession  of  the  wife  took  place  be-
tween the  two.  She  confessed,  and  the  one  who  had  hand-

1  The  Family  of  Rose  of  Kilravock  (Spalding  Club,  1848),  p.  147;
cf. p. 36. I  am indebted  for  this  interesting  notice  to Professor
J.  A.  Smith.

2  W.  F.  SKENE,  The  Highlanders  of  Scotland,  ed.  by  A.  MACBAIN
(1902),  p.  108. Cf.  SIR  WALTER  SCOTT'S  Monastery.

s  THOMAS  PENNANT,  Tour  in  Scotland,  1769,  II,  pp.  205-06:
"The  courtship  of  the  Highlander  has  these  remarkable  circum-
stances attending  it:  after  privately  obtaining  the  consent  of  the
Fair,  he  formally  demands  her  of  her  father.  The  Lover  and  his
friends  assemble  on  a  hill  allotted  for  that  purpose  in  every  parish,
and  one  of  them  is  despatched  to  obtain  permission  to  wait  on
the  daughter:  if  he  is  successful,  he  is  again  sent  to  invite  the
father  and  his  friends  to  ascend  the  hill  .  .  .  the  Lover  advances,
takes  hi*  future  father-in-law  by  the  hand  and  then  plights  his
troth,  and  the  Fair  one  is  surrendered  up  to  him."


V:  THE  PATRIARCHAL  HOUSEHOLD  247

fasted  her  first  carried  her  off.1  Again,  at  Easingwold  in
1484  a  man  says,  "Here  I  take  the,  Margaret,  to  my  hand-
fast  wif,  to  hold  and  to  have,  at  bed  and  at  burd,  for  farer
for  lather,  for  better  for  wars,  in  sekenes  and  in  heil,  to
dethe  us  depart,  if  holy  kirk  it  will  ordand,  and  thereto
plight  1  the  my  trowth."  2

Handf  ast  marriage  was  based  on  consent,  led  to  a  kind  of
preliminary  trial,  and  could  be  dissolved.  At  the  same  time,
it  was  regarded  as  a  wedding,  and  in  the  York  Charters  3
the  term  "wedded  wife  "  alternates  with  "handf  ast  wife."
"Wedded"  means,  of  course,  "bound"  or  "tied"  by  a
contractual  pledge,  and  so  does  ' '  handf ast. ' '

The  practice  of  "marriage  on  trial"  may  be  further
traced  in  Scandinavian,  Germanic  and  Celtic  customs.
Thus  in  certain  rural  districts  west  of  the  Rhine,  there
was  a  practice  of  concluding  a  marriage  which  was  on
trial  for  a  year.  If  there  was  offspring,  the  union  became  a
regular  marriage  for  life,  but  otherwise  it  was  dissolved.4
In  Scandinavia,  in  the  formula  of  Swedish  marriage,  the
term  was  at  festa  Konu  (i.e.  to  get  a  wife  by  contract).
This  marriage  was  not  always  necessarily  for  life,  but  might
be  only  a  temporary  arrangement.5  In  ancient  Ireland
coibche  means  the  purchase  of  a  wife  by  agreement.  The
arrangement  usually  lasted  for  a  year,  from  May  1st  or
August  1st,  and  was  set  on  foot  especially  at  the  Fairs  of
Lug  in  Ulster  and  Carman  in  Leinster.6  For  ancient
Wales  we  have  the  testimony  of  Giraldus  Cambrensis:
"  Matrimoniorum  autem  onera,  nisi  expertis  antea  cohabi-
tatione,  commixtione,  morum  qualitate,  et  praecipue  fe-
cunditate,  subire  non  solent.  Proinde  et  puellas,  sub  certo
parentibus  pecuniae  pretio,  et  resipiscendi  poena  statuta,

1  Acts  of  the  Chapter  of  the  Collegiate  Church  of  88.  Peter  and
Wilfrid,  Ripon,  1452-1506 (Surtees  Society,  LXIV,  1875),  p.  159  ff.

2  IMd.,  p.  162,  note  i.
s  Loc.  cit.

*H.  SCHURTZ,  Altersklassen  und  Mannerbiinde  (Berlin,  1902),
p.  91.

6  AMIBA,  Nordgermanisches  Obligationenrecht,  I,  pp.  536  ff.  The
formula  of  Uplandslaga,  p  538.

e  H.  D'ARBOIS  DE  JUBAINVILLE,  Cours  de  litUrature  celtique
(1895),  VII,  pp.  310  ff.  Cf.  O'DoNOVAN,  Book  of  Rights  (1847),
p.  243,  note.


248  TRIBAL  LAW:  PART  II:  ARYAN  CULTURE

non  ducere  quidem  in  primis  sed  quasi  conducere,  antiquus
in  hac  gente  mos  obtinuit."  1

These  cases  are  not  curiosities  of  law,  but  are  the  out-
come of  the  ancient  conception  that  the  relations  between
the  two  sexes  need  not  be  permanent,  but  can  remain  fluid.
Sexual  jealousy  and  chastity,  as  we  know  them,  did  not  play
a  great  part,  and  the  background  was  entirely  different
from  that  of  the  modern  Christian  marriage  leading  to  a
permanent  settlement.

Marriage  There  are  some  generally  known  forms  of  marriage  which

capture.  have  left  more  distinct  traces  in  legal  literature.  The
variety  of  forms  in  Hindu  and  Roman  Law  have  already
been  noticed,  and  that  of  marriage  by  capture  reappears,
at  least  as  a  ceremony,  in  nearly  all  rites.  One  of  the
standing  ceremonies  in  Irish  custom  was  the  meeting  of
the  two  parties  of  kinsmen  as  if  in  hostile  conflict,  and  the
throwing  of  bolts  at  each  other  before  joining  the  wedding
procession.  These  bolts  were  merely  of  light  wood  but  they
represented  the  spears  of  the  original  fight.

Marriage  Marriage  by  purchase,  the  coemptio  of  Roman  Law,  is

purchase.  well  established  as  the  most  common  form.  At  first  sight  it
seems  exceedingly  brutal,  as  if  the  woman  were  treated  as  a
slave  or  an  animal.  Some  notion  of  this  kind  underlies  cer-
tain of  the  facts  under  discussion,  but  it  is  not  the  principal
one.  The  object  of  the  transaction  was  in  reality  not  a  per-
son, but  power,  manus  or  mund.  The  most  explicit  com-
mentary on  this  principle  is  supplied  by  Scandinavian  law.
The  very  name  of  a  legitimately  married  wife  in  old  Norse
Law,  mundi  kjobt,  implies  that  the  legal  wife  is  one  whose
mund  has  been  purchased.  In  Sweden,  the  passage  of  mund
was  effected  by  donation,  "gift":  hence  the  Scandinavian
expression  for  marriage — giftarmal.  The  important  point
is  that  mund  has  to  be  transferred,  and  that  this  legal
passage  of  power  marks  the  line  between  concubinate  and
marriage.  Where  the  formal  transference  of  power  had
taken  place,  legitimate  marriage  was  effected  at  once,  while

1  GIRALDUS CAMBRENSIS, Descriptio Kambriae, lib. II, cap. vi
(Rolls  Series,  Giraldi  Cambrensis  Opera,  VI,  p 213).


V:  THE  PATRIARCHAL  HOUSEHOLD


249


in  the  case  of  informal  cohabitation  it  might  be  only
brought  about  by  a  kind  of  customary  prescription.  Thus
legal  marriage  is  prima  facie  distinguished  from  concu-
binate  by  the  element  of  the  transference  of  power.

We  have  to  ask  next:  who  transfers  power?  The  gist
of  the  legal  situation  lies  in  the  passage  of  power  from  one
authoritative  person  to  another.  The  view  that  the  woman
sells  herself  —  coemptionem  fecit  —  has  been  supported  by
reference  to  the  forms  of  Roman  marriage,1  but  the
modernized  use  of  the  active  form  —  fecit  —  is  too  slight  a
foundation  for  a  theory  according  to  which  the  bride  would
appear  as  both  the  subject  and  the  object  of  the»transaction.
In  normal  cases  the  person  to  effect  the  transfer  is  the
father,  or,  failing  him,  a  brother  or  agnatic  guardian.  In
Greece  the  subject  of  the  transfer  is  nvpioz.  Thus  mar-
riage is  originally  not  a  transaction  between  husband  and
wife,  but  between  the  bride's  guardian  or  father  and  the
guardian  or  father  of  the  bridegroom.

One  fundamental  consequence  of  the  fact  that  the  mar- Distinction

i  i  T  ,1 T T between

riage  was  a  contract  between  the  guardians  was  the  dupli-  sponsaiia
cation  of  ceremonies  and  the  distinction  between  betrothal  nuptiae.
and  final  marriage.  This  was  fully  expressed  in  the  con-
trast between  sponsaiia  and  nuptiae  of  Roman  Law.  The
sponsaiia  was  the  contract  concluded  between  the  guard-
ians. The  formulae  used  on  that  occasion  are  frequently
mentioned  in  ancient  comedies  of  Plautus  and  Terence.
Questions  and  answers  were  matched:  Spondesne,  "do
you  promise  to  give  your  daughter  in  marriage?"  —
Spondeo,  "I  promise,"2  This  was  the  betrothal  of
primitive  law,  traces  of  which  survive  even  now  in  the
modern  ceremony  of  the  "giving  away"  of  the  bride.  The
nuptiae  consisted  in  conducting  the  bride  to  the  house  of
the  bridegroom;  after  the  procession  they  join  hands  in
front  of  the  hearth.  Here  the  personal  element  is  very
prominent.  In  the  ancient  Roman  ceremony  the  bride,  on
the  giving  of  hands,  says  ubi  tu  Gains,  ibi  ego  Gaia.  This


1  KARLOWA,  Rechtsgeschichte,  15Sff

2  COSTA, in  the  Bulletino delT  Institute di  Diritto Romano, II,
28  ff.


250  TRIBAL  LAW:  PART  II: ARYAN  CULTURE

formula  expresses  the  fact  that  henceforth  the  two  are
joined  as  one  person.  It  is  sometimes  said  that  this
quaintly  expresses  the  taking  by  the  bride  of  the  husband's
name,  by  which  she  renounces  her  own  name  and  kin.
There  is,  however,  one  flaw  in  the  reasoning:  Gains  was
never  the  name  of  a  gens,  it  was  always  a  personal  name  and
at  no  time  was  there  a  gens  Gaia  in  Rome.  Besides,  we
know  that  Roman  brides  did  not  change  their  gentile  name :
the  mother  of  the  Gracchi,  for  instance,  always  remained
a  Cornelia.  What  was  expressed  by  the  formula  was  the
joining,  not  of  the  gentes,  but  of  the  persons.  It  is  an
important  point,  which  has  not  been  noticed  by  com-
mentators, that  the  significance  of  the  sponsalia  and
nuptiae  lies  in  the  duplication  of  the  bond  of  marriage :  in
the  contract  between  the  kindreds  on  the  one  hand,  and  in
the  sacramental  agreement  between  two  individuals  on  the
other.

The  Greek  framework  was  similar:  it  started  with  the
syyvrfGiS,  the  transaction  between  the '  guardians,  after
which  the  woman  was  dyyvrfT^  yvvrj  (Satrap)}  *•  the  second
part  of  the  ceremony,  answering  the  nuptiae,  was  yaj^o?
the  process  of  taking  the  wife  to  the  domicile  of  her  hus-
band and  the  beginning  of  their  cohabitation  and  married
life.  This  expressed  the  personal  side  which,  from  the  legal
point  of  view,  was  less  important  than  eyyvrjffit.  Thus  in
the  trials  reported  in  the  speeches  of  Isaeus  and  Demos-
thenes, the  answer  to  the  question  as  to  whether  a  woman
was  a  legitimate  wife  or  not,  entirely  depends  on  the  evi-
dence as  to  syyvrfffi?  '•, 2  ydf-ios  is  treated  as  a  secondary
feature.  It  is  significant  that  the  term  eyyvav  is  used  for
the  action  both  of  the  nvpios  who  gives  away  the  bride,
and  of  the  person  who  stands  security  for  a  debt  and  is
expected  to  "  hand  over  "  the  person  of  the  debtor.3

The  fact  that  the  marriage  that  led  to  the  production  of
legitimate  offspring  was  a  bond  not  only  between  persons,
but  between  kindred,  is  expressed  in  the  formulae  used  in


,  Familienrecht,  I,  pp 40  ff.

2  E.g.,  ISAEUS. Or.  Ill,  4,  70

3  PAETSCH,  Griechisches  Biirgschaftsrecht,  p.  87  ff.


V:  THE  PATRIARCHAL  HOUSEHOLD  251

the  marriage  ceremonies  in  Greece,  Rome  and  India.  Thus
when  Kleisthenes,  ruler  of  Sikyon,  gave  his  daughter
Agariste  in  marriage,  he  invited  suitors  to  compete  for
her,  and  on  giving  her  to  the  successful  competitor,  the
Athenian  Megakles  of  the  Alkmaeonids,  he  pronounced  the
formula,  "I  give  my  daughter  to  thee,  Megakles  of  the
Alkmaeonids,  for  the  breeding  of  legitimate  children."1

Curious  features  of  the  ancient  ritual of  the  law  of Parallel

features
marriage  are  presented  in  the  ancient  Roman  and  in  the in  B.ial>-  .

^  manic  and

Indian  ceremonies.  Brahmanic  marriage,  the  most  devel-  J£omau  p
oped  and  sacred  form,  is  fully  before  us,  being  practised  rites.
even  now,  and  as  regards  the  ancient  Roman  marriage,  the
confarreatio,  we  have  the  notices  of  historians.  If  we  com-
pare the  ritual  of  the  two,  we  find  that  they  are  identical  in
all  the  chief  particulars,  which  are  so  concrete  and  expres-
sive that  there  can  be  no  question  of  composing  these  rites
at  a  later  stage ;  it  may  be  said,  therefore,  that  we  have
here  the  old  ritual  of  sacral  marriage  as  practised  five
thousand  years  ago,  before  the  division  of  the  races.  Three
points  must  be  noticed.

(1)  The  bride  and  bridegroom  conclude  the  agreement  as
to  common  life  and  perpetual  union  by  giving  the  hand
(handfasting),  described  in  Rome  as  dextrarum  prehensio.
In  Indian  ritual  the  corresponding  rite  is  called  panigra-
~kana  (handshaking).2

(2)  In  both  rituals  the  bride  and  bridegroom  sit  down
together  on  a  seat  covered  with  sheep-skin,  thus  establishing
in  a  symbolical  way  the  fact  that  both  take  part  in  the
same  act  of  housekeeping  in  a  household  in  which  pastoral
pursuits  are  prominent.

(3)  The  bride  and  bridegroom  partake  of  food  in  com-
mon. In  the  Brahmanical  ritual  the  chief  stress  is  laid  on
the  sharing  of  "fire  and  water,"  but  rice  is  also  shared.
The  Roman  ritual  in  this  respect  is  more  expressive  and
gives  the  name  to  the  whole  ceremony:  confarreatio  is  the
sharing  of  a  cake  made  of  far  (spelt). The  use  of  spelt
is  characteristic,  and  points  to  a  period  when  wheat  was

1  HERODOTUS,  vi,  130. The  formula  was: M  xaiduv  yrjoiuv  apdr^.

2  Cf.  NABADA,  XII,  pars.  2  and  3.


252  TRIBAL  LAW:  PART  II:  ARYAN  CULTURE

probably  unknown,  while  barley  and  spelt  were  the  only
sown  grains.  The  cake  shared  in  the  Patrician  ceremony
was  not  an  ordinary  one :  it  is  described  as  mold  salsa,  i.e.,
a  baked  cake  of  roughly  ground  corn,1  and  thus  assigns  the
ritual  to  the  later  stone  period.

There  is  another  supplementary  trait  which  is  not  men-
tioned explicitly  in  the  Latin  descriptions,  but  may  be
supposed  to  have  been  in  use.  The  bride  and  bridegroom
went  round  the  hearth  in  symbol  of  the  fact  that  the  new
hearth  would  be  one  and  the  same  for  both.  In  the  Brah-
manic  ceremony  this  feature  is  very  important  and  has
developed  on  the  line  of  making  seven  steps  together  (hepta
pada]  ;  according  to  the  judicial  commentaries,  when  the
seventh  step  is  taken,  the  marriage  is  fully  concluded.  This
does  not  appear  in  the  narratives  concerning  confarreatio,
but  it  is  still  recognizable  in  the  ritual  of  the  Eastern
Church,  as  the  newly  married  pair,  led  by  the  priest,  walk
three  times  round  the  little  altar  in  the  centre  of  the
church,  which  corresponds  to  the  altar  of  the  domestic
hearth  of  pagan  custom.

The  confarreatio  ceremony  became  exclusive  and  purely
Patrician.  Other  classes  could  not  practise  it  at  all,  but
members  of  the  Patrician  families,  the  old  aristocrats,  who
wanted  their  sons  to  stand  for  ancient  priesthoods,  such  as
that  of  the  flamines,  had  to  prove  that  they  were  the  issue
of  marriages  by  confarreatio.  Let  us  notice  also  that  in
both  rituals  the  greatest  stress  is  laid  on  the  personal  factor.
The  sacramental  marriage  is  between  the  bride  and  the
bridegroom,  and  the  part  taken  by  the  kinsmen  is  not  ap-
parent; it  is  really  the  last  act  of  the  nuptiae,  ya^io?.
Thus  it  is  in  the  betrothal,  sponsalia,  syyvrjfftt  that  the
kinsfolk  predominate,  not  in  the  religious  acts  which  sanc-
tify personal  union.

A  most  curious  description  of  a  wedding  according  to  Old
English  Law  occurs  in  an  Anglo-Saxon  Formulary:  it
covers  the  whole  ground  of  matrimonial  relations.  "If
people  want  to  wed  a  maid  or  a  wife  and  this  is  agreeable

1  Cf .  Germ,  mahlen  and  its  linguistic  parallels,  and  the  evidence
as  to  ancient  stone  hand-mills.  SCHBADEB,  Reallex.  511.


V:  THE  PATRIARCHAL  HOUSEHOLD  253

to  her  and  to  her  kinsmen,  then  it  is  right  that  the  bride-
groom  should  first  swear  according  to  God's  right  and
secular  law  and  should  wage  (pledge  himself)  to  those  who  ounEng-
are  her  forspeakers,  that  he  wishes  to  have  her  in  such  a  lish  Law-
way  as  he  should  hold  her  by  God's  right  as  his  wife — and
his  kinsmen  will  stand  pledge  for  him.

Then  it  is  to  be  settled  to  whom  the  price  for  up-
fostering  her  belongs,  and  for  this  the  kinsmen  should
pledge  themselves.

Then  let  the  bridegroom  declare  what  present  he  will
make  her  for  granting  his  desire,  and  what  he  will  give  if
she  lives  longer  than  he  does.

If  it  has  been  settled  in  this  way,  then  it  is  right  that  she
should  enjoy  half  the  property,  and  all  if  they  have  a  child,
unless  she  marries  another  man.

All  this  the  bridegroom  must  corroborate  by  giving  a
gage,  and  his  kinsmen  stand  to  pledge  for  him.

If  they  are  agreed  in  all  this,  then  let  the  kinsmen  of
the  bride  accept  and  wed  their  kinswoman  to  wife  and  to
right  life  to  him  who  desires  her,  and  let  him  take  the
pledge  who  rules  over  the  wedding.

If  she  is  taken  out  of  the  land  into  another  lord's  land,
then  it  is  advisable  that  her  kinsmen  get  a  promise  that  no
violence  will  be  done  to  her,  and  that  if  she  has  to  pay  a
fine,  they  ought  to  be  her  next  to  help  her  to  pay,  if  she
has  not  enough  to  pay  herself."  *

The  first  paragraph  states  certain  preliminary  require-
ments. First  the  duties  of  the  husband  are  defined — he
must  hold  his  wife  according  to  God's  law.  Then  the  con-
sent of  the  parties  must  be  clear  and  definite:  the  mar-
riage must  be  agreeable  to  the  bride  as  well  as  to  the  bride-
groom :  thus  the  wife 's  personality  is  specifically  recognized
and  respected.  But  the  marriage  must  also  be  agreeable  to
the  Kinsmen,  and  the  parties  who  arrange  the  terms  of  the
contract  are  not  the  pair  to  be  wedded,  but  the  bride-
groom's kindred  and  the  "forspeakers"  of  the  bride.

The  second  paragraph  relates  to  the  price  which  is  to  be
paid :  note  that  this  price  is  not  for  possession  of  the  woman
i  LIEBEBMANN,  Gesetze  der  Angelsachsen,  I,  p.  442.


254  TRIBAL  LAW:  PART  II:  ARYAN  CULTURE

herself  as  an  object  of  property,  nor  even  for  mund  over
her,  but  it  is  for  the  expense  of  "upfostering"  her.  This
is  interesting  as  an  evidence  of  transition,  and  clearly  shows
not  only  the  roots  of  the  transaction,  but  the  process  of
transformation.

In  the  next  paragraph  another  kind  of  price  is  referred
to:  it  is  money  paid  by  the  bridegroom  to  his  wife  for
''granting  his  desire."  This  is  a  payment  quite  apart
from  the  original  sum  agreed  to  be  due  from  the  husband
to  parents  and  kinsmen.

Next  comes  the  third  idea  connected  with  the  pecuniary
obligations  of  the  bridegroom,  namely,  that  he  must  guar-
antee a  certain  maintenance  to  his  wife  if  she  survives  him.
Here  we  see  the  origin  of  dower,  an  institution  familiar
to  Germanic  law,  and  quite  distinct  from  the  Roman  dos.
If  there  is  a  child  of  the  union,  the  wife  is  guaranteed  a
life-interest  in  the  whole  property  of  the  husband ;  if
there  is  no  issue,  she  shall  have  an  interest  in  half  the
property.

The  next  paragraph  emphasizes  the  part  which  the  kin-
dred take  in  the  transaction :  while  the  individual  contracts
by  gage,  the  kindred  stand  surety  for  him.  Then  we  come
to  the  actual  ceremony  of  betrothal,  which  is  effected  by  the
giving  of  the  wed,  the  gage  or  pledge,  the  symbol  of  obliga-
tions which  are  definitely  undertaken  by  the  parties  to  the
union, — another  reminder  of  the  important  fact  that  the
history  of  marriage  is  intimately  connected  with  the  history
of  contract.  He  who  rules  the  wedding — the  umpire  or
middleman, — must  also  be  taken  into  account  in  this  con-
nection.

Finally,  after  the  actual  wedding  has  taken  place,  we
hear  that  the  right  of  the  kindred  to  protect  the  bride  is
not  superseded  when  she  passes  into  the  household  of  her
husband.  There  is  a  definite  statement  that  the  kindred
retain  a  right  to  interfere  for  her  protection  and  are  under
a  duty  to  help  her  if  she  incurs  a  fine  or  a  similar  liability.
This  is  very  important,  and  it  is  one  of  the  most  firmly
established  principles  of  the  wergeld  fines  that  they  are
paid  by  both  sides.  This  fact,  not  realized  by  former  stu-


V:  THE  PATRIARCHAL  HOUSEHOLD  255

dents,1  that  the  wife  did  not  belong  entirely  to  the  gens
of  her  husband,  and  was  not  absolutely  in  their  power,  but
that  the  protection  of  her  rights  rested  on  the  lasting  agree-
ment made  between  the  two  kindreds  by  the  transaction  of
the  marriage,  was  the  foundation  of  her  position  in  right
and  in  law.
In  regard  to  the  position  of  women  in  ancient  Aryan  source^  of


society  a  very  important  question  concerns,  of  course,  the
exercise  of  rights  of  property.  According  to  the  ancient  property.
constitution  of  the  family  an  unmarried  woman  was  for
ever  dependent  upon  her  curator,  but  the  position  of  a  mar-
ried woman  as  to  property  rights  was,  as  it  were,  double-
edged.  Although  she  was  dominated  by  her  husband,
she  was  yet  the  matrona,  patni,  a  personality  under  the
protection  of  her  former  kin.  In  the  higher  forms  of  legiti-
mate marriage  as  contrasted  with  concubinate  and  matri-
monium  usu,  the  wife's  rights  of  property  were  recognized,
even  though  she  had  to  exercise  them  under  the  supervision
and  restrictions  of  her  husband.  There  were  two  principal
sources  of  these  rights  of  property:  (1)  according  to  the
Anglo-Saxon  ritual,  one  item  making  for  the  recognition  of
the  wife's  proprietary  rights  is  the  present  which  the  bride-
groom gives  the  bride  on  the  morning  after  the  marriage
"for  granting  his  desire."  In  German  law  this  is  called
the  morning  gift,  and  a  similar  custom  is  mentioned  in
Russian  law.  The  agreement  as  to  dower  appears  as  a
further  development  of  the  custom.  (2)  On  the  other  hand,
the  bride  is  supposed  to  bring  a  certain  number  of  things
from  her  home.  Thus  in  the  Laws  of  Manu,2  in  all  descrip-
tions of  the  conclusion  of  a  marriage  the  bride  is  said  to
proceed  to  the  house  of  the  bridegroom  decked  with  jewels
and  well  adorned.  Besides  an  outfit  of  trinkets  and  festal
clothes,  she  would  be  provided  with  articles  of  furniture,
and,  sometimes,  with  cattle.  The  married  woman  there-
fore draws  her  property  from  two  sources—  one  being  the
dower  assigned  from  the  bridegroom's  side,  and  the  other
the  "dos"  from  father  or  guardian.  In  the  Brehon  Laws

1  E  g.,  FUSTEL  DE  COULANGES,  in  La  Cit6  Antique

2  E.g.,  Manu,  III,  27  and  28.


256  TRIBAL  LAW:  PART  II:  ARYAN  CULTURE

of  Ancient  Ireland,  these  two  are  contrasted  under  the
names  of  tinol  and  tinnskra,  tinol  being  goods  brought  by
the  bride  from  her  old  home,  dos,  her  outfit,  which  is  re-
garded as  especially  protected,  and  which  never  becomes
the  property  of  her  husband.  The  wife's  right  is  juri-
dically recognized  and  protected,  and  her  children  have  a
special  right  of  inheritance  even  against  the  father.  Tinn-
skra is  the  bridegroom's  allowance  to  the  bride.  Irish
law  demands  that  it  should  be  equalized  with  the  tinol,
so  that  the  bride  receives  as  much  as  she  brings  with
her.

These  are  the  typical  features  of  the  ancient  rights  of  the
wife  as  regards  property.  When  their  full  development  is
insisted  on,  there  arises  a  conflict  with  the  other  rule —
that  the  paterfamilias  is  the  absolute  ruler  of  the  house-
hold— and  compromises  of  various  kinds  between  the  two
conflicting  tendencies  are  devised  among  Indians,  Komans,
Greeks,  Celts,  Slavs  and  Teutons.  We  have  thus  in  this
case  a  curious  example  of  the  inconsistencies  of  ancient  law :
it  does  not  generally  follow  up  conclusions  to  absolutely
consistent  results.  Even  the  most  consistent  system  of  all
— Eoman  Law — recognizes  customary  rights  in  the  shape
of  the  peculium:  the  paterfamilias  is  absolute  owner  of
property,  yet  his  son  and  servant  are  protected  by  custom
in  the  ownership  of  their  stock  of  cattle  and  other  goods.
The  wife  is  protected  in  the  use  of  her  dos  not  only  by
custom,  but  by  the  influence  of  her  relations.

Celtic  and  Germanic  law  show  that  the  different  forms  of
family  property  were  regarded  from  the  point  of  view  of
daily  use.  Thus  a  strong  distinction  is  made  between  the
things  that  are  in  the  ordinary  use  of  the  man — his  military
outfit  and  his  team  of  oxen  for  ploughing 1 — and  the  things
with  which  his  wife  is  especially  connected,  such  as  the
spindle,  pillows,  blankets,  house  furniture  and  jewels,  her
Gerade.  The  legal  situation  is  adapted  to  simple  economic
considerations  and  to  the  natural  division  of  labour.


i  The  Germanic  designation  of  these  things  is  Gewaet  (plur.
Geicaete) ,  hence  the  heriot  (Her-gewset),  the  best  horse  or  the  best
ox  ceded  to  the  chief.


V:  THE  PATRIARCHAL  HOUSEHOLD  257

An  occasion  when  the  separate  rights  of  husband  and  Divorce,
wife  assume  a  tangible  form  arises  when,  by  the  separation
of  the  married  pair,  the  rights  of  property  have  to  be  re-
adjusted. How  could  it  be  admitted  in  the  old  Aryan
society  that  marriage  could  be  dissolved  at  all? — can  one
speak  of  divorce  under  a  regime  of  appropriation  by  the
husband?  In  a  sacramental  marriage  it  was  impossible  in
principle,  and  Suttee  is  the  consequence  of  the  complete
union.  But  this  form  is  only  one  expression  of  marital
union  and  is  perhaps  not  the  most  common  in  ancient  law.
Contract  or  #w&st-contract  is  more  common,  and  just  be-
cause the  clauses  of  the  marriage  agreement  are  recognized
to  a  great  extent  by  the  kindred  concluding  the  agreement
as  subject  to  strict  observation,  the  right  to  renounce  it,  if
broken  by  the  other  party,  is  not  entirely  destroyed.  Di-
vorce or  separation  is  produced  not  merely  by  the  dismissal
of  the  wife,1  but  also  on  her  demand,  or,  rather,  on  the  de-
mand of  her  kin.  How  property  is  dealt  with  in  the  case  of
divorce  may  be  seen  from  the  Gortyn  Code  found  in  the
ruins  of  a  Doric  city  in  Crete.  It  belongs  to  the  sixth
century  B.C.,  that  is,  to  a  period  soon  after  the  time  of  the
legislation  of  Solon  in  Athens.  ' '  If  a  husband  and  wife  be
divorced,  she  shall  have  her  own  property  that  she  came
with  to  her  husband,  and  the  half  of  the  crop,  if  it  be  from
her  own  property,  and  whatever  she  has  woven  within,  the
half,  whatever  it  may  be,  and  five  staters,  if  her  husband
be  the  cause  of  her  dismissal ;  but  if  her  husband  deny  that
he  was  the  cause,  the  judge  shall  decide,  confirming  his
decision  on  oath." 2  It  is  important  to  notice  that  the  cause
had  to  be  established  by  a  judge,  who  might  decide  that  the
husband  was  at  fault.  Thus  the  wife  was  not  at  the  mercy
of  her  lord,  but  had  protected  rights  and  a  status  before
the  Courts.

In  the  Brehon  Laws  we  see  a  further  development  of  the
principle :  the  wife  has  certain  rights  as  to  things  belonging
to  her  husband.  As  regards  succession  there  is  an  inter-
esting distinction:  if  there  is  issue,  the  wife  remains  in

1  Cf  the  Roman  practice.

2  DABESTE,  Inscriptions  juridiques  grecques,  III,  par.  14.
2231  0


258


TRIBAL  LAW:  PART  II:  ARYAN  CULTURE


The

servants  a
part  of  the
ancient
Aryan
family.


possession  of  what  she  had  during  the  life  of  her  husband ;
if  there  is  no  issue,  she  has  an  allowance.  In  ancient
Greek  law  the  rights  of  the  wife  to  property  were  estab-
lished by  the  State.  In  other  cases,  however,  we  must  guard
against  exaggeration  and  must  notice  that  in  the  Roman
household  we  are  dealing  with  an  extreme  manifestation  of
patriarchal  absolutism.

There  is  a  third  element  in  the  Family  besides  the  ruler
and  his  wives  and  children :  according  to  the  general  Aryan
conception  the  servants  are  a  part  of  the  household.  Even
the  slave  is  not  regarded  as  an  outside  subject:  he  is  a
member,  though  an  inferior  member,  of  the  family.  Curious
consequences  from  this  principle  arise  in  law.  It  is,  how-
ever, necessary  to  make  a  clear  distinction  between  periods :
the  slave  of  Cicero  or  Pericles,  unlike  that  of  the  Iliad
and  of  the  Vedas,  is  a  tool;  but  such  a  description  would
not  be  true  of  the  ancient  slave.  In  the  archaic
period  he  was  an  inferior  member  of  the  domestic  cult
of  the  hearth,  not  godless  but  sharing  in  the  religion  of  the
family  to  which  he  belonged.  Though  unable  to  perform
the  rites  himself,  he  was  present  at  them  and  might  assist
at  subsidiary  ministrations.  In  Greek  law  he  is  either  $ju&$,
a  captive,  a  prisoner  of  war  who  may  have  been  a  prince  in
his  own  land,  or  perhaps  even  a  Greek  and  not  a
barbarian,  so  that  there  need  not  have  been  a  fundamental
distinction  between  him  and  his  master:  or  else  he  was
termed  oiHer^?y  a  domestique.  Consequently  we  find  in
ancient  times  a  milder  expression  of  the  relationship  be-
tween master  and  slave  than  in  later  law.1  Greek  observers
about  the  year  300  B.C.,  encountering  the  more  archaic
culture  of  India  where  the  ancient  views  and  customs  were
better  preserved,  were  struck  by  this  difference  between
slavery  and  the  free  condition  of  the  sudras.  Megasthenes,
an  envoy  of  one  of  Alexander's  generals,  Seleucus,  gives  a
description  of  the  India  of  the  closing  years  of  the  fourth
century  B.C.2  He  comes  to  the  conclusion  that  the  Indians

1  The  human  relationship  between  master  and  slave  is  illustrated,
for  example,  in  the  Odyssey  by  the  relations  between  Odysseus  and
his  old  nurse.

2  MEGASTHENES  in  Fragmenta  Historicorum  Graecorum,  II,  436.


V:  THE  PATRIARCHAL  HOUSEHOLD  259

did  not  know  slavery.  Indeed,  the  pariahs,  the  outcasts,
in  spite  of  their  debased  and  miserable  position,  were  not
personal  slaves,  but  subjects  of  the  entire  community  some-
what similar  to  the  helots  of  Sparta.  The  position  of
the  sudras  was  better,  as  they  were  recognized  as  a  lower
caste  of  the  people.  In  this  matter  the  account  of  Mega-
sthenes  may  be  compared  with  Tacitus,  who  observed  that
subjection  among  the  Germans  did  not  amount  to  the
abolition  of  personality,  and  was  more  in  the  nature  of
colonate  than  of  slavery.1  The  subject  colonus  was  a  de-
pendent rural  farmer,  paying  tribute  in  kind  or  in  money.  The
The  client  had  his  own  little  household,  of  which  he  was  Aryan1
master,  but  which  was  taxed  for  tribute,  heavily  or  not  as  tributary
the  case  might  be,  in  the  shape  of  a  certain  number  of
measures  of  corn  or  part  of  the  offspring  of  his  cattle.
How  then  is  ancient  slavery  to  be  characterized?  It  has
been  thought  sometimes  that  complete  exploitation  on  the
lines  of  the  slavery  of  Mohammedan  countries  or  of  the
Southern  States  of  America,  where  the  negro  was  no  better
than  an  ox  or  a  horse,  has  been  the  rule  in  primitive
countries.  But  in  reality,  the  primitive  slave  had  a  bet-
ter standing,  not  on  account  of  sentiment,  but  for  prac-
tical reasons.  The  fundamental  reason  is  economic.
Ancient  communities  were  based  on  natural  husbandry,  and
so  weak  and  insufficient  was  the  concentration  of  society,
that  any  complex  organization  of  labour  or  exploitation
of  dependents  could  not  be  carried  out.  As  every  one
was  close  to  nature,  the  best  way  of  using  one's  de-
pendents was  to  fleece  them,  as  it  were,  to  take  what
they  could  provide  in  the  easiest  way.  The  master's  de-
mands as  regards  his  servant  were  limited  by  considera-
tions as  to  the  latter 's  existence  and  health.  There  was
not  much  choice  in  the  matter,  and  the  best  thing  to  do  was
to  settle  serfs  in  their  own  homesteads  and  let  them  take
part  in  cattle-breeding  or  the  cultivation  of  the  soil  in
much  the  same  way  as  the  master  himself.  The  tributary

1  Germania  xxv :  " .  .  .  ceteris  servis  non  in  nostrum  morem
discriptis  per  familiam  ministeriis  utuntur.  Suam  quisque  sedem
suos  penates  regit.  Frumenti  modum  dominus,  aut  pecoris,  aut
vestis,  ut  colono,  iniungit;  et  servus  hactenus  paret."


260  TRIBAL  LAW:  PART  II:  ARYAN  CULTURE

form  of  slavery  was  therefore  the  natural  one,  especially
among  the  Aryans  who  practised  pastoral  husbandry  and
primitive  agriculture.  It  is  hardly  a  paradox  to  say  that
slavery  was  intensified,  up  to  a  certain  point,  by  the  pro-
gress of  civilization.1

Accordingly,  in  the  Gortyn  inscription,  there  is  no  dis-
tinction in  quality  between  the  superior  and  the  subsidiary
household.  If  the  household  is  in  danger  of  disappearing
for  want  of  heirs,  succession  goes  over  to  the  tributary
clients  (FOIHSIS  ).  There  is  no  escheat,  the  community
does  not  claim  the  property.  In  Sparta,  for  instance,  the
nepioiKoi,  the  "dwellers  round,"  may  be  compared  with
the  FoineiS  of  Gortyn.  Thus  primitive  law  is  far  from
manifesting  any  sharp  contrasts  between  the  social  orders
and  from  degrading  slaves  to  the  position  of  cattle  or  tools.
The  lower  classes  were  dependent,  but  they  were  not  devoid
of  personal  rights  and  juridical  protection.  The  root  of
this  lies  in  the  necessities  of  the  economic  situation  to  which
customs  and  morals  had  to  adapt  themselves.

i  A  remarkable  exception  occurs  in  the  case  of  female  slaves,
whose  value  depended  on  sexual  attraction,  not  on  labour  The
female  slave — cumhal — was  used  by  the  Celts  as  a  unit  of  currency.
SEEBOHM,  Tribal  Custom  in  Anglo-ttaxon  Law,  97  ff.


CHAPTER  VI
THE  JOINT  FAMILY

WE  usually  consider  family  ties  and  family  property The  per-

, ,,  . sistence

from  the  point  of  view  of  successive  generations  and  ot  in- of  family

organiza-

heritance.  This  is,  however,  by  no  means  a  necessary  or  tion
even  a  natural  mode  of  approaching  the  subject.  In
ancient  life  the  principal  fact  governing  these  relations  was
the  continuity  of  a  family  organization,  and  there  was  no
compelling  reason  for  dissolving  it'  in  connection  with  the
death  of  a  particular  member,  even  if  the  member  in  ques-
tion happened  to  be  the  ruler  or  manager  of  the  concern.
We  are  quite  familiar  with  the  persistent  maintenance  of
corporate  units  like  the  State,  the  Church,  a  town,  a  teach-
ing institution,  and  there  is  no  inherent  reason  for  treating
the  combination  of  persons  and  things  constituting  a  house-
hold unit  in  another  way.  As  a  matter  of  fact,  every  parti-
tion and  dismemberment  is  bound  to  produce  some  loss  and
dislocation,  and  while  such  losses  have  to  be  incurred  nowa-
days in  order  to  satisfy  the  claims  of  individuals,  the  natu-
ral bent  of  ancient  Aryan  custom  was  in  the  direction  of
keeping  up  the  unity  of  the  household  at  the  cost  of  curtail-
ing individual  tendencies.  Strictly  speaking,  there  should
not  have  been  any  disruption  of  the  family  community  by
way  of  partition  or  inheritance,  any  more  than  there  is
a  necessity  for  a  party  meeting  for  a  meal  to  alter  or
abandon  that  common  meal  every  time  one  of  the  members
has  to  leave  the  table.  In  connection  with  this  prevailing
idea,  we  find  among  all  the  branches  of  the  Aryan  race
manifestations  of  the  so-called  united  family  or  joint  family
arrangement.  The  most  extensive  and  best  described  prac-
tices of  this  kind  are  to  be  found  in  India  and  among  the
Southern  Slavs,  but  there  are  many  traces  of  similar  insti-
tutions in  the  history  of  the  Germans,  of  the  Eastern  Slavs

261


262  TRIBAL  LAW:  PART  II:  ARYAN  CULTURE

and  of  Komance  nations.  To  begin  with,  let  us  consider
the  Indian  data.

The^  joint in  the  Rig  Veda  we  read  in  a  Hymn  (x.  85,  46)  *  of  a
India.  bride  who  is  invited  to  take  charge  of  a  household  in  which

parents-in-law  and  other  relations  are  mentioned  as  mem-
bers. The  Sutras  often  refer  to  the  common  management  of
families  which  have  outgrown  the  stage  of  the  primordial
group  of  father,  mother  and  children.  The  institution  is
considered  in  the  Indian  law  books  chiefly  from  the  point
of  view  of  its  possible  dissolution  by  partition ; 2  but  this
does  not  mean  in  any  way  that  partition  was  the  normal
consequence  of  the  decease  of  a  householder.  On  the  con-
trary, the  sons  of  a  householder  generally  continued  to
manage  their  affairs  in  common  as  before,  but  it  was  ad-
visable from  a  juridical  point  of  view  to  anticipate  the  possi-
bility of  partition,  and  to  lay  down  rules  as  to  the  relative
rights  of  interested  persons.  The  supposition  that,  in  the
ordinary  course  of  affairs,  common  management  remained
the  usual  expedient  is  supported  by  the  fact  that  right
through  recent  history,  and  up  to  our  times,  Indian  families
keep  together  as  far  as  possible  and  submit  to  division  only
with  great  reluctance.  It  has  been  argued  sometimes  that
the  possibility  of  claiming  a  partition  places  these  united
families  in  the  category  of  voluntary  associations.  Such  a
reading  of  the  evidence,  however,  perverts  the  true  state  of
things ;  it  represents  exceptions  as  the  rule  and  the  rule  as
an  artificial  contrivance  built  up  by  help  of  the  exceptions.
In  these  cases,  as  in  many  others,  we  have  to  take  into  ac-
count not  so  much  extreme  possibilities  as  the  customary  or
usual  development  of  affairs.  From  this  point  of  view  it  is
highly  characteristic  that  brothers,  cousins  and  nephews  in
India  strive  to  keep  up,  as  far  as  possible,  the  household

1  H.  H.  WILSON'S  transl. (1888):  "Be  a  queen  to  thy  father-in-
law ... to  thy  mother-in-law ... to  thy  husband's  sister . . .
to  thy  husband's  brothers."

2  E.g.,  Manu,  IX,  104;  Gautama,  XXVIII,  I;  Baudhdyana,  II,  38;
Yajnavalkya,  II,  117. Cf.  The  Law  of  Inheritance  from  the  Mitdk-
shard,  transl.  by  H.  T.  COLEBBOOKE  in  Two  Treatises  on  the  Hindu
Law of Inheritance (1810), pp. 257, 259-61; J. D. MAYNE, A
Treatise  on  Hindu  Law  and  Usage (4th  ed.,  1888),  p.  256;  WEST
and  BUHLER,  A  Digest  of  the  Hindu  Law  of  Inheritance,  Partition,
and  Adoption  (3rd  ed.,  1884),  I,  pp.  59-60.


VI:  THE  JOINT  FAMILY  263

unit  with  which  their  claims  are  connected.  During  a  re-
cent visit  to  India  I  came  across  many  significant  facts
of  this  kind:  e.g.,  a  large  family  of  some  seventy  rela-
tives was  keeping  up  its  connection  with  the  central
household  of  a  judge  of  the  'High  Court  in  Calcutta
(Justice  Chaudhuri).  I  was  told  that  great  gatherings
of  the  members  took  place  twice  a  year,  that  most  dis-
tant relatives  looked  upon  the  household  of  the  Judge  as
the  principal  stock  on  which  they  could  rely  in  case  of
need,  that  considerable  property  was  managed  in  common
and  that  personal  maintenance  was  provided  for  spinsters,
widows,  minors  and  other  members  who  could  not  shift
sufficiently  for  themselves.  Similar  arrangements  could  be
witnessed  in  the  daily  life  of  some  professors  of  the  San-
skrit College,  and  of  other  Hindu  householders  with  whom
I  came  into  contact.

The  modern  practice  of  the  institution  as  reflected  both
in  its  customary  peaceful  development,  and  in  occasional
conflicts  before  the  Courts,  is  marked  by  specific  juridical
traits  which  draw  a  definite  line  between  this  legal  arrange-
ment and  forms  of  association  known  to  the  modern  West.
I  have  chiefly  in  view  four  consequences  of  the  Joint
Family  system:

(1)  The  estimate  of  the  shares  held  by  the  different
members  in  the  common  concern.

(2)  The  method  of  managing  property.

(3)  Bights  of  maintenance.

(4)  The  relations  between  common  and  self-acquired
property.

(1)  The  basis  of  the  juridical  conception  in  this  case  Shares
is  the  corporate  existence  of  the  family :  there  is  originally
no  privileged  right  assigned  to  the  father  or  to  any  senior
member  who  acts  as  his  substitute.  Taking  the  case  of  the
father  as  the  most  obvious,  the  fundamental  fact  is  recog-
nized that  father  and  sons  stand  on  an  equal  footing  as
members  of  the  Joint  Family.  In  this  way  the  son  cannot
be  said  to  be  heir  to  his  father,  and  does  not  take  after  the
father's  death  property  which  did  not  belong  to  him  before.
The  only  change  which  occurs  on  the  decease  of  the  father


264


TRIBAL  LAW:  PART  II:  ARYAN  CULTURE


The  policy
of  the
manager
supervised
by  the
body  of
members


is  the  alteration  which  would  follow  from  the  fact  that  a
family,  say,  of  five  members,  would  shrink  to  a  family  of
four  members  and  the  surviving  members  would,  therefore,
each  hold  a  fourth  instead  of  a  fifth.  The  same  effect  would
be  produced  if  one  of  the  sons  disappeared  in  his  father's
lifetime.  This  position  is  quite  clear  in  the  older  system
represented  by  the  Yajnavalkya  and  Mitakshara,  and  it
holds  good  at  the  present  time  in  the  greater  part  of  India.1
In  parts  of  the  Bombay  Province  a  more  individualistic
conception  has  taken  root.  According  to  the  so-called
DayabJiaga  (partition)  of  this  Western  region,  the  father
is  recognized  as  the  owner  of  the  property  during  his  life-
time. But  even  in  this  modernized  arrangement  the  idea
of  the  continuity  of  the  family  tradition  is  preserved,  and
there  is  no  question  of  a  purely  individualistic  treatment  on
the  pattern  of  the  Roman  dominium.

Altogether  the  rights  of  members  of  a  Joint  Family  ap-
pear as  ideal  shares :  in  order  to  understand  the  proportion
in  which  these  shares  are  allotted,  we  must  keep  clearly  in
view  the  fact  that  they  follow  the  pedigree.  Without  going
into  the  details  of  the  question  we  have  to  notice  that  the
right  of  representation  holds  good,  so  that  the  members  of
junior  generations  may  have  to  wait  for  the  realization  of
their  individual  claims  till  the  decease  of  their  parents,
who,  while  alive,  represent  the  whole  branch.  Such  ques-
tions are,  however,  only  particular  applications  of  the  gen-
eral rule  that  shares  are  assigned  to  members  in  proportion
to  their  relative  seniority,  and  that  the  reckoning  is  car-
ried out  not  per  capita,  but  per  stirpes.2

(2)  As  the  father,  or  any  substitute  of  his,  acts  as  man-
ager of  the  family  and  not  as  owner,  his  policy  is  subject
to  supervision  and  if  necessary  to  correction  by  the  body  of
members.  There  is  a  good  deal  of  evidence  in  the  Law
Reports  as  to  conflicts  between  managers  and  members.
There  are  a  good  many  disputed  points  as  to  the  amount  of

1  Cf . COLEBROOKE, Hitdkshard, pp. 254, 256, 257; WEST and
BiiHLEE,  op.  cit.,  I,  p.  69;  II,  p.  603.

2  COLEBROOKE,  Mitakshara,  pp.  259,  264,  350-2; MAYNE,  op.  cit.,
pp.  256,  259-60;  WEST  and  BUHLER,  op.  cit.,  I,  pp.  76,  339.


VI:  THE  JOINT  FAMILY  265

discretion  to  be  left  to  the  managers  in  dealing  with  cur-
rent affairs  and  with  emergency  cases,  but  on  the  whole  it
is  an  established  rule  that  alienations  of  valuable  property,
or  mortgages  which  produce  heavy  encumbrances,  should
not  be  carried  out  without  the  consent  of  the  whole  body
of  members.  At  the  same  time,  the  conditions  in  which  such
consent  has  to  be  given  or  can  be  withheld  are  not  set  out
very  clearly.  The  customary  tendency  is  towards  unani-
mity ;  in  practice  such  unanimity  cannot  always  be  attained
and  dissent  is  sometimes  overruled,  but  there  are  no  definite
rules  as  to  decision  by  the  majority.1

(3) The  right  of  maintenance  introduces  a  conception The

,  .  , .  ., ,.  .,  institution

which  is  quite  alien  to  modern  European  views  as  to  prop-  primarily


erty.  The  nearest  analogy  might  be  found  in  English  Law
in  the  position  of  beneficiaries  under  a  general  trust,  such
as  the  inmates  of  a  charitable  institution.  In  Continental
law  a  similar  situation  is  met  by  the  rules  as  to  foundations
for  definite  aims  (the  German  Stiftungen).  The  point  in
these  cases  is  that  a  certain  amount  of  property  or  its
income  is  set  apart  for  the  maintenance  of  certain  persons
and  cannot  be  diverted  from  that  destination;  nevertheless
none  of  the  beneficiaries  can  exchange  his  right  for  any-
thing else  or  realize  it  as  an  object  of  property.  In  the
same  way,  in  the  case  of  the  Indian  Joint  Family,  the  stock
of  material  goods  belonging  to  it  is  regarded  primarily  as
the  basis  for  the  economic  position  of  the  members,  but  not
as  a  complex  of  things  to  be  treated  as  materials  in  db-
stracto,  from  the  point  of  view  of  ownership  and  possession.
It  would  hardly  do  to  conceive  of  the  institution  on  the
lines  of  the  abstract  notion  of  '  '  corporation  '  '  as  understood
in  the  West  :  the  aim  and  essence  of  the  arrangement  is  to
provide  the  means  of  subsistence  for  its  members.

Turning  back  to  Indian  Law,  we  may  say  that  this  pe-
culiar colouring  of  the  institution,  although  present  right
through,  is  especially  noticeable  in  the  case  of  those  mem-
bers who  stand  in  need  of  help  and  protection.  If  we  take

iFor  the  position  of  the  manager  see,  COLEBROOKE,  Mitdkshard,
p.  257;  MAYNE,  op.  cit.,  p.  288;  WEST  and  BUHLEB,  op.  cit.,  II,
pp.  603,  618,  630,  634-5.


266


TRIBAL  LAW:  PART  II:  ARYAN  CULTURE


Distinc-
tion be-
tween
property
acquired
by  per-
sonal  la-
bour and
the  com-
munal
stock.


the  fully-qualified  householders  or  their  grown-up  sons,  the
usual  correspondence  between  requirements  and  services,
between  meals  and  means,  is  expressed  more  or  less  on  the
same  lines  as  in  ordinary  corporate  property,  but  the  fact
that  the  Joint  Family  aims  directly  at  establishing  a  ma-
terial basis  for  the  personal  existence  of  its  members,  is
strongly  brought  out  in  the  case  of  the  weaker  members  of
the  institution.  A  widow  is  entirely  dependent  on  the  as-
sistance of  the  imperishable  household  to  which  her  late  hus-
band belonged.  In  the  case  of  a  spinster,  it  is  the  duty  not
only  of  parents  but  of  the  Joint  Family,  to  arrange  a  suit-
able marriage.  Perhaps  the  most  striking  cases  arise  in
connection  with  the  requirements  of  education.  In  this
respect  there  can  be  no  definite  limitation  of  individual
claims :  they  depend  entirely  on  capacity  and  opportunity.1
A  Joint  Family  would  not  think  of  refusing  to  spend  money
on  an  expensive  course  of  education  on  the  ground  that  the
claimant  was  overdrawing  his  balance  in  the  common  fund.
The  other  side  of  the  matter  appears  when  the  community
claims  profits  which  are  considered  to  be  the  result,  not  so
much  of  individual  exertions,  but  of  the  bringing-up  by  the
help  of  the  family.

(4)  This  leads  to  the  difficult  question  of  drawing
proper  distinctions  between  communal  and  self-acquired
property  within  the  sphere  of  action  of  a  Joint  Family.
The  development  of  modern  economic  ideas  and  relations  is
unquestionably  breaking  up  the  primitive  conceptions  of
family  solidarity,  and  it  is  unnecessary  to  consider  in  detail
the  various  inroads  which  the  interests  of  individuals  make
in  the  compact  block  of  primitive  conceptions  as  to  pro-
perty ;  but  it  ought  to  be  noticed  that  the  germ  of  the  dis-
tinction is  already  definitely  before  us  in  the  period  of  the
Sutras.  There  is  a  famous  saying  in  the  Laws  of  Manu 2
that  a  ploughed  strip  of  reclaimed  land  belongs  as  much  to
the  tiller  as  a  deer  brought  down  by  an  arrow  belongs  to

iSee  Ndrada,  XIII,  5;  COLEBROOKE,  Mitdkshcwd,  p.  316;  MAYNE,
op.  tit.,  pp.  256-7;  WEST  and  BUHLER,  op.  tit.,  I,  pp.  255,  263;  II,
p.  65.

2  IX,  43,  44.


VI:  THE  JOINT  FAMILY  267

the  hunter.  This  saying  has  sometimes  been  cited  in  proof
of  the  prevalence  of  private  property  in  land  in  ancient
India,  but  as  a  matter  of  fact  it  is  nothing  of  the  sort  ;  it  is
neither  land  as  such  nor  the  animal  as  such  that  is  claimed
as  property,  but  the  result  of  the  personal  exertion  of  the
tiller  and  of  the  hunter.  We  need  not,  I  think,  labour  the
point  that  a  field  which  has  not  been  appropriated  by
actual  tillage  would  be  out  of  the  range  of  private  owner-
ship, in  the  same  way  as  a  deer  which  has  succeeded  in
escaping  from  the  arrow.  As  the  stress  is  laid  on  concrete
appropriation  by  some  kind  of  exertion,  the  way  is
opened  for  a  distinction  between  objects  directly  acquired
by  personal  labour  or  prowess,  and  the  store  of  goods
which  are  potentially  at  the  disposal  of  the  family  com-
munity.

Speaking  in  terms  of  modern  economics,  we  may  say  that
self-acquired  property  is  directly  derived  from  labour,
while  the  capital  from  which  labour  starts  remains  in  the
hands  of  the  community.1  But,  of  course,  all  such  trans-
lations from  one  set  of  terms  into  another  and  more  modern
set  are  only  intended  to  call  attention  to  characteristic  dis-
tinctions and  could  not  be  followed  with  safety  in  working
out  details.


A  most  interesting  corroboration  of  the  teaching  as  to  the similar
economic  foundation  and  the  natural  history  of  the  Indian
Joint  Family  is  provided  by  the  fact  that  perfectly  similar


organizations  arise  on  Indian  soil  in  those  cases  where  f
society  is  built  up  not  on  the  patriarchal,  but  on  the  matri-
archal principle.  All  the  features  which  we  have  been
examining  in  the  life  of  the  Mitakshara  community  recur
in  the  practices  of  the  Malabar  tarwads.2  The  only  dif-
ference is  that  we  should  have  to  substitute  connection
through  the  females  for  the  agnatic  skeleton  of  the  Mitak-
shara Joint  Family.  The  taiivazhi  runs  from  the  mother
instead  of  from  the  father,  and  the  management  of  pro-

1  Ndrada,  XIII,  6;  COLEBBOOKE,  Mitdkshard,  pp.  256,  278-9;  MAYNE,
op.  cit.t  pp 288-9.

2  See  KBISHNAN  PANDALAI  on  Marumakatayam  Law,  18  ff.


268  TRIBAL  LAW:  PART  II:  ARYAN  CULTURE

perty  is  complicated  by  the  addition  of  a  male  protector,
the  karnavan;  but  in  other  respects  we  are  met  by  the  same
problems  as  to  unity  and  partition,  as  to  ideal  shares  and
representation,  as  to  limits  on  alienation,  as  to  maintenance
and  self-acquired  property,  which  we  have  noticed  within
the  domain  of  the  patriarchal  system.  This  shows  convinc-
ingly that  the  necessity  of  holding  together  in  large  clusters
of  relations  is  the  natural  consequence  of  the  social  situa-
tion in  India,  and  that  systems  of  relationship  built  up  on
opposite  lines  have  to  take  these  necessities  into  account  in
the  same  way.
The  No  less  instructive  an  instance  is  provided  by  the  South-

Zadrugo,

of  the  ern  Slavonic  Zadruga. It  has  been  proved,  in  spite  of  some

Slavs.  captious  criticisms,  that  this  institution  goes  back  to  the

tribal  settlements  of  the  Slavs,  right  from  the  earliest  times,
and  that  it  is  endemic  among  all  the  branches  of  this  race.1
But  let  us  turn  our  attention  first  and  chiefly  to  the  de-
velopment of  the  institution  as  presented  by  contemporary
arrangements  in  Serbia,  Montenegro,  Bosnia,  Herzegovina,
Dalmatia  and  Croatia.  Contemporary  practices  and  abso-
lutely trustworthy  evidence  as  to  the  state  of  affairs  in  the
earlier  years  of  the  nineteenth  century  make  it  possible  to
describe  the  working  of  the  institution  with  great  complete-
ness and  with  clear  indications  as  to  the  solution  of  prob-
lems which  otherwise  might  have  presented  difficulties.  In
these  regions,  where  the  population  had  constantly  to  fight
for  existence  against  the  Turks,  the  Albanians,  sometimes
the  Hungarians,  and  where  the  economic  struggle  was  also
no  easy  matter  in  the  absence  of  good  roads,  political  se-
curity and  commercial  credit,  the  stress  of  social  organiza-
tion was  laid  emphatically  on  the  communal  principle  as
against  individual  action.  According  to  a  Croatian
proverb,  a  single  man  does  not  get  food  nor  work.  An-
other saying  likens  a  man  devoid  of  communal  support  to
a  man  without  an  arm.2  As  a  result,  all  the  provinces
enumerated  above  were  covered  with  Zadrugas,  large
families  which  had  grown  out  of  the  narrow  family,  or

iA.  KADLEC,  Encyklopedya  Polska,  IV,  2,  p.  67  ff.
2  KRAUSS,  Sitte  und  Branch  der  Siid-Slaven,  pp.  66  ff.


VI:  THE  JOINT  FAMILY  269

inokoshtina,  composed  of  father,  mother  and  children.  The
inokoshtina  itself  presents  the  features  of  a  family  corpora-
tion in  its  structure,  and  the  father  is  anything  but  the
absolute  owner  and  ruler  of  Roman  Law.  He  is  in  truth
the  manager  and  senior  member  who  leads  the  family,  but
is  included  in  its  corporate  existence.  In  this  way  there  is
no  break  of  continuity  when,  after  the  decease  of  the  father,
the  brothers  and  eventually  the  cousins  of  different  degrees
develop  the  inokoshtina  into  a  zadruga.  The  feature  of  the
family  hearth  is  still  preserved  in  the  central  ognisce,  round
which  the  members  congregate  in  the  common  hall.  It
stands  usually  in  the  centre  of  a  settlement  shaped  like  a
horseshoe  and  is  surrounded  either  by  Kleti,  the  bedrooms
of  the  single  families  which  constitute  the  joint  household,
or  by  separate  cottages.  In  the  latter  case  relations  with
the  central  hearth  are  nevertheless  kept  up.  These  com-
munities are  very  different  in  size  according  to  topographi-
cal conditions  and  customs,  but  they  may  be  said  on  the
average  to  include  some  thirty  or  forty  persons  of  both
sexes,  not  counting  the  children.  Sometimes  these  clusters
number  even  from  fifty  to  seventy.  At  the  head  stands  the
elder  or  headman,  Glavar  Domacin.  His  election  is  not  The
regulated  in  a  very  formal  way,  and  it  may  be  said  that
seniority  is  taken  into  account  as  far  as  possible,  unless
there  are  definite  reasons  for  passing  over  persons  who  are
either  senile  or  of  weak  character.  Sometimes  a  dying
glavar  may  point  out  his  successor,  and  his  recommenda-
tion in  such  a  case  would  be  treated  with  due  respect.
Sometimes,  again,  an  especially  capable  or  strong  person-
ality would  win  the  seat  of  domacin,  even  against  senior
competitors,  as  a  result  of  an  expression  of  public  opinion.
This  is,  however,  not  connected  with  any  regular  election
or  vote  by  majority.  By  the  side  of  the  domacin  leader
stands  the  domacica,  the  lady  manageress  in  charge  of  the
keys  of  the  storehouses,  the  dairy  and  other  household  ar-
rangements. In  the  settlement  of  all  important  affairs  a
council  of  the  heads  of  the  constituent  family  meets.  Its
decisions  are  reached  by  unanimity.  It  may  appear  strange
to  us  that  this  seemingly  vague  idea  of  unanimity  should


270  TRIBAL  LAW:  PART  II:  ARYAN  CULTURE

rule  the  proceedings,  but  what  it  really  comes  to  is
that  votes  are  not  counted  but  weighed,  or  rather  that
the  moral  influence  of  the  elder  and  of  the  other  leading
family  fathers  is  regarded  with  such  respect  that  no  action
of  the  community  is  taken  unless  there  is  unanimity.  The
most  prominent  expression  of  this  organic  conception  of
management  is  to  be  found  in  the  case  of  any  alienation  of
property:  it  is  impossible  to  imagine  a  domacin  acting  in
such  cases  by  his  single  will  without  the  assent  of  the  other
family  fathers.  On  the  basis  of  such  an  organization  cus-
tomary rules  arise  which  are  in  principle  identical  with
those  obtaining  in  the  Indian  village  communities.  We
might  start  from  the  position  of  the  father  in  the  narrow
family  (inokoshtina} ,  as  it  contains  the  germs  of  further
development.  Professor  Bogisic  has  summarized  the  cus-
toms in  this  respect  in  the  following  words :  *

(1)  The  father,  while  living  in  the  same  household  as
his  grown-up  sons,  has  not  the  right  to  dispose  of  the  family
property.

(2)  He  has  not  the  right  to  dispose  of  it  mortis  ccwsa
without  the  consent  of  his  sons.

(3)  The  father  is  the  head  of  the  administration,  but  on
important  occasions  he  acts  in  concert  with  his  sons. If,
for  any  reason,  he  is  not  equal  to  the  task  of  administering
the  affairs  of  the  community,  one  of  his  sons  may  be  put  in
his  place.

(4)  Sons  who  are  of  full  age,  especially  if  they  are  mar-
ried, may  demand  partition  during  the  life  of  their  father.

The  relations  between  members  of  large  zadrugas  were
usually  ruled  by  the  sense  of  common  interest  and  solid-
arity. In  the  exceedingly  valuable  collection  of  answers
from  various  districts  inhabited  by  the  Serbian  race,  which
have  been  published  by  Professor  BogiSic,  stress  is  often
laid  on  the  obligation  of  the  elders  to  keep  the  fortunes
of  the  community  intact,  so  that  the  growing  generations
should  in  any  case  not  receive  less  than  their  forefathers
had  left  to  their  parents.  Altogether  the  zadruga  com-

i  In  an  article  in  the  (Russian)  Journal  of  the  Ministry  of  Public
Instruction.


VI:  THE  JOINT  FAMILY


271


munities  present  a  striking  instance  of  the  spirit  of  comrade-
ship and  union  in  the  management  of  social  affairs.

The  possibility  of  partition  is  always  open.  For  a  general
division,  the  consent  of  most  members  of  the  zadruga  would
be  required,  but  single  members  and  small  families  are
constantly  observed  leaving  the  large  unions  on  account  of
overcrowding  or  quarrels.  Nevertheless  the  fact  remains
that  this  institution  was  up  to  quite  recent  times  regarded
as  the  customary  form  of  peasant  life  in  the  country  of  the
Serbians  and  Croatians.  We  have  here,  therefore,  a  case  in
which  custom  holds  its  own  tenaciously  in  spite  of  the  legal
possibility  of  dismemberment.

Similar  communities  are  reported  to  have  existed  among
the  Alpine  Slovenes  of  Carinthia  and  Istria,  although  in
these  parts  of  the  country  they  gave  way  to  more  individ-
ualistic management  under  the  influence  of  German  coloni-
zation.1

Important  facts  of  the  same  kind  have  to  be  noticed  in  The  joint
the  early  development  of  the  Russian  race,  both  in  the  ]
Northern  forests  and  in  the  Southern  steppes.  The  popu-
lation of  the  Northern  provinces,  colonized  from  Novgorod,
consisted  of  peasants  who  made  clearings  in  the  vast  forests
and  moors  of  the  provinces  of  Archangel,  Vologda,  Viatka,
etc.  The  settlements  were  achieved  by  clusters  of  kinsmen,
and  the  form  of  these  settlements  were  repeated  over  and
over  again  with  the  regularity  of  bee-hives.  The  unit  was
the  so-called  derevnia,  comprising  a  Joint  Family  which
usually  extended  to  second  cousins  and  sometimes  to  their
children.  Bach  derevnia  consisted  of  six  or  seven  dvors
(crofts  or  courts)  forming  the  dwelling-house  and  adjacent
orchards  of  the  smaller  households.  Several  derevnias,
again,  formed  a  higher  union  called  selo,  and  common  hus-
bandry did  not  reach  any  further  than  this.  The  selo  and
the  villages  composing  it  (derevnias)  held  wide  tracts  of
moor  and  forest  and  fisheries  in  common,  allowing  each  of
the  component  householders  certain  gangs  or  entries,  i.e.,
rights  of  exportation  for  the  purpose  of  fetching  wood,  fuel,

i  DOPSCH:  Die  altere  Sossial-  und  Wirtschaftsverfassung  der  Alpen-
Slaven,  1909.


among  the
Russians.


272


TRIBAL  LAW:  PART  II:  ARYAN  CULTURE


Communal

tendencies

among

Germanic

peoples.


hunting,  fishing,  etc.  Such  tillage  as  there  was  had  to  be
carried  on  in  fields  " snatched''  (terebit)  from  the  wilder-
ness. Each  of  the  householders  took  a  certain  number  of
strips  in  the  different  fields,  so  that  each  holding  was  origi-
nally equalized  as  between  the  brothers  or  companions
(siabri,  cf.  sobrini).  In  the  succession  of  generations  some
of  the  holdings  were  parcelled  up  into  smaller  parts  in  con-
sequence of  the  allowance  of  claims  by  stirpes,  but  the  idea
of  keeping  up  the  communal  union  was  strongly  held,  and
occasional  redivisions  might  take  place  under  the  pressure
of  insistent  claims  by  members  of  the  younger  generations.
Later  on,  with  the  growth  of  population  and  subjection  to
the  land-tax,  the  mir  system  grew  out  of  these  tribal  settle-
ments. We  shall  have  to  return  to  that  question  later  on.
The  South  Russian  arrangement  is  constructed  on  entirely
similar  lines,  with  the  difference  that  the  homestead  is
centred  not  in  the  dvor  (court),  but  around  the  big  oven
(pechiscJie) .  Again  there  recurs  the  fundamental  feature
of  the  enlarged  household  naturally  growing  out  of  the
ordinary  family  on  the  death  of  the  father.1  Similar  ar-
rangements are  recorded  in  the  history  of  the  Poles  and
Czechs.  I  may  refer  readers  for  information  on  this  sub-
ject to  the  excellent  monograph  of  Professor  Balzer  of  the
University  of  Lwow.2  It  is  to  be  noticed,  however,  that
with  the  Western  Slavs  zadruga  arrangements  gave  way  at
an  early  period,  and  that  from  the  fourteenth  century  the
peasantry  in  those  parts  were  organized  on  individualistic
lines.

The  same  observation  may  be  made  to  an  even  greater
extent  in  the  case  of  the  Germanic  peoples.  The  geographi-
cal features  of  the  land  and  the  troubled  history  of  migra-
tions and  conquests  led  to  individualization  in  the  earlier
Middle  Ages,  but  yet  we  find  widespread  vestiges  of  a
tendency  towards  common  management  of  family  affairs  on
the  lines  of  enlarged  households.  In  all  territories  in-
habited by  Germanic  tribes  we  find  the  practice  of  joint

1  MRS.  EFTMENKO,  on  Peasant  Land  Tenure  in  the  North  and  on
Southern  Russia  ( Russian ) .

2  0  Zadrudze  Sloicianskei. Lw6w,  1899.


VI:  THE  JOINT  FAMILY  273

management  by  co-heirs  (GanerbscJiaft)  working  in  the
same  direction  of  solidarity  in  the  difficult  struggle  for
existence  which  is  such  a  prominent  feature  in  the  life  of
zadrugas.  The  importance  of  voluntary  co-operation  and
the  more  frequent  partitions  testify  to  a  more  mobile  con-
stitution of  society  than  in  the  case  of  the  Southern  and
Eastern  Slavs.  We  read,  for  example,  the  following  rule
in  the  customary  law  of  Skone :  if  a  son  is  established  with
his  wife  in  the  household  of  his  father,  his  property  is  added
to  that  of  his  father.  If  he  dies  without  having  defined  his
property  in  severalty,  his  children  share  with  grandfather
and  other  co-heirs.  It  is  clearly  a  case  of  a  family  which
holds  together  under  the  authority  of  a  grandfather  after
the  marriage  of  some  of  its  members.1  A  similar  rule  may  Traces
be  cited  from  the  legislation  of  Liutprand  of  Lombardy,2  manage-
and  in  the  mediaeval  Italian  documents  we  often  hear  of  Romance
condomae  in  the  sense  of  joint  households.  Yet  it  is  not
always  easy  to  say  to  what  extent  customary  unions  for  the
management  of  property,  of  which  we  get  evidence  in  Ro-
mance countries,  are  to  be  traced  to  the  gradual  expansion
of  families,  and  in  what  measure  they  were  the  result  of
voluntary  associations.3  Altogether  the  Joint  Family  pre-
sents an  interesting  example  of  the  value  of  co-operative
action,  and  of  customary  restrictions  on  the  free  play  of
individual  self-determination.

1  BBUNNER,  Rechtsgeschichte,  I2,  105  ff. SEEBOHM,  Tribal  Custom
in  Anglo-Saxon  Law,  276  ff. On  this  subject,  see  SEEING,  Erbrecht
und  Agrarverfassung  in  Schleswig-tJolstein,  Berlin, 1900.

2  VIOLLET, Histoire du  droit  civil  francais (3rd ed. 1905),  pp.
750  ff.

s  FERTILE,  Storia  del  diritto  italiano,  Iv,  319  ff.


2231


The  natu-
ral law  of
succession
refers  to
personal
property


CHAPTER  VII
SUCCESSION  AND  INHERITANCE

HOWEVER  close  the  ties  which  bind  the  members  of  the
association  together,  there  is  always  a  possibility  of  indi-
viduals going  out;  disruption  of  the  group  is  a  con-
tingency to  be  faced,  and  therefore  by  the  side  of  the
joint  household  organization  we  find  a  system  of  laws
which  govern  succession  to  property:  it  is  clear  that
when  a  member  of  a  group  departs,  his  interests  must
be  vested  in  somebody  else.  At  the  outset  a  funda-
mental distinction  has  to  be  made:  the  natural  law  of
succession  refers  to  personal  property:  it  is,  for  ex-
ample, in  this  basic  principle  that  the  English  classi-
fication into  real  and  personal  property  has  its  origin.
There  are  many  forms  of  property  which  are  intimately
connected  with  the  person  of  the  individual  and  the  private
uses  which  he  finds  for  his  possessions.  A  totally  different
set  of  interests  is  connected  with  immovable  property:  here
the  rights  and  interests  involved  are  clearly  of  a  more  per-
manent character,  and  in  many  cases  extend  beyond  the
isolated  individual.  Succession  to  personal  property  arises
very  early  in  the  history  of  societies :  there  are  many  things
in  which  a  man  is  conceived  as  having  a  distinctively  indi-
vidual interest — his  shield,  his  sword,  and  so  forth,  are  re-
garded almost  as  part  of  his  personality.  Hence  among  the
most  primitive  peoples  succession  to  personal  property  is
governed  by  one  set  of  rules,  while  totally  different  prin-
ciples are  recognized  for  real  property.  Very  frequently
the  view  was  held  that  the  dead  man  had  the  right  to
take  with  him  into  the  next  world  a  part  of  the  possessions
which  had  been  his  during  life.  He  could  not,  as  it  were,
claim  all  his  property  from  the  grave,  for  a  compromise  had
to  be  made  with  the  interests  of  the  surviving  members  of
his  kin.  But  it  was  generally  considered  as  a  firmly  estab-

274


VII:  SUCCESSION  AND  INHERITANCE  275

lished  principle  that  the  deceased  had  the  right  to  "a
dead  man's  portion. "  The  practice  often  took  the  form  of
putting  in  the  grave  those  particular  things  which  were
considered  necessaries  for  the  life  of  the  departed  in  the
next  world.  This  custom  was  very  general  in  Egypt,  and
we  find  it  in  some  form  or  other  among  most  Aryan  peoples.
A  familiar  instance  is  the  description  of  Scyld's  funeral
in  Beowulf.1  In  the  interesting  and  instructive  description
of  the  customs  of  the  ancient  Russians  given  by  an  Arabian
writer,  Ibn  Fadhlan,2  who  lived  in  the  tenth  century,  we
are  told  that  "the  whole  of  the  personal  property  was
divided  into  three  parts :  one-third  went  to  the  family,  the
second  third  was  used  for  making  clothes  and  other  orna-
ments for  the  dead,  while  the  third  was  spent  in  carousing
on  the  day  when  the  corpse  was  cremated.  The  ceremony
itself  consisted  in  the  following:  the  corpse  was  put  into  a
boat,  dressed  in  the  most  gorgeous  attire.  Intoxicating
drinks,  fruit,  bread  and  meat  were  put  by  its  side ;  a  dog
was  cut  into  two  parts,  which  were  thrown  into  the  boat.
Then,  all  the  weapons  of  the  dead  man  were  brought  in,
as  well  as  the  flesh  of  two  horses,  a  cock  and  a  chicken.
The  concubine  of  the  deceased  was  also  sacrificed,  and  ulti-
mately all  these  objects  were  burned  in  a  huge  pile,  and  a
mound  thrown  up  over  the  ashes. ' '  This  description  is  the
more  interesting  because  it  starts  from  a  division  of  the
goods  of  the  deceased,  one  part  of  them  being  appropriated,
as  it  were,  to  his  personal  use.  This  rule  continued  to  be
observed  in  Germanic  law  in  later  times  and  became  the
starting-point  of  the  doctrine  of  succession  to  personal
property  in  English  law.  According  to  Glanville  (vii.  5,  4)
the  chattels  of  the  deceased  have  to  be  divided  into  three
equal  parts,  of  which  one  goes  to  the  heir,  one  to  his  wife,
and  one  is  reserved  to  the  deceased  himself.  "The  same
reservation  of  the  third  to  the  deceased  himself  is  observed
in  Magna  Carta  (c.  26)  and  in  Bracton's  De  Legibus  (fol.
60),  but  in  Christian  surroundings  the  reservation  of  'the
dead  man's  part'  was  confined  to  the  property  which  was

1 1,  28-40.

2  HABKAVY,  Mohammedan  Writers  on  Russia  (Russian).


276


TRIBAL  LAW:  PART  II:  ARYAN  CULTURE


Equal
shares  to
nearest
kin.


But

personal

sharing

restricted

as  regards

organic

units.


to  be  spent  for  the  good  of  his  soul  and  of  which,  accord-
ingly, the  Church  had  to  take  care. ' ' *

Practical  considerations  prevented  too  much  waste  in  the
disposal  of  goods  for  the  benefit  of  the  deceased.  A  large
part  of  them  was,  naturally,  distributed  among  those  who
were  nearest  to  him,  and  as  regards  cattle,  money  and  other
movable  property,  a  division  in  equal  shares  between  per-
sons standing  in  the  same  degree  of  relationship  to  the
deceased  suggested  itself  as  a  matter  of  course.  We  find
the  same  principle  applied  in  cases  where  land  was  regarded
as  a  marketable  commodity  and  could  be  fairly  easily  sold.
In  the  later  law  of  Greece,  Rome,  and  of  Romance  and
Germanic  nations,  as  far  as  they  lived  under  economic
systems  based  on  cash  nexus,  equal  partition  of  land  among
heirs  is  also  recognized.  This  may  be  illustrated,  for  in-
stance, from  the  customs  of  so-called  gavelkind  in  mediaeval
England.2  It  would  be  wrong,  however,  to  suppose  that
the  principle  of  equal  sharing  ever  obtained  unrestricted
application  in  the  customary  law  of  Aryan  peoples.  It
could  not  hold  good  in  regard  to  commodities  which  formed
organic  units:  it  was  out  of  the  question  to  assign  equal
shares  to  three  brothers  in  one  bull  or  one  horse.  What  is
even  more  important,  an  estate,  a  farm,  a  holding,  were  also
considered  primarily  from  the  point  of  view  of  the  organic
combination  embodied  in  them,  and  this  is  where  the  idea
of  real  property  comes  in  to  modify  the  abstract  influence
of  personal  claims  of  inheritance.  On  the  one  hand  a  farm
is  not  regarded,  and  has  never  been  regarded,  as  a  mere
complex  of  land  and  dwellings,  but  must  have  the  necessary
outfit  of  cattle,  implements,  seed,  other  stores  necessary
for  production,  and — labourers.  In  Roman  terminology
this  stock  annexed  to  the  farm  for  the  purpose  of  its  work-
ing is  characteristically  called  the  "instrument"  of  the
estate  (instrumentum  fundi).  In  the  law  of  inheritance

1  See  my  article  on  "  Succession  "  in  the  Encyclopedia  Britannica,
llth  ed.

2  Gavelkind  is  derived  from  gafol,  rent,  and  the  name  therefore
points  to  the  prevalence  of  the  custom  among  the  rent-paying  soc-
men  of  Kent,  Sussex  and  other  counties  which  had  kept  up  a  large
population  of  small  freeholders.


VII:  SUCCESSION  AND  INHERITANCE  277

the  same  organic  unity  produces  fundamental  restrictions
in  the  application  of  the  principle  of  personal  sharing.  We
need  not  go  back  to  the  question  of  joint  management  which
has  already  been  discussed.  If  such  a  joint  management
cannot  be  carried  out  for  some  reason  or  other — e.g.,  be-
cause the  population  of  the  estate  would  be  too  crowded,  or
because  of  dissensions  between  the  members — if  the  land
has  to  go  by  inheritance  instead  of  continuing  under  joint
tenure,  the  customary  law  of  succession  tends  in  one  way
or  another  to  preserve  the  vitality  of  the  farm  or  holding.
This  means  that  some  of  the  claimants  of  equal  degree  have
to  waive  their  potential  rights  in  favour  of  one  among
them.  This  may  not  happen  by  necessity  if  the  estate  in
question  can  be  easily  subdivided,  but  in  all  cases  of  dis-
memberment difficulties  arise,  and  at  a  certain  stage  actual
partition  may  be  quite  impossible.  Such  situations  are
met  in  various  ways.  One  of  the  best  examples  is  to
be  found  in  Norse  law — an  example  which  provides  an
explanation  for  some  of  the  more  complicated  institutions
of  Continental  systems.  The  unity  of  the  estate  is  recog-  Norwegian
nized  in  the  so-called  Odal  succession.1  Not  every  estate  is  succession,
restricted  by  the  land  settlements  of  the  Odal,  but  an  estate
which  has  been  in  the  possession  of  a  kindred  for  several
(five)  generations  is  reputed  to  be  Odal.

There  are  all  sorts  of  precautions  against  the  Odal  pass-
ing out  of  the  kindred  into  the  hands  of  strangers,  but  these
precautions  do  not  operate  by  way  of  an  absolute  prohibi-
tion. It  is  not  said,  for  example  "A  stranger  cannot
buy  the  Odal";  the  rule  is  that  if  the  owner  of  an  estate
wants  to  sell  it,  he  cannot  simply  go  into  the  market  and
look  for  the  highest  bidder.  He  is  first  to  offer  it  for  sale
to  his  own  relatives  and  they  can  take  it  over  even  if  there
is  some  one  else  who  will  give  more.  They  can  have  one-
fifth  of  the  price  taken  off  in  order  to  facilitate  the  sale  to
them.  Even  if  they  should  not  find  it  possible  to  avail
themselves  of  this  privilege,  and  consequently  let  the
stranger  purchase  the  estate,  their  rights  do  not  disappear
altogether, — they  can  come  back  and  compel  the  stranger
i  Cf.  BRANDT,  Norsk  Retshistorie,  I,  p.  220  ff.


278  TRIBAL  LAW:  PART  II:  ARYAN  CULTURE

to  sell  the  estate  to  them  at  a  redemption  price,  should  they
have  acquired  the  means  and  wish  to  resort  to  such
redemption.

Odal  right  ought  not  to  curtail  the  claims  of  the  younger
sons  or  of  any  heirs  in  a  similar  position.  As  a  matter  of
fact,  however,  customary  succession  in  Norwegian  peasant-
families  sets  great  value  on  holding  the  property  of  the
household  well  together.  It  is  keenly  felt  that  a  gaard
(farm)  ought  not  to  be  parcelled  into  smaller  holdings,
and  in  the  frequent  case  of  several  heirs  succeeding  to  the
farm,  they  generally  agree  among  themselves  who  is  to
remain  in  charge  of  the  ancestral  household:  the  rest  are
compensated  in  money  or  helped  to  start  on  some  other
estate,  perhaps  in  a  cottage  by  the  side  of  the  principal
house.

It  is  considered  to  be  wrong  for  a  son  to  insist  on  his
right  to  get  his  share  out  of  the  actual  estate ;  and  in  this
way  the  organic  unity  of  the  estate  is  guaranteed  in  spite
of  the  fact  that  it  involves  heavy  charges  on  the  land.
Ancient  The  working  of  a  similar  competition  between  claims  of

system.  relationship  and  requirements  of  organic  husbandry  is  even
more  characteristically  expressed  in  the  Welsh  system,
where  the  original  community  of  the  wele  or  bed  (lectum)
becomes  differentiated  into  gavells  according  to  stirpes.
Thus  in  the  Introduction  to  the  Survey  of  the  Honour  of
Denbigh,  1334, *  it  is  stated  that,  "In  the  surveys  of
the  cantreds  of  Rewaynok  and  Roos,  we  find  that  the  kin-
dred appears  as  a  rule  to  be  differentiated  into  smaller
units — the  wele  (lecta)  and  the  gavells.  There  was  no  strict
line  of  demarcation  between  these  different  terms.  .  .  .
In  general  the  terms  wele  or  lectum,  meaning  literally  led,
might  be  rendered  by  the  expression  stock,  and  we  can
hardly  go  far  wrong  in  assuming  on  the  evidence  of  the
Welsh  laws  that  the  term  was  usually  applied  in  Welsh
tribal  custom  to  the  descendants  of  a  common  father,  grand-
father or  great-grandfather.  Up  to  that  point,  a  close
community  of  interests  was  maintained  not  only  as  against

i  Ed.  by  P.  VINOGRADOFF  and  F.  MORGAN,  British  Academy  Records
of  the  Social  and  Economic  History  of  England  and  Wales  (1914),
pp.  xxii,  ff.


VII:  SUCCESSION  AND  INHERITANCE  279

strangers,  but  also  as  against  more  remote  relations  of  the
same  kindred.  A  curious  corroboration  of  this  rule  may  be
found  in  our  Survey,  where  it  is  stated  on  two  or  three
occasions  that  inheritance  in  land  went  on  intestacy  down
to  the  third  degree  (tertium  gradum)  ;  thus  in  the  com-
mote of  Kaymergh  it  is  stated  that  the  son  of  a  freeman  on
the  death  of  his  father  must  pay  the  lord  ten  shillings  by
way  of  relief,  whereas  a  brother  or  nephew  or  more  remote
heir  to  the  third  degree  shall  pay  twenty  shillings  for  the
same  relief.  Beyond  the  third  degree,  relations  cannot
claim  the  inheritance,  and  the  land  falls  to  the  lord  as  an
escheat;  but  if  the  lord  wishes  to  let  it,  he  has  to  offer  it
to  the  nearest  in  blood  (propinquiori  de  sangwne)  for  its
full  price  before  he  offers  it  to  any  stranger.  The  same
principle  of  inheritance  to  the  third  degree  is  stated  to
exist  in  the  commote  of  Yssalet.  .  .  .  Second  cousins,  as
descendants  of  a  common  grandfather,  would  constitute
this  third  degree,  or,  as  we  should  put  it,  third  generation.
When  that  grade  is  passed,  relationship  still  exerts  a  cer-
tain influence,  but  one  which  is  limited  at  the  time  of  the
Survey  to  a  preferential  treatment  by  the  lord  in  the  letting
of  land.  Reverting  to  the  notion  of  common  stock,  we  may
assume  that  it  was  applied  usually  to  the  descendants  of  a
person  through  males  down  to  the  line  of  great-grandchil-
dren. One  would  have  to  go  to  the  Laws  to  ascertain  that
such  consequences  were  manifested  both  in  regard  to  rights
of  property  acquired  by  inheritance  and  to  common  de-
fence. ...  As  for  the  surveys,  they  inform  us  that  the
rights  and  functions  of  the  lecta  in  regard  to  property  were
of  the  same  kind  as  those  of  the  kindreds  (progenies),
though  more  restricted  in  the  sphere  of  their  application.
Still  it  must  not  be  supposed  that  progenies  and  lectum  are
simply  interchangeable  terms.  .  .  .  On  the  whole,  how-
ever, a  general  correspondence  appears  between  the  two
units  of  organization  in  regard  to  rights  of  property.  Thus
we  find  that  the  co-parceners  of  a  lectum  appear  as  mem-
bers of  the  same  society  of  owners  in  various  villages  where
the  stock  has  rights  of  property  .  .  .  but  by  the  side  of
such  cases,  we  naturally  find  others  in  which  the  lecta  broke
up  into  differentiated  settlements  in  the  process  of  occupy-


280  TRIBAL  LAW:  PART  II:  ARYAN  CULTURE

ing  and  reclaiming  land.  ...  In  such  cases,  the  natural
thing  would  be  to  speak  of  the  lectum  as  broken  up  into
gavells.  ...  It  may  seem  at  first  sight  that  the  gavell
was  merely  a  subdivision  of  the  wele,  and  it  was  in  fact  so
treated  by  Seebohm.  But  it  seems  that  the  expression  was
really  used  on  rather  a  different  plane.  If  lectum  roughly
corresponds  to  the  English  stock,  gavell  might  be  appro-
priately rendered  by  the  English  holding.  .  .  .  What  is
evidently  meant  is  the  territorial  basis  of  the  kindred's
rights,  i.e.,  its  holding  or  estate.  .  .  .  But  the  term  is  con-
stantly employed,  in  the  surveys  of  Yssalet  and  Ughalet,
Ysdulas  and  Ughdulas,  for  the  specific  holdings  among
which  the  possessions  of  a  kindred  or  wele  are  distributed.
In  this  case,  the  gavell  may  be  considered  in  two  aspects —
either  as  the  closest  and  narrowest  circle  of  blood-relations
holding  in  common,  or  as  the  territorial  basis  of  their  hold-
ing. The  first  or  personal  aspect  may  be  exemplified  by
almost  any  of  the  cases  referred  to  in  the  Survey.  The
number  of  co-heirs  and  parceners  .  .  .  would  sometimes
be  very  considerable,  and  the  tenement  might  be  best  de-
scribed as  a  'joint  family  holding.'  .  .  .  But  the  territorial
aspect  is  also  very  prominent.  From  this  point  of  view  we
get  estimates  of  the  number  of  acres  which  ought  to  have
been  apportioned  to  each  gavell  if  the  land  were  held  not  in
ideal  shares  but  in  separate  occupation.  ...  It  should  be
noted  that  the  formation  of  communal  unions  and  holdings
on  the  basis  of  kinship  is  by  no  means  restricted  to  the  free
population;  the  nativi  (taeogs)  are  grouped  in  stocks  and
gavells  in  the  same  way  as  the  free  tribesmen.  .  .  .  But
while  we  must  recognize  a  general  similarity  in  the  economy
of  the  free  and  unfree  groups,  it  may  not  be  purely  acci-
dental that  in  connection  with  nativi  the  term  progenies,
applied  to  an  extensive  kindred  or  class,  is  hardly  ever  used.
We  constantly  hear  of  weles  or  gavells  held  by  nativi:  but
the  mention  of  a  progenies  of  nativi  is  quite  isolated  and
probably  relates  not  to  an  organized  kindred,  but  to  a
loose  succession  of  generations. ' '  *

i  Cf .  VINOGRADOFF,  The  Growth  of  the  Manor  (2nd  ed.,  1911),  pp.
13,  20-2.


VII:  SUCCESSION  AND  INHERITANCE  281

In  Indian  custom  we  have  indications  of  the  treatment  of
the  problem  on  lines  determined  by  parentage.  This  is  the
so-called  Pattiddri  system.  Its  main  features  are  described
in  Baden-Powell 's  work  as  follows : *

"The  principle  of  sharing  is,  or  originally  was,  not  one
of  '  democratic '  equality  of  right  in  the  area  obtained,  but
one  depending  on  the  place  in  the  table  of  descent  from  the
founder  or  acquirer,  the  different  heirs  each  taking  the
'legal'  share  that  belongs  to  him  by  the  law  or  custom  of
inheritance.  .  .  .  Properly  speaking,  each  takes  his  share
in  the  land  or  in  the  proceeds,  if  the  land  is  undivided,  and
pays  the  corresponding  fraction  of  the  revenue  or  other
burdens.  If  the  waste  has  remained  undivided  and  is  after-
wards partitioned,  the  owners  will  share  it  in  exactly  the
same  fractions  as  have  determined  their  holdings  in  the
arable.  This  is  the  admitted  theory ;  but  naturally  it  often
happens  that  in  the  course  of  years  the  strict  shares  have
been  forgotten  or  changed,  and  members  not  really  of  the
founder's  kin — perhaps  members  of  the  wives'  families  or
other  'helpers  in  time  of  need' — may  have  been  admitted
to  shares.  Shares  may  also  have  been  sold  to  outsiders
under  stress  of  necessity.  Accordingly  .  .  .  where  each
now  holds  simply  on  the  basis  of  his  de  facto  possession
.  .  .  the  village  ceases  to  be  pattiddri,  or  'ancestrally
shared.'  .  .  .  This  principle  (pattiddri,  or  ancestral-
sharing  according  to  the  law  of  joint-inheritance)  is  simply
the  result  of  the  joint-succession  of  all  the  heirs  together.
It  is  in  villages  of  this  class  that  it  can  truly  be  said  that
the  village  is  the  group  which  is  held  together  by  the  land
which  it  occupies  'in  common' — i.e.,  as  joint-heirs  or  co-
sharers.  .  .  .  Inside  the  patti  are  the  next  grade  of  di-
visions called  thok,  and  then  the  tula  (or  tola).  Under  one
or  other  of  such  final  or  'primary'  divisions  are  grouped
the  many  subordinate  later  families;  but  their  divisions
receive  no  new  designation.  So  much  may  be  ventured  in
this  preliminary  statement,  as  to  say  that  in  all  probability
the  general  prevalence  of  the  three  primary,  or  larger,  divi-
sions in  descending  grade  is  essentially  connected  with  the

i  The  Indian  Village  Community (1896),  pp.  29-31.


282


TRIBAL  LAW:  PART  II:  ARYAN  CULTURE


Unified
tenure  in
Mediaeval
Europe.


close-kindred  of  the  first  founders — representing  the  shares
of  the  founder's  son  (patti),  grandson  (thok),  great-grand-
son (tula)."

The  sub-divisions  in  this  case  are  the  result  of  a  competi-
tion between  the  principle  of  relationship  as  expressed  in
stirpes  and  the  tendency  to  keep  up  organic  estates.  The
inheritance  is  not  cut  up  among  co-heirs,  but  is  made  to
serve  as  a  basis  for  smaller  estates  estimated  in  accordance
with  the  relative  standing  of  the  branches  in  the  pedigree.
In  the  Malabar  arrangement  which,  as  I  have  said  before,1
is  exactly  parallel  to  the  patriarchal  arrangement,  the  tai-
wazhi  holdings  are  eventually  made  to  grow  into  inde-
pendent tarwads.

In  mediaeval  Europe  we  find  yet  another  system  of
the  economic  organization  of  inheritance.  It  may  be
called  the  system  of  unified  tenure,  and  we  may  watch  its
organization  at  work  in  Romance  countries  under  the
name  of  the  mansus.  The  Polyptych  of  St.  Germain-des-
Pres2  or  the  Cartulary  of  St.  Bertin  give  excellent  in-
stances of  that  tenurial  arrangement.  We  have  before  us
peasant-farms  evidently  designed  to  serve  the  needs  of
small  households  consisting  of  perhaps  half  a  dozen  mem-
bers of  various  ages.  The  peasant  in  question  is  a  colonus,
of  free,  half -free  or  servile  origin,  and  the  succession  is
regulated  by  the  custom  of  the  estate  in  such  a  way  that
casual  disruption  is  impossible.  The  fact  that  the  tenure  is
a  tributary  one  does  not  change  the  economic  condition  of
the  farm,  although,  of  course,  it  contributes  to  its  fixity  and
continuity.

Among  Germanic  nations  the  same  practice  is  expressed
in  the  customs  governing  such  units  as  the  hufe,  the  hide,
the  bol.  As  we  know  in  the  case  of  the  hide,  which  appears
in  Bede's  Ecclesiastical  History  as  a  terra  familiae,  the

1  Ante,  p.  267.

2  Polyptyque  de  V Allay e  de  Saint-Germain-des-Prts,  ed.  by  LONQ-
NON (1895), II, e.g., I, 14: "A. lidus et  uxor eius  colona . . .
habent  secum  infantes  iii. . . . H.  lidus  et  uxor  eius  lida  . . .
habent  secum  infantes  iii. . . . Isti  duo  tenent  mansum  servilem  i,
habentem  de  terra  arabili  bunuaria  vi  et  dimidium,  de  vinea  aripen-
num  i,  de  prato  aripennum  i  et  dimidium. Facit  in  vinea  aripennos


iiii,  manoperas,  quantum  ei  iubetur;  pullos  iii,  ova  xv.
II,  2-5,  etc.


Cf.  I,  42;


VII: SUCCESSION  AND  INHERITANCE  283

estate  was  deemed  to  correspond  to  the  work  of  one  large
plough-team  of  eight  oxen  and  consisted  generally  of  about
120-160  acres.  The  possibility  of  sub-division  was  not  en-
tirely excluded,  and  we  find  that  these  considerable  estates
were  partitioned  into  yardlands  (vir gates)  and  oxgangs
(bovates).  There,  however,  the  sub-division  stopped,  and
smaller  holdings,  if  they  had  to  be  built  up,  fell  entirely
outside  the  scheme  provided  by  the  plough  team.  In  tech-
nical language,  tenures  in  the  fields  (in  campis)  were  con-
trasted with  cottages  or  crofts.  Here  again  the  mode  of
tenure  has  been  stabilized  by  feudal  law,  but  in  itself  there
is  nothing  inherently  repugnant  to  free  tenure  in  such
arrangements.  The  contrast  is  not  between  free  and  servile
tenure,  but  between  farming  under  natural  husbandry  and
farming  under  cash  nexus.  In  the  first  case  the  organic
unity  prevails;  in  the  second  estates  become  broken  up  in
consequence  of  various  money  arrangements.  As  a  matter
of  fact,  in  Scandinavian  countries  and  in  northern  Ger-
many the  unification  of  tenure  has  nothing  to  do  with  a
servile  status  of  the  peasantry.1  On  the  other  hand,  it  must
be  noticed  that  the  equalization  of  the  units  termed  mansi
or  hufen  or  hides  does  not  necessarily  follow  from  their
consolidation.  Where  these  units  arose  from  scattered  farms
like  the  Norwegian  gaards,  or  the  homesteads  of  statesmen
in  Northumberland,  there  was  no  reason  why  they  should
be  equal :  in  fact  their  size  depended  on  topographical  fea-
tures, on  the  quality  of  the  soil,  irrigation,  etc.  A  certain
tendency  towards  average  sizes  was  produced  by  the  usual
constitution  of  the  family,  especially  if  this  family  hap-
pened to  be  a  small  one;  but  obviously  there  could  be  no
standard  measure  in  this  respect.  On  the  other  hand,  in
"  nucleated "  villages,  where  the  settlers  lived  in  groups,
there  arose  the  requirement  of  apportioning  rights  and
duties.  As  to  rights,  such  apportionment  was  governed  by
various  factors,  such  as  the  scarcity  of  meadows  which  led
to  their  division  into  strips,  to  be  occupied  alternately  by
the  various  households.2  Similar  results  followed  in  the
common  case  of  arable  cultivation  on  the  open  field  system.

1  SERINQ,  Erbrecht  und  Agrarverfassung  in  Schleswig-Holstein.

2  Cf.  post,  ch.  ix,  p.  336.


284  TRIBAL  LAW:  PART  II:  ARYAN  CULTURE

Here  again  ploughlands  and  yardlands  were  formed  by  the
apportionment  of  scattered  strips  in  various  fields  accord-
ing to  certain  common  standards.  In  this  way  there  was
created  a  basis  for  a  system  in  which  both  personal  rela-
tions and  agricultural  needs  entered  as  factors.  The  Welsh
gavell  is  an  especially  striking  example  of  this  tribal  com-
bination. Some  clauses  of  the  Welsh  Laws  afford  evidence
of  the  view  that  a  free  member  of  a  tribal  community,  a
boneddig,  was  supposed  to  have  a  customary  claim  to  a
certain  number  of  strips  in  co-aration.1  Such  a  claim  could
not  be  an  absolute  one,  but  while  there  was  a  quantity  of
waste  land,  it  was  not  uncommon  nor  impracticable.  The
actual  units  of  tenure  are,  however,  built  up  not  from  such
individual  assignations,  but  from  the  units  of  kinsmen
called  gavells.  Their  normal  sizes,  though  varying  from  one
locality  to  another,  tended  to  become  standardized  within
each  local  group.2

In  correspondence  with  these  assignments  of  claims  and
rights,  we  find  assessment  to  various  burdens  imposed  on
the  communities — the  tunk-pound,  the  feasting  of  chiefs,
the  provision  of  victuals  to  the  chieftains'  halls,  hospitality
to  officials  and  strangers,  etc.

There  is  no  necessary  connection  between  servility  and
the  unification  of  holdings.  As  I  have  already  mentioned,
the  superimposition  of  a  lord's  power  strengthened  the
unifying  tendencies  and  contributed  to  give  them  defi-
nite shape,  but  their  origin  is  to  be  sought  in  the  require-
ments of  the  economic  situation,  which  made  for  unity
as  against  dispersion,  and  which  was  especially  strong  in
primitive  times  when,  as  the  Serbs  have  expressed  it,  "the
single  man  is  no  person."

This  digression  into  the  question  of  the  unification  of
holdings  could  not  be  avoided  in  a  chapter  on  succession.
All  systems  of  unified  holdings,  except  the  Joint  Family,
start  from  the  exclusion  of  some  of  the  heirs  in  favour  of
others.  This  ruling  consideration  may  develop  in  two  dif-

1  SEEBOHM,  The  Tribal  System  in  Wales  (2nd  ed.,  1904),  pp 91-93;
Venedotian Code, II, xvi; Ancient Laws  and  Institutes of Wales
(1841),  I,  pp 178-9.

2  Survey  of  Denbigh,  pp.  xix  and  xxv.


VII:  SUCCESSION  AND  INHERITANCE  285

ferent  ways.  If  authority  is  the  most  important  element  of
the  institution,  then  seniority  and  primogeniture  are  clearly
indicated  in  the  case  of  inheritance.  This  is  the  case  in  all
patriarchal  arrangements.  We  need  not  go  back  to  the
paterfamilias  rule,  except  to  say  that  the  natural  substitute
for  it  is  the  rule  of  the  eldest  brother,  and  that  for  this
reason  the  most  common  political  institution  of  early  ages
is  the  rule  of  the  eldest.  Nor  is  it  necessary  to  dwell  at
special  length  on  primogeniture  applied  to  military  ten-
ure. We  might  just  point  to  a  parallel  to  the  Western
knights'  fees  in  the  impartible  succession  to  the  Indian
raj.1

The  converse  case  of  ultimogeniture  seems  more  strange, ultimo-
geniture,
and requires  some  explanation. The succession of  the

youngest  son  to  the  home  of  his  deceased  father  is  an
exceedingly  widespread  custom.2  The  wealth  of  material
in  this  case  allows  us  to  trace  sufficiently  clearly  the  prin-
cipal idea  which  governs  this  institution:  the  youngest  son
succeeds  his  father  because  usually  he  is  the  last  to  remain
at  home  when  his  elder  brothers  have  already  gone  out  and
started  their  own  households.3  Our  observation  cannot,
however,  stop  here.  One  is  naturally  led  to  ask  in  what
states  of  society  this  separation  of  the  elder  brothers  from
their  patriarchal  home  can  have  been  so  usual  as  to  shape
the  normal  course  of  succession.  Sir  James  Frazer  points
to  pastoral  habits  and  to  the  rudimentary  stages  of  agri-
culture when  tribes  cultivated  their  lands  by  destructive
methods,  such  as  burning  down  forests  for  the  sake  of  fer-
tilizing the  soil  with  the  cinders,  and  migrated  to  other
fields  when  the  fertility  of  the  harvest  began  to  fail.4  In
surroundings  of  this  kind  customs  of  ultimogeniture  may
easily  arise,  but  we  must  not  lose  sight  of  the  fact  that  in
some  of  the  most  characteristic  traces  of  pastoral  and  mi-

1  WEST  and  BtiHLER,  A  Digest  of  the  Hindu  Law  of  Inheritance,
I,  p.  157;  II,  pp.  735-41.

2  SIR  J.  G. FRAZER,  Folk-lore  in  the  Old  Testament (1918),  I,
pp.  433  ff

a  FRAZER,  op.  cit.,  I,  p  440.  BOQISIC,  Zbornik  Pravnih  Obidaja
(1874),  p.  1.

*  FRAZER,  op.  cit.,  I,  pp.  442,  443,  etc.  HANSSEN,  Agrarhistorische
Abhandlungen.


286  TRIBAL  LAW:  PART  II:  ARYAN  CULTURE

gratory  life  the  patriarchal  system  arose  and  developed
with  great  success.  This  was  eminently  the  case  in  regard
to  the  Hebrews,  from  whose  condition  Frazer's  analysis
starts.  On  the  other  hand,  ultimogeniture  in  the  shape  of
the  droit  de  mainete,  Jungstenrecht,  Borough  English,  etc.,
appears  firmly  established  in  the  life  of  sedentary  popula-
tions whose  members  were  legally  and  economically  ad-
scripti  glebae.  The  going  out  of  the  elder  brothers  in  such
cases  cannot  be  regarded  as  a  free  movement  in  quest  of
waste  land,  and  yet  it  is  just  among  these  half-servile  peas-
ants that  ultimogeniture  is  especially  common  in  Europe.
A  new  link  has  therefore  to  be  found  in  the  chain  of
explanation.

Without  denying  in  the  least  the  possibility  of  ultimo-
geniture in  fluid  states  of  society,  we  have  to  notice  that  in
the  life  of  small  peasants  exploited  by  lords  there  were
also  elements  making  for  ultimogeniture.  One  of  these
elements  is  the  size  of  the  holding:  when  holdings  are
parcelled  out  into  very  small  units,  their  size  puts  a  stop
to  any  enlargement  of  the  family  on  the  lines  of  a  zadruga.
Whatever  the  relation  of  the  holdings  to  one  another,  each
single  holding  becomes  emphatically  a  ''one-man  lot,"  and
under  these  circumstances  the  struggle  for  existence  sug-
gested the  keeping  of  the  weakest  at  home  and  the  attempt
of  the  stronger  to  get  out  into  his  own  independent  walk
of  life,  either  as  a  settler  under  new  conditions  on  re-
claimed land,  or  as  an  occupier  of  a  deserted  holding,
or  as  a  sergeant  or  bailiff,  later  on  as  a  labourer  seeking
wages.1

From  the  special  point  of  view  of  succession,  however,
both  primogeniture  and  ultimogeniture  appear  as  effects  of
one  and  the  same  main  cause — the  necessity  of  keeping  up
organic  units  of  an  economic  nature.

Let  us  now  turn  to  the  well-known  disabilities  of  women

i  For  the  revision  of  the  population  of  manors  by  the  bailiff  see
Historia  et  Cartulariiim  Monasterii  Sancti  Petri  Gloucestriae  (Rolls
Series,  1867),  III,  p.  213:  "  convocentur  omnes  nativi  maneriorum
.  .  provideatur  districte  qui  sunt  apti  retinendi  in  servitio
domini,  et  in  quo  servitio,  et  ad  quern  locum  .  .  .  quandocumque
placuerit  loci  hallivo,  amoveantur  ab  uno  loco  usque  ad  alium  ad
commodum  domini."


VII:  SUCCESSION  AND  INHERITANCE  287

imposed  by  primitive  law  as  regards  succession  to  land.
Norse  law  puts  women  and  men  on  the  same  footing  in
regard  to  all  forms  of  property  equated  to  "movable
money"  (Losore),  but  as  to  land  there  is  a  prevalent  idea
that  men  should  be  privileged.  Women  are  admitted  to  a
certain  extent,  but  always  placed  behind  males  of  equal
degree.  According  to  the  ancient  provincial  laws  of  Nor-
way, estates  are  considered  as  belonging  to  the  kindred  with
which  they  are  connected  historically.  In  order  to  keep
these  estates  within  the  kindred  they  are  to  descend  chiefly
to  males :  women  are  admitted  to  them  only  in  exceptional
cases — when  there  is  no  male  offspring  of  the  same  degree,
e.g.,  if  there  is  one  daughter  and  no  sons  of  the  deceased,
then  the  daughter  will  inherit;  also  the  sister  of  one  who
has  left  no  children  and  no  brothers;  nieces  and  first
cousins  may  be  admitted  in  the  sense  that  they  have  to  pass
the  property  to  their  nearest  male  heir.  The  daughter's
position  will  be  altogether  different  from  that  of  the  daugh-
ter who  has  brothers.  Instead  of  being  provided  with  a
dowry  she  is  admitted  to  a  man's  share  in  the  husbandry
and  the  rights  of  revenge,  and  therefore  is  called  in  a  char-
acteristic manner  baugrygr.1  The  notion  is  that  through
her  the  estate  ought  to  pass  by  marriage  to  her  son,  and  in
this  way  to  the  male  line  again — a  sort  of  engrafted  male
line,  in  the  same  manner  as  by  engrafting  a  tree — the  tree
of  kinship.

Frankish  and  Lombard  law  originally  excluded  women
from  inheritance  in  land,  and  this  exclusion  seems  as
ancient  as  the  patriarchal  system  itself,  whatever  we  may
think  about  the  position  of  affairs  in  pre-historic  times  when
rules  of  matriarchy  were  prevalent.  A  common-sense  ex-
planation of  one  side  of  this  doctrine  is  tendered  by  the
law  of  the  Thuringians  (Lex  Angliorum  et  Werinorum,
c.  6).2  It  is  stated  there  that  inheritance  in  land  goes
with  the  duty  of  taking  revenge  for  the  slaying  of  rela-
tives and  with  the  power  of  bearing  arms.  The  man  who

1  Bang,  bracelet  and  rygr,  woman. The  wergeld  was  supposed  to
be  paid  in  gold  bracelets,  and  the  heiress  of  a  man  who  had  no  male
descendants  was  entitled  to  receive  such  a  wergeld.

2  See  post,  p.  302.


288


TRIBAL  LAW:  PART  II:  ARYAN  CULTURE


The

Testament
unknown
to  tribal
custom.


takes  land  ought  also  to  get  the  suit  of  armour  and
the  sword.  The  land  is  practically  reserved  for  the
warrior.

Of  course  with  progress  on  economic  lines  things  change,
and  we  actually  notice  in  England,  for  example,  that
women  do  obtain  parts  of  the  inheritance  in  land  at  an
early  date.  One  of  the  most  potent  adversaries  of  the
system  of  exclusion  of  women  was  the  Church.  It  favoured,
all  through,  the  view  that  land  should  be  transmitted  in
the  same  way  as  money  and  chattels.  In  Anglo-Saxon
charters  we  consequently  see  that  women  hold  and  transfer
land.  The  natural  channel  for  their  acquiring  these  rights
consisted  in  the  development  of  bocland  property  and  of
dower.

In  the  Norwegian  system,  the  real  proprietor  is  the  per-
son who  gets  a  share  in  the  Bangs:  and  if  he  dies  leaving
one  daughter,  she  may  succeed  to  the  property;  but  she
will  transmit  the  right  to  her  husband  and  eventually  to
her  son.  This  view  is  even  more  fully  expressed  in  Greek
law,  in  the  rights  of  the  fTtinX^po?^  who  is  joined  as  a  kind
of  complement  to  the  Hhrjpos :  the  fact  that  a  man  has  not
left  sons  who  may  succeed  to  his  inheritance  is  remedied
by  the  rule  that  his  grandson  may  take  the  place  of  the
natural  heir.  Again,  a  Frankish  formula  (Marculf)  shows
us  a  father  who  takes  care  to  endow  his  daughter  with  a
piece  of  land  according  to  natural  affection  in  spite  of  the
strict  law  of  his  tribe.

It  is  hardly  necessary  to  point  out  that  the  detailed
Scandinavian  and  Germanic  customs  afford  a  good  clue  to
the  motives  which  underlie  ancient  Greek  Law  on  the
matter.  The  fnin^po?  of  Athens  and  of  Gortyn  appears
as  a  variety  of  the  ~baugrygr,  although  it  is  the  economic
and  not  the  military  side  of  the  institution  which  is  promi-
nent in  the  first  case.

One  fundamental  difference  between  the  treatment  of  in-
heritance by  tribal  custom  and  by  modern  law  consists  in
the  fact  that  primitive  organization  leaves  no  room  for  the
disposal  of  property  by  testament:  volition  is  naturally
supposed  not  to  reach  beyond  the  physical  existence  of


VII:  SUCCESSION  AND  INHERITANCE  289

the  individual.  A  sentence  in  Tacitus,  Germania,1  serves
admirably  to  summarize  this  view  not  only  in  the  case
of  Teutons,  but  also  in  that  of  other  Aryan  nations:
heredes  tamen  successoresque  sui  cuique  liberi,  et  nullum
testamentum.  We  find  this  principle  at  work  even  in  com-
paratively late  times.  Indian  law  does  not  recognize  testa-
mentary power,  in  the  proper  sense  of  the  word,  apart  from
the  law  as  to  gifts.2  Even  now,  although  under  the  in-
fluence of  English  legal  ideas  the  Indian  law  as  to  this  sub-
ject has  been  to  some  extent  developed,  it  is  still  limited  and
influenced  by  the  rules  as  to  gifts  inter  vivos.5

In  ancient  Greece  the  testament  was  the  product  of  a
comparatively  late  legislation.  It  does  not  appear  at  all  in
the  inscriptions  of  Gortyn  or  of  Naupaktos.4  In  Athens
the  power  of  disposing  of  property  after  death  was  intro-
duced, according  to  tradition,  by  Solon.  Originally  the
mode  of  procedure  in  the  case  of  a  disposal  of  family
property  after  the  death  of  the  owner,  was  by  adoption


The  one  marked  and  characteristic  exception  to  this  nega-
tive  principle  appears  in  the  history  of  Roman  Law.  There  Testa-
can  be  no  doubt  that  the  Romans  started  from  the  same
principle  as  the  other  branches  of  the  Aryan  family  in
regard  to  succession  :  heredes  successoresque  sui  cuique
liberi,  et  nullum  testamentum.  The  conception  of  the  unity
of  the  household  (familia  pecuniaque)  reflected  by  the  cult
of  ancestors  and  supported  by  common  property,  is  clearly
expressed,  among  other  things,  in  the  standing  of  sui
Jieredes,  who  are  said  in  as  many  words  to  be  masters  of
their  property,  successors  in  the  administration  of  the
household  property  as  coming  into  their  own.6  The

1  Ch.  xx.

2  TUPPER,  Punjab  Customary  Law,  III,  pp.  94  and  95  ;  WEST  and
BtJHLER,  op.  cit.,  I,  p 182;  II,  p.  813.

s  Tagore  v.  Tagore,  L.  R.  Sel.  Ind  App.,  p.  64,  WEST  and  BUHLEB,
I,  p.  183.

*  DARESTE,  HAUSSOULIER  ET  REINACH,  Recueil  des  inscriptions
jurisdiques  grecques,  I,  pp.  180,  352.

5  SCHULIN,  Das  griechische  Testament.

6PAULUS,  Dig.  xxviii,  2,  11:  "In  suis  heredibus  eyidentius  apparet
continuationem  dominii  eo  rem  perducere,  ut  nulla  videatur  hereditas
fuisse:  quasi  olim  hi  domini  essent,  qui  etiam  vivo  patre  quodam-
2231  8


290  TRIBAL  LAW:  PART  II:  ARYAN  CULTURE

heredium  of  two  jugera  assigned  by  Numa  was  regarded  as
a  family  share,1  but  the  powerful  development  of  the
patria  protestas  opened  the  way  for  an  early  assertion  of
the  personal  will  of  the  paterfamilias,  the  manager  of  the
household.  The  XII  Tables  contain  the  definite  rule:  si
intestato  moritur  cui  heres  sum  non  escit,  proximus  adg-
natus  familiam  habeto;  si  nee  adgnatus  escit,  gentiles
familiam  habento.  These  short  sentences  are  well  worthy
of  attention.  To  begin  with,  the  case  of  a  testamentary
disposition  is  considered  as  a  common  one,  and  evidently
confers  the  same  right  as  the  succession  of  the  suus  and  of
the  adgnatus,  the  acquisition  of  the  integral  household
(familiam  habento).  The  direct  aim  of  the  rule  was  ob-
viously to  establish  the  sequence  of  claims  to  inheritance :
as  regards  intestate  succession  the  order  proceeds  from  the
suus  to  the  adgnatus  and  then  to  the  gentiles.  It  cannot  be
a  mere  accident  that  the  proximus  adgnatus  is  mentioned
in  the  singular,  while  the  gentiles  appear  in  the  plural :  the
law  grants  individual  succession  according  to  precedence  of
degree  in  one  case,  and  provides  for  the  return  of  goods  to
the  gentiles  as  a  body  in  the  absence  of  agnates  with  a
definite  standing  by  pedigree.  (Cf.  Cicero,  Top.  VI,  29,
on  gentiles.)  In  view  of  such  a  careful  distinction,  it
is  hardly  accidental  that  the  Jieres  suus  also  appears  in
the  singular.  It  is  known,  of  course,  that  Roman  Law
admitted  heirs  of  equal  degree  to  equal  shares  in  the  suc-
cession, but  the  phraseology  of  the  XII  Tables  seems  to
suggest  that  it  was  customary  in  the  older  period  to  keep
the  "household"  together  as  far  as  possible,  and  to  pro-
vide in  some  other  way  for  the  satisfaction  of  current
claims — possibly  by  arrangements  like  the  unified  succes-

modo  domini  existimantur.  unde  etiam  filius  familias  appellatur
sicut  pater  familias:  sola  nota  hac  adiecta,  per  quam  distinguitur
genitor  ab  eo  qui  genitus  sit.  itaque  post  mortem  patris  non  heredi-
tatem  percipere  videntur,  sed  magis  liberam  bonorum  administra-
tionem  conscquuntur;  hac  ex  causa  licet  non  sint  heredes  instituti,
domini  sunt:  nee  obstat,  quod  licet  eos  exheredare,  quod  et  occidere
licebat."  GAIUS,  II,  157:  "Sed  sui  quidem  heredes  ideo  appellantur,
quia  domestici  heredes  sunt  et  uiuo  quoque  parente  quodammodo
domini  existimantur;  unde  etiam  si  quis  intestatus  mortuus  sit,
prima  causa  est  in  successione  liberorum  "

1  CUQ,  in  the  Nouvelle  revue  historique  de  droit,  X,  537. Manuel
des  institutions  juridiques  de$  Romains,  683  ff


VII:  SUCCESSION  AND  INHERITANCE  291

sion  of  the  Norwegian  odal,  based  on  customary  prac-
tice. It  would  be  unsafe  to  rely  too  much  on  such  in-
direct indications,  but  the  hypothesis  would  tally  with  a
well-established  fact,  namely,  with  the  special  position  as-
signed to  the  suus  in  regard  to  a  possible  will.  The  suus
mentioned  in  the  rule  of  the  XII  Tables  takes  the  property
by  a  different  title  from  the  agnate,  who  claims  only  in  the
absence  of  sui;  the  former  enters  on  the  inheritance  in  his
own  right,  while  the  latter  has  to  establish  his  claim.
The  passage  therefore  implies  that  the  right  to  make  a  will
belonged  only  to  such  citizens  as  had  no  Jieredes  sui  (cui
heres  suus  non  escit).  And  indeed  we  know  that  in  order
to  make  a  will  against  the  interests  of  a  suus,  a  son  or
grandson,  a  Roman  citizen  had  to  disinherit  the  latter  in  a
formal  manner  (exheredatio) .  That  such  a  procedure  was  Formal
not  regarded  as  natural  and  easy  is  sufficiently  indicated  by  tance  of
the  fact  that  Paulus  compares  it  to  the  right  of  the  pater-
familias  to  put  his  son  to  death  (Dig.  xxviii,  2,  11).  In
the  light  of  this  process  one  comes  to  understand  the  full
meaning  of  the  maxim — nemo  ex  parte  testatus,  ex  parte
intestatus  decedere  potest.  It  fits  strictly  the  situation  of
sui  in  respect  of  a  will.  If  a  suus  was  disinherited,  all  his
rights  to  the  familia  had  to  be  disposed  of:  it  was  impos-
sible to  leave  some  of  them  to  a  disinherited  person.  What
applied  pre-eminently  to  direct  descendants  was  naturally
extended  to  other  heirs  db  intestato.  One  material  differ-
ence there  was  between  the  exercise  of  the  ius  necis  and  the
exercise  of  the  power  to  disinherit  by  the  paterfamilias.
In  the  latter  case,  as  the  decision  of  the  father  had  to  take
effect  after  his  death  and  involved  no  alteration  of  the  natu-
ral course  of  family  relations,  it  depended  for  its  validity
on  the  consent  of  the  assembly  of  clans  presided  over  by  the
pontifex  maximum  (comitia  calata}.1  It  is  not  necessary
to  suppose  that  this  oldest  form  of  testament  was  derived
from  a  practice  of  appointing  a  successor  to  the  rule  of  a

*  GAIUS,  IT,  102:  "  Accessit  deinde  tertium  genus  testamenti  quod
per  aes  et  libram  agitur.  Qui  neque  calatis  comitiis  neque  in  pro-
cinctu  testamentum  fecerat,  is  si  subita  morte  urguebatur,  amico
familiam  suam,  id  est  patrimonium  suum,  mancipio  dabat,  eumque
rogabat  quid  cuique  post  mortem  suam  dari  uellet."


292


TRIBAL  LAW:  PART  II:  ARYAN  CULTURE


Heredis
institutio
est  cap-lit
testa-
menti.


political  association  of  the  household.1  There  is  no  direct
evidence  of  such  a  practice,  and  the  analogy  of  the  interrex
and  of  the  magistrate's  designation  may  be  explained  on
different  grounds,  though  the  view  is  not  inherently  impos-
sible in  theory.  But  the  process  as  described  by  Gaius  was
clearly  designed  to  meet  exceptional  cases,  as  it  required
the  cumbersome  interference  of  the  convitia  calata  and
could  take  place  only  on  two  days  of  the  year.2  It  seems
clear  that  it  was  originally  reserved  for  cases  of  exliere-
datio.  As  in  the  kindred  cases  of  adrogatio  coupled  with
detestatio  sacrorum,  the  federation  of  the  clans  had  to  pass
a  special  decree  in  order  to  alter  the  usual  course  of  family
law.

This  is  the  negative  basis  of  the  oldest  Roman  testament.
Such  a  negative  basis  implies,  however,  a  positive  conse-
quence. As  one  could  not  discard  one's  sacral  obligations
(detestatio  sacrorum}  without  assuming  obligations  towards
other  sacra,  even  so  one  could  not  disinherit  an  heir  with-
out appointing  another  in  his  place.  Hence  the  famous
maxim,  heredis  institutio  est  caput  testamenti,  appears
rooted  in  the  oldest  institution  of  the  Roman  will.3

The  sacral  and  political  side  of  the  performance  was,
however,  relegated  to  the  background  by  considerations  of
a  purely  proprietary  character.  In  the  matter  of  intestate
succession,  the  Romans,  as  well  as  other  peoples,  had  to
reckon  with  the  plurality  of  heirs:  their  system  did  not
favor  either  the  growth  of  joint  families  or  the  formation
of  fixed  holdings.  The  basis  of  their  economic  life  was
intensive  agriculture,4  and  such  husbandry  leads  to  indi-
vidual property  in  small  farms.  It  would  be  needless  to
dwell  on  the  part  played  by  these  small  highly  individual-
ized plots  in  the  social  history  of  Rome.5  Under  these  cir-
cumstances the  fate  of  the  patrimonium  in  all  its  aspects —
as  to  land,  stock,  slaves,  stores,  pecuniary  claims  and  debts,
—became  the  chief  object  of  succession,  both  intestate  and
by  will.

IBONFANTE,  Bullettino,  IV,  97;  VII,  157.

2  MOMMSEN,  Staatsrecht,  II,  36;  III,  318.

3  Cf.  MITTEIS,  Romisches  Privatrecht,  I,  77

4  Cato's  directions  to  a  husbandman  were,  arare,  arare,  stercorare.
s  See e.g., WEBER, Agrargeschichte Roms, 81  ff ; MOMMSEN,

Romische  Geschichte,  I,  185,  441.


VII:  SUCCESSION  AND  INHERITANCE  293

By  the  side  of  the  institution  of  an  heir  or  of  several  Bequests.
heirs  by  testament,  there  stood,  as  early  as  the  forms
of  testament  represented  in  the  XII  Tables,  dispositions
as  to  gifts  after  death,  or  bequests  (legato,).  The  famous
passage  as  cited  by  Ulpian1 — Uti  legassit  super  pecunia,
tutelave  suae  rei,  ita  ius  esto — treats  of  bequests  and  ward-
ships as  of  supplementary  dispositions  in  the  will,  and  for
this  reason  restricts  the  source  of  such  bequests  to  one  part
of  the  patrimony  of  the  testator,  namely,  to  his  pecunia.2

The  complete  liberty  to  dispose  of  cattle  and  money  and
other  movables  was  evidently  in  need  of  confirmation,  and
one  can  well  suppose  that  many  disputes  between  members
of  the  family  and  strangers  arose  in  connection  with  such
gifts.  Later  on,  legislation  had  to  step  in  to  protect  heirs
from  the  squandering  of  property  by  testators.3  However,
the  power  of  bequest  was  admitted  and  expressed  in  the
characteristic  formula  of  the  legatum  per  vindicationem
preserved  by  Gaius.  The  expressions  mandatela  and  custo-
dela  apply  primarily  to  the  trustee  of  an  imaginary  sale —
the  familiae  emptor.  They  show  not  only  that  bequests
were  allowed  within  a  wide  range,  but  also  that  the  func-
tion of  the  execution  of  the  will  was  considered  as  a  most
important  part  of  the  performance.  It  fell  naturally  to
the  heres  when  the  familiae  emptor  was  degraded  to  a
purely  ceremonial  participation  in  the  proceedings.5

This  is  most  evident  in  respect  of  the  will  in  procinctu,
which  is  represented  by  the  sources  as  a  substitute  for  the
ceremony  in  the  comitia  oalata  conditioned  by  the  excep-
tional circumstance  of  imminent  battle.6  In  essence,  it  was
not  different  from  the  full-dress  performance  before  the

1  GIBABD,  Textes  de  droit  remain,  3rd  ed.,  p.  14,  n.  3.

2  MITTEIS,  Romisches  Privatrecht,  I,  81  f .
s  Leges  Furia,  Voconia,  Falcidia.

*  II,  193-200.

s  I  fail  to  see  how  the  Roman  system  as  regards  testaments  could
have  developed  out  of  the  legato,,  according  to  a  theory  first  pro-
pounded by  Cuq,  supported  by  Ehrlich,  and  eventually  worked  out
in  a  subtle  manner  by  O.  Lenel.  It  fails,  as  it  seems  to  me,  to
account  for  the  position  of  the  heres.  On  the  other  hand,  Bonfante
seems  to  go  much  too  far  in  assigning  a  purely  political  foundation
to  the  heredis  institutio.  See  LENEL,  in  Essays  in  Legal  History
(ed.  by  Vinogradoff ),  120  ff.

eMoMMSEN — the  will  made  in  the  interval  between  two  military
auspicia  (Staatsrecht,  III,  307).


294  TRIBAL  LAW:  PART  II:  ARYAN  CULTURE

curiae,  though,  as  being  made  in  haste,  it  was  certainly
emancipated  from  any  strict  forms  and  must  have  been
confined  in  many  cases  to  very  elementary  dispositions
capable  of  being  remembered  and  testified  to  by  the  com-
rades of  the  testator.  This  does  not  touch  the  essence  of
the  transaction,  however,  which  was  meant  to  stand  in  lieu
of  the  will  made  before  the  curial  assembly.1

To  meet  the  requirements  of  the  new  situation  hingeing
on  the  economic  element  of  the  patrimowium,  a  new  device
was  brought  in  by  practice,  namely,  the  famtiliae  emptio.2
It  consisted  in  the  imaginary  sale  of  the  household  to  a
third  person  who  acted  in  the  place  of  the  heir  (loco
heredis).  If  we  follow  carefully  Gaius'  description,  we
can  hardly  escape  the  conclusion  that  the  purchaser  who
was  entrusted  with  the  duty  of  carrying  out  the  last  will  of
the  testator  must  have  been  originally  exempted  from  the
rule  as  to  express  disinheritance,  as  his  function  was  de-
rived from  a  simulated  sale.  As  Gaius  says,  however,  this
was  only  a  transitional  stage  which  helped  to  vulgarize  the
process  and  to  place  it  within  reach  of  the  plebeian  com-
munity— a  most  important  feature  of  this  mode  of  proceed-
ing. Once  the  practice  struck  root,  it  changed  its  character
by  absorbing  some  of  the  elements  of  the  public  testament.
Safeguards  were  wanted  against  a  possible  misuse  of  his
powers  by  the  trustee,  and  as  a  result  of  such  converging
tendencies  the  "  nuncupative "  will  per  aes  et  libram  arose
and  eventually  became  the  typical  civil  law  instrument  of
Roman  jurisprudence  in  contrast  to  the  still  wider  power
conferred  by  the  praetorian  transmission  of  lonorum  pos-
sessio.  Here  the  Jieredis  institutio  and  the  freedom  of  mak-
ing bequests  are  both  represented,  and  in  the  formula  ad-
dressed by  the  testator  to  the  seven  witnesses,  who  have
taken  the  place  of  the  libripens  and  his  classici  testes,s  there
is  still  a  vestige  of  the  ancient  participation  of  the  com-
munity.

1  EBDMANN,  Zeitschrift  filr  vergleichende  Rechtswissenschaft,  XXII,
14  ff.

2  GAIUS,  II,  103.

3  GAIUS,  II,  104. Ita  do,  ita  lego,  ita  tester,  itaque  voa  Quiritea
testimonium  mihi  perhibetote.


VII:  SUCCESSION  AND  INHERITANCE  295

We  need  not  follow  further  the  intricate  speculations  of
modern  writers  as  to  the  time  and  conditions  under  which
"universal  succession/'  and  especially  the  liability  as  to
debts,  were  developed  by  Roman  jurisprudence.  This
topic,  though  very  important  in  itself,  can  hardly  be  re-
constructed historically  with  sufficient  precision.  Nor  does
it  belong  properly  to  the  domain  of  tribal  law.


PART  III
CLAN  AND  TRIBE


CHAPTER  VIII
THE  ORGANIZATION  OF  KINSHIP

THE  most  profound  difference  between  modem  and
ancient  organization  consists  in  the  fact  that  modern  society  society
starts  from  individuals  and  adjusts  itself  primarily  to  the
claims  of  the  individual,  whereas  ancient  society  starts
from  groups  and  subordinates  individual  interests  to  the
claims  of  these  groups.  There  are  two  general  reasons  for
this  state  of  things.  To  begin  with,  there  is  the  weakness
and  insecurity  of  the  single  man  in  barbaric  surroundings,
which  drives  him  to  seek  companionship  and  to  place  him-
self under  protection  at  any  price.  It  is  only  by  close  union
that  tribesmen  can  survive  in  the  difficult  struggle  for  life
against  outsiders.  A  single  man  would  be  a  lost  man.  In
the  words  of  Robertson  Smith,  "It  is  only  by  mutual  help,
by  avoiding  intestine  quarrels  and  subordinating  individual
interests  to  those  of  the  kin,  that,  in  the  hard  conditions  of
desert  life,  and  in  a  state  of  constant  war  with  outsiders,  a
tribe  can  hope  to  hold  its  own  (comp.  Agli.  ii.  170,  1).  To
get  the  full  benefit  of  this  mutual  support,  the  group  or
Kayy  must  not  only  fight  together,  but  as  far  as  possible
move  together. ' ' 1

There  is  also  a  second  reason  which  may  not  perhaps  be
so  clearly  perceived  by  those  who  deal  with  these  matters.
In  modern  society  the  State  has  assumed  the  monopoly  of
political  co-ordination.  It  is  the  State  which  rules,  makes
laws,  and  eventually  enforces  them  by  coercion.  Such  a
State,  as  a  wide  and  more  or  less  abstract  union,  did  not
exist  in  ancient  times.  The  commonwealth  was  not  centred
in  one  sovereign  body  towering  immeasurably  above  single
individuals  and  meting  out  to  every  one  his  portion  of
right.  Therefore  the  necessary  political  elements  which  are
never  absent  from  any  human  society,  were  distributed

i  Kinship  and  Marriage  in  Arabia,  p 37.
299


300  TRIBAL  LAW:  PART  III:  CLAN  AND  TRIBE

among  formations  which  we  regard  now  from  the  point  of
view  of  private  law :  churches,  local  bodies,  kindreds.
Agnatic  The  organization  of  kinship  for  purposes  of  defence  and

mutual  help  is  naturally  dependent  on  the  manner  in  which
relationship  is  constituted  in  primitive  societies.  Of  the
three  possible  methods  of  treating  relationship,  the  agnatic,
the  cognatic,  and  the  totemic  systems — we  have  to  reckon
in  the  case  of  the  Aryan  nations  only  with  the  first  two.
The  totemic  classification  does  not  manifest  itself,  because
the  nations  in  question  became  known  to  us  in  the  fairly
advanced  stage  of  development  connected  with  separate
households.

There  is  also  a  marked  tendency  towards  agnatism  which
admits  of  a  more  compact  and  effective  organization  of  the
group  under  the  household  rule  of  a  patriarch  or  of  a
substitute  selected  from  his  male  relatives.

In  order  to  see  the  process  actually  at  work  in  historical
circumstances,  let  us  glance  at  the  way  in  which  this
agnatic  principle  has  been  developed  by  some  of  the  Aryan
races.

Among  the  Hindus,  agnatic  relationship  was  certainly
the  prevailing  one :  and  it  should  always  be  borne  in  mind
in  dealing  with  the  Aryans  in  general  that,  as  far  back
as  we  can  look,  we  find  the  predominance  of  the  patriarchal
family.  We  need  not  necessarily  conclude  that  the  patriar-
chal family  was  a  primordial  institution.  But  apart  from
the  question  of  absolutely  primeval  origins,  it  is  incon-
testable that  within  that  section  of  Aryan  history  which
is  known  to  us  by  actual  evidence,  agnatism  arising  out
of  the  patriarchal  family  is  certainly  the  social  start-
ing-point of  kinship.  Thus,  according  to  Gautama,1
"Sapindas  (blood  relations  within  six  degrees),  Sagoiras
(relations  bearing  a  common  family  name),  or  those  con-
nected by  descent  from  the  same  Rishi  (vaidika  gotra),  and
the  wife  shall  share  (the  estate)  of  a  person,  deceased  with-

iXXVIII,  §  21  (Sacred  Books  of  the  East — II,  The  Sacred  Laws
of  the  Aryas  Pt.  I,  transl.  by  G  BUHLEB,  2nd  ed.,  1897).  Cf.  Manu
IX,  187;  Apastamba  II,  6,  14,  2;  YAjnavalkya  II,  135-6;  WEST
and  BUHLER,  A  Digest  of  the  Hindu  Law  of  Inheritance,  Partition,
and  Adoption,  3rd  ed.  (1884),  I,  p.  114.


VIII:  THE  ORGANIZATION  OF  KINSHIP  3Q1

out  (male)  issue  (or  an  appointed  daughter )."  Cognates
are  indicated  by  the  term  Bandhu.1

Greek  and  Roman  antiquities  provide  well  known
examples  of  the  action  of  agnatism.  The  yivoS  (naipa)
is  as  old  as  Greece  itself:  in  these  associations  the  patri-
archal principle  is  clearly  fundamental.  Aristotle  says:
1 '  The  family  is  the  association  established  by  nature  for  the
supply  of  man's  everyday  wants,  and  the  members  of  it
are  called  by  Charondas  'companions  of  the  cupboard*
[oftoffiTrvovs],  and  by  Epimenides  the  Cretan  '  companions
of  the  manger'  [  OftondirovS].  But  when  several  families
are  united  and  the  association  aims  at  something  more  than
the  supply  of  daily  needs,  then  comes  into  existence  the
village.  And  the  most  natural  form  of  the  village  appears
to  be  that  of  a  colony  from  the  family  composed  of  the
children  and  the  grandchildren  who  are  said  to  be  '  suckled
with  the  same  milk'  [  6j*oydXaHTa$]."  2

The  period  of  the  Eupatrids  in  Athens  may  serve  as  an
example.  The  ancient  constitution  of  that  city  before  Clei-
sthenes  was  entirely  based  on  a  federation  of  phratries  and
yerrf.  All  these  alliances  were  essentially  agnatic;  they
possessed  the  usual  characteristic  features — they  started

i  WEST  and  BUHLER,  I,  pp.  486-8.

2  r)  (j.£v  ovv  £i£  Traoav  rjfiEpav  ovvearr]K.vla  Kotvuvia  Kara  <J>vaiv  oZ/cof  e<rrtvt
o£f  6  fj.£v  Xapwvdaf  nakzl  o/noanrvovg,  'ETr^uevtdj/f  J£  6  Kp^f  o/xo/caTrovf.  f]  6'  EK
TrXet6v(j)v  oliauv  itoivuvia  irpuTij  xpqoeuc  evenev  firj  £<f>rjftepov  nuprj.  fidhiOTa  de
Kara  <j>votv  eotKev  f)  KM/UTJ  cnrotn'ia  ol/c/af  elvai,  ovg  ttahovai  Tive£  ouoyd^a/craf
[Traiddf  re  /cat  iraiduv  TrattJaf],  Pol.  I,  2.  5-6  (p.  1252  b).  According  to
Dikaearchos,  as  reported  by  Stephen  of  Byzantium,  Trdr/oa,  ev  T&V  rptuv  TUV
Trap'  "Wdirjoi  Koivuviac  eldcjv,  tif  Af/camp^'of ,  a  dij  /caAoi)/Z£V  Trdrpav,  fparpiav,
ttdtfjQri  6e  irdrpa  fj.ev  d$  TJ/V  devrepav  fi£Ta(3aoiv  iWovruv  q  /card  [i6vac
Trpdrepov  ovca  cvyyivzia,  curb  rot)  Trpeofivrdrov  TE  /cat  fidTuara
h  rcj  ytvti  rrjv  tiruvvfiiav  e^ovaa  bv  dv  Tpoirov  Ata/ctJaf  ^  IleAoTrtJaf
elnoi  Tiq  av.  $arpiav  Jf  owi^rj  Myeffdat  /cat  ^parptav,  t-Kti&i)  rtvcf  etf  crepav
irdrpav  ididocav  ftvyaripas  iavruv.  ov  yap  in  TUV  rraTpiuTtituv  Ispuv  £i%e
Koivuviav  TJ  6o6e~iaa,  dA/l'  ttf  rtfv  TOV  Xa/3dvrof  avrrjv  avvertfac  Trdrpav.  uare
irp6TEpov  TrdQ^  rffq  aw66ov  yiyvop.EVTjg  dJe/l^aZf  cvv  arfeA^^,  iripa  rtf  lepuv
iriQrj  KOIVUVIK^  cworfof,  TJV  6?)  Qparpiav  uv6jia£ov.  /cat  irdluv  MOTE  iraTpa  JIEV

6v7T£/3  Ct7TO/i£V  EH  TT/S  CVyyEVEia^  Tp6TTOV  tyEVETO fld?UOTa. r/;f yOVEUV  OVV  TEKVOlf

Kal  rtnvw  ai)v  yovevat,  Qparpia  6s  EK  r,/f  rav


302  TRIBAL  LAW:  PART  III:  CLAN  AND  TRIBE

from  the  household  around  a  hearth  fire,  though  the  unit
of  association  was  frequently  enlarged  by  adoption;  but
it  was  always  thought  that  the  adopted  sons  stepped  en-
.  tirely  into  the  position  of  those  naturally  born.  The  mar-
riage of  the  heiress  {tninkripoS}  with  the  nearest  agnate  in
Greece/  the  succession  and  guardianship  of  agnates  in
Rome,2  are  striking  expressions  of  the  prevalence  of  rela-
tionship through  males  in  the  social  organization  of  the
classical  world.

In  the  case  of  the  Teutons  the  sword  side  has  a  natural
and  marked  precedence  over  the  spindle  side  in  all  matters
concerning  defence  and  ownership  of  land.3  Among  Scan-
dinavian folk  the  Frostathing  law  may  serve  as  an  example.
The  customary  law  of  tribes  settled  around  Trondhjem  in
Norway  treats  wergeld  from  the  agnatic  point  of  view.  All
those  who  take  the  principal  parts  of  the  composition,  the
~baugar,  are  agnates  of  various  degrees;  relationship
through  women  is  relegated  to  a  subordinate  position  as
the  nefgildi.  A  woman  takes  a  bang  only  exceptionally,
when  she  is  the  only  daughter  and  heiress  of  a  slain  man
(baugrygr).4

rognatism By  the  side  of  the  principal  ties  of  relationship  which

asCaSsutJ start  from  a  patriarchal  household  and  spread  out  in  the

tle!aiy  ramifications  of  agnatism,  the  Aryan  nations  recognize  in  a

lesser  degree  the  value  of  relationship through  women.

There  arises  a  dualism  of  relationship — on  the  side  of  the

father (the  spear) and  on  the  side  of  the  mother (the

i  Law  of  Gortyn,  X,  §45  (DARESTE,  Rec.  des  inscrip.  jur.
grecques,  I,  p.  375);  DAREMBERG  ET  SAGLIO,  Dictionnaire,  &.  v.
cpikleros.

2GAius,  I,  155-6.

3  Lex  Salica (ed.  GEFFCKEN,  1898) LIX,  p.  59: "  De  terra  vero
nulla  in  muliere  hereditas  non  pertinebit,  sed  ad  virilem  sexum  qui
fratres fuerint  tola terra pertineat." Cf. Monumenta Germaniae,
LL.  V,  pp. 103fF. : Lex  Angliorum  et Werinorumn  hoc  est Thurin-
gorum,  par.  26: "  Horeditatem  defunct!  filius  non  filia  suscipiat,  si
hlium  non  habuit  qui  defunctus  est,  ad  filiam  pecunia  et  mancipia,
terra  vero  ad  proximum  paternae  generationis  consanguineum  per-
tineat " Par.  34 : "  Usque  ad  quintam  generationem  paterna  gene-
ratio  succedat. Post  quintam  autem  filia  ex  toto,  sive  de  patris  sive
matris  parte,  in  hereditatem  succedat,  et  tune  demum  hereditas  ad
fusum  a  lancea  transeat."

4  VINOGRADOFF, Geschlecht und Verwandtschaft im altnorwe-
gischen Recht (Zeitschrift filr Sozial- und Wirtschaftsgeschichte,
V).


VIII:  THE  ORGANIZATION  OF  KINSHIP  3Q3

spindle).  If  we  proceed  one  generation  higher,  we  have
to  reckon  with  an  alliance  of  four  families  in  the  ascending
line,  because  the  descent  from  four  grandparents  converges
in  the  case  of  every  individual.  If  we  go  further  back  again
to  the  great-grandfathers  and  great-grandmothers,  we  may
get  eight  lines  of  converging  descent,  etc.  The  Frisians
were  actually  organized  on  the  basis  of  certain  definite
bodies  of  relationship  called  the  Klilfte  (corresponding  to
the  four  grandparents)  and  the  Fechten  (corresponding  to
the  eight  great-grandparents).1

The  Germanic  conception  of  the  Sippe  (sibja — Goth.)
came  to  be  applied  to  relationship  on  both  sides — through
males  and  through  females,  although  there  are  clear  traces
of  an  earlier  arrangement  on  strictly  agnatic  principles.2

The  stream  of  feeling  of  union  naturally  diminishes  with
the  remoteness  of  the  degree  of  kinship.  The  further  two
persons  are  apart  from  each  other  in  generation  and  house-
hold, the  less  powerful  will  be  the  bond  of  union  between
them:  and  we  must  therefore  expect  that  in  all  systems  of
relationship  it  will  be  necessary  to  recognize  certain  con-
centric circles  within  which  the  rights  and  duties  of  the
relations  are  more  or  less  intense.  On  the  evidence  of
actual  facts,  this  is  certainly  true:  we  may  observe  every-
where this  characteristic  formation  of  circles.

A  conspicuous  example  is  to  be  found  in  Greek  criminal  The
procedure — the  survival  of  the  right  of  accusation  by  the  fnnanc?ent
kindred.  Homicide  was,  in  the  view  of  ancient  Greek  law,
chiefly  a  private  wrong:  or  perhaps  it  would  be  more  ac-
curate to  say  that  it  was  a  public  wrong  which  was  inflicted
not  on  the  city,  but  on  a  clan.  Hence  came  the  rule  of
Greek  criminal  law  that,  when  a  man  was  slain,  the  accusa-
tion against  the  slayer  should  come  from  the  relatives  of  the
man  killed.  The  principle  is  very  definitely  formulated  in
a  law  of  Dracon  of  621  B.C.  The  fragment  was  transcribed
after  the  overthrow  of  the  Four  Hundred  about  409  B.C.,

i  G-father  =  G-mother  G-father  =  G-mother

Father —


ther

Ego

(See  BBUNNEB,  Deutsche  Rechtsgeschichte,  II,  pp.  114-6.)
2  A  MIR  A,  Orundriss  des  germanischen  Rechts,  pp.  169  ff.


304 TRIBAL  LAW:  PART  III:  CLAN  AND  TRIBE

and  thanks  to  this  transcription  we  have  an  authentic
record  of  the  early  law  as  to  homicide:  a  law,  it  is  to  be
remembered,  which  preceded  the  Solonian  by  one  genera-
tion. The  principal  prosecutors  are  members  of  the
ayxiGtsia  a  circle  of  close  relationship.1

"The  lead  in  a  prosecution  of  the  slayer  in  the  market-
place shall  be  taken  by  all  relations  nearer  than  the  degree
of  cousinship,  and  cousins  and  children  of  cousins,  and  sons-
in-law  and  fathers-in-law  and  members  of  the  phratry  shall
join  in  the  prosecution.  And  if  there  be  a  question  as  to
conciliation,  then,  if  there  be  a  father  or  brother  or  sons,
they  shall  all  join  in  allowing  the  conciliation,  and  if  any
one  of  them  opposes  it,  he  shall  prevail."

Thus  the  initial  accusation  had  to  be  made  in  the  market
by  relations  within  the  degree  of  first  cousins  once  removed,
and  it  is  very  important  to  note  that  in  the  next  stage  this
wider  kindred  merges  in  the  phratry,  the  extension  of  the
yivos  :  so  that  ultimately  these  kindreds  are  conceived  as
big  households  federated  in  phratries.  The  next  provision
of  the  law  is  that,  while  the  kindred  can  claim  the  execu-
tion of  the  offender,  they  are  also  empowered  to  enter  into
a  compromise  with  him.  But  the  decision  as  to  conciliation
must  be  unanimous  on  the  part  of  the  narrower  family
circle,  and  even  one  single  dissentient  voice  is  an  effective
bar  to  the  whole  proceeding.  If  there  are  no  direct  rela-
tives, then  the  decision  devolves  solely  on  the  phratry,  ten
members  of  which  are  empowered  to  declare  for  composi-
tion if  they  think  proper.


i  The  «}  ^lOTtia  in  the  fifth  and  fourth  centuries  comprised  the
collaterals  up  to  the  degree  of  first  cousins  once  removed  or,  possibly,
of  second  cousins  (corresponding  to  the  Latin  sobrini) ,  both  on  the
male  and  on  the  female  side.  In  the  case  of  succession  we  meet
the  same  extension  of  the  narrow  household  circle  into  the  ayxtoTeia
comprising  relations  ^XPi  avetpidTijros  that  is,  up  to  first  cousins
once  removed,  but  in  this  case  the  claims  of  relations  through
females  (sisters,  aunts  and  cousins)  are  admitted,  although  the
male  side  is  preferred.  In  view  of  the  constitution  of  the  irarpa
or  /fvoc  it  can  hardly  be  doubted  that  the  fourth  century  rule  was
an  extension  of  an  earlier  agnatic  arrangement.

See  CAILLEMEB,  Droit  de  Succession  A  Athdnes,  pp.  7ff.;  LEIST,
Oraeco-italische  Rechtsgeschichte,  p.  83;  and  in  the  opposite  sense,
JEVONS,  Kin  and  Custom,  Journal  of  Philology,  XVI  (1888),  pp.
95-8.


VIII:  THE  ORGANIZATION  OF  KINSHIP


305


In  this  particular  instance  we  are  dealing  with  an  ad-
vanced civilization:  Athens  about  621  B.C.  had  become
not  only  very  civilized,  but  to  a  great  extent  commercial-
ized; the  Greeks  looked  at  relationship  more  or  less  from
a  point  of  view  resembling  our  own;  and  yet  the  depend-
ence of  the  individual  on  the  kindred  is  strongly  ex-
pressed. Among  other  races  which  developed  much  more
slowly,  we  find  the  same  idea  of  concentric  circles  of  rela-
tionship more  definitely  connected  with  the  growth  of  the
households.  A  notable  example  appears  among  the  Celts
in  the  Irish  Fine.1  The  principle  of  organization  does
not  merely  estimate  the  degree  of  proximity,  but  leads  to
a  computation  ascending  to  the  heads  of  definite  house-
holds.

The  conclusion  to  be  drawn  from  all  these  examples  is

1  Gelfine — own  household  descendants  of  the  same  father :  brothers,
nephews,  sons,  grandsons.

Derbfine — certain  kin:  descendants  of  the  same  grandfathers:  un-
cles, first  cousins,  first  cousins'  sons.

larfine — further kin: descendants of great-grandfathers: great-
uncles,  second  cousins  and  their  sons.

Indfine — end  of  kin:  fourth  degree — third  cousins.

Derbfine  larfine Indfine
Certain Subsequent  Final

3rd  degree

son  of son  of  son  of

1st  2nd  3rd

cousin cousin  cousin

2nd  degree


Gelfine

4th 3rd 2nd 1st
degree,  degree, degree,  degree,
great-
great- great-
grand-  grand-
son son


father


1st 2nd
cousin cousin
Mac
brathar
athar

1st  degree
paternal  grand-
uncle uncle
Brathir
athar

grand- great-
father grand-
father
Sen- Sen-sen-
athair athair

3rd
cousin

great-
grand-
uncle

gg-grand
father

grand-
son son
Indua larmfia  tfa Mac Athair

D6mi,  outsiders  to  the  family,  form  a  fifth  class.
See  ABBOIS  DE  JUBAINVILLE,  La  famille  celtique,  p.  18.
2231  T


306


TRIBAL  LAW:  PART  III: CLAN  AND  TRIBE


Distinc-
tion  be-
tween
kindred
and  clan.


that  even  in  cases  when  the  blood  tie  is  recognized,  rela-
tions are  organized  according  to  households,  so  that  cog-
natism  appears  as  the  result  of  an  alliance  between  patri-
archally  organized  families.  This  is  the  essence  of  the
stirpes  or  parentelce,  as  they  were  called  in  mediaeval  times.
The  stirps  consisted  of  descendants  of  one  particular  house-
hold: it  could  be  the  house  of  the  father  or  mother,1  but
it  could  also  be  the  house  of  an  uncle,  as  the  representative
of  a  connection  through  the  grandfather,  or  that  of  a  great-
uncle — the  descendant  of  a  great-grandfather.

In  its  wider  extension  relationship  becomes  kinship.
When  organized  into  a  group,  it  acts  as  a  union  for  the
purposes  of  self-defence  and  other  vital  social  requirements.
Let  us  notice  the  material  distinction  between  a  kindred
and  a  clan.  The  latter  embraces  only  agnatic  relations :  it
is  based  on  the  idea  of  the  ever-expanding  household,  and
agnation  is  the  fundamental  principle  which  creates  and
maintains  it.2  In  the  kindred,  on  the  other  hand,  cog-
nation is  admitted  as  a  concurrent  conception.  But  while
it  is  both  useful  and  necessary  to  observe  these  differences
in  terminology,  which  express  very  different  notions  and
give  rise  to  very  different  kinds  of  rights,  it  is  not  to  be
supposed  that  because  clans  come  into  existence,  the  kin-
dred in  the  wider  sense  becomes  impossible,  or  vice  versa.
It  is  necessary  to  emphasize  this  fact,  because  the  contrast  of
the  two  principles  has  given  rise  to  some  misconceptions  in
the  treatment  of  the  subject.  After  studying  social  forma-
tions merely  from  the  point  of  view  of  the  clan,  and  realiz-
ing the  fundamental  difference  between  the  principles  of
clan  and  kindred,  many  writers  have  supposed  that  the
two  things  are  to  some  extent  mutually  exclusive.  Fustel
de  Coulanges,  for  instance,  entirely  disregards  cognatic
ties  in  the  construction  of  the  Roman  and  Greek  family.
On  the  other  hand,  even  so  authoritative  a  historian  as


1  The  alliance  between  the  household  of  the  father  and  that  of
the  mother  ia  clearly  expressed  in  Old  Norwegian  Law,  as  fadherm
and  modherrt/i.  See  VINOQBADOFF,  Z.  fur  Social-  und  Wirtschafts-
geschichte,  V.

2GAIUS,  III,  17.


VIII:  THE  ORGANIZATION  OF  KINSHIP  3Q7

Maitland  declared  that  as  soon  as  men  recognize  the  wide
circle  of  cognatic  relationship,  we  had  better  cease  to  speak
of  clans.1  In  reality  it  is  erroneous  to  make  the  terms
mutually  exclusive  in  this  rigid  manner ;  for  on  examining
the  evidence  we  find  that  in  innumerable  cases  the  two
formations  overlap,  as  it  were,  and  combine  in  all  kinds  of
compromises  suggested  by  utility.  In  many  cases,  though
we  find  a  very  pronounced  recognition  of  the  clan  prin-
ciple, another  powerful  influence  is  also  asserting  itself:
the  necessity  for  alliances  in  self-defence  makes  it  desirable
to  call  in  other  clans  or  kindreds  into  association  with  the
principal  group.2  In  this  way  around  a  kernel  of  agnatic
relationship  supplementary  cognatic  alliances  are  formed.
On  the  other  hand,  it  is  easy  to  realize  that  in  course  of
time,  as  the  individual  becomes  more  and  more  emancipated
and  the  State  grows  stronger,  the  strict  principle  of  clan
organization  begins  to  fade.  In  proportion  as  it  declines,
individual  relationship  takes  the  place  of  the  household
bond.  It  is  along  such  lines  of  transition  that  the  history
of  social  institutions  is  found  to  proceed.

Let  us  look  at  the  clan  as  the  more  consistent  manifesta-  The  clan
tion  of  agnatic  kinship.  All  the  members  of  the  clan  traced  tion.
their  pedigree  from  one  original  household  and  all  regarded
themselves  as  having  a  share  by  right  in  the  territory  held
by  the  collective  body  of  the  clan.  Thus  there  is  a  lively
personal  consciousness  of  the  principle  of  combination
between  representatives  of  all  kinds  of  social  grades  and
occupations.  The  intensity  of  the  feeling  for  the  clan  was
best  shown  when  attempts  were  made  to  disband  this  kind
of  organization.  Scott  provides  us  in  Rob  Roy  with  a  vivid
account  of  the  circumstances  under  which  the  clan
McGregor  was  outlawed  and  subjected  to  protracted  per-
secution.

What  were  the  leading  features  in  the  normal  organiza-
tion and  management  of  a  clan?  They  have  been  made
familiar  to  us  in  literary  form  by  Walter  Scott.  In  some
of  his  descriptions  of  Scotch  life  he  has  provided  remark-

1  History  of  English  Law,  II,  p.  242 (2nd  ed.)  ;  cf.  Miss  PHILL-
POTTS,  Kindred  and  Clan.

2  VINOGBADOFF,  Growth  of  the  Manor,  p.  11. Cf.  ARBOIS  DE  JUBAIN-
VILLE,  Revue  Celtique,  1902, pp. 358  ff.


308  TRIBAL  LAW:  PART  III: CLAN  AND  TRIBE

able  pictures  of  these  arrangements,  and  his  account  is
highly  valuable  not  only  for  its  intrinsic  vigour  and  in-
terest, but  for  the  accuracy  of  the  information  it  contains.
In  Waverley,  for  example,  he  gives  us  a  picture  of  the
clan  of  Fergus  Maclvor,  in  1745,  and  it  should  be  remem-
bered that  this  is  not  merely  an  imaginative  description,
but  one  which  would  have  applied  with  perfect  appro-
priateness to  any  of  the  great  clans  of  Scottish  history —
the  MacDonalds,  Gordons,  Mackintoshs,  etc.  In  Chapter
XX  we  are  told  that  during  the  rising  of  1745  a  chieftain
invited  an  English  officer  to  a  banquet.  At  the  head  of  the
table  sat  the  chief  and  his  visitor;  then  the  elders  of  the
chief's  tribe,  wadsetters  and  tacksmen,  as  they  were  called,
who  occupied  portions  of  the  estates  as  mortgagers  or
lessees,  sat  next  in  rank;  lower  down  their  sons  and
nephews  and  foster-brothers;  then  the  officers  of  the  chief's
household,  according  to  their  order,  and,  lowest  of  all,  the
tenants  who  actually  cultivated  the  land.  Outside  this
group — on  the  green — was  a  multitude  of  Highlanders  of
a  yet  inferior  description,  who  nevertheless  were  entitled
to  take  part  in  the  meal.  "  These  stout  idle  kinsmen  of
mine, ' '  explained  the  chieftain,  ' '  account  my  estate  as  held
in  trust  for  their  support,  and  I  must  find  them  beef  and
ale,  while  the  rogues  do  nothing  but  practise  the  broad
sword,  or  wander  about  the  hills  shooting,  fishing,
hunting,  drinking  and  making  love  to  the  lasses  of  the
strath."

wh1  h  ^e  neec*  n°t  dwell  further  on  these  expressions  of  cor-

cian.  porate  life,  for  their  meaning  is  fairly  well  realized  in  Eng-

land. Let  us  consider  in  greater  detail  the  internal  organi-
zation of  these  social  unions.  No  better  evidence  can  be
adduced  for  this  purpose  than  that  of  Welsh  documents.
The  strong  ties  of  the  wyrion  or  kindred  are  produced  by
the  actual  growth  of  households  through  many  generations.
In  the  Denbigh  Extent,  the  Black  Book  of  St.  David's,  the
Record  of  Carnarvon,  and  similar  documents,  we  can  watch
the  progress  of  the  clan  organization  from  stage  to  stage.
Let  us  take  one  simple  and  characteristic  example  of  a
Welsh  clan-unit.  It  is  the  lectum  or  stock  of  a  certain  Rand


VIII:  THE  ORGANIZATION  OF  KINSHIP  3Q9

Vaghan  ap  Asser.1 Its  beginnings  may  be  tabulated  as
follows :

(Progenies) Band  Vaghan  ap  Asser


(Wele  or  lecta) Ruathlon Idenerth Daniel Kewret


(Gavells) Guyon Bleth' Kewret Madok


(Holders) Ken' (Lewelyn)


I  I

lor' Ken'

Such  groups  often  represent  something  like  sixty  persons,
counting  only  males.  There  is  a  definitely  organized  system
of  defence  which  includes  the  male  members  of  the  clan
down  to  the  seventh  degree.  The  clan  was  by  no  means  an
amorphous  and  ill-organized  mass.  It  is  governed  by
certain  strict  rules  of  relationship,  which  form  two  inner
circles:  a  narrower,  limited  to  second  cousins  or  to  the
fourth  generation,  and  a  wider  which  stretches  to  the
seventh  and  to  the  ninth  generation.2

The  first  and  most  obvious  purpose  of  the  clan  organiza- The
tion  is  to  provide  an  adequate  defence  for  its  members, feud.
This  necessity  expresses  itself  in  the  blood-feud,  one  of  the
most  primordial  institutions  of  society:  it  represents  the
vengeance  taken  by  the  body  of  kinsmen  for  a  wrong  in-
flicted on  one  of  their  number. Though  its  origin  goes  very
far  back  in  history,  it  is  not  confined  merely  to  primitive
communities:  we  can  find  notable  examples  of  it  in  com-
paratively late  society. For  instance,  this  is  how  Domesday
Book  (I,  179)  describes  its  occurrence  in  a  Welsh  district.

1  Survey  of  the  Honour  of  Denbigh,  ed.  by  P.  VINOGBADOFP  and  F.
MORGAN,  p.  xxx.

2  SEEBOHM,  The  Tribal  System  in  Wales,  2nd  ed.,  pp.  76  ff.


310  TRIBAL  LAW:  PART  III:  CLAN  AND  TRIBE

"  If  a  Welshman  slays  another,  the  relations  of  the  de-
ceased assemble  and  harry  the  slayer  and  his  relatives,  and
set  their  houses  on  fire  until  the  corpse  of  the  dead  man  is
buried  the  next  day  about  noon.  Of  the  loot  the  king
recovers  one-third  and  they  get  the  rest  in  peace."  Cer-
tain police  considerations  are  beginning  to  assert  them-
selves as  regards  the  exercise  of  natural  right,  but  they  cul-
minate in  a  claim  to  a  third  of  the  booty  and  a  limitation
of  the  harrying  in  point  of  time.

composi-  The  blood-feud  generally  resolves  into  a  system  of  com-

position or  material  compensation  for  the  injury  inflicted.
It  is  easy  to  understand  that  in  primitive  societies,  when  a
wrong  done  to  a  single  individual  might  lead  to  retribu-
tion by  a  whole  group  of  kindred,  there  was  a  constant
danger  of  private  war,  which  would  be  exceedingly  in-
jurious to  society  at  large  unless  checked  by  arbitration.
The  incipient  State  did  all  it  could  to  render  conciliation
acceptable  to  individual  disputants,  and  it  did  not  always
have  a  very  easy  task.  The  desire  for  personal  vengeance
was  very  strong :  and  we  must  not  suppose  that  because  at
a  very  early  stage  we  find  elaborate  tariffs  of  payments  for
various  wrongs,  the  principle  of  reconciliation  was  estab-
lished beyond  cavil.1  The  practice  is  described  in  a  graphic
manner  by  Miklosich  as  regards  Southern  Slavs : 2

"The  humiliating  position  which  the  guilty  person  as-
sumes in  the  presence  of  the  injured  party,  and  which
is  indeed  the  main  feature  of  the  ceremony,  is  supposed
to  tame  the  savage  mood  of  the  avenger  and  to  incline  him
to  forgiveness.  The  same  object  is  thought  to  be  achieved
by  the  bringing  forward  of  innocent  and  helpless  infants.
The  kerchiefs,  mouchoirs,  which  Vialla  describes  as  lying

1  See TACITUS, Germcmia, xxi : "  Suscipere  tarn inimicitias seu
patris  seu  propinqui  quam  amicitias  necesse  est. Nee  implacabiles
durant, luitur enim etiam homicidium certo armentorum aut
pecorum  numero." — "  It  is  as  necessary  to  share  the  quarrels  of  a
father or a relative as to share his friendships. Such quarrels
admit, however,  of  reconciliation: even  homicide  is  atoned  for  by
a certain number of beasts of burden or heads of cattle." Cf.
Servius  in  Virg.  Eel.  IV,  43 : "  Si  quis imprudens  hominem  occi-
disset  pro  capite  occisi  agnatis  eius  oflFert  arietem."

2  MIKLOSICH, Die  Blutrache lei  den  Slaven. Denkschriften der
Kaiserlichen Akademie der Wissenschaften, Philosophisch-Histo-
rische  Classe,.  Vienna  (1888),  XXXVI,  p.  202.


VIII:  THE  ORGANIZATION  OF  KINSHIP  3H

in  the  cradles  of  these  infants,  are  presents,  the  acceptance
of  which  is  the  first  indication  that  the  injured  party  is
willing  to  forgive.  It  is  probable,  however,  that  this  inter-
pretation rests  on  a  misunderstanding,  for  according  to
J.  G.  Kohl,  I,  432,  each  of  the  children  is  presented  with  a
little  cloth  by  the  injured  man  as  being  his  god-child.  The
murderous  weapon  hanging  round  the  neck  of  the  guilty
person  denotes  that  he  is  entirely  in  the  power  of  the  in-
jured person.  Vialla  and  Kohl,  I,  434,  state  that  the
weapon  is  deliberately  broken.  The  associations  of  god-
parents and  of  chosen  brothers  are  intended  to  confirm  the
friendship  of  the  tribes.  The  presence  of  many  members
of  both  tribes  gives  the  act  of  atonement  the  necessary  pub-
licity. The  part  played  by  the  priest  in  the  transaction  in
no  way  transforms  it  into  a  religious  or  ecclesiastical  cere-
mony ;  his  presence  is  to  be  explained  sufficiently  by  the  fact
that  the  assembly  needs  the  aid  of  some  one  able  to  write.
So  much  for  the  rites  of  atonement  in  Montenegro  and  the
neighbouring  territories.

The  corresponding  ceremony  among  the  Albanians  so
closely  resembles  that  usual  among  the  Montenegrins  that
an  influence  must  undoubtedly  have  been  exercised  by  one
nation  over  the  other.  The  fact  that  the  Montenegrin  cere-
mony differs  in  certain  respects  from  that  of  other  Slav
nations,  and  that  it  is  precisely  in  these  respects  that  it
coincides  with  the  Albanian  rites,  would  lead  one  to  suppose
that  the  influence  came  from  the  Albanians.  Moreover,
the  Albanian  act  seems  clearer.  The  priest  adjures  the
injured  person  in  the  name  of  the  Cross,  the  Book,  and
the  innocent  Blood,  v.  Hahn,  on  p.  206,  calls  attention  in
this  connection  to  Justinus  VII,  2 :  Illyrii  infantiam  regis
pupilli  contemnentes  bello  Macedonas  aggrediuntur :  qui
proelio  pulsi,  rege  suo  in  cunis  prolato  et  pone  aciem
posito,  acrius  certamen  repetivere,  tamquam  ideo  victi
fuissent  antea,  quod  bellantibus  sibi  regis  sui  auspicia  de-
fuissent,  futuri  vel  propterea  victores,  quod  ex  superstitione
animum  vicendi  ceperant,  simul  et  miseratio  eos  infantis
tenebat."

In  many  cases  there  were  among  the  people  a  strong
feeling  against  "  composition "  and  a  marked  reluctance  to


312  TRIBAL  LAW:  PART  III:  CLAN  AND  TRIBE

adopt  it  in  practice.  As  an  example  of  the  disgust  with
which  compensation  was  often  regarded,  we  may  take  the
famous  story  of  the  cursed  treasure  as  told  in  the  Edda  and
in  Germanic  Sagas.

Three  gods,  Odin,  Hoenir  and  Loki,  start  on  one  of  their
usual  wanderings  round  the  world,  and  put  up  at  the  house
of  a  certain  Hreidmar.  They  sleep  there,  and  in  the
morning  go  out  to  the  stream  which  runs  by  the  house  and
see  an  otter  catching  fish  in  the  stream.  They  kill  it,  but
it  turns  out  to  be  the  son  of  the  owner  of  the  house  who
had  taken  that  shape  for  the  purpose  of  fishing.  The
surviving  kinsmen  ought  to  take  revenge,  but  prefer  to
accept  gold  as  compensation.  This  gold  is  obtained  from
a  dwarf,  Andvari,  who  curses  any  one  into  whose  posses-
sion his  treasure,  and  especially  a  magic  ring  of  his,  may
come.1

Evidently  the  practice  of  taking  gold  in  compensation
for  blood  was  repulsive  to  the  primitive  mind.  At  the
same  time,  there  is  the  testimony  of  whole  systems  of  law
to  show  that  the  composition  for  injuries  came  to  be  treated
in  a  perfectly  business-like  fashion  and  that  individuals  and
wrongs  to  individuals  were  actually  paid  for  in  carefully
estimated  sums  of  cash.  Let  me  quote  an  interesting  frag-
ment from  the  Anglo-Saxon  laws.2

(1)  Twelfhyndes mannes The  wergeld  of  a  1200-
wer  is  twelf  hund  scyl- man  is  twelve  hundred
linga.  shillings.

(1,1) Twyhyndes  mannes  wer The  wergeld  of  a  200-
is  twa  hund  scill'.  man is two hundred

shillings.

(2)  Gif man ofslsegen  If  a  man  is  slain,  let  the
weordhe, gylde hine  measure of compensa-
man swa he geboren  tion  be  according  to  his
sy.  birth.

1  Corpus  Poeticum  Boreale,  I,  pp.  33,  156;  MULLENHOF,  Deutsche
Altertumskunde,  V,  pp.  361  ff.

2  Die  Gesetze  der  Angelsachsen,  ed.  by  LIEBERMANN,  I,  p.  392. The
O.E  \>  has  been  rendered  by  th  and  ft  by  dh.


VIII:  THE  ORGANIZATION  OF  KINSHIP


313


(3)  And  riht  is,  dhaet  se
slaga,  sidhdhan  he  weres
beweddod  haebbe,  finde
dhaerto  waerborh,  be  tham
dhe  dhaerto  gebyrige :
dhaet  is  aet  twelfhyndum
were  gebyriadh  twelf
men  to  werborge,  VIII
faederenmaegdhe  and  IIII
medrenmaegdhe.


(4)  Dhonne  thaet  gedon  sy,
dhonne  raere  man  cyn-
inges  munde,  dhaet  is
dhaet  hy  ealle  gemaenum
handum  of  aegdhere
maegdhe  on  anum  waepne
dham  semende  syllan,
dhaet  cyninges  mund
stande.


(4,  1)  Of  dham  daege  on  XXI
nihtan  gylde  man  CXX
scill'  to  healsfange  aet
twelfhyndum  were.


(5)  Healsfang gebyredh
bearnum,  brodhrum  and
faederan ; ne gebyredh
nanum  maege  dhaet  feodh

. bute  dham  dhe  sy
binnan  cneowe.

(6)  Of  dham  daege,  dhe  dhset
healsfang  agolden  sy,  on
XXI  nihtan  gylde  man


And  it  is  right  that  the
slayer,  when  he  has
given  a  gage  as  to  the
wergeld,  should  also  find
the  pledges  required  by
it:  that  is,  for  the  wer-
geld of  a  1200-man
twelve  men  shall  be
pledges,  eight  from  the
father's  line  and  four
from  the  mother's  line.

When  that  has  been
done,  let  the  king's
peace  be  established  be-
tween them:  that  is,  let
them  all  of  both  lines  of
descent  give  sign  by
joining  hands  upon  one
weapon  before  an  arbi-
trator that  the  king's
peace  is  established.

For  twenty-one  nights
after  that  day  let  there
be  a  payment  of  120
shillings  as  a  Halsfang
from  the  wergeld  of  a
1200-man.

Halsfang  falls  to  chil-
dren, brothers  and
father's  brothers:  and
that  payment  falls  to  no
other  kin  save  those  who
are  "within  the  knee."

For  21  nights  from  the
day  when  the  Halsfang
has  been  paid,  let  the


314


TRIBAL  LAW:  PART  III: CLAN  AND  TRIBE


dha  manbote;  dhaas  on
XXI  nihtan  dhaet  fyhte-
wite;  dhaes  on  XXI
nihtan  dhaes  weres  dhaet
f  rumgyld ;  and  swa
fordh  thaet  fulgolden  sy
on  dham  fyrste,  dhe
witan  geraeden.


manbot  be  paid:  then
for  21  nights  the  fyhte-
wite  (id  est  forisfactura
pugne)  ;  then  for  21
nights  the  frumgild  (id
est  prima  redditio)  of
the  same  wergeld;  and
so  forth  until  full  pay-
ment shall  be  made  up
to  the  time  decreed  by
the  witan.


(6,  1)  Sidhdhan  man  mot  mid
lufe  ofgan,  gif  man
hwile  .  .  .  fulle  freon-
draadne  habban.


Thereafter  the  slayer
may  abide  in  love,  if  he
desire  to  have  full  fel-
lowship with  his  friends.


(7)  Eal  man  sceal  aet  cyr-
liscum  were  be  thaere
maadhe  don,  dhe  him  to
gebyredh,  swa  we  be
twelfhyndum  tealdan.


The  same  things  shall  be
observed  touching  the
wergeld  of  a  ceorl,  ac-
cording to  the  sum
that  befits  him,  even  as
we  have  written  con-
cerning a  1200-man.


There  are  two  points  to  be  particularly  noted:  (i)  the
marked  preponderance  of  the  agnatic  element,  the  influence
of  the  male  relations  of  the  father.  These  kinsmen  claimed
two-thirds  of  the  compensation  of  the  frumgild  portion  of
the  magbot,  and  also  stand  security  for  the  payment  of
two-thirds.  They  are  therefore  assumed  to  be  interested  in
the  affair  twice  as  strongly  as  the  kin  on  the  mother's
side,  (ii)  The  nearest  relatives  of  the  deceased  come  in
only  for  a  share,  and  not  a  very  large  share,  of  the  com-
pensation: they  take  altogether  one-tenth,  the  Halsfang,
and  possibly  some  portion  of  the  frumgild.  Two-tenths  go
to  the  lord  and  the  king,  while  the  kindred  at  large  take
no  less  than  seven-tenths,  although,  probably,  the  closer
circle  of  relations  shared  in  this  portion.  If  so,  its  members


VIII:  THE  ORGANIZATION  OF  KINSHIP  315

would  take  only  as  members  of  the  general  body  of  the
kindred.

An  interesting  situation  created  by  the  conflict  between  ice-
traditions  of  kinship  organization  and  settlement  on  indi-  law.
vidualistic  lines  is  presented  by  Icelandic  law.  Their  col-
lection —  the  Grdgds  (I1*,  pp.  193,  ff.)  makes  a  most  elabo-
rate statement  as  to  the  shares  of  wergeld  (nid-gjold)  to
be  received  and  paid  by  relatives  of  various  degrees  in
case  of  manslaughter,  when  the  slayer  has  been  outlawed
and  has  left  the  country.  The  payments  are  arranged  in
three  sections,  of  which  the  first  —  to  near  relations  —  is
particularly  called  baugar,  in  accordance  with  Norwegian
terminology  ;  but  the  general  heading  of  the  chapter  treat-
ing of  this  subject,  baugatal,  and  the  mention  of  all  the
baugar  in  the  sequel,  indicates  that  all  the  fractions  of
the  wergeld  of  120  ore  enumerated  in  it  were  baugar  in
a  wider  sense.  The  limit  of  kinship  is  drawn  in  this  state-
ment at  the  degree  of  fourth  cousins  (thridhia  brodhra  ens
vegna).1  This  is  not  an  isolated  calculation  of  relation-
ship. Icelandic  ''poor  law"  builds  up  its  system  of  assist-
ance to  destitute  people  on  a  combination  between  income
and  relationship,  and  the  latter  is  limited  in  the  same  way
as  in  baugatal,  namely,  by  the  degree  of  fourth  cousins
(Grdgds,  Ib,  pp.  3  and  26).  2  This  establishes  the  fact  that
we  have  to  deal  with  actual  conditions,  and  not  with  mere
reminiscences  of  Norwegian  custom.  In  the  twelfth  cen-
tury, at  any  rate,  kindreds  had  grown  into  sufficiently  ex-
tensive and  ramified  groups  to  admit  of  a  reckoning  of
rights  and  duties  stretching  to  the  degree  of  fourth  cousins,
issued  in  the  direct  line  from  a  common  ancestor  who  may
have  lived  some  150  years  before.  The  tracing  of  descent
from  an  atavus  (great-great-great-grandfather)  was  a  pos-
sible contingency,  even  if  the  original  settlers  of  the  Latid-
nama  are  to  be  considered  as  single  individuals  :  although
in  many  cases  brothers  and  cousins  of  various  degrees  had
migrated  together.  However  this  may  be,  emigrants  from
a  country  where  kinship  was  as  strongly  developed  as  it
was  in  Norway,  kept  up  the  conception,  and  it  naturally


Mandlige  sloegtninge  i  femte  led.
2  See  cap.  143,  which  treats  of  the  obligations  of  fourth  cousins,
and  is  ascribed  to  Gudmund,  logsogumadhr,  in  the  years  1123-24.


316  TRIBAL  LAW:  PART  III:  CLAN  AND  TRIBE

gave  rise  to  a  new  crop  of  rules  based  on  relationship
in  the  new  home.1  I  have  to  insist  on  these  points  of  de-
tail in  order  to  guard  against  the  extreme  view  that
baugatal  is  unreal,  and  could  not  possibly  be  applied  in
practice  in  Iceland.  It  presents,  of  course,  a  kind  of  dia-
gram or  scheme,  which  covers  all  sorts  of  possible  ramifica-
tions, and  for  this  very  reason  must  have  been  constantly
modified  in  practice.  But  it  would  be  rather  reckless  to
reject  such  a  deliberate  statement  of  legal  custom,  which,
besides,  is  entirely  in  agreement  with  similar  rules  in  all
varieties  of  barbaric  law,  and  with  statements  in  other  parts
of  the  Gragas.  The  fact  that  the  Sagas  do  not  allude  in
detail  to  the  repartition  of  payment  between  the  members
of  kindreds  can  certainly  not  invalidate  the  definite  state-
ment of  the  law-book:  such  minute  questions  did  not  in-
terest the  storytellers  or  their  public,  while  the  fact  that
those  who  helped  in  the  feud  were  rewarded  by  shares  in
fines  is  not  infrequently  noticed  in  the  Sagas.2  As  we
know  of  many  instances  of  increased  payments  (e.g.  triple
wergelds  in  Njala),  we  have  to  bear  in  mind  that  the
official  standards  of  payment  and  distribution  were  supple-
mented in  many  cases  by  voluntary  agreements  in  which
both  the  amount  and  the  repartition  must  have  greatly
varied.

One  problem  remains,  however:  how  is  the  statement  of
the  baugatal  to  be  reconciled  or  combined  with  the  di-
rections of  the  chapter  immediately  preceding  it — the
vigslodi  (consequences  of  homicide)  of  the  Gragas?  The
fine  mentioned  in  the  chapter  is,  however,  specifically  dis-
tinguished from  the  baugar  and  the  supplementary  pay-
ments of  the  nidgjold.  It  is  a  uniform  fine  of  48  ore,
called  Rettr,  and  is  payable  in  cases  of  manslaughter,  rape,
wounding  and  assault.3  For  its  application  in  cases  of
homicide  we  get  a  definite  formula  in  the  Stadharhdlsbok
version  of  the  Law.4  The  accuser  claims,  besides,  the

1  Miss  PHILLPOTTS (Kindred  and  Clan) thinks  that  the  insular
situation  of  Iceland — and  of  England, too — prevented  the  develop-
ment of  relationship  on  agnatic  lines; but  what  of  the  Scots,  the
Welsh  and  the  Irish?

2  For  example,  in  Valaljotssaga  and  in  the  Njala.

3  Grdgds,  Ia,  p.  150.

4  Grdgds,  II,  p.  359.


VIII:  THE  ORGANIZATION  OF  KINSHIP  317

property  of  the  slayer.  This  procedure  takes  place  only  in
cases  of  outlawry,1  but  outlawry  is  the  starting-point  for
the  application  of  all  vigslodi  rules.  They  are  intended  to
regulate  the  claim  of  the  nearest  heir  of  the  deceased,  and
are  independent  of  the  actual  prosecution  of  the  feud  or
suit,2  as  well  as  of  the  nidgjold.  This  fact  in  itself  shows
that  we  have  to  deal  here  with  personal  rights  not  covered
by  feud  and  composition.  For  this  reason  women  take
shares  according  to  vigslodi,  while  they  are  excluded  in
baugatal.

On  the  whole,  there  can  be  no  doubt  that,  although  Ice-
landic conditions  favoured  scattered  settlements  and  indi-
vidualistic enterprise,  the  support  of  kinsmen  was  one  of
the  most  effective  means  of  protection  against  aggression
and  violence.  There  are  no  traces  of  a  clan  system,  but
the  Scandinavian  kindred,  the  aet,  is  in  full  vigour,  and
its  influence  increases  as  generations  follow  one  another
in  wider  ramifications.  The  thridhia  brodhra  (fourth
cousins)  cannot  be  considered  as  a  necessary  element  of
every  kindred,  but  their  mention  remains  characteristic,
even  though  it  only  marks  a  possible  and  occasional  limit.

By  a  remarkable  coincidence  the  same  features  are  to  be
observed  in  the  social  organization  of  Celtic  peoples.  With
the  Celts  of  North  Wales,  the  kin  was  organized  much  more
stringently  than  among  the  Anglo-Saxons  or  Scandi-
navians. It  was  in  fact  a  clan,  but  the  fundamental  pro-
visions concerning  the  payment  of  composition  are  the
same.  The  system  observed  among  these  Celtic  tribes  is
recorded,  for  instance,  in  the  version  of  the  Venedotian
Code ;  it  estimates  the  shares  of  agnatic  relations,  or
rather  of  the  father's  kindred,  at  twice  as  much  as  those
of  the  mother's.

The  first  third  (of  the  gdanas)  falls  on  the  murderer,
and  the  mother  and  father  and  brothers  and  sisters  with
him,  for  those  persons  would  receive  with  him  a  third  of  the

1  Miss  PHILLPOTTS,  Kindred  and  Clem,  p.  41.

2  Botr  allar  om  vigsaear  ligo  arftaco  menn  hvart sem  theirero
kazlar  edha  konor  hvergi  er  sb'c  socir  edha  huergi  adhile  er. (Who-
soever institutes  the  suit  or  is  leader.) Gr.  Ia,  171. It  is  improbable
that  this  sentence  should  be  referred  exclusively  to  the  time  before  the
rule  of  944  which  forbade  women  to  prosecute  in  slaying  suits.


318


TRIBAL  LAW:  PART  III: CLAN  AND  TRIBE


Renuncia-
tion  of
kindred.


Compurga-
tion.


galanas  if  paid  to  them,  therefore  let  them  pay  so  with
him  .  .  .  (one-third  of  it  on  the  mother  and  father,  one-
third  on  brothers  and  sisters,  and  one-third  on  the  mur-
derer .  .  .  males  paying  two  parts  and  females  one).

The  remaining  two-thirds  fall  on  the  kindred  (two  parts
of  it  on  the  kindred  of  the  father  and  one  part  on  the
kindred  of  the  mother).1

this  purpose  is confined  within


The kindred for
seventh  generation :


the


1.

Brother

=braut.

2.

1st  cousin

=keuenderu.

3.

2nd  cousin

=keuerderu.

4.

3rd  cousin

=keyuyn.

5.

4th  cousin

=gorcheyuen.

6.

5th  cousin

—  gorchau.

7.

Son  of  5th

cousin=mab  gorchau.

Feud  and  composition  are  by  no  means  the  only  expres-
sion of  kindred  solidarity  in  ancient  law.  Some  notion  as  to
the  extent  of  mutual  support  may  be  gathered  for  instance
from  a  passage  from  the  law  of  the  Salian  Franks  (c.  60)
which  deals  with  the  case  of  a  man  who  has  renounced  his
kindred — a  case  which  may  have  occurred  frequently,  for  it
is  easy  to  understand  that,  as  individualistic  conceptions
began  to  assert  themselves,  a  man  might  not  wish  to  make
himself  responsible  for  the  deeds  of  his  kindred,  and,
vice  versa,  the  kindred  might  not  desire  the  presence  among
its  members  of  particularly  untrustworthy  individuals.
The  ceremony  of  renunciation  took  the  symbolic  form  of
breaking  sticks  over  the  head  of  the  man  who  quitted
the  kindred  (qwi  se  de  parentela  toller e  vult).2  He  re-
nounced his  claims  to  inheritance  and  oath-help,  and  all
other  forms  of  solidarity  with  the  kindred.  After  this
renunciation  by  him,  his  former  kinsmen  could  not  claim
either  inheritance  or  composition  in  respect  of  this  person.

In  this  ceremony  one  of  the  most  important  features  is
the  renunciation  of  oath-help.  This  was  a  most  funda-
mental institution  of  tribal  communities.  We  have  seen

1  SEEBOHM,  Tribal  Systems  in  Wales,  2nd  ed.,  pp.  101  ff. Cf.  79  f.

2  Lex  Salica,  LX.


VIII:  THE  ORGANIZATION  OF  KINSHIP  319

that  when  disputes  take  the  form  of  an  actual  feud,  the
kindred  support  the  individual  in  the  prosecution  of  his
claim  by  force.  In  the  same  way,  when  the  issue  has  to
be  decided  not  by  violent  means,  but  by  the  award  of  a
regularly  constituted  court,  a  modified  form  of  the  struggle
is  usual:  the  claimant  comes  before  the  tribunal  sur-
rounded by  his  kindred,  who  take  the  responsibility  of  sup-
porting him  very  much  as  in  actual  battle.  They  swear  in
support  of  his  contention.  This  is  the  result  of  the  view
that  collisions  occur  not  between  individuals,  but  between
societies:  and  if  one  member  of  a  kindred  or  clan  has  to
come  forth  as  accuser  or  accused,  he  appears  in  conjunc-
tion with  his  natural  helpers,  and  the  legal  issue  proceeds
on  the  lines  of  assertion  and  compurgation  in  cases  when
there  was  a  reasonable  probability  of  the  assertion  being
true.  On  the  other  hand,  if  appearances  were  strongly
against  a  contention,  the  court  usually  awarded  ordeal.
Much  depended,  of  course,  on  the  manner  in  which  the
burden  of  proof  was  assigned  by  the  tribunal.1

It  is  impossible  here  to  consider  the  practice  of  com-
purgation in  all  its  details:  the  important  point  for  us  to
note  is  that  here  in  court,  as  well  as  on  the  field  of  battle,
kindreds  were  pitted  against  each  other  as  unions.

There  are  a  certain  number  of  other  functions  and  duties  other
which  arise  as  incidental  to  the  main  activities  of  the  kin-  the  kin.
dred  organization.  We  find,  for  example,  that  the  kin
assume  responsibility  for  the  guardianship  of  minors.  We
are  not  told  exactly  who  the  guardians  were,  nor  on  what
principle  they  were  appointed  to  the  office.  It  is  a  con-
stant disadvantage  of  ancient  evidence  that  it  leaves  us  in
the  dark  as  to  everyday  occurrences,  which  are  supposed  to
be  known  to  everybody  and  therefore  do  not  need  to  be
recorded.  It  seems  clear,  however,  that  in  early  times  the
kin,  besides  providing  individual  guardians,  exercised  the
same  general  functions  of  guardianship  as  are  definitely
assigned  to  the  State  by  later  law.

Again,  as  has  already  been  mentioned,  the  kindred  took
and  gave  securities  in  connection  with  weddings,  and  it  has

i  Die  Oeaetze  der  Angelsachsen,  ed.  LIEBERMANN,  II2  603.


320  TRIBAL  LAW:  PART  III: CLAN  AND  TRIBE

been  noted  how  provision  is  made  that  when  a  woman
passes  to  the  house  of  her  husband,  certain  bonds  are  kept
up  which  ensure  her  remaining  in  touch  with  her  own  kin-
dred (see  above,  p.  211  f.).

In  some  instances  the  kin  undertook  the  maintenance  of
destitute  people.  This  appears,  for  example,  in  Iceland,
where  tribal  arrangements  were  necessarily  individualized,
and  the  tribal  principle  resolved  itself  very  largely  into  a
succession  of  claims  and  duties.1  In  India,  on  the  other
hand,  the  weight  of  supporting  needy  members  was  thrown
on  the  kindreds  as  groups,  and  on  their  natural  sub-
divisons.

i  Grdgds,  Omaga  Mlkr,  P>,  pp.  3  ff.


CHAPTER  IX
LAND  TENURE

SOLIDAKITY  between  the  members  of  a  elan  or  of  a  kin-
dred required  in  the  beginning  a  close  proximity  in  the
occupation  of  the  land  and  constant  economic  co-operation.
The  natural  basis  for  social  relations  of  the  kind  described
above  must  necessarily  be  found  in  the  soil.  We  cannot
therefore  avoid  the  discussion  of  the  vexed  question  of  the
origin  of  landed  property.  It  has  sometimes  been  nar-
rowed to  sceptical  remarks  as  to  the  lack  of  trustworthy
evidence,1  and  to  surmises  as  to  the  essentially  selfish
motives  of  savage  tribesmen,2  or  the  inherent  instinct  of
individual  appropriation.3  It  is  evident,  however,  that  the
problem  has  to  be  approached  in  connection  with  a  general
view  of  social  development  in  tribal  societies.  In  this
matter,  as  in  the  case  of  marriage  or  relationship,  sundry
variations  depend  on  geographical  and  historical  causes,
but  as  the  principle  of  kinship  has  exerted  a  powerful  in-
fluence on  all  forms  of  tribal  union,  it  is  bound  to  mani-
fest itself  conspicuously  in  the  history  of  land  tenure.

We  can  safely  start  from  the  general  proposition  that  in
the  earlier  stages  of  development  hunting,  fishing  and  pas-
toral tribes  do  not  know  of  any  individual  appropriation  of
the  soil  for  permanent  occupation  and  usage.  There  is  no
reason  for  carving  out  private  plots  when  the  whole  system
of  husbandry  is  based  on  roaming  about  wide  tracts  of
land.

Even with  the appearance of agriculture, territorial ance°ofder~
rights  remain  for  some  time  in  the  communities  of  the Waste-

iFusTEL  DE  COULANGES,  Origin  of  Property  in  Land,  transl.  by
M.  ASHLEY  (1891).

2  K.  HILDEBBAND,  Recht  und  Sitte  auf  den  primitiveren  wirtschaft-
lichen  Kulturstufen  ( 1907 ) .

3  POLLOCK  and  MAITLAND,  History  of  English  Law,  II,  p.  942,  and
VINOGRADOFF,  Growth  of  the  Manor,  pp.  18  f.

2231  U

321


322  TRIBAL  LAW: PART  III: CLAN  AND  TRIBE

households,  kindreds  or  clans.  An  organization  of  this
communal  kind  is  to  be  observed  in  a  number  of  hunting
and  pastoral  tribes  practising  agriculture  on  freshly  re-
claimed land  by  the  expedient  of  burning  down  trees  or
grass  on  certain  plots,  and  cultivating  them  for  a  short
time.1

On  the  borders  of  India,  conquering  tribes  have  been
known  to  settle  down  on  large  tracts  of  land  without  allow-
ing them  to  be  converted  into  separate  property  even
among  clans  or  kindreds.  Occasional  or  periodical  redivi-
sions  testified  to  the  effective  overlordship  of  the  tribe,
and  to  the  superficial  character  of  agricultural  husbandry.2

"Take  the  Tousoufzais,  who  are  aboriginals  of  the  coun-
try of  Candahar;  they  did  not  arrive  in  the  country  of
Svat  until  the  end  of  the  fifteenth  century :  they  drove  out,
exterminated,  or  subjugated  the  inhabitants,  Dilazaks  or
Svatis.  Then  their  chief,  the  Sheikh  Mali,  counted  the
population  of  each  tribe  and  divided  the  conquered  terri-
tory proportionately  in  as  many  portions  as  were  drawn  by
lot :  and  by  the  same  method,  the  portion  of  each  tribe  was
subdivided  between  the  different  clans  which  composed  it.

"As  it  was  impossible  to  parcel  out  sections  of  absolutely
equal  value,  the  apportionments  were  redistributed  among
the  clans  at  certain  fixed  periods,  so  that  the  clans  were
constantly  migrating  from  one  district  to  another  within
the  territory  of  the  tribe.  This  custom,  termed  vaicli,  was
still  in  use  among  certain  tribes  in  the  English  territory  at
the  beginning  of  the  British  occupation :  it  was  in  full  force
in  Taghistan."

iCf.  FRAZEB,  Folk-lore  in  the  Old  Testament,  I,  p.  452:  "Perma-
nent occupation  is  essential  to  individual  ownership,  it  is  not
essential  to  communal  or  tribal  ownership.  And  as  in  human
history  the  nomadic  life  of  the  hunter,  the  herdsman  and  the  migra-
tory husbandman  precedes  the  settled  life  of  the  farmer  under  the
more  advanced  systems  of  tillage,  it  seems  to  follow  that  individual
ownership  of  land  has  been  developed  later  than  communal  or
tribal  ownership,  and  that  it  cannot  be  recognized  by  law  until  the
ground  is  under  permanent  cultivation.  In  short,  common  lands
are  older  than  private  lands,  and  the  transition  from  communal  to
private  ownership  of  the  soil  is  associated  with  a  greatly  improved
mode  of  tillage,  which  in  its  turn,  like  all  economic  improvements,
contributes  powerfully  to  the  general  advance  of  society."

-'  DARMESTETER,  Lettres  sur  I'lnde:  a  la  frontiere  afghwne  (1888),
p.  87.


IX:  LAND  TENURE  323

Let  us  now  turn  to  the  evidence  of  the  influence  of  the
arrangement  by  household,  kin  and  clan  on  landed  pro- Communities
perty in  the  case  of  the  various Aryan  nations. The
ancient  law  and  modern  custom  of  the  Aryan  tribes  in
India  provides  evidence  on  this  point.

1  'The  great  mass  of  the  landed  property  in  the  Punjab
is  held  by  small  proprietors,  who  cultivate  their  own  land
in  whole  or  in  part.

"The  chief  characteristic  of  the  tenure  generally  is  that
these  proprietors  are  associated  together  in  village  com-
munities having  to  a  greater  or  less  extent  joint  interests,
and  under  our  system  of  cash  payments  limited  so  as  to
secure  a  certain  profit  to  the  proprietors,  jointly  respon-
sible for  the  payment  of  the  revenue  assessed  upon  the
village  lands.  It  is  an  almost  invariable  incident  of  the
tenure  that  if  any  of  the  proprietors  wishes  to  sell  his
rights  or  is  obliged  to  part  with  them  in  order  to  satisfy
demands  upon  him,  the  other  members  of  the  same  com-
munity have  a  preferential  right  to  purchase  them  at  the
same  price  as  could  be  obtained  from  outsiders.

"In  some  cases  (technically  known  as  zamindari  tenures)
all  the  proprietors  have  an  undivided  interest  in  all  the
land  belonging  to  the  proprietary  community.  Their  rights
are  regulated  by  their  shares  in  the  estate  both  as  regards
the  extent  of  the  holdings  they  are  entitled  to  cultivate,  and
as  regards  the  distribution  of  profits ;  and  if  the  profits  from
land  held  by  non-proprietary  cultivators  are  not  sufficient
to  pay  the  revenue  and  other  charges,  the  balance  would
ordinarily  be  collected  from  the  proprietors  according  to
the  same  shares.

"It  is,  however,  much  more  common  for  the  proprietors
to  have  their  own  separate  holdings  in  the  estate,  and  this
separation  may  extend  so  far  that  there  is  no  land  sus-
ceptible of  separate  appropriation  which  is  not  the  sepa-
rate property  of  an  individual  or  family. ' ' *

Of  course,  a  great  deal  depends  on  the  character  of  the
settlement.  When,  as  in  the  case  of  the  Norwegians  in

i  TUPPEB,  Punjab  Customary  Law,  III,  p.  129,  quoting  Punjab  Ad-
ministrative Report  of  1812-3.


324  TRIBAL  LAW:  PART  III:  CLAN  AND  TRIBE

Iceland,  a  few  settlers  occupy  what  is  practically  virgin
soil,  they  scatter,  and  landed  property  assumes  an  indi-
vidualistic character.  However,  the  treatment  of  the  waste
and  pasture  remains  the  business  of  groups  even  in  this
case.  But  when,  as  is  more  usual,  settlement  takes  place
in  connection  with  the  movements  of  large  tribes  and  cen-
tralized interests,  then  the  settlers  are  inevitably  driven  to
hold  closely  together  for  the  control  and  maintenance  of
the  landed  property  of  the  household.  In  point  of  settle-
ment, the  result  of  this  kind  of  centralization  is  the  village
or  township  as  opposed  to  the  farm  or  homestead.  In
general,  it  may  be  said  that  wherever  we  are  given  the  kin-
dred as  a  unit  of  society,  we  find  that  one  of  its  chief  mani-
festations is  projection  on  the  land.  Only  on  these  prin-
ciples can  we  understand  more  complex  tribal  organization.
If  we  move  from  the  North  to  the  South  of  India,  we  get
into  a  great  mixture  of  elements.  Everything  is  compli-
cated by  local  castes :  in  a  single  place,  there  may  be,  say,
twenty-five  associations,  each  one  of  which  is  a  very  close
and  exclusive  group,  and  the  village  community  will  not
be  identical  with  these  groups.1  These  complications  result
from  the  fact  that  the  Aryans  became  mixed  with  other
races — in  particular  with  peoples  of  Dravidian  stock.  But
the  general  principle — the  club  life,  as  it  were, — remains
active  throughout,  and  it  is  by  the  competition  of  com-
ponent groups  that  unity  is  ultimately  produced.

Viewed  from  the  historical  point  of  view,  the  clans  begin
by  being  combinations  of  kinsmen,  and  end  by  being  terri-
torial communities.  It  is  on  this  basis  only  that  neigh-
bours can  be  considered  as  claiming  a  share  in  property
or  succession.

in  T^e  Hin^u  term  ^or  village,  the  grama,  has  also  the
village  life,  connotation  of  a  settlement  of  kinsmen.2  It  was  pri-
marily the  seat  of  a  joint  family.  While  the  population
was  in  a  fluctuating  state,  and  agriculture  was  carried  on
as  a  more  or  less  temporary  pursuit,  the  appropriation  of
the  soil  was  dependent  on  the  application  of  labour,  and  a
tilled  field  was  as  much  an  object  of  protected  possession  as

1  Cf.  S£NART,  Les  castes  dans  L'Inde,  pp.  37  ff .

2  MACDONELL  and  KEITH,  Vedic  Index,  I,  245.


IX:  LAND  TENURE  325

the  product  of  the  chase  or  of  fishing.  Such  possession
is  fundamentally  different  from  the  notion  of  permanent
dominium:  it  is  as  shifting  as  cultivation  itself,
and  emphatically  a  subject  of  possession,  and  not  of
property.1

When  the  occupation  of  territory  became  settled  in  con-
sequence of  the  increasing  congestion  of  inhabitants,  the
appropriation  of  land  assumed  stricter  forms,  which  were
originally  derived  from  the  arrangement  of  kinship.  Of
the  three  kinds  of  village  settlement  known  to  modern
India — the  raiatwari  type,  the  zamindari  type  and  the
pattiddri  type,  it  is  the  last  that  bears  the  stamp  of
greatest  antiquity.  The  raiatwari  villages  are  nothing  but
casual  concentrations  of  individuals:  the  population  has
been  pulverized  into  a  number  of  separate  units  by  the
grinding  powers  of  the  rajas  and  their  tax-gatherers.  It
would  be  absurd  to  look  to  such  human  flocks  as  represent-
ing the  original  forms  of  village  settlements.  Some  writers,
for  example  Baden  Powell,2  lay  special  stress  on  the
numerical  preponderance  of  such  local  units  in  India  in
recent  times.  It  is  not  from  the  status  of  the  exploited
subjects  of  the  Moguls  or  of  the  Mahrattas  that  the  student
of  social  origins  can  derive  information  about  the  begin-
nings of  land  tenure.

The  zamindari  type,3  sometimes  considered  to  be  the
most  archaic,  is  also  not  likely  ta  be  the  rudimentary  form
of  village  organization.  It  is  closely  connected  with  the
principle  of  joint  responsibility  for  taxes  and  services,  and
therefore  presents  a  combination  in  which  governmental
influence  is  clearly  traceable ;  although  in  this  case  it  made
not  for  the  isolation  of  settlers,  but  for  their  joint  responsi-
bility. As  in  the  later  Russian  mir,  used  by  the  central
authority  as  a  material  basis  for  the  burdens  laid  on  the
population,  it  is  difficult  to  distinguish  in  the  zamindari
arrangement  what  has  to  be  ascribed  to  archaic  com-
munalism  and  what  to  the  correspondence  between  rights


1  Manu,  IX,  43. Cf.  the  old  Russian  conception  of  the  right  to
soil  where  the  "  axe  and  the  plough  have  gone."

2  The  Indian  Village  Community,  pp.  227,  241.  .

a  MAINE,  Village  Communities,  Lect.  V,  pp.  156  ff.


326 TRIBAL  LAW:  PART  III:  CLAN  AND  TRIBE

and  duties  produced  by  the  pressure  of  State  require-
ments. Many  features  in  the  zamindari  management  prob-
ably go  back  to  ancient  origins,  but  it  is  impossible  to
ascertain  what  the  exact  share  of  such  ancient  elements
may  be.

The  pattiddri  type,  on  the  contrary,  clearly  presents  the
application  of  the  same  principles  which  we  have  found  at
work  in  the  customs  of  the  joint  family.  The  group  holds
together  as  far  as  possible,  and  individualistic  tendencies
are  counterbalanced  by  the  overlordship  of  the  whole  and
the  claims  of  all  members  to  a  fair  measure  of  maintenance.
Very  striking  expressions  of  this  solidarity  are  to  be  found
in  the  tenacious  survival  of  a  common  fund  (sJiamilatdeli) ,x
in  spite  of  the  tremendous  congestion,  and  in  the  shaping
of  village  custom  and  village  husbandry  by  joint  boards
(panchaiats) .

But  the  apportionment  of  claims  proceeds  mainly  on  the
lines  of  estimates  based  on  the  reckoning  by  stirpes  (patti).

If  indefinite  subdivision  of  claims  were  admitted,  the
system  would  result  eventually  in  complete  individualiza-
tion.  But  the  most  characteristic  feature  of  the  system  con-
sists in  the  resistance  to  such  pulverizing  subdivisions.
The  intense  Indian  feeling  for  group  solidarity  acts  as  a
check  on  the  process  and  produces  stirpes  (patti)  which
take  care  of  maintenance  and  provide  opportunities  for
all  their  members.

Vestiges  of  communal  tenure  within  the  tribe  are  scarce
in  the  case  of  Greeks  and  Italians,  because  their  culture  de-
veloped at  an  early  stage  in  connection  with  town  centres
surrounded  by  small  plots  of  intensive  cultivation.2  Yet
even  in  these  cases  some  characteristic  facts  may  be  noticed.
In  Greece  there  was  a  widespread  idea  that  land  should  be
apportioned  in  equal  H\ijpoi,  ancestral  shares  to  be  kept
up  as  far  as  possible  in  accordance  with  an  original  division
between  households  (OIHOI).  Even  in  Athens  the  first
archon  had  to  supervise  such  an  arrangement,  which  may
have  been  regulated  by  Solon.  In  other  cities  the  main-

1  DOUIE,  Punjab  Settlement  Manual,  p.  70,  cf.  62.

2  ARISTOTLE,  Politics,  II  c.  4. 1266&.


IX:  LAND  TENURE  327

tenance  of  ancestral  shares  was  carried  to  much  greater
lengths.

In  Rome,  a  remarkable  vestige  of  early  communalism  was
preserved,  however,  in  the  ancient  notion  of  a  Jieredium  of
two  iugera  apportioned  from  the  ager  publicus  by  Numa.1
Such  a  holding  could  only  serve  as  a  centre  of  grazing
rights  for  a  household  chiefly  dependent  on  pastoral  pur-
suits.

It  is  among  the  Celts  that  the  tribal  system  of  land
tenure  is  most  developed  and  best  recorded.  The  detailed  villages,
and  accurate  descriptions  of  tribal  arrangements  in  the
Welsh  Surveys  compiled  for  the  use  of  English  conquerors,
give  a  complete  insight  into  the  principles  governing  a
tribal  community.  I  may  be  allowed  to  repeat  some  pages
from  the  Introduction  to  the  Register  of  the  Honour  of
Denbigh.2

"Instead  of  the  usual  hierarchy  of  lords,  freeholders,
and  villeins  joined  in  a  manorial  system,  we  are  met  by
tribal  communities  described  in  great  detail.  Their  com-
position is  dependent  on  the  tie  of  blood,  but  they  are  essen-
tially agnatic,  comprising  in  their  enumerations  only  males
and  noticing  only  relationships  through  males.  Both  the
free  and  the  unfree  are  grouped  in  kindreds.  These  kin-
dreds hold  land  in  communal  ownership,  and  their  posses-
sions do  not  as  a  rule  coincide  with  the  landmarks  of  the
villages  (trevs),  but  spread  spider-like  through  different
settlements.  For  example,  the  progenies  of  Owen  Gogh  .  .  .
is  a  very  large  aggregate  of  co-tenants  (coiheredes  et  par-
ticipes)  comprising  as  many  as  twenty-five  male  persons.
It  cannot  be  stated  too  emphatically  that  the  tenure  of  the
land  is  strictly  communal ;  no  particular  individual  is  given
a  preponderant  right,  but  they  are  all  equally  priodarii.
Noteworthy  consequences  flow  from  this  principle.  To
begin  with,  the  members  of  the  kindred  of  Owen  Gogh,
just  mentioned,  are  not  distributed  in  the  five  villages  as
holders  of  separate  tenements,  but  appear  together  as  lords
of  every  single  one  of  the  five  estates,  which  amount  in  all

IMOMMSEN,  Hist,  of  R.t  Bk.  I.  Ch.  VI  and  XIII,  pp  101  f.  and
194  f.

2  Survey  of  the  Honour  of  Denbigh  (1334),  ed.  by  VINOGRADOFF
and  MORGAN,  pp.  xviii-xxxii.


328


TRIBAL  LAW:  PART  III:  CLAN  AND  TRIBE


Welsh
System
Communal,
not  patri-
archal.


to  733  acres.  .  .  .  These  shares  are  ideal,  and  not  actually
marked  off  on  the  land :  so  that  the  compilers  of  the  Survey,
who  were  trying  to  turn  the  soil  to  account  on  the  prin-
ciples of  English  cultivation  and  delimitation,  have  con-
stantly to  make  reckonings  as  to  the  exact  number  of  acres
which  would  be  assigned  to  these  various  communities,  if
the  land  were  actually  meted  out  to  them  on  equitable  prin-
ciples :  for  instance,  in  the  case  of  Nanthyn  Canon  it  is  said
that  the  portion  of  each  gavell  secundum  equam  pwrtici-
pacionem  should  be  141  acres.  .  .  .

"We  hear  of  several  cases  in  which  either  the  English
lords  of  the  owners,  or,  in  early  times,  the  princes,  have
moved  whole  kindreds  from  one  place  to  another.  Thus  in
the  villata  of  Skeybeon  (Ysceibion),  in  the  commote  of
Kaymergh,  the  lord  holds  the  entire  villata,  one-half  by
way  of  escheat,  and  one-half  by  way  of  exchange  with  a
certain  David  ap  Griffith,  whose  progenies,  the  entry  con-
tinues, has  land  allotted  to  it  in  the  vills  of  Mathebrut
and  Trebothle  in  the  commote  of  Ughdulas.  Here  the
process  takes  the  form  of  an  exchange  of  land  between  the
lord  and  the  collective  body  of  the  kindred.  In  this  in-
stance we  see  again  that  the  subjects  of  rights  with  whom
the  lord  has  to  deal  are  not  individuals  but  groups.

''The  system  of  communal  estates  which  we  have  been
considering  was  characterized  by  Seebohm  as  patriarchal.
This  description,  however,  is  not  borne  out  by  the  facts.
The  Denbigh  Survey,  like  other  Welsh  surveys,  always  in-
sists on  the  equal  rights  of  the  co-tenants,  and  on  the  uni-
formly communal  nature  of  their  holdings.  Historically,
of  course,  the  different  kindreds  traced  their  descent  from
common  ancestors;  but  these  ancestors  as  a  rule  had  long
ceased  to  exist,  and  their  exuberant  progenies  were  held
together  by  communal  comradeship.  The  Welsh  Laws  tell
us  of  chieftains  of  kindreds  (pencenedl),  but  the  authority
of  these  chieftains  did  not  supersede  communal  tenure  of
land.  In  the  surveys,  the  chiefs  of  kindreds  are  not  men-
tioned as  such,  and  we  catch  a  glimpse  of  their  influence
only  in  indirect  ways.  It  sometimes  happens  that  some
particular  person  is  mentioned  as  representing  a  kindred  in


IX:  LAND  TENURE  329

specific  transactions;  e.g.,  in  the  exchange  of  territory  in
Skeybeon,  mentioned  above,  David  ap  Griffith  is  referred
to  as  if  he  were  the  only  person  who  had  to  decide  on  behalf
of  the  progenies.  The  explanation  of  this  apparent  incon-
sistency seems  to  lie  in  the  fact  that  certain  persons  were
considered  as  the  leaders  of  the  different  kindred-
groups.  .  .  .

"  . . .In  the  surveys  of  the  cantreds  of  Rewaynok  and subdivisions
Roos,  we  find  that  the  kindred  appears  as  a  rule  to  be  dif-
ferentiated into  smaller  units — the  wele (lecta) and  the
gavells  . . .

"  .  .  .In  general  the  term  wele  or  lectum,  meaning
literally  bed,  might  be  rendered  by  the  expression  stock,
and  we  can  hardly  go  far  wrong  in  assuming  on  the  evi-
dence of  the  Welsh  laws  that  the  term  was  usually  applied
in  Welsh  tribal  custom  to  the  descendants  of  a  common
father,  grandfather,  or  great-grandfather.  Up  to  that
point,  a  close  community  of  interests  was  maintained  not
only  as  against  strangers,  but  also  as  against  more  remote
relations  of  the  same  kindred.  A  curious  corroboration  of
this  rule  may  be  found  in  our  Survey,  where  it  is  stated
on  two  or  three  occasions  that  inheritance  in  land
went  on  intestacy  down  to  the  third  degree  (tertium
gradum)  .  .  .

1 ' .  .  .  The  gavell  may  be  considered  in  two  aspects —
either  as  the  closest  and  narrowest  circle  of  blood-relations
holding  in  common,  or  as  the  territorial  basis  of  their
holding.  The  first  or  personal  aspect  may  be  exemplified
by  almost  any  of  the  cases  referred  to  in  the  Survey.  The
number  of  co-heirs  and  parceners  (coheredes  et  participes)
would  sometimes  be  very  considerable,  and  the  tenement
might  be  best  described  as  a  " joint  family  holding,"  as  in
the  case  of  Ithel  Lloyd  ap  Cadugan  and  his  cakeredes  et
participes  already  mentioned.  But  the  territorial  aspect  is
also  very  prominent.  From  this  point  of  view  we  get  esti-
mates of  the  number  of  acres  which  ought  to  have  been
apportioned  to  each  gavell  if  the  land  were  held  not  in
ideal  shares  but  in  separate  occupation;  in  the  case  of
Pereyon  (Prion),  for  instance,  it  is  said  that  if  the  natwi


330  TRIBAL  LAW:  PART  III: CLAN  AND  TRIBE

held  a  share  proportionate  to  their  contribution  to  the  tunk,
each  gavell  would  take  a  parcel  of  ninety-one  acres  in
arable  and  wood,  and  fifty -three  acres  in  waste;  and  in
Postu  (Postyn)  the  entry  records  that  if  all  the  gavells
were  equally  divided  among  the  three  vills  which  make  up
the  area  of  Postu,  each  gavell  would  have  fifty-three  acres.
Then  again,  it  is  on  this  basis  only  that  we  can  find  an
explanation  for  a  description  like  that  of  Abergellue  ( Aber-
gele),  in  which  it  is  stated  that  the  kindred  of  Edred  ap
Marghuyd  was  divided  into  four  stocks  (lecta),  each  of
which  consisted  of  one  and  one-half  gavells.  The  expression
would  be  meaningless  if  applied  to  personal  and  not  to
territorial  divisions.  It  should  be  noted  that  the  formation
of  communal  unions  and  holdings  on  the  basis  of  kinship  is
by  no  means  restricted  to  the  free  population;  the  natwi
(taeogs)  are  grouped  in  stocks  and  gavells  in  the  same  way
as  the  free  tribesmen,  and  we  actually  learn  the  technical
Welsh  denominations  of  these  two  classes  of  holding.  They
are  described  as  "Re  the"  and  "  Cay  the"  gavells.  .  .  .  The
free  gavells  are  in  one  case  at  least  distinctly  reckoned  as
twice  the  size  of  the  unfree  gavells.  The  villata  of  Beryn
(Berain),  says  the  Survey,  consists  of  seven  and  one-half
gavells;  one-eighth  of  the  area  in  question  is  in  the  tenure
of  the  freemen  pro  dimidia  gavella,  and  seven-eighths  in  the
tenure  of  the  nativi  in  seven  gavells.  In  other  respects,  the
working  of  these  groups  seems  to  have  been  essentially  simi-
lar, and  the  distribution  of  the  native  holdings  of  Pereyon,
for  example,  affords  as  good  an  instance  of  communal  con-
ceptions as  any  of  the  cases  registered  under  the  heading
of  free  tenure ;  there  we  have  seen  that  if  the  shares  were
equally  divided  according  to  the  contribution  to  the  tunk,
each  gavell  of  the  nativi  ought  to  have  ninety-one  acres  of
arable  and  wood  and  fifty-three  acres  of  waste  assigned
to  it.  ...

"When  treating  of  communal  organization,  one  is  natu-
rally led  to  ask  in  what  ways  the  communal  principle  as-
serted itself  in  the  actual  occupation  and  cultivation  of
land.

"  . . .In  the  first  place  it  is  clear  that  the  occupation


IX:  LAND  TENURE  331

of  the  land  in  common  was  greatly  facilitated  by  the  fact
that  grazing  of  cattle  and  dairy  farming  were  evidently  «>-aratIon'
the  main  pursuits  of  the  Welsh  peasantry.  In  some  parts
of  Denbighshire,  with  which  we  are  more  immediately  con-
cerned, no  other  form  of  husbandry  is  possible;  even  at
the  present  day,  this  kind  of  farming  seems  natural,  on  the
precipitous  slopes  of  the  hills.  .  .  .  We  read  in  the  Survey
of  wide  tracts  held  by  stocks  or  kindreds,  which  might  have
been  apportioned  in  acres,  but  were  as  a  matter  of  fact
claimed  on  the  principle  of  equal  rural  opportunities  for
the  gavells  of  these  tribal  groups.  In  these  surroundings
agriculture  itself  assumed  a  communal  aspect.  Seebohm1
has  rightly  laid  stress  on  the  practices  of  co-aration  so
minutely  described  in  the  Welsh  Laws.  They  fit  in  re-
markably well  with  the  joint  family  groups  of  the  gavells. ' '
Thus  (Venedotian  Code,  III,  xxiv)  : 2

"1.  Whoever  shall  engage  in  co-tillage  with  another,  it
is  right  for  them  to  give  surety  for  performance,  and
mutually  to  join  hands ;  and,  after  they  have  done  that,  to
keep  it  until  the  tye  be  completed:  the  tye  is  twelve  erws.

"2.  The  measure  of  the  erw,  has  it  not  been  before  set
forth?

"3.  The  first  erw  belongs  to  the  ploughman;  the  second
to  the  irons;  the  third  to  the  exterior  sod  ox,  the  fourth
to  the  exterior  sward  ox,  lest  the  yoke  should  be  broken;
and  the  fifth  to  the  driver;  and  so  the  erws  are  appro-
priated, from  best  to  best,  to  the  oxen,  thence  onward,
unless  the  yoke  be  stopped  between  them,  unto  the  last;
and  after  that  the  plough  erw,  which  is  called  the  plough-
bote  cyvar ;  and  that  once  in  the  year.


". . .  Our  document  shows  us  at  the  same  time  how  Transition
tribal  society  is  gradually  modified  by  the  introduction  of to  village*
new  principles. It  may  be  broken  up  by  violent  methods  naSsm."
— a  fact  to  which  ample  evidence  is  borne  by  the  confisca-
tions and  escheats  which  followed  on  the  conquest  and  on

1  The  English  Village  Community  (2nd  ed.),  p.  120.

2  Ancient  Laws  of  Wales,  I,  p.  315. See  also  Gwentian  Code,  p.
354;  and  the  Leges  Walliae,  p.  801.


332  TRIBAL  LAW:  PART  III: CLAN  AND  TRIBE

the  suppression  of  national  risings.  Castles  and  manors
spring  up  before  our  eyes,  and  escheated  tracts  of  land  are
let  for  rack-rents  or  farmed  to  villages  by  the  new  lords.
But  it  is  even  more  interesting  to  observe  the  gradual
changes  brought  about  by  social  growth  and  migration.
These  changes  are  effected  by  various  processes.  In  the
first  place,  let  us  notice  the  fact  that  tribal  communalism
is  sometimes  transformed  into  what  may  be  called  tenurial
communalism.  For  instance,  the  use  of  waste  land  and
waste  pasture  is  as  a  rule  vested  not  in  particular  kin-
dreds or  stocks  but  in  the  population  of  entire  districts.
Then  again,  it  is  quite  the  regular  thing  for  the  community
of  a  trev  to  take  over  the  occupation  and  management  of
the  escheated  portion  of  its  territory.  In  the  description  of
Frees,  we  hear  of  a  tract  of  waste  land  no  less  than  8,878
acres  in  extent;  it  is  treated  as  a  common  for  all  the  ten-
ants of  the  Honour  of  Denbigh  in  Roos,  Rewaynok,  and
Kaymergh;  the  'whole  community  of  the  villa,'  we  are
told,  may  use  the  escheated  portion  of  the  waste  (1,699
acres)  for  the  grazing  of  their  cattle,  but  nobody  except
the  lord  may  depasture  the  beasts  of  extranei.  In  Pereyon,
we  read,  'of  the  part  of  the  aforesaid  gavell,  which  consti-
tutes the  escheat,  there  remains  ...  an  area  of  111  acres
.  .  .  from  which  the  lord  takes  no  annual  rent-profit ;  but
the  whole  villata  pays  six  shillings  per  annum  for  the  pas-
turage. '  Sometimes  the  communitas  villae  would  farm  not
merely  certain  pastoral  lands,  but  the  whole  estate  of  an
extinct  stock.  In  this  way  the  communitas  villae  of
Moghedreue  (Mochdre)  holds  the  Wele  Guyon  ap  Madok
and  pays  tenpence  tunk  for  it ;  another  wele  which  it  holds,
that  of  Blcth'  ap  Madok,  was  extirpated,  so  the  entry  in-
forms us,  in  the  days  of  the  Earl  of  Lancaster.  These
manifestations  of  the  'village  community'  principle  are
the  more  remarkable  because  in  the  case  of  the  Welsh  trevs
we  have  to  deal  not  with  'nucleated'  villages,  or  large
settlements  grouped  along  streets  or  round  a  green,
but  with  scattered  clusters  of  homesteads,  which  never-
theless display  a  considerable  amount  of  economic
solidarity.


IX:  LAND  TENURE  333

"The  next  stage  is  marked  by  the  rise  of  a  village  very
similar  to  the  English  type,  and  yet  connected  historically
with  tribal  antecedents.  A  case  in  point  is  the  hamlet  of
Brenbagle  (Brynbagl),  which  arises  on  soil  laid  out  by  the
Earl  of  Lancaster  for  grazing  purposes,  but  the  occupiers
made  it  into  a  complete  rural  settlement  divided  into  eight
shares  resembling  the  ox-gangs  of  an  English  village,  and
the  attungs  of  Swedish  rural  settlements.  Thus  we  can
see  that  the  transition  from  the  tribal  to  the  rural  com-
munity was  a  gradual  and  natural  process.  Another  phase
of  it  comes  to  our  notice  in  the  shape  of  the  frequent  sub-
stitution of  outsiders  in  the  place  of  the  original  members
and  stocks.  In  many  of  these  cases  the  admission  of  out-
siders was  probably  the  result  of  marriages.  The  old  laws
refer  expressly  to  inheritance  by  maternity,  which  arose
either  through  the  admission  of  husbands  to  the  gavells  of
their  fathers-in-law,  or  else  in  consequence  of  irregular  and
illicit  unions.  But  in  process  of  time,  what  may  be  called
transfer  of  shares  was  evidently  effected  in  the  course  of
economic  transactions — donations,  sales,  exchanges,  etc.  It
will  be  sufficient  to  call  attention  to  one  or  two  character-
istic instances.  In  two  cases,  the  Master  of  a  Hospital  of
St.  John  is  mentioned  among  the  members  of  regular
gavells.  As  his  place  in  tribal  pedigrees  is  not  traced  in
any  way,  he  must  have  acquired  his  shares  by  donation  or
purchase.

"The  history  of  the  kindred  of  Rand  Vaghan  ap  Asser
presents  several  interesting  features  which  illustrate  our
point.  Of  the  four  gavells  which  sprang  from  the  first  wele
of  this  kindred,  two  have  been  concentrated  in  the  hands
of  one  group  of  kinsmen,  descended  from  Bleth',  the
ancestor  of  the  second  gavell:  so  that  the  progeny  of  the
first  gavell,  named  after  Guyon  ap  Ruathlon,  has  altogether
disappeared.  The  third  and  fourth  gavells  of  the  same
stock  have  also  suffered  great  changes.  The  third,  which
ought  to  have  contained  descendants  of  Kewret  ap  Ruath-
lon, is  as  a  matter  of  fact  headed  by  a  certain  Bleth'  ap
Yeuan  ap  Madok,  who  may  be  connected  with  the  eponymos
of  the  fourth  gavell  (Madok  ap  Ruathlon).  In  this  fourth


334  TRIBAL  LAW:  PART  III:  CLAN  AND  TRIBE

gavell,  again,  there  is  only  one  man,  namely,  the  leader
(lorweth  ap  David  ap  Madok),  who  can  possibly  be  traced
to  the  original  occupier,  while  all  the  rest  of  the  holders
are  outsiders — Ken'  ap  Bleth'  ap  Grono,  Ken'  ap  lorweth
ap  Tudor,  Eden'  ap  Lauwargh  ap  Tuder,  and  Bleth'  his
brother  (ff.  155-9).  The  description  of  Hendrenennyth
gives  rise  to  another  curious  observation.  One  of  the  six
gavells  of  the  Wele  Goither  ap  Idenerth  has  entirely  lapsed
into  the  hands  of  the  gavell,  which  is  headed  by  Ken'  ap
Bleth'  Vaghan,  and  consists  beside  himself  of  lorweth  ap
Lewelyn  ap  Bleth',  Ken'  his  brother,  Ken'  ap  Bleth'  Loyd,
and  Hoel  his  brother  (f.  168). 1

"To  sum  up,  we  may  say  that  the  Welsh  surveys,  of
which  our  Denbigh  record  is  the  best  existing  example,  pre-
sent invaluable  evidence  as  to  the  evolution  of  tenurial  and
individualistic  groups  out  of  tribal  communities."

In  the  case  of  the  Slavs  the  passage  from  the  tribal  to
Slavs  and  the  village  community  is  most  clearly  expressed  in  the  his-
tory of  the  Balkan  peoples.  It  may  be  sufficient  to  quote
the  following  description  of  customary  arrangements.
"In  western  Bulgaria  some  fifty  or  sixty  years  ago,  each
zadruga  comprised  scores  of  houses  round  one  courtyard
with  from  30  to  80  working  men  (working  spoons)  and  50
to  25  inhabitants.  Marinov  quotes  the  reminiscences  of  an
old  man  about  the  zadruga  to  which  he  belonged:  for
ploughing  10  to  15  ploughs  were  sent  out;  at  the  hay
harvest  20  to  25  scythes  went  out;  corn  was  cut  with  40
sickles;  the  zadruga  owned  100  head  of  cattle,  150  horses,
800  sheep.  And  all  these  persons  were  gathered  round  one
hearth,  sat  down  at  one  table."  2

In  the  case  of  Germanic  nations  there  is  some  distinct
evidence  of  the  communal  practices  as  to  land.  Caesar  de-
scribes Teutonic  nations  on  the  move  towards  the  West  and
the  South,  especially  Suabians,  and  his  description  reads
like  some  of  the  accounts  of  Afghan  and  Jat  conquests

1  Perhaps  the  most  perfect  example  of  the  complicated  ramifica-
tions of  a  progenies  is  that  of  Edred  ap  Marghuyd: see  Survey  of
Denbigh,  p.  xxxii  and  Table  IT.

2  SMIRNOFF,  Outlines  of  a  Cultural  History  of  the  Southern  Slavs,
II,  p.  201  ff.


IX: LAND  TENURE  335

quoted  above  (on  p.  322).  The  tribe  acts  in  a  state  of  war
as  a  concentrated  group,  assigns  land  to  its  clans  and  kin-
dreds for  temporary  occupation,  and  removes  them  to  other
places  when  convenient.1  Tacitus'  account  presents  a  more
settled  state  of  society,  but  the  distribution  of  land  is  still
dependent  on  the  action  of  the  whole  group  (urviversi),  and
land  is  occupied  for  cultivation  on  a  basis  of  temporary
possession.  Fields  are  ploughed  up  for  some  few  years  and
left  to  lie  fallow  after  some  time.  There  is  room  for  such
shifting  husbandry  because  there  is  plenty  of  land  in  pro-
portion to  the  sparse  population.2  In  Alamannic  law  we
come  across  kindreds  holding  land  and  conducting  contests
in  regard  to  it.3  In  Frankish  law  a  curious  manifestation
of  communal  ownership  by  neighbours  has  been  preserved
by  an  Edict  of  King  Chilperic  (A.D.  571).  The  right  of
the  neighbours,  which  is  abrogated  by  the  Merovingian
king,  as  it  is  connected  with  succession,  was  obviously
derived  from  the  settlement  of  a  kindred.4

By  way  of  exception,  the  tribal  system  developed  in  iso-  Regulations
lated  districts  into  complete  clans:  the  most  notable  in-
stance of  this  is  presented  by  the  Ditmarschen.5  But  on
the  whole  the  constant  migrations  of  the  Teutonic  tribes,
the  intermixture  with  Celtic,  Slavonic  and  Finnish  ele-
ments, and  the  influence  of  Roman  culture,  led  to  an  early
development  of  class  distinctions  and  manorial  lordships.
As  a  result,  in  the  regions  of  village  settlements  the  tribal

iDe  Bell  Gall.  VI,  22:  "  Agriculturae  non  student  .  .  .  magi-
stratus  ac  principes  in  annos  singulos  gentibus  cognationibusque
hominum  quique  una  coierunt  quantum  et  quo  loco  visum  est  agri
attribuunt  atque  anno  post  alio  transire  cogunt."

2  Germania,  xxvi:  "Agri  pro  numero  cultorum  ab  universis  in
vices  occupantur,  quos  mox  inter  se  secundum  dignitatem  partiun-
tur  .  .  .  arva  per  annos  mutant  et  superest  ager."  Cf.  HANSSEN,
Agrarhistorische  Abhandlungen  I,  pp  125  ff.

s  Lex  Alamannorum,  c.  81.

4  Edict . Chilperici,  c. 3 : "  Placuit  atque convenit  ut  quicumque
vicinos habens et filios et filias post obitum suum superstitutus
fuerit, quamdiu filii advixerint,  terra  habeant, sicut  et  lex  Salica
habet. Et  si  subito  filii  defuncti  fuerint,  filia  simili  modo  accipiat
terras  ipsas  sicut  et  filii  si  vivi  fuissent  habuissent. Et  si  moritur
frater,  alter superstitutus  fuerit,  frater  terras  accpiat,  non  vicini.
Et  subito  frater  moriens  frater  non  direlinquerit  superstitem,  tune
soror  ad  terra  ipsa  accedat  possidenda."

5  AMIBA,  Grundriss  des  germanischen  Rechts,  pp.  13  ff. BBUNNEB,
Rechtsgeschichte,  P,  117fi


336  TRIBAL  LAW: PART  III: CLAN  AND  TRIBE

communities  are  either  dissolved,  or  transformed  into  com-
munities of  neighbours — village  communities.  Besides  the
substitution  of  strangers  for  kinsmen,  so  well  illustrated  in
the  case  of  Welsh  weles,  the  process  of  transition  involved
a  regularization  of  holdings,  a  change  from  apportion-
ment of  shares  according  to  rules  of  descent  to  an  appor-
tionment according  to  economic  standards.  This  side  of  the
process  is  best  exemplified  by  Scandinavian,  more  especially
by  Swedish  and  Danish,  law.  The  original  distribution  of
land  for  homesteads  and  cultivation  was  made  by  way  of
assigning  irregular  plots,  ut  fons  ut  nemus  placuit.  The
old  shifting  (forniskift)  was  designated  also  as  liamarskift,
possibly  from  the  act  of  throwing  a  stone  hammer  to  mark
the  boundary.  When  population  increased,  it  was  found
necessary  to  ''stint"  the  holdings  in  proportion  to  require-
ments and  means  of  cultivation.  The  result  was  a  solskift
(distribution  in  order  following  the  course  of  the  sun).
The  rules  adopted  on  these  occasions  are  given  in  detail  in
some  of  the  collections  of  provincial  laws.

The  distribution  of  plots  in  the  villages  regulated  accord-
ing to  solskift  is  carried  out  on  a  principle  that  corresponds
to  the  subdivisions  of  the  money  unit — the  mark.  As  the
mark  consists  of  eight  ore,  so  the  village  ought  normally
to  consist  of  eight  attungar.  The  Westgotalag  says  ex-
pressly that  a  village  shall  be  built  in  attungs  (Attungum-
skal  by  byggias).1  The  toft  or  homestead  which  serves
as  a  basis  for  the  reckoning  is  described  in  the  law  as  a
plot  occupying  twenty  ells  along  the  street,  with  a  cor-
responding extent  of  court  and  orchard  adjoining  it,  and
a  certain  number  of  equal  strips  ( tegtar)  in  the  fields.  The
attung  is  considered  as  the  normal  holding  of  a  peasant,
although  allowances  are  made  for  certain  variations  by  way
of  accumulation  and  diminution  of  the  original  shares.
Yet  the  actual  holdings  do  not  become  dispersed  in  irregu-
lar fractions,  but  are  combined  in  more  or  less  simplified
proportions,  all  of  them  gravitating,  as  it  were,  towards

i  Cf .  OSTGOTA-LAGEN,  Bygda  B.,  XXVIII,  §  3 ;  UPLANDSLAGEN,
Witterbo  Balk,  I  (SCHLYTER,  III,  p.  215)  ;  WESTGOTA-LAGEN,  Jordair
B.,  I,  F,  §3,  I,  4;  AMIBA,  Nordgermanisches  OUigationenrecht,  I,
pp.  609  ff.


IX: LAND  TENURE  337

the  normal  attung.  The  same  root  idea  of  a  normal  hold-
ing (bol]  ''in  scot  and  in  lot"  with  a  township  which  is
expressed  in  the  rules  of  Swedish  provincial  laws,  is  also
clearly  traceable  on  ancient  maps.  The  Danish  anti-
quarian, Lauridsen,  has  shown  in  a  most  interesting  man-
ner how  the  rectangular  plans  of  Danish  villages  con-
structed according  to  solskift  are  gradually  transformed
by  accretions,  intercalations  and  partitions  to  fit  the  re-
quirements of  a  growing  population.  Yet  the  original  plan
is  generally  apparent  in  spite  of  gradual  changes.

It  is  not  to  be  supposed  that  these  regulations  were
always  followed,  or  could  be  kept  up  against  the  pressure  of
population  and  the  diversities  in  the  lie  and  the  fertility
of  the  soil.  In  fact,  the  above-mentioned  studies  as  to  vil-
lage-planning  in  Denmark  have  shown  conclusively  in  what
manner  the  symmetric  plans  of  regulated  settlements  be-
came complicated  and  irregular.1  But  the  attempts  at  sys-
tematizing the  disposition  of  buildings  and  the  distribution
of  shares  in  Scandinavian  villages  are  characteristic  of  a
state  of  customary  law  in  which  the  tenure  of  land  was  con-
sidered primarily  from  the  point  of  view  of  the  group  of
settlers  and  not  of  individual  owners.  Whether  coloniza-
tion starts  from  regular  allotments  or  is  subjected  to  re-
divisions  for  the  sake  of  regularity  is  a  minor  question.  In
both  cases  the  superior  right  of  the  community  asserts  itself
and  produces  material  results.

Another  symptom  of  the  same  principle  of  the  overlord-  The  hold-
ship  of  the  village  community  is  to  be  found  in  the  widely share  in

.-  .  .  the  village

recurring  practice  of  estimating  and  assigning  holdings  as community.

shares  of  a  higher  unit. The  Scandinavian  villages  divide

into  eighths (attungar) for  the  apportionment  of  rights

and  duties. Now,  the  attung  on  one  side  corresponds  to  an

ore  assessment  in  money,  i.e.,  to  one-eighth  of  a  mark,  and

to three ortugar as further  subdivisions. As to seed,

the  mark  is  said  to  comprise  288  skaeppar  (measures),  at

one  penny  each (24  to  the  attung-share) . At  the  same

time,  as  we  have  already  noticed  in  the  legal  enactments  as

i  LAURIDSEN  in  Aarboger  for  Nordisk  Oldkyndighed,  2nd  Ser.,
XI,  pp.  155ff.

223J  V


338  TRIBAL  LAW:  PART  III: CLAN  AND  TRIBE

to  settlement,  the  attungar  were  meant  to  represent  actual
holdings — the  normal  shares  of  householders  in  Swedish
villages.  In  this  way  these  arrangements,  which  seem  arti-
ficial at  first  sight,  express  the  views  of  the  peasantry  of
Dalekarlia  or  Norike  as  to  the  outfit  and  obligations  of
average  householders.

It  is  curious  to  find  a  corresponding  scheme  in  England,
and  to  observe  that  in  this  case  it  is  intimately  connected
with  the  composition  of  a  large  plough  team  or  with  the
relation  between  large  or  smaller  plough  teams.  I  mean
the  well-known  equations  according  to  which  %  hide  is
supposed  to  fall  into  four  yardlands  and  eight  oxgangs.
The  Kentish  sulung,  though  comprising  a  larger  number  of
acres,  is  built  up  in  a  similar  way  as  a  complex  of  yokes.
These  fractions  cannot  have  been  uniform  and  measured  to
standard  right  through  the  country.  As  a  matter  of  fact
we  hear  of  different  standards  in  various  localities;  the
poles,  the  ells,  the  perches,  and  roods  are  of  varying  size.
Nevertheless  in  each  locality  economic  and  tenurial  units
are  standardized  on  the  basis  of  natural  husbandry.  It
is  in  connection  with  commercial  economics  and  cash
nexus  that  individualistic  tendencies  prevail,  and  hold-
ings are  broken  up  or  accumulated  in  arbitrary  com-
binations.

The  breaking  up  of  holdings  is  represented  in  eleventh-
century  England  by  the  social  conditions  of  East  Anglia
and  of  the  Dane-law,  where  the  immense  Danegeld  pay-
ments and  the  loot  collected  by  the  Vikings  had  contributed
to  introduce  cash  payments  and  to  mobilize  landed  pro-
perty. In  the  greater  part  of  England,  as  well  as  in
Scandinavia,  customary  standards  held  their  ground  until
the  end  of  the  Middle  Ages.

The  English  evidence  is  especially  worthy  of  attention  as
regards  the  correspondence  of  rights  and  duties  in  the  for-
mation of  shares  in  the  village  community.  The  char-
acteristic expression  is — to  be  in  scot  and  in  lot  with  the
village.  The  scot  covers  primarily  payments,  the  lot —
standardized  claims  to  land  and  its  appurtenances.  The
expression  is  quite  usual,  and  may  be  illustrated  in  detail


IX: LAND  TENURE  339

from  innumerable  documents.1  It  gives  the  clue  to  another
set  of  typical  terms  of  early  England,  such  as  marilot,  maib-
tal,  tenmardand,  etc.2  Such  a  manlot,  corresponding  to  the
Latin  sors  and  the  Greek  Hkrjpos,  was  made  up  of  stikkas
and  gedals,  that  is,  of  parts  and  strips.3  While  in  the
Welsh  cases  the  connection  with  tribal  arrangements  is
still  very  clear,  in  the  English  cases  we  have  to  deal  with
the  purely  territorial  aspect  of  the  process.  It  is  not  diffi-
cult to  see,  however,  that  there  is  an  intimate  connection
between  the  two  stages,  and  in  the  case  of  the  gavells  there
is  plenty  t)f  evidence  to  show  that  they  gradually  lost  their
tribal  connotation  and  assumed  the  character  of  territorial
associations.

The  decisive  point  in  the  transition  from  the  tribal  to  the
village  community  is  to  be  found  in  this  way,  not  in  the
substitution  of  single  outsiders  for  the  kinsmen  within  the
framework  of  gavells  or  hides,  but  in  the  reduction  of
holdings  to  standardized  types  independent  of  pedigree
(daddenhood) .  This  is  effected  partly  by  the  crumbling  of
the  larger  units  in  accordance  with  the  combined  elements
of  the  plough  team,  partly  by  the  increasing  pressure  of
duties  which  have  to  be  made  to  correspond  to  outfit  and
available  means.  The  pressure  need  not  be  a  manorial
one,  in  the  sense  of  the  subjugation  of  peasants  by  military
lords,  although  such  cases  are  very  common.  It  arises  also
in  the  case  of  a  heavy  struggle  with  the  sea,  or  with  pirates
or  raiders,  or  by  way  of  taxation.  Frisian,  Low  German
and  English  Fen  practices  may  be  taken  to  illustrate  the
first  eventuality;  border  districts  between  England  and
Scotland — the  second;  the  standardization  of  Swedish  and
Danish  holdings — the  third.

Very  similar  processes  are  apparent  in  the  case  of  the
Russian  family  communities.  The  term  siabr,  in  the  sense
of  a  cousin  or  a  relative,  becomes  an  equivalent  for  the

iP.  VINOGBADOFF,  The  Growth  of  the  Manor  (2nd  ed.,  1911),  pp.
196  and  275.

2  P. VINOGBADOFF, English Society in the Eleventh Century
(1908),  pp.  103,  281;  Villainage  in  England (1892),  p.  255.

3  W.  H.  STEVENSON,  Yorkshire  Surveys  and  Other  XI th  Century
Documents  in  the  York  Gospels  (English  Historical  Review,  January,
1912,  pp.  19  ff.).


340  TRIBAL  LAW:  PART  III: CLAN  AND  TRIBE

name  for  associate — skladnik.  There  is,  for  example,  an  act
of  division  between  six  brothers  from  the  north  of  Russia
of  the  year  1640.  They  agree  to  divide  bread  and  salt,
house  and  liberties,  money,  cloth,  and  stores  of  all  kinds,
and  to  settle  apart.  As  to  arable,  Shumilo  is  to  take  the
upper  strip  in  the  fields  by  the  settlement,  and  next  to  him
Tretjak,  then  Maxim,  then  Zavial,  then  Shestoy,  then
Luke.  In  the  big  harvest  furlong  likewise,  and  in  the  small
likewise,  and  by  the  meadow  likewise,  and  so  on  through  all
the  furlongs.  Here  is  a  clear  illustration  of  the  idea  that
everybody  should  have  a  share  in  the  concerns  of  the  com-
munity; and  that  an  equitable  division  should  be  made
among  individual  members ;  but  it  is  clear  that  there  is  no
exact  estimate  of  mathematical  principles  on  which  the  land
should  be  split  up.  The  basis  of  partition  is  simply  a
rough  division  into  a  number  of  furlongs,  so  that  every-
body may  have  the  opportunity  of  enjoyment,  in  some  part
or  other  of  the  common  property.  But  the  system  can
only  keep  together  so  long  as  it  remains  joint.  At  a  later
stage  shares  are  immobilized  and  redivided  in  accordance
with  the  requirements  of  the  State.

open-field  At  this  stage  of  our  inquiry  the  view  may  be  expressed

that  it  is  to  tribal  custom  that  we  must  look  for  the  prin-
cipal explanation  of  the  system  of  land-tenure  which  existed
everywhere  in  Europe  until  the  enclosures  put  an  end  to  it
— I  refer  to  the  open-field  system.  It  was  based  on  the  dis-
tribution of  the  elements  of  an  agricultural  holding  in  such
a  way  that  every  husbandman  was,  as  it  were,  entangled  in
the  economic  arrangement  of  his  neighbours;  and  the  or-
ganization of  village  interests  was  not  framed  to  meet  the
wishes  of  individual  householders,  but  was  concerned  essen-
tially with  the  regulation  of  conditions  and  interests  in  the
open  field.  This  degree  of  communalism  may  from  our
point  of  view  seem  almost  absurd;  for  why,  it  may  be
asked,  should  people  be  expected  to  subject  themselves  to
general  rules  which  had  nothing  to  do  with  their  own  pri-
vate and  individual  affairs?  But  if  this  would  seem  to  be
a  rational  objection  to  the  principle  of  the  open  field,  on  the
other  hand  the  system  evidently  arose  out  of  some  historic


IX:  LAND  TENURE  341

necessity,  for  it  prevailed  in  practically  all  the  principal
countries  of  ljurope,  except  the  extreme  South,  and  it  con-
tinued in  existence  for  thousands  of  years.  If  we  look  at  an
English  village  before  the  Enclosure  Acts,  we  find  an
organization  based  substantially  on  the  same  principles  as
those  which  are  to  be  found  in  Ine's  Laws.  It  is  in  tribal
custom  as  projected  on  the  land  that  we  observe  the  con-
stitutive elements  which  explain  the  recognition  and  con-
tinuity of  the  arrangement.  If  we  look,  for  example,  at
the  Welsh  communities  in  the  ninth,  tenth  and  eleventh
centuries,  we  shall  find  one  thing  constantly  recurring  in
different  conditions:  it  is  always  insisted  on  that  a  house-
holder, or  free  tribesman,  who  is  starting  in  life,  should
get  four  erws  (i.e.,  strips)  for  his  use  and  enjoyment.
Thus  provision  is  made  that  the  individual  shall  have  the
means  and  opportunity  of  profitable  labour:  but  it  is  not
the  individual,  nor  yet  the  private  household,  which  is
regarded  as  owning  the  land ;  the  ideal  right  of  property  is
vested  in  the  whole  clan,  and  it  is  to  that  collective  body
that  this  direction  is  really  addressed.  The  clan  should  see
to  it  in  its  weles  and  gavells  that  every  free  tribesman  gets
four  strips  for  cultivation.  The  provision  has  no  prac-
tical meaning  unless  the  land  is  virtually  unlimited,  and
the  individual  allotments  clearly  cannot  be  parcelled  out  if
the  agricultural  area  is  stinted — or  even  if  it  varies  greatly
in  fertility,  accessibility  and  similar  qualities.  That  means
that  the  abstract  rule  which  regulates  the  enjoyment  of  in-
dividual portions  must  be  adapted  to  the  conditions  of  the
land  actually  under  cultivation.  The  result  is  a  char-
acteristic process  of  partition  and  distribution.  Perhaps
the  most  remarkable  instance  of  this  process  is  that  of
meadows.  They  are  not  allowed  to  follow  the  course  of
individual  appropriation,  but  must  be  divided  according
to  the  number  of  households.  The  shares  are  taken  some-
times by  rotation  and  sometimes  by  lot.  The  practice
may  still  be  seen  in  full  force  in  English  villages,  e.g.,
in  Yarnton,  near  Oxford,  where  the  distribution  is  made  in
each  year  in  July,  and  the  villagers  take  the  meadow-land
by  lot.  In  the  case  of  arable,  a  still  more  intimate  connec-
tion is  established  between  the  land  and  the  individual


342


TRIBAL  LAW: PART  III: CLAN  AND  TRIBE


Continuity
of  Celtic
and
Saxon
practices.


holder  of  it;  the  labour  of  sowing,  fertilizing  and  reaping
gives  the  husbandman  a  particular  personal  interest  in  the
soil  which  is  under  his  care;  and  it  is  natural  that  as  the
individual  in  this  way  is  to  a  certain  extent  attached  to
the  land,  his  holding  tends  to  become  hereditary.  But  it  is
not  regarded  as  entirely  separated  from  the  communal
groups:  it  is,  for  instance,  considered  as  joint  property
when  the  crop  has  been  taken  from  it.  The  whole  system  of
division  does  not  start  from  the  convenience  of  the  indi-
vidual, but  from  that  of  the  group,  which  takes  care  that
an  equitable  division  shall  be  made.

In  conclusion,  I  should  like  to  point  out,  on  the  strength
of  English  evidence,  one  feature  of  rural  life  in  which  the
continuity  between  the  Celtic  tribal  system  and  the  Anglo-
Saxon  township  community  arising  from  it  is  especially
evident.  This  is  the  treatment  of  rents  in  kind,  especially
food  rents.  Every  student  of  early  English  institutions
is  familiar  with  the  " firms  of  one  night"  (firma  unius
noctis)  imposed  on  ancient  Eoyal  estates  and  towns.1  Corn
produce  was  supplemented  and  even  outweighed  by  dairy
products,  beer,  honey,  etc.  The  Laws  of  Ine  supply  the
standard  of  these  dues  in  the  eighth  century.2  A  considera-
tion of  the  Welsh  records  makes  it  clear  that  such  levies
are  simply  a  continuation  of  the  arrangements  by  which
Celtic  chieftains  maintained  their  household  and  retinue  by
levies  from  the  free  priodarii,  and  the  more  dependent
taeogs  of  the  country.3  As  we  can  trace  the  development  of
money  rents  and  week  work  from  these  modest  beginnings,
even  so  the  manorial  system  was  slowly  evolved  from  tribal
customs.

Three  main  conclusions  may  be  drawn  from  the  survey
of  Aryan  kinship  organization:

(1)  The  kindred,  as  a  variety  of  the  clan  system,  was
formed  by  the  alliance  between  agnatic  households  for  pur-
poses of  defence  and  mutual  help.  It  involves  a  subsidiary
recognition  of  relationship  through  women.

1  Domesday,  I,  p.  75,  etc. Cf.  VINOGRADOFF,  Growth  of  the  Manor,
p.  282.

2  Laws  of  Ine,  p.  70 (LIEBEEMANN,  Die  Gesetze  der  Angelsachsen,
I,  p.  119).

3  E.g.  Denbigh  Survey,  pp.  Ixiv  ff. Cf.  SEEBOHM,  Tribal  System  in
Wales,  p.'  185.


IX:  LAND  TENURE  343

(2)  The  arrangement  of  agriculture  on  the  open-field
system,  based  on  the  solidarity  of  the  groups  of  neighbour
cultivators,  was  originally  conditioned  by  kinship.

(3)  The  transition  from  tribal  to  village  communities
was  brought  about  by  a  standardization  of  holdings  which
aimed  at  establishing  a  fair  proportion  between  the  rights
and  the  duties  of  the  peasants.


CHAPTER  X
THE  LAW  OF  THE  TRIBAL  FEDERATION

Alliances  How  was  the  clan  or  the  kindred  to  maintain  its  exist-

cians.  ence  as  a  unit  of  social  organization? Although  these

unions  comprised  a  greater  number  of  members  than  the
primary  households,  they  cannot  be  conceived  as  entirely
self-contained  and  self-supporting  groups.  In  the  process
of  evolution  they  had  to  combine  with  other  clans  or  kin-
dreds in  tribal  federations.  This  growth  of  larger  groups
can  be  clearly  observed  in  many  countries.  In  Albania,  for
example,  the  system  of  social  organization  is  founded  on  the
alliance  of  a  number  of  clans  in  the  larger  body  of  the
tribe.  Among  the  southern  Albanians,  who  conducted  a
determined  struggle  against  the  Turks,  the  clans  which  con-
stitute the  federations  are  so  powerful  that  they  may  almost
be  considered  as  tribes  in  themselves.  There  is  a  recognized
order  of  seniority,  and  the  first  among  constituent  groups
— the  Hoti — takes  precedence  at  all  general  assemblies  of
the  tribe.  According  to  Gropcevic,  they  number  approxi-
mately 2,500  men,  and  have  to  provide  500  fighters  in
time  of  war.1  Now  as  these  family  associations  are  so
powerful  and  extensively  organized,  the  question  naturally
arises  how  the  government  of  the  whole  tribe  is  to  be  recon-
ciled with  the  authority  and  compact  organization  of  the
clan?  It  looks  at  first  sight  as  if  the  general  association
of  the  tribe  may  be  described  as  a  house  divided  against
itself,  for  occasionally  rivalry  and  strife  arise  among  the
influential  members  of  the  union.  But  usually  some  kind
of  reconciliation  of  the  conflicting  elements  is  effected  for
the  sake  of  common  defence:  the  lines  upon  which  such


i  The  Clement!  number  3,350  and  send  500  warriors  to  the  tribal
host:  the  Gruda  (2,200)  send  200  warriors,  and  the  Drekalovici
(9,000)  send  1,500  warriors:  GOPCEVIC,  Oberalbanien,  pp.  569  ff.

344


X:  THE  LAW  OF  THE  TRIBAL  FEDERATION 345

compromises  are  brought  about  are  very  similar  in  most
cases.

In  ancient  history  there  are  many  instances  of  tribal  £rl}J5Sr  on
federations  and  federal  governments.  Caesar,  for  example,  authority,
gives  us  a  remarkable  description  of  the  political  state  of
German  tribes — a  description  in  which  every  word  counts,
as  it  was  used  by  a  man  of  action  and  is  free  from  the
influence  of  rhetoric  or  political  prejudice:  "Cum  bellum
civitas  aut  illatum  defendit  aut  infert,  magistratus,  qui  ei
bello  praesint,  ut  vitae  necisque  habcant  potestatem,  de-
liguntur.  In  pace  nullus  est  communis  magistratus,  sed
principes  regionum  atque  pagorum  inter  suos  ius  dicunt
controversiasque  minuunt. ' ' *

The  most  striking  feature  in  Caesar's  account  is  that
there  is  no  common  tribal  authority  in  time  of  peace,
though  within  the  regional  clans  themselves,  disputes  are
settled  by  the  chieftains.  As  soon,  however,  as  war  breaks
out,  a  common  authority  is  elected  for  the  whole  tribe,  and
this  representative  (magistratus)  of  the  union  wields
power  over  life  and  death.

A  most  important  function  of  the  tribal  federation  is
the  administration  of  law.  Within  the  tribe,  its  constituent
members,  the  clans,  enjoy  full  autonomy,  but  in  relation  to
outsiders — especially  in  the  organization  of  defence — the
tribe  is  a  compact  and  undivided  whole.  In  order  to  pre-
serve this  organic  solidarity,  careful  provision  must  be
made  that  the  composite  character  of  the  aggregate  does  not
lead  to  any  irreconcilable  conflicts.  Thus  the  management
of  ordinary  law  in  tribal  society  falls  into  two  distinct  de-
partments. Within  the  clan,  government  is  based  on  patri-
archal authority,  which  in  its  turn  recognizes  the  sway  of
religious  and  moral  sanctions — those  primary  notions  of
right  and  justice  which  were  termed  by  the  Romans  fas  and
ius.  As  between  clans,  the  regulating  forces  are  directed
by  principles  which  nowadays  would  be  described  as  rules
of  positive  international  law.  The  adjustment  of  conflicts
between  members  of  the  tribe  belonging  to  different  clans
took  primarily  the  form  of  arbitration:  a  judicial  expedient

i  De  Bell.  Gall.  VI,  xxiii.


346 TRIBAL  LAW:  PART  III:  CLAN  AND  TRIBE

which  is  of  enormous  significance  in  all  systems  of  ancient
tribal  law.  The  principal  function  of  tribal  authorities
is  to  conciliate  and  to  arbitrate  between  members  of  dif-
ferent clans.  And  this  conception  is  not  confined  to  very
primitive  states  of  society:  even  at  a  comparatively  ad-
vanced stage  of  development,  the  judicial  power  of  tribal
leaders  is  plainly  conceived  and  developed  on  these  lines.
Hesiod,1  for  instance,  in  the  sixth  century  B.C.  describes
the  function  of  kings  sitting  in  judgment  as  the  action  of
"middlemen"  who  conciliate  contending  parties  by  per-
suasive words,  and  induce  them  to  make  peace  and  not  to
resort  to  hostilities.  Obvious  considerations  of  utility  dic-
tate the  policy  of  averting  intestine  conflicts  if  possible,
and  the  duty  of  those  in  authority  is  to  protect  tribal  soli-
darity against  the  disintegrating  influences  of  dissension,
compui-  But,  of  course,  it  is  not  always  possible  to  achieve  con-

trati<m.  "  ciliation  by  persuasive  words,  and  the  rival  parties  may
prove  intractable  to  the  suggestions  of  mediators.  Then,
if  unity  is  to  be  preserved,  the  intervention  of  authority
must  take  the  form  of  compulsory  arbitration.  On  the
growth  of  this  institution  a  great  deal  of  early  political
development  depends.  The  first  step  in  this  respect  is  to
put  an  end  to  armed  collisions  between  clans.  The  private
feuds  of  individuals  lead  to  hostilities  between  groups  of
clansmen,  and  the  central  authority  must  set  itself  resol-
utely against  the  action  of  these  destructive  forces.
Ancient  legal  lore  furnishes  some  interesting  pieces  of  evi-
dence which  illustrate  the  connection  between  voluntary
and  compulsory  arbitration,  and  the  transition  from  one  to
the  other.  By  chance  a  bronze  tablet  has  been  preserved
which  records  a  convention  (F 'par pa)  of  the  citizens
of  Elis:  it  concerns  the  case  of  one  man  accusing  another
of  crime — probably  homicide,  though  this  cannot  be  defi-
nitely ascertained.  It  is  quite  plain  from  the  first  words,
and  the  whole  tenor  of  the  enactment,  that  it  is  directed
against  a  possible  conflict  between  clans.

"  Let  the  clan  (Ttarpidv)  and  the  kindred  (yereav)  of
the  accused  and  his  property  be  secure  (Sapper)  if  any

i  Opera  et  dies,  38,  202,  etc.


X:  THE  LAW  OF  THE  TRIBAL  FEDERATION 347

one  brings  accusation  against  a  man  of  Elis.  If  the  chief
magistrates  and  the  kings  do  not  provide  legal  remedies,
each  of  those  who  have  failed  to  do  so  shall  pay  ten  minae
to  the  sacred  treasury  of  the  Olympian  Zeus.  Let  the
Hellanodike  pronounce  judgment  against  them,  and  as  to
the  rest  (as  to  the  subject  of  the  claim),  let  the  demiurgs
deliver  judgment  according  to  law.  If  he  (the  Hel-
lanodike) do  not  give  judgment,  he  shall  pay  double
at  the  rendering  of  accounts.  If  any  one  shall  offer  vio-
lence to  the  accused  man,  he  shall  be  liable  to  a  fine  of  ten
minae,  if  he  commit  personal  violence  knowing  that  the
issue  is  under  judicial  examination/'1

A  more  familiar  and  no  less  striking  instance  of  ancient
arbitration  is  the  procedure  described  in  the  famous  ac-
count of  the  shield  of  Achilles  in  the  Iliad  (XVIII,  497).
Two  men  are  disputing  about  the  blood  price  of  a  person
slain.  One  asserts  that  he  has  paid  the  whole,  the  other
denies  having  received  anything.  A  witness  is  produced
fini  i'ffTopi).  The  trial  takes  place  before  the  people  in
the  market-place.  Some  among  the  spectators  side  with
one  of  the  contending  parties,  others  with  his  opponent.
Ultimately  the  elders  (yepovreS  )  rise  in  turn  and  each
pronounces  his  verdict  after  taking  up  the  sceptre  sym-
bolizing authority.

The  case  is  one  which  turns  on  an  agreement  intended
to  take  the  place  of  an  open  struggle.  The  non-payment  of
the  fine  or  blood  price  was  in  itself  sufficient  ground  to  take
up  arms  and  wage  private  war.  Yet  the  decision  is  referred
to  a  tribunal  in  which  the  popular  element  is  not  absent,
and  public  opinion  finds  vent  in  the  support  given  by  out-
siders to  the  parties.  The  question  at  issue  is  ultimately
decided  by  the  elders  of  the  community,  who  deliver  the
verdict  each  one  by  himself.  We  are  not  told  by  what
means  the  general  result  was  consolidated  and  its  execution
was  enforced.

A  feature  in  the  procedure  which  remains  obscure  con-
sists in  the  fact  that  the  elders  who  deliver  the  best  judg-

i  SOLMSEN,  Tnscriptiones  dialecticae  Graecae,  p.  84;  GLOTZ,  La
Solidarite  de  la  Famille,  p.  248.  Cf.  ZIMMEBN,  The  Greek  Common-
wealth, p.  10.


348  TRIBAL  LAW:  PART  III: CLAN  AND  TRIBE

ment  receive  a  prize  in  the  form  of  money  deposited  as  a
wager.  We  do  not  know  how  and  by  whom  the  merits  of
the  different  judgments  were  estimated :  possibly  the  stand-
ard was  simply  the  number  of  votes  cast  in  favour  of  each
sentence;  or  the  "persuasiveness"  of  the  judicial  dicta  may
have  been  measured  by  their  effect  on  the  popular  audience.
Although  these  problems  remain  unsolved,  there  are  on  the
other  hand  many  elements  which  are  abundantly  clear.  The
cardinal  fact  is  that  this  is  a  suit  which  is  brought  before
a  public  court  on  the  principle  of  waging  certain  sums  on
the  issue,  and  a  final  decision  is  delivered  by  tribal  elders.
On  the  other  hand,  agreements  might  be  arranged  di-
rectly between  the  contending  parties.  An  example  of  this
is  afforded  by  agreements  in  regard  to  ivergelds.  We  see
them  reduced  to  regular  tariffs  in  the  laws  of  the  bar-
barians, but  originally  they  were  the  outcome  of  private
and  varying  settlements.  The  public  powers  threw,  of
course,  all  the  weight  of  their  influence  in  the  scale  of  such
peaceful  arrangements,  and  Charlemagne,  for  example,  in-
veighed with  severity  against  lawless  people  refusing  to
take  the  wergeld  price  and  insisting  on  revenge  in  kind.

It  is  by  no  means  only  in  cases  of  manslaughter  and
wergeld  payments  that  people  had  to  resort  to  agreements
resembling  international  treaties.  Every  settlement  of  a
dispute  in  tribal  surroundings  was  in  truth  a  treaty  of
peace.  A  treaty  between  parties  was  sometimes  made  the
express  condition  for  entering  on  a  trial  instead  of  fighting
it  out  by  force.  This  is  the  case  with  the  Germanic
Gedinge,  a  settlement  to  go  to  law  binding  on  both  parties
and  corroborated  by  the  giving  of  gages.  The  gage  is  in
this  case  usually  the  festuca,  a  staff  as  the  symbol  of  the
promise.1

This  aspect  of  arbitration  is  also  deeply  ingrained  in

The  legal the  constitution  of  ancient  courts  of  law,  and  the  forms  of

procedure. It  may  be  said  that  an  ancient  trial  was  not

much  more  than  a  formally  regulated  struggle  between  the

parties  in  which  the  judges  had  to  act  more  as  umpires  and

i  GRIMM,  Deutsche  RechtsaltertMmer.  II,  140  ff.  Cf.  KOVALEVSKY,
Coutume  contemporaine,  334.  AMIBA,  Der  Stab  in  der  germanischen
Rechtssymbolik.


X:  THE  LAW  OF  THE  TRIBAL  FEDERATION 349

wardens  of  order  and  fair  play  than  as  investigators  of
the  truth.

It  is  worth  while  to  look  somewhat  more  closely  at  the
peculiarities  of  the  different  modes  of  legal  proof,  because
they  express  the  gradual  substitution  of  judicial  process
for  actual  struggle.  Of  trial  by  combat  we  need  not  say
much:  the  transformation  of  actual  struggle  into  judicial
litigation  is  so  clear  in  this  case  that  it  is  not  necessary
to  labour  the  point.1  It  has  been  urged  that  single  combat
is  to  be  considered  as  an  appeal  to  God  to  manifest  the  right
of  one  of  the  sides  by  giving  it  the  victory.2  This  religious
element  is  often  strongly  expressed:  e.g.,  the  Bavarian
law  expresses  itself  in  the  following  manner: — "Let  them
accept  the  judgment  of  God,  and  the  man  to  whom  God
gives  victory,  believe  him. ' ' 3  But  single  combat  was  not
only  an  appeal  to  God's  authority;  it  was  a  substitute  for
private  war  and  irregular  self-redress.  With  the  Norse-
men it  was  regularly  resorted  to  by  agreement  between  the
parties,  and  it  might  therefore  take  one  of  two  different
shapes:  it  was  either  a  formless  single  combat,  einvigi, — as
it  were  an  outlet  for  individual  passion  or  resentment, —
or  else  it  took  the  form  of  an  encounter  according  to  fixed
rules  in  carefully  prepared  surroundings  (holmgang).

Another  very  characteristic  and  widespread  mode  of
proof  was  the  swearing  of  oaths.  The  swearer  was  to  pro-
nounce a  formula  which  was  supposed  to  call  forth  the
action  of  divine  Power,  so  that  truth  might  be  made  known
and  untruth  detected.  These  formulae  were  occasionally
very  intricate,  and  a  slip  of  the  tongue  was  taken  as  a  sign
of  divine  interference  to  disclose  the  falsehood  of  an
assertion.

The  most  striking  trait  of  medieval  judicial  oaths  is  cer-
tainly the  fact  that  they  were  uttered  not  merely  by  the
person  making  an  assertion  before  the  court,  but  also  by
a  number  of  other  persons  acting  as  his  companions —

1  G.  NEILSON,  Trial  "by  Combat  (1890).

2  LIEBERMANN,  Gesetze  der  Angelsachsen,  I,  pp.  411,  517;  Indicium
Dei,  V  and  X.

s  BRUNNER,  Deutsche  Rechtsgeschichte,  P,  232  ff.
*Cf.  STEMANN,  Dansk  Retshistorie  (1871),  p.  130.


350  TRIBAL  LAW:  PART  III:  CLAN  AND  TRIBE

compur  gat  ores,  consacramentales.  The  usual  number  was
twelve,  but  it  could  be  diminished  or  increased  according  to
the  importance  of  the  suit  and  the  social  standing  of  the
persons  concerned  in  it.  The  oath-helpers  had  to  be  selected
originally  from  among  the  kinsmen  of  the  principal,  or,  in
some  cases,  from  his  neighbours,  but  their  statement  was
never  brought  forward  as  unbiassed  testimony,  but  as  an  as-
sertion of  right,  the  strength  of  which  depended  mainly  on
the  social  standing  of  the  body  which  made  it.  This  asser-
tion of  the  right  on  the  part  of  a  body  of  men  is  not  a
mere  formality,  because  if  the  principal  failed  in  his  oath,
his  kinsmen  had  to  suffer  with  him.1  Eventually,  in  case  of
strong  prejudice  against  a  party,  there  remained  the  possi-
bility of  clearing  oneself  by  an  ordeal — a  miraculous  inter-
vention of  Providence  out  of  the  usual  course  of  nature.2
The  part  played  by  the  court  is  not  without  its  im-
portance on  such  occasions :  it  has  to  decide  what  mode  of
proof  is  to  be  used,  and  on  whom  the  burden  of  proof  shall
fall;  lastly,  of  course,  there  is  judgment  on  the  result  of
the  proof  attempted.3
Agree-  If  the  parties  have  agreed  to  submit  their  dispute  to  the

ments  as  . f  .

to  tines.  regularizing  action  of  a  court  instead  of  prosecuting  their
interest  by  private  means,  and  when  they  have  given  solemn
promise  to  appear  at  the  trial,  the  next  step  in  Greek,
Roman  and  Teutonic  law  was  to  provide  for  the  amount
of  possible  compensation  and  loss  in  the  forthcoming
struggle.  It  was  not  only  a  question  of  carrying  through
one's  contention  and  retaining  or  acquiring  the  objects  in
dispute,  or  making  good  one's  claim  to  the  performance  of
an  obligation,  the  conquering  party  meant  to  get  compensa-
tion for  the  danger  and  risk  of  the  enterprise,  and  for  their
efforts  in  carrying  it  out.  The  losing  party  had  to  incur
a  penalty  for  mischievous  and  useless  resistance  to  the
better  right.  Both  parties  usually  made  an  agreement  on
entering  on  the  trial  to  make  a  deposit  with  the  court,  in

1  LIEBERMANN,  Gesetzc  der  Angelsaclisen,  II,  p.  377  (Eideshelfer)  ;
BEUNNEB,  Deutsche  Rechtsgeschichte,  2nd  ed.,  I,  pp.  123.

2  HASTINGS' Encyclopaedia of Religion and Ethics, s. v. Ordeal.
s  An  appropriate  example  may  be  taken  from  the  Russian  Pravda,

Troitzky  MS.,  §  17,  p.  82.


X:  THE  LAW  OF  THE  TRIBAL  FEDERATION 351

order  that  the  losing  side  should  incur  a  fine  at  the  end
of  the  litigation.  This  pledge  was  symbolized  in  Greek  law
InyTrpvTavsia,  in  Roman  law  by  sacramentum  and  in  Teu-
tonic law  by  vadium  (gage).  In  all  these  cases  we  have
the  very  elements  which  characterize  international  law  at
the  present  time :  no  direct  compulsion,  no  necessity  to  bow
to  a  superior  or  sovereign  will,  but  a  voluntary  submission
to  rules  established  by  consent  of  the  parties  and  guaran-
teed by  their  good  faith,  and  by  a  certain  regard  for  public
opinion  as  far  as  it  represented  the  views  of  persons  not
directly  affected  in  the  struggle,  and  therefore  better  able
to  judge  it  with  impartiality.

Looking  back  on  ancient  law,  it  may  be  said  that  criminal Tribal

, . .,  ,  ....  ,.  authority.

and  civil  procedure  are  still  at  a  stage  corresponding  to
a  great  extent,  to  the  modern  state  of  international  law
and  procedure.  Procedure  begins  to  develop  at  a  time
when  the  element  of  public  compulsion  is  absent  or  insig-
nificant. The  transitions  from  one  stage  to  the  other — from
a  legalized  struggle  to  arbitration  and  ultimately  to  full
jurisdictional  authority  are  very  gradual.  Two  circum-
stances contributed  powerfully  to  effect  the  transition  from
international  law  to  a  law  regulated  by  the  commonwealth :
the  growth  of  a  mediating  power  to  which  parties  were
forced  to  submit,  and  the  increasing  strength  of  the  view
that  even  imperfect  compromise  is  better  than  open
struggle.  The  principle,  then,  of  tribal  federalism  is  suf-
ficiently manifest :  it  remains  to  consider  the  actual  politi-
cal forms  in  which  this  principle  is  embodied.  We  might
expect  them  to  differ  greatly  according  to  nationalities,  but
in  point  of  historical  fact,  they  are  remarkably  alike.
Throughout  the  tribal  arrangements  of  different  nationali-
ties, we  constantly  find  as  rudimentary  forms  of  political
authority — kingship,  the  council  of  the  elders  and  the  as-
sembly of  warriors.  It  is  difficult  to  establish  a  chronologi-
cal order  in  the  development  of  these  institutions.  In  any
case  tribal  kingship  is  not  the  most  ancient.  If  it  were
necessary  to  establish  an  order  of  priority,  I  should  be  in-
clined to  put  the  council  of  elders  (yfpovffia ,  senate)  first,
because  it  was  originally  a  council  of  clan  kings,  and  as


352  TRIBAL  LAW:  PART  III: CLAN  AND  TRIBE

clans  were  undoubtedly  of  more  ancient  origin  than  the
federation  of  the  tribe,  this  meeting  in  council  is  essen-
tially antecedent  to  the  institution  of  the  tribal  kingship.
As  in  a  modern  state  of  the  federal  type,  for  example,  in
the  United  States  of  America,  the  Congress  of  the  Union
may  be  traced  in  its  origin  to  meetings  of  plenipotentiaries,
so  in  early  society  the  clan  kings  made  up  the  central  body
of  federal  representatives.  It  is  important,  however,  to
remember  that  in  early  societies  a  king  did  not  represent
merely  political  and  judicial  authority :  his  office  was  con-
ceived as  intimately  connected  with  tribal  religion,  or
rather,  with  magic,  which  was  the  characteristic  form  of
religion  in  primitive  society.  The  king  was  a  kind  of  link
or  intermediary  between  the  gods  and  the  community,  and
his  first  duty  was  to  secure  by  divine  favour  the  welfare  of
the  people  under  his  care.  His  merit  as  a  kingly  ruler  de-
pended on  the  degree  of  his  fortune  in  representing  the
people  before  the  gods.  One  of  the  most  fortunate  kings
of  Norway  was  Halfdan,  the  Black.  The  importance
which  the  people  attached  to  his  good  fortune  was  shown  by
the  fact  that  when  he  died,  his  body  was  actually  cut  up,
and  every  district  of  his  kingdom  tried  to  obtain  a  portion
of  it.1  The  converse  aspect  is  presented  by  the  story  of
Olaf  Trastelgya,  a  powerful  ruler  and  a  great  colonizer,  who
at  the  end  of  his  reign  was  pursued  by  ill  luck:  his  sacri-
fices did  not  find  favour  with  the  gods.  There  was  nothing
for  it,  but  to  remove  this  source  of  offence,  and  to  take  some
other  ruler  who  was  more  pleasing  in  the  sight  of  the  gods.
Olaf  was  therefore  summarily  dispatched,  not  on  account
of  any  wilful  fault  of  his,  but  simply  because  he  did  not
possess  the  necessary  quality  of  kingly  fortune.2

The  assembly  is  no  less  vital  to  the  organization  of  early
society  than  the  kings  of  the  tribe  and  the  elders  or  chief-
tains of  the  clans.  We  are  not  to  suppose  that  there  was
anything  approximating  to  a  "democratic"  feeling,  in  the
modern  sense,  in  the  primitive  community.  The  principle
of  the  assembly  is  not  that  of  political  representation,  but

1  SNORRE  STURLESON,  Heimskringla,  Halfdans  Svarta  Saga,  K.  9.

2  Heimskringla,  Ynglinga  Saga,  K.  43.


X:  THE  LAW  OF  THE  TRIBAL  FEDERATION 353

of  military  organization.  The  general  assembly  of  the
people  is  identical  with  the  army  or  host.  Familiar  exam-
ples in  ancient  history  are  the  comitia  centuriata  of
Rome  and  the  armed  assembly  of  the  Teutons.1  To  what
extent  this  collective  assembly  of  the  host  was  able  to
assert  a  superior  power  over  the  kings  depended  on  the
particular  conditions  of  tribal  life.

It  is  extremely  difficult  to  enforce  the  rules  of  law  and  Seif-heip
the  decisions  of  courts  of  arbitration ;  this  difficulty  is  felt  courts,
even  at  the  present  time  in  international  law,  the  rules  of
which  are  provided  only  with  ''incomplete"  sanctions.
All  the  acts  of  the  parties  and  of  the  tribunals  had  to  be
formulated  in  an  exceptionally  strict  and  formal  manner.
The  governing  principle  upon  which  the  courts  proceeded
was  not  the  investigation  as  to  fundamental  right,  but  the
solution  of  conflicts  between  opposing  parties.  Its  nature
and  methods  are  not  directed  towards  an  analysis  of  the
complex  contents  of  the  cases.  This  latter  form  of  judicial
inquiry  is  difficult  at  all  times,  even  when  it  is  helped  by
the  resources  of  an  advanced  civilization  and  of  a  scientific
jurisprudence.  For  tribal  societies  it  is  impossible  to
tackle  such  problems,  as  the  dominating  influence  of  kin
solidarity  prevents  the  consideration  of  purely  individual
motives.

Hence  most  acts  of  a  judicial  character  in  early  societies
were  directed  towards  settling  the  forms  which  were  to
govern  legal  contests.  If,  for  example,  a  tribesman  of  the
Salian  Franks  wished  to  prefer  a  claim  against  one  of  his
neighbours,  he  was  obliged  to  adopt  a  precise  method  in
summoning  his  opponent.2  He  had  to  go  to  the  house  of
his  adversary,  state  his  claim  in  the  presence  of  witnesses
and  "set  the  sun,"  that  is,  name  a  day  on  which  the  party
summoned  was  required  to  appear  before  the  Mall,  the
judicial  assembly.  If  the  defendant  did  not  appear,  it  was
necessary  to  repeat  the  ceremony  over  and  over  again.
Eventually,  when  he  did  appear,  he  could  be  called  to  ac-
count for  his  failure  to  answer  the  former  summons,  and

1  TACITUS,  Germania,  XI  and  XIII.

2  Lex  Salica,  ch.  i,  De  mannire. Cf .  the  Roman  Condictio :  GAIUS,
IV,  §  18.

2231 W


354  TRIBAL  LAW:  PART  III: CLAN  AND  TRIBE

he  might  advance  a  number  of  pleas  to  excuse  his  default:
for  example,  that  he  had  been  ill,  or  absent  on  a  military
expedition.  Such  a  circumstantial  procedure  as  regards
summonses  was  rendered  necessary  by  the  weakness  of
tribal  authority :  it  could  not  lay  down  and  enforce  strin-
gent commands  supported  by  the  combined  force  of  the
whole  social  union.

So  wide  is  the  range  of  self-help  in  early  society,  that
it  may  sometimes  even  go  to  the  length  of  putting  pressure
on  a  tribunal,  and,  as  it  were,  compelling  it  to  give  judg-
ment. The  litigant  is  bound  to  ask  for  the  decision  of  a
court  to  authorize  his  own  action : — and  this  is  evidence  of
the  necessity  of  some  control  by  constituted  authority ;  but,
on  the  other  hand,  the  individual  had  to  extract  from  the
tribunal  the  judgment  he  desired ; — and  this  is  evidence  of
the  power  of  personal  self-help.  In  Frankish  law,  litigants
frequently  put  pressure  on  the  courts  in  order  to  obtain  the
required  verdict.  This  seems  a  glaring  anomaly  to  us  at
the  present  day,  for  we  are  accustomed  to  speak  and  think
of  the  supremacy  of  the  courts  in  litigation.  The  appeal  to
a  tribunal  had  to  be  made  by  the  particular  means  of  a
solemn  formula,  the  "tangano,"  and  the  arbitrators,  or
Eacliimburglis,  were  required  to  deliver  judgment  in  the
manner  specified  by  the  claimant.1  It  would  seem  that  in
many  cases  they  did  so  against  their  will :  often  the  parties
appearing  before  them  were  persons  of  great  influence,
and  in  primitive  society  it  was  no  light  matter  for  a
judge  to  provoke  powerful  individuals  by  adverse
decisions.

The  actual  settlement  of  a  case  depended  on  a  treaty,
each  party  giving  pledges  for  the  fulfilment  of  the  judg-
ment. But  when  this  decision  had  been  reached,  there
remained  a  further  and  no  less  important  process :  execu-
tion was  still  necessary  to  complete  the  course  of  law.  It
is  here  that  we  see  most  clearly  the  inherent  weakness  of
tribal  jurisdiction,  for  execution,  the  practical  enforcement
of  legal  decision,  was  not  effected,  as  a  rule,  by  sovereign
authority,  but  left  to  a  great  extent  in  the  hands  of  the

ilex  Salica,  LVII.


X:  THE  LAW  OF  THE  TRIBAL  FEDERATION 355

individual  litigant  and  his  friends:  it  amounted  to  little
more  than  self-help  juridically  sanctioned  and  approved  by
the  tribe.

Even  now  lynching  is  an  outburst  of  outraged  public Self.help
feeling  against  some  one  who  has  grossly  transgressed  the y^™1
rules  of  a  community  in  regard  to  right  and  wrong:  a doers<
negro  guilty  of  an  assault  against  a  white  woman  is  merci-
lessly lynched  in  America; a  professional  horse-thief  is
lynched  by  the  peasants  in  Russia. One  element  of  legal
action  remains  intact  and  is  strongly  prominent  in  such
cases ;  they  proceed  from  the  notion  of  a  right  emphatically
recognized  by  the  community.

An  interesting  expression  of  the  view  that  an  offended  or
persecuted  person  has  to  appeal  to  the  community  at  large
may  be  found  in  the  history  of  Slavonic  and  Teutonic  legal
procedure.  With  the  Czechs  in  Bohemia  an  accusation  had
to  be  instituted  by  a  "complaint" — literally  a  plaint  or
wail  before  the  people  of  the  neighbourhood.1  The  Ger-
manic Klage — plaint — which  forms  the  first  stage  in  pro-
ceedings against  wrongdoers  is  of  the  same  kind.  The
plaintiff  adjures  his  neighbours  and  fellow-citizens  to  stand
by  him.  I  do  not  think  that  the  famous  practice  of  hue  and
cry  in  Normandy  and  England  has  any  other  origin.  It
was  made  use  of  by  organized  government  to  strengthen  its
police  hold  over  the  population,  but  it  is  undoubtedly  con-
nected with  the  natural  cry  for  help  of  the  victim  of  an  as-
sault. It  appears  in  this  special  form  in  the  Sachsempdegel
in  cases  of  rape  (II,  64,  §1).  The  shepherd  is  said  to
"shout"  for  help  against  wolves  and  against  robbers
(Sachssp.,  II,  54,  §  4).  The  menace  of  inundation  is  also
announced  by  "Geriichte."

Another  striking  expression  of  this  principle  is  afforded
by  the  organization  of  self-defence  in  the  matter  of  pro-
tection of  life  and  limb.  All  the  national  branches  of  the
Indo-European  law  recognized  in  one  form  or  another  the
right  of  individuals  to  take  the  law  in  their  own  hands  in
certain  cases.  This  is  notably  so  in  acts  committed  in  a
state  of  excitement,  when  it  is  recognized  by  the  general

i  BBUNNEB,  Rechtsgeschichte,  I,  123.  GRIMM,  Rechtsalterthumer,
II,  488  f .


356  TRIBAL  LAW:  PART  III:  CLAN  AND  TRIBE

sense  of  the  community  that  provocation  of  a  serious  nature
has  been  offered  to  the  injured  party.  The  most  familiar
instance  is  that  of  action  against  an  adulterer.  In  regard
to  this  even  later  Greek. and  Roman  law  allowed  a  sum-
mary slaying  of  the  offender.1  A  noteworthy  modification
of  this  rule  may  be  found  in  Greek  law.  For  example,  in
the  laws  of  Gortyn,2  it  is  forbidden  to  kill  the  offender  off-
hand, and  the  amount  of  fines  to  be  paid  in  such  cases  is
fixed  by  custom.  If,  however,  the  relatives  of  the  culprit
do  not  pay  ransom  for  him,  he  remains  in  the  hands  of
the  offended  kindred,  who  may  do  with  him  what  they  like.
The  case  of  theft  provides  another  striking  illustration.
If  the  thief  is  taken  red-handed,  he  immediately  falls  into
the  power  of  his  captor.3  If  he  takes  to  flight  and  is
tracked,  the  tribe  exercises  its  influence  on  the  procedure
to  be  followed.  The  plaintiff  has  a  right  to  demand  a  search
in  the  house  of  the  person  suspected,  and  this  search  is
carried  out  by  the  aggrieved  individual,  though  he  can  only
conduct  it  in  certain  forms  which  the  law  prescribes.
Eoman  law  recognized  a  similar  form  of  execution.  The
pursuer  was  entitled  to  search  in  person,  but  again  only  if
he  observed  certain  precautions  and  ceremonies.  He  must
wear  the  minimum  of  clothing,  and  carry  a  platter  in  his
hands,4 — this  provision  was  perhaps  intended  to  prevent
the  plaintiff  from  bringing  some  objects  of  his  own  into  the
house  of  an  enemy,  and  then  accusing  the  latter  of  having
stolen  it.  The  general  tendency  of  these  practices  is  ob-
vious: theft  was  considered  as  a  private  rather  than  a
public  wrong,  and  it  was  the  business  of  the  party  injured
to  secure  redress  for  himself;  but  the  commonwealth  was
anxious  at  the  same  time  to  prevent  violent  collisions  and
to  ensure  as  much  order  as  possible  in  the  prosecution  of
the  claims  of  aggrieved  persons.  It  is  significant  that  simi-
lar practices  occur  in  widely  different  surroundings.  A
process  resembling  that  which  obtained  in  Greece  and  Rome
was  in  operation  in  Scandinavian  countries.  The  cere-

1  LYSIAS,  Speeches,  XXX,  On  the  slaying  of  Eratosthenes.

2  §§  8-13 (DARESTE,  Rec.  des  inscrip.  jur.  grecques,  ch.  i,  p  359).

3GAIUS, III, 189.

4GAIUS,  III,  192-3.


X:  THE  LAW  OF  THE  TRIBAL  FEDERATION 357

monial  is  indicated  by  the  word  ransack,  compounded  of
ran — loot,  and  sokia — to  seek.  Few  people  to-day  realize
that,  when  they  ransack  a  cupboard  for  food,  they  perform
an  act  which  may  be  traced  back  to  the  ancient  legal  process
of  searching  for  stolen  goods.

Self-help  is  admitted  by  the  ancient  law  of  Indo-Euro-  Distress,
pean  nations  in  connection  with  civil  as  well  as  with  crim-
inal litigation.  In  fact  it  looks  almost  as  if  it  were  the
orginal  basis  of  possession  itself.  It  is  at  least  character-
istic that  some  of  the  expressions  referring  to  ownership  in
Indo-European  language  go  back  to  the  notion  of  conquest,
the  taking  of  booty.  The  Italian  roba,  meaning  chattels,
goods,  is  nothing  but  the  Teutonic  Raub,  the  produce  of
robbery,  and  the  Latin  praedium,  estate,  is  related  to
praeda,  booty.  No  wonder  that  the  symbol  of  property  in
Rome  came  to  be  a  spear,  hasta.

One  of  the  most  common  forms  of  self-help  is  distress,
which,  as  is  well  known,  is  a  recognized  legal  expedient  even
in  such  a  highly  developed  legal  system  as  the  English.
Here  again  the  individual  takes  the  law  into  his  own  hands,
but  he  does  not  do  so  according  to  his  own  will  and  pleas-
ure :  if  he  is  willing  to  conform  to  certain  rules  established
by  authority,  his  self-help  will  be  sanctioned :  if  not,  he  will
himself  be  guilty  of  a  misdemeanour.  Roman  law  provides
many  examples  of  legalized  self-help  of  this  kind.  One  of
the  most  conspicuous  is  the  process  against  an  insolvent
debtor.  In  the  oldest  Roman  procedure  for  the  exaction  of
debts,  the  debtor  was  bound  to  the  creditor  (nexum),  and,
if  he  failed  to  fulfil  his  obligation  in  regard  to  payment,
he  was  liable  to  manus  iniectio, — to  be  thrown  into  prison
and  chained.  Gaius,1  unfortunately,  gives  only  a  fragmen-
tary account  on  this  point,  but  the  information  given,
though  scanty,  is  plain  enough  if  read  in  the  light  of  com-
parative evidence.  The  procedure  amounts  to  this:  the
creditor  may  lay  hand  on  the  debtor,  with  a  solemn  refer-
ence to  the  non-payment  of  the  debt  The  presence  of  wit-
nesses is  necessary  for  the  regularity  of  this  ceremonial  act.
What  guarantee  was  there  that  this  power  of  self-help

iIV,  21  ff.


358  TRIBAL  LAW: PART  III: CLAN  AND  TRIBE

would  not  be  abused?  The  only  safeguard  was  that  it
might  be  met  by  self-help  in  the  opposite  direction.  The
creditor  who  takes  his  debtor  in  execution  of  a  debt  is
liable  to  be  stopped  by  a  vindex  acting  on  behalf  of  the
debtor:  and  thus,  ultimately,  the  procedure,  instead  of  be-
ing a  one-sided  exercise  of  force  on  the  part  of  the  creditor,
resolves  itself  into  a  judicial  conflict  between  the  claimant
and  the  protector  of  the  defendant.

Pignoris  capio  1  was  another  familiar  species  of  private
execution  in  Roman  law.  It  consisted  in  the  taking  of
security,  and  could  be  employed  even  in  the  absence  of  the
person  who  owned  the  chattel  taken.  Most  commonly  it
took  the  form  of  impounding  animals  which  were  causing
damage  to  the  plaintiff's  property.  The  analogous  method
in  English  law  is  to  be  found  in  the  right  of  distress  damage
feasant.  There  is  an  obvious  reason  why  in  cases  of  this
kind  the  injured  party  should  have  a  summary  remedy  in
his  own  hands.  Strictly,  it  would  be  more  in  accord  with
modern  juristic  notions  if  he  made  a  legal  claim  against  the
person  responsible  for  the  damage :  but  if  injury  is  being
inflicted  by  an  animal,  it  would  be  absurd  to  expect  the
plaintiff  to  delay  action  until  a  trial  could  be  arranged  with
the  owner ;  it  is  only  reasonable  that  he  should  be  empow-
ered to  take  immediate  steps  against  the  continuance  of  the
damage.  But  here  again  he  is  bound  to  observe  certain
rules  if  he  desires  his  remedy  to  be  effectual  and  to  receive
the  sanction  of  established  law.  The  animal  impounded
must  be  placed  in  a  particular  enclosure :  and  various  ques-
tions arise  as  to  its  maintenance,  the  possibility  of  its
dying  while  in  the  charge  of  the  plaintiff,  etc.2

sanctfons  These  examples  immediately  suggest  an  important  prob-

lem to  the  modern  observer.  If  so  much  depended  upon
private  self-help,  and  if  the  intervention  of  the  tribe  or  the
city  was  so  inadequate,  how  was  the  ultimate  sanction  of
the  community  to  be  put  into  force  ?  In  the  view  of  many
modern  writers  on  jurisprudence,  the  existence  of  a  legal
rule  necessarily  depends  upon  the  sanction  which  can  be

IGAITJS,  III,  77-81.

2  ST.  GERMAN'S  Doctor  and  Student,  c.  vii,  p.  19.


X:  THE  LAW  OF  THE  TRIBAL  FEDERATION 359

found  to  enforce  it.  But  tribal  systems  present  this  vital
element  of  law  in  a  very  remarkable  light,  and  show  in  a
striking  manner  that  the  enforcement  of  legal  rules  does
not  necessarily  depend  on  the  existence  of  indisputable
sovereign  authority.  The  sanction  is  desired  and  produced
by  public  opinion,  sometimes  by  indirect  means,  sometimes
by  private  self-help,  and  sometimes  by  pressure  from  the
tribe.  But  it  is  essential  to  understand  that  the  origins  of
law  in  these  communities  depend  on  the  recognition  of  the
community.  It  is  to  this  principle  that  we  must  look  as
the  fundamental  creative  and  regulative  factor  in  early
law.  It  is  clear  that  in  spite  of  all  the  commands  of
tribunals  and  all  the  ceremonies  of  execution,  the  enforce-
ment of  rights  may  remain  difficult  or  impossible.  If  when
all  the  stages  of  judicial  process  have  been  passed  and  all
the  formalities  observed,  the  person  against  whom  judg-
ment is  given  remains  obdurate,  what  is  to  happen?  Will
the  State  step  in  and  use  direct  coercion  against  the
recalcitrant  individual?  It  will  not  do  so  in  tribal  society.
It  is  at  a  much  later  stage  that  we  meet  this  form  of  state
power,  and  as  soon  as  this  period  has  been  reached,  we  may
recognize  a  great  advance  in  social  organization.  In  gen-
eral, we  may  say  that  this  is  the  case  in  Teutonic  societies
where  bann,  or  public  "coercion,"  supersedes  the  mannire
and  private  process.  In  the  Roman  system  this  notion  of
public  coercion  is  rendered  by  the  term  districtio.  The
transition,  naturally  enough,  only  took  place  by  very  grad-
ual steps.  Even  in  the  time  of  Charlemagne,  public  execu-
tion was  only  possible  in  specific  cases.1

Originally,  when  such  execution  takes  place,  it  does  not  Outlawry,
assume  the  shape  of  the  direct  enforcement  of  a  certain
course  of  conduct,  nor  of  the  direct  exaction  of  a  particular
penalty,  but  is  represented  by  the  declaration  of  outlawry.
If  a  man  breaks  his  pledges  and  is  not  amenable  to  the
force  of  private  execution,  the  tribe  declares  that  social
intercourse  is  no  longer  possible  with  one  who  refuses  to
be  bound  by  social  rules,  and  that  he  is  to  be  deemed  equal
to  a  wild  beast,  a  wolf  (vargus,  caput  lupinum).  He  must

i  BBUNNEB,  op  cit.,  I*,  200.


.


360  TRIBAL  LAW:  PART  III: CLAN  AND  TRIBE

take  to  flight  and  dwell  outside  the  protection  of  the  law.1
He  has  by  his  own  rebellious  conduct  put  himself  beyond
the  pale  of  juridically  organized  society,  and  henceforth
he  can  enjoy  none  of  the  rights  which  he  had  denied  to
others.  The  usual  process,  as  we  see  it,  for  instance,  among
Scandinavian  tribes,  is  that  he  betakes  himself  to  the  forest
to  live  as  best  he  can.  The  skogar-men  are  literally  expelled
from  society :  by  means  of  solemn  forms  all  ties  which  bind
them  to  their  fellow-tribesmen  are  severed.  Not  even  their
wives  and  families  are  allowed  to  help  them  in  their  helpless
condition,  and  the  communion  of  fire  and  water  is  for-
bidden to  them.2  Sometimes  the  disapprobation  of  society
is  evinced  in  even  more  drastic  ways,  and  in  ancient  Russia,
for  example,  it  was  customary  not  only  to  drive  out  the
offending  individual,  but  to  destroy  his  house  and  loot  his
property.3

Outlawry,  then,  goes  one  step  beyond  private  execution :
it  is  a  declaration  by  the  commonwealth  that  a  particular
individual  shall  no  longer  enjoy  the  advantages  of  social
intercourse.  In  the  next  stage,  public  authority  proceeds  to
direct  coercion,  and  the  necessity  for  this  form  of  execution
is  at  least  partially  recognized  even  in  rudimentary  socie-
ties. There  are  certain  offences  which  injure  deeply  the
whole  community  as  a  collective  body,  and  the  tribe  is
bound  to  deal  with  them  in  its  corporate  capacity.  Treason,
for  instance,  is  a  menace  to  the  whole  system  of  social
organization,  and  desertion  from  the  army  is  an  offence
against  the  whole  armed  community,  the  military  Jiost  in
its  broadest  aspect.  It  is  not  surprising  to  find,  therefore,
that  in  nearly  all  tribal  communities,  both  these  offences
have  been  considered  as  deserving  direct  punishment  by
society  as  a  whole.4

Even  apart  from  immediate  retribution  by  superior
force,  there  was  another  means  of  dealing  with  the  more


1  GRIMM,  Deutsche  RechtsaltertMmer,  4th  ed. (1899),  II,  p.  335.

2  Cf.  HEUSLEK,  Strafrecht  der  Islander  Sagas,  I,  24  f.

sPotok  i  razgrablenie,  e.g.  Russian  Pravda,  p.  30  (JiRE<5EK,  Svod
Zakonov  Slovanskyh,  1880).

4  TACITUS,  Germania,  xii.  Cf.  STRACHAN  DAVIDSON,  Roman  Crim-
inal Laio,  I,  pp.  2  if.,  114.


X:  THE  LAW  OF  THE  TRIBAL  FEDERATION 361

serious  forms  of  social  delinquency — namely,  by  the  force
of  religion.  In  one  sense  it  may  be  said  that  a  person  who
defies  social  morality  outrages  religion  and  offers  a  direct
affront  to  the  gods.  But  apart  from  this  more  idealistic
conception,  there  are  in  tribal  society  certain  elements  of
magic  which  exercised  a  powerful  influence.  One  of  the
most  deeply-rooted  ideas  of  this  kind  was  that  the  shedding
of  human  blood  is  a  pollution  of  the  whole  community.
Public  reaction  against  homicide  asserts  itself  in  the  neces-
sity for  purifying  the  soil  from  that  pollution.  Primarily
— in  so  far  as  the  individual  injury  is  concerned — homicide
is  a  private  wrong:  but  in  the  consequences  which  it
entails,  it  affects  the  whole  body  of  society.1

In  conclusion,  it  is  interesting  to  inquire  in  what  form  Formulation
the  customs  and  principles  of  tribal  law  are  embodied  and  tribal  law-
enunciated.  In  spite  of  the  fact  that  we  are  dealing  with
rudimentary  conditions,  these  ancient  formulations  of  legal
principles  are  not  without  value  to  the  modern  student  of
general  jurisprudence.  The  actual  method  of  the  declara-
tion of  the  law  was  not  so  much  the  issue  of  a  positive  com-
mand as  a  process  of  ascertaining  established  views  and
customs.  The  ancient  lawgiver  never  considers  himself  as
issuing  an  order  to  particular  persons  or  the  community  in
general : 2  his  primary  function  is  to  find  tlie  law  and  give
expression  to  the  sense  of  the  community  in  regard  to  jurid-
ical acts.  Among  the  Frisians,  for  example,  who  possessed
little  codified  law,  the  task  of  formulating  and  declaring
customary  law  was  entrusted  to  a  special  functionary  of
high  standing,  the  asega.  He  was  not  a  judge,  but  a  legal
expert,  a  man  versed  in  legal  lore.  Originally  there  were
probably  separate  asegas  for  each  of  the  three  great  divi-
sions of  Friesland,  or  even  seven,  one  for  each  of  the  seven
provinces.  Later  on,  the  office  was  concentrated  in  the
hands  of  one  man.  The  record  of  the  oldest  Frisian  cus-
toms, the  so-called  Lex  Frisionum,  contains  a  number  of

1  See  e.g.,  CEdipus  Rex,  14  ff. Cf .  ZIMMEBN,  Greek  Commonwealth,
pp.  98  ff.

2  MAINE'S  criticism  of  the  Austinian  theory  as  to  this  point is
hardly  convincing. — Ancient  Law,  ch.  i. Cf.,  however,  Early  History
of  Institutions,  pp.  380  f .


362  TRIBAL  LAW:  PART  III:  CLAN  AND  TRIBE

paragraphs  marked  as  additions  made  by  the  wise  men,
additiones  sapientum,1  and  the  names  of  two  of  these
worthies,  Wlemar  and  Saxmund,  have  been  preserved  for
posterity.

Something  similar  occurred  in  Scandinavian  countries.
Both  in  Norway  and  in  Sweden  we  find  laghmen,  legal
experts  elected  from  among  the  people,  whose  office  was
to  lay  down  the  law.  The  Swedish  laghman  was  a  pro-
fessional, in  the  sense  that  he  had  to  be  versed  in  all  the
details  and  intricacies  of  the  law,  but  he  was  chosen  from
among  the  ordinary  laymen.  He  was  not  a  clerk  nor  a
student  of  foreign  law,  and  he  was  even  expected  to  repre-
sent more  especially  the  interests  of  the  peasant  population
in  opposition  to  the  court  and  royal  officials.2  A  curious
trait  of  his  activity  consists  in  the  obligation  to  deliver  not
only  consultations  in  cases  arising  by  chance,  but  state-
ments or  lectures  on  legal  custom  in  a  more  or  less  sys-
tematic form.  This  is  termed  the  logsoga,  discourse  on
law,  and  it  seems  as  if  some  of  the  provincial  laws  of
Sweden  owe  their  formulation  to  such  discourses.  At  any
rate  one  of  them,  the  "Law  of  the  Ostgota,"  closes  with
the  following  words:  "this  is  the  end  of  the  law  dis-
course."3 The  institution  of  the  "law  discourse/'  which
may  be  compared  in  some  respects  to  the  edict  of  the
Roman  praetor,  was  even  more  fully  developed  in  Ice-
land, where  the  logsogu-madhr  was  elected  by  the  Althing,
the  assembly  of  chiefs,  for  three  years  and  had  to  acquit
himself  of  the  task  of  proclaiming  the  law  by  lectures  de-
livered in  regular  terms  during  these  three  years.  It  was
expected  that  the  entire  domain  of  legal  custom  would  have
been  treated  by  that  time.4

The  difference,  however,  from  the  edict  of  the  Roman
praetor  is  significant:  the  latter  was,  at  least  in  theory,  a

1  LAMBERT,  Fonction  du  droit  compare,  744  f .

2  The lagmen of the Anglo-Danish borough, like Lincoln or
Stamford, are representatives of the military class. Cf. VINO-
GRADOFF,  English  Society  in  the  Xlth  Century,  p 5.

3  dstgota-Lagen, Bygda  B. LI; Nu er Laghsagha ithur  lyktath
og  ut  sagth.

4  KONRAD MAURER, Das Staatsrecht des islandischen  Freistaates
(ed.  by  the  Norwegian  Academy,  1909),  IV,  pp.  263  ff.


X:  THE  LAW  OF  THE  TRIBAL  FEDERATION 3(53

prospective  declaration,  and  was  certainly  not  based  on
popular  custom ;  the  Icelandic  edict,  on  the  other  hand,  was
a  statement  epitomizing  and  adopting  customs,  general
views  and  opinions  which  had  been  formed  in  the  past,  and
which  were  therefore  accepted  as  principles  applicable  to
the  future.  England  has  known  a  similar  kind  of  judicial
authority,  for  the  Witan  of  Anglo-Saxon  times  presents
many  points  of  similarity  to  the  laghman  and  the  log-
sogu-madhr.  They  met  in  the  superior  body  of  the  Witena-
gemot,  as  well  as  in  the  folkmots  of  the  counties.  It  was
not  only  their  chief  duty  to  decide  particular  cases,  but
they  were  also  required  to  give  verdicts  in  regard  to  gen-
eral customs  of  the  land.1

The  ' ' prof essional' '  function  was  to  discover  and  declare
the  general  opinion  of  society  concerning  certain  funda-
mental institutions,  such  as  succession.  Social  customs
themselves  obviously  did  not  take  their  origin  from  an
assembly  or  tribunal.  They  grew  up  by  gradual  process
in  the  households  and  daily  relations  of  the  clans,  and  the
magistrate  only  came  in  at  a  later  stage,  when  the  custom
was  already  in  operation,  and  added  to  the  sanction  of
general  recognition  the  express  formulation  of  judicial  and
expert  authority.  In  France  and  Germany,  from  the  Caro-
lingian  age  downwards,  a  special  board  of  legal  experts
appears  with  certain  characteristic  duties.  They  are  the
Scabini,  Schoffen,  echevins,  persons  definitely  elected  for
the  purpose  of  making  out  the  law  and  holding  office  for
life,  or  at  least  for  several  years.  Such  experts  were,  of
course,  of  great  help  to  the  authorities  in  the  settlement  of
all  questions  relating  to  local  customs,  but  their  standing  is
already  so  much  a  professional  one  that  it  would  be  difficult
to  treat  their  verdicts  as  pure  statements  of  public  opinion.
Still  they  were  supposed  to  declare  customs  of  unknown
origin  assumed  to  have  been  created  by  popular  tradition,
and  in  this  way  they  presented  a  marked  contrast  to  the
jurisprudence  of  royal  courts  and  learned  lawyers.  The
value  assigned  by  public  opinion  to  local  customs  in  all
Teutonic  countries  may  be  illustrated  by  a  couple  of  lines

i  VINOGBADOFP,  English  Society  in  the  Xlth  Century,  p.  8.


364 TRIBAL  LAW:  PART  III:  CLAN  AND  TRIBE

from  the  famous  poem  in  glorification  of  Simon  de  Mont-
fort:  "nee  omnes  provinciae  sic  sunt  idiotae  quibus  leges
propriae  melius  non  sint  notae" — the  people  in  the  prov-
inces, the  local  people,  are  not  so  peculiar  as  not  to  know
better  about  their  own  laws.

Formal-  When  we  turn  from  procedure  and  legislation  to  substan-

ancient  tive  rules,  the  feature  which  strikes  the  modern  student
most  is  the  formalism  of  ancient  law.  The  subjective  psy-
chological aspect  of  facts  in  law  is  ignored  or  relegated
to  the  background — only  results  are  considered,  and  results
have  to  be  presented  in  a  definite  and  traditional  form.
The  transfer  of  land  in  Norse  law,  for  instance,  had  to  be
effected  by  throwing  a  symbolical  object — a  piece  of  turf  or
a  stick — into  the  lap  of  the  donee  (Skojtning.1  Unless  the
ceremony  was  performed  exactly  according  to  custom  and
•  in  the  presence  of  witnesses,  the  donation  or  sale  did
not  hold  good.  The  spoken  formulas  of  different  acts  in
law  were  strictly  fixed,  and  a  slip  in  their  utterance
would  cause  a  breakdown  in  the  act.  For  this  reason  the
Vorsprecher  (forspeca)  was  an  important  personage  in
ancient  Germanic  and  Anglo-Saxon  communities,  as  the
instructed  leader  of  the  principal.2  The  practical  im-
portance of  such  solemn  ceremonies  may  be  illustrated  by
the  custom  prevailing  in  Bavaria  and  Alamannia,  accord-
ing to  which  transfers  of  land  had  to  be  performed  in  the
presence  of  a  certain  number  of  small  boys  who,  after  at-
tending the  ceremony,  were  treated  to  boxes  on  the  ear  in
order  that  they  might  keep  a  vivid  remembrance  of  what
had  happened.

The  decisive  part  played  by  form  in  legal  acts  made  it
necessary  to  provide  in  a  specific  manner  for  publicity  and
correctness  in  the  performance  of  all  customary  require-
ments. A  striking  manifestation  of  this  aspect  of  tribal
custom  is  presented  by  the  Scandinavian  institution  of  the
fastar.  They  are  members  of  the  folkmot  or  hundredmot


1  See TARANGEE, Transfer  of  Land in Old  Norwegian Law, in
Essays  in  Legal  History  of  the  1913  Historical  Congress  in  London,
ed.  by  VINOGRADOFF. Cf.  In  laisum  verpiri,  Lex  Salica,  XL VI.

2  BRUNNER,  op.  cit.,  I,  126.


X:  1HE  LAW  OF  THE  TRIBAL  FEDERATION 365

who  must  be  present  in  case  of  any  dealings  with  land,  or
of  weddings,  in  order  to  testify  to  the  performance  of  all
rites,  and  to  confirm  the  formal  legality  of  the  transaction.
They  are  not  witnesses  (vitni)  and  are  clearly  distin-
guished from  the  latter.  They  act  and  make  pronounce-
ments in  the  course  of  the  ceremony.  The  symbol  of  their
activity  is  a  spear  or  rod  (skapt).  In  a  charter  of  1281  for
instance,  the  principal  fastar  macMir's  action  is  described  in
the  following  words:  "praedictam  ordinationem  esse  legi-
time  factam  secundum  leges  terre  et  consuetudines  appro-
batas."  1  The  institution  of  the  fastar  was  not  restricted
to  the  territory  of  Swedish  provincial  laws.  There  are
traces  of  it  in  the  Anglo-Danish  region,  especially  in  con-
nection with  the  estates  of  the  Abbey  of  Medhamsted
(Peterborough).2  It  need  hardly  be  said  that  this  practice
of  solemn  confirmation  by  the  representatives  of  the  com-
munity reminds  us  of  the  action  of  the  comitia  curiata  in
regard  to  arrogation  and  testaments  in  ancient  Rome.  It
may  be  safely  asserted  that  the  formalism  of  tribal  law
had  its  roots  not  only  in  its  intimate  connection  with  re-
ligion and  the  reverence  for  traditional  custom,  but  also
in  the  federal  organization  of  society.  The  latter  laid  stress
on  the  interests  and  notions  of  groups,  and  for  this  very
reason  left  the  psychology  of  individuals  in  the  shade.
What  is  more,  tribal  law,  as  far  as  it  was  expressly  formu-
lated, was  founded  on  treaties  and  conventions,  and  this
origin  made  it  necessary  to  keep  strictly  to  details  and
formulae.
The  difficult  problem  for  a  law  of  this  kind  was  the  «

fictions.

problem  of  development.  How  were  necessary  changes  to
be  introduced?  How  were  the  traditional  rules  to  be
adapted  to  changing  circumstances?  The  conservatism  of
ancient  law  was  much  greater  than  the  conservatism  of
modern  times,  while  legislative  factors  and  methods  were
much  less  ready  and  effective.  Hence  the  prominence  of
a  peculiar  method  which  has  all  but  disappeared  nowadays


1  AMIRA,  Nordgermanisches  Olligationenrecht,  I,  pp.  273  ff.

2  P.  VINOGRADOFF,  Transfer  of  Land  in  Anglo-Saxon  Law,  Harvard
Law  Review,  1909.


366  TRIBAL  LAW:  PART  III: CLAN  AND  TRIBE

— the  method  of  legal  fiction.1  The  priests,  or  elders,  or
judges,  who  acted  as  guardians  of  legal  lore,  devised,  or
connived  at,  the  substitution  of  altered  contents  within  the
forms  hallowed  by  time  and  usage.  The  wisdom  of  the
pontifical  jurisconsults  of  Home  suggested  and  accepted
legal  reform  under  cover  of  an  observance  of  old  rites
dicis  causa,  "for  the  sake  of  the  term."  Instead  of  re-
quiring actual  transfer  of  cash  for  the  validity  of  an  act
of  sale  or  emancipation,  the  jurisconsults  admitted  the  con-
firmation of  the  transaction  by  the  fictitious  acceptance  of
a  piece  of  metal  in  the  presence  of  a  libripens  and  five  wit-
nesses (mancipatio  per  aes  et  libram}.  Instead  of  insisting
on  the  passing  of  an  express  law  to  allow  a  litigant  to  dis-
pose at  will  of  his  inheritance,  the  jurisconsults  introduced
the  fictitious  sale  of  the  household  to  a  middleman  (familiae
emptor)  who  had  to  pass  it  on  to  the  intended  heir  and  to
the  legatees.  Instead  of  liberating  spinsters  from  the  irk-
some tutela  of  agnatic  relations,  the  jurisconsults  advised
them  to  get  married  to  old  men  (senex  coemptionalis] ,  who
would  be  declared  their  guardians  for  the  sake  of  form,  but
who  would  be  debarred  from  exercising  any  of  the  rights
of  actual  husbands.2  In  Germanic  law  we  find  the  same
process  in  full  vigour.  In  order  to  pass  real  property  to
some  one  out  of  the  course  of  ordinary  succession,  the  Salian
Frank  played  a  part  in  a  little  judicial  drama — the  affa-
tomia.3  He  invited  his  neighbours  to  be  witnesses  to  the
fact  that  he  left  his  house  and  court  by  jumping  over  the
fence,  in  a  bare  shirt  and  with  a  staff  in  his  hand,  after
having  thrown  some  earth  from  the  four  corners  of  his
homestead  on  a  salman  (middleman),  and  declaring  that
he  had  nothing  left  of  his  homestead  either  above  the  soil,
or  under  the  soil.  Thereupon  the  salman  remained  in  the
house  assigned  to  him  for  three  nights,  and  treated  his
neighbours  to  a  meal  of  porridge  in  manifestation  of  his

1  Cf.  MAINE,  Ancient  Law,  ch.  ii. I  refrain  from  citing  the  well-
known  fictitious  devices  of  English  law,  such  as  fine  and  recovery,
the  action of  ejectment, the status of a  king's  debtor, the  venue
of Middlesex, etc. They  are  all products  of judicial  interference
with  obsolete  law.

2  CICERO,  pro  Murena,  122  f .

3  Lex  Salica,  XL VI.


X:  THE  LAW  OF  THE  TRIBAL  FEDERATION 367

faculty  as  householder.  The  closing  act  was  another  trans-
fer by  the  middleman  to  the  intended  donee.  It  is  im-
portant to  keep  in  mind  that  none  of  these  acts  or  of  simi-
lar fictions  could  have  had  any  positive  results,  if  the
judges  or  magistrates  did  not  make  up  their  minds  to  con-
nive at  them,  and  to  protect  the  beneficiaries  from  unde-
sirable consequences  of  their  formal  acts.  The  Roman  spin-
sters certainly  wanted  to  be  secure  against  possible  enter-
prises of  their  pretended  husbands,  and  they  could  obtain
such  security  only  through  the  protection  of  the  tribunals
which  had  allowed  them  to  escape  from  agnatic  tutela.
Nor  could  a  salman  safely  stop  the  dramatic  performance
of  the  affatomia  at  the  second  act  and  avoid  the  transfer  to
the  donee  in  the  third.

Legal  fiction  was  undoubtedly  not  the  only  means  of
effecting  changes  in  ancient  law.  Direct  legislation  and
codification  have  left  distinct  traces  in  the  history  of  Aryan
nations  from  very  early  times.  Even  more  potent  was  the
exercise  of  the  sense  of  justice  and  fairness  by  householders,
elders  and  chieftains.  The  Sfyiffre?  referred  to  in  the
Homeric  poems  *  were  decisions  of  this  kind.  The  notion
of  5///ZS"  cannot  be  rendered  by  our  term  "command":2
it  implies  a  pronouncement  as  to  right,  and  a  direction  as
to  conduct 3 :  it  is  the  basis  of  AIH.TI  and  is  closely  allied  to  ments  as

to  right.

religion.  The  Dharma  of  the  Hindu  Aryans  is  a  collection
and  consolidation  of  such  pronouncements.  Later  Brah-
manic  jurisprudence,  as  well  as  Roman  and  Celtic  law,
developed  this  notion  in  the  shape  of  an  extensive  power  of
interpretation  and  formulation  on  the  part  of  priests.4
Some  vestiges  of  a  similar  consolidation  of  sacred  custom
are  apparent  in  Greek  law.  The  f£tiyyi  <xi  who  had  to  pre-
serve the  traditions  as  to  cases  of  homicide  (dinat  (ponnai)
exercised  similar  functions  in  a  restricted  field.5  But  the
rapid  development  of  the  City  State  in  Greece  arrested

lE.g.  Odyssey  IX,  112,  215;  Iliad  I,  238;  IX,  99.

2  MAINE,  Ancient  Law,  ch.  2.

sHiRZEL,  Themis  and  Dike  (1907),  p.  157.

*  JOLLY,  Recht  und  Sitte,  pp.  3  ff .  The  Brehons  of  Ireland  were
in  this  respect  the  successors  of  the  Druids;  ABBOIS  DE  JUBAIN-
VILLE,  Cours  de  litterature  celtique.

s  DEMOSTHENES'  speech  against  Euergos  and  Mnesibulos.


368 TRIBAL  LAW:  PART  III:  CLAN  AND  TRIBE

these  beginnings,  and  as  for  the  Teutons  and  Slavs,  the
introduction  of  Christianity  acted  as  a  bar  to  such  develop-
ments.

There  is  yet  another  side  of  the  formation  of  legal  rules
that  has  to  be  considered  —  a  side  which  played  a  consider-
Non-  able  part  in  ancient  society. I  mean  the  growth  of


custom?  litigious  custom.  If  the  most  explicit  expression  of  legal
regulation  is  to  be  found  in  the  treaties  (prjrpai)  of  fed-
erated clans,  as  distinct  from  the  enactments  and  pro-
nouncements of  chieftains  within  their  own  kindreds,  the
latter  again  cannot  be  regarded  as  the  simplest  and  original
source  of  legal  custom.  It  is  not  conflicts  that  initiate  rules
of  legal  observance,  but  the  practices  of  every-day  directed
by  the  give  and  take  considerations  of  reasonable  inter-
course and  social  co-operation.  Neither  succession,1  nor
property,  nor  possession,  nor  contract  started  from  direct
legislation  or  from  direct  conflict.  Succession  has  its  roots
in  the  necessary  arrangements  of  the  household  on  the
death  of  its  manager,  property  began  with  occupation,  pos-
session is  reducible  to  de  facto  detention,  the  origins  of
contract  go  back  to  the  customs  of  barter.  Disputes  as  to
right  in  primitive  society  are  pre-eminently  disputes  as  to
the  application  of  non-litigious  custom.  The  fundamental
truth  that  a  great  deal  of  the  law  of  Aryan  nations  goes
back  to  the  customs  of  non-litigious  co-operation  in  the
"Dark  Ages,"  is  a  warning  against  the  rationalism  of  nar-
row utilitarians,  and  an  incentive  to  the  historical  study
of  law  as  a  product  of  social  conditions.  The  details  of  such
a  study  must  be  left  to  legal  historians,  but  it  is  of  the
province  of  Historical  Jurisprudence  to  call  attention  to
the  consequences  that  result  from  the  admission  of  one  or
the  other  principle  as  guidance  for  conduct.  Jurisprudence
even  in  its  most  modern  phases,  is  bound  to  be  historical
in  so  far  as  it  takes  stock  of  the  social  conditions  which  call
forth  legal  principles  ;  it  is  also  bound  to  be  analytical  in
so  far  as  it  examines  the  logical  consequences  of  these  prin-
ciples and  their  rational  combinations.  The  results  are

1  See  the  chapter  on  Ultimogeniture  in  FRAZER'S  Folk-lore  of  the
Old  Testament.  On  non-litigious  practice,  see  EUGEN  EHBLICH,
Grundlegung  der  Soziologie  des  Rechts,  passim.


X:  THE  LAW  OF  THE  TRIBAL  FEDERATION 369

never  quite  rational  or  simple :  various  side  influences  and
cross-currents  bring  in  unexpected  turns  and  complicate
actual  developments.  Opposition  and  compromises  between
conquerors  and  conquered,  psychological  peculiarities,  in-
dustrial discoveries,  the  pressure  of  economic  needs,  pro-
duce all  sorts  of  variations  which  it  would  be  impossible
to  reduce  by  dialectic  process  to  the  evolution  of  one  or  the
other  principle.  As  a  matter  of  fact  the  governing  prin-
ciples of  jurisprudence,  such  as  tribal  solidarity,  the  City
State,  the  Catholic  Church,  individualism,  socialism,  are
synthetic  in  their  nature  and  therefore  subject  to  disrup-
tion and  combination  as  well  as  to  evolution.  Yet  in  try-
ing to  understand  the  history  of  human  society  in  its  legal
aspects  we  must  begin  by  ascertaining  the  leading  themes
which  recur  in  jurisprudential  thought.  As  in  music,  they
are  not  stereotyped  in  their  manifestations,  they  vary  in  the
course  of  conflicts  and  harmonizing  attempts,  but  they  are
not  numerous  and  are  therefore  amenable  to  definite  ob-
servation and  to  reflective  estimates.


2231


ADDITIONAL  NOTE

I  HAVE  not  made  any  attempt  to  discuss  in  the  text  or  in
the  notes  the  views  of  J.  Ficker *  on  the  family,  marriage
and  succession  among  Germanic  nations.  His  observations
are  sometimes  interesting  and  generally  startling;  they
have  called  attention  to  unexpected  analogies  between  the
legal  customs  of  Scandinavian,  Frisian,  Burgundian  and
Lombard  branches  and  the  customary  law  of  Spain,  Por-
tugal and  France.  But  Ficker 's  method  in  stating  his
conclusions  is  so  involved  that  it  requires  a  great  deal  of
patience  to  ascertain  his  definite  meaning  and,  if  one  has
apparently  done  so,  it  is  usually  found  to  rest  on  doubtful
and  even  improbable  surmises.  It  is  quite  impossible  to
consider  any  particular  point  of  his  theory  without  taking
notice  of  innumerable  threads  connected  with  it  and  ap-
pealed to  in  support  of  the  author's  contentions.  The  only
thing  I  can  attempt  here  is  to  state  some  of  the  reasons
why  I  cannot  accept  Ficker 's  general  conclusions.

He  deals  with  the  subject  on  the  basis  of  a  comparison
between  legal  customs  formulated  and  practised  in  coun-
tries invaded  by  Germanic  tribes  during  the  Middle  Ages.
For  the  purpose  of  such  comparison,  he  has  selected,  as
the  title  of  his  work  shows,  the  sequence  and  rights  of
heirs,  but  he  treats,  besides,  of  forms  of  marriage  and
property  relations  between  husband,  wife  and  children.
In  all  these  respects  he  discards  the  usual  notions  as  to  the
prevalence  of  patriarchal  arrangements  and  reconstructs
on  the  strength  of  analogies  between  local  customs  certain
leading  principles  derived  from  racial  differences.  Instead
of  the  prevailing  influences  of  Roman  law  and  Salic  law

i  Untersuchungen  zur  Erlenfolge  der  ostgermanischen  Reekie,  I-V,
VI  (posthumous),  Innsbruck  1891-1904.  The  clearest  summary  of
the  work  in  so  far  as  it  concerns  mediaeval  France  has  been  made
by  R.  Caillemer,  La  formation  du  droit  francais  medieval  dans  lea
travaux  de  M.  J.  Ficker,  in  the  Annales  de  la  faculte  de  droit  et  des
lettres  d'Aix,  II,  and  Annales  de  la  faculty  de  droit  d'Aix,  I.

370


ADDITIONAL  NOTE  371

he  discovers  right  across  Europe  currents  of  Gothic
custom,  represented  by  Western  Norwegian  and  Frisian
laws  to  which,  according  to  him,  Danish  law  is  allied.
The  most  wonderful  combinations  arise  from  this  re-
shuffling of  ethnographic  elements.  Western  France  ap-
pears as  the  country  of  the  Frisians  in  point  of  legal  lore,
while  Britanny,  Normandy  and  England  are  discovered  to
be  under  the  prevailing  influence  of  a  current  best  repre-
sented in  the  customary  law  of  Trondhjem  (Frostathing
lov).

This  sounds  adventurous  enough,  but  the  proofs  adduced
are  quite  as  amazing.  The  derivation  of  the  law  of
Britanny  and  Great  Britain  from  Norway  is  chiefly  based
on  the  strongly  agnatic  character  of  the  systems  con-
cerned,1 as  if  patriarchal  and  agnatic  tendencies  could  only
be  traced  to  these  specific  localities  and  had  left  no  other
vestiges  in  Europe.  Again,  the  occurrence  in  Anglo-
Norman  and  Saxon  custom  of  a  "Drittelrecht,"  of  a  habit
of  dividing  property  in  three  parts,  of  which  two  went  to
males  or  to  the  male  line,  while  the  third  was  reserved
for  females,  is  supposed  to  be  specifically  Danish  and
Norwegian.2  A  similar  explanation  is  given  to  the  rule  of
community  in  the  administration  of  property  between  hus-
band and  wife  after  a  year  and  a  half  has  passed.  It  never
occurs  to  Professor  Ficker  to  look  up  the  facts  as  to  Celtic
customs  in  these  respects.  If  he  had  done  so,  he  would
have  seen  that  the  division  among  the  male  and  female
line  in  the  ratio  of  two  to  one  is  equally  prevalent  in
Anglo-Saxon  and  in  Welsh  law,  and  that  it  corresponds  to
the  rights  and  obligations  of  the  father's  kin  and  mother's
kin  in  regard  to  feud  and  wergeld  (see  above  pp.  312  ff.).
And  as  for  the  formation  of  community  of  possession  by
the  year  and  the  day  it  would  have  been  worth  while  to
notice  that  this  custom  looks  like  a  natural  outcome  of  the
stabilization  of  marriage  after  the  probationary  year  in
the  coibche  form  of  union  (see  above,  p.  247).  Altogether

iVol.  VI,  p.  1  f

2  FICKER,  ss.  1176-1179;  1237,  1245.

3CAILLEMEB,  Formation  du  droit  francais,  Annales  de  la  facultt
de  droit,  I,  208.


372  ADDITIONAL  NOTE

it  seems  rather  odd  that  the  legal  lore  of  Britanny  and
Great  Britain  should  be  treated  as  a  variation  of  Frisian
or  Scandinavian  themes,  as  if  a  Celtic  population  had
never  existed  there.  Historians  are  too  much  in  the  habit
of  disregarding  the  Celtic  and  Iberian  substratum  for  the
sake  of  racial  elements  superimposed  on  it.  We  have  seen
lately  several  students  of  Roman  Britain  arguing  in  favour
of  complete  Romanization.  On  the  other  hand  Julius
Ficker  may  certainly  be  cited  as  a  conspicuous  advocate  of
Germanization.

The  source  of  all  these  fanciful  combinations  can  be
traced  in  the  case  of  Ficker  to  one  main  fallacy,  which
has  been  rightly  characterized  by  R.  Caillemer:  "Custo-
mary law  in  the  south  of  France  as  well  as  in  the  north
is  a  law  of  heterogeneous  origin,  the  making  of  which
depends  on  the  fusion  of  Germanic  elements  with  custom
derived  from  vulgar 1  Roman  law,  but  which  contains
chiefly  elements  of  spontaneous  growth,  tending  to  satisfy
new  requirements — those  of  mediaeval  society,  different  both
from  the  Roman  and  from  the  Germanic  one  which  pre-
ceded the  invasion."2  Caillemer  has  illustrated  in  detail
the  truth  of  his  remark  by  analysing  the  evolution  of  the
very  customs  selected  by  Ficker  in  the  south-east  of
France;  and  the  materials  cited  by  Ficker  will  have  to
undergo  a  similar  process  of  critical  sifting  before  they
can  be  made  to  serve  as  basis  for  wide  generalizations  of
Comparative  Law.

il  should  like  to  add:  partly  based  on  Celtic  traditions.

2  Les  idees  coutumieres  de  la  renaissance  du  droit  remain  dans
le  sud-est  de  la  France,  p.  175.  (In  Essays  in  Legal  History,  Pro-
ceedings of  the  section  of  Legal  History  of  the  London  Congress  of
Historical  Sciences  of  1913.  Ed.  by  P.  VINOQBADOFF,  Oxford,  1913.)


LIST  OF  BOOKS  REFERRED  TO  IN  THE  VOLUME

I. INTRODUCTION

American  Bar  Association.  Montreal  Meeting,  1913.  Lord
Haldane  on  Higher  Nationality.

Ames  (J.  B.).  Law  and  Morals  in  Lectures  on  Legal  His-
tory. Camb.,  Mass.  1913.

Anson  (Sir  W.  B.).  Principles  of  the  English  Law  of
Contract.  14th  ed.  Oxford.  1917.

Austin  (J.).  Lectures  on  Jurisprudence.  3rd  ed.  Lon-
don. 1869.

Barbour  (W.  T.).  The  History  of  Contract  in  Early
Equity.  (Oxford  Studies  in  Social  and  Legal  History.
Vol.  4.)  Oxford.  1914.

Barth  (P.).  Die  Philosophic  der  Geschiehte  als  Sociologie.
Leipzig.  1897.

Baudrillart  (H.  J.  I.).  J.  Bodin  et  son  temps.  Paris.
1853.

Beccaria  (C.  Bonesana  Marchese  di).  Dei  Delitti  e  delle
Pene.  Monaco.  1764.

Bentham  (J.).  Works,  ed.  Bowring.  11  vols.  Edin-
burgh. 1843.

Bergbohm  (C.).  Jurisprudenz  und  Rechtsphilosophie.
Leipzig.  1892.

Bernatzik  (E.).  Polizei  und  Kulturpflege  in  Die  Kultur
der  Gegenwart,  II,  8.  ( Systematische  Rechtswissen-
schaft.)  Berlin  and  Leipzig.  1906.

Berolzheimer  (F.).  Strafrechts-Philosophie  und  Straf-
rechts-Reform.  (Vol.  V.  of  System  der  Rechts-  und
Wirtschaftsphilosophie,  I-V.)  Miinchen.  1907.

Beudant  (B.).  Cours  de  droit  civil,  I,  II.  Paris.
1896  ff.

Le droit individual et 1'lStat. Paris.

1891.

Boas  (F.). The  Mind  of  Primitive  Man. Annual  Report

to  Smithsonian  Institution. Washington. 1901.

373


374  BIBLIOGRAPHY

Binding  (C.).  Die  Normen  und  ihre  Ubertretung.  Leip-
zig. 1890.

Bodin  (J.). See  Baudrillart  (H.  J.  L.).

Bosanquet  (B.).  Philosophical  Theory  of  the  State.  2nd
ed.  London.  1910.

Brandes  (G.).  Hovedstromninger  i  det  XIX  Aarhundredes
Literatur.  Kobenhavn.  1894.

Brentano  (L.).  Die  klassische  Nationalokonomie.  Leipzig.
1888.

Brinz  (A.  von).  Lehrbuch  der  Pandekten,  II.  Brlangen.
1860(71).

Buckle  (H.  T.).  History  of  Civilization  in  England,  I.
(The  World's  Classics.)  London.  1903.

Biicher  (K.).  Entwickelung  der  Volkswirtschaft.  Tu-
bingen. 1904.

Bufnoir  (C.). Cours  de  droit  civil,  II. Paris. 1900.

Burke  (E.) .  Reflections  on  the  French  Revolution.  (Every
Man's  Library.)  London.  1910.

Caird  (E.).  The  Critical  Philosophy  of  Imm.  Kant.  2  vols.
Glasgow.  1889.

Cannan  (E.).  History  of  the  Theories  of  Production  and
Distribution.  London.  1903.

Carlyle  (T.).  On  Heroes  and  Hero  Worship.  (The  Peo-
ple's Library.)  London.  1909.

Carnevale  ( — ). Critica  Penale. Lipari. 1889.

Charmont  (J.).  Renaissance  du  droit  naturel.  Paris.
1910.

Coke  (Sir  E.). The  Reports  of,  117. London. 1777.

Colin  ( — )  et  Capitant  (H.).  Cours  de  droit  civil.  Paris.
1915.

Comte  (A.). Cours  de  philosophic  positive. Paris. 1830.

Croce  (B,).  The  Philosophy  of  Vico.  Translated  by
R.  G.  Collingwood.  London.  1913.

Croce  (G.  C.). Filosofia  della  Pratica. Ban. 1909.

Dante  Alighieri.  De  Monarchia.  Oxford  Text.  ed.  E.
Moore.  Oxford.  1916.

Dareste  (R,)-  Etudes  de  1'histoire  du  droit.  Paris.  1882.

Nouvelles  etudes  de  1'histoire  du  droit.

Paris.  1902,  1906.


BIBLIOGRAPHY  375

De  Greef  (GK). Precis  de  Sociologie. Bruxelles. 1909.
Dernburg  (H.). Pandekten,  II. 7th  ed. Berlin. 1884  ff.
Dicey  (A.  V.). Lectures  on  the  Relation  between  Law  and

Public  Opinion  in  England  during  the  19th  Century.

London. 1905.
— •, Introduction  to  the  Study  of  the  Law  of

the  Constitution. 6th  ed. London. 1902.

Thoughts  on  the  General  Assembly  of  the


Church  of  Scotland  under  the  Constitution  of  1690
(1690-1707),  in  The  Scottish  Historical  Review,  XIV,
no.  55.  Glasgow.  1917.

Duguit  (I.). Etudes  de  droit  public,  I,  II. Paris. 1901,
1903.

Manuel de droit constitutionnel. 3rd ed.

Paris. 1918.

Le droit social, le droit individuel et la


transformation  de  1'etat. Paris. 1908.

Les  transformations  du  droit  public. Paris.


1913.

Durkhehn  (&). De  la  division  du  travail  social. Paris.
1893.

— The  Elementary  Forms  of  the  Religious

Life. Trans,  by  J.  W.  Swain. London. 1915.
Les  regies  de  la  methode  sociologique.


Paris. 1895.

Le  suicide. Paris. 1897.


Ehrlich (E.). Grundlegung der Sociologie des Rechts.

Miinchen  und  Leipzig. 1913.
Encyclopaedia  Britannic  a. llth  ed. Camb. 1910.
Encyclopaedia  of  Religion  and  Ethics. Ed.  by  J.  Hastings.

Edinburgh  and  New  York. 1914-18.
L'Encyclopedie,  dictionnaire  des  sciences,  des  arts,  et  des

metiers. Par  MM.  Diderot  et  D'Alembert. Vols.  I-

VII. Paris. 1751  ff.
Engels (F.). Socialism,  Utopian  and  Scientific. Trans.

by E. Aveling. (Social Science Series.) London.

1892.

Espinas  (A.). Des  societes  animales. Paris. 1877.
Essays  in  Legal  History  read  at  the  London  Congress  of


376  BIBLIOGRAPHY

Historical  Sciences,  1913,  Legal  History  section. Ed.
by  Sir  P.  Vinogradoff. Oxford. 1913.
Ferri  (E.). Criminal  Sociology. Ed.  by  W.  D.  Morrison.
London. 1895.

Sociologia  Criminale. 3rd  ed. Torino. 1892.
Fouillee  (A.). L '^volutionnisme  des  Idees-forces. Paris.

1890.

Fraunce  (A.). The  lawiers  logike. London. 1588.
Garofalo (Baron E.). Criminology. Trans, by E. W.

Millar. London. 1914.

Geny  (F.). Methode  d 'interpretation  et  sources  en  droit
prive  positif. Paris. 1899.

and  others. See  Thaller.

Gerber  (C.  F.  von). See  Jahrbiieher  fur  die  Dogmatik  des

heutigen  romischen  und  deutschen  Privatrechts.
Giddings (F. H.). Principles of Sociology. New York
and  London. 1896.

Inductive  Sociology. New  York  and
London. 1901.

Gierke (0.). Johannes  Althusius  und  die  Entwickelung
der  naturrechtlichen  Staatstheorien. Breslau. 1880.
Das Wesen der menschlichen Verbande.
Berlin. 1902.

Genossenschaftsrecht. Berlin. 1868  ff.
Grundbegriffe  des  Staats  in  Zeitschrift  fur


gesammte  Staatswissenschaft. Tubingen. 1905.

Giffen  (Sir  R.).  The  Utility  of  Common  Statistics.  Lon-
don. 1882.

Girard  (P.  F.).  Manuel  elementaire  de  droit  romain.  2nd
ed.  Paris.  1898.

Gray  (J.).  The  Nature  and  Sources  of  the  Law.  New
York.  1909.

Grundriss  der  Sozialokonomik,  I.  See  Schumpeter  and
Wieser.

Gumplovicz  (L.). Der  Rassenkampf. Innsbruck,  1883.

Haldane  (Lord). See  American  Bar  Association.

Handworterbuch  der  Staatswissenschaft.  3rd  ed.  VII.  See
Loning.

Harvard  Law  Review. Camb.,  Mass. 1887  ff.


BIBLIOGRAPHY  377

Hastings (J.). Encyclopedia of Religion and Ethics.

Edinb.  and  N.  York. 1914-18.

Hatschek (J.). Englisches Staatsrecht. 2 vols. Tu-
bingen. 1905.

Haym  (K.). Die  romantische  Schule. Berlin. 1870.
Wilhelm  von  Humboldt. Berlin. 1856.
Hinneberg (P.). Die  Kultur  der Gegenwart, ihre Ent-

wickelung  und  ihre  Ziele. Berlin. 1906.
Hobbes (T.). Dialogue between a Philosopher and  .a

Student  of  the  Common  Law  of  England. English

Works  ed. Molesworth. 11  vols. London. 1839-45.
— Elementorum Philosophies.  London.

1642-55.
Hobhouse  (L.  T.). Mind  in  Evolution. 2nd  ed. London.

1915.
Holland  (T.  E.). The  Elements  of  Jurisprudence. 12th

ed. Oxford. 1916.
Hiibner (R.). Grundziige des deutschen Privatrechts.

Leipzig. 2nd  ed, 1913.
Humboldt  (W.). Ideen  zu  einem  Versuch  die  Grenzen  der

Wirksamkeit  des  "Staates  zu  bestimmen. 1792.
Hume  (B.). A  Treatise  on  Human  Nature. Part  II. Ed.

by T. H. Green and T. H. Grose. London.

1874.
Ihering (R.  von). Geist  des  romischen  Rechts  auf  den

verschiedenen Stufen einer Entwickelung, I-III.

Leipzig. 1852ff.

= — Der  Zweck  im  Recht,  I,  II. Leipzig.

1877  ff.

Scherz  und  Ernst  in  der  Jurisprudenz.


8th  ed. Leipzig. 1900.

— Kampf urns Recht. 15th ed. Wien.


1903.
Jahrbiicher fiir Nationalokonomie und Statistik, XVI.

Jena. 1863. See  Knapp.
Jahrbiicher  fiir  die  Dogmatik  des  heutigen  romischen  und

deutschen  Privatrechts. Ed.  by  C.  F.  von  Gerber  und

R.  Ihering. Jena. 1857.
Jellinek (G.). Allgemeine  Staatslehre,  I. Berlin. 1900.


378  BIBLIOGRAPHY

Jellinek  (G.). Die  Erklarung  der  Menschen-  und  Biirger-

rechte. Leipzig. 1895.
Jevons  (W.  S.). The -Theory  of  Political  Economy. 3rd

ed. London. 1888.

Kenny (C.  S.). Outlines  of  Criminal  Law. 5th  ed.,  re-
vised. Camb. 1913.

A  Selection  of  Cases  illustrative  of  Eng-
lish Criminal  Law. Camb. 1901.
Kidd  (B.). Social  Evolution. London. 1894.
Knapp  (G.  F.). Die  neuern  Ansichten  iiber  Moralstatistik

in Jahrbiicher fur Nationalokonomie und Statistik.

Ed.  by  B.  Hildebrand. Bd.  XVI. Jena. 1871.
Korkunov  (N.  M.). General  Theory  of  Law. Trans,  by

W.  G.  Hastings. Boston,  Mass. 1909.
Kovalevsky  (M.). Coutume  contemporaine  et  loi  ancienne.

Paris. 1896.
Lambert (&.). Fonction  du  droit  civil  compare. Paris.

1903.
Landsberg  (C.)  and  Stintzing  (R.). Geschichte  der  deut-

schen  Rechtswissenschaft. Miinchen. 1898-1910.
Langdell  (C.  C.). Summary  of  Equity  Pleading. Camb.,

Mass. 1877.
Lange  (L.). Les  emotions. Trad,  par  G.  Dumas. Paris.

1902.
Lappo-Danilevsky  (A.  S.). L'idee  de  1'^tat  in  Essays  in

Legal  History.

— On historical theories  in  the

Bulletin  of  the  Russian  Academy  of  Sciences  for  1917.

Petrograd.
Law  Reports :

(1907)  A,  C. Law  Reports,  Appeal  Cases,  1907.

4  Bing.  Bingham's  Reports, Common Pleas,

1822-1834,  Vol.  4.

36  Ch.  D.  Law Reports, Chancery Division,

Vol.  36.

10  Cl.  &  F. Clark  &  Finnelly's  Reports,  House  of
Lords,  1831-1846,  Vol.  10.

Co.  Rep.  Coke's Reports, 1572-1616, Vols. 1

and  5.


BIBLIOGRAPHY  379

24  Cox  C.  C. E. W. Cox's Criminal Law Cases,

Vol.  24.
2  Den.  Denison's Crown Cases Reserved,

1844-1852,  Vol.  2.
2  Eden  Eden's  Reports,  Chancery,  1757-1766.

Vol.  2.

6  Eq.  Law  Reports,  Equity  Cases,  Vol.  6.

10  Ex.  Law  Reports,  Exchequer  Cases,  Vol.

10.
1  F.  &  F.  Foster & Finlason's Reports, Nisi

Prius,  1856-1867,  Vol.  1.
(1917)  2  K.  B. Law  Reports,  King's  Bench  Division,

1917,  Vol.  2.

18  L.  J.  (Ex.). Law  Journal  Reports,  Vol.  18 (Ex-
chequer) .
T.  L.  K.  The  Times  Law  Reports,  Vols.  24  and

28.
Lieber  (F.). Legal  and  Political  Hermeneutics. Boston

Mass. 1839.
Liszt (F.  von). Strafrechtliche  Aufsatze  und  Vortrage.

1905.
Loning (E.). Handworterbuch der Staatswissenschaft,

VII. 3rd  ed. Jena. 1909.

Loria  (A.). The  Economic  Foundations  of  Society. Trans,
by  L.  M.  Keasbey. (Social  Science  Series.) London.
1917.
MacDougall  (W.). An  Introduction  to  Social  Psychology.

8th  ed. London. 1914.

Maine  (Sir  H.). Ancient  Law. London. 1860.
Lectures  on  the  Early  History  of  Insti-
tutions. London. 1875.

Maitland  (F.  W,). Collected  Papers, Ed.  by  H.  A.  L.
Fisher. I-III. Camb. 1911.

Domesday  Book  and  Beyond. Camb.

1897.

History of English Law. See Pol-


lock.

Makarewicz (J.). Einfiihrung in die Philosophic des
Strafrechts. Stuttgart. 1906.


380  BIBLIOGRAPHY

Marshall  (A.).  Principles  of  Economics.  6th  ed.  Lon-
don. 1910.

Menger  (A,). Neue  Staatslehre. Jena. 1904.

Merkel  (A.). Juristische  Encyclopadie. Leipzig. 1885.

Merz  (J.  T.).  A  History  of  European  Thought  in  the
Nineteenth  Century.  Vols.  1-4.  Edinburgh.  1896-
1914.

Meyer  (E.).  Kleine  Schriften  zur  Gesehichtstheorie  und
zur  wirthschaftlichen  und  politischen  Geschichte  des
Altertums.  Halle-a-S.  1910.

Michel  (H.). L'Idee  de  l'£tat. Paris. 1896.

Mill  (J.).  Analysis  of  the  Phenomena  of  the  Human
Mind.  London.  1869.

Mill  (J.  S.).  A  System  of  Logic.  9th  ed.  2  vols.  Lon-
don. 1875.

Mommsen  (Th.).  Eomisches  Staatsrecht,  I-III  (in  five
parts).  Leipzig.  1887.

Morley  (J.). Edmund  Burke. London. 1867.

Eousseau,  I,  II. New  ed. London. 1886.

Natorp (P.). Die  Sozialpadagogik. M.  Gladbach. 1912.

Nietzsche  (F.). Werke. Leipzig. 1907.

Odgers  (W.  Blake).  The  Principles  of  Procedure,  Plead-
ing, and  Practice  in  Civil  Actions  in  the  High  Court
of  Justice.  8th  ed.  London.  1918.

Paley  (W.). Moral  Philosophy. London. 1838.

Paul  (H.).  Prinzipien  der  Sprachgeschichte.  Hie  Aufl.
Halle.  1898.

Petrazicki  (L.).  Lectures  on  the  Theory  of  Law  and
Morality.

Phillpotts  (Miss  B.  S.).  Kindred  and  Clan  in  the  Middle
Ages  and  after.  Camb.  1913.

Planiol  ( — ). Cours  de  droit  civil,  II. Paris.

Plowden  (E.). The  Commentaries  of. London. 1761.

Pollock  (Sir  F.).  Principles  of  Contract.  8th  ed.  Lon-
don. 1911.

and Maitland (F. W.). History of
English  Law,  I,  II. 2nd  ed. Camb. 1898.

Post  (A.  H.).  Afrikanische  Jurisprudenz.  2  bde.  Olden-
burg. 1887.


BIBLIOGRAPHY  381

Post  (A.  H.). Grundriss  der  Ethnologischen  Jurisprudenz.

Oldenburg  and  Leipzig. 1895.

Quftelet  (I.  A.  J.). Physique  sociale. Bruxelles. 1869.
Ribot  (T.  A.). German  Psychology  of  To-day. Trans,  by

J.  M.  Baldwin. New  York. 1886.
Rickert (H.). Die Grenzen der  naturwissenschaftlichen

Begriffsbildung. Freiburg  i.  B. 1896-1902.

Naturwissenschaft  und  Kulturwissenschaft.

Tubingen. 1912.

Koberty  (E.  de). La  Sociologie. Paris. 1881.

Russian  Academy  of  Sciences  Bulletin  for  1918. See  Lappo-

Danilevski.

St.  Simon  (due  de). Oeuvres  choisis,  I. Bruxelles. 1859.
Saleilles  (R.  de). Essai  d'une  theorie  generale  de  1'obliga-

tion  d'apres  le  pro  jet  du  code  civil  allemand. Paris.

1890.

L 'Individualisation de la peine. 2nd

ed. Paris. 1909.

Introduction a 1'etude du  droit civil


allemand. Paris. 1904.

La  personalite  juridique. Paris. 1910.

L'ceuvre juridique de. See Thaller,


Ge"ny  and  others. Paris. 1914.
Salmond (J.  W.). Jurisprudence;  or  the  theory  of  the

law. London. 1907.
Schaffle  (A.  E.  E.). Bau  und  Leben  des  sozialen  Korpers.

Tubingen. 1875.

Schnlze-Gaevernitz  (G.  von). Zum  sozialen  Frieden. Leip-
zig. 1890.
Schumpeter (J.). Literary Survey in Grundriss der

Sozialokonomik,  I. Tubingen. 1914  ff.
Scottish  Historical  Review,  XIV,  no.  55. See  Dicey.
Schmoller  (Gr.). Jahrbiicher  fiir  Gesetzgebung,  Verwaltung

und Volkswirtschaft im deutschen Reich. Leipzig.

1871.
Sigwart (C.). Logic. Trans, by H. Dendy. London.

1895.

Simmel  (G.). Kant. Leipzig. 1904.
Soziologie. Leipzig. 1908.


382  BIBLIOGRAPHY

Smithsonian  Institution. See  Boas.

Spencer (H.). The Man versus the State. London.

(1884)  1886.

Social  Statics. London. 1851.

Principles  of Sociology. London. 1876.

Spinoza (B.). Tractatus  Theologico-politicus. Hamburg.

1670.
Stammler  (R.). Die  Lehre  vom  richtigen  Rechte. Berlin.

1902.
Stammler (R.). Theorie der  Rechtswissenschaft. Halle.

1911.
Wirtschaft  und  Recht  nach  der  materi-

alistischen  Geschichtsauffassung. Leipzig. 1896.
Steinmetz  (S.  R.). Ethnologische  Studien  zur  ersten  Ent-

wickelung  der  Strafe. Leipzig. 1894.
Stephen  (H.  J.). A  Treatise  on  the  Principles  of  Plead-
ing in  Civil  Actions,  with  preface  by  S.  B.  Williston.

Camb.,  Mass.
Stephen  (Sir  J.  F.). History  of  Criminal  Law. London.

1833.
Stephen  (L.). The  English  Utilitarians,  I. London. 1900.

The  Science  of  Ethics. London. 1882.
Stintzing  (R.). See  Landsberg.
Tarde (J.  G.). Les  lois  de  limitation. 2nd  ed. Paris.

1895.

Penal  Philosophy. Trans,  by  R.  Howell.

London. 1912.

Psychologic  economique. Paris. 1902.


Thaller (E.),  Geny (F.) and  others. L'oeuvre  juridique
de  R.  Saleilles. Paris. 1914.

Thayer (J. B.). Cases on Evidence. 2nd ed. Camb.,
Mass. 1900.

— A  Preliminary  Treatise  on  Evidence  at
the  Common  Law. (Printed  U.  S.  A.) London. 1898.

Thibaut  (A,  F.  J.). Theorie  der  logischen  Auslegung  des
romischen  Rechts. Altona. 1799.

Times  Law  Reports,  XXIII  ff.

Trevelyan  (G.  M.). Clio,  a  Muse,  and  other  essays. Lon-
don. 1913.


BIBLIOGRAPHY  383

Vinogradoff  (Sir  P.).  Common  Sense  in  Law.  (Home
University  Library.)  London.  (1914.)

Roman  Law  in  Mediaeval  Europe.

London.  1909.

The  Teaching  of  Sir  Henry  Maine.


London. 1904.
on  Comparative  Jurisprudence  in


Enc.  Brit, llth  ed.

Ed.  of  Essays  in  Legal  History,


q.v.
Vinogradoff (Sir  P.). Ed.  of  Oxford  Studies  in  Social

and  Legal  History. Vols.  I-V. Oxford. 1909-16.
Ward  (Lester  F.). Outlines  of  Sociology. New  York  and

London. 1898.

Webb  (S.). Socialism  in  England. London. 1890.
Webb  (S.  and  B.). Industrial  Democracy. New  ed. Lon-
don. 1902.
Weber (M.). Roscher  und Knies  in  Schmoller's Jahr-

biicher  fur  Gesetzgebung,  Verwaltung  und  Volkswirt-

schaft. Leipzig. 1871.
Whetham (W. C. D.). The Recent Development of

Mechanical  Science. 4th  ed. London. 1909.
Wieser (F, von). Theorie der gesellschaftlichen Wirt-

schaft  in  Grundriss  der  Sozialokonomik. Tubingen.

1914.
Windelband (W.). Naturwissenschaft  und  Geisterwissen-

schaft  Begriffsbildung. Strassburg. 1904.

Die  Philosophic  im  Beginn  des  zwan-

zigsten  Jahrhundert. Heidelberg. 1907.

Windscheid  (B.). Lehrbuch  des  Pandektenrechts. 9th  ed.

Frankfurt. 1906.

Wordsworth  (W.). Prelude. Boston,  Mass. 1888.
Worms (E.). La  Sociologie  et  la  morale. (Annales  de

Tinstitut  international  de  sociologie.) Paris. 1897.
Wundt  (W.). Ethik. Stuttgart. 1886.

Lectures  on  Human  and  Animal  Psychol-
ogy. Trans,  by  J.  E.  Creighton  and  E.  B.  Titchener.
London. 1894.

Logik. Stuttgart. 1880.


384  BIBLIOGRAPHY

Wundt  (W.). Volkerpsychologie. 2eAufl. Leipzig. 1904.
Zeitschrift  fiir  gesammte  Staatswissenschaft,  XXX. See

Gierke  (0.).
fiir  Kechtsgeschichte. Ed.  by  F.  v. Savigny

and  Eic'hhorn. Weimer. 1861-78.

fiir vergleichende Eechtswissenschaft. Stutt-


gart. 1878  ff.


LIST  OF  BOOKS  REFERRED  TO  IN  THE  VOLUME
II. TRIBAL  LAW

Aarboger  for  Nordisk  Oldkyndighed. See  Lauridsen.

Academy,  XVIII. See  Goldziher.

Acts  of  the  Chapter  of  the  Collegiate  Church  of  S.S.  Peter

and Wilfrid, Bipon. 1452-1506. Surtees Society,

LXIV. 1875. London  (1835-).
American  Anthropological  Association,  Memoirs  of  the. See

Hartland.
Amira  (K.  von). Grundriss  des  germanischen  Rechts. 3rd.

ed. Strassburg. 1913.

Nordgermanisches Obligationenrecht.

Leipzig. 1882-95.

Der  Stab  in  der  germanischen  Rechts-


symbolik.  Abhandl.  der  kais.  bayer.  Akad.  des  wissen-

schaften,  philos.,  philolog.  und  histor. Klasse. Miin-

chen. 1909.
Ancient  Laws  and  Institutes  of  Wales. Ed.  by  Aneurin

Owen. London. 1841.

L'Annee  sociologique,  VIII. 1905. See  Durkheim.
Apastamba. See  Sacred  Books  of  the  East,  II.
Arbois  de  Jubainville (M.  H.  de). Cours  de  litterature

celtique,  1895. Paris. 1883-
La  famille  celtique.

Paris. 1904.

Archivio  giuridico. See  Brugi.

Aristotle. Politics. Trans,  by  B.  Jowett. Oxford. 1885.
Atkinson  (J.  J.). Primal  Law. In  Social  Origins. By  A.

Lang. London,  New  York  and  Bombay. 1903.
Aulus  Gellius. Noctes  Atticae. 2  vols. Ed.  by  C.  Hosius.

Teubner  Lips. 1903.

Bachofen  (J.  J.). Das  Mutterrecht. Stuttgart. 1861.

385


386  BIBLIOGRAPHY

Baden-Powell (B.  H.). The  Indian  Village  Community.

London,  New  York  and  Bombay. 1896.
Balzer  (0.). 0  Zadrudze  Slowianskei. Lwow. 1899.
Beauchet (L.). Histoire  du  droit  prive  de  la  republique

athenienne. 4  vols. Paris. 1897.
Bogisic  (V.). Zbornik  Pravnih  Obicaja. Zagreb. 1874.

On  the  Inokoshtina. Offprint  from  the  Journal  of  the

Ministry  of  Public  Instruction. (Russian.)
Bonfante (P.). On  Hereditas  and  Legata  in  Bullettino

dell'  Istituto  di  Diritto  Romano,  IV,  p.  97,  and  VII,

p.  151. Roma. 1891  and  1894.

Book  of  Rights. Ed.  with  trans,  and  notes  by  J.  0 'Dono-
van. Celtic  Society. Dublin. 1847.
Bracton (H.  de). De  legibus  et  consuetudinibus  Anglise.

Ed.  by  G.  E.  Woodbine. Yale  Historical  Publications.

New  Haven,  U.  S.  A. 1915.

Brandt  (K.  J.). Norsk  Retshistorie. Kristiania. 1880.
Brugi  in  Archivio  giuridico,  Vol.  33,  on  Voigt,  Die  XII

Tafeln.

Calendar  of  Scottish  State  Papers.

Brunner  (H.). Deutsche  Rechtsgeschichte. Leipzig. 1887.
Biihler  (J.  G.). See  West,
Bullettino  dell'  Istituto  di  Diritto  Romano. See  Bonfante

and  Costa.

Burckhardt (J.  L.). Travels  in  Arabia. London. 1829.
Caillemer  (E.). Le  droit  de  succession  legitime  a  Athenes.

Caen. 1879.
Caillemer  (R.)- La  formation  du  droit  francais  medieval

dans  les  travaux  de  M.  J.  Ficker  in  Annales  de  la

faculte  de  droit  et  des  lettres  d'Aix,  II,  and  Annales

de  la  faculte  de  droit  d'Aix,  I. Paris. 1906  and  1907.
Les  idees  coutumieres  de  la  renaissance

du  droit  remain  dans  le  sud-est  de  la  France,  in  Essays

in  Legal  History. London. 1913.
Chilperici  Edictum. See  Geifcken,  Lex  Salica.
Cicero (M. Tullius). Pro Murena. Pro Sex. Roscio.

Topica. Oxford  Classical  Texts.
Codex  Diplomaticus. Stettin. 1748. See  Kotliarevsky  on

Baltic  Slavs.


BIBLIOGRAPHY  387

Colebrooke  (H.  T.). Two  Treatises  on  the  Hindu  Law  of
Inheritance. Calcutta. 1810.

Mitakshara,  a  commentary  on  Yajna-

valkya. Trans,  by  H.  T.  C. Calcutta. 1865.

Corpus  Juris  Civilis. See  Mommsen.

Corpus  juris  Sueo-Gotorum  antiqui. Ed.  by  H.  S.  Collin

and  C.  J.  Schlyter. Stockholm. 1827-
Corpus  poeticum  Boreale. Ed.  and  trans,  by  G.  Vigfusson

and  F.  Y.  Powell. Oxford. 1883.
Costa (E.). I  luoghi  plautini  riferentisi  al  matrimonio,

in  Bullettino  deir  Istituto  di  Diritto  Romano,  II,  28  ff.

Roma. 1889.
Crawley  (E.). The  Mystic  Rose. London  and  N.  York.

1902.
Cuq  (E.). Manuel  des  institutions  juridiques  des  Romains.

Revised  ed. Paris. 1917.

Sur  le  testament  per  aes  et  libram  in  Nouvelle

revue  historique  de  droit  francais  et  etranger,  X,  537.
Paris. 1886.

Czaplicka (Miss M. A.). Aboriginal Siberia. Oxford.

1914.
Daremberg  (Ch.)  et  Saglio  (E.). Dictionnaire  des  antiquites

grecques  et  romaines. Paris. 1873-1917.
Dareste  (R.),  Haussoulier  (B)  and  Reinach  (T.). Recueil

des  inscriptions  juridiques  grecques. Paris. 1891.
Darmesteter (J.). Lettres  sur  Tlnde:  a  la  frontiere  Af-

ghane. Paris. 1888.
Delbriick (B.). Die  Indogermanischen Verwandtschafts-

namen. (Abhandl.  der  philolog.  histor.  Classe  der  k.

sachs.  gesellsch.  der  Wissenschaften. Bd.  XI,  p.  379.)

Leipzig. 1889.

Dharmasutras. See  Sacred  Books  of  the  East.
Digesta. See  Mommsen.
Dionysius (of  Halicarnassus) . Antiquitatum  Romanarum

quae  supersunt. Ed.  by  C.  Jacoby. Teubner. Lips.

1885.
Dopsch  (A.). Die  altere  Sozial-  und  Wirtschaftsverfassung

der  Alpen-Slaven. Weimar. 1909.
Dorsey (J. 0.). Omaha Sociology. (Third Annual  Re-


388  BIBLIOGRAPHY

port  of  the  Bureau  of  Ethnology  to  the  Secretary  of
the  Smithsonian  Institution.)  "Washington,  U.  S.  A.
1885.

Douie  (J.  M.).  Punjab  Settlement  Manual.  Revised  ed.
Lahore.  1909.

Durkheim  (£.).  The  Elementary  Forms  of  the  Religious
Life.  Trans,  by  J.  W.  Swain.  (Social  Science  Series.)
London.  1915.

Sur  1'organization  matrimoniale  des  so-
cietes  australiennes. (In  L'annee  sociologique,  VIII.)
Paris. 1905.

Ebbo.  Vita  Ottonis.  See  Monumenta  Germaniae  Historica,
Scriptores,  XII  (Pertz).

Efimenko  (Mrs.).  And  ''Southern  Russia."  St.  Peters-
burg, 1905  (Russ.).

Ehrlich  (E.).  Grundlegung  der  Sociologie  des  Rechts.
Miinchen  und  Leipzig.  1913.

Encyclopaedia  Britannica. llth  ed. Camb. 1910.

Encyklopedya  Polska. See  Kadlec.

Encyclopaedia  of  Religion  and  Ethics.  Ed.  by  J.  Hastings.
Edinburgh  and  New  York.  1914-18.

English  Historical  Review. See  Stevenson.

Erdmann  (W.).  Die  Entwicklung  der  Testierfreiheit  im
romischen  Recht  in  Zeitschrift  fiir  vergleichende
Rechtswissenschaft.  herausg.  F .  Benhoft,  G.  Cohn
und  J.  Kohler.  Stuttgart.  XXII.  1908.

Essays  in  Legal  History  read  before  the  International  Con-
gress of  Historical  Studies  in  London,  1913.  Ed.  by
P.  Vinogradoff.  London.  1913.

Fallaize  (E.  N.  Gr.).  On  Family  (Primitive)  in  Hastings'
Encyclopaedia  of  Religion  and  Ethics,  V.

Feist  (S.).  Kultur,  Ausbreitung  und  Herkunft  der  Indo-
Germanen.  Berlin.  1913.

Festi  (Sex.  Pompei).  De  verborum  significatu  quae  super-
sunt  cum  Pauli  epitome.  (Ed.  by  W.  M.  Lindsay.)
Teubner.  Lips.  1913.

Ficker  (J.).  Untersuchungen  zur  Erbenfolge  der  ostger-
manischen  Rechte,  Vols.  I-V,  VI  (posthumous).  Inns-
bruck. 1891-1904.


BIBLIOGRAPHY  389

Finsen  (V.). See  Gragas.

Fragmenta  Historicorum  Graecorum.  Ed.  by  V.  Langlois.
Paris  1870.

Fraser  (Sir  W.).  The  Sutherland  Book.  3  vols.  Edin-
burgh. 1892.

Frazer  (Sir  J.  G.).  Folklore  in  the  Old  Testament.  Lon-
don. 1918.

Totemism and Exogamy. 4 vols.

London. 1910.

Fustel  de  Coulanges  (N.-D.).  La  Cite  antique.  Paris.
1864.

Origin of Property in

Land. Trans,  by  M.  Ashley. (Social  Science  Series.)
London. 1891.

Gai. Institutiones  Juris  Civilis. Trans,  by  E.  Poste. 4th

ed.  revised  by  E.  A.  Whittuck. Oxford. 1904.
Gait  (E.  A.). Census  of  India,  1891. Assam. Shillong.

1892.

Geffcken  (H.). Lex  Salica. Leipzig. 1898.
Gellius. See  Aulus  Gellius.
Gesetze  der  Angelsachsen. See  Liebermann.
Gillen  (F.  J.). See  Spencer.
Giraldus  Cambrensis. Descriptio  Kambriae. Opera. Ed.

by  J.  S.  Brewer. Rolls  Series. 21a'gh-
Giraud-Teulon  (A.). Les  Origines  de  la  famille. Geneva.

1874.
Glanville  (E.  de). Tractatus  de  Legibus  et  Consuetudini-

bus  regni  Angliae. London. 1780.
Glotz (G,). La solidarite de la famille dans le droit

criminel  en  Grece. Paris. 1904.
Gotz (I. K.). Das russische Recht, I, II. Stuttgart.

1910.
Goldziher  (I.). In  the  Academy,  XVIII,  p.  26. London.

1880.
GopSevic (S.). Oberalbanien und seine higa. Leipzig.

1881.

Gordon  (Sir  R.). The  Genealogical  History  of  the  Earl-
dom of  Sutherland. Edinburgh. 1813.
Gragas. Ed. by  V.  Finsen. (Nordiske Oldskrifter  ud-


390  BIBLIOGRAPHY

givne  af  det  nordiske  Literatur-Samfund.)  11, 17,  21,
22,  32.  Kjobenhavn.  1850-70.

Grimm  (J.).  Deutsche  Rechtsalterthiimer.  4th  ed.  Leip-
zig. 1899.

Gwentian  Code. See  Ancient  Laws  and  Institutes  of  Wales.

Hanssen  (G.).  Agrarhistorische  Abhandlungen.  Leipzig.
1884.

Harkavy  (A.  E.).  Mohammedan  Writers  on  Slavs  and
Russia.  (Russian.)  St.  Petersburg.  1870.

Hartland  (E.  S.).  Matrilineal  Kinship  and  the  Question
of  its  Priority.  (Memoirs  of  the  American  Anthropo-
logical Association,  IV,  no.  1.  Jan.-Mar.  1917.  Lan-
caster, Pa.  1917.)

Primitive  Paternity.  2  vols.  London.

1909,  10.

Harvard  Law  Review. See  Vinogradoff.

Hastings  (J.).  Encyclopedia  of  Religion  and  Ethics.
Edinb.  and  N.  York.  1914-18.

Herbordus.  Dialogus.  See  Monumenta  Gennaniae  His-
torica.  Scriptores,  XX.  (Pertz.)

Herodotus.  Histories.  Trans,  by  G.  Rawlinson.  London.
1862.

Hesiod.  Opera  et  Dies.  3rd  ed.  of  Teubner.  Leipzig.
1913.

Heusler  (A.).  Das  Strafrecht  der  Islander  Sagas.  Leip-
zig. 1911.

Hildebrand  (R.)«  Recht  und  Sitte  auf  den  primitiven
wirtschaftlichen  Kulturstufen.  Jena.  1907.

Hill-Tout  (C.).  British  North  America.  The  native  races
of  the  British  Empire.  London.  1907.

Hirt  (H.  A.).  Die  Indogermanen,  ihre  Verbreitung  ihre
Urheimat  und  ihre  Kultur.  Strassburg.  1905.

Hirzel  (R.).  Themis,  Dike  und  Verwandten.  Leipzig.
1907.

Historia  et  Cartularium  Monasterii  S.  Petri  Gloueestriae.
Rolls  Series.  1867.

Hoops  (J.).  Waldbaume  und  Kulturpflanzen  im  ger-
manischen  Altertum.  Strassburg.  1905.


BIBLIOGRAPHY  391

Hose  (C.)  and  McDougall  (W.).  The  Pagan  Tribes  of
Borneo.  London.  1912.

Howitt  (A.  W.).  The  Dieri  and  other  Kindred  Tribes  of
Central  Australia.  (In  the  Journal  of  the  Royal
Anthropological  Institute,  XX,  no.  1.  Aug.,  1890.)

Hruza  (E.).  Beitrage  zur  Geschiehte  des  griechischen  und
romischen  Familienrechts.  Erlangen.  1894.

Ihering  (R.  von).  Geist  des  romischen  Rechts  auf  den
verschiedenen  Stufen  seiner  Entwickelung.  Leipzig.
1852  ff.

Isaeus. Speeches. Ed.  by  W.  Wyse. Camb. 1904.

Jevons  (F.  B.).  Kin  and  Custom.  In  Journal  of  Philology,
XVI,  no.  xxxi.  Camb.  1888.

Jirecek  (C.  J.) . Svod  Zakonov  Slovanskyh. Prague. 1880.

Jolly  (J.).  Recht  und  Sitte.  (Grundriss  der  indo-
arischen  Philologie.)  Strassburg.  1896.

Journal  of  Philology. See  Jevons.

Journal  of  the  Royal  Anthropological  Institute.  See
Howitt.

Journal  and  Proceedings  of  the  Royal  Society  of  New  South
Wales.  See  Matthews.

Jyske  Lov. Ed.  by  N.  M.  Petersen. Kobenhavn. 1850.

Kadlec  (A.). In  Encyklopedya  Polska. Cracow. 1912-

Karlowa  (0.). Romische  Rechtsgeschichte. Leipzig. 1892.

Keith  (A.  B.). See  Macdonell.

Kluchevsky  (V.  0.).  History  of  Russia.  Trans,  by  C.  J.
Hogarth.  London  and  N.  York.  1911.

Kohler  (J.). Zur  Urgeschichte  der  Ehe. Stuttgart. 1897.

Koran. Trans,  by  M.  Rodwell. Everyman's  Library.

Kotliarevsky  (A.  A.).  On  the  Baltic  Slavs.  Works,  in  4
vols.  (Russian).  Transactions  of  the  Petrograd  Acad-
emy. Section  of  Russian  Language.  Vols.  47-50.
Petrograd.  1889-95.

Kovalevsky  (M.  M.).  Coutume  contemporaine  et  loi  an-
cienne.  Paris.  1893.

Tableau  des  origines  et  de  revolu-
tion de  la  famille  et  de  la  propriete.  Stockholm.
1890.


392  BIBLIOGRAPHY

Krauss  (F.  S.). Sitte  und  Brauch  der  Siidslaven. Wien.

1885.
Krishnan Pandalai (K.). Succession and Partition in

Marumakatayam  Law. Trivandrum. 1914.
Lambert (&). Fonction  du  droit  civil  compare. Paris.

1903.

Lang  (A.). Social  Origins. Primal  Law. By  J.  J.  Atkin-
son. London,  N.  York  and  Bombay. 1903.
Lauridsen  (P.). In  Aarboger  for  Nordisk  Oldkyndighed,

II  Ser.,  Vol.  XI. Copenhagen. 1896.
Leist (B. W.). Graeco-italische Rechtsgeschichte. Jena.

1884.
Lenel (0.). Zur Geschichte der Heredis Institutio, in

Essays  in  Legal  History.
Lex  Alamannorum. See  Monument  a  Germaniae  Historica.

Leges,  V. Ed.
Lex  Bajuwariomm. Ibid.
Lex  Frisionum. Ibid.

Lex  Thuringorum. Ibid. (Angliorum  et  Werinorum.)
Liebermann  (F.). Die  Gesetze  der  Angelsachsen,  Herausg.

im Auftrage der Savigny Stiftung. Halle. 1898-

1912.
Lindsay  (R,,  of  Pitscottie). The  Historic  and  Cronicles  of

Scotland  from  the  slauchter  of  King  James  the  First

to the one thousande fyve hundreith thrie scoir

fyfteen  yeir. (Scottish Text Society.) 42, 43, 60

(1911). Edinburgh. 1899.
Lipsius (J. H.). Attisches Recht und Rechtsverfahren.

Leipzig. 1915.
Longnon  (A.). Polyptyque  de  L'Abbaye  de  Saint-Germain

des  Pres. Societe  de  1  'histoire  de  Paris. Paris. 1895.
Lysias. Speeches. Oxford  Classical  Texts.
Macdonnell  (A.  A.) and  Keith (A.  B.). Vedic  Index  of

names  and  subjects. London. 1912.
McDougall  (W.). See  Hose.
McLennan  (J.  F.). Studies  in  ancient  history. New  ed.

London. 1886. Second  series. London  and  N.  York.

1896.


BIBLIOGRAPHY  393

Maine  (H.).  Lectures  on  the  Early  History  of  Institu-
tions. London.  1875.

Village  Communities  in  the  East  and  West.

London. 1871.

Maitland  (F.  W.). History  of  English  Law. See  Pollock.

Halinowski  (B.).  The  family  among  the  Australian
aborigines.  (Univ.  of  Lond.  monographs  on  Sociol-
ogy.) London.  1913.

Manu,  Laws  of. See  Sacred  Books  of  the  East.

Matthews  (B.  H.).  Notes  on  Some  Native  Tribes  of  Aus-
tralia, in  Journal  and  Proceedings  of  the  Royal  So-
ciety of  New  South  Wales,  XL.  Sydney.  1906.

Maurer  (K.  v.).  Das  Staatsrecht  des  islandischen  Frei-
staates.  Publ.  by  the  Norwegian  Academy.  Chris-
tiania.  1909.

Mayne  (J.  D.).  A  Treatise  on  Hindu  Law  and  Usage.
4th  ed.  Madras.  1888.

Memoirs  of  the  American  Anthropological  Association.  See
Hartland.

Migne  (L'abbe  J.  P.)  Patrologiae  cursus  completus,  II,
Ixxxix.,  Ser.  I-II.  Paris.  1844-65.

Miklosich  (F.).  Die  Blutrache  bei  den  Slaven,  in  Denk-
schriften  der  kaiserl.  Akad.  der  Wissenschaft.  Phi-
losophisch-historische  classe.  Bd.  XXXVI.  Vienna.
1888.

Mitteis  (L.). Romisches  Privatrecht. Leipzig. 1908.

Mommsen  (Th.).  Corpus  Juris  Civilis.  Digesta.  Berlin.
1872.

Romisches  Staatsrecht  in  Handbuch  der

romischen  Alterthumer. Ed.  by  J.  Marquardt  und
Th.  Mommsen. Leipzig. 1887.

Romische  Geschichte. Berlin. 1868.


Monumenta Germaniae Historica. Leges. Scriptores.

(Pertz.) Berlin  and  Hanover. 1877-
Morgan  (F.). See  Vinogradoff.
Morgan  (L,  H.). Ancient  Society. London. 1877.
Miillenhoff (K.  V.). Deutsche  Altertumskunde. Berlin.

1870.
Narada. See  Sacred  Books  of  the  East,  XXXIII.


394  BIBLIOGRAPHY

Native  Races  of  the  British  Empire,  The.  British  North
America.  C.  Hill-Tout.  London.  1907.

Neilson  (G.). Trial  by  Combat. Glasgow. 1890.

New  English  Dictionary.  Ed.  by  J.  A.  H.  Murray.  Ox-
ford. 1884-

Nouvelle  revue  historique  de  droit  frangais  et  etranger.
See  Cuq.

O'Donovan  (J.).  The  Book  of  Rights.  Celtic  Society.
Dublin.  1847.

Ostgota-Lagen. See  Corpus  juris  Sueo-Gotorum  antiqui,  II.

Partsch  (J.).  Griechisches  Biirgschaftsrecht.  Leipzig.
1909.

Paul  (H.).  Grundriss  der  germanischen  Philologie.  Strass-
burg  (Darmstadt).  1889-90.

Pennant  (T.).  Tour  in  Scotland,  1769,  in  Vol.  I.  of  W.
Mayor's  British  Tourist.  London.  1809.

Fertile  (A.). Storia  del  Diritto  Italiano. Roma. 1894.

Phillpotts  (Miss  B.  S.).  Kindred  and  Clan  in  the  Middle
Ages  and  after.  (Camb.  Arch,  and  Ethn.  Series.)
Cambridge.  1913.

Pollock  (Sir  F.)  and  Maitland  (F.  W.).  History  of  English
Law  before  the  time  of  Edw.  I.  2nd  ed.  Camb.
1898.

Polyptyque  de  1'abbaye  de  S-Germain  des  Pres. See  Longnon.

Punjab  Customary  Law. See  Tupper.

Reallexicon  der  Indogermanischen  Altertumskunder.  See
Schrader.

Rig-Veda-Samhita.  Trans,  by  H.  H.  Wilson.  3  vols.  Lon-
don. 1888.

Risley  (Sir  H.  H.).  Tribes  and  Castes  of  Bengal.  Cal-
cutta. 1891.

Rivers  (W.  H.  R.).  History  of  Melanesian  Society.
Camb.  1914.

Kinship  and  Social  Organization.
(Studies  in  econ.  and  polit.  science.) London. 1914.

On  Marriage  in  Encyclopaedia  of


Religion  and  Ethics,  VIII.

Robertson  (E.  W.). Historical  Essays  in  connexion  with
the  land,  the  ehurch,  etc. Edinburgh. 1872.


BIBLIOGRAPHY  395

Bossier  (E.)  in  Zeitschrift  fur  Ethnologie,  XXX. 1898.

(Verhandlungen  der  Berliner  Gesellschaft  fiir  Anthro-

pologie,  20.  Bericht  iiber  seine  fiir  die  kaiserl.  russ.

Archaologische Commission unternommenen Unter-

suchungen  in  Gouv.  Elizabethpol.) Berlin. 1898.
Roth  (H.  Ling). The  Aborigines  of  Tasmania. London.

1890.

Russian  Pravda,  Troitzky  MS. See  Gotz.
Sacred  Books  of  the  East. Translated  by  various  scholars

and  ed.  by  F.  Max  Muller. Oxford. 1879-
Sacred  Laws  of  the  Aryas. See  Sacred  Books  of  the  East,  II.
St.  German  (Chr.). Dialogue  between  a  Doctor  of  Divinity

and  a  Student  in the  Laws of England. London.

1532.
Sarvadhikari  Rajkumar. Principles  of  the  Hindu  Law  of

Inheritance. (Tagore  Lectures.) Calcutta. 1882.
Saxo Grammaticus. Vita et Passio S. Adalberti. See

Kotliarevsky  on  the  Baltic  Slavs.

Schlyter  (C.  J.). See  Corpus  juris  Sueo-Gotorum  antiqui.
Schrader (0.). Reallexicon  der  Indogermanischen  Alter-

tumskunder. Strassburg. 1901.

Sprachvergleichung und Urgeschichte.

3rd  ed. Jena. 1906.
Schulin (F.). Das  griechische  Testament  verglichen  mit

dem  romischen. Basel. 1882.
Schurtz (H.). Altersklassen  und Mannerbiinde. Berlin.

1902.

Scott  (Sir  W.). The  Monastery,  Rob  Roy,  Waverley.
Scottish  Text  Society. See  Lindsay  (R.).
Seebohm  (F.). The  English  Village  Community. 2nd  ed.

London. 1883.

Tribal  Custom  in  Anglo-Saxon  Law. Lon-
don (etc.). 1902.

The Tribal System in Wales. 2nd ed.


London  (etc.). 1904.
Seliginann  (C.  G.  and  B.  Z.). The  Veddas. (Camb.  Arch.

and  Ethn.  Series.) Camb. 1911.
Senart (&). Les  castes  dans  1'Inde,  les  faits  et  le  sys-

teme. Paris. 1896.


396  BIBLIOGRAPHY

Bering  (M.). Erbrecht  und  Agrarverfassung  in  Schleswig-

Holstein. Berlin. 1900.
Skcne  (W.  F.). The  Highlanders  of  Scotland. Ed.  by  A.

MacBain. Stirling. 1902.
Smirnoff  (J.  MT.). Outlines  of  a  Cultural  History  of  the

Southern  Slavs. 2  vols. (Russian.) Kazan. 1900.
Smith (G. Elliot). The Migrations of Early Culture.

Manchester  Memoirs,  Vol.  LIX,  no.  10. 1915.

Primitive  Man. (Offprint  from  the

proceedings  of  the  British  Academy,  VII.)

Smith (W.  Robertson). Kinship  and  Marriage  in  Early
Arabia. New  ed. London. 1903.

Smithsonian Institution, Report to Secretary of. See
Dorsey.

Snorri  Sturluson. See  Sturluson.

Solmsen  (F.). Inscriptions  Graecae  ad  inlustrandas  dia-
lectos  selectae. 3rd  ed. Teubner. Leipzig. 1910.

Spalding  Club,  miscellany  of. See  Stuart.

Spencer  (W.  B.)  and  Gillen  (F.  J.). Across  Australia. Lon-
don. 1912.

The Native Tribes of

Central  Australia. London  and  N.  York. 1899.

The  Northern  Tribes  of


Central  Australia. London  and  N.  York. 1904.

Stemann  (Chr.  L.  E.).  Dansk  Retshistorie.  Kjobenhavn.
1871.

Stevenson  (W.  H.).  Yorkshire  Surveys  and  other  XIth
century  Documents  in  the  York  Gospels.  (In  the
English  Historical  Review,  Jan.,  1912.)  London.

Strabo. Ed.  by  A.  Meineke. Teubner. Lips. 1895-98.

Strachan-Davidson  (J.  L.).  Problems  of  the  Roman  Crim-
inal Law.  Oxford.  1912.

Stuart  (J.).  The  Family  of  Rose  of  Kilravock,  in  the  mis-
cellany of  the  Spalding  Club,  1848.  Aberdeen  (1841-
52).

Sturluson  (Snorri).  Heimskringla  udgivne  for  Samfund
til  udgivelse  af  gammel  nordisk  litteratur  ved  F.
Jonsson.  Kobenhavn.  1893-1901.


BIBLIOGRAPHY  397

Surtees  Society.  See  Acts  of  the  Chapter  of  the  Church  of
S.S.  Peter  and  Wilfrid.  Ripon.

Survey  of  the  Honour  of  Denbigh. See  Vinogradoff.

Tacitus  (Cornelius). Germania. Oxford  Classical  Texts.

Taranger  (A.).  Transfer  of  Land  in  Old  Norwegian  Law
in  Essays  in  Legal  History.

Thomas  (N.  W.).  Kinship  Organization  and  Group  Mar-
riage in  Australia.  (Camb.  Arch,  and  Ethn.  Series.)
Camb.  1906.

Tupper  (C.  L.). Punjab  Customary  Law. Calcutta. 1881.

Uplands-Lagen. See  Corpus  juris  Sueo-Gotorum  antiqui,  III.

Venedotian  Code. See  Wade-Evans.

Vinogradoff  (Sir  P.).  English  Society  in  the  Eleventh  Cen-
tury. Oxford.  1908.

Geschlecht  und  Verwandschaft  im  alt-

norwegischen  Recht. in  Zeitschrift fiir Sozial- und
Wirtschaftsgeschichte,  V. Freiburg  i.  B. 1896-99.

The  Growth  of  the  Manor. 2nd  ed.


London. 1911.

on Ordeal, Christian, Greek, in  En-


cyclopaedia of  Religion  and  Ethics,  IX.
on  Succession,  in  Encycl.  Brit, llth


ed. Camb. 1910.

Transfer of Land in Anglo-Saxon


Law,  m  Harvard  Law  Review. Boston,  Mass. 1909.
Villainage  in  England. Oxford. 1892.


Vinogradoff (Sir  P.) and  Morgan (F.). Survey of  the

Honour  of  Denbigh,  in  British  Academy  Records  of

the  Social and  Economic History  of England and

Wales,  Vol.  I. London. 1914.
Viollet (P.). Histoire  du  droit  civil  frangais. 3rd  ed.

Paris. 1905.
Wade-Evans (A. W.). Welsh Mediaeval Law. Oxford.

1909.

Waitz  (0.). Deutsche  Verfassungsgeschichte. Kiel. 1844-
Weber  (M.). Die  romische  Agrargeschichte  in  ihrer  Be-

deutung  fiir  das  Staats-  und  Privatrecht. Stuttgart.

1891.
West  (E.)  and  Btthler  (J.  G.). A  Digest  of  the  Hindu  Law


398  BIBLIOGRAPHY

of  Inheritance,  Partition,  and  Adoption. 3rd  ed. 2

vols. Bombay. 1884.
Westermarck  (E.). History  of  Human  Marriage. 2nd  ed.

London. 1894.

Westgota-Lagen. See  Corpus  juris  Sueo-Gotorum  antiqi,  I.
Wissler  (C.). Diffusion  of  Culture  in  the  Plains  of  North

America. (Congres  internat.  des  Americanistes, 15e

session  Tom.  2,  p.  39. Quebec. 1907.
Yajiiavalkya. See  Colebrooke.
Zeitschrift fur  Ethnologic  und ihre Hiilfswissenschaften.

See  Bossier.

fur Sozial- und Wirtschaftsgeschichte. See

Vinogradoff.
fur  vergleichende  Eechtswissenschaft. See  Erd-


mann.

Zimmern (A. E.). The Greek Commonwealth. Oxford.
1911.


INDEX TO VOLUME I


a  dicto  secundum  quid  ad  dic-
tum simpliciter,  5  f .

Abbey  of  Medhamsted,  365.

Abergele,  330.

Abraham, union with Sarah,
186.

accusation  by  kindred  in  Greek
law,  303.

Achilles'  shield,  347.

acquisition,  76.

Act,  Criminal  Justice  Adminis-
tration, of  1914,  54  n.
Prevention of Crime, of
1908,  59  n.

activity  and  reception,  37.

actor,  the,  10  f .

Acts  of  1852  and  1854,  9.
of  Enclosure,  341.
of Judicature of 1874 and
1876,  9.

adaptation,  in  social  evolution,
170.

additiones  sapientum,  362.

adgnatus  proximus,  290.

administration  of  law  by  tribal
federation,  345.

admission  of  evidence,  11.

adoption,  289,  302.

adrogatio,  292.

adscripti  glebae,  286.

adulterer,  action against,  356.

aet,  317.

affatomia,  366.

affection,  46,  48  n.

affirmation,  absolute  and  condi-
tional, 5.

affirmations,  9.

Agariste.  marriage  of,  251.

ager  publicus,  327.

Aghani,  193  n.,  201,  211f.,n.,
299.

agnatic  system,  204,  300  ff.

among ancient Aryans,
227.


agnatic  system,  in  Roman  and

Greek  law,  206  f .
tendencies in Brittany and

Great  Britain,  371.
agnatism, among Celts of  N.

Wales,  317.
in  Greece,  207,  301  ff.
and  wergeld,  314.
agreements,  28  ££.,  347  f.,

parol,  21.

agriculture,  communal,  331.
and primitive land tenure,

322.
Alamannic  law  as  to  land,  335,

364.
Albanian  blood  feud,  311.

clans,  etc.,  344.
Alderson,  on  burden  of  proof,

13.

on  evidence,  15.
D'Alembert,  see  Diderot,
allegations,  classification  of,  9.
altruism,  46  ff.,  109.
Amazons,  224.
America (N.), matrimonial

groups  in,  183.
United  States  of,  as  a  type

of  federation,  352.

and  sovereignty,  121  f .

American  colonies,  declarations

of  right  of,  111.
Ames,  J. B., lecture on Law

and  Morals,  3  n.
on valuable consideration,

21.

afi^i6p6fua)  234.
dvaipeoccf  234.

analogies, between legal cus-
toms in Germanic and
Romance  countries,  370.
from  private  law,  limits  of,

90  ff.

anarchy,  140.
anatomy,  comparative,  75.


399


400


INDEX


ancestors, reincarnation of,

183  n.,  206.

worship  of,  156,  223  ff .
ancestral  shares  in  land,  326  f.
ia,  304.
f,  227.
ancient  law,  formalism  of,  364.

formulation  of,  361.
lawgiver,  function  of,  361.
trial,  348.
Anglo-Saxon  law,  147.

Laws,  on  blood  feud,  312  f.
marriage,  252  ff.
township,  342.

Anson,  Sir  W.  B.,  on  past  con-
sideration, 21  n.
on  validity  of  promise,  21.
anthropo-geography,  75.
anthropological jurisprudence,

140  f.
researches in criminal law,

54  f.

anthropology,  75,  137  ff.
apperception,  38  n.
apportionment  of  claims (vil-
lage), 326.

of land, 384  f.; in Scandi-
navian law,  336.
appropriation, of land, 320,

324.
in marriage, 165, 171,  176,

236.

Arabian  inheritance,  180  n.
marriage  by capture,  180  f.
parentage  customs,  198.
wife-lending,  173  n.
arable,  division  of,  342.
arbitration, in blood feud,

310.
compulsory and voluntary,

346.
between members of clans,

345  f.
arbitrators in Frankish law,

354.

archaeological parallels  in Ar-
yan groups,  223.
archaaology, prehistoric, 75,

137  f.

Archangel,  271.
Aristotle,  67,  89,  154,  301.


Armenian,  group,  217;  lan-
guage, 215

army,  the,  discipline  and  mo-
rale, 93.
art,  75.

Arunta  tribe  of  Australia,
local  association  in,  205.
theory  of  procreation  of,

183.

Aryan  agnatism,  227.
marriage  custom,  236  ff.
migrations,  216.
mixture  of  races,  223.
original  home,  217.
origins,  215.

patriarchal  system,  224,  232.
position of women, 255  ff. ;

of  slaves,  258.
Arya-varna,  229.
association,  133.

Gierke's  theory  of,  132.
of  ideas,  35,  48 f.;  local,  205.
associationists,  106.
assumpsit,  20.
assumption,  11  f .
asega,  361.
Asia,  S. Eastern,  matrimonial

groups  in,  183.
assembly  of  warriors,  351  f .
assessment  of  burdens  on  com-
munity, 284.
assignations in land tenure,

284.

asura  vivaha,  242.
Athens,  adoption  at,  302;  land
tenure at, 326; matri-
lineal survivals, 224 ;
testamentary  powers  at,
28,  289.
Atkinson,  J. J.,  on exogamy,

180.
on the patriarchal theory,

165.

atonement,  56.
attention,  37  f.,  42.
Attorney  General  v.  West  Eid-

ing,  etc.,  16.
attung,  336.

Austin,  J.,  on  Blackstone,
117 n.;  on  common  law,
116  f.;  definition  of


INDEX


401


crime,  34;  doctrines  of,
115-21; on judges and
laws,  117  f.; on  judges
and  the  sovereign,  118;
on  sovereignty,  116.
Hobbes  and  Bentham,  115  f.
and  Maine,  139.

Australia,  169;  Commonwealth
of,  122.

Australian  cross  cousin  mar-
riage, 185;  position  of
women,  193  f . ;  societies,
171,  178 ;  subsidiary
unions,  173 ;  totemic
groups,  153;  tribes,
184.

tribes,  Barkun jee,  182 ;  Chau-
an,  205  f.;  Dieri,  173,
207;  Urabunna,  174  f.,
185,  208.

authority,  in  the  Joint  Family,
285;  of  king,  352;  pa-
ternal, 197,  232  ff.;  in
the  State,  113  f .

autonomy  of  clans,  345.

Avesta-Iranians,  229.

Avestic  language,  215.

avoidance,  8  f .,  11,  120,  176  ff.

Bachofen,  J.  J.,  on  matrilineal
institutions  in  Europe,
224 ;  on  monogamous
marriage,  164;  on  moth-
erhood, 188;  on  mother
right,  138.

Bacon,  105.

Baden-Powell,  B.  H.,  on  the
Pattidari  system,  281

Bahima  tribe  of  Africa,  poly-
andry, 200.

Bain,  A.,  on  association  of
ideas,  35.

Baltic  Slavs,  wife  common  to
father  and  son,  237.

Balzer,  0.,  on  Slav  Joint  Fam-
ily, 272.

bandhu,  301.

bann,  359.

Banyai  tribe  on  Zambesi,
195  n.

Bar,  the,  7.


Barkunjee  tribe  of  Austra-
lia, matrimonial  classes
among,  182.

Barristers  and  judicial  deci-
sions, 3.

Barth,  P.,  69  n.,  91  n.

Basques,  198,  223.

Bastian  on  ethnographic  paral-
lels, 139.

Bauch,  Bruno,  on  evolutionist
morality,  51  n.

baugr,  288,  302.

baugar,  302,  315  f .

baugatal,  315  f .

baugrygr,  287,  302.

Bavarian  law  as  to  single  com-
bat, 349;  as  to  land
transfer,  364.

Baziba  tribe  of  Africa,  poly-
andry, 200.

Beaconsfield,  Lord,  150.

beati  possidentes,  10.

Beccaria,  Marquis,  30,  115.

Belgium,  neutrality  of,  121.

Bella  Coola  tribe  of  N.  Amer-
ica, 186  n.

Bench,  the,  7.

Bentham,  J.,  on  codes,  114;  on
common  law,  114 f.;  on
criminal  law,  115;  defi-
nition of  crime,  34;  on
democratic  institutions,
114 ;  doctrines  of,  114  f . ;
and  empirical  school,
106;  Fallacies,  108  n.;
'  greatest  happiness  of
greatest  number/  110,
115  f . ;  on  hedonism,  45 ;
on  history  and  educa-
tion, 108  n.,  109  n.;  on
law  and  right,  91  n. ;
on  private  law,  115;  on
sovereignty,  114 ;  utili-
tarian agitation  of,  30;
on  utility,  110  n.,  115.
Austin  and  Hobbes,  115  f .

Beowulf,  Scyld's  funeral,  275.

bequests,  by  testament,  293.

Bernatzik,  E.,  on  state-protec-
tion, 95  f.

Beseler,  H.,  131.


402


INDEX


Beudant,  R.,  on  right  and  lib-
erty, 112  n.

biological view of evolution,
136.

biology,  4,  66.

Black  Book  of  St.  David's,  308.

Blackstone,  30,  35,  111,  117.

blood  feud,  53,  309  f .

blood  price,  347.

bocland,  288.

Bodin,  J.,  113.

Bogisic,  V.,  on  S.  Slavs,  270.

Boghazkeui inscriptions, 216.

Bohemia, legal procedure of
Czechs,  355.

bol,  282,  337.

boneddig,  284.

Bonfanti,  on  Roman  will,  292.

bo  no  rum  possessio,  294.

Bopp,  linguistic  studies  of,  215.

Borough  English,  286.

Bosanquet, B., on the state,
98  n.,  Ill  n.

Bossuet,  on  human  right,  113  n.

bovate,  283.

Bahima  tribe  of  Africa,  poly-
andry, 200.

Bracton,  27.

brahma  vivaha,  241.

Brahmanic jurisprudence, 75,

367.
marriage,  251.

Brahmanism,  98,  154,  158.
transmigration  of  souls,  184.

Bramwell, on criminal re-
sponsibility, 31.

Brandes,  126.

Bray,  on  criminal  responsibil-
ity, 32.

Brehon  Laws  of  Ireland,  230.
on  marriage,  255  ff .

Brenbagle  (Brynbagl),  333.

Brinz, A. v., on judge-made
law,  26.

Brittany,  370  f .

Biicher,  K.,  and  Meyer,  156.

Biilow,  von,  152.

Buddha,  51.

Buddhism,  98.

Bulgaria (Western),  334.

Bufnoir,  C.,  on  cause,  23  f .

burdens  on  community,  284.


Biirgerliches  Gesetzbuch,  131.
Burke,  E.,  on  French  Revolu-
tion, 88.
on  history,  127.

Caesar, C. Julius, on Celts,

230.

on  German  federation,  345.
on  migrating  Teutons,  334.
on polyandry in Britain,
223.

Caillemer,  R.,  on  customary
law  in  France,  3701

calata  comitia,  291  f .

California,  198.

Calojanni,  55  n.

on  penal  anthropology,  58.

Calvinism,  79  ff.

Campbell,  on  exclusion  of  evi-
dence, 14  f .

Candahar,  322.

Canon  law,  158  f .

Canonists,  154.

cantreds,  329.

capital,  76;  accumulation  of,
78.

capture  in  marriage,  196,  209,
240,  248.

caput  lupinum,  359.

Carlyle,  T.,  and  evidence,  11.
on  Heroes,  52  n.;  on  political
economy,  77.

Carnevale,  on  criminal  re-
sponsibility, 54.

Cartulary  of  St.  Bertin,  282.

cash  nexus,  276;  conditioning
tenure,  283;  and  nat-
ural husbandry,  78.

castes,  229;  in  S.  India,  324.

Catholicism,  98.

categories,  logical,  6-10.

causa  justa,  22.

requirement  of,  23  f.
and  contract,  23  f . ;  and  ef-
fect, 38,  72  n.,  73;  and
intention, 24; and mo-
tive, 23.
cause,  efficient,  6  f .

"  Caythe  "  gavell,  330.

Celtist  clans,  139,  153;  custom,
371;  exposition  of  pa-
rents, 235;  group  of


INDEX


403


Aryan  race,  230;  in-
vasion of  Europe,  216;
kin  organization,  317;
land  tenure,  327;  ex-
position of  children,
234;  relationship,  305;
tribal  system  and  town-
ship, 342.

Celts  of  N.  Wales,  317.

centuriata  comitia,  353.

Charlemagne,  public  execution
of  law  in  time  of,  359;
and  wergeld,  348.

Charmont,  on  natural  right,
146.

Chau-an  tribe  of  Australia  on
the  reincarnation  of  an-
cestors, 205  f.

chemistry,  4,  66.

chieftains  of  kindreds,  328.

Chilperic,  Edict  of,  335.

Choctaw  tribe  of  N.  America,
193.

choice,  43.

Christian  civilization,  154.

Christianity,  effect  of,  368.

Chronicle  of  Nestor,  240.

chronological  order  in  study  of
legal  history,  155  f .,
159.

chur,  churban,  228.

Church  and  State,  56,  122.
and  succession  of  women  to
land,  288.

churinga  among  Aruntas,
183  n.,  184.

Cicero,  M.  Tullius,  on  gentiles,
290.

citizenship,  90.

city  life,  social  tie  of,  157.

civic  law,  158.

civilized  world,  limits  of,
154.

Charondas,  301.

claims,  apportionment  of,  in
village,  326.

clan,  140;  description  of,
306  ff.;  and  tribe,  344.

clans,  arbitration  between
members,  345  f . ;  au-
tonomy of,  139,  153,
345 ;  combination  of,


344;  owning  land,  341;
territorial  communities,
324.

classes,  matrimonial,  182  f.
of  relationship,  138,  207  ff.

Classical  school,  106.

classici  testes,  294.

Clementi  tribe,  344  n.

co-aration,  in  Welsh  laws,  284,
331.

Code,  Bentham  on,  114.
German  civil,  131.
Napoleon,  118.

coemptio,  242  f.

coercion,  119  f .,  358  f .

cognatic  relationship,  300.

cognatism,  204  ff.,  306.
in  Pratorian  law,  206  f.
in worship of ancestors
(Aryan),  227.

cognition,  42.

co-heirs,  in  Germanic  Joint
Family,  272.

colieredes  et  participes,  327,
329.

coibcht,  247,  371.

collective  person,  the,  132.

colonies,  259.

colonization,  disciplinary,  59.

colonus,  259,  282.

colours,  66.

combat,  trial  by,  349.

combination,  47,  90.

of  clan,  etc.,  in  tribal  federa-
tion, 344.

ccmitia,  calata,  291  f . ;  cen-
turiata, 353;  curiata,
365.

command,  60,  62,  68.

Commentaries  (Indian),  240.

common  fund  (village),  326.

Common  Law,  7  ff.

Ames  on,  3n.;  Austin  on,
116  f . ;  Bentham  on,
114  f.

Common  Law,  interpretation
of,  16  f.;  and  logic,  15;
and  pre-existing  prin-
ciples, 26  f .

communal,  cultivation  of  land,
330 f.;  estates,  328.


404


INDEX


ownership  of  land  (Welsh),

327.
by  neighbours  (Frankish),

335.

tenure among Greeks and
Italians,  326.

communalism in land, 321;
Teutonic,  334; in  open-
field system, 340; in
Rome,  327.
among  S.  Slavs,  268.
tenurial,  332.

communism,  82.

communitas  villae,  332.

communities, Gierke, Maine,
and  v.  Maurer  on,  139  f.
of  Indians,  and  Slavs,  153;
see  also  village  commun-
ities.

community, the burdens on,
284;  confirmation  of  le-
gal transactions  by,  364 f.
in administration of prop-
. erty  in  marriage,  371.

comparative anatomy, 75.
folklore,  126;  jurisprudence,
138;  law,  67;  philology,
75,  127;  politics,  67;  re-
ligion, 67.

comparison of legal customs
by  J.  Fieker,  370  flf.

compensation, 310,  350.

competition,  68,  76,  145.

complaint  (legal),  355.

composition  in  blood  feud,  310.

compromise,  111.

compulsion,  113  f .,  119.

compulsory  arbitration,  346.

compurgation,  319,

compurgatores,  350.

Comte,  A.,  66,  68,  77,  127  n.,
141.

conation,  42.

concentric circles of relation-
ship, 303.

concepts,  rules  as  to,  5.

conciliation, within the tribe,
346.

conclusions,  5.

concubines,  donations  to,  23.
among Greeks, 243  f.; Os-
setes,  243;  Romans,  238.


conditional  affirmation,  15.
condomae,  273.
conduct,  4.
confarreatio,  242  f .
confession,  8  f .,  11.

and  avoidance,  120.
confirmation  of  legal  transac-
tions by  the  community,

364  f.

conflict  of  clan  and  tribe,  344.
Congress  of  U.  S.  A.,  352.
consacramentales,  350.
consanguinity,  204.
conscience,  49  flf.,  112.
consent,  in  law,  90.
conservatism  of  law,  365.
consideration and motives,

21  f.

past,  Anson  on,  21  n.
valuable,  21,  24; Ames on,

21  n.; Hobbes  on,  21.
constitutional  law,  90,  120.
construction,  dogmatic,  20  ff.
contamination,  223.
contract, 23, 140  f., 159; in

Aryan  marriage,  239;  as

basis of political and

legal organization,  111;

origin  of,  368;  rescission

of,  3.

contractual  obligation,  20  ff.
co-operation,  76,  81.
corporation, 159; idea of, in

England,  148.
and  state,  88 ff.; reality  of,

89.

Corpus  juris,  130.
corrobbori,  171.
co-tenants,  327.
Coulanges,  see  Fustel  de  Cou-

langes.

council  of  elders,  351.
Court  of  Criminal  Appeal,  32.
court  in  ordeal,  350.
Courts, the, and evidence,

10  f.

couvade,  198.
Craft  gild,  see  Gild,
creditor  in  Roman  law,  357.
crime  and  delict,  91.

and punishment, 53, 55  ff.,

141.


INDEX


405


crime,  definitions  of,  34  f .
prevention  of,  33; psychol-
ogy of,  33  f . ;  remission
of,  34  f .

criminal  cases,  verdict  in,  33  f .
jurisprudence,  53  ff.;  justice,
34.

Criminal  Justice  Administra-
tion Act  of  1908,  54  n.;
criminal  law,  54  f . ;
Bentham  on,  115;  crim-
inal responsibility,  30  ff .,
54  ff.,  57.

criminals,  barbarous  treatment
of,  30;  isolation  of,  33;
psychology  of,  33.

cross-breeding  in  exogamy,  181,
211.

cross-cousin  marriage,  185.

Crown,  the,  proceedings
against,  91.

Crowther,  Humf rey,  5  f .

cultivation,  communal,  330  ff.

cultural  intercourse,  75.

cultural  science,  and  history,
72  f.

Cuq,  on  Roman  will,  290.

euro,  morum,  98.

Currie  v.  Misa,  21.

custodela,  293.

custom,  4,  60;  and  heredity,
42;  as  origin  of  con-
tract, etc.,  368;  non-
litigous,  368;  Western
Norwegian  and  Frisian,
371.

customary  law  in  France,
Caillemer  on,  372;  of
Trondjhem,  302.

Cyclopsean  family,  165  f.,  180  f.

Czechs, 230; Joint Family

among,  272.

in  Bohemia,  legal  procedure,
355.

dadderihood,  339.
daiva  vivaha,  241.
damage,  procedure  for,  358.
Danaiu,  216.

Dane-geld,  Dane-Law,  338.
Danish, Law, 371; villages,
337.


Dante,  De  Monarchia,  113.

Dareste,  E.,  on  legal  customs,
140.

Darwinism,  136  f.

Dasya-varna,  229.

David  ap  Griffith,  328  f.

Davies  v.  Davies,  25  n.

dayabhaga  (partition),  264.

de  ponte,  235.

"dead  man's  portion,"  275.

death  penalty,  58  f .

debtor  in  Roman  Law,  357.

deductions,  legal,  5.

delict  and  crime,  91.

demand,  77.

democracy,  ideal,  111.

democratic  feeling  in  primi-
tive community,  352.

demography,  71.

demurrer,  8f.

Denbigh,  Honour  of  (Survey),
308,  327  ff .

Dene  tribe  of  N.  America,  210

Denham,  Lord,  C.  J.,  on  pre-
sumption and  burden  of
proof,  12  f .

denial,  9.

Denmark,  village-planning  in,
337.

departments  of  Law,  two,  in
tribal  societies,  345.

deposit,  in  trial,  350.

derevnia  (Russian),  271.

Descartes,  105.

desertion,  360.

desire,  42.

Despine,  55.

destitute,  maintenance  of,  by
kindred,  320.

destitution,  60.

detestatio  sacrorum,  292.

development  of  procedure,  351.

Dharma,  367.

Dharmasutras,  229,  238.

Dicey,  A.  V.,  and  Jellinek,  144.
Law  and  Opinion,  153.
on  sovereignty,  121.

dicis  causa,  367.

Diderot  and  D'Alembert,  106.

Dieri  tribe  of  Australia,  dual
marriage,  173;  relation-
ships, 207.


406


INDEX


^  367.

.<*«%  367.

Dilazaks  (land  tenure),  322.

disciplinary  colonization,  59.

disposal  of  property  by  testa-
ment, 288  ff.

distribution  (economic),  76.
of  land  in  Scandinavian  law,
336.

district™,  359.

distress  (legal),  357;  damage
feasant,  358.

Ditmarschen,  335.

division  of  dead  man's  goods,

274  f.

Glanville  on,  275.
of  labour  in  matriarchal  sys-
tem, 194.
of  land,  276  f.,  284  f .,  341  f .,

336.
of property for succession,

277.

in  three  parts,  371;  by  six
brothers,  340.

divorce  among  Aryans,  257.

ow,  258.

dogmatic  construction,  20  ff.

d  o  m  a  c  i  n  and  d  o  m  a  c  i  c  a,
269

Domesday  Book,  on  blood  feud,
309  f.

dominium,  154,  325.

donation,  22.

dos,  254  f .

dower,  254  f.

Dracon,  Law  of,  on  homicide,

303  f.
on  marriage,  243.

Dravidians,  189  f .,  224,  324.

Drevlian  tribe  of  Russia,
240.

Drittelrecht,  371.

droit  de  Mainete,  286.
subjectif,  151.

dual  marriage,  173.

Duguit,  L.,  150  f.

Durkheim,  E.,  on  division  of
labour,  69;  on  elemen-
tary forms  of  religious
life,  69;  on  imitation,
69;  on  psychology,  in-


dividual and  social,  62  f .,

65  n. ; on social influ-
ence, 51  n. ;  on  sociology,

66  f .,  n. ; on tribal or-
gies, 172.

duties,  of  kindred, 319  f.; in

village,  338.
duty,  43,  51,  112.
dvor,  271.

East  Anglia,  338.

echemns,  363.

economic  arrangements,  73.
materialism,  79  ff.,  82  f .

economics,  4,  75,  81.

economy, political, 67, 75  ff.,
107  f .,  155  f .

Edda,  story  of  cursed  treasure,
312

Edict  of  Chilperic,  335.

Edred ap Marghuyd, 330;
progenies  of,  334  n.

education, 46, 60, 76, 106  f.,
110;  in  the  Joint  Fam-
ily, 266.
social,  48  f .,  53,  143.

educational  theories,  106  f .

effect,  see  under  cause.

efficient  cause,  6  f.

egoism,  46  ff.,  60,  109.

Egyptian  marriage  of  brother
and  sister,  186.

Ehrlich,  E.,  on  judge-made
law,  26  f . ;  on  sociologi-
cal jurisprudence,  145 ;
on  sociology  of  law,
152.
and  Puchta,  152.

Eichhorn  and  Review  of  Legal
History,  128.

etnvigi,  349.

elders, council of, 351; as
judges,  347.

Elis, evidence as to arbitra-
tion, 346.

elopement,  marriage  by,  210.

emancipation,  233.

empiricism and rationalism,
104  ff.

emotion, 36, 107; theory of,
40  ff.


INDEX


407


Enclosure  Acts,  341.

Encyclopaedists,  105.

endogamy  and  exogamy,  185  ff.,
211.

energy  and  reflex,  36  f.

Engels,  F.,  on  Calvinism,  79  f.
on the State and Law,
85  f.

England,  and  law  of  Tron-
dhjem,  371;  scheme  of
land  division  in,  338;
s  t  a  t  e-protection  in,
96  ff.

English  Law  of  contract,  20  ff.
of  distress,  357.
Jellinek  on,  144.

English  legal  fictions,  366  n.

kyyvriots,  250.

environment,  41.

Ephors  at  Sparta,  234.

epigamy,  180.

foirityMr,  288,  302.

Epimenides  the  Cretan,  301.

£TT"  laropif  347.

iiriBeoi^  289.

equity  and  common  law,  Ames
on,  3n.

erf  a,  228.

Espinas  on  evolution,  47  n.

ethics,  4.

ethnographic  parallels,  139.

ethnography,  139.

Etruscans,  223.

Eupatrids,  period  of,  at  Athens,
301.

evidence,  Law  of,  10-15.

evolution,  in  sciences,  153;
biological  view  of,  136;
historical,  51 ;  leading
ideas  of,  136  f.
juridical,  stages  and  types
of,  157 ff.;  teleological,
in  law,  137.

evolution  of  tenurial  and  indi-
vidualistic groups  out  of
tribal  communities,  334.

Evolutionists,  the,  136-146.
anthropology and archaeol-
ogy, 137-141.

Darwinism, 136  f . ; doctrine
of  natural  right,  144  ff. ;


juridical  analysis,  143  f . ;
sociological  orientation,
141  f.;  spread  of  an-
thropological jurispru-
dence, 140  f.;  teleologi-
cal evolution  in  law,
137.

exaggeration,  logical,  24-27.
and French and German
jurists,  25.

exception,  8.

exchange,  76.

execution of  judgment,  354  ff.

executive power of family,
189.

«£wcu,  functions  of,  367.

exheredatio,  291,  293.

exogamy,  139.

cross-breeding  in,  211;  and
endogamy,  185  ff.;  ex-
planations of,  179  ff.

expiation,  personal,  55  f.

exposition,  of  children,  234;  of
parents,  235.

extension,  19  f .

fables,  106.

fact  and  law,  7  f.

faculties,  38.

faculty,  42.

fairy  tales,  106.

fallacies,  5  f.

familiae  emptio,  294.
emptor,  293,  366.

family,  Aristotle  on, 301;  see
also  Joint  Family.

family  household,  140.

family  law,  159,  229.

family organization, persist-
ence of,  261.

farm,  unity  of,  276.

fas,  345.

fastar (at weddings, etc.),
364  f.

father, authority of, 232 ff.;

position  of,  195  ff.
in  S.  Slav  Joint  Family,  270.

fatherhood,  uncertainty  of,  183.
in  primitive  tribes,  197.

father's  kin,  317.

fear,  36,  41.


408


INDEX


Fechner,  36.

Fechten,  303.

federal  government,  345.

federalism,  tribal,  351.

federation,  tribal,  344  ff.

feeling,  42,  124.

feelings,  36,  76.

Feist,  S.,  on  home  of  Aryans,
217.

female  infanticide,  201.

Ferri,  E.,  on  punishment,  56,
58.

festuca,  348.

Festus,  lexicographer,  on  the
exposition  of  parents,
235.

feud,  see  blood  feud.

Feudal  Law,  158  f .

Feudalism,  124.

Ficker,  J.,  on  family,  marriage,
and  succession  among  Ger-
manic nations,  370  ff.

fictitious  marriage  in  Roman
Law,  366;  sale  in  Ro-
man Law,  294,  366.

fine  (legal),  351.

Fine  (Irish),  305.

Finlay,  Lord,  18.

Finnish  women,  180.

Finns  (non-Aryan),  223.

fire,  hearth,  as  centre  of  family
life,  226.

firms  of  one  night,  342.

fiscus,  the,  91.

foderaad,  235.

Folklore,  67,  73,  75;  compara-
tive, 126.

folkmot,  363.

food  rents,  342.

forgery,  17  ff.

form  and  content  in  morals,
51  f.

formalism  of  ancient  law,
364.

forms  of  legal  contests,  353.

formulation  of  ancient  law,
361.

forniskift,  336.

Fouillee,  A.,  37  f.

Frankish  Law,  arbitrators  in,
354.


on  exclusion  of  women,  287;
on  land,  335.
fraud,  17  ff.
Fraunce,  A.,  5f.
Frazer, J. G., on Aruntas,

183  n.
on monogamous marriage,

164.
on  occupation  for  ownership,

322  n.

on  ultimogeniture,  285.
Frederick  II  of  Prussia,  94.
free  will,  see  will,
freedom,  idea  of,  110  ff.
French  jurists  and  interpreta-
tion, 118; and logical
exaggeration,  25.
French  law  of  contract,  23  f .
French  Revolution,  124.
Friesland,  365.
Frisian  custom,  371.
Frisians, formulation of law

among,  361.

relationship  among,  303.
Frostathing  Law,  302.
Froude  and  evidence,  11.
frumgild,  314.
function  of  lawgiver,  361.
Fustel de Coulanges, la Cite"

Antique,  156.

on Greek  and  Roman  rela-
tionship, 306.

gaard,  278,  283.

gage,  254,  348,  351.

Gaius,  on  familiae  emptio,  294;
on  legatum,  293;  on
manus  iniectio,  357.

galanas,  317.

7<iy«°f,  250.

gandharva  vivaha,  241.

Ganerbschaft,  272.

Garofalo,  on  crime  and  punish-
ment, 54  n.,  57  f .

Gautama,  on  relationship,  300.

gavelkind,  276.

gaveU,  278  ff.,  284,  330.

gedals,  339.

Gedinge,  348.

ytvl*,  346.

,  207,  301,  304.


INDEX


409


Genossenschaftstheorie,  132.

gentes  and  subgentes  in  Omaha
tribe,  177.

gentiles,  290.

G6ny,F.,  25,89  n.

geography,  75.

geology,  75.

gerade,  256.

Gerber  and  Ihering,  Review  of
Roman  and  German
Private  Law,  142.

German  Civil  Code,  24-131.

German  jurists,  25  ff.
language,  215;  village  com-
munities, 139.

Germanic  ancestor  worship,
228 ;  communalism  in
land,  334;  Law,  147,
282,  366;  legal  fictions,
366;  polygamy,  238;  re-
lationship, 303 ;  succes-
sion, 289;  tribal  system,
230.

Germanists  and  Romanists,
131  f .

Germany,  civil  code  of,  24,  131.
mediaeval, 153; and Roman
law, 130; romantic re-
vival in, 128  f.; state
protection  in,  94  f.

Wporpo+ia,  233.

yepovoia,  351.

Gibbon,  11.

Giddings,  F.  H.,  on  conscious-
ness of  kind,  69 ;  on  free
exercise  of  will,  42;  on
sociology,  69  f . ;  on  so-
ciology and  history,
73  n.

Gierke,  0.  v.,  association  theory
of,  132 ;  championship
of  Germanistic  codifica-
tion, 131;  and  Maine,
139;  and  Maitland,
148.

Giffen,  R.,  on  statistics  and
sociology,  71.

giftermal,  248.

gifts  inter  vivos,  289.

gilds,  133,  140.

gipsies,  41.


Giraldus  Cambrensis,  on  "tri-
al" marriage,  247  f.

Glanville,  on  division  of  dead
man's  goods,  275.

glavar  domacin,  269.

God,  judgment  of,  349;  will  of,
45.

Gopcevic,  on  Albanian  clans,
344.

Gortyn,  Laws  of,  on  adulterer,
356;  on  clients  and  suc-
cession, 260;  on  divorce,
257;  on  heiresses,  288.

Gothic  custom,  in  theory  of
Ficker,  371.

government,  of  clan  and  tribe,
344;  and  the  State,  92.

Gragas  on  wergeld,  315.

grama,  324.

gratuitous  deposits,  22.

Greef,  de,  68.

Greek  law,  accusation  by  kin-
dred, 303;  adultery,
356;  agnatism  in,  207,
301;  homicide,  303,  367;
succession,  288.
trial,  350  f.

Greeks,  229;  idea  of  justice,
154 ;  communal  tenure,
326;  concubinate,  243;
migration,  216;  paternal
authority,  232  ff . ;  and
study  of  jurisprudence,
103.

Grelet,  115.

Grimm,  Jacob,  126.

group  marriage  or  union,  165,
184.

group  solidarity,  326.

group,  the,  and  the  individual

in  ancient  society,  299.
matrimonial,  182  f.

guardianship  of  minors,  319.

G  u  d  m  u  n  d,  Logsognmadhr,
315  n.

Guiana,  198.

Gumplovicz,  87.

habit,  60.

Haldane,  Lord,  Higher  Na-
tionality, 4n.


410


INDEX


Hales,  Sir  J.,  7.

Halfdan  of  Norway,  352.

halsfang,  312  f.

hamarskiftf  336.

handfast  marriage,  244  f.

handmills,  archaeological  paral-
lel, 223.

happiness,  45,  109  f .,  115  f .

Harald  Harfagr,  his  wives,
238.

Tiasta,  as  symbol,  357.

Hatschek,  J.,  144  n.

Haze,  115.

hearth,  in  marriage  rite,  252.
fire,  as  centre  of  family  life,
226.

Hebrews,  matriarchal  and  pa-
triarchal, 195.

hedonism,  45.

Hegel,  system  and  teaching  of,
126.

heirs,  sequence  and  rights  of,
discussed  by  Ficker,
370;  and  see  inheri-
tance.

heiress,  marriage  of,  302;  and
see  inheritance.

Hellanodike,  347.

Helotes  of  Laceda3mon,  259.

hepta  pada  in  Brahmanic  mar-
riage, 252.

heredis  institutio  est  caput  tes-
tamenti,  292.

heredity,  40  ft.,  54.

heredium of Numa, 290, 327

licres  suus,  heredes  sui,  289  f .

heriot,  256  n.

Hesiod,  on  kings  as  judges,
346

hide,  282. '

Hill-Tout,  C.,  on  Bella  Coola
tribe  (marriage),  186 f.,
n.

Hindu  agnatic  family,  300;
marriage,  241  f . ;  pater-
nal right  of  exposition,
234.

Hindus,  229.

Hingeston  v.  Kelly,  12  f.

historians  and  evidence,  11.

historical  evolution,  51.


Historical jurisprudence, 155

160.
materialism,  80.

Historical  School  of  Law,  128-
135.

historical  spirit,  127.

History and Law, 4, 124  f¥.,

137,  141,  143.

functions  of,  73 f.; of  reli-
gion, 126.

and  the  sciences,  72  ff.,  78  ff.
and the rationalists, 108.

110.

and  the  utilitarians,  74.
legal,  155  ff.,  159.

Hobbes,  T.,  on  absolute  state,
87;  on  coercion,  129;
on  ideal  monarchy,  111;
on  selfishness,  109  n. ;
on  sovereignty,  113  f .,
117  n. ;  on  valuable  con-
sideration, 21.
Austin  and  Bentham,  115  f .

holdings,  pulverization  of,
338.

Holland,  T.  E.,  153  f .

Jiolmgang,  349.

Homeric  poems,  on  Themistes,
367.

homicide,  causing  pollution,
361 ;  in  Greek  law,
303  f.,  367;  and  see
blood  feud.

homme  moyen,  71.

Honour  of  Denbigh,  the,
308,  327  ff.

horde,  the,  140.

Hoti,  Albanian  tribe,  344.

Howard,  30,  115.

hue  and  cry,  355.

hufe,  282.

Hugo,  and  historical  school  of
law,  128  n.

Humboldt,  W.  v.,  94  n.

Hume,  D.,  106;  on  association
of  ideas,  35;  on  sympa-
thy, 46.

husbandry, 141; natural, 78.

Hutcheson,  on  sympathy,  46  n.

hypnotic  suggestion,  55.

hypnotism,  62.


411


Iberians,  223.

Ibn  Fadhlan,  traveller,  237,
275.

Iceland,  Norwegians  in,  323  f.

Icelandic  law,  on  outlawry,
317 ;  and  relationship,
315;  on  wergeld,  315.

idea  of  freedom,  110  ff.

ideal  democracy  and  monarchy,
111.

idealism  in  social  movement,
82  f.

ideals,  51.

ideas,  theories  of,  35  ff.,  48  f .
moral,  43 ;  religious,  48  n.

ideological  order  in  study  of
historical  jurisprudence,
155  f.,  158  ff.

treatment of jurisprudence,
159  f.

ignoratio  elenchi,  5.

Ihering,  R.  v.,  definition  of
right,  142;  on  evolution,
137;  on  functions  of
law,  144;  and  Historical
School  of  Law,  134 f.;
on  juridical  analysis,
143;  on  law  and  history,
137;  on  logical  exag-
geration, 25  f . ;  on  so-
cial education,  48;  and
sociological  treatment  of
legal  facts,  141  f .
and  Gerber,  Review  of  Ro-
man and  German  Pri-
vate Law,  142.

Illyrian  language,  215.

imagination,  124,  126;  and  the
will,  42.

imitation,  61  ff.,  65,  68  f.,
77;  in  social  evolution,
170.

imperium,  122.

imprisonment,  59.

indemnification,  59.

India,  Megasthenes  on,  258.

Indian  (Aryan)  inheritance
and  relationship,  192;
law,  non-recognition  of
testament,  289 ;  mar-
riage, 241  f .  j  slavery,


258  f . ;  village  communi-
ties, 139,  153,  325  f .

Indians  of  N.  America,  com-
munalism,  166 ;  matri-
lineal  traits,  190  ff.

individual,  insecurity  of,  in  an-
cient society,  299;  and
law,  99;  marriage,  173;
psychology,  61  ff . ;  rights
of,  91;  and  the  State,
89  f.,  92,  93  n.,  97,  99,
150  f.

individualism, 155 ; rational-
istic, 108  f.,  112.
and  socialism,  157.

individualistic  jurisprudence,
158.

individualization  of  punish-
ment, 59.

Indo-European  origins,  215  f .

Indra,  216.

indulgences,  traffic  in,  56.

industries,  protection  and  de-
velopment of,  81.

Ine's  laws,  341  f .

infanticide  of  females,  201.

infection,  moral,  61  f .

inference,  9.

influence,  49,  51,  60.

inheritance,  Greek,  288;  Indian
(Aryan),  192,  281;  (N.
American),  193;  Ro-
man, 289  ff.;  Welsh,
278  ff.,  329.

in  land,  276  ff.,  287;  by  ma-
ternity, 193,  333;  renun-
ciation of,  318.

inokoshtina,  268  f.

insanity  and  criminal  responsi-
bility, 30-33;  and  wills,
28  ff.
moral,  31.

inscriptions of Rameses, etc.,  '
216.

insecurity  of  individual,
299.

instinct,  52,  60,  64,  124;  in  na-
ture, 40  f .,  47,  50.
and emotion, 40  ff.; and
heredity,  41.

instrumentum  fundi,  276.


412


INDEX


intention  and  cause,  24.
liberal,  21.

intercourse,  cultural,  75;  so-
cial, 48  n.

inter-mentality,  61  f .

internal  organization  of  clan,
308.

international  law,  85;  elements
of,  351;  sanctions  of,
120  f.;  in  tribe  between
clans,  345.

Interpretation,  15  ff.

inter  rex,  292.

intestate  succession,  290.

introspection,  64.

intuition,  77.

invention,  137.

Iowa  tribe  of  N.  America,
193.

Iranian  language,  215.

Ireland,  Brehon  Tracts  of,  230.

Irish  marriage,  247  f.

Iroquois  tribe  of  N.  America,
190.

irrelevant  conclusion,  5.

Islam,  98,  158.

isolation  of  criminals,  33.

issues,  general  and  special,  9.

Italians,  216.

Ithel  Lloyd  ap  Cadugan,  329.

James,  W.,  on  attention,  38;
psycho-physiological  hy-
pothesis of,  36  f .

Jellinek,  G.,  on  anthropologists,
147;  on  English  law,
144;  on  judicial  ana-
lysis, 143  f . ;  on  sociol-
ogy, 67  n.

Jevons,  W.  S.,  77,  110  n.

joint  boards,  village,  326.

joint  family,  Aryan,  261  ff.
authority  in,  285;  education
in,  266;  four  conse-
quences of,  263  ff. ;
maintenance  of,  265 ;
manager  of,  264;  matri-
archal, 267.

Aryan  Indian,  262  ff.;
Germanic,  272;  in  Ro-
mance countries,  273 ;


Russian,  271  ff.; South-
ern Slav,  268.
holding (Welsh),  329.

joint  marriage and property,

201.
responsibility  for  taxes,  etc.,

325.
succession  (Indian),  281.

judge,  the,  and  jurisprudence,

26  f.
culture  and  knowledge  of,  3.

judge-made  law,  26  f .,  116.

judgment,  execution  of,  354  ff.
of  God,  349.

judges and laws, Austin and

Salmond  on,  117  f.
and  the  sovereign,  118.

Judicature  Acts  of  1874  and
1876,  9.

judicial  decisions,  3.
interpretation,  118.
oaths,  349  f .

Tiingstenrecht,  286.

juridical  analysis,  143  f.,  149.
evolution, 157  ff.; person,
133  f.

juries,  5.

Jurisprudence,  3;  analytical,
155,  368;  anthropologi-
cal, 140  f . ;  Brahmanic,
75,  367 ;  comparative,
138;  comparative  meth-
od in,  148 f.;  construc-
tive point  of  view  in,
149;  criminal,  see  crim-
inal ;  critical  tendency,
147  ff . ;  dogmatic,  155 ;
and  ethics,  4;  historical,
155-160,  368;  and  his-
tory, 4,  124  f.,  127;  indi-
vidualistic, 158;  and  the
judge,  26  f.;  main  cur-
rents of  thought,  103  f . ;
methods  and  schools  of,
103-60;  (rationalists,
103-23 ;  nationalists,  124-
35 ;  evolutionists,  136-
60) ;  modern  tendencies
of,  147-60;  and  modern
tendencies  of  State  pro-
tection, 97  f . ;  Moham-


INDEX


413


medan,  75;  and  morals,
43;  and  philosophy,  4;
and  rationalism,  128  f.;
scope  of,  153  ff. ;  and  the
social  crisis,  149-53;  so-
cialistic, 158 ;  sociologi-
cal, 75,  141  f.,  145;
static  and  dynamic
points  of  view,  160;  see
also  under  Law.

jurist,  the,  3;  and  see  lawyer.

jury,  the,  and  criminal  re-
sponsibility, 32  f . ;  and
facts  of  trial,  7 ;  and  the
legal  profession,  7.

jus,  in  the  clan,  345.
necis,  291 ;  vitae  et  necis,  232.

justice  and  law,  119.

Justinus,  on  Illyrians,  311.

Jutland,  marriage  law  in,  244.

Kant,  I.,  on  conscience,  49  f.,
112;  on  contract  as
basis  of  political  organ-
ization, 111;  on  crime
and  punishment,  55  f . ;
scheme  of  universal  ju-
risprudence, 153 ;  sub-
jective idealism,  51.

karnavan,  267.

Kenny,  C.  S.,  definition  of
crime,  34.

Keretkun,  172  n.

Kidd,  B.,  on  social  evolution,
82  n.

Khasi  tribe  of  India,  192.

Kimbunda  tribe,  191  n.

Kindred,  accusation  by,  303;
combination  of,  344 ;  dis-
tinct from  clan,  306  f.;
duties  of,  319  f.;  func-
tion of,  in  marriage,
253 ff.;  renunciation  of,
318.

Scandinavian, 317; in the
Venedotian  Code,  317  f.

kings  as  judges,  346.

kingship,  tribal,  351  f .

kinship,  149,  306;  see  also  kin-
dred and  relationship.

Klage,  355.


Kleisthenes  of  Sikyon,  251.

K^poc,  idjjpoi,  288,  326,  339.

kleti,  269.

Klufte,  303.

Knapp,  on  statistics  and  so-
ciology, 71.

Knies,  77,  156.

Kohl,  J.  G.,  on  blood  feud,  311.

Kohler,  J.,  148 f.;  on  monoga-
mous marriage,  164 ;
Review  of  Comparative
Jurisprudence,  140.

Kovalevsky,  M.,  140,  149.

Krafft-Ebing,  55.

Kriviczi  tribe  of  Russia,  240.

kshatria  vivaha,  241.

kumara  class  among  Omahas,
178.

Ki>piof  in  marriage,  249  f.

Kurnu  tribe  of  Australia,  182.

labour,  82;  division  of,  681,
78.

Lacedaemon,  helots  in,  250.

laghman,  362  f.

laissez  faire  policy,  93.

land,  ancestral  shares  in,  326  f . ;
apportionment  of,  284  f.,
336 ;  appropriation  of,
320,  324 ;  communalism
in,  321,  326  f.,  330,  334;
division  of,  276  f.,  284  f .,
336,  341  f.;  divisions  in
England,  338 ;  inheri-
tance of,  276  ff. ;  owner-
ship by  clan,  341;  suc-
cession of  women  to,
288 ;  temporary  posses-
sion of,  335.

land  tenure,  321  ff. ;  Celtic,  327;
in  Greece,  326 ;  in  India,
322 f.;  in  Welsh  law,
284.

treatment of pasture and
waste,  324.

landed  property,  origin  of,
320;  and  household,  kin,
and  clan,  323.

landnama,  315.

Landsberg,  E.,  "Pamphlet  of
1830,"  125 n.;  on  aim  of


414


INDEX


a juridical institution,
143.

Lang,  A.,  on  the  Cyclopaean
family,  180  f.;  on  the
patriarchal  system,  165.

Lange,  L.,  on  emotion,  36.

language,  64  f . ;  history  of,  73 ;
in  logic  and  psychology,
39;  science  of,  126.

languages, Aryan, 218  ff. ;

224  ff.
Romance,  130.

Laplace,  105.

lares,  227.

Larka  tribe  of  Bengal,  198.

Lauridsen,  P.,  on  Danish  vil-
lages, 337.

Law,  administration  of,  by  tribal
federation,  345;  ancient,
351,  361,  364;  Anglo-
Saxon,  252  f .,  312  f . ;
Canon,  158  f . ;  civic,
158;  Common,  3n.,  7ff.,
10,  15  ff.,  26  f.,  114-117;
comparative,  67;  con-
servatism of,  365;  con-
stitutional, 90,  120;
criminal,  see  criminal;
Danish,  371 ;  definition
of,  119;  departments  of,
345 ;  differences  between
theory  and  practice,  34;
discourse,  362;  doctrine
of  latent  completeness,
26  f . ;  and  economics,
81;  English,  20  ff.,  144,
357  f . ;  of  evidence,  10-
15;  execution  of,  354-
60;  family,  159,  229;
feudal,  158  f.;  formal-
ism of,  364;  formulation
of,  361;  Frankish,  287,
335,  354;  Frisian,  361;
Frostathing,  302,  371 ;
Germanic,  289,  366;  and
good  faith,  118;  Greek,
207,  288,  301,  303,  356,
367;  historical  school  of,
128-35 ;  and  history,  137,
141,  143;  Icelandic,  315,
317;  Indian,  289;  inter-


national, 85,  345,  351;
Irish,  230, 255  ff. ;  judge-
made,  26  f .,  116 ;  of  Jut-
land, 244;  and  laws,
119;  logical  system  of,
26  f.;  Lombard,  287;  of
Manu,  255;  of  marriage,
see  marriage;  mediaeval,
158;  and  morality,  52,
118;  Norse,  287  f.,  364;
and  political  theory,  84-
99;  Pra3torian,  206  f.;
private,  90-93,  115,  120;
and  public  opinion,  153;
and  right,  119,  151;  Ro-
man, 289  ff.,  356  f.,  366;
in  Germany,  130,  and
Gothic  custom,  371;  of
Salian  Franks,  187  n.,
318,  353,  370;  sanctions
of,  119  ff. ;  Scandina-
vian, 336,  356;  sociology
of,  152;  and  the  State,
84 ff.,  91  f.;  teleological
evolution  in,  137;  theory
of,  160;  tribal,  158,  345;
Vulgar  Roman,  372 ;
Welsh,  230,  284,  328,
331,  371;  see  also  com-
mon law,  family  law,
and  Jurisprudence.

lawgiver,  function  of,  361.

Lawrence,  on  criminal  respon-
sibility, 32.

Laws  of  Dracon,  243,  303;  of
Gortyn,  257,  288,  356;
of  Ine,  341  f.

laws  and  judges,  117  f.;  and
law,  119.

leading  motives,  369.

lectum,  278  ff.,  329.

legal  decision,  enforcement  of,
354;  deductions,  5;  ex-
perts, 361  ff. ;  fictions,
366;  history,  155  ff.,  159;
practice  and  logic,  7;
procedure,  Slavonic  and
Teutonic,  355 ;  profes-
sion, 7;  proof,  modes
of,  349;  proofs  and
law  of  evidence,  10  f .


INDEX


415


(see also evidence) ;
rules,  4.

legata,  293.

Itgatum  per  vindicationem,
293.

legislation,  penal,  53  f.;  prob-
lems of,  58  ff.

Le  Play,  on  political  economy,
77.

levies  in  kind,  342.

Levirate,  the,  198.

hbripens,  294.

Liegeois,  55.

linguistic affinities, Aryan,

215.

parallels in Aryan groups,
218  ff.;  224  ff.

Liszt,  F.,  on  criminal  responsi-
bility, 57;  on  punish-
ment, 53.

Lithuanian,  ancestor  worship,
227  f . ;  language,  215 ;
migration,  216;  "re-
moval" of  aged,  235.

Liutprand  of  Lombardy,
273.

local  association,  205.

Locke,  J.,  on  association  of
ideas,  35;  contract  the-
ory of,  110 f.;  a  ration-
alist, 106.

Locris,  224.

logic  and  common  law,  7-10,
15 ;  and  education,
106  f . ;  and  pleading,
8  f . ;  and  reasoning,  5,
19;  and  substantive  law,
15.

logical  categories,  6-10;  sys-
tem of  law,  26  f.

logsogumadhr,  362.

Lombard  law  on  exclusion  of
women,  287.

Lombroso,  55  f .

Loria,  A.,  86  n.

losore,  287.

lot  (and  scot),  336,  338.

lunacy,  see  insanity.

Lycians,  224.

lynching,  355.

Lyon  v.  Home,  29  n.


Macaulay  and  evidence,  11.

MacDougall,  W.,  40  n.,  64  n.

Mach,  A.,  on  French  Encyclo-
paedists, 105.

Machiavelli,  67.

McLennan,  J.  F.,  on  exogamy,
139 ;  on  monogamous
marriage,  164;  on  moth-
erhood, 188.

Macmillan  and  another  v.  Lon-
don Joint  Stock  Bank,
Ltd.,  17  ff.

magbot,  314.

Magna  Carta,  275.

Maine,  H.,  and  Austin,  Gierke
and  Savigny,  139;  and
v.  Maurer,  140;  and
Maitland,  147  f.;  on
status  and  contract,  140;
his  thought  and  writ-
ings, 138  ff.;  on  the
Zamindari  village,
325.

maintenance  of  Joint  Family,
265.

Maitland,  F.  W.,  on  clan,  307;
and  comparative  meth-
od in  jurisprudence,
148 f.;  on  historical  ju-
risprudence, 147  f.

Malabar  coast,  190  f.

Malayans,  communalism  of,
166 ;  relationships  of,
208.

malfeasance,  20.

Malinovski,  B.,  his  method,
173  n. ;  on  matriarchal
system,  194;  on  patri-
archal theory,  172.

mall (judicial  assembly),  353.

Malthus,  76.

manager  of  Joint  Family
versus  members,  264.

manbot,  314.

mancipatio  per  aes  et  libram,
366.

mandatela,  293.

mandatum,  22.

manes,  227.

nannire,  359.

manlot,  339.


416


INDEX


Mansfield,  Lord,  on  validity  of
promises,  21.

man-sits,  282.

mantal,  339.

Manu,  laws  of,  255.

manus  injectio,  357.

manus  mariti,  236  f .,  243.

Marculf,  288.

Marinov,  on  Zadruga  in  Bul-
garia, 334.

marital  union  in  primitive  so-
ciety, 163  f.
differing  from  marriage,  203.

mark (measure  of  land),  336.

Mark  association,  133,  140.

Markmen,  133.

marriage,  ancient  Russian,  240 ;
Anglo-Saxon,  252  f . ;  ap-
propriation in,  165,  171,
176,236;  Aryan,  236  ff.;
Brahmanic,  251 ;  of
brother  and  sister,  186;
by  capture,  196,  240,
248 ;  by  co-habitation
for  a  year  and  a  day,
244;  community  of  prop-
erty in,  371;  contract  in,
203,  239;  dual,  173  f.;
duplication  of,  249  f.,
by  elopement,  210;  fic-
titious, 366;  forms  of,
209  f.;  J.  Ficker  on,
370  f;  fundamental  ele-
ments in,  167;  Greek,
243,  250  f.;  group,  165,
184;  handfast,  244  f.;
Indian  (Hindu)  240  f.;
individual  (and  group),
173;  Irish,  247;  laws,
changes  in,  164;  mo-
nogamous, origin  of,
164  f.;  Noa,  173  f.;  old
English,  252  f.;  Pirau-
ru,  173  f . ;  probationary
(coibche),  247,  371;  by
purchase  (among  Ban-
yai,  195  n.,  Irish  coib-
che, 247,  coemptio,  248,
tribal,  210  f.);  restric-
tions on,  177  ff. ;  Roman,
242  f.,  249,  251  f.;  sa-


cral, 251;  Scandinavian,
244;  Semitic,  186;  on
trial,  247  f.

Marshall,  A.,  on  marginal  util-
ity, 78  n. ;  on  political
economy,  76  n.

Martin  of  Pateshull,  27.

Marx,  K.,  79-83,  95.

Marxists,  85.

materialism,  economic,  79-83 ;
historical,  80.

maternity,  167;  inheritance  by,
193,  333.

matriarchal  institutions,  He-
brew, 195;  among  Sen
of  California,  188;  de-
velopment of,  194.

matrilineal  systems,  188  ff . ;
Aryan,  by  contamina-
tion, 212,  223;  Athenian,
224;  among  Iroquois,
190;  among  Khasi,  192;
among  N.  American  In-
dians, 193.

matrimonial  classes  or  groups,
169,  182  f.

Matthews,  R.  H.,  on  matri-
monial classes,  182;  on
reincarnation  of  ances-
tors, 205.

Maudsley,  F.,  36,  55.

Maurer,  K.  v.,  140.

meadows,  division  of,  by  lot,
341.

Medhamsted,  Abbey  of,  365.

medieval  judicial  oaths,  349;
law,  158 ;  schoolmen,
103,  105.

Megasthenes  on  India,  258.

Melanesian  Archipelago,
183.

Menger,  A.,  and  German  civil
code,  152;  and  League
of  Nations,  152  n.

mental  unity  (psychosis),  37 ff.

memory  and  the  will,  42.

Mephistopheles,  68.

Merkel,  A.,  on  spheres  of
power,  87  n.

Meshko  of  Poland,  238.

Meyer,  E.,  73,  156.


INDEX


417


Michel,  L.,  on  politics  and  de-
scent, 88  n.

Might  and  Right,  86  f .

migrations,  Aryan,  216;  Teu-
tonic, 334;  of  words,  in-
stitutions, etc.,  170.

Miklosich,  F.,  on  blood  feud
among  S.  Slavs,  310  f.

militarism,  progressive,  125.

Mill,  J.  S.,  on  association  of
ideas,  35;  on  irrelevant
conclusion,  5  n.;  political
economy,  76.

mimicry,  47.

minors,  guardianship  of,  319.

mir  (Russian),  272;  compared
with  Zamindari  village,
325.

Mitakshara,  264  ff.

Mitra,  216.

mode  and  cause,  24.

Mohammedan jurisprudence,

75.
law  of  parentage,  198  n.

Mohammedanism,  154.

mola  salsa,  252.

Mommsen,  Th.,  and  imperium,
157.

monarchy,  ideal,  111.

Monasterium  S.  Petri  Glouces-
triae,  286  n.

money  rents,  342.

Mongols,  225.

monogamous  marriage,  Aryan,
236  ff.;  origin  of,  164  f.

monogamy  and  polygamy,
141.

Montenegro,  blood  feud,  311.

Montesquieu,  67.

moral aims of the state,

98  f.
ideas,  origin  of,  43.

moral  infection,  61  f . ;  insanity,
31 ;  person,  134  n.

morality,  65  n. ;  and  conscience,
49  ff. ;  and  education,  46,
110;  elements  in,  51;
and  law,  52,  118;  and
selfishness,  46;  and  so-
cial requirements,  51 ;
utilitarian,  45 ;  utilita-


rian motives  of,  109  f.;
and  the  will,  43  ff.

Moralists,  43  ff.

morals,  73;  and  jurisprudence,
43;  form  and  content
in,  51  f.

Morel,  55.

Morgan,  L.  H.,  classificatory
relationships,  138 ;  on
Malayan  ditto,  208  f . ;
on  monogamous  mar-
riage, 164;  on  mother-
hood, 188.

Morley,  J.,  on  Burke  and
Comte,  127  n. ;  on  sel-
fishness, 109  n.

morning  gift,  255.

Moses,  51.

motherhood,  188  ff.

mother-kin,  193  f .-,  n.  2.

mother-right,  138.

motive  and  cause,  23.

motives,  21  ff.,  43,  45,  47;  psy-
chological, 48  n.,  60;
utilitarian,  109  f.

movable  property,  division  of,
276.

mund,  mundi  kjobt,  248.

murder,  361;  and  see  homicide.

mysticism,  124,  126.

myth,  73.

Naga  communal  houses  for  un-
married, 172  n.

Nanthyn  Canon,  328.

Napoleon,  72,  120,  125;  code,
118.

Napoleonic  rule,  114.

national  conceptions  of  right,
129  ff.;  psychology,  63-
66.

Nationalists,  the,  124-35;  gen-
eral conclusions,  134  f.;
Gierke,  131-34;  histori-
cal spirit,  127;  on  law,
128-35;  history  and  the-
ories, 124  ff. ;  Ihering,
134  f . ;  Romanists  and
Germanists,  131-34;  ro-
mantic revival,  126  f.

nativi,  280,  330.


418


INDEX


natural  husbandry  and  cash
nexus,  78;  law,  108;
right,  144  ff. ;  rights  and
political  combination,  91 ;
science  contrasted  with
cultural  science,  72  f .

Naupaktos,  289.

Nayar  tribe  of  Malabar  coast,
190  f.,  197.

nefgildi,  302.

Nestor's  chronicle,  240.

nidgjold,  315  f .

Nietzsche,  F.,  on  morality  and
selfishness,  43  ff.

noa  (marriage),  173 f.,  207.

nomoulousSj  243.

nonfeasance,  20.

non-historical  school  of  law,
128  f .

non-litigious  custom,  growth
of,  368.

Normandy,  371.

Norse  law,  on  succession,
287  f.;  on  transfer  of
land,  364.

North  American  Indians,  166,
169,  177,  186  n.,  205.

North  Aryan,  217.

Norton  v.  Eelly,  29  f.

Norwegian  custom,  371 ;  house-
hold of  father  and
mother  in  Old  Law,
306  n.;  odal  succession,
277,  291;  treatment  of
aged  parents,  235.

Norwegians  in  Iceland,  323  f.

nucleated  villages,  283.

Numa,  heredium  of,  290,  327.

nuncupative  form  of  will,  294.

nupa  in  Urabunna  tribe,  175.

nuptiae,  249  f .

nyioga,  238.

)ath-help,  renunciation  of,
318  f.

oath-helpers,  350.

oaths,  judicial,  349.

obligation,  abstract,  23  n. ;  con-
tractual, 20-24;  in  Eng-
lish law,  20  ff. ;  in  French
law,  23  f . ;  moral,  21.


obligations,  60.

occupation  of  land,  communal,

330  ff.

odal  succession,  277,  291.
ore,  315  f .,  336.

officers,  responsibility  of,  91.

ognisce,  269.

outlTJKj  258.

fa"*,  326.

Olaf  Traetelgya,  352.

Omaha  tribe  of  N.  America,
marriage,  177 f.;  totem,
205.

^  301.
aTrot;^  301.
wrvf)  301.

open-field  system,  283  f .,  340.

opinion,  popular,  8.

opposition,  62.

ordeal,  350.

organization  of  clan,  308.

orgies,  tribal,  171  f .

origins,  of  contract,  368;  Indo-
European,  215;  of  mo-
nogamous marriage,  164.

Ossetes,  tribe  of  Caucasus,  243.

Otto  tribe  of  N.  America,  193.

outlawry,  317,  359.

Owen  Gogh,  progenies  of,  327.

ownership  of  land,  by  clan,
341;  in  India,  322  f.

oxgangs,  283,  333,  338.

Paine,  T.,  "  government  a  nec-
essary evil,"  93.

paisaca  vivaha,  241.

Paley,  W.,  on  utilitarian  mo-
rality, 45.

panchaiats,  326.

pani grali ana,  251.

panunga  class  among  Omahas,
178.

parentela,  parentela,  306,  318.

parents,  aged,  treatment  of,
235.

pariahs,  259.

Parke,  on  burden  of  proof,
12  f.

parol  agreements,  21  f .

participes,  coheredes  et,  327,
329.


INDEX


419


partition,  in  Indian  lawbooks,

262  ff.; by  six  brothers,

340; in S. Slav Joint

Family,  270  f .

partnership  in  marriage,  237.
pasture  land,  treatment  of,  324.
paterfamilias,  197,  205,  232,

256,  290  f .

paternal  authority,  197,  232  ff.
paternity,  uncertainty  of,

187  f.
patni,  239.
Trdrpa,  301,  346.
irarpia,  346.

patria  potestas,  232  ff.,  290.
patriarch,  300.
patriarchal arrangements, J.

Ficker  on,  370  f.
authority  within  clans,  345.
system, 165; Aryan, 224,

232 ; development of,

195  f.; Hebrew, 195;

property  in,  197.
tendencies in Britanny and

Great  Britain,  371.
patrilineal system, 193, 195,

212.

patrimonium,  292.
pattiddri  system,  281; village,

325  f.

Paul,  H.,  63  n.,  73.
Paulus,  on  exheredatio,  291.
pechische,  272.
peculium,  232,  256.
penal  anthropology,  58.

legislation, 53  f.; problems

of,  58  ff.
penalty,  350.
pencenedl,  328.
penology,  effective  measures  of,

59.

perception  and  the  will,  42.
nepioiKoi^  260.

person,  collective,  132; juridi-
cal, 133  f . ;  moral,  134.
personality  and  relation,  90.
Petrazicki,  on  motives,  60.
phallic  cults,  172.
Philistines,  51.
philology,  65;  comparative,  75,

127.


philosophy,  75;  and  jurispru-
dence, 4.

phonetics,  65,  73.

phratries,  phratry,  301,  304.

physical  superiority  of  male.
167.

pignoris  capio,  358.

pinda,  pindapitriyajna,  227.

Pinnel's  Case,  25.

piraunqaru,  in  Urabunna  tribe,
175.

pirauru,  in  Dieri  tribe,  173  f.,
183.

pitaras,  227.

Plato,  154.

pleading  and  law  of  evidence,
10 ;  and  logic,  8  ff. ;  and
recent  Acts,  9  f . ;  his-
torical, 8;  rules  of,  5  f .,
9f.

Plowden,  E.,  on  efficient  cause
of  plurality  of  heirs,
292;  of  wives,  238.

Poles,  230;  Joint  Family,  272.

Polian  tribe  of  Russia,  240.

police,  95.

policy,  public,  and  law,  119.

w<tt«c,  157.

political  authority,  tribal,  351.
economy, 67, 75-78, 107  f.,

155  f.

forms  of  tribal  federalism,
351 ;  institutions,  73 ;
representation  not  in
primitive  assembly,  352;
theory  and  law,  84-99.

politics,  75;  comparative,  67.

Pollock,  Sir  F.,  on  logical
exaggeration,  25.

pollution,  religious,  361.

polyandry,  173;  among  Baziba
and  Bahima  tribes,
200;  among  Britons  an.l
Picts,  223;  reason  for,
199.

polygamy,  141,  203;  Aryan,
238.

polygynic  unions,  203  f .

Polyptych  of  St.  Germain-des-
Pres,  282.

pontifex  maximus,  291.


420


INDEX


popular  opinion,  8.

"  portion,  the  dead  man's,"
275.

position,  of  slaves  in  ancient
Aryan  society,  258;  of
women  in  ancient  Aryan
society,  255;  in  N.
American  tribes,  193.

possessio  bonorum,  294.

possession  and  the  anthropo-
logical school,  141 ;  of
land,  temporary,  325,
335;  origin  of,  368;  pro-
tection of,  10.

Post,  A.  H.,  149;  and  an-
thropology, 140.

power  and  right,  119.

pvaeda,  praedium,  357.

Praetorian  law,  agnatism  in,
206  f .

Pragmatists,  45.

prajapatya  vivaha,  242.

pre-Aryan  elements,  223.

pre-Celtic  race  of  Wales,  223.

predestination,  79.

prehensio  dextrarum,  251.

preferential  right  to  purchase
land,  323.

prehistoric  archaeology,  75,
137  f.

pressure  affecting  tribal  com-
munity, 309.

presumption,  11  ff.

prevention  of  crime,  33.
Act  of  1908,  59  n.

priests  as  interpreters  of  law,
367.

primitive culture and society,

meaning  of,  168.
land  tenure,  322.

primogeniture,  285.

principles  governing  a  tribal
community,  327.

priodarii,  327,  342.

private  law,  analogies  from,
90-93;  Bentham  on,  115;
and  constitutional  law,
90,  120.

privileged  rights  in  Joint  Fam-
ily, absence  of,  263.

probationary  year  in  marriage,


247,  371;  and  see  coib-
che.

procedure,  development  of,  in
ancient  law,  351.

procreation,  Arunta  theory  of,
183.

progenies,  279  ff.

projection  on  the  land,  324.

promiscuity,  sexual, 165, 170.

promises,  illegal  conditions,
23  f.;  motives,  22;  va-
lidity of,  21.

proof,  burden  of,  10-13,  319.

property,  administration  of,  in
marriage,  371 ;  burial
customs,  275;  in  devel-
opment of  patriarchal
system,  197;  disposal  of,
by  testament,  288  ff. ;
division  of  into  three
parts,  371;  in  Joint
Family,  266  f.;  in  mar-
riage, 371 ;  movable,
276;  origin  of,  368;
real,  in  family  law,
229;  self-acquired,  267;
spear  as  symbol  of,  357 ;
wife's  rights  in  (Ar-
^  yan),  255.

proximus  adgnatus,  290.

vairpvT£ta} 351.

psychology,  association  of
ideas,  35;  and  criminal
punishment,  53;  energy
and  reflex,  36  f . ;  exag-
gerations of  treatment
of  social  facts,  64;  in-
dividual, 61  ff. ;  and  law,
28-60 ;  mental  unity,
37  ff. ;  and  morals,  43  ff. ;
and  motives,  33,  60;  na-
tional, 63-66;  nomencla-
ture, 36  f . ;  physiological
school,  36  f . ;  reflex  and
energy,  36  f.;  social,  63-
66.

psychosis,  37  ff.

public  coercion,  359;  opinion,
92  f.,  153;  order,  92  f.;
policy,  119;  utility,  3,
118.


INDEX


421


Puchta  and  Ehrlich,  152.
Puffendorf, S., and Hobbes'

doctrine  of  sovereignty,

113.

punishment,  53,  58  fE.,  141.
Punjab,  land  tenure  in,  323.
purchase  of  land,  preferential

right  to,  323.
in marriage, 195  n., 242,

247  f.

marriage  by,  210  f.
Puritanism,  98.
pursiitpimi,  200.
purula class among Omahas,

178.

Pythagoreans,  184.
Pytheas,  216.

Quetelet,  L.,  on  statistics  and
sociology,  70  f .

Rachimburghs,  354.

Radimiczi  tribe  of  Russia,  240.

raiatwari  village,  325.

rakshasa  marriage,  241.

la  Ramee,  P.,  formal  logic,  5.

Rameses  III,  inscriptions,  216.

Rand  Vaghan  ap  Asser,  clan
of,  309;  kindred  of,
333.

ransack,  356.

rape,  in  Sachsenspiegel,  355.

rationalism,  51;  and  empiri-
cism, 104  ff.;  and  feud-
alism, 124;  and  his-
torical conceptions  of
jurisprudence,  128  f . ;
and  the  romantic  re-
vival, 125 f.;  in  social
science,  108.

rationalistic individualism,

. 108  f.,  112.
sensualism,  106.

Rationalists,  the,  103-23;  ab-
stract method  in  politi-
cal economy,  107  f . ;  and
associationists,  etc.,  106;
and  compulsion,  113  f .,
119 ;  and  conscience,
112;  definition  of  law,
119 ;  educational  theories


and  application  of  them,
106 f.;  and  history,  108,
110;  idea  of  freedom,
110  ff. ;  individualism,
112;  main  currents  of
thought,  1031;  sanc-
tions of  law,  119  ff.;
selfishness,  109  f.;  sov-
ereignty, 113  f.,  1161,
119-23.

Ratzel,  75.

raub,  357.

real  property,  in  Aryan  fam-
ily law,  229.

realistic  theory,  the,  133.

"  reality  "  of  corporations,  89.

reasoning,  51,  19;  and  the
will,  42  1

reception,  130,  169;  and  activ-
ity, 37.

recognition  of  community  as
foundation  of  law,
359.

reconciliation  of  tribe  and  clan
government,  344.

Record  of  Carnarvon,  308.

reflection  and  the  will,  42.

reflex  and  energy,  36  f .

reformatories,  56.

Reg.  v.  Fryer,  32;  v.  Haynes,
311;  v.  Jefferson,  31;
v.  M'Naughten,  30;  v.
Oddy,  141

Register  of  the  Honour  of
Denbigh,  308,  327.

reincarnation  of  ancestors,  206.

relation  and  personality,  90.

relationship,  167;  classes,
138 1,  207 ;  concentric
circles  of,  303;  in  Ice-
land, 315;  in  primitive
society,  300  ff.

relevancy  of  evidence,  11.

religion,  comparative,  67;  ef-
fect in  law  of  crime,
361;  history  of,  126;
study  of,  as  bearing  on
law,  75.

religious  beliefs,  39,  73;  ideas,
48  n. ;  impulses,  76 ;
sanction  of  patriarchal


422


INDEX


government  in  clan,
345;  worship,  39.

remission  of  crime,  34  f.

Renaissance,  the,  72;  scholars,
103.

rent,  76,  78;  in  kind  and  in
money,  342.

renunciation  of  kindred,  318  f.

representation,  in  Joint  Fam-
ily, 264;  not  in  primi-
tive assembly,  352.

rescission  of  contract,  3.

residence  in  primitive  mar-
riage, 195  f .

responsibility,  133;  criminal,
30-33.

restrictions  on  marriage,
177  ff.;  sexual,  167.

retaliation,  56.

"  rethe  "  gavell,  230.

retribution  in  punishment,  59.

Rettr,  316.

Review  of  Comparative  Juris-
prudence, 140.

Review  of  Legal  History,  128.
of  Roman  and  German  Pri-
vate Law,  142.

revolution,  92.

'pyrpat,  368.

Ribot,  T.  A.,  36.

Ricardo,  76,  79,  107.

Rickert,  H.,  73.

right,  43;  and  law,  119,  151;
and  might,  86  f.;  nat-
ural, 91,  144  ff.;  na-
tional conceptions  of,
129  ff. ;  and  power,
119.

rights,  4;  attribution  of,  60;
of  the  individual,  91;
in  village  community,
338

Rig  Veda/262.

rishi,  300.

Ritter,  K.,  75.

"  Rob  Roy,"  307.

roba,  357.

Robertson  Smith,  on  primitive
group,  299.

de  Roberty,  68.

Rossler,  E.,  on  raid  in  Cau-
casus, 209  f .


Rolfe,  on  burden  of  proof,  13.

Roman  agnatism,  206;  an-
cestor worship,  227 ;
Britain,  372;  communal-
ism,  early,  327;  con-
cubinate,  238 ;  culture,
229,  335;  jurists,  154;
law,  230;  (of  debt),
357;  (of  marriage  and
sale,  fictitious),  366;  (on
security),  350;  (on  suc-
cession), 289  ff.;  (on
theft),  356;  law  and
Germany,  130;  and
Gothic  custom,  371;  and
motives,  22 ;  vulgariza-
tion of,  130;  legal  fic-
tions, 366;  marriage,
242  f .,  251 ;  succession
and  testament,  289  ff . ;
trial,  350  f.

Romance  languages,  130.

Romanists  and  Germanists,
131-34.

Romanization of  Britain,  372.

Romans,  103.

romantic  revival,  125-29.

romantic  theory,  134  f .

Roscher,  77,  156.

Rousseau,  J.  J.,  and  contract,
110;  and  ideal  democ-
racy, 111;  on  logic  and
education,  107;  on  self-
ishness, 109  n.

rules,  as  to  concepts,  5;  con-
clusions, 5 ;  of  law,  3  f . ;
of  pleading,  5  f .,  9 ;  of
reasoning,  5;  of  trav-
erse, 9.

Russian  ancestor  worship,  228 ;
ancient  marriage,  240 ;
family  communities  and
transition  to  village,
339  f.;  mir,  272;  out-
lawry, 360;  tribal  sys-
tem, 231.

Ruth  the  Moabitess,  199.

sacerdotium,  127.
Sachs  ens  pie  gel,  355.
sacral  or  sacramental  marriage,
251.


INDEX


423


sacramentum,  351.

St.  Berlin,  Cartulary  of,  282.

St.  David's,  Black  Book  of,
308.

St.  Germain-des-Pres,  Polyp-
tych  of,  282.

St.  Simon,  due  de,  127.

Sagotras,  300.

sale  of  household,  fictitious,
294,  366.

Saleilles,  R.,  145,  151.

Salian  Franks,  law  in  renun-
ciation, 318;  summons,
353.

Salic  law  and  Gothic  custom,
370  f.

Salish  rules  of  marriage,
187  n.

Salmond,  J.  W.,  on  judges  and
laws,  117.

samanodakas,  227.

sanction  (legal),  353;  public,
358.

Sanskrit  College,  professors  of,

263.
language,  215.

Santal  tribe  of  Bengal,  harvest
festival,  172  n.

sapindas,  227,  300.

Savigny  and  Historical  School
of  Law,  128;  and  Maine,
139;  on  Roman  law  in
the  Middle  Ages,  130.

Saxmund,  362.

Scabini,  363.

Scandinavian  agnatism,  302 ;
ancestor  worship,  228 ;
law  (on  land  distribu-
tion), 336;  (theft),  356;
marriage,  244;  outlawry,
360;  succession,  287  f.

Schelling,  126.

Schleicher,  on  Aryan  linguistic
affinities,  215.

Schmidt,  J.,  on  Indo-European
languages,  215.

Schmoller,  G.,  77.

Schoffen,  130,  363.

Schrader,  0.,  on  Indo-Euro-
pean languages,  215.

Schultze-Gaevernitz,  G-  Von,
149  f.


science cultural and natural,

72  f.
social,  61-83,  108.

sciences,  applied  and  theoreti-
cal, 3  ff.

scot  and  lot,  336,  338.

Scott,  Sir  W.,  on  clan,  307  f.

Scottish  Highland  clans,  230,
307  f .

search  (after  theft),  356.

security,  policy  of,  94;  in  Ro-
man law,  350.

Seebohm,  F.,  on  co-aration,
351;  on  gavell  and  wele,
280;  on  Welsh  com-
munal estates,  328.

selection,  sexual,  167.

self-defence,  355.

self-help  in  ancient  law,  354  ff.

selfishness,  44,  46,  48,  77,
109  f.

self-preservation,  41.

selo,  271.

Semitic  marriage  custom,  186.

Senegalese  of  Kandy,  195.

sensualism,  51 ;  rationalistic,
106.

separate  holdings  of  land,  323.

separation  in  Aryan  marriage,
257.

Serbians,  tribal  system  of,  230.

serfdom,  145.

serfs,  82.

Seri  tribe  of  California,  189.

servants  as  element  in  family,
258.

Severian  tribe  of  Russia,  240.

sexual  competition,  181;  pro-
miscuity, 140,  165,  170;
relations,  problem  of,
60;  selection  and  re-
strictions, 167 ;  taboos,
169.

"shamanistic  potency"  among
Seri  tribe,  189.

shamilat  deh,  326.

Sheikh  Mali  and  division  of
land,  322.

shield  of  Achilles,  347.

Shelley's  case,  17.

shifting,  336.


424


INDEX


Shortland  Islands,  194  n.

siabr,  271,  339.

Siberian  festival,  exchange  of
mates  at,  172  n.

sibja,  303.

Sikani  (of  Dene  tribe),  210.

Simmel,  G.,  on  Kant's  ethics,
49  n.;  on  sociology,  68.

single  combat,  349.

sippe,  303.

skapt  (as  symbol),  365.

skladnik,  340.

skogar-i.ien,  360.

skojtning,  364.

Skone,  customary  law  of,  272.

slaves,  position  of,  in  Aryan
society,  258  ff.

slavery,  81,  145.

Slavonic,  joint  families,  139;
languages,  215 ;  legal
procedure,  355.

Slavs,  ancestor  worship,  227;
communities  of,  153 ;
passage  from  tribal  to
village  community,  334;
paternal  right  of  expo-
sition, 234;  "removal"
of  aged,  235;  tribal  sys-
tem, 230.
Southern,  268  ff.

Slovenes,  Alpine,  271.

Smith,  Adam,  46,  67,  76,
106.

social,  crisis,  149-53;  edu-
cation, 48  f.,  53,  143;
freedom,  149  f.;  ideals,
76;  influence,  51  f.;  life
and  individual  psychol-
ogy, 61  ff. ;  justice,  33 ;
movement,  idealism  in,
82  f . ;  psychology,  63-
66;  reaction,  56  f.;  sci-
ence (and  history),  79  f. ;
(and  law),  61-83;  (and
the  lawyer),  3  ff. ;  (ra-
tionalism in),  108;  self-
preservation,  33;  soli-
darity, 150  f . ;  status  of
women  in  matrilineal
system,  193  f . ;  studies,
classification  of,  75 ;


utilitarianism,  47;  utili-
tarians, 110.

socialism,  and  individualism,
157;  practical,  82.

socialistic  jurisprudence,  158.

Socialists,  83.

societas  and  universitas,  132.

society  and  law,  99;  and  the
State,  92-99.

sociological  jurisprudence,  145.

sociology,  66-74,  141  f . ;  of  law,
152.

Sogdian  group,  Aryan,  217.

solicitors  and  judicial  deci-
sions, 3

sollman,  366.

solskift,  336.

Solon,  289,  326.

sophism,  5  f .

Sophists,  51,  87.

Sorites,  18.

sors,  339.

South  India,  local  castes,  324.

Southern  Slavs,  268  ff.

sovereignty,  90,  113  f .,  116-123,
129.

Soviets,  83.

Sparta,  exposition  of  children,
234.

spear  as  symbol  of  property,
357.

Spencer,  H.,  66,  69;  individual
and  State,  93  n.,  141;
law  of  nature,  91  n.

spindle  side,  302.

Spinoza,  B.,  and  sovereignty,
113.

spinster,  in  Joint  Family,  266.

sponsalia,  249.

Stadarhalsbok  version  of  Ice-
landic law,  316.

Stammler, R., theory of  law,

146.
Eight  Law,  145  f.

standardization  of  holdings,
339.

State  and  church,  56,  122.

State,  the,  as  a  corporation,
88-91;  definition  of,  85;
and  government,  92 ;  and
the  individual,  89  f .,


INDEX


425


92  f.,  97,  99,  150  f.;  as
a  juridical  relation,  90;
and  law,  84 ff.,  91  f.;
moral  aims  of,  98  f . ;  na-
ture of,  84-93 ;  and  pub-
lic opinion,  92;  restric-
tion of  influence,  93  f . ;
as  ruler,  299;  and  so-
ciety, 92-99;  as  a  sub-
ject of  right,  91.

State-protection,  93-98 ;  aims
of,  93;  on  the  continent,
94  f . ;  in  England,  96  ff. ;
modern  tendencies,
97  f.

state  requirements,  effect  of,
on  village  organization,
325  f.

statesmen  in  Northumberland,
283.

statistics  and  sociology,  70  ff.

status  and  contract,  140.

Stein,  L.,  on  governnment  and
society,  95.

Steinmetz,  S.  R.,  on  crime  and
punishment,  149.

Stephen,  H.  J.,  35;  on  plead-
ing, 8  f .

Stephen,  J.  F.,  on  criminal  re-
sponsibility, 30,  32.

Stephen,  L.,  on  history  and
utilitarians,  74;  on  the
individual,  108  n. ;  on
philosophy,  106  n. ;  on
practising  lawyers,  3 ;
Science  of  Ethics,  107  n.

Stiftung  und  Verein,  133.

Stiftungen,  265.

stikkas,  339.

slirps,  stirpes,  264,  282,  306,
326.

stock  (Welsh  wele),  278.

Strabo,  on  Celts,  230.

submission,  60,  62,  68.

substitution  (for  offspring),
238.

subsumption,  17  ff.

substantive  law  and  logic,  15.

succession,  and  the  anthropo-
logical school,  141;  in
Aryan  family  law,  229;


as  between  wife  and
husband,  257;  in  canon
and  feudal  law,  159;  to
land,  exclusion  of  women
from,  287  f . ;  origin  of,
368;  to  personal  prop-
erty, 274;  to  property,
Welsh,  278;  see  also
under  law.

sudras,  258  f .

SMI  heredes,  289.

sulung,  338.

Sumerian  language,  219.

summons  among  Salian  Franks,
353.

superman,  the,  43.

suttee  in  India,  etc.,  236  f .

svayamvara  vivaha,  241.

Svat,  Svatis,  322.

swearing  of  oaths,  349.

Swedish  laghman,  361;  mar-
riasre,  247;  villages,  338.

Swinfen  Eady,  18.

sword  side,  302.

sympathetic  altruism,  48.

sympathy,  46,  60.

svnthetic  outlook  of  history,
73.

Tacitus  (Germania)  distribu-
tion of  land,  335;  plu-
rality of  wives,  238;  po-
sition of  sons,  234;
slavery,  259;  succession,
289.

taeog,  280,  330,  342.

Taghistan,  322.

taiwazhi,  267,  282.

Talmud,  the,  158.

Tarde,  J.  G.,  on  crime  and  pun-
ishment, 33,  54  n.,  56  n.,
57;  on  imitation,  69;
psychology,  39  n.,  61  f .

tangano,  354.

Tartars,  210.

tarwads,  267,  282.

Tasmanian  marriage,  203.

tax-payers,  94.

tegtar,  336.

teleological  evolution  in  law,
137.


426


INDEX


temporary  possession  of  land,
335.

tenman  land,  339.

tenure  of  farm-lands,  283.

tenurial  communalism,  332.

terra  familiae,  282.

territorial  communities,  324;
rights  of  households,
kindreds,  or  clans,
321  ff.

testament,  disposal  of  prop-
erty by,  288  ff.;  in  In-
dian law,  289;  Greek,
289 ;  Roman,  289  ff .,
293 ;  Germanic,  289.

testaments,  28  ff.

testamentum,  289,  292.

Teton  tribe  of  N.  America,  177.

Teutonic,  agnatic  family,  302;
communalism  in  land,
334 ;  legal  procedure,
355;  paternal  right  of
exposition,  234;  "re-
moval" of  aged,  235;
trial,  350  f. ;  tribes  in
Baltic,  216.

Thaller,  Geny  and  others,  on
the  work  of  R.  Saleilles,
89  n.,  138  n.

Thayer,  J.  B.,  on  evidence  and
burden  of  proof,  10  n.,
11.

theft,  356.

6^£f, Qifuares,  367.

Thibaut,  A.,  128.

thok,  281.

Thomas  v.  Thomas,  22.

Thracian  language,  215;  suttee,
236.

thridhia  brothra,  315,  317.

Thuringians,  law  on  inheri-
tance, 287.

Tibetans,  polyandry  among,
173.

tinnskra,  256.

tinol,  256.

Tocharic  group,  217;  language,
215.

Tocqueville,  A.  de,  153.

Todas,  polyandry  among,  173,
200.


toft,  336.

totem, groups in Australia,

153.
in  marriage,  174.

totemic  system,  205.

totemistic  society,  157  f .

Tousoufzais  of  Candahar,  322.

township,  Anglo-Saxon,  342;
and  farm  or  homestead,
324.

tradition,  62,  124,  137.

transference  of  power  in  mar-
riage, 248  f.

transition  from  tribal  to  rural
community,  333.

transfer,  of  land  in  Alamannic,
Bavarian,  and  Norse
law,  364;  of  shares  in
land,  333.

transmission  and  "  reception  "
in  social  evolution,  169.

traverse,  8  f .

treason,  360.

treaties  of  federated  clans,  368.

treatment  and retribution,  59.

Trevelyan,  G.  M.,  72  n.

trevs,  327.

trial,  ancient,  348 ff.;  by  com-
bat, 349;  by  oath,  350;
in  Greek,  Roman,  and
Teutonic  law,  350  ff.

tribal  arrangements,  157;  ar-
bitration, 345  f. ;  au-
thority, 345;  communal-
ism, 331  f . ;  federalism,
351;  federation,  344  ff.;
kingship,  351;  land  ten-
ure among  Celts,  327;
law,  158;  religion,  352;
systems  (Aryan),  230;
(effect  of  Roman  cul-
ture on),  335.

tribe,  conflict  with  clan  in  gov-
ernment, 344 ;  orgies,
171  f.

triple  wergeld,  316.

Trondhjem,  customary  law,
302,  371.

tula  (tola),  281.

tunk,  330.

tunk-pounds,  284.


INDEX


427


Tupper,  C.  L.,  on  zammdari
village,  325.

Turanians,  225.

Twelve  Tables  on  intestate  suc-
cession, 290.

ultimogeniture,  285.

unanimity  in  S.  Slav  family,
269.

uncertainty  of  paternity,  183,
188.

uncle,  position  and  authority
of,  191  ft.

unification  of  holdings,  282  ff.

unified  tenure,  282.

United  States  of  America,  fed-
eral type,  352;  sovereignty
in,  121  f.

unity,  of  household  v.  individ-
ual, 261 ;  sociological
concept,  68,  70.

universal  succession,  295.

universitas  and  societas,  132.

Urabunna  tribe  of  Australia,
dual  marriage,  174  f . ;
exogamy  and  epigamy  in
groups,  185 ;  relation-
ships, 208.

usu  in  marriage,  242,  244.

utilitarian  motives  of  morality.
109  f .

Utilitarianism,  social,  47.

Utilitarians,  45  f.,  106;  and
history,  74;  social,  110.

utilities,  calculus  of,  110.

utility,  143;  Bentham  on,  115;
public,  118.

vadium,  351.

vaich,  322.

vaidika  gotia,  300.

Valdemar's  law  of  Jutland,
244.

value,  72,  76,  77,  79  f.

vargus,  359.

Varuna,  216.

Vavisor,  on  secundum  quid  fal-
lacy, 6.

Yeddas of Ceylon, avoidance,

176.
monogamy,  166,  196.


Vedic  hymns  (on  exposition  of
parents),  235;  language,
216;  period,  229.

Venedotian  Code  on  agnatism,
317;  on  co-aration,  331.

verdict,  33  f .

Verein  and  Stiftung,  133.

veve  in  Australian  matri-
monial classes,  182.

Vialla  on  blood  feud,  310.

Viaticzi  tribe  of  Russia,
240.

Viatka,  271.  •

Vico,  127.

vigslodi,  316.

vill,  villata,  328  f.

villae  communitas,  332.

village communities, 139  f . ;
Maine  and  Maitland  on,
148;  Indian,  323  ff.
community,  332,  336.
contrasted with farm or
homestead, 324; origin
of,  301.

village-planning  in  Denmark,
337.

vindex,  358.

virgate,  283.

vitni,  365.

vivaha  (marriage),  241  f.

Vladimir  of  Russia,  plurality
of  wives,  238.

Vologda,  271.

voluntary  actions,  Wundt  on,
42 ;  arbitration,  346.

Vorsprecher,  364.

voting  bridge,  235.

Vulgar  Roman Law,  372.

vulgarization  of  Roman  law,
130.

wages,  76,  79.

Walker,  Watson  and  others  v.
Treasury  Solicitor,  28  f .

Ward,  J.,  36.

Ward,  Lester,  68.

warriors,  assembly  of,  351  f .

waste  and  pasture  land,  treat-
ment of,  324.

"Waverley,"  308.

Weber,  M.,  156.


428


INDEX


Webb,  B.  and  S.,  on  state  pro-
tection, 96  f .
S.,  on  socialism,  86.

wed,  254.

weddings,  duties  of  kindred,
319.

week  work,  342.

wele,  278,  329.

welfare,  84  ff.

Welsh  chieftains,  328;  clan,
308 ;  co-aration,  284,
331;  Law,  371;  Laws,
230 ;  marriage,  247 ;  pre-
Celtic  race,  223;  sur-
veys, 327.

Wends,  treatment  of  aged,  230,
235.

wergeld,  Charlemagne  on,
348;  duty  of  kindred,
in  Anglo-Saxon  laws,
312  ff. ;  in  Icelandic  law,
315;  in  Trondjhem  law,
302;  paid  by  group,
254.

Westermarck,  E.,  on  matri-
archal family,  194;  on
monogamous  marriage,
165 ;  on  patriarchal  fam-
ily, 172.

Western  Slavs,  272.

Whateley,  Archbp.,  on  ignora-
tio  elenchi,  and  irrele-
vant conclusion,  5.

widow,  in  Joint  Family,  266.

Wieser,  F.  v.,  on  political  econ-
omy, 78.

wife-lending,  173,  198.

wife's  rights  of  property,  255.

will,  the,  42  f.,  52;  exertion  of,
36;  free,  42  ff.,  54;  gen-
eral, 91;  of  God,  45;
Ihering  on,  142;  and
morality,  43  ff.

will  in  procinctu,  293;  and  see
testament.


wills,  law  as  to,  28  ff.

Windscheid,  B.,  131.

Winnebago  tribe  of  N.  Amer-
ica, 193.

witan,  witenagemot,  363.

wives,  plurality  of,  238.

Wlemar,  362.

wolf  (outlaw),  359.

Wolff,  J.  C.,  on  association  of
ideas,  35  n. ;  on  facul-
ties, 106;  and  schemes
of  universal  jurispru-
dence, 153.

women,  exclusion  of,  from  suc-
cession to  land,  287;
position  of,  in  ancient
Aryan  society,  255  ff . ;
under  the  matrilineal
system,  190,  191;  shar-
ing in  vigslodi,  317.

Wordsworth,  and  French  Revo-
tion,  88;  Prelude,  124  n.

worship  of  ancestors,  223  ff.

Worms,  R.,  68.

Wundt,  W.,  on  altruism,  47  n. ;
on  apperception,  38  n. ;
on  association  in  ani-
mals, 39  f .,  n. ;  on  hap-
piness, 45  n. ;  on  na-
tional psychology,  65 ;
on  sympathy,  46;  on
voluntary  actions,  42.

viyrion,  308.

Yajnavalkya,  263  f.
yardlands,  283,  338.
Yarnton,  open-field  system,

341.

Year  Book  cases,  6,  20.
Young  v.  Grote,  19  f.

Zadruga,  S.  Slav,  268 ff.;  in
Western  Bulgaria,  334.

zamindari  tenure  of  land,  323;
village,  325.


K  215  .E5  V5  1920  v.1 SMC
Vinogradoff,  Paul,
Outlines  of  historical
jurisprudence
