ENGLISH SOCIETY
IN  THE  ELEVENTH  CENTURY


T/"


PREFACE

I  HAVE  treated  in  a  former  work  ^  some  of  the  questions
of  social  history  connected  with  the  period  of  the  formation
of  Common  Law.  In  the  present  volume  I  should  like
to  follow  up  these  investigations  into  an  earlier  and  more
obscure  period — into  the  eleventh  century,  which  witnessed
the  definite  settlement  of  the  Danes^  the  overthrow  of  the
Anglo-Saxon  system,  and  the  beginnings  of  Norman  rule.
Both  the  setting  of  problems  and  their  treatment  have  to
be  different  on  this  occasion  from  what  they  were  in  the
book  on  Villainage.  Instead  of  dealing  with  clearly  for-
mulated legal  records  and  detailed  extents  of  manorial
possessions  and  services,  we  shall  have  to  use  chiefly  the
short,  barren  abstracts  of  Domesday  Bpoli-and  stray  notices
as  to  legal  customs  and  historical  events.  But,  on  the  other
hand,  it  is  easier  to  form  a  view  as  to  the  relative  influence
and  intercourse  of  the  orders  and  classes  of  society,  of
the  relations  between  the  different  functions  of  its  life.

The  central  record  of  the  study,  the  Domesday  Survey,
proved  invaluable  as  a  description,  unique  in  history,  of
the  state  of  a  great  country  in  the  eleventh  century,  in  the
beginning  of  a  new  and  momentous  period  in  the  life  of
Europe.  However  interesting  and  important  early  French
Sur\'cys,  early  German  and  Italian  documents  may  be,
they  describe  local  and  particular  instances,  while  the
Royal  Inquest  of  1086  stretches  over  all  the  social  groups

^  Villainage  in  England,  1892. Clarendon  Press.


ENGLISH SOCIETY
IN  THE  ELEVENTH  CENTURY


HENRY  FROWDE,  M.A.

PUBLISHER  TO  THE  UNIVERSITY  OF  OXFORD

LONDON,  EDINBURGH

NEW  YORK  AND  TORONTO


ENGLISH  SOCIETY

IN  THE  ELEVENTH  CENTURY


ESSAYS IN ENGLISH
MEDIAEVAL  HISTORY


BY

PAUL  VINOGRADOFE

M.A-,  Hon.  D.CL.  (Oxford),  Hon.  LL.D.  (Cambridge  and  Harvard),

Dr.  Hist.  (Moscow),  F.EA.

COBFDS  PBOPBSSOR  OP  JURISPRiniBIICB  IN  THB  UVIVBRSITY  OP  OXFORD


OXFORD
AT  THE  CLARENDON PRESS

1908


/_ .  ■■! v' ^

1 ■»  %  ■,  r  . .  I • -  ^.


\


V.f I .■■J"  ; : . >  I

y


IjU  (ytccxCt:  .>/,^oP.^^


OXFORD

PRINTED  AT  THE  CLARENDON PRESS

BY  HORACE  HART, M.A.

PRINTER  TO  THE  UNIVERSITY


TO  THE  MEMORY


OF


F. W. MAITLAND


PREFACE

I  HAVE  treated  in  a  former  work  ^  some  of  the  questions
of  social  history  connected  with  the  period  of  the  formation
of  Common  Law.  In  the  present  volume  I  should  like
to  follow  up  these  investigations  into  an  earlier  and  more
obscure  period — into  the  eleventh  century,  which  witnessed
the  definite  settlement  of  the  Danes,  the  overthrow  of  the
Anglo-Saxon  system,  and  the  beginnings  of  Norman  rule.
Both  the  setting  of  problems  and  their  treatment  have  to
be  different  on  this  occasion  from  what  they  were  in  the
tKx>k  on  Villainage.  Instead  of  dealing  with  clearly  for-
mulated legal  records  and  detailed  extents  of  manorial
possessions  and  services,  we  shall  have  to  use  chiefly  the
short,  barren  abstracts  of  Domesday  Booli-and  stray  notices
as  to  legal  customs  and  historical  events.  But,  on  the  other
hand,  it  is  easier  to  form  a  view  as  to  the  relative  influence
and  intercourse  of  the  orders  and  classes  of  society,  of
the  relations  between  the  different  functions  of  its  life.

The  central  record  of  the  study,  the  Domesday  Survey,
proved  invaluable  as  a  description,  unique  in  history,  of
the  state  of  a  great  country  in  the  eleventh  century,  in  the
beginning  of  a  new  and  momentous  period  in  the  life  of
Europe.  However  interesting  and  important  early  French
Sur\'eys,  early  German  and  Italian  documents  may  be,
they  describe  local  and  particular  instances,  while  the
Royal  Inquest  of  1086  stretches  over  all  the  social  groups

*  Villaiaage  in  England,  1892. Clarendon  Press.


viii  PREFACE

of  a  kingdom,  and  over  the  greater  jiart  of  its  territor)*.
In  a  way,  no  better  clue  exists  for  the  understanding  of
the  machiner>'  of  mediaeval  society  at  large,  and  for  the
appreciation  of  the  relative  importance  of  its  constitutive
elements.  A  thorough  study  of  the  record  in  its  endless
and  exceedingly  valuable  details  may  be  said  to  be  a  task
set  not  merely  to  English  historians  and  antiquarians,  but
to  the  students  of  the  social  development  of  feudal  Europe
in  general.

And,  for  all  its  puzzling  problems  and  difficulties,  such
a  study  presents  a  unique  opportunity  for  concentrating
materials  and  formulating  explanations  in  regard  to  later
and  earlier  periods  of  history.  The  antiquarian  has  con-
stantly to  go  back  to  Domesday  if  he  wants  to  trace  to
a  definite  starting-point  local  features  or  social  institutions.

There  is,  of  course,  a  *  be}'ond  '  even  as  to  Domesday,
but  the  safest  way  towards  an  apprehension  of  this
^  beyond '  lies  through  the  Great  Survey  itself.  The  latter
appears,  in  a  sense,  as  the  knot  in  which  the  threads  of
English  social  history  converge  from  all  sides,  and  we  cannot
wonder  that  the  efforts  of  scholars  should  be  directed  above
all  things  to  loosening  this  knot  in  order  to  disentangle  and
follow  up  the  threads.  Asa  matter  of  fact,  it  is  clear  that
no  attempt  to  explain  the  rise  of  a  landed  aristocracy  or  the
mediaeval  agrarian  system,  or  the  influence  of  the  Danish
invasion,  or  the  relative  strength  of  the  free  and  unfrec
elements  of  .society  can  succeed  unless  the  materials  pro-
vided by  the  Domesday  Survey  are  examined  and
accounted for.

On  the  other  hand,  it  is  not  less  im|>ortant  to  analyse
this  material  in  the  light  provided  by  later  and  earlier  facts.
The  Survey  is  primarily  composed  of  abstracts  from  mites
on  early  Norman  and  late  Saxon  conditions,  and  the  chics
to  its  terminology  and  statistics  must  be  sought  not  only
in  indications  provided  by  itself,  but  also  in  the  c\idcnce


PREFACE  ix

from  English,  French,  and  Scandinavian  sources  in  its
intimediate  neighbourhood.  In  a  sense,  the  Domesday
Inquest  became  a  powerful  factor  of  history  ;  it  led  to  the
definite  registration  of  groups  which  might  otherwise  have
remained  in  a  rather  floating  state ;  settlements  of  con-
troversies as  to  tenure  and  status  were  connected  with  it.
But  the  principal  aim  of  the  Survey  was  not  to  modify  but
to  record,  and  therefore  it  stands  in  the  closest  relation
to  the  age  which  precedes  it.  Difficult  critical  problems
certainly  arise  in  any  attempt  to  interpret  Domesday  by
the  help  of  feudal  incidents,  or  of  Anglo-Saxon  and  Anglo-
Danish  terms,  but  both  methods  of  interpretation  have
to  be  constantly  used  if  we  want  to  get  at  the  realities
indicated  by  the  dry  abstracts  of  the  Survey  itself.

One  great  question  I  have  thought  best  to  leave  aside —
namely,  the  rise  of  English  town  life.  The  authorities
of  the  eleventh  century,  and  especially  Domesday  Book,
supply  us  with  capital  evidence  on  this  point,  but  the  trend
of  such  an  inquiry  leads  to  intricate  problems  which  seem
to  require  a  separate  and  exhaustive  treatment.  I  thought
it  sufficient  for  the  day  to  discuss  the  principal  types  of
development  in  country  life  to  which  the  greater  part  of
the  Survey  and  of  other  eleventh-century  documents  are
devoted.

The  importance  of  the  subject  and  the  wealth  of  infor-
mation supplied  by  the  existing  evidence  may  justify  my
attempt  to  take  up  a  study  in  which  so  much  has  been
done  by  scholars  of  great  name,  and  especially  by  one,
the  greatest  of  all,  who  has  been  lately  taken  from  us.  In
a  recently  issued  volume  ^  I  have  tried  to  state  my  views
as  to  the  results  achieved  by  their  inquiries.  My  present
work  will  be  exclusively  devoted  to  an  examination  of  the
evidence  itself  in  as  far  as  it  treats  of  the  eleventh  century
or,  though  coming  from  later  and  earlier  sources,  has  a

*  The  Growth  of  the  Manor,  1905. Swan  Sonnenschein  &  Co.


X  PREFACE

bearing  on  the  state  of  affairs  in  the  course  of  the  eleventh
century.  It  is  to  the  terminological  and  institutional  side
of  the  inquiry  rather  than  to  the  statistical  and  topc^aphi-
cal  one  that  my  studies  have  been  principally  directed.
References  have  been  given  rather  fully  in  the  hope  that
a  selection  of  texts  from  original  authorities  might  prove
valuable,  even  apart  from  the  argument,  and  would  facilitate
the  task  of  testing  this  argument  as  far  as  it  goes.

I  am  greatly  indebted  to  friends  who  have  kindly
read  my  proofs  and  offered  many  a  valuable  suggestion,
to  W.  H.  Stevenson,  of  St.  John's  College,  Oxford,
Professor  C.  Gross,  of  Harvard  University,  and  F.  Morgan,
of  Keble  Collie,  Oxford.  I  have  also  had,  during  my
recent  visit  to  the  United  States,  the  benefit  of  the  advice
of  Professor  Gay,  of  Harvard  University,  in  regard  to  the
first  essay  of  this  book;  while  Miss  Toulmin  Smith  has
taken  great  pains  in  revising  the  proofs  of  the  second  essay
and  of  the  Appendices.  My  secretary.  Miss  A.  Sergeant,
has  rendered  me  most  valuable  assistance — among  other
things  by  compiling,  under  my  direction,  the  tabular
Appendices  and  the  Index.

I  am  conscious  of  many  shortcomings,  but  I  hope  that,
whatever  strictures  may  be  made  by  critics,  the  work  may
yet  be  found  to  be  a  not  superfluous  contribution  to  a
subject  which  is  likely  to  supply  generations  of  students
with  materials  for  inquiries.


CONTENTS


PAGE

Preface vii

ISTRODUCTION I •


FIRST ESSAY

GOVERNMENT  AND  SOCIETY

SECTION  I:  MILITARY  ORGANIZATION

Chapter  I. Mercenaries  and  National  Levies  . 14


/^


Chapter  II. Feudal  Service .... 39

SECTION  II :  JURISDICTION

Chapter  I. The  County  and  the  Hundred  90 *■

Chapter  II. Franchises 108

SECTION  III:  TAXATION

Chapter  I. The  Geld 140

Chapter  II. '  Fiscal  Immunities  .  -177

SECTION IV  : GOVERNMENT AND SOCIETY.  j

GENERAL  SURVEY 208

SECOND ESSAY

LAND  AND PEOPLE

SECTION  I :  LAND  TENURE

Chapter  I. The  Legal  Framework . . .219^
Chapter  II. Husbandry 263


xii  CONTENTS

PAGE

/  SECTION  II : RURAL  ORGANIZATION

Chapter  I. Manors 305

Chapter  IL The  Demesne 353

Chapter  III. The  Land  of  the  Tenants . .370

SECTION  III :  SOCIAL  CLASSES

Chapter  I. Landowners  and  Free  Tenants .  403

Chapter  II. Peasants 431

SECTION  IV: LAND  AND  PEOPLE. GENERAL

SURVEY 471

APPENDICES 480

INDEX 591


INTRODUCTION

I.  The  eleventh  century  seems  a  very  distant  time  to  us  Problems
who  arc  entering  into  the  twentieth.  It  appears  as  a  field  ^f^^^jj
for  antiquarian  speculations  entirely  devoid  of  practical  century,
interest.  What  can  its  study  profit  the  lawj^r,  or  even
die  historian,  bent  on  tracing  the  progress  of  living  insti-
tutions, on  explaining  the  present  by  the  past  ?  And  yet
it  does  not  require  profound  investigations  in  order  to  see
that  the  eleventh  century,  like  many  other  ancient  epochs,
still  lays  claim  to  attention,  and  that  its  study  repays  the
labour  of  the  scholar  who  turns  to  it  For  a  philolog^ist,  for
instance,  there  could  not  be  any  question  as  to  its  impor-
tance :  it  is  the  time  when  the  composition  of  the  English
language  was  definitely  settled,  when  it  was  decided  by
history  that  it  should  become  the  characteristic  mixture  of
Germanic  and  French  elements  which  it  has  remained  ever
since.  It  may,  in  a  sense,  be  said  that  English  in  its  two-
fold composition  dates  from  the  eleventh  century.

And  so  does  English  law  and  English  society. From  the
eleventh  century  most  of  the  great  forces  of  English  history
—royalty,  the  landed  aristocracy,  the  Church,  local  institu-
tions—proceed on  their  course  of  development  through  many
a  momentous  crisis,  but  without  substantial  break. Before
the  eleventh  century  we  witness  the  stunted  growth  of  a
Teutonic  state  which  might  have  resulted  in  something  more  r
akin  to  the  formation  of  Denmark  or  Norway  than  to  that
of  England  as  it  has  come  to  be. The  eleventh  century  may  I
be  truly  called  the  watershed  in  the  development  of  English!
society.

From  the  point  of  view  of  social  and  legal  history  three
great  problems  are  set,  and  to  a  certain  extent  solved,  at
that  time.
The  first  stage  is  reached  in  the  amalgamation  of  the  Old


vUKKBAOOrr


1

I


Old

English

element


2  INTRODUCTIOxN

English  and  of  the  French  elements  brought  together  by
the  Conquest;  the  Scandinavian  factor  is  reduced  to  a
secondary  place  in  the  life  of  the  country  at  large ;  the  con-
ditions for  the  growth  of  Common  Law  are  prepared  by  the
political  centralization  following  on  the  Conquest.  Of  the
third  of  these  processes  we  shall  have  to  speak  when  we
come  to  treat  of  the  fate  of  provincial  institutions.  It  may
be  convenient  to  remind  the  reader  now  briefly  of  the
general  features  of  the  first  and  of  the  second  process.

Very  few  words  will  suffice  in  regard  to  the  relation  be-
tween Old  English  and  French  institutions  and  customs,  as
this  matter  has  been  often  discussed  and  cleared  up  in  a
more  or  less  exhaustive  way.  Old  English  law  was,  of
course,  never  abrogated  and  French  law  never  introduced
by  a  comprehensive  enactment  after  the  Conquest.  English
legal  history  does  not  know  of  a  *  reception  *  of  foreign  law
in  the  sense  in  which  Roman  law  was  received  in  Germany
in  the  fifteenth  century.  The  wergelds  or  compensations
for  homicide,  the  proof  by  the  oath  of  a  body  of  men
swearing  together,  various  customs  as  to  marriage  law  and
inheritance,  &c.,  continued  to  exist  and  were  frequently  put
into  practice  in  royal,  provincial,  and  local  courts,  more
especially  in  those  of  the  boroi^hs,  where  they  have  left
deep  traces  in  later  times.^

The  Chancery  of  Norman  and  Angevin  kings  followed
most  closely  on  important  occasions  precedents  supplied  by
the  charters  of  Edward  the  Confessor  and  of  Canute.  King
Henry  II  sent  out  a  writ  in  1155  ^^  ^^1  ^^e  shires  in  which
the  See  of  Canterbury  held  land,  to  apprise  the  communities
of  these  shires  that  the  new  Archbishop  Theobald  was  con-
firmed in  the  possession  of  all  the  estates  and  liberties  which
his  predecessors  had  received  from  foreign  kings.  The  writ
was  bilingual,  Old  English  and  Latin,  and  contained  an
enumeration  of  social  ranks,  offices,  and  rights  which  would


^  The  Borough  Custumals,  Mited  by  the  late  Miss  Bateson,  are
a  mine  of  information  as  to  survivals  of  Old  English  customs.  See,
e.g.,  the  procedure  as  to  oaths  and  compurgation  in  practice  in
London,  Selden  Society  Series,  xviii.  37  ff.


INTRODUCTION  3

have  been  quite  appropriate  in  the  reign  of  Edward  the
Confessor.^  The  formula  of  the  writ  was  evidently  a  stand-
ing one,  and  came  to  be  repeated  at  the  accession  of  each
new  archbishop :  it  does  not  vouch  for  the  exact  corre-
spondence between  the  Anglo-Saxon  terms  employed  and
the  social  facts  of  Henry  II's  reign,  but  it  illustrates  in  a  tX
forcible  manner  the  continuity  of  legal  tradition.

Turning  to  Domesday  Book,  we  find  that  the  whole
complex  of  rights  acquired  by  the  French  conquerors  on
English  soil  is  determined  in  a  sense  by  Old  English  law.
The  Norman  lord  usually  got  his  title  and  claimed  his  rights
on  the  strength,  not  of  separate  and  express  grants,  but  of
a  general  assignment  of  all  the  titles  and  rights  that  had
been  possessed  by  his  Saxon  predecessors,  of  everything
that  had  been  held  in  a  particular  place  by  Godwin  or
Edric  or  Aslac  T.R.E.,  that  is,  at  the  time  of  King  Edward.^
Hence  we  come  across  constant  references  and  contests  in
reg^LTd  to  rights  derived  from  occupation  and  ownership  in
Old  English  law.  In  a  word,  substantive  Old  English  law
passed  from  the  time  of  the  last  Anglo-Saxon  kings  to  that
of  the  kings  of  the  Norman  dynasty,  and  continued  in  use
in  a  variety  of  relations,  especially  in  local  custom.

And  yet  French  law  was  imported  wholesale  and  put  into  French
practice  in  every  sphere  of  life. The  classification  of  persons
according  to  their  status,  legal  procedure,  police  responsi-
bility and  punishment  of  criminals,  military  tenure,  land-
ownership  and  seisin  are  at  once  affected  by  views  and  rules

'  Earle,  Land  Charters,  346 :  '  H.  ^urh  godes  gefu  aen^Ielandes  king
gret  eaUe  mine  bissceopas  and  eallemine  eorlas  and  eallemme  scirereuan
and  ealle  mine  beinas  frencisce  and  englisce  on  )»an  sciran  ^  Teobalt
ercebisccop  ana  se  hiret  act  Cristas  chyrchen  on  Cantuarabirg  habbad
land  inne  treondlice  and  ic  ke^  cow  )>et  ic  hebbe  heom  geunnen  |>et  hi
beon  aelc  bare  lande  wur)>  jw  hi  eafdon  ean  (sic)  Eadwardes  Kinges  dege
and  00  Willehnes  Kinges  mines  fur)nir  ealdefader,  and  on  Henrices
Kinges  mines  ealdefader,  and  saca  and  socne,  on  stronde,  and  on
streame,  on  wudan,  and  on  feldan,  tolles  and  theames,  grithbriches,  and
hamsocne  and  forstalles,  and  infangenes  thiafes,  and  fleamene  frimtha,
crfer  heore  agene  men,  binnan  Burgan  and  butan,  swa  ful  and  swa
ford  swa  mine  agene  Wicneres  hit  sechan  scholden,  and  ofer  swa  fele
beinas  swa  ich  heom  to  leten  habban.'  Collated  with  facsimile  in
Wol^ang  Keller,  Angelsachsische  Palaeographie,  Berlin,  1906,  plate  13.

'  Freeman,  Norman  Conquest,  v.  17  flf.

B  2


clement.


4  INTRODUCTION

which  may  be  ultimately  traced  to  Prankish  law.  The
pioneers  in  this  process  of  practical  'reception'  are  the
feudal  courts  on  the  one  hand,  the  king  s  courts  on  the  other.
In  proportion  as  the  feudal  and  the  royal  elements  gain
strength  the  law  assumes  more  and  more  a  French  aspect,
French  in  the  sense  of  proceeding  from  germs  brought  over
from  the  Continent  and  mainly  borrowed  from  Frankish
law,  although  the  ultimate  development  of  these  germs
was  very  unlike  that  of  similar  institutions  in  France.  It
may  be  sufficient  to  cite  the  introduction  of  wager  of  battle,
which  appears  in  full  use  at  once  after  the  Conquest.^  Trial
by  jury  presents  even  a  more  famous  and  important  instance,
and,  although  its  legal  evolution  belongs  chiefly  to  the  reign
of  Henry  II,  the  Frankish  Inquest  which  formed  its  basis  is
already  employed  on  the  administrative  and  fiscal  side  in
the  reigns  of  the  Norman  kings,  and  certainly  stands  iti
close  relationship  to  precedents  derived  from  the  practice  of
the  Duchy  of  Normandy.*
Scandina-  2.  It  is  more  difficult  to  estimate  the  influence  of  Scandi-
vian  clc-  navian  customs  on  England.  They  have  been  to  a,  great
extent  hidden  from  view  by  their  amalgamation  with  the
body  of  Anglo-Saxon  law.  From  the  point  of  view  of  the
French  conquerors  they  were  local  varieties  of  the  complex
of  legal  rules  which  used  to  be  included  in  the  general
designation  of  the  Confessor's  laws.  And  yet  it  is  interest-
ing to  notice  that  there  is  a  distinct  stream  of  Scandinavian
principles  and  practice  running  through  this  preconquestual
legal  lore.  We  can  distinctly  trace  a  time  when  there  were
two  great  bodies  of  law  in  concurrent  use  in  England:
Scandinavian  customs  in  the  Anglo-Danish  half  of  the
country,  roughly  speaking  in  England  north-east  of  Watling
Street,  and  more  purely  Saxon  and  Anglian  customs  and
legislation  in  what  may  be  termed,  for  want  of  a  better
word,  the  Anglo-Saxon  half  of  England,  south-west  of
Watling  Street.  It  is  more  difficult  to  ascertain  the  par-
ticulars of  the  first  case  than  those  of  the  second,  because

'  Bigelow,  Placita  Anglo- Normanica,  19,  41,  42,  61,  69,  &c.
'  Brunner,  Entstehung  der  Schwurgerichte.


■■»


1


}


INTRODUCTION  5

the  Danes  and  Norsemen  were  even  less  literary  people
than  the  Angles  and  Saxons,  and  their  peculiarities  are  more
often  referred  to  than  described.^  Yet  some  characteristic
features  may  be  made  out  with  sufficient  clearness.  They
diacloae  on  the  one  hand  a  great  similarity  in  the  general
coaceptions  of  justice  and  social  order  between  Scandi-
navians and  Ei^lish,  and,  on  the  other,  these  general  con-
ceptions receive  in  many  respects  a  peculiar  treatment.  It
is  worth  while  to  look  a  little  closer  into  these  questions  of
the  Scandinavian  elements  of  preconquestual  law,  as  their
examination  may  prove  useful  later  on,  when  we  come  to
investigate  the  social  differences  between  the  Anglo- Danish
and  Anglo-Saxon  provinces.^

Scandinavian  influence  is  clearly  traceable  in  some  points  judicial
of  judicial  organization  and  procedure.  In  several  of  the  2^*""*
towns  where  the  Danish  settlements  were  especially  strong,  /

in  Lincohi,  Stamford,  Cambridge,  Chester,  York,  we  find  a
peculiar  Scandinavian  legal  institution,  the  logmen^  some-
times under  that  very  name,  and  sometimes  under  the  desig-
nation of  indices.  In  the  Scandinavian  countries  the  logmen^ 1  i
the  Idjgsogumadr^  are  legal  experts  of  high  social  standing, '.
who  have  to  lay  down  the  law  before  the  popular  court, . /
either  in  connexion  with  particular  cases  as  they  come  up, /

*  iEthelred,  vi.  37  :  'on  Dena  lage  be  )»am  )«  heora  lagu  sy.'  Cf.
Canute,  iL  15  ;  15, 1 1.

*  The  principal  contribution  to  this  study  has  been  made  by
Steenstnip  in  his  volume  on  the  '  Danelag '.  Professor  Alex.  Hugge  in
his  lecent  book  on  th^  Vikings  has  also  called  attention  to  several
interesting  facts.  Both  authors,  especially  the  latter,  exaggerate
perhaps  the  amount  of  direct  loans  from  the  Scandinavians,  and  treat
the  subject  to  some  extent  in  a  strain  of  retrospective  nationalism.
Many  traits  which  are  considered  as  peculiar  to  the  Danes  and
Norsemen  appear  in  truth  as  a  close  parallel  to  older  Teutonic
customs.  Some  curious  misunderstandings  are  produced  by  these
nationalistic  prepossessions,  as  e.  g.  when  Professor  Alex.  Bugge  con-
tends that  serfs  were  of  higher  rank  than  the  villain  in  the  south-west  of
England,  because  they  happen  to  be  mentioned  first  in  some  of  the
surveys  of  the  shires  in  Domesday  Book  (Vikingeme,  ii.  322).  But  the
general  trend  of  these  inquiries  goes  in  the  right  direction,  and  leads
to  interesting  points  of  view.  The  study  of  Anglo-Danish  civilization
has  been  too  much  neglected,  and  therefore  the  copious  material
presented  by  Domesday  in  this  respect  has  not  yet  received  an
adequate  treatment


INTRODUCTION


or  in  a  systematic  series  of  statements  or  lectures.^  It
would  be  impossible  to  prove  that  the  function  of  the  lag-
men  in  England  was  differentiated  in  the  same  way  from
the  ordinary  jurisdiction  of  a  judge.  But  it  is  clear  that  the
town  judges  in  question  dojiojt  hold  their  commission  from
theking, and  are  not  elected  members  of  a  popular  tribunal.
Their  office  is  a  hereditary  one,  and  there  is  no  exact  counter-
part to  it  in  the  purely  English  portions  of  the  country.

The  standard  number  of  lagmen  seems  to have  been
twelve,  and  this  observation  leads  up  to  another  Scandi-
navian institution  of  considerable  interest,  namely,  to  the
twelve  senior  thanes  of  iEthelred's  law  enacted  at  Wantage
in  997. This  group  of  twelve  thanes  appears  in  two  of  the
clauses  formulated  by  the  Witanagemot. In  cl.  3  they  have
to  come  forward  in  the  court  of  every  wapentake  and  to
swear  on  relics  that  they  will  not  accuse  wrongly  any  inno-
cent man  or  conceal  any  guilty  one.* In  cl.  13  it  is  enacted
that  if  the  thanes  come  to  a  unanimous  decision,  it  should
I stand  ;  if  they  are  divided,  that  opinion  should  be  accepted
I for  which  eight  have  voted,  while  the  members  of  the
I minority  incur  a  heavy  fine— each  six  half-marks  or  two
I pounds.^ The  full  quorum  meant  in  this  second  case  is
evidently  one  of  twelve  as  in  the  first,  although  the  enact-
ment requires  somewhat  more  than  an  absolute  majority
for  the  validity  of  a  sentence — eight  and  not  seven. The
idea  of  fining  those  who  took  a  different  view  is  not  strange
from  a  barbaric  point  of  view  :  those  who  are  overruled  are
assumed  to  have  pronounced  a  wrong  judgement,  and  are
fined  accordingly.
Indictment The  most  interesting  feature  of  the  Wantage  enactment
procednre.  j^^  however,  the  provision  about  the  oath  of  the  twelve

^  Steenstrup,  Danelag,  195  if. ;  cf.  Lambert,  La  fonction  du  droit
civil  compard,  731  ff.

■  iEthelred,  iii.  3,  §  l  :  *  And  |»aet  man  habbe  gem6t  on  aelcum
waepentake  and  gdn  ut  |ia  yldestan  xii  )>egnas  and  se  gerefa  mid  and
suerian  on  )>am  haligdome,  )>e  heom  man  on  hand  sylle,  |>2et  hig
nellan  nsenne  saclassan  man  forsecgean  ne  nxnne  sacne  forhdan.'

'  Ibid.,  13)  §  2:  'And  |Ket  d6m  stande,  )»ar  (legenas  sammaele  beon  ;
gif  hig  sacan,  standan  jieet  hig  viii  secgad,  and  ^  jw  tfaer  ofer-
drifene  beod,  gilde  heora  aelc  vi  healfmarc.^


INTRODUCTION  7

thanes. It  has  been  pointed  out  that  we  actually  catch
a  glimpse  here  of  the indictment procedure  regularized
in  1 1 66  by  the  Assize  of  Clarendon.^ On  the  other  hand,
the  partisans  of  a  derivation  of  the  grand  jury  from  the
Inquest  of  Normandy  and  Carolingian  France  have  given
a  more  narrow  interpretation  to  the  action  of  the  twelve
thanes :  it  has  been  taken  to  establish  the  personal  status
of  accused  persons  in  regard  to  the  ordeal  spoken  of  in
d.  4  and  following. It  was  of  great  importance  to  settle
ndiether  a  particular  person  was  of  good  or  bad  repute,
as  the  ordeal  in  the  latter  case  was  much  heavier  than
in  the  first Brunner  thinks  that  only  this  preliminary
settlement  was  entrusted  to  the  twelve  thanes,  and  that  the
indictment  jury  led  by  the  twelve '  most  lawful  men '  of  the
hundred  as  regulated  by  the  Assize  of  Clarendon  has  nothing
to  do  with the  laws  of  Wantage,  and  is  derived  from
Nonvan-French  precedents.^ It  seems  to  me  that  this  is
emphatically  a  case  when  the  growth  of  an  institution  has  to
be  traced  to  different  roots. The  continuity  of  the  Frankish
and  Norman  inquest  procedure  may  be  considered  as  fully
established  in  regard  to  England  by  Palgrave  and  Brunner's
studies. But  this  does  not  preclude  that  in  preconquestual
England  itself  there  had  existed  legal  customs  which  pre-
pared  the  way for  the indictment  jury  of  the twelfth
century. The  leading  men  of  the  wapentake,  to  judge
by  the  Wantage  enactment,  were  called  up  to  point  out
persons  who  had  to  be  accused  of  crimes,  and  to  settle  the
conditions  under  which  they  might  undertake  to  purge \
themselves  of  the  accusation. The  tenor  of  cl.  3  is  too
general  to  admit of  a restrictive  interpretation bearing
merely  on  the  character  of  the  ordeal :  it  speaks  of  inno-
cence and  guilt,  and  not  of  repute,  and  the  quorum  of  the  v
twelve  thanes  appears  later  on  as  responsible  for  the  sen-
tence. Nor  is  the  remarkable  coincidence  with  the  twelve
lawful  men  of  the  Clarendon  Assize,  on  the  one  hand,  with
the  twelve  lagmen  of  the  Danish  boroughs,  likely  to  be

*  Steenstrup,  Danelag,  206  ff.

•  Brunner,  Schwurgerichte,  28,  403  ff.


Private
law.


8  INTRODUCTION

fortuitous.^  To  be  sure,  the  verdict  of  the  senior  thanes  was
not  final ;  it  could  be  reversed  by  successful  ordeal,  but
even  so  the  verdict  of  the  grand  jury  is  lacking  in  finality :
\  from  the  legal  point  of  view  in  both  cases  we  have  only  an
indictment  before  us.  In  a  vague  way  some  elements  of  such
a  procedure  on  the  strengfth  of  the  opinion  of  the  authori-
tative, the  leading,  men  of  a  district  may  be  said  to  have
existed  in  the  Anglo-Saxon  shires  as  well.  At  any  rate
It  is  quite  clear  from  records  of  late  Anglo-Saxon  pleas
that  the  decisions  were  formulated  in  the  county  and/
i  I  probably  in  the  hundred  court  by  the  leading  thanes,'
and  not  by  the  community  of  the  suitors.*  But,  of  course,
this  only  shows  that  jurisdiction  was  assuming  in  pre-
conguestual  England  an  aristocratic  basis.  The  Anglo-
Danish  practice  led  to  a  definite  differentiation  of  ranks,
and  to  a  concrete  development  of  the  institution  of  senior
thanes  and  lagmen  wielding  an  authoritative  supervision
over  the  criminal  police  of  the  district.  The  Anglo-Norman
inquest  provided  the  last  link  for  the  formation  of  an  indict-

iment  jury  empannelled  for  the  purpose  of  formulating
indictments,  and  capable  of  collecting  information  as  to
supposed  guilt.  If  the  Norman-French  inquest  had  not
supervened,  the  Scandinavian  procedure  might  have  easily
taken  the  shape  of  the  establishment  of  presumption  by
an  aristocratic  board.  If,  on  the  other  hand,  the  Scandi-
navian element  described  in  iEthelred  s  enactment  had  not
found  its  way  into  English  practice^  the  Prankish  inquest
would  have  hardly  assumed  the  definite  form  of  indictment
on  the  strength  of  the  opinion  of  authoritative  knights.
{ The  decisions  of  the  Witenagemot  of  Wantage  seem

^  Cf,  Pollock  and  Maitland,  History  of  English  Law,  i.  121.

'  Thorpe,  Diplom.,  p.  336  f.  (before  1036) :  *  An  scfrgem6t  scet  set
iCgelnodes  stdne  be  Cnutes  dsege  cinges  .  •  .  and  ^r  waes  Bryning
sc^erefa . . .  and  ealle  )>a  )>egnas  on  Herefordscire. .  . .  Da  ast6d
Durcil  Hwfta  up  on  ^am  gem6te  and  baed  eal/e  pa  pegnas  syllan  his
wffe  ba  landes  claene  ]ie  hire  mage  hire  geMe.  And  neo  swa  dydon
and  Durcil  rid  da  to  S^®  i£|«lberhtes  mynstre,  be  ealles  pas  jolces
ledfe  and  gewitnesse  and  let  settan  on  ine  Cristes  b6c.'  Cf.  p.  302
(before  loii),  <|«genas  segder  ge  of  East  Cent  ge  of  West  Cent,  eal
seo  dugud'  .  .  .;  p.  301  (about  icx:>6),  ealle  da  ildostan  )>aegnas  on
Dorsaeton.'


r-^. • ''  .  Jf


^ INTRODUCTION


altogether  to  have  been  an  attempt  to  legalize  the  position
of  the  Danes  in  their  English  settlements,  and  to  sanction
their  legal  arrangements. Besides  the  clauses  already  men-
tioned we  find  a  very  characteristic  enactment  that  witword
and  lahccp  and  landcop  and  lahslit  should  stand. ^ This
evidently  applies  to  Danish  customs  quite  as  much  as  the
diiposition  about  the  holding  of  wapentakes  applied  to
Danish  district  courts. The  laltslit  *  is  the  Danish  counter-
part of  the  Anglo-Saxon  bdt^  witword  \s  explained  in  Anglo-
Sixon  dictionaries  as  applying  to  testaments  and  bequests,
but  the  word  is  a  peculiar  and  well-authenticated  Northern
term  made  out  to  mean  a  legally  allowed  claim,^  more
eq;)ecially  the  right  to  vindicate  ownership  or  possession  by
one  s  affirmation  under  oath  ;  and there  does  not  seem
to  be  any  reason  for  seeking  another  sense  for  this  peculiar
expression  in  Anglo-Saxon  documents.^ Both  lahcap  and
Itmdcop  appear  in the enactment  under  discussion  in  a
ipedfically  Scandinavian  form  {lag-kaup^  landkaup) ;  the  Old
English  would  be  lahceap  and  landceap,  and  this  latter
actually  occurs  in  charters.^ The  buying  of  law  implied  by
kkcop  can  hardly  mean  anything  else  but  redintegration
to  one's  legal  status  after  the  payment  of  a  fine  similar
\o  the  later  amercement  or  miserkordia. As  for  landceap^
the  term  establishes  the  practice  of  alienation  of  land  by
purchase. It  is  corroborated  by  mentions  elsewhere,  and  is
interesting  as  marking  a  stage  in  the  history  of  the  transfer
of  land,  originally  hampered  by  the  right  of  the  kindred  or
magih. This  particular  point  is  curiously  illustrated  by
loroeYiotices  about  the  transfer  of  land  in  the  Anglo-Danish
county  of  Northamptonshire,  showing  that  the  main  features
of  purchase  and  tradition  were  the  confirmation  of  the
validity  of  the transaction by  festertnen (sureties),  and
occasionally  by  public  courts.^ This  evidence  does  not

*  i€tbdred,  iii.  3. Cf.  Law  of  Northumbr.  Priests,  67,  i.
'  £dw.  and  Guthr.,  iii.  3  ;  Canute,  ii.  49,  &c.

'  Amirav  Nordgerxnanisches  Obligationenrecht,  i.  91  flf.

*  Botworth  and  Toller,  s.  v.  witword^  explain  it  by  testament.

*  Licbermann,  Gesetze  der  Angelsachsen,  Glossar,  s.  v.

'  See  my  article  on  '  Transfer  of  Land  in  Old  English  Law  '  in  the
Harvard  Law  Review,  1907.


r*


lo  INTRODUCTION

only  come  from  a  province  deeply  permeated  by  Scandi-
navian influence,  but  it  agrees  in  fundamental  points  with
the  legal  customs  which  obtained  in  Sweden,  Norway,
Denmark,  and  Iceland.
Crimiiuil  One  more  feature  of  Scandinavian  influence  to  which
•  I  should  like  to  call  attention  is  the  characteristic  treat-

ment of  some  crimes from the  point  of  view  of  moral
^'  f reprobation. While  older  Anglo-Saxon  law  as  well  as

J  \ other  '  Leges  barbarorum '  considers  crime  mainly  as  a  tort,

\ \  \  and  dwell  on  compensation,  prevention  of  feud  and  atone-

\ }  ;  ment  for  breach  of  the  peace,  the  idea  of  punishment  for

(  ;  a  moral  wrong  finds  its  way  mainly  through  the  influence

;  of  the  Church,  which  considers  crime  primarily  as  sin.
There  is  a  second  channel,  however,  provided  by  the  con-
:  ception  of  honour  of  military  societies.  To  fly  before  the
:  enemy,  to  forsake  one's  companion  or  chief,  is  estimated  to
j  be  mean,  dishonourable,  unworthy  of  a  warrior,  and  this
/  '  factor  of  reprobation in connexion  with  a  certain  code

;  of  conduct  appears  clearly  in  the  legislation  and  legal  lore
^  of  the  Anglo- Danish  period.^ One  of  the  results  of  this

new  departure  is  the  appearance  of  a  group  of  misdeeds
which  are  described  as  nidingsvark.^  Quite  apart  from
the  material  consequences  of  his  doings,  from  the  amount^f
havoc  brought  about  by  them,  a  man  may  be  pilloried  as
a  niding,  a  mean  fellow,  because  the  crime  imputed  to  him
is  unworthy  of  a  warrior.  To  kill  an  enemy  in  strife,  to
bum  his  house,  are  not  the  acts  of  a  niding,  although  it
may  lead  to  very  unpleasant  reprisals  and  eventually  to
heavy  compensation.  But  Swegcn,  Godwin's  son,  for  the
kidnapping  of  Earl  Bjorn,  was  declared  a  niding.*  The
moral  standard  introduced  in  such  cases  testifies  to  an
important  progress  in  criminal  law,  but  it  is  intimately
connected  with  the  life  of  a  class— the  military  class  of  the
Scandinavian  invasions.  The  sentence  on  Swegen  was
pronounced  by  the  assembly  of  the  here^  and  we  know
from  other  sources  that  stringent  rules  of  discipline,  pro-

*  Cf.  Canute,  ii.  77.  *  Steenstrup,  Danelag,  257  if.

^  A.  S.  Chron.,  A.  D.  1049.


INTRODUCTION  ii

fessional  honour  and  justice^  were  formulated  and  enforced
by  the  military  associations  of  Scandinavian  warriors.  The
company  of  the  Jomsvikings  in  Pomerania,  from  which
the  Tkingemannalid  of  Canute  is  said  to  have  sprung,  was
closely  knitted  by  comradeship,  and  developed  very  strict
rules  of  conduct.  The  same  may  be  said  of  the  Thinge-
manmUid  or  Vederlag  of  the  Anglo-Danish  kings  them-
selves.^ Altogether  the  military  association  evidently  I
played  a  great  part  in  holding  together  and  organizing
the  Scandinavian  invaders  and  settlers  in  England.  The
ties  of  kinship,  though  very  powerful  and  elaborate  in  their
homes,  were  not  well  adapted  for  their  organization  abroad,
as  people  of  different  kindreds  and  even  races  were  very
much  thrown  together  in  the  campaigns  in  foreign  parts.
One  other  characteristic  feature  may  be  noticed  in  this  con-
nexion— namely,  the  rise  of  armed  guilds  in  Anglo-Danish
England,  corresponding  very  closely  to  similar  bodies
in  Scandinavian  countries.  The  guild  of  the  Cambridge
thanes '  finds  its  best  counterpart  in  the  guilds  of  St.  Olaf
in  Norway,  and  other  organizations  of  the  same  kind.^

On  the  whole,  a  study  of  conditions  in  the  north-eastern .  ^
provinces  of  England  reveals  everywhere  traces  of  the  legal  i  ^
and  social  influence  of  the  Scandinavian  race. The  institu-
tions more  particularly  at  home  in  this  territory  are,  as
a  rule,  akin  to  those  which  obtained  in the  south and  I
west,  but  often present  sharper outlines and find their  |
parallel  not  so  much  in  the  conditions  of  the  manorialized
south-west  of  the  eleventh  century  as  in  the  more  primitive
Anglo-Saxon  institutions  of  the  ninth  and  the  tenth. Any-
how, in  our  further  studies  we  shall  have  to  be  careful  not  to
slur  over  the  fundamental  dualism  of  preconquestual  Eng-
land, and  to  attend  to  the  variations  produced  by  it  in  the
aspect  of  legal  custom  and  of  economic  arrangements.

'  Cf.  Larson,  The  King's  Household  before  the  Norman  Conquest,
163  ff.

^  Thorpe,  Diplom.,  610  ff.

'  Skraa  for  et  Olafsgilde  i  Gulathingslagen  ;  Olafsgilde  i  Onarheim  :
Nofges  gamle  love,  v.  7,  11.  Cf.  Papenheim,  Ein  altnordisches
Schutzgildenstatut ;  Danische  Schutzgilden.


\


12  INTRODUCTION

Plan  of  3.  I  have  to  add  a  few  words  about  the  general  scheme

^°  *  of  the  present  book.  I  should  like  to  analyse  the  principal
legal  institutions  of  the  age  in  their  bearing  on  the  constitu-
tion of  society.  Law  is  always  closely  intertwined  with
the  business  interests,  the  economic  forces,  the  social  inter-
course of  the  age  :  the  aim  of  law  is  to  regulate  them,  and
at  the  same  time,  the  development  of  law  is  to  a  great
extent  dependent  on  these  very  business  interests,  economic
forces,  and  social  intercourse.  In  a  broad  sense  l^al  history
is  an  aspect  of  social  history,  and  it  is  from  this  side  that
I  desire  to  approach  it.  I  shall  try,  firstly,  to  examine  the
decisive  political  factors  of  social  life  and  to  trace  the
influence  of  public  law  on  society ;  secondly,  to  examine
the  economic  factors  of  social  life  and  to  trace  the  influence
of  husbandry  and  of  private  law  in  as  far  as  it  regulates
husbandry;  thirdly,  to  examine  the  classes  and  groups
produced  by  the  combined  working  of  political  and  econo-
mic causes,  and  to  trace  the  main  features  of  the  laws  as  to
personal  status  under  which  these  classes  live.  In  con-
nexion with  this  general  plan  I  shall  divide  my  volume  into
two  essays — one  treating  of  society  in  its  relation  to  govern-
ment, the  other  treating  of  land-tenure  and  the  classes
settled  on  the  land,  as  the  principal  elements  of  economic
organization  in  the  eleventh  century.

As  to  the  first  essay,  a  few  preliminary  remarks  may
not  be  amiss.  When  we  speak  of  government  and  political
organization  we  are  naturally  led  to  think  primarily  of
the  institutions  by  which  public  authority  is  represented —
of  kingship,  parliament,  the  courts  of  justice,  the  oflicials,
local  government,  &c.  But  when  it  is  not  so  much  the
political  machinery  itself  as  its  action  in  social  life  that
has  to  be  studied,  a  diflierent  treatment  of  the  subject  may
seem  appropriate.  Instead  of  the  anatomy  of  the  common-
wealth we  may  attend  to  its  physiology;  instead  of  the
structure  of  the  political  body  its  functions  may  he  made
the  subject  of  observation.  We  shall  have  to  speak  of  institu-
tions to  some  extent,  but  let  us  chiefly  look  at  the  work
they  were  doing,  at  the  social  problems  they  had  to  solve.


INTRODUCTION  13

From  this  point  of  view  a  primitive  government  like  that
of  England  in  the  eleventh  century  has  to  face  mainly  three
great  questions  which  continue  to  play  an  important  part
nowadays,  but  are  complicated  by  ever  so  many  other
issues.  The  three  tasks  this  rudimentary  government  had
to  master  were — the  defence  of  the  country,  the  maintenance
of  order  and  justice,  and  the  providing  of  the  means  of
existence  for  government  by  means  of  taxation.  Military  /
organization,  jurisdiction,  and  taxation  will  have  to  be/
discussed  in  their  relations  to  sociaAMlAMI


FIRST ESSAY

GOVERNMENT  AND  SOCIETY

SECTION  I : MILITARY  ORGANIZATION

••*^J^^PTER I

MERCENA<»K5*%VND NATIONAL  LEVIES

MUitary  I.  PERHAPS  the  most  general  feature  of  political  organiza-

gystcms.  ^j^j^^  ^  feature  common  to  all  its  varieties,  however  widely
they  might  differ  in  other  respects,  is  the  necessity  of
a  public  force  of  some  kind.  Tribes  and  cities,  savage
hordes,  feudal  society  and  modern  states,  in  as  much  as
they  are  united  against  outsiders,  and  claim  independent
existence,  have  to  provide,  in  one  way  or  another,  for  an
armed  host.  But,  of  course,  this  host  may  be  arranged  on
very  different  lines :  it  may  be  the  people  in  arms,  or  be
recruited  from  a  class  of  professional  warriors,  or  consist
of  bands  of  trained  mercenaries.  In  any  case  the  system
according  to  which  the  commonwealth  carries  on  its  arma-
ments cannot  but  exercise  a  potent  influence  on  the  whole
constitution  of  society — it  may  lead  to  social  equality,  or
to  the  predominance  of  the  armed  few,  to  the  endowment
of  soldiers  with  land,  or  to  the  sway  of  a  plutocracy  sup-
ported by  hired  armies.  The  central  centuries  of  the
Middle  Ages  in  England  present  us  with  at  least  three
main  varieties  of  military  organization,  comprising  further
subdivisions.  There  was  the  hereditary  aristocracy  of
feudalism  based  on  land  endowment ;  there  were  bodies
of  professional  soldiers  acting  as  mercenaries  and  house-
hold troops  ;  there  were  the  national  levies  of  fyrd  and
here  gathered  on  the  personal  or  on  the  territorial  basis.
All  these  distinct  systems  overlapped  a  good  deal,  and


SECT.  I.  CH.  I]  MERCENARIES  15

may  be  said  to  have  coexisted  during  the  greater  part  of
the  period.  But  the  epochs  when  each  of  them  was  pre-
dominant are  easily  distinguishable,  and  the  contrast  of
the  conceptions  underlying  them  is  so  great  that  they
may  be  considered  separately  from  the  institutional  point
of  view.

As  is  well  known,  mercenaries  were  often  employed  both  Hired
before  and  after  the  Norman  Conquest.  We  need  not*^^^**"*
treat  in  detail  of  the  hiring  of  Flemings  and  French  soldiers,
nor  of  the  levies  of  mercenary  troops  on  English  soil,  outside
the  ordinary  course  of  feudal  service.^  Although  these  ex-
pedients played  a  considerable  part  in  the  military  history
of  the  times,  their  social  importance  is  not  great.  They
did  not  lead  to  the  formation  of  new  classes,  and  did  not
alter  materially  the  development  of  existing  classes,  at  any
rate  in  the  eleventh,  twelfth,  and  thirteenth  centuries.  But
some  features  which  throw  light  on  the  economic  basis  of
military  service,  and  its  material  value  in  these  times,  have
to  be  noticed  shortly  in  a  work  treating  of  the  relations
between  government  and  society.

The  hiring  of  soldiers  was  always,  to  a  great  extent,
matter  of  special  agreement ;  conditions  and  pay  must
have  varied  greatly.  But  in  spite  of  these  fluctuations,  the
frecpient  use  of  mercenaries  tended  towards  the  establish-
ment of  certain  rules  and  common  standards  ;  it  may  be
said  that  there  was  a  certain  medium  price  of  the  com-  ,
modity  in  the  market.  We  find  8^.  a  day  to  be  the
allowance  of  a  fully  armed  knight  in  Henry  II's  time,^
and  this  is  maintained,  on  the  strength  of  ancient  custom,
as  the  normal  rate  in  the  thirteenth  century  in  the  case  of
fiilly  armed  horsemen.^  This  explains  why,  under  ancient
assessment,  scutage  was  computed  at  two  marks  per  fee ;
this  sum  corresponds  exactly  to  the  wages  of  a  knight  for ^^

^  Stubbs,  Constitutional  History,  i.  349,  470,  630 ;  ii.  290 ;  Miss
Nofgatc,  The  Angevin  Empire,  i.  285, 402,  427  ;  ii.  155, 162  ;  Thorold
Rogers,  Six  Centuries  of  Work  and  Wages,  i.  30  seq.,  200.  As  it
Kems  to  me,  Rogers  greatly  exaggerates  the  influence  of  the  hiring  of
mercenaries  on  social  and  economic  development.

»  Pipe  Roll,  Hen.  H,  p.  53.  »  Testa  de  Ncvill,  p.  52  b.


i6  MILITARY ORGANIZATION [essay  I

the  usual  forty  days.^  Later  on  scutage  gets  increased  to
£2  a  fee,  but  this  is  easily  explained,  partly  by  its  being
treated  more  as  a  convenient  exaction  than  as  an  equivalent
for  actual  service,  partly  by  the  gradual  rise  in  prices,  and,
consequently,  in  wages.  Extant  evidence  on  the  customary
allowance  of  fully-equipped  armed  men  before  the  Conquest
applies,  in  connexion  with  the  prevailing  military  system,
to  foot  soldiers.  According  to  the  Berkshire  custumal,  one
man  was  sent  from  five  hides,  and  received  4^.  from  each
for  two  months,  which  would  be  4//.  a  day.^  The  provision
for  the  host  assembled  by  William  Rufus  at  Hastings  in
1094  would  amount  to  3^  a  day,  if  a  service  of  forty  days
was  reckoned  upon,  or  2d.  if  the  original  outfit  was  made
for  two  months.**

Another  feature  of  interest  in  connexion  with  our  data
about  the  daily  allowance  for  military  service  is  the  transi-
tion which  they  sometimes  indicate  between  the  inconvenient
short  terms  of  obligatory  service  and  the  subsidizing  of
armed  forces  by  the  king.  One  of  the  main  objections
against  the  feudal  arrangement  of  the  host  was  its  liability
to  disperse  after  the  performance  of  its  forty  days*  service.
Hired- soldiers,  although  they  cost  more,  were  a  better  tool
in  the  hands  of  a  commander,  not  merely  because  they
were  likely  to  be  under  better  control,  but  also  because
they  were  engaged,  not  for  six  weeks,  but  for  longer  periods,
e.  g.  for  the  year.  This  is  undoubtedly  an  important  feature
of  contrast  between  the  two  systems.  But  there  were  in-
termediate links  between  the  two  which  explain,  to  some
extent,  why  the  passage  from  the  one  to  the  other  was  so
easy. In  the  case  of  the  Welsh  expeditions,  for  instance.


^  Round,  Feudal  England,  271.

'  Domesd.  i.  56 :  *  Si  rex  mittebat  alicubi  exercitum  de  v  hidis  tantum
unus  miles  ibat  et  ad  eius  victum  vel  stipendium  de  unaquaque  hida
dabantur  ei  iiii  solidi  ad  ii  menses.'

'  Sax.  Chron.  a.  1094:  'f  feoh  syllan  to  j^aes  cvnges  beh6fe  )«  hi
genumen  haefdon.  )>et  waes  selc  man  healf  punda.  Flor.  Wigom.  a.
1094  :  * ...  XX  mi  Ilia  pedonum  in  Normanniam  iussit  sibi  in  auxilium
mitti.  Qnibus  .  .  .  congregatis  pecuniam  quae  data  fuerat  eis  ad
victum  Rannulphus  Passelambardus,  praecepto  regis,  abstulit,  scilicet,
unicuique  decem  solidos.  . . .'


SECT.  I.  CH.  I]  MERCENARIES  17

and  for  the  defence  of  castles,  a  common  expedient
was  to  call  up  a  man  for  a  short  period  of  compulsory
service,  say  fifteen  days,  or  eight  days,  and  to  keep  him
afterwards  at  the  cost  of  the  king.^  By  this  method  valuable
'cadres'  of  English  men-at-arms  were  kept  ready  for  the
formation  of  contingents  of  hired  soldiers.

As  the  cases  quoted  apply  to  military  duties  which  were
organized  long  before  the  French  conquest — for  instancy,
the  frontier  defence  against  the  Welsh — it  is  to  be  surmised
that  many  of  the  instances  described  in  records  of  the
feudal  age  may  have  gone  back  to  preconquestual  origins ;
they  are  at  any  rate  clearly  distinguished  from  ordinary
Norman  knight  service,  both  in  terminology — they  are
technically  serjeanties — and  by  the  unusual  terms  of  service.
There  are,  besides,  direct  indications  of  the  hiring  of  mer-
cenaries during  the  Old  English  period.^

The  b^nnings  of  the  English  naval  establishment  are  Naval
particularly  characterized,  as  in  the  case  of  other  nations,  ^^^^^'
by  the  employment  of  experienced  sailors  from  abroad.
'  The  *  pirates '  used  to  man  King  Alfred's  galleys  in  his
memorable  attempt  to  meet  the  Vikings  on  their  own
element  were  mostly  Frisians,  if  we  may  judge  from  the
list  of  casualties  in  their  first  fight  with  the  Danes.^  In  1012
forty-five  ships  of  Swegen's  fleet  broke  off  from  the  rest,
and  made  a  bai^ain  with  the  Unready  King,  in  his  sore
plight,  to  keep  the  country  against  its  enemies,  on  condition
that  the  crews  should  be  fed  and  clothed.^  The  agreement
was  evidently  made,  not  with  single  seamen,  but  with  the

'  Testa  de  Nevill,  54  b  :  '  Randulphus  de  Perton  tenet  et  debet  servire
(ioinino  Regi  ad  custum  suum  in  Wallia  cum  duobus  equis  per  viii
dies  et  postea  ad  stipendium  domini  R.  et  ultra  mare  ad  stipendium
domini  Regis.'

'  Dd.  ii.  107  a :  (Customs  of  Colchester)  *  Preterea  de  unaquaque
domo  per  annum  vi  denarios  quae  reddere  potest  ad  victum  solda"
riorum  regis  vel  ad  expeditiomm  terrae  vet  mariSy  et  hoc  non  est
ad  firmam.  £t  hoc  sit  si  rex  soldarios  habuerit  vel  expeditionem
leccrit.'

'  Sax.  Chron.  a.  d.  897 :  *  pser  wear%  of  slaegen  .  .  .  Wulfheard
Friesa  ^  i£bbe  Friesa  T  iCwhere  Friesa  .  .  .  ealra  monna  Fresiscra
1  Engkscra  Ixii . .  .* ;  d.  Plummer's  note,  ii.  in,  112.

^  Sax.  Chr.  sub  anno,  i.  p.  143.


VlMOCKADorF


i8


MILITARY  ORGANIZATION [ESSAY  I


/


i


entire  seceding  squadron,  and  later  agreements  were  entered
into  on  the  same  principles  with  Scandinavian  ships.  In
Canute's  reig^  a  squadron  of  forty  ships  was  kept  up  after
the  disbanding  of  his  here,  and  this  proved  to  be  the
begrinning  of  a  Danish  standing  fleet  in  the  king's  pay,
which  served  under  Canute  and  his  successors.^  Its  crews
of  professional  seamen,  lidsmen^  were  clearly  distinguished
from  those  of  the  ships  manned  by  national  levies,*  and
exerted  a  great  deal  of  political  influence.^  The  men
received  eight  marcs  a  year  per  oar,  or  about  ^d.  per  day.^
The  reckoning  per  oar  was  the  common  estimate  of  a  ship's
fighting  crew  in  Scandinavian  parts  ;  it  comprised  all  able-
bodied  seamen  who  eventually  turned  out  as  soldiers,  but
did  not  extend  to  attendants.^  The  allowance  of  ^d.  per
day  was  a  liberal  one,  as  we  may  judge  by  comparing  it
with  the  provision  made,  some  150  years  later,  in  Richard  I's
reign,  when  only  boatswains  were  paid  41/.  a  day,  while
common  soldiers  received  merely  %d?  The  considerable
depreciation  of  money  during  the  interval  between  these
dates  renders  the  advantage  in  favour  of  Canute's,  Harold
Harefoot's,  and  Hardacanute's  sailors  even  greater.  On  the
other  hand,  it  has  to  be  said  that  the  seamen  of  the  Danish
kings  were  considered  quite  as  much  land  warriors,  had  a
harder  military  task  before  them,  and  enjoyed  correspon-
dingly greater  consideration,  while  by  Richard  Ts  time  the
services  had  become  more  specialized.  However  this  may
be,  the  Danish  standing  fleet  dwindled  with  the  decrease
of  Danish  influence  in  the  state,  and  under  Edward
the Confessor  the agreement  was gradually  dissolved,

^  Sax.  Chr.  a.  1018,  i.  p.  154-

'  Sax.  Chr.  a.  1046,  i.  p.  168 :  '  Da  ge(wende)  Godwine  eorl  west
onbuton  mid  ]ies  cynges  ii  scipum  ^m  anan  steorde  Harold  eorl  1
^am  o^ran  Tostig  his  bro%or  ^  landes  manna  scipa  xlii . .  .*  CC  Sax.
Chr.  a.  1047  :  (*  litsmamia  scipa  *).

'  They  took  a  conspicuous  part  in  the  election  of  Harold  Harefoot
to  the  regency.  Sax.  Chr.  £.  a.  1036,  i.  p.  159.  QL  Steenstnip,  Nor-
manneme,  iii.  414.

*  Sax.  Chr.  £.  a.  1039,  i.  p.  161 ;  cf.  Steenstrup,  iii.  433.

^  Steenstrup,  Kong  Valdemar*s  Jordbog,  199  fT. ;  Normanneme,  iv.
159  fT.  ;  Hildebrand,  Sverige's  Medeltid,  i.  256  ff. ;  iii.  617  f.

*  Round,  Feudal  England,  1.  c.


SECT. I.  CH.  i]  MERCENARIES  19

the  remnant of  the ships  leaving  England with  their
gains/

A  similar  case  is  presented  by  the  well-known  ^l^andingbhinge-
piard  of  the  English  kings  in  thejeleventh  century,  "while  p'*"*^'^'
alter  the  Norman  conquest  no  considerable  corps  of  that  I
kind  was  kept,  and  the  kings  were  merely  surrounded  by
persooal followers in  varying  number,  the huscarls of
Canute,  Edward,  and Harold were  a  powerful  standing
division,  which  constituted  the backbone of  the  army.*
To  judge  from  Northern  analc^es,  they  were  mercenaries
in  the  sense  of  having  made  a  definite  bargain  with  their
sovereign,  and  their  position  was  not  unlike  that  of  the
Daoidi fleet  while  it existed. They  were  picked  pro-
fessionals, gathered and kept together as a standing
military  force,  and  living  at  the  expense  of  the  sovereign
whom  they  were  serving. Members  of  this  guard  were
occasionally  employed  on  administrative  errands,  as,  for
instance,  the  luckless  two  slain  in  Worcestershire  while
gathering  the  geld  for  Hardacanute,'  but  they  were  de-
tached in  such  cases  from  their  chief  duties,  for  obvious
reasons,  as  men  enjoying  special  trust  from  the  king,  and
likely to  serve  him  well  on  occasions  which  demanded
courage  and authority. We hear  sometimes  of  grants
of  land  ^ to  huscarls,  and  most of  them  were  probably
rewarded  sooner  or  later  in  this  way  for  their  services ;
but  again,  it  was  not  as  landowners  that  they  were  impor-
tant,  and no  definite  conditions  were  attached  to  their
tenure  of  lands. It  merely  supervened  as  a  fitting  sequel
to  a  life  in  the  king's  household.^ At  the  outset  they

'  Sax.  Chr.  £.  a.  1047,  i.  171 : ' . . .  man  sette  ut  ix  litsmanna  scipa  and
fif  belifftn  wi^  aeftan ' ;  a.  1050,  i.  172  :  *  and  faes  ylcan  geares  he  sette
calleba  litsmen  of  mdle.*

*  Freeman,  Norman  Conquest,  i.  497 ;  Steenstrup,  Normanneme,
ill  374  (T. ;  iv.  146  ff. ;  Larson,  The  King's  Household  in  England  before
the  Norman  Conquest,  157  ff.

'  Sax.  Chr.  and  Flor.  Wigom.  a.  104 1.

*  See  a  list  of  the  huscarls  mentioned  as  landowners  in  Domesday,
Larson,  King's  Household,  163,  164.

*  The  Lex  Castrensis  of  Sveno  which,  whatever  we  may  think  of
details,  is  certainly  drawn  up  in  conformity  with  ancient  tradition,
appears  as  a  statute  of  the  household. Script,  rer.  Danicar.  iii.  4.

C  2


ao  MILITARY  ORGANIZATION [essay  I

were  recruited  mainly  among  Scandinavians — Danes  and
Norsemen,  and  although  in  time  the  force  came  to  include
English  as  well  as  Danes,  its  organization  was  framed
according  to  the  Scandinavian  pattern.^  The  Domesday
Survey  has  preserved  some  traces  of  payments  made  by
boroughs  for  the  maintenance  of  huscarls ;  they  are  not
lai^e — ranging  from  one  mark  to  two  in  the  four  Dorset
boroughs.'  The  description  of  Malmesbury  shows  that
a  similar  payment  was  made  there  for  feeding  '  buscarls ',
who  seem  to  be  seamen-warriors  of  the  same  kind  as  the
lidsmen,  and  to  correspond  to  the  huscarls  of  the  land-
army.^  An  interesting  trait  of  this  Malmesbury  notice
is  that  the  payment  for  the  maintenance  of  the  mercenaries
is  exacted  when  the  citizens  of  the  borough  do  not  take
part  in  the  king's  host.  Where  the  Malmesbury  record
has  buzecarlos^  the  Colchester  one  has  soldarios.  The  first
of  these  terms  is  generally  assumed  to  refer  to  sailors —
buzucarls,^  men  from  '  busses ',  in  the  sense  of  boats  of  a
special  construction.  This  derivation  rests  chiefly  on  the  sup-
posed connexion  with  the  O.N.  buza  (buss),  and  if  we  accept
it,  the  expression  will  have  to  be  explained  on  thit  pars  pro
toto  principle :  mercenary  soldiers  would  be  called  '  boats-
men  '  because  many  of  them  had  served  in  the  fleet. As,

^  The  organization  of  the  Thingemannalid  is  well  explained  by
Steenstrup,  Normanneme,  iv.  §  25.  Larson,  King's  Household,  166,
does  not  distinguish  with  sufficient  care  between  the  hird  or  thinge-
mannalid  and  the  here.

'  Dd.  i.  75  a :  (Dorchester)  *  Erant  dzxvii  domus.  Hae  pro  onmi
seruitio  regis  se  defendebant  et  geldabant  pro  x  hidis.  SaliceC  ad
opus  Huscarlium  unam  markam  argenti  exceptis  consuetudinibtis
quae  pertinent  ad  firmam  noctis.'  Bridport  paid  geld  for  five  hides
and  gave  '  ad  opus  Huscarlium '  half  a  mark.  Wareham  was  rated
at  ten  hides,  and  on  the  same  standing  as  Dorchester  in  regard  to  the
huscarls,  while  Shaftesbury  payed  the  double  (two  marks),  being  rated
at  twenty  hides.  There  can  hardly  be  a  doubt  that  other  places  besides
these  contributed  to  the  maintenance  of  huscarls,  but  their  assessment
is  not  mentioned  in  Domesday,  probably  because  by  most  jurors  it  was
not  considered  a  customary  one.

'  Dd.  i.  64  c :  '  Quando  rex  ibat  in  expeditionem  uel  terra  uel  man
habebat  de  hoc  burgo  aut  xx  solidos  ad  pascendos  suos  buzecarlos.*
I  do  not  see  why  this  interesting  notice  should  be  attributed  to  Wilton
and  not  to  Malmesbury. Domesday  and  Beyond,  156.

*  Oxford  Dictionary,  s.v.  buscarl^  buss.  Cf.  Plummer,  Notes  to  Sax.
Chron.  iL  239.


SECT.  I.  CH,  i]  MERCENARIES  21

howtver^  neither  the  Malmesbury  nor  the  Colchester  entries

iiof  the  references  of  the  Sax.  Chron.  aa.  1052  and  1066

point  necessarily  to  seamen,^  another  derivation  may  be

suggested, namely, from O.N. do^ — order, command.^

Budscarls  would  be  '  men  under  command  ',  an  explanation

which  seems  to  give  at  least  as  good  a  sense  as  the  received

'  boatsmen '. In  any  case  the  buzecarls  of  the  Chronicle

appear  more  in  the  light  of  mercenaries  forming  the  garrison

of  Hastings  and  Sandwich  than  of  disbanded  sailors. And

this  meaning  of  garrison  troops  would  go  far  to  explain  the

fact  that  only  boroughs  are  charged  directly  with  a  special

rate  for  the  feeding  of  buzecarls  and  huscarls.

The  attempt  to  organize  standing  mercenary  troops
on  a~  large  scale  failed  when  the  Danish  settlement  broke
down  as  a  leading,  political  force.  The  mercenary  bands
of  the  Norman  and  Angevin  periods  were  casual  combina-
tioas  of  men,  and  never  assumed  an  importance  similar
to  that  of  the  Thingemannalid  or  the  Danish  garrisons  in
the  towns.  The  social  basis  for  the  mercenary  system
of  the  eleventh  century  was  provided  by  three  conditions
which  could  not  be  kept  up  in  the  same  way  later  on  :  the
existence  of  a  race  of  professional  warriors,  their  unsettled,
migratory  habits  of  life,  and  a  governmental  policy  of  pro-
vidii^  maintenance  and  cash  to  dangerous  soldiers  in  the
way  of  tribute  or  of  pay.  All  these  conditions  were  removed
by  the  amalgamation  between  Norsemen  and  English,  and
by  the  French  conquest.  Society  settled  down  on  the
basis  of  land  tenure,  and  natural  economy  superseded  for
a  time  the  '  cash '  system  which  had  ruled  the  relations

'  Sax.  Chr.  a.  1052  (dL  Plummer,  ii.  239) :  *  he  gespeon  him  to  ealle
Kentingms  "]  ealk  \%,  butescarlas  of  Haestingan  ...  J  beson  aefre  foHS
mid  beoin  mie  ki  butsecarlas  he  heo  gemetton,  *]  comon  )»a  to  Sandwic
mid  mCendan  here.'  Sax.  Chr.  1060  (C.)  u' . . .  Tostig  ...  for  ...  of
Sandwic  *]  name  of  ^m  butsekarlon  sume  mid  him.  Sume  )>ances.
Same  an^ances.*  1066  (D.):  '"i  ^  butsa  cartas  hine  fbrsocan  . . .'  Is
the  mjrslerious  ^busones  comitatus'  of  Bracton,  f.  115,  and  of  the
Placitomm  abbreviatio,  p.  85,  connected  in  any  way  with  buzecarls  ?
It  would  be  hardly  possible  to  trace  any  relation  between  the  influential
leaders  of  the  county  and  *  boatsmen ',  but  perhaps  easier  to  recognize
in  the  tussofus  kingfs  vassals  supposed  to  lead  the  county.  The  term
woold  be  similar  to  the  designation  of  the  knights  of  the  shire.

'  Cf.  Fritzner,  Ordbog,  s.  v.


/


Fyrd  and
here.


22  MILITARY  ORGANIZATION [essay  I

between  the  government  of  Canute  or  Edward  the  Confessor
and  its  hired  soldiers.

2.  Mercenary  and  feudal  troops  had  to  be  used  because
they  were  specially  efficient  according  to  the  needs  of  the
time,  but  neither  the  first  nor  the  second  were  ever  con-
idered  as  the  unique  kind  of  military  array.  Even  durii^
he  feudal  period  national  levies^  stood  behind  them,  in
pite  of  the  predominance  of  the  aristocratic  class.  And  as
or  the  centuries  before  the  Conquest,  it  is  the  fyrd  and
the  Aere  that  present  the  fundamental  institutions  of  the
Old  English  and  of  the  Scandinavian  army  systems.  In
the  eleventh  century  both  terms  begin  to  be  employed  for
the  same  thing — an  army  summoned  by  the  king,  on  the
strength  of  the  general  principle  of  national  all^iance,
might  be  called  Aerf,  even  if  it  were  composed  of  English-
men, or  fyrd^  though  it  were  levied  in  the  Scandinavian
provinces,*  but,  originally,  the  distinction  between  the  fyrd
as  the  English  host,  and  the  Aerf  as  the  enemy's  army,  the
Danish  host,  is  clearly  established  and  consistently  kept
up.^  Both  the  ultimate  combination  of  the  terms  and  their
original  difference  carry  weight,  and  are  explained  by
historical  conditions.  After  the  definite  settlement  of  the
Danes,  and  their  subjection  to  the  rule  of  the  king  of  Eng-

'  On  the  fyrd  see  Stubbs,  Const.  Hist  i.  209,  291,  633 ;  Maitland,
Domesday  and  Beyond,  i$9ff. ;  Oman,  History  of  the  Art  of  War,  no,

357,  358-
^  Sax.  Chr.  1006 :  '  pa  het  se  cyng  abannan  ^t  ealne  ^odscipe  of

Westseaxum  ;]  of  Myrcean  j  hi  lagon  ute  )>a  ealne  )>one  herfest  on

fyrdinge  ongean  )K>ne  here  ...  Ac  for  eallum  fvissum  se  here  ferde  swa

he  sylf  wolde  ;]  se  fyrdinge  dyde  |»aere  landleode  aelcne  hearm. pet

him  na%or  ne  dohte  ne  fnn  here  ne  uthere.' 1013 : '  Swegen  mid

here  &  fyrde.' 1048  (£.) :  *  het  se  cyning  bannan  dt  here  aegder  ge  be

su^an  Temese  ge  be  noi^an  eall  f  aefre  betst  waes.' 1073  TE.^:

'  Wilklm  cyng  laedde  Engliscne  here  j  Frencisce  ofer  sae.*  1074  (D.) :

'  Englisce  fyrdc  ^  Frencisce  ofer  sae.'

'  Sax.  Chr.  921 :  ' . . .  f6r  Eadweard  cyning  mid  West  Sexna  fierde  to
Colneceastre  . . .  *]  eal  se  here  on  East  Englum  him  swor  annesse  . .  .  ^^
se  here  )}e  to  Gran  tan  brycge  hierde  hine  geces  synderlice  him  to
hlaforde  j  to  mundboran.'  a.  922 :  '  f6r  he  . . .  to  Snotingaham  "J  ge  i6r
)>a  burg,  J  het  hie  gebetan  J  gesettan.  aeg^er  ge  mid  Engliscum
mannum,  ge  mid  Deniscum ;  J  him  cierde  eall  pxt  folc  to  ^  on
Mercna  lande  geseten  waes,  aeg^r  ge  Denisc  ge  Englisce.'

Beda,  i.  16 :  hostilis  exercitus  is  rendered  in  the  A.S.  version
by  here.


SECT.  I.  CH.  I] NATIONAL  LEVIES  23

laad,  there  was  not, much  diflference  between  the  levies
of  Devonshire  and  those  of  Nottinghamshire  or  of  York-
shire. More  people  would  probably  be  liable  to  be  called
up  in  the  northern  provinces  than  in  the  south  of  the
iiland,  but  this  was  a  matter  of  social  organization  and
not  of  principle.

These  institutions  which  became  similar  in  the  eleventh
century  are  described  in  strong  contrast  to  each  other
in  earlier  times. The  here  may  be  said  to  be  properly
an  army  which  occasionally  took  to  pacific  pursuits,  while
^  fyrd  was  a  nation  which  had  to  rise  occasionally  for
warlike  activity. The  character  of  the  Danish  raids,  the
sudden  movement  of  the  heathen  squadrons  and  corps>  the
erection  of  temporary  fortifications,  the  '  horsing '  of  the
Vikings,  are  too  well  known  to  require  any  special  com-
ment I  will  just  recall  to  the  memory  of  my  readers  the
general  impression  left  by  the  descriptions  of  the  Chroni-
cles,  the  helplessness  of  the  cumbersome  arrays  of  the
shires  when  they  had  to  oppose  their  swift  and  reckless
enemies — they  are mostly  too late, they  look  for  the
invaders  in  the  south  when  their  adversaries  appear  in
the  north,  they  collect  in  the  west  when  they  ought  to  be
in  the  east.^ The  reason  is  not  far  to  seek  ;  it  lay,  not  so
much  in  the  ability  of  the  Norse  leaders  or  in  the  warlike
superiority  of  the  Vikings,  as  in  the  social  character  of  the
force  opposed  to  them. On some  occasions when the
shires  are  called  out,  the  summons  to  the  fyrd  is  spoken
of  as  the  summoning  of  the  whole  population.*  The  general
array  is  described  distinctly  as  a  gathering  of  the  country
people,  in  which  the  better  thanes  form  only  a  minority.^  It

'  Sax.  Chr.  894 :  '  pa  ne  mehte  seo  fird  hie  nd  hindan  of  faran,  ser
hie  waeron  inne  on  ^m  ge  weorce.*  895  :  *  swa  sio  fird  hie  geraecan
he  mehte  .  •  .'  loio :  '  |K>nne  hi  wseron  be  easton.  )K)nne  beold  man
fyrde  be  west  an.'

*  Sax.  Chr.  1016:  'Da  gesomnode  Eadmund  cyng  iiii  si)>e  ealle
Eogla^eode. .  .  .  v  si¥e  ealle  Engla^ode.*

*  Sax.  Chr.  1006;  1051:  1052  (C.) ;  cf.  1051  (D.),  *f  land  folc
him  ongean  gaderodan  seglSer  ge  of  Sumersseton  ge  of  Defenescire.
1  be  (Harold)  hig  aflymde.  ^  ^aer  ofsloh  m&  |>onne  xxx  godera  )>egena
butan  o^Srum  folce.'


24  MILITARY  ORGANIZATION [ESSAY  i

is  needless  to  dwell  on  the  difficulties  of  bringing  tc^ether
such  a  host.  We  come  across  notices  telling  that  a  king
had  to  harry  his  own  dominions,  in  order  to  punish  the
population  for  being  remiss  in  obeying  such  summons.^
When  the  fyrd  had  been  gathered  it  had  to  be  fed,  and
this  again  turned  out  to  be  no  easy  matter.  Unless  the
defenders  of  the  fatherland  resorted  to  wholesale  pillage  of
their  own  country,  as  they  sometimes  did,^  the  commissariat
question  was  a  difficult  one  to  solve.  We  do  not  hear
much  about  food  provided  by  the  government.  The  usual
expedient  was  to  oblige  every  soldier  to  take  food  and
money  with  him,  but  this  could  not  last  very  long,  and
sometimes  divisions  of  the  fyrd  had  to  be  sent  home,  or
dispersed  of  their  own  accord,  because  provisions  were
failing.^  Not  much  could  be  required  in  the  way  of  equip-
ment from  men  summoned  in  this  way.  Occasional  ordi-
nances show,  however,  that  measures  were  taken  to  maintain
a  certain,  very  moderate,  level  in  regard  to  the  offensive
and  defensive  weapons  of  the  men  of  \h<tfyrd  in  the  twelfth
and  thirteenth  centuries — a  bow  and  arrows,  or  a  spear,
or  a  hatchet  with  a  shield,  were  deemed  to  be  necessary
even  for  militiamen  of  the  lowest  degree.*  The  Bayeux
tapestry  affords  an  insight  into  the  armament  of  the  bulk  of
the  English  fyrd  at  the  time  of  the  great  crisis  of  1066 :

^  Sax.  Chr.  and  Flor.  Wigom.  a.  1016.  Staffordshire,  Shropshire
and  Leicestershire  were  ravaged  by  Edmund  Ironside  because  they  did
not  join  him  against  the  Danes.

'  Sax.  Chr.  a.  1006. See  p.  22,  note  2.

'  Sax.  Chr.  921 :  '  1  |»a  se  firdstemn  f6r  hdm,  ba  f6r  o^r  lit,  1  gef6r

(a  burg  set  Huntandune  .  .  .  ^  bset  folc  eal  pset  )>xr  to  lafe  waes
ara  landleoda  beag  to  Eadwearae  cyninge,  1  sohton  his  fn]>  *]  his
mundbyrde.'  1052  (£.):  'Sceolde  man  setton  oSre  eorlas  "}  o)Sre
hasaeton  to  )iam  scipum.  ^  lengde  hit  man  swa  lange  ^  seo  scipfyrd
eall  belaf.  ^  gewendon  ealle  heom  ham.*  1066  (C.) :  '  |»a  f or  he
(Harold)  into  Wiht  ^  ^ser  laeg  ealne  l^one  sum  or  ")  j^ne  haerfest  ^  man
hsefde  land  fyrde  aeghwar  be  sae  . . .  Da  hit  waes  to  Nativitas  s6ae
Mariae  \^  waes  manna  metsung  agin  *]  hig  han  man  )»ar  na  leng
gehealdan  he  mihte.'

*  Ordinance  of  14  Hen.  Ill,  Close  Rolls  membr.  5  d :  ' . .  .  qui  vero
habeat  catalla  ad  valorem  xl  solidorum,  habeat  capellum  ferreum,  per-
punctum  et  lanceam ;  qui  vero  habeat  catalla  ad  valorem  xx  solidorum,
habeat  archum  et  sagittas,  nisi  manent  in  foresta  nostra;  si  vero  manent
in  foresta  nostra  et  habeat  catalla  ad  valorem  xx  solidorum,  habeat
hachiam  vel  lanceam.* Cf.  Vincent,  Lancashire  Lay  subsidies,  69.


SECT.  I.  CH.  I] NATIONAL  LEVIES  25

Witty  of  the  men  mustered  by  Harold  were  armed  with
mere  dubs.^  These  cumbersome  levies  consisted  in  part  of
very  poor  people,  who  were  badly  fitted  out  for  warlike
expeditions  and  encounters,  and  their  main  value  in  a  fight
lay  in  numbers.  These  were  not  small,  as  we  may  judge,
ior  instance,  from  the  levy  of  William  Rufus  in  1094,  about
wiudi  there  was  certainly  exact  information  :  20,000  men,
in&ntry,  were  collected  for  an  over-sea  expedition,  and
they  were  certainly  picked  men,  better  equipped  and
provided  for  than  emergency  levies  for  the  defence  of  home
shires  would  have  been.

From  what  social  classes  were  these  militiamen  drawn,  YuU/yrd.
and  what  was  the  reason  of  their  low  military  standing  ? ,
In  exceptional  cases  the  militia  array  may  have  included  all  - '
able-bodied  men  of  certairf  districts  capable  of  wielding
a  weapon  of  any  kind,  without  distinction  of  class. I  sup-
pose  that  a  '  Landsturm  *  of  this  kind  was  called  up  for  the
protection  of  the  hearths  of  the  folk  in  a  literal  sense  of  the
word. It  may  not  be  safe  to  take  the  expressions,  \the
whole  people,'  or  *  all  the  country  folk ',  very  strictly,  but
there  is  weighty  though  indirect  indication  of  the  general
character of such levies  in  the  fact  that  they  appear
under  the  leadership  of  the  parochial  priests. Such  was  the  |
array  of  the  northern  shires  against  the  Scots  in  the  cam-  !
paign  which  ended  with  the  battle  of  the  Standard,^  and  I
similar  levies  en  masse  must  have  been  resorted  to  in  earlier
times  against  the  Danes. A  parallel  is  afforded  on  the
Continent  by  the  so-called  *  retro  bannus  *  {arrikre  ban),  in
which  the  parish  communities  {communitates  parochiarum)
were  collected  under  their  priests.^ It  is  on  such  occasions

'  Bayeux  TapcsUy,  plates  71,  79  (Fowkc*s  ed.).

'  Rich,  of  Hexham,  Chron.  of  Stephen,  Henry  II,  and  Rich.  I
(R  S.),  iii.  pi  161  :  *  Promisit  etiam  (Turstinus)  eis  quod  suae
diocesis  presbvteros  singulos,  cum  crucibus  et  parochianis  suis,  pariter
cam  illis  in  bellum  procedere  faceret,  et  quod  ipse  cum  suis  hello
interesse,  Deo  disponente,  cogitabat.*  >Elred  of  Kievaulx,  ib.,  p.  192 :
*  Sacerdotes  sacris  uestibus  candidati,  cum  crucibus  et  reliquiis  San-
ctorum exercitum  ambiebant'

•  Guilhennoz,  Origines  de  la  noblesse,  293  f. ;  P.  Viollet,  Histoire
des  institutions  politiques,  ii.  431.


26  MILITARY  ORGANIZATION [essay  I

that  the  men  with  pitchforks  and  flails  of  whom  the  Chronicles
sometimes  speak  were  brought  up — evidently  peasants  who
neither  kept  nor  used  weapons  in  ordinary  times,  but  were
gathered  to  meet  a  desperate  plight.^  However  this  may
be,  although  the  English  language  did  not  know  of  any
special  term  to  distinguish  such  gatherings  from  the  regular
fyrd^  they  cannot  be  considered  as  normal,  or  summoned
according  to  usual  regulations.

In  its  widest  customary  sense  the  fyrd  was  an  arr^^y^^  not
;  of  the  whole  able-bodied  male  population,  but  of  representa-
tives of  all  the  households  of  the  country.  In  Henry  Ill's  time,
at  any  rate,  an  Ordinance  of  Arms  exacted  the  possession  of
proper  equipment  for  militia  service  from  every  independent
householder  who  could  be  rated  for  the  possession  of  chattels
worth  over  20^-.  Inasmuch  as  the  qualification  was  drawn
from  property  in  movables,  the  Ordmance  did  not  applyjto^
every  man  of  free  birth  ;  sons  living  with  their  parents  and
people  devoid  of  independent  means  would  not  be  affected
by  it.^  Thus  one  of  the  most  important  mediaeval  checks
on  governmental  pressure  becomes  apparent :  the  royal
administration  was  not  able  to  set  up  a  purely  personal
standard.  It  had  to  concentrate  its  efforts  on  the  unit  of
the  household,  partly  because  it  had  to  reckon,  not  merely
with  men,  but  with  equipment,  and  partly  because  it  would
have  been  impossible  to  get  at  all  the  free  male  inhabitants
of  the  kingdom  :  the  days  of  the  poll  tax  had  not  yet
come.  The  other  limitation — free  condition — is  indicated
indirectly, as, according  to feudal law,  the  chatteb of

^  Fantosme  (Roils  Series),  Chronicles  of  Stephen,  &c,  p.  294.

'  Close  Rolls,  14  Hen.  Ill,  membr.  5  d.:  ^  unusquisque  habens  feo-
dum militis  integrum  habeat  loricam ;  qui  vero  babet  feodum  dimidii
militis,  habeat  haubergellum  ;  unusquisque  autem  qui  habet  catalla
ad  valorem  xv  marcarum,  sive  sit  manens  in  civitate  vel  extra
civitatem  sive  in  burgo  vel  extra  burgum  sive  in  alia  villa,  habeat
loricam;  si  vero  habeat  catalla  ad  valorem  x  marcarum  habeat
haubergellum  ;  qui  vero  habet  catalla  ad  valorem  xl  solidorum,
habeat  capellum  ferreum,  perpunctum,  et  lanceam ;  qui  vero  habet
catalla  ad  valorem  xx  solidorum,  habeat  archum  et  sagittas,  nisi
maneat  in  foresta  nostra ;  si  vero  maneat  in  foresta  nostra  et  habeat
catalla  ad  valorem  xx  solidorum,  habeat  hachiam  vel  lanciam.'  Cf.
Rot.  Hundr.  ii.  748  (Dreyton),  749  (Brudecot).


SECT.  I.  CH.  I] NATIONAL  LEVIES  ^^

serfs  would  be  deemed  to  belong  to  their  lords.^  But
the  fineedom  demanded  in  this  case  has  to  be  taken  in
the  widest  sense  of  personal  freedom,  and  not  in  the  higher
tenurial  sense,  because,  otherwise,  the  number  of  men  liable
to  be  called  out  for  service  in  the  militia  would  have  been
very  small  in  some  parts  of  the  country.  A  free  man
holding  in  villainage  would  come  under  the  Ordinance  if  he
had  an  income  or  chattels  of  his  own.  In  fact,  the  principle  \
of  the  estimation  could  hardly  have  been  different  from  that  ^
wliich  obtained  in  the  case  of  parliamentary  and  ecclesiastical
subsidies  assessed  on  the  basis  of  movable  property.'

I  do  not  think  that  this  way  of  treating  the  militia  array
is  to  be  considered  an  innovation  of  the  Angevin  period.
On  the  contrary,  it  may  be  said  to  revive  and  to  carry  out
in  a  consistent  manner  a  principle  admitted  all  through  by
the  older  organization  of  the  fyrd.  The  national  levy  was
emphatically  the  host  of  freemen,  and  in  serious  cases,  ^\
i^art  from  the  exceptional  emergencies  already  mentioned,
it  must  have  included  representatives  of  all  the  free  house-
holdsorthe  country.  The  ,^^  hosts  of  the  shire,  of  which
we  hear  so  often  in  the  history  of  the  Danish  wars,  cannot
have  consisted  merely  of  the  men  selected  on  the  principle
of  one  soldier  for  every  five  hides,  or  for  every  medium-
sized  borough.  The  armed  crowds  spoken  of  in  the
Chronicles,  and  depicted  on  the  Bayeux  tapestry,  do  not
look  like  trained  regiments  of  picked  men,  nor  does  one
see  what  the  Berkshire  fyrd  or  the  Devon  fyrd  ^  as  a  troop
of  some  300  or  400  men  could  have  done  against  the
Vikings  who  were  harrying  their  shires  in  860  or  in  997.
In  991  there  was  a  desperate  battle  at  Maldon  between  the

'  Villainage  in  England,  372,  475.

'  E.g.  the  taxation  of  the  fortieth  in  12^5  (Sel.  Chart,  8th  ed.,
p.  ^).  In  the  writ  for  the  collection  of  a  nneenth  in  1225  there  is
a  oittiDCt  exemption  in  regard  to  the  arms  of  villains,  '  as  to  which
they  have  sworn,'  an  evident  reference  to  the  arms  which  they  were
botmd  to  keep  by  the  Assize.  Sel  Chart  356  :  '  Exceptis  etiam
<|iiantiini  ad  villanos  armis  ad  quae  iurati  sunt* Cf.  Sel.  Ch.  371  •

'  Sax  Chr.  a.  860 :  '  Com  mycel  scip  here  up.  3  abrsecon  Wintan-
otastre.  1  wi^  )H>ne  here  fuhton  Osric  Ealdorman  mid  Hamtunescire.
1  i£Mwuif  ealdorman  mid  Bamicscire.' Cf.  a.  997.


a8  MILITARY  ORGANIZATION [essay

fyrd  of  Essex  and  the  here  led  by  Olaf  Tryg^vason.  The
latter  represented  the  crews  of  390  ships,  that  is,  not  less  than
15,600  men,  on  the  average  of  40  men  per  ship.  The  picked
men  of  ealderman  Byrhtnod  may  have  numbered  on  the  five
hides'  standard  some  530  men.  The  Norsemen  must  have
left  part  of  their  men  on  the  ships,  but  nevertheless,  the  dis-
parity would  have  been  too  overwhelming,  unless  the  Essex
fyrd  mustered  en  masse  on  this  occasion. If  the  expression

'  ^  all  the  country  folk '  cannot  always  mean  the  entire  male
population,  it  surely  means  more  than  the  array  of  the  holders
of  five  hides  and  of  representatives  of  borough  units.  The
summons  for  home  defence  was  directed  in  the  ninth,  tenth,
jx^and  eleventh  centuries,  to  all  the  free  ceorls  of  the  district,
and  in  the  yet  earlier  times  of  ofiensive  warfare  the  same
may  have  been,  the  rule  in  rq^rd  to  all  expeditions.  The
laws  as  to  attendance  at  the  fyrd  do  not  make  any  odier
difference  between  freemen  than  as  to  the  mode  and
amount  of  punishment  in  case  of  non-appearance.  The
simple  freeman  is  fined  30^.,  and  the  landowner,  that  is,
the  owner  of  boc-land,  or  of  land  of  corresponding  quality,
loses  his  estate.^  The  common  freeman  in  this  case  was
incontestably  the  ceorl,  and  later  on  the  compulsory  service
in  the  militia  had  to  be  extended  to  villains,  inasmuch  as  they
were  descended  from  ceorls;  no  other  rule  would  fit  the  case
of  the  southern  counties  as  they  are  described  in  Domesday.
The  main  idea  of  the  ceorl's  obligation  is  tersely  expressed,
just  before  the  Conquest,  in  the  famous  dictum — he  is  fyrd-
worthy,  moot-worthy,  and  fold-worthy.* We  must  confine

\  our  attention  at  present  to  the  first  of  these  qualifications.
Picked  As  a  matter  of  fact,  however,  the  attendance  at  ih^fyrd

became  very  early  a  burden  of  land-holding.  If  in  the
twelfth  and  thirteenth  centuries  it  was  not  every  person,
but  every  independent  householder,  who  could  be  assessed

^  Ine,  51.  The  penalties  are  somewhat  altered  in  i^thelr.  28  :  '  And
if  any  one  without  leave  return  from  the  "  fyrd "  in  which  the  King
himself  is,  let  it  be  at  the  peril  of  himself  and  all  his  estate  ;  and  he
who  else  returns  from  the  *'  fyrd  ",  let  him  be  liable  in  cxx  shilling^.'

•  C.  D.  853  ;  Earle,  Land  Charters,  p.  343  (grant  of  privfleges  by
Edward  the  Confessor  to  Ramsey  Abbey).


men.


SECT.  I.  CH.  I] NATIONAL  LEVIES  29

for  service  in  the  militia,  because  some  independent  property

was  necessary  to  carry  out  its  injunctions,  even  so  in  the

ruder  conditions  of  the  Old  English  age  the  duty  of  serving

in  tbe  host  necessarily  fell  chiefly  to  the  lot  of  those  who

heQland,  and  occupied  a  definite  place  in  society. Landless

men  could  not  be  sought  out  and  looked  after;  in  the  natural

order  of  things  they  had  to  range  themselves  behind  the

holders  of  land — the  landowners  or  the  men  settled  and  rated  '

under  their  authority.^ And  this^  administrativi^  iuspect  of

the  situation  was  corroborated  by  the  economic  one ;  a  man

without  a  firm  hold  on  a  unit  of  husbandry,  represented  by

a  tenement,  could  not  meet  the  expenses  and  requirements f  f

<^f|^J&r:^iA  r^;ard  to  equipment*  food,  and  necessary  loss |  /

of  time  and  labour. It  was  not  merely  as  a  fighting  man ^ !

that  he  had  to  appear  on  the  scene,  but  as  a  self-supporting

bousdiolder,  and  the  j3^r^.  had  to  be  considered  as  much

from  the  point  of  view  of  the  drain  on  his  resoiirces  as

from  that  of  personal  prowess  and  possible  bodily  danger.

In  accordailce  with  this,  .we  find  that  the  duty  to  serve  in

the  fyrd  is  spoken  of  as  one  of  the  normal  incidents  of

land-tenure.^ The  reservation  as  to  the  trinoda  necessitas

almost  invariably  accompanies  any  disposition  in  regard  to

landownership. And  the  original  idea  seems  to  have  been

that  every  hide  should  send  one  fully  equipped  soldier  to"^

the  fyrd. The  hundreds  were  taken  to  be  equivalent  to

wapentakes,  because  they  presented  the  common  form  of

district  organization  for  army  purposes. All  through  the

Germanic  world the hundred appears  as the  group  of

100  holdings,  meant  roughly  to  provide  for  the  maintenance  — -

of  a  company  of  xoo  soldiers.^ But  this  standard  could

not  be  kept  up. On  the  one  hand,  holdings  were  broken

up  in  different  ways,  yardlands  and  oxgangs  getting  to  be

*  Hence  the  enactments  about  the  settling  of  men  by  their  msegths.
^heUtan,  iL  3.

*  Dd.  i.  173  a:  *  Quattuor  liberi  homines  tenebant  (ad  Bisanture)
^  episcopo  T.K.E.  reddentes  omnem  socam  et  sacam  et  circset  et
scpohura  et  expeditiones  et  nauigia  et  placita  ad  predictum  hundredum :
et  hone  Caciunt  similiter  qui  tenent'

'  Amira  in  Paul's  Grundriss  der  germanischen  Philologie,  ii.  105 ;
Bnmner,  Deutsche  Rechtsgeschichte,  i.  133,  155.


30  MILITARY  ORGANIZATION [essay  i

the  regular  ailotment  of  many  households,  while  sometimes
the  free  tenants  were  possessed  of  plots  of  irregular  size
and  varying  quantities.  On  the  other  hand,  there  arose
many  larger  estates  as  combinations  of  several  hides.  And,
what  is  even  more  important,  it  became  impossible  to
perform  the  ordinary  fyrd  service,  in  frequent  expeditions
and  in  proper  equipment,  on  the  basis  of  a  tenement  of  one
hide,  without  help  from  outside.  The  coat  of  mail  and  the
horse  acquired  more  and  more  value  from  a  military  point
of  view — one  as  a  means  of  defence  in  the  hard  struggles
with  the  Danes,  the  other  as  a  means  of  quick  locomotion.
Well-forged  helmets  and  swords  were  scarce  and  very
expensive.*  Altogether,  the  difference  between  a  well-
armed  warrior  and  a  militiaman  with  indifferent  equipment
grew  more  and  more  important.  This  led  ultimately  to
the  formation  of  a  professional  force  of  knights  and
sergeants-at-arms,  but  it  led  also  to  changes  in  the  scheme
of  the  fyrd  expeditions.  The  same  reasons  which  produced
the  Lombard  Assize  of  Arms  of  King  Ahistulf,  and  the
graduated  service  of  Charlemagne's  armies,^  secured  the

*  Swords  are  the  objects  of  bequests  along  with  land  and  c6stly
trinkets,  e.  g.  iE^lstan  i£^ling's  will,  Earle,  234  (T.  The  average
prices  of  weapons  in  Austrasia  about  800  are  marked  in  Lex  Rip^
36,  §  II,  and  Uiey  are  very  high.

'  Ahistulf,  2  (Mon.  Germ.  Lgg.,  iv.  196) :  '  De  illos  homines  qui
possunt  loricam  habere  et  minime  habent,  vel  minores  homines  qui
possunt  habere  caballum  et  scutum  et  lanceam  et  minime  haben^
vel  illi  homines  qui  non  possunt  habere  nee  habent  unde  oongregare,
debeant  habere  scutum  et  coccura.  £t  stetit  ut  ille  homo,  qui  habet
septem  casas  massarias  habeat  loricam  suam  cum  reliqua  con-
ciatura  sua,  debeat  habere  et  cavallos ;  et  si  super  habuerit  per  isto
numero  debeat  habere  caballos  et  reliqua  armatura.  Item  placuit,
ut  illi  homines,  qui  non  habeant  casas  massarias  et  habeant  ^uadra-
ginta  iugis  terrae  habeant  cavallum,  et  scutum,  et  lanceam ;  item  de
minoribus  hominibus  principi  placuit  ut  si  possunt  habere  scutum,
habeant  coccora  cum  sagittas  et  arcum.'  Capitularia  (ed.  Boretius),
i.  p.  123,  N.  44,  c  6 :  '  De  armatura  in  exercitu,  sicut  antea  in  alio
capituUue  commendavimus,  ita  servetur,  ut  insuper  omnis  homo  de
duodecim  mansis  bruneam  habeat ;  qui  vero  bruniam  babens  et  eam
secum  non  tuUerit,  omne  beneficium  cum  brunia  pariter  perdat'
I,  p.  134,  N.  48,  c  2 :  '  Quicunque  liber  mansos  quinque  de  proprietate
habere  videtur,  similiter  in  hostem  veniat ;  et  qui  quattuor  mansos
habet,  similiter  faciat ;  qui  tres  habere  videtur,  suniliter  agat  Ubi-
cumque  autem  inventi  fuerint  duo,  quorum  unusquis^ue  duos  mansos
habere  videtur,  unus  alium  praeparare  faciat ;  et  qui  melius  ex  ipsis


SECT.  L  CH.  I] NATIONAL  LEVIES  31

transformation  of  the  fyrd  from  a  general  force  of  free
tribesmen  into  an  array  of  specially  selected  warriors.
Some  of  the  customs  followed  in  this  respect  have  been
preserved  by  Domesday  Book  and  one  or  two  Saxon
darters.  The  Berkshire  arrangement  is  the  clearest,^  but
there  can  be  no  doubt  that  it  coincided  in  its  main  lines
wiA  similar  arrangements  in  other  counties.  It  was  based
on  the  principle  that  only  one  man  per  five  hides  is  bound
to  go  to  the  war  in  case  of  a  royal  expedition,  and  that
a  sum  of  4^.  per  hide  has  to  be  provided  for  him  for  two
months'  service.  The  Malmesbury  and  Exeter  entries^
confirm  the  statement  by  alluding  to  the  normal  service  of
one  soldier  per  honour  of  five  hides.

In  regard  to  the  sea-fyrd,  we  get  the  additional  informa-
tion that  although  the  crew  of  a  longship  was  provided  on
the  principle  of  one  ship  per  300  hides,  which  would  require,
on  the  average,  one  fully  equipped  oarsman  per  five  hides,
the  ship  being  reckoned  at  sixty  oars,  the  proportion
of  men  with  coats  of  mail  was  smaller,  only  one  being

potoerit,  in  hostem  veniat. £t  ubi  invent!  faerint  duo,  quorum  unus

babeat  duos  mansos  et  alter  habeat  unum  mansum,  similiter  se  sociare

fiKiant  et  onus  alterum  praeparet ;  et  qui  melius  potuerit,  in  hostem

veniat Ubkumque  autem  tres  fuerint  inventi,  quorum  unusquisque

mantnm  unum  habeat,  duo  tercium  praeparare  faciant ;  ex  quibus  qui

mehns  potest,  in  hostem  veniat. I  Hi  vero  qui  dimidium  mansum

hibent,  <}uinque  sextum  praeparare  iiaciant. £t  qui  sic  pauper  inventus

6ierit  <^  nee  mancipia  nee  propriam  possessionem  terrarum  habeat,

tamen  m  praecio  valente  —  solidos,  quinque  sextum  praeparent ;  . . .

£t  unicuiqoe  ex  ipsis  qui  in  hoste  per^nt  fiant  coniectati  solidi  quin-

qae  a  suprascriptis  pauperioribus  qui  nuUam  possessionem habere

IT  m  terra. £x  pro  hac  consideratione  nuUus  suum  seniorem


'  Dd.  i.  56c:  'Si  rex  mittebat  alicubi  exercitum  de  v  hidis  tantum
nmts  miles  il)at  et  ad  eius  victum  vel  stipendium  de  unaque  hida
dabanfiir  ei  iiii  solidi  ad  ii  menses.  Hos  vero  denarios  regi  non
mhtehantpr  sed  militibus  dabantur.  Siquis  in  expeditionem  sum-
moaitus  non  ibat  totam  terram  suam  erga  regem  forisfaciebat.  Quod
s^uis  remanendi  habens  alium  pro  se  mittere  permitteret  et  tamen  qui
nuttendus  erat  remaneret,  pro  1  solidi s  quietus  erat  dominus  eius.'

'  Dd.  L  64  b :  '  (Malmesberie,  Wiltshire)  '  Quando  rex  ibat  in
expeditioDem  vel  terra  vel  mari  habebit  de  hoc  burgo  aut  xx  solidos
ad  pascendos  suos  buzecarlos.  Aut  unum  hominem  ducebit  secum
pro  honore  v  hidarum.*  lb.  100:  (In  Civitate  Exonia)  'Quando
expeditio  ibat  per  terram  aut  per  nuire  serviebat  haec  civitas  quantum
V  hidae  terrae.'


32  MILITARY  ORGANIZATION [essay  i

•  required  from  eight  hides.^  These  enactments  are  very
important,  and  require  some  comment  in  \  several  par-
ticulars.
Social  as-  To  begin  with,  if  what  has  been  said  above  in  regard  to
tSe/W  ^^"^^  defence  was  right,  the  king's  expedition,  which  is
sometimes  spoken  of  as  the  expedition /ar  excellence^  cannot
have  meant  every  case  of  the  calling  out  of  the  fyrd.  The
retro-bannus  has  to  be  distinguished  from  the  bannus^  special
summons  for  home  defence  must  have  been  kept  distinct,
in  one  way  or  another,  from  the  convocation  of  the  fyrd
for  external  service,  and  as  such  external  foreign  service,
not  only  expeditions  over  the  sea,  but  also  mobilizations
involving  service  in  distant  parts  of  the  country  must  have
been  reckoned.  The  Carolingian  monarchs  treated  the
obligations  connected  with  the  call  of  the  host  very  differ*
ently  according  to  the  place  to  which  the  army  had  to  go ;
men  from  Aquitaine  or  Brittany  were  not  sent  out  to
Saxony  on  the  same  conditions  as  Austrasian  Franks.'
Some  rules  of  the  same  kind  must  have  been  observed  in
England,  and  in  r^ard  to  service  in  the  marches  of  Wales
or  of  Scotland,  it  is  known  that  local  levies  were  summoned
in  a  special  manner.^  The  difference  in  the  summons  was,
however,  to  a  large  extent  a  matter  of  administrative
practice  and  political  consideration.  Should  the  king
choose  to  use  the  expedition  as  a  means  of  extortion,
either  in  harassing  small  tenants,  or  in  exacting  unusual

^  Sax.  Chr.  a.  1008 :  '  Her  bebead  se  cyng  f  man  sceolde  ofer  eall
Angel  cynn  scipu  feasdice  wircean.  f  is  )>onne  [of]  ]>ryin  bund  bidum
3  X.  bidon  xnne  sceg%  ^  of  viii  bidum  belm  ^  byman.'

'  Capitularia  Regum  Francorum,  ed.  Boretius,  i.  134.

'  Special  conditions  for  expeditions  '  in  Walliam '  are  often  men-
tioned in  tbe  feodaries  of  Sbropsbire,  Worcestersbire,  and  Hereford-
sbire  ;  e.g.  Feudal  Aids,  ii.  412,  413  (Hereford):  '  Godericbes-castell.
Subsidium  xi.  (et  inde  nicbil  quia  in  Wallia  extra  comitatum  predlc-
tum  . . .).'  Testa  de  Nevill,  53  b  (Salop) :  '  Rogerius  de  la  Morb  tenet
villam  de  Mora  per  seriantiam  scilicet  (^uod  debet  esse  constabularins
peditum  in  exercitu  domini  Regis  in  Wallia,'  &c.  66  a,  70  a  (Hereford) :
I  Francjet  Wallenses  de  Urcbenesfeld. . .  debent  invenire  xlix  servientes
in  servicio  domini  Regis  in  Wallia  per  xv  dies  ad  proprium  custom.*
Lib.  Rub.  272 :  '  et  de  istis  v  militibus  prenominatis  non  debet  domino
Re^i  nisi  unum  militem  in  Norfolcia  apud  Garlefli  contra  Dacos^  ut
antiqui  testantur.'


SECT.  I.  CH.  I] NATIONAL  LEVIES  33

eqoipmenty  and  in  drawing  money  by  means  of  the  fyrd^
tbere  were  no  clear  legal  means  of  preventing  him.

The  second  point  to  be  noticed  is  the  fact  that  the  array
of  picked  men  was  turned  out  by  the  shire  and  its  hundreds,
and  not  as  a  mere  consequence  of  feudal  dependency.  This
feature  will- have  to  be  considered  again  later  on,  but  I  would
Kke  to  call  attention  to  it  now  because  it  is  material  to  the
constitution  of  the  fyrd.  The  great  landowners  holding
estates  rated  at  multiples  of  five  hides  might  follow  their
own  method  in  providing  the  contingent  incumbent  on
them,  and  make  subinfeudation  the  means  of  holding  these
contingents  in  readiness.  But  in  the  Old  English  fyrd
lystem  the  apportionment  of  the  service  according  to  five*
hide  onits  was  not  feudal  in  itself.^  Small  landowners
would  have  to  club  together  in  order  to  fit  out  the  repre-
sentative of  the  unit,  exactly  as  in  the  Lombard  and  Caro*
Itngian  instances,  and  there  are  traces  of  such  combinations
of  seveial  participants  for  'defending'  estates  from  the^^^r^,
eipeciaUy  in  the  case  of  coheirs.'

The  outfit  money  cannot  be  considered  in  the  Berk-
shiie  entry  as  a  substitute  for  actual  service — 4;.  a  hide
have  to  be  provided  anyhow,  whatever  the  holding  of
the  man  who  actually  went  may  have  been.  Perhaps
he  held  three  hides  out  of  the  five,  and  therefore  he
had  evidently  to  find  himself  three-fifths  of  his  expenses.
On  the  other  hand,  the  man  acquitting  the  fyrd  obliga-
tioa  may  have  been  possessed  of  half  a  hide  only,
and  in  this  case  his  neighbours  evidently  had  to  pro-
vide i&r.  for  his  maintenance. As  for  the  personal  duty,

'  Dd.  L  87  c :  '  Istae  consuetudines  pertinent  ad  Tantone.  Burgheristh
etc  . . .  projfectio  in  exercitum  cum  hominibus  episcopi/  Heming,  Cart,
i.  77 :  ' . . .  episcopos  (Wlstanus)  diraciocinavit  iiii  nidas  . .  .  et  domos
in  ctvitate  de  sue  feudo  esse,  ita  quod  abbas  sibi  debet  inde  servire,
skot  alii  sni  feudati.  £t  diraciocinavit  socam  et  sacam  de  Hamtona
id  somn  hundred  Oswealdeslauue,  quod  ibi  debent  placitare,  et  geldum
et  espeditionem,  et  cetera  legis  servitia,  de  illis  xv  hidis  secum  debet
persohrere,  et  ciricsceat,  et  sepulturam,  ad  suam  villam  Croppethom
debent  reddere.'

'  Dd.  L  354  a :  (Covenham)  *  Chetel  et  Turner  fratres  fuerunt  et  post
mortem  patris  sui  terram  diviserunt.  Ita  tamen  ut  Chetel  iaciens
senridtun  regis  haberet  adiutorium  Turner  fratris  sui.'

D


(


34  MILITARY  ORGANIZATION [ESSAY  I

there  must  have  been  special  agreements  or  customary  rules
of  rotation.

It  remains  to  be  said  that  the  five-hide  unit  appears  very
large  when  compared  with  Carolingian  practice,  where  fouTy
or  even  three  '  Hufen '  usually  went  to  make  up  the  picked
soldier's  unit.  It  is  difficult  to  say  exactly  what  the  reason
for  such  a  contrast  may  have  been.  Four  Hufen  are  not  much
more  than  one  hide,  and  yet  they  were  deemed  sufficient
on  the  Continent,  for  a  number  of  years,  to  support  the
army  in  the  course  of  most  frequent,  protracted  and  arduous
expeditions.  Several  grounds  may  be  suggested,  but  it  is
difficult  to  make  a  choice  between  them,  and  perhaps  no
choice  ought  to  be  made,  as,  very  likely,  both  the  reasons  to
be  mentioned  acted  concurrently.  There  is  a  difference  in
the  epoch  to  begin  with — the  outfit  of  1066  was  mcMre
elaborate  and  costly  than  that  of  800.  Although  horses
were  already  employed  in  Charlemagne's  armies,  especially
in  his  scarae  or  picked  troops,  the  decisive  turn  towards
horsemanship  was  taken  in  the  Danish  wars,  when  the
'horsed'  Vikings  had  to  be  caught  up  and  pursued  by
riding  divisions,  and  the  five-hide  unit  probably  included
provision  for  one  or  two  horses.  The  more  intensive  system
of  cultivation  and  more  active  economic  intercourse  may
also  have  contributed  to  put  the  Prankish  five  Hufen  more
on  a  par  with  the  English  five  hides.  Anyhow,  there  the
unit  is,  and  its  formation  affords  a  most  important  land-
mark in  English  history.  It  is  a  sure  sign  that  the  social
foundation  of  the  old  army  establishment — the  status  of  the
small  free  householder,  provided  on  the  average  with  a  hide —
was  entirely  inadequate  to  meet  the  altered  requirements  of
the  art  of  war  and  of  military  organization.  A  unit  five
times  as  large  grew  up  as  the  natural  basis  for  the  man-at-
arms  in  the  national  array  of  the  tenth  and  eleventh  cen-
turies. One  might  say — using  political  expressions  with
-*some  caution — that  the  more  ancient  democratic*  arrange-
ment had  to  be  replaced  by  an  aristocratic  one,  although
the  tradition  of  the  earlier  system  continued  to  assert  itself
in  great  emergencies.


SECT.  I.  CH.  I] NATIONAL  LEVIES  35

I  have  been  speaking  all  along  of  the  fyrd^  as  we  are  The  her$,

better  acquainted  with  the  particulars  of  its  social  organiza-

don. But  by  the  side  of  it  stood  the  here^  the  Scandinavian

host ;  of  the  doings  of  this  latter  we  hear  more  than  enough,

but  we  are  not  so  well  versed  in  the  details  of  its  internal

organization. The  main  features  are,  however,  made  clear

enough,  partly  by  scraps  of  English  evidence,  and  partly  by

comparison  with  the  institutions  of  Scandinavian  countries.

There  can  be  no  doubt  that  the  here  lost  very  gradually
its  diaracter  of  a  host  of  rovers ; it  was  exceptionally
mobile,  living  by  violence  and  loot,  holding  on  more  to  its
skiffs  and  fortified  camps  than  to  the  fields  and  estates  of
the  country  around. Even  when women  and children
appear  as  natural  impediments  of  the  here,  they  are  easily
concentrated  in  the  camps  from  which  the raids  start.^
Troe  that  the  eleventh  century  discloses  the  here  already  in
a  comparatively  settled  state. If  we  did  not  know  from  the
Chronicles  how  little  time  had  elapsed  since  the  great  dis-
turbances after  the  death  of  Canute  and  Tostig's  rebellion,
we  might  think  while  reading  Domesday  that  the  Danes
and  Norsemen  were  fixed  to  the  soil  quite  as  firmly  as  the
Saxons  and  Angles. And  yet  Domesday  shows  on  every
page  a  state  of  things  in  the  half-Scandinavian  shires  which
stands  in  sharp  contrast  with  the  condition  of  the  rest  of
the  kingdom. I  shall  have  to  call  attention  again  and
again  to  this  contrast,  but  now,  in  connexion  with  the  here^
it  is  necessary  to  notice  that  the  predominance  of  small  -
freemen,  which was  a  thing of  the  past  in  the Saxon
south,  is  the  rule  in  such  Danish  shires  as  Lincolnshire  and
Leicestershire,  or  in  Norfolk. It  is  clearly  seen  to  give
way  slowly  before  the  southern  system  in  Nottingham-
shire,  Derby, Northamptonshire, Huntingdonshire, Bed-
fordshire,  and Cambridgeshire, and has been  disturbed
only  by  the  material  consequences  of  a  war  of  extermina-
tion in  Yorkshire. The  agrarian  and  legal  meaning  of

^  Sax.  Cbr.  a.  894,  p.  86 :  '  pact  geweorc  abraecon,  ^  ge  namon  eal
^eet  ^r  binnan  waes,  ge  on  feo,  ge  on  wifum,  ge  eac  on  beamum.'
CL  p.  88  ;  cf.  a.  896,  p.  89.

D  %


36  MILITARY  ORGANIZATION [essay  i

this  fact  cannot  be  approached  as  yet,  but  in  r^ard
to  the  military  problem  it  may  be  said  that  the  aspect  of
a  here  recruited  from  the  Danelaw  provinces  by  Harold
and  Edward  the  Confessor  must  have  resembled  much
more  a  Saxon  fyrd  of  the  seventh  and  eighth  centuries
than  one  of  the  eleventh  century.  The  five-hide  units  had
not  yet  been  formed  in  the  Danelaw ;  its  shires  were  yet
bristling  with  small  fighting  freemen,  and  it  is  only  by  the
fresh  history  of  the  here  that  the  standing  and  occupations
of  these  people  can  be  explained.  Men  holding  oxgangs,
or  tofts,  or  a  couple  of  assessment  acres,  which  could  not
have  represented  large  tenements  in  any  case,  appear  em-
phatically free,  can  often  go  where  they  please  with  their
land,  and  are  connected  with  superior  authorities  by  the
slightest  forms  of  subjection  known  to  the  feudal  world.  It
is  evident  that  they  were  full  members  of  the  here^  a  quality
which,  from  being  a  privil^e,  was  getting  to  be  a  grievous
burden.  It  is  evident  also  that  most  of  them  could  not
have  supported  their  households,  even  in  the  most  pre-
carious manner,  without  resorting  to  manual  labour,  and
it  is  not  likely  that  they  could  have  kept  up  their  privilqred
position,  for  economic  reasons,  even  if  the  Norman  Conquest
had  not  supervened.  Anyhow,  there  is  no  trace  of  the
five-hide  rule  of  service  in  the  north,  and  in  view  of  the
peculiar  constitution  of  society  in  those  parts,  it  would  have
been  difficult  to  frame  or  to  enforce  it.

Yet  some  rules  of  rotation  in  r^^rd  to  service  in  the
^yrd  must  have  obtained  there  too,  as  it  is  not  likely  that
the  northern  people  should  have  submitted  to  a  much
heavier  share  in  the  military  organization  of  the  king's
expeditions  after  their  definite  settlement.  What  these  rules
were  we  are  unable  to  say.
Scandina-  It  may  not  be  superfluous  to  notice  here  some  of  the
customs  referring  to  military  organization  in  Scandinavian
countries.  Although  it  would  be  impossible  to  argue  from
the  details  of  Danish,  Norw^ian,  and  Swedish  arrange-
ments in  the  twelfth  or  thirteenth  centuries  to  the  par-
ticulars of  English  customs  of  the  eleventh  century,  yet


vum  cns-
toms.


SECT.  I.  CH.  I] NATIONAL  LEVIES  37

tbe  repetition  of  similar  features  in  the  case  of  all  the  three

priodpal  branches  of  the  Scandinavian  race  strongly  sug-

gefts  that  the  main  foundations  of  military  institutions  go

back  to  very  ancient  customary  rules. I  will  call  attention

to  Danish  practices  as  presenting  an  especially  suggestive

(Kuallel.^

There  is  the  same  fundamental  distinction  between  home
defence  and  warlike  expeditions  as  that  noticeable  in
England :  priests  and  serfs  are  emancipated  from  the  last,
but  not  from  the  first.  Home  defence  was  understood  in
the  narrow  significance  of  fighting  for  one's  own  land,  one's
provincial  fotherland,  not  for  the  country  at  large.  The
oommon  militiamen  ought  to  have  been  armed  at  least  with
tbe  ordinary  weapons — spear,  iron  cap,  and  shield — but,
as  a  matter  of  fact,  the  lowest  stratum  of  the  home  defence
array  was  formed  of  men  with  clubs.  The  kding,  corre-
sponding to  the  regular  Old  English  fyrd  of  the  eleventh
century,  was  organized  on  a  territorial  system,  and  its
nonnal  condliidnaTwere  settled  for  service  at  sea,  although
tbe  land  expeditions,  for  example  those  for  the  defence  of
the  Dane^virke,  the  great  wall,  against  the  Germans  and
Slavs  were  evidently  arranged  on  similar  principles.  Naval
service  was  based  on  a  division  of  the  country  into  districts
bound  to  man  and  arm  one  ship  each,  and  the  tenants
of  land  were  combined  for  the  purpose  of  sending  armed
men  to  this,  in  such  a  way  that  each  tenant,  or  group  of
tenants,  possessed  of  land  of  the  value  of  one  '  mark  gold  '
sent  one  warrior  oarsman  every  three  years.  The  ordinary
longship  was  built  to  carry  from  forty  to  sixty  oarsmen.
The  men  called  up  by  rotation  to  the  leding  had  to  take
provisions  for  sixteen  weeks  with  them,  and  to  collect  this
outfit  all  the  householders  forming  the  hafnae,  the  section
assessed  at  one  mark,  had  to  contribute.  A  certain  number
of  warriors,  equipped  with  coat  of  mail  and  some  horses,
were  appointed  to  each  ship  according  to  customary  rules.
On  the  whole,  the  obligations  of  the  leding  are  based  on

*  Sec  Stccnstnip,  Kong  Valdemar's  Jordbog,  ch.  x,  pp.  185  flf. ;  cf.
Erslev,  Valdemarernes  Storhedstid,  185  f.


i

I

I  '


38  MILITARY  ORGANIZATION

the  main  assumption  that  the  bulk  of  the  population  is
composed  of  free  men  who  are  able  to  combine,  in  order  to
!  put  forth  a  considerable  national  army.  Feudal  relations  are
not  excluded  by  the  leding^  but  they  are  subordinated  to  it.
According  to  a  computation  drawn  up  for  the  time  of  King
Valdemar  I  (about  1200  A.  D.),  Denmark  is  said  to  have
been  able  to  send  out  1,400  longships  to  sea,  with  a  total  of
160,000  sailors,  of  whom  1400  were  fully  equipped  knights,
and  1,400  archers.  This  enumeration  applies  evidently
to  the  supposed  number  of  householders  entered  in  the
hafnae  sections,  but  not  to  the  sailors  actually  mustered.
These  would  amount,  roughly,  to  one-third  of  the  whole
population  registered  in  the  hafnae^  reckoning  at  about
forty  men  per  longship.  At  this  rate  the  number  would  still
be  a  very  handsome  one — between  fifty  and  sixty  thousand.
It  seems  as  if,  in  the  case  6f  Norway,  the  crews  of  the  ordinary
leding  fleet  of  309  ships  made  up  about  14^000  men,  but  that
a  full  complement  of  some  40,000  could  be  mustered  in
case  of  great  emergency.*  Without  pretending  to  solve
the  many  difficulties  connected  with  these  data,  or  to  start
special  investigationa  in  regard  to  them,  we  may  rest
content  in  noticing  the  general  result,  that  the  countries
which,  century  after  century,  had  sent  out  crowds  of  warriors
to  the  west,  were  still  able  to  muster  powerful  squadrons  on
the  principle  of  a  territorial  repartition  of  military  obligation
among  free  householders.  Nor  is  it  less  significant  that  all
the  main  expedients  employed  in  the  case  of  the  fyrd
were  represented  in  Scandinavian  practice,  with  the  funda«
mental  diflerence  that  what  had  become  an  antiquated
militia  system  in  England  was  still  the  groundwork  of
military  organization  in  Denmark  in  the  twelfth  and
thirteenth  centuries.^

*  Kaiser,  Efterladte  Skrifter,  ii.  222  f.
'  As  to  similar  Swedish  institutions  see  K.'Hildebrand,
Medeltid,  ii.  613  fT.


CHAPTER II

FEUDAL  SERVICE

I.  The  principal  feature  of  feudal  society  is,  of  course,  Syttcmt  of
the  system  of  interdependent  fiefs  burdened  with  various
military  duties.  Instead  of  shifting  agreements  between
contracting  parties—a  sovereign  as  employer  and  soldiers
paid  or  maintained  by  him — there  arises  a  hereditary  relation
between  lord  and  man  on  the  basis  of  tenure.  The  system
is  not  an  artificial  contrivance,  but  a  spontaneous  growth  :
it  ensures  stability  to  the  military  requirements  of  the
chiefs  of  society,  and  it  provides  maintenance  to  soldiers  in
the  shape  of  a  landed  estate,  the  most  usual  and  convenient
form  of  economic  organization  in  those  days  of  natural
husbandry.  Nothing  less  materialistic  and  tangible  would
have  done  at  a  time  when  social  intercourse  and  political
views  were  restricted  to  a  very  narrow  horizon  ;  nothing
k»  obligatory  and  regular  could  have  satisfied  the  needs
of  a  society  assailed  on  all  sides  by  invaders,  pirates,
rioters.  The  duty  of  military  service  was  not  only  a  neces-
ary  element  for  the  constitution  of  a  host,  it  was  recognized
^  employed  as  a  tie  between  the  separate  units  of  the
political  world.  The  various  obligations  springing  from
the  tenure  of  the  knight,  attendance  in  the  lord's  host,
wardship,  marriage,  relief,  &c.,  were  comprised  under  the
characteristic  term  of  *  foreign  service ',  jorinsecum^  distin-
^ished  as  such  from  all  other  varieties  of  tenurial  de-
pendence.*

*  Bracton's  Note  Book,  pL  288 :  '  Isabella  que  fuit  uxor  Stephani  de
Ebroycis  v.  Ricardum  de  la  Bere. . . .  £t  Ricardus  uenit  et  dicit  quod  . . .
de  Ibrinsecis  seniiciis  aquietabunt  que  ad  eandem  pertinent,  unde  dicit
qood  terra  ilia  debet  seniicium  militare,  scilicet  quartam  partem  feodi
i  militia,  ita  quod  liberi  homines  qui  tenent  de  eodem  feodo  semper


40  MILITARY  ORGANIZATION [ESSAY  I

There  was  not  much  to  choose,  on  many  occasions,
between  socage  tenure  and  fee-farm,  and  there  were  many
controversies  about  the  actual  treatment  of  the  one  or  the
ojher  tenement  as  a  frank-fee  or  a  socage  holding,  but
^^  was  always  held  in  Anglo-Norman  common  law  that
^  foreign '  service  stamps  the  tenement  as  a  military  fee,
or  a  serjeanty  akin  to  it,  and  that  all  other  incidents  ought
to  follow  this  main  distinction.  The  root  of  the  doctrine
lay  in  the  fact  that,  historically,  socage  tenure  proceeded
^^from  an  older  stratum  of  law  than  the  feudal  one,  from
a  stratum  in  which  relations  between  individuals  depended
on  the  rules  obtaining  in  wider  social  groups,  the  kindred,
the  hundred,  the  tribe,  while  military  tenure  formed  an
individualistic  unit  joined  to  the  rest  of  society  by  the
contractual  tie  of  foreign  service.^  The  socager  was  bound
to  perform  military  service  when  called  up  to  the  fyrd^
while  the  knight  served  his  forty  days  on  the  strength
of  a  'rear  obligation  laid  on  his  estate;  the  minor  heir
of  a  socager  came  under  the  guardianship  of  his  kinsmen
according  to  general  considerations  of  affinity  in  blood  and
of  economic  solidarity ;  the  guardian  of  a  tenant  by
foreign service  was  his  lord,  interested  in  the  adequate

fecenint  seruicium  forinsecum  pro  eodem  Stephano  ita  quod  dedenmt
ad  scutagium  de  Muntgumeri  ad  scutagium  dim.  marc

'  £t  Isabella  dicit  quod  terra  ilia  est  socag^um  et  debet  reddere  per
annum  j  marc,  pro  omni  seniicio,  et  ipse  cogposcit  cartam  et  in  carta
continetur  quod  idem  Ricardus  debet  aquietare  tenram  illam  de
forinseco  seniicio  petit  iudicium  si  custodia  ipsa  pertineat  ad  predictnm
Ricardum.  Post  cognouit  attomatus  Isabelle  quod  Stephanas  air
suus  semper  recepit  forinsecum  seruicium  de  liberis  hominilms  soii
et  inde  fecit  ei  predictum  redditum  j  marc.  Et  quia  cognosdt  quod
liberi  homines  faciunt  ad  hunc  seruicium  forinsecum,  et  pteterea
continetur  in  carta  quod  terra  debet  forinsecum,  consideratam  est

3uod  terra  ilia  non  est  socagium,  unde  predicta  Isabella  uUam  casto-
iam  clamare  poterit,  et  ideo  Ricardus  inde  quietus  et  Isabella  in
misericordia.' Cf.  236,  361,  978,  1076.

^  Bracton*s  Note  Book,  pi.  275  :  '  Radulphus  de  Gingos  v.  Warinnm
de  Monte  Kaneso  . . .  Et  Warinus  uenit  et  defendit  uim  etc  et  didt
quod  pro  defectu  eius  non  destringitur,  nee  ipse  facit  sectam  pro  eo,
quia  nee  ipse  nee  antecessores  sui  unquam  fecerunt  sectam  in  coria
Episcopi,  immo  idem  Randulphus  et  antecessores  sui  semper  feceront
forinsecum  seruicium  pro  tenemento  illo  ipsi  Episcopo  pro  eo  et
anteeessoribus  suis,  et  preterea  warde  castn  de  Stortfordia  ii  soL  et
ideo  non  debet  facere  sectam  pro  eo.' Cf.  pi.  659  (secta  et  scutagia).


SBa.LCH.n] FEUDAL  SERVICE  41

perfennance  of  this  service,  and  admitted  to  resume  for
a  that  control  over,  and  profits  in,  a  tenement  over  which
k  wielded  *  direct  domain  '.

Tbe  law  of  military  fees  is  in  substance  French  law  Customs  of
bfxxight  over  to  England  by  the  conquerors. The  ad-^^^j^'
mensiiration  of  service,  the  rules  as  to  inheritance,  investi-
ture, marriage,  wardship,  were  elaborated  in  the  provinces
of  North- Western  France  before  they  came  to  be  applied
in  the  England  of  the  Norman  and  Angevin  kings,  and
bore fruit hundredfold in the field of English com-
mon law. We  shall  often  have  to  attend  to  the  results
of  this  incorporation of  French  feudal law  on  its  civil
side. But  their  l^al importations  were  not  the  eflec^^
of  a  '  reception '  of  legal  principles  and  authorities. They  \  t
came with  a  reorganization of actual military  institu- \
tions. And as we are  concerned now  with knights^-^
service,  which  presents,  as  it  were,  its  backbone,  let  us  note
that  it  was  introduced  as  an  efficient  factor  on  the  very
morrow  of  the  Conquest,  as  soon  as  the  victors  of  Senlac
came  to  divide  the  spoils  of  the  vanquished  and  to  arrange
the  conditions  of  their  permanent  settlement  on  the  soil
of  Great  Britain. Again  and  again  we  hear  of  the  con-
tinuous tradition  of  titles  to  knights'  fees,  and  of  the  different
usages  connected  with  them  from  the  age  of  William  the
Conqueror.^ It  is  not  merely  the  case  of  establishing
pedigrees  and  proving  descent,  but  of  tracing  and  formu- |
lating  feudal  custom,  defining  rights,  settling  the  amount  of
contributions  and  the  size  of  contingents. The  appeal  to

'  Kentish  loquisitio  post  mortem.  Arch.  Cant.  ii.  p.  306  [Esc.
So.  83,  56  Hen.  Ill,  1251-2] :  '  the  said  land  of  Tryenstone  (Trien-
slooe,  in  the  parish  of  Burmarsh,  Hasted,  iii.  424)  immediately  after
the  conqoest  of  England,  was  given  to  a  certain  knight  named  Tryan,
wlio  held  it  as  long  as  he  lived,  and,  after  his  decease,  Hugh  Tryan,
bis  son  and  heir,  retained  it,  and  after  the  said  Hugh,  Robert  Tryan,
warn  and  heir  of  the  said  Hugh,  retained  it.  So  that  the  said  Trian,
Hqffa  and  Robert,  held  the  said  land  without  challenge,  from  the  Lord
Wwiam  tbe  King,  the  Bastard,  to  the  time  of  King  John,  who  took  the
nad  land,  together  with  other  lands  of  the  Normans,  into  his  own
bands,  as  his  escheats,  and  expelled  the  said  Robert,  the  last  holder,
horn  his  kingdom  of  England.'  Cf.  Liber  Rubeus,  400  (Norfolk.
Carta  Willelmi  de  Colecherche).


42  MILITARY  ORGANIZATION [ESSAY  I

continuous  tradition  was  not  vague  rhetoric  expressive
of  the  feelings  and  wishes  of  parties  rather  than  of
their  judicial  claims  and  arguments ;  military  tenure
was  created  and  perpetuated  by  ceremonial  acts  more
^than  by  written  documents,  and  it  received  its  definite
shape  from  actual  occurrences  more  than  from  stipulated
clauses.^

We  know  from  the  comparison  of  the  returns  of  1166  as
to  the  number  of  knights'  fees  held  from  the  different
baronies,  that  there  were  three  kinds  of  kn^ht  service
at  that  time :  that  from  the  old  fees  {antiquum  feoffamen"
tutn)^  created  in  the  reigns  of  the  three  Norman  Kings,
that  of  the  new  fees  {de  novo,  novum  feoff  amentum),  instituted
after  Henry  Ts  reign,  and  that  of  the  knights,  not  enfeoffed
with  particular  estates^  but  maintained  on  the  domain  of
the  barony.  The  first  and  third  category  were  drawn
(y/together  in  respect  of  the  feudal  obligations  of  the  barony ;
they  represented  the  original  service  due  from  it,  its
^  servicium  debitum '.  The  second  category  arose  from
the  policy  of  subinfeudation  carried  on  by  the  barons
on  their  own  account,  and  had  nothing  to  do  with  the
original  '  due  service ',  but  Henry  II  asserted  a  right  to
exact  military  service  or  its  substitute,  scutage,  and  the
other  eventual  privil^es  of  an  overlord  in  regard  to  these
fees  constituted  in  excess  of  '  due  service ',  as  well  as  in
regard  to  the  original  fees.  We  need  not  dwell  longer
on  these  cardinal  facts,  as  they  are  very  clearly  set  forth
in  the  evidence,  and  have  been  sufficiently  recc^^ized
of  late.

Nor  can  it  be  doubted  that  the  original  repartition  of
military  duties  was  not^  the  product  of  a  well-balanced
scheme,  of  a  summing  up  of  the  capacities  of  different
estates  to  support  more  or  less  knights.  It  was  the  result
of  a  rather  haphazard  distribution  of  estates  by  the  king
according  to  his  personal  views,  and  perhaps  according
to  rough  bargains  with  his  chief  followers.^ The  Saxon

*  Round,  Feudal  England,  258. Cf.  296.
'  Ibid.  248.


/


SEa.LCH.ii] FEUDAL  SERVICE  43

Chnmicle  tells  us  of  the  arbitrary  manner  in  which  estates
wen  confiscated  and  granted  away  in  1067,^  and  there  is
no  reason  for  supposing  a  more  regular  procedure  on  other
occasions. Guidance  was  provided  by  the  principle  that
the  Norman  stepped  into  the  shoes  of  a  Saxon  *  antecessor ',
and  therefore  the  proprietary  conditions  of  preconquestual
England  reacted  to  a  great  extent  on  those  of  the  new
settlement,  but  the  combinations  of  estates  were  modified
and  recast  on  all  sides,  and  the  process  of  endowment  of
tenants-in-chief  was  certainly  not  guided  by  any  careful
investigation  of  the  resources  placed  at  their  disposal. The
case  seems  to  have  been  similar  to  that  of  the  division
of  Ireland  into  baronies  under  Henry  II,  when  definite  con-
tingents were  assigned  to  the  barons  who  took  part  in  the
Conquest,  without  any  reference  to  estimates  of  revenue
or  area.'

The  only  trace  of  a  regular  and  conscious  plan  which  Baronies.
Mr.  Round  is  able  to  make  out  in  the  distribution  of  the
fees  is  their  grouping  according  to  combinations  of  five
knights  and  ten  knights.  It  happens  seldom  that  the
number  of  knights  assigned  to  a  barony  does  not  represent
some  multiple  of  five,  and  we  find  the  same  to  be  the  case
in  the  Duchy  of  Normandy.  This  calls  for  an  explanation,
and  a  plausible  one  seems  to  be  provided  by  the  military
organization  of  the  feudal  array  in  Northern  France  and
England :  it  is  subdivided  into  *  constabulariae '  of  ten
knights  each.^  Naturally  enough,  there  was  a  tendency,  in
forming  baronies,  to  assign  to  them  the  duty  of  main-
taining and  equipping  such  combinations,  or  simple  fractions
of  them.

If  the  method  of  rating  was  to  that  extent  imperfect  and
superficial  in  regard  to  the  barons  with  whom  the  king
dealt  directly  in  introducing  the  new  military  organization,
it  seems  idle  to  try  to  trace  any  system  or  rule  in  the
repartition  of  duties  between  the  subdivisions  of  a  barony.

*  Sax.  Chr.  1067  (E.) :  'he  geaf  aelccs  mannes  land  ba  he  ongean
com/ CL  Matt.  Paris,  i.  13,  quoted  by  Round,  F.  E.  298.

•  Madox,  Baronia  Anglicana,  29.  '  Round,  F.  E.  257-9.


44  MILITARY  ORGANIZATION [ESSAY  i

Recent  investigators  have  been  led  to  adopt  this  view,  and
to  reject  all  theories  as  to  a  normal  knight's  fee.  This  point
is,  however,  so  important  that  we  cannot  refrain  from  sub-
jecting it  to  a  renewed  examination.  After  all,  it  does  not
necessarily  follow  from  the  loose  adjustment  of  military
service  to  baronies  that  there  were  no  average  types  of
single  knight's  fees.  It  was  possible  to  enfeoff  magnates
without  looking  very  closely  to  the  military  capabilities  of
their  possessions,  but  difficult  for  the  baron  to  go  beyond
certain  limits  in  carving  out  fees  for  his  knights.  Just
because  the  knight's  fee  was  the  lowest  unit  it  seems  probable,
a  priori^  that  there  were  definite  views  as  to  its  approximate
valae.  And  it  would  be  exceedingly  material  to  know
what  estate  was  considered  as  the  minimum  outfit  for
a  fully  equipped  knight.  In  view  of  the  prevailing  impor-
tance of  knight  service  and  of  the  growth  of  a  military
aristocracy  in  connexion  with  it,  typical  estimates  of  knights*
fees  would  allow  us  to  draw  certain  boundaries  between
classes  of  society,  and  to  explain  indirectly  some  of  the
processes  which  led  to  their  formation.  But,  of  course,  all
statements  in  this  respect  must  be  based  not  on  a  priori
speculations,  but  on  matter  of  fact  evidence.
Irregular  We  possess  a  good  deal  of  evidence  as  to  knights'  fees  in
fo^  the  shape  of  the  Testa  de  Nevill  lists,  of  Kirkby's  Inquest,

of  the  various  returns  published  as  Feudal  Aids  by  the
Record  Commission,  of  the  Inquisitions  post  mortem,  &€.,
and,  at  first  sight,  this  evidence  is  most  disappointing.
Irregularities  and  contradictory  data  meet  the  eye  every-
where, and  our  keenest  inquirers  have  given  up  the  search  in
despair.^  How  can  one  try  to  ascertain  the  size  of  knights*
fees  when,  for  example,  the  three  abbots  of  Peterborough,
Abingdon,  and  Ramsey  are  assessed  at  sixty,  forty,  and
four  knights'  fees  respectively  ?  Surely  their  possessions  did
not  differ  in  such  a  ratio,  or  anything  like  it  ?  And  then,
we  often  hear  of  the  number  of  hides  that  go  to  a  fee,
but  these  vary  almost  for  every  place ;  there  may  be
i»  2>  3>  4>  5»  6|  7>  lo,  I4»  i8,  24,  48  hides  to  a  knight's  fee.
'  pollock  and  Maitland,  Hist,  of  Eng.  Law,  i.  252  ff.  Round,  F.  £.  i.  293^.


SECT.  I.  CH.  II] FEUDAL  SERVICE  45

Neverthdess  we  may  trace,  as  it  seems  to  me,  some  guiding
priDdples  in  the  midst  of  this  confusing  variety,  if  we
do  not  insist  on  absolute  regularity  and  are  content  with
looldng  for  standards  and  prevailing  types.

In  instituting  our  search  it  will be  advisable  to  leave

00  one  side  the  frequent  cases  when  mere  fractions  of  fees

appear  before  us,  and  it  is  impossible  to  reconstitute  the

units  broken  up  into  these  fractions.^ The  parcelling  of

fees  was  the  complicated  result  of  divers  causes. To  some

extent  it  was  produced  by  casual  dismemberment  in  the

process  of  hereditary  succession — namely,  in  the  case  of

abtenoe of  heirs  male  and  devolution to coheiresses.^

Even  more  common  was  dismemberment  by  subinfeuda-

tioiu If  the  baron  had  to  create  knights*  fees  in  order

lo  meet  the  obligations  of  military  service  incumbent  on

the  barony,  the  single  knight,  or  the  holder  of  a  few  knights'

fees  might  find  it  convenient  to  strengthen  his  military

outfit  by  enfeoffing  dependent  tenants  holding  fractions

of  fees,  and  bound  to  co-operate  with  him  in  the  performance

of  his  service. In  the  marches  of  Wales  and  of  Scotland

the  direct  connexion  between  feoffment  and  military  duties

was  made  especially  evident  by  the  frequent  calls  to  resist

invasions  and  to  join  in  punitive  expeditions.^ Then  again

^  Testa  de  NeviU,  249 : ' . .  .  — Kobertus  de  Suppethorp  tenet  wardam
scilicet  anam  hidam  et  di'  de  dicto  honore  et  respondet  pro  xv">*  parte
fiBodL  Ravenesdene :  lohes  le  Sauvage  &  Witts  En^ayne  tenent  unam
hidam  &  di'  pro  xxxvii  parte  unius  militis . . .  — Nichs  Pypart  tenet
imam  virgatam  terre  pro  xxxviii*  parte  feed' . . .  — Galfr'  de  Eyringeham
tenet  unam  virgatam  terre  pro  xxxviii  parte  unius  militis  . . .  — Witts
Pnoeys  &  Hogo  Picot  tenent  ii  virgatas  terre  pro  xxvi*  parte  unius
militis — Rad'  nl.  Willmi  &  Nigellus  de  HMevell'  tenent  iii  virgatas
tetie  pro  zxxiiii  parte  unius  militis...'

'  Lid.  Rub.  443  (Northumberland  :  Carta  Radulfi  de  Gaugy) :
'  Sdatts,  quod  de  meo  feodo  nullum  feodavi  de  novo  feffamento,  s^
potnata  soror,  scilicet  uxor  Hugonis  de  Ellintone,  feodavit  Radulfum
Barard  de  vi*  parte  militis,  et  Gilebertum  de  Hectone  de  xiii  parte
militis.'

'  L.  R.  4^9,  440  (Northumberland,  Carta  Stephani  de  Bulemer) :
' . . .  habeo  hos  milites  fefTatos  de  veteri  feffamento  :  . .  .  Et  de  novo
feffiimento  hos  habeo  fefTatos  quoniam  in  Marchis  vestris  maneo,  et
laepissime  probis  hominibus  indigeo :  Thomam  fil'  Ro^eri,  de  feodo
dimidii  militis — Thomam,  filium  meiun,  de  feodo  j  militis  et  de  hoc
fieodo  Thoniaey  filii  mei,  Radulfus  filius  Willelmi  tenet  de  eo  dimidium
feodum  militis — Robertum  Poheri  de  iiii*  parte  militis.'


46  MILITARY  ORGANIZATION [ESSAY  i

one  has  to  reckon  with  the  fact  that  ordinary  donations
and  sales  often  assumed  the  shape  of  subinfeudation  in  the
period  preceding  the  statute  *  Quia  Emptores '.  When  wc
hear  of  a  man  holding  one  hundredth  part  of  a  knight's
fee  it  need  not  mean  much  else  but  that  he  was  possessed  of
some  six  acres  of  land  for  which  he  had  to  render  homage
and  fealty,  to  pay  scutage  according  to  proportion,  and
eventually  to  submit  to  the  exercise  of  certain  rights  <^
wardship  and  marriage.^  Altogether  it  would  be  an  idle
undertaking  to  attempt  to  trace  the  motives  underlying  the
exceedingly  complicated  cases  of  subinfeudation.'  One
thing  is  clear,  however,  to  any  one  who  has  looked  at  them
more  or  less  carefully,  namely,  that  it  was  by  no  means  the
plan  to  divide  the  whole  area  of  England  into  fees,  or,
to  put  it  in  a  different  way,  to  parcel  up  each  barony  into
a  certain  number  of  subordinate  fees,  a  process  which  would
have  put  an  end  to  the  existence  of  the  barony  itself.'
As  a  rule,  a  large  margin  was  left  to  the  baron,  and
sometimes,  especially  in  ecclesiastical  baronies,  only  a  small
portion  of  the  land  was  carved  out  as  military  tenures.
It  is  advisable  to  consider  the  simpler  cases  when  fees  are
mentioned  as  unbroken  units,  or  when  their  fractions  are
expressly  combined  into  units.  What  values  or  agrarian
quantities  do  they  correspond  to,  and  is  any  system  to
be  traced  in  the  assignation  of  these  quantities  or  values  ?

Two  baffling  expedients  must  be  noticed  from  the
outset.  Knights  may  be  quartered  on  the  demesne  of
a  barony  instead  of  being  endowed  separately,  as  we  know
from  the  charters  o%-^i66.^ The  characteristic  provision

^  Testa  de  Nevill,  307  a  (Feoda  Com'  Albemarle) :  '  lolhts  de
Claxeby  tenet  centesimam  partem  unius  feodi  in  Claxeby.'  Cf.  249  b
(Tillebroc);  250  a  (Eton).

*  Transactions  of  the  Bristol  and  Gloucestershire  Arch.  Soc.  xi.
p.  150  :  '  Item  Elena  de  BefTord  tenet  unam  dimidiam  hydam  terre  in
Hame  lecto  de  Trussebyry  de  dono  lohannis  de  Solariis.  Et  idem
lohannes  de  Solariis  de  Waltero  de  Solariis.  Et  idem  Walterus  de
Constancia  de  Leye.  Et  ipsa  de  domino  Willielmo  de  la  Mare.  £t
idem  Willielmus  de  Comite  Glouc'  per  servicium  decime  partis  unius
militis. Et  ipse  Comes  de  Rege.'

'  Round,  F.  E.  234.

*  Lib.  Rub.  368  (Cambridge : Carta  Stephani  de  Scalariis) ;  401


SECT.I.CH.II] FEUDAL  SERVICE  47

b  added  that  each  baron  maintaining  knights  in  domain
should  be  bound  to  hold  coats  of  mail  and  arms  in  readi-
ness for  them,  and  probably  there  occurred  cases  when
equipment  was  provided,  not  only  to  such  oif  the  knights
as  were settled on  the baronial domain, but  also to
those  who  were  less  well-off  among  the  military  tenants.^
The  second  circumstance  which  prevents  us  sometimes  from
forming  an  estimate  in  regard  to  the  economic  basis  of
b^ts'  fees  is  the  imposition  of  service  on  a  whole  district
ora  complex  of  estates,  with  the  remark  that  all  the  holdings
of  the  territory  in  question  should  contribute  to  the  main-
tenance of  kn^hts,  in  proportion  to  their  size.^ On  such
occasions  the  duty  is  spread,  as  it  were,  over  a  whole  area,
and  it  is  impossible  to  ascertain  what  was  the  minimum  or
the  average  necessary  to  support  one  knight.

But  in  the  vast  majority  of  cases  we  get  definite  appor-
tionment of  knights'  fees  to  certain  estates,  or  equations
between  military  fees  and  units  of  value  or  holdings.
These,  of  course,  are  the  cases  which  are  to  be  studied
with  special  attention.

A  certain  presumption  in  favour  of  the  view  that  there  Units  of
was  a  tendency  to  consider  knights'  fees  and  even  baronies  *°^°™^'
as  approximately  equal  units  may  be  drawn  from  the  fact
that  the  reliefs  to  be  paid  on  change  of  ownership  were

(Norfolk :  Carta  Hubert!  de  Rid) ;  435  (Yorkshire :  Carta  Willclmi  de
Pergr).

*  Lib.  Rub.  283  (Hereford  in  Wallia :  Carta  Hugonis  de  Lascy) :
'  Ricardos  Brito  et  illi  aui  post  ipsum  sunt  nominati  tenent  de  domino
Hugoiie  sive  servitio  aliquo  quod  eis  statutwn  sit.  NuUus  istorum
phis  tenet  quam  c  solidatas  terrae,  praeter  mRiolomaeus,  qui  tenet  vi
tifaratas.  Quidam  de  istis  sunt  mecum  residentes  et  invenio  eis  neces-
:- £1  quidam  sunt  in  domibus  meis  in  Wallia  et  invenio  eis


This  is  a  remarkable  instance  of  military  men  (sergeants)  settled
on  the  Welsh  border  without  definitely  admeasured  duties,  and  receiving
the  necessary  maintenance  from  their  lord.

»  Lib.  Rub.  329  (Carta  Galfridi  Ridel)  :  *  Sciatis  quod  Ricardus
Basset,  pater  meus,  tenuit  anno  et  die  quo  Rex  Henricus  avus  vester
foit  vivus  et  mortuus  ix**  carucatas  terrae  et  iiii  et  i  virgatam,  pro
feodo  XV  militum.  Sed  nullus  militum  de  veteri  illo  feffamento  feffatus
fait  nominatim  pro  feodo  militis.  Sed  unaquaeque  carucata  terrae  ad
CMriendom  milites  xv  par  est  alii  ad  omnia  servitia  facienda,  et  in  exer-
ckibus,  et  in  custodiis  et  ubique.' Cf.  ibid.  371.


48  MILITARY  ORGANIZATION [ESSAY  I

fixed  at  constant  sums.  The  relief  of  a  baron  was  put
at  ;f  IOC  in  the  earlier  reigns,  but  gradually  reduced  to
lOO  marks,  while  the  knight's  fee  was  charged  at
ICO  shillings.^  As  the  baronies,  at  any  rate,  were  very
unequal  in  value  and  importance,  the  interest  of  these
figures  lies  in  the  relative  importance  of  the  knight*s  fee  and
the  barony  as  expressed  by  their  contrast.  The  barony  was
deemed,  in  a  general  way,  to  be  worth  more  than  thirteen,
or  even  twenty  times  as  much  as  an  ordinary  knight's  fee,
The  language  of  the  documents  sometimes  indicates  clearly
that  the  knight's  fee  was  considered  a  unit  of  value  from
which  estimates  of  income  could  be  deducted,  or  to  which
they  could  be  superadded.^  It  has  been  supposed  that  the
loo  shillings  relief  corresponds  naturally  to  a  fee  of  the  value
of  £20  a  year,  and  there  are  in  fact  traces  of  such  an
estimate  of  the  fee.^  This  estimate  appears  appropriate  ir
Edward  Ts  time,  and  we  actually  find  attempts  to  render  it
general.^  But  before  this  time  instances  of  an  income  ol
^£20  from  the  fee  are  rare.^ In  Henry  Ill's  time  the  official


^  Madox,  Hist  of  Exch.  I,  216  if.,  22a

'  Lib.  Rub.  372  (Hunts:  Carta  Nigelli  de  Levetot):  'Canonic
Huntedoniae  tenent  feodum  i  militis  et  dimidii,  et  ultra  x  sdidatai
terrae,  unde  perfiirnitur  servitium  Willelmi  filii  Oltfardi  qui  tend
feodum  i  militis,  v  solidatis  terrae  minus. — ^Walterus  de  ^eaumes
feodum  i  militis  et  iii*°^  partem  i  militis,  et  v  solidatas  terrae  unde  per
fumitur  servitium  Willelmi  de  Cloptone,  qui  tenet  feodum  i  mifitis
V  solidatis  terrae  minus.' Cf.  ibid.  387.

*  Lib.  Rub.  229  (Somerset :  Carta  Roberti  filii  Radulfi) :  '  Scia
vestra  dignitas  quod  ego  de  feodo,  pro  servitio  i  militis  teneo  s
Hbratas  terrae  quae  fuerunt  Reginaldi  filii  Hugonis  apud  Sumerteie.
Cf.  ibid.  245,  356,  404^uifolk :  Carta  Militum  Honoris  de  Claxe)
ibid.  405  :  *  WiUelmus  II  Hastinges  tenet  xx  libratas  terrae  et  i  militen
feodatum,  de  quibus  non  facit  servitium  nisi  i  militis.'  Testa  de  NeviD
316a  (Lincoln) :  '  Hugh  de  Nevill  tenet  xx  libratas  terrae  in  K^rringtoi
et  Aburg  de  domino  Rege  in  capite  pro  uno  feodo  de  veteri  feoffii
memo.'  Cf.  ibid.  318a ;  Round,  F.  £.  293 ;  Stubbs,  Const.  Hist.  i.  215
Pollock  and  Maitland,  Hist.  Eng.  Law,  i.  257.

*  There  is  at  the  Record  Office  an  unpublished  fragment  of  i
Hundmlal  inquisition  in  Middlesex,  of  Edward  Ps  reign,  to  asGCttaii
who  held  estates  of  ;^20  a  year  fit  to  furnish  knight  service.  Anoche
inquisition,  of  which  more  traces  are  preserved,  arranged  the  estates  01
a  scale  of  several  degrees. See  App.  L

'  By  way  of  exception  even  larger  fees  appear.  Lib.  Rub.  359 :  '  Leo
nardus  de  Venoz  tenet  xlviii  m(arcatas)  in  Hamme,  et  xxx  m(arcatas
in  Exing(es),  et  xxii  m(arcatas)  in  Westhalle,  per  i  militem— Ricardu


SECT.I.  CH.ll] FEUDAL  SERVICE  49

estimate  amounted only  to  ;£'i5.^ The  inquisitions  of

Henry  Ill's  reign  applied^  of  course,  not  only  to  actual  tenants

of  knights'  fees,  but  to  all  those  who  were  considered  capable

of  undertaking  the  burdens  and  honour  of  knighthood. But

for  the  purpose  of  ascertaining  what  the  common '  census '  of

a  Iqi^ht  was,  it  is  quite  as  relevant  as  if  it  had  contained

lists  of  actual  knights. In Henry  Ill's  early  years  the

standard  was  still  lower,  or  rather  was  expressed  in  lesser

figures. We  find,  namely,  in  the  Close  Roll  of  1230  an

Ordinance  of  Arms  enacting  that  every  knight  or  person

ponessed  of  chattels  of  the  value  of  15  marks  has  to  keep

a  coat  of  mail  (lorica),  while  tenants  of  half  a  knight's  fee,

and  owners  of  chattels  of  the  worth  of  10  marks  are  bound

to  have  a '  haubergel '. The chattels mentioned are

evidently  intended  to  correspond  to the  marcatae  and

udidatae  of  income  in  other  enactments.^ In Henry  II's

ffins  Aticberi  tenet  in  Langefarh  viii  libratas  terrae  per  iiii^°^  partem
feodi  i  militis.'  Ibid.  209  (Hampshire) :  '  Rc^rus  de  Sascy  tenet
1  fibratas  terrae  in  Derttone  et  Sumbome  per  feodum  i  militis.'  But
so  do  fees  of  very  small  value.  Bracton's  Note  Book,  pi.  1 1 82 :  '  Agnes
de  Wahtilla  tenuit  de  Dom.  Rege  in  capite  in  Wahulla  liii  carucatas  terre
com  pert  que  valent  per  annum  xlii  libras,  in  Brocberp^o  iii  carucatas
terre  com  pert,  que  valent  per  annum  xii  libras,  et  m  Langefordia
qoam  Robertus  Anquillun  tenuit  in  dotem  ii  carucatas  terre  cum  pert,
que  valent  per  annum  xl  libras.  Servicium  predictorum  maneriorum
nesciont  separare,  quia  tota  baronia  de  Wahulla  integra  respondet
Dom.  Regi  pro  xxx  militibus.*  However,  for  a  medium,  we  may  say
that  ;^2o  a  year  represents  the  normal  estimate  of  a  fee  in  Edward  Ts
rrign.

*  App.  II:  *qui  tenent  xv  libratas  terrae.*  Cf.  Lib.  Rub.  ii.  582  :
*  Dominica  quondam  eiusdem  honoris  (Boloniae)  Traynge  in  Hertford-
sdra,  valet  Ix  1.  Benediss  in  Essexa,  xlv  1.,  hos  tenet  Abbas  de
Favrediam.  Iclintone  in  Cantebrigescira.  I  tide  tenet  Rogerus  de
Locy,  zv  libratas  ten^e ;  Fratres  de  Muntmbrelun,  vi  libratas  et
i  marcatam ;  Moniales  de  Iclintone,  1  solidatas ;  Radulfus  Brito,
I  solidatas .  . .  Gameningeye,  valet  xxx  1.  Inde  tenent  heredes  Rogeri
fifii  Reinfridi,  x  libratas ;  Ricardus  Avenel,  x  libratas ;  haeredes  Ger-
visii  de  Comhulle,  x  libratas.'

'  Close  Roll,  14  Hen.  Ill,  m.  5  d.,  p.  398.  It  seems  strange  to  speak
of  the  value  of  chattels  where  otherwise  estimates  of  income  appear.
Bot  it  must  be  remembered  that  the  Assize  and  Ordinances  of
Arms  merely  provided  for  the  keeping  of  arms,  and  not  directly  for
service.  In  the  case  of  a  merchant  or  a  socman  it  was  sufficient  to
ascertain  that  he  was  possessed  of  chattels  to  an  amount  which  enabled
him  to  bay  a  coat  of  mail  or  a  *  haubergel ',  while  in  the  case  of  the
knight,  an  estate  and  an  income  were  necessary  as  the  basis  both  of
equipment  and  of  service. The  ordinance  of  Henry  III  establishing


MliOC«AZX>rV


50  MILITARY  ORGANIZATION [essay  I

well-known  Assize  of  Arms  of  1181  we  find  the  same
appreciation,  the  upper  degrees  being  expressed  by  two
distinct  forms  of  knightly  equipment :  the  coat  of  mail  d
a  full  knight  is  required  from  possessors  of  16  marks'  wortb
of  property,  and  the  lighter  armament  with  a  haubergel  hai
to  be  provided  by  those  possessed  of  10  marks  income.
Thus  if  we  take  the  standard  of  value  in  movable  property
or  of  income,  it  is  not  a  unit  of  20  librates,  but  two  units  oi
16  marcates  and  10  marcates  respectively^  that  we  shall
have  to  accept  as  representing  a  larger  and  a  lesser  fee,
a  more  complete  and  a  lighter  knightly  equipment.  Before
taking  leave  of  the  Assize  of  Arms  I  would  like  to  notice
that  it  evidently  contains  a  more  adequate  expression  d
custom  than  the  Ordinance  of  Henry  Ill's  time.  The
latter  attributes,  namely,  the  haubergel  equipment  to  holden
of  half-fees ;  but  this  can  only  be  an  attempt  to  stretch  the
military  requirements  as  far  as  possible  and,  indeed,  furthei
than  the  estimates  taken  as  a  basis  warranted.  Why  should
possessors  of  movables  of  the  value  of  10  marks  be  con-
sidered equivalent  to  tenants  of  half-fees,  the  whole  fee
being  estimated  at  15  marks  value  ?  And  was  the  haubei^d
outfit  really  equivalent  to  only  one-half  of  the  full  knight's
armament?  It  seems  evident  that  the  original  intentior
was  by  no  means  to  reduce  the  value  by  a  half,  but  tc
ensure  the  equipment  of  heavy  and  of  lighter  men-at-arms
standing  to  each  other  in  the  ratio  of  16  to  10  marks
Whether  this  valuation  should  be  reduced  even  more  foi

the  £is  standard  for  knights'  fees,  and  the  parallel  between  actual feei
and  assessed  chattels  msike  it  almost  certain  that  the  15  or  16  marki
corresponded  to  a  knight* s  average  income.

'  Assize  of  Arms  (1181),  cl.  2:  'Quicumque  vero  liber  laicus  ha*
buerit  in  catallo  vel  in  redditu  ad  valentiam  de  xvi  marcis,  habeai
loricam  et  cassidem  et  clypeum  et  lanceam;  quicumque  vero  libei
laicus  habuerit  in  catallo  vel  redditu  x  marcas  habeat  aubera;el  e
capellet  ferri  et  lanceam.'  Cf.  Rot.  Curiae  Regis,  6  Ric  I,  p.  56  (Line)
*  Alan  de  Bosco  petiit  v.  lohannem  de  Bosco  x  libratas  terre  in  Ledeluui
et  in  Fulebroc  ex  dono  Comitis  Alanis  Britanniae  et  ex  dono  Comiti
Conan  unam  cartam  illorum  protulit  que  testatur  quod  ipsi  dedenin
Alano  fil.  Galfrid'  (avunculo  ipsius  Alanis  de  Bosco)  predictam  temn
pro  servicio  et  homagio  suo  et  heredibus  suis  per  servitium  i  militi
pro  omni  servicio,  cuius  ipse  Alan  rectus  heres  est  et  protulit  confir
macionem  domini  Regis  Henrici  patris,'  &c.


SKT.LCH.n] FEUDAL  SERVICE  51

the  period  between  William  the  Conqueror  and  Henry  I  we
vt  not  able  to  say,  but  at  any  rate  it  can  in  no  way  be
exceeded

Although  attempts  at  valuations  in  money  were  thus  territorial
in  actual  use,  it  js  jnuchjnpre  common  to  find  knights*  fees  ^yl
estimated  in  territorial  units. In the  thinly  populated i
north-west  we  may  come  across  a  vague  reference  to  so  -^
many  vills  constituting  a  fee.^ In most  cases  a  certain
nomber  of  hides  or  carucates  are  reckoned  to  a  fee.^ There
ift  some  cases  where  fees  are  assigned  to  such  small
divisions  of  the  territory  that  it  is  impossible  for  us  to
make  out  nowadays  by  what  means  the  necessary  knight
equipment  and  service  could  be  kept  up. I  mean,  of
course,  cases  where  there  is  nothing  to  show  that  the
deficiency  in  quantity  was  counterbalanced  by  some  ex-
ceptional features,  in  point  of  quality,  which  rendered  the
estate  valuable. It  may  be  supposed  that  there  were  some
special  conditions  in  the  tenure  of  the  fee ;  for  example,
hdp  from  the  lord  in regard  to  equipment^ In  other
the  small estates  are distinctly  considered as  an


'  Lib.  Rob.  493  (Cumberland) :  *  Nomina  iUorum  qui  tenent  per  ser-
vitiiiin  mtlitare  et per  servitiimi  comagii  in  hoc  comitatu  (a.  d.  1210-13).
Robartus  de  VaUiDus  it  feoda  de  vi  villis  quas  tenet  in  dominico,  et  de
X  alus  quae  tenentur  de  eo.— Nicholaus  de  State ville,  Ivi  s.  de  Cor-
nagio  de  ii  villis  in  dominico,  et  iii  in  homagiis.'

*  The  intimate  connexion  between  knights'  fees  and  local  hides  may
be  illnstrated  by  an  example  from  a  Cartulary  of  Ely,  Tib.  B.  ii.
i8q  d.  cL  9.

'  Something  of  this  kind  may  be  indicated  by  the  following  return,
in  which  the  endowment  of  knights  in  separate  estates  is  mentioned  in
dose  connexion  with  the  maintenance  of  knights  on  the  demesne,  the
total  number  of  carucates  being  an  extremely  small  one  when  com-
paired  with  the  service  imposed.  Lib.  Rub.  38}  :  Carta  Lamberti  de
Sooleni  (Lincc^shire) :  '  Sciatis  quod  ego,  vestn  gratia,  teneo  de  vobis
xvi  camcatas  teriae  et  duas  bovatas  per  servitium  x  militum.  In  hiis
xvt  camcatis  terrae  habeo  v  milites  feodatos  ex  antiquitate  :— Ricardus
de  Haia  tenet  feodum  i  militis ;  et  servitium  illud  vobis  et  mihi,  post-
qoara  coronatus  fuisti,  detinuit  hucusaue,  nisi  quod  solum  duas  marcas
haboL  £t  Eudo  de  Cranesbi  tenet  feodum  i  militis.  Thomas  filius
Willelniiy  i  militem,  Rogerus  de  Millers, ii  milites.  Et  ex  dominio  meo
vobu  maodo  quod  debeo  servitium  v  militum  ;  et  ex  illo  dominio  dedi
Roberto  de  Poitemort  tres  partes  i  militis.  Ideo  vos  deprecor  quod
onhi  pfauritom  vestnim  de  Ricardo  de  Haia  mandetis,  qui  mihi  ser-
vitinoi  illins  feodi  detinet,  nee  potero  habere  nisi  per  praeceptum
vcstninu  Et  totum  servitium  istud  est  in  praedictis  xvi  camcatis  terrae.'

E  2


5a  MILITARY  ORGANIZATION [essay  i

unusual  feature  in  the  descriptions,  and  treated  as  units
of  repartition  burdened  with  an  obligation  which  ought
to  have  been  imposed  on  larger  units.^  However  this  may
be,  very  small  fees  of  a  couple  of  hides  or  less  are  not
frequent,  although  they  do  occur,  more  especially  in  the
south.2  It  jjjay  be  added  that  very  large  fees  of  forty-eight
carucates  and  the  like  are  also  exceptional,  and  occur
almost  all  in  the  north  and  east^  The  probable  reason
for  this  phenomenon  will  have  to  be  looked  for  by-and-by.
The  great  majority  of  extant  notices  of  the  contents
of  knights'  fees  fall  into  groups,  the  repartition  of  which
is  not  only  the  result  of  statistical  abstracts,  but  corresponds
to  types  indicated  in  the  sources  themselves.  One  main
distinction  is  evident  at  first  glance ;  there  are  great  fees
{magna  feoda)  or  ordinary  fees,  and  small  fees  {parva
feoda^  minutafeodd).^
Small  fees.  The  small  fees  are  also  generally  called  fees  of  the  honour
of  Mortain  (Mortaigne,  Moriton),  and  most  of  them  are
derived  from  the  fief  of  the  Count  of  Mortain,  the  brother
of  the  Conqueror,*  or  from  fiefs  which  have  grown  out  of  it,*

^  Shaftesbury, list  ofknights|  fees;  Dugdale,Monasticon  Anglicanum,
ii.  477  :  *  at  Apshulle  ys  on  hide  of  londe  and  on  gerde,  and  answarei
for  one  knystesmetehome.'

*  Testa  de  Nevill,  309  (Lincolnshire) :  '  Willelmus  le  Angevyn  tenet
duas  carucatas  et  duas  bovatas  terre  per  servitium  imios  militis  in
Holebeck  and  Quappelade.'  Cf.  ibid.  312  b,  318  b.  Cf.  Kentish
Inq.  p.  m.  viii  [Esc.  No.  17,  31  Hen.  Ill,  1247],  Arch.  Cant  ii.  p.  396.

'  Madox,  Baronia  Anglicana,  182;  Testa  de  Nevill,  310,  313  b,
316a,  317a.

^  Lib.  Rub.  i.  64  (from  Pipe  Roll,  3^  Henry  II),  Dorset  and
Somerset:  'Willelmus  de  Chahaygnes  ix  1.  pro  ix  militibas,  sed
recognitum  est  quod  sunt  de  parvis  feodis.'  Cf.  ibid.  loi,  125,  167,
i6q,  545.

^  Madox,  Hist,  of  Exch.  4396.  Lib.  Rub.  i.  43  (Pipe  Roll,  14  Hen.
11^  ;  71  (from  Scutate,  2  K.  I) :  '  Staffordsira,  Episcopus  Couentrensis,
vii  1.  x  s.  de  quibus  xix  s.  ii  d.  sunt  de  diversis  Comitatibus  Moreton(iae)
— XV  milites.  Ibid.  82  (from  Scutagium,  6  R.  I.  ad  20  s.) :  '  Norham-
tescira — vicecomes  (reddit  compotum)  . . .  de  zxxi  s.  ii  d.  de  scntagio
honoris  de  feodis  ae  Moretonia.*  Ibid.  92  (from  Scut.,  6  R.  1):
'  Sudsexa — Robertus  Peverel,  viii  s.  iiii  d.  de  duabus  partibus  i  feodi
Moretoniae.'  Also  ibid.,  155,  533,  550,  612.  Testa  de  Nevill,  169
(parva  feoda  in  Dorset).

'  Testa  de  Nevill,  223  (Honor  de  Aquila);  223,  224  (de  domino
Rege  in  capite) ;  Rot.  Hundr.  ii.  335  (Bucks):  ' Swaneboume
Inferior,  Heredes  Godardi  tenent  medietatem  feodi  i  militis  de  parvo
feodo  de  Morteyn  de  domino  lohanne  Passelewe  et  ipse  in  capite  de


SECT.  I.  CH.li] FEUDAL  SERVICE  53

but  it  is  not  always  the  case.  Some  of  them  are  drawn
from  other  honours,  e.  g.  from  the  fief  of  Arsyk,  cut  out  of
the  possessions  of  Odo  of  Bayeux,  and  those  of  the  barony
of  Stafford.^  Conversely  by  way  of  exception  there  were
some  large  fees  of  the  honour  of  Mortain.^  The  frequent
mentions  of  scutages  and  reliefs  due  by  such  '  parva  feoda '
in  contrast  with  the  ordinary  ones  show  that  a  very  material
inequality  was  assumed  between  the  two  types.  For  ex-
ample, when  the  ordinary  fee  paid  a  pound  for  scutage,  the
small  fee  paid  a  mark,  that  is,  two- thirds,  and  the  reliefs
differed  in  the  same  proportion.^  In  many  cases  the  pro-
portion is  not  quite  so  simple :  16s,  ^d,  for  the  Mortain
fiefs  corresponds  to  two  marks  (26^.  %d)  for  great  fees,  200^.
to  yiod.  Thus  the  endowment  of  a  Mortain  knight  was
taken  to  equal  five-eighths  of  the  endowment  of  an  ordinary
knighty'*  and  this  seems  to  have  been  the  most  exact  estimate,

domino  R^e  de  feodo  Cheyndreth  de  Langeleye  et  tola  ilia  terra  est  de
bonore  de  Berchampstead  praeter  ii  virg.  terre  oue  tenentur  de  Monia-
libas  de  Bradeleye.' Cf.  Vict  Hist,  of  Hertfordshire,  i.  280.

*  Testa  de  Nevill,  112b:  '(Oxon  and  Berk*.  De  baronia  Arsic.)  De
feodis  Herveiei  de  Stafford  de  parvis  feodis  de  Mortein.  De  eodem
de  terra  Hugonis  de  Tiwa  de  uno  parvo  feodo  in  Dunnestiwa  et
Edburbir  xviis.  xd.'  Rot  Hundr.  ii.  86ia:  '  Middelaston,  De  feodo
baroniae  de  Stafford . . .  idem . . .  dat  scutagium  quando  currit  feod.  dimid.
minoris  scuti.*  Cf.  Dugdale,  Baronage,  156 ;  Csuendar.  Geneal.  389,428.

■  Testa  dc  Ncvill,  31a:  *  (Northants,  De  feod*  comitis  Leyc'  &  feod'
Willelmi  de  Kaynes.)  De  Willelmo  de  Faukener  viil.  vis.  pro  vii
magnis  feodis  de  feod*  de  Morteyn  &  ii  parvis  &  di*  de  suo  proprio  et
iii  parvis  de  feod*  de  Kaynes  .  . .'

'  Testa  de  Nevill,  54b  (Salop  and  Staff.) :  '  Herveius  Bagot  tenet
L  lleoda  militum  de  quibus  tria  faciunt  duo.*  Ibid.  201  ;  Lib.  Rub.
219, 220  (Dorset),  'Carta  Willelmi  filii  lohannis — Ego . . .  teneo de  Rege
in  capite  de  veteri  feffamento  de  honore  Moretoniae  vii  milites,  unde  iii
milites  faciunt  servitium  ii  militum ' ;  also  Carta  Ricardi  filii  Willelmi.
Year  Books,  Ed.  II  (Seld.  Soc.)  i.  60 :  '  Stapeldon  v.  Stapeldon, . .  She
(Margaret)  says  that  Robert  Puddynge,  the  heir's  father,  held  of  her
late  husband,  Joce,  a  messuage  and  a  carucate  of  land  in  Treveglos  by
homage  and  fealty  and  the  service  of  half  a  knight*s  fee  of  the  fee  of
Mortain  (to  wit,  one  mark  towards  a  scutage  of  forty  shillings,  and  so  in
proportion).'  Madox,  Baronia  Anglicana,  184  note  (d)  ;  Hist,  of  Exch.
453.  The  neferences  in  the  Year  Books  vary  a  good  deal,  and  are  perhaps
not  very  accurate,  as  the  point  did  not  interest  the  reporters  ;  e.  g.\Year
Book,  Ed.  II,  vol.  ii.  187-8  (1310),  ^Wesicote:  vous  avowez  sUr
Doos  parceo  qe  nous  tenoms  de  vous  un  fee  de  chyvaler  par  escuage
de  zl  s.y  etc«  Sire,  nous  vous  dioms  qe  nous  tenoms  mesme  les  tene-
menz  par  le  petit  fee  de  Mortein  sc.  xxx  s.  a  Tescu  quant  Tescu  court
a  xl  s.^ Cf.  Rot.  Curiae  Regis,  6  Ric.  I,  p.  70.

*  Testa  de  Nevill,  201a  (Cornwall): 'Auxilium  19  Hen.  Ill  .  .  .


54  MILITARY  ORGANIZATION [essay  I

although,  not  unnaturally,  some  local  variations  did  occur.*
Now  these  figures  strike  us  at  once  by  their  exact  corre-
spondence to  the  two  grades  of  knightly  equipment  mep-
tioned  in  the  Assize  and  Ordinances  of  Arms :  the  holders
of  the  fees  of  the  '  smaller  shield '  evidently  correspond
to  the  men-at-arms  who  have  to  appear  in  lighter  armour  '
and  are  rated  at  ;£^io  or  lo  marks  when  the  fully  equipped
knights  are  rated  at  15  (or  16)  pounds  or  marks.'  Thus
the  contrast  is  by  no  means  a  casual  one,  but  is  based
on  the  quality  of  the  service.  It  is  perfectly  natural  that
a  horseman  serving  in  light  armour  should  be  required
to  pay  a  lesser  scutage  than  a  fellow  of  his  who  had  to
appear  in  a  heavier  and  more  costly  equipment.  His  day
must  have  been  valued  only  at  ^d.  instead  of  %d.  And,
further,  it  is  clear  that  the  difference  in  equipment  and
service  was  meant  to  correspond  to  a  difference  in  the  size
and  value  of  the  estates  on  which  the  service  was  imposed.
In  regard  to  duties  there  is  an  emphatic  distinction  between
large  fees  and  small  fees,  and  we  hear  of  additional  grants
of  land  intended  to  make  a  small  fee  as  complete  as
a  large  one.*

reddunt  compotem  de  lix  1.  iiii  s.  iiii  d.  de  Ixxi  feodis  Andr*  de  Cardina'
de  feodis  Morton, . . .  r.  c.  de  xvi  L  xii  s.  iiii  d.  de  xx  feodis  MortOQ  honoris
Matice'de  Lucy  et  Robert!  filii  Walteri  in  Mynely&  Lantyen,  .  .  .
r.  c.  de  xvi  s.  viii  d.  de  uno  minuto  feodo  Henrici-  de  Heriz  in  Ebbeford
cum  pert.' Pipe  Roll,  14  Hen.  II,  p.  142.

*  Lib.  Rub.  i.  52  ;  Kentish  Inq.  p.  m.  xxxv,  Arch.  Cant.  iii.  260;
cf.  Greenstreet,  Feodary  of  37  Hen.  Ill,  Kent,  Arch.  Cant  xii.  214.

'  Testa  de  Nevill,  165  a  (Dorset) :  '  Ricardus  le  Franc  tenet  unam
hidam  in  Upwinbume  quam  Walterus  Mobert  dedit  Alidae  matri
predict!  Ricardi  le  Franc,  in  liberum  maritagium  quam  Willelmus  Rex
dedit  Waltero  Mobert  in  incremento  feodi  sui  haubergelli.'

'  In  Normandy  the  ordinary  estimate  assumes  that  two  vavassories
corresponded  to  a  knight's  fee.  In  England  an  attempt  is  made  in
Henry  Ill's  ordinance  to  introduce  a  similar  principle  in  regard  to  the
obligations  of  ih^/eoda  minuta.  But  this  policy  does  not  seem  to  have
been  successful.

*  Bracton's  Note  Book,  Case  772 :  '  Willelmus  de  Albaniaco  v.
Ricardum  de  Wateruilla  quod  faciat  ei  consuetudines  et  recta  seiuicia
que  ei  facere  debet  de  libero  tenemento  quod  de  eo  tenet  in  Nabum'
Dauton',  et  unde  peciit  ab  eo  quod  faceret  ei  seruicium  v.  feodomm
integre  per  recordum  alibi,  etc.  Et  Ricardus  uenit  et  cognoscit  quod
tenere  debet  de  eo  v  feoda,  set  tria  feoda  in  Com.  Oxon.  in  Broctona
et  Niwetona  sunt  de  paruis  feodis  de  Morting*.  Et  inde  posuit  se
super  magnam  assisam  . . .  Et  post  uenit  Willelmus  per  attomatum


SECT.  I.  CH.ii] FEUDAL  SERVICE  55

Are  there  anj^express  indications  as  to  the  normal  size  Size  of  fees
of  a  fee,  and  as  to  the  reduced  size  of  a  small  knight's  fee  ?  y^nciai
Xherc  are  certainly  traces  of  a  view  according  to  which  custom.
five  hides  ought  to  go  to  the  fee  in  the  hidated  districts,
that  is,  in  the  south  of  England.^ By  the  side  of  these
equations  must  be  placed  numerous  cases  where  the  pro-
portion  approximates to this estimate without fitting
exactly,  cases  of  allotments  of  4-7  hides.^ Other  com-
binations are  much  less  frequent. As  for  small  fees,  two  or
three  hides  seem  to  be  the  average  estimate.^ The  relative

SQum  et  cognoscit  quod  terfe  de  Broctona  et  Neutona  non  debent  nisi
tria  pania  feoda  de  Moretoign',  et  dominica  Ricardi  de  com.  Ebor.
deboit  £Eu:ere  residuum  ad  perfidendum  plenarium  feodum  de  hoc
quod  pertinet  ad  feodum  de  Mortoing*.  . . .  £t  inc^uiratur  per  xii  de
com.  Ebor.  si  predictus  Ricardus  debeat  duo  feoda  m  comitatu  illo  et
preterea  implementum  quod  deest  ad  tria  feoda  parua  de  Moretoing'
ad  faciendum  tria  magna  feoda.'

*  Lib.  Rub.  237 ;  ibid.  292  (Carta  Rogeri  de  Berchelai) :  *  Sciat
dominus  Rex  quod  . . .  habeo  ii  milites  et  dimidium  feffatos  de  veteri
leffiunento,  unde :  —Michael  tenet  i  hidam.  Willelmus  filius  Baldewini,
ii  hidas.  Elias  de  Boiville,  i  hidam  et  dimidiam.  Hugo  de  Planta,
dimidiam  hidam.  Et  de  istis  integrum  militem  habetis.'  Bristol  and
Gloucester  Transactions,  xi.  139  ft;  cf,  Bracton's  Note  Book,  161 2;
Glastoobury  Inquest,  p.  2 : '  Kingtona,  iii  vireates,per  militiam  quantum
pertinet  ad  servitium  militis  tenentis  v  hidas.  Cf.  ibid.,  Lega,  p.  6.  The
following  case,  Lib.  Rub.  293  (Roger  of  Berchelai),  may  serve  to  explain
how  it  comes  that  by  the  side  of  regular  allotments  we  find  so  many
swerving  from  them  either  in  the  sense  of  an  increase  of  duties  or  in
the  direction  of  their  diminution  :  *  Ad  dimidium  (militem)  faciendum
tenet: — Radulfus  de  Ywelege,  dimidiam  hidam.  Femina  Radulfi
Cantilene,  dimidiam  hidam.  Rogenis  de  Alba  Mara,  i  virgatam.
Simon  de  Comelege,  i  virgatam.  Femina  Ricardi  Ganselli,  iii  virgatas.
Prior  de  Stanleie,  i  virgatam.— Et  hie  habetis  dimidium  militem.— Ad
alterum  militem  faciendum  Walterus  de  Hollecumbe  tenet  iii  hidas  et
dimidiam.  Gerardus,  iii  hidas  et  dimidiam.  Reginaldus  de  Alba
Mara,  iii  hidas.  Et  ita  tenent  isti  tres  x  hidas,  unde  nolunt  mihi  facere
servitium  nisi  de  iii  virgatis,  scilicet,  unusquisque  de  i  virgata.  Et  ita
habetis  ii  milites  et  dimidium  feodatos.  ...  Si  uobis  in  antea  de
dominio  meo  placet  audire  ...  In  manerio  meo  de  Oberlege,  habeo
feodum  duorum  militum.  Apud  Stanlege,  feodum  i  militis  cum  i  hida
de  Chcderintone.  In  Niwentone  habeo  feodum  i  militis.  In  Durellis
i  hidam.  In  Oslewarda,  dimidiam  hidam.  In  Doddintone,  iii  hidas
et  dimidiam.  In  Slimbergge,  iii  hidas  quas  ego  vestro  assensu  dedi
Maoricio  filio  Roberti,  unde  nullum  habeo  servitium.  Kingeswodam
tenent  Albi  Monachi,  ex  dono  Willelmi  de  Berchamstede  unde  vobis  in-
tegrum militem  facio,  quamvisipsi  nullum  servitium  michi  facere  volunt.'

*  Shaftesbury  fees : Dugdale, Mon.  Angl.  ii.  477 ; Abbreviatio
Placitorum  50  (Bucks),  63  (Wilts.).

'Small  fees  in  Somerset,e.g.  Site/I:  Exon.  Dd.248,  *Comes(deMori-
tonio)  habet  i  mansionem  quae  vocatur  Seuueila  quam  tenuit  Aluuardus

t


"J


56  MILITARY  ORGANIZATION [essa

value  of  these  very  rough  estimates  will  appear  when  '
compare  the  figures  for  the  southern  counties  with  those
the  Danelaw  and  of  the  north  of  England.  We  get  into
entirely  different  scale  of  numbers.  Fees  of  five  carucal
are  exceedingly  rare.^  A  rather  common  estimate  in  t
Danelaw  seems  to  be  13  or  14  carucates  to  the  fee,  b
the  numbers  often  range  from  7  to  16.*  In  the  north  24
not  uncommon,^  and  we  actually  get  in  some  few  cas
to  48.*  Yorkshire  presents  in  many  respects  interest!
peculiarities.  It  contained  a  good  many  estates  which  h
belonged  to  the  Count  of  Mortain,  but  they  were  r
parcelled  out  into  small  fees.  The  Mortain  fee^  in  t
special  sense  in  which  it  is  used  in  the  south,  does  not  ex
here.  As  for  the  ordinary  fees,  their  composition  diff<
very  much  in  the  same  wapentakes,  but  the  several  honoi
follow  systems  of  their  own,  and  keep  them  up  ratli

et  reddit  gildum  pro  iii  hidis ' ;  of.  Testa  de  Nevill,  160  b,  Swelle,  unt
feodum  (de  Moret) :  Redlinch :  Exon.  Dd.  256, '  Comes  (de  Moreton
habet  i  mansionem  quae  vocatur  Reliz  . .  .  reddit  gildum  pro  iiii  hid
Cf.  T.  de  N.  161  b  (Hd.  de  Briweton) :  '  In  Redlis feodum  ii  militum
parvo  feodo.'  Merriott :  Exon.  Dd.  252,  *  Comes  (de  M.)  habet  i  lok
sionem  quae  vocatur  Meriet . . .  et  reddit  gildum  pro  vii  hidas  ...  In
tenuit  Leuuinus  v  hidas  et  Bristuardus  ii  hidas  et  modo  tenet  ei
Dodemannus  de  comite  et  habet  inde  iii  hidas  et  dimidiam  et  ii  cani<
in  dominio.'  Cf.  T.  de  N.  163a  (Hd.  de  Northairy) :  'Nicholas
Meriet  tenet  Meriet  in  capite  de  domino  Rege  per  servidum  ii  militi
de  conquestu  Angliae  scilicet  unum  feodum  de  honore  Glovemie
aliud  de  honore  Morton.'  Compton  Durville :  Exon.  Dd.  245, '  Con
(de  M.)  habet  i  mansionem  quae  vocatur  Comtuna . . .  reddidit  gildi
pro  iii  hidis.'  Cf.  T.  de  N.  109  a :  *  (compotes  de  parvis  feodis) . . .  xv
viii  d.  de  uno  feodo  in  Cumpton  quod  est  in  manu  domini  Regis.'

^  Lib.  Rub.  390  (Lincolnshire :  Carta  Ricardi  de  Haia) :  '  Isti  st
milites  Ricardi  de  Haia,  et  serviunt  ad  servitium  Regis  per  carucat
Et  V  carucatae  faciunt  i  militem,  et  milites  tenent  eas,  quidam  pi
quidam  minus.'

'  TestadeNevill,302  a  (Morton);  307-9;  313,320,334.  Lib.Rub.^
(Yorkshire:  Carta  de  Feodo  Sciptone):  'Osbertus  Archidiacon
tenet  xi  carucatas  terre  unde  xiiii  carucatae  faciunt  feodum  milit
Petnis  de  Martun  xii  carucatas  unde  xiiii  faciunt  feodum  militis,'  &<
Testa  de  Nevill,  301  a  (Lines) ;  *  Hugo  de  Boby  tenet  v  carucal
terrae  in  Boby  unde  vii  carucate  faciunt  feodum  unius  militis.'  Kirkb
Inquest,  Yorkshire,  32  ff.,  fees  of  10  carucates  (Earl  of  Lincolr
14  carucates  (Albemarle) ;  16  carucates  (Percy).

'  On  the  lands  of  the  Archbishop  of  York  and  in  Lancashire  tl
was  the  rule.

*  Testa  de  Nevill,  317  a  (Lincoln :  Thurgremby).  Cf.  Madox,  Baroi
Anglica,  p.  182-3  note  (w)  (Ebor,,  Laurentius  de  Holbech).


SECT.  I.  CH.  II] FEUDAL  SERVICE  57

strictly.  The  Honour  of  Skypton  in  Craven,  for  example,
fonns  its  fees  of  14  carucates  each ;  in  the  fief  of  Albemarle
both  this  and  the  16  carucates  standard  occur  side  by  side,
while  in  the  Earl  of  Lincoln's  possessions  lo  carucates
go  to  the  fee.^  How  is  the  striking  difference  in  the  com-
position of  the  knights'  fees  to  be  explained  ?  It  corresponds
so  clearly  to  the  ancient  division  of  the  kingdom  into  the
Anglo-Saxon  part  of  the  kingdoms  of  Wessex  and  Mercia,
and  the  districts  occupied  by  the  Scandinavian  invaders,
that  one  is  naturally  brought  to  consider  this  contrast  from
the  point  of  view  of  the  differences  of  social  structure  and
political  hbtory  of  these  two  parts.  On  one  side  we  have
the  strongly  manorialized  south,  with  estates  of  large  land-
owners already  formed  before  the  Conquest;  on 'the  other
we  find  a  heterogeneous  mass  of  tenures  in  which  the  small
freemen  still  play  a  great  part.  Even  when  this  free
character  is  somewhat  obscured,  as  in  Yorkshire,  by  the
tremendous  devastation  of  the  struggle  in  the  eleventh
century,  it  is  yet  clear  that  before  the  Conquest  it
could  hardly  have  presented  a  very  different  aspect  from
the  neighbouring  Lincolnshire.  The  fundamental  difference
between  the  compact  estates  of  the  south  and  the  numerous
free  holdings  of  the  Danelaw  could  not  but  exert  an  in-
fluence on  the  introduction  of  the  feudal  military  system.
In  the  north  it  had  to  stretch  over  larger  areas  as  a  rule,
not  only  in  the  literal  sense  of  occupying  larger  tracts
of  country,  but  also  in  that  of  drawing  its  supplies  from
larger  congregations  of  tenants  and  larger  combinations  of
holdings,  because  the  single  tenants  and  holdings  were  sub-
jected to  much  more  superficial  exploitation.  At  the  same
time  the  system  took  more  the  shape  of  a  regular  repartition
of  service  between  the  component  units — the  carucates  of

'  Kirkby's  Yorkshire  Inquest,  32  ff.  Northumberland  fees.  Feudal
Aids,  iv.  p.  56  (1346) :  *  de  iiii  s.  pro  x™*  parte  i  f.  m.  pro  una  carucata
terre  in  In^ow  quam  quondam  Walterus  Swetehop  tenuit,  ut  de  par-
cella  baronie  predicte  (de  Hunfravill).*  Cf.  ibid.  p.  60 :  '  Saltdyk.  iiii  s.
pro  x"^  parte  i  f.  m. . . .  pro  una  carucata  terre  . . .  ut  de  parcella  baronie
predicte  (de  Morley).'  Cf.  ibid.  p.  66 :  '  Belford  . . .  de  iii  s.  iv  d. . . .  pro
xit"^  parte  i  f.  m. . . .  ut  de  una  carucata  terre . . .  ut  parcella  baronie  pre-
dicte (de  Musco  Campo).'


58  MILITARY  ORGANIZATION [essay  i


/.


^


1/


every  honour — than  that  of  a  selection  of  particular  estates
for  the  purpose  of  defending  the  land  in  respect  of  military
service.

The  character  of  knight  service  in  the  Danelaw,  and  the
difficulties  it  had  to  encounter,  may  be  well  illustrated
by  some  entries  taken  from  the  Lincolnshire  feodary  of  the
Honour  of  Richmond.  The  fees  have  actually  to  be  taken
over  in  some  cases  by  entire  communities  of  sokemen/  and
the  feudal  service  thus  loses  its  characteristic  aspect  of  a
personal  contract  of  vassalage.  Altogether,  the  very  varied
conditions  of  tenure  in  this  county,  as  well  as  in  those
of  East  Anglia,  are  reflected  in  the  feodaries  by  exceed-
ingly irregular  formations  of  the  knight's  fee.  It  is  clear
that  the  feudal  system  did  not  come  as  a  natural  growth  in
these  places :  it  appeared  prematurely  as  a  consequence  of^
the  French  Conquest.

In  the  south  matters  are  exactly  the  reverse.  Not  only
are  the  different  villages  comparatively  rounded  off  under
separate  landlords,  but  this  system  exists  there  already  for
some  time,  and  the  Norman  barons  follow  without  much,
difficulty  the  traces  of  their  Saxon  predecessors.  The  fe&
forms,  or  at  least  is  intended  to  form,  the  appendage  of
a  definite  place,  rather  than  the  service  contributions  laid
on  the  several  tenants  of  the  considerable  district  included
in  a  barony.

Dorset  may  be  taken  as  an  example  of  the  typical
southern  arrangement  prevailing  in  most  counties.  Th^
5-hides  groups  and  approximating  combinations  ^  forming;
the  basis  of  knights'  fees  occur  often.  The  lai^er  townships
composed  of  lo  hides  and  more  are  either  subdivided  into
several  fees  as  multiples  of  five,^  or,  in  the  case  of  eccle*

^  Honour  of  Richmond  (Rec.  Off.)*  See  App.  III.  We  find  a
similar  repartition  of  military  service  among  sokemen  in  some  of  the
tiefs  of  Peterborough  Abbey.

^  It  must  be  borne  in  mind  that  the  hides  spoken  of  are  mostly  taken
in  the  fiscal  sense,  and  are  therefore  very  uncertain  as  to  thdr
agrarian  value.  Therefore  in  many  cases  the  Domesday  ettimates
of  plough-land  and  teams  ought  to  be  consulted  in  order  to  form  an
idea  of  the  real  value  of  the  fees.

'  E.  g.  (Chardstock,  Dorset),  Dd.  77  b  :  '  (Cerdestoche)  Episcopot
(Sarisberiensis)  tenet  et  ii  milites  de  eo  .  . .  T.  R.  E.  geldabat  pro  zti


SECT.  I.  CH.li] FEUDAL  SERVICE  59

siasdcal  manors,  they  fall  into two  portions,  one  being

reserved  for  the  use  of  the  see  or  monastery  and  entered  as

frank  almoigne,  the  other  consisting  of  the  military  tenures

'  defending '  the  entire  fief  in  r^ard  to  military  service,  and

cut  out  more  or  less  on  the  5  hide  pattern.^ In  contrast

with  these  appear  the  small  groups  supporting  the  light

cavalry,  the  Mortain  fees  of  two  or  three  hides.^ When

these  light  horsemen  are  quartered  on  a  5  or  6  hide  vill

it  is  generally  divided  between  two  knights.^ In  some

cases,  when  the  5  hide  standard  seems  to  fail,  we  find

that  in  the  Domesday Survey  land  for  five  ploughs  is

mentioned,  and  the  not  unnatural  inference  is  that  the

hidation  was  a  beneficial  one.^

hidis.'  Feudal  Aids,  ii.  8 :  (Cerdestok) '  Episcopus  Sarisburiensis  duo
feoda.'  IVraxdtIi (Dorset):  Dd.  82d(Brocheshale,  14  hides  altogether);
F*  A.  iL  3  (Wroxhale,  2  fees).

'  E.g.  Beaminster,  Dd.  77  b :  (Beiminstre) '  Episcopus  (Sarisb.)  tenet
• . .  T.  R.  E.geldabat  pro  xvi  hidis  et  una  uirgata  terrae . . .  De  eadem  tenra
tenet  de  eptscopo  Algar  ii  hidas.  H.  deCartnu  ii  hidas  una  uirgata  minus.
SIdcmI  V  hidas,  Brictuin  i  hidam  et  dimidiam  . . .  Dominium  episcopi
uJet  xvi  libb  Hominum  uero  vii  lib.'  CI  F.  A.  il  7  :  *  Hunaredum
de  Bemcnistre . . .  dicunt  ^uod  villam  de  Bemenistre  que  non  est  gulda-
bflis  • . .  Canonici  Sarisburie  earn  tenent — De  feodis  militum  que  tenentur
In  opitt  de  domino  rege  dicunt  quod  episcopus  Sarisburiensis  tenet  in
capite  de  domino  rege  in  dicto  hundredo  novem  feoda  et  dL  de  qui-
bos  (p.  8)  Willelmus  de  Welle  un.  £  in  Axnolfe  (in  Beaminster,  v.
F.  A.  Index),  Pikiete,  Langeford  et  Dewelepole.*  Similarly  Netherbury
(Dorset),  Dd.  77b  (Niderberie),  Feudal  Aids,  ii.  7  (Nitherbury),  with
Worth,  p.  8  (Worth,  part  of  Netherbury,  v.  F.  A.  Index) ;  Sherborne
(Dorset),  Dd.  77a  (Scirebume),  F.  A.  ii.  4,  5  (Hundredum  de  Shir-
bum).

'  £.g.  Charmouth,  Dd.  80  a:  (Cememude)  'Robertus  tenet  de
Co(mite  Moritoniense)  . . .  Algar  tenuit  T.  R.  E.  et  geldabat  pro  iii
hidis.  Terra  est  iii  carucis.'  Testa  de  Nevill,  160 a:  '  (Cememuwe)
unum  feodum  de  eodem  (feodo  Roberti  de  BeUo  Campo) ' ;  Little
Herringstone,  Dd.  79b  ('Ceme.  Comes  Moriton.  iii  h.' — Eyton
identifies  with  Little  Herrin^tone  in  Charminster  parish) ;  Feudal
Aids,  iL  18;  Testa  de  Nevill,  169  b  (' Haringston,  xvis.  viiid.  de
tmo  feodo  Morton ') ;  Hook,  Dd.  79  d  ('  Lahoc.  Comes  Moriton  ii
hid.') ;  F.  A.  ii.  2  ('  La  Hoke.  Johannes  de  Syfrewast  . . .  pro  feodo
on.  m.  de  feodis  comitis  Mortonie ').

'  £•  g.  in  Somerset,  five  hides  in  Dd.,  two  knights  in  Testa  de  Nevill,
ia  Hatch  (Exon.  Dd.  251,  Hachia ;  T.  de  N.  160  a,  Hache),  Beer
(ExoD.  Dd.  251,  Bera;  T.  de  N.  160  a,  Weston  and  Bere),  Charlton
Horethome  (Exon.  Dd.  254,  Ceorlaton ;  T.  de  N.  160  a,  Cherleton),
Cfowcombe  (Exon.  Dd.  246,  Crawecoma  ;  T.  de  N.  160  a,  Crawecumb).

^  E.g.  Langton  Herring  (Dorset),  Dd.  75  c :  (Langetone)  *  geldabat
pro  i  hida  et  dim.  Terra  est  ii  carucis.'  83  d :  (ib.)  '  geldabat  pro  i
hida  et  dim. Terra  est  iii  carucis.' Feudal  Aids,  ii.  6 :  (Langetun)


ties.

i/


60  MILITARY  ORGANIZATION [essay  I

Staffordshire  presents  an  interesting  variation  of  this
system,  in  so  far  as  its  townships  are  small  and  fall  more
naturally  into  hamlets  of  two  or  three  hides  rather  than
into  the  larger  combinations  of  five,  ten  hides,  &c  The
small  Mortain  fees  are  especially  at  home  there,  but  as  for
the  large  ones,  they  are  mostly  formed  by  combinations
of  several  villages.^

Some  of  the  counties  of  the  Danelaw  itself,  like  Derby-
shire and  Nottinghamshire,  have  already  assumed  more  or
less  the  same  organization  as  those  of  the  southern  dis-
tricts ;  while^  on  the  contrary,  counties  included  in  the
hidated  region  of  England,  but  showing  strong  traces  of
Danish  population  and  social  institutions,  like  Cambridge-
shire, are  characterized  by  mixed  and  irregular  formations.'
Sergean-  2.  Speaking  of  the  feudal  military  system,  we  must  not
forget  that  knight  service  was  its  chief  but  by  no  means  its
only  expression.  By  the  side  of  the  knights'  fees  we  find
the  tenures  in  sergeanty,  which  very  often  are  an  exact
copy  of  the  former,  and  differ  from  them  only  in  the  quality
of  the  warrior  who  has  to  appear  from  them  in  the  host.
Upton,  in  Northamptonshire,  had  to  send  a  sergeant  to
serve  the  king  ii^  his  wars  for  forty  days  at  his  own  cost ;
Sybercroft,  in  the  same  county,  to  find  one  man  with  bow
and  arrows,  also  for  forty  days  at  his  own  cost.^  In  other
cases  the  service  of  spearmen  and  men  with  axes  is  stipu-
lated.* Interesting  entries  refer  to  sergeanties  by  the

'  Philip  Harang  tenet  medietatem  de  Langetun  •  .  .  pro  di.  f.  m. —
Rogerus  de  Novant  tenet  aliam  medietatem  de  Langetun  pro
di.  f.  m.*

^  Small  Mortain  fees  in  Staffordshire,  Dd.  249  d:  (Levehale)
'  Robertas  de  Statford  iii  hidas  et  Briend  et  Drogo  de  eo.*  Cf.  Testa  de
Nevill,  46  b :  '  (Leuerdehal)  Baronia  de  Stafford  de  feodo  de  Morteil
(sic)  Henricus  de  Verdon  et  participes  sui  unum  feodum ' ;  Dd.  349  a
(Titesoure),  cf.  T.  de  N.  46  b  (Titnesovere) ;  Dd  248  d  (Selte),
cf.  T.  de  N.  46  (Saut) ;  Dd.  248  d  (Waletone).  cf.  T.  de  N.  46  (Wale-
ton).  Magna  feoda  :  e.  g.  Testa  de  Nevill,  46  b :  '  Baronia  Rogeri  de
Somery  (De  Magnis  feodis),  Rogerus,  unum  feodum  in  Swmeford
&  Clent  &  in  Mere.'

'  Ely  Cartulary,  Tib.  B.  ii,

'  Kirkby*s  Inquest,  Notts.  Feudal  Aids,  iv.  9,  11.

*  Testa  de  Nevill,  55  b:  '  Nesta  de  Baskervill  tenet  per  seriantiam
et  debet  de  servicio  unum  servientem  cum  lancia  in  exercita  domini
Regis  in  Wallia.' Ibid.  318  a:  '  Lincolnshire.  Wapent.  de  Hawardow :


SECT.  I.  CH.  II] FEUDAL  SERVICE  6i

service  of  acting  as  constables  to  foot  soldiers — providing
enfeofled  officers  in  the  case  of  national  levies.^  The
numerous  tenures  by  castle-ward  have  also  to  be  mentioned
in  this  connexion.^  But  as  has  been  said  already,  the
sergeanties  are  by  no  means  so  uniformly  cut  to  one
pattern  as  the  knights'  fees.  The  term  of  service,  as  well  as
the  customary  obligations  and  the  size  of  the  estates,  varies
a  great  deal.  In  regard  to  the  first,  it  is  quite  common  to
find  short  terms  '  or  rather  vague  conventions,  in  which  the
service  is  bound  up  with  some  particular  kind  of  expedition,
the  defence  of  the  Welsh  Marches  or  of  the  sea  border  for
eicample.^

It  has  to  be  noticed  that  no  clear  line  can  be  drawn

between  military  sergeanties  and  services  which  seem  to

us  to  be  of  a  private  character. Hunters  and  foresters  are

constantly  mentioned  as  holding  estates  or  smaller  plots  by

the  service  of  assisting  the  lord  in  his  hunting  expeditions,

or  watching  over  his  forests,  parks,  and  warrens.* Riding <

sergeants,  accompanying  the  lord  or  bearing  his  errands

ondcr  certain  conditions,  are  also  of  common  occurrence,

and  must  have  formed  an  important  part  of  the  population

of  those  days.* Cooks,  chamberlains,  servants  of  different

eadem  Gracia  (de  Insula)  aliam  terram  suam  de  domino  Rege  in
capitc  pro  in  venire  unum  servicntem  in  Wales  ad  preceptum  domini
Regis  cum  i  hache  de  vcteri  feoffamento.*

*  Testa  de  Nevill,  53  b:  '  Rogerus  de  la  More  tenet  villam  de  Mora
per  seriantiam  scilicet  quod  debet  esse  constabularius  peditum  in
cxerdtu  domini  Regis  in  Wallia.* Cf.  ibid.  58  a.

'  Testa  de  NcvilT,  58  b  :  *  Seriantia  Rogeri  filii  Ade  de  Leytun  pro
qoa  debuit  commorari  in  castro  de  Salop'  tempore  guerre  per  xv  dies
cum  ana  balista  ad  custum  proprium.*

'  Teita  de  Nevill,  52  b :  *  Henricus  de  Auditheleg  tenet  infra
pndictum  manerium  (Novum  Castrum)  villatas  de  Tunstal  etc.  per
Knantiam  seruientis  peditis  cum  arcu  et  sagittis  infra  predictum
cutnun  per  viii  dies  tempore  guerre  ad  custum  proprium.'

*  Testa  de  Nevill,  56a :  *  Robertus  de  Girras  tenet  Burcton  mcm-
^*nim  manerii  de  Clavcrleg  de  dono  Henrici  Regis  patris  domini  Re^is
lohaonis  per  servicium  inveniendi  unum  servientem  peditem  in  exercitu
WalTquod  aolct  rcdderc  xxxii  sol.— Wrenoc  filius  Mcurici  tenet  viii
^^  terre  de  ballia  domini  Regis  Johannis  per  x  1.  in  escambio  de
^itmton  quod  Fulco  filius  Warini  tenet  et  debet  esse  de  servicio
*'l«timarius  "  inter  Angliam  et  Walliam/

'  Kirkby's  Inquest,  Northampton Feudal  Aids,  iv. i  (Pistesle) ;
Testa  de  Nevill,  52  b  (Kenefar,  &c.).
'  Testa  de  Nevill,  52  b,  55  b.


l/


62  MILITARY ORGANIZATION [essay

kinds,  appear  also  enfeoBed  of  plots  of  land.^  I  lay  stress
on  the  fact  because  it  discloses  one  of  the  roots  of  the  feuda
system — personal  service,  of  which  the  military  foUowinf
is  only  one  species.

As  to  the  size  of  sei^eanties,  they  range  from  greai
manors  held  by  some  grand  sergeanty — as  that  of  som<
officer  2— to  minute  holdings  of  a  fraction  of  the  hide.'  Thi
^^-services  required  were  so  varied  that  there  could  be  n<
fixed  or  even  typical  estimate  for  feoffments.  It  may  b<
noted  that  there  was  a  kind  of  standard  for  the  squired
service  in  Normandy.  It  was  deemed  a  kind  of  militar]
tenure,  a  '  vavassorie ',  and  estimated  at  half  a  knight's  fee.^
But  although  similar  attempts  at  estimation  occur  ever}
now  and  then,  they  did  not  prevail  or  lead  to  the  establish*
ment  of  a  rule.*
Drengage.  One  important  variety  of  sergeanty  is  to  be  founc
in  a  tenure  which  often  occurs  in  northern  counties,  namel)
^  in  *  drengage  '.• It  is  distinguished  from  military  service

^  E.g.  F.  A.  ii.  p.  36  (1303)  :^*Henricus  coquus  tenet  dimidiun
feodum  parvum . . .  de  episcopo  Sarisberiense.'  Cf.  Testa  de  NeviU,  115a

'  Bracton's  Note  Book,  c.  1231 :  *  inuenit  inde  Dom.  Regi  aersa
Walliam  duos  homines  per  xv  dies  et  redeundo  inde  duos  homines  pe
XV  dies . . .  unde  dicit  c^uod  tenementum  illud  non  est  socagium  sec
tenetur  per  magnam  senanciam  . . .  Seriancia  ilia  non  est  parva  sicu
de  sagittis  et  sparvariis  et  huius  modi.'

'  E.g.  Testa  de  Nevill,  348a  (Lines.):  '  Waiterus  de  Bauent  tene
ii  Covatas  in  Winceby  per  servicium  falconarie.'  Cf.  348  b,  *  De  ser-
iantiis  arentatis '  (Lines.) ;  ibid.  114  b,'  Seriantiae  arentattt  *  (Oxon.  e
Berks.).'

*  Robert  de  Torigni,  Chronicles  of  Reign  of  Stephen,  iv.  349  (<  Vavas<
sores  cum  scuto  et  lancea ').

'^  It  seems  that  in  some  counties  the  service  of  a  knight  in  lighi
armour,  instead  of  being  reckoned  as  a  Mortain  fee,  was  regarded  as
sergeanty,  and  probably  appreciated  at  half  the  service  of  an  ordinar)
knight.  Testa  de  Nevill,  55b  (Shropshire):  'Johannes  filius  Robert
de  Estleg  tenet  Estleg  antiquitus  ex  conquestu  et  debet  de  servick
unum  servientem  equitem  cum  uno  hauber^llo  ad  eundum  cuts
domino  Rege  quando  vadit  in  exercitu  in  Walha.' Cf.  ibid.  54  a.

*  Compotus  of  1346,  Northumberland,  Feudal  Aids,  iv.  61.  Lib.
Rub.  572  (Lancashire) :  '  De  hiis  qui  tenent  Theyna^um  et  Draasa-
gium.  Ricardus  de  Molineus,  i  carucatam  et  dimidiam  in  ezcamSk
de  Toxtale  per  xxs.* ;  573,  *  Drangagium,  Homines  de  Hameltonei  Hi
carucatas  per  xxiiii  s.  Rogenis  de  Monte  Begonis,  xiii  bovatas  h
Caskenemore  per  ix  s.  et  ii  d.  ob.  et  dimidium  iudicem.  Willeimas  dc
Neville,  xiii  bovatas  ibidem  per  xs.  et  ixd.  ob.  et  dimidium  iu<
dicem/


SECT.  I.  CH.  11] FEUDAL  SERVICE  63

by  its  peculiar  incidents.^  We  get  its  most  detailed  de-
acription  in  the  Durham  Boldon  Book,  where  it  appears
as  a  kiiHl  of  general  service,  including  attendance  on  the
lord  in  his  hunting,  overseers  duties  in  r^ard  to  less
fiivoured  classes  of  the  population,  military  help  in  case
of  need  without  a  distinct  formulation  of  military  service.
The  obligation  of  utware  is  sometimes  mentioned  among
the  duties  of  the  Durham  drengs,  and  under  it  have  to  be
included  all  the  'foreign'  duties  of  a  tenant — payment  of
taxes  to  the  king,  as  well  as  the  acquitting  of  tenements
from  the  burden  of  the  king  s  expedition.^  As  in  many
saniilar  cases,  carriage  duties,  boon-works,  and  sometimes
'boon-erth'  or  'gafolerth',  were  superadded  to  these
•  squire's  services '  of  the  dreng,  which  do  not,  however,
include  week-work.^

The  tenure  goes  back  certainly  to  the  times  before  the
Conquest.  It  is  mentioned  once  or  twice  in  accounts
of  the  proceedings  which  took  place  directly  after  the
Norman  invasion,  as  an  institution  characteristic  of  the
old  English  arrangement,  and  gradually  displaced  by
Norman  military  tenure.  I  need  hardly  recall  to  the  mind
of  my  readers  the  well-known  account  of  the  conversion
of  the  drengs  of  the  see  of  Canterbury  into  knights  by
Archbishop  Lanfranc,^  or  the  altercation  about  the  status
of  a  dreng.*

Indeed,  the  origin  of  the  class  and  of  the  term  may  be
safely  sought  in  the  Danish  expression  drengs  corresponding
to  the  Latin  puer  and  possibly  to  the  frequently  occurring
O.E.  cild. All  these  names  may  well  be  applied  to  sergeants,

'  Boldon  Book,  Lapsley  in  the  Durham  Victoria  County  History.
Cf.  Maitland  in  £.  H.  R.  v.  625  fT.

'  Ozenhale  :  '  W  . . .  fecit  utware  quando  positum  fuerit  in  episco-
patQ*  (Boldon  Book,  p.  583  a) :  the  expression  is  more  suited  to  taxa-
tion than  to  military  service,  but  it  must  have  included  both.  Cf.
Growth  of  the  Manor,  284,  and  Dr.  Liebermann's  Glossary  to  Anglo-
Saxon  Laws,  V. '  utware.*

*  Mr.  Lapsley  is  hardly  right  in  saying  that  week-work  was
imposed  on  the  drengs  of  all  the  manors  but  one.  V.  C.  H.
L  286.

*  Stttbbs,  Const  Hist.,  i.  284 ;  Elton,  Tenures  of  Kent.

*  Bigelow,  Placita  Anglo- Normannica,  p.  2.


64  MILITARY  ORGANIZATION [ESSAY  1

personal  dependants,  who  sometimes  received  an  outfit  in
the  way  of  an  estate.^

The  continuous  existence  of  drengage  in  the  north  is  an
interesting  feature,  not  only  in  itself,  but  also  because  il
shows  that  there  was  no  absolute  break  between  the  con*
ditions  preceding  and  those  following  the  Conquest.  Dren*
gage  is  a  Scandinavian  institution  bridging  over  the  intro-

j^duction  of  Norman  rule,  and  not  materially  altered  by  th<
influence  of  French  feudal  law.  There  is  a  famous  page  ol
Domesday  Book  treating  of  that  tenure  in  Lancashire  just
before  the  Conquest.^  We  hear  of  numerous  freemen  (*  liberi
homines ')  who  held  small  estates  termed  manors,  and  con<
centrated  around  the  great  royal  manors  of  Derby,  Newton
yWalintune,  Blackbume,  Lailand,  and  Salford. These  free

\y  men  have  to  attend  the  shiremoot,  the  hundred-moot,  anc

^  The  meaning  of '  fighting  man '  suggested  by  Bosworth  and  ToUei
for  the  term  dreng  is  certainly  a  derived  one.  The  passages  quotec
from  O.  £.  poetry  date  from  the  time  after  the  Danish  invasions.  Ye
this  use  of  the  word  is  characteristic  of  the  part  played  by  the«
sergeants,  who  may  aptly  be  compared  to  the  German,  Dtenstmdnnet
or  minisieriaUs, Lapsley,  in  Durham  County  History,  i.  290.

^  Dd.  i.  269  c,  d,  270a:  (Inter  Ripam  et  Mersham)  *  Maneriun
de  Derbei  ...  Duo  taini  tenebant  vi  bouatas  terrae  pro  ii  maneriis  11
Holand. . . .  £x  his  (supra  dictis  hidis)  iii  hidae  erant  libere  quamn
censum  perdonauit  (rex  £.)  teinis  qui  eas  tenebant.  Istae  reddeban
iiiil.  et  xiiiis.  et  viii  denarios.  Omnes  isti  taini  habuenint  con
suetudinem  reddere  ii  oras  denariorum  de  unaquaque  carucata  terrBi
et  faciebant  per  consuetudinem  domos  regis  et  quae  ibi  pertineban
sicut  uillani  et  piscarias  et  in  silua  haias  et  stabilituras,  et  qui  ad  haei
non  ibat  quando  debebat  ii  soiidis  emendabat  et  postea  ad  oput
ueniebat  et  operabatur  donee  perfectum  erat.  Unusquisque  eorun
uno  die  in  Augusto  mittebat  messores  suos  secare  segetes  regis.  S
non  per  ii  solidos  emendabat. ...  In  Neweton  .  .  .  aliam  terram  x\
homines  quos  drench s  uocabant  pro  xv  maneriis  tenebant,  sed  huiui
manerii  bereuuich  erant  et  inter  omnes  xxx  s.  reddebant.  Haius  Hon*
dredi  (Neweton)  homines  liberi  preter  duos  erant  in  eadem  consuetudini
qua  homines  Derberiae  et  plus  illis  ii  diebus  in  Augusto  metebant  ir
culturis  Regis,  llli  duo  habebant  v  carucatas  terrae  et  forisfacturan
sanguinis  et  feminae  uiolentiam  passae  et  pasnagium  suorum  hominum
Alias  habebat  rex  .  .  .  Modo  sunt  ibi  vi  drenghs. . . .  Rex  £.  tenuii
Walintune  ...  Ad  ipsum  manerium  pertinebant  xxxiiii  drenffh  el
totidem  maneria  habebant  .  .  .  Rex  £.  tenuit  Lailand  .  .  .  Ad  ho(
manerium  pertinebant  xii  carucatac  terrae  quas  tenebant  xii  hominei
liberi  pro  totidem  Maneriis  .  .  .  Homines  huius  manerii  de  Salford  noi
operabantur  per  consuetudinem  ad  aulani  regis  neaue  metebant  a
Augusto— tantummodo  i  haiam  in  silua  faciebant  ct  haoebant  sangutnl)
forisfacturam  et  feminae  passae  uiolentiam.  De  aliis  consuetudmibu!
alionim  superiorum  maneriorum  erant  consortes.'


SECT.  I.  CH.  II] FEUDAL  SERVICE  65

other  placita  which  must  have  been  the  moots  of  the  afore-
said great  manors.

Besides  the  generic  expression  Miberi  homines',  these
tenants  are  described  in  the  case  of  Derby  and  Salford
as  thanes,  in  that  of  Walintune  and  Newton  as  drengs,
in  that  of  Lailand  as  homines^  but  there  was  very  little
difference  in  the  condition  of  all  these  subdivisions  of  the
class.  They  were  all  charged  for  the  farm  of  the  king,  and
most  had  to  build  houses  for  the  king  on  his  progresses,
'  as  if  they  were  villains ',  to  raise  hedges  and  warrens,  to
send  their  men  to  help  in  the  reaping  the  king's  corn.  The
relief  in  case  of  succeeding  to  one's  father  was  40^.,  and
it  was  intended  to  save  the  land  and  their  chattels  from
confiscation.  This  characteristic  condition  shows  that  the
possession  both  of  the  land  and  of  the  movable^  of  these
men  was  thought  to  be  derived  from  the  king's  grant.  ^
This  is  further  illustrated  by  the  fact  that  thesct^enants  had
to  pay  401.  if  they  wanted  to  *  recede '  fro/i  the  king's
land.  The  drengs  and  thanes  of  Lancashire  were  em-
fdiatically  the  king's  men.  There  is  no  peculiarly  military
trait  about  their  tenure :  they  are  merely  free  servants
of  the  king  endowed  with  lands.  But  we  have  to  remember
that  the'  position  of  such  a  free  servant,  if  endowed  with
land,  in  regard  to  the  duty  of  serving  in  the  host  was  a
particular  one.  Although  liable  to  be  called  up  to  Xh^fyrd^
like  any  other  person,  his  responsibility  for  not  appearing
was  quite  different ;  he  was  liable  to  lose  his  land,  where
a  common  freeman  would  simply  incur  a  fine.^  In  a
frontier  district  like  Lancashire  this  meant  a  great  deal,
and  although  rents  and  agricultural  services  were  required
from  the  manors  in  time  of  peace,  in  case  of  a  local  ex-
pedition they  had  to  provide  soldiers.  It  is  very  important
to  know  that  the  fees  of  the  sergeants  or  ministers  were
still  quite  common  in  the  north  all  through  the  feudal
period.  In  the  Domesday  entries  the  arrangements  appear
almost  entirely  as  a  thing  of  the  past,  although  of  a  very

*  '  Gesidcund  man  landagende  .  .  .dolie  })es  landes.' Ine,  51.

\ IXOCBACOFF  F


66  MILITARY  ORGANIZATION [ESS

recent past  ^  ; but  later  documents  show  thans^e
drengage  to  be  still  flourishing  in  Lancashire,  Cumber]
Westmoreland,  Northumberland,  and  Durham. The
that  there  is  an  appreciable  difference  between  the  th
and  drengs^  of  the  district  described in Domesda
a  noteworthy  one ;  the  two  designations  differ  in  this  <
at  any  rate,  not  in  regard  to  substance  but  in  their  et
graphical  origin  ;  thanes  are  of  English  origin,  dreng
^Scandinavian,  but  in  both  cases  we  have  to  do  with
^^^rmed  sergeants  of  the  king  who  held  land  endown
from  him. The  size  of  their  holdings,  or  manors  as
are  termed,  is  not  very  large. In  some  cases  it  is  equ
ywith  a  hide,  in  others  it  is  somewhat  larger,  in  others  a
a  good  deal  less ;  ^  but  we  must  remember  that  the
in  these  parts  was  reckoned  at  6  carucates  of  land,
the  tenants  in  question  cannot  be  considered  as  anyt
but  small  squires,  burdened  with  agricultural  and  pen
services  of  a  rather  humble  kind. They  must  have
sessed  horses,  but  their  equipment  could  not  have  been
elaborate. When  the  time  comes  to  instal  knights
appear  in  much  less  numbers.
Thanes  and  ] 3.  The  case  of  the  drengs  makes  one  ask  whether  a  |
sergeantics.  ^^LTiy  of  the  so-callcd  sergeanties  of  feudal  times  do
Lscend  to  similar  ministerial  tenures  of  the  age  befon
lonquest. There  is  a  curious  report  in  Bracton's  \
look  of  a  litigation  in  regard  to  a  fee  dependent  01
Abbess of  Barking.* The  court  had  some troubl

^  Milites  of  Roger  of  Poitou  have  taken  their  place  as  lords  <
dependent  manors,  and  the  original  settlement  was  evidendy
disturbed,  as  very  small  numbers  of  cultivators  appear,  insteaa  <
former  considerable  population.

■  The  expression  dreng  may  possibly  have  been  applied  to  \
of  a  rather  lower  position  than  that  sometimes  held  by  free  ser
In  the  details  of  the  description  of  Derby  thane  alternates  with  roi
but  the  general  position  of  the  thanes  of  Derby  and  the  drei
Newton  is  practically  identical.

'  Dd.  i.  269  e :  ^  Tres  taini  tenebant  Alretune  pro  iii  maneri
dimidia  hida  .  .  .  Quattuor  radmans  tenebant  Cildeuuelle  p
maneriis. Ibi  dimidia  hida,  etc'

*  Bracton*s  Note  Book,  758  :  *  Agnes  que  fuit  uxor  Henrici  de  ]
ham  petit  uersus  Abbatissam  de  Berkinge  quod  reddat  ei  cust*
terre  ipsius  Henrici  de  Daleham  et  in  Berkinge  que  ad  ipsam  p<


SECT.  I.  CH.  II] FEUDAL  SERVICE  67

classifying  the  tenure ;  it  was  not,  strictly  speaking,  a
military  tenure,  and  yet  it  had  certain  features  of  such
a  one.  It  was  said  to  be  traceable  in  the  customary  incidents
to  about  seventy  years  before  the  Conquest  The  chief
incident  was  the  service  of  a  riding  attendant  of  the
Abbess.  Yet  it  was  considered  to  be  military  in  essence,
and  the  corresponding  incidents  were  held  to  follow  from  it.
This  example  is  well  fitted  to  impress  on  our  mind  the
view  that  the  staff  of  ministers  and  servants  endowed  with
land  was  a  social  feature  of  the  Anglo-Saxon  as  well  as
of  the  feudal  epoch,  and  that  the  customary  status  of
the  latter  has  many  of  its  roots  in  preconquestual  con-
ditions. If  we  turn  to  Domesday  in  our  search  of  the
sergeants  we  find  a  great  variety  of  groups  corresponding
to  this  general  designation.  To  begin  with,  there  are  some
counties  where  a  separate  rubric  is  made  for  the  estates

eo  quod  predictos  Henricus  tenuit  in  soccagio  predictam  terrain,  et
onde  dicit  quod  predictus  Henricus  ita  tenuit  auondam  terram  suam
de  nredicta  Abbatissa  in  Dakeham,  scilicet,  quod  reddidit  ei  per  annum
ad  re^mn,  etc,  vi  sol.  et  vi  den.  et  solet  itinerare  cum  eadem  Abbatissa
ad  maneria  sua  in  propria  persona  uel  mittere  cum  ea  quendam
hominem  Franciscum  vel  Anglicum,  dum  tamen  non  esset  uillanus
ipskis  Abbatisse.  .  . .  Et  Abbatissa  uenit  et  defendit  uim  et  iniuriam  et
dicit  quod  ipse  tenuit  de  ea  per  seruicium  militare,  ita  scil.  quod  ante
fondationem  Abbacie  de  Berking  septinginta  annis  preteritis  quamdiu
manerium  illud  fuit  in  manu  Dom.  Regis  et  aliorum  dominorum  feodi
Solent  tenentes  de  eodem  manerio  bene  circiter  triginta  qui  tenent
tam  libere  sicut  idem  Henricus  et  solent  ire  in  exercitum  cum  dominis
sots  dam  tamen  summonicionem  haberent  sero,  et  eciam  post  funda-
cionem  Abbacie  donee  manerium  illud  datum  fuit  in  liberam  elemo-
sinam,  et  postea  seruicium  tale  fecerunt  Abbatisse  quod  semper  solent
ire  cum  Abbatissis  uel  cum  senescallis  suis  quo  ipse  uoluerunt  ad
maneria  sua  et  alibi  dum  tamen  sero  haberent  summonicionem,  et
dicit  quod  sine  reddat  plus  uel  minus  de  redditu  semper  dant  pro
releuio  et  nomine  releuii  c  sol.  de  tenementis  suis  post  mortem
decedencium.  Dicit  eciam  quod  uxores  hominum  tenencium  de
eodem  manerio  recuperant  et  habent  nomine  dotis  semper  terciam
pftrtem  sicut  de  libero  feodo  et  non  medietatem  sicut  de  soccagio  . .  .
Didt  edam  (Agnes)  quod  terra  et  tenementum  ipsius  Henrici  non  debet
c  soL  de  releuio  nee  aliquid  forinsecum  seruicium,  nisi  tantum  ad
smnmam  annui  redditus,  et  quod  predictum  tenementum  nullum  debet
aliiid  releuium,et  quod  predictus  Henricus  non  fuit  in  custodia  Ricardi  de
Stapelfordia  per  ipsam  Abbadssam  set  per  ipsum  Willelmum  de  Ayete,
ncc  ^od  equitare  debeat  extra  maneria  uel  mittere  Franciscum  uel
Angiicam  cum  uno  equo  precii  dim.  marce  secundum  quod  predictum
est  nisi  infra  maneria  ipsius  Abbatisse.  £t  inde  ponit  se  super  patriam.
Et  Abbatissa  petit  indicium  si  debeat  ei  respondere  de  tali  seisina.*

F  2


68  MILITARY  ORGANIZATION [essay

of  the  kings  sergeants.  Such  is  Wiltshire,^  for  instano
where  these  estates  are  carefully  distinguished  from  thos
of  thanes.  On  reading  through  the  entries  we  find  that  tl
people  mentioned  as  tenants  are  actual  officers  of  tl
king*s  court,  household,  and  military  retinue — a  porte
several  chamberlains,  an  overseer  of  granaries  an  arlk
Usiarius.  The  men  who  held  the  lands  T.  R.  E.  are  name
thanes  or  known  as  such.^  The  estates  described  ai
mostly  small,  of  i,  i^,  2  hides,  although,  exceptional!;
larger  ones  occur,  for  example,  Thomwell,  which  paid  gel
for  ^\  hides  T.  R.  E.  In  Oxfordshire  the  lands  of  Richai
Kngaym  and  other  officers  {ministri)  of  the  king  also  for
a  separate  rubric.^  Here  we  find  a  treasurer  (arcartus)  an
a  goldsmith  {aurifaber)  mentioned  expressly,  and  there  ca
be  no  doubt  that  many  of  the  tenants  were  officers  of  tl
civil  or  military  household,  while  their  Anglo-Saxon  pn
decessors  may  have  been  either  in  the  same  position,  (
thanes,  that  is,  as  far  as  we  can  make  out  at  present,  person;
followers  of  the  king  with  no  special  duties  assignc
to  them.

The  close  connexion  between  sergeanties  and  the  offic
of  thanes  may  be  further  illustrated  by  an  entry  from  th
Kxon  Domesday,  where  a  porter  (Will.  Hostiarius)  is  sail
to  hold  thaneland  in  Devonshire.^  I  need  hardly  say  tha
similar  household  offices  are  often  mentioned  singly,  withou
being  ranged  under  a  general  rubric.^

^  Dd.  i.  74  c :  (Wilts.)  '  Terra  seruientium  regis  .  •  .  Ricardtt
Sturmid  tenet  i  hidam  et  unam  uirgatam  terrae  et  dimidiam  in  Iwis
Terra  est  iii  car.  In  dominio  est  una  car.  et  iiii  semi  et  iii  uillani  et  ii;
coscei  cum  ii  car.'  etc.

*  Ibid.  74  d:  'Albericus  Camerarius  tenet  DeureL  Duo  tail
tenuerunt  T.R.E.— Gundinus  granetarius  tenet  Witediue  . . .  etc'

*  Dd.  i.  i6oc,  d:  (Oxfordshire)  'Terra  Ricardi  et  aliorum  mini
storum  Regis.'

^  Dd.  iv.  439 :  '  Terra  seruientium  Regis  in  Deuenesira.  WiUelma
hostiarius  habet  i  mansionem  quae  uocatur  Tauelanda  {sic)  quam  tenui
Ciodricus  ea  die  qua  rex  £.  fuit  uiuus  et  mortuus  et  reddidit  geldin
pro  i  uirga,  banc  possunt  arare  iii  carrucae  . . .  Hec  mansio  reddid
dominice  mansioni  regis  quod  uocatur  Tauetona  de  consuetudine  ai
i  bovem  aut  xxx  denarios  per  annum.'  Cf.  Dd.  i.  6ib:  (Beiia
Chenetberie  Hd.)

^  Cf.  Dd.  i.  162  d : (Gloucs.)  '  In  eodem  Hundredo  (Dudestai


SECT.  I.  CH.  il] FEUDAL  SERVICE  69

4*  By  the  side  of  household  officers  appears  the  numerous  Rad-
group  entered  in  Domesday  as  radchenestriy  or  radmen.  °  ^  ^*
They  are  usually  kept  quite  distinct  from  the  rustics  within
the  manon^ The  size  of  these  holdings  is  not  large,  one
hide  or  two,  with  some  few  exceptions.^ They  carry  on
the  agricultural  work  on  their  plots  with  the  help  of  the
members  of  their  households  and  some  labourers  or  slaves  ;
the  number  of  agricultural  holdings  dependent  on  them
is  very  small  when  compared  with  the  extent  of  their  own
husbandry.^ As  agricultural  tenants  they  are  sometimes
required  to  perform  work  on  the  estates  of  their  lords,* ^
and  yet  they  are  emphatically  described  as  freemen. At
the  same  time  they  do  not  possess  full  power  to  dispose
of  their  land,  and  are  indissolubly  attached  to  the  manor

iuxta  ciaitatem  habuit  Vluuard  dimidiam  hidam  de  rege  £.  quietam
et  ibi  ii  car.  et  iiii  semi. Hanc  dedit  W.  comes  cuidam  coquo  suo.*

'  Dd.  i.  59  a  (Gosei)  ;  172  b  (Chideminstre) ;  2c;8a:  (Shropshire)
'Sibetane.  Suen  tenuit  et  liber  homo  fuit.  Ibi  li  hidae  geldantes.
Terra  est  iii  car.  In  dominio  est  una  et  iiii  servi  et  ii  radmans  cum
i  car.  Ibi  silua  c  porcis  incrassandum,'  etc.  Less  distinct  are  Dd.  i.
166  c  (Horselei;  Biselege) ;  265  a  (Estone;  Pichetone ;  Hotone ;
Botestoch,  etc.).

*  Dd.  i.  1 80  c:  (Hereford)  *  Feccheham  .  .  .  unus  radnian  tenet
dknidiam  hidam  et  li  partes  dimidiae  hidae  et  unam  croftam  et  habet
i  camcam.'

■  Dd.  i.  163  b :  (Tewkesbury,  Gloucs.)  *  In  Teodechesberie  . . .  ix
Radchenistres  habentes  xxvi  car.  et  v.  coliberti,  etc.  Hi  Radchenistres
axabant  et  herciabant  ad  curiam  domini.'  Cf.  burgenses,  ibid. '  reddentes
▼  solidos  et  iiii  denarios  et  seruientes  ad  curiam.'  163  c :  '  Ibi  (Teode-
kesberie)  iii  Radchenistres  T.R.E.  pertinebant.  Unus  eorum  tenebat
in  Estone  vi  hidas.  Modo  tenet  Girardus.  Alter  tenebat  in  Waltone
ill  hidas.  Modo  tenet  Radulfus.  Tercius  tenebat  in  Fitentone  ii
hidas.  Modo  tenet  Bemardus.  In  his  xi  hidis  sunt  x  carucae  in
dcnninio  et  iiii  uillani  et  i  bordarius  et  ix  semi  cum  una  caruca.'

^  Dd.  i.  166  b:  (Deerhurst,  Gloucs.)  '  Derheste.  Ibi  sunt  lix  hidae.
In  capite  M.  erant  T.R.E.  v  hidae  ...  Ad  hoc  M.  pertinent  hae
Beiewicae  Herdennic  (v  hid.),  Bortune  (viii  hid.),  Teodeham  (vii.  hid.),
Sudtone  (v.  hid.).  Inter  totum  xxv  hidae  .  .  .  De  terra  huius  M.  tene-
bant  Radcbenestres  idest  liberi  homines  T.  R.  E.  qui  omnes  ad  opus
domini  arabant  et  herciabant  et  falcabant  et  metebant.  Ad  Almunde-
stan  Brictric  i  hidam  ...  Ad  Telinge  Godric  ii  hidas.  Ad  Wicfeld
Eduoi  i  hidam.  Ad  Toteham  Eduui  i  hidam  ...  Ad  Botingtune  ii
hidae.  Ad  Bortune  ii  hidae.  Has  tenuit  Wluui.  Ad  Chinemertune
dimidiam  hidam.  Leuuinus  tenuit. ...  Ad  Giningtune  Eluui  i  hidam
et  imam  airgatam.  Ad  Tereige  Leuuinus  dimidiam  hidam.  Ad
Trinleie  Edricus  ii  uirgatas  et  dimidiam,  etc.  ...  In  his  terris  sunt  in
dominio  xi  carucae  et  dimidia  et  xiiii  uillani  et  xxvii  bordarii  cum  vii
camcis. Ibi  xiiii  semi  et  xx  acrae  prati.'


^o  MILITARY  ORGANIZATION [essav

unless  they  are  separated  from  it  by  the  lord  himseli
Domesday  does  not  dwell  specially  on  the  riding  service
but  there  are  indirect  allusions  to  these  ^  and  the  radm<
frequently  mentioned  in  the  survey  of  Worcestershire  •  a
evidently  of  the  same  kind  as  the  seigeants  describ<
in  Wulfstan*s  well-known  letter  as  subjected  to  the  L
equitandi,^  These  riding  sergeants,  frequently  enten
under  the  distinctive  name  of  radknights,  or  radmen,
the  western  counties,  were  hardly  confined  to  these,  ar
may  have  also  occurred  in  the  east^  where  they  we
probably  concealed  under  the  more  general  designation
freemen  or  servientes.

It  seems  natural  to  explain  the  names  of  the  group  fro
the  O.  E.  rdd^  and  both  the  compound  radknight,  and  d
connexion  with  Oswald's  lex  equitandi,  and  the  prevalent
of  the  term  in  the  western  counties,  make  it  most  probab
that  we  can  rest  content  with  the  usual  explanation  of  tl
terms  in  the  sense  of  riding  sergeants.* Another  explan:

^  Dd.  i.  38  a:  (Mapulderham,  Hakts)  *  Malpedresham.  T.  R«
pro  XX  hides,  modo  pro  xiii .  . .  Duo  rachenistre  tenuenint  nee  alicu
recederc  potuerunt*  Ibid.  164  d :  (Gloucs.)  '  Huesberie  .  .  .  Ad  1
pertinent  vi  Radchenistres  habentes  viii  hidas  et  viii  canicas.  Ni
poterant  a  M.  separari.'  Ibid.  179  c :  (Hereford) '  Maurdine . . .  Terra
W.  filii  Normanni  tenuenint  iii  Radchenistres  nee  poterant  de  hoc  1
separari.'  i8oc  :  (Hereford)  '  Merlie  . . .  Ipse  comes  dedit  Radul
de  bemai  ii  radmans  et  misit  eos  extra  hoc  M.  cum  terra  quam  ten
bant. Hi  habent  ii  carucas.'

*  Dd.  i.  1 73  b  (Nortune).  The  riding  servant  of  the  sheriff  of  Glo
cestershire,  bound  to  serve  all  through  England,  must  have  been  a  ra*
man,  Dd.  i.  162  d  (In  Cirecestre).

'  Dd.  i.  173  b:  (Worcs.  Blochelei)  '  iiii  radmans  habentes  vi  hida
173c:  (Norwiche  cum  uno  niembro  Tidbertun)  *\  radman  habei
iii  uirgatas.'  Cf.  174  b  (Aluieuecherche).  Cf.  the  radknights  •
Leofminster  (Herefordshire),  Dd.  i.  180  a.

^  C.  D.  1287 :  '  Quare  quo  modo  fidos  mihi  subditos.telluribus  qw
mihi  traditae  sunt  potestati  per  spatium  temporis  trium  hominui
id  est  duorum  post  se  haeredum,  condonarem,  placuit  .  • .  ut  fratribi
meis  successonbus,  scilicet  episcopis,  per  cyrographi  cautionem  aperti'
enuclearem  . . .  Hoc  pacto  eis  terras  sanctae  ecclesiae  sub  me  tene
concessi :  hoc  est  ut  omnis  equitandi  lex  ab  eis  impleatur  quae  1
equites  pertinet  ;  et  ut  pleniter  persoluant  omnia  quae  ad  ius  ipsii
aecclesiae  iuste  competunt,  scilicet  ea  quaeAnglice  dicuntur  ciricsoec
et  toll  id  est  theloneum  et  tace,  id  est  swinsceade,  et  caetera  iu
aecclesiae.'

^  Villainage  in  England,  320,  323,  407.  Maitland,  Domesday  ai
Beyond,  57,  305.


SECT.  I.  CH.ll] FEUDAL  SERVICE  71

tion  from  the  O.N.  rddmadr^  a  steward,  an  overseer,
literally  a  ruler,  has  been  suggested,^  but  there  does  not
seem  to  be  much  ground  for  a  Scandinavian  derivation
in  the  particular  district  where  they  are  mostly  met  with ;
and,  besides,  the  sug^sted  Scandinavian  etymology  would
hardly  fit  the  case  of  the  *  radknights '.

An  interesting  question  arises  in  regard  to  their  military
duties.  Domesday  does  not  mention  them,  as  it  generally
omits  to  speak  of  the  ordinary  military  obligations.  It
gives  more  information  about  their  rents  and  agricultural
services.  Evidently  the  tenure  was  primarily  meant  to  1/
support  officers,  bailiffs,  and  messengers,  who  had  to  keep  up
the  intercourse  between  the  scattered  parts  of  a  great  lord's
possessions.

But  it  included  personal  attendance  on  horseback,  and
through  the  necessary  keeping  up  of  horses  and  of  men
armed  for  travelling  in  that  unquiet  period  it  presented  the
best  formation  for  the  discharge  of  the  military  duties
incumbent  on  the  lord's  estate.  There  is  no  direct  proof
of  specific  military  service  imposed  on  the  radmen,  but
it  is  characteristic  that  the  subsequent  sergeanties  naturally
fit  into  the  place  formerly  occupied  by  radknights  and
similar  servientes?  In  laying  stress  on  this  connexion,  we
must  not  foi^et  that  the  strict  formulation  of  the  military
duties  belongs  in  any  case  to  the  feudal  period,  and  that
the  utmost  that  can  be  said  about  the  preceding  age  is  that
a  class  of  manorial  officers  had  already  formed  itself,  which
was  supported  by  land  endowments  and  presented  a  con-
venient material  for  the  discharge  of  the  military  obligations
of  great  estates,  in  regard  to  the  lord  as  well  as  to  the
king.*

*  A.  Bugge,  Vikingeme,  ii.  320.

*  Robert  dc  Torigny  (Chronicles  of  Stephen,  Henry  II,  and
Richard  I),  iv.  349.  In  Shropshire  we  find  in  the  feudal  period
*  muntatores ',  riding  sergeants  in  a  similar  position  to  that  of  the
earlier  radknights.  E.g.  Lib.  Rub.  272.  On  the  estates^  of  St.  feter  '
of  Gloucester  we  hear  of  a  *  servitium  esquieriae  *  in  ^  same  sense.
CarL  of  St.  Peter  (Rolls  Series),  ii.  208,  209.

'  Cf.  the  treatment  of  this  question  by  Maitland,  Domesday  and
Beyond,  and  Round,  Victoria  History  of  Worcestershire,  i.  250.


72


MILITARY  ORGANIZATION [essay  i


Geneats.


Franci-
^cnae.


The  direct  antecedent  of  the  group  of  riding  sergeants
has  to  be  sought,  it  seems,  within  the  earlier  Anglo-Saxon
evidence  in  the  class  of  so-caModgeneais,  the  fellows  and  fol-
lowers of  a  landed  proprietor.  Its  obligations  are  described
at  some  length  in  one  of  the  first  sections  of  the  Rectitudities
Singularum  Personarum}  The  duties  a  geneat  has  to
perform  are  very  varied,  and  agricultural  work  is  expressly
mentioned  among  them,  as  well  as  the  payment  of  rent
in  money  and  in  kind,  like  that  to  which  the  radknights  were
subject.  But  the  most  characteristic  service  of  the  class  is
to  ride  errands  and  to  drive  loads.^  The  geneats  were  riding
rbailiffs  and  officers  before  all,  and  when  we  reflect  on  the
agrarian  constitution  of  those  days  we  shall  not  wonder
at  the  importance  of  this  class.  In  this  age  of  natural
economy  its  emoluments  were  apt  to  take  the  shape  of
an  assignation  of  land,  and  the  geneat  mostly  became  a
tenant.  On  the  other  hand,  his  service  was  of  especial
value  at  a  time  when  the  intercourse  between  diflferent
places  was  so  difficult  to  maintain^  on  account  of  bad  roads,
long  distances,  and  dangers  attending  travelling.

5.  More  directly  connected  with  military  callings  were
evidently  the  Frenchmen  {Francigenae)  frequently  spoken
of  in  Domesday.^ They  occur  mostly  in  cases  when  small


^  Rectitudines  Singularum  Personarum,  Liebermann,  i.  445 :  (Gene*
ates  riht.)  '  Geneatriht  is  mistlic  be  %am  ^  on  lande  staent.  On
sumon  he  sceal  landgafol  syllan  and  gaers-swyn  on  geare  and
ridan  and  auerian  and  lade  laedan,  wyrcan  and  hlaford  feormian
and  ripan  and  mawan,  deorhege  heawan  and  saste  haldan  .  bytlian .
and  burh  hegegian  nige  faran  to  tune  feccan,  cyricsceat  syllan  and
«elmes  feoh,  hcafodwearde  healdan  and  horswearde,  serendian  fft
swa  nyr  swa  hwyder  swa  him  mon  totaec^^*

'  Cart.  Sax.  no.  928 :  '  (Consuetudines  de  Tidenham) . . .  Of  dyddan
hamme  gebyre¥  micel  weorcrsedaen.  Se  geneat  sceal  wyrcui  swa  on
lande  .  swa  of  lande  .  swa  hwe¥er  swa  him  man  byt .  and  ridan  .  and
auerian .  and  lade  laedan  .  drafe  drifan  .  and  fela  o¥ra  %inga  don.'  C£.
Thorpe,  Diplom.  142.

>  Dd.  i.  69  b:  (Wilts.)  <  Ecesatingetone.  T.R.E.  ^dabat  pro
vii  hidis.  Terra  est  iiii  car. . .  Ibi  xii  bordarii  et  vi  cotarii  et  ii  franci-
genae tenent  ii  hidas  et  unam  uii]gatam  tcrre  et  habent  ii  carucas  .  •  •
Modo  dominium  Edwardi  (Sarisber.)  vi  hb.  et  dim  .  Francigenae
xl  sol.'  173a:  (Worcs.)  'Abeleng  ...  vii  uillani  et  i  bordarius  et
i  francigena  cum  vi  carucis.*  241b:  (Birdingbury,  Warwick.)  '  Ber-
dingebcric  ...  Ibi  sunt  iii  francones  homines  cum  iiii  uillanis  et  lii


SECT.  I.  CH.  iij FEUDAL  SERVICE  73

tenants  are  mentioned,^  not  unnaturally,  as  the  bigger
French  tenants  are  mostly  entered  by  name.  One  might
expect  to  hear  of  them  more  often,  but  it  is  to  be  remem-
bered that  only  those  are  brought  to  our  notice  who
have  settled  down  as  tenants,^  while  a  large  number  must
have  remained  attached  to  the  households  of  the  king  and
of  great  lords,  and  have  got  their  maintenance  from  them.^
We  find  them  described  distinctly  as  *  servientes  *,  and
there  is  no  doubt  that  they  were  used  chiefly  as  a  military
retinue.  The  dangerous  position  of  the  French  lords
during  the  first  generations  after  the  Conquest  made  the


bordariis  habentes  iii  car. . . .  Ipsi  homines  francones  tenuerunt  libere
T.  R.  E.'  Cf.  241  d :  (Wormleigbton,  Warwick.)  *  In  Wimenestone  .  . .
XV  uiUani  et  iiii  bordarii  et  ii  franc'  inter  omnes  habent  vii  car.'  Cf.
Mersetone  (Marston)  242  a ;  264  b :  (Cheshire) '  Hurdingberie.  Comes
Edauinus  tenuit.  Ibi  v  hidae  geldantes  Terra  est  x  car.  In  dominie
est  una,  et  i  servus,  et  iii  uillani  et  iii  francigenae  et  unus  radman  cum
iiii  car.'  360  d :  (Lincolnshire)  Westbitham.  Ibid.  ii.  43  b :  (Essex)
*  Rageneiam  tenet  Suen  in  dominio  pro  uno  manerio  et  pro  v  hidis . . .
£>e  hoc  manerio  tenent  iiii  franci  ii  hidas  et  iiii  carucas  et  iiii  bordarios
et  nalet  be  sol.' Cf.  ii.  415  a  (Suffolk,  Cratafelda).

^  Dd.  L  3  c. :  (Gillingham,  Kent)  *  Gelingeham— De  hoc  manerio
tenet  quidam  francigena  terram  ad  i  carucam  et  ibi  habet  ii  bord. —
Quod  tenet  francigena  (ualet)  40  sol.'  In  the  corresponding  entries  of
adjoining  manors  milites  and  thanes  are  mentioned  with  larger  hold-
ings. Cf.  Dd.  L  135  c,  d  (villa  S.  Albani ;  Nortune) ;  138  c  (Here-
Ibrdingberie),  francigenae  by  the  side  of  villains.

•  Dd.  L  175a:  (Garstune ;  Piplintune,  &c.) ;  252  a:  (Shrewsbury)
'Haeccivitas  (Sciropesberie)  T.  R.  £.  geldabat  pro  c  hidis.  Dicunt
anglici  burgenses  de  Sciropesberie  multum  grave  sibi  esse  quod  ipsi  red-
dunt  toCiun  geldum  sicuti  reddebatur  T.  R.  E.  quamuis  castellum  comitis
occupauerit  Ii  masuras  et  1  aliae  masurae  sint  uastae  et  xliii  francigenae
burgenses  teneant  masuras  geldantes  T.R.E.  et  abbatiae  quam  facit  ibi
comes  dederit  ipse  xxxix  burgenses  olim  similiter  cum  aliis  geldantes.
Inter  totum  sunt  cc  masurae  vii  minus  ^uae  non  geldant.'  Inq.  Com.
Cant.  (Bertone.  Cants.)  *. .  .  Et  de  his  vii  hidis  tenet  Wido  de  Reimbud-
coort  iii  bidas  et  dimidiam  de  rege.  £t  Hunfridus  de  Ansleuilla  tenet
sob  eo  vi  car.  ibi  est  terra  ...  In  hac  terra  sunt  iii  milites  francigene.
Mane  terram  tenuerunt  xxiiii  sochemanni.'  Cf.  Dd.  i.  200  a  (Ber-
tone).

'  Dd.  i.  138  c:  (Ware,  Hertfordshire)  *  Waras.  xxiiii  hidas.  Terra
est  xxxviii  car.  In  dominio  xiii  hidae  et  ibi  sunt  iii  car.  ct  aliae  iii  pos-
stmt  esse.  Ibi  xxxviii  uillani  cum  presbytero  et  preposito  uillae  et  cum
iii  francigenis  et  ii  anglicis  hominibus  habent  xxvi  carucas  et  dimidiam
et  ibi  sunt  xxvii  bordarii  et  xii  cotarii  et  ix  serui.  Sub  francigenis
et  anglicis  sunt  xxxii  homines  inter  uillanos  et  bordarios.'  253  a :
(Shropshire)  *  Linteshelle,  x  hidae.  In  dominio  sunt  ii  car.  et  x  uillani
ct  V  bordarii  et  iii  francigenae  serttientes  cum  viii  carucis  inter
omnes.'


74  MILITARY  ORGANIZATION [essay  I

-keeping  of  such  foreign  domestic  soldiers  necessary.  Be*
sides  the  French,  Flemings  are  mentioned.  The  well-
known  story  of  Eustache  de  Boulogne's  adventures  and
mishaps  in  the  reign  of  Edward  the  Confessor,^  and  other
facts,  show  that  the  immigration  of  French  soldiers,  and
their  attempts  to  get  a  regular  footing  in  England,  began
before  the  Conquest ;  and  before  this  the  French,  Danes^and
other  Scandinavians  must  have  played  a  similar  part.
Without  attempting  to  follow  the  doings  of  these  advcn-
turers  in  detail,  it  is  important  for  us  to  notice  that  these
movements  of  immigration  led,  among  other  things,  to  the
formation  of  small  holdings,  corresponding,  not  to  the  later
knights*  fees,  but  to  sergcanties.'
Miiitn.  ^.  The  most  important  questions  in  regard  to  the  history

of  military  settlements  and  of  feudal  service  arise  in  oon*
nexion  with  the  tenure  of  the  knights,  the  military  tenure
par  excclleHcc.  Was  it  introduced  by  the  Conquest,  or  did
it  exist  already  before  the  Conquest  in  \Xs  main  outlines  ?
Was  the  equipment,  the  amount  of  service,  and  the  site
of  the  fees  more  or  less  prepared  by  Anglo-Saxon  cvoIih
tion  ?  Or  were  they  determined  by  the  influence  of  French
military  institutions?  Is  the  professional  military  claas
^o  be  traced  to  Anglo-Saxon  and  Danish  antecedents,  or
has  it  developed  out  of  a  conquering  minority  of  French
origin  ?  These  questions  have  been  debated  and  solved  in
different  ways,  and  we  have  to  make  up  our  mind  in  regard
to  their  most  likely  solution.

The  technical  terms  for  a  knight  and  a  knight's  fee  in
feudal  documents  are  milts  and  feaium  miliiis.  The
second  of  these  doen  not  actually  (jccur  in  records  of  the
Conqueror's  time,  but  the  history  of  the  fees  themselves
has  to  b<-  traced  to  it,  in  the  light  of  the  e\'idencc  about  the
ancient  fcofTments  of  William  the  Dastard. As  for  the  first


'  Del.  i.  3444:  ( Warwickihtrc)  '  K»lnnc  . .  .  Ibi  ftunt  ix  flsB<!
ct  XV  t  uilUni  cum  prcshytero  rt  &  bindar:!  habcntet  sii  Caracas.'

•  .s.it.  Chr.,  i'luininrr.  1.  1 73- 3.

'  l>(t.  I.  i^Kd  :  iWc^cun,  Hcrt  font  shire)  *  Westonc  .  . .  Ibt  c
Uni  I  urn  |irr»hytcri»  Uaohui  ct  1  tntlitc  duobut  fnncigcau

L  t  ■  .triir  _ik  *


\\i  t  jruca»


SECT.  L  CH.  II] FEUDAL  SERVICE  75

term,  it  is  mentioned  almost  on  every  page  of  Domesday.^
Let  us  take  a  couple  of  instances  from  Sussex.  The
Count  of  Ow  held  the  manor  of  Hou,  and  out  of  the
villains'  land  of  this  manor  he  had  enfeoffed  nine  milites  to
die  aggr^ate  amount  of  i\  fiscal  hides  of  8  virgates  to  the
hide.  These  7\  hides  corresponded  to  3^  teams  in  demesne
and  7  teams  belonging  Xq  \%  villains  and  3  bordarii.  The
lord's  part  was  worth  £\^  and  the  land  of  the  milites  ;f  7.  7^.^
Of  the  nine  milites  one  held  half  a  hide,  that  is  4  virgates,
one  4^  virgates,  one  7\  virgates^  and  the  other  six  2  virgates
each.  Francwelle,  in  the  same  fee,  presents  a  similar  ar-
rangement,^ with  the  difference  that  the  whole  manor  had
been  given  over  to  six  milites.  One  of  them,  Norman,
a  Frenchman  or  a  Scandinavian,  had  held  alone  T.  R.  E.
It  was  rated  at  i^  hides,  and  contained  land  for  two  ploughs.
Norman  was  still  among  the  tenants,  but  he  held  only  half
a  hide,  while  three  of  his  comrades  had  2  virgates  each,
and  two  i  virgate  each,  making  up  the  i^  hides,  at  the  rate
of  8  virgates  per  hide.  All  the  six  owned  between  them
I  plough  and  8  villains,  and  i  cottager  with  4  ploughs.
The  value  of  the  manor  had  increased  from  40J.  T.  R.  E.
to  46J.  at  the  time  of  the  survey.  The  figures  in  these  two
cases  are  instructive ;  we  see  a  considerable  number  of  mili-
tary tenants  enfeoffed,  with  very  small  plots :  if  we  start  from
the  fiscal  assessment,  the  fifteen  tenements  would  give  an
average  of  a^  virgates  per  knight,  while  the  number  of  vir-
gates chiefly  represented  among  the  holdings  would  be  two,
or  one  quarter  hide,  according  to  the  standard  of  8  virgates  to
a  hide. The  figures  as  to  ploughlands,  teams,  and  income

*  Homines = milites.  Dd.  i.  3d  (Wingheham);  5  a  (Gecham) ;
6  a  (Eisse) ;  17  a  (Filleicham).

*  Dd.  i.  18 a:  (Hooe,  Sussex)  *  Comes  de  Ow  tenet  in  dominio
manerium  quod  uocatur  Hou  .  . .  De  terra  uillanorum  huius  manerii
tenet  Reintiertus  dimidiam  hidam,  Robertas  ii  uirgatas  et  diniidiam,
Osbem  ii  uirgatas,  Alured  ii  uirgatas,  Giraldusii  uirgatas,  Ingelrannus
ii  uirgatas,  Witbertus  iiii  uirgatas  et  dimidiam,  Werelc  ii  uirgatas,
Robertus  altus  ii  uirgatas.  Inter  omnes  habent  in  dominio  iii  car.
et  dimidiam  et  xii  uillanos  et  iii  bordarios  cum  vii  carucis.  Totum
manerium  T.  R.  £.  ualebat^  xxv  lib.  et  post  vi  lib.  modo  dominium
comitis  xiiii  lib.  militum  ejus  vii  lib.  et  vii  sol.' Cf.  Nerewelle,  ibid.

'  Dd.  i.  18b. Cf.  23  a,  Silletone  (Sussex);  26b,  Dicelinges.


76  MILITARY  ORGANIZATION [essay  i

work  out  into  even  smaller  quantities.  There  are  only
4i  ploughs  in  demesne,  against  ii  ploughs  of  the  villains
for  the  15  tenements,  and  in  the  Frankwell  case  six  militar)
tenants  have  to  share  2  ploughlands  and  46^.  inconu
between  them.  One  of  the  explanations  for  this  strangi
state  of  affairs  lies  in  the  fact  that  most  of  these  knight
may  have  been  enfeoffed  in  several  townships,  thoug}
it  is  difHcuIt  to  make  it  out  with  exactness,  as  only  persona
names  are  usually  given,  and  these  such  as  constantly  recui
at  that  time.  Still,  the  identity  of  some  of  the  militar]
vassals  of  the  Count  of  Ow  has  been  traced  with  grea'
probability  in  some  cases.^  But  it  would  be  impossible  to  se
our  minds  at  rest  with  this  observation.  Although  in  some
instances  the  small  holdings  of  the  miliies  present  scatterec
possessions  of  rather  important  sub-tenants  of  the  grea'
feudatory  lord,^  in  many  other  cases  we  can  hardly  escap<
from  the  conclusion  that  actual  residence  in  a  place  wa:
meant  when  the  tenements  are  described,  and  that  somi
at  least  of  the  miliies  mentioned  in  Domesday  must  hav(
been  endowed  with  very  small  holdings.  This  is  especially
apparent  in  cases  when  the  miliies  in  question  are  enterec
as  tenants  belonging  to  a  manor,  without  being  honourec
with  a  specific  reference  to  their  names,'  but  there  cai
hardly  be  a  doubt  that  the  same  must  have  been  the  cast

*  Cf.  Sussex,  Victoria  County  History,  i.  377  if.

'  This  is  very  clear,  e.  g.  in  the  case  of  the  Peterborough  knights
e.g.  Lib.  Nig.  Men.  S.  Petri  de  Burgo  (Camden  Soc),  pp.  i68y  169
'Descriptio  militum  de  Abbatia  de  Burgo.  Asketillus  de  Sand
Medardo  tenet  de  Abbatia  de  Biu-ch,  in  Hamtonascira  x  hidaSyC
iii  partes  i  virgae.  £t  in  Lincolnescira  iii  camicatas,  et  inde  servi
se  vi  milite.  Et  dc  feudo  huius  militis  dedit  Rex  Willelmos  senio
Eudoni  Dapifero  in  Estona  i  hidam  et  dimidiam,  et  mandavit  de  Noi
mannia  in  Angliam  Episcopo  Constantiarum  et  R(otberto)  de  Oilli  pe
breves  suos  ut  inde  darent  ei  excambium  ad  valens  in  quocumqu
uellet  de  iii  uicinis  comitatibus;  sed  Abbas  noluit  .  .  .  Ricarau
Enganie  ii  hidae  in  Hamtonascira,  et  ser\'it  pro  i  milite.  Sed  socemani
faciunt  quartam  partem  militb,  et  ipse  iii  partes  unius  militis  • .  •  Vii
Enganie  en  Torp  iii  virgae  ct  en  Haragrava  dimidia  hida,  eten  Pihtesl
hida  et  dimidia,  et  i  uirga,  et  servicium  pro  i  milite  . . .'  etc.

'  Dd.  i.  3  d  :  (Wingham,  Kent)  '  \Vin|;heham  . . .  De  hoc  M.  teni
Willelmus  de  Arcis  i  solin  in  Fletes  et  ibi  habet  in  dominio  i  car.  i
iiii  uillanos  et  unum  militem  cum  icar.'  Cf.  6  a  (Eisse) ;  9d  (Pope
selle) ;  10  a  (Cildresham)  ;  laa,  b  (Tanet).


SECT.LCH.  n] FEUDAL  SERVICE  77

with  some  of  the  named  knights.  Thus  we  are  forced
to  admit  that  at  the  time  of  the  survey  the  group  designated
as  imlites  consisted  of  very  mixed  elements,  and  that  by
the  side  of  important  people,  possessed  of  substantial  hold-
ings,^ it  contained  a  great  number  of  minor  adventurers
who  were  glad  to  get  some  plot  to  support  them.*  These,
certainly,  did  not  represent  the  honour  of  five  hides  known
to  Anglo-Saxon  custom,  or  the  great  or  small  knight's  fee
of  later  feudalism.  Indeed,  when  the  service  of  a  knight
[mUes)  is  spoken  of  in  Domesday  it  generally  appears  as
a  kind  of  addition  to  money  rents,  and  corresponds  to
rather  insignificant  sums^

There  are  several  circumstances  which  go  far  to  explain
this  phenomenon.  To  begin  with,  in  many  cases  the
knights  in  question  were  still  in  the  stage  of  the  personal
following  of  a  great  man,  living  in  his  household  and
receiving  outfit  and  presents  from  him.  Even  knights
of  great  prowess  and  standing  might  in  such  cases  be
crowded  on  one  or  the  other  estate,  and  act,  e.  g.,  as  the
temporary  garrison  of  a  castle.*  It  does  not  require  a  great
effort  of  imagination  to  suppose  that  some  of  the  milites

*  Dd.i.27b  :  ( Westmeston, Sussex)  *Wesmestun . . .  De  hac  terra  tenet
onus  miles  iii  hidas  et  iii  uirgatas  et  ibi  habet  in  dominio  unam  carucam
ct  ii  uillani  et  v  bordarii ' ;  61  a :  (Berks.)  *  Offetune.  Willelmus  (filius
Auscul6)  tenet  et  quidam  miles  de  eo .  Horling  tenuit  de  Rege  Edwardo.
Tunc  se  defendit  pro  v  hides .  mode  pro  iiii  hidis  et  dimidia.'  Cf.  61  b
(Soteham^ ;  88  c  (Werocosale,  Somerset).

*Dd.  I.  5  b  (Kent,  Edesham).  67  a:  (Wilts.,  Brecheorde)  *  De
^^<^  terra  tenet  unus  miles  i  hidam  .  . .  Terra  militis  (ualet)  xx  solid.'
Cf.  ibid.,  Newentone  ;  65  d,  Elendune.

Dd.  i.  3  a :  (Kent,  Sondresse)  * . . .  pro  uno  solin  et  dim.  se  defendit

•  •;.Jn  totis . . .  T.  R.  E.  ualebat  xii  lib.  Quando  recepit  xvi  lib.  et  modo
^i  lib.  Tamen  reddit  xxiii  lib.  et  unum  militem  in  seruitio  Archi-
gwcopL*  67  d :  (Wilts.,  Dameford)  *  T.  R.  E.  geldabat  pro  iiii  hidis.
«ern  est  iii  car.  Eduuardus  tenet  de  abbatissa  ecclesiae  (Wil-
toniensis).  Tres  angli  tenuerunt  T.  R.  E.  et  non  poterant  ab  ecclesia
scpaiari.  Duo  ex  eis  reddebant  v.  sol.  et  tercius  seruiebat  sicut  tainus
'  • .  oaluit  c  sol.  modo  ix  lib.'  Cf.  173  a  (Abeleng,  Worcs.) ;  also  Dd.
i-  loc  (Cumbe,  Kent);  32a:  (Ditone,  Surrey)  *Wadardus  tenet  de

episcopo  (Baiocense)  Leuegar  tenuit  de  Heraldo  et  seruiebat  ei  sed  quo

uoloisset  cum  terra  ire  potuisset. T.  R.  E.  ualebat  iiii  lib.  et  post  xl  sol.

Modo  iiii  lib. I  lie  qui  tenet  de  Wadardo  reddit  ei  1  sol.  et  seruitium

onius  railitis.'

*  Sax.  Chr.  1087,  Plummer,  i.  p.  224.


78  MILITARY  ORGANIZATION [essay I

who  appear  as  small  tenants  in  Domesday  drew  part  of
their  maintenance  and  salary  from  their  lord's  domain,^
and  that  their  plots  afforded  them  only  a  supplementary
source  of  income.

Another  observation  which  suggests  itself  to  any  diligent
student  of  the  Great  Survey  is  that  the  milites  in  question
kre  intermingled  in  such  a  way  with  Francigenae  and
servientes  that  they  evidently  include  a  great  number
of  people  who  would  have  been  called  vavassors  in  Nor-
mandy and  sergeants  in  the  later  nomenclature  of  English
feudalism.^  The  definite  references  of  the  record  substan-
tiate what  would  otherwise  be,  necessarily,  a  guess.  It
is  clear  that  the  very  numerous  entries  about  the  milites
of  the  Conqueror's  time  cannot  apply,  and  were  not  meant
to  apply,  only  to  fully-equipped  horsemen  capable  of  per-
forming knight's  service  for  forty  days.  Where  would
the  archers,  the  spearmen,  and  hatchetmen  belong?  Of
the  first  two  kinds  the  invading  army  had  many,  and  as
for  the  last  they  are  sufficiently  represented  in  the  feudal
lists  of  sergeants  and  in  the  Ordinances  of  Arms.  Thus
we  come  to  the  conclusion  that  the  class  of  the  miliUs^
as  well  as  that  of  the  francigenae  not  further  specified  by
name,  must  have  consisted,  to  a  large  extent,  of  armed
sergeants  by  the  side  of  knights  and  riding  squires.

This  conclusion  is  fully  borne  out  by  another  group  of
observations,  namely  by  the  evidence  as  to  the  connexion
between  the  military  class  of  the  Conquest  and  Saxon
antecedents.  Although  crowds  of  French  adventurers  had
availed  themselves  of  the  grand  occasion  of  bettering  their
circumstances  by  the  conquest  of  England,  yet  even  the

^  Lib.  Niger  de  Burgo  (Camden  Soc),  p.  175 :  '  Hugo  Olifiud  de
Stokes  iii  uirgas  et  iii  partem  i  uirgae,  et  servit  pro  milite  in  exerdtu  et  in
warda,  et  in  ostensione,  cum  corredio  abbatis— Abbas  Turoldtis  dedit
Viviano  dimidiam  hidam  in  Circafeld  unde  Rex  misit  in  foresta  medie-
tatem.  Eidem  dedit  in  Undele  sextam  partem  i  hidae,  et  in  Wermintooa
quartam  partem  i  hidae  in  sergentaria,  unde  debet  esse  miles  in  exerdtu
cum  ii  e(}uis,  et  suis  armis,  et  abbas  inveniet  ei  alia  necessaria.'

'  Dd.  li.  86  b :  (Essex) '  Fennam  tenet  i  miles  de  G(altero  diacono)
quod  tenuit  liber  homo  pro  manerio  et  pro  ii  hidis.  Semper  ii  bor^
darii  et  i  seruus  et  i  caruca  et  ualet  I  sol.'  Cf.  ii.  90  b  (Invasiones  in
Essexa,  Stanbruge) ;  364  a  (Ingham,  Suffolk) ;  439  a  (Eascdelda,  Suff.).


SECT.  I.  CH.  II] FEUDAL  SERVICE  79

military  element  of  the  kingdom  was  not  exclusively  repre-
sented by  Frenchmen.  The  English  soldiers  {milites)  are
quite  a  standing  feature  of  the  survey,^  and  their  numbers
could  be  easily  increased  by  a  study  of  the  personal  names
of  the  milites  not  specifically  grouped  as  English.  A  great
many  Danes  and  Norsemen  were  of  course  included  among
these  latter,  although  every  now  and  then  their  distinct
nationality  would  be  recognized.^

7.  Now  the  enrolment  of  English  and  Scandinavians  among  ffhanes  and
the  military  class  of  the  Conquest  is  not  merely  a  result  ofg^^^^eJ
the  admission  of  persons  of  English  birth  to  the  benefits
and  duties  of  a French institution. We find that  th<
military  class  as  it  existed  after  the  Conquest  draws  largely
on  the  material  and  legal  conditions  which  preceded  the
catastrophe,  and  that  many  of  the  institutional  roots  of  .
Norman  knight  service  have  to  be  sought  in  the  arrange-
ments of  Old  English  thanage  ^.

It  may  be  said  that  the  knights  on  the  domain^  exempli-
fied byOdo  of  Bayeux*s  tenants  in  Folkestone  or  the  garrison
of  Rochester,  have  their  direct  predecessors  in  the  military
household  of  Anglo-Saxon  magnates — their  huscarls  or
hired  men."* In  the  same  way,  the  Norman  knights  are

'  Dd.  i.  62  b :  (Berks.)  '  Brintone  ...  In  dominio  est  una  caruca  et
dimidia  et  v  uillani  et  iii  bordarii  et  unus  miles  anglicus  cum  iii  car. .  .
vaL  iiiilib.  x  sol. . .  .*;  of.  138  b  (Belingehou,  etc.) ;  241  d  (Cestreton) ;
ibid.  L  83  a  :  (Dorset)  '  Odetun  . . .  Bricsi  tenuit  miles  regis  Edwardi
et  geldabat  pro  xii  hidis  . . . ' ;  i.  130  a  :  (Middlesex) '  Gistelesworde .
|nt)  Ixx  hides  . . .  Francigena  et  quidam  anglicus  iiii  hidas  et  sunt
milites  probati.  Sub  eis  manent  inter  uillanos  et  bordarios  xii,  et  vi
uillani  domini  qui  tenent  ii  hidas  et  dimidiam  uirgatam.'

*  E.g.  Oslac,  Finn,  Th6r,  &c.
'  I  do  not  intend  to  treat  of  the  thane  class  at  the  present  moment.

What  is  immediately  before  us  is  merely  the  part  played  by  the  thanes
m  the  military  organization  of  the  country.

*  Plummer,  ii.  219  ;  Flor.  Wig.  a.  1041 — harrying  of  Worcester  by
Hardacnut  for  the  murder  of  twp  huscarls  ;  levies  of  the  eorls —
'  omnesque  suos  huscarlos,  cum  magna  exercitu  . . .  misit.'  Sax.  Chr.
(£)  1036,  Plummer,  i.  161  :  *i£lfgifu  Hardacnutes  modor  saste  on
Winoeastre  mid  ^ses  cynges  huscarlum  hyra  suna.'  Huscarls  (in-
dividuals), C.  D.  iv.  202,  204,  221  ;  cf.  291.  Sax.  Chr.  (D)  1065,
Plummer,  i.  191  :  '  ge  gaderedon  )>a  ))egenas  hi  ealle  on  Eoforwicscire
and  on  Nox^hymbra  lande  togsedere  and  geutlagedan  heora  eorl
Tosti  and  ofslogan  his  hired  menn  ealle  )>e  hig  mihten  to  cumen
aeg^ser  ge  Englisce  ge  Denisce.*


8o  MILITARY  ORGANIZATION [essay  l

quartered  in  most  cases  on  the  same  estates  as  were
formerly  held  by  thanes,  and  evidently  occupy  their  very
places.^  Indeed,  thanes  are  sometimes  carried  over,  as
it  were,  from  T.  R.  E.  to  T.  R.  W.*  and  occupy  at  both
periods  a  position  corresponding  to  that  of  the  milites.
Sometimes  the  only  difference  seems  to  have  been  that  the
former  were  of  English  or  Scandinavian,  the  latter  of
French,  extraction.^  In  East  Anglia  chiefly,  but  some-
times in  other  districts  too,  in  the  north  and  in  the  west,
the  tnilites  of  the  Conquest  take  the  place  of  preconquestual
liberi  homines^  but  the  latter  designation  turns  out  to  be
nearly  equivalent  to  the  Old  English  thane ^^nA  was  probably
chiefly  used  for  free  warriors  of  Scandinavian  origin.*

Two  characteristic  traits  show  to  what  extent  the  position
of  the  thanes  and  of  the  milites  after  the  Conquest  was
similar. The  first  often  occupy  portions  of  estates  specially

*  Dd.  i.  71c:  (Wilts.,  Segretc)*Duo  taini  tenuenint  T.  R.E.  ct
geldabat  pro  v  hidis . . .  Valuit  xl  sol.  modo  I  solid.  Duo  milites  tenent
de  Durando  (de  Gloweccstre).*  Cf.  77  c  (Dorset,  Adford) ;  103  c
(Devon,  Tavistock);  133d  (Herts,  Peleham) ;  152a  (Bucks,  Lochin-
tone) ;  240  d  (Warwick.,  Luditone).

'  Dd.  i.  70  b  :  (Wilts.,  Chieeslaue) '  In  eadem  uilla  tenet  unus  tainas
de  Emulfo  ii  uirgatas  terrae  et  dimidiam.  Hie  T.  R.  £.  poterat  ire  ad
quern  uellet  dominum  et  T.  R.  W.  sponte  se  uertit  ad  Emulium.  Vale-
bat  haec  terra  xv  sol.  Modo  xl  den.  quos  reddit  Emulfus  de  finna.'
Cf.  89  b  (Somerset,  Cerdre) ;  63  c  (Berks.),  *  Terra  Odonis  et  aliomm
tainorum  *) ;  66  c  (Wilts.,  Dobreham),  '  Qui  tenuenint  T.  R.  E.  noQ
poterant  ab  ecclesia  separari  . . .  Terra  tainorum  ualet  vii  lib.  et  xv
solid.* Cf.  ibid.  Devrel.

"  Dd.  i.  103c  (Devon,  Tavistock) ;  iii  a  (Devon,  Ratreu),'  De  hac
terra  tenent  ii  milites  unam  uirgatam  terrae  et  dimidiam  et  units
Anglicus  unam  uirgatam  terrae.'  Cf.  129  c  (Middlesoc,  Ticheham);
ii.  372  a  (Suffolk,  Bury  St.  Edmunds),  *  modo  xxxiiii  milites  inter
francos  et  anglicos  et  sub  eis  xxii  bordarii.'  i.  155  b:  'De  texn
Dorchecestre  tenent  Angli  liberi  homines  iii  hidas  et  dimidiam,  et
Conan  viii  hidas  unam  uirgatam  minus.  Walcher  vi  hidas  et  (um.
Iseuuardusv  hidas  et  dim.  Jacob  ii  hidas.  RainaldusetVitalisv  hidas.'

*  Dd.  i.  181  c  :  (Hereford)  '  Medelagie  ...  In  eod.  Hiindredo  ten.
ii  liberi  homines  iiii  hidas  et  pertinent  ad  Bertune  episcopi .  •  •  Totnm
manerium  ualet  c  solid.  Terra  militum  xv  solid,  et  viii  denar.'  Cf.  182  a
(Hereford,  Liedeberge) ;  ii.  18  a  (Essex,  Berchinges) ;  31  b  (Esscy,  Bor-
ham) ;  38  b  (Essex),  *  Dommawa  .  .  .  ii  hid.  et  xxx  ac.  . .  /S^ Islam
terram  calumpniatur  uitalis  i' miles  quam  ut  testatur  tenuit  i  liber  homo
T.  R.  E.' ;  39 b  (Essex,  Alreforda) ;  ii.  55  b  (Essex,  Scanbume  et  Topes*
felde) ;  ii.  59  b, '  In  Hundredo  de  Berdestapla  erant  vi  liberi  homines
T.  R.  E.  quos  G(oisfndus)  inuasit  super  regem  Willelmum,  tenentet
xii  hidas  terrae  quas  tenent  v  milites  de  eo ' ;  cf.  60  b  (Estram) ;  65  b
(Menghedanam) ;  86  a  (Toleshuntam),


SECT.l.  CH.li] FEUDAL  SERVICE


8i


carved  out  for  their  use — this  is  the  so-called  thaneland^
which  cannot  be  separated  from  the  rest  of  the  estate
or  taken  out  of  the  over-lordship  of  the  magnate  to  whom
the  main  portion  of  the  estate  belongs.  These  very  thane-
bnds  are  found  as  the  appanages  of  the  milites  or  homines
and  opposed  to  the  demesne  portions  of  the  lords  after  the
Conquest.*  At  the  same  time  there  are  practices  in  the
period  before  the  Conquest  which  closely  correspond  to
the  personal  allegiance  of  later  knights  as  sanctioned  by
homage :  thanes  *  go  to  hand '  in  regard  to  their  lord  :  they
have  to  renounce  former  allegiance  if  they  want  to  accept
a  new  one.  Indeed,  the  famous  Salisbury  oath  of  all  /
tenants  of  land  {landsittende  men)  seems  in  one  sense  a
variation  of  the  *  going  to  hand  '  in  use  before  the  Conquest.^
In  a  word,  the  position  of  the  feudal  knight  holding  a  fee
under  the  personal  tie  of  vassalage  and  the  obligation  of
military  service  appears  anticipated  in  every  way  by  the

*  Dd.  L  66  d :  (Wilts)  '  Langeford  .  .  .  Duo  taini  tenuerunt  de
Abbate  (Glastingberiense)  T.  R.E.  et  geldabat  pro  ii  hidis  ...  In
eadem  oilla  tenet  Eduuardus  de  rege  i  hidam  quae  iure  pertinet  abbatiae
«l  tainlande  * ;  of.  67  b  (Breme) ;  ib.  (Coleburae);  67  c  (Pevesei,  Tisse-
beric);  68  c  (Boltintone) ;  71  c  (Liteltone) ;  89b  (Wivelescome,  Somer-
set); 93a  (Somerset,  Biscopestone). 15s  b  :  *  Cropelie. De  aecclesia
saactae  Mariae  Lincoliensis  fuit  et  est. Ibi  sunt  1  hidae. De  his
babet  episcopus  in  firma  sua  xxv  hidas  et  milites  tantumdem. Super
bas  1  hidas  est  terra  in  dominio  ad  x  carucas. Inter  totum  terra
est  XXX  car.' Ib.  (Eglesham);  155  c  (Thame) ;  181  c  (Hereford,  Mede-
iagic);  204b  (Hunts,  Stivecle),  cf.  Cartulary  of  Ramsey;  Dd.  i.  221  c
(Northants),  *  Terra  Hominum  eiusdem  aecclesiae '  (Sancti  Petri  de
Btugo^.  Cf.  Lib.  Nig.  Mon.  Sancti  P.  de  Burgo  (Camden  Soc.),  p.  168.
Descnptio  Militum  de  Abbatia. Dd.  i.  77  a :  Scirebume  (Dorset),
'Episcopus  Sarisberiensis  tenet  . .  .  T.  R.  £.  geldabat  pro  xliii  hidis  . . .
De  eadm  terra  huius  manerii  tenent  de  episcopo  Otbold  iiii  hidas.
SiDod  V  bidas  et  dimidiam. Ingelbert  v  hidas. Waleran  iii  bidas.
Radulf  iii  hidas. Uxor  Hugonis  f.  Grip,  ii  hidas.— Quod  habe  epi-
scopus in  dominio  in  hoc  manerio  valet  1  lib. Quod  monachi  vi  Kb.  et
X  solid. Quod  milites  episcopi  xxvii  lib. Quod  taini  vi  lib.' — In-
qnisitio  Eliensis  (Hamilton),  p.  123 :  *'  Idem  Picotus  in  eodem  comitatu
babet  de  Thainland  ecclesie  ely  de  quibus  concordatus  est  cum  abbate
concessione  regis  x  maneria*;  p. 124: '  Hardeuuinus  predictas  in
Grantcbryggesyra  habet  de  thainlandis  Ely  . . .  iv  maneria.*

'  Chron.  1085,  i.  217 :  *  ealle  hi  bugon  to  him,  and  weron  hisf^nenn,
and  him  hold  adas  sworon  "^  hi  woldon  ongean  ealle  odre  men  him  holde
beon.'  Chron.  882,  i.  79 :  *  Da  men  waeron  myclum  of  slagene  arj^d  for-
wundede  aer  hi  on  hand  eodon.*  Cf.  a.d.  1127,  i.  257  :  *  Se  hseflj  e  his
abbot  rice  S*  Johannes  of  Angeli  on  hande.*


VIKOCKAXMFP


H


8a  MILITARY  ORGANIZATION [essay  i

status  of  the  Saxon  thane  or  liber  homo  holding  land  under
a  lord.  The  main  differences  consist  in  the  fact  that  the
part  played  by  the  Saxon  free  tenant  corresponds  both  to
that  of  the  knight  and  to  that  of  the  sergeant  of  the  Nor-
man period,  as  the  thanes,  radmen,  and  liberi  homines  are
not  clearly  divided  from  each  other  in  point  of  quality
of  service  and  tenure.  Secondly,  the  service  of  the  Saxon
free  tenants  is  of  a  more  general  kind,  and  is  not  specifically
military  as  in  the  case  of  the  feudal  vassals. It  must  be

'  remembered  that  the  king's  thanes,  of  whom  we  know
most,  were  originally  household  servants,  dish  thanes  and
stallers,  as  well  as  military  followers.  The  apportionment
of  military  service  to  rigid  forms  in  respect  of  equipment,
occasion,  and  time  is  also  a  result  of  French  feudalism.
But  the  military  side  of  thane  service,  although  not  directly
prominent  in  the  general  conditions  of  tenure,  finds  sufKcwnt
and  drastic  expression  in  other  facts — in  the  laws  of  heriot,
v  strictly  regulated  by  Canute,^  but  slowly  developed  by
long  customary  practice,^  and  manifestly  derived  from  the
conception  of  military  outfit  and  service.  Military  service
also  is  put  down  as  the  fundamental  obligation  of  the  thane
in  the  description  of  his  standing  provided  by  the  RecfUu-

^  dines  Singularum  Personarum?  This  last  notice  is  par-
ticularly interesting,  inasmuch  as  it  supposes  that  the
tenurial  quasi-feudal  service  is  only  a  particular  form,  and
the  most  typical  form,  of  the  trinoda  necessitas.  Thia
information  appears  to  provide  us  with  a  valuable  connect-
ing link  in  r^ard  to  the  evolution  of  the  tenure  and  of  its
feudal  incidents.  Originally,  the  trinoda  necessitas  had
nothing  to  do  with  a  special  military  tenure,  and  a  thane'fl
posit  m  had  nothing  to  do  with  special  military  service-
The  'inoda  fiecessitas  was  an  obligation  falling  on  aU  free-
men^  r,  at  least,  on  all  free  householders ;  thane  service
was  t  minister's,  a  servant's  service  in  general. But  whefl

*  Ca  jute,  Secular  Dooms,  72,  codifying  older  customs.  Cf.  Bishop
Alfwol'.  's  heriot,  Crawford  Charters,  p.  127.

«  Tb  irpe,  Dip.  Ang.  499,  512,  544,  549,  578.

'  R«  -titudines,  *  p  he  ¥reo  ¥inc  of  his  lande  do  fyrd-faereld  3  baifc-
bote  7'  oryc-gcpeorc'


SECT.!.  CH.  ii] FEUDAL  SERVICE  83

and  in  so  far  as  the  soil  was  parcelled  out  among  a  few
great  men  holding  enormous  tracts  or  numbers  of  smaller
estates,  the  duty  came  to  concern  the  lords  of  these  tracts
and  estates  and  to  be  performed  primarily  by  their  ser-
vants. The  rule  of  the  five-hide  honour  became  in  this
connexion  a  rule  as  to  the  acquitting  of  districts  or  estates
in  proportion  to  multiples  of  five  hides. The  practical  out-
come of  this  was  not  necessarily  and  always  a  subdivision
of  the  territory  into  five-hide  units  with  a  fully  equipped
horseman  at  the  head  of  each ;  it  was  also  the  'defence',  the
utware,  of  territory  according  to  the  five-hide  or  similar  rule,
with  full  possibilities  of  the  great  lord's  '  sweating '  of  his
followers  by  quartering  them  on  smaller  estates  and  keep-
ing the  rest  of  the  acquitted  territory  for  his  own  use. How
tr  such  operations  were  counterbalanced  by  the  necessity  of  •^
helping  knights  and  sergeants  with  equipment  and  capital
from  above  cannot  be  made  out  in  detail,  but  the  necessity
for  such  supplementary  arrangements  may  be  taken  for
granted  if  we  take  the  five-hide  rule  and  corresponding  calcu-
lations as  to  small  fees  and  sergeanties  to  be  something
more  than  mere  haphazard  combinations.

Some  curious  cases  supporting  our  contention  as  to  Thanes  and
the  direct  institutional  connexion  between  thanage  and  ^°J^*'
military  service  appear  in  the  history  of  great  ecclesi-
,  astical  lordships.  The  peculiarity  of  this  case  is  that  the
\  churches  and  monasteries  were  not  as  a  rule  subjected
to  the  violent  dispossession  which  took  place  in  respect
of  lay  lordships.  In  most  cases  there  was  a  continuity
in  the  tenure  and  in  the  social  life  of  the  great  ecclesiastical
estates  which  cannot  be  matched  in  the  history  of  lay  fiefs.
Instead  of  having  to  look  out  for  Saxon  predecessors  and
to  speculate  about  the  extent  of  violent  change,  we  may
restrict  our  inquiry  to  a  conveniently  narrow  margin  of
tiansformation.  And,  from  ilSk. present  point  of  view,
the  question  we  have  to  ask  is — had  the  great  sees  of
Worcester,  of  Sherborne,  of  Lincoln,  the  monasteries  of
Peterborough,  Shaftesbury,  or  Glastonbury,  to  change  their
military  arrangements materially  in  consequence  of  the

G  2


I


I

i


84  MILITARY  ORGANIZATION [ESSAY

Conquest  ?  Or  did  they  substitute  knights  and  sergeants  fc
thanes  and  radmen  more  or  less  on  the  same  conditioni
although  the  service  exacted  came  to  be  r^arded  as  an  obli
..^^ation  of  feudal  contract  rather  than  of  tenurial  custom  in  ac
quitting  the  above-mentioned  lordships  in  respect  of  the j^i^

As  to  Worcester  ^  we  might  appeal  to  a  document  c
dubious  authenticity,  but  evidently  compiled  very  soo!
after  the  Conquest  The  possession  of  the  triple  hundro
of  Oswaldeslaw  is  made  the  subject  of  a  stipulation  on  th
part  of  the  king  grantor,  that  the  see  of  Worcester  shouL
hold  it  as  long  as  it  acquitted  the  service  of  the  naval  j^^
by  providing  for  one  scypfylled  of  armed  oarsmen— one  mai
for  five  hides.  An  Abingdon  Charter  *  of  821  had  made  th
military  service  of  twelve  vassals  the  condition  of  holding.

There  is  an  even  earlier  and  undoubtedly  genuin
example  in  the  endorsement  of  a  deed  made  about  800  AJ
which  regulates  the  service  of  a  territory  in  Middlesex :  i
should  be  five  men  for  thirty  hides.^  It  would  be  difficul
to  treat  all  these  instances  as  Norman  falsifications,  am
even  if  in  one  or  other  the  hand  of  an  interpolator  may  b
discovered,  it  would  seem  rather  strange  that  he  should  b
so  careful  and  so  artful  as  to  invent  such  very  antiquariai
conditions  as  the  outfit  of  a  scypfylled. It  looks  as  if  tb

*  Codex  Diplomaticus,  vi.  p.  340  (App.  D  xiv).

^  Cod.  Dip.  214  :  . .  .  '  £go  Kenulfus  . . .  anno  imperii  nostri  xzi
fui  rogatus  ab  apostolica  sede  per  priuilegium  domni  apostolid  ^oiio
sissimi  papae  Leonis,  et  Rethunun  uenerabilem  episcopum,  ut  sibimc
seu  familiae  quae  habitat  in  monasterio  quod  situm  est  in  Abbendkud
.  .  .  ut  illud  monasterium  seu  omnia  loca  quae  ad  ipsum  perdfier
dinoscuntur,  cum  rebus  mobilibus  et  immobilibus,  in  notb  cauns  c
ignotis  . .  .  donans  donabo  perpetuis  temporibus  aetemam  libertateii
in  Sanctae  Trinitatis  patrocinio,  omnia  loca  ad  praefatum  monasterioi
pertinentia  ;  quorum  infra  nominantur  nomina :  Culeham ;  Cheiata
&c. . . .  Expeditionem  cum  xii  uassallis  et  cum  tantis  scutis  exerceiit
antiquos  pontes  et  arces  renouent ;  caeterum  plena  et  integra  tibertal
glorientur.*

'  Cart.  Sax.  201 :  ^  . .  £^0  OfTa  divina  gubemante  gratia  Rex  Mo
ciorum  Stidberhtae  venerabili  viro  atque  abbatis  cura  praedito  temi
XXX  manentium  in  Middilsaexum  bituin  gumeninga  heigae  end  liddUny
et  est  vi  manentium  habitatio  ab  oriente  torrentis  Lidding  libentisnii
concedens  donabo.  et  iste  praefatus  Stidberht  mihi  terrain  totida
manentium  id  est  xxx  in  Ciltinne  in  loco  ubi  dicitur  wichama  in  vioB
commutationis  perdonauit.*  For  Stithbeorht  see  Searle,  Onomasda
Anglo-Saxonicum  :  [an.  767].  K.  C.  D.  1 16.


SECT.  I.  CH.  ll] FEUDAL  SERVICE  85

interpolator  were  at  any  rate  guided  by  local  traditions  of
a  perfectly  genuine  kind.^

In  several  cases  entered  in  due  form  in  the  Domesday
Survey  the  passage  from  Anglo-Saxon  thane  tenure  to
Norman  military  tenure  may  be  illustrated  from  different
points  of  view.

The  surveys  of  the  possessions  of  the  Abbey  of  Peter-  Peter-
boroi^[b  in  Northamptonshire,  Lincolnshire,  Leicestershire,  knlghte.
and  Huntingdonshire,^  when  compared  with  the  Survey
of  1104  and  with  notices  in  the  Chronicle  of  Hugh  Candidus
(about  1177)9  show  a  systematic  separation  between  the
land  of  the  Abbey  and  that  of  its  military  tenants.  In
some  cases  whole  estates  are  made  over  to  these  latter,
in  others  they  are  quartered  on  parts  cut  out  from  larger
estates,  the  minor  portions  of  which  remained  with  the
monastery.  The  families  of  the  tenants  in  question  were  of
French  origin,  but  the  apportionment  of  the  thaneland
must  have  gone  back  to  the  time  before  the  Conquest,
as  there  are  no  traces  of  a  difference  in  the  tenure  of  the
estates  T.  R.  E.  and  T.  R.  W.,  although  their  rental  was  ^
greatly  increased  in  the  interval.^  In  several  instances  we
gather  from  the  Survey  of  1124  and  from  notices  of
Henry  II's  time  that  part  of  the  military  service  was
still  acquitted  by  the  socmen  on  the  estates.* This  is  an

'  Cf.  Maitland,  Domesday  Book  and  Beyond,  p.  308  if. ;  Round,  in
Victoria  County  History  of  Worcestershire,  i.  p.  248.

•  I>d.  i.  221  c ;  231  b.  Cf.  Black  Book  of  Peterborough  (Camden
See.),  p.  160  if.

•  E,g.  Dd.  i.  221  c:  *  Terra  hominum  eiusdem  ecclesiae  (Sancti
Petri  de  Borgo,  Northants).  In  Castre  tenent  v  milites  iii  hidas  de
abbate  et  ibi  habent  v  car.  in  dominio.  Valebat  x  sol.  modo  xl  sol. —
In  Sudtorp  tenet  Goisfrid  et  ii  alii  milites  iiii  hidas  et  dimidiam  de
ibbate  .  .  .  valuit  xl  sol.  Modo  vi  lib.'  231  b  :  (Terra  Sci.  Petri
itt  BorgOy  Estone,  Leics.) . .  .  '  Duo  milites  tenent  in  hac  uilla  ii  cam-
citas  terrae  de  abbate. Valuit  xl  sol.  modo  c  sol.'

•  Liber  Niger  Mon.  S.  Petri  de  Burgo  (Camden  Soc),  p.  169 :
*RkaFdus  Enganie  ii  hidae  in  Hamtonascira,  et  seruit  pro  i  milite.
Sed  socemanni  faciunt  quartam  partem  militis  et  ipse  iii  partes  unius
nilitis';  p.  171  note  (quotation  from  Hugh  Candidus,  History  of
Monastery  of  Burgh,  p.  56),  *  De  Suttone— Primus  Ansketillus  de
Sottooe.  De  feodo  Thoroldi  de  Suttone  in  Northamptonscire  sunt
ties  hidae,  scilicet  in  Suttone,  et  inde  debetur  plenum  seruitium
diumim  militum,  sea  sokemanni  et  alii  tenentes  totum  faciunt/


86  MILITARY  ORGANIZATION [essay

important  feature,  showing  that  the  ancient  system  olfyr<
service  imposed  on  free  tenants  of  common  and  not  sped
ally  military  tenure  was  still  going  on  in  parts  of  th
country,  more  especially  in  the  Danish  districts.^  I  hav
already  called  attention  to  the  scattering  of  the  plot
attributed  to  single  milites  on  the  land  of  the  Abbey,  an
to  the  traces  of  help  from  the  Abbot  in  the  case  of  some  c
them  who  would  not  otherwise  have  been  able  to  perfon
their  service.  An  interesting,  and  at  first  sight  a  puzzlinj
observation  may  be  made  in  r^ard  to  the  standard  whic
regulated  the  apportionment  of  the  fees.  Roughly,  th
service  of  one  knight  was  reckoned  for  two  or  three  hide
The  carucates  in  Lincolnshire  were  mostly  treated  on  th
same  standard,  with  the  exception  of  one  instance  whei
nine  carucates  are  equated  to  three  hides.^  The  systemati
carrying  out  of  this  principle  of  apportionment,  and  the  foi
mation  of  sergeants'  tenements  for  those  who  did  not  reac
the  minimum  of  two  hides,^  points  to  a  policy  which  probs
bly  sprang  from  the  nature  of  the  service  itself.  The  mof
plausible  explanation  seems  to  be  suggested  by  the  grea
reduction  of  the  Northamptonshire  hidage,  the  result  c
which  must  have  been  to  let  down  honours  of  five  hide
to  three  ^  and  two  hides,  so  that  the  Old  English  apportion
ment  must  have  been  in  correspondence  with  the  norms
rate  noticed  before.

The  manors  of  the  Archbishop  of  Canterbury  in  Ken
the  Bishop  of  Sherborne  in  Dorset,  and  of  the  Bishop  c
Lincoln  in  Oxfordshire  show  very  clearly  the  subdivisio
of  ecclesiastical  property  into  the  home  part  reserved  fc
the  maintenance  of  Bishops,  chapters,  or  monks^  and  th

^  Cf.  the  Lincolnshire  knights'  fees  held  of  the  Honour  of  Richmon
MS.,  Appendix.

Another  ancient  feature  is  the  occurrence  oiparag^e^  Lib.  Nig.  p.  173
'  Walterus  Alius  Aluredi  v  hidas  de  feodo  Kogen  de  Luvetot,  et  <
abbate  i  uirgam  cxl  acras  in  paragio  in  Hamtonascira.'  Ct  D
231  b,  c.

*  Lib.  Nig.  p*  17$  :  'Robert  de  Guneges  ix  camicatas  in  Lincoln
scira  et  servit  pro  iii  hidis  . . .'

»  Lib.  Nig.,  pp.  172,  173, 175.

*  Round,  Feudal  England,  p.  155  ;  Victoria  County  History,  Norti
amptonshire,  i.  p.  260.


•'^


SECT.  I.  CH.n] FEUDAL  SERVICE  87

thaneland  to  which  the  defence  of  the  sees  as  to  fyrdvidjs
confided.^

On  the  other  hand,  such  lists  as  those  concerning  the
repartition  of  estates  between  church,  milites^  and  thanes  in
Somerset^  substantiate  the  view  that  the  main  difference
between  military  tenants  and  thanes  lay  in  their  nationality,  ^
an  inference  further  confirmed  by  the  names  of  thanes  and
of  miUtes  as  far  as  they  are  preserved  in  the  Exon.  Domes-
day.^ The  opposition  between  Franci  tnilites  and  Thani
anglici  is  laid  down  by  this  record  in  as  many  words,^  but
these  very  people  who  are  termed  Fraftci  milites  in  Devon-
shire are  named  Franci  thegni  in  Somerset.*  On  the  other
hand,  the  estates  of  the  thanes  disappear  later  on  among
the  fees  and  fractions  of  fees  of  ordinary  knights  and
sergeants.®  In  other  words,  the  two  institutions  were  so
similar  that  the  passage  from  the  one  to  the  other  was
effected  without  any  noticeable  break.

The  study  of  military  institutions  in  the  eleventh  century  Summar)'.
sui^ests,  as  it  seems  to  me,  several  not  unimportant  con-
clusions as  to  the  course  and  causes  of  social  evolution.

Natural  husbandry  provides  the  broad  ground  on  the
basis  of  which  all  the  institutions  of  the  time  were  con-
structed. The  local  forces  of  society  aimed  at  direct
consumption  of  produce  on  the  spot.  Commercial  inter-
course and  money  dealings  played  an  entirely  subordinate
part.  Therefore  the  attempts  to  organize  public  force  on
commercial  lines  by  hiring  mercenaries  were  either  casual  ;  \y^
expedients  or  followed  on  exceptional  pressure  on  the  part
of  conquerors.  They  could  not  lead  to  the  formation  of
a  permanent  system.

*  Dd.  i.  3  a,  4  b  (Terra  Archiepiscopi,  Terra  Militum  eius) ;  ^^  a
(Sdrebume,  Dorset) ;  155  a  (Dorchecesire,  Oxfordshire).

*  Dd.  iv.  491.

'  Cf.  Aldret,  Aluuard,  Coluin,  Ansgod,  Godwin  (Dd.  iv.  445)  with
Osbem,  Girold,  William,  Radulf,  Osbert  (iv.  421).

*  Dd.  tiv.  445  (Terre  Anglorum  Tegnorum  in  Devenescira) ;  453
(Tcrre  Anglorum  Tegnorum  in  Summersetaesyra) ;  421  (Terre  Fran-
comm  Militum  in  Devenesira).

*  Dd.  iv.  428  (Terre  Francorum  Tegnorum).

*  E.  g.  Sherborne,  Dd.  i.  ^^  a  (milites  and  iaini),  cf.  Feudal  Aids,
iL  p.  4,  Hundredum  de  Shirbum  (de  feodis  militum).


i  I


88  MILITARY  ORGANIZATION [essay  i

The  second  efliect  of  natural  husbandry  on  military
oi^nization  was  the  introduction  of  land  tenure  as  the
main  condition  of  military  service.  The  influence  of  this
element  makes  itself  felt  in  Anglo-Saxon  and  Anglo-
Danish  as  well  as  in  Anglo-Norman  society.  Warriors
had  to  be  settled  and  to  receive  means  of  existence  and
emoluments  in  the  shape  of  tenements  of  some  kind.  The
obligation  may  be  expressed  or  understood,  formulated
strictly  or  implied  in  a  loose  way,  but  it  appeared  in  all
three  cases  and  facilitated  the  passage  from  each  one  of  the
three  systems  to  the  other.  The  tltanelaful^  the  holding  of
the  Anglo-Danish  liber  homo^  and  the  fief  of  the  Norman
knight  stood  on  the  same  line.

Natural husbandry  in its agricultural  stage  leads  to
/^  an aristocratic military  system because it  involves  the
separation  of  the  class  permanently  engaged  in  agricultural
ft  ^  work  from  the  class  permanently  engaged  in  warlike  pur-

suits. The  professional  soldier  naturally  becomes  the  lord
of  the  professional  labourer. The  development  of  the  pro-
fessional warrior  was  bound  up  with  a  special  and  rather
costly  outfit,  a  good  deal of  leisure  devoted  to  warlike
occupations,  and  a  revenue  representing  the  results  not  of
productive  labour  but of a political superiority. The
differentiation between  warriors and labourers  was  not
brought  about in a  day. It  was  the  result  of  a  long
process  in  the  course  of  which  the  numerous  hosts  of  small
freemen,  grouped  on tribal lines  or  on  the  principle  of
guild  association  under  a  few  leaders,  were  gradually  sub-
divided into  a  body  of  occasional  militiamen  and  a  class  of
thanes  or  military  tenants. The  chief  features  of  this  pro-
cess may  be  summarized  under  the  following  heads  : —

1.  The  service  of  the free tribesman,  of  the  one-hide
^ householder,  and  of  the  representative  of  a  five-hide  honour

mark  the  principal  stages  of  this  evolution.

2.  The  Danish  liere  corresponds  in  a  general  way  to  the
early  Anglo-Saxon  ^'r^.

3.  The  array  of  the  fyrd  for  home  defence  included
"^ all  fyrd- worthy  men,  the  array  for  the  king's  expedition


SEa.LCH.ii] FEUDAL  SERVICE  89

a  picked  force  collected  on  a  tenurial  standard. The  scyp-
fflltdz.^ifeass  as  a  variety  of  the  latter.

4*  The  standards  of  equipment  and  service  in  the  Anglo-
Norman  army  were  fixed  by  the  great  knight's  fee,  the
mall  knight's  fee,  and  various  sergeanties.  The  great
knot's  fee  was  estimated  on  the  average  in  the  twelfth
century  at  fifteen  or  sixteen  marks'  income,  and  the  small
knot's  fee  at  two-thirds  of  the  great  one.  The  notion  of
tbehonour  of  five  hides,  derived  from  the  Saxon  customs  as
to  the  king's  expedition,  asserts  itself  sometimes  in  the
apportionment  of  the  fees  in  the  Norman  period  in  the
south  of  England.

5-  The  military  tenants  of  the  Conquest  included  knights  i/^
and  sergeants. They  step  naturally  into  the  places  occupied
formerly  by  thanes,  drengs,  radknights,  and  liberi  homines.

<5.  The  law  and  apportionment  of  knights'  fees  is  the
product  not  only  of  French  examples  and  irregular  bar-
gains between  the  Conqueror  and  his  followers  ;  they  have
ban  largely  influenced  by  the  rules  as  to  the  selection
of  pidccd  men  for  the  Old  English  king's  expeditions  on
the  one  hand,  by  the  customs  as  to  thanage  on  the  other.

7.  The  difference  between  thanage  and  Norman  military
tenure  lay  mainly  in  the  looser  character  of  the  first  as
based  on  a  general  contract  of  service.  Yet  the  military
»dc  of  this  contract  becomes  very  prominent  in  the  eleventh


cuitom.


SECTION II: JURISDICTION

CHAPTER I

THE  COUNTY  AND  THE  HUNDRED

Provincial  i.  I  DO  not  want  to  speak  of  the  well-known  featun
of  English  provincial  organization  :  the  subject  has  bee
treated  in  such  an  exhaustive  manner  by  Stubbs,  Gneis
Maitland,  and  others,  that  it  would  be  needless  to  revei
to  ft.  One  side  in  the  life  of  provincial  and  local  institudor
cannot,  however,  be  passed  over  without  some  discussio
in  a  book  treating  of  social  history — namely,  their  relatio
to  the  groups  and  ranks  of  society,  their  influence  on  tl
formation  of  such  groups  and  ranks.  In  r^^ard  to  tl
counties  Domesday  presents  some  curious  indication
One  of  its  most  important  features  is  the  series  of  custuma
serving  as  an  introduction^  to  the  survey  of  several  countic
They  do  not  treat  merely  of  the  revenues  of  the  Crow
but  also  of  all  sorts  of  matters  indirectly  connected  wit
them — of  Crown  suits,  franchises,  military  levies  and  guai
duties,  private  war,  &c.  ^  The  returns  enrolled  in  Domesdfl
are  evidently  the  result  of  presentments  made  by  inques
consisting  of  all  the  jurors  of  a  county,  although  we  do  »
know  in  exactly  what  way  the  machinery  of  the  Surv<
was  modified  to  serve  this  particular  need.  Wheth<
for  example,  the  County  Courts  took  any  part  in  formulatii
them  ;  and  whether  the  verdicts  are  to  be  considered,  in  ti;
case,  as  the  pronouncement  of  the  thanes  of  the  shires  onl
or  also  of  the  rustics  and  the  vilis  plebs^  which  were  n
left  aside  in  the  compilation  of  the  local  reports.  * T

^  In  a  few  cases  the  enrolments  do  not  follow  the  ordinary  cow
boundaries,  e.  g.  Derby  and  Nottingham  are  joined  together.
'  Dd.  i.  179  b  (Hereford),  on  the  Welsh  customs  of  private  war.
'  Dd.  69  a,  Alentone  (Allington,  Wilts) :  ...  *  Hanc  terram  tet


SECT.n.  CH.i] COUNTY  AND HUNDRED  91

circles  of  local  usage  would be narrower : the  customs
of  a  town,  like  Colchester  or  Bury  St.  Edmunds,  might
be  occasionally  revealed  to  us,  at  least  in  part,  and- tracts
with  a  very  peculiar  physiognomy,  like  the  borderlands
of  Wales,  or  the  district  between the Ribble  and the
Mersey,  would also receive  a special description. We
need  not  recall  to  the  memory  of  our  readers  that  later
on  every  town  and  manor  might  have  a  body  of  local
custom to  appeal  to. But  on  the  whole  it  is  according
to  counties  that  legal  customs  are  formulated  in  Domesday,
and  it  is  evident  that  this  is  not  a  casual  arrangement
which  might  easily  have  been  superseded  by  a  different
one. It  has  its  roots  in  the  conformation  of  legal  institu-
tions in  the  country,  and may  serve  as an indication
of  processes  with  which  we  have  to  reckon  very  materially.
The  fact  is,  that  before  the  Common  Law  of  England  was
worked  out  in  the  Royal  Courts  of  the  feudal  age  the  main
body  of  English  law  flowed  in  the  channels  of  provincial
customs,  and  the  shire-moots  were  the  chief  institutions
coDccracd  with  the  definite  laying  down  of  it. There  was
a  certain  stock  of  law  declared  and  enacted  by  the  kings,
but  it  covered  only  the  least  portion  of  the  whole  ground.
Indeed,  a  good  deal of  the  contents,  even  of  the  laws
promulgated by  the  kings,  was  provincial  in  origin,  and
niost  of  the  litigation  of  the  country  and  of  its  voluntary
jtJrisdiction  was  shaped  by  the  pronouncements  and  decisions
of  the  County  Courts.  ^ This  main  principle  is  but  slightly
modified  by  the  fact  that  sometimes  several  counties  joined,
'^  order  to  declare  the  law,  and  to  lay  down  a  decision
^wi  some  particularly  important  trial ;  ^ and  that,  on  the

Ijl^dus  comes,  in  eadem  uilla  sunt  iiii  hidae  terrae  quas  iniuste
J^'tTaxit  Heraldus  abaecclesia  Ambresberie  testimonio  tainorum  scirae/
Cf.66d  (Wintrebume) ;  70  c  (Chegeslei) ;  Exon.  Dd.  117  (Boeurda).

Thorpe,  Dipl.  p.  273  ff.:  claim  made  by  Archbishop  Dunstan  as
Jj  the  estates  of  yClfeh  before  the  gem6t  of  the  men  of  Kent  (before
9^).  Dipl.  301  (about  1006) :  agreement  between  Eadmund  i^tteling
^  the  convent  of  Sherborne  witnessed  by  the  senior  thanes  of  Dorset.
5^  p.  302  (before  loii) :  Trial  between  Bishop  Godwin  of  Rochester
™  Leofwin  son  of  /EAftah  before  the  gem6t  of  Kent  at  Canterbury.

Dd.  i.  175  d  :  Beningeorde  (Bengeworth,  Worcs.),  *  Ipsa  aecclesia
(«  Evesham)  tenet  iiii  hidas  .  .  .  et  v**™  hidam  tenet  Urso, Has


k'


92  JURISDICTION  [essay  i

other  hand,  some  counties,  like  Yorkshire,  consisted,  in
truth,  of  several  districts,  which  might  be  considered
in  certain  respects,  as  independent  provinces.  There  u
certainly  a  movement  of  transformation  in  the  historj
of  English  counties,  as  in  everything  else,  and  it  h
interesting  to  note  some  traces  of  their  rise  and  growth ;
but  these  are  matters  for  the  antiquarians:  the  prindph
of  county  autonomy  is  not  disturbed  by  them,  at  least  foi
the  period  of  the  Conquest  and  the  two  or  three  centurie
immediately  preceding  it.
Legal  pecQ-  A  direct  consequence  of  this  may  be  seen  in  the  fact  tha
ofshl^.  ^^^  ^^"^^  ^^  cleavage  between  the  different  legal  and  soda
varieties  of  English  life  follow  to  a  great  extent  counQ
boundaries.  Apart  from  such  fundamental  distinctions
as  that  of  the  Danelaw  as  against  Saxon  England,  wi
find  several  instances  of  sharp  contrast  between  adjoinin{
shires.  The  most  remarkable  is  afforded  by  Kent ;  no
only  is  the  system  of  agrarian  measures  quite  peculiar  there
and  certainly  goes  back  to  the  beginnings  of  the  KentisI
kingdom-  (sulungs  and  yokes  against  hides  and  yard
lands),  but  not  long  after  the  Conquest  we  find  a  whol<
body  of  customary  rules  in  force  in  the  county  which  an
direcdy  opposed  to  those  prevailing  in  the  rest  of  England
Socially,  the  most  important  of  these  is  the  famous  rul(
of  gafolciaid  (gavelkind),  succession  demanding  equa
division  among  sons,^  the  hearth  being  reserved  to  th
younger ;  and,  needless  to  say,  the  enforcement  of  this  rul
produced  a  very  different  system  of  holdings  from  tha

V  hidas  diratiocinauit  Walterus  abb.  ad  Ildebergam  in  iiii  sciris  corat
episcopo  baiocensi  et  aliis  baronibus  regis/  Cf.  338  c  (Aluestoiu
Warwick).  In  cases  concerning  kings  and  very  great  men  the  Wita
at  general  assemblies  decided.  £.  g.  Thorpe,  Dipl.  p.  201 — the  dedara
tion  of  Queen  Eadgifa  as  to  litigation  in  regard  to  her  estates.  C:
207-9.

^  An  interesting  example  in  Domesday  in  this  respect  is  the  di!
persion  of  Rutland  between  Northamptonshire  and  Lincolnshire.

'We  find  the  sulungs,  yokes,  and  aratra,  as  opposed  to  hides  an
manentes  or  cassati,  in  some  of  the  most  ancient  of  the  genain
charters  that  have  come  down  to  us.  £.  g.  Earle,  Land  Charters,  1
(a.  D.700  or  715) ;  Cod.  DipL  195  (a.d.  811).

'  The  original  term  seems  to  have  been  gafol-gecynd.


SECT.  II.  CH.  I] COUNTY  AND HUNDRED  93

commonly  prevailing  in  feudalized  counties.  The  unity
of  the  sulungs  and  yokes  was  kept  up  artificially,  but  they
were  in  truth  covered  by  a  network  of  entangled  rights,
and  the  economic  exploitation  of  the  land  tended  to
a  parcelling  of  it  up  into  small  plots,  instead  of  a  con-
centration into  efficient  husbandry  units.  This  Kentish
s}rstem  of  succession  is  the  corollary  of  a  mobilization
of  land  tenure  and  of  great  freedom  in  the  choosing  of
pursuits  on  the  part  of  labourers  and  small  landowners.^
With  all  its  accompanying  circumstances,  it  accounts,
probably,  for  the  startling  fact  recognized  by  the  exponents
of  Common  Law  in  the  thirteenth  century,  namely,  that
there  was  no  villainage  in  Kent  in  the  later  legal  sense,
that  is,  no  servile  population  holding  at  the  will  of  the
lord.  And  what  is  more,  a  whole  string  of  rules  of  private
law,  which  are  not  immediately  derived  from  social  standing,
arc  framed  by  this  provincial  custom^ — rules  in  regard
to  freebench,  to  wardship,  to  freedom  from  forfeiture.®
These  peculiarities  of  Kentish  custom  interest  us  here  from
the  point  of  view  of  the  shire  autonomy  they  disclose.
Nothing  of  the  kind  is  recognized  in  Sussex,  Surrey,  or
Elssex,  just  over  the  border. Customs  similar  to  gavel-

^  Villainage  in  England,  pp.  205,  248.  Cf.  Pollock  and  Maitland,
History  of  English  Law,  II.  i.  p.  269(1.

'  They  form  the  substance  of  the  famous  custumal  of  Kent  recog-
nized by  the  Royal  Courts  in  the  thirteenth  century.  Statutes  of  the
Realm,  p.  224.  Such  juridical  sayings  as  *  the  father  to  the  bough,  the
son  to  the  plough '  are  the  best  proof  that  the  customs  in  Question
were  formulated  in  courts  which  kept  up  their  legal  rules  by  oral
tradition.

•  Bracton's  Note  Book,  pi.  1338 :  *  Isabella  de  Grauenel  v.  Thomam
de  Wadenhale  medietatem  c  acr.  et  septem  acr.  terre  cum  pertinenciis
in  Nywelande  etc.  ut  dotem  suam  etc.  et  v.  lohannem  de  Wadenhale
medietatem  c  et  septem  acr.  terre  cum  pertinenciis  in  eadem  uilla
ut  dotem  suam,  unde  Walterus  de  la  Nywelande  quondam  uir  suus
cam  etc.  Et  ipsi  ueniunt  et  defendunt  ius  suum  et  dicunt  quod  non
debet  habere  terram  illam  ncc  aliam  nomine  dotis  quia  ipsa  post  mortem
predict!  Walteri  de  cuius  nomine  ipsa  clamat  predictam  terram  in
dotem  cepit  alium  uirum  et  consuetudo  est  quod  uxores  maritorum
defiinctorum  habeant  francum  bancum  suum  de  terris  sokemannorum
et  quod  nullum  uirum  capiat  post  mortem  uiri  sui,  quod  si  fecerit,  con-
suetudo est  in  eodem  comitatu  quod  amittat  dotem  suam  quam  clamat
nomine  primi  uiri  sui.  Et  super  hoc  uenerunt  militcs  de  eodem  comi-
tatu et  petunt  libertatem  et  consuetudinem  comitatus  sibi  teneri.'


94  JURISDICTION  [ESSAY

kind  may  be  noticed  in  this  or  the  other  place  outsid
Kent,^  but  they  would  be  rooted  in  manorial  usage  an(
not  in  county  law^  whereas  the  rules  enumerated  in  th
Kentish  custumal  may  be  considered,  if  one  may  use  th
expression,  as  the  Common  Law  of  the  shire.  Clearly  th
jurisdiction  of  the  shire-moot^  played  a  decisive  part  i:
shaping  the  local  usages  of  this  region  into  determine
legal  principles,  just  as  later  on  the  jurisdiction  of  th
King's  Courts  unified  the  Common  Law  of  England.

Another  instance  of  sharp  cleavs^e  between  adjoinin
counties  is  presented  by  the  comparison  of  the  survey
of  Suffolk  and  Norfolk  on  the  one  hand,  Essex,  Herl
fordshire,  Cambridgeshire,  and  Lincolnshire  on  the  othe
The  two  East  Anglian  shires  are  not  only  described  i
a  different  way  from  the  Mercian  and  Saxon  province
bordering  on  them,  but  they  display,  also,  peculiaritic
in  their  political  and  social  structure.  The  system  c
distributing  the  *  Scot '  among  manors  is  peculiar :  th
very  minute  settlement  of  the  position  of  freemen  an>
socmen,  when  compared  with  the  neighbouring  countie
being  due,  not  only  to  the  matter-of-fact  conditions,  bu
also  to  the  peculiar  treatment  of  questions  of  status  b
East  Anglian  County  Courts.^  It  is  not  likely  that  thi
difference  in  arrangement  should  be  traceable  chiefly  t

^  Bracton's  Note  Book,  pi.  623  (Cantebr.) :  *  Alicia  que  fiiit  uxc
Philippi  d2  Burgo  v.  Odonem  dc  Swafham  medietatem  ii  acr.  et  triui
rodarum  . . .  terre  . . .  et  v.  Willelmum  le  Fraunceys  medietatem  unit
acr. . .  .  £t  Odo  et  alii  prius  dixerunt  quod  talis  est  consuetude  i
feodo  Comitis  Britannie  quod  mulieresnon  poterunt  habere  nisi  terdai
partem  terrarum  uirorum  suorum  eo  quod  tencrunt  per  seniidui
militare  simul  cum  soccagio  . . .  £t  uicecomes  misit  inquisicionem . .
quod  talis  sit  consuetudo  eiusdem  manerii  quod  mulieres  non  possui
habero  nisi  terciam  partem.' Cf.  pi.  990  (Hereford).

'  After  all,  these  special  customs  of  honours  and  manors  are  als
traceable  to  the  action  of  separate  courts.

'  It  is  interesting,  e.g.,  to  compare  the  description  of  the  £ss<
hundred  of  Tendring  with  that  of  adjoining  parts  of  Suffolk.  Tt
materials  are  very  similar,  and  yet  the  surveys  even  of  such  manors  :
Erleia,  Laleford,  Dicheleia,  Sciddinchou,  which  lie  on  the  very  bord
and  present  many  varieties  of  condition,  including  in  the  case  of  Lal<
ford  a  considerable  Royal  Soke  with  many  sokemen,  are  different  iroi
the  exceedingly  heterogeneous  Suffolk  surveys  with  their  gradations  '
commendation  and  soke.


SECT.ll.  CH.I] COUNTY  AND HUNDRED  95

tie  separate  existence  of  East  Anglia  as  a  kingdom  or
afl  earldom. Some  of  the  traits  just  mentioned  belong
to  a  period  when  the  two  shires  had  ceased to  form
a  united  body  separate  from  the  rest,  and  although  the
policy  of  East  Anglian  earls  may  have  had  something
to  do  with  the  division  of  the  land,  it  hardly  extended
to  the  settlement  of  all  these  intricate  questions  of  com-
mendation, soke,  and  land tenure  which are  constantly
noticed by the Survey. These questions must  have
demanded  the  constant  attention of  the  thanes  of  the
Norfolk  and  Suffolk  shire-moots  before  they  came  to  the
cognizance  of  the  jurors  of  William  the  Bastard's  Inquest.
The  customs  as  to  fyrd  attendance  are  another  point
on  which  the  lines  of  cleavage  between  counties  became
very noticeable. Why  should the jurors of Berkshire
make  such  a  definite  statement  about  the  rules  of  military
service  in  their  county?^ Why are  the  duties of  the
Welsh  contingent  mentioned  expressly  in  the  custumal
of Herefordshire?^ Because, evidently, the ordinary
precepts  about  the  trinoda  necessitas  were  insufficient  to
settle  the  particulars  in  such  cases. Nor  is  it  at  all  likely
that  in  other  counties,  although  no  explicit  enrolment  with
regard  to  such  rules  is  made,  there  should  not  have  been
similar  peculiarities  in  regard  to  fyrd  attendance,  frontier
expeditions,  &c. Supplementary  arrangements  could  not
be  dispensed  with,  because  the  general  principle  o{  the  fyrd
obligation  was  too  broad  to  ensure  a  settlement  of  the
many  questions  arising  in  practice. How  far  these  sup-
plementary arrangements  had  to  be  framed  by  provincial
customs  in  every  instance  we  cannot  tell,  but  we  know

^  Dd.  i.  56  c  :  (Berks) '  Siquis  in  expeditionem  summonitus  non  ibat,
totam  terram  suam  erga  regem  forisfaciebat.  Quod  siquis  remanendi
habens  alium  per  se  mittere  promitteret  et  tamen  qui  mittcndus  erat
remaneret  pro  1  solidis  qui?tus  erat  dominus  eius/

•  Dd.  i.  179  a  :  (Hereford)  *  Si  uicecomes  iret  in  Wales  cum  exercitu
ibant  hi  homines  cum  eo.  Quod  siquis  ire  iussus  non  iret,  emendabat
regi  xJ  solidos.*  Cf.  179  c:  *  (In  Arcenfelde)  Similiter  em-ndat  (dat
ii  solidos  aut  unum  bouem  regi)  qui  iussus  a  uicecomite  secum  ire
in  Waiis  oon  pergit.  Nam  si  uic?comes  non  uadit  nemo  eorum  ibit.
Cum  exercitus  in  hostem  pergit  ipsi  per  consuetudinem  faciunt  Auant-
warde  ct  in  reuersionc  Redrewarde.*


moot


</>  JL"R[SDICnON  [ESSAY

enough  to  mafntam  that  the  abire-cDOot  of  each  county  haj
an  extenszTC  and  ccdsfve  jnrisdktioo  in  sudi  questionj
The  Whans  of  the  realm  pot  forth  general  requirement
and  the  royal  officials  had  to  watch  over  the  efiidenc
and  completeness  oc  the  natioffvil  fbroey  but  the  detail
as  to  repartztzon  and  enfonTment  of  service  were  Id
to  the  shires  themselves^

From  these  demonstrable  facts  we  may  surmise  thai
in  the  formation  of  group  distinctions^  the  customary  lor
of  the  thanes  of  the  shire  played  a  great  part.  It  wouL
be  wrong  to  assume  that  it  was  the  only,  or  even  the  chiel
agent  in  the  matter.  Royal  authority,  the  pressure  €
economic  wants,  the  strong  hand  of  the  mighty,  the  dis
tribution  of  capital,  have  certainly  to  be  reckoned  wit!
in  no  slx^t  degree.  But  before  makii^  up  our  mim
as  to  the  relative  influence  of  these  several  (actors,  wi
must  lay  stress  on  each  one  of  them  in  turn  as  they  preaen
themselves.  And  there  can  hardly  be  a  doubt  that  ii
regard  to  the  preliminary  processes  preceding  the  wholesali
arrangement  of  feudalism  by  the  Conquest,  the  jurisdictioi
of  the  Old  English  Count}*  Courts  exerted  a  most  powerfu
influence ;  this  influence  did  not  altogether  cease  even  afte
the  Conquest,  when  the  new  French  administration  hac
constantly  to  appeal  to  the  traditions  of  the  former  period
and  the  provincial  institutions  remained  active  in  theii
sphere,  although  their  competence  became  more  restricted
The  2.  The  origins  of  the  l\jindred  as  a  subdivision  of  tlu

°"  ^  ' shire  negd  not  concern  us  here. Whether  it  was  a  com-


paratively modem  machinery  introduced  by  Edgar,  or  th(
result  of  a  gradual  development  of  local  government,  oi
an  English  variety  of  a  universal  Teutonic  institution
it  was  in  full  action  long  before  Domesday,  even  it
Danish  counterpart,^  the  wapentake,  being  more  than  a
century  old  at  that  time. Nor  is  it  necessary  to  inves

*  Dd.  i.  375  a :  '  (Clamores  quae  sunt  in  Sudtreding,  Lincolniae)
In  Tadeuuelle  hundred  clamant  homines  episcopi  Baiocensis  i  camcar
tam  terre  super  Robertum  dispensatorem,  et  homines  de  Wapentai
dicunt  quod  ipse  episcopus  lore  debet  habere.'  Cf.  371  a  (Chisebi)
Round,  V.  C.  H.  Essex,  i.  p.  405  fT.,  Sussex,  i.  p.  36a


SECT.iLCH.i] COUNTY  AND  HUNDRED  97

t^te  the  various  district  divisions  intermediate  between
the  county  and  the  hundred— the  Riding,  treding,  rape,
last  ^— nor  the  local  branches  which  are  sometimes  men-
tioned within  the  hundred,  the  leets,  wards,^  &c.  All  such
investigations  may  be  left  on  one  side  as  not  affecting  the
main  issue.  The  subject  which  immediately  interests  us  is
the  part  played  by  the  hundred,  in  the  judicial  organization
of  the  county  on  the  one  hand,  in  its  financial  system  on  the '
other.  For  the  bulk  of  the  population  it  was  the  most
common  and  active  of  the  public  institutions  they  had  to
deal  with.  The  small  landowners  and  tenants  had  not
often  to  do  with  the  shire-moot ;  already  in  the  eleventh
century  the  latter  was  managed  by  a  group  of  thanes,
which  might  be  likened  to  the  county  families  of  later
days,  well-to-do  people  who  could  afford  to  appear  at
the  sessions,  and  were  able  to  exercise  local  influ-
ence. Thus,  although  the  small  freeman  suitors  were
not  excluded  from  the  county,  they  played  hardly  any
part  m  its  affairs ;  they  had  not  sufficient  power  and  energy
to  keep  up  their  real  participation  in  its  administrative  and
judicial  business.  lUwas  different,  to  a  certain  extent,
with  the  hundred.  Its  court  met  sufficiently  often  to
tnmsact  a  good  deal  of  legal  and  administrative  business,
the  attendance  of  small  suitors  was-  exacted  with  some
^verity,  and  the  place  where  the  hundred  court  was  held
was  within  easier  reach  for  everyone.® The  history  of

*  D<L  i.  ic  (L^st  de  Estrede) ; C.  S.  1 119  (provincia) ;  V.  C.  H.,
Sussex,  i.  353  (Rapes).

^  Dd.  i.  166  a  (In  Ferdingo  de  Wicelcombe,  Gloucs.)  ;  ii.  119  b  (H.
de  GrenehQu,  Norfolk,  de  xiiii  letis) ;  ii.  212  b  (Norfolk),  *  Terra
Sanctae  Adeldredae.  Hund  et  Dim  .  de  Clakeslosa  .  de  x  leitis.'  Cf.
Testa  de  Nevill,  319  b  (Wapent.  de  Avelund,  Hund  de  Brune,  &c..
Lines.).  The  fact  that  leets  appear  as  fractions  of  hundreds  is  impor-
tant as  an  explanation  of  the  Court  leet,  which  is,  at  bottom,  a  portion
of  the  Hundred  Court  in  private  hands.

'  See  the  transactions  witnessed  and  confirmed  by  the  hundreds  in
Northamptonshire  in  regard  to  property  ceded  to  Peterborough  Abbey
(Cart.  Sax.  11 30).  In  one  particularly  important  instance  the  whole
here  of  Northamptonshire  appears  to  ratify  the  transaction — ^a  shirc-
moot  is  evidently  meant.  £.  g.  Cart.  Sax.  1 130  (Medehamstede,  972-
992) :  *  pis  sind  ^  festermen  |)e  Osfer%  and  pQr  funden  Adeluuolde  b  and
iClfrice  cylde  and  Ealdulfe  ab  .  on  sehte  hundred  gemote  set  wylmes
forda  for  hiora  magas  2SX  ^n  lande  set  Beringafelde  ...  pa  Elfric

Vl!COCK>t»OrF  H


•

/"


/


y


98  JURISDICTION  [ESSAY

public  jurisdiction  in  the  local  divisions  is  intimately  con
nected  with  the  fate  of  this  court.

Now  the  hundred  may  be  regarded  from  two  pcMnta  c
view.  It  was  the  congr^ation  of  the  freemen,  or  as  w
should  say  of  the  citizens  of  the  district,  of  the  me
mot-worthy,  fyrd-worthy,  and  fold-worthy;*  and  it  wa
a  territorial  union  of  all  the  townships  and  estates  of  tb
district.  In  the  composition  of  the  hundred  one  ma
notice  both  elements ;  both  the  free  owners  as  such,  an
the  estates  as  such,  were  represented,  the  first  individually
the  second  by  delegations  of  the  lord,  the  steward,  or  <
committees  of  six  villagers,  including  the  priest  and  tij
reeve.*  The  attendance  of  the  suitors  was  urgenti
demanded,  and  fines  inflicted  for  non-attendance,  an
this  has  ensured  the  existence  of  sufficient  evidence  aboi
the  status  of  the  suitors.  According  to  the  position  of  th
shire  one  or  the  other  element  predominates,  mostly  fl
territorial,  as  far  as  we  can  see  from  the  records  of  fei
dalized  England.^  We  find,  even,  that  a  special  status  <
hundredors,  of  tenants  bound  to  acquit  a  manor,  or  towi

caldorman  bohte  bat  landc  xx  Leobrantestune  ast  Frenan  on  call
heres  gemote  on  namtone  ))e  bes  him  eal  se  here  boruhhand  dea
landes ...  Her  ge  swutele%  \2t\  Ealdulf  ab  ge  bohtc  ane  hyde  landet «
Esctune  xt  EaUfuuolde  on  |>ere  iii  hundred  ge  w^^esse.'  Dd.  i.  179
'  Inter  ciuitatem  ct  xviii  maneria  ^ui  in  Hereford  reddunt  finnas  su
computantur  ccc  xxxv  librae  et  xvin  solidi  exceptis  placitis  de  hundr^
et  de  comitatu.' Cf.  ii.  423  b,  424  a  (Faltenham,  SufTolk).

^  K.C.  D.  853  (vol.  iv.  p.  208).  Therefore  the  northern  distr
corresponding  to  the  hundred  is  the  wapentake,  and  the  moot  of  a  sh:
is  a  moot  of  the  whole  here. Cart.  Sax.  iii.  1 130,  p.  370.

'  Leg.  Henr.  I,  c.  VII,  7.  Cf.  VIII,  i ;  the  Lib.  Eliensis,  Introds
tion,  mentions  an  increased  deputation  of  eight  for  the  purpose  oft
Domesday  Survey.  Cf.  the  twelve  men  from  towns,  e.  g.  Chester,  Dd
263  d :  '  Tunc  erant  xii  indices  ciuitatis  et  hi  erant  de  hominibus  re|
et  episcopi  et  comitis.  Horum  si  quis  de  hundret  remanebat  die  %
sedcbat  sine  excusatione  manifesta  x  solidos  emendabat  inter  regcm
comitem.'

'  The  attendance  of  the  lords  must  have  been  freauent  in  the  shh
moots  and  exceptional  in  the  hundred-moots.  Hotn  lords  of  ettal
and  deputations  represent,  however,  the  territorial  element.  The  M
sonal  one  is  evident  in  cases  where  the  free  members  of  a  hundrea  I
enumerated  apart  from  the  organization  of  estates.  £.  g.  Dd.  ii.  146
(Dalllnga,  Norfolk) '  Ibi  calumpniatur  Edui  prepositus  regis  i  homiiM
de  XXX  acris  et  hoc  testatur  hundret.'  Small  freemen  belonging  to  1
hundred  are  often  mentioned  in  the  East  Anglian  shires.


sect.il  CH.  I] COUNTY  AND HUNDRED  99

ship,  by  suit  to  the  hundred  court,  is  created  by  custom.^
StUl,  the  personal  aspect  never  disappears  entirely,  and  on
the  great  law  days  the  whole  free  population  is  called  up
to  stand  before  the  sherifT,  or  the  magnate  holding  the
view  of  frank-pledge,  even  the  lowest  classes  being  repre-
sented by  their  tithings,  or  at  least  by  their  chief  pledges,
head-boroughs,^  &c

Originally  both  aspects  of  the  hundred  seem  to  have
been  connected  in  such  a  way  that  the  court  ought  to  have
been  formed  of  all  the  free  tenants  of  the  hundred,  each
possessed  normally  of  one  hide,  while  the  followers  {fol-
fmi)  of  the  '  hearthfast ' '  men  were  represented  by  the
latter  as  their  pledges.  The  fact  that  the  personal  respon-
sibility was  supported  by  a  collective  liability  of  the
tithings  did  not  alter  the  fundamental  relation  of  the  two
dasses— that  of  the  freeholders  and  suitors  of  the  hun-
dred, and  that  of  the  dependent  population.  In  this
construction  the  freeman  possessed  of  one  hide  appears  as
the  typical  landowner  and  member  of  the  hundred.  Traces
of  such  freemen  outside  the  manors  attached  to  hundreds
arc  still  to  be  found  in  Domesday,  or  rather  the  freemen,
who  are  generally  distributed  in  the  Survey  according
to  manors,  appear,  exceptionally,  as  directly  attached  to
the  hundreds;^  and  there  can  be  hardly  a  doubt  that

'  Cf.  Villainage  in  England,  pp.  188,  194.  The  status  of  the  /tun-
^redor  was  rendered  especially  important  in  manorialized  districts
^KCBuse  the  freeholders  of  ancient  custom  were  not  clearly  divided  from
tile  rest  of  the  peasantry.

'  Rot.  Hund.  ii.  127,  128  :  (Somerset)  '  Dicunt  quod  hundred  de

Sothperton  est  in  manu  domini  Radulphi  de  Albiniaco  . . .  £t  quatuor

theybing  qui  solebant  facere  sectam  ad  hundredum  predictum  sunt

sobCfi&cte . .  .  per  Ricardum  Comitem  Gloucestrie  . .  .  videlicet  Seven-

iwnpCon  Abbatis,  Sevenhamton  Deneys,  Kinigton,  et  Chafton,  et  eciam

lecta  duonim  eonindem  maneriorum  et  liberorum  hominum  in  predictis

<Iiiatiior  raaneriis  terras  habencium  subtrahitur  .  .  .  Dicunt  eciam  quod

idem  liberi  homines  et  eedem  decenne  solebant  facere  sectam  bis  in

anno  ad  tumum  Vicecomitis  et  modo  non  faciunt  ad  dampnum  domini

Resis-'

*  D^  L  i8d :  (In  Baldeslei  Hundred,  Sussex)  '  In  eodem  hundredo

tenet  Ingelrannus  de  comite  (de  Ow)  iii  virgatas  quas  tenuerunt  ii  liberi
bomines  T.  R.  £.  sed  geldum  nunquam  reddiderunt.'  Cf.  19  c  (In
Hcnhert  Hundred,  Drisnesel,  &c.)  ;  20  a  (Colespore  Hundred) ;  147  b
I  In  Coteslai  Hundred,  Bucks),  *  Duo  Angli  tenent  de  Walterio  in  hoc

II  %


hides.


loo  JURISDICTION  [essay

before  the  Conquest  this  was  regarded  as  their  natura
position.
Hundred-  The  hundred-hides  theory  is  clearly  traceable  in  the
composition  of  many  hundreds  in  Domesday,  or  in  docn-
ments  of  nearly  the  same  time.  Many  hundreds  wen
actually  composed  of  the  required  number  of  hides,^  an^
when  they  got  to  be  too  large  or  too  small  they  wen
treated  as,  and  called,  double,  ^triple  hundreds,  hundred]
and  a  half,  or  half-hundreds.^  In  course  of  time  the
estates  got  to  be  anything  but  single-hide  holdings ;  it
the  overwhelming  majority  of  cases  they  contained  five
ten  hides,  or,  on  the  contrary,  fractions  of  a  hide.  But  th<
hundred  was  nevertheless  rounded  off  as  much  as  possibk
to  contain  the  average  of  a  hundred  hides.  How  are  wc
to  explain  such  regularity  in  the  midst  of  all  the  incidents
of  land  tenure  ?  How  could  the  hundreds  keep  up  theii
round  numbers  while  the  estates  composing  them  gren
and  diminished,  while  so  many  of  the  original  members  d
the  hundreds  ceased  to  be  tenants-in-chief,  and  disappeared
within  the  estates  of  greater  and  more  successful  men  ?  It
has  to  be  said,  to  b^in  with,  that  the  passage  of  some  of

hundredo  unam  uirgatam.'  Cf.  148  c  (Stanes  Hundred) ;  357  c  (Piche-
uorde) ;  ii.  333  b  (Blidinga,  Suffolk),  *  Liberi  homines  Rpgeri  bigot'
-  ^  Dd.  i.  175  c :  (Worcs.) '  In  Fissesberge  hundred  habet  aecdesia  de
Euesham  Ixv  hidas.  Ex  his  xii  hidae  sunt  liberae.  In  illo  Hundredo
iacent  xx  hidae  de  dodentreu  et  xv  hidae  de  Wirecestre  perfidant
hundret.*

'  Dd.  i.  172c:  (Worcs.)  ^Ecclesia  Sanctae  Mariae  de  WircGestn
habet  unum  hundret  ^uod  vocatur  Oswaldeslau.  In  quo  iacent  ccc
hidae.  De  quibus  episcopus  ipsius  aecclesiae  a  constitutione  anti-
quorum  temporum  habet  omnes  redditiones  socharum  et  onrnes  cod-
suetudines  inibi  pertinentes  ad  dominicum  uictum  et  regis  seruicium  et
suum,  ita  ut  nullus  uicecomes  ullam  ibi  habere  possit  querelam  nee  IQ
aliquo  placito  nee  in  alia  qualibet  causa.  Hoc  attestatur  totus  oomi-
tatus.  Hae  predictae  ccc  hidae  fuerunt  de  ipso  dominio  aecclesiae  el
si^uid  de  ipsis  cuicunque  homini  quolibet  modo  attributum  uel  prestitmn
fuisset  ad  seruiendum  inde  episcopo.'  182  d:  (Hereford) '  Inter  totmn
sunt  in  episcopatu  (de  Hereford)  ccc  hidae  quamuis  de  xxxiii  Iddh
homines  episcopi  rationem  non  dederint.'  Cf.  Cart.  Sax.  1137  (Hni*
dret  de  Oswaldeslao  'in  quo  iacent  ccc  hidae').  133c  (Hertford
Dimidium  Hundret  de  Hiz).  Cf.  134a :  (Hertford) '  Has  xxxvi  hidai
tenet  episcopus  Londoniensis  et  sui  milites  et  cum  his  redamat  iiii  htdai
quas  tenet  abbas  de  Ely  in  Hadam.'— Northampton  Geld  Inqu.,  EUii
Introd,  i.  i84ff.


SECT.lLCH.i] COUNTY  AND HUNDRED  . loi

the  hundred  tenants  into  a  lower  story  of  tenure,  if  one
may  term  it  so,  did  not  itself  affect  the  hidage  of  the
district,  inasmuch  as  the  new  lord  represented  the  hide
which  had  lapsed  into  his  hands  as  well  as  those  formerly
held  by  him.  It  was  different,  of  course,  when  the  trans-
fer of  property  led  to  a  change  in  the  distribution  of  the
hides  into  hundreds :  if,  as  not  unfrequently  happened,  the
manor  to  which  the  small  and  formerly  independent  plot
came  to  belong  was  situated  in  another  hundred,  or  even
in  another  county.  This  certainly  led  to  complications  in
tenure  and  fiscal  liability,  of  which  there  are  so  many
reported  in  Domesday.^  But,  after  all,  the  fact  that  the
normal  hundreds  were  primarily  composed  of  hides,  and
not  of  estates,  maple  it  possible  to  keep  up  the  tradition  of
the  original  numbers  very  tenaciously^.  Secondly,  there
are  some  clear  cases  of  rearrangement,  when  great  changes
in  the  distribution  of  the  hides  necessitated  the  formation
of  new  hundreds,  and  the  different  grouping  of  old  ones.*^
And,  lastly,  it  has  to  be  said  that,  although  the  regularity
docs  make  itself  felt  in  many  districts,  there  are  a  great
niany  others  which  cannot  be  reduced  to  any  regularity.
One  need  only  glance  at  the  tables  of  hundreds  belonging
to  the  southern  counties  in  order  to  realize  the  meaning  of
this  observation.^  Very  characteristic  indications  are  given
in  this  respect  by  two  counties  situated  at  the  extreme
ends  of  the  island — Kent  and  Devon.  The  south-eastern
county  is  full  of  exceedingly  small  hundreds,  of  which
some  contain  only  three  or  four  townships  ;  *  the  hundreds
of  Devon  extend  over  wide  tracts  of  land,  of  which  a  great

Dd.  i.  20  d :  (Sussex)  *  In  eodem  Hundredo  (Totenore)  tenet  ipse
^^^J^fitt  viii  hidas  sed  appreciatae  sunt  in  alio  Hundredo.*  Cf.  69b
(Wilts,  Hundred  de  Wrderusteselle) ;  181  b  (Hereford,  Niware).

J  Ballard,  Domesday  Inquest,  66,  67.

^  Sec,  eg.,  the  Victoria  County  Hist,  of  Sussex,  i.  360.
£•£.  Witenestaple  Hund. — Soaneclive,  i  solin  (Dd.  i.  10  a),  Blehem.
jMUb) ;  Ceteham  Hund. — Gelingeham,  os.  (3  c),  Ceteham,  6s.  (8  c) ;
Ij*^^  Hund.— Erhede,  4s.  (3  a);  Loisnes,  4s.  (T.  R.  E.,  10s.)  (6c);
Mou,  1$.  (5  c) .  Plumestede,  2s.  i  jugum  (6  c) ;  Plumestede,  2s.  i  jugum
|"a);  Calehelle  Hund.— Cheringes,  8s.  (3d);  Pluchelei,  is.  (3d);
Urbam,  2s.  (4  c) ;  Litelcert,  2\  hides  (T.R.E.  3s.)  (5a);  Welle,  5s.
(T.R,E.  7s.)  (5b);  Piucntone,  is.  (10  d) ;  Rotinge,  J  j.  (12  b).


loa  JURISDICTION  [ESSii

part  was  hardly  cultivated  at  the  time  of  the  Survc
The  sulungs  of  Kent  do  not  stand  in  any  regular  relat
to  the  hundreds,  and  as  for  the  hides  of  Devony  tl
present  artificial  units  of  taxation  not  corresponding
the  least  to  actual  ploughlands.  The  number  of  Dev
shire  hides  in  the  hundreds  are  therefore  small,  and  har
ever  approach  the  hundred ;  and  the  same  may  be  saic
the  sulungs  of  Kent.  Yet  the  reasons  for  this  superfi)
similarity  lie  in  directly  opposite  deviations  from
common  standard  of  the  hide.  The  Kentish  househc
were  crowded  on  to  the  territory  of  the  sulungs,  and
hundreds  were  evidently  never  meant  to  be  enunu
tions  of  these  latter,  but,  if  anything,  enumerations
households  which,  for  all  we  know,  may  have  been  n
enough  to  the  mark,  at  least  in  old  times  when  the  Jul
immigrants  were  crowded  on  a  narrow  strip  of  territc
It  is  not  without  significance  that  the  number  of  tfa
hundreds  roughly  corresponds  to  half  the  number  of
hides  assigned  to  Kent  in  the  so-called  Tribal  Hida|
and  which  never  reappear  in  later  records.

On  the  contrary,  Devonshire  suffered  from  scarcity
population  and  want  of  capital.  Its  hidation  was  be
ficial,  that  is,  a  few  hide  units  were  assigned,  not  only
lai^e  tracts,  but  even  to  estates  containing  a  good  nu
plough-teams.  Therefore  the  territorial  hundreds  co
not  keep  pace  with  the  hidage.  Although,  as  a  mal
of  fact,  they  were  much  more  extensive  than  in  ot
places,  still  the  number  of  hides  in  them  did  not  nea
reach  the  average.^

Curious  provincial  variations  have  been  noticed  in
north,  where  we  find  hundreds  of  1 2  carucates,  and  cc
binations  of  6,  12,  and  18  hundreds.* The  numbers

*  See  Victoria  County  History  of  Devon,  i.  383.

'  Corbett,  Tribal  Hidage. Trans,  of  R.  Hist.  Soc,  xiv.  212.

'  The  hundred  of  Crediton,  containing  twenty  hides,  is  a  g
instance.  Cram-ford  Charters  (Anecdota  Oxoniensia),  ed.  Napier
Stevenson.

*  Dd.  i.  293  c:  (Roteland)  *In  Alfhodestou  Wapent.  sun
Hundrez.  In  unoquoque  xii  carucatae  ad  geldum,  et  in  uno  que
xxiiii  carucae  esse  possum. Hoc  Wapentac  dimid.  est  in  Turgasi


SECT.  II.  CH.  I] COUNTY  AND HUNDRED  103'

evidcntiy  grouped  artificially  according  to  northern  duo-
dcdmal  schemes.  It  is  not  unlikely  that,  at  the  bottom
of  these  strange  computations,  there  may  lie  the  toft,  as
one  man's  land,  leading  to  the  carucate,  as  tenmanland.^
The  hundred  would  then  consist,  not  of  households,  or
plural  combinations,  but  of  single  men's  holdings.  The
higher  units  would  have  to  be  formed  by  a  piling  up  of
dozens  and  half-dozens  of  these  smaller  hundreds,  and  it  is
dear  that  the  artificial  groups  in  question  were  formed
anew  by  the  northern  conquerors  of  the  Danelaw.

The  hundred  is  not  only  a  district  with  a  jurisdictional  Citizens  in
centre,  it  is  also  a  union  for  the  purpose  of  exacting  fiscal  dred.""
dues  and  public  contributions  of  all  kinds — police  service,
military  service,  attendance  at  inquests  and  judicial  courts.^
A  township  may  be  included  in  a  hundred  for  payment

of  geld,  and  for  the  fyrd,  although  it  is  incorporated  in
Wi^tac  et  dimid.  in  Brochelestou  Wapent.— In  Martinesleie  Wap.
est  i  bondret  in  quo  xii  carucatae  terrae  ad  geldum  et  xlviii  carucae
esse  possunt  exceptis  tribus  dominicis  regis  Maneriis  in  quibus  possunt
>ive  xiiii  carucae.'  Cf.  361  b  (Lines.), '  Blachene  Duo  hundreda  . .
«iiii  carucatae  terre  ad  geldum ' ;  Dd.  i.  38  c  (Wallop,  Hants) ^
'Wallope. .  .  .  Huic  manerio  pertinebat  T.R.E.  tercius  denarius  de  vi
hundrez  et  in  omnibus  siluis  quae  pertinebant  vi  bund,  habebat
P^storam  et  pasnagium  quietum ' ;  280  c  (Notts), '  In  Snotingeham
Kyreetin  Derbiscyre.  pax  regis  manu  uel  sigillo  data  si  fuerit  infracta,
^oiendatur  per  xviii  hundrez.  Unumquidque  hundredum  viii  lib.
Huius  emendationis  habet  rex  ii  partes.  Comes  terciam.  Idest  xii
"'<!«  emendant  regi  et  vi  comiti.'  Cf.  298  d  (Yorkshire) ;  336  c
(Lincolnshire).

.*  The  tenfnanland  occurs  on  the  Norfolk  estates  of  Ely  Minster.
Villainage  in  England,  p.  255  ;  cf.  Growth  of  the  Manor,  p.  375.  I
^l^oughtthat  the  term  might  be  a  corruption  tAiunmanlanddXidi  indicate
|hecanicate  or  ploughland  as  the  holding  of  a  typical  tunman^?iplenus
'^^llanus.  But  there  are  curious  variations  of  the  term  in  some  of  the
^ularies  of  Ely,  which  show  that  a  complex  of  ten  *  mantales  *  or
Jcnraan  *hloth*  was  meant. Cotton  MSS.,  Tiberius,  B.  ii.  f.  157:

^ilWmus  Franceis  et  Thomas  dc  Nordwald  tenent  dimid ium  ten-
®*iiloth,  SciL  60  acras  etc.  .  .  Galfridus  de  Gatestone  et  participes
^«t  uDum  tenmanloth,  scilicet  sexcies  viginti  acras  pro  10  sol.'
Y*  parallel  passage  quoted  in  Villainage  in  England  as  Ely  Inqu.
i?5a  should  have  been  given  as  Cotton  MSS.,  Claudius,  xi.  f.  193.
The  number  of  acres  assigned  to  tofts  varies,  but  ten  is  not  unusual,
^Z'  Claudius,  xi.  194  b;  199.  My  attention  was  called  to  the
P^^^blc  connexion  of  the  tenmanland  with  the  hundreds  of  twelve
^"icatcs  by  Mr.  \V.  J.  Corbett.

^g.  Dd.  ii.  235  a  :  (Necton,  Norfolk)  *Nechetuna  tenet  Radulfus
Wlocnio)  .  .  Habet  in  lungo  i  m.  et  dim.  in  lato  et  reddit  in  geho  ix  d.
Rwndo  hundredum  scotat  xx.  sol.'


I04  JURISDICTION  [ESSAY  I

a  franchise  in  respect  of  jurisdiction.^  A  few  cases  of
extra-hundredal  plots  are  mentioned  in  the  Survey,  and  it
is  added  that  they  do  not  geld  with  the  hundred,  nor  do
they  attend  it,  nor  appertain  to  it,^  meaning  of  course  that
the  tenants  do  not  go  to  the  hundred-moot,  and  are  not  in
scot  and  in  lot  with  the  members  of  the  hundred  in  regard
to  the  payment  of  geld.

The  hundred  being  considered  as  the  normal  institution
providing  local  administration  and  justice,  the  suitors  of
the  hundreds  were,  in  a  sense,  the  typical  citizens.  Indeed
we  hear,  not  unfrequently,  of  the  suit  to  the  hundred  as
being  the  condition  of  tenure  for  the  ordinary  freeman ;
he  is  a  suitor  to  the  hundred,  a  suitor  or  socman  of  the
King  in  the  hundred.^  According  to  a  most  curious
Norfolk  entry,  an  attempt  was  made  in  the  case  of
Fersfield  to  distinguish  between  tenants  of  less  than
thirty  acres,  who  were  to  look  for  justice  to  manors,  and
were  to  act  as  suitors  to  their  courts,  and  those  holding
thirty  acres  and  more,  who  remained  suitors  to  the
hundred.^ So  clear  a  cleavage  does  not  appear  in  other

^  Dd.  i.  174a:  (Worcs.)  'De  ipso  manerio  (Halhegan  cum  Brade-
wesham  (Broadwas))  tenet  abbas  de  Euesham  v.  hidas  ad  Hantune.
De  (juibus  episcopus  de  Wirecestre  T.R.E.  tantummodo  geldum
habuit  ad  suum  hundredum.  De  reliquo  tota  est  quieta  ad  aecciesiam
de  Euesham  ut  dicit  comitatus.*  208  b  :  (Hunts)  *  Testantur  homines
de  comitatu  quod  rex  Edwardus  dedit  Suineshefet  Siuuardo  comiti
soccam  et  sacam  et  sic  habuit  Haroldus  comes  praeter  quod  geldabant
in  Hundredo  et  in  hostem  cum  eis  ibant.*

'  Dd.  i.  157a:  (Oxford)  *Canonici  S.  Frideswidae  tenent  iiti  hidas
de  rege  iuxta  Oxeneford  .  .  Haec  terra  nunquam  geldauit  nee  alictti
Hundredo  pertinet  neque  pertinuit.*  175  a :  'In  Wirecestre  scire  tenet
Kobertus  parler  de  Gisleb^rto  filio.  Turoldi  unum  frustum  terrae  et
uocatur  Nadford. Haec  terra  non  geldat  nee  pergit  ad  hundredom.'

'  Dd.  i.  203  c:  (Stilton,  Hunts)  *  In  Stichiltone  habent  sochemanni
regis  de  Normanecros  [hund]  iii  virgatas  terrae  ad  geldum.'  Ibid. :
(Ouretune  (Orton  Longueville),  Hunts)  'habet  rex  socam  super  iii
hidas  terrae  et  dimidiam  in  terra  abbatis  de  Burg  quae  fuit  Goduini.'
Ibid.:  (Grafham)  Mn  Grafham  sunt  v  hidae  ad  geldum.  .Terra
viii  car.  soca  in  Lestunestan  hundredo.  Ibi  modo  vii  sochemanni
et  xvii  villani  habent  vi  carucas.*  Cf.  ii.  138  a,  146  b  (Somertum^
(Somerton),  Norfolk);  ii.  155a  (Wodetona  (Woodton),  Norfolk);
Exon.  Dd.  78  (Ermintona  (Ermington),  Devon).

*  Dd.  ii.  130b  :  (Fordwell,  Noifolk)  *  In  Feruella  iacet  soca  et  saca
t.  r.  e.  de  omnibus  qui  minus  habent  quam  xxx  ac.  De  illis  qui  habent
XXX  nc.  iacet  soca  et  saea  in  hundredo.*


SECT.  II.  CH.  I] COUNTY  AND HUNDRED  105

places,  but  the  principle  involved  is  probably  underlying
the  condition  of  most  of  the  freemen  and  King's  socmen
in  East  Anglia.  In  Norferik  and  Suffolk  the  free  elements
of  the  population  were  clearly  successful  in  upholding  their
direct  relation  to  the  Royal  hundreds  and  their  quality
as  free  tenants.  It  did  not  follow  that,  even  in  the  case
of  subjection  to  private  jurisdiction,  they  ought  to  have
lost  this  latter  quality,  but  naturally  enough  this  subjection
was  regarded  as  a  step  downwards,  and  the  records  are  very
careful  to  distinguish  between  the  position  of  the  King's
tenants  and  that  of  suitors  to  hundreds  in  private  hands.^

The  absorption  of  Crown  rights  by  privileged  subjects  Break  np
is  one  of  the  most  important  and  characteristic  features  JJI,^  of****
of  feudalism,  and  in  regard  to  the  hundred  jurisdiction  hundreds,
it  is  expressed  in  the  alienation  of  all  sorts  of  dues  con-
nected with  this  jurisdiction,  up  to  the  surrender  of  the
entire  administrative  and  judicial  leadership  of  the  hundred.
It  is  sufficient  to  point  to  a  few  instances  of  the  grant
of  the  right  to  levy  the  fines  and  wites  accruing  to  the
lord  of  the  hundred.^ In  the  hundreds  still  public  two-
thirds  of  these  judicial  dues  went  to  the  Crown,  while  one-
third  was  reserved  for  the  earl  (or  the  sheriff)  of  the  shire.
Both  these  items  are  often  alienated  to  private  lords,  and
sometimes  they  are  commuted  into  a  lump  payment,  liberat-
ing the  hundred  from  the  duty  of  accounting  for  each  single
fine  and  wite  levied  by  it.

\Dd.  i.  38Sd:  (Hoveringham,  Notts)  *  In  Horingeham  habuit
Siam  ii  carucatas  terrae  et  ii  bovatas  ad  geldum.  Terra  iiii  carucis.
1^  Walterus  habet  ii\  dominie  ii  carucas.  .  .  S.  in  Fiscartune  habet
^ahenis  dimidiam  carucatam  terrae  ad  geldum.  Unde  soca  pertinet
^  SudweUe.  S.  in  Mortune  habet  Walterus  dimidiam  carucatam
^^  ad  geldum.  De  qua  soca  pertinet  ad  SudweUe.  S.  in  Fames-
Jjd  luibct  Walterus  ii  bouatas  terrae  ad  geldum.  Una  est  in  soca
^  Sodwelle  et  alia  regis  sed  tamen  ad  hundredum  de  Sudwelle
Peninct;

Dd.  i.  162  c  :  (Winchcombe,  Gloucs.)  *  Burgum  de  Wincelcumbc
!!^cbat  T.R.E.  vi  lib.  de  firma.  De  his  habebat  Heraldus  comes
m««*  dcnarium  idest  xl  sol.  Postea  reddidit  xx  lib.  cum  toto
HondTedo  eiusdem  villae.  Durandus  vicecomes  apposuit  c  sol.  et
'^opnis  de  lurei  Ix  solid.  Modo  adiunctis  rii  hundredis  redd.
^ulib.  de  XX  in  ora.'  Cf.  64  c  (Wilts,  Sarisberie) :  186  a  (Here-
^BurgcUe); 253  b  (Shropshire,  Recordine) ; ii.  123  b  (Norfolk,


io6  JURISDICTION  [essay  i

By  the  side  of  these  partial  grants  of  fiscal  realities
stand  complete  surrenders  of  jurisdiction,  and  even  of  all
administrative  rights  attached  to  the  hundred.^  A  charter
of  William  the  Conqueror  to  Worcester  gives  a  rather  full
enumeration  of  these,^  while  another  charter  of  Edward
to  St.  Peter  of  Chertsey^  is  interesting,  inasmuch  as
it  contains,  besides  the  surrender  of  jurisdiction,  a  charac-
teristic reference  to  the  surrender  of  all  work  and  wara
to  the  church  services  in  kind,  probably  riding  and  canying
services,  as  well  as  week-work,  along  with  rents,  wara  being
taken  in  this  case  as  the  home  taxation  of  the  manor,  the
inwara  rather  than  the  uiwara,  A  note  about  the  customs
of  Taunton  mentions  that  the  tenant  of  every  one  of  the
so-called  nine  hides  has  to  pay  church-scot  and  tithe  (eight
pennies  per  hide),  and  is  to  seek  justice  and  pay  fines  and
wites  in  regard  to  homesocn  and  foresteal,  breach  of  peace
and  capture  of  thieves,  compurgation  and  ordeals,  and  fyrd-
wite,  at  the  Manor  of  Taunton,  to  which  the  Crown  rights
of  the  hundred  of  Taunton  had  passed.  Besides,  every  one
of  the  tenants  had  to  do  suit  at  the  manorial  hundred
court  as  often  as  he was  summoned.^ The  tenants  ot

^  Dd.  i.  172a:  (Worcs.)  Mn  ipso  comitatu  sunt  xti  hundreda
horum  vii  ita  sunt  quieti  sicut  scira  dicit  quod  vicecomes  nichil  habet
in  eis  et  ideo  sicut  dicit  in  firma  multum  perdit.'  Cf.  ii.  139  b
(Hersam  dimidium  hund.) ;  cf.  Extenta  Hon.  Richmond  de  Hdand.

'  Thorpe,  Dip].  442 :  '  VVillelmus  rex  Anglorum  V.  vicecomiti,  et
Osbemo  filio  Escrop,  et  omnibus  Francis  et  Anglis  de  WiriceastrecyRi
salutem.  Volo  et  praecipio,  ut  episcopus  Wulfstan  ita  pleniter  habeat
socam,  et  sacam,  et  servitia,  et  omnes  consuetudines  ad  suum  hundred,
et  ad  terras  suas  pertinentes,  sicut  melius  habuit  in  tempore  r^ps
Edwardi. .  .  Pit  de  xv  hidis  de  Hantona,  unde  episcopus  diratiocinaiat
socam,  et  geldum,  et  expeditionem,  et  cetera  mea  serx'itia  ad  suum
hundred,  et  cirichescot,  et  sepulturam  ad  suam  villam  pertinere,
precipio,  ne  uUus  ei  contra  teneat,  sed  sic  habeat  omnia  de  illis  ad
meum  opus  et  suum.'

'  C.  D.  850:  (Eadweard)  'ic  habe  geunnen  Criste  and  Sancte
Petre  int6  Certeseige  ¥one  sylfa  tun  and  Eggchdm  and  Torp  and
Cebbehdm  mid  ^n  hundredc  of  Goddelie  freo  wi%  echege  scote,  and
weorc  and  ware,  and  saca  and  s6ca,  and  tol  and  te^m,  and  infongene-
^6f  and  grn5bruche  and  forestel,  hdms6ca,  and  flemenfonnft,  and
mor^slehte,  inne  fr^ls  and  lit  of  freols,  and  wi¥  ealle  ¥c  )nnge  ¥e  x6
me  belimpa%,  on  wude  and  on  felde.* Cf.  848,  849.

*  C.  D.  897  :  (After  Eadweard)  *  Her  swutula%  on  %isum  gewrite
hwylce  gerihta  langon  intd  Tantune  on  ¥dm  tfman  ^e  Eddwera  cing
wes  cucu  and  dedd.  Dxt  is,  arrest  of  %am  lande  set  Nigon  hfdon
seo  mann  redden  int6  Tdntune  cirhsceattas,  and  burhgerihtu,  heoiV-


SECT.  II.  CH.  I] COUNTY  AND HUNDRED  107

some  other  places  were  subjected  to  the  same  court,  in
regard  to  the  above-mentioned  Crown  pleas,  but  had  to
attend  the  moots  only  three  times  a  year.^  Yet  even
in  such  cases  attendance  after  extraordinary  summons  was
sometimes  specially  claimed.^  In  a  charter  to  Abingdon
the  soke  of  the  hundred  of  Homemere  is  ceded  by  King
Edward  the  Confessor  to  the  Monastery,  with  the  under-
standing that  neither  sheriff  nor  motgerefa  (the  hundred-
ealdor,  hundred  man)  might  henceforth  claim  any  suit,
nor  call  any  moot,  within  this  hundred,  unless  by  leave
oftheAbbot.^

penegai,  and  hundredpenegas,  and  teo¥ung  of  ulcere  hfde  eahta
poegas,  hims6cn  and  forsteall,  grfSbrice  and  handfangen^6f,  d^
ud  ordi^l,  fyrdwfte,  and  ^all  swd  oft  swd  him  man  bude  id  gem6te  he
come  ofiSe  hine  man  badode/  The  '  burgeristh '  of  the  Taunton
customs,  as  entered  Dd.  i.  Sy  c,  is  the  same  word  as  imrgerihtu
(d.  the  *"  radchenestri '  of  Domesday,  the  *  Knestesmetehdm '  of  the
Shaftesbury  list  of  knights*  fees).  The  word  may  mean  the  customary
dues  fiigeburs. It  has  hardly  anything  to  do  with  *  borough  *.

*  C.  D.  897 :  (After  Eadweard)  *  Ddnna  wes  ¥aes  biscopes  mann
t^  hm  tfman  ^  Eidward  cing  waes  cucu  and  dedd  of  ^m  lande  act
Acop  and  of  tii  lande  and  of  tw^m  Cedenon,  and  he  geaf  x6  gerihton
v<  circsceattas  and  heor^penegas,  and  hundredpenegas,  hamsocne,
Md  forsteall,  gri¥bricc  and  handfangene¥e6f,  d¥  and  ord^l  and  |>riwa
s^  gem6t  on  xii  mon^um,  and  of  Edforda  ¥a  ilcan  gerihtu.  And
£^dred  wses  %xs  biscopes  mann  of  ¥dm  lande  aet  Hele  and  dyde
^  ilcan  gerihta  ^  man  dyde  of  Nigon  hfdon,  and  of  ¥4m  fff  hfdon
xt  Baggabeorgan  iii.  circsceattes,  and  burgerihta,  heor^penegas  and
hundredpenegas,  and  handfangene^eof,  d%  and  orddl,  hdms6cn  and
^ORteall,  gri^brice  and  })re6  motlae^u  ungeboden  on  xii  mon^um.'

*C.  D.  897:  (After  Eadweard)  'of  Hylle  i  circ  sceatt,  and  burh
S^tu,  heor^penegas  and  hundredpenegas,  hdm  s6cne  and  for^stealU
pi^ricc  and  nandfangene^6f,  i^  and  orddl  and  iii  gem6t  on  geare
^ton  be  hit  gebicge  a€6^  gebidde.  Of  ^sere  o^re  healfre  hfde,  aet
t»iin  Holaforda  ii  circsceattas  and  eall  ?ae  geylcan  gerihta  ^  man
«J  of  Cedenon.'

'  C.  D.  840 :  (Eadweard)  *  Eadward  cyningc  gr^t  Hereman  bisceop,
^  Harold  eorl,  and  G6drfc,  and  ealle  his  ^genas  on  Bearrucscyre
fre6ndh'c ;  and  ic  cy¥e  eow  ¥aet  Ordric  abbud  and  eal  ¥ait  hired  on
Abbcndtincs  mynstre  be  mfnre  unne  and  gife  frigelfce  habban  and
^dan  Homem^res  hunred  on  hyre  dgenre  andwealde  on  ^cere
yonildc,  and  swi  ¥aet  ndn  scyrger^fe  o^¥e  Motgerdfe  ¥dr  habban
*yi  56cne  o^e  gem6t  buton  ¥es  abbudes  dgen  haese  and  unne.'
Sf  ^^*  ^^^*  ^^^^  (Grant  by  King  Edgar  to  Adelwold  Bishop
l^  ^Vinchester],  De  Barwe  super  Humbram) ;  cf.  V)d,  i.  360  b
(Barcwc).


CHAPTER  II

FRANCHISES

Origin  of  I.  The  passage  of  entire  hundreds,  and  of  jurisdictioiial
ranc  ises.  ^^j  fiscal  regalities  connected  with  hundreds  and  shires,
into  private  hands,  leads  us  directly  to  the  question  as
to  the  forms  and  origin  of  feudal  rights  of  jurisdiction.
All  the  well-known  franchises  or  liberties  of  the  feudal
age  were  chips  from  the  block  of  Royal  authority.  They
were  severed  from  it  at  a  time  when  it  was  found  impossible
to  govern  society  by  the  direct  command  of  the  King
or  of  his  officers,  and  to  render  justice  by  the  direct
intervention  of  the  King  and  of  his  judges.  The  local
decentralization  of  feudal  rule  called  for  a  dismembmnoit
of  public  authority ;  it  had  to  be  confided  to  locally
influential  people ;  but  the  idea  that  all  such  del^ations
of  power  proceeded  ultimately  from  the  king's  grant  was
never  abandoned,  and  helped  the  Crown  to  resume  its
alienated  functions  when  it  was  again  strong  enoi^h  to
do  so.  The  Placita  de  Quo  Warranto  give  the  best
information  about  the  struggle  and  compromises  between
the  Crown  and  its  vassals,  in  r^^ard  to  franchise,  after
the  restoration  of  Royal  power  under  Edward  I,  and  it
would  be  an  interesting  undertaking  to  go  through  this
immense  store  of  materials  in  order  to  gather  the  threads
of  the  principal  English  franchises.  It  is  not  my  purpose
to  attempt  such  a  task,  but  I  should  like  to  point  to  a  few
instances  taken  from  the  judicial  records  of  the  thirteenth
century,  in  order  to  show  how  intimately  the  later  franchises
were  connected  with  the  private  appropriation  of  rightSi
vested  in  hundreds  and  shires,  which  we  have  just  been
discussing.  If  we  look  at  the  great  collection  of  pleas
made  by  Bracton  while  preparing  his  treatise, we  find,


SECT.  II.  CH.  ii]  FRANCHISES  109

among  other  things,  a  very  suggestive  selection  of  cases
treating  of  franchise  privileges.  There  is,  for  instance,
a  case  turning  on  the  right  of  the  Liberty  of  Berkham-
stead  to  try  suits  which  ought  to  have  gone  to  the  county
in  its  own  court.^  There  is  a  significant  litigation  as
to  the  right  of  the  Abbey  of  Beaulieu  to  exact  services,
from  certain  free  tenants,  for  the  afforciamentunty  the
strengthening,  of  their  court  of  the  Manor  of  Farringdon
in  Berkshire,'  evidently  in  connexion  with  the  regalities
alienated  to  that  court  There  is  a  verdict  on  the  famous
h*berties  belonging  to  Bury  St.  Edmunds  in  Suffolk.*
In  a  dispute  between  the  Bishop  of  Ely  and  the  Abbot
of  Ramsey  the  origin  of  the  disputed  rights  is  clearly
traced  to  grants  of  sake  and  soke,  thus  following  feudal
contentions  to  their  old  English  beginnings.^

'  Bracton's  Note  Book,  pi.  1406 :  *  Libertas  de  Berchamstede
(Herts)  . . .  £t  Waleranus  le  Tyes  constabularius  de  Berchamstede
iKnit  et  defendit  . . .  et  dicit  quod  loquela  ista  tangit  Dom.  Kegem
<inia  manerium  illud  est  Dom.  Regis  et  liberum  est  et  tales  habet  liber-
ty quod  omnia  placita  que  ad  Dorri.  Regem  pertinent  de  terris  et  de
aliis  rebus  infra  libertatem  illius  manerii  debent  teneri  in  curia  ipsius
Regis  apad  Berchamstede,  ita  ^uod  uicecomes  nullam  habet  potestatem
trabcndi  placita  ilia  de  curia  ilia  ad  comitatum  suum,  set  si  aliquid
^ctom  fuerit  in  curia  ilia  quod  debeat  de  iure  emendari,  Dom.  Rex  uel
eios  iusticiarii  illud  debent  emendare  in  curia  sua.'  Cf.  pi.  20  (Libertas
S.Aldrcthe,  Lines.) ;  435  (Libertas  S.  Albani,  Herts) ;  1218  (Libertas
S.£(lmundi  Arch.  Cantuar.  Kent,  cf.  pi.  277);  1436  (Curia  Episcopi
Mxmiensis,  Somerset) ;  1443  (Libertas  Abbatis  de  S.  Eadmundo,
SoffoDc,  cf.  pi.  592) ;  513  (Libertas  Thomae  de  Basset  in  hundredo  de
Bolendena,  Oxon). Cf.  Y.  B.  Ed.  II,  i.  126  (franchise  of  St.  Leonard).

'B.N.B.  pi.  655:  (Curia  Abbatis  de  Ferenduna,  Berks)  Mdem
Abbas .  . .  dicit  quod  cum  habeat  manerium  de  Ferenduna  ex  dono
^otn.  Regis  cum  omnibus  pertinenciis  suis,  et  cum  idem  Bartholomeus
(4f  ia  Hose)  semper  quamdiu  manerium  illud  fuit  in  manu  Regis
^^m  per  multum  tempus  postquam  fuit  in  manu  sua  solebat  facere
^^ctam  ad  curiam  de  Ferenduna  quando  latro  ibi  esset  iudicandus
^  ()^i^do  breue  Dom.  Regis  ibi  esset  de  recto  pro  afTorciamento  curie,
'^  Bartholomeus  subtraxit  se  iam  per  tres  annos  unde  deterioratus
^  etc  et  inde  producit  sectam.'


lueritur  quod  cum
^<^lesia  sua  Elyensis  multas  habeat  libertates  ex  dono  antecessorum
^'  Regis  per  cartas  suas,  Abbas  de  Rameseia  contra  libertates  illas
^  contra  coronam  et  dignitatem  Dom.  Regis  capere  fecit  quemdam
"Ominem  ipsius  Episcopi  . .  .  Et  quod  idem  Abbas  hoc  fecit  contra
hbertatcs  ecclesie  Eliensis  profert  cartam  Regis  Edwardi  que  testatur
J^  • . .  Et  Abbas  uenit  et  defendit  uim  et  iniuriam,  set  uerum  uult
^^cere . . .  et  uidetur  ei  quod  hoc  facere  bene  potuerunt,  quia  predictus


no  JURISDICTION  [i

Profits  of Domesday  Book  supplies  us  with  a  great  num
autbodty. indications  about  the  gradual  breaking  up  of  Royal
in criminal  jurisdiction,  and  the  attempts  of  the
to  keep  at  least  a  fraction  of  it. The  process  is  uni
^  but  its  results  are  very  different  according  to  loc

being  brought  about,  in  each  single  instance,  by  r
of-fact  relations.  Let  us  take,  as  an  instance,  the  p
of  affairs  in  Chester.  The  king  and  the  earl  are
jenough  to  keep  the  great  Crown  cases  Tn  tHeZF"
and  they  divide  the  profits  ii{Lmri3diction  between
selves,  two-thirds  being  reserved  to  the  king^  oil
to  the  earl.  Besides  the  ordinary  Crown  cases,  two
crimes  are  mentioned,  the  jurisdiction  over  which,  w
profits  accruing  from  it,  are  reserved  for  the  kin
earl.  Their  reeve  in  Chester  is  to  receive  the  fii
false  coinage,  and  for  the  brewing  of  bad  beer,  in
land  soever  these  crimes  may  have  been  comir
The  case  is  interesting  on  account  of  the  wide  ext
of  the  rights  of  public  authority,  as  represented  b;
and  earl ;  we  are  on  the  soil  of  a  Palatinate,  whicl
on  was  distinguished  by  the  extraordinary  franchises
holder,  the  Palatine  of  Chester.^  Other  forfeiture
were  in  use  all  along  the  border  of  Wales,  in  Herefor
and  Shropshire.  Most  conspicuous  is  the  right  to
one-third  of  the  booty  in  case  of  private  feud  amoi
Welsh.^ It  is remarkable that  the  fyrdwite  for  r

Rex  Edwardus  feoffauit  ecclesiam  de  Rameseia  de  pluribus  ten
hundredo  et  dimidio  de  Clackelose  cum  omnibus  libertatibus  qii
Dom.  Rex  habuit,  et  sicut  idem  Dom.  Rex  tenuit  tunc  ten
et  hundredum  que  tunc  fuerunt  de  dominico  sue,  ita  ilia  dedit  *
de  Rameseia  de  omnibus  que  Dom.  Rex  ibi  habere  posset ...  1
talem  habet  libertatem,  profert  cartam  Regis  Edward!  que  testat
Cf.  pi.  520  (Lib.  de  burgensibus  de  Wycumba,  Bucks);  1154  {
Coplande,  Northumberland) ;  1551  (Lib.de  Beuerlaco,  Yorks
(Lib.  Abbatis  de  Bello,  Sussex) ;  1676  (Lib.  Abbatis  de  Witeby,

^  Dd.  i.  262  c,  d.

'  Ormerod,  History  of  Cheshire,  L  liv,  Iv,  126,  127.

'  Dd.  i.  179b :  (Hereford)  *  In  Arcenefeldc  .  . .  Siquis  eonun
rex  habet  de  eo  xx  solidos  per  consuetudinem.  Siquis  Wal
furatur  hominem  aut  feminam  equum  etc.  .  . .  conuictus  indc
prius  furtum  et  dat  xx  solidos  pro  forisfactura,  siquis  Occident  h<
regis  et  facit  heimfaram  dat  regi  xx  sol.  de  solutione  hominis  et  c
factura  c.  sol. §i  alicuius  taini  hominem  Occident  dat  x  sol.


SECT.ii.  CH.  II]  FRANCHISES  iii

o!  military  service  appears in  the  shape  of  two  widely

different  sums,  forty  shilling's  and  one  hundred  shillings.

Tbe  first  occurs  especially  in  cases  of  failure  to  appear

10  Welsh  expeditions,  the  second  in  all  probability  applies

to  neglect  of  g^eral  summons  to  serve. It  appears  in  the

same  way  in  Oxfordshire,  which  had  nothing  to  do  with

the  Welsh wars.* The  great fyrdwite  is emphatically

termed forfeiture,  farisfactura^  perhaps because thanes

holding  land  were  liable  to  forfeiture  in  such  cases. The

hundred  shillings  fine  would  have  thus  to  be  considered

mainly  as  a  redemption  from  the  forfeiture  of  land.

An  important  group  is  formed  by  cases  in  which  the  Reserved
king  grants  away  jurisdiction  and  profits  in  regard  to  all  ^o^«*^"'**"
minor  pleas  except  six. These  are  hamsocn,  the  breaking  ^
into  a  house ;  grithbreche  (breach  of  the  king's  peace) ; \
foresteal  (attack  on  the  highway) ;  murder ;  reception  of  an  /
outlaw  ;  leyrewite  (adultery). The  reservation  of  six  for-
feitures  is  rather  common,  but  there  are  some  variations
in the  making  up  of the  list. In Kent,  for  instance,
kamicidium,  murder,  is  not  included at  all,  while  theft
appears  as  one  of  the  delicts  leading  to  forfeiture — namely,
if  a  thief  has  been  sentenced  to  death,  half  his  chattels  go
to  the  king. In  cases  of  adultery  the  man  was  adjudged
as  a  *wite-theow'  to  the  king,  the  woman  to  the  arch-
bishop, except  on  the  lands  of  St.  Augustine,  Canterbury,
and  of  St.  Martin. These  great  ecclesiastical  foundations
excluded  the  king,  and  had  therefore  the  right  to  punish
the  offending  adulterer  themselves.^ The Kentish enu-

hominis  mortui.  Quod  si  VValensis  Walensem  occiderit  congre^antur
parentes  occisi  et  praedantur  eum  qui  occidit  eiusque  propinquos
ct  combunint  dotnos  eorum  donee  in  crastinum  circa  meridiem  corpus
mortui  sepeliatur.  De  hac  praeda  habet  rex  terciam  partem,  illi  uero
totum  aJiud  habent  quietum.'

'  Dd.  i.  1 54  d :  (Oxford)  '  qui  monitus  ire  in  expeditionem  non  uadit
c  sol.  regi  dabit.'  Cf.  252  a:  (In  Civitate  Sciropesheire)  *  Cum  in  Walis
pergcre  uellet  uicecoines  qui  ab  eo  edictus  non  pergebat  xl  solid,  de
torisfactura  dabit.'

'  Dd.  i.  I  b :  (Kent)  '  £t  de  his  terris  scilicet  Goslaches  et  Bocheland
et  alium  Bocheland  et  tercium  Bocheland  et  Herste  .  i  iugum  de  Ora
et  i  iugum  de  Herte  etc.  habet  rex  has  forisfacturas  Handsocam,  Gri-
brige,  Foristel.  De  Adulterio  uero  per  totum  Ghent  habet  rex
hominem  et  Archiepiscopus  mulierem  excepta  terra  S.  Trinitatis  et


112  JURISDICTION  [ESSAYi

meration^  if  murder  and  fyrdwite  should  be  added,  would
be  exceptionally  complete,  and  would  contain  actually,  not
six,  but  eight  reserved  cases.  Otherwise  we  generally  hear
of  six  only.  In  some  Norfolk  cases  it  is  interesting  to  note
the  contrast  between  the  six  cases  and  the  right  of  sake
and  soke  ceded  to  manorial  lords ;  one  might  almott
compare  the  distinction  with  that,  common  on  the  Con*
tinent,  between  haute  justice  and  fnqyenne  et  beuse  jusfia.
A  material  difference  would,  hoWever,  exist  in  the  fact  that
the  haute  justice  was  determined  by  the  eventual  penalty;
it  was,  to  use  the  German  expression,  a '  Blutbann  *.^  Some
similar  idea  was  contained  in  germ  in  the  English  distinctioo,
as  is  shown  by  the  Kentish  mention  of  capital  punishment
for  theft.^  In  a  few  exceptional  instances  even  the  six
forfeitures  are  surrendered  to  private  lords.  A  conspicuous
case  of  the  kind  is  presented  by  Bury  St.  Edmunds.^

It  is  not  unusual  to  find  that  four  forfeitures^  are  re-
served to  the  king  instead  of  six ;  as,  for  instance,  in
Worcestershire,  or  in  Berkshire,  where  a  baron  gets  his
land  exempted  from  all  customary  payments  except  fines
for  theft,  murder  (and  manslaughter),  homfare,  and  breach
of  the  king's  peace.^

Even  more  frequent  is  the  reservation  of  three  Crown
cases. In  the  Shropshire  custumal  it  is  even  stated  that

S.  Augustini  et  S.  Martini  de  quibus  rex  nichil  habet.  De  latione  qui
iudicatus  est  ad  mortem  habet  rex  medietatem  pecuniae  eias.  £t  qui
exulem  recepcrit  sine  licentia  regis  inde  habet  rex  forisfactaram.'

^  Dd.  ii.  155  a,  b  :  (Hosford,  Norfolk) '  Hosforda  tenuit  edricus .  • .
Et  tunc  et  post  xxii  soc.  modo  xxi . . .  de  duobus  soc.  habet  rex  et  comes
socam  et  super  alios  vi  forisfacturas.'  Cf.  ibid.  Horsham, ' . . .  xix  soce-
manni . .  .  De  tribus  rex  et  comes  socam  et  super  alios  vi  forisfactnras.'

^  Dd.  i.  ib.;  v.  note  2,  pp.  iii,  112.

'  Dd.  ii.  384  b:  (Cedeberia,  Suflfolk)  *  ii  carucatae  terre  pro  dnobns
maneriis  ii  liberi  homines  T.  R.  £. . . .  Tota  hec  terra  iacebat  in  dominio
abbatiae  tempore  regis  eduardi  cum  omni  consuetudine  praeter  set
forisfacturas  Sancti  Edmundi.'  Cf.  ii.  391a  (Stoches,  Sunblk) ;  ibid
(Westlea) ;  414  b  (Wankeforda).

*  Dd.  i.  61  c :  (Kintbury,  Berks)  *  In  Cheneteberie  tenet  isdem
W(alterus  F.  Other)  dimidiam  hidam  quam  rex  E.  dedit  eius  antecesMiri
de  firma  sua  et  solutam  ab  omni  consuetudine  propter  forestam  cu-
stodiendam,  excepta  forisfactura  regis  sicut  est  Latrocinium,  et  homi-
cidium  et  Heinfara  et  fracta  pax.' Cf.  Dd.  ii.  22  a  (Colchester).

*  Cf.  Dd.  i.  172  a  (Worcestershire).


SECT.  II.  CH.  Ii]  FRANCHISES  113

three  forfeitures— for  breach  of  peace,  for  breaking  into  a
house,  and  for  forsteal,  were  reserved  to  the  king's  domain
all  throi^h  England.^  This  is  not  literally  true,  as  we
have  already  been  able  to  gather  from  previous  instances.
Nor  can  there  be  a  doubt  that  the  list  of  the  three  reserved
Crown  cases  was  formed  in  different  ways  in  various  places.^
Such  a  treatment  is  in  keeping  with  the  customary  character
of  all  these  franchises.  The  warrant  of  express  grant  is
sometimes  mentioned  ^  and  exacted  by  the  Crown ;  such
a  grant  would  be  invaluable  in  case  of  a  dispute.  But
there  can  be  no  doubt  that  it  would  have  been  impossible
for  all  those  who  claimed  franchises  to  produce  grants  or
to  ai^>eal  to  the  testimony  of  a  county  court,  or  a  hundred-
moot,  when  such  a  grant  should  have  actually  been  pro-
duced. Custom,  usage  from  time  immemorial,  came  to  be
a  test  in  many  if  not  most  cases,  and  we  see  that  such
a  test  is  actually  appealed  to,  though  not  always  with
success,  in  the  Quo  Warranto  inquests.

Another  explanation  of  the  variety  in  question  may  be
that  in  some  cases  it  was  not  meant  to  affirm  that  only
three  forfeitures  went  to  the  king,  and  that,  e.  g.,  forsteal
or  breach  of  peace  was  not  reputed  a  Crown  forfeiture,
although  the  three  excepted  cases  ceded  to  the  burgesses  of
the  new  castle  of  Rhuddlan*  were  said  to  comprise  only
manslaughter,  theft,  and  homfare.  This  may,  after  all,  be
an  inexact  form  of  expression,  and  mean  in  this  as  in  some
other  cases  ^  that  three  out  of  the  six  great  Crown  for-

^  Dd. i.  252 a :  (Shropshire) '  Has  iii  forisfacturas  (Pax  infracta,  hein-
fara,  forestel)  habebat  in  dominio  Rex  £.  in  omni  Anglia  extra  firmas.*

'  Dd.  i.  269  b:  (Rhuddlan)  '  In  ipso  manerio  Roelend  est  factum
nouiter  castellum  similiter  Roelent  appellator.  Ibi  est  nouum  burgum
et  in  eo  xviii  burgenses  inter  Comitem  et  Robertnm  ut  predictum  est.
Ipsis  burgensibus  annuerunt  leges  et  consuetudines  quae  sunt  in  Here-
ford et  in  bretuill.  Scilicet  quod  per  totum  annum  de  aliqua  foris-
factura  non  dabunt  nisi  xii  denarios  praeter  homicidium  et  furtum,
et  Hetnfar  praecogitata.' Cf.  4  c  (Lamport,  Kent).

'  Dd.  ii.  195  a:  (Blofield,  Norfolk)  Mn  Blafelda  tenet  Almarus
episcopus  T.  R.  E.  ii  carucatas  terrae  .  .  .  isti  manerio  pertinent  xliii
socemanni  t.  r.  e.  et  semper  qui  non  potuerunt  terras  suas  uendere  nee
dare.  .  .  Super  hos  habuit  t.  r.  e.  epbcopus  vi  forisfacturas.  Sed
handredum  nee  uidit  breue  nee  sigillum  nee  concessum  regis.'

*  Cf.  note  2.

*  Dd.ii.  244  a:  (Tunstead,  Norfolk)  ^  Tunesteda  tenet  idem  (Rogerus


M^JOCAAOorr


1 14  JURISDICTION  [essay  i

feitures  had  passed  int6  the  hands  of  these  privileged
tenants.

However  this  may  be,  an  interesting  feature  of  some  of
these  instances  is  the  fact  that  the  right  to  exact  fines  for
minor  offences,  and  to  be  exempted  from  paying  these
fines  to  the  king  or  the  officers  of  one  of  his  courtSi  is
expressly  conceded  to  bodies  of  men  who  club,  or  '  scot,'
together  to  commute  the  casual  payments  into  a  lump
sum,  and  are  thereby  liberated  from  a  part  of  the  ordinary
jurisdiction.  The  most  famous  instance  of  this  kind  is
presented  by  the  socmen  of  the  Huntingdonshire  manor
of  Broughton,  who  had  bought  the  right  to  exact  fines
for  the  effusion  of  blood,  adultery,  and  theft,  up  to  four
pennies,  while  the  greater  fines  went  to  their  lord,  the
abbot  of  Ramsey.^  This  does  not  mean,  of  course,  that
these  socmen  had  a  court  of  their  own,  nor  is  it,  in  itself,
necessarily  a  proof  that  the  fines  were  levied  in  the
manorial  court  of  Brenton  belonging  to  the  abbot.  But
it  certainly  supposes  organized  action  and  organized
supervision  on  the  part  of  these  socmen  as  a  body.  In
fact,  they  appear  in  the  same  position  as  holders  of
a  franchise,  in  regard  to  the  abbot,  as  he  occupied  himsdf
in  a  higher  sphere  as  against  the  king.  It  may  be  said
at  once  that  the  socmen  above  mentioned  could  exercise
their  right  most  naturally  as  legal  suitors  of  the  court
of  Broughton.

The  Domesday  Survey  does  not  very  often  go  into  such
details  as  to  rights  acquired  by  bodies  of  men  subject  to
great  lords,  but  some  characteristic  instances  of  the  same
kind  as  the  Broughton  one  it  does  mention.'

Pictauiensis)  AJfere  tegnus  Heroldi  t.  r.  e.  ...  xxiiii  socemanni ...  el
idem  sunt  additi  t.  r.  w.  et  R.  comes  addidit,  vi  liberi  homines  i  cu
terre  et  dimidiam  .  ex  his  habet  sanctus  benedictus  socam  et  de  one
commendationem  et  de  xxiiii  tres  forisfacturas.'

^  Dd.  i.  204  b :  (Broughton,  Hunts)  '  In  Broctune  habet  abbas  di
Ramesy  iiii  hidas  ad  geldum.  Terra  vii  carucarum  et  ii  bourn.  lb
est  terra  sochemannorum  v  hid.  ad  geldum.  Terra  viii  carucarum  c
vi  boum.  Isti  sochemanni  dicunt  se  habuisse  Legreuuitam  et  bkxle
uuitam  et  Latrocinium  suum  usque  ad  iv  denarios  et  post  iiii  denazio
habebat  abbas  forisfacturam  latrodnii.'

*  Dd.  i.  179  a:  (Hereford)  *  Modo  habet  rex  ciuitatcm Hereto


SECT.  n.  CH.  II] FRANCHISES  1 15

The  effect  of  the  granting  of  jurisdictional  franchises  is
described  in  a  few  cases  rather  fully,  because  there  were
some  special  features  connected  with  it.  Thus  we  hear
that  several  great  men  in  Berkshire  had  retained  the  gafol
which  they  ought  to  have  paid  from  their  houses,  and  had
a  right  to  the  fines  in  cases  of  bloodshed,  or  reception  of
strangers  before  they  were  delivered  to  the  reeve,  as  well
as  adultery  and  theft,  when  all  these  offences  were  com-
mitted within  the  precincts  of  their  houses.  As  to  other
wites,  they  went  to  the  king.^  In  this  case  only  remission
of  the  fiscal  due  is  stipulated.  In  the  description  of
Dunwich,  the  private  jurisdiction  arising  out  of  such  cases
is  more  clearly  seen.  The  manor  has  to  be  represented  in
the  hundred  court  by  two  or  three  of  the  tenants,  but
thieves  caught  in  the  place  had  to  stand  their  trial  in  it,
and  as  for  corporal  justice  (cases  involving  corporal  punish-
ment) it  had  to  be  administered  in  Bliebury,  a  capital
manor  of  Robert  Malet,  the  tenant-in-chief.^

But  the  common  and  well-known  manner  in  which  Sac  and
grants  of  private  jurisdiction  were  made  was,  of  course,
the  insertion  of  the  famous  sac  and  soc  (sake  and  soke)
clause  in  a  charter  conveying  property.  The  first  points
to  the  deciding  of  cases  (sake) ;  the  second  to  the  suit  the
men  subjected  to  the  jurisdiction  had  to  do  with  the  court.^
Thus  sake  and  soke  is  literally  case  and  suit,  a  very  appro-
priate conjunction  of  terms,  which  lays  stress  both  on  the

in  dominio  et  anglici  burgenses  ibi  manentes  habent  suas  priores  con-
suetudines.  Francigenae  uero  burgenses  habent  quietas  per  xii  denarios
omnes  forisfacturas  suas  preter  tres  supradictas.'

^  Dd.  i.  56  c :  (Berkshire)  *  /Elmer  presbiter  et  alius  Elmer  presbiter
et  Bruman  . . .  habent  gablum  de  domibus  suis  et  sanguinem  si  ibi
efiimditur,  si  receptus  fuerit  homo  intus  antequam  calumnietur  a  pre-
posito  regis  excepto  sabbato  propter  mercatum  quia  tunc  rex  habet
fonsfactoram  et  de  adulterio  et  Latrocinio  habent  ipsi  emendam  in  suis
domibus. Alie  uero  forisfacturae  sunt  regis.*

'  Dd.  ii.  312  a,  b  :  (Dunwich,  Suffolk)  *  Rex  habet  in  duneuuic  con-
suetndinem  banc  quod  duo  uel  tres  ibunt  ad  hundret  si  recte  moniti
fuerint  et  si  hoc  non  faciunt  forisfacti  sunt  de  ii  oris,  et  si  latro  ibi
fuerit  captus  ibi  iudicabitur  et  corporalis  iusticia  in  blieburc  capietur,
et  sua  pecunia  remanet  domino  de  duneuuic  et  t.  r.  e.  non  fuit  ibi
auibitor  sed  in  blideburh.'

'  Maitland,  Domesday  Book  and  Beyond,  84.

I  2


ii6  JURISDICTION  [essay  i


passive  and  on  the  active  side  of  the  relation  which
created  by  the  franchise  for  those  who  came  under  iu
application.  They  had  to  submit  to  decisions,  and  they
had  to  attend  a  private  tribunal  competent  to  give  such
decisions,  and  eventually  to  take  part  in  its  jurisdiction  as
judges  or  members  of  inquest  juries.  Needless  to  add,  the
fundamental  formula  acquired  a  somewhat  diflTerent  mean-
ing when  applied  to  the  lord's  exercise  of  judicial  rig^l
and  collection  of  its  profits.  He  received,  or  had,  sake  and
soke  in  the  sense  of  a  privil^e  to  exercise  jurisdiction
I  need  not  dwell  on  the  amplifications  of  the  formula :  Toll
team,  infangennetheof,  utfangennetheof,  flymenafeorm,  an
the  most  frequent  adjuncts,  all  terms  which  have  been  often
and  sufficiently  explained,  both  in  glossaries  and  pleas,  and
in  the  books  of  modem  commentators.^  Let  us  merely
take  notice  that  in  some  instances  the  contrast  between
sac  and  soc,  as  the  ordinary  attributes  of  private  jurisdicti<m,
^nA  forisfactiirae^  as  important  cases  mostly  reserved  to  the
Crown,  is  expressly  drawn  and  insisted  upon.  From  the
combination  of  the  two  arose  the  diiTerent  d^rees  ol
manorial  justice  in  so  far  as  it  deals  with  criminal  and
police  matters.  A  case  in  point  is  presented,  e.  g.^  by  tiic
rule  about  the  trial  of  thieves  in  Southwark.  If  a  man
was  accused  on  the  spot  (*  in  flagranti ')  he  paid  his  fine  to
the  king ;  if  he  left  the  place  without  being  accused,  and,
we  must  add,  I  suppose,  was  brought  up  for  trial  afterwards
his  fine  went  to  the  lord  of  the  manor,  the  bishop  d
Bayeux.'-  In  Alverstone,  Warwick,  the  predecessor  of  the
bishop  of  Worcester  had  sake  and  soke,  and  team,  and


^  Dd.  i.  280  c:  (Notts)  *  Hie  notantur  qui  habuerunt  socam  et
et  Thol  et  Thaim  et  consuetudinem  regis  ii  denariorum  .  .  .  Aichi'
episcopus  Eboracensis  super  maneria  sua  . . .  Horum  omnium  nemc
habere  potuit  tercium  denarium  comitis  nisi  eius  concessu  et  hoc
quamdiu  uiueret  praeter  archiepiscopum  et  Ulf  fenisc  et  Godeoan
comitissam  .  .  .  Super  socam  quae  iacet  ad  Cliftune  debet  haben
comes  iii  partem  omnium  consuetudinum  et  operum.'  Cf.  Eaile
201;  Dd.  i.  173  d  (Grimanleh) ;  249  b  (Fricescote)  ;  336  a,  3371
(Lincoln).

*  Dd.  i.  32  a :  (Sudwerche)  *  Si  quis  forisfaciens  ibi  calumpniatB
fuisset,  regi  emendabat.  Si  uero  non  calumpniatus  abisset  sub  eo  qn
sacam  et  socam  habuisset,  ille  emendam  de  reo  haberet.*


/


SECT.  II.  CH.  ii]  FR ANCH ISES  1 1 7

church-scot,  and  all  fines,  except  the  four  forfeitures  which
the  king  had  all  through  the  realm.^

Noteworthy  cases  arise  when  sake  and  soke  include
rights  to  fines  imposed  by  a  hundred  or  a  wapentake.  It
is  not  easy  to  distinguish  them  clearly  from  the  normal
forfeitures,  and  they  may  be  occasionally  treated  as  such.
Yet  the  crucial  fact  of  the  appropriation  of  fines  by  a
private  lord,  on  the  ground  of  his  being  possessed  of  soke
as  to  land,  or  to  men,  within  the  hundred,  or  even  in  regard
to  the  hundred  itself,  is  seen  to  be  at  the  bottom  of  the
arrangement.^

One  of  the  difficulties  in  reading  the  older  evidence  Profits  and
arises  from  the  fact  that  it  is  not  always  clear  whether  the  ^°"*^^*°"'-
grant  of  sake  and  soke^  of  forfeitures^  or  of  pleas  {placita\  is
to  be  construed  as  a  grant  of  judicial  functions,  or  of  leave
to  collect  and  appropriate  fines.  Domesday,  and  documents
of  the  same  kind,  are  chiefly  interested  in  the  latter  side,
and  therefore  they  are  seldom  very  explicit  in  regard  to
the  former.  Indeed,  there  are  cases  in  which  it  can  be
shown  that  the  actual  trial  and  delivery  of  the  sentence
took  place  in  the  hundred  court,  but  the  men  more  directly
concerned  in  it  stepped  out  to  form  a  special  quorum.^
But  this  is  evidently  a  transitional  stage,  and  as  a  rule
the  grants  of  sake and soke led to the formation of

'  Dd.  i.  238  c ;  (Alveston,  Warwick)  *  Brictuinus  T.  R.  E.  tenuit  in
Aluestone  vii  hidas  et  dimidiam.  De  hac  terra  habiiit  Eldred  archi-
episcopus  socam  et  sacam  et  tol  et  teim  et  cerset  et  omnes  alias  foris-
faicturas  praeter  ilJas  iiii  quas  rex  habet  per  totum  rcgnum.'  Cf.  298  c
(Yorkshire).

'  Dd.i.  376  b :  (Clamores  in  VVestreding,  Lincoln)  *  Wapentac  testa-
tur  quod  Ulchil  et  Asfort  et  Reslef  et  Ulmer  habuerunt  sacam  et
socam  super  terras  suas  et  super  homines  suos  in  Stratone  hundredo  .
et  super  forisfacturam  de  Wapentac  habet  Sancta  Maria  ii  partes
socae  et  comes  terciam  .  Nunc  Rex  .  Similiter  de  herietc  .  et  si  terram
suam  forisfecissent  S.  Maria  ii  partes  habuisset  et  comes  terciam.'
Cf.  ii.  22  a  (Meresaia).

'  Dd.  i.  58  b:  (Brightwell,  Berks)  *  Bristowelle  .  .  .  Stigandus  tenuit
T.  R.  E.  Tunc  pro  xx  hidis .  modo  pro  x  hidis  .  . .  Ibi  aecclesia  et  de
placitis  terrae  que  in  Walingeford  huic  manerio  pertinent  xxv  sol.*
Exon.  Dd.  198  (Fardle,  Devon),  *  Comes  (de  moritonio)  habet  i  mansio-
nem  quae  uocatur  ferdendella  .  .  .  de  hac  mansione  calumpniatur
hundremani  et  prepositus  regis  xxx  den.  et  consuetudinem  placitorum
ad  opus  firme  Ermtone  mansione  regis.'  Cf.  Maitland,  Domesday  Book
and  Beyond,  97.


1


ii8  JURISDICTION  [ESSAY]

separate  manorial  courts.  This  is  implied  in  the  very
name  of  the  privileged  holders  of  sake  and  soke  in  Danisli
places  like  Lincoln  and  Stamford  ;  they  are  designated  ai
laymen-judges,  a  common  Scandinavian  expression  foi
persons  exercising  the  right  of  declaring  the  law  and  ad-
ministering justice.^  In  the  west,  which  appears  stroni^y
feudalized  already  at  the  time  of  Domesday^  a  manor  like
Persore,  belonging  to  St.  Peter  of  Westminster,  is  said  to
yield  an  income  of  £8^  with  the  pleas  of  the  freemen.^
These  freemen,  or  franklins,  would  correspond  to  the
socmen  of  the  Danish  districts,  and,  to  judge  by  the
description  of  the  manor,  some  of  the  villains  of  the  place
must  have  been  included  in  the  class,  as  personally  free,
or  descended  from  a  group  which  had  to  be  distin-
guished from  the  serfs  in  point  of  jurisdiction.  Howevei
this  may  be,  the  pleas  in  question  can  hardly  be  taken
in  the  sense  of  judicial  profits  only.  They  may  have
accrued  to  the  manor  as  a  result  of  the  judicial  functions
of  the  hundred  attached  to  it,  but  they  appear  character-
istically as  an  attribute  of  the  manor  itself,  and  are  on
entirely  the  same  footing  with  similar  pleas  proceedii^
from  grants  of  sake  and  soke.  A  case  of  the  same  kind  ia
that  of  the  huge  manor  of  Taunton*  in  Somerset,  to
which  many  of  the  most  important  franchises  appertained
Three  times  a  year  the  tenants  had  to  attend  to  hold  the
pleas  of  the  bishop  without  summons  ;  the  pennies  from

'  Dd.  i.  336  d  (Stamford). Cf.  Lincoln,  336  a.

'  Dd.  i.  175  b:  (Pershore,  Worcs.)  'Omnes  hae  supradictae  temc
iacuerunt  et  iacent  ad  Persore.  Hoc  manerium  T.  R.  E.  reddebot
quater  xx  lib.  et  iii  et  1  sextarios  mellis  cum  omnibus  placitis  frBnconmi
hominum.'

'  Exon.  Dd.  162 :  (Taunton,  Somerset)  *  Istesunt  consuetudines  per
tinentes  ad  tantonam  .  burgerist  (burgeriht) .  latrones  .  pads  infractic
.  hamfara  .  denarii  de  hundreto  .  denarii  sancti  petri .  cirdeti  •  et  to
in  anno  teneri  placita  episcopi  sine  ammonitione  .  et  de  talanda  .  et  d<
lacca.  et  de  Holeforda  et  Ubcedena  et  Succedcna  et  Maidenobraca.e
de  lafort  et  Lediart  et  Lega  et  Billa  et  Bcla  et  Denichebede  et  omne
illi  debent  ire  in  expeditionem  cum  hominibus  episcopi .  et  com  donuo
de  supradictis  terris  morientur  debetur  sepeliri  in  Tantona  •  han
cadem  consuetudinem  debet  Bagueberga  Tantone  .  praeter  exerdton
et  sepulturam .  et  de  Scobinalre  et  de  Stoca  debetur  predicta  consuetod
excepto  exercitu,  etc.* Cf.  i.  269  d  (Derbci).


SECT.  11.  CH.  II]  FRANCHISES  119

the  hundred  jurisdiction  are  included  in  the  customary
dues  to  the  Bishop  of  Winchester,  but  they  are  only  one  of
his  many  privil^es  there.  The  reciprocity  of  the  collection
of  dues  and  the  performance  of  functions  is  very  clear  in
sudi  conspicuous  cases, and  it  is  not  less  apparent  in  instances
where  the  natural  relation  of  the  estate  to  higher  units
was  for  some  reason  ambiguous  or  complicated.  It  might
ha|q)en  that  a  township  was  attributed  to  one  district  for
the  purpose  of  rents  and  service,  and  belonged  to  another
in  regard  to  geld  and  to  the  holding  of  pleas.  This  is
noticed  sometimes  in  a  way  which  leaves  no  doubt  as  to
the  intimate  connexion  between  judicial  profits  and  juris-
diction. Thirteen  hides  of  Martley  and  five  hides  of
Socheley  have  to  pay  geld  and  to  hold  pleas  in  Dodintre
Hundred,  Worcestershire,  although  their  farm  is  in  Here-
fordshire.^ Even  more  explicit  is  the  statement  in  respect
of  two  hides  in  Kingston,  Herefordshire ;  ^  they  pay  geld
and  do  work  in  Gloucestershire,  but  their  tenants  are  bound
to  attend  pleas,  in  order  to  do  and  to  receive  right,  in  the
Hundred  of  Bremesete,  Herefordshire.  In  fact,  the  juridical
side  of  jurisdiction  cannot  be  conveniently  separated  from
its  fiscal  side ;  those  who  get  the  profits  have  to  do  the
work,  and,  as  we  have  said  before,  every  g^rant  of  sake
comes  to  be  a  grant  of  soke.  The  fine  follows  investigation
^  sentence,  and  in  order  to  investigate  and  to  give  sen-
tence, not  a  single  judge,  but  suitors  forming  a  court  are
needed.  An  allusion  to  this  primary  requirement  of  the
holding  of  pleas  may  be  found  in  the  often  quoted  pas-
^  about  the  Sheriff  Picot,  who  accommodated  a  couple
of  socmen  *  propter  placita  sua  tenenda.'  It  is  not  clear
'whether  the  *  sua '  means  *  their '  or  *  his '.  More  likely  the
fiwtjif  we  may  judge  from  the  cases  quoted  above,  but  the
P^te  court  with  the  privilege  of  holding  certain  pleas,  and

^  D(LL  178  a  :  (Worcs.)  *  In  Dodintret  hundredo  iacent  xiii  hidae  de
Mertdaj  et  v  hidae  de  Suchelei  .  quae  hie  placitant  et  geldant  et
ad  Hereford  reddunt  firmam  suam  et  sunt  scriptae  in  breue  regis.'

'  Dd.  i.  i82d :  (Kingstone,  Hereford) '  Ecclesia  S.  Mariae  de  Cormeliis
toet  ii  hidas  in  Chingestune  et  geldant  in  Glouuecscire  et  operantur,
Kd  in  isto  hundredo  (Bremesese)  ad  placita  conueniunt  qui  ibi  manent
lit  reaum  faciant  et  accipiant*


I20  JURISDICTION  [ESSAY

a  certain  number  of  suitors  necessary  for  its  existence,  i
certainly  before  us  on  this  occasion.^
Soke  over  3.  The  Domesday  Survey  is  full  of  references  to  sola
persons.  Apart  from  some  special  cases  which  will  have  to  be  ex
amined  hereafter,  these  references  may  be  considered  froc
two  points  of  view.  They  speak  of  certain  rights,  and  the;
speak  of  certain  territorial  divisions.  Turning  to  the  fin
group,  we  find,  to  begin  with,  that  the  king  is  often  men
tioned  as  exercising  soke  over  men  or  over  places.  Th
description  of  Norwich^  is  a  good  instance  in  point  0
1,320  of  its  burgesses  1,238  were  in  the  soke  and  sakec
the  king  and  of  the  earl,  and  they  had  to  pay  customar
rents  or  to  perform  corresponding  services  ;  over  50  Ardi
bishop  Stigand  had  sake  and  soke  and  commendation,  an
over  32  Harold.  Besides  1,238  bui^esses  in  the  commoi
soke  of  the  king  and  earl,  there  was  one  tenant  of  the  kiq
who  was  *  to  that  degree '  under  his  lordship  that  he  couli
not  leave  nor  do  homage  to  any  one  without  permisatoi
from  the  king.  The  mention  of  this  single  very  dependen
burgess  is  not  without  importance,  because  it  throws  ligh
on  the  position  of  the  rest,  who  were  evidently  able  to  d
what  was  denied  to  him.  They  could  not  be  called  '  it
dominici ' — to  that  d^ree — under  his  lordship  as  he  was
Indeed,  their  dependence  on  the  king  and  the  earl  woul<
be  considered  nowadays  merely  as  the  obligation  of  subject
in  regard  to  pubh*c  authority.  The  mediaeval  Survey  put
it  as  a  subjection  to  the  soke  and  sake  of  king  and  earl
subjection  to  the  jurisdiction  of  the  ordinary  public  autho
rities.  Hardly  different  was  the  position  of  the  tenants  g
113  houses  in  Warwick,  who  held  under  the  king,  in  con
trast  to  the  112  who  held  of  the  king's  barons.  All  had  t
pay  geld,  but  the  former  resided  in  the  king's  demesne
This  is,  however^  an  inference  suggested  by  a  compariso
with  cases  like  that  of  Norwich,  as  sake  and  soke  are  nc
expressly  mentioned. Such  express  references  to  holding

^  Dd.  i.  193  c. Cf.  Dd.  i.  265  c  (Acton).
*  Dd.  ij.  116  a  (Norwich).
»  Dd.i.  238  a  (Warwick).


ffiCT.n.  CH.  ii] FRANCHISES  121

and  land  in  the  soke  of  the  king  are  of  common  occurrence,^
as  well  as  others  where  the  royal  soke  is  said  to  stretch
ofcr  certain  persons,  more  especially  over  freemen  or  over
sokemen.^  Of  special  interest  are  cases  when  this  royal
3oke  is  said  to  be  transferred  by  express  grant  to  a  private
pef9on,  a  great  lay  lord  or  an  ecclesiastical  foundation.
There  is,  e.  g.,  the  famous  passage  which  tells  us  that  five
liides  in  Broughton  were  land  belonging  to  socmen,  but
tl  King  Edward  gave  both  the  land  and  the  soke  to  St.  Benet
>l  of  Ramsey  in  acknowledgement  of  a  service  which  Abbot
[I  Alauin  had  rendered  to  him  in  Saxony.^  In  Norfolk  it
i§  Ittppened  that  some  freemen  over  whom  King  Edward  had
sob  and  sake  were  appropriated  by  force  by  Guerth,
Hardd's  brother.  King  William  granted  to  the  monastery
of  fiory  St  Edmunds,  along  with  the  manor,  the  sake  and
soke  of  all  the  freemen  of  Guerth,  and  therefore  the  monks
daim  the  persons  in  question.^  A  similar  contention  arose
about  Ae  freemen  of  MulcelseL*  We  trace  here  very  clearly
the  passage  of  men,  whom  we  should  have  called  ordinary
dtizens,  under  the  sway  of  private  jurisdiction,  and  the
Bfoughton  instance  seems  especially  eloquent,  because  it
discloses  motives  and  proceedings  which  remind  us  of  the

'  D<L  i.  203  d :  (Orton,  Hunts)  *  In  Ouretone  ...  iii  hid.  et  i  uirg.

ad  geklum  . . .  Johannes  tenet  de  episcopo. De  hac  terra  clamat  rex

socam.' Cf.  204  a  (Eregrave) ;  205  b  (Ouretune)  ;  208  b  (Cateuuorde).

'  Dd.  ii.  133a: (Hasingham,  Norfolk)  'In  hasingeham  vi  liberi

iKNnioes  R«  stalre  et  de  uno  habuit  socam  t.  r.  e.  .  .  .  et  de  istis  ii  uiliis

(Limpeshoet  Hasingeham)  T.  R.  £.  erat  soca  regis  testimonio  hundredi.

Sed  K.  tenuit  ex  quo  fuit  comes  .  modo  tenet  Godricus  in  manu  regis.

In  frietorp  ix  liberi  homines  .  super  v  habuit  K.  socam  t.  r.  e.  et  super

iiii  rex.* CL  154  b  (Torp).

*  Dd.  L  208a  :  (Hunts,  Broughton)  *  De  v  hidis  de  Broctone  dicunt
quod  terra  sochemannonim  fuit  T.  R.  £.  sed  isdem  rex  dedit  terram  et
bocam  de  eis  S.  Benedicto  de  Ramesy  propter  unum  seruitium  quod
abbas  Aluuinus  fecit  ei  in  Saxonia,  et  postea  semper  eam  habuit.'

*  Dd.  ii.  2ioa  :  (Abbas  de  Sancto  Edmundo,  Norfolk)  *  Super  omnes
istos  liberos  homines  habuit  Rex  Edwardus  socam  et  sacam  et  post  ea
Gitert  accepit  per  uim  sed  rex  W.  dedit  cum  manerio  socam  et  sacam
de  omnibus  liberis  Guert .  sicut  ipse  tenebat .  hoc  reclamant  monachi.'

^  £>d.  ii.  360  b:  (Mulcelsel)  '  Mulcelsel  tenuit  Sanctus  Edmundus
t.  r.  e.  Ix  ac  pro  manerio  ...  In  eadem  tenuit  Ailricus  liber  homo  Ix  ac.
terrae  . . .  Hanc  terram  ideo  tenet  Abbas  quod  ille  Ailricus  accepit
uxorem  T.  R.  £.  que  hanc  terram  tenebat  libere  in  soca  regis,  sed  abbas
rQiocat  socam  de  dono  regis.'


122  JURISDICTION  [ESSAl^

innumerable  grants  of  land  made  in  Anglo-Saxon  charten
it  is  not  only  the  soke  that  is  passed  in  this  case,  but  ali
the  land  and  people  get  subjected,  at  one  stroke,  to  a  feud
lordship  as  a  reward  for  services  rendered  by  a  msLgtiBtt  \
the  Crown.  Similar  services  were  of  everyday  occurrenc
both  in  the  State  and  the  Church,  and  on  the  other  han
the  great  fund  for  the  distribution  of  rewards  was  m
doubtedly  the  land  of  the  kingdom,  with  its  various  due
And  proceeds  of  jurisdiction  stood  on  a  par  with  agricultun
rents  and  services  as  a  source  of  income  at  the  disposal  i
the  authorities.^  Another  group  of  entries  which  ala
shows  clearly  the  passage  of  valuable  political  rights  finoi
the  king  to  the  lords  are  the  passages  bearing  on  thetran
fer  of  the  jurisdiction  in  the  hundreds.  If  we  look  at  tk
nomina  vUlarum  list  ^  we  get  sufficient  material  to  judge  <
the  extent  to  which  hundreds  had  come  into  private  hand

*  This  is  a  source  of  difficulty  in  interpretation  and  of  ambiguity
the  use  of  the  term.  Although  the  intimate  connexion  with  jurisdicttc
is  sufficiently  clear  in  most  cases,  in  some  the  term  '  soke '  is  taki
to  imply  all  the  rights  accruing  to  the  king  from  his  subjects.  The
include  claims  on  their  assistance  for  mustering  the  host,  contributioi
to  royal  progresses  and  farms  of  right,  and,  possibly,  some  rents  ti
services.  By  granting  the  soke  the  king  may  grant  all  such  riglits  i
a  part  of  them.  This  meaning  of  the  term  may  be  illustrated  bo<
from  Domesday  and  from  preconquestual  evidence.  £.  g.  Edgir
charter  to  Ely,  probably  forged,  but  in  accordance  with  the  legal  cu
toms  of  the  time.  (Thorpe,  Oipl.  242) : '  Ic  |>a  geeacnode  to  |iare  am
sylene  ten  )>usenda  aelfixa  selce  geare  bam  munecum, }«  me  for  fyidini
gefymdagum  aras  binnan  |>am  iggobe  of  |yam  folce  set  WyUan,  ac
ealle  |>a  socna  eac  ofer  |)et  fennland  into  })am  twam  hundredum  him  '
scrudiultume, . . .  eac  ealle  ba  socna  ofer  fif  hundredum,  and  ofer  eal
)ki  land,  gelice  ¥a  socna  75e  into  |>am  mynstre  nu  synd  begytei
o%%e  ¥a  ))e  him  gyt  becuma^  [)urh  Cristes  foresceawunge,  o%¥e  ^hoea
d'66^  |>urh  gife,  habbon  hi  sefre  on  eallum  )>a  socne,  and  |?one  feoiVi
pening  on  folclicre  steore  into  Grantabricge  be  minre  unnan  .  and  f
aenig  man  |>is  awendan  wille,  |>onne  gange  eal  seo  socn  }«  to  anre  oi'
feorme  gebyre^  into  (isere  stowe.' — The  last  stipulation  seems  ratb
an  astonishing  way  of  introducing  a  penal  clause,  but  whatever  we  ml
think  of  its  juridical  character,  the  term  '  socna  to  anre  niht  feorme'
characteristic  by  itself :  it  points  to  contributions  in  kind  to  a  koigfal
farm.  Cf.  Dd.  i.  368  a :  (Sumerdebi) '  hec  soca  talis  erat  quod  ml
reddebat,  sed  adiuuabat  in  exercitu  regis  in  terra  et  in  mari.'  This  a
of  the  term  *  soke '  has  led  Mr.  Ballard,  as  it  seems  to  me,  to  formuli
a  somewhat  exaggerated  theory  as  to  soke  in  opposition  to  sake  ai
soke.  Domesday  Inquest,  84,  159  ffi  Cf.  Maitland,  Domesday  Bo
and  Beyond,  67  ff.,  76  ff.

'  Feudal  Aids,  i.  47  (Berks),  ii.  39  (Dorset),  iii.  449  (Norfolk)i  &c


SECT.  IL  CH.  li]  FRANCHISES  1 23

In  Domesday  we  see  the  process  of  such  transfer  in  its
actual  course  of  development.  To  begin  with,  even  when
hundreds  are  retained  in  the  king's  hands  they  may  be
merged  into  the  administration  of  a  royal  manor.  Such
was  the  case  with  the  Hundred  of  Grenehow,  Norfolk,  e.  g.,
it  was  attached  to  the  manor  of  Wiston  (Wistune).^  Then
come  the  constant  notices  of  the  attribution  of  this  or  the
other  hundred,  or  of  two,  three,  eight,  twenty-seven  of  them,
to  a  great  lord  or  a  see  or  a  monastery.*  These  are  well-
known  facts,  and  I  only  mention  them  because  they
illustrate  the  meaning  and  application  of  soke,  or  sake
and  soke,  as  a  right  to  jurisdiction.

Some  cases  of  grants  of  soke  require  special  notice —
namely,  the  cases  when  a  place,  or  some  persons,  are  said
to  be  exempted  from  it,  or  quit  of  it,  as  it  is  expressed
in  the  Survey.  The  expression  is  suggested  clearly  by
the  corresponding  '  reddere  socam  *,*  to  render  soke,
meaning  the  payment  of  certain  dues  accruing  from
jurisdiction.  But  what  is  the  aim  of  the  quit-claim?
Clearly  it  could  not  be  an  entire  abolition  of  fines  and
wites;  as  this  would  have  had  the  worst  effect  on  the
grantees.  There  can  be  hardly  a  doubt  that  they  were
left  in  such  a  case  to  manage  their  judicial  affairs  them-
selves, and  to  collect  the  fines  for  themselves.  Whether
they  could  alter  the  amount  and  character  of  such  fines
may  be  doubtful  if  we  look  only  to  Domesday,  but  the

*  Dd.  ii.  113b:  (Norfolk)  *Soca  et  sacha  dc  Grenehou  hundredo
pertioet  ad  Wistune  manerium  regis  quicunque  ibi  teneat  et  habet  rex
et  comes.'  Cf.  114a  (Dimidium  Hundredum  de  Dice);  i.  227c
(Epingeham).

'  Dd.  i.  154c:  (Headington,  Oxford)  *Rex  tenet  Hedintone.  Ibi
sunt  X  hidae  .  . .  Duorum  Hundredonim  soca  pertinet  huic  manerio.
Ricardus  de  Curci  de  xvi  hidis  retrahit  sibi/  Cf.  ib.  (Cherielintone
(Kirtlinton);  Optone  (Upton);  Sciptone  (Shipton),  Bentone  (Bamp-
ton));  154  d  (Blochesham  et  Edburgberie  (Adderbury) ).  Cf.  39  c
(Sumbume,  Hants) ;  ii.  215  b  (Norfolk),  *  De  soca  hundreti  et  dimidii
(de  Clacheslosa)  habet  Sanctus  Benedictus  Ixx  sol.'  Cf.  ii.  282  a  (Dice,
SufToIk).

'  Dd.  i.  231  a :  (Misterton,  Leics.) '  Idem  (Radiilf)  tenet  de  episcopo
(Lincoliense)  in  Ministone  iii  canicatas  terrae  et  dimidiam  et  unam
carucatam  terrae  quae  reddit  socam.  Terra  est  iii  car.  Ibi  iiii  uillani
cum  ii  sochmannis.' Cf.  377  a  (Turoluebi).


134  JURISDICTION  [essa

wealth  of  material  presented  by  borough  custumals  ai
other  records  of  local  custom  points  to  a  very  free  exerd
of  customary  legislation  in  connexion  with  the  grow
of  franchises.^  Perhaps  the  most  interesting  instan
entered  in  Domesday  is  that  of  Dover,^  which  w
pardoned  '  sake  and  soke '  as  a  reward  for  the  fittii
out  of  twenty  ships,  for  fifteen  days  in  the  year,  twenty-oi
men  serving  in  every  ship.  A  similar  buying-oflf  of  sal
and  soke  seems  implied  by  the  service  of  the  sea  perfomM
by  the  men  of  Romney.  The  term  *  frigsoca '  ^  that  som
times  occurs  in  Lincolnshire  points  to  authority  ov
freemen  as  opposed  to  *bui^eriht' — rights  over  gebtirs.
The  socmen  so  frequently  mentioned  in  Domesda
and  the  socagers,  or  tcnants-in-socase,  of  later  days,  see
naturally  to  be  men  under  soke,  and  men  doing  sdi
suitors. The  question  gets  to  be  a  somewhat  complicate


*  Dd.  i.  373  c:  (Risby,  Yorks)  *  In  Risbi  habuit  Gam  .  . .  iiii
catas  tcrre  . .  .  De  hac  terra  iacuit  olim  soca  in  Welleton  sed  Thom
Archiepiscopus  habet  breuem  regis  Willelmi  per  quem  concessit  ipa
socam  quietam  S.  lohanni  de  I^ureli  similiter  de  iiii  carucatis  tei
in  Walchinton  (Walkington)  pertinebat  soca  ad  Welleton.  Sed  r
Willelmus  donauit  earn  quietam  Eldredo  archiepiscopo  testu
wapentak  qui  breuem  regis  inde  uidit  ct  audiuit.'

'  Dd.  i.  I  a :  *  Dovcre  tempore  regis  Kdwardi  reddebat  xviii  libr.
de  quibus  denariis  habebat  rex  Kdwardus  duas  partes  et  con
Goduinus  terciam  .  .  .  Buigenses  dederunt  xx  naues  regi  una  ai
in  anno  ad  xv  dies  et  in  unaque  naui  erant  homines  xx  et  unus.  Hi
faciebant  pro  eo  quod  eis  perdonauerat  saccam  et  socam.  Quanc
missatici  regis  ueniebant  ibi  dabant  pro  caballo  transducendo
denarios  in  hieme  et  duos  in  estate.  Bufgenses  uero  inueniebant  sdr
mannum  et  unum  alium  adiutorem  et  si  plus  opus  esset  de  pecunia  ei
conducebatur.' Cf.  Dd.  i.  4  c  (Romenelj.

'  CD.  845:  (Eadweard)  *S6^hdmplonscire— Ic  ky¥c  cow  ^
wille  ann  %at  ic  ann  ¥at  sainte  Petre  and  ¥a  ^ebrd^ran  on  Westmintt
habben  ^t  cotlif  Eueresied  and  ale  %dre  |>mge  ¥at  ^$drt6  mid  ricb
gebire^,  mid  cirkc  and  mid  milnc,  mid  wode  and  mid  felde  . . .  And
\vilie  . . .  %at  pa%u  mf  meodes  wrichte  and  Wlno^  min  huscarl  ai
i4ilfrfce  Hort  and  Fr^bern  mfn  freosocne  men  ¥e  ¥at  cotlyf  heM
%At  hi  heonnefor^  mid  lande  and  mid  loge  heore  ale  mid  his  dile  bi
on  sainte  Petres  wealde  and  ^dm  hirde  on  ^m  minstre  hersumian  ai

tiewwan  '  (cf.  Dd.  43  c).  Dd.  i.  340  b:  (Skillington,  Lines.)  '  In  Sdb
intune  habuit  comes  Morcar  iii  carucatas  terre  ad  geldum  et  Fngsi
et  Bridmer  i  carucatam  terre  ad  geldum.  Terra  ad  v  camcat
dimidium.  Frigesoca  in  Schillintune.  Ibi  VValchelinus  homo  aid
episcopi  ii  carucas  et  xiii  uillani  et  v  sochemanni  habentes  iiii  canici
Cf.  ib.  368  c  (Carlebi).  The  charter  of  Edward  the  Confessor  gh
a  clue  in  explanation  of  the  term  as  /reo  and  not  frrit,  Cf.  MaitSu
Domesday  Book  and  Beyond,  93.


SECT,  a  CH.  II]  FRANCHISES  ia5

oDe,  becauae  the  right  of  soke  may  be  taken  so  differently,
as  «t  have  ahready  had  occasion  to  notice — there  is  the
lok  of  the  king,  and  that  of  magnates,  and  that  of  com-
Bomties  which  have  acquired  the  franchise.  Besides,  it
J  ii  not  only  socmen  who  are  under  soke  and  have  to
I  '  io  suit,  but  also  freemen  {liberi)^  and  villains  too.^  Some
of  tiie  points  bearing  on  the  question  will  have  to  be  dis-
cussed in  the  chapter  on  Socmen ;  I  should  like  on  the
picient  occasion  merely  to  call  attention  to  the  fact  that
rigiits  of  soke  over  socmen  are  often  granted  in  the  same
way  as  rights  over  freemen.-  Sometimes  the  right  is
divided,  and  this  can  hardly  mean  anything  else  than  that
the  profits  accruing  from  suit  of  court  and  from  fines  for
OQo-attendance,  as  well  as  for  transgression,  had  to  be
(Kvided  equally  between  two  lords,^  one  of  them  being

^  The  capital  distinction  between  certain  and  uncertain  tenure  in  feudal

CQuioQ  law  amoimted  to  a  refusal  of  judicial  protection  to  villains,  while

loiocinea  such  protection  was  granted  (Villainage  in  England,  114).

Tlis  feature  led  to  a  modification  of  the  doctrine  in  regard  to  socage

tare. It  came  to  be  considered  chiefly  from  the  point  of  view  of

I cntutty  of  tentu«  and  service. But  originally  the  tenure  is  certainly

I CQUMcted  with  the  term  and  institution  of  the  soke  as  franchise —

i tportioo  of  public  authority  either  residing  in  the  ordinary  royal

flftdils  and  district  courts  or  granted  to  a  subject. Many  traces

tf  tint  and  of  the  suit  (sect a)  corresponding  to  it  are  to  be  found  in

Istcr documents. Rot.  Hund.  ii.  301:  (Notts) '£t  adhuc  de  eodem

vipottik  hmbet  soka  de  Dunham  duos  tumos  de  omnibus  tenentibus

I "tt  per  annum,  et  semper  habuerunt  postquam  primo  fuerunt  de

( teittco  domini Regis  et  valent illi  duo  tumi  per  annum  20  s.'

^ B-3.13  (Amball),  318  (Orston) ;  ii.  177  (Suffolk),  'Omnes  isti  pre-

Boniiutti  sunt  ac^uitati  de  murdro  et  de  communibus  misericordiis

' ctde  omnibus  misis  cjue  pertinent  ad  dominum  Re^em  que  pertinent

^  Wadredom  et  capiunt  emendaciones  de  braciatonbus  et  non  habent

^^ibwltuui  exceptis  Holebroc  et  Selfleye.* Cf.  ii.  178;  Plac.  Quo

^ur.,  144:  'Sallowe  cum  Soka  (Derby) :  ...  ex  quo  idem  Gauselinus

M  habet  iudicialia  que  ad  huiusmodi  libertatem  requiruntur  . .  .

ite  GtnseKous  huiusmodi  libertatem  habere  non  potest'

'  Dd.L  lad:  (Badlesmere,  Kent) '  Scyra  testificatur  quod  Bedenes-
■oe  felt  S.  Augustini  T.  R.  £.  et  de  illo  qui  eam  tenebat  habebat
*bkis  ticam  et  tocam.'  lb.  330  a:  (Barford,  Northants) '  In  Bere-
M  eic  i  hida.  Oslac  albus  hanc  tenuit  cum  ii  sochemannis  de
^fSbn  ipse  socam  habebat.'  ii.  250  b:  (Barton  Bewdish,  Norfolk)
'laBertona  . .  Huic  manerio  adiacent  semper  iiii  homines  de  omni
CBiiaetiidine  et  alii  iiii  ad  socham  tantum.  Cf.  251a  (Buchetuna) ;
3f2  b  ( Wahiccham).

'  Dd.  L  345  d :  (Walcott,  Lines.)  '  In  Walecote  habuit  et  habet
S.  Petnis  de  Burg  v  carucatas  terre  ad  geldum.  Terra  ad  vt  carucas.
.Vimc  Gislebertus  homo  abbatis  habet  ibi  i  carucam  et  vi  uilbni  et


126


JURISDICTION


[ess


Confusion

of

attributes.


possibly  the  king.  One  curious  case  has  been
served  in  which  the  socman  was  free,  not  only  to
his  land,  but  to  sell  his  soke.^  His  position  was  in  e
way  exceptional,  as  there  were  five  others  in  the  s
place  who  could  only  alienate  their  land.  The  only  pos
explanation  which  such  a  remarkable  right  may  ten
seems  to  consist  in  the  leave  to  transfer  land,  with  all
rights  accruing  from  its  possession  in  r^ard  to  jurisdic
while  in  the  case  of  a  sale  of  land  by  any  of  the  fd
of  this  socman  the  right  to  jurisdiction  remained  as  be
It  is  in  any  case  a  very  unusual  privilege.  There  may  1
been  definite  limitations  to  such  a  licence  of  tradii^
public  allegiance,  but  we  are  not  told  what  these  limital
were.

It  is  not  difficult  to  see  how  uncertain  and  opei
misunderstandings  and  encroachments  the  arrangem
derived  from  the  right  of  soke  were.  The  jurisdicti
privilege  of  the  lord  crossed,  as  it  were,  several  other  1
of  superiority  which  led  to  the  collection  of  dues
profits,  and  it  was  by  no  means  easy  to  disentangle
meshes  of  these  concurrent  rights  to  exploitation,  esped
as  they  resembled  each  other  very  much  in  concrete
ticulars,  and  were,  very  often,  wielded  by  the  same  pei
The  surveys  of  the  eastern  counties,  drawn  up  after  re
Danish  invasions,  and  therefore  not  reduced  to  the  ii
colourless  uniformity  of  those  of  counties  settled  from


V  bordarii  cum  ii  carucis,  et  ecclesia  .  et  xiiii  socbemanni  de  ii  cam
habentes  iiii  carucas.  Una  medietas  de  soca  est  S.  Petri  et  i
Gisleberti  de  Gam  pertinens  in  Folchingeham.'  ii*  159  a :  (M^
Norfolk)  'Wituna,  i  liber  homo,  xxx  acras  .  .  Almanis  epiac
T.R.E.  et  Willelmi  medietatem  et  W.  Malet  similiter  1
medietatem.'

^  Dd.  i.  142  d  :  (Standon,  Herts)  'Rothais  uxor  Ricardi  f.  (
berti  comitis  tenet  Standone .  pro  xi  hidis  se  defendit. — Hoc  man<
tenuit  Stigandus  Archiepiscopus.  In  hoc  manerio  fuerunt  vi  si
manni  homines  eiusdem  archiepiscopi  et  quisque  unam  hidam  h
et  uendere  potuerunt  praeter  socam.  Unus  autem  eorum  etiam  s
suam  cum  terra  uendere  poterat.'  Cf.  K.  C.  D.  797  :  (Eadu
1053-1053)  *  H^r  swutela%  on  ^issere  b6c  ¥aet  Osfei%  bohte  v.
landes  set  Lence  set  Lifince  bisceope  )>reora  manna  dsg,  mid
and  mid  s6cne,  on  %d  gerdd  ^t  he  wera¥  hf  for  11.  on  ^Sass  cy
gehwitnesse  and  on  ealra  his  hwitena.'


SECT.  II.  CH.  II]  FRANCHISES  127

times,  abound  in  references  to  the  confusion  and  conflicts
resulting  from  theco-existence  of  several  forms  of  superiority.
A  place  in  which  the  inhabitants  paid  dues  in  commutation
for  the  casual  fines  derived  from  soke  might  easily  be  taken
for  a  settlement  of  tenants  paying  customary  rent.  A  free-
man, attached  to  a  lord  by  voluntary  commendation,  might
occasionally  be  drawn  into  a  circle  of  men  bound  to  recc^ize
the  jurisdiction  of  this  same  lord.  In  a  dispute  with  r^ard
to  the  ownership  of  a  manor  or  of  a  holding,  it  might  be
material  to  discover  whether  the  Saxon  '  antecessor '  of  the
Norman  claiming  the  land  was,  really,  possessed  of  land,
or  only  held  soke  over  its  tenants,  or  perhaps  was  merely
entitled  to  a  claim  to  commendation.  I  only  mention
a  few  of  the  possible  queries  and  complications  in  order
to  explain  the  stress  laid,  in  some  parts  of  the  Domesday
Survey,  on  the  exact  distinctions  between  commendation,
soke,  land*ownership  and  customary  dues.  ^  We  shall
have  to  come  back  to  the  subject  in  other  connexions.
I  should  like  to  point  now  to  the  fact  that  the  great  variety
of  conditions  and  privileges  is  distinctly  traceable,  in  a  general
way,  although  not  in  every  single  case,  to  Old  English
antecedents,  working  on  different  though  converging  lines.
The  Norman  age  reduced  this  variety  to  somewhat  simpler
combinations,  but  did  not  succeed  in  getting  rid  of  it
entirely.

^  Dd.  ii.  162  a:  (Feltwell,  Norfolk)  *  In  fatwella  xl  sochemanni
iii  carucatas  terrae  et  xl  acras.  . .  Super  hos  omnes  habuit  Sancta
Aeldreda  socam  et  omnem  consuetudinem  et  commendationem  et
illomm  vii  liberi  erant  cum  terris  suis  sed  soca  et  commendatio
remanebat  sanctae  Aeldredae.  Totum  fuit  liberatum  Willelmo  (de
Warenna)  pro  escangio.'  Ibid.  207  b,  208  a:  (Gawestone,  Norfolk)
'  Girdfestuna,  zix  liberi  homines  .  c  acras  terrae  ...  Ex  his  testatur
hundredum  quod  suus  antecessor  nullam  habuit  consuetudinem  praeter
conuDendationem  . .  .  et  quidam  homo  Hermeri  offert  iuditium  quod
suns  antecessor  habuit  omnem  consuetudinem  T.  R.  £.  praeter  socam
Sancte  Adeldrede  et  quod  poterat  terram  suam  uenaere/  Cf.  i.  249  d  :
(Amblecote,  Stafford)  ^  In  Elmelecote  i  hid.  .  .  Duo  homines  Algari
Comitis  tenuerunt  sine  soca.'  Ibid.  250  a  :  *  Biscopesberie  . .  .  Ulfric
tenuit  cum  saca  et  soca';  346 d  (Dowdyke,  Lines.),  'In  Duuedic
habait  et  habet  S.  Gutlacus  ii  carucatas  terre  ad  geldum.  Terra  ad
ii  canicas  cum  sacca  et  soca.'  Ibid.,  *  In  Burtoft  habuit  et  habet
S.  Gutlacus  i  bouatam  terre  quae  iacet  in  Duuedic.  Inde  habet  rex
socam.' Cf.  375  a  (Richesbi) ;  375  b  (Hotot) ;  375  d  (Golsa).


ia8  JURISDICTION  [essa^

Territorial 4. The  relation  bound  up  with  the  right  to  sake  a<

soke

soke  is,  in  principle,  a  personal  one.  Certain  persons  a
exempted  from  the  ordinary  jurisdiction  of  the  hundn
and  of  the  shire,  and  placed  under  the  jurisdictioii  <
a  great  man  or  of  a  great  institution.  These  exempt!
persons  may  be  taken,  and  mentioned,  singly  or  in  batchc
but  the  character  and  limitations  of  their  new  subjecttoi
will  be  derived  from  the  nature  of  every  single  grant,  an
is  not  necessarily  bound  up  with  any  general  schea
of  local  government  and  local  repartition  of  r^hts  i
jurisdiction.  Therefore  the  relation  may  sometimes  assuin
a  shape  very  similar  to  personal  commendation.  But  tbq
is  one  feature  which  separates  it  clearly  from  this  last,  SD
forms  a  link  between  the  personal  and  the  territorial  aqwc
of  the  right  to  sake  and  soke.  It  is  not  r^ardless  of  an;
relation  to  land  that  one  is  subjected  to  the  right,  ba
as  the  tenant  of  some  land — a  holding,  an  estate— or  a
one  temporarily  connected  with  some  land,  one  wbn
dwells  on  it,  or  who  has  committed  some  specified  actioi
on  it,  e.  g.  a  theft.  This  side  of  the  attribution  of  sob
makes  it  akin  to  land-ownership,  and  necessitates  careb
distinctions  in  some  instances.  And,  on  the  other  hand
the  juxtaposition  of  soke  privileges  in  respect  of  scatterec
tenants  tends  to  resolve  itself  into  territorial  combinatioDi
to  concentrate  into  local  jurisdictions.  Let  us  take  a  ctf
from  Lincolnshire.  Robert  of  Stafford  claims  that  th
land  of  Outi,  a  vassal  of  Archbishop  Thomas,  ought  tc
lie  in  the  soke  of  Lepsi,  his  own  predecessor,  but  th
wapentake  says  that  they  never  saw  Outi  render  soh
to  Lepsi.  The  test  of  the  contention  is  transferred  ti
evidence  of  a  personal,  customary  duty,  which,  in  tU
case,  seems  to  have  been  a  commutation  rent,  but  dn
claim  is  directed  to  include  a  certain  holding  into  a  loGi
district  called  Soke^.

The  building  up  of  more  or  less  compact  franchises


^  Dd.  i.  376  d :  (Clamores  in  Chetsteven)  '  Robertus  de  Stadfa
clamat  terrain  Outi  hominis  archiepiscopi  Thomae  debcre  iacere  i
soca  Lepsi  antecessoris  sui,  sed  Wapentak  dicit*  quod  nunqoa
uiderunt  Outi  dare  socam  Lepsi.'


SECT.  II.  CH.  II]  FRANCHISES  ^ 1 29

facilitated  by  the  very  common  occurrence  of  a  grant  of
privilqred  jurisdiction,  in  regard  to  whole  townships,  ^  or
maiXMr%  with  all  their  population,^  or  all  the  lands  and
men  beloi^ing  to  a  lord.^  But  there  are  numbers  of  cases
when  stray  hides  or  carucates,  or  a  church,  or  a  wood,  are
connected  by  soke  with  some  manor  to  which  they  do  not
otherwise  belong,  and  from  which  they  may  lie  at  a  con-
siderable distance  ;^  or  are  attributed  as  to  soke  to  a  person

*  Birch.,  Cart.  Sax.  iii.  1348  (1029  6),  A.  D.  958  (p.  690) :  '  Dis  sint
^fam  tunes  ^  bire%  in  to  sudpellan  mid  sacce  "}  mid  sacne  feames
efiS  Cyslinstune  .  Nordmantune  .  Uptune  .  Mortune  .  Fiscertune  .
Gypesmere  .  blisetune  .  sofestune  .  healhtune  .  healum.'  Cf.  Dd.  i.
1S3 :  (Southwell,  Notts)  '  In  Suduuelle  numerantur  xii  (bereuuiche
(zi?)-^In  SudweUe  cum  Bereuuitis  suis  sunt  xxii  carucatae  terre  et
dimidia  ad  geldum.  Terra  xxiiii  carucis.'  Cf.  Cart.  Sax.  iii.  1029
(a.  d.  958)  :  *  ego  Eadwy  . . .  meo  desiderabili  episcopo  Oscytello  con-
cede ...  at  Sudpellan.  xx  mansar  in  haereditatem.'  K.C.D.  805 : '  quan-
dam  telluris  partem,  scilicet  rus  quod  ab  incolis  Deotinctum  uocatur
com  alio  uiculo  ad  illud  pertinente  qui  iClfsigestun  nominatur,  tres
nidelicet  hidas  terrarum  in  duabus,  ut  praedixi,  uillulis,  cum  licentia
domini  mei  regis  Eduuardi , . .  Sanctae  . . .  Mariae  condono  ad  usus
fratnim  •  .  «  ut  habeant  et  possideant  iure  aecclesiastico  perpetua
haexeditate,  cum  saca  et  socne,  tolle  et  teame,  reditibus  et  campis,
pascuis  et  pratis,  et  cunctis  utilitatibus  ad  praenotatam  villam
peitiDentibus.*  Dd.  i.  235  d :  '  In  Godtorp  (Leics.)  sunt  iii  carucatae
terrae  et  dimidia.  Soca  de  Picheuuelle  et  de  Summerdebie.'  275  b :
'  In  Redeslei  (Derbyshire) ...  xii  bouatas  terrae  ad  geldum  . . .  Abbas
(de  Bertone)  damat  socam  huius  uillae '  (cf.  273  b).

'  Dd.  ii.  173  b:  (Massingham,  Norfolk)  '  Masingeham  .  .  .  Super
hoc  manerium  et  super  omnes  homines  qui  erant  in  eo  habebat
Stigandus  socam,  et  fuit  liberatum  Rogero  uiuente  eo.'

*  K.  C.  D.  856 :  (Eadweard)  *  Eadward  kyng  gr^t  Willeme  bissope,

and  Suetman  mfne  porter^fe,  and  alle  %e  burhware  on  Londone

freondliche . .  .  ich  wille  ^t  Wulfuuold  abbod  at  Cherteseye  bed  his

saca  wz^  and  his  s6cna  ofer  his  higan  land  h^rbinne  and  ouer  his

igene  man.* Cf.  857,  *  burh^gnes  * ;  867, '  quod  ipsi  sint  de  eorum

sacha  et  eorum  socha  liberi  supra  eorum  terras  et  supra  eorum

bomines  *  (Hereford) ; 8SS (Eadweard),  '  his bisceopas, and his

abbodas  and  his  eorlas  and  l^eignas  ^  on  ¥im  scvran  syndon  ^

Ordrk  abbud  hxPS  land  inne  .  . .  ic  haebbe  geunnen  him  into  Sancta

Marian  mynstre  sace  and  s6cne,  toll  and  team,  etc. . . .  ofer  his  dgen

^od.' Cl  893  :  *  Ealdred  aercebisceop  . . .  %at  he  be6  his  saca  and

bis  s6cna  wur^  ofer  his  land  and  ofer  eallum  his  mannum.'

*  Dd.  i.  205  d :  (Hammerton,  Hunts)  '  In  Hambertune  habuit
Ulfech  XV  hidas  (carucatas)  terrae  ad  geldum.  Nunc  habet  Eudo
2^er  de  rege  et  Alich  et  Leuuine  iii  hidas  Soca  in  Lectunestane
hnndredo.  banc  terram  habet  Eudo  et  rex  habet  socam.  Nunc  in
'^pQ^o  sunt  iiii  canicae  in  dominio  in  iii  hidis  huius  terrae,  et  xxvi
*"J^i  babentes  vi  carucas.'  221  d :  (Armston  and  Kingsthorpe,
Northants)  *  In  Mermeston  et  Chingestorp  tenent  v  milites  de  abbate
vbidasde  soca .  Terra  est  viii  carucis. In  dominio  sunt  v,  et  ix  uillani

VTRociADorr  K


I30  JURISDICTION  [essa

who  is  not  the  owner  of  them.* We  even  hear  of  the  sc

of  half  an  acre  belonging  to  Countess  Judith  in  Brachcfc

Northamptonshire. It  is  difficult  for  us  nowadays  to  und

stand  how  such  a  fractional  privilege  could  be  realized,  I

mediaeval  arrangements  very  commonly  assumed  the  sha

of  similar  subdivisions,  as  we  have  already  had  occasi

to  observe  in  the  matter  of  military  obligations.' Th<

scattered  privileges  explain  the  often-recurring  statemc

of  the  Survey  that  the  soke  of  a  certain  place,  or  of  certs

holdings  in  it,  belongs  to  or  lies  in  another  place.' Cc

versely,  some  manorial  estates  are  surrounded by  wh(

swarms  of  smaller  settlements,  hamlets,  or  holdings

other  vills,  which  are  expressly  designated  as  their  soke

In  Derbyshire,  Nottinghamshire,  Hertfordshire,  these  sv

ordinate  sokes  are  marked  off  in  the  margin  by  an  S,

which  the  full  '  soka '  corresponds  as  a  heading.^ T

et  iii  bordarii  et  vi  sochemanni  cum  iii  carucis  inter  omnes.'
222  b  (In  Rodewelle  Hd. — Boctone,  Gadintone,  Erniwade,  Scadewe
H  oh  tone, Langeport, Badebroc, Ferendone,  Udetorp, Clipesto
Calme,  Medewelle) ;  cf.  217 a  (Winessamestede,  Beds);  222  c  (Eddo
Northants) ;  373  a  f Middeltun,  Clamores  de  Euruicscire).

^  Dd.  i.  355b:  (Claxby,  Lines.)  'In  Clachesbi  habuit  Tonne
bouatas  terrae  ad  geldum. . . .  Ibi  Rademer  homo  Gisleberti  ha]
ii  carucas.  ...  In  eadem  uilla  habet  Gislebertus  quater  xx  ac
siluae  minutae  et  alias  cxx  acras  siluae  minutae.  De  tribus  partil
harum  acrarum  habet  Wido  de  Credim  socam.' Cf.  363  d  (WUgefai

'  Dd.  i.  222c:  (Brayfield,  Northants)  'In  Brachefeld  est  a
domus  pertinens  ad  Wicetone  cum  v  acris  terrae.  De  dimidia  m
habet  socam  ludit  comitissa.'

'  Dd.  i.  220 b:  'De  feudo  episcopi  Baiocensis  tenet  WiDefax
unam  uirgatam  terrae  in  Brandestone  (Northants).  Huius  soca  im
in  Faleuuesle.*  Cf.  ibid.  Waltone,  '  Huius  soca  iacet  in  SutcuM
Everdone, '  Huius  terrae  soca  iacet  in  Felesleuue.'  237  b  :  (Ibestod
Leics.)  '  soca  iacet  ad  superiorem  uillam  Bageworde.*  Cf.  37)
(Snellestune,  Derbyshire) ;  276  c  (Pinneslei  et  Caldecotes  et  Wildb
storp);  277  a  (Moresburg);  272  d  (Milebume).  280b:  (Nottil
hamshire  custumal)  '  In  Derby  habet  abbas  de  Bertone  i  moliiPi
et  i  mans,  terrae  cum  saca  et  soca,  et  ii  mans,  de  quibus  habet  r
socam';  cf.  ibid.  ' Stori  Antecessor  Walterii.'  370c:  (Barchestoi
Lines.)  '  ii  molina  unde  iacet  saca  in  Granham.'

*  Dd.  i.  281  a :  (Dunham,  Notts) '  In  Duneham  cum  iiii  Bereuuil
Ragenehil,  Wimentun,  Derluueton,  Suanesteme  habuit  rex  Edwaid
V  carucatas  terre  et  dimidiam  ad  geldum  .  Terra  xii  carucis  • .  •  So
huius  manerii.  In  Draitone. ...  In  Marcham  ...  in  Grenleige  •  •  •
Ordeshale ...  in  Graue  Ledune  (Hedune) ...  in  Upetone . . .  in  Nonn
tone';  cf.  341a  (Caditon,  Lines.);  ii.  135a  (Trukebei,  NorfbUc);
152  a  (Scerepham,  Norfolk).

'  Dd.  i.  272  b  (Newbold,  Derby.) ;  277  a  (Eehintune);  275d  (Estuii


SECT. IL  CH.  ii] FRANCHISES  i$i

oppotition  between  the  manor,  as  the  economic  unit  of
an  estate,  and  the  soke,  as  the  jurisdictional  union  encircling
the  manor  and  often  consisting  of  places  scattered  around
it,  is  one  of  the  important  results  of  the  different  modes
bjr  which  lords  acquired  rights  of  superiority  over  their
dqpendents.^  Brictric,  the  son  of  Alfgar,  held  a  hide  in
Beadun  from  the  Bishop  of  Worcester,  and  contributed
to  the  manorial  &rm  in  proportion  to  his  holding,  but
he  also  rendered  to  the  soke  of  the  bishop  everything
he  was  bound  to  perform  in  service  to  the  king.  The
expresaon '  soke ',  in  this  case,  may  be  stretched  to  a  some-
what wider  extent  than  usual,  or  else  it  may  be  simply  an  in-
exact rendering  of  the  usual  surrender  of  jurisdiction.  But
however  this  may  be,  the  contrast  between  the  two  forms
of  contribution  which  might  be  levied  from  a  hide  holding —
one  to  the  farm  of  the  manor,  the  other  to  the  customary
does  of  the  soke;  one  economic,  the  other  political — is
well  accentuated  by  the  entry.'  In  a  Suffolk  case  we
read  that  three  freemen  were  unable  to  sell  their  land  at
all,  uriiile  two  others  could  only  sell  within  the  precincts  of
the  Soke  of  St.  Edmunds.^ The  closing  of  a  soke  against

277  c  (Bareuue) ;  20$  c :  (Kimbolton,  Hunts) '  In  Chenebaltone  habuit
Harold  comes  x  bidas  ad  geldum  .  Terra  xx  carucis  ...  s  in  Caissot.
AUic  ill  utrgatas  terre  ad  gddum  .  Terra  vi  bourn. Soca.  a  in  Suines-

1m4#4  M^^ft^  fitCa'

>  DcLL  381  b,c:  (Mansfield,  Notts) ' In  Mamesfelde  et  Scbegebi  (B.)
et  Sutone  (B.) . . .  BB.  in  Grimestone ...  in  Edenestou.  SS.  In  Carle-
tooey  in  Mapelberg . . .  Item  soca  in  Wardebec  Wapentac.  SS.  In
Tiliie  •  • .  In  Ctedretone  . . .  Ibi  xxii  sochemanni  et  xi  uiUani  babent
ix  f?|iiK^*-  Hi  socbemannt  reddebant  xx  solidas  de  consuetudine
T.ILE.  SS.  In  Fentune,  Litdberg,  Estretone.  Haec  soca  ualet  xl
S0L9  etc'  Cf.  381  d  (Oschintone) ;  299  c  ^Baswick,  Yorks),  '  In
...  Soca  huius  terrae  pertinet  ad  Dritelt,  et  tamen  ibi  habuit


Morcar  manerium ' ;  3S5  d  rPolchingeham,  Lines.).

*  Dd.  L  173  b :  (Bredon,  Worcs.)  *  De  ipso  manerio  (Breodun)  tenuit
de  epbcopo  Brictric  £  Algar  i  hidam  ad  Biselege  et  inde  finnabat
ipfom  episcopum  omni  anno  et  tamen  reddebat  ad  socam  episcopi
quioguid  debebat  ad  seruitium  regis.  Modo  est  in  manu  Regis  Willelmi.'

'  f>d.  ii.  34J^a:  (Mendham,  Suffolk) '  Menham  tenet  idem  (Vluricus
leinniis)  . .  •  iii  homines  xx  acras  terrae  . . .  Isti  non  poterant  dare  uel
nendere  tenram  sed  tamen  soca  in  Hoxa ' ;  cf.  349  b  (Brockley,  Suffolk),
'  In  Brode  iii  liberi  homines,  ex  histis  habuit  sanctus  Edmundus  com-
mendationem,  cum  soca  super  unum  et  non  poterat  uendere,  super  alios
ii  habuit  rex  commendationem,  sed  poterant  uendere  in  soca  Sancti
Edmundi.'

K  2


132  JURISDICTION  [essay -

strangers  is  parallel  to  a  similar  phenomenon  within  th«^
more  narrow  circuit  of  a  manor,  but  the  boundaries  of  th^
two  do  not  coincide.
Organiza- A  jurisdictional  centre  is  necessary  for  the  constitutio-Ki
Sokes. ^^  ^  soke,  although  cases  occur  when  it  is  not  easy  to  malc^r
out  where  it  lay.^ This  points  to  a  feature  especially
common  in  Lincolnshire,  namely,  to  the  congregation  of
enormous  numbers  of  free  settlements  around  a  juriadic-
tional centre which has no importance whatever
a manorial unit. In Caistor^ in Grantham,^ there
hardly  any  domain to  speak  of: these  huge  lordship^
are  emphatically  sokes, and  the central  place appears
chiefly  in  the light  of a  meeting-place for  the  court
of  the  franchise. This  is not  the  rule  everywhere,  of
course,  and  sometimes  a  soke  gets  superadded  to  very
important  manors. In Harold's manor  of  Bemodeby  *
there  is  already  a  manorial nucleus  of  three  carucates
in  domain  in  Bemodeby  itself,  and  two  carucates  in  Rtby»
an  inland  or  berwick  of  the  manor. In  the  Derbyshire
possessions  of  the  abbey  of  Burton  ^  the  manorial  element
is  still  more  prominent.

>  Dd.  i.  355  b:  (Lines.)  *Soca  de  Bardenai.  SS.  In  Partene,  Scbe-
ueldelbi,  Screnbi,  Stepinge,  Calnodesbi,  Burg,  Herdetorp,  Haberdin^
ham,  H.  In  Wemflet.'

'  Dd.  i.  337  d :  (Grantham,  Lines.)  '  In  Grantham  babuit  Edid
regina  xii  earucatas  ad  geldum  . . .  SS.  In  Gunfordebi  sunt  vii  car«>'
catae  terre  ad  geldum  ...  In  Herlauestune  xii  canicatae  terre  .  •  •  1>^
Sudstoches  et  Nortstoehes  .  . .  ix  earucatae  ...  In  Nongtone  .  iii  ckT^*'
catae. ...  In  Magna  Pamptune .  xii  earucatae . . .  Ad  Granham  perti0^
haec  Soca.  Sumerdebi,  Sapretone  et  Breizbi,  Wellebi^  Beltone*  Hen*
gerbi,  Dunetorp,  Lundetorp,  Barehestone,  Dentone.  Simul  ad  gcldutD
Iv  earueatae. Terra  ad  Ix  carueas.' Cf.  338  d,  Soca  de  Castre.

'  Dd.  i.  349  b :  (BamoIdby-le-Beck,  Lines.)  '  In  Bemodc^  htbt^
Harold  comes  vi  earucatas  terre  ad  geldum. Terra  ad  xii  cuucM^
Tres  earueatae  sunt  in  soca  . .  .  Haec  soca  pertinet  ad  Bemodel''*
Item  in  Lobingeham  iiii  earucatae  et  i  bouata,  et  Irebi  i  caiucat*
et  dimidia,  et  Ribi  iiii  earucatae  et  dimidia .  •  •  Ibi  Iii  sochemaimi  ^
xi  uillani  et  vii  bordarii  faabentes  xi  earucas. In  Ribi  habet  EmteiM
homo  comitis  ii  ear.  in  dominie. Illam  socam  tenet  ipse  de  oomitt
(Hu^one). Alias  tenent  Willebnus,  Radul^s  et  Azelmus hominei
comitis.'

*  Dd.  i.  273  b :  (Miekleover,  Derby.)  *  In  Ufre  habuit  Rex  Edwardni
X  earucatas  terrae  ad  geldum.  Terra  xv  carueis.  Ibi  adiaoent  iii
J^ereuuiche,  Parua  Ufre,  Findre,  Potlac.  Ibi  abbas  de  Bertone  habd
nunc  in  dominio  v  carucas  et  dimidiam  . . .  Soca  eiusdem  maneriii


SECT.  11.  CH.  ii]  FRANCHISES  133

The  facts  that  sokes  may  appear  as  outside  adjuncts
of  manorSi  and,  at  the  same  time,  that  rights  of  sac  and
see  contribute  powerfully  to  the  formation  of  the  franchise
of  the  manor,  have  their  counterpart  in  the  extension  of
soke  over  very  different  elements  of  the  population.  It
stretches  naturally  over  socmen  and  freemen,  and  in
most  cases,  which  are  marked  off  as  special  sokes,  we
find  socmen  ^  or  freemen  ^  forming  the  bulk  of  the
population..  Villains  and  bordarii,  if  any,  appear  as  their
under-tenants.  And  yet  there  are  numbers  of  cases  where
villains  are  found  to  be  resident  in  sokes  ^  or  under  soke,
and  any  normal  manor  provided  with  the  ordinary  sake
and  soke  franchise  would  of  course  include  villains,  and
might  perhaps  consist  of  villains  alone  or  of  other  elements
of  the  population  reputed  unfree  according  to  mediaeval
Common  Law.^  These  facts  explain  themselves  in  so
far  as  manor  and  soke  overlap  without  coinciding ;  the
latter  ought  to  be  restricted  to  rights  of  jurisdictional  or
public  or^in,  while  the  former  comprises  both  jurisdictional
and  economic  elements.  But  the  local  influence  of  the
lord  easily  extended  beyond  the  strict  measure  of  rights
conceded  to  him  by  the  grant  of  franchise,  and  we  com-
monly find  socmen  gradually  drawn  on  into  the  closer

Snellestune,  iiii  bouatae,  Beuerdescote,  iiii  bou.  Dellingeberie,  iii  bou.
Hoogen,  iii  bou.  Kedlesleie,  xii  bou.  Sudberie,  iiii  bou.  Hiltune,  iiii  bou.
Sudtun,  i  canicata.'

'  Dd.  i.  139  d :  (Bordesden  Cm  Braughing)  Herts)  '  In  Bordesdene . . .
hanc  terrain  tenuerunt  iiii  sochemanni  de  soca  Asgari  Stairi  et  uendere
poCuenint.'  Cf.  314  c  (Bochetone,  Yorks)  ;  .349  c  (Staintune,  Lines.) ;
iL  1 10 a  (Saham,  Norfolk);  ii.  131  a,  b  (Salla,  Norfolk);  ibid.  (Tyr-
nii^^) ;  132  a  (Racheitha) ;  ii.  138  a  (Torp,  Norfolk).

'  Dd,  ii.  123  a :  (Burlingham,  Norfolk)  *  In  Berlingeham  i  liber  homo
R.  Stalre  cum  soca  de  xxx  acris  terrae  et  x  acris  liberae  terrae  per-
tinentis  ad  ecclesiam  .  .  .  Adhuc  in  Berlingeham,  iii  liberi  homines  et
dimidius  semper  unus  R.  socam.  Super  ii  et  dimidium  Rex  xlii  acras
tcrre  et  iiii  ac.  prati.*  Cf.  ibid.  (Stromessaga)  ;  i.  356  b  (Bundebi,
Lines.),  'habuerunt  Grinchel  et  Merdo  et  Aldene  et  alii  iii  taini
iii  carucatas  terrae  ad  geldum  .  . .  Socti  iii  bouatae  huius  terrae.'

'  Dd.  i.  273  c :  (Bectune,  Derby)  *  Soca  (of  Sudtune)  Ibi  ii  uillani
habent  i  carucam  et  i  acram  prati.'  Cf.  339  c  (Barcuurde,  Lines.
soke  of  Ulingeham);  339  d  (Rigesbi).

*  Dd.  i.  342  d  :  (Burgrede,  Lines.)  *  Soca  (de  Stratone)  iii  bouatae
terrae  ad  geldum.  Terra  ad  dimidiam  carucam.  Ibi  est  unus  uillanus
ct  i  bordarius  habentes  i  bouem  arantem.'


134  JURISDICTION  [essa^

bonds  of  manorial  subjection.  In  some  cases  they  at  les
held  their  own  as  socage  tenants  of  the  manor,  but  the
were  other  instances  in  which  they  lapsed  into  the  aai
state  of  bondage  as  the  villains.  We  shall  have  to  rev<
to  these  phenomena  when  treating  of  the  classes  of  t
population,  but  it  is  important  to  note  at  the  outset,  ai
in  connexion  with  the  subject  of  territorial  jurisdiction,  tb
there  is  material  contrast  in  the  treatment  of  this  instituti*
in  the  north  and  in  the  south  of  England.  In  the  non
including  the  East  Anglian  shires,  the  soke  appears
a  recognized  separate  institution,  and,  parallel  to
numerous  socmen  and  freemen  under  soke  represc
a  fundamentally  free  population,  subjected  to  politk
exactions  of  various  kinds,  but  preserving  its  high  see
standing  on  the  basis  of  suit  to  the  courts  of  the  sok
In  the  south  the  soke  is  almost  entirely  merged  into  t
manor,  while  socmen  and  freemen  appear  only  exec
tionally,  and  the  court  of  the  manor  has  to  attend  to
jurisdictional  business.  At  the  same  time  the  sake  a
soke  basis  of  the  manorial  franchise  is  quite  as  clear
in  the  case  of  the  Scandinavian  shires,  in  fact  clear
because  most  of  the  Old  English  charters  come  from  t
southern  counties.  Have  we  to  suppose  entirely  diflferc
courses  of  development  in  the  two  cases,  or  to  say  that  t
Saxon  south  had  gone  through  approximately  the  sai
stages  as  the  Scandinavian  north,  but  had  already  arriv
in  the  eleventh  century  at  the  goal  reached  by  the  northc
districts  only  in  the  twelfth  and  thirteenth  centuries,  unc
the  influence  of  the  Normans  ?  I  think  that  a  survey
the  grants  of  sac  and  soc  made  in  the  tenth  and  eleven
centuries  establishes  more  than  a  presumption  that  the  seco
eventuality  actually  took  place.  This  means  that  a  numt
of  men  who  are  technically  entered  as  villains  in  Domesd
were  ceorls  under  soke  in  earlier  times,  and  that  their  coi
plete  fusion  with  the  servile  elements  of  the  population
more  the  result  of  terminology  and  encroachment  than
a  fundamental  diflerence  in  the  conditions  and  developm<
of  the  two  halves  of  England. In  any  case,  in  the  feui


SECT.  11.  CH.  ii]  FRANCHISES  135

age  the  contrast  seems  to  be  to  a  great  extent  removed
even  in  the  counties  of  the  former  Danelaw.  Former
sokes  are  currently  treated  as  manors,  and  their  franchises
discussed  in  the  same  way  in  the  north  as  in  the  south.^

Yet  interesting  points  remain  even  in  later  evidence  Soke  of
to  show  the  original  difference  between  the  two  institu-  ^®^°*^y-
tions--a  jurisdictional  district  attached  to  an  estate,  and
an  estate  acquiring  some  rights  of  jurisdiction.  One  of
the  best  later  records  of  the  organization  of  sokes  is  the
thirteenth-century  custumal  of  Rothley,  in  Leicestershire.'
The  manor  is  kept  distinct  from  the  surrounding  members,
which  are  spread  over  a  surface  of  some  square  miles,^
exactly  in  the  same  way  as  the  sokes  of  Derbyshire,
Nottingham,  and  Lincoln  are  said  to  surround  the  centre
or  head  of  the  soke  in  the  Domesday  Survey.  The
manorial  /rourt,  held,  as  usual,  every  three  weeks,  and,
if  necessary,^  more  often,  could  evidently  clear  only  the
purely  juridical  part  of  the  business  incumbent  on  the
townships  of  the  district.  There  was  no  constant  centre
for  it ;  it  could  be  moved  by  the  reeve  from  one  member
of  the  soke  to  another  according  to  the  necessities  of  the
case,  although  probably  it  met  most  frequently  in  Rothley,
the  manorial  centre  of  the  franchise. This  point  puts  into

^  £.  g.  Lincolnshire,  Calthorpe,  Dd.  i.  363  b :  (Carltorp)  *  Soca  huius
manehi,  In  Brandune ...  Ibi  Rosbi.'  Cf.  Placita  de  Quo  Warranto,
395 :  '  manerium  de  Calthorp  cum  membris  suis  * ;  Fiskerton,  Dd.  i.
345  c  (Fiscartune),  *  Soca  huius  manerii.  In  Scoltornc,  et  Holme  ei  Sut-
broc.'  Cf.  Rot  Hund,  i.  371  b:  *  manerium  de  Fiskertun* ;  Holbeach  and
Whaplode,  Dd.  i.  368  a  (Holobech  et  Copelade), '  Soca  huius  manerii.
In  Stith  ...  In  Pincebec  ...  In  Westune  et  Multune.'  Cf.  Placita  de
Quo  Warranto,  p.  411 :  '  maneria  de  Holebech  et  Quappelade.*

'  Archaeologia,  vol.  xlvii.  pp.  89-130.

>  In  West  Goscote  Hd.:  Rothley  itself;  in  East  Goscote  Hd.  :
Gadesby  (Gad.'esby),  Bamsby  (Barsby),  Croxton  (South  Croxton),
Tylton  (Tilton),  Gnmeston  (Grimston),  Saxelby,  Wartnaby,  Kayham
(Keyham);  in  Gartree  Hd.:  Babgrave  (Baggrave) ;  in  Framland  Hd.:
Somerdeby  (Somerby),  North  and  South  Mardfield  (Marefield),  and
Caldwell.

*  Archaeologia,  vol.  xlvii.  p.  125 :  '  De  curia  tenenda.  Item  sciendum
est  quod  dictus  ballivus  tenebit  dictam  curiam  de  tiibus  septimanis  in
tres  septimanas  vel  in  unum  mensem  si  voluerit  vel  aliquando  amplius
iuxta  voluntatem  suam,  set  si  breve  domini  regis  ibi  fuerit  oportet  quod
teaeatur  de  tribus  septimanis  in  tres  septimanas  ubicunque  ei  placuerit
in  Soka.'


136  JURISDICTION  [Essy

strong  light 'one  of  the  most  important  features  of  the  s
arrangement.  Being  primarily  a  jurisdictional  one,  it  ^
not  contrived  to  fit  the  economic  requirements  of
lordship.  It  was  not  necessary  to  have  a  close  and  med<
some  supervision  over  the  husbandry  of  the  peasants  so
as  services  were  concerned,  because  there  were  few  servi
in  kind,  mostly  carriage  dues,  the  rest  being  aires
acquitted  in  money  in  the  thirteenth  century.  ^  Tl
remained,  to  be  sure,  the  multifarious  by-laws  ;
economic  arrangements  made  necessary  by  open-f
cultivation,  commons,  &c.  As  the  manorial  court  '
taken  up  with  other  business,  and  could  not  pretend
local  knowledge,  it  is  especially  clear  in  such  cases  1
the  by-laws  were  drafted  and  enforced  by  local  meeti
and  local  officers,  whatever  they  may  have  been  cal
The  case  stands  exactly  on  a  parallel  with  the  halimc
of  the  bishop  of  Durham,  to  which  one  great  mano
court  was  superimposed,^  and  with  the  placita  of
Lancashire  reeves  in  the  huge  manors  among  which
thanes  and  drengs  of  the  district  were  distributed.^
the  side  of  the  hundreds  and  of  the  purely  jurisdictic
sittings  of  manorial  courts  the  necessity  of  meetings
some  sort,  to  draw  up  by-laws  and  to  appoint  n
officers  and  juries,  must  have  asserted  itself.  And
same  may  be  said  about  all  very  large  manorial  a
binations  of  this  period,  of  which  there  are  many,  especi
when  they  take  the  shape  of  sokes,  that  is  of  organizati
of  tenants  emphatically  free.  The  manorial  jurisdict
remained  a  necessary  item  of  the  arrangement  in  so

^  Arch.  vol.  xlvii.  p.  125  :  '  Consuetudincs  et  servicia — Item  bam
de  Rol'  debent  cariare  omnia  blada  dominica  domini  regis  ultra  aq
scilicet  blada  de  veteri  dominio  de  di.abus  canicatis  terre  uaqu
orreum  domini  regis  cum  carectis  suis  propriis  ad  sununonicio
ballivi  set  ad  cibum  reg^s  semel  in  die.'  Cf.  p.  99 :  '  Consuetuc!
et  Servicia  de  mancrio  de  Rol'  et  soka.  Stephanus  de  Rol'  ten
defendit  duas  virgatas  terre  cum  tofto  quibus  reddit  per  annum  vi !
duos  terminos  et  propter  unam  culturam  vocatam  le  Breche  :
et  pro  uno  tofto  xii  d. . .  Homines  de  Munt  Sorel  tenent  unam  virgi
et  reddunt  ii  s.,*  etc.

"  Lapsley,  in  Victoria  County  History  of  Durham,  i.  pp.  261,  26

'  Growth  of  Manor,  273. Dd.  i.  269  b.


SECT.  11.  CH,  li]  FRANCHISES  137

as  it  had  to  sanction  and  to  enforce  the  fines  and  punish-
ments necessary  to  uphold  economic  order.  The  Rothley
custumal  formulates  specific  limitations  in  this  respect.
The  fines  for  transgression  and  minor  ofTences  of  diflferent
kinds  imposed  by  the  manorial  court  were  not  to  exceed
half  a  mark.^

The  social  substratum  of  the  whole  fabric  of  the  soke
was  a  numerous  population  of  free  peasants.  More  than
oco  socmen's  holdings  are  enumerated  in  Domesday  in
this  particular  instance.^  The  thirteenth-century  custumal
presents  an  even  lai^er  free  population  of  rent-paying
peasants  occupying  virgates  and  bovates.  Their  labour
services  are  few  and  not  burdensome.  The  rule  of  suc-
ces^on  admits  of  equality  between  sons,  to  the  exclusion
of  daughters^  if  there  is  male  issue,  yet  the  regularity
of  the  holdings^  makes  it  probable  that  a  customary  policy
of  buying  out  younger  sons  and  of  keeping  the  holdings
from  extreme  subdivision  must  have  been  pursued  by  the
tenants.  No  dispersion  of  the  same  sort  as  we  find  in  the
case  of  Kentish  gavelkind  is  noticeable  in  Rothley.

Extant  court  rolls  of  manors  developed  from  sokes,  in  so

'  Archaeologia,  1.  c.  pp.  125-6 :  '  et  si  implacitetur  de  terra  tenemento
aliquo  convencione  vel  transgressione  aliqua  et  super  hoc  convincatur
non  amerciabitur  ultra  dimidiam  markam,  similiter  si  conquerens
deficiat  in  prosequendo  non  amerciabitur  ultra.'

•  Dd.  i.  330  b,  c  :  (Rothley,  Lcics.)  *  Rodolei . . .  Huic  manerio  per-
tinent subsequentia  membra.  In  Adelacbestone,  Bamesbi,  Setgraue,
Seglebi,  Tochebi,  Sciftitone,  Merdefelde,  alia  Merdefelde,  Elstede,
Caldeuuelle  et  Wiche,  Tiletone,  OfTerdebie,  Caiham,  Worcnodebie,
Tuiuorde,  Sumerlidebie,  Frisebie,  Saxelbie,  Grimestone,  Badegraue,
Gadesbie  ...  In  his  sunt  cc  et  iiii  sochemanni,  cum  clvii  uillanis
ct  nonaginta  iiii  bordariis,  habentes  quater  xx  carucas  et  ii,  et  reddunt
inter  omnes  xxxi  lib.  et  viii  sol.  et  i  den.'

'  Arch.  L  c  p.  125  :  '  Item  si  aliquis  de  soka  habens  uxorem  habeat
de  ea  filios  plures  vel  filias  et  ipse  obierit,  terra  est  partibilis  inter
ipsos  vel  ipsas,  set  inter  filium  et  filiam  nequaquam ;  et  si  sit  unicus
nlius  et  plures  filie  Alius  habebit  totum.'

*  Arch.  1.  c  p.  99 :  *  Walterus  Dunning  et  Willielmus  frater  eius  tenent
i  virgatam  cum  tofto.  Rogerus  Alius  Stephani  et  Rogerus  Alius  Ive
tenent  i  virgatam  cum  tofto  . .  .  Stephanus  Page  tenet  i  virgatam  cum
crofto  .  . .  Ivo  tenet  duas  virgatas  terre  cum  tofto  in  dominico.*  Cp.
p.  100  :  *  Willielmus  Clericus  pro  una  virgata  terre.  Ricardus  Godtid
pro  una  virgata  terre.*  p.  108:  (Croxton)  *  Milo  de  Croxton  tenet  iii
tKiYatms  terre  . .  .  Robertus  de  Rival  tenet  i  bovatam  . .  Phelippus  tenet
i  bovatam  terre/  etc.


138  JURISDICTION  [E&

far  as  they  have  come  down  from  later  centuries,
sometimes,  as  an  interesting  feature  reminding  us  of  fo
conditions,  a  sharp  contrast  between  the  free  and  u
tenants,  the  socmen,  and  the  nativi  or  villanL  T\
very  much  the  case,  e.  g.«  in  the  rolls  of  Hartii^on
Derbyshire.  Originally  these  rolls  constantly  distil^
between  the  inquisitions  held  by  freemen  and  by  vill
while  later  on  the  opposition  is  expressed  in  a  subdiv
of  the  manorial  court  into  a  socs^e  and  a  bonds^e  poi
Somman-.  The  principal  results  of  the  chapter  on  jurisdiction
perhaps  be  summarized  in  the  following  manner : —

1.  All  departments  of  English  law  in  the  dev
century  were  very  much  under  the  influence  of  provi
custom.  More  especially  as  regards  jurisdiction,  status
tenure,  investigators  have  to  reckon  materially  witb
varieties  of  jurisprudence  practised  by  the  different  s
moots.

2.  The  hundred  was  originally  intended  to  hi
association  of  a  hundred  citizen  householders  exerc
full  rights  and  primarily  responsible  for  the  administn
of  justice,  the  defence  of  the  country,  and  taxation,
body  of  the  suitors  of  the  hundred  became  different]
into  the  group  of  landowners  and  that  of  deputic
the  townships.

3.  The  passage  from  the  Old  English  to  the  fe
system  of  government  is  characterized,  among  other  th
by  the  break-up  of  the  popular  courts  and  the  surre
of  public  authority  to  numerous  holders  of  franchises

4.  The  term  soke  appears  in  the  sense  of  a  sui
a  court  or  to  a  lordship,  of  authority  over  a  district,
of  a  franchise  or  of  a  customary  payment  to  it.

5.  The  surrender  of  profits  accruing  from  a  pi
function  like  jurisdiction  necessarily  leads  to  the  forma

'  of  private  courts.  The  ordinary  courts  could  not
expected  to  perform  duties  the  profits  of  which  ha<
be  given  away.

'  Court  Rolls,  Duchy  of  Lancaster,  45/52C  (Record  Office),  C
of  4-6  Ric.  II :  Inquisitions  '  liberorum  bondorum  '•


SECT.  II.  CH.  II]  FRANCHISES  139

6.  The  soke  over  persons  appears  as  an  earlier  stage
in  the  formation  of  territorial  franchises.

7.  The  soke  and  the  manor  are  institutions  of  the  same
kind,  and  are  both  derived  from  the  delegation  of  political
authority  by  the  kings.  But  the  soke  represents  more
especially  the  relation  between  a  jurisdictional  lord  and
the  free  suitors  of  his  court,  while  in  the  manor  the  political
attributions  of  lordship  are  indissolubly  blended  with  land-
ownership  and  the  authority  of  a  master  over  serfs.

8.  The  peculiar  treatment  of  soke  in  the  Anglo-Danish
counties  corresponds  to  the  great  strength  of  the  free
elements  of  the  population  in  those  districts.  It  suggests
comparisons  with  earlier  stages  in  the  evolution  of  society
in  the  Anglo-Saxon  south-west  of  the  country.


SECTION III: TAXATION
CHAPTER I

THE  GELD

Scheme  of  I.  0n£  of  the  most  remarkable  features  of  the  history  ^
taxation.  England  is  the  early  development  of  taxation  in  tb
country.  While  other  European  states  were  slowly  stnii
gling  to  evolve  taxation  for  common  purposes,  and  while  the
sovereigns  were  still  almost  entirely  dependent  on  the  scanl
revenue  of  feudal  aids  and  occasional  subsidies,^  Englafi
presented  comparatively  a  very  advanced  system  of  diro
taxes.  This  was  hardly  felt  as  a  blessing  by  the  populatioi
indeed,  the  sources  are  full  of  lamentations  about  tt
insufferable  burden  of  imposts.  And  yet  the  fact  that  tt
kings  were  able  to  collect  these  taxes  .testifies  to  a  coi
siderable  stress  of  political  energy,  if  one  may  say  so,  and  i
an  extraordinary  concentration  of  state  power,  which  b^
came  the  starting-point  of  many  other  national  advantag)<
for  England.  This  early  concentration  was  wrung  froi
the  people  by  the  tremendous  efforts  and  sufferings  of  tb
Danish  wars ;  but  the  ravages  of  Norsemen  had  been  fei
all  over  Europe,  and  yet  in  no  other  place  did  they  cal
forth  such  a  systematic  activity  in  the  matter  of  buiidiiU

^  Meyer,  Verfassungsgeschichte  Deutschlands  und  Frankreidtf
i.  32  fif.,  on  the  scanty  beginnings  of  common  taxation  in  these  countiiet
The  Treasury  of  the  Duchy  of  Normandy  was  a  different  affiur,  and
its  practices  may  have  exerted  influence  on  English  fiscal  institutiott
But  the  stage  was  too  narrow  in  the  Duchy,  and,  after  all,  the  matcfii
conditions  of  the  tax  in  England  were  created  a  good  whUe  before  tk
Normans  became  powerful  there ;  they  were  derived  from  the  necesBu;
reaction  against  the  Danes,  and  must  have  taken  shape  to  some  extM
in  support  of  Alfred's  comprehensive  system  of  defence,  although  tib
payment  of  enormous  sums  of  tribute  dates  mostly  from  subsequei
times.


SECT.  III.  CH.  i]  THE  GELD  141

up  a  financial  organization,  and  no^^ere  else  did  the  pros-
perity of  the  Royal  Exchequer  outlive  the  cessation  of
hostilities  in  the  Norman  wars.

The  eventful  period  which  gave  England  its  monarchical
centralization  and  its  popular  liberties  begins,  in  a  way>
with  the  careful  regulation  of  the  fiscal  system  in  the
eleventh  century,  with  fiscal  measures  which  turned  the
Danegeld  into  a  regular  tax  instead  of  an '  extraordinary
imposition.  The  decisive  turn  was  evidently  taken  under
Canute,  when  the  tax  changed  its  destination,  although
it  retained  its  name,  or  rather  when  it  was  perpetuated
in  order  to  consolidate  the  Anglo- Danish  state,  and  to
defend  it  against  further  invasions.  During  the  struggle
between  English,  Danes,  and  Frenchmen  in  Edward  the
Confessor^s  time  it  could  not  be  dispensed  with,^  and
William  the  Conqueror  took  it  up  with  all  the  energy
which  in  every  respect  characterized  his  rule.  The  Survey,
to  which  we  owe  our  most  precious  information  in  regard
to  English  institutions  and  society,  is  mainly  directed
towards  ascertaining  the  data  for  the  imposition  and  re-
partition of  geld.  It  became  the  invaluable  cadastre  which
we  know  because  such  a  cadastre  was  wanted  by  the
officers  of  the  king's  Exchequer  to  check  returns  and  to
effect  necessary  modifications  of  the  tax.

I  do  not  intend  to  treat  at  length  of  the  various  sources
of  revenue  existing  by  the  side  of  the  geld.  Their  meaning
and  relative  importance  are  sufficiently  known.  It  is  neces-
sary, however,  to  point  out  briefly  the  main  distinctions
between  the  terms  used,  as  in  concrete  cases  of  interpreta-
tion it  may  be  sometimes  doubtful  what  is  meant  by  our
authorities. Apart  from  indirect  contributions  like  toll  ^  or

^  The  Sax.  Chron.  (D)  a.  1052  speaks  of  Edward  as  putting  an  end
to  the  Danegeld. Only  a  temporary  respite  can  have  been  meant.

•  Dd.  i.  337  a :  (Torksey,  Lines.)  *  In  Torchesey  T.  R.  E.  fuerunt  cc  et
ztii  bargenses.  Easdem  consuetudines  habebant  omnes  quas  et  Ltn-
ootienses  et  tantum  plus  quod  quicunque  eorum  mansionem  in  eadem
nflla  habebat  neque  intrans  neque  exiens  theloneum  dabat  nee  con-
stietndinem.'  Cf.  Sax.  Chron.  (£)  a.  963  :  '  Ic  wille  bet  )yus  be  gifen
•e  t<^  .  fyrst  fra  Witlesmaere  eall  to  }>e  cinges  toll  of  Nor^mannes  cros
hundred  . .  •


14*  TAXATION  [essa

market  dues,^  from  the  coinage  r^ality,^  and  from  1
proceeds  of  justice,  including  bots  and  fines  for  non-atti
dance,^  the  public  revenue  fell,  at  the  end  of  the  Sax
period,  under  three  main  heads^  and  these  8ubdivi8t<
continue  to  be  traceable  after  the  Conquest  There  wei
(i)  customary  payments  in  kind  and  in  money/  (a)  ordini
land  taxes,  and  (3)  extraordinary  impositions.  As  to  *
first,  they  were  levied  in  different  ways,  as  food  rents,  carra
service,  housing  and  quartering  duties,  or  substitutes
them,  and  represent  the  most  ancient  and  the  simpl
form  of  assessment.  They  occur  in  private  econoo]
but  supply  also  means  of  providing  for  the  needs  of  t
royal  household,  of  the  army,  and  of  public  officers.  Soi
times  we  hear  of  liveries  on  definite  occasions,^  and  soc
times  of  systematic  collections  for  the  king's  progress
for  the  '  feorm ',  the  maintenance  of  his  household  or
those  of  his  servants  during  a  single  night  or  several  ti^
The  *  averages  *  ® — driving  and  carrying  duties — and  1

'  Dd.  i.  248  c  (Toteberie,  Stafford) ;  ii.  379  a  (Hoxana,  Suffolk).

'  Dd.  i.  336  c  (Lines., '  de  moneda^o,' '  moneta ').

'  Dd.  ii.  1 18  a :  (Norwich) '  Franci  de  Norwic.  In  nono  Buigo  a
burgenses  et  vi  anglici  et  ex  annua  consuetudine  reddebat  anusquia
i  d.  propter  forisfacturas,  de  hoc  toto  habebat  rex  ii  partes  et  coi
terciam.'  Cf.  i.  280  b  (Apletreu  Wapentac  In  DerberieJ ;  380c  (Da
and  Notts), '  Hie  notantur  qui  habuerunt  socam  et  sacam  et  Tho
Thaim  et  consuetudinem  regis  ii  denariorum,  Archiepiscopus  ^
censis  super  maneria  sua  et  Godeua  comitissa  super  Neuuerc
Wapentac  etc  Horum  omnium  nemo  habere  potuit  tercium  denari
comitis  nisi  eius  concessu.  Hoc  c^uamdiu  viveret,  praeter  Archiept!
pum  et  Ulf  fenisc  et  Godeue  comitissam—Super  socam  quae  iacd
Cliftune  debet  habere  comes  terciam  partem  omnium  consuetudio
et  operum.*

^  Dd.  i.  362  a  :  (Lincolnshire)  '  Homines  de  Colebi  retinent  vi  soi
X  den.  de  consuetudine.  Hommes  de  Hermestune  retinent  viii  soL
consuetudine.'

•  Growth  of  the  Manor,  pp.  28,  224.

•  Dd.  i.  347  d :  (Hache,  Lines.)  *  Ad  victum  equorum  1  sol.* 37^
(Navenby, Lines.)  '  Homines de  Nauenebi  detinent  per  uim
solidos  de  consuetudinibus  pascuarum  quae  sunt  in  Scapeaui<
Cherchebi,  et  non  dederunt  eos  in  die  regis  Eduuardi.' ii.  i!
(Breccles,  Norfolk).

^  Dd.  i.  336  d :  (Stanford,  Lines.)  *  Edded  regina  habuit  Ixx  mai
Quae  iacuerunt  in  Roteland  cum  omnibus  consuetudinibns  sine  p;
ncis.'

•  Dd.  ii.  nib  (Holt,  Norfolk).  Cf.  Dd  i.  132c  (Waldc
Herts).


SECT.  ni.  CH.  i]  THE  GELD  143

ward  penny, ^  for  which  inward^ — domestic  guard— duties
were  commuted,  represent  two  varieties  of  the  same  cus-
tomary aervices.

The  second  species  of  direct  fiscal  imposition  consisted  of
permanent  taxes  laid  directly  on  houses  or  holdings — ^the
land-gable  or  gafoL'  It  is  sometimes  difficult  to  distin-
guish in  this  case  between  rents  payable  to  landlords  and
actoal  taxes,^  but  there  can  be  no  doubt  that  the  gafol
existed  with  the  latter  meaning  from  very  early  times*'
Indeed  it  was  perhaps  coeval  with  the  very  establishment
of  Elfish  rule  in  the  island.  Still,  it  is  not  this  ordinary
land-tax  that  developed  into  the  later  system  of  flexible
fiscal  contributions,  but  the  extraordinary  impositions.  Of
these  several  were  in  use  during  the  Domesday  period.
Sometinies  a  gersutna  *  was  exacted  by  the  lord  of  the
manor  as  a  kind  of  general  subsidy  from  his  subject,  and
it  might  by  repetition  get  to  be  a  yearly  payment,  although
originally  it  was  certainly  meant  to  be  occasional.  The
taslgia,  iattagium^  expressly  mentioned  in  the  north-east»
and  conmionly  alluded  to  in  manorial  documents  of  the
feudal  age,  originated  probably  also  in  extraordinary  tas^-
tion  by  the  local  lords.

In  direct  opposition  to  these  local  rates  stands  the  geld,
the  common  geld,  the  Danegeld  levied  by  the  king.  It
b  the  most  sweeping  and  the  heaviest  of  all  the  taxes
in  the  eleventh  century.® From  being  an  extraordinary

'  Dd.  L  190  a  (Lidlintone,  Cants.), '  homines  huius  manerii  reddebant
Warpennam  uicecomiti  regis  aut  custodiam  faciebant*

'  Dd.  i.  191  a  (Bercheham).

f  Dd.  L  158  b  (Oxeneford) ;  303  b  (Huntedun), '  De  toto  hoc  burgo
ezibant  T.  K.  £.  de  Landgable  x  lib.  inde  comes  terciam  partem
hahebat,  rex  duas;  215  c  (Totenehou,  Beds) ;  336  a  (Lincolia,  Comes
Hugo) ;  336  b,  336  d.  Cf.  Cart.  Sax.  617 :  '  Drdo  pund  to  ^afole  •  and
cyresceattas .  and  cyretceat  weorc  and  |ienne  ^ass  nud  bi%  his  men  beon
ge  antwe  ge  t6  ripe.'  The  Church  scot  seems  to  have  been  coUected
on  the  same  principle.

*  Thorpe,  Dipl.  340;  CD.  758.  Dd.  i.  14c:  (Newton,  Kent)
*  Iviii  solidos  de  gablo  ex  his  nouem  solins.'

*  Cyninges  gafol :  Nordleod,  1.  7. Cf.  Ine,  23,  3.

*  Dd.  ii.  Ill  a:  (Himcham,  Norfolk)  'xxx  sol.  de  gersuma.'

''  Dd.  i.  339  c :  (Grasby,  Lines.) '  In  Grisebi  .  .  .  T.  K.  £.  ualuit
ill  lib.  modo  similiter  et  tailgia  xx  sol. ;  cf.  ibid. Lessintone.'
'  Dd.  i.  75  a :  (Dorset) '  In  Dorecestre  T.  R.  £.  erant  cbocii  domus.


nnits.


144  TAXATION  [essa^

subsidy  it  becomes  gradually  the  main  common  tax  <
the  realm,  and  loses  at  the  same  time  a  good  deal  <
its  importance,  because  its  payment  gets  to  be  on  the  oc
hand  a  matter  of  course,  a  canon/  while  on  the  othe
frequent  exemptions  make  it  less  and  less  burdensome
In  this  sense  it  appears  later  on  as  the  hidagiunt?  In  tli
twelfth  and  thirteenth  centuries  two  new  extraoidinax
imposts  arose  by  its  side,  scutage  in  commutation  of  mQitar
service,  and  camcage  '  as  a  kind  of  revival  of  the  origin]
Danegeld  in  great  emergencies,  with  the  object  of  gettin
contributions  from  the  entire  agricultural  area  of  thekingdoii
Fiscal  2.  After  glancing  at  the  general  fiscal  scheme  of  th

beginning  of  the  feudal  period,  let  us  turn  to  the  geld,  th
principal  tax  of  the  Domesday  Survey.  Its  fundamenti
feature  is  the  assessment  according  to  fiscal  units  callo
hides,  carucates,  and  sulungs.  The  tax  is  not  laid  directlj
on  the  estates  according  to  their  value  or  income,  but  th
districts,  localities,  and  properties  are  estimated  at  a  certaii
number  of  units,  and  the  sum  of  the  geld  has  to  be  dis*
tributed  according  to  those.^ There  is  one  exception  tfl

Hae  pro  omni  servitio  regis  se  defendebat  et  geldabat  pro  x  hidii
Scilicet  ad  opus  Huscarlium  unam  maikam  argent!  exceptis  ooo-
suetudinibus  quae  pertinent  ad  firmam  noctis ...  In  Brideport .  •  .ca
domus  et  ad  omnem  seruitium  regis  defendebat  se  et  geldabat  pn
V  hidis.  Scilicet  ad  opus  Huscarlium  r^is  dimidiam  markam  axgoAJ
exceptis  consuetudinibus  quae  pertinent  ad  firmam  untus  noctis  . . .
Modo  sunt  ibi  c  domus  et  xx  sunt  ita  destitutae  quod  qui  in  eii
manent  geldum  soluere  non  ualent ...  In  Burgo  Sceptesberie  T.  R.  £.
erant  c  et  iiii  domus  in  dominio  regis.  Haec  uiUa  ad  omnem  seniitiaiD
regis  se  defendebat  et  geldabat  pro  xx  hidis.  Sdlicet  ii  markas  aigenti
Huscarlis  regis.'  Cf.  30  a  f Gildeford,  Surrey) ;  336  d  (Stanford,  Lines.);
ii.  41  b  (Berdefelda,  Essex).

^  Dd.  i.  30  a :  (Guildford,  Surrey)  '  De  supradictis  hajns  habel
Rannulfus  dericus  iii  hagas  ubi  manet  vi  homines  et  inde  habd
Rannulfus  sacam  et  socam  nisi  commune  geldum  in  uilla  uenerit  undc
nullus  euadat.'

'  Madox,  History  of  the  Exchequer,  p.  475  ff.

'  Stevenson  in  E.  H.  R.  iv.  p.  109;  Rot.  Cart  2a;  Close  Rolli
(Rcc.  Com.),  i.  437  a,  b  ;  Roger  de  Hoveden,  iv.  46.

*  Dd.  iv.  489  :  (Somerset) '  In  hundreto  Bolestane  sunt  x  et  viii  hidi
et  dimidia  uirga.  Inde  habet  Rex  de  Gildo  suo  iiii  libras  et  ii  solkloi
et  vi  denarios  pro  xiii  hidis  et  iii  uirgis,  et  barones  regis  habent  in  sn
dominicatu  ii  hidas  et  dimidiam  uirgam.  De  his  habet  Giraidn
i  hidam  et  Hardingus  filius  Alnodi  i  hidam  et  dimidiam  uirnun.  et  d
i  hida  quam  tenet  Ansger  brito  non  habet  Rex  Gildum,  et  de  dimkiUi
hida  quam  tenet  Britellus  dc  Sancto  Claro  non  habet  Rex  Gildum  c


SECT*  m.  CH.  i]  THE  GELD  145

this  rale,  namdy,  the  assessment  of  East  Anglia,  where
eveiy  pound  of  the  tax  was  divided  among  the  estates
fiMmnig  m  hundred  in  certain  proportions.^  Even  there
carucatcs  and  their  subdivisions  are  mentioned,'  although
it  is  difficult  to  make  out  at  this  stage  of  our  inquiry  what
the  meaning  of  this  second  series  of  notices  was,  whether
duy  were  traces  of  a  fonner  fiscal  arrangement  displaced  by
a  new  mode  of  distribution,  or  whether  they  still  had  some
s^nificance  tor  purposes  of  assessment  in  regard  to  one  or
other  kind  of  service.  We  shall  have  to  come  back  to  this
question  by-and-by ;  at  present  it  is  sufficient  to  take  note
of  the  fiurt  that  the  system  of  assessment  units  is  not  entirely
absent  even  from  Norfolk  and  Suffolk,  although  a  different
mode  of  repartition  is  in  practical  use  by  the  side  of  it.

When  we  consider  this  method  of  estimating  the  rateable
vidue  of  properties  by  equating  it  to  a  certain  number
of  units,  or  fractions  of  these  units,  one  main  line  of  dif-
{cRotiation  strikes  the  eye  at  once. Although  the  object
oC  the  formation  of  such  cadastral  units  is  seemingly  the
same  throughout England,  and  although  they  are  all
formed  ultimately  of  acres — fiscal  acres  or  geld  acres,  of
course— they  appear  under  three  difTerent  names,  as  solins
in  Kent,  as  canicates  in  the  north  and  east  of  England,  and
^  hides  everywhere  else. Evidently  the  fiscal  standard
had  not  been  unified  in  the  kingdom,  although  such  a  unifi-
cation would  have  presented  very  g^eat  advantages  from
the  fiscal  point  of  view. Indeed,  the  king's  fiscal  advisers

de  dimidia  uirga  quam  tenet  Ogissus  non  habet  rex  gildum  et  de
dfl&idia  bida  de  qua  Segadri  receperunt  denarios  per  Quam  clamant
^^onetudinem  non  habet  Rex  Gildum  ...  In  manerio  Torne  sunt  vii
udt  Inde  habet  Rex  de  Gildo  suo  xxx  solidos  pro  v  hid  is  et  de
u  ludis  retinuit  Robertus  Gildum  regis.  In  manerio  Torleberge  sunt
lu  hide.  Inde  habet  rex  de  Gildo  suo  x  et  viii  solidos.'  i.  16S  a :
(Slaoghtcr,  Gloucs.)  *  Isdem  Rogerus  (de  Laci)  et  mater  eius  tenent
Sdoi^  Ibi  iii  hide  .  .  •  De  his  iii  hidis  geldabat  i  hida  singulis
asoii  per  x  solidos  ad  opus  regis.'
'  Do.  ii.  119  b :  (Sporle,  Norfolk)  '  In  Spairle  et  in  pagrana  xviii  d.

^naado  hundret  scotabat  xx  soL  et  m  Acra  vi  d.  et  in  Pichenham  xii  d*

qoiamque  ibi  teneat.' Cf.  1 12  a  (Holt) ;  1 10  a.
'  Dd.  ii.  109  b :  (Massingham,  Norfolk)  *  Masincham  tenuit  Heroldus

Lr.  e.  iii  canicatas  terrae  . . .  (Radulf  Bainard)  hoc  totum  habet  i  mille

in  longo  et  dim.  in  lato  et  de  xx  sol.  reddit  xvi  d.  in  gelto.*


viMooftAOorr


146  TAXATION  [esSAI

must  have  found  it  rather  difficult  to  distribute  the  g€
fairly  among  different  provinces  in  which  the  units
assessment  in  use  were  not  identical.  Nor  do  we  posse
the  key  to  all  the  methods  of  reduction  which  were  use
by  the  Exchequer  at  this  time.  Indeed,  in  order  to  get  ri
of  this  awkward  stumbling-block  on  the  very  threshold  (
the  inquiry  some  of  our  best  glides  have  supposed  that  th
sulung,  hide,  and  carucate,  though  different  in  name,  ver
actually  identical  in  their  fiscal  value,  and  subdivided  in  til
same  way  into  fractions,  each  geld  hide,  or  geld  camcat
containing  an  exact  correspondence  witTi  agrarian  measure
— 4  virgates,  8  bovates,  and  i2o  acres,  while  the  sofi
(sulung)  was  partitioned  into  yokes  instead  of  viigates^  bo
was  also  equated  to  I20  acres.^  This  being  assumedi  a
statistical  calculations  in  r^ard  to  Domesday  data  pic
ceed  on  the  convenient  basis  of  a  single  fiscal  standaui
Unfortunately,  matters  are  not  so  simple.  As  the  form
correspondence  between  agrarian  and  fiscal  units  has  to  I
granted,  we  have  at  once  to  recognize  in  the  solin  a  peculii
Kentish  standard  considerably  larger  than  the  hide  (
carucate  of  120  acres ;  it  contained  from  180  to  200  acre
and  may  even  have  been  reckoned  at  240  acres  if  11
two  hundreds  were  to  be  taken  as  long  hundreds.^  Tl
jugum  (yoke),  as  its  fourth  part,  comprised  consequent]

^  Maitland,  Domesday  Book  and  Beyond,  409 ;  cf.  Round^Domeidi
Studies,  i.  201.  It  may  be  added  that  the  virgate  appears  m  Keiit,b
as  a  fourth  part  of  the  yoke,  not  of  the  sulung^  a  fact  fitting  wdD  wi
the  arrangement  as  explained  below.  Dd.  i.  12  d :  (Kent)  *  In  Leit
in  hundredo  de  Estrei  habet  S.  Augustinus  iii  uirgatas  terre,  et  ibi
dominio  i  carucam  cum  v  bordariis.  T.  R.  £.  ualebat  x  solid,  et  pi
V  soL  Modo  XX  sol.'  Cf.  13  a:  (in  Estbrige)  '  Bertrannus  tenet ;
Hugone  dimidium  iugum  et  dimidiam  uirgam,  pro  tanto  se  defend
Cf.  ib.  Blachemenestone.

^  My  paper  on  *  Sulung  and  Hide',  E.H.R.  1904.  In  Dd.  li
(Possessio  Sti.  Martini)  450  acres  are  equated  to  i.\  soUns^  making  t
solin  180  acres.  The  Kentish  portion  ot  the  Surrey  manor  of  Menk
(Merton)  is  estimated  in  solins,  Dd.  i.  30  b:  'Episcopns  LiscMl
tenet  in  Chent  ii  solins  qui  huic  manerio  adiacuerunt.'  In  the  S«r
of  Litelcert  2}  hides  take  the  place  of  3  soUns  in  the  time  of  WW
the  Conqueror,  but  this  may  be  a  mistake  of  the  scribe  compiMoilf
returns.  At  any  rate,  the  instance  is  entirely  isolated.  Dd.  L  1
(Little  Chart,  Kent) '  Ipse  Archiepiscopus  tenet  Litelcert,  T.  R«£
defendit  pro  iii  solins  et  modo  pro  ii  hidis  et  dimidia.'


SECT.  in.  CH.  I]  THE  GELD  147

50  or  even  60  acres.^  Evidently  we  have  to  deal  in  this
case  not  with  an  artificial  unit  suited  to  the  Great  Inquests
of  William  the  Conqueror *s  reign,  but  a  provincial  standard
derived  from  a  provincial  local  unit  of  long  standing.^

The  difference  between  the  hide  and  the  carucate  is  no(
so  apparent  Indeed,  it  seems  clear  that  in  many,  and
perhaps  in  most,  cases  both  were  used  in  the  sen^e  of
a  group  of  120  fiscal  acres.^  And  yet  some  explanation
<^  the  fact  that  the  terms  were  different  has  to  be  found,
and  is  not  difficult  to  find.^  The  carucate  is  evidently
a  measure  employed  in  the  shires  held  by  Danes  and  Norse-
men ;  it  stands  in  a  much  more  immediate  relation  to  the
field  carucate,  the  carucafa  ad  arandum^  than  the  fiscal
hide,^  and  it  is  natural  to  see  in  this  mode  of  fiscal  apprecia-
tion the  result  of  a  survey  which  aimed  at  substituting
actual  field  units  for  the  artificial  measures  of  former  times,
which  had  swerved  greatly  from  their  agrarian  types  and
were  further  confused  by  the  Iiimsion^®  The  carucated
north  of  England  is  the  land  of  the  Norse  people,  and  the
suggestion  that  it  was,  as  such,  contrasted  with  the  hidated
south  seems  a  very  appropriate  one.'' The  precise  meaning

*  Several  instances  where  acres  are  mentioned  fit  better  into  a  system
of  yokes  of  fifty  or  sixty  acres  than  into  one  of  yokes  of  thirty  acres.
£.g.  Dd.  i.  1 1  c:  *  Osbertus  tenet  de  episcopo  i  iugum  et  x  acras  in  Masse-
berge  . . .  Isdem  Osbertus  . .  •  xv  acras  in  Esmetone ' ;  1 1  d  *  Radulfus
deCurbespine  tenet  xl  acras  terrae  quas  tenuit  MoUene  de  rege  Edwardo.'
The  conespondence  between  the  real  and  the  fiscal  yoke  may  be  illus-
trated by  Hd^  i.  10  b :  (Buckland) '  Isdem  Osbemus  tenet  unum  iugum
de  episcopo  in  eodem  manerio  (Bochelande),  et  pro  i  iugo  se  defendit.'

'  Kentish  Charters  of  the  seventh,  eighth,  and  ninth  centuries  are  all
consistently  of  aratra,  while  Mercian  and  West  Saxon  documents  have
'  manentes,' '  tributari,* '  cassati,*  etc.

'  Maitland,  Domesday  Book  and  Beyond,  396,  409.

*  Cf.  Round,  Feudal  England,  p.  71  fif. Domesday  Studies,  i.  199.

*  Dd.  L  272  b  (Mestesforde),  273  d  (Aisseford) :  *  carucatae  sine  geldo.'
'  Hides  are  occasionally  mentioned  in  the  North. Although  the

documents  in  which  they  occur  are  open  to  suspicion,  it  is  by  no  means
improbable  that  the  ancient  reckoning  according  to  hides  was  still  in
use  in  the  tenth  century.  Cart.  Sax.  1255  (Notice  of  the  lands  given
by  £ari  Thure^  to  St  Cuthberht's,  Durham,  at  Smeaton,  Craike,  and
Sutton,  CO.  York,  A«  D.  966-992) :  '  Her  is  gemearcod  hu  manega  hyda
landes  pure%  eoii  betseht  hafa%  into  Sancte  Cu^berhtes  stope.'  C.  S.
1378  (lands  at  Otley,  Ripon,  and  Sherbom,  co.  Yorks.  About  A.  D.  972).
CL  Stevenson  in  Engl.  Hist.  Rev.  v.  143.
'^  Dd.  i.  162  b  :  (Gloucs.)  *  In  Wales  habet  isdem  Willelmus  (de  Ow)

L  2


148  TAXATION  [essay  I

of  the  distinction  between  hide  and  carucate  is  not  their
different  composition,  but  the  fact  that  the  latter  represents
a  more  modem  attempt  to  make  use  of  agrarian  terms  for
purposes  of  estimation. The  elements  for  such  a  use  axe
at  hand  in  the  hidated  districts,  we  may  say  at  once,  in  the
shape  of  the  field  carucates  or  the  team-lands,  but  they  have
not  been  turned  to  account  as  recognized  geld  units,  while
this  has  been  the  case  in  the  north. At  the  same  time
it  is  clear  that  the  geld  carucates  have  been  already  some
time  in  use  in  the  north,  and  have  already  been  deflected
to  some  extent  from  their  originally  close  correspondence
to  their  field  counterparts.^ The  geld  units  tend  naturally
to  become  customary  and  constant,  and  therefore  are  bound
to  disagree  very  soon  with  the  actual  measures  of  the  fidd.
One  of  the  direct  consequences  of  the  modem  character
of  the  carucates  is  the  fact  that  they  are  used  everywhat
in  the  same  sense,  and  fall  into  the  same  subdivisions.'
The  formation  is  a  very  regular  one.
Geld  hides. Not  SO  With  the  hides. When  we  look  more  closely  at
the  use  of  this  term  in  Domesday  we  find  a  most  confusing
variety  of  meanings. Sometimes  the  hide  appears  in  the
sense  of  an  artificial  group  of  carucates. I  have  already
had  occasion  to  mention  that  in  Lancashire  six  carucates
were  occasionally  reckoned  to the  hide.^ From  other
entries  in  regard  to  the  district  between  the  Ribble  and  the
Mersey  it  would  seem  that  the  ratio  was  not  always  the
same,  but  that  in  any  case  the  hide  included  several  cant'

in  feudo  iii  piscarias  in  Waie,  reddunt  Ixx  solidos,  et  in  eodem  fendo
dedit  Willelmus  comiti  Radulfo  de  Limesi  1  canicatas  tenae  stent  fit  iia
Nonnannia.  Hoc  testantur  Hugo  et  alii  libcratores  quod  ita  RadiiUc^
concessit.  Modo  dicit  Willelmus  de  Ow  non  se  habere  de  hac  teim
nisi  xxxii  carucatas.' Cf.  Round,  Feudal  England,  69  ff.

^  This  is  made  clear  by  the  considerable  divergences  which  occur
between  the  number  of  geld  carucates  and  team-lands  on  someestatcs*
K.g.  Dd.  i.  381a:  *S(oca)  in  Ordeshale  i  bouata  terre  ad  gelduB.
Terra  i  carucae.  I  hi  ii  sochenianni  habent  i  carucam  .  •  •  S(oGa)
in  Mortune  et  altera  Mortune  x  bouatae  terre  ad  geldum.  Tent
iv  carucis. Ibi  vii  sochemanni  et  i  bordarius  habent  iv  carucas.*

*  Eight  bovates  or  oxgangs  go  without  exception  to  the  carucate.

'  Dd.  i.  269 d  :  (West  Derby,  Lanes.) '  De  isto  manerio  Derbei


modo  dono  Kogeri  pictauiensis  hi  homines  terram  ...  In  unaquaique
hida  sunt  vi  carucatae  terrae.'


SECT.  ni.  CH.  i]  THE  GELD  149

cates.^  At  first  glance  one  might  guess  that  in  this  thinly
populated  and  exposed  r^on  some  of  the  pubh'c  burdens
had  to  be  aasesaed  on  very  large  areas,  and  that  an  allevia-
tion was  effected  in  this  respect  by  combining  several  geld
camcates  into  the  unit  of  a  hide  approximately  equal
as  a  rateable  quantity  to  the  hide  of  the  southern  provinces.
This  would  be,  however,  a  mere  guess.  In  fact,  a  comparison
with  Leicesterdiire,  which  could  not  be  regarded  as  excep-
ttonally  depopulated  or  in  a  difficult  position,  m^;ht  lead
one  to  infer  that  the  term  'hide'  was  used  in  these  cases
without  any  regard  to  its  ordinary  fiscal  repartition.  Leices-
terriure  hides  are  said  to  include  la,  14, 18  camcates  and
the  like.*  This  would  suggest  a  similar  ratio  in  the  case
of  the  Lancashire  8  camcates  superadded  to  the  bides.  It
is  not  easy  to  realize  the  aim  of  such  artificial  combinations,
but,  besides  being  noteworthy  in  themselves,  they  are
mteresting,  inasmuch  as  they  show  that  the  term  hide  could
oocasicHially  be  used  in  a  manner  in  which  it  was  opposed
to  the  caracate,  and  out  of  proportion  with  the  ordinary
meaning  attached  to  it  in  the  south.

In  the  south-west  comer  of  England  we  come  across
a  similar  phenomenon,  namely,  hides,  virgates,  and  ferlins,
or  fourth  parts  of  virgates,  constructed  on  a  very  large
areal  scale.'  On  the  other  hand,  we  find  geld  carucates
and  geld  acres  of  a  peculiar  standard. Cornwall  is  the

*  Dd.  i.  269  d,  270  a:  Neweton,  Walintune,  Salford,  Lailand.

'  Dd.  L  331  b:  (BurbachjLeics.)  'Abbatia  de  Couentreu  tenet  Burbece.
Ibi  est  i  hida  et  iiii**  pars  t  hidae.  Ibi  sunt  xxii  carucatae  terrae  et
dimidia.'  335  c  :  '  Ipse  Goisfrid  (de  Wirce)  tenet  Medelton  (Melton
Mowbray).  Ibi  sunt  vii  hidae  et  una  carucata  terrae  et  una  bouata.
In  unaquaque  hida  sunt  xiiii  carucatae  terrae  et  dimidia.'  Cf.  336  a :
*  Ogems  Brito  tenet  de  rege  in  Cilebi  ii  partes  unius  hidae,  id  est  xii
carucatae  terrae.'

'  Dd.  iv.  205 :  (Boden,  Cornwall)  '  Comes  (de  Moritonio)  habet
i  mantionem  que  uocatur  Botcn  quam  tcnuerunt  ii  tagni ...  In  ea  est
i  uirgata  terre  et  reddidit  gildum  pro  i  ferlino.  Hanc  posscnt  arrare
ii  carrucae.  Hanc  tenet  Andreas  de  comite.  Inde  habet  A.  iii  partes
i  oirgatae  et  i  carrucam  et  uillani  aliam  terram.'  Cf.  ib.  (Treluueren) ;
tL  207:  (Liskeard,  Cornwall)  'Comes  habet  i  mansionem  que  uocatur
Liscarret  quam  tenuit  Merlesuanus  . . .  et  reddidit  gildum  pro  ii  hidis.
Sed  ibi  sunt  xii  hidae,  has  possunt  arare  Ix  carrucae.  De  his  habet
comes  in  dominio  i  hidam  et  iii  carrucas,  et  uillani  xi  hidas  et  xiii
camicas.'


I50  TAXATION  [essay  i

only  county  using  the  carucate  unit  in  the  south,  and  this
peculiarity  is  clearly  derived  from  its  wild,  half-pastoral
condition  and  Celtic  tribal  customs. Even  without  going
much  into  details,  we  notice  a  reckoning  in  Cornish  acres
which  correspond roughly  to  sixty-four  English acres ;
they  are  sometimes  used  synonymously  with  canicatesi  and
present  the  basis  of  the  geld  assessment  of  the  county.^
Both  the  hides  and the  acres  are  evidently  a  product
of  local  conditions,  and  cannot  be  equated  without  further
inquiry  with  their  counterparts in  Wessex  or Merda.
Indeed,  the  authorities  distinguish clearly  Welsh  hides
and  English  hides,^  not  only  here  but  in  other  districts
on  the  Welsh  border,  and  although  the  Welsh  hides  and
Cornish  acres  are  taken  primarily  as  real  agrarian  units,
enough  has  already  been  said  on  the  question  to  enable
us  to  draw  the  conclusion  that  the  geld  units  were  con-
structed  on  the  same  pattern. This  is  further  corroborated
by  the  subdivisions  of  the  hide  as  they  appear  in  Cornwall
and  other  Celtic  districts :  it  falls,  not  into  virgates  and
half-virgatcs,  but into  virgates  and ferlins^  or  fourths,
a  scheme  which  does  not  fit  with  the  usual  reckoning
of  fifteen  acres  to  the  half-viigate. The  ferlin  goes  well
into  a  duodecimal  system,  but  not  into  a  decimal  one.

In  Devonshire  the  same  conditions  have  left  a  trace
in  the  very  extensive  areas  assigned  to  the  hide,  or,  con-
versely^ in  the  very  small  fractions  at  which  estates  are
being  assessed.^ But  I  should  not  like  to  press  this  point

^  Dd.  iv.  213:  (Tremar,  Cornwall)  'Comes  habet  i  mansionem^
iiocatiir  Trelamar  quam  tenuit  Ailsi . . .  ibi  est  i  ager  terre,  et  reddidit
gildum  pro  dimidio  ferlino,  hunc  potest  arare  i  camica,  banc  tenet  idem
Ailsi  de  comite.*  Cf.  214  (Treloen ;  Treghemelin) ;  216  (Chiloxgoici) ;
231  (Karsala) ;  236  (Trehynoc) ;  220  (Treguin) ;  222  (Lisniwen).

'  Welsh  hides  :  in  Gloucester,  Dd.  i.165  b;  Hereford,  181  d(Caple-
fore). Cf.  Tregony  Pomeroy,  Testa  de  Ncvill,  185,  204.

^  Dd.  iv.  219:  (Amble,  Cornwall)  'Amal  ...  ibi  habet  (cones)
dimidiam  hidam  et  reddit  gildum  pro  ii  ferlinis.  Hanc  possunt  arue
iii  carrucae.* Cf.  235  (Witestan).

*  Dd.  iv.  75  :  (North  Tawton,  Devonshire)  '  Dominicatus  regis  ad
regnum  pertinens  in  Deuencscira.  Rex  habet  i  mansionem  que  uocatur
Tauuetona  que  reddidit  Gildum  pro  dimidia  uirga . .  .  hanc  possunl
arare  xxx  carrucae.  Ibi  habet  Rex  iii  carrucatas  terrae  et  iii  camicas
in  dominio,  et  uillani  habent  xxvii  camicas.' Cf.  Exch.  Dd.  i.  100  b«


SECT.  III.  CH.  i]  THE  GELD  151

too  muchy  as  it  is  not  with  the  realities  underlying
taxation  that  we  have  to  do  just  at  present,  but  with  the
fiscal  network  thrown  over  them.  And  in  Devonshire,
of  course,  the  exceedingly  thin  assessment  has  to  be
accounted  for  by  the  scanty  population  and  the  scantiness
of  means.  Still,  the  virgates  which  usually  take  the  place
of  hides  in  the  inquisition  of  Devon  manors  present  a  natural
stef^nng-stone  from  the  Cornish  acres  to  the  ordinary  hides
of  Saxon  England.  They  keep  traces  of  a  duodecimal
reckoning  in  the  system  of  their  subdivisions,  and  ferlings
are  by  no  means  restricted  in  their  occurrence  to  Devon-
shire.^ Indeed,  we  find  clear  indications  of  a  hide  of
forty-eight  acres  in  Wiltshire,*  and  one  of  forty  acres  in
Dorset*

Another  curious  local  variation  is  presented  by  a  series
of  entries  in  the  survey  of  Sussex. The  hides  appear  there

'  Dd.  iv.  88  (Wodeberia,  Devon) ;  120  (Waleurda,  Devon) ;  454
(Hawkwell  in  Dulverton,  Somerset),  '  Ulfbs  habet  i  mansionem  que
uocatur  Hauekeuuella  quam  ipsemet  habijit  et  reddit  gildum  pro
uirga  et  i  fertino  et  pro  quarta  parte  i  fertini^^  Hanc  possunt  arare  iii
camicae.  De  hac  terra  tenet  i  anglicus  WlnHirus  fertinum  i  et  quad-
rantem  fertini  pariter.  Ibi  habet  Ulfus  i  fertinum  et  i  carrucam,
et  uillani  habent  iii  fertinos  et  i  carrucam.'  Exch.  Dd.  i.  19  a  :  (Wil-
lingdon,  Sussex) '  Ibidem  (Willendone),  Aluuinus  tenuit  unam  uirgatam
et  unam  quartam  de  manerio  Sa^ngham/  I  am  bound  to  mention  an
isolated  case  of  division  into  three  parts  in  Devonshire,  Dd.  iv.  88 :
(Witheridge,  Devon)  *  Rex  habet  i  mansionem  que  uocatur  Wiriga
quam  tenuit  Gida  . .  reddidit  gildum  pro  i  uirga.  Hanc  possunt  arrare
ill  carrucae.  Inde  habet  Rex  in  dommio  tertiam  unius  uirge  (stc)  et  i
carrucam.  Et  uillani  ii  partes  illius  uirge  et  iii  carrucas.'  The  usual
English  reckoning  may  have  occurred  by  the  side  of  a  local  Celtic
one.  On  the  other  hand,  ferdings  oc(|ir  sometimes  in  the  north-east,
but  there  they  probably  go  back  toJEcandinavian  practices  based
on  the  division  of  the  B61  into  fer4i|^i|^nd  ottings.  Cf.  Dd.  i.  50  d
(Cantortun,  Hants).

'  Exon.  Dd.  iv.  13 :  (Hundredum  deH^olesfeld,  Wilts)  *  pro  xxxii
hidis  et  i  uirga  et  i  acra  reddite  sunt  re^i  ix  librae  et  xiii  sol.  et  vii  d.'
Cf.  16  (Hund.  de  Domerham)  *  pro  xiiii  hidis  iiii  acris  minus  reddite
sunt  rcgi  iiii  lib.  et  iii  sol.  et  viii  d.'  The  sums  correspond  exactly  to
a  reckoning  based  on  the  assessment  of  6s.  per  hide  of  forty-eight
acres.

*  Exon.  Dd.  iv.  42 :  (Hazlebury  Bryan,  Dorset)  *  Willelmus  de
Moione  habet  i  mansionem  que  uocatur  Poleham  quam  tenuerunt
XZ2  te^  pariter . . .  hec  reddidit  gildum  tempore  regis  Edwardi  pro
X  hidis,  has  possunt  arare  viii  carrucae.  Inde  habet  Willelmus
iiii  hidas  et  i  uirgam  et  vi  agros,  et  iii  carrucas  in  dominio,  et  villaai
v  hidas  et  dimidiam  et  iiii  agros  et  vii  carrucas.'


152  TAXATION  [essay  I

frequently  equated  with  eight  virgates.^  I  say  frequently,
because  the  usual  reckoning  of  four  virgates  to  the  hide
asserts  itself  also.'  There  occur  also  cases  of  entirely
abnormal  equations,  which  may  have  to  be  explained  by
a  reduction  of  hidage  without  a  corresponding  reduction
in  the  number  of  virgates.' But  the  ratio  of  one  hide

'  Dd.  i.  17  d :  (Sussex)  '  Ipse  Abbas  (S.  Martini  de  Labatailgc)
habet  in  suo  rapo  vi  hidas  et  dimidiam. Haec  ten^  pro  vi  hidis
se  defendit  et  dimidia  fuit  quieta  quia  foris  rapum. In  his  bidis  tenet
isdem  abbas  in  dominio  Bochehani .  • .  Tunc  et  modo  se  defendit  pro
dimidia  hida,  modo  est  una  uirgata  in  rapo  comitis  de  Ow  •  •  •  In  Bece
. . .  habet  abbas  iii  uirgatas  terrae  ...  In  Wasingate  habet  mbbas
unam  uirgatam  terrae ...  In  Wilminte . . .  vi  uirgatas  terrae .  •  •  In  Nire-
feld  . . .  vi  uirgatas  terrae  ...  In  Penehest .  • .  habet  abbas  dimidiam
hidam  ...  In  manerio  Hou  .  • .  dimidiam  hidam  ...  In  Pilesham  •  • .
habet  abbas  unam  uirgatam  et  unum  uillanum  cum  una  ...  In  Cedei-
feld  . . .  habet  abbas  iii  uirgatas  in  dominio. In  BoUintun  • . .  ii  hidas
unam  uirgatam  minus. In  Croherst  •  • .  unam  uii^atam  terrme. In
Witinges . . .  i  uirgatam  terrae  wast  am.  In  Holintun .  • .  unam  uii|;ataffl
terrae  wastam. . .  De  omni  hac  terra  habet  abbas  in  dominio  ii  hidas  eC
dimidiam  . . .  Hae  hidae  non  geldauenint  in  rapo.* 18  b :  (FilsbaiSt
X Sussex)  'Wilesham  tenuit  rex  Edwardus  in  dominia Ibi  xv  faidie
sunt  que  non  geldant  ne<]ue  geldauenint.  Terra  est  zxx  carucis.  Dehac
terra  tenet  ipse  comes  viii  hidas  et  i  uirgatam  et  ibi  habet  ii  canicas...
De  terra  eiusdem  manerii  tenet  Goisfridus  ii  hidas,  Robertus  i  hidam
et  unam  uirgatam,  Willelmus  dimidiam  hidam,  Hu^  ArbaUster  v
uirgatas,  Ingelrannus  ii  uirgatas,  Robertus  Cocus  dimidiam  hidimi
Walterus  v  uirgatas,  Sasuuardus  unam  uirgatam,  Wenenc  presbiter
unam  uirgatam,  Osuuardus  ii  uirgatas,  Rogerus  Daniel  oimidiini
hidam  . . .  Uiuuard  presbitcr  huius  manerii  tenet  aecclesiam  cumiaui
uirgata  sed  non  pertinet  ad  xv  hidas.' 18  c:  (Hollington,  Sumb^
'  Horintone  tenu?runt  Goduin  et  Alestan  T.  R.  £. . . .  Tunc  se  defeodit
pro  iiii  hidis  et  dimidia  modo  pro  iii  hidis  et  ii  uirgatis. Terra  est  viii
carucis. De  hac  terra  tenet  comes  in  dominio  unam  hidam  et  dimidim
et  ii  uirgatas. De  ipsa  terra  habet  Reinbertus  dimidiam  hidftO;
Willelmus  unam  hidam,  Hugo  dimidiam  hidam. Uluuardus  ii  uiigitai*'
Ibid.  (Wilting,  Sussex) '  Wiltin^ham  tcnuerunt  ii  liberi  homines  T.R.E*
Tunc  et  modo  se  defendit  pro  liii  hidis. Terra  est  ix  carucis. De  hic
terra  tenet  Ingelrannus  de  comite  ii  hidas  et  ii  uirgatas,  Reinbertu*
dimidiam  hidam  et  ii  uirgatas,  Radulfus  dimidiam  hidam,  Robertus  ii
uirgatas  . . .  Comes  habet  in  parco  suo  i  uirgatam  de  hoc  manerio.'
Cf.  Salzmann,  £.  H.  R.  Jan. 1904. Salzmann  is  less  confident  in
Vict.  H  ist.  of  Sussex,  but  the  value  of  his  observation  has  not  decreased.

*  D(l.  i.  20a:  (Ewhurst,  Sussex)  'Ipse  comes  (de  Ow)  tenet  is
dominio  Werste.  MMer  tenuit  de  rc^e  Edwardo.  Tunc  S':  defendit
pro  vi  hidis,  modo  pro  iiii  hidis  et  iii  uirgatis  et  quinque  sunt  retro  quit
una  hida  est  in  rapo  comitis  de  moritonio.'

*  Dd.  i.  20  b :  (Welland,  Sussex)  *  Waliland  tenet  do  comite  (de  Ow)
V  homines.  Una  hida  est.  Hanc  tenuerunt  iiii  fratres  . .  •  Non  fuit
nisi  una  hrxula  T.  R.  E.  et  modo  se  defendit  pro  una  hida.  De  bac  hida
tenet  Aluuold  ii  uirgatas,  Anschitil  iii  uirgatas,  Rogerus  v  uii^tas,
Hugo  unam  uirgatam,  Osbemus  ii  uirgatas.


SKT.in.CH.i]  THE  GELD  153

to  ^[ht  virgates  seems  too  casual  and  too  local  at  the
same  time  to  be  accounted  for  in  this  way.  A  possible
cxjdanation,  as  it  seems  to  me,  m^ht  start  from  a  com-
psrisoo  with  the  sulung  of  Kent.  A  double  hide  would
be  a  match  to  it  in  Sussex,  and  there  are  actually  traces
of  sodi  a  phenomenon.^

When  we  take  all  these  scattered  facts  into  account,  we
can  luufdly  escape  the  conclusion  that  the  geld  systefm
of  the  hides  w^  by  no  means  reduced  to  one  common
denominator,  but,  on  the  contrary,  disclosed  everywhere
tnces  of  local  peculiarities  and  variations.  It  was  evidently
not  devised  at  one  moment  nor  introduced  at  one  stroke,
^d  it  had  to  serve  the  purpose  of  the  local  repartition
of  scot  more  than  those  of  a  general  survey  over  the
Rsoorces  of  the  kingdom  and  the  relative  fiscal  strength
of  its  component  parts.  Three  circumstances  rendered
it  very  unfit  for  the  latter  purpose :  it  was  to  a  very  great
extent  a  record  of  antiquated  repartition ;  it  presented
all  sorts  of  local  varieties ;  it  was,  moreover,  traversed
by  an  enormous  number  of  exemptions  and  privileges,  of
which  we  shall  have  to  speak  more  fully  by  and  by.  And
yet  the  necessity  of  A  general  survey  must  have  prompted
to  a  large  extent  the  compilation  of  the  cadastre.  What
oieans  did  the  government  use  in  order  to  get  a  more
^  less  accurate  estimate  of  the  fiscal  capabilities  of  every  »
district  and  estate  ?  William  the  Conqueror's  government
^  recourse  to  means  which  were  often  used  later  on
^  the  Angevin  kings :  it  numbered  the  ploughs  actually
^  in  tilling  the  land,  and  it  exacted  returns  in  regard
to  the  quantity  of  land  fit  for  arable,  pasture,  or  other
*<^onomic  purposes.

3*  The ploughing strength of the  community was  Team-
measured  by  the  number  of  ploughs employed by  it.
1  need  not  dwell on a point  which  has been  entirely
^cd,  and  does  not  admit  of  controversy,  in  view  of  the
clear  and  entirely  concordant  statements  of  the  authorities.

'  Villainage  in  England,  255  ; Battle  Abbey  Custumals,  ed.  by
Scar]pll-Bird  (Camden  Soc),  29,  100.


154  TAXATION  [

The  king's  officers  marked,  not  the  ploughs  as  2
made  up  for  tillage,  but  as  groups  or  as  fractions  of  a
plough'-team  of  eight  oxen.^  As  a  matter  of  fac
might  be  used  instead  of  oxen  ;  horses,  or  oxen  and
might  be  yoked  together,  as  is  often  described  is
laries.^  Allusions  to  such  variations  from  the  usual
crop  up  in  the  Domesday  Survey,^  but  it  holds  fii
the  rule  that  the  plough-teams  mentioned  in  its  s
are  equivalent  to  the  eight-oxen  teams,  and  treats  tl
as  to  the  actual '  heads ',  or  animals  which  go  to  mal
up,  as  entirely  secondary.

Nor  does  the  Survey  make  any  attempt  to  deaa
larger  or  smaller  teams,  although  both  kinds  often  o
in  practice ;  it  notes  them  merely  in  groups  of  eighi
or  as  fractions  composed  of  a  lesser  number  of  he
example,  two  oxen  or  six  oxen.*  The  frequent  in
of  these  fractional  subdivisions  may  mean  either  t
holders  of  these  fractions  of  teams  had  to  join  in  <
start  full  ploughs,  or  else  that  they  actually  work<
smaller  ploughs.  The  latter  explanation  seems  tl
appropriate  one  when,  as  is  often  the  case,  the  si
three,  or  two  oxen  appear  in  separate  hamlets,  «
would  be  out  of  the  question  to  find  neighbours  ca]
joining  to  make  up  the  team.^ But  the  Survey  cons

^  Dd.  i.  340c:  (Brochlesby,  Lines.)  'In  Brotulbi  habuit
V  bouatas  terrae  ad  geldum.  Terra  ad  vi  boues.  Nunc  c
dunelmensis  . . .  habet  banc  terram  et  colit  earn.'  Cf.  353  d  (i
Risebi  et  Saleclif,  Lines.) ;  ii.  112  b  (Seartune,  Norfolk) ;  Seeb
74,  64;  Maitland,  Domesday  Book  and  Beyond,  142,  373
Domesday  Studies,  Somerset,  i.  29,  30;  Round,  Feudal  ]

35,  36.

'  E.  g.  Domesday  of  St.  Paul's  (Camd.  Soe.),  p.  13,  Sandoi
Tidwoldintun,  &e.

'  Dd.  i.  137a:  (Chesbunt,  Herts)  Mpse  comes  (Alanu
Cestrehunt  pro  xx  bidis  se  defendit .  . .  Pratum  xxiii  ear.  ad  d
equos.'  Cf.  8b  (Herbretitou,  Kent);  149c  (Wireeesberic,
227  d  (Westone,  Northants).

*  £.  g.  Dd.  i.  338  a :  (Laughton,  Lines.)  *  Luetone . . .  Ibi  bal
boues  et  xvi  uillanos  eum  iiii  earueis.'  Cf.  ib.  Gadenai ;  338 1
ii.  143  (Framingabam,  Norfolk).

•  E.g.  Dd.  i.  276 d  :  (Etwall,  Derby.)*  In  Etewelle  habuit
i  earueatam  terrae  ad  geldum.  Terra  i  earueae.  Ibi  ma
uillanus  habet  ii  boues  in  earuea.' Cf.  341  b  (Ravendal,  Lines


SECT.  m.  CH.  I]  THE GELD  155

abstains  from  giving  to  these  smaller  ploughs  the  designa-
tion of  *  carucae ' :  it  enters  them  merely  as  '  boves '.  This
deprives  us  in  many  cases  of  the  means  of  judging  whether
we  have  to  deal  with  fractional  items,  to  be  made  up
into  teams  by  co-aration,  or  with  small  ploughs,  but  the
method  is  characteristic  of  the  Survey,  and  is  a  very
reasonable  one  ;  it  gives  the  government  a  simple  clue  for
the  purpose  of  estimating  the  ploughing  strength  of  estates
and  districts  separately.  Some  uncertainty  is  also  pro-
duced by  the  mode  of  entering  cattle  which  served  not  for
ploughing,  but  for  milking,  food,  breeding,  or  carrying.  In
the  detailed  enumerations  of  the  East  Anglian  and  Exon#
Domesday  some  at  least  of  the  stock  used  for  these  purposes
are  entered,  but  in  the  Exchequer  Domesday  this  is  not
the  case,  as  a  rule,^  and  one  cannot  help  thinking  that  part
of  the  homed  cattle,  at  least,  must  have  been  entered  as
teams  according  to  the  computation  of  eight  heads  to
a  team.*  This  very  imperfect  mode  of  enumeration
evklently  corresponds  to  a  state  of  husbandry  when  there
was  not,  as  a  matter  of  fact,  much  differentiation  in  the
use  of  cattle,  the  same  cows  being  often  employed  for
milking  and  ploughing  purposes,  and  the  same  oxen  for
drawing  carts  and  ploughs.

Let  us  notice  that  in  the  case  of  carucages  levied  in  the
twelfth  and  thirteenth  centuries  the  junction  of  teams  is
made  one  of  the  principles  of  assessment,  and  there  can
be  no  doubt  that  the  normal  team  meant  was  the  same
eight-oxen  team  which  presents  the  standard  unit  in
Domesday.

But  both  in  these  carucages  and  in  the  Domesday  Survey

(Stapleforde,  Lines.);  iv.  265  (Cicecota,  Devon)  ;  ii.  122b  (Stiuecai,
Norfolk)  is  a  case  of  devastation.

*  Excepting  Dd.  iv.  34  :  (Affpiddle,  Dorset)  *  Abbas  (S.  Petri  Ceme-
liensis)  habet  i  mansionem  que  uocatur  Affapidela  que  reddidit  gildum
pro  ix  hidis  tempore  Edwardi  regis,  has  possunt  arare  vi  caruce  .  .  .
Ibi  habet  Abbas  ix  boues  et  xii  oues  et  i  rune  num  et  xii  porcos.*
CL  Pochcsuuella,  35  ;  Abbalesberia,  37.

*  Dd.  i.  182  c :  (Mansell  Gamage,  Hereford)  *  In  Malueshille  sunt  v
hidae  geld.  In  dominio  est  una  caruca,  et  alia  ociosa.*  Cf.  175  d:
(Oflfenham,  Worcs.)  *.  .  .  Ibi  sunt  boues  ad  i  carucam,  sed  pelram
trahunt  ad  aecclesiam.'


156  TAXATION  [essay:

a  second  unit  of  appreciation  occurs,  namely,  the  pkragh
land  or  team-land,  terra  carucaty  carucata  {ad  aramhad^
It  was  the  constant  aim  of  the  officers  in  charge  of  cadasbr
and  taxation  to  ascertain  not  only  how  many  actual  plough
were  in  use  in  the  country,  but  how  much  land  fhere  wi
for  tillage.  This  is  by  no  means  strange,  as  cadaitn
operations  arc  generally  meant  to  describe  the  i^^rictiltai
of  a  country,  not  merely  in  its  constantly  changing  roatta
of-fact  expression,  but  also  in  its  potential  aspects.  ]
was  not  merely  the  stock  in  hand,  but  also  tfie  arabl
territory  that  had  to  be  surveyed  and  estimated  from  tlii
point  of  view.  A  tract  of  land  which  might  lie  wail
to-day  might  come  under  cultivation  to-morrow,  nor  wi
it  the  interest  of  the  Crown  to  render  uncultivated  dbtrid
privileged  in  regard  to  taxation.  However  this  may  h
we  hear  distinctly  in  the  case  of  the  carucage  of  a  Richafd
that  lOo  acres  of  arable  land  had  to  be  reckoned  on  ever
carucate  in  the  sense  of  land  which  might  be  put  undc
plough.^  The  loo  acres  have  in  all  probability  to  b
taken  in  their  strict  sense  in  this  case :  it  is  hardly  likd;
that  the  long-hundred  system  should  have  been  used  at  dd
comparatively  late  date  as  a  common  reckoning  unit  fo
the  whole  of  England.  If  this  is  so,  the  carucage  of  II9'
was  actually  attempting  to  reduce  the  area  of  the  fisca
plough-land  in  comparison  with  its  agrarian  basis— tb
plough-land  of  1 20  acres.  Such  attempts  are  not  to  b
wondered  at ;  they  spring  from  the  natural  wish  of  states
men  introducing  a  new  fiscal  measure  to  make  it  yidi
as  much  as  possible,  and  to  stretch  it  further  than  tb
formerly  accepted  standard.

In  the  light  of  this  parallel  between  the  Angevin  can
cages  and  the  Domesday  computation  of  terrae  carucanm
it  seems  obvious  that  the  meaning  of  this  latter  was  t
provide  the  government  with  a  survey  of  the  arable  Ian
in  England  which  mi^/it  be  used  for  the  plough,  apai
from  its  actual  cultivation. For  this  purpose,  neither  di

'  Roger  de  Hoveden,  iv.  47 ;  cf.  Brist.  and  Glouc  Tran.  xiii.  33  ff
Testa  de  Nevill,  131,  132,  133  (Berkshire,  Carucage  of  l2ao).


SECT.  lu.  CH.  I]  THE  GELD  157

enumeration  of  the  ploughs  nor  that  of  hides  and  geld
carucates  could  serve :  not  the  first,  because  it  applied  to
teams  and  not  to  lands;  not  the  latter,  because  it  was
expressed  in  more  or  less  artificial  units  which  lacked
uniformity  and  were  not  up  to  date.  We  cannot  take
our  stand  on  this  simple  inference,  however,  as  the  matter
has  been  made  the  subject  of  much  controversy,  and  as
our  evidence  happens  on  some  occasions  to  be  rather
obscure.

The  meaning  of  '  land  fit  for  tillage '  seems  to  be  the  Referencet
most  natural  one  in  most  of  the  cases  presented  by  the  ^^  ^'  ^*  ^'
Domesday  Survey  and  kindred  documents.  In  fact,  we
sometimes  read  the  very  words, '  land  that  can  be  ploughed
by  so  many  teams,' ^  or  'land  for  tillage,  carucates  for
tillage,'  *  *  land  where  there  could  be  x  ploughs,'  ^  *  land
fior  X  ploughs  ^  {ierra  ad  x  cameos) '.  These  expressions
receive  their  simplest  explanation  from  the  same  duei
and  the  latter  leads  up  directly  to  the  common  notices
Urra  carucae^  terra  earuearum,  or  terra  carucis.  Indeed,
it  would  be  difficult  to  attach  too  much  importance  to
these  equal  terms.  '  It  requires  strong  proofs  to  the  con-
trary to  make  us  believe  that  people  chose  these  four  or
five  plain  expressions  in  order  to  convey  a  meaning  not

^  Dd.  L  67  d :  (S.  Newton,  Wilts) '  Newetone  . .  •  Totum  manerium
posRuit  arare  x  canicae.'  75  d :  (Charminster,  Dorset)  *  Cerminstre  • .  •
In  ipso  manerio  habet  episcopus  tantum  terrae  quantum  possunt  arare
ii  canicac.*  Cf.  269  b  (Kos  et  Reweniou) ;  299  b  (Cliue,  Yorks)  ;  305  b
(Lid,  Yoflcs) ;  iv.  50  (Here,  Dorset) ;  76  (Sulfretone,  Devon) ;  89  (Cede-
lintone,  Devon);  3ii  (Middeltona,  Cornwall);  456  (Bochelanda,
Somerset).

*  Dd.  i.  365  a :  (Rothwell,  Lines.)  '  In  Rodouuelle  habuit  Rolf  xiii
bouatas  terre  et  dimidiam  et  terciam  partem  unius  bouatae  ad  geldum.
Tena  duplidter  ad  arandum.'  Cf.  276  a  (Ednesoure,  Derby.)  ;  305  c
(Bioctune,  Yorks).

'  Dd.  L  127  c :  (Stepney,  Middlesex)  '  Stibenhede  ...  In  eadem
uilla  tenet  episcopus  Lisiacensis  de  episcopo  Lundoniensi  i  hidam
et  dimidiam.  Terra  est  i  carucae,  et  dimidia  caruca  est  ibi  et  dimidia
potest  fieri'  Cf.  136c  (Brichendone,  Herts);  231  a  (Leics.)  ^Toniscote
. « .  Duae  carucae  possunt  esse,  et  ibi  sunt.'  Cf.  323  c  (Brocstewic,
Yorks) ;  ii.  136  a  (Halingheia,  Norfolk).

^  Dd.  L  29  b :  (Sussex) '  Aluiet  tenet  de  Willelmo  (de  Braiose)  terram
ad  unam  carucam  de  dominio  Willelmi  sine  nuniero  hidae.  Ibi  est
uaa  caruca.'  41  a  (Ciltecumbe,  Hants) ;  iv.  325  (Baentona,  Devon) ;
491  (Sanctus  Petrocus  in  Comugallie).


158  TAXATION  [CiSAYl

directly  implied  by  any  of  them.  It  cannot  be  denied
that  there  b  a  certain  foundation  for  a  diflerent  coostmc*
tton  suggested  by  the  text  of  some  other  entries.  By  the
side  of  the  sentence  '  x  carucae  possunt  fieri '  (or  *
esse  *)  ap|>ears  another,  which  occurs  indeed  on  fewer
sions,  but  yet  often  enough  not  to  k>e  treated  as  a  mere
exception  or  as  a  slip  of  the  tongue ;  I  mean  the  phnae
*  X  carucae  plus  possent  esse '.'  Here  the  oontrasl  Iks
not  between  plough-teams  and  plough-lands,  but  bctwcea
plough-teams  in  actual  use  and  land  which  could  be  iitiKtcd
by  an  increase  in  the  number  of  the  teams.  And  in  tone
cases  the  Survey  goes  further,  and  speaks  of  a  ntunbcf
of  teams  which  could  k>e  restored  in  a  district,  u
of  speaking  of  land  for  ploughs,'  implying  that  at
former  time  there  had  actually  been  a  greater  ni
of  plough-teams.  On  the  other  hand,  we  may
there  being  as  much  land  for  ploughs  as  there  were
(x  carucai^  Terra  totidem  carucis).  *  In  a  few  counties,  for
example  in  I^iccstershire,  the  term  terra  a  canteis  alter*
nates  with  that  '  Ibi  fuerunt  T.K.K.  a  carucae  \  and  bjr
its  side  appears  occasionally  the  addition  of  mstme  or
to  the  number  of  actual  teams,  *  a  turn  of  phrase


*  I)d.  i.  174*:  (Ecclcsia  Sancue  Mahac  dc  Wireccsuv)  *  la
omnibus  his  maneriis  noa  possunt  esse  plus  carucae  ouam  4ictHB  en."
C(.  174  b  (Uoclintuiit  Cuer,  Intcberga) ;  1726  (Chidraioilie) ;  SSSC
(Burtune.  Shropshire) ;  aja  d  (Uuriuiie) ;  cL  ih.  (Hcsieic).

'  Dd.  iL  III  b:  (Holt,  Noriolk)'  Holt . . .  Semper  mdomiaioi
eCaliaposMt  resCaunuL' Cf.  tija  (Hohnunc);  ilSatO

I  sob  (Chiplena).

'  I>d.  i.  343  d  (Canuu  ct  Hrachcbri^^c,  Lines.).

*  Dd.  i.  331 1  :  (Ayle»tonr,  Lcics.)  '  Ailestooc  . . .  Ibi  cn  i
vi'*  pars  i  hidae. Ibi  fucnint  iiiii  canicae  T.  K.  K. In

II  carucae,  et  1  ancilla  ct  xiiiii  uiUani  cum  v  bordariis  habcac  v
Cf.  3^3b  (Stapeford);  333d  (liarcbebcrie ;  Clacbeaume):  a74a:
(firassington,  Derby.)  *  Uraxumctun  . . .  Terra  liii  canictti  Ibi
dominio  in  carucae,  et  xvi  uilUni  et  n  twrdarii  habeat  vi
I'erhapft  the  viUains*  teams  (warUnd;  are  the  only  ones
account  in  some  cases,  e  ie.374c:  Sirotun(S<.rupCua) 'Terra  via <
Ibi  modo  sx^ii  uiUani  et  %xm  buniani  habrni  sii  carucss.*  CL
bume,  Tiiingtun,  374  a  ;  Crocheshaile,  374  b.  Ct  also  Ud.  i.  I$4C:
(bcnson,  Oxicird.i  *  Uesmtooe.  Ibi  sunt  jui  HmIm  una  nitf  aia  lanas
mmuSi  T.  K.  K. erani  ibi  t  carucae.  Nunc  in  d4Mnm»  viti  carucafl» el  v
scnii,  et  u&ii  uiUani  cum  ui%  tMirdarii  babeot  ^siiii  carucas.*  Ct  I SS^
(Cropelw):  11.  133  a  (Kle^liam,  Nurfulk*.


SECT.  m.  CH.  I]  THE  GELD  159

again  makes  us  think  that  the  Survey  contrasted  teams
T.ILW.  with  teams  T.R.E.  On  the  strength  of  such
txpnssioDB  it  has  been  supposed  that  the  entries  as  to
4frrm  carucarum  or  Urra  carucis  apply  usually  to  the
namber  <^  teams  used  in  Edward  the  Confessor's  reign  in
distjnction  to  the  numbers  of  William  the  Conqueror's  age.
As  tbe  instructions  to  the  commissioners  preserved  in  the
Ely  Inquest  actually  require  the  different  data  of  the
Survey  to  be  given  for  three  periods,  namely,  for  the
tinie  of  Kii^  Edward,  the  moment  when  the  Domesday
possessor  received  the  estate,  and  the  date  of  the  Survey,
die  igrra  cantcarum  entry  seems  almost  necessary  to  fill
the  blank  which  would  otherwise  be  left  in  r^ard  to  the
TJR.E.  status  of  the  teams.

Are  we  then  to  take  the  clue  for  the  terra  carucarum
entry  from  the  reference  to  possible  tillage  and  speak  of
team-lands,  or  from  the  comparison  between  T.  R.  E.  and
T.  R.  W.»  and  speak  only  of  the  plough-teams  in  both
eases  ?  And  how  is  one  to  solve  the  apparent  contradiction
between  the  two  sets  of  passages  if  they  are  both  admitted
to  have  a  real  significance?*  It  seems  to  me  that  it  is  quite
out  of  the  question  to  employ  the  T,  R.  E.  number  of  the
teams  as  a  general  clue  for  the  Urra  carucis  entries  all
through  the  Survey.  In  a  very  large  number  of  cases  the
number  of  ierrae  carucis  is  a  good  deal  larger  than  the
number  of  teams  (carucae)^  while  the  value  of  the  estate
T.  R.  E.  turns  out  to  be  smaller — a  most  improbable  con-
tingency if  terra  carucis  is  taken  to  apply  to  the  T.  R.  E.
tillage.

A  mere  reference  to  teams  does  not  explain  the  cases
when  the  Survey  expressly  states  that  it  has  in  view  land
sufficient  for  tillage.^ Nor  does  it  fit  the  cases  when  the

*  Dd.  L  181  c :  (Preston-on-Wye,  Hereford) '  In  Prestetune  sunt  vi
hidae  geldantes . . .  De  hac  terra  tenent  ii  derici  ii  hidas  et  dimidiam,  et
una  hida  est  wasta,  hi  habent  vii  uillanos  cum  iii  carucis.  Villani  plus
nt  carucas  quam  aiabilem  terram.'  It>.  iv.  4^:  (iCcclesia  Glasti-
ds,  Wilts) '  de  eadem  ecdesia  tenent  milites  iiii  mansiones  de  xxvii
et  preterea  xxvii  hide  in  mansionibus  abbatis.  In  his  sunt  xvii  car-
nicae  in  dominio,  et  xxxiiii  uillani,  et  xviii  bordarii  et  ix  semi  habentes
xi  camicas  • . .  Hec  terra  sufficit  septies  xx  et  xvi  carr.  et  dimid.*


i6o  TAXATION  [essay

terra  carucis  expression  is  turned  into  the  equivalent  ran
caiae  or  carucatae  ad  araftdum.^  It  becomes  evident  t
such  instances  that  plough-lands  are  meanti  and  there  is  n
escape  from  this  affinity  of  the  entries  under  diBCUssioa  am
those  of  geld  carucates.  It  is  impossible  to  evolve  th
latter  out  of  the  team,  but  it  corresponds  naturally  to  du
plough-land,  whether  real  and  measured  or  estimated  b}
approximation.  But  how  is  one  to  deal  with  the  Leicester-
shire and  kindred  entries  ?
Methods  of The  way  out  of  the  difficulty  does  not  seem  hard  to  find

te^SS^Is.  ^^^  *^^»  ^^^^  ^"^  reflects  that  it  is  not  only  the  genenl
question  in  regard  to  land  fit  for  tillage  people  had  to
consider  in  such  a  case,  but  also  the  means  by  whidi  ft
could  be  solved.  All  investigators  of  Domesday  have
to  recognize  that  there  was  a  wide  gulf  between  the  formu-
laries of  questions  addressed  to  commissioners  and  juriest
and  the  actual  returns  made  by  them.  The  Ely  fonnubuy,
for  instance,  is  anything  but  a  complete  instruction  followed
unswervingly  throughout  the  realm.  A  number  of  item
crop  up  in  the  inquiry,  to  which  there  is  not  the  slightest
allusion  in  it :  the  bordarii  and  a  number  of  other  claasea^
for  instance,  are  simply  passed  over  in  this  document,
although  they  form  such  an  important  item  in  the  Survey
itself.  The  estimates  of  surface  and  the  enumeration
of  cattle  forming  such  an  important  feature  of  the  East
Anglia  inquiry  do  not  correspond  to  anything  in  the  Ely

^  Dd.  i.  151b:  (Tun^eston,  Bucks)  'Turuestone,  pro  v  hidis  te
defendit  Terra  est  viii  carucis,  praeter  has  v  hidas.  In  dominio  sunt
tres  carucatae  terrae,  et  ibi  una  caruca,  et  adhuc  ii  possent  esse,  et  vi
uillani  cum  iiii  bordariis  habent  v  carucas.'  Cfi  152  b  (Hmmesde).
21 1  a :  (Bolnhurst,  Beds) '  Bolehestre.  Abbas  de  Toroy  tenet  ii  hidis
et  i  uirgatam  terrae. . .  Terra  est  v  carucis.  In  dominio  est  i  canicaU
terrae,  extra  ii  hidas  et  uirgatam  et  ibi  est  i  caruca,  et  ix  uillani  habent  f
carucas.'  212a:  (Clapham)  *  Clopeham,  pro  v  hidis  se  defendit
Terra  est  xxx  carucis.  Preter  has  v  hidas  sunt  in  dominio  x  caniaUe
terrae,  et  ibi  sunt  viii  carucae  et  adhuc  ii  possent  esse.'  219  c :  (pcob*
ably  in  Stamford,  v.  Vict.  County  Hist.  Northants,  i.  278) '  Rex  habct
in  dominio  de  Portland  ii«carucatas  et  ii  partes  terciae  canicatae/
Cf.  127  b  (In  Hundredo  de  Heletome,  Middlesex) ;  205  d  (CoaintuMk
Hunts).  Cf.  75  d:  (Charminster,  Dorset)  'Cerminstre  ...  In  ipM
manerio  habet  episcopus  tantum  terrae  quantum  possunt  aiare  ii
carucae  * ;  iv.  230  (Tregoin).


scT.nLCH.i]  THE  GELD  i6r

St  of  questions.  On  the  other  hand,  the  threefold  notation
aijoined  by  it  is  scarcely  ever  followed  out  in  practice :  the
fmoub  recepit  numbers  are  given  only  exceptionally,  and
ai  far  the.  contrast  between  T.  R.  E.  and  T.  R.  W.,  it  is
tfcaOed  in  a  very  different  manner  in  divers  localities.
Altogether,  even  the  slightest  acquaintance  with  the  Survey
ii  sufficient  to  convince  one  that  the  cadastre  was  executed
ii  t  very  different  way  in  various  counties,  according  to  the
Egiits  of  the  local  juries  and  of  the  commissioners.

From  this  general  digression  let  us  turn  again  to  the
CQQcitte  question  underlying  the  terra  carucis  entries,
Kundy,  for  how  many  ploughs  was  there  land  in  a  particular
otate?^  The  subject  is  quite  on  a  par  with  the  approxi-
atdvc  estimates  of  the  quantity  of  land  in  a  manor  or
nder  pasture,  or  in  a  wood,  and  in  view  of  these  last  it
would  be  strange  indeed  if  the  number  of  plough-lands
or  team-lands  should  not  have  been  attended  to.  But
odther  of  these  questions  was  easy  to  answer,  and  in  regard
to  the  estimates  of  area  or  economic  value  of  pastures  and
woods  we  are  not  astonished  to  find  different  methods
cmpbyed  in  various  districts.  Sometimes  a  very  rough
otimate  in  square  leagues  and  furlongs  is  given,  sometimes
the  number  of  head  of  cattle  which  could  feed  on  the
Mtory,  sometimes,  again,  the  revenue  it  might  bring  in.*
Ao]dx>w,  the  juries  did  not  approach  this  part  of  the
>^uiiy  in  the  same  manner,  and  some  actually  omitted
it  altogether.

No  wonder  that  something  of  the  same  kind  happened
^  regard  to  the  arable.  In  order  to  make  an  estimate
^  the  potential  capacity  of  the  land  for  tillage,  the  jurors

Ipd.  L  230b:  (Croxton,  Leics.)  'Rex  tenet  Crohtone.  Ibi  sunt
^iii  ourucatae  terrae.  In  dominio  sunt  ii  carucae  et  v  semi,  et  xxii
^bni  cum  ii  bordariis  habent  ii  carucas  dimidiam  et  xxx  sochemanni
^*^  viii  carucas.'  Cf.  ib.  Cnipetone,  Herstan ;  337  c  (Bodebi,
^'•ocs.);  ii.  164a  (Lurlinga,  Norfolk);  iv.  76  (Braunton,  Devon),
'Bnotaaa  . .  .  defendit  se  pro  i  hida,  banc  possunt  arare  xl  carruce.
^  liabet  rex  i  carrucatam  terre  et  i  camicam,  et  uillani  habent  xxx
c&Tucas.*

'  Some  particulars  will  be  given  in  the  section  uii  husbandry  of  the
Kcood  essay.

u«oca<tDOFr  M


i6a  TAXATION  [essay

naturally  turned  in  many  places  to  the  data  of  the  Con^

fessor's  time,  especially  in  cases  where the  amount  a

ploughed  land  had  in  the  course  of  time  become  less. Oi

other  occasions  the  return  as  to  plough-lands  was  nuuk

as  a  rough  estimate  very  much  at  haphazard ;  it  is  actuaO)

said  of  a  district  in  Cornwall  that  it  was  appreciated  at  1501

30  plough-lands,  or  from  15  to  30  as  we  should  say  now

adays.^ But  in  most  cases  a  more  accurate  valuation  wt

attempted. It  proceeded  evidently  on  the  assumption  tha

120  acres  ought  to  go  to  the  normal  plough-land. As  tbi

is  the  average  composition  of  the  geld-hide  the  potentia

plough-land  must  have  been  thought  to  be  of  a  similar  mii

but  the  very  approximate  character  of  the  estimate  is  ex

pressed,  among  other  things,  in  the  noteworthy  fact  thi

fractions  are  very  seldom  given,  and  when  mentioned  at  al

they  are  expressed  only  in  the  main  subdivisions  of  a  plough

land  into  oxgangs. Terra  x  bounty  or  x  bobus  occur  aome

times,  but  acres  do  not  appear,  a  fact  which  in  itself  speak

strongly  against  the  theory  that  TVrra  r^iri^af  entries  are  refe

ences  to  Edwardian  numbers. Of  course,  the  computation

as  to  arable  when  formulated  in  the  shape  of  estimates  i

plough-lands  may  have  been  arrived  at  in  different  ways.  Iti

not  absolutely  necessary  that  they  should  have  been  goease

made  with  the  help  of  the  naked  eye,  although  many  sue

guesses  may  have  been  transmitted  to  posterity,  espedall

in  provinces  laid  waste  by  war  and  pillage.* In  otin

instances,  on  the  contrary,  the  plough-land  computation  ma

have  rested  on  the  solid  basis  of  actual  tillage,  presentin

the  sum  of  extant  holdings  by  the  side  of  the  numberbi

of  geld  units. Anyhow,  in  the  eyes  of  the  government,  tl

plough-land  entries  represented  a  general  estimate  of  aval

able  arable  land,  on  the  standard  of  1 20  acres  to  a  plough,  9

the  plough- team  entries  took  stock  of  the  beasts  of  burde

actually  employed  in  tillage  on  the  standard  of  eight  oxe

to  the  plough. This  being  so,  one  might  say  that  tk

^  Ludusham,  Dd.  i.  122  d.  Similar  cases  occur  in  StaficmUhiic  c
a  smaller  scale.

'  Dd.  i.  181  b:  (Berchelincope,  Hereford.)  '  Ibi  ii  hidae'was
fuerunt  et  sunt. Terra  est  iv  carucis.' Cf.  iv.  209  (Tremetiiereht).


SECT.  III.  CH.  I]  THE  GELD  163

ploui^-laiids  of  Domesday  are  a  medium  term  between  the
purely  artificial  geld  units — the  hides  and  carucates  of  the
geld — ^and  their  real  counterparts  in  the  fields.  In  fact,
the  kitroduction  of  the  carucate  unit  in  the  north  of  England
may  have  taken  the  shape  of  a  conversion  of  ideal  ploi^h-
lands  ci  the  kind  mentioned  in  Domesday  into  fiscal  caru-
cato^  as  it  was  not  the  real  and  actual  plough-holding  that
was  taken  as  taxable  area,  but  a  normal  and  average  group
of  lao  acres.  This  is  reflected  in  the  gradual  passage
bom  terra  canms  to  camcatae  ad  arandum  and  from
these  to  gdd  carucates.^  A  doubt  has  been  expressed
as  to  the  possibility  of  finding  room  for  the  plough-lands
meiitioiied  in  Domesday  in  the  arable  territory  of  England,
but  I  do  not  think  the  actual  figures  warrant  such  a  doubt,
and,  after  all,  it  would  not  be  easier  to  locate  the  long  hides
of  ISO  acres  in  some  provinces,  if  the  same  strict  rules  were
adopted  in  rq;ard  to  them.  The  plough-land  numbers  fit
better,  as  a  matter  of  fact,  because,  being  approximate,  they
aUow  of  the  inclusion  of  a  good  deal  of  uncultivated  land
within  the  area  of  estimatioa

4.  The  best  means  of  testing  theories  in  regard  to  the  Coire-
meaning  of  the  several  Domesday  expressions  is  to  examine  o^rms.^^
rather  carefully  their  mutual  correspondence  in  the  Survey.
It  is  clear  that  they  are  not  likely  to  coincide  in  most  cases,
although  there  may  be  cases  where  the  land  taken  up  for
tillage  by  teams  of  eight  oxen  amounted  to  the  entire  area
available  for  such  a  purpose,  and  was  taxed  at  a  number  of
geld  units  exactly  identical  with  the  number  of  teams  and
imaginary  plough-lands.'  By  the  side  of  such  cases  of
complete  coincidence  stand  numberless  instances  where  the
assessment  for  the  geld  is  heavier  or  lighter  than  the  number
of  plough-lands  or  of  teams  would  lead  one  to  expect ;  ^

*  l^^m  L  524  a :  '  In  Dimelton  sunt  v  carucatae  terre  ad  geldum
d  totidem  ad  arandum  ...  In  Aldenburg  habet  Ulf  ix  carucatas  terre
ad  geldum,  ubi  possent  esse  x  carucae '  (Yorks).

*  Dd.  i.  6ca:  (Compton  Cbamberlam,  Wilts)  'Contone  .  .  .  pro
X  hidis  geklabat.  Terra  est  x  carucis.  In  dominio  sunt  ii  carucae  et
ii  aemi,  et  xxviii  uillani  et  ii  bordarii  cum  viii  carucis.'

'  Dd.  i.  65  a :  (RushaU,  Wilts) '  Rusteselve .  . .  geldabat  pro  xxxvii
hidis  •  .  •  Terra  est  xxvii  carucis  et  dimidiae  :  In  dominio  sunt  xix

M  2


1 64  TAXATION  [ESSAY

cases  easily  explained  by  some  deficiency  in  the  estat
or  by  some  privil^e,  or,  on  the  contrary,  by  some  feature
of  additional  value.  Then,  again,  on  many  occasions  tli
number  of  teams  is  not  sufficient  to  till  the  availabi
plough-lands.^  Such  discrepancies  are  easy  to  explaii
and,  in  fact,  they  are  necessary  consequences  of  the  adopte
principles.  But  there  is  one  by  no  means  unfrequen
combination  which  seems  puzzling,  and  requires  aom
attention  on  the  part  of  inquirers.  I  mean  the  cases  wbja
the  number  of  teams  is  larger  than  that  of  the  availiU
plough-lands :  the  stock  on  the  estates  appears  to  be  t
excess  of  its  needs,  and  one  may  say  of  the  manors  an
townships  described  in  such  a  way  that  they  are  *ova
stocked  \^  What  lies  at  the  root  of  such  combinatioo!
which,  let  it  be  noted,  present  the  same  difficulties  to  al
the  theories  propounded  by  students  of  Domesday  ?  Seven
explanations  may  be  attempted,  and  they  may  all  be  justifie
to  a  certain  extent  To  begin  with,  we  must  reckon  wit
the  possibility  of  some  of  the  teams  mentioned  being  i
truth  batches  of  eight  oxen,  each  employed  not  for  tillagv
but  for  carrying  loads  or  any  other  purpose,  or  eve
collected  for  sale,  or  kept  as  a  reserve  for  eventual  need
Then,  again,  the  plough-lands  mentioned  may  have  bee
dispersed  among  a  great  many  holders  striving  to  kee
their  separate  teams,  in  which  case  the  quantity  of  stoc
employed  on  the  estates  would  of  course  come  to  excee

hidae  et  ibi  xii  carucae  et  xxxvii  semi.  Ibi  xxviii  uillani  et  zl  bordtf
cum  xiiii  carucis.'  Cf.  67  b  (Colebume) ;  38  b  (Meon  (East)  Hants
'  Menes  . .  .  Stigandus  tenuit  T.  R.  £.  Tunc  nierunt  Ixxii  hidae  *
geldabat  pro  xxxv  hidis  et  una  virgata.  Terra  est  Ixiiii  canicifc  I
dominio  sunt  viii  carucae  et  Ixx  uillani  et  xxxii  bordarii  cum  Ivi  canida
Cf.  344  a  (Welletone,  Lines.) ;  136  b  (Canesworde,  Herts).

^  Dd.  i.  243  a:  (Aston,  Warwick.)  'Estone  ...  In  dominio  est  teir
vi  carucis,  sed  carucae  ibi  non  sunt.'

"  Dd.  i.  2  d :  (Faversham,  Kent)  '  Favreshant,  pro  vii  solins  •
defendit.  Terra  est  xvii  carucis.  In  dominio  sunt  11.  ibi  xm  uiHii
cum  xl  bordariis  habent  xxiiii  carucas.'  Cf.  16  c  (Stanmere,  Stmnc)
77  c  (Odeham,  Dorset) ;  117  b  (WithechenoUe,  Devon) ;  155  b  (DordM
cestre,  Oxon);  241  b  (Walecote  et  Wilebene  et  Caldecoie,  WarwkL]
278  d  (Stantun,  Derby.) ;  294  a  (Ridlington,  Rutland),  '  In  ptedid
terra  (Redlinctune)  ...  In  ipsa  eadem  eius  terra  possunt  tmt  fi
carucae,  et  tamen  ibi  arant  xvi  carucae ' ;  iv.  loi  (V/inclieleia«  Devon


SECT,  m,  CH. I]  THE  GELD  165

the  purely  economic  requirements  of  the  situation.^  One
more  possibility  seems  worthy  of  consideration,  namely,  the
extslence  of  forms  of  cultivation  more  complicated  and
tolenmve  than  the  usual  methods  of  tillage,  and  therefore
requirii^  a  larger  stock.  The  i  ao  acres  usually  assigned
to  a  team  of  eight  small  oxen  yoked  to  a  clumsy  plough
ni^^  turn  out  to  be  inadequate,  even  in  the  case  of  a  three-
field  system,  with  some  manuring  and  a  two- fold  tillage  for
winter  seed  and  a  breaking  up  of  the  fallow,  not  to  speak
of  more  complex  systems.

However  this  may  be,  it  is  almost  impossible  for  us
to  trace  the  exact  course  of  such  an  influence.  There
is  nothing  to  show  that  the  contrast  between  a  two-field
and  a  three-field  system  was  reflected  in  the  ratio  between
gdd  units  and  plough-lands.  Indeed,  the  imposition  of
g^  units  was  determined  by  considerations  which  had
nothing  to  do  with  the  open-field  shift  of  townships.  It
would  have  been  preposterous  to  inflict  on  three-field
townships  a  heavier  burden  because  they  were  cultivated
rather  better  than  the  two-field  ones,  nor  is  there  the  slightest
support  for  a  construction  of  the  carucate  as  the  quantity
of  arable  cultivated  at  one  time  in  one  year.  But  it
deserves  notice  that  there  is  a  series  of  interesting  entries
in  Yorkshire  which  show  that  the  relation  of  the  geld
carucates  to  the  plough-lands,  to  the  terra  carucis,  was
not  made  out  for  each  single  case  separately. Canon

■  Dd.  i.  16  b :  (S.  Mailing,  Sussex)  <  Mellinges  . . .  T.  R.  £.  defendit
se  pro  quater  xx  hidis.  Sed  modo  non  habet  archiepiscopus  nisi  Ixxv
hidas,  quia  comes  moritonii  habet  v  hidas  extra  hundredum.  Terra
ffotius  manerii  I  carucis.  In  dominie  sunt  v  carucae,  et  cc  et  xix
triUani  cum  xxxv  bordariis  habent  Ixxiii  canicas  et  xliii  croftes/  17  b :
(Steyntng) '  Staninges,  Heraldus  tenuit  in  fine  regis  Edwardi  et  tunc  se
dclendit  pro  quater  xx  hidis  et  una,  et  insuper  adhuc  xviii  hidae  et  vii
acrae  fons  rapum  quae  nun^uam  geldauerunt.  Modo  Ixvii  hidae.  In
rapo  de  Harundel  sunt  xxxiii  hidae  et  dimidia,  et  aliae  in  rapo  Willelmi
de  Braiose,  et  tamen  abbas  tenet  omnes  modo.  Terra  totius  manerii
xli  carucis.  In  dominio  sunt  vii  carucae,  et  clxxviii  uillani  cum  Ixiii
bordariis  habent  xlviii  canicas.'  Cf.  17  b  (Rameslie) ;  241  a  (Bertane-
stone,  Warwick.);  274 d  (Sudtune,  Brailesford,  Holintune ;  Derby.);
275  b  (Duuelle) ;  280  b  :  (In  Burgo  Derby)  *  ad  ipsum  burgum  adiacent
xii  canicatae  terrae  ad  geldum,  quas  viii  carucae  possunt  arare.  Haec
terra  partita  erat  inter  xli  burgenses  qui  xii  carucas  habebant ' ;  321  b
^Coningesburg,  Yorks).


i66  TAXATION  [essa\

Taylor  has  ^  collected  data  to  show  that  this  relation  nu
be  almost  always  reduced  to  one  of  two  simple  ratios :  tl
number  of  carucates  is  either  exactly  equal  to  or  exact!
double  that  of  land  used  for  ploughs.  Even  putting  o
one  side  incorrect  assumptions  about  the  carucate  a
plough-land  and  the  terra  carucis  as  plough-teams,  or  tb
theory  about  the  two-  and  three-field  shift  in  use  at  thi
time  in  the  Yorkshire  manors,  we  cannot  disrq;ard  tt
remarkable  neatness  of  the  ratio  between  carucates  an
land  for  ploughs,  and  the  striking  opposition  between  tl
two  ratios  amounting  to.  a  duplication  of  the  fiscal  burdei
A  closer  examination  shows  that  this  neatness  has  bee
somewhat  exaggerated,  and  that  we  have  rather  to  sta
from  the  fact  that  in  a  great  many  cases  the  land  ft
ploughs  is  a  good  deal  less  than  the  number  of  geldab
carucates,  and  that  in  most  of  these  cases  it  amount!
to  one-half  of  the  latter.  These  proportions  are  exemplific
by  the  comparison  of  townships  on  the  heavy  clay  sc
of  Holderness,  where  the  two  terms  are  equal,  with  tho
on  the  lighter  soil  of  the  Wolds,  where  we  encounter  tl
double  ratio.  If  wc  reject  Canon  Taylor's  hypothes
as  involving  us  in  difficulties  on  all  sides,^  the  mo
plausible  explanation  seems  to^  be  that  the  juries,  in  the
approximate  estimation  of  the  capacity  of  the  district  fi
cultivation,  wanted  to  impress  on  the  government  the  vie
that  certain  parts  of  it  were  incapable  of  bearing  the  bunk
of  taxation  which  lay  on  them  from  the  preceding  ag
Yorkshire  was  an  especially  devastated  county,  and  tl
inquiry  of  the  Domesday  commissioners  was  in  mas
respects  directed  towards  different  aims  from  that  of  neigl
bouring  territories.  The  notice  terra  ad  x  carucas  occtt
in  a  great  many  cases  without  any  reference  to  actu
cultivation,  to  the  carncae  or  teams.^  The  values  afiix<
in  the  margin  are  very  small,  and  refer  to  an  undetermim
time. Even  on  the  occasions  when  we  get  regular  survr

'  Domesday  Studies,  i.  isofT.

'  W.  H.  Stevenson,  Engl.  Hist.  Rev.,  Jan.  1890. Round,  Feu(
England,  89.
'  Dd.  i.  300  c,  d ;  301  a,b.


SEa.m.  CH.i]  THE  GELD  167

of  manors,  similar  to  those  of  other  counties,  traces  of  waste
ire  apparent  everywhere.  The  alleviation  of  fiscal  burdens
was  not  as  yet  carried  out.  The  geldable  units  are  every-
where marked  in  full  as  of  old,  and  the  returns  were
seemingly  designed  to  prepare  the  way  for  reductions
bf  stating  roughly  where  the  imposition  was  warranted
bf  the  state  of  things,  and  where  it  ought  to  be  largely
nduced  The  juries  did  not  say  so  in  as  many  words,
bat  they  hinted  at  the  necessity  by  reducing  the  number
of  supposed  plough-lands.^  This  was  not  in  keeping  with
the  use  of  the  plough-land  term  in  other  parts  of  the
country,  but  it  was  an  effective  way  of  stating  the  case,
and  likely  to  attain  the  purpose  in  view.

5.  The  survey  of  Middlesex  and  a  few  entries  in  other  Sunev  of
counties  disclose  another  important  aspect  of  these  in-  *  ^^^'
vestigations  as  to  units  of  assessment  and  tillage.  The
three  usual  statements  referring  to  geld-hides,  plough-
lands,  and  plough-teams  occur  there,  as  everywhere  else,
but  there  is  one  interesting  supplementary  feature,  namely,
the  enumeration  of  the  holdings  of  the  tenants  estimated
in  fractions  of  the  hide — in  half-hides,  virgates,  and  acres.
It  is  clear  at  once  that  these  fractions  were  intended  to
be  subdivisions  of  the  hides  at  which  the  manors  are  rated
for  the  geld.^  But  the  numbers  do  not  always  correspond  :
in  some  cases  the  holdings  exceed  or  fall  short  in  their
aggregate  in  comparison  with  the  number  of  plough-lands
and  of  geld  units.^ This  being  so,  we  have  to  take  the

*  £.g.  Dd.  i.  325  :  (Yorks)  *  In  Ferebi  x  carucatae  terre  ad  geldum.
Tcna  est  ad  V  carucas.  Radulfus  habet  ibi  nunc  xiv  uillanos  cum  iii
cinicis  ...  T.  R.  £.  ualebat  c  sol.,  modo  Ix  sol.  Ad  hoc  Manerium
pntioent  Le  Bereuu,  etc — Simul  ad  geldum  vi  carucate  et  dimidia.
Term  est  iv  carucis.  Wasta  sunt  praeter  quod  in  Hase  sunt  iv  uillani
cvn  i  caruca.' Cf.  Hundemanebi,  f.  326  b,  etc

'Cases  of  correspondence: Westminster  (128b);  in  Hampstead
(ih.)  3}  hides  are  charged  to  the  demesne  out  of  a  total  of  4  hides,
vhOe  the  remaining  half  hide  is  distributed  between  a  villain  and  5
^darii. The  case  of  Staines  is  very  striking. Out  of  lo  hides
II  go  to  the  demesne,  villains  hold 3  hides  3 virgates,  bordarii
j  hides  I  virgate  and  90  acres,  cottarii  29  acres;  altogether  18  hides
and  29  acres,  or  19  hides  less  i  acre. This  cannot  be  a  mere  coinci-
dence :  the  repartition  of  the  holdings  squares  with  the  total  with  but
one  acre's  difference. Cf.  Suneburie,  Greneforde,  Hanewell,  &c.  (128  c).
'  Instances  of  excess:  Coleham,  Hillendone,  Chenetone  (f.  129  a,  b).


i68  TAXATION  [essai

estimate  of  the  tenants'  land  to  refer  not  only  to  artifid
units,  but  to  the  field  holdings,  the  hides,  virgates,  at
ac^es  of  agrarian  occupation.  This  means,  of  course,  thi
the  soil  of  the  manors  comprised  a  certain  number  (
units  called  hides,  virgates,  acres,  which  did  not  coincic
with  the  fiscal  units  imposed  on  it.  A  geld*hide  may  hai
corresponded  to  one  hide  and  a  half  or  two  hides  distribub
among  the  rustics.  While  in  most  cases  this  agricultm
basis  remains  concealed  in  the  Survey,  it  is  clearly  set  befo
us  in  the  Middlesex  survey.  The  description  of  Sawbridg
worth,  in  Hertfordshire,^  and  some  data  in  the  Cambrids
shire  inquest,  contain  also  direct  references  to  holdm
estimated  in  fractions  of  hides.'  Of  later  surveys,  ti
Burton  cartulary  follows  exactly  the  same  lines,  and  so
piemen ts  its  statements  as  to  the  number  of  fiscal  nil
by  particulars  referring  to  the  units  of  actual  agrari;
occupation.^  As  the  Middlesex  instances  present  t
fullest  data  about  the  relative  value  of  the  differe
Domesday  notes  on  the  cadastre,  I  may  be  allowed
examine  them  at  some  length.  In  doing  so  I  will  destgna
the  entries  as  to  geldable  units  as  term  I,  those  referrii
to  land  fit  for  tillage  as  term  II,  the  numbers  of  teat
as  term  III,  and  the  details  as  to  holdings  as  term  I
Distribu-  The  results,  as  far  as  they  can  be  clearly  ascertained,  a
teams^ tabulated  in  an  appendix. In  the  first  table  the  numb

Reduced  occupation:  Handone  (i28d);  Hermodesworth  (ibi);  1
bume  (ib.).

^  Dd.  i.  1 39  d  (Sabrixteworde).  The  number  of  holdings  in  reportiti
is  in  excess  of  the  geld  units.  Against  24^  hides  of  the  Utter  stand
hides  in  demesne,  half  a  hide  of  the  reeve,  i  hide  of  the  priest,  2\  of  fi
tenants,  7  hides  3}  virgates  belonging  to  villains,  1  hiae  3}  virgatet
bordariiy  i|  virgate  presumably  to  socmen  (predicH  villam  in  the  ti
seems  to  pomt  to  the  four  socmen  mentioned  in  the  beginning  and  belv
Besides  these  were  413  acres  distributed  among  various  smaller  ho
ings.  The  virgate  is  certainly  reckoned  at  30  acres,  as  is  shown  by  t
rent  of  the  socmen— 17J.  4//.  for  \\  virgate  and  9  acres,  exactly  2d.  |
acre.  The  whole  comes  to  about  28  hides  instead  of  24,  and  the  balai
is  not  restored  even  if  we  subtract  the  2^  hides  held  by  the  freeteoai

'  The  bordarii  are  oflen  entered  in  the  Inquisitio  Cantabrigiei
with  the  number  of  acres  assigned  to  them.  £.  g.  Eueresdona,  p.
(Hamilton).

'TBurton  Cartulary  (William  Salt  Society,  1884),  18,  19.  1
holdings  of  the  tenants  appear  considerably  in  excess  0^  the  geld  un


8ECT.nLCH.i]  THE  GELD  169

of  gekl-hides  imposed  on  the  estates  is  compared  with  the
tggregEte  sums  of  hides  and  virgates  distributed  among
the  demesne  and  the  tenantry. In  nineteen  cases  out  of
leveoty-six  the  sum  of  geld-hides  corresponds,  or  nearly
so,  to  the  sum  of  actual  holdings :  the  sum  total  of  the
tides  enumerated  in  these  instances  of  correspondence  is
(«)  geld*hides  against  (6)  field-hides  in  demesne  and  tenants'
Jbldii^ In  four  cases  only  term  I  turns  out  to  be  con-
•demUy  less  than  term  IL In  fifty-three  cases  the  sum
of  geld  units  is  considerably  larger  than  that  of  hides  in
actual  holdii^s. In  Harrow  (Herges),  for  instance,^  100
Ittdes  are  reckoned  for  the  geld,  while  the  domain  and
tenants'  holdings  comprise  only  60^  hides  and  13  acres.
In  Hannondsworth  (Hermodesworth) '  there  are  30  hides
to  the  geld»  and  only  18  hides  and  2  viigates  in  actual
possession. In  Bedfont '  3  hides,  %  viigates,  and  13  acres
are  distributed  among  the  holders,  although  ten  hides  are
charged  to  the  geld. The  inference  from  these  figures
seems  to  be  that  the  county  was,  as  a  rule,  assessed  in
a  mudi  heavier  manner  than  the  occupation  of  the  soil
at  the  time  of  Domesday  would  have  warranted. The
value  of  the  estates  shows  generally  a  decrease  for  the
time  of  the  Survey  in  comparison  with  King  Edward's
reign,  but  this  decrease  is  not  very  great. It  is  noteworthy,
however,  that  there  is  a  very  marked  falling-oflf  between
the  T.R.E.  notation  and  the  moment  when  the  manor
was  taken  up  by  its  Norman  holder. These  data  are
significant,  especially  as  they  are  gathered  from  a  good
many  entries. They  indicate  that  the  original  distribu-
tion of units between the estates, effected in round
numbers,  contemplated  a  state  of  greater  prosperity  in
the  country. The Norman Conquest produced,  as  an
immediate  result,  a  very  sharp  fall  of  values  and  an  actual
diminution of population and of agrarian occupation,
expressed  in  the  very  low  figures  of  the  *  valet '  clause
in  regard  to  the  time  when  the  estates  were  distributed

^  Dd.  i.  127  a.  *  Ibid.  128  d,  129a.

'  Ibid.  129  b,  130  a  (bis).


I70  TAXATION  [ESSAY  1

among  Norman  lords,  that  is,  mostly  soon  after  1066.  In
1086  the  number  of  holdings  was  still  very  inferior  to  that
of  former  days,  but  the  income  of  the  lords  had  risen
almost  to  its  former  level,  presumably  in  consequence  of
the  imposition  of  much  heavier  duties.
Plough-  Turning  to  Table  II,  we  get  the  relation  between  the
Middif^x.  actual  holdings  of  1086  and  the  presumed  [dou^-landi.
We  find  only  one  instance  where  both  numbers  are  in
complete  agreement — Hampton,^  a  manor  of  St  Petet
of  Westminster,  in  which  the  16  plough-lands  correqpood
exactly  to  10  hides  in  domain  and  6  hides  held  by  the
tenants.  It  is  curious  that  this  equilibrium  is  supported,
notwithstanding  the  fact  that  out  of  the  16  plough-Iandfl
only  II  are  provided  with  full  teams,  and  there  cooU
be  five  more  teams  on  the  land  of  the  peasants.  Then
is  a  falling-oflf  in  value  from  12/.  T.R.E.  to  8/.  T.R.W^
with  a  corresponding  diminution  in  the  number  of  actus]
hides  against  the  geld-hides  of  ancient  assessment  (it
against  20).  The  inference  seems  to  be  that  in  this  case
the  decrease  in  the  area  of  cultivation  was  counter-balanced
by  an  increase  in  the  exploitation  of  the  remaining  in^
poverished  tenants.  Although  Hampton  is  the  only  cast
of  exact  correspondence,  there  are  about  eighteen  othe:
instances  out  of  sixty-nine,  where  the  numbers,  thoiq;!
not  identical,  show  a  very  great  similitude  betweei
II  and  IV.  In  the  case  of  Kensington,*  the  10  hide^
of  assessment  correspond  exactly  to  the  10  plcMigb-
lands,  and  the  manor  must  have  comprised  some  iflO^
acres  of  arable.  There  were  4  ploughs  in  domain  anc
5  teams  belonging  to  the  villains,  with  the  deficiency  o
only  I  plough.  The  value  had  sunk  for  a  time,  but  i
had  been  brought  up  again  T.R.W.  to  the  same  heigh
as  T.R.E.,  namely,  to  10/.  At  first  glance  this  seeni^
to  disagree  entirely  with  the  startling  fact  that  only  3  hide:
and  3^  vitiates  are  distributed  among  the  villains,  and  n^
hides  are  charged  to  the  domain.  But  as  there  are  4  teaD
actually  at  work  in  the  lord's  land,  the  disagreement  come

'  Dd.  i.  i28d  (Handone).  >  Ibid,  ijod  (ChenesiO.


SECT.  in.  CH.  i]  THE GELD  171

out  to  be  only  an  apparent  one,  and  in  reality  the  instance
is  one  of  nearly  complete  equilibrium.  In  most  cases,
however,  the  numbers  of  possible  plough-lands  and  of
actual  occupation  vary  greatly,  and,  what  is  even  more
remarkable,  the  variations  arrange  themselves  on  both
sides  of  the  balance.  In  about  an  equal  number  of  cases
there  are  considerably  more  plough-lands  than  actual  agri-
cultural hides,  and,  on  the  other  hand,  more  hides  of  actual
occupation  than  plough-lands.  On  the  one  aide  we  get,
for  example,  as  extreme  instances,  .such  entries  as  Isleworth
(Gistelsworde),  with  55  plough-lands  and  only  31  hides,
1^  virgates,  among  tenants  and  domain ;  Staines,  with
24  plough-lands  and  i**  hides  in  actual  occupation  ;  while
on  the  other  are  to  be  found,  e.  g„  Northalt,  with  ij  hides
of  actual  occupation  as  against  10  plough-lands ;  Fulham,
wiUi  49  field-bides  and  land  for  40  ploughs.  If  we  examine
diese  sdected  instances  a  little  closer,  we  find  that  Isle-
wortii'  had  about  6,600  acres  of  arable  land  on  the
computation  of  130  acres  to  the  plough,  but  instead  of
55  plouglis  to  till  them  it  possessed  only  34.  These
were  in  the  possession  of  the  demesne  (6),  some  knights
holding  4  bides,  and  of  more  than  100  peasant  householders,
with  34  hides  3^  vir^tes  between  them.  Notwithstanding
the  insufficiency  in  the  number  of  ploughs,  of  which  there
could  be  II  more,  the  value  had  decreased  only  from
Soi.  T.R.E.  to  70/.  T.R.W.  The  existing  teams  and
hcddii^  were  evidently  able  to  perform  the  necessary
work,  and  to  render  dues  wellnigh  to  the  same  extent
as  in  the  age  of  Edward  the  Confessor,  but  the  manor
was  considerably  below  the  level  of  its  original  assessment.
Staines,'  a  manor  of  Westminster,  was  rated  only  at  19
hides,  evidently  on  a  very  privil^ed  scale.  It  contained
land  for  34  ploughs,  that  is,  approximately,  2,f!So  acres
of  arable.  As  a  matter  of  fact,  there  were  34  teams
to  plough  the  land,  of  which  15  belonged  to  the  domain
and  II  to  the  peasants.  11  hides  were  charged  to  the
dcnnain  and  nearly  8  hides  to  villains ;  these  last  were
'  Dd.  L  130a  (Gistelesworde).  *  Ibid.  laSb.


l^%  TAXATION  [ESSAY

subdivided  in  a  number  of  holdings,  the  bordarii  bein
especially  numerous.  The  value  had  gone  down  from  40
^<^  i5^'  I'hc  ^gf^^te  of  the  holdings  is  thus  considerabl
less  than  the  number  of  ploughlands  and  of  teams  (i
against  24),  while  the  numbers  of  the  geld  hidage  an
of  the  holdings  coincide.  There  is,  however,  a  dear  11
dication  as  to  the  manner  in  which  the  balance  was  restore
in  this  case.  Staines  was  not  merely  an  agricultural  settl*
ment,  but  also  a  considerable  town,  containing  forty-si
burgesses.  Although  the  rent  paid  by  them  was  not  large-
40J.,  the  existence  of  the  urban  settlement  is  sufficient  '
explain  the  smaller  number  of  hides  in  the  rural  holdiii{
Kingsbury  ^  (Chtngesberie),  the  manor  of  Emulf  de  Hesdin
shows  a  decrease  in  value  from  61,  to  4/.,  and  has  on
%  teams  in  demesne  and  some  3  hides  belonging  to  tl
villains  on  a  territory  of  7  plough-lands  (840  acres) ;  tv
field-hides  are  wanted  to  make  up  the  full  compleme
of  holdings.  It  is  not  impossible  that  the  five  plough-tean
undertook  all  the  labour  necessary  for  the  tills^e  of  tl
7  plough-lands,  thus  reaching  an  average  of  about  li
acres  per  team,  but  it  is  more  likely  that  part  of  tl
arable  remained  without  cultivation  :  hence  the  diminutk
in  value.
Consuetu-  Let  US  now  look  at  the  instances  where  the  number  «
vuke.  hides  in  the  holdings  turns  out  to  be  larger  than  thi
of  available  plough-lands.  Northalt'  possessed  land  fi
10  ploughs,  and  yet  it  was  charged  to  the  geld  at  ]
hides,  and  there  were  15  hides  distributed  among  its  varioi
holdings,  8  being  in  demesne  and  7  in  the  hands  of  tl
peasants.  As  for  teams,  there  were  only  %  on  the  domai
and  6  on  the  land  of  the  villains  ;  there  could  be  two  mo
on  this  last  portion.  The  value  of  the  estate  had  goi
down  from  12/.  to  10/.,  and  this  seems  quite  natural
view  of  the  decrease  in  the  number  of  teams.  But  ho
is  the  large  number  of  field-  and  geld- hides  to  be  acGOunti
for  ?  As  the  field  holdings  were  in  this  case  in  exact  co
respondence  with  the  geld-hides,  we  have  to  assume  th

^  Dd.  i.  129  d,  130  a.  '  Ibid.  129  d  (Northala).


SECT.  m.  CH.  i]  THE  GELD  173

the  distribution  of  land  among  the  population  of  the  manor
wat  baaed  on  a  subdivision  of  the  fiscal  shares  and  not
of  pkH^-lands.  Hie  average  of  the  field-hide  would  thus
fidl  thcHrt  of  tiie  iso  acres  in  regard  to  arable,  and  even
mofe  in  regard  to  the  land  actually  cultivated  by  the  teams.
There  would  not  be  more  than  80  acres  per  hide  in  the
arable^  and  not  more  than  64  acres  under  actual  cultivation
by  teaaEis.  These  avenges  would  be  deceptive  in  their
rougfanessy  however,  because  the  strongest  contrast  is  to
be  found  in  the  case  of  domanial  land  where  8  hides
oorrespoiMl  to  2  teams  only,  while  on  the  land  of  the
pedants  die  proportion  is  7  to  6.  This  observation
brings  ot  to  an  inference  of  great  importance.  The  hides
diaiged  to  the  domain  cannot  be  considered  in  the  same
li^t  as  thoae  enumerated  in  the  land  of  the  rustics.
These  hut  are  evidently  taken  as  real  holdings,  and  stsmd
therefore  in  a  close  relation  to  the  plough-lands  and
plough*teams,  whereas  the  domanial  part  is  charged  with
hides  to  express  its  share  in  the  burdens  of  the  estates.
Its  hides  are  therefore  in  many  instances,  if  not  in  all,  the
result  of  artificial  computation ;  they  stand  in  a  closer
corre^xmdence  with  the  fiscal  numbers,  and,  on  the  con-
trary, swerve  very  greatly  from  the  number  of  teams
assigned  to  them.  One  circumstance  comes  out  very
forcibly  in  regard  to  this  portion.  While  the  holding  of
the  peasant  and  the  work  performed  in  it  determine  the
economic  value  of  the  peasant's  land  and  its  share  in
taxation,  the  economic  and  fiscal  significance  of  the  domain
depends  on  two  factors — on  the  work  of  the  teams  and
labourers  of  the  home  farm  and  on  that  of  the  tenants,
die  adrntarium  viUaiy  the  cansuetudines  villae.  The  im-
portance of  this  consideration  will  be  made  even  clearer
later  on,  when  we  come  to  consider  the  two  portions  in
their  separate  relations  to  the  system  of  holdings.

Let  us  now  take  the  bishop  of  London's  manor  of
Fuiham.^  It  is  rated  at  40  hides,  and  contains  land  for
40  ploughs  (4,800  acres). There  are  4  teams  in  demesne

'  Pd.  i.  127  c  (Fuleham).


174  TAXATION  [ESSAY  1

and  a6  peasants'  teams,  and  there  could  be  lo  moie. The
value  has  decreased  from  50/.  to  40/.,  and  the
description  again  gives  only  a  small  number  of
ploughs  (4,  and  4  might  be  added),  leaving  us  to  infer
that  a  good deal  of  the  work was  peribrmcd  by  tht
peasants. In  actual  distribution  there  are  13  hides  chaffed
to  the  domain,  14  held  by  peasants,  and  aj  of  peasant  land
ceded  to  French  soldiers  and  burgesses— altogether  50
It  is  quite  clear  in  this  case  that  the  distributed
do  not  fit  cither  into  the  aggregate  of  geld  units  or  into
the  numbers  of  ploughlands,  at least  according  to  the
normal  reckoning  of  1  io  acres  to  the  hkle. We  have  to
infer  that  the  shares  in  the  field  were  smaller about  100
acres  to  the  hide  if  wc  include  the  demesne  hades,  some
iia  acres  if  we  reckon  only  4  plough-holdings  far  tht
domain. Another  explanation  of  the  larger  nimibcr  oC
holdings  might  be  that  some  of  them  were  of  a  Iokt
sixe ;  for  instance,  those  occupied  by  buigesses,  while  the
rest  roughly  corresponded  in  shape  to  the  normal
This  second  explanation  is,  of  course,  particularly
to  some  of  these Middlesex places  in  their  11
vicinity  to  London,  but  it  is  hardly  sufficient  by  itself  to
meet  the  numerous  instances  of  congestion  of  holdings
recorded  in  our  second  tabic.
Table  III  treats  of  the  teams  on  the  domain  in  idntian
hidct. ^o  ^he  hides  in  domain. It  may  serve  to  illustrate  farther
the  notion  exposed  in  connexion  with  the  Northalt
There  are  only  two  instances  where  the  number  of
exceeds  that  of  the  hides  assigned  to  the  domain,  and  oaljr
four  where  both  numbers  are  equal,  while  in  thirty*t«o
cases,  where  both  domain  hides  and  teams  are  rcconML
the  latter 'arc  more  or  less  in  excess  of  the  first. In  some
instances  the  excess  is  very  great. In  Harrow,  c.  g.«  ottif
4  pk>ughs  arc  mentioned  on  the  domain,  while  jO  hides
are  put  to  its  reckoning ;  in  Haminton  ^  of  Walter  dc  &
Waleric  there  are  j  teams  to  iN hidea^ In the
case  the  whole  manor  wa<<  rated  at  Xj  hides,  and


SECT.ni.cH.i]  THE  GELD  175

was  land  for  35  ploughs,  that  is,  3,000  acres  on  the  i  oo
acres  standard. The  villains  held  17  teams  in  holdings
amounting  to  lo)  hides^and  there  could  have  been  5  teams
more  on  the  peasants'  land. It  is  clear  that  most  of  the
work  on  the  lord's  land  was  performed  by  the  peasants'
ploughs ;  in  £act,  that  the  rustic  part  of  the  manor  ought
to  have  occupied  fully  2fi40  acres  out  of  the  3^000,  although
the  hidage  of  the  domain  was  over  one-half  of  the  whole
geld  hidage  of  the  manor,  and  almost  twice  as  much  as
the  aggregate  of  actual  villain  holdings. The  almost  con-
stant predominance  of  hides  over  teams  is,  in  fact,  quite
characteristic  for  the  domain,  which  drew  its  income  and
labour  kugely,  not  from  its  own  resources,  but  from  those!
of  the  dependent  population.

Table  V,  illustrating  the  relation  between  plough-teams  Peuant
and  peasant  holdings,  is  more  complex  in  its  character.  ^  ^'^^
In  two  cases  the  numbers  are  equal,  and  in  about  ten  cases
nearly  equal,  but  there  are  eleven  cases  where  there  is  more
land  in  the  holdings  than  teams,  and  not  less  than  twenty
where,  on  the  contrary,  there  are  more  teams  than  holdings.
The  group  of  cases  in  which  the  aggregate  of  holdings  is
too  large  for  the  number  of  teams  is  easy  to  explain  by  an
insufficiency  of  stock  on  the  holdings,  and  on  the  whole  the
discrepancies  in  this  respect  are  not  very  striking,  the  most
glaring  instance  being  presented  by  the  already  quoted
description  of  Fulham,  with  its  peasant  36  hides  against
26  teams.  This  and  kindred  instances  are  easily  accounted
for  by  a  diminution  of  stock  and  a  corresponding  decrease
in  value.

But  we  hear  much  more  often  of  manors  in  which  there
were  a  good  many  more  teams  than  would  have  been
necessary  for  the  holdings.  Let  us  take  Edmonton  ^
(Adelmetone),  a  manor  of  Geoffrey  de  Mandeville.  There
was  land  for  26  ploughs  (31 120  acres),  and  there  were
exactly  4  teams  in  demesne  and  22  belonging  to  the
peasants,  so  that  every  acre  of  available  land  had  been
utilized. The  domain  was  charged with fully 16  hides,

^  Dd.  i.  129(1.


jy6  TAXATION

and  the  villains  held  among  them  twelve  hides  and  a  hal
It  is  impossible  to  suppose  that  there  were  i»92o  acre
in  the  domain  portion  and  1,500  in  the  peasant  portioi
because  this  would  bring  up  the  total  to  3,420  acres  (
arable,  instead  of  3,120.  The  discrepancy  between  th
22  teams  assigned  to  the  peasants  and  the  13  J  hide
held  by  them  is  even  greater.  There  does  not  seem  t
be  any  way  out  of  these  difficulties  but  the  suppositio
that  the  peasant  holdings  in  this  case  were  cut  large
than  usual,  so  that  some  of  the  hides  practically  containe
2  teams  each  or  not  much  less,  in  fact  the  peasant  portio
was  clearly  overstocked.  On  the  other  hand,  the  hide
in  demesne  evidently  comprised  not  only  plough-lands,  bu
also  a  certain  number  of  ideal  shares  meant  to  expies
the  additional  work  performed  by  the  auxiliary  plougb
of  the  township.  The  slight  discrepancy  in  the  Bggrtgutt
amounting,  if  expressed  in  terms  of  plough-land  quanti^
to  about  300  acres,  or  a  total  of  3,120,  may  have  bea
produced  by  the  loss  of  time  and  energy  consequent  on
the  transmission  of  peasant  work  to  domanial  land.  Simihf
instances  are  presented  by  the  surveys  of  Stibenheidi
Totenham,  &c.


CHAPTER  II

FISCAL  IMMUNITIES

I.  Hitherto  we  have  treated  of  taxation  and  fiscal  Beneficial
estimates  as  if  they  were  always  directed  to  ascertain  what  '^^**^^
bit  share  of  the  revenue  from  a  particular  estate  had  to  be
levied  for  the  needs  of  the  commonwealth.  But  the  fiscal
burden  was  not  always  divided  fairly  and  equally  between
the  different  members  of  the  community ;  there  were  many
cases  and  grounds  of  privil^e  and  exemption.  Besides
tliese  variations  from  the  standard,  we  have  to  reckon  with
other  reductions  produced  by  the  gradual  or  sudden  changes
in  the  economic  condition  of  certain  districts  and  properties ;
impositions,  which  were  quite  fair  and  reasonable  at  one
time,  got  to  be  too  heavy  at  a  later  time^  on  account  of  some
disturbing  influence :  the  assessment  had  to  be  revised  and
reduced  or  increased  accordingly.^  All  these  features  and
processes  have  left  traces  in  the  Survey,  and  we  have  to
mention  shortly  how  these  modifications  of  normal  returns
^^e  effected  and  recorded.

So-called  beneficial  hidation  is  often  to  be  noticed  on  the
strength  of  internal  evidence,  the  geld  unit  assigned  to

*  place  being  evidently  too  insigpiificant  in  view  of  other
facts  enrolled. Medeveld  '^  in  Staffordshire  may  be  taken  as

*  Very  moderate  instance  of  privileged  or  beneficial  hidation.

'  Dd.  iv.  277:  (Mockham,  Devon)  '  Mansionem  que  uocatur  Moge-
^<^^  quam  tenuit  Alcerlo  ea  die  qua  rex  Edwardus  fuit  uiuus  et
l^ortuus,  et  reddidit  Gildum  cum  supradicta  mansione  (Cannes)  pro
I  Qirp[a  ita  quod  iste  due  mansiones  adquietabant  se  ad  Gildum  regis
P^  1  uirga,  et  modo  computantur  pro  ii  uirgis.' Cases  of  increase  are


"^yiarii  cum  i  seruo  habent  i  carucam.'
'  Dd.  I  246  c

VUIOCRAOOPK  N


178  TAXATION  [ESSA^

It  is  rated  with  its  belongings  at  one  hide,  and  yet  there
land  for  1 2  ploughs  in  it,  and  there  are  actually  four  tear
on  that  land — one  in  domain  and  three  in  the  hands  of  tl
tenants.  Evidently  it  had  been  taxed  much  too  lightly,  at
one  may  suspect  that  this  was  done  on  account  of  tJ
influence  exerted  by  its  owners — at  the  time  of  Edward  H
Confessor,  at  any  rate,  it  was  owned  by  Algar,  n  gres
thane.  There  are  many  glaring  instances  of  such  ben^da
hidation  on  the  estates  of  great  men  ^  and  of  the  Church.'
Sometimes  we  are  told  expressly  that  a  reduction  of  tb
burden  has  taken  place.  Bastedene,  Berks,  e.  g.,  was  chafgo
to  the  geld  for  ao  hides  T.R.E.,  and  only  for  6  hides  T.R.W
In  Henret,  Berks,  the  hidage  of  one  portion  of  the  towiuhq
which  had  belonged  to  Alwin  had  been  reduced  from  ;
hides  to  2  hides,  while  another  portion  formerly  held  fa]
seven  freemen  for  5  hides  was  taxed  T.R.W.  at  only  30  aaes
In  the  case  of  Stanford,  in  the  same  county,  there  had  bea
two  reductions.  It  used  to  pay  geld  for  40  hides ;  Kin)
Edward  had  reduced  the  assessment  to  30  hides,  and  at  tb
time  of  the  Survey  it  was  charged  only  for  6  hides,  althoogl
there  were  1 2  actual  teams  on  the  land,  3  belonging  to  th
domain  and  9  to  peasants.'  A  curious  case  is  presentee
by  a  manor  called  Five-hide,  in  the  fief  of  Henry  dc  Ferrer
in  Berkshire.  One  would  have  thought  that  its  verynaoM
pointed  to  an  estimate  at  5  hides.  Yet  we  hear  that  th
assessment  used  to  be  10  hides,  and  it  was  brought  overtc

5  only  in  the  reign  of  King  Edward. There  was  land  fa

6  ploughs  in  the  place,  which  is  nearer  to  5  hides  than  to  10
Judging  from  this  and  from  the  name,  it  may  be  supposed
that  the  to  hides  assessment  was  not  the  original  one,bal
rather  an  attempt  to  increase  the  burden  of  the  estate^  vd
that  it  was  restored  to  its  former  valuation  in  the  age  0
King  Edward  the  Confessor.*


^  Dd.  i.  21  a :  (W.  Firle,  Sussex) '  Isdem  comes  (Moritoniensis)
in  dominio  Ferle. Abbatia  de  Wiltun  tenuit  T.  R.  £•  et  tunc  ie  docBd
pro  xlviii  hidis. Modo  pro  nihilo.' Cf.  ib.  Wilendone.

^  Dd.  i.  2  b  (St.  Martin's  of  Dover).

'  Dd.  i.  57a:  (Bastedene,  Berks);  60 a  (Henret);  tod  (Stanfsn

*  Dd.  i.  6od :  (Fyfield,  Berks) '  Isdem  Henricus  tenet  Fiv^iid^  Go
ricus  tenuit  de  rege  Edwardo^  et  tunc  se  defendit  pro  x  hidis,  et


SECT.  IIL  CH.  il] FISCAL  IMMUNITIES  179

It  is  to  be  noticed  in  passing  that  the  reduction  of  hidage
was  by  no  means  always  a  sign  of  deterioration  of  the
estate.  An  instance  like  the  following  would  by  no  means
be  an  isolated  one.  The  Archbishop  of  Canterbury's  manor
of  Aldintone  in  Kent  was  taxed  at  a  i  sulungs  in  the  time
of  Kii^  Edward,  and  at  15  in  the  reign  of  William  the
Conqueror.  It  was  an  enormous  estate,  with  land  for  100
frfoi^s  and  190  villains'  holdings,  besides  the  cottages  of
50  bordarn  on  the  land.  Its  value  had,  as  a  matter  of
fact,  increased  from  6a/.  T.R.E.  to  100/.,  aof.  T.R.W.  It
seems  clear  that  the  reduction  of  6  sulungs  on  a  tax  of  ai
is  to  be  attributed  to  the  pressure  brought  to  bear  on  the
Exchequer  by  the  owner,  and  not  to  a  fall  in  value.^  There
are  also  instances  where  a  change  in  the  taxation  of  an
estate  is  produced  merely  because  some  part  of  it  had  got
into  the  hands  of  a  new  owner.'

But,  of  course,  in  many  cases  the  reduction  was  called  for
by  the  devastation  of  the  province,  or  some  mishap  which
had  befallen  a  particular  estate.  A  most  characteristic
entry  in  the  Hampshire  Survey  tells  us  of  the  lightening  of
the  fiscal  burden  of  Famham  from  30  to  ao  hides  by  King
Edward  on  account  of  the  ravages  of  the  Vikings.^  It  has
been  shown  that  sweeping  reductions  were  made  in  North-
amptonshire and  Staffordshire  in  consequence  of  the
devastation  produced  by  the  war  of  the  Conquest.^

Some  Hampshire  instances  are  remarkable  because  they  Nnmbered
introduce  us  to  a  terminological  distinction  between  num-  ^^^

pro  V  hidis  (luia  rex  £.  sic  condonauit  ut  hundredum  testatur.  Terra
est  vi  canids.  In  dominio  sunt  ii  carucae,  et  viii  uillani  et  iii  bordarii
aun  H  carucis.*

'  Dd.  i.  4a;  dl  5  b  (Apeldres),  5  c  (Bronlei,  Mellingetes,  Totes-
dtoe,  EsnoUand).

*  £.g.  II d:  (Hastingleigh,  Kent)  *R(^erius  filius  Anschitil  tenet
de  feom  episcopi  (Baiocensis)  Hastingelai  quod  tenuit  Vlnod  de  re^e
^wardo,  et  tunc  defendit  se  pro  uno  solin,  et  mode  pro  iii  iugis  quia
Hugo  de  Montfort  tenet  aliam  partem  intra  diuisionem  suam.'  Cf.
156  d  (Watone,  Herts).

'  Y>^  i.  40  c :  (Famham,  Hants) '  Femham  . . .  T.  R.  £.  et  mode  se
delendit  pro  xx  hidis.  Tamen  sunt  numero  xxx  hidae.  Sed  Rex
Edwardus  ita  donauit  causa  Wichingarum  quia  super  mare  est.'

^  Round,  Feudal  England,  49 ;  Victoria  County  History,  Northamp-
tooshire,  i.  26a Maitland,  Domesday  Book  and  Beyond,  436,  457.

N  2


i8o  TAXATION  [essa"

bcred  hides  and  fiscal  hides.  This  distinction  occu
both  in  the  description  of  Famham  just  quoted  and
that  of  the  Bishop  of  Winchester's  manor  of  Walthaa
Thus  by  the  side  of  hides  paying  geld  or  entered  as  fisci
units  there  were  hides  which  had  nothing  to  do  with  geU
but  were  real  enough  nevertheless.^  The  Survey  often  in
sists  on  the  difference  between  these  two  kinds,  and  implie
clearly  enough  that  the  fiscal  valuation  was  not  the  basu  o
the  distribution  into  hides,  but  superadded  to  it.  The  hide
continue  to  exist  even  when  they  do  not  appear  as  fisa
units.  A  manor  or  a  district  is  said  to  be  defending  itsd
for  so  many  hides,  while  the  actual  number  of  hides  in  i
may  be  quite  different.^  There  is  an  intricate  entry  in  A
Survey  of  the  possessions  of  Abingdon  in  Berkshire
Beedon  defended  itself  T.R.E.  for  lo  hides,  and  T.R.W.fci
8  hides  only.  In  reality  there  were  15  hides,  and  Kiq
Edward  had  conceded  to  the  owner  to  hold  it  for  11  hides
The  further  reduction  to  10  hides  is  challenged  bytlui
verdict  of  the  jurors  as  illegal.*
The  most  striking  example  of  the  contrast  between  fiaol

^  Dd.  i.  40  b :  (Waltham,  Hants)  '  Ipse  episcopus  (WintonieBiiil
tenet  Waltham  in  dominio . . .  T.  R.  £.  et  modo  se  adfendit  proixhidii
quamuis  sint  ibi  xxx  hidae  numcro.'

^  Dd.  i.  12  c :  (Mongeham,  Kent)  '  Ipse  abbas  (S.  Ans^tiiii)  tcMl
Mundingeham,  pro  duobus  solins  et  dimidio  se  defendit.  Terra  est*
carucis.  In  hoc  manerio  terra  quam  tenent  monachi  niinquam  gekbniti
et  Wadardus  tenet  ibi  terram  auae  T.  R.  £.  semper  geldauit,  ct  ih
tempore  erat  manerium  in  simul.'  Cfl  26  a  (Ramelle,  Sussex) ;  16$  b
(Estoch,  Gloucs.) ;  174  a  (Fcpsetenatun,  Worcs.);  179  c  (Maoidiae,
Hereford);  iv.  181  :  (Cornwall)  '  Matela  .  .  .  reddidit  gildum  pn
i  hida  sed  tamen  ibi  est  i  hida  et  dimidia';  ib.  Tri^  (Trcgoff]
'  In  ea  sunt  xii  hide. Iste  reddiderunt  gildum  pro  ii  hidis  U  r.  £.'

^  Dd.  i.  138a:  (Miswell,  Herts)  'Mascewelle  pro  xiiii  hidif  M
defendit  T.  R.  £.  et  modo  pro  iii  hidis  et  ii  uii^gatis  et  dimidiif  taM
sunt  semper  xiiii  hidae.'  149  b :  (Oakley,  Bucla) '  Aciielei  pro  v  la&
et  iii  uirgatis  se  defendit.  Terra  est  vii  carucis  . . .  Hae  v  nidaeetn
uirgae  sunt  viii  hidae.  De  his  tenuit  Aluuid  puella  ii  hidas  quaspotn
dare  uel  uendere  cui  uoluit  et  de  dominica  firma  regis  Edwardi  habn
ipsa  dimidiam  hidam  quam  Godricus  uicecomes  ei  concessit  quandi
uicecomes  esset,  ut  ilia  doceret  filiam  eius  Aurifrisium  opexari  Has
terram  tenet  modo  Robertus  Alius  Walterii  testante  hundbret'  CL 16
(Boseham,  Sussex) ;  65  a  (Cosseham,  Wilts).

*  Dd.  i.  58  d  :  (Beedon,  Berks) '  Bedene  . . .  Tunc  se  defendit  pio
hidis,  modo  pro  viii  hidis.  Tamen  fuit  pro  xv  hidis,  sed  rex  Edwardi
condonauit  pro  xi  hidis  ut  dicunt.'


SECT.iacH.n] FISCAL  IMMUNITIES  i8i

hkles  and  numbered  hides  is  presented  by  the  description  of
ComwalL  It  contains  a  series  of  double  entries  about
hidage^  die  hides  of  assessment  being  distinguished  from
hides  payii^  geld  T.R.E.  Pawton  ^  is  a  good  example.  It
paid  gdd  for  8  hides,  but  there  were  44  hides  there.  There
was  land  for  60  ploughs,  and  actually  43  ploughs  on  the  land,
between  demesne  and  tenants'  land.  In  the  geld  inquisition
of  the  county  in  X084  the  same  information  is  imparted  on
the  strength  of  evidence  given  by  the  English  jurors.'  In
this  and  similar  cases  there  can  be  no  talk  of  a  liberation  of
domanial  hides — ^this  comes  under  another  rubric  The
point  is  that  of  roughly  400  hides  in  Cornwall  only  about
148  paid  geld.  What  were  the  rest  reckoned  for  ?  It  seems
clear  that»  as  in  the  case  of  the  East  Anglian  shires,  the
ofdtnary  hides  must  have  served  for  the  assessment  of  other
duties — ^fyrd,  churchscot,  suit  of  court,  &c.'

Sometimes  we  can  actually  get  a  glimpse  of  the  process
by  which  single  hides  or  estates  obtain  exemptions  from
gdd.  The  whole  county  of  Gloucester  testifies  that  out  of
15  hkles  which  used  to  pay  geld  in  Siward's  manor  of
Lecelade,  6  were  exempted  by  the  king  himself.^  In
Hampshire,  Alwi  the  thane  is  able  to  produce  a  writ  under
seal  of  King  Edward  in  respect  to  a  yardland  which  had
been  freed  and  exempted.^  In  Lancashire,  3  hides  are
mentioned  expressly  as  free,  because  their  geld  had  been
conceded  by  the  king  to  the  thanes  that  held  them.^ Nor

'  Dd.  i.  1 30  c.  Cf.  ib. :  '  idem  episcopus  tenet  manerium  c^uod
oocatur  ecdesia  Sti.  Germani.  Ibi  sunt  xxiv  hidae.  £x  his  xii  hidae
sunt  canoniconun  quae  nunc^uam  geldauenint,  et  aliae  xii  hidae  sunt
episcopi  et  geldabant  pro  ii  hidis  T.  R.  £.  In  hac  parte  episcopi  Terra
est  XX  canicaninu  In  dom.  sunt  ii  car.  et  iiii  serui,  et  xxx  uillani  et  xxii
bordarii  cum  xvi  car.'

«  Dd.  iv.  66.

'  Similar  instances  in  other  counties :  Dicelinges  (Sussex)  Dd.  i.
36b  ;  Beddinges  (Sussex)  i.  728  a  ;  Menes  (Hants)  i.  38  b  ;  Waltham,
i.  40  b.

*  Dd.  i.  169  a :  (Lechlade,  Gloucs.)  *  Henricus  de  Ferreres  tenet
Lecelade.  Siuuard  bar.  tenuit.  Ibi  xv  hidae  T.  K.  £.  geldantes.
Sed  ipse  rex  concessit  vi  hidas  quietas  a  geldo.  Hoc  testatur  omnis
comitatus,  et  ipse,  qui  sigillum  regis  detulit.'  Cf.  165  b  (Escetone) ;
168  a  (Hantone) ;  163  c  (Fitentone) ;  165  d  (Malgeresberiae).

*  Dd.  i.  50  b  (Rochebome).

'  Dd.  i.  269  c :  (West  Derby,  Lanes.)  '  Hoc  manerium  Derbei  cum


1 82  TAXATION  [essa.

can  there  be  any  doubt  that  other  cases  in  the  same  distrj
where  the  tenants  are  free  from  the  geld,  go  back  to  siii
royal  grants.^  Altogether,  there  are  many  instances  i
which  the  origin  of  the  exemption,  though  not  expresd
stated,  is  hardly  traceable  to  any  other  cause.'

An  important  group  of  exemptions  is  formed  by  certau
lands,  to  which  immunity  from  geld  had  been  grante
because  they  belonged  to  churches.  Of  course,  not  all  tk
ecclesiastical  estates  were  free  from  geld — every  page  <
Domesday  speaks  to  the  contrary,  but  a  good  deal  of  Ian
was  exempted  even  from  the  geld  in  order  that  it  migl
serve  exclusively  for  the  needs  of  religion  and  of  tk
clerical  profession.  These  special  exemptions  are  oftc
entered  in  the  Survey.^  We  even  hear  of  '  all  geld  an
foreign  service '  being  conceded  to  a  church.^  A  most  inte
esting  feature  of  such  concessions  is  that  they  were  suppoae
to  place  ecclesiastical  estates  in  the  same  position  as  thofl
of  the  king  himself.  Nor  is  there  a  lack  of  information  t
the  effect  that  royal  manors  were  in  principle  held  to  b
exempted  from  the  payment  of  geld  because  they  were  sub
jected  to  the  king's  farm/'  that  is,  included  in  the  doroaii

his  supradictis  hidis  reddebat  regi  Edwardo  de  firma  xsvi  lib.  et  j
solidos.  Ex  his  iii  hidae  erant  libere  quanim  censum  perdonioi
teinis  qui  eas  tenebant.'

^  Dd.  i.  269  d  (Otringemele  et  Herleshala  et  Hiretun);  270a  (Sal
ford).

'  Dd.  i.  12  a  (Lanport,  Kent) :  56  d  (Celsea,  Berks) ;  182  d  (Bns
tune,  Hereford.) ;  255  a  (Saleurdine,  Shropshire).

^  Dd.  i.  58d:  (Benham,  Berks)  '  Beneham.  ii  hidas  . . .  pro  tant*
se  defendit  tunc  et  modo  . . .  Haec  terra  non  fuit  in  abbatia  T.R*£
sed  est  quieta  regi.'  Cf.  176  b  (Eslei,  Worcs.);  252  c  (Wenlodi
Shropshire) ;  343  d  (Lundetorp,  Lines.) ;  iv.  169  (BuUestra,  Devon)
iv.  491  (Ecclesia  Glastoniensis,  Somerset).

*  Dd.  i.  165  c:  (Barton,  Gloucs.)  'Sanctus  Petrus  de  Glowecetfr
tenuit  T.  R.  E.  manerium  Bertune  .  .  .  Hoc  manerium  quietam  fv
semper  a  geldo  et  ab  omni  regali  seruitio';  ib.  Hinetune(Hinton-oii-thi
Green)  ...  *  Hoc  manerium  quietum  est  a  geldo  et  ab  omni  fotcs
seruitio  praeter  aecclesiae.*  1 74  a :  (Fepton,  Worcs.) '  Ad  hoc  maneriii
pertinet  i  Bereuuich  Crohlea  .  .  .  Simundus  tenuit,  de  dominiofoi
et  inde  reddebat  episcopo  omne  seruitium  et  geldum  et  nuaqna
se  cum  hac  terra  uertere  poterat' iv.  183:  (Lajihydrock,  Comwa

*  Sancti  Petrochi  canonici  habent  i  mansionem  que  uocatur  LaiV
henoc  . .  .  nusquam  reddidit  Gildum  nisi  ad  opus  ecclesie.'  Cfrii

*  Kieltona  (Rialton)quam  tenuit  ipse  sanctus  immunem  ab  omni  scmiti

•  Dd.  i.  60  c  : (Bagshot,  Berks)  *  Bechesgete.  , . .  Duae  hidae  n


SECT,  in.  CH.  II] FISCAL  IMMUNITIES  183

of  the  sovereign,  ministering  to  his  private  needs,  and  first
of  ill  providing  food  for  his  household.  There  are  cases
wliane  wlKde  hundreds  were  of  old  exempted  from  the  geld,
and  these  sweeping  privileges  can  hardly  be  accounted  for
by  any  other  consideration  but  that  the  hundred  dues  went
into  the  private  treasury  of  the  king,  or  of  some  person  of
his  fionily.^  Later  on  we  find  similar  exemptions  extended
to  diurches,  and  the  analogy  of  these  cases  with  that  of
mysd  domains  is  expressly  insisted  upon.'

Thus  we  are  led  to  consider  a  number  of  instances  where
land  was  not  subject  to  geld,  and  was  yet  divided  and
estimated  in  the  same  way  as  other  land  paying  geld.  Hides
not  liable  to  geld  are  to  be  met  with  at  every  step,  and
their  immunity  is  often  asserted  as  a  privilege  conferred  on
them  from  the  very  b^nning.^  This  means  that  the
original  grant  constituting  the  estate  liberated  it  from  all
dues  to  the  king,  including  geld,  or  was  construed  to  do  so.
It  is  important  to  find  the  many  traces  of  such  complete
exemption  in  Domesday,  as  they  enable  us  to  connect  the
Domesday  system  of  taxation  with  previous  periods.  If
anything,  we  should  expect  such  immunity  to  be  even
more  frequent

Besides  the  notices  mentioning  exempted  hides,  or  manors

getdabant  quia  de  firma  regis  erant  et  ad  opus  regis  calumniatae  sunt/
Cf.  $6d  (Waltham);  184  c:  (Hereford)  'Lestret(?)  Rex  Edwardus
tenuit.  Ibi  i  hida  cuius  medietas  erat  in  dominio  regis  et  non  geldat,
alia  medietas  geldat  Hanc  terram  de  firma  regis  dedit  W.  comes
Ewen  Britoni.'

*  Dd.  i.  18  d :  (Havochesberie  Hd.,  Sussex) '  In  Belingeham  habet
comes  (de  Ow) . . .  nunquam  geldauit.'  Cf.  19  a,  Belingham,  Herlin-
tooe,  Lestone,  Hechestone,  &c. ;  19  b, '  In  Essewelle  Hundredo.  Hoc
himdredum  nunquam  geldauit.' Cf.  Ailesaltede  Hd.,  20  a.

'  Dd.  i.  174  c  :  (Pershore,  Worcs.) '  Ecclesia  S.  Petri  Westmonasterii
tenet  Persore.  Rex  Eduuardus  tenuit  hoc  manerium  et  eidem  ecdesiae
dedit  ita  quietum  et  liberum  ab  omni  calumnia  sicut  ipse  in  suo
dominio  tenebat.  Teste  toto  comitatu,  Ibi  cc  hidae,  de  his  in  Persore
sunt  ii  hidae  quae  nunquam  geldauerunt  T.  R.  £•'

'  Dd.  L  6  b :  (Famingham,  Kent) '  tenet  Wadardus  dimidium  iugum
in  eadem  uilla  (Femingeham)  quod  nunquam  se  quietauit  apud  regem.'
$7 a:  (Wantage,  Berks)  *Wanetinz  .  .  .  Tunc  et  modo  iiii  hidae.
Nunouara  geldauit.'  166 c  :  (Rowell,  Gloucs.) '  Rawelle.  Ibi  x  hidae
• . .  Hoc  manerium  nunquam  geldauit.'  iv.  1 59  :  (Glastonbury,  Somer-
set) *  (ilaestingeberia.  In  qua  sunt  xii  hidae  terre  oue  nunquam
gilduro  reddiderunt.'  iv.  183 :  (Bodmin,  Cornwall)  *  Bodmine.  In  ea
est  i  hida  terre  que  nullo  tempore  reddidit  GiUlum.'


i8+  TAXATION  [ess/

and  hundreds  surveyed  in  hides  but  not  charged  to  the  gi
we  find  two  groups  of  data  disclosing  interesting  prindf
of  the  Old  English  system  of  taxation  as  received
Domesday.  Firstly,  it  appears  that  royal  manors  liable
the  king's  farm  were  sometimes  not  estimated  in  hidea^
not  divided  into  hides,^  as  the  Survey  expresses  it  Tl
expression  is  noteworthy — it  may  be  taken  as  one  of  1
many  indications  of  the  fundamental  fact  that  hides  were  r
ideal  shares  only,  but  real  entities,  a  fact  from  which  ma
consequences  resulted,  as  we  shall  soon  see.  Evidently  t
methods  of  collecting  the  farm  were,  in  some  cases  at  lea
of  such  a  kind  that  a  subdivision  into  hide  shares  i
deemed  unnecessary.  Another  case  when  hides  were  i
formed  was,  of  course,  that  of  newly  reclaimed  or  occupi
districts.^  The  geld  carucate  ought  to  stand  in  regard
these  eventualities  on  a  par  with  the  hide,  but  the  Sun
mostly  speaks  of  hidage  only,  evidently  drawing  a  distincti
between  the  ancient  repartition  into  hides  and  the  w
modem  measurement  of  land  in  carucates.

Indeed,  and  this  is  the  second  interesting  feature  of  1
system  of  exemptions,  it  is  quite  common  to  find  that  ag
rian  shares  freed  from  the  payment  of  geld  are  tera
carucates,  and  opposed,  as  such,  to  the  hides.  These  woi
be  field-carucates,  carucatae  ad  arandum^  and  they  \
currently  described  as  being  outside  the  hides  or  besides  1
VxAts-- extra  hidas^  praeter  hidas? In  this  sense  the  came

^  Dd.  i.  38 a:  (Neatham,  Hants)  '  Ipse  rex  tenet  in  dominio  N<
ham.  Rex  Edwardus  tenuit.  Quot  hidae  sint  ibi  non  dizen
38  b :  *  Wimeringes  (Wymering)  nunquam  hidatum  fdit'  %
(Basingstoke) '  Basingestoches.  R^^e  maneriiun  foit  semper.  H
quam  geldum  dedit,  nee  hida  ibi  distributa  fuit'

'  Dd.  i.  258  a:  (Clunbury,  Shropshire)  'Picot  tenet  Clonebc
Suen  tenuit.  Hoc  manerium  nunquam  geldauit  nee  hidatum  I
267  d :  (Hundredum  Tunendune,  Cheshire)  '  Unus  seruiens  con
tenet  unam  terram  in  hoc  hundredo.  Haec  terra  nunquam  fuit  hidi
269  b :  (Rhuddlan,  N.  Wales)  *  Omnes  hae  Bereuuichae  sapradii
de  Englefeld  iacebant  T.  R.  £.  in  Roelent  et  tunc  erant  wastae
Terra  huius  manerii  Roelend  et  Englefeld  uel  aliarum  Bereuuicha
supradictarum  ibi  pertinentium  nunquam  geldauit  neque  hidata  fii

^  Dd.  i.  2  c  :  (Middleton,  Kent)  *  Rex  tenet  Middletune  pro  qi
XX  solins  se  defendit.  Extra  hos  sunt  in  dominio  iiii  solins.*  7
(Stoke  Abbas,  Dorset) '  Stoche.  T.  R.  E.  geldabat  pro  vi  hidis  et  dim
Terra  est  vii  carucis. Praeter  banc  sunt  ibi  ii  carucatae  terrae  1


SECT.  ra.  CH.  II] FISCAL  IMMUNITIES  185

appears  as  the  plough-land  of  a  similar  composition  to  the
hide,  but  distinguished  from  it  as  a  purely  agrarian  unit
exempted  from  payment  of  fiscal  dues.^  Or,  if  the  relation
is  considered  from  another  side,  the  hides  turn  out  to  be,  as  it
were,  plough-lands  acquitting  the  carucates  in  r^ard  to  geld
or  defending  the  whole  manor  as  to  its  payment.'  It  is  not
always  made  clear  what  part  of  the  manor  was  put  outside
the  fiscal  hides  in  this  way,  but  sometimes  we  get  informa-
tion about  this  point,  and  it  appears  that  the  exempted
camcates  are  to  be  found  on  the  domain  land  of  churches
and  great  men,^  and  that  these  privileged  domains  are,  in

nimqiunn  diuisae  sunt  per  hidas.' 150  d :  (Tottenham,  Middlesex)

*  To>thani .  • .  pro  v  hidis. . .  In  dominie  sunt  li  carucatae  terrae  preter
has  ▼  hidas.' 148  d :  (Newport  Pagnell,  Bucks) '  Neuport,  pro  v  hidis

*  .  •  In  dominio  iiii  carucatae  terrae.'  204  a:  (Bluntisham,  Hunts)
'  Bhmtesham  •  .  .  vi  hidas  et  dimidiam  *  .  .  et  exceptis  his  hidis  in
dominio  tenam  ii  caruds.'  CL  ib.  Sumersham,  Snalduice.  204  b:
(Stnkdey,  Hunts) '  Stivede  •  abbas  de  Ramesy  vii  hidas  ad  geldum. . .
Excrads  his  hidis  in  dominio  terram  ii  carucis.'

^  *  Dd.  L  316  c :  (Yorks)  *  In  Tateshale  sunt  xvi  carucatae  terrae
sine  gddo^  ubi  possent  esse  viiii  car.  Hoc  manerium  habuit  rex.'  Cf.
357  d  (Grantham,  Lines.) ;  370a  (Lailand,  Lanes.) ;  iv.  490  ('  Ecdesia
Gfaudniensis ...  in  Dorseta').

*  Dd.  L  163  c :  (Tewkesbury,  Gloucs.)  *  Quater  xx  et  xv  hidas
quae  pertinent  ad  Tedechesberie  quinquaginta  hidae  su^tsl  tncmoratae
faciebant  quietas  et  liberas  ab  omni  geldo  et  regali  seruitic'  Cf.  2  b :
(Kent)  '  In  inland  S.  Martini  manent  vii  bordarii  cum  dimidia  caruca
...  In  communi  terra  S.  Martini  sunt  cccc  acrae  et  dimidia  quae
fiont  ii  soUnos  et  dimidium.  Haec  terra  nunquam  reddidit  aliquid
oonsuetudinis  uel  scoti  quia  xxiiii  solini  haec  omnia  adquietant'

*  Dd.  I  77a:  (Sherborne,  Dorset)  'In  hoc  manerio  Scirebume
preter  supnulictam  terram  habet  episcopus  in  dominio  xvi  carucatas
tenae.  Haec  terra  nunquam  per  hidas  diuisa  fuit  neque  geldauit . . .
De  hac  quieta  terra  tenet  Sinod  de  episcopo  i  carucatam  terrae  et
Edmiardns  aiiam  ...  In  hac  eadem  Sdrebume  tenent  monachi
eiusdem  episcc^i  ix  carucatas  terrae  et  dimidiam  que  nee  per  hidas
diuisae  fiioimt  nee  unquam  geldauerunt,'  77  c :  (Sturminster  Newton,
Dorwt) '  Ecdesia  S.  Marie  Glastingberiensis  tenet  Newentone.  T.  R.E.
geldabat  pro  xxii  hidis.  Terra  est  xxxv  carucis.  Praeter  banc  est
tena  xiiii  caruds  in  dominio  ibi  quae  nunquam  geldauerunt.'  Cf.  In-
quisition of  Glastonbury  Manors  (Koxburgh  Club),  p.  134 :  '  Niwetona.
Aluiedus  de  Nichole  tenet  duas  hidas  apud  Bakeber  libere  et  quiete
saloo  seruicio  Reg^s.  Idem  tenet  iiii  hidas  apud  Hacford  libere  et
quiete saluo  seruicio  Regis.' Dd.  ii.  106  a : (Colchester,  Essex)

*  Hamo  dapifer  i  domum  et  i  curiam  et  i  hidam  terrae  et  xv  burgenses,
et  hoc  tenuit  antecessor  suus  Thurbemus  T.  R.  £.  Et  hoc  totum
piaeter  suam  aulam  reddebat  consuetudinem  T.  R.  £.  et  adhuc  reddunt
burgenses  de  suis  capitibus.  Set  de  terra  sua  et  de  hida  quam  tenent
de  Hamone  nuncuam  reddita  consuetudo.  In  hida  i  car.  tunc,  modo
nulla.' i.  205  b :  (Fletton,  Hunts)  *  In  Fletun  habuit  Abbas  de  Burg


warland.


186  TAXATION  [ES&

a  way,  placed  in  the  same  position  as  the  royal  doms
This  leads  to  further  observations.
hkUnd  and  2.  A  substantial  difference  is  made,  in  regard  to  tl
cases,  between  land  held  by  a  church,  a  monastery,
a  lord  for  his  own  sustenance,  and  land  held  from  him
his  tenants,  be  these  free  or  servile  in  their  tenure.
first  is  the  inland  of  the  owner,  the  other  his  ww^k
The  first  ought  to  be  free  from  geld  because  It  provi
for  the  maintenance  of  the  knights  or  the  clerics  who
performing  military  service  or  religious  functions,  of  wt
the  king  and  the  pubh'c  stand  in  need.^ The  second  categ

V  hidas  ad  geldum.  Terra  viii  canicis.  Ibi  nunc  in  dmninio  ii  cuq
In  una  hida  et  dimidia  huius  terrae.'  iv.  108 :  (Tawton»  Devon) '  E
copus  habet  i  mansionem  que  uocatur  Tautona.  In  ea  smt
hide  de  qutbus  ix  reddiderunt  Gildum  T.  R.  E.  et  alias  tres  renuuKi
habuit  episcopus  in  dominio  et  nunquam  ^dauerunt.'  iv.  i
(Taunton,  Somerset)  'Episcopus  (Wintoniensis)  habet  i  numsia
que  uocatur  Tantona  ({uam  tenuit  Stigandus  archiepiacopnt  . .
reddidit  gildum  pro  liiii  hidis  et  dimidia  et  dimidia  uiif^a  • .  •  caoe
his  predictis  hidis  habet  ibi  episcopus  terram  ad  xx  Caracas
nunquam  reddidit  gildum,  et  in  hac  terra  habet  episcopus  xiii  aum
in  dominio.'

'  Dd.  iv.  13  :  (Wilts)  '  In  hundredo  de  Ailestebba  sunt  bpciii  hidt
viii  carrucate  nunquam  geldantes,  has  habet  rex  in  dominio.'  C£  i
(Hd.  de  Dolesfeld)  Mxx  hidae  dimidia  uirga  minus  et  iii  carrv
nunquam  geldantes  de  terra  regine  Edit.  Has  habet  Rex  in  doinii
18  (Hd.  de  Westberia;  Hd.  de  Colingebuma).

'  Dd.  i.  43  d  :  (Ovington,  Hants)  *  Ipsa  abbatia  (S.  Mariae  de  ¥i
tonia)  tenet  Ebintune  . . .  Tunc  se  defendit  pro  una  hida  et  dimi
modo  pro  nichilo  quia  de  uictu  monialium  est.'  44  a :  *  Ipsa  abb
(de  Warwelle)  tenet  in  ciuitate  Wintonia  xxxi  masuras  de  qnibos  hi
omnes  consuetudines  quietas  excepto  geldo  regis.  A  quo  edam  0e
est  quieta  propria  domus  abbatissae.'  Cf.  I27d  (Heruluestunc^  N
dlesex);  155  c  (Wicham,  Oxon) ;  155  b  (Eglesham,  Oxon).  l^i
(Newnham  Murren,  Oxon) '  Neuham.  Ibi  sunt  xvi  hidae . . .  Pni
inland  habet  ii  hidas  et  unam  uirgatam  de  terra  uillanorum.'  163
(Tewkesbury,  Gloucs.)  <  In  Teodechesberie  fuerunt  T.  R.  £.  qaata
et  XV  hidae.  Ex  his  sunt  in  dominio  xlv  et  erant  quiete  ab  a
seruitio  regali  et  geldo  praeter  seruitium  ipsius  domini  cuiiis  <
manerium.  lb.  'In  Glouuecestre  erant  viii  burgenses  leddente
solidos  et  iiii  denarios  et  seruientes  ad  curiam.'  165  d :  ^Sheiboi
Gloucs.) '  Ecclesia  S.  Mariae  de  Wincelcumbe  tenet  Scirebome.
XXX  hidae.  Ex  his  x  sunt  liberae  ad  curiam  pertinentes.'  Cf.  Cc
tone  (ib.).  167  d :  (Guiting,  Gloucs.) '  Getinge.  Ibi  x  hidae  geldafl
praeter  dominium  quod  non  geldat.'  203  b  :  (Hunts) '  In  Hen  ~
Hd.  sunt  dominicae  carucae  quietae  de  geldo  regis. Villani  et


manni  geldant  secundum  hidas  in  breui  scriptas.  Excepta  Brod
ubi  geldat  abbas  cum  aliis  pro  una  hida.'  Cf.  243  b  (^LisleCQi
Warwick.). 254  c :  (Leigh,  Shropshire) '  Caput  huius  manerii  tem


SECT.  HL  CH.  II] FISCAL  IMMUNITIES  187

has  to  defend  or  acquit  all  the  taxes  imposed  by  the  state.
Hence  its  name,  as  wara  corresponds  literally  to  defensio^
and  the  defence  meant  is  undoubtedly  the  acquittal  of  all
dues  to  be  levied  from  a  district  or  manor.^ These  are

•

the  fundamental  lines  of  the  distinction  often  employed
in  Domesday,  and  recurring  in  other  documents  in  r^ard
to  the  terms  inland  and  warland.  The  corresponding  ware^
acrrware^  &c.,  are  easily  explained '  once  this  fundamental
contrast  between  exempted  domain  and  land  acquitting
the  dues  is  grasped.  Nor  must  we  let  this  guiding  thread
slip  from  our  hands  when  we  discover  that  these  terms,
and  eq>ecially  inland^  are  sometimes  used  in  a  somewhat
difleient  and  derived  sense.  Inland  occurs  very  often  in
the  Danelaw,  especially  in  Lincolnshire,  and  there  it  is
taken  mostly  as  the  equivalent  of  domain  whether  exempted
or  not,'  or  even  of  a  township  in  which  there  is  land  cul-

comite  Rogerio  Roserus  uenator,  et  terrain  eius  quae  est  inland
dciendimt  a  geldo  ii  hidae  quas  tenet  Azo.'

*  Dd.  i.  100  d :  (Cowley,  Oxon)  *  Couelie.  Ibi  sunt  iiii  hidae  et
duniduL Tenm  x  carucis. Ibi  i  hida  de  warland  in  dominio.'

'  £>d.  L  132c:  (Westonin^,  Beds)  *  Westone  . . .  Sed  wara  huius
nianerii  iacuit  in  Bedefordscire  T.  R.  £.  in  hundredo  de  Maneheue
et  ibi  est  manerium  et  fuit  semper  et  post  mortem  Regis  Edwardi
non  se  adc^uietauit  de  gildo  regis.'  211  d:  (Beds)  '  Hanefelde  . . .
Haec  terra  iacuit  semper  in  Chenebaltone  sed  warram  dedit  semper
iuste  in  Bedefordscinu'  212  a:  (Milton  Ernest,  Beds)  *  In  Middel-
tone  habuerunt  ii  socbemanni  xvi  acras  terrae  et  suam  Warram  in
eadem  Middeltone  dederunt,  sed  terram  suam  cui  voluerunt  dare  uel
ueodere  potuerunt.'  212  b :  (Sandy,  Beds)  'Sandeia ...  Hie  reclamat
Eudo  iii  acras  siluae  super  Hugonem  Belcamp  quas  U  Imams  tenuit,
sed  RaduUtts  quando  erat  uicecomes  eum  desaisiuit,  ideoque  Eudo
nolait  dare  Warras  de  eadem  silua.'

*  Dd.  i.  347  d :  (Burton  Goggles,  Lines.)  *  Burtune  (Hundret)  habuit
Radulfiis  StaJre  xiii  carucatas  terrae  ad  geldum  in  dominio  et  v  earu-
catas  terrae  ad  geldum  de  soca.'  Cf.  348  a  (Beningtun) ;  377  a  (Clamores
in  Cbetsteven,  Lines.), '  Dicunt  pertinere  ad  eeelesiam  de  Grantham
dccimas  et  eeclesiastieas  consuetudines  de  Winebruge  Wapentak  et  de
Trees  Wapentak  de  omnibus  soeis  et  inlandis  auas  rex  habet  ibi.'  Cf.
344  c  (Dunesbi) ;  337e,d  (Colebi);  339c  (Cueuait) ;  340a  (Stalinburg) ;
ib.  (Dusebi) ;  340b  (Belingei);  ^40  e  (Harduuic) ;  340 d  (Chirehebi) ;
341b  (Screnbi);  341  e  (Triehmgheham) ;  342  c  (Chelebi) ;  369  b
(Bliburg).  Cf.  301  b :  (Holme,  Yorks)  '  Holne  .  .  .  ii  carucatas  ad
geldum  .  . .  Hanc  terram  alii  dicunt  inland,  alii  socam  in  Wachefeld.'
QL  301  c  :  '  Usebume  (Ousebum)  .  Inland  et  soea  in  Chenaresburg.'
317  a:  (Notton)  '  Notone,  vi  carueatac  terrae  ad  geldum  .  . .  De  hae
terra  sunt  iiii  earucatae  in  soca  de  Tateshalla  et  ii  earucatae  inland.
Ibi  tamen  habuit  Godricus  aulam.' Cf.  321  d  (Vlsitone).


i88  TAXATION  [essa

tivated  for  the  lord— a  manor  with  a  hall,  or  a  berwic
The  opposite  is  soca — land  held  by  free  tenants  under  t
jurisdictional  patronage  of  the  lord.^  On  the  other  ban
in  other  counties,  like  Oxfordshire  and  Northamptonahti
we  find  sometimes  a  distinctidh  made  between  domain  an
inlattd,  only  the  exempted  domain  being  reckoned  as  tl
latter.^  This  may  be  partly  explained  by  the  iact  tb
in  some  cases,  plots  which  had  been  originally  wark^
may  have  been  taken  in  the  lord's  hand,  so  that  by  ti
side  of  the  originally  exempted  old  domain  there  gre
up  another  category  of  domain  soil  which  could  not  dai
the  nature  and  privileges  of  inland.  Altogether,  there  a
be  no  doubt  that  a  large  portion  of  the  domain  lands  di
pay  geld — whether  by  compulsion,  or  in  consequence «
agreement  with  the  tenantry,  it  would  be  impossible  1
say.  This  circumstance  made  it  quite  reasonable  thattha
should  be  attempts  to  draw  a  distinction  between  domai
and  inland.  In  the  way  of  derived  meanings,  it  may  i
Nvorth  while  to  notice  that  both  inland  and  wara  are  use
as  names  of  places.^  It  is  certainly  not  strange  that  tt
terms  mentioned  should  have  gone  through  a  kind  of  oigan
growth,  and  developed  offshoots  which  did  not  coindc
in  their  ramifications  with  the  direction  of  the  main  branche
But  there  can  be  no  misunderstanding  in  regard  to  tt

*  Dd.  i.  309  c:  (Carkin,  Yorks)  Mn  Cartun  sunt  ii  carucatae  1
geldum,  et  est  inland  in  Aldebume.*

'  E.g.  317  a  :  (Stainborough,  Yorks)  ^  Stainburg,  alia  soca  pertinn
ad  Tateshalla.'

'  Dd.  i.  155b:  (Banbury,  Oxon)  *  Banesberie.  Ibi  sunt  1  liidl
De  his  habet  episcopus  in  dominio  terram  x  carucis,  et  iii  hidaspicl
inland.  Homines  uillae  xxxiii  hidas  et  dimidiam.'  Cf.  ib.  (Tafl
Cropelie)  ;  155  d  (Stantone) ;  158  a  (Watelintone).  158  b:  (Ealo
'  Etone.  Ibi  sunt  v  hidae.  Terra  v  carucis.  Piaeter  has  hidas  hafc
de  inland  iii  hidas  et  dimidiam  quae  nunquam  geldauerunt.'  304 <
(Hemingford,  Hunts)  'alia  Emingeforde . . .  v  hidae  ad  geldum, .  •  J
his  fuit  i  hida  inland  et  super  hoc  ii  carucae  in  doniinia'  ai9
(Whitfield,  Northants)  '  Witefelle.  Ibi  sunt  ii  hidae,  et  inland
carucis  et  hominibus  terra  v  carucis.  In  dominio  sunt  ii  cum  i  sen
Cf.  ib. :  'Falelau  ^Fawsley).  Inland  est  ad  iiii  canicas.  Ibi  11
ii  carucae  ...  In  alia  terra  extra  dominium  sunt  vi  uillani  cum  prepo)
habentes  iiii  carucas.' Cf.  Hardingcsiorp  (ib.).

^  c.^.  Dd.  i.  80  c  (Inlande,  Dorset) ;  138  b  (Wara  (under  Wesov
Herts) ;  214  a  (Wares,  Beds) ;  242  c  (Wara,  Warwick.).


SECT.  III.  CH.  iij FISCAL  IMMUNITIES  189

fundamental  terminological  distinction,  and  this  is  the  really
important  point.  ^

Thus  we  have  to  reckon  in  the  Domesday  Survey  with  the  Early  geld
idea  that  the  domain  land  of  the  military  and  clerical  class  ^'*^"**^
should  be  free  from  geld.  Two  documents  preceding  the
Survey  by  a  few  years  bear  out  this  view  in  a  much  more
complete  manner  than  the  Domesday  Survey  itself.  I  mean
the  Geld  Inquest  of  the  south-western  counties  of  1084,  and
the  Survey  of  Northamptonshire  previous  to  1075.  Both
are  returns  in  regard  to  the  collection  of  geld,  and  both
group  their  data  according  to  hundreds.  The  south-western
Inquest  tells  us  how  much  money  was  actually  collected  ;
who  among  the  owners  or  tenants  of  estates  had  failed  to
pay,  and  who  could  claim  exemption.^  The  Northampton-
shire document  mentions  the  composition  of  the  hundred
in  hides,  and  points  to  exemptions  and  to  failure  of  payment
without  giving  the  sums  actually  levied.^  These  are  trifling
differences  after  all,  and  the  general  arrangement  of  these
documents,  separated  by  an  interval  of  some  ten  years,
is  remarkably  alike.  They  are  probably  fragments  of  much
more  comprehensive  returns  relating  to  the  execution  of
fiscal  measures. The  king's  land  does  not  pay,^  but,  besides,

^  Dd.  iv.  18  :  '  Dorseta.  In  hundreto  Etheminstre  sunt  xlvii  hidae,
et  tantum  terrae  habet  ibi  Saresberiensis  episcopus  (Quantum  possunt
arare  vi  canicae.  Inde  habent  barones  in  dominio  vi  hidas  et  i  uirga,  et
vi  canicatas.  Inde  habet  episcopus  vi  carucatas  et  Rogerus  arondellus
iii  hidas  et  i  uirgatam,  et  Bristumus  prepositus  iii  hidas,  et  de  xl  hidis
i  uireata  minus  habet  rex  xii  libras,  decern  et  octo  denarios,  et
i  oboTiun  minus,  et  de  dimidia  hida  auam  tenet  Urso  de  Amulfo  de
hesdinc  nunquam  habuit  rex  W.  gildum,  et  de  dimidia  hida  quam
tenet  dodemanus  de  comite  de  Moretonio  non  habuit  rex  gildum  hoc
anno.  Sed  xii  solidi  prescriptorum  denarionim  qui  deberent  esse
redditi  ad  primum  terminum,  non  sunt  redditi  usque  ad  extremum.'
Observe  the  use  of  'vi  carucatae'  as  an  equivalent  to  'terra  quam
vi  canicae  arare  possunt.'

'  Ellis,  Introduction  to  Domesday,  i.  184:  'Dis  is  into  Suttunes
hundred  ^at  is  an  hundred  hida.  Swa  it  w^es  on  i^duuardes  deige
kinges,  and  ^er  of  is  gewered  an  and  tuenti  hide  and  twadel  an  hide,
and  fourti  hide  inland,  and  10  hide  wes  kinges  ahhen  ferme  land,  and
28  hide  weste  and  )>riddel  an  hide.'  Cf.  185:  '.  .  .  Egelweardesle
hundred  .  .  .  and  aet  nortune  seue¥e  (seuen^)  healf  hide  ne  com  nan
peni  of  faet  ah  Osmund  )»es  kynges  writere.*

'  lb.,  p.  185  :  *Wilebroc  hundred  . . .  \^\  healie  hundred  eal  un-
wered  J»aet  hesih  sc  kyng.'


I90  TAXATION  [l

a  large  proportion  of  the  hides  belonging  to  each  h
is  set  apart  in  both  cases  ;  they  are  exempted  as  be!
to  the  domain  of  the  barons.^  On  closer  examin
turns  out  that  these  liberated  lands  do  not  coinci
the  carucates  put  outside  the  hides  in  the  Survey
latter  appear  by  themselves  in  the  south-western  1
but  form  only  a  small  fraction  of  the  total  of  ex
lands.  In  the  Northamptonshire  return  it  is  quite  c
to  find  that  40  hides  out  of  a  hundred  are  libei
'  inland ',  and  as  besides  those  there  is  a  vet]
quantity  of  waste,  and  the  royal  manors  have  ab
taken  off,  what  remains  as  geldable  is  generally  mi
than  half  the  hundred.  This  is  hardly  to  be  expla
the  devastated  condition  of  the  county.  The  waste  fa
noticed  separately,  as  has  been  said,  and  the  south-
exemptions,  though  not  so  sweeping,  still  present
striking  diminution  of  the  fiscal  burden.  One  ii
only  remains  open  to  us,  namely,  that  these  doc
both  previous  to  the  Domesday  Survey,  accept  am
out  consistently  the  principle  that  two  shares  ougt
made  of  the  land  on  which  the  fabric  of  the  commoi
of  those  times  was  resting — one  share  being  geldaU^
king,  and  the  other  ministering  to  the  wants  of  soldi
priests  who  were  serving  state  and  society  in  their  re
callings.  It  is  noteworthy,  however,  that,  to  judge
south-western  Inquest,  which  gives  particulars,  the  d
lands  of  the  military  and  clerical  classes  were  not  cor
as  eo  ipso  exempted.  Some  of  them  are  and  soi
and  we  cannot  perceive  now  why  some  were  adm
take  advantage  of  immunity  while  others  were  not.  \
a  special  list  was  drawn  up  for  each  occasion — ^1
quite  unlikely — or  whether  certain  customs  had
themselves  in  this  respect  and  what  these  customs  v
cannot  say.  We  can  just  notice  that  the  church<
to  have  been  more  favoured  than  the  lay  fiefs,  at  2

'  Dd.  iv.  I :  *  In  hundredo  dolesfelt  sunt  Ixvii  hidae  el
et  dimidia  uirgata.  Inde  habent  barones  in  dominio  xxxv
uirgatam  ct  dimidiam.'


SEa.in.CH.n] FISCAL  IMMUNITIES  191

io  the  sonth-west.  The  uncertain  character  of  the  exemp-
tion is  well  in  keeping  with  the  fact  that  it  is  not  mentioned
in  tile  Domesday  Survey.  This  last  is  a  general  cadastre
m  wiiich  all  the  estates  stand,  or  ought  to  stand,  according
to  their  estimated  value.  And  it  is  the  more  noteworthy
that  the  extra-hidal  carucates  and  the  non-hidated  manors
are  duly  entered  in  Domesday  book.  This  shows  that  the
ground  for  exemption  was  a  special  and  a  more  absolute
one;  evidently  also  the  more  ancient,  as  it  breaks  not
only  through  fiscal  liabilities,  but  even  through  the  usual
tamindogy  and  metrology  of  the  Survey.  Its  origin  has
to  be  soi^ht  in  the  division  of  the  land  into  farm-rendering
and  geld-paying  areas,  not  in  the  contrast  between  the
gddable  and  the  demesne  land  of  lay  and  ecclesiastical
baronSi  The  first  is  certainly  an  Old  English  institution,
the  latter  is  clearly  feudal,  although  it  may  have  its  roots
in  Old  English  history.  In  order  to  understand  its  bearing
we  must  recall  to  memory  the  later  separation  of  the  geldable
from  franc  fiefs.  The  Crown  made  great  efforts  to  restrict  im-
munities and  to  introduce  extraordinary  taxes  obligatory
for  all  classes,  but  it  did  not  succeed  in  getting  rid  of  the
principle  of  the  immunities,nor  of  their  practical  application.
On  the  other  hand,  the  claim  allowed  by  King  Henry  Vs
charter  that  all  knights  defending  their  fiefs  by  the  hauberk
should  not  pay  geld  for  them  was  never  carried  out  in
full.  Still,  it  is  characteristic  of  the  principle  underlying
the  claims  for  exemption  on  the  part  of  people  who  did
^joy  the  privilege.  The  limitation  embodied  in  the
Inquests  of  1075  and  1084  is  to  the  effect  that  immunity
^uld  be  granted,  not  to  all  knights,  but  to  the  barons ;
^  the  details  as  to  exemptions  show  that  this  view  was,
to  a  great  extent,  carried  out  in  practice,  although  not  all
l^aronial  land  was  granted  the  privilege,  and,  on  the  other
'^d,  some  people  of  lower  standing  shared  in  it.*

Dd.  iv.  65  :  (Cornwall)  *  In  hundreto  Conarditonae  sunt  xxxiii  hidae.
•  •  •  Rex  et  barones  sui  habent  in  dominio  xiv  hidas  . . .  et  homines
^^OB^  (Moretoniensis)  iv  hidas  quae  nunquam  gildauerunt . . .  secun-
dum testimonium  hundremannbrum.*


192  TAXATION  [essaVi

History  of  The  history  of  the  terms  *  wara ', '  warUnd  \  and  'inland*
tioM.^'  allows  us  some  insight  into  the  earlier  evolution  of  a  sysltm
of  taxation  based  on  a  distinction  between  the  ruling  military
class  and  the  taxed  labouring  class.  Most  of  our  information
comes  from  ecclesiastical  documents,  and  some  cf  them
are  by  no  means  above  suspicion,  but  the  continuity  of
terminology  and  institutional  development  cannot  be
doubted,  and  from  the  point  of  view  of  the  present  inqniry
it  is  not  the  fact  that  this  or  the  other  instrument  is  geniune
or  forged  that  is  really  important ;  a  product  of  a  forga
when  well  in  keeping  with  the  legal  requirements  of  the
age  is  quite  as  valuable  as  a  genuine  charter.  It  is  dear
from  a  series  of  charters  that  the  churches  claimed  and
enjoyed  immunity  from  all  taxation  and  senrice  for  some
of  their  estates.  The  reason  assigned  is  the  necessity  of
providing  for  prayers  and  ecclesiastical  functions.  The
franchise  does  not  consist  merely  of  a  liberation  from  dues
to  the  king,  but  in  the  assignment  of  dues  and  profitii
which  might  have  accrued  to  the  king,  to  the  use  of  the
churches  themselves.  As  a  consequence,  regalities  of  tax
and  service  passed  into  private  handstand  were  converted
into  claims  of  private  rents  and  labour  services.^  At  the
same  time  it  was  not  asserted  that  the  church,  as  such,  was
free  from  taxes,  or  that  particular  sees  and  monasterio
were  exempted  from  them  in  regard  to  all  their  possessions.
A  division  was  made  between  land  subjected  to  the  taxatran
of  the  government  and  land  enfranchised  from  it ;  the  fint


'  C.  D.  1346:  (Eadweard),  (cf.  915,  Latin):  <ic  an  eke  fr^dina
%in  hdlegen  kinge  seint  Eidmunde  s6  forV  so  be  feraieat  hauede  M
¥ere  st6we  %e  he  onrestet.  An  so  wille  him  ^Sat  se  fr^d6in  stmde
on  his  welde,  ¥at  so  fele  si¥e  so  men  gilded  hire  gilde  t6  heregiUei
o%er  t6  schipgeld,  gilde  ^e  ttinschipe  s6  6%ere  men  don  t6  ISe  abboltt
n^de  and  ¥6re  moneke  ¥e  ¥er  bin  me  schulen  for  ^s  serueli.  • .  •  And
ic  han  hem  al  here  ttine  s6kene  of  hale  here  londe.'  lb.,  739  {Cb^
1019),  (vol.  iv.  p.  5) :  *ut  liberum  permaneat  ipsum  monasterium  can
omnibus  praediis  illi  concessis,  et  cum  omnibus  rebus  ad  eum  rile
pertinentibus,  id  est  campis,  pratis,  pascuis,  siluis,  uenationibaii
piscariis,  ab  omni  regali  et  saeculari  grauedine  maiore  aut  mittOR^
exceptis  assiduis  orationibus,  nisi  sola  expeditione  et  pootis  00a-
structione  ;  et  si  aliquid  pro  expedition^,  aut  pro  aliquo  regali  tribolO
reddatur,  detur  monasterio.'


SECT-ra.  CH.  II] FISCAL  IMMUNITIES  193

had  to  bear  the  burden  of  dues  for  the  latter.'  This  was
die  defence  of-  the  land,  and  '  defended  land '  appears  as
t  standing  expression  ^  in  Old  English  charters  in  the  same
way  as  defence  as  to  geld  is  a  standing  term  in  the  Domes-
day Survey;  Inasmuch  as  defended,  gewered^  land  must
be  under  proper  cultivation,  gesett,  colonized,  cultivated,
appears  as  the  corollary  of  gewered.  The  opposition  be-
tween inkmd  as  demesne  and  sett  and  gewered  land  may
be  traced  before  the  Conquest' As a  variation  of  it

'Thorpe,  Diplomatarium,  44^:  ^Indicium  donationis  aecdesiae
Westb]friae  quam  Wlstanus  episcopus  usibus  monachorum  huius
•Htietiae  dedit,  1093. . . .  £t  quia  ten-a  quae  iure  ad  aecdenam
peitiaebat  impedita  et  direpta  erat  a  laicis  hominibus,  inito  con-
frnati  coosilio,  auxilio  bononim  hominum,  partem  praedictae  terrae,
kgili  hare  recuperatam,  partem  pecuniae  meae  redemptam  praetio,
iari  et  ditioni  aecdesiae  lestitui,  scilicet  ii  hidas  et  dimidlam  hidam
etdimidiam  vlipun  in  Uuestbiria,  partem  etiam  terrae  quae  con-
dnditor  ambitu  tpsius  monasterii,  et  vii  acras  terrae  in  orientali  parte
■ooaiteni,  partem  qooque  silvulae  ^Escgraf,  et  xii  acras  prati,
fibois  dedi  ab  omni  tribute  et  vectigali,  omnique  servitio  regali  et
mcopal],  pro  remedio  animae  meae,  et  ledemptione  animarum  prae-
wtfiinninn  sive  successorum  meorum,  quicumque  banc  nostram
danorinam  iUesam  servaverint.  aut  in  aliqua  re  augendo  emenda-
^wint  Hanc  libertatem  ideo  aedi,  quia,  hac  terra  excepta  et  libera
pomaoente,  omne  regale  servitium,  quod  de  meis  drcumiacentibus
torn  iure  debetur,  expkri  potest,  et  persolvendum  locavi  et  statui.'

'  C.  D.  628  (Brihtrfc  Grim,  964-80) :  '  Brihtrfc  Grim  gean  ¥es
landes  aet  Rimtiine  int6  Ealdan  mynstre  aefter  his  dege  mid  ¥^re
^ide%e  be  sy^$)$an  begeat  int6  %dm  lande,  and  igyf%  ^  Ixx:  ^  Eddred
^ing  him  geb6code  int6  ^5dm  Ealdan  mynstre  t6  ^re  ealdan  baec
^  i£TSdstin  cyning  4ex  geb6code,  on  ^t  gerdd  ^t  be  hxbbe  ^ne
^^  fo  landes  swi  lange  swi  his  tyma  s^,  and  gange  sv%¥an  int6
^  stowe  swi  gewered  sw&  hit  stande  mid  mete  and  mid  mannum,
and  mid  ^cmn  )»ingan.'  Ibid.  642  (iflthebed,  circa  984) ;  cf.  Dd.  i.
41:  '^^Selred  cynig  grdt  /EMric  ealdorman,  and  Wulmaer  and  iE^l-
*eard|  and  ealle  &  ))egenas  on  Htottinscire  frunlfce,  and  ic  cv^
^  and  eow  eallum  %xt  ^fllfh^ah  biscop  sende  t6  me  ¥aes  landes  d6c
^  Ciltancumbe,  and  ic  hi  let  rddan  aetforan  me. . . .  Nd  wille  ic  %aet
liit  man  on  eallum  |nngon  for  dne  hide  werige,  swd  swd  mfne  yldran
^zr^esetten  and  ^eueodan,  sy  ¥^r  mdre  landes,  sy  \Sdr  lesse.  Dus
^^  IS  ¥ae8  landes  mto  Ciltecumbe ;  %xt  is  ealles  dn  hund  hida,  mid
^^  ¥er  4  bdton  lf6.*  Ibid.  1323  (Cnut,  circa  1036)  :  *ic  wvUe  ¥ast
>£)fdnd)$  arcebisceop  werige  his  landdre  int6  his  bisceoprfce  nu  ealswi
^.dyde  sbr  ^geb^c  w^re  ger^fa.'  Cart.  Sax.  1148  (King  Edgar  to
^bcbester) :  '  |>set  land  on  eallum  )>ingon  for  ane  hide  werode,  swa
>«a  his  ykb-an  hit  aer  gesetton  and  gefreodon  waere  )>aer  more  landes
•ant  ysET  lassse.'

'  Edgar,  ii.  i,  §  i :  *  aeg^Ser  ge  of  ^gnes  inlande,  ge  of  geneatlande.'
£«rie,  Land  Charters,  376:  Cf.  Divisiones  et  Consuetudines  in  Dyddan-
iiamme:  '30  hida:  9  inlandes  and  ai  hida  gesettes  landes. ...  To


194  TAXATION  [KSAYI

appear  the  expressions  of  inwam  and  utwaru^  the  defence
of  an  estate  as  against  its  owner  being  contrasted  with
its  defence  in  respect  of  the  king.^  The  Low  Latin  ex-
pression corresponding  to  utwaru  would  be  sirviemm
farinsecum,  but  whereas  this  latter  in  process  of  time  begin
to  be  applied  mainly  to  feudal  military  obligationsi  the
utwaru  of  earlier  times  evidently  comprised  all  servioes  doe
to  the  king  in  distinction  from  what  had  to  be  perforaied
for  the  landlord.

The  twofold  division  of  land  into  inland  and  warlmi
is  reflected,  among  other  things,  in  the  Geld  Inquest  by
frequent  reports  about  peasants  who  were  remiss  in  payiqg
their  contributions  to  tiie  tax.^  The  inference  is  tliat  tkc
failing  dues  were  imposed  directly  on  the  warlani  d
the  estates.  It  is  easy  to  see  that  the  constructioQ  d
landed  property  connected  with  such  a  system  of  taxatioa
faced  two  ways.  In  a  sense,  the  land  owned  by  the  barons
and  by  the  tenants  was  separated  into  two  portions^  Ac
inland  being  distinct  from  the  warland.  In  another  sane
they  were  closely  united  because  the  warland  defended  tkc
inlatid  as  r^^rded  taxes,  and,  as  a  matter  of  fact,  supported
its  husbandry  by  the  payment  of  rents  and  the  performanoe
of  services.  Historically,  two  origins  are  to  be  assigned
to  such  a  double-faced  system  ;  there  is,  firstly,  the  liben-
tion  of  home  farm  or  of  central  estates  from  services  irfttdi
were  formerly  incumbent  on  them  along  with  other  pqrtioiii
of  the  same  estate  ;  and  there  is,  secondly,  the  combinatioo
intoonewhole  of  originallydistinct  settlements — of  sdgnoriil
estates  with  plots  belonging  to  small  statesmen,  as  tiie|

Cyngestune  5  hida  sind  13  gyrda  gafollandes  and  x  hida  bufrn  dk
¥aet  is  nu  eac  gafollandes,  and  %aet  utan  hamme  is  gvt  som  inluidiiBtf
hit  is  ¥an  scipwealan  to  gafole  gesett.'  Earle,  Land  Ch.  335 :  '3  bMl
to  inware  and  o¥erhealf  to  utware.*

^  Dd.  i.  254  c :  (Berrington,  Shropshire)  ^  Beritune  .  .  •  Thoi^
tenuit  de  S.  Andrea  per  seniitium  dimidiam  hidam  in  hac  idb*
Praeter  hanc  dimidiam  hidam  tenuit  ipse  ii  hidas  geldaiitei.'  GC
Liber  Niger  de  Burgo  (Camden  Sen),  159,  160:  'in  Estona  flflt
3  hidae  ad  in  Waram  . . .  Hasc  villa  adquietat  se  erga  R^em  |M
dimidia  hida.'

'  Dd.  iv.  13 :  (Hundredum  de  Stapla)  '• . .  De  5  hidis  de  terra  HaioU
quam  tenent  uiAani  regis  non  habet  rex  geldum.'


SECT.  nL  CH.  II] FISCAL  IMMUNITIES  195


in  the  north,  small  freemen  charged  with  public  duties.

It  may  be  that  the  well-known  enactments  of  Ine's  laws,

about  the  responsibility  of  royal  gesithcundmen  as  to  the

and  cultivation  of  districts,  apply  to  this  second

of  social  growth.^ The  lord,  a royal  follower

or  thane,  gets  a  district  of  ten  hides ; he  is  responsible

ibr  at  least  six  hides  of  it  being  defended  in  a  proper

manner,  that  is,  provided  with  settlers  paying  taxes ;  the

four  lematning  hides  would  be  his  inland^  and  cultivated

for  his  fiurm. CX  ao  hides,  12  ought  to  be  warland\  of

threes  one  and  a  half. In  certain  charters  we  eatch  glimpses

of  the  oolonizii^  activity  of  lords  who  had  obtained  grants

of  Udated  estates,  and  the  result  of  such  activity  was  quite

as  much  to  provide  the  State  with  gewered  hides  as  to  ensure

die  prosperity  of  the  lord's  farm.' However  this  might  be,

tile  deqi-^ing  social  influence  of  a  system  arranging  public

obligations,  according  to  the  principle  that  one  class  has

to  pay  and  another  'class  to  fight  and  to  pray,  can  hardly

be  exaggerated. And  when  we  have  once  thoroughly

iodised  this  fundamental  distinction  we  shall  be  in  a  position

to  anderstand  and  to  appreciate  fully  a  point  which  has

hardly  been  taken  at  its  full  value  in  the  existing  works

00  Anglo-Saxon  institutions,  namely,  the  usual  exemption

of  bookland  from  all  service  to  the  king,  with  the  exception

of  the  Trinoda  necessitas. This  exemption  surely  means

that  no  taxes  were  to  be  levied  from  owners  of  bookland,

aod  the  franchise  clause  is  repeated  over  and  over  again

in  the  numberless  grants  creating  bookland  property. Now,

^  was  the  aim  and  the  extent  of  such  emancipation  ?

It  was  certainly  intended  to free  the  owners  from  all

oidmary  rents,  taxes,  provender  dues,  the  quartering  of

soldiers  and  messengers,  &c.,  and  this  is  sometimes  ex-

preaKd  in  so  many  words,'  while  in  other  cases  a  general

^  Ine,  64,  65,  66.

'  Thorpe,  Dipl.  162 :  '  llonnae  his  )>aes  londss  hundseofeortig  hida
ttdttnu  €»11  gewaered,  and  %a  hit  aest  min  laford  mae  to  laet,  )»a  wass
^itierfadaeas  uid  mid  ae^num  folce  aburod.  And  ic  ^  seolf  ^t  ieifae
^t^Scstrindae  ^t  ^a^  mon  si¥%an  bi  waes.'

'  C.  D.  81  a  (a.  D.  1062) :  '  Haec  est  interim  ilia  libertas  quam  ut
pcrpetualiter . .  •  constitua Hoc  est  v  mansas  in  situ  eiusdem  mona*

O  2


tion.


196 •  TAXATION  [JSSSkT

reference  is  all  that  Is  given  in  the  charters.  The  popah
tion  settled  in  the  districts  comprised  in  the  boolduii
franchise  had  henceforth  to  serve  the  grantee  instead  c
paying  and  performing  services  to  the  king ;  it  passed  fm
a  status  of  subjection  to  a  public  power  into  that  of  sal
jection  to  a  private  lord,  although  the  sharpness  of  d
contrast  and  the  consequences  it  involved  may  not  hai
been  clearly  realized  at  the  outset.  On  the  other  ham
it  is  evident  that  these  bookland  franchises  did  not  invdi
by  themselves  an  immunity  from  extraordinary  taxatia
of  which  the  Danegeld  was  the  chief  expression.  Hi
bookland  grants  are  too  numerous,  they  pervade  too  mnc
the  whole  region  of  landownership,  to  allow  of  an  exemptio
of  bookland  owners  from  such  extraordinaiy  impositiaoi
These  latter  would  have  defeated  themselves  if  they  ha
put  up  with  such  exceptions.  But,  although  booUaD
and  in/and  are  not  identical,  they  proceed  from  the  san
principle — from  the  wish  to  place  the  fighting  and  pnyiqj
portions  of  the  community  in  a  privileged  position.  Th
fiscal  immunities  from  geld  come  as  a  second  Instalmcn
of  a  policy  already  embodied  in  the  freedom  of  bootdan
estates  from  ordinary  taxation,  from  £^a/oi  zxiAfearm.
Reparti-  ^.  Important  features  of  every  fiscal  system  are  its  medm
of  collection  and  scheme  of  repartition.  In  regard  to  tb
last,  it  is  clear  from  many  passages  in  Domesday  Bod
that  it  was  the  result  of  two  processes  which  counteracto
and  checked  one  another.  The  more  apparent  of  the  Xm
is  the  subdivision  of  the  total  sum  of  the  tax,  first  amoai
the  counties  and  hundreds,  then  within  each  hundred  p
wapentake  among  the  estates  attributed  to  it,  in  a  certafa
fixed  or  customary  proportion,  ultimately  within  each  esUt
among  the  hides  or  geld-carucates  and  their  fractiom

sterii . . .  quas  ab  omni  regali  tributo  liberas  esse  concede.'  C.  D.  81!
(a.  d.  io6j)  :  ' . . .  ab  omni  mundiali  iugo  .  . .  et  omnibus  gtldit  c
consuetudmibus  ;  concede  etiam  ei  libertatem  plenarianL*  C  D.  Ill
(a.d.  1066):  'Scotfre  and  gauelfre.'  C.  D.  806  (A.IX  1051-60)
*  Walecote . . .  semper  sit  libera  sicut  omnes  aliae  quae  sunt  ^"*^


liberrimae.*

^  Dd.  iv.  489: (Somerset)  '  In  Hundiedo  Frome  sunt  ooc  Udi
ii  minus,  de  his  habet  rex  de  gildo  suo  1  libras  et  xviii  solidot  ct  \


SECT.  m.  CH. n] FISCAL  IMMUNITIES  197

The  process  is  especially  clear  in  the  case  of  the  Suflfolk
and  Norfolk  assessment,  where  each  manor  is  charged  for
to  many  pence  of  every  pound  to  be  paid  by  the  hundred.
But  in  a  different  way  it  ought  to  hold  good  also  in  the
scheme  of  repartitkm  exemplified  by  the  south-western
Gdd  Inquest,  when  each  hide  had  to  pay  6s.

The  hides  of  the  geld,  the  fiscal  hides  for  which  land
has  to  defend  itself,  are  grouped  into  hundreds  which
ought  to  oorreqx>nd  to  their  names,  and  it  has  been  shown
tfiat  hkies  are indeed distributed in hundreds,  double
hmidreds,  triple  hundreds,  half  hundreds,  and  hundreds
and  a  half,  within  the  country,  and  that  these  numerical
dhrisons  correspond  to  territorial  districts. In  the  Dane-
hw  the  hundreds  appear  as  artificial  combinations  not  of
hides,  but  of  geld-carucates,  oddly  enough  twelve  to  the
Inmdfed,  the  hundred being  in this case 100  tofts  or
wmtah. We find  even  that  the  single townships or
manors  are  rated  in  very  even  numbers  as  groups  of
5  Udes  or  10  hides  in  what  may  be  termed  Saxon  Eng-
hnd,  and  groups  of  6  carucates, being  halves of  the
hundreds  of  la,  in  the  Danelaw.^ Fractions  and  combina-
tioos  appear,  of  course,  but  they  mostly  resolve  themselves
into  one  or  the  other  scheme — a decimal  grouping  or
s  duodecimal  grouping  of  geld  units. These  artificial  sub-
divisions were  not  only  employed  in  taxation,  but  also  for
police  purposes,  as  we  may  gather  from  the  division  of
hundreds  into  the  police  tithings  of  frankpledge,  which
ut  identified  with  townships  in  the  same  manner  as  the
t«i  and  twelve  groups  of  the  geld,  * If  we  keep  our  eye

<^  pro  clxix  bidis  et  iii  virgis,  et  barones  regis  habent  in  dominio
c  hidas  et  xv  dimidia  uirga  minus/

^  Round,  Feudal  England,  44  ff.,  69  ff. ;  MaitUind,  Domesday  Book
*n<i  Beyond,  121.

'  Feudal  Aids,  iv.  p.  293 :  (Derleghe,  Somerset)  '  Item  dicunt  quod
^idem  (su)  Odo  de  Derleghe  quondam  tenuit  villatam  de  Derleghe
<Kkonore  oe  Trobrugge,  et  solebat  tethinga  inde  esse  geodabilis  (st'c)
^icto  hundredo,  que  subtrahitur  per  eundem  Odonem/  &c.  Rot.
Huad.  ii.  Bla :  (Somerset)  '  Item  medietas  decennae  eiusdem  uillae  de
Balbekary  subtracta  est  a  dicto  hundredo  (de  Cattessass).' Ibid.  127  b:

"((uatuor  theghing  "  que  solebant  facere  sectam  ad  hundredum  predic-
^  lum  subtracte  et  fuerunt  per  Ricardum  Comitem  Gloucestrie  et  Gil^


198  TAXATION  [KSAY

particularly  on  the  latter^  we  are  led  to  con»der  the  teni

tonal  divisions  of  the  land  as  results  of  a  acheme  of  repaitl

tion  of  hides  proceeding  from  top  to  bottom,  and  natiirall

working  itself  out  in  round  numbers  and  even  fractiao

which  seem preposterously  inadequate  to  represent  tk

actual  grouping  of  population  and  property. One  featnr

which  had  better  be  noted  at  once,  is  the  fact  that  ti

schemes  of  repartition  from  above,  as  £atf  as  they  can  I

traced,  start  from  the  hundred  as  a  combination  of  towi

ships  and  not  of  manors.  ^ This  surely  means  that  tl

arrangement  according  to  manors  or  estates  was  a  later

a  superadded — one,  while  in  their  original  composition  ten

tonal  districts  reckoned  with  townships. This  £aict  casam

astonish  us,  the  more  so  as  even  during  the  whole  manori

period  the  townships  or  vilb  remained  in  most  respects  tl

mainstays  of  police  administration  in  the  country.

And  yet  in  the  light  of  the  data  collected  about  exem]

tion,  reductions  and  actual  hides,  in  contrast  with  gdd-hidi

or  geld-carucates,  we  may  well  doubt  whether  any  explans

tion  of  Old  English  local  arrangements  which  reckons  onl

with  these  facts  of  repartition  may  be  accounted  suffickn

If  it  suits  the  state  of  a  county  after  reductions,  it  will  m

suit  its  condition  before  them  ; if  it  holds  good  for  d

original  scheme  of  distributing  the  fiscal  units,  it  wiU  I

disarranged  by  any  considerable  change  in  this  distributioi

Indeed^  no  assessment  can  afford  to  disr^rard  entirel

the  matter-of-fact  condition  of  estates  and  villages,  an

the  surest  proof  that  the  government  had  to  reckon  laigd

with  such  conditions  is  given  by  the  compilation  of  tl

Domesday  Survey itself,  by  this  attempt to draw  u

a cadastre on a gigantic scale. The  well-aacertainc

duality  of  the  hide  census,^  the  contrast  between  gdi

hides  and  numbered hides  or  actual hides,  gives  us  ti

bertum  filium  suum. . . .  Dicunt  eciam  cjuod  idem  liberi  homines
eedem  dccenne  solebant  facere  sectam  bis  in  anno/

^  Maitland,  Domesday  Book  and  Beyond,  131  ff.

'  Dd.  i.  149b  :  (Clifton  Keynes,  Bucks)  'Clistone.  iiii  hidas. ...
hac  uilla  Clistone  tenent  Siuert  et  Turbert  iii  uirgatas  quas  WiUdn
et  Rogerius  habent  occupatas  et  celatas  super  regem  ut  hominet
hundnedo  dicunt.'


SECT.  in.  CH.  II] FISCAL  IMMUNITIES  199

due  necessary  to  solve  these  contradictions.  The  enumera-
tioo  of  the  hides  of  a  district  presents  the  complex  result
of  several  processes,  of  a  rough-and-ready  assignation  from
above,  of  a  much-discussed  repartition  among  the  parties
affected  by  it,  of  rectifications  and  alienations,  of  a  good
deal  of  tinkering  and  wrangling.  As  a  result,  although
ki mxat  cases  the  lines  of  governmental  approximate

are  still  visible,  in  most  we  have  to  face  a
much distorted  and  blurred  in  its  symmetrical
ootlinea.^

4.  As  for  collection  and  responsibility,  they  are  to  a  cer-  CoUectioou

tain  extent  dictated  by  repartition. A  lump  sum  is  laid

00  tiie  town  of  X  and  the  manors  subjoined  to  it. The

town  undertakes  to  collect  and  pay  in  three-fifths  of  the

sum,  and  the  manors  the  fourth  and  last  of  these  fifths.'

In  onfinary  cases  the  repartition would proceed  from

file  hundreds  to  the  townships,  but  the  manors  would

Qot  be  alien  to  collection ;  the  concentration  of  private

dues  and  the  existence  of  a  central  force  in  the  manor

render  it  a  welcome  help  in  collecting  geld  and  other

taxes.'

^  The  East  Anglian  scheme  gives  a  good  example.  In  its  most
noe&t  expression  it  gives  up  the  hide  computation  for  entire  estates
and  appraises  them  in  pence.  Yet  carucates,  virgates,  and  acres  occur
all  tlffoa^  this  part  of  the  Survey.  They  must  be  remnants  of  older
computations  which  had  lost  their  value  for  some  purposes.  Their
Bumoen  square  more  or  less  with  the  repartition  into  hundreds
(^g.  Babenbergh  and  Blackburae  Hundreds).  As  the  possessions
pf  the  small  freemen  and  socmen  are  minutely  reckoned  out  in  acres,
it  nay  be  supposed  that  the  carucate  computation  was  kept  up  according
to  toimships,  while  the  estates  were  rated  at  so  many  pence  in  the
potmd.  CLDd.  ii.  133b:  (Happisburgh,  Norfolk^  'Hapesburc  .  .  .
touiit  Edricus  T.  R.  £.  xiii  carucatas  terrae . . .  et  xxi  sochemanni  Ixxxvi
*oni . . .  et  xii  liberi  homines  de  quibus  habuit  Edricus  commenda-
tio&em  tantum  iiii  carucat.  terrae. . . .  Istos  liberos  homines  addidit
Mttlfus  comes  huic  manerio  et  in  eodem  sunt  adcensati  modo. .  . .
Tunc  totum  ualuit  vii  lib.  et  liberi  homines  xl  sol.'

'  eg.  Dd.  L  337a :  (Torksey,  Lines.)  * T.  R.  E.  reddebant  Torchesiy
et  Harduic  in  Lincolia  quintum  denarium  de  geldo  ciuitatis.  Ad  banc
^tam  partem  dabat  Torchesyg  ii  denarios  et  Harduic  tercium.  De
°ac  Torchesig  habebat  Morcar  tercium  denarium  de  onmibus  con-
i^Ktadinibus.  In  Harduic  .  .  .  cadit  tercia  pars  geldi  regis  quod  rex
^  habet  de  ilia  quae  pertinet  ad  Dorchesyg.'

*  Dd.  i.  28  a :  ( Washmgton,  Sussex)  '  Willelmus  (de  Braiose)  tenet
^atmgetune. Comes  Guerd  tenuit  T.  R.  £. Tunc  se  defendit  pro


aoo  TAXATION  [ESSAY :

The  manorial  lord  would  be  rendered  responsiUe  for  fhi
collection  of  the  geld;  there  were  even  instances  wfaer
the  possession  of  estates  depended  on  the  payment  of  the
tax.^  When  the  manorial  system  became  general,  share
in  the  scot  were  distributed  among  the  estates.'  B«
behind  this  repartition  according  to  estates  stands  dM
more  ancient  and  symmetrical  one  according  to  townships
and  at  the  time  of  the  Geld  Inquests  and  of  Domesda]
the  direct  incidence  of  the  geld  is  still  distinctly  trace
able. »
Local  5. The  fact  that  taxation  had  to  be  adjusted  to  th

real  features  of  landholding  corresponds  to  the  value  0
the  fiscal  units  in  husbandry. We  have  treated  of  hide

lix  hidis.  Modo  non  dat  geldum  . . .  De  hac  terra  tenet  Gisldxrtn
dimidiam  hidam,  Radulfus  i  hidam,  Willelmus  iii  uiigatas,  Leuuinn
dimidiam  hidam,  qui  potuit  recedere  cum  terra  sua  et  dedit  gddwi
domino  suo,  et  dominus  suus  nichil  dedit.'

^  Dd.  i.  141a:  (Libury,  Herts)  Mn  Stuterehele  tenet  Petnis  (d
Valongies)  dimidiam  uirgatam  et  x  acras  .  .  .  Hanc  teniut  quidin
sochemannus  K.  £.  et  uendere  potuit  et  de  consuetudine  iiit**™  paxten
unius  Auerae  uel  unum  denarium  inueniebat  uicecomiti  regis  pe
annum.  Hanc  terram  sumpsit  Petnis  uicecomes  de  isto  sochemanw
R.  W.  in  manu  eiusdem  regis  pro  forisfactura  de  gildo  regis  se  noi
reddidisse  ut  homines  sui  dicunt.  Sed  homines  de  Scira  non  portan
uicecomiti  testimonium  quia  semper  quieta  fuit  de  gildo  et  de  aliis  erp


hides.


regem  quamdiu  tennit  testante  hundret.'
^  Dd.  i.  163  c :  (Forthampton,


Gloucs.)  *  In  Fortemeltone  ix  hidai
pertinebant  huic  manerio  (Teodekesberie)  .  .  .  Has  duas  teni!
(Fortemeltone  et  Hanlege)  tenuit  W.  comes  et  geldabat  propter  Tede
kesberie.'  172a:  (Worcester)  *  Quando  comitatus  gddabat,  pro  xi
hidis  se  ciuitas  adquietabat.  De  eadem  ciuitate  habebat  ipse  res
(Edwardus)  x  lib.  et  comes  Eduinus  viii  lib.  NuUam  aliam  00a
suetudinem  ibi  rex  capiebat  praeter  censum  domorum  sicut  uniciiiqBi
pertinebat.  Modo  habet  Rex  Willelmus  in  dominio  et  partem  regis  e
partem  comitis.  Inde  reddit  uicecomes  xxiii  lib.  et  v  sol.  adpeasofl
de  ciuitate  et  de  dominicis  maneriis  re^s  reddit  cxxiii  lib.  et  iiu  soL  ti
pensum.  De  comitatu  uero  reddit  xvii  lib.  ad  pensum,  et  adhuc  reddi
X  lib.  denariorum  de  xx  in  ora  aut  accipitrem  Norresc,  et  adhuc  c  solid0
reginae  ad  numerum,  et  xx  sol.  de  xx  in  ora  pro  sununario.  Hae  xri
librae  ad  pensum,  et  xvi  lib.  ad  numerum  sunt  de  placitis  comitatni  e
Hundretis,  et  si  inde  non  accipit  de  suo  proprio  reddit.'  C£  4<
(Pecheham,  Kent)  ;  9d  (Rannullus  de  Columbels,  inEstreHd.);  W
(Estrei  Hd.),  *  Wibertus  tenet  dimidium  iugum  quod  iacuit  ingildn
de  Dovere,  et  modo  defendit  se  cum  terra  Osberti  filii  Letard  et  oak
per  annum  iiii  sol.*

'  e.  g.  Dd.  iv.  14  :  (Hund.  de  Cepeham,  Wilts) '  • .  .  de  xiiii  hidi
et  dimidia  de  terra  Tosti  quas  tenent  uillani  regis  non  hahet  re
geldum.* Cf.  i3,"Hund.  de  Calna  ;  18  Hund.  de  Westberia,  &c.


SECT.  m.  CH.  ii] FISCAL  IMMUNITIES  aoi

and  carncates  hitherto  mainly  as  units  of  assessmenti  and
in  tiua  sense  they  appear  most  prominently  in  die  Domesday
Survey. But  we  have  ahready  had  to  note  in  several  in-
stances that  hides  and  carucates  are  not  merely  fiscal  units^
but  also  shares  in  the  land  itself. In  fact  they  were  real,
actual  shares,  and  not  ideal  portions  with  rights  in  the  arable,
in  pasture,  and  woods  assigned  to  them.^ Let  us  take
fbr  a  starting-point  the  reference  to  a  contest  between
Ivo  of  Taillebosc  and  Robert  of  Todeni  about  two  carucates
less  50  acres  in  Lfaicolnshire.  ^ The  verdict  of  the  jurors
b  that  the  parties  should  imx:eed  to  the  place  and  divide
the  knd  m  accordance  with  the  repartition  of  the  gdd ;  the
field  measures  have  to  correspond  exactly  to  the  fiscal
units. Or,  again,  there  were  in  Dunwich  two  carucates
that  had  belonged  to  Edric  in  the  time  of  King  Edward.
Now  Robert  Malet  holds  one,  and  the  other  has  been
submefged  by  the  sea. ' The  different  hides  of  an  estate
may  be  given  away  separately  to  the  daughters  of  a  land-
owner as  marriage  portions,  or  divided  among  co-heirs.*
In  some  cases  a  minute  reckoning  has  to  be  made,  and
seres  and  tofts  are  subtracted  from  the  main  body  of
itkt  holding.  ^ In  fact,  acres  appear  sometimes  in  com-
binations which  leave  no  doubt  as  to  their  indicating  real
measures  and  not  fiscal  counters.  ^ By  the  side  of  them,
culiuraef  cultivated  areas  which  could  evidently  be  identified

^  VUlaiiiage  in  England,  26^.

'  Dd.  L  377  a :  (Clamores  in  Chetsteven,  Lines.)  *  Ivo  Taillebosc
c^Bomiatur  super  Robertum  de  Todeni  ii  carucatas  terrae  xxx  acras
nuaus  in  Suinunalt  unde  ipse  dat  geldum.  De  hoc  dicunt  rectum  esse
vt  ipsi  eanl  super  ipsam  terram  et  partiantur  earn  recte  sicut  dant

•Dd.n.  3ixb.

*  Dd.  L  ^  d  :  (Dorking,  Surrey)  *  Quidam  Edricus  qui  hoc  manerium
^emit  dedit  ii  hidas  fili^us  suis,  et  potuerunt  ire  quo  voluerunt  cum
^Bm  suis.  Ex  his  hidis  habet  Ricardus  de  Tonebridge  unam  quae
niilfi  manerio  pertinet . .  .  Aliam  hidam  tenet  Herfridus  de  Episcopo
oaioccnsL' Cf.  138  c  (Stanestede,  Herts).

*  e.g.  Dd.  i.  141  a  (Escelueia,  Herts) ;  145  a  (Latesberie,  Bucks).

'  Dd.  i.  138  d  :  (Graveley,  Herts)  *  Grauelai . . .  De  hoc  terra  tenuit
^^^^f^  de  Boscumbe  i  uirgatam  et  iacebat  in  Westone  et  Lepsi
^"^am  uirgatam  . . .  de  hac  dimidia  hida  (s/c)  iacebant  viii  acrae  et
^'^  Toft  in  Stigenace  quam  Rex  Edwardus  dedit  S.  Petro  de  West-
^^^^^nasteria' Cf.  2 1 5  a  (Chauelestome,  Beds).


2oa  TAXATION  [essay  i

by  the  local  people,  may  be  mentioned. '  In  tnaoy  cues
the  *  numbered '  hides  in  opposition  to  the  geId*hklcB  mjr
have  gone  back  to  such  real  units.  Every  now  and
one  comes  across  attempts  to  distinguish  the
as  carucates,  *  evidently  because  the  term  *  hide '  had
too  much  used  in  the  sense  of  a  fiscal  unit  and  had
to  afford  a  sufficient  due  in  respect  of  agrarian  oocu]
When  the  hides,  carucates,  and  sulungs  lie  in  compact  ploCi^
which  is  often  the  case,  they  appear  with  distinct  local
names.  In  a  manor  of  St.  Augustine,  Canterbury,  ibr
example,  we  find  a  sulung  called  Beveifel  (Bcvcifidd)/
in  Sussex  a  half-hide  receiving  the  characteristic
tion  of  Halfeeldene^  (Half-field-den).  The  name  of
hide  ^  (and  Fyficld  ?)  points  to  estates  rated  at  5  liidei»  apd
there  are  quite  a  number  of  instances  where  the  holding
appears  in  its  most  ancient  aspect  of  Hiwisc^^  pct>bably
meant  to  designate  originally  an  agricultural  settlcaoM
estimated  as  a  household-land  in  a  country  of  wood  apd
moors.  These  hiunscs  are.  of  course,  apt  to  grow
to  belie  their  ancient  name,  which  remains
nevertheless.  In  Anglo-Saxon  documents  the
boundaries  of  hides  and  virgates  are  frequently  givcii.  ^

The  quality  of  the local  hides  is  sometimes
In  the  same  estate  some  may  be  better  and  some

^  l>d.i.575d:  (CUmureiin  Ncirtredini^)*..  .pronsacris  prab
Aluredui  cUmat  in  Vluc»bi  debet  habere  in  eadem  uilU  uaain ^


terrae.' Cf.  Can.  Sax.  1037  (Grant  by  Kitif  Kadwif  to  to  *
Kadheah,  958)  :  * .  .  .  partem  terrae  id  e»t  duas  manaaa  cc
in  super  xxv  tesetet  iUic  ubi  Anglica  appellatiooe  diatur  «t
3  jcx  Ilyohylle.

*  iHi  i.  303b:  (Huntingdon)  '  Huntedun  Buiv  delcndcbai  «  ai
;;eldum  i^%\s  pro  ciuarta  parte  de  llyrttinKettan  hundrcdo  pro  I  feiAi
srd  niodu  non  {^idat  ita  in  illo  hundredo  pottquain  m  ^SilHai
);eldum  nuinete  potuit  in  bur,;o.  I>e  toto  hoc  bui^go  exibaM  T.ILL
de  Land^able  x  lib.  inde  cotnei  terciam  panctn  habebal  rca  daas  . .  •
Ad  h«)c  but  gum  iacent  ii  hidae  (camicatacf  et  U  acne  lenac  «C  a  aoBi
prati  unde  partiuptur.ccnium  rex  ii  pARe»  comes  tcrcMun.*

M>d.  1.  13C.  * Mid.  i.  33  1.  MM.  L6$c.

*  Cf.  lid.  iv.  37a  lllcuuisa,  I)evon):  ibid.  453  •Milchyiuir :  1.  113c
•Oiichiwift).

'  C.  U.  6itf  (Uiwald.  v7V'  '- '  i>is  i»  ^fe  ire  hide  limltiMJiS  m
Smitan.' Ibid.  &83  (Oswald, alter  972'. *  !>!•  sindoa  >i
geiiufcra  V«  gcbyria^  mto  ^dtrr  \Ve%(iiic«!an  hide  «t  WilMfe
londes  and  wudulandrs. Cf.  Cart.  Sax.  73 1  'Topsham,  ~


SECT.  in.  CH.  11] FISCAL  IMMUNITIES  203

as»  for  example,  in  Horton^  Dorset,  where  the  two  best
hides  cot  of  seven  had  been  appropriated  by  the  king
for  his  forest  of  Winbome.^  Again  and  again  hides
and  their  subdivisions  are  said  to  be  laid  waste.  In
Molland,  Devon,  one-half  of  a  virgate  is  tilled  by  three
oxen  and  the  other  half  is  entirely  devastated.'  In
Mullacot,  Devon,  a  thane  holds  one  ferling  out  of  half
a  hide,  while  the  rest  of  the  land  is  laid  waste  and  used  as
pasture.'  The  hides  paying  geld  and  the  waste  ones  may
be  directly  opposed  to  each  other.^  A  curious  case  is
presented  by  the  rural  possessions  of  the  borough  of  York.
They  were  estimated  at  eighty-four  carucates,  of  which
every  one  paid  geld  like  a  house  in  the  city,  and  was
chaiged  with  the  three  obUgatory  public  services  in  the
same  way  as  the  houses.  Of  these  carucates  the  Arch-
bishop of  York  had  six,  and  kept  three  ploughs  on  them.
Th^  were  not  provided  with  constant  tenants,  but  culti-
vated in  plots  by  the  burgesses  as  leaseholds.  A  new  pond
made  by  the  king  had  destroyed  two  mills  on  this  land,
and  of  arable,  meadows,  and  orchards,  a  full  carucate.^

There  are  interesting  references  to  the  number  of  acres  Site  of
contained  in  field-hides  and  iield-carucates.  In  Betminster,
Somerset,  112  acres  of  wood  had  been  taken  from  an
estate  by  the  Bishop  of  Coutances,  and  a  priest  cultivated
them  as  a  carucate  (plough-land)  for  20  shillings  a  year.*
In  Norfolk,  175  acres  belonging  to  two  socmen  of  St.
Benet  had  been  delivered  as  one  carucate  of  land."^  On
the  other  hand,  we  come  across  a  hide  of  64  acres  in

*  D(L  i.  78  c :  (Horton,  Dorset) '  Ecclesia  Hortunensis  tenet  Hortune
'^*  R.E.  geldabat  pro  vii  hidis  .  . .  Duas  meliores  hidas  de  his  vii  tenet
'^inforcsta  dc  Winbumc,' Cf.  ibid.  i86b  (Cuure,  Hereford.).

*  pd.  iv.  381  :  (Molland,  Devon)  '  MoUanda  . . .  reddidit  gildum
^  i  uirga  . .  .  Hanc  possum  arare  ii  carrucae.  Hanc  tenet  Bemardus
uc  Tetbaldo.  Inde  habet  Bemardus  in  dominio  diniidiam  uirgam  et
^  boues,  alia  medietas  uirgo  est  tota  uastata.'

'  t)d.  iv.  434 :  (MuUacot,  Devon)  '  Molacota  .  .  .  reddidit  gildum
P^  dimidia  hida  . .  .  De  supradicta  dimidia  hida  tenuit  quidam  tegnus
>  ferlinum  . . .  et  alia  terra  iacet  uastata  ad  pasturam.'

*  Dd.  i.  172  d  (Chemesege,  Worcs.) ;  ibid.  181  d  (Vllingwic,  Here-
^);  183d  (*in  marcha  de  Wales'  (Terra  Radulfi  de  Mortemer,
Hereford.) ).

'  Dd,  i.  298  a.  •  Dd.  iv.  489.  "  Dd.  ii.  158  b  (Hobuist).


i


ao4  TAXATION  [E

Gloucestershire,  which  seems  Celtic,  and  finds  its  oo
part  in  Cornwall.^ The  Wekh  hides  mentioned  in
fordshire  are  characterized  by  peculiar  renta^  and
distinct  from  English  hides,'  but^  unfortunately,  we  a
informed  about  their  composition.

A  group  of  entries  is  made  up  of  references  to  hi
wood  and  plain,  the  very  term  laying  stress  as  mi
more,  on  the  forest  element  in  the  hide  as  on  its  c
arable  portion.'  This  '  plain '  portion  of  the  hide  n
spoken  of  as  '  land '  {terra)  in  opposition  to  the  *
Meadows  were  every  now  and  then  expressly  men
as  forming  a  part  of  the  hide.^  Acres  are  also  ent<
measurements  of  arable  and  meadow.'  Such  reft
fully  bear  out  the  main  principle  of  the  composite  du
of  the  holdings ;  these  are  not  measures  of  land,  bn
rian  units  usually  including  pasture  and  wood  as  i
arable.  In  fact,  in  estimates  of  the  husbandry  of  a  <
or  of  an  estate,  pasture  and  wood  are  sometimes  appn
in  terms  employed  primarily  for  agricultural  pur
We  hear  sometimes  not  only  of  acres  but  even  of  h

^  Dd.  i.  165  b :  (GIoucs.,  Bishop  of  Hereford) ' . . .  unum  mane
una  hida  ...  In  ista  hida  quando  aratur  non  sunt  nisi  bdi
terrae.'

*  Ibid.  181  d :  (Hereford.)  '  In  Caplefore  (?)  sunt  v  hidae  1
geldantes,  et  iii  hidae  Waliscae  reddentes  vi  solidos  canoni
annum.'  Ibid.  182  c  (More) ;  cf.  Cart.  Sax.  1 108  (Lamem  and  <
ley,  Worcs.).

^  Dd.  i.  135  d  :  (Abbot's  Langley,  Hereford.)  ^  Langelai . . .
manerio  tulit  et  occupauit  Herbertus  filius  luonis  i  hidam  inter
et  planum.'  Ibid.  174  c  (Depeforde,  Worcs.) ;  175  b  (Beolejge)
(Ombcrsley,  Worcs.)  *Ambreslege.  Haec  antiquitus  pro  iii  h
libera  sicut  dicunt  cartae  de  ecclesia,  sed  T.  R.  £.  fuit  numei
XV  hid  is  inter  siluam  et  planum,  et  iii  hidae  ex  eis  sunt  liberae.'  '
Dipl.  563:  (Wulfgyth,  1046)  'Eldemes  landes  'j  baerto  Hyek
¥aer  syn  ealles  fiftig  xcera  [on  wude  *]]  on  feld.' Cf.  Cart.  Saj

*  Dd.  ii.  55  b  (Wigheberga,  Essex).
'''  Dd.  i.  164  a  (Cedeorde,  GIoucs.).

*  Dd.  i.  179  c  (Maurdine,  Hereford.).

^  Dd.  ii.  43  a :  (Wheatlcy,  Essex) '  Wateleam . .  .  dimidia  hi
uastatae.'  i.  49  d :  (Oakhanger,  Hants)  *  Acangre  . . .  De  hoc  \
calumniatur  prepositus  regis  dimidiam  hidam  ad  pasturam  bou
Scira  uero  testatur  quod  non  potest  habere  pasturam  nee  pai
de  silua  regis  sicut  calumniatur  nisi  per  uicecomitem.'  58a :  (B
Berks)  *  Henricus  de  Fereres  habet  ibi  i  hagam  et  dimidiam  u
terrae  in  qua  sunt  iii  acrae  prati.' iv.  213  (Chenowen,  Comws


SECT.  m.  CH.  n] FISCAL  IMMUNITIES  005

posture^land  or  woodland.  It  would  be  wrong  to  speak  of
a  household  rated  as  a  hide  as  if  it  consisted  o(  pasture,
but  pastoral  units  could  be  equated,  as  it  were,  to  the
standard  of  agricultural  and  mixed  households.  Such
equations  show,  in  any  case,  that  dairy  farming  and  forest
pursuits  were  common  in  those  days  in  certain  districts,
e.g.»  in  the  borderland  of  Wales.  But  the  normal  hide
and  Ac  northern  carucate  corresponding  to  it  were  generally
agricultural  settlements,  with  pasture,  meadows,  and  wood  I
attached  to  them.

In  view  of  such  evidence  there  can  be  no  doubt  as  to  the  Coonexioo
dose  connexion  between  field-hides  or  field-carucates  and  ^^[f^^
their  fiscal  counterparts. But  how  are  these  facts  to  be  field-hides.
reconciled  with  the  other  series  of  observations  tending  to
show  that  round  numbers  and  artificial  repartition  played
a  great  part  in  the  imposition  of  the  geld? Two  con-
siderations help  us  to  find  our  way  out  of  this  difficulty.
To  begin with, there is the  well-established contrast
between  numbered  or  actual  hides  and  the  defence  of*
estates  for  the  geld. The  latter,  when  stated  fully  and
correctly,  does  not  refer  to  hides,  but  to  taxation  for  so  -
many  hides,  or  as  if  there  were  so  many  hides. Any  one
who  has  been  assessed  for  local  rates  or  for  land-tax  at  the
present  day  knows  that  if  he  is  assessed  for  100/.,  this  does
not  mean  that  he  pays  100/.  house-rent  to  his  landlord.
It  will  be  120/.,  or  something  like  it,  as  a  matter  of  fact.
The  pound  in  this  case  is  a  notional  one,  and  professedly
smaller  than  the  real. Even  so,  the  geld-hide  or  the  geld-
canicate  was  a  notional one,  and  though  certainly  not
created  without any  relation to reality, it had to  be
treated  and  computed  as  a  notional  entity. But  behind  it
stood  the  numbered  hide  or  carucate,  which  had  to  be
accounted  for  in  making  out  scot  and  lot  for  many  duties
and  burdens,  and  which  referred  directly  to  the  hides  and
carucates  in  the  fields.

This  is  not  sufficient,  however,  to  explain  the  various
'^  brought  to  our  notice  by  the  evidence.  There  are
^'car  indications  that  hides  of  a  very  unnatural,  privileged


2o6  TAXATION  [KSAl

extent  were  used  not  merely  as  fiscal  figures,  but  as  actu
areas.  When  a  district  is  said  to  contain  a  certun  numb
of  fiscal  or  geld  hides  instead  of  being  described  at  d
fending  itself  for  so  many  hides,  this  cannot  be  treated
a  mere  terminological  transfer.  The  point  was  that  ev
the  notional  divisions  were  actually  stuck  on  the  soil,  maik
off  by  boundaries,  and  so  made  real  Preconquestoal  chart
often  show  that  land  was  granted  on  the  strength
approximate  estimates  which  had  to  be  made  good
subsequent  colonization.  Even  an  entirely  waste  tn
or  a  territory  with  very  few  inhabitants,  m^t  be  grant
for  so  many  hides,  according  to  the  estimate  of  the  men
the  country,^  and  the  actual  settlements  grew  up  aft
wards  in  greater  or  lesser  numbers,  while  the  or^
badge  of  the  grant  was  carefully  kept  up.  In  such  ca
the  hides  of  the  charters  would  be  more  akin — at  any  R
at  the  outset — to  the  terra  carucis  of  Domesday  than
its  geld  units.  The  whole  estimation  must  have  been
very  rough  one,  and  yet  it  led  to  real  delimitation  a
assignment  of  s^^rarian  shares.  The  grantees  had  mos
good  reason  to  keep  up  the  original  numbers,  and  tb
clung  so  firmly  to  the  localities  that  sometimes  they  ga
them  their  very  names.  In  some  instances,  however,  til
proved  premature  and  impossible  to  fill  up,  and,  of  coui
alleviations  of  fiscal  burdens  were  eagerly  sought  a
commonly  obtained  on  such  occasions.
Summary.  6.  The  principal  conclusions  reached  in  this  chap
may  be  formulated  in  the  following  manner: —

(i)  The  fiscal  units,  as  they  appear  in  Domesday,  :
variously  constructed  in  different  provinces.

(2)  The  reduction  of  local  varieties  to  common  standai
was  effected  in  the  Exchequer  by  the  help  of  estimates

^  C.  D.  1309  (iC^lred,  1014) :  '  Ruris  ciuandam  particulam,trede
uidelicet  ab  incolis  aestimatam  mansiunculis  in  loco  qui  die
Corigescumb.'  Cart  Sax.  866 :  (Stanmore,  in  Beedon,  Beiks) '  Ma|
tudo  autem  illius  terre  iuxta  cstimationem  circa  eundem  kK
degentium  tanta  esse  asseritur  quantum  bi^uinas  mansarom  spati
equa  demensione  fore  cemitur.'  Cf.  ibid.  1287  (Corsantim,  or  Corsl
Somerset) ;  1291.  (Carta  Edgari  Regis  de  Bergh'  facta  walmer'mim:
sue.)


SECT.  in.  CH.  II] FISCAL  IMMUNITIES  ao;


strength  in  teams  of  eight  oxen,  and  of  the
aiable  area  in  team-lands  of  lao  acres.

(3)  The  inland  possesions  of  the  kings,  of  the  military
and  clerical  dass,  were  meant  to  be  exempted  from
taxation.

(4)  The  repartition  and  collection  of  geld  were  originally
in  the  hands  of  the  townships,  but  the  manorial  lords  were
gradually  made  responsible  for  the  latter.

(5)  The  fiscal  units  are  based  on  real  and  local  agrarian


SECTION IV

GOVKRNMKNT AND  SOCIKTY. GKNERAL

SURVKY.

Military TllK  (government  of  Mn(;land  in  the  eleventh  ccniivy
%y%  emi presented  all  the  symptoms  of  transition  from  one  definite
system  to  another. It  was  progressing  towards  fciKUltHn.
, an  arrangement  of  s«iciety  on  local  lines  under  the  guidance
^  of  a  land-owning  aristocracy. It  was 'passing  out  of  the
stage  of  a  federation  of  territorial  communitiei  of  fyrd-
worthy,  mot- worthy,  and fold* worthy  men which had
replaced  the  more  ancient  tribal  arrangements. But  the
features  of  both  systems  were  as  yet  intermixed  in
sphere  of  life,  and  the  elements  of  two  widely  different
y of  society  were  struggling  everywhere,  though  the  pre-
dominance of  feudal  tendencies  was  already  manifest,
a  historical  point  of  view,  however,  for  the  purpose  of
origins  and  determining  causes,  the  features  of  the
ing  order  are  not  less  important  than  those  of  the  victorious
one. Thus,  in  the  domain of  military  <>*S?^''^^'?!b.^'*
notice  not  only  the  decisive  settlement  of  the  armed
on  the  land  as  a  means  of  providing  for  the
outfit  and  training  of  the  typical  soldiers  of  the  time.  Che
heavily  equipped  knights  and  the  accooipaiiyiDS
of  light  array. We  have  also  to  obser\*e  the  remnants  of
vinns  military  formations^  thrust  into  thctMlvoiiiid.  hot
still  alive. Firstly,  merccnar>'  troops,  which  though
' acceptable  for  their  great  mobility,  better  discipline,
good  training,  could  not  assume  a  leading  part,  on  aOD


\


f


of  the  lack  of  money  in  the  ro^'al  treasury'. On  the
hand,  the  national  levies  of  old  have  not  been  given
they  have  become  a  rare  exiiedicnt,  resorted  to  in
of  great  need  \  they  were  not  efficiently  trained.


j


SECT.  IV.] GOVERNMENT  AND  SOCIETY 209

and  organized  for  eifective  warfare.  The  connexion  with
hosts  of  freemen  in  the  past  is  especially  clear  in  the  case  of
the  Danish  here^  settled  in  comparatively  recent  times,  but  it
is  sufficiently  apparent  also  in  the  fyrd  of  the  southern  and
western  Anglo-Saxon  counties.  As  for  the  military  land-
owning aristocracy  in  the  foreground,  its  antecedents  have
to  be  traced  from  the  companions  of  the  Conqueror,  to  the
picked  array  of  mobile  troops  provided_by  tfje.  QQuntjesfpr
the  king's  expeditions  on  the  one  hand,  to  the  military
following  of  king  and  magnates — the  thanes  and  gesith-
cundmen — on  the  other.  These  personal  attendants,
especially  valued  for  military  purposes,  live  through  the
whole  history  of  Teutonic  nations,  right  from  the  time  when
Tacitus  described  them  as  the  comitatus  of  the  chieftains  I  i
in  his  Germania.  But  while  they  played  the  part  of  a  body-
guard in  the  great  wars  and  migrations  of  the  tribes,  they
become  more  and  more  conspicuous  and  influential  when
the  bulk  of  the  tribesmen  settle  down  to  a  quieter  life,
while  the  traditions  of  warlike  prowess  are  still  kept  up
in  the  immediate  following  of  the  chiefs  and  kings.  The
stamp  is  set  on  this  development  when  the  regular  require-
ments of  the  king's  expeditions  come  to  be  met  chiefly  by
the  service  of  military  followers,  and  when  these  latter  get
more  or  less  completely  diflerentiated  from  the  .«est  as
a  privileged  land-owning  class.  This  point  seems  to  have
been  reached  in  most  of  the  Anglo-Saxon  provinces  in  the
eleventh  century.  In  the  north  and  the  east,  however,
the  wider  class  of  warlike  freemen  is  still  very  clearly  before
usjj^ut  many  of  them  have  evidently  to  work  hard  for  their
existence,  and  have  been  subjected  in  many  cases  to  the
patronage  and  authority  of  the  great,  while  others  have
lapsed  into  a  more  or  less  rightless  condition.

Another  aspect  of  the  same  process  is  presented  by  the  Jnrisdic-
history of  jurisdiction. The  popular  courts experience  ^^^'^
a  change  in  their  structure  and  proc<;3^ure  as  the  aristocratic


element  of  the  good  and  lawful  men,  the  elder  thanes,
becoHies  increasingly  influential,  and  gets  to  be  formally
recognized  in its  leading  position,  in  contrast  with  the


V-IKOCKAOOTF


aio  CONCLUSIONS

majority  of  suitors  who  appear  more  for  general
and  special  inquiries  of  a  local  kind  than,  properiy  s
for  the  administration  of  justice.  But,  what  is
grealer  moment,  provincial  jurisdiction  gets  to  b(
up  by  franchises  and  private  courts  that  crop  up  eve
It  is  evident  that  this  movement  made  a  thorougl
in  the  position  of  the  citizen  classes  of  society.  Ii
the  simple,  and,  in  a  sense,  democratic  arrangemei
district  court,  discharging;  most  of  the  juridical  a
the  free  population,  and  conducting  its  business  b;
of  the  personal  or  virtual  attendance  of  all  the  mei
the  local  here,  ju.stice  falls  into  the  hands  of  n
local  iK>tentatcs,  who,  though  they  have  to  admi
not  individually,  but  through  courts,  turn  this
regality  into  a  means  of  exacting  profits  and  j
power.  Suit  of  court  must  always  have  been
to  those  who  had  to  attend,  but  when  it  came  to  be  \
by  private  lords  it  became  a  powerful  lever  for  then
of  smaller  freemen  into  a  state  of  subjection,  which
confined  to  a  purely  jurisdictional  subordination,  1
stantly  assumed  the  shai>e  of  tenancies  burdcoi
rents  and  services.  And,  vice  versa,  tenants  of  gits
liable  to  pay  rents  and  to  perform  customary,  <
became  naturally  his  subjects  in  respect  of  local  jus
police.  It  is  remarkable  that  the  standing  contrast  I
the  Anglo-Danish  north-east  and  the  Anglo-Saxoi
west  should  have  found  expression,  in  this  domaif
special  treatment  of  the  sokt^  which  remains  ape
a  free  in.stitution  in  the  Danish  distiicts,  while  it  I
amalgamated  with  other  manorial  franchises  in  th
and  loses  its  distinct  meaning;  of  an  institution
from  public  authority  over  the  free.
Tuatloo.  The  hi.story  of  taxation  is  not  Ic^s  characteristic.
nant-s  of  an  ancient  sy.stem  based  on  personal  ptxig
kings,  a  collection  of  food  rents,  and  an  occasional  cq
tion  of  such  lents.  are  still  clearly  discernible  Oi
domain  and  in  newly  acquired  primitive  districts,
rents  %kere  collected  as  a  i^afol  from  ordinar>'  fr


SECT.  IV] GOVERNMENT  AND  SOCIETY  an

not  only  from  the  serfs  and  personal  tenants  of  the  king.
But  the  struggle  with  the  Danes,  the  necessity  of  paying
tribute  to  them^  and  of  keeping  up  the  costly  military  and
social  arrangements  formed  in  the  course  of  the  wars,  led
to  the  assessment  of  the  geld,  an  extraordinary  and  general
impost  which  came  to  be  a  regular  though  never  quite
a  general  tax.  The  tremendous  burden  of  th^.^eld^  un-
doubtedly  prgwed  j'^jg^^JlflfLi^yfir  i;la.s*iffy  '"^^  ^  -txu^r^^
complete  dependence  on  the  wealthy  Mdjgpwerfijl^„wbo
had  more  means  to  meet  fiscal  requirements,  could  render
help  at  the  price  of  commendation  or  subjection,  and
gradually'aj^umed  a  position  of  responsibility  and  authority
in  regard  to  smaller  tax^^Syi^s.  It  is  most  important  in
tnis  connexion  that  the  gathering  of  the_gdd«  though,  it
or^nally  effected  by  the  townships  themselves,  gets  to


be  more  and  more  dependent  on  the  action  of  the  manorial
lords.  Here  i^in  a  humble  communal  institution  is  driven
into  the  background  by  the  stress  of  circumstances,  and

In  another  sense  the  evolution  of  the  geld  is  characterized
by  the  gradual  combination  between  inland  and  warland,
the  land  of  the  privileged  military  tenants,  and  the  land
of  the  gafol-  and  geld-paying  common  freemen — ceorls
sitting  on  gafol  land,  as  they  are  called  in  one  of  the  treaties
with  the  Danes.  The  inland  was  originally  exempt  from
the  ordinary  taxes,  because  it  served  the  commonwealth  in
a  diHereht  way,  by  providing  for  the  maintenance  of  war-
riors and  clerks.  But  as  its  holders  exercise  supervision
amd  are  admitted  to  draw  profits  from  the  adjoining  tribu-
tary land  the  inland  home-farms  get  naturally  combined
with  the  wara  districts  attached  to  them.  In  one  way  this
process  has  unpleasant  consequences  for  the  holders  of
privileged  land :  it  obliterates  the  distinction  between  the
two  kinds  as  to  tax,  and  we  find  both  classes  in  the  same
position  in  regard  to  the  geld  as  described  by  Domesday.
But,  on  the  other  hand,  the  closer  the  connexion  between
inland  and  warland  became,  the  more  they  came  to  stand
towards  each  other  in  the  relation  of  demesne  and  tenant

P  2


\


\'


firee  clau.


212  CONCLUSIONS  [ESSAl

landy  the  more  closely  was  the  yoke  of  the  landlord  rivet
on  holdings  which  may  originally  have  been  outside
economic  influence.
Decay  of  The  social  results  of  the  dismemberment  oi  pub
institutions  may  be  described  in  a  few  words:  the  decay
the  class  of  small  freemen,  the  rise  of  a  landed  aristociai
the  growth  of  a  semi-servile  rural  population.  It  is  imp
sible,  at  this  stage  of  the  inquiry,  to  estimate  these  pha
mena  at  their  full  value  and  to  fathom  their  bearing
every  direction.  There  are  economic  influences  and  poii
of  social  organization  which  will  have  to  be  studied  in  d
course  in  our  second  essay.  But  already  the  political  pi
cesses  on  which  I  have  dwelt  hitherto  aflford  some  ins^
into  the  working  of  the  evolution  in  question.  It  m
be  said  that  in  a  sense  the  lowest  limit  in  the  destini
of  the  free  class  was  reached  during  the  eleventh  centoi
The  desperate,  though  ineflectual,  attempts  of  Angl
Danish  and  Saxon  kings  to  organize  the  commonweal
on  the  basis  of  thanehood  led  to  a  wholesale  discrtablia
ment  of  the  twyhind  class,  of  the  ceorls  who  occupy  sa
a  conspicuous  position  in  the  earlier  laws,  and  on  who
shoulders  the  hundreds  and  wapentakes  pf  Jhe  nJDttuU)
tenth  century  rested.  These  ceorls  fall  a  prey  to  d
colonizing  sithcundman,  to  the  ecclesiastical  houses,  and  t
the  riding  soldiers  of  the  shires.  In  the  southern  an
western  shires  they  were  almost  entirely  driven  into  tb
lower  story  of  society,  as  peasants  paying  rents  and  per
forming  services  for  their  lords.  In  the  Danish  north-€is
a  good  number  still  survived,  but  they  were  losing  groan
daily,  and  the  Norman  Conquest  came  as  a  heavy  .bkv
to  this  particular  part  of  the  population,  whirh  wa^  ^
down,  persecuted,  and  encroached  upon,  not  only  inth
sharp  social  struggle  for  existence,  but  also  as  rep.raf39
tives  of  a  stubborn  and  hostile  nationality.  After  nad^
the  lowest  point  in  its  existence  the  free  class  rises  agtfD,
and  does  so  rapidly,  but  their  new  rise  is  conncctedj  oo^
with  the  traditions  of  popular  institutions  and  andM
freedom,  but  with  the  economic  superiority  of  the  wpfk-


acT.ivJ GoVERNMEMt  ANb  Society at^

JPg  popubtion  oyer  feudal  mastery  with  commy  tatjpn,  of

^ttvictt,  the  growth  o(  indu^O^  .an4  trade^  tji^  npir^

w^ conventions  and  free  asreements  between  masters^^d

^egvants,  the  increased  stabHitj^  ordex  and  the

mcreatcdLforce  of ^gpy<niimen^  protection. It  is  not  my

business  to  speak  of  this  tide  of  evolution  in  the  present

Wcrk,  but  it  is  not  superfluous  to  draw  attention  to  some

of  its  most  striking  features  in  order  to  realize  the  very

diflerent  meaning  of  the  term  *  free '  in  these  distinct  epochs

^xid  the  importance  of  the  feudal  system  which  marks  the

^vaterriied  between  them. The  key  to  the.  earlier  history


III


militaiy  organization,  the  key  to  the  later  is  economic

icvementj^  ^ough  husbandry  evidently^^  piayst^.9L  great

~^jibe  earlier  stage,  and  though  the  military  factor

is  not  elinunated  from  the  later.  I  Between  the  two  epochs  K'

Stands  feudalism  as  an  attempt  to  connect  xniUtary  oxgani^a- 1

tion  directly  with  agricultural  husbandry. As  for  the* A

political  institutions  under  the  guidance  of  which  both  these

epodis  of  national  life  went  on,  they  may  be  contrasted

en  the  lines  of  a  predominance  of  the  provincial  organization

<^  tribes  and  shires  on  the  one  hand,  the  predominance

of  the  central  power  of  the  king  and  his  council  on  the

other. Again,  by  saying  this  we  do  not  want  to  imply  that

provincial  and  local  self-government  did  not  play  a  great

put  in  the political  life  of  thirteenth-century  and  later

England,  or  that  national  kings  did  not  exercise  a  momentous

influence  before  the  Norman  Conquest. But  the  main  fact

•  —

^  the  history  of  citizenship  in  Anglo-Saxon  times  is  that

•^  "J*"' "  *  .........

^t  IS  derived  from  tribal  and  local  associations,  and  auc-
SiSlbs  with.  them.  The  main  fact  in  the  development  of  the
State,  manifesting  itself  roughly  from  the  end  of  the  twelfth

Icaitury,  is  that  the  citizens  are  protected  by  central  power
^^ek  to  obtain  a  direct  share  in  the  central  power  with
1^  national  councils  and  courts.  Between  the  two  epochs
^^Ss  again  the  doctrine,  and  to  a  certain  extent  the
practice,  of  f(Piirfjt|j|gjjm  whirh  throws  local  and  provincial
v|  'df-government  into  the  shade,  but  considers  the  central
^^^i^ization  itself  as  a  federation  of  feudal  potentates,  and


214


CONCLUSIONS


[bssk\


Semi-
servile
peasantry.


the  country  as  a  territorial  union  of  baronies.  Needless
say,  in  real  life  all  these  contrasts  were  not  so  deai
formulated  as  they  look  when  put  before  the  reader  in
short  summary  of  the  situation.  But  it  seems  mattfi
to  underline  the  leading  principles  even  at  the  risk
some  artificiality  and  exaggeration,  if  it  is  clearly  realii
that  in  the  domain  of  facts  and  details  we  have  to  reck
with  all  sorts  of  modifications  and  compromises.

One  political  feature  of  the  semi-servile  peasant  di
created  at  this  time  had  better  be  noticed  at  once,  name
the  tendency  to  rule  this  class  by  courts,  and  not  i
personal  commands  and  personal  servants.  Whatei
arbitrary  personal  sway  may  have  been  exercised
practice  by  masters,  landlords,  their  stewards  and  offia
of  various  names,  the  communal  arrangement  of  admin
tration,  justice,  and  police  is  always  considered  as  t
right  and  regular  means  of  governing  the  humbler  clasa
of  the  nation.  This  certainly  need  not  be  attributed
liberal  instincts  and  considerations  on  the  part  of  tl
predominant  race,  but  it  turns  out  to  be  the  outcome
properly  understood  interests  and  of  the  necessities  of  tl
situation.  The  master's  rule  over  slaves  must  have  bet
at  the  root  of  the  relation  of  the  feudal  lord  to  many  i
his  dependants,  but  although  many  of  the  incidents  <
villain  tenure  undoubtedly  go  back  to  these  attribob
of  slave-holding,  the  management  of  the  affairs  of  tl
peasantry  as  a  whole  is  not  derived  from  it*  On  tl
contrary,  in  every  respect,  in  regard  to  criminal  and  civ
justice,  to  police,  to  conveyancing  and  to  econoflo
arrangements,  matters  are  referred  for  discussion  ai
decision  to  moots  and  courts.  The  past  of  these  coUegis
communal  rights  is  demonstrably  a  delegation  of  powc
which  formerly  belonged  to  the  public  courts  of  the  pi
vinces.  The  court  leet  is,  after  all,  nothing  but
specially  important  moot  of  the  /e/a,  the  fraction  of  t
hundred  or  wapentake  alienated  into  private  hands.  1
conveyancing  business  of  the  later  court  baron  is  deri^
from the feudal principle that ever>'  over-lord is  s


SICT.IV] GOVERNMENT  AND  SOCIETY ai5

rounded  by  a  court  of  his  tenants  in~  the  exercise  of  his
manorial  rights.  It  is  remarkable,  however,  that  the
undivided  halimote  of  older  days  contains  also  the  germs
of  the  later  customary  court,  both  as  to  the  conveyancing
and  voluntary  jurisdiction  of  the  villains,  and  to  the
eoooomic  management  of  rural  aflfairs.  Thus  we  have
institutions  and  traditions  of  ancient  freedom  actually  .
projecting  into  the  sphere  of  semi-servile  customs  formed
under  cover  of  the  manorial  lordships.

In  conclusion  a  few  words  may  be  said about the  Tlie  tribii
moving  torccB  of  the  different  systems  which  are  seen  to  2[|d^  »•
displace  each  other  in  course  of  time. When  we  consider  ■odatioos
the  traces  and  traditions  left  by  more  rudimentary  organiza-
tions in  the  eleventh  century  they  appear  before  us  in
a  state  of  decay. In  order  to  understand  their  prolonged
existence  and  great  hold  on  the  people  it  is  advisable  to
look  back  and  to  realize  that  the  institutions  which  seem
so  disarranged  and  out  of  date  in  the  eleventh  century
have  had their  time  of  strength  and  glory  and  their
adequate  raison  dPltre. The  expressions  freedom,  p
vindal  self-government,  or  the  modernized  ^  citizens ',  Y
almost assumed a n^ative colouring  in  the  eleventh
century, and refer  to exceptional facts, numerous  un-
doubtedly, but  less  numerous  and  less  powerful  than  the
(acts  of  coming  feudalism. But  the  older  traditions  may  '
be  traced  back  with  perfect  continuity  to  tribal  organiza-
tion and  custom : they  start  from  the  conquering  tribes
settling  on  the  soil  of  Great  Britain  in  the  course  of  the
mighty  invasions  and  migrations  of  Germanic  and  Scandi-

(jiavian  warriors. Tribal  feelings  were  thus  creative  factors '
of  political  life. Their  clearest  expression  may  be  found  '-
in  the  wei^elds  and  blood-feuds,  the  procedure  of  oath-  '}
helpers  and  the  various  attributions  of  the  maegths  in  the '
domain  of  civil  law — in  succession,  guardianship,  restraint
on alienation,  marriage,  &c. Socially,  they  testify  to  a
settlement  in  groups  connected  by  blood  ties  and  power-  r
fully  knitted  together  by  common  friendship  and  common
hostility. The  Scandinavian  representatives  of  the  period


2i6  CONCLUSIONS  [ESSAYl

of  migration,  coming  later  than  their  German  predecesson,
and  appearing  for  a  long  time  as  pirates  rather  than  tt
regular  settlers,  show  a  much  weaker  sense  of  the  ties  of
kindred,  but  they  realized  the  necessity  of  joint  actioa  and
neighbourly  support  quite  as  much  as  the  earlier  GermaBic
conquerors. With  them  the  recognition of  this  aodil
necessity  takes  rather  the  form of  guilds  or  voluntuj
associations,  with  very  strict  rules  as  to  the  amount  and
character  of  mutual  support  to  which  the  members  pledge
themselves. However  this  may  be,  in  both  cases  fle
settlement  on  the  land  calls  forth  a  modification  of  tk
earlier  forms  of  solidarity ;  from  being  the  product  of  blood
I  relationship  or  of  voluntary  association  they  get  coffl-
I  plicated  by  neighbourly  interests  and  the  mans^^eouol
[of  common  agricultural  affairs. Instead  of  the  maegth
A  and  the  guild,  the  township  appears  as  the  unit  of  aodal
organization  for  the  superior  class  descended  from  tbe
conquerors. In  some  cases  the  union  is  a  loose  one,  as
between  more  or  less  detached  settlements,  possibly  con-
nected only  by  the  interests  of  common  rights  in  woods
and  pastures,  in  others  it  assumes  the  features  of  a  veiy
-^ close  agrarian  community. But  anyhow  the  discussion  aod
direction  of  neighbourly  affairs  appears  in  the  foreground
as  far  as  the  union  of  the  township  represents  active  forces
and  interests. The  passive side of  these commuoil
organizations  is  not  less  important They  have  to  aasoflie
^ duties  in  regard  to  taxation,  police,  and  justice,  for  which
they  are  held  responsible  by  the  general  government  oi
the  country,  and  this  ensures  their  vitality  and  contimuQ
of  tradition  not  less  than  the  sense  of  active  solidaiit]
and  the  conscious  resolve  to  act  together  against  every  oat
else. The  townships are  the  links  of  a  chain  wfaid
appears  more  completely  and  clearly  in  the  action  of  tb
hundreds,  wapentakes,  and shires. Though  humble  v
. their functions the townships  are well worth  the  coB
1 sideration  which  has  been  bestowed  on  them  by  historian
Whereas  the  hundred  and  the  shire  are,  after  all,  judid
and administrative superstructures, the keeping up


SECT.  IV] GOVERNMENT  AND  SOCIETY 217

lUch  required  a  good  deal  of  coercion  by  authority,  the
townships  are  directly  grounded  on  the  soil,  and  in  most
euet  have  to  deal  with  tangible  and  everyday2||[t£]:est9.

The  weak  sides  of  all  these  collegiate  and  communal  Weak  sides
BHtitutions  were  determined  by  two  awkward  facts :  thej  ^^^' ^^
cwld  not  be  protected  against  the  growth  of  overbearingii?«titu- '
ad  overwhelming  individualities ; they  were  necessarily  1
■ixed  up  with a quantity  of relations and customs,
derivtd,  not from the  conquering, but  from the  con-
quered classes. From  the  first  point  of  view  one  has
to  note  that  the  rudimentary  guarantees  set  by  restraints
en  alienation  and  testamentary  disposition,  or  rather  by
the  lack  of  these  judicial  forms,  by  the  agrarian  arrange-
ment of  holdings  and  commons,  &c.,  were  partly  swept  i\^
ivay,and  partly  over-ridden,  by  the  progress  of  husbandry,  I
the  struggle  for  existence, the  prowess  of  leaders  and
■uKtary  followers,  as  well  as  by  the  decay  and  the  over-
oowding  of  the weaker  members  of  the  communities.
Altogether  the  township  organization  undertook  to  watch  .
ever  the  allotment  of  shares,  but  not  over  the  relation  '
between  land-holding  and  population.

The  difficult  problem  of  maintaining  the  balance  between

oembers  of  the  community  in this  respect  was never

Mdcd  by  the  Teutonic  townships. There  was  nothing

to  prevent  men  from  thriving  in consequence  of  a  con-  I—

Wtration  of  shares,  and,  on  the  contrary,  there  was  not

modi  to  prevent  shareholders  from  decaying  in  consequence

<^  a  congestion  of  claims. Such  customary  methods  as

*ere  practised  in  such  cases  did  not  go  further  than  the

Aboration  of  rules  as  to  undivided  succession. These

tnuts  of  agrarian  life  will  have  to  be  discussed  at  greater

length  later  on. What  seems  material  now  is  to  realize

that  individual  enterprise  and  power  was  not  checked  by

the  free  township  communities,  and  that  they  were  very

liable  to  be  thwarted  and  subjected  by  the  strong  and

the  wealthy.

On  the  other  hand,  there  was no  hard  and  fast  line
ctween  the  conquerors  and  the  conquered,  the  free  ceorls


-I


2i8  CONCLUSIONS

or  socmen  and  the  geburs  of  base  origin  and
The  two  groups  were  dangerously  near  each  othei
^fe. It  taxes  our ingenuity  how  to  draw  dis

^tween  the  various  degrees  of  dependence  and  i
s()ke,  commendation,  tenant-right,  semi-servile  oc<

^rvile  labour — and  it  is  not  to  be  supposed  tha
much  easier  to  do  so  in  the  reign  of  Edward  the  C
or  William  the  Conqueror.  The  badge  of  weq
gradually  losing  its  importance  on  account  of
memberment  of  ma^hs,  and  of  the  introductioi
forms  of  punishment  and  responsibility.  Thus  wl
was  nothing  in  law  to  prevent  entirely  free  an
worthy  men  from  working  with  their  own  hands, «
ing  leases,  working  for  other  freemen  by  agree
custom,  as  a  matter  of  fact  all  these  perfect!
practices  led  to  a  g^dual  debasement  of  the  a
socmen  who  had  to  resort  to  them,  and  prepi
way  for  that  amalgamation  of  disparate  dasse
mould  of  villainage  which  became  the  rule  i
common  law  jurisprudence.  No  wonder  that  the
institution  of  the  township  itself,  though  or^[in:
tainly  not  servile  in  character,  was  drawn  into  si
to  the  manor  and  treated  by  public  authorities
from  the  point  of  view  of  a  convenient  machiner
enforcement  of  obligations  and  the  collection  of  <
fines.  But  notwithstanding  such  historical  detei
both  the  institution  and  the  class  for  which  it  was
did  play  a  most  important  part  in  providii^^
life  with  an  element  of  independent  right  and  t
of  communal  action.  Their  meaning  will  be  fully
only  when  we  come  to  examine  more  closely  the  c<
of  rural  life  on  their  economic  and  legal  side.


SECOND ESSAY

LAND  AND  PEOPLE

SECTION I: LAND TENURE

CHAPTER I

THE  LEGAL  FRAMEWORK.

^.  One  of  the  advantages  of  the  study  of  English  land  Effect  of
liw  is  that  it«^4ietidf4..-aaaagemOT^^  a  sharpjf  ^^'****-

^J25I2t:=^*^***'^'*'^^^^^'  collapse  of  the  old  order  in~c6hse-^
quence  of  the  Conquest.  The  Domesday  TriiJTOst-as  a
whole  is  a  testimony  to  this  fact,  and  special  quotations  are
hardly  needed  to  prove  it.  Still  it  is  not  without  interest
to  notice  that  even  the  smallest  holder  of  land  might  appeal
to  the  clean  sweep  made  by  the  French  invasion.  Godwin
the  beadle  holds  half  a  hide  from  the  king  in  Soleberie,
Bucks.  It  was  held  T.  R.  E.  by  Alric  Bolest,  and  the
'^cw  tenant  had  evidently  to  vindicate  his  possession  against
^c  old  one  or  his  heirs.  He  appealed  to  the  fact  that
^y  the  coming  of  King  William  the  former  owner  for-
feited his  right.^  If  some  Englishmen  still  held  land  it
^as  by  express  grant  from  the  king,  and  although,  as  a
^'Jitter  of  fact,  they  would  resume  their  former  estates,
^he  title  under  which  they  came  to  hold  henceforward  was
*  new  one — it  was  derived  from  an  express  or  implied  grant
^f  King  William.^ From  a  stray  notice  about  the  manor

^^Dd.  i.  153  b:  (Soulbury,  Bucks)  *  In  Soleberie  tenet  Goduinus
"Wellus  de  rege  dimidiam  hidam  .  .  .  Alric  Bolest  tenuit  T.  R.  E.
^t  hoc  dicit  iste  qui  nunc  tenet  quod  per  aduentum  R.  W.  fuit  foris-
^a,'  Cf.  Round,  Victoria  History,  Essex,  i.  354,  355.
.  Dd.  i.  62  b :  (Berks)  *  Isdem  Robertus  (de  Oilgi)  tenet  unam
•^dam  quam  Azor  dispensator  R.  E.  tenuit  et  cum  ea  ire  potuit  quo
^°'jJJt  .  .  .  Hanc  terram  tenet  isdem  Azor  de  Roberto  sed  homines
^e hundredo  testificantur  eum  de  rege  debere  tenere  qm  [sic  quoniam  (?)]


220  LAND  TENURE  [es

of  Stanton  in  Suffolk  we  learn  that  these  partial  resuna
were  accompanied  by  heavy  payments.  In  the  ti
King  Edward  this  estate  was  held  by  a  certain  Ul^
the  soke  of  the  king.  At  the  time  of  the  Survey  it
the  hands  of  the  Abbot  of  Bury  St.  Edmunds  in  mo
for  a  loan  of  2  marks  gold, '  when  the  English  red
their  lands.'  ^  It  is  not  exactly  clear  what  Engelr
to  do  with  the  loan,  but  the  main  fact  that  a  larg
had  to  be  paid  at  the  time  of  the  resumption  of  <
by  Englishmen  is  sufficiently  established.  As  ngxi
French,  the  counterpart  of  resumption  were  the  gran
'  liveries '  gradually  effected  by  the  Conqueror  in  the
of  his  acquisitions  of  the  territory  of  England.'
Grant  and  There  were  various  modes  to  confer  title  to  Ian
Jvcry.  ^^  tenants  possessed  of  land.  We  hear,  for  ire
that  fourteen  freemen  in  Lineforda  and  Iccheb
the  fief  of  Walter  Giffard  had  been  commended
predecessor  of  Ralf  de  Waer  (Ver),  and  were
wards  delivered  {liberati)  to  Bodin  de  Waer  on
of  the  king.  But  Ralf  de  Ver  obtained  possessioi
them  as  belonging  to  his  fief,  evidently  on  the  stren
his  having  stepped  into  the  shoes  of  his  Saxon  prede
Hervey  de  Ver  held  these  freemen  of  Ralf  when  the
forfeited  his  estates.  Walter  Giffard  must  have  got
after  this  forfeiture  from  the  king.  Livery  by  the  kit
claim  on  the  strength  of  rights  derived  from  a  1
predecessor  are in  collision in  this  case.' In  a)

rex  W.  apud  Windcsorcs  ei  reddidit  et  breuem  suum  inde  e
Robcrtus  uero  tenet  iniuste.  Nemo  enim  eorum  uidit  breuem r
ex  parte  cius  hominem  qui  eum  inde  saisissit.'

^  Dd.  ii.  360  b :  (Stonham,  Suffolk)  <  Stanham  tenuit  Vluw
homo  in  soca  regis  et  comitis  Ix  acras  .  .  .  Ailboldus  presbitc
Hanc  terram  habet  Abbas  in  uadimonio  pro  iibus  marcis  at
cessu  Engelrici  quando  redimebant  anglici  terras  suas.'  Fi
Norman  Conquest,  iv.  723,  tries  to  get  too  much  out  of  this  pa

'  Dd.  ii.  352  a :  (Uledana,  Suffolk)  '  In  eadem  Godumt
homo  X  acras  et  ii  boues  commendatus  Wisgaro  antecessori
f.  C.  .  .  Ex  hoc  fuit  saisitus  Raimundus  Giralt  et  Rogenis
uiensis  eum  tenet  et  Rogerus  de  Ramis  de  prima  liberal
hundredum  testatur  quod  sibi  prius  liberatus  fuit.*  Cf.  Round,'
Essex,  i.  354.

'  Dd.  ii.  242  a  :  (Lyndford  and  Ickborough,  Norfolk)  '  In  Li


CH  I] THE  LEGAL  FRAMEWORK aai

:  caae  Godric  hdd  in  Bradeham  one-quarter  of  a
e  firom  William  of  Warenne.  The  land  was  taken
e  king's  hand  when  William  de  Warenne  incurred
re  by  treason.  Robert  Blundus  held  it  in  farm  firom
it  9nd  Godric  was  marked  in  the  Exchequer  in  the
irrit  or  breve  for  oo  shillings.  And  yet  it  was
1  by  William  de  Warenne.  But  the  hundred  could
Uy  to  having  seen  a  writ  or  a  king's  messenger  who
sd  the  said  land  to  William.^
endun  in  Essex  was  held  by  a  certain  Ailricus  in  the
'  King  Edward.  He  served  on  board  Harold's  fleet
the  Conqueror,  and  on  going  back  fell  ill  and  gave
ite  to  St  Peter  of  Westminster.  The  Abbey  held
le  time  of  the  Survey,  but  they  had  no  title  from
HUiam,  neither  through  a  writ  nor  through  a  message
d  by  a  king's  servant'

ailar  dispute  occurred  in  regard  to  Spersold,  a  manor
diire  held  by  Anskitill  from  the  Abbey  of  Abingdon,
ire  gave  testimony  that  the  estate  had  beloi^fed,
die  Conquest,  to  Edric,  who  held  it  of  the  king  in
rhis  Edric  had  given  it  to  a  son  of  hiS|  who  was
in  Abingdon,  on  the  understanding  that  he  should
in  farm  and  supply  Edric  with  the  necessaries  of  life
I  income,  and  that  after  Edric's  death  the  manor
JO  to  him.  The  men  of  the  shire  did  not  think  that
:  to  appertain  to  the  Abbey  on  the  strength  of  such
ngement,  and  they  had  never  seen  a  royal  writ  or
estimony  of  its  having  been  granted  to  the  Abbey,
mks  maintained,  however,  that  they  could  produce
nd  seal  of  King  Edward.  Several  legal  points  have
loted  in  this  case.' The  transaction  between  the

mrc  xiiii  liberi  homines  .  •  .  hii  fuenint  commendati  ante-
tadulfi  de  Waer,  post  liberati  sunt  Bodin  de  Ver  ez  psite
Mtea  derationauit  cos  ad  suum  feudum  Radulfus  et  qumn
tenebat  eos  Henieus  de  Ver  de  illo.  Hoc  testatur  hundret.'
L  376  b  (Bradeham).
14  b  (Kelvenduna).

L  59b:  (Sparshoity  Berks)  'Spersold  .  .  .  De  hoc  manerio
statur  quod  Edricus  qui  eum  tenebat  deliberauit  ilium  filio
tnx  in  Abendone  monachut,  ut  ad  firmam  iUud  ttnercc  et


212  LAND  TKNURK  [essay  n

Saxon  owner  and  his  son  is  not  deemed  prima /ant  tufficicnt
to  create  a  title  for  the  monastery. Is  it  bccauat  it  was
merely  intended  to  transfer  the  property  after  death  lo
a  definite  person,  who,  though  a  monk  himseIC  was  not
identical with  the  monastic  corporation of  Abin^dott?
Hardly ;  if  the  transfer  to  the  son  in  regular  orders
recognized,  very  little  would  have  been  wanted  to
the  transaction  by  a  further  transfer  to  the  Abbey.
the  contention  is  not  between  Abingdon  and  the  hem  of
this  monk,  but  between  the  monastery  and  an
The  point in dispute  was  evidently  whether
confirmation  of  the  devise,  by  the  king,  was  extant« Edric
had  held  in  alod,  that  is,  in  free  property,  with  the  right
of  selling  it. And  it  is  very  significant  that  the  writ  ui
seal  required  by  the  shire  to  make  the  transfer  perfect
delivered,  not by  King William,  but  by  King  Edwasd
This  means  that  royal  grants,  or  private  grants  oonlinned
by  royal  seal  and  writ  in  favour  of  ecclesiastical  institvtioni^
were  recognized  after  the  Conquest  on  the  strength  of  the
ancient  deeds. Confirmations  are  indeed  frequent  and
important  for  practical purposes^  but  the Saxon rayal
grant  is  sufficient  in  law. The  same  nuy  be  gathered  hem
a  reference  to  the  sake  and  soke  of  freemen  in  SuflUk
which  was  granted  to  Bury  St  Ivdmunds  by  King  Edm^
The  sheriflT  had  infringed  the  privilege  of  the  Abbey  bf
fining one  of  them 4  shillings, but the hundred  Si
not  admit  that  Bury  St. Edmunds  could be  disscW
by right after it had received the  grant from Kim
Kdward  ^

iibi  donee-  uiucrrt  nei:riftAru  uitac  inde  donaret,  pose

rius  nunerium  haberet. Kt  ideo  ncsciunt hominet  de

abbatuc  pertincai. Nequc cnim inde uiderunt brtucm

fti)(illi;in. AbbAft  ucro  tc»utur  quod  m  T.  K.  b.  mitit  iUe

ad  arccleiiain undc  crat  ct indc habct brcunn  d  sigillMM  IL^

atte%uniil}u»  uiiinibut  inonachu  »uit.'

'  I)<1.  :i.  360  b:  (Onrhouftc,  Suflf(»lk»  *  In  Aahui  i  libcr
Kdnitindi  diinidiam  carucatam  lerrae  .  .  .  tempore  Edwafii  ha
ct  loca lit)  ci  ciitnnirnUatio  lic  iMii  <iinnibu»  Saacii |j
dunt>  rc)C>»  l^d«art]i  iicut  brruia  r(  ftigillum  demciOMl
habrt :  |iutt  lonrcMit \Villeliiiu%  Kr&.  icd  prepoiitm  R^pli
pruiMcr  »ucAai  dc  1  laturum  iiii  tolidot  cstct  [corr.  mT  ?] ,


SKT.I.CH.T] THE  LEGAL  FRAMEWORK 223

An  execution  by  King  William  of  a  writ  under  seal  of  Wilts.
Kbg  Edward  is  noticed  in  the  Survey  of  Dorset.  St.  Mary
rf  Shaftesbury  recovered  possession  of  Cheeseburne  and  of
Stee,  two  manors  appropriated  by  Harold,  on  the  strength
tf  a  writ  of  King  Edward  ordering  their  restitution.^
We  have  no  means  of  judging  in  this  and  similar  cases
lov  fiur  the  documents  appealed  to  were  genuine.  Many
tf  the  deeds  produced  by  churchmen  on  such  occasions
vcre  forgeries,  but  the  point  of  importance  for  us  is  not
die  genuineness  of  this  or  the  other  charter,  but  the  fact  -
dbt  arrant  of  King  Edward  was  admitted  in  a  court  of
Ppg  William  as^sulBcleiit  evidence  of  title.  The  mode
of  procedure  adopted  by  the  Norman  king  follows  closely
Old  English  precedents  ^  in  such  matters.

The '  breve '  appears  in  yet  another  sense^  as  we  have
liready  had  occasion  to  notice  in  the  case  of  Godric  in
Braddiam.  It  was  applied  to  enrolments  in  lists  of
Citates  belonging  to  divers  fiefs:  ao  acres  in  Marsam  in
Norfolk  are,  for  instance,  enrolled  and  measured  in  the
'breve'  of  St.  Adeldred.^  It  seems  that  official  lists  are
neaot,  and  it  is  not  unlikely  that,  in  regard  to  some  of  the
Ce£i  at  least,  such  lists  may  have  been  kept  at  the  Treasury.
The  Liber  Eliensis  might  be  described  as  such  if  it  had  not
been  primarily  made  for  the  use  of  the  lordship  and  not
of  the  Crown.  The  compilation  of  Domesday  rendered
lunor  enrolments  of  this  kind  unnecessary.

The  second  great  means  of  proving  title  after  the  Con-  The '  ante-
Vicrt  was  for  a  Norman  baron  to  appeal  to  his  *  antecessor ',  *^*"^  *

tt  oesciente  abbate  neque  ministris  suis,  et  hundredum  testatur  se

■ndsie  Sanctum  Edmundum  postea  fuisse  dasaisitum  postquam  rex

Cdwirdus  dedit.'
*  Dd. L 78  d : (Chesilbome, Dorset) *  Cesebume .  . . Istum

Mtaerium  et  Sture  abstulerat  Heraldus  comes  S.  Mariae  T.  R.  £.
ftd  Willelmus  rex  earn  fecit  resaisiri  quia  in  ipsa  aecclesia  inuentus
Mbrevis  cum  sigillo  R.  E.  precipiens  ut  aecclesiae  restituerentur  cum
Melecome  quern  rex  adhuc  tenet.'

'  C.  D.  929:  (Godwine  and  Leofwine)  '^a  sende  he  (it^lrcd)
pewrit  and  his  insegl  to  %am  arcebisceope  i4tllfrice  and  bead  him  %£et
le  and  his  (^egenas  on  East  Cent  and  on  West  Cent  hy  on  riht
oemdon,  be  ontale  and  be  oftale.*

'  Dd.  ii.  30$  b  (Marsam,  Norfolk).


224  LAND  TENURK  [ESSAY n

to  a  Saxon  into  whose  place  he  had  stepped  in  regud  Id
rights  *  of  all  kinds.  This  important  mode  of  scquirinf
title  is  constantly  referred  to  in  the  Survey,  and  need  nol
be  dwelt  on  at  length,  as  it  has  received  considcnble
attention  from  modem  inquirers,  and  is  not  subject  to
controversy.  Its  special  interest  from  a  legal  point  of
consists  in  the  fact  that  it  ensured  a  wholesale
of  Old  Knglish  land  law  by  the  Prench  conqueroiB.
stock  was  considerably  modified  by  foreign  influences^
it  was  never  entirely  given  up,  and  forms  one  of  the
elements  of  En^^lish  law  even  in  later  times.
Aiienatioii.  The  tutor  mentioned  in  some  few  cases '  appears
a  very  different  plane.  Me  is  the  warrantor,  the  mmci
to  whom  those  who  have  acquired  derived  post
to  appeal — the  donor  or  vendor  or  lessor  or  ovcr-lofd,
the  case  might  be.  This  standing  to  warrant
to  a  class  of  dealings  which  is  independent  of  the
acqubition  of  estates  by  the  conquerors  or  their  resuni!
by  the  conquered.  It  belongs  to  a  wide  group  of
actions  concerning  land.  In  regard  to  these  we
firstly,  the  celebrated  distinction  between  Undo
could  sell  or  give  their  lands  and  thoee  who  could
secondly,  between  those  who  could  go  with  their
where  they  pleased  and  those  who  could  noL  Both
tinctions  are  Old  English.  The  second,  derived  fi
freedom  of  commendation,  lapsed  after  the  C
voluntary  commendation  ceased  to  be  a  recogntied  i
tion.^  The  first,  dealing  with  freedom  of  disposal,
fieared  in  another  sense,  as  all  land-holding  became  tcnsrisl
and  therefore  the  consent  of  the  lord  was  required  in
of  any  alienation. This  consent  could  be  forced  in


*  Dd.  i.  4Ka: (In Sunhumc Hundred, Mantt)  '
Hrctcvilri  tenet  dr  rcge  unam  hidam  .  .  .  Haoc  hid
Hugo  de  pcirt  dicrni  earn  perlinere ad  »ua  maaena
KNchctune  et  ibi  earn  tenuerunt  lui  anieceisoret  ct  hoc  t
hundredum.*

'  lid.  II.  103a:  iChawreth,  Ktm)  *In  Craundc  •  .  .
nrrui  homo  Kicardi  et  utKauic  llbodonem  ad  tutofcin  cC
ifcddusit  tiitun  ni.*

'  Lf.  Maitland.  Pomesday  llcKik  and  Ueyond.  6S,  71.  7s.


BCT.I.CH.I] THE  LEGAL  FRAMEWORK 225


on  condition  of  paying  a  more  or  less  heavy  fine.^
^nt  the  s^ificance  of  the  distinction  rests  mainly  on  its
Be  in  Old  English  times.  In  the  passage  to  complete
Midalism  marked  by  the  Conquest  it  led  to  the  subjection
Fmany  tenants  to  lords  on  the  strength  of  the  assumption
lat  if  a  person  could  not  sell  his  land,  his  tenement  was
m  be  considered  as  a  part  of  the  estate  to  which  it  was
ppendant  As  r^ards  Old  English  law,  the  freedom  to
iyt  and  to  sell  was  one  of  the  distinctive  features  of  the
rivil^ed  mode  of  tenure  created  by  book,  and  its  history
Jigfatto  be  considered  Jn  connexion  with  that  of  book-land.^

The  Domesday  Survey  discloses  some  cases  of  inter-  interfer-
arence  on  the  part  of  the  king  in  the  making  of  private  ^  ®^
rants  which  may  be  derived  from  the  principles  of  privi-
Sed  book-land.  The  cases  in  which  it  applies  are^  however,
l^ways  instances  of  g^nts  made  to  churches,^  and  it  seems
Uit  the  motive  which  led  to  the  king's  confirmation  or
^ncession  was  derived  from  the  fact  that  the  king  lost
>ane  of  his  dues  by  the  passage  of  property  into  the  hands
r  an  ecclesiastical  body,  a  consideration  similar  to  that
^hich  prompted  the  drawing  up  of  the  Statute  De  religiosis
^  Edward  Ts  time.  However  this  may  be,  the  demand
^r  royal  confirmation  shows  that  in  such  cases  the  right
^f  the  king  to  exert  an  influence  over  an  estate  which  had
^^en  in  private  possession  for  some  time  had  not  disappeared
^d  might  be  exercised  occasionally.  On  the  other  hand,
^c  find  indications  of  a  procedure  reminding  us  of  the
pf'ecariae  verba  regis  in  use  at  the  beginning  of  the  Caro-
Ungian  dynasty :  I  mean  cases  where  ecclesiastical  institu-
^ons  are  driven  to  concede  land  to  military  tenants  *  for
Ac  love  of  the  king'.* Notwithstanding  all  reservations

^  History  of  English  Law,  i.  311  ff.

Cf.my  paper,  Romanistische  Einfliisse  im  Angelsachsischen  Recht :
^»s  Buchland  in  a  forthcoming  volume  of  Melanges  Fitting.

Dd.  i.  166  a :  (Gloucs.)  *  Ecclesia  S.  Mariae  de  Cormelies  tenet
^<^t.  Rex  Edwardus  tenuit.  Ibi  vi  hidae  nongeldauerunt.  Rogerus
^^|<^  dedit  huic  aecclesiae  pro  anima  patris  sui  concessu  regis
"jDelmi.* Cf.  ibid.  345  a  (Hacam,  Lines.,  St  Mary,  Stow).

I^d  i.  208  a:  (Hunts) '  De  altera  hida  (de  duabus  quas  Radulfus
°"Qs  Osmundi  tenet  in  Emingeforde)  dicunt  quod  Godricus  tenuit  earn


326  LAND  TENURE  [essayi

of  right,  this  practice  might  evidently  lead  to  the  pracdol
alienation  of  certain  estates  from  the  Church.^

An  eventuality  which  may  be  noticed  because  we  com
across  it  in  the  sources,  but  which  does  not  consdtnte
a  distinct  mode  of  conferring  title,  is  the  '  exchange'  {escmh
gium).  A  person  may,  for  example,  receive  some  estate
in  exchange  for  another  situated  in  Normandy  '  and  pcfr
sumably  acquired  by  the  king,  or  he  may  obtain  a  plol
in  exchange  for  another  taken  up  for  the  building  of  i
castle  ^  or  for  inclusion  in  a  forest.^  Juridically  these  an
only  cases  of  receiving  an  equivalent,  although,  as  a  matte
of  fact,  they  may  have  been  compromises  after  dispossesaoo
The  abuse  of  right  is  even  clearer  in  the  not  infineqixd
cases  where  the  tenant  has  nothing  better  to  appeal  tl
than  the  exercise  of  administrative  discretion  by  the  sheriffi
Freemen  are  accommodated  in  this  way  to  estates  o
influential  men  from  which  they  had  previously  been  entif^
independent  A  number  of  the  '  invasions '  by  great  peopii
are  traceable  to  such  exercise  of  arbitrary  power.'

de  abbate.  Sed  cum  abbas  (de  Ramesy)  esset  in  DanemidR
Osmundus  pater  Radulfi  rapuit  earn  a  Sauuino  Accipitrario  cui  abbi
earn  dederat  ob  amorem  regis.'

^  Heming,  Cartulary,  i.  248,  252.

'  Dd.  ii.  38  a:  (Plumberrow,  Essex) '  In  Plumbeiga  tenet  Rmnlii
de  Willelmo  (de  Warenna)  xxx  acras  quod  tenuit  i  liber  homo  tM
Tunc  dimidia  caruca,  modo  i.  Tunc  v  sol.,  modo  x.  Has  teiras  lediai
pro  escangio  de  normannia.'

'  e. g.  Dd.  i.  93a:  (Montacute,  Somerset)  'Ipse  comes  (Moritoa
tenet  in  dominio  Biscopestone  et  ibi  est  castellum  eius  Quod  aocad
Montagud.  Hoc  manerium  geldabat  T.  R.  £.  pro  ix  hiois  et  taki
abbatia  de  Adelingi  et  pro  eo  dedit  comes  eidem  aecdesiae  mancrii
quod  Candel  uocatur.'  Cf.  32  a :  (Sudwerche,  Surrey)  '  pro  CBBUtUi
unius  domus ' ;  43  a :  (Auitone,  Hants) '  pro  excambio  domnt  itg&'

*  Dd.  i.  51  d:  (Milford,  Hants)  'Aluric  tenet  de  rege  MeOeMd
excambio  forestae.'  Cf.  12  a:  (Garrington,  Kent)  '  Warwintfloe  •  •
dedit  episcopus  baiocensis  (abbati  S.  Augustini)  pro  excambio  pH
sui,  pro  dimidio  solin  et  xlii  acris  terrae  se  defendit'

'^  Dd.  ii.  393  a:  (Badley,  Suffolk)  'Badeleia  .  .  .  Huic  mum
additi  sunt  T.  R.  WiUelmi  xxvi  liberi  homines  .  •  .  hos  omncs  tOM
Ricardus  ad  hoc  manerium  quod  tenuit  fint  (jiV),  et  ipse  phin  tend
eos  per  accomodationem  uicecomitis,  ut  ipse  uicecomes  dicit'

<"  Dd.  ii.  1 12b:  (Holt,  Norfolk)  <  Ad  Holt  est  additus  i  liber boi
Ketel  post  mortem  regis.*  133b:  (Happisburgh,  Norfolk)  'Hlfi
burc  .  .  .  Istos  liberos  homines  addidit  Radulfus  comes  huic  1


et  in  eodem  sunt  adcensati.* 282  a :  (Suffolk)  '  Haminghelanda  •
i  liber  Aluuinus  commendatus  Gueit  .  .  .  Ulmar  prepositiis  adBn


.I.CH.I] THE  LEGAL  FRAMEWORK aaj

Before  leaving  the  question  of  titie  I  should  like  to  revert  Feofiment
die  £sict  that  the  practice  of  grants  in  military  tenure  chaiter.


to  a  large  extent  conducted  by  ceremonial  feoflfment
vrithout  any  charter.^  This  led  to  a  great  deal  of  uncertainty
■a  the  status  of  such  tenants,  and  to  the  necessity  for  the
I^rown  to  draw  up  special  feodaries  and  to  demand  formal
-t^stoms*  From  a  juridical  point  of  view  it  was  important,
^ccauae  it  led  to  the  employment  of  inquests  and  of
n^xorded  proceedings  in  the  feudal  courts.  One  of  the
r^sasons  for  the  speedy  formation  of  regular  courts  baron
ssost  have  been  the  necessity  for  securing  the  legal
sstablishment  and  transfer  of  titie.

But  the  practice  is  not  feudal  in  its  origin. It  may  be

t3-aced to  distinct precedents  in  the  Old  English  and

Scandinavian  public  courts. It  was,  in  fact,  the  necessary

outcome  of  the  requirements  of  alienation  in  an  age  and

in  a  society  which  were  not  much  conversant  with  writing,

and  had  to  rely  on  public  declarations  and  on  the  memory

of  witnesses  to  keep  up  the  validity  and  the  l^al  tradition

of  acts.

One  more  eventuality  has  to  be  considered  in  connexion  Adjndica-
^  title,  namely,  settiement  in  the  case  of  disputed  claims.  ^^*
lie  judicial  treatment  of  such  cases  needs  no  consideration,
^  it  is  not  more  peculiar  to  the  eleventh  century  than  to
4ny  other.  But  the  procedure  of  the  Domesday,  following
on  wholesale  appropriation  and  transfer  of  property,  brought
^  it  the  necessity  of  summary  adjudication  between  rival
cbimants,  and  thus  Domesday  Book  itself  gets  to  be  not
^ottdy  a  statement  of  fact  as  to  the  distribution  of  property
id  fiscal  dues,  but  also  a  record  of  title. We  need  not

K  libenim hominem  ad  firmam  regis  de Brunfort, et Roger

^comes  est  ei  Warant.' 282  b:  (Rin^eld,  Suffolk)  '  Rin^esfella.

Wanneforda  Hd.}.  .  .  Ixxx  iiberi  homines,  et  iii  sunt  additi  de  hoc

^  ad  manerium  de  Montfort,  tempore  regis  Wilielmi,  de  quibus  '

tupradicti  xii  qui  non  reddiderunt  ullam  consuetudinem  ad  istud

lictum  manerium  tempore  regis  Edwardi,  sed  modo  reddunt  xv

istam  consuetudinem  constituit  illis  Aluricus  prepositus  in  tem-

X.  Bigot.' Cf.  307b  (Rimdham,  Suffolk); 314b  (Strattuna,

) ;  333  a  (Lokesfort,  Suffolk).

prcconquestual  practice  see  my  paper,  *  The  Transfer  of  Land
English  Law,'  in  the  Harvard  Law  Review,  May,  1907.

Q2


228  LAND  TENURE  [essayH

speak  of  the  important  issues  which  turned  at  a  later  time
on  the  entries  as  to  the  Ancient  Demesne  of  the  Crown.
But  it  is  to  be  noticed  that  the  Clamares  and  Invaswm
which  are  noticed  throughout,  and  sometimes  brongbt
together  in  separate  columns,  were  materials  for  actnal
adjudication,  and  in  a  few  cases  we  actually  catch  glimpsa
of  these  quasi-judicial  proceedings  occasioned  hy  the
Inquest.  One  of  the  most  characteristic  is  the  notioe
in  the  Exon  Domesday  relating  to  the  manor  of  OlwritoiM
in  Devonshire.  It  was  in  the  hands  of  the  Abb^  d
Tavistock  at  the  time  of  the  Survey,  and  the  Abbot  resid
his  claim  on  the  fact  that  an  antecessor  of  his  had  held  tbe
estate  before  him.  But  the  barons  sent  by  King  WiDiu
to  inquire  into  the  state  of  land-holding  in  England  dissdnd
the  Abbot  because  the  English  jurors  gave  witness  dtfl
Olwritone  did  not  belong  to  the  Abbey  on  the  day  wkfl
King  Edward  was  quick  and  dead.^  The  entry  is  curmi
in  many  ways.  It  shows,  to  begin  with,  that  the  Enol
copy  of  Domesday  had  been  written  for  the  use  of  tk
Abbey  of  Tavistock,  or,  at  any  rate,  by  scribes  prejudiced
in  its  favour,  and  this  at  a  time  when  all  the  operatkm
connected  with  the  Survey  had  come  to  a  close;  it  ■
retrospective  in  its  character,  and  tinged  by  a  certain  pi»
possession.  And,  incidentally,  it  gives  direct  evidenced
to  the  power  of  the  barons  of  King  William,  his  ooa-
missioners,  as  we  should  say,  to  disseize  a  tenant,  that  iito
settle  in  a  decisive  way  disputed  questions  of  title  aad
to  transfer  possession.  They  act  in  accordance  with  tk
evidence  tendered  by  the  English,  that  is^  evidently,  ol
the  English  jurors  of  the  hundred,  and  the  latter  evidenlly
had  given  their  verdict  on  the  strength  of  the  traditi(m  «
to  title  preserved  in  the  hundred.


^  Dd.  iv.  165  :  (Werrington,  Devon)  *  De  mannone  que
Olwritona  erat  saisitus  abbas  Tauestochensis  ea  die  qua  n
Willelmus  misit  barones  suos  ad  inquirendas  tenras  anglie  eC  nM
cessor  suus  ante  cum  fuerat  inde  saisitus,  et  per  banmes  regis  arf
desaisitus  fuit  propter  hoc  quod  testati  sunt  angli  quod  ad  abbilia
non  pertinuit  ea  die  qua  rex  Edwardus  uiuus  et  mortaus  fiiit.'  A
the  judicial  power  vested  in  tlie  Pomesday  Commissioiiers  ct
in  Domesday  Studies,  ii.  541.


SECT.I.CH.I] THE LEGAL  FRAMEWORK 239

1  Before  disc  the  main  characteristics  of  tenure  LoDg

m  shaped  by  the  Conquest,  I  should  like  to  say  a  few  ^^"^
vords  about  transactions  which  did  not  transfer  owner-
iMp  nor  "obiistitute  tenant-right-  Leases  were  frequent  in
ttedeventh  and  twelfth  centuries,  although  not  so  frequent
ii  nowadays.  The  law  of  morti  in,  by  which  the  Church
rVitt  its  immense  possessions  v  is  ruled,  produced  an  ex-
itoant  system  of  long  leases,  and  the  disabilities  of  entail
Ml  privileged  tenure  further  developed  the  peculiar  growth
Mkiog  leases  in  English  law.  Taking  our  stand  on  the
ODoesday  Survey,  we  notice  of  course  only  a  few  of  these
tansactions,  as  the  object  of  the  cadastre  was  to  describe
tenmt,  income,  and  fiscal  liabilities,  and  not  flitting  incidents
ifposKssion.  Yet  we  catch  some  glimpses  of  the  features
Wd  tendencies  of  the  law  as  to  leaseholds.  To  begin  with,
ve  find  in  operation  a  practice  famous  in  its  Continental
fuillels  under  the  name  of  precaria  remuneratoria.  Its
fliiject  is  to  attract  certain  plots  of  land  into  the  possession
of  the  Church  by  granting  estates  of  the  latter  for  temporary
IK,  with  a  reversion  of  both  to  the  institution  granting  the
kise.^  Sometimes  the  reciprocity  of  obligations  is  not
^>parent  on  the  surface.  The  grant  of  a  piece  of  land
itnunes  the  forn^  of  a  one-sided  concession  of  usage,^  but
it  is  hardly  likely  that  the  Church  should  have  been  guided
on  such  occasions  by  purely  benevolent  intentions  ;  the
pin  to  her  corresponding  to  the  concession  made  must
hive  consisted,  in  these  cases,  in  indirect  advantages,  such
is  the  protection  and  help  of  an  influential  person,  a  sheriff,

'  Dd.  i.  208  a  :  (Hunts)  '  Terrain  Alurici  de  Geliinge  et  Eminge-
fcvde  testantur  fiiisse  S.  Benedicti  et  eas  fuisse  concessas  Alurico  in
vti  sua  tali  ratione  quod  post  mortem  suam  debuerant  redire  ad
sccdesiam  et  bocstede  cum  eis.  Ipse  autem  Aluricus  occisus  fuit
iibeUo  apud  Hastinges,  et  abbas  recepit  terras  suas  donee  Albericus
^  Ver  desaisiuit  eum.*  Cf.  ibid.  ii.  361  b  (Pachenham,  Suffolk)  ;
ftid.  i.  376  a  ('  Terra  Ingemund/  Lines.).

^  *  Dd.  i.  45  d :  (Amport,  Hants)  *  Anne  .  .  .  Huic  manerio  per-
fiKst  V  hidae  quas  tenet  Radulfus  de  Mortemer.  Quidam  frater  Edrici
leairit  tali  conuentione  quod  quamdiu  bene  se  haberet  er^a  eum  tarn
&i  terram  de  eo  teneret  et  si  uendere  uellet  non  alicui  nisi  ei  de  quo
leaebat  uendere  uel  dare  liceret.  Hoc  testatur  hundred.'  Cf.  47  a
[Scant  one).


f)


330  LAND  TENURE  [essay fl

for  instance,^  or  in  the  need  to  avert  gfreater  losses.  Tte
clause  guaranteeing  reversion  was  in  any  case  intended  t9
preclude  too  gross  encroachments  on  the  rights  of  the
Church.  A  very  characteristic  group  of  conventions  ii
formed  by  leases  for  three  lives,  which  seem  to  have  been
especially  common  in  the  estates  of  the  see  of  Worcester.*
This  is  again  a  form  of  land-holding  which  played  a  gittf
part  on  the  Continent,  especially  in  Italy.'  It  was  a  land
of  compromise  between  the  tendency  towards  concentratkm
of  property  in  the  hands  of  a  few  great  potentates,  and  Ae
dissemination  of  profits  among  a  numerous  class  of  their
retainers  and  servants.  The  Church  brought  this  particnhr
form  of  lease  into  practice  on  her  territory  in  onler  to
secure  at  least  some  supervision  of  her  rights  and  interesli
in  cases  which  would  have  led  otherwise  to  the  constitntioo
of  downright  freehold  and  military  tenure.  The  obl^jatioiis
incumbent  on  the  tenants  for  three  lives  instituted  bjr
Bishop  Oswald  of  Worcester  were  those  of  knights  mi
sergeants,  but  the  holdings  conferred  on  them  were  soIh
jected  to  a  clause  of  reversion  after  three  lives  which  pOt
the  bishop  in  a  position  different  from  that  of  an  ordinaiy
feudal  lord  in  regard  to  his  tenants.^
Short-term  Leases  on  short  terms  were  unusual  in  those  troubled
leases. times ;  they  did  not  give  sufficient  security  either  to  the

'  Dd.  i.  1 73  a :  ( Worcs.)  '  De  ipso  manerio  tenet  Ailricus  uchi-
diaconus  i  hidam  ad  Bradelege  .  .  .  Eldredus  ardiiepisoops
praestitit  suo  preposito  T.  R.  £.  et  quando  uoluit  iuste  ei  abftoBt'

'  Dd.  i.  66  c:  (Hannington,  Wilts)  'Eadem  aecdesia  (Gl«^
bericnsis)  tenet  Hanindone  .  .  .  De  hac  eadem  terra  iii  hidii
uendiderat  abbas  cuidam  taino  T.  R.  £.  ad  aetatem  trium  bomiaBV
et  ipse  abbas  habebat  inde  seruitium  et  postea  debebat  redire  id
dominium.'  Cf.  ibid.  72b  (Hiwi,  Wilts);  ibid.  46 d  (Ordie,  Hanto)
Heming,  Cartulary  (etd.  Heame),  p.  123  (968):  *£go  Oswald  OB
Christi  crismate  presul  iudicatus  Dominice  Incamationis  anno  9^
annuente  regi  Anglorum  Eadgar  Aelfereque  Merciorum  Comite»  no
non  et  familie  Weogomenis  ecclesie,  quandam  runs  particulain,  dot
uidelicet  mansas,  in  loco  qui  celebri  uocatur  a  soliculis  aet  stoc
vocabulo,  cuidam  ministro  meo  nomine  ^thelweardo,  perpetua  lan^
sum  hereditate,  et  post  uite  sue  terminum,  duobus  tantutn  heveoibi
immunem  derelinquat ;  quibus  defunctis,  aecdesie^Dei  in  Weogoni
ceastre  restituatur.* Cf.  125,  126,  127,  128,  215,  &c.

'  Fertile,  Storia  del  diritto,  iv.  303  ff.

*  Domesday  Book  and  Beyond,  309  ff.


SECT.  I.  CH.  I] THE  LEGAL  FRAMEWORK 231

tenant  or  to  the  owner.  Besides  the  difficulty  of  enforcing
covenants  and  of  getting  suitable  lessees,  the  tendency  of
the  tenants  was  decidedly  to  install  themselves  in  condi-
tions as  like  perpetual  tenure  as  possible.  It  was  the
poiition  which  answered  best  to  the  investment  of  capital
in  land  on  the  part  of  the  tenant,  and  to  a  husbandry
working  more  for  consumption  than  for  the  market.  Short
kues  were  also  inconvenient  for  the  great  landowner,
because  of  the  difficulties  of  administration.  It  is  very
dBLracteristic  of  the  steady  change  for  the  better,  in  regard
to  social  protection  and  intercourse,  that  short  leases  become
more  and  more  common  from  the  end  of  the  thirteenth
century,  and  begin  to  transform  the  economic  system  based
00  hereditary  tenant-right.  We  shall  have  to  revert  to
tbese  phenomena  when  the  time  comes  for  discussing  the
Imsbandry  of  our  period.  Now  we  have  to  take  into
account  on  the  juridical  side  that  such  contracts  as  the
Italian  libeUos^  commonly  concluded  for  twenty-nine  years,
ve  out  of  place  in  the  England  of  the  eleventh  and  twelfth
centuries.  Nor  is  the  colonia  partiaria^  based  on  the  division
of  profits  between  the  tenant  and  a  lord  providing  the
implements  and  capital  of  exploitation,  reflected  in  the
sources.  Leases  at  rack-rents  occur  but  rarely,  and  they
M  mostly  produced  by  efforts  to  get  waste  land  under
some  land  of  cultivation.^  Here  again  Continental  practices
present  instructive  parallels.  The  hospitality  offered  by
ecclesiastical  institutions  and  great  men  in  Capetian
France  to  settlers  {hospites)  started  generally  from  an
entirely  precarious  tenure,  but  led  in  many  cases  to  the
development  of  thriving  colonies  with  privileged  tenant-
right  for  the  '  guests '? Although  this  kind  of  hospitality


'  Fertile,  Storia  del  diritto  italiano,  iv.  291  ff.

'  Dd.  i.  314  b  :  (Hildreschelf,  Yorks)  *  4  carucatas  terre  ad  geldum.

Terra  4  camels. Nunc  Berenger  habet  ibi  iii  censarios  cum  ii  carucis.'

C£  Hotun,  ibid. Dd.  i.  270a:  (Blackburn,  Lanes.)  *•  Blacheburne  . .  .

ibt  sunt  tot  homines  qui  habent  xi  carucas  et  dimidiam  quos  ipsi  con-

cesserunt  esse  quietos  usque  ad iii  annos  et  ideo  non  appreciatur

moda*

'  Luchaire,  Institutions  Monarchiques,  pp.  128  fT.


232  LAND  TENURE  [essayO

was  not  quite  so  much  in  fashion  in  England,  both  fhe

term  and  the  thing  existed  there.^
j\ The  fief. 3. The terms  feudum,  fevum  „  wg;^
!  England  by  the  French  phraa^*ffc1r^gy  /^f^  fr^f  ^"^^IllflnW


They  do  not  appear  before  the  Conquest)- thcNiglLifflLff'!
certainly  speak  of  Old  TTf^pKcii  \^r^A  fr^m-y  ay  to  aj^rei

extent  feudalized  even  before  the  invasioo  ^tifayfilic»rg|a

Still,  the  terms  and  the  corresponding  definite  lq[al  mk

were  certainly  taken  over  by  these  latter  into  the  conqueie

kingdom. The  most  usual  sense  of  the  term  fmdum  0

fevum  is,  indeed,  the  complex  of  estates  held  by  a  kw

after  the  Conquest :  there  is,  for  instance,  a  fief  of  Frederic

the  brother  of  W.  de  Warenne,^  or  a  fief  of  the  Bishop  0

Thetford.^ But  such  general  mentions  show,  aocordii^  t

French mediaeval  ideas,  that  the  estates  were  held  c

somebody ;  in  the  case  quoted,  and  in  most  of  those  vliic

occur  expressly,  they  are  held  of  the  king. The  ttfj

'  feudum  '  implies  the  feudal  nexus,  and  the  virtual  reparti

tion  of  the  whole  of  England  into  fees  amounts  to  &

admission of  the famous rule formulated later  on  b;

the lawyers of Northern France: nuUe terriM

seigneur — *no  land  is  held  without  a  lord,'  as  we  migli

describe  it more  lengthily  in modem English. TU

rule, though not  expressed  in as many  words  in  th

Survey,  is  indicated  in  several  passages. There  is,  e.g

a  claim  of  a  certain  Norman  Crassus  in  regard  to  a  houfl

in Lincoln. It belonged formerly to  the  Abbey  <

«

*  Dd.i.i84c:  (Hope, Hereford) * Ibi ii hidae geldantes.  Tcrraestj
carucis.  Ibi  sunt  homines  reddentes  x  sol.  et  viii  den.  pro  suis  ho^iiti
Nil  aliud  ibi  est.'  Ibid.  (Lenehalle),  '  De  quibusdam  bominib
ibi  hospitatis  habentur  c  denarii  quamdiu  ipsi  uolnerint'  <
Letune,  184  d.

*  Dd.  ii.  170  b:  (Holkham,  Norfolk)  <In  Holcham  tenet  Galtd
diinidiam  carucatam  teixae,  semper  i  bordarius  ct  pertinet  ad  Biu
ham  et  est  de  feudo  frederici  et  ibi  est  appredata.'  C£  17
(Gersam) ;  277  a:  (Invasiones  in  Nordfulc)  'In  Toddenham
liberi  homines  dim.  car.  terrae  de  feudo  fedrici  commendati  \
antecessor!.' Cf.  Freeman,  Norman  Conquest,  iii.  47a

^  Dd.  ii.  379b:  (Thetford,  Norfolk)  'Feudum  episcopi  de  Tedi
In  Seilanda  i  liber  homo  Stigandi.  ii  carucatae  tenae  &  zii  bord
et  ii  carucae  in  dominio.  Tunc  iiii  carucae  hominam.  Modo
lb.  i.  32  d  (Surrey).


r.i.cH.i] THE  LEGAL  FRAMEWORK ^33

rborough,  but  the  Abbot  omitted  to  pay  geld  for  it,
it  was  taken  over  in  mortgage  (in  vadimanio)  by
red,  the  Saxon  predecessor  of  Norman  Crassus,  in
Dent  for  3^  marks  of  silver.  The  transaction  is  in-
(dng  in  yet  another  way,  indicating,  as  it  does,  the
len  of  the  geld ;  but  the  point  to  which  I  should  like
ill  attention  on  the  present  occasion  is  the  fact  that
nan  claims  the  house  as  of  the  king's  fee/  and  this
bardly  mean  anjrthing  else  but  that  he  was  enfeoffed  on
Jf  of  the  king  with  the  estates  of  Godred.  We  have
an  interesting  clue,  showing  that  the  feudal  principle
introduced  by  the  very  process  of  the  original  dis-
ition  of  land  after  the  Conquest.  This  is  also  expressed
rectly  in  two  disputes  between  Roger  Bigod  and
er  de  Ramis  as  to  land  in  Suffolk.  The  latter
lenged  the  possession  by  Bigod  of  the  land  which  had
ngcd  to  Wicolf,  and  all  the  freemen  whom  Warenger
of  Bigod,  asserting  that  the  estates  in  question  had
I  delivered  to  him  earlier  than  to  Bigod  The
ired  did  not  know  what  to  say,  because  Warenger^
_had  evidently  been  the  Saxon  owner,  held  of  both
ants.  Warenger  himself,  now  sunk  to  the  position  of
under-tenant,  gave  witness  in  favour  of  Bigod,  but
er  de  Ramis  did  not  submit,  and  contradicted  this
mony  by  all  legal  means.^  In  Staham  seventeen
nen  had  been  '  added '  by  Bigod  to  the  manor  in  the
1  of  King  William,  although  his  Saxon  predecessor
not  had  any  right  in  them.  Roger  de  Ramis  con-
ed that  they  did  belong  to  his  fief  before  Bigod  got
land  in  Suffolk ;  the  hundred  testified,  however,  that

M.  I  336  b,  c  :  (Lincoln) '  Domum  de  qua  abbas  de  Burgo . . .  non
geldum,  ipsam  clamat  Normannus  Crassus  de  feuo  regis.  Ipsam
habuit  Godredus  antecessor  suus  in  uadimonio  pro  tribus  markis
d  et  dimidia/

Id.  ii.  338  a,  b  :  (Hunston,  Honington,  Suffolk)  *  Totam  terram
16,  et  hos  omnes  liberos  homines  quod  (sic)  tenet  Warengerus  de
ro  Bigot  calumpniatur  Rogerus  de  Raimis  et  dicit  quod  sibi
tum  fuit  priusquam  Rogero  Bigot.  £t  hundret  nescit  ex  hoc  uenim
^  quia  ille  Garengerus  de  utroque  tenebat,  sed  tamen  iUe
agerus  reuocat  ad  feudum  Rogeri  Bigot,  et  Roger  de  Ramis  hoc
dicit  omnibus  legibu


tenures.


234  LAND  TENURE  [essayD

Roger  Bigod  had  received  them  in  connexion  with  lui
fief  before  Roger  de  Ramis.^  Not  only  the  collision  n
regard  to  feudal  rights  derived  from  delivery  by  the  1dQ|
is  to  be  noticed,  but  the  fact  that  these  rights  were  con
ceded,  not  piecemeal,  but  en  bloc^hy  reference  toSasra
predecessors.  This  involved  the  application  of  a  doubl
rule:  the  extent  of  the  estates  comprised.. io...thc.lN^
tenure  was  regulated  by  the  limits  and  incidents  of^tli
old  preconquestual  one ;  at  the  same  time  the  duiFaycti
of  the  tenure  incurred  a  change,  for  instead  of  the  vazKMi
forms  of  land-holding  known  to  Saxon  times  the  uniiaa
feudal  tenure  appeared.  We  see  that,  e.g.»  a  rd^
based  on  mortgage  {vadimonium)  is  converted  into j
ordinary  feudal  tenement.
Feadai  This  does  not  mean  that  the  fiefs  derived  from  the  nei

i  feudal  nexus  were  not  beginning  to  be  differentiated  in  thei
1  turn  :  frankalmoign,  burgage,  socage,  sergeanty  devdo
';by  the  side  of  the  main  military  tenure,  and  all  tlies
:varietics  have  roots  in  the  past  as  well  as  in  the  moi
Inodem  feudal  law.  But  whereas  in  Saxon  times  tiic
grew  without  any  direct  and  necessaiy  rrfercnce  tod
king's  grant,  as  results  of  independent  legil  fprc^^
introduction  of  fiefs  transformed  all  these  relations  iol
varieties  of  one  main  feudal  group.  Taking  frankalmoig
as  an  example,  we  find,  on  the  one  hand,  an  exceptional]
privileged  tenure  based  on  the  substitution  of  prayers  an
ecclesiastical  performances  for  material  scrvicCi  while  i
the  preconquestual  period  the  freedom  from  gafoUgeldy  an
various  other  public  obligations  is  an  immunity  of  oertai
churches,  or  estates,  or  parts  of  an  estate^  and  not  the  bas
of  any  specific  tenure. Indeed,  these  immunities  fluctua

^  Dd.  ii.  337  b :  (Suff.) '  Staham  tenuit  idem  Brun  pro  nuuMfio
acranim  t.  r.e.  modo  Warengerus  de  Rogero.  ...  In  eadem  x
liberi  homines  sunt  additi  huic  manerio  t.  r.  Willelmi  de  ooit
nichil  habuit  antecessor  Rogeri  Bigot.  Istos  liberos  homines  caian
niatur  Rogerus  de  Ram  is  tenuisse  ad  suum  feudum  antequam  R.  ^
terram  recepisset  in  Sudfolc,  sed  hundret  testatur  quod  Rogems  Bi|
eos  recepit  prius  ad  suum  feudum,  et  hoc  contradicit  Rogerus  de  Rai
omni  lege,  et  habet  bcviiii  acras.  Ex  his  fuerunt  v  commendati  n
cessori  Ranulfi  Piperelli.  scilicet  Saxo.'


\


SECT. I.  CH.  I] THE  LEGAL  FRAMEWORK 235

according  to  times  and  reigns,  sometimes  amounting  to  an
assertion  of  the  exemption  of  all  Church  property,  while  on
other  occasions  they  are  restricted  to  a  few  emphatic  cases  of
exemption.^  Burgage^tenements  are  indeed  specialized  by
their  position  and  obligations  from  Saxon  times,  and  the
Norman  invasion  did  not  make  them  more  peculiar  than
Hofc,^  but  socage  tenure,  or  non-military  freehold,  does
not  appestr  as  a  feudal  tenure  at  all  before  the  Conquest.
The  freemen  who  could  sell  their  land  to  whom  they
pleased  were  not  feudal  tenants  in  the  later  sense,  though
flttny  of  them  may  have  been  commended  to  one  or  the
other  magnate,  and  though  the  rest  held  under  the  king,
bj^jiot  from  .the.  king  io.  the  fpud^^  sense.  It  is  perhaps
the  best  place  here  to  notice  a  lsga].JaJ[|a£j;jvhich  comes
to  play  a  great  part  in  the  social  history  of  England.  I
Qjan  the  treatment  of  small  freemen  as  king's  tenantsln
the  counties  where  such  small  freemen  were  still  very
Mspjcuous.  Sometimes  this  is  done  in  such  a  way  that
^  perceive  at  once  the  late  introduction  of  the  feudal
principle  into  their  condition.^  In  other  cases,  however,
they  are  described  as  king's  tenants  or  freemen  on  the
rag's  estates,  as  though  this  were  already  their  specifically
feudal  condition  T.  R.  E.  and  before.  In  truth  this  sliding
ffio  the  feudal  groove  is  only  one  of  the  expressions  of  the
e^eral  growth  of  aristocracy  culminating  in  the  Conquest.  \
■  Ks  seamy  side  was  the  absorption  of  such  small  freemen  by
peat  lords  and  church  institutions.  I  am  not  speaking  of
the  economical  evolution  involved  in  this  process,  nor  of  the
numberless  acts  of  violence  by  which  it  was  characterized,
^t  of  a  juridical  element  connected  with  it,  namely,  the

'  Domesday  Book  and  Beyond,  235  f. Cf.  Thorpe,  Diplom.,  443, 660.

'  I>omesday  Book  and  Beyond,  198.

'  Dd.  ii.  372  b :  (Norfolk)  *1  .  .  .  sunt  homines  liberi  reg^s  ...  In

Stalham  habet  Ailmarus  filius  Goduini  vii  liberos  homines  de  1  acns

•  •  •  in  Ludham  tenet  isdem  iiii  liberos  homines  xii  ac.  .  .  .  £t  in

Secies  iiii  liberos  homines  xx  ac.  .  .  .  In  W'actanesham  iii  liberos

l|oininesx  ac  .  .  .  In  Horseiaiiii.  xx  ac* ii.  447  b:  (Suffolk)  '  Inua-

sooes  super Regem  .  .  .  Ricardus filius Gisleberti comitis. in

Bndeleia  iiii  liberi  homines.* 448 a:  *  In  eadem  (Kauanadis)  inuasit

Kicardus  de  Clara  liberum  hominem  regis  Edwardi  aed  antecessor  saus

oichil  omnino  in  eo  habuit.*


\


\


\


236  LAND  TENURE  [1

introduction  of  the  feudal  nexus  into  relations  whi
matter  of  the  public  law  of  citizenship  before.  T
trast  I  am  trying  to  express  may  be  too  pointc
reduced  to  such  very  modem  definitions,  but  I  t
meaning  will  not  be  misunderstood  when  I  use
substantiate  this  contrast.
Alod.  It  is  from  the  point  of  view  of  Old  English  an<

postconquestual  tenure  that  another  celebrated  te
in  the  Survey  must  be  explained,  namely,  ^g/grf>
The  term  is  again  French,  and  is  celebrated  in  th<
of  Continental  law  for  the  opposition  presented  by
term  feodum.  But  then  no  such  opposition  is  t
in  the  English  common  law  after  the  Conques
ownership  of  land  resolves  itself  into  tenure,  and  12
ultimately  from  a  royal  grant  in  consideration  of
There  is  no  independent  property  in  English  feu
nothing  like  the  dominium  of  Roman  law,  or  even
aleu  of  Southern  France,  where  the  maxim  *  nul !
sans  titre'  obtained,  that  is,  the  rule — no  one  is
a  lord  unless  he  proves  it.  Why  should,  then,  th<
lawyers  of  the  Conqueror  speak  of  alods  in  E
Evidently  because  they  came  across  forms  of  land
in  the  conquered  country  which  struck  them
resemblance  to  the  aleu  of  France.  At  the  tim
Survey  it  may  have  been  even  doubtful  whether  su
should  not  continue  to  exist  in  the  new  kingdom,
the  county  courts  and  the  hundreds  were  still  more
with  them  than  with  the  feudal  productions  of  t
quest.  The  possibility  of  such  a  development
short  by  the  jurisprudence  of  the  central  roya
which  systematically  enforced  and  developed  th'
doctrine.  But  it  is  interesting  to  note  how  often  1
Survey  appeals  to  alodial  law,  in  order  to  cha
the  land -holding  of  its  time.  The  direct  reference
held  in  alod  are  always  to  T.  R.  E.,  usually  y
adjunct  de  rege} Thus  it  is  assumed  that  the  land

'  Dd.  i.  43  c :  (Winchfield,  Hants)  '  Abbatia  de  Certes^g
tenet  Winesflet  et  Waltenis  Fitz  Other  de  Abbatia. Aluuinv


5ECT.LCH.I] THE  LEGAL  FRAMEWORK 237

>f  the  king.  But  it  would  be  wrong  to  say  that  the  ^lod
neant  land  held  of  the  king  as  opposed  to  land  held  of
3ther  persons.  To  begin  with,  there  are  numbers  of  cases
Rrhen  land  is  held  of  the  king  without  any  alodial  qualiii-
lation ;  in  fact  the  majority  of  the  tenentes  in  capite  held
>f  the  king  without  any  reference  to  alod^  and  were  meant
to  hold  fiefs.  Nor  were  their  Saxon  predecessors  described
as  normally  holding  in  alode.  The  mere  tenuit  certainly
does  not  imply  it.  In  some  cases  alod  is  said  to  be  held  of
the  king  and  even  of  private  persons.^  Once,  although
atod  is  not  directly  mentioned,  an  expression  is  employed
vrhich  seems  taken  as  an  equivalent  to  it :  it  is  '  in  propria
liber tate  de  r^e  Edwardo'.  This  is  opposed  to  in  presto^
'by  lease,'  'in  concession,'  which  applies  to  another
manor  held  by  the  same  person.  The  three  manors  held
Hn  propria  liber  tate'  in  his  own  franchise,  or  perhaps  Mn
free  ownership ',  seem  to  have  been  at  the  full  disposal  of
the  owner,  while,  of  course,  in  regard  to  the  fourth  he  had
only  a  conditional  use.  And  this  can  be  applied,  as  it
seems  to  me,  to  the  other  cases  where  alod  is  used,  or,  to
express  it  more  cautiously,  to  most  of  these  cases.  Alod
is  the  land  in  the  full  and  free  disposition  of  its  owner,  the
terra  testatiuntalis  of  the  charters,  the  terra  quant  vendere
potuit  cui  voluit  of  the  Domesday  Survey.  Such  land
Dught,  of  course,  to  be  normally  under  the  direct  supremacy
Df  the  king,  and  the  feudalists  of  the  Survey  put  it  as  if
it  were  held  of  the  king  even  T.  R.  E. They  might  have

ilodium  de  rege  Edwardo  et  nunquam  pertinuit  abbatiae.'  (Soanes-
felt  [Swallowfield]  &  Selingfelle  [Shinfield  ?]  Berks)  i.  57  b.

^  Dd.  i.  1 1  a :  (Solton,  Kent) '  Isdem  Hugo  tenet  Soltone  de  episcopo.
. .  In  hoc  Manerio  mansit  Godricus  et  tenet  xx  acras  de  alodio  suo. . . .
^Dsfridus  tenet  de  feudo  episcopi  in  Leueberge  dimidium  iugum,  et
bi  habet  i  uillanum  et  i  bordarium.  .  .  .  Ibidem  mansit  quidam  Altet
)ui  tenuit  de  rege  Edwardo  duas  acras  in  alodium,  et  tenuit  eas  de
\nsfndo.'  i.  39d,  Nonoelle  (Nunwell,  Hants);  i.  50b,  Sotesdene
Shoddesden  in  Kimpton,  Hants).

*  Dd.  i.  376  c  :  (Scotton,  Scotter,  Lincolnshire) '  Scira  testatur  quod
Vschil  habebat  ea  die  qua  rex  Edwardus  tuit  uiuus  &  mortuus  &
K>stea,  haec  tria  maneria— Scotune,  Scotre  &  Ragenaltorp  in  propria
ibertate  de  rege  Edwardo.  Similiter  habebat  Muscham  in  Snotmg-
laxnscire.  Et  unum  manerium  Malmatune  (Maunton)  tenebat  ae
ratre  suo  Brand  in  presto.'


238  LAND  TENURE  [essay  11

pleaded  for  their  treatment  of  this  derived  alodial
possession,  that  it  had  its  roots  in  royal  grants,  and  that
the  king  s  confirmation  or  additional  grant  is  often  re-
sorted to  when  it  comes  to  the  eventuality  of  making
use  of  the  owner's  full  powers.  Still  the  language  of  the
charters,  if  we  read  them  right,  does  not  warrant  the  feudal
assumption  of  the  compilers  of  the  great  Survey.

One  or  two  small  but  curious  results  of  the  difficulty
experienced  by  feudal  lawyers,  when  they  came  across
non-feudalized  tenures,  may  be  noticed  in  the  description
of  Middlesex.  We  find  in  Osulvestone  Hundred  1%  acres
termed  '  de  nanemaneslande  ^ '.  Their  value  is  and  was
five  shillings  a  year.  It  is  entered  as  held  by  King
William,  and  is  said  to  have  been  held  in  the  same
way  by  King  Edward.  No  man's  land  would  stand  directly
in  the  king's  power  under  any  regime,  but  perhaps  the
identity  in  the  way  of  *  holding  it '  attested  by  the  Survey
was  not  quite  a  literal  one.  The  same  expedient  of
assigning  the  king  as  lord  has  to  be  resorted  to  in  regard
to  persons  who  have  no  actual  lord  to  appeal  to.  In
this  same  Middlesex  hundred  are  to  be  found  30  cotters
who  are  said  to  belong  to  the  king,  although  they  are
not  assigned  to  any  manor.  They  pay  altogether
I4r.  lo}^.  a  year.  Two  more  are  to  be  found  in  Holbom
paying  2od.  a  year.  AU  these  small  people,  possibly
squatters,  at  any  rate  scattered  tenants  with  infinitesimal
holdings,  are  in  the  custody  of  the  Sheriff  of  Middlesex.'
They  are  mentioned  outside  the  boundaries  of  the  king's
estates. Yet they  are  said  to  belong  to  the  king,  and


^  Mr.  W.  H.  Stevenson  calls  my  attention  to  the  fact  that  the  term
was  used  as  the  name  of  a  place  of  execution  by  the  wall  of  London
(Annales  Paulini,  pp.  291,  321).  The  derivation  of  the  local  name
does  not  admit  of  a  doubt  and  is  characteristic.

'  Dd.  i.  127  a :  (Middlesex) '  In  Osuluestane  Hundret  tenet  Willelmus
rex  xii  acras  terrae  et  dimidiam  de  nanesmaneslande.  Haec  terra
ualuit  et  ualet  v  solidos.  banc  habuit  rex  Edwardus  similiter.  In
eodem  hundret  habet  rex  xxx  cotarios  qui  reddunt  per  annum  xiiii
solidos  &  X  denarios  et  i  obolum.  Ad  Holebume  habet  rex  ii  cotarios
qui  reddunt  per  annum  xx  denarios  uicecomiti  regis.  T.  R.  £.  Hos
cotarios  custodiebat  semper  uicecomes  de  Middelsexe.'


SECT.  I.  CH.  I] THE  LEGAL  FRAMEWORK 239

this  is  surely  the  most  appropriate  way  of  defining  their
position  in  a  feudalized  State.

4.  Let  us  look  at  some  consequences  of  the  feudal  as-  Sendee,
sumption.  The  principal  is  that  land  is  always  held  for*  -^
service.  There  is  no  lise  of  land  to  which  correspond-
ing'service  is  not  annexed.  Therefore  'tenet'  and
*  servit '  are  two  sides  of  any  tenure.  We  hear,  e.  g.,  of
a  *  remlineratory  *  concession  on  the  land  of  St.  Bennet
of  Hulme.  Edric  holds  two  carucates  in  *  Haninga'  of  the
Abbey.  Of  these  one-half  belonged  to  the  Abbot,  and
he  conceded  it  to  Edric,  while  Edric  in  return  gave  to  the
Abbot  the  other  half  out  of  his  fief,  and  the  whole  of  Hun-
ingham  was  then  held  by  him  of  the  Abbot  and  acquitted
of  service.^  It  happens  sometimes  that  several  brothers
are  possessed  of  an  estate ;  it  is  a  common  thing  in  such
a  case  that  the  juniors  should  serve  the  senior  representing
the  fief.*  The  view  that  every  tenement  should  be  justified
by  service  places  jurors  into  perplexity  when  it  has  to
be  extended  to  preconquestual  condition.  In  Warram,
Lincolnshire,  the  title  of  Walter  d'Eyncourt  goes  back
to  the  possession  of  Tori  T.  R.  E.,  but  a  certain  Norman
held  it  after  him  at  the  same  time,  and  the  men  of  the
locality  and  of  the  wapentake  do  not  know  by  what  pact
'  he  had  it,  as  they  did  not  see  him  do  any  service  for  it  *.^
The  passage  admits  of  different  construction  in  its  details.
The  post  eum  may  be  literally  after  him  in  point  of  time,
Norman  taking  the  place  of  Tori,  and  it  being  uncertain

^  Dd.  ii.  219  b  :  (Honing,  Norfolk)  Mn  Haninga  ii  carucatas  terrae
tenebat  Sanctus  Benedictus  tempore  regis  Eidwardi.  et  E^dricus
de  CO.  ita  quod  abbas  ei  dederat  dimidiam  de  suo  dominio.  et  iUe
concesserat  abbati  aliam  medietatem  de  suo  feudo.  et  totum  ita
tenebat  de  abbate  et  deseruiebat.' i.  49  b  (Hatch  Warren,  Hants).

'  Dd.  i.  341  b:  (Bishopthorp,  Linos.)  'In  Biscopetorp  habuerunt
Godric  et  ii  fratres  eius  iii  carucatas  terrae  ad  geldum.  Duo  seruiebant
tercio. Nunc  ii  homines  episcopi. Terra  vi  carucis.'

'  Dd.  i.  361a:  (Somerby?,  Lines.)  *  In  Summerdebi  habet  Tori
ii  carucatas  terrae  et  ii  bouatas  ad  geldum.  Terra  xviii  bobus.  Ibi
Kaynaldus  homo  Walterii  (de  Aincurt)  habet  ii  carucas  et  v  uillanos
cum  una  caruca  et  dimidia  .  .  .  Walterus  habet  Warram. . . .  Hoc
manerium  tenuit  Tori  T.  R.  E.  et  Norman  post  eum  eodem  tempore,
sed  homines  patrie  et  de  Wapentac  nesciunt  quo  pacto  habuit,
quia  nullum  scruitium  inde  uiderunt  ilium  facere.'


24©  LAND  TENURE  [essay  ii

by  what  service  he  came  to  hold  the  manor  of  the  king.
Eo  tempore  would  then  merely  stand  for  T.  R.  E.,  while
pacto  would  have  to  be  taken  in  a  general  sense  *  in  what
way ',  '  in  what  manner.'  On  the  other  hand,  one  may
zonsXx\xtp(zcio  and  eo  tempore  literally — *  by  what  convention '
and  '  at  the  same  time '.  In  this  case  post  eum  woukl  have
to  be  taken  in  the  sense  of  '  behind  him  ' ;  Norman  would
be  a  mesne  tenant,  what  the  French  called  arriire  vassal^
and  what  the  Germans,  in  a  rather  lower  range  of  relations^
termed  Hintersasse.  This  seems  the  more  probable  ex-
planation to  me,  but,  in  any  case,  the  doubt  of  the  jurors
remains  characteristic;  they  thought  they  had  to  look
primarily  to  service  in  order  to  determine  the  quality  of  the
tenure.

Looking  back  to  the  reign  of  King  Edward,  it  is  found
that  the 'service'  chiefly  implied  in  the  tenure  of  estates  held
directly  under  the  king  was  military  service,  in  fact  the
military  service  of  the  fyrdt  which  came  to  rest  primarily
on  the  landowners.

The  following  passage  hardly  admits  of  any  other  expla-
nation. The  brothers  Chetel  and  Turver  held  an  estate  in
Covenham  in  inheritance  from  their  father.  They  had
divided  it,  but  Chetel  had  to  acquit  it  as  a  whole  of  the
service  of  the  king,  not,  however,  without  assistance  from
Turver.^  Another  case  of  the  same  kind  occurred  in
Swanetone,  Lincoln :  Alsi  and  Athelstan  held  there  one
carucate  to  the  geld,  and  Alfric  their  brother  had  soc  over
them  in  Hazebi,  only  in  regard  to  the  king's  service,*  It
seems  obvious  that  this  passage  also refers  to  a  joint


^  Dd.  i.  354a:  (Covenham,  Lines.)  'In  Covenham  habuerunt  Alsi
et  Chetel  et  Turner  iii  carucatas  terre  &  dimidiam  ad  geldum.
Terra  iiii  canicis.  I  hi  habuit  Willelmus  in  dominio  iii  canicas  et  zviii
uillani  &  xvii  sochmanni  cum  quinque  canicis  et  dimidia. . . .  Chetel
et  Turuer  fratres  fuerunt  et  post  mortem  patris  sui  terram  diuisenint.
Ita  tam  ut  Chetel  faciens  seruitium  regis  haberet  adiutorium  Turuer
fratris  sui.'

'  Dd.  i.  357  c  :  (Swaton,  Lines.) '  In  eadem  uilla  habuerunt  Alsi  et
Adelstan  unam  carucatam  terrae  ad  geldum.  Terra  x  boum.  Aluricus
frater  eorum  habebat  socam  super  illos  in  Hazebi  (Ashby)  solummodo
in  seruitio  regis. '


SECT.  I.  CH.  I] THE  LEGAL  FRAMEWORK ^41

performance  of  the  king's  service,  mainly  consisting  in
military  obligations,  b^  three  brothers,  the  one  in  Hazebi
acquitting  himself  of  the  main  part  of  it,  probably  in  per-
son, while  the  two  others  in  Swanetone  did  suit  to  him  in
assistance.  The  character  and  quantity  of  the  service  might
be  left  uncertain  and  dependant  on  fluctuating  agreements.
The  absence  of  any  service  is  noted  as  quite  exceptional,
when  it  refers  to  the  reign  of  King  William,  and  is  not  ex-
plained by  frank-almoign ;  it  is  hardly  anjrthing  but  failure
to  undertake  or  to  perform  a  duty.  This  seems  to  be
the  most  natural  explanation  of  the  Bedfordshire  case  of
Godwin,  the  burgess  of  Bideham.^  In  the  preconquestual
period  the  absence  of  service  may  mean  an  arrangement
transferring  the  duties  incumbent  on  a  plot  of  land  to  some
person  other  than  the  tenant.^  Such  a  case  could  not
exist  under  feudal  law.  If  anybody  wanted  to  hold  land
securely  he  had  to  join  the  series  of  interdependent  tenures
by  a  nexus  of  service,  even  though  it  were  nominal.  But
the  Domesday  Survey  recognizes  sometimes  that  it  might
be  otherwise  before  the  Conquest ;  a  person  could  hold  land
without  being  liable  to  any  service.  A  case  in  point  may
be  quoted  from  the  survey  of  Worcestershire  (Biselie).'  It
is  characteristic,  however,  of  the  bent  of  mind  of  the  com-


^  Dd.  i.  218  b :  (Biddenham,  Beds) '  In  Bideham . . .  tenet  Goduinus
burgensis  de  rege  unam  hidam  et  quartam  partem  unius  uirgatae.
Terra  est  i  caruce  &  ibi  est  pratum  i  canice  . .  .  Dimidiam  hidam
de  hac  terra  iste  qui  nunc  tenet  tenuit  T.  R.  £.  quam  potuit  dare  cui
uoluit  Dimidiam  uero  hidam  &  quartam  partem  unius  uirgatae
emit  postquam  rex  Willelmus  in  anglia  uenit,  set  nee  regi  nee  alicui
inde  seruitium  fecit,  nee  de  ea  liberatorem  habuit.'

*  C.  D.  805  (Ealdred.  B.  1046-1060):  (Woreestcr)  *Ad  aecclesiam
quae  sita  est  .  .  .  in  Uuigomaeeastre,  ita  eam  liberam  trado  sicut
eam  liberam  ipse  (Aki)  tenebat  et  ego  eam  liberam  ab  eo  accepi,  tarn
a  seruitio  viliae  episeopalis  Breodune,  ad  quam  dicebatur  antiquis
temporibus  pertinere  debuisse,  .  .  .  quam  a  caeteris  cuiuscumque
hominis  seruitiis,  praeter,  ut  diximus,  regis,  iuxta  morem  patriae.  Sit
autem  . .  .  haee  terra  libera  a  Breodune,  ab  omni  seruitio  tam  aecde-
siastico  quam  saeculari  et  episeopali  etiam,  cum  saka  et  socne,  tolle
et  teame,  ciricsceatte  et  decimis,  et  omnibus  redditibus/

'  Dd.  i.  i8od:  (Bushley,  Wore.)* Rex  tenet  Biselie  .  Brietric tenuit.
qui  et  emit  illiid  a  Liuingo  episeopo  Wireeestre  .  iii  markis  auri  .
simul  et  unam  domum  in  Wireeestre  eivitate  .  quae  reddit  per  annum
markam  argenti .  et  simul  unam  siluam  una  leuua  longam  et  tantum-

VINOCRADOFF  R


a42  LAND  TENURE  [essay  ii

pilers  of  the  Survey  that  in  such  a  case  they  would  enter
the  land  under  the  general  rubric  of  the  king's  possessions.
The  freedom  referred  to  in  the  description  of  Photestorp,
Norfolk,  seems  of  another  kind :  it  is  freedom  from  sub-
jection to  the  Church,  in  fact  an  assertion  of  independence
which  would  make  the  owner  a  tenant  in  chief  performing
service  to  the  king.^
Recogni-  One  of  the  consequences  of  this  doctrine  as  to  service
is  the  value  of  the  latter  as  a  recognition  of  tenure,  quite
apart  from  its  material  importance.  Everybody  knows  the
significance  attached  to  the  payment  of  a  pound  of  pepper
or  the  presentation  of  a  rose,  from  this  point  of  view.  We
can  trace  the  practice  in  Domesday.  There  was  a  com-
plicated dispute  in  Norfolk  about  the  tenure  of  30  acres
in  Mundeham.  Alfric  had  held  them  T.  R.  E.  from
Archbishop  Stigand.  He  was  outlawed,  and  the  king's
reeve,  Ulketel,  seized  the  land  into  the  king's  hands.  Roger
Bigod  obtained  the  possession  of  it  from  King  William,
but  Count  Alan  claimed  the  holding  as  having  belonged
to  Earl  Ralph  (Guader)  in  his  manor  of  Rumburgh.  In
giving  evidence  on  the  claims,  the  men  of  the  hundred
made  statements  about  the  recognitions  and  services  per-
formed by  Ulketel,  who,  •  evidently,  had  kept  the  plot  in
his  direct  use.  He  had  recognized  once  a  year  Count
Ralph  before  the  latter  forfeited  his  estates,  and  in  the
same  way  he  had  once  performed  service  in  Rumburgh
after  the  forfeiture ;  but,  on  the  other  hand,  they  had
heard  Ulketel  say  that  he  owed  service  to  Roger  Bigod.*

dem  latam.  Hoc  totum  ita  emit  &  quiete  tenuit  .  ut  inde  non
seruiret  cuiquam  homini.'

^  Dd.  ii.  213 :  (Noifolk)  '  In  Photestorp  i  carucata  terrae  &  iii
uillani  &  ii  bordarii .  semper  i  carucata  in  dominio  &  dimidia  carucata
hominum. . . .  Hanc  terram  calumpniatur  esse  liberam  Ulchetel  homo
Hermeri,  quocunque  modo  iudicetur  uel  bello  uel  iuditio,  et  alius  est
presto  probare  eo  modo  quod  iacuit  ad  ecclesiam  die  qua  rex  Edwardus
obiit,  sed  totus  hundredus  testatur  earn  fuisse  t.  r.  e.  ad  socam
Adeld.'

*  Dd.  ii.  176  b:  (Mundham,  Norfolk)  *  In  Mundaham  tenuit  Aluricus
liber  homo  sub  Stigando  .  t  r.e.  xxx  acras  terrae  . . .  Iste  Aluricus  ut
lagauit  et  prepositus  regis  Ulketel  saisiuit  terram  in  manu  regis,
et  Rogerus  Bigot  rogauit  a  rege,  et  concessit  ei. Hanc  calumpniatur


SECT.  I. CH.  I] THE LEGAL  FRAMEWORK  243

A  special  recognition  was  due  in  case  of  a  change  of
tenants — the  beginning  of  relief.

It  would  be  difficult  to  say  whether  it  began  to  be  in  use
in  Edward  the  Confessor's  reign.  It  is  noticed  about  a
Hampshire  thane  that  he  omitted  to  make  the  customary
recognition  to  the  king  after  the  death  of  his  Uncle  Godric,
who  held  the  land  before  him.^  The  men  in  question  are
Saxons,  and  hold  from  the  reign  of  King  Edward,  but  the
change  of  tenant  may  have  occurred  after  the  Conquest.

Recognition  of  lordship  in  regard  to  land  and  corre-
sponding service  as  rent  occurs  certainly  before  the  Con-
quest.* There  is  a  curious  entry  in  the  narration  of  the
Acts  of  the  Monastery  of  Worcester.  A  Dane  of  the  name
of  Simund,  a  thane  {miles)  of  Earl  Leofric  of  Mercia,  is  said
to  have  devastated  Crohlea,  an  estate  of  the  monastery,  and
to  have  nearly  deprived  it  of  cultivators.  The  Prior  at  last
gave  him  the  land  to  hold  during  life  on  the  condition  of
performing  the  fyrd  service  for  the  abbey  by  land  and  sea,
and  of  making  recognition  of  the  lordship  of  the  Prior  by
the  yearly  presentation  of  a  horse  or  of  money  instead.^  The

comes  Alanus  quod  tenuit  comes  Ranulphus  ad  Rombort  manerium
suum,  et  homines  hundred!  audierunt  istum  Ulketel  cognoscentem
una  aice  per  i  annum  ante<juam  Ranulfus  se  forefecisset  et  postea  quam
forefecisset  una  uice  similiter  quod  iste  Ulketel  deseruiebat  in  Rom-
boro  .  et  ad  ultimum  audiuit  hundredus  istum  eundem  dicentem  quod
deseruiebat  erga  Rogerum  Bigot.  Homines  comitis  Alani  uno  quoque
anno  habuerunt  inde  x  solidos  praeter  iiii  annos  ultimos.'

'  Dd.  i.  50c:  (Redbridge  Hundred,  Hants)  '  Alricus  tenet  .  .  .
dimidiam  hidam.  Hanc  tenuit  pater  eius  de  rege  Edwardo.  Sed  hie
regem  non  requisiuit  post  mortem  Godric  sui  auunculi  .  qui  earn
custodiebat.*

'  Dd.  i.  174a:  (Hallow-in-Grimley,  Worcs.)  *  Dc  eodem  manerio
(Halhegan)  tenet  Hugo  Grentemaisnel  dimidiam  hidam  ad  Lappewrte
(Lippanl)  .  fuit  et  est  de  soca  episcopi.  I  hi  sunt  iii  uillani  et  ii
boxxlarii.  Ibi  presbiter  et  unus  uenator .  .  .  De  hac  terra  per  singulos
annos  redduntur  viii  denarii  ad  aecclesiam  de  Wirecestre .  pro  cirsette
et  recognitione  terrae.*  i.  175  b:  (Pershore,  Worcs.)  *De  hac  terra
tenet  Urso  unam  hidam  et  dimidiam  . . .  Hanc  terram  tenuit  Azor  et
inde  seruiebat  ecclesiae,  et  pro  recognitione  dabat  in  anno  monachis
unam  firmam  aut  xx  solidos  .  et  erat  conuentio  ut  post  mortem  eius
et  uxoris  suae,  rediret  terra  ad  dominium  aecdesiae.  Hie  uiuebat  die
obitus  regis  Edwardi  et  ita  tenam  tenebat.  Postea  uero  uxore  sua
iam  mortua  .  factus  est  Utlagh.'

'  Thorpe,  Diplom.  Saxon,  p.  450:  (Crowle,  Worcs.) 'Simund  quidam,
genere  Danus,  miles  Leofrici,  comitis  Merciorum,  possessor  existensalte-

R  a


244  LAND  TENURE  [essay  ii

narrative  may  excite  suspicion  as  to  details,  but  the  institu-
tional features  of  it  are  hardly  likely  to  have  been  devoid  of
foundation  in  matter  of  fact  usage.
Fendal  Some  of  the  casual  incidents  of  feudal  tenure  appear  in

rudimentary  form  in  the  Survey.  We  hear,  for  instance,
that  a  lord  gave  away  land  held  of  him  together  with  the
daughter  of  a  deceased  tenant  ^ ;  this  evidently  refers  to
the  marriage  of  an  heiress  in  case  of  failure  of  heirs  male.
The  material  part  of  another  transaction  is  not  so  clear  :
it  may  be  prompted  by  the  desire  to  provide  for  the  aged
widow  of  the  deceased.  Or  else  the  widow  herself  may  get
married  to  the  new  tenant  of  the  fief.^  But  we  see  that
the  marriage  right  of  the  lord  is  neither  a  formality  nor
a  mere  pretext  for  lev)ang  a  fine.  The  payment  of  heriot
is,  of  course,  Old  English,  but  it  is  quite  distinct  from  the
relief  of  a  particular  estate  or  fief.  The  latter  is  a  payment
for  renewed  investiture,  the  former  a  resumption  by  the
lord  of  part  of  the  equipment  or  stock  conferred  by  him
on  a  retainer.

The  heriot  varies  greatly  with  the  status  of  the  vassal,
while  the  relief,  after  a  long  period  of  struggle  and  arbitrary
exactions,  settled  down  into  a  kind  of  tariff  graduated
according  to  the  quality  of  the  fief;  barony,  knight  fee,  and
sergeanty  being  appraised  differently,  while  socage  tene-
ments were  held  to  be  exempt  from  relief — probably  a

rius  Crohlea . . .  nostre  tunc  propriae  villae  dominatum  avare  cupiebat.
Quam  cum  adipisci  nullo  modo  posset, .  • .  earn  tot  damnis  et  placitis
peioravit,  ut  fere  earn  colonis  destitueret .  . .  Prior  istius  monasterii  ei
terram  concessit  possidendam  vitae  suae  spatio,  ea  tamen  conventione,
ut  pro  ea  ipse  ad  expeditionem  terra  manque  ((]uae  tunc  crebro  age-
batur)  monasterio  serviret,  pecuniaque  placabali,  sive  caballo,  ipsum
priorem  unoquoque  anno  recognosceret.' (Heming,  Cart.  i.  264).

^  Dd.  i.  173  b :  (Crombe  d'Abitot,  Worcs.) '  Ibidem  ad  Crumbe  tenet
Siuuardus  v  hidas  et  ibi  habet  i  carucam  &  vi  uillanos  &  iiii  bordarios
cum  iiii  carucis  •  • .  Hanc  terram  tenuit  Sirof  de  episcopo  (de  Wireces-
tre)  T.  R.  £.  quo  mortuo  dedit  episcopus  filiam  eius  cum  hac  terra
cuidam  suo  militi .  qui  et  matrem  pasceret  et  episcopo  inde  seruiret.'

'  Dd.  i.  167  b:  (Guiting-Power,  Gloucs.)  *  Rex  Edwardus  tenuit
(Getinge)  &  accommodauit  eum  Aluuino  uicecomiti  suo  ut  in  uita  sua
haberet,  non  tamen  dono  dedit  ut  comitatus  testatur.  Mortuo  uero
Aluuino,  rex  Willelmus  dedit  Ricardo  cuidam  iuueni  uxorem  eius
et  terram. Nunc  Willelmus  successor  Ricardi  ita  tenet  hanc  terram.'


SECT.  I.  CH.  I] THE  LEGAL  FRAMEWORK 245

recognition  of  their  being  more  ancient  than  feudal  tenure
and  therefore  exempt  from  one  of  its  most  characteristic
incidents.

5.  The  Domesday  Survey  pays  a  good  deal  of  attention  Parage*
to  one  form  of  tenure  which  it  distinguishes  carefully  from  -«2rr—
ordinary  tenements.  I  mean  the  tenure  in  parage  (in
/•  paragto).  It  appears  as  a  preconquestual  tenure — people
are  not  said  to  hold  in  paragio  or  pariter  ^  T.R.W. ;  the
notices  in  question  are  introduced  by  lenuerunt^  Now
there  seem  to  be  two  clues  for  the  explanation  of  the  term
and  of  the  tenure.  In  a  certain  number  of  cases  the  words
in  paragio  and  pariter  are  glossed  by  the  expression  libere
inserted  over  them.^  In  keeping  with  this  we  find  that
when  a  thane,  holding  in  such  a  way,  has  for  some  reason
to  pay  a  certain  rent,  this  is  mentioned  as  an  exception
and  introduced  by  a  tamen}  Then  again  we  find  people
holding  tenements  in  such  a  manner,  who  are  styled  alodia-
riiy  so  that  the  tenure  is  assimilated  to  alod.^

*  See  especially  the  survey  of  the  Isle  of  Wight,  Dd.  i.  52  c,  ff.

*  Dd.  iy.  246:  (TintinhuU,  Somerset)  *Tintehella  quam  tenuit
Alnodus  Abbas  Glastingesberie  (Glastonbury)  die  qua  rex  Edwardus
fuit  uiuus  &  mortuus.  In  ea  sunt  vii  hide  &  i  uirga.  (Istam  uirgam
tenuit  unus  tegnus  pariter  die  &c.).'  Cf.  247  :  *  Estocha  c^uam  tenuerunt
V  tegni  pariter  die  qua  &c.  .  reddidit  gildum  pro  v  hidis  &  dimidia
&  i  uirga  (ista  uirga  non  reddidit  gildum  T.  E.  R.)*  Inde  tenuit  Edwi
duo  hidas  &  dimidiam  &  i  uirgam,  &  quatuor  fratres  tenuerunt  predictas
iii  hidas  .  &  unusquisque  eorum  habuit  tres  uirgas.'  Cf.  257  Cocin-
tune  (Somerset) ;  also  i.  60  a  (Peasemore,  Bencs).  I  do  not  wish
to  imply  that  the  tenure  was  unknown  in  Normandy.  On  the  contrary,
the  term  *  parage '  is  French.  See  Ancienne  Coutume  de  Normandie,
c  30;  cf.  Viollet,  Histoire  du  droit  civil,  841  f.  But,  as  a  rule,  the
French  tenants  did  not  use  this  tenure  in  England.

^  Dd.  iv.  202  :  (Spriddlestone,  Devon) '  Espredelestona,  auam  tenue-
runt iiii  tegni  pariter  ea  die  qua  &c.  et  potuerunt  ire  ad  quemlibet
dominum  &  unusquisque  eorum  tenuit  inde  1  ferlinum  et  reddidit  gildum
pro  i  uirga  .  banc  possunt  arare  .  ii  carucae  .  banc  tenet  Rainaldus  de
comite.'  Cf.  i.  105  b:  *Quattuor  taini  libere  tenebant  T.R.E.  ct
geldabant  pro  una  uirga  terrae';  i.  115  a:  (Raddiffe,  Devon)  'idem
Rojjerus  tenet  de  Rualdo  Radeclive.  Airic  libere  [in  paragio]  tenebat
T.  R.  E/ Cf.  Poteford  (ibidem),  Codleigh,  i.  Ii7d.

^  Dd.  iv.  480:  (Martock,  Somerset)  'Rex  habet  i  mansionem  quae
vocatur  Maertoc  .  auam  tenuit  Eadita  Regina  .  huic  addite  sunt
iiii  hidae  .  .  .  duas  hidas  tenuerunt  pariter  ii  tanni  tempore  regis
Edwardi  .  sed  tamen  reddebant  per  consuetudinem  xl  denanos.'

*  Dd.  i.  50  d  :  (Langiey  in  Fawley,  Hants)  *  Hugo  de  S.  Quintino
tenet  Langelic  per  episcopum  baiocensem  ut  dicit  .  pro  Excambio


246  LAND  TENURE  [essay  ii

The  freedom  of  the  tenure  is  sometimes  sharply  con-
trasted with  a  subsequent  reduction  to  dependence  within
the  farm  of  a  manor.*  And  yet  we  must  notice  at  once
that  in  a  number  of  cases  these  very  people  were  not  free
to  go  with  their  land  where  they  pleased.*.  As  in  many
other  equally  well  attested  instances  the  freedom  to  go
where  one  pleases  is  expressly  affirmed,^  we  have  to  infer
either  that  there  were  local  variations  in  the  conception
of  the  right  in  question,  or  that  the  qualification  as  to
freedom  to  go  or  not  to  go  where  the  tenant  pleased  was
not  deemed  essential  to  the  tenure.  And  after  all,  the
freedom  in  question  is  more  a  personal  than  a  tenurial  trait ;
it  corresponds  to  the  right  of  commendation  according  to
choice,  and  although  the  position  of  the  tenement  was
affected  by  it,  still  the  relation  may  have  been  construed
on  the  personal  basis.  In  any  case>  we  constantly  find
free  tenants  hampered  in  their  freedom  of  going  where
they  please  with  the  land.

The  meaning  o{ paragium,  if  we  start  from  these  passages,
might  seem  to  be  land  held  by  a  peer  of  the  lord.  But  it
would  be  rash  to  stop  at  this  conclusion.  There  are
other  passages  which  lead  us  one  step  further  and  give

unius  molini  quod  habebat  de  uno  homine.  Quattuor  alodiarii  tenue-
runt  in  paragio  .  T.  R.  E.'

^  Dd.  i.  38  b:  (Hayling  Island  and  Soberton,  Hants) '  Ipse  rex  tenet
in  Halingei  ii  hidas  &  dimidiam.  Leman  tenuit  in  paragio  de
rege  Edwardo.  Heraldus  abstulit  ei  quando  regnum  inuasit  et  misit
in  firma  sua  • . .  Ipse  rex  tenet  Sudbertune .  Leman  tenuit  de  Goduino
comite  .  Heraldus,  quando  regnabat,  abstulit  ei  et  in  sua  firma  misit,
et  adhuc  est  ibi.  Ipse  Leman  non  potuit  recedere  quo  uoluit  Dicunt
uero  <juod  fuit  in  Ceptune  in  paragio  . .  .  Ipse  rex  tenet  Sudbertune.
Godum  tenuit  de  rege  Edwarao  in  paramo  nee  alicubi  potuit  recedere.
Heraldus  abstulit  ei,  et  in  firma  sua  misit*

'  Dd.  i.  40  a:  (Easton,  Hants)  '  Ipse  episcopus  (Wintoniens.)  tenet
Estune. .  • .  De  hac  terra  huius  manerii  tenet  Goisfridus  iii  hidas.  Brictric
tenuit  de  episcopo  in  paragio  .  sed  non  potuit  ire  aliubi.'  Cf.  40  b,
Crannelie.

'  Dd.  iv.  334:  (Edgeborough  in  Creech  S.  Michael,  Somerset)
'  Tetesberga  c[uam  tenuerunt  vi  tegni  pariter  die  qua  &c  et  potuerunt
ire  ad  quern libet  dominum  et  reddebant  gildum  pro  ii  hidis.'  i.  7  a,
b:  (Sifnington,  Kent)  'Sifletone  pro  iii  iugis  se  defendit.  Terra
est  i  carucae. . . .  Hanc  terram  tenuerunt  T.  R.  E.  duo  homines  in
paragio.  Leuuinus  et  Uluuinus  .  et  potuerunt  cum  terra  sua  se  uertere
quo  uoluerunt.'


SECT.  I.  CH.  I] THE LEGAL  FRAMEWORK 247

a  more  explicit  interpretation  of  the  term.  The  Homecastre
Wapentake  gave  testimony  in  a  dispute  between  the  Bishop
of  Durham  and  Odo  the  son  of  Spirewic,  and  the  whole
Treding  of  Lindsey  confirmed  their  verdict,  that  there  were
three  brothers,  Harold,  Godwert,  and  Alfric,  who  divided
the  domain  of  their  father  aequaliter  et  pariliter  \ the  two
elder  divided  also  the  soke  of  their  father,  the  third  not
taking  part  in  this,  and  they  held  it  aequaliter  et  pariliter
at  the  time  of  King  Edward.* And,  again,  the  men  of
Calnedestou  Wapentake  testified,  with  the  consent  of  the
Treding,  that  Siwat  and  Alnod  and  Fenchcl  and  Aschil
divided  aequaliter  et  pariliter  between  them  the  estate
of  their  father,  and  held  it  in  such  a  way  that  if  it  was
necessary  to  go  in  the  king's  expedition  Siwat  should  go,
if  he  could,  and  his  brothers  should  help  him. After  him
the  second  went,  and  Siwat  with  the  others  assisted  him,
and  so  forth. But  Siwat  was  the  king's  man.^ It  cannot
be  contested  that  the  equality  and  companionship  in  this
case  apply  to  equality  between  co-heirs  in  rights  and  duties,
although  one  is  regarded  as  the  representative  of  the  holding
before  the  king. Indeed  the  cases  are  exactly  on  a  parallel
with  instances  already  quoted  of  a  division  between  co-heirs
not  destroying  the  unity  of  the  obligation  resting  on  the
estate. Nor  is there  any  reason for  doubting  that  in
the  frequent  cases  when  several  brothers,  or  co-heirs,  are
simply  said  to  hold  pariter  or  in  paragio^  this  kind  of

*  Dd.  i.  375  b:  (Horncastle,  Lines.)  ' De  calumnia  inter  episcopum
Dunelmensem  et  Eudonem  filium  Spireuuic  portauerunt  testimonium
homines  de  Hornecastre  Wapentac  annuente  toto  Treding,  quod
iii  fratres  Herold  et  Godeuert  et  Aluric  diuiserunt  dominicam  terram
patris  sui  aequaliter  &  pariliter,  &  solummodo  Herold  et  Godeuert
diuiserunt  socam  patris  sui  sine  tercio  fratre,  &  equaliter  et  pariliter
tenuerunt  earn  T.  R.  E.'

*  Dd.  i.  375  c,  d:  (Candleshoe  Wap.,  Lines.)  'Testificant  homines
de  Calnodeshou  Wapentac  consentiente  toto  Treding.  c[uod  Sinuate  et
Alnod  et  Fenchel  et  Aschil  equaliter  et  pariliter  diuiserunt  inter  se
terram  patris  sui  .  T.  R.  E.  et  ita  tenuerunt  ut  si  opus  fuit  expeditione
regis  et  Siuuate  potuit  ire  .  alii  fratres  iuuerunt  eum.  Post  istum  iuoit
alter  .  &  Siuuate  cum  reliquis  iuuit  eum  .  et  sic  de  omnibus.  Siuuate
tamen  fuit  homo  regis.'  ii.  229  a :  (?  Buxton,  Norfolk) '  In  Bukestuna  v
liberi  homines  fratres  vii  carucatas  terrae.  Unus  ex  his  fratribus  fuit
commendatus  antecessori  Malet  et  non  fuit  inde  saisitus.'


248  LAND  TENURE  [essay  il

joint  family  tenure  was  meant.  In  a  Gloucestershire
instance  five  brothers  holding  in  this  manner  are  expressly
styled  peers  (pares)}  The  cases  when  only  one  person  is
mentioned  as  having  held  in  par  agio  need  not  disturb  us,'
as  the  nature  of  the  tenure  was  not  altered  by  the  accidental
fact  that  there  was  only  one  heir  to  succeed  to  it  He
might  have  three  sons,  and  then  the  parage  succession  and
parage  tenure  would  come  to  their  right  again.  Besides,
in  some  cases  the  chief  representative  of  the  fief  might  be
mentioned — Siwat  in  the  Lincolnshire  case  just  quoted.  It
is  more  difficult  to  explain  a  Somerset  case,  in  which  the
two  brothers  holding  pariter  had  divided  the  succession
in  such  a  way  that  one  held  five  hides  and  the  other  one
hide.  They  could  not  be  said  to  hold  aequaliter^  and  if
they  held  pariter  it  means  that  they  were  compeers  in  the
quality  of  their  holding :  there  was  no  subinfeudation,  but
a  transfer  to  two  of  obligations  and  estates  which  were
formerly  held  by  one  and  seemingly  still  continued  a  unit
in  respect  of  service.^

But  how  is  one  to  explain  the  fact  that,  in  the  instances
first  referred  to,  parage  is  taken  to  be  synonymous  with
free  tenure  ?  The  probable  explanation  seems  to  be,  that
the  two  attributes  were  taken  as  coincident,  although  not
directly  derived  one  from  the  other.  As  a  matter  of  fact.
Old  English  free  tenure,  the  ordinary  tenure  of  thanes  and
persons  of  similar  standing,  was  not  necessarily  reduced  to


^  Dd.  i.  i68d :  (Whaddon,  Gloucs.) '  Durandus  tenet  Wadune.  Ibi
V  hide.  Quinque  fratres  tenuerunt  pro  v  maneriis  et  poterant  ire  quo
uolebant  &  pares  erant.  In  donninio  sunt  v  carucae  et  unus  uiUanus
&  vii  bordarii  cum  v  carucis.  T.  R.  £.  ualebat  viii  libras,  modo  c
solidos.'  A  curious  case  of  modification  of  customary  succession
in  the  interest  of  the  Church  is  presented  by  Thorpe,  Dipl.  346  (a.  d.
1040) :  — '  hi  wurdon  sehte  )>2et  ))agebrodra  eallse  geeodon  of  ^m  lande
butan  anum  se  his  Ulf  gehatan,  J^  hyt  becweden  wses,'  &c.

^  E.g.  Dd.  i.  38  b :  (Sudbertune), quoted  p.  246,  n.  i.

^  Dd.  iv.  329:  (Chapel  Allerton,  Somerset)  *  Aluuarditona . . .  reddidit
gildum  pro  v  hidis.  Huic  sunt  addite  ii  mansiones  quas  tenuerunt
ii  tagni  pariter  T.  R.  £.  unus  quorum  habuit  i  mansionem  v  hidarum.
et  alter  aliam  mansionem  .  unius  hide.  Has  xi  hidas  possunt  arare
viii  carruce.  Radulphus  de  Contiuilla  tenet  has  nunc  de  Waltero
pro  una  mansione.'


SECT.  I.  CH.  I] THE LEGAL  FRAMEWORK 249

unity  by  a  rule  of  primogeniture,  but  descended  to  all  the
sons.*  Yet  the  unity  of  the  tenement  and  of  the  service
attached  to  it  asserted  itself  in  a  remarkable  way.  The  one
and  full  service  was  due  from  the  estates  divided  or  held
jointly  by  the  co-heirs,  and  one  of  the  tenants  was  regarded
as  the  representative  of  the  whole,  although  he  was  assisted
in  the  performance  of  his  duties  by  his  compeers,  and  might
be  even  replaced  by  one  of  them.  Now  the  doctrine  of
later  feudalism  was  different,  and  much  more  stringent.
The  common  law  made  a  thorough  distinction  between
tenements  not  to  be  subjected  to  partition,  inasmuch  as  they
were  burdened  with  foreign  or  military  service,  and  socage
tenements  which  might  be  partitioned  without  detriment  to
the  service.^

The  unity  of  service  brought  about  a  unification  of  the
tenement,  while  the  Old  English  tenure  of  parage  had
merely  provided  rules  for  the  execution  of  service  by  joint
parceners.  It  is  in  partible  socage  and  in  gavelkind  ^  that
the  rules  of  the  parage  succession  of  the  Saxon  age  continue
to  be  admitted.  But  it  by  no  means  follows  that  parage
was  the  only  rule  practised  in  Saxon  times.  The  way  it  is
mentioned  in  Domesday  makes  it  all  but  certain  that  by

^  Dd.  ii.  104  a:  (Colchester,  Essex)  Mn  eadem  Colecestra  tenuit
Godricus  i  liber  homo  t.  r.  e.  iiii  mansiones  terrae  &  unam  ecclesiam  &
iiii  hidas  in  Grenesteda  .  Quo  mortuo  filii  eius  terram  in  quat(uor)
dimiserunt  partes  .  Quarum  rex  habet  duas  in  quibus  pertinent  due
domus  in  burgo  .  quae  semper  regi  reddiderunt  consuetudinem  .  et
adhuc  reddunt.  In  duabus  nidis  tunc  ii  carucae  in  dominio  &  mode.
Tunc  iii  uillani  &  modo.  Tunc  ii  semi  &  mode  .  .  .  Tunc  ualebat
xl  &  modo.  £t  de  duabus  aliis  partibus  habet  comes  Eustachius
i  hidam  .  Et  lohannes  filius  Walerami  alteram  habet  .  Et  in  quarta
comitis  Euastachii  est  tota'ccclesia  et  quarta  pars  molendini  et^quarta
pars  prati.  Tunc  i  caruca  .  modo  nulla  .  &  ualet  inter  totum  xxx
solidos.  Et  in  quarta  parte  lohannis  fuit  i  caruca  t  r.  e.  modo  nulla.
Et  quarta  pars  molendini,  quarta  pars  prati ;  et  ualet  inter  totum  xxx
solidos.  Et  de  his  duabus  partibus  nullam  habet  rex  consuetudinem.'
i.  32  a  (Surrey).

^  H.  N.  H.  703  :  '  Aunsellus  filius  Ade  v.  lohannem  filium  Ade  . . .
Terra  partibilis  sicut  socagium,  vel  non  partibilis  ut  per  servitium
forinsecum  vel  servitium  militare.' Cf.  795.

'  B.  N.  B.  666  :  *  Prior  Hospitalis  lerosolime  v.Thomam  dc  Kaun-
villa.*  (Partition  of  tenements  under  rules  of  gavelkind)  Archaeologia
Cantiana,  ii  :  *  Inquis.  post  mortem/  No.x.  '  Hundred  of  Milton, ...
that  land  is  divisible  according  to  the  custom  of  Kent,'  No.  xii.


250  LAND  TENURE  [essay  li

the  side  of  it  unified  succession  did  exist. If  it  had  not
been  so,  one  does  not  see  the  reason  why  parage  should  be
specially  marked  again  and  again. Of  the  cases  where  it
does  not  occur,  many  must  have  been  cases  of  unified  suc-
cession, instances  where  the  unity  of  the  holding  was  upheld
by  custom. And,  after  all,  impartible  Socage  and  Borough
English  ^  go  back  to  Saxon  times  quite  as  much  as  parage
does,  while  odal  succession  appears  as  an  ancient  and
independent  Scandinavian  custom.* The  buying  out  of
some  of  the  co-heirs,  the  customary  interdictions  of  the
marriage  of  juniors  and  the  position  of  their  offspring —
the  Haustalden  {bachelors)  of  Continental  usage — must  have
had  their  counterpart  in  those  districts  of  England  which
developed primogeniture and junior  right in order to
ensure  the  efficiency  of  husbandry  and  service  in  unified
holdings.^
Bequests. 6.  The  effect  of  the  law  as  to  bookland  is  yet  very
noticeable  in  the  Survey. It  was  sometimes  emphatically
styled  terra  testamentalis^  and  this  expression,  which  origi-
nally applied  merely  to  the  charter  {tesiamenium)  creating
title,  was  soon  understood  to  refer  to  the  right  to  bequeath
land  according  to  the  wish  of  its  owner. This  right  of
free  bequest  expressed  itself  mostly  in  the  endowment  of
churches,  and  provision  for  women  members  of  the  family
as  against  the  claims  of  the  kindred.* The  Worcestershire
Survey  has  a  most  curious  entry  illustrating  the  mode  of


^  GlanviUe,  vii.  i ;  Hist  of  Engl.  Law,  ii^  268  fT. ;  i^.  632.

^  Boden,  in  the  Zeitschrift  fiir  Rechtsgeschichte  (Savigny  Stiftung),
Genu.  Abth.,  xxii.  109  if. ;  Brandt,  Forlaesninger  over  Norsk  Rets-
historie,  i.  161  if.

'  Cf.  Rhamm,  Die  Grosshufen  der  Nordgermanen.

*  C.  S.  1317:  (Will  of  Wulfj^at  of  Donnington,  Worcs.)  *His  sawel
scaettas  ^  is  .i.  hid  aet  Tserdebicgan  (Tardebigg)  and  i  pund  pen^^  .
and  vi  and  twentig  freot  monna  for  his  sawle  .  and  into  Wigeracaestre
(Worcester)  an  bry))en  mealtes  healf  of  Dunnintune  healf  of  Cylles
hale  .  and  into  sancte  iC|>elbrihte  (Hereford  Cathedral)  healfes  pundes
weoi^^ .  . .  and  he  ann  his  wife  )>ses  landes  act  Cylles  hale  .  and  aet
Eowniglade  (Evenlode)  and  aet  Hrodene  ))a  hwile  hire  daeg  beo .  and
ofer  hire  daeg  ga  f  land  eft  in  min  cynn  ))a  ^r  ne  liste  syn  . .  .  and
vElfilde  mire  magan  ]>a  hide  beneo|>an  wuda.'  For  an  early  instance
of  the  clause  as  to  freedom  of  instituting  heirs  see  C.  D.  202.


SECT.  I.  CH.  I] THE  LEGAL  FRAMEWORK 251

making  a  '  cwii^'Se  \  a  testament  that  should  stand  at  law.
A  dying  man  calls  to  his  bed  his  son,  his  wife,  and  several
friends,  and  addresses  them  with  the  words :  *  Hark,  my
friends.  I  will  that  my  wife  shall  hold  this  land  which
I  bought  from  the  Church  as  long  as  she  lives,  and  after
her  death  let  the  Church  from  which  I  had  it  take  it.  And
should  any  one  encroach  on  this  land,  let  him  be  excom-
municated.' This  is  attested  by  the  best  men  of  the  shire,
who  presumably  were  among  the  witnesses  called  to  the
death-bed.^

Mentions  of  women  holding  land  are  not  unfrequent.*  Women
One  is  even  termed  lider  homo?  The  estate  of  a  widow  ii^^,"*^
is  taken  from  her  if  she  marries  a  second  husband  before
a  year  has  elapsed  ^ :  does  she  lose  her  freebench  in
this  case,  or  is  the  forfeiture  a  consequence  of  the  un-
seemly behaviour  of  the  woman?  It  seems  that  the
second  explanation  is  more  to  the  point,  as  in  the  first  case
the  use  of  a  deceased  husband's  estate  should  lapse  when

*  Dd.  i.  177a:  (Selley,  Worcs.)  *  Escelic.  Ibi  pertinet  una  Bcrc-
uaiche  Berchelai  .  (?  Bartley  Green).  Inter  totum  iiii  hidae  . . .  Hoc
raanerium  emit  isdem  Uluuinus  T.  R.  £.  de  episcopo  cestrensi  ad
aetatem  trium  hominum.  Qui  cum  infirmatus  ad  finem  vitae  venisset,
vocato  filio  suo  episcopo  Li[fing  Wigom.]  et  uxore  sua  et  pluribus
amicis  suis,  dixit.  Audite  uos,  amici  mei.  Hanc  terram  quam  ab
aecclesia  emi  volo  ut  teneat  uxor  mea  dum  uixerit,  et  post  mortem
eius  recipiat  aecclesia  de  qua  accepi  et  qui  inde  abstulerit  excom-
municatus  sit.  Hoc  ita  fuisse  testincantur  meliores  homines  totius
comitatus.'

*  Dd.  ii.  188  b:  (Keswick,  Norfolk)  *In  Kesewic  .  .  .  iiii  liberi
homines  duo  commendati  tantum,  et  unus  sub  antecessore  Godrid
similiter,  et  quartus  Stigandi  similiter,  et  habent  i  carucatam  terre  .  de
xxx  acris  istius  terre  saisitus  erat  Godricus  quum  Rogerus  forisfecit
et  due  sue  mulieres  ibi  manebant ;  modo  earn  tenet  Aitardus  de
Kogero.'  ii.  264  b :  (Seething,  Norfolk)  '  In  Sinthinga  calumpniatur
quedam  pauper  monialis  iiii  acras  terre  quas  ilia  tenuit  sub  Radulfo
tarn  ante  et  postquam  se  forefecisse  . .  .  Et  I  sac  reuocat  ex  dono  regis
ad  feudum  suum.'

*  Dd.  ii.  202  b :  (Walsham,  Norfolk)  *  Adhuc  in  Walessam  tenet  Gcrt
i  liberum  hominem  feminam  touu  de  i  carucata  terre.  Semper  iii
bordarii  et  dimidia  carucata.' Cf.  ii.  2iob  (Sterestuna).

^  Dd.  ii.  199  a:  (Plumstead,  NoHblk)  '  In  Plummesteda  tenet  God-
uinus  i  liberum  hominem  Gerti  .  i  carucatam  terrae  .  modo  tenet
Willelmus  episcopus  .  .  .  Et  ibi  sunt  x  liberi  homines  de  xxx  acris
terrae  commendati  tantum  Goduin  .  . .  Postquam  rex  Willelmus  uenit
in  hanc  terram  inuasit  Almarus  episcopus  pro  forisfactura  .  quia
mulier  que  tenuit  nupsit  inter  annum  post  mortem  uiri.'


2^2  LAND  TENURE  [essay  ii

his  widow  marries  again,  irrespectively  of  the  time  when
she  does  it.  The  origin  of  the  estate  had  to  be  carefully
looked  into,  if  one  may  judge  from  a  Norfolk  case  where
Roger  Bigod  had  appropriated  two  estates  of  a  Saxon  ante-
cesser,  of  which  only  one  had  belonged  to  him  in  full
property,  as  was  substantiated  by  the  fact  that  his  son  and
widow  still  lived  there,  while  the  second  estate  was  only
under  the  patronage  of  Bigod's  predecessor  and  was  in
truth  free — ^that  is,  the  property  of  the  tenant  subject  to
commendation.^

A  most  interesting  though  unfortunately  an  isolated  case
is  reported  from  Yorkshire.*  The  jurors  state,  namely,  in
r^ard  to  land  that  had  belonged  to  Asa,  that  the  whole  of
it  ought  to  go  to  Robert  Malet,  the  Norman  successor
of  this  lady,  as  she  held  her  land  quite  separate  and  free
of  the  power  and  the  dominion  of  Bewulf,  her  husband,
while  they  lived  tc^ether,  so  that  he  could  not  dispose  of  it
by  grant  or  sale,  nor  could  he  forfeit  her  land.  Afterwards
they  were  separated,  and  she  retired  with  all  her  land  and  was
possessed  of  it  as  its  owner  (domina).  Here  we  come  across
a  clear  case  of  a  married  woman  owning  land  in  her  own
right,  and  independently  of  her  husband.  Ultimately  the
consorts  get  separated,  and  the  lady  exercises  the  full
right  of  ownership  over  her  land.  For  a  commentary  to
this  passage  we  have  to  look,  not  to  feudal  law,  but
to the  Saxon practice of  marriage  contracts  described

^  Dd.  ii.  i88a:  (Mulbarton,  Norfolk)  Mn  Molkebertestuna  .  .  .
i  libera  femina  sub  antecessore  Godrici  commendatione  tantum  t.  r.  e.
XXX  acre  terre  &  ex  hoc  erat  Godricus  saisitus  quando  Rogenis  forisfecit
&  ex  debito  reddebat  ei  v  solidos  et  qui(dam?)  homo  Rogeri  com-
mendatione tantum  filius  eiusdem  mulieris  manebat  in  eadem  terram
(sic)  cum  matre  sua,  et  ideo  Rogenis  reuocat  dimidiam  terram,  et  pater
eiusdem  hominis  habuit  in  alio  loco  aliam  terram  liberam  sub  anteces-
sore Rogeri  commendatione  tantum,  et  i  (sic)  iUam  terram  tenet
Rogerus  totam.'

^  Dd.  i.  373  a,  b,  *  Clamores  * :  (East  Riding,  Yorks)  *  De  omni  terra
Asae  testantur  quod  Roberti  Malet  debeat  esse,  eo  quod  ipsa  habuit
terram  suam  separatam  et  liberam  a  dominatu  et  potestate  Bemulfi
mariti  sui,  etiam  cum  simul  essent,  ita  ut  ipse  de  ea  nee  donationem
nee  venditionem  facere  nee  forisfacere  posset.  Post  eonim  vero
separationem,  ipsa  cum  onmi  terra  sua  recessit,  et  eam  ut  domina
possedit.'


SECT.  I.  CH.  I] THE LEGAL  FRAMEWORK 253

in  the  fragment  on  wedding.^  By  such  contracts  the
disabilities  in  regard  to  donations  and  sales  couldhave
been  easily  imposed,  whereas  by  Norman  law  even  estates
inherited  by  heiresses,  *  ex  proparte  sororum '  would  have
at  once  lapsed  into  the  administration  of  the  husband's,
and,  indeed,  would  have  become  indistinguishable  from
other  parts  of  the  husband's  estate.^  The  separation  is
also  curious.  It  is  not  called  expressly  a  divorce,  probably
out  of  regard  to  the  doctrine  of  the  Church,  but  it  recalls  to
mind  the  views  on  separation  admitted  by  Scandinavian
and  early  Teutonic  legal  custom.*

I  have  touched  on  this  evidence  of  the  wide-reaching
capacity  of  women  for  holding  land  because  it  is  character-
istic of  the  later  Saxon  law,  and  quickly  disappears  under
the  influence  of  feudal  jurisprudence,  which  favoured  the
stronger  sex.  But,  notwithstanding  some  recent  attempts  to
interpret  these  expressions  of  woman-right  as  primordial
traits  of  Teutonic  society,  I  think  it  still  sufficiently  estab-
lished that  the  feudal  doctrine  only  reverted  in  this  case
into  an  ancient  groove,  legal  custom  having  been  originally
among  the  Germans,  as  well  as  among  other  tribes,  in  favour
of  the  succession  of  male  kinsmen  to  the  land.^  Therefore
it  seems  to  me  that  woman-right  originated  to  a  large  extent
in  the  rules  of  privileged  land-holding — book-land  law,  and
those  of  privileged  inheritance — the  *  cwi*5e  *.

The  word  b6cland  very  often  meets  the  eye  on  the  pages  Bookland.
of  the  Survey.  But  it  occurs  always  as  a  place-name.
I  shall  not  treat  here  of  the  much-discussed  problem
of  bookland-right,  except  in  so  much  as  it  may  help  to
illustrate  some  points  in  Domesday.  One  of  these  is
not  difficult  to  perceive.  Bookland  stands  clearly  in
a  kind  of  opposition  to  laen  land,  although  a  laen  might
be  constructed  in  writing,  and  therefore  give  origin  to  a
bSc, Yet  in  the  terminology  of  the  Church  of  Worcester,

^  Liebermann,  (lesetze,  i.  442,  c.  7.

*  History  of  English  Law,  ii.  405  ff.

^  Grimm,  RechtsalterthUmer,*  i.  624  f.

*  B runner,  Kritische  Bemerkungen  zur  Geschichte  dasgermanischen
Weibererbrechts,  Zeitschrift  der  Savignystift.  Germ.  Abtfi.,  xxi«  I  fL


254  LAND  TENURE  [essay  li

which  was  especially  apt  to  use  written  instruments  for
transactions  which  created  only  laen^^  the  latter  is  clearly
distinguished  from  bookland  possession.^  The  term  had
evidently  ceased  to  be  used  in  a  lax  sense,  at  any  rate  in
the  eleventh  century,  and  carried  the  meaning  of  full
ownership  with  it  The  precision  of  the  juridical  privil^e
involved  in  the  grant  of  bdcland  is  further  illustrated  by  the
instruments  which  convert  estates  into  Royal  b6clands  for
the  use  of  the  kings.^  It  seems  at  first  sight  rather  super-
fluous that  sovereigns  should  go  to  the  length  of  instituting
bdcland  possession  for  themselves,  as  it  stood  free  to  them
to  make  use  of  bookland  privil^es  in  regaLxd  to  bequests
and  grants  whenever  they  pleased.  But  the  institution  of
such  privileges  was  not  arbitrary  in  the  sense  of  being  a
one-sided  and  free  expression  of  Royal  will ;  it  required
certain  forms,  and  especially  the  consent  and  attestation  of
witan.*  Besides,  the  deeds  by  which  the  kings  created
b6cland  for  themselves  had  an  immediate  effect  on  the
status  of  the  land  and  its  obligations,  inasmuch  as  they
usually  freed  it  from  all  common  burdens  and  impositions,
except  the  trinoda  necessitas^  and  sometimes  perhaps  even

^  C.  D.  617  (Oswald,  977) :  '  Donne  is  ^s  landes  iii  hida  %e
Oswald  arcebisceop  bScaiS  Eddrfce  his  )>egne  ge  ner  tline  ge  fyr,  swd
swd  he  hit  ar  haefde  td  lanlande  mid  ^s  heorodes  gewitnesse  on
Wigomaceastre  (Worcester).* Cf.  Dd.  i.  173  a ;  C.  D.  1288  (^E^lred,

965-993).

*  C.  D.  679  (Oswald,  973-992) :  *  Unam  lai:gior  curtam  in  civi-

tate  Weogemensi,  Aelfsige  fruenti  vocitamine.  . . .  £dc  we  wrfta%  him
^ne  croft  int6  ^sem  hagan  ^  is  be  edstan  Wulfsiges  crofte  ^t  he
haebbe  hit  swd  nlm  t6  IxSclonde  swd  he  aer  haefde  t6  Ispnlonde.'

'  C.  S.  451,  vEthelwulf,  King  of  the  W.  Saxons,  grants  to  himself
land '  om  Homme ',  or  '  Hamme ',  Dorset  (?).  a.  d.  847.  ...  *  Viginti
manentium,  mihi  in  hereditatem  propriam  describere  jusi.'  C.  S.  1118  :
(K.  Eadgar  to  himself,  a.d.  963)  'Ego  Eadgar,  Rex  Anglorum  &c«
(h)abeo  id  est  .  v  mansas  in  loco  .  .  .  Aet  Peatanige,  quatinus  bene
perfruar  et  perpetualiter  possideam  vita  comite  et  post  me  cuicunque
voluero  perhenniter  heredi  derelinquam  in  aetemam  haereditatem.
Sit  autem  predictum  rus  liberum  ab  omni  mundiali  obstaculo  .  .  .
excepto  communi  labore.* Cf.  1127.

^  Cf.  Brunner,  Zur  Rechtsgeschichte  der  romanisch-germanischen
Urkunde,  169.

•  C.  D.  307  :  (iE^lred,  A.  D.  1012) '  Cuidam  ministro  meo  . . .  Leo-
fricus  vocamine . . .  decem  cassatos  ...  in  villa  . . .  Hwitcyrce  ...  in
provincia  Oxnafbrdnensi  sita  iuxta  ripam  fluminis  Tamesis  ...  sit
haec  tellus . . .  libera  ab  omni  saecularis  servitutis  honere,  exceptis  quae


SECT.  I.  CH.  I] THE LEGAL FRAMEWORK 255

from  this  latter.^  At  any  rate,  exemption  from  gafoU  from
the  harbouring  of  messengers  and  officials,  from  all  kinds  of
onerous  customs  {consueiudines)^  and  in  a  few  cases  from
the  geld,  was  common.  The  indirect  consequence  of  the
bookland  charter  serving  as  a  basis  for  all  kinds  of  transac-
tions not  warranted  by  tribal  custom  was  not  less  important.
It  would  be  interesting,  indeed,  to  solve  the  question,  in
which  of  the  Domesday  entries  we  have  to  recognize
bookland  grants.  The  latter  are  so  common  and  important
at  the  close  of  the  Old  English  period  that  we  must  expect  to
recognize  them  in  something  equally  common  and  important
in  the  Survey.  It  seems  to  me  that  the  only  category  of
T.  R.  E.  tenures  which  would  correspond  to  bookland  would
be  the  terrae  liberacy  the  ahd  tenements  which  receive  in
some  cases  such  a  special  position  in  the  Survey.  This  can
hardly  be  proved  without  possibility  of  doubt,  but  besides
the  general  agreement  of  attributes  I  may  be  allowed  to
quote  at  least  one  passage  containing  a  direct  translation
of  the  one  term  by  the  other — I  mean  the  spurious  Latin
charter  ascribed  to  Eadred,^  and  presenting  a  transliteration
of  a  Saxon,  probably  genuine,  grant.  The  *  boclanda '  of
this  latter  appear  in  the  Latin  copy  as  ontnes  liberas  terras^
&c.  The  Latin  document  is  a  forgery,  but  it  was  forged
by  people  who  were  cognisant  of  the  institutions  of  their
time,  and  though  we  consider  the  equation  merely  in  the  light
of  a  gloss,  we  could  not  dismiss  it  without  paying  attention
to  the  clue  it  gives  us.

The opposite to b6cland is  folcland^  the land held  Folcland.
under  tribal  custom. The  passages  in  which  it  is  men-
tioned expressly  are  well  known,  and  they  may  probably
be supplemented by  one or two  passages  speaking  of

omnibus  communia  sunt,  uidelicet  procinctu,  pontis  arcisue  recupera-
tionc*
^  C.  D.  240  :  *  Ut  nee  pontem  nee  arcem  facere  debeant.'
'  C.  S.  912  :  (Will  of  K.  Eadred,  A.  D.955)  *  An  ic  minre  meder  ^s
landes  act  Ambresbirig  and  set  Waneting,  and  set  Basingum,  and
ealra  minra  boclanda  |>e  ic  (on)  Su^seaxum  hxbbe,  and  on  Su^rigum,
and  on  Cent,  and  eaJra  ))2era  |>e  bio  aer  haefde.*  Cf.  914:  'Omnes
liberas  terras  quas  in  comitatibus  Suthsexiae  Suthreiae  et  Cantiae
habeo.'


256  LAND  TENURE  [essay-ii

terrae  reipublicae  iuris,  a  sounding  expression  which  can
hardly  have  meant  anything  else.^  Domesday  does  not
name  folclandy  but  it  contains  at  least  one  passage  which
seems  unmistakably  to  point  to  it.  From  the  description
of  Lincoln  we  learn  ^  that  a  ploughland  consisting  of  twelve
tofts  and  four  crofts  belonged  T.R.E.  to  the  church  of  All
Saints.  A  certain  Godric,  son  of  Gareuin,  held  it;  he
became  a  monk,  and  thereupon  the  Abbot  of  Peterborough
seized  the  land.  But  the  Burgesses  of  Lincoln  maintain
that  the  Abbot  has  it  against  law,  because  neither  Gareuin
nor  Godric  nor  anybody  else  had  a  right  to  give  the  land
outside  the  city  and  outside  their  kindred,  unless  by  leave
of  the  king.  And,  therefore,  Emuin  the  priest  claims  that
church,  and  what  appertains  to  it,  in  right  of  inheritance
from  Godric  his  kinsman.  This  is  clearly  a  case  of  collision
between  the  interests  and  legal  customs  of  maegths  and
local  communities  on  the  one  hand,  private  individuals
and  churches  on  the  other.  The  latter  had  the  means  of
breaking  folkright  custom  on  such  occasions,  but  these
means  had  to  be  derived  from  a  special  leave  of  the  king
creating  privileged  land  tenure.  According  to  the  verdict
of  the  townsmen  this  necessary  process  had  been  disregarded
in  the  case  in  question.

If  we  ask  where  what  used  to  be  folcland  has  to  be  sought
in  the  Domesday  Survey,  only  few  places  will  be  found
suitable  for  it.  From  the  T.  R.  W.  point  of  view  all  land  had
been  converted  into  freeland,  in  the  sense  of  depending  in
one  way  or  another  on  the  king,  or  on  lay  or  clerical  lords
endowed  with  franchises  from  the  king.  Somebody  has
the  freehold  of  every  estate,  as  we  might  say  in  words
borrowed  from  later  usage. It is  true  that  the  service

*  C£  Growth  of  the  Manor,  142  £

*  Dd.  i.  336  b. :  (Lincoln  City) '  Quarta  carucata  adiacuit  in  aecclesia
omnium  sanctorum  T.  R.  £.  &  xii  toftes  &  iiii  croftes.  Hanc  aecde-
siam  &  terram  aecclesiae  &  quicquid  ad  cam  pertinuit .  habuit  Godricus
filius  Gareuinae.  Sed  eo  facto  monacho,  abbas  de  Burg  obtinet.
Burgenses  uero  omnes  Lincoliae  dicunt  quod  iniuste  habet,  quia  nee
Gareuin  nee  Godricus  filius  eius  nee  ullus  alius  dare  potuent  extra
ciuitatem  nee  extra  paientes  eorum^nisi  coneessu  regis.  Hane  aecde-
siam  et  que  ibi  pertinent  elamat  Emuin  presbyter  hereditate  Godrici
consangumei  sui.'


SECT.  I.  CH.  I] THE LEGAL  FRAMEWORK 257

privil^es  of  the  free  tenements  had  shrunk  to  very  little ;
this  was  partly  the  consequence  of  political  arrangements,
which  were  already  forming  themselves  at  the  close  of
the  Danish  period,  with  its  huge  burdens  of  extraordinary
taxation,  partly  the  result  of  the  Norman  doctrine  of  service.
Yet  the  free  tenement  quality  of  the  bookland  survived  in
a  transformed  aspect  after  the  Conquest.  As  for  folcland,
it  has  evidently  to  be  looked  for  on  the  Terra  Regis^  with
its  remnants  of  the  small  freemen  of  Saxon  times,  and  in
the  tenements  of  those  among  the  socmen,  freemen,  and
villains  who  were  not  considered  as  mere  serfs  of  their  lords.
7.  One  more  species  of  land  tenure  remains  to  be  con-
sidered— namely,  Corporate  ownership.  It  does  not  often
appear  in  the  Survey,  but  it  appears  in  some  cases  very
clearly.  There  are,  to  begin  with,  the  cases  of  ecclesi-
astical corporations.  The  tenure  of  sees  and  monasteries
receives  an  individualistic  colouring  by  the  reference  to
some  dead  saint  to  whom  the  church  was  dedicated.
Administration  itself  was  also  mostly  in  the  hands
of  personal  rulers — the  bishops,  abbots,  priors,  &c.  The
share  taken  by  the  communities  themselves  is  not  very
apparent,  though  certainly  it  did  exist,  and  was  sometimes
expressed  in  forms  dictated  by  the  Romanized  Church  law  ^
Nevertheless,  communal  tenure  and  administration  are
sometimes  visible  in  the  Domesday  Survey,  as,  for  instance,
in  the  case  of  the  Canons  of  Chichester,  who  held  '  com-
muniter '  sixteen  hides  free  from  geld  *.  We  do  not  know
how  this  large  estate,  on  which  four  plough-teams  were
kept,  was  managed,  but  the  tenure  is  defined  in  a  very
precise  manner,  and  it  is  not  material  whether  the  hides  in
question  were  leased  to  a  farming  bailiff,  or  cultivated  in

^  The  familia  (hired)  of  monasteries  often  appears  as  an  acting  and
unified  body  in  A.-S.  charters,  e.  g.,  Thorpe,  Dipl.,  346  (a.  d.  1040) :
'  fon^'ord  ...  on  Excestre  xtforan  ealre  scire  betwyx  Alfwolde  bisceope
and  bam  hirede  set  Scirebuman,  and  Care  Tokies  suna.'  Cf.  Earie,
Lana  Charters,  pp.  215,  299.

*  Dd.  i.  17  a:  (Sussex)  '  Canonici  de  Cicestre  tenent  communiter
xvi  hidas  quae  nunquam  geldauerunt  sicut  dicunt,  et  ibi  habent
iiii  carucas  in  dominio.  Hoc  ualet  viii  libras.'  Cf.  i.  2  b :  '  in  communi
terra  S.  Martini  sunt  cccc  acre  et  dimid.quae  sunt  ii  solinos  et  dimid.'

viNOGaADorr  S


a58  LAND  TENURE  [essay  li

plots  by  small  tenants,  or  partitioned  according  to  some
rotation  between  the  canons  themselves;  the  basis  of
the  tenure  is  undoubtedly  coUectivistic,  and  there  does
not  seem  to  be  any  sufficient  reason  for  calling  it  joint
ownership  ;  the  canons  are,  after  all,  the  members  of
a  chapter,  and  not  individuals  who  find  it  expedient  to  put
their  separate  rights  together.  A  similar  corporative  con-
struction seems  to  impose  itself  in  the  frequent, cases  of
ownership  of  land  by  cities.  All  the  burgesses  of  Oxford
possess  in  common  the  pasture  outside  the  wall  which  is
called  Port  Meadow  to  the  present  day.  The  expression —
,  all  the  buigesses — might  have  led  to  misunderstandings  by
itself,  but,  in  conjunction  with '  in  common ',  it  can  mean
nothing  else  but  the  fact  that  all  those  who  claim  burgess-
right  in  Oxford  are  entitled  to  be  considered  members  of
a  community  to  which  Port  Meadow  belongs.  They  had
other  rights  and  duties  besides;  they  stood  in  scot  and  lot
for  many  purposes — for  discharging  fines,  for  keeping  up
buildings,  for  providing  for  market  police,  for  repairing  walls
and  bridges,  &c  Some  of  these  duties  were  distributed
among  the  householders ;  for  the  performance  of  others
there  must  have  been  a  common  chest.^  But  though  the
boundaries  between  the  rights  of  individuals  and  those  of
the  community  may  have  been  very  uncertain  and  wavering,
the  essence  of  the  tenure  in  common,  in  distinction  to  joint
tenure,  as  expressed  in  parage,  for  instance,  is  clearly  at
hand  in  these  borough  cases,  not  only  because  the  term
*  communis '  is  used,  but  chiefly  because  the  right  evidently
springs  from  a  constant  relation  of  the  members  possessed
of  it  to  a  higher  unity — the  city  or  the  chapter.  This
supplies  the  independent  aim  and  the  continuity  of  existence
which  distinguish  a  corporation  from  a  joint-stock  under-
taking, and  in  comparison  with  these  features  the  modes
of  actual  exploitation  and  the  division  of  profits  play
a  secondary  part.

^  Dd.  i.  154b:  (Port  Meadow,  Oxford)  <  Omnes  burgenses  Oxen*
forde  habent  communiter  extra  murum  pasturam  reddentem  vi  solidos
&  viii  denarios.'  Dover,  Dd.  i.  i  a ;  d^  Ballard,  Domesday  Boroughs,  88.


SECT.  I.  CH.  I] THE  LEGAL  FRAMEWORK 259

There  is  a  good  deal  of  information  on  similar  com*
munities  in  preconquestual  England.  Not  only  towns
but  shires  appear  in  a  corporate  capacity,  own  property
and  receive  bequests  for  the  discharge  of  specific  duties.^
What  is  more  interesting,  we  not  unfrequently  come  across
references  to  common  lands  in  documents  treating  of  rural
England  before  the  Conquest.  Sometimes  the  word  *ge-
maene  land'  occurs  in  the  descriptions  of  boundaries.'
Sometimes,  again,  a  plot  is  said  to  lie  within  the  common
land.^  Now  these  expressions  may  mean  either  commons
in  the  present  sense,  that  is,  unenclosed  spaces  accessible  to
everybody,  and  reserved  for  the  use  of  all  the  members  of
a  township  or  several  townships,  in  regard  to  pasture  and
wood ;  ^  or  else  they  may  indicate  open  fields  divided  accord-
ing to  certain  rules  between  the  members  of  these  townships.
The  latter  is,  for  instance,  evidently  the  case  in  r^ard  to
two  and  a  half  hides  in  Dumbleton,  conveyed  by  iEthelred
to  thane  Wefric  in  995.  The  whole  village  is  said  to  be
situated  in  communi  terras  and  it  is  made  free  of  all
exactions,  except  the  well-known  threefold  dut}%  according

^  Thorpe,  Diplom.  Sax.,  pp.  550,  55 if.  :  (Will  of  Archbp.  iClfric,
966-1006) '  One  ship  he  has  given  to  the  folk  in  Kent,  and  another  to
Wiltshire.  And  he  has  forgiven,  under  God's  favour,  to  the  Kentish
people  the  loan  which  they  owed  to  him  ;  and  to  the  Middle  Saxons
and  the  people  of  Surrey  [Sudrion]  the  money  that  he  advanced  to
them.'  C.  S.912 :  (WiU  of  K.  Eadred,  a.  d.  955)  <  |>aenne  an^^he  his
sawla  to  anliesnesse,  and  his  deodscipe  to  ^earfe,  sixtyne  hund  punda,
to  )>an  %aet  hi  niege  magan  hu[n]gor  and  haej^nne  here  him  fram
aceapian  gif  he  be|>unfen  [hearten],  psenne  fo  se  ercebiscop  *aet
Cristescirican  to  feower  hund  pundun,  Cfantwarum,  and  Suthrigum,
&  Suthseaxum,  &  Bearrucscire,  to  fultune  [fultume].  .  .  .  And  fo
i£lfsige  biscop  to  ^am  biscopstole  to  Winteceastre  to  feower  hund
pundun,  twa  hund  to  Hamtunscire,  &  to  Wiltunscire  an  hund,  and
o^r  to  Dorsseton.'

*  C.  S.  455 :  (Grant  by  Alhhun,  B.  of  Worcester,  to  K.  Bcrhtwulf,
of  land  at  Wastill,  Wore,  A.  D.  849)  Boundaries :  '  be  %am  gemaenan
lande  in  hse^  beorh  midde  weardne.'

'  C.  D.  793 :  (Eadweard,  1050) '  Duci  Godwino  iiii  mansas  perenniter
tribuo  illic  in  communi  terra  ubi  vulgus  prisca  relatione  vocitat  act
Sandforda.  . .  .  Dis  sind  ¥a  landgemaera  to  Sandforda  on  %am  genuui-
nan  lande.  yErest  of  Stibbucwere  swa  noHS  aefter  ¥are  Temese  be
healfan  streame  into  Sandfordes  larce,  &&'  Cf.  C.  D.  800 ;  C.  D.  658
(yt^lred,  987).

*  Growth  of  the  Manor,  p.  164  ff.

S  2

.  4


26o  LAND  TENURE  [ESSAY  ll

to  the  usual  bookland  formula.^  It  has  to  be  noted  that
the  common  land  does  not  receive  thereby  a  new  arrange-
ment ;  we  have  not  to  deal  with  an  inclosure  act,  or  a  grant
in  private  property  of  land  which  had  formerly  been  held
in  common.  The  newly  created  property,  for  all  its  privi-
leges, remains  a  part  of  the  common  land  within  which  it
lies.  The  words  of  the  document  indicate  therefore  clearly,
as  it  seems  to  me,  that  the  grant  concerns  two  and  a  half
hides  as  shares  in  an  open-field  township,  the  holdings  of
which  could  not  be  recast  at  pleasure,  either  by  the  grantee
or  by  the  king,  evidently  becauset  he  open-field  arrangement
was  the  result,  not  of  the  economic  convenience  of  a  lord,
but  of  intermixed  rights.  This  reading  is  supported  by
the  testimony  of  several  other  charters.  The  same  king
i£thelred  gave  in  983  four  hides  and  a  half  to  a  thane  of
the  name  of  Wulfgar.  The  whole  lay  in  cofnmuni  terra^
but  in  two  patches — three  hides  in  Drayton,  and  one  and
a  half  in  Sutton.  The  hides  subject  to  the  transfer  are  said
by  the  king  to  be  met  proprii  iuris^  and,  on  the  other  hand,
their  situation  'in  common  land '  is  not  altered  by  the  grant  ;*
the  right  passing  from  the  king  to  the  grantee  is  there-
fore a  complex  of  shares  in  two  common  lands  or  open-field
townships.  It  is  expressed  in  terms  of  full  private  tenure,  and
yet  it  is  subordinated,  in  a  way,  to  the  common-land  arrange-
ment. The  same  feature  may  be  noticed,  in  a  perhaps
even  more  characteristic  way,  in  the  case  of  a  grant  by
iEthelred  to  Archbishop  iElfric. The  king  grants  twenty-


^  C.  D.  692 :  (^^Selred,  99^)  '  Cuidam  dilectissimo  mihi  ministro
cui  parentele  nobilitas  Wlfric  indidit  nomen, — quandam  ruris  particu-
1am,  id  est,  duas  mansas  et  dimidiam  in  loco  ubi  solicolae  [act]
Dumbeltun  appellant,  in  perpetuam  concedo  haereditatem  ;  .  .  .  &
post  istius  labilis  vitae  excessum,  cuicunque  sibi  libuerit  successori
derelinquat.  Sit  autem  predictum  rus,  quod  in  communi  terra  situm
est,  liberum  ab  omni  mundiali  obstaculo— excepto  istis  tribus  expedi-
tione,  pontis  arcisve  constructione.'

*  C.  D.  1280 :  (iE^Sclred,  983)  *  Fideli  meo  homini,  vocitato  voca-
mine  Wulfgar,  modicam  mei  proprii  iuris  terrae  partenr,  id  est  iiii
mansas  et  dimidiam,  in  communi  terra  duobus  locisdivisas,  iii  videlicet
mansas  in  loco  ^ui  Anglica  appellatione  dicitur  Draetun,  et  onam
mansam  et  dimidiam  in  villa  quae  vocatur  Su^tun,  in  perpetuam  con-
cedo hereditatem  ...  &  cuicumque  sibi  libuerit  haeredi  commendet'


SECT.  I.  CH.  I] THE  LEGAL  FRAMEWORK 261

four  hides  in  three  places,  which  had  been  confiscated  from
a  woman  who  had  committed  fornication.  Of  these,  seven-
teen hides  lay  to  the  west  of  the  Essingbume,  two  on
the  eastern  slope  at  Eastun  '  sorte  communes  populari ' ;
the  rest  lay  in  woody  denes  on  either  side  of  the  brook
Pidwell.  Now  the  second  batch  of  hides  lay  evidently
in  intermixture  with  shares  in  common  fields  distributed
according  to  popular  usage.^  An  important  piece  of
evidence  is  also  presented  by  a  charter  of  Edgar,  by  which
he  granted  ten  hides  in  Winterboume  to  his  thane  Eadric.
Of  these,  five  hides  lay  at  Weston  in  severalty  (syndries
landes),  and  five  at  Easton  of  common  land  (gemaenes
landes).  In  the  description  of  boundaries,  the  qaalification
of  land  in  severalty  is  repeated  in  regard  to  the  Weston
portion,  and  as  for  the  Easton  one,  the  common-field
quality  of  the  land  is  expressed  even  more  fully ;  the
five  hides  have  to  be  assigned  out  of  the  common-field
as  much  as  appertained  thereto.^  There  can  be  no  doubt
that  in  a  series  of  instances  land  granted  in  general  terms
could  have  been  described  in  exactly  the  same  way,  and
that  such  specific  references  were  omitted  merely  because
it  was  not  worth  while  to  insert  them.  We  shall  have  to
come  back  once  more  to  the  open-field  system  as  a  feature
of  economic  condition. In  the  present  instance  it  was  im-

^  CD.  1295:  (JE^elrtd,  1002)  'Quandam  possessionis  propriae
tellurem  xx,  scilicet,  ac  iiii  mansarum  ab  indigenis  act  Dumoltun
appellatam,  tribusque  in  locis  disiacentem,— largior  archipraesuli
AAfnco ;  .  .  .  quae  portio  terrae  cuiusdam  feminae  fomicaria  prae-
varicatione  mihimet  vulgari  subacta  est  traditione.  Itaque,  ut  dixi,
terminus  dividitur  in  locis  x  et  vii  in  occidentali  parte  fluminis  Esing-
buman,  continens  mansas,  ac  duas  in  orientate  eiusdem  torrentis
climate,  sorte  communes  populari  aet  Eastune,  necnon  et  v  locis
silvaticis  in  utraque  parte  rivuli  qui  Pidwella  appellatur,  huiusque
cognomen  esse  aet  Fleferht  dicitur.*

*  C.  S.  1 1 45  :  (Grant  by  K.  Eadgar  to  the  thegn  Eadric  of  land  at
Winterboume  and  Easton,  Wilts,  A.  D.  922)  *  Dis  is  ^ara  tyn  hida
land  boc  at  Winter  Human  )>e  Eadgar  cing  ge  bocodc  Eadrice  his
begone  on  ece  yrfe  fif  hida  de  Westan  tune  syndries  landes  fif  be
Eastan  tunc  gc  nicxnes  landes :  Eadrico  decern  mansas  in  Wintcr-
buman.  .  .  .  pis  syndon  ))ara  fif  hida  land  gemsera  Into  Wintcrbur-
nan  be  Westan  tune  syndries  landes.  ponne  syndon  )>a  fif  hida  be
Easton  tunc  gcma^nes  landes,  on  gemacnre  mearce  swa  swa  hit  |xaer
to  be  limped.'


262  LAND  TENURE  [essay  ii

portant  to  notice  it  in  its  bearings  on  tenure  and  convey-
ancing. It  came  forward  especially  in  smaller  donations^
because  such  grants  broke  up  the  fields  of  a  township  into
several  fractions,  whereas  big  grants  mostly  included
entire  villages,  and  there  was  therefore  no  occasion  for
dwelling  on  the  open-field  arrangement.  It  seems  almost
as  if  the  quality  of  common  land  was  especially  connected
with  folkland  possessions ;  the  expression  in  iEthdred's
charter  of  looa,  'sorte  communes  popular!/  can  hardly
correspond  to  anything  else  in  the  vernacular.  But  although
originally  the  common  fields  may  have  been  considered  as
characteristic  for  the  settlements  of  freemen  under  tribal
law,  in  the  eleventh  century  the  system  evidently  extended
to  all  classes  of  property.  There  was,  however,  this  materia]
difference  between  the  cases  when  it  was  applied,  that  in
some  instances  it  still  retained  the  character  of  an  inde-
pendent kind  of  land  tenure,  while  in  other  ^instances  it
merely  survived  as  a  customary  arrangement  subordinated
to  the  feudal  title  of  the  chief  tenant.  In  any  case  it  is
important  to  notice  that  the  references  to  collective  tenure
do  not  diminish  as  we  go  back  in  the  course  of  centuries.
Domesday  in  all  its  bareness  supplies  us  with  some,
and  Old  English  documents  give  us  a  good  many  precious
indications  in  regard  to  its  existence  and  peculiarities.


CHAPTER II

HUSBANDRY

I.  The  natural  conditions  presented  by  the  territory  of  Natural
England  are  not  of  such  a  kind  as  to  direct  the  distribution  c"»^***~**
of  the population and its economic pursuits in any
particular  way. There  are  no  steppes  like  those  of  South
Russia  or  Hungary,  which  incite  and  almost  oblige  early
settlers  to  wander  about  with  their  herds  of  horses  and
sheep. The  greater  part  of  the  country  is  not  mountainous
like  the  Alpine  districts,  where  settlements  and  cultivated
plots  are  by  necessity  concentrated  in  narrow  valleys  or
scattered  along  the  slopes  and  ridges. The  climate  and
soil  do  not  favour  the  growth  of  the  vine  or  the  culture
of  olives,  which  give  the  husbandry  of  Southern  France
and  of  Italy  its  stamp  of  intensive,  individualistic care.
In some parts of England, however, notwithstanding
the  temperate  climate  and  the  fact  that  the  soil  might
be  turned  to account  in  different  ways,  certain  natural!
lines  of  development  suggested  themselves,  especially  at  \
a  period  when  the  accumulation  of  capital  and  international
intercourse did not materially modify the results of
economic  geography. The  large  forests  intersecting  the
territory  in  all  directions,  and  particularly  dense  on  the
borders  of  Wales,  the  fens  and marshes  so  frequent  in
the  eastern  counties,  the  invasions  of  the  sea  on  the  low  .
East  coast,  the  advantages  afforded  to  early  agriculture  S
on  light  soil  and  the  necessary  employment  of  lai^e  teams
on  heavy  clay  soil,  not  to  speak  of  other  more  technical
features,  gave  a  certain  bent  to  the  husbandry  of  different
districts, a bent which time and circumstances might
change,  but  which  has  to  be  reckoned  with  as  one  of  the
factors  of  the  economic  problem.


settlement.


264  LAND  TENURE  [essay  11

Another  range  of  influences  comes  from  what  may  be
called  the  historic  side — from  the  customs  of  the  tribes
occupying  the  soil,  from  the  political  advantages  and
drawbacks  of  concentration  and  dispersion,  from  the  re-
lative strength  of  social  classes  and  from  governmental
policy.  Without  attempting  to  give  a  systematic  account
of  the  action  of  all  these  elements,  we  shall  have  to  attend
to  them  in  studying  the  evidence  as  to  economic  life  in  the
eleventh  century.

Types  of  The  first  problem  which  it  would  be  important  to  solve
refers  to  the  modes  of  settlement  at  this  particular  period.
Did  the  people  live  in  close  clusters  or  in  scattered  farms  ?
Were  the  existing  villages  large  congregations  of  houses
and  dwellers,  or  hamlets  of  medium  and  small  size,  counting
a  few  houses  and  plots?  These  are  questions  on  the
settlement  of  which  a  good  deal  depends  in  the  arrange-
ment of  all  other  economic  traits  and  processes.  When
a  farmer  has  to  perform  his  task  in  an  isolated  homestead
with  the  help  of  a  few  '  hands '  belonging  to  his  family,  and
of  a  small  number  of  dependant  labourers,  his  work  and
needs,  and  the  very  basis  of  his  husbandry,  his  plot,  are
different  and  differently  organized  than  when  he  joins  in
a  vast  agricultural  undertaking,  where  a  definite  place  and
share  is  assigned  to  him  on  condition  of  his  following  the
rules  and  customs  adopted  by  the  community.

It  is  not  diflScult  to  see  that  England  was  not  given  over
to  one  particular ,  system  of  settlement,  although  villages
were  more  common  than  single  farms  or  small  hamlets  in
the  greater  part  of  the  country.  But  it  would  be  diflficult  to
speak  of  one  system  as  overwhelmingly  predominant  in  the
same  sense  as  the  Gaards  (single  farms)  are  predominant  in
Norway,  and  the  bys^  or  clustered  villages,  in  Denmark ;  or  as
the  Z^<?r/"  (village)  was  prevalent  in  the  greater  part  of  Central
and  Southern  Germany,  while  the  Hof  (farm)  was  prevalent
in  the  north-west,  and  especially  in  Westphalia.

Single  //  The  single  farm  occurs,  to  begin  with,  in  forest  districts.
It  appears  sometimes  as  an  isolated  homestead  among  the
woods. Perhaps  the  most  characteristic  description  of  such


farms.


\


SECT.  I.  CH.  II]  HUSBANDRY  265

a  settlement  in  a  wild  region  is  afforded  by  the  passage
in  the  Hereford  Domesday  relating  to  Eardisley.  It  is
a  plot  which  does  not  pay  geld,  nor  render  any  customary
payment  or  service,  nor  belong  to  any  hundred.  It  lies  in
the  midst  of  a  forest,  and  there  is  one  house  in  it  which  may
be  *  defended  *.  There  is  one  plough-team  belonging  to  the
master  of  the  house,  and  two  serfs  to  work  with  it,  and  one
Welshman  pays  a  rent  of  three  shillings.^  It  is  not  always
quite  so  easy  to  make  out  these  scattered  homesteads,  but
there  is  one  clue  which  seems  sufficient  to  identify  them,
namely,  very  small  numbers  of  plough-team  oxen  and  a  J
small  working  population.  I  mention  these  features  together
because  it  is  conceivable  that  a  settlement  endowed  with
only  one  team  or  less  might  occasionally  contain  a  pretty
considerable  population  occupied  with  pastoral  or  forest
pursuits.'^  Still,  as  a  rule,  low  figures  for  teams  and  labourers
show  that  the  settlement  was  a  small  one,  although  it  would
be  difficult  to  draw  the  line  between  single  farms  and  hamlets.
In  the  absence  of  other  data,  a  low  figure  of  assessment
may  serve  as  an  indication  of  such  a  small  settlement,  and
in  the  collection  of  rough  statistics  it  is  useful  to  look  to
these  figures  too,  especially  in  cases  where  there  are  no
other  means  to  distinguish  between  the  component  parts
of  a  large  aggregate.^  The  possibility  that  in  some
cases  the  dwelhngs  of  tenants  in  a  village  may  have  been
scattered  about  without  regular  alignment  in  streets*  is,
of  course,  of  a  totally  different  kind. It  concerns,  the

*  Dd.  i.  184  d:  (Eardisley,  Hereford)  *  Herdeslcge  .  .  .  Haec  terra
non  geld  it  neque  consuetudinem  dat  nee  in  aliauo  hundredo  iacet.  In
medio  cuiusdam  siluae  est  posita  et  ibi  est  domus  una  defensabilis.
In  dominio  est  una  caruca  et  ii  serui,  et  unus  Walensis  reddit  iii
solidos.*  The  defensabilis  has  to  be  seemingly  explained  as  'gewcrod  '
— capable  of  being  charged  to  the  wara,

'  E.  g.  Dd.  i.  185a:  (Frome,  Hereford)  '  In  dominio  est  i  canica
ct  iii  villani  cum  una  caruca.  lb.  ii  scrui  et  molinum  de  xxxii  denariis.
T.  R.  E.  ualcbiit  xx  sol.  Modo  xv  sol.'

'  Dd.  i.  166:  (Derherst  hundred,  Gloucester)  *  Ad  eundem  Mane-
rium  pertinent  ii  hidae  ct  dimidia  ultra  Saucme.  In  Olfendone  v  hidae,
in  Lalcgc  i  hida,  in  Valton  i  hida,  in  Canebertone  dimidia  bida.  In
his  terris  sunt  in  dominio  v  canicac  et  v  uillani  et  xviii  bordarii  cum
ix  carucis. Ibi  manet  i  liber  homo.'

*  Cf.  M  iss  DavenportjThe  Economic  History  of  a  Norfolk  Manor,p.  15.


.  266  LAND  TENURE  [ESSAY  il

manner  in  which  villages  themselves  were  built — whether
the  dwellings  were  disposed  at  random,  ut  fons  out  nemus
placuit^  or  constructed  in  regular  rows  cannexis  et  cohereniibus
aedificiis.  But  in  both  cases  we  should  have  to  deal  with
villages,  not  with  single  farms.
Htmlcu.  Altogether,  the  passage  from  the  one  type  of  settlement
to  the  other  is  not  sharply  defined,  although  the  central
conception  of  each  type  may  be  quite  clear.  When  we
speak  of  hamlets,  for  instance,  we  mean  a  cluster  of  2-4
homesteads  with  their  plots,  but  on  the  borders  of  the
group  there  may  stand  single  farms  subdivided  among
co-heirs,  so  that  the  original  unity  is  giving  way,  or,  on
the  other  hand,  small  villages  of  6-1 1  houses  which  in
other  respects  would  not  differ  much  from  the  hamlets
first  named.  As,  however,  it  is  the  general  character  of
the  settlements  that  we  are  examining,  and  not  minute
distinctions  which  it  is  out  of  the  question  to  establish  on
the  strength  of  written  summaries  compiled  800  years  ago,
we  may  rest  content  with  the  contrast  between  averages,
and  speak  of  a  cluster  of  2-5  homesteads^  on  an  average,  as
of  a  hamlet,  while  a  cluster  of  six  or  more  homesteads
would  form  a  village.  The  administrative  cat^ory  of  the
township  is  not  applicable  here,  because  in  many  cases
such  townships,  though  officially  termed  vUls^  were  arti-
ficial combinations  of  several  small  settlements  for  purposes
of  police  and  administration.  A  good  example  is  afforded
by  the  dale  called  Langdendale  in  Derbyshire,  on  the
border  of  Cheshire ;  it  is  unified  by  its  name,  and  represents
a  vill  and  a  manor  in  the  Survey.  Yet  it  consisted,  as
a  matter  of  fact,  of  a  string  of  small  settlements  of  a
couple  of  farms  each,  and  these  hamlets  composing  the
administrative  township  were  ranged  along  the  dale  at
intervals  of  one  or  two  miles,  the  whole  dale  covering
a  long,  narrow  range  of  some  twelve  miles  in  length.^  The
*  berewicks '  of  some  of  the  royal  manors  in  Derbyshire
must  have  presented  apparently  the  same  character  of  small

*  Dd.  i.  273  a.


/


SECT.  I.  CH.ii]  HUSBANDRY  2,6^

hamlets.^  In  Derbyshire  the  formation  of  the  country,  with
its  dales,  may  account  for  the  generally  small  size  of  the
settlements ;  there  was  no  space  to  expand  in,  and  the  home-
steads arranged  themselves  along  the  short  water-courses  in
a  kind  of  *  corridor '  system.  On  the  borders  of  Wales  the
^ngle  farm  and  hamlet  arrangement  was  produced  by  the
tribal  habits  of  the  Celts,  subjected  to  Norman  sway,  but  still
keeping  to  their  customs.  Among  these,  one  of  the  most
remarkable  was  the  re-arrangement  and  scattering  of  home-
steads in  consequence  of  divisions  and  re-divisions  among
heirs.*  This  tribal  practice  of  division,  involving  the  assign-
ment of  separate  dwellings  and  plots  according  to  gwelys
and  gavels^  seems  curiously  reflected  in  Domesday  in  the
enumeration  of  clusters  of  Welsh  villages  standing  under
one  reeve.  Each  of  these  clusters  numbers  from  6-14
villae,  usually  approximate  multiples  of  7.  The  groups
are  probably  formed  for  the  purpose  of  collecting  rents
in  honey,  milk,  cheese,  &c.,  but  the  units  composing  them
are  certainly  small,  as  one  reeve  was  deemed  sufficient  to
oversee  from  6-14  of  them,  and  the  analogy  of  the  laws
and  extents  of  Wales  shows  that  we  have  before  us  hamlets
or  trevs  grown  up  in  consequence  of  tribal  division  and
colonization.

In  the  case  of  Derbyshire  and  Wales  the  peculiarities  Farms  in
of  geography  or of  tribal  custom seem  to  account  foil *"*^
the  scattering  of  dwellings  and  settlements. The  sur-|
vty^  of  Lincolnshire  and  Yorkshire  show  that  scattered
hamlet  and  homestead  settlements  would  arise  occasionally
in  broad  plains  and  among  Scandinavian  settlers. The
description  of  Stalingeburg,  for  instance,  mentions  a  central

^  Dd.  i.  272  b :  (Ncuubold  cum  vi  Berewitis) ;  ibid.  372  d :  (Aisseford
cum  Berewitis  (12)) ;  ibid.  273  b:  (Vfrc,  3  Berewitae).

'  Dd.  i.  162  b:  (Gloucs.)  'Aluredus  Hispanus  habet  in  feodo  ii
carucatas  tcrrae  et  ibi  ii  carucae  in  dominio.  Isdem  Aluredus  babet
in  Wales  vii  uillas  quae  fuerunt  Willelmi  comitis  et  Rogeri  fUii  eius  in
dominio.  Mac  reddunt  vi  mellis  sextaria  et  vi  porcos  et  x  solidos.'
Ibid.  162  a  :  ^Sub  Wasuuic  preposito  sunt  xiii  uillae.  Sub  Elmui  xiiii
uillae.  Sub  Bleio  xiii  uillae.  Sub  Idhel  sunt  xiiii  uillae.  Hi  reddunt
xlvii  sextaria  mellis.  .  .  Sub  eisdem  prepositis  sunt  iiii  uillae  wastatae
per  regem  Caraducch.'  Cf.  253  d  (Salop,  Forde,  cum  xiiii  bcrc-
wichis).


/


r


a68  LAND  TENURE  [essay  ii

village  belonging  to  the  lord  of  the  manor,  containing
one  carucate  and  two  bovates  to  the  geld,  but  land  for  two
ploughs  and  a  half  (300  acres).  This  was  settled  by  a  group
including,  besides  one  plough-team  in  demesne,  a  labouring
population  of  5  villains^  3  socmen,  and  one  bordarius  house-
hold— very  small  tenants  owning  another  team,  probably,
one  ox  per  holder,  and  a  garden-plot  for  the  bordarius.
The  soc  of  this  manor  was  disposed  in  scattered  homesteads
with  distinctive  names :  Hegheling  estimated  at  i  bovate,
Cleia  at  3  bovates,  Ternescou  at  a  bovates;  in  all,  6  bovates
to  the  geld.  The  estimate  must  have  been  very  close  to
the  real  quantity  of  the  holdings,  as  there  was  only  land
for  one  plough  and  two  bovates  for  all  of  them  ;  there  were
also  eight  tenant  households  in  the  aggregate,  5  socmen  and
3  villains,  with  one  plough  between  them.  Whether  they
managed  to  unite  their  beasts  of  draught  in  order  to  form
the  team,^  or  resorted  to  small  ploughs  in  order  to  utilize
their  oxen,  we  cannot  tell,  but  the  fact  of  the  division  into
three  settlements  seems  firmly  established,  and  there  would
fall  only  two  or  three  households  to  each  of  these.*  It  is
impossible  to  guess  at  the  reason  of  such  a  scattering  in
every  concrete  case.  It  would  be  wrong  to  ascribe  it  to
ethnographical  reasons,  as  settlements  in  big  villages  were
quite  common  among  the  Danes,  both  in  their  native
countr>'  and  in  England.
Large  /  Nor  could  the  settlement  in  separate  farms  be  made
^  ^^'  ya  mark  of  the  personal  freedom  of  the  tenant.  Socmen  and
lliberi  homines  occur  in  large  villages,  while  villains  and  serfs
/  are  quite  common  in  hamlets  and  single  homesteads.  The
result  must  have  been  produced  by  circumstances  attending
the  occupation  of  the  district,  or  by  natural  features  which
are  hidden  from  us.  Anyhow,  it  has  to  be  noticed  that
Lincolnshire  and  Yorkshire  are  very  rich  in  big  villagesi
especially  the  former.  I  may  refer  to  Calthorp,^  where
there  was  land  for  48  ploughs  in  demesne  and  in  soke.

*  Dd.  i.  182  d:  (Almeley,  Hereford)  'Elmelie  .  .  .  Alterius  uillae
homines  laborant  in  hac  uilla.'
'  Dd.  i.  339  c  (Stalingeburg,  Lines.).
'  Ibid.  363  b  (Caltorp,  Lines.).


SECT.  I.  CH.  II]  HUSBANDRY  26g

The  demesne  portion  was  cultivated  by  3  teams  only,  but
113  socmen  had  32  plough-teams  among  them,  and  50  villains
with  7  bordarii  had  13.  Chircheby  may  be  taken  as  an
example  of  a  medium-sized  village.  It  contained,  besides
some  land  in  demesne  (i  car.  to  the  geld),  a  soke  divided
between  Stratone  and  Chircheby,  and  inhabited  by  18  soc-
men households  and  16  bordarii,  owning  6  plough-teams
between  them.^  Spalling,  again,  may  serve  as  an  example
of  a  large  village  chiefly  inhabited  by  villains.  It  had
40  villain  holdings,  and  33  occupied  by  bordarii^  and  13
plough-teams  altogether,  besides  4  teams  in  demesne.  Its
economic  position  in  the  district  is  characterized,  among
other  things,  by  a  market  held  there  to  the  annual  value  in
toll  of  40  shillings.^

Careful  topographical  and  archaeological  studies  will
clear  up  some  day  many  concrete  questions  in  regard  to
the  size  and  forms  of  settlement,  but  it  is  not  without  value
to  attempt  on  the  strength  of  the  Domesday  Survey  a  rough
statistical  estimate  of  the  relative  numbg-s  of  villages,  hani-^
lets,  and  single  farms  in  two  specimen  counties.  The
iritroductoiy  remarks  oh  the  types  of  settlemeTitwill  show
the  reader  that  this  statistical  sketch  is  presented  with  all
reservations.  Still,  although  there  cannot  be  any  pretension
to  exactness  in  such  a  case,  even  averages  and  approximations
are  better  than  blank  uncertainty.

I  have  selected  Derbyshire  and  Essex  for  the  purpose.
The  two  counties  niay  be  taken  as  interesting  examples  of
the  repartition  of  population  in  the  midlands  and  in  the
southern  counties.  At  the  same  time  the  Danish  element
is  strongly  represented  in  Derbyshire  without  being  pre-
dominant there,  while  Essex,  though  substantially  akin  to
Hertfordshire  and  Sussex,  yet  has  many  features  in  common
with  the  East  Anglian  settlement,  and  especially  Suffolk,
from  which  it  is  divided  by  the  slight  demarcation  line  of
the  Stour.  In  regard  to  the  soil  and  to  the  contour
of  the  country,  the  two  shires  in  question  present  a  marked

'  Dd.  i.  359  d  (Chirchebe,  Lines.)-  *  Dd.  i.  35ld.


%^o  LAND  TENURE  [essay  n

'  contrast ;  hills  and  dales  are  characteristic  of  Derbyshire,
plains  and  marshes  of  Essex.
Settlement^  Turning  to  the  northern  county/  we  naturally  find  popu-
s^ire.  ^  lation  more  scattered,  and  concentrated  as  a  rule  into  smaller
groups.  It  is  true  that  in  some  cases  a  rural  organization
described  under  one  name  in  Domesday  may  in  truth  have
consisted  of  several  members  only  loosely  connected  with
each  other.  But  although  this  element  of  uncertainty
cannot  be  eliminated,  it  is  not  unreasonable  to  suppose
that  in  most  cases  the  single  place-name  points  to  a
'  nucleated '  settlement  of  some  sort,  as  the  record  is  careful
to  notice  over  and  over  again  the  subdivision  of  rural  units
Again,  the  Domesday  entries  are  often  complex  and  diffi-
cult to  reduce  to  clear  statements  about  settlements.  But
even  if  we  put  aside  the  instances  which  are  too  indefinite,
or  too  involved,  there  remain  a  great  number  which  can
be  analysed  in  respect  to  the  size  of  the  settlements  de-
scribed. It  would  not  avail  to  take  notice  of  the  number
of  plough-teams  at  work  in  the  different  centres  of  rural
population,  because  the  large  normal  team  of  8  oxen  was
nearly  always  broken  up  into  fractions  among  the  rural
settlers,  each  household  being  possessed  only  of  an  eighth,
or  of  a  fourth,  seldom  of  a  half.  "^

The  best  way  seems  to  be  to  group  the  settlements
according  to  the  number  of  villains  and  socmen  households
assigned  to  them.  The  villains  and  socmen  were  the
principal  classes  of  rural  tenantry,  and  held  among  them
the  regular  shares  of  the  field  holdings,  while  bardarii  and
cotters  came  in  as  small  tenants  of  a  few  acres  or  of
cottages,  and  had  better  be  left  aside  in  a  review  of  the
main  features  of  village  settlements.  Cottages,  crofts,  and
huts  were  too  unstable  and  too  subordinate  in  their
economic  position  to  be  reckoned  with  in  the  regular
repartition  of  the  arable  and  of  its  appurtenances  to  the
holdings.  In  a  minute  study,  based  on  topographical  indi-*
cations,  the  cottages  may  have  to  be  taken  into  account.
Nevertheless, a general statistical  survey  ranging  over

*  App.  V.


K


SECT.  I.  CH.  II]  HUSBANDRY  %^\

the  area  of  a  county  may,  as  it  seems  to  me,  dispense  with
them,  the  more  so  as  many  of  these  cottages,  like  the  plots
of  Scandinavian  husmcmd^  must  have  been  connected  with
the  principal  holdings  and  sometimes  carved  out  of  them.

We  have  unfortunately  to  leave  out  of  account  some  im-
portant entries  like  Newbold  or  Bakewell,  not  because  there
is  any  doubt  as  to  their  representing  large  villages,  but
because  their  contents  are  combined  in  the  Survey  with
those  of  their  berewicks,  and  therefore  cannot  be  tabulated.
The  largest  village  which  admits  of  tabulation  is  Elmston
(Helmstun),  containing  thirty-six  households.  Should  we
reckon  on  an  average  some  five  grown-up  persons  (over
fifteen  years  of  age)  in  a  villain  or  socman  househol
thirty-six  of  the  latter  would  contain  roughly  a  population
of  about  1 80  inhabitants,  besides  the  bordarii  and  cotters.
This,  however,  would  merely  be  a  rough  guess  intended  to
give  an  impression  as  to  the  probable  size  of  the  settle-
ment. The  number  of  r^^lar  shares  in  the  fields  con-
nected with  separate  households  is,  on  the  other  hand,  an
attested  fact,  and  by  itself  sufficient  for  our  purpose.  Of
villages  similar  to  Elmston  there  were  very  few  in  Derby-
shire, but  of  single  farms  we  also  find  very  few — only  six,  \
with  one  household  to  each.  In  one  of  the  two  Somersalls
(Alia  Sumersale),  probably  the  place  known  at  present  as
Somersall  Herbert,  no  tenant  of  the  standing  of  a  villain  is
mentioned,  but  there  were  six  crofts  held  by  bordarii^  and  •
we  may  infer  that  though  there  was  no  agrarian  arrange-
ment on  the  plan  of  apportioning  yardland  or  oxgang
holdings,  the  hamlet  was  formed  of  a  cluster  of  cottages
with  some  land  utilized  in  one  way  or  the  other.

Hamlets,  in  the  sense  of  small  settlements  containing
from  two  to  five  households  with  regular  tenements  in  the
fields,  are  more  numerous,  some  thirty-three,  but  still  they
form  in  the  Survey  only  a  group  of  \%%  households  in
all,  or  about  9  per  cent,  of  the  tabulated  1,337  house-
holds  of  the  county.  A  large  group,  in  respect  of  the
number  of  distinct  settlements,  is  that  of  small  villages
containing  from  six  to  eleven  households. Of  such  there


2^%  LAND  TENURE  [essay  ii

are  fifty-eight  with  an  aggr^ate  of  435,  or  about  thirty-
five  per  cent,  of  the  tabulated  households.  I  need  hardly
say  that  the  lines  of  division  between  this  class  and  the
hamlets  on  one  side  and  the  larger  settlements  on  the  other
have  to  be  drawn  in  a  somewhat  rough  and  ready  fashion.
There  is  not  much  to  choose  between  a  hamlet  of  fiv
households  and  a  '  small  village '  of  six,  or  between  a  sm
village  of  eleven  households  and  a  *  larger  village '  of  twel
Still  the  line  had  to  be  drawn  somewhere,  and  the  gene
classification  answers  the  purpose,  as  it  seems  to  me:-^

The  *  larger  village '  group  is  represented  by  forty-three  '
places  containing  774  households,  or  57  per  cent,  of  the
whole  number  of  tabulated  households  in  the  county  between
them.  The  net  result  seems  to  be  that  the  prevailing  type
of  settlement  in  Derbyshirejvasjthat  ofa  village  of  nioderate^
jize.  The  cfefacter  of  the  country,  except  in  the  south  and
south-east,  prevented  the  concentration  of  large  bodies  of
inhabitants,  but  the  population  mostly  clustered  in  groups
of  some  8-16  peasant  households  with  shares  in  the  field,
and  with  varying  numbers  of  cottages  hanging  on  to  them.

Essex  presents  a  different  aspect.^  Before  surveying  the
results  of  the  tabulation  of  its  recorded  households  I  have
to  mention  a  special  difficulty  preventing  us,  as  in  the  case
of  Derbyshire,  from  utilizing  many  important  entries.
I  mean  the  fact  that  Essex  socmen  and  freemen  are  often
said  to  be  added  or  appended  {odditis  adiacent^  pertifient)
to  certain  manors.  It  is  generally  impossible  in  such  cases
to  make  out  whether  the  persons  'added'  were  actually
living  in  the  place  characterized  by  the  manorial  name,  or
were  only  reckoned  up  with  the  rest  of  the  manorial
tenants  on  account  of  their  jurisdictional  and  fiscal  ties.
The  omission  of  the  above-mentioned  entries  deprives  us
of  the  possibility  of  making  an  exact  statistical  estimate
and  of  drawing  inferences  as  to  the  distribution  of  socmen
and  freemen  in  the  county.  But  it  does  not  prevent  us
from  using  the  evidence  in  order  to  form  an  approximate
view  of  the  prevailing  types  of  settlement. Although  the

*  App.  VI.


SECT.  I.  CH.  II]  HUSBANDRY  273

entries  admitting  tabulation  are  certainly  incomplete,  they
fall  into  groups  in  accordance  with  the  characteristic  distri-
bution of  households. The  first  thing  to  be  noted  is  the
considerable  proportion  of  settlements  where  no  villains  or
socmen  are  to  be  found,  but  only  bordarii ;  in  one  or  twof
cases  even  servi  alone. There  are  eighty-four  such  places.]
Their  great  number  may  be  explained  by  two  considera-
tions :  many  of  them  represent  villain  and  socmen  house-
holds of  the  time  of  King  Edward  which  have  been  brought
low  by  the  Conquest. In  some  cases,  however,  the  insig-
nificant allotments  in  land  may  be explained  by  some
special pursuit  carried on by  the inhabitants,  e.  g.  by
fisheries. In  any  case,  although  we  have  to  take  note  of
this  feature,  it  would  not  do  to  include  these  crofts  and
cottages in the tabulation of  the  households  provided
with  regular  shares  in  the  fields. Turning  to  these,  we
find  that  the  number  of  single  farms is  again  small — \
36  out  of  a  total  of  381  tabulated  settlements. Hamlets  «
(a-5  households)  are  clearly  represented by 115  settle-]
ments. Their relative social importance may be to
some  extent  expressed  by  the  fact  that  the  number  of
households  contained  in  them,  421,  forms  about  9*4  per
cent,  of the  whole aggregate of  tabulated tenements
(4,5^6).

The  group  designated  as  that  of  small  villages  (6-1 1
households)  may  be  reckoned  at  97  places  with  768
tenements,  or  roughly  16-9  per  cent,  of  the  whole.  Lastly,
large  villages  appear  as  the  most  characteristic  type  of
settlements  in  the  county,  with  133  place-names  and  3,301
households,  or  73  per  cent,  of  the  tabulated  tenements.
The  striking  difference  between  mountainous  Derbyshire
and  flat  Essex  seems  strikingly  illustrated  by  these  incom-
plete but  characteristic  returns.

2.  The examination of the forms  of  settlement hasconip«ct
already  made  it  clear  that  in  a  great  number  of  cases  the^^^^"***-
agricultural  exploitation  of  the  country  led  to  the  formation
of  compact  plots. In  those  districts  where  the  households  I
of  the  settlers  were  scattered  in  separate  farms  there  was  j


MNOORAlHJKh


274  LAND  TENURE  [ESSAY  ll

I  no  special  reason  to  arrange  the  central  part  of  the  hus-
bandry— the  arable — in  any  other  way  than  by  disposing  it
in  a  field  or  several  fields  on  the  spots  cleared  for  cultivation,
and  the  only  influences  which  exerted  themselves  on  the
distribution  of  those  fields  were  the  lie  of  the  country,  the
quality  and  quantity  of  the  soil  at  the  disposal  of  the  tillers,
and  the  system  of  husbandry  followed  by  them. There
were  no  members  of  the  townships  with  equal  and  con-
current rights  to  check  the  free  disposal  of  the  ownen
Neighbouring  claims  and  rights  had  to  be met  at  the
boundary  of  the  settlement  and  not  within  it. The  simple
form  of  a  compact  plot,  enclosed  by  fences,  or  at  least
marked  off  by  definite  limits,  suggested  itself  naturally  on
such  occasions. But,  even  in  the  case  of  a  settlement  start-
ing from  such  a  compact  plot,  several  might  supervene  in  its
subsequent  development  which  would  lead  to  its  breaking
up,  and  to  the  appearance  of  more  complicated  agrarian
forms. To  begin  with,  there  was  the  increase  of  population^
In  regard  to  the  family  of  the  owner,  this  increase  meant
the  appearance  of  rights  of  succession,  and  in  the  cases
of  gavelkind,  parage,  and  partible soo^e  juniors were
provided  for  either  in  the  way  of  common  management,
or  by  the  subdivision  of  the  group. The  two  main  varieties
of  partition  would  be— firstly,  colonization,  the  migration  of
one  set  of  tenants  to  some  outlying  part  of  the  estate,  or  an
altogether  new  place  of  abode ;  *  secondly,  the  subdivision
of  the  plots  themselves  into  minor,  but  yet  compact  parts ;  •
thirdly,  the  subdivision  into  strips  with  an  intermixture  of
those  tending  to  equalize  advantages  and  disadvantages  in
the  distribution  of  the  soil.*  ^  **

Separate One  more  eventuality  has  to  be  considered  in  r^^rd  to

^  Maitland,  Domesday  Book  and  Beyond,  p.  365.

»  Thorpe,  Dipl.  529:  (Will  of  Wulfwaru)  *^  daes  landes  at  Budan
cumbe  ic  geann  him  healfes  mid  mete  "^  mid  mannum  and  mid  ealre
tilde,  healf  ic  his  geann  Alfware  minre  gyngran  dehter  .  .  .  et  daelon
hi  |)xt  heafodbotl  him  betweonan  swa  nhte  swa  hi  rihtlicost  magon,
heora  segder  his  gelice  micel  habbon.'

*  C.  D.  674 :  (Oswald,  990)  *  Ic  moste  gebocian  twa  hida  landes  on
Mortune  on  )»reora  monna  daeg  minum  twam  getreowum  mannum


SECT.  I.  CH.  II]  HUSBANDRY  ,/ ^/>^275

the  formation  of  compact  plots,  namely,  the  case  when  the  piongh-
ploughlands  of  a  settlement  were  kept  asunder  although  they  ^"^•
might  be  subject  to  subdivisions  within  these  units. This
meant  that  although  partitions  of  property-rights  were
recognized  and  carried  out,  the  unity  of  the  ploughland  was
kept  up  on  the  territory. The  scheme  produced  would  be
difierent  from  that  of  the  ordinary  open  field,  inasmuch  as
the  holdings  would  not  appear  as  bundles  of  strips  dispersed
in  the  different  fields,  each  ploughland  or  field  hide  being
represented  in  these  furlongs  and  fields. The  ploughlands,
or  at  least  their  j)ortions  in  the  twofield  or  threefield  courses
of  husbandry,  would  form  rounded-off  units  on  the  soil.^^
Lastly,  it  occurred  sometimes  that,  even  in  village  settle-  |
ments,  the  inhabitants  received  separate  allotments,  not  f
intermixed,  but  by  the  side of  each  other. This  was '
especially  easy  in  level  country,  and  in  the  case  of  small
plots. We  find such  a  system  in connexion with the
assignment  of  tofts  in  Danish  counties.^ Of  course,  my

Beorhnaege  and  Byrhstane  twaem  gebro^rum ;  and  se  ealdra
hsebbe  %a  |>reo  seceras,  and  se  iunffra  %one  feor%an,  ge  innor,  ge
utter,  swa  to  ¥am  lande  gebyri^e  1$xt  mon  nemneiS  o^re  naman,
Upp)!^rop.'  Cart.  Sax.  1 256:  (Earl  Noi^man  to  St  Cotbbert*s,
Durham,  at  Ediscum  (Escomb),  Co.  Durham)  '  Her  syleV  Noi^man
eorl  into  sancte  Cu^berhte  Ediscum  "]  eale  f  ^r  into  hyreV,  l  %bne
feor^n  aeccr  act  Feregcnne.*  Thorpe,  Dipl.  pp.  597-8 :  (iElthelm)
*  Ic  gean  minum  brym  bro^rum  to  geaale  )»aes  landes  aet  Trostingtune,
. .  .  and  ic  wille  p  min  wif  fo  aefre  to  healfum  on  aelcum  tune,  fo  to
lande  se  \>e  fo.'

^  Cart.  Sax.  952 :  (Grant  by  King  Eadwig  to  the  noble  lady
/Ethelhild,  of  lands  at  Iplanpen,  or  Ipplepen,  &c,  Co.  Devon,
A.  D.  956)  ' .  .  .  )K)nne  up  be  streame  on  Maedercumbe  on  ^a  wic
be  ^arto  hyrth,  ^  aet  Bitelanwyr)>e  an  hiwisce,  ^  act  Bromleage  an
hiwisce.'  Cf.  ibid.  968  ;  ibid.  1182:  (Lease  for  three  lives  by  Oswald,
Bishop  of  Worcester,  to  his  'compater'  Eadric,  of  land  at  Eanulf-
eston,  near  Stratford-upon-Avon,  a.d.  966)  '  iii  scilicet  mansas  tribus
tamen  in  locis  divisam  cui  vocabulum  est  act  Eanulfestune,  o|ier  beadf
hid  ~)  act  uferan  straet  forda  on  baere  gesyndredan  hide  bone  o^eme
aecer  3  aet  fachan  leage  ^ne  |>riadan  aecer  feld  landes,  3  nealfne  ^one
pudu  on  east  healfe  |>aEs  peges  "^  |>one  act  |>aBrc  eor^  byrig,  "J  on  east
healfe  Afene  cahta  aeceras  maedpa  '^  fomegean  biccen  dife  xii  accents
macdwa  "]  |)reo  .xcras  be  nor^an  Afene.*

*  Thorpe,  Dipl.  p.  580 :  (Thurkytel,  1050)  *  And  alle  mine  men  fre,
and  ilk  habbc  his  toft,  and  his  metecu  "}  his  metecom.  And  ic  an  at
Reydoneberh  t>at  midleste  forlong  fre  into^  kirke,  and  Scortland,  and

Cz  prestes  toft  al  into  ))e  kirke  fre.  -  -  ^  1  Alfwold  habbe  mid  ton  \t
e  her  hauede  xvi  acres  mid  tofte  mid  alle.*

T  2


276  LAND  TENURE  [ESSAY  ll

object  in  mentioning  these  forms  is  not  to  enumerate  all
/possible  varieties  of  agrarian  arrangement,  but  to  point  to
I  the  main  types.  Every  one  of  them  would  be  seen  to  shade
I  off  gradually  into  the  next  one,  if  we  came  to  consider  the
local  varieties.  By  the  side  of  the  separate  hide  or  plough-
and,  for  instance,  we  should  find  the  separate  srardland,*
and  this  would  bring  us  already  a  good  way  in  the  direction
of  an  intermixture  of  rights  between  members  of  the  same
village.  And  again,  in  Kent  we  should  find  that  although
sulungs  and  yokes  are  kept  separate,  a  whole  network  of
rights  and  material  strips  would  arise  within  their  precincts.
The  estates  of  the  Abbey  of  St.  Augustine,  Canterbury,  for
instance,  consist  of  sulungs  distinguished  by  local  names,  and
presenting  rounded-off  plots  in  each  case.  But  the  detailed
thirteenth-century  Survey  in  the  'Black  Book '  of  the  Abbey
does  not  omit  to  mention  numbers  of  coparceners  to  whom
acres  in  these  sulungs  were  assigned.  Whether  these  acres
were  in  each  case  kept  materially  apart  from  each  odier  we
do  not  know ;  it  is  very  likely  that  they  were  often  under
the  same  management.  But  the  rights  were  undoubtedly
strictly  apportioned.  To  take  one  instance, '  in  the  sulung
of  Wisebech,  John  the  son  of  Ecard  and  his  peers  {pares
sui)  held  15  acres,  Robert  son  of  Wulfstan  two  acres  and
a  half,  Richard  son  of  Peres  and  his  peers  9  acres  3  roods,
John  son  of  Sevenoth  3  acres  half  a  rood,  William  Palmer
3  acres  half  a  rood,  the  same  of  the  land  of  Dede  {de  term
Dede)  half  an  acre,  the  same  of  the  land  of  Sperke.  3  roods  ;
Adam  of  Idleigh,  of  the  land  of  Deme  4  acres,  the  same  of
the  land  of  Christina  of  the  Marsh  i  acre,  the  same  of  the
land  of  John  Stede  half  an  acre ;  and  so  forth,  to  the
aggr^ate  of  about  200  acres  to  the  sulung.  Some
of  the  fractions  are  exceedingly  minute — one  Alexander
son  of  Ralph,  e.  g.,  holding  four  acres  and  a  half  and  the
sixth  part  of  a  half  acre,  John  Gyle  one  third  of  half  an
acre,  &c.

^  K.  C.  D.  770 :  (Eadweard,  1044)  '  Dys  is  |>aere  anre  gyrde  land-
gemseru  be  ni^San  elddin  aerest  on  Sehfrod  .  .  .  fram  |>am  mere
a  gerihte  to  eldin  byri^  middeweardre.*

^  Cotton  MSS.  Faustina,  A.  i.  f.  58.


SECT.  I.  CH.iiJ  HUSBANDRY  277  ^  ^^  ^^,, .

3.  We  have  already  had  occasion  to  notice  the  formation^ CbampioD
of  intermixed  holdings  and  open-field  customs  in  the  case  ofr™"*^*
settlements  and  plots  gradually  developing  out  of  more  or/
less  complete  isolation*  A  good  many  smaller  villages  and ,
hamlets  must  have  carried  on  their  cultivation  of  the  arable/
on  systems  of  intermixture  of  a  comparatively  small  numbef
of  elements.  But,  of  course,  the  so-called  open-field  system,
with  its  strips  scattered  about  the  fields  in  such  a  manner
as  to  combine  into  holdings  in  regular  proportions  to  each
other,  finds  its  home  chiefly  in  villages  where  it  would  have
been  difficult  otherwise  to  allot  holdings  to  the  settlers  on
a  regularly  graduated  scale.  The  curious  intermixture  of
rights  arising  from  such  a  system  of  allotment  is  sometimes
described  in  the  authorities  with  considerable  detail.  For
instance,  in  the  charter  of  King  Edgar  to  chamberlain
Winstan  conferring  land  at  Avon,  Wilts,  the  three  hides
given  are  said  to  be  '  singulis  jugeribus  mixtum  in  communi
rure  hue  illucque  dispersis  loco ...  at  Afene  \^  A  charter  of
iEthelred  tells  of  a  plot  of  common  land  (communis  Urrae)
at  Ceorlatune,  granted  to  the  thane  iElfgar  with  all  privi-
leges except  the  common  labour.  The  said  village  is  not
divided  by  definite  boundaries,  because  the  acres  lie  in
intermixture  between  each  other.*  In  a  grant  of  King
Edgar  to  the  thane  iElfric  of  nine  hides '  at  iE|^eredingetune '
these  nine  hides  are  said  to  lie  in  intermixture  {onge  mang)
with  other  *  share-land '  {gedal  lande)^  so  that  the  field
pastures  are  in  common,  and  the  meadows  in  common,  and
the  arable  (yrpiand)  in  common.^  Both  share-meadows  and
share-land,  in  the  sense  of  arable  in  shares,  occur  in  charters,*

*  Cart.  Sax.  1 1 20.
^  K.  C.  D.  1278: (i€^lred,  982)  '  Quandam  runs  particulam  v

videlicet  cassatos,  cuiusdam  loco  sed  communis  terrae,  qui  celebri  aet
Ceorlatune  nuncupatur  vocamine,  cuidam  meo  ministro  vocitato
nomine  yElfgar  ei  ouanter  tribuendo  concessi  .  .  .  excepto  communi
labore,  cxpeditione,  pontis  arcisue  construaione.  .  .  .  Rus  namque
praetaxatum  manifcstis  undique  terminis  minus  diuiditur,  quia  iugera
altrinsecus  copulata  adiacent.'

'  Cart.  Sax.  1079 :  * . .  .  ix  mansas  .  . .  concedo  . .  .  pas  nigon  hida
licggead  on  ge  mang  o|>ran  ge  dal  lande  feld  kes  gemane  "]  maeda  ge
mane  3  yrb  land  gemame.*

*  K.  C.  U.  680:  (Oswald,  after  972)  * .  .  .  ufeweardre  ^nne  gebiraC


ayS  LAND  TENURE  [essay  ii

I

and  I  need  hardly  recall  the  famous  paragraph  of  Ine's  laws

treating  of  the  ceorls  who  have  to  keep  up  the  hedges

around  share-meadows  and  share-fields.^ It  is  only  worthy

of  attention  that  the  paragraph  in  question  r^^ulates  the

responsibility  for  negligence  in  keeping  up  hedges,  not  in

regard  to  dependent  peasants  who  would  have  to  take  their

law  from  their  lord,  or  possibly  from  their  own  moot,  but

in  respect  of  freemen  whose  relations  had  to  be  adjusted  by

the  King's  courts. In  view  of  the  widespread  customs  of

open-field  cultivation,  it  was  natural  enough  to  insert  such

an  enactment  in  a  collection  of  the  general  laws  of  Wessex.

The  peculiar  conformation  of  the  arable  fields  under  such

a  system  is  fully  described  in  treatises  on  champion  farming,

and  has  been  sufficiently  explained  by  modem  inquirers.^

Domesday  Survey,  of  course,  does  not  go  down  to  such

details  in  its  general  cadastre,  and  only  occasionally  affords

glimpses  of  the  prevailing  system. But  profuse  material

for  the  nomenclature  and  practice  of  open-field  husbandry

is  supplied  by  the  entries  of  the  Old  English  charters  as  to

boundaries. I  will  call  attention  to  a  few  of  them. In

a  charter  of  979  we  read  of  a  half  furlong  extending  by

the  right  boundary  of  the  land.^ A  charter  of  Edward  the

Elder  (a.  d.  903)  mentions  a  gore  acre — an  acre  strip  running

to  a  point  on  account  of  the  lie  of  the  land,  instead  of

running  between  parallel  lines. In  the  same  deed  a  fore^

arth  occurs,  that  is,  a  strip  used  for  the  turning  of  the


se  fifta  secer  ^sere  dalmsedue  to  ^re  hide.  Dis  is  ¥aes  wuda
gemaere  ^  to  ^re  hide  gebyre^.  .  .'  Cart.  Sax.  1298:  (Lease  for
three  lives  by  Oswald,  Archbishop  of  York  and  Bishop  of  Worcester,
to  the  thane  Brihtlaf,  A.  D.  974)  ' .  .  •  xxx  secra  on  |>sem  tpaem
feldan  dal  landes  pi%utan.'

*  Ine,  42.

*  Nasse,  Agrarian  Communities  in  England;  Seebohm,  English
Village  Communities,  p.  7  ff. ;  Cunningham,  Growth  of  English
Industry  and  Commerce— Early  and  Middle  Ages,  pp.  74,  126,
527  ;  Growth  of  the  Manor,  p.  163  ff. ;  Maitland,  Township  and
Borough,  pp.  55,  107.

"  C.  D.  622 :  (it¥elred,  979)  * .  .  .  Dis  synd  ^ara  fif  hida  landge-
maeru  to  Su^tune.  iErest  on  Wifeles  mere,  ^t  adune  to  %am  slede ;
andlangas  sledes  syx  secera  brsede  %et  up  be  healfan  furlange  be
riht  landmearce  to  abrocenan  beorge.'  Cf.  Earle,  Land  Charters,  1 79
(a.d.  944),  192  (a.d.  956).


SECT.  I.  CH.  II]  HUSBANDRY  279

plough.^  In  a  charter  of  Edgar  of  969  a  headland  acre  is
mentioned,  a  feature  of  the  field  arrangement  which  served
the  purpose  of  reaching  the  strips  of  a  furlong,  as  it  ran
at  right  angles  to  them.  The  headlands  were  also  used
for  the  same  object  as  the  forearths  in  ploughing,  that
is,  for  turning  the  plough.*  Again,  local  features  con-
nected with  the  rotation  of  crops  on  the  furlongs  of
open  fields  may  be  apparent  in  the  way  of  acres  of  beanland
and  bar  ley  land  included  in  a  hide.*  Linches,  terraces  formed
on  the  slope  of  a  hill  by  ploughing  across  it,  are  often  men-
tioned/ The  single  strips  in  the  open  fields,  forming  as  it
were  the  elementary  units  of  the  groups  or  bundles,  are
not  usually  spoken  of,  because  they  were  too  minute  to  be
reckoned  up  in  deeds.  But  occasional  mentions  may  occur
nevertheless.  The  most  interesting  memorandum  about  the
transactions  connected  with  the  restoration  of  Medhamstead
(Peterborough  Abbey)  speaks  in  one  case  of  thirty  acres  lying
in  sixty  *  sticca  landes ',  and  I  do  not  think  anything  else
but  strips  or  measured  pieces  can  have  been  meant.^

4.  The  open-field  system  finds  its  direct  complement  in  Holdingi.
the  arrangement  of  shares  and  holdings,  inasmuch  as  the
complicated  intermixture  of  strips,  the  cumbersome  cus-
toms regulating  the  fences  and  hedges,  the  roads,  drains,
and  ditches,  the  use  of  headlands  and  forearths,  &c.,  were
primarily  called  forth  by  the  wish  to  make  the  holdings  in

*  Cart.  Sax.  601 :  (Grant  by  King  Eadward  to  Tata,  son  of
itthehun,  of  land  at  Hordwelle,  or  Hordle,  Ca  Hants,  A.D.  903)
' ...  on  a^nne  gar  aecer  f  andlanges  )>asre  fyrh  to  anum  andheaf-
dum  to  anre  forier^e  ;)  sco  foriert  gae^  in  to  JMmi  lande.'

*  Cart.  Sax.  1229  :  (Grant  by  King  Eadgar  to  the  thane  Alfwold  of
land  at  >£pslea,  or  Apsley,  Co.  Bedford,  a.d.  969) '.  .  .  on  ^ne  hea-
fod  aicer.' Cf.  Earle,  Land  Charters,  372  (a.d.  951) ;  389  (a.d.  959).

'  K.  C.  D.  724  :  (Leofsine,  1016)  *.  .  .  )iriddan  secer  beanlandes  on
Biscopes  dune  ',  *  ondlang^ses  gemaeres  ¥a:t  on  berlandes  heafda.'

*  C.  D.  1221  (A.D.  959) :  *  Donon  to  grenan  lince  westewardan.'  Cf.
C.  L).  353  (a.d.  931) ;  CD.  356  (A.D.  938).

*  Carl.  Sax.  1130,  iii.  371  :  *  jJonne  bohte  man  set  Wulwo¥e  metere
Oxanege,  t>onne  on  oxanige  is  ametenes  wudes  "]  feldes  "]  medwe
25  a:cera  "j  wi^utan  ban  ige  sixti  sticca  landes  ^t  is  ameten  to  50
xcerum  ")  on  wude  (>e  |)ridde  trcow  ^  wid  utan.*  Cf.  Napier  and
Stevenson,  .\necd.  Oxon.,  Mediaeval  and  Modem  Series,  vh.  49,  on
landscearu.


a8o  LAND  TENURE  [essay  n

the  village,  if  not  exactly  equal,  at  least  corresponding  to
each  other  in  simple  proportions  and  reduced  in  their
variety  to  a  few  fairly  equivalent  types.  I  need  not
return  to  the  much-discussed  relations  between  the  hide
and  carucate  as  full  ploughlands^  and  their  fractional  sub-
divisions— the  yardland  (virgate)  and  oxgang  (bovate).  The
origin  of  these  subdivisions  and  their  relation  to  acres
may  still  be  matter  of  investigation,  but  their  meaning
in  mediaeval  husbandry,  during  the  period  covered  by
Domesday  and  approximately  two  centuries  before  and
after,  does  not  admit  of  doubt.  They  are  units  of  hus-
bandry formed  by  the  combination  of  acres  lying  either
together  in  plots  or  dispersed  as  strips  in  the  furlongs
of  an  open-field  township.  Before  approaching  these
principal  agrarian  units  of  which  we  constantly  hear  in
Domesday,  I  should  like  to  notice  one  rather  excep-
tional combination  occurring  in  the  Danish  provinces.  It
was  more  or  less  stamped  out  by  the  more  common
holdings  of  the  carucate  and  hide  systems,  but  it  has  left
some  traces,  and  these  are  characteristic  on  account  of  the
composition^  not  merely  of  this  exceptional  unit,  but  also
of  the  holdings  of  the  common  types.  In  the  north-east
comer  of  Norfolk,  in  a  fen  district  bordering  on  Lincoln-
shire, we  find  in  the  local  custom  of  the  manor  of  Walpole  ^


*  Cotton  MSB.  Tiberius  B.  ii.  £  157  :  *  Willelmus  Franceis  et  Thomas
de  Nordwold  tenent  dimidium  tenmanloth  scilicet  Ix  acras  et  quin-

2uaginta  et  duas  acras  ex  altera  parte  pro  vi  solidis  et  viii  denariis.  . . .
'>e  consuetudinariis  Galfridus  de  Gaderbone  et  pardcipes  tenent
unum  tenmanloth,  scilicet  sexies  viginti  acras  pro  x  sol.'  Cotton
MSB.  Claudius  C.  xi.  f.  193:  ^  De  mtlitibus  et  libere  tenentibus.  .  .  .
Jacobus  le  franceis  et  Thomas  de  Northmande  tenent  dimidium  ten-
manland,  scilicet  Ix  acrae  terra  et  lii  a.  ex  altera  parte  pro  vi  sol.  et  viii
den.  De  consuetudinariis  et  censuariis.  Alanus  et  Matheus,  Johannes,
et  Radulfus,  Petrus  et  Galfridus  de  Cartestowe  et  eorum  participes
tenent  unam  tenmanland,  scilicet  sexies  viginti  acras  terre.'  Prof.
Napier  quotes  the  following  passage  from  a  Bury  St  Edmund's  MS.,
now  197  C.C.C.  Oxford,  f.  106 b:  'On  Elsington  hundred  ah  Sancte
Edmund  xxvi  manslot.  On  Spelhoge  hundred  xlv  manslot  On  In
hundred  x  manslot.  On  Fuwelege  hundred  healf  ehtebe  manslot.  On
iCmehogo  hundred  xxv  manslot.  On  Clenevare  hundred  healf  ehte^
manslot.  On  Lynwaru  hundred  v  manslot '  (Transactions  of  the  Philol.
Soc,  1903-6,  p.  307).


SECT.  I.  CH.  II]  HUSBANDRY  iiSi

a  division  of  the  land  according  to  Unmanlands  or  tenman-
lots.  Such  a  tenmanland  contains  a  hundred  and  twenty
acres,  that  is,  exactly  the  equivalent  of  the  ordinary
carucate,  and  presents  one-tenth  of  the  peculiar  Danish
hundreds  of  I2  carucates.  Dividing  the  tenmanland
by  ten  we  should  get  a  onemanlot  or  onemanland  of
12  acres,  and  this  is  about  the  medium  size  of  a  Danish
toft  in  this  district,^  that  is,  of  a  house  and  orchard  with
a  few  acres  in  the  fields  of  the  township.  Now,  this  by
itself  would  be  interesting  enough,  inasmuch  as  we  should
find  the  ordinary  division  into  eight  bovates  replaced  by
another  without  any  direct  relation  to  the  composition
of  a  plough.  But  this  is  not  all.  In  the  Danish  district
we  find  other  traces  of  a  system  of  holdings  called  lots  and
gedales.  In  a  charter  of  958  several  donations  to  a  church
are  enumerated  in  manlots — two  manlots  in  Famsfield
appertaining  to  Southwell,  three  manlots  in  Normanton,  in
Fishton  two  parts  and  four  manlots  of  all  the  land.^  The
number  of  acres  comprised  in  the  lots  is  not  expressly
mentioned  in  these  cases,  but  the  term  manlct  is  the  same
as  in  the  case  of  Walpole.  In  the  account  of  the  redemp-
tion of  estates  of  Medhamstead  by  Bishop  iEthelwold  it
is  stated  that  the  land  redeemed  from  Wulfgeat  and
Gyrping  consisted  of  29  *gedale'.  *  These  29  shares
seem  to  fit  naturally  into  the  system  of  manlots,  although
an  exact  equation  cannot  be  established  between  the  two
terms.  On  the  other  hand,  these  gedale  have  to  be  referred
in  Anglo-Saxon  custom  to  the  gedalland  of  Ine's  laws.
So that the Danish arrangement appears merely  as

^  In  the  Ely  Survey,  Claudius  C.  xi,  the  tofts  are  given  as  con-
taining 15  acres  in  Tyrington,  10  acres  in  Walpole,  18  acres  in  Walton,
ff.  192,  196,  202.

'  Cart.  Sax.  1348  (1029 b)  a.d.  958  (p.  690):  'On  feames  felda  ge
byra%  twegra  manna  hlotlandes  in  to  Sudwellan  on  healum  are  seoxta
accr  "]  %reon  manna  hlot  on  normantune  a  se  ¥ridda  ares,  on  fiscetune
dam  tvvegcndales  3  fcower  manna  hlot  ealles  danslandes.'  Cf.  Thorpe,
Dipl.  p.  545.

^  Cart.  Sax.  11 30:  (Record  of  Medehamstede)  'pis  synd  ba  fester-
men  )>€  Wulfgeat  -]  Gyrping  fundon  )>am  ab  iCdduue  ^  hi  ^t  lande.
guldun  cct  macusige  for\San  iitlage  ^a  he  on  Walno^e  worhte. .  . .  pes
landes  is  under  cal  ix  ^  xx  ge  dale.'


a8a  LAND  TENURE  [essay  n

a  variation  of  the  system  of  holdings  obtaining  everywhere
Qn  the  island.

In  all  the  cases  where  holdings  are  formed  of  scattered
strips  of arable  with  appendant rights to the  use  of
meadows,  pasture,  and  wood,  two  main  features  have  to
be  noticed. The  holdings  are  proportionate  shares,  and
the  arrangement  of  the  open-field  or  champion  farming  is
entirely  dependent  on  them. Although  the  arable  is  as
a  rule  not  subject  to  redivision,  it  was  originally  allotted
in  consequence  of  a  scheme  of  equalization  ;  the  tenements
which  are  parts  of  it  are  termed  and  considered  *  lots ',  and
in  case  of  confusion  or  encroachment  the  repartition  could
be  renewed  by  going back to the original  scheme  of
^portionment  indicated  by  the  holdings.^ Thus  it  may
I  be said that the English  open-field  settlements  were
I  primarily  communities  of  shareholders  whose  shares  had
ybeen  apportioned  according  to  certain fixed  proportions.
iBe  second  side  of  the  arrangement  consists  in  the  fact
that,  though  there  is  no  legal  necessity  for  keeping  the
shares undivided and maintaining constant relations
between the holdings and the groups of population
settled  on  them,  there  is  a  customary  tendency,  especially
among  the  humbler  folk,  to  keep  up  as  far  as  possible  the
organic  unity  and  efficiency  of  the  shares. An  important
consequence  of  this  tendency  may  be  traced  in  the  con-
stitution of the ordinary subdivisions  of  the  holdings.
Excepting  Kent,  where  the  ancient  subdivision  of  sulungs
into  yokes  gradually  disappears  and  land  tenure  is  treated
in  a  thoroughly  individualistic  manner,  the  shares  of  the
English  open-field  system  correspond  to  the  divisions  of
the  plough-team. Further  and  more  complicated  divisions
are  not  impossible,  but  they  are  not  usual,  and  in  most
cases  the  accidental  working  of  the  law  of  succession  and
of  free  alienation  was  evidently  checked  by  custom.
Thcarablc.y 5.  The  terms  used  in  Domesday  and the  charters  in
regard  to  arable  are  worth  notice. Usually,  it  is  alluded

^  See  on  the  practices  of  readjustment  employed  in  Scandinavian
countries  and  in  England,  my  Growth  of  the  Manor,  pp.  178,  263  ff.


SECT.  I.  CH.  II]  HUSBANDRY  283

to  merely  as  the  central  part  of  the  ploughland,  carucate,
hide,  or  sulung,  and  of  their  subdivisions — the  virgates,
bovates — while  on  the  other  hand  the  land  for  ploughs  and
the  reckoning  of  actual  teams  remind  us  that  there  was
a  good  deal  of  difference  between  realities,  possibilities,
and  fiscal  estimates,  although  they  would  all  be  expressed
in  terms  derived  from  agriculture.  Sometimes,  howeveri
the  arable  land  as  such  is  made  the  subject  of  observation
and  separate  description.  Even  a  '  scrap '  of  arable  land
may  be  entered  specially,  and  probably  it  is  just  as  a  scrap
that  it  is  not  merged  in  the  rubrics — carucates,  virgates,
bovates.^  In  fact,  arable  land  not  subjected  to  ordinary
conditions  of  measurement  and  fiscal  estimation  passes,  as
it  were,  outside  the  common  frame  of  holdings.  We  have
already  come  across  many  instances  where  the  Survey
speaks  of  land  which  neither  pays  geld  nor  is  hidated.  It
belongs  generally  to  the  king  or  to  churches,  and  it  is
entered  in  the  cadastre  as  a  certain  number  of  carucates —
field  carucates  in  this  case — or  as  so  many  acres  of  arable.*
The  number  of  such  acres  may  be  large,  but  they  are
properly  reckoned  merely  as  acres,  because  they  do  not  go
to  form  holdings,  and  are  not  connected  with  the  other
items  of  a  holding — rights  of  pasture,  of  wood  usage,  &c.
In  a  case  reported  from  Dorset*  William  de  Ow  holds
a  portion  of  land  which  never  paid  geld  in  the  reign  of
King  Edward,  but  it  was  included  in  the  demesne  and  in
the  farm  of  the  king. It  fell  into  the  hands  of  a  Royal

*  Dd.  i.  39  c :  'In  insula  (de  Wit)  habet  rex  unum  frustum  terrae
unde  exeunt  vi  uomeres/

^  Dd.  i.  336  b:  (Lincoln)  *  In  campis  Lincoliae  extra  ciuitatem  sunt
xii  carucatae  terrae  et  dimidia.  .  .  .  De  hac  terra  habent  Rex  et  comes
viii  carucatas  in  dominio.  .  .  .  Praeter  has  viii  carucatas  habet  rex  et
comes  ccxxxi  acras  terrae  arabilis  inland  ct  c  acras  prati.'  Ibid.  336  d:
(Stamford)  *Terram  arabilem  extra  uillam  in  Lincolescire  habet  rex
DC  acras.  Lagemanni  et  burgenses  habent  cclxxii  acras  sine  omni
consuetudine.' Cf.  Dd.  ii.  94  (Peltenduham,  Essex).

'  Dd.  i.  Sod:  (Sucre)  *  In  ista  uilla  tenet  W.  ^uandam  partem
terrae  quae  nunquam  geldauit  T.  R.  E.,  sed  erat  in  dominio  et  in
firma  Regis.  Hanc  prestitcrat  Toxos  quidam  prcpositus  regis,
deinde  resumpsit  earn  in  manu  regis.  Toxus  ueroper  regem  E.  iterum
fuit  saisitus  sicut  dicit  et  ita  tenuit  eam  in  uita  et  m  morte  regis  £•  et
tempore  Ilaraldi. Prius  erat  pascualis,  modo  est  seminalis.


284  LAND  TENURE  [ESSAY  II

reeve,  and  remained  so  during  Harold's  domination. It
used  to  be  pasture,  but  now  it  is  cultivated  for  '  seed '. The
uncertainty  in  regard  to  the  quantity  of  the  land  and  its
juridical  condition  are  connected  with  the  fact  that  the  land
in  question  never  paid  geld — was,  as  a  matter  of  fact,  con-  \
verted  from  its  original  use  as  pasture  into  arable,  and/
had been appropriated by  a reeve. Altogether, one!
cannot  wonder  that  the  Survey  had  to  content  itself  in
this  case  with the  merest  economic  description ;  we  do
not  even  hear  what  peasants  there  were  on  the  land  to
cultivate  it.

The  Saxon  expression  for  terra  arabilis  was  yrdland}
and  we  find  it  sometimes  in  distorted  forms  in  the  Domes-
day Survey  itself.  In  fact,  the  herdwicks,  which  it  is  so
tempting  to  identify  with  pastoral  settlements,'  seem  to
have  been  sometimes  agricultural  clearings  in  the  waste  or
in  the  woods.^  Yrdland  appears  in  any  case  commonly  in
the  form  herctland  and  herdland^  and  is  sometimes  directly
connected  with  herdwicks  and  hardwicks.  The  herdwick
would  thus  be  a  close  counterpart  of  berwick — barley-
wick — denoting  the  grange  and  stable  of  a  small  manorial
settlement.
Assarti.  J  The  struggle  to  reclaim  land  for  cultivation  is  also  indicated
by  some  allusions  to  essarts,^  assarta  (newlands),  allusions

^  Cart.  Sax.  542 :  (Boundaries  of  land  at  Overbury,  under  Bredon
Hill,  Co.  Worcester,  a.d.  875)  ^  To  west  maedwan  butan  an  fkrlung
hina  her%landes  betweonan  )>aere  straete  *]  ^aere  meadwe.'  Cart.  Sax.
864  (a.d.  948) :  '  Ter  duodenas  segetes  cum  bis  quinis  prati  iugeribus,
quod  anglice  dicitur  xxxvi  aecera  yr)>  landes,  *]  x  aeceras  maede.

'  The  Burton  Cart.  21  speaks  definitely  of  a  herdwick, '  de  quantis-
cumque  vaccis  sibi  placuent.' Cf.  N.  £.  Dictionary,  s.v.  Herdwick.

'  Dd.  i.  162 a :  'In  Wales  sunt  iii  harduices :  Lamecare  et  potes-
chuinuet  et  Dinan.  In  his  sunt  viii  carucae  et  xi  uillani  dimidii  et  xv
bordarii  cum  vi  carucis.

*  Cart.  Sax.  608: 'eac  hi  syllad  him  Beferbuman  "]  eac  )»aerto


accents  ea^  landes  of  hbete  wellan  4  bi  ]>an  eard  lande  to  ^n  to  brocenan
beorge.'  C.  S.  1130  :*  Mt  Castre  ...  an  toft  "j  fourtig  aecere  herdelandes
"]  maedwe';  ib.  'Four"]  twentig  aecere  is  |>es  wudes  "^  22  haeredlandes
buton  odrum  ge  maenum  be  Ealdulf  ab  gebohte  act  cyneferde.'
^  Dd.  i.  179  d  :  (Much  Marcle,  Hereford)  'Merchelai  .  .  •  Ineodem


SECT.  I.  CH.  II]  HUSBANDRY  285

which  seem  to  come  almost  too  rarely  ;  but  one  thing  which
every  investigator  of  these  facts  of  early  agrarian  history  has
constantly  to  bear  in  mind  is  the  disproportion  between
the  real  significance  of  phenomena  and  their  appearance  in
express  notations.  Facts  of  everyday  occurrence  and
extreme  economic  importance  are  again  and  again  hidden
from  our  view,  or  disclosed  merely  in  occasional  glimpses,
by  the  barren  and  rigid  formulas  adopted  in  the  descrip-
tions and  narrations  which  have  come  down  to  us.  It  is
not  the  couple  of  direct  allusions  to  assarted  land  that  can
give  us  a  statistical  test  of  the  work  of  colonization  and
reclaiming  from  waste  which  was  going  on  in  England  in
the  eleventh  century  or  before,  but  it  is  important  to  note
that  in  trying  to  realize  the  conditions  and  stages  of  this
work  we  have  to  look  not  only  to  the  few  scanty  notices  of
newly-reclaimed  land  but  also  to  other  indications.  And
on  closer  examination  of  the  very  mentions  of  terra  aradilis
with  which  we  are  dealing  now  we  find  that  they  are  in-
dissolubly  connected  with  another  group  of  notices  which
meets  us  at  every  step  in  the  Survey,  and  throws  light,  if
not  on  the  actual  spread  of  colonization,  at  least  on  its
direction  and  aims.

It  turns  out,  in  fact,  that  terra  arabilis  is  sometim^Tern
distinctly  used  to  denote  the  area  not  only  of  actual  butr*^
also  of  possible  cultivation,  a  use  which  agrees  well  with
the  literal  sense  of  the  term.  In  Norfolk,  for  instance,  we
find  a  large  tract  entered  as  the  King's  land  in  Thetford,  on
the  other  side  of  the  Ouse.  It  is  one  league  long  and  half
a  league  broad,  and  there  are  three  persons  who  share  in
its  income — the  King,  the  earl,  and  the  sheriff,  each  for  one-
third.  Another  part  of  the  same  tract  of  Thetford  lies
towards  Suffolk,  and  is  half  a  league  in  length  and  half
a  league  in  breadth.  One-third  share  of  it  belongs  to  the
earl,  and,  presumably,  two-thirds  to  the  King. Now  of  the

manerio  sunt  Iviii  acrae  terrae  proiecte  (essarz)  de  silua,  et  preposttus
et  alii  ii  homines  tenent  plures  acras  de  ipsa  terra.*  Ibid.  184  d:
( Weobley,  Heref.) '  Wibelai . . .  Silua  dimidia  leuua  loDga  et  iiii  quaran-
tenas  lata.  Ibi  est  parcus  et  terra  ad  i  carucam  de  Essarz  reddens
xi  sol.  et  ix  den/


286  LAND  TENURE  [ESSAY  n

first  portion  one  half  is  said  to  be  arable  and  the  other
half  pasture,  while  in  the  Suffolk  portion  all  the  land  is
arable,  and  it  could  be  ploughed  by  four  teams.^  This  is
a  most  interesting  entry.  The  tract  in  question,  though
entered  under  the  rubric  of  royal  land,  and  as  a  royal
manor,  is  clearly  a  district  subjected  to  the  King,  earl,  and
sheriff  as  public  powers,  and  not  to  the  King  as  a  private
landlord.  The  passage  from  sovereignty  to  feudal  land-
lordism is  well  illustrated  by  it.  On  the  other  hand,  the
arable,  which  forms  so  large  a  portion  of  the  district,  is
clearly  not  taken  as  the  aggregate  of  the  holdings,  but  in
the  same  sense  as  pasture— it  is  land  fit  to  be  cultivated  for
seed.  Therefore  its  capacity  may  be  expressed  not  only
in  leagues,  but  also  in  the  number  of  ploughs  which  might
be  there  or  might  till  it.  It  is  the  prospect  of  cultivation
more  than  the  fact  of  its  being  to  a  certain  extent  culti-
vated that  is  insisted  on.  The  passage  may  also  serve  to
establish  once  more  the  interpretation  for  which  I  have
been  contending  when  I  had  to  explain  the  terra  carucis
term ;  it  has  nothing  to  do  with  the  occupation  of  the
reign  of  King  Edward,  and  is  plainly  directed  to  giving  an
estimate  of  the  land  fit  for  agriculture.  Nor  is  this  passage
by  any  means  an  isolated  one.  Similar  entries  occur  in
Lincolnshire.^  Indeed  in  the  latter  county  the  expression
terra  arabilis  ad  xii  carucas?  and  similar  ones,  sometimes
take  the  place  of  the  usual  terra  carucarum^  terra  carucis^
terra  ad  carucas,  &c.
Meadows. 6.  The  most  valuable  of  the  rights  appendant  to  the

*  Dd.ii.  Ii8b:  (Thetford,  Norfolk)  *Tcrre  regis  in  Tetford  ultra
aquam  uersus  Norfolc  est  una  leugata  terrae  in  longo  et  dimidia  in
lato  de  qua  rex  habet  duas  partes,  de  his  autem  duabus  partibus  tercia
pars  in  consulatu  iacet.  De  superior!  leugata  R.  Bigot  terdam  partem.
Tota  hec  terra  medietas  arabilis  est  altera  in  pastura.  De  alia  parte
uersus  Suthfolc  est  dimidia  leugata  terrae  in  longo  et  dimidia  in  lato
de  hac  terra  tercia  pars  est  ad  comitatum  iiii  acrae  prati.  Tota  haec
terra  arabilis  est  et  iiii  carucae  possent  arare.'

^  Dd.  i.  340a  (Horbelinge,  Lines.);  cf.  ibid.  340b  (Lavintone);
ibid.  345  c-d  (Osgotebi).

'  Dd.  i.  348 a:  (Foston,  Lines.)  '  Foxtune  (Berewiea  de  Beningtun)
xii  car.  terrae  ad  geldum.  .  .  .  Terra  arabilis  ad  xiv  carucas.'  ibid.
351  a :  (Mentinghes) '  Terra  arabilis  duplex.' Cf.  ibid.  (Chinetorp).


SECT.  I.  CH.  II]  HUSBANDRY  287

holdings  ^  was  the  use  of  the  meadows,  if  there  were  such.
The  quantity  of  this  kind  of  land  mentioned  in  Domesday
is  not  lai^e,  and  we  know  from  other  sources  that  the
greatest  care  was  taken  to  prevent  encroachments  in  this
respect.  The  practice  of  dividing  meadows  into  strips,  and
of  assigning  these  strips  in  rotation  or  by  lot  to  the
members  of  the  ancient  township  community,  has  even
now  not  quite  disappeared  from  rural  England.  A  few
miles  from  Oxford,  the  Yamton  meadows  are  still  dis-
tributed according  to  immemorial  custom,^  reminding  one
of  analogous  practices  employed  in  the  case  of  Aston  and
Cote.'  The  advantages  of  possessing  meadows  yielding
a  rich  harvest  of  hay  were  keenly  realized  by  the  farmers
at  all  periods,  but  it  is  very  seldom  that  we  find  in  Domes-
day meadows  estimated  to  cover  by  their  yield  the  entire
requirements  of  the  domain  and  of  the  tenants  for  the
feeding  of  horses  and  oxen.*  Even  more  rare  are  cases
where  a  good  deal  of  the  hay  could  be  sold  after  the  needs
of  the  manor  itself  had  been  satisfied.^  Usually,  even  in
large  estates,  only  a  few  acres  of  meadow  are  mentioned.
What  value  was  set  on  these  may  be  gathered  from  a  case
in  Kent,  in  which  a  whole  yoke,  the  land  of  four  oxen,  was
deemed  to  find  its  equivalent  in  two  acres  of  meadow
yielding  los.  a  year.*  Another  instance  from  the  same
county  is  less  clear.  In  the  huge  royal  manor  of  Tarente-
fort,  containing  land  for  forty  ploughs,  and  as  many  as  142
villain  tenements  with  5;^  teams,  there  is  as  much  meadow
as  appertains  to  ten  acres  of  land,  while  another  meadow

*  I  will  touch  very  briefly  on  this  subject.  It  has  been  treated  very
adequately  in  Mr.  A.  Ballard's  recent  book  on  the  Domesday  Inquest.
As  to  the  connexion  between  holdings  and  rights  of  commons,  see  e.g.
C.  D.  633  (a.d.  982) :  *  Dxs  mearclandes  (marshland)  swi  micel  siH,
i6  |n-im  hidon  gebyrad.* Cf.  Cart.  Sax.  513.

'  Transactions  of  Oxford  Historical  Soc.  xxiv,  pp.  307-11.
'  Gomme,  Village  Community,  p.  161  f.

•  Dd.  i.  149b:  (Wycombe,  Bucks)  'Wicumbe  .  .  .  pratum  iii  car.
et  ad  equos  de  curia  et  carucis  uillanis.'

*  Dd.  i.  169  a:  (Kempsford,  Gloucs.)  *  Chenemeresforde  .  .  .  dc
pratis  ix  lib.  praeter  pasturam  bourn.* Cf.  ibid.,  Legelade.

•  Dd.  i.  7  b  :  (Tottington,  Kent)  *  In  Totintune  ad  firmam  de  rcgc  i
iugum  ct  istud  est  dc  nouo  dono  episcopi  Baiocensis,  et  ibi  nil  est  nisi
ii  acrae  prati.*


a88  LAND  TENURE  [ESSAY  ll

and  twenty  acres  of  land  have  been  appropriated  by  some-
body.^ The  expression  'appertains  to  lo  acres'  is  very
unusual,  and  in  the  case  of  the  subtracted  meadow  the
twenty  acres  appear  as  a  direct  estimate  of  what  was
lost.  But  even  assuming  that  the  total  amount  of  meadow
land  were  thirty  acres,  it  would  appear  exceedingly  small
when  compared  with  the  enormous  extent  of  the  holdings
in  arable  and  their  stock  in  teams.  There  was  indeed
a  good  deal  of  wood  pasture,  but  still  the  disproportion
would  remain,  and  the  term  'pertinet'  makes  me  think
that  the  acrae  terrae  are,  as  in  the  case  of  the  yoke  just
quoted,  fiscal  units.  Now  the  taxation  of  Tarentefort  in
sulungs  was  preposterously  low — only  i)  sulungs  for  the
whole,  that  is,  probably  300  fiscal  acres.  Of  these,  thirty
fiscal  acres  of  meadow  would  form  one-tenth,  which  seems
appropriate  and  reasonable.
Pasture.  Most  of  the  food  for  the  cattle  was  provided  in  those

times  by  wild  pasture,  and  Domesday  gives  abundant  in-
formation in  most  counties  in  regard  to  its  extent  and
economic  importance.  I  will  just  mention  a  few  of  the
most  salient  features  of  these  entries.  It  is  obvious  that  in
many  cases  actual  arable  land  was  used  for  pasture.  Apart
from  the  regular  customs  of  stocking  the  field  commons,
about  which  a  few  words  will  have  to  be  said  later  on,
arable  reverted  to  pasture  by  its  falling  waste  or  being
encroached  upon  by  a  powerful  neighbour.^  But  in  most
cases  the  pastoral  land  of  the  township  was  carefully
separated  from  its  arable,  and  there  must  have  been  definite
customary  views  in  the  selection  of  both.  Separate  pas-
ture, pastura  separalis^  occurs,  but  is  not  very  usual.  The
most  ordinary  form  of  pasture  is  the  stocking  of  the
commons,  which  are  not  unfrequently  recorded  as  the  com-

*  Dd.  i.  2c:  (Dartford,  Kent)  *  Rex  Willelmus  tenet  Tarentefort  pro
uno  solino  et  dimidio  se  defendit.  Terra  est  xl  carucis.  In  dominio
sunt  ii  carucae  et  cxlii  uillani  cum  x  bordariis  habent  liii  carucas.  •  •  .
Homines  de  hundredo  testificantur  quod  de  isto  manerio  regis  ablatom
est  unum  pratum  .  .  .  et  xx  acrae  terrae,  et  adhuc  tantum  prati
quantum  pertinet  ad  x  acras  terrae.'

'  Dd.  iv.  338  (Aisseforda,  Somerset).


SECT.  I.  CH.  II]  HUSBANDRY  289

mon  pasture  of  a  township  or  a  manor,^  or  pasture-rights
in  one  place  appertaining  to  the  inhabitants  of  another.^
An  interesting  entry  occurs  in  the  Somerset  manor  of
Haminton.  It  gelds  for  21  hides,  and  out  of  these  one  is
added  on  account  of  the  common  pasture^ — a  very  strong
case  of  artificial  fiscal  hidation,  as  pasture  land  never
formed  actual  field-hides  by  itself.  The  commons  of
pasture  might  occasionally  stretch  over  enormous  districts^
as  has  been  shown,  for  instance,  in  the  case  of  the  seashore
pastures  of  Essex,  to  which  far  distant  townships  had  ways
of  access.^  Nor  was  it  impossible  or  uncommon  to  at-
tribute common  pastures  to  a  whole  hundred,  the  beasts
of  which  were  left  to  depasture  the  commons  '  horn  under
horn  '.*  The  fens  and  marshes  offered  similar  opportunities
for  very  extended  and  communal  rights  of  pasture.*  It
is  curious  that  in  Romney  Marsh  the  attention  of  the
surveyors  was  almost  exclusively  directed  towards  the
estimate  of  arable,  surely  not  because  there  were  no
pasture-rights  to  speak  of,  but  because  these  rights  did
not  seem  to  admit  of  definite  expression.''

Rights  of  pasture  occur  also  as  one  of  the  chief  sources  WoocU.
of  income  from  woods.  The  breeding  of  swine  especially,
the  animal  whose  flesh  was  used  most  for  food  in  the  course
of  the  middle  ages,  depended  to  a  great  extent  in  England
on  the  produce  (*  mast  *}  of  oak,  beech,  chestnut,  and  other
glandiferous  trees. But  goats  and  homed  cattle  had  also

*  Dd.  i.  117c:  (Rockham,  Devon)  'Rouecome  .  .  .  i  acra  prati  ct
iiii  acrae  siluae  et  communis  pastura.'  Cf.  ibid.  iv.  103  (Fouretona,
Devon) ;  137  (Hardingtona,  Somerset).

^  Dd.  iv.  108:  (Haxon,  Devon)  'Haustona  .  .  .  communem  pas-
cuam  Bratonae.'

^  Dd.  iv.  394:  (Hemington,  Somerset)  *  Hamintona  .  .  .  gildum
pro  XX  (et  i)  hid  is  .  .  .  De  his  xxi  hidis  habet  i  hidam  communem
pascuam  in  Hardintona  mansione  episcopi  Constantiensis.*

*  Victoria  County  History  of  Essex,  i.  336,  369-74.

^  Dd.  ii.  339b:  (Suffolk)  'In  Hundredo  de  Colenes  est  quedam
pastura  communis  omnibus  hominibus  de  hundret.'

*  Dd.  i.  341  a :  (Kelby,  Lines.)  *  Chelebi  .  .  .  Ibi  Ixx  acrae  prati  et
quater  xx  et  x  acrae  siluae  minutae,  quas  R.  episcopus  et  Colegrim  et
eorum  socii  tenent.*

^  Dd.  i.  5  b :  (Kent)  *  Ameslant  in  Maresc  de  Romenel  pro  uno  solin
se  defendit.  .  .  .  De  hac  terra  i  iugum  .  .  .'  Cf.  I2d  (Bur-warmaresc
In  Maresc  de  Romenel).

VINOCRAOOFF  U


^90  LAND  TENURE  [essay  li

very  often  to  resort  to  wood-pasture.  The  useless  wood
was  rather  an  exception,^  and  the  exploitation  referred  to
would  be  quite  as  much  the  pasturing  of  animals  as  the  use
of  the  wood  for  building,  making  hedges,  carpentering,  &c.
Small  wood,  silva  minuta^  would  be  very  valuable  from
the  first  point  of  view.  Therefore  the  wood  was  sometimes
entered  in  the  Survey  in  conjunction  with  pasture,^  and  the
way  of  estimating  its  value  is  very  often  to  indicate  the
number  of  swine  which  might  get  their  food  in  it.'^  Another
mode  of  appreciation  based  on  the  same  feature — the
nutritive  capacity  of  the  wood — ^was  to  specify  how  many
animals  were  rendered  in  dues  for  the  use  of  the  pannage :  ^
this  seems  the  most  appropriate  explanation  for  otherwise
odd  expressions,  such  as  'wood  for  two  pigs'.^  It  is  hardly
needful  to  remind  the  reader  of  the  immense  extent  of
territory  covered  by  woods ;  although  the  exact  boundaries
and  quantity  may  be  sometimes  difficult  to  ascertain  with
certitude,  there  cannot  be  any  doubt  as  to  the  general
aspect  of  such  tracts  as  the  weald  of  Kent,  the  southern
hundreds  of  Surrey,  the  forest  of  Rockingham,  &cJ  When
these  woods  are  not  turned  into  Royal  forests  they  are
mostly  in  the  common  use  of  the  demesne  and  tenantry  of
a  manor,^  or,  if  large,  of  a  number  of  manors,  perhaps  of

^  Dd.  i.  43  d :  (Littleton,  Hants)  '  Liteltone  •  .  .  silua  inutilis.  .  .  .'
CL  46  a  (Chementune).

*  Cf.  p.  289,  n.  6.

'  Dd.  i.  10  c :  (Beamonston,  Kent)  '  Betmonteston  .  .  .  De  isto
manerio  tenet  Hugo  de  Montfort  inter  siluam  et  pasturam  quod
ualebat  T.  R.  £.  vi  lib.  et  post  et  modo  tantumdem.'

*  Dd.  i.  31  b :  (Woking,  Surrey)  '  Wochinges  .  .  .  Istud  manerium
habet  et  habuit  consuetudinem  in  silua  regis  de  Wochinges  hoc  est
quod  dominus  uillae  huius  potest  habere  in  ipsa  silua  cxx  porcos  sine
pasnagio.'  Ibid.  ii.  38  b:  (Essex)  *Tachesteda.  .  .  .  Tunc  silnam
M  porcis. Modo  DCCC'

'  Dd*  i.  14  b:  (Mere worth,  Kent)  '  Marourde  .  .  .  Ibi  tantum
siluae  unde  exeunt  Ix  porci  de  pasnagio.*  Ibid.  32  d  :  (Surrey) '  Torp.
.  .  .  De  herbagio  xxiiii  porci.'

*  Dd.  i.  7  d  (Tiuedele,  Kent).

^  Cf.  Dd.  i.  5  c  (Sudfleta,  Estanes,  Kent) ;  5  d  (Hallinges,  Frandes*
berie);  ibid.  145a  (Tedinwiche,  Bucks);  ibid.  239b  (Sciplei,
Warwick).

*  E.g.  Dd.  i.  163  b :  (Tewkesbury,  Gloucs.) '  In  tota  Teodecfaesberie
sunt  cxx  acrae  prati  et  silua  una  leuga  et  dimidia  longa  et  tantumdem
lata.*


SECT.  I.  CH.  ii]  HUSBANDRY  291

a  whole  county.*  The  '  admensuration '  of  the  rights  of
usage  in  woods  is  effected  in  different  manners,  and  there
is  even  a  greater  variety  in  the  expressions  used  by  our
documents  to  describe  them.  A  good  example  of  an
explicit  declaration  in  this  respect^  from  the  Domesday
Survey,  is  afforded  by  an  entry  about  Newenton,  a  Wiltshire
manor  of  the  Abbey  of  Wilton.  This  manor  is  said  to
have  the  customary  right  to  80  cartloads  of  wood,  pannage
for  80  pigs,  and  the  material  for  the  repair  of  houses  and
hedges  from  the  wood  of  Melchet.*  Old  English  charters
often  give  similar  information  as  to  the  number  of  cartloads,
and  the  pasture  for  pigs.^  In  the  great  Royal  wood  of
Havocumber,  Dorset,  Earl  Godwin  had  a  right  to  the
third  oak ;  ^  the  appropriation  of  these  valuable  trees
could  not  be  left  to  chance,  but  had  to  be  strictly  regulated.
As  in  the  case  of  pasture,  the  right  to  the  wood  was
necessarily  proportionate  to  the  size  of  the  holding,  being
in  fact  a  part  of  the  share  in  the  common  ooncems  of  the
township.*

Two  terms  and  peculiarities  of  wood-custom  remain  to
be  noticed— the  dtnes  and  the  hays  or  hedges.  A  dene  is
a  clearance  in  the  thicket  in  which  men  and  animals  may
move  with  some  ease :  such  pasturage  grounds  within  the
wood  were  especially  numbered  and  guarded,  and  mostly
contained  a  few  huts  for  the  keepers  and  herdsmen.^  When

*  Dd.  i.  230  a :  (Leics.)  '  Silua  totius  VicecQmitatus  Hereswode
uocatur  habet  iiii  leugas  in  longo  et  i  leu^^am  in  lato.  The  Leicestershire
here  reminds  one  of  the  Northamptonshire  kerjar gemdt^  Cart.  Sax.  1 130.

'  Dd.  i.  68  a :  (S.  Newton,  Wilts)  '  Newentone.  ...  Ad  istum
manerium  pertinet  habere  per  consuetudinem  in  silua  Milcheti  quater
XX  caretedes  lignorum  et  paissonem  quater  xx  jporconim  et  ad  domos
et  sepes  reemendandas  quando  opus  fiierit.' (Jf.  ibid.  68  b  (Waisil).

^  E.g.  Cart.  Sax.  513  (a.d.  86iS):  '  70  porcis  saginam  in  commone
iila  salvatica  (corr,  silvatica)  taxatione  .  .  .  v  pkustros  plenas  de
virgis  bonis  et  hunicuique  anno  i  roborem,'  &c.

*  Dd.  iv.  28  (Boscus  de  Hauocumba,  Dorset).

^  Dd.  i.  140  b:  (Hailey,  Herts)  *  Hailet.  .  .  .  De  quadam  silua  re-
claniat  Radulfus  de  Limesi  tantum  quantum  pertinet  ad  iii  hidas  de
Kmmeuuelle  .  .  .  et  Canonici  de  Waltham  reclamant  tantum  stluae
quantum  pertinet  ad  unam  hidam.'

*  Dd.  i.  7  c,d  :  (Peckham,  Kent) '  Pecheham  .  .  .  Rex  habet  dehoc
manerio  tres  denas  ubi  manent  iiii  niUani  et  ualet  xl  sol.'  Ibid.  56  d:
(Windsor)  '  Windesores  .  .  .  Silua  de  1  porcis  de  pasnagio  et  alia

U  %


292  LAND  TENURE  [essay  ii

a  dene  of  half  a  yoke  is  mentioned  in  Kent,  it  means  pro-
bably that  the  use  of  grass  allowed  to  particular  tenants
was  proportioned  to  the  half  yoke  attributed  to  them.*
The  kaiae  indicate  another  aspect  of  forest-life  which  was
certainly  not  the  least  important  one — the  woods  were
mainly  hunting  grounds,  and  had  to  be  preserved  as  such.
In  order  to  keep  game  and  deer  the  ordinary  device  ^as
to  enclose  the  hunting  ground  by  permanent  hedges ;  *
besides  these,  temporary  hedges  were  raised  during  the
hunting  seasons  for  drives  {stabiliturae).^  The  enclosed
tract  itself  received  the  name  of  haiay^  from  the  fact  of  its
being  within  hedges.  Besides  their  value  as  parks  for
game  the  haiae  must  have  served  also  for  other  purposes
of  wood  exploitation.  A  share  in  a '  hay'  might  thus  become
a  very  valuable  husbandry  item.^  It  would  be  out  of
the  question  to  dwell  here  on  the  history  of  Royal  forests.
I  will  only  call  attention  to  a  few  passages  of  the  Survey
showing  the  rapid  and  violent  extention  of  forest  rights  in
consequence  of  the  Conquest,  and  the  destructive  influence
exercised  by  the  spread  of  forests  and  forest  jurisdiction  on

silua  missa  est  in  defensa,  et  adhuc  sunt  in  uilla  c  hagae  v  minus.  .  •  .
De  terra  huius  manerii  tenet  Albertus  unam  hidam  et  dimidiam  et
terciam  partem  unius  denae,  Walterus  filius  Other  .  .  .  tantum  sUuae
unde  exeunt  v  porci  de  pasnagio.'  Cf^  ibid.,  Taceham,  Cocheham,
Cart.  Sax.  442  (a.d.  843) :  *  Haec  sunt  pastus  porcorum  qui  in  nostra
saxonica  lingua  denbera  vocantur/  &c.

^  Dd.  i.  9  d :  (Kent)  *  In  Rouinden  Hundredo,  Adam  filius  Huberti
tenet  .  .  .  i  denam  de  dimidio  iugo  quae  remansit  extra  diui^onem
Hugonis  de  Montfort  et  iacuit  in  Belice.  Ibi  habet  ii  uiUanos  cum
dimidia  caruca.*

'  Dd.  i.  176c:  (Kington,  Worcs.)  '  Chintune  . . .  habebant  i  haiam
in  qua  capiebantur  ferae.'  Cf.  ibid.  256  c  :  (Cortune,  Salop)  *  Ibi  est
haia  capreolis  capiendis.*  '  Dd.  i.  269  d,  cf.  i.  56,  c.

*  Dd.  i.  240  a:  (In  Hatton,  Warwick)  'Donnelie  ...  Ibi  haia
habens  dimidiam  leugam  longo  et  dimidiam  leugam  lato.'  Cf.  ibid.
180 c  (Haloede,  Hereford);  185c  (Ruiscop) ;  cf.  211c:  (Merestone,
Beds)  *sepem.*

^  Dd.  ii.  278  a :  (Scole,  Norfolk)  '  In  Osmundestuna  inuasit  Hugo
de  Corbun  sub  Rogero  Bigot  medietatem  unius  liberi  hominis  cum
X  acris  terrae  et  partehege  (sic :  partem  hege  ?) ;  hoc  tenuit  R.  comes
quando  forisfecit  et  post  cum  fuit  in  manu  regis  inuasit  eum  Hugo  de
Corbun  qui  modo  tenet.  Radulfus  de  Felgeris  tenet  manerium  sed
non  habet  hanc  partem.'  Cf.  ibid.  282  a  (Blideburc,  Suffolk) ;  ibid.
371  b:  (Southwofdy  Suffolk)  'Sudwolda  .  .  .  medietas  unius  heie
maris  et  quarta  pars  alterius  medietatis.'


SECT.  I.  CH.  ii]  HUSBANDRY  293

the  population  at  large,*  Various  other  economic  com-
modities mentioned  in  the  Domesday  Survey,  such  as
mills,  quarries,'*  orchards,  vineyards,*  &c.,  are  by  their  very
nature  mostly  held  in  severalty  and  not  as  appendant  to
holdings.  In  regard  to  saltworks  ^  and  fisheries,^  both
might  be  the  case,  but  the  Survey  mostly  tells  us  of  cases
of  individual  appropriation,  probably  because  they  came
more  within  the  purview  of  exact  estimates.  Before
leaving  the  subject  of  appendant  rights,  I  will  again  call
attention  to  a  fact  which  must  hamper  all  attempts  at

^  Dd.  i.  38  d :  (Stanswood,  Hants)  *  Staneude.  Cheping  tenuit  de
rege  Edwardo.  Tunc  se  defend  it  pro  ii  hidis,  modo  pro  una  quia
alia  est  in  foresta.'  Ibid.  51c  (Otreorde).  Ibid.  154 d:  (Oxon.)  'In
Scotome,  Stauuorde,  Wodestoch,  Comeberie,  et  Hucheuuode
dominicae  forestae  regis  sunt,  habent  ix  leugas  longo  et  totidem  lato.
Ad  has  forestas  pertinent  iiii  hidae  et  dimidia  et  ibi  vi  uillani  cum  viii
bordariis  habent  iii  carucas  et  dimidiam.  De  his  et  omnibus  ad
forestam  pertinentibus  reddit  Rainaldus  x  lib.  per  annum  regi.'  Ibid.
268  d :  (Flintshire)  *  Brochetune,  Vlfemiltone,  Latbroc,  Bachelie,
Colesett  &c.  .  .  .  Harum  uiginti  hidarum  omnes  siluas  habet  comes
in  foresta  sua  positas.  Unde  maneria  simt  multum  peiorata.  Haec
foresta  habet  x  leugas  longo  et  iii  leugas  lato.'  Cf.  ibid.  19b  (Has-
lesse,  Sussex) ;  51  a  (Suei,  in  Nova  Foresta) ;  68  b  (Lauurecestokes,
Wilts);  i8od  (Hanlie,  Hereford);  182  c:  (Hereford)  *  Huius  terrae
maxima  pars  est  in  defensa  regis ' ;  208  b  (Brantune,  Hunts).

'  Dd.  i.  157  a  :  (Teynton,  Oxon.)  *  Tcigtone  .  .  .  Inter  quadrariam
et  prata  et  pascua  reddit  xxiiii  solidos  et  vii  denarios.*  290  d :
(Whatton,  Notts)  'Watone  ...  Ibi  una  molaria  ubi  molae  fodiun-
tur  de  iii  markis  argenti.'

'  Dd.  i.  43  b:  (Lomer,  Hants)  'Lammere  .  .  .  reddebat  abbati
per  annum  x  sextaria  vini.*  Cf.  69b :  (Wilcote,  Wilts)  *  Vinea  bona' ;
73  a  :  (Tollard,  Wilts)  *  ii  arpenni  uineae.'

*  Dd.  i.  172  b  :  (Droitwicn,  Worcs.)  *  In  Wich  habuit  rex  Edwardus
demos  xi  et  in  v  puteis  habebat  rex  Edwardus  suam  partem.  In
i  puteo  (Vpcuuic)  liiii  salinae  et  ii  hocci  reddunt  vi  solidos  et  viii
denarios.  In  alio  puteo  Helperic  xvii  salinae.  In  iii  puteo  Midelwic
xii  salinae  et  ii  partes  de  uno  hocco  reddunt  vi  solidos  et  viii  denarios.
In  V  aliis  puteis  xv  salinae.  De  his  omnibus  habebat  rex  Edwardus
de  firma  Iii  libras.'  Cf.  268  a:  (Northwich,  Cheshire)  Mn  eodem
Mildestuic  hundredo  erat  tercium  Wich  quod  uocatur  Noniuich  et
crat  ad  firmam  pro  viii  libris.  Ipsae  leges  et  consuetudines  erant  ibi
quae  erant  in  aliis  Wichis,  et  rex  et  comes  similiter  partiebantur
rcdditiones.  Omnes  teini  qui  in  isto  Wich  habebat  salinas  per  totum
annum  non  dabant  in  die  veneris  buUiones  salis.'  Ibid.  268  b:  (unum
Wich  in  Warmundestron  Hd.)  '  Omnes  istae  salinae  et  communes  et
dominicae  cingebantur  ex  una  parte  quodam  flumine  et  quodam  fossato
ex  alia  parte.'

'^  Dd.  i.  6a:  (Swancomb,  Kent)  '  Suinescamp  .  .  .  v  piscariae  de
XXX  den.  et  vi'*  que  seruit  ad  hallam.'  Cf.  ibid.  32  d  (Patricesham.
Surrey) ;  ibid.  57  b  (Wcregrave,  Berks).


294  LAND  TENURE  [essay  ii

general  statistics  in  regard  to  these  rights.  Pastures  and
woods  are  by  no  means  always  noticed  in  the  descriptions.
In  most  instances,  perhaps,  more  or  less  explicit  entries
were  made,  but  there  are  counties  where  wild  pasture  was
nearly  disregarded.*  Negatively,  this  is  an  important  fact,
as  it  ought  to  check  calculations  tending  to  estimate  the
contrast  between  the  agriculture  of  Domesday  and  pastoral
or  forest  pursuits.*
Waste.  7.  One  of  the  reasons  for  the  uncertainty  of  many  de-

scriptions in  the  Survey  is  the  enormous  amount  of  waste,
in  the  sense  of  devastated  land.  On  the  borders  of  Wales,
for  instance,  in  Herefordshire,  there  were  nine  manors  of
19  hides  entirely  laid  waste.  In  eleven  other  manors
/there  was  land  for  36  ploughs,  but  it  was  and  had  been
I  waste,  and  had  never  paid  geld.®  The  estimate  of  the
/  terra  carucis  ought  to  be  noted,  as  it  establishes  again,
in  a  most  conclusive  manner,  what  I  have  been  trying
to  make  out  as  the  meaning  of  the  ploughlands  of  the
Survey ;  the  terra  carucis  or  terra  carucarum  applies  not  to
land  under  actual  cultivation,  and  not  to  that  which  had
been  under  cultivation  in  the  reign  of  King  Edward,  but  to
the  land  considered  fit  for  agriculture.  In  fact,  in  the  reign
of  King  Edward  the  land  was  already  lying  waste.  In  the
same  way  we  find  in  Cheshire  a  large  tract  of  16  potential
ploughlands,  formerly  held  by  eight  freemen,  lying  waste
from  the  time  before  the  Conquest*  Yorkshire  was,  of
course,  one  of  the  counties  most  terribly  harried,  both  by
Harold  and  by  William  the  Conqueror,  and  on  every  page
of  its  survey  we  find  records  of  devastation — in  fact,  many
of  these  pages  present  hardly  anything  else. I  will  just

^  This  seems  to  have  been  to  a  great  extent  the  case  in  Gloucester-
shire and  Staffordshire,  for  instance.

'  Cf.  C.  S.  Taylor,  in  Bristol  and  Gloucestershire  Society's  Trans-
actions, 61  ff.,  227-9.

^  Dd.  i.  181  b:  'Rex  habet  in  Herefordscire  ix  maneria  wasta  de
xix  hidis.'  Ibid.  186  d  :  '  In  his  xi  maneriis  Bradelege,  Titele^  &c.,
est  terra  xxxvi  carucis,  sed  wasta  fuit  et  est.  Nunquam  geldauit  iacet
in  Marcha  de  Walis.*

*  Dd.  i.  264  a :  (Cheshire) '  Has  terras  tenuerunt  viii  liberi  homines
pro  maneriis.  Terra  est  xvi  carucis  inter  totum.  Wasta  fuit  et  est
tola.*


SECT.  I.  CH.  ii]  HUSBANDRY  295

refer,  as  an  example,  to  the  description  of  Agemundenesse.
Of  the  enormous  soke  centring  around  Earl  Tosti's  manor
of  Preston,^  and  containing  sixty-one  villages,  only  16  acres
were  still  cultivated,  but  even  as  to  these  it  was  not  known
exactly  who  their  inhabitants  were.  All  the  rest  was  waste.
Again,  Whitby  ^  used  to  be  a  flourishing  estate  of  Earl  Siward, .
with  15  carucates  and  land  for  15  more  ploughlands;  it  was
valued  in  the  reign  of  King  Edward  at  ;f  4a  yearly  income.
T.  R.  W.  the  tract  with  its  three  leagues  by  two  of
open  fields,  and  seven  by  three  of  wood,  was  tenanted  by
William  Percy,  under  Earl  Hugh  of  Chester,  with  two  teams
in  demesne,  and  one  team  among  ten  villains  and  three
bordarii.  The  value  was  ;f  3.  The  soke  of  the  manor  was
in  as  desolate  a  condition  as  the  manor  itself.  It  was  estim-
ated for  the  geld  at  a8  carucates,  and  there  was  room  for  %%
ploughlands  more,  and  yet  there  were  only  6  teams  in  two
of  the  townships,  and  a  population  of  8  socmen  households,
and  30  villain  holdings.  Staffordshire  ^  and  Northampton-
shire *,  though  not  so  thoroughly  devastated,  show  every-
where traces  of  the  great  ravages  incurred  during  the  struggles
of  the  eleventh  century.  On  the  other  hand,  such  instances
as  Bishopestrev  in  Cheshire,  an  estate  that  had  passed  from
Earl  Edwin  to  the  Earl  of  Chester,  where  one  manor  and
two  half- manors  are  estimated  to  contain  land  for  one
plough,  two  serfs,  and  one  bordarius^  may  be  due  to  the  fact
that  the  place  was  in  a  state  of  almost  complete  wilderness,
due  not  to  devastation,  but  to  the  lack  of  capital  and  labour.
The  insignificance  of  the  one  ploughland  assigned  to  the
manor  seems  to  point  this  way.* The  opposition  to  waste

*  Dd.  i.  301  d:  (Preston,  Yorks)  *  In  Prestune  comes  Tosti  vi
carucatas  ad  geldum.  Ibi  pertinent  he  terrae  (61)  Omnes  hae  uille
iacent  ad  Prestune  et  iii  ecclesiae.  £x  his  xvi  a  paucis  incoluntur  fed
quot  sint  habitantes  ignoratur.  Reliqua  sunt  wasta.'  Cf.  ibid.,
Haliun ;  Witetune.

^  Dd.  i.  305  a  (Whitby).

'  Cf.  Eyton,  Domesday  Studies,  Staffordshire.

*  Cf.  Victoria  County  Hist.  Northamptonshire,  i.  260-3.

^  Dd.  i.  269  b:  (Cheshire)  *  Hiscopestreu  fuit  manerium  Eduini
comitis  T.  K.  K.  Nunquam  geldauit  neque  hidatum  fuit.  Tone  erat
wasta,  ct  quando  Hugo  comes  recepit  similiter  wasta  mode  tenet
Hugo  K.  Norman  de  comite  medietatem  huius  manerii  et  totam  Legge


2g6  LAND  TENURE  [ESSAY  n

is  settlement  {vastunt:  fwspitatum).  The  mere  fact  that
untenanted  land  rendered  some  income  to  stray  occupiers,^
or  could  be  utilized  for  pasture,^  or  for  hunting,'  did  not
much  change  its  condition.  It  is  only  through  permanent
colonization  that  it  passes  from  the  category  of  waste  to
that  of  terrae  hospitatae.^  The  Saxon  equivalent  of  terra
hospitata  would  h^geseit  land^  and  generally ^^fu/^r^  is  added
to  this  qualification  of  settled  land,  to  show  that  it  was  not
only  held  by  permanent  tenants,  but  also  rendered  dues  to
the  king  or  '  defended '  itself  in  r^ard  to  him,  as  the  ex-
pression went.*  The  policy  of  providing  the  land  with
tenants  for  tillage,  and  to  enable  it  to  bear  the  burden  of
taxes  and  public  services  was  one  of  the  chief  concerns  of
Old  English  Royalty,  and  one  of  the  motives  making  for
feudalization  and  the  rise  of  aristocracy.  The  landrica  or
landlord  had  to  help  materially  with  the  outfit  and  pro-
tection if  waste  districts  were  to  be  '  hospitated '  and  enabled
to  take  up  the  *  wara  '.•  Therefore  every  period  of  economic
and  social  restoration,  following  on  great  devastation,  was
at  the  same  time  a  period  of  advantage  for  the  growth  of
aristocracy.  This  is  told  in  as  many  words  in  the  history
of  colonizing  ecclesiastical institutions,  which  created  an

et  Sudfell.  Terra  est  i  carucae  q|uae  ibi  est  in  dominio  cum  ii  bordariis
et  i  acra  prati  ibi.  Valet  x  solid.  Aliam  medietatem  huius  manerii
et  medietatem  de  Mulintone  et  totum  Wiselei  tenet  de  comite  Odinus.
Terra  est  i  carucae  quae  ibi  est  cum  ii  semis  et  uno  bordario.  Valet
X  solid.'

^  Dd.  i.  368  b :  (Elsthorp  and  Bulby,  Lines.)  '  In  Aighelestorp  et  in
Bolebi  habuit  OfTram  ii  bouatas  terrae  ad  geldum.  Wido  habet  et
uacuae  sunt,  sed  tamen  coluntur.'

«  Dd.  i.  278  c  (Totinglei  (Totley),  Derby) ;  275  c  (Barcovcre  (Birch-
over),  Derby)  *  Was^i  •  .  •  silua  .  .  .  tercia»pars  pastil  is.'  Ct.  273  a
(Maperlie) ;  274  b  f  Heorteshom).

^  Dd.  i.  186  d  :  (Herefordshire)  '  In  his  wastis  terris  excreuerunt
siluae  in  quibus  isdem  Osbemus  uenationem  exercet  et  inde  habet
quod  capere  potest. Nil  aliud.'

*  Dd.  i.  336  a  :  '  In  ciuitate  Lincolia  erant  Tempore  regis  Eduuardi
nouies  centum  et  Ixx  mansiones  hospitatae.  Hie  numerus  anglice
computatur  i  centum  pro  cxx.'  Ibid.  336  b:  '£x  predictis '  mansio-
nibus  quae  T.  R.  £.  fuerunt  hospitatae  sunt  modo  wastae  cc  anglico
numero  i.e.  ccxl  et  eodem  numero  septies  centum  et  Ix  sunt  modo
hospitatae.'

*  Earle,  Land  Charters,  376  (Customs  of  Tiddenham).

*  Thorpe,  Diplom.  162  (Bishop  Denewulf  s  grant).


SECT.  I.  CH.  II]  HUSBANDRY  297

aristocracy  of  privileged  corporations  if  not  of  individuals.
But  the  same  process  may  be  traced  in  Ine's  legislation  ^
during  the  rise  of  Wessex,  in  some  of  the  later  Anglo-Saxon
books  during  the  struggle  with  the  Danes,'  and  in  Domes-
day itself  in  the  efforts  of  the  great  ecclesiastical  houses
to  gather  tenants  in  order  to  improve  the  dilapidated
condition  of  the  ancient  estates  that  had  fallen  into  their
hands.^

Before  leaving  the  subject,  let  us  glance  at  the  different  Canset  of
causes  producing  devastation  in  those  times ;  there  is  such  '*'"^*'
a  multiplicity  of  them  that  one  can  easily  realize  what
a  hard  stand  the  constructive  and  reconstructive  tendencies
had  against  the  constant  threat  of  devastation.  We  have
already  seen  what  the  Celts  of  Wales  could  do  in  that
direction,  and  what  aspect  the  March  of  Wales  showed  in
some  parts.  In  Devonshire  we  come  across  terrible  ravages
committed  by  Irish  pirates.*  But  the  host  of  the  king
himself  could  be  responsible  for  similar  desolation.^  The
building  of  castles,  which  went  on  uninterruptedly  from  the
Conquest  through  the  greater  part  of  the  twelfth  century,  and
was  only  temporarily  checked  by  Henry  Plantagenet,  was
another  source  of  destruction  to  the  adjoining  population.*
Of  the  forests  we  have  already  had  occasion  to  speak  ;  they
were  a  curse,  both  directly  and  indirectly.as  a  surrender  of  the
rights  of  men  to  the  comfort  of  beasts  and  plants,^  and  as  a

'  Ine,  108-12.

^  See  e.g.  Heming*s  Cartulary  about  the  activity  of  Bishop  Oswald
of  Worcester.  *

^  On  the  restoration  of  the  estates  of  Abingdon.  Chron.  Monast.  de
Abingdon  (Rolls  Series),  i.  486;  ii.  i,  2,  ,

*  Dd.  iv.  301  :  ( Devon)*^  Hae  ix  predictae  roansiones  sunt  uastatae
per  irlandinos  homines.*  Dd.  i.  40  c  (F^rnam) :  *  Rexita  donauit  causa
Wichingariim,  quia  sup6r  mare  est.'

''  Dd.  i.  239  a:  (Harbury,  Warwickshire)  '  Edburberie  .  .  .  uasta
est  per  exercitum  regis.  ^  .  .  Valuit  x  solid. Modo  ii  solid.'

^  Dd.  i.  254a:  (Montgomery,  Shropshire)  'Ipse  comes  (Ro^erius)
construxit  cast  rum  Muntgumeri  uocatum  ad  quod  adiacent  lii  hidae  et
dimidia  quas  tcnuerunt  Seuuar,  Oslac,  Azor  de  rege  Eduuardo  quie-
tas  ab  omni  geldo  ad  uenandum  eas  habuerunt.  .  .  .  Wastae  sunt
et  fuerunt.'

"  Dd.  i.  i66d  :  (Wyegale,  GIoucs.)  *  Wighcictc  .  .  .  nunc  est  iussu
re^is  in  forcsta  sua.  Ibi  erant  vi  hiaae  et  geldabat  et  ualebat  Ix  solid.
Modo  non  est  nisi  piscaria  de  x  solid.'


298  LAND  TENURE  [essay  11

vantage  ground  from  which  privil^ed  animals  carried  out
their  inroads  against  the  cultivated  districts.  But  besides
these  most  tragic  eventualities  there  was  the  constant  wear
and  tear  of  life,  badly  provided  for  and  badly  protected,  in  its
struggle  for  existence.  Let  us  listen  to  the  simple  but
eloquent  words  of  the  description  of  Lincoln :  *  Of  these
waste  houses  there  were  destroyed  for  the  sake  of  the  castle
one  hundred  and  sixty-six ;  the  rest,  seventy-four,  were
laid  waste  outside  the  boundaries  of  the  castle — not  on
account  of  the  oppression  of  sheriffs  and  bailiffs,  but  because
of  disasters,  poverty,  and  fires.*  ^  Although  the  direct
responsibility  of  officials  is  set  aside  in  this  case^  it  is
clear  that  it  was  generally  a  standing  cause  of  oppression
and  destruction.  Their  pernicious  influence  is  clearly
affirmed  in  the  case  of  Norwich  ;  of  the  burgesses  who
lived  in  the  Borough  of  Norwich '  twenty-two  left,  and  stayed
in  Beccles,  a  village  belonging  to  the  Abbot  of  St  Edmund's.
Those  who  fled,  and  others  who  remain,  are  entirely  ruined
{vastatae)^  partly  through  the  forfeiture  of  Earl  R.,  partly
through  fires,  partly  by  the  King  s  geld,  and  partly  by
Waleran  (the  sheriff).'  ^  A  significant  story  of  oppression
by  the  local  lord  is  told  from  Cambas  in  Suffolk.  There  were
in  this  place  62  freemen  originally  commended  to  Ulnott,
a  thane  of  King  Edward,  then  under  the  patronage  of  Earl
Brian,  the  predecessor  of  Earl  Robert,  while  the  soke  over
them  remained  in  the  hands  of  the  King.  Their  number
dwindled  under  King  William  and  the  rule  of  Earl  Robert
to  50,  and  instead  of  16  teams  T.  R.  E.  they  held  only
8  between  them.  The  whole  manor  of  Cambas  had  increased
in  its  yield  from  ;f  10  to  £16^  but  was  hardly  lible  to  bear
the  burden.  As  for  the  50  freemen,  their  worth  was  not
more  than  £16,  but  the  landlord  was  getting  from  them  by
extortion  ;f  31,  notwithstanding  the  decrease  of  their  numbers
and  means, and  they  were  unable  to  bear  it  without  'con-
fusion '.^  Here  the  negative,  extortionary  side  of  landlordism
makes  itself  manifestly  felt  and,  of  course,  it  is  necessary
to  take  both  into  account  in  order  to  draw  an  estimate  of
1  Dd.  i.  336  c.  •  Dd.  ii.  117  b.  »  Dd.  ii.  291.


SECT.  1.  CH.  ii]  HUSBANDRY  299

the  effects  of  the  rise  of  aristocracy.  It  sounds  like  a  para-
dox, but  both  lines  of  action  on  the  part  of  the  mighty  led
to  their  historical  success ;  they  grew  strong  by  protection
and  by  oppression,  as  capitalists  and  patrons,  as  well  as
tyrants  and  destroyers.  They  began  to  lose  ground  again
as  soon  as  a  certain  equilibrium  of  political  forces  was
reached  in  the  arrangement  of  society,  and  the  constructive
power  of  labour  began  to  make  itself  felt  behind  the  screen
of  feudal  privileges.

8.  Does  the  Domesday  Survey  ever  mention  real  measures  Measnre-
in  distinction  to  fiscal  units,  estimates  of  ploughlands,  and  "*"**•
reckonings  of  normal  plough-teams  ?  As  a  rule,  the  numbers
given  in  holdings  or  acres  are  primarily  meant  as  geld
numbers,  but  there  are  cases  when  this  may  be  questioned.
Take,  for  instance,  the  following  Devonshire  statement  about
'  Leuge  \^  Alsi  held  it  T.  R.  E.,  and  paid  geld  for  3  virgates.
There  is  land  for  8  ploughs.  There  are  2  teams  and  a  serfs
in  demesne,  and  10  villains,  5  bordarii^  and  2  cotters  have
4  teams.  There  are  10  acres  of  meadow  and  30  of  pasture,
and  one  virgate  of  wood.  The  same  Norman  and  Saxon
owners  (Godobold  and  Alsi)  had  held  in  turn  Leveleghe,
which  paid  geld  T.  R.  E.  for  one  virgate.  There  is  land
for  4  ploughs.  There  are  2^  ploughs  and  2  serfs,  2  villains
and  4  bordarii ;  2  acres  of  meadow  and  20  acres  of  pasture,
and  one  ferling  of  small  wood.  If  we  take  acres,  vir-
gates, and  ferlings  to  be  geld  measures  in  every  case,  it  is
difficult  to  account  for  the  fact  that,  in  the  first  case  one-
third  of  the  total  tax,  and  in  the  second  one-quarter,  is  laid
on  the  w  ood — one  virgate  out  of  three  in  L^he,  and  one
ferling  out  of  four  in  Leveleghe.  Besides,  if  the  acres  are
added  to  the  tax  of  the  woods,  40  acres  in  the  first  instance
and  22  in  the  second,  we  get  considerably  over  the  supposed
number  of  acres  in  Leghe  according  to  the  48  acres  standard
(40  +  21  —  62) ;  while  there  should  be  only  36  acres  in  the
3  virgates.  Even  taking  the  120  acres,  we  reach  70  acres
for  wood  and  pasture  out  of  a  possible  90,  and  there  would
only  remain  20  for  the  arable. In  the  second  instance  the

*  Dd.  i.  117  b.


300  LAND  TENURE  [essay  ii

reckoning  is  even  more  embarrassing.  According  to  the
48  acres  standard  to  which  the  mention  of  ferlings  seems
to  point,  26  acres  would  be  required  for  wood,  meadow,
and  pasture,  while  there  are  only  12  to  dispose  of.  On
the  1 20  acres  standard  we  should  reach  29^  acres  for  wood,
meadow,  and  pasture  out  of  32,  and  there  would  be  still  all
the  arable  to  account  for.  All  this  would  be  absurd,  and
we  are  driven  to  take  the  acres  in  the  sense  of  real  and  not
fiscal  measurements  in  these  and  similar  cases,  while  the
vitiates  and  ferlings  for  the  wood  seem  still  to  stand  for
fiscal  quantities,  as  it  would  be  very  unlikely  that  such
a  small  quantity  as  7^  acres  of  wood,  not  to  speak  of  3  acres,
should  be  described  as  a  ferling,  and  entered  in  addition  to
a  good  deal  of  arable  and  pasture,  especially  in  Devonshire,
one  of  the  counties  which  possessed  the  largest  tracts  of
uncultivated  land  and  woods.  But  what  are  we  to  say  of
cases  when  we  hear  of  so  many  acres  inter  silvam  et  planum^
as  we  occasionally  do  in  Suffolk^  and  other  shires?  It
seems  to  me  that  the  elaborate  description  of  acres  in  this
manner  leaves  hardly  any  doubt  as  to  their  reality.  The
inter  silvam  et  planum  is,  after  all,  the  translation  ^of  the
time-honoured  *  be  wode  and  be  felde  *,  even  the  peculiar
sequence  of  the  two  constitutive  elements  being  preserved.
A  similar  argument  to  that  employed  in  the  Devonshire  case
just  quoted  may  be  appealed  to  in  favour  of  such  an
interpretation,  when  we  find,  as  in  Estone,  Beds,  that  only
half  a  hide  to  the  geld  is  assigned  to  a  manor,  while  at  the
same  time  60  acres  inter  silvam  et  planum  are  claimed  out
of  the  entire  estate.^  These  60  acres  would  simply  swallow
up  the  whole  half-hide  if  geld  units  were  meant  in  both
cases,  and  it  seems  evident  that  the  adjunct  of  the  'wood

'  Dd.  ii.  294  b :  (Stonham,  Suffolk) '  In  Stanham  tenet  Ulmarus  de
comite  v  liberos  homines  de  xlviii  acris  et  tenent  xii  acras  de  dominie
comitis.  .  .  .  Huic  superiori  terrae  quam  tenet  Hunfridus  pertine-
bant  in  dominio  xxviii  acrae  inter  siluam  et  planum  quod  tenuit
Godmarus  t.  r.  e.  et  modo  tenet  Rogerus  Bigot.'

'  Dd.  i.  210  b:  (Easton,  Hunts)  *  In  Estone  tenet  Willelmus  de
Caron  dimidiam  hidan|*et  dimidiam  uirgatam  de  episcopo  (Lincoliense).
Terra  est  i  carucae.  ...  In  hac  terra  episcopatus  reclamat  Willelmus
de  Caron  Ix  acras  inter  planum  et  siluam.'


SECT.  I.  CH.  II]  HUSBANDRY  301

and  field  *  qualification  stamps  the  latter  number  as  that  of
field  acres  in  contrast  to  the  earlier  geld  entry.  And,  again,
when  acrae  stands  by  itself,  without  further  addition,  it
mostly  points  to  geld  units.

The  liberi  homines  and  socmen  of  Danish  districts  are
throughout  rated  in  acres,  more  seldom  in  virgates,  bovates,
hides,  and  carucates.  In  all  these  cases  one  has  primarily
to  think  of  geld  units,  or  rather  of  wara  assessment  estab-
lishing the  proportion  represented  by  the  tenants  in  question
in  the  scot  and  lot  of  the  hundred.  This  may  look  intricate
at  first,  but,  after  all,  it  is  the  direct  consequence  of  the
swerving  of  the  wara^  the  schedule  rate,  from  natural  and
local  measurement,  and  the  cases  examined  are  certainly
not  more  intricate  than  the  Middlesex  one.  Hitherto
I  have  dealt  with  the  estimates  of  quantity  expressed  in
agrarian  holdings  and  measures,  but  there  is  another  way
of  indicating  quantity  and  extent  which  is  in  frequent  use
in  the  East  Anglian  and  some  other  shires,  namely,  the
reckoning  in  leagues,  quarantenes,  perches,  &c.  It  is  com-
prised under  the  general  term  mensura,  and  the  measurement
of  a  place  may  be  used  to  estimate  territory  *  or  boundaries.'
The  measurement  of  wide  tracts  of  wood  and  pasture  by
leagues  seems  especially  appropriate,  as  these  tracts  could
not  be  included  in  the  ordinary  agrarian  units,  but  were
only  appendant  to  them.^  But  the  plain  or  open  could
also  be  made  the  object  of  such  measurement.^  Even  more
frequently  a  whole  township,  or  estate,  or  even  a  hundred,
might  be  described  as  being  so  many  leagues  in  length
and  so  many  in  width.^ In  most  cases  the  numbers  given

^  Dd.  ii.  147  (Foxle,  Norfolk);  241b  (Euincham,  Norfolk).

^  Dd.  ii.  144  b  (Fulenduna,  Norfolk).  *

'  Dd.  i.  117c:  (Buckland,  Devon)  'Bochelande  .  .  .  pro  iii  uirgatis
terrae.  Terra  est  iiii  carucis  .  .  .  iiii  acrae  prati  et  iiu  quarantenae
pasturae.'  Cf.  Dd.  iv.  26  (Piretona,  Dorset) ;  iv.  213, 314  (Rekaradoc,
Cornwall).

*  Dd.  i.  264  b:  (Cholmondely,  Cheshire) ' Calmundelei.  .  .  .  Habet
dimidiam  leuuam  de  piano.'

^  Dd.  ii.  283  b:  (Suffolk)  *  Hoc  dimidium  Hundredum  (de  Ludinga-
landa)  habet  in  longo  vi  leugas  et  in  lato  ii  leugas  et  dimidiam  et  ii
quarantenas ' ;  ii.  365  a:  (Stow,  Suffolk)  'Stoua.  .  .  .  Habet  haec
uilla  in  longo  i  leugam  et  viii  quarantenas  in  lato.'  Cf.  ii.  369a
(Ferdinga  et  alia  Walcfeldc).


302  LAND TENURE  [ESSAY  II

are  rough — one  leag^ue,  half  a  league,  one  quarantene,  &c. —
but  instances  are  not  wanting  when  the  numbers  are
calculated  to  a  nicety.^

Now  what  was  the  meaning  of  such  measurements,  and
how  were  they  used  in  practice  ?  The  territory  of  England
was,  after  all,  nowhere  divided  into  regular  squares  like
those  formed  sometimes  on  the  chessboard  of  North
America.  The  shapes  formed  by  the  boundaries  of  shires,
hundreds,  townships,  and  estates  were  very  irregular,  and
sometimes  consisted  of  several  bits  patched  together.
Besides,  what  is  quite  natural  in  the  division  of  vacant
soil  of  approximately  uniform  quality  seems  very  strange
in  the  case  of  a  country  of  ancient  and  very  uneven  culture,
in  which  the  concentration  of  inhabitants  and  the  appropri-
ation of  capital  meant  a  good  deal  more  than  square  leagues.
However,  there  are  the  measurements,  and,  as  we  have
seen,  they  were  sometimes  made  with  a  pretension  to
exactness.

It  is  difficult  to  make  out  whether  the  woods,  estates,  and
hundreds  were  measured  along  their  belts  of  greatest  length
and  width,  or  on  perpendiculars  drawn  in  some  way  across
their  main  body — perhaps  on  the  meridian  and  parallel  of
the  place ;  measurements,  in  well-authenticated  cases,  of
parishes  preserving  their  ancient  boundaries  may  serve  some
day  to  clear  up  the  question.'  But  it  seems  to  me  that,  in
any  case,  the  aim  of  this  kind  of  measurement  must  have
been  to  provide  an  approximate  basis  for  the  claims  of
estates  and  townships  in  a  country  where  boundaries  were
still  difficult  to  determine.  Of  course,  most  of  the  Old
English  grants  of  land  were  accompanied  by  careful  indica-
tions of  boundaries,  but  our  grants  belong,  after  all,  almost
exclusively  to  privileged  land,  and  their  boundaries  do  not
comprise  the  wide  tracts  of  adjoining  woods  and  commons.
At  a  time  when  most  settlements  were  surrounded  by
a  kind  of  natural  wilderness,  somewhat resembling  the

^  Dd.  ii.  i6ob  :  (Acre,  Norfolk)  *  Acre.  .  .  .  Tota  habet  i  leugam  et
X  perticulas  in  longo  et  i  leugam  in  lato  et  iiii  pedes  et  dimidium.'
^  Cf.  Miss  Davenport,  History  of  a  Norfolk  Manor,  6.


SECT.  I.  CH.ii]  HUSBANDRY  303

natural  wildernesses  said  to  have  been  created  by  German
tribes  along  their  frontiers,  the  best  device  for  a  distribution
of  rights  was  to  assign  to  every  one  the  extent  of  his  power
in  length  and  widths  without  pretending  to  draw  a  complete
circle  around  him.  If  this  process  came  into  use  with  early
systems  of  regularizing  the  settlements,  it  was  sure  to  endure
for  a  long  while  after  more  exact  boundaries  were  drawn  in
some  cases  or  even  in  most.

The  principal  results  of  the  section  on  Land  Tenure  may  Results,
be  summarized  in  the  following  points : —

1.  The  Norman  Conquest  led  to  a  complete  revision  and
modification  of  the  land-law  of  preconquestual  times,  by
making  the  feudal  nexus  general  and  obligatory.

2.  Yet  the  compilers  of  Domesday  Book  had  to  take
heed  of  some  flagrant  discrepancies  in  the  treatment  of  land
tenure  in  Anglo-Saxon  times.  The  notices  as  to  a/o^^nd
as  to  parage  were  produced  by  the  wish  to  take  stock  of
some  striking  peculiarities  of  preconquestual  land-law,  in
terms  derived  from. French  usage.

3.  In  the  important  question  of  succession,  the  genera-
lizing tendency  of  feudal  law  must  not  conceal  the  fact  that
the  main  types  of  succession — iojnt  ^^i^Ming^i  ^«^«««^"
among  heirs,  unification  of  estates — are  in  process  of
development  beR>re  the  QQQQuest*  and  that  the  motives
for  these  forms  of  development  are  supplied  by  considera-
tions of  economic  efficiency  as  well  as  by  requirements  of
service.

4.  Collective  ownership  is  clearly  indicatedjn  the_01d  |  i
EngHsh  evidence. It  is  apt  to  be  combined  with  overlord-  v  (
ships,  which  after  the  Conquest  assume  more  and  mory  the
aspect  of  ownership  or  private  tenure.

5.  Tfie  size  and  distribution  of  settlements  depended  not
only  on  racial  habits,  but  on  a  variety  of  geographical
causes  as  well  as  on  the  conditions  of  colonization.  The
prevailing  type  of  settlement  in  the  greater  part  of
England  was  the  village,  but  single  farms  and  hamlets  are  I
to  be  found  everywhere  by  the  side  of  it.

6.  In connexion with the modes  of  settlement both


\


304  LAND  TENURE  [ESSAY  ll

/compact  holdings  and  open-field  intermixture  of  holdings
;  occur,  but  the  latter  appears  as  the  most  common  system
I  of  cultivation  and  tenure. There  are  many  intermediate
stages  between  both  systems.

7.  Practices  of  champion  farming,  which  occur  in
modem  open-field  husbandry  up  to  the  time  of  en-
closures, may  be  clearly  traced  in  all  their  principal
features  back  to  early  Anglo-Saxon  evidence.

8.  The  open-field  arrangements  are  intimately  connected
with  a  distribution  of  the  land  into  holdings,  and  the
prevailing  agrarian  husbandry  depends  entirely  on  the
apportionment  of  rights  and  interests  according  to  the
proportionate  shares  of  the  holdings.  On  the  other  hand,
there  is  a  tendency,  both  among  the  free  and  the  servile
population,  to  keep  up  as  much  as  possible  the  efficiency
of  the  holdings  as  far  as  it  depends  on  the  organic  forma-
tion of  the  plough-team  and  its  natural  fractions.

9.  The  growth  of  landed  aristocracy  is  partly  to  be  ex-"
plained  by  the  influence  of  capital  and  of  patronage  in
times  of  severe  social  struggle  and  recurring  devastation.


SECTION II: RURAL  ORGANIZATION


CHAPTER I


MANORS


I.  The  term  manor  and  the  M.  serving  to  abbreviate  The

man<
unit.


it  meet  the  eye  of  the  Domesday  inquirer  at  every  °^*"®"*
moment,  and  it  is  especially  important  to  grasp  its  exact
meaning  or  varieties  of  meaning.  To  begin  with,  the
expression  is  clearly  used  in  the  sense  of  the  mansion,  the
residence  of  a  more  or  less  exalted  personage.  One  might
appeal,  to  substantiate  this  meaning,  not  only  to  the  un-
doubted derivation  from  manere  through  the  medium  of
the  French  manoir,  but  also  to  the  equivalent  employed  by
the  Exon  Domesday — mansio^  instead  of  manerium.  But
the  more  common,  and,  one  may  say,  the  prevalent  meaning,
is  that  of  an  estate  or  district,  of  which  the  central  house  is
the  hall  [aula).  The  general  correspondence  with  estates
is  sufficiently  clear  in  the  frequent  cases  when  the  colourless
terra^  in  the  sense  of  a  complex  of  land,  is  used  as  an  equi-
valent to  Mancrium,  Thus  to  the  *  Mansion  '  of  Middelton
in  Devon,  two  other  *  mansions  '  are  added  according  to  the
Exon  Domesday — Lega  and  Littleton,  and  these  very
manors  arc  described  in  the  Exchequer  Domesday  as
terrac,  estates.^  This  would  be  in  keeping  with  other  cases
where  terra  is  used  in  an  entirely  neutral  sense  as  a  tract
of  land.'-  Rut  the  terms  may  be  opposed  to  each  other  with
the  evident  object  of  drawing  more  precise  distinctions. The

'  I)d.  i.  103  c  (cf.  iv.  164):  *  Cum  hoc  manerio  (Middeltone)  tenet
abbas  ((ic  Tauestoch)  ii  terras  Lege  et  Liteltone.  Has  tenuenint
ii  taini  T.K.K.  pro  ii  maneriis.* Cf.  Round,  in  the  E.  H.  R.  1900.

'  I)d.  iv.  328:  (?In  North  Pctherton  Hd.,  Somerset)  'Waltcrus
habet  i  iiir>^'atain  que  uocatur  Doneham  quamtenuit  Algarus  ...  et  est
dc  ilia  terra  quam  R.  dedit  ci  inter  ii  aquas.'


MNOGRADOIF


3o6  RURAL  ORGANIZATION [essay  ii

manor  of  Lindene  in  Gloucestershire  is  said  to  have  been
formed  by  William  de  Ow  out  of  four  terrae ;  and  in  the
same  way  two  originally  independent  estates  called  terrae
are  said  to  have  become  merged  in  the  Kentish  manor  of
Eisse^  belonging  to  Hugh,  a  tenant  of  the  Bishop  of
Bayeux.^  The  point  is,  that  small  estates  have  been  sub-
jected to  the  administration  of  a  large  one,  and  are
regarded  merely  as  pertinent  to  a  manor  and  not  as
manors  themselves.  Whether  they  were  ever  considered
as  such  before  it  is  impossible  to  say.  In  other  instances,
estates  {terrae)  rated  separately  to  the  geld  arc  said  to
belong  to  some  big  manor,  Tewkesbury,  for  instance.^  Or
else  a  piece  of  land  may  be  said  to  appertain  to  several
manors  ;  a  remark  which  can  hardly  be  accounted  for  on
any  other  ground  but  that  the  owners  had  held  the  land  in
question  in  joint  ownership.^  In  a  few  cases  the  terra^
being  taken  as  a  special  term,  is  represented  by  a  T,  in  the
margin  instead  of  the  usual  M,^  A  good  case  of  an
attempted  distinction  between  manor,  as  a  definite  unit  of
ownership  and  administration,  and  terra  as  an  indefinite
quantity  of  land,  is  presented  by  the  Survey  description  of
Driteham.  There  were  in  this  place  i  J  hides  which  Alfric
held  of  King  Edward  as  one  manor,  and  afterwards  he  gave

*  Dd.  i.  164  a  :  (Lydney,  Gloucs.)  *  In  Lindenee  fecit  comes  Willelmus
unum  manerium  de  iiii  terris  quas  ab  earum  dominis  accepit ' ;  i.  6  a :
(Ash,  Kent)  '  Eisse,  pro  tribus  solins  se  defendit ...  In  dominio  est  una
caruca  et  xii  uillani  cum  viii  bordariis  habent  iii  carucas.  Ibi  quidam
miles  habens  viii  inter  seruos  et  ancillas  et  terram  ad  unam  canicam.
Praeter  hoc  habet  Hugo  ii  homines  tenentes  dimidiam  solin,  aui
poterant  T.R.E.  ire  quolibet  sine  licentia.  Una  terra  uocatur  Didde,
et  alia  Soninges.  Terra  est  ibi  ad  unam  carucam  et  appreciatur
XX  sol.*

'  Dd.  i.  163  c  :  (Shenington,  Gloucs.)  *  In  Senendone  x  hidae  perti-
nent eidem  manerio  (de  Tedekesberie)  .  .  .  Haec  terra  geldabat  pro
vii  hidis.*  Cf.  ibid.,  Clifort ;  i.  208  a  :  (Weston,  Hunts)  *  Dicunt
terram  Wluuini  chit  de  Westone  per  se  fuisse  manerium  et  non  perti-
nuisse  ad  Kenebaltone  sed  tamen  eum  fuisse  hominem  Haroldi  comitis.'

'  Dd.  i.  19  c :  (Sussex)  '  In  eodem  hundredo  (Henbert)  est  dimidia
hida  et  una  uirgata  et  dimidia.  Terra  est  iii  carucis.  Haec  terra
T.R.E.  pertinuit  tribus  maneriis  Ratendone,  Willendone,  Ferle.  Nun-
quam  geldum  reddidit.  Ibi  habet  Reinbertus  vi  uillanos  cum  iii
carucis  T.R.E.  et  modo  ualet  xxii  sol.  .  .  .  Isdem  Reinbertus  tenet
de  comite  dimidiam  hidam  ^uae  pertinuit  T.R.E.  duobus  maneriis.'

*  Dd.  i.  203  c  (Botuluesbrige,  Hunts).


SECT.  II.  CH.  i]  MANORS  307

this  land  to  hti  wife  and  his  daughter  at  die  church  of
Chertiey,  as  the  men  of  the  hundred  testify.  This  de-
claration is  challenged  by  Ridiard,  son  of  Gislebert,  the
holder  in  the  reign  of  King  William.  It  does  not  lie  in
any  manor,  and  he  does  not  hold  it  as  a  manor,  but  it  had
been  delivered  to  him.  In  this  '  land  of  AlfHc '  there  was
one  canicate  in  demesne  <md  %  bordarii  and  2  serfs.'  The
fact  that  the  land  tn  question  stood  outside  any  manor
makes  it  probable  that  the  verdict  of  the  hundred  was
perfectly  right,  and  that  the  little  estate  of  Alfric  had  been
bequeathed  to  Chertsey  after  the  extinction  of  the  life*
interest  of  Alfric's  widow  and  daughter,  who  very  likely
had  taken  refuge  there.  An^iow,  we  have  to  note  the
endeavour  to  oppose  the  manor  as  an  organized  unit
with  an  administrative  centre  to  a  piece  of  land  witliout
a  particular  organization.  This  is  not  the  only  way  in
which  the  terms  are  used,  but  it  is  a  characteristic  one.

A  '  terra ',  a  small  estate,  might  commonly  become
a  mere  tenement  dependent  on  the  h^ter  urdt  of  the
manor.  Such  is  the  case  with  a  small  holding  of  i^
virgates  owned  by  Ralf  de  lisle.  It  lies  in  the  Royal
manor  of  Biggleswade,  in  Bedfordshire  and  is  estimated
there,  and  the  Saxon  owner  of  it  could  neither  give  nor
sell  his  land  without  leave  of  the  owner  of  Bicheleswade.*
Manors  occur  of  the  most  diverse  size,  from  plots  of  land
rated  at  one  virgate,  or  40  acres,  to  enormous  oiganitations
like  Taunton  or  Leominster,  containii^  villages  by  the
score,  and  hundreds  of  dependent  holdii^.  This  by  itself
would  not  be  strange  by  any  means,  as  the  measure  of  an

'  IM.  i.  35  c :  (Effingham,  Surrey)  '  In  eadem  Dritehun  est  una
liidn  et  diinidiaquam  tenuit  Aluric  de  rege  Eduaanlo  pio  nno  manerio
t  postea  dedit  illam  ten-am  lucori  nue  et  fitiae  M  aecclenun  d


Cenesy,  sicviti  hamines  de  hnndredo  teuantor.  Ricardiu  hanc  cahun-
niatur.  Nan  iacet  ulli  manerio  ncc  pro  Bwnerio  tenet  Md  liberata
fuit  t\  ...  In  hac  terra  Alurici  en  in  doroinio  i  catiica  et  ii  bordarii  et
ii  senii. Valet  xlfol.'

)Dd.i.2i7a:  (Warden,  Beds) '  In  Waidooe  tenet  i«km  RadtiKia
(de  Intula)  de  rege  i  uirgatam  et  dimidUm.  Haec  terra  iacet  in
Itichelesuuade,  et  ibi  e«t  appreciata  et  qui  earn  T.R.E.  tennit  aec

iiendere  nee  dare  potuit  line  Ikentia  eiu>  «ni  r''*^'' ^~ '

Cr  Dd.  J.  62  c  (Elinge,  Berks).

X  3


3o8  RURAL  ORGANIZATION [essay  ii

economic  organization,  of  an  estate,  is  after  all  only  its
capacity  of  being  ruled  from  one  centre.  But  curiously
enough  there  are  many  indications  of  a  tendency  to  treat
the  manor  as  a  unit,  and  to  estimate  this  unit  as  a  definite
quantity.  To  b^in  with,  we  constantly  hear  of  people
holding  land  pro  manerio^  or  even  pro  uno  manerio^  and
this  seems  to  imply  that  any  given  quantity  would  not
make  up  a  manor.  Still  it  might  be  said,  if  the  instances
we  are  speaking  of  stood  isolated,  that  the  adjunction  of
the  words  pro  manerio  does  not  mean  much  more  than  the
word  manerium  itself  or  an  M,  in  the  mai^n,  namely,  that
a  certain  described  quantity  of  land  was  organized  as
a  compact  estate,  with  its  separate  administration,  its
distinct  income,  and  distinct  accounts.  But  then  we  find
in  Nottinghamshire  and  Derbyshire,  counties  with  a  strong
admixture  of  Danes,  curious  attempts  to  count  up  manors
in  order  to  settle  the  amount  of  reliefs.^  A  thane  holding
6  manors  or  less  is  said  to  be  bound  by  custom  to  pay
3  marks,  that  is  £%^  as  a  relief,  on  entering  on  possession,
while  a  thane  having  more  than  6  manors  would  be  taxed
for  relief  at  ;^8.  The  notice  is  interesting  and  puzzling  in
many  respects.  It  comes  from  a  Danish  district,  it  applies
to  customs  which  obtained  in  the  time  before  the  Con-
quest, and  therefore  speaks  of  thanes,  and  still  it  uses  the
Norman  expression  reliefs  perhaps  inaccurately  for  heriot.
The  sums  mentioned  do  not  correspond  to  any  of  the
later  standards  of  relief,  neither  to  the  £$  of  the  knight,
nor  to  the  loo/.  or  loo  marks  of  the  baron.  And  lastly,  how
could  manors  be  counted  up  by  half-dozens?  In  what
sense  did  the  half-dozen  form  a  convenient  division  for  so
sharp  a  contrast  as  that  between  men paying  £%  and

^  Dd.  i.  232  b :  (Thurmaston,  Leics.)  '  Idem  (Hugo  de  Grente-
maisnil)  tenet  x  carucas  terrae  in  Turmodestone.  Terra  est  vii  canids
.  .  .  Hanc  habet  Hugo  pro  uno  manerio  sed  scira  negat.'  CL  ii.
157b  (Helsinga,  Norfolk);  ibid.,  Tauerham;  ii.  261b  (Gutheketuna,
Norfolk).

'  Dd.  i.  280  c ;  (Derby  and  Nottingham) '  Tainus  habens  j>liisquam
vi  maneria  non  dat  terrae  releuationem  nisi  regi  tantum  viii  lib.  Si
habet  vi  tantum  uel  minus  uicecomiti  dat  releuationem  iii  Markas
argenti  ubicumque  maneat  in  Bui^o  uel  extra.'


SECT.  II.  cH.i]  MANORS  309

people  paying  only  £2  to  obtain  the  right  to  succession  ?
The  reckoning  by  dozens  is  by  itself  characteristic  of  the
Danish  region,  but  the  oddity  of  drawing  a  clear  line
between  possessors  of  six  manors  and  possessors  of  seven
or  more  is  not  lessened  by  the  consideration,  nor  does  it
explain  in  what  way  a  manor  could  be  equated  to  another
in  order  to  form  the  required  estimates.  A  similar  difii-
culty  occurs  in  the  survey  of  Essex,  where  it  is  supposed
for  some  reason  that  Eustache  de  Boulogne  had  a  r^t  to
a  round  hundred  of  manors,  and  measures  were  taken  to
fill  up  this  hundred.^  Here  the  instance  would  date  from
after  the  Conquest,  but  there  occurs  the  same  idea  of
a  counting  up  of  manors  as  fairly  equivalent  units.  A  batch
of  Norfolk  cases  seems  to  give  a  clue  to  these  curkxis
reckonings  of  manor  units.  In  a  large  number  of  instances
land  and  tenants  are  added  to  certain  central  estates  *  to
make  up  a  manor '  ad  perficundum  manerium}  The  use
of  '  perfidendum  '  is  not  singular :  it  occurs  in  relation  to
the  making  up  of  a  hundred,  where  there  cannot  be  any
doubt  that  the  completion  of  the  exact  number  was
meant.^  Fortunately,  we  are  told  expressly  in  a  few  cases
what  standard  the  manor  had  to  reach  in  order  to  be
complete.  William  de  Warenne  had  a  number  of  plots
of  land  and  of  rights  in  regard  to  freemen  in  Thorp,
Mulleslee,  Trunchet,  &c.,  to  the  aggregate  of  %  carucates
and  352  acres  to  the  gdd,  or  a  little  less  than  5  carucates.
And  '  all  this  land  was  delivered  to  William  for  one  manor
of 5 carucates  of  land'.^ But  the  same  William de

»  Dd.  ii.  268.

'  Dd.  ii.  170b:  (Green  How  Hd.,  Norfolk)  'Est  gamera  t«»et
Eluolt  i  liber  homo  tr.e.  et  iiiit  libmta  fredcaio  mo  terra  ad  per*
Sciendum  maneria  suos  {sky  Cf.  ii.  \^x  b  (RinctediO  \  iZ^b  (Bnote*
tuna) ;  ibid.  (Simplingaham) ;  233  b  (Kuientona) ;  345  b  (Dertinchain) ;
346  a  (Aldeberge) ;  357  b  (Gunatorp) ;  358  a  (Walsi^eham).

'  Dd.  i.  iTjc::  (Worcestershire)  'In  Fisseberge  hondredo  habet
aecclesia  de  Euesham  Ixv  hidas.  Ex  his  xii  hidae  sont  liberae.  In
illo  hundredo  iacent  xx  hidae  de  Dodentreu  et  xv  hidae  de  Wircecestre
perficiunt  hundret.' Ellis,  Introduction  to  Domesday,  L  p.  xix.

*  Dd.  ii.  171 :  (Norfolk)  'In  Torp— Mukslai— Trunchet —Repet—*
Norrepes— Sistran— Sutrepes  et  Norhrepes  [altogether  3  carucalas
353  acras]  .  .  .  Haec  tota  terra  fuit  liberata  wiUdmo  pro  i  manerio
V  carucatarum  terrae.'


3IO  RURAL  ORGANIZATION [essay  ii

Warenne  received  a  series  of  plots  and  tenants  in  Sistrow,
Kemapat,  for  one  manor  of  4  carucates.^  There  the
manor  units  were  not  identical  in  the  two  cases,  but  they
were  very  much  alike,  and  could  be  easily  used  for  the
purpose  of  drawing  rough  averages.  If  we  follow  this  clue
we  shall  find  that  in  Norfolk  at  any  rate  there  was  certainly
a  policy  tending  to  form  estates  called  manors,  of  the  size
of  some  4  or  5  carucates.  The  making  up  of  Laringset,
a  manor  of  Walter  Giflfard,  is  well  in  point.  If  we  count
up  the  portions  of  carucates  and  the  acres  ass^ed  to  the
freemen  engulfed  by  the  estate  of  Laringset  in  order  to
make  up  a  manor,  we  come  to  2^  carucates  +180  acres,
that  is,  exactly  4  carucates.^  There  is  another  clue
leading  to  a  standard,  which  is  expressed  in  an  estimate
of  income.  The  normal  manor  was  assumed  to  be  worth
;f  10  a  year.  This  would  mean  roughly  £%  per  carucate,  if
we  take  the  5  carucates  unit,  and  £%  10s.  if  we  take
that  of  the  4  carucates.  Such  an  estimate  is  high,  but  by
no  means  uncommon  in  the  case  of  East  Anglia.  It
would  not  apply  in  other  counties,  however,  as  in  most
instances  £1  per  hide  or  carucate  seems  to  be  more  nearly
adequate.

These  considerations  show  that  there  can  be  no  talk  of
the  adoption  of  a  uniform  standard  in  this  respect  all  over
England,  but  the  facts  adduced  are  nevertheless  most  signifi-
cant. They  show  a  set  policy  pursued  before  the  Conquest,
and  tending  to  substitute  estates  of  4  or  5  hides  held  by
thanes  for  a  quantity  of  small  freehold  tenements.  Such
a  policy  could  be  pursued,  shortly  before  the  Conquest,

*  Dd.  ii.  171 :  (Norfolk)  *  Sistran— Keanapat— Hoc  totum  fuit  libc-
ratum  pro  uno  manerio  de  iiii  carucatis  terrae  et  hoc  totum  habet
ii  leugais  in  longo  et  viii  perticas  et  v  pedes,  et  in  lato  i  leugam  et  xii
perticas  et  iiii  pedes.'

*  Dd.  ii.  242  :  (Letheringsett,  Norfolk) '  In  Leringaseta  tenuit  Oslacus
liber  homo  t.r.e.  i  carucatam  terrae ...  In  Baiafelda  xl  acras  terrae  . . .
In  Glamforda  xxx  acras  terrae  ...  In  Esnuterlea  xxx  acras  terrae  . . .
In  Bodenham  i  carucatam  terrae,  et  pertinet  ad  Laringaseta  ...  In
Hunaworda  Ix  acras  terrae  et  pertinet  ad  Laringaseta  ...  In
Warham  pro  dimidia  carucata  terrae  ...  In  Bemingeham  tenet
i  liber  homo  xx  acras  terrae  .  .  .  £t  fuit  liberata  ad  perficiendum
Laringesere.'


SECT.  II.  cii.  i]  MANORS  311

only  in  East  Anglia,  and  in  the  Danelaw,  because  only
there  did  the  material  for  the  delivery  of  freemen  to  make
up  manors  still  exist.  Would  it  be  too  bold  to  guess  that
the  same  process  had  taken  place  a  good  while  earlier  in  the
south,  and  that  its  landmarks  are  the  numberless  grants  of
manentes,  cassati,  and  tributarii  collected  in  the  Codex
Diplomaticus  and  in  the  Cartularium  Saxonicum  ?  How-
ever this  may  be,  we  have  to  take  note  of  the  view  that
a  normal  manor  in  Norfolk,  and  perhaps  in  the  east  of
England,  ought  to  consist  of  about  4  or  5  carucates,  and
to  give  roughly  £10  income ;  a  standard  which  forcibly
reminds  us  of  the  5-hide  unit  repeatedly  mentioned  in
A.-S.  Law,  and,  on  the  other  hand,  of  some  of  the  knigbt-
fee  estimates,  and  of  the  lesser  fee  of  £\o  income  corre-
sponding to  the  minor  standard  of  equipment  in  Henry  ITs
assize  of  arms.  Lastly,  these  attempts  show  that  at  the
time  of  the  Domesday  Inquest,  at  any  rate,  the  expression
*  Manor '  was  currently  used  to  designate  estates  organized
under  aristocratic  administration — under  knights,  or  the
ecclesiastical  corporations-  which  may  be  substituted  for
them.  «^*  fMf(itL^nd

2,  Actual  manors,  as  they  appear  in  Domesday,  do  not  Capitalistic
often  conform  to  these  averages,  and  present  a  variety  of|J^^"*'
different  types  which  must  be  examined  separately  if  we
want  to  form  an  opinion  as  to  the  character  and  origins  of
manorial  institutions. They  may  be  arranged  very  roughly
in  the  following  five  classes,  with  a  good  many  subdivisions
and  intermediate  shades  between  them.  The  grouping  would •
be  somewhat  as  follows: 'the  manor  as  a  capitalistic  or-
ganization, an  economic  centre  surrounded  by  peasant-hold-
ings supporting  it ;  the  manor  as  an  administrative  centre
of  scattered and  more  or  less  independent  settlements;  '
the  soke,  a  centre  of  jurisdictional  and  tributary  organi-
zation ; Royal  mafU>rs ; small  estates  exploited directly
either  by  their  masters  or  by  rustics.

Medium-sized  manors  of  some  4-10  carucates,  with
a  domanial  centre,  are  the  most  common  variety  of
Domesday  estates, and  it  is hardly necessary  to  quote


312  RURAL  ORGANIZATION [essay  u

instances  in  illustration.  I  will  refer  to  a  couple  of  cases,
however.  The  manor  of  Segenehou,^  in  Bedfordshire,  was
held  by  Walter,  brother  of  Seiher.  It  paid  geld  for  lo
hides,  and  had  land  for  lo  ploughs.  Four  hides  were
reckoned  to  the  demesne,  and  there  was  one  team  on  the
home-farm  though  there  could  be  two  more.  The  tmants
actually  occupied  the  rest  of  the  arable  with  seven  teams.
There  were  24  villain  households,  4  bardarii  households,
and  3  serfs.  In  the  time  of  King  Edward  thSte  had
been  a  socman  with  half  a  hide  in  Scgenehou  who  could
go  where  he  pleased.  He  had  disappeared  among- the
peasantry  at  the  time  of  King  William.  The  value  of
the  manor  had  gone  down  from  i^i6  to  ;£^6  a  year,  and
it  is  difficult  to  account  for  such  a  fall  on  the  strength
of  the  Domesday  description,  which  shows  only  a  deficit
of  two  ploughs  on  the  demesne  land.  Apart  from  the
puzzling  fall  in  value  the  case  is  a  very  normal  one,  the
number  of  hides  being  exactly  equal  to  that  of  the  plough-
lands  and  of  the  possible  teams,  while  there  is  only  a  cer-
tain falling-off  as  regards  the  actual  teams  in  the  demesne.
The  extra  hide  put  on  the  demesne  represents  probably  the
extra  value  conferred  on  it  by  the  labour  of  the  peasantry,
the  *  consuetudines  villae '.  This  additional  labour  cannot
have  been  very  excessive,  however,  as  there  remained  still
6  hides  to  be  defended  by  the  land  of  the  tenants  with  its
seven  teams.

The  case  of  Hallingbury,^  an  Essex  manor  of  Roger  de
Otburville,  may  be  taken  as  a  specimen  of  more  intricate
combinations.  It  paid  geld  for  only  3  hides  and  38
acres,  and  yet  the  two  freemen  who  held  it  T.R.W.  had
land  for  16^  ploughs,  of  which  six  were  on  the  demesne
and  10^  in  the  hands  of  villains.  The  manor  had  sufferea
greatly  from  the  Conquest :  there  remained  only  three
teams  on  the  demesne  instead  of  six,  and  2^  with  the
peasantry  instead  of  10^,  and  of  18  villain  households
only  eight  were  left.  There  was  wood  for  600  pigs
25  acres  of  meadow,  a  pasture  yielding  18^.  in  pasnage

*Dd.  i.2i6a.  ■  Dd.  ii.  52  a.


SECT.  II.  CH.  i]  MANORS  313

and  a  mill.  Nine  ploughs  could  be  restored  out  of  the
missing  eleven.  It  appears  from  the  further  description
that  in  the  reign  of  King  Edward  there  were  two  manors
in  Hallingbuiy,  although  it  is  said  first  to  have  been  held
as  one.  The  larger  of  the  two  manors  was  worth  £S,  and
the  smaller  £^,  Their  values  had  gone  down  T.  R.  W.  to
£4  and  £2,  Some  points  of  this  description  are  not
entirely  clear.  There  must  have  been  some  close  con-
nexion between  the  two  *  freemen '  who  owned  the  com-
bined manors  T.  R.  E.  Perhaps  the  more  considerable
one  represented  the  other  in  regard  to  public  requirements,
and  therefore  the  two  estates  were  deemed  one  manor  in
one  sense  and  two  in  another.  The  relation  between  the
home-farm  and  the  tenants'  portion  is  more  evenly  matched
than  in  the  Segenehou  case,  but  one  does  not  see  why  out
of  the  eleven  ploughlands  which  were  left  untilled  only
nine  could  be  restored.  It  seems  as  if  the  original  repar-
tition of  teams  implied  a  case  of  overstocking.  It  is  worth
notice  that  the  tenantry  are  entered  under  one  head,  while
the  value  is  reckoned  separately  for  each  of  the  two
manors.

These  are  minor  points,  however,  and  the  main  character
of  the  estates  or  estate  is  clearly  one  of  intimate  colla-
boration between  home-farm  and  the  peasant  part,  without
any  great  predominance  of  one  over  the  other.

Sometimes  the  concentration  of  work  and  capital  leads  to  Great
much  larger  formations.  Let  us  take,  for  example,  the**^^***
case  of  the  Herefordshire  manor  of  Leominster.^  It  had
been  in  the  hands  of  Queen  Edith,  and  consisted  of
16  'membra'.  It  was  estimated  to  the  geld  at  80  hides,
and  there  were  30  plough-teams  in  its  demesne  land.
The  administrative  staff  consisted  of  8  reeves,  8  beadles,
and  8  rodknights  (radchenistri)^  while  the  peasant
population  comprised  238  villains,  75  bordariiy  and  83
serfs  and  female  slaves  (ancillae).  The  peasants  held  230
teams  between  them.  The  villains  rendered  in  customary
payment  £\\ f^,  2 J.,  and  the  riding  men 14s,  4//.,  and

»  Dd.  i.  180  a.


314  RURAL  ORGANIZATION [essay  ii

3  sesters  of  honey.  The  villains  also  ploughed  and  sowed
with  their  own  seed  140  acres.  The  numbers  were
somewhat  altered  T.  R.  W.  The  King  held  the  manor
in  his  hand,  and  60  hides  were  reckoned  for  the  demesne,
in  which  there  were  29  teams,  only  one  less  than  before.
The  staff  consisted  of  6  priests,  6  riding-men,  7  reeves,
and  7  beadles,  while  the  villains  were  224,  the  bordarii
had  increased  to  81,  the  serfs,  male  and  female,  diminished
in  number  to  25.  The  rustics  had  201  teams  between
them,  and  ploughed  and  sowed  125  acres  for  the  lord.
This  description  is  exceptionally  detailed,  inasmuch  as  it
mentions  not  only  the  numbers  of  teams  and  households,
but  goes  the  length  of  stating  what  the  peasants  tilled  as
gafolerth^  and  how  much  they  paid  as  customary  rent.
But,  of  course,  the  services  and  payments  in  question  were
not  the  only  duties  which  lay  on  the  dependent  population.
Their  ordinary  week-work  is  not  mentioned  separately,
but  must  have  been  very  considerable,  if  one  takes  into
account  the  number  of  peasant  teams  and  holdings,  and
the  heavy  proportion  of  the  home-farm  in  r^ard  to  the
geld.  As  many  as  60  hides  are  assigned  to  the  demesne,
out  of  80,  and  as  the  Survey  is  exceedingly  careful  in  such
matters,  it  seems  that  there  is  hardly  any  other  explana-
tion for  such  a  repartition  but  the  considerable  amount  of
work  performed  by  the  villains  for  the  lord,  by  the  side
of  the  already  large  stock  represented  by  his  private
teams.  A  similar  instance  would  have  been  presented
by  the  manor  of  Ledbury,^  belonging  to  the  Bishop  of
Hereford,  if  the  estate  had  not  been  greatly  devastated.
It  was  rated  to  the  geld  at  53  hides,  of  which  32^  were
waste  at  the  time  of  the  Survey.  There  were  only  four
teams  in  demesne,  38  villains  with  4  bordariiy  and  8
riding-men  with  28  bordarii,  holding  altogether  23  plough-
teams.  There  was  a  wood  where  160  pigs  could  fatten.
The  value  had  gone  down  from  £^^  to  ;g'i2,  and  had  even
stood  at  £iQ  for  some  time.  Notwithstanding  the  g^reat
ravages inflicted on it,  it bears  the  stamp  of  a  great

^  Dd.  i.  252  b.


SECT.  11.  CH.  i]  MANORS  315

enterprise  served  by  a  large  concentration  of  dependent
people.

Dorchester,^  Oxon,  may  be  mentioned  next.  It  be-
longed to  the  Bishop  of  Lincoln,  and  was  rated  at  90
hides,  or  to  speak  with  the  record,  at  a  hundred  hides  less
ten.  The  bishop  had  retained  in  his  farm,  that  is,  for  his
own  account,  60  hides  less  one  virgate,  and  his  knights
held  30  hides  and  one  virgate.  There  were  at  the  time  of
the  Survey  3  plough-teams  in  demesne,  although  there
was  land  for  4  ploughs,  and  34  villains  with  22  bordarii
had  1 5  ploughs.  Omitting  minor  items,  we  find  that  the
manor  rendered  £^0  a  year,  while  T.  R.  E.  it  was  only
valued  at  £\^,  An  outlying  portion  of  the  same  manor
held  by  Bristeva,  and  amounting  to  20^  geld  hides  and
land  for  16  ploughs,  had  also  4  plough- teams  in  demesne
and  20  ploughs  among  46  villains  and  15  bordarii.  The
value  had  gone  up  from  j{^io  to  £%o^  although  it  was  only
worth  £i  when  the  Bishop  got  it.  A  point  which  requires
notice  in  this  instance  is  the  comparatively  small  number
of  ploughlands  and  teams  in  demesne.  If  there  were  few
teams  but  a  good  deal  of  land  one  might  think  that  the
deficiency  of  the  home-farm  teams  was  supplied  by  an
increased  labour  of  the  peasant  teams  on  demesne  land.
But  as  there  were  altogether  only  four  plough-teams  on  the  .
demesne,  the  difference  would  not  be  more  than  one  plough-
land  in  any  case.  And  yet  the  increase  in  value  in  both
portions  of  the  manor  is  so  striking,  that  there  must  have
been  a  considerable  addition  in  the  quantity  of  labour
performed  for  the  lord.  The  probable  solution  is  that  the
peasantry  had  to  till  a  great  deal  of  gafolerth,  as  the
manor  was  undoubtedly  an  agricultural  one.  A  second
problem  is  presented  by  the  enormous  taxation  estimate —
90  hides  for  some  20  ploughlands,  and  a  value  of  even
^^30  seems  exorbitant.  It  looks  almost  as  if  there  had
been  a  great  falling-off  in  value  before  the  reign  of
King  Edward,  which  is  not  otherwise  reflected  in  the
Survey.

'  Dd.  i.  15s  a.


3i6


RURAL  ORGANIZATION [essay  il


Adminis-
trative
organiza-
tions.


Chepeham/  in  Warwickshire,  was  a  Royal  manor  that
had  never  paid  geld  nor  been  rated  in  hides.  It  was
estimated  to  contain  land  for  loo  ploughs,  a  round  num-
ber which,  like  that  of  the  Dorchester  hides,  suggests  a  very
superficial  computation  from  above  and  not  a  careful
valuation.  In  this  large  district  there  was  demesne  land
for  16  teams,  and  there  were  28  serfs  on  it,  while  48
y  villains,  45  bordarii,  20  cottarii,  and  23  parcarii  had
'  between  them  66  ploughs.  The  manor  rendered  the  full
farm  of  a  knight,  or  ;f  1 10.

I  In  all  the  instances  quoted,  and,  I  believe,  in  most  other
cases  of  large  manorial  organizations,  we  are  struck  by  the
1  comparatively  small  development  of  the  home-farm.  In
some  cases  there  is  a  set-ofT  against  this  in  the  great
quantity  of  services  rendered  by  the  tenants  on  the
demesne,  but  this  is  by  no  means  always  the  case.  We
are  driven  to  the  conclusion  that  even  in  the  case  of  large
organizations,  supposing  a  relatively  great  employment  of
capital,  the  high  income  obtained  was  more  the  result  of
tribute,  and  assignment  to  the  lord  of  part  of  the  produce
of  the  peasant  holdings,  than  the  outcome  of  a  great  con-
centration of  labour  on  domanial  land.

3.  This  is  even  more  striking  in  the  case  of  the  second
group,  namely,  of  manors  united  by  a  central  adminis-
tration but  otherwise  presenting  heterogeneous  elements
and  scattered  parts.  Of  course  it  is  impossible  to  draw
the  line  very  sharply  between  types  I  and  II.  The
Danish  and  East-Anglian  districts,  for  instance,  present
many  cases  in  which  fairly  considerable  home-farm  centres
are  formed,  and  yet  the  manor  is  largely  composed  of
scattered  tenements  and  varied  rights.  Let  us  take  Count
Alan's  manor  of  Costessey,*  in  Norfolk. It  had  been  held


'  Dd.i.64d;  of. i.3b(Medde8tane, Kent);  i75b(Persore, Worcs.);
302  c  (Scirebume,  Yorks).

'  Dd.  ii.  145  a  (Costeseia,  Norfolk) ;  cf.  ii.  157  a  (Kerdestuna,  Nor-
folk);  ii.  I  Sob  (Fomesetta,  Norfolk);  ii.  237  b  (Morlea,  Norfolk);
i.  253  c :  (Cherbuiy,  Shropshire)  *  Ipse  comes  (Rogenus)  tenet  Cireberie.
Rex  Edwardus  tenuit.  In  dominio  sunt  iiii  carucae  et  xiii  uillani  cum
preposito  habent  v  carucas. Ibi  viii  bouarii. Ibi  ii  aecdesiae  cum


SECT.  II.  CH.  i]  MANORS  317

T.  R.  E.  by  Harold's  brother  Guerth,  and  was  rated  at  4
carucates  to  the  geld.  There  were  2  ploughs  in  demesne,
and  5  belonging  to  the  8  villain  and  8  bardarii  holdings
on  the  estate.  To  this  central  portion  of  the  manor  were
joined  one  berewick  in  Bawbui^h  of  2  carucates  to  the
geld,  2  ploughs  in  demesne,  and  2  belonging  to  6  villains
and  6  bordariu  There  was  another  berewick  in  Thorp,  of
I  geld-carucate,  with  i  plough  in  demesne  and  4  villains
and  3  bardarii  with  half  a  plough.  To  the  same  manor
were  added  44  socmen  in  Estun  and  Hunincham  of  3
geld-carucates  with  8  ploughs  (12  ploughs  T.  R.  E.),  and
in  Hereford  7^  socmen  of  46  acres  with  2  ploughs  and
6  free  villains  and  5  bordariu  This  entry  suggests  many
questions  which  have  to  be  reserved  to  later  stages  of  this
book,  but  I  refer  to  it  now  as  presenting  a  typical  instance
of  a  Norfolk  manor  with  several  local  subdivisions  culti-
vated by  villains  and  bordarii  on  the  pattern  usual  in  the
south,  and  by  the  side  of  them  two  batches  of  socmen
joined  to  the  same  manorial  centre  by  their  services  or
rents.  Costessey  thus  appears  primarily  as  a  centre  of
administration,  and  this  accounts  for  the  disparate  settle-
ments combined  with  it.  At  the  same  time,  within  a
narrower  sphere,  it  is  an  estate  of  the  usual  two-storied
type,  with  a  home-farm  and  rustic  holdings  surrounding  it
and  supplying  it  with  labour.  The  lord's  farm^  both  in
Costessey  itself  and  in  the  dependent  settlements  of  Baw-
burgh  and  Thorp,  is  of  a  very  modest  kind,  and  so  is  the


prcsbitero  qui  habet  i  carucam.  Huic  manerio  pertinet  Witetreu
hundredum.'  i.  320  a  (Hallun,  Yorks);  i.  349  a:  (Waddington,
Lines.)  '  In  Wadintune  habuit  Haroldus  comes  xxiiii  carucatas  terrae
ad  geldum.  Terra  ad  totidem  carucas.  In  soca  ix  carucatae  et  ii
bouatae.  Ibi  habet  comes  Hugo  iiii  carucas  in  dominio  et  xv  uiUani
et  ix  bordarii  et  xxiiii  sochemanni  habentes  xi  canicas  ...  In  Medri-
(esham  Herewicha  huius  manerii  viii  carucatae  terrae  et  dimidia
ad  geldum.  Terra  ad  iiii  carucas  et  ii  boues.  Ibi  habet  comes  ii
carucas  et  x  uillani  et  vi  bordarii  cum  ii  carucis  ...  In  Timbrelund
r>crewicha  vi  bouatae  terrae  ad  geldum.  Tenra  ad  iiii  bouatas.  Ibi
ii  bordarii  habcnt  dimidiam  carucam  ...  In  Hermodestune  Soca  de
Wadintone  xx  carucatae  terrae  et  dimidia  ad  geldum.  Terra  ad
totidem  carucas.  Ibi  xxxviii  sochemanni  et  xi  bordarii  habent  x
carucas.*


3i8  RURAL  ORGANIZATION [essay  ii

husbandry  of  the  tenants.  The  lord  had  altogether  5
ploughs  in  demesne,  as  against  6^  belong^'ng  to  the  18
villains  and  17  bordarii^  and  10  held  by  the  socmen.  It
is  not  without  significance  that  the  value  of  the  manor
had  increased  from  £%o  to  ;^45,  although  the  socmen  had
lost  one-third  of  their  teams.  The  increase  was  due  in
some  measure  to  improvements  on  the  home-farms,  but
the  greater  part  of  it  must  have  been  produced  by  the
addition  of  socmen  tenants  who  were  formerly  independent,
and,  probably,  to  heavier  duties  exacted  from  all  classes  of
the  rustic  population.
I  The  Royal  manor  of  Mansfield,^  Notts,  with  its  two
,  berewicks  in  Skegby  and  Sutton,  presents  another  example
;  of  administrative  as  distinguished  from  economic  concen-
tration. Its  assessment  to  the  geld  was  insignificant —
merely  3  carucates  and  6  bovates ;  there  waT  land  for  9
ploughs.  In  the  King's  demesne  we  find  only  2  ploughs,
while  5  socmen  were  assigned  3  bovates  in  the  central
estate,  and  35  villains  and  20  bordarii  had  19^  ploughs.
But  alongside  of  the  central  portion  represented  by  Mans-
field, Skegby,  and  Sutton,  we  find  as  many  as  27  settle-
ments, of  which  two  are  marked  as  berewicks,  and  four
as  sokes,  while  21  are  merely  enrolled  with  a  number  to
denote  their  assessment  to  the  geld.  Neither  demesne  nor
tenants  are  mentioned  in  these  latter  cases,  but  as  they  are
carefully  distinguished  from  berewicks,  they  must  have
been  places  directly  dependent  on  the  main  estate,  and
without  any  residing  representatives  of  the  manorial  ad-
ministration. Their  geld  assessment,  although  not  a  sure
indication  of  their  actual  economic  strength,  must  have
closely  corresponded  to  it,  and  affords,  in  any  case,  a  clue
as  to  the  proportionate  size  of  these  outlying  parts.  We
are  clearly  in  a  district  of  scattered  homesteads  inhabited
by  small  farmers  paying  dues  to  the  central  court  in
Mansfield,  and  possibly  performing  some  services  for  it,
but  not  subjected  to  the  regular  week-work  exploitation
which  necessitated  supervision  and  concentration  on  the

^  Dd.  i.  281  b,  c.


SECT.  II.  CH.  i]  MANORS  319

spot,  and  therefore  could  not  be  thought  of  without  at  least
a  bcrewick  to  head  it.  The  prevailing  system  is  therefore
one  of  tributary  subjection  to  the  manorial  administrative
centre  which  happens  to  be  located  in  Mansfield.  Besides
the  small  sokes  directly  reckoned  up  with  the  manor,  there
is  a  large  soke  in  Oswardebeck  wapentake,  of  which  we  need
not  say  anything  more  on  the  present  occasion  but  that  it
was  convenient  for  the  purpose  of  administration  to  join
it  to  the  great  centre  of  control  and  account  in  Mansfield,
although  there  was  no  org^anic  reason  for  doing  so,  and  one
might  as  well  fancy  some  of  the  sokes  described  on  f.  281  c
as  apportioned  to  other  centres.

The  famous  abbey  of  St  Denis,  near  Paris,^  had  a  great
number  of  estates  in  Gloucestershire,  six  were  situated  on
the  cast  bank  of  the  Severn,  with  40  hides  to  the  geld
to  account  for,  15  ploughs  in  demesne,  and  75  villains
and  12  bordarii  with  39  ploughs.  Beyond  the  Severn
there  were  10  hides  in  five  estates,  with  5  ploughs  in
demesne,  and  9  ploughs  held  by  5  villains  and  18  b&r^
darii.  For  purposes  of  administration  the  whole  of  these
50  hides  were  concentrated  around  Deerhurst  manor,
which  was  also  the  seat  of  a  hundred,  and  to  which  there
belonged  30  burgesses  in  Gloucester.  There  is  no  men-
tion of  any  home-farm  in  Deerhurst,  or  of  any  population,
and  the  seat  of  the  manorial  counting-house  and  court
must  have  been  fixed  in  one  of  the  places  mentioned  as
members  of  Deerhurst  hundred.  But  the  whole  district
was  treated  as  a  manorial  unit  from  the  point  of  view  of

*  I)d.  i.  166b:  (Gloucestershire)  *  Ecclesia  S.  Dyonisii  tenet  has
uillas  in  Derhest  hundredo  Hochinton  v  hid.  Stanienton  iii  hid.
Colne  et  Caldecot  v  hid.  Contone  xii  hid.  Praeston  x  hid.  Welle-
ford  XV  hid.  In  his  terris  sunt  in  dominio  xv  carucae  et  Ixxv  uillani  et
xii  bordarii  cum  xxxix  carucis.  Ibi  xxxviii  semi  et  iiii  molini  de
xl  solidis  et  xxxvi  acrae  prati  .  .  .  Ad  eundem  manerium  pertinent
ii  hidae  et  dimidia  ultra  Saueme.  In  Olfendone  v  hidae.  In  Lalege
i  hida.  In  Valton  i  hida.  In  Caneberton  dimidia  hida.  In  his  terris
sunt  in  dominio  v  carucae  et  v  uillani  et  xviii  bordarii  cum  ix  carucis.
Ibi  inanct  i  liber  homo  ...  Ad  hoc  manerium  pertinent  xxx  burgenses
in  Glouuc'cestrc  reddcntes  xv  solidos  et  viii  denarios.  In  Wicelcombe  ii
burgenses  reddcntes  x  den.  T.R.E.  totum  manerium  ualebat  xxvi  lib.
et  x  sol. Modo  xxx  lib.'


320  RURAL  ORGANIZATION [essay n

the  Royal  Exchequer,  and for purposes  of  jurisdictM,
accounts,  and  general  supervision.

Something  of  the  same  sort  may  have  been  the  cast  is
some  Royal  manors  like  Brailes,'  or  Quinton  and  Wak^
bourne  in  Warwickshire.  The  first  had  been  in  the  hwl
or  Karl  Kdwin.  paid  geld  for  46  hides,  and  had  land  far
60  ploughs.  There  were  only  6  in  demesne,  whik  4&
(iloughs  were  held  by  100  villains  and  30  barJmriu  Tkr
disproportion  of  the  home-farm  and  the  number  of  vflhiss
makes  it  probable  that  the  rustic  population  had  not
employed,  at  least  originally,  in  strictly  manorial
but  was  congregated  under  administrative  supeivisioa
paying  tribute.  Hut  there  is  a  clear  trace  of  a
change  in  the  condition  of  the  imputation  in  the  leap
by  the  revenue  of  the  place  ;  instead  of  yielding  jf  17  IQC-
it  comes  to  render  £^.
Sikc*.  4.  A  third  variety  is  presented by manors

centres  of  extensive  sokes.  The  home-fann
generally  exists  in  such  cases,  but  it  pla>*s  a
]iart  :  -  the  important  thing  is  the  right  to  jnriadictiaa  ■'
ix>litic«il  authority,  with  the  corresponding  fines  iw  dv
non-appearance  of  .suitors,  and  various  public  chafgcfv'
rents.  U'e  have  already  had  a  prominent  example  of  M
kind  in  the  Nottinghamshire  manor  of  Mansfield, to  visck
the  soke  of  ( )swanlebcck  u  as  appendant.  The  riawtnl  b*'
of  great  sokes  is  Lincoln*ihirc  with  such  enormous  wtA
for  instance,  as  those  of  ( rrantham  and  llomcastle  '^afl^i^
would  be  difficult  to  d<>  justice  to  these  ctpccially  michlf

* \U\.  I.  23S  h  ;  <  f .  ihuj.  St.inlri.

-  V..^.  !)({.  I.  ;i  ;h: iC  Iiftnn,  Vnrksi  *  In  Cliftunr  ad
I  .iriK  .itr  rt  tiininii.!  rt  v  i  ariicac  pobsrnt  r»»r  .  .  1  In  Oiftua
rn.inrrio  adhirr?  mh  .i  h.iri . F'ii]cfi»rdr  li « .,  in  h.),  .\tcn  (tM  c),
stftrp  KM  i.t.  I..in;:rirh  IK  .rtdini.t.  C  hr:«hcfrlcHnr..n  H.P,  Mofiiilici
Pi^ii>nc  (iMii-.>. If.irc tri.i  fucmni  nuncria,  umcn
(  !ift::n. Siiiuil  ad  i;r!d'.im  &v  carucut.ic  1  bouata  minus  ct  «ai

I>i1 I.  .;^7tl: M.r.intluMi) '  A<! tfrantham pe:tinrt
Mirnrrdr'ii.  >iiprctf(iic,  rit .  . .  ^iniul  41I  ^'cldum  U  cj
.1(1  Ix  f  .iru'. .!<>.' Ih.  1.  JV^-i  :  '  Ifomc*  .i«trri  '.Sura  huint  Mi
SiunMrhi  ctf .  .  . Intrr  tutum  ad  ;:cJdiim  xlii  camcatc
ad  I\i:i  <.dru<.  .15.'


H.l]  MANORS  321

general  review  of  manorial  types.  I  may  call
to  the  soke  of  Bolii^broke,'  where  there  were
on  times  2  geld-carucates  and  2  ploughs  in
while  iz  villains,  8  Aordarii,  and  13  socmen  had

The  soke  of  this  manor  extended  over  no  less  \
ilaces,  many  of  which were also  economically  j

with  other  manors. The number  of  socmen  '

0  this  great  court  was  529  !  The  description  of
Stow,'  may  also  be  noticed  for  its  characteristic

1  of  inland  and  soke,  the  first  representing  the
1  portions,  and  the  second  the  jurisdictional  lord-
ected  with it Sometimes t)ic division is not

marked  on  the  map,  as  It  were,  but  the  great
ance  of  socmen  makes  it  practically  certain  that
ipal  element  in  the  constitution  of  a  particular  .
nsisted  in  its  jurisdictional  rights,  and  not  in  1
-farm,  and  the  rustic  work  supporting  it.  If  we
lale,^  for  instance,  we  find  it  taxed  at  3J  carucates
bird  of  a  bovate.  There  was  land  for  6  ploughs,
atns  and  42  socmen  had  6  teams.  No  demesne
:  mentioned,  and  the  number  of  villains  is  quite
,nt  when  compared  with  that  of  the  socmen.  It
:  that  both  Aschil  and  Outgrim,  who  held  the
R.  E.,  and  their  Norman  successor,  drew  their
lot  from  any  dominical  husbandry,  or  any  con-
services  in  kind  on  the  part  of  the  villains,  but
dues  of  the  socmen.  In  fact,  the  whole  settlement
IS  an  almost  complete  free  community  of  socmen,
rd  who  had  to  wield  hereditary  jurisdiction  over

(Sib  (Bolinbroc) ;  cf.  343  b  (Aschebi).
;44  a :  (St.  Mary,  Slow)  '  In  Sanctae  Maxiu  Stou  sunt  iiii
errae  ad  geldum.  Terra  est  ad  iiii  Caracas  ...  In  Welinge-
land  huius  manerii.  Decern  bouatae  terrae  et  iii''*  pars
iiatarum.  Terra  ad  tantumdem  ...  In  Couenebi  inlana  de
■ucatae  terrae  ad geldutn.  Terra  ad  iiii  carucas. . .  InNortune
e  terrae  ad  geldum. Terra  ad  vi  carucas. Inland  et  kkx

In  Glentham  iii  caracatae  terrae  et  vi  bouatae  ad  geldum.
ii  carucas  et  vi  boualas. Soca  in  Stou,'  &c. Cf.  338  a,  b

341  a,b(Evedune);  342  b  (Aldulucbi) ;  344d(Eslaforde);
anune) ;  350  a  (Clachesbi  et  Normanesbi).
343  b  (Wichale) ;  cf.  347  b  (Waltham).


322  RURAL  ORGANIZATION [essay  ii

them.  Now,  it  is  a  fact  that  socmen  could  be  subjected  to
services  in  kind,  and  to  customary  rents,^  but  these  were
always  kept  distinct  from  the  week-work  of  villains  proper.
Even  in  the  cases  where  they  were  especially  heavily
burdened  they  were  held  apart  from  villains,  both  by  the
lesser  quantity  of  their  work  and  by  its  fixity,  its  con-
tractual character.*  Without  going  further  into  this
question,  of  which  I  had  to  speak  on  another  occasion,
what  I  have  to  lay  stress  on  now  is  the  growth  of  manors
out  of  jurisdictional  franchises.^  The  manor  as  a  soke  is
an  emphatically  free  institution :  it  is  a  piece  of  public
administration  broken  off  from  the  hundred  and  granted  to
a  private  lord,  but  still  preserving  its  public  features.  The
chief  home  of  the  sokes  are  the  Danish  counties.*  The
soke  is  peculiar  to  them,  however,  only  in  the  sense  that
it  survived  the  Conquest  and  kept  its  own  by  the  side  of  the
manor  and  in  combination  with  it  in  counties  where  the  war-
riors of  the  recent  Scandinavian  conquest  were  strongly
represented.  But  it  has  an  English  name  and  is  a  general
feature  of  English  history  as  one  of  the  elements  which  went
to  the  making  of  manors  all  over  the  kingdom.  It  has  to  be
studied  on  the  soil  of  the  Danelaw,  but  it  is  not  difficult  to  see
that  its  history  there  makes  it  exceedingly  improbable  that
southern  manors  should  have  been  products  of  a  purely
economic  evolution,  and  even  less  probable  that  they  should
be  in  the  main  mere  modifications  of  servile  arrangements.
One fact remains to be noticed in  this  connexion,

^  Round,  Feudal  England,  30.

^  Black  Book  of  Peterborough  (Camden  Ser.),  158.

'  E.  g.  Dd.  i.  219  c,  d :  (Brigstock,  Northants)  *  Rex  tenet  Bricstoc
Ibi  sunt  iii  hidae  et  dimidia.  Terra  est  ix  carucis  . . .  Huic  manerio
appendunt  haec  membra.  Slepe  i  hida  et  iii  uii^gatae  terrae.  In
Geitentone  i  hida.  In  Stanere  1  uii]gata  terrae  et  dimidia.  Terra  est
viii  carucis.  Ibi  sunt  iiii  sochemanni  et  ix  uillani  et  vii  bordarii.  Inter
onmes  habent  vii  carucas.'  Cf.  ibid.,  Rodewelle  et  Overtone ;  i.  319  a
(Lastone  et  Trapun,  Yorks.).

*  Dd.  ii.  nob :  (Hingham,  Norfolk)  *  Himcham . . .  xliii sochemanni
modo  XX,  de  reliqufs  habet  Willelmus  de  Warrena  xii,  et  comes  Alanus
iii  et  Eudo  filius  clama  hoc  inde  accepit  viii  quos  modo  habet  Radulfus
de  Bellafago.  Et  illi  xx  habent  i  carucatam  terrae,  et  unus  ex  eis
habet  iii  bordarios.*  Cf.  ii.  120  b,  12 1  a  (Ruhham,  Norfolk) ;  ii.  125  a,  b
(Radanahalla) ;  ii.  330  b  (Caranhallam,  Suffolk).


>ECT.  II.  CH.  i]  MANORS  323

namely,  the  appropriation  of  hundreds  by  the  feudal  aristo-
cnuy,  and  their  connexion  with  manors.  In  Shropshire,
for  instance,  the  hundreds  of  Comeston  and  Patinton  are
bound  up  with  the  manor  of  Cortham,^  the  central  portion
of  which  consisted  of  5  ploughs  in  demesne,  and  3  ploughs
belonging  to  3  villains  and  3  bordarii.  The  home-fiirm  in
this  case  was  more  important  than  the  peasant  portion,  but
both  are  insignificant  enoi^h  when  compared  with  the
extensive  jurisdictional  rights  attached  to  the  manor.  The
Buckinghamshire  manor  of  Witehunge  was  in  the  same
way  the  jurisdictional  centre  of  the  half-hundred  of
Coteslay.'  To  the  4  ploughs  of  its  demesne  corresponded
51  villain  holdings  and  20  bordarii^  with  2i  ploughs,
^  15  ploughs  could  be  added.  This  makes  exactly
half  a  hundred,  and  it  is  evident  that  the  original  arrange-
OKnt  of  the  manor  implied  only  a  soke  over  the  households
^  the  ceorls,  and  that  these  were  turned  into  villains,  in
fte  later  sense,  by  the  Conquest.  The  case  reminds  us
strongly  of  the  already  quoted  instances  of  Brailes  and
Qiunton,  in  Warwickshire ;  if  I  am  not  much  mistaken,
4e  manor  of  Hitchin,  the  centre  of  the  half-hundred  of
His,  must  have  gone  through  a  very  similar  history,
^though,  in  this  case,  the  hardening  of  the  hundred  soke
'nto  a  manorial  jurisdiction  must  have  been  prepared  by
Harold,  and  was  only  completed  by  the  Norman  Conquest.^

5'  Royal  manors  are  an  important  item  in  the  Survey.\Royal
Observed  from  the  economic  point  of  view  they  do  notp*"®"*
orm  a  homogeneous  class,  but  present  examples  of  all  the
^3T)es  spoken  of  hitherto,  with  some  interesting  features  of
^eir  own  called  forth  by  their  connexion  with  the  King.
*he  capitalistic  type,  the  administrative  or  tributary  type,

*  Dd.  i.  253  c:  (Cortham,  Shropshire)  *Corfan  .  .  .  Huic  manerio
P^inct  totum  Coraestane  Hundredum  et  Patinton  Hundredum.'
^f.  ibid.,  Albcrberie.

'  Dd.  i.  146b:  (Wing,  Bucks)  *  Ipse  comes  (Moritonensis)  tenet
Witehunge  pro  v  hidis.  In  Coteslai  Hundredo  se  defendit.  Terra
^  xl  carucis.  In  dominio  est  i  hida  et  ibi  sunt  iiii  canicae.  Ibi
li  uillani  cum  xx  bordariis  habent  xxi  carucas  et  ad  hue  xv  canicae
possunt  fieri.'

'  Dd.  i.  132  c,  d;  133.

V  %


3*4  RURAL  ORGANIZATION [ESSAY  ii

the  jurisdictional  type  or  soke,  are  all  traceable  in  this
group.  I  have  not  scrupled,  therefore,  to  use  Ro3ral  manors
as  illustrative  examples  of  the  already  mentioned  varieties.
But  yet  Royal  manors  have  to  be  considered  also  as  a  group
by  themselves,  as  they  exhibit  features  common  to  them
and  different  from  other  classes.

/The  l^al  and  economic  conditions  of  the  tenantry  on
Royal  manors  deserve  attention  in  many  respects,  and  may
serve  to  illustrate  many  points  which  remain  rather  obscure
when  considered  from  the  point  of  view  of  the  ordinary
manorial  org^anization.  The  reason  is  easy  to  see:  the
King,  as  sovereign,  exercised  authority  over  many  classes
of  the  population  which  were  not  subjected  to  any  private
lordship,  and  the  quasi-manorial  aspect  of  Royal  rights  in
such  cases  does  not  entirely  conceal  their  political  origin.
In  any  case  it  is  clear  to  begin  with,  that  the  possessions
described  in  Domesday  under  the  heading  Terra  Regis  are
not  uniformly  constituted,  and  have  to  be  grouped  under
several  subdivisions.  There  are  organized  estates  of  the
same  kind  as  those  commonly  found  on  the  land  of
ecclesiastical  and  lay  magnates;  there  are  estates  of
a  special  character  rendering  tribute;  there  are  manors
acting  mainly  as  centres  of  Royal  jurisdiction ;  and  there
are  tenements  joined  loosely  to  some  Royal  manor,  but
not  really  belong^ing  to  any  economic  organization  of  the
manorial  type.  Let  us  look  at  each  of  these  subdivisions
and  mark  the  chief  features  of  their  legal  and  economic
condition.

In  many  cases  the  Royal  manors  present  a  formation
almost  entirely  similar  to  those  of  private  lords:  there  is
a  central  demesne  and  a  number  of  tenants,  free  and  un-
free,  who  are  assessed  to  the  geld,  and  who  perform  ser-
vices of  different  sorts  for  the  benefit  of  the  Royal  owner  ^

^  E.g.  Writelam  (Writtle,  Essex) ;  Dd.  ii.  5  a,  b :  ' tenuit  Heroldus
pro  manerio  et  pro  xvi  hidis  tJ'.e.  Modo  rex  Willelmus  pro  xiiii  hidis.
Tunc  c  uillani  iii  minus,  post  et  modo  Ixxiii.  Tunc  xxxvi  boidarii.
Post  et  modo  Ix.  Tunc  xxiiii  semi,  post  et  modo  xviii.  Tunc  xii
carucae  in  dominio.  Post  et  modo  ix.  Tunc  inter  homines  bdiii
carucae. Post  et  modo  xlv.'


SECT.  II.  CH.  i]  MANORS  325

of  the  estate.  Some  of  these  cases  go  back  to  escheats
and  forfeitures  of  numbers  of  estates  which  had  originally
belonged  to  private  men.*  But  undoubtedly  a  good  many
of  the  purely  Royal  estates  had  been  cast  in  the  same
common  form,^  and  it  would  have  been  strange  if  this  had
not  happened,  as,  after  all,  the  same  tendencies  which
regulated  the  formation  of  private  manors  made  themselves
felt  in  the  case  of  Crown  manors.  Conversely,  several  of
the  estates  of  great  lords,  which  might  be  classed  as  private
in  view  of  comparison  with  the  king's  possessions,  were  in
truth  characterized  by  the  same  mixture  of  public  and
private  points  of  view  and  rights.  This  was  the  case  with
the  possessions  of  royal  ladies  like  Queen  Edith  or  Queen
Ghida,  who  had  received  lai^e  appanages  from  the  fund
assigned  to  the  use  of  the  Royal  family  and  of  the  King
himself^  It  was  even  more  so  with  many  of  the  lands
belonging  to  the  great  earldoms  of  the  eleventh  century.
The  Earls  of  Chester  and  Shrewsbury  had  a  quasi- royal
position  in  their  counties  after  the  Conquest,  and  Edwin,
Morcar,  Si  ward,  Harold,  had  in  the  same  way  obtained
sway  over  vast  territories,  in  which  their  political  influence
tended  naturally  to  assume  the  shape  of  landlordship.
Edwin  and  Morcar,  for  instance,  certainly  occupied  the
same  position  in  Yorkshire  as  King  Edward  did  in  most
of  the  English  counties.*  It  would  be  very  useful  to  con-
sider the  Domesday  notices  of  their  possessions  from  this
point  of  view  ;  but  in  order  to  simplify  the  inquiry  I  shall

'  K.g.  the  private  possessions  of  Harold  in  Devonshire,  Dd.  i.  loi ;
rf.  preceding  note.

^  £.  g.  Dd.  i.  143b,  Eilesberia  (Bucks);  i.  154c,  Besintonc
(Oxon).

'  Dd.  i.  1 80 a:  (Leominster,  Hereford)  'Rex  tenet  Leofminstre.
Kddid  regina  tenuit  cum  xvi  membris, ...  In  hoc  manerio  cum  his
menibris  erant  quater  xx  hidae,  et  in  dominio  xxx  carucae.  Ibi  erant
viii  prepositi  et  viii  bedelli  et  viii  radchenistres  et  cc  et  xxxviii  uillani
et  Ixxv  bordarii  et  quater  xx  et  duo  inter  seruos  ct  ancillas.  Hi  omnes
simul  habebant  cc  et  xxx  rarucas  ...  Ad  hoc  manerium  pertinebant  ii
mancria  Stanford  et  Merchelai  T.R.E.  Hae  terrae  infra  scriptae  iacc-
bant  ad  Leofminstre  T.R.E.,  Hetfelde,*  &c.  (180  b,  part  of  180  c).  Cf.
Dd.  i.  100  d.

*  Dd.  i.  299  fir.


demesne.


S26  RURAL  ORGANIZATION [essay  ii

refrain  from  taking  up  this  thread  of  study,  and  will  merely
examine  the  entries  bearing  directly  on  the  ancient  pos-

X  sessions  of  the  Crown.

Ancient  The  germs  of  the  later  ancient  demesne  doctrine  are

clearly  perceptible  even  in  the  case  of  the  first  group  of
estates,  those  most  similar  to  ordinary  manors.^  It  was
considered  that  the  main  stock  of  Crown  estates  ought  not
to  be  alienated  at  all :  they  are  sometimes  described  as
belonging,  not  to  the  King,  but  to  the  Kingdom  (re^um).^
This  initial  position  was  one  of  the  necessary  premisses  of
the  doctrine  that  even  in  cases  of  alienation  the  state  of  the
tenants  ought  not  to  be  changed,  but  of  course  the  view  in
question  could  be  developed  as  an  exception  only  when  the
denial  of  protection  to  peasants  in  their  relations  to  their
lords  had  become  the  common-law  rule.  Another  side  of
ancient  demesne  condition  is,  on  the  contrary,  fully  estab-
lished in  its  main  features  at  the  time  of  the  Great  Survey.
''  I  mean  the  immunity  of  Crown  manors  from  ordinary
taxation.  The  Royal  estates  were  not  to  pay  geld,  nor  to
contribute  to  other  common  levies  collected  by  the  Sheriff.'
Therefore  the  estates  forming  the  ancient  Crown  demesne
are  described  as  not  rated  at  a  certain  number  of  hides.
This  did  not  mean  that  the  tenants  of  these  estates  were
not  distributed  on  the  same  kind  of  holdings — hides,  vir-
gates,  and  bovates — as  in  other  places,  but  only  that  there

^  The  idea  underlying  the  later  doctrine  may  be  traced  to  Anglo-
Saxon  times.  Cart.  Sax.  1220  (Witenagemot  at  Cheddar.  Confirma-
tion by  King  Eadgar  and  the  witan  to  Winchester  Cathedral  of  lands  at
Taunton,  a.d.  968) — *  ge  twelf  hynde  men  ge  ty  hynde  wcron  on  ]iam
Godeshame  ^ra  gerihta  wyr)>e  )>e  his  agene  men  sindon  on  his
agenum  cyne  hamum,  3  man  eaole  spaeca  n  gerihtu  on  f  ylce  gemet  gefe
to  Codes  handa  ^  man  to  his  agenre  drin,  ;]  )>es  tunes  ciyping  y  se6
innung  ^re  port  gerihta  gange  into  |)ere  halgan  stowe.'

'  Dd.  ii.  119b:  (Sporle,  Norfolk)  *  Hund.  de  Grenehou,  de  xiiii
letis.  Sparle  tenuit  R.  £.  et  hoc  manerium  fuit  de  regno,  sed  R.  £•
dedit  Radulfo  comiti.'  * **

'  Dd.  i.  30  c :  (Gomshall,  Surrey)  '  Rex  tenet  in  dominio  Gomeselle.
Heraldus  comes  tenuit.  Tunc  se  defendit  pro  xx  hidis,  mode  pro
nichilo  . .  .  Huius  uillae  uillani  ab  omni  re  uicecomitis  sunt  quieti.'
i.  163  b  ;  (Tewkesbury,  Gloucs.)  *  Terra  Regis.  In  Teodechesberie
fuerunt  T.  R.  £.  auater  xx  et  xv  hidae.  £x  his  sunt  in  dominio  xlv
et  erant  quiete  ab  omni  seruitio  regali  et  geldo  praeter  seruitium
ipsius  domini  cuius  erat  manerium.'


r.  II.  CH.  i]  MANORS  327

no  estimate  of  geld-hides  in  this  case.^  This  character-
trait,  the  absence  of  hidage,  does  not  belong  to  all  the
al  estates,  but  only  to  the  ancient  Crown  possessions ;
irally  enough,  later  and  casual  acquisitions  did  not  share
•

[aterially,  this  exemption  from  taxation  was  explained
Jie  fact  that  the  estates  in  question  were  subjected  to
ry  burdens  in  connexion  with  the  maintenance  of  tho
g's  household.  A  laige  group  among  them  is  liable  to|
farm  of  the  household  for  so  many  nights  or  days.^
r  these  food-rents,  assessed  on  the  estates  in  constant
itlties,  constitute  a  kind  of  tribute  which  rendered
K:essary  an  extended  home-farm  husbandry,  and  threw

>d.  i.  39  c:  (Yaverland,  Isle  of  Wieht)  'Euerelant  tenet  rex
minia  Rex  Edwardus  tenuit.  Non  mit  hidata.'  56  d:  (That-
1,  BerlLs)  *  Rex  tenet  Taceham  in  dominio.  Rex  E.  tenuit.  Tunc
dfendit  pro  ii  hidis  et  nunquam  geldauit'  Ibid.:  (Cookham)
beham  in  dominio. Rex  £.  tenuit. Tunc  xx  hide,  sea  nunquam

!)d.  i.  64  d  :  Wiltshire  manors,  with  very  different  estimates,
iring  farms  of  one  night,  e.  g.  Cauna  (Calne) :  '  Rex  Edwardus
t  et  nunquam  geldauit,  ideo  nescitur  quot  hidae  sint  ibi.  Terra
dx  caruas.  In  dominio  sunt  viii  carucae  et  viii  semi.  Ibi  xxxvii
li  et  Ixxviii  bordarii  et  x  coliberti  habentes  xxi  carucas.  Ibi  xlv
enses  et  vii  molini  reddentes  iiii  lib.  et  xii  sol.  et  vi  den.  et  1  acrae

et  pastura  ii  leu.  Ig.  et  una  leu.  lat.  Haec  uilla  reddit  firmam
\  noctis  cum  omnibus  consuetudinibus.'  Ibid.,  Chepeham  (Chippen-

:  '  Terra  est  c  camels.  In  dominio  sunt  xvi  camcae,  et  xxviii
Ibi  xlviii  uillani  et  xlv  bordarii  et  xx  cotarii  et  xxiii  porcarii.

omnes  habent  Ixvi  camcas.  Ibi  xii  molini  de  vi  lib.  et  c  acrae
Silua  iiii  leu.  in  Ig.  et  lat.  Pastura  ii  leu.  Ig.  et  una  leu.  lat.
manerium  cum  appenditiis  suis  reddit  firmam  unius  noctis  cum
bus  consuetudinibus,  et  ualet  ex  lib.  ad  numemm.*  Cf.  ibid.,
linde,  Amblesberie,  Guerminstre  ;  65  a,  Theodulueside.  Cf.  75  b,
et  manors  grouped  for  rendering  farms  of  nights  :  t.f,^  Bridetone
Te  et  Colesberie,  et  Sepetone,  et  Bratepolle,  et  Cidihoc  . . .  Hoc
irium  cum  suis  appendiciis  et  consuetudinibus  reddit  firmam
i  noctis.*  Cf.  ibid.,  Winbome  et  Scapeuuic,  et  Chirce  et  Opewin-
i,  86  b,  Somerset  groups  for  farm  of  i  night :  '  Haec  ii  maneria
[nertone  et  Cedre  cum  appenditiis  suis  reddebant  firmam  unius
s  T.  R.  E.'  Cf.  ibid.,  Nordperet  et  Sudperet  et  Churi.  X54d,
rdshire :  ^  Comitatus  Oxeneford  reddit  firmam  trium  noctium,  hoc

lib.'  189  c,  Cambridgeshire^  e.  g.  Fordeham  (Fordham)  :  *  TJLE.
ibat  X  lib.  ad  numerum,  et  firmam  trium  diemm  inter  mel
;ntum  et  brasiura.'  Cf.  ibid.,  Witborham.  2X^9^  Northampton-
:  '  Northantone  scire  reddit  firmam  trium  noctium  xxx  lib.  ad
us.*  Cf.  Dd.  ii.  5b:  (Writtle,  Essex)  *  Writelam  .  .  .  Tunc
dit  hoc  manerium  x  noctes  de  firma  et  x  lib.  modo  reddit  c  lib.  ad
us  et  c  sol.  de  gersuma.* Cf.  7  a  (Neuport).


328  RURAL ORGANIZATION [ESSAY  ll

the  weight  of  economic  management  on  the  tenants  them-
selves. The  reeve  or  bailiff  was  little  more  than  a  collector
of  produce  under  this  system.  Accordingly,  the  central
,  halls  of  these  Royal  manors  are  often  quite  insignificant  as
husbandry  units  ^ ;  they  were  evidently  storehouses  more
than  anything  else.  In  many  cases -this  tributary  condition
developed  directly  from  the  rendering  of  produce  to  pay-
ment in  money,  without  the  intermediate  stage  of  labour
arrangements  which  were  the  most  usual  and  important
expression  of  the  manorial  system  in  other  places.  And  it
is  to  be  noticed  in  this  connexion  that  the  food-farm  s)rstem
and  the  commutation  dues  which  take  its  place  are  com-
monly to  be  found  in  the  case  of  Royal  boroughs,*  that
is,  of  organizations  in  which  the  pressure  of  manorial  lord-
ship was  especially  small  and  did  not  involve  any  element
of  personal  servitude.  And  some  of  the  rural  manors
charged  to  the  King's  farm  are  little  more  than  districts  in
which  tribute  in  produce  was  being  collected  by  Royal
officers.^  The  features  of  capitalistic  husbandry  and  servile
labour  organization  are  almost  entirely  absent  in  such  cases.
Royal  The  second  group  of  Royal  manors  is  formed  by  districts

sokes.  jj^  which  the  manorial  hall  appears  mainly  as  a  centre  of  juris-
diction and  political  authority.  We  have  already  seen  many
examples  of  this  in  the  case  of  private  manors,  and  recognized
in  the  soke  one  of  the  most  important  transitional  forms
in  the  growth  of  the  manorial  system. In  regard  to  the

^  £.  g.  Dd.  i.  loob :  (Braunton,  Devon)  *  Rex  tenet  Brantone.  T.R.E
defendebat  se  pro  una  hida.  Terra  est  xl  carucis.  In  dominie  est
i  caruca  et  iiii  semi,  et  xl  uillani  et  xxx  bordarii  cum  xxx  carucis ' ;  cL
i2ob  (Lanehoc,  Cornwall) ;  ibid.  (Glustone).

*  E.  g.  Dd.  i.  75  a :  (Dorchester,  Dorset)  *  In  Dorecestre  tempore
Regis  Edwardi,  erant  clxxii  domus.  Hae  pro  omni  seruitio  r^s  se
defendebant,  et  geldabant  pro  x  hidis.  Scilicet  ad  opus  Huscarlium
unam  Markam  argenti  exceptis  consuetudinibus  quae  pertinent  ad
firmam  noctis.' Cf.  ibid.  (Brideport),  (Warhara).

'  E.g.  Dd.  i.  179c:  (Linton,  Herefordshire)  'Rex  Willelmus  tenet
Lintune  .  .  .  Ibi  erant  v  hidae,  et  reddebat  quartam  partem  firmae
unius  noctis, .  .  .  Ilbertus  uicecomes  habet  ad  firmam  suam  de  Arcene-
feld  consuetudines  omnes  mellis  et  ouium  quae  huic  manerio  per-
tinebant  T.R.E.*  179  d  :  (Clive)  *  De  hoc  manerio  est  in  foresta  regis
Willelmi  tantum  terrae  quae  T.R.E.  reddebat  vi  sextaria  mellis  et  vi
oues  cum  agnis.'


SECT.  II.  CH.  i]  MANORS  329

formation  of  Royal  estates  it  is  especially  common  to  find
that  the  element  of  public  jurisdiction  was  materialized,  as
it  were,  in  the  shape  of  an  arrangement  of  socmen  and  free
tenants  around  a  manorialized  estate.^  Stonleigh  in  War-
wickshire, Newbold  in  Derbyshire,  and  Holt  in  Essex  are
instances  of  organizations  chiefly  characterized  by  this  trait.
The  economic  elements  that  went  to  their  composition  were
subordinated  to  the  extended  relations  derived  from  the  soke
over  settlements  of  free  tenants.*  The  same  phenomenon
recurs  in  the  north  in  the  case  of  great  manors  of  Queen
Edith  and  of  the  northern  earls,  which  to  all  intents  and
purposes  share  in  the  p>osition  of  Crown  manors.^

*  E.g.  Dd.  i.  230b,  c:  (Rothley,  Leics.)  'Rex  tenet  Rodolei.  Rex
Kdwardus  tenuit.  Ibi  sunt  v  carucae  terrae.  In  dominio  sunt  ii  de
his  et  ibi  ii  carucae  et  xxix  uiUani  cum  presbitero  et  xviii  bordariis
habent  vi  canicas.  Huic  manerio  pertinent  subsequentia  membra,
Adelachestone  etc.  In  his  sunt  cc  et  iiii  sochemanni  cum  clvii  uillanis
et  nonaginta  iiii  bordariis  habentes  quater  xx  canicas  et  ii.'  Cf.  ibid.,
Bugedone.

'  Dd.  i.  238  b:  (Stoneleigh,  Warwick)  *Rex  tenet  Stanlei.  Rex
Kdwardus  tenuit.  Ibi  sunt  vi  hidae.  Terra  est ...  In  dominio  sunt  v
carucae  et  i  seruus  et  i  ancilla,  et  Ixviii  uillani  et  iiii  bordarii  cum
ii  presbiteris  habent  xxx  canicas.*  273  b:  (Newbold,  Derby)  *In
Neuuebold  cum  vi  Rerewitie  ...  Ibi  sunt  vi  carucatae  terrae  et  a
bouata  ad  geldum.  Terra  vi  carucis.  Ibi  habet  Rex  xvi  uillanos  et  ii
bordarios  et  i  seruum  habentes  iiii  canicas.  Soca  huius  manerii.  In
Wingreurde  ii  carucatae  terrae  ad  geldum  ...  Ibi  xiiii  sochemanni
habentes  iiii  canicas.'  ii.  iiib:  (Holt,  Norfolk)  'Holt  tenuit  rex
Kdwardus  ii  car.  terrae  .  .  .  Tunc  ualuit  xx  lib.  et  i  noctem  mellis
et  c  sol.  de  consuetudine.  Modo  1  lib.  Huic  manerio  pertinebant  t.r.e.
viii  liberi  homines  de  iii  car.  t.  et  dim.  .  .  .  Adhuc  pertinebat  huic
manerio  i  liber  homo  xxiii  ac.  Huic  manerio  iacet  i  beruita  in
Hencpsteda  de  xxx  acris,  ...  In  Bathele  i  liber  homo  de  ii  car.  terrae,
...  In  Burstuna  v  sochemanni  pertinent  ad  Holt, ...  In  Huneworda
iii  sochemanni,  ...  In  Stodeia  i  sochemannus  ...  In  Glanforda  iii
sochemanni  ...  In  Neutuna  iii  sochemanni  et  dim.  ...  In  Gunestorp
dim.  car.  terrae  ...  In  Scametune  iacet  i  beruita.'

^  Dd.  i.  281  a :  (Terra  Regis,  Notts)  *  Duneham  et  soca, . .  .  habuit
Rex  Kdwardus,  .  .  .  Bodmescel  et  soca,  .  .  .  habuit  Tosti  comes.
281  b  :  Mamesfelde  et  soca,  .  .  .  habuit  rex  Edwardus.'  2^ a:  (Terra
Regis,  York  (Allerton)) :  Mn  Aluenune  sunt  ad  geldum  xliiii  carucatae
terrae  quas  xxx  carucae  possunt  arare.  Hoc  tenuit  Eduinus  comes  pro
uno  manerio  ...  Huic  manerio  appendent  xi  bereuuitae  . .  .  Ad  hoc
manerium  pertinet  soca  harum  terrarum . . .  Inter  totum  sunt  ad  geldum
({uater  xx  et  v  carucatae  quas  possunt  arare  xlv  carucae .  .  .  Ibi  fuenmt
c  et  xvi  sochemans.  Modo  wasta  est.'  337  d :  (Terra  Regis,  Lines.)
'  In  Orantham  habuit  Edid  regina  xii  canicas  ad  geldum,  .  .  •  Ad
C.rantham  pertinet  haec  soca  Sumerdebi  etc.  Simul  ad  geldum  Iv
carucatae.'


33©  RURAL  ORGANIZATION [essay ii

Lastly,  there  is  a  veiy  considerable  group  of  firee
tenements  gradually  passing  under  the  manorial  authority
of  the  King  and  of  his  officers  from  a  condition  of
independence.  These  cases  are  especially  clearly  set  before
us  in  the  surveys  of  Essex  and  of  the  East- Anglian  coun-
ties. The  independence  of  the  freeholders  is  sometimes
expressly  insisted  on.^  But  it  is  a  more  usual  expedient  to
note  that  the  freemen  or  socmen  in  question  belong  to
the  whole  hundred,-  which  means,  of  course,  that  they  ought
to  stand  outside  the  manorial  divisions.  It  is  difficult  to
make  out  precisely  on  what  grounds  dominical  freemen  of
the  King  are  entered  under  a  special  rubric  in  Norfolk  by
the  side  of  the  freemen  outside  the  farm,  that  is,  outside  the
manors.'  Usually,  however,  free  tenants  and  socmen  are
distributed  between  the  Royal  manors,  but  the  imperfect
way  in which  they  are  connected  with  their  respective

'  Dd.  ii.  3b,  4a :  (Hd.  de  Hidingeforda,  Essex)  *  In  isto  hundiedo
habet  rex  xviii  sochemannos  tenentes  zxvi  acras  et  dim.  et  nunquam
reddiderunt  consuetudinem  praeter  semidum  regis.*

'  Dd.  ii.  I  b :  (Hundret  de  Berdestapla,  Essex)  *  In  toto  hoc  hondret
habet  rex  xviii  liberos  homines  tenentes  dimidiam  hidam  et  xlriiii  ac'
2  a :  (Dim.  Hund.  de  Witham  (Withsun))  '  In  hoc  manerio  adiacebant
t.r.e.  xxxiiii  liberi  homines  qui  tunc  reddebant  x  sol.  de  consuetudine  €t
xi  den.  Ex  illis  tenet  llbcnlus  ii  de  xlv  acris  et  ual.  vi  soL  et  r^dunt
manerio  suam  consuetudinem.'  113  b :  *  Soca  et  sacha  de  Grenehou
Hund.  pertinet  ad  Wistune  manerium  quicunque  ibi  teneat  et  habet
rex  et  comes.'  114a:  (Dimidium  Hundredum  de  Dice) '  Tota  soca  et
saca  istius  dimidii  hundredi  praeter  terram  sancti  Edmiindi  et  de  ilia
sanctus  dimidium  et  rex  aliam  medietatem  praeter  terram  Ulfiet  et
praeter  terram  Stigandi,  et  de  omnibus  aliis,  soca  fuit  in  hundredo
T.R.E.'  123  b :  (Witton,  Norfolk)  '  In  Witona  iiii  liberi  homines  de  Ix
acris  terrae  et  xi  acris  prati.  Semper  i  caruca.  De  istis  soca  in  hun-
dredo ad  tercium  denarium.' Cf.  131  a  (Bedingaham).

'  Dd.  ii.  109 :  Rubric  Ixiiii, '  De  liberis  hominibus  regis.  Ad  nuUam
firmam  pertinentes.'  Ixv,  *  De  dominicis  hominibus  regis.'  Cf.  273  a :
*  Isti  sunt  liberi  homines  t.r.e.  ad  nullam  firmam  pertinentes  quos
Almarus  custodit  qui  additi  sunt  ad  firmam  tr.w.'  ii.  447  a :  '  Isti
sunt  liberi  homines  de  Sudfiilc  qui  remanent  in  manu  regis.*  Cf.  Dd.  L
190a:  (Fulboum,  Cambs)  'In  Flamingdice  Hund.  In  Fulebeme
tenet  Picotus  xxvi  sochemannos  qui  habent  iiii  hidas  sub  manu  regis . . .
Reddunt  per  annum  viii  libras  arsas  et  pensatas  et  unoquoque  anno  xii
ecjuos  et  xii  inguardos  si  rex  in  uicecomitatu  ueniret.  Si  non  ueniret
xii  sol  et  viii  den.  T.R.E.  non  reddebant  uicecomiti  nisi  Aueras  et
inguardos  uel  xii  sol.  et  viii  den.  et  super  plus  inuasit  Picot  super
regem.'  127  a :  (Middlesex) '  In  eodem  hundredo  (Osulvestane)  habet
rex  XXX  cotarios  qui  reddunt  per  annum  xiiii  sol.  et  x  den.  et  i  ob. . . .
Hos  cotarios  custodiebat  semper  uicecomes  de  Middelsexe  T.R.E.'


SECT.  II.  CH.  i]  MANORS  331

manors  is  clearly  marked  by  some  such  expression  as
iacuerunt  manerio^  or  ad  manerium  additi  suni^  or  mamrio
accomodati  sunt}  Most  of  the  Uheri  homines  or  lUfere
tenentes  of  the  Norfolk  and  Suffolk  numors,  and  a  good
many  of  the  socmen,  were  tenants  of  this  sort,  loosely  I
joined  to  the  manors  and  estimated  separately  as  to  geld
and  as  to  the  holdings  attributed  to  them.  Of  course,  the
transition  from  such  a  position  into  one  of  more  strict
dependence  on  the  manor  was  easy,  and  we  notice  the
next  stage  in  this  respect  when  the  liberi  homines  or
sochemanni  are  entered  in  the  survey  of  the  manor  simply
as  classes  of  the  tenantry  alongside  other  similar  groups.*
This  is  the  case  in  most  counties  where  such  elements  are
considerably  represented.  We  have  not  the  means  of  judg-
ing how  far  the  distinction  in  terminology  was  determined  by
a  real  and  deep-going  difference  of  condition ;  in  many
cases  it  may  have  been  simply  the  result  of  a  more  cursory
method  in  handling  the  materials  at  hand.  But  in  East
Anglia,  at  any  rate,  the  different  treatment  of  liberi
homifus  and  sochemanni  cannot  have  been  accidental,  and
this  makes  one  think  that  variations  of  the  same  kind  must
have  occurred  in  Yorkshire,  Lincolnshire,  Leicestershire,  &c
Even  as  to  tenants  entered  as  mere  villains,  it  is  made  clear  in
a  few  cases  that  they  were  in  a  rather  independent  position,
and  came  evidently  from  the  same  stock  as  the  freemen  of
other  counties.^ The  Royal  manors  in  Kent,  although

*  Dd.  ii.  6  a :  ( Lawford,  Essex) '  Laleforda . . .  Haic  manerio  iacuerunt
xvii  sochemanni  t.r.e.  de  i  hida  reddentes  omnem  consuetudinem,
et  postciuam  rex  uenit  in  banc  terrain  et  Hain(ardti8)  fuit  utcecomet
occupauit  istam  terram  Tedricos  Pointel,  et  qiuuMO  earn  aocepit
manebant  in  ea  xvii  sochemanni  babentes  ix  camcat.  Modo  sont
in  inanu  regis  et  xiii  homines  tenent  banc  terram  . . .  Pertinebant  adhnc
xxi  sochemanni  tenentes  i  hidam  et  ii  utr^atas  et  v  acras, .  •  •  et  iiii
sochemanni  fuerunt  t.r.e.  in  isto  maneno  omnem  contnetodinem
reddentes.' Cf.  5  b  (Writelam,  Essex) ;  109b  (Maiincbam,  Norfolk).

^  Dd.  i.  338  d  (Gayton,  Lines.);  ii.  liob  (Hingbam,  Norfolk);
ii.  60  a  ('  Nutlea '.  Essex).  Cf.  Dd.  ii.  134 :  (Castor,  Norfolk)  *  Caitre
tenuerunt  Ixxx  liberi  homines  t.r.e.  et  modo  similiter  iiii  car.  terrae.
Tunc  xxii  carucae  et  ex  hoc  toto  fecit  R.  comes  manerium.'

'  Dd.  i.  190 a :  (Litlington,  Cambs) '  LidltntODe.  Ibi  xatvi  tiillani  et
X  bordarii  cum  vii  canicis  .  .  .  Homines  hnios  manerit  reddebant
\Var{)ennam uicecomiti regis aut cnstodiam fodebant.' CL  joc


riola.*


332  RURAL ORGANIZATION [essay  ll

not  assessed  for  farms  of  nights,  seem  to  have  had  a  similar
character ;  at  any  rate,  the  great  numbers  of  their  tenants
are  out  of  all  proportion  to  the  small  dominical  centres,  and
in  view  of  the  general  exemption  of  Kentish  peasants  from
the  burdensome  duties  of  week-work  and  other  servile
incidents,  there  can  hardly  be  a  doubt  that  the  villains  of  a
place  like  Dartford,  for  instance,  were  little  else  than  the
tribute-paying  population  collected  around  a  counting-
house,  and  possibly  taxed  for  some  minor  labour  duties  in
addition  to  their  regular  rents.^  But  unfortunately  we  have
to  be  content  with  general  sttggestions  in  the  case  of  this
important  class,  as  there  are  no  means  of  analysing  the
various  groups  of  which  the  class  described  in  Domesday
was  composed.
/  *  Mane-  6.  A  variety,  the  social  importance  of  which  is  much

greater  than  its  economic  aspect  would  lead  one  to  suppose,
is  presented  by  the  numerous  cases  of  very  small  manors
registered  in  the  Survey.  There  are,  to  b^n  with,
instances  like  that  of  Lutwyche  in  Shropshire,  where  the
demesne  consisted  of  one  ploughland  and  two  bovates,  and
there  was  one  villain  household  and  one  bordarius  with  half
a  plough.  Now  such  an  entry,  which  is  not  the  result
of  devastation,  but  marks  a  state  of  things  practically
undisturbed  by  the  Conquest,  gives  material  for  reflec-
tion. The  demesne  is  separated  from  the  peasant  por-
tion, and,  for  all  its  insignificance,  is  double  the  size  of
;  the  latter.^  No  serfs  are  mentioned,  and  we  are  led  to  the
^conclusion  that  the  household  of  the  solitary  villain  had
to  cultivate  the  demesne  portion  with  the  help  of  the
bordarius^  while  half  a  ploughland  was  left  for  the  special
use  of  those  rustics. It  is  not  a  case  of  capitalistic  or  of

(Chingestunc,  Surrey) ;  203  c  (Godmundcestre,  Hunts) ;  209  b  (Lcs-
tone,  Beds) ;  ibid.  (Loitone).

*  Dd.  i.  2c:  (Uartford,  Kent)  * Tarentefort,  pro  uno  solino  et
dimidio  se  defendit.  Terra  est  xl  carucis.  In  dommio  sunt  ii  carucae,
et  cxlii  uillani  cum  x  bordariis  habent  liii  carucas.'

'  Dd.  i.  254  c :  (Lutwyche,  Shropshire)  *  Rainaidus  tenet  Loteis  et
Ricardus  de  eo.  Goduinus  tenuit  et  liber  homo  fuit.  Ibi  i  hida
geldans.  In  dominio  est  una  caruca  et  ii  bouate  et  unus  uillanus
et  unus  bordarius  cum  dimidia  caruca.' Cf.  i.  365  d.


SECT.  11.  CH.  i]  MANORS  333

administrative  concentration,  but  a  single  fium  occupied  by
two  peasant  households,  a  larger  and  a  smaller  one,  who
got  some  land  in  remuneration  for  their  labour.  Cases  of
this  kind  are  very  frequent,  especially  in  the  districts  where
single  homesteads  abound.

Then  come  numerous  instances  of  little  *  manors '  where
no  demesne  is  apparent,  and  the  manorial  organization
consists  in  the  drawing  (^  certain  profits  from  small  groups
of  peasants  who  live  by  themselves,  and  have  no  place
to  perform  week-work  in.  Such  is,  for  instance,  Helmerin*
tone  in  Warwickshire,^  with  land  for  one  plough,  which  is
actually  there  with  three  cotaets.  This  means,  I  suppose,
that  the  rustics  in  the  place  were  gathered  in  three  small
households,  which  possibly  got  their  team  of  oxen  from  the
lord.  In  Pellinges,  Sussex,'  a  township  of  four  hides  and
land  for  four  ploughs,  there  had  been  four  manors  T.  R.  E.,
and  there  were  two  T.R.W.,  with  only  one  villain  and  one
bardarius  to  till  them.  This  is  seemingly  a  case  of  waste,
although  nothing  is  said  expressly  about  it,  but  the  absence
of  demesne  is  characteristic  nevertheless,  and  at  their  best
the  four  manors  could  not  have  comprised  more  than  one
field-carucate  each.

A  similar  case  is  Binstead,  Hants,^  and  indeed  the
whole  of  f  53  of  the  Hampshire  Survey  describes  chiefly
infinitesimal  manors  consisting  each  of  a  couple  of
dependent  peasants  assigned  to  some  small  lord  who
has  no  apparent  demesne  to  match  the  peasant  part.
Most  of  these  little  estates  do  not  show  any  sign  of  decay
through  waste,  but  have  gone  on  much  in  the  same  con-
dition from  Saxon  to  Norman  times.  The  Survey
of  Leicestershire  is  also  very  rich  in  them.^  Devonshire
presents sometimes the same phenomenon, with the

>  Dd.  i.  70  a.  *  Dd.  i.  33a.

'  Dd.  i.  S3  a :  (Binstead,  Hanu)  *  Wilklmus  tenet  Benestede.  Tool
tenuit  in  alodio  de  rege  Edwardo  pro  manerio.  Tunc  ffekbbat  pio
V  uirgatis  modo  pro  ii  uirgatis.  Terra  est  ii  camcts.  Ibi  sunt  cum
ii  uillanis. Ualet  et  ualuit  x  soL'

*  Dd.  i.  234  b  :  (Peatling,  Leics.)  'Robertus  de  Bud  tenet  de  r^
iii  carucatas  terrae  in  PeUinee.  Terra  est  ii  csmds.  Ibi  est  onus
uillanus  ct  viii  acrae  prati. Valuit  ii  sol.  modo  v  soL'


334  RURAL  ORGANIZATION [ essay li

additional  feature  that  the  little  farm,  considered  as  a
manor,  is  clearly  a  [Mstoral  and  not  an  af^ricnUural  ooe.
'  Cornewrdc/  '  for  instance,  a  manor  of  Alurcd  Brito,iiiedto
he  held  by  three  thanes  in  the  time  of  King  Edward.  It  paid
^cld  for  one  viryate,  and  had  land  for  three  ploughi^botDo
teams  are  mentioned  there.  There  was  one  villain  and  one
serf,  and  1 2  acres  of  meadow  and  as  much  wood,  and  joo
acres  of  pasture.  It  was  held  as  three  manors  T.  R.  E^  bat
had  come  to  be  one  in  the  hands  of  Alured  Brita  Tk
value  was  always  ic  shillings  and  6  pence.  It  would  be  of
no  use  to  s|x^culate  on  the  state  of  the  population  of  drii
place  in  the  «^;e  of  Kinj;  Hdward,  the  De\'onshire  Suncy
not  bein^  careful  to  state  how  many  peasants  there  vac
T.  R.  ^^  Kut,  as  the  value  remained  stationary  to  a  pcnif.
the  conditions  of  husbandry  must  have  continued  very  isack
on  the  same  lines,  and  while  the  land  fit  for  agricultnic  an
not  used,  the  pastoral  economy  evidently  foroied  the
concern  of  the  villain  household  settled  in  it.
which  is  not  unlikely,  that  the  same  household  manafodlhr
dairy  farm  in  the  Old  Kn(;lish  |)eriod,  when  its  relatioo  tolhr
three  manors  of  which  it  formed  the  basis  must  have  kd  li
a  division  of  produce  between  three  claimants — it  vodUbr
diflficult  to  And  a  dee|)er  meaning  in  the  expression  *  maaor*
in  this  case.  Nor  is  this  instance  of  De\*onshire  hosfatfdrjr
an  isolated  one.-

Another  numerous  group  of  small  manors  isfonncdbftk
cases,  especially  frequent  in  the  east  and  north,  where  frc^
men,  socmen,  and  thanes  appear  holding  ver>*  small
and  cultivating  them  with  their  ou-n  hands,  or.  to
more  accurately,  with  the  help  of  their  personal  honscholi

In  (fikeringlon.^  Lincoln,  e.  g.,  Klmxl  held  T.  R.E  on

' 1)<!.  i.  11^*  A  :  M'urworthy.  I>cvnn>  '  Trrs  taini  tencM  de
<  nrnritnlc. Ipin  tt-nihant  T.K.K.  ct  >:cMah.iiic  pro  una


Trrr.i  rsi  111  •  .'irui  is. I  hi  est  unu«  uilUnui  el  uniu
|ir.iti rt  tntifirm  ^iluac  ct  ctr  At  rje  |uitunic. Olim
\  s*»I.  n  \i  lirn. Tri.i  Manrri.i  fucrunt.'
*  (f.  Mil.  i\. V'4  '((»>tnnA.  l>cMini:  \\.  311  (KemehalUi;  k  iisc

i  lliviis  .

^  I)i|.  1 ;37.i. <  t.  I.  .;;M>:  KasuuIc,  Lines.'  *  In  O
Vluici  in  SouaM'^  Trrrar  Atl  f*cMuin. Terra  v\  bobot. Ibi


SECT.  II.  CH.  I]  MANORS  335

bovate  to  the  gdd  and  land  for  two  oxen.  Matthew  held
half  a  plough  there,  and  the  value  remained  the  same
T.R.  E.  and  T.R.W.— three  shiUings.  The  place  is
marked  as  a  manor.  The  farming  must  have  been  more
intensive  than  usual,  as  four  oxen  did  work  on  land  which,
according  to  common  standards,  ought  to  have  been  culti-
vated by  two,  and  reckoned  at  one-fourth  of  a  ploughland.
But,  anyhow,  both  the  team  and  the  revenue  were  snudl
indeed.  In  East  Deeping,^  the  abbey  of  Peterborough  had
possessed  five  socmen  in  five  manors  rated  at  two  carucates
and  six  bovates  to  the  geld,  and  containing  exactly  the
same  quantity  of  land  fit  for  ploughing.  The  place  had
passed  to  two  vassals  of  Geoffrey  of  Cambrai,  who  turned
it  into  a  regular  capitalistic  manor  with  i}  teams  in  demesne
and  1 2  villains  with  3^  teams.  The  original  socage  tenants
did  not  always  disappear,  however,  but  often  went  on
holding  their  exiguous  manors  under  a  powerful  lord  and
providing  for  their  cultivation.  A  number  of  such  cases
may  be  quoted  from  the  survey  of  the  Peterborough
possessions  in  Lincolnshire.'  It  is  very  common  to  find
these  small  manors  held  by  self-supporting  cultivators  in
farms  of  exactly  one  plough  strength.

A  case  from  Somerset  may  be  taken  on  account  of  its
rather  complex  setting.  Under  the  rubric  *  Anglici  tegni ',
evidently  designating  military  tenants  of  Englidi  race  who
had  somehow  kept  their  land  after  the  Conquest,  we  find
one  Brictrius  holding  a  manor  called  *  Tocheswilla  ',*  which
a  certain  Godwin  had  held  T.  R.  E.  It  did  not  pay  geld
at  that  time,  but  it  contained — the  jurors  know  that  it  con-
tained— land  of  half  a  virgate  to  the  geld.  This  could
have  been  tilled  by  a  plough-team.  As  a  matter  of  fact,
half  a  team  was  employed  there,  and  4  bardarU  and  one

Aluredi  habet  i  carucam,  et  ii  uillani  et  i  bordarius  cum  ii  bobos  hi
caruca.  T.R.E.  ualuit  x  sol.  mode  zx  sol.'  359d  (Estrecale);  360a
(Endrebi) ;  344  b  (Cotes).

»  I)d.  i.  366  b.

^  V..^.  I)d.  i.  371a:  (Rurgh,  Lines.)  'In  Bwrg  habuit  Archil  v
bouatas  terrae  ad  geldum.  Terra  vi  bobus.  Ibi  ii  tochemamii  atm
i  caruca. T.K.K.  et  modo  ualet  iii  sol.' Cf.  371  b  (Filingeham).

*  Dd.  iv.  454. Cf.  iv.  455  (Draecotta,  SoPMOTCt).


336  RURAL  ORGANIZATION [essay  n

serf  are  mentioned  without  any  definite  endowment,  so  that
they  probably  had  to  till  the  demesne.  There  were,  besides,
4  acres  of  wood  and  7  of  pasture.  It  rendered  1 2  shillings
and  6  pence.  We  find  a  series  of  such  small  places  in
Shropshire,^  and  their  holders  are  sometimes  designated  as
freemen  and  sometimes  as  radmen — riding  tenants.'  Their
social  formation  seems  determined  by  two  facts — scattered
farm-settlements  with  the  tendency  to  form  complete
ploughlands,  and  the  existence  of  a  class  of  small  free
tenants  used  as  riding  sergeants  for  carrying  messages,
supervision  of  outlying  possessions,  and  probably  for
military  purposes.  Similar  cases  may  be  quoted  from
Gloucestershire  and  Warwickshire,^  although  these  latter
counties  were  not  settled  mainly  on  the  single-farm  system.
A  curious  and  illuminating  instance  may  be  cited  from
Dorset,  where  Chimedecome  was  held  T.  R.  E.  by  10  thanes
'  as  one  manor '.  It  paid  geld  for  one  hide  and  one-third  of
a  virgate.  There  was  land  for  one  plough,  and  a  team  was
actually  at  work  in  the  place.^  This  typical  ploughland
seems  a  very  small  basis  for  the  support  of  these  ten
thanes,  and  yet  it  is  hardly  anything  else  but  a  large  house-
hold of  small  military  sergeants  of  the  King,  joined  in
husbandry  as  well  as  in  their  *  forinsec  service '  or  *  utwaru '.
Without  prejudging  further  developments,  we  are  entitled,
I  thinks  to  compare  all  the  cases  just  mentioned  with  the
manors  of  the  thanes  and  drenghs  of  Lancashire — small
carucate  or  hide  holdings  subjected  to  some  organizing


^  Dd.  i.  255  c:  (Stapleton,  Shropshire)  'Isdem  Rogerius  (filius
Corbet)  et  Rannulfus  de  eo  tenet  unum  manerium  (Hundeslit)  de
una  uirgata  et  diraidia,  et  geld.  Huning  tenuit  et  liber  fiiit.  Terra  est
i  carucae.  Ibi  est  unus  uillanus.  Valuit  xvi  den.  modo  xii  den.'  Cf.
i.  255  d  (Messe) :  i.  256  b  (Sdle).

'  Dd.  i.  257  c  :  (Gravenhunger,  Shropshire)  *  Willelmus  Malbedeng
tenet  de  Rogerio  comite  Grauehungre.  i^luric  et  VIgar  tenuerunt  pro
ii  maneriis  et  liberi  fuerunt.  Ibi  i  hida  geldans.  Terra  est  iiii  carads.
Ibi  ii  radmans  habent  i  carucam.*

'E.g.  Dd.  i.  164c:  (Shipton,  Gloucs.)  'Gimdulf  tenuit  et  tenet
in  Scipetune  unum  manerium  de  una  hida  et  geldat,  et  ibi  i  caruca  in
dominio  et  ualet  viii  sol.  De  Thomo  archiepiscopo  tenet.*  Cf.  ibid,,
Hagepine ;  Dd.  i.  241  b  (Cawston,  Warwickshire) ;  ibid.,  Wiloughby.

*  Dd.  i.  84  d.


SECT.  II.  CH.  i]  .  MANORS  337

influence  of  large  Royal  manors.^  The  tenants  of  these
latter  were  undoubtedly  warriors  of  light  equipment  idio
had  to  manage  their  own  agricultural  work  and  do  some
work  for  their  lords,  but  whose  main  characteristic  was  their
sergeanty  in  peace  and  war.

The east and  north provide us  with  a  number  of '
examples  of  manors  rated  at  40,  30,  and  even  ao  acres,
held  and  tilled  by  some  free  tenants — liUri  komittes^  or
socmen. It  must  not  be  forgotten,  however,  that  the  acres  ;
in these  cases are emphatically  geld -acres,  and  often  ,
correspond to  whole  ploughlands  or  large  portions of'
them.^ A  curious  instance  is  the  '  maneriolum  '*  of  Bishop
Remigius  of  Lincoln,  contiguous  to  that  city  and  provided
with  all  rights  of  sac  and  soc,  toll  and  team;  it  gave
occupation  to  one  plough-team  only,  and  no  under-tenants
were  mentioned  in  it. How  was  it  cultivated  ? By  hired
labour  ?  or  has  the  attention  bestowed  on  the  enumeration
of  the  franchise  privil^es  occasioned  a  blank  in  regard  to
the  tenants  settled  in  the  *  maneriolum '  ? We  cannot  say,
but  the  little  plough- team  manor  is  characteristic  enough  as
it  is. With  its  franchises,  it  might  turn  out  to  be  the  germ
of  a  great  organization.  .

One  of  the  most  important  features  oS  the  extant  notices  n
about  these  microscopic  '  manors '  is  the  ins^^ht  afforded  by  1
their  history  into  the  process  of  formation  and  the  character  1
of  the  larger  units.  Already  in  the  instances  quoted  hitherto  t
we  have  often  had  occasion  to  observe  how  the  small

^  Dd.  i.  269  c :  (Lanes.)  *  Ibi  habuit  Rex  Edwardos  unum  maneriom
Derbei  nominatum,  cum  vi  Bereaulchis.  Ibi  iiti  hidae.  Terra  est  zv
carucis  . . .  Vctrcdus  tenebat  vi  maneria  . .  .  Dot  tenebat  HiCune  et
I'orboc. Ibi  i  hida  quieta  ab  omni  consiieCodhie  pneter  gdldo.*

*  Dd.  i.  137  a  :  (Wakeley  Farm,  Hcru) '  In  Wacbelei  tenet  RadaUas
dc  comite  (Aiano)  xl  acras  tcnrne.  Terra  est  i  camcae.  Ibi  est  omis
sochemannus  et  unus  seruus.  Pratnin  ii  bbbat.  Valet  et  oalnit  z  soL
T.K.K.  XX  sol.  Hoc  manerium  tenuit  Eddeua  pokhra.'  Dd.iL  316b:
(SutTolk)  '  In  Sutbuma  tenet  Gislebertos  de  WIscand  de  Roberto
Malct  xii  liberos  homines  commendatos  eiusdem  E  (jiir)  be  acr. .  •  •
Vnus  ex  his  liberis  fuit  manerium  de  xx  acris.'  Cf.  ii.  323  b (Brisewrda,
Suffolk).

^  Dd.  i.  336  a:  (Lincoln)  '  Remigius  episcopus  habet  t  manerioimii
cum  i  caruca  contiguum  in  ciuitate  Lincolia  com  saca  et  soca  et  ami
Thol  et  cum  Theim.'


\  tN'N^KMXit  I


338  RURAL  ORGANIZATION [essay  il

to  organizations  were  being  swallowed  up  by  big  neighbouring
I  estates,  or  how  estates  of  considerable  extent  were  formed

by  the joining  together  of several  independent  farms.

These  instances  could  be  multiplied  to  any  extent,^  and

the  facts  of  this  natural '  integration '  of  small  estates  into
4  larger  units  with  more  complex  organization  throw  light
I  on  one  of  the  chief  causes  of  the process  which  called

*  manors  * of  the more  developed  types  into  existence.

They  presented  a  kind  of  compromise  between  the  origi-

inally  independent  cultivation  and  ownership  of  small
households,  and  the  forces  of  patronage  and  exploitation
4  embodied  in  the  great  lordships.  The  resultant  line  of
fi  both  developments  was  found  in  the  characteristic  combina-
'■t  tion  of  a  domanial  centre  and  the  dependent  economy
*  of  the  tenants.
Anglo-  7.  We  have  now  to  consider  the  important  question  how

ori^M.  ^^^  ^^^  manorial  system,  so  generally  prevailing  in  England
at  the  time  of  the  Survey,  is  to  be  traced  back  into  Saxon
times.  Domesday  Book  supposes  everywhere  that  there
were  manors  in  the  reign  of  King  Edward,  and  that  the
existence  and  rights  of  the  Norman  manors  have  to  be
drawn  from  them.  The  very  fact  that  the  numbers  and
composition  of  these  manors  were  not  identical  T.  R.E.
and  T.  R.  W.  makes  it  the  more  necessary  to  mark  exactly
what  the  relation  between  both  formations  was ;  and  the
Survey  informs  us  with  minute  accuracy  as  to  the  sub-
division of  certain manors  into smaller  items'  in con-


^  Dd.  i.  260  a :  (Mawley,  Shropshire)  *  Isdem  Radulfus  (de  Mortemer)
tenet  Melela  de  i  hida  et  Lei  de  i  uirgata  et  Fech  de  i  uirgata  teme.
Haec  iii  maneria  et  geld,  fuerunt,  iii  teini  tenuerunt  et  liberi  homines
fuerunt.  Quando  Turstinus  de  Wigemore  recepit  de  comite  Willelmo
iunxit  supenori  manerio  Cleberie,  et  tunc  et  modo  inibi  sunt  appreciata.'
Cf.  i.  273a  (Langedenedele,, Derby) ;  iv.  315  (Aissecoma,  Devon);
iv.  419  (Ragiol,  Somerset) ;  iv.  420  (Morthona,  Somerset).

'  Dd.  i.  26  c :  (Ouingdean,  Sussex)  ^  Godefridus  tenet  de  Willelmo
Houingedene.  Alnodus  tenuit  de  rege  Edwardo  et  potuit  ire  quo
uoluit.  Tunc  se  defendit  pro  v  hidis.  In  eadem  uilla  tenuit  Eddeua
iii  hidas  de  rege  in  paragio.  Quando  Godefridus  recepit  tunc  inaenit
in  uno  manerio.  Sed  de  his  viii  hidis  habet  comes  Moritonienait
hidam  et  dimidiam  in  suo  rapo.  Quod  tenet  Godefridus  geldat  pro  vi
hidis  modo.' Cf.  i.  341  a  (Neutone,  Lines.)*


SECT.  II.  CH.  i]  MANORS  339

sequence  of  partition  between  co-heirs,  or  the  sale^  of  one
or  the  other  among  them,  of  violent  modifications  in  their
state  by  the  forcible  abduction  of  some  of  the  tenants,*  or
by  the  forcible  addition  of  others,*  of  the  joining  together
of  different  manors  into  one,*  and  similar  contingencies.
These  variations  undoubtedly  testified  to  the  fact  that  the
manorial  system  was  not  something  immovable,  fixed  once
for  all ;  it  was  an  aggregate,  a  living  organism,  but  yet  the
Survey  always  supfKDses  that  it  was  in  full  growth  at  the
time  of  Edward  the  Confessor  and  even  before.  Now  this  \
must  be  true  of  the  material  conditions  of  manorial  life,
but  not  of  its  legal  and  economic  systematization.  Neither
the  term  manor  nor  any  corresponding  and  equally  com-
prehensive designation  occurs  in  Saxon  times ;  nor  was  the
land-law  of  the  Old  English  epoch  identical  with  that  of
the  conquerors,  and  very  important  differences  are  to  be
noticed  in  regard  to  local  administration,  justice,  feudal
service — in  a  word,  in  all  the  constituent  elements  of  the
subject. We  thus  come  to  the  conclusion  that  the  compilers

*  Dd.  i.  232  d,  233  a :  (Wimeswould,  Leics.) '  Robertus  ct  Serlo  tenet
de  Hugone  (de  (jrentemaisnil)  ix  carucatas  terrae  et  v  bouatas  in
Wimundewalle.  Terra  est  vi  carucis.  In  dominio  sunt  ii  canicae
cum  i  seruo  et  xi  uillani  et  iiii  sochemanni  cum  iiii  bordariis  et  ix
francigenis  seruientibus  habent  x  carucas  inter  omnes . . .  Hanc  terram
tenuerunt  ii  fratres  pro  ii  maneriis  et  postea  emit  alter  ab  altero  partem
suam  ct  fecit  unuin  manerium  de  duobus  T.R.E.'

^  Dd.  ii.  1 10a  :  (Norfolk)  *  Et  iiii  sochemanni  iiii  acras  terrae  t.r.e.
quod  post  quando  rex  uenit  et  postquam  Rogerus  hoc  manerium
rccepit  Brum  prepositus  K.  Bigot  tulit  de  hoc  manerio  et  modo  tenet
Rogerus.' Cf.  ii.  137  b  (Wimundham,  Norfolk).

'  Dd.  ii.  114  b  :  (Foulsham,  Norfolk)  *  Folsham  .  .  .  Huic  manerio
adiuncti  sunt  ii  liberi  homines  per  Radulfum  Talibosc  t.r.w.  hoc
testatur  hundred.'  Cf.  ii.  135b,  136a  (Hunestanesteda,  Norfolk);
ii.  153  a  :  (Fundenhall,  Norfolk)  *  FundehaJa . . .  Huic  manerio  addidit
Galtcrus  de  Dol  ii  liberos  homines  qui  sunt  in  Habetuna  .  . .  et  habent
xc  acras  .  .  .  Addidit  etiam  iii  liberos  homines  viii  acras.'  ii.  164  a
(Rokelun,  Norfolk).

•  Dd.  i.  6b:  (Darcnt,  Kent)  *An^chitillus  de  Ros  tenet  Tarcnt
(le  episcopo,  pro  dimidio  solin  se  defendit  ...  In  eadem  uilla  habet
isdein  Anschitillus  i  manerium  de  episcopo,  pro  dimidio  solin  se
defendit.'  c  f .  6c:  (Hortunc)  *  Aluuardus  tenuit  de  Heraldo.  Haec
iiii  maneria  sunt  modo  pro  uno  manerio.'  Cf.  6d  (Craie).  Dd.  i.
57  a  :  (Sparsholt,  Berks)  *  Spersolt  .  .  .  Trcs  liberi  homines  tenuerunt
T.R.E.  pro  iii  maneriis.  Frogerius  uicecomes  post  habuit  ct  fecit
unum  manerium.*  Cf.  68c  (Latone  et  Aisi,  Wilts);  256a  (Westune,
Shropshire) ;  264  d  (Melas,  Cheshire) ;  ii.  174  a  (Wadetuna,  Norfolk).

Z  2


\


340  RURAL  ORGANIZATION [essay  n

of  the  Survey  overstated  their  case  when  they  currently  spoke
'  of  manors  as  they  existed  T.  R.  £^  but  they  did  it  in  good
faith,  and  must  have  had  some  good  reasons  for  doing  so.

On  closer  examination  we  find  that  the  summarizii^
terminology  and  the  unifying  legal  treatment  adopted  by
the  Survey  were  the  results  of  facts  which  had  actually
existed  before,  though  in  a  rather  straggling  condition,  with
many  gaps  and  irregularities.  If  we  look  to  the  antecedents
of  the  manor  in  A.-S.  times,  we  do  not  find  a  single  institu-
tion corresponding  to  the  Conquest  manor,  but  we  do  find
several  institutions  working  each  by  itself,  but  combining
in  practice  to  produce  the  inchoate  manorial  systeiD  which
Domesday  supposes  everywhere.  These  institutions  are  the
hdni  or  cotlif,  the  estate  centre ;  the  bdclqnd^  privileged  land
tenure ;  the  soke^  jurisdictional  franchise ;  and  the  landricas
or  landhlaforct s  patronage^  the  element  of  lordship.

Hdm^  and  cotlif^  are  the  expressions  which  most  closely
correspond  to  mansio  and  manor. Like  the  latter,  they  lay
stress  on  the  element  of  residence,  and  point  primarily  to
^he  hall  or  court — to  the  residence  of  the  owner  of  an  estate
or  of  his  steward,  but  they  usually  extend  their  meaning
and  include  the  district  dependent  on  the  lord's  residence,
as  well  as  the  rustic  population  settled  on  the  territory  for
.purposes  of  cultivation. It  is,  however,  in  the  sense  of
{mansions  or  halls,  that  the  Chronicle  uses  these  terms
!  when  telling  of  the  ravages  of  the  Danes.^ These  ex-
pressions lay  stress  on  the  economic  and  capitalistic  side  of
manorial  life — on  the  estate,  as  such. But  they  contain

^  Cart.  Sax.  912  (Will  of  K.  Eadred,  before  955) :  '  an  he  in  to  Winte-
ceastre  to  ealden  mynstre  )>reora  )»ama  (carr.  hama),  |>set  is  |nenne
Duntune,  and  Dromerham,  and  Calne.'  Cf.  Cart.  Sax.  914 :  *  legat
veteri  Monasterio  Wyntoniae  tres  villas,  quae  sunt  Duntone,*  &c.

'  Chron.  Sax.  A.D.  963  (i.  1 15-17) :  *  Adelwold  biscop  . . .  bohte  |ia
feala  cotlif  act  se  King.'  .  .  .  C.  D.  855  ;  *  dat  cotlif  Stine  mid  dam
lande  Staeningehaga  widinne  Lundne  and  iif  and  britty  hyde  scene
dsrto  mid  alien  dam  bexewican  de  ic  habbe.*  Ct.  C.  D.  829 :  'oa
cotlife  Perscore  and  Dorhurste.'

^  Chron.  Sax.  A.D.  looi  (i.  132) :  '  forbaemdon  )K>neham  aet  Peonnh6
1  aet  Glistune,  3  eac  feala  gddra  hdma  )>e  we  genemnan  na  cunnaiiy "]
f6ran  da  eft  east  ongean  od  hy  comon  to  Wiht ;  "]  )»aer  6n  meigen
forb^iemdon  done  ham  set  VVeahnam  3  odra  cotlifa  feala.'


A^-Mk^M^  iiX.  uJ  flfti:a- .


SECT.  II.  CH.  i]  MANORS  341

already  some  elements  of  local  authority  for  purposes  of
police  and  justice,  the  ancient  authority  of  the  hearthfast
man,  the  hlaford  over  his  household  and  labourers — ^hts
hired.  This  kind  of  authority  was  not  necessarily  bound
up  with  considerable  estates.  Even  the  owner  of  a  small
one,  of  a  hide  or  carucate,  could  wield  it  over  his  own
people  if  otherwise  qualified  Let  us  notice  in  connexion
with  this  that  the  Hiwisc^  in  regard  to  land  tenure^  appears
frequently  in  the  local  terminology  of  those  times.  As  the
expression  is  by  itself  a  very  general  one,  it  must  have
acquired  a  determinate  sense  from  the  context ;  for  instance,
by  pointing  to  a  settlement  in  a  wild  country  amid  pastoral
surroundings,  the  denes  of  a  forest  district.  It  denoted
sometimes  exactly  one  hide,^  but  there  was  nothing  to
prevent  the  estate  from  assuming  great  dimensions.'  It  is
hardly  needful  to  say  as  to  the  kdms  themselves,  that  as
proper  names  they  may  have  swerved  considerably  from
their  original  meaning  of  a  klafard^s  estate.  They  could
grow  to  be  the  centre  of  very  large  settlements,  in  whicJi
the  manorial  element  was  not  prominent,  if  it  existed  at
all.  Grantham  is  a  hdm^  for  instance,  and  one  of  the  largest
self-governing  sokes  in  England. But  the  appellative  kdm ^

is  certainly  a  very  near  equivalent  to  manar^  as  an  estate.V^

The  second  Saxon  root  of  the  manor  is  the  boeUmd^  the-BodduMi
privileged  piece  of  land  exempted  from  all  ordinary  obliga-  ^^
tions  of  common  tenure,  and  endowed  with  the  rights  of
private  property,  capable  of  alienation  and  transmission  by
testament,  but  subject  to  one  of  the  two  most  urgent
requirements  of  the  time — formed  to  support  thanes  for
military  service,  or  priests  for  religious  service.  Without
dwelling  on  the  ecclesiastical  tide  of  these  grants,  so  wdl

>  Dd.  i.  8od  :  (In  Bradford  Peverel,  Dorset)  *  WiOelmus  tenet  de
Willelmo  (de  Ow)  in  Hiwes  i  hidam.  Tenm  est  dimidiae  camcae.
Valet  XX  sol.*

*  Del.  iv.  412:  (Hewlish  Champilower,  SonierKt)  ^ Himns  qoam
tenuit  Alricus  .  .  .  reddidit  gildnm  pro  ii  hidb  et  iii  uiigatn.  Has
possunt  arare  xii  carucae.*  Cart.  Sax.  460  (A.D.  854) :  *  ista  est  Ubatas
quain  .Kdelulf  rex  suo  mtnistro  Wiferwe  in  perpetuam  hereditatam
ahere  concessit  i  cassati  in  loco  qui  didtnr  Heregeardingc  hiwisc.*  Cf.
Cirt.  Sax.  472,  480.


34a  RURAL  ORGANIZATION [ESSAY  n

known  and  copiously  illustrated  by  the  charters,  let  us
remember  that  the  sidcundtnan  landagende,  the  thane
owning  land,  undertook  special  obligations  in  regard  to
fyrd  service.^  They  were  exposed  to  much  harder  punish-
ments if  they  failed  to  perform  them  than  the  rest  of  the
community.  The  confiscation  of  their  land  by  the  king  in
all  cases  of  default,  without  distinction  as  to  the  direct
allegiance  of  the  culprits,  is  a  very  characteristic  measure,
showing  that  military  service  was  beginning  to  assume  the
character  of  a  special  duty  of  landowners.

Domesday  gives  us  a  noteworthy  illustration  of  this
tradition  in  the  way  it  treats  bScland  in  its  terminology.
In  the  description  of  the  Bishop  of  Coutances'  (formerly
Edric*s)  manor  of  Boui,  the  Exon  Domesday  b^ins  by
giving  an  ordinary  description  of  a  middle-sized  tnansio
with  land  for  lo  ploughs  and  13  teams.  But  then  it
proceeds  to  state  that  to  this  estate  was  added  the  land
of  15  thanes,  and  then  gives  the  names  and  tenantry  of
those  mansiones  called  bochelandae  *  over  the  line  in  the  MS-
This  is  a  case  of  small  estates  held  in  parage :  there  was  land
for  8  ploughs  and  7  teams  to  till  it.  The  size  does  not
matter,  as  we  know  there  were  hundreds  of  small  thanes.
The  equation  drawn  between  mansiones  and  bochelandae  is
precious.  It  may  have  originated  in  the  wish  of  the  com-
pilers to  get  rid  of  the  repetition  of  mansio,  as  the  term  had
already  been  used  to  denote  Edric's  large  estate,  although,
as  wc  know  from  many  instances,  such  '  submanors ' '  were
quite  common. But  whatever the occasion,  the gloss

*  Ine,  J  I.

'  Dd.  IV.  126 :  (Bovey,  Devon)  ^  Episcopus  habet  i  mansionem  que
uocatur  Boui  quam  tenebat  Eddricus  .  . .  pro  ii  hidis.  Has  possunt
arare  x  carucae  ...  Huic  mansioni  est  addita  terra  xv  tagnorum  una
ex  his  mansionibus  (bochelandis)  que  uocatur  Adoneboui  et  ibi  manse-
runt  iiii  tagni,  et  alia  uocatur  Wermehel  et  ibi  mansit  i  tagnus  (etc) . . .
et  isti  XV  insioiul  habent  ii  hidas  et  dimidiam  uirgam  et  tenuerunt
terram  suam  pariter  t.r.e.  Possunt  arare  viii  carucae.  Sunt  vii
carucae.'

'  Dd.  iv.  407 :  (Witham,  Somerset)  '  Witeham  quam  tenuit  Erlc-
baldus  . . .  reddidit  gildum  pro  ii  hidis.  Has  possunt  arare  iii  carucae
. . .  Haec  mansio  iacebat  in  Briuueham  mansioni  Wiilelmi  de  Moione
. . .  et  non  poterat  ille  tangnus  qui  eam  tenebat  separari  a  mansione
Briuueham.


SECT.  II.  CH.  i]  MANORS  343

retains  its  value,  and  discloses  an  important  link  between
Norman  feudalism  and  a  widely  extended  Old  English
institution.  On  another  occasion,  in  the  same  Exon
Domesday,  an  estate  called  Bocland  is  described  as  being
held  by  a  thane  T.  R.  E.,  hanc  "inansionem  tenuit  unus  tainus
liberam,  and  this  reads  like  an  explanation  of  the  Saxon
name.  Immediately  afterwards  we  come  across  another
Bocland  held  by  another  thane,  and  it  is  mentioned  that  it
was  a  free  manor  T.  R.  E.,  but  subsequently  was  added  to
Bristric's  land.^  It  is  remarkable  in  this  connexion  that
the  designation  bScland  occurs  frequently  in  place-names
in  different  counties,  and  often  in  estates  which  lie  near  to
each  other,  so  that  it  seems  to  have  been  originally  used
as  an  appellative.^  '  Bocland  *  could  become  eventually
a  proper  name,  because  it  denoted  privileged  property,  and
therefore  could  be  used  to  designate  a  particular  place.  It
would  be  impossible  to  mark  any  prevalent  size  for  these
doc/and 'ttidinors,  but  it  may  be  worth  notice  that  they
sometimes  appear  as  five-hide  estates.^  There  is  quite
a  number  of  curious  places  called  Fifehide,  a  designation
which  must  have  had  a  technical  origin,  as  by  the  side  of
/liwisc  it  is  the  only  one  in  which  a  number  of  hides  is  re-
ferred to.  We  never  hear  of  Twohides  or  Threehides  or
Scvenhides  or  Tenhides,  but  *  Fivehides '  is  not  uncommon.^
It  seems  natural  to  connect  this  with  the  well-known  im-
portance of  the  fivehide  unit  in  regard  to  social  status.
The  *  thriving*  of  the  thane  and  of  the  wealh  was  graduated
by  this  very  limit,  and  so  was  military  service.

'  I)d.  iv.  369:  (Buckland  (Toutsaints),  Devon)  '  Bochelanda  .  .  .
Hanc  mansioncm  tenuit  unus  tannus  liberam  . .  .  Bochelanda  . ,  .  Hec
niansio  fuit  lil^era  .  . .  modo  est  addita  ad  terram  Bristrici.'  Cf.  £xch.
I  )d.  (1).  113  a:  '  Bochelande  .  .  .  Liber  homo  fuit  qui  tenuit  T.R.E/  Cf,
Kd^'.  ii. 2 :  '  gyf-hwa  }^nvi^ degna-sy^e-on  his boclande  cyrican  habbe . .  •'

'  I)d.  iv.  306,  353,  373,  374»  377.  390-  Dd.  i.b  gives  a  curious  case
of  three  boclands  '  by  each  other  *.

^  I  )(1.  i.  34d  :  ( liuckland,  Surrey)  *  Bochelant.  Alnod  tenuit  dc  xtfgt
Kdwardo. Tunc  se  defendit  pro  v  hidis. Modo  pro  ii  hidis.'

*  K.^'.  1)(1.  i.  47  c  :  (Fifield,  Hants)  *  Willelmus  tenet  vhidas  terrae.*
.  .  .  (In  niar-in,  *  Fifhide  uocalur').  i.  70  c:  (Fifhide,  Wilts)
•T.K.K.  -cldabat  pro  v  hidis/  i.  78d;  (Fifhide,  Dorset)  *  T.R.E.
^eldahat  pro  v  hidis.' i.  157  d  :  (Fifhide,  Oxon)  *  Ibi  sunt  v  hidae.'


344  RURAL  ORGANIZATION [essay  n

It  was  the  acquisition  of  five  hides  that  enabled  a  warrior
to  aspire  to  the  rank  of  king's  thane,  and  led  to  the  passage
into  the  class  of  twelvehyndmen  for  him,  or  to  sixhyndmen
in  the  case  of  the  prosperous  wealh.  There  is  a  remarkable
entry  in  the  Berkshire  survey^  which  shows  that  the
5  hides  in  question  were  not  taken  as  the  thane's  home-
farm,  but  as  the  estimate  of  a  district  or  estate  of  villains
which  stood  under  him.  This  would  correspond  strictly
to  the  5  hides  at  Cyninges  utwaru  of  the  famous  fn^^ent
about  the  thriving  of  the  thane,  and  it  would  be  difficult
not  to  recognize  in  the  villains  in  question  the  Saxon  ceorls
on  gafolland^  transformed  after  the  Conquest  into  villains
on  warland  or  villains  holding  5  hides  de  wara,

I  will  not  speak  again  at  any  length  of  the  Old  English
soke,  as  this  subject  has  already  occupied  a  good  deal  of
our  time,  and  will  come  up  again  in  the  chapters  on  per-
sonal status.  The  only  point  which  I  should  like  to  recall
to  mind  is  the  universal  use  of  the  soke  in  Saxon  England.
The  soke  as  a  jurisdictional  authority  is  not  less  frequently
mentioned  in  the  southern  counties^  than  in  the  half-
Scandinavian  north  and  east,  and,  indeed,  is  much  more
frequently  attested  in  those  very  shires  where  we  do  not
hear  at  all  of  separate  sokes  and  hear  very  little  about
socmen.  In  any  case,  the  villains  of  Berkshire  or  Kent
were  subjected  to  the  manorial  jurisdiction  and  the  private
hundreds  of  their  feudal  lords,  not  as  former  serfs  or  slaves,
but  as  former  ceorls  over  whom  sac  and  sac  had  been

^  Dd.  i.  58  c:  (Cumnor,  Berks)  'Abbatia  de  Abbendone  tenet
Comenore.  Semper  fuit  in  abbatia.  T.R.E.  se  defendit  pro  1  hidis.
Modo  pro  XXX  hidis  ...  De  his  1  hidis  tenet  Anschil  v  hidas.  Norman
tenuit  T.R.E.  pro  uno  manerio  . . .  et  non  potuit  ire  quo  uoluit  pro  v
hidis  geldauit  cum  aiiis  superioribus  ...  In  Winteham  tenet  Hubertus
de  abbate  v  hidas  de  terra  uillanorum,  fiierunt  iiii  et  geldaueront  cum
hidis  manerii. Hida  taini  (}uieta  fuit  sed  non  potuit  ire  quo  uoluit . .  .*

'  See  e.g.  the  characteristic  entries  in  connexion  with  the  Royal
manors  in  Oxfordshire.  Dd.  i.  154  c :  *  Rex  tenet  Besintone  . . .  Soca
de  iv  hundredis  et  dimidio  pertinet  ad  hoc  manerium  . . .  Rex  tenet
Hedintone  .  .  .  Duorum  hundredorum  soca  pertinet  huic  manerio.
Ricardus  de  Curci  de  xvi  hidis  retrahit  sibi . . .  Rex  tenet  Cherielintone.
De  ii  hundredis  et  dimidio  soca  pertinet  huic  manerio,  ii  hidis  et
dimidia  minus  in  Lantone  quae  ibi  olim  iacuerunt.  Has  dedit  rex
S^.  Petro  de  Westmonasterio  et  Balduino  suo  filiolo.'


/  \


SECT.  II.  CH.  i]  MANORS  545 ,

ceded  by  Edgar  or  iGthelstan.  If  there  had  been  a  Domes-
day Survey  about  986  we  would  perhaps  have  found  the  fn-
habitants  of  southern  shires  still  divided  into  their  original
groups,  like  the  Norfolk  population  of  1086,  instead  of  being
fused  into  the  uniform  mould  of  villainage.  The  &ct  that
no  such  Survey  exists  constitutes  an  argument  from  silence,
which  is  hardly  sufficient  to  arrest  further  inquiries.  Indeed*
the  laws  and  charters  tell  us  clearly  enough  that  sokes  were
not  the  same  thing  as  hdms  in  the  tenth  and  eleventh  centmy.

The  fourth  Old  English  root  of  the  manorial  system  iJuiidloid-
the  institutions  of  landlordship,  which  we  find  in  full  worll^'
in  the  last  two  centuries  of  Saxon  rule. When  we  read  ia
Archbishop  i£lfric's  will  (a.d.  1006)  that  he  bequeath^
the  land  at  Dumeltun  to  Abingdon,  and  gives  three  hides
of  it  to  iElfnoth  for  life,  with  the  provision  that  he  should
follow  the  lordship  to  which  the  land  bdonea.  we  have  to
construe  the  instrument  in  the  sense  that  Abingdon  gets
authority  over  iElfnoth  and  his  land  even  before  it  falls
by  reversion  into  the  hands  of  the  monks,^  and  this  Idnd
of  authority  or  lordship  meets  us  again  and  again  in  the
laws,  in  the  shape  of  the  patronage  of  the  Umdhlaf&rd  or  of
the  laftdrica. It  is  especially  pronunent  in  rq;ard  to  all
sorts  of  police  arrangements— the  following  on  the  track
of  stolen  cattle,  the  production  of  warranty  in  rqfard  to
the  sale  of  animals,  the  catching  of  thieves,  and  the  responsi-
bility for  the  good  behaviour  of  the  people  living  under  the
landlord's  patronage,^  but  it  is  clear  that  the  position  of
the  landrica  was  naturally  akin  to  that  of  a  lord  possessing
sac  and  soc  on  the  one  hand,  to  that  of  the  owner  of
a  hdm  in  regard  to  its  labouring  population  on  the  other.
Indeed,  part  of  the  sa£  and  soc  formula — its  claims  of
team,  infangennetheofand  utfangennetheof* — connects itadf
necessarily  with  the  rights  of  a  landrica. It  is  interesting
to  see  that  in  Canute's  reign  an  attempt  was  made  to  treat

>  Karlc,  Land  Charters,  p.  333  (A.D.  1006):  'and  filgan  h(  dim
I.ifordscy(>c  de  dset  land  td  byre.'
'  The references are collected  in  Liebennanii*i  Qoesary,  s«v.

liniihltxjord  and  landrica^


/
/


\


346  RURAL  ORGANIZATION [ESSAY  n

the  whole  country  as  subdivided  into  landrica  districts ;  ^  and
in  the  interesting  fragment  on  the  wedding  of  a  wife  it  is
also  supposed  that  every  kindred  arranging  a  contract  of
marriage  with  another  kindred  is  settled  on  the  land  of  some
thane,  and  is  under  the  special  protection  of  its  local  law.'
These  indications  may  not  amount  to  a  perfectly  accurate
description  of  the  state  of  land  law  in  those  times ;  they
suppose  a  uniformity  which  is  not  quite  realized  even  later;
but  they  convey  the  impression  made  upon  contemporaries
that  the  land  of  England  was  more  or  less  carved  out  into
territorial  lordships,  in  which  aristocratic  chiefs  had  to  look
after  law  and  police,  and  were  made  responsible  for  public
order  to  central  authority.  Needless  to  say  that  this
arrangement  was  not  invented  at  pleasure  by  the  sovereigns
of  the  tenth  century  and  their  witan.  It  grew  slowly  out
of  practices  of  patronage  which  were  introduced  from  the
very  time  of  the  early  English  settlements  on  British  soil —
practices  of  private  patronage  to  which  the  most  ancient
records  of  English  and  Teutonic  legal  custom  testify.'  But
these  bonds  of  personal  patronage  and  dientship  were
gradually  transformed  into  real  relations  based  on  land
tenure;  the  hlaford  became  a  landhlaford\  men  com-
mended to  his  protection  became  more  and  more  his
dependants,  not  only  as  to  their  persons,  but  in  regard  to
their  land  also.

A  number  of  drastic  illustrations  of  the  difficulty  of  keep-
ing these  different  sets  of  relations  consistently  apart  may  be
found  in  the  frequent  verdicts  of  Domesday  jurors  trying
to  disentangle  personal  commendation  from  the  dependence
of  land,*  and  to  settle  definitely  when  people  had  a  right  to

*  Cf.  Growth  of  the  Manor,  216.

*  Licbermann,  Gesetze,  i.  p.  442,  c.  7.
'  Tacitus,  Germania,  c.  13.

*  Dd.  ii.  182a:  (Haddiscoe,  Norfolk)  Mn  Hadescou  unus  soche-
mannus  Edrici  de  Laxsefelda  xxx  acras  .  .  .  hie  sochemannus  com-
mendauit  se  Ahiuino  tempore  Willelmi  regis  et  erat  inde  saisitus
quando  rex  dedit  terrain  Rogero  Bigoto.*  ii.  310b:  (Darsham,  Suffolk)
*  In  Dersam  i  liber  homo  Edricus  tenuit  t.r.e.  Ixxxxiiii  acras  pro  manerio
...  Hie  Edricus  commendatus  fuit  Edrico  de  Laxefelda  antecessori
Roberti  Malet  priusquam  rex  Edwardus  obisset. Postea  uxtlagauit


SECT.  II.  CH.  i]  MANORS  347

CCiwith  <^^^««-  '^"^  ii/Vii^r^  th^r  {Jgascdi  £tnd  when  they  could
not  take  land  out  of  the  lordship.'  These  questions  of  Old
English  law  were  of  primary  importance  after  the  Conquest —
although  the  practice  of  voluntary  and  personal  commenda-
tion was  not  kept  up — because  they  afforded  a  clue  for  the
assignment  of  pieces  of  land  to  manors,  and  to  the  settle-
ment of  questions  of  ownership.  XhcJau^rors-ol^'WiUiam
the  Conqueror  started  from  the  principle  that  mere  personal
conTmendation  did  not  atriAnnt  to  a  dependence  of  the  land  *
and  that  a  tenant  who  could  go  with  his  land  where  he
pleased  was  not  part^nd  p^^fcel  of  ^^^^][j;^O.LJnjyh^^h  ^^
paid  his  dues  to^a  Jord.*  But  there  is  ample  evidence  to
show  how  difficult  it  was  to  keep  up  these  distinctions,*
and  it  is  a  characteristic  fact  that  they  were  less  frequent  in
the  southern  counties,  where  condition  was  regulated  by

Edricus ;  Rex  Edwardus  saisiuit  totam  suam  terrain.  Postea  con-
c Hiatus  est  regi  Kdwardo  et  concessit  ei  terrain  suam,  dedit  etiam
breuem  et  sigillum  ut  quicunque  de  suis  liberis  commendatis  hominibus
ad  eum  uellent  redire  suo  concessu  redirent ;  Hunc  Edricum  saisiuit
K.E.  in  sua  manu  postea  non  uidit  Hundret  ut  ad  Edricum  dominum
suum  rediret  sed  tunc  ipse  dicit  et  ofTert  iuditium  quod  rediit  et  liberos
homines  quos  habet  sub  se  com'mendatos  tenet ;  et  ex  eis  reuocat
Robcrtum  warant.*

*  I)d.  i.  59  a:  (Lyford,  Berks)  'Walterius  Gifard  tenet  de  abbate
Linford.  T.R.E.  tenuerunt  filii  Eliert  de  abbate,  nee  poterant  alias  ire
absque  licentia,  et  tamen  commendauerunt  se  Walterio  sine  abbatis
precepto/

'  Dd.  i.  70  b:  (Chedglow,  Wilts)  'Emulfus  tenet  Cheieslaue  ...  In
cadcm  uilla  tenet  unus  tainusde  Emulfo  ii  uirgatas  terrae  et  dimidiam.
Hie  T.R.E.  poterat  ire  ad  ouem  uellet  dominum  et  T.K.W.  sponte
se  ucrtit  ad  Emulfum.'  Cf.  Dd.  ii.  119a  (Tetford,  Norfolk);  Dd.  iv.
191  (Widcfella,  Devon);  iv.  192  (Bratona,  Devon).

'  Dd.  i.  36  a  :  (Surrey)  *  VValterius  de  Doai  tenet  in  Waleton  Hd.  ii
hidas  de  regc  sicut  dicit.  Sed  homines  de  hundredo  dicunt  se  num-
c]uam  uidissc  breuem  uel  nuncium  regis  qui  eum  inde  saisisset.  Hoc
autcm  testantur  quod  quidam  liber  homo  banc  terram  tenens  et  quo
uellet  abirc  ualens  summisit  se  in  manu  Walterii  pro  defensione  suL

*  Dd.  i.  32  c:  (Surrey)  ^  Ipsa  abbatia  (de  Certesyg)  tenet  ii  hidas
terrae  ct  Willelmus  tenet  de  abbate.  Sed  homines  testantur  (^uod  fuit
terra  dominica  Aluuini  T.R.E.  et  quo  uoluit  ire  potuit.'  Ibid.:  *  In
e.idem  uill  i  Aissela  habet  isdem  Willelmus  de  abbatia  Certesy  sicut
dicit  iii  hidas  et  dimidiam.  T.R.E.  tenuerunt  unus  homo  et  ii  feminae
et  quo  uoluerunt  se  uertere  potuerunt,  sed  pro  defensione  se  cum  terra
abbatiae  sunimiserunt.*  i.  50  c:  (Hants)  Alwinus  Wit  tenet  ii  hidas.
Ipse  tenuit  T.K.M.  Hie  Aluuinus  tenuit  banc  terram  T.R.E.  sub
Wigoto  pro  tui:ione,  modo  tenet  eandem  sub  Miloneet  fuit  deliberatus
per  Hunfricium  Visdelupo  Wigot  in  excambio  de  Bradeuuatre  sicut
ipse  (licit. Sed  Hundredum  inde  nichil  scit.'


I1


348  RURAL  ORGANIZATION [essay n

Irougher  and  more  uniform  standards.  It  is  chiefly  in  the
north  and  east  that  the  discussions  about  commendation,
soke,  and  landownership  constantly  recur.*
Honours,  i  8.  The  manor  is  the  principal  unit  of  oi^nization  rec<^-
nized  by  Domesday,  but  it  is  not  the  only  one.  Manors
may  be  grouped  into  higher  units  according  to  different
points  of  view.  There  is,  to  begin  with,  the  unit  of  an  honor ;
it  occurs  already  in  Domesday,  but  comes  to  play  a  greater
part  later  on.  In  the  Survey  it  appears  mostly  as  an
equivalent  oifeudum^  in  the  sense  of  a  complex  of  landed
property  and  rights  combined  in  one  person,  and  perpe-
tuated as  a  unit  after  the  original  holder  has  given  place  to
others.  Thus,  if  we  hear  of  the  feudum  Frederici^  we  also
hear  of  the  honor  Edmeratorii  or  the  honor  Ordulfi?  and,
later  on,  honours  of  any  size  and  composition  appear  as
great  fiefs  created  for  well-known  men,  and  from  which
succession  or  infeudation  has  to  be  traced.  By  the  side
of  this  use  of  the  word  another  is  noticeable — namely,  the
history  of  a  complex  of  property  is  derived,  not  from  a
person,  but  from  a  locality  which  appears  as  the  chief  seat
of  the  honour,  its  capital  manor,  and  gpVes  its  name  to  the
whole  group.  Thus  we  hear  later  on  of  the  honours  of  Berk-
hamstcad,  of  Wallingford,  of  Broughton.^ In  these  cases

'  E.g.  Dd.  i.  163b  :  (Berkeley,  Gloucs.)  *In  isto  manerio  tenuerunt
ii  fratres  T.R.E.  in  Cromhal  v  hidas  ...  Hi  ii  fratres  cum  terra  sua  se
poterant  uertere  quo  uolebant.  Hos  Willelmus  comes  commendauit
preposito  de  Berchelai  ut  eorum  haberet  seruitium  sicut  dicit  Rogerius.'

'  Dd.  iv.  190  {i.  104  c) :  (Coldeia,  Devon) . . .  'quam  tenuit  Chepinus
pariter  . . .  et  homines  comitis  Moritaniensis  tenent  earn  ad  honorem
Ordulfi,  sed  ille  tegnus  p)otuit  ire  ad  quemlibet  dominum  sine  licentia
Ordulfi.*  iv.  190 :  (Devon)^  *  Buchesurda  quam  tenuit  Iric  .  .  .
Potuit  ire  ad  quemlibet  dominum  cum  ista  terra  .  .  .  Istam  terram
tenet  comes  cum  honore  Edmeratorii.*  iv.  196:  (Devon)  *  Honetona
tenuit  Elmerus  .  .  .  Haec  mansio  fiiit  libera  .  .  .  modo  est  addita  ad
terram  Elmeratori.*  Cf.  Wiborde;  Lege.  iv.  199:  *Lodebroc.
. .  .  Hanc  terram  tenuit  pariter  Colbertus,  et  modo  est  addita  honori
Edmeratori  quem  comes  tenet.'  iv.  201  (i.  105  b) :  (Qevon)  *  Motberia
tenuit  Wado  . .  .  potuit  ire  ad  quemlibet  dominum,  reddidit  gildum  pro
i  hida.  Hanc  possunt  arare  v  carucae  . . .  Inde  habet  R.  dimidiam
hidam  et  i  carucam  in  dominio,  et  uillani  dimidiam  hidam  et  uirgam,
quem  uirgam  tenuit  Wado  de  Ordulfo,  et  non  potuit  cum  ilia  uirga
separare  de  Ordulfo,  sed  cum  supradicta  hida  potuit  .  .  .  £t  hanc
hidam  tenet  comes  cum  honore  Ordulfi  iniuste.'

^  Feudal  Aids,  ii.  424,  452 ;  Testa  de  Nevill,  264  b,  269  b.


SECT.  II.  CH.  i]  MANORS  349

something  more  than  an  historical  reminiscence  as  to  descent
seems  indicated,  and  the  central  manor  may  turn  out  to  be
the  capital  of  a  barony,  or  the  seat  of  a  court  exercising  the
higher  franchises  for  a  series  of  manors.*  We  do  not  yet
notice  in  Domesday  traces  of  such  great  regional  organiza-
tions, but  there  are  a  few  expressions  which  show  that  honor
was  not  used  quite  indiscriminately  of  any  combination  of
estates.  Already  a  phrase  like  *ad  honorem  pervenit' —
when  A  had  obtained  the  honour — makes  one  think  that  the
existence  of  a  particular  honour  was  a  fact  preceding  its
acquisition  by  the  person  from  whom  it  might  otherwise
draw  its  name.^  Then  we  hear  of  the  *  honor  comitis '  and
even  '  honor  comitum ' ;  terms  appearing  as  an  equivalent  of
'  comitatus ',  and  this  leads  to  the  conception  of  a  complex
of  estates  somehow  connected  with  a  dignity,  an  official
position,  and  not  a  casual  combination  of  personal  rights.'
As  a  rule,  the  honour  appears  as  a  group  of  manors,  but  in
one  case  at  least  it  is  used  irrespectively  of  any  such
^roupmg,  and  in  a'^sense  vmtvc  feudum  mthtjijyt  t!^9Mi3M^
itself  mi<^ht  have  been  used  instead.  I  mean  the  famous
passage  in  the  survey  of  Wiltshire,  where  the  burgesses  of
Malmcsbury  are  said  to  be  bound  to  send  a  warrior  to  the
King's  expedition  '  pro  honore  v  hidarum  '.**  The  five-hide
unit  recalls  the  obligation  of  the  Berkshire  men  to  send  one

'  Court  Rolls  of  Broughton  (Selden  See.) :  Select  Pleas  of  Manorial
Courts,  ii.  48  ff.

*  Dd.  i.  214b:  (Clophill,  Beds)  'Ipse  Nigellus  (de  Albingi)  tenet
Clopelle  pro  v  hidis  se  defendit . . .  Hoc  manerium  ii  teigni  tenuerunt.
Homines  Tosti  comitis.  De  his  v  hidis  damat  Nigellus  i  uirgatam
quam  tenuit  Antecessor  eius  T.R.E.  Ipse  Nigellus  mde  saisitus  fuit
postquam  ad  honorem  uenit  sed  Radulfus  Tallgebosc  eum  desaisiuit.'
Cf.  138  c  (Horcmede,  Herts).

^  Dd.  i.  24Ca :  (Stafford)  *  In  Burgo  de  Stadford  habet  Rex  in  suo
dominio  wiii  burgenses  et  viii  uastas  mansiones.  Praeter  has  habet
rex  ibi  xxii  mansiones  de  bonore  comitum  . . .  Rogerius  comes  habet
iii  mansiones  quae  iacent  ad  halam  . . .  Hugo  filius  eius  tenet  de  comi-
tatu  V  mansiones  et  pertinent  ad  Guruelae.  Robertus  de  Stadfoid
)iabet  xiii  mansiones  de  honore  comitum  et  pertinent  ad  Bradelie.
Ibdcm  Robertus  habet  de  feudo  suo  xli  mansiones  .  .  .  Willelmus
f.  Ans«  ulii  habet  de  comitatu  iiii  mansiones  quae  pertinent  ad  Pennam
manerium  comitis.'

*  Ud.  i.  64  c :  '  (^uando  rex  ibat  in  expeditionem  uel  terra  uel  man
habebat  de  hoc  burgo  aut  xx  soL  ad  pascendos  suos  buxecarlos.  Aut
unum  hoinincin  ducebat  secum  pro  honore  v  hidarum.'


I


350  RURAL  ORGANIZATION [essay  II

man  to  the  wars  for  every  5  hides  on  one  hand,  the  thane's
fee  of  5  hides  and  the  five-hide  manors  on  the  other.  The
term  honour  is  significant  in  so  far  as  it  shows  that  the
comparison  was  not  drawn  with  any  chance  accumulation
of  5  hides,  but  with  a  fee  held  by  one  tenant,  in  fact,  a  thane's
fee  of  5  hides.

As  for  the  baronies,  their  formation  belongs  to  a  later
epoch,  and  the  only  thing  that  can  be  deduced  from  stray
indications  in  the  Domesday  Survey  is  that  sometimes
attempts  were  made  to  round  off  the  possessions  of  great
tenants- in-chief.  As  we  have  seen,  in  the  case  of  Eustache
\  de  Boulogne  there  is  a  mention  of  a  hundred  manors  as  the
contents  of  his  fee,  an  expression  which  cannot  refer  to  the
number  of  actual  estates  held  by  him,  but,  possibly,  to  the
number  of  knights'  estates  or  fees  considered  as  normal  for
his  '  honour '.  An  expression  is  used  in  regard  to  Hugh  de
Montfort  ^  which  might  lead  one  to  suppose  that  the  number
of  his  manors  was  also  raised  to.  a  definite  sum,  but  these
indications  are  too  vague  to  build  any  theory  upon  them.
Farm-  The  second  basis  for  grouping  manors  is  provided  by  the

wish  to  make  their  produce  fit  the  requirements  of  a  large
household.  The  Royal  household  is  supposed  to  require
a  certain  quantity  of  provisions  and  provender — so  many
loaves  of  bread,  flitches  of  bacon,  sestcrs  of  honey,  &c.
The  whole  quantity,  a  very  considerable  one,  makes  up
the  so-called  farm  of  one  night,  or  farm  of  one  day,  and  the
Royal  manors  in  Domesday  are  combined  in  groups,  in
order  to  levy  the  necessary  quantity  of  victuals,  or  to  pay
a  corresponding  sum  of  money.  In  Dorset,  Dorchester,
Fortitone,  Sutton,  Gelingeham,  and  Fromme  combine  to
render  a  farm  of  one  night.  It  takes  altogether  56  ploughs
and  114  villains, besides  9 bordarii,  xicoliberHy  and  %o serfs,
to  raise  the  revenue.  Pimpre  and  Cerleton,  with  land  for
20  ploughs,  and  18  actual  teams,  raise  only  half  a  farm  of

^  Dd.  ii.  100  a :  (Essex) '  In  hundredo  de  Laxendena  inuasit  (Hugo
de  Monteforte)  iii  liberos  homines  tenentes  i  hidam  et  xxx  acras  . . .
unus  ex  his  tribus  iacet  ad  feudum  S.  Petri  de  Westmonasterio  ad
Seringas,  et  hoc  est  testimonio  hundreti,  set  fiiit  liberatus  Hngoni
in  numero  suorum  maneriorum  ut  dicunt  sui  homines.*


groups.


SECT.  II.  CH.  i]  MANORS  351

one  night,  and  Winfrode,  Alulurda  and  Wintreboume  make
up  another  half-farm  among  themselves.^  In  Hampshire,
Basingstoke,  Clere,  and  Esseboume  are  grouped  to  render
a  farm  of  one  day.^  In  Derbyshire,  the  farms  of  one  night
or  of  one  day  have  disappeared,  but  five  Royal  manors  form
a  group  rendering  £jp.  and  6^  sesters  of  honey,  or  £AtO
instead,  and  another  group  of  three  manors  has  to  pay  £yi
and  5^  sesters  of  honey,  and  5  cart-loads  (?)  of  lead;  the
remnant  of  the  rent  in  kind  may  be  commuted  for  £\o  ds?
It  may  happen  that  some  private  manors  have  to  render  dues
to  some  great  Royal  manor,  and  it  seems  in  such  cases  that
these  dues  are  remnants  of  a  time  when  all  the  estates  in
question  formed  one  group,  and  that  even  after  the  granting
away  of  portions  of  it  some  of  the  dues  were  reserved.  But
it  is  impossible  to  trace  any  definite  policy  or  numerical
combinations  in  such  instances.*

The  manors  belonging  to  a  great  tenant-in-chief  may  be
styled  his  *  division  '.^  Estates  held  by  the  same  lord,  as
a  mesne  tenant,  would  not  be  considered  to  be  within  his
division,®  so  that  this  term  evidently  aims  at  representing
the  original  distribution  of  estates  produced  by  the  Conquest,
and  docs  not  cover  subsequent  transactions.

'  Del.  iv.  28,  29  (Dorset).  Cf.  i.  180  d  :  (Worcestershire)  *  Haec  vi
iiianeria  (Hiselie,  Lapule,  etc.)  reddunt  ad  Hereford  de  firma  1  libras  et
XXV  solidos  de  gersumma.'

»  Dd.  i.  39  b  (Hants).

*  Dd.  i.  272  c :  (Derbyshire) '  Hi  v  manerii  (sic)  Derelei,  Mcstesfordc,
WerchesQorde,  Esscbume  et  Penreuuic  cum  suis  Bereuuichis  reddc-
bant  T.R.E.  xxxii  lib.  et  vi  sextarios  mellis  et  dimidium  modo  xl  lib.
purl  argenti/  273  a :  *■  Haec  tria  maneria  reddebant  T.R.E.  xxx  lib.  et
V  sestarios  mellis  et  dimidium  et  v  plaustratas  pluoibi  de  I  tabulis.
MckIg  reddunt  x  lib.  et  vi  sol. Willelmus  Peurcl  custodit.'

*  E.  g.  Dd.  iv.  -]•]  (i.  100) :  (Devon)  *  Alsemenistra  . . .  nescitur  quot
hide  i})i  sunt  (|uia  nunquam  reddidit  gildum  sed  per  xl  camicas  potest
arari  terra  .  .  .  Et  huic  mansioni  est  addita  quaedam  alia  mansio  que
uocatur  Deneord  .  . .  Et  in  ipsa  Alsemenistra  est  alia  mansio.  Odesdiua
.  .  .  Conies  dc  Moritonio  habet  i  mansionem.  Honetona  quae  tr.e.
rcddebat  huic  mansioni  regis  Alseministrae  xxx  den.' .  .  .  &c.

'"  Dd.  i.  13a:  (Kent)  *  Hugo  de  Montfort  tenet  unum  manerium
I  stuellc  quinl  tcnuit  Frederic  de  regc  Edwardo  pro  uno  solin  se
defcndit.  Tria  iuga  sunt  infra  diuisionem  Hugonis  et  quartum  iugum
est  extra  et  est  de  leudo  episcopi  Baiocensis.'

*  \)k\.  i.  II  c  :  (In  Heusberge  Hund.,  Kent)  *Hugo  de  Montfort  tenet
(le  episcopo  i  solin  uacuae  terrae  extra  diuisionem  suam  et  adiacuit
Ncuentone  manerium  quod  habet  intra  suam  diuisionem.'


35a  RURAL  ORGANIZATION [essay  n

The  rape  is  a  group  of  manors  considered  not  only  as  a
complex  of  property,  but  also  as  a  large  unit  for  the  payment
of  geld.^  Therefore  privileged  estates  and  holdings  ex-
empted from  geld  would  be  termed  outside  the  rape,  and
the  fact  of  their  being  owned  by  a  particular  magnate  would
in  no  way  be  contested  by  such  an  expression.'  The  term
rape  is,  however,  a  provincial  one;  we  find  it  only  in
Sussex.

^  Dd.  i.  i6c:  (Sussex)  'Ipse  archiepiscopus  tenet  Odintune  de
nestitu  monachorum  T.R.E.  se  defendit  pro  vi  hidis  et  mode  pro  iiii
hidis  et  dimidia  quia  aiiud  est  in  rapo  comitis  de  moritonio.'  Cf.  17  d
(Alsistone) ;  20  c  f Borne).

'  Dd.  i.  20  a :  (Sussex)  '  Walterius  filius  Lanberti  tenet  de  comite
(de  Ow)  Salescombe.  Lefsinus  tenuit  de  Goda  comit.  pro  una  hida  et
iii  uirgatis  foris  rapum  se  defendit,  et  modo  pro  ana  hida.'  Cf.  20  b
(Selescome) ;  21c  (Ferles);  22  c  (Calurestot) ;  22  d  (Ferlega);  28  b
(Staninges) ;  ibid.,  Clopeham.


f


I


CHAPTER II

THE  DEMESNE.

I.  The  lord's  part  in  the  manor  is  naturally  called  domi"  Domini-
nicum,  demesne. The  term  admits  of  two  main  acceptations;  *|^^Sl»* ( \
it  may  point  to  the  estates,  or  part  of  the  estates,  assigned  \
to  the  use  of  the  tenant-in-chief,  in  opposition  to  those I
given over to military followers — thanes, knights, or  /
sergeants.^ Or  else  it  may  point  to  the  home-farm,  as
distinguished  from  the  holdings  of  the  tenants,  and  it  is
in  this  sense  that  we  find  the  expression  on  every  page  of
Domesday  Book. The  immediate  object  of  demesne  is  to
provide  for ,  the  food  ^  of  the  lord  and  of  his  household,
probably  also  for  their  clothing. The  Old  English  expres-
sion corresponding  to  the  Low  Latin  dominium  or  domtni^
cum  is  hired. It  is  used  commonly  in  the  same  general
sense  as  we  use  *  household '  nowadays,^  but  it  has  not  yet
acquired the  technical  meaning  of  the  later  daminicum^
because  the  combined  system  of  husbandry  had  not  yet
come  to  be  the  prevailing  feature  of  agrarian  organization.

We  have  already  had  occasion  to  touch  several  times  on
the  part  played  by  the  demesne  in  rural  arrangements,  and
I  will  refer  to  it  very  briefly  at  present*  The  separate
home-farm,  cultivated  for  its  own  needs,  exists,  but  it  is  an

^  Dd.  i.  12  d  :  (Elmstone,  Kent)  '  Ansfridus  tenet  de  abbate  (Sancti
Augustini)  yElvetone  pro  dimidio  solin  et  dimidio  iogo  se  defcndit.
Terra  est  .  .  .  In  dominio  est  una  caruca,  et  iii  uillani  cum  iii  bobus  in
caruca.  In  isto  manerio  tenet  Ansfridus  dimidium  solin  de  dominio
monachorum  et  reddit  inde  Sancto  Augustino  c  dcnarios  per  annum.
Godessa  tcnuit  in  alodium,  et  dedit  inde  Sancto  Augustino  xxv  denarios
in  elemosina  unoquoque  anno.'

^  Dd.  i.  68  c  :  (Cholston,  Wilts)  '  Chelestanestone  . . .  Ipsa  aecde*
sia  (Ambrcsberiensis)  tenebat  ii  hidasT.  R.£.  et  post  tenuit  T.  R«
Willelmi,  et  sunt  de  uictu  monialium.'

'  Thorpe,  Dipl.  571 :  (a.  d.  1045)  'and  ic  wille  ^t  alle  mine  men
ben  fre  on  hirede  and  on  tune.'

*  Cf.  Ballard,  Domesday  Inquest,  506*.

MNoc»iux>»r  A  a


354  RURAL  ORGANIZATION [essay  n

exception.  It  occurs  chiefly  in  cases  of  very  small  estates,
with  one  plough-team,  or  less.^  In  all  these  cases  the  work
of  the  place  is  done  either  by  small  freemen,  or  by  serfs  and
bordarii — villains  occur  very  seldom.  But  the  r^ular  thing,
of  course,  is  the  juxtaposition  of  the  demesne-farm,  and  of
a  certain  number  of  tenant  holdings.  A  very  ordinary
arrangement  is  the  combination  of  a  very  small  home-farm —
one  or  two  ploughs — and  a  very  large  number  of  tenants
around  it  This  may  be  said  to  be  the  prevailing  case  in
East  Anglia  and  Lincolnshire,  and  can  hardly  be  accounted
for  on  any  other  supposition  than  that  the  domanial  centre
was  a  kind  of  adjunct,  and  served  more  as  a  counting  house
and  the  seat  of  a  court  than  for  purposes  of  husbandry.
The  socmen,  and  even  the  villains,  in  these  cases  followed
very  much  their  own  economic  course,  although  bound  to
render  rents,  and  possibly  to  perform  a  few  boonworks  and
other  customary  services.^  But  these  insignificant  manorial
home-farms  are  by  no  means  confined  to  the  emphatically
free  districts.  There  is,  e.  g.,  the  great  manor  of  Thanet
belonging  to  St.  Augustine,  Canterbury.^ It  was  rated  at

^  Dd.  i.  8  d :  (Bensted,  Kent)  '  Isdem  Adeloldus  tenuit  de  episoopo
(Baiocensi)  Benedestede  et  Robertas  tenet  ad  finnam  pro  uno  iugo  se
defendit.  Terra  est ...  In  dominio  est  i  caruca  cum  v  semis.'  Cf.  Ber-
melie  (ibid.).  49  a :  (S.  Tidworth,  Hants)  '  Croc  (Venator)  tenet  de
regt  ii  hidas  in  Todeorde.  Alouinus  tenuit  de  rege  Eduoardo  in
alodium  pro  manerio.  Tunc  et  modo  geldat  pro  ii  hidis.  Terra  est
i  canicae,  et  ibi  est  in  dominio  cum  uno  bordario  et  uno  semo.'
Dd.  iv.  189 :  (Stocldeigh,  Devon) '  Estocheleia  . . .  geldat  pro  i  ferlina
Hanc  potest  arare  i  camica.  Ibi  habet  Aluuardus  i  carucam  in  dominio
et  iii  bordarios  et  ii  seruos.'

*  Dd.  i.  338  d  :  (Gayton,  Lines.) '  In  Gettone  habuit  Edid  reginaiii
canicatas  terrae  ad  geldum.  Terra  ad  iiii  carucas.  Ibi  habet  Kez  in
dominio  i  carucam  et  dimidiam  et  xviii  sochemanni  et  iiii  bordarii  cum
V  carucis.'  Cf.  Homecastre  (339  a).  Dd.  ii.  112b:  (Wighton,  Nor-
folk) '  Wistune  tenuit  rex  £.  xii  car.  terrae.  xxvi  uillani  tunc  et  modo,
tunc  xxiiii  bordarii  modo  xvii,  t\mc  et  modo  i  caruca  in  dominion  tunc
hominum  x  carucae  et  post  et  modo  vii.'

'  Dd.  i.  I2a-b:  (Thanet,  Kent)  'Ipse  abbas  (Sancti  Augustini)
tenet  Tanet  manerium  quod  se  defendit  pro  xlviii  solins.  Tenra  est
Ixii  carucis.  In  dominio  sunt  ii  et  d  uillani  cum  1  bordariis  habent
Ixiii  carucas.  Ibi  aecdesia  et  nnus  presbiter  qui  dat  xx  solidos  per
annum.  Ibi  una  salina  et  ii  piscariae  ae  iii  denariis  et  unum  mc^nom.
T.  R.  E.  ualebat  quater  xx  lib.  Quando  abbas  recepit  xl  lib.  Modo
c  lib.  De  isto  manerio  tenent  iii  milites  tantum  de  terra  uiUanomm
quod  ualet  ix  lib.  quando  pax  est  in  terra,  et  ibi  habent  iii  carucas.'


SECT.  II.  CH.  II] THE  DEMESNE  355

48  sulungs,  and  contained  land  for  62  ploughs.  There  were
only  two  plough-teams  in  demesne,  while  150  villains  and
50  bordarii  had  63  ploughs  between  them.  Of  the  land  of
the  villains,  three  knights  held  as  much  as  was  worth  ^^9
when  there  was  peace  in  the  country,  and  they  had  three
ploughs  there.  It  is  difficult  to  say  whether  the  knights
contented  themselves  with  drawing  income  from  the  villains,
or  whether  they  had  occupied  their  land  with  their  own
home-farm  of  three  ploughs.  But  the  chief  manor  is  con-
stituted in  a  very  peculiar  way ;  it  was  evidently  based  on
rents  and  occasional  services^  and  later  *  extents '  fully  bear
out  this  inference.^  Kent,  of  course,  is  practically  as  much
the  land  of  freedom  as  Norfolk  or  Lincolnshire.  But
occasionally  the  same  state  of  things  occurs  in  the  west  and
south.  The  manor  of  Wichc,  Gloucester,  e.  g.,  paid  geld  for
I  hide,  and  there  was  only  i  plough  on  its  demesne,  while
35  villains,  16  bordarii^  a  priest,  and  13  rodknights  had
52  ploughs  between  them.  There  were  \%  serfs,  and  these
usually  indicate  home-cultivation,  but  in  the  case  under
discussion  some  of  them  may  have  been  employed  on  the
mills,  of  which  there  were  four  in  the  place.*  Sapey  in
Worcestershire  was  a  much  smaller  estate,  but  its  constitu-
tion must  have  been  of  exactly  the  same  kind.  It  paid  geld
for  3  hides,  and  yet  there  were  only  9  plough-beasts  in  the
home-farm,  a  fact  which  seems  to  have  attracted  the  attention
of  the  Domesday  jurors  themselves ;  9  villains  and  4  bordarii
had  1 1  ploughs  between  them,  and  3  more  teams  could  have
been  employed. ^^  All  these  cases  would  fall  under  the
second  head  of  our  manorial  classification ;  they  are  best

*  Black  Book  of  St.  Augustine,  Cotton  MSS.,  Faustina,  i.

'  Dd.  i.  167  d  :  (Painswick,  Gloucs.)  *  Isdem  Rogerius  (de  Laci)
tenet  Wiche.  Ibi  una  hida  geldat.  Eroesi  tenuit.  In  dominio  est  i
caruca  ct  xxxv  uillani  ct  xvi  bordarii  et  presbiter  et  iii  Radchenistres.
Inter  omnes  habent  Iii  carucas.  Ibi  xi  semi  et  iiii  molini  de  zxiiii
solidis.  Silua  v  leu.  longo  et  ii  lato.  Valuit  xx  lib.  Modo  xxiiii  lib.
Ipse  teinus  puterat  ire  quo  uolebat.'

^  Dd.  i.  i76d:  (Lower  Sapey,  Worcs.)  '  Isdem  Osbemus  ^filius
Kicardi )  tenet  Sapie. ...  Ibi  iii  hidae  geldant.  In  dominio  nisi  ix
animalia  et  presbiter  et  ix  uillani  et  iiii  bordarii  cum  xi  carocis,  et  iii
carucae  plus  ibi  possent  esse.  Ibi  molinum  reddit  vi  sununas  annonae.
Valuit  xlv  sol. Modo  xxx  soL'

A  a  2


356  RURAL  ORGANIZATION [ESSAY  n

accounted  for  on  the  principle  of  what  may  be  called
the  levying  of  tribute — varied  rents  in  this  case,  for  the
collection  and  accounting  of  which  the  small  manorial  farm
afforded  a  convenient  centre ;  but  the  peculiarity  of  the
instances  under  consideration  is,  that  the  tributary  tenants
of  the  Gloucestershire  and  Worcestershire  estates  are  not
scattered  in  different  places,  but  congregated  in  large
villages.

Cases  of  more  evenly  balanced  relation  between  home-
farm  and  tenant-holdings  are  more  frequent,  however.
They  correspond  to  a  greater  emplo)rment  of  capital  on
the  home-farm  itself,  and  come  up  under  the  first  type  of
our  classification.  The  great  pioneers  in  this  direction  were
the  ecclesiastical  institutions.  We  find  on  their  estates  the
largest  concentrations  of  capital  and  the  most  systematic
combinations  of  peasant  labour  to  support  them.^  And
yet  it  is  noteworthy  that  even  in  this  group  of  estates  ¥re
hardly  ever  come  across  traces  of  very  large  home-farms.
Evidently  it  was  throughout  more  advantageous  to  leave
most  of  the  work  of  cultivation  on  the  shoulders  of  the
peasant  farmers.  Nor  is  it  at  all  necessary  that  the  demesne
land  should  lie  in  compact  plots:  it  may  as  well  join  in
the  open-field  system  of  the  tenants  and  consist  of  strips
scattered  among  their  holdings.  Domesday  Book  gives
too  general  a  description  to  afford  such  details,  which  are
well  established  both  by  later  and  earlier  evidence,  but
we  may  occasionally  catch  a  glimpse  of  them  even  in  our
Survey.*
Consuetu.  One  difficulty  in  our  reading  of  Domesday  evidence  is  to
ines  VI  ae.  estimate  the  exact  proportion  which  the '  customs  of  the  town-


*  Dd.  i.  273  b :  (Appleby,  Derby)  *  In  Apleby  habuit  abbas  de
Berton  v  carucatas  terrae  ad  geldum.  Terra  v  carucis  ...  in  eadem
uilla  modo  in  dominio  ii  carucae,  et  viii  uillani  et  i  bordarius  cum  i
caruca.' Cf.  ibid.,  Wineshalle,  Stapenhille,  &c.

•  Dd.  i.  I56d  :  (Garsington,  Oxon)  'Gislebertus  tenet  de  abbate  vii
hidas  et  dimidiam  in  Gersedune.  Terra  vi  carucis.  Nunc  in  dominio
ii  carucae  et  ii  serui  et  vi  uillani  cum  ix  bordariis  habent  iii  carucas.
Ibi  xii  acrae  pratL  . . .  Ibi  i  hida  de  inland  quae  nunquam  geldauil
iacet  inter  terram  regis  particulatim.'


SECT.  II.  CH.  II] THE DEMESNE  357

ships'  {consuetudines  vtUa€)hore  to  demesne  cultivation  in  the
combined  husbandry  of  the  home-farm — what  was  done  for
it  by  peasant  teams,  how  much  did  it  depend  on  the  help
of  the  peasants  for  harvest,  threshing,  and  all  other  kinds
of  farm-work  ?  If  we  are  to  judge  from  eleventh-century
evidence,  the  best  way  is  to  notice  the  surplusage  of  geld
commonly  charged  to  the  demesne  in  consequence  of  the
additional  advantages  it  derived  from  the  customary  work
of  the  peasants.  I  will  quote  two  cases  from  Lincolnshire,
where  the  problem  seems  reduced  to  a  very  simple  ex-
pression. The  manor  of  Holm  ^  was  rated  T.  R.  E.  at  24
geld  carucates,  and  of  these  Ulf  had  12  and  is  were
assigned  to  the  soke.  T.  R.  W.  the  successor  of  Ulf,
Gislebert,  has  4  teams  in  demesne,  and  28  socmen,  28
villains,  and  3  bordarii  have  14  teams.  The  equal  division
of  the  geld  must  have  remained  at  the  later  period,  but  the
demesne  had  only  4  teams  to  show  for  the  12  carucates,
while  14  teams  went  to  the  peasants'  portion :  the  balance
must  have  been  restored  by  the  rents  of  the  socmen,  and
especially  by  the  auxiliary  services  of  the  villains.  A  similar
case  is  reported  from  Goldesbi.*  The  geld  is  divided  quite
equally  between  lord  and  tenants — 4§  bovates  in  demesne
and  4I  bovates  in  the  soke,  which  represents  the  whole  non-
domanial  part  of  the  estates  in  these  cases.  And  yet
Colegrim,  the  holder,  both  T.  R.  E.  and  T.  R.  W.,  had  only
one  plough-team,  while  2  socmen  and  6  villains  had  two.
The  Middlesex  survey,  and  those  of  several  other  counties,
constantly  show  the  same  surplusage^  of  geld  assessment


'  Dd.  i.  355  d:  (Holme,  Lines.)  'In  Holm  habuit  Ulf  xii  canicatas
tcrrae  in  dominio  et  xii  canicatas  terrae  soca  ad  geldum.  Terra
totidem  carucis.  Ibi  habet  Gislebertus  iiii  carucas  in  dominio  et
xxviii  sochemanni  ct  xxviii  uillani  et  iii  bordarii  habentes  xiiii  carucas.'

'  Dd.  i.  370  b :  (Goulsby,  Lines.)  *  In  Goldesbi  habuit  Colegrim  iiii
houatas  terrae  ct  tcrciam  partem  unius  bouatae  ad  geldum  in  dominio
ct  tantumdem  tcrrae  in  soca  ad  geldum.  Terra  ii  carucis.  Ipse  ibi
habet  modu  i  carucam,  et  ii  soehemanni  et  vi  uillani  cum  ii  earucis.'

^  Dd.  i.  143  c:  (Kisborough,  Bucks)  *  Riseberge  fuit  uilla  Heraldi
( onutis  pro  xxx  hidis  se  defendit  semper.  Terra  est  xxiiii  carucis.
In  dominio  XX  hidae,  et  ibi  sunt  iiii  carucae.  Ibi  xxx  uillani  cum  xii
Ix>rdariis  habcnt  xx  carucas. Ibi  iii  serui  et  ii  molini  de  xiiii  sol.  et


(


\


358  RURAL  ORGANIZATION [ESSAY  n

on  the  demesne  portion,  a  fact  which  cannot  be  explained
on  any  other  ground  but  that  the  dues  and  services  with
which  the  tenants  were  burdened  in  favour  of  the  demesne
were  very  properly  reckoned  up  on  its  side,  and  that  the
land  income-tax  of  the  geld  represented  in  its  two  parts
the  repartition  of  estimated  income  between  the  lord  and
^e  tenants,  and  by  no  means  the  revenue  of  the  home-
farm  only.
Hall.'  a.  The  demesne  is  not  only  a  home-farm^  but  also
y,k  centre  of  admini^tratioiL  In  this  respect  it  is  repre-
^^■ented  by  the  hall  ^  or  the  court  {aula^  holla).  As  a  nile»
\  the  hall  is  necessary  to  constitute  a  manor,  and  it  may  be
said,  in  a  sense,  to  be  the  manor  itself,  inasmuch  as  the
manor-house  was  a  place  of  residence  for  the  lord  or  his
steward.  The  intimate  relation  of  the  two  terms  may  be
gathered  from  the  following  passage  of  the  Yorkshire
Domesday:  *In  Kirkby^  there  were  8  carucates  to  the
geld,  and  land  for  4  ploughs.  Ulchil  has  a  manor  there
(i^  car.) ;  Ligul,  Tor,  Gamel,  and  Siward  had  the  rest  of  the
land  with  one  hall.'  The  hall  of  the  latter  half  of  the
sentence  corresponds  to  the  manor  of  the  first  There  is
a  difference  in  the  use  of  the  two  expressions,  inasmuch  as
the  first  may  be  taken  in  a  wider  as  well  as  in  a  more
restricted  sense,  while  the  second  has  only  the  latter — that  of.

viii  den.  pratum  vii  carucis.  Silua  mille  porcis.  Inter  totum  reddit
per  annum  xlvii  lib.  de  albo  argento  xvi  den.  minus.  T.  R.  E.  redde-
bat  X  lib.  ad  numerum.  In  hoc  manerio  iacct  et  iacuit  quidam  bur-
gensis  de  Oxeneford  reddens  ii  solidos.  Adhuc  unus  salinarius  de
Wicg  reddens  summas  salis,  et  in  eodem  manerio  fuit  et  est  quidam
sochemannus  iii  uirgatas  tenens,  uendere  quidem  potuit,  sed  tamen
uicecomiti  seruiuit.'

^  Dd.  i.  35  c  :  (Shalford,  Surrey) '  Scaldefor.  Duo  fratres  tenuerunt
T.  R.  £.  Unusquisquc  habuit  domum  suam,et  tamen  mansenint  in  una
curia  et  quo  uoluerunt  ire  potuerunt  Tunc  et  modo  se  defendit  pro
iiii  hidis.  Terra  est  vi  carucis.  In  dominio  sunt  ii  canicae  et  xxix
uillani  et  xi  bordarii  cum  ix  carucis.'  Dd.'i.  163  c :  (Oxenton,  Gloucs.)
*  Apud  Oxendone  T.  R.  £.  erat  Aula  et  v  hidae  pertinentes  ad  Teode-
kesberie.  Ibi  sunt  v  carucae  in  dominio  et  v  uillani  et  ii  radchenisties
habcntes  vii  carucas,  et  inter  seruos  et  ancillas  xii.'

*  Dd.  i.  309 d:  (Kirkby,  Yorks)  'In  Chirchebi  ad  geldum  viii
carucate  et  iiii  carucae  possent  esse.  Ibi  habuit  Vlchil  (i  car.  et  dim.)
i  manerium.  Ligul  et  Tor  et  Gamel  et  Siuuard  habuerunt  residuam
terram  cum  una  naula.' C£  312  c  (Bruntone).


SECT.  n.  CH.  II] THE  DEMESNE  359

a  place  of  residence  and  administration. But  still  the
prominent  an^^  igipgrtant  ff ^tiifi  nf  n  man
a  hall  in  which  the  lord  carjjjvi^  anrf  ni1#., Fpr  this  reason, \
ail  appliances  and  buildings  which  appertsun  to  the  demesne,
or  serve  it  more  particularly,  are  said  to  serve  the  hall,  no
matter  whether  the  manor  be  large  or  small. There  are
mills  and  forges  serving  the  hall,^  ploughs  belonging  to  the
hall,'  horses  and  other  animals  in  the  halL^ In  a  curious
Berkshire  notice  a  wrongful  owner  is  said  to  have  abstracted
and  brought  over  to  another  manor  the  hall  and  other
buildings  and  the  chattels  of  the  estate  of  Ebrige. The
abduction  of  the  chattels — meaning  cattle,  implements,  and,
possibly,  stores  and  money — may  perhaps  be  taken  in  the
literal  sense,  but  in  r^^ard  to  the  buildings  nothing  worse
than  appropriation  to  another  manor  can  be  meant^

The  hall  may  be  opposed  to  the  soke  in  the  same  way  as
demesne  is  sometimes  opposed  to  soke.^  Complications
arose  in  some  cases.  In  Langeton,  Yorkshire,  e.g.,  rated
at  the  geld  for  9  carucates,  Torfin  and  Fingal  had  two  halls,
and  of  the  two  only  Torfin  had  sac  and  soc.  The  rest  of
the  land  was  held  by  a  third  parcener  called  Tor,  who  had

'  Dd.  i.  32  d :  (Chertsey,  Surrey) '  Ipsa  abbatia  (de  Certesyg)  iacet
in  Godelei  hand,  et  ipsa  uiila  T.  R.  £.  et  modo  se  defendit  pro  v  hidis.
Terra  est . . .  Ibi  unum  molinum  ad  hallam  et  cc  acraeprati . . .  et  una
ferrariaquae  operatur  ad  hallam.'  Cf.  177  c  (Costone,  Worcs.) ;  366  b
(Budewrde,  Cheshire) ;  268  a  (Gretford,  Cheshire).

*  Dd.  i.  203  c  :  (Alconbury,  Hunts)  '  In  Acumesberie  et  Geddinge
(Berew.)  fuerunt  x  hidae  ad  geldum.  Terra  xx  carucis.  Ibi  nunc  ad
tulam  V  carucae  in  duabus  hidis  hujus  terrae.'  C£  57  d  (Sudtone,
Berks).

'  Dd.  ii.  3^7  b :  (Binham,  Norfolk) '  Binneham. ...  In  aula  dominica
tunc  viii  equi  modo  v,  tunc  iii  animalia  modo  i,  tunc  xvi  (?)  post  modo
X,  tunc  cxx  modo  d  c  (dimidium  centum  ?)  oues.'

*  Dd.  i.  63  b :  (Berks) '  Ebrige.  .  .  .  De  hoc  manerio  testatur  sdra
quod  non  pertinuit  ad  antecessorem  Hugonis  per  quern  redamat
homines  autem  eius  noluerunt  inde  reddere  rationem.  Ipse  quoque
transportauit  hallam  et  alias  domos  et  pecuniam  in  alio  manerio.'

*  Dd.  i.  299  c :  (Kildwick,  Yorks)  *  Praeterea  in  Chilleuuinc  sunt  ad
geldum  xvi  carucatae  terrae  ubi  possent  esse  viii  carucae.  De  his
carucatis  sunt  vi  ad  aulam  et  x  sunt  in  soca  de  podinton.*  Cf.  308  a
(Temusc,  Yorks) ;  337  d :  (Harlaxton,  Lines.)  *  In  Herlauestune  sunt
xii  carucatae  terrae  ad  geldum.  Terra  ad  xvi  carucas.  Nouem  sunt  in
soca  et  iii  in  aula  Granluim.'  Cf.  368  d  (Roscebi,  Lines.) ;  369  c  (Ludin-
tone) ;  ii.  263  b  (Plestune,  Norfolk).


36o  RURAL  ORGANIZATION [ESSAY  II

sac  and  soc  but  no  hall.^  This  is  an  example  of  the  extent
to  which  rights  of  property  could  be  sometimes  differentiated
in  practice.  It  might  happen  that  only  the  demesne  in  the
immediate  administration  of  the  hall  was  under  the  soke  of
the  owner.*

The  home-farm  is  every  now  and  then  described  especially
in  connexion  with  the  hall.  In  Danish  districts  it  may
consist  of  a  single  toft,  a  fenced  plot'  In  purely  Ei^lidb
districts  we  find  it  described  as  a  viigate  ^  or  a  hide.*  This
is  the  mansus  indaminicatus  of  continental  documents,  not
necessarily  the  whole  home-farm,  although  sometimes  it
may  have  formed  the  chief  portion  of  the  estate.  When
distinctness  and  accuracy  are  aimed  at,  the  Survey  speaks
of  the  demesne  of  the  hall,  or  the  demesne  belonging  to  the
hall,"  but,  for  the  sake  of  brevity,  the  hall  may  stand  for
the  demesne  as  a  whole,  or  for  domanial  authority.^  It
might  be  even  said  that  a  tenant  was  free  from  the  hall,  in
the  sense  of  his  being,  for  some  reason,  free  from  dues  to


^  Dd.  i.  309  b:  (Langton,  Yorks)  Mn  LangetOD  ix  caructte
ad  geldum  et  ix  carucae  possent  esse.  Ibi  habuenmt  Torfin  (iii
car.  et  dim.)  et  Finegal  (ii  car.)  ii  haolas.  Torfin  cum  saca  et  soca,
et  tercius  nomine  Tor.  reliquam  terram  cum  saca  et  soca  9^  non
haulam.'

*  Dd.  i.  376  a :  (Clamores  in  Nortreding,  Lines.)  <  Dicit  Wapentac
quod  comes  Alanus  debet  habere  socam  super  aulam  Grimch^  cuius
terram  habet  episcopus  dunelmensis  in  Neutone.'  C£  Dd.  ii.  408  b :
(PAveley,  SuAToIk)  '  Hagala  tenuit  Gutmundus  sub  Rege  Eduuardo  pro
manerio  viii  carucatas  terrae  cum  soca  et  saca  super  dominium  hafiae
tantum.'

'  Dd.  i.  340  c  :  (Newton,  Lines.) '  Neutone. ...  Ibi  halla  cum  tofta
et  soca  et  saca.' Cf.  360  d  (Hacberdingham).

'  Dd.  i.  21  d :  (Parrock,  Sussex)  '  Apedroc  •  •  •  Ibi  est  una  virgata
ubi  comes  (Moriton.)  habet  aulam  suam.'

'  Dd.  i.  34  c  :  (Burgham,  Surrey)  '  Borham . . .  Osmundus  tenuit  de
rege  Eduuardo.  Tunc  se  defendit  pro  iiii  hidis,  modo  pro  iii  hidis.  • . .
De  his  hidis  habet  Godricus  i  hidam  quae  uocatur  Wucha,  in  qua  fiiit
haula  T.  R.  £.  pertinens  ad  istum  manerium.'

*  Dd.  i.  283  a :  (Laneham,  Notts)  '  In  Lanun  cum  Bereuuicis  • .  •
viiii  canicatae  terrae  et  ii  bouatae  ad  geldum.  Terra  xxvii  carucis.
In  dominio  aulae  sunt  x  bouatae  de  hac  terra.  Reliqua  est  soca.'
Cf.  Dd.  ii.  286  b  (Sutberie,  Suffolk).

^  Dd.  ii.  29  b :  (Maldon,  Essex)  '  Melduna. ...  In  eadem  i  liber
homo  tenuit  xxx  acras  t.r.e.  quem  occupauit  Ingelricus,  modo  tenet
Sanctus  Martinus  de  comite  et  alium  libmim  hominem  de  xxx  acris.
Istos  homines  posuit  Ingelricus  ad  suam  hallanu'


SECT.  II.  CH.  II] THE  DEMESNE  361

the  hall.^  This  kind  of  exemption  has  to  be  distinguished
from  the  occasional  exemption  of  demesne  land  from  the
payment  of  taxes,  which  is  also  expressly  mentioned  every
now  and  then.^

The  importance  of  the  element  of  residence  and  adminis-
tration in  the  constitution  of  the  manor  is  especially  brought
out  by  the  very  frequent  instances  of  halls  being  kept
up  by  landowners  living  in  the  same  place,  and  sometimes
closely  allied  in  their  proprietary  and  economic  relations.
In  a  very  small  place  called  Ballebi  in  Yorkshire  4^  bovates
belonged  to  two  thanes,  and  each  of  them  had  a  halL'
Two  brothers  holding  an  estate  in  parage  commonly  have
two  halls.^  Now  this  appearance  of  two  halls  is  taken  by
the  compilers  of  the  Survey  to  indicate  the  existence  of  two
manors,  and  it  is  therefore  sometimes  expressly  said  that
one  manor  has  taken  the  place  of  two  halls.*  A  singular
case  is  reported  from  Norfolk,  where  a  freeman,  possessed
of  one  carucate,  entered  as  a  manor  and  occupied  by  2%
bordarii  and  one  serf,  indulged  in  the  luxury  of  living  in
two  halls.®

It  would  be  wrong  to  suppose,  however,  that  manors  Manors

'  Dd.  ii.  125  b:  (Redden  Hall,  Norfolk)  'Redana  halla. . .  •  Ipse
(liber  homo)  erat  quietus  de  aula  quia  erat  ancipitrarius  comitis,  post-
quam  R.  se  forisfecit  et  fuit  in  manu  regis  sub  G.  sed  nichil  reddidit
et  reclamat  regem  defensorem.'

'  Dd.  i.  336  a:  (Lincoln)  *Tochi  filius  Out!  habuit  in  ciuitate  xxx
mansiones  praeter  suam  Hallam  et  ii  aecclesias  et  dimidiam  et  suam
hallam  habuit  quietam  ab  omni  consuetudine.'

^  Dd.  i.  373  a  :  (?  Bagley,  Yorks) '  In  Ballebi  sunt  iiii  bouatae  terrae
quae  fucrunt  Orme  et  Basin  et  habuerunt  ibi  aulas.'

^  Dd.  i.  41  b:  (Crondal,  Hants)  'Crundele  .  .  .  De  terra  huitts
manerii  ...  In  Ticelle  (ItcheU)  et  in  Coue  (Cove)  Leuuinus  et
Vluuardus  tenuerunt  in  paragio  de  episcopo,  et  non  potuerunt  ire
quolibet.  Quisque  habuit  aulam.  Quando  Germanus  recepit  non
nisi  una  Aula  fuit.' Cf.  62  a  (Hevaford,  Berks.).

*  Dd.  i.  II  d:  (Acryse,  Kent)  '  Anschitil  de  ros  tenet  de  feudo
episcopi  (Baioc.)  Acres  quod  tenuerunt  duo  fratres,  et  ouisque  habuit
haulam.  Mode  est  pro  uno  manerio.'  37  a:  ^Percning,  Sussex)
'  Pcrcingcs.  .  . .  Azor  tenuit  de  rege  Eduuardo  et  li  homines  de  Axor
pro  V  hid  is  ct  dimidia  se  defendit  tunc  et  modo.  Tunc  fuenint  ii
Hallae,  modo  in  uno  mancrio.'

*  Dd.  ii.  i6cS  b  :  (Harsham,  Norfolk)  *  Barseham  ...  In  eadem  uilla
i  liberum  homincm  de  i  carucata  terrae  pro  manerio,  et  fuit  liberata
pro  terra. Semper  xxi  bordarii  et  i  seruus,  et  manebat  in  ii  hallis.'


36a  RURAL  ORGANIZATION [essay  II

without  without  halls  were  impossible.  They  do  occur.  Sellinges,
e.g.,  was  quite  a  considerable  Kentish  estate  of  St.  AugustinCi
Canterbury.  It  paid  geld  for  6  sulungs.  There  was
nothing  in  demesne,  but  30  villains  had  10  ploughs  there.^
'  Platenout,'  '  Postinges/  *  Belice,'  are  estates  of  the  same
kind.^  In  Fenton,  Notts,  a  certain  Sperauoc  hdd  2|
bovates  to  the  geld  and  land  for  one  plough,  with  sac  and
sec,  but  there  was  no  hall.'  In  this  case  the  land  was
waste.

The  explanation  is  not  far  to  seek.  If  we  leave  the
Nottinghamshire  instance  on  one  side,  as  possibly  brought
about  by  devastation,  the  cases  of  manors  without  halls  are
found  to  belong  to  the  by  no  means  insignificant  class  of
manors  without  demesne,  inhabited  and  cultivated  entirely
by  peasants.  These  people  were  in  their  way  dependent  on
the  manorial  lord  ;  they  paid  rents  in  money  and  kind,  per-
formed, probably,  carriage  service,  possibly  even  boonworks
once  or  twice  a  year  at  some  neighbouring  manorial  centre,
but  on  the  whole  they  lived  by  themselves  and  were  in*
dependent  of  direct  meddling  with  their  affairs.  The  manor
could  dispense  with  a  hall  in  such  a  case,  and  the  dues  were
either  brought  by  the  peasants  themselves  to  some  hall  in
other  manors,  or  might  be  fetched  by  the  lord's  riding
bailiffs  or  stewards.  This  class  is  not  large  if  compared
with  the  more  usual  type,  but  is  very  characteristic,  because
it  leads  us  naturally  to  suppose  that  even  in  many  cases
where  there  was  a  hall  and  some  demesne,  the  interference
of  the  lord  in  the  affairs  of  the  community  did  not  actually
amount  to  much.

The  hall  or  court,  being  the  seat  of  the  lord,  may  be
called  the  head  of  the  manor  (cafiuf  manerii)^  and  there  are
entries  in  Domesday  Book  telling  us  exactly  where  this

^  Dd.  i.  12  b  :  (Sellinge,  Kent) '  Ipse  abbas  tenet  Setlinges  manerium
sine  halla,  quod  se  defendit  pro  vi  solins.  Terra  est  xi  canids.
Nichil  in  dominio. Ibi  xxx  uillani  habent  x  carucas.'

'  Dd.  i.  12  c  (Platenout) ;  13  b  (Postinges) ;  ibid.  (Belioe).

'  Dd.  i.  286  c :  (Fenton,  Notts)  '  Fentone.  .  .  •  Ibidem  habait
Sperauoc  ii  bouatas  terrae  et  ii  partes  unius  bouatae  ad  geldom.
Terra  i  carucae,  cum  saca  et  soca  sine  Aula. Wasta  est'


SECT.  II.  cii.  II] THE  DEMESNE  363

head  has  to  be  looked  for.^  It  is  even  said  once  that
a  particular  thane  is  the  head  of  a  manor,  but  this  probably
only  means  that  the  hall  was  in  his  holding,  and  that  the
tenant-in-chief  had  no  special  court  there.*  The  term
caput  manerii  is  the  equivalent  of  heafod  botl^  the
Old  English  expression  for  the  hall,  showing,  if  it  were
needed,  that  the  system  of  estate  administration  from
a  central  dwelling  or  holding,  with  satellites  around  it,
had  been  going  on  for  a  long  while  before  the  French
conquest.

3.  The  functions  connected  with  the  hall  or  court  belong  The  Conri.
to  one  of  two  distinct  sets  of  relations.  There  is  the  court
for  purposes  of  jurisdiction  and  local  government,  and  there
are  the  offices  and  stores  of  the  economic  centre.  The  first,
the  curia^  in  the  technical  sense,  was  not  necessarily  held  in  \  \
the  hall  itself:*  in  many  places  the  tradition  of  the  open-
air  moot  was  still  kept  up  at  later  times.*  But  the  meeting
of  villagers  for  the  regulation  of  their  agrarian  afTairs  and
the  transaction  of  police  and  legal  business  was  necessarily
convened  and  presided  over  by  the  manorial  lord  {landrica)
or  his  representative. Its  different  attributes as  a  court

^  Dd.  i.  166  b:  (Dcerhurst,  Gloucester)  'Ibi  sunt  lix  hidae.  In
capite  manerii  erant  T.  K.  £.  v  hidae.*  In  this  case  the  expression
covers  the  whole  of  the  principal  village.  Dd.  ii.  227  (Diepham,
Norfolk) :  the  caput  manen'i  points  to  the  estate  of  the  lord  in  opposi-
tion to  the  free  tenants  added  to  it.  Cf.  Chettlebiriga,  Suffolk,  Dd.  ii.
293  b.

^  Dd.  i.  291  b :  (Notts)  *  In  Crophille  habuerunt  Vluiet  et  Godric
ii  bouatas  terrae  ad  geldum.  Terra  ii  carucis.  De  hac  terra  fujt
saisitus  Ilbertus  de  Laci,  sed  quando  Rogerus  Pictauiensis  accepit
tcrram,  saisiuit  istud  manerium  super  llbertum.  Wapentac  portat
testimonium  llbertum  fuisse  saisitum.  Modo  est  in  manu  regis
preter  terciam  partem  et  Tainum  qui  est  caput  manerii  quern  tenet
Ilbertus.*  The  thane  in  Question  was  evidently  Uluiet  or  a  successor
of  his,  and  the  hall  must  nave  been  in  his  possession  still.

'  Thorpe,  Dipl.  542  (A.  D.  998):  *  Ic  gean  . . .  minre  fatfan  Leof-
ware  \>.vs  heafod  botles  on  Purlea.*  Cf.  Cart.  Sax.  I130  (Medeham-
stcad  record)  *  Adclwold  bisceop  gebohte  ast  mislicum  mannum  ut  on
Withcringa  rige  .xrest  on  gyrewerde  24  cccera  and  jwrto  god  gebotl.*
Cart.  Sax.  473  :  (a.  d.  854)  * ...  up  to  heafod  stoccan  . . .  of  neafod
stocca.'

*  Dd.  i.  265  c :  (Acton,  Cheshire)  *  Actune.  .  .  .  Hoc  manerium
habet^suum  placitum  in  aula  domini  sui.'

*  Gommc,  Open-air  Moots.


364  RURAL  ORGANIZATION [essay  n

of  sac  and  sac,  as  a  union  of  tenants^  and  as  a.vJU^^
gathering  for  agrarian  purposes,  are  clearly  distinguish-
able in  later  times,  although  the  court  is  not  originally
differentiated  according  to  these  various  dUticsT"  TTic
indications  we  get  in  Domesday  on  this  subject  are  very
sporadic  and  barren,  although  it  would  not  do  to  minimise
for  this  reason  the  importance  of  the  institution  itself.  It
is  not  the  frequency  or  fullness  of  information  that  can
provide  a  standard  for  estimating  the  relative  influence  of
early  mediaeval  institutions,  and  it  would  be  very  misleading
to  regulate  our  appreciation  of  them  by  the  number  of
direct  quotations  about  them.  Still,  some  indirect  indica-
tions there  are,  even  in  Domesday.  We  know,  for  instance,
that  sac  and  soc  does  not  necessarily  arise  in  every  hall ;  it
is  a  matter  of  franchise  and  grant  Nor  are  the  numerous
halls  of  microscopic  manors  necessarily  seats  of  manorial
courts,  although  they  are  certainly  seats  of  some  economic
administration,  however  rudimentary.  We  are  left  to
guess  that  this  administration  amounted  in  separate  farms
to  the  commands  of  a  landowner  or  steward  to  his  couple
of  dependants ;  while  in  other  instances,  especially  in  open-
field  country,  or  in  the  case  of  regulated  fen,  wood,  and  pas-
ture commons,  claims  and  by-laws  had  to  be  adjusted  by
meetings  of  people  belonging  to  several  manors,  and  even
townships.^  We  shall  have  to  come  back  to  these  questions
by  and  by.
The  stores.  4.  Let  US  now  turn  to  the  offices  and  stores  of  the  lord's
hall.  The  manorial  grange  is  put  clearly  before  us,*  and
it  is  not  without  reason  that  the  grange  has  come  to  be

^  This  must  have  been  frequently  the  case  in  places  like  Fleet,  in
the  Lincolnshire  fens,  where  a  very  complicated  and  minutely  defined
apportionment  of  rights  is  described  in  an  early  fourteenth-century
Survey,  Brit.  Mus.  Add.  MSS.,35169.  Nor  can  one  see  how  the  pasture-
rights  on  the  seashore  of  Essex  (Vict.  County  Hist.,  Essex,  i.  369)  could
have  been  adjusted  and  exercised  without  a  good  many  by-laws  and
administrative  measures  in  which  several  townships  had  to  participate.

'  Dd.  ii.  290:  (Ipswich,  Suffolk)  'De  Gepeswiz  et  de  burgo  habuit
rcgina  Edeua  t.r.e.  duas  partes  et  comes  Guert  terciam  partem,
habebat  etiam  regina  in  suo  dominio  unam  grangiam  cui  pertmebant
t.r.e.  iiii  carucatae  terrae  et  modo  similiter.  De  hac  terra  semper
tenent  xii  liberi  homines  manentes  in  alia  sua  propria  terra  Ixxx  acras


SECT.  II.  CH.  II] THE  DEMESNE  365

the  local  name  of  some  very  grand  mansions  of  later  times.
The  corresponding  Saxon  *  berton '  appears  mostly  in  local
names,^  but  its  use  as  an  appellative  indicating  grange  or
corn-stores  is  easily  traceable.^

This  leads  us  to  an  important  feature  of  manorial
organization— namely,  to  the  part  played  by  berewicks  as
subordinate  centres  of  manorial  life.  The  berewick  derives
its  name,  like  the  berton,  from  a  corn-store,  a  grange.*  It
is  naturally  connected  with  the  demesne,  and  the  connexion
is  sometimes  expressly  dwelt  upon.^  It  may  assume  the
size  and  importance  of  a  considerable  manor,  and  get  to
be  a  market-place  by  itself:*  this  would  be  a  matter  of
economic  growth.  But  as  a  rule  the  berewick  is  an  appendix,
a  member  of  a  manor ;  the  latter  would  stand  over  it  in  the
hierarchy  of  economic  organization.*  The  system  of  out-
lying berewicks,  acting  as  satellites  of  one  central  manor,

ad  seruitium  et  consuetudinem  regis.  £t  sunt  x  alii  homines  bordarii
qui  non  habent  suam  propriam  terram,  sed  manent  in  Ixxxvi  acris  de
supradicta  terra.  Pertinent  adhuc  ad  dominium  supradicte  grangie
duo  burgenses  qui  reddunt  Regi  vi  den.  de  consuetudine.  Et  tunc  ii
carucae  in  dominio  et  post  similiter,  modo  i.  Tunc  iii  animalia  mode
viii.  Tunc  ii  runcini,  modo  i.  Tunc  xiiii  caprae  modo  vii.  Tunc  xl
cues,  modo  xiii,  et  uillani  semper  habent  vi  canicas,  haec  terra  habet
in  longo  viii  qr.  et  similiter  in  lato  et  nichil  reddit  in  gelto  regis.'  Ql*
ii.  294  a,  b  (Gepeswiz).

^  Dd.  i.  58  c :  (Barton,  Berks) '  Ipsa  abbatia  tenet  Bertune  in  dominio.
T.R.E.  se  defendit  pro  be  hidis.  Modo  pro  xl  hidis.  Terra  est  xl
carucis.  In  dominio  sunt  iii  carucae  et  Ixiii  uillani  et  xxxvi  bordarii
cum  xxxiiii  carucis  et  x  mercatores  ante  portam  aecclesiae  manentes
reddentes  xl  den.  et  in  Bertune  ii  semi  et  xxiiii  coliberti  et  ii  molini
dc  xl  sol.*

'  Cf.  Growth  of  the  Manor,  p.  282.

'  Maitland,  Domesday  Book  and  Beyond,  p.  114.

^  Dd.  i.  345  c  :  (?  Bowthorpe,  Lines.) '  Berewita  de  Bergestorp  est  in
Bint  ham  iiii  carucatae  terrae  ad  geldum.  Terra  ad  iiii  carucas.  Haec
terra  est  S.  Petri  Burg  dominica.'  338  c-d  :  (Castor,  Lines.)  *  Castre
...  Ad  huius  manerii  aulam  pertinent  Catena!  et  Usun  iiii  carucatae
terrae  ad  geldum.  ...  Ad  eundem  manerium  iacet  haec  soca  in
Linberge.  .  .  .  Norchclsci,  etc.*

^  Dd.  ii.  137:  (Dunham,  Norfolk)  'Iacet  etiam  alia  beniita  Dum-
hain  ...  In  hac  bereuuita  semper  dimidium  mercatum.'

•  Dd.  i.  29  a:  (How  Court  in  Hurstpierpoint,  Sussex)  *Willelmus
filius  Honardi  tenet  de  Willelmo  unam  Bereuuicam  ouae  iacuit  in
Hcrst  manerio  quod  tenet  Willelmus  de  Waiene.  Vocatur  How.*
Cf.  265  (  (Merbcriej;  272  c  (Essebume) ;  273  b  (Bubedene) ;  ii.  192
(Turned  is).


366  RURAL  ORGANIZATION [ESSAY  n

and  forming  with  it  a  great  social  organization,  is  carried
very  far  in  some  parts  of  the  country,  especially  in  the
districts  on  the  borders  of  Wales,  where  it  seems  to  have
afforded  a  convenient  intermediate  link  between  Welsh
tributary  settlements  and  the  central  hall  of  a  Saxon  or
French  landlord.  In  the  manor  of  Roelent,  a  wild  repoa
included  in  Shropshire,  there  were  four  berewicks^ — Dissaren,
Bodugan,  Chiluen,  and  Maineual.  There  was  only  one
ploughland  for  them  all,  and  one  freeman  and  2  villains
occupied  in  tilling  the  land— the  rest  was  forest.  Three
other  batches  of  berewicks  are  mentioned,  and  to  each  one
ploughland  is  assigned,  while  under  the  protection  of  the
castle  of  Roelent  there  worked  three  teams  with  7  serfs.
The  berewicks  had  been  waste  in  the  time  of  King  Edward,
but  Earl  Hugh  of  Shrewsbury,  the  Norman  landlord,  had
brought  them  up  to  an  annual  value  of  110  shillings.^

The  berewicks  are  also  frequent  in  the  east,  because
scattered  possessions  are  common  there  too,  although  from
different  reasons  than  in  the  west.  While  the  land  of  a
manor  is  scattered,  on  the  Welsh  side,  on  account  of  im-
perfect cultivation  and  wild  conditions  of  life,  in  the  east
it  is  scattered  because  the  great  lords  have  not  succeeded
in  bringing  the  population  and  the  country  under  syste-
matic and  universal  subjection.  The  territory  of  their
manors  is  patched,  somehow,  of  broken  fragments,  and,  as  a
result,  subsidiary  centres  for  the  collection  of  dues  are  needed.
The  berewicks  are  carefully  distinguished  from  sokes,  how-
ever, because  they  are  primarily  centres  of  husbandry,
while  the  sokes  are  political  and  jurisdictional  districts.  The
expression  inland  is  commonly  used  in  these  half-Scandina*
vian  parts  to  denote  a  small  portion  of  demesne  attached
to  a  manor,  or  a  small  dependent  estate  with  demesne
and  villains,  in  opposition  to  the  sokes.^ In  such  cases  the

^  Dd.  i.  269  a  (Chester).

'  Dd.  i.  338  b :  (Kirton,  Lines.) '  Chirchetone ...  Ad  ipsum  manerium
pertinet  soca  haec,  Glenteuurde  etc  . . .  Hiboldestone  est  Bereuuita
non  soca  et  in  Grangeham  sunt  ii  carucae  inland,  et  in  Springetorp
dimidia  caruca  est  inland.  Reliqua  omnis  est  soca.*  C£  346  b
(Withani) ;  315  a  (Chipesch  et  Ledestune,  Yorks).


SECT.  II.  CH.  II] THE DEMESNE  367

term  uUafid  does  not  convey  an  idea  of  exemption  from
geld,  but  is  true  to  its  original  sense  of  the  inner,  or  demesne
portion  of  an  estate,  reserved  for  the  husbandry  of  the
owner;  in  fact,  the  home-farm,  or,  at  least,  an  estate
administered  by  the  steward  of  the  owner,  and  not  by  free
socmen  subjected  to  jurisdiction.  In  rq^ard  to  assess-
ment, the  berewicks  are  treated  differently — some  are
included  in  the  assessment  of  their  manor,  others  are  taxed
separately.^

As  a  consequence  of  this  use  of  berewkk  for  a  portion  of
the  domanial  estate,  we  may  come  across  queer  expressions
like  '  turning '  a  socman  or  a  freeman  *  into  a  berewick ' :  *
the  point  is,  of  course,  that  a  holding  belonging  to  a  free
tenant  is  turned  into  a  subsidiary  farm  of  the  manor.  It
has  already  been  noticed  that  it  is  difficult  to  draw  a  hard
and  fast  line  between  a  berewick  and  a  manor ;  the  first  may
become  the  latter  by  prospering,  or  by  receiving  a  separate
and  complete  administration  of  its  own.  We  therefore  read
of  berewicks  registered  or  considered  as  maLnors{promanerio).
The  main  difference  lay  in  the  fact  that  the  manor  had
supervision  over  its  berewicks,  and  was  more  completely
organized  in  point  of  husbandry,  and  especially  of  jurisdic-
tion. But  this  was  more  a  matter  of  d^^ee  than  of  kind.


^  The  berewicks  are  assessed  jointly  in  Newbold,  Derby.  Dd.  i.
272  b:  Mn  Neuuebold  cum  vi  Berewitis:  Witintune,  Bnmintune,
Tapetune,  Cestrefcid,  Buitorp,  Echintune.  Ibi  sunt  vi  canicatae
terrae  et  i  bouata  ad  geldum.'  Separately  in  Darky,  ibid.:  '  In
Dereleie  habuit  rex  Edwardus  ii  canicatas  terrme  ad  geldum.  iiib.
In  Farleie  et  Cotes  et  Berleie  i  carucata  terrae  et  ii  bcMatae  ad  gel-
dum. Cf.  Dd.  ii.  289a:  (Mildenhall,  Suffolk)  '  Mttdenehalla  .  .  .
Huic  iacet  i  beruita  ecclingaham  .  . .  Et  supradicta  bereuuita  habet  ii
leugas  et  dimidiam  in  longo  et  tantumdem  in  late  et  de  gelto  xi  deiL
et  i  fcrd.'

*  Dd.  ii.  193  b :  (Sedgeford,  Norfolk) '  Secesforda . . .  Huic  manerio
iacet  i  beruita  quae  uocatur  Frenga.  Semper  i  caruca  in  dominio  et
vii  uillani  ct  ii  sochemanni  tenent  i  canicam  et  dimidiam.  De  imo
socemanno  fecit  beruita  Agclmarus  episcopus  et  vii  bordarii  et  alios
socemannus  hal)ent  iiii  borckuios  et  i  liber  homo  i  canicam  in  dominia
Ue  hoc  ctiam  fecit  bereuitam.  Semper  vi  bordarii  et  ii  semi.  £t
alius  liber  homo  semper  i  canicam  in  dominio,  et  de  hoc  fecit  bere-
uuitam  semper  liii  bordarii  et  ii  serui.  £t  ii  liberi  homines  ii  cam*
caus  terrae  de  hoc  et  i  bereuuita  ii  carucae  in  dominio  et  v  bordarii  ct
ii  serui.'


368  RURAL  ORGANIZATION [ESSAY  n

and  many  of  the  small  Domesday  manors  were  less
considerable,  and  less  developed,  than  the  berewicks  of  some
large  neighbouring  estates.

There  remain  to  be  considered  one  or  two  terms  and
arrangements  of  the  same  kind  as  the  berewidc  but  yet
distinguished  from  it.  There  is  a  curious  case  in  the
Berkshire  survey^  which  puzzled  the  Domesday  com-
missioners, and  cannot  fail  to  puzzle  us.  Bishop  Osbem
holds  in  demesne  an  estate  called  Bocheland  as  belonging
to  his  see.  And  yet  Uluric  lived  in  that  estate  in  the  tihie
of  King  Edward.  The  commissioners  dare  not  decide,
and  reserve  the  case  for  the  consideration  of  the  King
himself.  The  conditions  of  the  estate  itself  are  very
peculiar.  There  is  no  demesne,  but  there  are  9  villains  and
7  cotters  with  four  ploughs,  a  church  and  a  mill  and  7  serfs.
And  there  is  a  '  wica '  of  ten  pounds  of  cheese,  valued  at
32J.  and  4^/.  The  value  of  the  estate  is  considerable.  It
was  rated  at  15^  hides  T.  R.  E.  and  at  8  hides  T.R.W.
Its  revenue  was  formerly  £16,  and  ;^8  at  the  time  of  the
Survey.  The  fact  that  there  was  no  demesne  need  not
astonish  us  in  itself,  but  in  this  case  it  can  only  mean  that
there  was  no  arable  in  demesne,  because  the  Saxon  owner
actually  lived  there.  In  fact,  the  wica  has  evidently  to  be
taken  as  a  dairy-farm,  and  corresponds  to  the  vacaria
mentioned  in  Spcrsolt  ^  and  other  places.^


^  Dd.  L  58  c :  (Bucldand,  Berks)  '  Osbemus  episcopus  tenet  in
dominio  Bocheland  de  episcopatu  suo  ut  dicit.  Vluric  chenp  T.  R.  E.
ibi  mansit.  Vnde  iudicium  non  dixerunt  sed  ante  regem  ut  iudicet
dimiserunt.  Tunc  se  defendit  pro  xv  hidis  et  dimidia.  Modo  pro
viii  hidis.  Terra  est  vi  carucis.  Ibi  nil  in  dominio,  sed  ix  uillani  et
vii  cotarii  cum  iiii  carucis.  Ibi  aecclesia  et  vii  semi  et  molinum  de  xii
sol.  et  vi  den.  et  iiii  piscariae  de  xx  sol.  et  vi  den.  et  ccxx  aoae  prati,
et  Wica  de  x  pensis  caseorum  ualentes  xxxii  sol.  et  iiii  den.  T.R.E.
ualebat  xvi  lib.  et  post  xii  lib. Modo  viii  lib.'

'  Dd.  i.  57  c,  d :  (Sparsholt,  Berks)  '  Spersolt . . .  De  isto  manerio
tenet  Henricus  de  Fereres  unam  virgatam  terre  et  xii  acras  pniti  et
unam  uacariam  de  vi  pensis  caseorum  quae  sicut  sdra  testatur  reman-
serunt  in  firma  regis  quando  Godricus  uicecomitatum  perdidit.'

'  Dd.  i.  175b:  (Wadborough,  Worcs.)  'In  eadem  Wadbergae  est
una  hida  terrae  in  qua  fuit  uaccaria  monachorum.  Hanc  emit  quidam
Godricus  teinus  regis  E.  uita  trium  haeredum,  et  dabat  in  anno
monachis  i  firmam  pro  recognitione.'


SECT.  II.  CH.  II] THE DEMESNE  369

Herdwich  appears  in  a  few  cases  in  a  sense  closely
resembling  that  of  berewick.  As  the  berewicks  of  Roelent
were  scattered  oases  of  ploughland  in  the  wilderness  between
Cheshire  and  Wales,  so  there  were  three  herdwicks  belonging
to  the  Castle  of  Striguil  (Chepstow)  in  the  Gloucestershire
portion  of  the  Welsh  march.  Eight  ploughs  and  11  half  vil-
lains are  assig^ned  to  them,  and  Roger  of  Ivry  is  said  to
levy  100  shillings^  from  them.  In  Hertfordshire,  Theunge
is  said  to  be  a  herdwick  of  the  manor  of  Stevenage,'
and  to  be  estimated  with  it.  In  Berkshire,  Northampton-
shire, and  other  counties,  we  find  villages  called  Hardwick?
in  the  same  way  as  there  are  Bartons  which  have  taken
their  name  from  the  berUma — the  grange.  The  derivation
of  *  herdwick  *  from  a  settlement  of  herdsmen,  making  it  the
equivalent  of  vacaria^  seems  tempting,  and  I  have  taken  it
up  myself  in  a  former  work,*  but  I  have  already  shown
that  the  term  may  be  employed  sometimes  in  the  sense  of
an  agricultural  farm.^  At  any  rate,  in  the  cases  collected
from  Domesday,  there  is  no  special  indication  of  pastoral
husbandry  similar  to  those  connected  with  the  use  of
vacaria,  while  the  descriptions  seem  to  fit  small  agricultural
farms  very  well.

*  Dd.  i.  162a:  (?  Striguil  Castle,  Gloucs.)  'Castellum  de  Estrighoiel
...  In  Wales  sunt  iii  Harduices,  Lamecare  et  Poteschiuet  et  Dinan.
In  his  sunt  viii  carucae  et  xi  uillani  dimidii  et  xv  bordarii  cum  vi
carucis,  pro  his  iii  harduicis  uolebat  habere  c  sol.  Rogerius  de  lurei.'

^  Dd.  i.  135b:  (Stevenage,  Herts)  'Ipse  abbas  (de  Westmon.^
tenet  Theunge,  pro  ii  hidis  et  dimidia  se  defendit  Terra  est  1
canicae  .  . .  Haec  terra  est  Harduich  de  Stigenace  et  est  appreciata
cum  ea.'

^  Dd.  i.  146b  (Harduich,  Bucks);  i.  329a  fHerdewiche  in
Andferdesho  Hd.,  Hardewiche  in  Ordinbaro  Hd.,  Northants).

*  Growth  of  the  Manor,  p.  224.
^  See  above,  p.  284.


s  iMooRAr>OFr


Bb


^


CHAPTER III

THE  LAND  OF  THE  TENANTS

Thaneiand.  i.  The  first  group  of  tenants  to  be  conBidered  are  those
who  stand  outside  the  fundamental  arrangement  of  the
manor,  and  are  only  connected  with  it  by  special  services.
Such  was  the  position  of  the  Old  English  thanes,  and  of  the
French  knights,  to  whom  portions  of  estates,  or  small  estates
within  the  range  of  patronage  of  the  manor,  had  been  ceded.
This  category  of  holdings  is  termed  thdMneland^  and  is  care-
fully distinguished,  both  from  demesne^  and  from  soke.'
Let  us  look  at  a  page  of  the  Exon  Domesday  describing
the  '  occupied  lands '  of  Somerset.  In  the  Royal  manor  of
South  Petherton  two  hides  have  been  carved  out  in  Straton,
for  a  certain  Merleswain,  as  thaneland.  These  had  been
made  to  contribute  to  the  farm  of  the  manor,  that  is^  included
in  its  economic  arrangements,  either  as  an  ordinary  tenant's
holding,  or  as  part  of  the  demesne.  A  virgate  which  had
been  thaneland  in  Petherton,  and  let  to  a  thane,  is  said  to
be  joined  to  Alfred  of  Spain's  manor  of  Wolmersdone.
Alevardetone  and  AInodestone,  two  estates  that  had  been
thaneland,  had  been  made  into  one  manor.'

^  Dd.  i.  66  d  :  (Laneford,  Wilts) '  In  Langeford  tenet  abbas  eiasdem
ecclesiae  ii  hidas  et  Eduuardus  de  eo.  Duo  taini  tenuerunt  de  abbate
T.  R.  £.  et  geldabat  pro  ii  hidis.  Terra  est  i  carucae  et  dimidiae.  In
dominio  est  hida  una  et  iii  uirgatae  de  hac  terra ...  In  cadem  ulDa
tenet  Eduuardus  de  r^e  i  hidam  quae  iure  pertinet  abbatiae  ad  tahi-
lande.'  76  a,  b :  (Hinton,  Dorset)  '  Hinetone  .  .  .  De  hac  eadem
terra  tenuit  quidam  presbiter  i  hidam  in  tainlande  et  poterat  com
ea  ire  quo  uolebat. Modo  est  in  dominio  regis.'

'  Dd.  i.  274  d :  (Hatton,  Derby)  '  In  Hatune  vi  bouatae  teme  et
dimidia  de  soca  et  1  bouata  et  dimidia  de  Tainlande.  Haec  pertinet  ad
Scrotune.*

'  Dd.  iv.  471 :  (S.  Petherton,  Somerset)  '  Rex  habet  i  mansionem
quae  uocatur  Sutpedret,  de  ea  tenuit  Merlesuanus  ii  hidas  in  Stratona
.  . .  quae  erat  teglanda,  et  modo  reddit  firmam  in  praedicta  mansione.'
Ibid.  472  :  (Wohnersdon)  'Aluredus  de  Hispania  habet  i  mansionem


SECT.  II.  CH.  Ill] LAND  OF  THE  TENANTS 371

As  a  rule,  it  is  expressly  insisted  upon  that  these  outlying
parts  were  indissolubly  connected  with  the  land  of  some
church,  or  other  tenant-in-chief,  and  could  not  be  separated
therefrom.^  The  motive  for  such  remarks  is  not  far
to  seek ;  the  position  of  these  tenements  rendered  them
particularly  liable  to  be  cut  off  from  the  lordship.  There
are  cases,  however,  where  the  relation  was  reversed,  and
the  thanelands  seem  to  have  been  estates  attracted  by
the  adjoining  manors  rather  than  plots  carved  out  of
the  manorial  territory  for  a  special  purpose.  What  that
special  purpose  was  it  is  not  difficult  to  see — it  was  thane's
service,  that  is,  primarily,  military  service,  with  some
private  scrgeanties,  perhaps,  hanging  on  to  it.*  This  con*
ception  of  service  forms  the  basis  of  a  curious  dispute
between  St.  Mary  of  Berkeley  and  Ralf  Piperel.  The
latter  was  seised  of  a  hide  in  Tollesbury,  which  Siward  had
held  T.R.E.,  and  offered  to  do  service  to  the  Abbey,  as  his
predecessor  had  done,  but  the  Abbess  would  not  accept
the  service  or  grant  the  tenure,  because,  as  she  said,  the
land  was  reserved  for  the  sustenance  of  the  church.'  In  so
far  as  the  service  of  thanes  or  knights  was  military,  it

quae  uocatur  Vlmerestona.  Huic  addita  est  uirga  et  dimidia  terrae.
Virga  autein  erat  de  dominica  mansione  Regis  auae  uocatur  Pedret
et  fuit  accomodata  cuidam  tagno  .  . .  Virga  haec  niit  teglanda.'  482  :
(Chapel  Alierton,  Alston  Sutton,  Somerset)  '  Aluuarditona,  Alnodes-
tona  .  .  .  Has  ii  teglandas  tenet  Hubertus  pro  i  mansione*;  cf.  488
(Stand.

'  Dd.  i.  66  c  :  (Christian  Malford,  Wilts) '  Cristemeleforde.  T.R.E.
geldabat  pro  xx  hidis.  Terra  est  x  canicis.  De  hac  terra  xiiii  hidae
sunt  in  dominio  .  . .  De  eadem  terra  tenet  Robertus  dimidiam  hidam  et
Kduuardus  unam  uirgatam.  Haec  terra  teinlande  non  potuit  abaecdesia
separari ' ;  cf.  iv.  34  (Cemelium,  Dorset) ;  iv.  137 (Millescota, Somerset);
•V.  335  (Bumetona,  Somerset).

'^  Dd.  i.  262  d  :  (Chester)  *  Terra  in  qua  est  templum  Sancti  Petri
quani  Robertus  de  Kodelend  clamabat  ad  teinland,  sicut  diratiocinauit
comitatus  nunquam  pertinuit  ad  Manerium  extra  ciuitatem,  sed  ad
burgum  pertinet.  et  semper  fuit  in  consuetudine  regis  et  comitis,  sicut
aliorum  burgensium.*  iv.  28  :  (Long  Loders,  Dorset)  '  Lodres  . . .  pro
xviii  hidis  .  .  .  Cum  his  .  .  .  sunt  in  ista  mansione  ii  hidae  de  teglanda
quae  non  pertinent  ei '  ;  cf.  iv.  296  (Taui,  Devon).

*  Dd.  ii.  18  b  :  (Tollesbury,  Essex)  *  Tolesbcriam  tenet  semper  Sancta
Maria  pro  inanerio  et  viii  hidas  .  .  .  Ranulfus  Piperel  tenet  i  hidam
qiiain  tcnuit  Siuuardus  de  abbate  et  ipse  uult  facere  tale  seniitiiun
(juale  suus  antecessor  fecit,  sed  abbatissa  non  uult,  quia  erat  de  uictu
ecclesiae.*

Bb  a


37a  RURAL  ORGANIZATION [essay  n

was  the  king's  service,  and  it  might  be  said  of  an  estate
that  it  could  not  be  separated  from  the  Royal  service,  in
the  same  sense  in  which  other  entries  speak  of  an  estate  or
holding  being  thaneland.^
Reeveiand.  Another  kind  of  specially  tenanted  land  is  the  so-called
Reeveland.  It  is  generally  exempted  from  the  farm;*
although,  as  a  matter  of  exception,  it  may  be  included
in  it.^  But  the  exemption  is  so  prevalent  that  a  verdict  is
passed  in  the  case  of  Getun,  in  Herefordshire,  stating  that,
as  the  estate  had  been  turned  into  reeveland,  from  having
been  thaneland,  all  the  service  and  rent  yielded  by  it  mig^t
be  considered  a  loss  to  the  king>  The  farm  which  is  referred
to  in  these  cases  is  the  king's  farm,  and  it  seems  pretty
clear  that  reeveland  is,  properly,  land  attributed  to  the
sheriff  while  exercising  his  duty,  in  fact,  a  kind  of  office-
endowment*  We  know  enough  of  the  career  of  the  sheriffs
of  those  days  to  suspect  that  in  many  cases  this  official
endowment  was  made  the  basis  of  private  encroachment*
It  seems  that  the  term  reevelafid  was  sometimes  used  also
for  the  holdings  reserved  to  private  reeves  in  their  manor&^

^  Dd.  iv.  46 :  (Worth  Matravers,  Dorset)  '  Orda,  quam  tenoit
Ailuertus . . .  non  poterat  separari  a  seruicio  regis.'

'  Dd.  i.  ^7  c :  (Shalbourn,  Berks) '  Eseldebome . . .  De  isto  manerio
sunt  ii  hidae  et  dimidia  in  manerio  Henrici  missae,  una  hida  fah
de  Reue  Land,  alia  de  uillanis,  et  dimidia  hida  fait  de  firma  r^[is,
sed  tempore  Godrici  uicecomitis  fuit  fbris  missa.  Hoc  attestatur  tota
scira.*

'  Dd.  i.  208  a :  (?,  Hunts) '  Comitatus  testificatur  quod  terra  Bricmer-
belehome  fuit  Reuelande  T.R.E.  et  pertinuit  ad  firmam.'

*  Dd.  i.  181  b:  (?  Gay  ton,  Hereford)  'In  Getune  tenuit  Wetman
unam  hidam  geldantem,  et  poterat  ire  ouo  uolebat.  Hugo  tenuit
ad  firmam  de  Hunfrido  camerario  et  reddeoat  xxx  sol.  et  adhuc  reddit
tantumdem.  Haec  terra  fuit  tainland  T.R.E.  sed  postea  conoersa  est
in  Reueland  et  ideo  dicunt  legati  regis,  quod  ipsa  terra  et  census  qui
inde  exit  furtim  aufertur  regi.'

*  Dd.  i.  69  a :  (Redditus  Eduuardi  Sarisberiensis,  Wilts) '  Eduuardus
uicecomes  habet  per  annum  de  denariis  qui  pertinent  ad  uicecomitatom
cxxx  porcos  et  xxxii  bacons  . . .  Habet  etiam  quater  xx  libras  nalent
inter  Reueland  et  quod  inde  habet.  Quando  prepositis  firma  deficit
necesse  est  Eduuardo  restaurare  de  suo ' ;  cf.  i.  83  a  (Chirce,  Dorset).
i.  179  c  :  (Lugwardine,  Herefordshire) '  Lucuordne . . .  Ibi  liii  hidae. .  •
Una  ex  his  iiii  hidis  fuit  et  est  in  Reueland  .  .  •  De  aliis  iii  hidis  potult
Radulfus  de  Bemai  1  acras  ad  suum  Reueland  . . .  Quod  habet  uice-
comes ad  suum  opus  ualet  Ix  sol.'

*  Cf.  Dd.  i.  69  a  (Redditus  Eduuardi  Sarisb.).

^  This  is  especially  clear  in  Saxon  doctmients. Thorpei  DipL  570 1


SECT.  II.  CH.  Ill] LAND  OF  THE  TENANTS 373

This  means  of  recompensing  them  for  their  services  was
quite  in  keeping  with  the  economic  manners  of  the  ttme^
and  was  more  easy  to  provide  than  a  regular  sabuy.

The  third  kind  of  tenements  of  special  tenure,  about  Land  of
which  we  get  a  good  deal  of  information  in  the  Survey,  is  P'^^'^
the  tenure  of  the  churches.  These  are  considered  a  neces-
sary element  of  every  full  township  organization,  and  it  is
with  the  township  and  not  with  the  manor  that  they  are
directly  connected.  The  parish  church  is  the  iun  kkrke  of
Old  English  times,  and  tenement  of  a  hide  or  two  virgates
is  of  right  reserved  to  it^  The  spread  of  the  manorial
system  draws  them  gradually  into  the  manorial  oiganization.

All  parish  churches  had  to  contribute  to  the  farm  of  their
manors.^  The  insufficiency  of  parochial  churches,  the  rise
of  private  jurisdictions,  and  the  spread  of  private  religious
bequests,  led  to  the  foundation  of  many  private  churches
and  chapeb,  which  collided,  in  respect  of  revenue,  with  the
mother  churches  of  the  parishes.*  We  need  not  go  into
the  details  of  these  controversies,  and  of  the  sources  of
ecclesiastical  revenue,  it  will  be  sufficient  to  mention  the
principal  of  these  latter:  burial  dues,  church  scot^ — an
impost  similar  to  landgafol,  but  levied  for  the  benefit  of  the
church— tithes  in  money  or  produce,*  and  assignment  of

( A.D.  1045) :  '  and  i€ylmer  habbe  ^  kmd  at  Stonham  |pe  ic  bym  er  to
hande  let  to  reflande.  And  ic  an  Godric  mine  leoe  at  Waraingield
ba  ^ritti  acre  de  ic  hym  er  to  haode  let*'  Ibid.  581  (4J>.  1050):
^ . . .  mine  refe  ^t  he  sitte  on  be  fre  kmd  ^t  ic  him  to  hoode  hum
leten,  his  time  euere  fre,  and  after  bis  time  folege  )at  lend  ben  ojwre.*
C.  D.  949  (A.D.  1049-53) :  ^  .  •  dk  msede  da  gebfiad  to  dam  gere^
lande.'

'  Thorpe,  593  (A.D.  1060) :  *  into  de  tunkirkeon  Mardingtod  v  acres
and  ane  toft  and  ii  acres  medwe  and  to  waynegong  to  wiide.*  Ibid.
574  (a.d.  1045) :  ' .  . .  and  ic  an  Memyn  and  bis  wife  andbeie  bem  \9X
lond  at  Dunmawe,  buten  an  alf  hide  ^  teal  into  ^  kirioe  ttnd
an  tuft.'
'  Dd.  ii.  1 16  a  :  (Norfolk) '  Omnes  ecdesiae  in  pretio  com  maneriis.*
'  Dd.  i.  280  b :  (Derby)  '  De  Stori  Antecetsore  Walterii  de  Aincuit
dicunt  quod  sine  alicuius  licentia  potuit  faoere  tibi  mecclesiam^  in  sua
terra  et  in  sua  soca  et  suam  decimam  mittere  quo  ueUet.'  Cf.  iL  a8l  b
(Hundret  de  Stou,  Norfolk).

•  E.g.  Ddii.  281b.

*  Dd.  i.  38  c:  (Wallop,  Hants)  '  Wallope  .  .  .  Ibi  aecdetia  cni
pertinet  una  hida  et  medietas  deciroae  manerii  eC  totorn  cirsel  el  de
deciina  uillanorum  xlvi  den.  et  medietas  agronmu' 5s  c:  (Wight)


374  RURAL  ORGANIZATION [essay  n

certain  strips  in  the  open  field.^  In  certain  cases  local
churches  were,  like  some  of  the  famous  monasteries,  liberated
from  the  payment  of  all  public  dues,  and  their  tenure  thus
converted  into  frank-almoign?'  But  in  any  case,  although
subject  to  patronage,  and  occasionally  to  exploitation,  the
township  churches  and  their  lands  never  became  the  property
of  the  manorial  lord  in  the  same  way  as  mills  or  fidieries.

Their  public  character  was  always  kept  up  by  the  duties
of  public  worship  and  the  connexion  with  the  great  cor-
poration of  the  Church,  and  therefore  the  holding  of  the
mass-thane,  or  priest,  though  certainly  in  the  manor  in
one  sense,  was,  at  the  same  time,  even  more  separate  from
it  than  its  thaneland  or  reeveland.  On  the  other  hand,
through  his  endowment  with  a  common  holding,  the  priest
was  a  regular  member  of  the  village  community,  and  it  is
only  natural  that  he  was  made  to  appear  as  one  of  its
representatives  on  all  occasions  when  it  was  called  up  for
police,  judicial,  or  administrative  duties ;  I  need  not  remind
the  reader  of  the  place  and  part  of  the  priest  by  the  side
of  the  reeve,  and  of  the  representative  villains  in  inquests
and  local  courts.
The  farm.  .'  2.  The  usual  way  of  drawing  income  from  estates,  rights,
iand  privileges  was  to  give  them  in  farm  to  a  bailiff  or
I  steward. This  was  the  recognized  practice  even  in  regard

'  Abbatia  S.  Mariae  de  Lire  habet  in  insula  de  Wit  vi  aecclesias  quibos
pertinent  ii  hidae  et  ii  uirgatae  terrae  et  dimidia  et  in  pluribus
maneriis  habent  v  uillanos  qui  tenent  i  hidam  et  dimidiam  auartam
partem  unius  uirgatae  minus.  Decimas  habent  de  omnibus  readitioni*
bus  regis  *  ;  cf.  ii.  417  b  (Clopetuna,  Suffolk).

^  A  very  graphic  and  important  notice  about  the  levying  of  tithe  has
been  preserved  in  the  Medhamstead  records.  Cart.  Sax.  1128  (A.D.
963-84) :  'of  |}am  twam  hundredum  )«  seca:d  into  Normannes  cros
man  ageaf  to  tiodunge  into  Medeshamstede  feord  healf  hund  aecere  sed,
and  23  secera  clenes  wetes.  Of  |)am  twam  hundredum  ute  on  ^am
nesse  \t,  Medeshamstede  onstent  man  ageaf  of  six  tunan  swa  man  aer
simle  dide  tio)»unge  set  aelcere  sylh  an  foder  coraes  \t  eahte  jureues-
cornes  on  weron.  ponne  letan  |>a  tiojninge  of  )>an  24  tunan  man  ageald
to  mynstre  twa  hund  aecera  saed  and  3/  &c.  It  is  to  be  noticed  that
the  tithes  are  distributed  according  to  townships,  and  acquitted  from
a  certain  number  of  acres.  Only  on  one  occasion  the  duty  is  laid  on
the  plough.

'  Dd.  i.  58  b :  (Waltham,  Berks)  '  Episcopus  Dunelmensis  tenet
Waltham  in  elemosina.'


xrr.ll.CH.  Ill] LAND  OF  THE  TENANTS 375

income  derived  from  the  highest  dignities  in  the  realm.
'e  possess,  for  instance,  interesting  notices  about  the  fanned
les  of  the  counties  of  Oxford  and  Northampton.^  Both
e  said  to  be  commutation  sums  for  a  farm  of  3  nights,
id  yet  Oxfordshire  pays  £150,  and  £25  by  weight  for
igmentation,  while  Northamptonshire  pays  only  £30,
be  solution  of  the  difficulty  seems  to  be  that  in  the  second
ac  the  ^£30  by  wdght  is  also  augmentation,  while  the
mi  of  3  nights  is  reckoned  separately,  and  either  paid

kind  or  assumed  to  be  known.  There  is  a  separate
lyment  of  ^30  for  the  borough  of  Oxford,  and  £%o  for
e  r^ht  of  coinage  of  the  Oxford  mint  The  borough  of
cnthampton  pays  £30  los.  But  this  sum  goes  to  the
icriff,  and  is  not  included  in  the  farm.  A  commutation
kyment  is  made  instead  of  the  feeding  of  the  king's  d<^  in
)th  cases,  and  it  reaches  in  Oxfordshire  the  considerable
im  of  ;fx4,  while  in  Northamptonshire  its  amount  is  even
rgcr,  £43.  The  presentation  of  a  hawk  is  redeemed  in
ith  cases  with  £10,  30  shillings  have  to  be  given  instead
'  a  pack-horse,  and  20  shillings  more  are  paid  in  Northants
stead  of  a  hunting  horse.  The  queen  received  100  shillings
'gfrsvma  in  Oxfordshire,  a  custom  which  does  not  occur

Northants,  where,  on  the  other  hand,  there  is  a  special
xount  with  the  farmer  in  regard  to  the  estates  of  Queen
dith,  the  Confessor's  widow,  which  are  valued  at  £^0,
here  is  a  payment  of  4  shillings  in  Oxfordshire  for  arms,
id  30  shillings  in  Northants  for  alms ;  6  sesters  of  honey,
id  15  pence  as  an  equivalent  of  a  customary  rent  in

'  Dd.  i.  1 54  d  :  '  Comitatus  Oxcneforde  rcddit  finnam  trium  noctium
ic  est  cl  Ubras.  De  Augmento  xxv  libras  ad  pondus.  De  Burgo  xx
iras  ad  pondus.  De  moneta  xx  libras  denanos  de  xx  in  ora.  Ad
ma  iiii  solidos.  De  Kersuma  reginu  c  solidos  ad  numenun,  pro
idpitre  x  libras,  pro  summario  xx  solidos,  pro  cauibus  xxiii  liraas
marios  de  xx  in  ora,  et  vi  sext^a  mellis  et  xv  denarios  de  con-
letudinc.'  Dd.  i.  2193:  '  North  an  tone  scire  reddit  firmam  trium
Mrduin  XXX  libras  ad  pondus.  Ad  canes  xlii  libras  albas  de  xx  in  ora.
e  dono  reginae  et  de  feno  x  libras  et  v  oras.  De  accipitre  x  libras.
e  summaiio  xx  solidos.  De  elemosina  xx  solidos.  De  equo  uenaloris
c  solidos.  De  Manerio  Eddid  reginae  xl  libias,  De  Cliue  z  libns.
urgenses  de  Hantone  reddunt  uicecomiti  per  annum  xxx  librai  et
solidos. Hoc  pertineC  ad  firmam  ipsius.'


376  RURAL  ORGANIZATION [essay  n

honey,  are  supplied  by  Oxfordshire,  and  do  not  Bppcar  io
Northants.  The  general  agreement  in  both  cases  is  vcfy
striking,  although  there  are  small  variations  of  local  custom.
The  main  point  was  the  commutation  of  the  food-farm  into
a  payment  of  ;{^5o,  and  the  buying-ofTof  the  feeding  of  dogs
and  other  customary  dues  connected  with  hunting  pfogre8se&
Altogether,  the  stamp  of  the  original  arrangement  of  rents
in  kmd  is  manifest.  A  collector,  for  example  the  Sheriff,
would  have  to  keep  an  account  with  the  Treasury  about
the  paying-in  of  the  various  dues,  and  to  charge  remiss
taxpayers  for  the  deficient  sums.  The  expression  fimta
might  be  used  in  such  a  case  in  r^[ard  to  consolidated
customary  payments.  But  there  might  be  also  an  s^^ree-
ment  with  a  farmer  for  the  whole  amount,  in  which  case
he  would  be  responsible  for  the  whole  sum,  and  would  be
left  to  seek  compensation  either  in  a  certain  percentage
ceded  to  him  according  to  bai^in,  with  eventual  remissions
in  the  case  of  gross  deficiencies  in  the  payment  of  the  taxes.
This  was  the  method  used  for  the  recovery  of  sums  fixed
once  for  alL^  If,  on  the  contrary,  the  sums  to  be  roidered
were  not  consolidated,  but  flowed  according  tocircum8tance%
as,  for  example,  in  the  case  of  proceeds  of  jurisdiction  and
fines,  the  common  practice  was  to  farm  these  proceeds  at
a  lump  sum,  and  to  leave  the  farmer  to  collect  as  much
as  he  could  in  excess — a  detestable  system,  directly  inciting
to  extortions.  The  references  to  the  farms  of  Ro)^  rights
in  Shropshire  and  in  the  city  of  Chester  allude  to  such
^arrangements.^  The  term  firma  may  indicate  both  the
J  income  drawn  by  the  king  or  by  a  lord  from  a  province,
^  a  city,  a  manor ;  and  the  sources  of  their  income. In  the

^  The  Pipe  Roll  accounts  are  rendered  on  this  basis.

'  Dd.  i.  2^4 a:  (Shrewsbury)  '  Ipse  comes  Rogerius  tenet  de  rqpe
ciuitatem  Sciropesberie  et  totum  comitatum  et  totum  dominium  quod
rex  Edwardus  ibi  habebat  cum  xii  maneriis  quod  ipse  rcpc  tenebat  cum
Ivii  Bereuuichis  ibi  pertinentibus  et  alios  (He)  xi  maneria  habet  idem
comes  in  eadem  Scira.  Inter  totum,  idest  ciuitatem,  ethundredam,  et
placita  comitatus  reddunt  ccc  libras  et  cxv  solidos  de  firma.'  i.  262  d :
(Chester)  *  Hanc  ciuitatem  Mundret  tenuit  de  comite  pro  Ixx  libris  el
i  marka  auri.  Ipse  habuit  ad  firmam  {)ro  1  libris  et  i  marka  auri  omnia
placita  comitis  in  comitatu  et  Hundretis  preter  Inglefeld.'


ffiCT.  n.  CH.  Ill] LAND  OF  THE  TENANTS 377

list  sense  we  are  told,  for  example^  that  the  king  receives
C375  in  farm  from  Balduin  for  the  county  of  Devon,  and
CioS  from  Goscelin  for  the  estates  of  Queen  £dith»  and
C%4  from  Ranald  for  the  land  of  Ordulf.^  In  the  second
at  hear  that  certain  estates  or  sources  of  income  are  appro-
mated  to  the  farm,^  or,  on  the  contrary,  abstracted  from
t  by  officials.^  From  this  second  point  of  view  there  may
yc  mention  of  hides  belonging  to  a  particular  farm.^  It
¥as  important  to  know  not  only  to  whom  a  farm  had  to  be
>aid,  but  also  in  what  pkice  it  had  to  be  rendered.  The
aistomary  arrangement  and  the  tendency  towards  con-
necting all  obligations  with  real  objects,  and  of  turning
hem  as  much  as  possible  into  real  rights,  led  to  the  locali-
sation of  the  firma^  to  the  concentration  of  dues  into
XMistant  groups  attached  to  certain  manorial  centres.  Such
i  group  was  formed,  for  example,  around  the  Royal  manor
>f  Reading  in  Berkshire.^  In  consequence  of  a  further
extension  of  the  meaning  of  the  term,  we  find  that  freemen
ire  sometimes  said  to  be  outside  any  farm,  in  the  sense
>f  being  independent  of  any  manorial  oiganization,  although
loubtless  they  would  be  subject  to  the  dues  of  the  hundred
ind  of  the  shire,  thus  appertaining  to  the  farm  of  the
lundred  or  of  the  county.  The  great  point  was  that  they
lid  not  belong  to  any  of  the  king's  manors,  and  were  only

*  Dd.  iv.  90  (Devon).

*  Dd.  i.  58  a:  (Pangbourne,  Berks)  'Pandebome  iacuit  in  fimia
r.  R.  £.  et  post  tenuit  Aluuoldus  Camerarius.  Sed  hundredum  nescit
)uoinodo  habuit.  Frogerius  postea  misit  in  firma  regis  absque  placito
5t  lege.'

*  Dd.  i.  31  b :  (Titing,  Surrey)  '  Ipse  episcopus  (Osbera)  tenet
Fetinges.  Elmer  uenator  tenuit  T.  R.  £.  Tunc  se  defendit  pro  una
tiida  et  modo  similiter.  Terra  est  ii  carucis.  In  dominio  est  una
::aruca  et  unus  uillanus  et  vi  bordarii  cum  i  caruca.  T.  R.  £.  et  post
aaluit  ill  lib.  Modo  xl  sol.  Homines  de  hundredo  testantur  quod
prestitum  fuit  istud  manerium  per  uicecomitem  extra  firmam  regis
Edwardi  et  quod  Osbemus  episcopus  non  habuit  hoc  manerium  T.R.E.'
Zi,  Dd.  i.  57  c  (Cheneteberie,  Berks).

*  Dd.  i.  72  c :  (Foxley,  Wiltshire)  *  Foxelege  . . .  Idem  Rogerius  (de
Berchelai)  tenet  i  hidam  dimidiam  uirgatam  minus  de  dominica  firma
ie  Cepeham.'  Cf.  i.  184a:  (Hertfordshire)  ^Isdem  Rogerius  tenet
inam  hidam  de  firma  Maurdine  manerii  regis.'

*  Dd.  i.  57  b:  (Finchampstead,  Berks)  ^  Modo  non  geldit  sed  reddit
&rmam  in  Radinges.'


378  RURAL  ORGANIZATION [essay  ii

under  the  custody  of  the  sheriflf.^  It  must  be  added  that
even  when  freemen  were  added  to  the  farm  of  a  manor
their  dues  were  mostly  reckoned  up  separately  from  those
of  the  rest  of  the  estates.^  In  a  Herefordshire  instance  it
appears  that  a  manor  estimated  at  4  hides  T.R.W.  was  not
put  to  farm  T.R.E.,  so  that  it  was  not  known  what  its  value
was  at  that  time.  This  is  hardly  to  be  explained  by  inde-
pendence of  former  holders,  but  rather  by  the  unsettled
condition  of  the  district,  which  did  not  admit  of  a  fixation
of  dues,  or  of  leasing  to  bailiffs.^
Agree-  In  regard  to  the  ways  in  which  farms  were  disposed  of,

aiK^atfarm.  I  should  like  to  refer  to  two  characteristic  instances.  Oger
holds  an  estate  of  St.  Guthlac  in  Repinghale.  It  used  to
belong  to  the  dominical  farm  of  the  monks,  and  Abbot
Ulchel  had  commended  it  to  farm  to  Hereward  by  yearly
leases.^  This  short  entry  implies  a  great  deal.  There  was
a  dispute  between  the  monastery  and  a  lay  lord  who  had
seized  the  land.  The  estate  in  question  was  included  in
that  portion  of  the  monastery's  land  which  was  assigned  to
the  use  of  the  monks  themselves.  'De  dominica  finna
monachorum  *  corresponds  here  to  the  otherwise  conunon
expression  '  de  victu  monachorum ',  as  opposed  to  the  '  terra
militum ',  or  *  tainland ',  the  estates  conferred  on  soldiers.


^  Dd.  ii.  272 :  (Norfolk)  '  Isti  sunt  liberi  homines  t.r.e.  ad  nullam
iirmam  pertinentes  quos  Almarus  custodit  qui  additi  sunt  ad  finnam
T.R.W.  In  Burc  tenuit  iste  Guert  libere  t.r.e.  Ix  acras  terre . .  •  et
viii  liberos  homines  sub  eo  de  xxvii  acris  terre  . .  .  Tunc  ualuit  x  soL
modo  XX  sol.  in  firma  Caluestune  cui  non  pertinebant  et  Rogerus  fedt
prepositum.  £t  in  Rothbfuesbei  tenuit  isdem  Almarus  viii  liberos
homines  . . .  Tunc  ualuit  iiii  sol.  modo  viii  in  supradicta  firma.  Sed
t.r.e.  non  pertinerunt  et  ibi  sunt  additi.*

'  Dd.  ii.  129  b:  (Wintcrton,  Norfolk)  *  In  Wintrctuna  i  liber  homo
X  acras  terrae,  appretiatum  cum  liberis  hominibus  in  Walessam.'  Cf.
ii.  175  (Sutherlingaham,  Norfolk).

'  Dd.  i.  179  c :  (Lugwardine,  Herefordshire) '  Rex  tenet  Lucuordne.
Rex  Edwardus  tenuit.  Ibi  iiii  hidae.  In  dominie  sunt  iii  carucae  •  •  •
Hoc  manerium  reddit  x  libras  modo  de  albis  denariis  et  unam  undam
auri  T.  R.  £.  non  fuit  positum  ad  iirmam  et  ideo  ignoratur  quantum
tunc  ualuit.'

*  Dd.  i.  377  b  :  (Clamores  in  Chetsteuen,  Lines.) '  TerramS.  Guthlad
quam  tenet  Ogerius  in  Repinghsde  dicunt  fuisse  dominicam  firmam
monachorum,  et  Vlchel  abbatem  commendasse  eam  ad  firmam  Here-
uuardo  sicut  inter  eos  conueniret  unoquoque  anno.'


SECT.  II.  CH.  Ill] LAND  OF  THE  TENANTS 379

A  more  complicated  story  is  told  in  the  description  of
Bergholt  in  Suffolk.  The  manor,  with  the  soke  of  a  hundred
and  a  half  appertaining  to  it,  rendered  In  the  reign  of  King
Edward  £24.  To  this  farm  were  added  two  manors  in  Vert
rendering  £g.  In  the  reign  of  King  William,  Robert  Malet
had  it  first,  and  then  Bergholt  with  all  the  other  items
rendered  ;f  60  by  weight,  and  £S  by  tale  as  gtrsmma}
Then  it  came  into  the  hands  of  Roger  Bigod,  who  asserts
that  he  paid  for  it,  in  addition  to  the  price  already  stated,
40  shillings  by  tale,  and  one  mark  geld.  But  the  sheriff,
Aluric  de  Wanz,  who  took  it  over  last,  maintains  that  Bigod
paid  exactly  the  same  sum  as  Roger  Malet.  Roger  Bigod
offers  to  prove  his  assertion  by  the  evidence 'of  the  men
who  had  entered  into  agreements  with  him — ^his  sub-
bailiffs.  At  the  time  of  the  Survey  the  whole  complex  of
estates  and  rights  was  held  by  Aluric  for  £60  by  weight.
There  was  a  convention  between  him  and  the  King  that  he
should  render  to  the  King  £60  out  of  the  profits  of  the
estates,  and  he  calls  the  King  to  warrant  that  it  was  so.
And  he  adds  that  it  does  not  rest  with  him  that  he  does
not  render  that  profit  (or  Bergholt  does  not  3deld  such  pro-
fits).^ The  case  arose  evidently  out  of  the  jealousy  between
different  bailiffs.  The  former  sheriff,  Roger  Bigod,  boasts
of  having  paid  much  more  to  the  King  than  the  actual  one,
Aluric  de  Wanz,  and  even  on  the  latter's  own  showing  the
farm  has  declined  to  some  extent It  is  much  larger,  how-

*  Cf.  Dd.  i.  5b:  (Adisliain,  Kent)  Mpse  Archiepiicopus  tenet
Edesham  pro  xvii  sohns  se  defendit .  •  •  Tolimi  manerium  T.  R.  £•
ualebat  xl  lib.  Quando  recepit  similiter.  Mode  reddit  zlvi  libras  et
xvi  solidos  et  iiii  denarios  et  archiepiscopo  c  solidoi  de  Gartufme*

*  Dd.ii.aS;:  (Bergholt,  Suffolk)  ^BercoU  cum  hoc  quod  etpertiiiebat
et  cum  soca  de  hundredo  et  dimidio  reddebat  t.  r.  e.  xxiiii  lims*  £t
duo  supradicta  maneria  Vert  que  huic  firme  addita  sunt  teddebant
tunc  ix  libras,  et  quando  Robertus  Malet  habuit  reddebat  totum  simol
Ix  libras  ad  pensum  et  viii  libras  ad  numerum  de  gersuma,  eC  tantum-
deni  modo  reddebat  Rogero  Bigoto  ut  ipse  pvepositns  dicit,  sod
Kogerus  dicit  quod  reddebat  plus  xl  solicios  ad  numerum  et  unam
marcam  auri.  Sed  Aluricus  prepositus  contradicit  et  Rogerus  unit
probare  per  illos  homines  qui  ad  suas  conuentiones  fiierunt.  Modo
reddit  ille  Aluricus  Ix  libras  ad  p(»sum  et  sic  tenet  de  rege  tali
conuentione  quod  debet  facere  regi  Ix  lib.  de  proficuo,  et  ex  hoc
reuocat  regem  ad  warantam  sic  ipse  dicit,  et  dicit  etiam  quod  noo
remanet  in  eo  ciuod  non  Cacit  illud  proficuum.'


38o  RURAL  ORGANIZATION [essay  u

ever,  than  the  farm  of  King  Edward's  time,  and  must  have
involved  an  increase  in  all  dues  within  the  estates  and  the
hundred,  although  we  do  not  know  in  what  manner  this
increase  was  effected.  Its  ultimate  result  was»  however,
that  the  paying  power  of  the  population  was  overstrsuned,
and  the  rents  could  not  be  gathered  in.  The  last  farmer
not  only  had  to  give  up  the  supplementary  payments,  but
was  not  even  able  to  pay  the  £60  for  which  he  had  made
a  bargain  with  the  King.  The  form  of  the  bargain  must
have  been  an  inscription  on  the  rolls  of  the  Exchequer,  and
not  a  lease-deed,  as  the  bailiff  had  to  call  the  King,  that  is
the  Royal  Exchequer,  to  warrant,  in  order  to  prove  his
contention.  It  is  not  without  interest  to  note,  from  Roger
Bigod's  statement,  that  the  bailiffs  used  to  make  agreements
with  sub-bailiffs  in  order  to  carry  out  their  undertakings.
This  appears  as  a  very  natural  and  even  necessary  expedient
when  one  takes  into  consideration  the  enormous  transactions
and  official  liabilities  of  the  general  bailiffs,  who  were  mostly
sheriffs.  Three  such  personages  had  already  followed  each
other  in  the  administration  of  Bergholt

A  perplexing  instance  is  presented  by  the  Royal  manor
of  Leominster  in  Herefordshire.^  Its  rents  were  computed
at  £23  2s.,  besides  the  profits  from  eeUfisheries.  The  manor
was  at  farm  for  £60,  and  nuns  had  some  claims  in  it  in
respect  of  provisions.

The  Shire  gave  a  verdict  that  if  the  manor  should  be
'delivered'  {deliberaium)  it  could  be  valued  at  ;£'iao.
What  is  the  meaning  of  *  delivery '  in  opposition  to  farm  ?
And  why  was  the  farm  so  much  below  what  the  proper
estimate  turned  out  to  be?  Is  open  competition  meant;
as  likely  to  raise  the  income?  Or  is  the  estate  to  be
'  delivered '  from  the  farm  and  the  farmer,  and  taken  into
direct  administration  ?  Or  is  the  delivery  to  be  made  to
the  tenantry  of  the  manor  ? This  last  eventuality  has  more

^  Dd.  i.  180 a:  (Leominster,  Herefordshire)  *In  omni  hoc  redditn
preter  anguillas  computantur  xxiii  librae  et  ii  sol.  Hoc  manerium  est
ad  firmam  de  Ix  libris  preter  uictum  monialium.  Dicit  comitatus
cjuia  si  deliberatum  esset  hoc  manerium  appreciari  posset  sexies  nc
lib.  hoc  est  cxx.'


SECT.ll.CH.in] LAND  OF  THE  TENANTS 381

particularly  to  be  taken  into  account  Documents  of  the
feudal  age  often  show  burgesses  and  even  peasants  taking
over  the  Gtrm  of  their  city  or  township.*  This  is  the
essence  of  the  so-called  firma  burgi*  an  institution  which
wu  as  advantageous  to  the  Royal  administration,  or  that  of
other  manorial  lords,  as  it  was  constantly  desired  by  the
subject  populations  themselves.  I  refrain,  however,  from
sui^esting  a  definite  solution  of  this  problem,  as  the  term
'ddiberatum '  is  too  va^e  to  admit  of  more  than
hjrpothetical  interpretation.

3.  A  common  equivalent  oi  Jirma  is  pretiutH,  by  which  Value.
the  pajrment  to  the  owner  at  which  the  administration
of  the  estate  could  be  taken  over  Is  primarily  meant ;  it
assumes,  however,  sometimes  the  other  subsidiary  meanings
oi  firma.' The  redditus  or  exitus  of  a  manor  is,  of  course,
•imply  its  revenue  or  outgoings,*  quite  apart  from  the  way
in  which  they  were  collected,  and  as  such  they  are  generally
equivalent  to  the  value  {valet),  a  sum  in  which  the  yield  of  the
estates  is  generally  estimated  in  the  Domesday  Survey.*
But  there  is  another  sense  in  which  the  revenue  {redditus)  and  \
the  value  (v<^()  do  not  coincide. The  first  refers  to  the \
actual  income  drawn  from  an  estate,  while  the  latter  is \
taken  in  the  meaningof  a  fair  and  normal  estimate  of  economic
capability. Now  these  two  things  need  not  be  the  same,

*  E.g.  Rot.  Hund.  i.  365,  the  proceedings  connected  with  the
taking  over  of  the  fann  of  Castor  by  the  free  socmen  of  the  place,
a.  P&cita  Quo  Watt.  411.

*  Rot.  Hund.  i,  pp.  391,315.

*  Dd.  ii.  147 :  (Weston,  Norfolk) '  Westuna  xx  sochemanni  i  caru-
catam  terrae  . . .  £l  sunt  isti  sochemanni  in  pretio  de  Costesei  soca
in  Fcdsam  regis  t. r. e.'  Cd  ii.  334b  (Stalein,  Norfolk);  ii.  393:
[WiMcta,  Suffolk) '  Totum  est  in  pretio  mancrii,  el  Comes  socatn  et
MCam.'

'  Dd.  1.  179  d :  (Herefordshire)  '  Lene  .  .  .  De  consuetudinibus
et  de  molinis  et  uiltanis  et  colibertis  exeunt  c  solidi  v  sol,  minui.
Except  is  Anguillis.'

*  Dd.  i.  164a :  (Dymock,  Gloucs.)  'Rex  Edwardus  tenuit  Dimoch.
Ibi  erant  xx  hidae  et  ii  camcae  in  dominio  et  xlii  uillani  et  x  bordarii
et  xi  coliberti  habentes  xli  carucas  .  .  .  De  hoc  manerio  reddebat
nicecomesquoduolebat  T.  R.  E.'  Cf.  ibid.,  Cedeorde ;  Aluredintune ;
li.  131  a:  (Mileham  &  Bittering,  Norfolk) '  In  Mulchain  et  in  Britinea
I  camcala  terrae  et  xi!  acrae  quas  tenuit  Aluinus  i  liber  homo.  Modo
tenet  quedam  uidua  . . .  totum  hoc  ualuit  tunc  xx  sol.  modo  nicbil
reddit  quia  nichil  habet,  et  tunc  Godricus  pro  ea  cenmm  reddit.'


1


I


38a  RURAL  ORGANIZATION [essayu

and  were  very  often  not  identical  in  the  England  of  the
Conquest. When  we  hear  of  a  sudden  and  enormous
increase  in  value,  as  e.  g.  in  Peterborough,  where  a  value  of
20S.  is  converted  into  ;f  lo,  we  may  suspect  a  very  great
change  in  social  conditions,  quite  apart  from  extortions
of  the  owners.^ Again,  a  rapid  economic  deterioration  may
be  marked  by  a  great  fall  in  value.^ But  there  are  numbers
of  cases  in  which  the  actual  income  was  forced  up  for  a
time  by  oppression  and  destruction  of  capital,  and  in  such
cases  the  valet  estimation  naturally  fell  below  that  of  the
revenue. In  Southfleet,  Kent,  e.g.,  there  is  land  for  13
ploughs,  and  there  are  actually  13  teams,  one  in  demesne
and  12  with  the  tenants. There  are  7  serfs,  25  villains,
and  9  bordariu The  wood  is  sufficient  to  feed  100  pigs.
The  geld  has  gone  down  from  6  sulungs  to  5. The  value
was  ;£'ii  T.  R.  E.  and  has  increased  T.  R.  W.  to  £^i. And
yet  the  estate  renders  a  little  over  £%^. The  excess  of
revenue  over  the  normal  income  is  not  very  great  in  this
case,  but  is  not  the  less  characteristic  of  the  tendency  to
draw  more  than the  estates  could  yield  under  normal
circumstances.^ But  any number  of  more  sensational
instances might  be  given. Winfarthing  in  Norfolk  was
valued  at  40  shillings  T.  R.  E,  and now  (T.R.W.)  its
valuation  has  risen  to  £%  $s.  4^/.,  of  which  £y  were  paid
by  freemen  who  had  been  added  to  the  manor  at  the
Conquest. They  were  not  able  to  pay  such  a  sum  any
longer.^ In  another  Norfolk  case  the  value  had  fallen  from


'  Dd.  i.  221  b:  (Peterborough,  Northants)  'Abbatia  S.  Petri  de
Burg  tenet  uillam  quae  uocatur  Burg.  Ibi  sunt  viii  hidae.  Tenra  est
xvi  carucis.  In  dominio  sunt  v  et  vii  semi  et  xxxvii  uillani  et  viii
bordarii  cum  ii  carucis.  Ibi  molinum  de  v  solidis  et  xl  acrae  pratL
Silua  i  leuua  longo  et  iiii  quarentenae  lato.  Valuit  xx  sol.  Mode  %
lib.' Cf.  ibid.,  Cotingeham.

'  Dd.  iv.  408  :  (Somerset)  *  Vitel  tenuit . . .  T.  R.  £.  et  geldabat  pro
X  hidis.  Terra  est  x  carucis.  De  ea  sunt  in  dominio  iiii  hidae  et  ibi
iii  carucae  et  viii  serui  et  iiii  coliberti  et  xi  uillani  et  xvii  bordarii  com
V  carucis.  Ibi  xxx  acrae  prati,  et  c  acrae  pasturae.  Silua  iii  quar.
longo  et  ii  quar.  lato.  Valuit  xviii  lib.  quando  R.  recepit,  modo  reddit
X  bacones  et  c  caseos.*

'  Dd.  i.  5  c  (Sudfleta).

*  Dd.  ii.  130  a  (Wineferthinc).


SECT.  II.  CH.  Ill] LAND  OF  THE  TENANTS 383

£S  T.  R.  E.  to  £3  at  the  Conquest,  and  had  riaen  again
to  £8  10s.  at  the  time  of  the  Survey,  but  this  was  done
'cum  magna  pena'.^  In  the  two  last-named  cases  the
Survey  does  not  try  to  make  a  difference  between  value
and  revenue,  and  speaks  of  value  aU  along,  but  it  is  dear
that,  in  point  of  fact,  we  have  to  deal  with  an  actual
revenue  artificially  forced  up  beyond  the  normal  value  of
the  estate.

It  would  be,  naturally,  out  of  the  question  to  establish  a
common  average  of  value  for  the  whole  of  England.  But
it  is  interesting  to  notice  that  the  valet  numbers  are  not
taken  entirely  at  random,  but  that  in  some  districts,  at  any
rate,  there  is  evidently  a  tendency  to  bring  them  to  a
certain  standard.  In  the  midland  counties  a  standard  o(
one  pound  per  hide  and  ploughland  is  clearly  perceivable,'
I  say  per  hide  and  ploughland,  because  when  numbers
disagree  strongly  in  rtg^xd  to  these  two  terms  it  is  difficult
to  make  out  which  of  the  two  has  to  be  connected  with  the
normal  value,  and  we  have  often  to  fall  back  on  the
national  estimate,  viz.  the  ploughland  (tfrra  earucis).  I
may  add  that  the  common  estimate  of  values  is  best  teen,
not  in  large  manors  with  many  complicated  elements  of
dues  and  services,  but  in  the  simpler  combinations,  where
estates  are  rated  at  one  hide  or  two  and  estimated  to  con-
tain one  ploughland  or  twa  It  is  evident,  however,  that
though,  as  a  rule,  small  estates  presented  more  or  less  regular
numbers  in  regard  to  value,  the  reason  for  the  irrqi^larity
of  the  larger  ones  consisted  in  their  complexity  and  in  the
wish  to  appraise  profits  which  did  not  occur  in  the  case  of
small  economic  units.

4. The term 'custom' had a  special meaning in  Heats.
mediaeval  speech,  namely,  it  signified  a  service,  or  rent,
due  by  custom  from  one  person  to  another. This  con-
ception might  be  applied  to  persons  of  all  ranks :  a  great
baron  might  be  called  a  customer  of  the  king,  as  he  had

'  Dd.  ii.  237  b  (Helgctuna).

'  I  have  given  in  an  Appendix  some  rxsmples  of  vahuitioiis  of
small  estates  in  Oxfordshire,  Berkshire,  and  Hertfenlshiie.


384  RURAL  ORGANIZATION [essay  U

to  perform  customary  military  and  court  service  to  him.
But  in  ordinary  parlance  the  term  was  mostly  applied  to
rural  services  and  rents,  with  which  the  lower  class  was
burdened  for  the  benefit  of  their  superiors.^  Tlie  expressioo
was  convenient  because  it  enabled  men  of  the  time  to
group  all  sorts  of  duties  together  without  being  obl^;ed  to
distinguish  very  carefully  whether  these  duties  were  of
servile  or  free  origin,  and  the  same  may  be  said  about
people  called  consiutudinarii^  customers.  Their  subjection
was  clearly  indicated,  and  so  was  the  manner  by  whidi  the
quantity  and  quality  of  their  service  was  fixed — it  was  the
result  of  usage,  practice,  custom.  But  there  was  no
necessity  of  drawing  the  delicate  and  complicated  distinc-
tions between  born  serfs,  freed  men,  dependent  freemen  and
so  forth.  If  they  were  all  bound  to  perform  customary
duties  or  to  render  customary  dues,  they  were  all  by  right
deemed  *  customers  *.^

I  have  already  had  occasion  to  speak  several  times  of  the
great  arrangements  of  food-rents  known  as  the  farms  of  one
night,  or  of  one  day :  they  were  mostly  in  practice  in  Royal
manors,  but  similar  customs  prevailed  also  in  connexion  with
many  ecclesiastical  institutions.'  The  component  elements
of  the  full  farm  oflen  linger  as  customary  rents  when  the
lai^er  part  of  it  has  been  commuted  for  money. We  hear

^  Dd.  ii.  104  a :  (Colchester)  '  £t  burgenses  calumpniantur  v  hidas
de  Lexsendena  ad  consuetudinem  et  Cootum  (sic^  scotum  ?)  duitatit
quae  iacuerunt  ad  predictam  terrain  (^uam  tenebat  Godricus.'  ii.
370  b :  (Bury  St.  Edmunds)  '  Omnes  isti  (liberi  homines)  fadunt
consuetudinem  ad  Rikingahala.'

'  Dd.  ii.  168  a :  (Sculthorp,  Norfolk)  '  Sculetorpa  . . .  £t  xxx  soche-
manni  iacent  huic  manerio  cum  omni  consuetudine  manentes.'  ii.
215  a :  (Hilgey,  Norfolk) '  Hidlingeia  . . .  De  hoc  manerio  tulit  Willel*
mus  de  Warenna  viii  homines,  consuetudinarios  ad  hoc  manerium  ds
xliiii  acris  terrae.'  Cf.  ii.  265  b  (Cherebroc,  Norfolk) ;  273  b  (Phinc-
ham,  Norfolk).

'  Dd.  i.  162  d :  (In  Cirencester  Hd.,  Gloucs.)  '  Ibi  ii  liberi  homines
ii  carucas  habentes.  Lanam  ouium  regina  habebat,  T.  R.  E.  reddebat
hoc  manerium  iii  modios  frumenti  et  dimidium  et  braisi  iii  modios  et
mellis  vi  sexterios  et  dimidium  et  ix  libras  et  v  solidos  et  ter  mille
panes  canibus.  Modo  reddit  xx  lib.  et  v  sol.  xx  uaccas,  xx  porcos,  et
pro  panibus  xvi  sol.*  172  d :  (Witley,  Worcs.)  *  Witlege  . . .  Amuinnus
presbiter  tenuit,  reddens  aecclesiae  omnes  consuetudines  firmae,  et  i
sextarium  mellis.*


SECT.  II.  CH.  Ill] LAND  OF  THE  TENANTS 385

of  tribute  in  corn/  in  honey,*  in  bee|?i^  Originally  these
food-rents  were  claimed  at  the  progresses  of  the  King  or  of
the  lord,  in  order  to  provide  for  the  feeding  of  him  and  of
his  retainers  on  the  journey.  A  curious  feature  of  these  pro-
gresses, dating  from  the  time  when  the  collection  of  tribute
in  kind  was  independent  of  the  existence  of  any  special  hall
or  house,  was  the  erection  of  a  temporary  dwelling  for  the
itinerant  potentate,  and  Domesday  still  shows  traces  of  this
custom,  in  purely  English  localities.^  The  feeding  of  dogs  is
another  remnant  of  ancient  practices  which  had  struck  deep
roots  in  consequence  of  the  extension  of  hunting  privileges
and  the  importance  of  the  hunting  retinue.*  Next  in
importance  are  the  presentations  of  animals — oxen,  pigs,
sheep — in  connexion  with  herbage  and  pannage,  that  is,
with  payments  for  the  use  of  pasture.*  I  need  not  say
that  presentations  of  fish  are  common  in  sea- shore  districts
and  wherever fisheries  become  a  valuable asset,'' while

^  Dd.  i.  253  b :  (Morville,  Salop)  '  Membrefelde  . .  •  De  ipsa  terra
huius  manerii  tenet  Ricardus  Pincema  ii  hidas  etc.,  et  molinum
reddens  x  summas  annonae.' Cf.  253  d  (Archelov).

*  Dd.  i.  238  a :  (Warwick)  *  Praeter  haec  reddit  xxiiii  sextaria  mellis
cum  maiori  mensura,  et  de  Burgo  vi  sextaria  mellis.  Sextarium  scilicet
pro  XV  den.*

'  Dd.  iv.  183 :  *  De  ecclesia  Sancti  Germani  ablata  est  i  hida  terrae
quae  erat  de  dominicatu  predictae  ecclesiae  et  reddebat  ibidem  pro
consuetudine  i  cupam  ceruisii  et  xxx  den.'

*  Dd.  i.  205  a  :  (Hunts)  '  In  Witelesmare  .  .  .  materiam  inuenit
ad  unam  domum  Ix  pedum  et  uirgas  ad  curiam  circa  domum.  Reficit
etiam  domum  et  curiam  si  defecerint.  Haec  conuentio  T.R.E.  faiCiSL
est  inter  eos  *  (Abb.  de  Ramesy  et  Abb.  de  Tomy).

^  Dd.  i.  162  d  :  (Cheltenham,  GIoucs.)  'Chmteneham  .  .  .  Huic
manerio  accreuit  prepositus  regis  W.  duos  bordarios  et  iiii  uillanos  et
ill  inolinos.  Horum  li  sunt  regis,  tercius  prepositi  et  i  caruca  plus  est
ibi.  T.R.E.  reddebat  ix  lib.  et  v  sol.  et  ter  mille  panes  canibas.
Modo  reddit  xx  lib.  et  xx  uaccas  et  xx  porcos  et  xvi  sol.  pro
panibus.'

*  Dd.  i.  9  d  :  (Barham,  Kent)  '  Berham  . . .  De  Auera  id  est  serui-
tium  Ix  sol.  De  herbagio  xxvi  sol.  et  xx  acras  prati.  De  pasnagio  d
porci.*  Cf.  16  b  (Meninges,  Sussex) ;  16c:  (Pagham,  Sussex)  *  Page^
ham  .  .  .  De  herbagio  unus  porcus  de  unoquoque  uillano  qui  habet  vii
porcos  [Similiter  per  totum  Sudsex].'  Cf.  17c  (Halestede) ;  liyd:
(Taw land,  Devon)  *  Tauelande  . .  .  Hoc  manerium  debet  per  consue-
tudmem  in  Tauetonc  manerio  regis  aut  i  bouem  aut  xxx  den.'  l8oa:
(Ficreford)  '  Lcofminstre  .  .  .  Quisque  uillanus  habens  x  porcos
dat  unum  porcum  de  pasnagio.* Cf.  iv.  180  (Cudifort,  Cornwall).

^  Dd.  i.  5  c  :  (Stone,  Kent)  *  Estanes  . .  .  reddit  xx  lib.  et  unam
unciam  Auri  et  unum  Marsum.' 17  c:  (Lewes,  Sussex)  '  In  Lewes  x

.  I.Vuv*KAL»<-»Fh  C C


386  RURAL  ORGANIZATION [essay  n

customary  presentations  of  certain  quantities  of  iron  arc
conspicuous  in  mining  districts.^

Welsh tracts,  and  districts bordering  on  Wales,  are

especially  rich  in  food-rents  of  Celtic  origin. The  Survey

makes  a  curious  distinction  between  hides  rendering  English

and  Welsh  customary  dues,^  and  from  other  passages  we

can  gather  that  the  Celtic  gwestwas  were  food-rents  of

a  peculiar  kind,^  in  which  presentations  of  honey  and  sheep

played  a  great  part.*

Services.  / It  is  niuch  to  be  regretted  that  the  Domesday  Survey

/  does  not  give  details  as  to  the  *  rustic  work '  *  done  by  the

/ peasants,  although  it  is  quite  clear  that  it  was  one  of  their

/ chief  contributions  for  the  benefit  of  their  lords. As  in  the


buigenses  de  lii  denariis  et  de  uillanis  xxxviii  millia  alledum  et  quin^
genta  pro  marsuins  iiii  lib.  pro  forisfactura  uillanorum  ix  lib.  et  iii
summas  de  piscis.'

^  Dd.  i.  162  a :  (Gloucester)  '  Tempore  Regis  Edwardi  reddebat
ciuitas . . .  xxxvi  dicras  ferri  et  c  uirgas  ferreas  ductiles  ad  clanot
nauium  regis.'  179  d :  (Much  Marde,  Hereford)  '  Merchelai .  • .  De
hoc  manerio  est  una  hida  ad  Turlestane  quae  T.R.E.  reddebat  1
massas  ferri  et  vi  salmones.  Modo  est  haec  terra  in  foresta ' ;  iv.  345 :
(Somerset)  '  Stantuna  ...  1  agros  pascuae  quae  reddit  iiii  bloinas
ferri.'

'  Dd. L  181  a:  (Westhide,  Hereford)  'Sanctus  Petrus  de  Glouoe-
cestre  tenet  Westuode  caput  manerii  huius.  Rex  Edwardus  tenuit
Ibi  vi  hidae.  Una  ex  his  habet  Waliscam  consuetudinem  et  aUae
Anglicam.'

'  Dd.  i.  269  b :  (Flintshire)  '  In  eodem  Atiscros  Hd.  Habuit  Rex
Grifin  i  manerium  Biscopestreu  et  in  dominio  i  carucam  hitebiit
et  Homines  eius  vi  carucas.  Quando  ipse  rex  ibi  ueniebeit  reddebat
ei  unaquaque  caruca  cc  hesthas  et  unam  cuuam  plenam  cemiiia  et
unam  butiri  ruscam.'

*  Dd.  i.  184a:  (Ewias  Harold  Castle,  Hereford)  'In  CasteHaria
de  Ewias  Rogerius  de  Laci.  In  dominio  habent  ii  carucas  et  iiii
Walenses  reddentes  ii  sextaria  mellis  . . .  Isdem  Rogerius  habet  unam
terram  Ewias  dictam  in  fine  Ewias  haec  terra  non  pertinet  ad  casteh
lariam  neque  ad  Hundredum.  De  hac  terra  habet  Ro^perius  xv
sextaria  mellis  et  xv  jporcos  auando  homines  sunt  ibi  et  plaata  soper
eos.'  179c:  (Hereford)  '  Ilbertus  uicecomes  habet  ad  finnam  soam
de  Arcenefeld  consuetudines  omnes  mellis  et  ouium  quae  huic  manerio
pertinebat  TJI.E.'

°  Dd.  i.  172  d :  (Kempsey,  Worcs.)  '  De  ipso  manerio  (Chemeaege)
tenet  Rogerius  de  Laci  ii  hidas  ad  Ulfrintun  et  Aiulfiis  de  eo.  T.R.E.
fuerunt  in  dominio  et  Alricus  eas  tenebat  etiam  tempore  regis  WiUelmi
et  reddebat  inde  omnes  consuetudines  firmae  sicuti  reddebant  ante-
cessores  sui  excepto  rustico  opere  sicut  deprecari  poterat  a  prepoaito.'
176  d:  (Wichbold,  Worcs.)  '  Wicelbold  . . .  Ibi  . . .  xiii  buigenses  in
Wich  secantes  ii  diebus  in  Augusto  et  Mardo  et  seruientes  coriae.'


SECT.  II.  CH.  Ill] LAND  OF  THE  TENANTS 387

case  of  moots  and  rural  officers,  we  have  to  turn  for  par-
ticulars to  later  documents,  which  enaUe  us  to  draw
a  complete  picture  of  these  arrangements.  Gafolearth  is
sometimes  mentioned,^  however,  and  so  are  boonworks,'
but  the  most  important  labour-service,  week-work,  is  never
spoken  of  except  in  one  case,  when  it  is  said  that  bardarU
are  doing  one  da/s  work  in  the  week.*

Averagia  ^—carrying  duties— are  noticed  sometimes,  and
r admen's  service  is  described^  as  being  accordii^  to  the
lord's  wish,  evidently  not  a  mark  of  special  servility,  but  of
the  fact  that  these  riding  messengers  and  servants  coukl
not  be  assigned  definite  customary  work,  but  had  to  take
orders  according  to  circumstances.  Once  a  lord's  oven
(cf.  the  French  four  banal)  is  mentioned  in  a  Hampshire
manor.*

One  special  obligation  of  the  dependent  peasantry  is  Soke  of
often  spoken  of  and  alluded  to,  namely,  the  socafaUUu — the
duty  of  the  peasants  to  send  their  sheep  to  the  lord's  foldJ
It  is  evidently  considered  as  one  of  the  most  characteristic
incidents  of  rustic  tenure,  and  often  forms  a  kind  of  dividing
line  between  the  free  tenants  and  their  neq^hbours  reduced
to  a  more  servile  condition,  althotq^  transitional  links  are

>  Dd.  i.  179  d :  (Marde,  Hereford)  '  Merchelai .  •  •  In  domfaiio  sunt
iiii  carucae  ct  xxxvi  uillani  et  x  bordaril  com  xl  ctfucts,  bi  oiUani  anuit
et  seminant  de  proprio  semine  quater  jx  acras  frumend  et  totidem  ad
auenas  praeter  ix  acras.' Cf.  Cod.  Dipl.  661,  977.

'  Dd.  i.  174  c :  (EckingtoQ,  Worcs.Jf  '  Aichintone  • .  •  De  ipsa  tern
tenet  Turstinus  . . .  iii  hidas.  Brictnc  tenuit  •  • .  Hi  duo  Dimning  et
Brictric  secabant  in  pratis  domtni  sui  per  consiietiidinem  onam  dim.'

'  Dd.  i.  i86a  (Ewias,  Hefeted).

*  Dd.  i.  9  d  (Berham,  Kent).

°  Dd.  i.  172 d :  (Lawem,  Worcs.)' De  eodem  manerio  (Laure)  tenet
Robertus  Dispensator  dimidiam  hidam  ad  Laure  •  •  •  Keneouaidns
tenuit  et  deseniiebat  sicut  eniscopus  uolebat'  Qt  i73a(AbdleQf);
174  a  (Bennicworte);  174  c  ^Longedune);  174  d:  (Powick)  'Poiwic
.  .  .  Ipsi  radmans  secatNuit  1  die  in  anno  in  pratb  domini  et  omne
servitium  quod  eis  iubebat  fiunebant' Qt  175  a  (Pidelet).

*  Dd.  i.  52  d:  (Cheverton,  Hants)  '  Ceuredone .:.  Ibidem  babeC
isdcm  Willelmus  de  rege  unum  uillanam  cum  dimidia  virgata  terrse  ct
unam  acram  terrae  et  dimidiam  . . .  Fumus  comitis  loit  im«'

^  Dd.  ii.  124  a:  (Norfolk)  Mn  Kerfcebei  xii  bomines  saqoentes
faldam  Edrici  * ;  310  b :  (Suffolk)  '  In  Alrincbam  i  liber  bomo  coin-
mendationem  et  socam  falde  et  alia  stmitia.'  CL  ao^a  (MdtOBS,
Norfolk);  204b  (Hederseta,  Noifblk);  aiob  (TboffcMliaft,  Nor-
folk); 246b  (Depwada,  Norfolk);  56a b  (Etcsaca,  Soflbfc^  Ac.

cca


388  RURAL  ORGANIZATION [ESSAY  n

not  wanting,^  as  usual,  and  we  read  occasionally  of  socmen
subjected  to  the  suit  of  the  fold.  This  feature  is  interestii^
in  many  ways.  It  dates  from  before  the  Conquest :  a  charter
of  Edward  the  Confessor  ^  combines  the  fact  that  a  man  is
fold-worthy — that  is,  free  to  send  his  sheep  to  a  non-manorial
fold — with  the  right  and  duty  to  attend  the  fyrd  and  to
attend  moots.  Thus  subjection  or  freedom  in  respect  of
a  manorial  privilege  is  thought  to  be  connected  in  principle
with  the  political  rights  of  the  citizen,  if  we  may  use  this
expression — attendance  in  the  host  and  in  public  assemblies.
Whether  we  take  the  latter  to  mean  merely  the  courts  of
the  hundred  and  of  the  shire,  or  whether  we  include  town-
ship moots  as  well,  the  combination  with  the  freedom  of
the  fold  remains  characteristic.  It  draws  a  sharp  contrast
between  the  people  forming  the  ancient  host  and  the  moot
oi^anization  of  the  people,  and  dependants  of  lords,  who
cannot  send  their  cattle  where  they  please.  The  distinc-
tion is  not  peculiar  to  the  northern  and  eastern,  half*
Scandinavian,  districts ;  it  occurs  in  a  southern  charter,  and
is  worded  in  a  way  which  gives  it  the  aspect  of  a  universal
principle.  The  frequent  references  to  the  suit  of  the  fold
in  the  Domesday  Survey,  especially  when  contrasted  with
the  barrenness  of  the  latter  in  regard  to  other  incidents  of
rustic  tenure,  corroborate  this  g^eneral  proposition  by  a
number  of  concrete  applications.  We  find  in  the  case  of
Reedham,^  Suffolk,  that  the  peasants  subject  to  the  lord's

^  Dd.  ii.  129  b:  (Norfolk)  Mn  Modetuna  vii  liberi  homines.  In
Wichatuna  i  sochmannus  de  Ivi  acris  tenrae  . .  .  Sunt  in  soca  hundret
et  isti  omnes  cum  aliis  qui  sunt  in  alio  hundredo  reddunt  viii  libns
blancas  et  c  solidos  de  consuetudine  ad  numenim  et  xx  solidos  de
gersuma.  Super  onmes  istos  qui  faldam  comitis  requirebant  *»qhfW
comes  socam  et  sacam,  super  alios  omnes  Rex  et  comes.'  131  a :
(Bedingaham,  Norfolk) '  In  tempore  Regis  Edward!  adiacebant  buic
manerio  vi  sochmanni  cum  omni  consuetudine,  post  et  mode  xxvL
De  quibus  addidit  R.  comes  xx  cum  soca  falde.'  181  b:  (Hadestana,
Norfolk) '  £t  xi  homines  soca  falde  et  commendatione  trx.et  possent
uendere  terram,  sed  consuetudo  remanebat  in  manerio.'  187  b:
(Florenduna,  Norfolk) '  xv  liberi  homines  . . .  soca  falde  et  commeD-
datione  tantum.'  Cf.  ibid.,  Carletuna,  Vmincham;  306  a  (StoUi
Norfolk);  364 a  (Ingham,  Suffolk).

'  Earle,  Land  Charters,  343.

^  Dd.  iL  2i6a:  (Reedham,  Norfolk)  '  In  Redeham  tenuit  Saactus


SECT.  IL  CH.  m] LAND  OF  THE  TENANTS 389

fold  go  to  his  court,  while  those  free  of  their  fold  go  to  the
hundred,  and  it  is  tempting  to  compare  this  instance  with
the  Fersiield  (Feruella)  one,^  in  which  those  who  own  more
than  30  acres  go  to  the  hundred,  while  those  who  own  less
are  subjected  to  the  manorial  soke.  Taking  these  two
attempts  at  classification  together,  we  realize  the  difficulties
of  social  differentiation  in  these  troubled  times,  and  the
methods  of  drawing  the  dividing  lines;  in  one  case  the
disability  in  regard  to  the  fold,  in  the  other  the  size  of  the
holding,  are  taken  as  standards,  and  it  is  interesting  to  see
that  in  the  latter  case  30  acres — a  normal  virgate — is  taken
as  the  unit  marking  the  line  of  separation :  the  viigaters
are  assumed  to  be  moot -worthy.  Another  important
feature  consists  in  the  fact  that  the  suggested  use  of  the
fold  is  eminently  an  incident  of  champion  farming.  Of
course,  folds  are  made  for  sheep  in  separate  homesteads  as
well  as  in  concentrated  townships,  but  the  idea  of  gathering
other  people's  sheep  in  one's  fold  is  suggested  by  a  system
of  combined  township  cultivation.  The  point  is  that  the
lord's  demesne  arable  gets  the  benefit  of  the  sheep's  manure>
and  the  natural  places  for  it  are  the  open  fields  of  a  con-
siderable village  before  seed-time.  In  a  country  of  scattered
homesteads  it  would  have  been  impossible  or  difficult  to
drive  the  sheep  into  the  lord's  fold  every  night.  The  use
of  the  fold  for  purposes  of  manuring  is  especially  charac-
teristic of  the  modes  of  husbandry  in  which  one  part  of  the
soil  was  reserved  as  '  infield '  for  more  intensive  cultivation.
In  concentrated  villages  every  holding  got  its  strips  in  the
infield,  and  the  question  of  the  distribution  of  the  returning
cattle  and  sheep  for  the  night  became  a  very  burning  one.

It  may  be  added  that  the  question  of  the  township  fold
seems  to  have  played  a  great  part  in  the  arrangement  of
Danish  villages  {byer). The  for ta  was  a  necessary  feature

Henedictus  t.  r.  e.  i  canicatam  terrae.  Semper  ii  uillani,  v  bordarii,
i  caruca  in  dominio  et  i  caruca  hominum  . . .  De  Redeham  habebat
abbas  socam  super  hos  qui  sequebantur  faldam,  et  de  aliis  soca  in
hundredo.'

^  Dd.  ii.  130  b :  (Fersfield,  Norfolk)  '  In  Feruella  iacet  soca  et  saca
t  r.  e.  de  omnibus  qui  minus  habeant  quam  xxx  acris.  De  illis  qui
habent  xxx  acras  iacet  soca  et  saca  in  hundredo.'


390


RURAL  ORGANIZATION [essay  n


Cross  re-
lations of
townships
and
msmors.


of  those  founded  on  free  soil ;  this  was  a  large  green  in  the
middle  of  the  township  where  the  cattle  were  congr^atcd
at  night,  and  from  which  they  started  for  the  pasturages  in
the  morning.^

I  need  hardly  say  rents  in  money  are  already  quite
common  in  the  age  of  Domesday,  They  are  mainly  of
three  different  kinds:  gafol?  dues  assessed  originally  as
regular  money  tribute ;  exceptional  payments  or  presenta-
tions ^  igersuma) ;  and  payments  in  commutation  of  rents
in  kind.^

5.  The  fundamental  union  of  the  population,  for  purposes)
of  husbandry  and  local  government,  is  not  the  manor  but
the  township.  Townships  are  l^^ally  supposed,  in  die
feudal  age,  to  cover  the  entire  territory  of  the  kii^om,*^
and  where  they  did  not  exist  naturally  they  had  to  be
formed  for  the  sake  of  police  and  justice;  but,  of  course,
this  last  expedient  was  taken  because  there  was  the  model
of  the  actual  townships  to  go  by,  and  because  these  pre-
vailed as  a  matter  of  fact.  The  same  fundamental  character
of  the  village  or  township  unit  is  expressed  in  early  records,*

^  Lauridsen,  Aarboger  for  Nordisk  Oldkyndighed,  ii  Ser.^  zi
(1896).

'  Dd.  i.  12  d :  (Lewisham,  Kent)  '  Leuesham  .  •  •  Ibi  iii  serai  et  xi
molini  cum  gablo  rusticorum  viii  lib.  et  xii  solid,  reddunt.*  14  c:
(Newington,  Kent)  '  Newetone  . . .  Iviii  solid,  de  gablo  ex  his  nouem
solins.'  26  c:  ('Bristelmestune'  (Brighton?),  Sussex) '  De  gablo  iiiimillia
allecium.'  35  b :  (Ebsa  (Epsom),  Surrey) '  tenet  unus  uillanus  dimidiam
hidam  de  qua  usque  nunc  dedit  hominibus  Ricardi  xxx  den.  de  gaUa'
154  c  (Sciptone,  Oxon). Cf.  Cart.  Sax.  1317 ;  Thorpe,  129  (A.D.  8S3).

^  Dd.  it.  ^  b :  (Writela,  Essex)  '  Tunc  c  uillani  iii  minus.  Post
et  modo  Ixxiii.  Tunc  xxxvi  bordarii,  post  et  modo  be  Tunc  xziiii
servi,  post  et  modo  xviii . . .  Tunc  reddidit  hoc  manerium  x  noctes  de
firma  et  x  lib.  Modo  reddit  c  lib.  ad  pondus  et  c  sol.  de  gersuma.'  CL
ii.  129  b  (Modetuna,  Norfolk)  ;  131  a  (Bedingaham,  Norfolk).

*  Dd.  i.  12 c:  (Northboume,  Kent)  'Norbome  .  ••  Wadaidus  ...
iiii  solins.  Ipse  uero  nullum  seruitium  reddit  abbati  nisi  xxx  soL  quos
persoluit  in  anno.'  Ibid.  (Great  and  Little  Mongeham)  *  Mundinge-
ham  . . .  Wadardus  in  dominio  i  canicam  . . .  nullum  seruitium  inde
reddit  nisi  xxx  sol.  per  annum  abbati.*  11  d  (Brochestele) ;  lob
(Bocheland) ;  11  a  (Soltone) ;  9  d  (Selinge).

''  History  of  English  Law,  i.  560.

^  A  good  instance  is  presented  by  one  of  the  Medhamstead  docn-
ments  (Cart.  Sax.  1128):  'Of  )^m  twam  hundredum  ute  on  ]«m
nesse  \k  Medeshamstede  onstent  man  ageaf  of  six  tunan  . . .  tio^nnge
a:t  selcere  sylh  an  foder  comes  .  . .  )K)nne  letan  )>a  tiobunge  of  ^an  34
tunan  man  ageald  to  mynstre  twa  hund  aecera  saed  ana  3  ysic).


SECT.  II.  cH.iii] LAND  OF  THE  TENANTS 391

and  in  Domesday  by  the  fact  that,  when  a  reference  to  the»  |
local  duties  and  rights  is  needed,  it  is  generally  made  to
the  village  or  township,  and  not  to  the  manor.^  And,  as
well  in  the  Domesday  Inquest  as  in  other  cases  when  an
exhaustive  inquiry  into  local  conditions  is  aimed  at,  the
reeve,  the  priest,  and  four  villagers  appear  as  representatives
from  each  township  quite  irrespectively  of  manorial  relations
and  divisions.  The  four  or  six  villains  remain  the  charac-
teristic delegates  of  rural  population  all  through  the  feudal
epoch,  in  the  same  way  as  the  twelve  burgesses  were  the
characteristic  delegates  of  a  borough  for  purposes  of  local
information  and  administration  in  the  hundred  and  in  the
county  court.

The  existence  of  the  township  organization  as  the
basis  of  society  produces  a  variety  of  administrative  and
economic  consequences.  The  vill  is  rated  as  a  unit  to  the
geld,  and  the  shares  of  assessment  are  sometimes  distributed
among  the  manors  in  a  complicated  way.'  The  artificial,
relatively  modern,  character  of  the  manorial  formation,
as  compared  with  that  of  townships,  is  forcibly  illus-
trated by  the  fact  that  its  threads  reach  across  the  old
provincial  divisions  of  hundreds,  and  even  of  counties,**
producing  very  complicated  relations  of  fiscal  and  economic
dependence.  For  instance,  a  Staffordshire  manor  may
attract  a  number  of  Derbyshire  vills  into  its  sphere  of
influence.* Berkshire  and  Oxfordshire,*  Bedfordshire  and

*  I)d.  i.  181  d  :  (Bishop's  Frome,  Hereford)  'Fromc  .  . .  presbiter
uiilac  unam  uirgatam  terrae  .  .  .  Prepositus  uiilae  habet  i  molinum  de
xxxii  den.'  i.  275  b  :  (Wyaston  and  Edlaston,  Derby)  *  Widerdcstunc
ct  Duluestunc  .  .  .  he  ii  uiilae  sunt  de  firma  Regis  in  Rouecestre
praeter  i  bouatam  que  iacet  in  Osmundestune.'

-  i:.  g.  Westerfield,  Suffolk,  Dd.  ii.  295  a. Sec  Appendix  VIII.

^  I)d.  i.  277  a,  b:  (Wirksworth,  Lea,  and  Tansley,  Derby)  *  In
W  erchcsuiiordc  et  Lede  et  Taneslege  iiii  bouatae  terrae  ad  geldum . .  •
Hacc  terra  iacet  in  Crice,  scd  geldum  reddit  in  Hamelestan  Wapentac'

*  I)d.  i.  275  a  :  (Snelston,  Derby)  'Snellestune  . ..  Ibidem  dimidia
(  iruca  torrc  sora  in  Ouere,  ct  iii  bouatae  tcrrc  soca  in  Rouecestre'
275  I) :  (WiUlerdestune  et  Duluestunc)  *  Hac  duac  uiilac  sunt  dc  firma
K.  in  Koutcestrc,  praeter  i  bouata  que  iacet  in  Osmundestune.'  Cf.
Cildccote  :  1 272  d,  Herewick  of  Rapendune)  *  Hacc  ad  Cliftunc  pertinet
in  Siadford.*

'•  Dd.  i.  57  d :  (Steventon,  Berks)  'Stiuctune  . .  .Ad  hoc  maneriom
pertinuerunt  in  Oxeneford  xiii  hagac  rcddcntes  xii  soL  et  vi  den.  et


392  RURAL  ORGANIZATION [essayu

Huntingdonshire/  StafTordshire  and  Gloucestershire,'  Wor-
cestershire and  Herefordshire,^  overlap  each  other  freely,
vills  being  appraised  for  the  manorial  farm  in  one  county
and  paying  geld  in  another,  or  dividing  their  taxes  between
them.  And  with  the  geld  the  service,  that  is  the  fyrd
obligation,  went  in  some  cases,  so  that  a  man  might  be
called  to  serve  in  the  Huntingdonshire  array,  although  his
estate  was,  as  a  matter  of  fact,  in  Bedfordshire.^  Some  of
these  cases  may  have  been  the  result  of  encroachments,  but
they  are  too  common  to  be  all  explained  in  this  way :  the
point  is  that  manorial  relations,  being  to  a  great  extent
parts  of  a  comparatively  recent  military  and  ecclesiastic
superstructure,  do  not  conform  with  previously  established
tribal,  provincial,  and  local  units, — their  net  is  drawn
across  the  original  divisions.  The  relations  between
single  manors  are  even  more  intricate.  We  have  already
had  occasion  to  observe  what  a  patchwork  was  presented
by  East  Anglian  manors,  in  spite  of  a  set  policy  which
endeavoured  to  make  them  complete,  as  estates  of  3^,  or  4,
or  5  hides.  The  chief  means  of  bringing  them  to  their
proper  size  was  to  accommodate  socmen  and  freemen  to

unum  pratum  de  xx  sol  Modo  homines  de  hundredo  dicunt  qaod
Kobertus  de  Oilgi  istud  tenet  ut  suspicantur  nil  aliud  sciunt  eo  quod
est  in  alia  scira.'  Cf.  61  d :  '  Lonchelei  .  .  .  Haec  terra  iacet  et
appreciata  est  in  Gratentun  quod  est  in  Oxenefordsdre  et  tamen  dat
scotum  in  Berchescire.*

^  Dd.  i.  207  c  :  (Keysoe,  Beds)  '  Caissot . . .  Iacet  in  Bedefordscira
sed  geldum  dat  in  Huntedscire.'  Cf.  216  d :  (Meppershall,  Beds)
^  Malpertesselle  . . .  pro  iiii  hidis  se  defendit  in  Bedeforde  scire  ...  In
Hercfortscire  ipsa  uilla  se  defendit  pro  iii  hidis  et  una  uirgata.'

'  Dd.  i.  172  c :  (Kinver,  Worcs.)  *  Chenefiare .  .  .  Haec  terra  est
in  Stadfordscire.  Similiter  est  et  Suinesforde.'  Ibid.:  (Terdeberie)
'  Vicecomes  de  Stadfordscire  rccepit  et  reddit  firmam  huius  manerii  in
Suinesforde/  Ibid.,  Clent.  Ibid. :  '  In  Wich  est  dimidia  hida  quae
pertinet  ad  aulam  de  Glouuecestre.'

'  Dd.  i.  175  c :  (Mathon,  Worcs.) '  Ipsa  aecclesia  (Sanctae  Mariae  de
Persore)  tenuit  Matma.  Ibi  v  hidae  sed  non  geldant  nisi  iii.  Una  ex
his  V  hidis  iacet  in  Herefordscire  in  Radelau  Hd. . . .  Comitatus  de
Wirccestre  diratiocinauit  eam  ad  opus  S.  Marie  de  Persore  et  pertinet
ad  supradictum  manerium.'

*  Dd.  i.  203  d :  (Pertenhall,  Hunts)  '  In  Partenhale  habuit  Aluuinus
i  uirgatam  terrae  ad  geldum.  Terra  dimidiae  carucae.  Haec  tena
sita  est  in  Bedefordescire  sed  geldat  et  seruitium  reddit  in  Hontedune-
scyre. Hanc  clamant  ministn  regis  ad  opus  ipsius.'


SECT.  II.  cH.iii] LAND  OF  THE  TENANTS 393

fill  the  gaps.  No  wonder  that  we  constantly  come  across
socmen,  and  occasionally  freemen,  of  the  half-Scandinavian
districts  who  h've  in  one  township  and  'lie'  in  another —
that  is,  are  joined  to  its  economic  organization.^  In  the
case  of  burgesses  such  a  double  allegiance  was  especially
common.-  The  position  of  tenants  affected  by  it  must
have  been  very  complicated,  as  we  cannot  suppose  that
they  were  quite  liberated  from  their  duties  in  regard  to  the
locality  they  were  living  in,  when  made  to  lie  in,  or  to
appertain  to,  another.  It  is  not  likely  that  they  could
escape,  e.g.,  the  duty  of  catching  and  keeping  thieves,  or  of
helping  to  trace  stolen  cattle  and  fugitive  serfs,  according
to  the  position  of  their  dwellings,  although  in  all  respects
touching  farm  and  geld  they  must  have  looked  to  the  town-
ship to  which  they  appertained  as  tenants.

Apart  from  these  frequent  cases  of '  accommodation  '  of
free  tenants,  the  most  varied  cross  relations  between  manors
are  to  be  found  in  Domesday  practice.  One  carucate  out
of  a  batch  of  four  belonging  to  a  certain  township  may  be
diverted  from  its  natural  dependence  and  made  to  lie  in
a  different  one.^  One  and  the  same  owner  may  possess
two  exactly  similar  estates  in  the  same  township,  and  of
these  estates  one  will  be  diverted  to  *lie'  in  another  town-
ship.^ We  cannot  tell  whether  these  aberrations  are  called
forth  by  the  history  of  the  estates  in  question,  or  by  some
fiscal  or  legal  expedient  which  it  would  be  impossible  to

^  I)(l.  ii.  121  b:  (Swathing,  Norfolk)  '  In  Suatinga  tenet  Hagana
liber  homo  t.r.e.  ii  carucatas  terrae  . .  .  Huic  manerio  iacent  xiii  soce-
inanni,  in  cadcm  uilla  manent  v,  et  in  Thustuna  iiii,  et  in  Turstane-
stuna  iiii';  cf.  122  b  (Snaringa) ;  233  a  (Walsingaham  ;  Stiuecai);
271  a  (Guclla).

-  Dd.  i.  173  c  :  (Worcester)  *Ad  ipsum  manerium  (Norwiche)  per-
tinent in  Wirccestre  quater  xx  et  x  domus.  De  his  habet  episcopus  in
dominio  xlv,  nil  reddunt  nisi  opus  in  curia  episcopi  .  .  .  De  burgo
\\  irecestrc  habuit  episcopus  T.R.E.  tercium  denarium  et  modo  habet
rum  rc^c  e'  comite.' Cf.  Ballard,  Domesday  Boroughs.

'  Dd.  i.  273  r  :  (Kniveton,  Mackworth,  and  AUestree,  Derby)  *  In
(  hcniuctun  et  Machcuorde  et  Adelardestreu  Bereuuichis  iiii  carucatae
t(  rrae  ad  f^elduni  .  .  .  Una  carucata  ex  his  iiii  iacet  in  Ednodestun
manerio  Hcnrici.'

*  Dd.  i.  275  d  :  (Osmaston,  Derby)  *In  Osmundestune  habuit
Osmundus  iii  bouatas  terrae  ad  geldum  ...  In  Osmundestune  iii
bouatac  terrae  ad  geldum  pertinent  ad  Codetune.'


394  RURAL  ORGANIZATION [ESSAY  li

bring  to  light  nowadays.  But  what  can  hardly  be  contested
is  the  inference  that  these  artificial  combinations  disclose
the  composite  and  recent  character  of  manorial  arrange-
ments, stretching  over  the  natural  growths  of  the  townships.
Manors  of  this  kind  are  assuredly  not  organic  germs  of
townships.^  And  although,  as  I  say,  it  would  be  quite  out
of  the  question  to  trace  all  the  entangled  meshes  of  these
manorial  cross  relations  to  their  sources,  one  prolific  cause
of  entanglement  may  easily  be  seen  in  the  overlapping  of
manors  and  sokes.  The  manor  was  mainly  an  estate,and  not
necessarily  endowed  with  higher  forms  of  jurisdiction.  It
had  to  be  supplemented,  on  the  latter  side,  either  by
hundreds  or  by  private  sokes,  radiating  from  other  manorial
centres,^  and  this  gave  rise  to  complications  by  no  means
peculiar  to  the  Domesday  epoch,  but  clearly  apparent,  e.g.
in  the  Qiw  Warranto  inquisitions  of  the  close  of  the
thirteenth  century.^

But  the  plain  and  most  usual  cause  of  manorial  complica-
tions lay  in  the  fact  that  the  manor,  being  originally  a  unit
of  property  and  not  of  settlement  or  husbandry,  could  stand
in  all  sorts  of  relations  to  the  organic  unit  of  the  township ;
it  could  include  one  or  several,  but  could  also  share  with
another  manor,  or  several,  the  basis  of  a  single  township.
Quite  apart  from  subinfeudation,  which  produced*well-known

^  Dd.  i.  278  b :  (Rowthom,  Derby)  '  In  Rugetom  UIsi  et  Stdnnlf
habuerunt  i  carucatam  terrae  ad  geldum  pro  manerio,  et  in  Branl^
ii  bouatas  terre  de  soca  de  Rugetom';  cf.  278 d  (Englebi) ;  353a
(Osgotebi,  Lines.).

'  Dd.  i.  273  a  :  (Mapperley,  Derby) '  In  Maperlie  habuit  Stapleuine
iiii  bouatas  terrae  ad  geldum  . . .  Ibidem  est  dimidia  caruca  terrae  de
soca  pertinens  ad  Spondune  manerium  Henrici.'  Cf.  Rapendan  (273  d) ;
Pinneslei  (276  c);  Ednodestune  (276 d).  Cf.  Dd.  ii.  355  b,  356a:
(Holton,  Suffolk)  'In  Holetuna  iii  liberi  homines  •  .  .  Super  totam
Holetuna  habet  Comes  Alanus  soca  praeter  terram  Osberti.'

'  Placita  de  Quo  Warranto,  45  :  (Kerdyngton,  Beds)  *  dicunt . . .
quod  lohannes  (Pycot)  et  omnes  antecessores  sui . . .  seisiti  fiieruntde
. . .  uisu  et  emendis  tanquam  pertinentibus  ad  manerium  predictum,
dicunt  tamen  quod  ipse  tenet  predictum  uisum  oneratum  de  quatuor
solidis  et  sex  denariis  domino  Regi  per  manum  Vicecomitis  reddenda.
Quesitus  si  habeat  pillorium  et  tumbrellum  dicunt  quod  habeat  tum-
brellum  set  non  pillorium.  Set  dicunt  quod  idem  lohannes  usus  est
punire  delinquentes  contra  assisam  panis  et  ceruisie  per  fines  et  amercia-
ment a  et  non  per  penam  corporalem.'  Cf.  22  (Leighton  Buzzard,  Beds) ;
329  (Fauconesherst,  Kent) ;  392  (Ingoldsby,  Lines.).


SECT.  II.  CH.  Ill] LAND  OF  THE  TENANTS 395

results  in  the  parcelling-up  of  mediaeval  estates,  they  appear,
from  the  very  first,  in  innumerable  instances,  as  fractions  of
townships.  I  will  just  quote  a  few  instances  from  Derby ,^
Lincoln,'  Dorset,^  Devon,*  and  Wiltshire.*

6.  The  township  is  not  only  the  fundamental  and  organic  Economic
unit  of  rural  oi^anization ;  it  is  also  sufficient  in  itself  for  ^IJ^p,
economic  purposes,  and  may  exist  without  any  direct  inter-
ference of  the  manor  in  its  affairs.  This  principle  finds
expression,  in  the  Domesday  Survey,  in  the  fact  that  there
are  numbers  of  settlements  described  in  it  in  which  there  is
no  home-farm,  and  no  hall,  so  that  the  husbandry  of  the
place  is  conducted,  not  on  the  principle  of  combined  work,

*  Dd.  i.  272  b:  (Unstone  and  Temple  Nonnanton,  Derby)  Mn
Onestune  et  Normantune  ii  maneria  et  Bereuuita  habuenmt  Leuuine
et  Eduuine  vii  bouatas  ten^et  iiii  acras  ad  geldum.  Terra  xii  booatis.
Ibi  mode  in  domtnio  i  caruca  et  vi  uillani  et  iiii  bordarii  habentes  iiii
carucas.'  Also  ibid., '  Soca  Neuuebold,  in  Normantune,  v  pars  unius
camcatae  terrae  ad  geldum  ...  in  Honestune  tercia  pars  unius  cani-
catae  terrae  ad  geldum.*  Cfl  272  c,  Waletune ;  Tichenhalle,  under
Rapendune,  272  d  ;  under  Abbot  of  Burton,  273  b  ;  Tunierdestune,  in
two  manors,  27 ^  b  ;  Bumulfestune,  &c  (5  manors),  27c  d ;  Cotenoure
el  Hainoure  et  Langeleie  et  Smitecote  (6  manors),  276  b ;  Echintune,
276  d-277  a ;  Stratune,  alia  Stratune,  277  a.

*  Dd.  i.  347  a :  (Willingham,  Lines.) '  (ii  maneria).  In  Welingeham
habuit  Staigrim  xii  bouatas  terre  ad  geldum.  Terra  ad  xii  bouatas.
Ibidem  habuit  Gunneuuate  vi  bouatas  terre  et  iii  partem  ii  bouatarum
ad  geldum.'  Cf.  350  c,  d,  &c.  (Hiboldeston  ;  Linberge;  Cucualt;
Lobrageham) ;  354  c  (Aplebi,  Riscbi  et  Saleclif ) ;  354  d  (Osgotebi) ;

355  a  (Witham  et  Mannetorp)  et  Toftlund  ;  355  c  (Aschebi) ;  Clachesbi,

356  c,  &c. ;  Chime,  355  c,  &c. ;  Trinchigeham,  357  b,etc. ;  Stalinbuxg,
356  b,  &c. ;  356  d  (Scotstome  et  Holme  et  Sudborc).

■  Dd.  i.  79  b:  (Little  Herringston,  Dorset)  *Ansgerus  tenet  dc
Comite  (Moritoniensi)  Ceme.  Duo  taini  tenuerunt  lioere  T.R.E.  et
geldabant  pro  iii  hidis  . . .  Radulfus  tenet  de  Comite  Ceme.  Decern
taini  tenuerunt  in  paragio  T.R.E.  et  geldabant  pro  iii  hidis  . . .  Ipse
Comes  tenet  in  Ceme  ii  hidas  et  dimidiam.  Sex  taini  tenuerunt
in  paragio  T.R.E.  .  . .  Ansgems  tenet  de  Comite  Ceme.  Brictuinus
tenuit  T.R.E.  et  geldabat  pro  ii  hidis.*  Cf.  Wintrebume,  ibid.,  et  79  c,
83  c,  &c

*  Dd.  iv.  307 :  (Mutley,  Devon)  '  luhellus  habet  i  mansionem  aue
uocatur  Modleia  quam  tenuit  Goduuinus  . .  .  pro  i  uirgata. . . ;  luhellus
i  mansionem  que  uocatur  Modleia  quam  tenuit  Aluuinus  et  reddit
gildum  pro  i  uirgata.*  Cf.  308,  309,  Meuui  ;  311,  Langadona;  312,
Ogham  uillae ;  319  et  alibi,  Estocheleia;  362,  363,  Lollardesdona ;
Coma,  367  ;  Biheda,  368.

*  Dd.  i.  68c: (Robson,  in  Winterboum Bassett,  Wilts)  'Ipsa
aecclesia  tenet  in  Wintrebume  vi  hidas  . .  .  Ipsa  aecdesia  tenet
Wintrebume  T.R.E.  geldabat  pro  iiii  hidis  et  dimidia.' Cf.  69  b
Wintrebume  (to) ;  70  a,  Caldefelle  (dt's).


396  RURAL  ORGANIZATION [essay  ll

but  by  the  villagers  alone.  Some  of  the  instances  are  drawn
from  small  settlements  ^  which  had  just  been  converted  into
manorial  land  out  of  private  estates,  and  in  this  case  it  may
have  been  deemed  superfluous  to  create  a  separate  domanial
superstructure.  But  this  is  by  no  means  the  only  case
where  the  villagers  are  left  to  themselves.  Many  of  the!
recorded  instances  in  question  concern  lai^  townships,^  in
which  economic  arrangements  must  have  involved  a  con-
siderable amount  of  co-operation  and  administrative  work.
The  absence  of  hall  and  demesne  indicates  self-governing
communities,  farming  their  own  dues,  an  arrangement  which
can  be  copiously  illustrated  from  later  practice.'  But  even
if  there  were  no  compromise  between  landlord  and  tenants
in  regard  to  farm,  if  the  latter  were  under  the  direct  super-
vision of  a  reeve,  bailiff,  or  riding  sergeant  their  dependence
on  the  lord  may  have  consisted  largely  in  tribute  ;  ^  while,
on  the  other  hand,  it  is  to  be  kept  in  mind  that  even  where
there  was  a  distinct  demesne  it  could  be  let  in  farm  to  the


^  Dd.  i.  7  a  :  (Crofton  in  Orpington,  Kent)  '  Anschitillus  tenet  de
episcopo  Croctune,  pro  uno  solin  et  uno  iugo  se  defendit  Terra  est
In  dominio  nichil  est,  sed  iii  uillani  et  iiii  bordarii  ibi  sunt.'  151  d :
(Shenley,  Bucks) '  In  Senelai  ii  hid.  et  dim.  pro  uno  manerio.  Terra
est  ii  carucis,  et  ibi  sunt  cum  viii  uillanis  et  ii  semis.'  Cf.  168  c
(Baudintune,  Gloucs.) ;  248b  ^Cressuale,  Staffordshire) ;  253  a  (Lar-
tune,  Salop);  257a  (Barbingi,  Salop);  292c  (Ormestune,  Notts);
293 a  (Claureburg) ;  Ibid.  (Elchesleie) ;  352  b  (Lastone, Lines.).  iL  151  b:
(Nayland,  Norfolk)  '  In  Neilanda  xi  liberi  homines  Stigandi  1  acras,
semper  i  car.  et  dim.'  Cf.  ii.  154  (Fasilingaham,  Nonolk);  Dd.  iv.
121  (Bochelanda,  Devon).

'  Dd.  i.  10 a:  (Ospringe,  Kent)  'Ospringes,  pro  vii  solins  et
dimidio  se  defendit.  Terra  est  xx  canicis.  In  dominio  non  sunt
canicae.  Ibi  xxix  uillani  cum  vi  bordariis  habent  xi  carucas.*  163  c :
(Tewkesbury,  Gloucs.) '  In  eodem  manerio  de  Teodekesberie  pertinebant
iiii  hidae  sine  dominio  quae  sunt  in  Hanlege.'  170c :  (Woodcbester,
Gloucs.)  '  Widecestre.  Ibi  sunt  xvi  uillani  et  xii  boidaril  cum  zvi
carucis.  In  dominio  nichil.*  Cf.  239  c  (Ailespede,  Warwidc) ;  273  b
(Neuuebold,  Derby) ;  272  d  (Badequella) ;  342  d  (Sotebi,  Lines.) ;  ii.
162  b  (Northwolde,  Norfolk) ;  ii.  235  b  (Frouuesham,  Norfolk) ;  iL
269b  (Binnetre,  Norfolk);  ii.  292  (Bukelesham,  SofTolk) ;  iv.  76
(Rodeleia,  Devon).

'  £.  g.  Brightwaltham  (Seld.  Soc.),  Select  Pleas  of  Manorial  Courts,
172.

*  Dd.  i.  174  c :  (Bricklehampton,  Worcs.) '  In  Bricstelmestune  sunt  x
hidae.  Ibi  x  uillani  et  x  bordarii  cum  vi  carucis  et  arant  et  seminant
vi  acras  de  proprio  semine.'


SECT.Ii-CH.m] LAND  OF  THE  TENANTS 397

viUagers.  These  latter  cases  are  numerous  enough,'  al-
though they  form  the  minority  in  comparison  with  those
of  the  more  common  system  of  combined  husbandry,  in
iriuch  the  lord's  interest  was  represented  by  a  distinct  home-
lann,  either  with  a  separate  plot  allotted  to  it,  or  with  shares
in  the  open  field  of  the  township.  But,  although  what  may
be  called  the  independent  township  is  the  exception  at  the
date  of  the  Survey,  still  it  exists,  and  it  is  especially  inter-
esting, inasmuch  as  it  presents  a  simpler,  more  rudimentary,
type  than  the  combined  system,  corresponding  best  to  the
indications  as  to  open-field  practices  given  by  the  Anglo-
Saxon  laws,*  and  connecting  itself  naturally  with  the
township  as  one  of  the  fundamental  units  underlying  the
manorial  o^^ization.  The  other  fundamental  unit  Is
tbe  private  estate  cultivated  by  slaves  or  serfs,  and  the  link
between  this  type  and  the  later  combined  system  is  pre-
sented by  the  manors  consisting  exclu^vely  of  a  home-farm.'
The  other  pole  of  development  has  to  be  sought  in  the
manors  consisting  of  a  township  without  home-farm,  and
the  inquirer  has  to  attend  to  both  lines  of  development.

The  communalism  of  the  independent  township  was  not
hidden  from  the  view  of  the  people  who  made  use  of  it,*
although  we  cannot  expect  them  to  have  bad  a  very  clear


>  IM.  i.  3i9d:  (Walgrave  and  Wold,  NorthaDts)  'Huic  manerio
(Fextone)  pertinent  Waldgraue  et  WaldB.  Ibi  ii  hidac  et  iii  uiigatae
Icirae  et  dimidia.  Terra  est  vii  canicis.  Ibi  sunt  xiiii  socbemantii
cum  vi  carucis.'  236  b ;  (Oadby,  Leics.)  '  In  Oldebi  'a.  car.  terrae  et  ii
bouaL  Ibi  fuerunt  ix  canicae  et  tot  carucas  habent  ibi  xlvi  socbemanni
cum  xi  bordariis  ct  iii  seruis.'  Cf.  373  (Begelie,  Langeleie,  Aiunc,
Middeltune ;  Derby)  ;  373  c.  d  (Lunt,  Blan^hesbi  |  Derby).  Cf.  the
tablei  of  Liocolnahire  settlementi  in  Appendix  IX.  Lincolnsbirc  was,
to  be  sure,  an  exceptionally  free  shire,  but  there  ii  not  the  slightest  pro-
bability that  its  social  organisation  should  have  been  entirely  peculiar.
It  presents  merely  in  a  reinforced  form  featnies  which  are  to  be  met
in  Leicestershire,  Norfolk,  Cambridgeshire,  Ac.

*  Tbe  gedalland  of  the  ceorles. Cf.  Growth  of  the  Manor,  p.  174.

*  Dd.  i.  357  a  :  (Wall- Town,  Salop) '  Isdem  Radulfus  (de  Mortemer)
tenet  Walle  et  Ricardus  de  eo.  Vluric  tenuil.  Ibi  i  hida.  Tern  est
ii  canicis. Ibi  est  una  cum  Ii  bouariis.'

*  Dd.  i.  313  d  :  (Goldington,  Beds)  '  In  eadcm  (Goldentone)  tenet
Walterus  i  hidam  de  Hugone.  Terra  est  i  canicae,  et  Ibi  est  .  .  .
Haec  terra  est  cscambium  de  Wares.  Hanc  terram  tenuerunt  homines
uillae  communiler  et  uendere  potuenmi.'


398  RURAL  ORGANIZATION [essay  n

conception  of  the  extent  to  which  a  theory  of  corpontc
ownership  was  involved  in  their  proceedings.  Without
attempting  to  analyse  in  too  searching  a  manner  these
necessarily  rudimentary  institutions,  we  cannot  pass  them
by  as  insignificant  features.  Although  the  indications  of
the  Survey  consist  of  a  few  words,  and  do  not  go  into  any
details  as  to  the  way  in  which  the  rural  organization  of  sudi
townships  was  carried  on,  they  are  precious  indeed,  because
they  give  documentary  evidence  of  the  existence  of  con-
ditions in  which  some  kind  of  by-laws,  and  orders  of
champion-farming,  were  needed.  People  who  had  to  man-
age the  open-field  system  in  communities  like  Ospringe,
Woodchester,  the  non-domanial  adjunct  of  Tewkesbury,
or  Oldeby,  could  not  do  it  unless  they  entered  into  agree;-
ments^  made  by-laws,  issued  orders,  and  enforced  themt
in  some  way  or  another.  It  is  deplorable  that  no  orders
or  by-laws  of  these  early  periods  have  come  down  to
us,  but  no  more  have  the  directions  of  reeves  or  stewards,
and  it  is  by  the  presence  of  the  problem  and  the  con-
ditions in  which  it  is  put,  together  with  later  indications,
that  we  have  to  shape  our  notions  in  r^^rd  to  its  solution.
It  is  not  from  the  steward  that  the  independent  township
could  have  received  directions  about  the  rotation  of  crops,
the  stocking  of  the  commons,  or  the  customs  as  to  hedges,
drains,  paths,  &c.^
Boroughs  The  management  of  townships  without  demesne  is  the
"i^uS^  natural  stepping-stone  to  another  important  variation  of
ties.  social  life,  namely,  to  that  of  cities  or  boroughs  possessed

of  agricultural  land.  It  is  clear  that  the  passage  from  the
town  in  a  rural  sense  to  the  town  in  the  urban  sense  was
a  very  gradual  one,  and  many  transitional  forms  exist  in
which  the  features  of  both  types  are  mixed  up.

To  begin  with,  the  beginnings  of  town  life,  as  expressed
in  a  distinct  group  of  burgesses,  may  be  traced  in  manors
which  otherwise  do  not  present  any  peculiarity  in  their
structure. Calne,  near  Chippingham,  Wilts,  is  not  an  im-

^  See  Appendix  X.


SECT.  II.  CH.  Ill] LAND  OF  THE  TENANTS 399

portant  place  at  the  present  time,  while  in  the  Domesday
Survey  it  appears  as  a  considerable  estate,  heading  the  list
of  the  Royal  manors  of  the  county.  The  first  lines  of  its
description  read  like  one  of  the  many  thousands  of  notices
about  rural  manors ;  there  is  land  for  %g  ploughs ;  there  is
land  for  8  plough-teams  in  the  Iord*s  dctnesne,  and  8  serfs ;
there  are  37  villains  and  78  smaller  tenants,  and  10  freedmen,
with  a  I  plough-teams  between  them.  But  all  at  once  we
seem  to  be  switched  oiT  on  a  new  track  ;  there  are
47  burgesses,  7  milb,  &c.^  In  other  words,  part  of  the
settlement  is  still  going  on  with  its  rural  husbandly,  while
for  some  reason  or  other  a  considerable  portion  of  the  in-
habitants have  taken  to  other  pursuits — industry  and  trade
of  some  kind  Yet  both  elements  of  the  population  are
kept  together  by  the  same  institutions  of  village  administra-
tion and  manorial  supremacy.  The  burgess  and  the  peasant
evidently  stood  closely  together,  and  it  was  not  difficult  to
turn  one  into  the  other.

On  the  other  hand,  in  completely  urban  settlements —
walled  towns — land  was  still  held  by  the  buq^esses  for  rural
purposes.  A  well-known  instance  is  Oxford,  with  its  Port
Meadow,  which  still  keeps  up  a  trail  of  corporate  ownership
running  from  the  time  before  the  Gmquest  It  is  ex«
pressly  stated  in  the  Survey  that  it  was  owned  by  all  the
burgesses,  that  is,  by  the  burgesses  in  common,  and  that  it
yielded  profits  amounting  to  6x.  8^  a  year.'  It  was  not  a
singular  case  in  any  sense.  The  Cambric^  buige»es
were  claiming  a  common  pasture  appropriated  by  the
Sheriff  of  Cambridgeshire,  and  there  can  be  hardly  any
doubt  that  they  had  the  right  on  their  side  00  this  oocasbii.
Indeed,  we  know  from  later  history  that  there  were  vast
open  fields  adjoining  the  city,  and  cultivated  in  the  same

■  Del.  i.  64  d.  Profiesaor  Tait  has  referred  to  the  eyamnle  of  Calae
in  his  remarkable  review  of '  Domesdav  Book  and  Bejfona ' :  EnsBsh
Hist.  Rev.  xii.  775.  Cf.  Tamworth,  Dd.  iL  846d.  Sudbury  (Sofilk},
Dd.  ii.  286  b ;  also  BoUingtmi  (Sussex),  Dd.  L  18  b ;  Linoonshiis^  k

345  a.

'  Dd.  i.  iS4b :  *  Omnes  burgenses  Oxeneford  habeot  coomunutar
extra  murum  pasturam  reddeatcm  vi  tolidos  «t  Tiii  denarios.*


400 •  RURAL  ORGANIZATION [ESSAY  li

manner  as  ordinary  unenclosed  fields  belonging  to  a  rural
manor.^  The  description  of  York  in  the  Domesday  Survey
shows  a  very  large  rural  establishment  connected  with  the
archiepiscopal  city — not  less  than  84  carucates,  or  approxi-
mately ten  thousand  acres,  were  included  in  the  common
geld  of  York,  and  of  these  only  six  carucates,  or  about  700
acres,  were  held  separately  by  the  archbishops.  Even
those  were  evidently  mixed  up  with  the  strips  of  the
burgesses,  and  cultivated  by  them  in  patches  {per  loca)  in
consideration  of  certain  payments  to  the  ecclesiastical  lord.^
To  mention  one  more  instance — the  rural  portion  of  the
town  of  Derby  contained  twelve  carucates.  In  this  case
not  all  the  burgesses  of  the  city  shared  in  the  ownership,'
but  only  forty-one,  and  the  land  was  partitioned  among
them,  probably  in  the  same  way  as  in  York,  and  on  the
same  principle  of  open-field  holdings  which  is  characteristic
of  mediaeval  rural  husbandry.

In  the  instances  quoted  we  have  examples  of  meadow
(Oxford),  of  wild  pasture  (Cambridge),  and  of  arable  land
(York  and  Derby).  Port  Meadow,  to  judge  by  its  name,
must  have  been  largely  used  for  making  hay,  and  was  kept
in  defence  until  Lammas  Day  in  this  case^  while  it  stood
open  as  a  common  for  depasturing  cattle  belonging  to  the
burgesses,  or  to  persons  to  whom  they  had  rented  the  use,
after  the  hay  had  been  cut  and  up  to  the  time  in  spring
when  the  greensward  was  put  under  defence.  Grass  for
hay  was  very  precious  in  Domesday  times,  and  the  meadow
may  have  been  distributed  among  the  burgesses  by  lot,  each
householder  taking  his  share  for  one  year.  This  custom
obtains  even  now  in  villages  in  the  immediate  vicinity
of  Oxford — in  Yarnton  and  Kidlington.*  Of  course,  such
customs,  as  well  as  the  practices  of  champion-farming  on
the  arable  fields  of  York,  Derby,  or  Nottingham,  presup-
pose not  only  a  strong  sense  of  communal  solidarity,  to

*  Dd.  i.  185a:  ^Reclamant  autem  super  Picotum  uicecomitem
communem  pasturam  sibi  per  cum  et  ab  eo  ablatam.'  Cf.  Maitland,
Township  and  Borough,  p.  190.

*  Dd.  1.298  b.  »  Dd.  i.  280  b.

*  Three  Oxford  Parishes  (Oxford  Historical  Society).


sect.il  CH.in] LAND  OF  THE  TENANTS 401

which  all  forms  of  private  usage  have  to  conform,  but  also
special  regulations  as  to  the  time  of  defence,  the  means  of
protecting  common  and  individual  rights  against  trespass
and  encroachment,  the  modes  of  apportioning  strips,  &c.
Of  the  by-laws  elaborated  by  the  town-moots  we  cannot
expect  to  hear  in  the  Survey,  but  it  is  important  to  note
that  it  lays  stress  on  the  communal  ownership.  The
combination  of  this  communal  ownership  with  the  superior
right  of  the  King  and  of  the  various  lay  and  ecclesiastical
lords  interested  in  the  towns  and  superimposed  on  some  of
their  burgesses^  does  not  appear  to  me  to  be  different  in
essence  from  the  combination  of  communal  and  manorial
rights  in  the  rural  townships.  The  burgesses  were  more
closely  knitted  together ;  they  were  protected  by  their  walls
and  their  economic  importance ;  they  were  better  able  to
take  care  of  their  rights  and  to  resist  encroachments  of
private  lords.  But  at  bottom  their  union  was  a  modifica-
tion of  the  union  constituted  in  every  rural  township,  and  it
is  not  necessary  to  look  out  for  a  different  principle  in  the
organization  of  their  property  and  husbandry.  The  real
difference  consisted  in  the  widely  different  re-action  of  the
urban  and  of  the  rural  townships  against  feudalism:  the
first  succeeded  in  preserving  and  consolidating  itself  in  the
struggle,  while  the  latter  had  to  submit,  and  to  shape  its
l^^l  and  economic  framework  according  to  the  scheme  of
personal  tenure  and  service.

The  main  points  of  the  section  on  rural  organization  Summary
may  be  summarized  under  the  following  heads : —

1.  The  open-field  system  is  not  especially  connected
either  with  free  villages  or  with  servile  villages  :  it  existed
in  all  the  varieties  of  rural  settlements,  independently  of  the
condition  of  the  peasants.

2.  Manorial  organization  is  characterized  in  the  eleventh

^  I  need  not  touch  on  the  disputed  question  of  the  'contributory'
tenements  and  of  the  garrison  burgesses  (Maitland,  Domesday  Book  and
Beyond,  I79ff. ;  A.  Ballard,  Domesday  Boroughs).  It  is  sufficient  for
tny  purpose  to  note  the  undoubted  fact  that  many  of  the  town  houses
were  claimed  by  great  lords  who  held  estates  in  the  neighbourhood  of
the  borough,  although  sometimes  in  a  different  county  from  the  one  in
Mrhich  the  borough  was  situated. £.  g.  Dd.  i.  154  a  (Oxford)*

VINOCOAOOFF  D d


402  RURAL  ORGANIZATION [essay  n

*

century  by  a  great  variety  of  types,  and  cannot  be  traced
to  the  prevailing  influence  of  a  single  current  of  economic
development.

3.  The  older  and  wider  basis  of  rural  life  is  presented  by
the  township.  The  manorial  organization  appears  as  a
later  superstructure  on  this  original  basis.

4.  The  rural  and  the  urban  township  have  developed
from  a  common  stem,  and  help  to  explain  one  another.


SECTION III: SOQAL  CLASSES

CHAPTER I

LANDOWNERS  AND  FREE  TENANTS

1.  It  has  been  already  made  clear  that  the  military  Thano
tenants^who  with  the  ecclesiastical  institutions  formed  the  ^/^"^
bulk  of  the  privileged  classes  in  the  feudal  age,  had  stepped  Conquest,
to  a  great  extent  into  the  place  occupied  before  the  Con-
quest by  thanes.^ Indeed,  in  some  cases  the  same  people
held  the  estates  from  which  military  service  was  due  both
after  and  before  the  Conquest,^  and  grou£s  of.*  English
thanes  ''^  survive  at  the  time  of  the  Domesday  Survey  in  all
parts  of  the  country  as  one  element  of  the  upper  military
class  which  was  to  rule  England  during  the  next  centuries.
The  only  question  is  whether  these  military  tenants  of
ancient  stock  would  be  entered  later  on  as  knights  or  as
sergeants.* The  tie  of  service  between  the  thane  and  his

^  Dd.  i.  58  d  :  (Barton,  Berks)  *  De  eodem  manerio  (Bertune),  et  de
eadem  terra  tenet  Warinus  in  Sogoorde  iiii  hidas,  et  Bemerius  v  hidas
in  Soningeuuel  et  in  Chenitun,  et  Aluuinus  i  hidam  in  Genetune.  Sex
Anglici  tenuerunt,  et  ab  aecclesia  recedere  non  i>otuenint ' ;  65  c :
(Down ton,  Wilts)  '  Duntone.  De  eadem  terra  huius  manerii  tenet
Willelmus  de  Braiose  xiiii  hidas,  Walerannus  v  hidas,  Radulfus
V  hidas.  Ansgotus  iii  hidas  et  dimidiam  et  rex  habet  in  sua  foresta
iiii  hidas.  Aecclesia  eiusdem  manerii  habet  iiii  hidas  et  omnes  hi
de  episcopo  tenent.  Qui  has  terras  tenebant  T.R.E.  non  se  poterant
ab  aecclesia  separare  . . .  Modo  quod  habet  in  dominio  ualet  Ixxx  lib.
Quod  milites  xxiii  lib.'  Cf.  353  c  (Wclingeham,  Lines.) ;  iv.  391
(Mereuda,  Devon)  ;  iv.  392  (Witefella).

*  Dd.  i.  68  a:  (Lit.  Langford,  Wilts)  '  Langcford,  T.R.E.  geldabat
pro  iii  hidis.  Terra  est  ii  carucis.  Has  habent  ibi  ii  angli . . .  Pater
eonim  qui  nunc  tenent  tenuit  T.R.E.  nee  potuit  ab  aecclesia  separari.'
Cf.  70c  (Chenete,  Wilts).  259c:  (Lydley  Heys,  Salop)  *Auti  tenet
de  comite  Litlega.  Ipsemet  tenuit  et  liber  homofuit ' ;  378  d  (Riselei,
Derbyshire)  ;  ii.  204  b  (Meltuna,  Norfolk) ;  iv.  453  (Bochelanda,
Somerset).

'  Dd.  iv.  445  :  (Devon)  *  Terrae  Anglorum  tegnorum.  Aldretus,
etc.*

*  Dd. i.  206  c  : (Catworth, Hunts) *  In Catewordc  habuit Rex

D  d  2


404  SOCIAL  CLASSES  [ESSAY  n

lord  was  a  broader  one  than  that  between  the  feudal  lord.
and  his  military  vassal :  it  was  originally,  as  we  have  seen^
a  general  obligation to  serve,  which  was  byjno^ja^n^
"specRically restricted  to the  attendance in the armed

*  - < ....  - - - ■  -  I H MB

retinue  of  the  lord  for  a  period  of  six  weeks,  or  other  forms

of  military  duty. Suit  of  court,  household  attendance,  in

some  cases  messenger  services  and  help  in  huntinjg^,  were  its

: material  features,  some  of  which  are  perceivgi>ic  in  the

feudal  arrangements  of  military  tenure,  and  .do JlQt  jQQae

exclusively  from  English,  but  also  from  French  traditions

j although  the  usages  of  thaneship  lay.  mr*^  fstrrs'S  m  tht

1 "general  notion  of  service,  while  the  French_practices,  at

' least  at  the  time  of  the  Conquest  and  after  the  Conquest.

are  more  strictly  military.^ The  peculiar  personal  service

forming  the  essential  condition  of  land  tenure  appean,

however,  clearly  enough  at  the  time  of  KingEdsmul,'  and

there  is  no  reason  to  doubt  that  military  attendance  iq  IEc

fyrdf  apart  from  cases  of  general  levies,  was  an .esacntisjj

part  of  it^

Personal Xo  the  class  of  thancs  in  England,  vassals  and  minisUriaUs

vassalage.


would  correspond  on  the  Continent,  and  it  is  important  to
realize  that  the  tie  of  personal  service  formed  the  baais  of
their  condition,  because  this  fundamental  notion  will  hdp
us  to  unravel  some  of  the  otherwise  puzzling  featiiretu>f
terminology  and  usage  attending  their  position  in  the
Survey.  Free  land  tenure,  for  one — that  is,  a  form  of  land-
holding  which  enabled  the  tenant  to  go  with  his  land  where
he  pleased,  tojeH  and  give  it  as  he  pleased — was  an  incident
commonly  connected  with  thaneship,  but  not  necessarily
derived  from  it,  and  not  essential  for  the  status  of  a  thane.


Edwardus  ii  hidas  ad  geldum.  Terra  iii  canicis.  Ibi  fueront  viii
taini  habentes  sub  rege  sacam  et  socam,  banc  terrain  tennit  £u-
stachius,  et  modo  est  in  manu  regis,  et  ibi  sunt  viii  komtnes^  et  sub  eis
vii  bordarii  cum  iii  canicis.'

^  The  household  duties  of  English  thanes  are  well  indicated  in  such
expressions  as  discthegn  and  Imrthegn. Cart.  Sax.  91,  1286.

'  Dd.  i.  67  d :  (Dumford,  Wilts)  '  Dameford . . .  Tres  angli  tenoe-
runt  T.R.E.  et  non  poterant  ab  aecclesia  separari.  Duo  ex  eis
reddebant  v  sol.  et  tercius  seruiebat  sicut  tainus.'

'  Rectitudines,  i.


SECT.  TIT.  CH.  i] FREE  TENANTS


405


Land  was  the  rewj^jd  and  the  usual  material  equipmentCpr
service  in  those  days :  it  would  have  been  unfair  and
impossible  to  keep  the  allegiance  and  actual  help  of  thanes
as  serving-men  unless  they  were  recompensed  in  some  way,
and  unless  they  iiid^  some  means  to  provide  for  tb^r  sus-
tenance and  expenses.  Therefore  the  feofiinent  of  land
followed  as  a  matter  of  course,  and  the  more  complete  and
advantageous  this  feoflment  was  the  more  it  was  appreciated,
and  the  better  it  corresponded  to  the  idea  of  recompense
for  faithful  and  efficient  service.  Naturally  enough  we  find,
therefore,  that  the  best-endowed  and  most  privileged  land-
owners of  Old  English  society  turn  out  to  be  thanes,  and
have  received  their  endowments  as  grants  for  service.  We
may  trace  thaneship  as  a  constitutive  element  in  the  con-
dition of  the  alodiarii}  the  owners  who  have  their  lands  as
fully  at  their  disposal  as  was  possible  in  those  days ;  and
another  form  of  land  tenure,  also  described  as  essentially
free,  that  of  the  tenants  in  parage  *  is  besides  intimately  con-
nected with  thaneship.  But_Jhe^jfjyilegfi4..(lUaUty.  of  the
land  tenure  was  not  a  direct  and  necessary  result  of  thane-
ship,  nor  the  condition  of  a  thane  a  direct  consequence  of

'  Dd.  i.  lb:  (Kent)  *  Has  forisfacturas  habet  rex  super  omnes
alodiarios  totius  comitatus  de  Ghent,  et  super  homines  ipsonun.  £t
quando  moritur  alodiarius  rex  inde  habet  releuationem  terrae,  excepta
terra  S.  Trinitatis,  et  S.  Augustini  et  S.  Martini,  et  Exceptis  his,
Godric  de  Bumes,  etc.  .  .  .  Super  istos  habet  rex  forisCacturam  de
capitibus  eorum  tantum  modo,  et  de  terns  eonim  habet  releuamen
qui  habent  suam  sacam  et  socam.'  39  c :  (Knighton  and  the  Down,
Hants)  '  Kcx  tenet  in  dominio  Chenistone  et  Done.  Octo  liberi
homines  tenuerunt  in  alodium  de  rege  Edwardo.  Tunc  ^eldauit  pro
ii  hid  is,  modo  pro  nichilo.  Oda  cum  ii  liberis  hominibus  habuit
dimidiam  hidam  et  quartam  partem  unius  uirgatae.  Aluuoldus  i
uirgatam.  Herouldus  i  uirgatam.  Goduinus  i  uirgatam.  Alricus
unani  uirgatam.  Brictric  dimidiam  hidam.  Unuscfuisque  honim
partem  molini,  quaeque  pars  xxii  den.  Horum  v  tamorum  terram
tenet  rex  in  firma  sua,  ct  habet  ibi  ii  carucas  in  dominio  et  appre?
ciatur  c  sol.  et  tamen  reddit  viii  lib.  de  firma.'  Cf.  61  a  (Etingedene^
lierks);  cf.  ibid.,  Hingepcne;  61  b  (Ccrletone) ;  63  c  (Pcteorde).

^  Dd.  i.  79  b:  (Kadcsway  in  Broadway  Chapelry,  Dorset)  '  Dode
man  tenet  de  Comite  Wai.  Scireuuold  et  Vluuard  tenuerunt  (in
para^'io)  T.K.K.  et  geldabant  pro  ii  hidis.'  Cf.  79c,  d,  passim;  263
(Doneham,  Cheshire) ;  iv.  48 :  (in  Broadway,  Dorset)  *■  Uxor  Hugonis
f.  (]rip  habet  i  mansionem  que  uocatur  Waia  auam  tenaerunt  ix  tagni
paritcr . .  .  poterant  ire  cum  suis  terris  ad  quemiibet  dominuro'  iv.  435
(I'ultimora,  Devon).


4o6  SOCIAL  CLASSES  [essay  n

privileged  land-holding.  By  the  side  of  thanes  who  could
go  with  their  land  where  they  pleased  and  could  do  with  it
what  they  pleased,^  who  thus  enjoyed  full  liberty  in  regard
to  commendation  and  possessed  bdcland^  stand  other  thanes
who  could  not  separate  their  land  ^^^^  '^'TUtf  Bflltfr"''"'
estatej'oFcould  not  leave,  with  it,  the  patroo9g.e^Qf  tbl?-kiog»..
or  of  the  Church,  or  of  some  great  man.^  In  the  lat(cr  jC9^
the  tenement  of  the  thane  was  considered  as  the  pyopepty
of  his  lord,  as  a  portion  of  an  estate  which  had  to  'defend'
the  whole  of  it  in  respect  of  military  okUgaiiooa*  This
was  the  reason  why  the  Domesday  Commissioners  took  the
fact  that  a  man  lived  on  thaneland  which  could  not  be
separated  from  the  lord's  estate,  as  an  indication  that  the
tenement  had  to  pass  under  the  lordship  of  the  successor
of  the  Saxon  lord  ;  while  independent  estates  belonging  to
thanes  did  not,  as  a  matter  of  course,  follow  their  holders'
allegiance.  A  characteristic  consequence  of  the  quality  of
thaneland  was  that,  as  a  rule,  it  was  estimated  for  geld
with  the  estate  on  which  it  depended.*  On  the  contrary,
thanes  holding  b6cland  were  in  truth  only  personally  sub-


^  Dd.  i.  35  b :  (Apps  Court,  Surrey) '  Isdem  Ricardus  habet  vi  hidas
in  manerio  £bsa,  quas  abbas  Wluuoldus  deliberauit  ei  in  emendatioiie
Waletone,  sicut  homines  Kicardi  dicunt.  Sed  homines  de^  hundredo
dicunt  se  nunquam  uidisse  breuem  uel  liberatorem  regis  qui  earn  inde
saisisset  Hanc  terram  tenuerunt  nouem  teigni,  et  cum  ea  se  poterant
uertere  quo  uolebant.'  84  a  (Wilchesode,  Dorset).  277  d  :  (Shipley*
Derby)  *  In  Scipelie  habuerunt  Brun  et  Odincar  ii  carucas  terme  aid
geldum  .  .  .  Hanc  terram  dicunt  homines  qui  iurauerunt  non  per-
tinuisse  ad  Ulf  fenisc  T.R.E.  sed  ipsi  ii  taini  ita  tenuerunt  ut  potuis*
sent  dare  et  uendere  cui  uoluissent. iv.  88  (Coletona,  Devon).

'  Dd.  i.  3  a :  (Otford,  Kent)  '  De  hoc  manerio  (Otefort)  tenent  lii
teigni  i  solin  et  dimidium,  et  ibi  habent  in  dominio  lii  carucas ' ;  46  d :
(Otterboum,  Hants)  '  Otrebume.  Cheping  tenuit  de  episcopatu  Win-
toniensi,  non  potuit  recedere  ab  aecclesia.*  iv.  163 :  (Tavestock,
Devon)  'Tauestocha  . .  .  pro  iii  hidis  et  dim.  De  his  tenent  vi  niilites
hidam  et  dim.  Quam  tenuerunt  de  abbate  iiii  tagni  qui  non  poterant
ab  aecclesia  separari.'  Cf.  iv.  426  (Mochelesberia,  Devon) ;  cf.  1. 173  a :
(Worcestershire)  '  Si  ita  liber  homo  est  ut . . .  cum  terra  sua  possit  ire
quo  uoluerit.'  173  b  :  'Grastone  etc.  tenuerunt  teini  • . .  nee  poterant
recedere  a  domino  manerii.'

^  Dd.  i.  41a,  b  :  (Witnal,  Hants)  '  De  eodem  manerio  tenet  Wil-
lelmus  de  Fiscanno  vii  hidas  in  Windenaie  et  in  aliis  ii  loots.  Dno
teigni  tenuerunt  de  episcopo  et  non  potuerunt  ire  quolibet  et  gelda-
uerunt  cum  supradictis  hidis.' Cf.  41  b  (Eisseburne).


SECT.  III.  CH.  I] FREE  TENANTS  407

jected  to  certain  obligations  in  regard  to  the  lord.'  They
could  discard  him  if  they  found  his  protection  no  adequate
equivalent  for  their  service,  and,  at  any  rate,  their  land
endowment  was  by  right  in  no  way  implicated  in  the  estate
of  the  lord.^  The  cases  under  discussion,  besides  their
direct  significance  in  Old  English  law,  are  characteristic  for
the  use  and  meaning  of  the  expressions  *  freedom ',  *  free '.
These  expressions  admit  of  divers  constructions,  and  are
very  wide  in  their  application,  but  in  one  of  the  most
prevalent  senses  given  to  them  they  have  nothing  to  do
with  freedom  of  status  or  of  personal  condition.  They  are
used  to  denote  that  a  person  can  dispose  of  the  property
in  land  that  he  holds,  land  which  belongs  properly  to  him
and  not  to  somebody  else.^  The  contrast  between  the
forms  of  land-holding  in  question  might,  indeed,  be  illus-
trated to  some  extent  by  a  comparison  with  the  modem
distinction  between  freehold  and  leasehold.  i ";

Certain peculiarities of  Old English  law  account  fori '  ♦-

a  good  deal  in  the  history  of  thaneship.  It  inclined
decidedly  to  the  notion  that  all  the  sons  of  a  man  sliouTd
be  given  equal  rights  in  his  successiofir'TKIis  view  sub-
ordinates the  interestr  oT  eSFicTent  Tiusbandry  and  service
to  the  natural  growth  of  population,  and  the  result  must

^  Dd.  i.  145  d :  (E.  Bumham,  Bucks)  '  Esbumeham  .  .  .  Hoc
iiKinerium  tenucrunt  iii  teigni  T.R.E.  et  uendere  potuenint  et  tamen
ipsi  iii  rcddiderunt  per  annum  v  ores  de  consuetudine  ad  monasterium
dc  Stanes.'  163d:  (Tewkesbury,  Gloucs.)  'Hoc  nianerium  tenuit
I^rictric  filius  Algar  T.R.E.  et  has  subscriptas  terras  aliorum  teinorum
ipso  tempore  in  sua  potestate  habuit  .  .  .  Qui  T.R.E.  has  terras
tcnebunt  et  se  et  terras  suas  sub  Brictrici  potestate  summiserunt'

^  Dd.  i.  254  b:  (Marcbamley,  Salop)  *  Raynaldus  uicecomes  tenet
de  comite  Marcemeslei,  Seuuar  et  AJuric  pro  ii  maneriis  tenuerunt
r.R.K.  et  erant  liberi.'  Ibid. :  *  Wicford,  Sten  et  Wilegrip  tenuerunt  et
( uin  terra  ista  liberi  erant.*  Ibid.,  Grotintune.  iv.  265 :  (Bratton,
Devon)  '  Hratona  ...  In  ista  mansione  fuerunt  ii  tegni  tr.e.  qui
tenuerunt  dim.  uirgatam  terrae  pariter,  et  potuenint  ire  ad  quemlibet
dominum  cum  ista  terra.*  Ibid.:  (Bridestow,  Devon)  'Cum  ista
mansione  habet  Balduinus  terram  vi  tegnorum  qui  non  pertinuerunt
ad  supradictam  mansionem  .  .  .Isti  tegni  potuenint  ire  ad  quemlibet
dommum  cum  ista  terra.*

^  I  )d.  i.  84  a  :  ( Mappowder,  Dorset)  *  Bollo  presbiter  tenet  Mapledre.
Ipse  tiiber)  tenuit  cum  aliis  vii  tainis  (liberis)  T.R.E.'  266c:  (Cal-
ilecot,  Cheshire)  *  Caldecote.  Ulgar  presbiter  et  alii  iii  teini  tenuenmt
pro  iii  maneriis  el  liberi  erant.'


r


4o8  SOCIAL  CLASSES  [ESSAY fl

always  be  a  multiplication  of  rights  impairing  the  value  of
estates,  parcelling  them  up  into  small  fractions,  either  by
real  partition  or  by  dependence  on  too  great  a  number  of
tenants.  The  personal  character  of  ^^^Tirf^jp  CKPrfiff^
itself,  among  other  things,  in  the  absolute  character  _of
inherited  rights  springing  from  it.  Although  there  were
definite  standards  of  efficiency  iin  r^ard  to  estaJxaJatfisdoL
to  serve  as  a  basis  for  military  service,  although  it  would
have  been  advantageous  from  a  public  poisJLfiLldoiUbL.
keep  them  up  as  close  units  of  3^-5  hides  or  carucates,  as
a~  matter  of  fact  we  find,  especially  on  bdcland  estates,  the
most  luxuriant  growth  of  parage  tenures,  with  8,  9,  10,  14
tenants  for  each  estate/  which  in  itself  is  sometimes  by  no
means  a  large  one.  The  movement  towards  the  concentra-
.  tibn  of  estates  assumed  an  overwhelming^foroc  directly
after  the  Conquest  in  the  development  of  Freqch  military
'  tenure.
Military  Thaneship  as  a  condition  of  vassalage,  or  personal  service
Tenure,  ^f  ^  higher  kind,  was  not  restricted  to  the  following  of  the
King.  Great  personalities — queens,  earls,  bishops— had
their  thanes  as  well  as  the  King,^  and  in  strict  terminology

^  Dd.  i.  lie:  (Chillenden,  Kent)  *  Cilledene,  pro  uno  solin  et  uno
iugo  et  X  acris  se  defendit . . .  Goduinus  tenuit  de  rege  Edwaido  et
alii  V  teigni.'  72  a :  (Wilts)  '  Butremare  (?)...  Octo  taini  tenuemnt
T.R.E.  et  geldabat  pro  i  hida  et  una  uirgata  terrae.'  83  c  :  (in  Broad-
way, Dorset)  '  Waia  . . .  Novem  taini  tenuemnt  in  pan^o  T.R.E.  et
geldabat  pro  iv  hidis.'  146  c,  d :  (Woughton-on-tne-Green,  Bucks)
'  Vlchetone  . .  iiii  hid.  pro  i  manerio  .  • .  Hoc  manerium  tenuemnt
viii  teigni.  Homm  iiii  homines  Alurici  dimidiam  hidam  habuenmt.'
152a:  (Stoke  Hammond,  Bucks)  ^Stoches,  pro  x  hidis  .  •  .  Hoc
manerium  tenuemnt  viii  teigni.  Unus  eomm  vi  hidas  dim.  uirg.
minus  tenuit  pro  uno  manerio,  et  ipse  et  omnes  alii  vii  potuerunt
uendere  terram  suam  cui  uoluemut.* Cf.  Wluerintone,  ibid.

'  Dd.  i.  137  c :  (Braughing,  Herts)  '  Brachinges,  pro  v  hidis  se
defendit  ...  Hoc  manerium  tenuemnt  ii  teigni.  Homm  unus  homo
Regis  Edwardi  habuit  iiii  hidas,  et  alter  homo  Ansgari  Stalri  i
hidam  habuit.  Vendere  non  potuenmt  quia  semper  lacuenint  in
elemosina  Regis  Edwardi  tempore  et  omnmm  antecessomm  suomm
ut  scyra  testatur.'  Cf.  137 d  (Merdelai) ;  371  a:  (Colsterworth,  Lines.)
I  In  Colsteuorde  habuit  Tainus  reginae  iiii  camcatas  tenre  ad  geldum.'
ii.  151b:  (Norfolk)  *Torp  ten.  teinus  Stigandi  iii  camcatas  terrae.'
Cf.  152  b  (Hedenaham).  i.  50a :  (Hants) '  Sudberie  tenuemnt  Ednod
et  Edwi  in  alodium  de  rege.'  376  d  :  (Lines.) '  Wapentac  dicit  Ascfail
fuisse  tainum  regis,  nee  habuisse  unquam  sub  Merlesnen  terram
suam.'  ^


:CT.  III.  CH.  I] FREE  TENANTS  409

e  King's  thanes,  with  their  large  wer^eld  and  extensive
ghts,  were  carefully  held .  apatf  jwpi  ordinary  thane^/
nd  yet  we  mostly  read  of  thanes  in  Domesday  without
\y  qualifying  adjunct,  and  have,  if  possible,  to  determine
every  particular  case  whether  the  persons  in  question  are
nants-in-chief  or  under-tenants;  personal  attendants^ of
le  king,  or  of  some  private^person.  The  fact  that  tkemesy
I  such,  occupy  such  a  prominent  place  in  Domesday  must
?  explained  by  some  feature  common  to  all,  and  there  is
ily  one  such  feature — they  are  all  armed  sery^tSj.  thdr

-St  and  most  important  lluty.  is  to  a§3ist  the  iordiaJQie
yformance  of  military  duties  charged  to  the  estate ;  as
•edecessors  of  the  feudal  milites  t^ey  are  aU  tbaiics»  the
ghest  as  well  as  the  lowest,  and  stand  in  sharp  opposition
>  all  classes  not  subjected  to  3pecial  military  obligations.
This  is  very  characteristic  in  the  case  of  small  thanes,  of
hom  there  is  a  great  number  everywhere.  Holders  of
ploughland,  or  of  fractions  of  a  ploughland,  are  constantly
ascribed  as  thanes,  and  it  is  certainly  not  the  size,  but  the
iiality  of  their  tenement  and  the  nature  of  their  service,
lat  give  them  the  right  to  such  a  personal  distinction,
he  well-known  instance  of  the  Lancashire  thanes  is
orth  notice  in  this  respect.  These  thanes,  and  the
^tngSy  or  homines  corresponding  to  them,  hold  estates
■  one  ploughland  and  less ;  they  have  to  perform  boon-
orks  and  ploughings  on  the  King's  manorial  home-farms,
id  these  agricultural  services  are  emphatically  described
;  being  alike  to  those  of  villains.  The  services  in  question
e  not  numerous  or  burdensome,  but  they  speak  of  a
ibjection  which  suggests  a  comparison  with  downright
llains,  and  imply  rustic  arrangements  in  the  households
the  thanes  themselves.^ They  were  evidently,  for  all

*  This  is  especially  clear  in  Old  English  terminology. Liebermann,
esetze,  I,  358,  11  Can.  71.

*  Dd.  i.  269  d :  *  Inter  Kipam  et  Mersham  :  Omnes  isti  taini  habae-
nt  consuetudinem  reddere  ii  eras  denariorum  de  unaquaque  cam-
ta  terrae,  et  faciebant  per  consuetudinem  domos  regis  et  c^uae  ibi
:rtinebant  sicut  uillani,  et  piscarias,  et  in  silua  haias  et  stabilitoras,
qui  ad  haec  non  ibat  quando  debebat  ii  sol.  emendabat,  et  postea
I  opus  ueni^at  et  operabatur  donee  perfectum  erat. Unusquisque


1  >


4IO  SOCIAL  CLASSES  [essay  n

purposes,  peasants  with  medium-sized  holdings.  The  lord
exercised  very  stringent  rights  of  relief  in  cases  of  suc-
cession ;  and  the  expressions  used  by  the  Survey  about  the
passing  of  inheritance  imply  that  the  system  of  united
holdings  prevailed  there,  and  not  parage  or  gavelkind
succession.^  And  yet  all  the  terms  used  to  denote  the
condition  of  these  tenants — thanes,  drengs^  homines — dis-
tinguish them  from  the  ordinary  peasantry,  and  the  stress
laid  on  the  organization  of  justice  and  the  attendance  at
folk-moots  shows  these  men  to  have  been  eminently '  moot-
worthy'.  There  can  be  no  doubt  about  the  condition  of
these  independent  freemen :  they  are  *  statesmen ',  farmers,
and  warriors  at  the  same  time.  Their  very  independent
position  does  not  exclude  an  element  of  strongly  expressed
vassalage :  they  are  subjected  to  rules  of  a  distinctly  feudal
character,  and  their  tenements  are  liable  to  confiscation
for  grave  breaches  of  the  obligations  resulting  from  such
vassalage.

It  need  hardly  be  mentioned  that  the  CongufisL  with  its
wholesale  destruction  of  the  English  military  ^laa^  thff
destruction  of  property,  and  the  deeds  of  violence  brought
about  in  its  sequel,  lowered  in  every  direction  the  position
of  thanes.  We  often  notice  their  disappearance,  and  can
readily  suspect  that  they  have  been  replaced  by  peasants—
socmen  or  villains.^  In  other  instances,  although  they
keep  their  ground,  there  is  very  little  left  to  testify  of  their

eorum  uno  die  in  Augusto  mittebat  messores  suos  secare  segetes  regis.'
270  a :  '  Lailand :  Homines  huius  manerii  et  de  Salford  non  open-
bantur  per  consuetudinem  ad  aulam  regis  neque  nietebant  in  Augusta
Tantummodo  i  haiam  in  silua  faciebant  et  nabebant  sanguinis  foris-
facturam,  et  feminae  passae  violentiam.  De  aliis  consuetudinibus
aliorum  superiorum  maneriorum  erant  consortes.'

'  Dd,  i.  269  d  :  *  Si  quis  de  terra  regis  recedere  uolebat,  dabat  xl  sol.
et  ibat  quo  uolebat.  Si  quis  terrain  patris  sui  mortui  habere  udebaty
xl  sol.  releuabat.  Qui  uolebat  et  terram  et  omnem  pecuniam  patris
mortui  rex  habebat.'

^  Dd.  i.  I58d :  (Chipping  Norton,  Oxon)  '  Nortone  .  • .  xiiii  hid.  et
i  uirg.  terrae  et  dimidiam  . . .  nunc  habet  in  dominie  v  hidas  de  tena
uillanorum  . . .  Hanc  terram  tenuerunt  xiiii  tainL'  214  a:  ^Crawleyt
Beds)  *  Crawelai  ...  In  dominio  ii  carucae,  et  iii  canicae  uillanorum
possunt  fieri.  Ibi  unus  uillanus  et  vii  bordarii  et  i  seruus, .  •  Hoc
manerium  tenuerunt  ix  teigni,  et  cui  uoluerunt  terram  suam  dare  et
uendere  potuerunt.'


SFXT.  Til.  CH.  i] FREE  TENANTS  411

importance  in  better  times.*  Indeed,  it  is  almost  a  wonder
that  so  many  traces  should  have  still  been  left  in  the
Domesday  Survey  as  to  their  position  and  rights.

2.  We  have  already  had  occasion  to  deal  with  one  meaning  Alodiarii.
of  the  term  liber,  free.  It  is  also  often  used  synonymously
with  thane,  or  as  a  qualification  to  it,  marking  off  one  species
of  the  genus,  namely,  the  thanes  sitting  on  their  own  land,
and  free  to  go  with  their  land  where  they  pleased.*  We
would  sometimes  recognize  members  of  the  same  group
even  where  the  word  thane  is  omitted,  as  *  free  English  ',*
or  alodiarii,^  or  '  tenants  in  parage  '.*  But  as  these  terms
were  of  local  application  and  not  determined  by  an
unalterable  law,  in  the  case  of  alodiarius — the  free  tenant
holding  in  alod — it  is  not  absolutely  necessary  to  suppose
that  the  term  always  meant  exactly  thanes  owning  land  with
full  right  to  dispose  of  it,  owning  bScland  in  fact,  or  its
equivalent.  Some  of  the  local  jurors  actually  spoke  of
alodiarii  who  were  unable  to  recede,  and  therefore  were  not
quite  free  in  their  rights  of  ownership.*  And,  what  is  even
more  characteristic,  the  term  alodiarii,  which,  as  a  rule,

*  Dd.  i.  284  d:  (Eaton,  Notts)  'iCttune,  habuerunt  x  taini  quisque
Aulam  suam.  Inter  eos  vi  bouatas  terrae  et  dimidiam  et  vi  partem
unius  bouatae  ad  geldum  .  . .  Ibi . . .  xiiii  uillani  et  ix  bordarii  habentes
viicarucas.'  Cf.  ibid.,  Hedune ;  28^  d,  Westone ;  ibid.,  Normentune ;
286  d,  Ministretone ;  ibid.,  Gringeleia  ;  387  a,  Rametone.

^  Dd.  i.  239  d  :  (Avon  Dassett,  Warwick)  '  Ipse  comes  (de  Mellent)
tenet  in  Derceto  x  hidas.  Tres  taini  tenuerunt,  et  liberi  fiierunt.*  Ct.
ibid.,  Waltone,  Scirebume  ' ;  240  a,  Snitefeld.

'  Dd.  i.  78  d :  (Handley,  Dorset)  *  Hanle^e  T.  R.  E.  geldabat  pro  xx
hidis  .  .  .  De  hac  terra  tenent  ii  angli  liberi  liii  hidas.'

*  Dd.  i.  22  a  :  (Sussex)  *  Lodintone,  iiii  hid.  et  dim. . . .  Hanc  terram
tenuerunt  vi  teigni  sicut  alodium.'  26  c:  (Brighton,  Sussex)  '  Bristel-
mestune.  In  eadem  uilla  tenet  Widardus  .  .  .  vi  hidas  et  unam
uirgatam,  et  pro  tanto  se  defendit.  Tres  aloarii  tenuerunt  de  rege
I  .dvvardo  et  potucrunt  ire  quolibet.  Unus  ex  eis  habuit  Aulam,  et
uillani  tenuerunt  partes  aliorum  duorum.'  Cf.  27  c  (Venningorc)  ;
28  d  (Ordinges);  58  c  (Comenore,  Berks);  60  d  (BorgefcUe,  Berks).
53  b:  (Shanklin,  Hants) '  Sencliz.  Sex  liberi  homines  tenuerunt  de
le^^e  I'dwardo  in  alodio.*

^  Dd.  i.  46  b  :  (Knapp,  Hants}  *  Chenep  . .  .  Tres  alodiarii  tenuerunt
in  paragio  dc  rego  Edwardo  et  lii  aulae  fiierunt'  Cf.  54  a  (Heceford,
Hants).

'^  Dd.  i.  52  c  :  (Swainston  in  Calboum,  Hants)  'Caubome..  .  De
hac  terra  tenet  Robertus  vi  hidas,  Herpul  ii  hidas,  Alsi  iii  hidas  et
(limidiam.  Has  hidas  tenuerunt  vii  alodiarii  de  episcoponec  poterant
recedtre  alio  uel  ab  illo.*


412  SOCIAL  CLASSES  [ESSAY  n

carries  the  meaning  of  as  full  an  ownership  as  could  exist
in  those  times,  has  been  applied  exceptionally  to  people
who  can  hardly  be  described  as  thanes,  in  whose  position  no
element  of  vassalage  is  discernible.  In  the  description  of
the  Surrey  manor  of  Codinton,^  for  instance,  we  read  that
it  defended  itself  to  the  geld  for  30  hides,  of  which  the  earl
(Lewin)  had  twenty,  while  ten  were  held  by  the  alodiarii
of  the  township,  who  could  go  with  their  land  where  they
pleased.  The  connexion  with  the  township  is  the  main
feature  in  the  status  of  this  particular  set  of  alodiarii^  and  it
is  much  more  probable  to  see  in  them  small  independent
freeholders  of  the  township  than  thanes.  Indeed,  this  case
makes  it  clear  that  the  expression  alodiarii  used  without
further  qualification  applies  chiefly  to  persons  whose  con-
dition was  characterized  by  their  freehold,  thanes  forming
only  one  part  of  the  social  group.  This  is  borne  out  by  the
shades  in  the  application  of  the  right  to  sell  and  to  go  with
the  land — two  rights  intimately  connected  with  each  other.
Between  the  extreme  cases  of  those  who  could  sell  to  whom-
soever they  pleased,  and  of  those  who  held  land  belong-
ing to  ecclesiastical  or  secular  lordships,^  we  find  curious
intermediate  positions  which  it  would  be  difficult  to
rubricate  in  either  category.  There  are  those  who  have
the  right  to  sell  to  strangers,  if  they  have  first  ofTered

^  Dd.  i.  31  d :  (Cuddington,  Surrey)  '  Codintone.  Leuuinos  comes
tenuit  Tunc  se  defendit  pro  xxx  hid  is.  De  quibus  tenebat  comes  xx
hidas  et  x  hidas  tenebant  alodiarii  uillae  qui  cum  terns  suis  quo
uolebant  recedere  poterant.*

'  Dd.  i.  176 a:  (Lench,  Worcs.)  *  Lenche  . . .  Ibi  iiii  hidae  geldantes.
Duas  ex  his  tenuerunt  ii  teini,  et  alias  ii  tenuit  if^lueua  quaedam
femina.  Hi  poterant  ire  quo  uolebant,  et  pro  iii  maneriis  tenebant.'
177  d :  (Hampton) '  Hantune  . . .  Hoc  manerium  emit  abbas  dusdem
aecclesiae  (Evesham)  a  quodam  taino  qui  terram  suam  recte  poterat
uendere  cui  uellet,  et  emptum  donauit  aecclesiae.'  Cf.  L  10  b  (Bade-
lesmere,  Kent).  185c:  (Linton,  Hereford)  'Lintone  .  .  .  Le£ttan
tenuit  et  non  poterat  recedere  a  manerio  ipso.'  ii.  201 :  (RoUesby»
Norfolk) '  Adhuc  in  eadem  Roluesbei  i  liber  homo  de  Ixxx  acris  tenae
Almari  episcopi  et  Aluuoldi  abbatis  commend,  tantum,  et  hie  homo
erat  ita  in  monasterio  quod  non  poterat  dare  terram  suam  nee
uendere.'  Ibid. :  (Billockby)  '  Bitlakebei  tenet  Ketel  i  liber  homo
dimidia  fuit  Almari  episcopi  commendatione,  sed  tota  terra  sua  Init
ita  in  monasterio  S.  Benedicti  de  Holmo,  ad  uictum  quod  non  dare
nee  uendere  potuit.'  Cf.  also  i.  40  a  (Alresforde,  Hants) ;  S57  b
(Begestan,  Salop) ;  li.  172  b  (Helgatuna,  Norfolk).


SECT.  III.  CH.i] FREE  TENANTS  413

their  land  to  their  lord.^  There  are  other  freemen  who  are
said  to  be  unable  to  sell  unless  they  pay  a  tax  of  2  shillings.'
As  a  consequence  of  these  variations  of  meaning,  we  find
that  of  several  freemen  (liberi)  living  in  one  place  some  are
said  to  possess  the  right  to  sell  and  to  g^ve  while  others  in
the  same  group  are  deprived  of  it.^

3.  Another  interesting  group  of  cases  is  presented  by  the  Terra
use  of  the  term  terra  libera^  free  land,  or  free  tenement.  It
may  occur  in  a  general  sense,  without  any  qualifications
disclosing  the  character  of  the  freedom  or  franchise  claimed.^
But  there  are  a  sufficient  number  of  instances  showing  that
this  freedom  was  taken  to  mean,  as  regards  land,  either
freedom  from  some  kind  of  pecuniary  duty,*  or  freedom
to  give  and  to  sell,® A  curious  attempt  is  made  once  to

^  Dd.  ii.  260 :  (Fritton,  Norfolk)  '  Fridetuna  .  .  .  vii  homines  qui
possent  uendere  terrain  suam  si  earn  prius  obtulissent  domino  suo.'

'  Dd.  ii.  187  :  (Palling,  Norfolk)  '  Palinga  ...  In  eadem  v  homines
xxxiii  acras,  quos  tenet  Hugo  de  Hosdenc  .  .  .  £x  istis  erant  iiii  liberi
ut  non  possent  recedere  nisi  dando  ii  solidos.*

'  Dd.  ii.  397  b :  (Suffolk)  '  In  Wimundestuna  vi  liberi  homines  .  •  •
de  sexto  qui  uocatur  Brictricus,  nescit  hundredum  si  potuit  ternun
suam  uendere  uel  non  t.r.  e.  sed  testatur  quod  uiderunt  eum  iurare
quod  non  poterat  dare  uendere  terram  suam  ab  antecessore  Ricardi.'
Dd.  i.  367  d :  (Somerford,  Cheshire)  '  Sumreford.  Rauesue  et  Chetel
et  Morfar  pro  iii  maneriis  tenuerunt.  Duo  liberi  homines  fuerunt.
Morfar  non  poterat  recedere  a  domino  suo.'  Cf.  33  a,  b :  (Chimtead,
Surrey)  '  de  abbate  de  Certesy.  Turgisus  ct  Vlt  tenuerunt  T.R.E.
Terra  Turgisi  erat  de  abbatia.  Vlf  poterat  ire  quo  uolebat.*

^  Dd.  i.  7  d :  (in  Harrietsham,  Kent) '  Isdem  Hugo  (nepos  Herberti)
tenet  de  episcopo  i  iugum  liberae terrae  in  Selesbwne ' ;  8b :  (BninleUe)
*  Huic  mancrio  pertinet  quaedam  libera  terra  ad  iii  boues.'  Cf.  9  b
(Wicheham) ;  ii.  176  (Fiskele,  Norfolk).

''  Dd.  i.  31b:  (Bram)ey»  Surrey)  '  Bnmlei  .  .  .  pro  xxxiiii  hidis.
Quattuor  ex  his  hidis  fuerunt  liberorum  bominum  qui  de  Alnod
secedere  potuerunt.  Super  hoc  est  terra  ad  ii  carucas  in  ipso  manerio
quae  nunquam  geldum  reddidit.'  Dd.  ii.  61  b:  (Rodmg,  Esses)
'  Rodinges  .  . .  pro  i  hida  et  iii  uirgatis.  Haec  terra  dimidia  reddebat
socam  Ansgaro,  et  altera  pars  erat  libera  quam  R.  dedit  G.  ut  sui
homines  dicunt.' Cf.  ii.  194  b  (Hoccham,  Norfolk).

''  Dd.  i.  162  d:  (GIoucs.)  *  In  Dudestan  Hd.  habuit  quidam  tainus
IMmaer  iii  maneria  Hersefel  et  Athelai  et  Sanher.  Iste  homo  poterat
dare  et  uendere  terram  suam  cui  uoluisset.*  Cf.  ibid. :  (Barton  Regis)
'  Hertunc  .  .  .  De  hoc  manerio  tenent  ii  liberi  homines  ii  hidas,  et
habent  ibi  ix  carucas.  Ipsi  se  non  possunt  neque  terram  separare
a  manerio.'  Dd.  ii.  35  a:  (Hannin^field,  Essex)  '  Haneghefeldam
tcnuit  Knebcrtus  pro  i  manerio,  et  pro  ix  hidis  t.r.e.  modo . . .  In  eadem
tenuerunt  xxiii  liberi  homines  xiiii  hidas  qui  possent  recedere  sine
Iicentia  dommi  ipsius  mansionis. Hos  tenet  Episcopus,  sed  comitatus


414  SOCIAL  CLASSES  [essay  n

represent  free  tenure  as  necessarily  a  tenure  in  capite.
Orgar  held  four  hides  in  Berwick,  Oxon,  and  one  hide  in
Ganguluesdene,  of  Milo  Crispin.  The  notice  as  to  these
places  ends  with  the  remark  that  the  two  tenements  or
estates  ought  to  have  been  held  of  the  King,  as  Orgar,  as
well  as  his  father  and  uncle,  held  freely  in  the  time  of  King
Edward.^  This  may  have  two  meanings ;  either  all  the  lands
which  were  held  as  bScland  were  assumed  to  depend
directly  on  the  King,  so  that  the  licence  to  sell  was  at  the
same  time  the  proof  of  a  direct  connexion  between  the  King
and  the  alodiarius,  or  else  we  have  to  fall  back  on  a  more
general  use  of  the  tet-m  free  tenant  {tenens  liiere),  which
would  be  applied  to  all  those  who  were  suitors  of  the
county  and  of  the  hundred  courts.  It  seems  to  me  that  in
the  case  under  discussion  we  have  to  choose  the  first
eventuality.  The  instances  of  free  tenants  holding  of  great
men  and  of  churches  are  so  frequent  that  it  would  have
been  impossible  to  contest  the  title  of  all  the  lords  of  free
mesne  tenants.  On  the  other  hand,  bScUmd  ownership,
although  often  in  the  hands  of  mesne  tenants  in  the  time
after  the  Conquest,  was  properly  an  alodial  holding  T.  R.  E.,
and  therefore  directly  under  the  king,  under  whatever
obligations  the  owner  may  have  otherwise  stood  as  to  other
lords.
Libcri  But,  Undoubtedly,  the  expressions  *free'  and  'freeman*

homines,  (liberie  Uberi  homines)^  when  used  by  themselves,  without
direct  reference  to  landownership,  are  primarily  meant
to  denote  status  or  condition — the  condition  of  the  free
suitors  of  county  and  hundred.  Let  us  take  a  rather
intricate  Essex  case  to  start  with.  It  occurs  in  the  survey
of  the  estates  of  Hugh  de  Montfort. A  tenant  of  his,  Hugh,

nescit  quo  modo  eos  habuerit . .  .  Has  hidas  preoccupauit  Turoldas  de
Rouecestra,  et  abbatia  de  Eli  calumpniatur  ii  hidas  et  iii  uirgatas
quas  tcnebant  ii  homines,  et  hundredum  testatur  quod  ipsi  tenebant
hbere  terrain  suam  et  tantummodo  erant  commendati  abbatis  de  Eli.*
^  Dd.  i.  159c:  (Berrick  Prior,  Oxon)  *  Orgar  tenet  de  manerio
iiii  hidas  in  Berewiche  . . .  i  hidam  in  Ganguluesdene  . . .  Has  ii  terns
quas  tenet  Oi^ar  de  Milone  de  rege  deberet  tenere.  Ipse  enim  et
pater  suus  et  auunculus  tenuerunt  libere  T.R.E.*  C£  320  c  (D<
forde,  Northants) ;  ibid.,  Wadenho.


A


SECT.  UL  CH.  I] FREE  TENANTS  415

son  of  Mauger,  holds  Goldhanger.^  The  home  manor  gelds
for  I  hide  and  15  acres,  and  contains  only  half  a  plough-
team  (T.  R.  E.  one  full  team),  with  one  viUain,  6  ictdariit
and  4  serfs.  Besides,  there  lived  in  the  place  9  freemen
{liberi  homines)^  with  land  rated  at  half  a  hide,  and  a  '  man
thane '  {homo  ieignus — a  vassal  thane  ?)  had  30  acres,  and
two  other  freemen  10  acres.  The  same  Hugh,  son  of
Mauger,  had  accepted  (taken,  or  received?)  15  acres  from
a  free  thane  {de  uno  franco  theigno)  and  annexed  them
to  his  land,  but  he  had  no  warrant  for  this  according  to  the
testimony  of  the  hundred.  The  expression  liberi  homines
is  used  here  distinctly  for  very  small  tenants  who  had
nothing  to  do  with  thanage.  On  the  other  hand,  a  thane
occurs  in  the  place  as  frank  thatie,  and  it  seems,  if  the
wording  is  not  too  clumsy  for  such  an  interpretation,  that
this  frank  thane  is  distinguished  from  the  man  thane,  or
vassal  thane,  spoken  of  before.^  However  this  may  be,  the
term  liberi  homines  is  applied,  in  our  case,  without  reference
to  the  right  to  give  and  sell  land,  although  the  franchise  of
the  thane  may  have  consisted  in  this  right.  We  thus  come
across  the  trace  of  a  very  numerous  class  in  the  East  of
England  which  stands  distinctly  apart  from  the  thanes,  and
gets  its  distinctive  character  from  personal  freedom  and  not
from  any  freehold.

In  Staffordshire,  on  the  contrary,  cases  occur  where  thanes
are  qualified  as  liberi  homines^  and  these  are  exact  parallels

'  D(L  ii.  54  a,  b:  (Goldhanger,  Essex)  '  Goldhangram  tenet  idem
(Hugo  f.  Malgeri)  quod  tenuit  Leuuinus  post  Hagra  pro  manerio,  et
pro  i  hida  et  xv  acris  . . .  et  ix  liberi  homines  manserunt  in  dimidia
hida,  et  unus  homo  tegnus  tenuit  xxx  acras,  et  ii  alii  liberi  homines
tenuenint  x  acras .  . .  Quidam  miles  Hugonis  de  Monteforti  nomine
Hugonis  f.  Malgeri  accepit  xv  acras  de  uno  franco  teigno,  et  misit
cum  sua  terra  et  non  habuit  liberatorem  sicut  hundredum  testatur,  et
ita  est  in  manu  regis/

«  Cf.  Dd.  ii.  159b;  (Hilgey,  Norfolk)  *  In  Hidlingheia  xxii  acrae,

quod  tenuit  t.r.e.  viii  o2s  (sic — ^homines  ?).  Sed  hundredum  testatur
quod  fuit  ad  uictum  monachorum  de  Sancto  Benedicto.'  335  a,  b :
(Stokesby,  Norfolk)  '  Stokesbey  ten.  Eduinus  liber  homo  Guerd  iii
carucatas  terrae  .  .  .  et  xxi  homines  Ixxx  acras  terrae  (sic)  iacent
semper  huic  manerio.  Rex  et  comes  socam  de  toto  .  . .  et  iii  liberi
homines  quos  addidit  Harduinus.'
*  Dd.  i.  249  a:  (Hilderstone,  Stafford) '  Ipse  Robertus  (de  Statford)


4i6  SOCIAL  CLASSES  [ESSAY  II

to  the  francus  teignus  of  the  above-mentioned  Essex
instance,  the  freedom  or  franchise  being  applied  to  the
relation  between  the  landowner  and  his  lord :  the  fiiBt  was
not  a  mere  dependant  of  the  second,  sitting  on  tfaandand,
but  a  free  follower  possessed  of  bScland^  as  I  should  like  to
construe  it  in  these  cases,  and  in  all  others  where  Uberi
homines  appear  as  T.  R.  E.  landowners.^  These  latter
instances  are  frequent,  and  the  designation  liberi  homims
might  in  all  of  them  be  easily  altered  into  that  of  thane&
Not  so  in  the  not  less  frequent  cases  where  liberi  homines
appear  as  tenants  of  an  estate  along  with  the  priest,  the
reeve,  villains,  and  bordarii?  In  these  the  stress  evidently
lies  on  the  personal  condition  of  the  holders.  When  we
find  in  the  Hertfordshire  manor  of  Bcrlai  that  there  were
1^  hides  in  demesne,  with  6  bordarii  and  %  servi^  and  that
the  tenantry  consisted  of  eight  freemen  {Uberi  homifus)^  we
cannot  explain  the  entry  on  the  supposition  that  the
freemen  were  landowners  who  could  go  with  their  land
where  they  pleased:  it  seems  that  the  rustics  of  this
particular  place  were  free  ceorls  who  enjoyed  full  folk-
right,  and  could  even  defend  it  as  against  the  Abbey  of
Ketteris,  which  held  the  manor.^  An  attempt  may  even  be
made  to  distinguish  between  the  ordinary  tenants  of  an
estate  and  the  freemen  settled  on  it,  as  is  the  case,  e.g.,  in
the  Northamptonshire  manor  of  Byfield.*

tenet  in  Helduluestone  quintam  partem  unius  hidae.  Dunning  et
Vluric  tenuerunt,  et  liberi  homines  fuenint.'  349  b:  (EUastone)
'  Elachestone . . .  Sex  taini  tenuerunt  T.  R.  £.,et  liberi  homines  fberunL'

^  Dd.  i.  23  d :  (Glatting,  Sussex)  '  Clotinga  . .  •  Quattuor  homines
liberi  tenuerunt  in  alodium  .  .  .  ibid.  Stopeham:  Quinque  liberi
homines  ...  in  alodium.'  Cf.  226  d  (Hecham  Hd.,  Northants);  358  d
(Brome,  Warwick).

'  Dd.  i.  48  a :  (Houghton,  Hants)  '  Holstune  ...  In  dominio  est
caruca  et  dimidia  cum  v  bordariis  et  i  franco  homine  et  ii  semis.'
169  b  :  (Brockworth  (?),  Gloucs.) '  Brocowardinj^  ...  In  dominio  stmt
ii  carucae,  et  viii  uillani  et  vi  bordarii  et  presbiter  et  ii  liberi  homines
et  prepositus.  Inter  omnes  habent  xv  carucas.'  Cf.  390  a  (Basson-
ham,  Northants) ;  239  c  (Smitham,  Warwick).

'  Dd.  i.  136  b :  (Barley,  Herts) '  Abbatissa  de  Cetriz  tenet  in  Berlai
iii  hidas  et  dimidiam  ...  In  dominio  i  hida  et  dim.  Ibi  viii  liberi
homines  habent  ii  carucas  et  dim. Ibi  vi  bordarii  et  ii  semi.'

^  Dd.  i.  224  d  :  (Byfield,  Northants) '  Bifelde ...  Ibi  unus  miles  com
ii  uillanis  habent  i  camcam,  et  ii  liberi  homines  manent  ibL'


SECT.  III.  CH.  I] FREE  TENANTS  4^7

Another  group  of  entries  concerning  freemen  is  formed  Added
by  mentions  of  such  as  were  added  to  a  neighbouring  ^'
manor  at  the  Conquest  or  a  little  before  it  They  are  often
marked  off  from  the  rest  of  the  manor  by  their  special
assessment  to  the  geld.^  The  source  from  which  these
freemen  come  is  easy  to  trace :  they  are  free  suitors  of  the
hundred  who  have  been  passed  by  the  King  into  the
custody  of  the  sheriff  or  of  some  great  landowner.*  All
these  subdivisions  of  the  class  are  especially  strongly
represented  in  the  counties  where  Danish  influence  was
powerful.  We  find  there  large  numbers  of  free  landowners,^
of  freemen  attached  to  neighbouring  estates,^  and  of  ^small
rustic  tenants  entered  as  liberi  hominesfi  In  most  of  these
cases  the  persons  mentioned  are  very  small  people,  and
certainly  had  to  perform  rustic  work  with  their  own  hands
and  the  help  of  their  families.  The  remarkable  congestion
of  these  small  freemen  in  Danish  districts,  both  in  small
farms  or  hamlets  and  in  large  villages,  has  evidently  to  be
explained  by  the  recent  Danish  conquest,  which  introduced
large  numbers  of  warriors  of  the  kere^  who  had  after  the
settlement  to  provide  their  own  subsistence,  and  who,
although  very  much  lowered  by  their  humble  condition  and
scanty  outfit,  were  still  proud  of  their  freedom,  and  able  to

*  Dd.  ii.  148  b:  (Ingham,  Norfolk)  '  Hincham  ten.  Edricus  homo
G.  de  Laxafelda  i  carucatam  terrae  .  .  .  et  xvi  liberi  homines  com-
mendatione  tantum  i  carucatam  terrae  et  xx  acras  •  •  .  Tunc  ualuit
manerium  xii  sol.  et  liberi  homines  xii  soL  et  modo  similiter.'

'  Dd.  ii.  183a:  (Norfolk)  *  Isti  sunt  liberi  homines  Rogeri  Bigot
Frcdrcbrugc  Hd.  et  dim.*

'  Dd.  ii.  388  a:  (Bungay,  Suffolk)  'Bongeia  .  .  .  vi  liberi  homing
xiiij  acras  et  i  carucam.  Tunc  ualuit  iiii  sol.  et  postquam  rex  W.  uenit
in  istam  patriam  habent  partiti  ii  fratris,  i  ex  eis  est  in  manu  regis  Vlsi,
Vluricus  in  manu  comitis.'  Cf.  ibid. :  *Buighea:  Godricus  liber  homo
XXX  acras.  Huic  manerio  pertinent  ii  dim.  liberi  homines,  et  unus
integer,  dc  xvi  acris.*

*  Dd.  ii.  Ill  a:  (Fakenham,  Norfolk)  'Fachenham  . . .  In  Estan-
byrda  iii  liberi  homines,  et  in  Barsham  i,  et  in  Snaringa  iii  liberi
homines  et  inter  hos  homines  iii  acrae  terrae.'  Cf.  121  b  (Runhalai
Norfolk)  ;  150  b(Carlctuna,  Norfolk).

'  Dd.  ii.  159  b:  (Fincham,  Norfolk)  Mn  Phincham  tenuit  liber
homo  ad  socham  abbatis  de  Rameseia  ii  carucatas  terrae  t«r.e.  • . .
Tunc  xxiiii  liberi  homines  et  modo,  et  vi  bordarii  et  iiii  semi ...  In  Mulem
uilla  semper  viii  liberi  hommes,  quod  tenet  Willelmus  (de  Warenoa),  et
xi  bordarii  et  v  serui.*


l.N<A.RAI>Uf  f


£  e


41 8  SOCIAL  CLASSES  [SSSAvn

keep  it  up.  It  is  not  to  be  wondered  at  that  the  ireefnan
appears  in  the  half-Danish  counties  as  a  substitute  for  the
thane  of  the  English  counties,  but  it  must  not  be  overlooked
that,  in  another  sense,  he  corresponds  also»  from  an
economic  point  of  view,  to  the  viUam  of  the  English
counties.  Whatever  the  gulf  between  these  two  classes
from  the  point  of  view  of  later  feudal  law  may  have  been,
they  stood  very  close  to  one  another  in  the  east  of  England
in  point  of  husbandry,  and  it  was  easy  to  glide  down  from
one  to  the  other,  especially  as  there  were  many  intermediate
links  between  the  two,  as  we  shall  have  to  notice  by  and
by.
Freemen  A  most  interesting  passage  of  the  Worcester  survey
ulnsr^  shows  to  what  extent  the  social  basis  of  the  position
occupied  by  the  freemen  in  the  east  and  the  villains
descended  from  free  ceorls  in  the  west  was  identicaL  I
mean  the  entry  as  to  the  respective  rights  of  the  churches
of  Pershore,  Westminster,  and  Evesham.^  The  shire  gave
evidence  that  the  church  of  Pershore  ought  to  have  chnrdi
rent  from  300  hides,  that  is,  one  load  of  com  at  MardnmaSy
from  every  hide  in  which  a  franklin  {/rancus  homo)  is
settled,  and  if  he  has  more  than  one  hide  let  the  rest
be  free ;  if  there  is  a  breach  in  the  performance  of  this  duty,
at  the  appointed  day  the  person  who  has  kept  back  the
com  ought  to  render  eleven  times  as  much  after  having
acquitted  himself  of  his  due.  The  Abbot  of  Pershore  has
forfeiture  from  his  hundred  hides,  such  as  he  ought  to  have
from  his  own  land.  From  the  other  two  hundred  hides  the
Abbot  has  the  load  and  the  acquittal  due,  while  the  Abbot
of  Westminster  has  forfeiture  on  his  own  land  (because  it  is


^  Dd.  i.  175  c:  (Terra  Sanctae  Mariae  de  Persore,  Worcs.) '  Didt
Comitatus  quod  aecclesia  de  Persore  debet  habere  Circset  de  omnihflt
trecends  hidis,  scilicet  de  unaquaque  hida  ubi  frsmcus  homo  maaet
unam  sumxnam  annonae  in  die  festo  S.  Martini^  et  si  plures  habet  hidas
sint  liberae,  et  si  dies  ille  fractus  fuerit,  qui  retinuit  annonam  perwlnet
undecies,  prius  tamen  soluet  quod  debet,  ct  ipse  abbas  de  Persore  habet
forisfactuFam  de  suis  c  hidis  qualem  habere  debet  de  sua  terra.  De
aliis  cc  hidis  habet  ipse  abbas  summam  et  persolutionem,  et  abbas  de
Westmonasterio  habet  forisCacturam,  quia  sua  terra  tutt^  et  abbas
de  Euesham  similiter  habet  de  sua  terra  propria,  et  omnesalii  similitieT
de  suis  terris.'


SECT. iiL CH. I] FREE  TENANTS.  419

own  land),  and  the  Abbot  of  Evesham  has  the  same  from
his  own  land,  and  all  other  landlords  in  the  same  way.
There  are  few passages in Domesday  so  replete  with
information  as  this. We  see  the  three  hundreds  in  question
subdivided  in  regard  to  the  forfeiture  fines,  and  presumably
as  to  sac  and  soc,  between  the  great  churches  of  Pershore,
Westminster,  Evesham,  and  other  great  landowners,  Per-
shore wielding  the  franchise  over  a  full  hundred. The
distribution  of  sac  and  soc  follows  landownership,  but  in  this
particular  case  landownership,  or  damimum,  as  we  might
say,  using  a  Roman  legal  expression,  is  not  anything  else
but  a  landlordship — the  power  of  the  landrica  or  lamdhla-
ford — and  goes  well  with  different  kinds  of  subordinate  land-
holding. As  to  the  ancient  right  of  levying  churchscot,
Pershore  possesses  a  monopoly,  evidently  going  back  to  a
Royal  grant  not  shared  by  the  other  ecclesiastical  institu-
tions interested  in  the  district. The  repartition  of  church-
scot is  very  characteristic  ;  it  is  imposed  on  the  hides,  and
it  is  assumed  that  these  hides  are  normally  held  by  frank-
lins, every  one  being  possessed  of  one  hide  or  more. The
exemption  of  the  extra  hides  in  a  franklin's  possession
supposes  two  things — firstly,  that  the  tax  was  levied  from
the  free  households  as  such,  and  secondly,  that  the  accumu-
lation of  several  hides  in  one  free  household  was  an  excep-
tion at  the  time  when  the  tax  arose. Anyhow,  we  see
clearly  the  framework  of  ancient  English  society  in  the
west underlying  the  superstructure  of  the  landlordships
which  towers  over  it. It  is  composed  of  households  of  the
size  of  one  hide  on  the  average  grouped  into  hundreds,  and
the  heads  of  these  households  are  reputed  franklins ;  they
are,  in  a  sense,  liberi  homines^  like  their  fellows  in  the  east
of  England. And  yet,  if  from  this  verdict  of  the  county  we
turn  to  the  survey  of  the  very  hundreds  mentioned,  we
shall  not  find  any  group  marked  ofT  in  the  same  way  as  the
freemen  of  the  half-Danish  districts,  but  almost  exclusively
villains  with  no  particular  claim  to  a  special  standing. We
arc  thus  reminded  that  the  franklin  population,  the  fyrd-
worthy,  moot-worthy,  and  fold-worthy  tenants,  constitutes

£  e  2


r


cases.


420  SOCIAL  CLASSES  [essay  n

one  of  the  elements  of  villainage.  If  we  look  out  for
English  and  Scandinavian  terms  corresponding  to  the  UbiH
and  franci  homines  used  by  Domesday,  the  only  ones  that
could  be  applied  would  be  cearl^  twyhyndman  and  frigman.
Bonde  would  hardly  do  as  a  distinctive  term,  because  it
assumes  at  a  very  early  period  on  English  soil  a  tinge  of
bondage.^  Twelvehyndman  and  thane  would  apply  to  the
higher  groups  of  the  same  general  class,  but  we  have  no
means  of  judging  how  far  the  equality  of  wergeld  between
all  Danish  freemen  and  English  twelvehyndmen,  stipulated
in  the  tenth-century  treaties,  was  kept  up  later  on.
Standard  4.  Before  leaving  this  subject  I  should  like  to  call  atten-
tion to  a  few  standard  cases,  illustrating,  in  a  concrete  way,  the
use  of  the  term  liberi  homines  in  the  eastern  counties.  Hal*
stead,^  Essex,  assessed  to  the  geld  at  %  hides  less  4  acres,  and
held  by  William  de  Gare,  a  tenant  of  William  de  Warenne,
had  been  at  the  time  of  King  Edward  in  the  possession  of  50
freemen.  The  manor  was  cultivated  at  both  periods  by  ten
ploughs  in  demesne  and  three  ploughs  belonging  to  tenants.
At  the  time  of  the  Survey  there  were  8  villains,  23  bardarU^
and  6  serfs  settled  there,  but  the  repartition  of  the  teams
between  demesne  and  tenant  holdings,  kept  up  from  the
time  before  the  Conquest,  and  the  entire  disappearance  of
freemen  after  the  Conquest,  show  that  only  a  small  number
of  the  later  tenants  had  occupied  the  same  rank  T.  R.  £. :
most  of  the  earlier  freemen  had  evidently  lost  caste  through
the  Conquest  and  had  slipped  into  the  position  of  villains
and  bordariu  Reverting  to  the  T.  R.  E.  state  of  things,  as
indicated  by  the  great  number  of  free  landowners  and  the
marked  predominance  of  demesne  cultivation,  it  is  not
difficult  to  see  that  there  had  been  in  the  township  a
considerable  cluster  of  small  freeholders  cultivatti^  their
own  land  and  having  a  few  bondmen  under  them,  who,

^  Villainage  in  England,  146.

*  Dd.  ii.  37  a  :  (H^tead,  Essex)  *  In  Haltesteda  tenet  Willelmus  de
Gare  ii  hidas  iiii  acris  minus  quas  tenuenint  xsdc  liberi  honines  trx.
In  c|ua  terra  sunt  semper  x  carucae  in  dominio,  et  iii  canicae  hmitmiim^
et  viii  uiUani  et  xxiii  bordarii  et  vi  semi . . .  Tunc  et  post  ualuit  x  lib.
modo  xiii  lib.  et  xvii  sol.  et  iiii  den.'


J


SECT.  III.  CH.  I] FREE  TENANTS  421

however,  were  certainly  too  few  to  feed  them  by  their  work.
It  is  worthy  of  notice  that  the  value  of  the  estate  increased
as  a  result  of  the  subjection  of  the  freeholders;  from
;^ic  a  year  it  rose  to  £14  lys.  4d.  The  French  knight
drew  a  better  income  from  his  dependents  than  the  small
freemen  had  been  able  to  do.  A  somewhat  similar  case  is
presented  by  Huntingfield,  Suffolk,^  where,  however,  two
sets  of  freemen  are  clearly  distinguished,  one,  larger,  21  in
number  with  two  bardarii  under  them,  who  have  been
drawn  into  the  manor  of  Robert  Malet,  and  another,  of
four,  whose  sac  and  soc  still  remained  in  Blideburgh,
a  Royal  manor,  for  the  benefit  of  the  king  and  the  earl,
which  means,  of  course,  that  the  public  rights  of  these
latter  tenants  were  still  kept  up.

Nayland,  in  Essex,^  consisted  of  two  parts :  a  manorialized
estate  of  5^  hides  with  18  villains,  42  bardarii  (formerly
33),  and  7  serfs,  and  a  free  settlement  of  3  hides  with  37
iiberi  homines  under  the  lordship  of  Sweyn,  formerly
under  Robert.  From  these,  one  freeman  with  7^  acres  is
distinguished,  who  could  go  wherever  he  pleased ;  his  land
had  lapsed  into  Sweyn's  hand.  The  rustic  character  of  the
free  settlement  cannot  be  doubted,  and  it  is  very  probable
that  it  represented  a  group  of  free  peasants  closely  con-
nected in  all  husbandry  arrangements  with  the  villains
and  bordarii  of  Sweyn  living  in  the  same  township,  yet

^  I)d.ii.3iia:  ( Huntingfield,  Suffolk)  '  Huntingafelda . . .  £t  adhuc
huic  manerio  Huntingafelde  (de  Roberto  Malet)  iacent  modo  cc  acne
terrae  quas  tenuerunt  xxi  Iiberi  homines  tr.e.,  semper  x  carucae,  et  sub
cis  ii  bordarii . .  .  Et  haec  terra  babet  i  leugam  in  longo,  et  ix  quar.  in
lato,  et  vii  den.  et  obolum  reddit  de  gddo  regis.  Et  adhuc  huic
manerio  iacent  in  Huntingafelda  xl  acrae  terrae  quas  tenuerunt  iiii
Iiberi  homines  . .  .  Et  de  tota  hac  terra  liberonim  hominum  iacet  soca
ct  saca  in  Hlideburh  ad  opus  regis  et  comitis.  Et  de  omnibus  istis  ho-
minibus  habuit  Edricus  antecessor  Robert!  Malet  commendationem.*

'  D(i.  ii.  47  a  :  (Nayland,  Essex)  *  Eiland  tenuit  R.  pro  uno  manerio
ct  pro  V  hidis  ct  dim.  Modo  tenet  Suenus  in  dominio.  Semper  xviti
uillani.  Tudc  xxxiii  bordarii,  modo  xlii.  Semper  vii  semi,  et  ii
carwrac  in  dominio,  et  x  canicae  hominum  .  . .  De  hoc  manerio  tenet
Godeboldus  de  Sueno  i  hidam  et  dim.  .  .  Adhuc  tenet  idem  xzzvii
liberos  homines  manentes  in  iii  hidis  terrae  quos  habuit  Robertus  tj'.e.
et  Suenus  postea  .  .  .  et  quidam  liber  homoerat  commendatus  RoberU)^
tenuit  vii  acras  et  dim.  et  poterat  ire  quo  uellet,  et  illam  terram  habet
Suenus.'


4aa  SOCIAL  CLASSES  [ESSAY  n

distinct  from  them  in  regard  to  personal  status  and  I^;al
right  as  to  their  holdings.

Hepworth,^  SufTolk,  may  stand  as  an  example  of  a  large
number  of  villages  within  the  lordship  of  Bury  St  Edmunds.
It  was  a  settlement  of  20  freemen,  assessed  at  a)  carucatet,
who  had  3  villains  and  4  serfs  under  them.  There  is  no
distinction  between  home-farm  and  tenant-land  in  this  case,
the  cultivation  evidently  going  on  in  the  same  way  on  the
holdings  of  the  free  and  of  the  villains.  The  freemen  could
give  and  sell  their  land,  but  sac  and  soc,  and  commendation
and  some  customary  dues  not  further  specified,  remained
in  the  monastery;  the  services  accruing  from  these  free
tenants  had  to  be  rendered  in  the  abbatial  manors  of
Stanton  and  '  Cunegaston '.  Similar  conditions  prevail  in
a  number  of  other  Suflfolk  townships  subjected  to  the  great
abbey.

In  the  same  county  of  Suflfolk  we  find  in  the  survey  of
the  estates  of  Roger  of  Poitou  '  evidence  of  another  chai^
in  the  status  of  Itberi  homines  in  Domesday — ^namely,
the  gradual  subjugation  of  small  squires  and  scattered
farms.  A  good  many  of  these  were  encroached  upon  by  the
Norman  lord,  who  took  advantage  of  his  position  as  a  sheriff,
notwithstanding  the  protection  of  the  church  of  Ely.

Already,  from  the  examples  quoted  hitherto,  it  can  be
gathered  that  the  quality  of  freemen  did  not  exclude  sub-
jection of  various  kinds.  In  a  sense,  every  ordinary  freeman

^  Dd.  ii.  36^  b :  (Hepworth,  Suffolk) '  In  Hepworda  xx  liberi  homines
de  ii  canicatis  et  dim.  terrae,  et  habent  iii  uillanos,  et  iiii  senios.
Semper  viii  carucae . . .  Ecdesia  de  xv  acris  libere  terrae  in  elemosina.
Hi  omnes  potuerunt  dare  et  uendere  terram  suam,  sed  aaca  et  soca  et
commendatione  et  omni  consuetudine  remansenint  Sancto,  et  teniitiiim
in  Stantunam  et  Cunegestunanu'  Cf.  ibid.,  Watlesielda,  Hopetuna^
Bemingham ;  cf.  366,  367.

^  Dd.  ii.  346  a,  b :  *  Terra  Rogeri  Pictauiensis.  In  Grundesburch
vii  liberi  homines  commendati  Sanctae  i1£theldredae  tj'.e.  xx  acras
terrae  ...  In  Haschetuna  ten.  Aluuinus  liber  homo  Sancte  iCthekhedae
t.r.e.  xl  acras  ...  hie  Aluuinus  non  potuit  terram  suam  uendere  nee
dare  ab  aecclesia  de  Eli.  In  eadem  vii  liberi  homines  commendad
S.  iCtheldredae  dxvi  (sic)  acras ...  In  Thisteldena  viii  et  dim.  libori
homines  commendati  S.  iEtheldredae  t.r.e.  de  xxx  acris  .  • .  Adhuc  in
eadem  tenet  i€moldus  de  Rogero  Pictauiensi  i  libenim  hominem
I  acris  post  modo,  commendatus  S.  iCtheldredo  t.r.e.*


SECT.  III.  CH.  i] FREE  TENANTS  423

was  subjected  to  soce,  but  originally  it  was  the  sooe  of  the
king,  and  of  the  earl  as  the  local  potentate.^  By  the  side
of  these  there  appear,  however,  the  freemen  owing  suit  and
subjected  to  the  jurisdiction  of  private  lords.'  Commenda-
tion comes  in  as  a  second  and  lesser  degree  of  dependence,
and  it  is  especially  to  commendation  and  soce  that  the
curious  instances  apply  when  the  record  speaks  of  entire
freemen  and  half-freemen.  The  terms '  complete'  or  *  entire ',
and  the  partition  of  a  person,  can  hardly  apply  to  condition
in  these  cases.  In  what  sense  could  one  speak  of  a  half-
free  condition  as  distinguished  from  that  of  the  socman
and  the  villain  ?  On  the  other  hand,  there  was  sufficient
ground  to  talk  of  the  possession  of  half  a  freeman,  if  a  lord
could  only  claim  half  of  the  dues  from  him,  either  because
he  had  to  divide  them  with  some  other  private  lord,  or
because  they  remained  for  one  half  a  source  of  public
revenue.'

'  Dd.  ii.  nob:  (Breccles,  Norfolk)  '  In  eadem  (Brecdes)  i  liber  in
Saham  xxvi  acras  . . .  Rex  et  comes  socam.*  190  a :  (Pickenham,  Nor-
folk) *  In  Pichenham  tenuit  i  liber  homo  Ix  acras  tr.e.  et  postquam  rex
uenit  in  istam  patriam  dedit  R.  com.  preposito  hundret  et  per  uioe-
comites  regis  tenet  ille  adhuc  earn  terram.'  133  a:  (Hevingham,
Norfolk)  *  In  Heuincham  i  liber  homo  presbiter  xl  acras  terrae  in
clemosina  .  .  .  Hunc  tenuit  Leustan  antecessor  Tiheli  t.r.e.  .  .  .  modo
eum  tenet  (iodricus.  Sed  Taraldus  homo  WiUelmi  de  Warenna  eom
saisiuit  super  regem  et  tenuit  per  tres  annos,  modo  deimtionatus  super
cum,  et  reddit  Turaldus  v  sol.  de  catallo  regis,  et  dedit  nadem  de
iustitia  facienda.'  Cf.  ibid.,  Wittuna.  269  b:  (Filby,  Norfolk)  '  Phile-
bey  .  .  .  Rex  et  comes  socam  de  liberis  hominibus.'

^  Dd.  ii.  160 a:  (Winebotsham,  Norfolk)  'In  Winebotesham  .  .  •
banc  terram  tenuerunt  xxiii  liberi  homines  ad  socam  Sancti  Benedicts'
Cf.  ibid.,  Danefella.  245  a :  (Oxbur^^h,  Norfolk)  '  Oxenburfa  .  • .  viii
liberi  homines  tenent  c  acras . . .  de  illis  hominibus  liberis  calumpniatur
Radulf.  de  Toenio  quia  antecessor  eius  cum  toca  et  saca  tenuit,  at
hundrcdum  testatur.* Cf.  416  b  (Asetona,  Suflfolk).

*  Dd.  ii.  174a:  (Sutton,  Norfolk)  'In  Suttuna  iacent  vii  liberi
homines  et  sunt  in  Repes  et  Rotholfuesbet  i  car.  terrae,  et  ix  ac
prati.  et  iii  liberos  sub  eis  vii  acris  terrae.  Semper  ii  carucae.  Et
unns  dc  his  dim.  vii  liberis  testatur  hundredum  Sancto  Benedicto
(ie  Holmo,  et  unus  homo  R.  comitis  incursit,  et  hie  dimidius  habet
vi  acras  terrae.  Appretiati  sunt  in  x  lib.  Suttune.  Sed  super  eos  xiiii
sol.  et  tenet  in  dominio.'  175a:  (Rockland)  'In  Rokelunda  xiiii
inte^i  liberi  homines  Ulketel  commendati  t.r.e.  et  vi  dimidii.  Inter
homines  Ixxxx  acrae  terrae.*  Cf.  203  a  (Rokelund);  ibid.,  Brambre-
tuna.  Cf.  i.  i8od  :  (Suckley,  Worcs.)  'Suchelie  . . .  Rogenia  comet
dedit  cuidam  Kicardo  dimidiam  uirgatam  terrae  in  tolidalibertate.*


424  SOCIAL  CLASSES  [ESSAY  II

Another  important  feature  of  subjection  was  the  suit  to
the  lord's  fold.  Indeed,  as  we  have  seen,  it  is  sometimes
treated  as  the  dividing  line  between  free  and  unfree  tenants.*
But  in  a  number  of  other  instances  from  East  Anglia  the
suit  to  the  fold  appears  only  as  an  incident,  not  incompatible
with  free  tenement.^  Some  of  the  great  communities  of
freemen  acknowledging  the  lordship  of  St  Edmundsbury
in  Suffolk,  although  emphatically  free,  are  bound  to  send
their  sheep  to  the  abbot's  folds,  and  customary  service
{cansuetudines)  appears  closely  connected  with  this  duty.'
It  is  so  in  East  Anglia,  but,  as  has  been  already  suggested,
the  soce  of  the  fold,  appearing,  as  it  does,  as  an  incident  of
base  tenure,  must  have  played  a  decisive  part  in  markii^
the  social  division  between  freemen  and  villains.  The
aggregate  of  dues  and  obligations  of  different  kinds  which
may  be  drawn  by  a  lord  from  his  free  tenants  forms  the
service  of  the  latter  and  is  assigned  to  some  manor.^

The  Domesday  Survey,  with  its  two  lines  of  entries
representing  the  state  of  things  before  and  after  the  Con-
quest, not  only  enables  us  to  notice  the  variations  of  social
condition  within  the  class  of  freemen  to  be  explained  by
a  process  of  subjection  to  lordship,  but  gives  direct  and

*  Dd.  ii.  203  b:  (Helgheton,  Norfolk)  '  Halgatima  ...  In  eadem
uilla  xii  homines  vi  quonim  erant  in  soca  falde,  et  alii  vi  erant  libefi'
Cf.  204  a :  (Melton) '  Meltuna . . .  ix  liberi  homines  soca  £idde  et  com-
mendatione  tantum.'  Cf.  ibid.,  Hederseta ;  Parua  Meltuna ;  ao6a
(Bertuna).

'  Dd.  ii.  135  b:  (Raveningham,  Norfolk)  'Raverincham  •  •  •  x
liberi  homines  soca  falde  et  commendatione.'  350:  (?,  Norfolk)
'  Thurketeliart  .  .  .  xv  liberi  homines  falde  et  commendatione.'  Cf.
ibid.  (?  Finch  am) '  Pincham  . . .  Huic  manerio  iacent  v  liberi  homines
ad  socam  tantum  commend,  et  ii  de  omni  consuetudine.'

'  Dd.  ii.  361  b :  (Gt.  Barton,  Suffolk)  '  Bertuna  •  •  .  Izx  liberi  v
carucatis  terrae  . .  .  Super  hos  homines  habet  et  semper  habuit  sacam
et  socam  et  omnem  consuetudinem  et  ad  faldam  pertinent  omnes
praeter  iii.' Cf.  362  a  (Ruhham).

*  Dd.  ii.  358  a :  (Brockley,  Suffolk) '  In.Brodega  tenent  Tebaldus,  et
Rodbertus  de  abbate  iii  liberos  homines  de  ii  carucatis  terrae  .  •  •
Horum  duo  poterunt  dare  et  uendere  terram,  sed  saca  et  soca  et  com-
mendatio  remanebat  Sancto.  Tertius  non  potest  dare  nee  uendere
terram  sine  licentia  abbatis.*  Cf.  ibid.,  Reoda.  364  a :  (Stow,  Sofiblk)
*  In  Stowa  xxi  liberi  homines  de  ii  carucatis  terrae  ...  hi  sunt  nncti
cum  saca  et  soca  et  omni  consuetudine  et  seruiunt  in  Ledbrdam.
Semper  ualet  xx  soL' Cf.  363  a  (Hametuna).


SECT.  III.  CH.  i] FREE  TENANTS  425

copious  evidence  as  to  the  gradual  stages  of  the  process.
There  can  be  no  doubt  about  its  general  direction.  The
number  of  freemen  steadily  decreases,  and  their  position
gets  worse. ^  An  apparent  increase  in  some  cases'  is
evidently  obtained  by  the  annexation  to  some  private
manor  of  freemen  who  used  to  belong  to  Royal  hundreds.'
The  absorption  of  free  holdings  by  manors  is  mostly
achieved  in  one  of  two  ways.  Domesday  is  full  of  notices
of  encroachments  or  invasions,  weak  freemen  being  reduced
to  subjection  by  the  strong  hand  of  their  powerful  neigh-
bours.^ The  formation  of  manors  becomes  from  this  point

'  Dd.  i.  257  c:  (Grinshill,  Salop)  'GriuelesuL  Leuiet  et  Godric
et  Seuuard  et  Algar  tenuenint  pro  iii  maneriis  et  liberi  fuerunt . . .  Ibi
sunt  iii  liberi  homines,  et  readunt  vii  sol.  per  annum.  Haec  terra
ualebatxxxiisol.  T.R.E.'  ii47b:  (Supleford  Tawney,  Essex) '  Staple-
fort  tenet  Siricus  de  Sueno  quod  tenuit  Godricus  pro  uno  manerio
et  pro  V  hidis,  et  de  his  v  hidis  dedit  suis  x  liberis  bominibos  libere  iiii
hidas»  et  i  retinuit  in  dominio,  et  postquam  rex  aduenit  dono  regit
tenuit  Kobertus  i  hidam  et  Suenus  Alius  eius  adiunxit  iiii  hidas  cum
ista  post  mortem  paths  sui.  Tunc  in  i  hida  nuUus  bordarius  erat,
et  tunc  in  iiii  hidis  vi  bordarii,  modo  ii  uillani  et  xviii  bordarii.'

^  Dd.  ii.  166  b:  (Depham,  Norfolk)  Mn  Depham  xxx  ac  terrae
i  liber  homo  in  eadem  camicata  . .  .  Tota  soca  in  Hincham  regis.'
Ibid. :  (Windham) '  Wimundham . . .  xxx  liberi  homines  quando  recepit
(VVillelmus  de  Warenna),  modo  xliii.  Semper  i  carucata  terrae  .  . .
Hoc  totum  est  de  escangio  de  Laquis  de  terra  sanctorum.'

^  Dd.  ii.  109  b :  (Massingham,  Norfolk)  '  Masincham . . .  Sunt  et  de
hoc  manerio  ablati  xiiii  libui  homines  et  xii  uillani  quos  tenet  Radulftis
Haignus.'  1 24  a  :  (Shotesham)  '  Scotessam  .  .  •  ualuit  tr.e.  xxx  sol.
post  et  modo  xx  sol.  et  omnes  isti  liberi  homines  ualent  xl  soL  sed  tr.e.
non  erat  in  censu  scotessa.  R.  blondus  adcensauit.*  186  a :  (Starston,
Norfolk)  '  In  Sterestuna  . .  .  tenuit  i  liber  homo  Sanctae  Aldrede  t.r.e.
et  Stigandi  erat  soca  et  saco  in  Hersam,  sed  nee  dare  nee  uendere
potcrat  terram  suam  sine  licentia  Sancte  Aldrede  et  Stigandi;  dim.  car.
tcrre  modo  tenet  Goduinus,  et  sub  eo  iii  bordarii.  Semper  i  caruca
in  dominio,  ct  viii  liberi  homines  sub  eo  de  xx  acris.  Semper  iii  car.
. . .  Modo  Kogerus  Bigot  reuocat  ad  feudum  liberonim  suorum  ex  dono
regis.  Sed  hundredum  testatur  quod  quando  Ricardus  Punnatus  erat
prcpositus  in  liersam,  pertinebat  in  Hersam,  sed  ille  qui  modo  tenet,
tunc  subprepositus  Kicardi  in  Ersam,  abstulit  et  teste  hundredo^  et
dcdit  censum  in  Ersam  xx  sol.  et  vi  den.  unoquoque  anno  de  hac  terra
nonimatim,  et  de  alia,  sed  hoc  anno  non  reddidit,  et  W.  de  Noicrs
hahuit  hue  usque  censum.'

*  l)(i.  ii.  3b:  (Hatfield,  Essex)  '  Hadfelda  .  .  .  Pertinebat  hutc
manerio  i  sochcmannus  de  dimidia  hida  tr.e.  quam  G.  de  Magnavilla
inde  abstulit.'  5b:  (Writela)  'Dimidia  hida  quam  libere  tenuit  i
sochcmannus  reddens  socam  in  manerio  et  taroen  cum  terra  sua  posset
ire  quo  uellct,  hunc  comes  £.  adiunxit  sue  terre.'  Cf.  7  a  (Nettport;
449  a  (Wiscta,  Suffolk).


426  SOCIAL  CLASSES  [ESSAY  n

of  view  a  kind  of  social  int^^tion— the  swallowing  up  of
small  units  unfit  for  the  political  struggle  by  more  resisting
and  aggressive  units.  Undoubtedly  the  Conquest,  with  its
violence,  its  racial  collisions,  its  wholesale  expropriation,
presented  an  epoch  when  this  process  of  aristocratic  in-
t^ration  must  have  made  itself  felt  with  especial  effect
Royal  5.  But  another  side  of  the  same  process  is  perhaps  even

granu.  more  interesting  to  watch,  and  may  have  had  even  more
extensive  results,  because  it  went  on  with  great  force  a  long
I  time  before  the  Conquest.  I  mean  the  granting  away.  ^
freemen — of  rights  over  free  citizens,  as  we  should  say — b^
the  king  and  other  persons  in  authority*  We  read  of
sheriff's  appropriating  rights  over  freemen,^  or  '  accommo-
dating '  freemen  '  to  some  lordship.  In  a  way,  these  cases
would  fall  under  the  head  of  violent  encroachment,  but  it
must  not  be  foi^otten  that  the  sheriffs  act  in  such  cases  as
representatives  of  the  king,  and  that  what  they  give  away
is  authority  over  members  of  the  hundreds  and  dues  to  be
collected  from  them.^  A  stricter  and  more  burdensome
subjection  may  grow  out  of  these  forms  of  appropriation,
but  the  original  root  is  the  transfer  of  part  of  the  Royal
authority  and  of  Royal  income.  And  this  aspect  comes
even  more  forcibly  to  the  fore  when  freemen  are  said  to  be
granted  directly  by  the  king.  A  notion  has  to  be  realized
which  is  very  alien  to  our  present  conceptions  of  public
law,  but  which  runs  through  the  whole  history  of  the  earlier
Middle  Ages.  The  authority  of  the  king  over  freemen  is
conceived  as  a  reality,  a  profitable  regality,  which  may  be
the  object  of  a  grant,  and,  as  a  matter  of  fact,  is  constantly

^  Dd.  ii.  211  b:  (Shelfhanger,  Norfolk) '  In  Sceiuagram. .  •  Quando
Radulfus  comes  fuit  potestatiuus  et  sui  et  terrae  suae  seniientes  eios
cambierunt  cum  seniientibus  Sancti  Edmundi  iiii  homines  de  Bors-
tuna  pro  aliis  iiii  in  Gessinga,  quod  comes  habuit  iiii  et  Abbas  iiii.*

'  Dd.  ii.  299  b :  (Mildeltuna,  Suffolk)  '  Kenricus  homo  Edrid  filii
Ingoldi  et  Grimus  homo  eiusdem,  et  habent  1  acras  terrae  . .  .  Rex
et  comes  socam.  Grimus  et  Kenricus  fuerunt  commendati  anteoeuori
R.  Malet  Edrico  et  ipse  accommodauit  Walterode  Gada  •  • .  Mode  tenet
R.  Bigot  de  feudo  Hugonis  comitis.'

'  Dd.  ii.  99  a :  (Essex)  '  In  Hundret  de  Laxendena  habet  rex  1^
liberos  homines,  et  hos  prepositus  hundredi  habet  tenentes  dimidiam
hidam,  et  ualet  viii  sol'


SECT.  III.  cii.  i] FREE  TENANTS  4«7

put  into  currency  in  order  to  acquit  debt,  fit  out  servants,
recompense  for  services,  &c.  The  Domesday  references
are  clear  and  varied  as  to  this  point.  Eustache  de  Boulogne
has  stepped  into  the  rights  of  Orgar,  a  liber  homo  in  Anmere
in  Norfolk.  On  this  hand  he  gets  2  carucates,  with  one
villain,  6  bordarii,  and  4  serfs.  But  he  has  also  manorial
lordship  over  six  freemen,  possessed  of  one  carucate  with
2  bordarii. These  he  claims  as  granted  by  the  King.^

There  was  a  dispute  in  Suflfolk  '  between  Roger  Bigod
the  sheriff  and  Hugh  the  earl  in  regard  to  their  respective
rights  over  manors  and  freemen,  but  a  temporary  arrange-
ment seems  to  have  been  n^otiated  between  them.  In  the
case  of  a  freeman  and  priest  named  Suarinus  an  intricate
question  arose,  however.  He  held  a  small  estate  of  30  acres
to  the  geld,  one  plough-team,  and  2  bordarii^  and  Walter  of
Dol  was  seised  of  him,  and  Earl  Hugh  '  after  him '.  The
seisin  of  the  latter  was  challenged,  evidently  by  Roger  Bigod,
and  evidence  was  produced  in  regard  to  the  livery  from
which  it  was  derived.  A  certain  Normannus  appeared  as
a  *  liberator '.  He  averred  that  he  had  received  a  writ  from
the  king  that  he  should  put  Ralph  de  Savigny  into  seisin
of  all  the  freemen  of  whom  Hubert  de  Port  had  formerly
seised  the  Bishop  of  Bayeux,  and  therefore  he  put  Ralph
into  seisin  of  the  priest  Suarinus  aforesaid,  but  he  had  to
admit  that  he  did  not  know  whether  Suarinus  did  belong
to  those  freemen  of  whom  Hubert  de  Port  had  seised  the
bishop.  The  king's  barons — that  is,  the  Domesday  Com-
missioners— when  they  came  into  the  county,  found  this  to

*  Dd.  ii.  151a,  b:  (Anmere,  Norfolk)  'Anemere  tenuit  Orgar  liber
homo  t.  r.e.  ii  car.  terrae  . . .  £t  vi  liberi  bofnines  de  i  camcata  teme .  • .
hos  liberos  homines  reclamat  (Eustacbius)  de  done  regis.*

^  Dd.  ii.  377a:  (Ashfield,  Suffolk)  'In  Asfelda  Suarinus  presbiter
liber  homo  in  soca  et  commendatione abbatis  xxx  ac  semper  ii  Dordarii»
et  i  caruca,  et  ualet  x  sol.  Ex  hoc  presbitero  erat  taisttus  Galterius  de
Dol  quando  forisfecit  suam  terram,  et  comes  Hugo  postea,  ticot
hundret  testatur.  Kt  Normannus  dicit  quod  rex  misit  ei  unumbieuem
ut  saisiret  Kadulfus  de  Sauigni  ex  omnibus  liberis  homtnibusex  quibus
Mubertus  de  Portu  saisierat  episcopum,  et  ideo  Normannus  saisiuit
Kadulfum  ex  hoc  presbitero,  sed^tamen  nescit.si  Vbertus  prius  saisierat
episcopum  de  illo,  et  hoc  inuenerunt  barones  re^  in  pace  inter  Rogenim
Higot  et  liugonem  comitem  quando  uenerunt  m  comitatu,  et  tta erit  in
pace  donee  sit  derationatus.'


428  SOCIAL  CLASSES  [ESSAY  n

be  true  in  regard  to  the  arrangement  between  Koger  Bigod,
who  in  this  case  represents  the  succession  of  the  bishop,
and  probably  claimed  Suarinus  as  forfeited  to  the  king
and  Earl  Hugh.  The  case  is  summed  up  in  the  words:
'  Let  this  remain  in  peace  (as  in  the  arrangement)  until  he
(Rc^er  ?)  has  made  good  his  claim.'  Some  points  of  this
case  and  of  the  interpretation  I  give  to  it  may  be  obscure
and  disputable,  but  the  chief  point  of  interest  is  dear
enough.  We  hear  of  two  acts  of  delivery  of  sdsin  as  to
freemen  effected  by  Royal  sergeants  in  behalf  of  the  Idi^,
and  constituting  a  title  to  which  any  claim  in  respect  of
these  freemen  has  to  go  back.

The  church  of  St.  Mary  of  Barking^  is  possessed  of
different  estates  in  Essex,  and,  among  others,  holds  6  free-
men in  connexion  with  the  manor  of  Muching,  who  are
said  to  belong  to  the  hundred.  They  are  free  as  to  the
abbey,  but  the  king  can  do  with  them  what  he  pleases.

Roger  Bigod  had  appropriated  a  large  number  of  freemen
in  Norfolk.  Among  others  there  were  some  in  Repps,
Bastwick,  and  Somerton,  whom  he  claimed  as  the  successor
of  an  Englishman,  Alwin  of  Thetford,  asserting  that  the
king  (Edward  the  Confessor?)  had  granted  them  to  the
said  Alwin  with  their  lands.^

If  we  look  back  from  these  Domesday  instances  to  Old
English  charters,  we  shall  at  once  perceive  that  there  is  an
intimate  connexion  between  the  two  groups  of  evidence.
The  hides,  with  tributarii,  cassati,  manenUSf  which  form  the
object  of  Royal  grants  in  the  time  before  the  Conquest,
were  not  necessarily  occupied  by  freemen,  but  they  might
be  so,  and  there  was  nothing  in  the  condition  of  gafol-
gelders  or  men  under  soke  to  enable  the  courts  to  draw

^  Dd.  ii.  17  b:  (Muching,  Essex)  '  Mucinga  ...  In  hoc  hundredo
sunt  vi  liberi  homines  tenentes  ii  hidas  et  1  acras.  Isti  homines  libere
exstitenint  ad  Berchingum,  sed  rex  modo  ex  ipsis  potest  facere  quod
sibi  placuerit.'

'  Dd.  ii.  174b:  (Repps,  Bastwick,  Oby,  Somerton,  Norfolk)  'In
Repes  vii  liberi  homines,  iiii  Sancti  Benedict!,  ii  Alwi,  i  AJmari
episcopi  commendati  t.r.e.  l3cxx  ac  terrae  ...  In  Bastuic  ii  libere
femine  Edrici  et  Rigulfi  xiii  ac.  terrae  ...  In  Othebei  i  liber  homo  vi
ac  terrae  ...  In  Somertuna  i  liber  homo  xxi  ac  terrae . . .  Hos  liberot
dedit  rex  Alwio  de  Tetfordo  cum  terris  suis  sic  Rogerus  Bigot  recfamat.'


SECT.  III.  CH.  I] FREE  TENANTS  4^9

a  line  between  the  ceorls  sitting  ongafol  land,  or  the  socmen
and  the  freemen  of  higher  d^^ee  and  greater  independence.
In  fact,  in  the  light  of  the  Worcestershire  verdict  as  to  the
three  hundreds  of  Pershore,  the  typical  occupants  of  the
hides  at  any  rate  should  be  franklins.  I  will  not  press  this
argument  further,  as  I  have  no  wish  to  demonstrate  that
free  ceorls  alone  formed  the  bulk  of  the  peasantry,  and  that
holdings  similar  to  theirs  were  never  settled  with  bondmen
and  serfs.  What  I  want  to  make  clear  is  the  trail  of
evidence  which  shows  the  gradual  absorption  of  free  settlers
and  warriors  by  aristocratic  formations,  a  process  which
was  met  half-way  by  another  wave  of  social  evolution — the
gradual  rising  of  serfs  and  slaves  to  the  position  of  dependent
householders.

One  great  difficulty  has  to  be  met  at  the  very  threshold
of  such  a  theory.  Even  granted  that  the  ideas  of  the  time
were  so  confused  as  to  permit  of  the  transfer  of  the  r^^ities
we  have  been  talking  of,  how  can  it  be  explained  that
private  citizens  were  subjected  to  the  sway  and  exploitation
of  other  private  citizens  ?  To  what  extent  could  they  be
considered  to  be  free  when  brought  under  such  private
authority  ?  Now  it  is  important  to  notice  that  the  intention
of  keeping  up  the  status,  rights  of  possession,  and  fixed  dues
of  the  free  ceorls  in  the  same  condition  as  before  the  grant,
is  distinctly  traceable  both  before  and  after  the  Conquest.
In  Old  English  law,  the  connexion  of  the  free  tenant  with
the  hundred  and  the  county  courts  did  not  cease  because  he
was  placed  under  a  lordship  or  granted  with  his  land.  We
even  get  a  few  extremely  valuable  and  direct  allusions  to
the  wish  to  keep  up  the  status  of  transferred  tributaries  in
exactly  the  same  manner  as  when  they  were  under  the
king.^  Now,  after  the  Conquest,  a  corresponding  doctrine
is  the  well-known  teaching  as  to  the  immutability  of  ancient
demesne  condition.  This  condition  was  traced  to  the  time
of  Edward  the  Confessor,  because  as  to  earlier  times  *  memory
did  not  run ',  but  the  main  point  of  it  was  that  the  Royal
grant  should  not  change  the  tenure  and  status  of  the  people

*  See  above,  pp*  336,  330.


430  SOCIAL  CLASSES  [ESSAY  n

granted,  and  that  the  Royal  courts  should  see  that  it
should  not  be  otherwise.  This  involved  the  fundamental
contrast  between  the  jurisdictional  r^hts  of  villain  socmen
and  villains,  on  which  we  need  not  dwell  at  length  her^  as
the  subject  has  been  sufficiently  discussed  in  another  work.^
From  our  present  point  of  view  it  is  material  that  the
doctrine  of  ancient  demesne  covers  the  cases  of  small  rustic
tenants,  who  otherwise  would  have  lapsed  into  the  same
rightless  condition  as  ordinary  villains,  but  were  rescued
from  it  by  the  view  that  tenants  granted  by  the  long
should  not  deteriorate  in  their  condition.  The  people  who
availed  themselves  of  the  ancient  demesne  privilq;e  were
chiefly  peasants  of  a  rather  low  standing,  as  the  acknow-
ledged free  socmen  and  free  tenants  naturally  took  to  the
ordinary  processes  of  Common  Law  in  vindicating  their
rights.  But  there  is  no  reason  to  doubt  that  many  of  the
people  who  had  to  use  the  parvum  breve  de  recto  or  the
monstravertmt  came  substantially  from  the  same  stock  as
the  granted  freemen  of  the  abbeys  of  Pershore,  of  Abing-
don, of  Peterborough,  &c.,  and  in  this  case  their  appeal
rested  on  the  broad  ground  of  immutability  of  custom  on
Royal  manors.  In  conclusion,  I  have  to  remind  the  reader
that  the  population  attached  to  these  Royal  manors  ooo*
sisted  largely  of  free  suitors  of  the  public  courts  who  had
been  annexed  to  some  manor  for  protection  and  r^istra-
tion.  In  their  case  the  transfer  was  meant  to  be  a  jurisdic*
tional  one  in  the  main,  but  it  must  have  carried  some
customary  dues  and  services  along  with  it

It  is  hardly  needful  to  say  that,  in  practice,  the  fixity  of
tenure  and  customs  aimed  at  by  the  doctrine  as  to  the
transfer  of  Royal  rights  was  constantly  infringed  and  set  at
nought.  As  a  matter  of  fact  the  deterioration  of  the  social
status  of  freemen  was  much  greater  than  legal  theory  would
admit  or  suppose.  But,  for  tracing  the  history  of  English
aristocracy,  it  is  very  material  to  notice  that  it  starts,  in  one
sense,  from  a  dispersion  of  the  regality  inherent  in  the  pnblk
authority  of  the  king  over  freemen.

^  Villainage  in  England,  p.  90  ff.


CHAPTER II

PEASANTS

I.  It  is  not  easy  to  draw  the  line  between  freemen  and  Freemen
socmen.  They  constantly  interchange  in  the  East-Angliad  socmen,
shires.  In  Norfolk  their  numbers  are  about  equal;  in
Suffolk  the  freemen  predominate,  but  socmen  occur  also
in  a  certain  number  of  instances.^  In  a  general  way,  the
term  freeman  marks  the  higher  condition,'  but  it  may  come
to  pass  that  a  socman  has  freemen  under  him.' One  of  the

*  Dd.  ii.  131  a:  (Kimberley,  Norfolk)  '  Cbineburlai . . .  Praeter  hoc
iacent  huic  manerio  in  Karletuna  xvi  liberi  homines  Ix  ac.  tenae.
Semper  ii  carucae  et  sunt  in  superiori  pretio,  et  borum  viiii  erant
sochemanni  Stigandi  t.  r.  e.  Sed  Radulfus  comes  eos  omnes  babebat
priusc^uam  forisfaceret.'  134  b :  (Runham,  Norfolk)  '  Rombam  tenue-
runt  ii  liberi  homines  t.  r.e.  unus  fuit  homo  Edrid  de  Laxelelda,  et
alter  Radulfi  Stalra,  et  semper  i  carucata  terrae  et  dimidia  .  .  .  et
xi  sochemanni  et  dimidius  de  dimidia  carucata  terrae,  temper  iii  canicat
.  . .  et  xi  liberi  homines  et  dimidius  de  dimidia  carucata  terrae  et  v
acris.  Tunc  iiii  carucae,  post  et  modo  iiL'  353  a :  (Cley,  Norfolk)
*  Cleietorpa  ...  iii  sochemanni  tenent  idem  zx  acras,  et  semper  dim.
car.  Et  de  his  iii  habet  rex  socam.'  361  a :  (Wortham,  Sum>lk)  *  In
VVordham  ii  sochemanni  Ix  ac«  pro  ii  numeriis  t.  r.  e. . .  •  In  eadem
i  sochemannus  xiiii  ac. .  . .  In  eadem  Alfahc  liber  homo  in  soca  et
commendatione  abbatis  xxx  ac.  pro  manerio  tr.  e.  •  •  .  In  eadem
Vluricus  liber  homo  xxx  ac  soca  et  commendatione  abbatis ...  In
eadem  xxv  liberi  homines  iii  car.  terrae.'  Ibid:  (Gislingham)  'In
Ciislingheham  Aluricus  sochemannus  xxx  ac  . . .  In  eadem  xii  liberi
homines  et  i  sochemannus  viii  ac  de  xxx  ac.  in  soca  eadem  terra  et
commendatione  abbatis.*

'  Dd.  ii.  iioa :  (Saham-Tony,  Norfolk)  ' Sabam  . . .  Huic  manerio
iacebant  t.r.e.  xlvi  sochemanni  cum  onmi  consuetudine,  post  et  modo
xxxi,  iii  car.  terrae  .  .  .  De  istis  bominibus  habet  Rainakios  filius
luonis  XV,  et  Bemerus  Arbalister  ii.'  Ibid.:  (Griston)  '  In  Gristuna
xviiii  sochemanni  i  car.  terrae  t.r.e.'  Ibid. :  (Caston)  *  Caatestuna  iiii
liberi  homines  Heroldi,  cciiii  ac  terrae,  et  sunt  aclditi  huic  manerio
postquam  rex  aduenit.*  ii.  331  a  (Dalbam,  Sufiblk)  '  Delbam  • . .
i  socliemannus  perttnet  huic  terrae  quam  tenet  isdem  Ettardus  et  iacet
in  Horam  de  xl  acris  ...  In  eadem  i  liber  homo  Stisandi  quam  (jxir)
tenet  idem  Ettardus  xxx  ac  . .  Hoc  est  pro  escangio  oe  terra  Isac  .  •  •
In  eadem  i  liber  homo  x  ac  Stigando  commendatus  • . .  hoc  est  pro
eodem  escangio.'

'  Dd.  ii.  371a:  (Stoke  Ash,  Sufiblk)  <  In Stocbes  t.  r.  t.  tenuit


432  SOCIAL  CLASSES  [essay  u

reasons  for  the  confusion,  behind  which  there  must,  however,
lurk  real  differences,  is  the  variety  of  local  usage ;  the  same
term  may  have  been  understood  with  different  shades  of
meaning  in  places  situated  close  by  each  other.  This  is
not  all,  however,  and  some  distinctions  may  be  traced.  To
begin  with,  there  is  an  opposition  between  socemanm  Uteri
and  nopt  liberie  which  widens  into  that  between  socemanm
as  such  and  liberi  homines^  on  the  basis  of  the  right  to
dispose  of  one's  land.^  This  right  is  considered,  as  we
know,  as  an  attribute  of  a  free  tenement,  while  it  may  be
said  of  a  less-favoured  tenant  that  he  was  to  that  degree
socman  that  he  could  not  dispose  of  his  land.'  The
category  of  free  socmen  would  in  this  Domesday  sense
comprise  exceptionally  privileged  socmen,  endowed  with
full  power  over  their  land.^ As  the  ordinary  socman  b

Bucardus  xiiii  acras.  Sochemannus  abbatis  et  ualet  Hi  soL  Hanc
terrain  calumpniatur  Robertus  Fardenc  homo  Godrici  Dapiferi  ad
manerium  regis  de  Melnessam,  et  dicit  quod  Galterius  de  Dol  tenoit
quando  forisfecit,  et  hoc  uult  probare  contra  totum  handxcdmn
omnibus  legibus  ...  In  Wicham  ii  liberi  homines  conunendati
Burcardo  de  Melnessam.'

^  Dd.  i.  313d:  (Stamford,  Beds)  'In  Stanford  tenet  Hago  (de
Belcamp)  i  hidam  et  dimidiam  uixgatam  terrae  •  •  •  Hanc  tenam
tenuerunt  iiii  sochemanni  quorum  iii  liberi  fiierunt,  qoartus  uero  ooam
hidam  habuit,  sed  nee  dare  nee  uendere  potuit'  ii.  57  b:  (Eskz)
'  Teiam  ...  In  eadem  tenuerunt  xx  sochemanni  i  hidam  et  '^^mHift"*
et  xxxi  acras.  Modo  tenent  xxx  sochemanni  illam  tenam,  et  non
poterant  recedere  ab  illo  manerio  . . .  et  ibi  fuerunt  iii  liberi  hoonines
tenentes  xii  acras,  sed  non  fuerunt  de  illo  manerio  quod  Gmiridiis
habet,  sed  ipse  reuocat  liberatorem.'  Ibid. :  '  Wochadnnam  •  • .  In
hac  terra  sunt  xiii  sochemanni  qui  libere  tenent  viii  hidas  et  dimidiam
et  XX  acras,  et  habent  xii  bordarios  et  iacent  ad  hanc  firmam  de  xvi
lib.*

'  Dd.  ii.  2^8  a :  (Barton,  Norfolk)  '  In  Bertuna  tenet  GaoafridnSi
iii  liberi  hommes  Ixxxx  ac. .  .  .  Unus  ex  illis  tribus  cum  xxx  ac.  eiat
ita  sochemannus  Sancti  Benedicti  ut  nuUo  modo  posset  recedere;'

'  Dd.  i.  129  b:  (Twickenham,  Middlesex)  'Ticheham  .  .  •  Dehoc
manerio  tenuit  Tochi  ii  hidas,  huscarle  regis  Edwaxdi  fiiit,  ct  ii
sochemanni  ii  hidas  et  i  uirgatam,  homines  Vluuardi  luennit  ct
Aluuinus  i  hidam  et  iii  uirgatas,  homo  Vlsi,  filii  Manni  fuit.  Vendere
potuerunt  quo  uoluerunt  T.  R«  £.  Haec  terra  tota  iacet  modo  in
Coleham  ubi  non  foit  T.  K.  £.'  129  d  :  (Enfield,  Middlesex)  '  FnefcMfi
...  In  hac  terra  fuerunt  v  sochemanni  de  vi  hidis  qnas  potuefunt
dare  uel  uendere  sine  licentia  dominorum  suorum.'  234 a:  (Hol-
denby,  Northants)  'Aldenesbi  .  .  .  Siuuardus  cum  ix  aodmnaimis
libere  tenuerunt.'  ii.  5  b  :  (Writtle,  Essex)  'Writelam.  •  •  et  dimidiam
hidam  quam  libere  tenuit  i  sochemannus  reddens  socam  in  manerio^
et  tamen  cum  terra  sua  posset  ire  quo  uellet,  hunc  Comes  Eustadiias


SECT.  III.  CH.  ii]  PEASANTS  433

bereft  of  such  a  right,  he  is  said  to  belong  to  an  estate,
while  the  typical  free  tenant  is  '  added  to '  an  estate,  and,  as
such,  stands  outside.  The  socman,  being  as  a  rule  impli-
cated in  the  economic  management  of  the  estate,  is  more
burdened  with  service  and  customary  dues,  although  some
dues  of  the  latter  kind  may  fall  upon  the  freeman  as  well.^
Ultimately  the  central  notion  in  the  socman's  position  is  his
subjection  to  soke.  Freemen  are  also  mentioned  in  con*
nexion  with  soke,  but  when  it  comes  to  a  distinction  between
socmen  and  free  tenants  or  freemen,  stress  will  be  laid  on
the  condition  of  the  socman  as  subject  to  jurisdictional
authority.^  Some  SufTolk  cases  are  well  in  point  to  illus-
trate the  general  opposition  and  the  relative  character  of
the  distinction  between  liberi  homines  and  socmen.  In
Northbery ,  a  manor  of  Roger  of  Poitou,  there  lived  a  certain
priest  Edwin,  who  was  socman  of  the  Abbot  of  Ely,  and
held  30  geldable  acres,  with  a  team,  as  a  manor. To  this

adiunxit  sue  terrae.'  ii.  28  b :  (Belchamp  Otton,  Essex)  '  Belcham
.  .  .  huic  manerio  iacent  v  sochemanni  cmorum  ii  occupauit  logelricus
tempore  regis  Willelmi  qui  tunc  erant  liberi  homines,  et  habent  xxxv
acras  terrae.*

*  Dd.  i.  141  d:  (Widiall,  Herts) '  Widihale.  Hoc  tnaneriom  tenue-
runt  ix  sochemanni  ...  hi  per  annum  uicecomiti  inueniebant  ix  den.  nel
ii  aueras  et  iiii  partem  unius  auerae.'  Cf.  ibid.,  Berchedene.  Dd.  ii.
I  b :  (Witham,  Essex)  '  Witham  . .  .  Tunc  xxi  uillani,  modo  xv  .  .  .
Tunc  xxiii  sochemanni  et  modo  similiter.  Tuncxviii  canicae  hominnm
.  .  .  In  hoc  maneno  adiacebant  tempore  regis  Edwardi  xxxiiii  liberi
homines  qui  tunc  reddebant  x  sol.  ae  consuetndine.'  36  b:  (Cogge-
shally  Essex)  *  Cogheshala  . .  .  Huic  manerio  pertinent  xi  sochemanni
et  i  presbiter  et  i  porcarius  et  i  mercennarius,  huic  terrae  additae
sunt  xxxviii  acrae  quas  i  liber  homo  tenet  de  rege.*  Ct  389  b  (Bade-
mondesfelda,  Suffolk).

'  Dd.  ii.  190  a,  b  :  (Wallington,  Norfolk)  '  WaGnghetuna .  .  .  Huic
manerio  semper  iacent  iii  liberi  homines  commend,  tantum,  Ix  ac.
de  his  habuit  Heroldus  socam  et  ual.  xl  sol.*  ii.  287  a,  b:  (Berffholt,
Suffolk)  '  De  his  hominibus  qui  huic  manerio  (Bercolt)  remann  stmt
non  habuit  Haroldus  etiam  commendationem  t.  r.  e.  praeCer  de
quattuor,  Ulnod,  Estmunt,  Aluricus,  Wistricus.  Et  Guert  firater
Haroldi  habuit  commendationem  de  duobus  maneriis,  et  Aluiet
(3mnes  alii  erant  commendati  aliis  baronibus  t  r.  e.  de  i  habuit
Antecessor  Malet  commendationem,  et  Robertus  filius  Wimarc  iiii,
et  tamen  semper  Haroldus  habebat  socam  supradictum  manerium
scilicet  Hercolt  cum  hoc  quod  ei  pertinebat  et  ctmi  soca  de  hundreto
et  dimidio.  ...  Hii  liberi  homines  qui  t.  r.e.  pertinebant  in  soca  de
Hercolt  unusquisque  gratis  dabat  preposito  per  annum  iiii  tantwn  den.
ct  reddebat  soca  sicut  lex  ferebat/ Cf.  388  a  (Bramttma).


434  SOCIAL  CLASSES  [essay  II

estate  were  added  49  freemen  with  10  teams ;  they  were
all  dependent  on  the  Abbot  of  Ely,  both  in  regSLtd  to  soke
and  to  commendation,  but  one  among  them  was  entirely
{omnino)  a  socman  of  the  Abbot  The  commentary  to
this  significant  'entirely'  is  presented  by  an  Elmeswell
entry  which  gives  five  socmen  as  entirely  belon^ng  to
St.  Edmund — they  were  unable  either  to  give  or  to  sell
without  his  consent.^  In  Cambas,  a  manor  of  Robert  Malet,
socmen  take  the  place  of  freemen  at  the  time  of  Count
Bryan,  Robert's  '  antecessor ',  and  the  material  side  c^  this
change  of  terms  consists  in  the  cutting  off  of  the  population
from  its  former  parish  and  from  the  hundred.'  Again  and
again  the  full  subjection  of  the  tenant  in  r^[ard  to  his  land  '
is  coupled  with  the  soke,  and  one  can  easily  understand
that  the  free  peasant,  who  could  not  leave  the  land,  nor
dispose  of  it,  was  in  an  entirely  different  position,  in  respect
of  the  lord,  from  those  who  could  give  or  sell,  and  thus  get
rid  of  a  situation  which  became  burdensome  or  unbearable.
If  these  latter  are  still  termed  socmen  sometimes,  the  differ-
ence between  them  and  the  bulk  of  their  fellows  b  carefully


^  Dd.  ii.  353  a:  (Suffolk)  'Nordberiam  tenuit  Eduinus
sochemannus  abbatis  xxx  acras  pro  manerio  t.r.e.  Semper  i  cani-
cam.  In  eadem  xlviiii  liberi  homines  additi  huic  manerio  cclx  ac  et
dim.  Semper  x  car. . . .  Omnes  isti  fuerunt  in  soca  et  commendatioiie
abbatis  et  unus  sochemannus  omnino  nomine  Godricus.*  364  b:
(Ehnswell,  Suffolk) '  Elmeswellam  . . .  v  sochemanni  de  x\  acris  tenae
...  Hi  sunt  sancti  omnino  nee  dare  uel  uendere  potuerunt  sine  licentia
abbatis.'

'  Dd.  ii.  391  a,  b :  (Combs,  Suffolk)  '  Cambas . . .  Postqoam  conei
Brienus  antecessor  Roberti  hoc  manerium  habuit,  nullam  consueta-
dinem  reddidit  in  hundredo  . . .  xii  sochemanni  in  Cambas  s<M>iat
esse  parrochiani  in  aecclesia  Stou,  sed  mode  sunt  in  aecdesia  Cambas.
Idem  Nigel ius  abstulit.'

'  Dd.  i.  129  a  :  (?  Harlington,  Middlesex)  '  Herdintone  • .  •  Hoc
manerium  tenuit  Wigot,  et  de  hac  terra  tenuit  i  sochemannus  il  hidasi
-non  potuit  uendere  sine  eius  licentia.'  C£  135  a  (Bigrave,  Heits)^
ii*  353  b  '  (Weston,  Suffolk)  '  Westuna  . . .  iii  liberi  homines  •  • .  Hii
poterunt  dare  et  uendere  terram  suam  t.  r.  e.  sed  commendatio  et  soca
et  saca  remanebat  sancto  Eadmundo,  et  in  eadem  x  sochemanni
Sancti  Eadmundi  cum  omni  consuetudine  t.  r.e.'  ii.  357  b,  358  a:
(Flempton,  Suffolk)  '  In  Flemingtuna  ten.  Uloardus  de  abbate  x
sochemannos  de  i  carucata  terrae  ...  hi  sunt  sancti  cum  saca  et  soca
et  commendatione,  et  seruitium  debent  in  Riseby,  et  in  Leacfordamt
et  in  Hemegretham,  nee  poterant  dare  uel  uendere  tenam  nne
licentia  abbatis.' Cf.  359  a  (Melafordam,  Suffolk).


SECT.iii.CH.il]  PEASANTS  435

noticed,^  and  I  suppose  that  when  we  hear  of  a  socman,
without  further  qualification,  we  ought  primarily  to  think
of  one  who  could  not  recede  with  his  land,  and  thus,  not-
withstanding his  personally  free  condition  and  his  public
rights,  was  nevertheless  actually  a  '  colonus  ascribed  to  the
glebe ',  to  use  the  Roman  term.  One  of  the  natural  conse-
quences of  this  adscription  to  the  glebe  was  the  subjection
to  economic  exploitation  on  the  part  of  the  landlord,  and
this  is  noticed  in  Domesday,  from  the  point  of  view  of  the
suit  of  the  fold,  which  is  commonly  connected  with  the
jurisdictional  suit,  although,  at  first  sight,  it  has  nothing  to
do  with  it.'^  Indeed,  we  come  across  expressions  which
lead  to  the  conclusion  that,  at  least  in  the  mind  of  some
jurors,  the  socman  was  the  typical  suitor  of  the  lord's  fold.'
To  sum  up,  it  seems  that  in  a  general  way  the  difference
between  the  freeman  and  the  socman  amounted  to  that
between  a  landowner  or  a  contractual  tenant  on  the  one
hand,  and  a  free  peasant  attached  to  a  township  under  lord-
ship on  the  other.  In  drawing  these  general  lines  I  do  not
wish  to  dogmatize.  The  common  law  of  these  relations  was
far  from  settled,  and  far  from  clear  in  the  minds  of  the
people  of  the  day ;  the  local  verdicts  contain  many  con-
tradictions  and  riddles  which  it  would  be  impossible  to
unravel,*  and  wc  must  be  content  with  putting  the  principal
distinctions  into  a  strong  light.

^  L)d.  i.  129  c:  (Greenford,  Middlesex)  'Greneforde  .  .  .  Hanc
terrain  tenuerunt  ii  sochemanni.  Vnus  horum  canonicus  fuit  S.  Pauli,
ii  hidas  habuit,  potuit  inde  facere  quod  uoluit.  Alter  homo  foit
Ans^ari  Stairi,  non  potuit  dare  praeter  eius  liccntiam.'  Cf.  1.909 d,
2ioa  (Dcna,  Heds) ;  3ioa  (Giveldene, Estone,  Riaelai,  Tomai) ;  aiob
(Serncbroc);  213  b  (Tamiseforde).

^  I)d.  ii.  356  b:  (Risby,  Suffolk)  *  Risebi  .  .  .  vii  sochemanni  de
i  canicata  et  dim.  terrae  . .  .  Super  hos  homines  habet  S.  Eadmimdus
sacam  ct  socam  et  commendationero  et  omnem  consuetudinem,  nee
potuerunt  dare  et  uendere  terram  sine  concessu  abbatis,  ad  faldam
etiam  omncs  excepto  uno  qui  faldam  habet  pro  se.  In  eadem  i  liber
homo  (lelit  carucatam  terrae  quam  tenet  Normannus  de  abbate  . . .
hie  potuit  dare  et  uendere  terram,  sed  saca  et  soca  et  commendatio
remansit  Sancto  .  .  .  hoc  manerium,  excepto  libero,  tunc  ualuit  iiii  lib.'

**  Dd.  ii.  194  b  :  (Begcton  or  Boyton,  Norfolk)  '  In  Begetuna  tenuit
episc  opus  Almarus  per  emptionem  t.  r.  e.  cum  soca  et  saca  de  comite
Al^'aro  de  Hor  ct  de  sequentibus  faldam  iii  carucatas  terrae.'

*  Dd.  ii.  138  b  :  (Denton,  Norfolk)  '  In  Dentuna  xii  sochemanni,  de

F  f  a


436  SOCIAL  CLASSES  [ESSAY  ll

Soke  and  2.  Socmeti^  as  members  of  jurisdictional  sokes^  are  very
^^'^^'  prominent  in  the  eastern,  half-Danish  shires,  especially
in  Lincolnshire,  but  also  in  Nottinghamshire,  Yorkshire,
Norfolk,  and  Suffolk.^  In  most  cases  the  socmen  appear  as
groups  of  tenants,  or  single  tenants,  in  manors  provided
with  the  franchise.'  The  lord's  jurisdictional  rights  stretch,
in  such  cases,  not  only  over  the  socmen,  but  alao  over
villains,  but  whereas  they  are  an  adjunct  to  economic  sub-
jection in  the  case  of  the  latter,  they  appear  as  the  essential
basis  in  the  position  of  the  former,  economic  subjection
being  added  to  this.

his  ix  habebat  Stigandus  socam  in  Ersam,  et  habebant  Ix  acras,  qood
nee  dare  nee  uendere  poterant  terrain suam  extra  **T*^Tiafn,  sod


et  habebant  —  ac  terrae,  et  xviii  Sancti  Eadmundi  coaunendati«  et  non
poterant  reddere  sine  licentia  sancti,  sed  soca  et  saca  in  Hersam.'
Cf.  ibid.,  Brodiso.

'  Dd.  i.  339  a :  (Gayton,  Lines.) '  Soea  huius  manerii  •  .  •  simol  ad
geldum  XXV  carucate  et  dimidia  et  i  bouata  et  iii  [mub  bouatae.  Ton
ad  xxxviii  carueas.  In  his  sunt  ebcvii  soehemanni,  et  saonrii  inDaai  cl
xxvii  bordarii  habentes  xxxiiii  earueas.'  339  b  :  '  Soca  de  HoniecaitTei
Inter  totum  ad  geldum  xlii  carucate  terre.  Terra  ad  Iviii  carueas.  In
his  sunt  ccxii  sochemanni  et  Ixvi  uillani  et  Ixx  bcndarii  babcnteslr
carueas.'  299  a :  ( Allerton,  Yorks)  '  Aluertune  . . .  Ad  hoc  maoerimn
pertinet  soca  harum  terrarum,  Neuhuse,  etc  Inter  totiim  sunt  ad
geldum  quater  xx  et  v  carucatae  quas  possunt  arare  xlv  camcae.  Ibi
sunt  be  acrae  prati.  Ibi  fuerunt  exvi  sochemans.  Mode  waata  est'
Cf.  ibid.,  Walesgrif ;  299  b  (Picheringa).  Dd.  li.  120b:  (HoraiiigitDft,
Norfolk) '  Hommghetoft . . .  ix  sochemanni  et  ii  bordarii  i  car.  terrM
. . .  de  his  nouem  sochemannis  habuit  Stigandus  socam  t.r.e.  sed
Radulfus  eam  inuasit,  et  ideo  habet  Godricus.'  ii.  136  a:  (Stow,
Norfolk)  '  Stou  ...  Huie  manerio  iacent  xxviiii  sochemaimi  iii  car.
terrae  et  xxxvi  ac.  Tune  ualuit  x  lib.  Quando  reoeptt  zH  libi  et  xiii
sol.  et  iiii  den.  et  Godricus  eum  dedit  pro  xiii  lib.  et  ziii  soL  et  iin  den.
et  XX  sol.  de  gersuma  quandiu  habebat  socam.  Mode  rfttfq«f«
amisit  socam  reddit  vii  lib.  et  super  sochemanos  quos  amisit  simt  vii
lib.' Cf.  ii.  287  a  (Bercolt,  Suffolk).

'  Dd.  i.  272  e :  (Walton-on-Trent,  Derby)  '  In  Waletime  ct  Red-
lauestun  ...  iii  sochemanni  et  xxxiii  uillani  et  x  bordarii  habentes  si
carueas.'  Cf.  273  c  (Blanghesbi) ;  275  b  (Cedesdene) ;  377  a  (Baife-
burg  and  Witeuuelle).  282  c :  (Sutton-upon-Trent,  Notts)  '  SMtow
. . .  li  car.  terrae  et  vi  bou.  ad  geldum  . . .  xiii  sochemanni  de  medie-
tate  terrae  huius.'  284  b :  (Bamby-in-the-Willows,  Notts)  '  Bandbi
...  iiii  sochemanni  de  ii  bouatis  huius  terrae,  et  ix  uillani  ct  vi  bordarii
habentes  iiii  carueas  et  dimidiam.'  Dd.  ii.  39b:  (Bureau  Essex)  'In
Buro  hab.  Rieardus  in  dominio  xiii  sochemannos  de  xxxv  acris.*  CL
40  a,  Focsearde,  Pebenhers,  Alfelmestuna,  MildeltanSy  Hatateda.
287  a :  (Groton,  Suffolk)  '  In  Grotena  iiii  sochemanni  pertiaentes  lati


SECT.  III.  CH.  ii]  PEASANTS  437

An  important  group  is  formed  by  the  socmen  of  the  King,
or  the  men  in  the  King's  soke.*  Some  of  them  were  very
free,  and  could  dispose  of  their  land,  but  had  to  abide  in  the
Royal  soke.^  Others,  though  under  the  personal  protection
of  some  great  man,  were  still  in  the  Royal  soke.'  They
were  people  appertaining  to  some  Royal  manor,  and  impli*
cated  in  its  jurisdiction  and  economic  arrangements.  Their
manorial  subjection  separated  them  from  freemen  owing
suit  to  a  hundred.^  There  are  a  number  of  entries  telling
of  the  concentration  of  duties  and  payments  of  socmen
in  central  royal  manors. Such  was  Newark,  Notts,^  to

manerio  c  ac.  terrae  et  iii  bor.  Inter  omnes  i  caruca  . . .  Soca  in
e*idem  uilla.'

'  Dd.  i.  1^3  d  :  (Pelham,  Herts) '  Peleham  (ii  milites  de  episcopo) . . .
Hoc  manenum  tenuerunt  ii  teigni.  Unus  homo  Aschi  (Wara)  et  alter
homo  Almari  (Belintone),  et  cum  eis  v  sochemanni  de  soca  regis
Edwardi,  ii  uirgatas  habuerunt  et  uendere  potuerunt.'  Cf.  134  a
(Wicheham);  Dd.  ii.  281b:  (Thomey  Green^  Suffolk)  'In  hoc
manerio  (Tomai)  fuenint  tempore  Regis  Edwardi  xl  sochemanni  cum
omni  consuetudine,  postquam  Rop^erus  recepit  fuerunt  onmes  ablati
cxceptis  vii,  semper  habuerunt  hi  Iviii  acras  et  dimidiam  carucam.
Sed  tempore  Regis  Edwardi  i  car.  inter  quattuor.  Et  prepositus
huius  manerii  tenet  xxvi  acras  in  soca  regis,  tempore  Regis  Edwardi
hoc  manenum  cum  integrum  fuit  ualuit  xv  lib.  . . .  De  hoc  manerio
habet  Hugo  de  Monteforti  xx  sochemannos,  et  Rotbertus  comes  vi,
Kogerus  de  Otburuilla  iiii,  Frodro  habet  ii,  Rogeros  Pictauiensis  tit.*

^  Dd.  ii.  78  a :  (Stevington,  Essex)  *  In  Stauintuna  tenet  Renoldus
de  Alberico  xxx  acras  quod  tenuit  Aluuinus,  et  Ordricus  tenait  xv
acras,  et  isti  ii  fuerunt  in  soca  regis,  sed  eos  dedit  Alberico  ...  In
Eadem  tenet  quidam  Anglicus  de  Alberico  xl  acras  quas  tenuit
Aluricus  sochemannus  potens  uendere  terrae,  sed  soca  et  saca  rema-
nebat.'

'  Dd.  i.  148c :  (Marston,  Bucks)  *Merstone  . . .  De  hoc  manerio
tenuit  Leuric  homo  Eduini  comltis  v  hidas  pro  t  manerio,  et  alter
homo  habuit  i  hidam  et  i  uirgatam  de  soca  regis  Edwardi,  et
Hrictuinus  homo  Tosti  comitis  i  uirgatam  habuit.  Onmes  hi  uendere
potuit.*

*  Dd.  ii.409a,  b:  ( and  Thurston,  Suffolk)  *  In  Ciltunaet  in  Tor-

stuna  tenet  Hugo  in  dominio  ex  liberatione  ut  dicit  xvi  sochemannos
qui  pertinebant  in  Tomei,  manenum  r^is  est  cum  omnt  consuetu-
dine .  .  .  Et  omnes  isti  liberi  homines  e  (xiV)  et  soca  fuerunt  liberati
sicut  omnes  Hugonis  dicunt  pro  ii  maneriis  v  carucatarum  terrae.*
Ibid.:  (Newton)  *  Newetuna  ...  In  eadem  tenet  Hugo  in  dominio
ex  lil>eratione  pro  escangio  ii  liberos  homines  de  quibus  soca  erat
in  hundret  el  habent  xxvii  acras.'

^  Dd.  i.  283d:  (Newark,  Notts)  'Ad  Neuuerche  adiacent  omnes
consuetudines  regis  et  comitis  de  ipso  Wapentac  .  .  .  Soca  huius
manerii :  I  n  Baldretone  .  . .  Cheluintone . . .  Sirestune . . .  Eluestune . . .
Stoches  . . .  lioltone  . . .  Cotintone  . . .  Bamebi . . .  Wimuntorp.  Stmul
ad  ^'eldum  iii  carucatae  et  dimidia  bouata. Terra  x carucis  et  dimidiae.


438  SOCIAL  CLASSES  [ESSAY  n

which  145  socmen  owed  customary  suit.  Rothley,^  in
Leicestershire,  was  the  centre  to  which  204  socmen,
and  157  villains,  gravitated.  Newbold,*  in  Derbyshire,
occupies  a  similar  position.  To  Lawford,'  in  Essex,
17  socmen  were  attached,  with  all  customs.  Now
this  expression  'customs'  (consuetudines)  means  that  it
was  not  only  a  question  of  paying  forfeitures,  or  com-
pounding for  them,  and  attending  the  manorial  court,^  but
also  services  and  payments  imposed  on  these  dependent
freemen  for  the  profit  of  the  lord.^  Domesday  gives  some
indications  in  regard  to  these  services.  We  hear  of  averagia^
carriage  services  for  the  sheriiTs  use.® In  the  borough  of

Ibi  Ixxvii  sochemanni  cum  iiii  bordariis  habentxv  carucas  et  dimidiain.
...  In  Scomelei,  Gretone,  Spaldesforde,  Tomesbaie  et  Wisesleie^
Herdrebi,  Cotun.  Simul  ad  geldum  vi  carucatae  et  dimidia  et  dimidiA
bouata.  Terra  xxi  carucis  et  iii  bouatis.  Ibi  Ixxi  sochemanni  et  tu
bordarii  habent  xxi  carucas  et  dimidiam.'

^  Dd.  i.  230b,  c:  (Rothley,  Leics.)  'Rex  tenet  Rodolei.  Rex
Edwardus  tenuit . . .  Huic  manerio  jpertinent  subsequentia  membra,
Adelacbestone,  etc.  In  his  sunt  ccini  sochemanni  cum  clvii  uillanis
et  nonaginta  iiii  bordarii  habentes  auater  xx  carucas  et  ii,  et  reddnnt
inter  omnes  xxxi  lib.  et  viii  sol.  et  i  den.'

'  Dd.  i.  372  b:  (Newbold,  Derby)  *Soca  huius  manerii  (Neune-
bold)  in  Wingreurde  ii  carucatae  terrae  ad  geldum  •  • .  Ibi  xiiii  soche-
manni habent  iiii  carucas.'  Cf.  Greherst, '  Normantune,  etc  •  •  Adhu
terras  sochemannorum  adiacent  vii  acrae  prati.'

'  Dd.  ii.  6  a,  b :  ( Lawford,  Essex)  '  Lalefoidam  . .  •  rex  Willelmus . . .
Huic  manerio  iacuerunt  xvii  sochemanni  t.  r.  e.  de  i  hida  reddentes
omnem  consuetudinem,  et  postquam  rex  uenit  in  hanc  terxam,  et
Bainus  fuit  uicecomes  occupauit  istam  terram  Tedricus  Pointel  et
quando  eam  accepit  manebant  in  ea  xvii  sochemanni  habentes  ix
carucas,  modo  sunt  in  manu  regis,  et  xiii  homines  tenent  hamc  temun
habentes  iiii  carucas.'

^  Dd.  i.  211  c:  (Dunton,  Beds)  '  Domtone  .  .  .  Hanc  terxam  iiii
sochemanni  tenuerunt,  et  terram  suam  uendere  potuerunt.  Homines
Stigandi  archiepiscopi  fiierunt.'  Cf.  ibid.,  Melehou  ;  Stratone;  Ci^es-
sane ;  Chambeltone  ;  Dene.  21 1  d  :  (Tillbrook,  Beds)  '  Tilebroc  . . .
Hoc  manerium  idem  ipsi  sochemanni  (xx)  qui  tenent  tenuerunt,  et  ita
de  soca  et  saca  regis  fuenint  quod  dare  et  uendere  temun  suam  cm
uoiuissent  potuerunt,  et  recedere  ad  alium  dominum  sine  licentia  eius
sub  quo  fuerunt.'

^  Dd.  ii.  4  a  :  (Wethersfield,  Essex)  '  Westrefeida  ...  In  isto  hnn-
dredo  habet  rex  xviii  sochemannos  tenentes  xxvi  acras  et  dim.  et
nunquam  reddiderunt  consuetudinem  praeter  seruicium  regis.'

*  Dd.  i.  134b:  (Libury,  Herts)  'In  Sutreshele  •  .  .  Hanc  temun
tenuerunt  ii  sochenuinni  homines  Leuuini  comitis  de  soca  regis
Edwardi  et  uendere  potuerunt,  et  inueniebant  uicecomiti  mm  i  suemm
uel  V  denarios  et  unum  quadrantem  per  annum.'  Ci  134  c  (Lufenhate);
I34d  (Odenhou).


SECT.  III.  CH.  II]  PEASANTS  439

Stamford  there  were  77  socmen  house-owners  who  held
their  land  in  demesne,  and  could  seek  their  lords  where
they  pleased,  and  the  King  had  nothing  to  claim  from  them
but  forfeiture  fines,  heriots,  and  tolL^  These  men  of  Stamford
were  in  a  specially  privileged  condition,  but  even  they  had
to  pay  heriot,  which  is  an  acknowledgement  that  they  had  to
redeem  their  chattels  from  their  lord  the  King  on  entering
into  succession.  In  a  number  of  cases  they  appear  as
rent-  or  tribute-paying  tenants,  their  services  in  kind  having
probably  been  commuted  for  certain  payments.'  Indeed,
it  would  be  difficult  to  draw  a  line  between  them  and  the
censores  mentioned  sometimes  in  the  Scandinavian  district
The  diflerence  must  have  consisted  in  the  greater  stability
of  the  arrangement  in  the  case  of  the  socmen.'^  Most
socmen  were  subjected  to  lighter  work  and  smaller  rents
in  kind  than  the  villains.  They  had  chiefly  to  attend  on
boon-days,  to  ride  on  errands,  and  to  drive  loads,^  and  these
services  of  theirs  are  well  known  from  records  of  a  somewhat
later  time  than  Domesday.  On  the  Peterborough  estates
they  are  even  subjected  to  week-work,  although  of  a  lighter
kind  than  their  villain  neighbours,^  but  in  a  general  way
their  services would rather  correspond to  those  of  the

^  Dd.  i.  336  d :  (Stamford)  '  In  his  custodiis  sunt  bucvii  mansiones
sochemannorum  qui  habent  terras  suas  in  dominio  et  qui  petunt  dominos
ubi  uolunt,  super  quos  rex  nichil  aliud  habet  nisi  emendatione  fbris-
facturae  eorum,  et  heriete,  et  theloneum,  et  i  molinum  de  xxx  sol.
quod  abstulit  Eustachius  de  Huntedune.  Illud  erat  unius  soche-
manni.'

*  Dd.  i.  149  b:  (Stone,  Bucks)  'Stanes  .  .  .  Ibi  i  sochmannus
reddit  xv  sol.  per  annum.'  Cf.  228  b  (Riehale,  Northants)  ;  Dd  ii.
126  b  (Ellingham,  Norfolk).

'  Dd.  i.  273  a :  (Weston-upon-Trent,  Derby)  *  In  Wcstunc . . .  iiii  cen-
sarii  reddunt  xvi  sol.';  274 d:  (?Trusley)  'Toxenai  .  .  .  Ibivcensarii
rcddunt  v  sol.  et  ii  sochemanni  v  sol.'  276  d  :  (Ockbrook)  *"  Ochebroc . . .
iiii  censarii  reddunt  xiiii  sol.'  277  a:  (Palterton,  Scardiflf,  Tunstall)
'  In  Faltretune  et  Scardeclif  et  TunesUd  ...  Ibi  nunc  in  dominio  ii
carucae,  ct  x  uillani  et  i  sochemannus  et  ii  bordarii  habentes  iii  canicas,
et  i  ccnsarius  cum  i  caruca.*

*  Black  Book  of  Peterborough  (Camden  Soc.),  i?8  (Pilesgete)  ;  159
(Torp,  &c.),  162,  163. Cf.  Round,  Feudal  England,  3a

'  Cf.  Dd.  i.  284  b:  (Collingbam,  Notts)  *  In  Colingeham  hab.
S.  Petrus  de  Burg  iiii  carucatas  terre  et  dimidiam  bouatam  ad  geldum
.  . .  Ibi  xxxvii  sochemanni  de  ii  carucatis  et  iii  booatis  huius  terre,  et
V  iii  uillani  et  XX  bordarii  habentes  xiiii  carucas.'


440  SOCIAL  CLASSES  [ESSAYS

geneat  class  than  to  those  of  the  gebir  class  in  the  RecH^
tudines}
Scandi-  3.  The  socmen  are  distributed  over  England  in  a  vety

socmoi  and  Peculiar  way. They  are  very  numerous  in  the  Scandinavian
i^v^ and  East  Anglian  districts,  and  decrease  in  number  as  we
proceed  to  the  south  and  west.' Still  they  are  to  be  met
sporadically  in  Essex,^  Hertfordshire,^  Cambrid^^eshire,' Bed-
fordshire,^ Buckinghamshire,''  and  Kent' But  even  in  these

^  Dd.  i.  219  b :  (S.  Liifienham  and  Kdthorpe,  Northaats)  '  Ra
tenet  Lufenham  et  Sculetorp  . . .  Ibi  sunt  xii  sochenumni  et  xvi  bonkrii
cum  presbitero  habentes  xii  Caracas . . .  Homines  operantor  open  regis
quae  prepositus  iusserit'

*  Dd.  li.  315  a:  (Rushmere,  Suffolk) '  In  Ryscemaia  ii  sochemaimi
Goduuini  xxx  ac*  Cf.  315  b  (Grundesburh) ;  316  a  (Aldeboxc) ;  317  a
(Holes  lea).  Dd.  I  319  b :  (Ketton,  Northantt)  '  Cbetene  ...  Im  xii
sochemans  et  xxiiii  uillani  et  v  bordarii  cum  prestnteio  habentes  xi
Caracas.'  Ibid.:  (Berchedone)'x80chemanni.'  Ibid.:  (SeietODy Ton,
Morcote,  &c.) '  In  his  terris  sunt  xv  sochemanni  et  xxxiii  uillaiii  et  xxni
bordarii  cum  presbitero  habentes  xuc  Caracas.'  221  b-asa  a :  '  Tern
Sancti  Petri  de  Burg  in  Northants :  sodiemanni  de  Eglesworde  (vin),
Pillesgete  (xxvi),  Glintone  (viii),  Widerintone  (xix),  AdelintQiie  (ri),
Sliptone  (vi),  Erdiburae  (iiii).'  221  c:  'Terra  Hominam  eruMem
aecclesiae  :  Meletone  (vi),  Witheiingham  (xx) ;  Glintone  (nodii),  Wri-
torp  (iii),  Lidintone  (vi),  Warmintone  (iii),  Podiebroc  (iii}»  Winewidie
(ii)i  Stoche  (i),  Pilchetone  (ii),  Tircemesse  (iii),  Clotone  (tii),  Pihtttlca
(iiii),  Cateworde  (iiii),  &c.

'  Dd.  ii.  I  b  (Witham,  Essex),  2a  (Hadfelda)  ;  3a(Rodinffit)  ;  4a
(Westrefelda) ;  4  b  (Stanwega);  5  a  (Wochenduna);  6  a  (Lalemda);
i4b(Pheringae).

*  Dd.  i.  137  d,  138  a:  (Latchworth,  Herts)  'Leceworde  •  .  .  Hoc
manerium  tenuit  Goduinus  de  Souberie  teignus  R.E.  et  nendere  poCuit,
et  ibi  iii  sochemanni  homines  eius  ii  hidas  et  iii  uirgatas  habnemnt  et
uendere  potuerant'

'  Dd.  1.  189  c  (Fordeham,  Cambs) ;  ibid.,  Gisleham ;  ibid.,  Cnm-
bertone.  189  d  (Esselinge) ;  190  a  (Flamingdice  Hd.) ;  ibid.,  AbintODe ;
190  b  (Basingborne) ;  190  c  (Histone) ;  ibid.,  Gisleham ;  190  d  (Wan-
tinge)  ;  ibid.,  Belesham  ;  ibid.,  Coeia ;  191  a  (Berchehani) ;  191  b
(Escelforde) ;  ibid.,  Wadone ;  191  d  (Dodinton),  &c

*  Dd.  i.  209  c  (Mildentone,  Beds) ;  209  d  (Dim.  Hd.  de  Boch) ;  ibid.,
Hd.  de  Bereforde;  ibid.,  Melceburae;  ibid.,  Dena;  aioa  (£s-
tone),  &c.

^  Dd.  i.  14^  c :  (Weston  Underwood,  Bucks)  '  Westxme  .  .  .  iiii
uillani  cum  iii  bordariis  habent  vi  Caracas,  et  cum  eis  sunt  vii  sodie-
manni et  quidam  francigena  .  •  .  Hoc  manerium  tenuerunt  x  teinii
homines  Burgret  et  uendere  potuerant  et  ibidem  futt  unus  bomo  Alnci
iii  uirgatas  habuit  et  uendere  potuit.*

'  Dd.  i.  1 1  d  :  (Wy,  Kent)  '  Wi . . .  Radulfus  de  Curbespim  tenet
unam  denam  et  unum  iugum  de  terra  sochmannoram  hoios  maaerii
reddit  de  consuetudine  vi  den.  et  Adelulfus  ii  partes  onius  solin  veddit
xii  den.  et  Hugo  de  Montfort  habet  ii  iuga,  reddit  ccc  Aagnillas  et  ii


SECT.  III.  CH.  II]  PEASANTS  441

counties  there  is  always  aome  suspicion  that  they  represent
an  admixture  of  Danish  elements.  This  predominance  of
a  class  which  appears  emphatically  as  one  of  free  peasants
in  Scandinavian  districts  points  the  same  way  as  the  frequent
occurrence  of  free  tenants  or  franklins  in  these  same  districts.
Evidently  both  groups  represent  Scandinavian  influence,
not  in  the  sense  of  some  peculiar  Danish  or  Norwegian
institution,  but  as  a  result  of  the  recent  appearance  on  the
scene  of  men  who  were  too  small  to  obtain  an  aristocratic
position  and  to  set  up  as  squires — who  had,  in  fact^  to  work
hard  for  their  living,  and  to  acknowledge  the  superiority  of
powerful  neighbours,  but  who  maintained  a  standard  of  free
citizenship  which  had  all  but  disappeared  in  the  purely
English  districts.  We  have  more  than  probabilities  for  the
inference  that  the  state  of  things  so  characteristic  of  Danish
England  in  the  eleventh  century  was  not  less  characteristic
of  Anglo-Saxon  England  a  couple  of  centuries  earlier.
Indeed,  the  very  expression  socmen  is  used  in  a  Buckingham-
shire verdict  ^  in  the  same  sense,  and  for  the  same  purpose,
as  the  expression  franklin  in  the  Worcestershire  verdict
about  churchscot.  Every  socman  possessed  of  a  hide
has  to  pay  one  carriage-load  of  com,  called  annofa^  to  his
parish  church,  and  there  is  a  provision  for  the  case  of  non-
performance of  this  duty,  as  in  Worcestershire.  This  general
rule,  asserted  by  the  Church,  breathes  the  spirit  of  an  epoch
which  had  gone  by  long  ago  at  the  time  of  the  Survey.
Socmen  holding  hides  would  be  dURcult  to  find  in  Bucking-
sol,  et  sacam  et  socam  in  T.RX.  reddebant  De  xxii  hundredis
pertinet  isti  manerio  saca  et  soca  et  omnia  forisfactura  cmae  iuste  per-
tinent regi.'  13  b:  (Komney  Marsh) '  Hugo  in  Maresc  de  Romend . .  Ibi
xiiii  sochemanni ;  Rogerius  de  Hugone  luium  iugum  .  •  •  Duo  soche-
nianni  tenuerunt ;  Rotbertus  de  Hugone  . . .  textam  partem  unloi  iu^.
Unus  sochemannus  tenuit ;  Isdem  Hugo  dimidium  solin  .  • .  Duodecun
sochemanni  tenuerunt  et  tenent  . . .  Ipse  Hugo  unum  iugum  ...  Ibi
sunt  xii  sochemanni  cum  viii  bordariis.'

'  Dd.  i.  143d:  (Stoke  Mandeville,  Bucks)  'Stoches  .  .  .  Hoc
n^inerium  iacet  ad  aecclesiam  de  Elesberie  . . .  De  viii  hundredis  qui
iacent  in  circuitu  Elesberie  unusquisque  sochemannus  qui  habet  i
hidain  aut  plus,  reddit  unam  sununam  annonae  huic  aeccJesiae.  Adhuc
etiam  de  unoquoque  sochemanno  i  acra  annonae  aut  iiii  denarii  tolue-
bantur  huic  aecclesiae  T.  R.  E.  sed  post  aduentum  regis  W.  redditom
non  fuit.' Cf.  174  a,  Worcestershire.


442  SOCIAL  CLASSES  [essay  n

hamshire,  either  T.  R.  W.  or  even  T.  R.  E.  And  yet  the
rule  was  a  customary  one,  and  certainly  not  meant  to  be
a  dead  letter.  How  it  was  applied  to  the  villains  of  the
eleventh  century  it  would  be  difficult  to  say  in  detail,  but  it
is  clear  that  they  were  the  direct  representatives  of  the
socmen  from  whom  churchscot  had  to  be  collected.  This
ancient  tribute,  parallel  to  the  king's  gafol^  does  not  take
heed  either  of  the  manors  or  of  their  lords,  but  only  of
socmen  and  of  their  hides  ;  it  is  thus  directly  imposed  on
the  free  peasant  households ;  the  servile  peasantry  is
omitted,  evidently  because  it  was  thought  of  either  as
settled  behind  the  socmen  or  as  exempted  by  the  privilq;es
of  its  lords ;  in  any  case  it  must  have  formed  the  exception,
in  the  sense  of  a  group  of  householders,  at  the  time  when
the  churchscot  rule  was  framed.  Another  piece  of  evidence
to  the  same  effect  is  the  transformation  of  the  Kentish
villains  into  Kentish  socmen ;  it  is  evident  that  the  group
was  formed  from  the  same  materials  which  appear  under
the  rubric  of  villains  in  Domesday.^

As  in  the  case  of  freemen,  Domesday  discloses  the
constant  deterioration  of  the  status  of  socmen.  They  are
the  object  of  various  encroachments.  Sometimes  they  are
transferred  by  force  from  the  fee  of  one  lord  to  that  of
another.-  In  a  large  number  of  cases  they  are  joined  or
accommodated  to  a  manor  to  which  they  did  not  belong.*

*  Bracton*s  Note  Book,  iii.  1338:  'consuetudo  est  quod  uxors
maritorum  defunctorum  habeant  francum  bancum  suum^  de  terris
sokemannorum  . . .  petunt  libertatem  et  consuetudinem  comitatos.'

*  Dd.  ii.  133a:  (Belagh,  Norfolk)  '  In  Bela^  ii  sochemanni  Saacti
Benedict!  xxxiiii  ac.  terrae,  et  in  Bemeswide  i  sochemannus  eiusdem
xvi  ac.  .  .  .  Hos  sochemannos  tenebat  Radulfiis  quando  Ibrisfedt
Modo  Godricus  ad  feudum  regis,  et  est  in  pretio  de  i£lfsham.*

'  Dd.  i.  130a:  (Bedfont,  Middlesex)  'Bedefunde  ...  De  hoc
nianerio  tenet  Azor  viii  hidas  et  dimidiam,  et  fuit  Berewicha  in  Stan-
uuelle  et  iii  sochemanni  habuerunt  i  hidam  et  dimidiam.  Vnus  honim
homo  Regis  Edwardi  fuit.  Alter  homo  Leuuini.  Tercius  homo  Aioris,
quisque  habuit  dimidiam  hidam,  et  potuerunt  uendere  uel  daie,  et
ad  manerium  non  pertinuenint  T.R.E.'  373  b :  (Winshill,  Derby)  '  In
Wineshalle  . . .  Ibi  apposuit  rex  Willelmus  vi  sochemannos  pertinentes
ad  Rapendune.'  Dd.  ii.  109  b:  (Massingham,  Norfolk)  *De  hoc
manerio  desint  xxv  sochemanni  qui  aderant  t.'r.e.  cum  onmi  coo-
suetudine,  xx  horum  tenet  Wido  angeuinus,  et  habent  ii  carucatas  teme
et  Iviii  acras  et  quartam  partem  unius  acre. Et  Willelmus  de  Wamma


SECT.  III.  CH.  II]  PEASANTS  443

Very  often  people  who  were  masters  of  an  estate  are
reduced  to  the  position  of  tenants  dependent  on  a  French
lord.^  As  often,  again,  they  disappear  altogether  as  socmen,
and  have  to  be  looked  for  among  the  villains  or  bordarii\  ^
it  may  happen  that  no  trace  whatever  is  to  be  found  of
them.^

iii  qui  habent  cxx  acras  et  dimidiam.  £t  Rogerus  Bigot  i  qui  habet  xv
acras. Et  W.  de  Foies  i  de  x  acris.' iL  115  a:  (Cawston,  Norfolk)

*  Caustituna  . . .  iiii  socheroanni  et  dimidius  . .  •  Unum  ex  illis  iiii  soche-
mannis  uendidit  prepositus  de  Caustuna  x  soL  et  RaduLfus  cum  tenebat
quando  forisfecit.'

*  Dd.  i.  129a:  (Hatton,  Middlesex)  '  Rogerius  comes  tenet  in
H atone  i  hidam  et  dimidiam  .  .  .  Duo  sochemanni  tenuerunt  earn,
homines  Albert i  Lothariensis  erant,  uendere  et  dare  poterant.  Modo
apposita est in  Coleham,  ubi non  erat  T.  R.  £.' 1^7  b : (Herts)

*  Treunge  . . .  Ibi  xxi  uillani  cum  vi  bordariis  et  xvi  cotariis  et  iii  soche-
mannis  habent  ix  carucas  ...  Hoc  manerium  tenuit  Engelri  T.R.E.
et  ibi  fuerunt  ii  sochemanni  homines  Osulfi  filii  Frani  ii  hidas  tenuerunt
et  uendere  potuerunt.  Hos  sochemannos  apposuit  isdem  Engelricus
huic  maneno  post  aduentum  regis  Willelmi  ut  homines  de  hundredo
testantur,  et  unus  homo  abbatis  de  Ramesyg  v  hidas  de  hoc  manerio
habuit  ad  eundem  modum.  Iste  non  potuit  dare  uel  uendere  terram
suam  extra  aecclesiam  sancti  Benedicts  Quern  Engelri  apposuit  huic
manerio  post  aduentum  regis  Willelmi  qui  non  fuit  ibi  T.  R.  E.  ut
hundredum  testatur.  lUi  predict!  iii  sochemanni  qui  adhuc  ibi  sunt  i
hidam  habentes  homines  Engelrici  fuerunt  et  terram  suam  uendere
potuerunt.* 209  d  (Hd.  de  Stodene).

*  Dd.  i.  137  d :  (Tiscote,  Herts) '  Robertus  de  Oilgi . . .  Theisescote
...  iii  uillani  et  dim.  cum  ii  sochemannis  de  una  hida . ..  Hoc  manerium
tenuerunt  v  sochemanni.  Horum  duo  homines  Brictrici  unam  hidam
et  dimidiam  habuenint,  et  alii  duo  homines  Osulfi  filii  Fran  unam  hidam
et  dim.  et  quintus  homo  Edmer  Atule  i  hidam  tenuit,  nuUus  eorum  ad
antecessorem  Wigot  pertinuit.  Sed  unusquisque  terram  suam  uendere
potuit.  Horum  unus  terram  suam  emit  a  Wulelmo  rege  nouem  uncis
auri  ut  homines  de  hundredo  testantur,  et  postea  ad  Wigotum  se  uertit
pro  protectione.'  Cf.  i38a(Sapeham)  ;  ijSd  (Hamsteuuorde);  140  a
(Sabrixtewordc).

'  I)d.  i.  35  d,  36  a  :  (Wandsworth,  Surrey)  '  Wendelesorde  .  • .  Sex
sochemanni  tenuerunt  de  rege  Edwardo  et  potuerunt  ire  ^uo  uoluemnt
Ibi  erant  ii  hallae.  Tunc  et  modo  se  defendit  pro  xii  hidis.  Terra  est
iiii  carucis.  Hare  terram  habuit  Ansculfiis  postquam  recepit  oice*
coinitatum,  sed  homines  de  hundredo  dicunt  se  non  uidisse  sigiUum
ncc  liberatorem.  Ansfridus  v  hidas,  modo  pro  una  hida.  Heldredos
iii  hidas,  modo  pro  nichilo,  Uluuandus  iii  nidas,  Waltenis  uinitor  i
hidam.  Non  ded.  geldum.  In  terra  istorum  sunt  ii  carucae  in  dominie
ct  dimidia,  et  v  uillani,  et  xxii  bordarii  cum  ii  carucis  et  xxii  acris
p)rati.  Tot  urn  manerium  T.  R.  E.  ualebat  ex  sol.  et  post  1  sol.  Modo
\iii  lib.  inter  totum.*  Cf.  136c  (Scenlei,  Herts) ;  137  a  (Wallingtone).
Dd.  ii.  295  b,  296  a :  (Hintlesham,  Suffolk) '  Hinclesham  tenuit  Suwart
i  carucatam  terre  pro  i  manerio  t.r.e.  sochemanus  Stigandi,  modo  tenet
Kadulfus  de  comite,  semper  iii  uillani  et  iii  bordarii,  et  ii  carucae
in  duminio,  et  i  caruca  hominum  .  . .  Stigandus  soca.'


444  SOCIAL  CLASSES  [ESSAY  II

Holdings  The  Size  of  the  holdings  and  the  position  of  socmen
of  socmen.  .^  ^j^^  townships  vary  greatly.*  They  occur  both  in
scattered  farms  and  in  champion-farmed  country,  and
appear,  therefore,  both  as  holders  of  homesteads  and
separate  tenements,  and  as  members  of  laige  communities
of  peasants.  Although  socmen  in  scattered  farms  some-
times occupy  a  position  resembling  that  of  small  squires,'
as  a  rule  they  are  peasants — that  is,  they  have  to  cultivate
their  land  with  their  own  hands.  In  a  curious  Kentish
entry  from  the  district  of  Romney  Marsh  it  is  said,  in  as
many  words,  of  some  socmen  that  they  have  no  halls  and
no  demesne.'  Instances  when  socmen  are  said  to  hold
tofts  and  orchards  occur,  and  the  tenants  would  be  not
much  more  than  crofters  in  such  cases.^  On  the  other
hand,  a  large  group  is  formed  by  instances  in  which  they

^  D(L  ii.  109  b  :  (TitchweU,  NorfoUc)  <  Tigeswella . . .  iiii  sochemsiuii
ii  carucatas  terrae,  ii  canicas.  £t  ii  sochemanni  v  acrat.  £t  i  socbe-
mannus  Ix  acras  ii  bouatas.  £t  i  sochemannus  de  quarts  pute  onins
acre  . . .  £t  i  carucata  ten^e  quod  tenuit  i  liber  homo  tXJt^

*  Dd.  i.  34  b:  (Streatham,  Surrey)  'Estreham  •  •  .  T.  R.E.  se
defendit  pro  v  hidis  . . .  Tres  sochemanni  tenuerunt  ii  hidas  et  quo
uoluenmt  cum  eis  ire  potuerunt.'  1 28  d :  ( Harmondsworth,  MiddjetCK)
*  Hermodesworde  . . .  pro  xxx  hidis  se  defendit, ...  in  hoc  maneriofnit
ouidam  sochemannus  tenens  ii  hidas  de  his  soot  hidis,  noQ  potoit
dare  uel  uendere  extra  Hermodesworde  T.  R.E.'  138  d:  (Cbailtoo,
Herts) '  Rex  Willelmus  tenet  Cerletone,  pro  una  uirga  se  ddSeadit.. ..
Hanc  terram  tenuerunt  ii  sochemanni  de  Heraldo  comite,  et  nenoae
potuerunt  absque  licentia  eius.  Soca  fuit  semper  in  His.  Ilbertns
quando  fuit  uicecomes  apposuit  in  Hiz.'  Ibid. :  (Dunsley)  *  Drnrilii,
pro  vii  hidis  se  defendit, . .  .  Hoc  manerium  tenuerunt  h  sochemaimi
pro  ii  maneriis  de  Heraldo  comite  T.R.E.  et  uendexe  potucnmt
Tamen  ii  aueras  et  ii  inwardos  unusquisque  inueniebat  in  Hu,  ted  per
uim  et  iniuste  ut  hundredum  testatur.' Cf.  140  c  (Belingdiou,  Herts).

'  Dd  i.  1 1  a :  (Romney  Marsh,  Kent) '  Robertus  (de  Romend)  tenet
de  episcopo  (baioc.)  dimidium  solin  in  Maresc  et  pro  tanto  ae  defcndit
. . .  Sex  sochemanni  tenuerunt  T.  R.  E. . . .  In  Adiloutesbcige  Huad.
Isdem  Robertus  tenet  de  ei>iscopo  dimidium  iugtun  et  pro  tsnto  se
defendit . . .  Duo  sochemanni  tenuerunt  T.R.E.  sine  aolis  ct  d«iiiuiiib.'
Cf.  1 1  c  (Midelea).

*  Dd.  i.  337  d:  (Grantham,  Lines.)  'Buiigenses  cxi  Toftes  socbe-
mannorum  teignorum  quater  xxiii  minus.'  344  c:  fFGosbevton)
'  Gozeberdecherca  . . .  i  sochemannus  de  suo  orto.'  356  b :  (Stallins-
borough)  ^  Stalinburg  .  .  .  ii  sochemanni  de  v  toftis.'  3S9C  :  (Becsbjf
and  Maltley-le-Marsh)  'In  Besebi  et  Maltebi  habuit  AgenQund  vi
bouatas  terrae  ad  geldum  . . .  i  sochemannus  de  iiii  toftis  huins  terne^
et  i  uillanus  cum  ii  bobus  in  caruca.'  365  c :  {?  Keelby)  *  Chilefai  • . .  i
sochemannus  de  ii  toftis,  et  ii  bordarii,  et  xiiii  acr.  pvati.'  C£.  ibid.t
Torgrebi.


SECT.  III.  cii.  II]  PEASANTS  445

cluster  in  villages,  and  appear  as  the  occupiers  of  the
regular  holdings.^  Townships  may  be  exclusively  composed
of  their  tenements,^  and  it  is  quite  dear  that,  as  a  rule,  they
till  the  land  which  they  hold.  Therefore  it  is  exceptional
to  find  villains  dependent  on  socmen,  as  peasants  depend  on
a  squire.'  It  may  happen  that  some  few  villains,  more
often  bordarii,  are  attached  to  large  communities  of  soc-
men,^ which  means  that  the  help  drawn  by  the  latter  from
the  labour  of  the  former  is  only  a  subsidiary  source  of
income.  As  a  rule,  the  two  classes  appear  side  by  side,
and follow evidently  the same course of husbandry,^


*  Dd.  i.  209  d :  (Bedfordshire)  *  In  Hundredo  de  Bereforde . . .  Ibi  xx
sochemanni  et  xii  bordarii  et  i  seruus  . . .  Hoc  manerium  tenuerunt
xxiiii  sochemanni  et  potuenint  dare  et  uendere  terrain  soam  cui  uo-
luerunt.'  337  c  :  (Kirkby,  Lines.) '  Cherchebi . . .  xiiii  sochemanni  • . .
car  {sic)  v  uillani  et  v  bordarii  cum  i  caruca  . . .  Ad  eundem  manerium
pertinet  haec  soca  Oustorp,  Welle,  Hechintone,  Comintone  ...  In
his  habet  rex  vii  sochemannos  habentes  i  camcam.'  338  d :  (Soke  of
Caistor)  '  Inter  totum  ccxi  sochemanni  et  xxiiii  uillani,  et  xxviii  bordarii,
cum  XXX  carucis.'  Cf.  360  b  (Bareuue,  Lines.) ;  Dd.  ii.  109  b  (Sutmere,
Norfolk).

-  Dd.  i.  234  a :  (Gilmorton,  Leics.) '  Mortone  ...  Ibi  sunt  xiiii  cam-
c  atae  terrae  T.  R.  £.  erant  ibi  ix  carucae.  In  dominio  sunt  ii  carucae
cum  i  seruo,  et  xxiiii  sochemanni  et  iiii  frandgenae  habent  v  carucas.'
347  a :  (Gate  Burton,  Lines.)  '  In  Bortone  habuerunt  Gonneuoate  et
Godricus  iiii  carucatas  terrae  et  vi  bouatas  ad  geldufn.  Terra  ad
V  carucas.  Nunc  habet  comes  Alanus  ibi  i  camcam  et  x  sochemannos
habentes  iii  carucas.'

'  Dd.  ii.  136  b :  ( Mileham,  Norfolk) '  Meleham  . .  •  semper  xx  uillani
et  xliiii  bordarii,  Tunc  vi  semi,  post  et  modo  i . . .  eC  iii  sochemanni  i
carucatam  terrae  .  .  .,  tune  et  post  xii  uiUani^  mode  iiii,  temper  x  bor-
darii, . . .  et  iiii  sochemanni  xxx  ac  terre,  et  1  bordarius, . . .  et  i  soche-
mannus  i  car.  terrae, . .  .  et  i  sochemannus  vtii  ac,  inter  totum  xboid.,
.  .  .  et  vii  sochemanni  xl  ac.  terrae  et  i  bord.'

*  Dd.  i.  235  c :  (Melton  Mowbray,  Leics.) '  Medeltone, etc ...  In  bis
terris  T.K.E.  fuemnt  xlviii  camcae.  Modo  smit  ibi  c  sochemanni  cum
X  uillanis  et  xiii  bordariis  habentes  xiiii  camcas.'

^  DH.  i.  13a:  (Romney  Marsh,  Kent)  'Hugo  (de  Montfort)  in
Marcsc  de  Komenel  i  iu^^m, .  . .  Medietatem  hums  teme  tenuerunt  ti
sochemanni,  et  ii  uillani  aliam.  Ibi  sunt  modo  iiii  uillani  habentes
i  camcam.  .  .  .  Isdem  Hugo  tenet  dimidium  iugum  quod  tenuit  unui
sochemannus.  Ibi  ii  bordarii  sunt  modo.  Haec  terra  appreciatur  in
Titentone,  quia  iUuc  arata  est  cum  dominicis  carmcts.'  136c:  (Aid-
bury,  Herts) '  Aldeberie, . . .  viii  uillani  cum  i  sochemanno  et  i  franci-
^ena  habent  iiii  carucas.'  273  b :  (Long  Elaton,  Derby) '  In  Aitone  xii
canicatae  terrae  ad  geldum.  Terre  xii  camds.  Ibi  xxii  sochemanni
et  v  bordarii  sub  ipsis  habent  ix  camcatas  de  hac  terra,  etxiti  camcas.
Aliae  iii  carucatae  terrae  sunt  uillanomm.'  3^d:  (Thoresby  and
Audby,  Lines.)  '  In  Toresbi  et  Alwoldebi, . . .  xxiii  uiUant  et  v  bordarii


446  SOCIAL  CLASSES  [essay  n

whatever  the  difference  as  to  rights  and  duties  in  r^ard  to
the  lord.
Villains. 4.  The  most  numerous  and  important  social  class  of
Domesday  is the  villains. Their households amount,
roughly,  to  ioo>ooo  out  of  some  240,000. The  most  salient
feature  in  their  condition  is  their  agricultural  work:  they
are  not  only  peasants,  but  have  to  perform  agricultural
services  for  their  manorial  lords.^ In  this  sense  they  are
emphatically  rustics;^  their  tenements  are  customary  tene-
ments.^ It  may  happen  that  a  village  which  lies  in  one
place  has  to  send  its  peasants  for  the  performance  of  services
to  another  place.^ But  this  is  not  sufficient  to  establish
the  definition  of  villainage. The  rustic  population  would
comprise  the  bordarii  and  the  cotters  as  well  as  the  villains.
The  latter  are  the  main  species  of  the  larger  genus  of  rustics.
From  several  entries  in  Domesday  we  can  gather  that  the
villains  were  the  principal  shareholders  of  the  township,
the  tenants  among  whom  the  ploughlands  belonging  to  it
were  chiefly  distributed. The  Middlesex  survey  gives  the
best  information  in  this  respect,'  but  occasional  glimpses

cum  ii  carucis  et  v  bobus,  et  xxvii  sochemanni  babentes  v  t^rwr^^  Ji
boues  minus.'

^  Dd.  i.  17  b :  (Steyning,  Sussex)  '  In  burgo  fiierunt  csviii  masuiae
. . .  et  modo  sunt  cxxiii  masurae  . . .  et  habent  i  carucam  et  dimidiam.
Ad  curiam  operabantur  sicut  uiUani  T.  R.  £.'  41  a :  (Chilbolloii,
Hants) '  Cilbodentune  . . .  De  terra  huius  manerii  non  habet  emscopus
nisi  V  hidas  et  iii  uirgatas  et  haec  est  vii  carucis.  Ricardus  Stunnid
tenet  alias  hidas.  Quidam  prefectus  tenuit  et  non  potuit  ire  quolibet,
et  ii  hidas  ex  his  habuit  quasi  uillanus.'  346  d  :  (Drayton,  Staflfoid)
'  Draitone  ...  Ibi  sunt  ix  uillani  et  iii  boidarii  cum  iiii  camcis  et
dimidia,  et  viii  bui]genses  in  Tamuuorde  huic  manerio  pertinent,  et  An
operantur  sicut  alii  uillani.'

'  Dd.  i.  173c:  (Huddington,  Worcs.)  'Hudintune  .  .  •  Vlnricus
tenuit  sicut  rusticus  seruiens.'  Dd.  iv.  35  (Langebridia,  Dorset) ;  It.
51  (Lodraro,  Dorset);  cf.  Cod.  Dipl.,  792,  1283.

'  Dd.  i.  154a:  (Oxford)  'Walterius  Gi£aLrd  xvii  mansiones  red-
dentes  xxii  sol.  Ex  his  vii  sunt  uastae.  Vnam  ex  hts  habuit  ante*
cessor  VValterii  dono  regis  Edwardi  ex  viii  uii^gatis  quae  consuetodi*
nariae  erant  T.  R.  E.'

*  Dd.  i.  291c:  (Broadholm,  Notts)  'In  Brodeholm  habuerunt
Turgot  et  Halden  v  bouatas  terre  ad  geldum.  Terra  ii  f  t^m^
Wasta  est.  Modo  habent  Berengerus  de  Todeni  et  Willelmus  de
Perci.  Terra  iacet  ad  Neuuerce,  sed  opus  uillanoruni  pertiiict  ad
Saxebi  in  Lincolescira.'

^  E.g.  Dd.  i.  127 d: (Heruluestune)  Mbi  xii  uillani  quisqoe  de


SECT.  III.  CH.  ii]  PEASANTS  447

and  material  for  inferences  are  afTorded  by  descriptions  of
other  counties  too,  and  by  comparison  with  later  records,
like  the  Black  Book  of  Peterborough  or  the  Cartulary  of
Burton.^  A  villain  does  not  usually  hold  one  full  plough-
team  or  the  corresponding  ploughland.^  Holders  of  half-
carucates,  of  virgates,  and  even  of  bovates,  are  more
frequent.'^  In  Kent  it  is  common  to  find  very  large
numbers  of  villains  congregated  on  comparatively  small
areas,^  but  this  may  be  explained  by  the  peculiarities  of

i  uirgata  et  x  uillani  quisc^ue  de  dimidia  uirgata.'  128  c :  (Grenefbrde)
Mbi  i  uillanus  habet  i  hidam  et  i  uii^gatam  et  iiii  uillani  quisque  de
dimidia  hida,  et  iiii  uillani  de  i  hida.'  Cf.  128  d  (Hermodesworde) ;
1 29  b  (Cbcnctone).

*  Dd.  i.  136b:  ^Sandon,  Herts)  'Sandone  pro  x  hidis  se  defendit.
Terra  est  xx  canicis.  In  dominio  v  hidae,  et  ibi  sunt  vi  carucae.  Ibi
presbiter  cum  xxiiii  uillanis,  habent  xiii  carucas,  et  adhuc  una  potest
fieri.  Ibi  xii  bordarii  et  xvi  cotarii  et  xi  semi.'  Cf.  136c  (Wemaelai) ;
ibid.,  Brichendone.  149  b:  (Iver,  Bucks)  'Eureham,  pro  xvii  hidis
se  defendit.  Terra  est  xxx  canicis.  In  dominio  ii  hidae,  et  ibi  iiii
carucae,  et  xxxii  uillani  habent  xxvi  carucas.  De  his  uiUanis  v  habent
vi  hidas. Ibi  vi  bordarii  et  iiii  serui.'

*  Dd.  iv.  77  :  (Kerswell,  Devon)  'Carsauella  . ..  i  hidam  et  dimi-
diam  possunt  arare  xvii  carrucae  . . .  Inde  habet  Rex  i  utrgatam  et
dimidiam  et  i  carucam  in  dominio  . . .  uillani  i  hidam  et  xvi  carucas  •  •  •
xvi  uillanos,  xxxiii  bordarios,  iii  seruos.'

'  Dd.  i.  127b:  (Stepney,  Middlesex)  'Stibenhede  ...  In  eadem
uilla  uxor  Brien  v  hiaas  de  episcopo  ...  In  dominio  est  i  caruca  et
i  caruca  potest  fieri  uill.  Ibi  i  uillanus  de  dimidia  hida  reddit  iiii  sol.
de  domo  sua,  et  alter  uillanus  de  dimidia  hida  reddit  viii  sol.'  Dd.  ii.
4b,  5a:  (Stan way,  Essex)  'Stanewe^  .  .  .  De  hoc  manerio  tulit
Keimundus  Giraldus  i  uillanum  de  dimidia  hida,  et  reddebat  consuetu*
dinem,  .  . .  Et  Rogerus  Pictauiensis  accepit  i  uillanum  tenentem  i
acram.  Et  Ingelricus  abstulit  i  feminam  Bricteuam  tenentem  xviii
acras,  et  reddcbat  unoquoque  anno  huic  manerio  xxxii  nommos.'
ii.  234  b:  (Hanningham,  Norfolk)  Mn  Banincham  tenet  Rogerus  i
uillanum  de  Caustuna  xvi  ac.  ii  sol.  uakt,  hoc  inuasit  Wibenoc,  et
reddebat  v  sol.  in  Caustuna  idem  uillanus.'  Cf.  Inq.  Eliensis  (ed.
Hamilton),  p.  115:  *  Wittleseia,  octo  uillani  quisque  de  xii  acris.'  116:
'  Doddintona  . .  .  iiii  uillani  auisque  de  vii  acris  et  dim.'

*  Dd.  i.  5  a :  (Chartham,  Kent)  *  Certeham,  pro  iiii  solins  se  defendit.
Terra  est  xiiii  carucis.  In  dominio  sunt  ii,  et  Ix  uillani  cum xv cotariis
habent  xv  carucas  et  dimidiam.'  Ibid.:  (Godmersham^  'Gomershaniy
pro  viii  solins  .  . . Ix  uillani  cum  viii  cotariis  habent  xvii  carucas.*  5b:
(West well)  *  Welle,  T.  R.  E.  se  defendit  pro  vii  solins  et  modo  pro  v.
Terra  est  xviii  carucis.  In  dominio  sunt  iiii,  et  quater  xx  et  unus
uillanus  cum  v  bordariis  habent  xii  carucas  et  dimidiam.'  7c:
(Milton)  *  Mcletune,  pro  uno  solin  et  iii  iugis  se  defendit  Terra  est
iiii  carucis.  In  dominio  est  una,  et  xxi  uillani  cum  ii  bordariis  habent
ii  carucas.'  loc :  (Horton) :  *  Hortone,  pro  dimidio  solin  se  defendit.
Terra  est  i  caruca.  Ibi  est  in  dominio,  et  xiii  uillani  habent  dimidiam
carucam.'


448  SOCIAL  CLASSES  [BSSAvn

Kentish  gavelkind,  and  the  great  number  of  housdudds
which  obtained  concurrent  rights  under  this  kind  of  tenure.
The  same  kind  of  parcelling  up  of  rights  to  land  may  be
observed  in  Kentish  cartularies  of  a  later  period.^ In  the
greater  part  of  England  villain  tenements  were  held  under
the rule of  single  succession,  either primogeniture  or
Borough English,  and  the  passing  of  the  holding  to  the
heir  was  eflfected  without  sufficient  regard  for  the  daims  of
3^unger  brothers  and  side  relations.' In  connexion  with
this  assignment  of  holdings  to  villain  households  within  die
township  stand  the  expressions  pUni  viUam  and  dtmudU
villaniy  which  occur  now  and  then. The  full  villain  is  the
tenant  possessed  of  a  full  share  in  the  township — ^a  virgatCi
or  a  hide,  or  a  half  a  hide. The  half-villain  would  hold  half
a  share,  and  would  be  taxed  in  a  corresponding  proportion.*
Villains  are  rarely  mentioned  on  demesne  land,  and  the
instances  when  this  occurs  find  their  explanation  in  the  fact
that  the  home-farm  is  not  kept  separate,  but  is  leased  to
the  tenants.^ This  is  distinctly  stated  in  some  of  the  moie
important  instances,  and  as  a  result  of  such  an  arrangement
the  hall  may  be  altogether  left  out.^

^  Growth  of  the  Manor,  p.  278.

*  Dd.  i.  166 a:  (Hidcot  Bois,  Gloucs.)  'Hedecote.  Ibi  iii  hidae.
In  dominio  est  una  caruca,  et  ii  semi,  et  uzores  iiii  uiUancmim  nuper
defunctorum  habent  i  canicam.*

'  Dd.  i.  163  b :  (Gloucs.)  '  Durandus  uicecomes  tenet  de  rqfe.  Is
Caroen  i  terram  (nomine)  Caldecote.  Ibi  habet  in  dominio  iii  camcu,
et  XV  dimidios  uillanos  et  iiii  seruos  et  unum  militem.  Hi  oamet
habent  xii  carucas.'  Cf.  168 a  (Hasedene,  Gloucs.);  169c  (Hildeslei,
Gloucs.).  252  b:  (Onibury,  Salop) '  Aneberie ...  Ibi  iii  hidae  geldanteSi
In  dominio  est  una  caruca  et  iiii  uillani  integrietvidimldii  etpcesbiler
et  unus  cozet  cum  iii  carucis.  Ibi  i  seruus.  Ibi  i  mfles  tenet  1  hidain,
et  habet  i  carucam,  et  v  uillani  T.  R.  £.  erant  in  hoc  manerio  ix  cur.'
Cf.  Burton  Cartulary  (William  Salt  Arch.  Soc.,  part  i,  voL  vJI^  p.  94:
(In  Wineshulla) '  De  hits  (bouatis)  quae  sunt  ad  opus  tenent  ini  uiHuii
plenarii  viii  bouatas  idest  unusquisque  ii  bouatas.  Cetens,  idest  ▼!,
tenent  vi  uillani  dimidii,  idest,  unusquisque  i  bouatam.'

^  Dd.  i.  8  c :  (Delce,  Kent) '  Delce,  pro  uno  soltn  sedefendit.  Tenn
est  ii  carucis.  et  ibi  sunt  in  dominio  et  cum  uno  uiUano  et  v  boidaxiis
et  vi  semis.*  48 d:  (Hants)  'In  Sunbume  Hd.  Isdem  Wmdmiis
(filius  Stur)  tenet  unam  hidam  . . .  Terra  est  i  camcae,  et  ibi  est  ia
dominio  cum  iiii  uillanis ' ;  cf.  53  b  (Bordourde  et  Brandeslone  et
Litesland,  Hants).

^  Dd.  i.  10 b :  (Ore,  Kent)  'Adam  tenet  de  episcopo  (baioc.)  mmm
iugum  in  Ore, . . .  Banc  tenet  iii  uillani  modo  ad  nnnanu* C£  lad


SECT.  III.  CH.  II]  PEASANTS  449

The  villains  being  the  principal  tenants  of  the  manor,  Tem


their  land  is  often  spoken  of  as  the  land  of  the  tenants —
the  terra  villanorum  almost  comes  to  be  the  equivalent  of
terra  hominum.  This  \sz  pars  pro  toto^  as  there  were  other
classes  among  the  peasants  besides  the  villains.  Anyhow,
the  rights  of  the  villains  to  part  of  the  land  are  constantly
noticed.  Of  course,  the  Domesday  Survey  does  not  go
the  length  of  discussing  the  nature  of  these  rights  and
establishing  I^^al  barriers  between  villains  and  lords.  We
do  not  hear  how  far  the  claims  of  the  peasants,  as  repre-
sented by  the  manorial  descriptions,  were  based  on  express
agreement,  or  on  dependent  right,  or  on  custom  and  practice,
but  when  the  Survey  enters  the  number  of  holdings,  teams,
or  mills  belonging  to  the  villains,^  when  it  gives  the  exact
partition  of  geld  between  the  demesne  and  the  holdings
of  the  villains,^  when  it  notices  encroachments  made  on  the
land  of  the  villains,'  it  certainly  does  not  refer  to  casual

(Bodesham,  Kent);  ibid.,  Chenetone.  26 d:  (Aldrington,  Sussex)
'  Eldretune  . .  .  vii  hid.  et  dim.  uirg. . . .  Non  j^ldauit.  Villani  tenae-
runt  T.  R.  £.  Ibi  sunt  xli  uillani  et  x  bordarii  cum  vii  canicis, ...  In
eadem  uilla  ix  hid. . .  et  x  uillani  et  xii  bordaril  cum  ii  canicis, ...  In  his
duabus  terris  nisi  una  halla.'  37  b:  (Westmeston,  Sussex)  *  Robertus
tenet  de  Willelmo  (de  Warene)  in  Wesmestun  xii  hidias.  Gueda
comitissa  tenuit,  et  sub  ea  tenebant  uillani.  Non  fuit  ibi  halla,  neque
geldauit  ut  dicunt.'  137  d  :  (Willesden,  Middlesex)  '  Wellesdone  pro
XV  hidis  . .  .  Terra  est  xv  carucis.  Ibi  uillani,  viii  car.  et  vii  possent
fieri.  Ibi  xxv  uillani  et  v  bordarii, . .  .  Hoc  manerium  tenent  uillani  ad
firmam  canonicorum.  In  dominio  nil  habetur.  Hoc  manerium  fuit
de  dominico  uictu  T.  R.  £.';  cf.  73c  (Sualodiue,  Wilts);  iv.  371
(Herstanahaia).

^  Dd.  i.  7d:  (Leeds,  Kent)  'Esledes,  .  .  .  xxviii  uillani  cum  viii
bordariis  habent  vii  carucas, ...  Ibi  ...  v  molini  uillanorum.*  168  c :
( Rendcomb,  Gloucs.)  *  Rindecome, ...  Ibi  unus  linancigena  tenet  terram
duorum  uillanorum,  et  molinum  de  viii  soL  et  iiii  acras  prati.'  Ct  169  c
(Omenie,  Gloucs.).

^  Dd.  i.  136c:  (Berkhamstead,  Herts)  '  Berchehamstede,  pro  xiii
hidis  se  defendit.  Terra  est  xxvi  canicis.  In  dominio  vi  hidae  et  ibi
sunt  iii  carucae,  et  aliae  iii  possunt  fieri.  Ibi  presbiter  cum  xiiit
uillanis  et  xv  bordariis  habent  xii  carucas  et  adhuc  viii  possunt  fieri.'

'  Dd.  i.  12  c  :  (Kent)  '  Norbome,  pro  xxx  solins, . . .  De  terra  ail-
lanorum  huius  manerii  tenet  Oidelaxd  i  solin,  • . .  De  eadem  terra
uillanorum  tenet  Gislebertus  ii  solins  dimidium  iugum  minus . . .
Wadardus  tenet  de  isto  manerio  iii  solins  Ix  ac  minus  de  terra
uillanorum,  .  .  .  Odelinus,  de  eadem  terra  uillanorum  i  solin,  Mar-
chcrius,  dc  eadem  terra  uillanorum  quod  ualet  viii  soL  . . .  Osbemos
filius  Letardi,  dimidium  solin  et  xi  acs.  prati  de  terra  uillanorum  quod
ualet  xxv  sol.' 67  c  :  (Tisbury,  Wilts)  *  Tisseberie,  T.R.  E.  gddabat


nun.


450  SOCIAL  CLASSES  [essay  ii

arrangements  which  may  be  shifted  at  pleasure  by  the  one-
sided will  of  the  lord. Some  of  the  caaes  in  question  are
worthy  of  a  little  more  attention. Folkestone  ^  was  a  laige
manor  held  by  William  de  Arcis  from  the  Bishop  of  Bayeuz.
In  the  reign  of  King  Edward  Earl  Godwin  held  it«  and  it
paid  geld  for  40  sulungs. There  was  land  there  for  as
many  as  120  ploughs,  but  there  were  only  14  teams  in
demesne,  and  209  villains  and  63  bordarii  had  45  teams
between  them. The  great disproportion between  the
available  ploughland  and  the  actual  cultivation  of  the  estate
had  partly  to  be  explained  by  encroachments  on  the  portioD
of  the  peasants. Of  the  land  of  the  villains,  Hugh,  son  of
William  (Fitzwilliam),  had  an  entire  manor  carved  out  for
him. Nine  sulungs  had  been  abstracted  from  the  viOain
land,  and  Hugh  had  four  and  a  half  teams,  and  38  villains,
with  17  bordarii ^  provided  with  16  teams,  on  his  submanor.
Smaller  fractions  had  been  cut  oflf  for  other  military  tenants
— Walter  of  Appeville,  Walter,  son  of  Engelbert,  Richard,
&c. In  Breme,  Wiltshire,^  the  apportionment  of  land  had

pro  XX  hidis  . . .  De  hac  terra  sunt  in  dominio  y  hidae, . .  •  De  eaden
terra  tenet  de  abbatia  Turstinus  iii  hidas,  Gunfridus  iii  hidas,  Albericu
ii  hidas, . . .  Eduuardus  uicecomes  habet  iii  carucas  in  tena  uiDano-
rum.' Cf.  Dd.  iv.  103  (Halsbretona,  Devon).

^  Dd.  i.  9  c :  (Folkestone,  Kent)  '  Wiilelmus  de  Arcis  tenet  FqI-
chestan.  T.  R.  £.  se  defendit  pro  xl  solins,  et  modo  pro  -"^y  Ton
est  cxx  canicis.  In  dominio  sunt  xiiii  carucae,  et  cdx  uillani  et  quatcr
XX  et  iii  bordarii.  Inter  omnes  habent  xlv  carucas.  Ibi  v  aecdesaede
(fuibus  habet  Archiepiscopus  Iv  sol.  Ibi  iii  semi  et  vii  molini  de  ii
lib.  ...  Hoc  manerium  tenuit  Goduinus  comes, .  • .  De  hoc  manerio
tenet  Hugo  filius  Willelmi  ix  solins  de  terra  uillananun,  et  ibi  habet
in  dominio  iiii  carucas  et  dimidiam  et  xxxviii  aillanoft  cum  xvii  bor-
dariis  qui  habent  xvi  carucas, . . .  Walterus  de  Appeuile  tenet  de  hoc
manerio  iii  iuga  et  xii  acras  terrae,  et  ibi  habet  i  carucam  in  dominio
et  iii  uillanos  cum  i  bordario . . .  Aluredus  tenet  i  solin  et  xl  acns
terrae,  et  ibi  habet  in  dominio  ii  carucas  cum  vi  bordariiss  .  •  •
Walterus  filius  Engelberti  tenet  dimidium  solin  et  xl  acns,  et  ibi
habet  in  dominio  i  carucam  cum  vii  boidariis, .  • .  Wesman  tenet
i  solin,  et  ibi  habet  in  dominio  i  carucam  et  ii  will^gy^  com  vii
bordariis  habentes  i  carucam  et  dim. ;  Aluredus  Dafufer  tenet  i  soliii
et  unum  iugum. .  .  Eudo,  dim«  solin  . . .  Bemardus  de  S.  AndoeniH
iiii  solins, . . .  Baldricus,  dimidium  solin, . . .  Ricardus,  Iviii  acras  tcme.'

^  Dd.  i.  67  b:  (Wilts)  Mpsa  s^ecclesia  (Malmesberiensis)  tenet
Breme,  T.  R.  E.  geldabat  pro  xxxviii  hidis  . . .  De  hac  terra  sunt  in
dominio  xvii  hidae, ...  Ibi  xxxii  uillani  etc., . . .  De  eadem  tena  tenet
Eduuardus  iiii  hidas,  et  Teodricus  iiii  hidas, . . .  Qui  te&cbant  has  viii
hidas  T.  R.  E.  ab  aecclesia  non  poterant  separari. De  tena  nilfauMNiiBi


SECT.  III.  CH.  II]  PEASANTS  451

also  been  disturbed.  A  series  of  knights  were  enfeoffed
there.  Two  of  them  had  received  land  out  of  what  used  to
be  thancland  in  the  reign  of  King  Edward.  But  the  villain
settlement,  represented  by  32  villains  and  13  bordarii  with
twenty  teams,  had  lost  part  of  its  land.  One  Teodric  had
received  one  hide  of  it  from  the  Abbot  of  Malmesbury,  to
whom  the  manor  belonged.  Two  other  hides  of  the  same
land  had  gone  to  Edward,  one  of  the  abbey's  knights,
from  the  King  himself  The  jurors  sketch  some  of  the
incidents  which  led  to  the  alienation  of  this  last  tenement.
An  English  Abbot  had  severed  it  from  the  ownership  of
the  Church  and  given  it  to  a  certain  reeve  (made  it  into
reeveland  ?),  and  afterwards  granted  it  to  a  thane  to  hold  as
thaneland  that  could  not  be  separated  from  the  Abbey.
How  it  came  into  the  hands  of  the  King  the  record  does
not  say.

The  term  *  demesne '  may  be  coupled  with  that  of  terra
villanortitn^  but  in  this  case  it  would  merely  carry  the
meaning  of  ownership,  not  that  of  home-farm.^  On  the
other  hand,  stress  may  be  laid  expressly  on  the  fact  that
the  land  of  the  villains  belongs  to  them — is  their  own.^

This  is  no  mere  manner  of  speech :  very  tangible  con-
siderations gave  the  distinction  between  the  two  parts  of
a  manor  a  direct  bearing  on  public  interests.  Not  only
w  ere  they  separately  taxed  to  the  geld ;  the  ancient  dis-
tinction between  warland  and  inland  was  still  not  obsolete,

tenet  idem  Teodricus  i  hidam  quam  dedit  ei  abbas.  De  eadem  etiam
tenet  Eduuardus  ii  hidas  de  rege  et  Gislebertus  de  eo.  Has  abstulit
de  dominio  aecclesiae  quidam  abbas  Anglicus,  et  dedit  cuidam  pre-
posito,  et  postea  uni  taino,  qui  nuUo  modo  separari  poterat  abaecdesia,
.  . .  Willelmus  quoque  de  Ow  tenet  de  eadem  terra  iinam  hidam  quam
prestitit  abbas  Alestano.'

'  l)d.  i.  67a:  (Corston,  Wilts)  'Corstone,  vi  hid....  De  eadem
ctiam  terra  tenet  Robertus  iii  hidas  et  dim.  Willelmus  ii  hidas.  Una
anglica  mulier  i  hidam.  Qui  has  terras  tenuerunt  T.  R.  £.  non
potcrant  ab  aecclesia  separari.  De  dominio  monachorum  terra  uil*
lanorum  {sic)  tenent  ii  milites  iii  hidas  et  dimidiam.  Dominitmi
abbatis  quando  recepit  ualebat  xxvi  lib.  Modo  xxx  lib.  Quod
KannuUus  et  alii  tenent  ualet  xi  lib.  et  iiii  sol.'

'  Dd.  i.  173  b  :  (Blockley,  Worcs.)  *  Blochelei  . . .  Ansgotus  tenet
i  hidam  et  dimidiam  de  propria  terra  uillanonim,  et  habet  i  carucam
cum  i  bordario/

Gg  2


451  SOCIAL  CLASSES  [ESSAY  n

and  therefore  it  was  material  for  the  Crown  that  the  warknd
of  the  villains  should  be  kept  intact. We  come,  e.g.,  across
the  following  significant  entry  in  the  Survey  of  ComwalL*
St.  Constantine  has  i^  hides  forming  4  plougMands. In
the  reign  of  King  Edward  it  was  exempted  (ifnmtims)  from
all  service,  but  since  the  Count  (of  Mortain)  got  the  estate
it  has  had  to  pay  geld  as  villain  land  {terra  viltoHarum).
The  opposition  between  the  two  categories  could  hardly  be
clearer  expressed. The  converse  case  is  presented  by
a Huntingdonshire  entry: *The  Abbot  of  St.  Peter  of
Winchester  holds  Aulton,  which  used  to  be  a  manor  of
Queen Edith. There  were  10  hides  there  in  the  reign
of  King  Edward,  and  the  villains  who  lived  there  paid  geU
for  5  hides. At  the  present  time  (at  the  time  of  the  Survey)
the  abbot  has  5  hides  in  demesne,  but  does  not  pay  geld.''
This  did  not  prevent  the  development  of  the  servile  theory
of  villainage  which  obtained  in  feudal  common  law,  but  the
Domesday  Survey  does  not  yet  consider  the  villains  from
that  point  of  view. It  takes  them  more  as  an  economic
class — the  peasants,  on  whose  work  and  rents  both  the
private  households  of  the  aristocracy  and  the  public  one  of
the  King  depend.^
Servile  and 5*  The  basis  for  a  servile  theory  is,  however,  already
^^  existing  in  some  respects. The  opposition  between  tlie

franklin,  the  freeman,  and  the  villain  is  often  insisted  upcm.^
In  one  famous  case  the  evidence  of  the  best  and  mort


^  Dd.  iv.  188:  (Cornwall)  'S.  Constantinus  habet  dimidiam  hidan
terrae  quae  t.  r.  e.  fuit  inmunis  ab  omni  Semitic  sed  postquam  comes
accepit  terram  semper  reddidit  giidum  iniuste  ut  terra  uiUanomnL'
Cf.  Dd.  i.  121  b.

'  Dd.  i.  43  a :  (Alton,  Hants)  '  Abbas  Sancti  Petri  de  Winoestit
tenet  Aultone.  Eddid  regina  tenuit  T.  R.  £.  Tunc  enmt  x  hidae  et
uillani  qai  ibi  manebant  gddabant  pro  v  hidis.  Mode  habet  abbas  la
dominio  v  hidas,  sed  non  geldauenint.*

'  Villains  have  to  answer  to  the  Sheriff  in  r^;ard  to  theae  latter
obligations.  Exceptions  are  rare.  Dd.  i.  50  c:  (Gomahall,  Surrey)
'  Gomeselle,  .  •  .  Huius  uiUae  uillani  ab  omni  re  uicecomitia  mat
quieti.*

*  Dd.  L  127  a:  (Harrow,  Middlesex)  <  Herges,  •  • .  Ad  dominfaua
pertinent  xxx  hide,  et  ibi  sunt  iiii  carucae  et  v  poteat  fierL  Inter
francos  et  uillanos  xlv  carucae  et  xvi  plus  possent  eaae.'  C£  253  d
(Sudtone,  Salop) ;  ii.  348  a>  b  (Cham,  Suffolk).


SECT.  III.  CH.  II]  PEASANTS  453

ancient  men  of  the  county  is  opposed  to  that  of  villains,  of
vile  plebeians,  and  of  reeves.^  Not  only  the  admixture  of
downright  serfs  settled  in  tributary  holdings,  but  the  whole
arrangement  of  week-work,  the  burdensome  rustic  duties,
and  the  harsh  discipline  of  the  hall  and  of  the  steward,  gave
to  the  condition  of  villainage  a  particularly  humble  setting.
It  was  marked  as  a  degradation  when  a  freeman  became
a  villain.^

And  yet  the  redeeming  features  are  still  very  noticeable
in  Domesday.  The  free  elements  cast  into  the  mould
assert  themselves  in  many  ways.  After  all,  the  diflference
between  the  socman  and  the  better  situated  villain  was  not
great,  on  the  testimony  of  the  Survey.  A  soce  over  freemen
was  considered,  in  one  sense,  as  an  extension  to  them  of
a  power  originally  established  in  regard  to  villains.^  Among
socmen  there  were  many,  as  we  have  seen  already,  who
were  actually  subjected  to  the  same  kind  of  exploitation
and  supervision  as  the  villains,  although  in  a  lesser  degree^
On  the  other  hand,  some  of  the  general  customs  applied  to
the  villain  class  disclose  in  its  midst  a  considerable  element

\  pd.  i.  44  d :  (Chardford,  Hants)  *  Cerdeford  ...  In  isto  hundredo
et  in  isto  manerio  tenet  Picot  ii  uirgatas  et  dimidiam  de  rege.  Phi-
telet  tenuit  in  alodio  de  rege  Edwardo,  • . .  Istam  terram  calumniatur
Willelmus  de  Chemet  dicens  pertinere  ad  maneriam  de  Cerdeford
feudum  Hugonis  de  Port,  per  hereditatem  sai  antecessoris,  et  de  hoc
suum  testimonium  adduxit  de  melioribus  et  antiquis  hominibus  totius
comitatus  et  hundredi,  et  Picot  contraduxit  suam  testimonium  de
uiUanis  et  uili  plebe,  et  de  prepositis  qui  uolunt  defendere  per  sacra-
mentum  aut  per  dei  iudicium  quod  ille  qui  tenuit  terram  liber  homo
fuit,  et  potuit  ire  cum  terra  sua  quo  uoluit.  Sed  testes  Willelmi  nolunt
accipere  legem  nisi  regis  Edwardi  usque  dum  diffiniatur  per  regem.'

*  Dd.  ii.  lb:  (BenHeet,  Essex)  'Benflet,  ...  In  hoc  manerio  erat
tunc  temporis  cjuidam  liber  homo  de  dimidia  hida  qui  modo  effectus
est  unus  de  uillanis.*

'  Dd.  ii.  285  b:  (Mendlesham,  Suffolk)  'Melnessam  tenet  Bur-
chart,  ...  In  Cottuna  xviii  liberi  homines  . .  •  hue  manerio  additi, . . .
hundredum  testatur  quod  uere  rex  et  comes  habuit  soca  et  saca  t  r.  e.,
sed  homines  illius  utile  testantur  c^uod  Burchardus  similiter  habuit
socam  de  liberis  hominibus  sicuti  de  suis  uillanis,  et  non  habent
aliquid  testimonium  praeter  se,  et  tamen  nolunt  probare  omni
modo.'

^  Dd.  i.  225  d :  (Rushden,  Northants)  *  Risdene  .  .  •  Sochemanni
de  Risdene  et  Irencestre  et  Rande  fuerunt  homines  Burred  et  iccirco
G.  episcopus  clamat  hominationem  eorum.'  Cf.  Liber  Niger  ecclesiae
de  Burgo  (Camden  Soc.),  158:  Pilesgete.


454  SOCIAL  CLASSES  [essay  ii

reckoned  to  be  free.^ Curiously  enough,  we  find  the  nme
verdict  as  to  churchscot  which  we  have  already  seen  applied
to  freemen  in  Worcestershire,  and  to  socmen  in  Bucldngfaam-
shire,  applied  to  free-  and  to  villain-hides  in  another  Wor-
cestershire verdict.^ These  hides  have  to  pay  the  same  loads
of  com  to  the  Bishop  of  Worcester,  and  are  liable  to  the
same  kind  of  forfeitures. This  is  surely  very  characteristic
We  come  across  the  same  framework  of  Old  English  society
arranged  into  hides,  and  the  social  desig^tion  of  these
hides  leaves  us  the  choice  in  this  case  between  free  and
villain. The  inference  is  not  far  to  seek,  that  these  ex-
pressions correspond  to  the  free  and  to  the  socman  house-
holds of  the  other  two  instances,  and  that  the  churchsoot
had  primarily  to  be  levied  from  the  hides  of  the  suiton  of
the  hundred,  the  free  settlers,  both  landowners  and -agricul-
tural tenants.  The  very  fact  that  the  designation  of  villains
assumes  in  process  of  time  such  a  very  general  and  all-
embracing  sense  ^  speaks  volumes  against  the  homogeneoui
origin  of  the  class  composing  it. It  was  a  common  moald
for  various  elements  ranging  from  downright  ser&ge  to  the
ascription of  men  personally  free,  and  to  the  subjectioa
of  men  who  might  have  been  classified  with  the  socmen
forming  so  important  a  group  in  some  parts  of  the  countty.
Nor  can  there  be  a  doubt  that  a  most  important  and  con-
siderable part  of  the  villain  class  is  descended  from  the  Old


^  Dd.  iv.  245 :  (Cricket  St.  Thomas,  Somerset), '  Cruce  • .  •  Inde
habet  Turstinus  iiii  hidas  in  dominio  et  iii  carucas,  et  uiUani  habent  ii
hidas  et  iii  carucas.  Ibi  habet  Turstinus  vi  uillanos  et  v  boidarios  et
ii  senios  et  xiiii  animalia, . . .  Haec  mansio  reddebat  per  conmetodiaem
unoquoque  anno  in  Sutpetret  mansione  R.  vi  oues  cmn  i^is  saisy  et
unusquiscjue  liber  homo  1  blomam  ferri.'

*  Dd.  1.  174a:  (Terra  Aecclesiae  de  Wirecestre)  *  Dicit  uke-
comitatus  quod  de  unaquaque  hida  terrae  libera  uel  uiUana  quae  ad
aecclesiam  de  Wirecestre  pertinet  debet  episcopus  habere  in  die  festo
S.  Martini  unam  summam  annonae  de  meliori  quae  Ibidem
Quod  si  dies  ille  non  reddiia  annona  transient  qui  retinult
reddet  et  undecies  persoluet,  et  insuper  forisfacturam
accipiet  qualem  de  sua  terra  habere  debet.'

'  Dd.  IV.  107 :  (Crediton,  Devon)  '  Chritetona, . . .  Inde  habcft  epi-
scopus vi  hidas  et  xiii  carucas  in  dominio,  et  inter  mUites  et  ii«n*«fl<
habet  ix  hidas  et  clxxii  carucas.  Ibi  habet  episcopus  cdbdiii  uillaiMS
et  Ixxiii  bordarios,  xl  seruos,  xxx  porcarios.'


SECT.  in.  CH.  II]  PEASANTS  +55

English  ceor]s,  so  often  described  as  freemen  in  Anglo-
Saxon  lawa.  Their  manorial  subjection  is  the  result  of  the
process  of  formation  of  a  military  aristocracy  gradually
differentiated  from  the  previously  indistinct  mass  of  free-
men. In  their  quality  of  typical  members  of  the  townships
th«  villains  appear  as  the  natural  representatives  of  the  latter
in  the  juries  called  to  give  evidence  before  the  Domesday
Commissioners,  and  the  comi>osition  of  these  juries  proves  to
be  the  same  as  the  ordinary  representation  of  townships  in
the  hundred  and  the  county  courts :  the  reeve,  the  priest,
and  six  villains  in  the  Domesday  Inquests  ;  the  reeve,  the
priest,  and  four  villains  in  the  public  moots.'  The  parish
priest  with  his  virgatc,  half-hide,  or  hide, appears  accordingly
as  one  of  the  villain  shareholders  of  the  township,  although
his  tenement  h  held  free  of  the  common  service  on  account
of  its  special  obligations.

I  have  been  discussing  the  typical  features  of  villainage
in  the  agricultural  counties  of  England,  but  it  is  hardly
needful  to  mention  that  in  forest,  pastoral,  or  fishing  districts
the  usual  terms  are  applied  to  the  working  population,
although  its  occupations  would  not  have  much  to  do  with
ploughing  and  other  agricultural  processes.  As  we  hear  of
forest  hides  and  Welsh  hides,  so  we  come  across  villains
settled  and  doing  work  in  the  forest,"  or  as  fishermen,^  or
according  to  Welsh  custom*— presumably  connected  with
pastoral  and  forest  pursuit.s.  Individual  villain,i  might  even
be  drawn  from  their  ordinary  occupations  and  be  employed


'  Dd.  i.  183b  :  (Dindor,  Hereford)  •  Dunni, ...  In  dominio  mm  ii
carurac,  et  xiji  uillani  cum  prcpoiilo  CI  v  bonUriis  cum  xii  carucii.
Ibi  iiii  boiurii  ei  lii  andlltLc.'

'  Dd.  i.  179c:  (Kingston,  KMcTord)  '  ChiiiKutonc.  ...  Ibi  tilua
nomine  Trikieliiie  iiulLiRi  reddens  coniueiudiciem  niii  uenationem.
Villani  T.  R.  E.  ibi  mancntes  porubuit  ueiutionem  Bd  Hereford,  nee
aliud  semitium  fnciebani  ul  icira  dicit.'

*  I)d.  i.  164 n;  (Tidentinm,  Glouci.)  '  TedenehAm, ...  In  Saiioma
xi  pitcariae  in  duminio.  et  xlii  piscariae  ijjlluionim.  In  Woia  i
piscarin  et  ujllanonim  ii  pitcariac  et  dimidia.  Rogers*  comet  creuit
m  Waia  ii  piscariiis.'

*  Ud.  i.  353c  :  (Salupi '  Alretone, ...  In  domtDio  e»  una  auoca  et
V  uillani  cum  i  Libero  homlne  habent  iii  Caracas,  ei  quidam  Walenies
ibi  laborantes  reddunt  xvi  sol.'


456  SOCIAL  CLASSES  [essay  n

as  artizans  without  losing  their  standing  within  the  peasant
class.^
Bordarii. 6.  It  is  very  rare  to  find  villains  alone  by  themselves  m  a
manor.^  They  are  usually  coupled  with  bordarii  on  thetenant
land,^  and  the  numbers  of  these  in  the  aggt^ate  are  not
much  less  than  those  of  the  villains.^ They  are  also  rustics^
and  subjected  to  the  same  kind  of  service  as  the  villains,
but  the  amount  of  their  service  is  considerably  less. In  one
instance  the  Domesday  Survey  tells  us,  in  as  many  words,
that  the  bordarii  had  to  do  work  for  one  day  in  the  week.*
This  would  connect  them  directly  with  the  Monday-men,
the  Lundifiarii  of  later  '  extents ',  who  are  one  group  of  the
cottagers,  of  whom  we  hear  so  much  both  before  and  after
the  Conquest/ This  observation  is  borne  out  by  the  cases
where  the  size  of  the  tenements  held  by  bordarii  are  given.
They  stand  always  in  contrast  with  those  of  the  villains,  as
small  plots,  whereas  the  villain  holdings  correspond  to  the
large  fractions  of  the  plough-team  and  plougUand. The
bordarii  held  orchards  or  crofts,  plots  of  5  acres ;  veiy
rarely  their  tenements  rise  to  as  many  as  10  or  12  acres.^


\  Dd.  i.  30  c:  (Kingston,  Surrey)  '  Chingestune,  •  .  .  De  uil
huius  uillae  habuit  et  habet  Hunfridus  camerarius  unum  uiUannm  in
custodia,  causa  codunandi  lanam  reginae.  De  ipso  etiam  mcaegSx  n.
sol.  in  releuamen  cum  pater  eius  fuit  mortuus.'

'  £.  g.  Dd.  i.  206  d :  (Sawtry,  Hunts)  *  In  Saltrede  babuit  Turcliil  z
bidas  ad  geldum.  Terra  xv  carucis.  In  dominie  sunt  de  hac  teRS  U
hidae  et  dimidia.  Ibi  nunc  ludita  comitissa  ii  carucas,  et  zxvii  uillani
habentes  x  carucas. Ibi  presbiter  et  aecclesia.'

'  Dd.  iv.  274  :  (Kenn,  Devon)  '  Ghent  . . .  reddidit  ^dum  pro  vi
hidis,  has  possunt  arare  xxv  carrucae  ...  Ibi  habet  Balduinus  slii  tatcr
uillanos  et  bordarios.*  But  cf.  Dd.  i.  163  b :  (Tewkesbury^  Gloiics.)  *  In
Teodechesberie ...  In  capite  manerii  erant  in  dominto  xii  camocy  et!
inter  seruos  et  ancillas,  et  xvi  bordarii  circa  aulam  manebant'

*  Ellis,  Introduction  to  Domesday  Book,  ii.  511 :  Bordsriiy  82, 119 ;
Bordarii  pauperes,  490 ; Dimidii  Bordarii,  15.

^  Dd.  i.  186  a :  (Ewias  Harold  Castle,  Hereford)  'CasteUnmEwks,...
Ibi  habet  in  dominio  ii  carucas,  et  ix  Walenses  cum  vi  canici%icd*
dentes  vii  sextaria  mellis,  et  xii  bordarii  operantes  una  die  ^Mlomad.
Ibi  iiii  bouarii,  et  unus  homo  reddit  vi  den.  Quinque  mQites  .  •  .
habent  v  carucas  in  dominio,  et  xii  bordarios  . .  •  Turstinot  . .  •  et
Wamerius  ...  Hi  habent  v  bordarios.'

*  Rectitudines,  Villainage  in  England,  p.  256.

^  Dd.  i.  127  d :  (Fulham,  Middlesex) '  Fuleham, ...  In  eadcm  niOa
tenent  canonici  S.  Pauli  de  rege  v  hidas  pro  uno  manerio.  Ton  ett
V  carucis. Ad  dominium  pertinent  iii  hide,  et  ibi  sunt  ii


SECT.  III.  CH.  II]  PEASANTS  457

The  term  and  the  classification  into  a  group  are  suggested,
not  by  the  membership  of  the  township  {vilia),  but  by  the
occupation  of  a  homestead — a  mansura^  a  borda}  The
latter  was  a  term  well  known  to  the  French  barons  who
directed  the  Survey  and  to  the  Frenchmen  placed  on  the
local  juries.^  It  appears  as  a  peculiarity  of  the  Domesday
classification,  and  disappears  quickly  from  usage,  both  in
the  law  courts  and  in  economic  practice.  '  Villain '  becomes
the  one  legally  recognized  designation  for  manorial  sub-
jection, while  Villains'  and  *  cottagers'  divide  the  class
between  them  as  the  two  main  economic  groups.  In  con-
nexion with  the  usual  meaning  of  bordarius^  as  a  crofter,
we  find  them  very  often  in  the  demesne  portion  of  the
manor.^  They  were  evidently  in  this  case  domanial
labourers  settled  in  cottages,  and  provided  with  a  bit  of
land  of  their  own,  or,  perhaps,  small  peasants  who  had
to  undertake  the  work  on  the  demesne,  not  as  week-work,
but  as  a  whole,  on  certain  conditions.  In  most  of  these
cases  the  home-farms  assigned  to  the  cultivation  of  the
bordarii  are small. It is quite  exceptional to find a

Villani  ii  canicas,  et  tercia  potest  fieri.  Ibi  viii  uillani  quisj^ue  de
i  uirgata,  et  vii  uillani  quisque  de  dimidia  uiigata,  et  vii  bordarii  quis-
que  de  v  acris.'  238  b :  (Coton  End,  Warwick)  '  Cotes,  •  • .  Extra
burgum  c  bordarii  cum  hortulis  suis  reddunt  1  sol.'  Cf.  Inq.  Cantab.
(ed.  Hamilton),  p.  24, '  Belesham  . . .  xii  bordarii  quisque  de  x  acris* ;
p.  40, '  Hestitona,  xii  bordarii  de  xii  acris* ;  p.  45,  '  Herlestona  :  • .  xv
cotarii  de  suis  hortis  ';  p*  SI9 '  Trumpintone : . .  i  bordarius  de  acra  et
dim.,  V  cotarii  de  suis  ortis  ;  p.  77, '  Oreuuella  :  . .  iii  bordarii  quisque
de  V  acris.'

'  Dd.  i.  38  d :  (Eling,  Hants)  '  Edlinges,  ...  In  Foresta  sunt
occupatac  xvi  mansurae  uilianorum  et  iii  bordariorum.'  52  b  :  (Bow-
combe,  Hants) '  Bouecome, . . .  Ad . . .  accclesiam  adiacent  xx  masurae
bordariorum.'  203  a:  (Huntingdon)  *  In  Burgo  Huntedone  . . .  sunt
modo  cxvi  burgenses  consuetudmes  omnes  et  geldum  regis  reddentes,
et  sub  eis  sunt  c  bordarii  qui  adiuuant  eos  ad  persolutionem  geldi.'
ii.  136  a  :  (Feltwell,  Norfolk)  *  In  Feltwella  . . .  v  bordarii  t.  r.e.  modo
iii.  et  ii  mansure  sunt  uacuae.'

'  Liebermann,  Gesetze,  i. Leis  Willelme,  17  a:  '  Le  Seignur  pur

den.  que  il  donrad  si  enint  quites  ses  bordiers  e  ses  bouer)  e  ses
scrian;.  Lat.  Dominus  autem  pro  uno  denario  adquietabit  bordarios
sues  ct  bubulcos  et  seruientes.*

'  Dd.  i.  223  b:  (VV.  Famdon,  Northants)  *  Idem  (Radulfus)  tenet
i  hidam  et  dimidiam  et  unam  bouatam  terrae  in  Ferendone.  Terra  est
ii  cariicis.  Ibi  est  una  cum  ii  bordariis.*  Cf.  359b  (Summeriede,
Lines.);  360  c  (Stroustune) ;  ibid.,  alia  Pamtone;  iv.  178  (Bera,
Somerset);  421  (Bicatona,  Devon).


45^  SOCIAL  CLASSES  [isuTn

large  manor  settled  in  such  a  way  that  bardmrii  ocoipy  the
tenant  portion '  of  the  estate  alone,  or  almosl  alone.  It  ii
quite  common,  on  the  other  handy  to  find  fci  4m  ii  as  a
group  of  under-tenants  in  settlements  hdd  bjr  smal
freemen  or  socmen.*

The  cases  where  bardarii  are  alone  would  unpljr  tku
the  crofters  were  provided  with  ploughs  by  the  bid.  or
could  form  plough-teams  of  their  own  by  joiatag  tkdr
oxen,  and  it  is  stated  exceptionally  in  the  Swwy  dm
the  bordarii  have  teams.'  Even  in  the  ordinary
where  villains  appear  on  the  scene  as  the  chief
of  the  fields,  bordarii  follow  them  in  the  rechonun,  ii  a
way  which  supposes  that  they  had  some  diarc  in  Ar
ploughlandi,  and  possessed  some  oxen  and
implements,  which  enabled  them  to  joni  in  the
tion.  But  their  participation  and  position
been  subordinate  in  any  case.

The  reason  for  assigning  such  a  considerable
the  crofters  and  cotters  lay  in  the  economic  and
necessity  for  a  class  of  smaller  householders^  who
assist  both the  lords  and the  larger  peasants  ia
routine  of  agricultural  work. The  economi
sisted  in  the  fact  that  no  large  agricultnral
could  dispense  with  occasional  labourers  and  do  aD  At
work  required  in  it  by  the  help  of  its  ordinary
If  it  had  to  employ  the  same  staflf  in  the  critical
the  slack  periods  of  the  economic  year,  one  of  two
would  follow :  either  the  labouring  population


*  I)d.  iv.  27 :  (rortland,  Dorset)  *  Rex  habec  i  i
Porlandsi  qium  tenetwit  Eduuardui  Kex, ...  11m  habct
in  Horn  in  io,  et  uillani  ha  bent  ibi  xxiii  canicat. Ibi  ^ "^
ct  r  bordxrios,  x  minu»,  et  v  leriiof.'

'  I)d.  ii.  166  a :  (liarnham  Broom.  Norfolk)  *  la
terre  rt  vi  arras  tenebani  xlvii  liberi  homines
War.)  et  modo  Ivii,  semper  vii  bord.  et  viii  car/ Ct  ibid«
166  b  I  Morlra) ;  ibid.,  I)epham»  Wimiindham,  ftc

'  I)d.  i. I  c  :  (Kent)  M;ocisione, ...  Ad  banc
XXV acnu' trrr-ie in  'Cornel i hundredo, ct  ibi
cum  dimidi.i  canica.' i3^)d:  (Hemel  llemMcad,  Hcnal  '
amr<itedc,  .  .  .  Ihi  ii  franc iicenac  cum  xiti  bonlarm  hi
Cf.  ii.  134  a  'llcnistctia,  Norfolk).


J


SECT.  in.  CH.  ii]  PEASANTS  459

for  the  spring  and  harvest  work  would  have  to  sit  in
comparative  idleness  during  the  winter  and  part  of  the
summer,  or  else  it  would  have  to  bear  a  strain  besrond
its  strength  at  the  critical  periods  of  husbandry.  We  know
that  manorial  management  tried  to  help  itself  by  an
excess  of  boon-works  at  these  exceptional  times.  But
taking  the  tasks  of  the  agricultural  population  as  a  whcde,
a  demand  must  have  always  existed  for  extra  labour  at
certain  periods  of  the  year,  somewhat  similar  to  the
demand  for  hop-pickers  in  Kent  nowadays.  This  kind  of
demand  is  always  met  to  a  great  extent  by  the  influx  of
outsiders,  the  Sachsengdnger  of  Eastern  Germany.  Minis-
ters' accounts  of  the  feudal  epoch  show  that  this  was  to
some  extent  the  case  in  manorial  husbandry.  But  the
rigid  local  divisions  of  the  feudal  arrangement,  and  the
imperfect  conditions  of  intercourse,  put  many  impediments
in  the  way  of  the  ebb  and  flow  of  agricultural  labourers,
and  the  economic  supplement  for  migrations  of  loose
*  hands'  was  presented  in  most  countries  of  mediaeval
Europe  by  a  large  class  of  settled  labourers  living  in
very  strait  circumstances  in  small  crofts  and  homesteads,
and  ready  to  undertake  all  sorts  of  auxiliary  work  and  odd
jobs  in  the  routine  of  village  life.  This  appears  to  be
the  economic  character  of  the  various  bordarii^  bordiers,
cottagers,  'husmaend',  *kotter*,  *  Brinksitzer '  of  England,
France,  Germany,  and  Scandinavian  countries.  There  was
plenty  of  social  material  for  the  formation  of  the  class.  It
consisted  chiefly  of  younger  brothers  and  side  relations  of
the  peasants— the  villains  (Bauern) — provided  with  hold-
ings. The  great  feature  of  the  holding  system  which
obtained  in  Western  Europe  is  the  concentration  of  the
household  shares  into  close  units.  In  contrast  with  the
gavelkind  and  parage  systems  which  parcel  up  rights
according  to  the  growth  of  population,  the  re-<livisions
among  the  kindred  practised  in  Celtic  districts,  and  the
periodical  re-allotments  of  Russia,  the  prevailing  mediaeval
arrangement  of  Teutonic  Europe  tended  to  sacrifice  the
interests  of  the  plurality  of  claimants  to  the  economic


46o  SOCIAL  CLASSES  [ESSAY  ll

efficiency  of  the  agrarian  units— of  the  Hof,  the  Hnfe,  the
mansus,  the  virgate  or  bovate,  and  the  '  odal '.  Superfluous
claims  were  cut  off  or  bought  out,  and,  as  a  result,  a  large
percentage  of  the  population  was  thrown  out  into  minor
occupations  and  side  settlements.  For  a  time  one  of  the
principal  exits  left  open  for  bachelors  (Haistalds^  Ha^es-
tolzen)  was  settling  in  crofts  and  cots  around  the  main
stock  of  the  peasants.^  The  working  of  these  economic
and  social  processes  comes  to  a  head  in  the  formation  of
the  class  of  crofters  and  cottagers  represented  by  bardarU
and  cottarii  in  England.
Settlements I  have  dwelt  especially  on  this  side  of  the  development,

of  serfs

because  it  has  hardly  been  realized  sufficiently  by  most
writers  on  the  subject.  But  it  was  supplemented  from
another  side  by  the  influx  of  settled  labourers  of  servile
origin.  It  may  be  supposed  that  in  most  cases  the  con-
version of  a  slave  into  a  serf  of  the  glebe  was  effected  by
planting  a  servile  household  on  a  small  plot  of  land,  and
subjecting  it  to  the  fluctuating  requirements  of  manorial
husbandry,  without  such  definite  limits  as  to  customaiy
employment  as  those  which  obtained  in  the  case  of  the
more  cumbersome  and  costly  arrangements  of  the  large
peasant  farms.  Sometimes  the  crofts  of  the  iardaru
Ttiight  grow  into  holdings  of  the  higher  type ;  in  other  cases,
on  the  contrary,  they  might  multiply  as  cotti^es.  But  any-
how they  presented  one  of  the  steps  by  which  the  niunerous
slave  contingents  of  ancient  times  advanced  towards  a
more  protected  and  economically  advantageous  position.
Cotugcrs.  7«  A  somewhat  puzzling  feature  of  Domesday  termino-
logy is  the  occurrence  of  cottagers  by  the  side  of  the
*  bordiers '.  The  Survey  mentions  cottarii^  cotmenf  and
cotsets  ^  in  different  parts  of  the  country,  and  the  members

^  Rhamm,  Die  Grosshufen  der  Nordgermanen,  140  AT.

'  Dd.  iv.  195:  (Faringdon,  Devon)  'Ferentona,  •  .  •  Ibi  babet
Bretellus  i  carucam  et  ii  cotarios.'  Cf.  i.  138  a:  (Adportam  episcopit
Middlesex) '  Canonici  . . .  habent  . . .  x  cotarios  de  ix  acris.*  960a:
(Stoke,  Salop) '  ^toches, . . .  ix  feininae  cotariae.'

•  Dd.  i.  177  b :  (Northfield,  Worcs.)  *  Nordfeld,  . . .  vii  uillani  et  m
bordarii  et  vi  cotmanni  cum  xiii  camcis, ...  Ibi  ii  semi  et  1  ancilla.'

'  Dd.  i.  64  d : (Bedwin,  Wilts)  '  Beduinde, ...  Ibi  ...  Ix


SECT.  III.  CH.  II]  PEASANTS  4^1

of  these  groups  make  up  a  considerable  class.  They  even
occur  in  the  same  entries  with  bordarii^  and  are  distinguished
from  them.  These  facts  are  not  difficult  to  explain  how-
ever. Cotman,  cotset  is  the  vernacular  designation  for  the
class,  and  therefore  its  cropping  up  is  only  natural.  The
Norman  Survey  uses  the  French  term  constantly,  however,
and  even  makes  attempts  to  co-ordinate  both  terms  in  order
to  express  shades  of  meaning  in  regard  to  the  size  of  the
plots  assigned  to  the  various  crofters.^  This  is  carried
very  far,  and  distinctions  are  attempted  on  this  line  between
cotarii  and  cotsets.^  There  may  be  other  elements  under-
lying such  minute  subdivisions,  e.g.,  the  wish  to  distinguish
between  cottagers  of  ancient  standing  and  settlers  pro-
vided with  new  homesteads  and  an  outfit.  But  it  is  neither
possible  nor  necessary  to  trace  all  these  shades  and  niceties
in  detail.  The  principal  facts  are  clear  enough.  They
consist  in  the  grouping  of  the  peasantry  into  two  g^eat
classes :  the  holders  of  the  regular  farms  and  tenements  in
the  fields,  and  the  crofters  and  cottagers  surrounding  the
main  stock  of  the  agricultural  population.

Besides  these  two  main  streams  leading  to  the  formation
of  the  crofter  class,  it  has  to  be  noticed  that  the  aristocratic
evolution  culminating  in  the  Conquest  had,  as  one  of  its
consequences,  the  breaking  up  of  a  great  number  of  full
peasant  farms,  and  the  eviction  of  large  numbers  of  free
peasants,  with  a  corresponding  increase  in  the  number  of
crofters  and  cottagers  on  their  precarious  small  tenements.
Many  facts  of  this  kind  come  directly  under  our  notice
in  the  Survey.^  Sometimes  it  may  be  found  that  this
parcelling-up of farms  and dispossession of  substantial

et  xiiii  coliberti.'  Cf.  iv.  46  (Pouertona,  Dorset);  lit  (Coritcma,
Devon).

'  I)d.  i.  127  b:  (Stepney,  Middlesex)  'Stibenhede,  .  .  .  In  eadem
iiilla  .  .  .  Hugo  de  Bemeres,  . .  .  Ibi  i  uillanus  de  dimidia  hida,  et
\  i  uillani  de  iii  uirgatis,  et  ii  bordarii  de  dimidia  uirgata,  et  iii  cotarii
ct  ii  acris  ct  dimidio.*

^  Dd.  i.  73  d  :  (Somerford,  Wilts)  'Sumreford, ...  Ibi  sunt  ii  coscez
ct  i  cotarius.'

'  I)d.  ii.  90a:  (Thorrin^on,  Essex)  '  Torindunam,  .  .  .  Tunc  i
uillanus  modo  non. Tunc  liii  bKordarii  mode  xL' 247  b:  (Kerdiston,


462  SOCIAL  CLASSES  [ESSAY  n

peasant  tenants  coincides  with  a  certain  g^rowth  of  the
demesne  farm^  supported  by  cottagers  work.  In  a  few
cases  the  increase  in  the  number  of  cottagers  seems  partly
due  to  the  disappearance  of  serfs,^  as  well  as  to  a  lowering
in  the  status  of  peasants.
Censores.  In  some  cases,  again,  the  bardarii  must  have  held  lease-
holds which  it  was  impossible  to  classify  as  ordinary  villain
holdings,  because  they  were  let  for  rackrents.  In  this
sense  the  term  bordarius  would  correspond  to  that  of
censaritis  or  censor^  and  a  comparison  between  Domesday
and  the  Burton  Cartulary  shows  that  the  transition  did
actually  take  place  :  the  older  record  uses  bordarius  where
the  later  one  speaks  of  censores.  The  numbers  do  not
coincide,  and  the  twelfth-century  Cartularies  show  a  con-
siderable  increase  of  these  rent-holdings,  as  is  only  natuial
in  view  of  the  general  progress  achieved  in  the  35-40  yean
since  1086.  But  the  place  of  the  bordarii  as  a  group  is
clearly  taken  by  the  censores  gproup  in  the  twelfth  century,'

Norfolk)  '  Kerdestuna,  .  .  .  Tunc  et  post  xxx  uillani,  et  mode  xvi,
et  modo  xiiii  bordarii, .  .  .  Huic  terre  iacent  hominei  in  Refham,
et  sunt  appretiati  cum  ipsa  terra.*

^  Dd.  ii.  191  a :  (Great  Cressingham,  Norfolk)  '  Cresintghaluuii
tenet  Episcopus  in  dominio  pro  manerio  ct  pro  ii  carucatis  feme.
Tunc  vii  uillani  modo  iiii,  modo  iii  bordarii.  Tunc  iiii  serui,  mode  L
Tunc  ii  carucae  in  dominio,  modo  iii.  Tunc  inter  homines  i  csnicay
modo  dimidia.*

*  Dd.  ii.  69  b :  (Wimbish,  Essex) '  Wimbeis, . .  .  Semper  iii  t^r^M-mm^
in  dominio.  Tunc  xxi  carucae  hominum,  modo  xv.  Semper  szri
uillani  et  i  presbiter.  Tunc  xviiii  bordarii,  modo  Iv.  Tunc  vi  semiy
modo  nullus.'

'  Dd.  i.  273  b.  In  <Ufre'  (Mickel  and  Uttle  Over)  the  Abbey
of  Burton  had  T.R.W.  twenty  villain  holdings  and  ten  kordarUcniX%
on  eight  ploughlands.  In  the  earlier  twelfth-century  surveys  then  are
still  twenty  villain  holdings  but  no  bordarii.  On  the  other  hand,
a  good  deal  of  the  Warland  is  at  rent,  and  there  are  thirteen  ctmatm.
The  later  twelfth-century  survey  gives  twenty-four  villain  holdingSi  but
only  six  censores.  Part  of  the  land  has  evidently  been  apaia  subjected
to  work  instead  of  being  leased  for  rent.  Similar  condiUons  piCYail  in
other  Burton  manors.  Burton  Cartulary,  William  Salt  Soc^  v,  put  i,
pp.  i8ff.  In  the  paper  by  Mr.  Baring,  Engl.  Hist  Rev.,  xL  qSk,  the
bordarii  are  not  considered,  and  no  account  is  taken  of  the  growth  of
cultivation  in  the  interval  between  Domesday  Book  and  the  twdfkh-
century  surveys.  This  enables  the  author  to  arrive  at  the  ttsitimg
conclusion  that  the  rent-paying  tenants  were  detibeiately  omillcS
in  the  Domesday  Survey  of  Southern  England.


SECT.  III.  CH.  ii]  PEASANTS  463

and  this  fact  throws  a  reflected  light  on  the  meaning  of
bordarius  in  Domesday.  The  constant  occurrence  of  the
latter  may  explain  why  censor  and  censarius  occur  so
seldom.^

8.  At  the  bottom  of  the  social  ladder  of  the  Domesday  Servi.
Survey  we  find  a  class  of  unfree  servants — serfs  or  slaves
(servi). Their  total  number  is  not  very  large — some  25,000,
and  there  arises,  at  the  very  beginning,  the  question  whether
we  have  to  reckon  in  this  case  with  households  or  with
persons. Serfs  have  no  holdings  or  tenements,  in  the
proper  sense  of  the  word. This  is  not  only  a  theoretical
inference  from  their  general  status,  but  a  fact  rendered
clear  by  their  connexion  with  the  demesne. The  Survey,
indeed,  enumerates  them  sometimes  as  one  of  a  series  of
social  groups  on  the  estates,  and  in  this  case  it  may  mention
them  in  the  same  breath  with  villains  and  bordarii^ But
in  more  carefully  drawn  up  descriptions  it  places  them  on
the  demesne,^  and  keeps  them  quite  distinct  from  the  other
tenants  and  the  land  of  the  tenants  {terra  hominum). And
yet  I  hesitate  to  construe  the  Domesday  entries  as  referring
to  heads  of  population. This  would  be  quite  out  of  keeping
with  all  the  other  items  of  the  Survey,  and  would  lead  to
a  very  strange  result :  serfdom  would  seem  to  have  almost
entirely  disappeared  in  many  parts  of  the  country,  and  to  be
represented  by  one  or  two  persons  only  on  a  number  of  estates
where  it  does  occur. This  would  be  startling  indeed,  some
fifty  years  after  the  Danish  invasions. I  think  the  serfs
entered in the record are  those  who held ministerial

'  I)d.  i.  78  c  :  (Dorset) '  Oscheruuille  . . .  ii  censores  redduntxv  soi|
314  b:  (Yorks)  *  Hotun  . .  .  Berengarius  habet  ibi  ii  uillanos  . . .  et  iii
censarios  et  alios  xiiii  uillanos  et  bordarios.'  Cf.  325  c  (Ghellinge,
Yorks) ;  362  d  (Bertone,  Lines.).  ^^

'  K.g.  Dd.  ii.  136  a:  (Methwold,  Nofrolk)  '  Methelwalde  . . .  Tunc
xxviii  villani  post  xxiiii,  modo  xviii.  Tunc  iiii  bordarii,  post  viii,modo
xiii,  semper  xxiiii  serui.'  191b:  (Elmenham,  Norfolk)  '  Sempor  xli
uillani  ct  Ixiii  bordarii.  Tunc  vi  serui  bor  (sic)  modo  iiii.*  Cf.  i.  7  c
((iraiiesham,  Kent).  Cf.  Ipswich,  Suffolk,  Dd.  ii.  393a:  'In  eodem
burgo  habet  Richardus  xiii  burgenses  . .  .  unus  eorum  est  seruus.'

'  Dd.  i.  8  b  :  (*  Winchelesmere,*  Kent)  ...  *  Terra  est  i  carucae.  Et
ibi  est  in  dominio  cum  iii  semis.'  Cf.  lib  (Brochestele) ;  356  d
('  Hantcnetune/  Salop).


464  SCX:iAL  CLASSES  [essay  n

definite  offices  connected  with  the  estates  or  farms;  both
the  members  of  their  families  and  stray  personal  attendants
must  have  been  omitted. A  difficulty  presents  itself  in  the
fact  that  female  servants  ^  {ancillae)  are  often  mentioned,
but  it  looks  insuperable  only  at  first  glance ; there  must
have  been  many  minisUria  confided  to  women  in  a  wdl-
ordered  estate,  and  the  disappointing  feature  in  this  case  is
rather  that  offices  of  this  kind  are  not  alluded  to  more
often. The  positive  reasons  for  my  suggestion,  besides  the
above  observations,  consist  in  the  fact  that  in  some  cases
the  servile  labourers  on  the  demesne  appear  more  specially
as  ploughmen  {bovarii). They  are  designated  as  such  in
one  or  two  cases,^  and  in  a  number  of  other  instances  we
are  led  to  some  conclusion  of  the  kind  by  the  symmetrical
correspondence  between  the  number  of  teams  and  of  sef6
on  the  demesne.^ Two,  and  perhaps  four  in  some  cases,
seem  to  be  reckoned  to  each  plough  as  a  rule. This  average
would  be  a  reasonable  one,  as  there  must  have  been  at  least
a  double  personnel  to  serve  the  demesne  ploi^hs  on  well-
ordered  estates. The  forgoing  observations  appear  as  a
probable  solution  of  the  question  in  regard  to  some  counties,
but  it  would  not  do  to  restrict  the  employment  of  serfs  to
the  office  of  ploughmen. They  may  have  acted  as  herdsmen,
keepers,  artisans  in  other  places,  and  this  would  explain  why
the  numbers  vary  so  much  and  go  on  increasing  towards  the
west. Evidently  many  more  serfs  were  kept  in  Devonshire,
Dorset,  Gloucestershire,  to  fill  the  household  offices  of  the
lord's  farm  in  the  west  of  England,  than  in  the  east,  where
they  may  have  been  entrusted  to  hired  labourers  or  tenants,


^  Dd.  i.  169  d:  (' Tantesbome,' GIoucs.)  .  .  .  Wandllae.'  173  b:
(*  Bremesgraue,*  Worcs.)  . . .  Mx  serui  et  i  anciUa.'  Cf.  224  c  (*  Niwe-
botle,  Northants).

*  Dd.  i.  256 d :  ('  Hantenetune,*  Salop)  .  .  .  'In  dominio  sunt  ti
carucae  et  iiii  serui  (bouarii),  et  ii  uillani  et  ii  bordarii  et  unus  rad-
mannus  cum  i  caruca.'  Cf.  172  b  :  ('Grastone,'  Worcs.)  . . .  Mbi  ii
serui  et  vi  bouarii.'

'  Dd.  i.  254  b :  ('  Hetune,'  Salop) ...  *  In  dominio  est  una  canica  et
iiii  serui.'  Cf.  ibid.,  *  Stantune  ;  Wicford  . . .  ii  carucae  et  viii  send.'
Dd.  iv.  113  :  (Hermondesuuorda,  Devon)  *  Ibi  habet  Drogo  i
et  ii  seruos.'


SECT.  III.  CH.  ii]  PEASANTS  465

especially  bordarii,  for  a  certain  consideration,  or  for  the

remission  of  ordinary  week-work.*  /  ^

As  an  exception,  serfs  may  appear  connected  with  fractions
of  plough-teams.*  Perhaps  the  terminologfy  may  be  some-
what deceptive  in  this  case,  and  alludes  to  ploughmen  like
the  above,  but  even  if  tenants  were  meant,  it  would  not  be
strange,  on  the  face  of  it,  to  find  such  settled  serfs,  *  serfs
chas<5s,'  as  they  were  called  in  France.  The  only  wonder
would  be  why  the  record  should  call  them  serfs  in  such
cases,  and  not  bordarii^  cottagers,  or  even  villains,  according
to  the  size  and  nature  of  their  tenement.  But  of  such
terminological  inconsistencies  there  are  too  many  in  the
Survey  to  allow  us  to  make  strict  inferences  from  them.

In  the  treatment  of  serfs  by  the  Domesday  commissioners  Evolntioa
and  jurors,  we  have  one  of  the  many  instances  of  the  mis-  o^"«^<>"*
leading  character  of  inferences  based  on  a  literal  adherence
to  the  statements  of  mediaeval  documents  without  proper
consideration  of  the  perspective  of  their  presentation  of
society.  Should  we  follow  implicitly  the  guidance  of
thirteenth-century  jurists,  we  might  suppose  that  almost
the  entire  peasant  population  of  the  England  of  their  time
was  of  servile  condition.^  If  we  stand  by  the  Domesday
rubrics  we  may  come  to  the  conclusion  that  serfage  was
quickly  dying  out,  and  had  all  but  disappeared  in  several
of  the  shires  at  the  time  of  the  Conquest.  If  we  turn  to
the  Old  English  charters  we  shall  have  to  recognize  that,
up  to  the  eleventh  century,  slavery  and  manumission  from
slavery  are  playing  a  most  important  part  in  social  life.
Without  even  referring  to  such  early  instances  as  that  of
the  cultivation  of  Selsey,  which  presents  a  large  colony
of  downright  serfs  {tluows)^  it  is  sufficient  to  call  attention

^  I)d.  i.  175  c  :  (Evesham)  *  Ibi  sunt  in  dominio  iii  carucae  et  xxvii
bordarii  seniicntes  curiae/

'  I)d.  i.  272  b  :  (Neuuebold,  Derby) '  Ibi  habet  Rex  xvi  uillanos  et  ii
hordarios  et  i  seruum  habentes  iiii  carucas.'  Cf.  375  a  (Bubedene) ;
275  b  (Duiielle).

'  Villainage  in  England,  44  ff.

*  Hirda,  Hist.  Eccl.  iv.  13  (Plummer,  i.  23a):  *  Rex  i€dilualch
donauit  reuerentissimo  antistiti  Uilfrido  terrain  Ixxxvii  fiunilianiiny ubi
buos  homines,  qui  exules  uagabantur,  recipere  posset,  uocabulo  Sefaeseu

Hh


\  IVOCKMK)!  ^


466  SOCIAL  CLASSES  [ESSAY  n

to  the  constant  references  to  slave-born  men  ^  to  show  that
serfdom  was  a  very  important  item  in  the  aocial  oigani-
zation  of  the  eleventh  century. Although  the  incidents  of
the  life  of  this  lowest  order  of  society  are  to  a  great  extent
concealed  from  us  by  the  contemptuous  disr^ard  of  loids
and  clerks,  and  by  the  peculiar  terminology  of  the  aourcesi
the  contradictory  data  of  the  Codex Diplomaticua,  the
Domesday  Survey,  and  the  thirteenth-century  plea  rolls
have  to  be  reconciled  somehow. In  reality,  these  data
ought  to  dovetail  into  each  other,  and  not  to  contradict
each  other.

The  solution  of  the  problem  has  to  be  sought  chiefly  in
the  rearrangement  of  enormous  numbers  of  serfs  according
to  a  new  classification  in  the  eleventh  century,  and  the  legal
consequences  drawn  from  this  classification  by  the  rising
Common  Law.  The  descendants  of  the  slaves  {ikeaws)  of
older  Saxon  custom  are  distributed  in  two  distinct  dassei
in  the  eleventh  century — ^they  appear  as  serfs,  domestic  and
home-farm  servants,  and  asgeburs  or  settled  labourers  who
have  to  be  looked  for  among  the  bordarii  and  the  villains
of  Domesday  Book.  This  is  indicated  by  the  heavy  services
imposed  on  the^^^r  according  to  the  Rectitudines.' From

quod  dicitur  Latine  insula  uituli  marini . . .  £t  quoniam  illi  res  cam
praefata  loci  possessione  omnes,  qui  ibidem  erant,  ^r'lHatgt  cum  apis
et  hominibus  donauit,  omnes  fide  Christi  institutoSi  unda  **T^ir*r^
abluit;  inter  quos,  seruos  et  ancillas  duoentos  quinquaginta;  qooi
omnes  ut  baptizando  a  seruitute  daemonica  saluauit,  etiam  libertate
donando  humanae  iugo  seniitutls  absoluit.'

'  Thorpe,  DipL  153:  *tfreo  Wite^we  men  buibeerde  and  dkeo
deowbaerde  da  me  salde  bisceop.'  Ibid.  533 :  'ic  wille  f  man  fript
haealue  mine  men  on  elcum  tune/

^  Rectitudines :  '  Gebur-gerihta  syn  mislice  gewar  hy  wn  hefip
gewar  eac  me^eme,  on  sumen  lande  is  f  he  sceal  wyrcan  to  WK-ipeorae
ii  dagas,  swilc  weorc  swilc  him  man  taedS  ofer  geares  fyzst,  doe
wucan,  and  on  hxrfest  iii  dagas  to  wic-weorce,  and  of  Candcumcne  oV
Eastran  iii.  Gif  he  afera%  ne  ^Seaif  he  wyrcan  ^  hwile  %e  hb  hois  ate
bi^  He  sceal  syllan  on  Michaeles  maesse-daeig  x  nufol-pL  and  oa
Martinus  maesse-daeg  xxiii  systra  beres  and  ii  hen  fngoasi  on  Eastrm
an  geong  sceap,  o¥^  ii  p.  and  he  sceal  licgan  of  Martinus  mirmn  cUS
Eastran  act  hlafbrdes  fafde.  Swa  oft  swa  him  to-begcV^  and  of  Vud
timan  %e  man  aerest  ere%  o¥  Martinus  maessan  he  sceal  «lcre  wucn
erian  i  aecer  and  rae¥an  sylf  f  sasd  on  hlafqrdes  heme  •  to  •  cacan  Vud
iii  accents  to  bene,  et  ii  to  gaers-yi%e.  Gyf  he  manua  gajna  be^^fife
^nne  eamige  for  swa  him  man  ^Safige. His  gavol-yiVa  iii


sECT.iii.cii.il]  PEASANTS  4^7

an  interesting  entry  of  the  Medhamstead  memoranda  we
gather  that  on  the  estates  of  the  Danish  Midlands,  of  which
Northamptonshire  may  be  regarded  as  a  standard  example,
a  certain  number  of  agricultural  labourers  were  connected
with  the  regular  stock  of  provisions  and  cattle  on  the  farm.
Both  men  and  women  are  mentioned,  and  the  entry  as  to
the  latter  indicates  that  we  have  to  do  with  a  servile
population — they  would  correspond  to  the  ancilUu,  the
dairymaids,  and  the  artisans  of  whom  we  occasionally
hear  in  the  Domesday  Survey.  But  the  numbers  of  the
labourers  are  so  large,  and  they  are  so  carefully  distinguished
from  a  lower  group  called  young  nun^  that  it  would  hardly
do  to  regard  them  merely  as  farm  labourers  settled  in  the
lord's  demesne.^  The  work  of  which  they  are  worthy
would  naturally  seem  to  be  week-work  and  other  incidents
of  customary  rustic  labour.  A  corroboration  of  this  view
may  be  found  in  the  frequent  allusions  to  settled  serfs  made
in  eleventh-century  charters  and  wills.*

These  instances  form  a  transition  from  the  old  status  of
the  personally  enslaved  theows  to  the  serfage  of  the  glebe,
on  which  the  law  books  and  the  law  records  of  the  feudal
age  lay  stress.  Not  that  any  inference  as  to  the  general
derivation  of  villains  from  servile  condition  would  be  war-
ranted in  any  way,  but  by  the  side  of  the  oeorls  of  free
origin,  who  certainly  form  one  of  the  constitutive  elements
of  villainage,  we  have  to  make  room  for  the  servile  labourers
settled  on  dependent  land,  the  *geburs  who  sit  on  gafol-
land  ',  of  Anglo-Saxon  laws  and  charters.'

erige  and  sawc  of  his  aganum  heme,  and  ^lle  his  heor^penig  .
twcgen  and  twegen  fedan  aenne  heador-htind,  and  aek  f;ebur  sylle
vi  hlafas  %am  in-swane  ^onne  he  his  heorde  to  maestene  dnfe.'

^  Cart.  Sax.  1 128  :  *  ponne  is  xt  Farresheafde  xvl  weorc  woHSe  men
and  viii  iunge  men,  ...  pis  is  f  erf  ge  writ  set  Geaceslea  ^ryttene
wc[)nicn  weorc  wyr(«  and  v  wimmen  and  aehta  seonge  men.'

*  Thorpe,  435  :  '  binnon  ^rym  ffearum  agife  p  land  fam  hiiede  mid
swa  myclum  swa  se  hired  him  on  hand  sette,  j^  synd  xii  beowe  men  and
ii  gcsylhde  oxan»  and  i  hund  sceapa  and  half  hundred  fotfta  cornet.'
519:  'mid  mete  and  mid  mannum.'  539:  'mid  mete,  and  mid
mannum,  and  mid  eallre  tilde*

^  Cart.  Sax.  1002 :  '  Dis  sindon  ^  land  gemaero  ^aes  ge  burlandes  to
Abbendune  f  is  gadertang  on  ^reo  genamod  f  is  hengestet  ig.  and

H  h  2


468  SOCIAL  CLASSES  [ESSAY  n

Freedmen.  In  the  Anglo- Danish  treaties,  by  the  side  of  the  ceorls
settled  on  gafol-land,  Uysings  (freedmen)  are  to  be  found,
and  manumission  is  often  alluded  to  in  early  Engliih
charters '  and  inscriptions  on  holy  books  belonging  to  die
churches.'  There  can  be  no  doubt  that  there  was  a  mighty
current  of  emancipation  which,  though  it  did  not  do  away
with  the  economic  dependence  of  the  serfs,  placed  them
on  a  better  personal  footing  than  that  of  pure  slaves,  and,
among  other  things,  must  have  provided  them  with  wer-
gelds.  It  is  curious  to  notice  the  reflection  of  this  process
in  Domesday  Book.  It  is  not  adequately  represented,  in
so  far  as  a  great  number  of  freedmen  were  certainly  included
in  the  bordarii  and  in  the  viUani  class,  with  hardly  aoy
indication  as  to  their  former  status  or  the  act  of  manumis-
sion.^ But  the  casual  resolve  of  several  sets  of  juron
frequently  advises  us  of  the  existence  of  a  class  diccUbirA^
which  discloses  its  origin  in  its  name.  It  is  difficult  to  ny
why  the  shorter  and  simpler  term  liberti  is  not  used,  and
why  coliberti  appears  instead — perhaps  we  may  trace  in
it  an  indication  of  manumission  by  groups  as  distinguished
from  individual  emancipation.  There  may  also  be  a
reminiscence  of  the  Germanic  ge  appearing  in  such  com-
posite words  as  gebtir  or  geneat.  The  relation  of  the
coliberti  to  the  estates  on  which  they  are  found  varies
a  great  deal.  They  are  kept  distinct  from  the  serfs,  villains,
and  freemen,  but  they  appear  sometimes  in  close  oomiexioD
with  the  home-farm,^  while  in  other  instances  they  are  fiDund

seofocan  wyr^.'  Thorpe,  Diplomatarium,  536:  'be  ^an  lande  act
Cinnuc  hit  agon  ])a  hiwan  aet  Sceaftesbyrig  <Six  hyre  daeg,  and  bio  ah
\7eX  yrfe  and  |>a  men  |>enne  an  hio  ^n  hiwum  |mra  gebuzm  ^  on  ^un
gafol-lande  sitta%.'

^  Thorpe,  Dip.  591-2:  'Thurkil  and  i€thelgith :  and  >>  men  half
fre  .  I^eowe  and  hsingas.'  Ibid.  593,  Siflaed :  '  And  ic  [an]  mine  land-
se^len  here  toftes  to  owen  aihte,  and  alle  mine  men  fre.'

^  Earle,  Land  Charters,  253  ff.,  269  ff.

'  Dd.  i.  167  c :  ('  Heile,'  Gloucs.) . . . '  In  dominie  sunt  iii  camaieiet
iz  uillani  et  xi  bordarii  cum  viii  caruds.  Ibi  erant  xii  semi  quos
Willelmus  liberos  fecit.*

^  Dd.iv.8i:  (' Candetone,*  Somerset) ;  ibid.,  Cruca;  87(Clistoiia);
90  (Winnetona,  Cornwall).

^  Dd.  i.  64 d:  (*  Amblesberie,'  Wilts)  .  .  .  *In  dominio  sunt  xvi
carucae  et  Iv  semi  et  ii  coliberti.' Cf.  67  c  (Bradeford,  Wflts) ;  38  b


SECT.  III.  CH.  II]  PEASANTS  469

together  with  villani,  socmen,  or  bordarii  on  the  tenant  land
of  the  manor.^  In  the  first  case  the  terminological  distinc-
tion is  easily  explained :  we  have  two  classes  of  farm
labourers  before  us — those  of  servile  condition  and  the
frecdmen.  In  the  second  case  the  separate  mention  of
coliberti  is  somewhat  more  difficult  to  interpret :  the
material  position  may  be  identical  either  with  that  of  the
villani  or  with  that  of  the  bordarii  group,  and  yet  they  are
held  apart.  Is  it  because  of  recent  manumission  involving
a  certain  contrast  between  older  settlers  and  newly  colonized
freedmen  ?  Or  are  these  peculiarities  in  their  mode  of
holding  land  and  performing  services  ?  It  is  impossible
to  give  a  definite  answer  to  such  queries,  and  perhaps  both
eventualities  have  to  be  considered.  However  this  may  be,
we  certainly  find  the  coliberti  burdened  with  rents*  and
services  ^  analogous  to  those  of  the  other  groups  of  peasantry.
What  is  more,  there  are  curious  indications  of  a  close
connexion  between  the  Low  Latin  coliberti  and  the  early
English  buri.  The  latter  term,  so  common  in  Old  English
documents,  occurs  very  rarely  in  Domesday  Book.*  But
it  is  definitely  equated  there  to  coliberti  in  one  instance,
and  there  can  hardly  be  a  doubt  that  in  another  case
the  same  sort  of  equation  was  meant.^ These  indications,

(Mcnestoche,  Hants);  38c  (Brestone,  Hants);  65a  (Bretford,
Wilts).

'  Dd.  i.  68  a  :  (*  Chelche/  Wilts)  . . .  '  De  hac  terra  sunt  in  dominio
\  hidae  et  ibi  x  carucae  et  xx  serui.  I  hi  quater  xx  et  vi  uillani  et
1  bordarii  ct  x  coliberti  habentes  1  carucas.'

'  Dd.  i.  38  c:  (Barton  Stacey,  Hants)  '  Bertune  .  .  .  Nunouam
in  hidis  numeratum  fuit,  nisi  tantum  vi  hide  quas  tenuenint  colioerti
et  tcnent,  ...  Ibi  vi  coliberti.'

'  Dd.  i.  174  c:  (Kckington,  Worcester)  ^Aichintune  ...  Ibi  vi
coliberti  reddunt  per  annum  xi  soL  et  ii  den.  et  arant  et  seminant
<Ie  proprio  semine  xii  acras.'  Cf.  163  b:  (Bertune  apud  Bristou,
( .loucs.)  .  .  .  Mbi  ix  serui  et  xviii  coliberti  habentes  xiiii  canicas ...  Ibi
iiii  seruos  ct  xiii  colibertos  cum  iii  carucis.'  I79d:  ('Lene,'  Herts)
.  .  .  '  xix  uillani  et  ix  bordarii  et  ii  radchenistres  cum  xvi  carucis.  Ibi
vi  scnii  et  ii  ancillae  et  vi  coliberti  . .  .  uillani  dant  de  consuetudine  xiii
bol.  et  iiii  den.  et  coliberti  reddunt  iii  sextaria  frumenti  et  ordei  et  ii  oves
ct  diniidiam  cum  agnis  et  ii  den.  et  unum  obolum.'

*  Dd.  i.  1 82 a  (Uptunc,  Hereford);  182  d  (Hereford);  Dd.  iv.  165,
166  ( Bcrnurtona,  Devon).

•  Dd.  i.  38  d:  (Wallop,  Hants)  *Wallope  .  . .  Coliberti  (ucl  Buies)
ut  bupra  leddunt  consuetudinem  aliorum.' 38b:  (Cosham,  Hants)


470  SCX:iAL  CLASSES  [essay  ii

however  slight,  g^  well  with  the  view  that  the  principal
channel  of  emancipation  led  to  the  position  of  holders
of  small  farms  burdened  with  week-work  and  other  kinds
of  heavier  rustic  service.
Summary. A  few  points  may  be  added  by  way  of  summary.

I.  The  distinctions  between  thanes,  liberi  homines^  and
socmen  are  rather  in  the  degrees  of  freedom  than  in  the
essence  of  status.

a.  Villains  appear  as  a  composite  g^up  in  which  both
servile  and  free  elements  are  clearly  traceable.

3.  Domesday  Book  testifies  to  a  rapid  decay  of  the  free
classes.

4.  The  bordarii  group  was  lai^ely  recruited  from  freed-
mea

5.  The  extinction  of  slavery  is  to  be  attributed  both  to
the  influence  of  religious  views  and  to  economic  conditions.

'  In  Coseham  sunt  iiii  hidae  quae  ^rtinent  huic  manerio  ubi  T.ILE.
erant  viii  burs  i  (sic)  coliberti  cum  iiii  carucis  reddentes  1  sol.  viii  den.
minus.  Ibi  est  in  dominio  una  caruca  et  viii  uiilani  et  viii  boidarii
cum  V  carucis  et  ii  serui.'


SECTION IV

LAND  AND  PEOPLE : GENERAL  SURVEY

At  the  close  of  our  R£S}2[^g^'S^u^y  ^^  social  institutions  Scope  of
we  may  attempt  to  gathertnctnreads  of  our  investigation  J*^'*^
and  to  present  a  synthetic  view  of  the  subject.  Such
a  view  must  strive  to  bring  clearness  and  co-ordination  into
a  discussion  which  in  its  details  has  constantly  had  to  reckon
with  obscurities,  contradictions,  and  gaps.  A  reader  who
has  had  the  patience  to  follow  the  ailment  of  the  book
will  know  in  what  respects  the  rough-and-ready  dogmatism
of  such  a  general  survey  has  to  be  supplemented  by  reser-
vations and  exceptions.  But  at  this  last  stage  it  is  no  use
encumbering  a  summary  with  them.  We  must  try  not  to
describe  every  single  institution,  but  to  sketch  their  mutual
relations  and  organic  interdependence.

We  have  to  start  from  the  fact  that  the  social  organization
of  the  eleventh  century  does  not  fit  into  one  system,  but
presents  a  rather  incoherent  combination  of  two — of  the
feudal  system  and  of  another  which,  for  want  of  a  better
word,  we  may  call  the  territorial.  The  latter  proceeds
from  an  earlier  tribal  arrangement ;  but  we  need  not  concern  .
ourselves  much  now  with  these  beginnings,  which  fall  into  f
earlier  ages  and  ought  to  be  studied  rather  in  connexion
with  the  general  history  of  tribal  Europe  than  with  the
history  of  the  Commonwealth  of  England.

The  feudal  system  is  predominant  on  the  surface. Its  Feudal
nu)st  striking  expression  is  the  political  and  economic  sway  ^^"^•^'^P'
of  a  class  whose  social  relations  are  adjusted  on  the  baaia
of  contract :  a  contract  of  personal  service  resulting  in •
military,  clerical,  or  economic  obUgations. In  the  localities
the  mainstay  of  the  system  is  the  Manor. Domesday  Book


47^  LAND  AND  PEOPLE  [ESSAY  ll

shows  this  institution  in  full  vigour,  although  not  yet  in
the  completeness  and  legal  precision  of  a  later  period.
The  principal  element  of  an  eleventh-century  manor  is  the
lord,  the  representative  of  feudal  aristocracy  in  the  place.
,  The  manor  appears  in  one  sense  as  the  district  surrounding
:  •  the  lord's  hall.  From  another  point  of  view  it  may  be  said
that  the  manor  is  a  mansion  and  district  in  which  there  lives
a  lord,  a  personal  follower  and  officer  of  the  King.  Or^
again^  it  may  be  termed  an  estate  serving  aa  ^  nijateri^l
basis  to  local  political  authority.  These  self-evident  pro-
positions account  for  many  particulars  in  the  evidence,  and
dispose  of  some  interpretations  which  might  otherwise  have
suggested  themselves.  Neither  the  fiscal  nor  the  purely
economic  explanation  of  the  manor  turns  out  to  be  suffi-
cient :  the  lord  is  not  primarily  a  person  responsible  for
taxes,  nor  merely  a  landowner :  he  is  a  man  in  authority
over  a  district  connected  with  his  estate,  and  this  authority
he  wields  in  consequence  of  a  contract  of  feudal  service.
Manorial  lordship  was  in  full  growth  in  Anglo-Saxon  times,  -'
but  the  rights  derived  from  it  were  very  much  subdivided
and  shifting.  Besides,  manorial  authority  had  not  yet
succeeded  in  disentangling  itself  from  the  influence  of  terri-
torial institutions.  It  is  manifest  to  what  extent  the
Norman  Conquest  and  the  formation  of  Common  Law
contributed  to  consolidate  manorial  oi^^izations  and  to
make  them  prevalent.
Free  Under  the  sway  of  the  lord  two  classes  of  men  appear

within  the  manor :  free  tenants  and  subject  rustics — ^villains,
bordarii^  &c.  The  presence  of  both  these  elements  is  usuali
but  not  necessary.  In  a  great  many  cases  the  rustics
appear  alone  on  the  spot  and,  as  a  matter  of  fact  though  not
of  principle,  their  existence  in  the  manor  is  of  vital  impor-
tance, as  the  whole  structure  is  mainly  supported  by  their
work  and  dues.  But  a  manor  may  consist  oC.iirwmen
only,  even  in  the  time  of  King  Ayilliam^  or  of  free  tenants
in  such  majority  that  the  presence  of  a  few  ruaUfi9!  did  not
alter  its  character.^ Such  cases  are  rare,  but  their  value  is

^  See  above,  pp.  321  ff.,  362  ff.,  396  flf.,  421  f.


SECT.  IV]  GENERAL  SURVEY  473


considerable,  because  they  show  that  the  servile  status
of  the  tenantry  was  not  of  the  essence  of  the  institution.
An  aristocratic  lord  may  be  placed  over  freeholders  as  well
as  over  villains,  and  it  does  not  require  a  very  keen  sight
to  notice  that  such  lordships  were  more  common  in  Saxon
times  than  after  the  Conquest^

Another characteristic trait of the free tenants of
Domesday  Book  is  that  a  large  number  of  them  are,  as \
it  were,  attached  to  the  manors  by  a  rather  slight  tie : f
many  have  been  added  or  accommodated  to  their  manors
in  consequence  of  the  Conquest. This  refers  us  to  a  time
when  they  stood  entirely  outside,  and  lived  their  life  as  '^
members  of  the  territorial and not  of  the  feudal  sub-
divisions.

In  the  theory  of  Common  Law,  freeholders  were  tenants
by  free  contract  and  therefore  certain  of  their  tenure.
This  is  demonstrably  a  later  legal  fiction  framed  to  meet
a  situation  when  legal  protection  in  the  King's  Courts  was
refused  to  villains  in  their  dealings  with  their  lords.  The
theory  would  not  fit  even  the  state  of  things  described
in  the  Domesday  Survey :  the  g^eat  majority  of  libtri
homines  and  socmen  mentioned  in  that  record  derive  their
position  from  recognized  social  status,  and  not  from  agree-
ment or  grant.  And  if  we  look  beyond  Domesday  we
fmd  various  social  strata  of  ceorls  and  free  Scandinavians
as  predecessors  of  later  free  tenants  and  socmen.  Their
condition  had  nothing  to  do  with  contract,  but  was  based
on  free  ownership  under  the  King  or  under  the  authority
of  magnates  who  had  received  special  powers  from  the
Kin^r.

1  hcse  considerations  throw  light  not  only  on  the  history  Villains.
of  freeholders,  but,  indirectly,  on  that  of  the  largest  class
of  the  population—  the  villains  and  their  satellites,  the
bordarii  and  cottagers.  This  wide  group  appears  unified  /
ill  feudal  practice  by  agricultural  service  and  the  denial  of
protection  in  the  Royal  Courts  as  r^ards  the  lord.  The
uncertainty  of  tenure  and  service  is  the  legal  result  of  the

'  See  above,  pp.  345  ff.,  426  f.


474  LAND  AND PEOPLE  [ESSAY  n

latter  feature.  But  what  appears  unified  and  subjected  to
similar  rules  in  Common  Law  is  seen  to  be  worked  out  of
different  elements  by  the  action  of  convergent  forces.
= :  From  beneath  comes  the  gradual  transformation  of  slaveiy
- '  into  serfdom,  partial  emancipation  coupled  with  a  position
as  subject  cultivators  which  enabled  the  serfs  to  cLaim  for
their  own  use  a  considerable  part  of  their  time  and  of  the
products  of  their  labour,  as  well  as  the  plot  on  which  they
had  been  settled.  Their  tenure  was  precarious  in  law,  but
well  established  in  custom,  and  in  the  long  run  custom
cannot  fail  to  produce  legal  results.  From  above  theie
goes  on  the  d^radation  of  numerous  free-bom  ceoris^
not  only  in  consequence  of  violence,  encroachment,  and
oppressive  patronage,  but  as  a  result  of  slow  but  sure  social
processes — subdivision  of  property,  loans,  the  economic
attraction  of  better-situated  neighboura  Material  helpless-
ness and  agricultural  dependence  had  set  in  for  many  of
them  long  before  the  Norman  lawyers  devised  and  carried
out  the  doctrine  that  the  King  has  no  need  to  interfere  in
the  relations  between  a  manorial  lord  and  his  villains.  I
will  not  repeat  here  what  I  have  tried  to  show  in  another
book,  namely,  that  it  was  not  without  hesitation  and  con-
tradictions that  this  denial  of  jurisdiction  was  applied  in
Common  Law.  It  may  be  sufficient  to  mention  that  the
most  important  exception  preserved  in  later  law — the
Ancient  Demesne  condition — turns  out  to  have  roots  ex-
tending far  into  Anglo-Saxon  antiquity.  It  is  a  narrowed
and  technically  circumscribed  application  of  the  general
rule  that  Royal  grants  of  territory  ought  not  to  have  as
a  result  a  change  in  the  condition  of  the  King's  free  subjects.
In  this  broad  formulation  the  rule  was  equitable^  but
inefficient :  in  the  narrower  form  imparted  to  it  by  feudal
lawyers  it  was  consistently  enforced.
Types  of  Taking  the  manor  as  a  unit,  and  comparing  its  actual
manors,  manifestations  in  the  feudal  age  with  those  marked
T.  R.  W.  and  T.  R.  E.  in  Domesday  Book,  we  are  struck  by
their  disparity.  By  the  side  of  very  small  estates  with  a  few
cultivators  are  to  be  seen  large  self-governing  townships


SECT.  IV]  GENERAL  SURVEY  475

under  administrative  patronage ;  by  the  side  of  jurisdictional
franchises,  fairly  developed  capitalistic  undertakings.  The
most  common  type  presents,  undoubtedly,  a  combination
between  a  home-farm  of  moderate  size  and  a  circle  of  rustic
tenures  supporting  it  by  service  and  rents.  But  in  order  to
understand  the  growth  even  of  this  usual  type  one  has  to
attend  to  the  other  varieties  as  well :  they  show  clearly
what  distinct  elements  went  to  the  composition  of  the
manorial  groups.  V^

Beneath  the  individualistic  network  of  feudal  rights  a  The  town-
system  of  territorial  organization  is  clearly  discernible. It ^^'
is  of  more  ancient  date  than  the  feudal  arrangements,  and
it  has  by  no  means  lost  its  vitality  and  importance  even  in
the  feudal  age. We  need  not  trace  its  beginnings  in  the
settlements of various tribes on English  soil. It  is
sufficient  for  our  purpose  to  note  that the  divisions  of  m
shires, hundreds, and wapentakes stretch all over the/i
kingdom  as  a  complete  organization  for  the  management  fv
of  military,  fiscal,  and  judicial  afTairs. The  primary  cell  inj  1
this  organization  is  not  the  manpr  but  the  township :  it  isl
called  upon  to  perform  various  administrative  duties — to
deliver  evidence  at  inquests,  to  catch  and  watch  thieves,  to
mend  roads,  to  contribute  in  keeping  up  bridges  and  walls,
to  assess  and  levy  taxes,  to  witness  transactions,  &c. In
some  cases  townships  had  to  be  constituted  artificially  to :
meet  these  divers  administrative  requirements,  but  there
can  be  no  doubt  that  the  main  stock  of  English  town-
ships  was of natural growth and not constituted at
pleasure  by  higher  authority.

Nor  did  they  exist  mainly  for  the  sake  of  performing  \
judicial  and  administrative  service  to  the  King  :  their  every-
day life  and  most  vital  interest  lay  in  the  management  of
their  own  affairs.  Their  yearly  routine  of  such  affairs  was
a  very  full  and  complicated  one,  especially  in  districts  where
champion-farming  prevailed.  Even  in  regions  with  scattered
settlements  the  management  of  pasture  and  wood  recalled
to  the  mind  of  the  individual  farmers  that  neither  they  nor
their  lords  were  quite  free  to  do  what  they  liked  with  a


476


LAND  AND  PEOPLE


[essay  II


^


Peculiari-
ties of
English
village
com-
munity.


-/


considerable  part  of  the  land  used  by  them.  In  open-
field  country  the  restrictive  and  regulating  influence  of
the  township  extended  to  all  the  principal  operations  of
.husbandry — to  the  laying  out  and  apportioning  of  the
arable^  to  the  rotation  of  crops,  the  rq^ulation  of  seasons,
the  order  of  ploughing,  sowing,  hay-harvest  and  corn-
harvest,  to  the  division  and  allotment  of  meadows,  the
erection  and  removal  of  fences,  the  framing  and  keepii^
up  of  numberless  rules  in  regard  to  agrarian  limits  and
strips,  to  roads  and  right  of  way,  to  the  use  of  cattle  on
the  pastures,  to  stinting  the  commons  in  various  directions,
to  responsibility  for  trespassing,  &c  This  very  com-
plicated and  very  restrictive  system  was  spread  all  over
England  as  well  as  in  other  countries  of  Western  Europe,
and  its  roots  are  certainly  to  be  sought  not  in  individualistic,
but  in  communalistic  notions,  which  even  the  individualistic
law  of  feudalism  was  powerless  to  remove.  Its  history
goes  right  back  to  the  tribal  period,  which  provides  the
best  explanation  for  this  communalistic  side  of  rural  life  in
the  subjection  of  the  individual  to  tribal  rules  and  kinship
organizations.

It  is  not  enough,  however,  to  note  the  strong  infusion
of  communalistic  elements  in  English  township  life.
There  are  several  features  which  give  to  the  village
community  a  very  peculiar  stamp,  and  explain  why  it
could  combine  with  institutions  based  seemingly  on  an
entirely  different  conception  of  right  The  English  rural
community,  as  well  as  the  German  and  Scaridhiavian,
never  aimed  at  a  complete  subjection  of  the  indiyiduals  '
constituting  the  union  to  the  rule  of  this  union,  or  at
the  exclusion  of  all  private  interests.  On  the  contrary,
individuals  were  left  very  free  to  do  what  they  liked  wii^^
their  labour  and  to  start  on  private  enterprises.  They
could  freely  leave  the  unions  if  they  wanted  tOj...GOuld  use
their  private  earnings  in  the  village  if  they  liked,  and  could
even  start  on  private  cultivation  if  there  was,  room  and
they  had  the  means.  Whatever  obstacles  may  have  existed
in  all  these  respects  came  largely  from  feudal  authority


SECT.  IV]  GENERAL  SURVEY  477

and  not  from  the  community  itself,  andjsxfia.tbeJeudal
lord  mostly  contented  himself  with  claiming  dues  and.;6im
in  such  cases,  without  putting  insurmountable  hindrances
in  the  way.  There  is  no  trace  of, periodical  re-divisiQns.  ^
of  the  arable,  although  there  is  distinct  evidenoe  that
arable  could  be  re-alloted  according  to  the  original
shares  on  exceptional  occasions,  and  meadows  are  some-
times subjected  to  re-partition  by  lot  even  to  the  present
day.  Although  in  this  way  there  was  a  great  scope  for
the  development  of  individual  fortunes,  and  the  Germanic
communities  never  tackled  the  problem  of  regulating  the
interdependence  between  population  and  soil,  they  certainly
faced  the  other  problem  of  constituting  a  union  of
economically  efficient  shares  to  which  the  rights  and
uses  of  rural  occupation  should  be  apportioned.  The
champion  husbandry  of  England,  Germany,  Denmark,
and  Sweden  cannot  be  thought  of  without  a  system  of
graduated  holdings  to  support  and  direct  it.  The  hides,
yard-gangs,  oxgangs,  b61s,  ottings,  hufen,  are  different
forms  of  one  and  the  same  main  institution — the  normal
holdings  sufficient  for  the  support  of  peasant  families  on^
different  rungs  of  the  social  ladder  of  a  village.  To
these  normal  tenements  rights  and  claims  are  apportioned
according  to  certain  scales.

As soon as wc reach a standpoint from which all
such  facts become  connected  and  related  to  each  other,
it  becomes  evident  that  the  village  community  in  ques-b^
tion  is  neither  free  nor  servile  in  its  essence. Both  thcf
open-field  system  and  the  township  combine  equally  wclr
with free and servile  institutions: they  are  economic.1
and  social  arrangements  suggested  by  the  nature  of  thc»
agricultural problems  and  the  state  of  culture,  but  theyf
cannot be derived exclusively  from one  or  the other/
stratum  of  society.

One  more  observation  has  to  be  made  in  connexion
with  the  township  and  the  open-field  system  in  the
Anglo-Danish  regions  of  England.  These  provinces  are
conspicuous  by  the  large  number  of  small  freemen* At


478  LAND AND  PEOPLE  [ESSAY  ll

the  same  time  there  are  no  traces  of  clan  or  kinship*
settlements.  The  members  of  the  townships  appear  as  j
neighbours,  not  as  relations.  Altogether,  it  seems  dear
that  tribal  ties  did  not  play  an  important  part  in  those
districts  of  England  conquered  and  re-colonized  by  bands
of  warriors  organized  as  military  hosts  and  voluntary  guild
associations.  This  is  not  to  be  wondered  at  in  view  of  the
late  period  when  the  Scandinavian  invasions  took  place,
and  their  character  as  the  conquests  of  pirates.  Never-
theless, the  characteristic  features  of  township  organization
are  not  less  noticeable  in  Lincolnshire  or  Leicestershire
than  they  are  in  Sussex  or  Berkshire,  in  Jutland  or  in
Skone.  Evidently,  apart  from  the  fact  that  the  ^^kings
found  an  English  rural  organization  in  full  working  order,
we  have  to  reckon  with  general  conceptions  in  their  midst
very  similar  to  those  of  the  conquered  English.  In  fact,
it  is  from  half-Danish  provinces  like  Northamptonshire,
Norfolk,  and  Lincolnshire,  that  some  of  our  best  evidence
in  regard  to  the  open-field  system  and  the  apportionment  of
rights  to  shares  or  holdings  does  come.  The  notices  as
to  tofts,  to  one-man  lands,  the  carucates  as  ten-man  lands,
the  dales  and  stikkas  of  the  intermixed  arable,  come  ^m
this  region.  Thus  the  differences  between  English  and
Scandinavian  arrangements  turn  out  to  be  differences  in
degree  and  period,  not  in  the  essence  of  institutions.
csuucIl  ^f  ^  '^y  stress  on  these  points,  I  do  not  wish  to  imply

I in  the  least  that  private  property  and  private  estates  did
not exist  and  did not play  a  very  important  part  in
social evolution. The Domesday  Survey  and Anglo-
\ Saxon  charters  are  full  of  evidence  concerning  separate
estates,  acquired  and  exploited  for  private  use;  and  free
from  the  manifold  restrictions  imposed  by  village  com-
munities on  their  members. Nor  was  a- class  of  unfree
labourers  wanting  to  supply  the  work  necessary  for  such
1  , private  estates. But  neither  the  private  est^tff  "Q**  ^Ht
J I  ; servile class  can be consiHered as  cxclusiigplY  or  even
I  ; chiefly  characteristic  of  early  English  lan^^tenure. The
I \ problem of  the  social origins of England cannot be


\


SECT.  IV]  GENERAL  SURVEY  479

solved  unless  we  take  into  account  both  currents  of
development — that  proceeding  from  the  private  estate
with  its  unfree  labourers  and  that  connected  with  the
township,  as  a  union  of  peasant  shareholders  Only  by
studying  both  elements  can  we  obtain  results  which  will
enable  us  to  bring  the  social  evolution  of  England  into
harmony  with  that  of  the  Romanized  West  of  Europe  ||
on  the  one  ~Band,  and  with  Germanic  and  iScajidinavian  wr
culture  on  the  othei;.  "


f


k*«.-^<


APPENDIX I

MIDDLESEX  HUNDRED  ROLL, 7  Edward  I  (Pubuc

Record  Office).

M.  I.  Inquisitiones  facte  per  preceptum  domini  Regis  coram  Rogero

Middlesex.  ^^  Katheworthe,  Radulfo  de  Septem  Fontibus  et  WilMmo  de
Hurley,  specialiter  assignatis  de  habendbus  zz  libratas  terre  vcl  mmm
feodum  militis  integrum  sicut  dominus  rex  precepit,  per  hnndredos
subsequentes,  videlicet,  Edelmeton,  Elethorn,  Speletbom,  GsoIiKS-
ton,  Istelworth,  et  Gor  Hundred,  apud  Cmcem  L^idis  die
sabbati  proximo  post  festum  Sancti  Bartholomei  anno  regni  regis
Edwardi  vii.

Edel-  luratores  dicunt  per  sacramentum  suum  quod  Philippus  Culling

meton.  habet  xx  libratas  terre  in  totenham  et  est  districtns  similitefp  et
Henricus  de  Frowik  qui  habet  terram  in  Sout  Minimis  habet
respectum  per  breve  habet  respectum  per  breve  {sic),

Spelethorn.  luratores  dicunt  quod  Michael  de  >^^tonia  habet  xz  libratas
terre  in  Catenham  que  est  in  Soureye  et  in  Litlintone  que  est  in
Middlesex.  lohannes  de  Hanneman  tenet  in  Sanwelle  xz  libiatas
terre  et  reddit  inde  x  marcas  Alano  de  Hanneman  patri  suo  ad
vitam  ipsius  Alani.  Inquisitio  facta  per  breve  dicit  quod  non
habet  xx  libratas  terre.

Elethorn.  luratores  dicunt  quod  Willelmus  de  Harpedene  tenet  xx  libiatas
terre  in  villa  de  Herdinton  in  libertate  honoris  de  WalingefonL
Inquisitio  facta  per  breve  dicit  quod  non  habet  xz  libratas  terre.

Istelworth. luratores  dicunt  nichil  sciunt.

Gor  luratores  dicunt  quod  Ricardus  de  Hedersete  habet  in  Harwe

Ilundred.  ^^  solidatas  terre  et  credunt  quod  habet  xx  libratas  terre  in  viDa  dc
Hedersete  in  comitatu  Norfolch.

Item  dicunt  quod  Adam  de  Stratton  tenet  xx  libratas  terre  in
villa  de  Eggeswere  et  alibi  in  diversis  comitatibus,  habet  respectum
per  breve.

Item  dicunt  quod  Thomas  de  Kasing  habet  unam  carncatam
terre  in  Hendene  et  alibi  usque  ad  xx  libratas  ut  credunt

Osnlues* luratores  dicunt  quod  Henricus  le  Waleys  habet  zz  libratas  terre

ton.  jj^  Finchelee  et  alibi.


APPENDIX  I  481

Item  dicunt  quod  Quintinus  de  Neuueport  habet  c  solidatas
terre  in  comitatu  Middlesex  et  alibi  usque  ad  xx  libratas  terre  ut
credunt.

Item  dicunt  quod  Radulfus  Huscrad  habet  in  Stebenhee  xvi
marcas  terre  et  in  Somersete  usque  ad  xx  libratas  ut  credunt.

luratores  dicunt  quod  Ricardus  de  Wyndessore,  dominus  de  Libertas
Stanewell,  qui  nuper  fuit  infra  etatem  et  in  custodia  domini  regis  f^^^xail
habet  viginti  libratas  terre  in  Stanewell  et  Hakebum  et  non  est
miles.  Dicunt  de  Michaele  de  Wyntonia  sicut  illi  de  hundredo  de
Speleihom.  Dicunt  de  lohanne  de  Haywan  sicut  illi  ut  supra  in
eodem  hundredo.  Preceptum  fuit  vicecomiti  quod  distringat
Philippum  Culling  de  Cesterhunte,  Henricum  de  Frowik,
Michaelom  de  Wyntonia,  Willelmum  de  Harpedene,  Adam  de
Stratton,  Quintinum  de  Neuport,  Radulfum  Huscarle,  Ricardum
de  Wyndesore  per  omnes  terras  et  catalla  sua  ad  anna  militaria
sine  dilatione  suscipienda  nisi  citra  festum  Sancti  Michaelis  proximo
futurum  respectum  sibi  a  domino  rege  inde  perquirere  poterunt,
vel  quod  dominus  rex  aliud  inde  fieri  mandaverit,  ita  quod  bonam
et  sufficicntem  securitatem  inde  ab  eisdem  recipiat,  etc.

[Tom.]  (jiU^g.

ham  et

Robertus  de  Comhill  habet  in  eadem  villa  ..  . [Tora]  v^U^.

Dictum  manerium  seisiatum  fuit  per  Elyam  de  Fingrith  ad  opus  Kensintoii.
domini  \V.  la  Susch  primo,  et  secundo  idem  manerium  seisiatum
fuit  ad  opus  domini  W.  de  Breus  per  Hugonem  pistorem.  Et  est
ibi  unum  mesuagium  cum  curtilagio.  Valet  per  annum  xiid.
¥a  unum  columbarium  quod  valet  per  annum  iiis.  Et  una  vinea
c}ue  valet  per  annum  xiid.  Et  unum  molendinum  quod  valet
per  annum  xx  s.  Ibidem  sunt  DC  et  xxix  acre  terre  arabilis  et
valcnt  ]>er  annum  vii  lib.  xviis.  iiid.,  scilicet  quelibet  acra  iiid.
Kt  xii  acre  prati  et  valent  per  annum  xxxvis.  Et  iiii*'  acre
pasture  et  valent  per  annum  xx  s.  Et  c  acre  bosci  unde  sub-
boscuin  et  pasiura  valent  per  annum  vis.  viiid.  Ibidem  sunt
villani  qui  tenent  xvi  virgatas  et  dimidiam  terre  qui  debent  a  festo
Sancti  Petri  ad  Vincula  usque  ad  festum  Sancti  Michaelis  mcccc
ct  lii  opcrationes  et  valent  Ixs.  vid.,  scilicet  quodlibet  opus
ol>olum.  Kt  a  gula  Augusii  usque  ad  festum  Sancti  Michaelis  d  et
xxviii  opcraciones  et  valent  xxziiis.,  scilicet  quodlibet  opus  iii
(}uadrantos.  Kt  xvi  agni  et  dimidius  de  redditu  et  valent  xvis.  ixd.  ob.
Va  xxxii  galline  et  valent  lis.  ixd. Et  cccc  et  xv  oves  et  valent  xvid.


482  APPENDIX  I

quad. Summa  redditus  termini  Sancti  Michaelis  iiiilL  vis.  viid.
iii  quad. £t  termini  Natalis  Domini  vid. £t  tennini  Fucbe
Ixixs.  yiiid.  iii  quad. £t  termini  Sancti  lohannis  vid. Inde
debentur  iis. £t  ibidem  debent  dicti  consaetudinarii  coocxz  acns
et  iii  rode  arare  per  annum,  et  valent  c  et  vs.  iid.  quad.,  sdliceC
quelibet  acra  iiid. £t  ibidem  sunt  ii  cotarii  qui  debent  per  annum
v»  et  iiii  operaciones  et  valent  iiiis.  iiiid. £t  memorandum  quod
redditus  Sancti  Michaelis  est  in  manibus  tenentium.
Summa  totalis  profectus  xzx  li.  ziiii  s.  iii  d.  ob.
Twiford. In  eadem  villa  tenet  dominus  Franco  de  Boun  per  heredem  qui
in  custodia  eius  est  quia  infra  etatem  unam  camcatam  tene  com
pertinentiis  valoris  et  rationabilis  eztente  usque  ad  v  maicas  et
dimidiam  tam  in  terra  arabili  quam  in  pratis,  homagiis  et  servitiis,
quam  in  cunctis  rebus. Istud  tenementum  aaiwtnm  fint  per  ser-
vientes  domini  Robert!  de  Bruis  primo,  postea  per  servientes
domini  Willelmi  de  Breus  et  tercio  per  servientes  domini  EdwardL
Summa  v  marce  et  dim.
Ghybum. Istud  manerium  seisitum  fuit  primo  per  £l7am  de  Fingrith  ad
opus  domini  W.  la  Susch  et  secundo  ad  opus  domini  W.  de  Breus
per  Hugonem  pistorem. Redditus  de  termino  Sancti  Michadis
viis.  ixd. £t  de terminis  Natalis,  Pasche  et  Sancti  lohannis
xxviiis.  vd.  quad,  videlicet  ad  quemlibet  terminum  izs.  vd.  ob.
quad. Sunt  ibi  ix  tenentes. Ibidem  est  unum  mesuaginm  cum
curtilagio  et  valet  per  annum  vid. Item  sunt  ibi  viiin  acre  terre
arabilis  pretium  acre  iiid. Item  vi  acre  prati  pretium  acre  vid.  Item
vn  et  XV  acre pasture  pretium  acre iiid. £t Abbatissa  de
Barking  debet  habere  de  dicto  manerio  ad  festum  Sancti  Mirby*^!'*
per  annum  xxxs. Ibidem  sunt  consuetudinarii  qui  debent  a  festo
Sancti  Michaelis  usque  gulam  Augusti  cc  et  li  operationes  et  valent  xs.
vd.  ob.  pretium  operationis  ob. £t  a  gula  Augusti  usque  ad  festum
Sancti  Michaelis  Ivi  operationes  et  valent  iiis.  vid.  pretium  operas
. tionis  iii  quad. £t  sciendum  quod  redditus  Sancti  Michaelis  est  in
manibus  tenentium.

Summa  totius  valoris  manerii  de  Tyburn  iiil.  ziiis.  iiiid.  ob.  quad.
£t  memorandum  quod  Thomas  de  Basing  tenet  in  Kensinton
de  comite  Oxon'  Ixx  acras  terre  arabilis  que  pertinent  ad  manerium
de  Kingesholt  pretium  acre  iiid.  Inde  dominis  feodi  debentur
xxiis.  viiid.  per  annum.  £t  sic  est  extenta  nimis  cara  pro  firms
quam  debet  per  annum.

In  villa  de  Willesdon  Galfridus  Godard  tenet  cvi  acras  tene  et


APPENDIX  I  483

dimidiam  reddendo  inde  per  annum  dominis  feodi  xxvis.  vd.  ob.
£t  sic  est  extenta  satis  cara. £t  fuit  seisiata  primo  per  dominum .
Galfridum  le  Rus  et  postea  per  quendam  clericum  de familia
domini  Edwardi.

Thomas  Vrel  tenet  iiii"  v  acras  terre  in  socna  Sancti  Egidii  Sokna
prctium  acre viiid. Suroma  Wis.  viiid. De  redditu 1x8.  *d  ^^| *
annum  ad  iiii  terminos. Item  unum  columbarium  extentum  pro  Egidii
xiid. Item  gardinum  pro  xiid. Item  dimidia  acra  prati  precii  vid.  ^I^on
Item  memorandum  quod  una  marca  et  xxd.  de  termino  S.  Michaelis
sunt in  manibus  tenentium. £t  dictum  tenementum  defenditur
pro  dimidio  feodo  unius  militis. £t  debet  inde Castro  Baynard
pro  guarda  per  annum  iis. £t  sic  est  summa  totius  extente  per
annum  cxviis.  iid. Ista  terra  fuit  seisiata  per  dpminum  Hugonem
dc  Trubleville  nomine  domini  £dwardi.

Summa  totius  profectus  cxviis.  iid.

In  cadem  parochia  lohannes  Derkin  tenet  xl  acras  pretium  acre
viiid.  Summa  xxvis.  viiid.  Item  unum  mesuagium  cum  gardino
extentum  pro  xvii  s.  Inde  debet  dominis  feodi  xxxiiiis.  per  annimi.
£t  sic  est  extenta  totius  valoris  ixs.  viiid.  £t  fuit  seisiatum
per  dominum  Egidium  de  Wodeham  nomine  domini  £dwardL

Summa  totius  profectus  ixs.  viiid.

Item  in  manerio  de  Kingesholt  Thomas  de  Basinges  qui  infra
eiatem  est  tenet  xii^^  acras  terre.  £t  debentur  dominis  feodi  per
annum  de  codcm  manerio  xxxiiiis.  vd.  £t  sic  est  extenta  nimis
cara. Et  seisiatum  fuit  per  dominum  Robertum  de  Bruis  luniorem.

In  dicta  parochia  predictus  Thomas  de  Basinges  infra  etatemsancti
tenet  \\i^^  acras  terre  pretium  acre  viiid.  Summa  viiili,  De  red-  P»ncratii.
ditu  viii.  iiiid.  per  annum  ad  iiii  terminos.  £t  est  smoma
redditus  de  termino  S.  Michaelis  iis.  id.  et  est  in  manu  tenentium.
Ki  septem  acre  prati  pretium  acre  xviiid.  £t  est  summa  xs.
vid.  Kt  debet  inde  dominis  feodi cxixs.  viiid.  ob.  Margin:  Item
unum  columbarium  preiii  iiis.  Item  unum  molendinum  ventricium
prclii  XX  s.

Ki  memorandum  quod  quidam  nomine  WiUelmus  qui  stat  cum
domino  Thorn  a  de  Clare  venit  ibidem  ad  salvandum  onmia  tene-
nienu  ct  catalla  eiusdem  manerii  ex  parte  dicti  domini  Thome  de
Clare  domini  Rogeri  de  Leucanor  ad  opus  domini  comitis  Gloucestrie.

In  radcm  villa  dictus  Thomas  tenet  xii^  acras  terre  pretium  acre  Fincheleg.
iiiid. Sunnna  iiiil. Et  de  redditu  assiso  xxiiiis.  iiid.  ob.  ad  iiii
urminos. Kt  est  summa  termini  S.  Michaelis  vis.  iiiob.  et  est

li  2


484  APPENDIX I

in  manu  tenentium.  Summa  ciius.  iiid.  ob.  .  Inde  debentnr  dominis
feodi  zliiiis.  id.  ob. £t  sic  est  summa  totius  profectus  Iz  s.  iid.

£t  memorandum  quod  seisina  dicte  teire  fSicta  Aut  per  dominum
Willelmum  servientem  domini  Thome  de  Clare  vel  per  dominum
Rogerum  de  Leucanor  ad  salvo  custodiendum  ad  opus  comids
Gloucestrle.
Shoredich.  In  eadem  villa  tenet  Henricus  de  Coventre  dvis  Londonie  unam
grangiam  et  z  acras  terre  et  dimidiam  de  terra  arabili  pretiiim  aae
per  annum  zviiid.  Summa  zvs.  viiid.  De  redditu  assise  viiis.  zd.
Ezinde  debentur  dominis  feodi  per  annum  ziis.  Item  Waltefus
Auberkin  civis  Londonie  tenet  ibidem  quoddam  mesuagium  cum
gardino  etxv  acras  terre  arabilis  et  dimidiam  computato  ipso  mesuagio
cum  gardino  infra  dictas  zv  acras  et  dimidiam  prelium  acre  zviiid.
Summa  xxxiiis.  De  redditu  assiso  viiis.  viiid.  Et  dictum  tene-
mentum  solvit  per  annum  capitalibus  dominis  feodi  xviis.  Red-
ditus  S.  Michaelis  est  in  manu  tenentium.  Ista  tenementa  seisiata
fuerunt  per  dominum  Egidium  de  Wodeham  ad  opus  domini
Edwardi.

Summa  totalis  profectus  xxixs.

Nomina  collectorum  reddit'  termini  S.  Michaelis  Willdmus  de
Stratford  clericus  et  lohannes  Punchard.

APPENDIX  II

(P.R.O.)  CHANCERY  MISCELLANEA, Biwdle  i.  Na  1.

Nomina  eorum  qui  tenent  xv  libratas  terre  in  comitatu  Notting-
ham et  Derby,  et  non  sunt  milites.

Herlianus  de  Herdebi  habet  xv  libratas  terre  in  comitatu  Not-
tingham servitio  militare.

'Rogerus  dc  Vans  eodem  modo  tenet  zv  libratas.  lohannes  filius
Aluredi  de  Sulem  eodem  modo  tenet  xx  libratas  terre  et  non  est  miks.

lohannes  de  Vilers  eodem  modo  tenet  xz  libratas  terre  et  non
est  miles.
Bingham. Radulfus  de  Coliston  Basset  eodem  modo  tenet  zv  libratas  tene.

Robertus  de  Wythefordhd  eodem  modo  tenet  zv  libcatas  tene.

Thomas  Malet  eodem  modo  tenet  zv  libratas  terre.  lohannes
Barri  eodem  modo  tenet  zz  libratas  terre.  Henricus  de  Herite  tenet
xzx  libratas  terre  et  amplius  et  non  est  miles.

Willelmus  de  Tuke  eodem  modo  tenet  zv  libratas  teire  et  non
est  miles.


APPENDIX  II  485

Robertus  de  Tregoz  tenet  in  comitatu  Nottingham  et  alibi  xx
libratas  terre  et  non  est  miles.

Ricardus  de  Marcham  eodem  modo  tenet  xv  libratas  terre.

Stephanus  Mallonel  in  comitatu  Nottingham  et  Ebor.  xv  libratas
terre  et  eodem  modo.

Robertus  de  Hersi  eodem  modo  tenet  xv  libratas  terre.

Thomas  de  Harton  tenet  x  libratas  terre  per  servitium  militare
et  c  solidatas  per  liberum  sokagium.

Robertus  de  Vehpunt  tenet  in  comitatu  Nottingham  x  libratas
terre  et  alibi  c  libratas  terre  et  amplius.

APPENDIX III

EXTENTA  TERRARUM  HONORIS  DE  RICHMOND.

P.R.O.  EXCHEQUER;  TREASURY  OF  RECEIPT;

MISCELLANEOUS  BOOKS,  69.

Edwardus  Dei  gratia  Rex  Anglie  Dominus  Hibemie  et  Dux  FoL  5
Aquitanie  dilectis  et  fidelibus  suis  Thome  de  Normanvill  et  lohanni
de  Crokeslee  salutem.  Quia  quedam  feoda  de  honore  Richemund
que  fuerunt  Petri  de  Sabaudia  die  quo  obiit  in  comitatibus
Lincoln  et  Nottingham  nondum  per  vos  extensa  sunt,  ut  accepimus,
licet  vobis  ea  mandaverimus  extendere,  assignavimus  vos  ad  omnia
feoda  ilia  in  comitatibus  predictis  fideliter  extendenda.  Et  ideo
vobis  mandamus  quod  ad  certos  dies  et  loca  quos  ad  hoc  provideritis
omnia  feoda  predicta  fideliter  extendatis,  quantum  scilicet  valeant
per  annum  in  omnibus  exitibus  et  qualiter  et  quo  modo  et  extentam
illam  fideliter  et  aperte  factam  nobis  sub  sigillis  vestris,  et  sigillis
eorum  per  quos  facta  fuerit  sine  dilatione  mittatis  et  hoc  breve.
Mandavimus  enim  vicecomitibus  comitatuum  predictorum  quod
ad  certos  dies  et  loca  que  eis  scire  facietis  venire  faciant  coram  vobis
tot  et  tales  probos  et  legales  homines  de  ballivis  suis  per  quos  rei
Veritas  in  promissis  melius  sciri  poterit  et  inquirer!.  In  cuius  rei
testimonium  has  litteras  nostras  fieri  fecimus  patentes.  Teste  me
ipso  apud  Turri  Londonie  x  die  Decembris  anno  regni  nostri  nono.

[Noiiingham^^  Extenta  facta  die  S.  Edwardi  Regis  apud  Neu-
werk  anno  regni  regis  Edwardi  nono  coram  Thoma  de  Norman-
vill et  lohanne  de  Crokesle  ad  hoc  assignatis  per  preceptum
domini  regis  de  feodis  militis  que  de  domino  Petro  de  Sabaudia
tenebantur  die  quo  obiit  in  comitatu  Notingham  spectantibus
ad honorem Richmond  per  sacramenlum  Galfridi  de  Gorham


486  APPENDIX III

in  Flintham,  etc  Qui  dicunt  quod  dominos  Hugo  de  Babinton
et  Dominus  Henricus  de  Perpount  tenent  unum  feodum  militis  in
Roleston,  Cotyngton,  Barneby  et  Colingham,  et  reddunt  per  annum
xs.  pro  warda  castri  Richemond  et  debent  homagium,  idevium  et
scutagium  cum  evenerint  £t  dominus  Robertus  de  Mosteit  tenet
duo  feoda  militum  in  Knyveton,  S3rre8ton,  Sybethorp,  TyresweD,
Ketelthorp  et  Wivelingham,  et  reddit  per  annum  zzs.  pro  warda
castri' Richmond  et  debet  homagium,  relevium  et  scutagium  cum
evenerint.  £t  lohannes  iilius  Ade  de  Moscham  tenet  nnnm
feodum  militis  in  Sutton  et  debet  homagium,  retevium  el  scuta-
gium cum  evenerint.  £t  dicunt  quod  de  ezchaetis,  wardis,  releviis
et  maritagiis  que  de  dictis  feodis  accidere  poterunt  nichil  eztenditnr
nisi  tantum  modo  redditus  qui  debetur  per  annum.

Summa  feodorum  iiii.  feoda.

Summa  denariorum  redditus  per  annum  zzzs. . .  •

Fol.  6.  ...  Extenta  facta  fuit  die  veneris  prozima  post  festum  Sancli  Luce

evangeliste  anno  regni  regis  Edwardi  decimo  coram  predictis  Thoma
et  lohanne  ad  hoc  deputatis  per  sacramentum  Hugonis  Damiaely
etc.  qui  dicunt  quod  lohannes  filius  Ade  de  Mnsham  tenet  in  Sutton
et  Mering  unum  feodum  militis  de  honore  Richmond  per  bomagiom
et  scutagium  et  valet  per  annum  ut  in  donunicis,  pratis,  pattnris,
piscariis,  molendinis,  liberis  servitiis,  villenagiis,  liberis  cur*  et  in
omnibus  aliis  exitibus,  sicut  melius  et  plenius  inquiri  potest  per
particulas  extentas.

Summa  xxxv  li.  xiii  s.  ii  d.

£t  est  advocacio  ecclesie  pertinens  ad  dictum  lohannem,  et
valet  per  annum  xxxiiil.  iiis.  viiid.  . .  •

Fol.  7.  [^Lincoln,']  Inquisitio  et  extenta  facta  per  preceptum  domini  Regis

per  sacramentum  proborum  et  legalium  hominum  que  feoda  ad
honorem  Richemond  pertinentia  sint  in  comitatu  Lincoln,  et  que
feoda  inde  sint  elemosinata  et  que  alia  et  qui  ea  tenent  et  quantum
valeant  per  annum  ut  in  wardis,  servitiis,  releviis,  maritagiis,  escheatis
et  omnibus  aliis  exitibus  et  per  sacramentum  horum  subecriptorom
scilicet  Henrici  le  Taillus  de  Fulbek,  etc.  Qui  dicunt  super
sacramentum  suum  quod  lohannes  de  Britannia  comes  Ridhemond
tenet  dimidium  feodum  militis  in  Ledenham  et  in  Fulbek  peitinens
ad  honorem  Richemund  et  valet  per  annum  ut  in  capitale  niesuagio^
dominicis  terris,  pratis,pasturis,  villenagiis,redditibu8  assisisliberopnn
tenentium,  perquisitis  curie  et  in  omnibus  aliis  servitiis  et  ezitibus.


APPENDIX III  487

Samma  xiiii  li.

Margeria  filia  Simonis  de  Fulbek  tenet  unum  feodum  militis
peitinens  ad  eundem  honorem  de  predicto  lohanne  de  Britannia
per  homagium  et  scutagium,  et  valet  per  annum  ad  opus  dicte
Margerie  ut  in  capitale  mesuagio,  dominids  terris,  pratis,  pasturis,
villenagiis,  molendinis,  redditibus  assisis  liberorum  tenentium,  per-
quisitis  curie  et  omnibus  aliis  servitiis  et  exitibus  xxivli.  £t  de
illo  feodo  tenet  Prior  de  Sempringham  sextam  partem  in  elemosina
et  valet  per  annum  iiii  li.  xvi  s.  viii  d.

Summa valoris predicti feodi quam dicta Margeria  tenet

•  •  •  •  f  •

XXllll  li.

Summa  valoris  predicte  partis  elemosinate  iiiili.  xvis.  viiid.

Item  predicta  Margareta  et  loceus  de  Hawe  tenent  medietatem
feodi  militis  de  eodem  honore  in  Ledenham  et  de  Fulbek,  et  valet  per
annum  ut  in  dominicis  et  aliis  omnibus  exitibus  ut  predictum  est
xvi  li. Summa  xvi  li.

Nicholaus  le  Breton  tenet  de  eodem  honore  in  predictis  villis
de  comite  Richemond  dimidium  feodum  militis  et  quartam  partem
dimidii  feodi  pro  homagio  et  scutagio,  et  valet  per  annum  ut
in  dominicis  et  aliis  omnibus  exitibus  ut  predictum  est  xiiili.
xiii  s.  et  iiii  d.  £t  de  feodo  illo  tenet  magister  militie  Templi
in  Anglia  in  elemosina  in  Fulbek  xvi  bovatas  terre  et  Prior
de  Sempringham  tenet  in  elemosina  xx  acras  terre.  £t  tota  ilia
terra  elemosinata  valet  per  annum  cvis.  viiid.

Summa  valoris  predicti  Nicholai  xiii  li.  xiii  s.  iv  d.

Summa  valoris  predicte  partis  elemosinate  cvi  s.  viii  d

Willelmus  Wynnebys,  Petrus  de  Exton  et  heredes  Eustachii  de
Wykes  tenent  de  eodem  honore  in  Ledenham  de  predicto  comite  pro
homagio  et  scutagio  tres  partes  dimidii  feodi  militis  que  valent  per
annum  ut  in  dominicis  et  aliis  omnibus  exitibus  ut  predictum  est
ix  li. Summa  ix  li-

Rogenis  de  Colevile  tenet  de  eodem  honore  in  Ledenham  et
Bracheland  de  predicto  comite  pro  homagio  et  scutagio  tres  partes
unius  feodi  militis  que  valent  per  annum  ad  opus  predicti  Rogeri
ut  in  dominicis  et  omnibus  aliis  exitibus  ut  predictum  est  xiili.  £t
magister  militie  Templi  in  Anglia  tenet  inde  in  Ledenham  in
elemosina  medietatem  predictarum  trium  partium  dicti  feodi,  et
valet  per  annum  xii  lire.

Summa  valoris  partis  predicti  Rogeri  xii  li.

Summa  predicte  partis  elemosinate  xii  li. .


•  •


488  APPENDIX  III

Fol.  II.  Thomas  de  Langeton  et  sui  participes  tenent  in  soka  de  Mnmbj

tria  feoda  militis  et  dimidium  per  homagiam  et  scntagiiim  de
eodem  honore  que  valent  per  annum  ut  in  dominicis  et  omnibus
exitibus  ut  predictum  est  Ivili.  viiis.  iiiid.

Abbas  de  Barking  et  alii  religiosi  tenent  de  eisdem  tribns  lieodis
XX  bovatas  terre  arabilis  et  iii  partes  unius  bovate  et  c  acras  pasture
que  valent  per  annum  xvii  li.  xviis.  viiid. Summa  .  .  •

Walterus  de  Scures  ei  sui  participes  tenent  in  Kylingholyn  com
membris  de  dicto  honore  unum  feodum  militis  •  •  .  zxi  IL  iiiis.
iii  d.  quad.

Abbas  de  Neuhus  et  sorores  de  Irford  tenent  de  eodem  bonore
in  elemosina  vi  bovatas  terre  arabilis  que  valent  per  annum  xxxs. . . .

Fol.  I  a.  Philippus  de  Bretton  et  plures  alii  liberi  sokemanni  de  soka

de  Gayton  tenent  in  eadem  soka  de  honore  Richemond  unum
feodum  militis  et  tres  partes  unius  feodi  que  valent  per  annum  at
in  dominicis  et  omnibus  aliis  exitibus  xlvil.  xiiis.  ob.  Et  Abbas  de
Langenet  et  plures  alii  viri  religiosi  tenent  inde  in  elemosina  ad
valorem  xxiiili.  xs.  viid.  ob. .  .  •

Exienta  ierrarum  honoris  Richemund  in  camitaiu  Lmcdm  in
Hoyland,

Extenta  facta  die  sabbati  proxima  post  festum  Apostolonim
Philippi  et  lacobi  anno  regni  regis  Edwardi  octavo  apud  Sanctum
Botulphum  coram  Thoma  de  Normanville,  Adam  de  Wjnton.  etc.
de  maneriis  de  Wykes  et  Frampton  ville  et  ferie  Sancti  Botulphi
per  sacramentum  lohannis  de  Holand  militis,  etc.

[Afanerium  de  Wykes."]  Ibidem  est  capitale  mesuagium  quod
continet  duas  acras  terre  cum  edificiis  et  gardino  et  valet  per
annum  xxs.  Et  ccvi  acre  et  dimidia  terre  arabilis  in  dominico
per  perticam  xx  pedum  que  valent  per  annum  xlL  vis.  vid.  pretiom
Fol.  13.  acrexiid.  Etxlii  acre  et  dimidia  pratique  valent  vili.vii8.vid.pretiam
acre  iii  s.  Et  quedam  pastura  xiii  acrarum  et  dimidie  que  nunc
est  terra  arabilis  et  valet  per  annum  xxiis.  vid.  pretium  acre  xzd.
Et  quedam  pastura  xxxiii  acrarum  et  dimidie  que  valent  per  annum
Ivs.  xd.  pretium  acre  xxd.  Et  quoddam  molendinum  ventricium
quod  valet  per  annum  Is.  Et  sex  saline  que  valent  per  annum  Ixs.
Et  vi  selde  in  foro  de  Donington  que  valent  per  annum  xiis.  Et  vl
acre  terre  arabilis  et  dimidia  bovata  comune  in  Drayton  in  marisco
de  Holand  que  valent  per  anntma  xiii  s.  iiii  d.  Ibidem  sunt  custunarii
qui  tenent  xxv  bovatas  terre  et  dimidiam  terre  arabilis  et  prati  qoe


APPENDIX  III  489

continent  v^  liii  acras  et  reddunt  per  annum  viil.  xxid.  ob.  quad.
Opera  eorundem  valent  per  annum  viiL  ixs.  viiid.  Ildem  reddunt
per  annum  pro  quadam  consuetudine  que  dicitur  Flourgavill  xxs.
Quidam  predictonim  custumariorum  tenent  xxvii  acras  et  dimidiam
et  reddunt  per  annum  xxiiis.  iiid.  Opera  eorundem  valent  per
annum  xd.  Auxilium  annuum  omnium  predictonim  custumariorum
viii ].  £t  quidam  cottarii  qui  reddunt  per  annum  xi  s.  £t  unus  eomm
pro  Flourgavill  xvid.  £t  Ix  galline  que  valent  vs.  £t  due  escaete
que  valent  viiis.  vid.  et  continent  viii  acras.  Sunt  ibi  liberi  tenentes
qui  reddunt  per  annum  cvis.  iid.  ob.  Item  inquisitiones  curie  vi^ent
per  annum  viii  1.

Summa  Ixviil.  xvs.  iiid.  ob.  quad.

\^Framp/<ffi.]  Ibidem  est  capitale  mesuagium  quod  valet  per
annum  xiiis.  iiiid.  £t  clxi  acre  terre  arabilis  in  dominico  que'
valent  per  annum  xl.  xvd.  pretii  acre  xvd.  £t  xxxix  acre
prati  que  valent  per  annum  iiiil.  xviis.  vid.  pretii  acre  iis.  vid.
£t  quedam  pastura  continens  xl  acras  et  valet  per  annum  xls.  pretii
acre  xviiid.  £t  alia  pastura  in  Cotetoft,  Cbistilholm  et  in  marisco
maris  continens  xviii  acras  et  dimidiam  que  valent  per  annum  xviiis.
vid.  £t  quedam  pastura  que  vocatur  Holm  in  villa  Sancti
Botulphi  pertinens  ad  manerium  de  Frampton  que  continet  xviii
acras  que  valent  per  annum  xls.  pretii  acre  iiis.  iiiid.  £t  quoddam
molendinum  ad  ventum  quod  valet  per  annum  xls.  Ibidem  sunt
custumarii  tenentes  ix  bovatas  terre  que  continent  cccxvi  acras  terre
arabilis  et  prati  et  reddunt  per  annum  liiiis.  viiid.  Opera  eorundem
valent  iiii  1.  ix  s.  ix  d.  Et  plures  cottarii  qui  tenent  xli  acras  terreet  prati
et  reddunt  per  annum  xxxvis.  viiid.  Opera  eorum  valent  iis.  ixd.
£t  iidem  dant  xii  gallinas  que  valent  xii  d.  In  Fraunc  hundred  sunt
X  bovate  terre  et  dimidia  pertinentes  ad  manerium  de  Frampton
que  continent  cxxxiii  acras  terre  arabilis,  prati  et  pasture  et
reddunt  per  annum  Ixviiis.  xd.  Opera  eorum  valent  iiiis.  xid.
ob.  £t  debent  xxviii  gallinas  que  valent  iis.  iiiid.  et  v  busselos  salis
que  continent  secundum  mensuram  Londonie  i  quarterium  ii
busselos,  et  valent  per  annum  xvd.  Auxilium  annuum  custu*
mariorum  predictorum  valet  s.  (sic).  Ibidem  sunt  liberi  tenentes
qui  reddunt  per  annum  xviiis.  iid.  et  i  libram  cimini  que  valet  id.
Perquisita  attachiamentorum  in  marisco  valent  per  annum  is.
Perquisita  curie  valent  per  annum  Ixs.

Summa  xlix  li.  xii  d.  ob.

In  villa  de  Gosberkirke  sunt  due  carucate  et  due  bovate  terre


490  APPENDIX  III

que  reddunt  per  annum  xlvs.  iid.  ob. In  Doningtoii  doe  carocate
una  bovata  et  octava  pars  unius  bovate  terre  que  reddunt  per
annum  xliis.  xd.  ob.  quad. In  Biker  sunt  due  camcate  eC  dimulxa
et  reddunt  per  annum  is.  id.  et  quad. In  Wyketoft  snot  tres
carucate  et  vii  bovate  et  reddunt  per  annum  Izzviis.  viiid. In
Sutterton  sunt  v  carucate  terre  et  dimidia  et  reddunt  per  annum  cxs.
Fol.  14. iid.  ob.  quad. In  Algerkyrk  sunt  vi  carucate  et  vii  bovate  que
reddunt  per  annum  vii.  xviis.  xxd. In  Kirketon  sunt  xiii  camcate
et  V  bovate  que  reddunt  per  annum  xiiil.  ziis.  vd. Et  in  eadem
villa  de  feodo  Coterel  i  carucata,  vi  bovate  et  dimidia  et  quarta  pan
unius  bovate  et  reddunt  per  annum  xxxviis.  ob. In  Wjbertoo,
Frampton  et  Skyrbec  sunt  ix  carucate  et  quarta  para  unius  bovate
terre  et  reddunt  per  annum  ixl.  xis. In  Leek  sunt  x  camcate  terre
et  reddunt  per  annum  x  1. In  Leverton  sunt  v  camcate  et  reddmit
per  annum  cs. In  Donington  sunt  ii  carucate  et  reddunt  per
annum  xls. id. In Skyrbek  sunt  ii carucate  et  ii  bovate,
et  reddunt  per  annum  xlv  s.  i  d.  ob. In  eadem  villa  est  una  canicata
quam  Radulfus  de  Rocheford  tenet  et  reddit  per  annum  zixs.  xd.
Omnes  predicti  liberi  tenentes  reddunt  in  communi  pro  pannagio
quolibet  anno  bisextili  videlicet  quolibet  quarto  anno  zzizs.  ob.
quad, et  valet  per  annum  viis.  iiid.  ob.  quad,  per totum  in
quatuor  annis. In  villa  de  Bykerest  quedam  escaeta  que  reddit  per
annum  xvi  s. Et  quedam  in  Skyrbek  que  reddit  per  annum  iiis.
£t  due  escaete  in  Leverton  que  [reddunt]  per  annum  xiii  s.  vid. Et
quedam  in  Algerkyrk  que  reddit  per  annum  iii  s. £t  quedam  in
SuHerton  que  reddit  per  annum  ix  s. Perquisita  curie  soke  vaknt
per  annum  xviii  1.

Summa  ilii"  viii  Ii.  xi  s.  i  d.

APPENDIX IV: D. BK. MIDDLESEX

HOLDINGS

TABLE  I. CORRESPONDENCE  BETWEEN  GELD
AND  DETAILED  HOLDINGS

The  numbers  on  the  left  side  of  the  dash  ( — )  show  the  asaemnent  to  the  geld,
the  numbers  on  the  right  the  aggregates  of  holdingB.


a-^,  geld  greater ;  A,  equality ;
/,/,  geld  smaller.

a. Herges,  100  h.  —  6oi  h.  1 3  a.
Gistelsworde,  70  —  31  h.  i|y.
Hesa,  59  —  394  h.
Hermodesworde,  30  —  1 7  h.  2  v.
Rislepe,  30 —  21  h.  i  v.  28  a.


Ticheham  (CnU  Roger),  9|— 3}h.

20  a.
Hamntooe  (Walter  de  S.  Wala-

ric),  35  — a8|h.
Bedefimde  (Walter  Fhz  Other),

10  —  3h.  av.  13  a.

fi. Adelmetone,  35  —  a84  h.  40

Cheneait,  10 — 3  h-  3S  ▼•


APPENDIX IV


491


Herdintone,  10  —  4  h.  1 1  a.
Chingesberie  (Eroulf  de  Hesding),

74  — ah.  ajv.  250.
Fudiaiii  (Bp.  L.,  Fiilchered)i  5  —

ib.  8a.
SUnmera  (Roger  de  Ramb),  9}  —

5}h.  15  a.
Handone  (St  Peter),  ao — 16  h.
Stibenhede fBp. L., Hugo de

Bemen),  sn,  iv. — ih.  i4v.  a^a.
c. Stibenhede  (Bp.L.,  Wife  of  Brien),

5 —  ijh.  10  a.
Enefelde,  30  —  a6f  h.  30  a.
Ticheham  (Geoff,  de  Mandeville),

3jh.  — iJy.
W.  Bedefnnd  (Walter  F.  Other),

8  —  5h.  loa.
Cranforde,  5  —  a  b.  i  v.  a  a.
Draitooe,  10 — yh.  39  a.
Stibenhede  (Robt  Fafitoo),  4  —

i|h.  \v,  a6a.
Haneworde,  5  —  a  J  h.
eU  Greneforde  (Geoff,  de  Mandeville),

3  — Jh.
Tibome,  5  —  a^  h.  ^  v.  10  a.
Stibenhede  (Bp.  L.,  Ran.  Flam-

^*rd),  3j— ijh.
I^»Ucga,  3  —  I  h.  5  a.


Felteham,  la  —  10  h.  4  v.
Iiendone  (Dem.  of  St.  Paurs),


ah.


IV.

Tueurde  (Gucri),  ah.  —  i  v.  6 a.
Eia,  10  —  8h.  a  v.
e, Leleham (Comes Moritoniens),

3  —  Jh.
Stibenhede  (Bp.  L.,Wm.  Camera-

rius),  ijh.  IV. —  1  V.  5  a.
BedefQDt (Comes Moritoniens),

a  h.  —  4  h.  8  a.
StibcnhcJc  (Bp.  L.,Bp.  LisiaensU),

ijh. —  14  a.


/


Stibenhede  (Bp.  London),  %%  —

3o|h.lv.
Tueorde  (Dmnd),  a — }  h.  }  v.
Haitone,  i  h.  $4  t.  —  a  ▼.  5  a.
Chinraberie  (St.  Peter), a^ —

Stanmere (Comei Moritoniens),

9|— 8|h.  II  a.
Stanwelle,  15  — 14  b.  a8  a.
Stibenhede  (Bp.  L,  Engdbric),

1  h.  I  V.  —  I T.  a8  a.
Hemlvestnne,  5  —  4  h.  i  ▼.
HerefeUe,  5  — >  4h.  i|t.  8  a.
Sunneberie,  7  — >  64  b.  |  v.
Tolentone,  a  —  in.  a4T. 9 a.
Chenetone,  5  —  4b.  ^t.
g. Stibenhed  (Robt.  F.  RoMelin),  i\

—  3Jth.  loa.
ScepcTtone,  8  —  7f  h.  a4  a*
Stanes,  19  — 18  h.  119  a.
h.  Northala,  15  — 15  h.

Greneforde  (Wettminster),  ii|  —

ii^h.
Leleham (Robt Blimd), 8  —

8h.
Hanewelle,  8  — 8h.
Hamestede^  4  —  4  h.
Covelie,  a  —  ah.
Lilestone,  5  —  5  h.  a  a.
Cerdentone,  5  —  5  h.  8  a.
Hillendone,  4 — 4  h.  10  a.
Chelched,  a  —  ah.  15a.
'  VilU  nbi  sedet  aecdeiiaSt  Petri,

Fuleham (St. Paul's), 5  — sh.

3jv.  35  a-
Coleham,  8  •—  9  h.  50  a.

Toteham,  5  —  6  b.  3  V.  60  a.  +  a

camcates.
Fuleham (Bp. London), 40  —

49  h.


f.


TABLE  IL CORRESPONDENCE  BETWEEN
PLOUGH-LAND  AND  DETAILED HOLDINGS


a-Cy  plough-land  greater ;  /,  equality  ;
g-k,  plough-land  less.

a Gistelsworde,  55  —  31  h.  ijv.

Herges,  70  —  6aA  h.  13  a.

Chcnesit,  10 — 311.  }\\,

Stanes,  34  —  18  h.  119  a.

Chingesberie  (Emulf  de  Hesding),
7  —  ah.  a|  V.  25  a.

Ticheham  (Cnt  Roger),  6  —  afh.
aoa.

Stibenhede  (Bp.  L.,  Ran.  Flam-
bard),  5  —  ijh.


Chelched,  5  —  ah.  15a.
b, Stibenhede (Bp. L., Hogo de

Bemers),  4 —  i  h.  iJy.  %\  a.
Hermodetworde, ao  —  17  b. i  v.

30  a.
Fuleham  (Bp.  L.,  Fulchered),  3  —

ih.  8a.
Herdintone,  6  —  4  h.  1 1  a.
Herefelle,  5  —  4  h.  ^  v.  38  a.
Ticheham  (GeoiT.  de  Mandeville),

a  —  ij  V.
Stanmera  (Roger  de  Ramts),  7  —

5}  h.  15  a.


49*


APPENDIX IV


Bedefnnde  (Walter  F.  Other),  5  —
3h.  ay.  13a.
c, Isendone  (Dem.  of  St.  Panl't),  \\

IV.

Stibenhede  (Bp.  L.,  Wm.  Came-

rariui),  1} —  IV.  5  a.
Tuenide  (Gneri),  lA—  i  v.  6 a.
Stibenhed (Robt. Fa6ton), 3  —

14  h.  ^v.  36  a.
Leldiam  (Comes  Moritooiens),  i}
—  Jh.
Grenefofde  (GeoiT.  de  Mandeville),

Dallega,  a  —  i  b.  5  a.
Stibenhede  (Bp.  L.,  Wife  of  Brien),

2\ — i|h.  10a.
</.  Stibenhede  (Bp.  L.,  Bp.  Lisiaensis),

1  —  14  a.
Tueurde  (Dnrand),  i|  —  J  h.  \  v.
Toteham,  10  —  oh.  3  V.  60a.  -1-  2

camcates.
Chingesberie  (St.  Peter),  2  —  i  h.

IV.

Cranforde,  3  —  ah.  i  v.  2  a.

Stibenhede (Bp.  L., Engelbric),
I  —  IV.  28  a.

Hesa,  40  —  39i  h.

Haneworde,  3 —  2}  h.
e, Haitone,  i  —  2  v.  5  a.

Bedefont (Comes Moritoniens),
I— ih.  8a.

Tibnme,  3  —  2}  h.  }  v.  10  a.

Tolentone,  2  —  i  h.  2I  v.  9  a.

Chenetone,  5  —  4  h.  3 J  v.
/. llondone  (St  Peter),  16  — 16  h.
g. Felteham,  10  —  10  h.  ^  v.


Stibenhed (Robt. F. Rondio

a  —  a^h.  19a.
Eia»8  — Sh.  st«
Soimcberic^  6  —


^6  — 6|1i.|t.
V  7— 7lh.a4ft


A. Hameitedc^
Covelie,  i  — '%  h.
Ceidcntone,  4  —  5  b.  8a.
W.  Bedeftud  (Walter  F.  Odier)


a— 5h.  10  a.

Diel


Fnleham (St Pknrt).  5  — sh

3iv.35a.
Stanmere  (Comes  MoritMNdens), ;

— 8|h.  lie.
Hemlyettimey  4 — 4h.  i  t.
f. Draitone^  6 — 7h.  59  a.
Riiltpe,  ao  —  ai  h.  i  y.  a8  a.
Lilettoiie»3 — ^b.  a  a.
Hillendooe,  a  — 4  b.  10  a.
Colaham,  7  —  9b.  50a.
<  VilU  abi  wdec  aecdena  St  Fttri,'

II  — X3|b.4T.  5a.
Adehiictoiie»  ao —  a84  h.  40  a.
y. Lelefaam(Kobt.  Blimd),  5^8h.
Hanewelle,  % — 8b.
Enefelde,  aa —  a6}b.  30  a.
Hanmtone  (Walter  de  S.  Walaric),

35  — aSjh.
Stanwellei  10—  14b.  aSa.
Greneforde (Wfihninitcr)» 7  —

I  lib.
NorthaU,  10 —  ish.
k, Stibenhede  (Bp.  Loodon),  a5  —


3o4h.  |v.
''lueham


Fmeham (Bp. London}*  40  —
49  h.


TABLE  111.

CORRESPONDENCE  BETWEEN  AGGREGATE
PLOUGH-TEAMS  AND  DETAILED  HOLDINGS


^-<A  Aggregate  plough-teams  greater ;
e-jf  aggregate  plough-teams  less.

a,  Toteham,  14  —  6h.  3v.  6oa.  +  2
camcates.

Chenesit,  9 —  3  h.  3J  v.

Stanes,  24 — 18  h.  119  a.

Chingcsberie  (Eroulf  de  Hesding),
7  —  2h.  2  J  v.  25  a.

Stibenhede  (Bp.  L.,  Ran.  Flam-
bard),  5  —  i^h.

Gistelsworde,  34  —  31  h.  i4v.

Stibenhede  (Bp.  L.,  Hugo  de  Ber-
ners),  4  —  i  h.  i^v.  2ja.

Ticheham  (Geoff*,  de  Mandeville),
2  —  I J  v.


b, Tolentone,  3  —  I  h.  a)  t.  9  a.
Haneworde,  4  —  'i  1>-
Fnleham  (Bp.  L.,  Folchered),  2  —

4  b.  8  a.
Bedefunde  (Walter  F.  Other),  5  —

3  h.  2  v.  13  a.
Stibenhed (Robt. Fafitoo),  3  —


c.


i4h.  |v.  j6a.
Tichi "


20


eham  (Cnt«  Roger)^  4  —  ajh.


Leleham (Comes Moritoniess),

i4-|h.

Dali(^  a  —  I  h.  5  a.
Herdmtone,  5  — 4  h.  11  a.
Chelched,  3  —  a  h.  15  a.
Isendone  (I>em.ofSt.Panl*t)«  i — i  ▼.


APPENDIX IV

Chineeibcrie  (St.  Pdcr),  a  —  i  h.

-ah.  IV.  IB.
Jp.L.,  Wm.  Camen-


Cnnforde,  3  —
StibenbedeCr

Tantdc  CGueri),'i


[v.aSa.


GreDefon]c(Geoff.  de  MtikdeTille),

SUbenhede  (Bp.  L.,  Bp.  LIummIi),

Hbnrae,  3  — i^h.  Iv.iOL
, Hutooe,  J— av.  .sa,

Bcdcfiuil (Comet Moriloaieai),

l-ih.8..
Stibenhede  (Bp.  L.,  Wife  of  Brien),

i-iih.io..
Cbenetoiie,  4~4h.  3l»-
Scepeitone,  7  —  7I  h.  j^  ■.
Covelie,  1  —  a  h.
lilcsIODe,  4  —  5  h.  a  «.
Vi.  Bedefund  (Walter  F.  Othet),

j-Sh.  «««.
F«lieh>in,  9  —  loh.  )  r.
Stanwelle,  13  — t4b.  18  a.
DnittMc,  6  —  7h.39tL
Suumets  (Roger  de  Runii),  4  —

e}b.  15  ■.
Stibenh«f  (Robt. F. KoKClin),

I  — 3ih.  iga.


. Snnncbcrie,  5  —  fij  h.  J  v.
Herolvcstnne,  aj  —  4  h.  I  t.
Haroesiede,  a  —  4  h.
Fuleham (St. Paul's),  4  — £  h.

3i"- J5»-
Adelmetone,  a6  —  )S  jh.  40  a.
Ulebam  (Kobt.  Dlund},  5  —  8  h.
Hiuenellc.f  — Sli.
. HUleodooe.  1  — 4h.  lOa.
Colcham,  <  — gh.  go  a.
Cerdentone,  i|— gb.Sa.
•  Villa  obi  aedet  aeccleda  StPetri,'

lO-.Sih-l'S*-
Homodeiworde, 13  — 17 b.  it.

30  a.
Stanmere (Comea Mofitsoieiii),

3i-81h.  iia.
Hudoae,  1 1  — 16  h.
Grenebrde (Watninttet), 6  —

II)  b.
Stibeahede  (Bp.  Loodoa),  »$  —

301b.  4  V.
Rialne,  15  — 11  b.  I  t.  aS  a.
Ni>rtbala,8~i|h.
Enefelde,  30  — a6f  b.  30  s.
Kamntooe  (Walter  de  S.  Walaric),

M  — iS)h.
He»a,a8  — 39ih.
, Her»ei,49— foih.  13a.

FulehaiD (Bp. Lcodon), 30  —


TABLE  IV  A. CORRESPONDENCE  BETWEEN
TEAMS  IN DEMESNE  AND  LAND  IN  DEMESNE
Leiebam (Robt. Btaad). i  -


Cbcldied,  a

.  Stanwelle,  3
Herefelle,  a
Toleham,  a-
Tolentone,  i
Glsteliworde.  6  —  6^  h.
Covelie,  i  —  1 J  h.
Stibenbed  (kobi.  F.  Roscelin),  1


1  canicntea.


Tibume,  i  —  3  h.
FulebaiD  (St.  Paul's),
Cbenetonc,  1  —  ah.  ^
Scepcrtone,  1  ~  jl  b-
■/.  Lilestone,  t—4\h.
Ilamestede,  ■  —  3ib.
Stannieta  (Koger  de  Ramij),
4h.


3h.


Smuiebeile,  t  —  4  b.
EU,  a  — sh.
Colehain,  3 — 6h.
. Hanewelle,  I  —  4 h.  it.
CerdcDtoae,  I  —4!  h.
GrcMfoide (Wcttniofter),


Hoillaatens),


Draitooe,  I  —  |  b.
Stanmere (Coo

a-fiih.
Hermodnwofde,  3  —  8  h.
Felleham,  1  — 6h.
■  VlUanbiiedet  aeccletU  SL  Fetrj,*

4- Oh.  IV.
Nottb^,  )  —  8  b.
Handooe  (St.  Peter),  3  — 10  b.
Ridepe,3  — lib.
Fideham  (Bp.  Loodoo),  4 — 13  h.
Heaa,  a  — lib.
Eiteleldc,4  — I4h.


494


APPENDIX  IV


g. Stibenhede (Bp. London), 3  —

i4h.
Addmetone,  4  — 16  h.
Hamntone  (Walter  de  S.  Walaric),

3  — i8h.
Herges,  4  —  30  h.
h, Bedefnnde (Walter F. Other).

I  —
W.  Bedefund  (Walter  F.  CHher),

I  —
Bedefunt  (Comes  Moritoniens),  ?
Chenesit,  4  —

ChingesbCTie  (St.  Peter),  i  —
Chingesberie  (Emnlf  de  Hesding),

a  —
Cranforde,  i  —
/. Dallega,  i  —

Fuleham  (Bp.  L.,  Falchered),  i  —
Greneforde {Gtoff. de Mande-

ville),  ?
I  laitone,  ?
Haneworde,  i|  —
I  lerdintone,  2  —


HeralTertime^  a  —
j, Hillcndone, o  —  ah.

Iiendoiic  (Dem.  of  St.  Fail's},  ?
I<rirham  (Comes  Moritaoiens),  ?
Stibenhede  (Bp.  I^  HlwodeBe^

neia),  i  —
Stibei^ede  (Bp.  L.,  Wife  of  Brien),

I  —
Stibenhede  (Bp.  l^.  Ran.  Flam-

baid),  a  —
Stibenhede (Bp. U,  £acdbrie\

I  —
k,  Stibenhede  (Bp.  L.,  B^.  LkiacB.

sia),?
Stibenhede  (Bp.  L.,  Wm.  Caaieni-

nns),  I  — -
Stibenhied  (Robt.  Fa£txm)»  ?
Ticheham  (Cnt.  Rogeri  Y
Ticheham (Geoff. 6t Mande-

viUe),  7
Tuemde  (Dnnuid)^—
Tuenrde  (Gneri),  ?


TABLE IV  B.

CORRESPONDENCE  BETWEEN  VILLAINS' TEAMS
AND  DETAILED  HOLDINGS  OF  VILLAINS


11-^,  teams  greater ;  f,  equality ;  g-i,
teams  less;  y,  kf  comparison  in-
complete,  alphabetically  arranged.

a.  Herges,  45  —  30!  h.  1 3  a.
Adelmetone,  a  a  —  i2^h.  40  a.
Hamntone  (Walter  de  S.  Wala-

ric),  17 —  loih.
Stibenhede (Bp.  London), 2  a  —

i6|h.  ^v.
Totenam,  i a  —  6  h.  3  v.  60 a.
Felteham,  8  —  4  h.  ^  v.
Gistelsworde,  a8  —  a4  h.  3J  v.

b,  Stanes,  11  —  7h.  119  a.
Enefelde,  i6  —  1  a|  h.  30  a.
Draitone,  5  —  ah.  39 a.
Chingesberie  (Emnlf  de  Hesding),

5  —  ah.  aj V.  35 a.
Handone  (St  Peter),  8  —  6  h.
Stibenhede (Bp. L., Hugo de

Berners),  3  —  i  h.  ijv.  a  A  a.
'Villa  ubi  sedetaecclesia St.  Petri,*

6  —  4h.  ijv.  5  a.

r. Stanmera  (Roger  de  Ramis),  3  —
i^h.  15a.
Scepertone,  6  —  4  h.  i  v.  34  a.
Rislepe,  la  —  10  h.  i  v.  a8  a.
Stibenhede  (Bp.  L.,  Ran. Flam-
bard),  3—1 J  h.


Ei*>  6  —  3  h.  a  V.
Snnneberie,  4  —  a|  h.  }  t.
Tolentooe,  a  —  a^  t.  9  a.

d,  Tibnme,  a  —  a|  v.  10  a.
Chenesit,  5  —  3  h.  3}  t.
Hennodeswordey  10  —  9  h.  j  v.
Hamestede,  i  —  ay.
Herefielle,  3 — ah-^v.  38a.
Lilestone,  1  "-^  4  h.  a  a.
Fnleham  (Bp.  U,  Fakhered),  i  —

Ah.  8a.

e,  B^efhnde  (Walter  F.OkherX  4  —

3h.  av.  13  a.
Hanewelle,  4  —  3  h.  3  t.
Chenetoner  3  —  a  h.  3  ▼.

f,  Leleham  (Robt  Blond),  4 — 4  h.
Haneworde,  a^  ^  2|  h«

g,  Dallega,  i  —  i  h.  5  a.
Cerdentone, }  —  ^  h.  8  a.
Chelched,  i  — ih.  15  a.
Chingesberie  (St.  Pfeter),  i  ^  1  L

I  V.

Cranforde,  a  —  ab.iT.aa.
SUnmere (Comet Moritonicns),

ij  — ifh.  II  a.
Stibenhed (RobL F. RoneUa),

I  —  I  h.  I T.  19  a.
h.  Coleham,  3  —  30.  50  a.
Noitbala,  6  —  7  h.


APPENDIX  IV


495


HillendoDe,  i  —  ah.  lo a.
Herdintone,  3  —  4  h.  1 1  a.
Fnleham (St. Paul's), a  — ah.

Stanwelle,  10  —  1 1  h.  38  a.
Hesa,  a6  —  37^  h.
f. Greneforde (Westminster), 5  —

6  h.  a  ▼.
W.  Bedefimd  (Walter  F.  aher),

3  —  5h.  loa.
Hernlvestnne,  J  —  4  h.  i  ▼.
Fnleham (Bp. London), a6  —

36  h.
/• Bedefimt (Comes Moritoniens),

?  — Jh.  8a.
Coyelie,  ?  —  |  h.
Grenefovde  (Geoff,  de  Mandeville),

?  — Jh.
Haitone,  ?  —  a  v.  5  a.


Isendone  (Dem.  St  Paul's^  7^  i  ▼•
Leleham (Comet Montonieiit),

P  —  ih.
Stibenhede (Bp.  L.,  Eogelbric),

o — IV.  aSa.
k,  Stibenhede  (Bp.  L.,  Wm.  Camera-

rins),  o — IV.  5  a.
Stibenhed (Robt. Fafitoo). ?—

14  h.  I V.  a6  a.
Stibenhede  (Bp.  L.,Bp.  Lisiaensu},

?  — 14  a.
Stibenhede  (Bp.  L.,  Wife  of  Brien),

o  —  i|h.  loa.
Ticheham  (Geoff,  de  Mandeville),

?  — ijv.
Ticheham  (Cnt.  Roger),  7  —  a  h.

3v.  aoa.
Tneurde  (Dnrand),  o  —  J  h.  }  v.
Tuenide  (Gneri),  o  —  i  v.  6  a.


APPENDIX  V  : D. BK.


SOCMAN  AND  VILLAIN  HOUSEHOLDS  IN

DERBYSHIRE

(The  numbers  of  socman  holdings  are  given  in  itaUcs)


Over  12  households

Helmetnne  (Elmton),  36
Crochethalle  (Croxhall),  35
Marchetone  (Markeaton),  33
Dubrige  (Doveridge),  30
Wcstune  (Wcston-on-Trent),  4  cens.,

Braideshale  (Breadsall),  /  miles,  31
Brailesford  (Brailsford),  24
Aitone  (Long  Eaton),  22
Lnllitone  (Lullington),  a  i
Chcdesdene  (Chaddesden),  i/,  10
Stavelie  (Stavcley),  ai
Milebnme  (Melbourne),  ao
Barctone  (Barton  Blount),  19
Horselei  (Horsley),  19
Dochemaoestun (Duckmaoton), 18

cens.
Holtune  (Stoney  Houghton),  18
Meratun  (Marston),  18
Calehale  (Calow),  17
Wcrchesuorde  (Wirksworth),  16  and

over
Branxinctun  (Brassington),  16
Ednunghale  (Edingale),  16
Stapconille  (Stapenhill),  16
Wineshalle  (Wintbill),  6,  10
Etcwellc  (Etwall),  15
I^lesourc  (Bolsover),  14


Chetnn  (Cattoo),  14
Echintone  fEckingtoD),  14  and  over
Spondune  (Spondon),  14
Ochebroc  (Ockbrook),  4  oens.,  10
Sudberie  (Sudbury),  14
Wingreurde  (Win^^rworth),  M4
Bectune  (Beighton),  13
Moresborg  (Mosborough),  //
Neutone  (Newton),  13
Aiune  (Eyam'),  la
Bradebume  (Bradboume),  i  a
Farulveston  (Foston),  la
Hiltune  (Hilton),  la
Oswardestune  (Oslestoo),  i  a
Tidnctune  (Tiasington),  la
Bradelei  (Bradley),  1 1  and  over
Winleslei  (Willesley,  Leic),  2^  10

6-11  households

Hoge  (Hoon),  1 1

HoUntune  (HoUington),  11

Toxenai  (Trusley),  /  cens.,  4  villains

and  a  socmen
Broctime  (Church  Bronghton),  10
Ednesoure  (Edensor),  10
Holmesfelt  (Holme^eld),  10
Sandiacre  (Sandiacre),  10
Barleie  (Barlow),  9
Eltuoe  (Elton),  9
Sudtune  (Sutton*on-the-Hill),  9


496


APPENDIX  V


Elstretnne  (Alfreton),  9

Soelleitime  (Snelftoo),  9

Topetime  (Tnpton),  /,  8

Tibecel  (Tibdiein,  9

Alchementime  (AikmoDtoD)i  8

Apleby  (Appleby),  8

Estone  (Aston-OQ-Trent),  8

Bolnn,  8

Boilesttm  (Boyleston),  8

Bradewelle  (Bradwell),  8

CUptane  (Clifton),  8

Clone  (Clowne),  8

Estone  (Coal  Aston),  2,  6

Eghintnne  (Egginton),  6  oens.,  a

GUpewell  (Glapwell),  8

Loot  (doo),  (Lowne,  by  Heath),  8

Midddtone  (Stoney  Middleton),  8  and

over
Mogintnn  (Moggington),  8
Osmondestone  (Osmaston),  8
Sdpelie  (Shipley),  /,  7
Stanton  (Stanton-by-Bridge),  4,  4
Winefeld  (S.  Wingfield),  8
Bradestone  (Breaston),  7  and  over
Denebi  (Denby),  7
Erlestone  (Arleston),  7
Eisse  (Ash),  7
Gheveli  (Yeaveley),  7
Tichenhalle  (Tickhall),  2,  5
Winsteme  (Winster),  7
Belidene  (Ballidon),  6
Cotone  (Coton*in-the-Elms)^  6
Caldewelle  (Caldwell),  6
Delbebie  (Dalbory),  6
Esnotrewic,  6
Englebie  (Ingleby),^,  4
Henleie  (Hanley),  2,  4
Iretone  (Lit.  Ireton),  6
Merchenestone  (Mercaston),  6
Normentone  (S.  Normanton),  6
Peorewic  (Parwick),  6
Redleslei  (Rodsley),  6
Radbome  (Radboome),  6
Rogetom  (Rowthom),  6
Sorcheston  (Swarkeston),  6
Sireld  (Shirley),  6
Siuardingescotes (Swadlincote), /

cens.,  4
Toroerdestone  (Thorvaston),  6
Westone  (Weston  Underwood),  6
Werrcdone,  6
Sodtone  (Sotton  Scarsdale),  6

2-5  households

Boletone  (Boolton),  2y  3
Chetelestone  (Kedleston),  5
Chinewoldemarese  (Killamarsh),  5
Fomcwerche  (Foremark),  5
Ilalon  (Kirk  Hallam),  5
Hatone  (Hatton),  5


Hortel  (Huthill),  5
Rtsdda  (Risky),  5
Snmmenale  (Potter  SomenftU),  5
Smidesbie  (SakUAjj\  5
Sapertone  (SappertODi.  5
Cobelei  (CnWcy),  4
GFttnne  (Giattoo),  4
Mordd  (MorlcjX  4
Stantnne  (SCantoo-tn-Che-Ptek),  4
Streitoo  (Stietton-cn-le^ld),  4
Tapetone  (Tapton),  4  and  oter
WiUetone  (WaUnston),  4
Begelie  (Beeley),  3
Celesdene  (ChelUstoa)p  3
Caldecote  (Chilcote).  3
Dranefeld  (DronfieldX  3
Essebnme  (Aihbonnie),  i  Msmo^  2
Etsonre  (Aahover),  j  oen^
Nortone  (Nortoo).  3
Pechefers  (Peak  Forat),  3
Barwe  (Barrow-oo-Tkent)^  /,  i
Codentone  (Cottoot),  a
Collei  (Cowl^),  a
Langelei  (Kirk  Langler),  j
Alia  Stratime  (Strettoo),  a
Sedenefeld,  (Sinfin),  a
Stanlei  (Stanley),  a

SingU  k^msik^ids

Geldeslei  (Yeldenley),  i
Giolgrmve  (Yoalgreave),  1
Normantone  (Temple  rf offmaatoo),  /

and  over
Normantone  (N.  by  Derby),  i
Osmonde»tone(Osinatton-by»Defby),i
Stanton  (Stantoa-by-Newhall),  i

Other  imamis  cnlj
Alia  Sommersale  (Somemll  Heibert^

No  tenants  (6  bcrdarU)

Dore  (Dore)
Etelawe  (Atlow)
Uloritone

Achetorp  (Ookthoipe)
Adelardestren  (AUeitiee)
Barcooere  (Biroiover)
Beneleie  (Hon^  Bentlej)
Cheniveton  (I&veton)
Dorandestorp  (Dooisthorpe)
Grehorst  (Greyhoiit)
Padinc

Habenai  (Abney)
Heorteshorae  (Hartihoni)
Hochelai  (Hocklow)
Hortedon  (Hartingtoo)
Langedenedele  (Longoendale)

Toraesete  (Thomiett)

Lodeoorde  (Lndwotth)


APPENDIX  V


leswrde  (Charlesworth)

Tde  (Chisworth)

il  (Chonal)

t  (Hadfidd)

Id  (Padfield)

ic  (Dinting)

>  (Glossop)

i  (Whit6eld)

d  (Hayfield)

re  (Kinder)

(Linton)

(Mapperlcy)

n  (Measham)

-de  rMatlock  Bridge)

ae  (M.  by  Youlgrcavc)

swelle.

(Newton  Grange)

Pilsley)

an  (Ravenstone)

ti  (Totlcy)

i(Watcraeld)
(Ivonbrook)
:  (Wormhill)

Complicaied  entries

[Aston  -  upon  -  Trent), and
elan  (Shardlow),  4
Ldale),  V.  Hope
estun  (Alvaston),  /  miles,  33
destone  (Ambaston)
»tnne  (Thurlaston)
•Idestunc  (Elvaston)
Uton-on-Trent),  v.  Hope

(Ashford),  with  Bere-
s :  »

(Rowland)
dune  (Longstone)
pe  (Hassop)
re  (Calver)
iu  (Baslow)
nle  (Bubnell)
s  (Birchill)
iun  (Sheldon)
une  (Taddington)

(t'lagg)
live  (PriestclifT)

uuelle  (Blackwell)  ^

d  Segessale  (Eaton-on-Dove

Sedsall),  5

:?stune,  v.  Acluuoldcstun

Bade(|uella
la  (Bakewell),  with  8  bere-
s  :

(Haddon)
(^  Holme)
je  (Kowsley)


18


Bortune  (Biirton-<m*Tient, /
Notts)  miles,

Cranchesberie  (Conktbnry) 35

Aneisc  (One  Adi)

Maneis  (Monytsh)

Haduna  (Over  Haddon)
Banford,  v.  Hereseige
Barlebnxg  and  Witennelle  (R)  (Bvl-

borough  and  Whitwdl),  /o,  10
Basselan,  v.  Aisseford
Benedlege,  y.  Enebnme
Berceles,  v.  Aisseford
Berleie,  v.  Dereleie
Bereuoardescote.  v.  Bomalfestoiie
Blacheuuelle.  v.  Aisieford
Blanghesbi  and  Hertestaf  (Blingsby

and  Hardstoft),  /,  I
Bredelawe,  v.  Mapletnne
Brandune and  Wadescel  (Bnunpton

and  Wadshelf)>  4
Brantune,  v.  Holnn
Bretebi,  v.  Newetnn
Brimintunei  v.  Newebold
Bubedene (Buptoo) et  Appendida,

12
Bubedene,  v.  Tonrerdestune
Bubenenle,  v.  Aisseford
Bnitorp,  ▼.  Newebold
Buntesnale,  v.  MesUch
Bnmulfestune and Berewaidescote
(Bnmaston  and  Betrwaidoote),  8
Burtune,  v.  Badeqnella
Caldecotes,  ▼.  Pinneald
Caldelawe,  v.  Cmnfoide
Calvoure,  v.  Aisseford
Cestrefeld,  ▼.  Newebold
Chetesuorde,  ▼.  Langelde
Chiteslei,  v.  Smalei

Cotenoure  (Codnor) '

Hainoure  (Heanor)

Langeleie  (Langley)

Smitecote  (?)
Cotes,  Y.  Dereleie
Cranchesberie,  v.  Badeqnella
Crice and Scodietorp (Cridi and

Oakerthorp),  10
Crunforde  (Cromford)

Middeltune  (Middleton)

Opetune  (Hopton)

Wdledene  (Weldon) y  36

Ghersintune  (Carsington)

Caldelawe  (Callow)

Hiretune  (Kirk  Ireton)
Dereleie  (Darley  Dale),  with  3  bcre-
wicks,  \  7

Farieie,  Cotes,  and  Berleie
Drachelawe  and  Hedcote  (Drakelow

and  Heathcote),  6
Draicot,  v.  Salle
Duluestune,  v.  Widerdestnne


h  "


1


K\iO\  y


Kk


498


APPENDIX  V


•32


Dauelle  (Dnffield)

Bradelei  (Bradley)

Holebroc  (Holbrook)

Mnleforde  (Milford)

Machenie  (Mackeney)

Hcrdebi  (?)
Echintune,  v.  Newebold  '
£lDode8time  and  Hoilant  (Edoaiton

and  Hulland),  a
Eitnne,  ▼.  Elleshope
Elleshope  (AUop  le  Dale) ]

Hanzedone  (Hanion  Grange)  I-

Eitune  (Cold  Eaton)  j

Emboldettone,  v.  Aelwoldeston
Faitnne  and  Stertnne (Fenton and

Sturston),  xx
Farleie,  v.  Dereleie
Findre,  y.  Ufire
Flagon,  V.  Aisseford
Ghersintone,  v.  Cninfordc
Hadun,  v.  Badequella
Hadtina,  v.  Badequella
Hainoure,  v.  Cotenoare
Halen,  ▼.  Tilchestone
Hanzedone,  ▼.  EUleshope
Hedcote,  ▼.  Drachelawe
H^elebec  and  Liton  (Hazelbadge  and

Litton),  3

Herct,  V.  Heieseige

Herdebi,  ▼.  DnueUe

Hereseige (Hathersage),  with 4

berewiclcs :

Banford, Herct,  dimidia  OfTre*
tone,  I  Middeltone
Hertestaf,  v.  Blanghesbi
Hetesope,  v.  Aisseford
Hiretune,  v.  Crunforde
Hoilant,  v.  Elnodestnne
Holebroc,  v.  Duuelle
Holnn,  V.  Badeauella
Holnn,  Wadescel  and  Brantnne  (Holm ,

Wadshelf,  Brampton),  8
Hope  (Hope),  with  berewicks: \

Aideie  (Edale),  Estnne  (Ash-
ton-on-Trent)

Scetone  (Shatton),  dim.  Offre-
tune  (OfTerton)

Tideswclle  (Tideswell)

Stoche  (Stoke),  Mnchedeswelle

(?)

Ibeholon,  ▼.  Meslach
Langeleie  and  Chetesuorde,  5
Langeleie,  v.  Cotenoure
Langesdane,  v.  Aisseford
Longesdnne  (Longstone),  10
Lede,  v.  Werchesuorde
Litun,  ▼.  Hegelebec
Lodowelle,  v.  Pilesberie
Maneis,  v.  Badequella
Middeltnne,  v.  Hereseige


8


r3o


II


If


Machenle»  ▼.  Dandle
Mapletnne  (Mapleton)
Bredelawe  (Biadley)
Torp  (Thorpe)
Benedl^se  (Fcnnr  Bentlcy)
Ophideootes  (Offoote)
OcheaaTeitim  (HQgiiuton)j
Meslach  (Matlock)
Sinitretone  (Sntttntoti)
Wodnealeie  (Weuley)
Bnnteshale  (Boonll)
Ibeholon  (Ible)
Teneslege  (Tmnaley)
Midddtune,  t.  Rapendmie
Mortone, Ooghoaefltmie, and Wu^
tanestnne  (Morton^  Ogiloii»Wcf-
sington).  14
MncbedetweUe,  t.  Hope
Mnleforde,  t.  Dnuelle
Newebold  (Newbold)9wiUi6  here-
wicks:
Witintnne  (WhittingtoQ)
Brimintone  (BrimingtoB)
Tapetmie  (Tapton)
Cestrefeld  (Chesterfield)
Bnitorp  (Boythorpe)
Echintone  (EckinA|toii)
Newetnn  and  Bietebi  (fCag^M  Nevtoo

and  Bretbr),  19
Nortberie and Roechintone (Sot-

bory  and  Rortoii),  17
Ochenavestun,  t.  Mapietnne
Offretnney  v.  Hereseige
Offretnne.  y.  Hope
Oneitnne  and  NonnaTitnne  (Unstooe

and  Temple  NotmantonX  ^
Opetnne,  y.  Crunfoide
Opewelle,  y.  Salle
Ophidecotes,  y.  Mapletane
Oughedestune,  y.  Mortiiiie
Paltretune,  Scaideclif;  Timestal  (Pftl-
tertoo,  Scaidiffe,  TiinitaU)^  /,  10,
and/cens.
Pentric,  v.  Ripelie

Pinneslei, Caldeootes,  Wilehnestofp
(Pilsley, Oldcolesy WilUans-
thorpe),  I  a
Potlac,  y.  Ufre
Presteclive,  y.  Aisadbfd
Rapendnne  and  Middeltnne  (Repton

and  Milton),  37
Ranenes  and  Upeton  (7),  ^
Redlanestun,  v.  Waletime
Renslege,  y.  Badequella
Ripelie  and  Pentnc  (Ripley  and  Fea-

trich),  13
Roschintone,  v.  Nortberie
Ralnnt,  ▼.  Aisseford
SaUe, Draicot, Opewelle (Sawky,
Draycotty  Hopwdl),  99


APPENDIX  V


499


Scardcclif,  v.  Paltretune

Scelhaduo,  v.  Aisseford

Scetune,  v.  Hope

Scochctorp,  V.  Crice

Scrotun  (Scropton),  with  3  berewicksi

/  miles,  3J
Segessale,  v.  Aitun
Serdelau,  v.  Aestun
Sinitretone,  v.  Mc«lach
Sirelunt and Uftane  (ShirUnd and

Uflon),  5
Smitccotc,  V.  Cotenonre
Sothelle  and  Walestone  (Shottle  and

\Vallstonc\  3
Stantone,  v.  Tilchestune
Steinesbi  and  Tunestalle  CSUinsbj  and

TunsUll),  8
Steintunc,  v.  Tuiforde
Stcrtane,  v.  Faitune
Stochc,  V.  Hope
Stratune,  Tegestou,  Henlege  (Stretton,

Egstow,  Hanlcy),  6
T.idiotune  (Taddington),  v.  Aisseford
Tcgcstou,  V.  Stratnne
Tcncslcge,  v.  Meslach
Taneslcgc,  v.  Werchesuorde
Tidcswcllc,  V.  Hope
Tilchestune  (Ilkeston),  2
Tilchestune, with Halea, Stantone,

Hraidcstone,  jo,  18


Torp,  T.  Mapletone

Toraerdestune  and  Bubedone  (Thor-

vastoo  and  Bopton),  3
Torolfestune,  v.  Aelwoidetton
Tuiforde  and  Steintnne  (Twyford  and

Stensoo),  4
Tonestalle,  v.  Stetnesbi
TuneiuUe,  ▼.  PaJtietnne
Uftune.  V.  Sirelnnt
Vttt  (Mickleover),  with  3  here-'
wicki :

Panra  Ufre  (Littlcorer)  >•  JO

Findre  (Finden)

PotUc  CPotlock)
Upetun,  V.  Raoenes
Wadescel,  v.  Brandnne
Wadeicel,  ▼.  Holnn
Walestone,  v.  Sothelle
Waletone  and  Kedlaneston  (Walton-
upon-Trent  and  Rotliston),  j,  33
Welledene,  v.  Cmnforde
Werchcfworde (Wirksworth), Lede
(Lea),  and  Taneslege  (Tansler),  3
Wklerdcftune  and  Doloeftone  (Wyaa-

ton  and  Edlaston),  o
WUelmestorp,  v.  Pinneslei
Wistanestnne,  ▼.  Mortnne
Witewelle,  v.  Barlebnrg
Witintnne,  v.  Newebold
Wodnesleie,  v.  MesUch


APPENDIX  VI : D. BK.

SOCMAN  AND  VILLAIN  HOUSEHOLDS  IN  ESSEX

(The  numbers  of  socman  holdings  are  given  in  italics)


Hundred  of  Tendrinc

Oirr  12  houst holds

Acltlulvesntsa  (Eadwulfsnets),  63
Clachmluna  (Clacton),  47  (or  45)
Hriclnccscia  (Brightlingsea),  34
dec  (Si.  Osylhs),  22
Irlcia  (Ardlcigh),  6  1.  h.,  I4
lakforda  (I^wford\7,  16
Kamcscia  (Ramsey),  18
Kulej>ct Ikaumont),  /,  17
A«lrm Little  Oakley;,  17
Ilolanda  (Holland  ,  17
Wica  (\Vix\  16
Mosa  (M()sc\  14
Almcitcda  (Elmstcad),  13

0-11  houstholds

Acclcia  ^(;reat  Oakley),  li
IJradcfcliia Hradficld),  7  1.  h.,  4


WileU(Weeley),  II
Renetlea  (Little  Bentley),  10
Tenderinge  (Tendring),  9
Cliva,  «  L  h.

Hoilanda  (Uttle  HoUmnd),  8
Benetleta  (Great  Bentley).  6
Wrabenasa  (Wraboeti),  6
DniTrectirt  (DoTcrcourt),  6

%-hkouHkMs

Frietnna  (Frinton),  5
Fuletona  (Foolton),  4
Torinduna  (Thorrington),  3
Micheleitou  TMichaelatow),  2
Eleaforda  (Alresford),  j
Brumlea  (Little  Bromley),  2


Single  houukM
Manestuna  (Bradfield  Mamtoo),  i
Kk  2


500


APPENDIX  VI


No  socman  or  villcun  housekoids;
oiker  tina^Us

Sciddinchon  (Manningtree),  15  bord.,

I  ler.
Birichon  (Birch  Hall),  8  b.,  i  s.
Dicheku  (Dikelev),  8  b.
Frating^  (Frating),  3  b.,  3  s.
Frorwica  (Frowick  Hall),  3b.,  la.
Mittcslea  (Mistley).  i  b.
Witclcbroc,  i  b.
Buma,  none

Hundred  of  I<ezden

Over  12  households

Eiland  (Horkcslcy),  J7  1.  h.,  ao
Pheringae  (Fecring),  12,  27
Tcia  (Marks  Tcy)^/)
Stanwega  (Stanway),  16^  9
laingaham  (Langham),  17
Teia  (Great  Tey),  16,  2
Widcmondefoit  (Wormingford),  79, 4

6-11  households

Forham  (Fordham),  7
Bricceia  (Great  Birch),  7,  6
Bocchesteda  (Boxtcd),  /,  5
'Colon'  (the  CoUics),  7  (in  Wakes
Colnc)

2-6  households

Delham  (Dedham),  5
Lcssendena  (Lexden),  5
Wivnhou  (\Vivcnhoe).  5
BercolU  (W.  Bcrgholt),  5
Bura  (Mt.  Bnres) ,  5
Metcinges  (Messing),  3

Single  households
Perestcda  (Prested),  /  1.  h.

No  socman  or  villaipi  households;
other  tenants

Bricia  (Little  Burch),  13  b.,  6  s.
Dunulanda  (£.  Donyland),  16  b.,  i  s.
Estorp  (E.  Thorpe),  8  b.,  2  s.
Crepinga  (Creping  Hall),  6  b.
Witesworda,  I  b.
Aldeham  (Aldham),  4  s.

Hundred  of  Hinokford
Over  12  households

Ilainghcham  (Castle  Hedinghaxn",  /;,

33
Westrcfelda  (Wcthersfield),  28

Ilaltestcda  (Halstead),  22^  9

Stibinga  (Stebbing),  27

Pcntelawa  (Pcntlow),/*,  8


Raines  (Rraie),  33

Belcham  (Belchunp  Sc  Ptanl  s)  34

Phincin^ielelda (Fincliii^gfield).  a,

13
Phensteda  rFelstend),  30

Foxearde  (Foxcarih),  §9
Ghettingetorp  (Gcitingtiiocpe).  1/,  \
Bummeiteda?Steeple  BiimpitMd)j,i
Ttuncsteda  (TViiutMul)^  mS
Pebenen  (Pebmanh).  iSi  with  litdc

Mapleitead,/  I.  h.
Bnim  (Buret),  mj^  5

Belcamp  (Belduunp  Walter),  15

Cheneboltmui,  1/

Alfelmestima  (Alphaautoiae),  mj


8
"5


Ltmers  (Lammarsh).  ^  L  h^  6
HedingMm  (Sibil  Hedioflliam),  14
RidewelU  (RidgweU),  14
Mildeltima  (Middleton),  mj

SUnbiinui(Siamb(rani)y  1 4,withTopet-

felda
Stanburoa,  ij  1.  h.

Belcham  (Bdchamp  Otton).  6
Barlea  (Boilej),  10
Babitema  (Bapthome).  6
Pe&felda  (Panfidd).  8
Brandima  (Bnuidoa},  J
Listmia  (Liston),  7  L  n.
Goldingham  (Golding^m),  6
Bridebroc  (Biidbrook),  6
Geldham  (Little  Yeldham),  6

S-6  h^atseMdt

Henies  (Great  Hennj),  5

TiUberia  (TUbary  by  Clare),  5

Celvestuna,  /

Mapledesteda  (Great  Maplettead),  5

Wicham  (Wickham  St.  lW*t),  5

Clare  (Claret),  4

Stanesteda  (Stanited  Hall),  4

Salinges  (GreU  Saliof ),  a  and  prt.

Smedetnna  (Smeetoo  Hall),  3

Ovituna  (Oyington),  3

Stormere  (Stnxmer),  3

Hersa  (Hersham  Hall),  3

Bineslea,  2

Topcsfelda (ToppesSeld),  4, Stan-

buma  and  Topesfielda  together  14

more
Mapledesteda  (little  Mapleitead),  i

pst. ;  /  1.  h.  Mappesteda  and  Pebe-


ners


Binglm  hoMseialds


Belcham  (BeanchampSt.  Ethdbert),  i
Boitnna  (Boytoo  Hall),  i
Heni  (Little  Henny),  i


APPENDIX  VI


501


No  socman  or  villain  households  ;
other  tenants

Wcstuna  (Weston),  10  b.,  4  s.

Belindane  (Balingdon),  9  b.,  4  s.

AssewelU  (Asbwell  Hall),  7  b.

Folhcia  (Polhey),  6  b.

Asec  (Ashen),  6  b.

Weninchoo  (How  Hall),  5  b.,  4  s.

Horstedafort,  5  b.

Alreforda  (Alderford),  4  b.

Gcrham,  3  b.,  i  s.

Bulenemera  (Bolmer),  i  b.

Westuna  (Weston),  none

Hundred  of  Freshwell

Over  12  households

Birdcfclda  (Great  Bardficld),  23
Kcdewintra  (Radwinter),  2a
Hamsteda  (Hempstead),  22
Ascenduna  (Ashdon),  20
Sanfort  (Great  Sampford),  16
Sanforda  (Little  Sampford),  2  franci,

Bunste<Ia  (Helion  Bumpstead),  14
Cadenhou  (Hadstock),  12

6-11  households

IkncdUc  (Bcndish  Hall),  /,  8
Newhara  (Newenham),  9
Hcnham,  8
Birdcfelda  (Little  Bardfield^  6

2-5  households
Stavintuna  (Stevington  Elnd),  2  1.  h.,  3

No  soiffian  or  villain  households  ;
other  tenants

Koda  (Roihe  Knd),  none

Hundred  of  CUvering

Over  12  households
("lavelinj;a  (Clavcring),  17

6  11  households

liciicfelda  (Ifendfieldbury;,  9
Maj^'ghedana  (Manuden),  8
I'gghclca  (Uglcy,  7
T'olituna  i^lk)llington),  /  1.  h.  ;  7,  with

Itertuna
riichcdaua  (Tledgdon),  6

2-5  households

I'>erilanc  (lierden),  4
riK-ruthain  (Kamham).  4
rachcnilou  ^ra)ton  Hall),  2

a\'o  SO:  'II an  or  villain  households  ;
other  tenants

I'lncepo I'inchpoles),  3  b.,  i  s.
Sniahuna,  none


Handred  of  UtUecford

Over  IS  households

Waledann  (Saffron  Walden),  46
Litelbyria  (Littlebaiv),  39
Dcppedana  (Debden),  30
Cnsteshala  (Chrahall),  32
Nenport  (Newpoit),  a6
Elmerdnna  (Elmdoo),  26
Cestreforda  (Great  Chetterford),  24
Richelinga  (Rickling),  20
Amberdana  (Amberaen),  19
Haidena  (Heydon),  18
Tacheleia  (Takeley),  16  and  pst.
Widittina  (Widdingtoo),  15
Timreslea  (Thnnderlev),  1 1  and  pst.
Suncsteda  (Stansted  Moiintfichet),  11
and  pst.

6-11  households

Elsenham  (Elsenham  Hall),  11
Cestrefort  (Little  Chesterfozd),  10
Wicam  (Wickham  Bonhont),  9
Wendena  (Great  Wcndcn),  9
Wicgepct,  9

Cisbella  (Great  Chishall),  7
Sdlcheham,  6
Strathala  (Strethall),  6
Cishella  (Little  Chishall),  6

2-5  households

Wendena  (Wenden  Loughts),  5
Lea  (Leebury^,  5
Archesdana  (Axkesden),  4
Kuenadana  (Qaendon),  3
Cesewic  (Cheswick  HaU),  3
Eineswrda  (Eynsworth),  3
Wendena  (Little  Wenden),  2
Mooehala  (Manhall),  2

Single  households

Sortegrava  (ShortgroTe),  i
Becangra  (Birchanger),  i

No  soeman  or  villain  households  ;
other  tenants

Gerdelai  (Yaidley),  7  b.
Banhnnta  (Bonhont),  4  b.
Crawelaea  (Crawlejbary),  2  b.

Hundred  of  Dunmow
Over  12  household

Tachesteda  (Thaxted),  52
Estra  (High  Easter),  47
Wimbeis  (Wimbish),  26  and  pst.
Dommawa  (Great  Diiiimow),i9(or  23)

and  pst.
Dommawa  (Little Diinmow),ao  (or  24)

and  pst.
Estaoes  (Great  Easton),  19  and  pst.


5oa


APPENDIX  VI


LindcieU  (Lindsell),  i8  and  pst.
Broccheshevot  (Broxted),  i8
*  Rodinijes'  (the  Rodings  (9)),  /,  55,
mod  4  ptts.

6-11  households

Canefelda  (Great  Canfield),  11
Canefelda  (Little  Canfield),9and  pst.
Estra  (Good  Easter),  8
Bemestnna  (Bamston),  7
Alferestnna  (Bigods,  in  Great  Dun*

mow),  7
Vdecheshale,  6

S-5  households

Niwetnna  (Newton  Hall),  5
Scelda  (Shellow  Bowells),  J,  a
Eistanes  (Little  Easton),  3  and  pst.
Ulingehala  (WHUingale  Spain),  4
Willingehala  (WiUingale  Doe),  5
Tileteia  (Tiltey),  3

No  socman  or  villain  households  ;
other  tenants

Plesinchon,  7  b.,  3  s.

Cicchenai  (Chickney),  14  b.  and  pst.

Hundred  of  Witham

Over  12  households

Witham,  qj^  17
Chelleyedana  (Kelvedon),  27
Knenhale  (Riyenhall),  ^,18
Bochinges  (Booking),  18
Nmlea  (Black  Notlej),  2  1.  h.,  15
Hadfelda  (Hatfield  Peverel),  15
Stiesteda  (Stisted),  13

6-11  households

Terlinga  (Terling),  /,  10
Cogeshala  (Coggeshall),  9
Brachesteda  (Great  Braxted),  i,  7
Nutlea  (White  Notley),  6  or  8

2-6  households

Fairsteda  (Fairsted),  4
Breddinchon  (Bennington  Hair,  4
Vltinga  (Ulting),  4
Hobruge  (Hubbridge  Hall),  3
Blundeshala  (Blnnt^s  Hall),  /,  a
Melesbam  (Great  Mulsham)|  a

No  socman  or  villain  households :
other  tenants

Falchebnma  (Fanlkboume),  8  b.,  3  s.
Bracteda  (Little  Braxted),  8  b.,  a  s.  and

pst.
Coghessala(LittIeCoggeshall),8b.,i  s.
Rctleia  (Ridley  Hall),  3  b.,  i  s.
Smalelant  (Smalland),  i  b.,  i  s.
alia^Molesham  (Little  Mulsham),  as.
Slamondesheia  (Slamondsay),  none


Eimdrvd  of  ¥7iiialvM

Over  IM  Jimu^JMds

Mereiaia(W.  Menea),  36
'  Legra  *  (the  Layeis),  14

WicgliebeigarGreftt  WlftioRNigfa),  10
Meresai  (E.  Mcnejt^  8
LanghoQ  (Langeolioe),  9

S-5  koustMds

Wigheberga  (Uttie  W^boroogh}.  3
Peltendima  (Pddoa),  j,  3

No  socman  9rviaamkmu9kMs;
other  tamemis

Edboighetnna  (Abfaeitoo),  8  b.»  1 1.
Boroomitima  (Bamwaldcn),  4  h.
SalcoU  (Saloot  Verier),  3  b.,  i  i.
Samantnna  (Samptoo),  a  h.

Eimdred  of  Tbniatelila

OverlSk  kamselMb

Tidwolditnna  (Heybridge),  16
Tolesberia  {JoXit&nifL  13
Toleshonta,  (the  Tollcdinnte  (3)},  16
1.  h.,  3a,  and  4  knighta

t-llhamsoAMr

Toteham  (Great  TothamV  9
Wicham  (Wickam  Bishopa),  / L  k,5

%'^  homselUidi

Langefort  (Langfoid),  4  «hoinfaies'y  i

villain
Goldhangra  (Goldhangcr), «  L  h^  i

Biagb^  housekold
Toteham  (Little  Tothun),  i

No  socman  or  viUaiu  kmtstkMs ;
other  tenants

Uveseia  (Oesey  Isle),  3  a.
Blacham,  none

Hundred  of  ObeliiiBfard

Over  12  homukaUs

Writela  (Writtle),  76  and  paL
Waldbam  (Great  Waltham),  75
Hanegfaefelda  (S.  Hanningfield),  »s

1.  h.,  4
Ratendnna  (Rettendon),  36
Vdeham  (Woodham  Ferren),  34
Badwen  (Great  Baddoir),^,  16
Ginga  (Monntnening),  /  1.  h.,  16
Newelanda  (Newland  Hall),  15
Ginga  (Margarettlng),  13

e-VLhonsekMs
Bmmfelda  (Broomiield),  9
Springinghefelda  (Springfield),  8


APPENDIX VI


503


Rnncwella  rRunwcll),  8
Phingbcria  (pingrith),  6
licTcwic,  6
Hadwen  (Little  Baddow),  4  franci,  a

2-6  households

I^ga  (Lees),  5
Celmcresfort  (Chelmsford),  4
Cingehala  ,Chignal\  4
Cinga  (Balsbary),  4
Inga  (Ingatestone),  /,  2
Pacinges  (Patching  Hall),  3
Molesham  (Moulsham),  3
Inga  (Frieming),  2
VValiham  (Little  Waltham),  /,  I
Cetham  (Chatham),  2

Single  households

Richeham  (Culverts),  I
Laghenberia  (Old  Lawn\  I
Keventuna  (Kcwton  Hall),  i
Cinguehella  (Chicknal  Zo]m),  I
]k)rham  (Boreham),  m  1.  h.
I  )anengeberia  (Danbnry),  I

Ko  socman  or  villain  households ;
other  tenants

Itedcnesteda  (Sandon),  32  b.,  3  s.
Walcfara  (Walkfares),  15  b.,  5  s.
Haningefelda  (K.  Hanning6eld)  9  b.,

2  s.

Festinges  (Fresling),  4  b.
llaningefeld  (W.  Hanningfield),  4  b.,

3  5.

Mnasehirig  (Mashbury),  3  b.,  I  s.
Iieleste(ia  vHelstead  Hall),  3  b.,  a  t.
Cabrij^  (Cowbridge),  none

Hundred  of  Harlow

Over  12  households

Ilndfclda  (Hatfield  Broadoak),  60
llerlftva  (Harlow),  13

6-11  households

Halingcl>eria  (Little  HalUngbary),  10
Ovcsham  (Housham  Hall),  10
Matcin^'e  (Matching),  9
Halmgcl>cria  (Great  iialUngbary),  8
Kuindune  (koydon),  8
l^ltuna  (Latton),  6  and  pst.
Cuicn <^)uick  Hnry),  6

2-6  households

Scfrini,'a  (Sheering).  3
Tcrt-nduna  ((Ircat  Pamdon\  3
\\  altla,  2

Single  household

Siri  •e^U•a  (Riic  Mar&es),  i


No  socman  or  villain  households  ;
oihir  tenants

Walla  (Wallbnry).  6  b.
Perindana  (Little  Pandoo),  5  b.,  3  s.

Hundred  of  Walthmm
Otfir  18  hoHSikolds
Waltham  (Waltham  Abbey),  80

e-nkoHSikoUs

Nasinga  (Nazing),  6

Cingbefort  (Chingford  St  Paul's),  8

Cingerfort  (Chingiford  Earls),  7

S-5  houuholds

Epinga (Epping),  a, Nasinga and
Epwga  to^^ether,  7

Hundred  of  Ongar

Over  18  koustholds

Stanfort  (Sunford  Rivers),  /  1.  h^  34
Nasestoca  (Navestock),  12  *  men  ',  i  a
CioghewelU  (Chigwell),  19  and  7 1,  b.
Walla  (N.  Weald  Basset),  17
SUpleforda  (Stapleford  Abbots),  la
*  Taindena '  (the  Theydons),  a3

0-11  households

Gemesteda  (Greensted),  10
Alvertnna  (Alderton  Hall),  9
Angra  (Chipping  Ongar),  8
Fifheda  (Fviield),  8
Nortnna  (Norton  Mandeville),  6
'  Laghafiura '  (the  Lavers),  1 1

8-5  households

Parva  Stanfort  (in  St.  Riven),  5
Senleia  (Shelley),  5
PasKfelda  (Passelow),  5
Ulfelmestnna  (Wolverrtoo),  4
Tippedana  (IXebden),  4
Mortnna  (Moreton),  4
SUplefort  (St.  Tany),  a
Looietima  (Looghton),  a
Kelvendona  (Kelvedoo  Hatch),  a

Single  koussMds

Ijimborna  (Lamboume),  1
Plomtnna,  i

No  socman  or  villain  housshoUb  ;
olhor  tenants

Angra  (High  Ongar),  6  b.,  is.
Babtngeorda  (Bobbingworth),  2  b.,  as.

Hundred  of  Dengie

Ovor  18  households

Lalinge  (Lawling),  ai

Tillingham,  ao

Parlai  (Parleigh),  16  and  pit.


504


APPENDIX  VI


Mnnduna  (Mundon),  15
Sadmnnstra  (Soutbminster),  /^  <  homi-
nes*, II

6-11  kouseholds

Nortnna  (Cold  Norton),  6  1.  h.,  5
Daneseia  (Dengie),  <<  L  h.,  6
Lacendnna  (Latchingdon),  .^  I.  h.,  4
Wdeham  (Woodham  Walter),  6
*  Meldtma '  (Little  Maldon),  9

2-5  households

Halesheim  (Hazeleigfa),  5

EstoUeia,  4  (or  7)

Odcham  (Woodham  Mortimer),  4

Fenne  (Stow  Maries),  6

Dona  (Down  Hall),  4

Niwelant  (W.  Newland),  3

Carseia  (Northqr  Isle),  3

Essecestra  (Bradwell),  j  I.  h.

Stanesgata  (Stangate),  2

Weneswic,  a

Fanbmge  (N.  Fambridge),  2

Single  households

Wringehala,  /

Hale^nna,  i

Niwelanda  (£.  Newland),  /  1.  h.

Altenai  (Utney),  i

Baineham  (Bumham),  i

Stepla  (Steeple),  /  1.  b.

Ulwinescherham,  i  famulus  regis

No  socman  or  villain  households  ;
other  tenants

Copeforda  (Copford),  14  b.,  3  s.

Hacflet,  10  b.

Witham  (E.  Whettenham),  8  b.,  i  s.

Criccheseia  (Cricksea),  4  b.,  a  s.

Ilainctmia  (Asheldham),  4  b.

Mildemet  (Middlemead)  3  b.,  a  s.

Acleta,  I  b.

Uleham  (in  Lawling),  t  b.,  2  s.

Hundred  of  Meldnna  (J)
Over  12  households

Malduna (Maldon), bnrgesses, i
socman  (5  bordarii),  2  (or  4)  1.  h.

Hundred  of  Bochford
Over  12  households

Hocheleia  (Hockley),  27
Carendnna  (Canewdon),  16
Essoberia  (Shoebury),  15  and  /  1.  h.
Sudcerca  (Southchurch),  14

6-11  hottseholds

Hachewella  (^Hawkswell),  8
Mildentnna  (Milton  Hall),  8
Kageneia  (Kaylcigh),  8
Scopelanda  (Shopland).  2,  5


Rochefort  (Rocfafacd),  5
Thorp  (Thorpehall%  4
Piittewella  (Prittlewdl),  4
Estwda  (Eaitwood),  3
Wachelinga  (Great  Wmkering),  a
Toipeia  (Northorp),  a
Stanbnige  (Little  Stambridge),  2
Poteseia  (Potsey),  a
Legra  (Leigh),  a

Binsle  household

Midebroc,  i

No  socman  or  viliain  households;
other  tenants

Sattnna  (Sntton),  2  a  b.,  6  t.
Pachesham  (P^letham),  18  b.,  3  s.
Stanbruge  (Great  Stmmbridge),  la  b.,

I  s.
Berlinga  (Berling),  10  b^  i  a.
Wacheringa  (Little  Wakering},  10  b.
Plmnberga  (Plnmberow),  8  b.
Berrewera  (Barrow  Hall),  3  b.,  3  s.
Bacheneia  (Bedmey),  a  b.
Nesenduia  (Ashiogdon),  i  b.

Hundred  of  Barafeable

OverVi  hodiseholds

Bnrgfaesteda  (Great  Bnntead),  aa
Orseda  (Oiiett),  2  a
Hasinghebroc  (Haidiigbioke),  20
Bnlgeuen  (Bnlphan),  16
Madnga  (Mndcing),  i  a
'  Benflet '  (the  BenfleeU),  36

e-HhoHsehoUs

Wicfort  (Wickfoid),  2  \.  h.,  8
Beidestapla  (Bantable  Hall)«  6
Phenge  (Vange),  6
Lea  (W.  Lee^6
Thmireslea  (Thimderaley)i  5

^-^  households

Tornindona  (W.  Homdon)|  o^  3
Langendona  (Langdoo),  5
Atahon  (Hattoo),  j,  a
Bare  (Bowers  Gifford),  4
Phobinge  (Fobbim;),  3
Legenduna  (Lainooo),  3
Currincham  (Corringham),  a
Dantnna  (Donton),  a
Celdewella  (Chadwell),  z,  i  pet.
Borghesteda  (Little  Biiratead),  a
Phantnna  (Fanton  Ham»  a
Gravesanda  (GraTesend),  a

Single  households

Inga  (Ingrave),  i
Piceseia  (Pitsea),  I
Berlesdnna  (Basildon),  i


APPENDIX  VI


a  (Homdon-on-the-Hill),  i
la  *  (the  Ramsdens)y  / 1.  b.,

(the  Tilburies),  i

m  or  xnliain  households  ;
other  tenants

Vheatley),  12  b.
(Shenfield),  6  b.

b.,  I  s.

lenc  (Doddinghurst)


a  (Newcnden)

ndred  of  Ohafford

>oer  12  households

(Rainham),  25

^pminster),  14

Great  Warley),  12

(the  Thurrocks),  22

una '  (the  Ockendons),  //,

6-11  households

Weald).  II
3hilderditch),  9
Kenningtons),  7
iveley),  6

2-5  households

5tifford),  5
Xittle  Warley},  5
(Wenington),  2

Single  households

na,  I

tan  or  villain  households  ;
other  tenants

a,  2  b.

Qdred  of  Becontrea

Over  12  households

e  (Barking),  143

ic  (Havering),  40

tou  (Walthamstow),  36

Lcyton),  22  and  2  psts.

Woodford),  13

E.  and  W.  Ham),  86

6-11  households
Higham  licnsted),  10

2-5  households
ford),  4


Wenesteda  (Wanstead),  s  ^Oinun  and
f  rumen  attacked  to  matters.

Hundred  of  Tendriiic
Laleforda,  j^  or  40

Hundred  of  Lexden

Bara,  3 :  '  adhoc  lemper  pextiiicnt  *
Metdnges^:  '  pertinent  manerio  *
Feringae,  /  1.  h. :  'iacet  ad'

Hundred  of  Hinokford

Westrefelda,  8 :  <  iacent  *
Phensteda,  ^ :  'iacent*
Ghestingetorp,  1 :  '  iacet '
Bnmmesteda,  /  L  h.  :  <  additut  *
Belcamp,  7  :  <  adiacent '
Hedingham, .a :  'adiacent'
Ridewella,  /^  :  '  adjacent  semper '
Stanbume  and  Topcsfelde  iji  'ad-
iacent *
Clare,  /  1.  h. :  'additns*;  7  socmen

'adiacent'
Belcham,/:  'iacent'
Babitema,  2 :  ' adiacent'

Hundred  of  Olaverlns

Benefelda,  / :  '  adiacet '

Hundred  of  XJttleaford

Maledana,  14 :  '  adiacent'
Neuport,  2 :  'pertinentes'
Wldituna,  4  :  *  iacent '
Cishella,  /  :  '  iacet '

Hundred  of  Dunmow

Tachesteda,  J,  with  a :  'adiacent'
Estra,  6f  j:  ^ adiacent '
Dommawa,  /,  with  a  :  '  adiacet  *
Scelga,  / :  '  adiacet '
Rodinges,  j

Hundred  of  Witham

Witham,  j2  1.  h. :  '  adiacent '
Cogeshala,  Ji,  i  pst.,  i  porcarias,  i

mercennarius :  'pertinent'
Cogeshala,  i  1.  h. : with  land  '  ad-

diu'

Hundred  of  Winatree

Meresaia,  i  pst. :  '  adiacet '
Wigheberga,  2 :  *  additi '
I^gra,  2 :  *  additi '

Hundred  of  Ohelmaford

Writela,  2 :  *  semper  iacent '

Hundred  of  Harlow

Hadfield,  /,  i :  'adiacent*
Herlava,  2  :  with  4  h. '  addite'


5o6


APPENDIX  VI


Hundred  of  Waltham

Walhiun,  6,  with  i :  '  adiaoent  *

Hundred  of  Onsra

Staplefort,  ^  1.  h. :  'in  loca  manerii '

Hundred  of  Dengie

Copeforda,  to  :  *  pertinent '

Hundred  of  Barstable

Bai]^hesteda,  28  Lh,:  <additi  *
Phobinge,  22  1.  h. :  '  additi '


Ingaf7l.h.:  'additi'
Piceseia,  « 1.  h.  :<  additi '
Wicford,  4  L  h. :  •  additi'


Upmontra,  r :  *iaoet'
ATileia,  r:  <additna'
Tarruc,/:  'iaoent'

HoBdrad  of  B^oontraa
Hame,  i, '  adiaoet  *


APPENDIX VII: D. BK.


OXFORDSHIRE  VALUES:


Tewe  (Dd.  I.  156  b)
Niwetone  (ibid.)
Stantone  (156  c)
Monitone(i57b)
Sivewelle  (ibid.)
Stiintesfeld(i58a)
Edbnrgberie  (ibid.)
Estone  (ibid.)
Snmertooe  (159  c)
Gersednne  (i59d)
Samertone  (ibid.)
Hentooe  (160  a)
Ypestan  (160  c)
Besintone  (ibid.)
Nortone  (160  d)
Pereio  (156  a)
Bodicote  (159  b)
Hardintone  (156  b)


Teova  (156  c)
Asccri57d)
Cote  (159  b)
Sciptone  (i6od)
Adiach  (161  a)
Sexintone  (155  d)
Haliwelle(i58c)
Bercford  (156  b)
Ro€ote(i6od)
Adingeham  (161  b)


V//#p

PUugk'

Vaimii

Volte.

tueS,

lands.

T.Ji.E.

aor.

lar.

aor.

_-

aor.

lor.

lor.

aor.

lor.

aor.

aox.

30r.

aor.

3or.

15*.

aor.

aor.

aor.

aor.

aor.

aor.

aor.

aor.

aor.

aor*

aor.

aor.

lax.lkf.

I  or.

aor.

li

3W.

3or.

l{

.V>r.

30r.

a

lor.

aor.

ides.

PUmgh'
teams.

Veamt
T,  P.  E.

Valei.

2

2

4or.

49'-

2

a

40r.

£i

2

a

3or.

4or.

2

a

4or.

4or.

2
2

a

3

4or.
4or.

SJ:

2

I

aor.

4<».

ai

Ii

3W.

5or.

a

a

4or.

^4

^i

3

5or.

5or.

APPENDIX  VII


507


BERKSHIRE  VALUES


Comenore  (Dd.  i.  58  c)
Spenolt  (60  c)
Aneborae  (61  d)
Siford  (6a  c)
Solafel  (63  c)
Bnrlei  (63  d}


Hides.


I
I

>i

I
I


Plough-
lands,

I

I
a
I

a


Valuit
T.  R.  E,

aof.
40J.
40f.
zos,

205,

30*.


VaUt.

JOS,

zos.
20s,
20s,
20s,
20s,


Hannei  (60  b)
Cerletooe  (60  c)
Peteorde  (61  a)
Wille  (61  d)
Hiirlei  (6a  d)


//ides.


a*
aj

1

I
(T.  R.  E.  a)


Plough-
teams.


1
I

a
a

a


Valuit
T,  R,  E.

40r.

50/.

30J«
40^.


VaUt,

40X.

40r.
401.


HERTFORDSHIRE  VALUES:


Welei(Dd.  i.  133  a)
Trochinge(i33c)
Mesdone  (133  d)
Pcleham  (134a)
Almeshou  (134  b)
Eldeham  (136  a)
Bore  (1 36 d)

Rctc(i37a)
Rctth  (ibid.)

Cornci  (137  b)

Bradefclle  (137  c)

Scelua  (137  d)

Sammersele  ( 1 38  a)

Satrebdia  (139  a)

Chaissou  (139  c)

Stiaicesuuorde  (I39d)

Stanestede  (i4od)

Lufenclle  ( 1 36  h)

Pentlai  (136  c)

Bublecote  (i36d)

Grauelai  (140  d)

Haingesteauorde  (14 id)

Wcrmclai  (142  h)


Hides.

Plough'
lands.

Valuit

Valet,

T.  R,  E,

Post,

2

zos.

20s.

aox.

h

i|

^%'

30X.

5".

5

&

aor.

aox.

2

4W.

aox.

aox.

I

ZOS,

lOX.

aox.

I

20s,

I  ax.

lax.

»i

I

20s.  9</.

I  ox.

aox.  9^/.

3

6or.

lOX.

aox.

3

60J.

aox.

aox.

I

20s,

lOX.

jy,Ad,

1

i

I  ox.

5^-

hs.

1

I

aor.

lOX.

lOX.

1

I

aox.

I  ox.

6x84/.

ih.  Jv.

a

Z^'

aox.

aox.

I

I

20s.

6^.

5J.

1

•i

40X.

aox.

aox.

i

i

lor.

5^.

I  ox.

3

2

40X.

aox.

aor.

3

2

40f.

aox.

30J.

li

'i

4CXX.

30X.

zos.

2

3

60X.

aox.

40X.

2

2

aox.

40X.

3i

a

60J.

50^-

40X.

5o8
APPENDIX  VIII:  D. BK.

WESTERFIELD,  SUFFOLK


*<  •  I  M  I  t  I -i  I  I  I  r '


Dd.  ii.  294  b :  Westrefeldam  tenuit  Bar.  liber  homo
Radulfo  Stalra,  i  carucatam  terrae  pro  i  manerio,  modo  tenet
Normannus  de  comite,  semper  ii  uillani,  modo  ii  bordarii.  Tone
in  dominio  i  caruca,  modo  ii,  semper  i  caruca  hominum,  ii  acne
prati,  modo  i  runcinus  et  iiii  animalia  et  xx  pord  et  c  cues.  Tunc
ualuit  X  sol.  modo  xx. Comes  socam.

295  a:  In  eadem  tenet  idem  vi  liberos  homines  de  zziiii  acris
commendatos  Radulfo  Stalra  t.r.e.  semper  i  caruca,  et  uaL  iiii  sd.
soca  comitis.

Ibid. :  In  eadem  tenuit  Stanuinus  liber  homo  xiiii  acraa^  mode
Osbernus,  et  ualet  ii  sol.  et  iiii  den.,  habet  viii  quarentenas  in  hmgo
et  iiii  in  lato,  et  xx  den.  de  geldo. Soca  comitis.

Ibid. :  In  Westrefelda  vi  liberi  homines  Lr.e.  xx  aeras,  semper
i  caruca,  et  sunt  in  pretio  de  Gipeswiz.  Comes  tenet  in  dominia
Rex  et  comes  socam.

Ibid. :  In  Turuestuna  i  liber  homo  ii  acras,  et  in  Westrefdda
ii  liberi  homines  iii  acras,  et  ualet  xd.  Aluricus  presbiter  tenet  de
comite.

Ibid. :  In  eadem  tenuit  Uluricus  liber  homo  vi  acias,  et  oafant
xii  d. Rex  et  comes  socam.

305  b :  In  Westrefelda  tenuit  Vluuiet  liber  homo  commendatos
Guerto,  Ix  acras  terrae,  et  iacent  in  Rissemera,  modo  tenet  Hnnfiridos
de  R(oberto)  Malet Tunc  i  bordarius,  et  ualet  x  soL

Ibid. :  In  eadem  ii  liberi  homines  vi  acras  et  dimidiam.  Com*
mendati  Wluieto,  et  ualet  ii  sol.  Idem  Hunfridus.  Soca  regis
et  comitis.

306  a:  In  Westrefelda  i  liber  homo  commendatns  x  acras,
et  ualet  ii  sol. Rex  et  comes  socam.

352  b :  In  Westrefelda  dimidia  ecclesia  vii  acras  et  dimidiam.

Ibid. :  In  Westrefelda  ii  liberi  homines  ix  acras,  et  ualet  xviiid.,
soca  regis  et  comitis.

383  b:  In  Westrefelda  tenuit  Aseret  i  socemannus  abbati8(Sanctae
Aldredae)  xxv  acras,  semper  i  caruca  et  i  acra  prati,  et  ualet  v  soL
Herueus  tenet  de  abbate  iussu  regis.

Ibid. :  In  eadem  Turchillus  liber  homo  commendatus  viii  acras,


APPENDIX  VIII  509

et  ualet  xvid.,  hoc  tenuit  Herueus  de  rege,  et  modo  de  abbate  iussu
regis  sicut  ipse  didt. Soca  regis.

410a:  In  Westrefelda  tenet  Hugo  in  dominio,  quern  tenuit
Ordricus  liber  homo,  viii  acras,  et  ualet  xvi  den.

411a:  In  Westrefelda  tenuit  Langfere  liber  homo  commendatus
Haldein,  xiiii  acras,  et  ualet  ii  soL  Idem  Willelmus  Rex  et  comes
socam.

433  b:  In  Westrefelda  iii  liber!  homines  xxviii  acris.  Tunc
et  post  i  caruca,  modo  nichil,  et  i  acra  prati,  et  ualet  x  sol.  Rex
et  comes  socam.

Ibid. :  In  Westrefelda  v  liberi  homines  xxiil  acris  et  i  uirga.
Tunc  et  post  i  caruca,  modo  nulla,  et  ualet  iiii  sol. Giroldus  tenet.

Ibid. :  In  eadem  i  liber  homo  xvi  acris.  Tunc  et  post  dimidia
caruca,  modo  nulla,  et  ualet  xxxiid.  Rex  et  comes  socam.
Emaldus  tenet  de  eo.

436  b :  In  Westrefelda  tenuit  Almarus  liber  homo  xxx  acras,
et  iiii  bordarios,  semper  i  caruca,  et  ii  acrae  prati,  et  ualet  viii  soL
Turstinus  de  Galtero  de  feudo  Tedrici,  rex  et  comes  socam.

Ibid. :  In  Westrefelda  iii  liberi  homines  xxviii  acris,  et  tunc
dimidia  caruca,  et  ualet  xxxvid.  Bemardus  et  Almarus  tenent.
Rex  et  comes  socam.

Ibid. :  In  eadem  liber  homo  vi  acris,  et  ualet  xiid.  de  eodem
feudo. Normannus  tenet. Soca  Regis  et  comitis.

446  b:  In  Westrefelda  vi  liberi  homines  Aluuinus,  Flint,  Aluuinus,
Edricus,  Vluricus,  Alestan,  inter  eos  xv  acrae,  et  i  caruca,  et  ualet
xxxd.  Unus  ex  his,  nomine  Flint,  dedit  uadum  ex  hoc  quod  dixit
quod  dabant  firmam  in  Gipeswiz,  et  uicecomes  derationauit  quod
mentitus  erat,  et  idem  uicecomes  de  eo  est  fide  iussor.  Rex  et
comes  socam.

Ibid. :  In  Westrefelda  tenet  semper  Aluricus  presbiter  xii  acras,
et  ii  acras  prati,  et  ualet  iii  sol. Rex  et  comes  socam.


5"


APPENDIX IX: D. BK.

LINCOLNSHIRE HOLDINGS

Table  I

CORRESPONDENCE  OF  GELD  TO  ESTIMATES

OF  PLOUGH-LAND


A. Geld  exceeding  estiiiates  of  Plough-land

The  assessment  figures  of  the  geld  are  given  on  the  left  of  the  ^■■fc  (— ),
the  estimites  of  plough-land  on  the  ri^t.


Blachene,  M  (Walter  de  Aincurt),  34c.

—  13

Belingei,  M  (Abp.  of  York),  120.-4

fiasingeham,  M  (K.  William),  34  c.  —

16
Haneworde,  3  M  (Walter  de  Aincort),

13  c. — 6

Scheldinchope,  B.  Dodintone  (Bald-

win),  13  c  —  6
Weranghe,  s.  Draitone  (Cnt  Alan),

IOC. —  5

Nortane,s.Stapleforde(Cnts6.  Jadith),

I3C  — 7
Sunderby,  s.  Akeley  (Cntss.  Jadith),

II  c. — 6
Stapleforde,  M  (Jadith,  Osbem),  10  c.

—  5

Hacam,  free  M  (Bp.  Line.,  Hagh),

14  c.  —  9  c.  4  b.
Holobech-Copelade,  s.  Gadenai  (Cnt.

Alan,  Landric),  13c.  6b. — 9  c  ab.
Hadinctune, s. and iol. Dodintane

(Baldwin),  8  c.  4  b.  —  4  c.  a  b.
Medricesham,  s.  Branztone  (Walter

de  Aincart,  Wintrehard),  8  c  4  b. —

4  c.  3  b.
Medricesham, B. Wadintone (Cnt

Hugh),  8c.  4b.  —  4c.  2b.
Lttdintone&  Geralftorp,  and  Maraeand

Watertone,  s.  in  Crale  (4ic),  M

(i  c.),  s.  in  Beltone  (Jc.)  (Geoffrey

de  Wirce)  6  c.  —  2
Gadenai,  M  (K.  William),  8  c.  — 4
Witenai,  M  (Henry  de  Ferrers,  Sas-

walo),  12  c  —  8
Torp,  3  M  (Roger  de  Poitou),  6  c  6  b.

—  3

Schirebecy  B.  Draitone  (Cnt.  Alan),
1 1  c.  6  b.  —  8


Taralfbi,  inl.  and  a. Akeicy  (Cats.

Jadith),  7C.  4 h.  —  3c  6b.
Herigerbi,  M  (Wido  de  Credn,  Algpr),

5  c  —  I  c.  a  b.
Nortchime,  M  (jCohnan),  5  c.  a  b.

—  a

Wiaebi,  s.  and  inL  Dodintone  (Bald-
win), 6e.— 3

Mediloesham,  M  (Soitebfand),  5  c.  4  b.

Chime.  M  (K.  VmUam),  4c.  a  k— a
Tite> M  (K.  William).  5  J  1  b...,
Flcot  (K.  William).  H^  —4 *
Leche,  t.  Draitone  (Cnt.  Alan),  lac.

—  10

Branxtune,  M  (Walter  de  AineaitX

lac.  — 10
Gt.  PampCune,  s.  in  Gnntham  (K.

William,  Ito),  la  c.  — 10
Lactone,  M  (K*  WUliam),  4c  —  a
Haltone,  M  (Cnt.  HuA»  Wflliam  F.

Nigel),  8  c— 6
Gt  Pamptone^  M  (Jndith,  Nigd),  8  c

—  6

Noithniche,  M  (Cnt  Alan,  Col^rim),

4  c.  —  a
Hacham,  M  (Jadith,  Bp.  Line),  5  c

—  3

Gonnebi,  M  (Rad.  Fita-Herbert),  4&

—  2

Dodingtone,  M  (St  Peter  of  West-
minster), 6  c.  —  4

Badebnrg,  M  (Gilbert  de  Gand),  lac
— 10

Walecote,  inl.  Belingei  (Abo.  York.
Walchelin),8c— 6

Butrenaic,  s.  and  inL  Qitone  (G.  de
Wircc),  3  c  —  I

Akeley,  M  (Jadith),  8 c  _6


APPENDIX  IX


5"


Chirchebi,  s.  Folchingeham  (Gilbert

de  Gand),  7  c.  —  5
Timberlunt,  s.  Branztnne  (Walter  de

Aincart),  5  c  6i  b.  —  4
Chirchcbi  and  Scapewic, M  (Heppo

Balistarius\  5  c.  6  b.  —  4
Alfgare,  s.  Draitone  (Cnt  AUo),  10  c

5  b.  — 9

Scredintune,  s.  I'olchiDgham  (Gilbert
de  Gand\  10  c.  4  b.  — 9

Lund  and  other  Lund,  a  M  (Geoffrey
de  Wircc),  3  c  —  i  c  4  b.

Tcdulibi,  5.  Haltone  (Cnt.  Hugh,  Wil-
liam F.  Nigel),  10  c.  4  b.  —  9

Turolfbi,  M  (Odo  Balistarius),  4c.  4  b.

—  3

Iladinctone, B. Abume (Robert  de

Todcni,  Bcrengar),  3  c,  4  b.  —  2
Cberchebi  and  Scapuic,  a.  Braogtone

(Waller  de  Aincurt),  7  c.  4  b.  — 6
Welle,  8,  Eslaforde  (Bp.  Lincoln),  5  c.

3  b. —  4
Tile,  B.  Spallinge(IvoTaiIlebois),3c.

2  b.  —  2
0})etune,  Cbeftesbi  and  Nonnancbi,  s.

Slow  (Bp.  Linc.)>  n  c.  iJJ  h. —

10
Ousiorp  and  Leresbi,  s.  Torp  (Gilbert

de  Gand),  3  c.  —  2
Stapleforde,  M  (Bp.  Bayeox,  Tor),  a  c.

—  I

Branztune,  M (Walter  de  Aincart),

IOC- 9
Timbcrlunt,  B.  Chcrchebi  and  Scape-

uic  (Heppo  Bal.,  Simond),  3  c.  —  a
Scaltorp,  s.dcotere  (Sl  Peter  de  Barg),

3C.  — J
Pamione, B. Stronstune (Drogo  de

licurerc),  4  c.  —  3
Hicham,  s.  and  inl.  Dodintone  (Bald*

win^  4  c. —  3
Hcdcbi,  s.  Haltone  (Cnt.  Hugh),  3  c.

—  2

Werangle,  M  (Wido  de  Credun),  a  c

—  I

Burtune,s.  Scantonc  (Gilbert  de  Gand),

3c. -J
Adclingctone,  2  M  (Bcrengar  de  To-

deni),  6  c.  —  5
Adclinctune  (Robert  Malel,  Godric),

6  c  —  5

Amccotes, s. Crule [G. de Wiroe,

Abbot  of  St.  (lemano),  2  c.  —  1
Chcrchebi,  M  [^K.  William),  5  c.  —  4
Timl>crlunt,  s.  Chirchcbi  and  Scapaic
(Norman  do  Adrcci),  2  c.  3i  b. —

1  c  4  b.

( >u»torp,  M  (Colsuan),  3  c.  5  b.  —  3
Le<lulfiorp,  s.  Ei>lafordc  (Bp,  Line),

2  c  —  1  c.  3  b.


Dribi,  M  (GUbert  de  Gand,  Ivo),  5  c

4b.  — 5
Screnbi,  1.  Baidenai  (Gilbert  de  Gand),

4C4b.  — 4
Spallinge,  B.  CroyUnd  (St.  Gnthlac

of  CroyUnd),  a  c  —  1  c  4  b.
Stainfelde,  M  (WiUiam  de  Peid),  i  c.

4  b. —  I
Stith,  s.  Holobech  and  CopUde  (Wido

de  Crednn),  i  c  4  b.  —  i
Medricesham,  M  (Robert  de  Statford,

Ehelo),  I  c  —  4  b.
Hacham,  t.  Merettone  (Colsuan,  Wml*

ter),  a  c.  —  i  c.  4  b.
Fortintone, Aacbebi, Bretoft, Lan-

gene,s. Grantham  (Cnt.  Hugh),  18  c.

4b.— 18
Wideme,  Abi,  Hage,  Caletbi,  s.  Gran-

tham  (Cnt.  Hngn),  7  c.  —  6  c  4  b.
Geresbi,  s.  Eslaforde  (Bp.  Lincoln),

ic.5b.  —  ic  ab.
Evedune,  s.  Eilaforde  (Bp.  Lincoln,

Osmond),  4  c.  3  b.  —  4
Buletbam,  M  (Robert  de  Statford),

I  c.  I  b.  —  6  b.
Adei,  M  (Roger  de  Poitou),  i  c.  5  b.

—  I  c  2  b.

Camelingeham,  a  M  (Durmnd  Malet),

1  c.  —  6  b.
Wenffet,  Hage,  Calesbi,  Tedlagestorp,

Malbertorp, s. Grantham (Cnt.

Hugh),  ao  c.  a  b.  —  ao
Timbrelond, B. Wadintone (Cnt

Hagh),6b.  — 4  b.
Snmmercoies  (Roger  de  Poiton),  6  b.

-4b.
Torp,  s.  Dodingtone  (St Peter of

Westminster),  6  c.  a  b.  —  6
Nortstoches,  M (Drogo  de  Beorere,

Colegrim),  i  c.  a  b.  —  i
Soindrebi  (Colegrim\  x  c  —  6  b.
Borg, s. Jeresbt (Colegrim), 6  b.

-4b.
Jeresbi,  M  (Colegrim,  Rold),  a  c  —

IC  6  b.
Holoben  and  Copelade,  M  (St  Gnthlac

of  Croyland),  i  c.  —  6  b.
Holobech  and  Copolade,  K  Flee  (Cnt

Alan),  X  c.  —  Ob.
Draitone,  M  (Cnt  Alan),  8c ab.

—  8

Evedone, B. Reschintooe  (Geoffrey

Anselin  and  Radnlfus),  a  c  —  x  c

6  b.
Evedone.  B.  Chcrchebi  (K.  Wlllkm),

1  c.  a  b.  —  I
Chime,  M  (Gilbert  de  Gand,  Ejgbriht),

I  c.  6  b.  —  X  c  4  b.
Walecote,  B.  Colebi  (Emegis  de  Borun,

John),  6  b.  —  4  b.


512


APPENDIX  IX


Aclci,  M  (Odo  BalUUriut),  7  h.—

Alfgmre, B.  Duuedic (St Gothloc,

Colcgrim),  ic4b.  —  icab.
Can  vie,  M  (Norman  Crassns),  i  c

—  6  b.

Cherchebi  and  Scapuic,  M  (Norman

de  Adred),  6  b.  —  4  b.
Sdrebec,  t.  Tateshale  (Endo  F.  Spire-

wic),  2b.  —  lb.
Torp,  t.  Basingeham  (K.  William),  6  b.

—  5  b.

Snardesforde»  s.  Resne  (Kadalf  Page-

nel),  3  b.  —  a  b.
Ouatorp,  B.  Grenebi  (Martin),  6  b.—

5  b.
Ilechintune,  s.  in  Catorp  (Robert  de

Veci),6ib.  — 5ib.
Ilechintnne,  a  M  (Colsoan,  Conded),

ic6b.  —  ic  5b.
Goldesbi,  s.  Folcbingham,  (Gilbert  de

Gand),  3c  lb.  —  3


Claipol,  M (fip>, Bajcu),  30.  ik

—  3

Ajcle»  iL  Na^Fcnebi  (Danad  Makl)i

3b.— ab.
Amecotes,  s.  Gemlftoip  (Gcoiicjde

Wine),  6  b.^  5  b.
Onftorpv WellCy HocUataBBt  Cor-

ninctoneb  s.  Chiichebi  (K.  WnUan;,

IC  44b. —  IC  4bu
Mortnne,  M (Qger  Brito),  ac.  \b.

—  a

Huuelle,  s.  Cherchebi  (Colnu),a)bL

—  abu

Hnuelle,  s.  Torp  (Gflbert  de  God),

IC.  Ab. — I
Hodebl,  s.  WelecoCe  (St. Peter  de

BQig%  ab.  —  lib.
Gonfordebl,  a. "Adetoip  (Wido  de

Ciednn),  3I  b.  —  3  b.
Escnmetorp, B. Meariqgeham (St

Peter  de  Bug,  WiUlAm),  i)  b.-

lb.


B. Geld  in  exact  correspondence  with  Plough-lands


Holm,  M (Gilbert  de  Gand),  34  c.

—  34

Wadintune,  M  (Cnt  Hugh),  24  c.—

Hermodestnne, s.  Wadintune (Cnt.

Hugh),  30  c.  4  b.  —  20  c.  4  b.
Bartune, M (Cnt. Alan), 18 c. —

18
Wdllngoure,  M  (K.  WillUm),  i8c.

—  18

Cherchebi  and  Kesuebi,  s.  BoUnbroc

(Ivo  Taillebois"),  12  c. —  la
Colebi,  inl.  and  s.  Washingburg  (K.

William),  12  c. —  la
CranewcUe, M (Gilbert de Gand.

Geoffrey),  12  c.  — 12
Dicbt,  ».  Reschintone  (Geoffrey  Anse-

lin\  12  c. — 12
Edeham,  M  (Gilbert  de  Gand),  12  c.

— 12
Folchingeham,  M  (Gilbert  de  Gand),

I2C  — 12
Foztnne,  B.  Beningtune  (Cnt.  Alan),

12  c.  — 12
Reschintone,  2  M (Geoffrey  Ansclin

and  Rad.),  13  c  — 12
Reschintone,  s.  Draitone  cCnt.  Alan),

12  c  — 12
Westburg,  M  (Geoffrey  Anselin),  1 2  c.

— 12
Ronestune, s.  Reschintune  (Geoffrey

Anselin),  12c  — 12
Ludes,  M  (Bp.  Lincoln),  12c.—  12


Lenetone,  s.  Dndtooe  (Cnt.  Aba),

lac. — 13
Wintiingeham,  M  (GUbert  de  God,

Robert),  lac. —  xa
Bntniic,  M  (Wido  de  Ciedim),  lac.

—  la

Abnme,  M  (Robert  de  Todcai,  Bcrb-

gar),  lac  — la
Flichesbnrg,  4  M  (Nonnen  de  Adied\

iic.7b.  —  lie  7b.
Sideftham,  M  (Wido  de  Reinbudcnit,

Ingelrannni),  11  c.  6b.  —  iic.6b
Stepinge, s. Raidmai (Gilbert  de

Gand),  iic.  4  b. — 11  c  4  b.
£ilmforde» M (Bp. TJwonln), ixc;

—  II

Westnne  and  Moltnne,  s.  SpelUnge

(Ivo  Taillebob),  10  c.  ib.  — 10  c.

lb.
Ellingetone, M (Gilbert de  Gand,

Egbert),  10  c.  —  10
Riche,  s.  Draitone  (Cnt  AIan)»  xoc

— 10
Picebech,  s.SpaUinge  (Ivo  TniUebob),

IOC.  — 10
Little  Pamptone,  M  (Jodhh,  Nicd)>

IOC  — 10
Broxholme,  inl.  and  s.  Englebi  (Robert

de  Todeni,  Berengnr),  loc  ^  10
Dodintone, t. Wcstmug (GeoAty

Anselin),  9  c.  6b.  —  9c.6b.
Blochesham,  M  (Roger  de  Poitoe),

9c  5b.  —  9C5b.


APPENDIX  IX


5»3


Hranzewellc,  s.  and  inl.  Retchintooe
((ieoffrcy  Anselin),  9  c.  a  b.  —  9  c.

3  b.

llnndintone,  s.  Bcrgebi  (Ivo  Taille-

bois),  9  c.  —  9
Haltan  and  Siepi,  s.  Bolinbroc  (Ivo

TailleboU),  9  c.  —  9
Kosccbi, M (Robert de Sutford,

Brien) ,  9  c.  —  9
West  Bitham,  M  (Drogo  de  Benrere),

9c.  — 9
Spallinge, M (Ivo Taillebois), 9  c

—  9

Toft,  M  (Wido  de  Credun),  9  c.  —9

NVitham,  Mannetorp  and  TofUnnd,  s.
Edeham  (Gilbert  de  Gand),  84  c

Corbi, M ^Bp. Line,  Walter),  8  c.

—  8

Duneham,  s.  Netelham  (K.  William),

8  c.  — 8
I  lech  intone,  inl.  and  s.  Torp  (Gilbert

de  Gand),  8c.  —  8
Stratone,  M  (Bp.  Bayeux,  Ilbert),  8  c

—  8

Burg,  s.  Bardenai  ;,Gi1bert  de  Gand),

8  c.  — 8
Ilelpericham,  M  (Robert  deVeci\  7  c

3  b.  —  7  c.  3  b.

Colebi,  M  (K.  WillUm),  7  c.  — 7
(lerncham,  M  (Radalf  Pagenel),  7c.

—  7

( Jfiintone,  M  (Alured  of  Lincoln),  7  c.

—  7

Bitham,  M  (I)rogo  de  Beurere),  7  c.

Urcdcilorp,  s.  West  Bitham  fDrogo

dc  Beurere,  Ingclram  and  Lmolf),

7  c.  —  7
Cro|)csbi and Cunesbi, s. Haltune

iCnt.  Hugh,  William  F.Nigel), 6c.

6  b.  —  6  c.  6  b.
Walccoie.  free  M  (St.  Peter  de  Borg,

lvo>,  6  c.  ^  b.  —  6  c.  i^  b.
lUichchalo,  s. Ilamingebi  (Hugh  F.

Jial(lric\  6Jb.  —  6ib.
iahnloiie.  M  (Alured  of  Lincoln),  6  c.

4  f).  —  6  c.  4  b.

Kosbi,  s.  Kc^chintonc  ((ieoffrey  Anse-

lin  and  Kad.).  6  c.  iib. — 6c.  24b.
.\sla«.lubi.  M  (^Kol>crt  ueTodcni),  Oc

jh._6c.  \h.
Aimiiiic. 1!. Kcschintone ((icoffrey

An>olin' .  6  c.  —  6
A>chcbi.  M Ka.luUI'at;enel\6c.  — 6
CariMC and liraccbrif^c, 2 M (Bp.

( loi-^frid^.  ft  c.  —  6
C'arlctunc.  M  (Sortcbrand),  6  c.  —  6
(iKlctorp,  ».  Westbitham  (Drogo  de

lieurerc,  Walter  and  Ulric\  6  c.  —6


Dentone  (or  Hanelle),  M  (Robert  de

Todeni),  6  c. — 6
Donnesbii  s.  Cominetone  (St.  Benedict

of  Rainsey),  6  c.  — 6
Dannesbi,  s. Reichintone  (GeoflFrey

and  Rad.  Anselin),  6  c.  — 6
Langetof,M  (St.GathlacofCroyland),

6c  — 6
Hongretmie,  iol.  Dentuie  (or  Hauelle),

(Robert  de  Todeni),  6  c  —  6
Lessingham,  M  (Bp.  Lincoln ,  Adam),

6c. — 6
Levesingham ,  a.  Reschintone  (Geoffirey

Alselin\  6  c.  —  6
Melingesbi,  s.  Bolinbroc  (Ivo  Taille-

bolf),  6  c  — 6
Nortnne,  inl.  and  1.  Stow  (Bp.  Lincoln) ,

6c  —  6
Scheveldebi,  t Bardenai  (Gilbert  de

Gand),  6  c  — 6
Bnme  and  other  Brane,  t.  Epenrde

(Geoffipev  de  Wirce),  6  c  —  o
Spiletbi, ireibi,  and  Torp,  M  (Bp.

Durham),  6  c.  — 6
Crule,  M  (Geoffrey  de  Wirce,  Abbot

of  St.  G.  of  Salebi),  6  c  —  6
Waldingurde,  s.  in  Straton  and  Cher-

chehi (Bp.  Durham  (J),  Odo  F.

Spirewic  t4))»  6  c  —  6
Bicnere,  s.  thmitone  (Cnt  Alan),  5  c

7  b.  —  5  c  7  b.
Dooninctmie,  B.  Draitooe  (Cnt  Alan),

5  c.  6  b.  —  5  c  6  b.
Gnteforde, M (Robert de Todeni,

Beicngar),  5  c.  4  b.  —  5  c  4  b.
Sibold,  s.  Bolinbroc  (Ivo  Taillebob),

6c  — 6
Stow,  t.  Folchingeham  (Gilbert  de

Gand,  Robert),  5  c.  4  b.  —  5  c.  4  b.
Wilingefaam,  3  M  (Gozelin  F.  Lambert,

WaIo),5ic-U
Talintme,  2  M  (Robert  de  Todeni,

William  and  Roger),  5  c.  4  b. —

5C4b.
Bresebnrc  and  Bametone,  t.  Griteforde

(Robert  de  Todeni,  BeiengmrX  5  e.

4  b.  —  «  c  4  b.
Bodebi,  M  (Gilbert  de  Gand),  5  c.  —  5
Beltone,  5  c  —  5
Colebi,  M  ( Jndith).  5  c  —  *
Dwietbi,  M  (Bp.  Lincoln,  Rad.),  5  c«

—  5
Endrebi,  t.  Bolinbroc  (Ivo  Tailleboii),

5C.  —  5
Osgotebi,  M  (St  Peter  de  Burg,  An-

•chltil),  5  c  — 5
Normanebi,  M (Drogo  de  Benrere,

Goxelin).  5  c  —  5
Partene,  t.  Bardenai  (Gilbert  de  Gand),

5c— 5


•-  IS'  iCK  M-».if  I


Ll


5^4


APPENDIX IX


Sninluunstede, i. Witham (Ridiilf

Pagend),  5c.  — 5
Widme,  M  (Tiidith,  Bernard),  5  c.— 5
Adewelle,  M  (St  Peter  de  Burg),  5  c.

—  5

Weft  Depinge,  M  (Godfrey  de  Cam-

brai),  5  c  —  5
Ringesdune,  M  (Robert  de  Todeni,

Ivo),  4c.7|b.— 4c7|b.
Refaim.  inl.  Fiscartiine  (bL  Peter  de

Burg),  4  c.  6  b.  —  4  c  o  b.
Rosbi,  3  M  (Robert  de  Sutford,  Edelo),

4c.  4b.  —  4c.  4b.
Saerefelt,  M  (Heppno  Balist.),  4  c.  4  b.

^4  c.  4  b.
Estrecale,  s.  Bolmbroc(Ivo  Taillebc^),

4C4b.  —  4c.4b.
Ounebi,  s.  Stow  (Bp.  Lincoln),  4c.  3  b.

—  4C.3b.

Stepingcham,  M  (Alured  of  Lincoln,
Gozelin),  4  c.  a  b.  —  4  c.  a  b.

Herdetorp,  s.  Bardenai  (Gilbert  de
Gand),  4  c.  2  b.  —  4  c.  a  b.

Colsteworde,  M  (thegn  of  Queen),  4  c.

—  4

Covenebi,  inl.  St.  Mary,  Stow  (Bp.  Lin-
coln), 4  c  —  4

Horbelinge,  M  (Abp.  York,  Walter
de  Aincurt),  4  c.  — 4

Horbelinge,  M  (Cnt.  Alan,  Ste£ui),
4c.  — 4

Ostone,  M  (Geoffrey  de  Wirce),  4  c

Hundelbi,  s.  Bolinbroc  (Ivo  Taille-

bois),  4  c.  —  4
Loctonc,  s.  Folchingebam  (Gilbert  de

Gand),  4  c.  —  4
Ilarebi,  s.  Bolinbroc  (Ivo  Tailleboit),

4c.  — 4
Stanwald,  s.  Bexgebi  (Robert  Malet),

40.  — 4

St.  Mary,  Stow,  M  (Bp.  Lincoln),  4c

—  4

Wime,  M  (Alured  of  Lincoln,  Glen),

Wellebi,  M  (Wido  de  Crednn,  Ran-

nulf),  4  c.  —  4
Wintrintune,  s.  Haltone  (Cnt.  Hugh,

William  F.  Nigel),  4  c  -4
Ulestanetorp,  a  M  (Robert  de  Todeni),

4c.  — 4
Ulestanetorp,  M  (Robert  de  Todeni),

4c  — 4
Bastunc,  M  (St.  Guthlac  of  Croyland),

4c.  — 4
Beltone,  M  (Walter  de  Aincurt),  4  c.

—  4

Bintham,  B.  Bergestorp  (St.  Peter  de

^»irg)»4C  — 4
Brantune,  M  (Bp.  Lincoln),  4  c.  — 4


WiYdcftoip,  M  (Iiro  TaOldxMi),  4c

Englebi,  M  (Robert  de  Todeni,  Beni-

g»r),4c.— 4
Radebi,  t.  Bolinbroc  (Ivo  TsiUdMb),

3c.  7b. — 3c.  7b.
Rochetham,  a.  ReMlilntone  (Gcoficy

Alielitt),  3c.  6 b.  —  3c. 6b.
Glentham,  s.  St.  Mary.  Stow  (Bp.  Lb-

cobi),3c  6b. —  3c.6b.
East Dqiinge, 3 M (Godfrey  ^

Cambimi,  a  men),  3  c.  6b.— )&

Noogtooe,  a.  Gimntbam  (K.  'WDini),

3C5ib.  — 3c5|b.
Turolnebi,  M (St. Peter  de  Bm),

3C5b.  — 3c  5b.
Hermodestone,  M  (Rad.  de  Mortena),

3C.4b.  — 3C4bu
Cheftesbi,  M  (Coboan.  Adddm),  3c

3|b.  — 3C.  3|b.
Burgrede,!.  Randebl  (RanunlfdeSL

Walaric),34b.— 3§b-
Haconesbi  and  Stentoitb,  M  (Hqipo

Balist.),  3 c.  24b.  -- 3c  a|b.
Hogtone,  M  (Wfdo  de  Cfedn^  Vito-

lis),  3c.  ajb.— 3C.  a^bi
Gosberdechirdie,  a. Diaitone  (CiL

Alan),  3c.  ab. —  3  c  ab.
Horbelinge,  M  (Colaoan,  Matdiev),

3c.  ab.— 3e.  a  b.
Rotcebi  (Robert  de  Statford,  Briea),

3c.  I  b.— 3c  1  b.
Brotulbi  and  Toip,  a.  Scanton  (GiUwt

de  Gand),  3  c.  —  3

Burtone,  M  (Sortebrand),  3  c 3

Betebi,  il  ClacbeaU  (Gilbeit  de  Gand,

Rademer),  3  c  —  3
Toft,  s.  Drmitone  (Cnt.  Alan).  3  c. — 1
Bertune,  4  M  (Walter  de  Aincnt), 3c.

-73
Welingoure, B. Nanenbi (Drniad

Malet),  3  c.  —  3
Totintnn,  s.  Bolinbroc  (Ivo  TaiUebob).

3C-3
Stichenai,  i.  Bolinbroc  (Ito  TaiDebobN

30.^-3
Stocbe,  M  (Cnt.  AUn,  Cokgiim),  3  c

Schillintune,  s.  Grantbam  (K.  Wil-
liani),3c.  — 3

Schinende,  M (Robert  de  Statibid,
Colegrim),  3  c 3

Stan^how,  s.  Belteaford  (Ivo  Tailk-

bois),3c.  — 3
Repinghale,  M  (Ogcr  Brito),  ac— S

^"J?l?f ^x*' ^  (^»<*^ ^ Cied«.
Widaid),  3  c.  —  3

Steveninge,  M  (Cnt.  Alan.  Geoftey

Tonud),  3C— 3


APPENDIX  IX


5^5


Herdetorp,  M  (Robert  Dispensator),

3C.  —  3
Hamingebi,  s.  Beltesford  (Ivo  Taille*

bois),  3c— 3
Newbeiie,  M  (Cnt  Hugh,  Osbern),

3C.  — 3
Holm,  s.  Rageneltorp  (St.  Peter  de

Burg),  3c  — 3
Hondintone,  s.  Folchingeham  (Gilbert

de  Gand,  Fulbert),  3  c.  —  3
Frisetorp,  s.  Ingeham  (7  b.),  s.  Felinge-

bam  (17  b.)  (Colsuan),  3  c.  —  3
Fiscartune,  M  (St  Peter  de  Burg),  3  c.

—  3

Estrebi,  a  Beltesford  (Ivo  Taillebois),

3C  — 3
Diisebi,  M  (Offram),  3  c.  —  3
Dusebi,  M  (Wido  de  Credun),  3  c.  —  3
Dusebi,  M  (Abp.  York,  Hugh),  3  c.

—  3

Daninctune,  M  (St.  Peter  de  Burg),

3c  — 3
Colstewrde,  s.  Schillintune  (Abp.  York,

Walchelin),  3  c.  —  3
Colchesbi,  s.  Beltesford  (Ivo  Taille-

boU),  3c  — 3
Dosebi,  3  c.  —  3
Asgerebi,  s.  Bolinbro€(Ivo  Taillebois),

3c  — 3
Greneham,  Auuartorp,  and  Bolebi,  M

(Alured  of  Lincoln),  a  c.  7  b.  —  a  c.

7l>-
Branzewellc,  M  (Alured  of  Lincoln),

a  c.  6  b.  —  a  c  6  b.
Kochesham,  M  (Alured  of  Lincoln,

Raduir,  a  c.  6  b.  —  a  c.  6  b.
East  Depinge,  5  M  (a  men  of  Godfrey

de  Cambrai),  2  c.  6  b.  —  2  c.  6  b.
Torp,  s.  Bolinbroc  (Ivo  Taillebois),

2  c.  5  b.  —  a  c.  5  b.
Hagenebi,  s.  Bolinbroc  (Ivo  Taille-
bois), a  c.  5  b.  —  2  c.  5  b.
Scotone,  M  (Ivo  Taillebois,  Gozelin),

2  c.  4  b.  —  2  c.  4  b.
Brune,  M  (Ogcr  Brilo).  a  c.  4  b.  —  2  c.

4  b.
Breseborg  and  Bametorp,  3  M  (Robert

de  Statford,  Geoflfrcy),  ac.  4  b. —

2  c.  4  b.
Beltone,  M  (Colcgrim),  2  c.  4  b.  —  a  c.

4  b.
Stichesforde,s.  Bolinbroc  (Ivo  Taille-
bois), 2  0.  4  b.  —  2  c.  4  b.
Tudetorp,  M  (Wide  de  Credun,  Ran-

nnlf;,  2  c.  4  b.  —  2  c.  4  b.
Partcnai,  Stcpingc,  Trie, and  Burg,

s,  Guldcsmerc  (Robert  Dispensator),

2c.  4  b. —  2  c.  4  b.
Buchchalc,  M  (St  Guthlac  of  Croy-

land),  2  c.  4  b.  —  a  c.  4  b.

L


Cretun,  M  (Godfrey  de  Cambfai),  a  c.

^  b.  —  2  c.  4  b.
Caletorp,  1.  Bmne  (Qger  Brito),  ac.

4b.  —  ac.  4b.
Welingeham,  a  M  (Cnt  Alan),  ac.

3 J  b.  —  a  c  3i  b.
Blochesham,  s.  BranKwelle  (Aimed  of

Lincoln),  a  c.  3  b.  —  a  c.  3  b.
Faldingenrde,  M  (William  Blund),  a  c

a  I),  — i^  a  c.  ^  b

Stigeswald,  s.  Beltesford  (Iyo  Taille-
bois). ac  ab.  —  ac  ab.
Ringeftdnne,  M  (Bp.  Lincoln,  Adam),

a  c  a  b  ■""  a  c  a  b
Englebi,  M  (William  de  Perd),  a  c

a  b.  —  a  c  a  b.
Pochinton,  i.  Folchingeham  (Gilbert

de  Gand),  ac.  ab.  —  ac  ab.
Mesiingeham,  free  M  (Bp.  Lmcoln,

Malger),  acab.  —  ac.  ab.
Sumerdebi,  M  (Walter  de  Aincort,

Raynald),  acab.  —  a  c.  a  b.
Holtham,  M  (Robert  Dispensator),  a  c

a  b.  "^  acab.
Greibi,  M  (Robert  de  Todeni,  Gnnfrid),

a  c  a  b  ~^  acab
Croft,  M  (Gilbert  de  Gand,  RadnU),

ac  ab.  —  ac  ab.
Ceila,  M  (Bp.  Lincoln,  Malger,  ac.

a  b.  —  a  c  a  b.
Carletune,  M  (Norman  Craatns),  a  c

a  b.  —  a  c  a  b.
Canvic,  s.  Eslaforde  (?)  (Bp.  Lincoln,

William),  a  c.  i)  b.  —  a  c  ij  b.
Colebi,  a  c  I  b.  —  a  c*  i  b.
Bolinbroc,  M  (Ivo  Taillebois)  a  c  —  a
Aiglestorp,  M  (Alured  of  Lincoln),  a  c.

—  a

Branzbi,  M  (Robert  de  Todeni,  Bereu-

gar),  a  c  —  a
Burtone,  s.  Scantone  (Peter  de  Va«

longes),  ac  —  a
Bacstune,B  Edeham  (Gilbert  de  Gand,

Ivo),  ac  —  a
Sudwelle,  M  (Walter  de  Aincurt),  a  c

—  a

Torp,  inl.  and  s.  Chirchebi  (Bp.  Dur-
ham), a  c  —  a

Wime,  a  M  (Abp.  York,  Walcheling),
ac. —  a

Torp,  M  (Bp.  Durham  (}),  Odo  F.
Spirwic  (I)),  a  c.  —  a

Torp,  (Eudo  F.  Spirewic),  a  c  —  a

Thuorstorp,  s.  Clachesbi  (Hugh  F.
Baldric,  Wido),  a  c  —  a

Wimme,s.  Ouretone  (Judith),  a  c —  a

Wime,  M  (Abp.  York,  Walchelin),  a  c

—  a

Suinham,  s.  Corbi  (Bp.  Lincob),  ac.

—  a

u


5i6


APPENDIX  IX


SuAfeld,t.Corbi(Bp.  Lincoln,  Walter),

ac.  —  a
Sninhamstede,  s.  Widme  (Jndith),  a  e.

—  a

Salebi,  s.  Clachesbt  (Hugh  F.  Baldric,

Wido),  a  c.  —  a
Sndtorp,  M  (Wido  de  Crednn),  ac.

—  a

Alia  Pamtone,  B.  Stronstuoe  (Drogo

de  Bcurere),  ac. —  a
Pincebec,  b.  Holobech  and  Copelade

(Wido  de  Crednn\  a  c.  —  a
Lopintorp,  M  (Bp.  Lincoln),  a  c.  —  a
Offintnne,  M  (Robert  de  Todeni),  a  c

—  a

Little  Lavintnne,  M  (Offimn),  a  c  —  a
Evednne,  E  inl.  Chercbebi  (Colsoan),

a  c —  a
Ellingetone,  M  (Ito  Tailleboit,  Wal-

tcr)  a  c*  ~~  a
Dnnedic,  M  (St.  Gnthlac,  Colegrim),

ac —  a
Doneham,  t.  Eteleham  (Odo  Balist),

a  c.  —  a
Dnneham,  M  (Rad.  Pagenel,  Knight),

a  c.  —  a
Dnneham, M  (Ilbert  de  Laici),  ac.

—  a

Coringeham,  M  (Robert  de  Todeni,

Beiengar),  a  c.  —  a
Canvic  and  Bragebrnge,  M  (Roger  de

Poitou,  Ernuin),  a  c.  —  a
Repinghale,  M (Alnred  of  Lincoln,

Dodin),  1  c.  7§  b.  —  i  c.  7I  b.
Bertune  and  Torp,  M  jacet  m  Beigebi

(Ivo  Toillebois,  Azor),  i  c.  6  b.  —

1  c  6  b.
Wilingeham,  M  (Gilbert  de  (land),  i  c

6  b. —  I  c.  6  b.
Hochtmie,  M  (Colegrim,  Fredgis),  i  c.

6  b.  —  I  c.  6  b.
Gozeberdecherca, M (Bp. Lincoln,

Malgcr),  I  c.  6  b.  —  i  c.  6  b.
Corninctune,  M  (St.  Benedict  of  Ram-
sey), I  c.  6  b.  —  1  c.  6  b.
Cretnne, a M (Robert  de  Statford,

Basuin),  i  c.  5|  b.  —  i  c  si  b.
Opetorp,  s.  Edeham  (Gilbert  de  Gand),

I  c.  5  b.  —  I  c.  5  b.
Dreistorp,M  (Eudo  F.  Spirewic,  Ivo),

I  c.  5  b.  —  1  c.  5  b.
Burch,  s.  Draitone  (Cnt.  Alan),  i  c

4  b.  —  I  c.  4  b.
Billefclt  and  Westbi,  M  (Robert  de

Statford, Basuin), i  c. 4  b. —  i  c.

4  b.
Dentune, M (Robert de Statford,

Geoffrey),  i  c.  6  b.  —  i  c.  6  b.
Tisteltnne (Godfrey de Cambrai,

Glen),  I  c.  4  b.  —  i  c.  4  b.


Witham,  Bfannetorp,  andToiUnd,  M

(St  Peter  de  Ikng^  Anert),  ic.

4  b. —  1  c.  4  b.
Welingeham, M (Ilbert de Lud,

miles),  ic.4b.  —  IC4K
Wintrintone,  2  M  (Nomum  de  Aied},

ic.4b. —  IG.  4b.
Welingduini,  M  (Bp.  Bftjeoz,  Ilbert},

IC.  4b. •^ic.  f  b.
Stodiei,  s.  Gnnthaiii,  M  (Drogo  de

Benrere, Col^gzliB). ic. 4b.^

ic.  4  b.
Screndintini,  M  (Robert  de  StatM,

Gnlfered),  i  c  4  b.  —  t  c  4b.
Tnroldnebl,  M  (St. PMer  de  Bng,

Geoffrey),  i  c.  ^  b.  —  i  c.  4b.
Reresbi,  s.  Sneleslmt  (Gos.  F.  Lta-

bert),  ic.4b. —  i  C4b.
Risnn,  B.  Scaotooe  (Gilbert  de  (yiiid),

ie.4b. —  I  c.  ^b.
Rocstone,  s.  Toiintime  (Robert  De-

speniator),  ic.4b.  —  ic.4b.
Scapewic,  il  CbercbelN  and  S&(Hqipo

Baliit),  IC.  4b. —  I  C4b.
Die  and  Caletorp, s. Bnme  (Ogcr

Brito),  ic.4b. —  ic.4b.
Cherchebi,  M  (Aloied  of  Linodbi},  ic.

4  b.  —  ic.4b.
Canvic  (Bp,  Bayeiiz»  Ilbert),  i  c.  4K

—  IC.  f  b.
Calchewelle,  M  (Nonnan  de  Adred.

Roger),  I  c.  4b.  —  i  c  4 b.
Calchewelle,  i.  Belteeford  (Ito  TtS-

lebois),  IC.  4  b.  —  I  C4b.
Wade,  i.  Waltham  (Cnt.  Akii)»  i  c.

3  b.  —  I  c.  3  b.
Wintrintone,  a  M  (Seward,  prt.},  z  c.

3  b.  —  I  c.  3  b.
Trichingeham, B. Leatone (Odo

Balist),  icafb.  — icafb
Welingeham,  inl.  St.  Maiy^Stow  (Bp.

Line),  I  c.  a|  b.  —  i  c.  a|  b.
Torp,  M  (Eudo F.  Spixeinc)»  i  c.

a|  b.  —  I  c  af  b,
Bnigrede  andTnrlai,  a.  Belteslard  (Ivo

Taillebois),  i  c.  a|b.  —  i  c.a4b.
Bichere,  M  (Wido  de  Cicdnn),  i  e.

a  b. — I  cab.
Barchestone, s. Hnndintoiie (Ito

Taillebois),  icab.  —  i  cab.
Westbi,  for  s.  in  Heidune  (C61«un),

icab.  —  IC.  ab.
Walecot, M (Norman de Adied,

Robt.),  I  c  a  b. —  icab.
Scachetorp,  M  (Robt.  de  Todeni),  i  c

a  b.  —  I  c.  s  b.
Hochtune  (Abbot  Tiirold,  Colegrim),

I  cab.  —  I  c.  a  b.
Buchehale  (St.  GntbUc),  i  c.  a  b.—
I  c  a  b.


APPENDIX  IX


517


Gallingham  (Bp.  Linc.)»  i  c.  a  b.  —

I  c.  a  b.
Glandhmm,  2  M  (Bp.  Bayenx,  Wad-
aid),  I  c.  a  b.  —  I  c.  a  b.
Faldiogurde,  M  (Osbera,  pst.)»  i  c

a  b.  —  1  c.  a  b.
Casric,  M  (Gonfrid  de  Ciochet),  i  c.

a  b. —  I  cab.
Mortune,  s.  Haconesbi  and  Stentnith

(Hep^  Balist.),  i  c.  i^b.— ic.  i^b.
Cropetbi  and  Cunesbi,  B.  inl.  Cnnesbi

(Nonnan  de  Adreci),  i  c.  i^  b. —

I  c.  ijb.
Stow,  t.  Brantime  (Bp.  Lincoki,  Wm.

Perci\  I  c.  i|  b.  —  i  c.  i4  b.
Burg,  M  (Eado  F.  Spirewdc),  1  c.

ID.  —  I  c.  I  b.
Haconesbi  and  Staintone,  t.  Edeneham

(O^er  Brito),  i  c.  i  b.  —  i  c.  i  b.
Nonnanebi  and  Onnesbi,  s.  of  Bp.  of

Line,  (Goz.  F.  Lambert),  i  c.  i  b.

—  I  c.  lb.
Herdetorp, s. inl.  Bnrg  (Eiido F.

Spirewic),  icib.  —  icib.
Coningesbi, B. Scrivelesbi (Robt.

Dispensator),  i  c.  i  b.  —  i  c.  i  b.
Reborne,  M  (Ivo  Taillebois,  Peter),

I  c  J  b.  —  I  c.  }  b.
Carlebi, a M (Robt de Statford,

Geoflfrey),  i  c.  )  b.  —  i  c.  4  b.
Carlebi,  M  (Bp.  Lincoln,  Ercnenold),

I  c  i  b.  —  I  c.  J  b.
Bnlesford,  M  (Goscelin  F.  Lambert),

I  c.  —  I
Aletorp,  8.  Bel  tone  (Geoff,  de  Wirce),

I  c  — I
Bnrg,  s.  Calnodesbi  (Endo  F.  Spire-
wic), I  c.  —  I
Brexbi  and  Sapretone,  &  Bergebi  (Ivo

Taillebois),  1  c. —  i
Brezbi s.  Pioheurde  (Bp.  Durham),

I  c.  —  I.
Bodebi  and  Samerdebi  M  (Wido  de

Crednn,  Godwin),  i  c  —  i
Bellingeburg,  M (Alured of  Line.,

Gozelin),  i  c.  —  i
Bilingebuig,  M  (Cnt.  Alan,  Colegrim),

I  c. —  I
Bicbere  (Godric,  M.  Colegrim's  land),

I  c. —  I
Hurtone, inl. Branzbi (Robt de

Todcni,  Bcrengar),  1  c.  —  i
Bnrton,  s.  Wellctonc  (Bp.  Lincoln),

I  c. —  I
Bercaham and Estow, s. Burg  (St.

Peter  de  Burg,  Godfrey  and  Robt.),

I  c.  —  1
Bercaham and Estow, B.  Witham,

Monntorp  and  Toftlnnd  (St.  Peter

de  Burg,  Asford),  i  c.  —  1


Bercheham,  M  (Godfiiey  de  Cambrai,

a  men),  i  c.  —  i
Bdtot,  8.  Beltone  (Geoff,  de  Wiice),

I  c.  —  I
Barchettone,  t.  Beltone  (Colegrim),

I  c. —  I
Barchettone,  t.  Merestune  (Had.  Dap.

and  Osbern  pft.)»  i  c  —  i
Waletuie  and  Bodebi, s. Wilgebi

(Gilbert  de  Gand,  Roger),  i  c.  —  i
alia  Tifteltane,  1.  Tistdtuie  (Alnied

of  Lincoln,  Glen),  i  c.  —  i
Tedulfbi,  s.  Nonnanebi  (Dxogo  de

Bearere),  i  c  —  i
Witham,  M  (Rad.  Pagenel,  Hacon),

I  c.  —  I
Wizebi  and  CUchetbi,  M  (Got.  F.

Lambert,  Walter),  i  c.  —  i
Wertbi,  M  (Colegrim),  i  c  — i
Welletone,  1.  Catebi  (Bp.  Durham,

Torstin),  i  c.  — - 1
Stow,  s.  Wilingeham  (Goz.  F.  Lam-
bert), I  c.  —  I
Stratone,  B.  inl.  Randebi  (Rann.  de

St.  Waleric),  i  c.  — - 1
Stubetuie, M  (Norman  de  Adred,

Gamelin),  i  c.  —  i
Schillingtnne,  M  (Carie),  i  c.  —  i
Sepingeham,  t.  Avetorp  (Robt.  de

Todeni,  Gonfrid),  i  c  —  i
Screnbi,  M  (Bp.  Dmham,  Fenchd),

I  c. —  1
Trichingeham,  s.  Folchingeham  (Gil-
bert de  Gand),  i  c  —  i
Ringeadun and Repinghale (Oger

Brito),  I  c.  ~  1
Ringeidene  (Oger  Brito),  i  c —  i
Risnn,  M  (Colraan),  i  c.  —  i
Scachertop,  M  (Wido  de  Crednn)  i  c

—  I

Sanctone, s. Aplebi, Risebi, and

Saleclif  (Roger  de  Bnsli),  i  c.  —  i
Pochintone, M  (Wido de Crednn,

Warner),  i  c.  ^  I
Qoadheveringe,  inl.  Ceila  (Bp.  Line,

Malger),  i  c.  —  I
Quedhaveringe,  M  (Cnt.  Alan,  Goert),

I  c.  —  I
Haconesbi, M (Robt.  de Sutford,

Gulfer),  I  c.  —  1
Mortun, B. inl. Haconesbi (Oger

Brito),  I  c.  —  I
Lopintorp,  M  (Algar),  i  c.  —  I
Loletorp, B.  inL  and  s.  Gainesbnrg

(Geoff,  de  Wirce),  1  c  —  i
Offintone,  M  ( Alnred  of  Lincoln),  i  c

—  I

Horsintone,  s.  Beltetford  (Ivo  Taille-

bois),  I  c.  —  I
Ladnlftorp,  M  (*  Anglicat*),  i  c—  i


5i8


APPENDIX  IX


Hogetone,  B.  in  Westoip  (Walter  de

Ainciirt)p  i  c  —  i
Hermodestorp, M (Heppo Bftliit.,

Simnnd),  i  c. —  i
Herdetorp,  B.  Calnodetbi  (Ettdo  F.

Spirewic),  i  c.  —  i
lUrdetorp,  M  (Cnt.  Alan,  Eudo),  x  c.

—  X

Gunnebi,  s.  B.  Wime  (Rad.  F.  Hn-

bcrt),  1  c.  —  I
GreibiyS.  Dusebi  (Abp.  York,  Hngh),

X  c. —  I
Eslaforde,  %.  Corainctiine  (St.  Bene-
dict of  Ramsey),  i  c.  —  i
Dnneftbi, inl. B. Ringesdune (Bp.

Lincoln,  Adam),  x  c.  —  i
Draitone  (Cnt.  Alan),  i  c.  —  i
Draitone, B.  Dunedic  (St.  Gnthlac,

I  c.  — I
Die,  B.  Brane  (Oger  Brito),  i  c.  —  i
Cretune,  M  (Lcuric),  x  c —  x
Corby,  M  (Bricteva),  x  c  —  x
Nortcarletone, i. Carletune (Soite-

brand),  i  c.  —  i
Carlentone, M (Bp. Bayeux, Rad.

Dap.  and  Gilbert  de  G.),  i  c.  —  i
Cancwic  and  Bragebruge  (*  in  Branz-

wic  iacet'),  (Roger  Poitou),  i  c.

—  x

Canewic  (Colegrim),  i  c  —  x
Calnodesbi,  s.  Bardenai  (Gilbert  de

Gand),  x  c  —  i
Aschebi,  s.  Screnbi  (Bp.  Durham),

I  c.  —  I
Cretone,  M  (Alured  of  Line.,  Radulf),

74  b.  —  71  b.
Brune,  M  (Oger  Brito),  7  b.  —  7  b.
Sumertebi,  M (Ivo  Taillebois),  7  b.

—  7  b.

Normanebi  and  Santone,  2  M  (Wido
de  Credun,  Alured),  7  b.  —  7  b.

Burg,  M  ^Archil),  6^  b.  —  6i  b.

Uvesbi,  B.  Neutone  (Odo  Balist.,
Wm.),6§b.  — 6ib.

Brune,  M  ^Robt.  de  Statford,  Geof-
frey), 6  b.  —  6  b.

Brune,  M  (Alured  of  Line,  Dodin),
6  b.  — 6  b.

l^rtune,  M  (Rad.  Pagenel,  Oger),
6  b.— 6  b.

Bescbi  and  Maltebi,  M  (Goz.  F.  Lam-
bert, Kurold),  6  b.  —  6  b.

Barchestone,  B.  Bel  tone  (Colegrim),
6  b.  —  6  b.

Tisteltone,  s.  Colebi  (Judith,  Hugh),
6  b.— 6  b.

Ulvesbi,  M  i^Suen),  6  b.  —  6  b.

Widme  (Sortcbrand),  6  b.  —  6  b.

Westbi,  M  (Cnt.  Alan,  Colegrim),
6  b. —61).


Wadingefaam  and  Staintaoe,  M  (Gol

F.  Lambert),  6  h.  —  6  b.
Snmeidebi* s. Chiaebi (Wido  de

Credun),  6  h. — 6  b.
Sumerdebi,  M  (Torchll),  61i.^6l)i
Scotone,  M  (St.  Peter  de  Bm\  6  b.

—  6b.

Stantooe,  M  (Roger  de  Poitoa.Ropr),

6  b.— 6  b.
Tiraetorp,  B.  Beltone  (Colegrim),  6  b.

^6  bu
Lundeloro, B;. Beltone (Colegrinl-i

6  b.  — 6  b.
Reretbi,  B.  Staintnne (Cnt. H^

Ofbem),  6  b.  —  6  b.
Steveuinge,  M  (Robt.  de  Ved),  6  k

Hamingebi,  M (Hugh F.  Bddric),

Hamiiigebi,  M  (Cnt.  Hugh,  Bddik),

6  b.  —  6  b.
Helpericham, s. Wirelitorp (Ito

Taillebois,  Odo).  6  b.  —  6  b.
Maltebi,  M  (Cnt.  Alan),  6b.— 6b.
Orbelinge,  s.  Haaebi  (Waldin  Brtto\

6b.-6b.
Heretoro, inl. Ertrecale, Heredi

and  Grdbi (Bp.  Darbam),  6  h.

—  6  b.

Donninctime,  M  (Cnt.  Alan).  6  b.—

6  b.
Draitone,  M  (Cnt.  Alan),  6  b.  —  6  k
Dodmtone,  1.  Merettone (Cokotti,

Walter),  6  b.  —  6  b.
Dodintone,  M  (CoItuan),6  b.— '6h.
Dodintnne^  M  (Bp.  Bajreux,  Baldxic;,

6  b.  —  6  b.
Cotes,  s.  Sudcotes,  (Bp.  BayeDz),6l)L

(or  3)— 6  b.
Casvic,  M  (Alured  of  Lincoln,  Boto\

6b.-6b.
Chcftcsbi  (Ledwin),  6  b.  —  6  b.
Chaschintorp,  M  (Robert  de  Statford,

Hugh),6b.  —  6  b.
Carletune,  s.  Scantone (Gilbert  de

Gand),  6  b.— 6  b.
Estrecale,  M (Eado F. Sphewic],

6  b.  — 6b.  *^

Estrecale,  M  (Bp.  Duriiam),  6  b.—

6  b.
Wade,  s.  Achesbi  (Wido  de  Credun',

5ib.  — 5ib.
Catenase  and  Utnn,  B.  Nortcbelesei

(Cnt.  Alan),  a  b.  —  5J  b.
Trichingeham,  B.  Nentone  (Ulniet),

6i  b.  —  5  J  b.
Trichingeham,  B.  Neutone  (Bp.  Dm*

ham,  5|b.  — 5|b.
Catenase  and  Utnn,  M  (Cnt.  Alan),

si  »>•  —  5i  b.


APPENDIX  IX


519


Loctone, s. Avetorp (Robert de

Todeni,  Gnnfrid),  5^  b.  —  k4  b.
Loctone, s. Rqpioghfde (Wido de

Credun,  Wamer),  5I  b.  —  $h  b.
BilUDgebiiTK,  M  ^Abp.  York,  Walter

de  Aiocnrt),  5  b.  —  5  b.
Witham, M (Drogo de Benrere,

Colegrim),  5  b.  —  5  b.
Onnebi,  2  M  (Bp.  Bayeux,  Ilbert  and

Wadard),  5  b.  —  5  b.
Cherchebi, M (Alared  of  Liiicoln,

Offinrn),  6  b.  —  5  b.
Cberchebi,  M  (Cnt.  Alan,  Godric),

5b.  — 5b.
Hacnnesbi,  s.  Dunesbi  (Bp.  Lincoln),

4ib.-4ib.
Estow,  s.  Witham  (St.  Peter  de  Burg,

Asfort),  44  b.  —  4i  b.
Canewic  (Colegrim),  4  b. — 4  b.
Chiaebi,  M,  4  b.  — 4  b.
Cotes,  B.  inl.  Ingeham  (Bp.  Bayenx,

Ilbert),  4  b.  — 4  b.
Cotes,  free  M  (Bp.  Lincoln,  Erche-

nold),  4  b.  —  40.
Cotes,  M  (Goz.  F.  Lambert),  4  b. —

4  b.
Est  Depinge,  s.  Talintone  (Alnred  of

Lincoln),  4  b.  —  4  b.
Draitone,  M  (Wido  de  Crednn),  4  b.

-4b.
Draitone, s.  Draitone  (Cnt Alan,

Godric),  4  b.  —  4  b.
Endrebi,  M  (Kudo  F.  Spirewic),  4  b.

-4  b.
Falingeorde, M (Colsuan),  4  b.  —

4  b.
Uuelle,  s.  Jeresbi  (Colegrim),  4  b.  —

4  b.
Lolestorp,  free  M  (St.  Peter  de  Burg),

4  b.  —  4  b.
Loctone,  2 M  (Oger  Brito),  4  b.  —

4  b.
Nongetone  (Bp.  Osmund,  St.  Ulfran

Granth.),  4  b  — 4  b.
Lopeham,  s.  and  B.  Lea  (Cnt  Alan),

4  b.  —  4  b.
Mortune,  s.  Cominctone  (Oger  Brito),

4  b.  —  4  b.
Normanebi  and  Ounesbi,  M  (Goz.  F.

Lambert,  Colsuan),  4  b.  —  4  b.
Ilechintune, s. burtun (Wido de

Crednn),  4  b.  —  4  b.
Pochinton,  s.  Cherchebi  (Cnt.  Alan),

4  b.  —  4  b.
Poclintone, s. Ulvesbi (Colsuan,

Conded),  4  b.  —  4  b.
Koscebi,  s. Wintrinton  (Norman  de

Adreci),  4  b.  —  4  b.
Salebi,  B.Clachesbi  (Gilbert  de  Gand,

Rademcr),  4  b.  —  4  b.


Rison,  M  ( Agemiiiid),  4  b.  ^  4  b.
Rifmi,M  (St  Peter  de  Bqxg,  Colsuan),

4  b.  —  4  b.
Reresbi, s. Wichtngebi (Wm. de

Perci,  Norman),  40.  —  4  b.
Refiu,  M  (Rannlf  de  St Waleric),

^  b.  —  4  b.
Tmforde,  s.  Nortnoine  (Abp.  Yoik),

4  b.  —  4  b.
Tnrolnebi,  B.  Bnine  (Robert  de  Stat*

ford),  4  b. — 4  b.
Tomlfbi,  B.  inL  in  Bmiie  (Alnxed  of

Lincoln),  4  b.  —  4  b.
Trichingham, M (St  Benedict of

Ramsey),  4  b.  —  4  b.
Snmerdebi,  B.  Gainesbnrg  (Geoffrey

de  Wiroe),  4  b.  — 4  b.
Snmerdebi,  s.  Lea  (Cnt  Alan),  4  b.

—4b.
Sninhamstede,  M  (Ragenald),  4  b.

—  4  b.
Ston,  ml.  and  s.  Dnnebam  (Hbeit  de

Laid,  miles),  4  b.  —  4  b.
Ston, s. Haltnn and  Stepi, (Cnt.

Alan),  4  b.— 4  b.
Tedlagettorp,  s.  Hotot  (Alnxed of

Lincoln),  4  b.  —  4  b.
Trie,  8.  Draitone  (Cnt.  Alan),  4  b. —

4  b.
Wintrintone,  s.  Scallebi  and  Stntnn

(Durand  Malet),  4  b.  —  4  b.
Witbam,  Mannetor  and  Toftlnnd,  B.

(St.  Peter  de  Burg,  Ansfrid),  4  b.

—4  b.
Tednlfbi,  B.  inL  Flichesborg  (Nor-
man de  Adreci),  4  b.  — 4  b.
Beltone  s.  Tndetorp(Widode  Crednn),

4  b. — 4  b.
Bercham, s. Edeham (Gilbert de

Gand),  4  b.  —  4  b.
Bercham,  s.  Casnic  (Gilbert  de  Gand),

4  b.  —  4  b.
Bintham,  s.  Cretnn  (Godfrey  deCam-

brai),  4  b.  —  4  b.
Bitham,  s.  Cretnne  (Robert  de  SUt-

ford,  Basnin),  4  b. — 4  b.
Braseborgand  Bametorp,  s.  Edeham

(Gilbert  de  Gand),  4  b. — 4  b.
Brescburg  and  Bametorp,  s.  Greteford

(Robert  de  Statford),  4  b.  —  4  b.
Ounebi,  M  (I\^  Taillebois,  Peter),

4  b.  —  4  b.
Die  and  Caletorp,  s.  Hacnnesbi  (Oger

Brito),  3ib.  — 34  b.
Germnndtorp,  s.  Covenham  (Wm.  de

Perci),  .ab.  —  3|b.
Nentone,  M  rUlniet),  3I  b.  — 34  b.
Kadbnme  and  Staintone  and  Wading-

ham,  s.  Snetrebi  (Heppo  Balist),

34  b.  —  3|  b.


520


APPENDIX  IX


Other  Roibi, t.  Roibi  (Robert  de

Statford),  34h.--3}b.
Brnne,  M  (Snen),  3  b.  —  3  b.
Buigrede,  s.  Rmndebi  (Ramittlf  de  St.

Waleric),  3j  b.  -  3^  b.
Brune,  M  (Ivo  Taillebois,  Odo),  3  b.

-3  b.
Tedlagestorp,  s.  Calnodesbi  (Qietel-

bern),  3  b.  —  3  b.
Walecote,  B.  Haltooe  (Cnt. Hngfa,

Wm.  F.Nigel),  3  b.  — 3  b.
Tedlagestorp,s.  Mundebi  (Cnt.  Alan),

3  b.  — 3  b.
Wadingeham,  M (Elfiftiii), 3  b. —

3  b.
Hagenebi,  B.  Wettrecale  (Endo  F.

Spirewic),  3  b.  —  3  b.
Die. i. Hacooesbi and Stentnith

(Heppo  Balist.),  3  b.  —  3  b.
Aschebi,  s.  Rageneltorp  (St  Peter  de

Burg),3b.  — 3  b.
Amecotet,  B.  inl.  in  Westode  (Geof-
frey de  Wirce),  3  b.  —  3  b.
Wenflet,  B.  in  Cale  (Eudo  F.  Spire-
wic), 2jb.  —  2jb.
Breietoft,  s.  Calnodesbi  (Chetelbem),

2  b.  —  2  b.
Wintrintone,  B.  Witenai  (Henry  de

Ferrers,  Saswalo),  2  b.  —  2  b.
Wintrintone,  B.  Roxebi  (Rad.  Page-

nel),  2  b. —  2  b.
Wenflet,  s.  Andrebi  (Goz.  F.  Lam-
bert), 2  b.  —  2  b.
Wenflet,  to  Chelebi  M  (Bp.  Bayeux,

Wadaid),  2  b.  —  2  b.
Wadingeham, s. Wadingeham, M

(Elfain),  2  b. —  2  b.
Wadingeham, M (Aldene),  2  b. —

2  b.
Wade,  s.  Iribi  ?  (Ivo  Taillebois),  2  b.

—  2  b.

Trie,  s.  Calnodesbi  (Eudo  F.  Spire-

wie),  2  b.  — 2  b.
Trie,  s.  Barg  (Endo  F.  Spirewic),  2  b.

—  2  b.
Totintnne,  s.  Spilesbi  (Bp.  Durham),

2  b. —  2  b.


Screnbi, 9. Wotaode (EmIo F.

Spirewic),  a  bw  —  a  bi
Todetorp, s. Hostoae (Wido de

Credim),  a  b.  ^  a  h.
Pochintooe,  M  (Gonted  ^  CiocMi

a  b.  —  a  b.
Helperichun,  B. Heduntue  (Gol-

snan,  Conded),  a  b.  —  a  b.
Hcdebi,  B.  inl.  Waleoote  (Noohb

de  Adrect)y  a  b.  —  a  bi
Haiebi,  M  (Odo  BalisL).  a  b.  ^  a  b.
Opeitorp,  ft.  WiTdatoip  (Iiro  TaiDe>

boil,  Odo),  a  b. —  a  b.
Herdetorp,  B.  Cale  (Eudo  F.  Spiie-

wic),  a  b.  ^  a  b.
Griteioffd,  t.  Bercb^uun  (Godfinn  de

Cambrai,  Evremar),  a  b.  — a  b.
Friichend,  B. Calnodcdil  (ClKtel-

bem),  a  b.  —  a  b.
Evedone,  i.  Jeresbl  (Colcsrim),  a  k

—  a  b.
Estow,  ft.  Werche  (St.  Peter  de  Bug,

Godfrey),  a  b.  —  a  b.
Coteft,  ft.  Ingeham  (Colsnan),  a  bi  —

2  b.
Cherchebi,  inl.  Rlneeadime  (Robert  de

Todcni,  Iyo),  ab.  —  a  b.
Ardnlnetorp,  B.  Cabicideabl  (Cbetel-

bem),  2  0 a  b.

Bicheie, inl. Duiebi (Abix. Yak,

Hugh).  lib.  — I J  b.
Estott, s. Bercbeham (Godficy  de

Cambrai),i|b.  — lib.
Eston,  f.  O^ntone  (AlnTcd  of  Lin-
coln), i|b.— i4b.
Burg,  ft.  Gunnebi  (Eudo  F.  Sjniwic),

ID. —  I  b.
Wenflet, B.  inl. in  Bnwg  (Endo  F.

Spirewic),  1  b.  —  i  b.
Wintrintone,  B.  Colebi (Enegb  de

Bnrun),  i  b.  —  I  b.
Herdetorp,  ft,  Draitone  (Cnt  Alan),

lb.  —  lb.
Cuningeftbi,  B.  inl.  Cale  (Chelelbem;,

I  b.  -«  I  b.
Salflatebi,  ft.  Cadintoa (Rayner de

Brimon),  ^  b.— ^  b.


C. Plough-lands  in  excess  of  Gsld


Toresbi  and  Alwoldesbi,  s.  Cabnme
(Hugh  F.  Baldrie),  ig  b.  —  2  b.

Sudtone,  B.  Stratone  (Endo  F.  Spire-
me), 3|  b.  —  4  b.

Hagetom,  M  (Martin),  3}  b.  —  4  b,

Hagetome,  B.  Haneurde  (Colsuan,
Turold.  pst.),  3}  b.  —  4  b.

Cheneide,  St.  M.  Stow  (Bp.  Lincoki)
I  e.  4§  b.  —  I  c.  5  b.


Stalinberg,  inl.  Ltnbei]ge  ( Abp.  Yctk\
^  b. — 1  b.

Wicham,  s.  Torp  (Alured  of  Unoc^),
i  b.  —  I  b.

Bechelin^e,  s.  Blesebi  (Goc.  F.  Lam-
bert), J  b.  —  I  b.

Croehhiton,  s.  Caditon  (Bp.  DufaaBi)^
4  b,  —  I  b.

Bichere,  B.  inl.Wime(Jtid.),  I  |b.--abL


APPENDIX  IX


5*1


Sadtone,  s.  Stratone  (Kudo  F.  Spire-

wic),  I  j  b. —  2  b.
Sudtone,  s.  Ilotoft  (Chetelbern),  i  b.

—  I }  b.

Salflatebi, s. Catebi (Alnred of

Lincoln},  i  b.  —  i  J  b.
Itrebi, B. Wilaelesbi (Drogo de

iJcurcre),  i  b. —  ij  b.
Hotot,M  (Alared  of  Lincoln,  Benrnnl),

I  b. —  il  b.
Hotot,  M  (Alured  of  Lincoln,  Dodo),

1  b.  —  ij  b.
Kndrebi  and  Kadebi,  M (Bp. Dor-
ham),  A  b.  — 5  b.
Wenflet,  b.  inl.  Screnbi  (Bp.  Durham,

Bundo  and  RadolO,  7i|  b.  —  8  b.
Ulresbi,  M  (Cols nan,  Brunei),  a  c.

1 4  b.  —  2  c.  2  b.
Salflatebi,  s.  Caditon  (Bp.  Durham),

lb.  —  J  b.
Osgotebi,  s.  Tanelesbi  (Gor.  F,  Lam-

l«rt),  I  b.  —  2  b.
Osgoicbi,s.  Tauelesbi  (Rad.  Pagenel),

1  b.  —  2  b.

Osgolcbi, M (Si ward  p«t.),  i b. —

2  b.

Meringhe,  s.  Scriuelesbi  (Robert  Des-

jienscr),  i  b.  —  2  b.
Ludcfordc, s. W'icham (Rayner  dc

Hrimou  ,  i  b.  —  2  b.
Lcuesbi, s. Wioelesbi (Drogo de

Bcurcre),  i  b.  —  2  b.
Cocrinton,  M  fColsuan,  Maths.),  I  b.

—  2  b.

Hrachenbcrg,  s.  Alvingham (Alured

of  Lincoln,  Rannulf),  i  b.  —  2  b.
Chillcbi,  s.  Suarrebi ( Wido  de  Credun,

Aschil  pst.),  1  b.  —  a  b.
Andrcbi,  s.  Aschebi  (Goz.  F.  I^m-

bert;,  I  b. —  2  b.
Habuinc, s. Ncuhuse (Alured of

Lincoln),  l  h.  —  2  b.
(Jrinuibi, 15. NVivclesbi (Drogo  de

Itcurcrc),  I  b.  —  2  b.
Moriun,  s. Ilaconesbi (Oger Brito),

,« b.  —  2lb.
Siultonc,  under  Hadelmrg  M  (Gilbert

«lc  (iand),  2  b.  —  3  b.
Koxebi,  H.  Aplebi,  Rosebi  and  Saleclif

((iilbt.  dc Gand,  Rol)crt),  2  b. —

Salflatebi  nnd  Schitebroc,  s.  inCatebi

William  hlund\  2  b.  —  3  b.
Mundcl.i, H. Wilgebi (Gilbert de

( iand  ,  2  I).  —  3  L).
Inj^'ham,  M  (Krnuin;,  2  b.  —  3  b.
<  alno<lcsbi,s.  Hardctorp,  (Cnt.  Alan),

2  h.  —  3  b.
IIa<;c  and  Calcsbi,  M  (Hp.  Durham,

\\  illianj  ,  2  b.  —  3  b.


Grimesbi,  s.  CoTcnham  (Bp.  Durham,

St.  Karilcf),  2  b.— ah.
Filingeham,  M  (Roger  de  Poitou?

Anschitil),  2  b.  —  3  b.
Picheoorde, i. in Pichenorde, M

(Colsuan),  24  b.  —  3^  b.
Suardesforde,  M  (Roger  de  PoitoO|

Mainard  and  Tnrold),  3  b.  —  4  b.
Cleia, i. Hegelinge (Bp. Bayeox,

Wadard),  3  b.  — 4  b.
Hagetome,  M  (Colsuan)  3  b.— 4  b.
Burgrede,  s.  Stratone  (Bp.  Bayeax,

lUxTt),  3  b.  —  4  b.
Chirchebi, M (Eudo F.  Spirewlc),

4  b.  — 5  b.

Calnodesbi,  M  (Chetelbem),  4  b.—

5b.
Burg,  M  (Archil),  5  b.  —  6  b.
Brotttlbi,  M  (Bp.  Diirham,  Colsnnen),

5  b.  —  6  b.

Bertone,  M  (Rad.  Pagenel),  7  b.  —

8b.
Andrebi  and  Marchebi,  s.  Aschebi

(Bp.  Bayeux),  7  b.  —  8  b.
Lnndetorp,  to  ch.  at  Grantham  (Bp.

Osmund),  i  c.  7  b. —  2
Berchetorp,  s.  Folchingeham  (Gilbert

de  Gand),  i  c.  7  b.  —  a
Colebi, s. Haltone (Cnt. Hugh,

WUliam  F.  Nififel).  1  c.  7  b.  —  a
Chelvipghou,  3  M (Ito  Tailleboit,

Odo),  a  c.  7  b.  —  3
Alvingham,  s.  Cocrinton  (Rayner  de

Brimou),  2)  b.  —  4  b.
Sndtone,  s.  Bnig  (Ewio  F.  Spirewic),

5i  (or  6l)  b.  —  7  b.
Cleia,  M  (Ivo  TaiUeboit,  Wimwid),

af  b.  — 4  b.
Alesbi,  B.  g. in Cotes  (Alured  of

Lincoln,  Bernard),  }  b. —  a  b.
Cocrinton,  s.  Cadinton  (Rayner  de

Brimou),  ^  b.  —  a  b.
Lobingeham,  s.  Abume  (William  de

Perci,  Norman),  i^  b.  —  3
Brochelesbi,  s.  Stalinburg  (Norman

de  Adreci),  ij  b.  — 3  b.
Brochelesbi,  s.  Neuhuse  (Alured  ol

Lincoln),  1 4  b.  —  3  b.
BecheUnge,  s.  Wichhigebi  (WUliam

de  Perci,  Robert),  if  b.  —  3'b.
Scotome,  s.  Relan  (Rannulf  de St.

Waleric),  2jb.--4*>.
Aslachebi, s. Avetorp (Robert de

Todeni,  Gunfrid),  6}  b.  —  8  b.
Sudtone, M (Chetelbem), 5}  b.—

7  b.
Messingeham,  M  (Emegis  de  Borun,

Turstin),  1  c.  aj  b.  —  1  c.  4  b,
Horsintone,  s.  Hamingebi  (Hn^  F.

Baldric),  a  c.  6)  b.  —  3


5»»


APPENDIX IX


Goldetbi, M (Walter  de  Aincnrt),

4jb.  — 6  b.
Ulvesbi,  B.  inl.  Nentone  (Colsoan),

6}  b.  —  I  c.
Alesbi, M (Bp. Durham,  Nigel),

6|  b.  —  I  c.
Ciicualt,s.Rodowelle  (Dnrand  Malet),

Welle,  f.  Rigesbi  (Bp.  Bayenx),  i  b.

-3  b.
Wighini^bi,  M  (William  de  Perci,

Robert),  5  b.  — 7  b.
Scotome, B. Dnneham (Ilbert de

I^ici,  miles),  7  b.  —  9  b.
Scitebroc,  inl.  Couenham  (Bp.  Dur-
ham. St.  Karilef),  7  b.  —  90.
Wichingebi, s. Sneleslunt  (Goz.  F.

Lambert),  3  b.  —  5  b.
Aschebi,  M (William  Taillebosch),

3  b. —  5  b.
Clachesbi,  M (Normau  de Adreci,

Geoffrey),  3  b.  —  5  b.
Wilgebi,  B.  Wilgebi  M  (Gilbert  de

Gand),  3  b.  —  5  b.
Crochestoue,  M  (Bp.  Lincoln,  Gois-

lan),  2  b.  —  4  b.
Ravendale,  M (^Waldin Ingcniator,

William),  2  b.  —  4  b.
Ravenedal, M  (Bp.  Durham,  Wal-

bert),  2  b.  —  4  b.
Sndtrie,  free  B.  inl.  Vlingeham  (Bp.

Lincoln,  Osbem  pst.),  2  b.  —  4  b.
Sutreie,  inl.  Haintone  (Bp.  Bayeux),

2  b,  —  4  b.
Strubi,  s.  Haintone  (Roger  de  Poiton,

Acnn),  a  b.  —  4  b.
Strubi, s. Haintone (Bp. Bayeux),

2  b.  —  4  b.
Suarrebi,  M  (Wido  de  Credun,  Vitalis),

2  b.  —  4  b.
Esnelent,  inl.  ands.  Lessintone  (Abp.

York,  Herbert),  2  b.  —  4  b.
Torentone  and  Brune,  M  (Emegit  de

Burun,  Ulric),  2  b,  — 4  b.
Temesco,  s.  ?  Hegelhige  (Bp.  Bayeux,

Wadard),  2  b.  —  4  b.
Ulesbi,  s. Welle ^Gilbert  de CJand,

Ravemer),  2  b.  —  4  b.
Wilgebi,  M  (Odo  Balist,,  Colcgrim),

2  b.  —  4  b.
Ludcforde, s. Wlcham (Hugh F.

Baldric),  2  b.  —  4  b.
Ludeford,  s.  Badeburg  (W'illiam  de

Perd),  2  b.  —  4  b.
Langetone,  s.  W'aragebi  (Emegis  de

Burun),  2  b.  —  4  b.
I^metebi,  B.  in  Torentone  (William

de  Perd),  2  b.  —  4  b.
Bechelinge,  M  ^Norman  de  Adred,

Herbert),  2  b.  —  4  b.


BcchcHnge,  M  (Roger  de  PoitoH),  2  k

Bedidinge,  s.  T  cwintope  (Abpi  Yod,

Herbert),  a  b.  —  4  b.
Chdlestome,  M  (Wal<lin  Ingauator),

a  b. — 4  b.
Chelebi,  M  (Ivo  Talllebau,  Nigel),

a  b. — 4  b.
Habime  and  Nenhniey  s.  Bvodidabi

(Emegis  de  Bninn),  a  b.  — 4  b.
Habnrae  and  Nenhme,  midcr  Brodte-

lesbi  M  (Emepsde  Biiniii),a  b^— 4b.
Caicfaingctoip,  s. Bergebt (Robert

Bilalet,  Ivo),  6  b.  —  1  e.
Re&n,  B.  Berliiwe  (Colraaa),  6  b.— 1  c
Stantooe  and  Widingeham,  M  (B|k.

Bayeux,  Ilbert),  6  b.  —  i  c.
Sonetorp, t. Sneleslunt (Gok. F.

Lambot),  6  b.  —  i  c.
Torp  and  East  Torp,  M (Uhwiet;,

6  b.  —  I  c.
Wideroe, t. Clacbesbl (Hugh F.

Baldric,  Wido),  6  b.  ~  I  c
Mundebi.  B.  Endrebi  (Endo  F.  Sfiie^

wic),  6  b.  —  I  c
Martone,  s.  Bortoae  (CnL  Alan),  6  h.

—  X  c.

Ingeham,  firee  M (Bp.  T^fff^w^  Eju

chenold),  6  b.  —  i  c.
Bertone  and  Billeafelt,  M  (Calflaa,

William).  6  b.  —  i  c.
Berlinge,  M  (Colsaan),  6  b.  —  i  c.
Berlinge,  M  (Colaoan),  6  b. —  i  c
Barcauorde,  t.  Pantone  (Abix  Yort,

GUbeit),  6  b.  ~  I  c
Westrecale,  M  (Eodo  F. Spirewic\

6  b.  —  I  c.
Avetorp  and  Aslachebi,  B.  Loctooe

(Ogcr  Brito),  6  b i  c

Andrebi,  M  (Goz.  F.  Lambeit,  Lam-
bert), 6  b.  —  I  c.
Ormesbi,  a. Teafoide (Abp. Yoikt

Gilbert),  4  b.  ~  6  b.
Risnn  and  Carlcntnn, M (Cobm

Maths.),  4  b.  —  6  b.
Alforde,  M  (William  TailleboK),4  b.

—  6  b.

Goldesbi,  M  (Aacbil),  4  b.  — 6  b.
Ingeham, M (Rayner de Brimoi,

Colsaan),  4  b.  — >6  b.
Ingeham,  M  (Roger  de  Poiton,  Main-

ard),  4  b.  —6  b.

Avetorp,  B.  Chisebi(Wido  de  Ciedaa),

4  b.  —  6  b.
Suavitone,  B. Carltoip (Robert  de

Veci),  4  b.  —  6  b.
Avetorp,  M  (Alored  of  Lincoln,  Soca),

4  b.  — -  6  b.

Gunnewordebi,  M  (Colegrim),  4  b.—
6b.


APPENDIX  IX


5^3


Kaschingetorp,  M  (Bp.Bayeux,Swen),

I  c.  4  b.  —  X  c.  6  b.
Cale,  M  (Chetelbero),  i  c.  4  b.  —  x  c.

6  b.
Herigerbi, M (Cnt.  Alan,  Godric),

1  c  —  I  c.  2  b.

Saavetone,  M (Colsnan),  i  c.  —  1  c.

2  b.

Strigeswalde,  M  (Waldin  Brito),  x  c.

—  I  c.  2  b.

Cbaschingetorp,  M  (Wido  de  Crediua,

Algar),  I  c.  —  I  c.  2  b.
Navenebi,  M  (Duimnd  Malet),  x  c.  —

X  c.  2  b.
Delbebi,  M  (Colsuan,  Rainald), xc.

—  X  c.  2  b.

ToDcttele,  inl. and  s.  Torp  (Roger

de  Poitou),  X  c.  2  b.  —  i  c.  4  b.
Snetrebi,  M  (Heppo  Balist.),  1  c.  2  b.

—  X  c.  4  b.

Lastone  M  (Roger  de  Poitou),  i  c.

2  b.  —  X  c.  4  b.
Chirchebi,  M (Bp.  Bayeux,  Ilbert),

X  c.  a  b.  —  X  c.  4  b.
Germnndtorp, M (Judith, Nigel),

1  c.  6  b.  —  2

Blitone, s. Lacestone (Wido de

Credun),  i  c.  6  b.  —  2
Bortone, 2  M  (Cnt  Alan),  4  c.  6  b.

—  6

Lavintone,  s.  Folchingeham  (Gilbert

de  Gand,  Azelin),  4  c.  6  b.  —  5
Englebi,  2  M  {Up.  Bayenx,  Colsuan

and  Wadard) ,  3  c.  6  b.  —  4
Messingeham,  M  (St.  Peter  de  Burg,

William),  5  c.  —  5  c.  2  b.
lialintan,  Chelestnrne,  Radresbi,  and

Maltebi  s.  Tadewclle  (Cnt.  Hugh),

9  c.  2  b.  —  9  c.  4  b.
Maltesbi, s. Clachesbi (Gilbert de

Gand ,  Rademer) ,  2  c.  6  b.  —  3
Aslachebi and Spingeham, s. Fol-

chingham  (Gilbert  de  Gand),  3  c.

2  b.  —  3  c.  4  b.

Holtone,  M  (Rayner  de  Brimou,
Roger),  5  b.  14a.  1  V. —  1  c.  2  b.

Chillcbi,  M  (Waldin  Ingeniator,  Wil-
liam),  3I  b.  —  6\  b.

Oresbi,  M  (Norman  de  Adrcci,  Geof-
frey), 2jb.  — 4jb.

Chirchclune,  M  (Wido  de  Credun),
I  c.  6^  b.  —  2  c.  I  b.

Suarrebi,  M  (Odo  Balist.),  34  b. —
6  b.

Cucualt,  M  (Ivo  Taillcbois,  Goz.),
I  i  b.  —  4  b.

Caditon,  a  M  (Bp.  Durham,  Turstin),
I  c.  ij  b. —  I  c.  4  b.

Sisse,  M (Bp.  Bayeux,  Ilbert),  6J  b.

—  I  c.  I  i>.


Sperllnctone,  M  (Colsaan),  ac.  5^b.

—  3c.
Herpeswelle,  M  (Abp.  Yoik,  Wil-

liam),  5*  b.  —  i  c
Stubetnne,  M  (Normmn  de  Adieci),

Sjb.  — xc
Bechebi,  B.  Torp  (Hngh  F.  Baldric,

Gilbert),  54b.— xc
Osgotebi,  M  (Roger  de  Poiton,  Geof-

ft«y)i  2jb.  — 5  b.
Strobi,  t.  Clachesbi  (Gilbert  de  Gand),

2jb.  — 5  b.
Strobi,  g.  Lechebnixxe (Cnt  Alan),

2|b.  — 5b.
Osgotebi,  M  (Seward),  2ib.—  5  b.
Itrebi,  M (Waldin  IngenUtor,  WU-

liam),  2|b. — 5  b.
Catebi,  M  (WUliam  Blnnd),  a}  b.  —

5  b.

Chinetorp,  B.  Waragebi  (Emegts  de

Bnrun),  24  b.  —  5  b.
Hardwic,  M  (Bp.  Durham,  Nigel),

2|b.  — 5b.
Chinetorp,  M  (Ivo  TaiUebois,  Odo),

2|b.  — sjb.
Rebame,  B.  Scalebi  (Osbem  de  Arab),

a|b.  — 54  b.
Rebnme,  B.  Scalebi  and  Stratone  (Col-

snan),  2^b.  — 54  b.
Snalun,  B.  inl.  Hechesinge  (Aimed

of  Lincoln,  Bernard),  3  b.  —  6  b.
Mortune,  M  (Ito  TaiUebois),  3  b.—

6  b.

Sualim,  s.  Alesbi  (Cnt.  Alan),  3  b.  —

6  b.
Stivetone,  M (Bp. Bayeux,  Ilbert),

3  b.  —  6  b.
Seurebi,  B.  Nortchelesei  (Cnt.  Alan),

3  b.  —  6  b.
Slodebi,  B.  Wilgebi  (GUbert  de  Gand,

Roger),  3  b.  —  6  b.
Lobingebam, s. Cotes (Drogo de

Beurere),  3  b.  —  6  b.
Langetone,  s.  Stratone  (Bp.  Durham),

3  b.  —  6  b.
Clachesbi,M  (IvoTaiIlebois,Geoffrey),

3  b.  —  6  b.
Osgotebi  and  Tavelesbi,  s.  Clachesbi

and Normanebi (Ivo TaiUebois,

Hugh),  3  b.  — 6  b.
Chinetorp,  M  (Rayner  de  Brimon),

3  b.  —  6  b.
Brochelesbi,  M  (Emegis  de  Bumn,

Rannulf),  3  b.  —  6  b.
Bacuurde,  s.  Haintone  (Bp.  Bayeox),

3  b.  —  6  b.
Aplebi, Risebi, Saledif, free M.

(St.  Peterde  Burg,  RadulQ.  3b.— 6  b.
Cucualt,  M  (Alur^  of  Lincoln,  Gleu),

3  b.  —  6  b.


5^4


APPENDIX  IX


Cncualt,  B.  Cabnme  (Hngh  F.  Bal-
dric), 3  b. — 6  b.
Sisse, M  (Rayner  de  Brimoa),  5  b.

—  ic.

Alduluebi,  M  (Roger  de  Poitoa,  Blan-
caid),  5  b.  —  I  c.

Sootstofse,  M  (Norman  de  Adred),
I  c.  lb.  —  I  c  4  b.

Berlinge,  M  (Bp.  Dnrfaam,  Colinan),
I  c.  lb. —  I  c.  4b.

Toisrebi.  M  (Ito  Taillebois*  Odo),
ab.  —  5  b.

Welletone,  under  Machetoiie,  M  (Ana-
got),  2b.— 5b.

CMrcbetune,  M  (Cnt  Alan,  Toll),
icab.  —  ic.5b.

Chirchebi,  M  (Bp.  Dorham),  ic.  a  b.

—  ic.5b.

Slodebi,  B.  inl.  Bnmetorp  (Bp.  Dur-
ham, Nigel)  ,4  b.  —  7  b.
Torentnn  (Roger  de  Poitou),  i  c.  3  b.

—  I  c  6  b.

Hacberdingham,  s.  Hardetorp  (Cnt.

Alan,  £udo),  6  b.  —  x  c.  x  b.
Scotstome,  and  Holme  and  Sudborc,

M  (Coltuan),  3  c.  5  b.  —  4  c.
Suavintone,  M (Wido de Credun,

Warner),  i  c.  —  i  c.  3  b.
Neutone,  M (Odo Balist.), 7b.^

IC.  ab.
Cadinton,  M (Rayner de Brimou,

Baldwin),  4I  b.  —  i  c
Alvingeham, s. Cocrintone (Bp.

Bayeux,  Ilbert),  4I  b.  —  i  c.
Mentinges  (Judith, William,  pst.),

2|b.~6b.
Habume,  s.  Chelvingeholm  (Norman

de  Adred),  3I  b.  —  7  b,
Haintonc,  M  (Kayner  de  Brimou),

3ib.— 7  b.
CXher  Rase,  s.  Lindude  (Alnred  of

Lincoln),  4}  b. —  x  c.
Scotstome,  Holme  and  Sudborc  (Col-

suan),  4ib.  —  i  c.
Catebi,  2  M  (Roger  de  Poitou),  4ib.

—  I  c.

Wibertone, M (Wido de Credun),

I  c.  3 b.  —  I  c.  6ib.
Sisse,  8.  Haintone  (Roger  de  Poitou,

Albert),  2  c.  4^  b.  —  3
Picheuuorde,s.FoTchingeham  (Gilbert

de  Gand),  2  c.  ^  b.  —  a  c.  4  b.
Basebi,  M  (Cnt.  Alan),  3  c.  4^^  b. — 4
Slodebi,  B.  inl.  Clachesbi  (Gilbert  de

Gand,  Rademer),  4  b.  —  i
Rodewelie,  M  (Alured  of  Lincoln),

4  b. —  I
Sudtune,  Dreuistorp,  and  Herdetorp,

inl.  Rigesbi  (Abp.  York,  Hubert),

}c. —  I


Sneleifamt,  i. Widdngdii  (Wmu

de  Perd,  Waldlii)»  4L—  i  &
Tistdtone,  M (Alnred of  Unooln,

Glen),  I  c. —  z
Tistertiiiie»  M (Jndithy  Hugh),  {c.

—  I
Tairdesbi,  M  (Bp.  BayciUE»  LmouS^

4c— I
Ulnrioebi, M (Hq^ F. Bddnc^

Radnlf),  4c-^i
Maltetorp, B. Welle (Gilbat de

Gand,  Ranemer),  ^  c  —  z
Langetooe, s. Wansdii (WaUi

IngeniatcH'),  4  K  —  1
Hoctnn,  M  (Roger  de  Poitoa,  Roger),

Jc—  I
Cleia,  M  (j^  Bajeax»  Ilbert),  Ig—x
Belesbi,  M  (Godric), 4 h.^  i  c.
Beletbi,  M  (Odo  B^iK.),  &c— i
Baicnorde,  M  (Kayner  de  Brimoa,

Giraxd),  |  c.  —  1
Aiwardebi, s. Metiaii (Wido de

Cxednn),  he, —  z


Aresbi,  M  CSiward,jpet),j|c —  i
Helmeswelle,  M (Bp.  mjcd^  Lo-

soard),  ^  c.  —  z


Hacberdii^ham,  M  (Cnt.  Alan,  Eado)i

Jc. —  I
Grosebi,  M  {ZT^h  4  c  —  z
Golse,  M  (Hi^rii),  ic^x
Croceatooe, M  (Hngh F. BaUik,

Hamelin),lc. —  z
Tavelea>i, Id (Gos. P. Lembert,

Godard),  i  c.  —  z  c  4  h.
Ingeham,  a  M  (Gos. F.  Leabcrt,

Anschitil),  i  c  —  z  c.  4  h,
Haberdingham  (B.  in  Loiebi,  Gilbat

de  Gand),  i  c  —  z  e.  4  b.
Other  RosbC  a.  ReachintoQe  (Geafej

Alselin),  i  a  —  i  c.  4  b.
Summerdebi,  M (Gos.  F.  Lambert,

Rayner),  i  c—  I c.  4b.
Summerdebi,  M  (Goc  F.  Lambert),

I  c.  —  I  c.  4  b.
Schillintune,  M  (Wido  de  Credm),

I  c.  —  I  c  4  b.
Torp,  8.  Scotone  (St.  Peter  de  Bng\

IC  —  ic4b.
Walesbi, M (Rajner de Brimoa,

Baldwin),  i  c. —  i  c.  4  b.
Merestune,  a.  Hache  (Cnt.  Alan),  i  c.

—  I  c.  4b.
Lecheburoe,  M (Roger de Poiloa,

Girard),  i  c—  I  c.  4b.
Langetone  and  Torp,  M  (Bp.  B^ycox),

I  c  —  I  c.  4  b.
Itrebi,  inL  and  t.  Cleia  (Bp.  BneoL

Ilbert),  I c—  I  c  4 b.
Ingeham, M  (Colsoan, Roger and

Anscbitil),  i  c  -^  i  c.  4  h.


APPENDIX  IX


5*5


Ingeham,  M  (Bp.  Bftjenx,  Ubert),  i  c

—  I  c  4  b.

Alchebazge,  &  Walecote  (St  Peter
de  Burg,  Ivo),  i  c  —  i  c  4  b.

Adredebi,  M  (Goz.  F.  Lambert,  Bal-
dric), I  c.  —  I  c.  4  b.

Botiate,  M  (Robert  Dispensator),  i  c

—  I  c  4b.

Hazebt,  i.  Folchingeham  (Gilbert  de

Gand),  i  c.  —  i  c  4  b.
Gunfordebi,  to  ch.  of  Grantham  (Bp.

Otmnnd,  St  Wlfran), i  c. —  i  c.

4b.
Graingeham,  M  (Emegis  de  Bnnm),

I  c. —  ic.4b.
Graingeham,  M  (Bp.  Lincoln,  Mal-

gcr),  I  c.  —  I  c.  4  b.
Doibelbi,  s.  Folchingeham  (Gilbert

de  Gand),  i  c  —  i  c.  4  b.
Tuiec,  inl.  and  s.  Torp  (Roger  de

Poiton),  I  c.  4  b.  —  2
Farforde,  M (Cnt  Hugh,  Baldric),

I  c.  4  b.  —  a
Oxecumbe,  s.  Farforde  (Cnt.  Hugh,

Baldric),  i  c.  4b. —  a
Oxetmie  and  Wlaricebi,  t. Fullobi

(Bp.  Dnrliam,  William),  ic  4  b.

—  a

Sonetorp,  inl.  and  i.  Lessintone  (Abp.

York,  Herbert),  i  c.  4  b.  —  a
Torp,  M  (Roger  de  Poiton,  Roger),

I  c  4  b.  —  a
Wilgesbi,  B.  Scrivelesbi  (Robt.  Dis-

pensator),  1  c.  4  b.  —  a
Martone,  t.  Chirchebi  (Bp.  Durham),

1  c.  4  b.  —  a
Martone, s. Chirchebi (Eudo F.

Spirewic),  i  c  4  b.  —  a
Lastone,  M  (Roger  de  Poitou,  Blan-

card),  I  c.  4  b. —  a
Hagetome,  M (Waldin  Ingeniator),

I  c  4  b. —  2
Ascbebi,  M  (Gilbert  de  Gand,  Roger),

1  c.  4  b.  —  a

Gunfordebi,  M  (Walter  de  Aincurt,

Elwi),  I  c.  4b. —  a
Gunfordebi,  M  (Bp.  Durham,  Lom*

bcrt),  10.  4  b.  —  a
Grimesbi,  s.  Archintone  (Ivo  Taille-

bois,  Geoffrey),  i  c  4  b.  —  a
Tunbi,  M  (Eudo  F.  Spirewic),  a  c.  4  b.

Sassebi,  M  (Eudo  F.  Spirewic),  ac.

4  b. —  3
Herpcswelle,  4  M  (Goz.  F.  Lambert),

2  c.  4  b.  —  3

Avctorp,  M  (Robert  de  Todeni,  Gun-

frid\  2  0.  4  b.  —  3
Evedunc,  M  (Bp.  Durham,  Colsuan),

2c.  4  b.  — 3


Asdiebi,  a  M  (Colsuan),  3c.  4b.  —  4
Wideme,  t. Cladiesbi (Gilbert de

Gand,  Rademer),  3  c.  4  b. —4
CoTenham,  3  M  (William  de  Pefd),

3c.4b.  — 4
Heghelinge,  Cleia  and  Temetocm,  a.

Stalingeb«iig(Abp.  York,  Herbal),

6  b.  —  I  c.  a  b.
Haberdingham,  a.  in  Gretham  (Gilbert

de  Gand),  6  b.—  t  c.  a  b.
Glenteorde,  M  (Martin),  6  b.  —  i  c.

ab.
Cucnalt,  M  (Seward),  6  b.  —  i  c.  a  b.
Tonestale,  M  (I?o  Tailleboii),  a  a  —

ac.  4b.
Westorp, M (Walter de Aincut,

Raynald),  a  c.  —  a  c.  4  b.
Faldingenrde,  1  Filingeham,  Speilin-

tone  and  Lageliam  (Colraaa),  a  c.

—  a  c.  4  b.

Stinblebi,  inl.  and  a.  Laogetooe  and

Torp  (Bp.  Bayenx),  i  c.  a  b.  —  i  c

6b.
Helmeiwelle,  M  (Martin),  i  c  a  K  —

ic.  6b.
Toreswe,  M  (Ivo  Tailleboii,  Odo),

ab.  — 6b.
Torentnn  (Roger  de  Poiton),  aK  —

6  b.
Widcale,  a  M  (William  Hand),  ah.

—  6b.

Mnndebi, B. Wilgebi (Gilbert de

Gand,  Roger),  ab. — 6b.
Hiboldestow,  M  (Onti),  a  b.  —  6  b.
Spanesbi,  B.  Brune  (Oger  Brito),  a  b.

—6b.
Brandnne, s. Carltoip (Robert de

Ved),  7  b.  —  I  c.  3  0.
Scoltoroe,  Holme  and  Sntbroc,  s.  Fit •

cartnne  (St  Peter  de  Bnrg),  5  c

4b.  —  6
Brotnlbi,  M  (Colsnan),  3  c.  —  3  c.  4  b.
Rigesbi,  M  (Abp.  York,  Herbert),  6  b.

—  I  c.  a  b.

Rase,  M  (Roger  de  Poiton,  Mainard),
3  b.— 7  b.

Snardeiforde,  M  (Bp.  Durham,  Col-
suan), a  c.  a  b.  —  a  c.  6  b.

Cametlingeham,  M  (Colsnan),  4  c.  4  b.

—  5

Lobingeham,  M  (Norman  de  Adred,

Bereuuold),  44  b.  —  i  c  i  b.
Cotes,  s.  Chelebi  (Norman  de  Adred,

Richard),  4)  b.  —  i  c.  i  b.
Chelebi,  M  (Abp.  Yoric,  William),

4 J  b.  —  I  c.  1  b.
Chelebi,  M (Bp.  Bayenx,  Wadard),

4| b.  —  1  c.  lb.
Boimtone,  M  (Bp.  Durham,  Nigel),

3  J  b.  —  1  c.


5^6


APPENDIX  IX


Bolintone,  M  (Cnt  Hugh,  Colsoan),

3ib.— ic.
Tenntone,  t. Stigeswalt  (?)  (Aimed

of  Lincoln,  Goz.),  3J  b.  —  i  c
Terintone,  s.  Haintone (Alnred of

Lincoln,  Goz.)»  3}  b.  —  i  c
Toresbi, s. Waltham (Cnt  AUn),

ic  i^b. —  ic  6  b.
Clietelbi,  M  (Drogo  de  fienreFc,  Ray-

ner),  3I  b.  —  i  c
Chetelbi,  M  (£raegis  de  Banin,  Tnis-

tin).  3j  b.  —  I  c.
Haneurde,  s.  Snerteforde  (Roger  de

Poiton,  Turold,  pst),  3  b.  —  1  c.
Bertone, Mannebi  and  Castorp,  M

(Dnrand  Malet),  3  b. —  i  c
*  In  soca  de  Linberge  *  i^Abp.  York),

3  b.  —  I  c
Nentone,  4  M  (Cnt.  Alan,  Wimnnd),

3  b.  —  X  c.
Neutone, s. Ingeham (Rayoer de

Brimoa\  3  b.  —  i  c.
Neatone,  M  (Jutten),  3  b.  —  i  c.
Slodcbi,  M  (Hugh  F.  Baldric,  Wldo),

3  b.  — I  c
Brochclesbi,M  (Ivo  Taillebois,  Nigel),

3b.  — IC
Scalebi  and Stratone,  M  (Colsnan,

Alnred),  i  c.  3  b.  —  2
Hazebi,  M  (Waldin  Brito,  Godwin),

I  c.  3  b.  —  2
Hazebi,  M  (Wido  de  Credun,  God-
win), I  c  3  b. —  a
Newtonc,  2  M  (Bp.  Dnrham,  Walbert),

I  c.  3  b.  —  2
Torp,  M  (Gilbert  de  Gand),  3  c.  3b.— 4
Picheorde,  2  M  (Bp.  Durham,  Goislan),

1  c.  5  b.  —  2  c  2  b.

Scallebi, M (Odo  Balist.,  Alnred).

2  c.  3  b.  —  3

Cotes,  M  (Alured  of  Lincoln,  Ber-
nard), 5  b.  —  I  c.  2  b.

Habume,  M  (Alured  of  Lincoln,
Radulf),  5  b.  —  X  c.  2  b.

Alebi,  5.  of  Rigesbi  (Bp.  Bayeux),  5  b.
—  I  c  2  b.

Clachesbi,  s.  in  Wiham  (Durand
Malct),  5  b.  —  I  c.  2  b.

Ludcslorde,  M  (Ivo  Taillebois,  Odo),
5  b.  —  I  c.  2  b.

Newhuse,  M  (Ivo  Tailleboit,  Roger),
5  b. —  I  c.  2  b.

Wicham,  s.  Catebi  (Alured  of  Lin-
coln), 5  b.  —  I  c.  2  b.

Terintone,  s.  Bechelinge  (Roger  de
Poitou),  5  b.  —  I  c.  2  b.

Temescrou,  M  (Ivo  Taillebois,  Wi-
mund),  5  b.  —  I  c  2  b.

TorgTcbi,  M  (Waldin  Ingeniator,
\\  illiam),  5  b.  —  i  c.  2  b.


Qigotebi  u  Aldalnebi  (Bp.  Bajcui\

5  b. —  I  cab.

Totp  (or  Catdyl),  M  (Aimed  of  Uh

coin),  5b.  —  I  c  Jb-
FogelertOD,  M  (Cnt.  Hvgh,  Ri»3diD\

6  b.  —  I  c.  3  b.

Glentenrde,  M  (Refold).  7  b.  — ic

4b.
Glentennxde,  M (Goz. F.  Laabot,

Anichitil),  7  b.  —  i  c  4b.
Apeleia, •.  SUinlelde (William  de

Perci)»  7  b.  —  I  c.  4  b.
Apeleia, s. Berlinge (WOIiam  de

Perd),  7b. —  IC.  4  b.
Strobi and Malteby, ■. Cladiesli

(Hugh  F.  Bnldric,  Wido),  7  k-

iC4b.
Lodebi, B.  inl. Hnndebi (6  b.),  s.

Clachcibi  (I  b.),  (Ivo  Taillebob),

7  b.  —  ic.4b.

Cletham,  tree  M  (St  I^Cer  de  Bus,

Roger),  7  b. —  I  c.4b.
Chelebi, M (Normmn de Adred,

Geoffrey),  5|b.  —  ic,  a^b.
Trinchigeham,  B.  Newtone  QC6Uan\

ic6}b.  —  3C4b.
Stratone,  M (Bp. Bayeiu^ Ilbat^

3c.2|b.  — 4
Catebi,  2  M  (Bp.  Dorham.  TuitiB),

4jb. —  IC.  a  b.
BUbnrg,  M  (Ivo  TaUlebois,  NW),

5|b.  — IC.  3b.
Sulinbmg,  inL  nnd  a.  Chelebi  (Bpu


Bayeux),  r  J  b.  —  i  c  3  b.
Wan^bi,  M (Emegis


de  Banm


';»


6}  b.  —  I  c  ^  b.
Alforde,  s.  Welle  (Gilbert  de  (kod,

Rauemer),  6|  b.  —  i  e.  4  b.
Alvingeham,  M  (Alured  of  lincolfi.

Got),  6A  b.  —  X  c  4  b.
Chelebi,  M  (Bp.  Lincoln,  Raniralf^,

5ib.— IC  3b.
Harduic,  t.  Wamgebi (EnKgis  de

Burun),  5i  b.  —  i  c.  3  b.
Wilgebi,  M  (Wido  de  Keinbodcnt,

Ingelram),  3  c  s  b.  —  4
Bodebi  and  Snmeitane,  M  (Aimed  of

Lincoln,  Goc),  4 c.  -^ 4 c.  6bL
Humbi,  s.  Snmmeidebi (Walter  de

Aincurt),  4  c.  —  4  c.  6  b.
Totintun,  s.  Bolinbroc  (Ivo  Taille-
bois), 5  c.  2  b. — 6
Roxebi,  M  (Rad.  Pagenel,  Heibert),

5c.  2b.  —  6
Torp and  Aestorp, a. Wilinseham

(Gilbert  de  Gand),  5  c.  a  b. --6
Walmesgar,  t.  Cheteleabt  (Cnt.  Hugh,

Hugh),  I  c.  —  1  c.  6  b.
Crocsbi,  M  (Norman  de  AdiecL  Odo),

3b.  — I  CI  b.  ^


APPENDIX  IX


537


Estone,  M  (Abp.  York,  Otbem),  3  c.

—  3  c.  6  b.

Barcoarde,  s.  Wangebi  (£111^^  de

Bunin),  3  c.  2  b.  —  3
Billesfelt, s. Corbi (Bp. Lincoln,

Walter),  a  c.  2  b.  —  3
Bodebi  and  Waletone,  s.  Hunbia  (Ivo

Taillebois,  W . . .  d),  2  c.  a  b.  —  3
Merestone,  M  (Colsnan,  Walter),  2  c

2  b.— 3
Waletone  and  Bodebi,  s.  in  Clasbi

(Goz.  F.  LAmbert,  Rayner),  2  c.  2  b.

—  3

Wlnricesbi,  M  (Abp.  York),  2  c  2  b.

—  3

Beningtone,  R&  t.  Carletone  (William

de  Warenne,  Aldelin),  2  c.  2  b. —  3

Lacestone,  M  (Wido  de  Crednn,
Alnred),  2  c.  2  b.  —  3

Tedforde.  M  (Go«.  F.  Lambert.  Wal-
ter), 2  c  a  b.  —  3

Tavelesbi,  M.  (Rad.  Pagenel),  ic
6  b.  —  2  c.  4  b.

Houten,  s.  Lagesbi  (William  de  Perd,
Enrard),  i  c.  2  b.  —  2

Newtone,  2  M  (Colsnan,  Radnlf),
I  c.  2  b.  —  2

Torp,  M  (Bp.  Bayenxyllbert),  i  c  2  b.

—  2

Rigesbi,  M (Bp.  Bayenz,  Loioard),

I  c  a  b.  —  2
Hacberdiogham,  M  (Drogo  de  Beurere,

Robert),  I  c.  —  i  c.  6  b.
Clachesbi, M (Hugh F. Baldric,

Wido),  I  c.  —  I  c.  6  b.
Chelvingholme,  R  Cotes  (Drogo  de

Bcnrerc),  4  b.  —  i  c.  a  b.
Maltetorp,  B.  Combreuorde  (Rayner

de  Brimoa),  4  b.  —  i  c.  a  b.
Touedebi,  s.  Rigesbi (Bp.  Bayeux),

4  b.  —  I  c.  a  b.
Ulesbi, s.  Combreuorde  (Rayner  de

Brimou\  a  b.  —  i  c
Ormesbi  (Drogo  de  Beurere),a  b. —  i  c.
Crocestone, M (Roger de Poitou,

Anschitil),  6  b.  —  i  c.  4  b.
Grisebi  and  Burg,  s.  Waragebi  (Er-

negis  dc  Bunm),  6  b.  —  i  c.  4  b.
Abume,  M  (William  de  Perci,  Nor-
man), 6  b.  —  I  c  4  b.
Haneurde,  M  (Colsuan,  Turold,  pst.),

6  b.  —  I  c.  4  b.
Barcuurde,  s.  Vlingcham  (Abp.  York,

William},  6  b.  —  1  c.  4  b.
Brigclai,  s.  Achcsbi  (Wido  dc  Credun),

6  b.  —  I  c  4  b.
Clachesbi, M (Gilbert de Gand,

Rademer^,  6  b.  —  I  c.  4  b.
Clachesbi  and  Normanebi,  M  (Drogo

dc  Beurere,  Colsuan),  6  b. — i  c.  4  b.


Cletham,  M  (Aldeiie),  6b.  —  i  c.  4b.
Cletbam,  M (Bp.  Bayeux,  Ilbert),

6  b.  —  t  c.  4  b.
Lobingeham,  M  (Ito  Taillebois,  Odo),

6  b.  —  I  c.  4  b.

Udetone,  M  (Norman  de  Adred),  6  b.

IC.  4b.
Wil^bi,  M  (Robert  de  Statford,  God.

wm).  6  b.  —  I  c.  4  b.
Stigeswalt, M (Alured  of  Lincoln,

Siward),  6  b.  —  i  c.  4  b.
Rase,  M  (Bp.  Bayeux,  Wimmid),  5}b.

Cncnalt,  M  (Abp.  York,  William),

7f  b.  —  I  c  6  b.
Ulingeham,  M  (Bp.  Bayenx,  Wadard),

6 J  b.  —  I  c.  5  bw
Blasebi,  M  (Odo  Balut,  Herbert),

5jb. —  IC.  4b.
Sndcotes, s.  wivdesbi (Drogo de

Benrere),  7  b.  —  i  c  6  b.
Hegelinge,  M  (Bp.  Bayeux,  Wadaid),

7  b.  —  I  c  6  b.

Bonedebi,  3  M  (Emegis  de  Bnnm,

Ulric),  7  b.  —  I  c.  6  b.
Westledebi,  M  (Ito  TaUkboU,  Odo),

7  b.  —  I  c.  6  b.
Catebi,  M  (Alnied  of  Lincoln),  7  b.

—  I  c.  6  b.

Cocrintone,  3  M  (Alured  of  Lincoln,

Goz.),  7  b.  —  I  c  6  b.
Scallebi  and Stratone,  M  (Doxmd

Malet,  Aloied),  i  c  i  b.  —  2
Randebi,  inl. and s.  Stratone  (Bp.

Bayeux,  Ilbert),  i  c.  i  b.  —  a
Scrivelesbi,  M (Robert Despenser),

7  c.  5  b.  —  8  c.  4  b.
Scallebi  and  Stratone,  M TGoz.  F.

Lambert,  Baldric),  i  c.  5  b. —  2c

4  b.

Rosbi  and  Other  Rotbi,  s.  Wilgebi-
Chirchebi  (Bp.  Durham,  Alnod),
3c.  lb.  —  4

Summerlede,s.  Aldnlnebi  (Bp.Bayenx),

5  b.  —  I  c.  4  b.

Ulvesbi,  M  (Hugh).  4  b. —  i  c  3  b.
Goldesbi, M (Colegrim), ic }b.

—  a

Haintone, a M (Roger  de  Poiton,

Albert),  I  c  ib.— a
Chinetorp,  M  (Ivo  Taillebois),  7}b

—  IC.  7jb.

Fodrebi,  M  ( WilUam  de  Perd,  Fnlco),
4  b.  —  I  c.  4  b.

Chemitone,  M  (Cnt.  Alan),  4  b.—
I  c.  4  b.

Chemitone,  M  (Drogo  de  Beurere,
Robert),  4  b.  —  I  c.  4  b.

Welletune,  s.  Catebi  (Roger  de  Poi-
tou), 4b. —  I  c.  4  b.


.M8


APPENDIX  IX


Rase, B. inL lindude (Aimed of

LlDcoln),  4  b.  —  I.e.  4  b.
Stainton,  M  (Wm.  de  Perd,  Alnlf),

4b.  — I  c.  4b.
Scamelesbii  s.  Beltesford  (Ivo  Taille*

boit),  6  c.  —  7
AWingeham,  2  M  (Alured  of  Lincoln,

Rannulf),  6  b.  —  i  c.  6  b.
Alchebai^,  M  (Ivo  Taillebois),  5  c

—  6

Walecote,  M  (St  Peter  de  Bnrg  (j),

Gilbert  de  Gand  (4)  ),  5  c.  —  6
Gettune,  M  (King  William),  3  c  —  4
Atebi,  M (Colsoan,  William),  3  c.

—  4

Cadebi,  s.  Waltham  (Cnt  Alan),  3  c.

Chetelesbi,  M  (Cnt  Hngh,  Hugh),

3C.  — 4
Besebi,  i.  Waltham  (Cnt  Alan),  3  c.

Homecastre,  M  (King  William),  3  c.

Lazebi,M  (GUbertdcGand,  WillUm),

3C.--4
Mnndebi,  M  (Cnt.  Alan,  Endo),  3  c

Ulbgeham,  2  M  (Abp.  York,William),

3c.  — 4
Wiaelesforde,  i.  Sechebroc (Robert

Malet),  3  c.  —  4

Tesforde,  2  M  (Abp.  York,  Gilbert),

3c.  — 4
Ristone  and  Carletone,  M  (William

de  Perci,  Osbem),  3  c.  — 4
Roabi,  s.  Carltorp  (Robert  de  Ved),

3  c.  — 4
Ormesbi,  M  (Cnt.  Hugh,  Hugh),  3  c.

—  4

Staintune,  M  (Cnt  Hugh,  Osbem),

3c.  — 4
Glantham,  M (Ivo  Taillebois),  3  c.

Foztun,  M  (Cnt.  Alan,  Hervcy),  i  c.

—  3

Golse,  free  M  (Bp.  Lincoln,  Roger),
ic.  —  2

Haberdingham,  s.  in  Luzebi  (Gilbert
de  Gand),  i  c,  —  2

Cabume,  M  (William  de  Perci,  Nor-
man), I  c.  —  2

Nortchelesei,  M  (Cnt.  Alan),  i  c. —  2

Bechebi,  M  (Bp.  Lincoln,  Rannulf),
1  c.  —^  2

Belesbi,  M  (Waldin  Ingeniator,  Wil-
liam), ic.  —  2

Brachelesbi,  M  (Bp.  Durham,  Nigd),
I  c.  —  2

Brunetorp,  M  (Bp.  Durham,  Nigell),
I  c.  —  2


Bondebi, M (Rad. de Mortfaner,

William),  IC  — a
Hoctnne  (Ivo  Taillebois,  Odo),  i  c

—  a

Hootone,  inl.  and  a.  LeMmtooe  (Abp.
York,  Herbert),  i  c.  —  a

Houtooe,  s.  Blesebi  (Goa.  F.  Lam-
bert, Herman),  i  c.  *-  a

Iribi,  M  (Ivo  Taillebois,  Odo),  ic.

—  a

LagesU,M(William  dePtatd,Eiinid),

la  —  2
Normaneston,  M  (Bp.  Bajenz,  Obert),

ic — a
Wicham,  M  (Rayner  de  Brimon),  i  c

—  a

Walesbi  and  Otesbi,  M  (Ivo  Taille-
bois, Geoffrey),  i  &  —  a

Welletune,  M  (Cnt.  Alan,  Landric),
I  c  — ^  a

Wilgebi,  M  (Bp.  Lincoln,  Radalf),
I C- a

Tatenai,  M  (Ivo  Taillebois,  Hcnner),
IC.  —  a

Sndeslunt,  M  (Goa.  F.  Lambert,
Rayner),  i  c.  — <-  a

SUlinbmg,  M  (Hngh  F.  Baldiic),  i  &

—  a

Snalnn,  s.  and inL  Cncoalt  (Abp.

York,  WiUiam),  i  c.  —  J
Snalnn,  s.  Grosbi  (Bp.  Bayenz),  i  c.

—  a

Sualun, M  (Roger  de  Poiton,  W-

mnnd),  i  c. —  a
Rebnme,  M  (Bp.  Lineoln  and  Canons

of  St  Mary),  i  &  —  a
Risebi,  s.  Aldnlnebi  (Bp.  Bayenz),

I  c.""-  a
Haroldestorp,  B.  Wilgebi  (Gilbert  de

Gand),  i  c  —  a
Haidure,  s.  Osbemedebi  (Wido  de

Crednn),  4  c.  — 5
Aschebi,  M  (B^  Bayeox),  4c.— .5
Westrecale,  s.  Bolinbroc  (Ivo  Taille-
bois), 4c. —  5
Lavintone,  M  (Abp.  Yoric,  Rannnlf),

4c.  — 5
Walecote,  s.  Foldiingdinm  (Gilbert

de  Gand),  4  c.  —  5
Lea,  4  M  (Cnt  Alan,  Robert),  4c.

—  5

Hacham,  M  (Colsoan,  William),  ac.

—  3

Agetorp,  s.  Bonielle  ( Anwot),  s  c —3
Chisebi,  M  (Wido  de&ednn).  ac

—  3

Merestone,  M (Ahned  of  Lincoln,

Walefrid),  a  c  —  3
Wichingebi,  M  (William  de  P^rci,

Osbem),  ac — 3


APPENDIX  IX


5*9


Widnn,  free  M  (Bp.  Lincoln,  Malger),

2  c.  —  3
Widon. 2 M (Ivo  TaiUebois, Wi-

mund),  2  c.  —  3
Spanebi,  s.  Ulvetbi (Colsuan), a  c,

—  3

Spilesbi,  Iresbi,  and  Torp  (s.  Gredbi

and Estrecale  (Bp.  Darham),  ac

—  3

Panlone, M (Abp. York,  Gilbert),

ac. —  3
Pantone,  s. Waragebi (Ernegis de

Bnrun),  a  c  —  3
Bardenai,  M  (Gilbert  de  Gand),  ac.

—  3

Picheuorde, M (Colsnan, William),

ac  — 3
Osgotebi, s. Bardenai (Gilbert de

Gand),  2  c.  —  3
Osbcrnedebi, M (Wido de  Crednn,

Vitalis),  a  c.  —  3
Esctorp,  M  (Robert  de  Todeni,  Beren-

gar),  a  c.  —  3
Folnodebi,  M  (Cnt.  Hugh,  Baldric),

ac  — 3
Langetone,  a  M  (Drogo  de  Beurere,

Gcoffrcv),  a  c —  3
Beningnrae,  M  (Abp.  York,  Osbem),

a  c  4  b.  —  3  c  4  b.
Ormesbi, a M  (Norman  de  Adred,

Herbert),  a  c.  4  b.  —  3  c  4  b.
Bodcbi.  M  (King  William),  8  c.  —  9
Kipeslai,  M  (Robert  de  Todeni,  Ivo),

8  c  —  9
Sotrebi, Dalbi, and Dristorp, &.

Grantham  (Cnt.  Hugh),  15  c  — 16
Abi,  M  (Bp.  Bayeux,  Wadaid), i  c.

6  b.  —  a  c  6  b.

Tavelesbi,  2  M  (Rog*r  de  Poitou,
Rogcr\  I  c.  4  b. —  2  c.  4  b.

Ferebi,  M  (Gilbert  Tison,  Anschitil),
2  c.  7^  b.  — 4

Orcsbi,  M  (William  de  Perci),  7|c.

—  2

Wilchetone,  M  (Waldin  Ingeniator),

2  c.  3}  b.  —  3c.  4  b.
Sprcilclintone, M (^Cnt. Alan), a  c.

1 4  b.  —  3  c  a  b.
WiJcalc  (Roger  de  Brimou),  i  c.  7|b.

—  .^

Elesham,  M Bp.  Bayeux,'llbcrt),  7  b.

—  2

Hliburj;,  M Bp.  Durham  and  monks),

7  b.  —  2

Wilchetone,  2 M Odo  Balist.),  3  c

3  b.  —  4  c.  4  b.

Westlcdcbi,  s.  Wichingebi  (Wm.  de
rcrci\  I  c.  lb.  —  2  c  a  b.

W  iuclin^'cham,8.  Rase;Rad.Pagenel),
1  c.  lb.  —  2  c  2  b.


Clachesbi  and  Normanetbi,  s.  Tava-
lesbi  (Goz.  F.  Lambert),  i  c  i  b.

—  ac.  ab.

Bachehale  and  HordtODe,  %.  Hamin-
gebi  (Cnt.  Hugh,  Baldric),  i  c  i  b.

—  I  c.  a  b.

Aschebi, M (Bp. Bayenx, Ilbert),

1  c.  I  b.  —  a  c.  a  b.
Haintone,  M  (Roger  de  Poiton,  Aeon),

ic.  lb.  —  acab.
Calnodesbi,  M (Endo  F.  Spirewic),

4  c.  a  b.  —^  s  c«  ^  b.
Welle,  3  M  (Cnt. Hngh,  Oabem),

ic.  7  b.  —  3
Blesebi,  M  (Goz.  F.  Lambert,  Her-
man), I  c.  64b.— 3
Crocestone,  M (Hngh F. Baldric,

Hamelin),  i  c  3  b. —  a  c  4b.
Fngeleston,  a  M  (Bp.  Durfanm,  Wal-

bert),  I  c.  a  b.  —  a  c.  4  b.
Golse,  M  (Alnred  of  Lincoln,  Radnlf),

IC  ab.  —  ac4b.
Golfe,  M  (Eraegii  de  Bunm,  Ulric),

I  c  a  b.  —  a  c.  4  b.
Ulingeham,  s.  Barcuorde  (Ralner  de

Brimou),  I  c.  a  b.  —  a  c.  4  b.
Stalingebnrg, a M (Abp. York,

Herbert),  xcab.  —  ac4b.
Strobi,  t.  Abi  (Bp.  Bayeux),  i  c.  a  b.

—  a  c  44  b.

Ravenedale, t. Achesbi (Wido de

Crednn),  ic.  ab.  —  ac.  4b.
Torp,  a  M  (Hugh  F.  Baldric,  Gilbert),

I  c  a  b.  —  a  c.  4  b.
Fngelestow,  a  M  (Cnt.  Alan,  PlcoC),

acab.  "^  ^  c»  A  b.
Ormetbi,  M  (Ivo'TaiUeboi8,Wimund),

acab.  ""^  •!  c  A  b
Fullobi,  a  M  (Bp.  Duriiam,  William),

3  c.  6  b.  —  5
Stimblebi, M (Drogo de Beurere,

Geoffrey),  3  c.  6  b.  —  5
Dembelbi,  s.  Oibemedebi  (Wido  de

Crednn),  6  b.  —  a  c
Bliburg,  M  (Goc  F.  Lambert),  6  b.

—  ac.

Neutooe,  t. Friiebi (Bp. Bayeux,

Ilbert),  6  b.  —  a  c.
Ulvesbi,  free  M  (Bp.  Lincoln,  Ran*

nulf ),  6  b.  —  a  c.
Fugelettou,  M  (Robert  Ditpeniator),

I  c  6  b.  —  3
Other  Raie,  s.  Raae  (Rad.  Pagenel),

I  c  6  b.  —  3
Covenham, M (Bp. Durham, St.

KarileQ,  a  c.  4  b.  —  3  c.  6  b.
Neteltone,  M  (Emegii  de  Bunm),  5  b.

—  I  c  7  b.

Bertone,  M  (Rad.  Pagenel),  loc  6  b.

—  la


V  ISvX^KMXJhK


M  m


53°


APPENDIX  IX


Torentone,  s. Ombi (William de
Perd,  Roger  de  Poitoa),  a  c.  6  b.

Fimntime,  M  (Wido  de  Crednn),  4  c.

ab. — 5  c.  4  b.
Waragebi  (Waldin  Ingeniator),  5}  b.

—  ac.
Cotes,  M  (Dttnmd  Malet,  Richard),

icajb.  —  ac5b.
Chenebi,  s.  Aldnlnebi  (Bp.  Bayenx),

5b. —  ac
Bolintone,  M  (Ivo  Taillebois,  Odo),

5  b. —  ac.
Mingeham, t. Chelvingham (Nor-
man de  Adred),  5b.  —  ac.
Neteltone,  M  (Roger  de  Poitoa,  Blan-

card),  5  b.  —  a  c.
Neteltone,  M  (Leveva),  5  b.  —  a  c.
Grosbi,  M (Ito TailleUns, Odo),

5  b.  —  a  c.
AdiesU,  M  (Wido  de  Credun,  Aimed),

I c.  lb.  —  a c 4 b.
Elesham,  M  (Rogerde  Poiton,  Emnin),

I  c.  lb. —  ac.  iib.
Ormesbi, s. Widun (Bp. Lincoln,


Malger),  ic5b.  —  3
^ilineeni


Filingeham,M  (Roger  de  Poiton,  Ans-
chitil),  a  c.  i  b.  —  3  c.  4  b.

Terintone,  t.  Waragebi  (Emegis  de
Bnnm),  a  c.  4^  b.  —  4

Dretbi,M  (Rogerde  Poiton),  i  c  4b.

—  3

Haintone,  s.  Torp  (Abp.  York,  Wil-
liam), I  c.  4  b.  —  3
Brigetlai,  s.  Waltham  (Cnt.  Alan),

1  c.  4  b.  —  3

Hiboldeston, a  M  (Ivo  Taillebois),

ic.  4  b.  — 3
Machetone, M (Ansgot), ic 4  b.

—  3

Snalnn,  M  (Cnt.  Alan,  Picot),  i  c.  4  b.

—  3

Ribi,  M  (Roger  de  Poitoa,  Emnin),

IC  4b.  — 3
Staintone, M (Drogo de Benxtre,

Geoffrey),  6  b.  —  a  c  a  b.
Uivesbi,  M  (Norman  de  Adred,  Odo),

6  b.  —  a  c  a  b.
Staintone,  M  (Rayner  de Brimou),

6  b.  —  a  c.  a  b.
SchiHintune, free  g.  in Sch. (Abp.

York,  Walchclin),  4  c  —  5  c  4  b.
Esbemebi,  s.  Folchingeham  (Gilbert

de  Gand),  4  c.  —  5  c  4 b.
Hale, s.  Torp (Gilbert de Gand,

Radnlf),  8  c  4  b.  — 10.
Offran,  B,  Edeham  (Gilbert  de  Gand),

3C4b.  — 5
Stalmburg,  a  M  (Norman  de  Adred),

2  c.  4  b.  —  4


Tiwoide^  t.  Widme  (Cntsi.  Judith),

5C4b.— 7
Agetome,  a  M  (Al^  Yoric,  William),

ac  —  3C4b.
Limberge»  M  (Nonnan de  Adied,

Hnbot),  4_b.  —  ac
lindnde,  M  (Dmand  BCakt),  4^.^  ac
Toreabi and Alwoldobi,  M (Bp.

Bayeoz,  Dbeit),  4  c  3f  b. — 6
Cabnme,  M  (two  TaillAola,  Roger),

ic3b.— 3
CheleU,  3  M  (Bp.  Dmliam,  Almod),

6c  3b.  —  8
Stivetooe,  M  (Aimed of  Unooln),

t  c  5bu  —  3c  a  bb
Hag  and  Brudme,  s.  Foldiiiigdim

(Gilbeit  de  Gand,  Deiinc),  3 c  3h.

—  5

Hawardebi,  s.  Waltham  (Cut  Ahn),

ac  3b.  — 4
Scallebi  and  Stratooe,  M  (Oiben  de

Ards,  Aimed),  ac  3^ — 4
Wivelingeham,  s.  Tavdeabi  (Oca.  F.

Lambert,  Ivo),  i  c  7  b.— 3c  4bL
RighesU,  Halebi,  Tatebi,  a.  Rigeibi

(Abp.  Yoik,  Herbert),  ic  70.—

3c.4b.
Stobeton,  a.  Weatbmg  (Geoficy  AIk-

lin  and  Rad.,  hia nephew),  5c  a| h.

—  7

Rodowelle,  M  (Dumnd  Malct),  i  c.

5|b.*  — 3c3|b.
Scalehi  and  Stratooe,  M  (R«L  P»ge-

nel),  3  c  ab. — 5
Torgrembi,  M  (Norman  de  Adnd,

Gamelin),  ic  6b.  —  3c  4^
Neteltone,  a  M  (Bp.  Bayenz,  Emegb

and  Wadard),  i  c6bb — 3c  4^
Cociinton,  M  (Rayner  de  BrimoB;,

I  c6b. —  3C4b.
Grimealn, M (William de Pod,

Fnlco),  IC  ak  —  3
Adnloebi,  3  M  (Bpi.  Bayeox),  i  c  ah.

—  3

Nentooe,  a.  Aldnlndii  (Bp.  Baycax),

I  c  a  b  "■  4
Hiboldeston,  M  (St.  Peter  de  Baig,

Gilbert),  i  c  a  b.  —  3
Cheraitone,  M (Ho^ F. Baldric,

Hamelin),  a  b.  —  a
ForeU,  a  M  (Bp.  Dufaam,  TnnliB),

7  b.  — a  c  5  b.
Cherchetmie,  a.  Dialtone  (CbL  Alan),

IOC  i(b.  — la
Toigrebi,  M  (Bp.  BayeosX  xc  7b.

Wilgebi,  M  (Waldhi  Bdto\  i  c  7^

—  3  c  6  b.

Hahitone,  M  (Bp.  BKycmc,  Ilbat),
1  c  7b.  — 3cob.


APPENDIX  IX


531


Newtone,  s.  Baaebi  (Cnt  Alan),  3c

Golse,  t.  Barewe  (Drogo  de  Beurere)|

ac  —  4
Gnnresbi,  i.  Waltham  (Cnt.  Alan),

2C.  —  4
Grosbi,  M  (Bp.  Bayenx),  a  c.  —  4
Hechelinge,  M  (Alored  of  Lincoln,

Bernard),  a  c  "^  4
Aplebi,  Risebi  and  Satedif,  M  (Gil-

bert  de  Gand,  Robert),  a  c.  —  4
Aresbi,  M (Bp.  Bayeux,  Wadard),

ac.  — 4
Azesbi,  M (Bp.  Lincoln, Goislan),

ac.  —  4
Holtone,  1.  Tatenai  (Ivo  Taillebois),

a  c.  —  4
Mameltune,  free M (St. Peter de

Barg.  Radulf),  ac. — 4
Wispinctone,  t.  and  B.  Stratone  and

Cnirchebi  (Bp.  Dorham),  a  c.  —  4
Wtspinctune,  s.  Stiatone  and  Chir-

cnebi  (Eado  F*  Spirewic),  a  c.  —  4
Udetone, M (Bp.  Lincoln,  Roger),

ac.  —  4
Tofgiebi, 8. Belesbi (Odo Balist.,

Herbert),  a  c — 4
Rageneltorp, free  M (St. Peter  de

Burg,  Radolf),  a  c.  —  4
Wilgebi,  M  (Gilbert  de  Gand,  Roger),

a  c  —  4
Barewe, a M (Drogo de Benrere,

Tetbald),  ac.— 4
Cbelebi (or  Cotes), M (Drogo  de

Beurere,  Robert),  1  c.  —  3
Crosbi, 8. Binnibroc (Robert de

Todeni,  Berengar),  i  c.  —  3
Crocsbi,  M  (William  Blnnd),  x  c.  —  3
WitcwcUe,  M  (Judith,  Herbert),  i  c.

—  3

Rocheland,  M  (Cnt.  Hugh,  Brisard),

I  c.  —  3
Welle,  M  (Gilbert  de  Gand,  Raue-

mer),  1  c.  —  3
Staintone,  M  (Hugh  F.  Baldric),  i  c.

—  3
Doninctone,  s.  Beltesford  (Ivo  Taille-
bois), 6  c.  —  8

Nortchime, M (Robert de  Todeni,

Ivo),  6  c.  — 8
Sticandebi,  M  (Alnred  of  Lincoln),

6c.  — 8
Beltesford,  M  (Ivo  Taillebois).  6  c.

—  8.
Merestune. a M (Radulf Dapifer,

and  Osbern  pst.),  6  c.  —  8
Fulnedebi,  ». vVaragebi  (Emegis  de

Bnmn  ,3  c.  —  5
Grcnesbi,  3  M  (Cnt.  Alan,  Wimnnd),

3  <-'•  —  5

M  m


Grentewelle^ M (Roger  de Bosli,

Turold),  3  c  —  5
Rande i. Waragebi (EmegU de

Bnrun),  3  c  -—  5
Aiedebi,  t.  Folchingdiam (Gilbert

de  Gand),  5  c.  —  7
Carletnne,  M  (William  de  Warenne,

Aldelin),  5  c  —  7
Gunfordebi, B. and •• Grantham

KingWiUUm),7c.— 9
Snavetone,  M  (Colsnan),  7  0.-9
Sotebi,  M  (Bp.  Bayeux,  Radulf),  4  c.

—  6

WiTelesbi,  M  (Drogo de Beurere,

Robert),  4  c. — 6
Hotot,  ToTulnesbi,  Sutune,  Dniiatorp,

Billetbi,  Marchetbi,  1.  Grantham

(Cnt  Hugh),  18  c.  —  ao
Lecbebuxne, 1. Grantham (Cnt.

HugM,  IOC —  xa
Brigedai,  Wade  and  Ravenedal,  s.

AKhebi  (Bp.  Bayeux),  a  c.  5}  b.

— 4  c.  6  b.
Sninhope,  s.  Waltham  (Cnt  Alan),

I  c.  7jb.  —  4
Wibertune,  t.  Draitone  (Cnt  Alan),

9  c.  3  b.  — 13  c.  4  b.
Hagetome  and Haneuuorde, a  M

(Goz.  F.  Lambert),  a  c  7  b.  — 5
Sudootes,  M  (Bp.  Bayeux),  1  c.  7  b.—

Aletbi,  M  (Cnt  Alan,  Picot),  a  c

6ib.-5
Tofte,  M  (Bp.  Bayeux,  Wadard),  i  c

64  b.  — 4
Endretorp,  s.  Clachetbi  (Hugh F.

Baldric,  Wido),  a  c.  4  b. —  5
Uluricebi,  a 6ee  M (Bp.  Lincoln,

Goislan),  a  c.  4  b.  —  5
Sumertebi, a. Brune (W^illiam de

Perci),  a  c.  4  b.  —  5
S^nrebi,  M  (Durand  Malet),  a  c.  4  b.

—  5

Caldecote,  s.  Waragebi  (Emegii  de

Burun),  i  b.  4  c.  — 4
Lindude,  a  M  (Alured  of  Lincoln),

1  c  4  b.  —  4
Langetone,  B.  Butiate  (Robert  Dit.

pensator),  i  c.  4  b.  —  4
Gnmetbi and  Snalun,  M  (Rad.  de

Mortemer,  Richard),  a  c. a  b. —

4  c.  4  b.
Grisebi,  M  (Abp.  York,  WUliam),

a  c.  a  b.  —  4  c.  4  b.
Binnibroc  and  Erforde,  M  (Wido  de

Credun,  Alnred),  x  c  a  b.  —  3  c.

4b.
Rase,  M  (Rad.  Pagenel),  6  c.  6  b.  —  9
Franetone,  B.  Draitone  (Cnt.  Alan),

7  c.  6  b.  —  10


532


APPENDIX IX


Odencbi,  M  (William  de  Perci,  Wil-
liam),  2  c.  3  b.  —  4  c.  6  b.

Beningiude,  2  M  (Ivo  Taillebois,
Odo),  3  c.  4  b.  —  o

Widiale,  2  M  (Bp.  Bayeax,  Ilbeit),
3C.  3|b.— 6

Cabnme,  M  (Hugh  F.  Baldric),  2  c.

Sjb.  — 5
Ferebi,  s.  Bertone  (Gilbert  de  Gmnd),

2  c  7i  b.*  —  5  c.  4  b.
Haltun  and  Stepi,  M (Cnt Alan,

Eudo),  3  b.  —  3  0.
Grimesbi,  Cleia,  Itrebi  and  Temescoa,

s.  Levesbi,  Bredelon  and  Scarhoa

(Bp.  Bayeux),  3  c  i  b.* —  5  c.  7  b.
Clachetbi  and  Normanesbi,  4  M  (Ivo

Taillcbois,  Hugh),  2  c  6  b.*  —  5  c.

4  b.
Chelestome,  2  M  (Alured  of  Lincoln),

2  c.  6  b.  —  5  c.  4  b.
Helperincham  and  Bnrtone,  t.  Fol-

chingeham  (Gilbert  de  Gand),  5  c.

2  b.— 8

Cocrintone,  M  (Bp.  Bayeux,  Ilbert),

3  c.  I  b.  —  6

Rasa,  M  (Bp.  Bayeux,  Wadard),  2  c

I  b.  — 5
Linberge,  M  (Ivo  Taillebois,  Nigel),

1  c  1  b.  —  4

Fendebi, s.  Waltham (Cnt  Alan),

3c.  — 6
Colesi,  M  (Roger  de  Poiton,  Roger),

3C.— 6
Castre  (and  Hnmendone  B.),  M  (King

William),  3  c. — 6
Biscopetorp,  3  M (Bp.  Durham,  2

men),  3  c.  —  6
Bundebi,  6  M  (Hugh  F.  Baldric),  3  c.

— 6
Acheseia, M (Geoffrey de Wirce,

Wazelin),  3  c  —  6
Chevremont,  M  (William  de  Perd),

3  c.  — 6
Adelinctune,  M  (Robert  de  Todeni),

3  C--6
Ravendal and Other Ravendal,  s.

Waltham  (Cnt.  Alan),  3  c.  —  6
Torintune,  M  (Robert  Dispensator),

3c.  — 6
Sudstoches and Nortstoches, s.

Grantham (King William), 9  c.

— 12
Wivelesforde,  M  (Godfrey  de  Cam-

brai),  9  c. — 12
Limberge,  2  M  (Rayner  de  Brimon),

2  c  — 5

Stratone,  M  (Eudo  F.  Spirewic),  2  c.

,  -5

Linberge,  2  M  (Hugh  F.  Baldric),
2  c.  4  b.  —  5  c.  4  b.


Hatuie, 8. Waragebi (Emcgis de

Burwi),  5  c — 8
Normanebi,  M  (Ivo  Taillebois),  5  c

—  8
Hadedive,  s.  Waltham  (Cnt.  AUnX

4C  — 7
Horchetou, 1. and inl. Bertone

(Gilbert  de  Gaud),  4  c. —  7
Staintone,  s.  Randebi  (Raimlf  de  St

Waleric),  4  c.  —  7
Linbergham,  M  (Drogo  de  Bemeve),

1  c  —  4
Tadewelle,  M  (Robert  DItpenator),

I  a  — 4
Beitone,  Bechebi,  Wirichebi,  Saraer^

tebl,  Habume,  1.  Bemodebi  (Cnt

Hugh,  WiUiamj,  3  c  7|  b.  —  7


Ormesbi,  a  M  (Drogo

Geoffrey),  4  c.  7  b.  —  8
Neteltone,  M  (Dmand  Makt,  a  men),

I  c  6  b, — 5
Sninhope,  M  (Odo  Boliit.),  3  c.  fb.

—  6  c.  4  b.
Randebi,  M  (Rammlf  de  St  Waleric),


I  c  5^.-5
Ti
ie
5b.— 9


Fodxebi  and  TnrgrebL  1.  Bumibroc
(Robert  de  Todeni,  Berengar),  5  c.


Scantone,  M  (Gilbert  de  Gand),  6  c

4  b.  — 10
Saxebi,  a  M  (Ivo  TaiUebois,  Roger),

A  ^  _  7  c  ^  b
Ounesbi,  s.  Wilgebi  (Wide  de  Rdn-

buedaut),  3  c  4  b.  —  7
Iribi,  M  (Dniand  Malet),  3  c.  4  b.

—  7

Chelvingfaolm, 6 M (Cnt Alan,

Landnc),  a  c  4  b.  —  o
Hacberdingham  (or  Mimdebi),  6  M
(Cnt Alan, Eudo), 8  c.  — iic

Blibnrg, M (Geoffrey de Wiree,

Robert),  ac  a  b. — 6
Rase,  Osgotebi, Waleibi,  Otebi,  a

TavdeMH  (Roger  de  Poiton,Rogcr),

3c.  ijb.— 7
Imungeham,  a  M  (William  de  Perd),

4  c.  i|  b.  —  8
Filingeluun,  5  M  (Colman),  7  c  I  K

—  II

Rodewelle,  2  M  (Aimed  of  Lincolo,

Gleu\  4  c.  I  bb — 8
Exewelle^  M  (Cnt  Hngli,  Goc),  a  c

—  6

CheneM,  M  (Bp.  Lincoln,  GoiibB),

2  c— 6
Langtnne,  Hacberdingham,  Salnmn-

debi,  Tedfbide^  BxGiGle,  Winaebi,

Clachesbi, u Gimntham (Cat

Uu^),  a9c.  — 33


APPENDIX  IX


533


HerUveslnney  B.  and  s.  Grantham
(King  William),  la  c.  — 16

Netelham,  M  (King  William),  la  c.
— 16

Welletone,  M  (Bp.  Lincoln,  6  canons
of  Lincoln),  la  c.  —  i6

Carltnne,  M  (Drogo  de  Benrere),  12  c.

—  16

Wellebnme,  M  (Robert  Malet),  la  c.

—  16

Chevelestnne,  B.  Hache(Cnt.  Alan),

la  c. —  16
Medeltone,  a  M  (Emegis  de  Bnnm),

3  c.  —  7
Hecham,  3  M  (Cnt.  Hngh,  Monks  of

St  Scvenis),  a  c.  —  6

Grantham, M (Cnt. Hugh), a  c

—  6

Catenai  and  Usun,  to  Castre  (King
William),  4  c.  —  8

Archintone,  M  (Ivo  Taillebois,  Geof-
frey), 4  c  —  8

Tatenai,  a  M  (Ivo  Taillebois),  4  c.

—  8

Belesbi,  s.  Waltham  (Cnt.  Alan),  4  c.

—  8

Scotere,  2  M  (St.  Peter  de  Burg),  8  c.

—  la

Lodeburg,  s.  Binnibroc (Robert  de

Todeni,  Bcrengar),  8  c. —  la
Epcnrde,  M  (Geoffrey  de  Wirce),  8  c.

—  12

Gainesbnrg, M  (Geoffrey  de  Wirce,

Rainald),  8  c.  — 12
Hache,  M  i,Cnt.  Alan),  7  c.  6  b. —

12
Asnnardebi,  s.  Folchingeham  (Gilbert

de  Gand),  4  c.  5  b. — 9
Waragcbi,  M  (Geoffrey  Alselin  Rad-

ulO,  2  0.  3«  (ori)b.  — 7
Rase,  M  (Goz, F.  Lambert,  Walo),

3  b.  —  5  c.

Ludeforde,  3  M  (William  de  Perci),

4  c.  6  b.  —  9  c.  4  b.
Scchebroc,  M  (Robert  Malet),  4  c.  —

9
Soke*  of  Grantham  (King  William,

T.R.E.  Edith),  55  c— 60

Burgelai,  M  (Gilbert  de  Gand,  Geof-
frey), 2  c  — 7

Wilgebi,  s.  Folchingeham  (Gilbert
de  Gand),  5  c.  —  10

Chelvingholm,  M  (Norman  de  Ad-
rcci),  4  c.  7  b.  —  10

bemulfbi,  s.  Waltham  (Cnt.  Alan),
6  c.  —  12

Humbrestonc,  s.  Tatenai  (Ivo  Taille-
bois), 6  c.  — 12

Waltham,  M  (Cnt.  Alan),  6  c.—
12


Bemodebi,  M  (Cnt.  Hugh,  WUliam),

6  c.  —  13
Leisintone,  M  (Abp.  Yoric,  Herbert),

4  c. — 10
Ulvesbi,  a  M  (Encgis  de  Bnnm),  4  c.

— 10
Soabi, Elgelo, Toresbi, CUctorp,

Totele,  s.  Grantham  (Cnt  Hugh),

la  c. — 18
Bnnielle,  M  (Anagot^,  a  c.  —  8
Eleham,  M  (Bp.  Lmcoln,  Goislan),

2  c.  a  b  ^"^  o
Bergebi,  M (Robert  Malet),  8a^

Bnrtun,  M  (Wido  de  Credon),  10  c.

—  17

Levesbi,  Bredeloa  and  Scarfaon,  3  M

(Bp.  Bayenx),  9  c.  — 16
Rebnme,  3  M  (Goz.  F.  Lambert),  7  c.

lb.  —  14c.  ab.
Toreswe,  a  M  (Alnred  of  Lincoln),  5  c.

7b.  — 13
<Two Mentinghes,' s. Beltesford

(Ivo  Taillebois),  7  c.  sJb. —  15c

a{b.
Soke  of  Chirchetone (K. William,

T.R.E. Earl Edwin), 59  c.—

Alchmton, M (William de Perci,

Fulco),  8  c  — 16
Chirchetone,  M  (K.  WUliam),  8  c

—  16

Wichingedene,  M  (Jndith,  Hngh),  4  c.

—  la

Overtnne  and  Stratone,  M  (Jndith),

3c.  4b.  —  la
Glentewrde,  M  (Bp.  Bayeux,  Wadard),

ic.  3  b. —  ID
Barewe,  M  (Drogo  de  Benrere),  9  c

a  b. —  18  c  4  b.
Aplebi,  Risebi,  and  Saleclif,  M  (Roger

de  Busli),  9  c.  5  b. — 19  c  a  b.
Torentnne  and  Bodebi,  and  Udetone,

M  (Rad.  de  Mortemer), 10  c.  —

ao
Exentnne,  M  (Tndith),  a  c.  —  la
Lobingeham,  Irebi,  and  Ribi,  s.  Ber-

nodebi  (Cnt  Hngh),  10  c.  i  b. —

aoc.  ab.
Aschebi,  s.  Waltham  (Cnt.  AUn),  6  b.

—  la

Wibertune,  (Cnt  Alan),  1  c  a  b. —

13
Westnne  and  Mnltnne,  s.  Holobech

and  Copelade  (Wido  de  Credon),

I  c  7  b.  — 15
Soke*  of  Gettnne  (K.  William,  T.R.E.

Edith),a5c.  5|b.»  — 38
Bertone,  M  (Gilbert  de  Gand),  13  c

—  27


534


APPENDIX  IX


Tadewellc,  M  (Cnt.  Hugh),  5  c  —

20
Binnibroc, M (Robert de Todeni,

Berengmr),  8  c.  4I  b.  —  24
Soke*  of  HoTDCMtle  (K.  William,

T.R.E.  Edith),  42  c.  —  58


Soke*orCafltre(K.Willum,  T.R.E.
Earl  Morcar),  a8c  i  b.  —  58

Inegnlar.

Holobech  and  Copelade,  M  (Wido  de
Crednn),  scab. — land  for  la den.


D. Defective  instances: Plough-land  oxxtted


Cucnalt, s. Rodowelle  (Alarcd of

Lincoln),  i  b.  —
Esnetrebi,  s.  Normanebi  (Ivo  Taille-

bois),  lb.  —
Sninhope,  B.  inl.  Crocsbi  (Norman  dt

Adred),  i  b.  —
Rasa  (Durand  Malet),  i  c.  —
Rodowelle,  s.  Neteltone  (Bp.  Bayeox),

lb.—
Cabume,  s.  Cnctialt(Alnred  of  Lincoln,

Glen),  I  b.  —
Cletham,  s.  Mameltone  (St.  Peter  de

Borg),  I  b.  —
Cuningesbi, inl. Tedintone (Cnt.

Hngh),  lb.  —
Cuningesbi,s.  Hacberdingham  (Drogo

de  Benrere),  i  b.  —
Marchcbi,  s. Aschebi,  or  Andrebi?

(  Goz.  F.  Lambert),  i  b.  —
Sntreie,  B.  inl.  Wilingeham  (Gilbert

dc  Gand),  2  b.  —
VVemflet,  B.  Croft  (Gilbert  de  Gand,

Radulf),  2  bi  — -
Stnibi,  s.  Chinetorp  (Rayner  de  Bri-

mon),  2  b.  —
Echintune,  s.  Eslaforde  (Bp.  Lincoln),

2  b. —
Griteford,  s.Edeham  (GilbertdeGand),

2  b.—
Gamclstorp  or  Hiboldestou,  M  (Ivo

Taillebois),  2  b. —
Apeleia,  s. Bolintone (William de.

Perci),  2  b.  —
Cletham,  B.  inl.  Balesforde  (Goz.  F.

Lambert),  2  b.  —
Straitone  and  Scallebi,  B.  inl. .  . .  .  ?

(Ivo  Taillebois\  3  b.—
Rebume,  M  (Ivo  Taillebois),  3  b.  —
Odenebi,  B.  Nortchelesei  (Cnt.  Alan),

3b.-
Suamestede,  K  Sudwelle  (Walter  de

Aincurt,  Odo),  Ac.  —
Iloctune (St. Peter de Burg),


Jc.


Rischintone (Drogo de Benrere),

6  b.—
Ingoldesbi,  s.  Bergebi  (Robert  Malet),

6  b. —


Estou,  t.  Eddiam  (Gilbert  de  Gand),

6Jb.-^
Combrenorde,  M  (Rayner  de  Brimoo),

6  b.—
Merestmie,  B.  Hasebi  (Wido  de  Cre-

don,  Otbert),  6  b.  ~-
Holtmi,  M  (Cnt.  Alan,  Wimond),  sk

a  ▼.  5  a.  —
Catenal, inl. Elesham (JRoga  de

Poitoa),  5}b.—
Barcnnrde and Siitrei, InL and  s.

Haintone  (Roger  dePoitoo,  Albeit),

6  b.—

Binnibroc, M (Osbem, pat), i  c

lib.—
Nodietnne,  M  (Nonnan  de  Adied),

ic  —
Sootatome,  Holme,  and  Sndfaioc  (Col-

snan),  i  a  —
Spidlinge,  M  (Wido  de  Ciedoa),  i  c.

3b.-
Stainfelde,  a.  Berlinge  (WOBam  de

Perci),  I  c.  4  b. —
Cranewelle, B. Inl. Foldiinsdiafli

(Gilbert  de  Gand),  i  c.  4  b.—
CarleU,  i.  Edeham  (Gilbert  de  Gand,

Ivo  Berendd),  i  c  7  b.  —
Stroustnne,  M  (Drogo  de  Benrae),

2C. —

Tite,  &  Lactone  (K.  Williain)»  sc

lb. —
Bolinbnig,  M  (Colsnan,  Bnmel),  2  c.

7  b.—

Frisebiy  M  (Bp.  Bayeox,  Ilbert),  3  c.

5b.—
Waleoote,  a.  Bnmitnne  (Walter  de

Aincnrt),  4  c  —
Leduluetorp,  2  M  (Colfoan,  Condcd

and  Anachitil),  5  e.  4  b.  —
Nortbhicam,  t.  and  B.  inL  DodintDne

(Baldwin),  S  c.  —
Holebech,  s.  Gadenai  (K.  WUliaia),

8c.  6  b.—
Dnnestnne,  a.  Nocheatnne  (Nonaan

de  Adred),  I9c  —
Beningtnn,  M  (Cnt  Alan),  ai  c.  6  b.—
Nochetune,  M  (Norman  de  AdiceQ,

23  c —


APPENDIX IX


535


Table  II

CORRESPONDENCE  OF  PLOUGH-TEAMS  TO

PLOUGH-LAND

A. Number  op  Plough-teams  in  excess  op  number  of

Plough-lands


Sombi,  Elgelo,  Toresbi,  Clactorp,
Totele,  s.  Grantham  (Cnt.  Hugh),
31  c  — 18

AsQtiardebi,  &  Folchingebam  (Gilbert
de  Gand),  a2  c.  —  9

Lnzebi,  M  (Gilbert  de  Gand.  Wil-
liam), 14  c.  —  4

Westone  and  Maltune,  s.  Spallinge
(Ivo  Taillebois),  20  c  — 10  c.  i  b.

Wellingouie,  M  (King  WUliam),  18  c
— 10

Spallinge,  M  (Ivo  Taillebois),  17  c

—  9

Haneworde,  3  M  (Walter  de  Aincurt),

14  c  —  6
Sonderby,  s.  Akeley  (Judith),  13  c.

—  6

Ludes,  M  (Bp.  Lincoln),  18  c.  —  la
Hnmbrestone,  s.  Tatenai  (Ivo  Taille-

boiiy  Hermer),  18  c. —  la
Chirchetone,  M  (King  William),  aa  c.

—  16

Tite,  M  (King  William),  p  c.  —  3
Herdertorp,  M  (Robert  Dispensator),

9c— 3
Branztnne, M  (Walter  de  Aincurt),

15c.  — 9
Eslaforde,  M  (Bp.  Lincoln),  17  c. —

II
Scheueldebi,  s.  Bardenai  (Gilbert  de

Gand),  i  a  c.  —  6
Grantham,  M  (Cnt.  Hugh),  la  c. —

6
Bcltesford,  M  (Ivo  Taillebois),  14  c

—  8

Langetune,  Hacberdingham,  Salmun-
debi,  Tedforde,  Brincle,  Winzebi,
Clachesbi,  s.  Grantham  (Cnt.
Hugh),  39  c.  —  33

East  Depinge,  3  M  (Godfrey  de  Cam-
brai,  a  men),  9  c.  —  3  c.  6  b.

Scredintune,  s.  Folchingham  (Gilbert
de  Gand),  14  c.  —  9

Butmic,  M  (Wide  de  Credun),  17  c.

—  la

Adredebi,  M  (Gor.  F.  Lambert,
Baldric\  6  c.  4  b.  —  i  c.  4  b.

Hale,  s.  Torp  (Gilbert  de  Gand,
Radulf),  15  c. —  10


Haconesbi  and  Stentnith»  M  (Heppo

Balist.)>  8  c — 3  c.  9}  b*
Covenham,  3  M  (William  de  Perd),

8  c  4  bt — 4
Brune,  M  (Oger  Brito),  7  c.  —  2  c.

4  b.
Stapleforde,  M  (Judith,  Oabem),  9  c.

—  5

Dunesbi,  M  (Bp.  Lincoln,  Radulf).

9c.  — 5
Raie, M (Ridulf  Pugenel), 13  c

—  9

Suavetone,  M  (Colfuan),  13  c.  ^9

Westbithaim,  M  (Drogo  de  Beurere),

13  c.  — o
Aschebi,  M  (Radulf  Pagend),  10  c

Fiscartune,  M  (St.  Peter  de  Burg),

7  c.—- 3
Hamingebi,  t.  Beltesford  (Ivo  Taille-

bois),  7  c.  —  3
Hache,  M  (Cnt.  Alan),  16  c.  — la
Lechebume,  s.  Grantham  (Cnt.  Hugh),

16  c. —  13
Tatenai,  a  M  (Ivo Taillebois),  la  c^

8
Leche,  s.  Draitone  (Cnt.  Alan),  14  c.

— 10
Stainfelde,  M  (WiUiam  de Perci),

5c  — I
Pochinton,  s.  Folchingebam  (Gilbert

de  Gand),  6  c.  —  a  c.  a  b.
Medricetham,  t.  Branstooe  (Walter

de  Aincurt, Wintrehard),  8  c. —

4  c.  a  b.

Cherchebi  and  Scapeuic,  M  (Heppo

Baliit.),  7  c.  4  b.— 4
Timberlnnt,  t.  Branztune  (Walter  de

Aincurt),  7  c  4  b.  —  4
Scrivelesbi,  M  (Robert  Dbpeniator),

I  a  c.  —  8  c  4  b.
Caditon,  a  M  (Bp.  Durham,  Turathi),

5  c  —  I  c.  4  b.

Gemeham,  M  (Radnlf  Pagenel),  10  c.

4  b.  — 7
Toresbi and Aluuoldebi, M (Bp.

Bayeux,  Ubert),  9  c  3  b.  —  6
Hamingebi,  M  (Hugh  F.  Baldric),

4  c.  —  6  b.


536


APPENDIX IX


Witham  and  MiAbetorp,  Toftlund,
s.£deham  (Gilbert  de  Gand),  8}  c*

—  iij

Hecham,  3  M  (Cnt  Hng^,  Monks  of
St.  Scverui),  9  c.  —  6

Beninguide,  2  M  (Ivo  Taillebois,
Odo),  9  c.  —  6

Nortunef  inL  and  s.  Stow,  St.  M.
(Bp.  Lincoln,  man),  9  c.  —  6

Lavintone,  M  (Abp.  York,  Rannnlf),
8  c.  — 5

Horchetou,  t.  and  inl.  Bertnne  (Gil-
bert de  Gand),  10  c.  —  7

Catena!  and  Uson  to  Castre  (King
William),  1 1  c.  —  8

Ulnesbi,  2  M  (Emegis  de  Baran),
13  c. — 10

Branztnne,  M  (Walter  de  Aincnrt),
13  c.  — 10

Hiboldeston,  2  M  (Ivo  TailleboU),
6  c.  — 3

Chelvinghou,  3  M  (Ivo  Taillebois,
Odo),  6  c.  —  3

Colchesbi,  s.  Beltesford  (Ivo  Taille-
bois), 6  c.  —  3

Kepinghale,  M  (Wido  de  Credon,
Widald),  6  c.  —  3

Stan^hou,  s.  Beltesiford  (Ivo  Taille-
bois), 6  c.  —  3

Tite,  B.  Spallinge  (Ivo  Taillebois),
5c*— 2

Sadwelle,  M  (Walter  de  Aincnrt),
5  c  — 2

Bolinbroc,  M  (Ivo  Taillebois),  5  c. — 2

Bertone,  M  (Iladnlf  Pagenel),  15  c. —
12

Levretune,  s.  Draitone  (Cnt  Alan),

15  C— 13
Suarrebi, M (Wido de Credun,

Vitalis),  3  c.  4  b.  —  4  b.
Torp,  M  (Gilbert  de  Gand),  7  c.  —  4
Catenase  and  Usnn,  M  (Cnt.  Alan),

3  c.  4  b.  —  5  J  b.
Luctone,  M  (Kmg  William),  4  c  6  b.

—  3

Croft,  M  (Gilbert  de  Gand,  Radnlf),

5  c  —  2  c.  2  b.
Calnodesbi,  M  (Endo  F.  Spirewic),

8  c.  —  5  c.  3  b.
Medricesham,  M  (Sortebrand),  5  c  —

3  c  4  b.

Caletorp,  s.  Brune  (Oger  Brito),  5  c.

—  3  c.  4  b.

Bescbi,  s.  Ciachesbi  (Gilbert  de  Gand,

Rademer),  5  c.  4  b.  —  3
Toft,  s.  Draitone  (Cnt.  Alan),  5  c.

^4  b.  —  3

Ciachesbi and Normanesbi, 4 M
(Ivo  Taillebois,  Hugh),  8  c. —  5  c.

4  b.


Ferebi,  s.  Bertooe  (Gilbert  de  Gand),

8  c.  — 5  c  4bii
Esbemebi,  s.  FolrWngfham  (Gilbert

de  Gand),  8  c.  —  5  c.  4  bw
Evcdune,  s.  EsUfoide  (Bpu  linooln,

Oaimmid),  6  c  4  b. — 4
Gettnne,  M  (lUng  William),  6  c.  4&

Bntiate, M (Robert Diqwnsator),

4  c. —  I  c  4  b.
Brotolbi,  M  (Colsnan),  6  c. — 3  c  4  b.
Gozeberdecfaerca,  M  (Bp. Linooln,

Malger),  4  c.  -—  i  c.  6  b.
Wlii^3iam,  M  (GUbeit  de  Gtad),

4  c.  —  I  c.  6  b.
Hamingebi,  M  (Cnt.  Hngh,  BaMiic},

3  c. — 6  b.

Snmmerdebi,  M  (Walter  de  Amcnrt,
Rajnold),  4c.4bu  —  acsb.

Donninctnne,  B.  Draitone  (Cnt.
Alan),  8  c  —  5  c.  6  bu

East  Depjnge,  5  M  (Godfrey  de
Cambiai,  2  men),  5  c— -  a  &  6  b.

Rozebi,  M  (Radnlf  Pagenel,  Herbert),
8  c.  a  b.^6

Onstorp  and  Leresbi,  s.  Torp  ((fil-
bert de  Gand),  4  c  —  a

Scaltorp,  s.  Scotere  (St  Peter  de
Burg),  4c.— a

Offintnne,  M  (Robert de  Todeai),

4  c.  —  a

Sndtorp,  M  (>^do  de  Crednn),  4  c

—  a

Torp, M (Bp. Durham,  Eado  F.

Spirewic)  ^  c.  ^  a
Mortune,  M  (Oger  Brito),  46.  —  2
WilgeU,  M  (Bp.  Lincoln,  Radall),

4c  —  2
Bnintune,  M  (Bp.  Lincoln),  6  c— 4
Lindude,  2  M  (Alared  o(  Linooln),

6  c  —  4
Tofte,  M  (Bp.  Bayeux,  Wadard),  6  c.

Aresbl,  M  (Bp.  Bayeux, Wadaid),

6  c. — 4
Ristone  and  Carletone,  M  (William

de  Perci,  Osbem),  6  c.  —  4
Belingei,  M  (Abp.  York,  Waldidin),

6  c.  —  4
Wadingurde,  s.  in  Stratooe  and  Chir-

chebT  (Endo F. Si^rewic), 8  c

—  6

Cmle,  M  ((Geoffrey  de  Wiroe,  Abbot
of  St.  Gemano  of  Salebi),  8  c. — 6

Scoltome,  Holme,  and  S^tbioe,  s.
Fiscartune  (St  Peter  de  Baig),8c.

—  6

Cbeuremont,  M  (William  de  F^rd),

8c.  — 6
Alchebarge,  M  (Ito  TaiUebon),8  c.-«


APPENDIX IX


Hechintime,  B.  in),  uid  t.ToTp(Git-

bett de Gaud),  loc  — 8
Helpeiiclum uid Barton, i. Fol-

duDgehtm  (Gilbert  de  Gaud),  la  c.

—  8
ORintoae, M (Alnied  of  Ltocoln),

9  c  — 7
Meddtooe,  a  M  (Emegii  de  Bonm),

9C  — 7
Bertane,  4  M  (Walter  de  Aincnrl,  i

menhold  j),5c.  — 3
Goldnbi,  s.  Folchmgeliiin  (Gilbert

deG«nd),  s  c.  —  3
Lacettone, M (Wido de Crednn,

Alnr«d),5  c  — 3
Billeifelt, t. Corbi (Bp. Lincoln,

Walter),  S  c-  -  3
Heipenrelle,  4  M  (Goz.  F.  Lambert),

jc  — 3
Aldaluebi,  3  M  (Bp.  Barenx),  5  c  —


Bdetforde,  M (Goz. F. Lambert),

3  c  — 1
Dribi,  M  (Gilbert  de  Gand,  Ito),  7  c.

Camolingeham,  M  (Coltoan),  7  c.  —

5
Greotewelte, M (Roger de Bnli,

TDrold),7c-s
Griiebl, M  (Abp. York, William),

Land  and  Other  Lund,  3  M  (Geoffrey
de  Wirce),  3C4b.— 1  c.  4  b.

Graingebam,  M  |Enicgi$  dc  Baron),

3  c  4  b.— I  c.  4b.
Edcham,  M  (Gilbert  de  Gand),  14c

Badeburg,  M  (Gilbert  de  Gand),  lie

Loclone.  1  M  (Oger  Brito),  ic.  4  b.

—  4  b-
Carlebi,  1 M (Robert de  Slatford,

Geoffrej},  sc-  — »c.  Jb.
Cailebi,  M  (Bp.  Lincoln,  Erchenold),


Altelin, Kad, nepos), 7 c 7  b.

Clachesbi, M (Hugh >'■ Baldric,

Wido),  3c.  4b.— lc6b.
W  idme  (ihegn) ,  1  c  4  b.  —  6  b.
lluTgrede  and  I'urUi,  s.  Heltcsford  (Ito

T»illtboi)),3c.  — lc.3ib.
KcKbi,  s.  Rcschintone  (Geoffrey  Alse-

lin.  Kail.  nephew\  8  c.  —  6  c.  »i  b.
BUbutg,  M (Ivo  TailUboii,  Migel),

JC— ic.3b.


Other  Koabi,  s.  Rosbi  (Robert  de
Sutford,  Edelo),  J  c.  —  3J  b.

Welletune,  M  (Cnt.  Alan,  Ludric),
3c.4b.~1

Gunfordebi,  M  (Walter  dc  Aincort,
E!wO,  3C4b.  — )

Apeleia,  s.  Bedinge  (^^  illiam  dcPerci),

Apdda,  ■.  Stainfelde  (WilllMn  de
Peid),3c.  — tc.4b.

Clacbettn,  M  (Gilbert  de  Gand,  IUde-
me^),3c-lc4l>■

Cletham,  H  (Bp.  Btfeex,  Ilbett),  1  c.

Sbunton,  H  (Williun  de  Ferd,  AlnU),

Winuiiitane,  1 H  (Nonnu  de  Adi«d),

3C.  — ic.4b.
Ingdiam,  M  (Bp.  Barenx,  Ilbeit),  3  c

Denbelbi,  %. Folchingdiam  (Gilbert

deGand),  Jc.  —  ic.  4b.
Haietd,  1.  Folchingeham  (Gilbert  de

Gand),  3c.  —  re.  4b.
Spdlinee,  U.  CroyUnd  (St  Gnthlac  of

CroyTand),  jc—  ic  4b.
ToneKale,  M  (Ito  TaillcboU),  4c  —

ac4b.
Scotone,  U  (Ito  TaUlebtua,  Go»Ua),

4fc  — »c.4b.
Fichennorde,  a.  Folchingeham  (Gilbert


a  Tailleboii,  Roger),
1.  Feter  de  Bnig,


Cabume,  M

*C4b.-.
HIboldeMoo,  M  (

Gilbert),  4C.  4  b.-  ,
Eaetoip,  H  (Robert  de  Todeni,  Beten.

gar),  4  c  4  b.  — 3
Croceitonc,  M (Hu^ F. Beldiic,

Hamelin),  1  c  4  b. —  I
Ferebi,  M  (Gilbert  Titoa,  AiMchltU),

5c.4b.  — 4
Cheteldbi.  M (Cnt. Ilogh,  Hu^),


Wadiageham and Staintone,

(Got  F.  Lambert),  ic.  1  b,-

Hag  and  Branduue,  i.  Folchini

(Gir •  - ■  -


°^.™!


(Gilbert  de  Gand,  Derinc),

—  S
Torp,  1. Dodingtone (St.  Feter of

Wettminater),  7c  4b.  — 6
Hacam,  free  M  (Bp.  Lincoln,  Hogh),


Ripealal,  M  (Robert  de  Todeni,  Ito),

loc.ib.— 9
Turolnebi,  H  (St.  Peter  de  Baqi),  5  c

—  3  c.  s  b.*
Eoglebi,  3  c.  4  b.  —  4


538


APPENDIX IX


Opetorp,  t.  Edeham  (Gilbert  de  Gand),

J  c.  —  I  c.  5  b.
Witham  Hd.,  M  (Drogo  de  Beurere,

Colegrim),  3  c  —  5  b.
Catenmse  and  Usnn,  B.  Nortchelesei

(Cnt.  Alan),  a  c.  —  5|b.
Roscebi  (Robeit  de  Statford,  Brien),

4c  3b.  —  3c«  I  b.
Neatone,  M  (Odo  Balist.)»  a  c.  4  b. —

I  c.  ab.
Brachenberg,  s.  Aluingham  (Alnred  of

lincoln,  Rannnlf),  i  c.  4  b.  —  a  b.
Diaitone,  M  (Cnt.  Alan,  Toli),  ac.

—  6  b.
Bmne,  M  (Alured  of  Lincoln,  Dodin),

a  c.  —  6  b.
Sidestham,  M  (Wido  de  Reinbndcnrt,

Ingeliam),  13c  —  iic.6b.
Glentham,  s.  St  M.  Stow(Bp.  Lincoln),

5  c  —  3  c.  6  b.
Ceila,  M  (Bp.  Lincoln,  Malger),  3  c.

4  b.  —  a  c  a  b.
Uluesbi,  M  (Colsnan,  Bninel),  3  c.

4  b.  —  a  c.  a  b.
Odenebi,  M  (William  de  Perd,  Wil-

liam),  6  c. — 4  c.  6  b.
Becbelinge, s. Lessintone (Abp.

York,  Herbert),  i  c.  6  b.  —  4  b.
Sndtone,  M  (Chetclbcm),  a  c.  —  7  b.
Nonnanebi  and  Santone,  a  M  (Wido

de  Crednn,  Alnred\  a  c.  —  7  b.
Bnine,  M  (Oger  Brito),  a  c.  —  7  b.
Greneham  and  Annartorp,  and  Bolebi,

M  (Alnred  of  Lincoln),  4  c.  —  a  c.

7  b.
Ounebi,  s.  Stow  (Bp.  Lincoln),  5  c.

4b. —4c.  3b.
Gunfordebi,  s. Tudetorp  (Wido  de

Crednn),  i  c.  4  b.  —  3  b.
Schinende,  M (Robert  de Statford,

Colegrim),  4  c.  i  b.  —  3
Agetome,  a  M  (Abp.  York,  William),

4c.  5b.— 3c.  4b.
Tistcrtnnc,  M  (Jndith,  Hugh),  a  c— i
Calnodesbi,  s.  Bardenai  (Gilbert  de

Gand),  ac. —  i
Loletorp,  B.  inl.  and  s. Gainesbnrg

(Geoffrey  de  Wirce),  a  c.  —  i
llaconesbi, M  (Robert  de  Statford,

Gulfer),  a  c.  —  1
Sanctone, s. Aplebi, Risebi, and

Saleclif  (Roger  de  Bnsli),  a  c.  —  i
Bercaham  and Eston,  s. Bnrg  (St.

Peter  de  Burg,  Godfrey  and  Robeit),

ac.  —  I
Andrebi  and Marchebi, s. Aschebi

(Bp.  Bayeux),  a  c.  —  i
Bertone,  M  (Radulf  Pagenel),  a  c.  —  i
Aslachebi, s. Avetorp (Robert de

Todeni,  Gonfrid),  3  c.  —  i


Wideme,  s.  CladiedM  (Hugh  F.  Bald-

ric,  Wido),  ac — i
Stantone  and  Widiogduun,  M  (Bpi

Bayenx,  Ilbert),  9  c  —  i
Bnrtone, s. Scantone (Gilbert de

Gand),  3  c.  —  a
Bercbetorp,  s.  Folchii^duuii  (Gflbert

de  Gaud),  3  c  —  a
Aiglestorp,  M  (Aimed  of  Linoob),

3c.—- a
Wime,  a  M  (Abp.  York,  Waldidin),

3C.  — a
Wimme,  t.  OoreCooe  (Jodidi),  3  c.

—  a

Soaield,  s.  Corbi  (Bp.  Lincoln,  Wal-
ter), 3  c*  — '  a

Ellingetone,  M  (Ito  TaQleboia,  Wal-
ter), 3c  —  9

Risebi,  s.  Aldnlnebi  (Bp.  Bayeu),  3 &

—  a

Walesbi  and  Otesbi,  M  (I^  Taille-

boit,  Geoffrey),  3  c — a
Lagesbi,  M  (Willimm  de  Perd,  En-

Hontnne,  inl.  and  &  Leaintooe  (Abp.

York,  Hexi>ert),  3  c.  —  a
Bechebi,  M  (Bp.  Lincolii,  Rtimall),

3C-— a
Golse,  free  M  (Bp.  Linodln,  Roger),

3c.  — a
Goldesbi,  M  (Colegrim),  3  c.  —  a
Farforde,  M  (Cnt  Hugh,  Bddric),

3c  — a
Blibnig,  M  (Gos.  F.  Lambert),  3  c.

—  a

Blibug,  M  (Bp.  Doriiam,  Monks  of

Dnmam),  3  c  ——  a
Oresbi,  M  (William  de  Perd),  3c.

—  a

Hicham,  s.  and  inl.  Dodintone  (Bald-
win), 4c.— 3
Sperlinctone,  M  (Colsnan),  4  c.  ^3
Stoche,  M  (Cnt  .^an,  Colegrim),  4  c.

—  3

Nenberie,  M  (Cnt. Hngh,  Osben),

4C.  — 3
Wichingebi,  M  (William  de  Vtni,

Osbem),  4C. —  3
Merestone,  M  (Alnred of  Unoob,

Walefrid),4C  — 3
Waletone  and  BodeM,  s.  Hnnbia  (Ivo

Taillebois,  W  . . , .  d),  4  c. — 3
Sassebi,  M  (Eodo  F.  Spivewic),  4  c.

—  3

Welle,  3  M  (Cnt.  Hngh,  Osbem),  4  c.

—  3 •

Pantone,  s. Waragebi (Emcgis  de

Bnran),  4  c  -^  3
Screnbi,  s.  Bardenai  (Gilbert  de  Gand),

5C-— 4


APPENDIX  IX


539


Conenebi,  inl.  St.  Mary,  Stow  (Bp.

Lincoln),  5  c.  —  4.
Horbelinge,  M  (CnL  Alan,  Stefan),

5c— 4
Homecastre,  M  (K.  William),  5  c. — ^

Rosbi  and  Other  Rosbi,  s.  Wilgebi
and  Chirchebi  (Bp.  Durham,  Al-
mod),  5c  — 4

Stratone,  M  (Bp.  Bayenz,  Ilbert),  5  c.

Wideme, s. Clachesbi  (Gilbert  de

Gand,  Rademer),  5  c.  — 4
Aresbi,  M  (Bp.  Lincoln,  Goislan),  5  c.

—  4

Dodinctone,  M  (St.  Peter  of  West-
minster), 5  c  —  4

Adelinctnne,  s.  Sechebroc  (Robert
Malet,  Godric),  6  c.  —  5

Osgotebi,  M  (St.  Peter  de  Burg,
Anschirtl),6c  — 5

Suinhamstede,  s.  Witham  (Radnlf
Pagenel),  6  c.  —  5

Westrecale,  s.  Bolinbroc  (Ivo  Taille-
bois),  6  c.  —  5

Haidnre,  s.  Osbemedebi  (Wido  de
Credun),  6  c  — 5

Stratone,  M  (Eudo  F.  Spirewic),  6  c.

—  5

Ulnricebi, 2  free  M (Bp. Lincoln,

Goislan),  6  c.  —  5
Chirchebi,  s.  Folchingeham  (Gilbert

de  Gand),  6  c.  —  5
Dcntnne  or  Huuelle,  M  (Robert  de

Todeni  in  dem.),  7  c.  —  6
Bmne  and  Other  Bnine,  s.  Epeurde

(Geoffrey  de  Wirce),  7  c.  —  6
Sibolci,  8.  Bolinbroc  (Ivo  Taillebois),

7c,  —  6
Walecote, M (St. Peter de Burg,

Giselbcrt),  7  c.  —  6
Excwellc,  M  (Cnt.  Hugh,  Gozelin),

7  c.  —  6
Chenebi,  M  (Bp.  Lincoln,  Goislan),

7c  —  6
Torintnnc, M  (Robert  Dispensator),

7  c. —  6
Hundebi,  6  M  (Hugh  F.  Baldric),  7  c.

—  6

Wichalc,  a  M  (Bp.  Bayeux,  Ilbert),

7  c.  -— 6
Navcnebi, M (Durand Malet),  2  c.

2  b.  —  I  c.  2  b.
Est  Dcpinge,  s.  Talintonc  (Alured  of

Lincoln),  1  c.  4  b.  —  4  b.
Carletunc,  M  (William  de  Warenne,

Aldclin),  8  c.  —  7
Hal  tun  and  Stepi,  s.  Bolinbroc  (Ivo

Taillebois),  10  c.  —  9
Sechebroc,  M  (Robert  Malet),  10  c.

—  9


Cherchebi  and  Retoebi,  i.  Bolinbroc

(Ivo  Taillebois),  13  c— 19
Foztnne,  B.  Beningtnne  (Cnt.  Alan),

I3C^I3

Wichingedene,  M  Qndith,  Hugh),

13  c.-— la

Bmnelle,  M  ( Anmt),  9  c.  —  8

Normanebi,  M  (iVo  Taillebois),  9  c
—  8

Dnninctnne,  s.  Beltesford  (Ivo  Taille-
bois), 9  c.  —  8

Schirebec,  B.  Draitone  (Cnt.  Alan),
9c.  — 8

Scantone,  M  (Gilbert  de  Gand,  in
dem.),  II  c  — 10

Blachene, M  (Walter  de  Aincnrt),

14  c  — 13

Messingefaam,  M  (Eniegis  de  Bnran,
Tnrstin),  2c.4b.  —  ic4b.

Cletham,  M  Aldene),  a  c  4  b.—  i  c.
4  b.

Waragebi,  M  (Emegisde  Boron),  2  c.

4  b.  —  I  c  4  b.

Tavelesbi,  M  (Goz.  F.  Lambert,
Godard),  3c.4b.  —  ic.4b.

Gnnnewordebi,  M  (Colegrim),  i  c.
6  b.  — 6  b.

Estrecale,  a.  Bolinbroc  (Ivo  Taille-
bois), 5  c  4  b.  —  4  c.  4  b.

Filingeham,  M  (Roger  de  Poitoo,  Ans-
chml),  4c.  4  b.  —  3C4b.

Spredelintone,  M  (CSiit.  Alan),  4  c.
a  b.  —  3  c.  3  hi

Rebume,  M  TIvo  Taillebob,  Peter),

2  c.  —  I  c.  )  b.

Oresbi,  M  (Norman  de  Adred,  Geof-
frey), I  c.  4  b.  —  4J  b.

Rocstune,  s.  Torintune  (Robert  Dis-
pensator), 3  c.  3  b.  —  I  c.  4  b.

Brandnne,  s.  Carltorp  (Robert  de
Veci),  3  c  3  b.  —  I  c.  3  b.

Burg,  M  (Eodo  F.  Spirewic,  2  men),

3  c  —  I  c.  I  b.

Schitebroc,  inL  Covenham  (Bp.  Dor-
ham.  St.  Karilef),  3  c.  —  i  c.
I  b.

Brochelesbi,  M  (Eraegis  de  Boron,
RannolO*  1  c  c  b.  —  6  b.

Scirebec,  s.  Tateshale  (Eodo  F.  Spire-
wic), I  c.  —  lb.

Camelingeham,  2  M  (Dorand  B/Ialet),
I  c.  5  b.  —  6  b.

Beltone,  a  M  (Geoffrey  de  Wirce),

5  c  6  b.  —  5  c

Rochesham,  M  (Alored  of  Lincoln,

Radulf ),  3c.  4  b.  —  2c.6b.
Abi,  M  (Bp.  Bayeox,  Wadard),  3  c.

4  b.  —  a  c.  6  b.

Stigeswald,  s.  Beltesford  (Ivo  Taille-
U>is),  3  c— '3  cab.


540


APPENDIX  IX


Ringefdune,  M  (U[\  Lincoln,  Adam\

3  c.  —  J  c  J  b.

BaJrcbntone,  s.  Hnndintonc  (Ito
Taillebois),  >  c.  —  I  c.  a  l>.

Wettbi,  free  toke  in  Heidore  (Col-
suan),  J  c.  —  I  cab.

(tlAndham,  a  M  (Bp.  Bayeoz,  Wn-
dard).  a  c. —  i  cab.

Casaic,  M  ((lanfrid  de  Ciocbet),  J  c

—  I  c  a  b.

Ludesforde,  M  (IvoTaillcboii,  Cido),

a  c  —  I  c.  a  b.
Ncwhaic,  M  .  IvQ  Tatllebois,  Roger),

a  c  —  I  c  a  b.
Cotes,  M  (Alured  of  Lincoln, lier-

nard),  a  c  —  i  c.  a  b.
Delbcbi,  M  ^CoUuan,  Rainald),  a  c

—  I  c  a  b.

Drone,  M  (Sncn),  i  c.  i  b.  —  3  b.
Ravendale, M  '  (Waldin Ingmiator,

William),  I  c  a  b.  —  4  b.
Uucbchale  ami  llonitone,  a. Ilam-

ingebi  (Cnt.  Ilngh,  Balaric),  j  c

—  I  c  ab.

Kefan,  M  (Rannulf  de  St.  Walcric;,

1  c  a  b.  —  4  c
linberge,  a  M  ;^Hugh  F.  Haldric),

6c.  a  b.  —  5C4b.
.Siaplefoide.  M (lip.  BaTenx,  Tor),

1  c  6  b.  —  I  c
Stanlooe,  M  '^  Roger  dcPoitou,  Roger),

1  c  4  b.  —  6  b.
Holeben and Copelade, M (St.

Gathlac  of  Cro7bnd>,  1  c.  4  c  —

6  b.
KiMin  and  Carlentnn, M (Colkoan,

Matthew;<.  1  c.  4  b.  —  6  b.
Ulucftbi,  M  .Suen),  1  c.  4  b.  —  6  b.
Itcrtnnr, M ^Kad. Pagencl,  Oger),

I  c.  4  b.  —  6  c.
Itrune.  M  ^Robert  dc  Stalford, Geof-
frey) ,  I  c.  4  b.  —  6  b.
Sudtone,  i.  Stratone  ;Eodo  F.  Spire-

wic),  I  c  —  a  b.
Itrrictoft,  a.  Calnndeabi Chetrlljem;,

I  c.  —  a  b.
llorbelinge,  M  XoUuan,  Matthew  \

4  c.  —  3  c.  a  b.

Turp,  M  (Kudo  K.  Spirewic;,  a  c. —

I  c.  j|  b.
I  e<lnluctur|s  «.  Eklaf^rdc  (lip.  Ijn-

culn  .  a  c.  —  I  c.  3  li.
Kii|:cle»iou,  M  (Cut.  Ilagh.  Koirlin  ,

1  c  —  I  c.  3  b.
Turp,  3  M  I  Roi;er  dc  Toituu' .  3  c  5  b.

—  3

Scrrntii.  M  1. Hp.  I>uiham.  henchcl.,
I  c.  ^  b.  —  I

*

Chetcllti.  M  ^Itri>gii  lic  llearere,
Ra\iicr;,  I  c.  5  b.  —  I


Btkhrin),  1  c.  f  h^  —  1


WidoUe,  a  U  (WilttMi  Wkmi^.  1  c

3b.— 6  b.
ftmrhrlwhi i^ SlalfakHv  •!

dc  Adrad).  ic— jhk
Aacbcfai.  K  lUfttthuni  (SI.  Hm^t

Bwg),  I  c  — sK
WndiofdMB. If (EIWb). I  c-

3b.
NciAooe.  M  (UImQ.  i  c  —  lib
Gennnodtecp,  t.  Ctmakam  (wMb

dc  Pwd).  I  c  —  ll  bk


Un\  I  c.  —  4  b.
Ulcibi.  I.  WcUc  (Gilboi  M

Rbmmt).  I  c  —  4  bk
Cocn.  B.  faU.  hjibiM  ^1

Ubeit),  I  c— 4  b.
Coic*. Irae M (Bp^ I  iiiili^  U

cbcaold).  I  c  — >  4  b.
Endrebi.  M  (Eado  >.  Sipfcfk,  1  ft

-4b.
Rim.  M  (Agcand:.  1  c  *  «  b
PocUatow. a. Ulnibi CC<

CoimM).  I  c  —  4  b.
Oonebi.  U ilvo  Ti

I  c— 4  b.
CDcaalt.  M  (Ivo  Ti

I  €.  — 4  U
Lolcflloq>,  ftw  If

I  c— 4  b.
Witbna. Ml

M  (.SI.  rter  de

—  I  c.4b.
Weliagcbaoi.  M  (B^

ac^i  c  4K
Cannic  (Bp.  HbiN

I  c.  ^4b.
CalchcweUt.  M  (N<
Roger;,  ac— I  c  4  b.
'  CaUbeweUc.  a.  Biburfwi  Jm  Ti
I bote),  ac  — I  ^  4b.
; Berlinge.  M  (Bn.
a  c  — I  c  4b.
Chircfacbi.  M  (BpL

a  c  —  I  c.  4  b.
Raae.  If  (Bik  Bi]P«a,  WIbmC  .  a  c

—  ic  4  bu
' CroccMow.M
j chiuh.  J  c «-  I  c  4  bL
I llaaewtW.  M  [d

^1  C4b.
CUcbc«UaadK«
oc  BiwcffCa  O

Gramgebam.  M  ^B^  i
a  c.  —  I  c  4  bL
,  Cbcniiiaac,  II  (Col.  AIm^  *  c  —
I  c  4  b.


aft  —


APPENDIX  IX


541


Timberlunt,  s.  Cherchebi  and  Scapuic
(Norman  de  Adreci), a  c. —  1  c.

Bacstune, B. Edeham (Gilbert de

Gand,  Ivo),  2  c.  4  b.  —  a  c.
Thuorstorp,  s.  Clachesbi  (Hugh  F.

Baldric,  Wido),  a  c  4  b.  —  a
Coringcham,  M  (Robert  de  Todeni,

Berengar),  a  c.  4  b.  —  a
Branzbi, M (Robert de Todeni,

Berengar),  2  c  4  b.  —  a
Scalebi  and  Stratone, M (Colsoaoi

Alnred),  a  c.  4  b.  —  a
Aichebi,  M  (Gilbert  de  Gand,  Roger),

a  c.  4  b.  —  a
Lindnde,  M  (Durand  Malet),  a  c.  4  b.

—  2

Crosbi,  M  (Ivo  Taillebois,  Odo),  a  c.

4  b.  —  a
Waragebl  (Waldin  Ingeniator),  2  c.

4  b.  —  a
Randcbi,  inl.  and  s.  Stratone  (Bp.

Bayeux,  Ilbert),  a  c.  4  b.  —  2
Timberltint,  B.  Cherchebi  and  Scapenic

(Heppo  Balist.,  Simand)i  2  c.  4  b.

—  a

Chime,  M  (King  William),  a  c.  4  b.

—  a

Ormesbi,  M  (IvoTaillebois,  Wimnnd),

4  c.  —  3  c.  4  b.
Fngelestou,  a  M  (Cnt.  Alan,  Picot),

4  c.  —  3  c.  4  b-
Wilchetonc,  M  (Waldin  Ingeniator),

4  c-  —  3  c.  4  b.
Englebi,  2  M  (Bp.  Bajreux,  Colsuan

and  Wadard),  3  c.  4  b.  —  4
Bodebi  and  Sumerdebi,  M  (Wido  de

Credun,  Godwin),  1  c.  4  b. —  i
Bilingcburg, M (Cnt. Alan, Cole-

grira),  I  c  4  b. —  I
Carlentone,  M  (Bp.  Bayeux,  Gilbert

de  Gand,  Rad.  Dapifer),  i  c.  4  b.

—  I

Nortcarletone, s. Carletune (Sorte-

brand),  i  c.  4  b.  —  i
Catebi,  2  M  (Roger  de  Poitou),  i  c.

4  b.  —  I
Refon,  B.  Berlinge  (Colsuan),  i  c.  4  b.

—  I

Berlinge,  M  (Colsuan),  i  c.  4  b.  —  i
Berlinge,  M  (Colsuan),  i  c.  4  b.  —  i
Bolintonc,  M  (Bp.  Durham, Nigel),

I  c.  4  b.  —  I
Bolintone,  M  (Cnt.  Hugh,  Colsuan),

I  c.  4  b.  —  I
Ti«teltune, M (Alured of Lincoln,

Gleu),  I  c.  4  b. —  I
Hoctun,  M  (Roger  de  Poitou,  Roger),

I  c.  4  b.  —  I
Ik'ltone,  M  (Colegrim),  3  c. — ac.  4  b.


Stichesforde,  t.  Bolinbroc  (Ito  Taille-

bois),  3  c.  —  2  c  4  b.
Acbesbi,  M  (Wido  de  Cradnn,  Alured) ,

^  C  ^"^  2  0^  b*

Golse,  M  ( Aimed  of  Lincoln,  Radnlf  ),

3  c.  —  2  c.  4  b.
Golse,  M  (Emegtt  de  Banin,  Ulric),

3c. —  2C.  4b.

Ulingeham,  s.  Barcomde  (Rayner  de

Brimou),  3  c.  —  2  c.  4  b.
Torp,  2  M  (Hugh  F.  fiJdric,  Gilbert),

3  c.  —  2  c.  4  b.

St. Manr, Stoti,  M (Bp. Lincoln),

4C4b.  — 4
Wilgebi,  M  (Wido  de  Reinbndcnrt,

Ingeliam),  4  c.  4b. —  4
Mondebi,  M  (Cnt  Alan,  Endo),  4  c.

4b — 4
UUngebam, 2 M (Thomas, Abp.

York,  William),  4c.  4b.  —  4
Glantham,  M  (Ivo  Taillebois,  Rain-

frid),  4c.  4b.  —  A
HecheUnge,  M  (Alured  of  Lincoln,

Bernard),  4  c.  4  b.  —  4
Casnic,  M  (Aimed  of  Lincoln,  Boio),

I  c.  2  b.  —  6
Suarrebi,  M  (Odo  Balist.),  ic  2  b.

—  6
Waletone  and  Bodebi,  s.  in  Clasbi

(Goz.  F. Lambert,  Rayner),  3  c.

4  b.— 3

Wadingeham,  M  (Aldene),  6  b.  —  2  b.
Levesbi,  Bredelon  and  Scarfaon,  3  M

(Bp.  Bayeux),  16  c.  4  b.  — 16
Adewelle, M (St  Peter de Bmg),

5C.  4b.  —  5
Welle,  8.  Eslaforde  (Bp.  Lincoln),

4c.  4b.  — ^
Stou,  8.  Folcningeham  (Gilbert de

Gand,  Robert),  6  c.  —  5  c.  4  b.
Schillintnne,  free  soke  in  S.  M.  (Abp.

York,  Walchelin),  6  c.  —  5  c.  4  b.
Estou,  8. Bercheham (Godfrey de

Cambrai),  5  b.  — 1|  b.
Hacunesbi,  s.  Dunesbi  (Bp.  Lincoln),

1  c.  —  4}b.
Burg,  M  (Archil),  i  c  2b.  — 6} b.
Chi^hingetorp,  M  (Wido  de  Credun,

Algar),  I  c.  5  b.  —  i  c  2  b.
Torgrebi,  M  (Ito  Taillebois,  Odo)»

I  c.  —  5  b.
Chirchebi, M (Eudo F.  Spirewic),

I  c.  —  5  b.
Heretorp,  inl.  Estrecale,  Heresbi  and

Greibi  (Bp.  Dmham),  ic.  ib. —

6  b.
Ingeham, M (Rayner de Brimon,

Colsuan),  i  c.  i  b.  —  6  b.
Cnningesbi,  B. Scrivelesbi (Robert

Dispensator),  i  c  4  b.  —  i  c.  i  b.


54*


APPENDIX  IX


Cotes,  s.  Chelebi  (Norman  de  Adred,
Richard),  i  c  4 b.  —  i  c.  lb.

Ingeham,  free  M  (Bp.  lincobi,  £r-
chenold),  i  c.  3  b.  —  i

Chetelbi,  M  (Eniegis  de  Bnnm,  Tiir«
stin),  I  c.  3  b.  —  I

Tavelesbi,  M  (Bp.  Bayenx,  Losoard),

1  c.  3  b.  —  I

Sisse,  M  (Rayner  de  Brimon),  i  c.  3  b.

—  I

Torp,  s.  Bolinbroc  (Ivo  Taillebois),

3  c.  —  a  c.  5  b.

Hagenebi,  s.  Bolinbroc  (Ivo  Taille-

iMis),  3  c.  —  a  c.  5  b.
Cotet,  M  (Dorand  Malet,  Richard),

3c.-— a  c.  5  b.
Cheneide (Bp.  Lincoln, St Marjr,

Stow),  a  c  —  I  c.  5  b.
Chirchetnne,  M (Cnt.  Alan,  Toll),

a  c.  —  I  c.  5  b.
Ulingeham,  M  (Bp.  Bayenx,  Wadard),

2  c.  —  I  c  5  bt

Ingeham,  M  (Colsnan,  Roger  and
Anschitil),  ic  7b.  —  ic.4b.

Loctone,  s.  Aoetorp  (Robert  de
Todeni,  Gnnfrid),  i  c — 5ib.

Cretnne,  a  M  (Robert  de  Statford,
Basuin),  a  c.  —  i  c  5^  b.

Hotot,  M  TAlored  of  Lincoln,  Dodo),

4  b.  — 1\  b.

Sadtone,  s.  Hotoft  (Chetelbem),  4  b.

—  lib.

Nongtune,  s.  Grantham  (King  Wil-
liam), 4c.— 3c.  5jb.

Wade,  s.  Achesbi  (Wido  de  Credun),
I  c  —  5  J  b.

Wadingeham,  s.  W.  M.  (Elfiun),  4  b.

—  ab.

Wade,  t.  Iribi  (Ito  Taillebois),  4  b.

—  ab

Opestorp,  8.  Wivelestorp  (Ivo  Taille-
bois, Odo),  4  b.  —  a  b.
Griteford,  s.  Bercheham  (Godfrey  da

Cambrai,  Enremar),  4  b.  —  a  b.
Estow,  s.  Werche  (St.  Peter  de  Burg,

Godfrey),  4  b.  —  a  b.
Snardesforde,  s.  Resne  (Radulf  Page-

ncl),  4b. —  ab.
Osgotcbi,  s.  Tanelesbi  (Radnlf  Page-

nel),  4  b.  —  a  b.
Salflatcbi,  s.  Caditon  (Bp.  Durham),

4  b.  —  a  b.
Ludeforde,  s. Wicham (Rayner  de

Brimou),  4  b.  —  2  b.
Cocrinton,  M (Colsnan, Matthew),

4  b.  —  2  b.
Twifordc,  s.  Nortuuine  (Abp.  York),

a  b.  —  4  b.
Jeresbi,  M  (Colegrim,  Rold),  ac. —

I  c.  6  b.


Bertnne  and  Torp,  M  (Ito  Taillebois,

Azor),  a  c.  —  i  c.  6  b.
Commctone,  M  (St  Benedict  of  Ram-

sev^  a  c*  ^"^  I  Ca  6  bu
Torabi, 1.  Walthftm (Cnt.  Alan),

ac.  —  IC  6b.
Helmeswelle,  M  (Martin),  a  c —  1  c

6  b.
StimUebi,  inl.  and  s.  Langetooe  (Bp.

Bayenx),  a  c  —  i  c.  6  b.
Alningeham,  a  M  (Alnied  of  Unoob,

Rannnlf),  ac— -x  c  6bw
HegeUnge,  M  (Bj^  Bayem,  Wadaid),

a  c  —  I  c  6  b.
Bemedebi,  3  M  (Enicgis  de  Bun,

Uliic),  a  c  —  I  c  6  b.
Catebi,  M  (Aimed  of  Lincoln),  a  c —

IC  6b.
Cncualt,  M  (Abp.  Yoilc,  WiUkm),

ac  — I  c  6b.
Hacbeidingfaam,  M  (Drago  de  Bea-

rere,  Robert),  a  c —  i  c  6  b.
Suindrebi  (Colegrim),  le. — 6bu
Cannic,  M  (Nonnan  Cruns),  i  c—

6b.
Helpericham, a. Wiveleiton} (Ivo

'Dullebois,  Odo),  i  c— 6b.
Maltebi,  M  (Cnt  Alan,  EndoX  ic

——6  b.
Dodintune,  M  (Bp.  Bajeiii»  BaUiie),

IC  —  6b,
Westbi,  M  (Cnt  Alan,  CdUgrioi),

IC — 6b.
Bnrg,  M  (ArchU),  i  c— 61b.
Mundebi, K Wilgebl (Gilbert  de

Gand,  Roger),  i  c  — 6  b.
Torentnn  (Roger  de  Poitoii),  1  c— 6h.
Spaneibi,  B.  Snme  (Oger  Brito),  ic

6  b.
Stivetone,  M  (Bp.  Bayeu,  Hbert),

IC  —  6b.
Clacbesbi,  M  (Ivo  TaOleboi^  Gce^

frey),  ic  —  6  b.
Aplebi,  Risebi,  and  Sakdi^  free  U

rSt  Peter  de  Borg,  Radnlf),  i  c—

ob.
Cucualt, M (Aimed of Linoob,

Glen),  IC — 6b.
Cucualt  B.  Cabnme  (Hn^  F.  Bal-
dric), IC  —  6b.
Ingeham,  M  (Roger  de  Poitoii,  ICais-

ard),  I  c  —  6  b.
Avetorp,  B.  Chiaebi  (Wtdo  deCiedim),

I  c  —  6  b.
Avetorp,  M  (Aluied  of  Lincoln,  Saen),

IC — 6  b.
Bellingeburg,  M  (Aimed  of  LneolB,

Gozelin),  i  c  a  b.  —  i
Witham,  M  (Radnlf  Pagenel,IIaciB\

IC.  ab.  —  I


APPENDIX  IX


543


Scachertorp,  M  (Wido  de  Credtin),

I  c.  ab. —  I
Huaelle,  s.  Torp  (Gilbert  de  Gand),

I  c.  ab. —  I
Wenflet,  B.  inl.  Screnbi (Bp.  Dnr-

ham,  Bundo,  and  Radnlf),  i  c.  2  b.

—  I

Caschingetorp, s. Bergebi (Robert

Malet,  Ivo),  i  c.  a  b.  —  i
Ulnricebi, M (Hugh F. Baldric,

Radulf),  I  c.  a  b.  —  i
Bichere,  M  (Wido  de  Credtm),  i  c.  4  b.

—  I  a  2  b.

Gnllingham  (Bp.  Lincoln),  i  c.  4  b.  —

I  c.  a  b.
Wichingesbi,  M  (William  de  Perci,

Rob^^,  I  c.  I  b.  —  7  b.
Normanebi,  M (Drogo  de  Bearere,

Gozelin),  5  c.  a  b.  —  5
Hombi,  s.  Sammerdebi  (Walter  de

Aincurt),  5  c.  —  4  c.  6  b.
Scotstome,  M  (Norman  de  Adreci),

1  c  6  b.  —  I  c.  4  b.

Abnrne,  M  (William  de  Perci,  Nor-
man), I  c  6  b.  —  I  c.  4  b.

Haintone,  M  (Roger  de  Poiton,
Acnn),  ac.  4b. —  ac.  2b.

Couenham,  M  (Bp.  Durham,  St
Karilef)»  4  c.  —  3  c,  6  b.

Wilgebi,  M  (Waldin  Brito),  4  c.—
3  c.  6  b.

Tnmlfbi,  inl.  and  s.  B.  Akeley
(Judith),  4  c.  —  3  c.  6  b.

Hagctome,  M (Waldin  Ingeniator),

2  c.  2  b.  —  2

Torp,  M  (Roger  dc  Poitou,  Roger),

2  c.  2  b.  —  2
Lobingcham,  M  (Norman  de  Adreci,

Herenuold),  i  c.  3  b.  —  i  c.  lb.
Snardesforde,  M  (Bp.  Durham,  Col-

suan),  3  c.  —  2  c.  6  b.
Brotulbi  and  Torp,  s.  Scanton  (Gilbert

de  Gand),  3  c.  2  b.  —  3
Chisebi,  M  (thegn),  6  b.  —  4b.
Summerdebi,  B.  Gainesburg  (Geoffrey

de  Wircc),  6  b.  —  4  b.
Torcntone  and  Brune,  M  (Emegis  de

Burun,  Ulric)  ,6  b.  —  4  b.
Bnchehale,  s.  Hamingebi  (Hugh  F.

Baldric),  ic— 6ib.
Hogtone,  M  (Wido  de  Crcdun,  Vita-

lis),  3c  4b.  — 3  0.  2jb.
Wenflet,  B.  in.  Cale  (Eudo  F.  Spire-

wic") A  b.  —  2  k  b.
Wibcrtonc, M (Wido de Credun),

2  0.  —  I  c  64  b.
Herdctorp,  s.  Draitone  (Cut.  Alan),

2  b.  —  lb.
Wenflet,  B.  inl.  in Burg (Eudo  F.

Spirewic\  2  b.  —  i  b.


Escnmetorp, B. Meiaingeham (St.

Peter  de  Bvajt,  William),  a  b.— i  b.
Calnodesbi,  t.  Hardetorp  (Cnt  Alan),

4b.  — 3  b.
Hage  and  Caleibi,  M  (Bp.  Dnriuun,

William),  4  b.  — 3  b.
Bnme,  M  (Iyo  Taillebois,  Odo),  4b.

—  3b.

Telagestorp,  s.  Mnndebi  (Cnt.  Alan),

4  b.  —  3  b.
Cleia,  t. H^;elinge (Bp. Bayeox,

Wadard),  5b.  — 4b.
Chdebi,  M  (Ito  TaUlebois,  Nigel),

5b.  — 4b.
Habnme and Nenhnse,  t.  Broche-

lesbi  (Emegis  de  Bnran),  5  b.— r4  b.
ChiUebi,  t.  Suarrebi  (WidodeCredm,

Aichil,  pst),  3  b.  —  a  b.
Wade, t. Waltham (Cot. Alan),

ic.  4b.  —  ic.  3b.
Cherchebi,  inL  Kingesdnne  (Robert

de  Todoii,  Ivo),  3  b.  —  a  b.
Cletham,  free  M  (St  Peter  de  Bug,

Roger),  ic5b. —  ic.4b.
Langetone  and  Torp,  M  (Bp.  Bayeox,

man),  i  c.  5  b.  -^  1  c.  4  b.
Greibi,  t.  Dnsebi  (Abp.  York,  Hugh),

IC.  lb.  —  I
Stratone,  B.  inl.  Randebi  (Rannnlf

de  St  Walaric),  i  c.  i  b.  —  i
Chelebi,  M  (Bp.  Bayeox,  Wadaid),

I c  3 b.  —  I c.  lb.
Radebi,  t.  Bolinbroc  (Iro  Taillebois),

4  c  —  3  c.  7  b.
Bundebi,  M (Radnlf  de  Moitemer,

William),  a  c.  i  b.  —  a
Grimesbi,  Clda,  Itrebi,  and  Temes-

coo,  s.  Levesbi,  Bredeloo  and  Scaiv

hou  (Bp.  Bayeox),  6  c  —  5  c.  7  b.
Tesforde,  a  M  (Abp.  York,  Gilbert),

4c.  lb.  —  A
Habome,  s.  Chelningeholm  (Norman

de  Adreci),  i c.  —  7b.
Chinetorp,  M  (Ivo  Taillebois),  a  c.

—  I  c.  7i  b.

Cocualt,s.  Rodowelle  (Donuid  Malet),

4b.— 3ib.
Hodebi,  s.  Walecote  (St  Peter  de

Borg,  Iyo),  a  b.  —  1 4  b.
Hotot,  M  (Alored  of  Lincoln,  Ber-
nard), a  b. —  1 4  b.
Cheftesbi, M ((Jolsoan, Adelelm),

3  c  4  b.  —  3  c.  3j  b.
Radbnme,  Staintone  and  Wadingfaim,

s.  Snetrebi  (Heppo  Balist),  4  b.—

3jb.
Hechintone,  s.  in  Catorp  (Robert  de

Veci),6b.  — 5Ab.
Repinghale,  M  (Alored  of  Lincoln,

Dodin),  a  c.  —  I  c.  7I  b.


544


APPENDIX  IX


B. Equality  of  Plough-teams  with  Plough-lands.


Foitintone,  AschebiyBretoft,  Langene,

s.  Grantham  (Cot.  Hugh),  i8  c.  —

i8
Bartune,  M  (Cnt.  Alan),  i8 c.  ?—  18
Welletone,  M  (Bp.  Lincoln,  6  canons),

16c. — 16
Herlaaestune,  B.  and  s. Grantham

(K.  William),  16 c— 16
Beigebi,  M  (Robert  Malet),  15  c.—

Overtone  and  Stratone,  M  (Judith),

lac — 12
Dicbi,  8.  Reschintone  (Geoffrey  Alie-

lin),  I2C. — 13
Folchingeham,  M  (Gilbert  de  Gand),

I2C.  — 12
Franetone,  B.  Draitone  (Cnt  Alan),

IOC. — 10
EUingetone, M (Gilbert de Gand,

Egbert),  10  c  —  10
Bodebi,  M  (K.  William),  9  c.  —  9
Imungeham,  2  M  (William  de  Perci),

8c  — 8
Stobetun,  s.  Westburg  (Geoffrey  Alse-

lin  and  Radnlf),  7  c  —  7
Bitham,  M  (Drogo  de  Beurere),  7  c.

—  7
Wideme, Abi, Hage, Caleabi, &

Grantham  (Cnt  Hugh),  6  c  4  b.  —

6  c  4  b.
Scheldinchope,  B.  Dodintone  (Balde-

win),  6  c.  —  6
Akeley,  M  (Judith),  6  c  —  6
Walecote,  inl.  Belingei  (Abp.  York,

Walchelin),  6  c  —  6
Haltone,  M  (Cnt.  Hugh,  William  F.

Nigel),  6  c.  —  6
Achescia, M (Geoffrey de Wirce,

Wazelin),  6  c  —  6
Adelinctune,  M  (Robert  de  Todeni,

Warin),  6  c.  —  6
Langetof, M  (St.  Guthlac  of  Croy-

Und),  6  c.  —  6
Hungretune,  inl.  %.  Dentune  (or  H.)

(Robert  de  Todeni),  6  c  —  6
Lessingham,  M  (Bp.  Lincoln,  Adam),

6  c. — 6
Melingesbi,  8.  Bolinbroc  (Ivo  Taille-

bois),  6  c.  —  6
Griteforde, M (Robert  de  Todeni,

Berengar),  5  c.  4  b.  —  5  c  4  b.
Breseburc  and  Bametone,  s.  Griteforde

(Robert  de  Todeni,  Berengar),  5  c

4b.  — 5  c.  4b.
Adelingetone, 2 M (Berengar de

Todeni),  5  c.  — 5


Randebi,  M  (Rammlf  de  St  Waliiic),

5C-  — 5
Hagetome and Haneanorde, 2  M

(Goz.  F.  Lambert),  5  c. —  5
Senrebi,  M  (Dnimnd  Malet),  5  c  —  5
Summeitebi,  t.  Bnme  (William  de

Pexci),  5  c —  5
Cabnme,  M  (H^  F.  Baldric),  5  c

—  5

Raia,  M  (Bp.  Bayetiz,  Wadaid),  5  c

—  6

Offian,  1.  Edeham  (Gilbert  de  Gand),

5c  — 5
Grenesbi,  f  M  (Cnt.  Alan,  Wimimd),

5c  — 5
Lavintnne,  a.  Folchiiigefaam  (Gilbert

de  Gand,  Aielin),  5  c.  —  5
Endrebi,  a.  Bolinbroc  (Ito  Tmilldwb),

5  c  — 5
Partene,  a.  Baidenai  (Gilbert  deGand),

5  ^  ""  5
Wilchetone,  a  M  (Odo  Balift),  4  c

4  b.  —  4  c  4  b.
Stalinbarg,  2  M  (Norman  de  Adred),

4c  — 4
Gnnreibi,  1.  Waltham  (Cnt  Alan),

4C  — 4
Grosbi,  M  (Bp.  Bayenz),  4  c  —  4
Aplebi,  Riaebi,  Saledif,  M  (Gilbert  de

Gand),  4c  — 4
Wilgebi,  M  (GUbert  de  Gand,  Roger),

4C— 4
Staintnne,  M  (Cnt  Hng^,  Oabem),  4  c

Ormeibi,  M  (Cnt  Hngh,  Hogh),  4  c

Asebi,  M (Colman, William).  4c

Horbelinge,  M  (Abp.  Yoik,  Walter  de

Aincnrt),  4  c. — 4
Ostooe,  M  (Geoffrey  de  Wiree),  4c

Hundelbi,  s.  Bolinbroc  (Ivo  Taille-

bois),  4c— 4
Harebi,  s.  Bolinbitx;  (Ivo  Taillebob),

4c— 4
Stanwald,  s.  Bergebi  (Robert  Malet),

4c  — 4
Wime,  M  (Alured  of  linoob,  Gka),

4C.— 4
Wellebi,  M  (Wido  de  Credmi,  Ran-

nulO,4C-  — 4
Ulestanetorp,  M  (Robert  de  Todeni),

4c  — 4

Ei^lebi,  M  (Robert  de  Todeni)  Bena-


APPENDIX  IX


545


Beningnrde,  M  (Abp.  York,  Oibern),

3C4b.'-3c.  4  b.
Onstorp,  M  (Colsuan),  3  c.  —  3
BrigttUi,  s.  WaUh«m  (Cnt.  Alan),

3c.  — 3
Newtone,  t.  Aldnluebi  (Bp.  Bay€ax)i

3c  — 3
Cbelebi,  or Cotes, M (Drogo de

Benrere,  Robert),  3  c. —  3
Crosbi^  s.  Binnibroc  (Rob^t  de  To-

deni,  Berengar),  3  c.  —  3
Witewelle,  M  (Judith,  Herbert),  3  c.

—  3

Welle,  M  (Gilbert  deGand,Raaeiiier),

3c.  — 3
Os^tebi, s. Bardenai (Gilbert de

Gand),  3  c  — 3
Picbenorde,  M (Colsnan, William),

3c.  — ?3
Bardenai,  M  (Gilbert  de  Gand),  3  c.

—  3

Pantone,  M (Abp.  York,  Gilbert),

3c  —  3
Widon,  3  M  (Ito  TaiUebois,  Wimund),

3c  — 3
Widun,  free  M  (Bp.  Lincoln,  Malger),

3c.  — 3
Sisse,  s.  Haintune  (Roger  de  Poiton,

Albert),  3  c. —  3

Tnnbi,  M  (Eudo  F.  Spirewic),  3  c.

—  3

Horsintone,  s.  Hamingebi  (Hugh  F.

Baldric),  3  c.  —  3
Bortone,  M  (Sortebrand),  3  c.  —  3
Asgerebi,s.  Bolinbroc  (I  vo  TaiUebois),

3c.  — 3
Duninctune,  M  (St.  Peter  de  Bnrg),

3c  — 3
Estrcbi,  s.  Beltesford  (Ivo  TaiUebois),

3c,  —  3

Frisetorp,  s.  Ingeham  7  b,  Felingeham
1 7  b.  (Colsuan),  3  c.  —  3

Ilondintone,  s.  Folchingeham  (Gil-
bert de Gand, Fulbert), 3  c.

—  3

Schillintune,  s.  Grantham  (K.  Wil-
liam), 3c.  —  3
Stichenai,  s.  Bolinbroc  (Ivo  TaiUebois),

3c.  — 3

TotintuD,  s.  Holinbroc  (Ivo  TaiUe-
bois), 3  c.— -3

Crocestonc, M (Hugh F. Baldric,

1  lamelin) ,  2  c.  4  b.  —  2  c.  4  b.
Kavenedale,  s.  Achesbi  (Wido  de  Cre-

dun),  2  c.  4  b.  —  a  c.  4  b.
Lud  intone,  Genilftorp,  Maras,  Water-
tone  ?  s.  Crule  (Geoffrey  de  Wirce),

2  c.  —  2

Gunnebi,  M  (Kailulf  F.  Hubert),  2  c.

—  2


Hedebi,  t.  Haltone  (Cnt.  Hugh,  WU-
liam  F.  Nigd),  a  c  —  2

Bolintone,  M  (Ito  Taillebois,  Odo),
3  c  "^  2

Chemitone»  M  (Hugh  F.  Baldric,
Hamelio),  a  c.  —  a

Branetorp,  M  (Bp.  Dnrham,  Nigel),
ac  —  3

Belesbi,  M  (Waldin  Ingeniator,  WU-
liam),  3C. — a

Oxetnne  and  Uulnricetbi,  t.  Fnllobi
(Bp.  Durham,  William),  a  c.  —  a

Grimesbi,  t.  Archiatone  (Ivo  TaiUe-
bois, Geofiey),  a  c.  —  a

Gnnfordebi,  M  (Bp.  Durham,  Lam-
bert), 3  c  —  3

Scallebi  and  Stratone,  M  (Durand
Malet,  Alured),  3  c.  — -  3

Honten,  i.  La^^bi  (William  de  Perd,
Eurard),  3  c.  —  a

Torp,  M  (Bp.  Bayeux,  Ilbert),  ac.

—  3

Oxecumbe,  t.  Farforde  (Cnt  Hugh,

Baldric),  3  c.  —  3
Germundtorp,  M  (Judith,  Nigtl),  2  c.

—  3

Wime,  M  (Abp.  York,  Walcfaelin),

3C.— 3

Suinhamstede,  i.  Widme  (Judith),  3  c.

—  a

Sakbi,  a.  Clachesbi  (Hugh  F.  Baldric,

Wido),  a  c.  — 3
Dnuedic,  M  (St  Guthlac,  Colegrim),

3C. —  3
Duneham,M  (Radulf  Pagenel,Knight),

3  c«  *-"  3
Duneham,M  (Ilbert  de  Laid,  Knight),

3C.  —  3

Wenflet,  s.  Andrebi  (Gox.  F.  Lambert),

3  b.  —  3  b.

Hazebi, M (Odo BalUt), a  b.—

2  b.
Welletune,  s..Catebi  (Roger  de  Poi-

touV  I  c.  4  b.  —  I  c.  4  b.
Grisebi  and  Bnrg,  t.  Waragebi  (Emegii

de  Bnrun),  i  c.  4b.  —  i  c.  4  b.
Glenteuurde,  M  (Goz.  F.  Lambert),

I  c  4  b.  —  1  c.  4  b.
Glenteurde,  M  (Restold),  i  c.  4  b.  —

ic.  4  b.
Alningeham,  M  (Alured  of  Lincoln,

Gozelin),  i  c.  4  b.  —  i  c.  4  b.
Itrebi,  inl.  and  s.  Cleia  (Bp.  Bayeux,

Ilbert),  1  c.  4  b.  -—  I  c  4  b.
Walesbi,  M  (Rayner  de  Brimou,  Bald-
win), I  c.  4  b. —  1  c.  4  b.
Sumeraebi,  M  (Goz.  F.  Lambert),  i  c.

4  b.  —  I  c.  4  b.

Burch,  a.  Draitone  (Cnt  Alan),  i  c.
4  b.  —  1  c  4  b.


\  lN<X.KAl>Of  F


N  n


546


APPENDIX  IX


Stoches,  s.  Grantham  (Drogo  de  Beu-
rere,  Colegrim),  i  c.  4  b.  —  i  c.  4  b.

Cherchebi,  M  (Alured  of  LincoLa),
ic.  4b.  —  I  c  4b.

Holtone,  M  (Kayner  de  Brimon,
Roger),  I  c.  a  b.  —  1  c.  a  b.

Kigesbi,  M  (Abp.  York,  Herbert),  i  c.
2  b.  —  I  c.  a  b.

Torp  (or  Catebi),  M  (Alured  of  Lin-
coln), 1  c.  a  b.  —  I  c.  a  b.

Osgotebi,  s.  Alduluebi  (Bp.  Bayeux),
I  c.  a  b. —  I  c.  ab.

Ilabume,  M  (Alured  of  Lincoln,
Radulf),  I  c.  a  b.  —  i  c.  a  b.

Catebi,  a  M  (Bp.  Durham,  Tuntin),
1  a  a  b.  —  I  c.  a  b.

Butreuuic,  s.  and  B.  inL  Ostone  (Geof-
frey de  Wirce),  i  c.  —  i

Amecotes,  s.  Cmle  (Geoffrey  de  Wirce,
Abbot  of  S.  Gemano),  i  c.  —  i

£vedune,  B.  Cherchebi  (K.  William),

IC. —  I

Grosebi,  M,  i  a — i
Golse,  M  (Hugh),  I  c  —  i
Helmeswelle, M  (Bp. Bayenx,  Lo-

soard),  1  c.  —  i
Langetone, s. Waragebi (Waldin

Iiigeniator),  1  c.  —  i
Maltetorp, B. Welle (Gilbert de

Gond,  Rademer),  i  c.  —  I
Sneleslunt,  s. Wichingebi  (William

de  Perci,  Waldin),  i  c.  —  i
Slodebi,  B.  inl.  Clachesbi  (Gilbert  de

Gand),  Rademer),  i  c  —  i
Newtone,  4  M  (Cnt.  Alan,  Wimund),

1  c. —  1
Aluingeham, s. Cocrintone (Bp.

Bayeux,  Ilbert),  1  c.  —  i
Other  R&se,  s,  lindude  (Alured  of

Lincoln),  i  c.  —  i
Alesbi,  M  (Bp.  Durham,  Nigel),  i  c.

—  I

Westrecale, M  (£udo  F.  Spirewic),

I  c.  —  I
Bertone  and  Billesfelt,  M  (Colsuan,

William),  i  c.  —  i
Torp  and  East  Torp,  M  (Ulniet),  i  c

—  I

Aletorp,  s.  Beltone  (Geoffrey  de
Wirce),  i  c.  —  I

Bur{^,  g.  Calnodesbi  (Eudo  F.  Spire-
wic), I  c.  —  1

Brezbi  and  Sapretone,  s.  Bergebi  (Ivo
1  aillebois),  i  c.  —  I

Bichere,  s.  Draitone  (Godric),  i  c

—  I

Burtone,  inl.  Branzbi  (Robert  de
Todeni,  Berengar),  i  c.  —  1

liurton,  s.  Welletone  (Bp.  Lincoln),
1  c. —  I


Bcmhan and Estow, t. Witham,

Mannetoip  and  Toftlnnd  (St  Peter

de  Burg,  Asfort),  I  c.  —  1
Tedolfbi,  s. Normanebi  (Drogo  dc

Beuere),  i  c.  —  z
Wisebi  and  Clachesbi,  M  (Gok.  F.

Lambert,  Walter),  i  c. — i
Stow,  t.  Wilingeham  (Goz.  F.  Lam-
bert), I  c  —  I
Schillintime,  M  (Carle),  I  c.  — i
Serongeham,  a.  Avetorp  (Robert  de

Todeni,  Gmifrid\  i  c—  i
Pochintone,  M (Wide de Credoa,

Warner),  i  c  —  i
Quadheveiinge,  inL  Ceila  (Bp.  lin-

coin,  Mal^),  i  c.  —  i
Mortun, B. inL Haconcibi (Oger

Biito),  IC.  — I
Lopintoip,  M  (Algar),  i  c.  —  i
Omntone,M(Alnredof  T  inroln),  ic.— i
HoTsitone,  s.  Beltetford  ^vo  Taille-

bois),  I  c.  —  I
Hermodestorp,  M (Heppo Balist,

Simuid),  1  c  -—  I
Eilaforde,  s.  Cominctooe  (Sc  Bene-
dict of  Ramsey),  i  c.  —  i
Cretune,  M  (Leiiric),  i  c.  —  i
Corbi,  M  (Bricteva),  i  c  —  i
Caneoic  (Col^rim),  i  &  —  i
Totintun, s.  BoUnbroc  (Ivo  Taille-

bois),  6  c.  —  6
Osgotebi  and  Tavelesbi,  s.  Clachesbi

and  Normanetbi  (Ivo  TaHlebois,

Hugh),  6  b.  —  6  b.
Besebi  and  Maltebi  M  (Goz.  F.  Lam-
bert, Eurold),  6  b.  —  6  b.
Dodintone,  s. Merestone  (Cdkoai^

Walter),  6  b.  —  6  b.
Clachesbi, M  (Nonnan  de  Adred,

Geoffrey),  5  b.  —  5  b.
Onnebi,  a  M  (Bp.  Bayenz,  Ilbert  aad

Wadard),5b.  — 5  b.
Cherchebi  and  Scapoic,  M  (Nonnis

de  Adieci),  4  b# —  4  b.
Timbrelund, B. Wadintnne (Cbl

Hugh),  4  b.— 4  b.
Scotstoroe,  Holme,  and  Sndbioc  I  M

(Colsuan),  4  c.  —  4
Clela,  M  (Ivo  Taillebols,  WimaBd),

4  b.  —  4  b.
Bechelinge,  M  (Norman  de  Adied,

Herbert),  4  b. — 4  b.
Ludefoide, s. Wicham (Hugh  F.

Baldric),  4  b.  —  4  b.
Temesco,  s.  Hegelinge  (Bp.  Baynx>

Wadard),  4  b.  —  4  b.
Strubi,  s.  Haintone  (Bp.  Baycoz),  4  b

—  4  b.
Sutreie,  inl.  Haintone  (Bp.  Bayenz),

4  b.  —  4  b.


APPENDIX IX


547


Sudtrie,  free  B.  inl.  Ulingeham  (Bp.

Lincoln,  Osbern),  4  b.  — 4  b.
Draitone,  M  (Wido  de  Credon),  4  b.

—  4b.
Falingeurde, M  (Colsuan),  4  b. —

4  b.
Moitnne,  s.  Corninctone  (Oger  Brito),

4b.  — 4b.
Normanebi  and  Ounesbi,  M  (Gos,  F.

Lambert,  Colsoan),  4  b.  —  4  b.
Pochinton,  s.  Cherchebi  (Cnt.  Alan),

4  b.  —  4  b.
Reresbi,  s.  Wichingcbi  ( Wm.  de  Pcrci,

Norman)  y  4  b.  —  4  b.
Turolnebi,  B.  Brune  (Robert  de  Sut-

ford),  4  b.  —  4  b.
Toralf  bi,  B.  inl.  in  Brune  (Alured  of

Lincoln),  4  b. — 4  b.
Tricliingham, M (St. Benedict of

Ramsey),  4  b.  —  4  b.
Sainhamstede,  M  (Ragenald),  4  b.  —

4  b.
Stow,  s.  of  Haltun  and  Stepi  (Cnt.

Alan),  4  b.  —  4  b.


Wintrintone,  s.  Scallebi  and  Stratone

(Dorand  Malet),  4  b.  —  4  b.
Witbam,  Mannetor  and  Toltlund,  B.  t

(St  Peter  de  Burg,  Ansind),4  b.—

4  b.
Beltone, s. Tudetorp (Wido de

Credon),  4  b.  —  4  b.
Filingeham,  M  (Roger  de  Poiton,  An-

ftchitil),  3  b.  —  3  b.
Haganebis,  B.  Wettrecale  (Eudo  F.

Soirewic),  3  b.  —  3  b.
Aycle,  8.  Navenebi  (Dorand  Malet),

2  b.  —  a  b.
Wintritone,  B.  Roxebi  (Radulf  Page-

ncl),  3  b.  —  2  b.
Trie,  s.  Calnodetbi  (£udo  F.  Spire-

wic),  a  b.  —  a  b.
Crochinton,  s.  Coditon  (Bp.  Durham),

lb.  —  lb.
Bechelinge,  s.  Blesebi  (Gos,  F.  Lam-
bert), lb.  —  lb.
Stalinberg,  inl.  Limberge  (Abp.  York,

Rayner  de  Brimon,  loke),  1  b. —

I  b.


C. Number  of  Plough-teams  less  than  op  Plough-lands


Burgrede,  s.  Randebi  (Rannulf  de  St.

Waleric),  3^— 3ib.
Estow,  8.  Witham  (St.  Peter  de  Burg,

Asfort),  4  b.  —  4  J  b.
Chelebi, M (Norman de Adreci,

Geoffrey),  i  c.  2  b. —  i  c.  2J  b.
Itrebi, B. Wivelesbi (Drogo de

Beurere),  i  b.  —  i|  b.
Trichingeham, B. Neutone (Odo

Balist.),  I  c.  2  b. —  I  c.  2 j  b.
Tedlagestoqp,  s.  Calnodesbi  (Chetel-

bcrn),  2  b.  —  3  b.
Ingham,  M  (Emuin),  2  b.  —  3  b.
Roxebi,  B. Aplcbi,  Ri8ebi, Saleclif

(Gilbert  de  Gand,  Robert),  2  b.  —

licchelinge,  s.  Wichingcbi,  (Wm.  de
Perci,  Robert),  2  b.  —  3  b.

Brochclesbi,  s.  Neuhuse  (Alured  of
Lincoln),  2  b.  —  3  b.

Lobin(;eham,  s.  Abume  (Wm.  dc
Perci,  Norman),  2  b.  —  3  b.

Sudtone,  s.  Burg  (Eudo  F.  Spirewic),
6  b.  — -  7  b.

Other  Rosbi,  s,  Reschintone  (Geof-
frey Alselin),  1  c.  3  b.  —  i  c.  4  b.

Suanintone,  M  (Wido  dc  Credun,
Warner),  1  c.  2  b.  —  I  c.  3  b.

Chelebi,  M  (Bp.  Lincoln,  Rannulf),
1  c.  J  b.  —  I  c.  3  b.

Tcrintone,  s.  Bechelinge  (Roger  de
Poilou),  I  c.  I  h.  —  1  c.  2  b.


Temescron,  M  (lyo  TaUlebois,  Wi-

mnnd),  i  c  i  b.  —  i  c.  a  b.
Herigerbi,  M  (Cnt.  Alan,  Godrtc),

I  c.  I  b.  —  I  c.  a  b.
Hacberdingham,  s.  Hardetorp  (Cnt.

Alan,  Eudo),  i  c.  —  i  c.  i  b.
Haconesbi  and  Steintone,  s.  Edene-

bam (Oger Brito), i c.  —  i c.

I  b.
Screudinctun,  M  (Robert  de  Statford,

Gnlfered),  1  c  3  b.  —  i  c.  4  h.
Rauendal,  M  (Bp.  Durham,  Walbert),

3  b.  —  4  b.
Bechelinge,  M  (Roger  de  Poitou),  3  b.

—4  b.
Cheiltetome,  M  (Waldin  Ingeniator).

3  b.  — 4  b.
Hagetom,  M  f  Martin),  3  b.  — 4  b.
Tedulf  bi,  B.inl.  Flichesburg  (Norman

de  Adreci),  3  b.  —  4  b.
Sumerdebi,  s.  Lea  (Cnt  Alan),  3  b.

—  4  b.
Roscebi,  s.  Wintrinton  (Norman  de

Adreci),  3  b.  —  4  b.
Hechintune, s. Burtun (Wido de

Credun),  3  b.  —  4  b.
Trie.  8. Burg  (Eudo  F.  Spirewic),

lb.  —  a  b.
Screnbi, s. Westrecale (Eudo F.

Spirewic),  i  b.  —  a  b.
Herdetorp,  B.  Cale  (Eudo  F.  Spire-
wic), I  b.  —  a  b.


N  n  2


548


APPENDIX  IX


Hedebi,  B.  idI.  Walecote  (Npnnan  de

Adreci),  i  b.  —  2  b.
Osgotebi,  M  (Siward  pst.)>  i  b. —

ab.
Alesbi,  B.  and  t.  in  Cotes  (Alaied  of

Lincoln,  Bernard),  i  b.  —  2  b.
Grimesbi,  B.  Wivelesbi (Drogo  de

Beorere),  i  b.  —  2  b.
Meringbe,  8.  Scrivelesbi  (Robert  Dis-

pensator),  i  b.  —  2  b.
Levesbi, s. Wivelesbi (Drogo de

Benrere),  i  b.  —  a  b.
Andrebi,  s.  in  Aschebi  (Goz.  F.  Lam-
bert), I  b.  —  2  b.
Cocrinton,  s.  Cadinton  (Rayner  de

Brimou),  1  b.  —  a  b.
Calnodesbi,  M  (Chetelbem),  4  b.  —

Welletone  (Ansgot),  4  b.  —  5  b.

Wilgebi,  B.  VVilgebi  M  (Gilbert  de
Gand),  4  b.? — 5  b.

Strobi  s.  Lechebume  (Cnt.  Alan),
4  b.  ^  5  b.

Strobi,  s.  Clachesbi  (Gilbert  de
Gand),  4  b. — 5  b.

Osgotebi,  M  (Roger  de  Poitou,  Geof-
frey), 4  b.  —  5  b.

Endrebi  and  Radebi,  M  (Bp.  Dur-
ham), 4  b.  —  5  b.

Billingebnrg,  M  (Abp.York,  Walter
de  Aincurt),  4  b.  —  5  b.

Torp,  s.  Bosingebam  (King  William),

4  b.  —  5  b.

Aclei, M (Odo Balist.), 4  b.—

5  b.

Corletone,  s.  Scontone (Gilbert  de

Gand),  5  b.  —  6  b.
Sumerdebi, s. Chisebi (Wido de

Crednn),  5  b. — 6  b.
Chaschintorp,  M  (Robert  de  Statford,

Hugh)  ,5  b.  —  6  b.
Goldesbi,  M  (Aschil),  5  b.  —  6  b.
Trichingeham,  B  Nentone  (Uluiet),

4  b.  —  5  J  b.
Trichingeham,  B.  inl.  Neutone  (Bp.

Durham),  4  b.  —  5^  b.
Picheuorde, 8. in Pichenorde M

(Colsuan),  2  b.  —  3}  b.
Canuic,  s.  Eslaforde  (Bp. Lincoln,

William),  2  c.  —  2  c.  i  J  b.
Cropesbi  and  Cunesbi,  B.  inl  Cuncsbi

(Norman  de  Adreci), i  c  —  1  c.

i^b.
Mortune,  s. Ilaconesbi and Stent-

with  (Heppo  Balist.),  i  c.  —  i  c.

i^b.
Walecote, B. Colebi (Emegis de

BuruD,  John),  2  b.  —  4  b.
Summercotes  (Roger  de  Poitou),  2  b.

—  4  b.


Twiforde,  s.  Nortnaine  (Abp.  York),

2  b.^4b.
Langetooet  1.  Waragebi  (Emegit  de

Bonm),  2  b.  —  4  b.
Stmbi,  i.  Haintone  (Roger  de  Poitou,

Acun),  a  b.  — 4b.
Hagetome,  M  (Coltoaii),  a  b.  — 4b.
NoDgetune, (Bp.  Ounwid,  St  Ul-

fram  of  Grantham),  a  b.  —  4b.
Bintham, s. Cxetnn (Godfiej de

Cambrai),  a  b.— 4  b.
Bercham, s. Edeham (Gilbert de

Gand),  a  b.  —  4  b.
Tedlagestorp,  a.  Hotot  (Alnxcd  of

Lincoln),  a  b.  — 4  b.
Lopeham,  1.  and  B.  Lea  (Cnt  Alan),

a  b.  —  4  b.
Ormeibi,  s.  Tcsibrde  (Abp. York,

Gilbert),4b.— 6  b.
Bacttuide,  s.  Haintone  (Bp.  Bayenz),

4  b. — 6  b.
Estrccale,  M  (Eudo F. Spirewic),

4  b.  —  6  b.
Doidintone, M (Colsnan),  4  b.—

6  b.
Doninctnne,  M  (Cnt.  Alan),  4  b.—

6  b.
Lundetorp, B.  Bdtooe  (Colegrim).

4b.^6b.
Tuuetorp, B. Beltone (Col^iia),

4  b.— 6  b.
Barchestone,  B.  Bdtooe  (Colegrim}t

4  b.  —  6  b.
Barcnorde,  M  (Rayner  de  Brimoa,

Girard),  6  b.  —  i  c
Herpeswelle,  M  (Abp.  Yoric^  WU-

liam^,  6  b. —  i  c.
Berchenam,  M  (Godfrey  de  Cambnu,

a  men),  6  b.  —  i  c
Mundebi, B.  Wil«!bi (GUbeit  de
• Gand),  i  b.  —  3  b.
Wiuilingefaamy a. Raae (Radulf

Pagend),  a  c.  —  a  c.  2  b.
Westledebi,  s.  Wicfaingebi  (Willian

de  Perd,  Radulf),  a  b.  —  a  c.  2  b.
Staintone,  M  (Di«^ de Beuicre,

Geoffrey},  a  c.  —  a  c.  a  b.
Holtham,  M  (Robert  Diapewator),

2  C-— a  cab.
Gadenai,  M  (King  William),  3  c.  6  b.

— 4C
Bintham?,  B.  Beigestorp  (St.  Peter

de  Bnig,  Saswalo,  &c),  3  c.  6b.  I—

4C.
Medricesham, B.  Wadintooe  (Cot

Hugh),  4  c. — 4  cab.
Herdetorp,  1.  Baidenai  (Gilbert  de

Gand),  4  c.  — 4  c.  a  b.
Herigerbi, M (Wido de CrcdnB,

Algar),  I  c.  —  I  c.  a  b.


APPENDIX IX


549


Walecotc,  M (Nonnan  de Adreci,

Robert),  I  c.  —  I  c.  a  b.
Faldingnrde,  M  (Osbern  pit.)»  i  c, —

I  c.  3  b.
Strigeswalde,  M  (Waldin  Brito),  i  c.

—  I  c.  2  b.
Suavetone,  M  (Colsnan),  i  c.  -^  ic

3  b.
Heghdinge, Cleia, Ternescon,  s.

^Salingeberg  (Abp.  York,  Herbert),

I  c.  —  I  c.  2  b.
Alebi,  s.  Rigesbi  (Bp.  Bayenx),  i  c —

I  c.  3  b.
Maltetorp,  B.  Combreuorde  (Rayner

dc  Brimon),  I  c  —  i  c  a  b.
Blesebi,  M  (Gor.  F.  Lambert,  Her-
man), 3  c.  6  b.  —  3  c.
Stivctonc, M (Alared  of  Lincoln),

3  c.  —  3  c  3  b.
Messingeham,  M  (St.  Peter  de  Barg,

William),  5  c.  —  5  c.  3  b.
Netcltone,  2  M  (Bp.  Bayeux,  Emegis
and Wadard), 3  c, 3  b.  —  3 c.

4  b.

Bodebi and  Sumertane,  M  (Alared

of  Lincoln,  Gozelin),  4  c.  4  b.  —  4  c.

6  b.
C.nnuic  and  Bragebruge,  M  (Roger

dc  Poitou,  Emain),  i  c.  6  b.  ? —  2
Haroldcstorp, B, Wilgebi (Gilbert

de  Gand),  i  c.  6  b.  —  2
Crocsbi, M (Norman de Adreci,

Ode),  7  b. —  I  c.  lb.
Dcntune,  M.  s.  Grantham  (Robert  de

Statford,  Geoffrey),  i  c.  4  b. —  i  c.

6  b.
Calc, M  (Chctclbcm),  i c.  4  b. —

I  c.  6  b.
Die  and Calctorp,  s. Brunc (Oger

Brito),  I  c.  2  b.  —  i  c.  4  b.
Sumcrledc,  s.  Addulnebi  (Bp.  Baycax) ,

I  c.  2  b.  —  I  c.  4  b.
Chinctorp,  M (Rayner  de  Brimou),

3  b.  —  6  b.
Slodcbi, B. Wilgebi (Gilbert de

(iand,  Roger),  3  b.  — 6  b.
Seurebi,  B.  Nortchelcsei  (Cnt.  Alan),

3  b. — 6  b.
Su.ivintonc,  B.  Carltorp  (Robert  de

Vcci),  3  b.  — 6  b.
Holobech and Copelade, B. Flee

(Cnt.  Alan),  3  b.  — 6  b.
Wilgebi,  M  (Odo  Balist.,  Colegrim),

I  b.  —  4  b.
Scotome, s. Refan (Rannult dc

St.  Waleric\  i  b.  —  4  b.
Burgrede,  8. Stratone (Bp. Bayeux,

Ilbcrl,  I  b.  —  4  b.
Salcbi, H. Clachesbi (Gilbert dc

Gand,  Ra«lemcr),  i  b.  — 4  b.


Cotes,  M  (Gos.  F.  Lambert),  i  b.  —

4  b.
Itrebi,  M  rWaldin  Ingeoiator, Wil-

liam),  2  D.  —  5  b.
Aschebi, M (Willimm Taillebots),

a  b.  —  J  b.
Cherchebt,  M  (Cnt.  Alan, Godric),

a  b.  —  5  b.
Cherchebi,  M  (Alared  of Lincoln,

OfTran^  2  b.  —  5  b.
Helpericnam,  M  (Robert de  Veci),

7  c,  —  7  c.  3  b.
Ingdiam,  a  M  (Goz.  F. Lambert,

Anschitil),  i  c  1  b.  —  i  c.  4  ^.
Haberdingbiam,  B.  Lazebi  (Gilbert  de

Gand),  ic.  ib.  —  ic.4b.
Wil^bi,  M  (Robert  de  Statford,  God-
win), I  c  lb.  —  I  c.  4  b.
Slodebi,  B.  InL  Branetoip  (Bp.  Dar* '

ham,  Nigel),  4  b.  —  7  oL
Rase,  M  (Roger  de  Poitoa,  Mainard),

4  b.  —  7  b.
Hardaic,  s.  Waragebi (Emegis de

Baron),  i  c.  —  i  c.  3  b.
Stalinbarg,  inl.  and  s.  Cheleb!  (Bp.

Bayeox),  i  c  —  i  c.  3  b.
UlaeK>i,  M  (Hogh),  i  c —  1  c.  3  b.
Westbi,  M  (Col^m),  5  b.  —  i  c.
Herdetorp,  B. inL  Bui^g  (Eodo  F.

Spirewic),  6  b.  —  l  c  i  b.
Westorp,  M  (Walter  de  Aincart,  Ray-

nidd),  2C.  lb.  —  2c.4b.
Welingeham,  2  M  (Cnt.  Alan),  ac.

—  a  c.  34  ^  ?

Chinetorp,  M  (Ivo  Taillebois,  Odo),

ab.--5ib.
Cretone,  M  (Alured  of  Lincoln,  Ra-

dalf),  4b.— 7ib.
Rodewelle,  M  (Alored  of  Lincoln),

4  b.  —  I  c.
Sudtone,  Duinstorp,  and  Herdetorp,

inl.  Rigesbi  (Abp.  York,  Herbert),

4  b.  —  I  c.
Asuuardebi,  s.  Marran  (W*ido  de  Cre-

don),  4  b.  —  I  c.
Aresbi,  M  (Si ward  pst.),  7  b.  —  i  c.
Slodebi,  M  (Hogh  K.  Baldric,  Wido),

4  b.  —  I  c.
Aldoluebi,  M  (Roger  de  Poitoa,  Blan-

card),  4  b.  —  I  c
Andrebi,  M  (Goz.  F.  Lambert),  4  b.

—  I  c.

Aslachebi  and Avetorp,  B.  Loctone

(Oger  Brito),  4  b.  —  i  c.
Die,  B,  Brone  (Oger  Brito),  4  b.—

1  c.
Dunetbi, B. inl. Ringesdone (Bp.

Lincoln,  Adam),  4  b.  —  i  c.
Hardetorp,  M  (Cnt.  Alan,  Eodo),  4  b.

—  I  c.


550


APPENDIX IX


Stubetnne,  M (Norman  de Adved,

Gamelin),  4  b.  —  i  c.
Welletone,  s.  Cotebi  (Bp.  Dnriuun,

Tnrstin),  4  b.  —  i  c.
Barchestone,  s.  Beltone  (Colegrim),

4  b.  —  I  c.
Brezbi  Hd.,  s.  Picbearde  (Bp.  Dar-

ham),  4  b. —  I  c
Sumerdebi, M (Goz. F. Lambert,

Ravner),  i  c.  —  i  c.  4  b.
Schillintune,  M(VVidodcCredun),  i  c.

—  I  c.  4  b.

Torp,  s.  Scotorne  (St.  Peter  de  Burg),

I  c.  —  T  c.  4  b.
Lechebume, M (Roger  de Poiten,

Girard),  i  c.  —  i  c.  4  b.
Brigelai,  s.  Achcsbi  (Wido  de  Cre-

dun),  I  c  —  I  c.  4  b.
Udetone,  M  (Norman  de  Adreci),  1  c.

—  I  c.  4  b.

Stigeswalt,  M (Alnrcd  of  Lincoln,

Siward),  i  c  —  i  c.  4  b.
Barcuurde,  s.  Ulingeham  (Abp.  York,

William),  i  c.  —  1  c.  4  b.
Aschebi,  s.  Waltham  (Cnt.  Alan),  i  c.

—  la.

Blasebi,  M  (Odo  Batist.,  Herbert),

I  c. —  I  c.  4  b.
Lodeby,  B.  inl.  Hnndcbi,  s.  Clachesbi

(Ivo  Taillebois^,  i  c. —  i  c  4  b.
Alforde,  8.  Welle  (Gilbert  dc  Gand,

Rademcr),  i  c.  —  i  c.  4  b.
Chemitone,  M (Drogo  de  Beurere,

Robert),  i  c.  —  i  c.  4  b.
Snctrebi,  M  (Heppo  Balist.),  i  c. —

I  c.  4  b.
Oustorp,  Welle,  Hechintone,  Comin-

tone,  s.  Chcrcbebi  (K.  William),

1  c.  —  I  c.  4  b.
Reresbi,  s.  Sneleslant  (Goz.  F.  Lam-
bert), I  c. —  I  c.  4  b.
Risun,  B.  Scantone  (Gilbert  de  Gand,

Colsuan),  i  c.  —  i  c.  4  b.
Scapeuic,  s.  Cbercbebi  and  Scapeuic

(Hcppo  Balist.),  i  c  —  i  c  4  b.
Kouestane,  s.  Reschintone  (Geoffrey

Alselin,  a  knights), 1 1  c.  4  b.  —

12

Tnrolduebi,  M  (St.  Peter  de  Burg,
Geoffrey),  1  c.  —  i  c.  4  b.

Chime.  M  (Gilbert  dc  Gand,  Egbriht),
I  c.  —  I  c.  4  b.

Tedforde,  M  (Goz.  F.  Lambert,  Wal-
ter), 2c.  4  b.  — 3

Fulnodcbi,  M  (Cnt.  Hagh,  Baldric),
2c  4b.  — 3

Osbernedebi,  M  (Wido  de  Credun,
Vitalis),  2  c.  4  b.  —  3

Chi<ebi,  M  (Wido  de  Credun),  ac.
41^  —3


Langetone,  2  M  (Drogo  de  Benroe,

Geoffrey),  a  c  4  b.  —  3
Other  Rase,  s.  Rase  (Radvlf  P^igend),

2C4b.  —  3
Fngelestoii,  M  (Robert  Dispenntor),

2  c.  4  b.  —  3
Widcale  (Rayner  de  Brimoa),  2  c.  4  b.

—  3
MacheCoDe,  M  (AnsgcA),  a  c.  4  K  —  3

Stevenin^,  M  (Cnt.  ALan, Geoftey

Tomai),  a  c.  4  b.  —  3

Claipol,  M  (Bp.  Bftyeox),  ac.  4b.

—  3
Mortnne, M (Ivo  Taillebob), ab.

—6  b.
Alforde,  M  (William  TailleboU),  a  b.

—6  b.
Estrecale,  M  (Bp.  Darham),  ab.—

6b.
Cotes,  s.  Sadcotes  (Bp.  Bajeoz),  a  b.

—  6b.
Tisteltone,  s.  Colebi  (Judith,  Hugh),

ab. — 6  b.
Rotbi,3  M  (RobertdeStatlbid,Edek>),

4  c.  —  4  c.  4  b.
Cudetorp,  s.  Westbitham  (Drogo  de

Bearere,  Walter  and  Ulric),  5  c.  4U?

—  6
Talintooe,  M  (Alured  of  Lincolii),  6  c

—  6c.4b.
Broxholmie,  s.  and  ioL  Engldbi  (Robert

de  Todeni,  Berengmr),  9  c  4  b.  — 10
Aschebi,  a  M  (Colman^,  3  c.  4  b. — 4
Udetone,  M  (^p.  Lincoln ,  Roger),  3  c

4b.  — 4
Wivelestorp,  M  (Ivo  Taillebois,  Odo),

3c.4b.  — 4
Loctone,  s.  Folchingehani  (Gilbert  de

Gand)^  3c  4b.  —  4
Winitlngeham,  s.  Taveksbi  (Cos.  F.

J.^amMit,  I?o),  3  c  —  3 c  4b.
Aslachebi and Spingeham,  s.  Fol-

chingeham  (Giloert  de  Gand),  3  c.

—  3  c.  4 1>-
Tunec,  inl.  and  s.  Torp  (Roger  de

Poiton),  I  c.  4  b.  —  a
Neutone,  2  M  (Colsnan,  Radnlf),  1  c

4  b. —  a
Rigesbi,  M  (Bp.  Bayenx,  Loaoaid^,  i  c.

4  b.  —  a
'  Neutone,  a  M  (Bp.  Dnrham,  AValbert),

I  c.  4  b.  —  a
Sneleslnnt,  M  (Goc  F.  Lambert,  Ray-
ner), I  c.  4  Ix  —  a
Snalun,  M  (Roger de  Poiton,  Wi-

mund),  I  c.  4  b.  —  a
Fostun,  M  (Cnt.  Alan,  Hervey),  1  c

4  b. —  2
Neutone, s. Frisebi (Bp. Baycu,

nbert),  ic.4b.  —  a


APPENDIX  IX


551


Scallebi  and  Stratone, M  (Goz.  F.

Lambert,  Baldric),  a  c.  —  a  c.  4  b.
Strobi,  t.  Abi  (Bp.  Bayenx),  a  c  —

a  C4b.
Stalingebarg,  a  M  (Abp.  York,  Her-
bert), ac. —  a  c.  4  b.
Buchehale,  M  (St  Guthlac  of  Croy-

land),  a  c.  —  a  c  4  b.
Tadetorp,  M  (Wido  de  Credan,  Ran-

naif),  a  c.  —  a  c.  4b.
Cncualt,  M  (Siward),  6  b.  —  i  c.  a  b.
Chinctorp,  B.  Waragcbi  (Emegis  de

Buran),  lb.  —  5b.
Burtnn,  M  (Wido  de  Credun),  16  c

4  b.  —  17  c.
Onnesbi,  s.  Wilgcbi  (Wido  de  Rein-

bndcurt),  6  c.  4  b.  —  7
Lobingeham,  s.  Cotes  (Drogo  de  Ben-

rere),  i  b.  —  6  b.
Saalnn,  B.  inl.  Hechelinge  (Alured  of

Lincoln,  Bernard),  i  b.  —  6  b.
Hiboldestow,  M  (Onti),  1  b.  — 6  b.
Toreswe,  M (Ivo  Taillebois,  Odo),

lb.  —  6  b.
Samerdebi,  M  (Torchil),  i  b.  —  6  b.
Buletham,  M (Robert de  SUtford),

lb —6b.
Chelebi. M (Abp.  York,  William),

4b.  —  I  c.  lb.
Nentone,  s.  Ingeham  (Rayner  de  Bri-

mou),  3  b. —  I  c.
Alia  Tisteltnne,  s.  Tisteltune  (Alnred

of  Lincoln,  Glen),  3  b.  —  x  c.
Iribi, M  (Ivo  Taillebois,  Odo),  I  c

3  b.— a
Haintone, a M (Roger de Poitou,

Albert),  i  c.  3  b.  —  a
Lastone,  M  (Roger  de  Poitou,  Blan-

card),  I  c.  3  b.  —  a
Pichcnrde,  a  M  (Bp.  Durham,  Gois-

lan),  1  c.  5  b.  —  a  c.  a  b.
Faldingcurde, M (William Blund),

I  c.  6  b.  —  2  c  3  b.
Glentcurdc, M (Martin), 5  c.  —  I  c.

ab.
Chilebi,  M  (Waldin  Ingcniator,  Wil-
liam), I  b.  —  6  J  b.
Terintone,  s.  Haintone  (Alured  of  Lin-
coln, Gozelin),  3^  b.  —  i  c.
Terintone,  s. Stigcswalt (Alured of

Lincoln,  Gozelin),  a  J  b.  —  i  c.
Haneurdc,  s.  Snertcforde  (Roger  de

Poitou,  Turold),  a  b.  —  i  c.
Brochclesbi,M  (Ivo  Taillebois,  Nigel),

3  b.  —  I  c.
Iklcsbi,  M  (Godric),  2  b.  —  i  c.
Scotstome, Holme, Sudbroc, (Col-

suau ;,  3  b.  —  i  c.
Mundebi,  !>.  Endrebi  (Eudo  F.  Spire-

wic),  3  b.  —  I  c.


Herdetorp,  B.  Calnodesbi  (Eado  F.
Spirewic),  a  b.  —  i  c.

Stith,  s.  Holobech  and  Copelade
(Wido  dc  Crednn),  a  b.  —  i  c.

Wicham,  s.  Catebi  (Alured  of  Lin-
coln), 4  b.  —  I  c.  2  b.

Wellebrane,  M  (Robert  Malet),  15  c
a  b.  — 16

Fullobi,  a  M  (Bp.  Durham,  William),
4  c.  a  b.  —  5

Alesbi,  M  (Cnt  Alan,  Picot),  4  c  a  b.

—  5C
Brigetlai,  Wade,RaTenedal,i.  Achesbi

(Bp.  Bayeox),  4  c.  —  4  c.  6  b.
Refaim,  inL  Fiscartnne  (St  Peter  de


Bnrg),  4  c.  ---  4  c  6  b.
acham,  B
ab.— 3


4c.  Ob
>itaan,


Hacham,  M  (Coltoan,  William),  a  c.


Staintone,  M  (Hugh  F.  Baldric),  2  c

ab.  — 3
Eyedune,  M  (Bp.  Durham,  Colsuan),

a  c.  a  b.  —  3
Hadinctune,  s. and  inl.  (Dodintune

(Baldwin),  3C4b.  —  4c.  ab.
Chirchetune,  M  (Wido  de  Credun),

ic.3b.  —  ac  lb.
Kaschingetorp, M (Bp. Bayeux,

Suen),  I  c.  —  I  c.  6  b.
Sudcotes,  *s. Wlueletbi (Drogo  de

Beurere),  i  c —  i  c  6  b.
Cocrintone,  3  M  (Alured  of  Lincoln,

Gozelin),  i  c  —  i  c.  6  b.
Westledebi,  M  (Ivo  TailleboU,  Odo),

I  c.  —  I  c.  6  b.
Hochtune,  M (Colegrim, Fredgis),

I  c.  —  I  c.  6  b.
Cheuebi,  t.  Aldnluebi  (Bp.  Bayeux),

I  c  a  b.  —  2  c.
Wilgetbi,  B.  Scrivelesbi  (Robert  Die-

pensator),  i  c.  a  b.  —  a  c.
Haxebi,  M  (Wido  de  Credun,  God-
win), I  c.  a  b.  —  a
Northniche,  M (Cnt. Alan, Cole-
grim),  I  c.  a  b.  —  a
Fleot  (King  William),  3  c  a  b.  — 4
Aschebi,  M  (Bp.  Bayeux,  Ilbert),  i  c.

4  b.  —  a  c  a  b.
Ulnesbi, M (Norman de Adred,

Odo),  ic.4b.  —  acab.
Englebi,  M  (William  de  Perd),  i  c

4  b.  —  acab.
Lastone,  M  (Roger  de  Poitou),  6  b.  —

I  c  4  b.
Billefelt  and  Wettbi,  M  (Robert  de

Statford,  Ba8uin),6  b.  —  i  c  4  b.
Cropesbi  and  Cunesbi,  s. Haltone

(Cnt Hugh,  William  fF.  Nigel),

6  c.  —  6  c  6  b.
Tavelesbi,  a M  (Roger  de  Poitou,

Roger),  I  c  5  b.  —  a  c  4  b.


55^


APPENDIX  IX


Hontnne,  s.  Blesebi  (Goz.  F.  Lam-
bert, Hennan),  i  c.  i  b.  —  a

Strobi  and  Maltebi,  i.  CUchobi
(Hugh  F.  Baldric,  Wido),  5  b.—
I  c  4  b.

Touedebi,  s.  Rigesbi  (Bp.  Bayeox),
3  b.  —  I  c.  3  b.

Merestone,  M  (Colsnan,  Walter),  a  c.
I  b.  — 3

Clachesbi  and  Normanesbi,  s.  Tave-
lesbi  (Goz.  F.  Lambert),  i  c.  3  b.

—  2  c.  3  b.

Bechebi,  B.  Torp  (Hugh  F.  Baldric,

Gilbert),  i  b.  —  i  c
Bichere,  s.  Draitone  (Cnt.  Alan),  5  c.

—  5c  7  b.

Snalnn,  s.  Grosbi  (Bp.  Bayeox),  i  c.

—  3

Stalinbnrg,  M (Hugh  F. Baldric),

I  c.  —  3
Normaneston,  M  (Bp.  Bayenx,  Ilbert),

I  C.  —  2  0.

Hoctune,  (Ivo  Taillebois,  Odo),  i  c

—  3

Cahnme,  M  (William  de  Perci,  Nor-
man), I  c.  —  2

Uluesbi,  free  M  (Bp.  Lincoln,  Ran-
nulf),  I  c.  —  3

Dembelbi,  s.  Osbemedebi  (Wido  de
Credun),  i  c  —  3

Elesham,  M  (Bp.  Bayeox,  Ilbert),  i  c.

—  3

Neteltone,  M  (Roger  de  Poiton,  Blan-

card),  I  c.  —  3
Neteltone,  M  (Leoeoa),  i  c  —  2
Martone,  s.  Chirchebi  (Eudo  F.  Spire-

wic),  I  c.  —  2
Martone,  s.  Chirchebi  (Bp.  Durham),

I  c.  —  3
Sonetorp,  inl.  and  s.  Lessintone  (Abp.

York,  Herbert),  i  c.  —  3
Limdctorp,  to  Ch.  at  Grantham  (Bp.

Osmund),  i  c  —  3
Pinccbec,  s.  Holobech  and  Copelade

(Wido  de  Credun),  i  c.  —  3
Torp,  M  (Eudo  F.  Spirewic),  i  c.  —  a
Torp, inl. and s. Chirchebi (Bp.

Durham),  i  c.  —  3
Nortchime,  M  (Colsuan),  i  c.  —  3
Scallebi  and Stratone, M (Radulf

Pagcnel),  4  c.— 5
Ncutone,  s.  Basebi  (Cnt.  Alan),  4  c

—  5

Lea,  4  M  (Cnt.  Alan,  Robert),  4  c.  —

5
Endretoqi, s. Clachesbi (Hugh F.

Baldric,  Wido),  4  c.  —  5
Bortone,  M  (Cnt.  Alan),  4  c.  —  5
Bodebi,  M  (Gilbert  de  Gand,  Roger),

4c.— 5


Aichebi,  M  (1^  Bayenx),  4  c.  —  5

Scamelabi,  i.  Beltesfocd  (Ivo  Taille-
bois), 6  c.  —  J

Asedebi.  s.  Foldiingeham  (Gilbert  de
Gand),  6  c.  —  7

Borgelai,  M  (Gilbert  de  Gand,  Geof-
frey), 6  c  —  7

WaraMbi,  M  (Geoftey  AIkIid,
RadQlf)>6c« — 7

Iribi,  M  (Dorand  Makt),  6  &  —  7

Cadebi,  s.  Waltfaam  (Cnt  Alan),  3  c

—4
WiTelesforde,  s.  Sechebioc  (Robert

Malet),  3  c— 4
Rotbi,  t.  Carltorp  (Robert  de  Ved),

3C.  — 4
Hawaidebi,  s.  Waltham  (Cnt  Abu),

3  c— 4
Wispinctoney  1.  and  B.  Stntone  and

Cidrcfaebi  (Bp.  Dorfaam),  3  c. — 4
Wi8pinctane,s.Stratoiieand  Chirdiebt

(Eodo  F.  Spirewic\  3  &  —4
Holtone,  s.  Tatenai  (Ivo  Taillebob),

3  c.— 4
Golse,  s.  Barewe  (Diogo  de  Beorere),

3  c.-— 4
Unberge  M  (Ivo  Taillebois,  Nigel),

3c.  — 4
Langetooe,  B.  Botiate  (Robert  Dis-

pensator),  3  c  —  4
Beltone,  M  (Walter  de  Aincnrt),  3  c.

—4
Bastone,  M  (St  Gnthlac  of  Cioyland),

3c  — 4
Carletone,  M  (Norman  Crassns),  i  c.

a  b. —  a  cab.
Spilesbi,  Iresbi,  Torp^  s.  Grcdbi  aad

Estrecale  (Bp.  Doniam),  a  c.  —  3
Agetorp,  s.  Bonielle  (An^ot),  a  c.—

3
Spanebi,  t.  Ulnesbi  (Colsnan),  a  c.  —

3
Ribi,  M  (Roger  de  Poiton,  Ennin),

ac  — 3

Soalun,  M.  (Cnt  Alan,  Picot),  ac—

3
Grimesbi, M (William de Fterd,

Folco),  a  a — 3
Rocheland,  M  (Cnt  Hvgh,  Brisand],

3C  — 3
Crocsbi,  M  (William  Blond),  a  c—

3
Beningtone, B and s. Carletone

(William  de  Warrenne,  Alddia),

3  c  — ~"  X

Wluricesbi,  M  (Abp.  Yoric),  a  c— 3
Barcourde,  s.  Waragebi  (Eniegii  de

Burun),  a  c.  —  3
Scallebi,  M  (Odo  Balist., AIned),

a  c.  —  3


APPENDIX  IX


553


Maltesbi,  s.  Clachesbi  (Gilbert de

Gand,  Rademen),  a  c.  —  3
Repinghale,  M (Oger Brito), 2 c.

—  3

Holm,  8.  Rageneltorp  (St.  Peter  de

Burg),  a  c  — 3
Dasebi,  M  (Offram),  a  c. — 3
Dnsebi,  M  (Wido  de  Credon),  a  c.  —  3
Colstewrde, s. SchelliDtune (Abp.

York,  Walchelin),  a  c.  —  3
Turolfbi,  M  (Odo  Balist.),  a  c.  —  3
Wizebi,  s.  inl.  Dodintone  (Baldwin),

2  c  — 3

Exentnne,  M  (Judith),  11  c—  la

Scotere,  2  M  (St.  Peter  de  Burg,
Turold,  abbot),  11  c — I  a

Wintringeham,  M  (Gilbert  de  Gand,
Robert),  11  c  —  i  a

Cocrintone,  M  (Bp.  Bayeux,  Ilbert),
5  c  — 6

Scotone.  M  (St.  Peter  de  Burg,  Rich-
ard), 5  c.  —  6

Cherchebi  and  Scapuic,  s.  Branztune
(Walter  de  Aincnrt),  5  c.  —  6

Nortchime,  M  (Robert  de  Todeni,
Ivo),  7  c. — 8

Belesbi,  s.  Waltham(Cnt.  Alan),  7  c.

—  8

Corbi,  M  (Bp.  Lincoln,  Walter),  7  c.

—  8

Witenai,  M  (Henry  de  Ferrers,  Sas-

walo),  7  c.  —  8
Hacham, s. Merestone (Colsuan,

Walter),  4  b.  —  1  c.  4  b.
Tonestele, inl. s. Torp (Roger de

Poitou),  4  b.  —  I  c.  4  b.
Tisteltunc (Godfrey de Cambrai,

Glcii),  4  b.  —  I  c.  4  b.
Gcresbi,  s.  Eslaforde  (Bp.  Lincoln),

3  b.  —  I  c.  3  b.

Piccbcch, s.  Spallinge (Ivo Taillebois),

9  c.  —  10
Hcrtonc,  M  (Gilbert  de  Gand),  26  c.

—  27

Frantune,  M  (Wido  de  Credun),  4  c.

4  b.  —  5  c.  4  b.

Suinhope,  M  (Odo  Balist.),  5  c.  4  b.

—  6  c.  4  b.

Grimesbi  and  Sualiin,  M  (Radulf  de
Mortimer,  Richard),  3  c  4  b.  —
4  c.  4  b.

Sucrefclt,  M  (Heppo  BalistOi  3  c.  4b.

—  4  c.  4  b.

Fufjclestow,  2  M  (Bp.  Durham,  Wal-

\)CTi),  I  c.  4  b.  —  a  c.  4  b.
Trinchigeham,  H.  Neutonc  i^Colsuan),

1  c.  4  b.  —  3  c.  4  b.

Hrescburg  and  Harnelorp,  3  M  (Robt.
d«  Statford,  Geoffrey),  i  c.  4  b.—

2  c.  4  b.


Staintone,  M  (Rajner'  de  Brimon),

icib.  —  acab.
Alchebaxge,  B.  Walecote  (St.  Peter  de

Burg,  iVo),  3  b.— I  c.  4  b.
Chirchebi,  M  (Bp.  Durham),  4  b.—

ic  5  b.
Wintrintooe,  a  M  (Seward,  pst.),  a  b.

—  X  c  3  b.

Eleiham,  M  (Roger  de  Poitou,  Erani),

I  c  a  b. —  ac  4b.
Haintone,  M  (Bayeux,  Ilbert),  a  c.

4  b.  —  3  c.  6  b.
Rase,  B. inl Lindude (Alured  of

Uncoln),  a  b.  —  i  c.  4  b.
Nortchelesei,  M  (Cot.  Alan),  6  b.—

a  c.
Messingebam,  free  Bi  (Bp.  Lincoln,

Malger),  i  c.  —  acab.
Gosebolechirche,  s.  Draitone  (Cnt.

Alan),  a  c.  —  3  c  a  b.
Tatenal,  M  (Ivo  Taillebois,  Hermer),

5b.  — a  c
Lobingefaam,  M  (Ivo  Taillebois,  Odo),

lb.  —  I  c.  4  b.
Dreistorp,  M  (Endo  F.  Spiiewic,  Ivo),

a  b.  —  I  c  5  b.
Rodowelle,  M  (Dunmd  Malet),  a  c —

3  c.  3l  *>•

Rmgesdnne,  M  (Robert  de  Todeni,

I?o),  3c.4b.  —  4C7|b.
Hadinctone,  B.  Abume  (Robert  de

Todeni,  Berengar),  4  b.  —  a  c
Burtone,  s.  Scantnne  (Peter  de  Valon-

gies),  4  b.  —  a  c.
Sualun,  s.  and inl. Cncualt  (Abp.

York,  William),  4  b.  —  a  c.
Limberge,  M (Norman  de  Adreci,

Herbert),  4  b.  —  a  c.
Hermodestone, M  s.  in  Wadintone

(Radulf  de  Mortemer),  a  c  »  3  c

4  b.

Ormesbi,  a  M  (Norman  de  Adreci,

Herbert),  a  c  — 3  c  4  b.
Binnibroc  and  Erforde,  M  (Wido  de

Credun,  Alured),  a  c  —  3  c  4  b.
Torgrembi,  M  (Norman  de  Adreci,

Gamelin),  a  c.  —  3  C..4  b.
Cocrinton,  M  (Rayner  de  Brimon),

a  c.  —  3  c.  4  b.
Torp  and  Eastorp,  s.  of  Wilimreham

^  Scantone?  (Gilbert  de  Gand),

4  c.  4  b.?  —  6
Bliburg, M (Geoffrey de Wirce,

Robert),  4  c.  4  b.  —  6
Colesi,  M  (Roger  de  Poitou,  Roger),

4  c.  4  b.  —  6
Bitcopetorp,  3  M  (Bp.  Durham,  a  men),

4  c.  4  b.  —  6
Cretun,  M  (Godefrey  de  Cambrai),  i  c.

—  a  c.  4  b.


554


APPENDIX  IX


Faldingenrde,  s.  Filingebun,  SperliD-
tone,  and  Lageham  (Colsnan),  i  c.
»-  2  c.  4  b.

Tavelesbi,  M  (Radnlf  Pagenal),  I  c.

—  3  c  4  b.

Wenflet,  Hage,  Calesbi,  TedUgestorp,
Malbeitorp,  s.  Grantham  (Cnt.
Hngh),  x8  c.  4  b.  —  20

Stepi^e,  t.  Bardenai  (Gilbert  de
Gand),  10  c. —  11  c  4  b.

Bemodebi,  M  (Cnt.  Hugh,  William),

IOC  4b.  —  13

VYibertune,  s.  Draitone  (Cnt  Alan),

lie.  —  I3C.  4  b.

Avetorp,  M  (Robert  de  Todeni,  Gun-

frid),  I  c  4  b. —  3  c.
Wintrintune,  s.  Haltone  (Cnt  Hugh,

William  F.  Nigel),  3  c.  4  b.  —  4
Foiebi,  3  M  (Bp.  Durham,  Turstin),

1  c  —  3  c  5  b.

Rebnme,  M  (Bp.  Lincoln  and  Canons

of  St  Mary),  3  b.  —  2  c.
Mingeham,  s.  Cheluingham  (Norman

de  Adreci),  3  b.  —  3  c.
Neteltone,  M  (Emegit  de  Bumn),  2  b.

—  I  c  7  b.

Staintone,  s.  Randebi  (Rannulf  de  St.

Walaric),  5  c.  3  b.  —  7
Stimblebi, M (Drogo de Beurere,

Geoffrey),  3  c.  a  b.  —  5
Hazebi,  M  (Waldin  Brito,  Godwin),

3  b.  —  3  c.
Carletune,  M  (Sortebrand,  man),  4  c.

2b.?  — 6
Brachelesbi,  M  (Bp.  Durham,  Nigel),

lb.  —  3  c.
Colcbi,  s.  Haltone  (Cnt.  Hugh,  Wil-

liam  F.  Nigel),  i  b.  —  2  c.
Ilaberdingham,  s.  Luzebi  (Gilbert  de

Gand),  i  b.  —  20.
Blochesham,  s.  Branzewelle  (Alnred

of  Lincoln),  4  b.  —  2  c.  3  b.
Ludcforde,  3  M  (William  de  Perci),

7  c  4  b.  —  9  c.  4  b.  ?
Rageneltorp, free M  (St.  Peter  de

Bur£,  Radulf),  2  c.  —  4
Mameltunc,  free  M  (St.  Peter  de  Burg,

Radulf),  2  c.  —  4
Torgrebi, s. Bilesbi (Odo Balist.,

Herbert),  3  c.  —  4
Suinhope,  s.  Waltham  (Cnt  Alan),

2  c. — 4

Tadcwelle,  M  (Robert  Dispensator),

2  c.  —  4
Colstcvordc,  M  (thegn  of  Queen  Edith) ,

2  C.  •——  A

Cherchcbi, M (K. William), 2  c

^  —4

Sotebi,  M  (Bp.  Bayeux,  Radulf),  4  c.

—  6


Castre  and  Humendooe,  M.  and  B.

(K.  William),  4 c— 6
Canuic  and  Brachebrige, a  M  (Bp.

Geoffrey),  4  ^  ""  ^
Haltnn  and  Stepi, M (Cnt  Alan,

Endo),  I  c.  —  3
Ormesbi, s. Widon (Bp. Lincobi,

Mmlger),  ic  — 3
Fulnedebi,  a.  Wangebi  (Eniegii  de

Bnran),  3  c.  —  5
Neteltone,  M  (DuTud  Bfalet,  a  men),

3C-  — 5
West  Depinge,  M  (God£rey  de  Cam-

brai),  3c  — 5
Gnnfordebi,  B«  and  s.  Grantham  (K.

WillUm),  7  c  —  9
Fodrebi  and  Tmrgmi,  a.  Bimibioc

(Robert  de  Todeni,  Berengar),  7  c.

—  9

Toft,  M  (Wido  de  Ciednn),  7  c.  —  o

Burg,  s.  Bardenai  (Gttbert  de  Gaad),

6c.  — 8
Stratone,  M  (Bp.  Bayeiiz,  Dbcrt),  6  c.

—  8

Duneham,  s.  Netelham  (K.  William,

Odo  Balist),  6c.— 8
Righesbi,  Halebi,  Tatebi,  s.  Rigeibi

(Abp.  York,  Herbert), ic.  46.^

3c.  4  b.
Partenai,  Stepbge,  Trie  and  Bmg,  s.

Guldesmerc  (Robert  Dispenator),

4  b.  —  a  c.  4  b.
Netelham, M (K. William),  14  c.

— 16
Cherchetune,  1.  Draitone  (Cnt.  Alan),

IOC. — 12
Rescfaintone,  a  M  (Geof&ey  Alielin

and  Radnlf),  10  c. -—  la
Nortune,  s.  Staplefocde  (Judith),  5  c.

—  7

GrdbiyM  (Robert  de  Todeni,  Gmifrid),

2  c  —  2  c.  2  b.
Holobech  and  Copelade^  s.  Gadenai

(Cnt  Alan,  Landric), 7  c. — 9  c

2  b.

Rande,  s.  Waragebi  (Emegisde  Boron),

ac.5h.  — 5
Hahitone,  s.  Torp  (Abp.  York,  WiV

liam),  5  b.  — 3
Branzewelle,  M  (Alnred  of  Linoob),

3  b.  —  2  c.  6  b.

Bertone,  Bechebi,  Wirichebi,  Snincar-
tebi,  Habume,  s.  BemoddK  (C^
Hugh,  WilUam),  4  a  4  b.  —  7

BeruuTfbi,  s.  Waltham  (Cnt  Alan),
9c  4b.  —  la

Saxebi,  2  M  (Ivo  TaiUdnna,  Rofer),

f>  Q^  . iT  c  A  b

Fendebi,  s.  Waltham  (Cnt.  Alan),

4  b.  —  6


3C>


APPENDIX IX


ChelMtomc,  i  M  (Alnred  of  Lincoln),

3c  — sc.4b.
Bescbi,  MCCnt.  Alar),  ic^b.  — 4
Torentone, s. Oieibi (WitlUro de

Perci, Roger dePoUon),  l  c.4b. — 4
Cildecote,  s.  Wangebi  (Omegit  de

Buran),  1  c.  t  b.  — 4
Torerebi,M  (Bp.Baycnx),  1  c— 3  c  6  b,
Dmbi,  M  (Roeer  de  Poitoa),  1  b. —

31:.
Estone,  M  (Abp.  Yorli,  Oibem),  I  c

_3c6b.
Dodinlone, ». Weitburg (Gcoffiey

Alselini,7c.  — 9C.6b.
Hicberdineham, 6 M (Cut. Alw,

Eudo),  8c6b.—  iic-jb.
Scallebi  and  Suatone,  M  (Ofb«rn  de

Accis,  Alnred),  i c,  lb.  —  4
Flichesburg,  4M  (Norman  de  Adreci),

9C.  — iicrb.
Sokn  of  Gettnne  (K.  William),  35  c.

-38
Arcbintone,  M  (Ivo  Taillebois,  Geof-
frey), jc- 8
Draitone,  M  (Cnt.  Alan),  5  c.  —  8
Alfgnre,  s.  Draitone  (Cnt.  Alan),  6c

—  9
Widme,  M  (Judilb,  Bernard),  )  c.  —  5
Colebi,  M  (jndllh),  i  c—  f,
Cheluinghofm.  6  M  (Cnt.  Alan,  Lan-

dfic),  jc.  —  6  b.
Donnobi,  s. Rescbintone, Gcoflicy

Alselin  and  Radulf),  3  c.  —  0
I>unncibi,  s.  Cominctune  (St.  Benedict

of  Ramjey),  3  c.  —  6
Talinlune,  a  M  (Robert  de  Todenl,

William  and  Roger),  ic.  4  b.  — 5  c.

CheluinghoIm,M(Nonnandc  Adreci),

Ussintone,  M  (Abp.  York,  Herbert),
Riche,  1.  Draiionc  (Cn(.  Alan),  7c.

Ilarpwc,  3  M  (I>toco  de  Bcurcre.  Tel-

baldi,  >c.-4
Tcrinlonp,  s. WaracebJ  (Emecis  de

HiiiunMc  — 4
llcscbi,  s.  Wallham  (Cnl.  Alan),  ic

Ulcsianclorp,  1  M  (Robert  deTodeni),

Wiuelcsforde,  M  (Godfrey  de  Cam-

Colebi.  s.  and  B.  WashinficburE  (K.

William,,  9  c.  (or  81— 1  J
fianewellf, M (Gilbert dc Gand,

Geoffrey;,  9  c—r 3
ILideclive,  s.  Wallbam  (Cnt.  Alan),


Tlnoorde,  i.  Widme  (CntM.  Judith),

AC— 7
Colebi,  M  (K.  William),  4c  —  7
Wilingdum,  a  M  (Got.  F.  Lanbeit,


ilingdum,  a  M  (Got
wJo).JC-si


M  (R<%er  de  PintDn),  6c.

4n.  —  9  c.  ih.
Braniewelle,  li.s.andinl.  Reachintone

(Geoffrey  Alselin),  6c.  I  —  ()c.ab.
Slepingeham,  M  (Alnred  of  Lincoln,

Goielin),  I  c  —  4  c.  1  b.
Aplebl,  Risebi,  Siteclif,  M  (Roger  de

Buili),  16  c.  —  19  c.  Jb.
Haliotun,  Chelextiune,  RadreilN,  Mal-

lebi.  s.  Tadewelle  (Cnt.  Hugh),  6  c

~ac.4t>.
Hnndtntone,  i.  Bogebi  (I10  Taille-
bois), jc.  4b.— 9
MeieMnne,  )  M  (Radalf  Daplfet  and

Oabem  piL),  4  c.  4  b.  —  B
limbcTge,  1  M  (Rayner  de  Brimoo),


ngeham,  ,


Filingel


M  (Coluan),  7  c  4  b.


Opctnne,  Chefietbt,  and  Normaoebi,

fc  Stow (Bp. Lincoln), 6c.  4b.  — 10
Walecote,  free  M  (St.  Peter  de  Bntg,

I»o),  JC  —  6c  jb.
Elebam, M  (Bp.  LIncoto,  GoiiUn),

JC— 9
Wenuighe,  s.  Draitone  (Cnt.  Alan),

IC  — 5
WUgebi.  t.  Folcbingebam  (Gilbert  de

Gand),  6  c  —  10
Ultle  Pamptone,  M  (Judith,  Nigel),

Gaineibnrg,  M  (Geoffrey  de  Wirce,

Ralnald),  Sc—I}
Lodebnrg,  1.  Bimilbroc (Robert de

Todeni,  Berengar),  8 c.  —  la
Epenrde,  M  (Geoffrey  de  Wirce),  8  c

Rodevclle.  a  M  (Alaied  of  Lincoln,

Glen),  4  c.  — 8
Hatime, ■. Waiagebl (Emegis de

Bnnin),  4  c  —  S
ChelclM,  3  M  (Bp.  Darbam,  AInod),


(Cnt.  Hngh).  I
Bredetlorp, M (Drogo de  Benrere,

Ingelram  and  Emnll),  3  c.  —  J
Ravenedal  and  Other  RSTenedal,  t.

WBlthaoi  (Cnt.  Alan),  ic  — 6


556


APPENDIX IX


Wiuelesbi, M  (Drogo de Benrere,

Robert),  Jc  —  6
Spilesbi,  Iresbi,  and  Toq),  M  (Bp.

Durham^  2  c  —  6
Rase,  M  (Goz.  F.  Lambert,  Walo),

6  b,  —  5  c.
2 Mentinghes, s. Beltesford (Ivo

Taillebois),  1 1  c.  —  15  c.  3|  b.
Sokes  of  Hornecastre  (King  William),

«;3c.  4b.  — 58
Aslachcbi, M  (Robert  de  Todeni),

3  c.  —  6  c.  J  b.

Tcdulfbi,  8.  Haltone  (Cnt.  Hugh,
William  F.  Nigel),  4  c.  4  b.  — 9

Great  Pamptone,  M  (Jadith,  Nigel),
I  c  4  b.  —  6

Wcstburg,  M  (Geoffrey,  Alselin,  and
RadnlO,  7  c.  3  b.?  —  13

Rcschintone,  s.  I)raitone  (Cnt.  Alan),
6  c. — 13

Sudstoches  and  Nortstochcs,  s.  Grant-
ham (King  William),  6c. —  13

Abume,  M  (^Robert  dc  Todeni,  Bcren-
gar),  6  c.  —  13

Stigandebi,  M  (Alured  of  Lincoln),

3C.  — 8

Ormcsbi, 3 M (Drogo  de  Bcurere,

Geoffrey"^,  3  c.  —  8
Holm,  M  (Gilbert  de  Gand),  18  c.  —

24
Torcswc,  2  M  (Alured  of  Lincoln),

7c.— 13
Torentune,  Bodebi,  and  Udetone,  M
(Radulf  de  Mortemer,  Odo),  13  c.

4  b.? —  20

Barewe,  M  (Drogo  de  Beurere),  1 2  c.
— 18  c.  4  b.


Alchinton, M (William de  Perci,

Fnlco),  9  c  4  b.  —  i6c
Lobingelmm, Irebi, and Ribi, s.

Bemodebi (Cnt. Hugh), 13  c. —

aoc  ab.
Roscebi, M (Robert de Statfbrd,

Bricn),  ic.  4b. — 9
Rebume,  3  M  (Gox.  F.  Lambert),

6  c.  4b. —  14  c.  9  b.
Basingeham,  M  (King  William),  8  c.

—  16
Glentewrde,  M  (Bp.  Bayenx,  Wadard),

I  c  — 10
Carletnne,  M (Drogo  de Beurere),

7  c — 16

Wadintone,  M  (Cnt  Hugh),  15  c  —

Great  Pamptone,  i.  Grantham  (King

William,  Iro),  4  b.  —  10  c
Cheaelestone,  B.  Hache  (Cnt.  Alan),

6  c  — 16
Hermodestone,  s.  Wadintone  (Cnt.

Hugh),  ID c.  —  30 c.  4b.
Tadewelle,  M  (Cnt.  Hngh),  9  c.  —  so
Binnibroc, M (Robert de Todeni,

Berengar),  i  a  c.  —  34
Sokes  of  Chircbetnne  (King  WUliam),

55  c.  3  b.  — 68
Colebi, 3 M (Emegis de Bom,

Johan.),  4  c. — 17
Westune  and  Mnltnne,  s.  Holobech

and  Copelade  (Wido  de  Ciedm;,

4b.  — 15  c
Sokes  of  Grantham  (King  Willian),

43  c.  4  b. — 60
Sokes  of  Castre  (King  William),  33  c

7b.-58


Table  III

CORRESPONDENCE  BETWEEN  PLOUGH-TEAMS  IN
DEMESNE,  AND  PLOUGH-TEAMS  HELD  BY  TENANTS

A. Plough-teams  in  Demesne  only

Wilgebi,  M  (Odo  Baliat,  Colegrim),


Mercstune,  B.  Hazcbi  (Wido  de  Cre-

dun,  Osbert),  3  b.  —
Nochctune,  M  (^Norman  de  Adreci),

5  b.—
Straitone  and  Scallcbi,  B.  inl.  Gamels-

torp  (Ivo  Taillebois,  man  of  his),

I  c. —
Rischintone (Drogo de Benrere),

1  c. —
Suamcstede,  B.  Sudwelle  (Walter  dc

Aincurt,  Odo\  |  c.  —
Gamelstorp, M (Ivo Taillebois),

I  c. —


Calnodesbi,  M  (Chetelbem),  }c. —
T  Ravenedal,  M  (Bp.  Durham,  Wal-

bert),  3  b.--
Linberge,  M  (Ivo  Taillcboia,  Nigel),

3c.—
Nortchime,  M  (Colsnan),  i  c.  —
?  Uluesbi,  free  M  (Bp.  Lincoln,  Ran-

nulf),  1  c.  —
Cabume,  M  (WillUm  de  Perd,  Nor^

man),  i  c.  -^
Hoctone  (Ivo  Taillebois,  Odo),  i  &—


APPENDIX IX


557


Stalinburg, M (Hugh F. Baldric),

1  c. —

Endrebi  and  Radebi, M  (Bp. Dur-
ham), 1  c.  ^-
Repinghale,  M  (Oger  Brito),  2  c  —
Billmgcbnrg.  M  (Abp.  York,  Walter

de  Aincurt),  A  c  —
Hagetoroe,  M  (Colsnan),  3  b.  —
Herigerbi, M (Wido de Credun,

Algar),  1  c. —
Faldingurde,  M  (Osbem,  pst.),  i  c.  —
Stigeswalde,  M  (Waldin  Brito),  i  c. —
Itrcbi,  M  (Waldin  Ingeniator,  Wil-
liam), 2  b

Cherchebi, M (Alured of  Lincoln,

Offran),  2  b. —
Aschebi, M (WUliam TailleboU).

2  b.—

Uluesbi,  M  (Hugh),  i  c.  —
Wcstbi,  M  (Colegrim),  5  b.  ~
Cretone, M (Alured of Lincoln

(Radulf),  4  b.—
Alduluebi,  M  (Roger  de  Poitou,  Blan-

card),  i  c.  —
Stubetune,  M (Norman  de  Adreci,

Gamelin),  J  c.  —
Udetone, M (Norman de  Adreci),

1  c. —

Blasebi, M (Odo Balist.,  Hubert),

ic.  —
Gunnebi, M (Rad., F. Hubert),

2  c,

Wime,  M (Abp.  York,  Walchelin),

2  c.  —
Hazcbi,  M  (Odo  Balist.),  3  b.—
Neutone,  4  M  (Cut.  Alan,  Wimund),

I  c. —
Westrecale,  M  (Eudo  F.  Spirewic),

1  c. —

Wizebi  and  Clachcsbi,  M  (Goz.  F.

Lambert,  Walter),  1  c. —
Pochintone,  M (Wido de Crednn,

Wamcr,  i  c. —
Lopintorp,  M  (Aljjar),  i  c.  —
Hermodestorp, M (Hcppo Balist.,

Simund),  i  c.  —
Cretune,  M  (Leuric),  i  c.  —
Corby,  M  (Bricteua),  1  c  —
Cleia,  M  (Ivo  Taillebois,  Wimund),

}c.-
Normanebi  and  Ounesbi,  M  (Goz.  F.

Lambert,  Colsuan),  ^  c.  —
Stepingeham,  M  (Alured  of  Lincoln,

Gozclin),  1  c.  —
Stigandcbi,  M  (Alured  of  Lincoln),

2  c. —

Roscebi, M (Robert de Statford,

Hrien  ,  i  J  c.  (and  5  b.)  —
Messingcham, Iree  M (Hp.  Lincoln,

Malj^cr),  I  c.  —


Binnibroc  and  Erforde,  M  (Wido  de

Credun,  Alured),  2  c.-—
Haltun and Stepi, M  (Cnt.  Alan,

Eudo),  I  c  —
Torgiebi,  M  (Bp.  Bayenx),  i  c  —
Eitone, M (Abp. York, Otbexn),

1  c. —

Widme,  M  (Judith,  Bernard),  2  c  —
Barewe, 2  M (Drogo  de Benrere,

Tetbald),  i  c.  —
Chemitone,  M  (Drogo  de  Benrere,

Robert),  i  c.  —
Snetrebi,  M  (Heppo  Balist.),  i  c.  —
Turolduebi,  M  (St.  Peter  de  Burg,

Geofirey),  i  c  —
Hiboldestow,  M  (Outi),  i  b.—
Snmerdebi,  M  (Torchil),  1  b.  —
Chelebi,  M  (Abp.  Yoric,  William),

Cfailebi,  M  (Waldin  IngenUtor,  Wil-
liam), lb.  —
Bdetbi,  M  (Godric,  son  of  Agemund),

2  b. —

Crochettone,  M  (Bp.  Lincoln,  Goit-

lan),  I  c  —
Cotet,  free  M  (Bp.  Lincoln,  Erche*

nold),  1  c.  —
Endrebi, M (Endo F. Spiiewic),

I  c. —
Risnn,  M  (Agemund),  i  c  —
Cucualt,  M  (ivo  Taillebois,  Gozelin),

I  c. —
Lolestorp,  free  M  (St.  Peter  de  Buxg),

I  c  —
Canuic  (Bp.  Bayeux,  Ilbeit),  2  c.  —
Torgrebi,  M  (Ivo  Taillebois,  Odo),

ic. —
Chirchebi, M (Eudo  F.  Spirewic),

I  c. —
Hotot,  M  (Alured  of  Lincoln,  Dodo),

Jc  —
Cocrinton, M (Colsuan, Mathew),

Jc.-
Sumdrebi  (Colegrim),  i  c.  —
Canuic,  M  (Norman  Crassus),  1  c.  —
Torentun  (Roger  de  Poitou),  i  c.  —
Stivetone, M  (Bp.  Bayeux, Ilbert),

IC  —
Clachesbi.  M  (Ivo  Taillebois,  Geof-
frey), I  c.  —
Aplebi,  Risebi,  and  Saleclif,  free  M

(St.  Peter  de  Burg,  Radulf),  i  c  —
Cucualt,  M  (Alured  of  Lincoln,  Gleu),

1  c. —
Avetorp,  M  (Alured  of  Lincoln,  Soen),

IC  —

Wibertone, M  (Wido  de Ciedun),

2C. —

Hotot,  M  (Alured  of  Lincoln,  Ber-
nard), 2  b.  —


558


APPENDIX  IX


Snmerdebi,  s.  Chisebi  (Wido  de  Cre*

dun),  5  b.  —
Oonebi,  2  M  (Bp.  Bayeax,  Ilbert  and

Wadard),  5  b.—
Barchestone,  B.  Beltone  (Colegrim),

4b.-
Bichere,  s.  Draitone  (Godric),  i  c  —
Terintone,  s.  Waragebi  (Ernegis  de

Burun),  i  c. —
Rison,  B.  Scantone  (Gilbert  de  Gand,

Colsuan),  1  c. —


Onnebi, M  (Ivo  Taillebois,  Peter),

I  c. —
PocUntone,  s.  Ulnesbi  (Cobaan,  Coo-

ded),  I  c —
Spanetbi, B. Bnme (Oger Brito),

ic  —
Cheileitonie,  M  (Waldin  Ingeniator),

Onnebi,  a  M  (Bp.  Bayeux,  Ilbert  and

Wadard),  5  b.—


B. Ploughs  in  Demesne  in  excess  of  Tenants'  Ploughs


Stratone,  M  (Eudo  F.  Spiiewic),  5  c.

—  I

TadewcUc,  M  (Cnt.  Hugh),  6  c  —  3
Torp,  M  (Gilbert  de  Gand),  ft-c  —  a
Cabiodesbi,  M  (Eudo  F. Spiiewic),

5c.4b.  —  2c.4b.
Ledulnetorp,  a  M  (Coltuan,  Conded

and  Ancnitil),  4  c. —  i  c.  4  b.
Welle,  3  M  (Cnt  Hugh,  Osbern),  3  c.

—  I

Haltone,  M  (Cnt  Hugh,  WilUam  F.

Nigel),  4  c.  —  a
Stratone,  M  (Bp.  Bayenx,  Ilbert),  4  c.

—  2

Hiboldestow,  a  M  (Ivo  Taillebois),

4  c.  —  a
Brantune,  M  (Bp.  Lincoln),  4  c.  —  a
Uluricebi, a  free  M (Bp. Lincoln,

Goislan),  4  c.  —  a
Westorp,  M  (Walter  de  Aincurt,  Ray-

nold),  2  c.  —  lb.
Bnndebi, M (Rad. de Mortemer,

William),  a  c.  —  1  b.
Navenebi,  M  (Durand  Malet),  a  c.  —

a  b.
Torp,  M  (Roger  de  Poitou,  Roger),

a  c.  —  2  b.
Steveninge,  M  (Cnt.  Alan,  Geoffrey

Tomai),  2  c.  —  4  b.
Loctone, a  M  (Oger  Brito),  2  c. —

4  b.
Aschebi,  M  (Gilbert  de  Gand,  Roger),

a  c.  — 4  U
Mundebi,  M  (Cnt.  Alan,  Eudo),  3  c

—  1  c.  4  b.

Ingeham, M (Colsuan, Roger and

Anschitil).  i  c.  4  b.  —  3  b.
Dribi,  M  (Gilbert  de  Gand,  Ivo),  4  c.

—  3

Cameslingeham,  M  (Colsuan),  4  c. — 3

Normanebi  and  Santone,  a  M  (Wido
de  Credun,  Alured),  i  c  4  b. —
4  b.

Medeltone,  2  M  (Ernegis  de  Burun),
5<i— 4


Randebi,  M  (RamiiiU  de  St  Wakfk),

3c  — a
Eleham,  M  (Bp.  Lincoln,  Gmalaa),

3  c.  —  a
Scotone, M (St. Peter de Bug,

Richard),  3  c — a
Aldnlnebi,  3  M  (Bp.  Bayeiu),  3  c.—  2
Ouitorp,  M  (ColsQan),  a  c  —  i
Welle,  M  (Gilbert  de  Gand,  RaacflKr),

a  c.  ***  I
Widem,  a  M  (Ito  TaUleboti,  Wi-

mnnd),  a  c.  —  i
Burtooe,  M  (Sortebnmd),  a  a  —  i
Neteltone,  M  (Dnrand  Malet,  a  men),

a  c.  —  I
Chelningfaolm, 6 M (Cnt Alan,

Landric),  a  c  —  i
Dunnesbi,  s. Reachintone  (GeoAey

Alselin  and  RadnlO*  a  c.  —  i
Beltone,M(WalterdeAinciut),ae.^i
Stiuctooe, M (Alured  of  Lincoln),

a  c.  —  I
Bttletforde,  M  (Goc F.  Lambert),

a  c.  —  I
Risun,  M  (Colman),  a  c —  t
Blibuig,  M  (Ivo  Taillebois,  Nigd),

a  c.  -~*  I
Stainton,  M  (WilUam  de  P^rd,  Alif),

a  c "~~  I
Clachesbi, M (Gilbert de  Gand,

Rademer),  a  c.  —  i
W^intrintone,  a  M  (Normande  Adreci),

a  c.  —  I
Ingeham,  M  (Bp.  Bayenz,  Ilbert),  a  c.

—  I

Wime,  a  M  (Abp.  York,  Walchdm).

a  c. "—  I
Ellingetone, M (Ito Taillefaois.

Walter),  a  c.  —  i
Lagesbi, M (WillUm de P^

Euraid),  a  c.  —  i
Golie,  free  M  (Bp.  Lincoln,  Roger),

ac.  —  1
Blibuig,  M  (Goz.  F.  Lambert),  a  c.

—  1


APPENDIX  IX


559


Bliburg,  M  (Bp.  Durham,  monks  of

Durham),  a  c.  —  i
Oresbi,  M  (William  dc  Perci),  a  c. — i
Achesbi,  M  (Widodc  Credun,  Alured),

a  c, —  I
Couenham, M (Bp. Dnrham, St.

Karilcf),  a  c.  4  b.  —  i  c.  4  b.
Scallebi  and  Stratone,  M  (Osbem  de

Arcis,  Alured),  i  c.  —  lb.
Tcmescrou, M •(Ivo Taillebois,

Wimund),  i  c.  —  i  b.
Ingeham, a M (Goz.  F. Lambert,

Anschitil),  i  c.  —  i  b.
Haberingham,  B.  in  Luzebi  (Gilbert

de  Gand),  1  c  —  i  b.
Wicghingesbi,  M  (William  de  Perci,

Robert),  i  c.  —  i  b.
Stratone,  B.  inl.  Randebi  (Rannulf  of

St.  Waleric),  i  c.  —  i  b.
Neteltone,  a  M  (Bp.  Bayeux,  Emegis

and  Wadard),  a  c.  —  i  cab.
Rigesbi,  M  (Abp.  York, Herbert),

I  c.  —  a  b.
Torp (or Catcbi), M (Alured of

lancoln),  i  c.  —  a  b.
Habume, M (Alured of Lincoln,

Radulf),  1  c.  —  a  b.
Catebi,  a  M  (Bp.  Durham,  Tnrstin),

1  c.  —  a  b.
Elesham,  M  (Roger  de  Poitou,  Emui),

I  c.  —  a  b.
Caldccote,  s.  Waragebi  (Emegis  de

Burun),  1  c.  —  a  b.
Wilgesbi,  B.  Scrivelesbi  (Robert  De-

spenscr),  i  c.  —  2  b.
Hazebi,  M  (Wido  de  Credun,  God-
win), I  c.  —  a  b.
Northniche,  M  (Cnt.  Alan,  Colegrim),

I  c.  —  3  b.
Chelebi, M (Norman de Adreci,

Geoffrey),  i  c  —  a  b.
Chelebi,  M  (Bp.  Lincoln,  Rannulf),

I  c. —  2  b,
Suavintone, M (Wido de Credun,

Warner),  1  c.  —  2  b.
Kauendale, M (VValdin Ingeniator,

William),  1  c.  —  2  b.
Kefan,  M  (Rannulf  de  St.  Waleric),

I  c.  —  2  b.
Casuic,  M  (Alured  of  Lincoln,  }k>so),

1  c.  —  2  b.
iiurj,',  M  (Archil),  1  c.  —  2  b.
liellingeburg,  M  (Alured  of  Lincoln,

Gozclin),  I  c.  —  2  b.
Scachertorp, M  (Wido  de  Credun),

I  c.  —  2  b.
Uluricebi, M (Hugh F. Baldric,

Radulf),  I  c.  —  2  b.
Chelebi, M Mip. Haycux, Wadard),

1 c.  —  2  1).


Chirchetone,  M  (Wido  de  Credun),

I  c.  —  3  b.
Iribi,  M  (Ivo  TaiUebois»  Odo),  I  c^

3  b.
HaiDtone,  2  M (Roger  de  Poitou,

Albert),  i  c.  —  3  b.
Lastone,  M  (Roger  de  Poitoa,  BUn-

card),  I  c.  —  3  b.
Scredinctim,  M  (Robert  de  Statford,

Gulfered),  i  c.  —  3  b.
Widcale,  a  M  (WUliam  Blond),  i  c.

—  3b.

Tanelesbi,  M  (Bp.  Bayenx,  Losoord),

1  c.  —  3  b.
Sisse,  M  (RaynerdeBrimon),  i  c. — 3  b.
Lobingeham,  M  (Norman  de  Adreci,

Berennold),  i  c.  —  3  b.
Filingeham,  5  M  (Coltuan),  4  c. —

3  c.  4  b.
Bvcnorde,  M  (Rayner  de  Brimou),

5  b. —  I  b.
Chetelesbi,  M  (Cnt.  Hugh,  Hugh),

3  c.  —  a  c.  4  b.
Tdintnne,  2  M  (Robert  de  Todeni,

William  and  Roger),  i  c.  4  b.  —  i
Cletham,  M  (Aldene),  i  c.  4  b.  —  i
Crosbi,  M  (Ivo  Taillebois,  Odo),  i  c.

4b.-i
Merestnne,  a  M  (Radulf,  Dapifer  and

Osbem,  pst.),  a  c.  4  b.  —  a
Bodebi  and  Snmertune,  M  (Alured  of

Lincoln,  Gozelin),  a  c.  4  b.  —  a
Ulin^eham, a  M  (Tb.  Abp. York,

William),  a  c.  4  b.  —  a
Glentenurde, M  (Goz.  F.  Lambert,

Anschitil),  i  c.  —  4  b.
Aluingeham,  M  (Alured  of  Lincoln,

Gozelin),  i  c.  —  4  b.
Walesbi, M (Rayner de Brimou,

Baldwin),  i  c  —  4  h.
Limberge,  a  M  (Rayner  de  Brimou),

I  c.  —  4  b.
Magna  Pamptone,  M  (Judith,  Nigel),

I  c.  —  4  b.
Fugelestow, a M (Bp. Durham,

Walbert),  1  c— 4  b.
Breseborg  and  Bametorp,  3  M  (Robt

de  Statford,  Geoffrey),  i  c.  —  4  b.
Neutone,  a  M  (Colsnan,  Radulf),  i  c.

Rigesbi,  M (Bp.  Bayeux,  Losoard),

I  c. — 4  b.
Neutone,  a  M  (Bp.  Durham,  Walbert),

1  c.  —  4  b.
Sneleslunt, M (Goz. F. Lambert,

Rayner),  i  c.  —  4  b.
Foztun,  M  (Cnt.  Alan,  Hetueus),  i  c.

—  4  b.

Bilingeburg,  M  (Cnt.  Alan,  Colegrim),
1  c.  —  4  b.


56o


APPENDIX  IX


Uluesbi,  M  (Norman  de  Adred,  Odo),

I  c.  —  4  b.
Englebi,  M  (William  de  Perci),  i  c

—  4  b.

Cale,  M  (Chetelbem),  i  c  — ^  h.
Brackenberg,  s.  Alningham  (Aiured  of

Lincoln,  Rannolf),  i  c.  —  4  b.
HolebenandCopelade,  M  (St  Gnthlac

of  Croyland),  i  c.  —  4  b.
Ristin  and  Carlenton,  M (Coltnan,

Mathew),  i  c  —  4  b.
Ulaesbi,  M  (Snen),  i  c  —  4  bw
Bertune,  M  (Radulf  Pagenel,  Oger),

I  c. — 4  b.
Bodebi  and  Somerdebi,  M  (Wido  de

Ciedun,  Godwin),  1  c.  — 4  b.
Refan,  B.  Berlinge  (CoUuan),  i  c.  —

Berlinge,  M  (Colsnan),  i  c  «^  4  b.
Berlinge,  M  (Coliuan),  i  c.  —  4  b.
Bolintone,  M  (Cnt  Hugh,  Colsnan),

I  c — 4  b.
Tisteltone,  M  (Aiured of  Lincoln,

Glen),  I  c.  —  4  b.
Hoctun,  M  (Roger  de  Poiton,  Roger),

I  c.  —  4  b.
Sisse,  M  (Bp.  Bayeoz,  Ilbert),  i  c.  —

4b.
Bicbere,  M  (Wido  de  Credun),  i  c. —

4  b.
Benrngurde,  M  (Abp.  Yoik,  Osbem

pst.),  a  c  —  I  c  4  b.
Grimesbi  and  Snalun,  M  (Radulf  de

Mortemer,  Richard), a  c.  —  i  c.

4  b.
Ringesdune,  M  (Robert  de  Todeni,

Ivo),  a  c.  —  1  c.  4  b.
Udetone,  M  (Bp.  Lincoln, Roger),

a  c.  —  I  c.  4  b.
Graingeham,  M  (Emegis  de  Buron),

a  c«  —  I  c.  4  b.
Clachesbi, M (Wido de Credun,

Gilbert  de  Gand),  a  c.  —  i  c.  4  b.
Welletune,  M  (Cnt.  Alan,  Landric),

a  c. —  I  c.  4  b.
Englebi,  a  M  (Bp.  Bayenx,  Colsnan

and  Wadard),  a  c.  —  i  c.  4  b.
Cheftesbi,  M  (Colsuan,  Adelelm),  a  c.

—  I  c.  4  b.

Clachesbi,  M (Norman  de  Adreci,

Geoffrey),  4  b.  —  i  b.
Chaschinturp,  M  (Robert  de  Statford,

Hugh),  4  b.  —  I  b.


Chelebi,  M  (Ivo  TaUlebois,  Nigd),

4  b.  —  lb.
Pichetude,  a  M  (Bp.  Diuliam,GoiiUui),

I  c.— fib.
Brochelesm,  M (Emegis  de  Bwon,

Rannnlf),  i  c.  -—  5  b.
Tandesbi,  a  M (Roger  de  Poitoa,

Roger),  I  c.  —  5  b.
CameUngcbiun,  a  M  and  t.  (Dinand

Malet),  I  c.  —  f  b.
Screnbi,  M  (Bp.  Dnxfaam,  Fenchel),

I  c  —  5  b.
Chetelbi, M (Drogo de Beorere,

Rayner),  i  a  —  50.
Cadintoo, M  (Rayner de  Brimoo,

Baldwin),  i  c. — 5  b.
Chaichingetorp,  M  (Wido  deCiednn,

Algar),  I  c.  —  5  b.
Cletham,  free  M  (St  Peter  de  Bvg,

Roger),  I  c.  —  5  b.
Langetooe  and  Torp,  M  (Bp.  Bayeox,

man),  i  c— 5  b.
Blesebi,  M  (Goz.  F.  Lambert,  Her-
man), ic.4b.  —  icab.
Andrebi,  M  (Goz.  F.  Lambert,  Lam-
bert), 3  b.  — - 1  b.
Faldingenrde,  M (W'iUlam Blond),

I  c.  —  6  b.
Cannic  and  Bragebroge, M  (fUiga

de  Poiton,  Emnin),  i  c  — 60.
llaroldcstorp,  B.  Wilgebi  fGUbert  de

Gand,  Roger),  i  c  —  6  a
Gunnewordebi,  M  (Colegrim),  i  &—

6  bi
Stapleforde,  M  (Bp.  Bayeoz,  Ivo),

I  c.  —  6  b.
Scotstome,  M  (Norman  de  Adieci),

I  c. — 6b.
Besebi and liialtebi, M (Got. F.

Ijunbeit,  Eniold),  4  b.  -—  a  b.
Dodintone, s. Mereitone (Cdltoao,

Walter),  4  b.  —  a  b.
Berpheham,  M  (Godfrey  de  Cambcai,

a  men  of  his),  4  b.  —  a  b.
Wadingeham, M (Aldene), 4b>'

ab.
Sumerdebi,  B.  Gaiiiesbai]g  (Geofiicy

de  Wirce),  4  b.  —  a  b.
Crocsbi,  M  (Noiman  de  Adieci,  Odo),

4  b.  —  3  b.
Aresbi,  M  (Siward,  psL),  4  b. — 3  b.
Tcsforde,  a  M  (Abp.  York,  Gilbert),

a  c.  I  b.  —  a


APPENDIX IX


561


C. Plough-teams  in  Demesne  equal  to  Tenants'  Ploughs


Tatenai,  2  M  (Ivo  Tailleboii),  6  c.

—  6

Scriuelesbi,  M  (Robert  Dispensator),

6  c.  — 6
Flichesbnrg,  4  M  (Norman  de  Adreci),

4c.  4b.  —  4c  4b.
Imnngehmm,  a  M  (William  de  Perci),

4c  — 4
Chenremont,  M  (William  de  Pcrci),

4C.— 4
Chelainghow,  3  M  (Ivo  Taillebois,

Odo),  3c.  — 3

Odcncbi,  M  (William  de  Perd,  Wil-
liam), 3  c  —  3

Stalinburg,  2  M  (Norman  de  Adreci),

3C.  —  2
Englebi, M (Robert de Todeni,

Berengar),  2  c.  —  2
Wellebi,  M  (Wido  de  Crednn,  Ran-

niilf)>  2  c.  —  2
Ormesbi, M (Cnt. Hagh, Hugh),

a  c  — 2
Staintune, M (Cnt.  Hngh,  Osbem),

2  c.  — ^  2
Wilgebi,  M  (Gilbert  de  Gand,  Roger),

2  c.  ~~~  2
Aplebi,  Risebi,  and  Saleclif,  M  (Gil-
bert dc  Gand,  Robert),  2  c,  —  a
Grosbi,  M  (Bp.  Baycux),  a  c.  —  2
Chclebi,  3  M  (Bp.  Durham,  Almod),

a  c.  —  2
Colcbi,  2  M  (Emegis  dc  Bnran,  John),

2  c.  —  2
Scalcbi and Stratone, M (Radulf

Pagenel),  2  c. —  2
Mcdricesham, B. Wadintone (Cnt.

Hugh),  3  c.  —  2
Hamingebi, M (Hugh F.  Baldric),

2  0.  —  2

Wilgebi, M (Bp.  Lincoln,  Radulf),

2  c  —  3
Mortunc,  M  (Oger  Brito),  2  c.  —  a
Torp,  M  (Bp.  Durham,  j ;  Eudo  F.

Spirewic,  §),  2  c.  —  2
Sudtorp,  M  (Wido  de  Crcdun),  2  c.

—  2

Offintunc, M (Robert de Todeni),

2  c.  —  3
Wilingeham,  M  (Gilbert  de Gand),

2  0.  —  2
Tonestalc, M (Ivo Taillebois),  2  c,

—  2

Scotone,  M  (Ivo  Taillebois,  Gozelin),

2  0.  —  2
Greneham, Auuartorp, and Bolcbi,

M  (Alured  of  Lincoln),  a  c. —  2

VIKOGRADOFF  O


Sperlinctonei  M  (Colsiian),  a  c.  —  a
Stochcy  M (Cnt  Alan,  Colegrim),

a  c  —  a
Nenberie,  M  (Cnt  Hugh,  Osbem),

a  c*  ^~~  a
Wichingebt,  M  (William  de Perci,

Osbem),  a  c  —  a
Sassebi,  M  (Eado  F.  Spirewic),  ac.

—  a

Pantone,  t.  Waragebi (Emegis de

Bumn),  ac.  —  a
Ormesbi,  M  (Ito  Taillebois,  Wimnnd),

ac.  —  a
Fngelestow,  a  M  (Cnt.  Alan,  Picot),

ac— a
Frisebi,  M  (Bp.  Bayenx,  Ilbert),  a  c.

—  a

Wilchetone,  M  (Waldin  Ingeniator),

a  c.  "~*  a
Wilgebi,  M  (Waldin  Brito),  a  c  —  a
Pantone,  M (Abp.  York,  Gilbert),

I  c.  4  b.  —  I  c.  4  b.
Bolinbttrg, M (Colsnan, Brunei),

I  c.  4  b.  —  ic.  4  b.
Bechebi,  M  (Bp.  Lincoln,  Rannnlf),

I  c.  4  b.  —  I  c.  4  b.
Torp,  a  M  (Hngh  F.  Baldric,  Gilbert).

iC4b.  —  ic.4b.
Dnneham,  M  (Ilbert  de  Laici,  miles

eins),  I  c.  —  i
Donedic,  M  (St.  Gnthlac,  Colegrim),

I  c. —  I
Combreuorde,  M  (Rayner  de  Brimon),

I  c — I
Torp,  M  (Bp.  Bayeux,  Ilbert).  i  c —  i
Holobech  and  Copelade,  M  (Wido

de  Credun),  i  c  —  i
Scallebi  and Stratone, M  (Dnrand

Malet,  Alored),  i  c.  —  i
Gnnfordebi,  M  (Bp.  Durham,  Lam-
bert), I  c  —  I
Grimesbi,  s.  Archintone  (Ivo  Taille-
bois, Geoflrey),  i  c.  —  i
Belesbi,  M  (Waldin  IngenUtor,  Wil-

liam),  I  c.  —  I
Branetorp,  M  (Bp.  Durham,  Nigel),

I  c  —  I
Chemitone,  M (Hugh F.  Baldric,

Hamelin),  i  c.  —  i
Bolintone,  M  (Ivo  Taillebois,  Odo),

I  c. —  I
Colebi,  M  (Judith),  i  c.  —  1
Wilingeham,  a  M  (Goz.  F.  Lambert,

Walo),  I  c  —  I
Ormesbi,  a M  (Drogo  de  Benrere,

Geoflrey),  i  c* —  i


56a


APPENDIX  IX


Spallinge,  M  (Wido  dc  Credan),  i  c

—  I

Spilesbiy  Iresbi,  and  Torp,  M  (Bp.

Durham),  i  c.  —  i
Cherchebi,  M  (King  William),  ic.

—  I

Tadewelle,  M  (Robert  Dispensator),

I  c.  —  I
Mameltune, free M (St. Peter  de

Burg,  RadnlOi  i  c.  —  i
Rageneltorp,  free M  (St.  Peter  de

Burg,  Radulf),  i  c.  —  i
Cocrinton,  M  (Rayner  de  Brimon),

I  c. —  I
Torgrembi,  M  (Norman  de  Adred,

Gamelin),  i  c.  —  i
Ormesbi,  2  M  (Norman  de  Adreci,

Herbert),  i  c. —  i
Ilermodestone,  M,  s.  in  Wadintone

(Radulf  de  Mortemer),  i  c.  —  i
Rodowelle,  M  (Dnrand  Malet),  I  c.

—  I

Gosebertechirche,  s.  Draitone (Cnt.

Alan),  I  c.  —  I
Tudetorp, M (Wido de Credun,

Rannnlf),  i  c.  —  i
Buchehale, M (St. Gnthlac), i  c.

—  I

Stalingeburg,  2  M  (Abp.  York,  Her-
bert), I  c — I

Sonetorp,  inl.  and  s.  Lessintone  (Abp.
York,  Herbert),  i  c.  —  i

Holtham,  M  (Robert  Dispensator),
I  c. —  I

Staintone,  M  (Drogo  de  Benrere,
Goisfiid),  I  c.  —  I

Cannic,  s.  Eslaforde  (Bp.  Lincoln,
William),  i  c.  —  i

Dasebi,  M  (Wido  de  Credun  and
Hemald),  i  c.  —  i

Dasebi,  M  (OfTram),  i  c  —  i

Scallebi,  M  (Odo  Balist.,  Alured),
I  c.  —  1

Barcourde.  s.  Waragebi  (Emegis  de
Bnran),  i  c. —  i

Wluricebi,  M  (Abp,  York),  I  c.  —  i

Bcningtone,  B.  ana  s.  Carletone  (Wil-
liam  de  Warenne,  Aldelin),  ic.'

—  I

Crocsbi, M. (William Blond), i  c.

—  I

Rocheland,  M  (Cnt.  Hugh,  Brisard),

I  c. —  I
Grimesbi, M (William de Perd,

Fulco),  I  c.  —  I
Ribi,  M  (Roger  de  Poitou,  Emnin),

I  c.  —  I
Welingeham,  2  M  (Cnt.  Alan),  1  c. — 1


Cletbam,  M  (Bp.  Bayenx,  Ilbert),  i  c.

—  I '

Draitooe,  M  (Cnt.  Alan,  Tdli),  i  c— i
Bnme,  M  (Aimed  of  LiD€oln,  Dodin),

IC — I

Witham  Hd.,  M  (Drogo  de  Bentre,

Colegrim),  i  c  —  i
Sadtone,  M  (Chetdbein\  i  c.  —  i
Bertone,  M (Radnlf  Fagenel),  ic

—  I

Loletorp,  B.  inl.  and  s.  Gaineibiiig
(Geottey  de  Wiioe)»  i  c.—  i

Haconesbi,  M  (Robert  de  Statfbid,
Gnlfer),  I  c. —  X

Tirtertnne,  M  (Jadith, Hngh),  ic.

—  I

Stantone  and  Wldingdiam,  M  (Bp.

Bayenx,  Ilbert),  i  c.  —  i
Rebome,  M  (In>  Taillebois,  Pder),

I  c.  —  I
Burg,  M  (Endo  F.  Spiiewic,  two  men

<nhis),  xc — X
Borcliestone, s. Hnndintooe (Ifo

Tailleboif),  xc^x
Glandluim,  2  M(Bp.Ba7eax,Wadard),

IC —  I

Canic,  M  (Gnnfrid  de  Ciodiei),  i  c

—  X

Lndesforde,  M  (Ito  TsiUebois,  Odo),

IC  —  X

Delbebi,  M  (Colwum,  Rainald),  i  c

—  I


Torp,  M  (Endo  F.  Spirewic),  i  c — i
igelesto¥

IC — I


Fagelestow,M(Cnt


Ipirewic
Hn^,


kosodin),


Welingeham,  M  (Bp.  Bayenx,  Dbert),

IC  — I

Calchewelle,  M  (Norman  de  Adied,

Roger),  I  c.  -*  X
Berllnge,  M  (Bp.  Dnrbam,  Colnui%

IC  — I

Neahnse,  M  (Ito  TaiUebois,  Roger),

ic  —  I
Chirchebi,  M  (Bp.  Bajeox,  nbert]*,

IC  —  I

Rase,  M  (Bp.  Bayeux,  Wiorand),  i  c
—  I

Crocestone,  M  (Roger  de  Poitou,  Aot-

chitil),  I  c  —  I
Hanenrde,  M  (CoUnan,  Tnrold,  ^\

I  c.  —  I
Cladiesbi  and  NonnaneU,  M  (Drogo

de  Benrere,  Colsoan),  x  c  —  i
Chemitone,  M  (Cnt.  Alan),  i  c— i
Graingeham,  M  (Bp.  Lincoln,  Blal-

^r),  I  c  —  X
Chirchetonc,  M  (Cnt.  Alan,  Toli),

IC  —  I


'  loh,  luid  u  iniafid.


APPENDIX  IX


563


Ulingeham, M  (Bp.  Bayenx,  Wadard),

I  c  —  I
Jeresbi, M (Colegrim, Rold), i  &

—  I

Coniinctnne, M (St. Benedict of

Rmmflcy),  i  c.  —  I
Ilelmeswelle,  M  (Martin),  i  &  —  I
Ilegelinge,  M  (Bp.  Bayenx,  Wadard),

I  c —  I
Bemedebi,  3  M  (Emegit  de  Boron,

Ulric),  I  c. —  I
Catebi,  M  (Alnred  of  Lincoln),  I  c

—  I

Cucualt,  M  (Abp.  York,  WilUam),

I  c  —  I
Hacberdingham,  M  (Drogo  de  Beo-

pere,  Robert),  i  c  —  i
Chinetorp,  M  (Ito  Taillebois,  Odo),

ic  —  I
Holtone, M (Rayner de Brimoo,

Roger),  5  b.  — 5  b.


Aleibl,  M  (Bp.  Dorham,  Nigel),  4  b.

—  4b.
Bertooe  and  BQksieU,  M  (Colsoan,

William),  4  b.— 4  b.
Glenteorde^  M  (Bp.  Bayeox^  Wadard),

Chime,  M  (Gilbert  de  Gand,  Egbriht),

4b. — 4b.
NetdtoQe,  M  (Leoena),  4  b. — 4  b.
Westledebi,  M  (Ivo  TaOleboii,  Odo),

4b.  — 4b.
Cocrintone,  3  M  (Alored  of  Linooln,

Gocelin),  4  b*  —  4  b.
Soaoetooe,  M  (Colraao),  4b. — 4 b.

Neotooe,  M  (Uloiet),  4  b 4  b.

Toientooe  and  Bronc^  M  (ErncgU  de

Bonm,  Ulri^,  xh,  —  30.
Becbelinge,  M  (Norman  de  Adred,

Herbert),  a  b.  — a  b.
Cberchebi  and  Scapnic,  M  (Nonnan

de  Adred),  a  b.  —  a  bw


D. Plough-teams  in  Demisne  less  than  Tenants'  Ploughs


Ilerigerbi,  M  (Cnt.  Alan,  Godric),  4  b.

Staintone,  M  (Rayner  de  Brimoo),  4  b.
-Jib.

Ingeham,  M  (Rayner  de  Brimoo,
Colsnan),  4  b.  —  5  b.

Wil^ebi,  M  (Robert  de  Statford,  God-
win), 4  b. — 5  b.

Ingeham,  free  M  (Bp.  Lincoln,
Krchcnold),  5  b.  —  6  b.

Merettone,  M  (CoUnan,  Walter),  i  c.

—  I  c  I  b.

Rase,  M  (Goz.  F.  Lambert,  Walo).

ab.  —  4  b.
Fallobi,  3  M  (Bp.  Dorham,  William),

3  c.  —  3  c.  3  b.
Wadingeham  and  Staintone,  M  (Goz.

F.  Lambert),  I  c  —  I  c.  J  b.
ILi^ctome  M  (Waldin  Ingeniator),  i  c.

—  I  c.  3  h.

Ilacham,  M  (Colsuan,  William),  ic,

—  I  c.  3  b.

Staintone,  M  (Hugh  F.  Baldric),  ic
-^  I  c.  i  b.

Kvcdunc,  M  (Bp.  Dorham,  Coltoan),
I  c.  —  I  c.  3  b.

Rcbumc,  3  M  'Goz.  F.  loimbert,  a
man  of  his),  3  c.  —  3  c.  4  b.

Gunfordcbi  Hd.,  M  (Walter  de  A  in-
curt,  Klwi>,  I  c.  4  b.  —  3

I'lucsbi,  M  Colsuan,  Brunei),  i  c.  4b.

—  3

Kochesham,  M  (Alurcd  of  Lincoln,
Ivadull) ,  I  c.  4 b.  —  3

O


Atcfaebi,  a  M  (Coltaan),  i  &  4b.  —  a
Lodefoide,  3  M  (WtUiam  de  Peici),

3C.4b.^4
Crooeitoiie, M  (Hogh  F. Btldrk»

HameUn),  i  c.  — >  i  c  4  b.
Neotoiie,M  (OdoBallat),i  c^i  c.4b.
Meningduun,  M  (Eni^gis  dc  Boimi^

Torrtin),  i  &  —  i  c.  4  b.
WaiigeU,  M  (Emegit  de  Bonn),  i  c»

— 1&  4bw
Taoeleri)i, M (Got. F. Lambert,

Godard),  ic— ic.4b.
Coringeham,  M  (Robert  de  Todeni,

Bemgar),  i  c—  i  c.  4 b.
Bransbi,  M  (Robert  de  Todeni,  Beitn-

gar),  I  c.  —  I  c.  4b.
Scakbi  and  Sbratooe,  M  (Colfoan,

Alored),  i  c  —  i  c.  4  b.
Lindode,  M  (Doraad  Malet),  i  c  —

iC4b.
WarageU  ( WakUa  Ingeniator),  i  c.  —

iC4b.
Randebi,  inl.  and  i.  StratOM  (Bp.

Bayeox,  Hbcrt),  i  c.  —  i  &  4b.
Haintone,  M  (Refer  de  Poitoo,  Aeon),

I  c.  — I  c.  abw
Crooestone, M (Hogh  F. Baldric,

Hamelin),  1  c  —  i  c.  4  b.
Tedforde,  M  (Got.  F.  Lambert,  Wal-
ter), I  c.  —  I  c  4  b.
Binnibroc,  M  (Oibem  pet),  i  c.  —  i  c

Oiteniedebi,  M  QMdo  de  Ciedn,
Vitalis),  I  c  —  a  c  4  b.


O  2


5^4


APPENDIX IX


KulnodeU.  M  \Cnt.  IIaf;h,  lUldric),

I  c.  <—  1  c.  4  b.
Chiiebi,  M  ^Wklo  dc  Credim),  i  c—

I  c.  4  b.
Laii);etone,  2  M  ^Drogo  de  Rcoicfc,

(ieoffrey  ,  1  c.  —  I  c.  4  b.
Fagelcstou,  M  (Robert  Diipcnutor.i,

I  c  —  I  c.  4  b.
Widcale  \  Kayiicr  de  Brinoii\  1  c.  —

I  c.  4  b.

Nfachetonc,  M  (AD«cot',  I  c.^  1  c.  4b.
<'laiiH>l,  M  ,Hp.  Iteyenx^  1  c. —  1  c.

Somerdebi,  M .Walter  de  Aincatt,

Kaynald  ,  3  c.  —  J  c.  4  b.
Hiboldestow,  M  (St.  Peter  de  Bure,

Gilbert  ,  »c.  —  3  c.  4 b.
Cabume,  M  {Uo  TailleboU,  Ro|«er  »

a  c  —  3  c.  4  b.
Kilingcham,  M  ^Koger  de  Foitoa,  Ant-

chitil,  3  c. —  3c  4  b.
Wilgebi,  M :Wido  de  Reinbndciut,

Iii|*clram  -,30.  —  j  c  4  b.
Glantham,  M Ivo  Taillebob,  Kam-

frid  \  a  c.  —  a  c.  4  b.
Ilecbelince, M Alored  of  IJncoln,

Heroard  ,  a  c  —  a  c.  4  tiw
Wilchetooe,  a  M  ^(>do  HalUt.).  ac

—  a  c.  4  b.
Hliburg, M .Geoffrey cle Wirce,

Robert  ,  a  c.  —  a  c  4  b.
HtKopetorp,  3  M  .B|x  narhaiii,3iiicn\

a  c.  —  a  c.  4  b.
Frantune,  M  ^Wido  de  Credoo;,  s  c.

^  J  c.  4  b.
Oretbi,  M Norman  de  Adreci,  Geof-
frey ,4b. —  I  c.
Stan  tone,  M  .Roger  de  Toitou,  Roger] ,

4  b.  —  I  c.
Hruoe,  M Robert  dc  Sutford,  (;cof-

frey,  4  b.  —  i  c.
Catebi,  J  M Roger  de  rohoa  ,  4  bw  —

I  c
Kolintone,  M Kp.  Durham,  Nigel  ,

4  b. —  I  c.
( jlentturde.  Nf Rc^toM  ,  4  K  —  1  c
Stochc»,  M  f.  (irantham Drogo  de

Rcurere.  Colegrim  .  4  b.  —  1  c.
C'hercheU, M Alnrcd  of  Lincoln;, i

4  b.  —  I  c.  '

Auctorp  Robert  de  Todeni,  Gonfrid  , '

4  It.  —  I  c.
Sualun,  M Ro(*er de  Puiton. \Vi-

mund  t  4  b.  ~  I  c.  |

AM.bcbi.  M H|).  liayeat,  Ilbert  ,  4b.

-  i  c.  '  I
Ikiitnnc,  M  u  ( irantham Roljeit  de ■

Staitiiid.  tirfiHrry  ,4  b.  —  I  «:.
rhctrHi,  Nf Krne^ift  ilc  llorun,  Ttir- I
ktii.  ,  ih.  —  1  c.  i


.  4C


.  at


WtthaM.M.RadaU

ab.— ic.
AbwBC,  M  (WilltaM  4e  taci.

nuui\  4  c.  —  I  c  a  bk
Xofwaiwhi.  M  J««  TaflMas

AcbcwU, M ^CmdKmj  4r V

WaMtti\  ac.  4b. ^  ic  4^
Rodcwdlc.  a  M  (Aland  «f

GIca),  iC4bk  — ac^  4K
Caaak  a^  mmcht^^  a  M

Gotefrtd;,  iC4b-^ac4k
Cratan*  a  M (.Ratevt  4t

Bania),4h.*lc.4K
Repowhalep  M (Aland  af

Uodla\4h.^  ic.  4fck
Gafaiaadtnqs  M  JadiA,  X^ai ,4^

DBoelMua.M(Radalfri^wHa^ .

4b.—  I  c.  4b.
Saalaa, M  (Cat.  AIm\  4  b.  —  I  c  4b
BoUabroe,  M (Ivo  T

Sada4ne,  M  ;Walltf  4e

Tite,  a  Sfalli^a 1«o  Ti

ac— J
Croft,  .M  :GUbafft  dc  Cmm

llcrpcaw^le,  4  M Gaa.  F.

ac  —  j
Hlkafeli,  a.  Corbi  Bp.

t«f ),  a  c  —  1
Uoealoac, M '^Ida da

Alaved;.  ac.  — s
Hotnecatfft^ M «K-  1K>'

—  3

llorbeliage.  M  /TaL
ac  — 3

Wtdencp  a. Clachaal
Gaad.Rada»ar:.ac,--3

AfCMM,  M  \o|k  UaaaiB

—  3

Cabama,  M  .H^  F

—  3

Scarcbi  M  .nwaad  Maki .  a  c  -  j

llagctofM  a^ Hiiaaafc, a  V

CfOi.  V,  tamhtn  «  a  c  —  1
Offraa,  E  fdrilM  .GOkaai  da

ac.  —  3
Ualalaoe.  a.  FoldUMgakan

dc  Gaarf,  Aaalia  •  a  c  —  3
Saiebi,  a  M  J«o  TaiBaba^

«c^_— 3  .ji.*_

Irid  .  a  c  —  3
StrowtCBM^ M lltaco  dr

Wiio  ,  a  c.  —  3
C  ocriatoBCi  M  ^BjpL

jc— 3


ac


dt
ac.
at.


APPENDIX  IX


565


Mesaingeham,  M  (St.  Peter  de  Burg,

Williaro),  2  c.  —  3
Fiscartane,  M  (St.  Peter  de  Burg),  3  c.

—  4

Grentewelle, M (Roger de Busli,

Turold),  3  c.  —  4
DentuDe  (or  Huuelle),  M  (Robert  de

Todeni),  3  c.  —  4
Bundcbl,  6  M  (Hugh  F.  Baldric),  3  c

—  4

Torintune, M  (Robert  Dbpeniator),

a  C.  ~~'  A

Toft,  M  (Wido  de  Credun),  3  c  —  4
Chelningholm,  M  (Norman  de  Adreci),

3c.  — 4
Nortchime, M (Robert  de  Todeni,

Ivo),  3c.  — 4

Helpericham,  M  (Robert  de  Ved),  3  c.

—  4

Hamingebi,  M  (Cnt.  Hugh,  Baldric),

I  c.  —  2
Carlcbi, 2 M (Robert de  Statford,

Goisfrid),  i  c.  —  2
Carlebi,  M  (Bp.  Lincoln,  Erchenuuold),

I  c.  —  2
Farforde,  M  (Cnt.  Hugh,  Baldric),  i  c.

—  2

Goldesbi,  M  (Colegrim),  i  c.  —  3
Walcsbi  and  Otesbi,  M  (Ivo  Taille-

bois,  Geoffrey),  i  c. —  2
Aiglestorp, M (Alured  of  Lincoln),

I  c.  —  2
Ringesdunc,  M  (Bp.  Lincoln,  Adam),

I  c.  —  2
Heltone,  M  (Colegrim),  i  c.  —  2
Golse,  M  (Alured  of  Lincoln,  Radulf),

I  c. —  2
Cotes,  M  (Durand  Malct,  Richard),

I  c.  —  2
Chelebi (or Cotes), M (Drogo  de

Bcurere,  Robert),  i  c.  —  2
Witeuuelle  (Rut.),  M (Judith,  Her-
bert), I  c.  —  2
IMchcuorde,  M  ;Colsuan,  William),!  c.

—  2

Widun,  free  M  ;Bp.  Lincoln,  Malger),

I  c.  —  2
Tunbi,  M (Eudo F.  Spirewic), i  c.

—  2

Duninctune,  M  (^St.  Peter  de  Burg),

1  c.  —  2
Walecote,  free  M  (St.  Peter  de  Burg,

Ivo',  I  c.  —  2
IJrcdcstorp, M s. in Westbitham
I)rogo do Bcurere, Ingelran and

Krnulf ,  I  c.  —  2
Chelestomc,  2  M  (Alured  of  Lincoln),

I  c.  —  2
Langetonc,  B.  Butiate  (Robert  Dispen-

sator),  I  c.  —  2


Bastone,  M  (St.  Gnthlac  of  Croyland),

I  c I  2
Bardenai,M(GilbertdeGand),  i  c—  a
Snardesforde,  M  (Bp.  Durham,  Col-

suan),  I  c.  —  3
Stimblebi, M (Drogo de Benrere,

Goisfnd),  i  c.  —  a  c.  a  b.
Wiuelestoip,  M  (Ivo  Taillebois),  i  c.

—  a  c.  40.

Suerefelt,  M  (Heppo  Balist.),  I  c.  —

ac.  4b.
H(^one,  M  (Wido  de  Credun,  Viu-

lis),  I  c.  —  a  c.  4  b.
Abi,  M  (Bp.  Bayeux,  Wadard),  i  c.

—  a  c.  4  b.

Ceila,  M  (Bp.  Lincoln,  Malger),  i  c.

—  a  c.  4  b.

Suarrebi,  M  (Wido  de  Credun,  Vita-
lb),  I  c.  —  a  c.  4  b.
Coleti,  M  (Roger  de  Poitou,  Roger),

ic4b.  — 3
Esetorp,  M  (Robert  de  Todeni,  Beren-

gar),  ic.  4b.  — 3
Haintone,  M  (Bp.  Bayenx,  Ilbert),

4  b.  —  a  c.
Carlebi,  s.  Edeham  (Gilbert  de  Gand,

Ivo,  Beieonold),  4  b.  —  a  c.
Bacstnne, B. Edeham (Gilbert de

Gand,  Ivo),  4  b.  —  a  c.
Timberlont,  B.  Cherchebi  and  Scape-

iiic  (Heppo  Baliit.,  Sirnnnd),  4  b.

'^~  a  c.
Chime,  M  (K.  William),  4  b.  —  2  c.
Adeuuelle,  M  (St  Peter  de  Burg),  a  c.

—  3  c.  4  b.

Griteforde,  M (Robert de Todeni,

Berengar),  a  c  —  3  c.  4  b.
Hundintone,  s.  Bergebi  (Ivo  Taille-

boifl),  a  c.  —  3  c.  ii  b.
Cudetorp,  t.  W>stbttham  (Drogo  de

Benrere,  Walter  and  Ulric),  2  c.  —

3  c.  4  b.

Suinhope,  M  (Odo  Balist),  2  c.  —  3  c.

4  b.

Fleot  (K.  William),  6  b.  ^  a  c.  4  b.
Stangenow,  s.  Beltesford  (Ivo  Taille-

bois),  a  c.  —  4
Brotulbi,  M  TColsuan),  a  c.  >-  4
Lindude,  a  M  (Alured  of  Lincoln),

a  c.  ^"^  A
Belingei,  M  (Abp.  York,  Walchelin

and  a  sons  of  Snen),  a  &  —  4
Ristone  and  Carletone,  M  (William  de

Perci,  Osbem),  a  c.  —  4
Adelinctune,  s.  Sechebroc?  (Robert

Malet,  Godric),  a  c.  —  4
Osgotebi, M (St. Peter de Burg,

Anschitil),  a  c.  —  4
Schillintune,  free  i.  in  Sc.  (Abp.  York,

Walchelin),  a  c  —  4


566


APPENDIX IX


Akelcy,  M  (Judith),  a  c. — 4
Letsingham,  M  (Bp.  Lincola,  Adam),

3C.  —  4
Abomc^  M  (Robert  dc  Todoki,  Bercn*


—4


Taiintooe,


ared  of  Uncola),  a  c


ISurgelaip  M  (Gilbert  de  Guid,  Goi»-

frid),  2c.  —  4
WaraKcbi.  M  (Geofrn7  Altelin,  Kadolf

Al,)t  J  c.  —  4
Iribi,  M  (DnrxuKl  Malet^  a  c.  —  4
(fOfebetdecherca, M (lip. Lincoln,

Mnlger),  1  c.  —  3
UutiAtc,  M  (Robert  Dispensator),  1  c.

—  3

Merestone,  M (Alurcil of  Lincoln,

Walelricl),  1  c.  —  3
Iliucbi,  M  (Abp.  York.  I  Inch),  1  c.

—  3

Hicham,  s.  and  Inl.  Do4lintunc  (Bald-
win), I  c  —  3

llorbelinge,  M  (Coltoan,  Matthew),
I  c. — 3

llorbelinge,  M  (Abp.  York,  Walter
de  Aincart),  1  c. — 3

Ottone,  M  (GculTrey  de  Wircc),  I  c.

—  3

Wime,  M  (Alnred  of  lincoln,  Gleu),

I  c  — 3
Ule»tanetorp,  M  (Robert  dc  Todenl),

ic  — 3
Scotfttoriic,  Holme,  and  Subbroc,  M

\i  'olftuan),  I  c.  —  3
Cotebi,  M  (K.  WillUm),  1  c-  3
C'afttre  and  Iluromdooe,  M aaid B.

(K.  William),  1  c  —  3
Ixa,  4  M  (Cnt.  AUn,  Robert),  I  c.  —  3
Bortone,  2  M  iCnt.  Alan),  1  c.  —  3
IkHlebi,  M  ((albert  de  Gand,  Rtiger ;

Wido  de  Crednn,  3)  b.  Mike),  I  c.

—  3

Atchebi,  M  (lip.  liaycaa),  I  c.  —  3
l^onninctune,  B.  Drattuoe  Cnt.  Alan),

3c.  — 5
Alchebait.'e,  M  (Ivo  Tailleboi*;,  3  c.

—  5

Carlctunc,  Nf  William  ile  Waienne,
Altlehn),  3c.—  5

I.utlrlnir^'.  ».  Itinoit«roc  (Rubett  dc
Tu«leni.  Bcrcn^ar),  3c.  —  5

Ka«t  I>cpint;r,  5  M  (Godfieyde  Cam-
brat,  2  men^,  1  c.  4  b.  —  i  c.  4 b.

iitcucftbi,  3  M  ;Cut.  Alan,  Wimund).
I  c.  4  b.  —  3  c.  4  l«.

Ibilcburj;.  M (filticft  de  GaiMp,  5  c.

KoUluii^'iham.  M  ^Gilbert  tie  liand  ,
Sr«.lir(>ft'i. M ko!>cit  Malct  ,  4  c.  —  6


Bllfrtu— ,  M  (GObai  4t

EfMft\  4  c  —  (
Gobe,  M  (koMfb  4r  Btew,  VkM%

4U  — ac4K
WiailliytMw,  a.  Tiartirti  (Cm.  f.

Lanbcft,  I«o)«  4  bu  —  a c  4k
SpiwMitwwi,  M  (CaL  Ak^l  ic->

3C.  ab.
Unbci|c^  a  M  (H^fk  F.  >rfdDc]b  ic

-*4C  ah.
AktU,  M  (Cat.  Aka.  rboai:^,  ac-

ac  ah.
GadcMl,  M  (K.  Wai^K  (hL~|c
Torpb  3  M  (lUcRdc  rMMaM  II  -

3C-

Coacnhaa,  3  M  CWiUm  4t  KnX

3  c  — 5  c.  4  h.
Graebl,  M  (Ahp.  Yock,  «j^'«

ac  — 4c.  4faL
Si.  Maiy,  Slow,  M  :Bp.  liariih  ,ic

—  3C4h.
WaktoDc  a^ Bodchi.  i^  m  C^

(Goc  F.  Laahcrt.  Ra|Mf^4h^-

3c
Agctorae,  a  M  (Abp.  Vock.

I  c.— |C.  f  bL
CarleCaac,  M  (SMNUbnad,  ^

6b.  — 3c.4bu
liiathamf,  &  Iliitiaimi  Hi

BwK.Sa«alo).4bL-|&ak
HachcnliatbaM. «r  UmiI^  ft  H

(Cat.  Aba.  EmIo).  j  c—  fc  «b
ScaoiMe,  U  (GUbcrt  4t  Gmi^  ac

-7
Scolave,  a  M  (Sl  IVlcff  4r  9mg\  4<-

Wiatriagcbai^  M  (Cflbm  4r

Braartaof.  M  (Waliav  4t

WnlhiaccilcM,  M  (JadMb,  H^b^  1  c

Herdotoip,  M  (Rob«t  Vm^m^m .

3c.— 6
Uecham.  3  M  (CM.  Ili«k  w^a  ^

Sl  Saviow;,  jc  — > 4
Bcningardcall  ItoTi

3c-«
Nortaae,  laL  a^  a.  S

Bp.  LaaooU,  ■«•  «l  haV  I  c  —  •
Buniellc.  M  :AaM«  ,  jc— ft
DualactaBc,  a.  HiktUtt  I  Jim  Tm^

hoia  .  3  c.  —  ft
WiaelciMc,  M  (GodiMv  4t  i«»-

Ual  ,3c.*ft
Itnme.  M  \Ogn  Mto  .  a  c  —  f
Chcoehi,  M ^ll|iL  UBoab^

I  c  —  5
tjicuellr,  M (Cac Hack.

2C —  «


APPENDIX  IX


567


Bitham,M(DrogodeBeiirere),  a  c— 5
Toreswe,  a  M  (Alured  of  Lincoln),

a  c  —  5
Carletnne  Hd.,  M  (Drogo  de  Beu-

rcrc),  a  c  —  5
Holobech  and  Copolade,  s.  Gadenai

(Cnt.  Alan,  Landric),  a  c.  —  5
Lessintone,  M  (Abp.  York,  Herbert),

ac.  —  5
Corbi,  M  (Bp.  Line,  Walter),  a  c  —  5
Witenai,  M  (Hen.  de  Ferieres,  Sas-

walo),  a  c.  —  5
Stainfelde,  M  (Wm.  de  Perd),  i  c  —4
Scallebi  and  Stratone,  M  (Gos.  F.

Lambert,  Baldric),  i  c.  ^  a  c.  3  b.
Caditon,  a  M  (Bp.  Durham,  Turstin),

I  c — 4
Medricesham, M (Sortebrand), i  c

—  4

Stratone,  M  (Bp.  Bayeox,  Ilbert),  x  c

—  4

Dodingtonc,  M  (St.  Peter  of  West-
minster), I  c.  —  4
Adelingetone, a M (Berengar de

Todeni),  i  c.  —  4
Lactone,  M  (K.  William),  6  b.  —  4  c.
Normanebi,  M  (Drogo  de  Bemere,

Gozelin),  i  c.  —  4  c.  a  b.
Staintone, s. Randebi (Rannnlf or

St.  Waleric),  x  c.  —  4  c.  a  b.
Cherchebi  and  Scapewic,  M  (Heppo

Halist.),  a  c.  —  5  c.  4  b.
Gernebam, M (Radolf Pagenel),

3  c.  4  b.  —  7
Evedune,  s.  Eslaforde  (Bp.  Lincoln,

Osmund,  1 1  b.),  i  c.  4  b.  —  5
Gettane,  M  (K.  William),  i  c.  4  b.  —  5
Ferebi,  M  (Gilbert  Tison,  Anschitil),

I  c.  —  4  c.  4  b.
Estrccale,  s. Bolinbroc  (Ivo  Taille-

bois), I  c  —  4  c.  4  b.
Blochesham,  M  (Roger  dc  Poiton),  i  c.

4l>-  — 5
Roxebi,  M  (Radulf  Pagenel,  Herbert),

3  c.  2  b.  —  6
Beltone, 2 M (Geoffrey  de  Wirce),

I  c.  —  4c.  6b.
Grantham^  M  (Cnt.  Hugh),  4  c.  —  8
Harewe,  M  (Drogo  de  Beurere),  4  c.

—  8

Binnibroc, M (Robert de Todeni,

Herengar),  4  c.  —  8
Luzebi,  M  (Gilbert  de  Gand,William),

5  c-  —  9
Beltesford, M (Ivo  Taillebois),  5  c.

—  9

Edeham,  M  (Gilbert  de  Gand),  5  c.

—  9

Haconesbi  and  Stentwith,  M  (Heppo

IJalist.},  2  c.  —  6


Medrioesbam,  a.  Bzmnztone  (Walter

de  Aincnrt,  Wintiehard),  a  c.  —  6
Lavintone,  M  (Abp.  York,  Rmnniilf),

at  —  6
Clachetbi  and  Nonnanesbii  4  M  (Ivo

TaUlebois,  Hugh),  10.-6
Gainetborg,  M  (Geoffrey  de  Wirce,

Rainald),  ac.— 6
Epenrde,  M  (Geoffrey  de  Wirce),  a  c.

—  6

Basingeham,  M  (K.  William),  a  c—  6
Repinghale,  M (Wido  de Credno,

Widald),  I  c.  —  6
Arcsbi,  M  (Bp.  Bayeux,  Wadaid),  i  c.

—  5

Tofte,  M  (Bp.  Bayenx,  Wadard),  i  c.

—  5

Stow,  fl.  Folchingeham  (Gilbert  de

Gand,  Robert),  i  c  —  5
Langetof,  M  (St.  Gnthlac  of  Croy-

Und),  I  c  — 5
Brangewelle,  B.  s.  and  inL  Reichin-

tone  (Geoffrey  Alielin,  a  men),  i  c.

—  6

Little  Pamptone,  M  (Judith,  Nigel),

xc  — 5

Sadstochet  and  Nortstoches,t.  Grant-
ham (K.  William),  i  c— 5

Scamelesbi,  i.  Beltnfbrd  (Ivo  Taille-
bois), ic  — 6

Nochetune,  M  (Norman  de  Adreci),
5  c.  —  Qc  ab.

AdredebC  M  (Goz.  F.  Lambert,  Bal-
dric), 1  c.  —  5  c.  4  b.

Bemodebi,  M  (Cnt.  Hngh,  William),
3  c.  —  7  c.  4  b.

Exentnne,  M  (Judith),  3  c.  —  8

Bodebi,  M  (K.  William),  a  c.  —  7

Bergebi,  M  (Robert  Malet),  5  c. —
10

Rase,  M  (Radnlf  Pagenel),  4  c.  —  9

Ulaetbi,  a  M  (Emegis  de  Bunm),  4  c.

—  9

Wichale,  M  (Bp.  Bayenx,  Ilbert),  x  c.

—  6

Walecote,  M  (St.  Peter  de  Burg,  4  c. ;

Gilbert  de  Gand,  jc),  x  c  — 0
Sibold,  8.  Bolinbroc  (Ivo  TaiUebots),

IC  —  6
Gonfordebi, B. and s. Grantham

(King  William),  1  c.  —  6
Fodrebi  and  Tnrgrebi,  s.  Binnibroc

(Robert  de  Todeni,  Berengar),  x  c.

—  6

East  Depinge,  3  M  (Godfrey  de  Cam-

brai,  a  men),  a  c.  ^  7
Stapleforde,  M  (Judith,  Osbem),  a  c.

—  7

Dunesbi,  M (Bp.  Lincoln,  Radulf),

ac.  —  7


568


APPENDIX  IX


Dflfintone,  Nf  v^Alnrcd  of  Lincoln',  a  c

Tombi and Alwuldebi, M ^Bp.

Ha)CDX,  Ubeit.if  a  c.  —  7c.  3  b.
Hag  and  lirandnne,  a.  Folcfaingehain

(Gilbert  de  Gand,  DerinC',  4  b. —

6  c.
Wahhaiu,  M  (Cnt.  Alan),  4  c. —9c.

4  b.
Ak-hinton, M (William de Pcfd,

Kulco  ,  J  c.  —  7  c.  4  b.
I'rulc,  M  i^Gcofirey  de  Wirce,  Abbot

of  St.  Gemano\  I  c.  —  7
Welletone,  M  ■  Hp.  Lincoln,  6  canaiii]t,

5 c. ^  II
Schcuelticbi,  s.  liardcnai (iilbert  de

Gand  ,  3  c.  — 9
Overtone  and  Stratone,  M  (Judith',

3c.  — 9
Atchebi, M '.Kadulf Tai^cnel  , 3  c.

—  8

llecbintune,  H.  inl.  and  a.  Torp  (Gil*

bert  de  Gand ;,  a  c.  —  8
Franctone,  li.  Draitone  ;Cnt.  Alan  .

ac  — 8
Kcschintone,  a  M (Geoffrey  AUclin

and  his  nephew},  a  c.  ^-  8
l<i]>esUi,  M  (Robert  de  Todeni,  Ivo.,

a  c.  —  8  c.  4  b.
Ifurtun, M  'Wido  de  Credon;,  5  c.

—  II  c.  4 b.

Wadintune,  M dit.  IIu(;h.,  4c. — 11
Horcheaton.  S.  and  inl.  Keitooe  (liU-

bert  de  (iand  ,  t  c.  4  b.  —  8  c.  ^  ti.
(■atenai  and  Utun  (to  Ca^re ;  King

William  ,  a  c.  —  9
llacam,  free  M  Jip.  Lincoln.  Hugh',

a  c.  —  9
a  Mcntinge»,  &.  Iklteifurd  ^Ivo  Taille-

Uii*  ,  a  c.  —  9
Suavetone,  M  ^Cultoan  »  3  c.  —  10
Wcstbithani,  M  -.iMigo  de  Ikurere  ,

3c.  —  10
Titc.  M K.  William  ,  ic.^8
Schircbec.  R  I)raituiic  ^^'nt.  Alan,,

I  c. — »
Oancwelle, M (iilbert de Gaad,

limffrey  ,  1  c.  —  S
liriixholiiicft.  ami  tjil.  Fjif^lcbi  Robert

lie  Todeiii,  Ikrrengar  ,  1  c  —  8c.  4  U


JC-II


IC.

ha


NctdhMB,  M  ( K.  H
WdlingvMK  M  (K.  H

ali.\Bc— a
Haltu  ud  Stqii,  a.

TaUlebab),  1  c^f
llache.  M  (Cat.  Ahmj,  4  c  ~  ii
Apkbi,  RMehl.

dcbwii},  4C— It
Ucningtu. U  (Cat.

IC3I1.),  5  0 — 11
SpalUBge.  M vivo  Tifflii  11,  «c

—  13
Hale,  a.  Toq» 'Gilbot 4t

Radulf),  3c  — It
Fortanc,  K  liiniHtM<  .Cm

ac  — II
lx>buigehnBi.  IicU.  mad  RAi.  a.  B»

no£fai  (Cm.  Ili«fc.  Ac  .  ac- 11
Wcllebnnc,  M  vKohm  Mate,  jc

—  IJC.  ih.
Satrefai,  Unlbi.  DriAat^  k  (iiM^

(CnuH^gh),  ic*-ii
Holm,  M i^Gilfatrt  4e  Omi .  4  c

LcnnU,  Btcdcbn,  wd  Sciitei,  1  If
(Bp.  Baycu  ,sc^ijC4k.

Ealaforde,  H  1  Bo^  I  woah  «  |c~  14

linuutuDc,  M  iV'nIiflr  4r  Amm .
ac — 13

RcrtoM.  M  ,IUdBUPliC»d  .Bc- 1 J
M (WMo 4k  ^

ItlnB/.  IC— la

*«* »^  »

VIICR9CD

(Ivo  TatUeboia  ,  1  c  —  la
BcfUac,  M  iGUbcrt  4e  GMi . ;  c -

ijKka.  M  {h^  Uocofca  ,  Jc  *  if
HcrUvcne,  a nod c  Gm^^

o(G.— 1«
HQtndcMCWidoikCRdM .  ic-if
Aauaardefai,  a.  h\

de  Gaod,  RodsU.  jtc  .  4  c  —  if
ChlidMtooe,  M  (K.  Win  .4c-if
SukcaofCMifc(K.^iIL*,ac  — jsi.

.SolcaofChifcWtoM
IC--S4C.  aK
I  .SokcaofHo

I )  c  ibL  —  Si  c-  4  ^


K. 1*1.01  GH-TKAMb HELD BY TgWAXTS  OKLT


Kau  :l>urand  Malct),  —  I  k
Ai^lcia. b. iiohiitur.e ^ William dc

Tcrti  ,  —  lb.
(  btliani.  It.  ixil.  iSulnfurdc  {iioi.  F.

l.-imljcrt  ,  -  -  I  b.
Ki(n.:i.r,  M  'liu  TaiUcbiJU]  t  —  lb.


r.  &  inL  CiooU  >

Adrccs\  —  I  bk
Rodowclie,  k  NdclMw  vl

—  tb.
Cabome,  k  CmemM

cuin,  Glc«\  — 1  L.


APPENDIX  IX


569


Cletharo,  s.  Mameltune  (St.  Peter  de

Cnningesbi,  t.  HacberdingehAm
(Drogo  de  Bcurcre),  —  i  b.

Marchebi,  s.  Aschebi  ?  (Goz.  F.  Lam-
bert), —  lb.

BargTcde,  s.  Stnitone  (Bp.  Bayeux,
Ilbert),  —  I  b.

Salebi,  B.  Clachesbi  (Gilbert  de  Gand,
Rademer),  — i  b.

Mundebi,  B.  Wilgebi  (GUbert  de
Gand),  —  i  b.

CocrintoD,  s.  Cadinton  (Rayner  de
Brimou),  —  1  b.

Andrebi,  s.  Aschebi  (Goz.  F.  Lam-
bert), —  lb.

Lenesbi,  s.  Wiuelesbi  (Drogo  de
Bcurere),  —  i  b.

Meringhe,  s.  Scrivelesbi  (Robert  Dis-
pensator),  —  i  b.

Gnmesbi,  B.  Wiuelesbi  (Drogo  de
Beurere),  —  i  b.

Alesbi,  B.  s.  in  Cotes  (Alured  of
Lincoln,  Bernard),  —  i  b.

Hedebi,  B.  inl.  Walecote  (Norman
de  Adreci),  —  i  b.

Herdetorp,  B.  Cale  (Endo  F.  Spire-
wic),  —  lb.

Screobi,  s.  Westrecale  (Eudo  F.
Spire  wic),  —  lb.

Tric.s.  Burg  (EudoF.Spirewic),  — i  b.

Itrcbi,  B.  Wiueslesbi  (Drogo  de
Beurcre\  —  i  b.

Bechebi,  B.  Torp  (Hugh  F.  Baldric,
Gilbert),  —  i  b.

Chinetorp,  B.  Waragebi  (Eraegis  de
Burun),  —  i  b.

Lobingcham,  s.  Cotes  (Drogo  de
Ikurere),  —  i  b.

Sualun,  B.  inl.  Hechelinge  (Alured  of
Lincoln,  Bernard),  —  1  b.

Haberdirigham  s.  in  Luzebi  (Gilbert
de  Gand),  —  i  b.

Colebi,  s.  Haltone  (Cnt.  Hugh,  Wil-
liam F.  Nigel),  —  I  b.

Crochinton,  s.  Caditon  (Bp.  Durham),

—  I  b.

Bechelinge,  s.  Blesebi  (Goz.  F.  Lam-
bert), —  I  b.
Stalinl^rg,  inl.  Linberge  ( Abp.  York),

—  I  b.

Osgotebi,  M  (Si ward,  pst.),  —  I  b.
Toreswe, M f,Ivo  Taillebois, Odo),

—  1  b.

Hulethani, M (Robert  de  Statford),

—  I  b.

Brachelesbi,  M  (Bp.  Durham,  Nigel),

—  1  b.

Lobingcham,  M  (Ivo  Taillebois, Odo),

—  I  1>.


Cotes,  M  (Goz.  F.  Lambert),  —  i  b.
Hodebi,  s.  Waleoote  (St.  Peter  de

Buig,  Ivo),  —  a  b
Eienmetorp, B. Metsingeham (St.

Peter  de  Btu^,  WillianoO,  —  a  b.
Burg,  s.  Gtmnebi  (Eodo  F.  Spirewic),

—  3  b.

Wenflet,  B.  inl.  Burg  (Eado  F.  Spire-

wic),  —  a  b.
Herdetorp,  s.  Draitone  (Cnt  Alan),

—  3  b.

Coningesbi, inl. Tedintone (Cnt

Hugh),  —  a  b.
Wemflet,  B.  Croft  (Gilbert  de  Gand,

Radulf),  —  a  b.
Stmbi, fl. Chinetorp (Rayner de

Brimou),  —  3  b.
Echintone,  s.  Eslaforde  (Bp.  Lincoln),

—  3  b.

Pichenorde,  a.  in  PicbenordeM  (Col-

snau),  —  a  b.
Lopeham,  t.  and  B.  Lea  (Cnt.  Alan),
' — 3b.
Tedlagestorp, a.  Hotbt  (Alured  of

Lincoln),  — -  a  b.
Bercham, a. Edeham (Gilbert de

Gand),  —  a  b.
Bintham, s. Cretun (Godfrey de

Cambrai),  —  a  b.
Nongetone,  computatur  com  ecclesia

de Grantham (Bp.  Oimond,  St.

Ulfran),  —  a  b.
Strubi,  s.  Haintone  (Roger  de  Poiton,

Acun),  ^  a  b.
Laugetone,  s.  Waragebi  (Emegis  de

Burun),  —  a  b.
Summercotes  (Roger  de  Poitou),  —

3  b.
Walecote, B. Colebi (Emegit de

Burun,  John),  —-3  b.
Roxebi,  B.  Aplebi,  Risebi  and  Saleclif

(Gilbert  de  Gand,  Robert),  —  3  b.
Bechelinge,  s.  Wichingebi  (William

de  Perci,  Robert^  —  3  b.
Lobingeham,  s.  Abnme  William  de

Perd,  Norman),  —  3  b.
Brocheleibi,  a.  Neuhuie  (Alured  of

Lincoln),  —  3  b.
Tedlagestorp,  s.  Calnodetbi  (Chetel-

bem),  —  3  b.
Geresbi,  s.  Eslaforde  (Bp.  Lincoln),

—  3  b.

Mundebi,  B.  Endrebi  (Eudo  F.  Spire-

wic),  —  3  b.
Herdetorp,  B.  Calnodesbi  (Eudo  F.

Spirewic),  —  3  b.
Stith,  t.  Holobech  Copelade(Widode

Credun),  —  a  b.
Scotstome, Holme and Sudbroc?

(Coliuan),  —  3  b.


57°


APPENDIX  IX


Terintone,  s.  Haintone  (Alared  of
Lincoln,  Gozelin),  —  a^  U

Terintone,  s.  Sti^eswaltt  (Alured  of
Lincoln,  Gozelin),  —  a)  b.

Haneurde,  s.  Soeiteforde  (Roger  de
Poitoa,  Tnrold),  —  a  b.

Cotes,  s.  Sndcotes  (Bp.  Bayenx), — a  b.

Tisteltone,  s.  Coleby  (Judith,  Hogh),

—  ab.

Rase, B.  inl.  Lindude (Alured of

Lincoln),  —  a  b.
Wintritone,  B.  Roxebi  (Radulf  Page-

nel),  —  a  b.
Trie,  8.  Calnodesbi  (Eudo  F.  Spire-

wic),  —  a  b,
Aycle,  8.  Navenebi  (Durand  Malet),

—  ab.

Ingham,  M  (Ernnin),  —  a  b.
Brochelesbi,  M  (Ivo  Tailleboit,  Nigel),

—  a  b.

Mortune,  M  (Ivo  Taillebois\  —  a  b.
Alforde,M  (William  TaiUebosc),— a  b.
Estrecale,  M  (Bp.  Durham),  —  a  b.
Dresbi,  M  (Roger  de  Poitou),  —  a  b.
Greibi,M  (Robert deTodeni,Gun£rid),

—  ab.

Hazebi,  M  (Waldin  Brito,  Godwin),

—  ab.

Neteltone,  M (Emegis  de Bumn),

—  ab.

Dreistorp,  M  (Eudo  F.  Spirewic,  Ivo),

—  ab.

Wintrintone,  a  M  (Seward,  pat.),  — a  b.
Cherchebi, M (Cut.  Alan,  Godric),

—  a  b.

Chinetorp,  M  (Ivo  Taillebois,  Odo),

—  a  b.

Tuiforde,  s.  Nortnuine  (Abp.  York),

—  a  b.

Cherchebi,  inl.  Ringetdene  (Robert

de  Todeni,  Ivo),  — 3  b.
Chillebi,  s.  Snarrebi  (Wido  de  Crednn,

Aschil),  —  3  b.
Odenebi,  B.  Nortchelesei  (Cut.  Alan),

-3  b.
Suavitone,  B.  Carltorp  (Robert de

Veci),  —  3  h.
Ilolobech and Copolade, B.  Flee

(Cnt.  Alan),  —  3  b.
Seurebi,  B.  Nortchelesei  (Cnt  Alan),

—  3  b.

Slodcbi,  B.  Wilgebi  (Gilbert  de  Gand,

Roger),  —  3  b.
Hechintune, s. Burtun (Wido de

Credun),  —  3  b.
Roscebi,  s.  Wintrinton  (Norman  de

Adreci),  —  3  b.
Sumerdebi,  s.  Lea  (Cnt.  Alan),  — 3  b.
Tednlfbi,  B.  inl.  Flichesburg  (Norman

de  Adreci),  —  3  b.


Bnrgiede,  s.  Randebi  (Ranniilf  de  St

Waleric),  —3  b.
TonedeU,  s.  Rigesln  (Bp.  Bayenz),

Nentoiie, a. Ingeham (Rayner de

Brimoa),  —  30.
<alia'Tistdtime,  s.  Tiiteltime  (Aimed

of  Lincoln,  Glen),  —  3  b.
Mingfham,  i.  f'K^lnmgWam  (Noman

de  Adreci),  —  3  b.
Alchebuge,  B.  Walecote  (St  Peter  de

Buig,  Ivo),  —  3  h,
Ha^eoebi,  K  Weatncale  (£«do  F.

Spirewic),  —  3  b.
Becheliiige,M  (Rogads  Poitou),— 3b
Hagetom,  M  (Maitin),  —  3  b.
Branaewelle,  M  (Aimed  otllnc^ — ^3b.
Rebnme,  M  (Bp.  fJncoln  and  canoos

of  St  Mary's),  —  3  bw
FiliDgeham,  M  (Roger  de  Poitoy,  An-

schitil),— 3  b.
Chinetoip,  M  (Rayner  de  Brimon),

—  3  b.

Cucnalt,  s.  Rodowelle  (Durand  Malet),

—  4b.

Telagestorp,  s.  Mundebi  (Cnt  Alan),

—  4b.

Calnodesbi,  s.  Hardetoip  (Cnt  Alan).

Wenflet,*  B.  Cale(£iido  F.  Spncwic),

--4b.
Lndefoide,  s.  Wichani  (Raynef  de

Brimon),  —  4  b.
Salflatebi,  s.  Caditon  (Bp.  Dniham),

—  4  b.

Osgotebi,  s.  Taueleslu  (Radulf  Pag^
neH,  — ^  b.

Snardesforae,  s.  Rcsne  (Radnlf  P^e-
nel),  —  4  b.

Estow,  s.  Werche  (St.  Peter  de  Bug,
Godfrey),  —4  b.

Griteforde,  s.  Beicheham  (Godfrey  de
Cambrai,  Euremar),  —  4  b.

Opestorp,  8.  Wiuelestorp  (Ivo  Taille-
bois, Odo),  — 4  b.

Wade, ? (Ivo  TaiUebob),  —  4  b

Wadingeham,  s. Wad.  M  (EUun),

—  4  b.

Sudtone,  s.  Hotoft  (Chetelbem),— 4  b.
Bresbi,  s.  Pichenrde  (Bp.  Dnriuun),

—  4b.

Barchestone,  s.  Bdtooe  (Col^giim),

—  4b.

Welletone,  s.  Catebi  (Bp.  Dnbam,

Turstin),  —4  b.
Asuuardebi, s. Marran (Wido  de

Credun),  4  b.
Sudtune,  Dreuistorp,  and  Hcidetoq),

inl.  Rigesbi  (Abp.  York,  Heibot),

—  4b.


APPENDIX  IX


571


Donesbi,  B.  inl.  Riogeidiiiie  (Bp.
LincolD,  Adam),  — ^b.

Dk,  B.  Bnine  (Oger  Bnto),  —4  b.

AsUchebi  and  Avetorp,  B.  Loctone
(Oger  Brito),  —4  b.

Extow,  s.  Edeham  (Gilbert  de  Gand),
-4b.

Slodebi,  B.  inl.  Brunetorp  (Bp.  Dor-
ham,  Nigel),  —  4  h.

Trichingeham,  B.  inL  Neutone  (Bp.


Durham),  —  4  b.

richingi

-4b.


I,  B.


Trichingeham,  B.  Nentone  (Ulniet),


Tnuetorp, B. Beltone (Colcgrim),

-4b.
Lnndetorp, B. Beltone (Colegiim)|

—  4  b.

Bacuurde,  s.  Haintone  (Bp.  Bayeox),

—  4  b.

Ormesbi,  s.  Tesforde  ( Abp.  York,  Gil-
bert),—4b.
Torp,  f.  Basingeham  (King  William),

—  4  b.

Strobi,  s.  Clachesbi  (Gilbert  de  Gand),

—  4  b.

Strobi,  s.  Lechebnme (Cnt Alan),

—  4  b.

Welletone  ( Ansgot),  —  4  b.

Ilacham,  s.  MereCone  (Colsuan,  Wal-
xer\  —  4  b.

Tisteltune  (Godfrey  de  Cambrai,
Gleu),  — 4  b.

Estow,  s.  Witham  (St.  Peter  de  Burg,
Asfort),  —  4  b.

Wicham,  s.  Catebi  (A lured  of  Lin-
coln), —  4  b.

I'artcnai,  Stepinge,  Trie,  and  Burg,
s.  Gnldesmere  (Robert  Dispensator),

—  4  b.

lUochesham,  s.  Branzewelle  (Alured

of  Lincoln),  —  4  b.
Great  I'amptune,  s.  Grantham  (King

William,  Ivo),  —  4  b.
Burtune,  s.  Scantune  (Peter  de  Valon-

gics),?»-4b.
Sualuii, s. and inl. Cucualt  (Abp.

York,  William),  —  4  b.
lladinctone, H.  Abume (Robert  de

TiHleni,  lierengar),  —  4  b.
Westune  and  Multune,  s.  Holobech

and  Copelade  (Wido  de  Credun),

-4b.
Ludcforde,  s.  \\icham  (Hugh  F.  Bal-

tlric  ,  —  4  h.
Tcrncsco,  ?».  Ilegelinge  (Up.  Bayeux,

Wadaril),  — 4  b.
Strubi, s. Haintone (lip. Bayeux),

-4  b.


Sotieie,  inl.  Haintone  (Bp.  Bayeux),

—  4b.

Sndtrie,  £rce  B.  InL  Ulingeham  (Bp.

Lincoln,  Osbem,  pet.),  —4  b.
Moftone,  t.  Comin^oae  (Qger  Brito),

—  4b.

Pochinton,  s.  Cherdiebi  (Cnt.  Alan),

Reretti,  a.  Wichingefai  (WUliun  de

Perct  (Norman),  —  4  b.
Turolnebi,  K  Brane  (Robert  de  Stat-

ford),  —4  b.
TonilfU,  B.  inL Brane  (Aimed  of

Lincoln),  —4  b.
Stow,  a.  Haltnn  and  Stepi  (Cnt  Alan)»

—  4h.

Wintrintooe,  a.  ScaUebi  and  Stiatooe

(Dnrand  Makt),  "4  b.
Witham,  ManneCor,  and  Toftlund,  B.

AdeweUe  t  (St.  Peter  de  Boxg,  Ans-

frid),-4b.
Beltone,  a.  Tudetoip  (Wido  de  Cre-

dnn),  *-4b.
Timbrelund, K Wadhitune (Cnt.

Hngh).  -4  b.
Radbome,  Staintone,  and Wading-

ham,  a.  Snetrebi  (Heppo  BalisL),

—  4b.

Hage  and  Caleabi,  M  (Bp.  Dnrfaam,

William),  — 4  b.
Brune,  M  (Ivo  TaiUeboia,  Odo),—

A^,  M  (Odo  Baliat.),  — 4b.

O^ebi,  Bl  (Roger  de  Poiton,  Geof-
frey),—4b.

Limberge,  M  (Norman  de  Adieci,
Herbert), —4  b.

Chirchebi,  M  (Bp.  Dnrfaam),  —  4  b.

Soinhamatede,  M  (Ragenald),  — 4  b.

Trichingham,  M  (St.  Benedict  de
Ramsey),  — 4  b.

Falingenrde,  M  (Colsuan),  —  4  b.

Draitnne,  M  (Wido  de  Credun),  —

4b.
Hardetorp,  M (Cnt,  Alan,  Endo),

Sl^eti,  M  (Hogfa  F.  Baldric,  Wido,

son-in-law),  —4  b.
Rodewelle,  M  (Aluied  of  Lincoln),

-4b.
Rase,  M  (Roger  de  Poiton,  Mainard),

—  4b.

Estrecale,  M  (Endo  F.  Spiiewic),  —

4  b.
Dodintooe,  M  (Colsaan),  —  4  b.
Doninctune,  D  M  (Cnt.  Alan),  — 4  b.
Habume  and  Nenhnse,  s.  Brochembi

(Emegis  de  Burun),  —  5  b.


1  <


dominium  colitur  et  locator.*


57»


APPENDIX  IX


Cleia, s. Ilrf^lioge (Bp. Htyeox,

WtdarU).  —Kb.
Alston, 1. Bercbchani (Godfrey dc

Cambrmi;,  — 5  b.
Carletooe,  •.  Scantone (Gilbert  dc

(;and},  5  b.
Stn>bi and Maltebi, 1. CUchetbi

(Hugh  y.  iSaldnc,  \Vido\  5  b.
llaintiNic,  k.  Toq>  (Abp.  York,  Wil*

Ham .,  —  5  b.
(mldcsbi,  M  f  Afichil).  —  5  b.
(ilcnteurdc,  .M  iManin\  — 5  b.
Tatcnai.  M  (Ivu  TatlleboU,  llcrmer),

—  5  b.

Ilcchintnnc, s. Catorp?  ( Robert  de

Veci;.  —6k
Sutreia,  )i.  iul.  in  Ulingchau  ((jilbert

de  Gand\  —6  b.
Kuietrebi,  ».  Nonnanebi  (Ivo  Taille-

boit;,  —  6  b.
llenletorp, U.  inL Iturg  (Eiido  F.

SpirewiC,  — 6  b.
Sudtone,  ».  Hurg  (Eudo  F.  Spirewicj,

—  6b.

Chiicbi,  M soke  in  Oigotcbi,  thei»n),

-6b.
Hillefelt  and  Westbi,  M Kobett  de

Sutford.  Kasain;,  —  6  b.
Laitooe,  M  ^  Roger  dc  Foitoo  ,  —6  b.
rucnalt,  .M  •  Seuaid),  —6  k'
Nortcbelestei, M (Cnt. Alan\ —

6  b.
Ucr|ie»welle,  M '  Ab|>.York,\ViUUm),

—  6b.

I.octooe, fs Auctorp (Robeft «le

Todeni,  (iunfritl;,  —  1  c.
llabumc,  k.  Cheluingebolm  •Nurman

de  Adrcci  ■,  —  1  c.
Hochebalc,  «.  llamingeM  ;IIagh  F.

Baldric  .  —  I  c.
Avetorp*  B.  Chiiebi  ;\Vido  de  C re-
dan \  —  I  c.
('ucnalt,  B.  Caliunic  ^IIui;h  F.  Bal-

«!ric  ,  —  I  c
Muntlebi, B. WilgiU Gilbert de

Ganil»  R tiger, ,  —  1  c
llc]|)eiichani, k. Wiucleitur]) (Ivo

TaiUebuiH,  ikW„  —  1  c.
Waile,  s.  Achnbi Wiitu  de  ('retlttn;,

—  I  c.

Ilaciumbi,  %.  I)iineftU Bp.  1  incoln  .

—  I  c.

BrctcbelnU, ». Stalinburg Ncirmao

dc  Adrcvi  ,  —  I  c
AMThctii,  h,  Ragcnchiirp M.  I'eter  de

Buijj  .  —  I  c.
( fcrmundtorp.  1.  Cuucnbam  (William

dc  I'crci  ,  —  I  c.
Vlobi.  v.'\Vrllr (.illicrt .le  <;and,

Kadcnici  ,  —  1  c.


CoCct,&  U.
nbcft).  —  ic.

DRIClOni  S*  C<

—  le.
Sttdtoae,  •.$
wlc>»  —  I  e.


Ikrcvwfe.  n  UlhgAiM  lAftffL  Taft.

WOllui),  ^  I  c
Aichefai.  ft.  Wr

—  ic
BrigeUi,  a.  AchnH  ( WU«  dt  I

—  IC.
Ilaidaic,  a. Wj

Hwu},  —  I  c
.SialiDbvrg.  isL

Bavm),  — 1  c.
Cr«MMcllc. a »L Fi

(GUbcft 4e Gm4,

IC.

Cooudt,  k WiMlrwini i,i

UncoInX  — I  c
lloctnc  (Sl  tav  4r  mmg,  C

pi«),  —It
Cintciofd, a. f

Gutd\  —  I  c
CatcMi,ial.

lo«,  Enii).  —  I
ScouioffBe.  llobM,

nan\  —  i  c
.Mallctorp,  B.

dc  Brimm\  ^  1  c
Akbi,  a. RifoM ,Bf.

IC

llegfacllMc.  CWb. Md T«^M«.

i.  Stalagtbcif  (Abp.  ToA.  Hm

bcrt),  — it
Mortne,  a

'  llcppo  BalHL  .  ^  t
Cropcriii  — d  Cwwti,  B,  toL  O

NoHMUi  4e  Adnci  .  —  I
llacoMibi  aad  SioBiaat,  1

baa  Uftf  BM»:,^ic.
llacbcfdta^Mi.  a. II

Aba,  Eadb'..  —  1
Torp,  ial.  aad  k  Cl

baa),  —  I  c.
PiDoebcc.  a.  HolobciA  mA  C*

Wide  dc  TicdM  .  *  i  c
Undctorp, to  cbwck  «f

(Bp.  OoMMl:.  —  I  c
Maitooe^t.  Cblpdbcbi  {Wfk

—  I  c
Martooe.  •.  CMickcbi  .bfo  V.

«k).  —  It
Deabclbi.  a.
Cirdn;,  —  1 1


APPENDIX  IX


573


Siuiliin,  s.  Grosbi  (Bp.  Bayenx),  ^  i  c
Sudcotet,  s.  Winelesbi  (Drogo  de  Ben-

ntc),  ^  I  c.
ReresbiyS.  Siielesliiiit(Got.  F.  Lambert,

William  dePerd).— I  c.
Onstoq),  Welle,  Hcchintooe,  Conun-

tooe,  s.  Cberchebi  (K.  William),  —

I  c.
Alforde,  s.  Welle  (Gilbert  de  Gand,

Rademer),  —  i  c.
Scapeoic,  t.  Chirchebi  and  Scapeoic

(Heppo  Balist),  —  i  c.
Besebi,  s.  Waltham (Cnt.  Alan},— i  c
Ormetbi,  t.  Widnn  (Bp.  Lincoln,  Mai-

ger),  — ic.
Fudingeurde,  s.  Filingeham,  t.  Sper-

lintone,  %.  Lageham  (Coltuan),—

I  c.
Weranghe,  s.  Draitooe  (Cnt.  Alan),

—  ic

Other  Rase,  t. Lindude  (Ainred  of

IJncoln),  — >  I  c.
Aletorp, f. Beltone (Geoffrey de

Wirce),  —  i  c.
Burg,  8.  Calnodetbi  (Endo  F.  Spire-

wic),  —  I  c.
5>epingeham,  s.  Avetorp  (Robert  de

Todeni,  Gonfrid),  —  i  c.
Quadhevcringe,  inl.  Ceila  (Bp.  Lincoln,

Malger). —  i  c.
Morton, B. inl. Haconesbi (Oger

Brito),  —  I  c
Horsitone,  t.  Belteiford  (Ivo  Taille-

bois),  —  X  c.
Eslaforde,  s.  Cominctune  (St.  Benedict

de  Ramiev),  —  i  c
Canenic  (Colegrim),  —  i  c
Hrezbi  and  Saprctone,  s.  Bergebi  (Ivo

Tailleboit\  —  i  c
Burtone, inl. Branzbi (Robot de

Todeni,  Berengar), —  i  c.
Borton,  t.  Welletone  (Bp.  Lincoln),

—  I  c.

lirrcabam and Eston, B. Witham,

Mannetorp,  and  Toftlond  (St  Peter

dc  Burg,  A»ford), —  i  c
Te<iain)i,  t.  Normanebi (Drogo  de

Beurcrc),  —  i  c.
Stow,  s.  Wilingeham  (Goz.  F.  Lam-

l>ert), —  I  c.
Amccotcs,  s.  Cmle  (Geoffrey  de  Wirce,

Abbot  of  St.  Gemano),  —  i  c.
Kvetlunc,  H.  Chcrchebi  ;K.  William),

I  c.
Lanj;etonc, 8. Waragebi (Waldin

Inj^cniator:,  —  i  c.
M.iltctorp,  H.  Wcllc  .Gilbert  dc  Gand,

kadcnier -, —  I  c.
Siitlctilunt,8.  Wichingcbi  ^William  de

Tcrci,  Waldin  , —  i  c


Slodebi,  6.  inl.  Clacheibi  (Gilbert  de

Gand.  Rademer),  —  i  c
Altdngeham, ■. Cocrintdie (Bp.

Bayeax,  Ubert), —  i  c
Botieimicy a. aad B. inL Ostone

(Geoffrer  de  Wirce),  —  i  c.
Maltebi,  M  (Cnt  Alan,  Endo),  —  i  c
Doditttone,  M  (Bp.  Bayeu,  Baldric),

—  IC

Westbi,  M  (Cnt.  Alan,  Colegrim),  —

IC.

Bug,  M  (Archil),  — I  c

Ingdbam,  M  (Rc^gnr  de  Poitoa,  Main-

ard),  —  IC
Wadingrham,  M  (Elfain),  —  i  c
Normaoettoo,  M  (Bp.  Bayenx,  Ubat),

—  ic

Neteltooe,  M  (Roger  de  Poitov,  BUm-

card), —  I  c
Elesham, M  (Bp.  Bayenx, Ilbert),

—  ic

Torp,  pro  M  (Eodo  F.  Spirewic),— i  c
HoditDoe,  M  (Colegrim,  Fredgb),—

ic
Kaschingetorp,  M  (Bp.  Bayem^  Snen),

—  IC

Ulestanetorp,  3  M  (Robert  de  Todeni),

—  I  c

Forebi,  a  M  (Bp.  Doriuun,  Tnntin),

—  I  c

TandcM,  M  (Radolf  Pageoel),^  i  c
Cretm,  M  (Godfrey  de  Cambnd),—

I  c
Waleoote,  M (Noimaii de  Adrad,

Robert),  —  i  c
OflSntOQe,  M  (Alu«d  of  Uacdii),—

ic
Torp  and  East  torp,  M  (Ulniet),  —  I  c
Helmeswelle,  M  (Bp. Bayenx,  Lo-

•oard),— -I  c
Golse,  M  (Hngh),  —  I  c
Groaebi,  M  (tbcgn),  —  i  c
SchilUoUme,  M  (Cade),  —  I  c
Stigeswalt, M  (Aimed  of  Linoob,

Sward),  — I  c
Somerdebi, M (Goa. F. Lambert,

Rayner),  —  i  c
SchilBntmie,  M  ( Wido  de  Cicdaii),  —

IC

Lechebome,  M (Roger  de  Pdtoo^

Girard),  —  i  c
Gieibi,  a.  Dmebi  ( Abp.  York,  Hugh),

—  I  c  I  b.

Heretorp,  inl.  Eitiecale,  Heteihi,  and
Grdbi  (Bp.  Doriiam),  —  i  c  i  bw

Temitooe,  a.  Bechellnge  (Roger  de
Poitoa),  —  I  c  I  b.

Hontmie,  s.  Bleiebi  (Gos.  F.  Lam-
bert, Herman),  —  i  c  i  h.

Brwie,  M  (Snen),  —  i  c  i  bw


574


APPENDIX  IX


Caschingetorp, s. Bcrgcbi (Robert

Malet,  Ivo),  —  i  c.  a  b.
Wenflet,  B.  inl.  Screubi  (Bp.  Durham,

Bundo  and  Radnlf),  —  i  c.  a  b.
Hnnelle,  s.  Torp  (Gilbert  de  Gand),

—  I  c.  a  b.

Tite,  B.  Luctone  (K.  William),  —  I  c.

ab.
Ingoldesbi,  s.  Bergebi  (Robert  Malet),

—  1  c.  a  b.

Samerlede,  s.  Aldulnebi  (Bp.  Bayenx),

—  I  c.  a  b.

Die  and Caletorp,  t. Bmne  (Oger

Brito),  —  I  c  a  b.
Trichingcham,  B.  Nentone  (Odo  Ba-

list),  —  I  0.  a  b.
Chenebi,  s.  Aldulucbi  (Bp.  Bayenx),

—  I  c  a  b.

Osgotebi,  s.  Aldulnebi  (Bp.  Bayenx),

—  I  c  a  b.

Suarrebi,  M  (Odo  Balist),  —  I  c  a  b.
Carletune,  M  (Norman  Crassni), —

I  c.  a  b.
Other  Rosbi,  s.  Reschintone  (Geoffrey

Alselin),  —  i  c.  3  b.
Clachesbi  and  Normanesbi,  s.  Tauel-

csbi  (Goz.  F.  Lambert), —  i  c.  3  b.
Cinllingham  (Bp.  Lincoln),  —  i  c.  4  b.
Cotes,  ft.  Chelebi  (Norman  de  Adreci,

Richard),  —  i  c.  4  b.
Cuningesbi, B. Scriuelesbi (Robert

Dispensator),  —  i  c.  4  b.
Nortcarletone, s. Carletone (Sorte-

brand),  —  i  c.  4  b.
Estdepinge,  s.  Talintone  (Alured  of

Lincoln),  —  i  c.  4  b.
Gunfordebi, s.  Tndetorp  (Wido  de

Credun), —  i  c  4b.
Tunec  (in  Warton),  inl.  and  s.  Torp

(Roger  de  Poitou),  —  i  c  4  b.
Nentone, s. Frisebi (Bp. Bayenx,

liberty  —  I  c  4  b.
Torentone, s. Oresbi (William de

Perci,  Roger  de  Poiton),  —  i  c  4  b.
Rigbesbi, Ilalebi, and Tatebi, s.

Rigesbi  (Abp. York,  Herbert),  —

I  c.  4  b.
Trincbigeham,  B.  Nentone  (Colsuan),

—  I  c.  4  b.
l^urch,s.Draitone(Cnt.  Alan), — i  c  4b.
Itrcbi,  inl.  and  s.  Cleia  (Bp.  Bayenx,

Ilbert),  —  I  c.  4  b.

Grisebi  and  Burg,  s.  Waragcbi  (Eme-
gis  de  Buron), —  i  c.  4  b.

Welletune,  s.  Catebi  (Roger  de  Poi-
tou), —  I  c  4  b.

Wade,  s.  Waltham  (Cnt.  Alan}, —  i  c.
4  b.

Carlcntone,  M  (Bp.  Bayenx,  Rad.
Dapifer,  G.  de  Gand),  —  i  c.  4  b.


Beiebi,  M  (Cnt  Alan),  —  i  c.  4  b.
Snmerdebiy  M  (Goz.  F.  Lambert),—

ic^b.
Becheluge,  i.  Leiaiiitoiie  (Abp.  York,

Herbert), —  ic.6b.
Stimblebi,  inL  and  a.  Langetooe  Toip,

(Bp.  Bayenx), — a  a
Toresbi,  s.  Waltham  (Cnt  Alan),—

ac
Bertone  and  Torp,  M  (Ivo  Tullebou»

Azor),  —  a  &
Cheneide, (Bp. Lincoln,  St  Mary

Stow),  —  a  c.
Calcheondle,  t.  Bdtesford  (Ivo  Taille-

bois),  ^  a  c
Timbolont,  t.  Chercliebi  and  Scapdc

(Norman  de  Adred),  —  a  c.
Ledolftorp,  a.  Eslaforde  (1^  Linoob),

—  ac.
Westbi,  free  soke  in  Heidnre  (Col-

snan), — a&
Scitebrocs  inL  Conenham  (Bjpi  Dv-

ham,  St  Karilef),  ?  —  a  c
Widane,  a.  CUcfaeriii  (Hugh  F.  Bdd-

ric,  Wido),  —  a  &
Aslachebi, a. Avetorp (Robert  de

Todeni,  Gnnfrid),  —  a  c.
Andrebi  and  Marcbebi,  i.  Aadtthi  (Bp,

Bayenx),  —  s  e.
Bercaham and  Ertoiit  i.  Basg  (St

Peter  de  Borg,  Godfrey),  —  a  &
Sanctone,  s.  ApleU,  RiseU,  Sakdil

(Roger  de  Bntli),  —  a  c.
Cahiodesbi,  a.  Bardenai  (Gilbert  de

Gand),  —  a  c.
Catenase  and  Usnn,  B.  Nortchdexi

(Cnt  Alan),  —  a  c.
Other  RosU,  s. RoiU  (Robert  de

Statford),  —  a  c.
Stainfelde,  s.  Berllnge  (William  de

Perci),  —  a  &
Westledebi,  s.  WicUngehl  (William

de  Perci,  Radnlf),  —  a  e.
Winllingeham,  a.  Raae  (Radvlf  Pk-

genel),  —  a  c.
Agetorp,  a.  Bnmelle  ( AmgoC),  —  a  c.
Spilesbi,  IresM,  and  Torn,  a.  Gi«dbi

and  Estrecale  (&>.  Durham),  —  a  c.
Spanebi,  s.  Ulnesbi  (Colsnan), —  ac.
Idaltesbi,  s. Clachesbi (GUbert  de

Gand,  Rademer),  —  a  c
Holm,  a.  Ragendtorp  (St  Peler  de

Burg),  —  a  c.
Colsteunrde, s. Schillintuie (Abp.

York,  Walchclfai),  —  a  c
Strobi,  s.  Abi  (Bp.  Bayenx),  —  a  c
Suinhope,  s.  Wauham(Cnt  Alan),—

a  c
Torgrebi, a. Belesbi (Odo B§M^

Herbert),  —  a  &


APPENDIX  IX


575


Ravened al  and  Other  Ravenedal, s.

Waltham  (Cnt.  Alan),—  a  c
Wcnflet,  8.  Andrebi  (Got  F.  Lambert),

—  3  b.

Salebi,  s.  Clachesbi  (Hugh  F.  Baldric,

Wido),  —  3  c.
Sninhamstede,  s.  Wtdme  (Jndith),  —

3C.

Ozecnmbe,  s.  Farforde  (Cnt  Hugh,
Baldric),  —  3  c.

HoQten,  s.  Lagesbi  (William  de
Ferci,  Eurard),  —  3  c.

Oxetone  and  Uloricesbi  t.  Fiiiy>bi
(Bp.  Durham,  William),  — 3  0.

Hedebi,  s.  Haltone  (Cnt.  Hugh,  Wm.
F.  Nigel),  —  3  c.

Ludintone,  Gerulftorp,  Marae,  Water-
tone,  s.  Cmle;  M  s.  Beltone
(Geoffrey  de  Wirce),  —  3  c

Buchehale  and  Horsitone,  s.  Hamin-
gebi  (Cnt.  Hugh,  Baldric),  —  a  c.

Aluingeham,  3  M  ( Alured  of  Lincoln,
Rannulf),  —  3  c

Witham,  Mannetorp  and  TofUnnd
M  (St.  Peter  de  Burg,  Asuert),— a  c

Cotes,  M  (Alured  of  Lincoln,  Ber-
nard), —  3  c.

Brune,  M  (Oger  Brito),  —  3  c.

Turolfbi,  M  (Odo  Baliit),  —  3  c

Colsteuuorde,  M  (a  thegn  of  the
Queen),  —  3  c.

Aslachebi, M (Robert de  Todeoi),

—  3  c.

Wiuelesbi,  M  (DrogodeBurun,Robt.),

—  2  c.

Brandone, s. Carllorp (Robert de

Veci),  —  3  c.  a  b.
Kocstunc,  s.  Torintune  (Robert  Di»-

pensator),  —  2  c.  3  b.
Thuorstorp,  s. Clachesbi (Hugh  F.

Baldric,  \Vido),  —  a  c.  4  b.
Widme  (thegn),  —  a  c.  4  b.  ?
Other  Rase,  8.  Rase  (Radnlf  Pagenel),

—  a  c  4  b.

Wintrintonc,  8.  Haltone  (Cnt.  Hugh,

Wm.  F.  Nigel),  —  a  c.  4  b.
Raucncdalc, s. Achesbi (Wido de

Credun),  —  a  c.  4  b.
Rande, S. Waragebi (Emegis de

Burun),  —  3  c.  5  b.
Hagenebi,  s.  Bolinbroc  (Ivo  Taille-

bois),  —  3  c.
Torp,  s.  Holinbroc  (Ivo  Taillebois),

—  3c.

Stichesfordc,  s.  Bolinbroc  (Ivo  Taille-
lK>is),  —3  c.

Ulinjjeham,  H.  Barcnorde  (Rayner  de
Brimou),  — 3  c.

Stigesuuald,  s.  Bcltesford  (Ivo  Taille-
bois), —  3  c.


Houtune,  inL  and  s.  LeMintoiie  (Abp.

York,  Herbert),  —  3  a
RIsebi,  i.  Aldabiebi  (1^  Bftyeu),

—  3C

Wimmc,  •.  Onietoiie  (Jadith),  —3c
Suafeld, r. Corbi (Bp. Lincoln,

Walter),  —  3  c.
Berchetoip,  s.  Folehingefaam  (Gilbert

deGand), — 3  c.
Burtone, a. Scantone (Gilbeit de

Gand),  —  3  c.
Opetorp, s. Edeham (Gilbert de

Grnnd),  — 3  b.
Dunbelbi,  a.  Folchingeham  (Gilbert

de  Gand),  —  3  c
Hazebi,  s.  Folchingdbam  (Gilbert  de

Gand),  —3  c.
SpalUnge,  K  Croyland  (St.  Gnthlac),

—  3c

Apdeia, t. Berlinge (William de

Peid),  —  3  c.
Apeleia,  s.  Stalnfelde  (William de

Perdi  —  3  c.
Bainede  and  Torlai,  a. Beltetlbrd

(fvoTaUlebois),  — 3C
Bekoly  i.  Beltooe  (Geoffrey  de  Wiroe),

Wisp&ctone,  a.  and  B.  Stimtooe  and
Cnerchebi  (Bp.  Durham),  —  3  c.

Wispinctnne,  a.  Stratooe  and  Chir*
chebi  (Endo  F.  Spirewic), «—  3  &

Holtone,  a.  Tatenai  (Ivo  Taillebob),

—  3C-

Golse,  1.  Barewe  (Drogo  de  Benrere),

—  3C-

Hauuardebi,  t.  Waltham  (Cnt  Alan),

—  3c

Roabi,  a.  Carltorp  (Robert  de  Veci),

—  3c.

Wiueleafofde,  a.  Sechebroc  (Robert
Malet),  —  3  c

Cadebi,  a.  Waltham  (Cnt.  Alan),— 3c.

Aalachebi  and  Spingeham  a.  Fol-
chingeham  (Gilbert  de  Gandl  — ^  c

I>unnesbi,a.  Coromctune  (St.  Benecuct
ofRamaey),  —  3  c.

Fulnedebi,  s.  Waragebi  (Emegia  de
Bnnm),  ^30.

Totintooe,  a.  Bolinbroc  (Ivo  Taille-
bois), —  3  c.

Stichenai,  a.  Bolinbroc  (Ivo  Taille-
bois), —  3c

Schillintune,  s.  Grantham  (King  WU-
lUm),  —  3  c

Hondintone,  s.  Folchingeham  (Gilbert
de  Gand,  Fulbert),  —  3  c

Frisetorp,  s.  Ingeham  and  Felingeham
(Colsuan),  —  3  c.

Estrebi,  s.  Beltesford  (Ivo  Taillebob),

—  3c


57'*


APPENDIX  IX


Asf^erelii, ».  lioIinbroc(IvoTaillebois),

—  3c
Ilonintone,  t.  Hamlngebt  (Hugh  F.

lUIdric),  —  3  c.
SiMe,  t.  llaintune  (Rocer  dc  Poiton,

Albeit), —3  c.
Oif^tebt,  i. Rardcnmi,  (Cnbett  de

Uand),  —  3C.
Croshi, s. Rinnibroc (Robert de

Todeni,  Rerengar),  ^  3  c
NentoBc,  s.  AMntiiebi  (Bp.  Bft]reiix)t

—  3c
Rrigeslai,  t.  Waltham  (Cnt  Alan),

—  3C.
Sodcotes,  \f  ^Rp.  Baycvx),  —  3  c.
Weitdepinge,  M  (Godfrey  de  Cambrai),

--3C
Rrotulbi  and  Torp,  %,  Scanlon  (Gilbert

de  Gaud),  —  3  c.  1  b.
Land  and  Otber  Lnnd,  2  M  (G

deVVIroc),  —  3c  4  b.
Fendebi,  s.  Waltham  (Cnt  Alan),  —

3  c  4  b.
Loctone,  s.  Folchinceham  (Gilbert  de

(!and),  — 3c  4  b.
Kadebi,  a.  Bolinbroc  (Wo  Tailleboit),

—  4C.
Tnralfbi,  i.  and  ainl.  Akeley 'Jndith),

—  4C.
Nongtoiiei  i.  Grantham  (King  Wil-
liam), ^4  c.

Waletooe  and  Rodebi,  t.  llonbU  (Ivo

Tailleboit,  Wimnnd),  —  4  c.
Picbennocdc,  a.  Folchingeham  (Gilbert

de  Gand).  —  4  c
Scaltorp, a.  Scotone  'S(. P^er de

Knrg),  —  4  c
Oastorp  and  l^re»bi.  ».  Torp  'f  lilbert

de  (iaod',  —  4  c.
Walecote. s. Branztune  ^V alter  de

Aincurt),  — 4  c.
Ilerdrtnrp, •.  Rardenai "(filbert  de

(iand.i,  —4  c.
Nentone,  t. Itaicbi  (Cnt.  Alan),  —

Kndretnq), t. Clachettii >.  Ilngh F.

lialdric,  Wido  ,  —  4  c.
Rrimlai.  Wa'le,  Kavcndalc,  i.  Aicbebi

.  lip.  liayevK  ■,  —  4  c.
Kefaim,  inl.  Fi«cartune Sc.  Peter  de

Horg  >,  —  4  c.
Iladrclinc,  s.  Waltham  ;(.'nt.  Alan\

—  4C.
llatune, %. Waragebi ^Krncgi» dc

Rarun^,  —  4  c.
TiDuordr,  t.  Widme  'Tntt^.  Jodith  .

—  4  <:-
K.1-4-.  (K^^'otrlii, Walnlrf. <  >tet*i. s.

Taarlctti Ko^rrdc  I'oitoa,  Kcigcr  ,

—  4  •■•


Scamuld,

—  4C-
llaicfai.  a.  BoltahRie  (1«o  T

—  4C-

Hvddbi,  a.  BoUBbnc  (H*  Ti

boia),*4C
Gnmbi,  t.  WaklMi  (

RoaU, 3 M (Robert  de

Edelo)>-4C

Solebi,  N  (Bp^

4C-
A«bi,  M  (C


'•—4


C
Colcfria),— 4CI  K

Roaoebi,  (Robert  4r  SM

— 4e.iK
Welle,  n  EdnfBtdc  (Bpc

4C4h.
T«lnirU,  a.  Hnhoot (

WiUiani  F.  Niftl),  ~ 4K  4  k


My


cebi  and HnbMH.

(Cnt  Hwb.  WiIliM\  — 4  C4 1^

Hnmbl.  n  ^■cffiitM  (Hk'nlM

cnrt),  —  5  e-
Rosbi  and  Ote  KaM.  ft.

and  CnvdMBi  (o^

mod),  — se-
Coonebi.  U.  St Mary

Sci««fai,a.  BwdiMl  :G4ftM4t

Glcniaa.  a.  Sl Umj

Uncola),  —  i  c
Goldafai.a.r

Gand),  —  a  e.
Caktorp.  1.  Wimi

Cbercbebi  aad

(WahcrikAMM^.I
Hkberr.  a.  Dimitaoe  (d.

NortnK.  ft.  Sfphioiia  (Ji

Paitcoe,a.

—  5C
Kjidiefai,  t.  BoIMmc  (IvoTi

—  5t
SomcftcM.  ft.  Br«B»  ^Wa.  4r

nrailaoe.  M  [Cat  A1m\  -1
Kaaa.  M  h^  ^pm.  WaM^-4i
llmcbnrc  and

(Robert  de

5C4b,
Uciebi,  k  Clacbabi

Radcmcr:,  ~  |  c.  4  k


APPENDIX IX


577


Toft, 1. Dnitone  (Cnt.  Alan),  —

5  c.  4  b.
OuDcbi,  1.  Slow  (Bp. Lincoln),  —

SchelilincbDpe,  B.  Dodinto&e  (Bald-
win), —  6c

Wnleoote,  inl.  Belingei  (Abp.  York,
Wilchtlin),  — 6  c.

HnngretuDe,  Inl.  Dentnne  (Robert  de
Todeni),  —6  c.

Melingcibl,  i.  Bolinbtoc  (Ito  Taillc-
boi»),  —  6  c.

Totintun.  s.  Bolinbroc  (I*o  Taillc-
boii),  —  6  c

Halintan,  CbcIettDrne,  IUdi«ibi,
Mallcbl,  >.  Tadewellc(CnL  Hn^},

Wilgcbi,'*.  Folcbinecham  (GUbert  de

Gand),  —6c
Reschinione,  i.  Diailone  (Cnt.  Alan),

Cheoelettane,  B.  Hacbe  (Cnt.  Alan),

Borg,  s.  Baidenai  (Gilbert  de  Gand),

Danebani,  s.  Netelham  (King  Wil-
liam). —  6  c.
Alfgarc,  >.  Drailone  (Cat.  Alan), —


Asedebi,  s.  KolcbinEebam  (Gilbert  de

Gand), —6  c.
l>DchiDlon,  9.  Kolcbingeham  (Gilbert

lie  Gand),  —6  c.
Cnlcbesbi,  s.  Bcltnfoid  (Ivo  Taille-

boiO,  —6  c,
ISuinhamstede, s. Wilham (Radalf

Pagenel),  —  6  c.
Ilaidnnc,  s. Osbeinedebi  (Wldo  de

Crednn),  —  6c
Weitiecale,  s.  Bolinbroc  (Ivo  TaiUe-

bois),— 6c
Chirchebi,  >.  Folcbingetuun  (Gilbert

de  Gand},— 6c.
Grlmesbi,  Ckia,  Ilrebi,  and  Teme*-

cou,  9.  Levegbi.  Bredelou,  andScar-

hou  '11)1.  Itayenx),  — 6c.
\Videme, Abi, Hage, CalrabI, a.

Grantham  (Cm.  Hugh), —6  c.  4b.
U|ielune,  Chefteitrf,  and  Nonnaoebi,

9.  Slow  (l!p.  Lincoln),  —  6  c  4  b.
Siobeiun, s. Westburg (Geoffrey

A1»-lin  and  Radnlf),  —7c
I  tod  intone, s. Weil  burg (Geoffrey

Alwrlin),  —7c
Kichc,  s.  Draitone  ^Cn^.  Alan\  — 7  c.
liclesbi,  s.  Wallham (Cnt.  Alan),  —


Fercbi,  i.  Bcrtone


-7c4b.
(^Gilbert  dc


Hnmingebl,  t.  Belteiford  (Iro  Taille-

boii),  —7  c.
Urune  and  Other  lirnne,  s.  Epeorde

(Geoffrey  dc  Wifce),  —7c
Tinberlnnt,  a.  Bianztnne  (Waller  de

Aincnrt),  —  7  c.  4  b.
Tor^. s. Dodingtone (St. Petet of

Gand),

E9beinebi,  s.  Foldiingeham  (Gilbert

de  Gand),  — 8  c.
Wadlngutdc, 9, in Stratone and

Cherchebi  (Bp, Darham,  Eudo  F.

Spirewic),  —8  c.
Scottonie, Holme, and Sndbroc, %.

Fi9cartmie(St.  Peter  de  Enrg .,  —8c
Rosbi, I. Reichuiione (Radulf  and

Geoffrey  Alwlin),  —9  c.
Picebech,9,Spallingei[voTaillcboLi',


Nochcatmie  (Nomaii
de  Adieci),  — 9e.
Beranlfbi,  1.  Waltbam  (Cnt  Alan),

—  9  c.  4  b.

Cberchetnne,  a.  DnHoiie  (Cnt  Alan),

—  IOC,

Steplnee, t. Baidenai (Gilbert de

Gand),  — 10  c
HennodMue,  *.  Wadlnlooe (Cut

Hn^),-itic
HelpcridkBtnMidBniton,*.FoicUiige-

ham  (Gilbert  de  Gand\  —  lOC.
Wibertnnc,  >.  Drailone  (Cnt.  Alan),

Holebech,  1.  Gadenaj  (Kiiq[  Wil-
liam), —  lie

DIcU,  a,  ReKhintooe  (Geoffrey  Al*e-
lin),  —  lie

Snnderby,  ».  Akeley  (Jndith),  —  13  c

Sctediatane,  *.  Foleh^ham  (Gilbert
de  Gand),  —  14  c

Hotot,  Tornlacabl,  Sntnnc,  DraiMoqi,
BUIrabi,  and  MarcheiU,  i.  Granl-
ham  (Cot  Hngh),  — 16c

Lcchebame,  •.Grantbam  (Cnt  Hngh),

—  i6c


Hombreslone,  1.  Tatenal  (Iro  Taille-
boig,  Henner),  —  18  c

Wenflel,  Haebe,  Caletbi,  Tedk«e-
Uoip,  and  Malbertorp,  i.  Grant-
ham (Cnt.  Hngh),  —  iS  c  4b.

Wetinnc  and  Maltane,  «.  Spallinge
(ITO  TalUeboii),  —  mc

SnaU,  Elgelo.  Tombi,  Clactorp,  aad
Totele.  1.  GrantbaiB  (Cnt.  Hngb),
—  3IC.


578


APPENDIX IX


Sokes  of  GettuDc  (King  WillUm),  ^

Lancetnnc,  Hacberdinghun,  Sftlmwi-
debi,  Tetiforde,  Briocle,  Wlowbi,


•ad  riirfcnM.


SokM


(Kkc  W


F.  No  Ploughs  imnoNXD  in  Dduski,  kt  Iklaxd  gito

ASPAKT  or  HOLOIXC

Wizebi,  t.  and  inl.  Dodintooe  (Bald*

win),  a  c.  inl.  —  a  pL  of  tenants.
Hadincmne,  s.  and inl. Dodintooe


(Haldwin),  9  b.  inl.  —  3I  pi.  ten.
Colebi,  s.  and  B.  NVashingebiug  (King

NVilliam),  1  c.  inL  —  9  (or  8)  u.  ten.
North  bicam,  s.  and  B.  inl.  I>odin*

tone  (lialdwin),  1  c.  inl.— >3|  pL  ten.
Lodeby, B.  inl. lliindcbi,  6b.? a.

CUchesbi, lb. (Ivo TaiUeboU),

6  b.  inl. —  I  fil.  ten.


Toocstelc,  inL  ami  a.  Torp  ;ft^fv  di
PoiMi,  Ifol  4  b.  nL  ^  4  CHK.  «R

Ooncabi,  s.  WU|cbi  (WidA  d ^
badcvt, ImJImX a  k
6|pl.«.

OigoCeU  ud  Tiiiiiiii.s
aad  KnfMiwM  (Ivo  Ti
H^).  a  k  tel.  ~  «an»

Barcranfe  aad  Sauvi,  ad.  Ei
(Roger  dc  Potao«,  Alkon:.  •  ^

-jpLlOL


Abbeiviations  IK  AppmNs  IX

c.  «  ciracate,  tmmtm.  M«  *

b.  --  borate.  &  *

s.  -i  soke  U.  »

A  figure  not  followed  by  c.  or  b.  dcaoica  c  (eg.  p.  517).


APPENDIX X

BY-LAWS

I DO  not  intend  to  diaciiss  the  question  of
at  any  length,  as  I  have  already  had  occaaioo  to  treat  of
jett  in  The  Growth  of  the  MaiUN-. It  seems  dear  to  ar
cannot  disregard  the  late  but  detailed  evidence  of  tbc  ^
of  champion  farming  in  modem  times  and  in  the  later
Ages,  and that  we must  connect  it with  the
supplied  by  early English documents  as  to  the  nfalj
praetiec  of  o|K*n-field  cultivaiion,  and  with  siinikr  data  horn
sources.  cs|)ccially  from  Gennany  and  ScaadiBaTia. Wkai  I
to  ilo  now  is  lu  adduce  some  interesting  par
o|H;n-field  husbandry  and  its  organixation,  drawn  horn
periods. This has  to  a  certain  extent  been  «lone  m
famous  |>amphlct  on  the  English  Village  Coounnaitj  (L*
niiticlalterliche  Feidgemeinschaft  in  Englandy,  bat  the
be  followed  up  a  great  deal  further. In  fact,  there  can  be
that  a  diligeia  study  of  Court  Rolls  and  other  local
pru\ide  a  conimuous  series  of  valuable  ilhinralinni Ote


APPENDIX  X  579

almost  begin  at  the  present  time,  as  the  lot-meadows  of  Yamton
and  Kidlington  still  show  the  apportionment  of  strips  in  shifting
combinations  to  the  members  of  ancient  unions  of  neighbours.^  The
practices  are  substantially  the  same  as  those  which  obtained  in
the  well-known  case  of  Aston  and  Cote  (Giles,  Hittory  of
Bampton ;  Gomme,  Village  Community,  162 ;  Villainage  in
England,  392);  Maitland's  criticism,  in  'Survivals  of  Archaic
Communities'  (Law  Quart.  Rev.  ix.  216),  seems  rather  rationalistic,
and  hardly  does  justice  to  this  case.

I  will,  however,  chiefly  draw  my  illustrations  from  documents
describing  the  arrangements  previous  to  the  enclosures  of  the
eighteenth  and  nineteenth  centuries.  W.  Marshall,  in  his  books
on  the  Rural  Economy  of  England,  has  been  often  appealed  to,  and
he  gives  indeed  most  valuable  information  about  open-field  practices.
Those  examples  are  of  especial  interest  which  contain  references
to  ancient  terms  and  institutions,  and  therefore  help  to  connect
modern  customs  with  their  early  antecedents.  In  Marshall's
description  of  the  Vale  of  Pickering,  Yorks,  we  find,  e.  g.,  the
following  interesting  remarks.  He  states,  to  begin  with,  that
manorial  courts  are  still  of  practical  importance  even  in  places
where  copyhold  and  free-rent  tenures  have  all  but  disappeared,
because  ihey  provide  for  the  cleansing  of  rivulets  and  common
sewers,  the  repair  of  roads,  the  sufficiency  of  ring  fences,  the
estimation  of  damages  by  impounded  cattle,  the  stocking  of
commons,  and  the  removal  of  nuisances.  These  matters  require
frequently  the  interposition  of  a  jury,  who  in  places  where  they  are
still  empanelled  are  considered  not  only  as  judges  of  the  general
welfare  of  the  manor,  but  are  frequently  called  in  as  arbiters  of
private  differences.'  Coming  to  the  agrarian  aspect  of  the  country,
he  says :  '  In  my  own  remembrance  more  than  half  the  Vale  lay
open.  ...  In  the  beginning  of  the  present  century  [eighteenth],
the  immediate  township  of  Pickering  remained  in  its  ancient
uninclosed  state.  Having  been  thought  too  large  to  be  laid  out
conveniently  as  one  township,  it  had  been  judiciously  split  into
two  divisions  by  a  natural  line,  a  considerable  brook  which  runs
through  it.  On  each  side  of  the  brook  lay  a  suite  of  common
fields,  three  in  number,  for  the  unvarying  round  of  wheat,  Ac,

'  Mrs.  B.  Stapleton,  Three  Oxfordshire  Parithet,  Oxf.  HUt.  Soc.  XXI V»
307-12.

'  Rural  Economy  of  Yorkshire,  iccond  edition,  1796,  vol.  i.  p.  aS.

P  p  2


58o  APPENDIX X

beans,  &c.,  fallow.  These  common  fields  were  respectively
divided  into  oxgangs,  evenly  scattered  over  every  field,  so  that
each  occupier  might  have  an  equal  or  similar  share  of  good  and
bad,  near  and  distant  land ;  the  houses  being  in  this,  as  in  every
other  common-field  township,  placed  in  the  town.  Each  field
consisted  of  twenty-two  oxgangs,  each  of  which  on  one  side  of  the
township  contained  twenty-four  acres,  on  the  other  twelve  acres.
Consequently  the  six  fields  contained  2,376  acres.  Each  diiwon
had  likewise  its  common  meadow.  Other  portions  of  the  town-
ship were  laid  out  in  stinted  pastures,  wholly  appendant  to  the
common-field  lands,  each  oxgang  of  which  having  a  right  to  a
limited  number  of  gaits  for  cows  and  working  oxen.  The  re-
mainder of  the  township,  containing  many  thousand  acres,  was
common.  .  .  .  Within  memory  it  seems  an  attempt  was  made  to
stint  them,  but  the  regulation  lasted  only  one  year.  Brfore  and
since  that  time  they  have  been,  in  the  strictest  sense  of  the  word,
unstinted  commons  for  all  kinds  of  commonable  stock,  excepting
sheep  and  working  oxen,  which  last  were,  by  the  by-laws  0/  the
townships  confined  to  the  stinted  pastures  and  the  upland  commons,
and  the  former  to  the  upland  commons  only.'  ^

Another  interesting  and  rather  peculiar  case  is  described  in
Lincolnshire.  '  Lord  Exeter  has  property  on  the  Lincoln  skk  of
Stamford  that  seems  held  by  some  tenure  of  ancient  custom  among
the  farmers,  resembling  the  rundale  of  Ireland.  The  tenants  divide
and  plough  up  the  commons,  and  then  lay  them  down  to  become
common  again,  and  shift  the  open-fields  from  hand  to  hand  in  sudi
a  manner  that  no  man  has  the  same  land  two  years  together ;  whkfa
has  made  such  confusion  that  were  it  not  for  ancient  anrveysi  it
would  now  be  impossible  to  ascertain  the  property  (cf.my  Gloocester*
shire).  In  regard  to  commons  a  similar  custom  prevails  in
Devonshire  and  Cornwall.  And  with  respect  to  common  fields  the
same  practice  under  the  name  of  run-rig  formerly  was  commoo
in  the  Highlands  of  Scotland.' '

1  am  indebted  to  the  kindness  of  Mr.  A.  Ballard  for  having  been
able  to  use  three  very  interesting  Court  Rolls  of  the  manor  of
Great  Tew,  Oxon,  dated  20th  October,  1756,  aand  October,  1759,
and  23  rd  October,  1761. For  a  discussion  on  them  I  will  refer

^  Rural  Economy  of  Yorkshire,  pp.  47-50.

^  Marshall,  Review  of  the  Reports  of  the  Board  of  Agricnltare  fan  the
Kastem  Department  of  England,  iSii,  p.  loa.


APPENDIX  X  581

the  reader  to  a  paper  to  be  published  in  a  forthcoming  issue  of
the  Economic  Quarterly  Review.  Though  late,  these  rolls  present
exceptionally  full  and  precise  information  about  the  iftanagement
of  an  open-field  township.  The  orders  (by-laws)  were  made  by
juries  elected  from  among  the  homage.  Modern  practices  in  the
way  of  complicated  rotations  of  crops  and  of  the  cultivation  of
sainfoin  do  not  detract  from  the  exceedingly  archaic  methods  of
champion-farming  described  in  these  documents.  One  of  the  most
remarkable  traits  revealed  by  them  is  the  survival  of  the  hide-
system  in  the  arrangement  of  the  fields,  a  fact  exactly  parallel  to
the  oxgangs  of  Pickering.

From  a  book  little  known,  The  History  and  Antiquities  of  Gains-
borough (com.  Lincoln),  by  Adam  Stark,  London,  181 7  (pp.  160-3),
I  should  like  to  quote  some  clauses  of  a  curious  set  of  by-laws,
ordered  by  a  body  called  the  Forraynes,  that  is,  by  the  tenants  of
the  foreign  or  rural  portion  of  Gainsborough,  kept  clearly  apart
from  the  borough  (or  Portman)  section  of  the  township.  These
by-laws  were  entered  in  a  Court  Leet  held  on  May  Day  in  1601,
and  are  headed  Paynes  \j>enalti€i\  made  by  the  Forraynes.

2.  '  We  lay  in  payne  that  the  constables  make  Leygate  and  the
fences,  Moorgate  and  the  fences,  and  the  bridges  to  them  belong-
ing, before  Lady-day  in  Lent,  and  so  keep  them,  in  payne  of  every
default — ii  (j.)

3.  If  any  man  keep  more  sheep  upon  his  stint,  to  put  them
away  before  our  Lady-day  in  Lent,  upon  payne  of  every  five  sheep
-6  (^.)

4.  That  every  man  gripp  his  lands  in  the  come  fields  so  oft  as
need  shall  require,  in  payne — or.  41/.

5.  That  every  man  mowe  his  thistles  in  his  fallow-field  so  oft  as
need  requireth,  in  payne  of  every  land — 41/.

6.  Tiiat  noe  man  keep  or  teather  any  horse  in  the  ox-pasture,
or  in  the  Pitt-Hills,  but  for  every  ox-gang  one,  and  that  he^ieep
nor  leather  any  mares  that  have  foles,  in  payne — 41/.

7.  That  every  man  make  his  fence  in  the  South  Sands  [corr,
lands]  and  North  Sands,  at  such  tyme  as  men  sowe,  and  having
warning  given  by  the  furman,  and  soe  keepe  them  untill  harvest  be
done,  in  payne — i2d,

9.  That  none  gleane  corne  untill  the  furk>ugh  be  led  away,  and
none  to  gleane  but  the  poore,  and  that  none  of  Morton  shall  gleane
but  in  the  North  Sands,  upon  payne — 4</.


582  APPENDIX  X

10.  That  noe  man  put  any  milkes  on  the  North  Marsh,  or  in
Humble  Carre,  but  every  man  of  his  owne,  in  pajme — i2d.

1 1.  That  every  man  having  any  headland  in  the  fields  shall  plowe
them  no  farther  than  usually  they  have  been  plowed  upon — ^gi/.

12.  We  lay  in  payne  that  none  of  Morton  keepe  or  put  any
swyne,  geese,  or  other  beastes  upon  any  grounds  belonging  to
Gainsburgh,  upon  payne — lod.

1 3.  We  lay  in  payne  that  noe  man  or  his  servant  shall  keepe  their
horses,  or  oxen,  in  the  Belks  [balks],  Pitt-Hills,  or  cornfields  in  the
night,  in  payne — 2od.

14.  That  the  persons  are  to  let  their  lands  called  Reddings,
Stannowe,  two  closes  beyond  the  Belks,  and  one  in  North  Sands,
lie  open  after  the  crops  are  taken  off,  in  payne— 39^.

15.  It  is  layd  in  payne  that  the  yeariy  fiuman  shall  make  and
sufficiently  maintain,  yearly  and  every  year  continually,  a  bridge,
passable  both  for  horse  and  beasts,  at  all  useful  and  fitting  tymes,
into  Humble  Carre  untill  it  be  layed  in,  in  payne — sox.

1 6.  Wee  doe  lay  in  payne  that  Sir  Willoughby  Hickman,  BartyshaH
betwixt  this  and  our  Lady-day  next,  make  a  suflkient  fence  betwixt
Leafields  and  the  lordship  of  Gainsbuigh,  and  for  not  doing  the
same  we  doe  amerce  him  39  sh.,  and  that  the  said  summe  shall  be  bf
the  Burgrave  taken  out  of  the  estreats  of  the  aforesaid  Sir  WiUought^
Hickman,  Bart.,  and  by  him  payed  to  the  overseers  of  the  pooie,
and  by  them  to  be  distributed  according  to  their  discretion — 39X.'

If  we  turn  to  earlier  Court  Rolls,  we  find  curious  differences  in
the  enrolment  of  agrarian  business  in  different  manors.  In  some
cases  there  are  a  good  many  indications  as  to  a  treatment  of  these
concerns  corresponding  to  what  we  have  seen  in  full  application  in
the  seventeenth  and  eighteenth  centuries ;  in  other  cases  no  notice
whaiever  is  taken  of  by-laws,  open-field  practices,  nor  even  of
agrarian  trespasses.  Is  there  any  reason  to  think  that  these
contrasts  correspond  to  a  deep-rooted  opposition  between  the
husbandry  of  one  class  of  manors  and  that  of  another?  I  do  not
think  any  person  who  has  studied  Court  Rolls  will  maintain  that
Sometimes  the  contrasts  mentioned  may  be  observed  in  phoes
which  lie  close  by  each  other  and  are  situated  in  exactlj
similar  economic  conditions.  The  explanation  must  be  evident^
sought  in  the  fact  that  manorial  officers  enrolled  agrarian  entries
in  some  cases  and  contented  themselves  with  enrolling  conveyancing
and  police  business  in  other  cases. And  the  earlier  the  rolls  taken


APPENDIX  X  583

up,  the  thinner  is  found  the  stream  of  agrarian  entries,  although
there  is  indeed  no  reason  to  suppose  that  the  manors  and  townships
of  the  thirteenth  century  were  less  active  in  regulating  rural
affairs  than  the  villages  of  the  eighteenth.  And  then  comes  a  time
— the  first  half  of  the  thirteenth  century  and  earlier — when  Court
Rolls  themselves  cease,  and  we  do  not  hear  either  of  agrarian
by-laws,  or  of  manorial  conveyancing,  or  of  the  police  jurisdiction
of  Court-leets.  And  yet  we  know  that  all  these  matters  did  not
begin  in  the  later  years  of  King  Henry  IIL  It  is,  I  think,  a
valuable  lesson  in  historical  perspective.  We  must  not  jump  to  the
conclusion  that  an  object  is  small  because  it  looks  small  in  the
distance.  It  would  be  imprudent  to  assmne  that  it  ceases  to  exist
when  it  disappears  from  our  horizon.  Indirect  evidence  may  have
to  go  a  long  way  in  similar  cases.

So  much  as  a  general  estimate  of  Court  Rolls  evidence.  And
now  let  us  look  at  some  characteristic  examples  of  it.  Even  when
agrarian  by-laws  are  not  enrolled  as  such  they  may  be  referred  to
for  the  sake  of  the  fines  (poenae)  inflicted  under  them.  Or  else
penal  clauses  may  be  inserted  in  a  casual  way,  although  in  other
respects  the  agrarian  arrangements  may  be  settled  by  word  of
mouth  at  the  moots,  or  left  to  the  orders  of  a  peasant  jury.  In
the  soke  of  Grantham,  Lines.,  e.g.,  we  often  find  entries  like  the
following :

'  Impositum  est  quod  nullus  inhabitantium  permittat  porcos  suos
ad  largum  fore  ac  cursicitare  in  le  garthes  sine  clausura  vicinorum
post  discessum  siue '  ortum  solis  sub  pena  pro  qualibet  vice  sic  visus '
1 2  d.  £t  dicunt  quod  nullus  effiigat  cattalla  sua  laxata  per
separates  campos  a  festo  Apostolorum  Philippi  et  Jacobi  usque  ad
exitum  Authumni  sub  pena  qualibet  vice  6d.,  et  quod  omnes
antique  pene  in  prioribus  visis  facte  remaneant  usque  ad  proximum
visum,  etc/  (Record  OflSce,  Court  Roll  155/44,  m.  i;  n-i6
Eliz.  1568-1574.)

There  is  at  the  Record  Ofiice  an  interesting  set  of  rolls  of  the

manors  of  the  Abbey  of  Ramsey ;  they  range  from  the  reign  of

Henry  III  to  that  of  Henry  VIII. Here  are  some  extracts  from

copies  made  for  me  by  Miss K.  S. Martin. I  venture  to  call

attention  by  means  of  italics  to some  of  the  more important

points.

'  '  Usque  ortum  solii*  ii  probably  meant.
'  As  ordered  by  the  view,  i.  c.  Coort-lect.


5H4  APPENDIX X

Ramsey  Ahbey  dmri  Roll  179/44  (lS-20  Jtk,  II  \
memh,  3  dorso  (Barimi), Custodes  canpomm


quod J. S.  habuit bidentes,  equos  et bettias octo
divcrsis  imparcatas  pro  trangressSooibos  fiictb  in  blado

suorum.

Ramsey  Ahbey  Court  Roil  179/50(7  Hetvy  IV \

m.  I//.  (HoughimS. J.  H.  fregit  bitegem  pattQr(aiido ?)
in  bladis  communiiatis.

(Ordinacio). Ordinatum  est  per  domAmm  ei
quod  nullus  pastoral  nee  communicat  cam  bidcDtibos
Houghton  per  unum  annum  integram  mb  pent  cviuililMl  de  n  d

m.  2  {Sirpe).  .  .  .  fregit  bilegem  /actam  per  emmi
quod  nullus  intret  in  stipulam  fnimentL

m.  3  (Barton).  Item  quod  T.  W.,  R.  L.,  etc.
carectis  sots  bladum  extra  campum  commmiuiis
inter  dominum  et  eos /actam.  Ideo  in  miacrkordia.  Et  qvod  ifcior
ccclesie  de  Barton  conculcauit  stipulam  commmitalia  ana  camm
suis  contra  ordinationem  predictam.

(Weston).  Quod  J.  W,  fregit  bilegem  faclam  per  doouHB  cc
communitatem  uillac  attachiando  equos  aooa  taper  k  Lews
licet  vi  d.  domino  et  vi  d.  (communitati  }\

Ramsey  Abbey  Court  Roll  179/59  (7  Henry  VI  ),


m.  1  (Vpwode). Visus  franciplegii  cum  coria  icma
Lune  in  festo  Sancti  Luce  Koangeliate  anno  rcsni  regis  Ikoiai
scxti  septimo  et  anno  Johannis  Tytchemefhe  abbaiss
dccimo.

Tliomas  Peny  lohannes  Tinles  lohannea  Pivcnf \

Kicardus  Heryng lohannrs  Hurre Ricordos  Skjmncr [
lohannes  liendson lohannes  Fox lohannea  Avbes 1


lohannes  Huk worth Willelmus  Ahbys

.  .  .  Ponitur  in  pena  quod  omnia  fossala  in6m  viDun
citra  festum  Inuencionis  hancte  l^nicis  sub  pena
xiid.

Ki  quod  I^staldyche  mundctur  citra  festnm  Natabs  I
|K*na  cuiusliliet  di'fectus.  xii  d.

Ft  qufkl  omnia  animalia  forincica  eaacoenlar  extra
infra  xv  dicb  proximos  s^qucnies  sub  pena  xld.  •  •  •


APPENDIX X  585

lohannes  Hicson  etatis  Ixxxiv  annorum  iuraius  ad  dicenium
ueritaiem  interrogatus  fuit  super  sacramentom  suum  cm  parcella
bosci  in  Roucegrove  uocaia  ie  Rcwesway  uel  Rowts  perHnet^  et  didt
quod  nescit,  sed  dicit  quod  quidem  Ambrosius  quondam  ballivus
istius  manerii  dedit  duas  uel  tres  carectas  bosci  de  predicta  parcella
diuersis  tenentibus  domini  Abbatis  et  inde  ab  aliquo  non  fuit
culpatus.

Bailtuus  preseniat  quod  lohannes  Freestone  uenit  in  manerium
vi  et  armis  cum  uno  pykefork,  et  in  Willelmum  balHuum  domini
in  ostio  aule  insultum  fecit  et  ipsum  balliuum  percussisse  uoluit,
in  contemptum  domini  (xl  s.).

£t  quod  lohannes  del  Wolde  transgressus  est  grauiter  in  herbagio
domini  in  Grenedale  balk  et  puteis  cum  uacca  (xl  d.)  .  .  .

Haywardus  preseniat  quod  lohannes  Bygge  cum  porcis»  lohannes
Fox  cum  equis,  Willelmus  Dobyn  cum  porcis  transgressi  sunt  in
pisis, Ideo  etc.  (iii  d.,  iii  d.,  ii  d.).

Willelmus  Edward  iunior  transgressus  est  cum  iumentis  super
Hymade  Knoll. Ideo  etc.  (ii  d.).

Item  lohannes  Loueday  transgressus  est  in  ordeo  cum  bouiculis
super  Hynthill  (iiid.)  .  .  .

m,  2  d.  {Wardeboys),  .  .  .  luraHdicunt . . .  quod  lohannes  Elys
fregit  bilegem  pascendo  bidentes  in  stipula  frumenti  (xx  d.).

Kt  quod  Thomas  Fraunce  cum  bidentibus,  Galfridus  Hunne
cum  bidentibus,  Willelmus  Hyche  cum  vaccis  utile  transgressi
sunt  in  stipula  frumenti  (iii  d.,  iii  d.,  iid.).  .  .  .

Pene,  Ponitur  in  pena  quod  sepes  ab  Hervy  Lege  usque  Bury
wode  reparetur  citra  festum  Natalis  Domini  sub  pena  cuius-
libet  iis.

Kt  quod  nullus  ligabit  in  Blacland  Hadens  neque  Milneway  citra
Pcntecosten  sub  pena  iis.  .  .  .

EUciio  bedelli.  Willelmus  Baronger,  lohannes  Baronger  iunior,
lohannes  Bennesson  et  lohannes  Scut  eUcti  sunt  ad  officium  bedelli
per  totum  homagium  de  quibus  predictus  lohannes  Scui  eleclus  at
per  Sencscallum  ei  iuratus  est.

Wod7vardus  preseniat  quod  I.  B.,  iun.,  R.  B.,  W.  H.,  I,  N.,
R.  S.,  R.  C,  T.  E.,  R.  H.,  succiderunt  et  asportauerunt  uirgas
etc.  (eight  fines  ofiid.)  .  .  .

Bailtuus  preseniat  quod  W.  O.  transgressus  est  noctanter  in  pisis
cum  iumentis.  .  .  .  Et  quod  W.  O.  ligauit  suem  cum  porcellis  in
Ics  rakynges  ordei. Ideo  etc.  (iiid,,  iid,).


586  APPENDIX X

m.  2d,  {Halywell).  Ponitur  in  pena  quod  nuHus  laborarius^  capiet
plus  in  die  citra  Annunciacionem  id.  ob.,  pena  xld.

£t  quod  nullus  thakker  capiet  plus  in  die  quam  iid.  citra  idem
festum  ibidem  eadem  pena  .  .  •

m.  3  d,  {^Hemmyngfofd),  Ponitur  in  pena  quod  nullus  carpentarius
capiat  ultra  duos  denaiios  per  diem  citra  Annunciacionem  beate
Marie  sub  pena  xld.,  et  post  dictum  festum  non  ultra  iiid,  sub
pena  xld.

£t  quod  hii  qui  laborant  et  sunt  laborarii  seruient  tenentibus
equaliter  sub  pena  xiid.

£t  quod  nullus  procurabit  seruientem  alterius  a  seruicio  suo  sub
pena  iis.  .  .  .

lurati  dicunt  quod  lohannes  Sutton  senior  falcauit  et  asportauit
les  communes  balkes  inter  blada  (ii  d.)  .  .  .

m.  6  ( Westone),  lurati  dicunt . .  .  quod  W,  Ch.  fregit  bilegem
in  Westbrok  cum  bidentibus. Ideo  ipse  incurrat  penam  (vid.) . . .

£t  quod  uxor  W.  M.  fregit  bilegem  coUigendo  siliquas  pisei.
Ideo  ipsa  incurrat  penam  (ii  d.)  .  . .

m.  7  d,  (Wysicwe),  Ponitur  in  pena  quod  nullus  depascat  in
prato  de  Rauele  citra  festum  Natalis  beate  Marie  sub  pena
xiid.

£t  quod  nullus  depascat  in  stipula  frumentt  citra  idem  festum
sub  eadem  pena.

lohannes  Plombe  et  lohannes  Owly  iunior  electi  sunt  ad  officium
preposiii  auiumpnalis  et  lurati  sunt.

Ponitur  in  pena  quod  nullus  depascat  in  prato  a  Wolfhey  brige
usque  Parson  broc  citra  festum  Natiuitatis  beate  Marie,  sub  pena
XX  d.  domino  et  xxd.  ecclesie. ,  .  .

£t  quod  nullus  depascat  in  stipula  citra  festiun  predictum  sub
pena  vid.  domino  et  vid.  ecclesie.

£t  quod  nullus  puUanus  ponatur  in  campum  cum  iumentis  sub
eadem  pena  vid.  domino  et  vid.  ecclesie  predicta.

£t  quod  nullus  ponat  canabum  neque  linum  in  aqua  a  Bury
Pyghtill  usque  Gosholme  sub  pena  predicta.

£t  quod  omncs  qui  tenent  gardina  versus  le  Brook  euacuent
talices  et  dammynges  a  le  broke  citra  festum  sancti  Martini  sub  pena
cuiuslibet  deficientis  vi  s.  viii  d.

*  These  entries  do  not  concern  agrarian  by-laws,  but  I  insert  them  as
intcrestinjT  in  themselves,  showing  the  complexity  of  the  jurisdiction  of  the

Court-leet.


APPENDIX X  587

Ricardus  Randolf,  Ricardus  Baker,  Ricardm  Rede  et  Stephanos
at  Gate  electi  sunt  prepositi  autumpnalis  iurati. . . .

m,Sd.  {Chaieris),  Iurati  dicunt  .  .  .  quod  lohannes  Pegge  de
Somersham  falcauit  iniuste  infra  ladam  de  Crowlode,  ubi  illi  de
Somersham  nunquam  falcauenint. Ideo  etc.  (xl  d).

I  give  one  more  set  of  extracts  from  the  Court  Rolls  of  the
Derbyshire  manors  of  the  Duchy  of  Lancaster,  which  seems
interesting  on  account  of  the  sharp  division  of  the  manorial  court
into  a  free  and  a  bond  section.

Duchy  0/  Lancaster  C our i  Rolls  45/525  (4-6  Ric.  II).

Inquisitio  liberorum  presentat  quod  Thomas  de  Wokhawe  nihil
tenens  (nihil  hie  quia  in  agistamento  yemali)  occupat  communam
pasture  cum  Ixxx  bidentibus.  £t  quod  idem  Thomas  superonerat
pasturam  cum  xxiv  aueriis  de  catallis  forensicis  sine  licentia  domini.
Ideo  in  misericordia  . . .

Inquisitio  natiuorum  presentat  quod  . . .  item  R.  W.  superonerat
communam  pasture  cum  xx  bidentibus.

Duchy  0/ Lancaster  Court  Rolls  48/567  (1-4  Henry  VI).

m.  3.  Inquisitio  liberorum  iurata  presentat  quod  . . .  J.  W.  de  C
superonerat  communam  pasture  cum  Ixxx  bidentibus  .  .  .  et  quod
R.  S.  fecit  transgressionem  in  le  Fryth  cum  c  bidentibus.  Ideo
ipsi  in  misericordia.

m.  4  d.  Inquisitio  bondorum  iurata  presentat  quod  N,  de  N.
fodebat  turbas  et  petes  in  communi  ubi  non  habet  communam,
ideo  etc.  Et  quod  idem  N.  occupat  communam  cum  aueriis  suis
ubi  non  habet  communam  etc.  Et  quod  villata  de  C.  occupat
communam  ibidem  in  le  Fryth  cum  aueriis  et  bidentibus  suis  ubi
non  habent  communam.  £t  quod  eadem  villata  fodebat  turbas  et
bruera  ibidem  sine  licentia  firmarii.  Ideo  ipsi  in  misericordia.  Et
quod  I.  V.  capellanus  superonerat  communam  tenendum  cum  d
bidentibus  ubi  non  habet  communam.  Et  quod  uicarius  ecclesie
de  Bradburn  occupat  communam  similiter  cum  cc  bidentibus.  Ideo
ipsi  in  misericordia.

111.  6  d.  Inquisitio  liberorum  iurata  presentat  quod  I.  S.  de  S.
includit  i  parccllam  lerre  vocatam  Frischelyleye  ad  nocumentum
tenencium.  Ideo  ipse  in  misericordia.  Et  quod  I.  C.  de  eadem
includit  i  parccllam  terre  vocatam  le  More  ad  nocumentum  tenencium
Regis. Ideo  in  misericordia.


588  APPENDIX X

Duchy  of  Lancaster  Court  Rollt  Sl/^^^  (^-3  -£?».).

m.  3  d.  {Bonteshail).  Inquisitio  .  .  .  iurata  dicit  et  presentat
super  sacramentum  suum  quod  . . .  non  fecerunt  rupturas  suas  in
le  Kyrke  medoo,  Hartstall,  et  le  Howgh  iuzta  ordinacionem  curie
et  consensum  aliorum  vicinorum.

Duchy  of  Lancaster  C  R,  57/626  (8-9  Eliz.\

{WirkesTVorih  de  baundagio).  £t  insuper  ponunt  penam  quod
omnes  homines  facient  sepes  suas  circa  triticum  campam  ante
festum  sancti  Philippi  et  Jacobi  Apostoloram  sub  pena  ziid.

Some  extant  rolls  of  Wirkesworth  Socage  illustrate  the  same
course  of  agriculture,  e.  g.  :^

Duchy  o/lAinc.  C.  R.  49/589  (2-3  Henry  VITI\

m.  I  d.  Quod  H.  6.  et  R.  B.  forisfecerunt  penam  de  xiid.  eo
quod  non  fecerunt  rupturam  prout  iniunctum. . . .

£t  pena  posita  est  A.  fi.,  [et]  abbati  de  B.,  quod  amoiieant  ones
suas  quia  superonerant  communem  pasturam,  et  amoueantur  dtn
proximam  magnam  curiam  sub  pena  forisfaciendi  prout  patet
(xiii  s,  iv  d.,  xl  s.).

m.  5  (Afelburne).  Et  quod  I.  C,  W.  K.,  R,  H.  iun.,  W.  C.
II.  K.,  et  R.  T.  posuerunt  animalia  sua  super  terras  seminatas
antequam  grana  fuerunt  inde  asportata  contra  ordinadonem  curie
(six  fines  of  iv  d.  each).

Duchy  of  Lane.  C  R»  50/620  (4-6  Philip  and  Mary),

{Brassington),  (lurati)  ulterius  dicunt  super  sacramentum  suum
quod  R.  W.  etc.  non  fecerunt  rupturas  et  les  gappes  in  pasturis
suis  secundum  le  beyre  lawe  et  ordinacionem  inter  eos  factas.  Ideo
ipsi  sunt  et  quilibet  eorum  separatim  est  in  miaericordia  prout
palet  super  eorum  capitibus.*

m.  5  {Afat/oc),  (lurati)  .  .  .  dicunt  .  .  .  quod  H.  A.  etc  noD
annulauerunt  porcos  suos  secundum  ordinacionem  curie,  ideo  ipsi
sunt  in  misencordia.

'  Eleven  men  were  here  fined  vi  d.  each.  On  the  (mginal  rolk  each  man's
fine  was  written  over  his  name ;  the  fines  are  bracketed  at  the  end  of  eadi
sentence  throughout  the  above  extracts.


SYNOPSIS  OF  APPENDICES

PAGE

App.  I  (see  p.  48,  n.  4).  Hundred  Roll,  Middlesex,  7  Edw.  i  .  480
App.  II  (see  p.  49,  n,  i).  Chancery  Miscellanea,  Nottingham  .  484
App.  Ill  (see  p.  58). Extenta  terrarum  Honoris  de  Richmond

(Nottingham  and  Lincoln),  Exch.  T.  R.  Misc. . . . 485
App.  IV  (see  pp.  i68>76).  Domesday  Book.  MiddlesexHoXdAngs :
Table  i.  Correspondence  between  Geld  and  detailed  Holdings 490
Table  ii. Correspondence  between  Plough-land  and  detailed

Holdings 491

Table  iii. Correspondence  between  aggregate  Plough-teams

and  detailed  Holdings 492

Table  iv  a.  Correspondence  between  Teams  in  Demesne  and

Land  in  Demesne 493

Table  iv  B.  Correspondence between Villains' Teams and

detailed  Holdings  of  Villains 494

App.  V  (see  pp.  269-72)  Domesday  Book. Socman  and  Villain

Households  in  Derbyshire 495

App.  VI  (see  pp.  270,  272-3)  Domesday  Book. Socman  and

Villain  Households  in  Essex 499

App.  VII  (see  pp.  381-3)  Domesday  Book. Oxfordshire^  Berk-
shire^ and  Hertfordshire  Values 506

App.  VIII  (see  pp.  391-3)  Domesday  Book.  Westerfield,  ^f^^//*

(text  extracted) 508

App.  IX  (see  pp.  267-9,  320-1 ;  and  Essay  II»  §  2,  Chap.  Ill,  esp.
pp.  397-402)  Domesday  Book. Lincolnshire  Holdings: —
Table  i.  Correspondence  of  Geld  to  estimates  of  Plough-land :
A.  Geld  exceeding  estimates  of  Plough-land . . .510
H.  Geld  in  exact  correspondence  with  Plough-lands  • •512

C.  Geld  less  than  Plough-lands  ^ ..... 520

D.  Defective  instances :  Plough-land  omitted . . . 534
Table  ii.  Correspondence  of  Plough-teams  to  Plough-land :

A.  Number  of  Plough-teams  in  excess  of  number  of  Plough-

lands  535

B.  Equality  of  Plough-teams  with  Plough-lands . . 544

C.  Number  of  Plough-teams  less  than  of  Plough-lands . 547

'  The  above  is  the  correct  title  of  Section  C,  instead  of  the  one  givai  on

1>.  5^0.


590  SYNOPSIS  OF  APPENDICES

App.  IX  {continued).  PAGE

Table  iii.  Correspondence  between  Plough-teams  in  Demesne
and  Plough-teams  held  by  Tenants :

A.  Plough-teams  in  Demesne  only 556

B.  Ploughs  in  Demesne  in  excess  of  Tenants'  Ploughs  558

C.  Plough- teams  in  Demesne  equal  to  Tenants'  PkNighs  .  561

D.  Plough-teams  in  Demesne  less  than  Tenants'  Ploughs  .  563
£.  Plough-teams  held  by  Tenants  only  .  .  .  •  568
F.  No  Ploughs  mentioned  in  Demesne,  but  Inland  given

as  part  of  Holding 578

App.  X  (see  p.  398). By-laws :  illustrations  from  Court  Rolls,

&c.  ...  578-88


INDEX


Ntlt. — Words  between  ' '  are  pUce-oi


s  in  the  old  ipelliaE-


Abingdon,  Abbey  of,  44,  84,  107.

Accommodation  of  free  tenants,
226.  393.  426,  443,  473.

Acres,  Cornish,  149,  15a

Acres,  Field,  301.

Acres,  Fiscal,  145.

Adjudication  of  claims,  337.

Administrative  organization  fA
manor,  316-20.

Adscription  to  glebe,  435,  454.

Adveniurers,  French,  77,  78.

itlfric.  Archbishop,  Will  of,  345.

Albemarle,  Fief  o^  57.

Alfred's  galiws,  17.

Alienation  of  hundredal  jurisdic-
tion, 105,  123.

Alienation  of  land,  314.

Alod,  136-8,  355,  414.

Alodiarii,  345,  405,  411-13)  414'

'  Alulurda,'  351,

Alverstone,  116.

Ancient  Demesne,  33S,  336-8,
439.  430.  474-

Anciiiae,  464,467.

Anglo-Saxon  origins,  338.

Anitnalia  ociosa,  155.

Anmere,  437.

Annona,i,i,\.

Antecessor,  the,  43, 137,  333,  338.

Appended freemen,  373,  330-3,

Arable,  3B2-6.  ^417.

Army,  14,  32-38.  See  Military
and  Fyrd.

Arms  and  equipment,  30,  47,  49-
51,  54.60.

Array  of  men,  31,  33.

Arriire  ban,  25.

Arsylc,  Fief  of,  53-

Ash,  306.

Ash  by,  240.

Assarts,  3S4.

Assiie  of  Arms,  50.

Assiie  of  Arms,  Lombard,  30.

Assise  of  Clarendon,  7.

Asion.  287.

Augustine's,  St.,  Canterbury,  276.


'  Ballebi,'  361.


Barking,  Abbey  of,  66,  438.

Barley,  Mjum-  of,  41&

Bwleytend,  379.

Bamoldby-le-Breck,  132.

Baron,  Court,  214-IS'

Baronies,  42,  43,  44,  46-7,  3Sa

Bast  wick,  428.

Battle,  Abbey,  153.

Battle,  Wager  of,  4.

Bauem,  459.

Uayeux  Tapestry,  34,  V],

lleanland,  379.

Beauiteu,  Abbey  of,  109^

Bedfont,  169.

Bedfordshire,  35,  440,

Beedon.  180.

'  Belice,'  36a.

BeneficiaThidation,  176-9.

Beivholt,  379.

Berkhamstead,  Liberty  oi^  109.

Berkshire,  16,  3li33)  95>i»t  uSi

^  35*377^  S07.

Bemck  Pnor,  414.

'  Berton,'  365.

Berwick,  berewick,  366,  365-7,

Bcvesfield,  303

Biddenhatn,  341.

Biggleswade,  307.

Binatead,  333.

'  Bishopstrev,'  395.

Blackburn,  Manor  dS,  64.

Bbiibaxn,\\%.

Bokian  Book,  63.

BoUngbroke,  331.

Benai,  430.

Book-Uod,  I9S>  335, 3SO-7, 341-4,

401, 406,  tfi&,  414.
Boon>WDrk,  387,  409i  459-
BordmHi,  456-60,  46S,  469,  473.
Borough  Ei^bih,  350.


59*


INDEX


/iVJ/,  9.

lUrt'afii^  464.

Hovate,  281,  S7^  ;  btn/ts^  IS4»  ISS*

Hovey,  342.

*  Bradeham/  221.
Uray  field,  15a
Hrayles,  323.
Hredon,  131.

*  Hreme/  450.
lirinksitzer,  459.
hroiighton,  114,  121.
HuckinKhamshire,  440,  441.
Burgage  tenure,  234-5.
liurxerikt^  124.
Burgesses.  258,  393,  398,  399.
Bun,  469.

Burtun,  Abbey  of,  132, 447.
Bury  St.  Edmund's,  91,  109,  112,

I3l«424-
liuscarls,  2a

Buss  (a  boat),  2a

Bytield,  416.

By-laws.  136,  364,  398,  401 ;  illus-

irations  of,  578-88.

Calthorp,  368.
Cambas,  298,  434-
Cambridge,  5,  11,  399.
Cambridgeshire,  35,  94,  44a
Canterbury,  Church  of,  63.
Canute,  Fleet  of,  18.
Capitalistic  organization  of  Ma-
nors. 311-16.
Caput  Miif$rru\  36a.
Carulingians,  Army  of,  32.
Carucage,  144,  1 55-6.
Carucates,  56,  57.  58.  147,  I48, 184.
(\issti/t,  311.
Castle- ward,  16,  61.
CiiStor,  132.
Crnwrts,  431;,  462,
Ceorls.  212,  418,  420,  429,  455,

473  4.

*  Cerletcm,'  350.

i  hainpion  farming.  277.

I  h.irleinagne,  .Armies  of,  30,  34.

'  i  hi-pchain,*  316.

rhrHM-y,  Churrh  of.  !o6.

(  lirshire.  2f>S,  294,  295.

(  hrslcr.  5,  1 10.  376.

Chuhrster,  Church  of,  257.

*  <  hirnedecnnie/  336.
1  hisMick.  J7U

i.hurthes,  I'ansh,  Land  i»f.  22*j,
37  ?■


Church-scnc.  373,  419.  443.  4^

Ctamttres  m  I>.li-,  23S.

Classes,  social.  15,  403-7^

'  Cocrinlon/  334.

Colchester,  20,  91.

CoUberU,  468.

Collection  of  geld,  199.  sua

Collective  ownership*  356-63.  y&\

Cohmia  pariiaha^  331.

CoitmMj^  435.

Cmm'fahiJt  209^

CommendatioD.  346,  347.  423

Common  Law,  influcacc  <tf.  4??-

Commons,  388.

Communalism,  3I5-I8,  997,  400.

401,  476- S.
Commumiimies  pmr&ckgmrmm^  ;^
Commuuiioii  paymcais.  39a  4?*
Comjna  lettlemcBCa,  373' S*
Confiscatioa  of  mates,  43.  2>9
Conquest, Norman, cflccu oi,

313,  318,  4>o.  471-
Ccnsiahmiarimi^  45.
i'tmimrituiimani,  584.
CvmsmHiuiimes vtiUt^ v:\ .'p.

434-
Cornwall,  150,  180.

Corporate ownership, 3:7  6;.

397-8.
Correspondence  ol  lemt  n  D  t.

161.
Cortham,  333.
Costessey,  316.
Coce,  387.
Ceiariu  Cocters.  4SS>  4£o-3.  4T3

Counties,  in  Sur\-cy,  90-61

County  Court,  90,  91.

Court Rolls  of  MaBon, ir-*^

$78-588.
Courts.  Royal,  439.  aVK  473
Criminal  bw,  Scinrtwissiaa  •-

fluenceon,  10^  11.
Cmfiers,  457.
Cniwle.  343.
Cuddington,  413.
Cuiinrmf^  30l .
Cumberland.  66.
'Cunegaston.*  433.
Curworthy,  334.

Custom,  1 1 3f  383.438-
Cuitomary  pnyventa,  143.
Customs,  pffoni  w\_  9a
Cu«tumals  of  Countna,  m  Sanvf.
yo.  112.


DaneKeld,i4t,  143- AndweCeld.

Danelaw,  56,  57,  92,  187.

Danes,  wars  with,  17,  35,  340.

Danewirke,  37.

Danish  fleet,  37,  3^1.

Danish  influence,  4,  5,  9,  20,  64,

420,  478.
Danish  military  organiiation,  20,

21.33.  3S.  37-
Danish  shires,  4,  3;,  417-18,  436,

440.  467.  478-
Dartford,  287.
Decay  of  free  class,  212-14,  3i8,

474-
Deeping,  East,  335.
Deerhurst,  319.
Demesne,  174,  353-69,  396,  462,

463.  SeealsoAncient  Demesne.
Jlenei^  291.

Denis,  St.,  Abbey  of,  319.
Denmark,  10.
Derby,  400.
Dert^,  Manor  of.  64.
Derbyshire,  35, 266, 269-72,495-9-
Derbyshire  Court  Rolls,  587-8.
Devonshire, 87, 101, jjo,  297,

"99,  333.  377,  464-
DivisKin  (tenancy- in-chief),  351,
Dominica  firma,  378.
DotninicuM,  353.
Dorchester,  Dorset,  350.
Dorchesier,  Oxon,  315.
Dorset,  58,  S7,  336,  464.
Dover,  124.
Drengage,  62-6.


Dumbteton,  259.
Dunwich,  201.
Durham,  63,  136.

East  Anglia,  94, 95,  301, 331.434-
Kasl Anghan measurements in

D.  H.,  301.
'  Ebrige,'  359.
Edmonton,  175.
i:dward  the  Confessor,  Chatters

of.  2.

Elmslon,  271.

\-.\y  Inquest,  159.

I'^nc  roach ments  on  freemen,  423,

442.
Ilssex.  94, 269,  372-3,  330,  414,

420.  440, 449-506.
Kstaics,  large,  313.


Evesham,  Church  of,  41R.
Exchange,  title  by,  226.
Exemptions  from  geld.  181-96.

Exon  Domesday,  22S.
Expeditions  of  war.  30-I.
Extraordinary  iiiiposls,  ij3.

Faiingdon,  Manor  of,  109.


Farm  of  one  n^t^  142,  384.
Faims,  single,  264,  371.
Farahun,  17^
Fees,  Great,  53,  6a
Fees,  Small,  53-4, 55>  59-
Fenton,  362.

Feodum  militis.  See  Knight*' fees.
Feoffamenlum,  cmtiqmMt,  43.
Ftoffamentum,  nvfum,  43,
FeoRment  without  Charter,  247.
Feorm,  farm,  143.
Ferlio,  ferling,  149>  I5i-
Fenfield,  104.
Festeiroan  (surety),  9.
Feudalism, 14,  39-89,  308,  334,

344.  471.  473-S.
Feudum,  74,  232,  348-50.
Fiet  39,  232-6.
Field  hides,  303.
Firma. See  Farm.
Firma  burgi,  381 .
Fiscal  and  Agrarian  imits,  146-
Fisheries,  293,  385,  455-
Five-hide  unit,  31,  33,  34.  36.  SS.

58-9,  77,  83,  84,  202,  349.
Fleet,  Canute's,  18.
Flemings,  15,74.
Fold,  soke  of,  387-90,  434,  435.
Fold-wotthiness,  28, 36S,  419-
Folgarii,  99.
Folliestone,  450.

Folkland,  255,  256, 357,  363,  401.
Fcrik-right,  356.
Food  rents,  143,  337,  364-6.
Foreartk,  379.

Forest,  61,  364,  393,  397,  455.
Foresteal,  ill.

Forfeitures,  tiay tis, 116,  418,
I 419.  438-9-
l-ofge.  359-
horinsfcum,  39.

Fomtynes  of  Gainsbontagh,  5S1.
I Fortilone,  350.
! Franchises,  108-39.

q


->94


INDEX


Frasui  militts^  87.
l-rancigenaty  7a-4»  78.
FroHCUs  thefmuSf  415.
Frankalmotn^  59,  234,  374.
Krank-pl.dfcev  197.
Franklins.  118,  418,  440-4.
Krankwell,  75.
Free  dast. See  Decay.
Freemen,  35,  104,  105.  133,  aia,

235»273.33o.4i7»43i  -5.472-3-
See  also  IJberi  homims.

Freemen,  subjection of.  423-30,

454.  455-
Freedmen,  468-70.

I  rench  adventurers,  78.

French  law  m  ICnf^land.  2.  3,  7.

41,(4,404.

FrigwMH^  42a

Frigsocit^  124

I  risians,  17.

'  Fromnie,'  350.

Fulham,  171,  173.

Fytield,  178,  202.

tvrd,  14,  22,  23-34,  65.  86,  8»>.

95.  209.  39a-
/■>n/-a'i/^,  no,  111.

Fyrd-worthinest,  28,  388, 419.

ilafol,  143,  210.  255, 267.  390. 44:.
(;afol-earth,  387.
(iaintborough  by-laws,  581-2.
(Harrisons  in  towns,  21.
(ravelkind, 92, 137, 24< . 44^

,459.  ^'

Cteburs,  1 24, 440,  466.

iiedaUs^  281.

(ield. 140-207, 210, 451. Sre

F.xi-mptions.
<;r)d,  Inauest  of  10S4,  188.
'(ielinigenam,*  350-
(jeneat.  71-3,  440.
iUfsuma,  143.  375.  39a
iitsett  land,  396.
(tUstnnbury.  MonaMery  of,  >.^.
tiloucesterihiic,  3V'.  155.  464.
I  .oldh.inKcr,  415.
<  Itirc  acre,  279.
( ;iiiilsl)y,  357.
« •r.iniham.  132.  320.  583.
ttnftihfti  //r,  111.
•  .u  mI,  Kinji^,  iii^. >te .i'»"

Mi:s(  arU.
<iUiid«,  Amieil.  1  u
</ur/».  2<>7.
(/:<r. /;«•!.  3,S/i.


iiofmae^  37.
//a#tf .  202.
'ilAUeeldeiie/
HalMiirloag,  378.
HaUmoCe,ai5.
Hmll,  the,  30$,  3St-6s.44>.
Hdm,  340,  341.
Haminton,  174.
Hamlets^  a66,  271.
Hampshire,  333.
Hampton,  17a
Ifamuotn^  III.
Hardwickf  384,  369.
Ilarmondswortb,  i6y.
Harokl's  army,  35,  )(k.
llanow,  169.  174.
HartinfitOD,  138.
llastinKS,  16.  at  mait.
Mauberipel.  49,  $a

*  Ha\tx-iimberv*  3«;i.
Hayiebury,  312.
Hays,  391-  3.
Headland  acre,  379.
Heartbfastmen,  9t^.

*  Helmcrintonc.'  333.
Hepworth,  423.
Herdi%ick,  284*  369.
y/iry, 10, 14. 3f. 3^-  *^

417.
Herefordshire,  9s,  365,  394.  37I
Heriut,  244,  439.
Henf6rdshire»  94,  114,  41^  4«°.

507.
H idage,  rcduciiofi  ol,  1 77 ^
Huiagium^  143.
Hide  and  canicitr,  147.
Hide,  (;cld.  I48»  3o$.
Hides,  £xrm|H,  \h\.
Hides,  Field,  aoo-^
Hides,  Nunbcred,  179

Hired,  i^liy

Hired soldierv. 15. Sfv  M*f


Hiti-'heiit  323.

/iiwisi,  102,  S03,  341.

Ho/,  460.

Holburne.  238

H  oilier nv»»,  i€ii6.

Holm,  357.

Holt,  329.

Honie-fami, 316^ SSI"^

44^.

Homesteads,  scaitcrei,  26}.
//.'/i//«^j,  6;,  409.  4ick
Home  teifmau^  413.


Honour,  a  greftt  lief,  348-50.
Hooe,  75.

Homcastle,  347.  320.
Hcimmere  Hundred,  107.
Hospitti,  231.
HuffH,  34,  460.
Hundred,  29,  IOO-7,  195,323.
Hundred  moot,  96-100.
Hundredors,  98.
Huningham,  339.
Hunting,  provision  for,  61,  393.
Huntingdonshire,  j5t  453>
Husbandry,  ai,  87,  88,  363^304.
Muscarls,  19-ai.
Husmaend,  4S9'

Iceland,  10.

IckboTOugh,  330.

Incidents,  feudal,  344.

Indictmenl  procedure,  7,  S.

Ine's  Laws,  378.

Inhnd,  185,  194,  3ti,  366,  451,

578.
Jnvasiones,  336.  228,  43S-
Iniaara,  [06,  194.
Inward,  143.
Isle  worth,  171.

Jomtvikings,  tt.
Judicts,  5.

JuLiliones,  2j8.
Jurisdiction,  9°-'39i  ^'>
J  urj',  trinl  by,  4  ;  Grand,?,  8.
Juarice,  feudal  and Kranchisal,
104,  108-17.

'  Ketvendun,'  231.
Kensington,  170.

Jvent.  86,  93,  94,  101,  111,  153,
•-=276,  2S2, 387,  331,  33S.  383,
440,  442,  444i  447,  448-
Kidlington,  400'
Kind,  payments  in,  [43.
Kingsbury,  172.
King's  expeditions,  30-3.
King's  thanes.  409.
Kingston,  Heref.,  119.
Kinship,  [  [.  215.
Kirkliy,  Line,  269.
Kirtby,  Yorks.  358.
Knights, 49, 50, 74, 89. 370,

403-
Knight's  fee,  41-60,  Sc^
Knight's  service,  I7t  4i-3i  4K.


•Ea  595

Labour,  demand  for,  458-60, 47S.
Laen-liatd,  254,

Lagmen,  5.

Lakcop,  9.

Lahslit,  9.

'  Lailand,'  65.

Lailand,  Manor  of,  64.

Lancashire,  35, 64-6, 181,336,409.

Lancaster Duchy, Derbyshire

Court  Rolls,  J87.
Land  and  people,  218-79.
Landeeap,  9.
Ijxndcop,  9.
Land  gable,  143.
L;ind  taxes,  142,  143.
Land  tenure.  31,  39,  40,  88,  31^

304,  404.
Landlordship,  Anglo-Saxon,  345-

8,419.
Lando^vne^s  and  cenanis,  403-30.
Laitdshirm,  35,
Langdendalc,  266.
Langton,  360.
Last,  the,  97.
Lathe,  97.
Leases.  239-33.
Lechlade,  iS'i.
Ledbury,  314.
l^'i'"j:.  37-
Leet,  Court,  31,

■  Lega,'  305.

Lefts  barb-irorum,  10.
Leicestershire,  35,  331,  333,  478.
Leominster.  307,  313,  380.
Leta,  314-
Letheringseil,  310,

■  Lcveleghe,'  399,
Lex  tquitandi .  70.
/.cyrewile.  111.
/,»;yn>yj,  freed  men,  468-70.
IJMhs.  331.

IJberi  komutes,  64,  6j.  115,  30I,

330, 413. 4I4-3'>. 473- Se*

also  Freemen.
Uiismtn,  sailors,  t8.
I -inches,  379.  -  -  ■'>'

Lincoln,  s.  "8,  398,  334.1  '  '>  •"
Lincoln,  Church  of,  83,86(3371'''
Lincoln,  Earldom  of,  57.
Lincolnshire, 35, 57, 138,  133,

187,  301,  367,  368,  386,  3««^

33l.33S.'t78.
Lincolnshire  Holdmgs  in  Damn'

day  analysed.  510-77.
Liltleton,  305.


59^


INDKX


Livery,  143,  220,  427,  42i>.  1

Lordship,  feudal,  472.

Lots,  281,  401.  I

iMmiimtriiy  456.

Lutwyche,  332.

Lydney,  306.

Lyndford,  220.

NLic^lh,  cy,  25^'-

NLildon.  Hattic  uf.  37.  I

NUlincbbury,  20,  31.  34<^.

MittunUs^  311.

Maturiutn^  305,  308,  30/

Manlot,  281.

M  aiior  and  Soke,  1 30-  5 .

Manor  and  township.  390-3.

Manors. 305-52* 33**'  3';o« 3V».

47 1 .  474.
Manbtleld,  318.

Mansio.  305,  340.

Afiwsum^  457.

NLinuniission  of  slaves,  465.  468.

Marsam,  223.

Mass-thane,  374.

Meadowii,  204.  27 S.  286-8.  400.

Measurements in Domesday,

WA»i  299  303.
•  Medevcld,'  177.  1

Medhamstead,  467.  |

Mtusti,  364.  I

Mercenaries,  14  38.  j

Middlesex.  48  /if'/c,  84. 167  76.  ;

3j8,  446,  480-4-
Middlesex Holdings analysed,

490  5-
Middleton,  305.

Military as^«iciat:on«. .S<andi-

navian.  11.
Military  ser\icc,  16.  41.  340.
Milit.ir)'  sy>t«'iiis,  14-8^.  2o8-«>.
Military  tenure.  ^9  fo,
Ml/:/rt. Srr  Kn^rhtN.
MiiiiM. J3,  J",  3^-33. :Sce  a]»o

/'if.:',
Mi.U.  J-,;.  \yt.
MdII.ishI.  3'>3.
M«un  y  rrn:".  ?«/-.
Mi'Mu'r^i:  t'f  u/i/,  writ  ol.  4^0,
\l»»ot-viortliincN!».3>.  :i8.  3h>.  4Hy.
'•lorieyii.  Hitnuiir  df.  ;3.  53.  5«>.  '<>.
Mctrt^.i^r.  zu-
M<»rtin.iin.  Uiw  ol,  33',.
Mt:IrrI-f  I. ]  zi.

^L.n(lll.ll:i.  Zi2.


*  Nanrminwlinilr/  J3B.
National  levies.  »  3^.

Na\-a]  esublisluneot,  17-
NayUnd,  431.
Newark.  437.
\ewboW,  3J9,  43».
Newenton,  291.
Newton,  Manor  of.  64.

Norfolk,  35,  94.  10$.  iis.  1 .'
285,  382,  438.  43«.  43«^

Normandy.  43.  69.

Northalt,  171.  17a.

Nonhamptunshirr,  9.  35.  Mi  il-
188.  295,  375.  416.  467.

North befv,  435.

Northumberland 9  66l

Norway,  10, 1.

Norwich,  lao,  398.

Nottinghanuhire,  35.  400  a^
484.

Oath  6L  rwcl%«  Thanes.  «l

Old  Knglish  eknienis  in  tkvtu^

century,  a.
Open-6eld  syttem.  the,  ate  r**.

279.  397.401-8,476^
Orchards,  393.

Ordinance  of  Ann«^  :&«*>-

Osprii»ei,  398.

Oswaklesbw.  Triple  HudM  ^

Oven,  kMd's,  187.
Ownership,  Cfommuaai.  jor
Ownership,  Corporate.  257  ^
Oxen.  154.  155.
Oxford.  375.  399-
Oxfordshire,  87.  187,  371.  ye^
Ox)(ang,  39.  38a

Tannage,  389,  391.  )8s
Parage,  245  5<^ 40$. #a». «:■

4J9.
r.irish  church,  land  ol.  \7y
r.tn'um  /r^v,  4  JO
;  a«ture.  204,  aM,  40a
Patronage.  .904.  346.
Pawton,  180.
Payment  of  «aikin«  la.
P.iyment  of  joklwn.  i|.  i&
i  ayinent4.  Cj»tocnar>,  14a.
Peavint  hoMingt,  175.  461.
!'raMntry.  314,  43I-70L
I  'eaMnls,  M  ibtary  srr«  ka  d  H^  ^


'  Pellinges,"  333.

Perahore,  Church  of,  u8,  418.

I'eteibo rough,  Chundi  of,  44,  84,

85.  33S>383,439.  447-
Picked  men,  a8, 33.
Pickering,  579.
Pi^s,  389,  391.
'  Pimpre,"  350.
Pirates,  I?.
Flaeila, in private courts, 65,

117-19.
'  Platenoui,'  363.
Pleas  of  Crown,  107.
Plough,  the,  154.
Ptoughland, 163-73, 375, 491,

Sio,  513,  547,  589. See  Team-

Plough-ieams,  589.

Population  and  settlements,  37o>

Port  Meadow,  358,  399.

'  Postinges,'  363.

Prtcaria  remuntratoria,  139,

Prectiriae  verba  regii,  335.

Preston,  395.

Prttium,  381.

Priests,  land  of,  373,  45;.

Private  property,  478.

Problems  of  eleventh  century,  I.

Profits  of  jurisdiction,  110,  117.

Progresses,  Royal,  65,  3ia


Ra<i(henistres,  Radmen.  61 ,69-  73,

89,313.387.
'^•'P',  97.  353-
Riim borough,  243.
Hanisey  Abbey,  44  ;  Court  Kolts

of,  583-6.
Krcognition  of  lordship,  343-4.
Reclihidiitcs  Singularum Ptrso-

/laruiii,  71,  83,  440-66.
Ueeveland,  373.
Keyalitics,  Grants  of,  105, 106,

426,  430.
belief,  47. 48,  i3,  343.
Rents,  3S3.

Repartition  of  geld,  196-9.
Rcpinijhale,  378.
Repps,  438.
A'e/to  h.iiiniii,  25,  33.


Rhuddlan,  113,  366.  369-

Riby,  133.

Richmond,  Honour  of,.  58,  48$-

490.
Riding,  the,  97.
Rockingham.  190.
Romney,  124.  444-
Rothley,  135,  43s.
Royal  household,  Food  for,  iyy
Royal  manors,  333  6, 337, 409.

430.  437-40-
Royal  sokes,  328-32.  437.
RuttdaJe,  runrig^  580.
Rural  organiiaiion.  305-403.

,Sac  and  soc, 109, 115-38, 139,

344,345- 364, 4191  4a<.  432-
Sailors,  hired.  17,  tS,  3o.
Salford,  64,  65.

Salisbury,  Oath  of  tenants,  81.
.Saltworks,  393.
.Sandwich,  31.
Sawbiidge  worth.  168.
Scandinavian  customs, Judicial.


MUiury,


SCd


%34-


Reve


ion  of  land.  23y.


-Scattered  homeste&ds.  3 18.
Scot,  distribution  of,  94.
Scotland,  Marches  of,  33,  45.
Scutage,  15,42,  53,  143-
SiypMUii,  84,  89.
Sea-lyrd,  31.
'Se^enehou,'  313.
Sellmge,  363.
Selsey,  465.
Sergeanties,  17,60-73.
Sergeants,  King's,  68.
Sergeants,  Riding,  67.  69-72, 1%
89-

Sttvi,  429, 460, 463-7.

Service,  Feudal,  43,  238-44.

Service,  M  ilitaiy,  140-

Service,  Personal,  403,  404.  405.

Service,  Private,  61.

Service,  Rustic,  386  90,  43')<  434>

456. 467.
Stn-tiiiim  tUbiliim,  41.  89.
Settlements,  types  of,  264-73.
Shaftesbury,  Monastery  of,  84.
Sherborne,  Monastery  of,  84.
■Ships,  Scandinavian,  18.
Shirt,  military  sen  ire  of,  33.
Shire  Court,  91,  95, 97.


59«


INDEX


Shire,  Thanes  of,  95-6.

Shires,  legal  peculiarities  of,  92-6.

Shropshire,  112,  336,  376.

Si/va  minutay  290.

Skypton- in- Craven,  Honour of,

57.
Slavery,  manumission  from,  465,

474.
Slide,  278.

Socage  tenure,  40,  235,  249.

Soctmanni  liberie  432.

Soke,  120-39,  210,320-3,  328-32,

344»  359»  423,  433»  436.
Soke  and  manor, 130-8,  320-3,

359.
Sokemen, 58, 124-6, 133,  270,

32i,33o>392,  431-46,  45a-
Sokes,  Royal,  328.

Soldariiy  20.

Soldiers,  professional,  17,  21,  30,

88.
Somersall,  271.
Somerset,  87,  335.
Somerton,  428.
Southfleet,  382.
Southwark,  116.
Sparsholt,  221.
Stafford,  Barony  of.  53.
StafTordshire,  60,  295,  415.
Staines,  171.
Stallingborough,  267.
Stamford, 5, 118, 177, 439,

580.
Standard,  Battle  of,  25.
Stanton,  422.
Stepney,  176.
Stevenage,  369.
Stoneleigh,  329.
Stonham,  220,  233.
Stores  of  manor,  364.
Stow  St.  Mary,  Line,  321.
Subinfeudation,  46.
Succession,  Rules  of  O.K.,  407,

410,  448.
Succession  by  women.  250-3.
Suffolk,  94, 105, 131,  197,  300,

422,427,431,436.
Sulung, 144,  145,  147,  153,  276,

282.
Surrey,  412.
Sussex,  151.  333.
Sutton,  350.
Swaton,  240.
Sweden,  lo.
Sybercrofl,  60.


TtUlagium^  143.
Taunton,  106,  118,  307.
Tavistock,  Abbey  of,  aaS.
Taxation,  140-207,  21a
Teamland,  153-74,  589.
Teams, I54~5»  i74-6»  49»f  494f

535,  556.
Tegni,  AngUd,  87,  335i  403-
Teignus  frcuuus,  415.
Tenants'^Iand,  370-402.
Tenmanland,  103,  281.
Tenures,  40,  218-3041  4^-
Terra,  305,  306,  307.
Terra  arabiliSy  282-6.
Terra  carucis^  157-74-
Terra  hosfiitaia^  296.
Te9ra  libera,  255,  413.
lerra  Regis,  257,  3^4-
Terra  lesiamentalis,  237,  250.
Terra  vUlanorum^  449,  451.
Testamenium,  250.
Tew,  Great,  58a
Tewkesbury,  398.
Thaneland,  68,  81,  85,  87,  88,

370-2, 406.

Thanes,  6,  65,  66,  79-«5.  95, 9^

370,  403-",  415,  43a
Thanes,  twelve  senior,  6,  7, 8.
Thanet,  35?.
Theows,  40(5.

TkingfPtannalid,  11,  19,  21.
Tithings,  99,  197-
Title  to  land,  220-8.
*  Tocheswilla,*  335.
Toft,  103.
Tollesbury,  371.
Tottenham,  176.
Township,  197-9, 216, 217,  390-8,

402,  475-8.
Treding,  97.
Tribal  system,  215.
Tribularii,  311.
Tribute,  356,  385.
Trinoda  tiecessitas,  29^  82. 83,  95,

255.
Tulor,  224.
Twelvehyndman,  420.
Twyhyndman,  212,  420.

Upton,  60.

Utware,  63,  194,  344-

Vacaria^  368.

Value  of  estate,  381-3 ;  Values  in
three  counties,  506-7.


Vassalage,  personal,  404.
Vavassorie,  63,  78.
Vtderlag,  11.
Vendible  soke,  136.
ViH,  391 . See  Township.
Village  community, 476-8. See

also  Township.
Villages,  large,  368,  272.
Villages,  small,  371-3.
Villam  households,  37a
Villain  socmen,  430.
Villainage,  servile,  theory  of,  453.
Villains,  370,  430,  445, 446-56.

4S7.  473-
Villains'  land,  449-S3-
Villani,  pleni  el  kimidii,  448.
Vineyards,  293.
Virgales,  150,  152.

Wales,  32,  45.  61,  367.
'  Walintune,'  64.
Waltham,  79,  179.
Wantage,  Witanagemot,  6,  8.
Wapentake,  6,  7,  9,  117.

lV„ra,  106,  344.
Ward,  97.
Ward-penny,  143.

IVarland,  185,  211,  344,451.
Warwick,  120.
Warwickshire,  333,  336,
Waste,  294-9-
Weald  of  Kent,  ago.
Weapons  of  fyrd,  24,  25,  30.
Week-work,  387,  439.
Welsh  expeditions,  15,  16,  17,
Welsh  hides,  1 50.  204.


iVi;grlii,  2 1 5,  2
Wprrington,  22S.


,  Church  of,  418.
Westmoreland,  66,
Weston,  361.
Whitby,  295.
mca,  368.
'  Wichale,'  331.
"Wichc,*  355.
William  Kufus's  host  at  Hastin,

16,35.
Wilton,  Abbey  of,  agi .
Wiltshire,  68,  450.
Winferthine,  3S2.
'  Winfrode,"  351.
Winierboume,  a6i.
'  Wintreboume,'  351.


'  Wisi


'53-


Wiston,  133.

'  Witehunge,'333.

WitenaRemot,  6,  ■".
I Wi/uvrJ,  9.

Women, Succession by, 253,
253.
' Woodchester,  398.
I  Woods,  304,  389-93,  3**'-
'  Wotcester,  Monastery  of,  243,

Worcester,  See  of,  84.

Worcestershire,  70, 1  r3,  1 19,  2  jo,
3^5-  4i8.  439-  44'-

Writs,  title  through,  331-3.

Yardland,  29,  284.

Yamlon,  5,  203,  387,  400,  578.

York,  5,  203,  400.

Yorkshire,  35,  s6,  57, 165,  252,

267.268,331.358,436.
Yorkshire, Pickering township

and  by-laws,  579,  ;So.
yrfi/,mi/.  278,  a«4.  369-


1


OXFORD

I'RINTKD  AT  THE  CLARENDON  ?RES«;

BY  HORACR  HART, If.A.

PRINTER  TO  THE  UNIVERSITY


_  *


r


"^^


V.  HOBROUKR  Wll.l,  HF  CHARC^KD
I-.  COST  OF  0\-KRI)Ui-  NOTIFICATION
THIS  mX>K  rs  NOT  RFTURNRI)  TO
!■ I.IURARV  ON  OR  lil-l'ORI-  THR  LAST

'11-:  STAME'r:i>  nr.i.ow.


Eii-^!  Id


;, ^li.M ""
