ROMAN LAW

IN

MEDIAEVAL
EUROPE


BY

PAUL
VINOGRADOFF


HARPER  X
BROTHERS

LONDONXNEWYORK


ROMAN LAW


IN


MEDIAEVAL EUROPE


BY

PAUL VINOGRADOFF

M.A.,  D.C.L.,  LL.D.,  DR.  HIST.,  F.B.A.
CORPUS  PROFESSOR  OF  JURISPRUDENCE
IN  THE  UNIVERSITY  OF  OXFORD
HONORARY  PROFESSOR  OF  HISTORY
IN  THE  UNIVERSITY  OF  MOSCOW


LONDON  AND  NEW  YORK
HARPER &.  BROTHERS

45  ALBEMARLE  STREET,  W.
1909


-


College
Library


so


PREFACE


THE sketch of a great historical process
presented in the following chapters is
based on lectures delivered in the spring of
1909 as an advanced historical course on the
invitation  of  the  University  of  London. I  have
not attempted to trace the history of Roman
Law  in  the  Middle  Ages  in  all  its  details  or  even
in  all  its  stages,  but  I  have  tried  to  characterise
the principal epochs of this development in
Western  Europe. One  of  the  reasons  for  pub-
lishing this  essay  consists  in  the  fact  that  there
is no English account  of the  mediaeval  life_  of
Roman Law  similar to the masterly  tracts of
Modderman  and  v.  Below. I  have  given  refer-
ences at the foot  of the pages  very  sparingly,
and have  cited  in  connection  with  each  lecture
only the books which have been used  in  pre-
paring it. But  a  few  fragments from  the  texts
have been added in an Appendix to  illustrate
some points as to which it  was important  to


PREFACE

consider  the  very  words  of  the  original  authori-
ties.

I  take  this  occasion  to  thank  the  Dean  and
Chapter  of  Worcester  for  the  loan  of  their  famous
MS.  of  Vacarius'  Liber  Pauperum.

P. VlNOGRADOFF
OXFORD,

October,  1909


CONTENTS

LECTURK  PAGE

I. THE  DECAY  OF  ROMAN  LAW  i

II. THE  REVIVAL  OF  JURISPRUDENCE .  32

III.  ROMAN  LAW  IN  FRANCE . .  59

IV.  ROMAN  LAW  IN  ENGLAND  ...  84
V. ROMAN  LAW  IN  GERMANY  .  .106

APPENDIX '3-


ROMAN LAW
IN MEDIEVAL EUROPE

LECTURE  I

DECAY  OF  THE  ROMAN LAW

Principal  authorities:  Mommsen,  Ostgothische  Studien
in  the  Neues  Archiv  fur  altere  deutsche  Geschichtskunde,
XIV,  1889;  Notitia  dignitatum,  ed.  Seeck,  1876;  Codex
Theodosianus,  ed.  Mommsen  et  Kriiger,  1905  ;  Lex  Romana
Visigothorum,  ed.  Haenel,  1838;  Conrat  (Cohn),  Das
Breviarium  Alaricianum,  1903  ;  Conrat  (Colin),  Der
westgothische  Gaius ;  der  westgothische  Paulus,  Ver-
handlingen  der  Kon.  Akademie  van  Wetenschoppen  te
Amsterdam,  N.R.  VI,  4  ;  and  VIII,  4.  Lex  Ro-
mana Curiensis,  ed.  Zeiimer,  in  the  Monumenta  Ger-
mania?  Historica,  Leges,  V  ;  //.  Bninncr,  Deutsche
Rechtsgeschichte,  1906,  I2,  especially  §§  35  and  52  ;
Savigny,  Geschichte  des  romischen  Rechts  im  Mittelalter,
I,  II  ;  K.  Neumeyer,  Die  gemeinrechtliche  Entwickelung
des  internationalen  Privat  und  Strafrechts  bis  Bartolus,  I,
1901  ;  A.  von  Halban,  Das  romische  Recht  in  den  ger-
manischen  Volksstaaten,  I,  II,  III,  1899-1907  ;  /.  Picker,
Untersuchungen  zur  Erbenfolge  der  ostgermanischen
Rechte,  I-V,  1891-1902  ;  Leges  Visigothorum,  ed.
Zeitmer,  in  the  Monumenta  Germania?  historica,  Leges,  in
4to  ;  Leges  Langobardorum,  ed.  Bluhme,  Mon.  Germ,
hist.  Leges,  fol.  IV  ;  Formulae  regni  Francorum,  ed.
ZeumeY,  in  the  Mon.  Germ,  hist.,  4to  ;  H.  Bmnner,  Zur
Rechtsgeschichte  der  romisch.  germanischen  Urkunde,
1906  ;  Fustel  de  Conlanges,  Histoire  des  institutions  de  la
France,  especially  Les  origines  du  Syst£me  feodal,  1890;


ROMAN LAW


P.  Vinogradoff,  Komanistische  Einfliisse  im  Angel-
sachsischen  Recht:  das  Buchland  in  the  Melanges  Fitting,
II,  1908  ;  H.  Fitting,  Die  juristischen  Schriften  des
friiheren  Mittelalters,  1876  ;  M.  Conrat,  Geschichte  der
Quellen  und  der  Litteratur  des  romischen  Rechts  im
friiheren  Mittelalter,  1891  ;  /.  Flach,  Etudes  d'histoire  du
droit  Remain,  1893  ;  Isidori  Hispalensis  Etymologise
sive  Origines,  in  the  Corpus  grammaticorum  latinorum
veterum,  ed.  Lindemann,  III,  1833  ;  Lex  Romana
Canonice  Compta,  ed.  Conrat,  in  the  Transactions  of  the
Amsterdam  Academy,  1904.

WITHIN  the  whole  range  of  history  there
is  no  more  momentous  and  puzzling  pro-
blem than  that  connected  with  the  fate  of  Roman
Law  after  the  downfall  of  the  Roman  State.
How  is  it  that  a  system  shaped  to  meet  certain
historical  conditions  not  only  survived  those
conditions,  but  has  retained  its  vitality  even
to  the  present  day,  when  political  and  social
surroundings  are  entirely  altered  ?  Why  is  it
still  deemed  necessary  for  the  beginner  in  juris-
prudence to  read  manuals  compiled  for  Roman
students  who  lived  more  than  1500  years  ago  ?
How  are  we  to  account  for  the  existence  of  such
hybrid  beings  as  Roman  Dutch  Law  or  of  the
recently  superseded  modern  Roman  Law  of
Germany  ?  How  did  it  come  about  that  the
Germans,  instead  of  working  out  their  legal
system  in  accordance  with  national  precedents,
and  with  the  requirements  of  their  own  country,
broke  away  from  their  historical  jurisprudence
to  submit  to  the  yoke  of  bygone  doctrines  of  a


DECAY  OF THE ROMAN LAW

foreign  empire  ?  Surely  these  and  kindred
questions  are  well  worthy  of  the  attention  of
lawyers,  historians,  and  students  of  social  science.
I  cannot  attempt  to  cover  the  whole  ground  in
the  discussion  of  such  a  problem,  but  it  may  be
of  some  value  to  sketch  the  chief  lines  of  the
subject  in  regard  to  the  principal  countries  of
Western  Europe  during  the  Middle  Ages.  It  was
mainly  at  that  time  that  there  took  place  the
momentous  process,  not  inappropriately  called
by  German  scholars  '  the  Reception  of  Roman
Law.'

We  shall  have  to  deal  with  laws  and  law  books,
with  doctrine  and  casuistry — all  topics  devoid
of  romantic  charm.  But  there  is  a  peculiar
interest,  as  I  conceive  it,  in  watching  the  play
of  social  forces  and  human  conceptions.  I  should
like  here  to  recall  the  words  of  one  of  the  masters
of  modern  historical  study  :  "  The  history  of
Institutions  cannot  be  mastered — can  scarcely
be  appreciated — without  an  effort.  It  affords
little  of  the  Romantic  interest  or  of  the  picturesque
grouping  which  constitute  the  charm  of  history
in  general,  and  holds  but  small  temptation  to
the  mind  that  requires  to  be  tempted  to  study
the  truth.  But  it  has  a  deep  value  and  an  abiding
interest  to  those  who  have  the  courage  to  work
upon  it."  *

We may call this interest a scientific one,
*  Stubbs,  Constitutional  History,  Introduction.
3


ROMAN LAW


because,  although  the  methods  of  social  science
and  of  natural  science  are  necessarily  different,
their  aims  are  identical.  Both  strive  to  ascertain
the  causes  of  events  in  order  to  pave  the  \vay  for
the  formulation  of  la\vs  of  development.

i.  The  story  I  am  about  to  tell  is,  in  a  sense,
a  ghost  story.  It  treats  of  a  second  life  of
Roman  Law  after  the  demise  of  the  body  in  which
it  first  saw  the  light.  I  must  assume  a  general
acquaintance  with  the  circumstances  in  which
that  wonderful  doctrinal  S3'stem  arose  and  grew.
My  tale  begins  at  the  epoch  of  decay  during
which  the  Western  Empire  was  engaged  in  its
last  struggles  with  overwhelming  hordes  of
barbarians.  It  was  the  time  when  the  new
languages  and  nations  of  Western  Europe  were
born  ;  when  the  races  gathered  within  the  boun-
daries fixed  by  Augustus,  Trajan,  and  Septimius
Severus  were  permeated  by  Latin  culture  ;  when
the  elements  of  Romance  and  Teutonic  Europe
were  gradually  beginning  to  assume  some  shape.
The  period  may  be  studied  from  two  opposite
points  of  view  :  it  was  characterised  by  the
Romanisation  of  the  provinces  and  by  the  bar-
barisation  of  Rome.  As  it  is  forcibly  put  by
Lampridius  in  his  Biography  of  Alexander  Severus,
the  Roman  world  was  crowded  with  undesirable
aliens.  Xo  wonder  that  the  standard  of  culture
rapidly  fell  while  the  range  of  Roman  influence
was  extended.  We  seem  to  watch  a  great  stream
4


DECAY  OF  THE ROMAN LAW

emerging  into  the  expanse  of  a  delta ;  its  waters
become  shallow,  sluggish,  and  discoloured  by
the  quantities  of  sand  it  carries  with  it.  The
gradual  transformation  of  racial  elements  is
especially  manifest  in  military  organisation.  Sturdy
Illyrians,  Thracians,  Goths,  and  Franks  were
substituted  for  the  national  legions  of  Italy  or
Gaul,  and  it  was  only  through  the  influx  of  these
recruits  that  the  emperors  of  the  fourth  and  fifth
centuries  were  able  to  stave  off  temporarily  the
threatening  catastrophe.  The  transformation  of
the  army  went  so  far  that  the  expression  '  bar-
barian '  (barbanis]  came  to  be  commonly  used
in  the  sense  of  soldier.  As  pagan  became  an
equivalent  of  heathen,  instead  of  indicating  the
country  folk,  so  barbarian  was  used  in  the  sense
of  military  man.  Nor  were  the  foreign  soldiers
merely  individual  recruits.  They  were  settled
in  whole  troops  in  the  provinces,  and  their  settle-
ments were  organised  as  separate  administrative
districts.  The  official  Calendar  of  the  Empire,
the  Notitia  Dignitatum,  mentions  Iceti  in  Gaul ;
we  hear  of  Sarmatians  and  Suevi  as  Gentiles  in
Italy.  Whole  nations,  such  as  the  Burgundians,
the  Visigoths,  the  Ostgoths,  the  Franks,  were
admitted  as  allies  (/vderati)  within  the  limits  of
the  Empire,  and  quartered  in  the  provinces  in
a  way  that  made  them  practically  masters  of
a  third,  sometimes  even  of  two-thirds,  of  the
land.  This  influx  of  alien  immigrants  in  the


ROMAN LAW


provinces  of  the  West  was  bound  to  make  itself
felt  in  the  legal  domain.  The  Empire  was  forced
to  recognise  to  some  extent  the  legal  customs
of  the  various  tribes,  and  the  idea  of  wiping  out
these  customs  in  favour  of  the  civilised  law  of
Rome  was  never  entertained.  As  evidence  of
this  invasion  of  barbarian  customs,  we  may
quote  the  words  of  Bishop  Theoderetos  (middle
of  the  fifth  century).  After  having  spoken  of
the  unity  of  government  and  lav/  achieved  by
the  Empire,  he  qualifies  the  statement  by  the
remark  that  the  Ethiopians,  Caucasian  tribes,
and  barbarians  in  general  were  left  to  follow
their  own  legal  customs  with  regard  to  transactions
among  themselves.  This  raises  a  question  which
came  to  lie  of  vital  importance  somewhat  later,
namely,  how  were  members  of  different  tribes
to  transact  business  when  they  met  ?  The
supreme  authority  of  the  Imperial  Courts  and
of  Roman  Law  did  not  allow  these  divergences
to  assume  a  sharp  and  uncompromising  aspect,
but  as  alien  customs  were  allowed  within  its
boundaries,  the  principle  that  a  man  must  be
made  answerable  primarily  to  his  own  personal
law  existed  already  in  germ  in  the  closing  cen-
turies of  the  Western  Empire.

2.  A  second  result  of  great  moment  was  the
fact  that  Roman  Law,  even  so  far  as  it  was
recognised  and  practised  by  the  barbarians  in
the  provinces,  began  to  take  the  shape  of  a  body

6


DECAY  OF  THE ROMAN LAW

of  debased  rules.  Though  many  of  the  character-
istic institutions  of  Roman  legal  antiquity  were
still  in  vigour,  they  had  ceased  to  represent  a
high  level  of  juridical  culture.  Three  principal
statements  of  barbarised  Roman  Law  arose  at
the  close  of  the  fifth  and  at  the  beginning  of
the  sixth  century  :  the  Edicts  of  the  Ostgothic
kings,  the  Lex  Romana  Burgundionum,  and
the  Roman  Law  of  the  Visigoths  (Breviarium
Alaricianum)  compiled  in  506  by  order  of  King
Alaric  II.  Of  these  three,  the  latter  exerted  the
greatest  influence.  While  the  Edicts  of  the
Ostgothic  kings  lost  their  significance  after  the
destruction  of  their  kingdom  by  the  Byzantines,
while  the  law  of  the  Romans  in  Burgundy  re-
mained local,  the  Visigothic  compilation  became
the  standard  source  of  Roman  Law  throughout
Western  Europe  during  the  first  half  of  the  Middle
Ages.  The  Breviarium  Alaricianum  purposed
to  be.  and  indeed  was,  a  more  or  less  complete
Code  for  the  usage  of  the  Roman  populations  of
France  and  Spain.  And  it  deserves  attention
as  evidence  of  the  state  to  which  Roman  Law
had  been  reduced  by  the  beginning  of  the  sixth
century.

It  still  testifies  to  considerable  knowledge
and  experience.  Its  Latin  is  sufficiently  pure  ;
it  presents  a  reasoned  attempt  to  compress  the
enactments  of  the  later  Empire  into  a  compendium
of  moderate  size.  The  texts  are  accompanied


ROMAN LAW


by  an  interpretation  composed  either  just  before
Alaric's  code,  or  in  connection  with  it,  and  in-
tended to  make  the  sense  of  the  laws  as  simple
and  clear  as  possible.  It  is  not  to  be  wondered
that  the  Breviarium  obtained  a  dominant  position
in  European  Western  countries.  The  Corpus  Juris
of  Justinian,  which  contains  the  main  body  of
Roman  Law  for  later  ages,  including  our  own,
was  accepted  and  even  known  only  in  the  East
and  in  those  parts  of  Italy  which  had  been  re-
conquered by  Justinian's  generals.  The  rest
of  the  Western  provinces  still  clung  to  the  tra-
dition of  the  preceding  period  culminating  in
the  official  Code  of  Theodosius  II  (A.D.  437).
In  the  fifth  century,  lawyers  had  to  take  account
of  the  legislative  acts  of  Constantine  and  his
successors  up  to  437,  of  fragments  of  earlier
legislation  gathered  together  in  the  private  com-
pilations of  Gregorius  and  Hermogenes,  of  the
"  Novelise  "  of  fifth-century  emperors,  and  of
a  vast  unwieldy  body  of  jurisprudence  as  laid
down  in  legal  opinions  and  treatises  of  the  first
three  centuries  A.D.  Even  after  the  achieve-
ment of  the  commissioners  of  Theodosius,  the
despairing  remarks  of  Theodosius  II  on  the  state
of  the  law  in  his  time  remained  to  a  great  extent
true.  One  of  the  principal  reasons  of  the  "pallid
hue  of  night  studies  of  Roman  Law,"  as  he
expresses  it,  was  undoubtedly  connected  with
the  "immense  quantity  of  learned  treatises,  the
8


DECAY  OF  THE ROMAN LAW

variety  of  actionable  remedies,  the  difficulties
of  case  law,  and  the  huge  bulk  of  imperial  enact-
ments which  raised  up  a  dense  wall  of  fog  against
all  attempts  of  the  human  mind  to  master  it."
It  was  a  rather  fine  performance  of  the  "bar-
barian "  Visigothic  king  to  attempt,  in  506,
with  the  help  of  his  nobles,  his  clergy,  and  the
representatives  of  provinces,  to  do  for  the  Roman
population  under  his  sway  what  Justinian  did
some  thirty  years  later  with  infinitely  greater
resources  at  his  disposal  for  the  Eastern  Empire.
3.  The  comparison  with  Justinian's  Code  is  also
instructive  in  other  respects.  Both  Codes  fall
into  the  same  three  fundamental  subdivisions —
that  of  the  Institutes,  of  Common  Law  (jus),
and  of  the  Statutes  (leges).  The  first  consists
of  an  introductory  survey  for  beginners,  the
second  of  jurisprudential  doctrines  as  laid  down
by  legal  authorities,  and  the  third  of  the  enact-
ments of  recent  emperors.  Each  division  is
represented  in  the  Breviarium.  As  a  parallel  to
Justinian's  Institutes,  the  Breviarium  introduces
an  abstract  from  Gains.  The  choice  of  this
authority  was  very  appropriate,  but  it  was  neces-
sary to  revise  Gains.  And  in  the  hands  of  Alaric's
commissioners  the  introductory  treatise  served
a  purely  utilitarian,  not  a  scholarly,  purpose.
Accordingly,  we  find  eliminated  from  the  text
all  antiquarian  notices  such,  for  instance,  as  the
distinctions  between  various  kinds  of  free-born


ROMAN LAW


citizens,  the  Quiritcs,  the  Latini,  the  dediticii,
although  corresponding  distinctions  were  main-
tained as  regards  freedmen.  Controversial  matter
was  also  omitted,  and  the  text  revised  with  a
view  to  greater  simplicity  and  clearness.  Some
important  parts  of  the  Institutes  were  surrendered
in  the  course  of  this  process  of  simplification  ;
for  example,  the  teaching  on  sources  of  law,  on
the  contrasting  systems  of  the  jus  civile  and  the
jits  gentium,  and  the  whole  of  Gains'  treatment
of  actions.  In  all  these  respects  the  Visigothic
version  of  Gains  presents  a  complete  contrast
with  the  handling  of  Gains'  text  in  the  schools
of  grammar  of  the  fifth-century  Empire,  as  ex-
emplified by  the  Autun  MS.  of  Gains.

This  shrinking  of  the  intellectual  horizon  is
even  more  striking  in  the  second  subdivision,
the  part  devoted  to  jus — the  legal  doctrine  and
jurisprudence  of  common  law,  as  we  should  term
it  nowadays.  It  consists,  in  Justinian's  Corpus,
of  the  stupendous  collection  of  extracts  from
the  great  jurists  of  the  first,  second,  and  third
centuries,  known  as  the  Digest.  The  barbarians
were  even  more  unfit  to  bear  the  weight  of  such
a  "mass  of  wisdom"  (ad  portandum  tanta  sap-
icntice  inolem)  than  the  Roman  citizens  of  the  sixth
century.  The  corresponding  element  in  the
Breviarium  is  represented  mainly  by  an  abstract
from  the  sentences  of  one  of  the  great  third-
century  jurists — Paul,  and  by  a  stray  text  from


DECAY  OF  THE ROMAN LAW

Papinian.  The  sentences  of  Paul  were  treated
from  the  same  point  of  view  of  practical  usefulness
as  the  Institutes  of  Gaius,  although,  as  we  are
not  in  possession  of  a  complete  edition  of  the
original  work,  we  are  unable  to  judge  so  well  of
the  amount  of  text  omitted  by  the  Visigothic
editors.  Still,  the  general  directions  of  the  changes
in  the  text  can  be  ascertained,  and  these  leave
no  doubt  that  discussions  of  too  learned  a  char-
acter as  well  as  antiquarian  notices  were  excluded.
Thus  the  output  of  the  older  jurisconsults,
Labeo,  Scsevola,  Sabinus,  and  their  compeers,
and  nearly  the  whole  of  the  admirable  doctrinal
work  of  Papinian,  Ulpian,  Modestinus,  Gaius,
and  Paul,  with  the  exception  of  the  educational
manuals  of  the  two  latter,  went  overboard  at
the  time  of  the  Visigothic  codification,  as  too
learned  and  too  complicated  for  the  age.  This
renouncement  of  the  best  inheritance  of  Roman
Law  by  men  who  were  themselves  neither  ignorant
nor  incompetent,  speaks  volumes  for  the  great  de-
cline in  the  level  of  culture,  and  is  especially  remark-
able in  the  provinces  of  Spain  and  Gaul,  where
there  still  existed  a  compact  Roman  population.

A  similar  decay  may  be  observed  in  the  third
part  of  the  Breviarium,  the  part  devoted  to  the
leges,  i.e.  the  enactments  of  emperors.  The
Breviarium  makes  its  selection  from  a  practical
point  of  view.  Omissions  are  again  more  char-
acteristic than  chancres.  The  substitutions  of


ROMAN LAW


Curia  for  the  provincial  governor  and  of  municipal
justices  (judices  civitatitm)  for  the  praetor  arc
not  especially  noteworthy.  But,  although  all
the  sixteen  books  of  the  Theodosianus  appear  in
some  form  or  other  in  the  Breviarium,  it  is  im-
portant to  notice  that  the  sixth,  for  example,
treating  of  civil  officers  and  their  attributions,  is
represented  by  two  enactments  instead  of  thirty-
eight,  and  the  next  one,  the  seventh,  bearing
on  military  organisation,  by  one  law  instead
of  twenty-seven.  Such  shrinkage  is  noticeable
throughout  ;  in  this  case  it  arises  not  so  much
from  a  change  of  intellectual  culture  as  from  a
difference  in  administrative  arrangements  and
the  decay  of  governmental  institutions.

4.  The  Breviarium  Alaricianum  consists  of
laws  and  rules  that  are  in  any  case  reasonable
and  tolerably  well  expressed.  A  later  document
of  legal  tradition,  the  Lex  Romana  Citriensis,
of  the  end  of  the  eighth  century,  testifies  to  a
further  and  deeper  decay.  This  is  a  statement  of
legal  custom,  drawn  up  for  the  Romance  popu-
lation of  Eastern  Switzerland,  and  used  in  the
Tyrol  and  Northern  Italy  as  well.  Its  language
and  contents  arc  most  barbarous.  Though  the
influence  of  Rome  is  manifest  in  the  borrowing
of  legal  institutions,  the  juridical  treatment  is
in  no  way  better,  and  often  worse,  than  that  of
contemporary  Prankish  or  Lombard  legal  customs.

The  law  in  question  is  based  on  a  very  imperfect


DECAY  OF  THE ROMAN LAW

abstract  of  the  Lex  Romana  Visigothorum,  in
which  the  Institutes  of  Gaius  and  the  greater
part  of  Paul's  Sententiae  are  dropped,  while  the
enactments  of  emperors  are  generally  taken
from  the  text  of  the  "  Interpretation."  To
what  extent  some  of  these  enactments  were
misunderstood  by  the  Grisons  ecclesiastics  and
judges,  may  be  gathered  from  one  or  two  examples.
The  latter  actually  had  the  courage  to  quote  the
"Novella  "  of  Valentinian  III  on  the  use  of  the
works  of  ancient  jurisconsults.*  There  is  not
much  harm  in  the  fact  that  Gaius  appears  in
their  text  as  Gaggius  and  Scaevola  as  Scifola.
But  the  emperor's  direction  that  if  opinions
conflict,  authorities  should  be  counted,  and  a
casting  vote  allowed  to  Papinian  as  the  greatest,
is  interpreted  by  the  Raetians  to  mean  that  every
party  to  a  suit  ought  to  produce  witnesses  and
oath-helpers,  and  if  the  number  of  these  prove
equal,  the  case  must  be  decided  in  favour  of
the  side  whose  contention  is  countenanced  by
Papianus.  Even  apart  from  the  fact  that  Papianus
is  a  corruption  of  Papinianus,  originating  in  the
Lex  Romana  Burgundionum,  this  reference  to
a  legal  authority,  which  was  not  even  in  use  in
the  region  in  question,  completes  the  muddle.
And  it  is  clear  that  the  paragraph  as  it  stands
neither  corresponds  to  the  original  nor  could  be
put  into  practice.

*  See  App.  I.

13


ROMAN LAW


There  are  many  scattered  traces  of  barbaric
usage  making  its  way  into  the  debased  Roman  Law
of  the  Rsetian  country.  Fredum,  the  price  for
peace  obtained  through  the  intervention  of  public
authorities,  appears  here  under  the  same  con-
ditions as  in  Prankish  districts.  The  Dos,  the
possession  of  which  was  guaranteed  to  the  wife
of  a  criminal  whose  property  had  been  con-
fiscated, is  the  German  dower,  settled  on  the
wife  by  the  husband,  not  the  Roman  dos,  brought
by  the  wife  to  the  common  household.  One
of  the  enactments  of  the  Theodosian  Code  and
of  Alaric's  Breviarium  on  lawful  marriage,  em-
phasising the  importance  of  the  consent  of  both
bride  and  bridegroom,  is  stated  in  such  a  way
that  it  is  possible  to  catch  a  glimpse  of  a  wedding
ceremony  performed  before  a  judex,  a  ruler  of
some  kind,  and  an  assembly  of  neighbours  (VII,  3).
It  is  evident  that  we  are  in  the  presence  of  a
rather  debased  and  Germanised  form  of  legal
custom,  engrafted  on  fragments  of  what  had
been  once  a  system  of  Imperial  law.

5.  We  must  next  inquire  in  what  way,  and
how  far,  the  degenerated  legal  customs  of  Rome
were  applied  in  the  early  Middle  Ages.  It  must
be  noticed  firstly,  that  no  State  of  this  period
was  strong  enough  to  enforce  a  compact  legal
order  of  its  own,  excluding  all  other  laws,  or  treat-
ing them  as  enactments  confined  to  aliens.  Even
the  most  powerful  of  the  barbarian  governments
14


DECAY  OF  THE ROMAN LAW

raised  on  the  ruins  of  the  Empire,  such  as  the
Lombard  or  Prankish,  dealt  with  a  state  of
affairs  based  on  a  mixture  of  legal  arrangements.
The  Carolingian  rulers  and  especially  Charle-
magne, introduced  some  unity  in  matters  of
vital  importance  to  the  government  or  to  public
safety,  but,  even  in  their  time,  racial  differences
were  allowed  to  crop  up  everywhere.  Law  be-
came necessarily  personal  and  local  in  its  appli-
cation. Both  facts  must  be  considered  in  con-
nection with  the  survival  of  Roman  legal  rules.

The  forcible  entry  of  the  Goths,  Lombards,
and  Franks  into  the  provinces  did  not  in  any
sense  involve  the  disappearance  or  denationalisa-
tion of  the  Roman  inhabitants.  The  legal  status
of  the  latter  was  allowed  to  continue.  The
personality  of  a  Roman  was  valued  in  a  peculiar
way,  differing  from  the  barbarians  that  sur-
rounded him.  If  it  cost  200  solidi  to  atone  for
the  homicide  of  a  Frank,  it  cost  100  solidi  to
kill  a  Roman  in  Prankish  Gaul.  All  intercourse
between  Romans  was  ruled  by  the  law  of  their
race.  When  a  Roman  of  Toulouse  married  a
girl  of  the  same  race,  she  brought  him  a  dos  in
accordance  with  Paul's  Sentential,  II,  22,  I  ;
he  exercised  a  father's  authority  over  his  children,
on  the  strength  of  the  ancient  custom  of  p atria
potcstas,  as  modified  by  the  laws  of  Constantine.
If  a  landowner  wanted  to  sell  his  property,  he
would  do  it  of  his  own  free  will,  according  to

15


ROMAN LAW


the  rules  of  emptio  venditio.  If  he  wished  to
dispose  of  his  property  after  his  decease,  he  would
be  able  to  draw  up  a  will  making  provision  for
bequests  to  be  paid  out  by  his  heir,  but  carefully
avoiding  to  bequeath  more  than  three- fourths
of  his  property,  in  conformity  with  the  Lex
Falcidia.  In  all  these  and  in  many  other  respects
the  legal  rights  of  the  Roman  would  be  at  variance
with  those  of  his  German  neighbours.  These,
again  would  act  differently,  each  according  to
his  peculiar  nationality,  as  Salian  Franks  or
Ripuarians,  Bavarians  or  Burgundians,  etc.  The
position  became  very  intricate  when  members
of  different  nationalities,  living  under  different
laws,  were  brought  together  to  transact  business
with  each  other.  As  Bishop  Agobard  of  Lyons
tells  us  about  850,  it  happened  constantly  that
of  five  people  meeting  in  one  room,  each  followed
a  law  of  his  own.  We  find,  in  fact,  in  these
cross-relationships  very  striking  examples  of  so-
called  conflicts  of  law.  Before  proceeding  to
examine  the  material  questions  at  issue,  it  was
necessary  for  the  judges  to  discover  to  what
particular  body  or  bodies  of  law  the  case  be-
longed. The  report  of  a  trial  between  the  monas-
teries of  Fleury  on  the  Loire  and  St.  Denis  pro-
vides a  good  illustration  of  the  points  raised
on  such  occasions.  The  case  was  brought  before
the  tribunal  of  the  Frankish  Court.  It  was  found
necessary  to  adjourn  it,  because  both  plaintiff
16


DECAY  OF  THE ROMAN LAW

and  defendant  were  ecclesiastical  corporations,
and  as  such,  entitled  to  a  judgment  according
to  Roman  Law,  of  which  none  of  the  judges
was  cognisant.  Experts  in  Roman  Law  are
summoned  as  assessors,  and  the  trial  proceeds
at  the  second  meeting  of  the  tribunal.  The
parties  would  like  to  prove  their  right  by  single
combat  between  their  witnesses,  but  one  of  the
assessors  of  the  court  protests  against  the  waging
of  battle,  on  the  ground  that  such  a  mode  of
proof  would  be  contrary  to  Roman  Law.  The
point  at  issue  is  therefore  examined  and  decided
according  to  Roman  rules  of  procedure,  that  is,
by  production  of  witnesses  and  documents.
St.  Bennet,  however,  the  patron  of  the  Abbey
of  Fleury,  was  seemingly  prejudiced  in  favour
of  the  Prankish  mode  of  proof-by-battle,  as  he
revenged  himself  on  the  too  forward  assessor
by  striking  him  dumb.*

The  rules  as  to  allowing  or  disallowing  recourse
to  one  or  the  other  personal  law  were  necessarily
rather  complicated.  For  instance,  the  payment
of  fines  for  crimes  was  apportioned  according
to  the  law  of  the  criminal,  and  not  of  the  offended
person.  As  regards  contracts,  each  party  was
held  bound  by  the  rule  of  its  own  law  ;  but  if
the  contract  was  accompanied  by  a  wager,  it
was  interpreted  according  to  the  law  of  the

*  Miracula  S.  Benedict! ;  Mon.  Germ.,  XV1,  p.  490,
quoted  by  Brunner,  P,  p.  394. '

c  17


ROMAN LAW


party  making  the  wager.  In  the  case  of  a  con-
tract corroborated  by  a  deed  (cart a),  the  legal
form  and  interpretation  depended  on  the  status
of  the  person  executing  the  deed.  Some  cases
were  rendered  more  complex  by  the  fact  that
the  courts  found  it  necessary  to  consider  not  only
the  legal  status  of  the  grantor,  but  also  the  quality
of  the  disposable  property.  For  example,  in  an
Italian  charter  of  780,  we  find  that  a  certain
Felix  makes  a  donation  to  his  daughter,  and
receives  from  her  a  launegild,  a  compensation,
according  to  Lombard  Law,  although,  as  a  clerk,
he  is  himself  subject  to  Roman  Law.  The  reason
is  that,  while  still  a  layman,  lie  received  the  pro-
perty in  question  from  his  wife  according  to
Lombard  Law.

6.  The  confusion  resulting  from  such  cross-
relations  of  personal  legal  status  was  not  lessened
by  the  fact  that  in  almost  every  jurisdictional  dis-
trict, local  customs  arose  to  regulate  the  ordinary
dealings  of  its  population.  In  districts  with  a
clearly  preponderating  racial  majority  these  cus-
toms assumed  a  specific  national  colouring —
Lombard,  Frankish,  Roman,  as  the  case  might
be.  Local  customs  become  in  course  of  time  a
very  marked  characteristic  of  the  Middle  Ages.
They  tend  to  restrict  the  application  of  the  purely
personal  principle,  although  the  latter  was  not
entirely  abolished  for  a  long  time.  The  way  in
which  the  light  of  Roman  legal  lore  was  trans-
18


DECAY  OF  THE ROMAN LAW

formed  while  breaking  through  the  many-coloured
panes  of  local  custom  was  most  varied.  It  is
sufficient  for  our  present  purpose  to  note  the  geo-
graphical boundaries  of  the  regions  where  legal
customs  were  built  up  on  the  basis  of  Roman
Law.  The  area  was  a  wide  one.  It  covered,
firstly,  Southern  Italy,  where  the  Byzantine
Empire  upheld  its  authority,  until  the  advent  of
the  Saracens  and  of  the  Normans.  Here  the
courts  administered  not  only  Roman  Law  as
laid  down  in  the  Corpus  Juris,  but  also  the  legis-
lation of  Justinian's  successors.  In  the  centre,
the  district  forming  the  so-called  Romagna  was
characterised  by  the  application  of  Justinian's  Code.
Thirdly,  in  Southern  France  and  Northern  Spain,
the  Breviarium  Alaricianum  reigned  supreme.

Now,  by  laying  stress  on  these  geographical
limits,  I  do  not  mean  that  Roman  legal  customs
did  not  assert  themselves  outside  the  mentioned
regions.  On  the  contrary,  throughout  the  proper
domain  of  barbaric  laws,  in  Northern  France,
in  Germany,  and  even  in  England,  the  influence
of  certain  Roman  institutions  was  manifest  in
many  ways.  Even  where  there  was  no  numerous
Roman  population  to  represent  the  Roman
racial  element,  the  clergy,  at  least,  followed
Roman  Law,  and  many  rules  of  the  latter  were
adopted  for  their  practical  utility.

Let  us  notice  some  of  these  borrowings  of  the
barbarians  during  the  early  Middle  Ages.

19


ROMAN LAW


Roman  influence  was  strongest  in  the  case  of
the  Goths.  They  had  been  in  contact  with  the
Empire  at  the  time  of  its  comparative  strength —
in  the  third  and  fourth  centuries.  Their  two
chief  branches  were  settled  for  a  considerable
time  on  Imperial  soil  as  confederates,  very  un-
ruly and  dangerous  confederates  indeed,  as  Rome
came  to  feel  at  the  hands  of  Alaric  I,  but  still
as  confederates  who  learned  constantly  from
their  civilised  neighbours.  In  consequence  of
this  long  permeation  of  Roman  customs  and  legal
ideas,  we  find  firstly,  that  the  Ostgoths  founded
their  legislation  directly  on  Roman  patterns,
and  secondly  that  the  Visigoths  of  Spain  and
France  adopted  Roman  enactments  wholesale,
apart  from  the  fact  that,  as  we  have  seen,  they
codified  Imperial  law  for  the  use  of  their  Roman
fellow-citizens.  Already  in  the  fragments  of
the  laws  of  Enric,  the  most  ancient  part  of  Yisi-
gothic  legislation  (about  464),  we  find  a  number
of  paragraphs  drawn  from  Roman  sources,
for  example,  the  clause  forbidding  actions  con-
cerning events  which  had  occurred  more  than
thirty  years  previously  (c.  277)  ;  the  declaration,
that  donations  extorted  by  force  or  intimidation
(ri  ant  metn)  are  to  be  null  and  void  (c.  309),
a  rule  which  breaks  through  the  purely  formalist ic
treatment  of  obligations  natural  to  barbaric
law  ;  the  admission  of  equality  between  men
and  women  as  to  inheritance  (c.  320),  etc.  Later


DECAY  OF  THE ROMAN LAW

on,  during  the  sixth  century,  the  influence  of
Roman  rules  becomes  stronger  and  stronger.
Entire  sections  are  adopted  by  the  Lex  Visi-
gothorum,  from  the  Breviarium,  the  Novellas,
and  from  customary  laws  of  Roman  origin  which
still  lingered  in  the  courts,  in  spite  of  the  official
codification  of  Alaric  II.  About  one-third  of
the  so-called  antiqua  goes  back  to  Roman
sources.  As  to  the  legislation  of  the  great  kings
of  the  seventh  century,  Chindaswind  and  Recces-
wind,  who  made  an  attempt  to  replace  personal
laws  by  territorial  codes,  the  greater  part  of
it  is  based  on  Roman  patterns.  It  must,  how-
ever, be  said  of  this  overwhelming  Romanisation
that  it  is  to  some  extent  exaggerated  in  official
laws.  Picker's  remarkable  investigations  have
shown  that  there  was  a  continuous  stream  of
Germanic  legal  customs  running  counter  to
the  Romanising  tendencies  of  royal  enactments,
and  maintaining  rules  and  institutions  which
remind  us  strongly  of  Scandinavian  custom,
and  evidently  go  back  to  a  Teutonic  origin.
These  Germanic  elements  emerge  again  in  the
later  statements  of  provincial  customs,  the  so-
called  Fueros.  But,  even  if  we  allow  for  the
existence  of  such  an  undercurrent  of  Germanic
custom,  the  general  inference  is  not  destroyed
that  Roman  legal  lore  had  a  most  powerful  in-
fluence on  the  Visigoths  of  Spain  and  France.
The  history  of  the  Lombards  discloses  a  different


ROMAN LAW


state  of  affairs.  The  very  large  Roman  popu-
lation of  Northern  and  Central  Italy  was  neither
destroyed  nor  entirely  bereft  of  its  legal  inheritance.
But  the  practice  of  its  law  was  confined  to  volun-
tary transactions  and  to  forms  of  arbitration,
resembling  those  which  were  in  use  among  Chris-
tians before  the  Church  was  recognised  by  the
Empire.  It  is  known  that  votaries  of  the  Christian
faith  tried  to  avoid  interference  from  heathen
magistrates  by  settling  their  disputes  through
arbitration.  Something  of  the  same  kind  preserved
the  tradition  of  Roman  Law  in  Lombard  districts
in  the  course  of  the  sixth  and  seventh  centuries,
until  it  was  laid  down  expressly  by  an  enactment
of  Liutprand  (cl.  91)  that  instruments  made
before  Roman  notaries  should  conform  to  the
rules  of  Roman  Law  in  the  same  way  as  Lombard
deeds  should  be  drawn  tip  according  to  Lombard
Law.  Although  the  existence  of  a  body  of  Roman
Law  was  indirectly  recognised  in  this  fashion,
no  provision  was  made,  even  after  the  above
enactment,  for  the  creation  of  Roman  tribunals
or  the  appointment  of  judges  versed  in  this
particular  law.  We  are  left  to  surmise  that  when
cases  necessitating  the  application  of  Roman
rules  came  before  the  Lombard  courts,  the  Ger-
manic judges  obtained  help  from  assessors  ac-
quainted with  Roman  Law,  and  probably  chosen
from  among  those  very  notaries  mentioned  in
Liutprand's  enactment.


DECAY  OF  THE ROMAN LAW

Xow  it  is  remarkable  that  although  Lombard
legislation  thus  remains  true  to  its  Teutonic
origin  as  regards  the  contents  of  legal  rules,
it  nevertheless  lay  open  to  the  powerful  in-
fluence of  Roman  Law  from  two  different  sides.
Firstly,  the  rapid  growth  of  economic  inter-
course in  Italy  with  its  complicated  relations,
requiring  nice  adjustment,  rendered  a  recourse
to  civilised  law  highly  desirable,  more  especially
as  many  parties  to  business  affairs  were  people
of  Roman  birth,  and  as  transactions  with  citizens
of  the  Exarchate  and  of  Southern  Italy  living
directly  under  Roman  rule  were  of  every  day
occurrence.  This  particular  means  of  permeation
is  represented  by  the  growth  of  Lombardic
formula  for  the  framing  of  contracts,  which  are
evidently  influenced  by  Roman  patterns.  A
second  path  was  laid  open  to  the  invasion  of
Roman  ideas  by  the  appearance  of  juridical
reflection.  In  the  legislation  of  the  purely  Lom-
bard epoch  at  the  beginning  of  the  eighth  century,
we  find  already  traces  of  jurisprudential  analysis.
There  is,  for  instance,  an  enactment  of  Liutprand
(c.  134),*  treating  of  the  ejectment  of  a  landed
proprietor  by  his  neighbours.  If,  in  the  course
of  these  violent  proceedings,  he  suffers  bodily
harm,  the  offenders  must,  of  course,  pay  the
line  for  the  homicide  or  wounding,  but  the  legis-
lator declares  in  addition  that  they  are  guilty
*  See  App.  II.
23


ROMAN LAW


of  conspiracy,  and  must  be  lined  20  solid!  on
that  account.  In  analysing  the  case,  Liutprand,
or  his  legal  advisers,  explain  why  they  decree
such  a  fine  and  not  another.  They  state  their
reasons  for  not  considering  the  transgression  to
be  one  of  '  arischild, '  that  is,  of  forming  an  armed
band  (cf.  Roth.  19,  Liutpr.  35,  141),  not  a  case
of  unlawful  organisation  of  country  folk  (consilium
rusticanorum,  Roth.  279),  nor  of  riot  (rusticanorum
seditio).  It  seems  to  the  legislator  that  the
material  point  in  the  case  lies  in  the  preparation
to  commit  murderous  assault.  It  is  this  intention
which  constitutes  the  criminal  element  in  the
conspiracy,  and  which  may  lead  to  the  perpe-
tration of  the  crime.  In  spite  of  the  barbarous
language,  the  mode  of  reasoning  testifies  to  a
rising  level  of  juridical  thought  ;  and,  though
a  direct  connection  with  Roman  rules  is  not
traceable,  yet  this  and  similar  cases  of  legal
analysis  in  Lombard  legislation,  suggest  that
Lombard  justice  was  progressing  from  a  naive
application  of  barbarian  rules  to  a  reflective
jurisprudence,  and  this  undoubtedly  opened  the
way  for  a  consideration  of  Roman  doctrine.

In  the  Prankish  Empire  we  have  before  us
a  third  example  of  the  process  of  permeation  of
barbaric  law  by  Roman  notions.  The  resistance
to  foreign  law  is  stronger  in  this  case  than  even
in  that  of  the  Lombards.  The  Salic  and  Ripuarian
Codes  are  based  almost  exclusively  on  Teutonic
24


DECAY  OF  THE ROMAN LAW

principles.  And  yet  there  were  many  channels
by  which  Roman  legal  ideas  assert  themselves.
Firstly,  there  is  the  influence  of  the  Church,
which  has  left  its  mark  more  especially  on  Ba-
varian law  and  on  the  capitularies  of  the  kings
and  emperors  of  Carolingian  race.  Secondly,
there  is  the  influence  of  Roman  rules  on  private
transactions.  In  this  field  the  barbarians  left
a  wide  margin  for  the  settlement  of  legal  diffi-
culties by  private  agreements  between  parties,
provided  such  agreements  did  not  infringe  some
established  or  formulated  rule  of  law.  Large
gaps  in  the  barbaric  enactments  concerning  the
settlement  of  business  matters  had  to  be  filled
up,  and  this  was  achieved  by  extensive  borrowing
from  Roman  legal  materials.  Abundant  evidence
is  afforded  in  this  respect  by  the  Prankish  col-
lections of  formula,  that  is,  ready-made  models
of  legal  instruments.  Such  ancient  collections
as  those  of  Marculf,  of  Anjou,  of  Tours,  are  full
of  instruments  framed  on  the  pattern  of  Roman
deeds  ;  and  a  history  of  barbaric  legal  instru-
ments must  start  in  every  case  from  beginnings
laid  down  by  Roman  precedents.  To  mention
just  one  or  two  cases  :  a  formula  of  Marculf
shows  clearly  the  breach  made  into  Germanic
customs  of  succession  by  the  theory  of  the  equality
of  sexes  in  regard  to  inheritance  admitted  by
Roman  Law  :  a  lather  bequeaths  land  to  his
daughter,  in  spite  of  the  Salic  Law  reserving

25


ROMAN LAW


land  to  the  male  sex  (II,  10). The  emancipation

from  slavery  is  mostly  carried  out  according
to  Roman  rules  constituting  a  relation  of  clicnt-
ship  between  the  frecdman  and  his  former  master
or  to  the  Church,  etc.

Even  England,  the  country  least  affected  by
Roman  influence,  does  not  form  an  exception
in  this  respect.  The  Old  English  Books,  which
constitute  grants  of  private  property  exempted
from  the  application  of  Folkright,  arc,  to  a  great
extent,  a  Romanesque  importation  effected  by
the  Church  in  conjunction  with  the  kings.  Their
chief  aim  was  to  substitute  a  form  of  property
similar  to  that  known  to  Roman  Law,  for  the
landownership  restricted  by  tribal  custom,  which
represented  the  barbaric  mode  of  land  tenure
in  England.

7.  The  life  of  Roman  Law  in  the  barbaric
states,  as  far  as  we  have  considered  it  hitherto,
was  upheld  by  the  continuance  of  fragmentary
and  garbled  rules  derived  more  or  less  directly
from  the  system  formed  during  the  prosperous
periods  of  Roman  civilisation.  Can  it  be  said
that  the  barbaric  successors  of  Papinian  and
Ulpian,  of  Marcus  Aurelius  and  Constantinc,
kept  also  up,  to  some  extent,  the  threads  of
theoretical  reflection  and  intelligent  teaching,
which  in  former  days  had  served  to  combine
separate  details  into  a  reasoned  whole  ?  Is  there
a  distinct  stream  of  jurisprudence  winding  its
26


DECAY  OF  THE ROMAN LAW

way  through  the  dark  ages  from  the  fifth  century,
when  western  jurists  took  part  in  the  codification
and  interpretation  of  Imperial  Law,  to  the  twelfth
century  when  a  body  of  learned  doctrine  sprang
up  again  in  Italy  and  France  ?  These  problems
have  given  rise  to  much  controversy  among
modern  scholars.  We  find  such  names  as  those
of  Stiritzing,  Fitting,  Chiapelli,  on  one  side,  and
those  of  Conrat  and  Flach  on  the  other.  It  is
necessary  to  take  up  a  position  in  regard  to
this  discussion,  even  though  there  can  be  no  talk
of  any  detailed  examination  of  the  arguments
adduced  on  both  sides.

To  begin  with,  it  seems  clear  that  even  legal
learning,  as  distinguished  from  legal  practice,
did  not  entirely  disappear  with  the  downfall  of
the  Empire.  It  survived  to  some  extent  together
with  other  remnants  of  ancient  culture,  more
especially  through  the  agency  of  the  learned
classes  of  those  days — the  clerical  and  monastic
orders.  The  survivals  in  question,  however,
are  not  only  slight  and  incoherent,  but,  as  a
rule,  hopelessly  mixed  up  with  the  attempt  of
the  early  Middle  Ages  to  effect  a  kind  of  salvage
of  the  general  learning  of  antiquity.  There  arc
no  definite  traces  of  organised  schools  of  law.
\Yhat  legal  learning  there  is  remains  connected
with  exercises  in  grammar,  rhetoric,  and  dialectics.
A  striking  example  of  the  kind  of  work  carried
on  in  the  course  of  the  seventh  and  eighth  cen-
27


ROMAN LAW


turies  is  presented  by  the  Etymologies  or  Origins
of  the  Spanish  Bishop,  Isidor  of  Seville.  It  is
an  Encyclopaedia  embracing  all  sorts  of  information
collected  from  classical  sources — on  arts,  medicine,
Old  and  New  Testament  topics,  ecclesiastical
history,  philology,  and  law.  The  legal  sections
comprise,  firstly,  generalisations  on  subdivisions
of  jurisprudence,  on  the  aims  and  methods  of
law,  on  legislators  and  jurisconsults ;  and,
secondly,  notices  as  to  substantive  law — on
witnesses,  on  deeds,  on  the  law  of  things,  on
crime  and  punishment,  etc.  All  these  matters
are  treated  by  excerpts  from  classical  literature,
from  writings  of  jurisconsults,  and  from  legal
enactments.  As  is  shown  by  the  title,  the  author
lays  great  stress  on  supposed  etymologies  for
the  explanation  of  institutions  and  rules.  It  is
needless  to  say  that  the  philological  derivations
compiled  by  him  are  sometimes  fanciful  in  the
extreme.  In  dealing  with  legal  instruments,
for  example,*  Isidor  explains  that  donatio  is
the  same  as  doni  actio  (the  action  of  a  gift),  while
dos  (the  marriage  portion  of  the  bride)  comes
from  do  item  (I  give  likewise).  And  this  quibble
is  referred  to  the  fact  that  in  effecting  a  marriage
settlement  the  gift  (of  the  bridegroom)  comes
first,  while  the  portion  of  the  bride  follows  second.
In  a  similar  way  condition  is  derived  from  con-
dictio  (joint  declaration),  because  the  testimony  of
*  See  App.  III.
28


DECAY  OF  THE ROMAN LAW

not  less  than  two  witnesses  can  be  accepted  as
evidence  (V,  24,  25).  There  are  also  many  direct
misunderstandings,  as,  for  example,  when  lie
declares  that  edicts  are  enactments  of  kings  or
emperors,  that  -pecnlinm  belongs  to  minors  only,
etc.  It  is  characteristic  of  the  state  of  legal
knowledge  in  the  early  Middle  Ages  that  these
fragments  were  greatly  appreciated  and  con-
stantly copied  and  excerpted.

The  study  of  legal  books  was  mainly  limited
to  two  narrow  grooves.  The  leisure  of  clerical
life  was  employed  in  this  particular,  as  in  other
fields,  in  making  abstracts  from  the  voluminous
productions  of  the  Roman  age,  and  in  trying  la-
boriously to  discover  the  literal  meaning  of  ex-
pressions. The  abstract  (Epitome)  and  the  Gloss
are  the  two  channels  for  the  tradition  of  learning
in  the  course  of  this  barren  epoch.  To  illustrate
the  results  achieved  by  abstracts,  one  may  refer,
for  example,  to  the  so-called  Lex  Romana  Canonicc
compfa,  a  compilation  of  Roman  laws  dating  from
the  ninth  century,  in  which  the  selection  of  ma-
terials was  primarily  affected  by  the  wish  to
provide  members  of  the  Church  with  rules  of
Roman  Laws  that  might  be  of  use  to  them.

The  work  of  supplying  glosses  goes  on  un-
interruptedly from  classical  times  right  through
the  Middle  Ages.  The}'  were  the  mediaeval  sub-
stitutes for  translations  and  commentaries.  Short
renderings,  etymologies  and  explanations  were
29


ROMAN LAW


inserted  over  the  line  to  facilitate  the  interpre-
tation of  single  terms  or  words,  while  longer
summaries  and  notices  were  jotted  down  on  the
margin.  The  gloss  to  a  Turin  MS.  of  the  Institutes
and  the  gloss  to  the  Epitome  of  the  Codex  in
a  MS.  belonging  to  the  Dean  and  Chapter  of
Pistoia  (Tuscan}-),  may  serve  as  examples  of
this  type  of  work.  The  first  was  compiled  some
time  before  the  tenth  century,  and  was  based  on
translations  of  Byzantine  notes  to  all  parts  of
the  Corpus  Juris.  The  Pistoia  gloss  is  more
original.  Its  principal  elements  date  also  from
the  ninth  century,  but  it  was  in  use  all  through
the  tenth,  eleventh,  and  twelfth  centuries,  and
grew  considerably  by  later  additions.  Most  of
the  notes  have  been  provided  by  a  person  of  by
no  means  contemptible  intelligence.  Though
his  direct  borrowings  from  the  Corpus  Juris
cannot  always  be  traced,  he  shows  in  his  sum-
maries and  in  his  explanatory  remarks  an  under-
standing of  juridical  questions,  and  is  quite  able
to  give  the  gist  of  a  rule  in  his  own  words.  For
instance,  the  Epitome  II,  12,  10,  gives  the  words
of  an  enactment  to  the  effect  that,  if  the  representa-
tive of  a  person  (procurator)  had  lull  powers  to
act  in  the  hitter's  behalf,  a  decision  given  against
him  in  a  trial  ought  to  stand  ;  for,  in  the  case
of  a  fraud,  the  procurator  might  be  sued  by  his
principal  (Si  quid  fraudi  vel  doli  egit,  conveniri
cum  more  judiciorum  non  prohiberis).  The  gloss
30


DECAY  OF  THE ROMAN LAW

notes  shortly  :  "He  who  has  full  power  to  act
can  carry  a  matter  to  a  conclusion  unless  he  com-
mits a  fraud  "  (nota  qui  habet  plenum  potest-
tatem  agendi  posse  rcm  sine  dolo  firmiter  finire).
The  idea  is  the  same  as  in  the  original,  but  is
formulated  from  a  different  point  of  view.  On
the  strength  of  these  and  similar  observations
we  are  able  to  maintain  that  there  was  a  constant,
though  thin,  stream  of  legal  learning  running
through  the  darkest  centuries  of  the  Middle
Ages,  that  is,  from  the  fifth  to  the  tenth.  The
existence  of  organised  law  schools  is  not  proved,
nor  can  there  be  any  talk  of  a  very  active  de-
velopment of  individual  thought.  But  transcripts
and  abstracts  from  the  fragmentary  materials
bequeathed  by  antiquity  were  made  and  studied
in  the  scriptoria  of  monasteries  or  chapters  and
in  the  classrooms  of  teachers  of  Arts.


LECTURE II
THE  REVIVAL  OF  JURISPRUDENCE

Authorities  :  Savigny,  Geschichte  des  romischen  Rechts
im  Mittelalter,  11,111,1V;  /. Picker,  Forschimgen  zur  Reichs
und  Rechtsgeschichte  Italians,  1868-74  ;  N.  Tammassia,
Lanfranc  arcivescovo  di  Canterbury  e  la  Scuola  Pavese
in  the  Melanges  Fitting,  II  ;  H.  Fitting,  Die  Anfange  der
Rechtsschule  zu  Bologna,  1888  ;  Chiappelli,  Lo  Studio
bolognese,  1888  ;  Modderman,  Die  Reception  des  romischen
Rechts,  iibersetzt  von  K.  Schurz,  1875  ;  Quaestiones  de
juris  subtilitatibus  des  Irnerius,  ed.  by  H.  Fitting,  1894  ;
Summa  Codicis  des  Irnerius,  ed.  by  H.  Fitting,  1894;
Besta,  L' opera  di  Irnerio,  1896  ;  P.  Kriigcr,  Geschichte  der
Quellen  und  Litteratur  des  romischen  Rechts,  1888  ;
Tourtoulon,  Placentin,  1896  ;  Dissensiones  dominorum,
ed.  Haenel,  1834  ;  E.  Landsbcrg,  Die  Glosse  des  Accursius
und  ihre  Lehre  voin  Eigenthum,  1883  ;  T.  E.  Holland,
Vacarius,  in  the  Dictionary  of  National  Biography  ;
E.  Liebertnann,  Magister  Vacarius  in  the  English  Historical
Review,  1896  ;  F.  II'.  Maitland,  Vacarius'  Summa  de  matri-
monio,  Law  Qu.  R.,  1897;  K.  Wcnck,  Magister  Vacarius,
1820;  Stolzel,  Ueber  Vacarius,  in  the  Zeitschrii't  fi'ir
Rechtsgeschichte,  \'I  (1867);  It  iv  alt  a,  II  rinovamento
della  giurisprudenza  filosofica  secondo  la  Scolastica,  1888  ;
Jiii'alta,  Dispute  celebri  del  diritto  Civile,  1895  ;  Ed.
Meynial,  Encore  Irnerius  in  the  Nouvelle  Revue  de
droit  franfais  et  etranger,  1896  ;  5.  Brie,  Die  Lehre  voin
Gewohnheitsreche,  I,  1899.

i.  *  I  ""HE asjicct of legal studies begins to

JL change in a  remarkable  manner  about

the eleventh century. This epoch witnessed

several ne\v departures  in the  history  of  Kuro-

32


REVIVAL  OF  JURISPRUDENCE

pean  civilisation.  The  papacy  achieved  a  de-
cisive concentration  of  power  during  the  pon-
tificate of  Gregory  VII.  Feudalism  becomes
crystallised  into  a  complete  and  consistent  system.
The  Norman  states  arise  with  the  promise  of
efficient  administration  and  political  order.  The
foundations  of  Scholasticism  are  firmly  laid
in  the  age  of  Anselm.  The  commonwealths  of
Lombardy  begin  to  earn  the  fruits  of  a  brilliant
economic  and  cultural  progress.  It  is  on  this
background  of  returning  prosperity  and  growing
self-reliance  that  we  notice  a  spontaneous  awaken-
ing of  jurisprudence — of  theory  and  learning
in  the  field  of  law,  and  this  awakening  is  not
confined  to  one  locality.  At  least  four  powerful
centres  of  legal  learning  must  be  taken  into
account — one  in  Provence,  still  a  dependency
of  the  Empire  at  that  time  ;  the  second  in  the
cities  of  Lombardy  ;  a  third  at  Ravenna,  with
its  ancient  Imperial  traditions ;  and  last,  but  not
least,  the  famous  school  of  Bologna,  the  city
at  the  crossways  between  the  Romagna,  Lom-
bardy, and  Tuscany.

The  most  striking  evidence  of  the  awakening
of  jurisprudence  in  Southern  France  is  afforded
by  a  tract  on  Roman  Law,  called  Exceptiones
Petri,  "Excerpts  by  Peter,"  composed  some
time  in  the  latter  half  of  the  eleventh  century
and  dedicated  by  the  unknown  author  to  Odilo,
a  '  vicarius  '  (rigid 'er]  of  Valence  in  Dauphin e.

D  33


ROMAN LAW


The  opening  passages  of  its  prologue  explain
the  scope  of  the  work.  "  As  it  is  not  possible,
even  for  scholars  most  learned  in  the  knowledge
of  laws  (etiam  juris  sapientissimis  doctoribus)
to  come  to  a  definite  conclusion  in  regard  to
many  and  different  kinds  of  cases  on  account
of  the  large  number  of  various  scruples,  let  us
unravel  the  results  of  juridical  decisions  and
controversies  by  examining  the  reason  of  natural
and  civil  law7.  If  anything  in  the  law  be  disused,
abolished,  or  contrary  to  equity  (inutile  ruptum
aequitative  contrarium),  let  us  tread  it  under
foot  (pedibus  concalcamus).  Let  us  reveal  to
you,  Odilo,  magnificent  master  of  the  most
splendid  city  of  Valence,  whatever  has  been  dis-
covered anew  or  tenaciously  preserved.  So
that  in  the  examination  of  your  tribunal  and  in
the  terms  of  your  acts  there  should  not  appear
anything  unjust  or  subject  to  provocation.
But,  that  all  corruption  being  removed,  everything
should  be  resplendent  for  the  sake  of  the  power
of  justice,  of  the  glory  of  your  dignity,  and  of  the
praise  of  supreme  majesty."

You  will  notice  that  this  introduction,  though
couched  in  sounding  language,  is  by  no  means
a  flight  of  empty  rhetoric.  Every  word  in  it  has
a  definite  meaning,  and  its  particulars  are  worthy
of  attention.  The  work  of  the  "  Exceptiones  "
has  been  prompted  by  practical  considerations,
by  difficulties  experienced,  in  the  administration

34


REVIVAL  OF  JURISPRUDENCE

of  the  law.  It  is  not  merely  dedicated  to  a  magis-
trate of  high  standing,  but  is  intended  to  give  him
help  in  the  exercise  of  his  office.  His  jurisdiction
forms  a  link  in  a  system  culminating  in  an  appeal
to  "supreme  majesty,"  evidently,  in  this  case,
the  supreme  majesty  of  the  Emperor.  The  ne-
cessity of  having  recourse  to  a  juridical  manual
is  derived  from  frequent  controversies  and  doubts
among  experts  in  law.  The  tract  uses  the  ex-
pression, sapientissimis  legibus  doctoribits,  which,
though  it  cannot  be  taken  in  the  usual  academic
sense  of  doctors  of  laws,  yet  is  full  of  meaning,
even  in  the  narrower  sense  used  in  our  trans-
lation. It  implies  a  preceding  period  of  study
and  discussion  which  would  range  into  the  earlier
years  of  the  eleventh  century.  This  observation
is  well  in  keeping  with  the  contents  of  the  "  Ex-
ceptiones,"  which,  for  all  their  brevity  and  oc-
casional misunderstandings,  exhibit  a  remarkably
ripe  juridical  judgment,  as  well  as  a  considerable
acquaintance  with  the  sources  of  Roman  Law.

The  author  claims  great  power  and  responsi-
bility with  characteristic  self-reliance.  He  does
not  scruple  to  "tread  under  foot"  enactments,
which,  according  to  his  view,  have  fallen  into
disuse,  or  are  contrary  to  equity,  and  his  only
authority  for  such  an  act  is  that  of  a  jurisconsult,
of  a  learned  exponent  of  legal  doctrine.

The  execution  of  the  work  is  not  unworthy
of  the  design.  The  "  Exceptiones  "  form  a  short

35


ROMAN LAW


manual  of  rules  for  practical  use.  Their  materials
are  drawn  from  the  Corpus  Juris,  and  not  from
the  Breviariutn  Alaricianum.  As  the  Provencal
surroundings  of  the  author  cannot  be  called  in
question,  we  must  infer  that  there  was  in  the
eleventh  century,  in  the  south  of  France,  a
marked  revival  in  the  study  and  application  of
the  Law  of  Justinian,  probably  in  close  con-
nection with  Italy.  All  these  parts  of  Justinian's
codification  have  been  employed,  but  it  must  be
noticed  that  the  Novelise  are  referred  to  through
the  medium  of  the  so-called  Julian's  Epitome,
made  about  the  middle  of  the  sixth  century.
As  for  the  Digest,  it  is  the  so-called  "Digestum
vetus"  (the  first  twenty-four  books)  which  has
been  chiefly  used,  whereas  the  New  Digest  (books
39-50)  has  been  utilised  much  less  frequently,
and  the  middle  portion  (the  Infortiatum)  has
hardly  been  touched.  The  practical  bent  of
the  author  prevents  him  from  ignoring  the  ex-
istence of  barbaric  laws.  He  sometimes  mentions
customs  based  on  Lombard  and  Prankish  enact-
ments, as,  for  example,  when  he  states  that  a
fine  of  200  solidi  is  payable  if  someone  squeezes
out  another's  eyes.  Although  the  amount  of
the  fine  is  higher  than  is  usual  in  barbaric  Codes,
the  method  of  imposing  fines  is,  of  course,  char-
acteristic of  early  Germanic  laws.  Let  us  add
that  the  Peter  of  the  "  Exceptiones  "  clearly
realises  that  the  territories  north  of  the  Alps

36


REVIVAL  OF  JURISPRUDENCE

fall  into  two  divisions,  according  to  their  relation
to  Roman  written,  and  to  customary,  law.  On
one  occasion  he  opposes  the  districts  in  which
the  '  most  sacred  laws  '  are  in  force,  that  is,
where  the  authority  of  Imperial  law  is  recognised,
to  territories  where  the  Codes  are  unknown
(II,  31).  Another  time  he  distinguishes  between
laws,  that  is,  written  laws,  and  the  custom  of
the  country  as  far  as  it  can  be  discovered  (se-
cundum  patriae  probabilem  consuetudinem,  IV,  3).
We  thus  find  in  the  south-east  of  France  a  dis-
tinct centre  of  knowledge  and  reflection  on  the
subject  of  Roman  Law,  characterised  by  a  prac-
tical tendency  and  developing  on  its  own  lines,
although  evidently  influenced  by  intercourse
with  Italy.  We  shall  remember  this  when  we
come  to  speak  of  the  future  development  of  Ro-
man legal  studies  in  France.  The  existence  of
this  French  centre  of  the  legal  revival  helps  to
show  that  the  more  powerful  and  influential
revival  of  Bologna  was  an  event  arising  out  of
the  spontaneous  growth  of  ideas  and  require-
ments in  different  localities  of  the  more  civilised
regions  of  Europe.

2.  There  is  a  second  centre,  as  I  have  said,
in  the  cities  of  Lombardy.  The  legislation  of
the  Lombard  kings,  Rothari,  Grimoald,  Liut-
prand,  Rachis,  Ahistulf,  was  not  abolished  by
the  Frankish  conquest  of  774.  Lombard  Italy
continued  to  a  great  extent  to  develop  on  its
37


ROMAN LAW


own  lines,  although  merged  in  the  Carolingian
Empire  and  subjected  to  a  certain  amount  of
Prankish  legislation.  When,  in  the  eleventh
century,  Northern  Italy  advanced  to  prosperity
and  political  importance,  due  partly  to  the  eco-
nomic progress  of  its  cities,  and  partly  to  the
activity  of  Emperors  and  Popes,  the  interpre-
tation of  Lombard  laws  in  tribunals  made  rapid
progress,  and  assumed  the  character  of  systematic
and  reflective  study.  We  hear  not  only  of  in-
genious barristers  (causidici)  and  of  learned
judges,  but  of  actual  schools,  in  which  rival
teachers  gathered  pupils  and  expounded  the
materials  of  Lombard  and  Franco-Lombard  law.
A  mine  of  information  is  supplied  by  the  inter-
pretation of  these  enactments  in  the  school  of
Pavia.  This  interpretation  finds  expression,
to  begin  with,  in  questions  and  glosses,  which
not  only  employ  the  comparison  of  texts  and
reasoning,  but  also  refer  more  and  more  frequently
to  Roman  Law.  Our  texts  show  that  one  of
the  exponents  of  this  method  of  interpretation
was  a  certain  Walcausus,  whom  we  are  able
to  identify  in  charters  as  a  judge  of  the  Imperial
court,  who  held  office  in  Verona  about  the  middle
of  the  eleventh  century.  It  is  worth  noticing
that  the  collections  of  glosses  on  Lombard  law
often  oppose  his  explanations  to  those  of  the
older  group  of  interpreters  of  the  law.  The
opinions  of  the  latter  were  marked  with  the  ab-

38


REVIVAL  OF  JURISPRUDENCE

breviation  a,  meaning  anliqui,  but  often  ex-
tended as  amentes  (the  madmen),  or  even
as  asini  (donkeys),  while  in  the  abbreviation
for  Walcausus,  v  is  read  valentcs — the  prevailing,
those  who  get  the  better  of  it.  The  best  insight
into  the  method  of  Lombard  jurisconsults  is
afforded  by  the  so-called  Exposition  to  the  book
of  Pavia,  a  compilation  of  laws  obtaining  in
Lombardy.  It  is  an  extended  commentary  based
on  the  work  of  several  generations  of  lawyers.

The  authorities  on  the  old  school  of  Pavia,
anliqui,  antiqni  judices,  antiqui  cansidici,  are  re-
ferred to  on  seventy-two  occasions.  Among  them,
the  most  prominent  were  Bonifilius,  an  assessor
of  the  Imperial  courts  mentioned  in  charters
from  A.D.  1014  to  1055,  and  Lanfranc,  the  famous
Archbishop  of  Canterbury,  who,  in  his  younger
days,  was  a  conspicuous  light  of  the  school  of
Pavia.  He  left  it  in  1042  for  Normandy,  where
he  became  a  monk  and  later  abbot  of  Bee,  before
following  William  the  Conqueror  to  England.
As  has  been  shown  by  a  careful  investigation
of  his  later  theological  writings,  he  did  not  con-
sign his  juridical  training  to  oblivion  even  in  the
time  of  his  greatness  in  England.  Of  the  younger
Lombard  jurisconsults,  the  most  prominent  were
Gualcausus  (Walcausus),  mentioned  above,  Guilel-
mus,  and  Ugo.  To  give  you  some  idea  of  the  way
in  which  legal  questions  were  put  and  contro-
versies conducted  by  the  Lombard  doctors,

39


ROMAN LAW


I  will  just  refer  to  two  of  these  disputes  in  which
Lan franc  took  part.  Guido  of  Spoleto,  elected
emperor  in  889,  had  enacted  that  in  case  a  charter
was  impugned  as  a  forgery,  the  notary  who  had
drawn  it  up,  or,  if  the  notary  were  dead,  the  per-
son producing  the  charter,  should  defend  it  by
calling  up  witnesses  and  swearing  to  its  genuine-
ness with  twelve  oath-helpers.  Lanfranc  is
reported  to  have  had  the  following  encounter
with  Bonifilius  about  this  enactment.  He  asked
the  latter  what  was  to  be  done  if  the  notary  and
the  witnesses  were  dead.  Bonifilius  answered,
"  The  party  producing  the  charter  can  clear  it
with  twelve  oath-helpers  and  two  other  charters
(required  for  the  verification  of  the  notary's
handwriting)."  To  this  Lanfranc  said,  "  Is  there
no  other  custom  but  this  ?  "  Bonifilius  :  "No."
Lanfranc  :  "  In  this  case  the  custom  is  against
the  law,  as  is  shown  by  the  prologue  to  Otto's
laws,  where  it  says  that  a  detestable  and  dishonest
custom,  which  ought  not  to  be  followed,  has
obtained  currency  in  Italy."  After  this  Bonifilius
left  with  shame  in  his  face  and  a  bowed  head.
But  Willelmus  defined  the  meaning  of  the  change
with  considerable  ingenuity  in  the  following
manner.  Otto's  prologue  had  in  view  that  some
persons,  greedy  after  other  men's  goods,  acquired
them  by  perjury.  Therefore  King  Otto  enacted
that  the  plaintiff  had  the  right  to  require  the
contention  to  be  decided  by  battle.  If  he  did
40


REVIVAL  OF  JURISPRUDENCE

not  do  so,  the  defendant,  who  had  produced
the  charter,  was  left  free  to  defend  himself  by
oath-helpers.  It  appears  from  this  narrative
that  Lanfranc  considered  Otto's  prologue  to
contain  a  general  condemnation  of  the  procedure
of  swearing  oaths,  and  Bonifilius  did  not  know
how  to  meet  the  argument  drawn  from  the  later
enactment  of  Otto.  Willelmus,  however,  found
a  way  out  of  the  difficulty  by  applying  the  words
"  detestable  custom  "  (nws  detestabilis],  not  to
the  swearing  of  the  oath,  but  to  the  practice
of  perjury,  so  that  Otto's  enactment  was  under-
stood as  completing,  and  not  as  abolishing  that
of  Guido.  The  plaintiff  had  the  option  of  choosing
trial  by  battle,  but  if  he  did  not  do  so,  the  older
rule  about  the  oath  held  good.  In  an  amusing
exposition  to  Grimowald,  c.  8,  Lanfranc  is  repre-
sented as  making  fools  of  the  disciples  of  Bonifilius
by  propounding  to  them  the  thorny  question  which
of  two  wives  had  the  right  to  a  fourth  part  of
their  husband's  inheritance  after  his  death,  if
he  had  constrained  his  first  wife  to  enter  a  monas-
tery and  married  a  second.  The  dialectician  leads
his  interlocutors  astray  by  putting  before  them
six  arguments  of  different  kinds.  They  agree
with  him  (bene  dixisti)  each  time  he  brings  for-
ward one  of  these,  and  no  sooner  have  they
done  so  than  he  reproves  them  (immo  male),
and  tacks  on  the  opposite  course,  until  at  last
lie  arrives  at  the  conclusion  that  the  second  wife

41


ROMAN LAW


cannot  be  considered  a  lawful  one,  and  has  there-
fore no  right  to  the  fourth  part.  The  windings
of  this  dialectic  exercise  give  rise  to  lengthy  de-
velopments, which  I  cannot  report  here,  but  let
us  notice  that  in  the  course  of  the  argument,
Lanfranc  not  only  draws  on  Lombard  enact-
ments, which  he  characteristically  styles  jus
gentium,  but  also  juggles  with  a  direct  quotation
from  the  Institutes :  on  the  strength  of  the  law
in  the  Institutes,  which  runs  "  Roman  citizens
contract  lawful  marriage,"  she  cannot  acquire
the  fourth  part  of  her  husband's  property.  This
suggests  the  conclusion  that  the  Lombard  doctors
considered  Roman  Law  as  the  general  or  common
law  to  which  recourse  must  be  made  in  all  cases
where  Lombard  enactments  provided  no  ground
of  appeal.  The  rule  is  stated  in  so  many  words
in  the  Exposition  to  Guiclo,  c.  4 ;  the  ancients
said  that  as  the  law  did  not  contain  any  precepts
on  certain  questions,  such  cases  must  be  decided
according  to  Roman  Law,  which  is  the  general
law  of  all  (qua  omnium  cst  gcncralis).  This
principle,  exemplified  in  particular  cases,  is,  of
course,  of  primary  importance.  It  shows  that
Lombard,  barbarian,  judges  and  jurisconsults
had  been  led  by  the  exercise  of  juridical  dialectics
to  look  to  Roman  Law  for  instruction  and  direc-
tion. The  controversies  reported  by  the  Ex-
position are  doubly  interesting,  inasmuch  as
they  stand  in  close  touch  with  the  practice  of
42


REVIVAL  OF  JURISPRUDENCE

tribunals,  and  at  the  same  time  manifest  tl.e
beginnings  of  systematic  teaching  in  law.  We
cannot  say  where  and  how  these  disputations
were  conducted,  but  the  reports  show  that  they
were  not  simply  encounters  between  barristers
in  pleading  or  differences  of  opinion  between
judges,  but  the  outcome  of  school  organisation.
For  this  reason  I  do  not  think  the  designation —
"  Lombard  doctors  " — an  inappropriate  one.  The
principal  place  where  these  juridical  studies
were  organised  was  Pavia,  although  the  claims
of  Verona  and  Xonantula  have  also  been  urged.

3.  As  against  the  mixed  characters  of  these
studies  in  Lombardy,  where  Roman  and  Germanic
Law  were  blended,  a  legal  school  on  purely
Romance  ground  arose  in  Ravenna.  There  are
some  indications  as  to  legal  studies  also  in  Rome,
but  it  is  impossible  to  discover  whether  the  legal
teaching  there  was  carried  on  as  a  special  faculty.
As  to  Ravenna,  definite  evidence  proves  that  a
school  of  jurists  took  an  active  part  in  the  struggle
between  Pope  Gregory  VII  and  the  Emperor
Henry  IV.  It  stood  on  the  Emperor's  side,  and
supported  Wibert  of  Ravenna  (Clement  III),
the  ant i- pope  raised  by  Henry  against  his  for-
midable opponent.  From  Ravenna,  Petrus  Crassus
launched  against  Gregory  VII  a  violent  pamphlet,
armed  with  quotations  from  Roman  legal  sources.
On  the  other  side,  the  fiery  Cardinal  Peter  Damiani
inveighed  against  the  iniquitous  lawyers  of
43


ROMAN LAW


Ravenna.  One  of  Damiani's  writings,  composed
between  1061  and  1073,  is  especially  characteristic.
It  treats  of  the  introduction  into  legal  practice
of  the  Roman  computation  of  relationship.
The  Florentines  consulted  the  lawyers  of  Ravenna,
who  assembled  in  corpore  and  pronounced  in
favour  of  the  Roman  computation.  Damiani
reproves  them  angrily,  and  speaks  with  scorn
of  the  wise  men  of  Ravenna  in  congregation
(Sapientes  civitatis  Ravenna  in  unum  con-
venientes),  of  their  books  (the  Corpus  Juris)
and  their  Justinian.  This  passage  and  other
indications  substantiate  a  famous  account  of
the  rise  of  the  Bolognese  school,  given  by  Odofre-
tlus,  a  thirteenth-century  Bolognese.  According
to  him,  the  centre  of  legal  studies  was  originally
at  Rome,  but,  in  consequence  of  wars,  it  was
transferred  to  Ravenna,  and  from  Ravenna  it
came  to  Bologna.

4.  The  immediate  occasion  for  the  creation  of
the  great  Bolognese  school  was  provided  by  the
endeavours  of  the  famous  Marchioness  Matilda.
As  a  staunch  supporter  of  Gregory  VII,  she
wanted  to  counterbalance  the  influence  of  the
Imperialistic  school  in  Ravenna  by  establish-
ing a  centre  of  studies  in  Roman  Law  that  would
act  on  the  papal  side.  The  first  exponent  of
laws  in  Bologna  had  been  a  certain  Pepo,  who
taught  in  the  last  quarter  of  the  eleventh
century.  He  is  mentioned  as  a  doctor  of  laws
44


REVIVAL  OF  JURISPRUDENCE

in  a  notable  judgment  delivered  in  the  court
of  Beatrice,  Duchess  of  Tuscany,  in  1076,  in
which  the  Digest  was  referred  to  and  utilised
for  the  decision.  But  the  man  with  whose  literary
activities  the  rise  of  the  Bologna  law  school
has  been  traditionally  connected,  is,  of  course,
Irnerius  or  Guarnerius.  Originally  a  teacher  of
arts,  he  went  to  Rome  at  the  instigation  of  the
Marchioness  Matilda,  and,  after  having  studied
there  for  some  time,  began  to  lecture  on  law  in
Bologna.  This  happened  towards  the  end  of
the  eleventh  century,  perhaps  about  1088.

I  need  not  dwell  on  the  brilliant  success  of
this  teaching,  and  on  the  external  circumstances
attending  the  development  of  the  Bologna  school.
It  is  well  known  that  it  soon  became  the  leading
university  of  the  Middle  Ages  for  the  study  of
law,  and  that  it  attracted  thousands  of  under-
graduates from  all  countries  of  Europe.

I  should  like  to  characterise  briefly  the  spirit
of  this  revival  of  legal  studies.  It  presents  at
bottom  an  application  to  law  of  the  method
which  was  employed  by  the  new  scholarship  of
Western  Europe  for  the  treatment  of  all  problems
of  theology  and  science — the  so-called  scholastic
method.  The  dark  centuries  preceding  the  year
1000  A.D.,  when  learning  meant  merely  the  sal-
vage of  fragments  of  ancient  knowledge,  were
followed  by  a  period  when  organisation  again
appeared.  The  great  instrument  for  the  advance-

45


ROMAN LAW


ment  of  learning  at  that  time  was  the  dialectical
process  by  which  formal  and  universal  logic
analyses  conceptions  and  constructs  syllogisms.
The  permeation  of  the  insufficient,  fragmentary,
classical  texts  by  overwhelming  logic  was,  in
a  sense,  a  masterly  achievement,  and  the  lawyers
had  more  than  their  fair  share  in  this  work.
While  their  fellows  in  the  school  of  Divinity
operated  on  Scripture  and  Canonic  tradition,
and  the  masters  of  arts  struggled,  by  the  help  of
distorted  versions  of  Aristotle,  with  the  rudiments
of  metaphysics,  politics,  and  natural  science,
the  lawyers  exercised  their  dialectical  acumen
on  a  material  really  worthy  of  the  name,  namely,
on  the  contents  of  the  Corpus  Juris.  And  as
legal  reasoning  largely  consists  of  dialectical
analysis  and  co-ordination,  they  were  able  to
produce  remarkable  results  even  at  this  early
stage.

It  is  not  a  matter  of  pure  chance  that  the  text
of  the  Corpus  Juris  received  critical  attention,
and  was  restored  to  completeness.  For  the  doctors
of  the  new  study,  the  books  of  Justinian  were
sacred  books,  the  sources  of  authority  from  which
all  deductions  must  proceed.  It  is  not  to  be
wondered  that  they  were  not  content  with  casual
fragments,  but  made  researches  into  its  com-
ponent elements,  and  considered  it  as  a  whole.
The  use  of  the  Pisa  MS.  of  the  Digest  (now  in
Florence)  was  certainly  of  the  utmost  importance
46


REVIVAL  OF  JURISPRUDENCE

for  the  reconstitution  of  a  good  text  of  the  most
valuable  part  of  the  Corpus  Juris.  But  even  apart
from  the  study  of  that  MS.,  the  different  elements
of  Justinian's  codification  were  gradually  saved
from  oblivion,  and  the  Bolognese  Vulgate,  the
version  made  up  for  use  in  the  schools,  is  historically
of  no  less  interest  than  the  Littera  Pisana.  Irnerius
himself  took  a  prominent  part  in  the  collection
of  Justinian's  texts  by  replacing  the  fragments
of  the  Novellae,  hitherto  quoted  from  Julian's
Epitome,  by  the  so-called  Authenticum,  a  more
complete  Latin  compilation  of  later  date.  Alto-
gether, the  critical  examination  of  the  state  of
the  text  was  one  of  the  chief  preoccupations  of
the  Bolognese  scholars.

The  next  was  literal  interpretation,  and  in
this  respect  the  Bolognese  followed  in  the  foot-
steps of  early  mediaeval  literary  students.  They
became  glossators  par  excellence,  although  the
gloss  is  certainly  not  a  weapon  peculiar  to  them.
But  their  glosses  could  not  well  remain  between
the  lines  as  explanations  of  single  words  or  short
remarks.  They  naturally  spread  out  on  the
margin,  where  there  was  more  room  for  notes,
that  were  not  merely  transliterations.  With
Azo  and  Accursius  they  grew  to  be  consecutive
commentaries,  and  at  that  stage,  the  period  of
glossators  proper  comes  to  an  end  (about  1250).
It  covered  roughly  150  years.

One  of  the  ways  in  which  the  gloss  was  made
47


ROMAN LAW


to  illustrate  the  text  was  to  summarise  its  con-
tents in  short  sentences.  Compilers  of  ancient
glosses  called  such  summaries  notabilia.  With
the  Bolognese  they  assumed  a  more  distinct
character  as  statements  of  juridical  rules,  and
were  nicknamed  Brocardica.  A  collection  of  such
brocardica  was  made  in  the  school  of  Azo.

Another  common  expedient,  employed  to  give
a  systematic  view  of  the  divisions  of  an  intricate
subject,  was  the  distinctio.  Starting  with  a  general
term  or  wide  conception,  it  indicated  the  different
species  subordinated  to  it,  splitting  each  up  into
its  subdivisions,  and  following  these  ramifications
of  sense  and  terminology  into  the  most  minute
details.  To  take  a  very  simple  instance,  it  was
done  in  this  manner  :

(  alias  electus, (  major, f  ordinarius.

)  alias! alias  I

I  alias  compromis- | minor, I  delegatus.

>  sarius,

This  method  had  already  been  much  in  favour
in  the  school  of  Pavia.

All  these  simple  processes  of  study  were  sub-
ordinated to  the  dialectical  analyses  of  texts,
in  which  these  were  shown  either  to  complete
and  support  each  other,  or  to  contain  gaps  and
contradictions.  The  latter  case  offered  oppor-
tunities for  the  exercise  of  the  reputed  scholastic
ingenuity.  And  here  it  must  be  noticed  that
the  earlier  doctors,  though  most  keen  and  clever
48


REVIVAL  OF  JURISPRUDENCE

in  their  operations,  generally  contrive  to  explain
the  texts,  while,  later  on,  especially  after  Accursius,
the  construction  of  artificial  arguments  for  its
own  sake  begins  to  attract  schoolmen.

In  any  case  the  dialectical  analysis  of  texts
was  the  great  work  of  the  school  of  Bologna,
and  in  this  respect  it  attained  an  excellence
which  we  cannot  refrain  from  admiring  even  now.
In  its  first  period,  that  of  the  glossators,  it  de-
veloped the  theoretical  side  of  teaching.  It
strove,  according  to  its  lights,  to  present  as  pure,
clear,  and  complete  a  statement  of  Roman  legal
doctrine  as  possible.  The  mixture  of  Roman  and
barbarian  elements,  characteristic  of  the  school
of  Pavia,  and  even  of  that  of  Provence,  disap-
pears. Irnerius,  Placentinus,  Azo,  Accursius,
reason  as  if  the  Lord  Justinian  was  still  holding
sway  over  Italy,  and  all  disputes  were  to  be
decided  in  his  courts.  The  academic  standpoint
imposed  limitations,  but  at  the  same  time  was
a  source  of  intellectual  strength.  It  enabled  the
glossators  to  master  thoroughly  and  in  all  direc-
tions the  materials  of  the  Corpus  Juris.  A  slight
but  significant  sign  of  the  extent  to  which  these
scholars  became  familiar  with  the  texts  is  shown
in  their  manner  of  quoting  them.  Instead  of
referring  to  chapter  and  verse,  that  is  quoting
book,  title,  law,  and  clause,  as  we  do  now,  and
as  was  done  in  earlier  times,  the  glossators,
following  the  lead  of  the  school  of  Pavia,  referred
K  49


ROMAN LAW


to  a  passage  by  the  rubric  of  the  title,  and  some-
times a  reference  to  a  book.  For  instance,  in
support  of  the  rule  that  no  one  can  reclaim  his
property  by  the  procedure  of  condidio  from
anyone  but  a  thief,  they  referred  to  Digest,
iisufnictnarius  quemadmodnm,  last  law,  which,
according  to  the  modern  mode  of  reference,
would  be  Digest  VII,  9,  12.  This  means,  of
course,  that  a  doctor  of  Bologna  was  expected
to  have  the  entire  mass  of  chapters'  rubrics  in
the  Corpus  at  his  fingers'  ends.  Besides  mastering
the  material  and  expounding  it  in  a  rational
way,  these  jurists  were  fond  of  putting  different
cases  for  solution,  as  is  done,  for  instance,  in
a  tract  entitled,  Qnastioncs  de  juris  subtilitatibns,
attributed  to  Irnerius.  As  in  the  Lombard
school,  they  delighted  in  controversies,  and  the
trend  of  the  more  important  disputes  has  been
preserved  to  us,  notably  in  a  work  on  the  Dis-
sensiones  dominomm,  and  in  the  great  sum-
marising glosses  of  Azo  and  Accursius.

5.  The  school  did  not  identify  itself  with  any
of  the  great  political  parties  of  the  time.  Though
Irnerius  began  under  the  protection  of  the  Mar-
chioness Matilda,  he  changed  sides  after  attaining
success,  and  in  the  later  part  of  his  life  was  a
palatine  judge  under  Henry  V.  His  successors,  the
four  doctors  —  Bulgarus,  Martinus,  Jacobus,  and
Ugo  —  made  the  memorable  declaration  at  the
Roncaglia  Diet  of  1158  in  favour  of  the  Emperor
So


REVIVAL  OF  JURISPRUDENCE

Barbarossa's  right  to  tax  the  cities  of  Lombardy.
In  this  case,  however,  they  seem  to  have  been
actuated  not  so  much  by  Ghibelline  zeal  as  by
their  natural  inclination  to  interpret  the  sources  of
Roman  Law  in  a  literal  sense,  and  to  attribute  to
them  an  actual  bearing  on  the  controversies  of
the  twelfth  century.  These  very  doctors,  however,
were  by  no  means  agreed  as  to  the  limits  of
Imperial  authority,  and  an  anecdote  of  the  schools
tells  us  that  when  the  Emperor  Frederic  was
riding  one  day  with  Bulgarus  on  his  right  hand
and  Martinus  on  the  left,  he  asked  them  whether
the  Emperor  was  not  by  right  lord  (domimis)  of
everything  held  by  his  subjects.  One  of  the
doctors,  Bulgarus,  had  the  courage  to  answer
that  he  was  lord  in  the  political  sense,  but  not
in  the  sense  of  an  owner.  Some  of  the  Bolognese
jurists  held  staunchly  to  the  Guelf  party,  as  did,
for  instance,  one  of  the  most  brilliant  among  them,
Placentinus.  But,  of  course,  the  natural  bent  of
these  men  schooled  in  the  law  of  the  later  empire
inclined  to  the  monarchical  point  of  view.  In
any  case  they  stood  for  a  central  authority  as
against  feudal  disruption,  and  although  some
of  them  made  a  study  of  feudal  law,  they  treated
it  as  a  development  of  the  Roman  doctrine  of
emphyteusis.

6.  The  best  way  to  obtain  some  insight  into
the  intellectual  work  of  the  glossators  is,  I  think,
to  examine  the  teaching  of  one  of  them  in  some

51


ROMAN LAW


concrete  cases.  I  should  like  from  this  point
of  view  to  dwell  somewhat  on  the  doctrine  of
Vacarius,  who,  although  by  no  means  the  most
brilliant  or  influential  representative  of  the
school,  deserves  our  special  attention  as  a  pioneer
of  the  new  learning  in  England.  The  external
facts  of  his  career  are  sufficiently  known.  He
studied  Lombard  and  canon  as  well  as  civil
law,  and  has  written  on  all  three  branches  of
contemporary  jurisprudence,  but  he  was  princi-
pally concerned  with  the  teaching  of  Roman
Law,  and  may  be  considered  a  fair  representative
of  the  earlier  Bolognese  jurists.  He  was  attracted
to  England  by  Archbishop  Theobald,  taught  in
Canterbury  and,  according  to  Gervase's  testi-
mony, in  Oxford.  He  was  silenced  for  some  time
by  Stephen,  either  because  his  teaching  was
considered  dangerous  to  the  authority  of  native
legal  custom,  or  because  Stephen  was  jealous
of  the  success  obtained  by  a  clerk  of  Archbishop
Theobald,  who  maintained  a  hostile  attitude
towards  him.  Vacarius  must  have  resumed  his
professional  activity  after  an  interruption  of
some  years,  and,  in  any  case,  his  doctrinal  in-
fluence left  a  dee]")  trace  in  Oxford,  where  the
students  of  law  came  to  be  styled  panpcristee,
because  their  principal  text-book  was  Vacarius'
Book  of  Poor  Scholars  (Liber  pauperitin).

No complete edition of this work has ever
been  made,  but  it  is  sufficiently  known,  as  several


REVIVAL  OF  JURISPRUDENCE

MSS.  of  it  have  come  down  to  us,  and  some  ex-
tracts from  his  glosses  have  been  published  by
Wcnck  and  Stolzel.  The  Liber  pauper nm  is  a
compilation  of  the  Codex  and  of  the  Digest
arranged  for  students  who  had  not  the  means  to
acquire  costly  books,  nor  the  time  to  make  a
prolonged  study  of  Roman  sources.  The  glosses
are  brief  remarks  inserted  between  the  lines  and
on  the  margins.  One  of  the  earliest  shows  our
author  grappling  with  a  difficulty  in  the  applica-
tion of  the  privileges  of  the  Church  concerning
prescription.  According  to  enactments  of  Justinian,
ecclesiastical  institutions  were  not  debarred  from
asserting  claims  concerning  property  by  the  usual
prescription  of  thirty  years  ;  that  common  law
period  was  extended  for  them  to  forty  years,  and
the  canonists  asserted  that  the  Church  of  Rome
had  a  right  to  even  a  greater  extension,  namely,
one  hundred  years.  There  was  a  lively  con-
troversy on  the  latter  point  among  civilians,
in  which  Vacarius  did  not  take  part,  however.
The  Worcester  MS.  of  his  book  simply  gives  an
extract  from  Nov.  9  as  to  the  hundred  years'
privilege  of  the  Church  of  Rome,  and  does  not
go  into  the  question  how  far  it  was  abrogated
by  Nov.  in.  But  our  author  does  not  fail  to
notice  a  question  as  to  the  juridical  application
of  the  privilege.  \Yas  it  possible  to  plead  the
thirty  years'  prescription  against  the  Church  if  it
had  acquired  property  from  a  private  person  who

53


ROMAN LAW


had  not  asserted  his  right  within  the  thirty  years
allowed  by  common  law  ?  One  set  of  lawyers,
as  Vacarius'  gloss  tells  us,  replied  in  the  negative,
because  no  one  can  pass  a  right  he  does  not  possess.
But  our  glossator  notices  also  another  opinion —
that  the  privilege  of  the  Church  is  derived  from
its  own  peculiar  position,  and  was  not  to  be  made
dependent  on  the  passing  of  a  right  by  an  out-
sider. This  is  how  I  understand  the  short  re-
mark in  Vacarius'  Libey  pauperum,  and  it  may
serve  as  an  example  of  the  juridical  queries
which  constantly  presented  themselves  to  the
attentive  student  of  Roman  legal  authorities.

The  next  section,  devoted  to  a  commentary  on
D.  i,  3,  intituled  "on  laws,  enactments,  decrees
of  the  senate  and  long  custom  " — Ac  Icgibus,  consti-
tiitionibus,  senatns  consultis  el  louga  consiietudine),
is  of  greater  general  interest  ;  it  treats,  according
to  an  explanatory  gloss,  of  laws  about  laws,  which
are  contrasted  with  laws  about  business  matters
(leges  legion — leges  negociorum).  Vacarius  treads
here  on  ground  occupied  by  the  most  vital  prob-
lems of  jurisprudence.  The  glossators  were
greatly  exercised  by  the  fundamental  question
of  the  relation  between  law  and  equity.  I  have
already  had  occasion  to  notice  the  radical  point
of  view  of  the  Exceptiones  Pctri.  The  author  of
this  Provencal  text-book  does  not  scruple  to
tread  under  foot  positive  rules  of  law  which
seem  to  him  obsolete  or  contrary  to  equity.
54


REVIVAL  OF  JURISPRUDENCE

And  he  is  by  no  means  alone  in  taking  up  such
a  position.  The  author  of  a  tract  on  subtle
questions  of  law  of  Irnerius  describes  graphically
in  his  prologue  a  wall  on  which  are  engraved
texts  of  law.  Honourable  men  in  great  numbers
frequently  approach  this  wall  and  study  the
texts  diligently,  so  that  enactments  which  do
not  conform  with  equity  may  be  taken  as  can-
celled. In  the  manual  of  a  MS.  of  Troyes  (Summa
Trecaisis),*  representing  one  of  the  first  steps
in  the  jurisprudence  of  the  epoch  of  glossators,
we  are  told  that  laws  have  to  be  interpreted  in
a  humane  way,  so  that  their  meaning  may  be
preserved,  and  there  should  be  no  discrepancy
with  equity ;  the  precepts  of  laws  should  be
admitted  only  if  they  tally  with  equity  (Summa
Trecensis,  I,  14,  §§6,  7).  On  the  other  hand,
Irnerius  himself,  as  a  genuine  gloss  of  his  testifies,
saw  a  danger  in  such  a  wide  power  to  modify
law  on  the  part  of  the  judge,  f  He  considers  equity
as  the  mere  enunciation  of  a  principle  of  justice,
whereas  law  propounds  the  same  principle  as
the  expression  of  a  will,  that  is,  with  a  certain
admixture  of  authority.  Both  differ  considerably
through  the  weakness  of  human  nature ;  law
contains  partly  more  and  partly  less  than  is
ordained  by  equity.  They  differ  also  in  many
other  ways,  and  the  interpretation  of  their  dis-
crepancies, if  it  is  to  have  force  of  law,  appertains
*  Fitting  attributes  it  to  Irnerius.  f  App.  IV.

55


ROMAN LAW


to  sovereigns  only.  From  what  we  learn  of  the
teaching  of  Bulgarus,  he  stood  up  for  a  stricter
interpretation  of  law,  while  Martinus  and  his
pupil,  Placentinus,  inclined  towards  more  lax
interpretation.

It  is  interesting  to  see  that  Vacarius'  position
in  this  controversy  is  indicated  by  a  short  but
interesting  gloss.*  He  starts  from  the  doctrine
that  the  Emperor  is  the  only  originator  and  in-
terpreter of  law.  In  his  case  lawgiving  is  the  out-
come of  his  will,  while  others,  that  is,  subordinate
magistrates  and  judges,  may  have  to  lay  down
the  law  from  necessity.  This  being  so,  one  need
not  wonder  at  the  maxim  that  the  sovereign  is
not  bound  by  the  law  (legibits  solittits)  ;  law  itself
is  the  creation  of  his  will.  And  further,  when  a
judge  interprets  law,  his  interpretation  holds
good  merely  in  the  case  of  litigants  before  him,
and  in  so  far  as  they  have  no  legal  remedy  at
hand  against  his  decision.  Thus  interpretation
modifying  the  legal  rule  itself  is  reserved  to  the
action  of  the  legislator,  and  not  conceded  to  the
judge.  Any  discrepancy  between  equity  and  law-
has  therefore  to  be  removed  by  legislative  means,
while  the  power  of  the  judge  does  not  reach
further  than  the  dispute  immediately  in  hand.

The  same  reverential  attitude  towards  sovereign

authority  underlies  the  teaching  of  Vacarius  on

legal  custom. The  glossators  were  again  divided

*  App.  V.

56


REVIVAL  OF  JURISPRUDENCE

on  this  point.  According  to  one  view  the  people,
having  surrendered  its  legislative  power  to  the
Emperor,  custom  is  subordinated  to  law,  and  the
latter  cannot  be  repealed  even  by  disuse.  From
another  point  of  view,  popular  custom  appears
as  the  survival  of  the  legislative  authority  of  the
people,  and  this  justifies  the  modification  of
express  laws  by  custom.  A  gloss  of  Vacarius
bears  on  this  difference  of  opinion.  His  contention
is  that  things  are  generally  dissolved  by  the  same
process  by  which  they  have  been  created.  An
enactment  may  be  made,  and  will  hold  good
even  against  the  wish  and  protest  of  the  people.
Therefore  it  cannot  be  abrogated  by  custom,
unless  the  people  has  resumed  Imperial  authority
and  power  by  depriving  the  sovereign  of  them.
The  last  words  contemplate  a  possible  resumption
of  power  by  the  people — an  interesting  conception
by  no  means  uncommon  during  the  Middle  Ages.
But  this  part  of  the  doctrine  is  not  developed
further,  whereas  the  initial  remarks  are  in  com-
plete harmony  with  the  part  assigned  by  Vacarius
to  the  legislative  omnipotence  of  the  sovereign.

The  above-mentioned  passages  may  be  suf-
ficient to  show  what  a  lively  intercourse  of  ideas
was  taking  place  among  these  twelfth-century
scholars.  Their  discussions  were  conducted  very
much  on  academic  lines,  but  it  is  clear  that  the
interests  of  actual  life  were  by  no  means  without
influence  on  the  setting  and  solution  of  their
57


ROMAN LAW


problems.  Judicial  interpretation,  the  influence
of  custom,  the  part  played  by  the  idea  of  sove-
reignty, in  the  formation  of  law — all  these  ques-
tions had,  besides  their  intrinsic  jurisprudcntial
value,  a  special  interest  for  men  who  were  moving
in  a  society  where  the  elements  of  law  and  political
order  had  to  be,  as  it  were,  discovered  anew.
The  theorists  framed  their  definitions  and  dis-
tinctions in  too  rigid  a  manner  ;  yet  they  helped
materially  to  disentangle  the  general  conceptions
of  law  from  the  chaotic  uncertainty  of  a  blind
struggle  for  existence.


LECTURE III

ROMAN LAW IN FRANCE

Authorities  :  Brachylogus  juris  civilis,  ed.  Backing,
1829  ;  Lo  Codi,  ed.  H.  Fitting  und  H.  Suchier,  1906  ;
E.  Littcn,  Ucber  lo  Codi  und  Seine  Stellung  in  der  Ent-
wickelung  des  Culpa — Problems  in  the  Melanges,  Fitting,
II,  1908  ;  A.  Tardif,  Histoire  des  Sources  du  droit  fran-
£ais;  Origines  romaines,  1890;  /.  Brissaiid,  Histoire  du  droit
fraiifais,  1899  ;  P.  Viollct,  Histoire  du  droit  civil  fran9ais,
1905  ;  Esmein,  Histoire  du  droit  fraii9ais,  8  ed.  1907  ;
P.  Viollct,  Les  etablissements  de  St.  Louis,  I-IV,  1881-6  ;
Ch.  Guiraud,  Essai  sur  1'histoire  du  droit  fraii9ais  au
moyen  age,  1846  ;  Beaumanoir,  Coutumc  de  Beauvaisis,
ed.  Salmon,  I,  II,  1899  ;  P.  Van  Wetter,  Le  droit  remain
et  Beaumanoir  in  the  Melanges,  Fitting,  II,  1908  ;  Ed,
Meynial,  Des  renonciations  au  moyen  age  et  dans  notre
ancicn  droit,  in  the  Nouvelle  Revue  historique  de  droit
francais  et  etranger,  1900,  1901,  1902,  1904;  Bordier,
Philippe  dc  Remi,  sire  de  Beaumanoir,  1869.


i.  T  HAVE  already  had  occasion  to  notice
J.  several  facts  which  show  that  Italy  \vas
by  no  means  the  only  country  in  which  signs  of  a
revival  of  civilisation  appeared  in  the  eleventh
century.  France  was  also  on  the  way  towards
new  ideals  of  culture  and  learning.  If  Italian  life
was  preparing  for  the  rise  of  Bologna,  French
life  was  gathering  strength  for  the  glory  of  the
University  of  Paris.  The  course  of  the  latter
was  dedicated  to  the  arts,  divinity,  and  canon

59


ROMAN LAW


law,  but  the  great  scholastic  movement,  consisting
in  the  concentration  of  studies,  was  nowhere  more
powerful  than  in  Paris,  and  it  could  not  but
react  on  legal  learning.  It  showed  a  growth  of
intellectual  power  which  by  itself  was  bound  to
benefit  indirectly  the  study  of  laws.  And  indeed,
we  find  many  products  of  French  scholarship
dedicated  to  law  at  the  same  critical  period  when
the  Italian  school  was  gradually  taking  shape.
Besides  the  Exceplioncs  Pclri,  already  mentioned
above,  I  should  like  to  call  attention  to  the  work
of  Ivo  of  Chartres  (about  noo).  His  Dccrdnm
and  his  Panormita  show  a  minute  acquaintance
with  Roman  legal  sources  and  more  especially
with  Justinian's  codification.  Another  valuable
legal  book  of  French  origin  is  the  Brachylogits
juris  civilis,  a  very  clear  and  learned  manual  for
the  teaching  of  Roman  Law,  probably  composed
in  the  first  quarter  of  the  twelfth  century  ;  though
showing  traces  of  the  influence  of  the  glossators,
it  still  remains  original  in  its  method  of  arranging
material  and  stating  rules.

The  most  interesting  contribution  of  France
to  the  revival  of  Roman  Law  is  the  recently
discovered  summary  of  Justinian's  Code,  com-
piled for  the  use  of  judges  in  Provence,  the  so-
called  Lo  Codi.  Like  the  Exccptioncs  Pclri,  it
originated  in  the  south-eastern  corner  of  France,
probably  in  Aries,  which  in  the  twelfth  century
was  a  dependency  of  the  Empire.  An  allusion
60


ROMAN LAW IN FRANCE

to  the  possible  capture  of  Fraga,  a  fortified  town
in  the  March  of  Barcelona,  enables  us  to  fix  the
date  of  its  composition  as  about  1149.  Certain
Provencal  expressions  occur  in  the  Exceptiones
Petri,  but  Lo  Codi  was  written  entirely  in  the
Provencal  language,  and  presents  therefore  the
first  treatise  on  Roman  Law  composed  in  a  native
dialect.  The  Provencal  text  has  not  been  pub-
lished yet,  but  Professor  Suchier  of  the  University
of  Halle  is  preparing  an  edition  of  it.  A  Latin
translation,  made  by  Ricardus  Pisanus  some  time
before  1162,  is  already  in  our  hands,  thanks  to
the  industry  of  Professor  Hermann  Fitting,  the
leading  representative  of  the  study  of  Roman
Law  in  the  Middle  Ages.

Lo  Codi  stands  already  under  the  influence  of
the  glossators.  It  follows  closely  a  summary  of
the  Codex  extant  in  a  MS.  of  Troves  (Snmma
Trecensis)  and  attributed  by  Fitting  to  Irnerius
himself.  The  authorship  of  Irnerius  cannot  be
proved,  but  the  Snmma  Trecensis  is,  in  any  case,
a  fair  sample  of  an  early  glossator's  work.  The
compilers  of  the  Codex  have  also  utilised  a  Summa
Codicis  of  Rogcnis,  a  glossator  of  the  third  genera-
tion. It  seems,  in  fact,  that  Rogerus  personally
took  part  in  the  compilation  of  the  Codi.  Yet  the
Codi  has  distinctive  features  which  on  the  one  hand
distinguish  it  from  the  Bolognese  books,  and
on  the  other  hand  connect  it  with  the  tradition
of  the  Fxceptiones  Petri.  It  is  written  not  for
61


ROMAN LAW


academic  use,  but  for  the  courts,  and  more  par-
ticularly for  laymen  acting  as  presiding  judges  or
arbitrators  ;  it  is  absolutely  free  from  pedantry
or  abstruse  argument  ;  it  aims  chiefly  at  clearness,
and  at  easy  access  in  case  of  reference.  Cases
likely  to  occur  in  common  practice  are  constantly
put.  Lo  Codi  is,  in  short,  a  manual  for  immediate
use,  somewhat  resembling  the  books  of  reference
of  modern  justices  of  the  peace.  I  will  give  one
or  two  instances  in  illustration  of  its  treatment
of  the  subject.

The  rules  as  to  the  responsibility  of  a  person
using  goods  belonging  to  another  greatly  exer-
cised the  ingenuity  of  Roman  lawyers.  The
borrower  was,  of  course,  answerable  for  fraudulent
misuse  (dolus),  but  how  far  was  lie  answerable
for  negligence  (citlpa)  ?  Xervu,  as  reported  by
Celsus,  had  laid  down  that  gross  negligence
(citlpa  latior]  is  equivalent  to  fraud,  and  con-
stitutes a  breach  of  good  faith.  But  what  is  to
lie  taken  as  the  measure  of  gross  negligence  ?
The  Codi  points  to  some  palpable  absurdities  to
illustrate  the  general  meaning  of  gross  negligence.
It  arises  when  a  person  thinks  that  what  is  noxious
to  everyone  else  is  innocuous  to  him,  as,  for  ex-
ample, if  I  leave  a  book  out  in  the  rain  and  do  not
consider  that  it  is  sure  to  be  damaged,  or  if  I  lead
a  horse,  entrusted  to  my  care,  by  places  that  I
know  to  be  the  haunts  of  robbers  and  thieves.
Such  acts  constitute  gross  negligence,  and  I  must
62


ROMAN LAW  IN FRANCE

compensate  for  any  damages  resulting  from  it.
But  it  is  not  sufficient  to  point  to  extreme  absurdi-
ties. In  practice,  much  will  depend  on  the  stand-
ard of  reasonableness.  And  although  the  Codi
does  not  follow  the  Roman  lawyers  in  tracing
minutely  the  differences  between  culpa,  culpa
latior,  and  dolus,  it  is  very  careful  to  set  up  a
standard  of  reasonable  care  and  to  make  it  as
practical  as  possible.  Classical  jurisconsults  were
divided  :  some  held  that  a  minimum  of  average
care  was  sufficient  to  avoid  direct  responsibility
for  damage,  others  that  the  party  to  a  contract
was  bound  to  exercise  a  high  degree  of  diligence,
to  act  as  a  good  householder  (bonus  paterfamilias)
and  as  a  \\ise  man  (sapiens)  would  have  done
under  the  circumstances.  The  compilation  of
Justinian  and  the  early  glossators  did  not  pay
much  attention  to  the  controversy,  and  failed
to  provide  definite  rules  for  the  guidance  of
practitioners.  Not  so  the  Codi.  From  its  emi-
nently practical  standpoint,  the  question  as  to
the  proper  standard  was  of  much  greater  import-
ance than  the  abstract  derivation  of  culpa.  It-
declares  for  a  standard  of  high  efficiency  :  it
amounts  to  culpable  negligence  if  I  have  not  taken
care  of  borrowed  goods  as  a  wise  man  would  have
done  (sicut  facer et  aliqiris  sapiens  homo,  IV,  69,  9  ;

cf.  IV,  55.  3)-

Let  us  take  another  instance,  showing  to  what
extent  the  abstract  doctrines  of  Roman  Law  were


ROMAN LAW


influenced  by  customary  rules  and  local  condi-
tions. In  the  treatment  of  damages  occasioned
to  someone  by  another  person's  fraud  or  deceit
(fraude  vcl  inganno,  II,  10),  the  Codi  follows,  in  a
general  way,  the  doctrine  laid  down  in  Justinian's
Code,  II,  20.  But  it  introduces  variations  in
point  of  detail.  It  starts  from  an  important
distinction.  If  the  deceiver  induced  the  ag-
grieved party  to  enter  into  an  unsound  trans-
action, as,  for  example,  to  make  a  contract  on  the
strength  of  false  information,  the  contract  must
be  rescinded  at  the  request  of  the  aggrieved  party.
If  I  have  sold  goods  to  a  man  who  has  deceived
me  as  to  the  price,  I  may  claim  the  difference  be-
tween the  diminished  price  and  the  fair  value.
If  I  did  not  wish  to  sell  at  all  and  have  been
induced  thereto  by  fraud,  the  sale  is  of  no  effect
whatever.  Should  fraud  be  employed  without
any  reference  to  a  contract,  compensation  must
be  made  if  the  damage  done  is  considerable — not
less  than  two  byzantes.  In  insignificant  cases
no  action  is  allowed,  but  there  may  be  important
cases  in  which  indemnity  ought  to  be  granted.
For  instance,  a  person  called  his  brother  to  his
death- bed  and  said  to  him,  "Brother,  be  you  my
heir,  and  if  you  are  not  my  heir,  my  wife  shall  be."
After  the  death  of  the  testator,  the  widow  cir-
cumvented the  rightful  heir  by  fraudulently  per-
suading him  not  to  accept  a  ruinous  inheritance.
\Vhen  he  followed  her  advice  she  took  the  inherit-
64


ROMAN LAW  IN FRANCE

ance  and  holds  it.  This  is  a  case  for  indemnity,
although  not  connected  with  any  particular
contract.  The  whole  setting  of  the  case  and  of
the  distinctions  is  evidently  coloured  by  actual
practice,  and  is  not  merely  copied  from  Justinian's
Code  or  from  the  summaries  of  the  glossators.

2.  We  have  thus  in  the  Provencal  Codi  an
excellent  example  of  the  intelligent  and  practical
use  of  Roman  Law  in  a  region  where  this  law
was  recognised  as  the  principal  legal  authority.
But  the  influence  of  Roman  sources  stretched
much  further.  It  affected  materially  the  state
of  the  law  in  parts  of  France  governed  by
customary  laws  derived  to  a  large  extent  from
German  tradition.  Here  the  process  of  trans-
formation is  especially  suggestive.  It  does  not
start  with  the  acceptance  of  an  external  authority
from  which  all  changes  in  detail  should  be  derived,
but  from  a  kind  of  struggle  for  existence  between
concrete  rules  and  institutions  of  German  and  of
Roman  origin.

Naturally  the  initial  move  in  this  case  came  from
the  spread  of  knowledge.  It  was  necessary  to
study  Roman  Law  before  applying  it,  and  it  is
material  from  this  point  of  view  that  the  Bolognese
school  not  only  attracted  foreigners,  and,  among
them,  many  Frenchmen,  but  also  that  it  sent
forth  disciples  into  France.  One  of  the  most
brilliant  glossators,  Placentinus,  disgusted  with
Bologna,  became  a  famous  teacher  of  the  law
F  65


ROMAN LAW


school  at  Montpellier.  The  legal  faculty  there
was  situated  in  the  "pays  de  droit  ecrit,"  in  the
region  dominated  by  Roman  Law,  but  it  also
served  as  an  influential  centre  for  the  rest  of
France.  There  can  be  no  doubt  that  the  rise  of
this  rival  of  Bologna  on  French  soil  greatly  con-
tributed to  the  development  of  jurisprudence,
and  to  the  progress  of  law  itself,  during  the  event-
ful centuries  when  both  England  and  France
evolved  the  fundamental  institutions  of  their
national  law.  Later  on,  the  school  of  Orleans,
organised  in  1312  by  Philip  IV,  became  the
authoritative  representative  of  legal  teaching  in
the  "pays  de  droit  contiimier,"  but  this  official
step  had  been  prepared  by  the  activity  of  legal
writers  and  by  academic  influence,  first  in  Mont-
pellier and  then  in  Orleans  itself.

The  reign  of  St.  Louis  is  as  conspicuous  for  the
progress  of  legal  institutions  as  for  its  two  crusades
and  its  brilliant  feats  of  chivalry.  Trial  by  battle
is  relegated  to  the  background  in  the  Royal  courts,
and  the  production  of  evidence  takes  its  place,
while  the  organisation  of  the  Parlement  of  Paris
assumes  a  systematic  and  well-developed  form.
To  this  juridical  revival  two  principal  causes  can
lie  assigned — the  growth  of  royal  authority  and
a  diligent  study  of  Law.  As  we  arc  concerned
with  the  latter,  let  us  notice  the  appearance
of  the  Conscil  a  mi  aini  (advice  to  a  friend)
of  Philip  of  Fontaines,  bailli  of  Vermandois,
66


ROMAN LAW IN FRANCE

His  work  testifies  to  an  eager  interest  in,
and  a  very  poor  understanding  of,  written  law.
Fontaines  simply  copies  passages  from  the  Digest
and  from  the  Institutes  without  being  able  to
co-ordinate  or  interpret  them.  More  curious  is  a
production  of  the  Orleans  school,  the  Book  of
Justice  and  Pleading  (le  lime  de  justice  et  de  plaid).
Of  its  342  clauses,  197  are  borrowed  from  Roman
sources,  while  the  rest  are  of  customary  origin.
The  unknown  author,  perhaps  a  professor  of  the
Orleans  school,  tries  to  enliven  his  dry  subject
by  numerous  references  to  the  sayings  and  doings
of  the  great  personages  of  his  time  ;  but  these
references  turn  out  to  be  fictitious — somewhat
resembling  similar  references  to  King  Alfred  and
Anglo-Saxon  judges  in  the  English  Mirror  of
Justices.  A  passage  from  Ulpian  appears,  for
example,  under  the  name  of  King  Louis  himself,
and  quotations  attributed  to  Renaut  de  Tricot,
Geoffrey  de  la  Chapelle,  and  other  worthies,  are
not  more  genuine.

Next  comes  a  private  compilation  which
achieved  a  great  reputation  and  influence  under
the  name  of  the  Etablisscments  de  Saint  Louis.
Only  its  first  nine  chapters  are  drawn  from  the
Ordinances  of  St.  Louis.  The  other  paragraphs
of  the  first  book  present  a  statement  of  a  custom
of  Touraine-Anjou,  while  the  second  book  consists
of  a  custom  of  the  Orleanais.  The  compiler  has
patched  these  two  records  of  customary  law  with
67


ROMAN LAW


extracts  from  Justinian's  Corpus  Juris,  but  even
when  these  are  removed,  the  influence  of  Roman
rules  remains  distinctly  traceable,  especially  in  the
Orleans  custom.

3.  The  most  interesting  document  of  French
juridical  revival  under  the  influence  of  Roman
Law  is  the  remarkable  Coutume  de  Beauvaisis,
compiled  by  Philippe  de  Remi,  Sire  de  Beau-
manoir,  between  1279  and  1283,  some  ten  or
fifteen  j-ears  later  than  Bracton's  great  treatise
on  the  Common  Law  of  England.  Beaumanoir  had
been  bailli,  that  is,  judge  and  deputy  governor,  of
the  county  of  Clermont  in  Beauvaisis,  which
belonged  to  Robert  de  Clermont,  the  sixth  son  of
St.  Louis.  He  was  a  man  of  extraordinary  ability,
learning,  and  varied  experience.  He  had  served
in  England  in  his  early  youth  and  has  left  not
only  the  juridical  tract  already  mentioned,  but
poetry,  including  a  poetical  romance  describing
the  adventures  of  a  French  knight,  Jehan,  and  a
fair  lady  of  Oxford,  Blonde  d'Oxford.  His
originality  of  mind  did  not  fail  him  when  he
came  to  treat  of  legal  topics,  and  his  Coutume  de
Beauvaisis  is  one  of  the  most  refreshing  legal
treatises  in  existence.  He  knew  his  Roman  Law
thoroughly,  and  used  it  with  the  freedom  and
dexterity  of  one  who  had  mastered  its  contents
and  was  not  a  slave  to  its  superior  authority.

In  order  to  judge  of  the  influence  exerted  by
Roman  Law  on  the  legal  usage  of  Northern  France,
68


ROMAN LAW IN FRANCE

we  can  hardly  do  better  than  consider  in  some
detail  the  teaching  of  Beaumanoir  on  a  few  sub-
jects of  legal  doctrine.

Beaumanoir 's  prologue  *  to  his  work  is  well
worth  notice.  He  does  not  hope  to  impress  the
reader  by  his  personal  authority,  and  even  con-
ceals his  name  until  the  end  of  the  book,  so  that
the  good  wine  he  offers  may  not  be  left  untasted
because  of  its  poor  "etiquette."  We  need  not
take  the  author's  modesty  too  literally,  but  this
much  is  certain  :  he  sets  himself  a  carefully
restricted  and  unambitious  aim.  He  wants  to
give  primarily  the  substance  of  local  custom  in
his  own  place — Clermont  in  Beauvaisis,  because
he  is  well  acquainted  with  it,  while  the  further  he
goes  from  his  district,  the  less  he  can  vouch  for
the  accuracy  of  his  knowledge.  Therefore,  if  he
can  base  his  information  on  actual  judgments  or
ascertainable  custom  of  Clermont,  he  will  rely
first  of  all  on  them,  and  only  when  doubts  arise
as  to  local  custom,  will  he  turn  to  the  custom  of
neighbouring  lordships  or  even  to  the  common  law
of  the  kingdom  of  France.  The  point  of  view  is
characteristic  of  a  French  lawyer  of  a  period
which  may  still  be  called  feudal.  It  is  exactly
opposed  to  the  method  of  Bracton,  who,  strong  in
the  judicial  authority  of  Royal  courts,  sets  out
to  describe  the  common  law  of  England  and
refers  to  local  custom  only  as  a  subordinate  source
*  A  pp.  VI.
69


ROMAN LAW


of  information.  This  being  so,  what  is  the  mean-
ing attached  to  the  term  "common  law"  by
Beaumanoir  ?  It  occurs  several  times  in  his
treatise,  and  can  only  mean  legal  rules  generally
accepted  throughout  the  realm  of  France,  for
example,  the  rule  that  a  husband  disposes  of  his
wife's  property  during  their  married  life.  This  is
not  a  rule  especially  expressed  in  Beauvaisis  cus-
tom or  established  in  the  tribunal  of  Clermont,
nor  is  it  a  rule  in  strict  correspondence  with
Justinian's  law,  but  is  the  view  generally  pre-
vailing in  France,  and,  I  presume,  acted  upon  by
Royal  courts  such  as  the  Parlement  of  Paris  (cf.
§  552  on  wardship).  From  this  and  other  in-
stances it  is  clear  that  Beaumanoir 's  use  of  the
term  is  a  much  more  lax  one  than  that  of  Bracton.
Whereas  for  the  latter  the  common  law  of  Eng-
land is  primarily  substantiated  and  exemplified
by  the  decisions  of  the  Royal  courts  of  justice,
the  French  jurists  seem  to  look  more  to  the
comparative  evidence  of  divers  customs,  aim  unit-
ing to  what  might  be  termed  a  law  common  to  all
French  territories.  Some  of  the  MSS.  of  Beau-
manoir have  actually  expressed  as  much  in  the
text  of  the  passage  in  question.  An  appeal  to  the
decision  of  Royal  courts,  of  the  Parlement  of
Paris,  is  not  excluded,  but  is  not  indicated  as
necessary  (cf.  §  3/4).  As  for  a  possible  reference
to  Roman  Law,  it  cannot  have  been  the  meaning
of  the  author  to  speak  of  it  as  the  general  or
70


ROMAN LAW  IN FRANCE

common  law  in  the  same  sense  as,  for  instance,
Lombard  jurists  had  done.  Roman  Law  as  such  was
not  recognised  within  the  territory  of  customary
law.  It  applied  only  when  it  had  been  accepted
by  the  jurisprudence  of  local  courts,  by  local
custom,  or  general  custom.  This  seems  clearly
proved  by  t\vo  considerations  ;  firstly,  by  an
express  declaration  that  reasonable  men  ought  to
follow  their  own  customs  and  not  "  ancient  laws  "
of  which  they  do  not  know  enough  ;  and,  secondly,
by  the  fact  that  Beaumanoir's  prologue  is  con-
structed on  the  same  lines  as  a  passage  of  Julian's
in  the  Digest,  but  that  he  intentionally  differs
from  it  as  to  the  decisive  point.  Where  Julian
has  recourse  to  the  Law  of  Rome,  Beaumanoir
says,  "common  law  of  the  kingdom  of  France,"
or  "  the  customs  of  France."

4.  I  dwell  on  the  analysis  of  this  prologue
because  it  affords  the  best  clue  to  the  interpreta-
tion of  Beaumanoir's  references  to  Roman  Law.
He  does  not  accept  them  on  authority,  and  yet
he  draws  constantly  on  Roman  rules  in  so  far
as  they  have  been  already  accepted  by  French
legal  custom  or  jurisprudence.  Consequently,  he
never  once  quotes  from  Roman  books,  and  yet  his
expressions  frequently  follow  the  exact  wording
of  these  same  books.  To  put  it  shortly,  he  deals
largely,  not  with  written  law  itself,  but  with
customary  law  partly  derived  from  Roman
origins.  A  good  illustration  is  provided  by  his


ROMAN LAW


chapters  on  the  so-called  renunciations,  on  clauses
inserted  in  charters  for  the  express  purpose  of
renouncing  a  possible  appeal  to  some  legal  rule
or  expedient  of  pleading.  A  number  of  purely
Roman  remedies  are  guarded  against,  as,  for
example,  the  exceptio  pccunicz  non  numerates,  or
the  complaint  that  a  vendor  has  obtained  less
than  half  value  for  his  property.  It  is  evident,
however,  that  Beaumanoir  did  not  compose  for
himself  the  list  of  all  these  "renunciations."  He
simply  took  the  customary  formulae  which  had
made  their  way  into  the  region  of  customary  law
in  the  North  from  the  region  of  written  law  in  the
South,  where  they  had  a  much  more  real  mean-
ing (§§  1094-1098).  This  makes  his  references  to
Roman  Law  only  the  more  interesting ;  they
depend  not  on  his  personal  taste,  but  on  a  process
of  acceptance  or  reception  effected  by  the  legal
custom  and  jurisprudence  of  the  age.

Some  of  the  principal  points  worked  out  by
thirteenth-century  jurisprudence  concerned  forms
of  procedure.  It  was  a  matter  of  importance  to
settle  in  what  manner  and  order  legal  remedies
should  be  granted,  claims  framed,  and  defences
against  them  allowed  by  the  courts.  Unless
these  and  similar  procedural  points  were  definitely
worked  out,  no  discussion  as  to  substantive
rights  could  avail.  The  importance  of  procedure
as  a  framework  for  material  law  was  further
enhanced  by  the  very  complicated  nature  of
72


ROMAN LAW IN FRANCE

jurisdiction,  the  intermixture  of  feudal  justice  of
various  degrees,  on  the  one  hand,  and  of  lay
courts  and  courts  Christian  on  the  other.  These
difficulties  presented  themselves  to  English  law-
yers as  early  as  the  twelfth  century,  in  the  time  of
Henry  II,  while  in  France  they  only  began  to  be
cleared  up  one  hundred  years  later,  under  St.
Louis  and  his  successors.  And  it  is  evident  from
Beaumanoir's  treatise  that  an  acquaintance  with
Roman  terms  and  forms  of  procedure  greatly
facilitated  the  task  of  French  lawyers  in  this
respect.  The  beginning  of  his  exposition  on
stages  in  pleading  illustrates  this  point  (ch.  vi).
Our  author  notices  expressly  that  clerks,  learned
ecclesiastics,  have  at  their  disposal  very  suitable
expressions  borrowed  from  Latin  speech,  but
laymen  do  not  understand  these  terms  when  put
in  French.  They  have  consequently  to  be  ex-
plained to  the  latter,  and  they  may  be  used  in  lay
courts,  as  it  were,  in  a  vernacular  guise.  An  action
begins  with  a  demande  (a  bill  of  petition),  corre-
sponding to  the  libcUus  of  the  clerks.  The  libcllus
convenlionis  of  the  libellary  process  of  later  Roman
Law  is  alluded  to.  Beaumanoir  does  not  dwell
on  the  libcllus  rcsfionsionis  of  the  defendant
(Niance  de  fait,  ci.  §  257),  but  proceeds  to  point
out  the  pleas  which  may  be  brought  forward  in
answer  to  the  allegations  of  the  plaintiff.  These
are  styled  exceptions,  as  in  Roman  procedure.
The  plaintiff  may  oppose  them  by
73


ROMAN LAW


again  as  in  a  tribunal  administering  justice  accord-
ing to  the  Corpus  Juris.  But  here  the  similarity
ceases.  The  Romans  admitted  further  pleadings
on  both  sides,  duplications,  triplications,  etc.,
and  the  courts  Christian  followed  their  example  in
this.  Not  so  the  lay  courts.  The  process  was
simplified  ;  each  party  could  plead  in  bar  once
only.  After  that,  issue  must  be  joined  on  ques-
tions of  fact.  The  context,  in  which  the  doctrine
is  expounded,  makes  it  probable  that  the  Roman-
istic  views  were  passed  over  to  the  courts  of
customary  law  through  the  channel  of  ecclesiastical
tribunals.  In  the  same  way  we  find  in  the  Contumc
de  Bcanvaisis  (as  well  as  in  the  Etablissemcnts  dc
St.  Louis]  Justinian's  classification  of  actions  into
personal,  real,  and  mixed  ;  the  first  aiming  at
enforcing  obligations,  the  second  directed  towards
obtaining  ownership  of  things,  and  the  third
starting  from  an  obligation  but  resulting  in
claims  as  to  things  (§§  228-230,  cf.  Inst.  IV,  6,
§§  i,  2,  20).  In  this  case  there  is  no  need  to  assume
the  influence  of  Canon  law.  The  distinctions  were
well  known  and  frequently  treated  in  all  schools
where  law  was  taught.

A  subject  of  much  importance  to  all  lawyers,
and  especially  to  lawyers  of  this  period,  was  the
very  fundamental  distinction  between  ownership
and  possession,  and  its  effects  on  legal  procedure.
In  ancient  German  law,  when  private  ownership
of  land  was  greatly  restricted,  quarrels  as  to
74


ROMAN LAW IN FRANCE

ownership  occurred  chiefly  between  clans,  town-
ships, ecclesiastical  institutions,  etc.,  and  were
treated  as  fundamentally  different  from  the
assertions  of  individual  claims.  On  the  other
hand,  rights  of  protected  occupation  and  pos-
session arose  easily,  and  were  based  on  the
application  of  labour  to  a  particular  plot  of  land.
If  a  man  was  suffered  to  settle  on  and  to  cultivate
a  piece  of  land  for  a  year  and  a  day,  he  could
claim  the  protection  of  the  courts  for  his  labour
and  occupation.  This  is  the  origin  of  the  peculiar
German  "  usiicaption  "  by  a  year  and  a  day.
It  is  derived  from  the  effective  short  -  period
cultivation  of  an  otherwise  unreclaimed  plot.
This  mode  of  "  nsucaption  "  is  clearly  set  forth
in  the  cnstomal  of  Touraine-Anjou  enrolled  in
the  first  book  of  the  j&tablissements  (I,  163),  and
it  occurs  also  in  Beaumanoir's  treatise.  "The
user  of  one  year  and  a  day  is  sufficient  to  acquire
seisin  (protected  possession),  as  when  a  man
holds  ploughed  land,  or  a  vineyard,  or  another
piece  of  inheritance  (land)  and  takes  the  fruits
of  it  for  a  year  and  a  clay.  Should  anyone  come
then  and  prevent  him,  the  lord  ought  to  remove
the  obstacle,  until  he  has  lost  the  land  in  a  trial
for  ownership  "  (§  685  ;  cf.  955).  Apart  from  the
peculiarly  short  period  of  "  usucaption,"  we  notice
here  the  definite  wish  of  the  authorities  to  protect
seisin  as  a  prinm  facie  ground  for  occupying  and
using  land.  Several  distinct  actions  sprang  from
75


ROMAN LAW


this  far  -  reaching  principle.  The  well  -  known
remedy  of  the  English  courts — the  action  of
Novel  Disseisin — is  not  unknown  in  French  law,
but  it  comes  into  being  rather  late  by  a  Royal
Ordinance  of  1277  (§§  958,  959).  Customary
procedure  admitted  also  of  a  plaint,  or  a  complaint,
as  they  said  in  France,  to  the  lord  of  the  country
against  violent  interruption  of  peaceful  possession,
and  it  was  sufficient  that  this  should  have  lasted
for  a  year  and  a  day.  On  the  other  hand,  Canon
law  had  borrowed  from  Roman  Law  a  process
which,  through  the  channel  of  ecclesiastical  juris-
diction, obtained  access  into  provincial  customals,
as,  for  instance,  into  the  Orleans  one.  In  this
case  an  entirely  different  theory  of  acquiring  pos-
session was  deemed  necessary.  A  person  dis-
turbed in  the  peaceful  enjoyment  of  a  plot  could
bring  an  action  asking  for  a  reintegrande,  but  the
court  when  deciding  the  question  of  possession
would  require  one  of  at  least  ten  years  if  reasonable
ground  for  it  was  shown,  and  one  of  thirty  years
if  no  specific  ground  was  stated.  We  find  the
teaching  as  to  ten  and  thirty  years'  prescription
clearly  stated  by  Beaumanoir,  and  he  advises  his
readers  to  try  for  seisin  by  prescription  before
venturing  on  the  much  more  difficult  plea  of
ownership.  First  get  your  seisin,  and  then  prove
ownership  if  you  can  (§  199).

From  this point of  view  of  the  "beatitude  of
seisin,"  (bcati  possidentes)  both  the  Orleans cus-
76


ROMAN LAW  IN FRANCE

tomal  and  Beaumanoir  lay  great  stress  on  a  rule
which  was  expressed  by  the  formula — le  mort
saisit  le  vif.  This  does  not  mean  that  the  dead
man  clutches  the  one  alive,  but  that  the  seisin  of
the  land  or  inheritance  passes  from  the  dead  man,
the  ancestor,  to  the  living  man,  the  successor.
It  is  a  short  and  more  striking  way  of  saying  that
the  heir  has  no  need  to  prove  his  title  to  land  :
he  is  protected  by  the  seisin  of  his  predecessor.
The  question  turns  on  inheritance,  and  not  on
title  to  property.  Here  again  we  are  on  firm
Roman  ground.

The  technical  character  of  these  rules  must  not
conceal  from  us  their  great  social  importance.
The  elaboration  of  the  doctrine  of  seisin,  pro-
tected possession,  with  all  its  eventualities  and
ramifications,  made  it  possible  to  avoid  the
tangle  of  feudal  claims,  and,  what  is  more,  to
establish  a  prima  fade  legal  order  where  violence
and  casual  appropriation  had  reigned  supreme.
The  check  put  on  Novel  Disseisin  was  a  fair  test
of  the  efficiency  and  social  value  of  the  State.
\Yhen  the  protection  of  seisin  had  been  achieved,
the  disentanglement  of  fundamental  rights  could
follow.  And  the  part  played  by  Roman  distinc-
tions and  rules  in  this  process  was  considerable.

5.  In  matters  concerning  family  law,  the  in-
fluence of  Roman  conceptions  is  not  so  obvious,
because  some  of  the  latter  remained  archaic,
as,  for  instance,  the  patria  potestas,  even  in  its

77


ROMAN  LAW


mitigated  form.  There  was  little  to  choose
between  Germanic  and  Romance  custom  in
regard  to  the  authority  of  the  father  and  the
privileged  position  of  the  male  sex  in  legal  ar-
rangements of  all  kinds.  On  the  other  hand,
special  tenacity  was  evinced  in  the  retaining  of
ancient  native  custom  in  the  branch  of  law  that
treats  of  some  of  the  forms  of  kinship.  We  find,
therefore  in  the  Beauvaisis  customal  such  insti-
tutions as  the  retrait  lignager,  the  right  of  re-
deeming goods  alienated  by  a  relative,  the  German
dower — the  portion  settled  on  the  wife  out  of  the
property  of  the  husband's  family,  etc.

A  very  important  departure  is  established
by  the  admission  of  the  mother  to  the  guardian-
ship of  her  child  under  age  (§  629  ;  cf.  Nov.  118).
This,  of  course,  ran  entirely  counter  to  ancient
Germanic,  and  indeed  to  ancient  Roman,  ideas.
It  is  not  impossible  that  we  have  to  do  here  not
with  a  principle  borrowed  from  Justinian's  law,
but  with  an  indigenous  evolution  of  legal  con-
ceptions.

In  chapter  640,  Beaumanoir  discusses  the
responsibilities  of  parents  for  crimes  committed
by  their  children.  According  to  this  view,  the
father  should  pay  the  fine  incurred,  if  the  children
are  under  his  patronage  (mainburnie).  Such
a  child  has  nothing  of  his  own,  whether  lie  be
of  age  or  under  age.  If  the  father  or  the  mother
desire  to  avoid  responsibility,  they  must  place
78


ROMAN LAW IN FRANCE

their  children  out  of  their  power  (main)  and
patronage  (mainburnie),  and  divide  bread  and
broth  with  them  (pain  et  pot}.  This  teaching
presents  a  quaint  combination  of  terms — main
corresponds  to  the  Roman  manus  in  the  sense
of  power,  authority,  while  mainburnie  is  a  cor-
ruption of  the  Germanic  mtindebttrdis.  The
vital  points  of  the  doctrine  are,  however,  that
children  dwelling  with  their  parents  round  the
same  kettle,  even  when  of  age,  are  not  con-
sidered independent  persons  in  the  sense  of
having  property  of  their  own — a  very  positive
expression  of  the  unity  of  the  joint  household.
The  latter  was,  of  course,  very  characteristic
of  Germanic  archaic  custom,  as  well  as  of  Roman.
The  Corpus  Juris  shows  that  a  person,  who  had
attained  full  age,  remains  in  the  power  of  the
father  unless  emancipated  by  him,  the  separation
of  the  households  and  property  rights  being
commonly  effected  by  the  marriage  of  the  son.

Another  department  of  the  law  strongly  affected
by  Roman  influence  was  the  law  of  contract.
This  subject  grows  in  importance  with  the  de-
velopment of  intercourse,  and,  naturally  enough,
Roman  rules  were  greatly  in  advance  in  this
respect,  as  compared  with  the  customs  of  bar-
barian communities.  Besides,  the  circumstances
under  which  obligations  arise,  are  enforced,  or
declared  invalid,  vary  considerably,  and  give
occasion  to  much  casuistry.  Barristers  and
79


ROMAN LAW


judges  had  therefore  a  greater  latitude  in  bringing
forward  personal  views,  and  in  drawing  on  Roman
juridical  sources  to  support  them.  The  definition
of  partnership  (compagnie),  for  example,  is  bor-
rowed from  Inst.  Ill,  25,  §§  i,  2.  Beaumanoir
especially  wanted  to  impress  his  readers  with
the  idea  that  it  was  by  no  means  necessary  for
partners  to  contribute  equal  pecuniary  shares
to  obtain  equal  shares  in  the  profits.  He  could
not  do  better  for  that  purpose  than  refer  to  the
passage  in  the  Institutes.

In  the  analysis  of  contracts  created  by  order
(mandatum)  a  nice  point  occurs  in  connection
with  the  personal  character  of  the  order.  It  is
not  difficult  to  see  that  if  the  person  giving  the
order  changes  his  mind  and  countermands  it
in  time,  the  contract  does  not  hold  good.  It  is
also  clear  that  if  the  counter-order  does  not
reach  the  agent  and  the  latter  executes  the  order
in  good  faith  as  given  to  him,  the  principal  is
held  by  it.  But  what  is  to  happen  if  the  principal
dies  ?  As  the  agent  represents  his  person,  the
agreement  falls  to  the  ground,  and  the  heir
is  not  bound  by  the  obligation.  But  one  event-
ualit}'  must  in  fairness  be  guarded  against.
If  the  heir  has  obtained  some  profit  by  the  exe-
cution of  the  order,  he  cannot  repudiate  the
obligation.  Thus"  Beaumanoir  follows  Institutes
III,  26,  §§9,  10,  in  all  its  windings  (§§  810,  8n).

I  need  not  pursue  further  the  examination
80


ROMAN LAW  IN FRANCE

of  the  traces  of  Roman  influence  in  Beaumanoir's
text.  What  has  been  said  seems  more  than
sufficient  to  show  how  great  that  influence  was.
It  was  conditioned  by  the  superiority  of  Roman
legal  rules  in  their  struggle  with  corresponding,
but  not  identical,  conceptions  of  Germanic
origin.  The  influx  of  Roman  doctrine  produced
neither  a  haphazard  collection  of  fragments  nor
wholesale  copying  and  complete  subordination
in  form  and  contents.  It  led  rather  to  an  in-
telligent "  reception,"  if  I  may  use  this  term
commonly  employed  by  German  scholars.  In
other  cases,  Roman  views  were  modified,  com-
bined with  native  ideas,  or  entirely  rejected.
And  when  one  meets  with  a  personality  such  as
Beaumanoir,  one  comes  to  understand  better
in  what  way  the  process  took  place.

6.  But  I  must  not  leave  the  subject  without
calling  attention  to  one  peculiarity  in  this  psy-
chological side  of  "reception."  It  happened
not  unfrequently  that  the  practitioner  or  the
learned  judge,  who  were  the  chief  agents  in  the
process,  picked  out  one  or  the  other  doctrine  not
in  its  proper  and  logical  sense,  but  in  order  to  con-
firm or  to  prove  some  opinion  of  their  own,  which
possibly  did  not  fit  in  exactly  with  the  concrete
rule  brought  forward  to  support  it.  Take,  for
instance,  the  famous  maxim,  quod  principi  placnit
legis  liabct  vigorem  (Inst.  I,  i,  2,  §  6).  Beaumanoir
quotes  it  expressly  in  his  paragraph  1103.  But

G  Si


ROMAN LAW


it  is  certainly  not  the  generally  constitutional
import  of  this  doctrine  that  he  wishes  to  ac-
climatise in  the  France  of  his  clay.  It  were  odd
indeed  if  he  wanted  to  do  so  at  the  end  of  the
thirteenth  century,  in  the  time  of  Philip  the  Fair,
a  few  years  before  that  King  brought  together
with  considerable  difficulty  the  first  more  or
less  complete  assembly  of  the  estates  of  his
realm.  No  ;  Beaumanoir  makes  use  of  this
famous  maxim  to  give  authority  to  a  statement  as
to  the  right  of  a  king,  starting  on  an  expedition
or  a  crusade,  to  suspend  the  fulfilment  of  obli-
gations for  knights  joining  his  army.  In  this
mediaeval  guise  the  saying  of  Roman  jurists  is
hardly  recognisable,  but  we  need  not  accuse
the  bailli  of  Clermont  of  ignorance  or  misrepre-
sentation ;  he  simply  made  use  of  this  Roman
plank  to  build  a  platform  of  his  own.

Another  curious  case  in  point  turns  on  the
use  made  by  Beaumanoir  of  the  principle  of
the  res  judicata  :  *  when  judgment  has  been
delivered  in  a  case,  it  ought  not  to  be  reversed
in  the  same  court.  In  the  absence  of  such  a
rule  litigation  would  have  been  endless.  The
Romans  recognised  the  rule  in  theory,  and  con-
sistently put  it  into  practice.  So  does  Beaumanoir
— he  states  it  in  his  thirty-first  clause,  but  he
gives  it  a  peculiar  twist.  The  one  judgment
aimed  at  by  the  res  jitdicata  rule  is,  for  him,  the
*  App.  VII.
82


ROMAN LAW IN FRANCE

judgment  of  the  court  of  the  lord  with  its  full
complement  of  assessors,  peers,  or  pritd'hommes,
according  to  mediaeval  phraseology.  From  such
decisions  are  to  be  distinguished  those  taken  by
the  bailli  himself  as  sole  judge — in  cases  sufficiently
clear  and  admitting  of  reference  to  custom.
Such  decisions  are  not  judgments.  Why  should
our  jurist  have  recourse  to  such  an  ambiguous
play  with  words  ?  Two  reasons  may  be  stated.
Firstly,  he  wanted  to  enlarge  the  scope  of  the
personal  jurisdiction  of  the  bailli  untrammelled
by  assessors.  Secondly,  his  distinction  was  made
to  allow  of  reconsideration  in  some  cases  which
the  bailli  found  after  all  to  be  too  difficult,  by
bringing  them  before  the  full  court,  without
prejudice  to  the  res  jndicata  rule.  In  any  case,
we  must  accustom  ourselves  not  to  treat  our
mediaeval  lawyer's  references  to  Roman  texts
in  too  strict  and  pedantic  a  manner.  His  object
was  not  to  present  us  with  a  faultless  commentary
on  the  Corpus  Juris,  but  to  make  use  of  some  of
the  Roman  doctrines  for  his  own  purpose  as  a
wise  judge  of  France.


LECTURE IV

ROMAN LAW  IN ENGLAND

Authorities  :  Pollock  and  Maitland,  History  of  English
Law,  I,  II  ;  W.  S.  Holdsworth,  History  of  English  Law,
II,  III,  1909  ;  Stitbbs,  Lectures  on  Mediaeval  and  Modern
History  ;  Selden,  Dissertatio  ad  Fletam  ;  Maitland,
Bracton's  Notebook,  1888  ;  Marcel  Fournier,  L'Eglise  et  le
droit  remain  au  XIII  siecle,  in  the  Nouvelle  Revue
historique  de  droit  francais  et  etranger,  1890  ;  E.  Caillcmer,
Le  droit  civil  dans  les  provinces  Anglo-Normandes  au
XII  sie"cle,  1883;  Glanvill,  De  legibus  et  consuetudinibus
Angliai  ;  Br acton,  De  legibus  Angliae  ;  Giiterbogk,  Henricus
de  Bracton  und  Sein  Verhaltniss  zum  romisches  Recht  ;
F.  W.  Maitland,  Bracton  and  Azo  ;  Selden  Society,  VIII,
1894;  P.  Vinogradoff,  Villainage  in  England,  1892;
James  Williams,  Latin  Maxims  in  English  Law,  Law
Magazine  and  Review,  1895,  August.

i.  /~~MVIL  law  did  not  become  a  constituent
\^s  element  of  English  common  law  acknow-
ledged and  enforced  by  the  courts,  but  it  exer-
cised a  potent  influence  on  the  formation  of
legal  doctrines  during  the  critical  twelfth  and
thirteenth  centuries,  when  the  foundations  of
common  law  were  laid.  Indeed  the  leaching
of  Roman  Law  inaugurated  by  Vacarius  seemed
for  some  time  to  carry  everything  before  it.  Xo
school  was  more  popular  in  Oxford  at  the  close
of  the  twelfth  century  than  the  school  of  legists.
The  tide  was  stemmed  to  some  extent  by  powerful

84


ROMAN LAW IN ENGLAND

agencies  acting  in  other  directions.  The  Church
realised  that  its  predominance  was  threatened
by  the  spread  of  secular  learning  in  the  field  of
la\v  ;  Canon  law  was  more  sharply  differentiated
from  civil  jurisprudence,  and  it  began  to  oppose
the  latter  in  its  striving  towards  juridical  su-
premacy. A  bull  of  Honorius  III  (Super  Speculum,
A.D.  1217),  and  another  of  Innocent  IV  (Dolentes,
A.D.  1259)  were  directed  against  the  teaching
of  Roman  Law  in  Paris  and  in  "neighbouring
countries."  On  the  other  hand,  there  grew  up  a
national  opposition  against  cosmopolitan  doctrines
which  finds  a  definite  expression  in  many  facts.
In  1234  Henry  III  forbade  the  teaching  of  Civil
law  in  London,  while  in  1236  the  great  men  of
England,  assembled  at  Merton,  declared  against
any  modification  of  English  custom  by  foreign
views  in  the  treatment  of  bastardy  (Nolumus  leges
Anglice  mutari).

Nevertheless,  the  teaching  of  Roman  Law
was  never  discontinued  at  the  principal  seats  of
learning  in  England.  The  canonists  themselves
frequently  referred  to  its  sources,  as  is  shown,
for  instance,  by  the  Golden  Text-Book  (Siimma
uiirea)  of  the  Oxford  professor,  William  of  Urog-
heda  (thirteenth  century).  The  study  of  Roman
Law  in  Cambridge  can  be  traced  from  this  very
thirteenth  century,  which  witnessed  so  many
declarations  of  the  powers  that  be  against  its
introduction.  It  was  used  at  both  universities

85


ROMAN LAW


and  in  other  minor  centres  of  learning  as  a  kind
of  "general  jurisprudence,"  and,  as  such,  it
exerted  considerable,  though  indirect,  influence
on  the  practice  of  common  law.

Turning  to  the  results  of  this  study  in  England,
we  have  to  notice,  firstly,  its  bearing  on  the
principal  juridical  doctrine  evolved  during  the
twelfth  century,  namely,  on  the  doctrine  of
seisin,  and  the  means  of  protecting  it.  The
age  of  Henry  II  has  left  a  profound  mark  in  this
respect  by  formulating  the  point  of  view  of
possession,  and  providing  adequate  remedies
for  its  protection  in  the  King's  courts.  As  we
have  seen,  the  French  lawyers  were  much  con-
cerned with  this  aspect  of  jurisprudence  in  the
thirteenth  century,  and  so  were  the  English  in
the  twelfth.  A  point  in  which  the  influence  of
Roman  Eaw  is  clearly  traceable  concerns  the
action  itself  by  which  possession  was  protected.
The  famous  writ  of  Novel  Disseisin — introduced
by  Henry  II's  lawyers,  appears  as  a  secular
variation  of  the  canonistic  action  of  spoliation
(actio  spolii],  and  this  again  has  evidently  sprung
from  the  Roman  interdict  "  undc  vi."

To  what  extent  the  English  view  of  seisin  was
coloured  by  Roman  teaching  on  possession  may
also  be  gathered  among  other  things  from  Glan-
vill's  treatment  of  the  gage  of  land.  He  admits
of  the  transfer  of  land  from  the  debtor  to  the
creditor  with  the  object  of  providing  a  security
86


ROMAN LAW IN ENGLAND

for  debt  and  interest,  but  he  fails  to  recognise
any  distinct  "  estate  "  of  the  creditor  in  land
transferred  in  such  a  way.  The  possession  of
the  debtor  remains  legally  intact,  and  the  relation
of  the  creditor  is  considered  as  a  mere  matter
of  fact  devoid  of  juridical  essence  ;  it  may  be
interrupted  by  the  legal  tenant,  should  the  latter
not  be  afraid  of  exposing  himself  to  reprisals  in
the  shape  of  a  personal  action.

Probably  at  the  same  time  with  Glanvill's
treatise,  William  Longchamp,  a  Norman  peasant
who  was  to  become  Bishop  of  Durham  and  Regent
of  England  in  the  reign  of  Richard  Cceur-de-Lion,
composed  his  Practice  of  Laws  and  Decrees  (Prac-
tica  legit  in  et  decretornni).  It  is  a  short  manual  of
procedure  based  on  civil  as  well  as  on  canon  law,
and  intended  for  use  primarily  in  the  French
possessions  of  the  English  Crown.  As  the  career
of  the  writer  demonstrates,  however,  there  was
no  sharp  cleavage  between  the  English  and  the
French  parts  of  the  Plantagenets'  dominions.
At  the  fair  of  Lagny  in  Bresse,  which  is  casually
mentioned  in  the  tract,  English  merchants  were
so  numerous  that  one  of  the  streets  got  its  name
from  them  (vicits  Anglicits).

The  teaching  of  the  pradica  may  well  have  in-
fluenced contemporary  English  lawyers  on  one  or
two  important  occasions.  There  was,  for  instance,
a  great  controversy  among  the  jurists  of  the  time
about  the  framing  of  an  action.  An  authoritative
87


ROMAN LAW


glossator,  Placentinus,  held  that  it  was  not  neces-
sary to  formulate  an  action  in  accordance  with
strict  terms  ;  the  plaintiff  might  be  allowed  to  state
his  claim  in  general  expressions.  Other  doctors,
such  as  Johannes  Bassianus  and  Azo,  disputed  this
and  required  the  presentation  of  claims  according
to  technical  forms.  William  Longchamp's  "prac-
tice "  urges  the  necessity  of  definite  formulae  of
actions,  and  it  may  be  considered  in  this  respect
as  introducing  the  theory  of  strict  writs  adhered
to  by  common  law.

2.  The  most  important  English  contribution
to  Romanesque  jurisprudence,  however,  is  con-
tained in  Bracton's  work  on  the  Laws  and  Customs
of  England.  Although  this  famous  book  was
primarily  written  for  the  instruction  of  practical
lawyers,  and  its  most  valuable  chapters  are  based
on  the  case  law  of  Henry  Ill's  age,  it  opens  with
a  comprehensive  introduction  chiefly  drawn  from
Azo's  manuals  of  the  Institutes  and  of  the  Code,
a  general  analysis  of  actions.  The  very  fact  that
an  English  justice  should  have  felt  the  necessity
of  such  a  general  introduction  is  extremely  note-
worth}'.

Nor  is  his  work  in  this  line  by  any  means  a
contemptible  one.  I  do  not  propose  to  determine
by  exact  marks  what  the  school  value  of  such
work  may  be  nowadays.  But  what  we  can  do
is  to  notice  that  Bracton's  aim  was  as  different
from  that  of  his  model,  the  Bolognese  doctor,
88


ROMAN LAW IN ENGLAND

as  the  means  at  his  disposal  were  peculiar.  He
lived  in  a  country  which  could  not  be  compared
with  Italy  in  its  standard  of  general  culture,  and
especially  in  the  wealth  of  classical  tradition  and
scholarship.  The  Bologncse  glossator  provided  a
remarkable  exegesis  of  the  Institutes  and  of
Justinian's  Code  ;  he  comments  on  his  texts,  illus-
trates and  explains  them,  but  does  not  remodel  their
doctrine — he  speaks  of  patria  potcstas,  of  slavery,
of  the  Lex  Aqnilia,  of  the  interdicts,  as  if  they
were  institutions  which  still  obtained  in  the  Italian
practice  of  his  time  ;  in  doing  this  he  does  not
consider  modern  practice,  and  he  stands  very
near  our  own  expositors  of  Roman  Law :  we
might  almost  be  induced  to  treat  him  as  one  of
ourselves,  as  a  citizen  of  our  present  republic
of  letters.  Now  such  a  standard  would  be  entirely
out  of  place  in  regard  to  Bracton.  He  does  not
want  to  state  Justinian's  teaching  more  or  less
exactly,  but  compiles  Institutes  for  the  English
law  of  his  time,  and  he  attempts  to  build  up  these
English  Institutes  with  the  help  of  Roman  ma-
terials. There  were  no  better  materials  at  his
disposal  ;  there  was  no  body  of  doctrine  which
could  show  better  the  general  notions  with  which
legal  thought  must  deal,  and  when  we  think  of
the  place  still  occupied  by  the  teaching  of  Roman
Law  in  European  schools,  we  shall  not  wonder
at  the  course  followed  by  Bracton.  In  fact,  he
attempted  to  do  in  a  very  systematic  manner


ROMAN LAW


what  his  French  contemporaries  were  doing  in  a
much  more  casual  fashion.

Some  of  the  general  principles  expounded  in  the
Institutes  and  in  the  commentaries  to  them  might
serve  as  an  illuminating  guide  for  English  legal
thought,  while  features  entirely  foreign  to  English
life  had  to  be  removed.  Thus  the  Introduction
was  undoubtedly  intended  to  strengthen  native
legal  doctrine  by  the  infusion  of  legal  conceptions
of  a  high  order  drawn  from  the  fountain  head  of
civilised  and  scientific  law.  But  there  might  also
be  a  second  aim,  namely,  to  influence  the  material
development  of  English  legal  doctrine,  to  provide
it  with  clues  for  the  solution  of  difficult  problems,
and  to  improve  on  the  existing  practice  of  the
courts.  Bracton  aimed  chiefly  at  the  first  of
these  results,  although  in  some  cases  we  may
notice  that  he  had  in  view  to  influence  substantive
law  itself.

Let  us  turn,  however,  to  Bracton 's  own  work
and  take  as  examples  some  of  its  initial  specu-
lations.

3.  On  the  very  threshold  he  encounters  an
inevitable  difficulty  of  his  undertaking,  and
striking  contrasts  between  English  Law  and
Roman  Law  cause  him  to  reflect  on  the  great
question  as  to  the  modes  by  which  a  legal  rule
is  sanctioned  and  stated.  Civil  law  as  collected  by
Justinian  and  expounded  by  Azo  was  a  definite
body  of  doctrine  sanctioned  by  Imperial  authority,
90


ROMAN LAW IN ENGLAND

and  consigned  to  an  authorised  written  version.
Now  does  English  law  afford  a  parallel  in  this
respect  ?  Where  is  the  sanction  of  English  Law
to  be  found  ?  How  is  one  to  recognise  its  rules  ?
Both  Glanvill  and  Bracton  have  been  reflecting
on  these  questions.  It  is  not  absurd  to  give
English  unwritten  rules  the  designation  of  law,
because  they  proceed  from  a  command  of  the
sovereign,  the  King,  are  established  by  the  con-
sent of  the  great  men,  and  imply  a  promise  of
obedience  (sponsio)  on  the  part  of  the  common-
wealth. Thus  far  Bracton,  while  Glanvill  is  not
only  shorter  but  onesided — he  deduces  the  au-
thority of  English  law  from  the  famous  saying  :
quod  principi  placnit  Icgis  halct  vigor  cm — a
saying  which  was  not  in  keeping  with  the  political
tendencies  of  Simon  de  Montfort's  time,  and
therefore  put  aside  by  Bracton.  In  what  sense
can  it  be  said,  however,  that  the  consent  of  great
men  is  an  element  of  English  law  ?  At  first
sight  this  may  be  true  of  Statutes  and  Assizes,
but  hardly  of  the  decisions  of  judges  on  which
the  greater  part  of  common  law  rests.  But,  as
Statutes  and  Assizes  are  written  law,  they  do
not  come  within  the  scope  of  the  argument  at  all.
It  seems  that  the  body  of  magnates,  of  great  men
whose  consent  appears  necessary  for  the  making  of
the  law  in  England,  is  assumed  to  be  identical  with
the  body  of  the  Curia  Regis,  from  which  all  juris-
diction proceeds.  To  its  authority  the  sanction
91


ROMAN LAW


of  English  legal  rules  is  thus  ultimately  referred,
although  it  remains  always  expressed  in  vague
Romanesque  terms.*  We  can  sec  that  a  diffi-
culty is  felt  as  to  the  power  of  single  judges  to
lay  down  the  law,  and  it  is  settled  in  a  way  which
reminds  us  of  Beaumanoir.  The  Common  law  rules
established  by  general  custom  ought  to  proceed
from  the  whole  court  of  the  King,  and  their  repeal
and  alteration  is  the  affair  of  the  whole  court.
In  case  of  doubt  recourse  should  be  had  to  this
court,  which  represents  the  inajorcs,  the  magnates
of  the  kingdom.  Undoubtedly  some  of  the  great
men,  the  judges  and  justiciars,  one  might  be  in-
clined to  say,  do  not  act  up  to  this  general  doctrine,
but  lay  down  decisions  as  if  their  opinions  were
sufficient  to  constitute  law.  This  is  altogether
reprehensible.  The  single  judge  is  in  the  position
of  interpreter  of  the  law,  however,  and  though
he  is  precluded  from  altering  it  at  his  wish,  he
may  not  only  follow  it  when  it  is  clear,  but  also
improve  upon  it,  an  improvement  not  being  an
alteration.  This  reasoning  is  partly  suggested
by  Azo's  teaching  as  to  the  interpretation  of
law,  and  as  to  legal  fictions  by  which  the  meaning
of  rules  is  widened,  but  it  goes  further  both  in
wording  and  spirit,  and  though  strained  from  a
purely  logical  point  of  view,  it  very  aptly  opens
a  work  which  has  to  combine  and  contrast  Civil
law  and  English  Common  law.
*  App.  VIII.
92


ROMAN LAW IN ENGLAND

If  the  difficulty  as  to  the  authority  and  sanction
of  common  law  may  be  easily  overcome,  the
second  objection  to  the  common  form  of  English
doctrine  is  recognised  to  be  grounded  on  serious
considerations.  There  is  no  authorised  version
of  English  legal  rules.  This  is  felt  both  by  Glan-
vill  and  by  Bracton.  Very  material  drawbacks
follow  from  the  absence  of  such  a  version  ;  law
is  perverted  by  the  ignorance  of  beginners  who
ascend  the  bench  before  they  have  mastered  the
elements  of  legal  lore  ;  it  is  also  perverted  by
the  overbearing  conceit  of  people  in  authority,
who  treat  it  according  to  their  personal  views
and  inclinations.  It  is  to  remedy  these  very
drawbacks  that  both  Glanvill  and  Bracton  set
out  to  perform  their  task,  the  first  in  a  perfunctory
and  thoroughly  practical  manner,  the  other  with
a  great  store  of  authorities  at  his  disposal.  Brae-
ton's  work  may  be  called  a  private  treatise  on
the  common  law  in  its  relation  to  general  juris-
prudence, and  this  literary  departure  remains
significant  for  the  further  course  of  English
legal  studies.

4.  There  follow  generalities  about  justitia  and
jus.  The  Bolognese  doctor  starts  from  the  de-
finition of  justice  as  given  in  the  Digest  :  "  justice
is  a  constant  and  permanent  will  to  allow  every-
one his  right  "  (jnstitia  cst  constant  et  pcrpelua
voliintas  jus  suum  cniqite  tribuendi).  According
to  scholastic  method  he  takes  up  every  word

93


ROMAN LAW


in  the  sentence  and  expands  it  by  interpretation
so  as  to  define  the  different  attributes  and  con-
ditions of  justice.  In  this  way  he  draws  attention
to  the  fact  that  justice  may  be  considered  as
a  divine  institution,  deciding  once  for  all  what
is  right  and  what  is  wrong.  Or  else  it  may  be
considered  from  the  point  of  view  of  humanity.
In  this  case  the  stress  would  lie  on  the  will  of
man  to  do  right,  and  not  on  external  facts.  Im-
mutability and  permanency  are  necessary  attri-
butes of  justice.  Variations  or  changes  would
destroy  its  very  essence.  If  a  legal  privilege  is
first  conceded  and  afterwards  denied,  this  is  in
no  way  a  change  of  justice,  but  a  consequence
of  a  change  of  acts.  Bracton's  summary  of  this
section  cuts  short  many  of  the  philological  dis-
tinctions. He  finds  himself  confronted  with  a
peculiarity  of  English  phraseology,  namely,  with
the  absence  of  an  equivalent  in  English  to  the
word  jus.  Though  writing  in  Latin,  he  does  not
want  to  make  his  teaching  dependent  on  a  foreign
use  of  terms,  and  therefore  he  introduces,  though
very  shortly,  the  terms  lex  and  consuetude —
law  and  custom — explaining  that  they  correspond
to  jus,  which  in  this  case  would  be  rendered  by
the  English  word  'law.'  But,  we  may  add,  the
proper  rendering  of  jus  would  not  always  be  'law,'
the  objective  order  of  tilings  and  duties,  as  one
might  say,  but  sometimes  'right,'  the  subjective
sphere,  what  I  claim  as  my  own  against  my
94


ROMAN LAW IN ENGLAND

neighbours.  If  Bracton  had  been  making  a  trans-
lation, he  would  have  found  himself  obliged  to
observe  this  variation  of  meaning.  As  it  is,
he  uses  Latin,  although  a  Latin  addressed  to
English  readers,  and  this  gives  rise  to  what  seems
at  first  sight  a  gross  blunder.  Azo,  talking  of
jus  as  'law,'  ridicules  the  idea  that  there  could
be  the  law  of  Peter  or  John,  of  a  lion  or  of  a
donkey.  Bracton,  evidently  speaking  of  jus  as
'  right,'  turns  the  same  sentence  to  positive
account,  and  admits  the  right  (jits)  of  Peter  and
of  Paul.  "The  right  of  a  lion  or  of  a  donkey  "
would,  ho\vever,  sound  quaint  enough,  and  it
would  have  been  better  if  Bracton  had  not  gone
so  far  on  the  subjective  track.  His  meaning
seems  to  have  been,  that  we  have  to  consider
varieties  of  right  derived  from  claims  of  divers
beings  and  of  claims  in  respect  of  divers  things.

He  differs  from  Azo  yet  another  time  when
the  contrast  between  propriefcis  (ownership)  and
bonorum  possessio  (possession)  makes  it  necessary
for  him  to  notice  a  material  difference  in  the
use  of  these  fundamental  conceptions  in  Rome
and  in  England.  While  the  Roman  lawyer
draws  a  slurp  distinction  between  ownership
as  the  genuine  and  complete  right  to  a  thing,
and  possession  as  the  protected  enjoyment  of  it,
the  English  lawyer  merges  both  ideas  in  the  inter-
mediate and  relative  conception  of  seisin.  A
man  is  seised  of  a  thing,  more  frequently  of  land,

95


ROMAN LAW


and  his  seisin  must  be  protected  by  the  courts
until  a  better  ground  of  seisin  has  been  found.

B,  the  eldest  son  of  A,  may  be  his  right  heir,
but  if  he  did  not  obtain  seisin  on  A's  death,  and

C,  the  second  son,  has  done  so,  C  must  be  prima
facie  protected  because  he  is  already  in  seisin.
He  may  be  ousted  only  if  B  challenges  his  title
and  proves  the  truth  of  his  contention. Bracton
quite appropriately called attention to this
fundamental difference of legal principle in a
marginal note which eventually crept into the
text  itself,  and  destroyed  the  smooth  course  of
Roman  doctrine  as  set  forth  in  Azo's  manual.

There  follows  a  section  on  the  law  of  nature,
the  jus  civile  and  the  jus  gentium.  Azo,  con-
cerned with  the  interpretation  of  Roman
texts  as  they  stand,  treats  of  the  general
philosophical  problem  of  the  law  of  nature  as
opposed  to  the  positive  law  of  States.  But  he
also  explains  the  purely  Roman  distinction
between  jus  civile  —  the  law  of  the  Roman
people  —  and  the  jus  gentium  —  private  law
based  on  the  legal  customs  of  different  nations.
Bracton  gives  the  substance  of  Azo's  teaching  on
the  law  of  nature,  noticing  the  two  possible
meanings  of  the  expression  —  as  derived  from
the  nature  of  live  creatures,  of  animals  as  well
as  men,  and  as  representing  the  rational  concepts
of  man's  nature.  But  he  combines  this  second
idea  with  that  of  the  jus  gentium,  not  taking
96


ROMAN LAW  IN ENGLAND

much  care  to  discover  the  historical  differences
between  such  reasonable  rules  and  those  im-
posed by  the  jus  civile.  In  this  respect  he  is
undoubtedly  inaccurate,  but  we  can  hardly
reproach  him,  when  we  remember  that  even
Roman  jurists  did  not  always  distinguish
clearly  between  the  bidding  of  the  jus  naturale
and  the  ratio  naturalis,  on  which  the  rules  of  the
jus  gentium  were  supposed  to  be  based.  As  for
the  jus  civile,  Bracton  seeks  to  appropriate
the  expression  in  a  way  characteristic  of  medi-
aeval usage.  He  has  no  interest  in  the  original
law  of  the  Roman  State,  the  jus  of  the  Quirites,
but  there  is  one  kind  of  law  existing  in  England
which  might  be  designated  by  a  reference  to
jus  civile.  This  is  the  customary  law  of  boroughs
— jus  civitatum.

5.  The  contrast  between  the  professor  ex-
pounding  antiquarian  doctrines,  and  the  judge
fitting  English  facts  into  a  Roman  frame,  is
especially  striking  in  the  treatment  of  the  law
of  persons.  Bracton  follows  Azo  as  to  the
principal  and  very  important  generalisation,
"  all  men  are  either  free  or  slaves."  But  such
a  generalisation  had  to  be  modified  both  in
ancient  Rome  and  in  mediaeval  Italy  or  Eng-
land. Azo  proceeds  to  give  the  necessary
commentary  from  the  point  of  view  of  ancient
Rome.  He  treats  of  statu  liberi  and  of  ad-
scnf)ticii  to  show  that  it  is  possible  to  arrange
H  97


ROMAN LAW


these  subordinate  groups  under  the  chief
headings  of  free  and  unfree.  He  does  not  deal
with  the  Italian  world  in  which  he  lives,  nor  is
he  troubled  by  the  fact  that  neither  the  statu
liberi  nor  the  adscripticii  are  known  to  his
Bolognese  or  Florentine  contemporaries.  The
English  lawyer  proceeds  on  an  entirely  different
course.  The  statu  liberi  and  adscripticii  are  used
by  him  to  illustrate  actual  English  conditions,
although  they  lose  much  of  their  antiquarian
genuineness,  thanks  to  this  process  of  adapta-
tion. Of  the  free  (liberi}  it  is  needless  to  speak
at  length,  for  they  appear  in  England  under
the  same  name.  Villains  are  equated  with
slaves  —  a  far-reaching  assumption.  As  the
adscripticii  represent  a  kind  of  intermediate
stage  between  free  and  serf,  their  counterpart
would  be  the  villain  socmcn  of  ancient  demesne,
and,  to  some  extent,  the  freemen  holding  in
villainage.  As  for  the  statu  liberi,  Bracton  em-
ploys this  term  to  denote  serfs  enjoying  a
state  of  liberty,  as  for  example,  serfs  dwelling
as  freemen  on  free  soil.  In  this  case  they  are
prima  facie  protected  by  law,  and  any  person
claiming  them  as  villains  must  bring  an  action
(de  natiro  habendo),  and  assume  the  burden  of
proof  in  court.  This  is,  of  course,  no  Roman
doctrine  ;  it  is  the  adaptation  of  a  Roman  term
to  English  distinctions.

-At  the  end  of  the  sections  treating  of  the  law
98


ROMAN LAW  IN ENGLAND

of  persons  Bracton  returns  to  the  problem  of
slavery,  and  lays  stress  on  the  fact  that  slaves
are  not  completely  in  the  power  of  their  lords.
He  finds  support  for  this  contention  in  the  later
Roman  doctrine  which,  through  the  influence
of  Stoicism  and  Christianity,  granted  some
protection  to  the  slave  against  exceptional
cruelty  on  the  part  of  the  master.  From  the
time  of  the  Antonines,  a  master  treating  his
slave  in  an  intolerable  manner,  could  be  con-
strained by  the  magistrates  to  sell  him.  It
was  declared  that  the  homicide  of  a  slave  by
his  master  was  a  criminal  offence.  Azo  took
particular  notice  of  these  limitations  of  the
power  of  masters  over  slaves,  and  adduced  as  a
reason  for  the  interference  with  the  right  of
property  in  slaves,  the  importance  for  the
Commonwealth  of  preventing  owners  from
misusing  their  property  (expedit  reipubliccs  ne
quis  re  sita  male  utatur).  Bracton  not  only
endorses  the  doctrine,  but  adds  an  important
concrete  feature  which  shows  that  in  this  case
lie  did  not  merely  copy  foreign  learning,  but
was  pleading  for  a  certain  point  of  view  before
English  jurists.  He  defines  the  "intolerable
injury  "  as  a  destruction  by  the  master  of  the
serf's  waynage,  that  is,  of  his  plough  team
which,  as  we  know,  was  safe  from  Royal  amerce-
ment. There  are  precedents  for  this  view  in
Norman  legal  usage,  forbidding  the  taking
99


ROMAN LAW


away  of  the  rustic's  waynage  by  the  lord  ;  and,
of  course,  in  the  fact  that  in  Anglo-Saxon  times
the  predecessor  of  the  villain,  the  ceorl,  was  not  a
slave  at  all,  but  had  a  standing  against  his  lord
in  the  courts  of  law.  But  at  the  time  when
Bracton  wrote,  the  defence  of  waynage  did  not
tally  with  the  surrender  of  the  old  rights  of  free
cultivators  in  other  respects.  Bracton  himself,
representing  the  general  drift  of  the  jurispru-
dence of  his  time,  had  maintained  that  there
was  no  difference  between  a  serf  and  a  villain.
The  reservations,  he  wished  to  draw  in  regard
to  the  right  of  waynage,  are  akin  to  the  vacilla-
tions of  his  brother  judges  in  cases  where  there
was  at  stake  the  right  of  men  holding  in  villain-
age to  appeal  to  the  King's  courts  for  remedies
against  their  lords.  After  some  contradictory
decisions,  the  courts  ended  by  applying  strictly
the  rule  that  villains  have  no  civil  claims
against  their  lords,  and  that,  in  law,  what  is
held  by  the  villain,  is  owned  by  the  lord.  At  the
same  time  the  reservation  as  to  waynage  dis-
appears. Bracton 's  teaching  on  villainage  is
thus  very  instructive,  not  merely  from  the
point  of  view  of  the  evolution  of  villain  tenure,
but  also  for  estimating  the  practical  influence
of  Romanesque  learning  on  him  and  other
English  lawyers.  Though  the  status  of  villains
was  undoubtedly  developed  chiefly  by  the
pressure  of  economic  and  political  forces,  it  is
too


ROMAN LAW  IN ENGLAND

clear  that  the  study  of  Roman  precedents
played  an  important  part  in  the  shaping  of  its
legal  rules.  To  put  it  in  another  way,  the
historical  growth  of  English  villainage  did  not
necessarily  involve  its  treatment  on  the  basis
of  serfdom  or  slavery.  But  the  infusion  of
Roman  doctrine  made  the  legal  treatment  of
villainage  harder  than  might  have  been  the
case  otherwise,  while  the  partial  reservations
introduced  by  the  Emperors  and  admitted  by
Bracton  did  not  carry  much  weight  in  practice.

Another  case,  where  the  study  of  Roman
doctrine  has  left  a  distinct  trace  on  English
legal  thought,  is  the  well-known  distinction
between  real  and  personal  property.  We  may
observe  the  actual  origin  of  this  famous  distinc-
tion which  still  holds  good  at  the  present  day.
The  root  of  it  lies  in  the  teaching  of  Roman
lawyers  on  actions.  There  are  real  actions —
actiones  in  rein — which  aim  at  obtaining  the
property  of  a  certain  thing,  and  personal  actions,
urging  certain  claims  against  persons,  requiring
them  to  do  something,  to  give  something,  or  to
forbear  from  something.  The  question  of
obtaining  a  specific  object  does  not  arise  in  the
latter  case.  It  is  the  value  claimed  that  is  of
importance.  So  far,  the  teaching  is  common
to  both  Roman  and  English  lawyers.  But
Bracton  and  his  fellow-judges,  working  on  this
basis,  went  a  step  beyond  their  Roman  guides.


ROMAN LAW


They  used  the  distinction  between  actions  to
differentiate  between  different  kinds  of  pro-
perty. Land  and  interests  connected  with  it
appeared  to  them  to  be  naturally  the  object  of
real  actions,  because  here  the  claim  \vas  directed
to  a  definite  thing  and  to  nothing  else.  On  the
other  hand,  chattels  were,  as  a  rule,  claimed
in  the  same  way  as  rights,  for  example,  as  the
performance  of  some  labour  or  office.  The  aim
of  the  action  was  to  obtain  either  the  thing  or
service,  or  its  equivalent  from  the  person  under
obligation.  The  distinction  became  funda-
mental in  the  English  legal  system.  Again,  a
striking  example  of  the  influence  of  Roman  dis-
tinctions is  afforded  by  the  treatment  of  leases  for
terms  of  years.  Bracton  and  thirteenth  century
judges  consider  the  lessees  not  as  tenants  having
an  estate  of  freehold,  but  as  mere  usufructuarii.
This  is  altered  to  a  great  extent  by  later  doctrine,
but  the  initial  classification  has  left  its  traces  on
the  law  of  the  subject.

Bracton  and  his  compeers  had  especially
much  to  learn  from  the  Romans,  and  the  glots-
ators  who  expounded  their  doctrines,  on  the
subject  of  obligations  generated  by  contracts
and  torts.  The  exceedingly  active  economic
intercourse  of  the  Roman  State  in  its  most
prosperous  days  had  been  utilised  by  keen
jurists  to  frame  a  doctrine  conspicuous,  even  in
the  domain  of  classical  law,  for  its  subtlety  and


ROMAN LAW  IN ENGLAND

dialectical  resourcefulness.  Part  of  this  vast
material  had  to  be  left  on  one  side  by  Bracton,
while  other  parts  were  adopted  more  for  the
sake  of  possible  eventualities  than  for  the
immediate  requirements  of  practice.  Bracton
appropriates  the  fundamental  idea  that  a  nude
pact,  a  convention  bereft  of  particular  form,
does  not  constitute  an  obligation  enforceable  at
law.  He  cites  a  couple  of  doggerel  lines  in-
tended as  an  assistance  to  the  beginner  in
remembering  what  could  serve  as  vestments  to
pacts.  "  Re,  vcrbis,  scripto,  consensu,  traditione,
jnnditra  vestes  sumere  pacta  solent."

The  first  three  species  apply  to  real  con-
tracts— such  as,  e.g.,  deposit ;  to  verbal  con-
tracts— the  Roman  solemn  promise  (stipulatio),
or  an  equivalent  of  it  in  writing,  the  deed
under  seal,  which  came  to  be  the  principal
mode  of  contracting  in  English  law  ;  the  fourth
relates  to  consensual  contracts — sale  and  hire
by  mutual  consent,  although  in  this  respect
English  law  could  not  be  made  to  fit  exactly
the  Roman  view.  Besides  these  Azo  mentions
two  modes  of  clothing  a  bargain  which  he
describes  in  quaint  language.  Whereas  in  the
first  four  cases  the  contract  is  born  vested,
there  are  two  occasions  when  it  is  bare  at  the
moment  of  birth  ;  but  once  having  seen  the
light,  it  begins  to  look  about  for  suitable  cloth-
ing, and,  eventually,  it  may  find  furs  which  will


ROMAN LAW


protect  it  from  frost  and  decay ;  this  happens
should  delivery  (traditio)  supervene,  or  a  condi-
tion which  did  not  exist  at  the  moment  when
the  convention  was  made,  but  which,  if  it
appears  later  on,  renders  it  perfect  and  pro-
vides it  with  a  vesture.  All  this  is  appropriated
by  Bracton  in  a  slightly  modified  form,  and  this
"reception"  of  the  Roman  doctrine  provides
a  starting-point  for  subsequent  development.
First,  the  ecclesiastical  courts  and  the  Chancery,
later  on  Common  Law  Courts,  took  part  in  the
development  of  a  doctrine  concerning  obliga-
tions which  took  account  of  informal  agree-
ments, and  laid  down  rules  as  to  their  validity
and  enforcement.

On  the  whole  it  is  clear  that  it  is  impossible  to
estimate  the  influence  of  Roman  law  in  Eng-
land by  references  to  paragraphs  of  the  Digest  or
of  the  Codex.  If  we  want  to  find  definite  traces  of
it  we  have  to  look  out  not  for  references  but  for
maxims,  some  of  which,  besides,  had  passed
through  the  medium  of  Canon  law.*  The  only
real  test  of  its  character  and  extent  is  afforded  by
the  development  of  juridical  ideas,  and  in  this
respect  the  initial  influence  of  Roman  teaching
on  English  doctrines  will  be  found  to  be  con-
siderable. On  many  subjects  the  judges  and
legal  writers  of  England  were,  as  it  were,

*  E.g.  Year  Books  of  Ediv.  If  (Selden  Soc.\  I,  5,  ;,i,  iS6  :
II,  1 10,  176.

104


ROMAN LAW  IN ENGLAND

prompted  by  their  Roman  predecessors,  and
this  intercourse  of  ideas  is  nowhere  as  conspicu-
ous as  in  the  frequent  cases  when  English  lawyers
did  not  simply  copy  their  Roman  models,  but
borrowed  suggestions  from  them  in  order  to  develop
them  in  their  own  way.


105


LECTURE  V

ROMAN LAW IN  GERMANY

Authorities  :  It.  Schnidcr,  Deutsche  Rechtsgeschichte,
1889;  H.  Bncnney,  Grundziige  der  deutschcn  Rechts-
geschichte, 1887;  /.  Bryce,  The  Holy  Roman  Empire,
1904;  Jansen,  Geschichte  des  deutschen  Volks,  I,  1890;
Stintzing,  Geschichte  der  deutschen  Rechtswissenschaft,
1 880 ;  Geschichte  der  popularen  Litteratur  des  romisch-
kanonischen  Rechts  am  Ende  des  Mittelalters,  1867  ;
Stintzing,  Ulrich  Zasius,  Die  Juristen  sincl  bose  Christen,
1875;  Stobbe,  Geschichte  der  Rechtsquellen,  1860-64;
E.  Seckcl,  Beitrage  zur  Geschichte  beider  Rechte  im
Mittelalter,  1898  ;  Mutlicr,  Zur  Geschichte  der  Rechts-
wissenschaft und  der  Universitaten  in  Deutschland,  1876  ;
A.  Stolzel,  Die  Entwickelung  des  gelehrten  Richterthums,
1872  ;  G.  v.  Below,  Die  Ursachen  der  Rezeption  des
romischen  Rechts  in  Deutschland,  1905  ;  Modderman,
Die  Reception  des  romischen  Rechts,  ubersetzt  von  K.
Schurz,  1875  ;  C.  A.  Schmidt,  Die  Rezeption  des  romischen
Rechts  in  Deutschland,  1868  ;  O.  Gicrkc,  Deutsches
Genossenschaftsrecht,  1873  ;  /.  Kohler,  Beitrage  zur
Geschichte  des  romischen  Rechts  in  Deutschland,  1896;
Landsberg,  Ueber  die  Entstehung  der  Regel,  "Quidquid
non  agnoscit  glossa,  non  agnoscit  forum,"  1890.

i.  r"~invHE influence of Roman Law  on Ger-

J. many is marked by very peculiar

conditions. It seemed at the outset  as  if  there

would  not  be  much  room  for  Roman  doctrine  in

a country with a German-speaking population

of Germanic  stock. But yet  at  a later  period,

some time in the fifteenth century,  the  legal

1 06


ROMAN LAW  IN GERMANY

lite  of  Germany  was  forced  into  an  entirely  new
channel  by  the  wholesale  "  reception  "  of
Roman  Law.  To  give  a  clear  idea  of  the  circum-
stances which  brought  about  this  startling
result,  I  must  first  say  a  few  words  on  the
political  and  legal  conditions  of  Germany  at  the
close  of  the  Middle  Ages.

The  downfall  of  the  Swabian  dynasty  and  the
painful  Interregnum  in  the  third  quarter  of  the
thirteenth  century  revealed  the  unsound  basis
of  the  magnificent  structure  of  the  Holy  Roman
Empire.  While  stretching  over  Italy  and
Burgundy,  it  had  failed  to  strike  firm  roots
in  native  German  soil,  and  it  fell  to  pieces  in
spite  of  the  brilliant  achievements  of  some  of
its  rulers.  The  Hapsburg  and  Luxemburg
princes,  who  succeeded  to  the  Imperial  crown
after  the  Interregnum,  were  chiefly  interested  in
constructing  the  fabric  of  their  household — in
uniting  various  principalities  to  form  a  patri-
mony for  their  families,  and  in  strengthening
their  princely  power  in  these  territories.  The
German  Empire,  as  such,  the  "  Reich,"  became
more  than  ever  a  loose  confederation  of  number-
less political  units  without  effective  central
government  ;  it  could  not  even  prevent  feuds
among  its  members — the  various  dukes,  counts,
barons,  abbots,  and  towns.  The  Emperor
Frederick  III,  whose  reign  occupied  a  whole
half  of  the  fifteenth  century,  did  not  set  foot
107


ROMAN LAW


on  Imperial  ground  for  twenty-live  years
(1444-71).  The  surrender  of  sovereign  author-
ity to  the  princes  was  formally  recognised  in
respect  of  the  more  important  ones,  the  seven
electors  (Kurfiirsten),  by  the  Golden  Bull,  but
in  practice,  the  measure  of  political  importance
enjoyed  by  all  the  different  "  estates  "  of  the
realm  (Stande)  depended  merely  on  strength
and  opportunity.  The  central  court  of  the
Empire,  the  "  Reichshofgericht,"  was  hardly
more  than  a  name.  When  a  case  came  up  to  it
for  decision,  assessors  had  to  be  collected  for
the  special  purpose,  litigation  was  interminable,
while  the  means  for  executing  the  sentence  were
quite  inadequate.  It  is  not  to  be  wondered  at
that  the  various  representatives  of  political
authority  in  the  country  relied  much  more  on
alliances  and  leagues  than  on  Imperial  justice,
or  on  the  decrees  of  the  Imperial  Diet  (Reichstag).
The  towns  formed  powerful  confederations,  and
they  were  met  by  still  more  powerful  leagues
of  princes.  After  the  two  great  struggles  of
1388  and  of  1450  and  countless  smaller  feuds,
a  certain  order  was  guaranteed  by  regional
leagues,  like  the  Swabian  or  the  Rhenish,  in-
cluding both  princes  and  towns,  for  the  purpose
of  maintaining  a  more  or  less  precarious  peace.

It is  clear that the legal arrangements  of  a
society living under such political conditions
were necessarily peculiar. Jurisdiction and
1 08


ROMAN LAW IN GERMANY

law  were,  as  it  were,  pulverised  into  a  quantity
of  smaller  and  larger  fractions.  Each  princi-
pality, lordship,  town,  followed  a  law  of  its
own.  And  apart  from  the  disruption  of  these
circles  of  territorial  customs,  numberless  varia-
tions were  produced  by  the  social  status  of  the
parties  concerned  —  the  law  of  knights  and  of
fees  (Lehnrecht)  was  differentiated  not  only
from  the  law  of  the  country  in  general  (Land-
recht),  but  also  from  manorial  law  (Hofrecht),
municipal  law  (Stadtrecht),  guild  law  (Zunft-
recht),  peasant  law  (Bauernrecht).  Besides,
there  was  the  great  cleavage  between  lay  and
ecclesiastical  courts.  The  fundamental  princi-
ple of  German  law  amounted  to  a  recognition
of  the  right  of  each  group  of  citizens  to  apply
their  own  customary  ideas  in  the  dealings  of
their  members  with  each  other.  This  is  an
excellent  principle,  productive  of  freedom  and
of  exuberant  development,  but  it  stands  clearly
in  need  of  strong  set-off  in  the  way  of  co-ordina-
tion between  the  centrifugal  forces  of  all  those
local  groups.  And  the  centripetal  tendency,
so  necessary  in  such  a  case,  was  sadly  wanting.
The  political  disruption  of  the  Empire  made  it
impossible  to  reduce  local  customs  to  one
common  law  by  the  power  of  the  State  and  of
its  tribunals.  German  law  as  a  unity  did  not
exist  at  the  close  of  the  Middle  Ages.  It  was
broken  up  into  countless  local  customs,  which,
109


ROMAN LAW


for  this  very  reason,  were  unable  to  tackle  the
wider  problems  of  civil  intercourse.

A  second  difficulty  sprang  from  the  composi-
tion of  the  various  tribunals  and  from  the
manner  in  which  law  was  laid  down  in  them.
Statutory  law  formed  naturally  a  rare  exception.
There  were  some  enactments  passed  by  the
Diets,  chiefly  concerning  questions  of  public
law,  and  occasional  statutes  passed  in  the
different  principalities  and  towns.  But  most
legal  questions  had  to  be  settled  finally  by  un-
written and  unenacted  law,  which  had  to  be
ascertained  or  "  found  "  for  the  purpose.
German  tribunals  of  all  degrees  had  standing
organs  for  the  finding  of  law — the  Schoffen  or
assessors.  The  judge  (Richter)  presided  over
the  court,  directed  its  proceedings  and  put
questions  to  the  assessors.  It  was  the  duty  of
the  latter  to  give  decisions  or  sentences  (Urtheil)
on  all  points  of  law  raised  by  the  presiding
magistrate.  As  for  questions  of  fact,  they  were
settled  by  formal  methods  of  inquiry — by
battle,  oath,  witnesses,  and  the  production  of
deeds.  Thus  everything  hinged  on  the  "find-
ing "  of  the  law  by  the  Schoffen,  representing
the  legal  opinions  of  a  certain  social  or  political
group.  Now  these  Schoffen,  though  not  im-
panelled for  a  few  days  like  modern  jurors,  but
serving  in  the  courts  as  standing  assessors,  were
nevertheless  laymen.  What  they  knew  of  law


ROMAN LAW IN GERMANY

was  gathered  chiefly  from  personal  experience
and  occasional  information,  or  suggested  by
practical  wisdom.  The  laws  of  the  different
groups  thus  remained  in  close  touch  with
popular  conceptions  and  sometimes  rose  to  a
considerable  excellence  in  their  treatment  of
legal  problems,  but  they  were  not  connected
with  any  scientific  system  and  lacked  precision.
And  yet,  at  a  certain  stage  of  economic  and
social  development,  law  stands  in  need  of  school
learning  and  technical  skill.  Thus  it  came  to
pass  that,  at  the  very  moment  when  German
social  arrangements  were  progressing  from
mediseval  to  modern  conditions,  when  its  town
life  was  enjoying  a  kind  of  hothouse  prosperity
resulting  from  its  commerical  relations  with
Italy  and  the  Levant  on  the  one  side,  Flanders,
the  Scandinavian  North,  Poland,  and  Russia
on  the  other,  German  law  was  crippled  by
particularistic  tendencies  and  by  a  lack  of  pro-
fessional learning.  Further  progress  could  only
be  achieved  by  the  creation  of  a  Common  Law
based  on  systematised  knowledge.

2.  It  is  interesting  to  watch  the  attempts  to
get  rid  of  the  obvious  drawbacks  of  German
law  by  means  of  institutions  of  native  origin.
One  expedient,  which  obtained  considerable
success  in  municipal  jurisdiction,  was  the
reference  of  doubtful  cases  from  local  to  superior
courts.  These  superior  courts  (Oberhofe)  were


ROMAN LAW


constituted  in  some  of  the  more  important
cities  with  which  other  towns  were  closely
allied,  either  as  colonies  or  as  members  of  the
same  league.  Such  were  the  Obcrhofe  of
Frankfort-on-the-Main  for  the  Rhine  provinces,
of  Liibeck  for  the  Hanseatic  towns,  of  Magde-
burg for  Saxony,  Thuringia  and  the  German
settlements  in  the  East.  The  practice  of  the
Oberhofe  naturally  helped  to  systematise  to
some  extent  the  varieties  that  had  grown  up  in
private  law.

Another  powerful  influence  in  the  same
direction  was  exercised  by  the  spread  of  authori-
tative treatises  on  customary  law.  The  most
remarkable  and  influential  of  these  was  com-
piled by  Eike  von  Repgow  on  the  law  of  the
Saxons  (Sachsenspiegel).  It  may  be  compared
with  Bracton's  famous  work  on  the  laws  of
England,  with  this  characteristic  difference,
that  the  English  author  wrote  on  the  common
law  of  his  country,  while  the  German  treated  of
the  legal  customs  of  one  German  race.  But,  in
spite  of  this  material  limitation,  Eike  von
Repgow 's  work  was  an  historical  achievement.
It  provided  the  courts  of  Saxon  Germany  with
a  firm  basis  of  jurisprudence,  which  was  widely
accepted  and  maintained.  A  most  striking
effect  of  this  authoritative  statement  is  revealed
by  the  fact  that  the  Northern  territories,  armed
with  the  jurisprudence  of  the  Sachsenspiegel,

112


ROMAN LAW  IN GERMANY

opposed  a  stubborn  resistance  to  the  inroads
of  Roman  Law.  This  proves  that  the  whole-
sale "reception"  of  Roman  rules  is  not  ac-
counted for  by  any  inherent  incompetence  in
German  law.  Where,  as  in  Saxon  lands,  exces-
sive particularism  and  uncertainty  were  counter-
acted, German  law  proved  quite  able  to  stand
its  ground.

Other  statements  of  provincial  custom  testify
to  the  rising  tide  of  Roman  ideas.  The  German
Mirror  appeals  in  a  general  way  to  the  guidance
of  the  masters  of  law,  that  is,  of  the  Roman
jurists,  and  the  Swabian  Mirror  shows  distinct
borrowings  from  Roman  legal  sources.  Johann
von  Buch,  the  author  of  a  gloss  to  the  Saxon
Mirror,  composed  some  time  between  1325  and
1355,  finds  it  necessary  to  corroborate  the
rules  of  the  Saxon  Mirror  by  instituting  com-
parisons with  similar  Roman  rules  ;  and  at  the
same  time  a  town  clerk,  Johann  of  Briinn,  was
engaged  in  the  compilation  of  a  regular  text-
book of  Roman  Law  for  German  practitioners.

These  are  sure  indications  that  Roman  Law
was  beginning  to  assert  itself  as  a  remedy  for
the  shortcomings  of  German  jurisprudence.
To  explain  this  phenomenon  we  must  take  into
account,  to  begin  with,  that  in  the  view  of
educated  Germans,  the  Holy  Roman  Empire
had  united  Germany  and  Rome  ;  the  Emperors
of  the  German  race  were  deemed  the  direct  succes-


ROMAN LAW


sors  of  Constantine  and  Justinian.  Frederick
Barbarossa  and  Frederick  II  appealed  to  their
hereditary  right  as  successors  of  the  Roman
emperors  of  old,  and  actually  inserted  some  of
their  own  enactments  as  a  sequel  to  the  Novelise
of  Justinian.  Mediaeval  people  had  no  strong
sense  of  historical  diversities.  Artists  of  the
period  did  not  scruple  to  represent  the  guests
at  the  wedding  in  Cana  in  doublets  and  slouched
hats.  Nor  was  there  anything  incongruous
in  the  idea  that  the  Corpus  Juris  Civilis  was  the
Imperial  law  of  Sigismund  or  Frederick  111  as
rulers  of  the  Holy  Roman  Empire.  The  Church,
the  other  cosmopolitan  power  of  the  time,
helped  to  propagate  a  similar  theory.  It  had
worked  out  a  Canon  law  of  its  own,  and  had
come  to  draw  definite  boundaries  between  the
decrees  of  that  law  and  the  leges  of  secular
authorities.  But  the  jurisprudential  affinity  of
both  Codes,  the  ecclesiastical  and  the  civil,  was
obvious,  and  at  the  universities  the  studies  of
both  were  necessarily  allied.  It  came  to  be  so
at  Prague  and  in  the  purely  German  universities
that  followed  it — Erfurt,  Cologne,  Rostock,
Heidelberg,  Leipzig,  Greifswald,  etc.  It  is  true
that  the  principal  chairs  in  the  la\v  faculties  of
these  universities  were  chairs  of  Canon  law,
but  the  holders  of  them  were  frequently  doctors
of  both  laws  (ntriusqite  juris),  lecturing  in  Civil
as  well  as  in  Canon  law.  In  Prague  and  in
114


ROMAN LAW  IN GERMANY

Rostock  the  former  branch  of  study  was  already
regarded  as  a  necessary  part  of  the  system-
atic curriculum.  At  first  many  of  the  law  pro-
fessors were  Italians,  but  gradually  Germans
came  forward,  and  although  no  first-rate
scholar  can  be  named  among  them  before
Ulrich  Zasius,  professor  at  Freiburg,  and
Schiirpf  at  Wittenberg  (about  1500),  yet  the
large  number  of  teachers  and  pupils  proves  the
increasing  practical  importance  of  the  study.

3.  Even  more  weighty  evidence  is  forthcoming
from  the  text-books  of  Roman  and  Canon
law,  produced  in  the  fourteenth  and  especially
in  the  fifteenth  century.  These  books  were
intended  to  assist  persons  who  had  not  suffi-
cient time  to  spend  on  a  thorough  and  pro-
longed study  of  legal  sources,  but  who,  at  the
same  time,  desired  to  make  use  of  the  accumu-
lated wisdom  of  Roman  jurisprudence.  Such
was,  for  example,  the  Vocabulary  of  both  laws  of
Jodocus,  a  work  composed  by  an  Erfurt  doctor
about  1452  and  extensively  circulated  in
Germany  and  other  countries.  Fifty-two  edi-
tions of  it  were  issued  during  the  fifty  years
between  1473  and  1523.  The  Vocabulary  gives
short  definitions  and  explanations  of  all  sorts
of  terms  used  by  Roman  jurisconsults  and
enactments.  It  is  sufficiently  clear  and  well-
informed.

A  curious  expression  of  this  striving  towards
"5


ROMAN LAW


the  acquisition  of  Roman  legal  ideas  and  forms
may  be  found  in  a  widely  diffused  branch  of  the
juridical  literature  of  the  time,  namely,  the
so-called  "  trials  of  Satan."  It  was  a  favourite
concept  of  theologians  to  expound  the  doc-
trine of  salvation  by  using  the  form  of  a  fictitious
trial.  The  object  was  to  show  that  by  the
Saviour's  sacrifice,  hell  had  lost  its  power  over
mankind,  and  that  the  atonement,  consequent
on  this  sacrifice,  could  be  claimed  as  a  matter,
not  only  of  grace,  but  of  justice.  One  of  these
tracts  was  ascribed,  and  probably  rightly,  to  no
less  a  jurist  than  the  Bolognese  Doctor,  Bartolus,
and  a  German  translation,  named  after  Belial,
lays  stress  on  the  excellent  information  it
supplies  on  questions  of  procedure.  The  sub-
stance of  the  latter  discourse  is  as  follows.
Satan  appears  before  the  tribunal  of  Christ
under  the  name  of  Mascaron,  and  presents  a
complaint  against  mankind.  Christ  assigns  a
hearing.  The  defendant  failing  to  put  in  an
appearance  on  the  assigned  day,  the  plaintiff
claims  judgment  by  default,  but  Christ  declares
that  He  grants  an  adjournment  on  the  ground
of  equity  and  on  the  strength  of  His  discretionary
powers  as  judge.  The  next  day  the  Virgin
Mary  appears  as  an  advocate  for  mankind.
Mascaron  objects  to  her  being  admitted  to
represent  the  defendant,  firstly,  because  she  is
a  woman  and  therefore  unfit  to  be  an  advocate,
116


ROMAN LAW  IN GERMANY

and  secondly,  on  account  of  her  relationship
to  the  judge.  Christ  overrides  the  objection  and
the  case  proceeds.  The  action  brought  by
Mascaron  is  an  actio  spolii,  an  action  for  despoil-
ing hell  of  its  possession.  The  Virgin  demurs,
on  the  ground  that  hell  was  only  entitled  to  the
Detinue  of  mankind,  and  was  bound  to  safe-
keeping in  the  interest  of  God.  The  actio
spolii  is  not  allowed  by  the  court.  Satan  tries
then  to  bring  a  petitory  action  ;  he  demands  a
sentence  against  mankind  on  the  ground  of
original  sin  and  of  the  words  of  God  :  on  "  the
day  when  thou  eatest  of  the  fruit  of  the  tree,  thou
shalt  die."  The  Virgin  excepts  against  this  :
hell  itself  was  the  cause  of  the  Fall  and  is  not
entitled  to  reap  the  benefit  of  its  own  fraud
(dolus).  Satan  comes  with  a  replication  :  even
were  this  right,  mankind  ought  to  be  condemned
officio  jndicis,  by  the  action  of  the  court,  be-
cause justice  ought  not  to  leave  crime  un-
punished. The  Virgin  protests  against  such  a
new  departure  as  an  illegal  alteration  of  the
count.  Besides,  there  is  a  decisive  argument
for  the  defendant,  namely,  that  Christ  has
suffered  punishment  for  mankind,  and  satisfied
justice  by  His  voluntary  sacrifice.  Mascaron  is
therefore  dismissed  by  the  court.

It  may  be  observed  that  all  sorts  of  points  on
procedure  are  introduced  in  this  example,  evidently
with the idea of acquainting beginners with
117


ROMAN LAW


technical  terms  and  fundamental  forms  of  plead-
ing, such  as  summons,  default,  equity,  possessory
and  petitory  action,  exception,  replication,  count,
fraud,  etc.

A  popular  work  of  another  kind  is  the  Mirror
of  Actions,  a  production  dating  from  the  beginning
of  the  fifteenth  century.  The  author,  probably
some  town  clerk,  wrote  his  book  in  the  frontier
district  between  Swabia  and  Franconia,  perhaps
in  the  little  town  of  Schwabisch  Hall.  He  is
deeply  grieved  at  the  uncertainty  of  German
legal  customs,  the  greed  and  violence  of  princes,
the  slackness  of  the  Emperor.  He  wants  his
fatherland  to  build  up  its  laws  on  the  basis  of
the  Roman  code,  without  neglecting  ancient  and
reasonable  customs.  His  first  book,  dedicated
to  private  law,  is  partly  derived  from  a  work  of
Roffredus,  a  Bolognese  doctor,  and  partly  from
the  more  elementary  treatise  of  John  de  Blanosco
(de  actionibus,  1259).  The  German  author
endeavours,  for  the  most  part,  to  give  a  plain  and
useful  statement  of  Roman  rules,  and  avoids
pedantic  subtleties.  It  is  not  easy,  of  course,
to  combine  German  legal  principles  with  the
learned  apparatus  and  the  peculiar  distinctions  of
Roman  jurists,  and  it  cannot  be  said  that  our
author  has  succeeded  in  producing  a  thoroughly
logical  and  clear  amalgamation  of  both  bodies
of  law.  Yet  his  attempt  is  of  the  utmost  im-
portance, in  that  it  shows  that  the  introduction
118


ROMAN LAW IN GERMANY

of  such  technical  machinery  as  the  Roman  scheme
of  actions  was,  as  early  as  the  fifteenth  century,
not  merely  a  subject  for  book  learning,  but
directly  affected  practitioners.  We  find  the
Mirror  of  Actions  (Klagspiegel)  trying  to  fit
German  class  distinctions  into  the  social  classi-
fication of  Rome  in  the  same  manner  as  this  was
done  by  Bracton.  It  translates  fluently  the  Latin
servits  by  Eigen  Mann,  that  is,  by  'serf.'  The
equivalent  in  modern  German  would  be  Leibcigcn,
a  man  whose  body  is  owned  by  another.  Some-
times, however,  the  author  is  startled  by  the  in-
congruity of  such  an  identification,  and  is  careful
to  add  that  slavery  or  even  serfdom  does  not  exist
in  German  law.  But  then  in  the  country,  if
not  in  the  towns,  there  were  numerous  rustics
who  might  appropriately  be  termed  serfs  (leibeigen),
and  therefore  the  Klagspiegel  "receives,"  copies,
many  of  the  rules  originally  laid  down  for  Roman
slaves.  In  the  same  way  there  is  a  good  deal  of
Romanesque  learning  in  the  treatment  of  obli-
gations. Yet  the  author  of  the  Klagspiegel  does
not  seem  to  notice  the  difficulties  felt  by  Roman
lawyers  in  regard  to  the  enforcement  of  '  nude  '
promises.  He  admits  that  they  should  be  made
the  subject  of  actions.  Again,  his  treatment  of
emphyteusis,  of  the  hereditary  lease  of  Roman
Law,  is  strongly  coloured  by  the  fact  that  he
uses  the  peasant  tenancies  of  German  mediaeval
custom  as  concrete  material  for  his  scheme.
119


ROMAN LAW


Rents  and  services  become  the  chief  feature  in
the  relation  between  the  lord  and  his  tenant
(Hintersasse)  ;  the  rights  of  the  lord  to  supervise
the  cultivation,  and  to  exercise  a  disciplinary
power  over  the  tenant,  are  recognised  as  an
ancient  incident  of  the  tenure,  etc.  As  a  com-
mentary on  Roman  sources,  all  this  is  erroneous,
but  in  the  history  of  "  reception  "  this  and  similar
variations  from  the  orthodox  doctrine  are  inter-
esting and  significant.  They  prove  that  we  are
confronted  with  something  different  from  mere
literary  borrowings ;  \ve  witness  the  struggle
between  Roman  and  German  theories  in  practice.
4.  The  next  point  to  be  observed  concerns
the  influence  of  the  knowledge  of  Roman  Law
acquired  in  the  Universities  and  through  popular
or  learned  treatises  on  practice.  We  can  easily
discern  that  the  persons  who  had  recourse  to
Roman  texts  and  to  Romanistic  literature  in  the
fifteenth  century  belonged  for  the  most  part  to
one  or  other  of  three  classes.  There  were,  firstly,
ecclesiastics  desirous  of  confirming  their  con-
tentions on  church  matters  and  private  matters
by  reference  to  Civil  law,  to  which  Canon  law
was  closely  allied  ;  secondly,  town  clerks  acting
as  jurisconsults  to  cities  and  to  princes,  and
taking  part  in  the  discussions  of  ordinary  tri-
bunals as  assessors  ;  thirdly,  barristers  in  search
of  arguments  for  their  clients  ;  they  displayed
a  natural  bent  towards  the  written  Common

120


ROMAN LAW  IN GERMANY

law  of  Rome,  in  preference  to  the  native  wisdom
of  German  assessors  (the  Schoffen).  But  through
what  channels  was  Roman  Law  introduced  into
courts  of  law  or  into  administrative  offices  ?

Juridical  consultation  formed  the  principal
medium  for  its  application  in  the  earlier  stages
of  the  process.  Officials  in  doubt  as  to  some  in-
tricate problem  of  private  or  administrative
law,  and  also  parties  to  complicated  suits,  began
to  seek  the  advice  of  well-known  jurists,  especially
of  doctors  of  laws  at  the  Universities.  An  early
example  is  presented  by  the  action  of  the  Council
of  Cologne  at  the  close  of  the  fourteenth  century
in  connection  with  the  so-called  Brotherhoods
of  Common  Life  (Briider  des  gemeinsamen  Lebens)
— associations  of  fervently  religious  persons  of
both  sexes,  who  joined  in  a  common  life  of  work
and  prayer.  Consultations  have  been  preserved
on  the  question  as  to  whether  such  associations
were  to  be  allowed  or  not,  whether  they  were
collegia  licita,  according  to  Roman  terminology,
or  not.  The  first  of  these  consultations  is  signed
by  two  doctors  and  two  licentiates  of  laws  of
the  University  of  Cologne,  of  whom  the  two  first
were  holders  of  regular  chairs  of  law  (Icgum  doctor es
net  it  rcgentcs  in  legibns).  The  case  is  put  in  the
following  manner  :

"  In  certain  places  persons  join  to  live  in
common.  Some  are  ecclesiastics  dwelling  in
one  house,  where  they  are  engaged  in  writing

121


ROMAN LAW


lawful  books.  Others,  who  cannot  write,  are
engaged  in  mechanical  crafts  in  another  house.
Or  else  they  do  manual  work.  These  persons
living  in  the  two  houses  work  and  live  on  the
results  of  their  labour,  and  divide  among  them-
selves the  proceeds  and  their  own  goods,  should
they  have  any.  They  take  their  meals  together,
and  do  not  beg  for  alms,  and  they  have  a  rector
who  takes  charge  of  the  hall.  They  obey  him  as
good  disciples  obey  their  master,  and  they  settle
the  hours  for  work  and  the  hours  for  rest,  and
similar  matters.  They  choose  to  enjoy  their
goods  in  common,  that  they  may  live  more
quietly.  The  principal  object  in  such  a  life  is
not  to  make  profit,  but  they  hope  that  by  so
living  they  may  please  God  and  serve  Him.  Such
is  the  theme.  It  is  asked  whether  such  a  college
is  an  allowed  one,  and  whether  they  have  a  right
to  elect  a  rector,  to  make  by-laws  for  themselves,
and  to  do  other  things  allowed  to  colleges.  And
also  what  is  the  law  in  regard  to  women  who  live
apart  from  their  husbands,  and  sew  and  spin
and  exercise  textile  crafts  on  which  they  live  in
the  same  way  (as  described  above)  ?  "  The
doctors  of  Civil  law  gave  an  entirely  favourable
opinion  on  the  authority  of  Bartolus,  with  the
adjunct  that  women  could  only  join  in  such  a
college  provided  their  work  was  not  repugnant
to  womanhood  (si  statui  mnliebri  non  repugnet).
The  consultation  of  the  canonists  based  on  Jo-


ROMAN LAW  IN  GERMANY

lianncs  Andreas  was  to  the  effect  that  no  attempt
to  start  new  religious  beliefs  was  permissible,
but  that  life  in  a  society  was  not  illicit  in  itself.
I  may  add  that  the  brothers  of  Common  Life
had  to  endure  many  attacks  from  jealous  Church-
men, but  the  Council  of  Constance  supported
them,  and  their  communities  and  schools  con-
tinued to  flourish  throughout  the  fifteenth  cen-
tury. In  any  case,  the  above-mentioned  con-
sultation is  interesting  from  two  points  of  view  ;
its  subject  is  the  momentous  apostolic  revival
of  Gerhard  de  Groot  and  his  lay  brotherhood  ;
it  also  marked  a  step  in  the  introduction  of  the
Roman  theory  of  corporations  into  Germany.
The  ruling  both  of  the  legists  and  of  the  canonists
is  based  on  the  Roman  conception  of  the  universitas
as  a  juridical  person,  of  the  creation  of  a  fictitious
moral  being  endowed  with  the  same  rights  as  an
individual,  and  organised  in  such  a  way  as  to
ensure  action  for  certain  allowable  aims  in  a
continuous  manner.  A  rector  and  obligatory
by-laws  arc  necessary  to  ensure  such  action  ;
civil  rights  arc  ascribed  to  the  society  in  question
on  the  pattern  of  other  lawful  societies ;  the
individuality  of  its  members  is  merged  in  certain
respects  in  the  higher  being  of  the  corporation  ;
the  only  point  admitting  of  doubt  concerns  the
allowable  aim  of  the  latter.  Once  this  is  established
everything  else  follows  of  itself  from  the  Roman
theory  of  the  juridical  person.  We  are  able  to
123


ROMAN LAW


understand  now  why  a  consultation  was  needed,
and  what  it  supplied  from  the  legal  point  of  view
to  the  authorities  in  Cologne.  The  Germanistic
point  of  view  as  to  corporations  was  a  different
one — it  amounted  to  the  admission  of  joint
action  by  a  plurality  (Gesammtheit)  acting  as  a
union  (Genosscnschaft).  This  conception  had  not,
however,  reached  a  stage  of  theoretical  com-
pleteness and  of  a  conscious  co-ordination  of  all
details  under  the  ruling  principle.  The  Roman
doctrine  supplied  this  very  requirement,  and  it
was  substituted  as  being  more  scientific  and
thorough.

Another  characteristic  set  of  consultations
given  by  the  Cologne  jurists  in  the  course  of  the
fourteenth  and  the  fifteenth  centuries  concerns
difficulties  arising  from  the  adjustment  of  political
and  private  rights  in  cities  and  principalities.
The  formation  within  the  precincts  of  the  Empire
of  commonwealths  of  different  types  created
by  express  delegation,  by  force,  by  custom,  and
by  prescription,  gave  rise  to  constant  disputes
and  complications  both  in  Italy  and  in  Germany.
One  of  the  great  Italian  jurists  of  the  fourteenth
century,  Bartolus,  had  instituted  a  new  treat-
ment of  this  troublesome  department  of  municipal
law.  He  adapted  and  developed  Roman  con-
ceptions of  the  authority  of  the  people  as  a  source
of  power,  of  the  part  played  by  coercion  in  the
creation  of  law  (vis  coactiva),  of  the  delegation
124


ROMAN LAW IN GERMANY

of  political  authority  and  jurisdiction  by  the
Emperor,  and  the  like.  His  commentaries  on
the  subject  became  the  basis  of  the  public  law
of  central  Europe,  and  it  is  significant  that  the
professors  of  Roman  Law  in  Germany  appropriated
his  doctrine  in  preference  to  the  teaching  of
Justinian's  Code  itself.  The  modern  elements
of  Bartolus'  teaching  made  it  the  more  acceptable
for  the  solution  of  problems  arising  out  of  the
tangled  web  of  affairs  in  fifteenth-century  Ger-
many. It  is  in  its  Italian  garb  that  Roman  Law
was  received  by  the  Germans,  and  this  modifi-
cation explains  to  a  great  extent  the  reason  of
the  comparative  ease  of  its  adoption.

It  is  needless  to  add  that  in  a  state  of  govern-
ment and  society  as  that  which  prevailed  in
Germany  in  the  fifteenth  century,  the  cross
relations  between  different  political  units  and
social  groups  were  constantly  producing  friction
and  juridical  disputes.  And  in  all  such  questions,
German  legal  arrangements,  based  primarily  on
local  customs,  failed  signally.  Recourse  to
Roman  Law  as  "  Common  law  "  was  natural  and
unavoidable.  It  assumed  the  form  of  awards
as  well  as  of  consultations.  It  became  more  and
more  usual  for  parties  to  a  suit  to  submit  the
points  in  dispute  to  the  arbitration  of  doctors  of
law.  One  characteristic  method  of  submitting
cases  for  decision  to  learned  lawyers  was  the
institution  of  the  so-called  "  Actenversendung,"
125


ROMAN LAW


the  transmission  of  the  documents  relating  to  a
case  by  the  court  which  had  jurisdiction,  to  the
law  faculty  of  a  famous  university.  The  professors
of  the  faculty  acting  in  corpora  considered  the
evidence  and  pleadings,  sometimes  demanding
supplementary  material,  and  ultimately  formulated
a  decision.  This  was  forwarded  to  the  court.  Need-
less to  add,  that  this  "  transmission  of  acts  "
could  only  take  place  in  connection  with  a  pro-
cedure based  on  written  documents.  The  rules
of  such  a  procedure  followed  the  practice  of
ecclesiastical  courts,  and  were  largely  derived  from
usages  of  later  Roman  Law.  Thus  the  "Acten-
versendung,"  apart  from  the  fact  that  it  was  an
appeal  to  colleges  of  jurists  trained  in  foreign
law,  furthered  the  process  of  Romanisation  by
the  procedure  necessary  to  effect  it.

5.  I  have  dwelt  more  particularly  on  the  be-
ginnings of  "reception  "  in  the  fifteenth  century,
because  the  motives  and  reasons  of  the  process
are,  as  usual,  more  clearly  apparent  in  their
origins  than  in  later  developments.  But  the
practical  side  of  the  process,  the  harvest  of  results
in  jurisdiction  and  legislation,  belongs  chiefly
to  the  sixteenth  century.  The  German  courts  of
law,  with  their  peculiar  procedure  and  customary
lore  were  overwhelmed  by  tribunals  following
Roman  doctrine,  primarily  in  consequence  of
the  organisation  of  a  central  Imperial  court,
the  "  Reichskammergericht."  This  court  deliber-
126


ROMAN LAW IN GERMANY

ately  adopted  Roman  Law  for  its  guidance  as
the  common  law  of  the  Empire.  This  occurred
in  1495,  when  the  "  Reichskammergericht  "  was
definitely  constituted  as  a  standing  tribunal.
The  event  took  place  in  connection  with  a  move-
ment towards  the  strengthening  of  Imperial
institutions  in  the  reign  of  Maximilian  I.  The
Empire  was  reformed  as  a  federation  for  main-
taining public  peace,  divided  into  regions  and
circles,  and  subordinated  in  a  legal  sense  to  the
"  Reichskammergericht."  This  High  Court  never
attained,  of  course,  the  decisive  influence  of  the
English  Royal  courts,  or  of  French  Parlements,
but,  nevertheless,  it  provided  a  point  of  concen-
tration for  the  Common  law  of  the  Empire  ;
and,  in  spite  of  its  dilatoriness  and  weakness  in
execution,  it  exercised  a  considerable  influence
on  the  juridical  institutions  of  all  the  estates  of
the  Empire.  At  the  outset,  it  was  enacted  that
half  of  its  sixteen  assessors  should  be  doctors  of
laws,  the  other  half  being  knights.  Later  on,
it  was  decreed  that  even  the  knights  should,  so
far  as  possible,  be  chosen  from  among  persons
learned  in  the  Civil  law.  A  tribunal  thus  con-
stituted threw  all  its  weight  into  the  scale  of
the  "reception"  of  foreign  law  against  native
customary  jurisprudence.  The  law  of^  Justinian
was  received  in  complexn,  in  its  details  and  in  its
entirety,  with  the  characteristic  limitation,  how-
ever, that  it  was  adopted  not  directly  from  the
127


ROMAN LAW


original  sources,  but  from  the  texts  as  glossed  by
Italian  scholars.  The  rule  that  doctrines  not
recognised  by  the  glossators  are  not  to  be  taken
into  consideration  by  the  judges  (quod  non  ag-
noscit  glossa  non  agnoscit  forum),  was  more  than
a  confession  of  literary  subordination  to  the
greater  knowledge  of  Azo,  Accursius,  Bartolus,
Baldus,  etc.  It  was  necessary  in  order  to  avoid
details  too  intimately  connected  with  ancient
life,  and  entirely  unsuited  for  importation.

The  example  set  by  the  "  Reichskammergericht  "
was  immediately  followed  by  the  High  Courts  of
the  various  principalities,  and  "  reception  "  spread
from  the  top  to  the  bottom  of  the  ladder.  The
importance  of  this  gradual  assimilation  by  the
lower  courts,  of  the  leading  principles  of  the
superior  tribunals,  is  well  illustrated,  for  example,
in  the  history  of  "reception  "  in  the  principalities
of  Julich  and  Berg  (in  the  Rhine  province).
The  estates  of  these  principalities  resolved  in
1534  and  1537  to  remodel  their  laws  on  Roman
patterns,  in  order  to  avoid  clashing  with  the
superior  court  of  the  "  Reichskammergericht."
Under  the  influence  of  such  various  considerations,
a  movement  towards  the  codification  of  local
laws  on  the  basis  of  their  reformation  and  of
the  reception  of  Roman  doctrine,  sweeps  over
Germany.  The  towns  of  Worms  and  Niirenberg
(A.D.  1479)  are  among  the  first  to  carry  through
such  reformations.  Most  of  the  monarchically
128


ROMAN LAW  IN GERMANY

organised  principalities  follow  suit,  with  the
notable  exception  of  some  of  the  North  German
states,  which  remained  faithful  to  a  jurisprudence
based  on  the  "  Sachsenspiegel."

The  "reception  "  appears  in  this  light  mainly
as  a  movement  of  the  tipper  classes  and  of  the
political  authorities  connected  with  them.  It
encountered  a  good  deal  of  opposition  in  the  lower
orders.  Jurists  were  regarded  as  bad  Christians
(Die  Juristen  sind  hose  Christen}.  Every  now
and  then  one  or  the  other  among  them  was  ex-
posed to  contumelious  treatment,  as,  for  example,
two  Constance  doctors,  whom  a  court  of  Schoffen
in  Thurgau  put  to  flight,  because  it  did  not  want
to  hear  about  Bartele  and  Baldele  (Bartolus  and
Baldus),  and  was  resolved  to  uphold  its  ancient
customs.  The  revolutionary  peasantry  in  1525
declared  in  a  fictitious  document,  nicknamed
"  The  Reformation  of  the  Emperor  Frederick  III,"
"that  all  doctors  of  laws  should  be  abolished,
and  that  justice  should  be  administered  according
to  the  law  of  Moses,  because  it  is  not  good  for
men  to  get  better  law  than  that  proclaimed  by
God."  Ulrich  von  Hutten  was  never  tired  of
inveighing  against  the  greedy,  ignorant,  pedantic
set  of  lawyers,  who  spread  darkness  over  the
simplest  questions,  and  use  their  pretentious
learning  to  fleece  the  poor  public.  But,  on  the
whole,  the  "  reception  "  of  foreign  Common  law
was  affected  with  much  less  strife  and  opposition
K  129


ROMAN LAW


than  might  have  been  expected  from  the  radical
nature  of  the  experiment.  The  learned  judges
of  Germany  became  judges  in  Civil  law.  The
fundamental  incongruity  of  the  attempt  was
only  realised  much  later,  when  native  legal
customs  were  resuscitated  from  oblivion  and
contemptuous  relegation  to  the  lowest  local
courts.  The  revenge  of  German  law  against
artificial  reception  was  achieved  in  our  days  by
men  like  Heusler,  Beseler,  Gierke.  And  the
weapons  they  wielded  were  forged  from  the  general
doctrines  of  German  law,  reconstructed  by  the
help  of  its  history.

Is  it  allowable  to  draw  a  moral  from  a  complex
historical  process  like  the  one  we  have  been
examining  ?  It  seems  as  if,  in  spite  of  all  varieties
of  tone  and  mood,  two  or  three  leading  strains
were  constantly  recurring  in  its  course.  It  is
evident,  to  begin  with,  that  the  reception  of
Roman  Law  depended  largely  on  political  causes  ;
this  legal  system  was  subordinated  to  the  idea
of  the  State  towering  over  individuals  or  classes,
and  free  from  the  intermixture  of  private  and
public  interests  characteristic  of  feudalism.  It
was  bound  to  appeal  to  the  minds  of  all  the  pioneers
of  the  State  conception — to  ambitious  Emperors,
grasping  territorial  princes,  reforming  legists,
and  even  clerical  representatives  of  law  and  order.
Coming,  as  it  did,  from  an  age  of  highly  developed
social  intercourse,  Roman  Law  satisfied  in  many


ROMAN LAW IN GERMANY

respects  the  requirements  of  economic  development.
Although  history  never  repeats  itself,  and  the
conditions  of  industry  and  trade  in  fourteenth-
century  Europe  differed  widely  from  those  pre-
vailing in  the  Roman  Empire,  the  results  of  a
vast  experience  in  setting  legal  frames  to  business
dealings  had  been  accumulated  in  the  Roman  law-
books,  and  the  progressive  classes  of  the  closing
Middle  Ages  did  not  fail  to  utilise  them.  This
influence  is  especially  manifest  in  the  law  of
contracts.  Lastly,  from  the  jurisprudential  point
of  view  the  scientific  value  of  Roman  Lawr  could
not  be  contested  ;  it  asserted  itself  as  soon  as
there  reappeared  theoretical  reflection  on  legal
subjects.  And  when  the  elaboration  of  Common
law  became  a  social  necessity,  the  Roman  system
grew  to  be  a  force  not  only  in  the  schools,  but
also  in  the  courts.  Altogether,  the  history  of
Roman  Law  during  the  Middle  Ages  testifies  to
the  latent  vigour  and  organising  power  of  ideas
in  the  midst  of  shifting  surroundings.


APPENDIX


I. (top.  13).

Lex  Romana  Curiensis, IV.
De  responsis  pnulentum.


Codex  Theodosianus,  i,  4,  3.

Impp.  Theoclosius  et  Va-
lentinianus  A  A  acl  Sena-
turn  urbis  Roma?.  Inter-
pretatio.  Hacc  lex  osten-
clit,  quorum  Juris  condito-
rum  sentential  valeant,  hoc
est  Papiniani  Pauli,  Gaii,
Ulpiani,  Modestini,  Sc;u-
vola?,  Sabini,  luliani  atque
Marcelli,  quorum  si  fuerint,
prolatae  diversa:  sententia-,
ubi  maior  numcrus  unum
senserit,  vincat.  Quod  si
forsitan  sequalis  numerus  in
utraque  parte  sit,  eius  par-
tis pra?cedat  auctoritas,  in
qua  Papinianus  cum  a>quali
numero  senserit,  quia  ut
singulos  Papinianus  vincit,
ita  et  cedit  duobus.  Sca^-
vola,  Sabinus,  lulianus  at-
que Marcellus  in  suis  cor-
poribus  non  inveniuntur,
sed  in  pwefatorum  opere
tenentur  inserti.


Imp. Theodosius. In-

terpretatio.  Ha?c  causa
sicut  Papiani,  Pauli,  Gagii,
Ulpiani,  Modestini  et  Sci-
fola,  Savini,  luliani  atque
Marcelli  est.  Isti  viri  clar-
issimi  consilium  in  suis  cor-
poribus  melius  esse  non
cognoverint,  et  in  his  libris
sic  continent.  Ubi  de  ac-
cionem  indiciarie  contendi-
tur,  vel  ubi  inter  duos
heredes  de  ipsorum  facul-
tatem  intencione  inter  se
habuerint,  si  nnus  de  illis
habuerit  amplius  homines,
qui  eius  causam  teneant,
quam  ille  alius  :  qui  mai-
orem  numerum  habuerit  de
bonos  homines,  ipse  in  iu-
dicio  secundum  legem  suam
causam  vincat.  Et  si  for-
sitan de  homines  equalem
numerum  habuerint,  prece-
dat  eius  auctoritas,  qui  in
lege  Papiani  pro  se  alicum
titulum  invenerit,  ipsa  cau-
sa vincat.


APPENDIX


II.  Liutprancl 134  (top.  23).

Si  hominis  in  uno  vico  habitantis  aliqua  intentionis
habuerit  dc  canipo  ant  vinea  praclo  aut  silva  vel  cle  alias
res,  et  collexerent  se  una  pars  cum  virtutem  et  dixerent
"  quia  wifamus  et  cxpellimns  cum  dc  ipsum  locum  per
virtutem  foras,"  et  ambolaverunt,  et  scandalum  ibi
commissum  fuerit  et  plagas  aut  feritas  factas  vel  homo
occisus  fuerit  :  ita  decernimus,  ut  plagas  et  feritas  aut
hominem  mortuum  conponant  secundum  anteriorem
edicto,  quod  gloriosus  Rothari  rex  vel  nos  instituimus  ;
pro  autem  inlecita  presumptionem  de  ipsa  collectionem
conponat  solidos  20  ad  illam  partem,  qui  in  campum  aut
in  vitis  vel  in  prado  aut  in  silva  suum  laborem  faciebat.
Hoc  autem  ideo  statuimus,  ut  nullus  presumat  malas
causas  in  qualiscumque  locum  excitare  aut  facere  et
non  potuimus  causam  istam  adsimilare,  neque  ad  arischild,
neque  ad  consilium  rusticanorum,  neque  ad  rusticanorum
seditione  :  et  plus  congruum  nobis  paruit  esse  de  con-
silium malum,  id  est  de  consilio  mortis.  Quia  quando
se  collegunt  et  super  alius  vadunt  pro  peccatis,  ad  id
ipsum  vadunt  ut  malum  faciant,  aut  si  casus  evenerit,
hominem  occidant,  et  plagas  aut  feritas  faciant  :  ideo,
ut  dixemus,  adsimilavimus  causam  istam  ad  consilium
mortis,  quod  sunt,  sicut  supra  premisimus,  solidi  vigenti.


III. Origines,  V,  c.  24,  §  25 (to  p.  28).
De  instruments  legalibus.

Donatio  est  cuiuslibet  rei  transactio.  Dictam  autem
dicunt  donationem  quasi  doni  actionem,  et  dotem  quasi
do  item.  Pra-cedente  enim  in  nuptiis  donatione  dos
sequitur.

Conditio  quid  est  (V,  c.  24,  §  29).

Conditio  a  condicendo  quasi  condictiones  quia  non
ibi  testis  unus  jurat,  sed  duo  vel  plures  ;  non  enim  in
unius  ore  sed  in  duorum  aut  trium  stat  omne  verbum.
Item  condictiones  dicuntur  quod  inter  se  conveniat  sermo
testium  quasi  condictiones.

133


ROMAN LAW


IV.  Glossa  Irnerii  (top.  55).

"  Cum  equitas  et  jus  in  hisclem  rebus  versentur,  dif-
ferunt  tamen.  Equitatis  enim  proprium  est  id  quod
justum  est  simpliciter  proponere.  Juris  autem  idem
proponere  volendo,  scilicet  aliquantum  auctoritate  sub-
necti.  Quod  propter  hominum  lapsus  multum  ab  ea
distare  contingit,  partim  minus  quam  equitas  dictaverit
continendo,  partim  plus  quam  oporteat  proponendo.
Multis  quoque  aliis  modis  equitas  et  jus  inter  se  differunt.
cujus  dissensus  interpretatio,  ut  lex  fiat,  solis  principibus
destinatur  "  (quoted  by  Meynial,  Encore  Irncrins,  N.  R.  L.
de  dr.  fr.,  1897,  p.  352).

V.  Glossae  Vacarii  ad  D.I.  3  (to  p.  56).
(From  the  MS.  of  the  Dean  and  Chapter  of  Worcester. )

1 .  Conditor  autem  et  interpres  legum  solus  est  imperator.
Scilicet ex propria volumtate. Ceteri ex necessitate.
Item iudicis interpretatio  nulla intelligitur preterquam
si  nullo  ab  his  inter  quos  iudicat  iuris  remedio  infirmetur,
inter  eos  tantum  tenet.

2.  Generale  et  naturale  congruum  ut  eo  modo  solvatur
quid  quo  constructum est. Imperatoris  autem  consti-
tutionem inuito populo immo et reclamante interdum
fieri  contingit  et  valet. Ergo  et  durat  ut  nee  per  con-
suetudinem abrogari  possit  nisi  prius imperium et po-
testatem  a  principe  amotam  populus  recipiat.

VI. (to  p.  69).

Dig.  I,  3,  32  pr.  (Julianus). Beaumanoir,  Prologue  :

De  quibus  causis  scriptis  Nous  entendons  a  con-
legibus  non  utimur,  id  cus-  fermer  grant  partie  de  cest
todire  oportet  quod  mori-  livre  par  les  jugemens  qui
bus  et  consuetudine  indue-  out  este  fet  en  nos  tans  en
turn  est  :  ladite  contee  de  Clermont  ;

et  1'autre  partie  par  clers
usages  et  par  cleres  cous-
tumes  usees  et  acoustumees
de  lone  tans  pesiblement  ;

134


APPENDIX


et  si  qua  in  re  hoc  defi-  et  1'autre  partie,  des  cas

ceret,  tune  quod  proximum  douteus en ladite contee,

et  consequens  ei  est  :  par  le  jugement  des  chas-

teleries  voisines  ;

si nee id quidem ap-  et 1'autre partie par le

pareat,  tune  jus,  quo  urbs  droit qui est communs a

Roma  utitur,  servari  opor-  tous  on  roiaume.
tet.

VII.  Coutume  de  Beauvaisis, 31 (to  p.  82).

Pour  ce  que  mout  seroit  longue  chose  et  chargeant  as
hommes  qui  font  les  jugemens  de  metre  en  jugement
tous  les  cas  qui  vienent  devant  le  baillif,  li  baillis  doit
metre  grant  peine  de  delivrer  ce  qui  est  pledie  devant  lui,
quant  il  set  que  Ten  doit  fere  du  cas  selonc  la  coustume
et  quant  il  voit  que  la  chose  est  clere  et  aperte.  Mes  ce
qui  est  en  doute  et  les  grosses  quereles  doivent  bien  estre
inises  en  jugement  ;  ne  il  ne  convient  pas  que  Ton  mete
en  jugement  le  cas  qui  a  autre  fois  este  jugies,  tout  soit
ce  que  li  jugemens  soit  fes  pour  autres  persones,  car  1'on
ne  doit  pas  fere  divers  jugemens  d'un  meisme  cas.


VIII.  (Bracton  I,  i  §  2,  i  §  3)  (to  p.  92).

Cum  autem  fere  in  omnibus  regionibus  utatur  legibus
et  iure  scripto,  sola  Anglia  usa  est  in  suis  fmibus  jure  non
scripto  et  consuetudine,  in  ca  quidem  ex  non  scripto  ius
venit  quod  usus  comprobavit,  sed  non  erit  absurdum
leges  Anglicanas,  licet  non  scriptas,  leges  apellare,  cum
legis  vigorem  habeat  quicquid  de  consilio  et  consensu
magnatum  et  reipublicae  communi  sponsione,  auctoritate
regis  sive  principis  pmecedente,  iuste  fuerit  definitum  et
approbatum.  Sunt  etiam  in  Anglia  consuetudines
plures  et  diversa^  secundum  diversitatem  locorum.
habent  enim  Anglici  plura  ex  consuetudine  quae  non
habent  ex  lege,  sicut  in  diversis  comitatibus,  civitatibus,
burgis  et  villis,  ubi  semper  inquirendum  erit  qua;  sit
illius  loci  consuetude  et  qualiter  utantur  consuetudine
qui  consuetudines  allcgant.

Cum autem huiusmodi leges et consuetudines per

135


ROMAN LAW


insipientcs  ct  minus  cloctos,  qui  cathedram  iudicandi
ascendant  antequam  leges  didicerint,  saepius  trahantur
ad  abusuni,  et  qui  stant  in  dubiis  et  in  opinionibus,  et
multotiens  pervertantur  a  maioribus,  qui  potius  proprio
arbitrio  quam  legum  auctoritate  causas  decidunt,  ad
instructionem  saltern  minorum,  ego  Henricus  de  Brattone
'  animum  erexi  '  ad  vetera  indicia  iustorum,  perscrutando
diligenter,  non  sine  vigiliis  et  labore,  facta  ipsorum,  con-
silia  et  responsa,  et  quicquid  inde  nota  dignum  inveni  in
unam  summam  redigendo.


WILLIAM URE.S'DON AND SON, LTD.
JKl.VTliRS. J'LY.MOL'TH


HARPER'S LIBRARY OF
LIVING THOUGHT

Foolscap  &'0,  gilt  tafs,  decorative  ewers,  richly  gilt  back>
Per  Volume :  Cloth  zs.  6d.  net,  Leather  js.  6d.  net


THE


Sir  Oliver  Lodge

ETHER OF SPACE


Illustrated


"  This  handy  and  fascinating  volume  opens  up  new  views  into
the  nature  of  the  universe.  Precise  and  lucid,  it  summarises
our  knowledge  of  the  all-pervading  substance  which  fills  all
space  and  penetrates  all  matter  —  the  substratum  of  matter
itself." — Birmingham  Post.

Prof.  Svante  Arrhenius

THE LIFE OF THE UNIVERSE

2  vols. Illustrated

"  For  those  who  desire  to  obtain  an  adequate  conception  of  the
various  theories  of  man's  origin  from  the  earliest  times  to  the
present  day,  we  can  thoroughly  recommend  these  volumes.
The  information  he  affords  is  both  accurate  and  useful,  and  he
has  many  most  suggestive  remarks  to  offer."

Charles  H.  Hawes,  M.A.,
and Harriet Boyd  Hawes, M.A.

CRETE  THE  FORERUNNER
OF  GREECE

The  Authors  unfold  the  story  of  a  great  prehistoric  civilization,
until  recently  altogether  unsuspected,  the  forerunner  of  Greek
and  European  culture.

Sir  William  Crookes

DIAMONDS

The  chemical  composition  of  the  diamond,  a  study  which  has
attracted  scientists  for  many  years,  receives  here  its  fullest
exposition.  The  great  chemist  has  given  the  subject  closest
attention  both  in  the  laboratory  and  on  the  South  African
diamond  fields.  His  work  will  be  found  fascinating  to  the
general  reader  and  invaluable  to  the  specialist.


Harper's Library of  Living Thought
Prof.  Rudolf  Eucken

CHRISTIANITY AND THE
NEW IDEALISM

"It  is  a  mark  of  the  strength  of  the  new  movement  that
Eucken's  books  are  the  most  widely  current  philosophical
writings  of  the  present  day." — Hibl'trt  Journal.

Prof.  Johannes  Weiss

PAUL  AND  JESUS

A  deeply  interesting  discussion  of  the  Messianic  character  of
Jesus  and  his  own  consciousness  thereof — studied  from  the
facts  revealed  in  the  Gospels  and  compared  with  the  teaching
of  St.  Paul.

Prof.  Reinhold  Seeberg

REVELATION AND
INSPIRATION

Shows  that  while  the  traditional  theory  of  inspiratijn  must  be
abandoned  in  the  light  of  historical  criticism,  the  Divine
character  of  the  Bible  is  not  assailed.  Prof.  Seeberg  s  exposi-
tion of  the  subject  avoids  the  errors  in  the  old  doctrine  without
surrendering  any  of  its  material  value.

Prof. William Wrcde

THE ORIGIN OF THE NEW
TESTAMENT

Correcting  certain  inherited  opinions  on  the  twenty-seven
writings  of  the  New  Testament  and  their  formation  into
one  whole;  but  emphasising  their  importance  as  the  earliest
documents  of  the  new  gospel  which  was  to  con-juer  the  world.

Prof.  Arnold  Meyer

JESUS OR PAUL?

The  author  here  shows  that  although  it  was  Je-.us  who  led
mankind  to  the  intimate  communion  with  Uod  as  a  father,  it
was  mainly  St.  Paul  who  founded  that  form  of  Christianity
which,  though  hindering  and  embarrassing  in  many  ways  to-
day, alone  proved  capable  of  spreading  the  teaching  uf  Je>u<.


Harper's Library of Living Thought
Algernon  Charles  Swinburne

THREE PLAYS OF SHAKE-
SPEARE

"Contains  criticism  of  deepest  significance.  " — Glasgow  Her  aid.
"Splendid  incidental  finds  of  poetic  gold."

Manchester  Guardian.
"  Luminous  and  valuable." — Standard.

Prof.  C.  H.  Becker

CHRISTIANITY  AND ISLAM

A  study  of  the  similarities,  differences  and  the  interaction  of
ideas  between  the  two  schools  of  religious  thought,  and  the
discussion  of  the  possibility  of  a  Moslem  expansion.

W.  M.  Flinders  Petrie

PERSONAL RELIGION IN

EGYPT
BEFORE  CHRISTIANITY

•'Traces  the  development  of  belief  in  the  creative  'Word' —
adopted  by  the  author  of  the  Fourth  Gospel,  who  gave  it  a
new  significance." — Northern  Echo.

"  Shows  what  Christianity  meant  to  those  who  actually  heard
the  teaching  of  the  Way."

Prof.  D.  A.  Bertholet

THE  TRANSMIGRATION  OF
SOULS

A  concise  account  of  the  belief  in  metempsychosis  traceable  in
ancient  and  modern  history — the  theme  concerning  which
Schopenhauer  wrote  :  "  Never  has  a  myth,  and  never  will  a
myth  lie  more  closely  connected  with  philosophical  truth  than
this  primeval  doctrine."

Count  Leo  Tolstoy

THE TEACHING OF  JESUS


Harper's  Library  of  Living  Thought

No;c  Ready :
Algernon  Charles  Swinburne

THREE PLAYS  OF  SHAKESPEARK
Leo  Tolstoy

THE  TEACHING  OF  JESUS
W.  M.  Flinders  Petrie

PERSONAL RELIGION IX EGYPT BEFORE

CHRISTIANITY
Sir  Oliver  Lodge

THE ETHER OF SPACE. Illustrated
Prof.  William  Wrede  (University  of  Brcslau)

THE  ORIGIN OF  THE NEW TESTAMENT
Prof.  C.  H.  Becker  (Colonial  Inst.,  Hamburg)

CHRISTIANITY  AND ISLAM
Prof.  Svante  Arrhenius  (Nobel  Inst.,  Stockholm)

THE  LIFE  OF  THE  UNIVERSE, a  vols. Illustrated
Prof.  Arnold  Meyer  (University  of  Zurich)

JESUS OR PAUL?
Prof.  D.  A.  Bertholet  (University  of  Basle)

THE TRANSMIGRATION OF SOULS
Prof.  Reinhold  Seeberg  (University  of  Berlin)

REVELATION AND INSPIRATION
Prof.  Johannes  Weiss  (University  of  Heidelberg)

PAUL  AND  JESUS
Sir  William  Crookes

DIAMONDS. Illustrated
Prof.  Rudolf  Eucken  (University  of  Jena)

CHRISTIANITY AND THE NEW IDEALISM
C.  H.  Hawes,  M  A.,  and  Harriet  Boyd  Hawes.  M.A.

CRETE  THE  FORERUNNER  OF  GREECE. Ulus.
Prof.  P.  Vinogradoff  (Oxford  University)

ROMAN  LAW  IN  MEDI/EVAL  EUROPE

Forthcoming :
W.  H.  Fremantle,  D.D.  (Dean  of  Ripon)

NATURAL CHRISTIANITY
Prof.  Ernest  A.  Gardner  (University  of  London)

RELIGION AND ART IN ANCIENT GREECE
Theodore  Watts-Dunton

POETIC "ADEQUACY" IN THE TWENTIETH
CENTURY

Other  wiuiaes  '.'ill  l>e  shortly  announced

HARPER  & BROTHERS  ,v«-««^-,  IQOQ

45  Albemarle  Street,  London,  W.

Franklin  Square,  New  York


UNIVERSITY  OF  CALIFORNIA  LIBRARY,  LOS  ANGELES

COLLEGE  LIBRARY

This  book  is  due  on  the  last  date  stamped  below.


79 1 : (
3003d


Book  Slip Scries  41>S()


Urwersrty  ol  Cakfomia.  Los  Angeles


L  005  476  692  8


A 001132951 3
