OUTLINES OF
HISTORICAL JURISPRUDENCE


VOLUME II


JURISPRUDENCE OF THE GREEK CITY


<_< —-— eC Ch baal


In preparation:
VoLumME Ill: THE MEDIAEVAL JURISPRUDENCE
OF WESTERN CHRISTENDOM


OUTLINES


OF


ISTORICAL
JURISPRUDENCE


BY


SIR PAUL VINOGRADOFYI, F.B.A.


CORPUS PROFESSOR OF JURISPRUDENCE IN
THE UNIVERSITY OF OXFORD


Volhime Two


Lhe Jurisprudence of the Greek City


OXFORD UNIVERSITY PRESS
LONDON EDINBURGH GLASGOW COPENHAGEN
NEW YORK TORONTO MELBOURNE CAPE TOWN
BOMBAY CALCUTTA MADRAS SHANGHAI
HUMPHREY MILFORD


1922


Printed in England


TO THE MEMORY


OF


RODOLPHE DARESTE


PREFACE


IT may not be amiss to state from the outset what will
be attempted in this volume and what remains outside its
scope. The subject treated is not Greek positive law in all
its bearings, but the Greek jurisprudence of the epoch when
democracy prevailed in the leading cities.

One of the Nestors of Hellenic studies, Dareste, had this
distinction in view when he dedicated a book to the Science
of law in Greece (La Science du droit en Gréce). But
instead of tracing, as he might well have done, the applica-
tion of juridical doctrines in the institutes of positive law,
he contented himself with presenting a sketch of the
teaching of Plato, Aristotle, and Theophrastos.

And yet it might be said that we actually possess in
a fragmentary form the elements of Greek jurisprudence.
They are set out in the writings of Aristotle and of his
school—not so completely as the comparative politics of the
period, but with sufficient definiteness and clearness. The
well-known chapters of the Lthics, the Rhetoric, the Politics,
the treatise on the Athenian Constitution, supply precious
indications as to the way in which the various rules of
substantive law and of procedure, illustrated by inscriptions
and speeches, were connected in the minds of philosophers
of the fourth century into a system of city-law. Some of
the rules have disappeared, some of the applications appear
problematical or contradictory, but on the whole the Aris-
totelian teaching on Political Science makes it possible
to treat the details of Greek law as the ramifications of
philosophical and juridical principles conditioned by the
development of City-commonwealths. Greek juridical
theory was undoubtedly connected with actual practice
of Courts and Assemblies. There is no lack of books on
general jurisprudence nowadays: why should we not try
to reconstitute the general jurisprudence of the fourth
century B.C. ?


viii PREFACE


Another preliminary warning is suggested to me by
some of the criticisms—generally kind and pertinent—
called forth by the first volume of the Outlines. In that
volume I restricted my field of observation as much as
possible to a comparative study of Indo-European legal anti-
quities, called for the sake of brevity Aryan antiquities.
The only exception allowed was the use of ethnological
materials from various racial surroundings to characterize
the elements of the family, for which Aryan culture does
not provide sufficiently primitive examples. But I purposely
avoided including within the range of comparison the
data of Semitic or Babylonian history, not because IL
ignored the importance of Hammurabi's legislation or of
Babylonian inscriptions, but because I did not want to lose
my way in the maze of extremely different Social situations.
The Aryan group seemed wide enough for a more or less de-
finite statement of tribal institutions. In the same manner
in this volume I have abstained from plunging into the
immense sources of materials opened up for the Hellenistic
period in papyri and inscriptions. It is with the City
of the fifth and fourth centuries that I have to deal, and
not with the equally interesting manifestations of Greek
genius in Egypt and Hellenistic Asia. By way of excep-
tion I have referred to a few inscriptions of the third and
second centuries B.c. because they presented some charac-
teristic institutions with particular clearness, but I have
renounced with regret any idea of following in the footsteps
of Grenfell and Mitteis.

The fact that I refer seldom to Roman law will be easily
understood ; the subject has been treated so often and so
well that any one who wants to institute comparisons can
easily do so by turning to the works of the well-known
masters of the study.

It remains for me to acknowledge with sincere gratitude
the advice and assistance of kind friends—Prof. J. A. Smith,
Prof. J. L. Myres, Prof. De Zulueta, Mr. C. K. Allen, of
University College, and Miss M. F. Moor, of Somerville
College, Oxford. I am indebted to Miss Moor for the
compilation of the Index.


TABLE OF CONTENTS


CHAPTER PAGE
I. INrropuction
1. Unity of Greek Law . ; ; 1
2. ‘The Social Type . ' , : i) ae
II. Tut Concert or Law
1. Popular Notions . ; . 18
2. The Critical Analysis of the Sophists i. 20
3. The Justification of Law . -) ak
Ill. Tue Leaar System
1. Preliminary Notions . : . Ad
2. Corrective Justice ; : ; » 8b
3. Distributive Justice. ' . 51
4, Justice in general : ‘ : o coe
do. Fairness (émelkera) ; ' . 63
IV. Tue Sources or Law
1, Enactments. ; ; i Fe
2. Custom ; ; oe FS
3. Authority of Precedents Mode
4, Voluntary Jurisdiction : ; oad
V. THE STRUCTURE OF THE CITY
1. The Federation of Kindreds ; . 85
2. The Household ., : ; ; < ot
3. The City and Religion ‘ ; 6
VI. THE Orry AND THE CITIZEN
1. The City as a Juridical Person . 2 208
2. The Rule of Law. ; ’ ‘ ; 418
3. The Privileges of Citizens . ; J LG
4. Societies and Unions . : ; ee Sk


VII. Tue Law oF THE ConsTITUTION
1. The Deliberative Functions of the People 128
2. Control of the Administration . . 140
3. Judicial Functions of the People . 148


x TABLE OF CONTENTS
CHAPTER
VIII. RELATIONS BETWEEN CITIES
1. International Law and the Right of
Reprisals .
2. The granting of justice (Sood Kia)
IX. CrimME AND ToRT
1. Penal actions
2. Archaic forms of Coninal Pavers :
8. The Elements of Crime
4. Punishment
5. Actions in Tort .
X. PROPERTY AND POSSESSION .
1. General Terms and Distinctions .
2. The Public Element in Property .
3. Private Appr opriation ‘
4, Rights and Remedies in Land aw
XI. CONVENTIONS AND TRANSACTIONS


1. Form and Substance in Conventions
2. The Enforcement of Obligations .
3. Lease and Sale ;


Books REFERRED TO IN Vou. II


INDEX


PAGE


153
156


165
177
182
188
191


197
202
212
218


230
245
255


267
277


THE JURISPRUDENCE OF
THE GREEK CITY


CHAPTER I


INTRODUCTION
1. Unity of Greek Law.


ANCIENT writers have often called attention to the great Tribal
change effected in the history of civilization by the advance bag
from tribal conditions to city organization. Plato sum-
marizes in the Laws! the received view as to tribal lord-
ships (Suvacretat) which still existed in backward countries,
and had sprung from patriarchal communities like the one
described by Homer in his account of the Kyklopes. “ Did
not such States arise out of single settlements and kindreds
scattered and weakened by destructive misfortunes in the
course of which the eldest became the ruler? With them
government originated in the authority of a father and
a mother, whom, like a flock of birds, they followed, forming
one troop under the patriarchal rule and sovereignty of their
parents.” Thukydides in his introductory chapters describes
the contrast between the migrations of Greek tribes during
the early period and the final settlement in cities. ‘The
country which is now called Hellas was not regularly
settled in ancient times. The people were migratory, and
readily left their homes whenever they were overpowered
by numbers. There was no commerce, and they could not
safely hold intercourse with one another by land or by sea.
The several tribes cultivated their own soil just enough to
obtain a maintenance from it. But they had no accumula-
tions of wealth, and did not plant the ground permanently ;
for, being without walls, they were never sure that an


1 Laws III, 680bde Soxotci por mavres tiv ev rovTe TO xpdvo
moXtreiav Suvacreiay KaNeiy, 1) Kal viv ért moAAayov kal éy “EdAnot kal Kata
BapBdpous eotiv® eyes © avrny mov Kai “Opnpos yeyovevar rept thy Tay
KuxAore@y olknow... pay ody ovK é€k TOUT@Y TY KaTa play olknow
kal kara yévos Steorappevav vo drroplas tis ev Tais POopais, ev ais Td mpe-
oBurarov apxye dia ro THy apxny avrois €k maTpos Kal pyTpos yeyovéevat, ois
erdpevor KaOarep Gpyibes ayéeAny play ronTovet, TaTpovopovpevot Kai Bact-
Aeiay macav Stkatorarny Bacirevdpevor ;

2281-2 B


2 JURISPRUDENCE OF THE GREEK CITY


invader might not come and despoil them. Living in this
manner and knowing that they could obtain a bare subsis-
tence anywhere, they were always ready to emigrate;
so that they had neither great cities nor any considerable
resources.” !

Political thinkers laid stress on the immense advantages
of constant intercourse and close co-operation, which in-
duced citizens to forgo the superficial greatness arising
from huge numbers and extensive territory. Aristotle
emphasizes the transition from tribal villages to cities, as
a necessary condition of welfare. “ When several house-
holds are united and the association aims at something
more than the supply of daily needs, then the village comes
into existence. And the most natural form of the village
appears to be that of a colony of the household.... When
several villages are united in a single community perfect
and large enough to be nearly or quite self-sufficing, the
State comes into existence —originally for the sake of mere
life, but continuing in existence for the sake of good life.”?

“Tt is further asked: When are men, living in the same
place, to be regarded as a single city—what is the limit ?
Certainly not the wall of the city, for you might surround
all Peloponnesos with a wall. But a city, having such
a vast circuit, would contain a nation rather than a State,
like Babylon, which, it is said, had been taken for three
days before some part of the inhabitants became aware of
the fact.” *

The older jus civile of Rome as well as the law of Greek
States presents combinations of legal rules which depend on
one dominant fact—the nature of the city commonwealth
(7éArs); let us try to determine the balance of juridical

1 THUK. I, 2.


* AR. Pol. i; 2, 1252 b 15 4 oe ek Thetdvov oiKi@v Kowwvria mporn
XPHTEws EvEKEY fI) epnpepov kopn. piidvora dé kata vow gocey 7 Kon
arrotKia oixtas elvat.,.. 1 0 ek mretdvav Kopdy Kowwria TEeLos modus, HON
maons €Xovoa Tépas THs abrapKeias ws €ros elmeiy, yevopevn pev ovv rov CHy
évexev, ovaa S€ rod «db (hv. (Cf. Jowett.)

: Ibid. IIl, 3, 1276 a 24 dpolws 8¢ Kal rev Tov adroy Témy KaTOLKOUVT@Y
dyOparay more Sei vopifery piay eivar rnyv modu. ov yitp dn Tots reixeou"
ein yap dv IeAorovnow meptBadeiy ev treixos. rowavrn & iaws éori Kai
BaBvrwv kai raoa Fris Exet meprypapyy pardov EOvous" i) médrews* fis ye
paow éadroxvias tpitny nuepay ovk aiabéaOar te pépos THs médrews. (Cf.


Jowett.)


I: INTRODUCTION 3


principles in this stage of development, taking as our text
not the much studied jus Quiritium but the less familiar
law of Greek States. In spite of many drawbacks, the
latter has the great advantage that it can be more clearly
imagined as existing on one plane, namely, in the stage of
the City Commonwealth, while the law of Rome gradually
becomes the law of an Empire, and loses its municipal
complexion.

A perplexing problem presents itself at the very outset : Conscious-
are we justified in speaking of Greek law? Does such Deseo,
a thing exist? In other words, can Greek law be treated unity.
as a unity in spite of the fact that there were more than
a hundred independent cities, each with its own laws?
Had we not better speak of Athenian, Lakedaimonian,
Kretan, Boiotian, Korinthian law? The contrast between
centralized Roman jurisdiction and the autonomous law-
building commonwealths of Hellas seems to involve the
hopeless task of inquiring into countless local varieties of
jurisprudence. No very wide acquaintance with the
material is needed, however, in order to perceive that, in
a general sense, there is good reason to treat of Greek law
as such, and to analyse the contents of this great unity.
The Greeks themselves were conscious of a number of
institutions and customs which were peculiar to them and
bound them together in contrast with the barbarians.

When citizens of divers Greek states met abroad, and
were obliged to stand together against foreigners, they
established common legal arrangements without difficulty ;
consider, for instance, the evidence from Naukratis in
Lower Egypt. We are told that in the seventh century B.c¢.
members of many different Greek States recognized and
appreciated common ties and common institutions.

Naukratis was originally a Milesian colony,! founded
about 650 B.c.; it was reconstituted in 570 B.c. by Amasis,
who, as Herodotos tells us, was a “philhellene,” and gave
the town to the Greeks for their use as a trading dépét.?
The site contained a sanctuary dedicated to “the Gods of


1 §rraso XVII, p. 801.
2 D. G. HoGarRTH, Journal of Hellenic Studies XXV, “ Navkratis”,
pp. 105 ff; H. Prinz in Klio, Suppl. VII (Funde aus Naukratis).


ee


The “‘com-
mon law”
of Greece.


4 JURISPRUDENCE OF THE GREEK CITY


the Hellenes” as well as temples of individual deities, such
as Aphrodite, Artemis, and others. One building, called
the Hellenion, was the common sanctuary of nine Greek
cities, both Ionian and Dorian ; their names are given by
Herodotos, who also informs us that these nine cities
elected the overseers of the mart.1 There were also sanc-
tuaries of Apollo, Hera, and Zeus belonging respectively to
the Milesians, Samians, and Aiginetans. Judging by the
types of pottery found on the spot, it is probable that the
Greek settlement was in existence in the seventh century,
but the finds from the Hellenion are less archaic, and the
evidence goes to show that this was built when the town
was re-settled by Amasis in 570 B.c. The development of
this colony is a striking instance of the common action of
Greeks of different races and cities in the early period in
regard to religious, commercial, and legal custom.

In the fifth century B.c. the numerous treaty-arrange-
ments as to reciprocity in the administration of justice
(cvpBoAa), and the levelling practice of Athenian courts
during the sway of the first Athenian League, did much to
produce uniformity of legal procedure and of substantive
law in the Hellenic world. The Athenians were by no
means solely responsible for the growth of a common
system. In the fourth century we find that as regards
contracts and commercial relations the Greeks came to look
upon the laws of the various cities as fundamentally similar,
so that Demosthenes could say: “ Have we not all the same
laws and the same justice as regards commercial cases?”?
Isokrates’ Aiginetic speech deals with a case of disputed
succession, and shows that the law of three separate States


1 Herovotos II, 178 qidedAnv S€ yevdpevos 6 "Apaois . . . Toior
amixvevpevorot és Alyuntov éOwxe Navxpatiw modu evorxnoat’ rotor dé ji)
Bovdropevorot adtav oikéetv, adtov dé vavtiAhopévoicr, ES@Ke Ywpous eudpv=
cac$at Bwopors kai repévea Gcoiot.: Td pev vey péeyiotov a’T@y Tépevos, Kal
dvopaordraroy edoy Kal xpnoioratoy, KaXevpevoy dé “EAAnuov, alde modtEs
eiat ai dpupeva Kowy* ‘lovev pev Xios kal Téws Kal Poxata kat KAafopevat’
Awptéwy dé ‘Pddos Kai Kvidos kat “AXtkapynoods kal aondts* Alodewy Sé 7)
MuriAnvaioy pouvn. ToUT@y pev €ote TOUTO TO Tépevos, Kal mpoordras Tov
€uropiov atta ai médes elow ai mapéxovoa’ doa dé GANat wodS peta-
motevvrat, ovdev ode peredy peraroeivtat. xwpis dé, Alywhrat emi éwvtay
iSpioavro répevos Ards, kat GAAo Saysor “Hpys kat Midrnoroe ’ArdAdovos.
Cf. THuK. IV, 97.

* Dem. XXXV, c. 45 odx dracw jpiv of abrot vdpor yeypappévor eioi
Kal TO abrd Sikatoy mepi ray eyroptkav Bikar ;


1; INTRODUCTION 5


was substantially identical in this connexion. A native of
Siphnos in Keos, dying without issue, had adopted as his
heir a fellow-countryman whom he had known all his life.
Both men were residents at Aigina, and the trial took
place in the court there. The will was disputed by a party
belonging to a third city (unnamed). It was assumed that
the law as to wills was identical in all three places.!

In the Hellenistic period initiated by the conquests
of Alexander the common institutions and doctrines of
Greek Jaw form a kind of “xo.v7” in keeping with the
common Greek language of the period.?, The documents
which give us an insight into this process are the
inscriptions of Asia Minor and the Egyptian papyri. It
is out of the question for us to go into details in this
respect, but I should like to cite as an example the
deeree of Antigonos which directs the inhabitants of Teos
to remodel their law on the pattern of a neighbouring
State.® Such a procedure could only be adopted in the case
of institutions very similar in their essence. Another
example may be taken from Egypt: the recently discovered
collection of juridical notes prepared for an Alexandrian
lawyer of the second century B.c. contains among other
things a textual quotation from the municipal law of
Alexandria as to the rights and duties of neighbouring
owners of land. The law in question is borrowed literally
from one of the &£oves of Solon.*

The directing fact in the formation of all the more Common
important varieties of Greek law was the existence of the Principles:
small, closely-united City-State, and this fundamental con-
dition produced similar results in Ionic as well as in Doric
and Aiolic surroundings, in the Peloponnesos and in Attika

ISOKRATES (XIX), §§ 12-15. § 13 xara rovrovi Tov vOpoV, ... viv


pe emouoato Opasidoxos, moANiTHY fey avTov Kal pirov ¢ évra, yeyovora 8
ovdevos Xeipov prior, mem audevpevov 5 dpoiws avT@ kal teOpap pevor,


@oT ovk 01d’ Orws dy paddov kara TOV yd pov empager, 0 OS... keAevet maidas
elomrotei Oar. AaBe 8n pow kal Tov Keioy VOMGY, ka? ov aiets emohtrevdpea.
ei fev Tolvuy .. . TOUTOLS pEV TOS vopous mVAYTLOUVTO, Tov Oe map avrois kel


pevor obvdicoy etxov, iyrtov a&vov nv Oavpacery array’ viv Sé Kdketvos dpolws
Tols dveyvao pevous KEtTal.
‘ * Dio CHRYSOSTOM, quoted by Mirre1s, Rémisches Privatrecht, |,
1.
> Dirt. Syl.’ 1, 344.
* Dikaiomata, ed. by the Univ. of Halle (Graeca Halensis), pp. 64 ff.


6 JURISPRUDENCE OF THE GREEK CITY


as well as in Sicily or Asia Minor. In spite of the differ-

ences of political organization, the fact made itself felt that
these City-States were welded out of federations of agnatic
clans and that agnatic relationship continued to exert its
influence even when the autonomy of the clans had given
way before the requirements of the city-union. Besides,
apart from certain wilfully backward cities like Sparta,
the Greek world was a world of adventure, migration,
commercial intercourse; the psychology of the race was
marked by definite and ever-recurring traits—by a highly
sensitive, artistic spirit, by eager exploration both on the
theoretical and on the practical side, by a sense of harmony
and measure. Starting from common family arrangements,
the various cities carried out the process of law-making on
analogous lines. When Hermione in Euripides’ play wishes
to sting her rival Andromache to the quick, she opposes
the purity of Greek monogamy to the disgusting habits of
barbarians accustomed to unions between the nearest rela-
tions.1 “Such is the whole of the barbarian race; father
cohabits with daughter, son with mother, sister with
brother; the nearest and dearest die at one another's
hands, and law in no wise keeps them from these crimes.
Bring not these practices among us; for it is not right that
one man should control two women; but having due regard
for one marriage tie they are content,—unless one consents
to an evil life.” The connexion between family law and
family religion, the efforts to keep up the material house-
holds centred around ancestral cults, the peculiar value of
adoption, the treatment of the heiress as a link in the
transmission of family property to the next of kin,? the
conception of the kAjpos as the normal allotment of a citi-
zen family, the restrictions imposed on testamentary power


1 EURIPIDES, Andromache, 173 ff. :


TOLOUTOY Tay TO BapBapov yevos"
marnp Te Ovyarpi mais re pnrpl plyverae
Képn T aera, dia Gdvov 8 oi pidraror
Xwpovcr, at ravd’ ovdev e€eipyer vopos”

@ qu) map’ nas elorep™ ovde yap kaddv
dvoiv yovarcoiy avdp’ év’ nvias EXELY,

adn’ eis piay Bhérovres evvaiavy Kumpw
orépyovow, doris pi) Kak@s olkeiv Oédet.


* HERODOTOs, VI, 57.


I; INTRODUCTION 7


in favour of legitimate children—all these features recur
over and over again and evidently go back to an archaic
association of kinsmen common to all Greeks.’ On the
other hand, the humanizing strain of Greek psychology
and the early influence of commercial intercourse make
themselves felt in such constant traits as the weakness of
patria potestas, a feature noticed by Dionysios of Halikar-
nassos in contrast with Roman legal notions. The early
development of the property rights of married women, the
facilities for divorce, the emancipation of sons, the early
disappearance of formalism in contracts, may also be referred
to the humane tendencies of Greek life. On all these
points the rules of the Kretan city of Gortyn are quite as
characteristic as those of Athens, in spite of the fact that
the Doric cities of Krete framed their law without being
influenced in any way from Athens.?

Once the fundamental unity of Greek law has been Racial
recognized, we are, I think, at liberty to notice the more inert
important variations within this comprehensive whole.
Differences of race must have affected legislation as they
have affected dialects, but it would be impossible in the
present state of our knowledge to attempt any general
inferences as to Dorie or Ionic rules beyond such contrasts
in racial character as have been noticed by the Greeks
themselves—the rougher, coarser ways of the Dorians, the
bent of Ionians towards exuberance and a freedom border-
ing sometimes on licence What modern writers have tried
to do in tracing such general characteristics in detail has
not been very convincing. One must not forget that
Argos and Syrakuse were quite as Doric as Sparta, and
yet in government and legal arrangements these cities had
certainly more in common with Miletos or Athens than
with Lakedaimon. The most conspicuous monument of
Doric law, the code of Gortyn, shows features of very pro-
gressive legal thought (e.g. the treatment of daughters as
to succession, the law of divorce, &¢.). Customs as to


1 MiTreis, Rim. Privatr.,1, pp.11f. Cf. e.g. the dispositions of the
law of Gortyn as to the zarpaaxos (I, J. G., 1, xvii §§ 43-48, p. 375),
with the Athenian law as to the émi«Anpos (DAR. et 8. s.v. émikAnpos).

2 See e.g. Law of Gortyn, §§ 9, 14, 20, 31 (I. J. G. pp. 359 ff).


Constitu-
tional
contrasts.


8 JURISPRUDENCE OF THE GREEK CITY


common meals, and the military clubs which gave a peculiar
stamp to Kretan cities as well as to Sparta, were the result
of a life in camp which was not essentially Doric, but was
rather brought about by preparation for war on land, as
was clearly perceived and well expressed by Plato.! Neither
Korinth, nor Syrakuse, nor Argos had anything of the sort.

On the other hand, a promising line of inquiry leads to a
comparison between variations of juridical treatment con-
ditioned by differences of constitutional systems. Demo-
cracies did not shape their law in the same way as
oligarchies, and monarchies or tyrannies were also bound
to influence legal arrangements in a peculiar manner. To
mention one characteristic fact of this kind, in Isokrates’
speech ascribed to Nikokles, King of Salamis in Cyprus, it
is laid down as a consequence of the monarchical principle
that citizens are not allowed to form associations without
the leave of the government: this doctrine runs counter to
the ordinary law of Greek republics, and is evidently a —
consequence of the fact that citizens of Salamis were sub-
jects of a personal ruler, and that monarchs are jealous of
combinations which might gather political importance and
become a menace to their power.? Aristotle has some
interesting remarks as to legislation desirable and actually
obtaining in oligarchies and democracies. In discussing
Spartan institutions he notices the tendency to equalize the
members of the ruling minority in respect of property.
The Lakedaimonian ruling class was composed of 6ésoio1,
meant to be equals in social standing as well as in political
rights. One of the means of securing such equality was to
prohibit the alienation of land. But Aristotle is careful to
add that the Spartan legislators were not consistent in this
respect. They forbade sales, but allowed donations and
bequests. The result was a rapid growth of inequality of


* Laws I, 638a ra évocirid hapev Kai ta yupvdowa mpds Tov médEpov
eLevpnoOa to vopobern; Nui.

* IsOKRATEs III, 54, p. 38ab:

‘“‘Do not form clubs and associations without my sanction; for com-
binations of this kind may be profitable in other kinds of States, but
in monarchies they are dangerous. Keep yourselves not only from
crimes, but from practices of this kind, as to which it is inevitable


_ that suspicion should arise.”


I: INTRODUCTION 9


fortunes, and more especially the concentration of wealth
in land through marriages.’

Those observations of the defects and inconsistencies of
the Spartan legal system lead on to a scheme of legislation
on property recommended to oligarchies, if they want to
maintain the rule of a minority.”

Plato’s well-known legislative plan in the Laws is dictated
by similar considerations. In this case an aristocracy,
a government of specially educated citizens, is aimed at.
The corner-stone of the system is the formation of 5,040
indivisible and inalienable shares or holdings.* The pre-
scriptions of Aristotle and Plato were not followed to the
letter in any one State, but in Sparta and elsewhere drastic
measures were occasionally taken to preserve or to renew
compulsory equality between holdings: witness the reforms
in the reigns of Agis III and Kleomenes III, when attempts
were made to re-enact the legendary distribution of hold-
ings by Lykurgos.

Democracy had a natural bent towards loosening the
strictness of social ties, and it inclined therefore to great
indulgence in the treatment of women, children, and slaves.*
In commenting on Kleisthenes’ reform Aristotle explains
how important it was for the establishment of democracy
to break the influence of ancient clans, and to introduce
a reform of social law by reducing the number of private
cults, and transferring their privileges to public bodies.’
There are also many hints as to a policy by which the mass
of the poor citizens, once they have acquired political
sway, subject the rich to exactions of all kinds, and ruin
them by burdening them with Aecrovpyia.® This view is


1 Ar. Pol. 1, p. 1270 a, 19:

“ Although the legislator rightly holds up to shame the sale or pur-
chase of an inheritance, he allows anybody who likes to give and
bequeath it.”

2 Ibid. VII (V), 1809 a, 14 ff.

3 PLaTo, Laws, V, 737e and 740b. -

* NewMAN, Politics of Aristotle, Vol. IV, p. 460. (Pol. 1313b
and 1319 b.)

5 AR. Pol. VIII (VI),p. 1319 b 23 gudai re yap erepar wounréat mAelous
kai Pparpiat, kal ra Tey idiwy iepov cvvaKtéov.

6 Ibid. VII (V), p. 1805a 3 6ré pev ydp, va xapi{wvrat, adicovvres
TOUS yywpipous TvvLTTaGW, i) Tas ovotas avaddaTOUS ToLODYTES 7) TAS TpOTd-
Sous tais Aetroupyiais* éré Sé SuaBaddorres, wv’ Exoot Snpevew Ta KTnpara
Tay tTAOUCiOY.


Limits of
inquiry.


10 JURISPRUDENCE OF THE GREEK CITY


expressed in a blunt and cynical way in the oligarchic
pamphlet on the Athenian constitution ascribed to Xeno-
phon.! °

In describing the way in which legal systems arise in
the course of European development, our aim ought to be
to strike averages and to discover the balance of forces,
not to trace the innumerable fluctuations of the growth
and decay of actual laws. The Jatter task belongs to legal
history, while historical jurisprudence has to deal with the
relation between the legal rules and the institutions of an
epoch in their doctrinal connexion. This means that we
shall have to concentrate on certain periods and abstain
from an attempt to account for all details. We are not
concerned either with the tribal beginnings of Greek law,
or with its exuberant growth in Hellenistic times, although
now and then a principle established in the fifth and fourth
centuries B.C. may be well illustrated from late inscriptions
or papyri. But we must renounce all systematic exposition
of the complex legal currents of Hellenistic civilization, and
as for the institutions of ancient Greece, they have already
been referred to on some occasions in the volume on Tribal
Law.” It is the inscriptions, the speeches, the historical and
philosophical writings of the sixth, fifth, and fourth cen-
turies B.c. that form the main basis for our study.

Another limitation is imposed by the fragmentary state
of our data. The materials bearing on Athenian legal
institutions are much more copious than the evidence from

: [Xen.] Resp. Ath., i 3 and 4 émeira érdca pév rornpiay pépovor
Tey apxar, xpnorat oboat kal yu) xpnorai kivduvoy tw One 4 aravtt, TOUT@Y
pev T@Y apyov ovdey Seirae 6 Sijpos perewwat (otre trav oTparnyiav KAnp@
otovrat ahiat xpnvat peretvat obre Tov immapxtav)" yeyvorker yap é Sjpos
Ore trAEio apeheirat € EV T@ [LN adros dpxew Tavras Tas dpxds, adn’ €ay Tous
Suvarwrarous a apxew" oroca o elo dpxat pur Bopopias € évexa kal @pedelas
eis TOV oikor, ravtas Cnret 6 Sjpos apxew. émeira dé, 5 ene Gavpafovow
Ort mavTaxov mhéov vépovot Trois movnpots kat mévnoe Kat Snportkois 7 7) Tots
XpPNTTOIS, ev a’T@ TOUT pavowvrat Thy Snpoxpariav Siaod Corres. of pev yap
mevytes kat of Snpdrat kal of xeipous eb mparrovres, Kal mohQot oi Towovror
yeyropevor THY Snpoxpariav av€ovot" eav dé mpaTT@ow oi mAOvoLO Kal of
Xpnoroi, toyupov rb évavriov opiouw avtois kabtoracw of Snporikot.

It was by tracing the connexion between constitutions and ordinary
laws that Montesquieu came to plan his famous Esprit des Lois.
Ancient materials, sometimes misunderstood and sometimes analysed
with considerable acumen, served to a great extent as the basis for his


generalizations.
* Historical Jurisprudence, Vol. 1, pp. 248, 308, 326, etc.


I: INTRODUCTION at


all other cities of the Greek world taken together. There-
fore every attempt to state Greek juridical doctrines is
bound to assume an Athenian colouring. If we had pos-
‘sessed an approximately equal number of ascertained facts
in respect of the laws of Sparta, Argos, Thebes, Korinth, we
might have been able perhaps to notice more or less fully
the interesting variations brought in by the difference of
race and the contrasts of political organization. As it
happens, nothing complete can be achieved with the help
of the materials at hand, and although peculiarities of the
law of Gortyn, or of the laws of Ionian cities, will be noticed
whenever possible, it is the common law of Greece, the
ko.vy of the classical period, that will have to be reconsti-
tuted as far as possible by the help chiefly of Athenian
materials.

The Greeks did not allow their law to lapse into abstruse
technicality and to become a tool of professional jurists.
Greek law in its application was meant to be a frame for
public opinion. In Athens, at any rate, the remarkable
‘experiment was made of handing over the administration
of justice and the application of legal rules to batches of
201, 401, 1,001 jurors. The principle on which heliasts
were called to decide cases was the same as that which
has made the institution of the jury the usual device
for deciding questions of fact in modern criminal pro-
cedure. It is the view that justice should be adminis-
tered to the members of a community in accordance with
the standards of morality and common sense prevailing in
this community. But the Greeks went much further than
we do, and entrusted to their many-headed juries not
only questions of fact and responsibility, but questions
of Jaw which affected the distribution and enforcement of
rights. It is most instructive to watch the results of this
experiment on a large scale. Opinions differed among the
experimenters themselves. We need not lay much stress on
the contemptuous estimate of Plato, for he condemns all the
democratic institutions of Athens, and yet Athenian demo-
cracy had formed the background for the greatest achieve-
ments of Greek genius. The extant speeches of pleaders
indeed show that the experiment led to a somewhat


Public
opinion.


The polis.


12 JURISPRUDENCE OF THE GREEK CITY


capricious application of the law, opened the door for senti-
mentalism, prejudice, and sophistry.!. The heliasts were
often circumvented, “ bamboozled” by crafty pleaders, as
Wyse, one of our authorities on the subject, has irreverently
expressed it.2 But, on the whole, I confess that the wonder
seems to be not that the heliasts should have been some-
times led astray or that they proved unable to analyse
doctrine in the same way as jthis was done by Roman
jurists, but rather that they should have grappled with
their task as well as they did. These large tribunals were
admittedly free from corruption, and, what is more, they
were well able to appreciate the acute dialectics of Isaios
or the refined literary skill of Hypereides. Apart from
that, although learned jurisprudence in the sense of the
Romans could not arise on such soil, the courts succeeded
in treating problems of property, possession, obligation,
association, etc., in the light of advanced notions of justice,
fairness, and social expediency. This explains why Greek
legal rules, instead of disappearing before the more strict
and technical doctrines of Roman jurists, came to modify
the latter in many ways: the more we study Roman Law,
the larger is the share we have to assign to the influence of
Greek custom and Greek legislation.


2. The Social Type.


In considering the Greek polis and its institutions four
features appear to be of special importance from the outset.

1. The Greeks recognized a close analogy between the
organization of the State and the organism of the individual
human being. They thought that the two elements of body
and mind, the former guided and governed by the latter,
had a parallel in two constitutive elements of the State, the
rulers and the ruled. As Aristotle puts it in the Politics:


; Cf. IsOK RATES, XVIII, 9; 10:2 . os moa trapa yrouny €v TOIs bixa-
oTnpiots amroBatve, Kal Ott TUYN Paes i T@ Oikaio Kpiverat ra map upiv.
And LYKURGOS, in Leokr. is 11,12 of. . . rreioroe ray eis opas elovdyra@v
mavT@y drom@rarov mova" Y yap ovpSoudevovary évrav0a mept Tov KOLV@Y
mpayparev, ) Katyyopovat kat SiaBadAovor mayra pHadXoyv jj i) Trept ob pednere
Thy Wipor Pepe... routay de airvoe tpeis €oré, & avdpes* thy yap
efovoiay ravtny SeSaxare trois evOad’ eiorovow.


? WYSE, Speeches of Isaeus, p. 483.


{: INTRODUCTION 13


“he who can foresee with his mind is by nature intended
to be lord and master, and he who can work with his body
is a subject, and by nature a servant.” !

2. The second point to notice is the restriction in size of
the Greek State; in contrast with the modern State the
moAts may be described as a political club, endowed with
powers of government and legislation, and requiring a close
connexion in thought and action between all its members.
Aristotle in the Ethics compares the number constituting
a circle of friendship with that of a city, saying that there
must be a definite limit: “for a city could not consist either
of ten persons or of a hundred thousand.”* And again in
the Politics: “the most natural limit of the population of
a State is said to be the largest number which suffices for
the purposes of life, and can be easily surveyed.” *

3. The political association practised in the Greek States
may be regarded as the very opposite of the restricted
State organization recommended by modern individualists.
In order to discover anything analogous to the laissez-faire
doctrine one would have to go down in Greek political
development to the views of Epicurus, suggested by the
decay of the Hellenic polity.* In the classical period the
State was not conceived as a kind of necessary evil to be
tolerated for the sake of order and security. On the con-
trary, the Greeks attributed a positive aim to the State;
it exists not merely to facilitate association, but to shape
it: to help reasonable and strong-minded men in the pur-
suit of welfare. This is the proper sphere of the State,
because the task of finding true welfare is out of the range


1 Pol. I, 1252a 31 7d... duvdpevoy ry Stavoia mpoopay apxov hicer
kai Seandfov dice, To dé Suvdyevoy TO THpate Tava Totety apxopevoy Kal
dice Sovrdov. Cf. ibid. I, 1254a; III, 1287a; IV (VIL), 1332 b.

2 Eth. Nik. 1X, 1170 b €ore re perpov kai didrixod mAnOovs, Gomep rddcas"
ore yip ék déka avOporey yevoir ay modus, ovr’ ex déxa pupiddwy Ere wddts
€otiv.

3 Pol. IV (VII), 1326 b 23 odrés eort médXews Gpos apicros, 7 peyiaTn Tod
mAnOous vrepBorn mpos aitapkeav (ons evovvorros. We know from the
statement of Philochoros (Schol. in Aristoph. Vesp. v. 718) that in
445 B.c. the number of citizens of Athens was reduced from 21,000
to ao 15,000. Cf. FRAENKEL, Die attische Geschworenengerichte,

p. 13 ff.
ie Max WuwnpDt, Geschichte der griechischen Ethik, II, pp. 195f. Cf.
ee Outlines of the History of Greek Philosophy (Eng. trans. 1901),
pp. 266 f.


The
pursuit of
welfare.


14 JURISPRUDENCE OF THE GREEK CITY


of individual effort, but within the range and power of
a political association. The State exists od pévoy rod ¢hv
éveka, GAA TOD ev (Av.

But what is meant by ‘‘ welfare”? How did the Greeks
conceive a “ good life” (ed ¢jv)? Without going into the
details of philosophical doctrines on this subject, let us con-
sider some of the common interpretations which were given
of the notion of welfare. In the following passage of his


Rhetoric! Aristotle collects some of the current definitions |


of evdaipovia: éotm dh evdaipovia edmpagia per’ aper7s,
7 avrdpkeca (wns, 7 6 Bios 6 per’ dogadreias Adioros, 7
evOnvia KTnuadTov Kal cwpdrov pera duvdpews pvdrAaKTIKTS
TE Kal TPAKTLKHS TOUT@Y’ aXEddY yap TOUTwY Ev 7) Trew THY
evdatpoviay duodroyotcy elvat drravres. In point of interest
these definitions may be examined in inverted order. The
thought expressed in the words Bios per’ dogadeias AdtoTos
presents a kind of naive Epicurean view which does not
require very close examination. Nor again does the last.
More important are the other two. The second definition
summarizes in two words a principle which is insisted on
from the very beginning of Aristotle’s Politics to the end,
namely that the aim of society is to enable men to be self-
sufficient. .Again, welfare is said to consist in “ well-
doing combined with virtue.’ Virtue in the abstract is not
sufficient : it must be accompanied by evmpaégia, virtue in
action. This is characteristic of popular ideals in Greece.
The conception of active virtue is fundamental in the
idealistic philosophy of the fourth century. Aristotle
refers to it several times; in the Poldtics he puts it for
example in the following way: “happiness is . . . a realiza-
tion and perfect practice of virtue”, evda:povia ... dperns
évépyera kal xphaois Tis TéAELOS.”

1 Ar. Rhet., I, 5. 8, p. 1360b. “Take Happiness to be either well-
doing, through the exercise of virtue or self-sufficiency of life; or
that existence which combines safety with pleasure ; or a flourishing
state of wealth and health, with the power of guarding and producing
it; for it may be said that all men allow Happiness to be one or more
of these things.” Cf. Pol. IV (VII), p. 1825 b 14 aan’ ei... rh evdat-
poviay evmpayiav Oeréoy, kai Kow7 maons modews dy ein Kai Ka’ Exacrov
diptoros Bios 6 mpaxrikés.

® Pol. IV (VII), 1328 a 38; cf. 1382a 9; cf. PLato, Republic, VII,
p. 540. A kindred notion is expressed by Thukydides in the famous


sentence: didoxadovper re yap per’ edredeias kal Prrocopovpev divev padakias,


I: INTRODUCTION 15


As it was on these lines that the State aimed at pro-
viding for the attainment of welfare, the initial problem
clearly was to decide what kinds of things it could actually
guarantee. Of course the State could not promise that it
would achieve an absolutely favourable result: however
careful the organization may be, human life is surrounded
with possibilities favourable or unfavourable, as the case
may be, which may upset all calculations by the impact
of blind forces of nature. What can be attempted is
similar to the activity of mariners, who, though unable
to eliminate rocks and bad weather, try to use the winds
and to overcome dangers by courage and skilful manage-
ment. Aristotle holds fast to the conclusion that in spite
of the element of chance in human affairs, it is possible
to direct political life in such a way that wise and vir-
tuous men may reasonably expect the maximum of human
happiness.!. “He who would duly inquire about the best
form of a State ought first to determine which is the most
eligible life; while this remains uncertain the best form of
the State must also be uncertain; for in the natural order
of things, those may be expected to lead the best life who
are governed in the best manner of which their circum-
stances admit.” To this end the individual must endeavour
to combine the four cardinal virtues—courage, justice,
moderation, and wisdom.

4, The practical question remains: What means are to be Educa
employed to construct the ship in such a way that it may ot ig
provide the desired help for withstanding peril? The utmost
care must be taken in regard to the component parts. The
individual is a component part of the whole, and therefore the
direct action of the State upon the individual in Greece was
much greater than that contemplated in any modern society.

In the case of the military socialism of Sparta this is
obvious; in Athens there was of course a good deal of
room for individual development, as is insisted upon, for


1 Ar, Pol. IV (VII), p. 1823 a 14 dvdyxn 81) rov peddovta epi adrns
monoacOa Tv mpoonkovoay oxeyry dwopicacba mparoy ris aiperwratos
Bios. adndrov yap dvros rovrou Kal thy dpiotny avaykaioy adndov eivat
ToNTelay’ Apiora yap mpatTew mpoonker TOS Apiota TroALTEVOpEVOUS EK TOV
vrapxévT@v avrois, ay un TL ylyynrat mapddoyor.


16 JURISPRUDENCE OF THE GREEK CITY


instance, in Thukydides’ account of the Funeral Oration
of Perikles. In fact, according to Aristotle, democracy
tended generally towards the emancipation of the indi-
vidual: “the basis of a democratic state is liberty”, he
says, and liberty with the sense of doing what one likes
(rws av BovAnrai tis)1; but he feels that this tendency
is a dangerous one, “for where absolute freedom is allowed
there is nothing to restrain the evil which is inherent in every
man.”? As a matter of fact Aristotle mentions a number
of measures contemplated or adopted in democratic com-
munities for the purpose of regulating property and its uses.

In any case, from the point of view of present-day
individualists, Greek citizens were subject to frequent
interference by the City. The State was an educational
institution, and it was its duty to take the citizens at as
early an age as possible and to keep them under the
beneficial influence of laws throughout life. Thus in the
Ethics Aristotle says: “the factors which tend to produce
virtue in general are those regulations which are prescribed
with reference to the education of man as a citizen.”* A
socialistic point of view is expressed with exaggeration by
Plato in the Laws: “O my friends, we will say to them,
hard is it for you, who are creatures of a day, to know
what is yours,—hard, too, to know yourselves, as the
Delphic oracle says, at this hour. Now I, as the legislator,
regard you and your possessions, not as belonging to your-
selves, but as belonging to your whole family, both past
and future, and yet more do I regard both family and
possessions as belonging to the State.”* Being creatures
of a moment, we cannot profess to understand what we


: sf (VI) 1817a 40. Cf. ZimmMEeRN, The Greek Commonwealth,
pp- :

2 Ib. 1318 b 39 7 n yap e§ougia Tou mpdarrew 6 te dy eG€dn Tis ov Svvara
vAdrre 7 €v Exdot@ TV avOpararv paddov.

: Eth. Nik. V, 2, i 1130 b 25 ra TrounTeKi THs dAns aperns €oTt TOV
vopipwy doa peraneeerieds Trepi madelay Ty mpos TO kowvov. Cf. POHLMANN,
oe tsa fe der sozialen Frage und der Sozialismus in der antiken Welt, L

pp

* Laws, XI, 923 a 0 iro, pooper, kat drexvas en pepor, xademdoy
opiy éoru ylyvookew ra iperep’ avta@v xpipara Kat mpés xe bpas avrovs,
domep kal TO Tis Tlvdias ypdppa ppater, Ta viv. éyoy’ oov vouobérns dv
ob" u vpas pay avtay eivar riOnpe ovre THY ovgiay TauTnY, vupmavros de Tov
yévous ipar TOU TE eumpoobev kal Tob émeira €vopeévou, Kal €re paddoy ris
Toews eivat Té TE yevos Tay Kal THY OvCtaY,


I; INTRODUCTION 17


are, nor what belongs to us, nor what our real function
is for ourselves and for the State.

Such were the aims of the Greek State—enunciated
sometimes in a moderate and sometimes in an exaggerated
manner. In spite of the well-known contrasts in life and
character between Sparta and Athens, the philosophers
assumed a fundamental similarity between them as regards
the educational task of the State. As Aristotle putit, although
the conceptions of Sparta may be narrow, the way in which
they are brought to bear upon the individual should serve
as a model for all States. The ideal of social existence is
attained when every man lives as an equal of his fellow-
citizens, an duotos, and is thoroughly imbued with devotion
to the corporate life of the city.' Commonplace notions in
this respect were formulated, e.g. by Isokrates, an orator
not conspicuous for originality and power, but a character-
istic representative of public opinion in his time. In his
Areiopageitikos he declares that those who have means
should be taught horsemanship, athletics, and philosophy
in order to be able to live the higher life.”


1 Cf. WILAMOWITZ-MOELLENDORFF, in HINNEBERG, Aultus der
Gegenwart, II, 4, 1, pp. 114 f.

2 IsOKRATES, VII, 45 rovs d€ Blov ixavov Kexrnwéevous mept TE THY
immexny Kat Ta ‘yupvaotia Kal Ta KUynyéota Kal Ty Pirocopiay nvayxacay
dtarpiBerv, dpavres ek ToUTwY Tors pev Stadepovras yryvopevous, tous de Ta
mEloT@Y KAKO dre XOMEVoUS.


2281.2 Cc


Defini-
tions of
law.


CHAPTER II
THE CONCEPT OF LAW


1, Popular notions.


THE precepts concerning a welfare achieved by means
of civic virtue are, of course, all counsels of perfection.
In their bearing on juridical issues they culminate in the
notion of justice. The abstract qualities of courage and
wisdom cannot be directly governed by law, but justice
(Stkatoctvn) is a conception which is of the utmost im-
portance in the whole Greek theory of law, and leads
to the particular domain of véyuos which it is our purpose
to investigate.

In order to determine the nature of vémos let us again
notice some popular definitions which will serve as a guide.
In the Digest (I. 3. 2) we find a passage which has been
taken over by the Romans in the original Greek—it comes
from the first speech of Demosthenes against Aristogeiton.'

Aristogeiton is treated by Demosthenes as a typical law-
breaker, and the speaker lays stress on the idea that it
is only in accordance with the established laws that healthy
social life is possible. The concrete points mentioned are:
that law is sacred in its origin, being a gift of the gods;
that it is instituted by wise men; that its function is to
redress and correct mistakes and failures, whether they
be the result of deliberate intention or of negligence ; and
finally that it is a compact (cvvO4xn) entered into by
the members of the city. These attributes are clearly
set forth, and indicate the direction which the Greek
mind took in considering the social functions of law.

1 Dem. XXV, § 16, p. 774. The original text has been remodelled
slightly by Tribonian’s commission. oi d€ véuor rd Sikatoy Kai Td Kadov


kat TO cuphépoy Bovdrovrat, kat todto (nrovot, Kai eredav evtpeOn, Kowvdv
roito mpdorayp amedeiyOn, macw tooy Kal dpotoy, Kat’ rovr’ €oTe vdpos.
ny mavras tei Jer Bat mpoonker bia Todd, kal pariod ore mwas eat vopos
evpnpa pev kai d@poy Bear, Sdéypa 8 avOparav Ppovipwv, éravdpbapa Se
TOY éxovoiwy Kal dxovoiay duaprnudtav, médews S€ auvOnkn Kown, Kab’ hv
mao mpoonke (hv Tois ev TH wOAe. (Text of Butcher's ed., 8.C_B.O.)


=e


Il: THE CONCEPT OF LAW 19


These general expressions received particular meaning
in the popular mind, and indicated certain characteristics
which were far from being commonplace. They are
expressed in one or two typical definitions. Aristotle,
in the Rhetoric, thus defines d:katocdvyn: Eari dé Sikatocvyn
pev adpern Ou’ hy Ta adT@Y ExacTOL EXOUGL, Kai WS 6 Vépos,adiKia
dé du’ iv ra adAOTpLa, ovx ws 6 vopos.1 The characteristic
point here is that positive legality is introduced as a sub-
stantive element of justice. It is not sufficient to accept
the principle of justice in the abstract, because it is vague
and ambiguous; the question arises: “What is my own, and
what is somebody else’s?” and although from the pleader’s
point of view this is a matter of subjective appreciation, the
city is called upon to vive definite and objective directions
in its laws.

There is nothing in the Greek language exactly correspond-
ing to the Latin jus. The Roman term cannot be translated
by vépos, which is mainly used for statutory law—lex. Nor
is 7d O¢katov an equivalent, for it signifies “the just,” and is
so employed, for instance, by Cicero, who does not even
attempt to translate the term. These phraseological pecu-
liarities point to the highly important fact that the Greeks
regarded law primarily as the embodiment of justice—
it is 76 dfkatoy as interpreted by the city. Again, take
such a word as 76 vémipoyv: in its etymological origin it
is connected with voyuifey, and connotes the currently ac-
cepted notions of morality and justice (@ vopigerar).”

All these indications point towards a traditional view Varieties
of law in general as a complex of ethical rules. To the °f "stem
Greek philosophers of the older schools law was a sacred
and fundamental institution. Herakleitos declared that
citizens ought to defend their laws as they defend the
walls of their city —payerOar xpi) Tov djpov brép Tob vépov
ékwomep Te(xeos”; and again, he tells us that the law is

1 Rhet. I, 9, 1866b 9. “Now justice is a virtue, through which
every set of men have their own under the law; injustice is a vice,
through which men have —not under the law—what is not their own.”
(Cf. Jebb, p. 37.)

2 See article by WILAMOWITZ-MOELLENDORFF in Zum diltesten


Strafrecht der Kulturvilker, p. 22, ed. K. Brnpin@, Leipzig, 1905.


a DIELs, Fragmente der Vorsokratiker, 1, 3, p. 86, fr.44. ByWaATER,
. 100.


c2


20 JURISPRUDENCE OF THE GREEK CITY


a divine aire ak yap mdvres of advOpérresor
vopor wd évds tod Oefov.! It is evident, however, that
there is a certain contradiction between these two asser-
tions. Is it possible to claim a divine origin for law and
at the same time to localize it within the walls of a
particular city? The force of this objection was brought
home to the Greeks by their experiences in the discovery
of varied customs and legal rules. It is out of the question
to think of Greek cities as if they were isolated: they were
self-sufficient to some extent, but not isolated. A German
economist, von Tiihnen, has written about what he calls
the “isolated State,” and has drawn many deductions from
a consideration of the State as an isolated economic unit
of social organization. It is impossible to regard the Greek
States in this way; they were inextricably bound up with
each other, and the traveller had only to cross some arm of
the sea to find himself among barbarians whose institutions
were very different from those of his own home.

This is one of the starting-points in the consideration of
Greek social institutions. We cannot understand the
Sophists or Plato without taking into account that they
lived at the close of an age of discovery. Travellers from
Greece were penetrating into Persia, Italy, Gaul, Africa.
The book which best represents this spirit of discovery and
curiosity is the work of Herodotos. His history is in
a sense a general survey of the Mirabilia Mundi. It is
interesting to note how the comparative view of law asserts
itself in his narrative. He realizes that the customs of
different countries exhibit remarkable differences, and that
it is impossible to apply the same standards to all. Take
a curious tale in the third book of his history.2 Certain
Greeks were being entertained by King Dareios at a ban-
quet, and Dareios asked them for what price they would eat
the bodies of their dead parents. They repudiated the
suggestion with horror. The king then called up men
from an Indian tribe who happened to be at the court at

' Ibid. p. 100, Fr. 114, BYWATER, Fr: -OLb;. Cf, ISOKRATES


XV, 82 ray pév vdpor emaweicba trois dpxaordrous, rav 8€ Adyar Tods
Katvordarous,

* Heroporos, III, 38. Cf. Gomprrz, Greek Thinkers, trans.
L. Magnus, I, p. "408.


Il: THE CONCEPT OF LAW 21


the same time, and among whom such a custom actually
prevailed. These Indians were asked to say what price
they would take for burning their dead, and they repu-
diated such an idea with as much indignation as the Greeks
had shown in regard to eating human flesh. Herodotos
evidently notes this as an example of how widely peoples
differ in their fundamental notions of morals and right.
In a dialogue ascribed to Plato, and probably written by
some anonymous contemporary of his, there occurs a pas-
sage of some interest in this connexion:! “Whereas for
ourselves human sacrifices are not customary, but are un-
righteous, the Carthaginians do make such sacrifices as
being righteous and customary for them; some even sacri-
ficing their own sons to Kronos... Moreover, you have
probably been told of the customs which we ourselves
practised in former days in connexion with the dead,
slaying victims before the funeral procession started and
sending for women to gather up the bones. And still
earlier generations used even to bury the dead in their
houses. But we ourselves do none of these things.” Thus
the intercourse between cities and some knowledge of com-
parative institutions enabled the Greeks to take up the
comparative point of view in jurisprudence and _ political
science. These national divergences were in themselves
enough to show that law could not be regarded as some-
thing universal and immutable. How then was it possible
to ascribe a divine origin to it? This could evidently apply
only to the process of lawmaking in general, and not to the
particular results in each single case. Perhaps it were
better to say, as Herakleitos had said, that the laws should
be defended as resolutely as the walls of the city.

There was yet another reason for social unrest. The
close of the fifth century was a time of terrible cata-
strophes; all the fundamental notions of men were shaken
and disturbed: throughout Greece parties were in conflict and


PLATO, Minos, 315be eel avrixa np pev ov vopos: €oTtly avOporous
Ovew add’ dydovov, Kapxndonot be Ovovow ws Gowv dy kal YO pu poy avrois,
kal Taira €vioe abray kal Tous avray vieis TO Kpdvm... dotrep kat npas
avrovs otc ui mou kal auros dkov@y oto.s vdpots expapeba po TOU mept Tous
dro8avérras, iepeid Te mpooPirrovres mpo THs exopas Tou vekpou Kal
eyxutiorpias petamepmdpevor oi & ad éxeivov ere mporepot avtov Kat ¢Oamrov
€v TH oikia rovs amoOavdvras’ nueis b€ ToUT@y ovdey TroLodpeV.


Legal con-
ceptions
in the
plays of
Aischylos.


22 JURISPRUDENCE OF THE GREEK CITY


strife prevailed everywhere. The situation was summed
up by Thukydides in his third book (ec, 82) when he said:
“Men believe nothing but that nothing is secure.”

With regard to law—as indeed in all other subjects of
public importance—the evolution of the Greek drama
throws a strong light on the movements of public opinion.
The intense strain of dramatic literature at this period
may be traced to a great extent to the influence of
the tremendous social and political conflicts which were
taking place in actual life. If we-consider the historical
features of this time, we cannot help being forcibly struck
by its dramatic framework and by the irreconcilable con-
trast between its elements. Take, for example, the Sup-
plices. There has been considerable controversy in connexion
with this play. The plot is well known. The Danaids fly
from the sons of Aigyptos because they revolt with horror
from the idea of a marriage with their first cousins. Now
the marriage of first cousins was an every-day occurrence
in Athens, and it is asked as a problem of criticism, how
could an Athenian audience listen with patience to a drama
which is founded upon the idea that a union between
cousins is a form of loathsome incest? The explanation
seems to be that the extant play emphasizes one of the
points of view in the dramatic conflict; that it is part of
a trilogy, and, no doubt, if we had the complete trilogy, we
should see the point of view of the bridegrooms as strongly
represented as that of the brides. This means that Aischy-
los and the Athenians who followed the play with interest
were fully able to appreciate the tragic greatness of con-
flicting opinions, even when they did not coincide with
theirown. Take again the Oresteta: once more Aischylos
puts before us the conflict of views and moral duties. The
central problem of the play cannot be solved without a
disturbance of moral equilibrium; and it is significant that
the poet is not only concerned with the tumult in the soul
of Orestes, but with the fact, emphasized by the Erinyes,
that the most sacred commandment—the filial duty of a
son towards his mother—had been broken. The liberating
crisis comes through the intervention of Apollo and Athena,
who represent a new current in thought and law. As they


II; THE CONCEPT OF LAW 23


recognize the claim of the father to filial piety as being
as great as that of the mother, they open the way to
atonement for the unfortunate man who had to avenge his
father on his own mother. One can hardly doubt that the
legend which forms the subject of the play had been sug-
gested by a conflict between matriarchal and patriarchal
ideas. This does not mean that just before the time of
Aischylos Athens had been living under matriarchal rule ;
but there were many traces of matriarchal customs in early
Greece, and in writing this fifth-century drama the poet
was able to assume that the audience would follow the
thread of folk-lore with understanding and interest. In
process of time dramatic authors concern themselves more
and more with the problems of individual conscience and
political struggle. Sophokles, for instance, dealt primarily
with the problem of fate in relation to the life of
individuals.

The most copious and interesting materials illustrating Contrasts
the fermentation of popular ideas as to law are presented es
by Euripides. He subjects individual rights and ideas to Euripides,
the most searching and unsparing criticism. ‘Two plays
are especially striking in this connexion, the Medeiaw and
the Phoinissar. It can hardly be doubted that in the first
of these plays the principal character is intended to enlist
the sympathy of the audience as against the hypocritical
assertion of a national superiority of Greeks in matters of
law and justice.

The story is well known: Jason wins the love of Medeia,
a barbarian princess, who betrays and deserts her country
and her parents for his sake. She follows him to Korinth,
but there, in the hope of making a good match, he aban-
dons her and woos a Korinthian maiden. The pathos of
Medeia’s position is beautifully rendered by Euripides; in
defending himself against her claims Jason appears in a
very unfavourable light; he tries to turn the tables against
his accuser and to prove that he has in truth conferred
benefits upon her. “But indeed you have received more
than you have granted, something greater than my safety,
as I will tell. In the first place you have come to dwell in
Hellas instead of a barbarian country, and you are learning


24 JURISPRUDENCE OF THE GREEK CITY


to know justice and to live by laws whose sanction is not
force.” There is a pungent irony in the fact that the
betrayer, the faithless man, is made to boast of the national
sense of justice—justice for its own sake, not as an out-
come of force.

In the Phoinissai the scene is laid in the city of Thebes.
After the death of Oidipus the two brothers Eteokles and
Polyneikes are struggling for the throne of Thebes. They
have made a compact which both have sworn to recognize ;
their rights are supposed to be equal, and it is agreed that
they shall rule in turn, the one in odd, the other in even
years. But when Eteokles’ year is out, he refuses to sur-
render the throne to his brother, breaks the convention,
and indeed scorns the idea of observing obligations imposed
by morality or law. His mother exhorts him not to persist
in this attitude, but to yield to the commands of justice
(S:ikatoovrvn) ; he refuses, saying: “If for all alike the same
thing were both noble and wise, there would not have been
fierce strife among mankind; but as things are, there is no
likeness or equality for men except in name; it is other-
wise in fact.”? And again, “If one is bound to act unjustly,
it is most noble to do so for the sake of power; as regards
other things one ought to act righteously.” ®

This is an emphatic repudiation of legal obligation;
agreements, according to this view, are mere words; they
do not express any realities: this is the key to the dramatic
conflict and its tragic solution. The quest for something
enduring and fundamental could not, however, be sup-


} Medeia 534 ff. :


pei{w ye pevroe THs euns owrnplas
eithnpas 7) Sédwxas, os eyo ppdoo.
mp@tov pev “EAAdS dvti BapBapov xbovds
yatav xatotkeis Kat dixny éemioracat
vopots te xpnoOa py mpds ioxvos yap.

* Eur. Phoin. 499 ff. :
ei maot tavtov Kadov épu copdv & dua,
ovk hv av audirexros avOporos épis®
viv 8 of bpooy ovdév ovr’ icov Bporois,
mAnv dvdpaca’ To 8 epyov ovk ear rdde.


° Ibid. 524 f.:


” > -
elmep yap adixeiy xpyn, rupavvidos mépt

LA col ~
kddAtorov adtxeiv, radda 8 evoeBeiv xpeor.


II: THE CONCEPT OF LAW 25


pressed: in spite of perplexing doubts men sought to
justify and explain the binding force of law.

In a well-known passage of Sophokles we find expressed
another view of law as understood by the Greeks. Law
may appear in a sense as a command of nature, as an
absolute obligation distinct from the technical requirements
of the State. Antigone is defending herself against the
charge of having wilfully disobeyed the king’s orders; she
says to King Kreon: “1t was not Zeus that had published
that edict; not such are the laws set among men by the
Justice who dwells with the gods below; nor deemed I that
thy decrees were of such force, that a mortal could override
the unwritten and unfailing statutes of heaven. For their
life is not of to-day or yesterday, but from all time, and no
man knows when they were first put forth.” !


2. The Critical Analysis of the Sophists.


Reference has been made to the Sophistic views presented
in the plays of Euripides: indeed the Sophists devoted
most attention and ingenuity to problems of conduct and
to the criticism of received opinions on which conduct
was based. They were keen to inquire and examine into
everything, and the more they examined the more they
became convinced that absolute notions were groundless.
Plato describes the chaos which resulted from their sub-
versive dialectics: “These, my friends, are the sayings of
clever men... which find a way into the minds of youth.
They are told by them that the highest right is might, and
in this way the young fall into impiety and entertain
the idea that the gods are not such as the law bids them
imagine them; and hence arise contentions—the philoso-
phers inviting them to lead a true life according to nature,


1 SopH., Antigone, 450 ff. :


ov yap Ti por Zevs ny, 6 knpvgas tade,
ovd’ 7 Evvotkos ToY KaTw beady Aixn
totovad év avOp@rorow &purev vopous"
ovbe obévew Togovroy @opny Ta oa
knpuypad’, or aypantra kao pany Gey
vopipa Seven dai Ovnrov v0” trepdpapeiv®
ov ydp TL viv ye xayOes, adn’ dei trore
Cj tavra, xovdeis oidev €& Srov pavyn.


26 JURISPRUDENCE OF THE GREEK CITY


that is, to live as masters of others, and not in legal
subjection to them.” ? :

One cannot help being struck by the double aspect of a
movement which was unquestionably progressive in the
philosophical sense and which at the same time tended to
the dissolution of manners, customs, and laws. Ideas which
constituted an advance in the domain of thought appeared
as a solvent in the social life of the time. The principal
problem examined by the Sophists in regard to jurispru-
dence was how far the basic laws of society can be regarded
as ingrained in the nature of things, and how far they are
merely artificial establishment. The latter view did not
originate with the Sophists themselves, but made its appear-
ance at a much earlier date. In fact its point of departure
inay be found in a political atmosphere which has nothing
to do with the catastrophes of the fifth century. It seems
to me that the contrast between gvois and voyos may be
traced to Demokritos, and was therefore a product of
thought contemporaneous with the Persian War. This
philosopher said: “véu@ yAuKd, véuw mxkpdv, vouw Oeppov,
vouw wwuxpbv, vouw xpon, éreq (v.1. pice) aroua Kal
kevov. * It is not easy to interpret this passage, and
almost impossible to translate it without explanations.
Népos cannot be simply rendered “law”; stress is laid on
its opposition to ére7j (pce) and therefore a connexion
with voyigery seems inevitable. An approximate transla-
tion would be: “Things are [deemed] sweet and bitter,
hot and cold, and have colour by conventional rule; in
reality (or in nature) they are atoms and void.” The
peculiar use of the word véuos in this fragment is
suggested, as it seems to me, by a perception of the
difference between things as they are and things as we take
them to be. But it implies at the same time that our
formal rules also exist as phenomena, in contrast with
gvots.


_ . Laws X, 890.a rair’ eoriv, & hiro, dravra dvdpev copay mapa véois
’ ? bi

avO perros - » « paokdvroy eivat rd Sixardraroy Gre tis dv vixa Bratdpevos*

> la ‘ > ’ ra ‘

d0ev acéBeiai Te avOparois eurimrovat véots, ws odK dvT@y Hedy oious 6 vdpos

mpoordrret diavoeicOa dciv, ordves te Sua Tadta EAxdvtwv mpos Tov Kara
‘ > ‘ , o >» “> , a a os . 4 ,

puow opOov Boy, Os €otw ry dAnOeia kparodvta (hv rev Gddwy Kat pH Sovdev-

ovTa €Tépowwt Kata vdopoy.


* DiELs, Fragmente der Vorsokratiker, 11, 3, p. 60, Fr. 9.


Il: THE CONCEPT OF LAW 27


A: kind of scientific investigation was attempted on this
basis in the school of Anaxagoras. We read about an
interesting work of one of his pupils, Archelaos: édeye
(ApxéAaos) 70 Sikatov elvar Kai TO aicypov od pice: ddA
vone., “He said that right and wrong existed not by nature
but by opinion.” The saying appears in connexion with
a theory of what we should call transformism. Briefly
stated it amounted to this: all things are developed from
indistinct matter and the products of matter. They become
slowly differentiated, and in the process the initial contrast
is that between the warm lower parts and the cold upper
parts of the universe. In the warm lower parts, organisms
arose out of a kind of protoplasm. They gradually shaped
themselves into different forms, and eventually the highest
shape was reached in man himself. The next stage was
the setting up of leaders, laws, and social rules.? This
being so, it is idle to think of any fundamental and per-
manent justice, and Archelaos says this in as many
words. His doctrine may be regarded, in short, as a
development of the idea of Demokritos, and amounts to
the distinction between vopos and dvais. For Archelaos,
law resolves itself into a set of historical rules created by
gradual evolution.

Such a view allies itself naturally with the teaching of Rela-
relativism, which occupied so much place in the philosophy #Vis™.
of the Sophists. In the conflict of ideas, people came to
the conclusion that everything was in a state of flux, and
the first thing to be done in order to arrive at the truth
was to take stock of purely subjective notions. ‘This was
what Protagoras meant when he said: “ Man is the measure
of all things.’ Undoubtedly Protagoras achieved a great
stride in philosophy, and many of his views are still consi-
dered with respect ; but he gave a dangerous instrument to
those who wished to misunderstand and misuse his teaching.
One of the results of the notions which he advanced was


1 DIELS, op. cit., I, p. 410, ir

; Drexs, i p. 412 _Tepl Be ov (ApxeAaos) pnoiy ort Bepparvoperns
THs ys TO ™ p@Tov €v T® KATO pepeEl, Grou 76 Oeppov kat TO Wuxpoy € Epioyero,
dvepaivero td re dAXa (oa moda kat ol ayOperot htt SuexptOnoav
avOparot a dro Tay GdAwy Kali Nyeudvas Kai vopous Kal TEXvas Kal wddeLs Kal
Ta Ga ouveotncap.


28 JURISPRUDENCE OF THE GREEK CITY


that, in one at least of its ramifications, concrete individuals
were substituted for the abstract conception of man as a
psychological unit.1* Gorgias is the chief representative of
this extreme subjectivism. In his philosophy every man
has the right to set up his own standard of truth. Of
course, if this were so, there would be no general and
ultimate truth at all, Logie would have no meaning; and
indeed it came to be slighted in the school of Gorgias.
This particular group of Sophists sought to develop Rhetoric
as a substitute for Logic, and used “suggestion ”—the
év6%un4.a—instead of logical deduction. Too often the object
of such Sophists was simply to make the weaker cause
appear as the stronger, Ta €A\dtTw KpelrTw Troveiv.

Even apart from special pleading, it was not difficult
for ingenious persons to attack many positive institutions
of the Greek commonwealths. For instance, it was not
difficult for Archidamos to show that slavery is no part of
the law of nature; or for Lykophron to show that in the
natural order of things there is no virtue in mere nobility
of birth. It was easy to show that men were not bound to
particular spots on the earth, and therefore if a man should
happen to find himself in disagreement with the laws or
the ideas of his country, he was under no obligation of
loyalty to that country. This is what Hippias of Elis meant
when he called himself a citizen of the world.2? Such
sceptics might have appealed to the authority of Demo-
kritos himself, for it was Demokritos who had said: “ For
the wise man, the whole world lies open.” ®

In this way relativism came to be a political and social
solvent. If then it was impossible to speak of an eternal
or immutable law, how were particular forms of law to be
regarded? The most important discussion of this problem is
to be found in Plato. What was the legal basis of sovereignty
in particular States? The view put forward by Sophists
(as represented by Plato repeatedly) is that force is the
ultuma ratio. In the view of Thrasymachos, as shown in
the Republic, if people would only speak without hypo-


’ Cf. H. RIKKERT, System der Philosophie, I, p. 27.

* Cf. K. HILDENBRAND, Geschichte der Rechtsphilosophie, I, p. 73.

* Diets, II, p. 110, Fr. 247 avdpi copa maca yi Barn’ wuxis yap
dyabns marpis 6 Evpmas Kéopos.


II: THE CONCEPT OF LAW 29


critical pretences, they would say frankly that the law-
givers imposed laws which are really in their own interest.
Law is therefore nothing more or less than a confirmation
of the selfish interests of the rulers. Another view of law
is represented by Glaukon, according to whom law is essen-
tially a combination of the weak against the strong. In
other words it arises not only because the strong wish
to enforce their wills upon the weak, but because the
weak combine in order that the strong shall not have
everything their own way. Kallikles in the Gorgias goes
even further than this. He assumes the existence of a
league of the weak against the strong, but adds that if an
opportunity presents itself, the strong should burst all
bonds and do practically what he likes. “Lust and self-
will and licence, if they can be indulged in with security,
are happiness and virtue.”! This is, of course, a caricature,
but, like all Plato’s caricatures, it is suggested by a vivid
sense of reality.

A papyrus recently discovered in Egypt throws a strong Antiphon
light on the mixture of acute analysis and moral licence Sonktad
which characterizes the Sophistic movement of the period.?
“Justice,” says the writer, “consists in not transgressing
any of the ordinances of the State of which one is a citizen.
A man would therefore exercise justice with most advan-
tage to himself if in the presence of witnesses he held in
esteem the laws, but, in the absence of witnesses, the
precepts of nature. For the precepts of the laws are
adventitious, while those of nature are necessary ; the rules
of the laws are the product of agreement, not of growth,
while those of nature are the product of growth, not of
agreement... Most of what is just according to law stands
in opposition to nature. The law has laid down for the
eyes what they ought and what they ought not to see, for
the ears what they ought and what they ought not to hear,
for the tongue what it ought and what it ought not to say,


y PLaTo, Gorgias, 492 ¢ tpupy Kal dko\agia kal eAevOepia, éay ém-
Kouptay €xn, Toit éativ dpern te kal evdapovia. Cf. NETTLESHIP,
ma hy on the Republic; POHLMANN, Gesch. der sozialen Frage, I,
pp. 557 ff.

? Oxyrhynchus Papyri, XI, 1364. ANTIPHON the Sophist. See
appendix to chapter, p. 42.


Alki-
biades and
Perikles.


30 JURISPRUDENCE OF THE GREEK CITY


for the hands what they ought and what they ought not to
do, for the feet whither they ought and whither they ought
not to go, and for the mind what it ought and what it
ought not to desire... Much of what has been mentioned
would be found to be in opposition to nature; greater pain
is produced by it when less might be forthcoming, or, on
the other hand, less pleasure when more is possible, or
injury when injury might be avoided. Now if those who
adopted such courses as these had any protection from the
laws, whereas those who did not adopt them but opposed
them incurred loss, obedience to the laws would not be
without advantage; but as it happens, legal justice is found
inadequate to protect those who follow legal rules. First
of all it allows the injury of the injured and the aggression
of the aggressor, and besides the fact that it does not
prevent the injured from being injured, nor the aggressor
from making aggression, being held over until punishment
is inflicted, it is no more favourable to the injured than to
the aggressor.” The cynicism of this declaration can
hardly be surpassed.

The bearing of Sophistic theories on political thought may
be illustrated by a story related in the Memorabilia of
Xenophon,! which may possibly be derived from Antisthenes.
Perikles, the great statesman and wise man, is said to have
been questioned by the irreverent youth, Alkibiades. Asked
for his definition of law, Perikles declares it to be “the
command of the mass of the people (7d mAqOos).” What
then is to be said of an oligarchy? If the sovereign power

1 XEN. Mem. I, ii. 42 Idvres yap otro. vopo eiciv, obs rd mdHOos
auvedOov xai Soxiuacay éypae, ppatov, ad re Set orev kai d py... . Eav
S€ py) TO TANOos, GAN’, Gorep Orov Aryapxia €ativ, ddLyou cuvehOdvres ypd-
Woot 6 tt xp roreiv, tadra Ti €ort; Ildvra, pavat, doa dv Td Kparovy THs
modews Bovdevoduevor, & xpr Trorety, ypan, vouos Kadeirat. Kay ripavvos
ody Kpar&v ths médews ypa yn Tois woXiTas & xpp ToLEiv, Kal TadTa vdpos
€ori ; Kal dca ripavvos apxev, pavat, ypadet, kai ravra vépos KaXeirat. Bia
8, avat, kai dvopia ri €otiv, & Tepixhes ; Gp’ odx Stray 6 Kpeitrav rév irre
py meloas, GdAa Biagduevos, dvayxdon moeiy 8 te dv adit@ Soxy ; “Eporye
Boxei, pivac rov Tlepixdéa. Kal 60a dpa tipavvos pr meioas trovs roXiras
avaykafer moetv ypader, avouia éeori; Aoxet po, pavac rov Tepexdéa.
(xra.) Cf. PLATO, Laws, IV, 714cd Tiderar d8yrov, gaciv, rods
vopous ev rH) mOdet éxciorore Td Kparovv. ...”Ap’ ody ote, pagiv, more Sipov
viknoavta, | Tia ToAtTElay GAAny, f Kal TUpavvoy, OnoecOar ExdvTa mpds
ao te mparov vdpous i) TO cupepov eavTa THs dpyns Tod pévew;.. .


> “a x a
Ovxodv kai ds dy raira ra rebévra mapaBdwy, Koacer 6 Bepevos ws adtkorvra ,
~ »
Sixata eivat radr’ érovopdton ;


Ol
i


Il: THE CONCEPT OF LAW 31.


is in the hands of a few, will not their enactments have
the force of law? Perikles admits that they will. What
then if the sovereign power is in the hands of one man
only? Perikles admits that in this case also the command
of the sovereign would have the force of law, although
it be imposed by a tyrant. The cross-examination is
resumed in the reverse order, beginning with an inquiry
as to the imposition of rules by the violence of a tyrant,
and proceeding with the analysis of violence (ia) in oli-
garchies and democracies. Eventually Perikles comes to
the disappointing conclusion that he cannot offer a satis-
factory solution of these embarrassing contradictions!

The difficulty arose, of course, from the fact that States
do not rely in practice on law only, but also on force. But
the converse is also true: they do not rule merely by force,
but also by law. It must be admitted that there is some
other power behind the law, but the problem is: What is
this power? What is the difference between power (76 xpa-
toov) and violence (Bia)? We should answer now that the
distinction cannot lie in the mere mechanical arrangement
of society, but rather in the recognition of certain extra-
legal, moral ties; but it is highly significant that in the
Sophistic discussion reported by Xenophon this conclusion
is not reached, and the problem remains open in a dis-
concerting manner.


3. The Justification of Law.


The Greek world of the fifth century was full of stir and The politi-
ferment. But men naturally could not remain content with Pee ah aby
this confusion, and they addressed themselves to the task of Prota-
finding some way out of it. They attempted, in short, °°”
to justify the existing moral and legal order. After con-
sidering the critical point of view in regard to these
problems we have now to ask: How was positive law
justified as against the doubts and objections of critics
and sceptics ?

After all, people had to make up their minds not only to
solve such problems in practice, but to explain how, in spite
of all the factors making for disintegration, society did
exist and hold together. The life of society continues


32 JURISPRUDENCE OF THE GREEK CITY


in spite of selfishness and conflict, and there must be
some kind of harmony and organization to keep it up.
The attempt to justify positive law and to reconstruct
the ideas of right and duty comes originally from the
same school of searching criticism which had introduced
so many elements of dissolution. This side of its activity
has not been sufficiently noticed, as it seems to me, but
it is interesting in itself and fraught with important
consequences in the course of subsequent development.
It was a Sophist, Protagoras, who initiated a considered
justification of positive law. He was the principal ad-
vocate of the theory of relativism, and it may be said
of him that he was in a truer sense than either Sokrates
or Plato the originator of a definite theory of jurisprudence.
In the dialogue! bearing his name Protagoras is asked
to explain why people live in States and obey the laws, and
why when men are obviously actuated by selfish interests,
they still consent to some kind of social regulation ; he gives
his answer in the form of a myth. His theory is a fiction,
but it is the expression of a psychological truth. He tells
his interlocutors that the first men were quite helpless and
threatened with extermination by wild animals. Prometheus
brought them intelligence in order to protect them against
this danger. They gathered in cities, but it soon became
apparent that intelligence was not sufficient in itself to hold
people together in harmony, because they were all selfish,
and their interests clashed: they began to fight among
themselves instead of fighting the animals. Zeus made a
second attempt to save human kind by sending Hermes to


1 We are met here by a problem of literary criticism : How can we
reconstruct the gg | of Protagoras? Only fragments have come
down in the works of Plato, who was professedly an opponent of his,
and there is therefore considerable difficulty in ascertaining what
Protagoras actually did say. There seems, however, to exist a suffi-
cient foundation for reconstructing his main principles. To begin
with, whatever liberties Plato may have taken with his references,
still he was a great literary artist, and we have no reason to suppose
that he reduced things to a mere parody. He always managed to
make his people live, and represented them as real characters.
Secondly, there is no reason to suppose that Plato disagreed with all
the doctrines which he attributed to Protagoras, and he seems to have
accepted some of his statements. The doctrine analysed in the text
is of this kind, and in any case Plato states it not as a matter of
controversy, but merely as a matter of fact.


——es ee


II: THE CONCEPT OF LAW 33


men with aidés and dikn.1 The word aiddés, which is
sometimes translated “reverence,” seems rather to connote
“sense of shame,” or “conscience.”? In a fragment of
Demokritos we find the verb aideieOa: used in this sense:
“One ought not to feel ashamed (aidetrOar) before others
more than before oneself, nor should one do evil any the
more if no one is likely to know of it than if every one
will; but one should respect (aidetoOar) oneself most and
set before one’s soul as a principle to do nothing unseemly.” 3
There is also a remarkable passage in Plato’s Laws, which
describes the transition from aidés as “sense of shame,”
to dvaicxvvtia (shamelessness). Plato dwells on the de-
plorable results of the abuse of freedom: “Men fancying
that they knew what they did not know, had no longer
any fear (conscience ?), and the absence of conscience begets
shamelessness (avaicyvytia). For what is shamelessness
but the insolent refusal to regard the opinion of one’s
betters by reason of an over-daring sort of liberty ?” 4

In addition to self-consciousness and the conscience pro-
duced by it, man came to possess henceforth the faculty
of judging himself in his relation to others (dé«n). These
might be described as the social instincts which render
possible political union. One of the fundamental ideas
of all philosophy and sociology was thus elaborated: the
affectus socialis, which in later theory was chiefly insisted
on by Grotius in contrast with Hobbes. Protagoras discerned
in this social instinct two elements—aldeés, shame or con-
science (cf. the Biblical narrative of the Fall of Man), and


PoE BATO, Pr ‘otago? ‘as, 322be etnrouy $7 dd poiver Bat kal o@cerbat,
kriCovtes mines" ér ovv aOpoabetev ndikovy aAAndous Gre ovK Exovres Thy
ee ee” TEXYNYs ote mad oxeSavyupevor SuepOeipovro. Zevs ovv deioas

i to yever ROY, HH améAotro may, “Eppny mépmrer dyovta eis dvOparous

@ re kat Sixny, iv’ elev modCw@Y Kdopot TE Kal Seapot Pidias Tvvaywyol.

4 Cf. BuRNET, Nic. Eth. IV, c. 9, p. 200.

3 DIELS, op. cit, p. 114, fr. 264 pee Tt pahdov Tous avOparous aideto Oat
éwurov unde Tt pad)ov eLepydteoOat Kakov, el peAdet pndeis cldjoey, 7 A Cel)
ol maytes dvOperot G\N’ €wurov padiora aideioOat, Kat rovToy vépor TH Wuyn
kabeotavat, date pndev more averirndecov. Cf. PLATO, Laws, IV, 713 e
for a similar use of aidas.

‘ Laws, I, 701Lab auvepeamero de éhevdepia’ apoBo yap eytyvovro os
eiddres, 7) de Aden é dvato xuvriay evérekey’ TO yap THY Tou BeAriovos Sd€av BN
poBeicOa dia Opacos, TOUT avro eat oxedov 7 TovNpa avatcxurtia, dia by
Tivos €devbepias Niay arroreToApnpEevns.


2231-2 D


B4 JURISPRUDENCE OF THE GREEK CITY


dixn, or the capacity for judging the actions of man in
his relations to others.

Pragmat- | How does that agree with the principle homo omniwm

= mensura? In the Theaitetos this question is actually put:
If there is no standard of objective truth—if, in other
words, every man is his own standard of truth, how
can any means be found for men to join together and
to live harmoniously in cities and States? In a striking
passage ' Protagoras’ solution of this difficulty is presented.
It amounts to this: with regard to truth in the abstract,
nobody can speak with absolute certainty, and therefore
no city can say that its laws are better than those of any
other. But while this is undeniable, there is another
definite standard which can be ascertained, namely that
of utility. According to this positive standard, some cities
will achieve success, others arrive at deplorable results.
Thus in practice the consequences may be taken as a
definite and ascertainable standard of reasonable action.
This reads like an early example of pragmatism. The
position, reduced to its simplest elements, is that truth
cannot be discovered, but utility can.

Obvious objections may be advanced against this view.
As a matter of theory, the standard of utility is as diffi-
cult to discover as that of truth. In fact it is much more
difficult to arrive at it. When we are dealing with prob-
lems of truth, we can at least base ourselves upon logical
processes, but when we attempt to discover utility, every
one has the right to ask: in what does this utility consist ?
For whom does it exist? Does it exist for the majority, as
Bentham held, or for the “best people,” as Aristotle held,
or for the superman, as Nietzsche held? And _ besides
all these varying considerations, how is the standard of
utility to be applied to States? For instance, in the
case of the Peloponnesian war, have we to conclude that

* PLATO, Theaitetos, 172ab ovxodv kai mepi modurikOv, KaAa pev Kal
aiaxpa kai Sixata kal Gdika Kal dota kai un, ola dv éxdorn wéds oinbeioa
Ojrat vopipa avtH, tadra Kal eivat tH adnOeia éxdory, Kal év rovToLs pev
ovdev copwrepov obre idimrny idiwrov obre rdw médrews elvar’ ey 8} T@
ouphépovra Eavty f wr cvupépovra ridecbat, evrad6’, etmep mov, ad dpodo-
ynoe cvpBovddy re cuvpBovrov diapépew cai rérews SéEav érépay éxépas


> , “~ ~
re GAnGerav, kai od« ay ravu ToAphoere Pjoat, & dv Ojra wddLs cvppépovra
“- ca 4 a a
nOcioa avr, mavros padXov radra Kal ovvoicey.


Il: THE CONCEPT OF LAW 3d


because Sparta happened to win, her institutions were
necessarily better than those of Athens? Anyhow, the
pragmatic standard of utility was set up by Protagoras
in connexion with his theory of relativism. Each State,
according to him, sets up its own principles of justice
(d6€a THs méAews), and it is in the competition of practical
life that these principles are tried and either approved or
found wanting.

What means could be employed to arrive at practical
results on this basis? Protagoras considered this question
especially in relation to criminal law. The aim of criminal
law, he said, is least of all punishment in the sense of
retribution. What is done cannot be undone; why then add
more evils to those which have already happened? Punish-
ment therefore should be primarily a deterrent, and puni-
tive law is worthless unless it contains some reformatory
element.' Punishment in the scheme of Protagoras is
a measure of social utility. We can discover something
of the same kind in modern theories of penology.

Thus we see that there was an attempt on the part of
a leading Sophist to explain the working of society and the
function of law on the basis of relativism.

Protagoras had laid down that justice is the result sf Sokrates
certain social instincts regulated by each State according to nee sa
Hi ofa TNs
its own standard. This view was partly accepted and mércws.
partly rejected by Sokrates.2 He held that each State


PLATO, Protag. 324 a, b ovdeis yap Koddcet Tous adixouvras mpos TOUT®@
TOV vouv eXov Kai ToUTOU ev eka, ort ndiknoer, 6 ooTls a oorep Onpiov ddoyiotws
Tim@peirac’ 6 b€ pera Aoyou emtxetpav KoAdety ov TOU mapeAndvOdros eveka
adixnparos Tipepeirat—ov yap av 16 ye mpaxOev dyévyrov Gein—adha TOU
péedXovtos xapty, wa pr adds adiknon pyre avtos obTOs punte GAAS 6 TOvTOY
id@y koracbevra,

* In Sokrates’ teaching there are difficulties similar to those
which met us in the case of the Sophists. Our chief information
comes from Plato, who referred to Sokrates as an exponent not only
of the latter’s personal teaching, but of his own views. It is therefore
impossible to distinguish absolutely between the Platonic and the
historic Sokrates; but in spite of this, and of many vexed questions
of detail, it is to be remarked that there are points which can be
ascertained with considerable confidence in this respect. In some
cases the account given by Plato coincides with evidence from other
sources. In the particular case which I am about to consider we are
able to corroborate Plato’s evidence by the statements in Xenophon’s
Memorabilia. Cf. ZELLER, Socrates, Chap. V.


D2


36 JURISPRUDENCE OF THE GREEK CITY


should be autonomous in formulating its principles of law,
but he based this view not only on the suggestion of social
instincts and utility, but also on the requirements of know-
ledge and thought. In Sokrates’ view there is no inherent
opposition between natural justice and what is laid down
by every State as law; in any case the individual is
not called upon to act as an umpire in possible conflicts
between these two elements. This was the cardinal view
which is emphasized in the Krito, and corroborated by the
evidence of Xenophon concerning the facts of the trial and
condemnation of Sokrates. These facts were, substantially,
that when Sokrates had been accused of corrupting the
youth, had been found guilty and condemned to death, an
attempt was made by his friends to rescue him from prison.
It was in connexion with this attempt that Sokrates
said emphatically that the State may require from the
citizen absolute obedience to its positive laws. Sokrates
refused to fly. He did not think it right for a citizen
who disagreed with the government of his native land to
rebel against its positive enactments. The law of the
Commonwealth, he is made to say, is higher than that of
father, mother, or ancestors; the right of the city is im-
measurably greater than any private right.1 What the
individual has obtained as a kind of unearned increment
from the State cannot be balanced by anything else but
absolute submission to the laws of the city.

How then was Sokrates’ own action to be justified? For
it was he above all others who had taught the citizens to
differ from received views. Does his teaching, as repre-
‘sented in the Krito, mean that the individual is to cease to
think for himself? No; the individual has the right to
think for himself, and to seek his own way towards right
life. Sokrates had been urging all along that he had tried
to lead Athens to a better management of her affairs than
her ordinary statesmen could devise for her. He said in fact


: PLATO, Krito, lab j otras ef aopbs Sore AeAnbev ae, Sri wntpds Te
kal marpos kal tev Gddov Tpoydvey drdyvtey Tiuwrepdv eat 4 Tatpis Kal
gepydrepov Kai dy@repov kal év pei{ow poipg Kal mapa Ocois Kat map’
avOparots rois vowv €xovat, kal céBer bat Set Kat paddov breikerv Kat Ooreverv
marpida xaXeraivoveay i) ratépa;


II: THE CONCEPT OF LAW a i)


that in teaching and speaking as he did, he was performing
a public duty. If then he was now condemned by the very
State which he had attempted to serve, how was this con-
flict to be explained ?

Thought is free; no restriction can be placed upon a
man’s own subjective ideas. But in regard to external
conduct, every citizen has entered into an implied contract
with the State in which he lives, and on the strength of
that contract, if for no other reason, he must submit to the
laws which are imposed upon him. He must not only bow
to the immense weight of historical tradition, but also
recognize the fact that he has enjoyed the protection of the
State, and having accepted benefits from it, he must
accept unpleasant consequences as well. The State has
a right to say to him: If you do not like my ways, you can
leave the country. The implied contract therefore is agreed
upon as soon as the citizen settles permanently in a city ;
the counterpart of this is the possibility for him to leave
the State.! This seems a very harsh view; but at least it
was consistent, and moreover it was not only theory, for
every day people all over Greece were leaving their native
cities because they found themselves in disagreement with
social ordinances,


This theory of the implied contract and of the supremacy The intel-


of State law is supplemented by a less vague and arbitrary


doctrine than that of social instinet which culminated in Sokrates.


the appeal to aidés and dixkn. Sokrates’ whole teaching is
based on a kind of idealistic intellectualism. His chief
position was that we have in the human mind a force
which makes for combination and unity. This force is
reason governed by logic. There is a striking contrast
between Sokrates as the artist of dialectics derived from
universal logic and Gorgias, the teacher of impressionist
rhetoric. The one operated with deductions, the other with
suggestions (€vOvyypuara), and we all remember the con-


* Krito, 51d iets yap oe yervnoavres, exOpéavtes, madevoartes, peta~
Odvres dmdyrwv dv olot t juev KadOv cot kai Tois GAAols Tacw ToXiTats,
Spas Tpoayopevopey TO €€ovoiay nemotnkevat "AOnvaiwy to BovdAopera,
éme.Say Soxtpac On kat 16n Ta éy TH méAEL MpdypaTa Kal Huas Tovs vdpovs,
@ dv pr dpéoxopev tpeis, é&eivar AaBdvta Ta abtod dmévae Grou dy
BovAnra.


Plato’s
solution.


38 JURISPRUDENCE OF THE GREEK CITY


temptuous way in which Sokrates refers in Plato’s Apology
to the art of making weak things look strong, ra €Adrrova
kpelrrova moteiv, Tov HTT@ Adyov KpeiTT@ TroLeiv.'

As regards law, logic gave a convenient clue to the
universal elements underlying local variations. Men com-
municate their ideas to one another and reflect in common
because they possess means of mutual understanding and
agreement: there must be some mutual understanding of
this kind if we merely wish to avoid quarrels: and this
makes it possible to arrive at general results in jurisprudence.
For Sokrates, any problem may be solved by conscientious
analysis, and the process of searching for admissions and
inferences is the key to his eristic method. The impli-
cation in regard to jurisprudence is clear. If we can sub-
ject evidence to definite logical principles, then even locally
different centres of juridical work will eventually produce
similar juridical results as regards fundamental problems.

Such are the two main points in Sokrates’ doctrine: on
the one hand the recognition of the d6€a ris méAews, in the
sense that every State has the right to set up its own
legal standards*; and on the other hand the assertion that
moral and legal duties are connected primarily with the
logical framework of human understanding.

What was Plato’s own contribution to the solution of the
problem ? We need not dwell long on his juridical position,
because in spite of Plato’s aesthetic power and philosophical
depth, his conclusions appear only as an extension of
Sokrates’ views. There is a most emphatic adherence to
the ddga rs méXews principle. Why did Plato regard his
scheme of the threefold division of society not merely as
a device of political wisdom, but as the result of jurispru-
dential requirements? In his quest of justice, after having
tried to derive definitions from individual conduct, he comes
to the conclusion that in order to solve the problem it is
essential to determine the purpose of the State. Justice,
he says, is writ large in the State and writ small in the
individual, and if we wish to understand the smaller type,


' Cf. GoMPERZ, Greek Thinkers, II, iv, pp.66ff., and ZELLER, Socrates,
pp- 87-88 (of Eng. Trans.) (German, Vol. II, pp. 92-3). Cf. p. 28
above. 2 Cf. above, p. 34.


II: THE CONCEPT OF LAW 39


we must first understand the larger.1 Justice cannot be
embodied in any single individual: it depends on the har-
monization of elements in the State, and all attempts to
reconcile individual interests with justice apart from the
State are absurd. We must take up the problem, there-
fore, as being one of political harmony. This view is very
emphatically stated in the Republic. For Plato the pro-
blem hinges entirely on public and not on private law. He
dwells on the insufficiency of popular definitions of justice
based on the distinction between what is due to a person
and what is due to others, and shows that the notion of
“due,” ddecAduevoy, as regards any private individual is
purely relative.” The measure of rights and claims ought
to correspond with the measure of duties, as imposed by the
State. Therefore justice is rooted in the wise and perma-
nent distribution of obligations between the classes of
citizens. These duties are ranged under the well-known
rubrics of reflection of philosophers, of cowrage of the
defenders, and zndustry of the workers in the State. It
would be absurd for the industrial workers to ask for
the same range of power as the philosophers, and to grant
it to them would not be an act of justice. The rights and
duties of the individual must be assigned according to the
déga THs moAews, and “justice consists in doing one’s own
business and not being a busybody.”?

Let us notice in this connexion a very characteristic
passage in the VIIth book of the Republic:* “There is
a necessary inference from what has preceded, that neither
the uneducated and uninformed of truth, nor yet those who
never make an end of their education, will be able ministers
of State; not the former, because they have no single aim
of duty which is the rule of all their actions, private as
well as public; nor the latter, because they will not act at
all except upon compulsion, fancying that they are already
dwelling apart in the Islands of the Blest.” Plato here
. advances the view that the different classes of the people
should not only be assigned to their relative places, but

1 Republic, II, 368. ? Ibid. I, 332 ¢.


$ Ibid. IV, 483 a rd ra abrod mparrewy kal pi) ToUTpaypovey Sixatocvvy
? ,
€oTi.


* Ibid. VII, 519. Cf. ibid. 540 ab.


Law of
Nature.


40 JURISPRUDENCE OF THE GREEK CITY


should be obliged to engage in some form of activity useful
to the State. For example, philosophers should not be
allowed to lead an. entirely contemplative life, but should
be made to concern themselves with practical affairs. If
they remove themselves entirely from the practical sphere,
they are infringing the principle of justice, because the
State requires their service, and has a right to demand it.
On the other hand, the man in the street ought not to try
to thrust himself forward and claim the same privileges as
the philosophers. This is the net result of the whole
teaching; it was partly inspired by Plato’s own bitter
experiences in the world of decadent democracy.

In the perplexity which prevailed concerning the basis
of morals and law, there was only one way out of the
fundamental difficulties, and that was to leave the inter-
pretation of the main problems to the State. But what
was the Ideal State which was to act as arbitrator in these
differences? Certainly it was not the city as it existed in
Plato’s own time, and Plato was acutely conscious of the
fact. The tragic position of philosophy in the fourth
century is that the philosophers proclaimed the doctrine of
the d6£a ris méAews at the same time as they found that the
mods, called upon to enunciate this d6ga, was bankrupt.
In order to steer through these rocks it was necessary to
appeal to a universal principle, independent of historical
variations and the arbitrary establishments of local laws.
All the philosophical schools admit so much, and all turn to
nature (pvo.s) as the counterpart of law. But while the
representatives of subjectivism and relativism regard the
dictates of nature as opposed to the conventional rules
decreed by the tyrant véyuos (Antiphon, Hippias) and con-
cede to the latter only the value of cunning devices and
fictions (Gorgias, Kritias), the idealistic thinkers seek to
connect positive laws with an immutable background of
natural justice. One may notice the idea already in Demo-
kritos’ teaching: “The good and the true (goodness and
truth) are the same for all men, but sweetness is different
for different people.”! Fragment 2 shows that Demokritos


i DIELS, Fragmente der Vorsokratiker, U, p. 77, Fr. 69 dvOparots
maot tTwvrdy ayabdv Kai adnbés* nOv Se GrAAwi GAdo. Cf. p. 26 above.


II: THE CONCEPT OF LAW 41


looked to reason as the source of universal truth and
justice.!

Speculation on these lines is, however, much more promi-
nent in Herakleitos’ philosophy. While he underlines the
contrast between the absolute character of the good as
conceived by God with the forms of justice established by
men,” he lays stress on the derivation of the latter from the
former. There is a common element in justice as well as
particular elements, and this common element (70 €vvév)
should be defended or contended for (/cyupifec@ar) with
even greater vigour than in the case of cities defending
their laws. And this because all justice comes from God,
and value is imparted to all laws from that one source.’
The ground for this belief is found in the universality of
human reason.*

Thus appears the germ of the idealistic intellectualism
which may be regarded as the characteristic feature of
Sokrates’ teaching, and for which his eristic method pro-
vided the dialectical complement. @pdvnois, To ppoveiy,
provided the possibility of evolving certain general prin-
ciples of justice which may be regarded as commandments
of human nature and are therefore superior to the d6ga Ts
moAews. Sokrates argued on these lines against Hippias
according to Xenophon’s account in the Memorabilia.®
With Plato the notion is enlarged in the famous teaching
as to “ideas,” which, however, is too transcendental to form
part of our juridical discussion. In Aristotle's Encyclo-
paedia the conception of the véyos Kkoivéds as opposed to
vopuot tdioc reappears again.’ It is, however, characteristic

' Ibid., p. 56, Fr. 2 yiverac 8€ ek rod dpovety rpia taira’ Bovdeveo Bat


Kah@s, A€yey avayaptnrws Kal mpatrecy a Set.

? Ibid., 1, p. 98, Fr. 102. Bywater, Heracliti Reliquiae, 61 rau
pev Oecd. kaa mavra kai dyaba kai Sixata, dvOpwror dé & pev dika trecdjpace
& b€ Sixata.

* DIELS, Fr. 114. (ByWATER, 91b) dv véat A€yovras ioyxupifer Oa
Xpn Tt ~vvde wdvrwv, dkworep vdpor wdAts, Kal TOAD loxvpoTEpaws. TpE-
govrar yap mavres of dvOparetor vopor vd évds Tov Oeiov’ Kparet yap
Tocovroy bkdaov eb€det Kai e€apKei Tact Kal reptyivera, Cf. J. L. MYRES,
The Background of Greek Science, in California Chronicle, XVI, no. 4.

* Diexs, Fr. 113. (BYWATER, 91) fvvdv ore mac rd Hpoveey.

5 Mem. IV, iv.

® Ar. Rhet. I, x. 1868b 7 vépos & eoriv 6 pev idtos 6 S€ Kowwds. A€yw
de itoy pev Kab’ bv yeypappévoy mwodtrevovrat, Kooy b€ doa aypada rapa
maow dpodoyeiaba Soxei. And I, xiii, 13873b 4 A€yw S€ vdpov Tov pev


42 JURISPRUDENCE OF THE GREEK CITY


of the development of Greek juridical ideas that the “law
of nature,” though appealed to as a philosophical explana-
tion of existing facts; does not serve as a means for concrete
juridical deductions. It is at a later stage—with the advent
of Stoicism, especially in its Roman form—that the law
of nature began to be considered as a source of law in the
practical sense of the term. The explanation of this fact
may be found, I think, in the powerful development of
equity in the jurisdiction of the democratic courts of the
classical period, which left to the popular juries great lati-
tude in the interpretation and application of positive law.


APPENDIX TO CHAPTER II
ANTIPHON the Sophist. Oayrh. Pap. XI. 1364. pp. 96 ff.


Aikatoctyn mdévra THs ToAEws vopipa’ Ev f av modLTEdnTAl
ris py) mapaBaivey’ xpor’ dv ovv &vOpwmos paddota éavT@
Evudepdvrws Sikacoctvn, ef pera pty paptiper Tovs vopovs
peyddous &yol, povotpevos O&€ paptipwv Ta THS picews’ TA
fev yap Tov Bi emibera, Ta St THs pioEwS avayKala’
kal Ta pev TOY vopwv 6poroynbévra ov pivT’ Early, TA dE
Ths picews puvTd ody dpodroyn[Oév|ra... Ta moAAa TOV
kata vomov Sixkalwy modepios TH PUoe Keira’ vevopobérnTat
yap émi re Tois opOarpois & Set adrods dpav Kal & ov det
kal émi Tois wow & det atta adxovew Kail & ov det* Kai em
Th yAdTtTn & Te Sel adtiv Aéyerw Kai & od Det Kat Emi
Tais xepolv ad Te Set adtas Spay Kai & ov det* Kal emi Tots
toolv ep & te del adrovs lévar kai ég’ a ov Sel Kai Emi TO
v@ @v Te Set avrov émOupetvy Kal dv py... Kal TovT@Y TOY
e_pnévav TOAX' dv Tis ebpol TodEmia TH PUoe Evi TE avTors
ahytvecbai re paddov e€ov Hrrw. Kal éAdtTw AoeoOa Efdv
Trelw, Kal Kak@s mdoyev e€dv pi waoyxelv’ Ef pev ovY TLS
Tols Totavra mpolepévors Emikovpnots eylyveTo Tapa TeV
vopov, Tots St uw?) mpolepévors GAN’ Evavtiovpévols EAATTwOLS,
ovk avagedes dv ny Tois vopots meiOecOar viv dé paiverat
Tots mpotenévors Ta Towabra Td eK vopov dixkatov odx ikavov
emikoupeiv* 6 ye mp@rov pev emitpérer TH MadoxovTt mabey
kal T@ Op@vrTit Spdoa, kal ovre évradOa StexdAve Tov ma-
oxXovTa pu?) mabey, ovdé Tov Spavra Spdaar’ eis TE THY TLw-
pilav avadhepdpevoy ovdeyv ididrepov emi TO memovOdTt 7) TO
dedpaxéru. : :
idtov rov b€ Kowdy, itoy pe Tov Exdorots @pirpéevoy mpds avrovs, Kal rovroy
Tov pev aypapoy rov d€ yeypaypévoy, Kowdy Sé tov Kara vow kth.
I cannot help thinking that the exposition of the matter by SaLomon


\ in the Z. SS. Roman. Abth. XXXIII does not distinguish sufficiently
between the various periods.


CHAPTER III
THE LEGAL SYSTEM


1. Preliminary Notions.


Tu Encyclopaedia of Greek life and thought worked Aristotle’s
out by Aristotle and his school at the end of the classical ee
period supplies us with invaluable material for connecting
philosophical doctrines with actual politics and law. The
immense accumulation of data preserved by these encyclo-
paedists has certain drawbacks. The work was collective,
not individual, and therefore not equally sustained even
in its most important parts; it was not carefully edited
or published as a whole. It consists to a great extent
of lectures and surveys, taken down, no doubt, with care,
but presenting obscurities and contradictions such as are
inevitable when viva voce instruction and discussion are
reported by listeners. We must not attempt to make
everything fit precisely, but have to allow for gaps, mis-
understandings, repetitions, and obscure passages, some of
which were probably not very clear when the master
delivered his lectures.!

Another important question concerns the terms used by
Aristotle: their meaning is not to be established simply
by reference to the dictionary. The copious information
supplied by Bonitz or by Liddell and Scott has to be sifted
and classified from the special point of view of the jurist.

* A preliminary remark on a literary question may be of some use.
An important part of our material comes from the ethical writings.
These are not of equal value in themselves, and therefore cannot be of
equal authority. The Nikomacheian Ethics (Book V) is the most
important source, but for terminology and for the clearing up of
difficulties we have to turn to the other works. The Eudemian Ethics,
written by Aristotle’s pupil Eudemos, is not parallel to Aristotle’s
fifth book, but often contains expressions which help to interpret
passages of doubtful meaning in the Nikomacheian text. The 'H@«xa
MeydAa, or Magna Moralia, is apparently a report of earlier lectures,
and therefore the statements contained in it represent Aristotelian


doctrine in a preparatory stage of its development. So much for the
general perspective in which I propose to consider the ethical works.


44 JURISPRUDENCE OF THE GREEK CITY


The three terms to be noticed from the very beginning
are dfkatov, vdpupov, and icor ; of these véutpov is the easiest
to translate, as its meaning does not vary: it always stands
for the legal (or the lawful), that which is in conformity
with law. The other two terms are ambiguous, and Aristotle
sometimes gives explanations as to his use of them. In
the Magna Moralia! we find that Sécaov is used in two
senses :

1. It is justice as a virtue enjoined by the community and
formulated in its laws. Justice therefore covers a wide
field; it embraces the conduct of every single citizen in the
State, and may be concerned with the most intimate details
of his life; for example, under a “paternal” government
justice may enjoin us to be temperate; in other words,
there may be a law against drunkenness or incontinency.
This kind of justice concerns the individual in his relation
to the State of which he is a citizen.

2. The second kind of justice is termed “ civie ” (aoAtTiKoy
dfkatov)* and is specifically directed towards regulating
the relations between citizens; it is justice not between
self and the State, but between self and others.

In the Nikomacheian Ethics there is a more precise
use of terms. Justice as a general conception has to be
subdivided into two classes; it is obedience to laws or
equitable treatment of neighbours.? “There is a division
of injustice into the illegal and the unequal, and of justice
into the legal (or lawful) and the equal (or equitable).”
It must be observed that our expression “equitable” should
not be used without qualification, because, though it cor-
responds in part to fcoy in Aristotle’s writings, it also


* Magna Moralia, 1, 1193b éore 89 Surry rd Sixacov, Sv rd pév eore
kata vopov' Sixaca yap daow eivat d 6 vdpos mpoordtte. 6 b€ vdpos
kehever. .. dmA@s Gmavra doa cata tas dperds Aéyerat.. . GAAA TO Sikatov
TO mpos Erepov Go... €otiv. The term ré roderixdy Sixatoy for justice
of the first kind occurs later on p. 1194 b.

> Cf. Eth. N. V, 6, § 4.

* Eth, Nik. V, 2, 1180b, 8 ff. Stampiorae 81) rd Adixov 76 Te mapdvopoy Kal
To avuaov, Td dé Sixaoy 7d re vdpipov Kai TO icov. ... émei S€ Td dnoor
kal TO mapavopoy ov Tabrov GdX’ erepov ws pépos mpds dAov. .. . Kal rept THs
€v péper Oikaoovyns kal rept ris ev péper ddikias dexréov.... THs be KaTa
Hépos Sixatoovvns kal rod Kat’ airiy dixaiov év pév eorey eidos 76 ev Tais dtavo-
ais tTiuis i) xpnpdtoy i) rév dddXwv doa pepiora Tois KoLvwvOtGL THs TOA-
Teias ..., &v dé rd ev Trois gvvadAdyuaart SiopOwrikdy.


Ill: THE LEGAL SYSTEM 45


covers the term émefkeca to which we shall come later
on. Thus Justice is qualified on the one hand as satisfying
the law, on the other as fairness or equality in dealings with
others.

In Aristotle’s classification of the kinds of justice,! we find—
(1) General Justice (rd xaOddov Sékarov), and (2) Justice as
a particular or specific virtue (7d é€v péper dikaov). The
first is a complex of all the rules formulated by the State as
legally obligatory for the members of the community; the
second is the set of rules which govern relations between
the members of the community. The latter falls into two
classes (a) Distributive justice (d:aveunrexdv), and (6) Cor-
rective justice (SopOwrixév) or legal redress: (a) covers all
cases in which an answer is given to the question as to what
one person can claim on the ground of just distribution as
against others; (b) covers all functions of justice directed
towards redressing wrongs as between members of the
State.

This is the main scheme: by the side of this stands
an “annex,” which Aristotle calls émefkera, fairness or
equity, not to be distinguished as specific or general, but
acting as the correction of both according to circumstances.
Another digression occurs in connexion with retaliation
or retribution (76 avrimeroy 66s),? a doctrine originating with
the Pythagoreans; by considering this doctrine Aristotle
is diverted from the main thread of the discussion to the
subject of exchange; thus the clear scheme with its three
parts—General, Distributive, Corrective—becomes disturbed
in exposition.


2. Corrective Justice.


We need not follow Aristotle’s arrangement, but let us Con-
take the simplest part first, reserving the more difficult ventions
departments for a later stage. The part which admits
of the easiest interpretation is the one relating to cor-
rective justice (dtopAwrikév). Here Aristotle proceeds on
lines similar to the modern classification, whereas in deal-
ing with the distributive and the general departments he
takes up peculiar points of view.


1 Loc. cit. * Eth. Nik. V, 5 1132b 21, see below, p. 69.


Torts.


~~


46 JURISPRUDENCE OF THE GREEK CITY


Legal Redress or Corrective Justice falls into two sub-
divisions; (a) Obligations which are the result of voluntary
agreements (cuvadddypara éxovoia), and (8) obligations
which are not voluntary, but arise from delicts or torts
(cuvadrAdypara dxovo.a). For example, a man who has
inflicted an injury on another is charged with an obligation
to make the damage good. This is plain, but the question
arises, in what sense contractual obligations can be treated
under the heading of legal redress. In the case of “breach
of contract” the connexion is obvious. One party suffers
by the breach, and the Court is asked to give redress.
But Aristotle’s treatment is wider: he takes the whole
range of contract, enumerating sale, loans, security, lease
and hire, bailment, deposit.

Corrective Justice, in his view, covers not only breaches
of conventions, but also their execution. Contractual obliga-
tions may remain unfulfilled because one of the parties has
misinterpreted the terms of a contract, and thus the
question of fitting redress involves the interpretation of
the convention.

In enumerating the various forms of agreement, Aristotle
does not mention expressly the type of the contract of ser-
vice, although such conventions occurred in Greece.2 They
were not, however, very frequent, and we cannot expect an
exhaustive enumeration of juridical subdivisions in a philo-
sophical treatise.

These relations are treated very much on the same lines
as in Roman and modern law: the case is different in
regard to delicts. Aristotle's words are worth considering
with attention, especially as some commentators seem to
have gone astray in their interpretation. He gives exam-
ples of the principal kinds of delicts creating obligations.®
They form two groups; (1) those characterized by fraud


' Eth, Nik. V, 2, 1131a 2 mpaors avn Savecpds eyyin ypnots mapakara-
Onkn picbwors.

? In Roman law they belong mainly to the group of innominate
contracts (according to the formulae facio ut facias, facio ut des, and
do ut facias). They might also come under locatio operarum. See on
the subject BEAUCHET, Droit privé, IV, 221 ff.

* Eth. Nik. V, 2,1181a5 ray 8 dxovoiwy ra pev AaOpaia, olov Krom
porxeia Pappaxeia mpoaywyeia SovAararia Sodohovia Wevdouaprupia, ta dé
Biata, olov aixia Seopos Oavaros dprayi mpwots Kaknyopia mporndakto pes.


III: THE LEGAL SYSTEM A7


(AaOpaia), and (2) those characterized by violence (Bia:a).
To the first group belong theft, adultery, poisoning, procur-
ing for immoral purposes, enticing of slaves from their
masters, causing death by fraud, and false witness. Some
exceedingly “criminal” items have found their way into
this category, and the list makes an odd impression on a
modern reader. The Greek law of tort is based on princi-
ples different from ours; for example, murder was not
primarily considered as a crime against the community,
but as a private tort to be avenged by the nearest kinsman.
Therefore crimes like poisoning, or causing death by fraud,
come under this head, and are considered here from the
point of view of the damages to be exacted by the injured
party. This does not mean, of course, that poisoning,
manslaughter, and murder are treated exclusively as
private wrongs; the public side is apparent, e.g. in the
jurisdiction of the Areiopagos. But the injury to private
interests gives rise to claims of the same kind as those
against thieves or adulterers. In the second group we find
assault, imprisonment, homicide, rape, maiming, slander,
contumelious treatment. All these give the injured persons
the right to seek compensation.

The treatment of compensation is also peculiar. Aristotle
explains the situation by referring to certain mathematical
processes!: disputes covered by distributive justice are to
be settled according to geometrical proportion (xa7’ évado-
yiav), whereas compensation in disputes arising out of
corrective justice is to be adjudged according to arithmetical
proportion (kara thy apiOunrixyyv).2 This means that, as
regards obligations from delicts, the personal factor does
not come in; it is the same if a good man robs a bad
man or if a bad man robs a good one; they are equal—the
unit being the citizen or man. The points to be considered
are the act and the fact, not the person.

It is quite different in the case of distributive justice,
because that should be determined in consideration of


1 Eth. Nik. V, 4, 1181 b 32 ro & ev rois cuvaddaypacr Sixatov €ori pev
tgoy Tt, Kat TO Gdtkov Guc~oyv, aAX’ ov Kata THY avadoylay éxeiyny adda KaTa
Thy aptOpnrikny. ovdev yap Stadéper, ef emeeckns paddAov amecrépnoev 7
addos émeckn.


2 See below, p. 56.


48 JURISPRUDENCE OF THE GREEK CITY


personal values. Advantage ought to stand to advantage
in quantity as man stands to man in quality.

The case of corrective justice may be made clear by an
example. Suppose that some furniture has been stolen ;
the fact of the theft sets in motion a process of restitution
and compensation: a certain quantity of goods has been
carried away from the legal sphere of one individual to the
legal sphere of another. Justice must first restore the
things to their original owner; but this is not enough;
compensation goes further than restitution. Besides the
material damage suffered by the aggrieved party, there is
a moral element to be accounted for; the disturbance of
economic order, the feeling of humiliation, the sense of loss
and indignity, have to be estimated, and the moral injury
must be made good as well as the material one. The point
may be well illustrated by a reference to the speech of
Isokrates against Lochites.1_ He says: “If there had been
no contumely attached to my opponent’s action, I should
not have come before you; but as it is I come to obtain
redress from him, not merely for the damage arising out of
the blows, but for the assault and dishonour, for which it
is right that free men should feel the greatest indignation
and should obtain the highest reparation. I see that when
you convict a man of temple robbery or theft you do not
assess the penalty in proportion to the amount stolen, but
you condemn all alike to death, and consider it just for
those who attempt the same crimes to be punished by the
same penalties. You ought then to hold the same view as
regards those guilty of contumelious aggression, and not to
ask whether the blow was very severe, but whether the
law was broken, and to exact redress not for the particular
circumstance only, but for the conduct of the aggressors as
a whole.”

Moreover, the penalty (¢npia) must be made commen-
surate with the advantage (xépdos) which the thief had in
mind when he committed his crime.? In the case of crimes
of violence it is especially obvious that the moral damages


? ISOKRATES, XX, 396c.
2 Eth. N. V, 4, 1132 meiparat TH Snpig lodge, apatpaer Tou képOous.
. Gore TO émavopbeorixdy Sixatov dy ein rd péoov Cyuias Kai Képdovs.


III: THE LEGAL SYSTEM 49


have to be considered, but in all cases the estimation of
these damages presents problems which are sometimes very
complex. Modern illustrations of the view that moral injury
should be considered in assessing damages may be found in
cases of breach of promise of marriage, or of seduction.
The necessity of restoring the disturbed equilibrium by The

bringing the goods back to their owner and appreciating 4
the moral loss is clear; but the question is, how is this to damages.
be done? The Athenian courts had recourse to the process
called ripnois, assessment. When the person had been
found guilty, then came the question of damages. In the
so-called ayaves ariunro: the amount of the fine was deter-
mined beforehand by law; in the déyaves tTinroi, on the
contrary, the assessment was left to the jury. The proce-
dure about which we hear most is the competitive proposal
of assessment made by plaintiff and defendant. The jury
had to choose between the two, and usually it was impos-
sible for them to vary the estimates. If the court had
consisted of a few expert judges it would have been com-
paratively easy to do so; even with the numbers constitu-
ting a modern jury, the assessment can be left to their
deliberation and verdict; but in the huge Heliastic Courts,
consisting at least of 201, often of 401, sometimes even of
1,001 members, nothing like systematic discussion could be
allowed. The defects of the competitive procedure were
recognized, and Aristotle tells us of a different method of
voting advocated by Hippodamos of Miletos,' who suggested
that jurors, instead of receiving only the voting-counters
(W7por), should be provided with tablets (rivéxia) on which
every one could note what he thought best. Aristotle criti-
cizes this suggestion in some detail.? “Neither is the law
to be commended which says that the judges, when a


1 Pol. II, 1268 a.

2 Thid. 1268b od xadds 8° 088’ 6 mept Tis Kpioews €xet vopos, TO Kpivety
ak.oov Statpovvra TNS Kpicews athos Yeypapperns, kat yiverOat tov Stkaorrny
Siaernr ny. TovTO 8” ev pev tH Stain kat m€loow evdexerat (xowodoyovvrat
yap ahAndots meph THs kpicews), ev d€ trois Sikaotnpiots ovK COTW, adda Kal
Touvavtiov TOUT® TOV vouobeTay of trodXot mapackevdfovaty 6 ores of Sixagral
BI) Kowodoyavrat mpos addnAovs. emeira TOS OUK éorat Tapa xoons 7 Kpiots,
éray opeihew pep 6 Suxaorns ane HN) Togovroy & dcov 6 Sixagdpevos ; era
dinAov 6 Ore peptovow (oi Sicacrai).... Tis ody 6 Tpdmos €orat THs Siadoyns TOY

npov ;

2231.2 E


50 JURISPRUDENCE OF THE GREEK CITY


simple issue is laid before them, should make distinctions
in their judgement; for the judge is thus converted into
an arbitrator. Now, in an arbitration, although the arbi-
trators are many, they confer with one another about the
decision, and therefore they can draw distinctions; but in
courts of law this is impossible, and, indeed, most legislators
take pains to prevent the judges from holding any com-
munication with one another. Again, will there not be
confusion if the judge thinks that damages should be given,
but not so much as the suitor demands? The latter asks,
say, for twenty minae, and the judge allows him ten minae,
or one judge more and another less; one five, another four
minae. In this way if they will go on apportioning the
damages, and some will grant the whole and others nothing,
how is the final reckoning to be made? Indeed, no one
who votes for a simple acquittal or condemnation is com-
pelled to perjure himself, if the indictment is quite simple
and in right form; for the judge who acquits does not
decide that the defendant owes nothing, but that he does
not owe the twenty minae. He only is guilty of perjury
who thinks that the defendant ought not to pay twenty
minae, and yet condemns him.”

This concluding remark implies that it was in the
interest of the plaintiff not to put up his claim too high,
because he endangered his case thereby before the jury.

The procedure in the first instance evidently took place
in most cases before the arbitrators (S:a:tnraé), and even in
those cases which were submitted to Heliastice tribunals
various magistrates had the preliminary investigation (dvd-
Kptows), which must have included proposals as to assess-
ment.' We have some evidence that it was possible for a
court to adjudicate a supplementary assessment by some
process which is unfortunately not described in detail;
a case in point is referred to in the speech of Demosthenes
against Meidias.? “The people resolved that Evander the
Thespian was guilty of a contempt of the Mysteries, upon
a complaint brought against him by Menippos, a Karian.


" Plato has something of the same kind in view when he is treating
of agrarian disputes in Laws, VIII, 844.
* Dem. XXI, 175, 6, p. 571, 2 (cf. Kennedy's translation).


Ill: THE LEGAL SYSTEM 51


_ He had obtained a verdict against Menippos in a mercantile
cause, and being unable (as he said) to catch him before, he
seized his person while staying here at the Mysteries. When
he (Evander) came into court, you were disposed to punish
him with death, but, the complainant coming to terms, you
compelled him to forgo the whole of the judgement which
he had formerly recovered, amounting to two talents, and
to pay such damages as the man computed he had sustained
by stopping to prosecute.”

We know that the case arose out of a mpoPodr7 } intro-
duced before a Heliastic commission by the Oeopo6érat, and
the punishment inflicted by the tribunal must have been
the result not of a proposal by the accuser, but of a mpoc-
tiunois. Thus the courts were not absolutely bound by
the proposals of plaintiff and defendant as to the assessment.


3. Distributive Justice.


If we turn now to Distributive Justice, a clear definition of Distribu-
it is supplied in the chapter of the Lthics referred to above?; teers
“it is concerned with the distribution or division of honours
or of property or of other things which may have to be
divided between the members of a community.” We have
to reckon, therefore, with either the simple case of property
coming up for division (e.g. an inheritance), or the more
complex case of the distribution of honours or dignities
(ripai). Occasions for a division of property arise under
any system. In the treatise on the Athenian Constitution®
there is a reference to the duty of the First Archon to
receive claims in the process of so-called darnray aipeats,
the granting of umpires to distribute property among heirs
who could not agree as to respective shares. According to
Harpokration, darnrov aipeors also took place in the case
of any kind of distribution of kod (communia); these
proceedings correspond in Roman law to actions fumliae
erciscundae and communi dividundo.


1 See below, p. 63.

* Eth. Nik. V, 2,12, 1130b. See above, p. 44. Cf. Pol. IV (VII),
1326 b 15, and 1330a 2 ff.; also Top. VI, 143 a, 145 b.

5 Ath. Const. 56 ciadyet,.. cis Satnrdv aipecuw, edv tis uy O€AN Kowa
Ta Ovta vépnerOat.


E 2


Distribu-


tion of
honours
and
profits.


52 JURISPRUDENCE OF THE GREEK CITY


Another occasion on which distributive justice is seen in
practice is the foundation of a colony. We have the
evidence of inscriptions to show us what was done. For
example, there is the document relating to the foundation
of Brea about the year 444 B.c.!. Ten men were to be
chosen, one from each tribe, to divide the land; in this
way xAfpo, allotments, or family holdings, were formed.
The conception of the kAfpos is an ancient and universal
one in Greek law. The kAfpos is a plot of land intended
to form the basis of subsistence for a household, and cor-
responding to the standard of a citizen family. The prin-
ciple obviously required equal distribution in the course of
colonization, and even in Athens an effort was made to
keep up the tradition of the old xAfpor; according to the
testimony of Aristotle a law of Solon prohibited the accu-
mulation of property in land.? It was the special duty of
the Archon Eponymos to watch over the preservation of
families (ofxoc) in the sense of units of property.®

Thus, as regards the division of property, the meaning
of the term “ distributive justice ” is sufficiently clear; but
it applies also to the division of offices, honours, and privi-
leges (riai). Here we enter on a subject treated in a very
peculiar manner by the Greeks. On account of the inti-
mate connexion between politics and law all the Greeks
recognized that there must be a correspondence between
the duties and the rights of the members of a community.
In the Lthics Aristotle says: “He who does not do any
good to the community does not get honoured; the com-
munity is assigned to him who benefits the community ;
dignities are of the community.”* People disagreed, how-
ever, as to the principle on which such a distribution should
be effected. To quote again from the Ethics: “In distri-
bution ali men agree that what is just must be in accord-
ance with a value of some kind, but they do not all adopt


* Dirt. Syl.’ I. 67, p. 83 yeovdpos d€ eXeada déKa panna éva €x
dudes. ovrot S€ vepdvrov rev yev.

2 Pol. II, 7, 1267 b.

8 Ath. Const. c. 56.

* Eth. Nik. VIII, 14, 1163 b 6 ov yap Tiara 6 pyndev ayabov TQ KOW@


mopi{wv’ Td Kowvdy yap di8orat T@ TO KOLVOY EVEPYETOVYTL, 1) TUL) 8é Kowdr.


Cf. Pol. II, 1266 b, and III, 1278a.


III: THE LEGAL SYSTEM 53


the same standard of value; in democratic States they take
free birth as the standard, in oligarchic States wealth, or
nobility of birth, in aristocracies virtue.”! This discussion
as to justice is, of course, closely connected with political
theory, and the clearest embodiment of the principle is to
be found in timocratic constitutions, where rights and
duties were graduated according to classes determined by
relative wealth. In general the right to hold office was
brought into relation to the performance of civic functions,
and in case of doubt the ultimate decision rested with the
courts.

_ In order to make this point clear, and to show the work-
ing of the principle in practice, a few simple cases may be
cited.

1, Election to a public office or dignity (épy7). After
the election by lot a procedure of “ estimation ” (doxipaoia)
had to be gone through, by which the fitness of the candi-
date was tested. Stress was laid on the question whether
the person who aspired to be a member of the government
had served the city by contributing to its expenses and
sharing in its burdens. As to this process we have e.g.
the evidence of three speeches of Lysias,? making it clear
that there was an actual distribution (d:avoyy) of offices.
On behalf of a defendant Lysias tried to prove that his client
claimed the dignity by right, because he had done good
service to the commonwealth; on the other hand, as an
accuser he contested elections on the ground that the
candidate did not come up to the standard in respect of
services to the State.

2. Privileges of citizenship. Besides the actual offices of
the State, there were special rights and privileges attached
to the possession of citizenship. In Athens, which was for
some time at the head of an Empire, citizens drew all sorts
of benefits from their position in the city. In the twenty-
fourth chapter of the Athenian Constitution we find a list


1 Eth. Nik. V, 3, 1181a 25 16 yap Sikatoy ev rais vopais dporoyodar
mavres kar’ agiav rivad Seiv eivat, tiv pevtor akiav ov Thy adTHy Aéyovat
mdvres wmdpxew, Grr of pev Snpoxparikol édevbepiay, of 8 dAvyapytxol
Tovroy, oi 8 evyéveray, of 8’ dpictoxpatikol dperny.


2 XVI, XXVI, XXXI.


Public
assist-
ance.


54 JURISPRUDENCE OF THE GREEK CITY


of the advantages which could be claimed in this way’;
we are told that more than 20,000 Athenians possessed
rights which materialized in the form of various payments
and bonuses. At the head of the list stand the Heliasts,
the jurymen in the Courts, then come the members of the
Council, archers, horsemen, citizens performing garrison
service, city police, ete.

This condition of affairs was not one of purely political
exploitation; it was the result of the performance of
administrative and judicial duties. Again, Athens, wealthy
city as she was, had introduced a system of doles or pen-
sions for citizens disabled by wounds, sickness, and old age.
It amounted in some cases only to an obol a day, but for
the poor it was an important matter, as is shown by
a speech of Lysias delivered before the Council.? The
speaker’s plea is that he is destitute, and would be lost if
he were deprived of the daily obol. The man was accused
of having cheated the State, inasmuch as he was possessed
of some means, while he had been exempted from public
dues, and was receiving public assistance. He defended
himself against the charges made: “My adversary main-
tains that I am sufficiently strong and well-off, that I can
afford to ride horses, and that I make money by my craft,
that I am seen in the company of rich men.” He denies


1 Ath. Const. c. 24 ... xaréatnoay S€ kai trois modXois ed’ropiav rpodpis,
donep ‘Apioreidns elonynoaro. ouvéBawvev yap and tov Popov kai Tay Tehov
kat TOV Ouppaxey Treious 7) Suopupious avdpas rpeherIa. Stkaorai pev yap
hoay é€akioyidvor, ro€drac 8 é£axdoror kal xidvot, Kal mpos rovrots immeis
xiArtoe Kal Staxdorot, Bovdr d€ mevraxdcrot, Kai Hpovpol vewpiwy mevrakdctot,
kal mpos Tovrots ev TH mode Ppoupot ¥, apxai 8 évdnyot pev eis Emtakoious
advdpas, trepdpioe & els Erraxogious’ mpos dé rovtats émel ovvertnaavtTo Tov
méAepov Vatepoy, SmArirat pev Sioxidtoe kal mrevraxdoro, vnes SéE ppoupides
eixoot, GAdat 8€ vies al rods pdpovs Gyovea Tovs amd Tod Kvdpov SiryxiAlovs
dvSpas, rt 5€ mpuraveioy kai dppavoi kai Secpwrav vdAakes* Grace yap
TovTots ard TOY Kotvay 7 Stoixnots Hv.

2 Lysras, XXIV, 4 gyno yap 6 Kxariyopos od Sixaiws pe AapBavew rd
mapa Tis moAews apyvptov’ Kai yap T@ gopate SvvacGat Kal ovk elvar Tov
advvdtey, kal réxvnv ériarac ba tro.avtny Gore Kai dvev rod didopévov rovrov
(iv. Kal rexynplos xpira rhs pév TOU O@paros popns, Ste emt rovs immous
dvaBaivw, tis 8 év rh Téxvn evropias, Gre Sivapat cvveivat duvapevors avOpa-
mows avadioxev. . . . mpocodos S€ pot ovk €or GAAn TAY TavTns, hy dv
apernobe pe, xivduvevoca,’ dv ind rp Svoxepeotdarn yeverOar Tvxn. gy
roivuy, emedy ye €otiv, & Bovdn, cdoai pe Sikai@s, amodkéonte adixws* ...


x aM épe TOAuNoavres adikHoat Kal Tos GddAovs Tovs dpoiws enol Siaxerpevous


Wvupnoat mononre.


Ill; THE LEGAL SYSTEM 55


that these are really indications of wealth, and claims that
he is truly entitled to the scanty help which he enjoys.

Aristotle’s remark has been quoted above, that the principle
of distribution in a democracy is éAevOepia, freedom (of birth).
This could on occasion be made a very stringent test; for
example, in 445 B.c., an incident! occurred which led to
a considerable decrease in the number of free citizens.
A fleet from Egypt arrived, bringing a supply of corn
to Athens, and the problem of the distribution of the
corn had to be solved. A revision in the Demoi followed
(Svawydiots), and in consequence about 5,000 persons lost
their status as free citizens (€AevOep/a).

3. Public burdens (Aecroupy/az), in the shape of heavy ex- Public
penses undertaken by citizens in fitting out ships, equipping PU™t"*
embassies, providing dramatic choruses, etc. The result of
the principle of correspondence between needs, services, and
dignities was that an exchange of property (davridocts)
might be demanded by the overtaxed party. The procedure
is foreign to modern ideas, but very characteristic of Greek
politics, Isokrates pretends to have made use of it in his
defence against charges of bad citizenship. It was said
of him that he was so rich that he ought to be on the roll
of persons liable to contributions, and as a result of legal
proceedings his name was entered on the roll. The extant
speech on the Avridoois is not the one actually delivered
at the time, but a literary version published afterwards;
the arguments, however, are no less significant. The speech
of Demosthenes on the same subject? is probably genuine,
and certainly forensic. A citizen challenged another on
the ground that he was richer than himself, and ought
to be on the roll of the Aetovpyiat, as the division of
burdens ought to be proportioned to wealth. Accordingly
both households were put under seal, and watchmen guarded
the property until the valuation could be made. The com-
plaint made in the speech is that Phainippos had broken
the seals and removed a portion of his goods.


1 This incident is mentioned by Plutarch in his Life of Perikles
(c. 37), and also by a scholiast on Aristophanes’ Wasps (v.718). Both
eee Seon ormalion from the antiquarian Philochoros.

EM. XLII.


Propor-
tionate
standards.


56 JURISPRUDENCE OF THE GREEK CITY


The general conclusion arrived at by Aristotle points
to a correspondence in accordance with geometrical pro-
portion between a man’s social value and his claims to
honour. He draws a distinction between equality in number
(ép:6uo) and equality in proportion (Ady@).! Thus citizen
A should lay claim to certain advantages m according to
his general qualifications or status, against citizen B, whose
claims may be estimated at n. The symbols may represent
any amount, and the advantages so represented may take
any form; the point is that the relations between A and B
and between m and n must be the same. Taking an illustra-
tion from actual numbers, one might say that the relation
of 20 to 10 is the same as that of 6 to 3, although 20 and 6,
10 and 3, represent different quantities.

That this is not merely a personal theory of Aristotle’s
is clear from a passage in Isokrates’ Avreiopagettikos; he
refers to the earlier timocratic form of government as the
best, and extols the Athenians of that age for recognizing
an equality which was not absolute, but proportionate.
He says: “A very important factor in the good govern-
ment of the city at that time was that of the two kinds
of equality recognized—the one giving the same to all, and
the other giving each his due: they were well aware which
was the more profitable. That kind which considers the
good and the bad worthy of the same rewards they rejected
as not just; that which honours each man according to his
worth they adopted, and in accordance with it they governed
the city, not electing magistrates by lot from the whole people,
but choosing out the best and the most competent for each
function.” ?

In Aristotle’s view the standard of distribution ought to
be civic virtue; and our whole reading of his work must
be determined by the fact that he starts with a political
ideal of this kind. We may ask what a democratic states-


* AR., Eudemian Ethics, VII, 1242b 6ré pev yap dpiOue@ rod icov
peréxovow, dre d€ Ady. el pev yap toov apiOu@ eionveyxev apyvprov, trov


\ an > a -
kal T@ low aptOu@ dtadapBavovorr, ef dé x) ivov, dvddoyov" ... Sei dpa ruwi
A Lae > ‘ a a -
€TEp@ avicdaat Kal motjoat dvyddoyor. tovito 8 éativ 7) tTipy,.. . dei O€ ioa-


oOiva 76 Képdos mpos thy tiny. Cf. Pol. III, 1281a 31 ripas yap réyo-


 pev elvar ras apxds. Cf. also Magn. Mor. I, 1195 b; see below, p. 57.


* TsOKRATES, VII, 21, 22.


III; THE LEGAL SYSTEM 57


man of the type of Kleon—one who had broken with the
old tradition of timocracy and aristocracy—would say about
such a conception. He would, no doubt, disagree as to
virtue being the standard, but would certainly have insisted
on €AevOepia, and worked out the other aspect of the doctrine,
viz., that the rich and influential should be made to pay for
their advantages by being burdened with heavier duties and
expenses.}

Does Distributive Justice cover not only the distribution
of property, but also its protection? Supposing some one
claims to have a better right to certain goods than their
actual possessor—is that a case for distributive justice ?
There is no reason for treating the case under that head,
as claims to things depend in this case on title and not on
estimates ; the proper place for it in the system described
by Aristotle is under the heading of General Justice.


4, Justice in General (4 nabddrov éixatocvvn).


In comparison with the modern classification, Aristotle’s
general justice covers two great divisions— public law and
the law of things (jus in rem)—and a large part of a third,
namely, of the law of persons. We read in the fifth book
of the Ethics: “The acts which manifest complete virtue
form, we may say, the bulk of the acts which are in ac-
cordance with law; for the law orders us to display all the
virtues and none of the vices in our lives. But the acts
which tend to produce virtue are those legal acts which
are prescribed with reference to the education of man as
a citizen.”? In positive legislation, the principle of equality
does not hold good as a leading requirement; inequalities
may be necessary for the sake of public utility. The in-
equalities between citizens, denizens (yérorxor), freedmen


1 Eth. Nik. VIII, 14, 1163 b 10 rd 8) wept xpnpara eAarroupev@ tiny
drovépovat kai TG SwpoddKw xpnuata. Cf. above, p. 52. Cf. Magn. Mor.
I, 1195b madvres yap of édartov AapBdvovres avticatadAdrrovrat 7 Teysny 7)
€rawvov 7} SdEav 7) diAiay 7) GAXO Te TaY ToOLOUTOY.

2 Eth. Nik. V, 2, 1130b 22 cyeddov yap ra modAa Tov vopipwv Ta
and rhs OAns dperns mpatropeva eotiv’ Kab’ exaotny yap apetny mpoorarret
iv kal Kad’ éxdorny poxOnpiay kwodvet 6 vopos. ta S€ mounted ris dAns
dperis €oTt TOY vopipoy daa vevopobernrat mrept madeiay THY Mpos TO KOLWOy.


Contro-
versies as
to rights.


58 JURISPRUDENCE OF THE GREEK CITY


and slaves are of this kind. Positive enactments may be
independent of our moral conceptions; take, for example,
the case of the attitude of the citizens of Amphipolis in
relation to the cult of Brasidas;! there was nothing im-
moral in not wanting to join in this worship, but the
enactment was binding for them, it was part of the religion
of their State.

Thus in the field of General Justice the State maintains
by legislation its standards of compulsory morality and
political expediency; duties correspond to virtues, crimes
to vices. Accordingly it is under this heading that we have
to look for criminal justice. It is not to be found under
the head of Corrective Justice, although the Greeks cer-
tainly realized that theft, rape, murder, etc. were crimes
affecting the city (dnuéo1a) and not mere private wrongs.
Accordingly laws inflicted punishments in a number of
cases apart from any compensation.

The second class of rights which are to be derived from
General Justice, as expressed in positive enactments, are
the rights of property and possession. They give rise
primarily to so-called dugicBnrijcets, disputes; these are
characterized by the fact that there is no plaintiff and no
defendant in them; the parties stand both in the same
position in the trial, both seeking to ascertain their right,
and to have it declared. This variety is represented in
procedure by the form of process called d:adixacia, a special
kind of trial arising in cases where no one asserts that
there is any wrong on the side of the opponent, but each
party insists on his supposed right. The process was
chiefly used for the protection of those rights which might
be called rights of tenwre or property. The fact that
dtadixacia treats of rights of tenure protected by the State
as long as no better title has been produced is shown by
the definition given, e.g. in the Lewica Sequeriana;* the
aim of the action is only to establish and maintain the
strongest claim. Thus there is a clear contrast with the
Roman rei vindicatio.*


1 Eth. Nik. V, 7, 1184 b, 28. * See below, Chap. X, p. 221.

* Lexica Segueriana, ed. Bekker odx dds maca bikn diadiKcacia
kaXeirat, adn’ év ais epi rivos dudhioByrycis €or dro mpoonxer paddor.

* Lrpstus, Att. Recht und Rechtsverfahren,p.4638, is of a different opinion.


III: THE LEGAL SYSTEM 59


Turning to the actual material for the study of the pro-
cess in the extant forensic speeches we find nothing
treating of rights to property derived from purchase, but
several speeches on rights derived from inheritance. Very
conspicuous instances are presented by Isaios’ speech on
the estate of Hagnias,! and those of Demosthenes against
Makartatos and Leochares;? in the last there is a dis-
cussion of a very difficult point of Athenian law, namely,
the relative standing of a person claiming kinship as
against a posthumously adopted son of the last owner.
Other examples of d:adikacfa concern religious offices,
which were of importance, naturally, as sources of
income.

If we compare these cases with those of Roman, English,
or French law, we find that under the latter systems it
was advisable to try to get possession before urging one’s
claim to the title. The historical explanation of this
consists in the fact that Praetorian law developed as a
system working against the principle of “self-help” by
means of interdicts, e.g. uti possidetis or utrubi. The
introduction of interdicts was intended as a substitute for
juridical self-help, which was one of the most powerful
agents in the archaic process of securing right. While the
executive power of the State was weak, it had to let people
make their claims good on their own initiative, e.g. by
pignoris capio or manus injectio. As the authority of
the State developed, these methods became obsolete and
undesirable—in fact dangerous to society—and the State
began to assert its judicial monopoly. The gradual restric-
tion of self-help led also in French and English law to
a procedure aiming first of all at protecting or securing
possession and relegating the trial as to rights to a sub-
sequent stage.

It may be asked whether there was in Greek law any-
thing similar to that procedural relation between possession
and title.* It may seem that lawful possession was pro-
tected in accordance with a passage in the Athenian Con-
stitution containing a notice of a proclamation by the First


* Isaros XI. 2 Dem, XLIII and XLIV.
* HERMANN-THALHEIM, Rechtsalterthtimer, p. 118.


Restric-
tion of
self-help.


60 JURISPRUDENCE OF THE GREEK CITY


Archon, made upon entering office for the year.' He gave
out that every one would be entitled during his archonship
to hold all land and movable property which he held when
the Archon entered office, and should remain in possession up
to the end of his term of office. It might be argued that
this constitutes protection, and would form the ground
for an action if the proclamation were infringed. But this
idea can hardly stand when we consider the existing evidence ;
there is no speech on such a theme, and although the
argument a silentio is not always a very sound one, it
is pretty strong in this case, because so many forensic
speeches have survived, and we are informed as to
the general contents of many lost orations. The truth
probably is that the proclamation was an archaic survival
from the time when the First Archon was really a very
important magistrate, a kind of President of the Republic.
The proclamation has great historical significance, but it is
not the foundation of any process in law. It was meant to
guarantee the rule of law in connexion with every right of
property as well as of possession.

Yet in a community so highly developed as the Athenian
State protection against dispossession by violence had to be
provided in some way, and we do find certain forms of
procedure intended to meet the need. The principal remedy
was the dixn éfovAns, employed against those who ousted
other people from their possessions. The name was de-
rived, according to Harpokration, from the verb é£iAdAev
meaning “to push out.”? This is so clear that the only
doubt as to the bearing of the action arose from additional
remarks of Harpokration on various cases when it was
applied. These remarks have been interpreted to mean
that the action was directed towards the execution of a
judgement. But these cases mentioned by Harpokration
concern particular applications, and the fundamental idea
remains the defence of possession.®


1 Ath. Const. c. 56 doa tis eixev mpiv adrdv cioedbeiv eis rv apxny,
Tadr’ €xew Kal Kpareiv peypt apyns TéAous.

* HaRPORR. dixn é£ovAns (LIPSIuS, 665); see below, p. 225.

* As to the other statements contained in Harpokration’s fragment
see the controversy between RABEL and Lipstus in Z. SS. Roman.
Abth. 1915 to 1918.


an pts al


ee ~~


Ill: THE LEGAL SYSTEM 61


Instances of the process are found in several speeches of
the Attic Orators; Demosthenes used it in a trial arising
from his suit against his guardian Aphobos. The latter
had been convicted of mismanaging Demosthenes’ property
during his minority, and was condemned to pay both fine
and compensation ; but when Demosthenes tried to get the
money, a certain Onetor came forward saying that that
part of Aphobos’ property was pledged as the dowry of his
wife. Demosthenes had the right to remove this obstruc-
tion by means of the dikn efovAns.!

A second process, dikn Biaiwy, applies to dispossession by
violence as regards chattels.

We now turn to the question of the protection of public Public
rights and interests. This was secured in two ways: Wt°"8*
through individual and through State action.

1, The private accusation, which under the name of
auxopavria became the scourge of Greek public life, was
based on the principle that every*citizen was called upon
to defend and enforce public rights by actions which in-
volved personal profit. The point of view that there is a
fundamental difference between public and private, or be-
tween criminal and civil law is modern; while recognizing
the distinction, the Greeks admitted it only in an attenuated
form. An illustration is provided by the typical case of
Demosthenes’ prosecution of Meidias.? The quarrel was
a personal one; Meidias tried to humiliate Demosthenes in
every possible way, and even took advantage of the fact
that Demosthenes had undertaken a State service as Chora-
gos—he was providing the chorus and appurtenances for a
dramatic performance—to insult him publicly. The crown
and vestments worn by Demosthenes in his official capacity
were torn and cast in the dirt: Meidias actually slapped
his enemy in the face.

In bringing his action against Meidias Demosthenes had
ample material for enlarging on the personal aspect of the
case and the insult to himself, but he went further than
this, insisting that in his person as Choragos, the Common-
wealth had been insulted. In his speech he brought out


1 Dem, XXX. * Dew, XI,


62 JURISPRUDENCE OF THE GREEK CITY


the point of view that when a man’s action includes
violence, the effect is public; “what a man does with
violence constitutes an injustice against the community.” *
Aristotle in the Rhetoric remarks on the contrast between
an action for assault (a/k/as), a private wrong, and an action
for military desertion (do7parelas,\uroragias), which entirely
concerns the xo.vév; “he who commits adultery or assault
infringes the rights of a single citizen, but he who fails to
perform military duties breaks the law and commits injus-
tice against the commonwealth.” 2 Greek law presented in
this way what seems to us a peculiar mixture of civil and
criminal procedure.

2. There were also cases in which it was considered that
the public offence was so grievous or the public danger so
great that the city itself came forward and acted, as it were,
personally against the offender. Such a process was called
eloayyeAdia, to which a corresponding process is presented
under the English system by the Bill of Attainder. This
was a political trial in the Council or in the Assembly.
The proceedings against the unfortunate commanders who
had fought at Arginusae were conducted by etcayyedia.
Right through the fifth century the Council wielded ex-
tensive powers, and was not obliged to wait for the
lengthy procedure involved in actions before the Assembly.
We read in the Athenian Constitution that it was pos-
sible and usual for the Council to arrest, imprison, and
even put to death people accused of what we should call
high treason ;* Aristotle describes with approval the action
of one Archinos, who persuaded the Council to inflict
punishment without trial on persons who had broken one
of the principal conventions for the return of exiles after
the downfall of the Thirty. A resolution of the people,

, Dem. XXI, c.45 rav6’, doa tis Biatopevos mparret, koiv’ adiknuara Kat
kara he é£@ Tov mpdyparos dvTev ipyeiO 6 vonoberns.

* AR. Rhet. I, 18, 3 806 kai rddexnpara kat ra Stkatopara dixas Corey adexeiv
Kai Sixavompayeiv® i yap mpds €va kai wpicpevov i) mpos TO Kowwdy® 6 yap
poixevay Kal rumrop ddtkel Tia Tav wpiopéevar, 6 Sé pa) OTpaTEVdpeEvos TO
acca 8 ee Vol. I, p. 248. ‘i a attoct sts
¢nuwtvoas tee Broras ae Spiel i 1) MpoTepov pev nv kupla Kal xpnyuacw

Ibid. c. 40 Soret... rodtrevcacba Kadds Apxivos ... eet tis HpEaro


an , - > a“
Tov Karedn\vOsrev pynoikakeiv, dmayayov rovroy emt thy Bovdjy Kal meloas
akptToy amoxreivat,


III: THE LEGAL SYSTEM 63


(Wigiopa) which afterwards obtained force of law (vép0s),
put a stop to this use of power by the Council. One
Eumelides prevented the execution of a certain Lysi-
machos by summary process, and a law was passed that no
Athenian citizen could be sentenced to death, imprisonment,
or confiscation without a decision of the People.’ This
kind of justice appears as the spontaneous action of the
political body.

One more variety of procedure must be mentioned in this
connexion, namely, the action called mpoBod7.? This was
a form of procedure in which a private accuser brought a
case before the Assembly and obtained a prejudicial verdict
as to the guilt of the accused, but had to bring the case
before the Heliastic tribunal afterwards for regular trial.
The Court was not bound by the previous decision, but a
general atmosphere unfavourable to the accused was ob-
viously created, and an acquittal became improbable, though
not impossible. By a curious inconsistency the accuser was
allowed to drop the action if he wished.

These were the principal means for the protection of
public safety: they can all be traced in modern law, though
in different combinations.


5. Fairness.


Aristotle adds one more chapter on a kind of justice
which he describes as justice outside legality. This is
called émefKera, in the sense of fairness ; the English word
“equity ”— originally an equivalent—having assumed a
technical connotation as a branch of English law, does
not quite fit for our purpose.

The teaching on this department of justice forms one of
the most instructive parts of Greek jurisprudence ; it has
had a long history and a great influence on modern develop-
ments of the theory of law. It is noticeable that the

1 Ibid, c, 45 kal Avoipayov abtis dyayovans as tov Syysov KaOnpevoy On
HEA ovra amoOvyoKkew Evpndidns . .. apeidero, ov packer Seiv avev Sdixa-
ornpiov yracews ovdeva Tay Trokit@y arobyncke’ ... 6 dé Sppos .. . vdpov
éGero, dy Tivos atoxeiy 7 BovAn Katayve@ i) Cnut@on, Tas Katayv@ceis Kal Tas
emiCnuacers eiodyetv Tovs Oecpobéras eis rd SuxacTnptoy, Kat 6 Tt dy of Stxaorat


Vnpicwrra, roito Kvptov eva. Cf. P. CLocHé, Revue des études
grecques, XXXIII. 2 See below, Chap. IX.


* Emeixea,


64 JURISPRUDENCE OF THE GREEK CITY


framers of the Code Napoléon in 1804 thought it necessary
to restate the doctrine cf Aristotle on émefcera in their
introductory chaptér. The best and shortest way of
approaching the subject is to start with Plato’s dialogue
called the Statesman, in which we read: “ The law, in aim-
ing at what is best or most just, cannot at once enjoin what
is best for all. The differences of men and actions, and the
endless irregular movements of things, do not admit of any
universal and simple rule. No art whatsoever can lay
down a rule which will last for ever.”!_ Compare with this
short statement the definition given by Aristotle in the
Ethics: “The nature of the equitable is the correction of
law, inasmuch as law falls short of what is required by the
universal terms in which it is expressed. This (deficiency)
is the reason why all things cannot be regulated by law, so
that decrees are required; that which does not admit of
definition must be governed by indefinite rules.”? Thus
laws are general rules, and for this reason they sometimes
fail to do justice to the circumstances of particular cases.
There is often a wide gap between the abstract rule and
the concrete case, embedded, as it were, in circumstances ;
it would lead to great injustice if we applied such a rule
indiscriminately in all instances. In order to get some-
thing more than “ book ” righteousness, we must admit the
force of conceptions which go beyond the rule. ’Emuefkeca
is the liberal application of rules to special sets of cireum-
stances; it forms a link between the general véuos and the
single case in its complicated surroundings,

Treatment In the Rhetoric® Aristotle’s treatment is more developed

ee than in the EZthics; he says: “The equitable seems to be
just, and equity (fairness) is a kind of justice, but goes

* PLATO, Politikos, 294a vdpos otk dy more Sivaito 16 re dpiotoy Kar
70 Otkatdrarov axptBas maow dpa repi\aBov ro BeATioroy énuratrev’ ai yap
dvopodtntes tev Te avOpwrwy kal Tov mpdkewv Kai Tro pndérote pndev as
Eros eimetv novxiay aye tov avOpwrivey ovdev edow droid év oddevi rept
dravroyv kai emi mdyta tov xpovov arodaiver Oa téxvynv ovd’ jytivodr.

? Ar., Eth, Nik. V, 10, 8, 1187 b 16 émetkes Sixavov peév €ariv, od To Kara
vopov O€, GAN’ eravépOapa vopipov Stxaiov ... Kai €or attn 9 piots 7 Tov
emtetkovs, €ravdpOwpa vopou, 7 éAXeimer Sia TO KaOddov. TodTO yap atrLoy
kal TOU pu) Mayra Kata vdpoy eivat, Gre mEpi eviwy advvarov bécba vdpor,
dare Wnpicpatos Sei. tov yap adopicrou adpioros Kal 6 Kavev éorw.


* I, 13, 18-18. See appendix to this chapter, p. 71. Cf. Jess,
Translation of Aristotle’s Rhetoric.


—— A


III: THE LEGAL SYSTEM 65


beyond the written law. This margin is left by legislators,
sometimes voluntarily, sometimes involuntarily ; involun-
tarily when the point escapes their notice, voluntarily when
they are unable to frame a definition, and yet it is neces-
sary to lay down an absolute rule; also in cases which
inexperience makes it hard to define,—such as the case of
wounding with iron of a given size and kind; for life
would not be long enough for a person who tried to
enumerate the cases. If, then, it is impossible to be
definite, yet necessary to legislate, one must speak generally ;
and so, if even the wearer of a ring lift his hand against
another or strike him, he is guilty of a wrong under the
written law, but not in reality; and here fairness
comes in.”

The treatment of all the cases which may arise cannot
be completely planned beforehand; as Aristotle says, it
would take an age merely to enumerate the possibilities ;
so the general rules must be supplemented by the use of
reason and fairness in the application of them.?

In spite of various drawbacks in their procedure, the
Athenians had a great reputation among the Greeks for
this very side of their administration of justice; they
were admired for their humanity (¢:AavOpemia) and fair-
ness (€zve(Keia).

To illustrate the philosophical treatment of émefkera by
Aristotle let us turn to a few examples drawn from actual
litigation. But first let us observe one fundamental limi-
tation ; in all these cases we have to deal with pleadings in
the Courts. Now the essence of forensic pleading is to
make one’s own case as strong as possible, and to minimize
as far as one can the arguments of one’s opponent ; in no
system of law can pleaders be expected to be impartial.
In Greek law, so far as it is concerned with the applica-
tion of émeixera, the subjective element is very prominent ;
artificial devices and legal fencing are strongly represented
in the speeches of the orators. Wyse, in his very valuable
edition of the Speeches of Isaios, has been brought by his
close study of his author to an altogether sceptical conclu-


1 Ar., Rhet. I, xiii, 13 ff., ed. Cops, pp. 255 ff. Cf. Pol. ITT, 1282 b 2;
Magn. Mor. Il, 1.


2231-2 F


Testa-
ments.


66 JURISPRUDENCE OF THE GREEK CITY


sion. He detects so many sophisms and flaws in statement
and argument that his final estimate is an absolutely nega-
tive one. To this’extreme view we may, however, find an
antidote in the commentary on the text; for Wyse some-
times attempts to show that both sides are equally wrong,
and their arguments equally fallacious, thus leading up to
a reductio ad absurdum of his main position.

Let us be content with the fact that the general con-
siderations presented by the pleaders usually had public
opinion behind them ; no audience would stand pure non-
sense, and, least of all, a critical Athenian audience. The
orators employ every kind of ingenious artifice, but it is to
be remembered that they are seeking to persuade a large
number of average citizens that certain legal rules had to
be applied in a certain way; the Courts were influenced by
those subjective considerations, which sounded plausible,


and appealed to public opinion.


In two departments of law the orators made particularly
great use of general considerations of fairness as against
exact and rigid legal rules: Testaments and Contracts
afforded an extensive field for the application of equitable
principles, and many speeches deal with these subjects.
That of Isaios on the estate of Nikostratos, though other-
wise not very interesting, contains a general remark of
great weight.! He says that in trials concerning inheri-
tance it is much more important to give heed to circum-
stantial evidence than to statements of witnesses ; because
the principal witnesses are generally either dead, or—if the
will has been made abroad—absent, and therefore not
amenable to cross-examination ; their depositions have to
be taken as they stand, and strict standards of criticism
cannot be applied.

In these testamentary cases there were two facts before
the Court; (1) under Solon’s law every childless citizen
had the free right to make a will, but (2) his will was


‘ Isartos, IV, § 12 év pdvats 8€ rais rev KAnpov cicaywyais Soxet por
MpoonKew Tekpnplos padAov f pdprvow morevew. Tepl pev yap Tov GAdwv
ovpBodaiwy ov mavy xaderdv rods ra Yrevdyn paprupodyras édéyxew. (Aros
yap Kal mapdvros Tou mpagavros karapaprupovot rept b€ tev diabjKav was
dy Tis yvoin Tovs pn TAaAnOn Aéyovras, €i wy mdvy peyddra Ta diadéeporra ein,
atrov pev kab od paprupovar reOvedros.


Ill: THE LEGAL SYSTEM 67


invalidated if made in extreme old age, or when the
testator was of unsound mind, or under the influence of
a woman.! Thus, if the actual will had been made in due
form, and under normal conditions as to age and mental
sanity, the only way to get it set aside was to prove undue
influence. Several instances of this occur in the speeches.
In Isaios’ speech on the estate of Kleonymos the case is
somewhat different. The facts were that Kleonymos had
quarrelled with his nearest relations, and in a fit of temper
had excluded them from his will, and devised his whole
estate to strangers. Subsequently, however, as Isaios tries
to show, he became reconciled with his relations, and there
were some circumstances indicating that at the time of
his death he was actually on the best of terms with them.
During his last illness he sent for his will with the in-
tention of altering it in favour of his kinsmen; but it
did not arrive in time, and the alteration was not made.
Isaios pleads that there was sufficient evidence that when
he made the will he was not in a normal state of mind,
since later on, upon calmer consideration, he came to regret
his hasty action, and wished to change the dispositions
of his will in favour of his own kin.? The pleadings are
based entirely on psychological surmises; the case would
be quite impossible to maintain at the present day. There
is no doubt, however, that an Athenian Court would
frequently listen to such considerations, nor are they
entirely foreign to modern practice. Even now, for
example, jurymen may sometimes extend leniency to
an accused person, not only on account of mitigating
circumstances, but also because they are satisfied that
he acted under abnormal conditions. Aristotle in the
Problemata® says expressly that the efforts of sophists
and sharp practitioners were largely directed towards in-
validating wills; they persuaded the Courts to attach
weight to this kind of psychological suggestions (cf. évOv-
phpara).


1 Cf. HypEREIDEs, ITI (V), § 17.

? Is. I, e.g. §§ 10-21.

* Problemata, 29, 3,950 b 5 Aca ri éviows Stxaarnpiors Trois yévert paddov
i rais SiadnKas yprovvrat; f bre yévous pev odk éore karaWevoagbat, Gdda
To by amodaivew" StabjKat Sé rroAdal Wevdeis Fdn eEnrtCyxOnoay odcat.


F2


Contracts.


Interpre-
tation of
archaic
laws.


68 JURISPRUDENCE OF THE GREEK CITY


As regards contracts there isa very wide opposition between
legal rules and the arguments of pleaders. Hypereides calls
attention to the contrast between the letter and the spirit of
justice. A certain Athenogenes had persuaded Hypereides’
client to buy a shop; he had induced a clever woman of
more than doubtful character to serve as his agent in the
matter. Under her influence the plaintiff had concluded
the bargain. Later on he found that he had been grossly
imposed upon, and wanted to rescind the sale. He does
not.deny that the contract was actually made, but he urges
that he was gulled by the blandishments of the lady. This
would serve for an argument even now, if fraudulent mis-
representation could be proved, but our present standard
is much stricter. Hypereides put the point in a most
emphatic way. He forestalled the argument of his opponent,
saying: “ Athenogenes will tell you that, according to law,
agreements made between parties are valid. Yes, if they
are in accordance with justice; but when they are not, the
law on the contrary forbids them to stand.” !

It is clear that the administration of law in Athens de-
manded wide discretion on the part of the Courts. In the
first place, we are often told that the old laws—especially those
of Solon, which in the fourth century were still recognized
as the foundation of existing law—were archaic and obscure.
But the clumsiness and difficulty of the legislative process
made it hard to introduce amendments in good time; conse-
quently they mostly retained their archaic form, and the
best course open for amendment was to use wide discretion
in interpreting and applying them. This is expressed in
the oath taken by the Heliasts, in which they say that
if there is a law covering the case, they will obey it, but
if the application be doubtful they will judge “to the best
of their belief” (yvéun dikatordrn).2 It is evident from
the speeches that the range of “considerations of justice ”
was very extensive, and was not really restricted to cases
where there were no laws.


' HYPEREIDES, op. cit. § 13 épei d€ mpos byas adrixa pada ’AOnvoyevns
ws 6 vopos Aéyet, Goa dv Erépos Erépw Spooynon KUpia civa. ta ye dikaca
... 7a O€ pt) rovvaytiov dmrayopevet py kvpta etvar. Of, AR., Rhet. I, xv. 9.

* PoLLux, VIII, 10 6 & dpxos hy trav Stkacray rept pev dv vdpor eiai,
WnguetcOar xara rovs vdpous, mept b€ dv py eloi, yooun rH Sixacorarn,


Cf. Cope’s Rhetoric, I, p. 271.


ied ee eee


III: THE LEGAL SYSTEM 69


Another reason for such a free treatment of the laws Residuary
lies in the fact that the higher Courts (the Heliastic is
dixacTypia) represented the Sovereign People. Therefore people.
orators sometimes addressed juries as “you citizens of
Athens.” Thus the use of discretionary power by the
Courts constitutes an appeal to what is termed residuary
justice. There must be, as we see even in our own law,
a margin beyond actual legality. “Grace” is nowadays a
political prerogative concerned with cases of commutation
of criminal sentences; but in the fourteenth century, for
instance, the residuary justice vested in the King was a very
serious element in the juridical system. The King was to
some extent the safeguard and guarantor that there should
be no gaps and no exaggerations in the administration
of justice. He acted, through his Council or through
Parliament, especially with regard to cases where no
remedy could be found at law. In the Athenian juridical
system Demos takes the place of King or Parliament.
The Heliaea, though we are inclined to oppose it to the
Ekklesia, is really a sovereign assembly of the same kind.
The word “ Halia,” used in Doric Greece for the Assembly
of the People, is the same as the “ Heliaea” of Athens.

In this way the wide scope of the doctrine of émefkeva
covered general fairness and humanity; and it is not to be
wondered at that it did not form a separate class of legal
rights and remedies as did general, corrective, and distribu-
tive justice, but transcended these divisions and found expres-
sion in practically every department of law. Modern juries
act to some extent on similar lines when they are moved by
appeals to unwritten law, by psychological suggestions,
by pressure of public opinion.

Before leaving the legal system, let us consider briefly Retribu-
two additional passages in Aristotle’s Hthics, dealing with =~
Retaliation, and Exchange. We read in the fifth book:!
“There are some who consider retaliation (76 dv7umemov0os)
as justice.” The reference is to the Pythagorean conception

1 Eth. Nik., V, 5, 1182b 21 Soxet S€ riot Kat ro dvrimerrovbds ecivac
dma@s Sixatov, domep of WvOaydperon épacarv. ... 7d 8 avtumerrovOds ov
€papporre. ovr emi TO veuntikov Sixaov ovr’ ém rd SiopOwrikdy .. .
ToAAaxov yap dtahwvei* oiov ef apxny Exar ematager, ov det dvtimAnyhvat,
kai el dpxovta émata€er, ov mAnynvat povov Set ddA Kai KoAagOivat.


Justice in
exchange.


70 JURISPRUDENCE OF THE GREEK CITY


that the root of justice isin retribution. Aristotle denies this,
and criticizes sharply the view, and yet in some respects
he accepts it. He Says that, while 76 dytimemovO6s cannot
be applied in criminal justice, it may be applied to some
measure in civil law. This seems a contradiction, for
retaliation does occur in connexion with delict, and this
stands on the border between criminal and civil justice.
He rejects the Pythagorean view, first because 76 avrize-
tovOés does not fit in with either distributive or corrective
justice, and secondly because it is impossible to apply the
principle of proportion; “eye for eye and tooth for tooth”
cannot be exacted if the persons concerned are differently
situated ; supposing one were a magistrate and the other
an ordinary citizen, or one were a citizen, and the other
a slave. In these cases the mere returning of a blow
would by no means equalize matters.

Aristotle does, however, recognize that, as regards ex-
changes, real justice would lie in the establishment of
equivalents, and this idea, though not identical with that
of retribution, is analogous to it. He examines the work
of various crafts in relation to each other, e.g., the pro-
blem of equating boots with houses, a process which can
be accomplished by estimating the demand for a commodity
in the market! or the amount of work put into the product,
and the use which is to be made of it.”

The question may be asked, especially in our days of
profiteers and soaring prices, whether there is any indication
of a policy directed towards the establishment of a “ fair
price.” The treatment of the subject in Plato’s Laws might
lead one to suppose that the Greeks favoured the idea that
prices should be regulated, e.g. in regard to land. There is
one sentence, and that a very short and obscure one, which
could be interpreted in this sense. “If you want to estab-
lish proportion, you should not do it when the exchange has
been made, but when everybody has got his own.”* This


Eth. Nik. V.5, § 8, 1133 a 8 Sei ody AapBavewv roy oixoddépoy mapa Tov
okuToTopou TO exeivou Epyor, Kai av’roy éxeivom petadiddvat 1d [Tov] avrod.
€av obv mpatov 7 Td Kata Thy dvadoyiay troy, Eira TO avTuTerovOds yévnrat,
€otat TO eydpuevor’ ei S€ py, ovK ioov ovdé Tuppever’ ovbev yap KwdvVEL
Kpeirrov elvat To Oarépov epyov #) 1d Oarépov’ Set obv ratra loacOjva....
dei rolvuv Sep olkoddpos mpos oxvrotdpuov, rocadi tmodnpara mpos oikiav.

? Magn. Mor., IX, 1194a 2 ff.

* Eth. Nik., loc. cit., § 12, 1133b 1 eis cxjpa 8 dvadoyias ob dei dye,


III: THE LEGAL SYSTEM 1


seems to indicate the establishment of a maximum or tariff
of some kind, which ought to be set up before the exchange
takes place.

We have now concluded our survey of the legal system
with its three categories, Specific Justice, subdivided into
Distributive and Corrective, and General Justice, covering
rules as to civil rights and public law; all these depart-
ments were affected by émvefkera, the principle of fairness
or equity, which appears to be the most characteristic con-
tribution of Greece to the treatment of legal problems.


APPENDIX TO CHAPTER III
Ar. Rhet. I. xiii. §§ 18-18. (Cope’s text.)


T% yap EMLELKES Coker Sikavov elvalt, éoTe Oe émlerkes TO
mapa TOY Yeypapmevoy v6mov OlKaLov. oupPatver dé TobTo
7a pev dK ovT@v Ta O€ ExdvT@v TOV vomobeTar, aKov Tov ev
érav Ad On, € éxovTav 0 bray Bi OUV@VTAL O.opioar, aXN avay-
Katov bev Hi KabdXrov eElzeiv, 17) n 6€, GNX’ @s emt TO TOAD,
kat doa pay pad.ov Stopioa éu’ amet play, olov TO TPOTAL
oLdnpo mrik@ Kal mow@ Tivi. vmodelmot yap av 6 aly O.a-
pub obra. dv ouv 7) adubpuorov, dén dé vomobeT Hoar, avdyKn
amos ciety, OTE Kav SakTvALov EXOV emdpnra THY
Xeipa 7 TaTaén, Kara pev TOV YY pap pevov v6 pov évox os
€OTL Kal aOKel, Kata 0€ TO adn bes OUK GOLKEL, Kal TO EMLELKES
TOUTO early. es ep ots Te yap det ovyyvdpny EXEL, EMLELKT
TATA, Kal TO TH dpaprhpara Kal Ta AOLKH MATA pI TOD ioov
af.obv, pn de de dpapTypara kal Ta aTUXHmaTa Eat. 0 aTv-
Xnpara pev boa mapddoya Kal Ha dro Hox Onpias, a papTh-
fara dé doa pr mapdaroya Kal pr) dd mrovn plas, dduKy mara
dé doa pire mapddoya amr mrovnpias T €oTiy) Ta yap Ov
émOupiay a7r6 movnpias. Kal TO Tots av Opamivors ovyywa-
OKEly EmrlerKes. Kal 7} pi T pos TOV yOpov GAA mpos TOV
vouobérny oKomelv, Kal pi) pos Tov Abyov aXAA pos THY
Oidvoray Tob vopobérob, Kal PB pos THY Tpasev adn pos
THY Mpoaiperiy, Kal 47) Tpos TO pEpos andra Tmpos. TO éAov,
pnde motos TLS viv, AAG Trolds TLS HV det 7) @S €ml TO TOAV.
oe RAL TO dvéxeo Ba a0iKov pevov. Kal TO @addov Aoy é0€-
dew KpiverOat 7 7 Epye. Kal TO els Slairay paNov 7 7) els O(KnY
Botrec Bau ¢ devau’ 6 yap Scart ris TO EmLELKES Opa, 6 dé OiKka~
orns TOV vopov" Kal TovTov EveKa OLaiTnTHS evpedn, & dmws TO
EmlelKes LayXvn.


rap arakovrat (ei be BN, dpudorépas e&eu Tas imepoxas Td €Tepoy akpor),
G\N’ Grav €xwot Ta airay.


The term


‘‘ source.”


Néypos.


CHAPTER IV
THE SOURCES OF LAW


l. Enactments.


In proceeding to consider the subject of sources of Greek


law, we must be careful not to confuse historical with juri--


dical sources; the former term refers to material for in-
formation, while the latter deals with authority. Of course,
testimony in words and in writing is employed in order to
argue a case and to prepare a decision ; in this sense infor-
mation assumes a specially juridical aspect, and gives rise
to the law of evidence. Evidence deals, however, with
facts and not with law, though its use is regulated by law.
What we mean by source of law is the authority from
which law is derived.

Now what were these sources for Greek law? At present
we recognize: (1) Statutory law, enacted by Parliament or
under the authority of Parliament by subordinate bodies
such as County Councils, Borough Councils, ete.; (2) Com-
mon law,a body of rules abstracted from decisions given in
particular cases: it may be therefore designated judge-
made law; (3) Custom, rules of law arising out of the
traditional local practice, apart from direct enactment or
authoritative decision of the Courts. In Greece the rela-
tion between these categories differed from that obtaining
nowadays. In the period covering the greater part of
the fifth and the beginning of the fourth centuries Greek
democracies, as represented by Athens, required that laws
should be enacted. This principle usually holds good for
that period, though it is not absolutely applicable even
then ; still, at that time véyuo. undoubtedly were the prin-
cipal source of law. In the speech made by Andokides in
his defence against the charge of having taken part in the
profanation of the Eleusinian Mysteries, the strongest


\ argument is that the sentence of dripiéa, defamatory dis-


2 ® ’ é
— — — _


IV: THE SOURCES OF LAW 73


franchisement, passed on him, had been abrogated by the
amnesty declared in the archonship of Eukleides! ; mention
is also made of a great revision of the laws made in 403 B.c.,”
in consequence of an enactment by the people, on the
reconstruction of the constitution, to the effect that (1) no
unwritten law should have force, which means, apparently,
that nothing but the written laws were to be regarded as
binding; (2) that no decree of the Assembly or of the
Council should overrule a law; (3) that no law should be
enacted in regard to single individuals (ém’ avdp/) ; (4) writ-
ten laws were declared to be those received and confirmed
at the revision under Eukleides.’

These rules, enumerated by Andokides, are very charac-
teristic; if applied in their full force they would amount
to absolute abrogation of customary law and to the recogni-
tion of statute law as the one source of legal authority.
Such a principle is suggested by democratic doctrine; the
People were the only legislative factor, and therefore every
kind of law should have come expressly from the People.
Custom was looked upon with disfavour, because it had its
roots in antiquity, when privileged groups or families held
sway. Such a view certainly prevailed in Athens, as may be
gathered, for instance, from a passage in Euripides’ Supplices.*
In this play suppliants come to seek the protection of the
Athenians against the Tyrant of Thebes, Kreon, whose
heralds pursue them. The King of Athens, Theseus, in
spite of the anachronism, appears as the spokesman of
democracy and opposes the heralds. He expresses the
view of law held by every right-minded citizen. “ Nothing


' ANDOKIDES, I, 73-80.

* Ibid. 81 ff.

le ae edoker t buy Soxtpaca fev Tovs Yopous, Soxipdcoayres de
dvaypawat, dypige de vd pep Tas apyas py xpnoGat pnde Tept evds, yipiopa
bé Cundev) pnte BovAns pnre Snpou (vépou) KUPLOTE POV elvat, und’ em avdpi
vopov (é§elvaty TuUdevar ea BN Tov avtoy émt macw AOnvaiots, trois de
ae Tots Ketpevors ypnoba am’ EvkAeiSov dpxovros ... Cf. Dem. XXIV,


* Op. cit. 429 ff. :
ovdey Tupavyou Suc pevéorepov mOnet,
Grou 76 pev _Tpariorov ovK eioly vdpor
Kowwol, kparet & eis TOY vopoV | kexTnpevos
avrés Tap avT@ kal 768° over” €or ioov.
YEYPABHEVOY bé Tey vopov 6 7t aoberns
6 mAovotds te Ty Sikny tony exe.


Laws and
decrees.


74 JURISPRUDENCE OF THE GREEK CITY


is more deadly to a commonwealth than a tyranny, for
then, to begin with, there are no common laws, but the
single ruler himself holds sway over the law; this is not
equitable. But when laws are written down, then both
rich and poor can claim equal justice.” Such a written
law is véuos ; it is a measure carried through and promul-
gated according to the regular process of legislation.

Another term to be considered is Oeopds, which was
properly applied to a declaration of customary law; the
words “statement” or “establishment” would almost
exactly render its meaning. It is not necessarily an act of
the people as a whole, but rather of a college of magis-
trates or of a single lawgiver, declaring the law to the
people. Thus Drakon is usually described as a Oecpobérns,
Solon as a vopobérns'; but Solon himself uses both terms
with no perceptible difference of meaning.”

Let me revert again to the democratic principle that
enacted law is the normal source of legal authority.

In his classification of democracies in the Politics Aris-
totle lays stress on the difference between constitutions
and governments which follow strictly the legal rules of
the Commonwealth, and those which, on the contrary, dis-
regard these rules, and govern more or less according to
the whims and fashions of the Demos. While explaining
the contrast, he emphasizes the fact that in the first class
law (véy0s) holds the chief place, while in the second it is
the decree (r#dioua) which takes precedence of enacted
law.’ “This is a state of affairs brought about by the
demagogues. For in democracies which are subject to law
the best citizens are chosen as rulers, and there are no
demagogues; but where the laws are not supreme, dema-
gogues spring up. The people becomes practically a
monarch.... And the people, which is now a monarch, and
no longer under the control of law, seeks to exercise monar-
chical sway, and becomes a despot; the flatterer is held
in honour ; this sort of democracy being relatively to other
democracies what tyranny is to other forms of monarchy.


1 Cf. ANDOKIDES, I, § 81 ypiaba Trois Sddrwvos vopois Kal ois


~ Apdxovros berpois. 2 Cf. however below, p. 129.


8 Ar., Pol. VI (IV), 4, 1292 a, 7 ff.


IV: THE SOURCES OF LAW 75


The spirit of both is the same, and they exercise alike
a despotic rule over the better citizens. The decrees of the
Demos correspond to the edicts of the tyrant. ... The
demagogues make the decrees of the people override the
laws, and refer all things to the popular assembly.”

This theme is treated with many variations; Aristotle
returns to it continually. It forms an important basis
of his classification from the point of view of legality.
For example, in Athens he notices systematic endeavours
to keep up law-abiding democracy, as against the outbursts
of passion and arbitrary rule towards the end of the Pelopon-
nesian war, and in the course of the fourth century. Public
law was maintained, on the whole, on the lines indicated
by Aristotle, the central idea being that véyos, enacted law,
has to be guaranteed and fenced round by carefully-devised
measures of a public character.


2. Custom.


Was the democratic ideal of a State governed by enacted
law ever in force? Is it true that custom and juridical
authority were not active as legal sources during the
classical period? Even if there were no direct testimony
to the contrary, it would be hard to believe that customary
law did not exist, and in fact some evidence is available
showing that there was a vast amount of customary and
business rules in existence by the side of enacted law,
and that Athens, in particular, was governed to a large
extent by traditional law.

In regard to sacral institutions, and in all cases where
religion was concerned, the influence of traditional usage
asserted itself emphatically. The Council of the Areiopagos
had jurisdiction in cases of homicide, arson, and similar
offences, and this body was guided in its decisions by cus-
tom not put down in writing, and not enacted by the
people, but preserved by traditional jurisprudence as 7a
ma&7p.a, ancestral custom. There were professional repre-
sentatives of legal lore from whom the ordinary Athenian
had to seek instruction. These were termed éényntai
(interpreters), who, according to the lexicographers, were
able to give authoritative interpretation of traditional law ;


Interpre-
ters of
custom.


76 JURISPRUDENCE OF THE GREEK CITY


inscriptions record three kinds of interpreters: (1) egnynrai
ITv66y pynoror, (2) eénynrat rav Edpodrmday, (3) eénynral rav
Eirarpidév. The ‘first title contains a reference to the
oracle at Delphi, and the officials in question evidently
dealt with legal customs assumed to have been derived
from Delphi. In cases of purification, for example, when
a stain or pollution had to be removed from a family,
or from the people as a whole, the IIv@é6ypnoro probably
prescribed the measures to be taken. The second kind
were a consultative board for matters connected with the
Eleusinian Mysteries, the family of the Eumolpidai being
the most influential of the clans concerned with the celebra-
tion of these Mysteries. As to the third kind, our knowledge
is less definite; not all the Eupatrid families are meant,
but a special group of jurisconsults.1

As to the process of consultation, a speech of Demosthenes
against Kuergos and Mnesibulos? gives graphic information.
This case arose out of an execution for debt. A former
trierarch (i.e. one responsible for fitting out a ship) had
not rendered satisfactory account of some material supplied
to him by the State; he was called to account and sentenced,
and his goods were to be confiscated in payment. One
Theophemos was empowered to carry out the execution,
and in doing so treated the household of the debtor with
great harshness; an old -woman—an emancipated slave
who had been all her life in the family—was so roughly
handled that she died. The question arose, who had the
right to prosecute in connexion with her death? If she
had been a relative of the family, Drakon’s rules would
have been applied; they declared who among the kindred
should be the accuser, and who should support him; but
as the dead woman had not been a relative, but only
a member of the household, the matter was uncertain.
The plaintiff in the case explains that, being in doubt, he
went to the Interpreters, and asked for their advice.’


1 R.-Ene. s. v. éEnynrai.

* Dem., XLVII. Euergos and Mnesibulos were accused of having
given false witness in the suit between Theophemos and the present
plaintiff.

: Dem., op. cit., §§ 68, 69 dxovoavres dé pov of éénynrai taita, i{povrd
pe TOTepov eEnynowvtai por pdvoy }) Kai cupBovterawow. dmoxpivapévov dé


IV: THE SOURCES OF LAW ri


“When they heard the facts they asked me whether I wanted
them merely to interpret, or also to tell me what would be
expedient in the matter.” Thus it is clear that they did
not only expound legal custom, ra vépipa, but also gave
advice to those who consulted them, that is, their function
was that of juris periti, specially versed in a certain branch
of law. When we reflect on the vital importance of religion
and ritual in Greek public life, we obtain some idea of the
influence of the e€nynraié.

There is another connexion in which traditional law Rules laid
was still of great importance; there can be no possible ee
doubt that the chief forms of procedure—the different trates.
kinds of dééka: and ypagai—had been settled long before
the period of Ephialtes and Perikles, that is, before the
middle of the fifth century. We know, for instance, that
the First Archon had a wide jurisdiction in family affairs ;
that cases of wrongs to parents, orphans, heirs, and minors
under guardianship, all of which constantly occurred from
early times, were within his competence.1. The only inno-
vation carried out by Ephialtes in this respect consisted
in widening the range of appeal to the Heliastic Courts.
These Courts were a Solonian institution, but in the sixth
century, before the life of Attika became centralized in
the metropolis, the difficulty and cost of coming into the
city from the country districts materially lmited the
scope of appeal (gears) to the Heliaea, and these Courts
cannot have sat often. The necessity for the introduction
of picOogopia towards the middle of the fifth century
shows that before that time the jurors could be called
up only on rare occasions. Again, for jurisdiction in
the country districts, Peisistratos was the first to institute
dtkacrai Kata Shpyovs, who were not Heliasts, but sub-
stitutes for the Archon.

In the city the Archon’s jurisdiction was the chief means
of securing justice ; he sat originally as avroxpdétwp, and the
appeal to the Heliaea was reserved for the most important
cases. In fact, most of the judicial life of Athens before


> - b] , .. dae 66% a , A ‘ , ’ ,
Hou avrois auddrepa, eirov pot “ nueis Tolvuy cor Ta pev vVoutpa eEnynodpeba,
wv ,
ra d€ cvupopa mapavécopev.”


1 AR., Ath. Const. 56.


Pre-
cedents as
examples.


78 JURISPRUDENCE OF THE GREEK CITY


the second quarter of the fifth century was conducted by
the magistrates, and not by the Heliaea. It was not until
the League gave the Athenians hegemony in a great part of
Greece that these Courts acquired the importance attributed
to them, for example, in the Wasps of Aristophanes, and we
have to be on our guard against a possible distortion of
juridical perspective arising from too exclusive attention
to this period of their history.

Many of the forms of action handed down from earlier
times were not regulated by enacted law, but had been
evolved by practice; these forms were elaborated gradually,
starting, in some cases, from times before Drakon and Solon,
and were in general use in the sixth century. Thus the
law of procedure remained chiefly traditional, though in
some cases there were new laws enacted to regulate it.


3. Authority of Precedents.


Was there anything in Greek law corresponding to what
is called judicial authority? In English law this is a very
important source of law, operating with “precedents,”
which, though not actual law, lend authority to decisions ;
when a number of decisions on the same point follow one
another on the same lines, they crystallize, as it were, into
a rule of Common Law.

As far as Athens and other Greek democracies are con-
cerned there is nothing quite similar, because precedents were
not formally binding.t In Greece a peculiar way of in-
fluencing law by authority is apparent in the practice of the
Heliaea. A dixacrypioy of the Heliaea was unable to refer
to what is termed the ratio decidendi based on precedent,
but when decisions followed each other in the same sense,
direction was given to professional opinion and cases came
to be decided not under direct precedent, but on the ground
of similarity of motive and of prevailing conditions.

An instance in point may be cited from Demosthenes’
speech against Dionysodoros. The case arose out of a loan


* It should be noted that even in English law the hierarchy of
authorities culminating in the House of Lords only became binding


“in the course of the nineteenth century. In the United States Com-


mon Law exists apart from a general hierarchy of decisions.


IV: THE SOURCES OF LAW 79


made by certain merchants resident in Athens (pé7ovkoz)
to the skipper of a ship sailing to Egypt to buy corn.
The loan was made on condition that the skipper should
return to Athens with the corn and sell it there, because it
was expected that the corn would realize a large profit in
the Athenian market, and the calculations of interest, etc.,
were made on this basis. But the ship, instead of bringing
the corn to Athens, went from Egypt to Rhodos, and, the
corn having being sold there, came home without a cargo.
The skipper was prosecuted for breach of contract; he
pleaded ws major (a storm) in excuse, but this was held to
be insufficient, as the corn had been sold in Rhodos econ-
trary to agreement. At the end of the plaintiffs speech
occurs the following appeal to the Court: “Do not disre-
gard the fact that now, while you are deciding a single
case, you are legislating for the whole of the market, and
that numbers of those whose business is by sea are standing
here awaiting your decision. It you maintain the validity
of these contracts and agreements, and show no mercy to
those who break them, the money-lenders will be more
ready to make advances, and your trade will be stimulated.”
Thus the decision of a Court could be regarded as a symp-
tom of the views held by the tribunals.

On a number of points the decisions of the Heliaea pro- Influence
duced changes of the law. This might occur in cases where 1 tei
there had originally been a definite véuos, which, however, cisions on
had not been applied for a long time ; if then a case came up ai
for decision under conditions non-existent at the time when
the law was made, the Court might treat it as if it were
not binding. As regards wills, there was considerable free-
dom in the use and application of ancient rules. The
cumulative effect of such free application was that a foun-
dation was laid for a remedy which in Roman law took
definite shape in the querelu inofjiciosi testamenti—a ten-
dency prompted by the fact that there was a general
distrust of, and disinclination to grant probate in the case
of wills in which the claims of near relatives were disre-
garded. In Roman law eventually this produced a custom
of the Courts to treat wills as void in which one-fourth of

1 Dem., LVI, § 48, p. 1297.


80 JURISPRUDENCE OF THE GREEK CITY


the property had not been left to near relatives. The same
feeling is shown in Greek law in the attacks made on wills
by relatives whose claims have been ignored by the
testator."

In some cases claims are urged that are not acknowledged
by formal law, but creep in by the help of Heliastic deci-
sions; for example, inheritance by the mother The mother
was not an heiress at law in the fourth century, while in
the second she occupies a place in succession: in the same
way in Roman law she eventually obtained a standing in the
table of statutory succession. For this point in Greek law
we have evidence in the speech of Isaios about the estate of
Hagnias,? a case of diadixacia. In this trial the mother of
one of the parties was admitted to present a claim, and she
obtained some votes, It was the Archon who admitted
her, and his action in doing so shows that he recognized a
powerful tendency of public opinion in this direction.

Again, as regards bequests, a similar tendency is at work.
Bequests were valid if the heir consented to them, and had
to be paid through him; this made it very difficult to leave
anything to outsiders, and the law of the fourth century
shows a bent in favour of legatees, while in the next
century an actual change in the law takes place? This
change was not brought about by legislation (vopobecia),
but by the enlargement of the application of the law in the
Courts. Similarly in the case of dowry, though it was not
legally required, it became in practice a test of the legiti-
macy of marriage.* These instances may serve as examples
of a judge-made method for completing, supplementing, and
correcting the law.


1 K. g. Isatos, I, §§ 83, 34, 35, ending: adore ris dy tpav ravras eivat
kupias tas b1aOjnkas Wnicato, ds 6 pev Aides as ovx opbas é€xovoas
azredoxipacey.

? Isaros, XI, § 2 eav 8€ Kal rovr’ exdimn TO yévos,... moved rovs mpos
LnTpos Tov TedevTHTAavTOS Kupiovs airav. §17. els rocaitas § dmopias
kateoTnoayv 6 TL avttypawevra wept ths ayxiorelas, BoTE .. . padias Un’
€pou tore efndéyxOnoav ... of 8 imép ths ‘Ayviov pyntpos ... vdu@ ato-
kAnoperns bs Kehevet Kparety Tovs appevas, TovTO pev elacay, oiduevor 5° euod
meoverthnoew pnrépa evar Tov tedXevTHGavTOs eypayay’ 6 ovyyeveoraroy
pev hy roe ravrev, ev d€ rais ayxeoreiais GuoXoyoupévas ovK Cori.

® BEAUCHET, Droit privé, III, 697 ff.; Wyse, op. cit., 325.

* Isaros, III, § 28.


IV: THE SOURCES OF LAW . 81


4, Voluntary Jurisdiction.


It is often forgotten by those who are not brought into Business
contact with the legal profession that actual law is often (ry.
based on things never promulgated as formal rules, but
elaborated by business practice. The latter is not the same
thing as custom; it represents not traditional views as to
justice, but the cumulative effect of voluntary agreements.
This phase is very fully illustrated in Greek law; we have
evidence, especially for the later period, from inscriptions
and papyri. An example may be taken from an inscrip-
tion which belongs to the beginning of the second cen-
tury B.c. It refers to a loan made by a banker named
Alexandros to the town of Arkesine in the island of Amor-
gos. The terms are set forth, and one sentence runs as
follows:! “If the citizens do not pay the interest, the
execution shall be double, falling on private property
by every means, just as if there had been a conviction in
a trial for ejectment before a tribunal of arbitrators.”
Thus the whole trial, which should lead to the issue of
a writ of execution, becomes unnecessary, and a stage
in its development is omitted, for the sake of summary
execution. Instead of going to a Court and getting an
order for arrest or execution, the injured party can proceed
by the method of self-help on the basis of the agreement
made. This is possible because the other party has volun-
tarily submitted to the terms of the contract. In French
law there is an equivalent process called Haécution paree.
This way of claiming money is shown by inscriptions to
have been quite common in Greek law.’

A further point to be noted is that in Greek legal prac-
tice a contract could be made in writing, and the writing
of it established and guaranteed the details.’

If we ask who it was that made these agreements valid


'IJ.G., 1, xv, B, § 3, p. 818 éav 8€ rov téxov pi) drodadoww, mpaxrot
éotov 'AdeEdvdpwr of pi) arroddvres SumAdovoy To apyvptov ek Trav idiwy mpaker
mdont Kadarep Sixny @pAnkores eovAns év tHe ekxAnTrat kal Ovres Urepy-
pepo...

* See also DEMOSTHENES, XXXV. The speech is a claim for the
a aoe of a loan ; the case arises out of an éumopixoy cvpBdAaop,

ee below, Chap. XI.


2231.2 G


Scribes,


82 JURISPRUDENCE OF THE GREEK CITY


and authorized the tribunals to give verdicts with regard
to them, we can only say that the practice was the result
of voluntary action on the part of contracting parties. The
law was based on constantly recurring business arrange-
ments, and on the fact that the Courts accepted the docu-
ments as conclusive evidence.

In the Digest the law on shipwreck or jettison is traced
to the law of Rhodos, that is, the maritime customs
made in the third and second ceuturies B.c. By that time
Athens had lost her supremacy, and Rhodos was the com-
mercial centre of the Eastern Mediterranean. For the
earlier practice we can refer, among other things, to the
speeches of Demosthenes against Lakritos and against
Zenothemis. Customs originating in agreements between
skippers, merchants, bankers, and crews gathered force, and
were supported by the tribunals.

Let us note in conclusion the influence of a professional
class of scribes (ypappareis) corresponding to our clerks
and solicitors. The direct bearing of their practice on the
law is not hard to see; they were armed with technical
knowledge and skill, which made their assistance indis-
pensable to the less instructed citizens, although the latter
were politically the masters. The influence of the scribe,
it may be added, was of far greater importance in the East
than in the West.

It may be said without paradox that the most influential
scribes belonged to the lower personnel of the profession.
There was a number of high-standing secretaries. who were
elected by lot in fourth-century Athens from among citizens.
Five of these officials are mentioned in the list of the Council
of 335 B.c.; the ypappareds kara mputraveiav,the ypaupareds
Ths Bovdjs, the dvaypadeds, the ypappareds emi Ta Wndi-
opara, and the avriypagev’s. Aristotle, in the fifty-fourth
chapter of the Athenian Constitution, gives a somewhat
different enumeration, but in substance his account does
not contradict the evidence of inscriptions. Now the fact
that these officials, as well as the ypapupareds tov Oeopo-
6er@v, are all chosen by lot, shows that no importance was
attached to their learning. On the contrary, their numerous
subordinates for the keeping of accounts, drawing up re-


IV: THE SOURCES OF LAW 83


ports, formulating and publishing decisions and decrees,
were required to possess knowledge and experience. One
of the most prominent Athenian orators, Aischines, had
made his way to a great extent thanks to his training
as a clerk.! Even the standing of a State slave did not
debar men from acquiring important positions as specialists
inthis line. Most of the Athenian accountants seem to have
been dypdciot, i.e. slaves. In the most ancient reference
to the status of a ypaypuareds—an inscription of Olympia
of the year 580 B.c.—if we are to trust Blass’s interpreta-
tion—a certain Patrias is granted protection as to his person,
family, and property, although of foreign descent, because of
his employment as a scribe.? Altogether, the most definite
evidence concerning the importance of skilled clerks comes
from minor cities. The inscriptions of Priene are especially
instructive in this respect. A certain Hegepolis, for in-
stance, was sent as secretary to a citizen of Priene who had
to act as an umpire in deciding a case between foreign
cities, and the same man has to accompany another em-
bassy of three representatives of Priene on a similar errand.”
Perhaps the most interesting example is that of a certain
Apellis, son of Nikophon, who asks to be relieved from the
office of a ypapparevs, in which he had served for twenty
years; out of these twenty years, for fourteen he performed
his duties without pay, and had even taken charge of other
clerkships, thus saving the city from considerable expenses.‘

1 DEMOSTHENES, XVIII, § 127.

2 Gr. Dial. Inschr. I, 320, No. 1152.

MICHEL, 468 (pp. 346 f.).

I ...da 7 BovAn Kat 6 Srpos Boudevonrat Tiow det tipais TepnOnvac
Tov eae TOV Ipinvewy kal TOV TmapayevOpevov Tos: mpas dtxaorny ... Kal
TOV “ypauparéa “Hyemohw * Hyiov" ... eraweoat O€ kal tov cuveEaTrooraderta
per’ avuTou _ypapparéa “Hy€éronuy * Hyiov ... kal oretbav@cat Top pev Suka-
oTHy xpvoa. orepdavat . . . TOY S€ ypapparéa Baddov oreavar. ies
kal €oTepavaKact .. . TOV ypaypartea Oaddov otepavar,

and 543 (pp. 407 f.) ... emnvnoOat dé Kal TOV amootaX evra avrois ypap.-
patéa Hyérodw ‘Hyiov cai orehavwbnvat ev rois Avttoxeious €Xaias orepavar.

* HILLER VON GAERTRINGEN, Inschriften von Priene, 4, p. 7
erred)” AmehXus Nexoparros ypappareds aipebeis t Und TOU Onpov ev Te Tals
dixats kal ev TIL THY KOLVaY Ypapparay mores Kai _Kupteiat kal €v Tos adXous
TOs KaTa Tp TOA Tpagaopevots draow ivws Kat Sixcios THY Xpetap mape-
oxNTat TO, Tohtrav ExdoT@t, Kal mept Tos KoLWovs TIS TOAEws ayevas
Xpyotmos Kal mpddvpos dy Carer éAekep mept meiorov Tolovpevos TO Ta


Sixaca paiverba mparror, vuvt d€ mapehOov eis Thy exkAnoiav epmepavixey,
Ort Ta pep mavta ern mempaypadrevrat elkoowy, Tovtey Sé Sexatérrapa érn Thy


G2


84 JURISPRUDENCE OF THE GREEK CITY


The cumulative effect of the ant-like work of the innumer-
able clerks and accountants on the formation of technical
rules can hardly be overestimated.


NOTE


I should like to make a few remarks as to a curious
and doubtful case reported by Andokides in the speech on
the Mysteries. It bears on the trial of his father Leogoras,
who, during the famous process about the destruction of the
Hermae, had been denounced by a slave as having partici-
pated in the sacrilege, and had been included in the proposal
of a certain Speusippos, a councillor (BovAedwy) among the
persons charged of the crime.’ Leogoras had thereupon
brought against Speusippos a ypag7) mapavéper, as to the
contents of which Andokides does not give explicit informa-
tion. But he states that this ypag# was discussed before a tri-
bunal of 6,000, and that Speusippos succeeded in collecting
only a couple of hundred votes. The problem is: What
kind of Court could this assembly of 6,000 have been? The
number of persons seems to indicate the Assembly (€xxAnoia),
but the terms of the reference speak definitely of a sitting
of judges (d:kaora/), and the case was treated on the lines
of a ypadgi mapavépwr, that is, as a legal and not as
a political trial. It seems* that the speaker deals with
a case assimilated to the passing of a decree ém’ avdpi, of
which proscription by ostracism presents the most con-
spicuous instance. It is certainly remarkable that Ando-
kides speaks of dixacrai; this means that the éxxAnoia was
considered a dikaorypiov when performing judicial duties.*
Tols oTparnyots ypaupareiay AeAntrovpynke Swpedy Kal TOU avadwparos Tod
yiwopevov ek TOY voor TOL TOY VonopuAdKwy Kal TimovxwY ypappatet mapa-
AéeAuxe tov Sypoy...

bed6xOar. .. mapadedvaba te "AredXw THs ypapuareias Kabdre 7FElwKey
kat erate avrév, xr. Cf. Dirt. Syil.3 I, 353. On the whole subject
see SCHULTHESS in R.-Enc. VII, s.v. ypappareis.

? ANDOK. 1,17 Srevourmos b€ Bovrevoy mapadidaow aitots tH Sika-
otnpio. Kdmerra 6 maTIp...€ypawato Tov Srevourmoy Tapavdpwr, Kal nyovi-
gato ev é€axirxirlois ’AOnvaiwy, Kai petrédaBe Sixagtay rocovta@y ovde
diaxocias Wrnpous 6 Zrevourmos.

* Cf. FRAENKEL, Die attischen Geschworenengerichte, pp. 89 ff.


* The Assembly is treated as a dixacrnproy in AISCHINES, I, 86
ouvdexdfew thy exkAnoiay kai ra ada Sixagrnpia.


CHAPTER V
THE STRUCTURE OF THE CITY
1. The Federation of Kindreds.


MopERN democracies which have arisen in the course of Scheme
the struggle against feudalism and absolutism bear a pits,
strongly individualistic stamp. In France after the Revo-
lution, for example, all organizations and social groups
likely to claim autonomous authority were suppressed as
dangerous rivals of the commonwealth. This tendency to
isolate the individual is conspicuously absent in the Greek
City-state; it was not conceived as an aggregate of indi-
viduals, but consisted of clusters of kinsmen, strongly
bound together by common interests and common religion.
The earlier ages may be characterized as epochs of federa-
tion—the federation of kindreds (yév7).

According to the testimony of Aristotle,' the ancient
social constitution of Athens was based on an arithmetical
scheme; four phylae or tribes, each divided into three
phratries, each of the latter again divided into thirty kin-
dreds (yévn), and each kindred represented by thirty men
(dvdpes), forming a beehive-like community consisting of
ten thousand and eighty units.

Such a scheme seems quite unreal to us—in fact the result
of artificial calculation, but it must after all contain an ele-
ment of reality. The number thirty (rpiaxds) is actually
taken as an equivalent term for the yévos; those who were
not yevyjrac were said to be é£@ rpiaxdédos, “ outside the
thirty.” Plato, too, in the ideal State described in the
Laws, estimates the number of householders at exactly five
thousand and forty, just half of Aristotle’s total? Inscrip-

1 This testimony is preserved by the lexicographers, who quote
from pages of the Athenian Constitution no longer extant.

VALENTIN Rose, Aristoteles Pseudepigraphus, Fr. 385° (Ath, Const.


ed. KAIBEL u. WILAMOWITZ-MOELLENDORFF, Fr. 3).
7 Laws, V, 745.


86 JURISPRUDENCE OF THE GREEK CITY


tions from Samos and Kos refer sometimes to units of an
arithmetical scheme. In a decree of 324 B.c., two strangers,
Gorgos and Minyon; on receiving permission from Alexander
the Great to return to their native town, were granted
Samian citizenship; they were to be reckoned as “born
Samians,” and therefore had to enter some division of the
population. They obtain leave to join any tribe, any
thousand, any hundred, and any kindred.' Thus the
schematic arrangement has clearly some foundation in
fact requiring explanation.

In the case of Plato’s 5,040, it is plain that he had in
view the number of xAfpo or holdings taken as normal,
and this is probably suggested by some historical fact. In
saying this I do not affirm, of course, that the scheme was
always in being; war, poverty, and death must have caused
many inroads on the regularity of the numbers; but, as the
policy was directed towards keeping up the kindreds
(yévm),” the disruption of the scheme was not so great as
one might expect. The system aimed, no doubt, at a certain
equilibrium between the tribal elements of the population by
assigning to them evenly distributed shares of the territory.
We may then assume that, even if the numbers cited are
only approximate, ancient Athens was arranged as a federa-
tion of kindreds. And this original scheme was never
entirely broken up; Kleisthenes did not abolish the kin-
dreds, but restricted the sphere of their religious, punitive,
and cultural activity.

The constitution of a phratry after the reform of Kleis-
thenes is well known®; there were two elements in it:
(1) the yévn, provided with pedigrees, cults, and a close
organization, the members of which are all full yeyyfrae or
dpoyddaxtes ; (2) besides these there was a large number
of “ plebeians,” if one may use the expression: these also
had their religious organization, though not so strict or


* Dirt. Syl. 18. 312, p. 581 nai émudnpdca adrovs émi gudhv kat
X'Ataorvy Kal Exatooriv Kai yevos. The word émAnpdca evidently
means no more than “choose.” It is noteworthy that the system
here is decimal as at Rome, not duodecimal as at Athens.

* Cf. FRANCOTTE, La polis grecque, pp. 22 f.

* See e.g. ScHOEMANN-Lipsius, Griechische Alterthiimer, II,


_ pp. 574f.


V: THE STRUCTURE OF THE CITY 87


extensive as that of the yévy; they were called dpyeaves,
and formed groups called 6faco.. The latter term is used
in two senses; it may denote any religious association of
free growth, and in this sense it occurs in a law of Solon;?
in the second sense it points to a circle formed of men who
could not trace their origin to a kindred, but were united
by religious rites (dpyia). An interesting decree of the
Deme of Peiraieus may serve as an illustration.? It was
intended to keep the element of dpye@ves within limits.
We have no direct information about the internal life
of the yévos; but we have inscriptions made by phratries
which not only describe the arrangements of these bodies
but also refer to the yévn.

Let us take two such inscriptions, both of the fourth cen- The |
tury. one from Chios, set up by the Klytidae, the other from *!Y#4#e.
Delphi, set up by the Labyadae. The first*® treats of the
construction by the Klytidae of a kind of chapel or shrine
for their holy objects, which were previously dispersed in
private houses. The first part of the inscription contains
the decree forbidding to keep holy objects in a private
house ; the inscription then proceeds: “The Klytidae have
decreed that the sacred house of the Klytidae in which the
holy objects are deposited, and the place in front of the
house, shall be used by the Klytidae in common, and no
kindred (@arpiav %) or private person shall use it. He who
uses the house (privately), or allows anybody else to use it,
shall pay to the Klytidae a fine of 1,000 drachmae sacred
to Zeus Patroos for each case of use or leave to use, and he
shall be cursed in accordance with the law.” This decree
was passed in a regular assembly with the sanction of a
heavy fine and with the additional penalty of the curse.
It is clear from this fact that the phratry had power to


1 Digest, XLVII, 22,4. See below, p. 120, Chap. VI.

2 C.I.A. II, 573 b (p. 421).

$ MICHEL, 997, p. 786 éyvwoar Kdvuridat rai iepae oikwe TOV KAuriOav
év Gt Ta TaTpaia iepa KaOnTat Kal TOL Yopwt TH Tpds TO. olka xpnoOat
Kduridas kown, parpiay dé pndé idiarny pyOéva rat oikwt TovT@ xphjo Oat
pndé Grdw. Sotvar xpyoacGa pyOevi. bs 8’ dy mapa raira 7) avros xpnoerat
TH. olka 7 érépar dG. xpnoacOa, amodétw kal éxdotnv xphoww 7 ddow
Knuridais yiAias Spaypas iepas rov. Suds rou Tlarpatov, kai rais €k TOY vowwv
dpais évoxos ear.


The
Labyadae.


88 JURISPRUDENCE OF THE GREEK CITY


inflict punishment. It is probable that if a person would
not pay the fine an action would lie in the public Courts,
and the delinquent'would be made to pay, because by taking
part in the religious rites of his group he had made himself
liable to penalties inflicted by it. The word ¢arpiay must
evidently be taken here as an equivalent for rarpidv, and
not for ¢patpiay; as to the reading a fragment of Dikai-
archos supplies an appropriate comparison.! @parpiay is
impossible; the sacred house was only to be used by the
dparpia as a whole—not by an individual or by a division ;
the division must be a kindred, that is, a yévos or marpid.

The Labyadae inscription gives further information; it
is in the Delphic dialect, and contains several unusual
words, the meaning of which is, however, not difficult to
guess.” “It has been decided by the Labyadae by 182
votes that the tagoi shall not receive offerings on the
occasion of marriages or births or victims on majority,
unless by consent of the kindreds (yévn). If they give an
order against the law, it shall be done at the peril of those
who give the order.” In other paragraphs of the decree we
find besides the tagoi other officials referred to, for example,
the dnuiovpyés. A similar prohibition concerns judges
who take an oath; the case is parallel to the veto above
on the arbitrary taking of offerings. These judges are
analogous to the Heliasts at Athens, and the formula of their
oath contains a prayer to the gods to give them the best of
good things if they judge rightly, and to afflict them with
misery if they judge wrongly.

Infamy (d7ipéa) and fines could be inflicted by the phratry,
but this declaration of driufa is not identical with that
pronounced by the commonwealth ; it could only mean that
the phratry considered the person in question to be deprived
of his status in the corporation. The inscription contains
also an enactment about funerals; the corpse is not to have


1 Fragm. Hist. Graec. (ed. MULLER), DICAEARCHI MEss. 9, p. 238,
? I.J.G. II, xxviii, pp. 180-2, § 3 (about 400 B.c.)  zoge
AaBuddas ... év rau Gdiat oip Walplos éxardv dydSonxovra Svoiv: Tovs
tayovs pi) SexecOar pyre Sapdrav ydueha pyre ratdqia pyr’ dmedaia, al pi)


Tas matpias €mawweovoas Kal mAnOvdcas, ds xa ju’ ai d€ ri Ka Tap vdpov


’ Lol
\ keXevo@rti, Tay KeXevodvrwy 6 Kivduvos forte.


V: THE STRUCTURE OF THE CITY 89


more than one carpet and one pillow beneath it as it lies on
the pyre; it is not to be carried about the streets by people
wailing aloud; it must not be deposited at cross-roads on
the way to the pyre or burial ground. These sacral regula-
tions were issued by the phratry concurrently with rules
made by cities. The decree of the phratry is passed by a
large majority.

An inscription from Attika presents another side of the TheDemo-
activity of a phratry, namely the relations between mem- #°nidee.
bers of the corporate body. The most important are those
dealing with diawyduors, the revision of lists of citizenship.
A general revision took place because the phratry had to
revise its composition in accordance with a law introduced
by Perikles.' The usual mode of proof was by reference to
the entry of the individual into the phratry at birth or at
adolescence (at the Apaturia). The deme and the city
generally accepted this evidence. There was, however, a
general revision soon after 396 B.c., to which an inscription
set up by the Demotionidae refers.? It contains, among
other things, the following rules: “Every one of the ex-
cluded has leave to appeal to the Demotionidae. In this
case the house of Dekeleia shall elect five men of more than
thirty years of age as public representatives (cuv7yopor),
and they shall be made by the phratriarch and the priest
to swear an oath that they will decide in accordance with
justice, and not allow any one who does not belong to the
phratry to be admitted to the phratry. Any appellant re-
jected by the Demotionidae shall pay a fine of 1,000
drachmae sacred to Zeus Phratrios.” The house of Dekeleia
is evidently the premier kindred of the phratry, and takes
the lead in any case affecting that body. We do not see
what the majority of the members of the phratry have to do
in the appeal ; the case seems rather like that depicted on the
shield of Achilles, where a trial is being held in the agora,

1 PLUTARCH, Perikles, c. 37.

Pade G.. 1, xxix, pp. 200 ff, § 3 éay dé res Bornra epeivat és
Anporiwvidas bate drownpiowrrar, eeivar avrau’ ehécOa b€ er avrois
ovvnydpos Tov Aekedet@v oikov mévTE dvdpas 0 umep Tptakoyra ern yeyovdras,
Toros b€ eEopkwadte 6 6 pat prdpxos kal 6 lepevs. ouvnyopng ev ra Otkatdrata


kai ok é€doev dd€va pr) OvTa pparepa parpifev. dro 8 ay trav epertay
drown picwrrat Anporiwvidar, opethér@ xirias Spaxpas iepas tat Ati Tat


Pparpiat. (396-350 B.C. ?)


90 JURISPRUDENCE OF THE GREEK CITY


and the people take sides, though the chiefs of the yévn, or
Baoireis, decide the case, giving their decisions in turn.
Similarly here the decision is entrusted to five cvv#yopor
under oath before the whole phratry. A second fragment!
of the decree refers to the procedure in an extraordinary
diadikacia. “When the revision (d:adicacia) takes place,
the phratriarch shall not let the members of the phratry
vote as to the children until the members of the ¢hiasos of
each candidate have given their votes by secret ballot, and
these votes are counted and declared by the phratriarch in
the presence of all the members of the phratry present in
the meeting (a@yop@).”
See Other evidence is supplied by the Drakonian law for
oo By manslaughter of 621 B.c., which was re-enacted in 409 B.c.
’ after the collapse of the Four Hundred. In cases of man-
slaughter (when a man kills another pi é« mpovofas)* the
slayer has to flee; the accusation must be brought by rela-
tives of the deceased, relationship being reckoned in circles.
The first circle comprises the members of the household.
The relatives of this first circle have the duty of prosecuting
the slayer. ‘The proclamation against the slayer shall be
made in the market-place by the relatives nearer in degree
than cousins. Cousins and sons of cousins, fathers-in-law,
brothers-in-law and members of the phratry shall join in
the prosecution.” * With the same relatives rests the right
to compromise—to let off the slayer. If these near relatives
are not forthcoming, the right to prosecute falls to the
phratry ; there is no mention of the yévos; it is the éyyxu-
oreia, that is, the near relatives and representatives of the
phratry, who are to avenge. The absence of the yévos
looks like the result of a change made in the course of
a revision of the law; in any case, in spite of the omission,


ie iE J. G. II, XXiX, p. 204, § 9 "Oray Se he i Stadixacia, 6 pparpiapyos
Hi) Tporepov id6r0 THY Whhov mept tov maidwy Trois drace ppdtepor mp
dy oi auto Tov elgayopuevo Oacrat KpvBdnv ard 76 Bayo Péportes thy Wipov
Staynpicwrra, kai tas yhpos ras Torey evartioy ray anravtwv pparépwor Tov
mapdvtwv €év TIL ayopat 6 pparpiapyxos SiapiOunodrw Kai dvayopevéro drrérep’
dy pndicerra.

* See below, Chap. IX, section 2.
e 7, J. G. II, xxi, p. 2, §4 mpoeumev dé roe krévavte ev dyopar évrds
dveatéreros kai avedard’ ouvdidxev dé kai dvefotds kai dvedouov maidas Kai
yapBpos kai revbepds Kai pparepas.


V: THE STRUCTURE OF THE CITY 91


the line of agnatic relationship is kept up. In the order
of succession cognates are admitted after the agnates, but
in the order of avengers the agnatic group of the phratry
follows immediately on the narrower dyyorela.


2. The Household.


If the scheme of federation of kindreds could have been
upheld systematically, the xAfpos and the ofxos would have
been two aspects of the same institution—holdings in the
sphere of property would have corresponded to families in
the sphere of kinship. But owing to the development of
industrial and commercial conditions this correspondence
had to be abandoned. At Athens, in spite of certain efforts
made to maintain the holding, property in land was mobi-
lized. Yet the principle that family property should be
the basis of a citizen’s status was preserved, as may be seen
from the practice of Athenian law in the fourth century.

Let us take as an example the case dealt with in the
speeches of Demosthenes against Makartatos, and of Isaios
on the other side in defence of Makartatos’ claim.t The
matter in dispute was the inheritance of one Hagnias; both
parties based their claim on relationship to the deceased,
but Demosthenes claimed that his client Eubulides was the
only person who could really inherit on grounds of kinship,
the others being outside the limit of the household (ofkos).
Demosthenes, at the beginning of his speech, explains the
situation as regards the family. This is as follows:?
Buselos had five sons, each of whom married and had
children and grandchildren, five families (ofko1) being thus


1 [Dem.] XLII. Isaros, XI.
: Buselos


|
| |
Hagnias I Eubulides I Stratios (and two others)


|
Polemon Phylomache==Philagros Phanostratos Charidemos
|
Hagnias IT Eubulides IT Theopompos
|
Phylomache =Sositheos Makartatos


|
Eubulides III (son)


The case
of the

estate of
Hagnias.


“Ayxtoreia
and olkos.


92 JURISPRUDENCE OF THE GREEK CITY


formed. Two of these sons have no connexion with the
case; the other three were Hagnias I, Eubulides I, and
Stratios. Hagnias had two children, Polemon and Phylo-
mache, Polemon had a son Hagnias II, who died childless,
and whose inheritance (xkAjpos) is now in dispute. Phylo-
mache, full sister to Polemon, was married to Philagros, the
son of Eubulides I, and therefore cousin to Polemon
(aveyids). Their son is Eubulides II, whose daughter gave
birth to Hubulides III, on whose behalf the claim to the
estate of Hagnias is being made by his father Sositheos,
the client of Demosthenes. Meantime Stratios, the third
son of Buselos, had a family consisting of two sons,
Phanostratos and Charidemos, of whom Charidemos had
a son Theopompos, whose son Makartatos is the other
claimant to the estate (kAfpos) of Hagnias. Sositheos, in
the speech written for him by Demosthenes, rests the claim
of Eubulides III on the fact that the family (ofkos) of
Hagnias was represented at the time only by Eubulides ITI,
whose grandfather was Hagnias’ first cousin through
Phylomache, and whose great-grandfather was first cousin
to Polemon, the father of Hagnias. He maintained that
Theopompos and Makartatos were quite outside the family
(otkos), and could have no claim, Theopompos being only
second cousin to Hagnias. Makartatos, or Isaios on his
behalf, disputes Eubulides’ claim on the ground that Phylo-
mache (the elder) was not full sister to Polemon, and traces
his claim from Stratios as the brother of Hagnias’ grand-
father—Charidemos, grandfather of Makartatos, being first
cousin to Polemon, father of Hagnias, just as much as
Philagros was. That is, they go back a generation farther
and establish their claim as descendants of a common great-
grandfather, and not of a grandfather.

Thus the view that the ofxos only included those descended
from one (common) grandfather (in this case the elder
Hagnias) was disputed, but it could not be contested that
the estate of Buselos had been divided among his five sons.
If it had remained undivided, the case might have been
considered differently. Anyhow, the discussion of the
question as to the ofkos must be separated from that of the
avew.orns.


V: THE STRUCTURE OF THE CITY 93


It would not do to restrict the issue to the question
whether the expression péyp: aveyriad@v means “ up to first
cousins once removed ”—as contended by Demosthenes—or,
“up to second cousins ”—as argued by Isaios. At first
sight the right seems clearly to be on the side of the first
interpretation, but it is impossible to go past the fact that
in the previous trial a dikaorypiov had decided the case in
favour of Theopompos, the father of Makartatos, and there-
fore had pronounced in favour of the interpretation of
Isaios. It would be too cheap an expedient to class this
decision among the blunders of a democratic tribunal mis-
led by crafty pleaders. The truth probably was that the
Athenians were wavering between two conceptions of the
aéyxtoreia, a wider and a more narrow one. Theopompos
succeeded on the strength of the latter, On the other
hand, when the trial was resumed by Demosthenes on
behalf of Sositheos against Theopompos’ son, the new
pleader sought to strengthen his client’s argument by intro-
ducing the notion of the ofxos, as there could be no doubt
that the unity of the household did not go higher up than
the oixos of Hagnias.

The case helps to establish a point in the law of property
descending by pedigree; the estate (kAjpos) should remain
compact, and could continne so for many generations, and
the efforts of kindred were directed to this end, whoever
the heir-at-law really was.

Nevertheless, property was much broken up, in spite of
devices such as the marriage of the heiress (éafkAnpos) to
the nearest agnate. On the religious and moral side, the
notion of maintaining the family unity was more lasting ;
e.g. it was strongly felt that the family graves should be
kept up by the elder line.


These points about kindred help to show how the Restrie-
Athenians drew the line between citizens and other classes tions as to


of the population. The system of family holdings reacted sh
on law, and courts had constantly to deal with the ofxos
and the phratry.

The result was the enforcement of stringent rules as to
purity of descent. These were not mere devices of indi-
vidual statesmen to prevent overcrowding by aliens; the


94 JURISPRUDENCE OF THE GREEK CITY


law regarding citizenship was connected with the main
principle of kinship, and was restored after any disturbance,
in order to keep up the principle of political privilege. The
laws against intrusion were very severe; at the time of
Kleisthenes many slaves and strangers had found their way
into the privileged circle,! but under Perikles citizenship was
again restricted to those whose parents on both sides were of
Athenian birth.? Again, after the re-establishment of the
democracy in 403 B.c., in the archonship of Eukleides, the
law as to descent from citizens on both sides was re-enacted.
Towards the middle of the fourth century, in 364 B.c., a
third enactment of the same kind was made. The pro-
cedure and the penalties in connexion with it show how
much importance was attached to keeping up the barrier.
The demes as well as the families contributed to this end.
An illustration is given in the speech of Demosthenes
against Kubulides ;* as a result of the process of scrutiny
(Siayydiois) in the deme of Halimus, one Euxitheos had
been deprived of citizenship; he took advantage of the fact
that he could appeal to the Courts, and accused the demarch
of unfair practices in carrying out the diawydiois. He
maintained that nearly every one had gone away before the
voting, and that, in spite of his request for an adjournment,
the demarch forced a vote, giving out more voting stones
than there were persons present. He admitted that his
family had become impoverished, but he pointed out that
this was no legal ground for disfranchisement. The fact
that the penalty for failure in such an appeal from the
decision of the deme to the popular Courts was the sale of
the appellant into slavery shows what importance was
attributed to the matter.


' See below, Chap. VI, p. 117.

? See above, p. 55.

° Dem. LVII, 3; cf. LIX, esp. § 13 ey rotrov Feo emideigov eis
dpas, gévy pev yovarrt guvotkouvra Tapa Tov vopov, addXorplous dé maidas
cloayayovra els re Tous ppadrepas Kal eis tovs Synudras, éyyvavra dé ras
T@v €raipav Ovyatéepas ws abrod otaas, noeByxdra 8° eis rovs Oeovs, dxupov
d€ rovovvra Tov Ojpov Tay abrov, dy tiva BovAntar moXirny moncacba’ Tis yap
dy éru mapa Tov Snpov (nrnoete AaBeiv Swpecdy, pera ToAdOY dvadopdrwv kal
mpaypatetas moditns peAdwv EocoOat, ekov mapa SZrepdvov am’ éddrrovos
dvah@paros, ei ye TO avTd TovTO yernoerat aiTa;


V: THE STRUCTURE OF THE CITY 95


We know, too, from the Athenian Constitution,! that
a scrutiny (doxiuacia) as to the same point was obligatory
in the case of candidates for the archonship. Thus barriers
were set up against the intrusion of outsiders, and the
democracy of Athens when considered from a legal point
of view was a democracy by pedigree.

Citizenship in Greece was regarded in a different way Privileges
from that which developed later in the Roman Empire. It roar
was a political as well as a civil complex of rights; the fact
that a citizen was a potential ruler, and had actual access
in his turn to political power hampered the development
of forms of incomplete citizenship. Such an incomplete
form, similar to what the Romans called ciwvitas sene suf-
fragio, existed, but arose in a peculiar way and in excep-
tional circumstances. In the fifth century those who did
not possess full rights were not regarded as citizens at all.
Usually when privileges were granted to benefactors of the
city they did not amount to citizenship. This is the
meaning of mpogevia—the granting of rights to favoured
treatment as a specially protected visitor: quite a different
position from citizenship. In a case recorded by an in-
scription * full citizenship was granted by way of exception :
Thrasybulos of Kalydon, in consideration of his having
slain Phrynichos, one of the Four Hundred (in 411 B.c.)
was given full rights, and was admitted to the federation
of families, being allowed to select as his own any tribe,
deme, and phratry that he pleased. That is, he obtained
not only public and political rights, but also private family
rights: it was indeed a case of naturalization.

A lower class of the population of Athens clearly dis- Denizens.
tinguishable from the foregoing are the denizens (pérovKor),
resident aliens not protected by any special decree, or by
any treaty between Athens and their own city. They live
on sufferance, are exploited by the State in taxation, and
liable to military service of a subordinate kind, such as
rowing in the fleet; we hear that some who had served in
this capacity at Arginusae were rewarded by promotion to


' Chap. 55.
* Dire, Syll..2*,. 108, p.139,


Psycho-
logical
unity of
the City.


96 JURISPRUDENCK OF THE GREEK CITY


citizenship. Their situation is one of economic dependence
and legal sufferance. They were kept strictly outside the
circle of active citizenship, and any attempt on their part
to get within that circle was punished by heavy penalties.
The unfavourable treatment of that class in fully-developed
democracies may be connected with the general view of
Greek political thinkers that handicraft and retail trade
were inferior occupations, and unworthy of free citizens.’


3. The City and Religion.


No State has existed or can exist as an artificial and
mechanical arrangement; behind the constitution, the
magistrates, and the laws there always is a substratum of
group psychology, a conscious and subconscious unity, not
in itself political or juridical, but necessary for the vitality
of the political and juridical structure. That is why the
term “organic” is used in speaking of States; they are
organized for common life and action, while nations are
social groups in which union is supposed to be derived from
common origin and breeding, as is shown by the very word.
It is immaterial whether the community of race can be
proved as a physical fact, or whether the term is extended
to cover an admixture of elements transformed and assimi-
lated by civil intercourse. It may seem doubtful whether
the word “nation” may apply to such small and simple
States as were the Dorians of Sparta or of Argos, offshoots
of one ethnographical stock. But it seems appropriate to
use it also in their case, because each of those cities always
felt as a community of related people, very exclusive with
regard to outsiders.

As a result of this psychological fact, the law of Greece
cannot be understood unless we take stock of City-religion.
For in the religious domain the psychological substratum

' Cf. e.g. AR. Pol. IV (VII), 9, 1829 a 20 rd yap Bdvavoov od peréyxer
Ths ToAEws, OV’ GAXo OvdEv yévos 6 yu THS aperns Snuioupydy eotiv. 1328 b
37 havepoy ... ws ev TH KaAALOTA TOALTEVOME VN TOAEL Kal TH KEKTN EVN Stkaious
advdpas dtda@s, GAG py pds THY brdbeow, odre Bavavaoy Biov ot’ dyopaiov
det (nv rovs moXiras (ayevyns yap 6 ToLovTos Bios Kat mpos aperiy Umevavrios),
ovde 87 yewpyors eivat rods peAdovtas eoeoOat (Sei yap TXoANS Kal mpos THY
yéverwv THs aperns Kal mpds tas mpdkes tas modctikds). See, however,


ZIMMERN, Greek Commonwealth, pp. 270 f., and GLotz, Le travail en
Gréece, pp. 193 ff.


V: THE STRUCTURE OF THE CITY 97


became personified. It is impossible to speak of the con-
nexion, still less of the separation, of Church and State,
because there was no differentiation of the two; the City
was a religious as well as a political community. The
Greek commonwealths present themselves to our view as
households of the gods. Athens is the house of Athene,
Eleusis of Demeter Samos of Hera, Ephesos of Artemis,
&c. In the Athenian tradition Athene Polias appears as
the actual mistress of Athens, with her dwelling-place
beside that of Erechtheus, the “Hpws of the soil! In
illustration of this we read? that when Kleomenes occu-
pied the Akropolis as an ally of Isagoras, and wanted to
enter the temple of Athene, he was met by the priestess
with the words: “Stranger from Lakedaimon, retire ; enter
not the temple; for it is not lawfnl that Dorians should
pass therein.”

The struggles between the cities were in a way struggles
for the supremacy of one or the other cult. In many
instances it was sought to weaken the political feeling of
a community by abolishing or modifying its cults. Thus
Kleisthenes of Sikyon got rid of the cult of Argive Adrastos,
substituting for him another Hero, from Thebes, Melanippos,
who had defeated Adrastos in war.2 Dionysos probably
obtained participation in the patronage of the Apaturia in
connexion with a similar reform made by Kleisthenes of
Athens.

Cults provided centres of political grouping. It would
be a mistake to treat the matter in a rationalistic way. In
Aristotle’s Politics * we have an interesting discussion about
the juridical nature of the State; he says that in one sense
the State was a continuous growth in which the elements
changed, but unity remained, in the same manner as in
a stream the water is always changing, while the river
remains one and the same. In a similar way it is possible
to conceive the State as a historical unit in which change of
form does not produce an essential difference of substance.


1 HomER, Odyssey, VII, 78 ff. A@ijvn . . . Adve . . « Vxepiny eparewyy,
ixero 8’ és Mapadava kai edpudyuav ’AOnuny, dive 6’ EpexOjos muxivov dépor.

2 HeRop. V, 72. 3 Ibid. 67.

‘ Pol. Ill, 3, 6, 1276b. See below, p. 105.


2231-2 Jet


Religious
obliga-
tions of
citizens,


98 JURISPRUDENCE OF THE GREEK CITY —


From another point of view, however, any profound change
in “the constitution” starts a new era. Aristotle does not
decide between theSe two views, though he seems to incline
towards the second, and to hold that the State is comprised
within the mwoA:refa. In early Greece this problem could
not arise, because the unity expressed 1 in the cult was the
accepted symbol and factor of union, and this idea per-
sisted to some extent even in later times. If it be asked
whether the Greeks conceived the State as a corporation,
the reply should be, I think, that they did not think of
a corporation in the modern sense of the word, but of
a community whose life was connected with the immortal
person of the god—Athens, for example, was as it were
held in trust by Athene. Thus we have to deal in City-
religion not only with a theological and psychological, but
also with a juridical conception.

The fact of belonging to such a community imposed
religious duties on the citizen. The order of procedure
in public affairs shows the close connexion with religion ;
in the mpuravetov, Ta lepa Kai dora have precedence over all
other business.'!. The religious aspect of citizenship may
be illustrated from Plato’s Huthyphron, where the dis-
cussion turns on the meaning of religious obligation? The
belief in the gods of the city and the coincidence of religion
and justice, it was argued by Plato in defence of Sokrates,
do not go so far as Anytos and Meletos claimed. Yet from
the general notion of justice as regards the gods, i.e. the
duty of serving them in a particular way, there follow
certain consequences. The importance attached to the oath
of allegiance to the State is insisted upon, e. g. in Lykurgos’
speech against Leokrates ; in accusing him of deserting the
city in her hour of need, Lykurgos refers to that oath:
“The bond of democracy is the oath. The city is con-
stituted of three elements—the magistrate, the judge, and
the private citizen. Each one of these three tenders his
fealty by right....The oath-breaker cannot conceal himself
from the gods, nor can he escape their punishment. If it


1 SCHOEMANN-LIpsIvs, I. 414,


OD. cit. Euthyph. 12d el yap Hépos TO Sotov Tou btxaiou, Set 87 nas,
ws €orkev, e£evpely TO Toioy pépos Gy ein rov Stxaiov TO Oatov.


V: THE STRUCTURE OF THE CITY 99


is not he himself who succumbs to great misfortunes, then
it is his children and the whole of his kindred.” }

In dealing with the most important matters-—legislation,
judgement, conferment of privilege, even the enlightened
democracy of the fifth and fourth centuries made a distinc-
tion between what was settled in the Assembly by an
ordinary vote, and what was done under oath. Thus, in
the case of vopobecia it was found necessary to entrust the
most important part of the legislative function to sworn
judicial commissioners. In correspondence with the public
importance of the oaths taken by archons and dikasts,
tending as it did to the establishment of confidence in
political affairs, stands the fact that every Athenian when
admitted to citizenship as an “ephebos” swore on oath to
honour and worship the gods of the city.2. Every now and
then situations occurred in the history of Athens in which
waves of religious reaction against frivolity in matters
of religion rose high. Such was, for instance, the outbreak
against Alkibiades and his companions in connexion with
the mutilation of the Hermae.?

Scholars disagree as regards prosecutions for breach
of the law as to religious duties. Some authorities,
e.g. Schémann, hold that the Athenians never tried to
impose a definite code of doctrine, and only insisted on
outward respect and compliance with certain requirements
of public ritual. Participation in the great festivals, e.g.
the Panathenaic, was a duty prescribed by law; no one
could refuse to take the part assigned to him. Even
metoics had their place in the procession, and only slaves
were not admitted to any festival except the Kronia,
a Greek parallel to the Roman Saturnalia.* The highest
expression of this participation was the public service
(Aecroupyiat), the provision of choruses, and of religious
embassies.

But it cannot be denied that the Athenians did now and

then prosecute people for subversive teaching in matters


1 Lyk. in Leokr., 79.

2 ScHOEMANN-LIPSIUS, 379.
> THuK. Vi, 60... Cf. F226,
4 Dar. et 8. s.v. kronia.


H 2


“AgeBeva,


The
hearth of
the city.


100 JURISPRUDENCE OF THE GREEK CITY


of religion. There was no special department of State to
deal with religious thought, but every citizen had the right
to bring an accusation of impiety against a neighbour. On
some occasions special decrees were passed, e.g. that of
Diopeithes, which served as a basis for the prosecution of
Sokrates.! This case is the most familiar instance, but it
is not the only one; Anaxagoras was condemned for
teaching that the sun was a glowing mass of stone and not
a deity.2- One Hygiainon, in the course of a case of avzi-
doats, accused Euripides of impiety on account of a line in
his Hippolytos (612); “My tongue it was that swore, my
heart is free.” *

Thus the way was always open for accusation on the
score of an offence against religion, but prosecution was
not without danger for the accuser, and was not often
resorted to. The Athenians treated these cases somewhat
capriciously, but the juridicial basis for prosecutions for
aoéBeva is apparent in the oath taken by ephebes (above,
p. 99).

In a sense, the religion of the City-state was a family
religion, although some cults, e.g. those of Zeus and Apollo,
were represented in almost every city. The clearest form
of ancestral worship is presented by the cult of Hestia at
the central hearth of the city. Plato, in setting up his
ideal State. orders that “the first step should be to found
the temple of Hestia.”* The interesting point about the holy
hearth at Athens is that it was originally the centre of the
government, and closely connected with the Prytaneion ; it
was not moved, however, from the old Prytaneion to the
later place of meeting called the Tholos, It represented the
ancient hearth established by Theseus at the time of
the traditional union of Attika (cuvotxiopés). As it had
been the hearth of the royal household, a “king” was kept
to preside over it; it was the function of the king archon
(apxav Bactdrev’s) to direct all ceremonies connected with


1 PLUTARCH, Perikles,c. 32.
? THONISSEN, Droit pénal, pp. 178 ff.


8 Ar. Rhet. III, 15, 8.
* Laws, V, 745b pera S€ ratra pépn dodexa dtehécOa, Oeuevov ‘Eorias


 mp@rov kai Ards kat "AOnvas iepdv, "Axpdrrodww dvoudgorta.


V: THE STRUCTURE OF THE CITY 101


rites of purification. At Korinth it was usual to send out
as leader of a colony a member of the ancient kingly line,
the Bacchiadae, that he might carry over to the new city
the fire from the mother hearth in Korinth. We read in
Thukydides’ story of the flight of Themistokles, that when
he went to take refuge with Admetos of Thessaly, the
king’s wife, in her husband’s absence, placed the fugitive
beside the hearth, that is, under the protection of the gods
of the house.!

All these religious and political forms of the personifica-
tion of the city are connected with the idea of nativity,
breeding, succession. They show that the restricted form
of democracy characteristic of the Greek city was deter-
mined by the federation of kindreds which formed its
structural framework.


1 THuK. I, 186. See also Ar. Pol. VIII (VI), 1322b 28; also
PAUSANIAS, V, 155, and HERoporTos, I, 146, on the migration of the
hearth. See on the social aspect of the Hestia-Vesta cult, B. W. Leist,
Alt-arisches Jus civile, 1, 80 ff.


Peculi-
arity of
Greek
public
law.


CHAPTER VI
THE CITY AND THE CITIZEN


1. The City as a juridical person.


Ir is strange that although the organization of the Greek
States has been treated over and over again in all its
minute details, no comprehensive attempt has been made


to state the fundamental doctrines of Greek public law, if ,


we except Aristotle’s Work on the Politics This is partly
the result, of course, of the differentiation of the Greek
people into many separate commonwealths; but yet as
regards leading principles it is possible, and indeed necessary,
to try to reconstruct the juridical concepts which governed
public life. They inevitably group themselves round the
idea of democracy, because even in the States ruled by
the few the participation of the general body of citizens
was admitted in some form or other, and exerted its
influence on public law.

We have to start from an inquiry into the peculiar
manner in which the Greeks understood the connexion
between the commonwealth as a unity and the single
citizens as members of the State. Of course the pre-
ponderance of the city over all private interests may be
considered as an axiom; it is expressed, for instance, in
Aristotle’s Politics?: “The State is by nature clearly prior
to the family and to the individual, since the whole is of
necessity prior to the part ; for example, if the whole body
be destroyed, there will be no foot or hand.... The proof
that the State is a creation of nature and prior to the indi-
vidual is that the individual, when isolated, is not self-
sufficing ; and therefore he is like a part in relation to the
whole.” But, on the other hand, the commonwealth was


* SZANTO, Das attische Biirgerrecht, pp. 1 f.
2 Ar. ‘Pol. 1,2, 12, 1253:a,


a ia


VI: THE CITY AND THE CITIZEN 103


never thought of in abstract terms as separate from its
concrete members ; another passage of Aristotle! lays stress
strongly on the fact that the properly constituted city may
be defined as the sum of the citizens, that is, of those who
have a share in the sovereign power over it. “He who
has the power to take part in the deliberative or judicial
administration of any State is said by us to be a citizen of
that State ; and, speaking generally, a State is a quantity
of citizens sufficing for the purposes of life.” This is more
than a theoretical construction : the principle leads to some
very significant inferences.

To begin with, it is difficult from this point of view to
draw a rigid opposition between the commonwealth as a
corporation and the citizens as individuals. The well-
known problems which arise in our modern theory of legal
personality as applied to the State appear in a peculiar
light in Greek surroundings. What was the dominant
doctrine in Greece in the fifth and fourth centuries B.¢.,
concerning the juridical personality of the State? We are
not now speaking of details of political organization and
administration ; but we have to inquire how far the Greek
commonwealths were juridical persons or what we should
call corporations of public law. The question whether the
State is a corporation may be considered from two points
of view ; we may examine it in connexion with the working
of positive law ; in this sense there can be no objection to
the assumption that the State in relation to the citizens is
a corporate body—the greatest of them all, but still ana-
logous to other corporations such as chartered companies.
From another point of view we may consider the question
in relation to the historic growth of particular communi-
ties; we have to look in this case chiefly at the matter-of-
fact evolution which conditions the juridical formation of
the State. What is really important here is not the vindi-
cation of certain rights as being corporate, but the actual


1 Ibid. III, 1, 12, 1275b ¢ yap éfovoia Kowavety apxns Bovdevtins
i xpitixns, moditny Hon Aéyopev elvar tavtns THs Tédews, WOAW Se TO Tay
ro.ovrwy mAROos ikavov mpos adtapketay (wns, os dmdds eirety. Cf. Ibid. 1,
6, 1275. moXirns & dmdds odderi rev Hiddov Spiferar paAXov 7 TO peTexew
kpicews Kal apyjs. tav & dpxar ai pev eior Stnpnpéevar Kata Xpdvov,...
& ddéperros, otov 6 Sixaorns Kai €xkAnovaorns.


Historical


life of the
City.


104 JURISPRUDENCE OF THE GREEK CITY


predominance of particular groups which assert their will
in consonance and identity with that of the State.

In a great measure the Greeks were keenly alive to the
fact that every State possesses a moral and legal continuity
distinct from the actual individuals who make up its popu-
lation. It is a being with its own life, character, and
historical identity. This historical and collective com-
munity of national life was perceived, and frequently dis-
cussed, in ancient Greece. In a passage in one of the minor
dialogues ascribed to Plato’ the author urges that Athens
in the whole of its history was definitely one: “Then as
now, and indeed always, from that time to this, speaking
generally, our government was an aristocracy—a form of
government which receives many names, according to the
fancies of men, and is sometimes called democracy, being
really an aristocracy of the many who love virtue...”

The author goes on to contradict the view that we must
distinguish between several different kinds of Athens: that
which existed under the kings, that which existed under
the régime of democracy, and so forth. Athens, he declares,
was never conquered; its kings still exist in democratic
Athens as they did in former times, and on the whole it
may be said that Athens is still governed by an aristocracy.
This is obviously a fiction, but the point Plato tries to impress
on his readers is that Athens lived a continuous constitu-
tional life, and the history of the people is represented as
one consecutive process. The point of view, however, is
after all a cultural one; its juridical inferences are not
definitely drawn. It may be regarded as the germ of the
idea of an organic evolution of the State, but as yet the
idea is expressed in a very incomplete manner.

Let us ask what term could be used by the Greeks to
characterize the commonwealth of Athens considered as
a moral personality. The word wéd1s was an expression in


1 Menexenos, 238cd yap aviti modireia Kai tore Hv Kai viv, aptoto-
, > - “A ,
Kpatia, ev 7 viv Te moAtrevopeba Kal Tov del ypdvoy €& exeivov ws Ta TOAAG.
” A ‘ > -~
kahei de 6 pev abryy Sypoxpariay, 6 b¢ adXo, @ dy xaipn, €ore d¢ TH ddnBeia per’
evdogias mAnOous aptorokparia’ Bacwhijs pev yap dei npiv eiaw" obrot be rore


‘ > 4 ‘ A an
_PEV €K yevous, Tore O€ aiperoi* éyxpates b€ ris méAews Ta TOAAA TO TAROOS,
Se ‘ \ , cal

ras O€ apxas bidwot Kal Kpdros trois dei Sdé€aaty dpiorors eivat.


a .


VI: THE CITY AND THE CITIZEN 105


very general use, but the term commonly used was dé7jpos.
A third expression, kédapos, is not used frequently. It in-
dicates rather the fact that the State does not consist in
a concourse of people, which constitute its population, but
that these people are organized in a certain order.}

This point of view is emphatically expressed by Aristotle Juridical
in the Politics:* “ When the race of inhabitants as well as rei ne

; _ ity.
their place of abode remain the same, are we to say that
the commonwealth is also the same, although the citizens
are always dying and being born, as we are accustomed to
speak of rivers and fountains being the same, although the
water in them is constantly coming in and flowing away ?
Or shall we say that the human population remains the
same for the above-mentioned reason, but the ecommon-
wealth is different? For if a commonwealth is a union,
namely a union of citizens sharing in political life, it seems
necessary to maintain that the commonwealth is not the
same when the constitution is changed, in the same way as
we say of a chorus that it is a tragic one or a comic one,
although it may consist of the same persons. ... And if this
is true, it is evident that the sameness of the State consists
chiefly in the sameness of the constitution, and may be
called by the same name, whether the inhabitants are the
same or entirely different.” Here Aristotle faces the prob-
lem in a very business-like manner; to the question how
are we to consider the city as an organic unity, he replies
that we shall find it in the xo.vovia modiTay ToXirelas. It
is the fact that such a definite principle binds people to-
gether under a certain constitution that makes a common-
wealth. It is, in fact, the cowwwvia moAtTav moAtTetas Which
represents the unity of State personality.

But this view was not accepted without qualifications.
Changes might occur in the actual policy of the State and
_ yet the national life would go on with a kind of organic
continuity nevertheless. When the Thirty were overthrown
in Athens, after the short rule of oligarchy, they left

1 See HirzeEL, Themis, &c , pp. 283 ff.

* Pol. III, 3, 6, 1276 b (ending) «7 5) rovrov exer roy tpdmov, pavepov
Ore padtora Aexréov Tv av’THy moAW els THY ToALTEiay BAErovTas’ Gvopua Se


eee, A Cees We ‘ a t Spahe 4 5 yaa! ‘ ,
kadely €repov f tavrov e£eot kal TOY avT@Y KaTOLKOUYT@Y avTHY Kal Tapmay
Seer >
erépwy avOparav.


106 JURISPRUDENCE OF THE GREEK CITY


behind them considerable debts. It is very remarkable
that although the rule of the Thirty was directly opposed
to the main principles of Athenian democracy, the édjpos
took over and made itself responsible for the debts which
the oligarchs had incurred, This is, perhaps, the most
striking example in Athenian history of what Isokrates
calls the éme/xera of the Athenian people; but just because
it was often cited and admired, it can hardly be treated as
a normal case. As a rule, far-reaching political revolutions
put an end to the liabilities of commonwealths, and each
ToAtTeia Was supposed to embrace the life of a particular
collective being.

To sum up, Aristotle does not give us a definite solution
of the problem stated by him; he presents both sides, and
although he inclines towards the view that it is the unity
of the constitution which sets limits to the juridical exist-
ence of the commonwealth, he is willing to admit that from
a higher or “humane” point of view it would be fair to
consider the unity of a people’s life historically rather than
juridically: wherever there is continuity of national life
the growth of one personality of public law might be
recognized.

The nearest approach to a conception of a corporate life
of the State distinct from that of the individuals composing
it was obtained in the idea of State religion. Every Greek
commonwealth had as it were representatives of its his-
torical life in the gods protecting the State and revered as
its divine leaders!

A second inference from the intimate connexion between
city and citizens in Greece consists in the fact that the city
is understood primarily as the complex of the individuals
who compose it. The element of territory does not play
a great part in the realization of its existence. Remarkable
and by no means uncommon cases occur in which the city
is separated, as it were, from its geographical basis and yet
continues to assert itself as an entity of public law. I mean
especially the cases when a great number of citizens had to
leave their home-land in consequence of disturbances or


' See above, p. 97. Cf. WipE in GERCKE und NorDEN, Finlei-
tung, II, pp. 217 ff.


VI: THE CITY AND THE CITIZEN 107


conquests. A classical example is the building up of a
complete commonwealth by the Athenian fleet in Samos at
the time when the oligarchs overthrew the regular govern-
ment in Athens.' In the same way the return of the exiles
after the collapse of the Thirty ? was not regarded as a new
period in constitutional development, but merely as a re-
affirmation of a legal arrangement which had never ceased
to exist.


A third feature of the situation is disclosed by the View of


manner in which Greeks effected the representation of the
city on occasions when the commonwealth had to act as
a unit of public law. The case arose, to begin with, when
treaties had to be ratified and confirmed by oath. In the
inscription relating to the treaty of 446-5 b.c. between
Athens and Chalkis,’ we find that the oath was to be taken
by “all the Chalkidians who had reached manhood ;” but as
such a process is bound to be exceedingly cumbersome and
difficult to carry out in practice, the corresponding oath of
the Athenian Demos is restricted to “the members of the
Council and of the Heliaea.” According to Aristotle’s
definition, as we have seen above, these latter are to be
considered as the citizens exercising the supreme functions
of government. In the case of the treaty between Athens
and Eretria* the Athenian citizens are represented by “the
commanders, the Council, and the knights;” and in that
with Selymbria in 409 B.c.° by the commanders, the
trierarchs, the hoplites, and any other Athenians who
were there! In the case of smaller cities an attempt
was often made to call up all the citizens, although in
Athens, which was a comparatively large commonwealth,


1 Tuuk. VIII, 75-77.

? Ath. Const. c. 41.

§ Dirt. Syll. I’, 64, p. 79 dpdcat AGevaioy rév Bodev kai tos SiKaoras
.. Sudoa d€ Xadkiéwy ros €Bovras amayras.

* Ibid. 1°. 128, p. 168 dudoa d€ ’AO@nvatwy pev rods orpatnyovs kat
Thy BovAny kal rods imméas.

5 Tbid., 112, p. 150 dpocay ’AGevaiov of orpateyot Kal of rprépapxot
kal of 6mNirat Kal et tis GAXos ’AOevaioy maphy, Kal SedvpSpravoi mavtes.
Cf. MIcHEL, 19, and ibid., 21, p. 26 kupwOcioas S€ tas ovvOnkas édécOw
6 Samos mapaxpihpa avdpas wévre’ rol b€ aipebevres pera TY mapayeyevnpevav
€& ‘leparirvas mpecBevrav dpkiEavtay Tov viépipov Spxov ‘Podiovs adrayras
Tous dyras ey ddtktat.


the City


represen-
tation.


108 JURISPRUDENCE OF THE GREEK CITY


representation is restricted to some one or other group
of prominent citizens. The fact, however, remains that
these prominent representatives appear in different com-
binations, and this shows that there was no standing organ
representing the city in its treaty-making capacity, but
that a certain number of influential citizens were acting for
the rest.

Another case in which the city materialized as a cor-
porate unit is presented by the conclusion of city loans.
This was an occasion in which the distinction between the
property of the city and that of its individual members
arises in a most natural manner. In a number of cases
such a distinction was actually drawn; take e.g. the inscrip-
tion C. I. G. 1569: the 761s as a whole incurred the obliga-
tion, and the pastureland of the 7éAc:s was to be the security
in case of failure to pay. There are, however, a number of
instances in which recourse is had to the private property -
of individual citizens in order to guarantee the payment of
a loan and to provide material security for the execution.
The most remarkable case is that of Arkesine in the island
of Amorgos. Inscriptions furnish details of two instances
in which bankers granted loans to the city ; in both, the city
treasurers were responsible for the payment of the interest
due, and were liable to arrest and seizure of their goods in
the event of non-payment; as for the capital sum the
security was all the common property of the city as well as
the private possessions of the citizens. If payment were
not made at the agreed term, the creditor in each case was
to recover the sum “ by every means of execution on all the
common property of the citizens and their private property
wherever found.” !

In another inscription? we find that instead of making
all the citizens liable in their private fortunes for the pay-
ment of a city debt, the creditor picked out the principal


1 J.J. G.I, xv, A and B, pp. 313 ff., e.g. A, § 6 Kai eééorw mpdgacbau
IIpagtxdet ravra ta xpnuata mpdger maone ek Te T@y Kowa... Kal €k TOV
idiay trav "Apkeownwy... Kal && évds éExdotov ... Kai €& dravrov. In
the case of the city of Iulis (Dirt. Syi/*. I, 173 ; MrcHEL, 95) execution
was also evidently directed towards all the property available within
the territory of the city.

oA G1, SIV, Ppt ie


VI: THE CITY AND THE CITIZEN 109


magistrates and the ten wealthiest citizens of the city con-
tracting the loan. “Nikarete... made a loan (to certain
persons named, representing the city of Orchomenos). The
borrowers or the sureties shall pay back the money (on a
certain day). If not, execution shall be made upon the
borrowers (i.e. the magistrates), and the sureties alike,
singly, severally, or all at once, and upon their goods.” }
The transaction was a complicated one, and there is some
controversy as to a point of detail. Was the city to re-
imburse Nikarete in the case of failure of payment in term
concurrently with the wealthy citizens selected as secu ities ?
or was the latter’s liability to come in only in case of the
insolvency of the city? If the first interpretation ? is the
right one, then we should have a case of payment of the
double of the debt as a fine for failing to keep the term.
If the second interpretation * is preferred, we have simply
to do with a case of guarantors entering on their liability
in the place of the principal. There is something to be said
for both views, but it is not necessary for our purpose to
form a definite decision as to this point. What seems
material is the fact that private citizens were constrained
to come up with their property for the repayment of a debt
incurred by the city. In the case of Arkesine the enforced
liability fell on all the citizens ; in the case of Orchomenos the
wealthiest were picked out according to the usual practice
of Aerovpyiar. Anyhow it would not do to consider the
arrangement merely from the point of view of the con-
venience to the creditor; it undoubtedly illustrates the
peculiar conception of Greek public law as regards the
political tie between the commonwealth and its members.
There is nothing in Greek law corresponding to the Fiscal in-

notion of the fiscus as a separate subject of rights differen- Sttons.
tiated from the State. The obligations of the commonweath
in its fiscal affairs are intimately connected and mixed up
with the political life of the city. Asa result the enforce-


’ Ibid., pp. 280-282, VI a 7 de mpakis orm ék te aitay tay Saveioa-
pévov Kal ex Tov eyyvov kal && Evds Kat ek mrELdvay Kal ek TayT@Y Kal ek TOV
brapxévtwv avrois mpatrovont ov av rpdmov BovAnrat

? Proposed by Szanto, Wiener Studien, VII.

° The reading of the editors of I. J. G.


Consoli-
dated
funds.


110 JURISPRUDENCE OF THE GREEK CITY


ment of liabilities falling on the city is dependent on the
action of the Assembly, the Council, and the various
financial officers. . The only point on which we see a be-
ginning of differentiation of the two spheres of private and
public rights is the use of the judicial process to verify the
proper carrying out of confiscations. When citizens deem
themselves aggrieved by the arbitrary action of authorities
in such a case they may claim a judicial inquiry, and a
diadikacia will take place. Lysias’ speech on the Unjust
Claim of State Funds’ presents a good instance of the
procedure. In this case one Eraton had incurred a debt,
and had died without paying; his sons failed to pay the
interest. The creditor obtained an order for the payment
of the entire debt, principal and interest. Various compli-
cations ensued, and he then brought an action for the
satisfaction of his claim; this action was brought against
the Treasury because the State had confiscated the property
from which the debtor was to make good the debt. In
other respects the situation of the city as regards individual
citizens in matters of pecuniary liabilities cannot be said to
be based on reciprocal rights and obligations. While claims
against the city can be enforced only with its good will,
and are not made secure by coercive measures, apart from
proceedings against officers, the claims of the city against
its debtors are backed by exceedingly stringent measures,
especially as regards those who failed to pay contributions
or to deliver public money. A heavy fine of double the
amount due was claimed after a very short respite; and the
insolvent debtor could be eventually coerced by an execution
directed not only against his property but also against his
person.’

On the other hand, there was no regular budget, and
income and expenses were squared on the basis of laws and
decrees passed from time to time by the community. In-
teresting attempts were made to create certain consolidated
funds in order to meet the most important expenses, The
first attempt of this kind was made on the initiative of


1 Lys, 2.V iL,
? PARTSCH, Griechisches Biirgschaftsrecht, pp. 312 f.


VI: THE CITY AND THE CITIZEN ce


Themistokles when he persuaded the people to reserve
a hundred talents of the proceeds from the silver mines of
Laurion for the building of a fleet. The account of this
political measure is interesting in so far as the original
intention of the Athenians was to divide the money among
the citizens. In the time of the first Athenian League
a large fund was collected for war expenses, and although
eventually the people began to use part of it for the purpose
of embellishing the city (the building of the Parthenon,
Propylaea and so on),' the consolidated fund was still very
large towards the beginning of the Peloponnesian War.’
Out of this fund one thousand talents were kept as a special
reserve in case of extremity. The heavy expenses entailed
by the conflict with Sparta led, however, to the complete
exhaustion of this fund, and the collapse of Athens after
Aigospotamoi broke down the power which made such a
fiscal policy possible; the League had been destroyed, and
there were no more contributions to collect from the Allies
for the use of the city.

In a sense the subsequent fiscal history is even more
characteristic, because the resources of the city had to be
drawn chiefly from Athenian citizens themselves. The
main expedient was to ransom, as it were, the wealthier
people in order to keep the democratic majority in good
humour. In his second Olynthiac oration Demosthenes
refers to this policy of the Demos*: “If you assign to one
body of men the function of issuing orders to you, like
tyrants; to another, that of compulsory service as trier-
archs or tax-payers or soldiers; and to another, only that
of voting their condemnation without taking any share in
the labour, nothing that ought to be done will be done in
time.” By the help of such exactions the people made pro-
vision for securing a constant flow of money to the dewpikér,


' See PLUTARCH, Perikles, c. 12 and 18.

? According to THUKYDIDES, II, 13, the amount had been 9,700
talents, of which 6,000 talents remained in 431 B.c. As to the
reserve, see ibid., c. 24.

: Dem. Hy, 30. Cf. ISOKRATES, XH, 140... ek de rap Kouwav tais
idias a drropiats BonBetv (yrovrrer, ... kal mpos Tourots éxeiveus ToUs Ta pev
Tov GAov KtThpata THs Toews civat Pdokovtas, Ta Se ravTyns tOva Kreme
kal Svapragew toApevras.


The
treasuries
of the
gods.


112 JURISPRUDENCE OF THE GREEK CITY


a consolidated fund destined to provide for payments in
connexion with the attendance at the theatre on festal
occasions. One of*the most humiliating episodes of the
political history of Athens in the fourth century is the
struggle between public-spirited leaders like Apollodoros
and Demosthenes, who insisted on the needs of the war
equipment, as against demagogues like Agyrrhios and
Eubulos, who cajoled the Demos by persuading it to ear-
mark public money for popular amusements.

A peculiar device of Greek political life for meeting
permanent fiscal demands consisted in assigning large sums
of money to the gods. The temple of Athene Polias was to
some extent a treasury in which a reserve fund for the
public administration of Athens was kept to meet emergency
requirements.! The religion of the city was, as we shall
often have to remark, a definite side of its political life, so
that there was nothing strange in the fact that the Assembly
passed decrees to direct the treasurers of the goddess to
make certain payments in order to square the expenses of
some expedition to Thrace or to the Islands, and for
similar political purposes.2 A decree published in the
first volume of Dittenberger’s collection gives detailed
directions as to the disposal and management of the various
monies kept in the temple of Athene; some of these funds
are public, and are managed by Hellenotamiae; they are
surplus revenue derived from the tribute (dépoz), and are to
be kept apart from the treasure of the goddess. The
decree orders the repayment of a big loan which was made
in critical circumstances by order of the people from the
fund of the goddess. Three thousand talents were bor-
rowed at a nominal rate of interest, and we know that
such operations were constantly repeated during the great


' BOECKH-FRAENKEL, Staatshaushaltung der Athener, I, pp. 195 ff.

? Ditt. Syll. 1°. 94, pp. 123 ff. rapiat iepov xpeparov rés "AOevuias.. .
mapedooav heddevorapias ... dare Sovac rois rprepapyxows €s” Apyos rois pera
AcpooOevos. edokev ret Boret kal rou Sépor .. . amodovat ros heAAevorapias
kal Tos mapédpos trois tapias tés Oe0, ... Kat Tos tapias rés Oeod maw
mapadova rots heAXevorapiats Kal trois mapédpors, rovros b€ dévat orpareyois
emt Opaikes.

° Ibid. 1°. 91b, pp. 118 ff. ex 8 rov gdpoy xararibévat Kara tov


> \ AY , , ‘ a , =~ ”“ ? , |
eviavrov Ta hexdorore mepidvra mapa trois tapiaor Tov res "AOevaias ros


* €\XNevorapias.


VI: THE CITY AND THE CITIZEN _—118


war. Decrees ordering such loans could not be passed
quite as easily as other measures; special permission of the
people had to be asked in order to avoid the law which
forbade orators to propose any decree tampering with the
property of the goddess. But the necessary deca! was
carried over and over again ; so that the treasure of Athene
could be considered as practically a reserve fund of the
city.

All these peculiarities of Athenian fiscal administration
are consequent on the main feature of Greek political
life: the State was all-powerful as against the single
citizen, but at the same time it was regarded not as a being
separate from its live members, but as a complex of citizens
(700s 7), whose interests and rights are not differentiated
from the interests of the “corporation.” Hence, on the
one hand, the use and abuse of political power for the
satisfaction of personal needs and cravings; on the other
hand, the ruthless exploitation of private property in the
interests of the majority. One might almost say that with
a slight change Bentham’s idea of the aim of political union
could be applied to this system; it was directed towards
the greatest advantage of the greatest number of citizens.


2. The Rule of Law.


Apart from material profits, citizenship gave access to Personal
a highly privileged position in the legal domain. An Security.
Athenian citizen could claim rights which were refused to
other classes of the population of Attika, and his legal
standing corresponded in many ways to modern ideas of
democratic freedom. The “rule of law” applied primarily
to this privileged class.*

The exercise by the magistrates of their powers as
determined by law was carefully watched. The position
of the magistrates was entirely different in Greece from
what it was in Rome, where the magistrate’s authority was
based upon his ampertwm. In Greece, the principle was


1 Tbid, 194.
2 Ar. Pol. ILI, 1, 12, 1275 b. See above, p. 103.
3 See DEMOSTHENES, XXIII.


2231-2 if


114 JURISPRUDENCE OF THE GREEK CITY


rather to put the magistrates in such a position that they
should always be subject to the superior authority of the
community. We may take as an illustration of this view
a passage from the speech of Lysias against the Corn-
dealers. In this case certain persons were accused of
having infringed the law forbidding any one to buy
more than fifty measures of corn. The enactment was
designed to prevent hoarding and monopoly. Referring
to the policy of the law, Lysias describes one of the accused
as having admitted that he bought more than the legal
quantity, pleading, however, that it was at the bidding of
the archons that he had done so. Then Lysias turning to
the Court says: “If he shows that there is a law which
bids corn-dealers buy up corn if the archons tell them to,
acquit him; if not, justice demands condemnation. For
we have put before you the law which forbids any one
in the city to buy more than fifty measures of corn.” ?

On the other hand, the Roman rule as to appeal to the
people, which provided the Roman citizen with a safeguard
against any arbitrary action by a magistrate, cannot be
said to have existed in that definite form in the Athens of
the fifth century. It materialized, however, into a clear
legal guarantee in connexion with a reform brought about
by Eumelides at some date about 400 B.c. When a certain
Lysimachos had been arrested and condemned to death by
the Council, Eumelides rescued him, declaring that no
citizen ought to be put to death without the verdict of
a Court of law; a trial took place, and the Court acquitted
Lysimachos. Thereupon a law was enacted providing that, .
in cases where the Council condemned or penalized a man,
the Thesmothetae were to bring the verdicts and the
penalties before the Courts, and whatever the Heliasts
decided by their vote should stand.”

But the most usual means of keeping the magistrates in
order was provided by the right of every citizen to attack
and arraign a magistrate who had actually broken the law.

1 Lys. XXII, 5, 6.

2 Ath, Const. c. 45 6 Snpos . . . vopuov Gero dy twos addikeity 7 Bovdy
Katayv@ 7) (nutoon, tas Katayvocets Kal ras emi(nuidcers eladyew tors


i 5! , Ves 2 A
Oeopob€ras eis 7d Stxagrnptoy, kat 6 rt dy of Sixacral Wnpicwvrat, rovro KUptoy
eivat,


VI: THE CITY AND THE CITIZEN 115


This was regarded as a most potent safeguard against
abuses, although this rule certainly gave occasion for many
unjust prosecutions by sykophants. In addition to this
there were positive rules in Athens which imposed penalties
upon magistrates for an improper use of their authority.
Thus the archons were obliged to take an oath that they
would not accept bribes or be guilty of any other form of
corruption. The oath of the members of the Council of
Five Hundred bound them not to imprison wantonly any
Athenian citizen ;' they were obliged to allow bail on three
securities. Now with regard to the oaths of the Council
not to interfere with individual liberty, there is a
curious contradiction in our authorities. Aristotle in the
Athenian Constitution ? tells us of the action of a certain
Archinos, a leader of the restored democracy, who persuaded
the Council to put to death without trial a citizen whom he
suspected of treasonable designs. Aristotle makes much of
this as a most important fact, for by it, he says, a large
number of people were undoubtedly deterred from con-
spiracy.” It seems clear that the BovAy took upon itself the
duties of the éxxAnota. In the fifth century such discre-
tionary power undoubtedly existed, and in a time of
political agitation an act of State of this kind might be
resorted to, and certainly was sometimes used by the Areio-
pavos, or at a later time by the Five Hundred. It broke
down, however, after the restoration of democracy; and
when the liberty of the individual is absolutely safeguarded,
the rule of law is practically complete.

How could this rule of law be made effective? We have Enforce-
seen already that the right of private citizens to prosecute recat
offending officers kept the government within due limits.
This right of accusation is one of the fundamental prin-
ciples of the Athenian constitution, though it is difficult
from the extant materials to put together a clear statement
of the rules which governed it. But itis apparent throughout
the whole Greek system that its importance was enormous.


1 Dem. XXIV. 144.

2 Ath. Const. c. 40.

3 See the case of Lysimachos, p. 114 above, and a study by
P. CLOCHE in the Revue des études grecques, XX XIII.


I 2


Right of
political
accusa-
tion.


"Edevdepia,


116 JURISPRUDENCE OF THE GREEK CITY


Hence it was sometimes said that the principal re-
form of Solon consisted in the fact that he gave every
citizen the right to take up the cause of a fellow-citizen
and help him to obtain justice. The following passage
from the speech of Hypereides for Euxenippos deserves
attention:! “Among the many splendid arrangements
that exist in the city, what is there better or more popular
(democratic) than the fact that, whenever a private person
standing trial and danger is unable to speak in his own
defence, any one of his fellow-citizens can if he likes come
forward to help him and instruct the jury as to the rights
of his case.” Now what is said here with regard to the
defence of the weak by the strong applies, of course, as
much when an accusation is to be brought as when a de-
fence is to be maintained. The right of accusation, in
spite of all its defects and disadvantages, undoubtedly was
one of the greatest bulwarks of the constitution. In the
speech of Lykurgos against Leokrates the orator speaks of
the different elements of an action at law.? They are:
(1) the parties to the suit, (2) the law, (3) the judge. The


law must lay down what is allowable within the limits of


the action to be tried, the judges must find out whether the
acts put in issue are within the scope of the law; but neither
the one nor the other is of any avail unless somebody is
ready to come forward as an accuser and to deliver the
delinquent for judgement to the sovereign people. The
power of accusation was more than a mere private right.
Its essence was that it was political, and its value consisted
in the meting out of punishment to those who had violated
a law or exceeded their duty.


3. The Privileges of Citizens.


The status of a citizen assumed a particular importance
from the point of view of the close connexion between State
and individual interests; €AevOepia as a basis of citizenship
was a privilege in itself, inasmuch as it ensured a share in
the rights of the ruling class towering over a body of sub-


! Hyp: TY (1).
* LYK,, op ctt., 4,


i ee ee


VI: THE CITY AND THE CITIZEN 117


jects.‘ The juridical inferences are,well illustrated by the
history of citizenship in Athens. We need not trace the
process of its development further than the reforms of
Kleisthenes, which broke the political power of the ancient
clans. This crisis introduced a number of freedmen and
foreigners into the precincts of Athenian citizenship.? Pros-
perous democracy, however, took care to narrow the limits
of the conception.

The legal conditions of citizenship are very clearly set ‘tcomoa-
down in cases when the right of citizenship was acquired 7“
not by birth, but by a grant of the people. Such grants
were made on special occasions, and exact information about
them has been preserved in many inscriptions. They con-
ferred the full right of taking part in all matters human and
divine—peréyeiy dvOpwrivewy kai beiwv (6ciwv). This meant
that the recipient acquired a position within the circle of the
ruling class, was eligible to offices, and was admitted to the
cults of the State religion. One of the first decrees of this
kind preserved for us—the inscription of Chaladria *—gives
the new citizen access to political office by describing him
as Fioompogevos kai Ficodapiopyds. The inscription is inter-
esting also inasmuch as it shows that the addition of faos
to the notion of woAcrefa did not imply any special form of
erant of citizenship. Originally fcomoAirefa and plain
moAiTe(a are equivalent terms, and it is only gradually that
the idea of reciprocity between two States is brought into the
connotation of the term icomoXrefa.* One important con-
sequence of the full admission to political rights by naturali-
zation consists in the fact that the Greeks had no objection
to the cumulation of several citizenships in one person, In
this way they were less exclusive than the Romans.”


Such arrangements of cupoditefa shaded off gradually 2vpmoar
TELA,


1 AR. Pol. I, 2, 1252a, on 7d dpyxov kai 1d dpxdpevor. See above,
p. 13.

* Ibid., II, 2, 1275 b oiov ’AGiynow enoince KAXerobevns pera thy Tov
tupavywy exBoArnv* modAovs yap épudrérevae E€vous kal Sovdovs petoikous,

$ MICHEL, 194, p. 179 ‘A Fpdrpa roip Xadadpiorp : kat Aevkadion :
Xahadpiov é€uev advrov kai ydvoy : Firompo£evor, Furodupopydv: trav dé yar
éxev Tay ev icat... Fioompd€evos is not taken in the sense of honorary
guest, but in that of a magistrate.

* Szanto, Griech. Biirgerrecht, pp.67 ff.

5 MICHEL, 285. J.J. G.I, xi, p. 180 ff.


118 JURISPRUDENCE OF THE GREEK CITY


into cases where the individuality of one of the States was
merged into that of the other; in other words ouproArtrela
and cvvoixiopos are connected by a variety of transitions.
An interesting case is shown in the inscription recording
the treaty of friendship made at the desire of King Seleukos
between Smyrna and Magnesia about the middle of the
third century B.c.1 “The Smyrnaeans gave citizenship
(rrodurecav) to the dwellers in Magnesia ... The Magnesians
shall share as citizens with the Smyrnaeans according to
the laws of the city, without faction, having the same
friends and enemies as the Smyrnaeans... To the dwellers
in Magnesia citizenship in Smyrna to be given on the same
terms as to the other citizens; and in like manner citizen-
ship to be given to the rest of those dwelling in Magnesia
who are of free birth and Hellenic race.” A special case
arose when a definite political tie was kept up between
a metropolis and its colonies. In all cases religious inter-
course was continued ; we have evidence in regard to that
in the inscription relating to the foundation of Brea by the
Athenians,” and as regards the relations between Korinth
and its colonies.*

These relations established by treaties form, as it were,
a step towards the formation of federal governments, which
are in Greece based on a wide autonomy of the component
members and on their alliance for certain specified objects
connected mainly with defence. It is well known that
such federal governments came to play a very important
part during the Hellenistic period, when single cities were
in most cases too weak to maintain their political indepen-
dence. But rudimentary forms of federation occurred
already in earlier times. The best example is presented by
the Boiotian League referred to by Thukydides* He
describes how the Boiotarchs planned an alliance with


1 MICHEL, 19, p. 16 mohirevoovrat de pera Spupvaioy KaTa TOUS Tis

modEws Yopous doTacLdaTes Tov adrov €xOpoy kat pido 7 iryoupevor Zpupvaios
. Acdda Bat de rois éu Mayveoiac KaToiKols . . WOALTElay év Spvpyne ep’

ion kal dpoiat Tois adXows moXirats* dpotws Be 8e3é06a1 THe mohureiay kai
rois Gddots Trois ofkodaw eu Mayrynatar door dv dow ehevOepoi re kai "EdAnves.
(Hicks, 176.)

2 MICHEL, 72. Hicks, 29.

° GILBERT, Staatsaltertiimer, II, p, 87. AE 2


- a


VI: THE CITY AND THE CITIZEN 119


certain other cities and “communicated their intentions to
the Four Councils of the Boiotians, whose sanction is
always necessary.”


4. Societies and Unions.


In considering the general relation between the State Freedom
and the citizen we come across a problem of capital im- Sih
portance as regards the existence and the political treat-
ment of intermediate combinations between individuals.
There are cases when such combinations are prohibited, as
for instance in France after the Revolution of 1789; in
other cases social combinations are allowed on condition of
an express recognition by the State, as in Rome; in yet
another group of instances a marked juridical difference
is made between various forms of societies, and special
privileges are attached to corporations authorized by the
State, as in English law. There are, lastly, examples of
complete freedom as regards the formation of societies.
This last category is represented by Greek jurispru-
dence.

It is true that at first glance our principal guide, Aristotle,
appears to connect associations of all kinds with the State.
We read in the Ethics,! “ All associations appear to be parts
of the political association.” But it is evident on closer
consideration that the philosopher did not want to lay
down any rule as to the influence of the city on the forma-
tion, prohibition, or supervision of associations. The
-examples which he mentions in the same chapter,? and his
way of grouping them according to aims, show conclusively
that he is thinking primarily of voluntary associations. He
cites partners of a shipping concern (7Awrfpes) and soldiers
(of fortune) who join in a military expedition ; he contrasts
companies formed for the sake of obtaining profits with
societies which aim at pleasant pastimes in connexion with


1 Eth, N. VIII, ix, 1160 a, 28 mwaca 8) paivorvra kowwwviac pdpia ths
mo\uTikns (Kowvwvias) eivat.

2 Ibid. 1160 a, 14 ff. ai pev ody GAXa Kowwwviat Kata pépyn Tod cupe-
povros édievrat, oloy mAwtHpes ... TveTpaTL@TaL ... Gpoiws dé Kal puderar
kat Snuorac’ éviac b€ tev Kotvoniav dv HOoviv Soxovor yiverOat, Oracwrar
kal €pauoray. avrat yap Ovaias veka kal cvvovolas.


120 JURISPRUDENCE OF THE GREEK CITY


sacrifices and common meals. His remark that all (private)
associations are part of the general political one is therefore
significant in so far as it shows that he did not make a dis-
tinction in principle between ties of friendship, common
interest, and social intercourse on the one hand, and the ties
of political union on the other. All these varieties were
considered by him from the point of view of the natural
tendency of men, acting as social beings ((@a mod.TiKd) to
form combinations of various kinds and various degrees of
cohesion between their members. Thus, while he did not
pay attention to the contrast between temporary enter-
prises and associations for permanent ends, he laid stress
on the reality of all social combinations, from the lowest
to the highest, and traced them all to the political, or
rather social, tendency of human nature.

This general view is confirmed and developed on all
points by a consideration of the actual facts of Greek law.
To begin with, we have the rare advantage in this case of
possessing the text of a law by which Solon regulated the
relation between societies and their members. It has been
preserved in a fragment of Gaius inserted in the Digest.)
eav Oe Ojos 7) ppdropes f lepoy dpyiwv 7) vairat 7) avaoTot
7) Oporahor } Otac@rat 7} emi delay olydpevor 7H els Eptropiar,
bri dv tovTwy Siab@vrat mpds adAHAovS, KUplov elvat, ay
H) arrayopetvon Onpooia ypdéupara. There are minor doubts
as to one or two points of the enumeration, but they have
no material importance for us. The general tenor of the
enactment is perfectly clear. The law of Athens, as stated
on one of Solon’s &£oves, allowed all kinds of associations
to make rules or by-laws for their members provided that
these did not clash with existing laws of the State. The
enumeration of the societies is perhaps the most character-
istic feature of the text. By the side of partnerships and
companies formed for the sake of trade (els éumopfav) and
for the sake of privateering (émi Aefav) stand sailors (vairat)
and associations for common meals (ovcorror), and for the
use of common burial grounds (éuéra¢goz), adepts of religious
societies (dpye@ves, O1tac@rat), and at the top of the list


* Digest, XLVII, 22, 4 Haec lex videtur ex lege Solonis tralata esse,
nam illuc ita est (GAruS, libro quarto ad legem duodecim tabularum).


rey


VI: THE CITY AND THE CITIZEN 121


members of phratries and demes. In other words, no dis-
tinction is made in respect of the power to make decrees
obligatory for members between purely voluntary associa-
tions for temporary ends, societies whose object is the
satisfaction of some end permanent or at any rate enduring,
and, lastly, recognized subdivisions of the city. This does
not mean, of course, that there were no differences in fact
between these various species, but from a legal point of
view no sharp distinctions were drawn, and all varieties of
social combination were left to shift freely for themselves.
The next question to be examined concerns the distinction
between casual combines and permanent unions. Even
apart from State interference the juridical consequences of
these two kinds of associations are bound to be different,
but the contrast between them may be either strongly
insisted upon or, on the contrary, disguised by gradual
transitions. The latter was decidedly the case in Greece.
Apart from the way in which various combines are mixed
up both in Solon’s law and in Aristotle’s description, in
every group of associations mere partnerships pass over
imperceptibly into companies and into permanent unions.
A striking example is presented by the peculiar form of
combines termed épavo.. The word is used to designate
the relations arising from a “friendly ” loan—both between
the creditors and the debtor and between the creditors who
had contributed to raise the loan. The capital of the loan
seems as a rule to have been the result of a collection, and
no interest was charged on it, although conditions as to
hability and terms of repayment were stipulated as in the
case of an ordinary loan. The wide extent of such trans-
actions in ancient Greece seems to have been connected
with the frequent occasions when relatives and friends had
to render assistance in case of sudden misfortune, for in-
stance, for raising a ransom, paying a heavy fine, &e. In
any case such épavo: were obviously casual arrangements,
all traces of which disappeared on payment of the debt.!
And yet the same term épavos is used currently for durable
associations formed with a view to common pastimes and


1 Lipsius, Attisches Recht und Rechtsverfahren, 730 ff.


Moral


persons.


122 JURISPRUDENCE OF THE GREEK CITY


social intercourse. We may translate it “club” if we only
keep in mind that most of these friendly circles were very
small, consisting of ‘a score of people who met on certain
days to dine together and to offer certain sacrifices. Our
dining and reading clubs are the nearest parallel to these
associations, In this case the aim was neither casual nor
transient, but, on the contrary, tended towards permanency.
Thus the constitutive elements of a “moral person” were
clearly at hand, and in a great number of instances a
material basis was provided for the continuous existence of
the “ corporation” by the gift or the acquisition of a house,
some land, the building of a shrine, &c.1 The frequency
and importance of this kind of social combination is attested
by the fact that trials arising out of relations between
members of épavo: as well as between these corporations
and outsiders (d/kat épavixai) formed a special category
ranged together with dfkat xo.vwyixai, and were treated as
commercial cases by summary procedure, so that the case
had to come up before the Court in the course of a month
after its inception.” I have called attention to this remark-
able instance of affinity between a contractual transaction,
a form of partnership, and a club because it throws a strong
light on the gradual transition in Greek law from occasional
association to the enduring life of moral persons. The
element of super-individual personality is represented even
more clearly in another class of association, namely in
societies formed for the purpose of religious worship or, at
any rate, for occupations connected with some cult. Our
earliest recorded instances of corporative bodies in Greece
belong to this class and, far from shrinking in course of
time, they develop profusely in all directions. The corpora-
tion of dpye@ves founded by Amynosin Attika in the fourth
century B.C.,° the society founded by Epikteta in Thera *
(end of third century B.c.), the @/acos of Poseidonios,® are
remarkable instances of these religious corporations. The


1 Lipsius, 770 ff.

2 AR. Ath. Const. 52, 5.

* KOERTE, Mitteilungen des deutschen archdologischen Instituts, XX1,
_ 1896, referred to by F. PoLAND, Gesch. des gr. Vereins.

* C.1. G. 2448 (MIcHEL, 1001). 6 Dirt, Syll.§, III, 1044,


VI: THE CITY AND THE CITIZEN 123


story of the Epikteta foundation is known in detail from
a statute which has been preserved until our time. A
citizen of Thera, Phoinix, bequeathed land and a certain
capital to his widow, Epikteta, for the purpose of erecting
a shrine to the memory of their deceased son, on condition
that both he and the boy should be worshipped as heroes
at that shrine together with the nine Muses, Epikteta
added further funds of her own to the bequest, and founded
a society of worshippers composed originally of the relatives
with their wives and children, of husbands of married
daughters who had inherited property in their own right,
and of a few affiliated persons. In the act of foundation
she provided that she herself and her daughter should
enjoy the worship of the members of the corporation after
their death. In this way the family of Phoinix and of
Epikteta was raised to a semi-divine position as heroes to
be worshipped at the shrine of the Muses.

In this case and in many analogous ones the super-
individual element of corporative existence is provided
not by abstraction from the rights and liabilities of the
members, but by personification in the concrete form of
hero-worship. Phoinix and Epikteta continue to live in
their foundation, and their will remains active in the in-
fluence it exerts through the organization created in the
original statute. The statute of Epikteta is significant in
yet another direction: while it provides for the settlement
of all important questions by votes of the majority, it
forbids expressly any decision for dissolving the community."
This means, of course, that the founders intended their
corporation to last for ever. And this is no singularity
on the part of the Epikteta document. Poland has rightly
drawn attention to the fact that the innumerable inscrip-
tions treating of corporative arrangements never mention
the possibility of dissolution, which occurs constantly in
the statutes of modern companies of all kinds. As he


1 ZIEBARTH thought that dissolution was possible in the abstract,
but rendered difficult by the prohibition of any proposal to that effect.
The matter is simpler, as wAla|v has to be inserted between the two
clauses. See F. PoLAND, Geschichte des griechischen Vereinswesens,
p. 275.


124 JURISPRUDENCE OF THE GREEK CITY


remarks, the Greeks who founded a shrine or a festival
and a society connected with it never contemplated the
possibility of its disappearance. It was to be alive for
centuries (aidévioy) like the deity to which it was dedicated.
It may be said that although moral persons were born
of individual consent, they lived a real and concrete life
for which the worship of a deity provided the spiritual
tie. In this they were similar to the City which they
imitated in their organization.

Organiza- The link between the city and private associations was

pee in Athens supplied by the tribal and local subdivisions, the
phratries and the demes. They were officially recog-
nized bodies of historical origin and at the same time
they were considered in law to be a variety of the general
class of associations. They were governed by assemblies
and by elected magistrates—demarchs, phratriarchs, and
subordinate employees. Apart from the yévn which repre-
sented the primordial nuclei of the tribal system of
Attika, the component parts of the phratry were the thiasot,
or religious circles formed by what may be called the
plebeian portion of the citizen class. They are called
dpye@ves on certain occasions, and there is no reason to
doubt that the two designations—épyedév and d:acérns—
correspond to each other in the social terminology of
Athens at least in the period between the sixth and the fourth
centuries inclusive.! In these minor corporations govern-
ment was also in the hands of assemblies of members and
of elected magistrates. In connexion with the prominent
part played by the religious element priests appear with
a leading réle. Altogether sacerdotal representatives of
the organizations are more frequently mentioned in the
inscriptions than purely civil or lay magistrates, The
latter, however, are also mentioned as dpyepaniotal, rapiat,
&e. In societies formed by women or for the worship
of a female deity like the Meter in Athens, or Artemis,
priestesses assumed important functions and exercised con-
siderable influence.?


1 ZIEBARTH, 33 ff.; cf., however, POLAND, op. cit., 18 ff.
2 POLAND, 290 f.


VI: THE CITY AND THE CITIZEN 125


By-laws and regulations were made by the general body
of members as yépuor (sometimes Wydiopara). The assembly
which makes them and also elects the magistrates and
priests is called ayopdé, even when it is composed only
of a dozen or a score of members. On entering the cor-
poration new members have to swear an oath which binds
them to be faithful to the community and to obey its
decrees.!_ Discipline was maintained in the societies by
conventional fines: every infringement of the by-laws and
rules was to be followed by the payment of a certain sum
according to an established tariff. In extreme cases the
culprit was excluded from the community. The enforce-
ment of the payment was sometimes brought about by
private execution (mpagis, mpdrreiv) agreed upon in ad-
vance, but in the last resort the union might have recourse
to the help of the city, and some of the épavixal Sixar
mentioned by Aristotle must have arisen from disputes as
to fines and executive measures exercised by the corpora-
tions. Before matters came to this, however, influential
unions tried cases in their own courts, as we may gather,
for instance, from an interesting fragment informing us
of a case in which the union of the Evxadets had tried
certain members who had broken the oath of fidelity to
the community by siding with its adversaries in a public
suit and giving testimony against the corporation.? Apart
from decisions of the tribunals of the city in the course
of regular litigation, there was no interference of the State
in the affairs of unions or corporations; as already indi-
cated by Solon’s laws, these affairs were considered as the
results of voluntary agreement. A decree of the deme
of Peiraieus has sometimes been cited in proof of the view
that a deme could occasionally regulate and forbid the
formation of new religious associations (Oiacor).? The
decree in question need not, however, be interpreted in
this manner. It does not express a general prohibition,


' ZIEBARTH, op. cit., 141 f.

? C.I.A. 11, 609 (824-323 B.C.) émendn tives evartiov Te dpk@ dy
@pooay ... SuateAovot mpatrovres Kal Néyovres Kata Eixadéwv emi BAdBe
T@V KOLVOY KT.


8 C.I.A. 11.573 b. Cf. ZIEBARTH, op. cit., 167 f.


126 JURISPRUDENCE OF THE GREEK CITY


but is directed against possible encroachments of private
associations on the precincts of a temple belonging to
the deme.

As members of the various combines we find in the
earlier epoch (up to the third century B.C.) almost exclu-
sively citizens. The opinion of Foucart,' one of the pioneers
of the study of Greek associations, that the development
started from the intrusion of foreign cults has been con-
tested by Poland on the strength of an exhaustive study
of the inscriptions. The oldest examples, like that of the
Amynos Orgeones, testify indeed to religious motives in
the formation of Colleges, but these motives are connected
in Athens with the social reforms of the closing sixth cen-
tury, leading to the recognition of new clusters of citizens
gathered round traditional local cults similar to those of
the Lares compitales in Rome.” The earliest appearances
in Athens of a foreign cult and of a union connected with
it is that of the Thracian goddess Bendis in the fifth cen-
tury B.c. Later on foreigners appear chiefly as members
of religious associations of a mystic character. Women
are also mentioned only exceptionally in the older inscrip-
tions; they appear naturally as members of cult-associa-
tions for the worship of female goddesses, but also in
societies developing out of family relations. Slaves and
freedmen appear very rarely in the early records; the
most conspicuous instance is that of worshippers of Men
which can be traced up to the third century. In thiasot
and eranoi with predominating citizen membership isolated
slaves appear among the free, but these belong chiefly to
the class of dypudoro, public slaves, who occupied an alto-
gether privileged position, being independent of arbitrary
control by private persons, and frequently holding im-
portant posts in the bureaucratic organization of the city.
If I had to consider not only the classical, but also the
Hellenistic period, I should have had to describe the re-
markable growth of all sorts of combinations running
across the established subdivisions and customary rules
of city-organization. To mention only one point: in the


1 Des associations religieuses chez les Grecs, 20 ff.
* POLAND, op. cit., 515.


VI: THE CITY AND THE CITIZEN 127


unions of the Pythagoreans and of Dionysiac artists the
combines stretched wide across the frontiers of States and
created international associations with authorities which
could not be derived from any single city nor subjected
to the law of any. But these developments fall, as Poland
has rightly remarked, into a period when the city principle
was giving way and the Greeks were seeking new channels
for the satisfaction of their material and spiritual interests.
The facts of this momentous process lie beyond the scope
of the present work. They have been to a great extent
collected and sifted in the excelleat monographs of Ziebarth
and Poland. Before concluding, I should, however, like to
formulate a protest against Poland’s general contention
that the activity of associations was much restricted in
the time before Alexander the Great.! It is true that we
do not possess anything like the profusion of documentary
material which confronts us for the third and subsequent
centuries, but it is impossible, I think, to make inscriptions
the exclusive test of the importance of a social develop-
ment. ‘The clear statement of the law of Solon, the refer-
ences given by Aristotle, and the use of special procedure
in trials of dfkat ko.vwvixai and épavixai testify sufficiently
that already in the sixth, fifth, and fourth centuries social
combines were of common occurrence, and gave rise to
a considerable amount of litigation. It is probable that
in many cases these combines would have turned out under
closer inspection to be more akin to the type of voluntary
association (soczetas) than to that of the corporation. But
the latter variety was certainly represented not only
by tribal and local subdivisions (phratries and demes) but
also by the various religious bodies known as opye@ves and
Oiaco.. Altogether, although the Hellenistic epoch con-
tributed powerfully to the diffusion and development of
unions and corporations, it did not introduce any new
principle in the law as shaped by city jurisprudence. The
Greek “moral and juridical person” had reflected and con-
tinued to reflect the religious or quasi-religious personifica-
tion of the social side of human life.


1 See e.g. HEROD. V, 57, 61, 66.


Division
of func-
tions,


CHAPTER VII
THE LAW OF THE CONSTITUTION


1. The Deliberative Functions of the People.


In considering the fundamental principles of consti-
tutional Jaw in a democratic State, let us, to begin with,
notice a rather important difference between our own
current notions of the function of the State and those of
the Greeks. Our usual way of treating the subject is to
oppose three elements which since the time of Montesquieu
have been accepted as the factors of political life, viz. the
legislative, the judiciary, and the executive powers. For
purposes of convenience this is a good working classification,
but we must not lose sight of the fact that according to
Greek democratic thought supreme power was not distri-
buted in equal shares between these three functions. The
Greeks regarded the dpyai—the magistrates or the execu-
tive—as definite organs of the commonwealth, but they sub-
ordinated them to the people assembled for discussion and
decision. Thus supreme power did not really present three
aspects; it was twofold: (1) 76 BovAevopevor,the deliberative
aspect, and (2) 76 duxé gor, the judicial." One may go further
and say that even this twofold division is made only for
practical purposes; it is a division of functions, not of
powers. The latter would imply an opposition of forces,
whereas a division of functions only means that the same
body acts sometimes in one way and for certain purposes,
and sometimes in another way and for other purposes; no
checks are intended by such a division.

This observation supplies the clue to the organization of


1 Cf Ar. Pol. VI (IV); 14, 1298 a € ev pev ri TO Bovhevdpevov mept TOY
Kowar, Sevrepoy dé ro mept Tas apxds, ... TpiTov be rt TO /Stxdgor. KUptov
& éori 7) Bouhevdpevov rept Trohepou Kat elpipns kat ouppaxias kal i dtadiceas,
kal Trept vopov, kal mept Oavarov kai huyns kai Snpevoews, kat mapt apxov
aipécews kal trav evdvvav. Cf. VIII (VI), 1, $1, 1816 b. Cf. HinpEn-
BRAND, Gesch. der Rechtsphil. 1, 464.


Vil: THE LAW OF THE CONSTITUTION 129


power in a Greek democratic State. Let us see how the
deliberative function materialized at Athens for purposes of
legislation. In the passage of the Politics referred to above !
(1298 a) legislation is ascribed to the deliberative element
(i.e. to the Assembly in conjunction with the Council). It
is usually supposed that legislation belongs to the Heliaea,
the dikacrai. This is true, however, only of one period, and
of this only with certain reservations; the right of the
dikasts was not really judicial in this case, though it assumed
the forms of judicial procedure.

Before examining this question in detail, let us look at Classifica-
the various subjects which may come under the head of Hons
legislation. We find three groups: legal rules and enact- ments.
ments are described as Oeopol, vouol, and Wndicpara. The
difference between Oecpds and vdpos is one of epoch ; * Oecpds
belongs to the archaic period and does not occur in the age of
Perikles or that of Demosthenes ; Drakon was a Oecpodérns.
The distinction is connected with the fact that Oerpds is
a statement or declaration of customary law; customary
law islaid down. The term was preserved in the title of the
six minor archons, the Oecpobérar. Their old legislative
function gradually disappeared, and gave place to the
judicial, but they were originally magistrates formulating
law as well as enforcing it.

Two forms persisted in the classical period, véuos and
Wydicua. This is a fundamental division not difficult to
understand, as it is an equivalent to our own opposition
between statute and decree. A statutory law is a general
rule, and this is just what Aristotle says about véu0s—that
it deals with td kabédov. A decree (WHdiopa) is a rule
or order laid down for a particular occasion, and may apply
to definite persons or objects. This distinction seems in-
disputable : it is clearly indicated by Aristotle in the well-
known passage in the fourth book of the Polztvcs where he


1 Page foregoing.

2 Cf. above, pp. 74f. Prof. J. A. Smith calls my attention to the
fact that in Solon’s Elegy quoted by Aristotle in Ath. Const. c. 12,
ll. 42-47, the terms vouos and Oeopds are used one after the other,
and the latter refers seemingly to rules of procedure. It would be
hardly appropriate, however, to infer from this that vdyos stands in
that passage for substantive law. It is opposed to Bia, and points to
law in contrast with violence or oppression.


2231-2 K


130 JURISPRUDENCE OF THE GREEK CITY


is contrasting the legislation of normal and of degenerate
democracies.! A democracy, he says, which forms general
rules is normal and healthy; but there may come a time
when a democracy ceases to take itself seriously,—trifles
with the situation and legislates by decree. In this case
a democracy is like a tyranny in that it acts arbitrarily, and
its decrees (Wndiopara) are like the ukases (émitéypara)
of a despot. Aristotle refers to the same distinction in the
Ethics.

Objection has been raised to this general description :
some modern writers*® think that it is impossible to trace
this opposition in the text; the distinction beween the two
kinds is declared to be uncertain and fluid. We have a
number of laws of the fifth century, passed (as these writers
suppose) by WHdiopa, e.g. the law of Ephialtes abolishing
the rights of the Areiopagos was passed by the Assembly as
a decree. The law establishing ostracism is regarded as the
outcome of a decree and not of the ordinary procedure of
legislation. But these instances are not convincing: we do
not know in detail how these laws were passed, and if we
did we might find that certain legislative forms were
observed which would range them in the group of statutes.
The decisive consideration for us in this matter is that it
would be strange if a writer of the standing and qualifi-
cations of Aristotle should have fallen into a fundamental
misconception. We may grant that he puts it down too
dogmatically and does not allow sufficiently for the over-
lapping of boundaries and for intermediate links. The
distinction was not so clearly realized in earlier times
as it was in the fourth century, when political thought
had been sharpened by analysis, but the general oppo-
sition between law and decree is a matter of common
reasoning; and, what is more, the complicated process

' Pol. VI (IV), 4, 1292a 15 6 8 odv rovotros Sipos, dre pdvapyos dy,
(nrei povapxetv dia TO py ApxerOat bd vdpov, Kal yiverar SeorroTiKds, ...
kal €otiv 6 ToLodros Ojos avddoyoy Tay povapxia@v TH Tupavvidi. 81d Kal Td
nos TO avré, kat dudw Seororixa téy BeAtidvar, kal ra Wnpiopata donep —
€KEel Ta ETMLTAYLATA,

? Eth, Nik. V, x, 1187b 6 pev vépos Kabddov ras.

* B. KEIL in GERCKE und NorpeEn, LEinleitung, p. 351 Cf.


Swopopa in K F, HERMANN’s Lehrbuch der griechischen Antiquitédten,
Ill Th. (6te Aufl.), 122 f.


VII: THE LAW OF THE CONSTITUTION 131


of vopobecia was certainly not introduced at random—it
was a deliberate attempt on the part of the leaders of
democracy to prevent hasty and contradictory legislation.
If any corroboration were needed of Aristotle’s remark that
in bad democracies there was a tendency to confuse the
two kinds of rule, it might be found in Demosthenes’ speech -
against Leptines, where the orator says that the Athenians
mixed up laws and decrees, and ceased to maintain even
the general principle that laws should not be contra-
dictory.'

A second rule to be noticed in this connexion is the
requirement that no law should be made concerning single
persons; if véwos means a general rule, vépos én’ avdpi is
a contradiction in terms. But there were cases when the
people had to exercise power in order to confer a privilege.
Thus it is possible to make exceptionally a Widiopa en’
avdpi; the matter was, however, enacted in a manner
different from ordinary legislation. A special assembly of
not less than 6,000 was required, as in the case of ostracism,
which was another special form of vépos em’ avdpi. This
constituted a guarantee against misuse.

In two other typical cases privileges may be conceded :
for grants of citizenship the same procedure was employed,
and again in the case where the people decided to liberate
an intending legislator from a prohibition to legislate on
some matter: this prohibition was added for the purpose
of keeping law immutable. If changes, however, were
considered necessary, an immunity (d#éeva) was asked for
and often granted.

How was legislation carried out, and what guarantee Initiative
was there that the established views would be maintained risk
in practice? What was done in Athens to keep the
sovereign people within the bounds of legality? There
being no appeal to any court of higher instance, certain
forms were devised with a view of restricting its action.

The people was deprived of the initiative ? in legislation ;


1 DEMOSTHENES, XX, 92, Wndiopdrav & ot8 drrody dtapepovow oi
voor GANG vew@repor of vopor kal’? ots Ta Whdicpata Set ypaperOa, Trav
Wndiopareoy avrdy ipiv eiciy,

2 HERMANN Swogopa, III, 116.


K 2


132 JURISPRUDENCE OF THE GREEK CITY


it was supreme as to the decision, but impotent for initia-
tion. For the latter purpose a preliminary draft (mpoBov-
Aevya) had to be received. This was necessary, indeed,
because a large assembly had to start discussion from some-
thing definite. No law could be proposed without the
mpoBovrevpa of the Council; no one but a citizen could
attend the meeting ; no one but a citizen could speak in the
Assembly; and only a limited number of qualified persons
could address it; only responsible men had the right agere
cum populo. The Council (BovdAj) must draw up the
proposal, the generals (orparnyoi) could summon an
Assembly in addition to the ordinary ones which were
fixed. Thus there could be no surprises.’

There is an additional point to be considered: when the
people later on began to chafe at these restrictions, it found
ways for circumventing them. The power of proposing
amendment to bills was very wide; an amendment might
be quite opposed to the proposal made. We have an instance
of this recorded in Plutarch’s life of Perikles 2; Perikles was
attacked by his political enemies, who required him to pro-
duce his accounts. The original demand was drawn up by
one Drakontides in a mpoBovAevya giving Perikles the
opportunity to vindicate his conduct. The proposal was
that he should present his accounts to the Prytaneis (IIpv-
Taveis), and they should give judgement on oath. Hagnon
entirely altered the proposal by introducing a general
charge: Perikles should be judged by the usual tribunal,
and the accusation should be for embezzlement and
bribery, or for illegal practices. Thus the amendment
went directly against the sense of the original rpoBovAeupa ;
material changes of the original proposals were, altogether,
by no means an uncommon occurrence.? ‘The result was
greater elasticity and a good deal of confusion.


' Ar. Ath. Const. 44, 45.

? PLUTARCH, Perikles, 32” Ayvav Sé rovro pev adeire rod Wahicparos,
kpiver Oar de rhv dixny éypawev év dixaorais xtAlots Kal mevyrakogiots, Etre KNOTS
kai Sapwyv etr’ ddixiov Bovdotrd tis dvonacew thy Siwky.

° Cf. Dirr. Syll. 1%. 64, ll. 70 ff. ’Apyéorpatos eine’ ra pev adda
kabarep ’Avtixhés’ ras d€ evOvvas Xadxidedor kara ohov avrov Evat év Xadkidr
xaOdrep ‘AOéveow ’AOevaiors, rev buyés Kat Oavato Kal aripias’ mepi dé
routoy épecty evar 'Adevate és rév Edtalay rev rov Oecpoberov Kara TO Wéegiopa
70 Onpo. mept de pudaxes EvBoias ros orpateyos émipederOat hos dv dvvovrat


dpiora, hdros dy xe hos BeAriora ’AOevaiors. Cf. ibid. 116, ll. 33 ff.


VII: THE LAW OF THE CONSTITUTION 1338


Any orator who made a proposal to the People was Responsi-
responsible for the success or failure of the proposed line rasa
of action. The People might act foolishly under stress of tion.
passion, and afterwards repent and vent their rage on the
orator. This happened, for instance, after the battle of
Arginusae : the People regretted their action in condemning
the generals, and passed a decree that those who had
deceived the Demos should be subjected to a prejudicial
trial (7poBoA7), and then should be tried before the Courts.
They were accused and condemned, and one of their
number, Kallixenos, who fled, but afterwards returned to
Athens, eventually died of starvation. Thus the People
might charge those whose proposals it had accepted, and
refuse to assume the responsibility for its own decisions.
Similarly in the case of the ypag mapavopuor, impeachment
for illegal proposals, if a mistake was made it was the
proposer who was deemed guilty, not the People who had
passed the law. Under normal circumstances strict rules
were followed; in order to avoid surprises the various
assemblies of the Prytanies had to treat fixed subjects:
e.g. the first assembly of the first Prytany had to hold the
émlxetpoTovia Tay vopuev, the first of the sixth had to deal
with the responsibility of officers, ete.

The process of legislation assumed about 450 B.c. a very Nopodecia.
peculiar and intricate character, presenting a great contrast
to our own system.? A person wishing to introduce a new
law had first to obtain permission to submit a bill in the
first Assembly of the first Prytany of the year. If this
were approved, the proposal took a more definite form ;
certain of the old laws were criticized as obsolete or other-
wise defective, and the bill embodying the proposed changes
was posted up in the market-place. Then followed a dis-
cussion in the fourth Assembly of the first Prytany as to
whether definite schemes should be presented to the Courts.

If the decision was in the affirmative, advocates (cvvjyopoz)
were appointed to defend the old law against the accusa-
tions brought forward by the author of the new project.


1 XEN, Hell. 1, 7. See below, p. 151.
? ScHOEMANN-Lipstius, I, pp. 415 ff.


134 JURISPRUDENCE OF THE GREEK CITY


A judicial commission of voyobérar had to decide whether
the old law was to be abrogated; all existing measures
contradictory of the proposed new law had to be annulled
before the latter could be passed.!

In all this the principle is clear that particulars of legis-
lation should not be decided on in the Ekklesia or general
Assembly, but in a Heliastic Court. Decrees (xrnpiopara)
were passed both by the Council and by the Assembly, but
a law (vépuos) could only be introduced in the Assembly ; its
actual enactment was in the hands of the voyobéra:, who
formed a Heliastic Commission. This latter thus acted
as a kind of Second Chamber, but was not, as modern
Second Chambers are, mainly conservative in its action;
it must be added that the discussion as to the new law is
not presented with the same clearness of details as the
abrogation of the old one.

In the speech of Demosthenes against Timokrates the
extracts purporting to be taken from actual laws may not be
literally genuine, but there can be no doubt that in substance
they correspond to facts. Indirectly the process is referred
to in inscriptions, which corroborate the evidence from
speeches. For example, there is an inscription? of the
middle of the fourth century containing a decree in favour
of one Peisitheides. After the statement of the usual
privileges granted to this man come the words: “ That the
treasurer of the Demos should pay to Peisitheides a drachma
a day, and that this should be authorized by an ordinance
of the vopobéra: that the mpdedpor in office at the time and
the chairman (ézordrns) should draw up a special enact-
ment that the a@modéxra: should assign this money to the
treasurer of the Demos year by year.” Thus the Commis-
sion acted in regard to the passing of a financial measure.


' DEM. XXIV, § 33 evavriov 8€ vépov pr) ekeivar riOévar TOY vopav TeV
ketpevov pndevi. eav O€ Tis Avoas Twa Tav Vépwv THY KELevor Erepov avT.OH
py emitndecov TO Spo TH AOnvaiwy i) evavriov ray Ketpevav To, Tas ypapas
elvat kat’ avtov Kata Tov vdpoy bs KEiral, édv Tis py emiTnderoy Of vdpor.
Cf. Ath. Const. c. 59.

* Ditr. Syll’, 1, 226, 1, 87 rdv raplay rod Sipou roy det rapuevorra
diddvae TecoOeidne Spaxpny ris jpépas ek rov kara Wnpicpara dvadtoKopevov
Tat Onpar’ ev dé Tois vouobéras Tors mpo€dpors ot dv mpoedpebwoty Kai Tov
\ émoratny mpoovopobernoa Td dpyvpioy rovro pepitery rods amodéKras TH
Tapia Tov Snov els Tov evtavrdy exacror,


VIL: THE LAW OF THE CONSTITUTION 135


The law is not one of those passed as a general rule and
valid as long as it is not abrogated; but it is clear that
these financial measures had to pass the scrutiny of the
judicial commission in the same way as actual laws. In
this case the voyobéra: acted as a Court with yearly legis-
lative powers.

The voyodérar were a judicial commission consisting of
six hundred members selected from among the sworn
judges, and this, no doubt, was one reason why the elabora-
tion of laws was entrusted to them rather than to the
Assembly; since the latter body took no oath it was
regarded as less responsible. The oath of the vopodérar
made the process of legislation more solemn, and provided
an extra safeguard against hasty action.

Another important difference consisted in the fact that
judges were mute, while members of the Assembly were free
to discuss and to vary proposals. There was always a great
risk of confused and contradictory drafting of decrees, while
the adversaries pitted against each other before a Court
were bound to formulate and to argue on definite issues,
decision resting meanwhile with the d:cacrai.

By the side of ordinary legislation there were occasions
when general reforms or revisions were carried out by
special processes resembling the Roman method of legisla-
tion by means of a dictator rei publicae constituendae.
Solon was such a dictatorial legislator ; so was Kleisthenes
and, probably, Ephialtes. It was recognized on such occa-
sions that it was impossible to carry out sweeping reforms
through the entanglements of ordinary legislative procedure.
Confirmation of the People was expressed by the approval
of the whole complex of laws and by an oath to abide by
them for ever, or for a certain stated period. The revisions
of laws after the fall of the Four Hundred and after the
pacification of 403 B.c. must have been earried out by
similar methods.

Some light on these methods is shed indirectly by facts
which took place outside Athens. Under the Makedonian
kings wholesale legislative reorganization was not un-
common; Philip and Alexander insisted, for instance, on
a return to democratic systems in the Greek cities on the


Nopodu-
Aaxia,


136 JURISPRUDENCE OF THE GREEK CITY


islands and on the coasts of Asia Minor. We have an inscrip-
tion recording an order of Alexander the Great to the city of
Chios! The decree enacts that democracy is to be restored ;
legislators are to be elected to put down in writing the laws
of a new Code. Antigonos decreed about 303 B.c. that the
cities of Teos and Lebedos should be joined into one common-
wealth by synoikismos, and that a commission of vopoypé got
should draw up laws for that commonwealth, any differences
between the legislators being referred for settlement to
King Antigonos. In the interval between the passing of
the decree and the completion of the task of legislation the
two cities agreed to be ruled by the laws of the neighbour-
ing city of Kos. ?

A characteristic supplement to legislative functions at
Athens was provided by the guardianship or preservation
of the laws. In modern systems we do not make a definite
opposition between conservation of laws and the general
functions of legislation. In English law every judicial
decision aims at preserving law as well as deciding a
particular case. In other systems this opposition is more
clearly marked: e.g. in the United States discussion in the
Supreme Court starts from the point of view of private
litigants, although indirectly it may result in testing the
constitutional validity of a law. ;

In Athens there was no consolidated constitution ; but as
laws were presumed to be passed in a solemn and regular
manner they could be appealed to against a new law on the
ground of infringement. The development of the guardian-
ship of law*(vouyog¢vAakia) is so characteristic that it must
be noticed, if only briefly. It passed through three stages:


1 Dirr. Syll’. I, 283, 11, 4 ff. modireopa S€ elva ev Xie Sipov
aipeOjva S€ vopoypadous, oittves ypayyovot kai SiopAwaaovat tors vdpovs,
Srrws pndev evavriov He tHe Snpokparia pnde tHe Tov gvyddov Kabddat. Ta
8€ dtopOwbevra i) ypahevra éeravapeper Oar mpos ’Ad€éEavdpov.

2 Ibid., 344, ‘ 3 eis b€ rd Aowrdy Kai Siddvae kal AapBdvew Sixas
kata véuous ods dy vrodauBdvorre toovs apdorépos eivat.  amodeigat
d€ Exatépovs vowoypadors rpeis ... of S€ aipeOevres dpoodytwv ypawew
vépous ods ay vopicwow Bedtiorous eivat kai cvvoicew THe wore... TOY BE
cigevexbevrav doa pev dy €& dporoyoupévar 6 Sipos éemkupoont, xpacba
touvras, doa O€ avtideydpeva Ht, avareppOjvar mpds nuas, dros f avrot


> , a > ~

emkpiv@per f modLy arodeiE@per THY emikpivodvaay’... auvopodoynoavray
™~ ASS , - a

d€ audorépwy date trois Katwy vopos xypnobat, émikexpixaper, tovs 5€ Kaxovs


Ld a“ o
mapekadégapey mpos Tovs vopous ras Saou tpiv eyypayacba.


Vil: THE LAW OF THE CONSTITUTION 137


at first it was in the hands of the Areiopagos; on this we
have definite information in the Athenian Constitution.
Speaking of the laws of Drakon Aristotle says that the
Council of the Areiopagos was the guardian of the laws.
In describing Solon’s constitution Aristotle repeats, that
Solon set the Areiopagos to guard the laws as it had
done before.? This accounts, according to Aristotle, for the
importance of the Areiopagos in political affairs down to the
time of Ephialtes.

The Areiopagos was an essentially conservative insti-
tution, the stronghold of the wérpios roditefa. Developed
democracy could not leave such important powers in its
hands: therefore Ephialtes took them away; but in order
not to destroy the function of “guardianship of law”
a substitute had to be introduced. In the second stage
in the history of voyodvAakia, according to a fragment of
Philochoros,? vovoptAakes were instituted with the right
to watch over proceedings in the Council and in the
Assembly, where seats were assigned to them beside the
Presidents. This statement is definite, yet no instance
is recorded of interference by these supervisors in the
course of Athenian legislation, So much material has
come down to us in the speeches of the orators and in the
notices of scholiasts and lexicographers that the omission
cannot be accidental. The fact was that the arrangement
was not in harmony with the general trend of Athenian
politics and was in practice superseded by the “ accusation
for illegality” (ypadi mapavépev). The third period in the
history of the voyodvAaxkia is represented by its revival
towards the end of the fourth century ; at the “restoration ”
of Athenian democracy under Demetrios of Phaleron an
attempt was made to re-establish it on Ephialtian lines.


* Ath. Const. c. 4 7 y de _Bovdy 1 €& Apeiou méyou pvrak jv tov Huge
kal Ocetnpec Tas apxas Omas kata Tovs vdpous adpxwow. e€&nv O€ Tw
adixoupevo pos Ty Tay “Apeorayitay BovAny eioayyedAew dropaivoyre
map’ by ddixetrat vopov.

Ibid., c. 8 ryv b€ rev "Apeorray ray (BovAnv) fragev € emi ro vopopudakeiy,
@onep wunnpyev Kat mpdrepov émickoros ovca THs mToXITElas.
WILAMOWITZ-MOELLENDORFF, Aristoteles und Athen, II, p. 187 f.

Fragm. Histo Gr (Muller), I, Fr. 141b ras de dpxas nvarykatov
Tois vdpots xpnoda, kal €v TH exednoia kat ev tn BovAj peta TOY mpoedpav
exdOnvto kwAvovtes TA Govupopa TH TédEL TpaTTELy.


T'padg?


wapayd pov,


Rule of
law.


138 JURISPRUDENCE OF THE GREEK CITY


The ordinary course was to allow any one to bring an
accusation for infringement of legal rules,’ neglecting forms
of procedure or some regulation bearing on the legislative
process (voyobecia). That there was constant litigation of
this kind is shown by the speeches of the orators. Aischines
in his speech against Ktesiphon has a notable passage on
this point.? Aristophon had prided himself on having been
seventy-five times accused by ypag? mapavépev ; Aischines
says that it is a greater claim to fame to be able to say, as
Kephalos did, that no one living had proposed so many
decrees as he had, and that without ever having been
challenged by ypadi mapavépov. The most important
speeches dealing with this process are those of Demosthenes
against Aristokrates and Timokrates ; that against Leptines
is also noteworthy as showing that even after a year had
elapsed a person could be attacked, though not legally
penalized. In Demosthenes’ speech on the Crown and in
Aischines’ speech against Ktesiphon, to which the former
oration was the reply, we notice the worst side of the
practice, its use as a political weapon for personal motives.*
In the speeches mentioned above, however, there is more
than personal hostility: Demosthenes made a genuine
attempt to underline the principles which ought to be con-
sidered. In the speech against Aristokrates the facts were
that Aristokrates had proposed a special measure prompted
by gratitude to the Thrakian general Charidemos: one of
the clauses provided that if any one attempted to murder or
actually murdered Charidemos he should be seized and put
to death without trial. Demosthenes attacks Aristokrates
on the ground that such a procedure would amount to
a denial of judicial discussion, and that it would be em-
phatically a case of privilege for a single person, an illegal
vouos én’ advdpi. As we have seen before, there was only
one way of legislating in a case of this kind: the proposal


1 Dem. XXIV. 36 Bouddpevos didakas ipas tov vépov katacTioat.

? IIT, §§ 1938, 194. ae i ;

* Cf.also HYPEREIDES, II (IV),17. Inthiscase the proposed measure
was not in itself illegal, though open to criticism, and the use of the
yp. Tapavduov was an abuse of the purpose for which this procedure
was intended.


VII: THE LAW OF THE CONSTITUTION 139


had to be carried in a special assembly with 6,000
citizens present. ‘This was, of course, an exceedingly high
quorum, as there were only 20,000 citizens on the ordinary
roll; many of these could not be present on account of
various duties both public and private, including military
service at home and abroad:! but the difficulty of securing
this large attendance was just the reason why it was
required. We know that in the case of ostracism 6,000
had to vote in the Assembly, and though in the case of
privilege the voters would not be ekklesiasts merely, but
heliasts, there is some evidence to show that the number
could be used for the legislative purpose, that is, the pro-
posal could be put before them as d:kaorai.? In any case it
is clear that the Athenians had a rule that the ordinary
legislative process could not be employed to proclaim either
privilege or proscription of an individual.

Another point, illustrated in the speech against Timo-
krates, is the prohibition of ew post fucto legislation. In
this case Timokrates had contrived to carry a law which
defied legislative guarantees. Three Athenian ambassadors
were on their way to Halikarnassos when the ship on
which they were sailing captured an Egyptian vessel.
Egypt being at war with the Athenians, the vessel was
declared a prize. The money thus acquired was entrusted
to the ambassadors to be paid into the treasury; but they
kept it for a long time. They were accused and condemned
to repay the money, and not only the actual sum but double
the amount. Timokrates, coming to their assistance, brought
in a bill by which persons who were debtors of the State
and subject to imprisonment in default of payment should
be exempt from imprisonment if they could produce three
sureties, and should then be allowed to pay the debt by
instalments; up to the ninth Prytany of the year simple
payment of the money should satisfy the claim. It was
not difficult to show that this proposal was made for the
benefit of the three ambassadors, and, as being contrived
post factum, was illegal.

This shows that the Greeks recognized the principle


1 FRAENKEL, Die attischen Geschworenengerichte, 15 f.
2 See above, p. 84, App. to Ch. IV.


Position


of officials.


140 JURISPRUDENCE OF THE GREEK CITY


clearly stated in the constitution of the United States of
America that no law should be retroactive, that no person
ought to be affected by a law which was not in force when
his case was decided.


2. Control of the Administration.


The next point with which we have to deal is the treat-
ment of executive officials. In the sixth book of the
Politics Aristotle dwells on the general attitude of the
Athenian Demos as regards officers, taking Athens as an
example of extreme democracy.! There are two main
directing lines: the first principle is to make it possible
for every citizen in turn to become an official or magistrate.”
Offices were therefore arranged in colleges of ten, and
iteration was prohibited as a rule except in the case of the
otpatnyia, where such a prohibition was deemed impossible
because commanders must have technical knowledge and
recognized talent. Thus Perikles held office for fifteen
years aS orparnyos avtoxpdtwp. All the other officials
were chosen for a period limited to one year, or for those
of lower grade—curators and delegates—to six or even
three months. Thus access to honorary offices (riuat) was
open to very many people.

The second principle is that election is by lot, except, as
before, in the case of the generals. This is a direct con-
sequence of the number of claims to a share in power.
Aristotle’s remarks in the LHthics on the distribution of
advantages * show that ripai are thought of as a benefit or
boon to which every one has a claim, and for which every
normal citizen is deemed fit. It is obvious that the use of
the lot is not the best way to select magistrates; and the
drawing of lots was supplemented by a doxipacia, a test of
fitness; every candidate must have passed this scrutiny, in
which he had to defend himself eventually against accusa-
tions and criticism. In the case of the generals it was


1 See WILAMOWITZ- MOELLENDORFY, Aristoteles und Athen, I. 217 f.
* Pol. VUE (V1); 2, 18le b indbears pev ouv Ths Snpoxparikijs moXtreias


edevbepia® . . . ehevBepias de Ev pev TO ev péper dpxecOat kal dpyew.


8 Eth. Nik. V, ii and iii, 1180 b 30, 1131 a 25. See above, pp. 52 f.


VII: THE LAW OF THE CONSTITUTION 141


still required that they should be landowners and fathers
of families.

There are three speeches of Lysias written in cases of
doxipacia; in two of them he defended persons attacked,
and in the third he accused an archon-elect, named Evander.
In these speeches the main object was to scrutinize the
conduct of candidates during the rule of the Thirty. Lysias
tried to prove that his clients had not taken an active part
in the crimes of the Thirty, and on the contrary that
Evander did take part in an execution ordered by the
Thirty. The scrutiny dealt with no definite offence, no
single act or fact, but bore on the whole tenor of a man’s
conduct and involved a general review of his career. Even
in the case of Evander no special crime is alleged, and
Lysias only censures his general conduct. Such a scrutiny
counteracted to some extent the influence of chance in
the lot ; it provided a possibility of revision. The candi-
date’s personal capacity for the post he was to hold was
not, however, considered ; this was not necessary, since each
individual’s part was reduced to a minimum so that he
could not personally do much harm or much good.

Another point to notice is the processes ev@vvai and
émtyetporovia. very official when selected, though he had
certain prerogatives, knew that he had to stand a strict
examination not only by e#@vva: at the end of his term of
office, but even in the course of his tenure by émyetporovia.
The ev@vva: had two aspects: receipts must be presented
and expenditure justified before the auditors (Aoyicra/):
but besides this there was an examination before the
eVOuvos, and in the case of high offices before the Council
and the Judicial Courts.!' All sorts of accusations could be
brought up here. The émiye:porovia went further than
this: at any moment during one of the regular Assemblies
(xupia éxxAnoia, the first of each prytany), an official could
be suspended and brought up for examination. The
generals were liable to this as well as other officials (as we
learn from the Athenian Constitution), the question being
whether it seemed to the People that the magistrate in


1 Cf. HERMANN-SWOBODA, Griech. Antiqu. III, 152 f.


,
Em xetpo-
rovia.


The Five
Hundred.


142 JURISPRUDENCE OF THE GREEK CITY


question was performing his duties properly.!. Much con-
fusion might be caused in this way. We hear e.g. of the
becpobérat being suspended on a certain occasion.”

Another point comes for consideration here: the wish of
the Demos not to leave delegates in full possession of the
powers given to them, but to intervene directly in adminis-
tration. The Assembly being too numerous for that pur-
pose the Council of Five Hundred was charged with the
supervision of the current administration ; it came there-
fore to occupy an anomalous position. In one sense it was
an apx7: the members were chosen by lot, and had to submit
to scrutiny (doxipacia). Single members could be subjected
to ev@vvat, while the conduct of the Council as a body could
be approved or censured by indirect means. At the end of
the year the usual practice was to propose that a crown
should be offered to the Council in acknowledgement of its
good services. Demosthenes in his speech against Androtion
accused the latter of bringing his proposal without the
necessary mpoBovAevya. As the proposal concerned the
Council itself, it was somewhat difficult for that body to
make the ordinary draft. It may be inferred from this
speech, especially from §§ 33-38, that the gift of the crown
was regarded as covering the actions of the Council in all
directions. Certain members wished by means of Andro-
tion’s proposal to shield themselves and escape responsibility
for their actions. The Council, being a permanent delegacy
of the people, came to be the most important administrative
organ of the State; through the system of prytanies it
was always in session. It controlled the democratic
machinery of finance, according to which no money was
kept for more than a couple of days in the central office,
but all was distributed as soon as possible for definite
purposes (e.g. the Oewpixdv). It was the business of the
Council to see that there was no large amount of money
accumulating in the hands of the clerks of the treasury.
The main payments were made in the ninth prytany (20th
of Thargelion).


* AR. Ath. Const. 61 émyxetporovia 8 adrav (sc. trav orparnyay) éort


kara Ty mputraveiay exdorny, el doxodiow Karas apyev.


* Dem. LVIII, 27 f.


VII: THE LAW OF THE CONSTITUTION 145


The question also arises: Is the Council to be considered
_ only as an administrative organ, or as a kind of “Upper
House” taking a share in the sovereign power of Athens ?
When it was created by Solon the latter was, no doubt,
intended. This aspect is manifested e.g. in the form of
the decrees, édofe rH BovAj Kal 7@ Shu; and in the fact
that the Council prepared the mpoBovdrctpuara. In its
executive capacity the Demos could not do without delega-
tion of some kind; a definite framework for activity was
required, and in this respect the Council acted as a kind of
standing Committee of the Assembly. In the history of
the Council, however, as in other matters, we see a process
of gradual encroachment on the part of the democratic
Assembly which represented the people most directly.


3. Judicial Functions of the People.


There is a necessary separation of functions between Demo-
governmental and judicial action, and while the Greeks apa
laid chief stress as regards the former on deliberation, the
attribute of decision (kpiverv) was naturally prominent in
the latter. However, the separation of functions could not
be carried out consistently, and in Athens, at any rate, an
attempt was made to combine in the highest instance—that
of the Heliaea—the function of the People in judgement
with that of the People as a deliberative body. In some of
the extant speeches the pleaders address the juries as
citizens of Athens, not technically as dicacrai, and it is
clearly realized that the main difference does not consist in
the fact that the judicial body forms a special institution,
but in the fact that citizens of mature age are acting under
oath. Now the recognition of a unity of political and
judicial functions led of itself to the very democratic consti-
tution of the tribunals. It is hardly necessary to repeat
that we have to deal in this case with bodies of 201, 401,
sometimes even 1,001 and 1,501, in session. The drawbacks
of such a constitution of the judicature are obvious. Aris-
totle treats of them specifically in two or three instances in
his Politics. The most important passage is in the second


144 JURISPRUDENCE OF THE GREEK CITY


book,' where, after making a statement as to the proposals
of Hippodamos of Miletos for an improved arrangement of
democratic tribunals, Aristotle turns to the actual practice
of such tribunals.

Aristotle’s line of argument in this case seems reasonable,
and one cannot but agree with him that the introduction of
variety of opinion would have led in such large democratic
tribunals to inextricable confusion. The other objection
which Aristotle meets in another passage? bears on the
wisdom of allowing large crowds to pronounce sentences in
judicial disputes. Here again Aristotle presents an apology
on the ground that although each single member of such a
crowd may not be very competent or wise, there is reason
to suppose that many acting together are usually capable
of finding out a common-sense solution of difficulties. In
any case the system provides against corruption, as a large
quantity of water is more free from any taint of corruption
than a small quantity of the liquid. These characteristic
explanations and apologies must be accepted as the ultimate
result of doubts and controversies on the part of thinkers,
and there is a good deal of sound common sense about
them.

From our own experience of the speeches as preserved in
the various collections of the works of Demosthenes, Lysias,
Isaios, &c. we may come to the conclusion that on the one
hand the Athenian jurors were very apt to be caught by
sophistical arguments and impressionist suggestions, so
that from the point of view of strict application of the law
the system left very much to be desired. But on the other
hand it is clear that, at any rate during the best period of
democratic Athens, there was good reason to trust the
jurors in their general estimates of the rights and wrongs
of a case. The analysis of véyo. may have been often
faulty, but the exercise of equity (émefkeca) on the part of
jurors was aimed at as the principal guarantee that the legal
process would follow the line of public opinion, the standard
of justice being much influenced, of course, by the demo-


1 Pol. II, v, 3, 1268a. See above, p. 49.
? Ibid. III, 15, 1286 a 30 ff. Cf. Ath. Const. c. 41, § 2.


VII: THE LAW OF THE CONSTITUTION 145


—eratic conception of the superior right of the community at
large. After all it may be worth noting that even in
Rome, where of course the professional point of view was
much more prominent and led to remarkable results, the
notion as to the part played by the judex was clearly
governed by the assumption that a man representing the lay
element of the community must be guided by a general
appreciation of the merits of a case, and cannot be fettered
by very strict rules as to evidence and as to the value of
the arguments produced by pleaders.!

In any case, in order to work such a system with toler- Two |
able results, it had to be surrounded with certain guarantees terse =
and technical restrictions. The principal way out of the
difficulty was sought in a kind of dualism between the
preliminary steps leading to a discussion and_ possibly
conciliation, and the ultimate stage of adjudication. In
Rome this dualism found an expression in the clearly-cut
formulary arrangement by which the procedure im jure
appertaining to the magistrate and guided by jurisconsults
was quite distinct from the procedure in judicio which
culminated in the verdict of the judew. It would be mis-
leading to look for an exact parallel to this dualism in
Greek procedure. Nevertheless one must reckon seriously
with the preliminary action of the magistrate of Athens or
other democratic cities in directing the trial along certain
specific lines. The avaxpiois of the magistrate who had
to preside in the dixacrfpioy, or the arbitration of the
d.aitnTHs, was evidently a very important part of the
process, although we do not hear much about it. This
preparatory action is generally relegated to the background
by the display of forensic eloquence in the speeches ; never-
theless one may sometimes perceive certain vestiges of it in
the trials. In the dsadikacia as to the succession of
Hagnias, for instance, it is evident from the argument of
the parties that the archon who instructed the case, and
who presided at the trial, had settled the question as to the
persons to be admitted and the formula at issue in a manner
which established a definite line of prejudicial settlement


1 AULUS GELLIUS, Noctes Atticae, XIV, 2.
2231-2 L


146 JURISPRUDENCE OF THE GREEK CITY


for the various parties. The mother of one set of claimants
(Glaukon and Glaukos) was admitted to claim, and an urn
was put up for the votes likely to be cast in favour ' of her
and of her sons. Such an arrangement was much more
than a purely technical decision as to the number of
claimants. It was the result of the recognition by the
archon of certain views as to the relative rights to suc-
cession of various members of a family, and the claim of a
mother as a member of a family seems in this case to be in
advance of the rules of strict law. The importance of the
juridical functions of the magistrate conducting an ava-
kptois, and eventually deciding on the avenue which an
action was to follow (edcaywy%), is indirectly indicated by
the fact that the principal magistrates who had to act in
law were regularly helped by legal advisers (cvv7yopot).
At the same time one cannot suppose that the decision of
an archon or any other investigating and presiding magi-
strate was absolute and could not be reversed. As a matter
of fact in this speech against Zenothemis, for example, the
mapaypagby or exception of Demon is directed really against
the procedural course adopted by the investigating magi-
strates (the Oecpobérar). The affair was being tried on
lines of commercial jurisdiction, and Demon contested this
by raising the wapaypagyj. This means that although
the case had been treated as a dikn Eupnvos, the party
who was interested in having a trial on general lines
of contract could plead in that direction even when the
process had been opened in the dixkacrjpiov. In other
words the question could not be considered as finally
decided by the presiding magistrate.”

Another line of restrictions arose from the practice of the
diaitntai. It is quite evident that this institution of arbi-
trators played an exceedingly important part in the judicial
life of Athens. Most of the civil cases went through this
channel, and a great many of them did not reach the stage
of the dickacrjpiov at all. Our information as to the
diaitnrai shows to begin with that the membership of


 IsAlos, XI. Cf. Wyse, p 673; [DEMosTHENES], XLIII, §§ 8-10.
? On the rapaypagy see Lipsius, 848 f.


|
VII: THE LAW OF THE CONSTITUTION 147


that college was a very numerous one, and that the position
of a dvaitn7Hs was highly considered and connected with
very grave responsibility. We hear of appeals to the general
body of arbitrators by which dé:aitnrai who were supposed
to have acted wrongly were put to trial and condemned to
severe penalties.

This is one side of the matter, but what is even more
important is that the practice led to definite limitation in
the procedure of the Heliastic tribunal itself. Aristotle states
in the Athenian Constetulion? that the procedure in the
Heliaea was restricted to the use of documents which had
been produced before the dvaitnrHs: “It is not allowed to
make use either of laws or of judicial demands or of evidence
other than such as has been produced before the arbitrator
and has been included by him in the sealed casket.” This
hardly requires a commentary: the notice shows con-
clusively that the parties had to take great care in the
discussion before the arbitrator not to omit any part of the
evidence or anything which might turn out to be of material
importance for their case, as this would have prejudiced
their position before the Heliastic Court.

There is also another point of view on which depended a Summary
supplementary kind of justice. In Athenian law cases of Fit.”
flagrant crime were treated by summary methods, and self-
help and the interference of police magistrates were allowed
to a considerable extent.’ A thief, for example, caught in
the act could be taken, bound, and led off to prison by the
injured party (araywyy). Or else the assistance of the
police in the shape of the interference of the Eleven

of “Evdexa) could be required. These cases very often
resulted in summary sentences, and evidently the convicts
were not always able 6r willing to appeal by édeovs to
the dixacrjpiov, in spite of the fact that theoretically
such a way was open to them, at any rate against con-
demnations of a serious kind.

1 Dem. XXI, 86f. Cf. Ath. Const. 53, 6.

2 Ath. Const. c. 53 odx efeore 8 ovre vdpots odre mpokhyoect otre
paprupias GAN’ 7} rais rapa rod Siarntrovd xpyoOa tais eis rods éexivous
ep.BeBAnpevacs.


a6 a on the subject Lipstus, Attisches Recht und Rechtsverfahren,


De


l
148 JURISPRUDENCE OF THE GREEK CITY


Another set of measures of summary jurisdiction arose
from cases in which the safety of the People was involved
directly or indirectly. The Greeks were very sensitive in
this respect, and allowed great latitude to denunciation.
There were various forms of procedure of this kind; the
most common were ¢dars and pyHvvats, the first arising from
a denunciation made by a citizen, the second from one made
by a denizen or a slave. In both cases the administrative
authorities took the matter up and acted, as it were, on the
lines of prerogative for the sake of the “defence of the
realm.” <A third variety was connected with attempts
of men who for some reason had been deprived of
civil rights to exercise any of these rights—breaches
of atipia. These led to an €vdergis, a special form
of delation coupled with administrative action against a
person supposed to be guilty of the infringement. Without
attaching too much importance to these forms of procedure
one has to take stock of them because we have to account
for many cases in our records which spring from the
exercise of these special methods. The peculiarity of all
actions proceeding from denunciation was that the delator
had a personal interest in bringing the action, as he could
claim a part of the fine in case of pecuniary condemnation
or confiscation.

Before leaving this subject of supplementary measures of
a judicial character we must notice the attempt to create
local judges for cases in which it would have been a hard-
ship to call up the litigants to Athens. A special tribunal
was instituted for such cases by Peisistratos, the d:cacrai
kara Oypous; in the legislation of the tyrant the insti-
tution had a political meaning: he wanted to decentralize
as much as possible the life of Attika, so as to secure more
or less the quiet possession of central power for himself and
for his successors ; there is evidence as to a policy of the
tyrants in preventing people from coming too often to
Athens, and of course the creation of justices for local cases
tallied well with such a policy. But the idea had a mean-
ing for ordinary purposes in the administration of law;


' Ath. Const. c. 16.


VII: THE LAW OF THE CONSTITUTION 149


especially as regards the settlement of less important dis-
putes ; therefore the dicacral xar& Syjpous reappeared as
the Thirty in the democratic period, and eventually the
number of these magistrates was increased to forty. They
acted partly on the spot in minor cases (up to ten drachmae),
and their decisions on such occasions were taken by each
judge personally. Besides this they presided over the
decisions of tribunals in Athens, and this part of their
jurisdiction is connected with the settlement of disputes
which involved more considerable interests and were there-
fore taken over to the city.
Such are the principal features of the purely judicial State
organization from a general point of view. By the side of sare ,
: ‘ .__ HpoBoan.

these we find an extensive use of State trials: the practice
is a characteristic side of the life of the city, in which
political conflicts could not be disentangled from the purely
technical treatment of lawsuits. The principal avenues in
this respect were provided by two forms of procedure, the
mpoBodAn and the efoayyeAfa. Harpokration’s Lexicon sup-
plies a definition of the mpofod7 in connexion with the
so-called karayeiporovia.| The meaning of the passage is
. that the Demos could in the course of a political assembly
decide that certain citizens, or magistrates, or pleaders who
had misused their right of accusation (svkopdvra:) should
be brought to trial. The first step in this case, however,
consisted in obtaining a declaration of the people that such
and such a person was in the opinion of the Assembly guilty
of acrime. After such a declaration the case went, how-
ever, its usual course in one or the other tribunal of the
people. The best illustration of the procedure in such
a case is given in the speech of Demosthenes against
Meidias. The speech starts from circumstances which are
not mentioned in Harpokration’s notice. Meidias was accused
by Demosthenes of having insulted him when he was acting
for the people as Choragos, by tearing his vestments and
beating him. It is thus a case of an insult to a person


1 HARPOKRATION'S Lexicon (ed. Dindorf, 1853) s.v. carayetporovia :
€Oos nv ’AOnvno. kata Tov Gpydyrwv Kal KaTa TOV cukofavTay mpoBodrds év
TO Syuw ridecbar ef Sé tis Kataxetpotovnbein, odtos elanyeto els TO
dtkaornptoy.


150 JURISPRUDENCE OF THE GREEK CITY


representing the People on a great ceremonial occasion.
The process which could have started in an ordinary course
by a dixn Bialwy or a ypad? UBpews is brought into a poli-
tical channel, as Demosthenes explains, because he wanted
to emphasize the fact that the People had been attacked in
its dignity in the person of its representative.! The accusa-
tion was intended to provoke a prejudicial declaration by
the People, while the real trial with examination of the
evidence was to take place before a Court. But it is evi-
dent that the pronouncement of the Assembly was to be
reckoned with as a very serious support for the accuser in
the subsequent trial. The interest of the oration is in-
creased by the fact that Demosthenes mentions several
similar accusations from recent Athenian history. In one
of the cases quoted by him we hear of a remarkable com-
plication of the usual procedure in the dixacrjpiov. The
person who had brought the mpoBodA7y, a foreigner, was
willing to drop the case altogether, but the People pro-
ceeded with the investigation, and we hear that a special
proposal as to punishment (apooriunots) was made at the
trial of the case in the dikaorjpiov.2 Unfortunately we
are not informed about the manner in which such a special
proposal as to penalty was carried through. It may be
guessed that this was done on behalf of the State by the -
BovdAy, or possibly by some cuvy#yopos representing the
People, but all such suppositions are based on general
inferences. ,

Eloayye- A much more serious aspect was assumed by political

ae trials conducted as eloayyeAiat. This was a denuncia-
tion made directly to the People in their Assembly, and
calling for an exertion of the People’s authority and not
merely for an expression of opinion, as in the mpoBodAq.
The procedure in this respect underwent a considerable
change in the fourth century. We have to reconstitute its
history chiefly on the strength of two cases: one is the
famous case of the efoayyeAfa brought against the com-
manders at Arginusae, of which an account has been
preserved in Xenophon’s Hellenika.? The second case is


1 Dem. XXI, 33. * Ibid. 176. Cf. above, p. 50f.
5 XEN. Hellenika, I, vii.


VII: THE LAW OF THE CONSTITUTIUN 151


presented by Hypereides’ speech in favour of Euxenippos,
which gives us the law and illustrates the practice of the
elcayyeAia about the middle of the fourth century B.c.!
The Arginusae trial was obviously conducted by very
irregular methods, but the legal process can be ascertained
from the contention of men like Euryptolemos and
Sokrates, who were opposing the rush of the extremists
led by Kallixenos. It was material that the trial should be
conducted through two stages resulting in two decisions ;
one was to establish the procedure to be followed and the
law which had to be applied; in the second stage and by
a second vote the actual facts were to be considered and the
sentence had to be delivered. The law which it was proposed
to apply was the decree of Kannonos as to high treason,
with the eventual application of the death penalty in case
of conviction.? As a matter of fact the decision was rushed
through one session of the Assembly in disregard of the
distinction between the scheme of procedure, which had
to be settled by the Assembly in the first stage, and the
material consideration of facts after adequate defence. It
is important to establish that legally even in these political
trials the settlement as to procedural form ought to have
been clearly distinguished from the examination of the
facts. In other words, although the political aspect of the
trial gave the discussion a summary character and ren-
dered it juridically incomplete, some guarantees were pro-
vided in law against purely arbitrary proceedings.

When we come to the time of Hypereides, we find that
the experience gathered from the case of Arginusae and
other precedents, like the trial of Miltiades or of Kimon,
had led to a much more careful formulation of the law.
The heads of possible accusation are stated in as many
words in the quotation from the véyos referred to by
Hypereides. “For what offences,” he says, “do you think
impeachments are to be made? This you have already


1 See below, p. 152.

2 XEN. Heil. loc. cit., § 20. (Evpumrddepos eeLev) t tore O€ ... waves OTL
TO Kavvevod Whdiopd éorw loxvpéraroy, O keAevel, édy Tis TOV Ta@Y ‘AOnvaiwy
Sijpoy adiKy), dedepevov arroOKely €v TO Snpe, kal éav karayvoo On adixeiy,
arr oBaveiv eis To Bdpapov uBrnbévra, ra be xXpnpara avtod SnpevOnvar kat
ths Oeov ro émid€xarov elyat,


152 JURISPRUDENCE OF THE GREEK CITY


written down in detail in the law, so that no one should be
ignorant on the subject. ‘If one, says the law, ‘destroys
the people of Athens .. . or conspires for the destruction of
the people or forms a (political) club or if one betrays a
town or some ships or a fleet or an army, or as an orator
says what is not best for the Athenian people in considera-
tion of a bribe.” ! It is somewhat strange that by the side
of accusations of high treason appear processes against
pleaders misusing their power of private accusation (cvko-
gdévrat), but this notice shows how important it was to
prevent the further growth of that particular abuse. It is
another question, of course, how far the method was an
appropriate one and what practical results it could achieve.
Hypereides does in fact complain that the terrible weapon
of elcayyedla was being used for futile accusations about
all sorts of small matters, such as charging a high price for
the hire of musicians, enrolment in the wrong deme, or the
recital of dreams, as in the case of his own client, Euxenip-
pos. This wretched man had been dragged into an eicay-
yedXia process because he had reported to the people a
prophetic dream which he had dreamt in a sanctuary where
he had been sent by the people to ascertain the advice of
the gods. His report as to the dream had led to measures
which ended in disaster, and the dreamer was taken to task
by efcayyedia. The whole procedure throws a strong light
on the lack of clear distinction between judicial and political
functions. It has to be added, however, that at any rate in
the fourth century the People did not give the decisions
_ directly in cases of efcayyedfa, but empowered the ordinary
Heliastic Courts to pronounce sentence as to facts—again
an application of the dualism between procedure in jure
and in judicio. Judicial authority was, however, directly


derived in this case from the intervention of the Sovereign
Demos.


' HYPEREIDES, IV (III), $7 f. edv res... tov Sijpov tov AOnvaiwy katadvy
+++) TvvlN Tot Emi KaTahvoet TOD Snyov i) Eratpixdy owvaydyn, 7) €av Tis modu
twa Tpod@ 7) vais f meCnv fh vavrixny orpariay, 4} pntap dv pi) Aeyn Ta
\ dpiora to Sipo te AOnvaiwy xpypata KapBdvev.

? Ibid., § 3.


CHAPTER VIII
RELATIONS BETWEEN CITIES


1. International Law and the Right of Reprisals.


THE exclusiveness of Greek city-institutions has given Devoe
rise to a fundamental misconception in regard to the treat- Tor


ment of international relations. It is a common error to national
suppose that the Greek world was deficient in this respect, robin
that there could not be any talk of international law in
societies sharply divided into a number of small republics.’
As a matter of fact it was not so, and a closer study shows
that on the contrary the world of Greek cities was particu-
larly adapted to the development of a certain kind of
international, or—to speak more correctly—intermunicipal
relations. The point is that not one of these cities was
really self-supporting in the sense attached to the term by
Aristotle. Under stress of circumstances they could exist
for some time in isolation, as it were in a state of siege or
blockade. But under normal conditions each of these small
political units was dependent in a high degree on supplies
of goods and ideas from abroad ; in the existence of every
one of them the intercourse with neighbours, the exchange
of native products for foreign imports, was of first-rate
importance. The case of Athens may serve as an illustra-
tion. Attika was deficient in the very first element of
economic life—the poor soil could not provide the corn
necessary to feed its population. Hence a series of protec-
tionist measures and prohibitions of export,? ete. The
opening of trade routes connecting Athens with granaries
in the Bosporos and in Sicily played a great part in
Athenian history ;* and at the time of its flourishing
expansion Athens became a centre of international inter-
course without ceasing to be the home of some 21,000
privileged citizens.
‘ E.g. LAURENT, Histoire du droit des gens.


2 Lystas, XXIJ; DEMostTHENEs, XXXII.
° BELOCH, Griechische Geschichte, I, 395 ff.


Distress
and
reprisals.


154 JURISPRUDENCE OF THE GREEK CITY


The activity of intermunicipal intercourse in religious
and literary life, in games and competitions of all kinds,
was one of the most essential and remarkable features of
Greek history, and it would be impossible to understand
the influence of the Homeric poems, of Ionian philosophy,
of the art of Pheidias and Praxiteles,! without the back-
ground of this common intermunicipal organization. It is
characteristic that the practice of the great national games
was not entirely interrupted even by feuds between the
various cities”, and that consultations with the oracle of
Delphi were carried on at the same time by the Lakedai-
monians and by their enemies in Athens and in Thebes.

Commercial relations and the juridical effects of travel-
ling and settlement in foreign parts were not less necessary
and prominent consequences of the situation. For our
purpose, the inter-municipal action of the ordinary institu-
tions of Greek States is even more important than excep-
tional manifestations of solidarity, and the occasions for
such action in the classical period of Greek history were
numberless and varied.

The practices in this respect fall naturally into two
groups. There were cities which, though not at war with
each other, had not established definite agreements as to
the treatment of disputes between their respective citizens,
and there were other cities which had come to some
understanding in this respect. In the first case, apart
from the intervention of patrons, by means of which
a member of one State enforced claims against a member of
another, recourse had to be taken to procedure by self-help,
and, indeed, we commonly find men led away into captivity,
(ayerv) and property taken away by distress (fépecv)
because offended persons were seeking to obtain compensa-
tion for wrongs or to assert some right. This is termed
avAdy in the case of distress as well as in the case of
reprisals. Needless to dwell on the arbitrary character of
such methods, but it must be borne in mind that such raids
were not by any means simple outbursts of lawless violence.


' EK. Meyer, Geschichte des Altertums, I11, 433 ff.
* Cf. HERMANN-THUMSER, Lehrbuch der griech. Antiqu. 1, pp. 78 ff.
SZANTO, 8.v. exeyerpia in Real-Enc. V, 2162.


VIII: RELATIONS BETWEEN CITIES 155


As frequently happens in ancient law, distress was used
as a means of obtaining justice by self-help. Another
feature of the procedure was that distress or reprisals
are not necessarily directed against one’s opponent, but
might be levelled against relatives of his, or even against
his countrymen at large. Such cases were considered as
a justified taking of hostages, and designated by the special
term avdpoAnwia.'

This form of self-help, although exceedingly common,
presented obvious inconveniences, and one of the principal
objects of international agreement between Greek cities
was to replace it by some form of regular jurisdiction. In
order to put an end to the state of natural savagery in the
relations of the citizens to those of neighbouring States,
one city would “grant justice” (dwadikia) to another. A
very good illustration of such a public act is to be found in
the ancient treaty (fifth century B.C.) between two Lokrian
cities—Chaleion and Oiantheia—preserved ona bronze tablet
in the British Museum.? Self-help was not abolished by
it, but reduced to juridical methods.

“Tt is forbidden to any man of Oiantheia to carry off a
foreigner on the territory of Chaleion, and to any man of
Chaleion to carry off a foreigner on the territory of Oian-
theia, or to seize property by way of distress.

“Whosoever distrains property belonging to a foreigner
shall be allowed without exposing himself to seizure to take
away the goods by sea, except from the harbour below the
city. If the seizure be made without right, the fine shall


1 Real-Enc. s.v. avdpoArnwia.
2 MICHEL, 3 (Hicks, 31). A. Tov févov pé haye[c]y é ras Xadeidos
‘ > , N \ , > A > , ‘ ? ” a A
Tov OlavOéa pedé Tov Xadevéa € ras OiavOidos, pede Xpepatra at Te ovAdL TOV
d€ gvAovta avdatos ovAéy ta Eevika € Oadrdoas hayev Govdov mAav € Aipevos
TO kata mod. Al’ ddikos ovAGd Téropes Spaxpai ai dSé mdéoy b€x’ duapay
4 A aA , > Ld , , > , , A
€xo. TO avAOY heptdALov opd€ro, Fore gvAdoa. Al peraFotxéor mrEov pevos
é 6 Xadeteds ev OlavOea € OiavOedrs év Xadelor, tar emidapiar Sika xpéoro.
B. Atk avdixyd¢ovre rou Eevodixar émopdtas hedréoro 6 &évos 6mayov * trav
dixav éxOds-F mpokévo kai Fidio E€vo dptotivday emt pev Tats pvataiats Kat
r , ?
mA€ov tevtekaider’ Gvdpas emi tais peidvois evve’ avdpas. At K 6 Faooros
mot Tov Faoroy Sixdlerat katas avvBodas Sayuopyds hed€orat tos hopkopdras
dpiotivday trav mevtopkiay opdcavras ros hopxopédtas toy advtov hédpxov
Guvvev mrrEOdv dé vixev. DARESTE, Revue des études grecques, II, 318-21.
Cf. Orr, Zur Kenntniss der griechischen Hides, Leipzig, 1896, p. 123.


* = 6 émayov. + = éxrés.


The

‘¢ pranting
of jus-
tice.’’


156 JURISPRUDENCE OF THE GREEK CITY


be four drachmae. If the person distraining keeps the
thing seized for more than ten days, he shall pay the value
of it once and a half. If a man of Chaleion is a resident
established more than a month at Oiantheia, and vice versa,
he shall have recourse to the justice of the city.... If the
affair is carried before the judges who deal with foreigners,
the foreign claimant shall choose sworn persons from
among the notables, but not his proxenos nor any fellow-
citizen. For processes involving one mina or more he shall
have fifteen sworn persons, for those involving a smaller
amount he shall have nine. If a citizen pleads against
another citizen in virtue of the treaty, the demiurgi (magis-
trates) shall choose sworn assessors from among the
notables, after having taken the quintuple oath. The
sworn assessors shall in their turn take the same oath, and
the verdict shall follow the majority.”

Even in cases of treaty relations between two cities, self-
help may play a part in the defence against illegal distress
or violence. ‘The way was open in such case to the inter-
vention of a vindex, to use the Roman term and notion.
Striking illustrations of this counter-action by any member
of the contracting States may be found in the manumission
inscriptions of Delphi,! and in the inscriptions commemo-
rating the consecration of Teos to Dionysos, accompanied by
guarantees of dovdfa on the part of neighbouring cities.”
The formulae are:—avrocaurdév avAéwy kal of mapatuyxa-
vovtes afdp.or dvTes Kai dvuTrbdtkor mdaas Sikas Kal fapias.
6 BovAdpevos, 6 Oédwr, 6 mapatvyyxaver Kipio CaTwoav age-
Adpevot kai drrodidbyTes Tois adiKnpéevors.


2. The Granting of Justice (Swoidixia).


In contrast with these methods of self-help stood the
system by which the citizens of a foreign city obtained
a standing before the Courts of a State according to certain
rules: this is described as the “granting of justice,”
dwcdixia or dikatodooia, and the agreements regulating


* Griech. dial.-Inschriften, 1721, 1749, 1857, 1936.
* MIcHEL, 51ff. See Hirzia, Altgriechische Staatsvertrige sber
Rechtshilfe, 39, 40.


VIII: RELATIONS BETWEEN CITIES 157


the procedure in such cases were called ocupPodai or
ovpBora and the procedure itself dikn a6 cvpBddrov.

When justice is “granted” to a foreigner the simplest
way is to apply the laws of one or the other State accord-
ing to certain rules appropriate to the various modalities
of the controversy. Thus a so-called “conflict of laws”
takes place. The account of the struggle between Sparta
and Argos in the fifth book of Thukydides (ec. 79) presents
a good example of the application of this method in classi-
cal Greece. The sixth clause of the treaty of 418 B.c.
provided that “ justice shall be administered to individual
citizens of each State according to their ancestral customs.”
This can only mean that the tribunal before which the case
was brought was to apply either the law of Argos or the
law of Sparta, and, as the choice of the particular law to
be applied was made dependent on descent, the only out-
standing question is whether it was the status of the
plaintiff or of the defendant that was considered decisive.
The common practice in Greece was that, ceteris paribus,
when personality was taken as the standard of selection,
litigation proceeded in accordance with the status of the
defendant. The personality principle was sometimes modi-
fied by taking account of the forum domicilii of the
defendant.?

In the treaty between Athens and Phaselis (895-385 B. c.)°
two different principles are mentioned side by side. The
principle of the forwm contractus is introduced for con-
ventions made in Athens, but on other occasions the direc-
tion of the case depends on the defendant’s domicile.
Conventions made outside Athens were not to be inter-
preted in accordance with Athenian law, and this can
hardly mean anything else but the concession to the Pha-
selites of the application of their laws in the case of con-
tracts made with their city.

An important consequence of the frequency and multi-
plicity of intermunicipal relations was the tendency of the

1 Ar. Pol. III,9, p. 1289 a cipBora rept rod pr adixetvy. See H1TzIG,
es og eee enero Hermes, XX, 240. GILBERT,


Staatsalterth., 1, p. 487. Lipsius, p. 966.
8 MICHEL, 6. Cf. COLEMAN PHILLIPSON, [20.


General-
ization of
laws.


Leagues
and fede-
rations.


158 JURISPRUDENCE OF THE- GREEK CITY


various city customs and laws towards generalization and
unification. Rules of common law grew up on an inter-
municipal basis, and towards the end of the fourth century
one may speak of a private international law of Greece,
which, though not codified, was governed in most impor-
tant respects by similar if not identical principles. ‘This
is stated in as many words in Demosthenes’ oration against
Lakritos concerning commercial laws.!

In the speech against Zenothemis a similarity of trade
customs is implied by the fact that in a trial conducted at
Athens one of the parties proposes to obtain evidence as
to a transaction concluded at Syrakuse, while a Massaliote
trader pleads on the strength of a document executed at
sea with a skipper, and the magistrates of Kephallenia order
a Massaliote ship to sail to Athens in view of its original
destination to that port. Nor is that community of legal
principles restricted to commercial affairs, as may be
gathered from Isokrates’ Aiginetic speech, dealing with the
validity of a will.”

The processes which led to the building up of a Common
Law of Greece can be clearly discerned. ‘To begin with,
there was colonization, in which all the Greek cities of any
importance took part. It resulted in the transfer of rules
and usages across the seas to different places. Thurioi,
Kerkyra, Olbia, the Chalkidike, &c., were as many centres
for the spread of the customs of Athens, of Korinth, of
Miletos, of Chalkis, &c.? The compulsory tie of political
allegiance was sometimes altogether discarded, but, as in
the case of the United States as regards England, the legal
traditions of the metropolis persisted in the new surround-
ings, although with some variations in detail.

A second powerful influence brought to bear on the uni-
fication of intermunicipal law was the action of leagues
and confederacies. The most potent influence in this
respect was, of course, exercised by the first Athenian-


1 XXXV,§ 45. See above, p. 4.

? See above, p.5. Cf. E. WEIss, Z. SS. Rom. Abth. XXXIII, pp. 215 f.

® See e.g. the treaty between the Epiknemidian Lokri and the
Lokrian colonists in Naupaktos (fifth century B.c.), ROEHL, I. G. A.
321, MICHEL, 285. Griech. dial.-Inschr. 1478.


VIII: RELATIONS BETWEEN CITIES 159


Delian league.!| Its power made itself felt through the
greater part of the fifth century, and the gradual assump-
tion by Athens of jurisdiction in important cases led
necessarily to the introduction of Athenian methods and
principles in the administration of law.? This “ reception ”
of Attic law by the allies of Athens was, however, the effect
of governmental pressure rather than that of intermunici-
pal agreements, and, although its results were permanent
and important, their discussion does not lie within the
scope of our inquiry. The methods adopted by the second
Athenian league in the fourth century are more interest-
ing from our point of view.’ This alliance was framed
with the distinct object of avoiding the subjugation of the
allies by Athens, and, in the treaties with various mem-
bers of the league, the leading city had to renounce ex-
pressly the right to keep garrisons and to acquire land
within the territory of the allied commonwealths.* As
regards jurisdiction, it was to follow the ordinary lines of
the conflict of laws, while appeals had to be decided not
by the Heliaea but by the Council of the League.’

The report of a case has been preserved in which the
decision fell against an Athenian who had infringed the
rule forbidding the acquisition of landed property in an
allied State (C. J. A. 11.17). As a matter of fact, the lead-
ing city did encroach in many ways on the autonomy of
the fellow-republics, and turned its hegemony to advantage
in order to increase its political power. But this is matter
of political history rather than of law.

The oligarchical confederation of Boiotia in the fifth
century, whose organization has been made known to us in
detail through the discovery of the Oxyrhynchus fragment
of Theopompos’ Hellenika,® was constructed on a principle
of genuine representation of the eleven sections (yép7) of

1 Morris, American Journ, Phil., V (1884), 298 ff.


2 H. WEBER, Attisches Prozessrecht in den attischen Seebundstaaten.
On the cuppayia turned into an dapxy see Hermokrates’ speech in
Syrakuse. THux. VI, 76.

* See on the subject BUSOLT, Der zweite attische Bund.

SC 1A, 14, 17; 40:49",

SCLC. 1 A. 1V,.2,n, 54> (Dir; Syl? 1, 178), 1.454... IV, 2, 088",
St. C34 1m. 546,.1,:21,

® Hellenica Oxyrhynchia, ed. Grenfell and Hunt, ch. 4.


Arbitra-
tion.


160 JURISPRUDENCE OF THE GREEK CITY


the land, and the hegemony of Thebes was based mainly
on the greater number of its representatives in the regional
and in the central councils. Disputes between the mem-
bers of the confederacy were brought before a Federal
Court composed on the usual proportional basis; it is not
known to what extent this Court acted as a tribunal of
appeal, or of first instance, but it may be supposed that
the ordinary rules as to domicile and lex contractus applied,
subject to occasional revision of judgements by the central
Court.

Apart from articles of Confederation, international
intercourse was conducted under customary rules and
under treaties. A number of the latter have come down
to us in their documentary form, and we can judge from
them to what extent the device of arbitration was
resorted to in this world of independent States. It was
the natural outcome of conflicts between cities anxious to
settle disputes by legal process! The Kerkyraians com-
plained in Athens in the course of the negotiations which
preceded the Peloponnesian war that the Spartans did not
want to try conclusions on equal terms according to con-
vention, but preferred force to justice.2 The ordinary
expedient was to agree upon an umpire—either a foreign
statesman like Periander or Themistokles, or, more often,
a city in whose impartiality both parties had confidence.’
The wéArs €xxAnros thus selected conducted the proceedings
with all formalities necessary to secure careful examina-
tions of claims and evidence. A classical example of such
an arbitration is presented by the inscription commemora-
ting the proceedings in a trial before a court of Knidos
between the cities of Kos and Kalymna.‘ This case falls
into the second century B.c., but there are many notices
of similar proceedings on earlier occasions, and there

1M. N. Top, International Arbitration, Oxford, 1913.

2 Tuux. I, 34.


8 Dem. XVIII, 134. |
‘1.3.4. 1, 158ff. Cf. Top, op. cit, p. 49: “The inscription


> consists of four parts. A. The oath taken by members of the Knidian


tribunal. B. Directions regarding the production of evidence and
the conduct of the trial. C. A statement of the case for the claimants
and of the amount of their claim. D. A record of the verdict and
a list of the advocates on each side.”


VUI: RELATIONS BETWEEN CITIES 161


can be no doubt that similar methods of procedure were
commonly recognized and developed in the most minute
particulars.1

An important variety of intermunicipal justice arose Aica dnd
when law had to be administered not by arbitral, but oupbioXan,
by municipal Courts. Such cases were of daily occurrence
in connexion with commercial transactions. If a ship
belonging to a Milesian citizen came to Athens and dis-
charged a cargo owned by merchants of Smyrna, all sorts
of disputes might arise out of transactions and delicts
of the shippers, the crew, the passengers, the consignees.
Apart from ordinary rules of conflict of laws, Athenian
Courts had to take cognizance of disputes under inter-
municipal agreements—dé/kar dad ocuvpuBdrdov—of customs
of trade and navigation, of general principles of law
and equity in the punishment of delicts and the award
of compensation.2. Unless the dispute grew into an inter-
national quarrel, it was regularly considered and decided
by Athenian Courts—by the vavrodica: or, later on, by
a section of the jury, under the chairmanship of Oeopo0éra.”
The procedure in these cases when they did not assume the
character of public law trials (ypada/) was of a simplified
kind, as befits commercial jurisdiction. In Athens it was
provided in the fourth century that the case should be
tried within a month after the action had been brought.

The provision of treaties and agreements between inde- Sanctions.
pendent States raises the fundamental question of sanctions
for the fulfilment of the obligations laid down in them. Some-
times the payment of fines in case of infringement is men-
tioned in the text, as e.g. in the case of the treaty between


1 Cf. L&cRIVAIN, s.v. ephesis in Dar. et S. Ton, op. cit.,
passim.

?THuK., I, 77. Cf. Lipsitus, Afttisches Recht und Rechtsver-
fahren, p. 972.

3’ Dar. et S., s.v. Gecpodéra. LIpsius, op. cit. 86. It is not
unlikely that the transfer of the jurisdiction from the vavrodixac to
the ecpobéra was connected with the regulation of appeals to the
Heliaea. The vavrodixat probably judged without juries in order to
expedite commercial cases; when this jurisdiction was passed on to
the decuobéra it was found necessary to set a definite term for the
discussion of the cases. The procedure in épzoptxait dikac may be
illustrated by Dem., XX XIII and XLV. |


2231.2 M


Princi-
ples of
humanity.


162 JURISPRUDENCE OF THE GREEK CITY ©


Elis and Heraia! (588-572 B.c.) in which we find stipulated
the payment of one talent of silver to the Olympian Zeus.
Wagers are made in litigation with corresponding deposits to
satisfy the winning party; sometimes, again, hostages are
given to ensure the carrying out of the provisions ; this latter
expedient was, of course, chiefly used in cases of public obliga-
tions. But the principal guarantee of the fulfilment of treaties
and conventions was the oath of the parties. Now this may
mean very little or a great deal. We know by experience that
interests and passions may turn the most solemn assevera-
tion into a scrap of paper, and the history of ancient Greece
provides many examples of treachery of that kind. But
it would be a gross error to suppose that the religious
sanction implied by the oaths and imprecations had no
real meaning or weight. Its breach entailed not only
loss of credit—a most important source of influence in
the world—but it clashed with beliefs and moral feelings
which were strongly established and powerful in the
classical world. It is not for nothing that treaties, when
concluded and ratified, had to be confirmed by the oath
of the whole population of a State, or at least of large
and influential sections of its population.”

The formulae of these oaths are characteristic: they are
personal and not representative, because the ancient city
was a concrete reality, and not a corporation in the modern
sense, with the attributes of a persona ficta. In the earlier
stages of Greek history the fear of the dyos incurred by
the violation of an oath was certainly a strong deterrent,
though, of course, like all deterrents, it did not prevent
occasional breaches of faith under temptation. Even in
later times the religious sanction had not lost its meaning,
because religion afforded the natural channel for those
supermunicipal and supernational feelings which form, as
it were, the second root of international law.

The claims of civilization and of humanity were not vain
words for the Greeks; in spite of the narrowness of their
Civic organizations, they had a vivid sense of personal


1 C.1.G., 11, Micwen, I, 1 ai 8€ pa cvvéay rddavrév «’ dpyipo
arrorivotay tét At ’OAvyriot.


? See above, pp. 107 f.


ae)
VIII: RELATIONS BETWEEN CITIES 163


dignity and of moral restraint, as well as a sense of beauty
and a thirst for truth. No one who has read the story of
the interview between Priamos and Achilles in the Iliad
can fail to recognize that, amidst all the horrors of ruthless
fights, Greek youths were brought up to harbour humane
feelings towards the unfortunate and the vanquished. The
way in which Thukydides relates the atrocities committed
by his countrymen as well as by their enemies—the slaughter
of Mytilene, the slaughter of Melos, the slaughter of sailors
on neutral ships, is in itself a piece of evidence and a lesson.
And the popular roots of these feelings were intertwined
with religious conceptions. It is to the Zeds £évios that
a wanderer in a foreign land appealed for protection. It is
at the sacred hearth that a refugee sought an asylum from
vengeance and pursuit,’ and when the refugee took on his
lap the child of the householder, he made the latter think
of what fortune might have in store for his offspring.
A curious set of commandments bearing on humane con-
duct has come down to us in connexion with the traditional
lore of a noble family in Athens, the Buzygae.” A similar
though much shorter set of commandinents was adopted by
the Amphiktyonic League of Delphi and Thermopylae.’
This League might be regarded rightly as an embryonic The Am-
League of Nations; its constitution goes back to a very ee
early period in the colonization of Greece by Hellenes— tribunal.
its membership * was restricted and its methods rudimentary,
but it was an attempt to embody the notion of international
justice in an organized institution. The religious authority
of Delphi gave it powerful support, and it was not devoid
of compulsory sanctions. In this respect its endeavours
stranded, as usual, on the divergence of interests and the
inequality of forces of its component members. ‘Twice the
League, in order to enforce its decrees, carried on prolonged


' K.g. Themistokles at Admetos’ hearth. See above, p. 101.

2 TOEPFFER, Attische Genealogie, p. 139.

> Cf. as to free trade between allies, PLUT. Perikles, 29 mpoceyévovto
Meyapeis, altimpevor maons pev ayopas dndvtwv Sé Aipévav dv ’AOnvaior
Kpatovoi etpyerOar Kal anedavver Oat rapa Ta Kova Sixata Kal Tos yeyern-
pévous Spkous Trois “EAAnow.

* See on the subject BUERGEL, Die pyldeisch-delphische Amphik-
tyonie. Cf. HERMANN-THUMSER, I, 90 ff.


M2


164 JURISPRUDENCE OF THE GREEK CITY


wars with the help of coalitions of cities. -In both cases
these wars were made to serve the interests of the
great powers—Sparta and Makedon. This is, however, a
difficulty common to all states of society dominated by
territorial sovereignty, a difficulty which could only be
removed by the building up of a World State—a contin-
gency very distant even in our own time.

As for the Greeks, their intermunicipal humanity was
undoubtedly restricted during the early and the classical
period to the circle of Hellenic civilization. The barbarians
were regarded as inferior by nature; notice, for instance,
Aristotle’s account of the barbaric roots of slavery. But
this pride of race begins to undergo a remarkable trans-
formation towards the end of the classical age. Instead
of the racial it is the cultural aspect that is thrust into
the foreground, and hereby a transition is provided to
a different world in which Hellenism appears not as a
national peculiarity, but as a badge of civilization. One
of the forerunners of the Hellenistic age, Isokrates, has
expressed this in as many words:? “Our city has so
far surpassed the rest of mankind in power of thought
and speech that her disciples have become the teachers
of the rest; she has made the name of Hellene seem to
belong no longer to the race, but to the mind, so that
the name is given to those who share in our culture
more than to those who share the common blood.”


1 Pol. I, 3-6. 2 Isoxr. IV, 50.


CHAPTER Ix
CRIME AND TORT


1. Penal actions (ypagai).


THE treatment of criminal law in Blackstone’s Commen- Classifica-
taries starts from a distinction between public and private Ce
wrongs—the former affecting the community at large, while
the latter are taken to injure primarily private persons.
Blackstone’s definition has been criticized on the ground
that any infringement of legal right is directed against the
commonwealth which has acknowledged and guaranteed
these rights.!. But although the opposition between private
and public wrongs may not be an absolute one, it is fully
justified from the “subjective” point of view in so far as
breaches of law may be opposed either by the individuals
immediately concerned or by the community at large, if the
latter deems itself directly menaced in its interests or in
the fundamental principles of its political and legal order.
These two aspects of legal redress are sharply distinguished
in Greek jurisprudence. Individuals seek to enforce their
rights contested or infringed by other persons by means of
“appeals to justice ”"—dfka:. If the interests of the city are
directly affected by the act or omission of a person subjected
to its jurisdiction, a penal action is instituted by an accusa-
tion in writing—ypagy.? In both cases the trial starts, as
a rule, in the shape of an action brought by a citizen, or in
certain cases by a denizen or a foreigner, as there did not
exist in Athens or in other Greek cities any office corre-
sponding to the public prosecutor of English law or the
procureur of Continental systems; but the contrast between
private prosecution ((d/a) and the redress of public wrongs
(Snpuoaia) is clearly perceived and followed up to its conse-
quences as regards compensation and punishment. The

' KENNY, Outlines of Criminal Law, pp. & f.

2 Cf. G. M. CALHOUN, On Oral and Written Pleadings in Athenian


Courts in Transactions of American Philological Association, vol. L
(1919), pp. 177 ff.


Choice of
actions,


166 JURISPRUDENCE OF THE GREEK CITY


contrast may be illustrated, for example, from Demosthenes’
speech against Meidias. The orator brought a mpoBoA7, that
is, a political accusation, against his enemy, who had
treated him in a humiliating manner on a solemn occasion,
and he asserted that he had renounced the more profitable
course of bringing a private action for compensation, in
order to punish Meidias signally for the public wrongs
inflicted on the city in the person of her Choragos.1
Readers of the Greek orators are familiar with these two
kinds of suits: dfkat, private actions, dealing with the settle-
ment or adjudication of rights as between members of the
community, and ypagaé, actions in writing, arising when
the object of the suit was punishment. The Greeks used
them in a way very different from the legal practice of the
present day; they had a much wider scope in choosing be-
tween criminal and civil action. Special emphasis was laid
on the freedom of the party in choosing the form of pro-
cedure. An orator is often at pains to explain to his hear-
ers that various alternatives were open to him, giving also
the reasons for his choice. Sometimes he even goes so far,
as to confess that he was not strong enough to carry
through the more drastic alternative, and therefore confined
himself to the easier course. To take a familiar example
from the private orations of Demosthenes?: Ariston
brought an action of assault (aixia) against Konon. He
describes how this man and his friends set upon him, beat
him, and robbed him of his clothes; he explains that these
crimes rendered Konon liable to actions for robbery and
contumelious aggression (&Bpis), but in the circumstances
the plaintiff and his friends did not think it wise to insti-
tute ervminal proceedings, and he decided to seek only


' Dem, XXT, § 28 «i 8 eye rv emi rev lov Sixdv mdeovegiay adeis,
77 TOE Tapaxwpe THs Typnwpias, kat TodToy eiddpny Tov dyav’ ap’ ob pndev
€or Ajppa AaBeiv poi, yapw, ov BAABnv Sirov rodr’ ay eixdrws €VEYKOL
foot... Cf. §§ 25 and 382.


? al a
? Id. LIV, § 1... Aaxov atra chy dixny tis alxetas TavTnvi. TavT@Y


‘ cal n~ bg
_ 6€ trav didov Kai trav olkeiwy ols cuveBovdevdpuny, €voxov pev packdvrev


avroy €k TOD mem paypevey eivat kal 77) Tov AwroduTay amaywyh Kal Tais Tis
UBpews ypahais, cvpBovdrevdytwy dé pot kat mapawovytor pu) peito mpaypar’
i) Surnoopar hépey erdyer Oat, pnd brép tiv Hrexiav Sv érembvOew eykadodyra
faiverOa, ovtws emoinaa kai bv ékeivous idiav ~dayow Sixny, Foor dy...
Oavarov kpivas rovrop.


IX: CRIME AND TORT 167


damages. In another speech! there is a general statement
about choice of action. “Take theft: if you have lost
something, many methods are open to you.—Are you able-
bodied and confident in yourself? Take the thief to
prison ; but you risk the penalty of a thousand drachmae.
Are you not so strong? Take the archons with you; they
will do it. Are you afraid of this too? Indict him. Do
you distrust yourself, and are you too poor to pay the
thousand drachmae? Sue him for larceny before the
Arbitrator, and you will run no risk.”

The sharpness of the contrast is, however, modified by
the fact that a very important group of offences, treated
by all modern systems under the general rubric of crimes—
murder, manslaughter, poisoning, arson—are initiated by
dikat and brought to trial, not by any qualified citizen who
wished to do so, but by the offended party or by relatives
of the latter. These actions are, therefore, private as
regards procedure, but they come before special courts of
great traditional authority—the Areiopagos and the Ephe-
tae in Athens—and result in the infliction of heavy penal-
ties. The reason is not far to seek-—the trials in question
were still conducted in accordance with ancient customs of
tribal oligarchy (ra mwdrpia) and projected, as it were, like
a primeval rock in the midst of the more recent layers of
enacted law. It would be an anachronism to apply to them
the concepts of private and public wrongs, in the same way
as to other modernized forms of action; they must be
treated as a group by themselves.

The first thing that strikes one in the study of Greek
criminal law is the extraordinary development of repressive
actions against officials.

After the reforms of Ephialtes and Perikles the Areio-
pagos lost its high position as a court of redress in adminis-
trative cases.*2, These loom large in the jurisdiction of the

' Dem. XXII, § 26 roddas ddovs .. . did Trev vdpwv eri Todbs NdiKNKOTaS,
otov ths KAoTNS. Eppwaoat Kal GavT@e moTevers’ Gmay, ev xidlas 8 6 Kivdu-
vos, dabevertepos el* Tois apyovow epnyov’ rovto moincovoly eékeivot.
ovderepov BovrAe tovtrwr® ypadov. Katayeudyn ceavrov kal tévns dy ovx av
€xous xtAlas extetoar’ SixaCou kromns mpos StairynrHy Kal ov kivdvvevoers.. .
THs doeBelas kata Tav’T eat andyew, ypaper bat, SixalerOat mpds EdpoAridas,


paive mpos rov Baoidéa.
2 ARIST., Ath. Const., 8.


Accusa-
tions
against
officials.


168 JURISPRUDENCE OF THE GREEK CITY


democratic institutions—the Heliaea, the Council of Five
Hundred, and, on certain occasions, the Assembly. Magis-
trates, commissioners, and their subordinates were examined
in a searching manner on their appointment (doxipacia) and
were sometimes suspended from their functions (at the ém-
xXeporovia) in order to answer some charge against their
conduct in office! They were subjected to a stringent
audit before the Aoy:orai on Jaying down their office, and
also threatened by specific accusations before the e%@uvos
of their Phyle (tribe).?

Besides, there was, of course, always the possibility of
an attack prompted by political motives and directed
indiscriminately against the entire activity of a statesman:
the process against Perikles with its undefined charge of em-
bezzlement and corruption, or injustice (kAomfjs Kal ddpor, 7}
aéixiov) is a well-known example of such vague accusations.*
But Athenian procedure took cognizance also of a great
variety of specific delicts, for which members of the ad-
ministration could be sued. Failure to conform to laws or
rules in the exercise of the duties of a mpéedpos or an
émioTatns gave rise to a ypadi mpoedpixy or to a ypagi)
emiatatixy; failure to present accounts within the pre-
scribed times to a ypag?) ddoyfov; misconduct of ambassa-
dors to a ypagy mapampecBefas; failure to inscribe the
name of a public debtor on the list of persons liable—to a
ypap? dypadiov; failure to render an account of the
exploitation of mines—to a ypagi dvamoypddouv perdd-
Aov; the acceptance of bribes—to a- ypagdi Sépor cor-
responding with a ypagz dexacyod in the case of corruption
of judges. The ypad? déixiov was directed against the
misuse of judicial or administrative authority, while the
ypahn kdomjs Snpociwy xpnudrey was used to prosecute
officials guilty of embezzlement. It is hardly accidental
that we are informed with such details of the varied forms
of procedure against magistrates and employees. Many of
our notices are derived from the lexicographers, who had


* HERMANN-SwoBoDA, Griech. Staatsalt., III, 121.

* WILAMOWITZ-MOELLENDORFF, Aristoteles und Athen, II. 217 ff.

* It is hardly necessary to say that on all ‘questions of procedure
our chief authority is Lrpsius {Attisches Recht und Rechtsverfahren).


IX: CRIME AND TORT 169


at their disposal a much greater store of materials than we
possess now, as they could refer to many pleadings which
have been lost since. The reason for this wealth of infor-
mation is not far to seek—the holders of office in demo-
eratic cities like Athens were not only persons invested
with temporary authority, but in a sense the targets of
popular distrust and envy, and the professional accusers
(the cuxogadvrar) aimed their darts chiefly at them.

In connexion with these actions stand a number of Political
political offences attributable both to officials and to plain
citizens. There were of course actions (ypadi aorparteias,
AimooTpatiov, AuToTagiov, ALovavriov), against deserters
and men who had shirked military duties, and (ypady}
detAlas, ypapr epi Tod amoBeBAnkévat Thy aorida) against
cowards. High treason gave rise to two distinct forms of
prosecution: the crime was termed either xatdAvois Tov
dy ov or mpodocia, and, in view of the grave danger to the
State and the necessity of stringent measures the procedure
indicated for regular prosecution was the efcayyed/a, in
which the accusation proceeded not from private persons,
even if the accused had been denounced by them, but from
the Council, while the decision was to be pronounced by the
people in the Assembly. The contents of the charges are
definitely stated in the law by which the efcayyed/a pro-
cedure was regulated in the fourth century. In his speech
on behalf of Euxenippos! Hypereides compares his own
(correct) mode of procedure in such cases with the incorrect
methods of Euxenippos’ accuser, Polyeuktos: “When I
accused Philokrates,” he says, “I brought him into Court
and wrote a proper charge as the law directs ; I stated that
‘he being an adviser of the people (g7ropa) said what was
not in the best interest of the people of Athens, having
received money and presents from those who were working
against the people.’ And,” he continues, “I repeated this
many times in the charge.”

But although the law is reported in the most definite
form in this speech of Hypereides, the prosecutions against
persons suspected or accused of high treason and of attempts
to subvert democracy go back to the age of Solon, and


1 HYper., IV, 29f. Cf. 39. Cf. above, Chap. VII, p. 151.


170 JURISPRUDENCE OF THE GREEK CITY


were formulated more and more sharply. Andokides tells
us of a decree in this sense carried by Demophantes after
the fall of the Four Hundred,! and Xenophon in relating
the proceedings against the commanders at Arginusae
refers to a decree of Kannonos on the subject, disregarded
by the enraged people*; and Lysias mentions similar disposi-
tions after the fall of the Thirty.? The ypagy gevias was
used against foreigners or unfree persons who had surrepti-
tiously obtained admission into the ranks of citizens.

An action has to be mentioned here which has been
already considered in another chapter,> namely the ypad¢y
Tapavouev, the accusation of illegality. One point has,
however, to be noticed now in addition to what has been
stated before. Inthe extant speeches of the Attic orators
in cases of alleged illegality, e. g. in Demosthenes’ speeches
against Timokrates, Aristokrates, Aristogeiton, the pleaders
are never satisfied with urging the formal reasons for in-
validating the law: they always dwell a great deal on the
substantial inconvenience or injustice of the law they are
attacking as well as on the supposed bad motives and bad
character of the prompter of the impugned enactment.
This is of course a feature common to Greek pleadings in
general, a feature conditioned by the fact that the judges
in the case were not trained lawyers but men of the world
more amenable to impressions and suggestions than to
juridical deductions. There is, however, yet another con-
sideration which acted in the same sense—a consideration
embodied in various forms of action. A legislator, a states-
man, an orator, who had persuaded the people, was not
absolved from responsibility when the people had adopted
the measures advocated by him. On the contrary, he
remained responsible for the results, and if they were disas-


" ANDOK., I, § 95 6 8€ vipos ti Kedever, ds ev TH oTHn epmpoobEr
€ott Tov Bovrevrnpiou ; “bs dy dpén ev rH médet TAS Snuoxpatias KarTa-
erriadi vyrowei teOvavar” «tr. § 96 édv ris Snpoxpariay Katadin Tv
_ *AOnvnow 7 apxny twa dpyn Katadreduperns ras Snwokparias.

? See above, Chap. VII, p. 151. piiaa ris

* Lysras, XXXI, §§ 8, 26.

‘ Lipsius, 412.

° See chapter VII. It applied of course not only to legislation, but
to illegal proposals of all kinds; e.g. DemosTHENES, XXII.


IX: CRIME AND TORT ee |


trous or discreditable he became the scapegoat on whom
the Demos took revenge for its own folly. Turning to the
procedure against misconceived legislation, we notice that
closely allied to the ypad? rapavépyor stand attacks against
unprofitable laws and against their promoters—ypagy Tod
py €mitndeiov véuov. Lipsius cites in illustration the well-
known speech of Demosthenes against Leptines. The
argument of the orator is almost entirely directed against
the material injustice and lack of generosity of Leptines’
law ; its clauses are contrasted with those of a bill advo-
cated by Demosthenes’ client and his companion. Twice
the measure carried through by Leptines is expressly
characterized as unprofitable (47 emitAdecos).!  Lipsius’
conclusion that there was a specific action which took its
name from the unprofitable character of the law seems,
however, too bold,? and technically this side of the attack
might well be combined with the usual ypad7 rapavopor.
Anyhow, the close connexion between formal and material
grounds shows the force of the view that a legislator is
answerable for the consequences of his measures even to
the extent of criminal responsibility. In the case of
Leptines this lability did not arise, as we know, because
a year had elapsed since the impugned enactment had
been approved and confirmed by the people.

There was yet another form of action based on an accu-
sation of “deceit of the people” (ypagy amadrns Tod djpov).
A charge of this kind would naturally lead to prejudicial
proceedings (apoBoA7), and possibly to an impeachment by
elaayyedla. Miltiades was tried in this manner after the
failure of the expedition to Paros.* As a supplementary
guarantee against misdirection by insidious proposals
Athens demanded from orators in the Assembly a clean
record as regards fundamental requirements of morality.
Aischines enumerates four such requirements in his speech


1 Dem. XX, § 88 dvayvacerar tov vopov dpiv, dy Tapeog€epoper
ypavpavtes ayti rovde, bv ovK emirnSevov eivat paper.

2 Lipsius, Att. Recht, 383-6.

3 HeRopoTos, VI, 186 ZavOimrmos ... Oavdtov trayayav td tov

boa £ »>Q?/ Col : , > 4 ¢
Sjpov Midrriddea eSiwxe THs ’AOnvaiwy dmatns civexev, Cf. DEM. XLIX,
§ 67 vépor dvrav, édy tis Tov Sipov troayopevos eEaratnon, elaayyediav
eivat Tept avrov.


172 JURISPRUDENCE OF THE GREEK CITY


against Timarchos!: an orator addressing the people must
not be guilty of any of the following four misdeeds: beat-
ing his father or his mother or refusing to support them
in need; failure to perform military service, or cowardice
in the field (throwing away of the shield); prostitution
(€raipnovs) ; squandering of inherited property, On these
grounds a citizen might be prevented by efoayyeAia from
delivering a speech to the Assembly. If he had already
done so, the way was open for a prosecution. Demos-
thenes brought a charge of this kind against Androtion,
whom he accused amongst other things of having addressed
the people in spite of the fact that he had practised


4 , 2
eTQIpnols.


The people of Athens had to guard not only against |


deception and misdirection by demagogues. Their system
of accusation by private citizens lent itself to flagrant
abuses. It was often openly recognized by accusers that
they were prompted by personal hatred or revenge in
trying to subject the defendants to public condemnation.?
No wonder we are told that public accusation came to be
practised as a craft and an art: Aristophanes’ Kleon is the
caricature of the demagogue who relies on his skill not
only in flattering Demos, but in exciting his wrath; and
a number of political leaders are described as professional
sykophants, e.g. Androtion,t Theokrines.> As an antidote
against this evil Athenian law allowed a criminal action
for malicious prosecution, ypady cuxopavtias.® A syko-


phant was not merely one who spread false and defama-_


tory information about a person, but one who made use of
public accusation for a malicious and unjustified purpose.
Unfortunately, although we constantly come across charges
of this kind in various speeches, no oration held in a speci-
fic trial for cuxogavria has been preserved.

To the already mentioned public wrongs are to be added
offences against the gods of the city. As the life of the


' Ascit. I, § 28. See below, p.190. Cf. § 54.

> Dem. XXII, §§ 25-34. § 380 ek rotrou rod vépov, pire héyew pyre
ypahetv €eivat trois nratpnkdow,

°K. g. Dem. XX, 1-3. Lystas, XII, § 2.

* Dem. XX, 65-7. 5 Ibid., LVIII, 2, 12, &e.

° LIPSIUS, op. cit., p. 448.


et ee) ee) i ee ne 8


IX: CRIME AND TORT 175


State was intimately connected with their worship,' any
infringement of their rights and interests constituted a
heavy public delict. Two actions could be brought to safe-
guard these rights—the ypagy doePeias and the ypadgy
iepoovAias. The first was directed against those who sub-
verted the creed and worship of the national deities, and
the trial of Sokrates is the best-known example of it *; the
other was aimed at offenders who had violated the right of
property of the gods. Such sacrilege was treated quite
differently from ordinary theft or burglary.

The only department of common law, apart from the Offences
political one, which is safeguarded with minute precautions es fara
by many and various forms of action is family law. All
relations connected directly or indirectly with family or-
ganization were protected by ypadai. Foremost stand
proceedings against kéxwaovs, a term which may be rendered
by “ill-treatment”. The First Archon, on whom lay the
supervision and protection of citizen families and of their
property, received accusations against those who had ill-
treated their parents (kdkwos yovéwy), or orphans (x. épg¢a-
vov), or daughters inheriting landed property in the absence
of sons (x. émxAjpwv), or wards (x. ofkou éppavixod).2 In
all these cases the damage to property was estimated as
well as the ill-treatment of persons, and the actions for
Kkakwors are matched by another group of accusations which
aim at preventing the squandering of patrimony by extrava-
gance and inefficient management. There was a ypadgi)
Tob kaTadedwxévat Ta warpia, dispersing ancestral property,’
and also a ypady mapavoias, aiming not merely at putting
insane persons under curatorship—a proceeding which
does not involve criminal responsibility--but at inhibiting
the squandering of property to the detriment of eventual
heirs. Lastly, the ypad? apyias mentioned in historical
narratives can hardly have been directed against sloth and
laziness as a vice: its probable justification lay in the neg-
lect of family interests and the resulting material damage
to the family. The great development of actions protect-


1 See above, Chapter V. Cf. (Lysras), VI, § 10.

* Cf. THONISSEN, Droit pénal, 180

3 AR., Ath. Const., 56. 6. * LIPSIUS, p. 340.
5 Id., p. 353. © Idi p. 340;


Ordinary
crimes.


174 JURISPRUDENCE OF THE GREEK CITY


ing family relations and property may be considered in
itself as an expression of the importance of family organiza-
tion in the political structure of the city. As we have
already noted, the latter was considered in a sense as a
federation of kindreds, and its social order was based even
in democracies on the privileges of citizens of pure descent.!

In comparison with the manifold remedies provided
against political offences, the domain of criminal law relat-
ing to ordinary crimes appears very restricted and unde-
veloped; a crime of that kind may either be an attack on
the person of the plaintiff or a violation of his property
rights. We find accordingly in Athenian law two main
actions corresponding to these aspects—the ypad7 UBpews
for offences against the person and the ypagi xAomns for
certain kinds of theft. Outside those two main actions
there are only two crimes giving rise to a public action,
namely procuration (mpoaywyeia) and adultery (poryxela) ;
the treatment of the former offence is not particularly
characteristic of Athenian jurisprudence, but the manner in
which the main actions mentioned above were conducted is
worthy of attention.

Physical and moral injury to a person may be inflicted
in several ways—by blows, by defamation, by contumelious
treatment in general. In Athenian law the first two varie-
ties give rise to private suits for compensation (d¢«a:)—the
dikn aixias and the dikn xaxnyopias. On the contrary,
contumelious treatment and intentional insults are consi-
dered to be public wrongs, and the accuser is entitled to a
ypapi UBpews. The consequences for the defendant, if
convicted, are entirely different—in one case a fine esti-
mated by the parties and decreed by the jury, in the other
infamva (ati pia), heavy fines or confiscation, sometimes even
the death penalty. The classical illustration of iBprs is
the behaviour of Meidias to Demosthenes, although the
extant speech of the latter was delivered not before a tri-
bunal, but before the Assembly in support of a prejudicial
impeachment (mpoBodA7).2 The fact that Meidias had in-
sulted a choragos made the offence an aggravated one, but
any free citizen exposed to contumelious treatment of that

* Cf. above, Chap. V. * Dem. XXI. See above, p. 61 f.


IX: CRIME AND TORT 175


sort was entitled to have recourse to the penal action (ypa¢7
bBpews). The motive of the Athenian legislator in institu-
ting a criminal prosecution for #Bpis was evidently their
intention to suppress the perverse habit of insulting be-
haviour as a vice tending to corrupt public morality. There-
fore even UBpis against slaves was considered to be a public
offence and threatened with punishment. In _ practice,
however, there could hardly be much chance for a slave to
carry through such an accusation, unless a citizen took up
the case. It is in connexion with the injury to the strongest
feelings of a family man that adultery was considered to
be a public wrong and a subject for public prosecution.
The ypady poryetas was a substitute for private vengeance
in these cases. Lysias’ speech on the death of Eratosthenes
illustrates the legality of personal revenge not only of an
offended husband, but even of one who lived with a concu-
bine.’ If the adulterer was not killed on the spot, however,
he could be captured, held in captivity by the offended
party, and eventually brought to judgement by means
of a penal action—ypa¢i poyefas. If there was no ground
for such self-help the arrested defendant could, on his part,
bring a counter-accusation for “false imprisonment as an
adulterer” (@s poryds efpyxOqvat adixws). These penal
actions were evidently intended to restrict as far as possible
the range of allowable private self-help and revenge. In
granting them, Athenian law established the point of view
that a grave injury to the feelings, the honour, and the
reputation of a citizen entitled him to seek, instead of ordi-
nary compensation, a grievous punishment for the culprit.

Whether there was a corresponding penal action in
regard to the rape of a virgin we do not know; to judge
from the analogy of the Code of Gortyn? there may have
been one. The matter may have been also taken up, how-
ever, from the point of view of damages, and therefore
connected with a dikn and not a ypady.


7 Lystras, I, §§ 30, 31 "Akovere 1+ + Ort atta TO Stkagrypip TO €&
‘Apeiou Tayov.. . dcappidny elpnrat ToUTOU 7) karayryvao key psvor, 6 os ay
emt Sapapre 77 éavrod porxdv AaBov tavrny THy Tinwpiay moujonrat, Kal
ore opddpa 6 vopoberns emt Tals yaperais: yuvacgi dikata Tavta nynoato
eivat, ote Kat emt rais maddakais ... THv adryy Sikny eméOnxe. Cf. DEM.
XXIII, § 53.

ae ee I, xxvii, 8-17.


176 JURISPRUDENCE OF THE GREEK CITY


A person bringing a ypag¢y of the kind described above
exposed himself to the risk of a fine in case of defeat. The
law allowed him therefore to choose his mode of procedure
and to avoid the pitfalls of the criminal action by restrict-
ing his claim to one of civil compensation. This choice
in regard to blows and abuse is discussed in the speeches
of Isokrates against Lochites and Demosthenes against
Konon.! The plaintiffs in both cases had certainly been
treated in a most contumelious manner—one being thrashed
by his enemy and the other (literally) “aspersed” from a
slop-basin. Both inveigh passionately against the offenders,
but both consider discretion the better part of valour and
abstain from the risky venture of the trial for 8pis. It is
interesting to find that the point of honour made all the
difference between the civil and the criminal accusation in
such cases, but it is also noteworthy that the People took up
the high ground of a prosecution for crime not becarfse it con-
sidered itself directly offended in the person of its citizens,
but because the latter insisted on trying conclusions on
these lines with their opponents. Similar peculiarities are~
to be observed in the treatment of offences against property.
The action xAomjs is not necessarily a criminal action. A
thief who had penetrated into a house might be exposed to
various treatment according to circumstances. If he was
caught in flagrante delicto he might be imprisoned and, at
night, even killed. If he was pursued immediately after
the theft and tracked to a neighbouring house, that house
could be searched (dwpd) provided that certain conditions
were observed by the search party. If the accusation
rested on inference and was undertaken when some time
had elapsed, an action xAomfs had to be brought, and it
was conducted as a criminal action initiated by a charge in
writing (ypapy KAomjs) only if the theft had been com-
mitted in the market-place, in the bath-house, or in some
other public place. It is explained that a theft aggravated
in this manner was deemed to affect directly the security of
. the city, which was particularly interested in the safety of
the public buildings and places of public intercourse.
Otherwise trial proceeded as a civil action? (Sikn kdomfs)


1 Isokr., XX; Dem. LIV. 2 LIPSIUS, p. 488.


IX: CRIME AND TORT 177


with a prospective penalty amounting to double the value
of the stolen goods.!. Housebreaking does not seem to have
given rise to a special action.”


2. Archaic forms of Criminal Procedure.


A striking peculiarity of criminal jurisprudence in Athens Murder
was that the most grievous offences against the life of citizens FE IS
were not considered to be directly within the range of public
coercion. When an individual was killed the city left the
prosecution to the relatives, and if there were no relatives
or if they preferred entering into a bargain with the slayer,
the latter was let off without further punishment.? There
were déxai hovixai, but not ypapal fdovixa/ in case of homicide,
and this means that the affair was considered primarily as
a private feud to be settled between the two parties by
revenge or composition. This point of view had, however,
to be reconciled with the existence of a well-ordered com-
munity: hence the peculiar procedure described in an inscrip-
tion of 409 B.c. bearing a copy of the law of Drakon as
to manslaughter, and in the speech of Demosthenes
against Aristokrates,? and mentioned with some additional
details in Aristotle’s Athenian Constitution® and in
Plutarch’s biography of Solon.? We need not rehearse
the well-known enactment on unpremeditated homicide
(povos dkovaios) which gives leave to the members of
the household (father, sons, and brothers) to declare a
feud against the slayer, and to relatives of a second circle
down to cousins and their sons to join in the pursuit, nor
the clause which entitles them to effect, by unanimous
consent, a compromise with the slayer allowing him to
return from exile. Certain other points, however, require
some attention. I have already noticed in a former chapter ®
the fact that in the absence of relatives of the inner circles


1 ARISTOTLE, Problemata, XxX, 14 €av pev tis €k BaXaveiov kheyn
i) ek madaiorpas jj i) €& dyopas i) TOV TOLOUT@Y Twos, Bavaro (nucodra, dav dé
tis €& oikias, Surdovv ths agias Tov KA€pparos azrortivet.

? LIPSIUS, p. 442.

3 GLOTZ, La Solidarité de la famille, pp. 309 ff. Lipstrus, p. 610.

Sew 1a XSi, pp. kM, 5 DEM. XXL

® Ath. Const. 54. *3¢, 19)

® Chapter V, p. 90.


2281-2 N


178 JURISPRUDENCE OF THE GREEK CITY


ten members of the phratry chosen in accordance with
precedence in birth rank (dpiorivdnv) by the assessors
(épérat) are bound to take up the prosecution and entitled
to settle with the slayer. The yévos—the intermediate
unit between the family and the phratry—is passed
over, evidently because a number of citizens were only
6pye@ves of some kind and not members of old yévn; and
as the law had to formulate a general rule applicable to
all, such men had to be content with a representation
of their interest by their noble comrades in the same
phratry. Aischines, for example, would have been repre-
sented in such a case by some of the Eteobutadae,' plebeians
of the phratry of the Demotionidae by some scions of the
house of Dekeleia,? etc. The point is of great interest
in so far as it shows that the ancient scheme of avengers
was originally constructed on agnatic lines, while in its
modified form it proceeded from the household to the
nearest heirs (the &yxiorets) on both sides—through males
and through females—to return to the agnatic organiza-
tion of the phratry with its leading patriarchal kindreds
(apiorrivdny).

Another point to be noticed is the distribution of cases
of homicide among the three principal tribunals. Trials
for murder were assigned to the Areiopagos, composed
of acting and former Archons; unpremeditated homicide
(manslaughter) was of the province of the Ephetae, the
fifty-one representatives of the federation of kindreds in
the Palladion, and justifiable homicide was tried by the
Ephetae in the Delphinion. The question arises by what
means the competence of one or the other of these Courts
was to be determined. Lipsius solved the difficulty by
suggesting that evidently the choice of the tribunal was
determined by the nature of the plaintiff’s action or of
the defendant’s opposition.* This means, I suppose, that
if the avengers did not feel confident of obtaining a
verdict of wilful murder, they would not approach the


* AISCHINES, II, § 147.

* MICHEL, 951. Cf. above, Chap. V, p. 89.

* Lipsius, p. 26. PHiiippi, Der Areopag und die Epheten, seems
to me to be in the right when he draws the inference that the assign-
ment to a court was made by the kings.


IX: CRIME AND TORT 179


_Areiopagos but would bring their action before the
king in the Palladion. This may sound plausible, but
how would this account for the Delphinion? There
could be no motive for the plaintiff to seek justice before
a tribunal trying the question of legal homicide; this
kind of trial would surely arise in most cases in con-
sequence of a defence of the accused. If so, the attri-
bution of the case must have been determined, not by
the parties—especially not by the plaintiffs—but by a
preliminary investigation carried out by some court or
_by the presiding magistrates (the king or kings).1 When
Antiphon informs us that even in a case of murder the
accused could take to flight before the first decision had
fallen, he may have had in view the result of such an
avaxp.o.s.” The uncertainty of the situation before the
pronouncement of the judges as to the tribunal competent
to try the case may also explain the passage of the pseudo-
Demosthenic speech against Theokrines, in which the latter
is said to have arranged a compromise with the slayers of
his brother.* The imputation cannot concern manslaughter,
because compromise for ¢évos akova.os was legal and con-
stantly practised. It would also be out of place in a clear
case of dévos éxovctos, in which perpetual exile was the
only means of avoiding capital punishment. It is signifi-
cant that the expressions of the speaker in the oration
against Theokrines point to homicide in general and leave it
undecided whether the case should have been tried by the
Areiopagos or gone before one of the other tribunals.”


1 T incline to refer to this function the words of Drakon’s law, 1, 35:
I.J.G., p. 2 duxagery rovs Bacid€as airy povov,. . . tous de éperas dia-
yrova. The duty of the king was to determine the point of law and
the mode of trial ; the Ephetae g gave the verdict as to fact.

4 ANT. Ag § 13: kalros pol et ney Sieepe oréper Oat Thode THs Tews,
ivov nv pot kat mpookhnGevre Ny edeiv, adX’ épnuny opheiv eivat THY dixny,
tovto © droAdoynoapéev@ Thy mporépay éEeivar €AOeiv* Aract yap TovTO KoLVdY
€oTl.

3 DEM. LVIII, § 28 Teheurqoavros: avT@ roo addergov Biuiw Oavdtw,...
(ntnaas tous Spacavras kat imvOdpevos oiries joay, dpyupiov aBav dnn\ddyy.

4 DEM. XXXVH, § 58 aX’ Gpos drdvrav tovrwy dpos Kai Avats Tois
madovot TérakTat TO mennbcvtae apeta, Cf. XXVIII, 22.

5 GLoTz comes to the same result by another way (Solidarité,
p- 381); I am, however, unable to follow his argument as to the
distinction between compromises before and after sentence.


N 2


The juris-
diction of
the Areio-


pagos.


180 JURISPRUDENCE OF THE GREEK CITY


The next point to be established concerns the part played
by the city in determining the condition of citizens convicted
of homicide. When the Areiopagos pronounced a capital
sentence on a murderer it was carried out by the public
executioner in the presence of the relatives of the deceased.
Thus the avengers were prevented from taking the law
into their own hands when the murderer had not been
killed ém’ atropdépe@, on the spot. They had to be content
with the moral satisfaction of having destroyed their enemy
at the hands of public justice. The murderer could save
himself by flight, and the law protected him from the
“vendetta” of the offended family if he kept away from the
soil of Attika (decpvyia).! Butif he returned, he exposed him-
self to the vengeance of the hostile kindred—he was considered
as an outlaw, and could be killed by any one with impunity.’
There is no reason to suppose that the fate of a person
guilty of manslaughter and sentenced to conditional exile
was different if he returned without having arranged a com-
promise with the relatives of the victim. His case would
be covered by the clause on the avdpodévo: in the same way
as that of the murderer. The city forbade, however,
wanton cruelty to such outlaws: they might be killed,
but it was not lawful to cripple or otherwise to ill-treat
them. The clause may be part of a later addition to
the original text of Drakon’s law indicated by the words
“os €v T® &Eov Eipnrar” in the speech against Aristokrates.®
The point about the protection accorded to fugitives who
keep outside the frontiers seems to belong to the later
amendment which may have been added when Drakon’s
law was re-copied and re-enacted in 409 B.c.*

The Areiopagos was certainly the central tribunal for the
decision of criminal cases according to traditional custom (7
mé&rTpia); the courts in which the king sat with the Ephetae as


1 IJ. G. II, XXI, § 7, p. 4 (7) rots d€ avdpoddvous é€eivat drroxreivew
kal amayew é€y tH nuedat7, AvpaivesOa Sé pH, pydé amowav, } Simdodv
opeirew doov dy karaBddwy. Cf. Dem. XXIII, 28 ff. See below, p. 186.

* Law of Drakon, § 7. See above, note 1.

° Dem. XXIII, § 81.

* GLOTZ, op. cit., pp. 319 ff, builds up a hypothetical and com-
plicated theory on the analysis of the clause as given in Demosthenes’
oration. Cf. Lipsrus, p. 943.


IX: CRIME AND TORT 181


his assessors were engrafted, as it were, on the more ancient
institution of the Council on the hill of Ares. Indirect
consequences of this later formation may be traced in
certain facts of Athenian institutional history. In a sense
the tribunal of the 300 representatives of the Eupatrid clans
(apiorivdny aipebévres) may be said to have been an enlarged
and extraordinary commission of Ephetae appointed to try
the accomplices of Kylon or their slayers.1. The fifty-one
(or fifty if the king was numbered as the fifty-first)
assessors of the Palladion and of the Delphinion held
their ground for a considerable time, but were replaced
by heliasts either in connexion with the reform of Ephialtes
or at the revision of the laws after 403 B.c. In any case
the heliasts are found acting in the first half of the fourth
century, so that the re-enactment of Drakon’s law in
409 B.c. cannot have had a durable effect as to the composi-
tion of the Courts formerly held by Ephetae. On the other
hand the Areiopagos remained master of the stronghold of
criminal jurisdiction even though it was stripped of political
power.”

Aristotle enumerates in the Athenian Constitution the
criminal actions within the jurisdiction of the king archon,’
and his account is corroborated by Demosthenes’ speech
against Aristokrates. Apart from homicide, the king
archon was the presiding judge in trials for attempting to
establish tyranny, wounding with intention to kill, poison-
ing, and arson, and the central Court for all these trials was
the Areiopagos.* The duty of prosecuting persons conspiring
to obtain tyranny was entrusted to the Areiopagos by the
decree of Patrokleides® in 405 B.c. The psephism was
evidently voted by the people in a state of great excitement


Y ArR., Ath, Const. c..1. Cf. PLuTAkcH, Solon, 19 6 de _TpeoKade-
Kaos dav Tov ZdAwvos ... Exel aie » Yeypappevov" "ATipay dorot dir tpot
joa mpi Fj 2dhova apfa, é emitipous elvat TANY 6 doo €€ *Apetov mayou i} Garou
ék Tov eer ay Fj i ék T puTaveiov karadixacdevres t trd Tav Baothéwy eri Povo
i} Tpayatow 7 emi rupavvids Epevyov Gre 6 Oecpos epavyn be.

2 Cf. Dem. XXIII, §§ 65 f.

BG, Oe Os

* DEM. XXHI, 22 SixaCeey de Thy Bouhiy Tiy €Vv "Apel mayo pdvou kal
Tpavpatos €k mpovoias Kat mupkaias Kal dappdkey, €dy tis amoxteivy Sovs.
Cf. ANTIPHON, VI.

: ANDOKIDES, I, § 78.


Mens rea,


182 - JURISPRUDENCE OF THE GREEK CITY


and apprehension, in view of the desperate situation in
Athens with the prospect of defeat and capitulation. We
do not hear of its application in any particular case.

On the other hand all the other crimes in which juris-
diction is attributed to the Areiopagos are illustrated by
forensic speeches. The wounding with intention to kill
(dikn Tpavpdroy €x mpovoias) is represented by a tetralogy
of Antiphon,’ and by Lysias’ speech on the death from
a wound of an Athenian whose name has not come down to
us.? Poisoning is the subject of two important speeches of
Antiphon, in which the principal argument for the defence
consists in trying to prove that a fatal beverage was
administered not as a poison but as an aphrodisiac charm
or a medicinal drink.? As for accusations of arson (zupkaid),
they seem to have been placed within the competence of the
Areiopagos because the setting fire to a neighbour’s house
was regarded as an act of private feud. It may be sup-
posed that if no casualties were caused by the fire, the
matter would be considered merely from the point of view
of material damage and give rise to a simple df/kn BA&Bns.4


3. The Elements of Crime.


The differentiation of tribunals for the trial of homicide
shows the importance attached by the Athenians to the
psychological element in criminal proceedings, The funda-
mental distinction between dévos Exovatos and dévos dkovatos
turns on the presence or absence of the intention to slay
(rpévoia). In what circumstances was it allowable to put
up a defence of this kind (u7 é« mpovofas)? Unquestion-
ably death caused by an accident entitled a person to do so.
Accident and self-defence were defined in a peculiar way in
a law quoted in Demosthenes’ speech against Aristokrates.°
Death arising from a blow which was meant to be inflicted
on an enemy in battle, or from rough handling in a wrestling
match, was deemed “bootless,” and the orator goes on to
explain that if a wrestler succumbs in a contest this must

1 ANTIPHON, IV. 2 Lyst1as, IV.


* ANTIPHON, 1, $93 ck VI. §.19. * LIPSIUS, p. 984. -
5 Dem. XXIII, § 53. Cf. Lipsrus, p. 610.


IX: CRIME AND TORT 185


be regarded as an act of the gods. The rule as to slaying
on the road (éy 66@) is not clearly expressed and does not fit
_ well into the context. But there was evidently a tendency
of defendants in cases of this kind to avail themselves of
any proof of contributory negligence on the part of the
victim to claim complete absolution. The imaginary de-
fendant in Antiphon’s second tetralogy! tries to make out
that a boy killed by his spear was himself responsible for
his death, because he ran over the course when it was for-
bidden to do so. The accuser sets up against this plea the
curious assertion that an unfortunate accident of this sort
shows that the gods were discontented with the slayer, and
punished him for his want of piety by making him the
agent of a homicide, however involuntary. This seems
a far-fetched deduction, but as it was meant to serve as an
example of an argument before the Ephetae at the Palladion
it cannot be regarded as a mere attempt to mislead a popu-
lar court by sophistical suggestions. The delimitation
between negligence and accident mentioned by Aristotle
in the Rhetoric” evidently formed the subject of judicial
controversies among the venerable assessors of the Palladion.

On the other side there lay the indefinite borderland
between murder and manslaughter. According to Plato’s
Laws, death following on blows inflicted in a fit of anger
was not treated in the same way as deliberately prepared
murder ;* but this distinction, corresponding to our modern
rules on the subject, can hardly have been clearly recog-
nized by Athenian jurisprudence. There is, however,
evidence that the defence was set up in some cases that
as no weapons had been used, or prepared for use, there
could not have been an intention to kill. This was urged
by Lysias’ client in the oration about a deliberately inflicted
wound that caused death (epi tpatvparos €x mpovoias).*
He contended that as the wound in question had been in-
flicted by a blow with a shell picked up on the road, there
had certainly been no premeditated attempt to kill. An-


+ ANE LIL. § 8.
? 1, xiii. 16 €ore 8 drvynpara pev doa mapddoya Kal py ard poxOnpias,
dpaprhpara dé doa py tmapddoya kal yy ard Troynpias.
PLATO, Laws, IX, 9. 4 Lysras, IV, § 6.


184 JURISPRUDENCE OF THE GREEK CITY


other point of view from which the inquiry as to mpovora
might be productive of doubt and discussion arose in con-
nexion with the possibility of mistake in the use of
dangerous ingredients. Antiphon’s oration against the
stepmother ! was delivered in a case in which two men had
perished from the effect of a drug which was served to them
in some wine. For the defence it was pleaded that the
drink had been drugged by the concubine of one of them
in order to excite his amorous inclination. The plaintiff
did not dispute that a mistake of that kind had been made
by the coneubine who served the cups, but he maintained
that she had been deliberately misled by his stepmother, who
wanted to get rid of her own husband. ‘The decision rested
with the Areiopagos, but the fact that such arguments were
used by a prominent pleader shows that defences of that
kind were common, and had to be considered on their merits.
In another speech of Antiphon the whole force of the defence
consists in the proof that a choragos who caused the death
of a singer by treating him to a certain drink could not on
any account be made responsible for poisoning, but only for
a most unfortunate mistake.? The importance attached to
criminal intention explains why no material difference was
recognized between the actual perpetrator of a homicide
and its instigator. In the case of the stepmother just men-
tioned Antiphon puts side by side the action of the person
who administered the drink without realizing what it might
produce, and that of the woman who remained behind the
scenes but was the real agent of the misdeed2 The speech
just referred to indicates at the same time that no attempt
was made to draw distinctions in law between principals
and accomplices or accessories, although pleaders would be
sure to avail themselves of any circumstance likely to pro-
duce mitigation of the verdict. Another consequence of
the principle of moral responsibility for crime was that
conspiracy or plotting some one’s destruction, if there was
any attempt to carry the plot into execution, was tanta-


ae «00 ? Ant. VI.

* Ant. I, 20 dv@’ dv  pev Staxovycaca Kai yetpovpynoaca exe ra
énixetpa dv dkia fy, ovd€er airia obca—ro yap Onpoxolvw tpoxicbeioa tape-
850n—7 & airia re 48n kai evOvpnbeioa E€et, eav ipeis Te Kal of Oeot OéAwowy.


— Ts. 8


IX: CRIME AND TORT 185


mount to actual homicide. The king was in charge of
the trial BovAetdcews as well as of those of murder and
manslaughter.! The root idea was the reaction of society
against violence produced by hatred or self-will.

Yet, even apart from criminal intention, the shedding of Religious
blood had to be expiated as being a pollution of the city’s sane
soil. All the forms of trial for homicide, with the possible
exception of the one €v ®pearroi, were connected with
shrines and sacred rites. On the hill of Ares the solemn
oaths and sacrifices forcibly recalled to the mind the
presence of deities watching over truth and justice. At
the shrines of Pallas and of Apollo the wisdom of the judges
was directed towards distinguishing between manslaughter
and lawful homicide in self-defence, or in revenge. The The trial.
trial resolved itself, if the latter defence was accepted, into
expiatory rites at the shrine of Apollo. Even when death
had been caused by an animal or an inanimate object,
a stone or a beam, the kings of the city and of the tribes
went through the ceremony of a judgement ending in ex-
piatory sacrifices. In all cases the @yos, the curse called
forth by violent death, had to be removed from Attika, and
some of the principal acts of the pacification of civil strife
in the seventh century were the expiatory functions per-
formed by Epimenides of Krete. A poetic expression of
popular beliefs on such matters has been preserved in the
Oresteia of Aischylos: the Erinyes pursue the murderer up
to the last, and he is absolved by a judgement of the Areio-
pagos under the direct intervention of Pallas and Apollo.
It is not without meaning that the high tribunal stands in
its original unity and that the two titular deities of the
Kphetae Courts appear as protectors of the accused man.
A tragedy is, of course, not a historical statement, but
Aischylos would hardly have omitted to mention the sub-
sidiary Courts if they had not been regarded as the off-
shoots of the Areiopagos.


1 Ar., Ath. Const. c. 57.

2 Cf. GLOTZ, op. cit., 62 ff. We may expect an attempt to reopen the
question on the part of G. M. CALHOUN ; see Proceedings of the Classical
Association, Vol. XVIII (1921), pp. 87 ff.

> Dem. XXIII.


Private
violence
and public
danger.


186 JURISPRUDENCE OF THE GREEK CITY


It is not necessary to dwell long on the exercise of self-
help in the struggle against criminals. The latitude left
to vengeance by kinsmen has been sufficiently and fre-
quently described.!. One point of detail may be noticed
now, as it shows to what extent the pursuit of men guilty
of inflicting mortal wounds was regarded as an act of
private revenge. We learn from Demosthenes’ speech
against Pantainetos that if a person who had been mortally
wounded pardoned his assailant before his death, this
pardon barred further prosecution by the relatives.? The
proof that a plaintiff in a case of wounding, or the man slain —
in a case of homicide, had himself begun the fight was con-
sidered a sufficient ground to establish a plea of self-defence
(npée xepov adixwr).? The same defence held good in the
case of a culprit being taken in flagrante delicto (én’
avtopwpo). In the latter case it was common practice,
however, not to risk an accusation of homicide, and to
content oneself with the forcible arrest of a burglar or
thief and his delivery to the public authorities for im-
prisonment (amaywy7).4 The private arrest (dmaywy7)
starts in this way from the seizure in flagrante (én adro-
@oépw), but the notion was extended in several directions.
From Lysias’ speech against Agoratos we learn that the
Eleven, to whom the arrested persons had to be handed
over, required from the accusers that they should state
expressly that the arrest had been made ém’ atvropdpe, and
yet Dionysodoros, whose death Lysias’ client is trying to
avenge, was neither killed nor wounded by Agoratos, but
only supposed to have fallen a victim in consequence of
Agoratos’ denunciation. It was admitted to be suflicient
that the accused should be regarded by public opinion as
miscreants (kakodpyot) in order to enable accusers to arrest
and to conduct them before the Eleven.® A third case
where arrest was allowed by the side of self-help was that

1 See especially tie op. cit., 76 ff.

? Dem. XXXVII, § 59

* ANTIPHON, IV B, § c

2 OF LIpsIvs, op. cit., p. 38.

5 LysIAs, XIII, iy 85-87,


: ANTIPH on, V, § 9 kakoupyos evdedevypevos pdvov Sixny pevya, db ianin
kal s pév od Kaxodpyds eius ob Evoxos TH TAY Kakoupywv VépM... ObTOL...


Haprupes yeyévnvrat.


IX: CRIME AND TORT 187


of outlaws and persons deprived of civic rights (é#ripov)
when they showed themselves in the market or in temples
or exercised public office. The first prohibition concerned
those who had perpetrated a homicide and had been sen-
tenced, or at any rate had not obtained reconciliation with
the kinsmen of the deceased. The second came into opera-
tion in the case of state debtors who had not acquitted
themselves of their debt, and yet had taken part in public
life: we hear of capital sentence against such individuals.

In such cases the exercise of private force against the
accused was justified partly by the strong feeling of per-
sonal hatred—as regards persons guilty of homicide,—
partly, and even more, by considerations of public safety.
The debtor who was remiss with his payment, the outlaw,
the professional miscreant, were sources of danger to the
State, and when their transgression was a matter of public
notoriety they could be arrested and imprisoned either by
other citizens or by the authorities—usually the Eleven—
on a written accusation presented by a citizen (€vder£is).
This procedure rendered ineffective the usual guarantees of
civic rights: the accused had to submit to the hardships
and indignities of imprisonment; he was deprived of the
liberty necessary to prepare an effective defence ; his plight
created an unfavourable impression and made it difficult to
collect witnesses for the defence. Generally the person
arrested in such a manner had leave to obtain bail if he
was able to present three sureties, but in the case of the
murder of Herodes treated in Antiphon’s fifth speech such
bail was refused and the accused man incarcerated on the
strength of the deposition of a slave under torture. No
wonder procedure by évéeéis played a great part in State
trials for treason and infringement of the constitution.®
On the whole these summary forms of accusation and
arrest throw vivid light on the police of public safety in
Athens: the usual safeguards against arbitrary treatment
of citizens gave way when the principle of public safety
was invoked against them.


1 Dem. XXI, ANDOK.I. Lys. VI.


2 ANT, V.
3 AR., Ath. Const. 29, 4.


Doctrines
as to
punish-
ment.


Infamia.


188 JURISPRUDENCE OF THE GREEK CITY


4. Punishment.


In our age of extreme sensitiveness as to social responsi-
bility for the evils of punishment it seems strange that the
highly civilized Greeks were exceedingly callous as to the
fate of individuals who had excited the wrath of the city.
Even the best and most idealistic Greek thinkers were
never troubled with misgivings on this point: they con-
sidered the infliction of evil, including the death penalty,
as the most effective means of attaining civic virtue and
of preventing vice and crime. Demokritos, for example,
speaks of the necessity of destroying criminals as we destroy
wild animals.! Plato in the Laws classified offences care-
fully, and decreed the death penalty for a number of them.?
Protagoras, according to the statement in the dialogue
bearing his name, argued that the chief means of political
education was the enactment of laws likely to deter men
from wrongdoing.’

The practice fully corresponded to the theory in this
case; the death penalty was constantly decreed in laws
and adjudged by the courts. An instance like that of
Pyrrhos the Eteobutad, whom some of the judges wanted
to condemn to death because he had sat as a juror in a
tribunal while not absolved from a debt to the Common-
wealth, and this not on account of arrogance, but of
poverty—such an instance of harshness seems appalling to _
us,* and yet it is by no means exceptional in the annals of
Athenian judicature. The most terrible penalties are
threatened against attempts to seize tyrannic power; the
usurper and his offspring are doomed to extermination.®

I have already had occasion to mention the loss of civic
rights by fugitive murderers (avdpodédvor).© It extended
also to those convicted of manslaughter who had not been
admitted to pay composition (zo.iv7) by the relatives of the
victim. Such a condition was, however, exceptional.

1 Drews, II. Fragm. 257, 258, 259, 260.

2 Laws, 1X, passim.


* PLaTo, Protagoras 324ab. Cf. above, p. 35.
‘ Dem. XXI, 182.


° E.g. Law of Ilion, I. J.G., I, xxii, pp. 26 ff. and Judgement of
Eresos, ibid. xxvii, pp. 161 ff.


® Above, p. 180. Cf. GLorz, Solidarité, 485 ff.


TX: CRIME AND TORT 189


Usually the loss of rights was connected with a declaration
of a&ripia which did not involve the withdrawal of all pro-
tection, but only the loss of honour, of consequent political
privileges, and in some cases confiscation of property." A
detailed but yet incomplete enumeration of different kinds
of a@riuia is given by Andokides in his speech on the
Mysteries.2 He cites three groups of persons branded as
infamous (ér1por): public debtors who had not acquitted
themselves of the payments to which they were liable;
persons who had incurred an ignominious sentence, e.g.
citizens guilty of male prostitution (éraipyovs), convicted
of theft, &c.; persons who had been deprived of specific
rights—e.g. who were forbidden to bring a public action
because they had made use of this right in a frivolous
way and had failed to prosecute in actions brought by
them. Convicts of the first category, according to Ando-
kides, were punished in their property as well as in their
persons, their land and goods being confiscated if they
failed to pay. The second category suffered only in their
persons (c@puara). Their principal disability was that they
were debarred from participating in political life, standing
as candidates for office, sitting on juries, &c. The third
category was treated even more leniently in so far as the
deprivation of active right concerned only certain specific
functions like giving evidence on oath or bringing an action
for illegality (rapavopov).

So far Andokides’ enumeration corresponds to the facts.
But az7ipia was pronounced on several other very important
occasions. It could be decreed, for instance, against any one
attempting to abrogate or to modify a law. Witness the
psephisma concerning the foundation of the colony of Brea
in Thrace in the age of Perikles* and a similar prohibition
in the statute of the Second Athenian League.* It was
a necessary corollary of all condemnation in trials for
high treason.> It threatened persons guilty of misconduct

’ This distinction is often disregarded. See e.g. THALHEIM in
R.-Enc. II, 2101 s.v. dripia.

2 ANDOK. I, 73 fff.

"Cl And, ob. Divr..Syll”. b61, 25.


C1. A. th Wie Dear, Syl * J, 147, 3.96.
5 PLUTARCH, Solon, c. 19.


Fines and
imprison-
ment.


190 JURISPRUDENCE OF THE GREEK CITY


against their parents. All professional vagrants and mis-
creants (kaxodpyot) were ipso facto deprived of the ordinary
guarantees of civic freedom.' Besides, we hear of many
cases in which personal dishonour involves public a@ripéa,
as for instance in the case mentioned in a pseudo-Demos-
thenic speech, when a man was declared to be @ripos
because he had continued to live with his wife who had
committed adultery.? One striking feature of dripéa is
described at great length in Aischines’ speech against
Timarchos. The orator dwells on the care with which the
law prescribes to keep undesirable people from taking part
in government or legislation.* He mentions four types of
“evil livers” debarred from political life: those who mal-
treat their parents or refuse them housing; those who
shirk military service or play the coward; those guilty of
bodily vices ; those who squander their patrimony. These
are excluded from the public platform, and if they still
presume to use—or worse, to abuse—the privilege of speech
they are to be subjected to dox:pacia, and the verdict upon
them rests with the Courts. On the whole, the prominence
of driuia as a punishment of crime and vice seems as
characteristic of the highly-strung sense of civic honour
entertained by the Athenians as the importance attached to
contumelious treatment in trials for dBprs.

The penalty of imprisonment, so common in modern
times, hardly existed in Greece, although temporary capti-
vity was recognized as a means. of preventing flight; it
was the usual outcome of an @maywy7. As a substitute
for this kind of compulsory seclusion the Athenians sold


1 ANTIPHON, V.

? Dem. LIX, 87.

* AISCHINES, I, 28-382 rivas 8 ovx gero Seiv Aéyew 3 rors aicypas
BeBiwxdrus* ... Kal mov Tovto Sndot; “ doxipacia,” hyo, “ pytdpwv" édv
tis A€yn ev TO Snuw Tov maTépa TUNTwY f THY wNTEpa, 7) wy TpEpwv, h py
mapexov olknow.”... kat riot Sevrepoy areime py A€yew; “fh Tas oTparetas
py) €orparevpevos, doa dv aita mpocraxbaou, ) Thy dorida droB_eBAnkos.”

.. Tpirov riot Suadeyerar; “4 memopvevpeévos 7) nratpykas.”... réraprov...
“ra marp@a Karedndoxas, i) dv dy KAnpovdpos yévnra..” .. . TovTous ody
e£eipyer amd Tov Bnuatos, rovrous amayopever pr) Snunyopeiv. eav d€ Tis
mapa Taira py pdvov héyn GAda kal ovkoharry Kal doedyaivy, Kal pnkere Tov
Toovrov GvOpwrov Sivnrat pépew 7 mddts, “ Soxtpaciav per,” pyowy, “ émay-
yethar@ ‘A@nvaiwy 6 Bovddpevos, ois CEeoriv,” iuas 8 #Sn KeNevet rept rovT@y
ev T@ Otkaotnpio Stayryvooke.


IX: CRIME AND TORT 191


certain culprits into slavery; this manner of getting rid of
undesirable elements is mentioned, for instance, in con-
nexion with attempts by foreigners to get admission into
the ranks of citizens Free men were not subjected to
corporal punishment, which could always be inflicted on
slaves. Indeed it was considered a principle of common
law that the main difference between free men and slaves
consisted in the fact that the former had to suffer in their
property while the latter were coerced in their bodies.”

Fines and confiscations were indeed the ordinary penal-
ties meted out to citizens and to foreigners of free status.
It is unnecessary to recite the numberless references to
fines in the laws, the decrees, and the speeches of pleaders.
They were so varied and so oppressive that critics of demo-
eracy came to accuse popular governments, like that of
Athens, of multiplying unjust condemnations in order to fill
the public purse. As there was really no option but to
condemn either to death (or to its substitute, banishment)
or to a fine, it is difficult to see in what way the
material losses to the convicted persons could be consider-
ably mitigated. The distinction between fixed fines in
trials without assessment (@y@ves ariunrot) and varying
fines in trial with free assessment (@y@ves Tino’) depended
entirely on accidental circumstances and had nothing to do
with differences in principle. Confiscation was naturally
reserved for particularly serious offences.


5. Actions in Tort (dikat katd Tivos).


Claims for legal redress of private wrongs were brought Classifica-
by means of actions of two different kinds: a plaintiff prea
insisting on a right disputed or infringed by the defendant actions.
sued the latter by a dikn mpéos tiva which involved no
penalty, although it might lead to certain payments in
compensation of damages. On the other hand there was
a group of actions—dfka: kard tivos—which started with


an accusation against the defendant for a wrong supposed


1 Dem. LIX; Isaros, VI.
2 Dem. XXII, 55.
5 [XENOPHON], Resp. Ath.


192 JURISPRUDENCE OF THE GREEK CITY


to be inflicted on the plaintiff. While the first set of trials
turned mainly on questions of property and of contract, the
second set was concerned with matters in which public
force had to intervene for the restoration of disturbed legal
order, although the questions at issue were considered
mainly from the point of view of the infringement of
private rights and of the consequent necessity of com-
pensating for incurred material and moral damages. Be-
sides these two classes of actions there was a third, covering
what may be called prejudicial declarations of right—
diadtxkaciat. These latter are closely allied to the dfkat mpés
riva and their consideration may be postponed till the next
chapters. The dfkar xaré Tivos, on the other hand, which
correspond to English actions in tort, have to be considered
in close connexion with criminal jurisdiction, as they apply
frequently to the same or to similar subjects.

The simplest kind of prosecution for the illegal use
of force arose in connexion with assault and battery. A
person who had received blows could bring an action
aikias,in which the plaintiff was expected to prove that
he had not been guilty of beginning the brawl himself.
Isokrates’ speech against Lochites and Demosthenes’ speech
against Konon deal with trials of this kind. Both pleaders
lay stress on the fact that they might have prosecuted
their adversaries by penal actions tBpews, but as Athenian
plaintiffs had a free choice of remedies and were by no
means bound to give to the prosecution the character of
a penal accusation, they both preferred the less hazardous
course of an action in tort, with the prospect of substantial
compensation in damages.! They magnified the losses
incurred in order to be able to claim a high compensation
(riunua) when the time came to estimate the material and
moral damages suffered by them.

The action Biafwy covered various forms of wrong caused
by violence. It was used in pursuance of a law of Solon?
in cases of rape. The plaintiff must have been usually the
. father or xiépios of the maiden or boy who had _ been
assaulted. It may be noticed that originally the compen-


? Isoxr. XX, §§5 ff. Dem., LIV, §§ 13 ff.
? PLUTARCH, Solon, c. 28.


IX: CRIME AND TORT 193


sation was a fixed sum of 100 drachmae. Later on, how-
ever, as can be inferred from a speech of Lysias,! the culprit
had to pay the “ double price of the person” as compensation,
one half of the fine accruing to him and half to the city.
This notice is interesting in two ways: it shows that the
Commonwealth did not disinterest itself in cases of tort,
but claimed part of the fine as a fee for its services; the
amount of the compensation is estimated at double the
value of something or of some one. The most likely explana-
tion seems to be that the citizens and other inhabitants
of Attika were appreciated according to certain standards
of value, somewhat in the manner of the mediaeval wer-
gelds. The law of Gortyn gives a definite tariff of this
kind in connexion with rape.?

In another direction the action B:afwy was used by those
who had to complain of violent deprivation of their goods.
The corresponding action as to immovable property was
the dixn é€ovAns of which we shall have to speak at length
in the next chapter.* Here again the fine to be paid by
the convicted defendant was estimated at double the value
of the chattels “disseised.” The unjustified claim of liberty
for a slave was also treated as disseisin of a chattel; the
action directed against the citizen making the claim bore
the specific designation of dikn e€aipérews or apatpécews els
é\evOepiav.t As the slave had no standing in justice
against his master, and any one who claimed to be the
master of a slave could seize the latter by way of distress,
the only remedy against fraudulent assertions of this kind
lay in vindication. The d/kn apaipéoews was introduced to
prevent abuses on the part of those who assumed the
responsibility of vindication.

The dtkn kaxnyopias may be mentioned here, as it was
intended to protect persons against humiliating abuse.
A law had been framed against this kind of wrong by


2 aya. 1) 8.32.

2 I,J. G. xvii, §§ 8, 9, p. 358. Grorz, Solidarité, pp. 393 f. takes the
duplication to apply to the price of a slave as the lowest unit of com-
pensation. But the double fine occurs in all kinds of the dikn Braiwy
and not only in those in which slaves may be concerned.

3’ Dem. XXI, § 44. Cf. below, p. 225.

4 Dem. LIX, $40. Isoxr. XVII, § 14. Cf. Lipstus, p. 64 f.


2231.2 QO


Damage to
material
interests.


194 JURISPRUDENCE OF THE GREEK CITY


Solon,! but it is characteristic that what may be called
ordinary abuse was not punishable. Plutarch offers the
very plausible explanation that it would have been out of
the question to proceed effectively against every kind of
angry utterance or retort ; legislators must not attempt too
much, and had better restrict their action to what is really
important. Thus Solon forbade the levelling of abuse at
the dead, or, as to the living, the indulging in it in certain
specially protected localities—temples, tribunals, political
asserablies. Certain particularly obnoxious terms of abuse,
like dvdpodévos or marpadolas were also actionable.?
Magistrates were protected, by the severe threat of aripia,
against any abuse. ‘There is also a curious notice that it
was illegal to reproach a tradesman with the exercise of
his trade. Fines in these cases ranged from the trifling
sum of five drachmae to heavier penalties.

An action of great importance and very general applica-
tion was the dixn BAdBns, corresponding more or less to the
action ex lege Aquilia de damno injuria dato of Roman
law. It lay on two principal occasions: if some one had
deliberately inflicted damage on the plaintiff, and if the
plaintiff had been hurt or suffered damage by the act of
a slave or animal belonging to the defendant. The first
eventuality presented the simplest basis for a prosecution.
It occurred, for instance, in a trial mentioned in Demosthenes’


_ speech against Kallippos,® in which it is was contended by


the plaintiff that the banker Pasion had paid out a certain
sum sent to a wrong addressee contrary to the direction of
a correspondent of his and to the detriment of Kallippos ;
or again in the case referred to in the speech against
Pantainetos,* who complained of the arbitrary distress
practised by Nausimachos on Pantainetos’ agent, with the
result that Pantainetos was unable to acquit himself. It
was natural in such trials that an intention to harm should

1 PLUTARCH, Solon, 21 ‘Emawveirat 5€ rod VdAwvos Kal 6 KoAVoY vdpos
Tov TeOynkdra Kak@s ayopeverv... . (@vrTa dé kaxas déyery x@AvCE Tpos lepois
kal dtkaornpiows Kal dpxeiows Kal Oewpias ovons dyaver* ...7Td yap pndapod
Kpatety Opyns amaidevtov kai akddacTtoy’ ro 8€ mavtaxod xaderoy, évios &
advivaroy’ dei dé rpos 1d Suvardv ypapeoOat rov vdpor.

* Lysias, XI, 3,4. Cf. Lipsrus, pp. 649 ff.


$ Dem. III, § 14.
* Dem. XXXVII, § 4, 22.


IX: CRIME AND TORT 195


have to be proved in order to justify penal proceedings,
and the principal point of dispute was therefore whether
the damage had arisen accidentally or in consequence
of spiteful intention. In the trial between Kallikles and
the son of Teisias, Demosthenes for the defendant tried
to prove that the damage done to the plaintiff’s plot by
inundation was not the result of any building operations
carried out recently and intentionally on the estate of
his client, but the consequence of accidental torrential rain
rendered more noxious by certain acts of the plaintiff
himself.!| If compensation had to be paid at all, it ought
to be paid, according to this defence, only in reparation of
the material damage sustained, and not in double, as would
be the case in a penal action.

In view of the stress laid on harmful intention, it seems
doubtful whether a case like that against Boiotos, in which
the plaintiff Mantitheos objected to the use of his name
by the defendant, could be treated as a dikn BAdBns.”
In spite of the usual attempts-to cast suspicion on the
motives of defendants and to depict the consequences of
the latter's success in the trial in the darkest colours,
it seems to me that the juridical situation did not warrant
any claim for compensation either penal in duplum or
civil in simplum, although it gave ground for a con-
troversy as to the use of the name—a diadixacia—directed
towards a result which would be obtained in English law
by an injunction.”

The second group of dfckac BAdBns was the subject of
one of Solon’s laws* which treated of damage occasioned
by four-footed animals. Dogs are especially mentioned in
this connexion, but there can be no doubt that cattle and
other domestic animals were covered by this rule. The
responsibility of the master extended also to the acts of
slaves.” All these eventualities are discussed with many
concrete details by Plato in the Laws, and we may safely

» 1 DEM.) LV.


* Dem. XXXIX.


* Thalheim in the article on dikn BAdBns in R.-Enc. II, 554 ex-
presses a different view.

* PLUTARCH, Solon, 24.

® An oration on the subject was ascribed to Lysias.


oO?


Miscella-
neous,


196 JURISPRUDENCE OF THE GREEK CITY


suppose that he drew his precepts in this case from the
practice of his native city.

I have already had occasion to notice the strange fact
that theft was considered to be a matter for private and
not for public prosecution. In ordinary cases the sufferer
brought a dfkn KAom7js, while the ypap? kromys was reserved
for certain qualified transgressions, like stealing in a bath-
house or in a court of justice.? This does not preclude
the infliction of a fine on the thief: he had, as on some
other occasions, to pay compensation in double, and half
of the fine went as a penal payment to the city.

It seems even more strange from our modern point of
view that false evidence in a trial at law gave rise not
to a public but to a private prosecution. Such leniency
was evidently suggested by similar considerations of policy
as the impunity of ordinary abuse: false testimony was of
too common occurrence to call for criminal prosecution in
every instance. Anattempt was made, however, to penalize
false evidence treated as a profession. If some one was con-
victed three times in actions Wevdopaprupio@y he lost the
right to tender evidence in a court of law. Otherwise
that action was treated purely as an action in tort. A cor-
responding action lay against a person who had contrived
the production of such false testimony. He was actionable
by a dikn Kaxorexviav.* Another penal action akin to the
dikn evdopaptupi@v was the prosecution for referring
to witnesses who had not réally been called in to testify
to an action in law—dixn WevdoxAnreéas.2 In this case
again Athenian law entrusted the prosecution to the private
person whose interests were directly affected by the false
assertion.

' Laws, XI, 936.
2 See above, p. 176.
° Cf. Lrpsius, p. 778.


* Dem. XLIX, § 56. Cf. Lipsrus, p. 783.
6 LIPSIUS, p. 446.


CHAPTER X
PROPERTY AND POSSESSION


l. General Terms and Distinctions.


THE essence of the law of property is the attribution to The
certain persons of exclusive rights of disposal over certain ee
things. Modified and conditional rights are derived from perty.
this main position, and they will have to be examined in
time, but the first thing to be ascertained in any given
system of law is to what extent and on what basis things
are attributed to persons as belonging to them or owned
by them. It is evident at first glance that there are two
aspects of the matter. Things may belong to me because
I have made them or got hold of them; they may also be-
long to me because they have been granted or guaranteed
to me by some community of which I am a member. In
other words, ownership has been produced by private force
in the shape of labour or occupation ; it has roots also in
public force in the shape of laws protecting certain interests
as against other interests. For the sake of analysis it is
useful to examine these various elements separately and one
by one, but in reality social life always presents a combina-
tion of both tendencies. Such combinations vary greatly
according to systems, and their characteristic turn depends
to a great extent on the social type which serves as a basis
for the particular legal system under investigation. The
study of Greek jurisprudence is highly interesting from this
point of view. Although it cannot be reduced to a series
of simple deductions from the principle of city democracy,
it gives this principle a prominence which greatly restricts
and modifies all other influences bearing on the case.

The most striking feature of this formation is its contrast
with the Roman treatment of the subject. Rome and Athens
closely resembled each other in the initial stage of their


198 JURISPRUDENCE OF THE GREEK CITY


development as city federations of kindreds, but later on,
with the growth of their imperial policy, they came in
many respects to follow divergent roads. As to the problem
under discussion, Rome developed the conception of absolute
property for the citizen—the dominium ex jure Quiritiwm
—while Athens worked out a conception of relative pro-
perty rights (kuptms KrjcPa or Exetv Kat Kpareiv). It is
significant enough that there is no Greek term correspond-
ing to the dominiwm of the Romans. It has been con-
jectured that this is to be explained by the insufficient
development in Greece of the rules as to occupation and
usucapion. Under these circumstances, it is said, a Greek
attempting to assert absolute ownership ‘ against the whole
world’ would have had to run the gauntlet of an endless
string of references to one wuctor after another, truly a
probatio diabolica.2 I must own that I fail to understand
this line of reasoning: the Greek world traced property in
a multitude of cases to definite acts of State—to the
distribution of lots or to the public inscription of the tenure
in the presence of witnessing officials,’ and nothing could
have been easier than to assert absolute dominiwm at least
in such cases—provided that absolute dominiwm had been
recognized. In reality the point established was only a
recognition of better right (kaprepdv efvat), and not of
absolute right. And there was yet another point, not less
important than the first—in all cases of allotment, official
registration, adjudication, etc. the title of the proprietor was
emphatically derived not from the assertion of private will
(hunc fundum meum esse aio ex jure Quiritiwm), but from
a concession by the city. The public element was clearly
predominant, and this fact goes far to explain why occupa-
tion and usucapion did not come to play the part that they
played in Rome.

Another term conspicuously vague in Greek law is the
term ovaoia:* it means fortune, patrimony, the complex of


1 Dirt. Syll®, 1, 167. Mirrets in Z. SS. Rom. Abth. XXIII.

? BEAUCHET, Droit privé, III, 538.

, See, for example, the inseription of Halikarnassos, LJ, G:5, 4
kaptepos 8 elvau yns kal olKLav, oirives, Tor eixov Gre * AwroAAwwlons Kat
Tavapins €uvnpovevor, €i 41) UETEpOY amreTepagay.

Ovoia, BEAUCHET, op. cit., III, 367.


X: PROPERTY AND POSSESSION 199


objects owned and held, but not the right of property.
Aixn ovcias means an action concerning the patrimony of
a person or the interests of a person in certain objects, but
it does not mean a re? vindicutio in opposition to a personal
action. By calling attention to these peculiarities of legal
terminology I do not wish to create the impression that the
rules as to property in Greece were entirely built on a
foundation of public law and disregarded the influence of
individual will and interests. It is not necessary to rush to
such absurd exaggerations in order to appreciate at their
due value the importance of the public elements in the
Greek legal system. It is well, however, to take stock from
the very beginning of certain characteristic peculiarities in
the use of juridical terms and in the general treatment of
property in Greece.

Before examining in detail the juridical theory of pro- Kinds of
perty, let us ascertain what different species the Greeks Property:
distinguished within the generic conception of things be-
longing to persons. We are accustomed in modern systems
to oppose real to personal property; or property in land,
including houses, to chattels; or again, ancestral to self-
acquired property. The first of these distinctions is con-
nected with the mediaeval history of tenure and has no
parallel in Greek law. The other two classifications are
represented in somewhat modified forms in Greek law.

The contrast between land and chattels and its bearing
on legal rules is often noticed in the sources of the classical
period. We read, for instance, in Isaios’ speech on the inhert-
tance of Kiron ! that the Jatter possessed property of various
kinds: land (a&ypév) worth a talent, two houses (ockéas) in
the town, one leased, bringing in two thousand drachmae,
the other, in which he lived, worth thirteen minae. Also
slaves let out on hire (avédpéroda picbofopotvra) and two
maidservants and a girl; furniture (ém7Aa) used in the
house, worth, with the slaves, thirteen minae; and property
clearly ascertainable (favepé) worth more than ninety
minae; besides this considerable loans, from which he received
interest. Aischines in his oration against Timarchos lays


' Tsaros, VIII, § 35.


200 JURISPRUDENCE OF THE GREEK CITY


particular stress on the dissipation of various kinds of
fortune by his opponent.! In these cases and in similar
ones,” while the various elements of a person’s fortune are
enumerated, the principal place is naturally assigned to
land and houses. The expression ézrurAa, used originally for
furniture, came to be gradually extended to all sorts of
goods kept in a house or on an estate,* although cattle, slaves,
and money were generally mentioned as separate categories
of goods. Like the familia pecuniaque of Roman law,*
they were considered in Greek law from another point of
view than land and houses.

Slaves as well as cattle and agricultural implements were
often economically bound up with the cultivation of an
estate, and the znstruwmentum fundi came to be considered
in Roman law as a part of the fundus which could not be
detached from it at random. There are definite indications
of a similar view in Greek law, although it was not neatly
reduced to a formula as in the French Code Civil under
the heading of wmmeubles par destination. Plots are men-
tioned with some slaves connected with them, as for instance
in Demosthenes’ first speech against Aphobos.> In the
oration against Onetor Demosthenes tried to refute his
adversary’s contention that he held a certain estate in
mortgage for his sister by showing that he had let his
brother-in-law, Aphobos, denude the estate by removing the
slaves and other elements of the instrwmentum necessary to
its cultivation.’ “He went off with all that he could carry
away, the crops and the agricultural implements, all except
the jars; but what he could not carry off he of necessity
left behind, so that it is possible now for this man to claim
the land itself.” If it had been a dower estate he would
have been careful to treat it like a provident paterfamilias.

An indirect, but most important indication as to the
exceptional importance of land tenure is to be found in
the prohibition of the acquisition of land (@yx«rnacs) by


AISON. 1, OTE 2 Cf. Isaros, VI, 30.
SAR: Rhet..1,9, 73 Pol,.11,:4, 10.

* MiTTEIS, Rom. Privatr. I, p. 80.

* Dem: XX VU, -85.- Ch XXXVI.

§ Id., XXX, § 28.


X: PROPERTY AND POSSESSION 201


foreigners. While the ports and markets of Athens were
full of business men from all parts of the world, who
bought and sold goods and entered into all sorts of con-
tractual relations with citizens and among themselves,
while denizens (péroixor) formed one of the principal ele-
ments of the population of Attika, all these persons, fully
safeguarded as regards money, goods, and conventions by
Athenian law, were deprived of the right of owning land,
except in certain specified cases. I have already had
occasion to refer several times to the endeavours of autono-
mous allies of Athens to exclude the citizens of the capital
city of the League from their respective territories.' The
reason is obvious: each independent city was afraid of
letting in foreign colonists and capitalists who might
acquire undue political influence as landowners, and pro-
hibitions against such invasions are generally coupled
with promises that no foreign garrisons should enter the
territory of free allied cities. It will be necessary later on
to return to the prominent part played by land tenure in
Greek law.

The distinction between ancestral (marp@a) and selt-
acquired (émixrnra) is not often made the text of definite
declarations in Athens, but it played a conspicuous part in
the law of Gortyn, especially in cases of dowry and divorce,”
and it made itself felt in Athenian procedure by the wide
scope of the action directed against spendthrifts. It was
designated emphatically dikn card Tivos mepi Tod Ta maTpoa
dedwxévat, and there was sufficient material for such an
accusation in the case of Timarchos, if the assertions of
Aischines are to be believed even *in part. The speaker
declares that property of great value was left by the father
of Timarchos—enough to warrant the undertaking of a Aeu-
Tovpyia—estates, skilled slaves, furniture, money on loan,
and cites proof that Timarchos received this property and
dissipated it.? These facts point to another social aspect of


1 See above,p. 159.

> Code of Gortyn, I. J. G., §§ 14, 17, 36.

° ArscuH. I, §§ 96 ff. § 97 rovrw yap Katédurev 6 marip ovciay, ad’ js
eTepos pev kay eAytovpyet, odros Sé ovd atte Scapvddéar eSuvyOy’ otkiav
pev omicbev Ths modews, eaxatiav Se Thyrroi, Adwrexjor S érepov xwpior,
xwpis de oikérus Snproupyovs ris cKUTOTOMLKAS TEXUNS EvvEea } Séxa, Sv Exagros


Assigna-


tion,


202 JURISFRUDENCE OF THE GREEK CITY


property—to the economic and juridical connexion with
family organization. Here again the ancestral character of
the property could hardly be established except on the basis
of land tenure.

One more distinction has to be noticed in connexion with
management of property by the Greeks, namely the dis-
tinction between openly acknowledged (pavepdé) and con-
cealed property (apavijs otcia). Orators often use these
terms,! but it is evident that they do not deal in such cases
with juridical attributes, but rather with facilities for keep-
ing one’s wealth concealed in order to avoid the imposition
of public services and taxation. It was easier to do so by
placing one’s capital in the hands of bankers or lending
it out. Money was altogether less ostensible as an
element of one’s fortune than land, or houses, or workshops.
These terms need not detain us any longer, as they reflect
tendencies of economic management rather than legal
peculiarities.”


2. The Public Element in Property.


In theory every private estate in Greece was considered
as an allotment (KAjpos, KAapos) assigned by the State.
Nor was this theory a mere juridical fiction or antiquarian
speculation. In the frequent cases of the swarming of
colonies from some city (dockia), the emigrants led by an
oixtaTns established themselves in their new home as xAnpod-
xo.. In the precious inscription bearing on the colonization
of Brea in Thrace (about 444 B.c.) we read that the first act
of the new settlers was to divide the land among themselves.
Ten yeovduor—one from each Athenian tribe-—marked off
and distributed the lots; the temple and temple grounds
which had belonged to the former inhabitants were to be
taken over by the new settlers, but no religious estates


tour bv’ oBohovs dr opopay epepe THs nHEpAs, 6 8 nyeHav Tov epyaornpiou
Tpt@foXov" ere be mpos Tourots yuvaika dpopyov ema rapevny epyater Oat Kat
eépya emra eis Thy dyopay expépovoay, Kal avdpa trockiAtny, Kat opeihovrds
Twas avT@ apyvptoy, kal émim)a KTA.

1 E.g. Isaros, VII, § 35; Dem. XLVIII, § 12.

aa 6 BEAUCHET, Droit privé, III, 13.


X: PROPERTY AND POSSESSION 203


were to be formed. After the conquest of Chalkis 4,000
lots were formed ;? after the conquest of Lemnos 3,000, of
which 300 were to be dedicated to the gods.* Plutarch has
preserved in the biography of Perikles a list of colonies
sent out from Athens in his age,’ and there can be no doubt
that each citizen householder was assigned a plot of land by
lot. By instituting his hearth in the plot he dedicated it
to the permanent use of his family. The forfa of the
Lokrian colonists in Naupaktos was to remain undisturbed
even if the new colonist changed his mind and went back
to the mother city: he was obliged by law to leave a suc-
cessor in the person of a grown-up son or of a brother. If
he died without leaving near relatives, his hearth was kept
for relatives living among the Epiknemidian Lokri of the
metropolis.®

Nor was the assignation of landed property by the city
a feature restricted to colonial institutions. The law of
succession was not designated as xkAnpovoyuia, the heir as
KAnpovopuos, Without valid grounds. The complex of estates
in Attika was regarded in law as a set of xAjpor distributed
as far as possible permanently among a set of citizen
households (ofko:), and the Archon Eponymos had to watch
over this distribution and to guard against the dis-
appearance of any of these ancient households. This
principle went back to a period when kindreds and families
were still ruled by tribal rather than by civic law, when
the xAjpos, like the dpyxata: potpa: of Sparta, was inalien-
able, and this aspect of their history will have to be con-
sidered at greater length later on. But the notion of the
public character of the kAjpos was expressed in many
features of later law. The frequent use of confiscation as
a means of repression in political struggles as well as in
criminal justice gave occasion for constant reassertion of
the eminent domain of the State. ‘Take, for instance, the
law of Iasos passed about 367 B.c. against the enemies of


> ITT, Sy 1.6%.

2 Heron. V, 77.

® Ep. MEYER, Forschungen, [, 13 ff.
* PLUTARCH, Perc 11.

© dod, Gs 1-21. 1608.

6 AR. Ath. Const. I, 56, § 7.


Confisca-
tion and
expropria-
tion.


204 JURISPRUDENCE OF THE GREEK CITY


Molossos, the satrap ruler of Asia Minor under Artaxerxes
Memnon. Their estates were to be confiscated and sold by
a numerous commission for the benefit of the city. A great
part of the territory affected was distributed in lots (xAfpoz),
the size of which seems to have varied in the course of suc-
cessive adjudications. The validity of the bargain depended
on its confirmation by mnemones—a kind of public notaries.!
In another inscription—that of Mylasa,? connected with the
same struggle between the cities of Asia Minor and the
Persian authorities, the transfer of the plots is declared to
produce complete ownership (éxr#aOa: kupiws). The officials
charged with the duty of supervising dealings in land and
of giving decisive testimony as to the attribution of plots
(the mnemones) play a conspicuous part in the law of
Halikarnassos on the restitution of estates to amnestied
exiles.» The practice of public registration of documents
concerning land tenure assumed important dimensions,‘ and
made it possible to avoid many controversies. But although
it helped to prove private rights, it detracted in no way
from the prerogatives of the city, and made it much easier
for officials to proceed when necessary to the application of
sanctions against convicts or insolvent debtors.

A most drastic intrusion of the State in the domain of
private transactions is reported in an inscription of Ephesos.
It commemorates measures of public safety decreed by the
city authorities during the war against Mithridates (87 B.c.).
The date is a late one, but the legislation mentioned in the
inscription is entirely in keeping with the practice of Greek
cities during the classical period—in fact it can be referred
to as the closest parallel to Solon’s celebrated cescdy Bea,
although it was called forth not by internal struggles, but
by external danger.’ In a first law, passed in 87 B.¢., all
public debts contracted before the current year except those
resulting from the farming of taxes or from mortgages
made to colleges of priests were cancelled and the insolvent


debtors liberated from the driuéa into which they had


1 Ditt. Syll®. I, 169. 2 Ibid., 167.
° Ibid., 45 (4th cent.), 1. 20.

* The register of Tenos, I. J. G. 1, vii, pp. 64 ff.

© Tbid., liv; pe 28,1. 27 ff,


X: PROPERTY AND POSSE SION 205


fallen. Private debts also were to be remitted without
prejudice to the state of property rights in the year when
the law was passed. A second law was passed in 85 B.C.
authorizing a division of mortgaged estates between mort-
gagors and mortgagees by judicial arbitration ! in accordance
not with strict laws, but with equity.

No sweeping measure of this kind is known in the history
of Athens after the reform legislation of Solon. In facet
the heliasts are reported to have been pledged to swear an
oath at their assumption of office not to advise or allow the
repudiation of debts or the redivision of the land.2 But
the historians and orators of the fourth century tell us
repeatedly that the people in its impoverished condition
had recourse to confiscations and expropriations which
were not justified in law, but helped to fill the treasury at
the expense of wealthy citizens.’ A characteristic conse-
quence of the protection afforded to interests derived from
public sources is to be seen in the rule that the title of
a person who had acquired property from the city could
not be disputed under any circumstances. Those who
thought that they had been unjustly deprived of land or
houses by the city could contest the application of a decree
of confiscation or expropriation, and a diadikacia might
arise in consequence of such a protest, but even if it were
proved that the city authorities had been in the wrong the
property transferred by them to private owners (dné7para)
remained in the hands of those who had acquired it from
the State, while the latter had to compensate those who
had incurred the loss through an error of the magistrates.°

It ought to be noticed in this connexion that there was
no distinction in principle between State domains and
property of temples. The latter was considered a special
class of public property. In ordinary circumstances the
gods, for instance Athene in Athens, received their pro-
portionate share, but the rules and administrative practices
obtaining in the temples were subject to supervision and


UT, J.GA, 3, pp. 30 ff,

2 HERMANN-THUMSER, II, 377.

5 XENOPHON, Resp. Ath. * Dem. XXXVII, § 19,
5 BEAUCHET, Droit privé, III, 31.


Archaic
features in
City law.


206 JURISPRUDENCE OF THE GREEK CITY


revision by the people! Goods and land, though kept
together from reasons of provident economy, were in no
way extra commercium, and could be sold or mortgaged if
necessity required.” Above all, the city could fall back on
the wealth of the temples in extreme emergencies, and
Athens, for instance, had recourse to them in the critical
period of the Peloponnesian war. Expropriation for the
sake of public utility was admissible in the case of temple
goods, and there are recorded cases of it.”

I have abstained hitherto from discussing the lingering
influence of tribal institutions on the law of the classical
period. But it would be impossible to omit a reference to
the law of succession ; it proves that certain fundamental
rules obtaining in the fifth and in the fourth centuries
were derived from the archaic customs of an epoch when
the Greeks lived in kindreds loosely knit together around
tribal centres. Guiraud has said with some reason that
land tenure was created not by the city, but by the family
groups of older ages.* He ought to have added that these
family groups were themselves political associations, and
therefore units of public law, and not merely the private
combines of relatives which we usually have in view when
we speak of families and kindreds. It is even more impor-
tant to make up our mind from the outset as to the part
played in family economy and law by the religious element.
Fustel de Coulanges’ famous campaign against primitive
collectivism hinged on the view that early land law was
governed by principles derived from the cult of ancestors.
Private ownership, according to this theory, arose specifi-
cally from the appropriation of plots of land for family
burial grounds, and the main purpose of succession was the
continuance of rites and sacrifices in honour of deceased
ancestors, the shrine for these rites being connected with
the household hearth. Both Guiraud and Beauchet have
accepted this theory and developed it further by distinguish-
ing between the family root and the religious root of pro-

1 E.g. Dirt. Syll*. I, 94. See above, p. 112.


? BEAUCHET, op. cit. III, 39.


® Delos accounts are referred to by HomoLte, s.v. Donarium in
Dar. et S. ITI, 331.


* GUIRAUD, La Propriété fonciére & Athénes, pp. 1 ff.


X: PROPERTY AND POSSESSION 207


perty and succession.!. I submit that when the religious
source is separated from the family interests of which it is
the symbol, it loses its material meaning and remains, as it
were, in the air, as a mystic doctrine which might have
satisfied priests and superstitious clients looking out for
supernatural guidance, but could hardly have formed the
core of almost universal folklore. If, on the other hand,
we were to hold to Fustel de Coulanges’ notion of a cult
creating positive laws and private economics, we might be
accused—and, I think, with much reason—of setting things
upside down, treating causes as effects, and vice versa. It
requires a more vivid imagination than is generally pos-
sessed by scholars nowadays to accept the view that men
appropiated fields not for the sake of the harvest, but
because they had buried their parents in some part of the
compound. A pasture and a tilled field have their own
raison d’étre for men in all ages, and the only question to
be decided is, how far the use of a piece of land by one set
of persons is compatible with its use by other sets of persons.
In the solution of this problem considerations of defence, of
co-operation, of capital outlay, certainly play a great part, and
the religious sanctification of the relations arising on the land,
although by no means a negligible factor, serves chiefly to
embody and to vivify group conceptions which would
otherwise remain abstract and utilitarian. As in the case
of the State, the corporate life of the household, the kindred,
and the tribe tends to present itself in concrete forms of
hero-worship, of ancestral cults, of the tradition of the
hearth. In this way there is no reason either to oppose
the religious source of land law to the familial, or to sub-
ordinate the latter to the former.

We have an exceptionally favourable opportunity for
reconstituting the leading principles of the Greek law of
property at the early stage of city life, when they had
ceased to follow tribal habits of settlement, but had not
yet thrown off legal rules derived from the powerful in-
fluence of organized kindreds. This opportunity is given
by the Code of Gortyn, which affords insight into the


1 GUIRAUD, pp. 29 ff.; BEAUCHET, III, 68f. -


208 JURISPRUDENCE OF THE GREEK CITY


customary law of the outgoing sixth century. To be sure
the Code treats of Kretan Dorians, but the institutions
which it describes and implies are to be met with in a
similar, though not so complete a form, among Ionians and
Aiolians. Indeed, their study is indispensable if we want
to understand the somewhat fragmentary accounts of the
state of Attika before Solon.

Now, while the Code of Gortyn describes a perfectly
developed system of property in movable goods, with care-
fully drafted rules as to the rights of husband and wife,
father, mother, and children, in the clauses dealing with
divorce, dower, succession, partition, we find the land
holding (xkA&pos) excepted from the operation of these
rules. Sheep, cattle, dress, ornamental objects, and other
movable goods are to be partitioned among the heirs, the
sons taking the town houses and cattle and two-thirds of
other goods, and the daughters one-third of the latter." We
learn from clauses dealing with eventual difficulties in
partitioning articles of a perishable nature, or of a nature
that does not admit of division by number, that failing
agreement the judges had power to decide to whose share
they should be consigned.? What is more, in some cases
the successional mass of goods might be sold with a view
of dividing the sum obtained as price.*? The town houses
were evidently included in the processes of partition and
sale, but the rural holding cultivated by serfs (Forxjes) is
distinctly excluded,* and remains unaffected by the change
of ownership. Such difference between town property on
one hand and rural holdings on the other was, of course,
connected with the subjection of a population of rural serfs
to Doric masters. The Forxjes—or kAap@rat, as Hesychios
calls them—were attached to the holdings for their cultiva-
tion and the payment of fixed dues to the masters. The
whole system of rural exploitation was regulated by public

1 LJ. G. i xvii, p. 366, § 26 'H bé K drroBavne Tis "réyavs pev Tavs ev
mod Kk’ a ri : €v Tats "réyaus €vnt, ais Ka pa Foixeds ev Fouxije em Kapat
Fouxioy, kal Ta mpoBara kal kapratmoda, ad ka py Fouxéos nt, emt Tois vidoe


Npev, TA o a\\a kpfjpara mavra darnOOa Karas, Kal havedvev TOS pev vivvs,
émérrot k’ twyrt, dv0 polpavs Féxacrov, rad dé Ovyarépavs, Smdrrat x’ iwvrt,


piay use Fexdoray,
3 8 § 34,


* § 26, see above.


X: PROPERTY AND POSSESSION 209


law and not dependent on the vicissitudes of private
prosperity or misfortune. Some features of this dualistic
ownership are worth special notice. The Code of Gortyn
reckons with the possible absence of heirs succeeding on
the strength of relationship, however remote, and calls in
this case the forknes to succession—a most remarkable
recognition of the tenant right of the latter. On the other
hand the class of goods treated in the same way as town
houses extends to cattle and sheep as well, and therefore
some margin must be left for the use of pasture-land besides
that distributed among the holdings. In the minute regu-
lations about the marriage of heiresses (77atpa@xKot) the
attribution of chattels and of proceeds (xkap7@) is determined
in connexion with all sorts of eventualities, and the general
aim of the law is certainly to prevent as far as possible the
dispersion of family property. But the klaros is never
mentioned, and it is evident that the heiress and the agnate
whom she is expected to marry are only concerned with
the income or proceeds, but not with the property of the
holding.”

A curious corroboration of the tribal character of early
Doric land tenuremay be found inan Argive inscription of the
seventh century B.C. discovered on the site of the Heraion,
the common sanctuary of the cities of Argos, Tiryns, and
Mykenai.’ It treats of the consequences of a crime com-
mitted by a person and visited by the penalties of banish-
ment and confiscation. The latter concerned the goods
(rdépara) of the culprit, not his plot, and even these goods
were not sold indiscriminately to any one who offered a good
price for them, but either to the magistrates of the city or to
the members of the kindred to which the fugitive belonged.


1 I,J. G. 1, xvii, p. 368, § 31 ai d€ pp edev emiBaddovtes, tas Forxias
oirives K lwyte 6 KAGpos, TOUTOVS éxev TA KPNATA.

2 Ibid., pp. 376 ff., § 46 emi rae marparmxwt Huey Ta Kpnpata TayTa Kal
Tov Kaprrov mpely K Omvinu. (Cf. § 45.)

8 American Journal of Archaeology, Second Series (1901), edition
and commentary of J. Dennison Rogers. Cf. First Series (1894),
article by Prof. Wheeler. The term mapara can hardly be inter-
preted otherwise than as ‘‘goods”’; in early law it seems to have
corresponded to the familia pecuniaque of Roman custom. The
éotiorduwv was the head of the Doric household entitled to legal
marriage and to the administration of family goods and interests.


2231-2 P


210 JURISPRUDENCE OF THE GREEK CITY


Only if none of these wished to acquire them, might they
be disposed of by auction conducted by the tribe of the
Hyllaeans.

The law took a different shape in Athens, where there
was no social substratum similar to the forxjjes of Krete or
the penestae of Thessaly. The condition of affairs obtaining
before the reform of Solon might conceivably have developed
into something analogous, if the Attic 677es had been re-
duced into a state of subjection regulated by the city.
Solon’s reform, however, prevented this and led to the
individualization and the mobilization of landed property.
Before considering its results let us attend for a moment
to the epoch immediately preceding the reform. It is not
necessary to dwell on the well-known economic features of
the situation clearly outlined in the sources and commented
upon innumerable times by modern historians.’ It is
obvious that the main cause of the wretched state of the
peasants was want of capital and their consequent depend-
ence on those who for some reason did possess money or
stock and could lend them at high interest. What is par-
ticularly noticeable from our point of view is the inability
of the peasantry to repay debts by alienating part or the
whole of their land. The xdAjpos of the Athenian peasant
was as inalienable as the xAdpos of the Doric tenants
(Fo.xnes). It could not be given, sold, or bequeathed out
of the family course of tenure. This being so, nothing
remained but to pledge income and labour, and these
pledges took the shape of ever-accumulating heaps of
recognizances in stone. Five-sixths of the income had
commonly to be surrendered in this way, while personal
indebtedness might end in the sale of the debtor out of the
country or in his reduction to the status of a hand labourer,
a thes.?

The cure adopted by Solon was not only a drastic reduc-
tion of the burden of debts by subtracting interests paid
from the capital owed, and the remission of a certain quota
of the loan, but also the introduction of limited free trade
in land. It is this latter feature which concerns us imme-


’ See, e.g. MEYER, Gesch. des Altertums, II, § 401 ff.
* PLUTARCH, Solon, c. 16; AR. Ath. Const., c. 12.


X: PROPERTY AND POSSESSION 211


diately. Unfortunately we are not told to what extent the
heavily indebted peasants threw their farms into the
market in order to achieve their liberation, but it is
evident from the economic state of Attika in the sixth and
fifth centuries that the social struggle went on for a good
while even after the opening of the market in land, and
that it is only thanks to the unexpected outlets created by
the Persian wars and the policy of State colonization that
Athens succeeded in attaining for a time a certain equi-
librium between her agrarian and her commercial relations.
Anyhow, the legal basis for this ulterior development had
been created by the reform of Solon, and it remains for us
to notice that in spite of its radicalism it did not do away
with some traces of the previous archaic order. The most
characteristic of these traces are to be found in the law of
succession and in arrangements of family property dependent
on it. Solon’s legislation recognized the émixAnpos, the
heiress who serves as a link for the transfer of the family
holding to the nearest agnate. Her position is often dis-
cussed in the speeches of the pleaders,! but the details
supplied by them can add nothing to the minute regula-
tions of the Gortyn Code in familiarizing the modern
student with this particular device for preventing the
dispersion of the xAjpos. Intestate succession takes its
course, exactly as in Krete, on the lines of successive
parentelae—the descendants of the deceased coming first,
the males having precedence over the females; then come
the descendants of the father of the deceased, that is, his
brothers and nephews (eventually sisters and nieces): in
the third rank the descendants of the grandfather, that is,
uncles, cousins, and sons of cousins, with the corresponding
female relatives behind them. This closes the ¢yyxvorela
or narrow circle of relatives, and leaves the way open
to succession according to relative proximity of degree.’
Partition and sale may supervene and break up the actual
estates into new plots, and evidently no kind of regularity
could be traced in the distribution of the soil, say in the
_ time of Perikles. But the public supervision of the KAjpos
i. 8, teAtOS, 1M. 3124 Go, 7- 9, VIL Sly 4, 5.

2 Dem. XLII, § 51.

Bee


212 JURISPRUDENCE OF THE GREEK CITY


was never abrogated, and the Archon Eponymos continued
to perform onerous duties in connexion with the marriage
of heiresses, the appointment of guardians, the introduction
of new blood by adoption in cases when a household was
threatened with extinction. In this way, although a specific
law of Solon limiting sale and acquisition of land has only
left a vestige of its existence in an obscure sentence
of Aristotle’s Politics the general tendency of Athenian
democracy to preserve the family holdings as economic and
religious units is sufficiently indicated. The recognition of
the household estate as the normal basis of social life and
of juridical relations finds expression also in some of the
laws concerning testaments. In the early or tribal period
the institution of a stranger to take the place of a natural
heir was effected by adoption, and this method remained in
common practice even After the introduction of direct
testament. It was quite usual for a dying man to adopt
some one on the condition that he should marry his daughter
or even his widow.? Solon gave leave to bequeath pro-
perty by will, but on the condition that there were no
children and that the testator were in his sound mind
and not under undue influence.? Thus a certain family
solidarity asserted itself even in cases of disposal of property
by will.

Altogether it may be said that although democratic
cities gave a wide scope to individual will and private
interests, they never lost sight of the public element of
ownership and allowed it sometimes to manifest itself in
a manner quite foreign to our own notions and habits.


3. Private Appropriation.
Oceupa- The assertion of private power over things assumed
ne? a different character in Greek and in Roman law. While
the Roman agriculturist stubbornly asserted his right to
a field which he had occupied for cultivation, in Greece
private enterprise was mainly exercised by the trader,


AR. Pol. II, 4, 12. Glotz (op. cit.) tries to explain away this
reference, but as it seems to me without convincing reasons.
2 Dem. XXVII.


* Dem. XLVI, § 14; XLIV, § 68; Isaxos, II, § 13; VI, § 9.


X: PROPERTY AND POSSESSION 213


while peasants rarely detached themselves from their
fellows in the kindred or the colonizing group. Asa result,
occupation of land as an act of private force is hardly men-
tioned in Greek legal sources, while appropriation of chattels
is noticed and recognized as a juridical source of property.
Aristotle calls it the natural source of property in regard
to the proceeds of hunting and fishing.' The domestication
of bees also gave rights to the person who had tended
the insects on his ground and arranged skeps for them.
As for goods acquired by means of trade, it was sufficient
to establish title by referring to the original seller or pro-
ducing a receipt of his as regards the sale. This was,
however, only a means of proof, and not absolutely neces-
sary to establish title. In fact, although the famous rule of
the Code Napoléon—-“ en fait de meubles la possession vaut
titre” (Art. 2279)—was not proclaimed in as many words,
a very short period—one year—was suflicient to protect the
possessor against litigation, and as a matter of fact we do
not read in any of the speeches that have come down to us
of any disputes arising from uncertainty as to title in the
case of chattels.

This is different in regard to land, but the position there Usucapion
is peculiar when compared with Roman law. It is well Se.
known what an important part was played by acquisitive
prescription or usucapion in the latter system.’® It served
to justify title arising out of mere occupation, and was often
used by the praetors to avoid the cumbersome technicalities
of acquisition gure Quiritium. Now, acquisitive usucapion
is never mentioned as a legal source in Greek law. True,
in a speech of Isokrates dealing with the claims of Sparta
to the possession of Messenian territory the orator urges as
a recognized maxim the view that possession lasting many
years establishes ownership,’ and it will not do to challenge
this text on the ground that it deals with a purely inter-
national dispute. Isokrates has taken care to point out


YAR. Pol. I, 3.

? Notice e.g. the proposal of Protos in Demosthenes’ speech
against Zenotheniis.

5 BUCKLAND, Tezt-book of Roman Law, 244, 386 ff.

4 VI, § 32 mpos de rovrots Kai ro mANOE Tov xXpdvov.

5 BEAUCHET, Droit privé, argues in this sense.


214 JURISPRUDENCE OF THE GREEK CITY


that the principle in question obtains both in public and in
private law. But, on the other hand, as the reference is
couched in general terms and bereft of any specific deter-
mination as to a number of years—say thirty, or twenty,
or ten—it appears rather as an appeal to equity than as
a definite rule of usucapion. It is also characteristic that
the question of good faith does not arise in any of the
trials known to us, while it could hardly have been passed
over in any system attaching importance to acquisitive
usucapion. |

On the other hand there is a certain number of instances
in which a defence is opposed to claimants on the ground
of what may be termed limitation of actions, that is, pro-
hibition to initiate a trial when a considerable time has
elapsed since the occurrence of the fact complained of.
A mpo8ecpia of this kind limited to five years is mentioned
in connexion with actions of debt and of accounts of
guardians.! As to pleas of land the evidence is confused
and does not admit of a clear solution. There are some
passages which seem to suggest the conclusion that the
mpolecpuia of five years was applied also in trials as to
landed property, the most important reference being that
of Isaios in the speech on the succession of Pyrrhos, in
which it is said expressly that the law puts a term of five
years to claims of adjudication as to inheritance.” But the
reference is complicated by the adjunct that this term is
running not from the death of the original owner but from
that of his first successor. That these enigmatic words
are not the result of some copyist’s blunder may be gathered
from the fact that in well-known instances the trials to
which extant speeches belong took place some twenty or
twenty-two years after the death of the first de cujus.
This was the case with Isaios’ clients in the trials as to the
succession of Pyrrhos and of Dikaiogenes.’ As for Demos-
thenes, he meets the reproach that an action has been
brought late * by the observation that his opponent should


1 Dem. XXXIV; XXXVIII, § 17.
* Isaros, Ili, § 58 6 8€ vdpos mévre erav Kedever Sixdoarbar Tod KANpov,
emeOav TeXeuTHON 6 KANpovepos.


§ Id. III and V. *, Dem. XLIII, § 16.


X: PROPERTY AND POSSESSION 215


not complain of having been left unmolested for a long
while, but rather attend to proving his right. A rhetorical
counter-thrust of this kind does not help much to clear up
doubts; the only inference that one is able to draw from it
seems to be that there was no legal prohibition against
taking action after long delay, although one would expose
oneself thereby to unpleasant retorts on the part of the man
in possession. The speech of Isaios on the succession of
Aristarchos presents a similar situation. It is not denied
that the plaintiffs father abstained from bringing an action
when the inheritance was taken over by the brothers of the
deceased because he did not want to be separated from his
wife, the only remaining daughter of Aristarchos, who
might otherwise have been claimed as an epikleros by one of
these brothers.‘ Afterwards there were other delays occa-
sioned by service in the Korinthian war, and by other
untoward circumstances. Yet in spite of considerable
procrastination Isaios’ clients did eventually bring an
action.

When we put all these fraginentary notices together, it
seems that we have to formulate two main conclusions:
(1) any exception based on prescription could only be
pleaded against the successor of the original heir; this may
be a consequence of the fact that in the first instance the
adjudication was made by an émidixacla which could not be
met by a wapaypagdy if the claimant made out a prima
fucie case before the archon. The appearance of new claim-
ants, relying on new evidence, could thus lead to a number
of trials concerning the same inheritance. (2) When the
right of a first heir had not been contested, or he had suc-
ceeded in defeating his opponents, his successor derived
additional security from the fact that his de cujus had
maintained himself, and in strict law an exception by
mpobecpia was allowed to him after five years’ possession.?


1 Isatos, X, $19 6 yap matip obpos emt mporkt eyyugcapevos Thy euny
pnrépa ouvaxet, Tov S€ KANpoY TOUTWY KapTrOUpEVwY OvK ELEY OTS ElaTpa€alTo.
dre yap mept avrov Adyous emoujcato THs pyTpos KeAevOVENS, OVTOL TavTA
avr@ nreiAnoay, adrol emdicacdpsvor adrny e&evv, ef py Bovdorto adros emt
mpoukt €xerv. 06 S€ maTHp, GoTE THS pnTpos wn aTepnOjval, kat Sis toradra

pnuara etagey av abrovs kaprove bat.


x 3
2 Td. III, § 58.


Cultiva-
tion as a
source of
land
tenure.


216 JURISPRUDENCE OF THE GREEK CITY


However, it seems that this rule was not always followed
by the heliastic Courts, and there were occasions when
vindication of property remained open to claimants even
after the five years of the mpofecpia had elapsed.' Such
deviations from strict law were by no means uncommon in
the practice of the Athenian Courts. In any case, even if
we admit the operation of a certain procedural exception on
the ground of a statute of limitations, the fact remains that
acquisitive prescription or usucapion was unknown to the
law of the classical period and this is a most important
feature in the jurisprudence of the Greek city. Procedural
limitations correspond to one set of social requirements and
usucapion to an entirely different one. In the first case
the object is to put an end to vexatious demands and to
fraudulent devices of pettifoggers. This is why the limita-
tions are so prominent in claims as to debts in which the
defendants cannot fall back on any assertion of title.
Usucapion, on the other hand, proceeds from the recognition
of an acquisitive value in protracted possession. It arises
naturally in situations in which a number of persons hold
the soil without any other title but occupation and use, but
eventually claim protection for their tenure on the strength
of long user. While this juridical process is definitely
recognized by Roman law with its various forms of occupa-
tion, it is not apparent in Greek law, at any rate in the
period of the classical city ; and the reason for this stunted
development has to be sought, it seems, in the tendency of
Greek law to derive title to land either directly from
allotment (kAnpovoyia) or from transfer by conveyance.
Under this last head the practices of registration and
warranty? deserve special notice, although they are too
technical to form the subject of discussion in a work
dealing with principles of jurisprudence.

There is, however, one group of rules in Greek law, in
which the influence of men’s labour—of the exertions and
enterprise displayed by them for purposes of culture—is


} This is particularly suggested by the case of Dikaiogenes (ISAIos,
V, 7, 37). See on the subject E. CAILLEMER, Etudes sur les antiquités
juridiques d’ Athénes, no. 7 (1869).

? On BeBaiwors see e.g. Dem. XXXVII, § 12.


X: PROPERTY AND POSSESSION 217


recognized as generating real rights, although these rights
do not reach the standard of full property. I mean the
growth of protected tenant right on territories reclaimed
from the waste. While land bearing fruit (xkapmoica yn)
appears in the market as a commodity subjected to the
common law of leases, barren soil (yj WA7) requires an
entirely different treatment. In the later law of the
Empire the exploitation of such plots was termed eugvdrevars ;
in the classical period of the Greek city this generic term
was unknown, but the relations that corresponded to it
existed and gave rise to important juridical consequences.

Although the most characteristic particulars are presented
by the treatment of deserted or barren plots, the evidence
to be examined is mainly derived from leases made by
temples and priestly colleges which included soil of different
quality. One of the best examples is that of the fourth-
century leases of Heraklea in southern Italy.1 Certain
lands belonging to Dionysos were measured and divided
into lots (uepides) by surveyors in execution of a decree
made by the people of Heraklea in a regular assembly (év
KatakAnt@ ada). The proportion of cultivated land to
wild grounds may be illustrated by reference to the first
lot, which contained 201 schoinoi of arable land (éppnyeca)
and 6462 schoinoi of untilled (@pp7xz7@) covered with wood.?
Some 700 schoinoi had been appropriated by outsiders and
recovered by summary actions before the tribunals (éyéu-
kagapévor dikas Tpiakooraias). Both the recovered terri-
tory and the other grounds belonging to Dionysos are leased
for life (€uic6On & ya kara Biw) for a yearly rent of some
measures of corn.? Although the term of the lease is
nominally during lifetime, the conditions of the subjoined
contract as to the lands of Dionysos show that a lease in
perpetuity was intended. In the first clause it is specified
that the tenants are to hold their plots for ever, provided
they supply the securities required and pay their yearly
rent. The third clause of the contract lays down that if


Ride. 4,1, z11; ppeleo-n.

2 Ibid., p. 196, § 3, cf. § 7. The total of cultivated land amounted
to 1,095 schoinoi, of uncultivated to 2,225 schoinoi.

> Ibid., § 9. * Ibid., p. 200, § 1.


Self-help.


218 JURISPRUDENCE OF THE GREEK CITY


the tenants sublet the plots to third persons, bequeath them
by will, or sell the right to collect the fruits, the assigns,
legatees, or purchasers are bound to provide securities in
the same manner as the original tenants.’ Besides the
payment of the moderate rent in kind, the lessor is required
to plant a certain number of vinestocks and of olive trees
in proportion to the size of the plot. If he declares that
the soil is not appropriate for the culture of olives, experts
are to report to the popular assembly after having made
a comparison of the soil with that of neighbouring plots.
Every fifteen years the polianomoi, together with ten
citizens chosen from among the people, have to examine
the progress of the plantations, and those tenants who have
not carried out their obligations incur a corresponding fine.

The beginning of a similar record has been preserved in
regard to the lands of Athene Polias,? which had been
partly invaded by private settlers, and had to be reclaimed.
The greater portion of the lots are described as yn WiAg,
while the rest consisted of valuable plantations.

The particular points mentioned in the Heraklea leases
receive further elucidation from inscriptions found on the
sites of Thisbe (Boiotia), Olymos, Mylasa, ete? For our
present purpose it is important to note that special rights
approximating to ownership were conceded to leaseholders
in order to improve cultivation. In some cases the emphy-
teutic condition must have originated in downright occupa-
tion by outsiders.*


4, Rights and Remedies in Land Law.


Certain claims were considered by the Greeks to be so
self-evident that those who asserted rights under them
could proceed to put themselves into possession by their


own private action, without any warrant or decree of |


judicial or administrative authorities. Such a situation


"IJ. G.I, xii, 202, § 3, 11. 105-8 kai ai ri ka GAX@ wapdhyte Trav yay, av


> ‘ fal , x 2? Le x > 8 , A > , a =
_ Ka GUTOL pemtoCwo@vral, 1) apTUTwyTt 7 aTOOwYTaL Tay emLKapTiay, ay auTa


Ta mapeEsvrat mpwyyvws of mapdaBdvtes i) ois «’ dpriaes i) of mprapévoe Tav
entkapriay, av & kal 6 €& dpxas peutic Owpevos.

 Ibid., pp. 218 ff. 3 Ibid., pp. 258 f.

* MITTEIS, Zur Geschichte dev Erbpacht im Alterthum in Abhandl.
der k. stichs. Gesells. der Wissenschaften, XX, no. 4 (1901).


X: PROPERTY AND POSSESSION © 219


arose in three cases. After the death of a person his sons
entered (€uPareverv) into the inheritance ipso facto,’ in
accordance with the view that they had been joint owners
with their father. They were heredes sui in Roman law,
and in old French law the same principle was expressed by
the maxim “le mort saisit le vif”. This continuation of
“seisin” on the part of sons and of their male descendants
extended also to sons by adoption, if the latter had been
adopted in the lifetime of the father, but not in the case
of adoption by testament.”

The second eventuality when éuBarevois was admitted by
law arose from hypothecary obligations. If a debtor, who
had obtained a loan under hypothecary security, had not
made payment in time (v7epyepos) the gage was liable to be
seized without further formalities by the creditor. A case
in point is that mentioned in the speech against Apaturios,
where the creditor seized a ship by €uBarevors.® Thus by
law a hypothecary mortgagee was assimilated to a heres
swus and allowed to proceed to execution by his own hand.*
We have to distinguish from this case the execution which
might take place against any insolvent debtor, as the pro-
perty of the latter might be considered as a general security
for the repayment of debts. In that case execution would
proceed from a judgement or the order of a magistrate,
unless there was a preliminary agreement that the creditor
had the right to take steps to satisfy his claim by distress.°

Property pledged as a security for the payment of a
dowry was deemed by Greek law to be safeguarded by
hypothecary right, so that the husband or, eventually, the
KUpios, Of a woman could seize it in satisfaction of her
claim.

» Isatos, IL, § 59 dxpiBas yap, emaTdpe Bu TavTes OTe adedbav pev
kAnpov pdeuaia Tac eotiv Tip, dtm d€ yovw yeydvact yynovoe maides,
ovdevi emdixaCea Oat TOV TaTp@av moor KEL.

. Tbid., § 60 kairor. . . doou pev dv kaTaNinwoe ynoious matdas €& avTar,
ov Tm poonket Tos mao be Bindous de: TOV ) Tar pov" ooo. O€ Siabijkars avtot
elomrovovprat, ToUTots em dura Cer bau mpoonke. tav Sodevrwv. Tos: pev yap,


ort yove yeysvaowy, ovdeis a av Sijmou dpa Byrnoece mept TOV TaTpwwrL, mpos —
d€ rovs elomrounrovs dmavres of Kata yevos mpoankovtes audirBnreiv akovow.

5 Dem. XXXIII, § 6.

* BEAUCHET, op. cit., III, pp. 262 ff., seems right on this point
against GUIRAUD, p. 228,

> Dem. XLI, $ 5.


Action in
vindica-
tion.


220 JURISPRUDENCE OF THE GREEK CITY


The third eventuality in which seizure by self-help was
allowed arose from the execution of a judgement: procedure
by distress was rendered necessary in this case because the
city was altogether disinclined to use its power of adminis-
trative coercion. As regards public prosecutions it relied,
as we have seen, mainly on accusations by individual citi-
zens; in the same way, it had not the time or the means
to employ bailiffs to enforce decisions of tribunals in civil
cases. Usually the winning party took steps on his own
account with the eventual recourse to a dikn é€ovAns if he
was refused satisfaction by the loser. This reserve of an
action against a condemned party who prevents execution
was the principal means of insisting on the satisfaction of
one’s rightful claims. Before turning to a closer examina-
tion of this form of procedure let us first mention some
other methods of asserting rights to property.

By the side of self-help by éuBdrevors stood in the case
of claims to inheritance the émidicacia. If there were no
male heirs in the direct line and the deceased had not
adopted a son during his lifetime, the succession was de-
clared to be open to adjudication (éiéixos). If a son had
been adopted by the deceased by testament, his claim had
to be tested in connexion with the question as to the state
of mind of the testator and his freedom from corrupting
influences. In the absence of sons, daughters had the
first claim, as émixAnpo., and the adjudication bore on
the recognition of their right together with a decision as to
which of the agnates should receive them in marriage
(€mdukacia émixAnpov).” If none of these claims could be
produced, the relatives could urge their claims on the
strength of comparative proximity of degree and other
circumstances.* The adjudication was announced by
a public declaration, made by a herald, calling upon all
pretenders or opposers to come forward before the Archon
and to state their claims or to contest the claims of others


' Isaros, VI, § 9. See on succession CAILLEMER, Le droit de suc-


cesston & Atheénes.


2 , =
Isaros, VI, § 14 dar’ ovr’ emitpomeveoOar mpoonke Thy KadXinmny ert,
Ae) > ,
TplakovtouTly ye ovaay, ovte aveKdoTov Kal Gmatda eivat, GAda mavu tadat
“a ” 2? - -
guvotkely, i) eyyunGeioay Kuta Tov yopov fh émOikacGeicar.


> Dem. XLVIII, §§ 22 ff,


X: PROPERTY AND POSSESSION 221


(a4pupicBnreiv).' The adjudication turned entirely on the
question of comparative right, and did not settle the
problem in a final and absolute manner. If a pretender
appeared on the scene who had not previously tried his
chance, or if one of the parties concerned entered a plea in
error in regard to the conduct of the émdixaoia, the lists
were reopened and a diadixacia took place. The Demos-
thenic speech against Olympiodoros gives an example of
such vicissitudes, while the speeches of Isaios on the estate
of Hagnias and Demosthenes against Makartatos and
against Leochares present a lively picture of the complicated
claims and counterclaims among which archons and tribu-
nals had to pick their way towards solutions. The principal
feature of the procedure by emidixacia and by diadikacia
was that there were no plaintiffs and no defendants, but
parties to a controversy seeking a judicial declaration of
right. There was, however, in so far a difference between
the two varieties of controversy that in the case of a diadi-
kaoia after adjudication the opponents of the persons who
had obtained possession had to make a considerable deposit
(rpoxaraBoXdy) amounting to one-tenth of the inheritance in
dispute. The fairness of this requirement was obvious, as
otherwise there would have been no limit to the attempts
to get hold of profitable estates.

The d:adcxacia of inheritance is the species of adjudica-
tion most copiously illustrated in our sources, but it is only
one species of a wide genus. Caillemer defined this kind of
procedure in the following words: the attribution of a right
or of a charge toa person designated by the judge from
among two or more persons who assert that they are en-
titled to the right or to exemption from the charge.” It is
quite distinct from an action (d/«n) or from the rendering of
accounts (ev@uva).> It amounted to a declaration of better
right,* or relative right as between several persons ; and in
so far it established a prejudicial situation which might be
appealed to in case of any further dispute between the

1 Dareste refers the expression to pretenders; Lipsius gives it a
wider meaning (p. 582).

2 CAILLEMER, s.v. diadikasia in DAR. et 8.


> Dem. XXIV, § 54; XX, § 147.
* Cf. the jus merum of the English writ of right.


222 JURISPRUDENCE OF THE GREEK CITY


parties.! Besides the class already discussed—the dradixacia
as to inheritance—we have to note decisions as to citizens
liable to be charged with some public duty or payment, like
a trierarchy, the training of a chorus, or as to the inscription
of a particular person on the roll of public debtors.? Again,
if a premium had been offered for the denunciation or cap-
ture of a criminal and several Athenians claimed to have
offered the information required, the selection of the one
entitled to receive the premium was the result of a diadi-
kasia.” A dispute between claimants to a priesthood or
some income connected with a sacerdotal office was con-
ducted on similar lines of procedure.* One of Demosthenes’
private orations was delivered in support of a claim to the
exclusive use of a name.’ In connexion with confiscations
any claim of third persons to some part of the property
seized by the State was similarly settled as between the
aggrieved party and the State.° In the speech against
Zenothemis the dispute between the two merchants Protos
and Zenothemis, each of whom claimed a hypothecary
mortgage in regard to the corn freight on Hegestratos’ ship,
must have been engaged by way of a diadikasia, and each
of them could make out a prima facie case.’ Perhaps if a
number of speeches of Lysias, Isaios, Hypereides, Deinarchos,
mentioned by the lexicographers, had survived, we might
be able to add other important classes of trials conducted
by diadikasia, but in the absence of this evidence we can
only endorse the supposition ° that the diadikasta may have
served to settle controversies as to the right of property not
derived directly from succession or testament, but based on
other varieties of title, for example on registration, on ~
donation, on uncontested possession for a long time, ete.®


1 BEAUCHET, pp. 377 f.

> Dem. XXIV, § 13. ’ ANDOKIDES, I, §§ 27, 28.

‘ The subject was treated in orations which have not come down to
us. BEAUCHET, III, p. 380.

* Dem. XXXIX, 6° Lysras, XVII.
_ ' VInoGRADOFF, “ On the legal background in Demosthenes’ speech
in Zenothemis v. Demon.” International Review of Legal History, 1922,
pp. 202 ff.

° BEAUCHET, ITI, p. 381.

* On the subject of the diadikasia our principal authority is
G. A. LEIst, Der attische Eigentumsstreit im System der Diadikasien.


X: PROPERTY AND POSSESSION 228


But such suppositions cannot form part of any systematic
teaching on the subject.

What is more, there is some evidence of an entirely
different course of action open to those who wanted to
assert rights as to property. I mean the curious, though
controversial, passages bearing on the dixn ovcias. We
have, to begin with, the following statement in Harpo-
kration’s Glossary, which has to be given in full, as there
is a considerable difference of opinion among leading
scholars as regards its translation and interpretation.’ It
may be rendered in the following way: ‘Claimants who
go to law against those in possession of estates or houses
bring the action ovoias in the second instance, while in the
first instance they have recourse to an action évotxiov in
the case of houses and xapzoé in the case of estates. In
the third instance there is the action efovAns. It was
possible for the holders (the defendants)? to retain posses-
sion of the property if they were defeated in actions xapzrod
and €vocxiov or in the second stage as to ovaia,® while, if they
lost in the trial é€ovAns it was impossible for them to hold
on any longer to possession, but they had to evacuate the
property adjudicated to their opponents.’ And the lexico-
grapher refers in support of this summary to speeches of
various orators, especially of Isaios, and to the eighteen
books of Theophrastos’ treatise on the laws ; unfortunately
none of these references can be verified from the texts
which have come down to us.

The meaning of the terms designating the four actions
is not difficult to make out; the passage deals with actions
for the recovery of rents (kapzro®, évotxiov), for the recovery
of property (ovcfas = krnudrev), and for the recovery of
possession (efovAns). Nor is the sequence in which the
three stages are enumerated an unnatural one, although it
does not present the same order as the one usually followed
in Roman and in mediaeval procedure, in which litigants
tried conclusions as to possession before coming to grips on


1 For the Greek text see Appendix to this chapter, p. 228.

2 The MSS. have €Xoto, which editors alter into éyovar.

3 TH. REINACH, in Dar, et S., s.v. enoikiou dike, explains ovcias
as T'action en revendication proprement dite.


224 JURISPRUDENCE OF THE GREEK CITY


the question of title. In Greece evidently the first step of
a claimant asserting his rights as owner of a plot of land
or of a house was to demand from the occupier the payment
of a rent; the evidence might be easy to obtain by pro-
ducing testimony as to customary or habitual payments in
former years. In a second stage the trial turned to a dis-
pute about the title to the property in question, and this
could be termed appropriately a dikn odcias, as it concerned
the attribution of certain xrj#para and not a claim as to
rent or proceeds. A third eventuality arose when a person
who had been shown to hold as a lessee or whose title had
been proved to be inferior continued nevertheless to hold
on to the house or to the plot. This was a case of trespass
and dispossession, and the remedy open to the plaintiff was
a dikn e€ovAns with its increased fines.

So far the passage does not present any particular diffi-
culty, and we are able to quote in corroboration of it extant
references in certain speeches still accessible to modern
students. Ina fragment of a speech of Lysias preserved
by Harpokration the orator asks his adversary why he
does not bring an action for recovery of rent (€vo:xiov) in
respect of a house which, he asserts, belongs to him.’ In
Demosthenes’ speech against Olympiodoros a similar argu-
ment is used.”

The only difficulty for the understanding of the passage
of Harpokration about ovaias dikn arises out of the regular
progress from the first instance to the second, and from the
second to the third. What is the reason of this obligatory
ascent from actions as to rent to actions as to property and
ultimately as to possession? It seems to me that too much
has been made of the systematic statement of Harpokration
as to stages of procedure. There is no reason to consider
these transitions as obligatory, and we can well imagine
that some claimants may have started right away by con-
testing the title to kr#para (odcla), while others may have
brought the action of disseisin (é€£otAns) without going
‘through the two previous stages. We are dealing, after


* HARPOKRATION, 8.v. xaprov dikn. See Appendix, p. 228.
* [Dem.] XLVIII, $45 dia ri od . . . odderamoré por hayes evorkiov
Sixny ris oikias, fs Epackes pucOdcai por ws Gavtod ovaar ;


X: PROPERTY AND POSSESSION 225


all, with a statement by a late lexicographer, who, of course,
had the inestimable privilege of being able to refer to a
number of speeches and treatises lost to us, but who cannot
be relied upon as regards his deductions concerning the
connexion to be established between various juridical rules.
Even if it were established that there were practical advan-
tages in starting litigation from the point of view of an
owner claiming rent, this would not prove that such a pre-
liminary contest was obligatory in all cases of vindication
of property in land.!

The dixn €go0Ans—the action of disseisin, if we may use The
such a term derived from the well-known action of pieces
Mediaeval common law—took in any case a most important
place in Greek procedure, and the best means of judging of
its application is offered again by a statement of Harpo-
kration.? Under éfovAns dixn he tells us that “it is the
name of an action brought by persons who assert that they
are being kept out of their own property against those
who are keeping them out. The term is said to come from
the verb éé/AXecv, which means to push or thrust out. The
action is used also in the case of damages by those who do
not get them within the proper time-limit, when the persons
convicted become defaulters. Those who succumbed in a
dixkn efovAns gave up to the successful litigant what they
had taken from him, and paid the required penalty to the
State. The action was used also by a creditor who tried
to obtain possession of some property of his debtor, and
who was prevented by some one. Also if a person is
deprived of the products of his labour in cultivating land,
the law gives an action efovAns against the depriving
party. So, too, in the case of a slave and of everything in
which a person claims rights. This is shown clearly by
Isaios and by Lysias in his speech against Stratokles in a
trial €govAns. Deinarchos, however, in the diadikasia of
the Krokonidae employs the term in a special sense, applying


1 BEAUCHET’s interpretation (III, pp. 368 ff.) tends to turn the
ovaias dikn into an action for the execution of a decision. Against
this see LIPSIUS, p. 680.

? HARPOKR. 8.v. e€ovAns dikn. Cf. above, chap. III, p. 60. See
appendix to this chapter, p. 229. 7


2231-2 Q


226 JURISPRUDENCE OF THE GREEK CITY


it to the priestess who refused to perform sacrifices. That
the action is applicable in every case of ejectment from
private property, and not only, as Caecilius thinks, in the
case of losers in a trial who owe a fine, is made clear
by Phrynichos in his Proastriae (as well as by other
evidence).”

The statement is somewhat obscured by the intermixture
of general propositions and of references to special cases.
This may be the result of the fact that the lexicographer
used heterogeneous materials without much skill in sorting
them. But apart from this juxtaposition of general rules
and particular applications there is nothing contradictory
or unreasonable in Harpokration’s enumeration. He lays
down repeatedly and emphatically that the action éfovAns
was used as a remedy against all kinds of disseisin or
eviction, and states specifically that the opinion of Caecilius,
who confined the range of the action to the enforcement of
rights recognized by judicial decision, but nevertheless
withheld by the defendants, is wrong. Two of the special
cases in which the action was used—the recovery of slaves
and the recovery of products of one’s labour—are covered
distinctly by the general principle of the security of posses-
sion. In two other cases the possession of things withheld
is guaranteed by judicial sentences—these are the cases of
unpaid fines and unpaid debts. Lastly, there is the reference
to the refusal of a priestess to perform certain duties con-
nected with her office. We do not know the circumstances
of this last case, but it seems probable that the action was
brought by persons or by a corporation interested in the
regular performance of certain religious rites and damaged
by their interruption; perhaps the priestess had réfused to
pay a fine inflicted by a judgement.

Even if there were nothing else in the way of material,
we should be justified in rejecting Beauchet’s contention !
that the dixn efovrAns was restricted to cases when a
judicial sentence had been passed, and presented therefore
an exact parallel to the Roman actio judicatz. But there
is additional evidence to show that the action in question
had a much wider range. There is, for instance, the appli-

1 BEAUCHET, III, 395.


X: PROPERTY AND POSSESSION 227


cation of an action which could hardly be anything else but
a dikn €£o0Ans in connexion with the ejectment of a man
in possession of a bath-house.! In this instance the d/ky
efovAns appears as the counterpart of an e€aywy7—an
eviction or ejectment—and it is probable that a contest fol-
lowing on an ejectment led normally to an action of e€ovAns
on the part of the disseised. In Demosthenes’ speech
against Zenothemis,? the égaywy7 is spoken of as a form
of simulated self-help which could have been converted
easily into actual violence, and called for a reaction by dé«n
efovAns. Altogether the action in question appears to be
closely connected with the maintenance of possessory rights
against infringement by lawless self-help. In this sense it
is a necessary step in the substitution of orderly methods
for private self-defence and for execution by private force.
No distinction is made between possessory and _ petitory
remedies—both sides are equally covered by the proceedings
against illegal intrusion and illegal obstruction of rightful
claims.® At the same time it must be said that although
the action resembles the Roman procedure by interdicts, it
is entirely devoid of the preliminary character imparted to
the latter by the Romans and imitated by Norman lawyers.
There is no cogent reason why possession should be regarded
as a kind of outwork to property and strictly distinguished
in procedure from trials of right and title. As in the cases
of the German Gewere, procedural methods admitted of a
good deal of intermixture between claims based on posses-
sion and claims based on title, because title itself was
treated not as an absolute, but as a relative qualification.
When all this has been said, it is hardly necessary to Posses-

point expressly to the fact that the Greeks were not in- 2°"
different to the juridical value of possession. Inasmuch as
all orderly trials require a proper start from some deter-
mined situation of the parties, Greek law prohibited arbi-
trary seizure of subjects of litigation—chattels as well as
plots of land. The law of Gortyn lays down definite rules


1 Tsatos, V, 22.

2? Dem. XXXII. Philippi was the first to recognize the fact. See
article by VINOGRADOFF as above, p. 222, n. a

5 Cf. LIPSIUs, p. 667.


Q 2


228 JURISPRUDENCE OF THE GREEK CITY


about the party who should hold in his possession a slave as
to whose ownership there was trial between two claimants.’
A law of Zaleukos is reported to have settled the matter
definitely among the Epizephyrian Lokrians, and Polybios
has inserted in his history an account of a complicated
case in which one of the claimants had tried to secure
for himself the benefit of actual possession by seizing the
subject of litigation a short time before the trial.? These
instances show conclusively that a kind of wté possidetis
rule was recognized by Greek jurisprudence. But it re-
mains characteristic of the Greeks that the contrast between
possession and ownership was not developed into anything
like the elaborate doctrine which obtained in Roman law.
Their treatment of the problems connected with individual
appropriation may be characterized as fluid and dependent
on varying circumstances. Their doctrine of property was
indeed governed by the idea of providing safeguards for
possessions guaranteed by the city, but it was liable at any
moment to be curtailed for the sake of public safety or
publie service.


APPENDIX TO CHAPTER X
HARPOKRATION, Lexicon (ed. Dindorf, 18538), p. 229.


odcias dixn.

Oi dikagopevor mepi xwpiwy 7} olkidy mpos rods éxovras
ovaias edtkdfovtTo Thy Sevrépav Sikny. 1 S€ mpotépa nv TeV
fev olki@v evoikiov, Tav d€ xwpiwvy Kaprod, rpitn d& émi
rovras egovAns. Kai é€jv Tois éhodal Kpareiv TaY KTH LETOV
kai ef thy Oikny Thy Tod Kaprod 7 TOO évoikiov Kal et THY
devrépav HrTnOelev TH THS ovaias ef St Kai E€oUANS dAoier,
ovKéTL e€fnv emikpateiv, ad’ e€loracbar Eder On Tov
KTNMaTe@V Tos KaTAadLKacapéevols.


Ibid., p. 169.
kapTou Siky.
Avoias é€v T@ kata Anpoobévous émitpomas “ei yap Tt
€ykadels TadE TH pelpakiw Kal Tov ody TL Exel, Sikdoat


1 I,J. G.I, xvii, §§ 1f., pp. 354 ff.
* PoLtyBios, XII, 16. Cf. Lrpsrus, p. 170, n. 120.


X: PROPERTY AND POSSESSION 229


avre@ Kara sTovs vopous, él Bey xoplov dugisBnreis, Kaptrod,
ei 8 oikias, évoikiov, @omEep ovTOS aol viv EemiTpoTAS
Oud ¢erat.”


Lbid., p. 117.
egoudns sable

"Ovopa dikns iv emdyovowy ol pdokorres eLelpyer Oat Tov
ldimy Kara TOY e€erpydvrar. eipnT at ev ovv TovVOMa ard
Tov efiArewv, 6 6 ear efwbetv Kal ex Padre. OikadfovTar dé
e€ovAns, Kaml Tos Emitiplois of pi) amoAapBadvorTes Ev TH
Tpoonkovon mpolecpia, UmEepnpépwv yEevouévov THY KaTadl-
KkaobévTwy. of d€ addvres E€oUANS Kai TH EAYTL EdiSoTaY &
adnpotvro avrov, kal T@ Onpociw KareTibecay Ta TipnOErTa.
eduxd (ero de eLovdns Kal 6 XpHorns KaTeXely EMLY EL POV
XPnKA Tod Xpeworobvros Kal koduopevos vd TIVOS. Kal
emepyactas OE Tis el elpyolro, didwow 6 vomos Oixd cer Bar
mpos TOV eipyovra eLovdns. Kal mrept avdpamodov dé Kai
TavTos ov gna Tis avT@ pereivat, Tatra de capes 'Icaios
Oddoker Kal Avoias ev T@ KaTa& XTpatoxdéovs efovdns.
Acivapxos HEVTOL ev Th Kpoxoridav diadixkacia (dis KEXpn-
ra TO THS é€ovANS dvéuare emi THs phy Bovropévns Te iia
Spay. dre de él Travros ToD €x Tay tdidy éxBaddopévou
TATTETAL ToUvopa Kal oux @S oleT aL Kaikidios HOvov TOV EK
KaTadikns dgetovT@y Kal Povyixos év IIpoacrpiais dyrov
TrOLEl.


PotLux, VIII. 59.
‘A dé rhs eLovrns dikn yiverau, bray TUS TOV EK Snpootov
Mpidpwevov pi) eg kaprota bat a empiaro, Tov ViKHoavTa a


eviKn TEV, aX’ 7} EXOVTA eKBGNAN o) oXel Kohton, 7 aur os


b


6 ddra@y 7) dAXOS Umep avTov. Kal pny Kal él 6 pev @ @s €wvn-
pévos audioBnret ktHpartos, 6 d€ as bToOnKnY Exwy éEovdAnS
u)


Philo-
sophic
view of
conven-
tions.


CHAPTER XI
CONVENTIONS AND TRANSACTIONS


1. Form and Substance in Conventions.


ARISTOTLE treats in several places of the conventions
entered into by individuals and juridical persons. We have
already had occasion to speak of his statement in the Ethics
about voluntarily and involuntarily imposed obligations
(cuvaddrAdypata éxovota Kai dkovora) which correspond to
the obligations ex contractw and ex delicto of Roman and of
modern law. In the Rhetoric! he explains the great im-
portance of conventions for social intercourse and describes
them as a kind of law established by private agreement.
At the same time he lays stress on the fact that their
validity and practical application depend ultimately on the
general legal order adopted by the Commonwealth. This.
close connexion between private agreements and public
rules reminds us of the saying of Demosthenes previously
quoted,? according to which law (véuos) may be defined as
universal convention (cvv@yKn Ko.vy). Two important
consequences may be deduced from this view of the matter.
To begin with, private conventions can only be recognized
and enforced if they do not contravene the laws of the
city. This should be self-evident, and yet the point must
be insisted upon, because there are one or two passages
which seem to be in contradiction to it. In Demosthenes’
speech against Lakritos*® a convention is mentioned as


€ ”
* Rhet. 1, 15, § 21 1 yap cvvOnkn vdpos eoriv ibios Kai Kata pépos, kal
ai pev ovvOjkat ov Trotovat Tov vdopoy KUpLov, of S€ vdpor Tas KaTa Toy vdpoy
iid ral
auvOnkas. Kai dros aitos 6 vdpos cuvvOnkn Tis €ativ, Bore Gs tis amoret f


> - , 4 , > val »* ‘ la ‘ ‘ “~
avatpet ovvOnkny, trovs vdépous avaipet, ere d€ mparterar Ta TOA TOY


cuvah\aypdrwy Kal Ta €éxovo.a kata ouvOnKxas, @oTE GkUp@v yvyvopéevey
adatpeira 7) mpds adAnAovs xpeia Tov avOpatrwv.

2 Cf. above, p. 18.

* [DEm.] XXXV, § 18 cvyypadn* ... Kupi@repov S€ mepi tovray aAdo
pndev elvar tis ovyypadis. ;


XI: CONVENTIONS AND TRANSACTIONS 231


expressly free from objection on the greund of any
existing law. It is not admissible, however, that an in-
fringement of any specific command or prohibition was
meant. The contracting party signified by this clause
that he would not avail himself against the other side of
legal rules which might otherwise have been appealed to
in favour of the promisor. We frequently find instances of
such “renunciations” in mediaeval legal practice.’ Again
in the Arkesine contracts preserved in certain inscriptions
found in the island of Amorgos? there is an emphatic
declaration that no law or decree shall be deemed stronger
(kupi@repa) than the agreement in question. Here again
the literal sense of the words cannot obscure their intended
meaning. The contract was made on behalf of a sovereign
city, and the declaration referred to amounts to a promise
that no legislative or administrative measures will ever be
taken that might invalidate or curtail the contractual
obligations specitied.

A second inference to be drawn from the close connexion
recognized between the social contract constituting the
Commonwealth and private agreements may be expressed
in the words that all transactions are recognized as con-
ventions which are enforceable at law. This principle is
not devoid of technical meaning and specific application.
So-called natural obligations are not considered as a
separate chass, or rather, we should say, Greek law gives an
equal force to all varieties of convention established by
mutual consent, so-called “ nude pacts” being also included.
There is, however, an exception which strengthens the rule
by its explicit opposition. We are told® that Charondas
declared that in the case of sale the money had to be paid
on the delivery of the goods, so that credit agreements were
not actionable. Plato develops a similar rule in the Laws,
and justifies it by the consideration that those who have
consented to forgo the receipt of the price for a certain
time have implicitly admitted that they are willing to


1 Cf. MEYNIAL, Les Renonciations, in Nouvelle Revue de droit francais
et étranger (1900-1902).

Pad Gil, sv 8,11, 43 fy. 316,

8 THEOPHRASTOS, ap. StTos. Florileg. XLIV, 22.


Early


traces of


formal-
ism.


232 JURISPRUDENCE OF THE GREEK CITY


abide by the decision of the other parties to the agreement.
These remarks may seem to suggest that friendly arrange-
ments in the nature of non-actionable transactions were
not unusual in the Greek world, and it may have occurred
sometimes that a so-called é€pavos loan assumed the
form of a gift}; but we find in that very case of épavor
that they gave occasion to frequent litigation and were
treated in accordance with special methods of procedure, so
that the immunity from action cannot have had a lasting
effect on the law of the subject. The existence of certain
unprotected transactions can be dismissed therefore as a
peculiarity of local custom and the product of certain
special doctrines.

Students of ancient law are accustomed to regard the
early history of legal transactions as dominated by more or
less rigid formalism. It is not only the well-known features
of the jus Quiritium—the mancipatio, the nexwm, the
manus injectio, the sponsio, the stipulatio—that are charac-
terized by ceremonial acts and solemn words without
which the transaction remains imperfect and void.2 The
same recourse to sacramental acts and words is to be
observed in Germanic, Celtic, and Slavonie custom. I will
cite as an example the dramatic procedure of affatomia® in
Salic law—the ceremony of throwing a stick as a symbol
of possession into the lap of a middleman, who had to pass
the ownership of a house to an intended donee after having
performed certain acts of hospitality as master of the house.
Everywhere we come across certain forms prescribed by
traditional custom in the case of binding acts in law. Quite
apart from any particular tendency of the Roman mind to
clothe transactions in certain set forms of act and word,
there was evidently a cogent reason that induced these
various peoples to work out juridical forms and to hold on


1 |DEm.] LILI, 8 f. drexpud puny Ort... TAs TE Tptaxogias, ds ro adehpo
edwka epsdioy 6 Ore émopevero emt rovroy, depueiny avT@, Xtias TE Spaxpas
€pavoy atT@ eis Ta dirpa elooicoie. . . - erred) ouK nod povy dpyupiov, ...
saat dos Ocoxhéa TOV TOTE spane{irevowra ¢ éx@pata kai oréavoy xpvoovy

. éxedevoa Sovvat rovr@ xthias Spaxpds, kai rovTo €dwxa dwpedy adrg rd
dpyvpioy,
GIRARD, Manuel, pp. 284 ff.
3 GRIMM, ‘Deutsche Rechtsalterthiimer, I*, 662.


a


XI: CONVENTIONS AND TRANSACTIONS 233


tenaciously to them even in epochs of more advanced inter-
course. Nor is it impossible to unravel the reason of such
formalistic treatment. It may be explained to some extent
by the wish to ensure the observation of the agreement by
a quasi-religious sanction, and to give a sharp and marked
manifestation to certain important acts of the parties con-
cerned, and of impressing them on the surrounding public.
One might go further and interpret the curious combina-
tions of formal acts and solemn words—like the joining of
hands (dextrarum prehensio, pawmée, handfasting, éyytn,
related to yvia),' the solemn declaration in set formulas,
the swearing of oaths, and the ceremonial steps (the hepto-
pada of the Brahmanic marriage) as traditional remnants
of religious rituals of alliance or pacification.2 In any case
it is evident that archaic formalism goes back to much
deeper roots than mere superstition or magic practices
suggested by individual devices. The reasonable explanation
for these universally recurring usages has to be sought in
tribal custom and relations between kindreds which neces-
sarily assumed the character of international treaties,”
although it would be hazardous to try to account for every
detail by reference to a system of religious law. Let us
see whether definite traces of this archaic formalism may
not be discovered in Greek tradition. At first sight it seems
that nothing similar to the elaborate rules of Roman or
Germanic custom obtained in Greece. There is nothing
so picturesque and concrete in the legal custom of the Greeks
in spite of their well-known sensitiveness to outside impres-
sions. All the authorities agree that the binding force of
Greek contracts did not depend on the strict adherence to
any particular form. All that we know about them suggests
again and again that the obligation in voluntary agreements
depended on consent, on the mutual concurrence of wills.
There was, however, in reality no irreconcilable contrast
between the development of Greek law and that of other
national systems in this respect. There are some traces of


* Prof. J. A. Smith suggests that the term may be interpreted as
ekyvin, emancipatio.
. GERNET, in Revue des études grecques, see below, 4 235 note.


3 Cf. Outlines of Hist. Jur. 1, 364 ff.


234 JURISPRUDENCE OF THE GREEK CITY


formalism in ancient Greek custom, while, on the other
hand, Roman law in the course of its evolution arrived
eventually at the recognition of intention and consent as the
constitutive factors in contract; this result was achieved
at a late stage by means of the jus honorarvwm and the
jus gentiwm. The archaic methods of the jus civile stood
out in consequence in sharper outlines. What we are
concerned with now, however, is to show that in spite of
the early prevalence of the consensual contract conditioned
by the lively commercial intercourse of the Greek cities
and the sensitiveness of the nation as regards psycho-
logical aspects of jurisprudence, there are distinct traces
of archaic formalism in the treatment of transactions at an
early stage of Greek civilization.

A starting-point is afforded by the Homeric tale of the
capture of Ares and Aphrodite by the jealous Hephaistos.!
The culprits are entangled in the net cunningly laid for
them by the lame husband. The assembled gods enjoy
the sight and laugh at the comical situation. Poseidon,
however, takes the part of Ares and entreats Hephaistos to
free Ares from the bonds, assuring him that the ransom
required by the offended husband would be paid by the
adulterer. Hephaistos refuses on the ground that if Ares
takes to flight instead of paying, he will not be able to
exact anything from Poseidon: de:Aaf ror derko@v ye Kai
éyyvat éyyvdacba. Thereupon Poseidon pledges himself
to pay the fine himself if Ares escapes without paying it,
and Hephaistos agrees to accept that second promise.
There has been a good deal of controversy in connexion
with this passage. Partsch? has explained it as an assump-
tion of liability on the part of Poseidon, who acts as an
eyyvns, that is, a surety for Ares, and offers himself as
a hostage to Hephaistos in the place of the culprit. Esmein
and Glotz have translated éyy%a: as promises, and have
explained the whole transaction as the substitution of
a convention with Poseidon for the convention with Ares,
‘as originally proposed by Poseidon. M. L. Gernet has


* Odyssey, VIII, 305 ff.
* Griechisches Biirgschaftsrecht, I, 11 ff.
* EsMEIN, Mélanges de Rome, VIL, 436. GuLoTz, Solidarité, p. 132.


XI: CONVENTIONS AND TRANSACTIONS 235


recently developed their thesis further in a very subtle and
interesting disquisition,! assuming that Poseidon’s action
in the matter was a manifestation of solidarity between
kinsmen. The enigmatic verse 351 quoted above in
Greek is translated from this point of view as follows:
“the promises of the weak (¢mpuissants) are weak pro-
mises.” A decisive turn is supposed to have been given
to events by this reply of Hephaistos: he refused to
enter into a convention with the powerless Ares, and
in consequence Poseidon pledged himself to pay the fine
himself.

I may say that the interpretation defended by the
French scholars seems convincing in a general way.
Partsch’s theory, built up on the analogy with the German
submission of hostages as sureties (zur Hand gehen), leaves
unexplained the curious subdivision of the narrative into two
distinct parts—the first dealing with a promise by Poseidon
on behalf of a third person, which Hephaistos does not
accept ; the second indicating that Poseidon steps in himself
as a party to a convention, which Hephaistos does accept.
What is more, a translation which refers the deiAéa to
Hephaistos, and renders éyyvai by sureties and éyyvéacbat
by accepting sureties seems misleading, because there is no
likelihood that the speaker would disparage himself, while
in reference to Ares the expression desA@y would apply
naturally, as he was bound and therefore would have acted
under duress. Besides, Partsch’s interpretation makes it
impossible to connect the two accepted meanings of éyyvady
—to stand as surety and to give in marriage—by any
reasonable transitional link similar to the Latin triad—
sponsor, sponsio, sponsalia.

We shall have occasion to come back to the question of
sureties. What we are concerned with now is the fact that
the passage in question treats of two kinds of conventions
practised in ancient Greek law, and calls them éyyvar.
Now this leads directly to the consideration of the Greek
betrothal as a contract originating in the tribal stage of
Greek civilization, but enduring with characteristic modifi-
cations in the classical period of the city. The Greek


1 L. GERNET, Revue des études grecques, XXX (1917), pp. 254 ff.


236 JURISPRUDENCE OF THE GREEK CITY


éyytn appears as a characteristic formal contract like the
Old English wedding and the Scandinavian mdldagi.! The
requirement of a formal betrothal stated in an old law
quoted by Demosthenes laid stress on the performance of
rites established by law. In order to breed legitimate
children a man has to marry a wife in accordance with
legal custom (émi dixafois). By a piece of luck even the
formulae employed in the Greek wedding. have been pre-
served for us by Herodotos in the story of Megakles’
marriage with Agariste.? Kleisthenes, the father of the
bride, pronounces the sacramental formula of betrothal—
éyyv@ traida tiv éunv Ayapiorny, vopoiot Toot AOnvaiwv—
and the bridegroom confirms the contract by his acceptance,
gdapévov dt éyyvacba Meyaxdéos, éxextpwro 6 ydpos
KnXecbévet. There can be no doubt that the juridical basis
of marriage was provided in ancient law by a formal con-
tract of. betrothal (verbis) concluded between the father or
curator («kdpios) of the bride, on behalf of her family or
kindred, and the bridegroom, behind whom stood his family
or kindred, as we may infer from the analogy of the
wedding. Even at a later epoch the éyyt’nors én dixators
remained the legal foundation of legitimate descent and
consequently of legitimate marriage. The institution was
materially modified by later practice, and the consummation
of marriage came to be recognized as a second element in
the formation of the contract. We are, however, not con-
cerned at present with these later developments, but with
the evidence afforded by ancient custom as to the verbal
formalism of an important contract in early Greek law.
Coming back to Demodokos’ story in the Odyssey, let us
notice that the term characteristic for the wedding of
a betrothed bride was applied by the rhapsode to a con-
vention as to compensation for adultery. If the interpre-
tation accepted by Esmein, Glotz, and Gernet is right,
Poseidon suggested first a convention between Ares and


Cf. AmirA, Nordgermanisches Obligationenrecht, II, 282 ff., and
Grundriss des germanischen Rechts, 181 ff.

* HERODoTOS, VI, 130.

* Outlines of Hist. Jurispr. I, p. 819.

* Demosthenes’ mother and sister were éyyunrai, but not married ;
see his speech against Aphobos A (XXVII). Cf. Dem. XLI.


XI: CONVENTIONS AND TRANSACTIONS 237


Hephaistos, and subsequently offered to conclude a conven-
tion himself with the aggrieved husband of Aphrodite. No
sacramental words were pronounced, and no solemn acts were
performed on the occasion, but it has been pointed out with
considerable probability ! that the repeated reference to the
presence of the gods, who witness the transaction, lends it
validity. Publicity is one of the requirements of a formal
convention ; the dramatic performance which gives a con-
crete expression to the concurrence of wills must take
place before the public; its proper public is originally the
assembly of the people in arms or in its civil capacity.
Legal history presents curious examples of the gradual
symbolization of this civic public—the substitution of
skeleton comitia for the real comitia in the Roman pro-
cedure of adoption and testament-making, the probable
substitution of the ten witnesses in the confarreatio
ceremony. In Greek law the formal requirements of
archaic contracts made way for two modern institutions—
registration, which was currently employed, for instance, in
the matter of constitution of dower, and the calling in of
witnesses, which was, however, not required as a necessary
element of the convention, though it was considered the
best means for proving facts.

Another set of comparisons that is suggested by the
study of Greek contracts bears on the question whether
certain conventions might be void or voidable on account
of a substantial flaw. It need hardly be said that there
are no indications of the doctrine of consideration, dear to
the hearts of Common lawyers. French lawyers with their
staunch adherence to the necessity of an adequate cause to
justify a convention also look with disappointment on the
attitude of Greek courts of the classical period in this
respect. There was no definite limit to the capacity of
an Athenian to enter into any kind of convention that he
desired, provided it was not made in defiance of the laws
of the City.2, Sometimes agreements were made for im-
moral purposes, for example, for entering into or continuing


1 GERNET, loc. cit.
2? BEAUCHET, Droit privé, IV, p. 42.


Require-
ments of
substance.


238 JURISPRUDENCE OF THE GREEK CITY


immoral intercourse, but these were obviously supported
rather by bad customs than by judicial authority: at any
rate there is no evidence as to actions brought before the
courts in connexion with them. On the other hand,
Athenian litigants did not scruple to press home agreements
intended to achieve some result which could not be described
as straightforward or even honest. The dispute between
Kallistratos and Olympiodoros presents a case in point.
A convention had been made between them for the acquisi-
tion of an inheritance that could only be obtained by one
of the parties concerned if the claim of the other party was
wrong. Nothing prevented Kallistratos from trying to
get the agreed advantage from the suppressio vert and
suggestio falst which had been arranged between the
partners.! This, however, is rather a reflection on the
state of current Greek morality than a characteristic of
the legal system.

On the whole, it may be said without fear of contradiction,
that conventions in Greece in the classical period were
formed by simple consent, dca tis dv Exwy Erepos ETEp@
Oporoynon, Tadra KUpia elvat.2 In keeping with this
absence of formal requirements stands the absence of
definite terms or rather the occurrence of several terms
designating conventions. JuvOynxn, cvvddrAX\aypa, dporoyla ®
are used more or less indiscriminately. Svyypagdy has a
somewhat more special connotation because it applies as
well as yeipoypagpov to written instruments. The writing
is not, however, of the essence of the convention in the
classical period in the same sense as the verba of the stipu-
latio are of the essence of the Roman verbal contract. An
important modification of this statement will have to be
noticed in course of time. At present we are considering
the principles of the classical period, and it is clear that
writing was not an obligatory condition for the validity of
any kind of convention at that time, although it was com-
monly used by business-like persons in order to secure


’ Dem. XLVIII, passim. Cf. DARESTE, Plaidoyers civils de Démo-
sthéne, Il, p. 2.

? Dem. LVI, §2; XLVIII,§ 54. Hypezr. VI, §§ 7, 8.

§ BEAUCHET, op. cit., IV, 15, 53 ff.


XI: CONVENTIONS AND TRANSACTIONS 239


convenient proofs of the transaction. In Plato’s Krito
stress is laid on the purely consensual essence of conven-
tions,' while in the pseudo-Demosthenic speech against
Timotheos * a convention is mentioned which had not been
secured either by a written instrument or by witnesses.
Yet it is not treated as invalid for that reason, but as
incapable of being ascertained in its details. It was there-
fore possible for an Athenian pleader to build up an argu-
ment on circumstantial evidence that made a convention
probable, although no instrument or deposition could be
produced in Court.’

All this is true, and it would be wrong to judge of Greek Equity in
contractual law from the point of view of the rigid rubrica- (77).
tion of forms and requirements of contract with which we
are familiar in Roman and in modern law. The Greeks
treated conventions as they treated delictual obligations in
the light of utility (ra cupdépovra) and of equity (76
emetkés). The centre of interest lay for them in the in-
tentions of the parties, but this did not exclude the advisa-
bility of taking precautions for the proper and effective
carrying out of these intentions. Registration, witnesses,
and instruments were not strictly obligatory : even in their
absence a party to a convention could claim an equitable
remedy, and was allowed to argue for its recognition,
but the usual method of claim was legal, and based on
some tangible kind of proof—registration, witness, instru-
ment.‘

The necessities of business intercourse led gradually to The


a use of instruments (cvyypadgai) that amounted to the eee


1 PLATO, Krito, dle és & dv vpov Tapapeiyy . . 70 papev ToUToV
apohoyneevas 2 Epyo pw a ay npeis kedevoper roujoew Tavita, Kal TOY Ba
mrevOopevov TPLXH Paper ddixeiy, +++ Kal Ort dpodoynaas npiv meiver Oar ovre
meiOerat ote Treiber Nuas, et 41) Kahas TL Trovoupey.

[Dem. 2 XLIX, § 2 AaBov dpyuptoy - + 4 OU pdvoy odK amréOwke Ea
ddha kat TO Sobev a ) amroore pet He. kairot oparevros pev TOUTOUV GT@AAUTO .

TO ovpBdraLov" ovTE yap em’ evexUp@ ore pera paptiper dake (6 marhp)..

$ BEAUCHET, IV, 23.

* DEM. XXXIIL, § 36 mavres avOpero, Stay _™pos add7Aous Tow@vrat
ovyypapas, TOUTOU éveka onunvapevot riBevrat map ois ay mioTevowou, wv,
edy Tt dyTihéywou, 7 avrois ermravehOovoww emt Ta ypappata, éevredvOey Tov
ead moncacba rept Tod audicByntoupevov. Cf. BEAUCHET, op. cit.,

elon


240 JURISPRUDENCE OF THE GREEK CITY


recognition of a species of formal convention, the contract
litteris, as conclusive in itself and not merely accessory as a
proof of the existence of a consensual agreement, This pro-
cess appears most distinctly in documents of the Hellenistic
and of the Roman epoch, but there can be no doubt that the
later evidence only summarizes a development which pro-
ceeded from the practice of the classical age. As this sub-
ject has been discussed controversially since the publication
of a famous monograph by Gneist,’ it might not be amiss
to point to certain determining considerations in the treat-
ment of the question. The problem arises from the fact
that a certain kind of Greek contracts, namely the bilateral
ovyypapai, are mentioned by Roman writers as consti-
tuting an obligation in themselves, apart from and even in
contradiction to the actual transactions which underlay
them. ‘Two passages are usually quoted in this connexion.
Gaius? tells us that foreigners in the provinces—evidently
Greeks or Hellenized Orientals—were using instruments of
their own (cvyypagai) to conclude obligatory conventions
instead of the usual Roman contracts. <A scholiast of the
fifth century, pseudo-Asconius, has an even more explicit
statement on the subject.? He makes a distinction between
chirographa, written documents, and cvyypad¢ai, inasmuch
as the first merely report what has actually taken place,
while in the latter a convention arises even if the statement
does not correspond truly with what has happened. In the
syngrapha sums of money are commonly mentioned which
have not been paid or have only been paid in part as the
persons concerned expressed their wish at that time. This
is in accordance with the customs and rules of the Greeks.


1 GNEIST, Die formellen Vertriige des neueren rimischen Obligationen-
rechts in Vergleichuny mit den Geschichtsformen des griechischen Rechts.

? Gaius, III, § 134 Praeterea litterarum obligatio fieri uidetur
chirographis et syngraphis, id est si quis debere se aut daturum se
scribat; ita scilicet si eo nomine stipulatio non fiat. quod genus
obligationis proprium peregrinorum est.

8’ PsEUDO-ASCONIUS in Verr, II, 1, 36 Inter syngraphas et cetera
chirographa hoc interest, quod in ceteris tantum quae gesta sunt
scribi solent, in syngraphis etiam contra fidem veritatis pactio venit
‘et non numerata quidem pecunia aut non integre numerata pro
temporaria voluntate hominum scribi solent more institutoque
Graecorum ; et ceterae tabulae ab una parte servari solent, syngraphae
signatae utriusque manu utrique parti servandae traduntur.


XI; CONVENTIONS AND TRANSACTIONS 241


Besides, other instruments are kept by one of the parties
only, while the cvyypagai are executed by both parties,
and copies are in the keeping of both.

Gneist does not acknowledge that these references to
binding contractual forms of Greek origin testified to the
existence of a specific literal contract used in the Eastern
provinces of the Empire concurrently with the usual Roman
forms. Lately Professor Brandileone has come forward
with a renewed defence of Gneist’s conclusions, arguing
that the Greeks never recognized anything but conventions
by consent, and that,in so far as there can be any talk of
alteration of the law of contracts in the Imperial period, it
amounted to the gradual spread of a modified form of the
Roman verbal contract—the stepulatio, which was largely
adopted by foreigners, especially after the publication of
Caracalla’s constitution of A. D. 212 by which Roman citizen-
ship was granted to the provincial subjects of the Empire.'
He contests the value of the passages of Gaius and pseudo-
Asconius for the solution of the problem. Gaius is supposed
to be stating certain reflections on Greek practices from
the point of view of the Roman classification, while the
evidence of the scholiast is brushed aside as a confused
statement of a late writer, incapable of grasping nice dis-
tinctions or of giving an exact account of them. As far
as Brandileone allows he finds it a positive significance
to this notice in the reference to a “temporary” inten-
tion of the parties which does not modify the fundamental
grounds of contracts concluded either re or verbis. Such
special pleading can hardly remove the impression conveyed
by Gaius and the scholiast that a species of literal contract
had found a home in the Eastern provinces, and had struck
firm roots there in spite of the extensive diffusion of Roman
citizenship and Roman rules in the beginning of the third
century B.C.

The epoch-making investigations of Mitteis bearing on The doc-
the vitality of Hellenistic vulgar law in the East have led brea
to a revision of Gneist’s doctrine. In a chapter of his


1 BRANDILEONE, Sulla supposita obligatio litterarum nell’ antico
diritto greco. Bologna. 1920.


2231-2 R


242 JURISPRUDENCE OF THE GREEK CITY


Reichsrecht und Volksrecht Mitteis called attention not only
to the weighty import of the passages just quoted, but to
the rich harvest of contractual instruments in the inscrip- -
tions of Greece and Asia Minor, as well as in the papyri of
Egypt.! He saw in them examples of a mode of concluding:
conventions that had taken shape in the East, under the
influence of the common use of writing, for the sake of
securing adequate proof of agreements of all kinds.
Gradually the literal form of the contract had hardened,
as it were, and had become a constitutive factor of the
agreement. In consequence various obligations were apt
to assume the outward form of a contract (cvyypagy) of
debt, and to obtain execution on the strength of formal
though fictitious instruments independently of the actual
transactions which had taken place under their cover.
Mitteis pointed to a signal instance in the inscription
reciting the dealings of the woman banker, Nikarete of
Thespiae, with the city of Orchomenos in Boiotia.? She
had lent money to the city on several occasions, but the
city was unable to pay on the expiration of the term. A
respite was granted in the guise of a fictitious loan to the
three polemarchs, the treasurer, and ten persons selected by
Nikarete from among the citizens, with powers for the
creditor to proceed to execution against these persons, and
with the proviso that the new ovyypa¢y could be made
payable to bearer. When the time came for the substitutes
to make the agreed payment, it was delayed again for a
short time and a convention (éuoAoyfa) was made with the
city itself that the sum due should be paid in the course
of two months. In this convention the story of the previous
transactions was briefly recited as a preamble to the promise
of payment. This time the city acquitted its debts, and
ordered the various instruments bearing on them to be
engraved on a stone slab. It is evident, as Mitteis points
out, that the loan contract (cvyypagy) concluded with the
fourteen select citizens of Orchomenos was a fictitious
instrument representing an entirely different transaction


1 Reichsrecht, p. 479 ff.
* LJ. G.I, xiv, pp. 276 ff. Cf. pp. 333 ff.


XI: CONVENTIONS AND TRANSACTIONS 243


from those which had actually taken place. It asserted
“contra fidem veritatis” that 18,833 drachmae had been
paid by the lady at Thespiae to the fourteen persons in
question, while in reality these 18,833 drachmae represented
the sum total of a number of loans made to the city. Thus
the formal device of a loan was used to cover a contract of
suretyship, and the meaning of the transaction was obviously
to make it possible for the creditor to recover his money
by execution against representative citizens instead of
proceeding to a cumbersome and uncertain execution against
the city at large. The practice of directing an execution
against private citizens for the satisfaction of a debt in-
curred by a city was by no means unusual in Greece, and
is illustrated on a large scale by contracts as to loans con-
cluded by the city of Arkesine in the island of Amorgos.
While insisting on the formal character of the title obtained
by the creditor in the cvyypady under discussion, Mitteis
did not assert that in all cases when a cuvyypady or cautio
was presented the existence of the writing made it impos-
sible to plead for the nullity of the contract on the ground
of fraudulent misrepresentation. The practice of Imperial
rescripts mentioned in Justinian’s Codex shows that the
Roman authorities did not renounce the right of verifying
the good faith of parties to a transaction.' But the exercise
of such an eminent control does not alter the fact that for
ordinary purposes the statement of a duly executed ovy-
ypady was taken as conclusive without reference to the
contents of the actual transaction. It is difficult to meet
the evidence adduced by Mitteis from the point of view of
Gneist’s theory. The most recent follower of this theory,
Professor Brandileone, is constrained to urge that the
Nikarete transactions are based on a real contract in so far
as the money had been actually paid by the banker, and
that a reference to this causa of the obligation is to be
found in the last convention (6uoAoyfa) which preceded the
payment of the debt by the city. But this cannot explain
away the cvyypagd7 conditioning the original respite and
composed in the style of an independent and fictitious loan


1 RICCOBONO in the Z. SS. Rom. Abth. XXXV, 214 ff.
RY


244 JURISPRUDENCE OF THE GREEK CITY


to the fourteen Orchomenians. The desperate expedient
of treating the two documents as one connected whole, and
looking for the material cause of both in the later one of
the two, will hardly satisfy unprejudiced readers. One
may well ask what causa there was in the earlier cvyypagy
apart from the fiction of a loan received by the fourteen
sureties.

To sum up this rather lengthy disquisition: we have to
admit, I think, that although Greek law laid chief stress
on the concurrence of the wills of parties to a convention,
the constant recourse to written instruments for the sake
of proof led gradually to the development of literal con-
tracts in which the form of the instrument came to be
considered as establishing a contractual obligation, and it
was not easy, though not impossible, to rebut the presump-
tion by direct proof of fraudulent misrepresentation. This
process had gone so far in the course of the Roman period
that the codification of Justinian and the mediaeval gloss
derived from it assumed the literal contract to be one of
the recognized species of contractual obligation, and the
pseudo-Asconius gloss is interesting in so far as it traces
that class of conventions definitely to Greek sources. But
the notice in Gaius III, 128-34, shows that the instruments
of the Greeks were already regarded as specimens of literal
obligation in the beginning of the second century. Egyptian
papyri and the Orchomenos inscription help to trace the
connexion with earlier Greek practice. It is not far from a
ovyypahy of 230 B. c. to the cvvOAKa1 of which Demosthenes
speaks in the speech against Apaturios or Hypereides in the
speech against Athenogenes.! Even though a wide latitude
must be assumed as regards pleadings based on the equity


1 Dem. XXXIIT, § 15 kai ouveberto € év Tais ovOnKats, | el per Tpeis ovTes
Opoyrapioves yevoineda, TavTa kupta etvat avrois, el dé BN ois oi dvo yoingay,
rourous emdvaykes eivat éupéeverv, ouvbéeror d€ ravra, €yyuntas TovTev
uAANAols KaTéoTNEGAY. Cf. § 19.

HYPER. III (VY), §8 as yap elmdvros avrov Taita €yo Tpor@pohdynoa,
evdvs €K TOV yovarav AaBov TOV avrov ypapparetoy To eyyeypappevov
dveyiyvorkey. joav dé abrat owOiKat mpos ene dv ey dvayryvorkopevear
uv nkKovor, éomevdoy pévror ep’ é ijKov TOUTO Storxjoac bat, kat onpatyerat
Tas ovvOnkas evOvs ev TH adTyn oixia iva | wndeis Tov ed dpovovvrwy dxovoa Ta


eyyeypappeva, mpooeyypawas per €uod Nikwva rov Knguotéa.


XI: CONVENTIONS AND TRANSACTIONS 245


of mutual consent, the influence of the prevailing practice
as to proof did gradually pave the way for the recognition
of the force of properly drawn-up instruments.


2. The Enforcement of Obligations.


The most characteristic contract of early law is debt, and Personal
the means of execution against a party who does not fulfil aba
his obligations are chiefly manifested in the case of non-
payment of loans. The simplest way of coercing an in-
solvent debtor was to seize him personally and to hold him
captive so long as the loan had not been repaid. There is
plenty of evidence to show that the Roman nexvwin had its
parallels in Greek law. In the archaic period it was pre-
valent everywhere, as we can judge, for example, from the
account of the state of Attika before Solon, when the
greater part of the population was burdened with debts
and many were imprisoned or even sold into slavery over
the border. One of the chief measures of Solon’s reform
put an end to this disastrous condition by prohibiting the
seizing of debtors in their persons,’ and we are told that in
this matter the Athenian legislation followed a precedent
set by Bokchoris in Egypt?: it was held that although
property belonged to private individuals and could there-
fore by right be attached for their debts, the persons of
the debtors belonged to the city, which ought not to lose
its subjects on account of their private liabilities. How-
ever, even after Solon, personal imprisonment of debtors
took place in Athens on some occasions in the case of
debtors who could not fulfil their obligations to the State °
and in execution of commercial debts.’ The latter case is
noteworthy because it must have occurred very often: the
remedy was evidently suggested by the necessities of lively
commercial intercourse regulated by summary decisions in
‘monthly trials’ (Eupnvor décat).

In the rest of Greece the arrest and imprisonment of


1 PLUTARCH, Solon, c.13. AR. Ath. Const. c. 6.
2 DiopoRws SIcuLvws, I, 79, 4; 94, 5.

’ HERMANN-THUMSER, Griech, Alterth, I, 568.

* Dem. XXXIII, $1.


Distress.


246 JURISPRUDENCE OF THE GREEK CITY


insolvent debtors was universally practised and obviously
much favoured by creditors as a likely means of obtaining
payment either from the debtor himself or from his relatives
and friends. We find it specifically mentioned in Hali-
karnassos,) in the Orchomenos contracts in regard to
sureties,? and in the contracts of Arkesine, as one of the
ordinary forms of execution.®

By the side of personal arrest corresponding to the
manus injectio of Roman law stood the seizure of goods
belonging to the insolvent debtor or to the party that had
broken some convention—for example, had failed to pay rent
within an agreed term. The seizure might be only directed
towards securing a gage like the pignoris capio, or it might
be an actual execution (mpa€is) intended to give satisfac-
tion to the full to the creditor or claimant. Originally it
was not possible to draw careful distinctions between these
two varieties, Distress took the form of forceful self-help
(cvAav) and was used in the enforcement of compensation
for delicts as well as in the execution of conventions.* It
was based on a claim of right, the enforcement of which
had to be justified if necessary before the Courts of the
city. Distress preceded the judicial trial as a rule, and the
proper means of defending oneself against unjust distress
was to oppose it by force, always with the proviso of
subsequent justification. An illustration of this kind of
authorized private action may be found as late as in the
Makedonian period (second century) in the documents
relating to the establishment of the franchise sacred to
Dionysos in Teos.° The Arkadians join in the declarations
of immunity from distress of the territory in question and
concede the right to the Teians to seize the persons and the
goods of any Arkadians who should commit injustice within
the precincts of the franchise. The right to oppose unjust
incursions takes the shape of a counter-distress as to the


+ uJ. G. 1,1, pp: 2m.

2 Ibid., xiv, pp. 376 ff. ° Tbid., xv, pp. 313 ff.

* See above, Chane VIII and IX.

° MICHEL, 58, p. 68, ll. 31 ff. 1. 35 al rues trav Sppopévwr ’Apkadov
aduxnowvri twa Thiwy f Kowa f dia wap rd ypapev Sdypua tepi ras dovAias
tm ras méduos ras “Apkddev, éLéoTw rat mapayevopévat Thiwy émdAaBéeoba
kal TOY TwudTwY Kal Xpnparer, ai Tis Ka Gynt.


XI: CONVENTIONS AND TRANSACTIONS 247


persons and the property of the offenders. It is obvious
that the people using such reflected distress did not wait
until they had obtained a condemnation, but acted on their
private responsibility in the hope of justifying their con-
duct eventually before a tribunal if it was impugned by
any one.

The tendency to avoid judicial trials is manifested in an
orderly form in a number of conventions which mention
specifically that the non-fulfilment of conditions agreed upon
by one party will give the other party the right to proceed
to execution without having recourse to the formalities of
judicial procedure. A clause in point is quoted by Demos-
thenes in his speech against Lakritos.’| It occurs twice in
the Arkesine contracts—once in the form of a reference to
the treaty between Naxos and Arkesine, and the second
time in the shape of an express statement that if the
debtors are remiss in paying off the capital, the city and
all its inhabitants should be subjected to execution kaOdzep
diknv aprAnkbtov Ee€ovAns ev THL EKKANT@L Kal dvT@Y bTrEpPN-
Hépwv a¢npiot dvtt méons ¢nputas.*” The reference to the
dikn efovAns shows that the creditors had the right to
proceed without further delay to execution, but that the
judgement which might have been an equivalent to their
direct action would have been a judgement in disseisin,
implying a penal element. It seems that this highly
threatening wording of the contract was intended to
emphasize in every way the stringent character of the
obligations to which the debtors had to submit. It pre-
sents in this regard a marked contrast with the lenient
treatment of Orchomenos by Nikarete. But these are
distinctions of fact; as for the law it amounted sub-
stantially to the right of the creditor to take immediate


: [Dem. ] XXXV, $12 day 8€ py dmodaow ev ro TVyKELMEVD xpove, Ta
brrokeipeva Tois Sareloace ebéoTo imobeivat kai dmodéaba Tis Umapxovons
TUS” kal €dp Tt edreiny TOU dpyvpiou, ov det yever Oar trois Saveicact Kata
THY ovyypapny, mapa "Aprépovos Kat "Amohdodwpou & €oTw 7 mpakis Tots Savei-
gact Kal €k T@y TOUTwY dmdayTeY, Kal eyyeiov kul vavTiKOy, TavTay ov Srov ay
don, kadarep Sixny OpAnkstov kai Umepnpepwv dvrav, Kai Evi éxaTépm
trav Saveirdvtwy kal duorepots.

* I.J.G. I, xv, p. 318, § 6. Cf. the commentary of the editors,

pp. 333 ff.


Sureties.


248 JURISPRUDENCE OF THE GREEK CITY


action (€uBdrevors) without attending to any cumbersome
technicalities of judicial procedure. The care taken in
certain cases to give notice that execution will follow
without any reference to the decision of a Court implies
that usually the procedure was not so simple and the
aggrieved party had to apply for redress to a tribunal.
The result would be eventually reached by a roundabout
way, but would be the same in substance as one by mpa@éus
directed against the property of the defaulter ex causa
judicati.. In general it may be taken for granted that
goods were seized or plots of land and houses occupied by
the creditors themselves, without intervention of officers
of the City,? although by way of exception, magistrates
might have ‘to lend their assistance for the execution of
the judgement; in Athens the demarchs acted in this
capacity.® |

Greek law was exceedingly prolific in the matter of
securing the fulfilment of obligations by providing guaran-
tees from third persons. Looking back for a moment at
Demodokos’ story in the Odyssey,* let us notice that the
intervention of Poseidon has a decisive influence in per-
suading Hephaistos to conclude a convention as to the
payment of the fine (uotyéypia) incurred by Ares, and that
the convention is concluded directly between the offended
party and the intervener, while not a word is pronounced
by the culprit. This is characteristic of the attitude of a
surety in ancient law. Poseidon’s obligation is not an
accessory to that of a principal, but a substitute for the
latter. Although there is nothing to indicate that Poseidon
assumes the part of a hostage,® his responsibility in regard
to the payment of the fine is placed in the foreground,
a vinculwm binds him to Hephaistos, while it remains for
him to seek satisfaction from Ares, whose release he has
procured. This tallies well with the position of a chieftain
or an influential relative of the offender. In later law, we


1 BEAUCHET, IV, 446 f.
2 Dem. XLVII, 35.


* HAUSSOULLIER, La vie municipale & Athénes, pp. 104 ff.
* Above, p. 234.


® This is the view held by Partsch, op. cit., pp. 23f.


XI: CONVENTIONS AND TRANSACTIONS 249


come across a conception of suretyship derived from these
archaic antecedents. Sureties appear in all kinds of con-
ventions—as to voluntary agreements as well as in delictual
obligations. In the speech of Demosthenes against Pan-
tainetos,! for instance, an arrangement to abide by the
deposition of a slave is guaranteed by sureties on both
sides. In the speech against Apaturios a similar conven-
tion is made between two adversaries to abide by the
decision of a board of arbitration. Every lease, every
loan, is corroborated by sureties. In the case of criminal
responsibility, sureties were personally lable for the
appearance of the accused and for the fulfilment of the
sentence, so that in case of his absconding they might be
subjected to the punishment incurred by him. When
Agoratos took to flight his sureties also escaped,” and Ando-
kides even talks of unfortunate men put to death in the
course of the Hermakopidae affair, because the persons for
whom they had stood surety had fled. This extreme
instance may, however, be explained by the state of
panic which prevailed in Athens at that time. In any
case the fact that sureties were made hable to the full
extent of the principal obligation and were proceeded
against without delay or excuse is characteristic of the
social tendency of the institution—the lack of confidence
in the credit and good faith of single individuals and the
spreading of the circle of responsibilities to the friends or
relatives of the principals.

A curious modification arose when a convention was made
secure by the setting aside of a certain sum in the keeping
of a reliable third person in order that it should be paid to


1 Dem. XXXVII, § 40a dvaylyvag ket LoL mpdxhnow paxpay, agiay 6 év prow
olkerny Tavta ovverdévar, Bacavites Oa, Kay pev 9 Tait’ adnOn, kul Sixny
dripntov opheiy att@, éav de wevdn, tov Bacanorny Mynoixhea emtyywpov’
elvat THS TINS TOU rebes: haBov & eyyunras TOUT@Y Tap’ €pov KTA,

? Lysias, XIII, §§ 24 ff. 6 de ‘Aydparos kat ol éyyuntal kabiCovow € eT
Tov Bopoy Movtxiaow" emetdy Oe exdbioar, €BovAevoytro Ti xXpn TroLEiy’
eddKxeu ovy Tots eyyuntais kat Tois aos dnacw éxnodov tronoacba tov
“Ayoparov os TAXLOTA, « .. Kat avdrol épacay ouverndevocio Bat,

5 ANDOK. I, § 44 dxovoayres d€ tatra Mavrideos kal Awediov ent ripy
€otiav exabeCovro, i ixerevovTes p21) orpeBhoOqvat GAN’ eLeyyundevres KpeOjvat.
podes de TOUT@Y Tuxovres, emetdn Tos eyyuntas kaTéoTn our, emt Tovs immovs
dvuBartes @xovTo - «+ Katahurdvtes Tous eyyuntas, ovs det (€v) rois avtois
€véxer Oat ev olomep ovs nyyvncarto.


Gage and
mortgage.


250 JURISPRUDENCE OF THE GREEK CITY


the promisee in case the convention was not carried out or
some condition remained unfulfilled. This is the so-called
peceyyvn practised chiefly in cases when a recourse to
justice would have been impossible or beset with difficulties.
Lysias tells, for instance, that Ergokles deposited three
talents with a “ middleman ” (wecéyyvos) on condition that
they should be paid to certain pleaders in the case of
his acquittal.’

Another way of ensuring the fulfilment of obligations is
the pledging of goods or landed estate as a security. The
gage (€véyupov) in Greek law was used approximately in the
same way as the pignus in Rome. It was pledged usually
as a material equivalent of a debt. The delivery of sym-
bolic objects, chararacteristic of the German wed, did not
develop in a corresponding manner in Greece. The juridical
consequences of the taking of a gage are derived by necessity
from the transfer of the object from the debtor to the
creditor: its possession passes to the latter, while property
remains with the debtor so long as he has not transgressed
the term set for repayment.?

A much more interesting situation arises when the
material security consists in the delivery of a landed
estate, or when chattels are pledged on the same conditions
as are usually operative in the case of landed estates.
Greek law developed in this direction two interesting
institutions—the mp@ots émi Avoes and the dro0bAKn. These
forms differ from the ordinary gage (évéyvpov) in two
respects: in the case of the sale conditioned by possible
repayment the property of the plot or of the goods passed
to the creditor and the loan assumed the aspect of a sale
in which the risks attending the transaction were borne by
the creditor, who on the other hand obtained provisional
possession and exercised the rights of an owner. This
meant, for instance, that if a ship was sold in this manner,
as happened in the case treated by Demosthenes in his
speech against Apaturios,®? and this ship suffered shipwreck


_ while held bythe creditor,the debtor would be absolved from


1 Lysras, XXIX, § 6.
? BEAUCHET, IV, p. 177.
8 [DEem.] XXXIII.


XI: CONVENTIONS AND TRANSACTIONS 251


the payment of the debt. Nothing indicates, however, that
he might claim compensation for the loss of surplus value,
unless a special clause of the convention guaranteed such
compensation.! The estate sold in this way could be sold
further by the purchaser, who exercised in this case his
right of free disposal, and the debtor could not prevent the
sale, which did not, however, affect the condition of possible
resumption within the agreed term.’

The dro84Kn is based, on the contrary, on the retention
of ownership and possession by the debtor, so that the right
of the mortgagee comes into operation only when the mort-
gagor has infringed the stipulations of the loan, e. g. when
he has failed to make the payment within the agreed term
(7epnpuepia). Very commonly the tzobjxn was employed
in order to secure to the wife the restitution of dowry in
case of divorce,* and sometimes, on the contrary, the payment
to the husband of the dos profecticia, the dower settled on
a bride by her parents. Another common case arose from
the obligation imposed on the guardians of orphans to
secure the property rights of their wards by a correspond-
ing mortgage.* In these eventualities the economic back-
ground of the transaction is sufficiently apparent. It was
not in the interest of the obligees to liquidate abruptly the
obligation, which would on many occasions remain as it
were in suspense while the parties concerned lived and
worked in good harmony. At the same time the imposi-
tion of the mortgage served as a guarantee in case of a
disruption or disturbance of harmonious co-operation. In
the same way hypothecary lability arose naturally in the
case of leaseholders and lodgers, who were not deprived of
the use of their chattels by the City or by landlords, but had
generally to submit to the liability of the effects introduced
by them into the farm or the lodging for the punctual
carrying out of the conditions as to rent, terms, improve-
ments, &c. Altogether the tmo4xn arose, as its name
indicates, from the imposition of certain burdens on a con-
stituted economic organization.


1 Lipsius, pp. 703 ff. * Ibid., pp. 692 ff.
° I,J. G., 1, vi, Register of Mykonos, pp. 49 ff.
* LIpsius, 520 ff.


Origins of
bro0OnKy.


252 JURISPRUDENCE OF THE GREEK CITY


This being so, if seems to me that the much debated
question as to the origins of the law of mortgage’ and the
relative priority of the d7o6y4xn or the mpaors emi Adve has
to be decided in favour of the former. It is impossible, of
course, to maintain dogmatically that both methods could
not have been used at the same time independently of each
other. But the hypothecary mortgage agrees better with
the historical evidence bearing on indebtedness in the early
period. The most detailed account we possess in this
respect is derived from the story of Attika before Solon
and of the reforms which put an end to the “enslavement
of the Attic land”. It is stated specifically that the
holdings of the peasantry were crushed by the weight of
the stone slabs bearing record of the debts, and it is difficult
not to recognize in these épo the hypothecary muniments
familiar to epigraphists.? The cewdy@era cannot have
consisted in the redemption (Avavs) of estates sold to satisfy
creditors, because one of the main reasons of the crisis con-
sisted in the fact that holdings could not be alienated by
sale. This legal obstacle was removed by Solon’s legislation,
and land was henceforth mobilized, but the plots crushed
by the dpo: had never been sold, and could therefore not be
redeemed.* We are driven to infer that the debts imposed
on them had accumulated in the form of increasing rents
and arrears, and that the liberation consisted both in the
annulment of part of these rents, and in the possibility of
treating land for purposes of securing loans in a manner
similar to chattels, as an ordinary évéyvpoy, or by the
expedient of a sale on condition of redemption (rpdaous émi
Avoe = mancipatio fiduciae causa).?

' Hirzie, Griechisches Pfandrecht; SzaAnto, Wiener Studien, IX;


BEAUCHET, op. cit., III, 187; Lipsrus, pp. 696 ff.

2 Soon, Poetae lyrici Graeci (Bergk), II, Fr. 36. PLUTARCH, Solon,
ce, 15.

3 Cf. I.J.G. I, viii, pp. 107 ff.

* What is one to make of the anecdote related by Aristotle, Ath.
Const. c. 6, about the radaidrAovrot—Solon’s friends who invested money
in loans because they knew about the coming reform in land-law ?
Such stories do not inspire much confidence asarule. As the term


\ madatémAovrot is well established, however, it may have been used to


designate a group of families which derived their wealth from the
acquisition of estates burdened with hypothecary obligations.

5 So far I agree with BEAUCHET (III, p. 185), who, however, denies
the existence of all kinds of hypothecary securities before Solon.


XI: CONVENTIONS AND TRANSACTIONS 258


Certain considerations appear to militate against such an
interpretation. Hypothecary arrangements of the kind
just mentioned would be devoid of the principal and final
guarantee stipulated on behalf of the creditor—namely his
right to foreclose: as the holding engaged was inalienable
it could not be passed on to the lender in the event
of the insolvency of the debtor. The argument against
alienation by sale seems to tell equally against alienation
by foreclosure. The inference is unavoidable as regards
mortgage in its well-known later form. But the correspond-
ing consequence was only drawn exceptionally in ancient
law, as we can gather from a notice of Aristotle,! who
ascribed a special prohibition of the kind to Oxylos, the
legendary companion of the Heracleidae. But the argument
would not apply against the admission of an earlier tran-
sitional use of the hypotheca in the sense of a real burden
engrafted on the holding. The existence of some arrange-
ment of that kind seems required by the juridical and
economic conditions attributed to the epoch before Solon
and to his reformatory action. There can hardly be a doubt
that the land was distributed in inalienable family holdings
(kAjpo). If so, the Aristotelian saying 4) 6 yA maca dv
6A‘yev jv meant simply that the soil was in the control of
afew. It can be reconciled with the existence of inalien-
able family holdings by the assumption of a semi-servile
condition into which a large part of the owners of kAfpou
had lapsed in consequence of indebtedness. And here the
notion of a dependence based on a kind of predial servi-
tude, inherent to the soil, involving heavy rent, and secured
by inscriptions on épo., appears as the only compromise
fitting the situation and corresponding in its various parts
with well attested facts. The regulations of Solon as to a
timocratic distribution into four classes are in no way
opposed to the view advocated in the above paragraphs.
Solon never attempted to start from a clean slate. He had
to reckon with a society in which social inequalities had
come to play a great part, although the differences could
not be estimated properly by the size of estates. He
graduated the classes according to standards of income


1 Pol. VILL (VI), 1319 a, 12.


254 JURISPRUDENCE OF THE GREEK CITY


which, at the outside, were calculated on a very modest
scale. How many of the revraxootoipédipvor were really
large landowners, and how many only ranked on an equal
footing with them we cannot say, nor is it possible to make
out how far the division into classes was prepared in the
previous social order by an unequal distribution of shares
among the modvKAnpoe and ordinary ¢evyiza:. The sixth
chapter of Aristotle's Athenian Constitution inspires confi-
dence in no one. I should like to suggest that the divergent
development of fiducia and pignus in Roman law may
have been connected with the early expansion of Rome on
Italian soil. The social struggle between patricians and
plebeians reflected originally in the institution of newum
did not lead to the imposition of hypothecary épo., but was
turned off into the channel of conflicts as to the occupation
of ager publicus.

Modern writers familiar with the definite and complex
institutions of lease and mortgage have failed to describe
with sufficient precision the rudimentary and transitional
species of security found in Greece, but they have supplied
us with all the component elements of the combination.’

A second difficulty concerns the diffusion of the hypothe-
cary mortgage through Greece. It was of course by no
means restricted to Attika. We get glimpses of it at
Delphi, in Naxos, in Lemnos, in Halikarnassos, in Delos,
in Kos, in Thera, in Cumae, etc.? How is it to be explained —
that an institution of general application should have had
a development so closely conditioned by events of Athenian
history? The answer to this should be, I think, that apart
from the immense influence of Athens in shaping later
Greek law—an influence that would go far to account
for many late developments—there was a similarity of
circumstances and social requirements in the Greek world
at large which suggested similar juridical devices. Solon’s


1 SZANTO, Wiener Studien, IX, came near the solution indicated in
the text: he regarded the troOjxn and the mpacis emi Avoe as inde-
>, pendent of each other, and derived the first from the earlier form of
personal liability. In my opinion the liability became predial
before Solon.

thd Gd; Vil; pp, 107 ft.


XI: CONVENTIONS AND TRANSACTIONS 255


reform of land law, for example, appears to have been pre-
ceded by the similar legislation of Charondas in Magna
Graecia.! The struggle of the Demos against landed aristo-
cracy was, of course, by no means peculiar to Athens, and
presented obvious points of analogy in all cities where the
geomoroz tried to defend the position against the oncoming
tide of the Demos.

The problems of agrarian indebtedness and of the securi-
ties obtained by landed capitalists were certainly to the
fore in most States that had a considerable rural population.
The solutions of these problems, without being identical,
must have moved very much on similar lines, and the pro-
vision of securities based on real estate without dis-
possessing the peasant population was obviously one of the
most convenient expedients. The generalization of legal
rules as to hypothecary mortgage must have taken place at
a later period.? As in the case of transfer of landed pro-
perty, the establishment of mortgages and fiduciary sales
(rpaous eri Avocet) Of all kinds was commonly safeguarded
against abuses and infringements by public proclamations
and registration.°

It lies outside the scope of this survey to consider the
much-debated subject of the influence of the Greek law of
mortgage on Roman law.* The only remark which I should
like to make in this connexion refers to the evidence sup-
plied by the use of the term hypotheca for the continuity
of Greek customs under Roman rule. The statements of
Gaius and of Marcian prove, if nothing else, that the prac-
tice of securing interests by obligations imposed on estates
rather than on persons using them had its popular roots in
the economy of the Hellenized Kast.


3. Lease and Sale.


It would be out of the question to discuss the details of
the Greek law of contract, as embodied in the various
species of conventions. ‘The rules inserted in the speeches


t An, Pol. 11; 1274.4.

? Beauchet’s theory requires a similar surmise.

° K.g. the Register of dowers at Mykonos, I. J. G. I. vi.
* R-Enc. X, 343 ff.


Ordinary
leases.


256 JURISPRUDENCE OF THE GREEK CITY


of orators and commented on by them are to a great extent
technical and suggested by various political and economic
conditions rather than by considerations of juridical doc-
trine. They are discussed with much learning in the
leading works on Greek law, such as those of Caillemer,
Beauchet, Meier and Schémann, Lipsius, Hitzig, &., but it
would be impossible to fit these details into a scheme of
jurisprudence. I do not attempt, therefore, to pass in
review all the known classes of conventions—debt, deposit,
mandate, partnership, contract of service (locatio operarum),
and I may perhaps plead in extenuation of this omission
that the Greeks themselves did not differentiate much be-
tween the various conventions in their organization of
procedure. The main action was common to all: it was
the dékn cvvOnkev mrapaBdéoews. But it will help us to
grasp the leading ideas of the law of contract if we look
somewhat more closely to the working of two important
varieties of that department—the law as to leases and the
law of sale.

The transfer of the use of houses, land, or chattels by
their owner to other persons was widely practised in Greece,
and the rules governing such transactions were very similar
to those obtaining in Roman law. When the surrender of
the right of usage was compensated for by payments in
money or in kind, there arose the contract of lease and hire
(locatio conductio), of which we have many illustrations in
epigraphic documents and some in forensic speeches. Almost
all the extant examples deal with the property of cities, of
demes, of phratries, and other associations, or with estates
belonging to temples, but this is only accidental and depends
on the fact that juridical persons were bound to manage
business in a more circumstantial and formal way than
private persons. The conventions of the former were
generally engraved on stone, while the agreements between
private persons were usually written on tablets and there-
fore had not the same chance of surviving. The care with


. which conveyances as to temple property or public pro-


perty were formulated and recorded shows that the formal
side of such conventions was by no means overlooked or
neglected. In spite of the fact that there were no specific


XI: CONVENTIONS AND TRANSACTIONS 257


requirements as to the conclusion of a lease and that the
contract was formed by the agreement between the parties
and the concurrence of their wills, there were two aspects
of such a transaction which involved definite conformity to
certain rules and requirements. To begin with, it was
necessary to determine with precision the capacity of the
lessors to act in the matter as well as the extent of their
right of making a valid agreement. The question did not
arise in this form in the case of private owners, but it
recurs over and over again in the inscriptions recording
conventions in which one of the parties was a moral person.
A city, a deme, a temple were abstractions unless repre-
sented by definite plenipotentiaries, and such _plenipo-
tentiaries were either certain magistrates or specially
designated commissioners,’ or even the people of the city or
association in their lawfully constituted assembly.2 Apart
from that the conventions are often framed in such a way
as to refer for authority to some general regulations passed
on the subject.? These features do not affect the freedom
of agreement between bailor and bailee, but they put into
a strong light a point which is sometimes slurred over in
the usual treatment of contractual relations in Greek law.
Whatever stress we may lay on the consensual character
of Greek conventions, we must not forget that the Greeks
were very much alive to the necessity of clothing their
agreements in definite forms and providing them with con-
clusive proofs so as to preclude as much as possible mis-
interpretation and misunderstandings. They did not labour
the problem of the causa in contract, but they attached
a great deal of importance to practical measures devised to
safeouard a strict fulfilment of obligations. For this reason,
although there is ample evidence as to the consensual
essence of the contract of lease, there are also occasions
when oaths + or the testimony of witnesses ° are mentioned


1 BEAUCHET, op. cit., IV, 163 f.

2 For instance, 1. J.G. I, xiii’, p. 238. Leases of the deme of
Aixone. .

8 HoMOLLE, Les archives de l’intendance sacrée & Délos, p.1194; Bull.
de correspondance hellénique, VI, 63 ff.; XIV, 421 ff.

4 HAUSSOULLIER, Bull. de corr. hell. II, 253.

5 See above, p. 237.


2281-2 $8


Varieties
of leases.


258 JURISPRUDENCE OF THE GREEK CITY


as important for the conclusion of a proper agreement of
this kind: while, on the other hand, the drawing up of an
instrument is considered to be so important that the parties,’
especially the lessors, take elaborate and costly measures to
ensure publicity by inscriptions.

Turning to the contents of Greek leases, it is to be
observed that the rule expressed by the German proverb
“Kauf bricht Miete”, “sale prevails over lease”, seems to
have obtained in Greece as well as in Rome in the absence
of a specific agreement to the contrary. This may be
inferred e contrario from occasional prohibitions to the
lessor to alienate while the lease was running.’ The obliga-
tion of the lessor to warrant the possession of the lessee
against third persons was, naturally, admitted. But it
depended on the lessee to decide whether he preferred for
the sake of an expeditious settlement to assume himself
the position of defendant (avrouayetiv)* or to call on the
lessor to enter the lists against eventual claimants. If the
estate was damaged by vis major, as for example by an
incursion of enemies, the lessor had to bear part of the
ensuing loss: in the Aixone lease, e.g., half the rent is re-
mitted in such circumstances.* On the other hand the
cultivation of the plots is not only to be carried on in
accordance with customary standards of efficiency, but is
often regulated by special and minute rules® and super-
vised by representatives of the lessor. It may be surmised
that at the conclusion of the lease the owner could claim
compensation from the lessee for any deterioration or loss
caused by the latter’s negligence. No evidence is extant as
to a possible counter-claim on the part of the tenant on the
ground of improvements brought about by his industry and
care.

Leases may assume forms varying with the prevailing
economic and social conditions. It is easy to distinguish four
principal varieties in this respect: leases at rack rents to be


1 Dem. XLV, § 31.

2? BEAUCHET, op. cit., IV, 168 f.

3 Ibid., IV, 136 ff.

‘ I.J.G. I, xii, p. 204, § 8. 5 Tbid., xiii*, p. 238, § 3.
° C.I.A. Il, 600; J. G. 1, xii, p. 204; I, 120 ff.


XI: CONVENTIONS AND TRANSACTIONS 259


paid either in money or in kind, stock and farm leases
(bail a& chaptel), leases for part profit (métayage, colonia
partiaria), and emphyteutic tenancies. Greek evidence is
chiefly concerned with the first and the last varieties.
Apart from archaic cases like that of the Attic éxrypopor,
who may have been partly tenants and partly heavily
indebted peasant owners, or that of customary tenants of
the type of the Kretan Foxjes or the Thessalian revéorat,
we hardly ever hear of farmers receiving their outfit
from landowners or dividing the produce of their agri-
cultural labour to acquit their rent.1. This does not mean
that such arrangements were unknown, but that they did
not come, as a rule, under the notice of the engraved
records and of the city Courts: such as there were must
have been transacted mainly by verbal and customary
agreements. On the other hand we get plenty of infor-
mation as to conventional rack rents and as to emphyteutic
long leases. The former are the natural outcome of a
lively cash intercourse produced by the commercial hus-
bandry of the cities, and it is with them that students of
inscriptions mostly have to deal. As for the third variety
of leases, their main features have been briefly considered in
the preceding chapter.?

In the case of the contract of sale we have the advantage The
of getting a short but systematic survey of its most pee
important points from the work of Aristotle’s pupil Theo- phrastos.
phrastos. In the XVIIIth and possibly in the XVIIth
book of his Laws he treated of this subject, and a few
pages of his exposition have been preserved for posterity by
Stobaeus.*? Modern inquirers can hardly do better than
follow Theophrastos’ text, supplementing with such infor-
mation as may be gathered from the inscriptions and
pleadings that bear on the matter of sale.

The first point noticed is the publicity of sales and of
hypothecary conventions.* Theophrastos describes regis-


Md. G. 1, xii; Pp. 200,. § 1.
2 See above, p. 217f.


8 THEOPHRASTOS, epi cvpBoraiwoy ; STOBAEUS, Florilegium, XLIV,
22, ed. Meineke, II, 166 ff.


# Jbid., p. 166, ll. 4 ff. of pev ody imd KnpuKos KeAEvovaL T@dEV.. . Ot


Se


260 JURISPRUDENCE OF THE GREEK CITY


tration as the most perfect method of ensuring the transfer
of title, but mentions also various other devices, such as
proclamation by a herald sixty days in advance, or pro-
clamations on five consecutive days preceding the sale, or
the payment of a small coin to three. neighbouring house-
holders in order that they should be able to testify to the
bargain.’ These proceedings are intended to establish in
a definite manner the act of transfer, to secure for the
purchaser the possibility of a recourse to official documents
or, at least, to trustworthy witnesses. On the other hand
they call for objections and challenges if any one wants to
produce them. What is even more important, the procedure
is not a mere reflection of the wishes of the consenting
parties. It amounts to certain positive requirements which
though not distinctly stated may be easily surmised. The
officials superintending registration have the right and the
duty to refuse the performance of this act if the formalities
of the procedure have not been properly carried out ;* and
we may add, on the strength of the Halikarnassos and
Iasos inscriptions,® that confirmation is not a mere question
of form: the mnemones mentioned in these documents are
taking a prominent part in the conclusion of the convention,
and a late example from the Roman epoch provides an
illustration of this kind of public supervision.* In other
words, the formalities of public proclamation and regis-
tration gave scope for the exercise of a certain public
supervision which did not amount to a denial of the funda-
mental doctrine of convention by consent, but made it
possible in certain cases to veto negligent or fraudulent
agreements.

It cannot be said that such interference was equally
effective in all Greek cities—it was reduced to the very


S€ map’ apx7 sd ee évioe dé mpoypapey mapa rH apxn Tpo nuepav BN
éXarrov fj éfnkovra . . Gras Stapgio Byrioat re €£7) kal Otapapripacba Te
BovAopeva, Kal 6 Ricatue ¢ €wvnuevos pavepos 7 TO TEAEL.

1 THEOPHR., loc. cit., 1. 16 Oi de Govptaxoi re keAevovot KO] TOV
yertsvev TOY ects Tplot vopiopd Te Bpaxd pynpns evexa Kal paprupias.

? Ibid., p. 167, 1. 13. After enumerating various regulations, he
says dvev 8¢ toirey Bn eyypapew THY apxny.

PLhIG ALLA y Drre. Sei* 1169,

* CicERO, Pro Flacco, cc. 29-32.


XI: CONVENTIONS AND TRANSACTIONS 261


attenuated expedient of proclamation in Athens—but it
must have been sufficiently general and useful, as Theo-
phrastos has given it so large a place in his treatise.

Another guarantee of good faith was sought in an oath
imposed on the contracting parties in affirmation of the
genuineness of the transaction and the absence of collusion
or fictitious pretence.!

A strong light is thrown on the importance of the official
confirmation of transfers by the Tenos registration list.’
It is not by any means a mere enumeration of concluded
agreements. Under cover of a register of sales it confirms
varied transactions cast in this form on account of its con-
venience for establishing title and discouraging claims by
third parties.» Some of the sales mentioned in it are in
reality redemption instruments consequent on the mpéaovs
emi Adoet. Others are disguised constitutions of dower.
A third variety, represented by § 18, arises from execution
of a judgement by the defeated party : a certain Anaxikles
is said to have bought a plot of land from Philothea, who,
it is explained, had lost the above-mentioned plot in a suit
against the purchaser.’ The entry nevertheless mentions
& mpadtwp as guarantor. In ordinary cases the mpdrwp is
a previous owner from whom the estate had been acquired
by the actual vendor; in other words, transfer by purchase
is traced one step higher, greater security being sought by
calling in a second wuctor. It is difficult to guess to whom
the designation of mpétwp could apply in the case under
discussion ; it must have been a person who had passed
property to Philothea, so that she must have had a
transfer to rely upon in spite of the fact that she
lost in the trial: she may have forfeited her right in con-
sequence of the foreclosure of a mortgage. Yet the trans-
action with Anaxikles was clothed in the form of a fictitious
contract of sale between the latter and Philothea.®


' THEOPHR., loc. cit., p. 167, ll. 6 ff.

EJ. GA, vis pp. 638 ft.

3 Ibid., pp. 89 ff.

* Ibid., § 13, pp. 68 f. ’Avagéikdys ... mapa Bidobéas ... €mpiaro ras év
ZamnO@ aipaoias tértapas (description) ... gap in text... mepi ov
eviknoev “Avagixdns Bidobeav tv Siknv' mpatep ApirrokAns ToAvéevov. .. .


O Abad ..p. 91.


Conclu-
sion of
sale.


262 ‘JURISPRUDENCE OF THE GREEK CITY


Another indication as to the importance of these registered
transfers of title is afforded by the part assigned to the
guarantors or sureties—the éyyunrai or mpdrapes. They
are constantly mentioned at the end of the entries on the
register, and their obligation was not merely a formal or
accessory one. The responsibility for the legality and
firmness of the bargain! rested primarily on them. In
case of eviction the purchaser had a recourse against them
or, at least, as much against them as against the vendor
himself.2_ To judge from the analogy of the guarantors of
the fictitious sales of emancipated slaves at Delphi these
persons were usually drawn from among the most wealthy
and influential citizens of a given city. Their consent to
act as patrons to the transaction presented an additional
asset for the security of title, and was evidently much in
demand for the conclusion of conventions.

The second point discussed by Theophrastos concerns the
conclusion of the sale. He says that in most cities the
contract was deemed perfect on the payment of the price,
not before. A presumption was created, however, by a
preliminary agreement confirmed by the payment of earnest
money.® If the purchaser subsequently refused to pay the
price the convention was annulled and he lost the deposit.*
In the converse case, when the vendor subsequently refused
to deliver the property although the agreed price was
tendered to him, there arose the question whether he was
liable to restore a sum of money equivalent to the price
which had been agreed on and, perhaps, also the deposit.
Such a solution does not appear to be equitable, but was
seemingly resorted to by some legislators, as Theophrastos
describes it in some detail. It has been argued that the
payment of earnest money presented a formal requirement
of the contract of sale.° Theophrastos, however, does not


dds Gy ky Vil, S41, Of, -..100;

2 PLtatTo, Laws, XII, 7, init.

° THEOPHR.,, loc. cit., p. 167, ll. 17 ff. kupia dé 9 dv) Kal  mpaors eis
pev ktnow Stray 4) Tyst S007 Kal Tak Tav vpov ToMawcty, oioy avaypapyy
i) Spxov 7) Tots yelroos TO yeyvdpevov" eis d€ Thy mapddoaw Kai eis avTo TO
Twreivy Grav appaBova AdBn" oyeddv yap ovTas of ToAXOL vopoberovorr.

* Tbid., pp. 167 f., 1. 80 éav 8€ AaBov dppaBdva pu) S€xnTat KTr.

5 BEAUCHET, IV, 426.


XI: CONVENTIONS AND TRANSACTIONS 263


indicate anything of the sort. His statement is chiefly
directed towards establishing the consequences of an
eventual renunciation of the agreement.

A third point consists in the requirement that the consent
given by each of the parties should be given in sound
mind ; a convention concluded in anger, in jealousy, or in
a state of insanity is declared to be invalid.1. This necessary
provision opened the way to many disputes in the Courts,
and we have an excellent illustration of the way in which
it could be used by a skilful pleader in Hypereides’ speech
against Athenogenes. The validity of the sale of a per-
fumery shop was impugned in spite of the fact that the
vendor had carefully secured witnesses of the transaction
and a sealed instrument to confirm it. The arguments of
Hypereides are derived from observations as to the psycho-
logy ofamorous persons of weak character under the influence
of deceitful women charmers:* they are strengthened by an
express reference to one of Solon’s restrictions on the free-
dom of testamentary disposition, by which the yuvacki
meLOduevos is regarded as incapable of a reasonable decision.
There was no assertion of lwesio enormis in the Roman
sense, but of a flaw as regards the free consent (dca rus
Exov omordoyjon). We may think what we like about
Hypereides’ arguments, but the fact of his using them
before the Court proves that the validity of conventions
could be attacked from the point of view of lack of sound
mind, shown in an unreasonable resolve.

A last question put by Theophrastos is whether the Credit.
property remains with the vendor until the full price has
been paid. He notes the radical solution laid down by
Charondas and recommended by Plato in the Luws.
According to these legislators an actionable sale was only
effected when the price had been paid, so that if some one
sold on credit he had to rely exclusively on the good faith
of the purchaser.* There can be no doubt, however, that in


‘ THEOPHR., p. 167, Il. 23 ff., ending 1. 27 Zo.xe yap é« Katpod ra
To.avta kai 7dOous yiyverOar’ Sei dé ek mpoatpevews" oUTw yap Earat TO Sikatov.

? Hyper. III (V), § 17.

° THEOPHR., loc. cit., p. 168 map’ éviorw SedixacOar Kedevovot TS py
SeXoueva tiv Timny. mdrepov Sé ews dy Kopionrac KUpLoy Eivat TOU KTHMATOS ;


264 JURISPRUDENCE OF THE GREEK CITY


most of the Greek States credit was recognized and prac-
tised to a large extent. Commercial intercourse on the
scale on which it was carried on in Athens or Syrakuse
could not have existed without it.1 It must have been
extensively used in the sale of goods; as to landed estate,
it was easy to protect it by bonds, and all considerable
transactions in this branch must have been carried on by
means of instruments of some kind. The chief means of
providing against bad faith and fraud in connexion with
goods was to transact sales in the open market under the
supervision of the city’s officers. The administrative organi-
zation of Athens was much developed in this respect.
Chapter LI of Aristotle’s Athenian Constitution gives
many details on the functions of the dyopavépo., the
peTpovopor, and the oropiAaxes. They exercised a very
close supervision over the quality of the products sold, the
exactitude of the weights and measures used, and the ful-
filment of conditions imposed by laws and regulations in
regard to trade.”

It may be said in conclusion that the treatment of con-
ventions is highly characteristic of the general tendencies
of Greek jurisprudence. It combines in a striking manner
the fullest possible development of private initiative and
freedom of decision with the constant intervention of the
City. Archaic formalism disappeared at an early stage, but
the practices of instruments in writing and of registration
by magistrates developed steadily, and came to provide the
common foundation of title. Nevertheless, even after the
spread of these practices of literal evidence, conveyances
and conventions were considered and adjudicated upon in
the last resort by tribunals which were always disposed to


ovTw yap oi modXot vopoberovow, ) Gomep Xapwvbas kat WAdt@v; ovrot yap
mapaxpnua KeXevovor Siddvar Kai AapBavew* cay O€ tis micTEvoN py eEtvat
Sixny, avrdv yap airtoy eivat tas adtkias.

' BUECHSENSCHUETZ, Besitz und Erwerb im Alterthum.

? Ath. Const., c. 51 KAnpodvrat dé kal dyopavopot, .. . rovtous b€ Und TaY
vopwv mpootéeraktat TaY @vioy emipedcicba ravtwy, dws kabapa Kai axiBdnra
mo@Anoerat. KkAnpovvrar be kal petpovdpol,... Kal oUTOL TY péTpaV Kal TOV
orabpav értpedovvrat Tavtwr, Oras of m@dodvres xpnoovrat Stkaios. oar
d€ kai ocropvAakes KAnporoi. . . . odTor 8 emipedovvrat mpOrov pev Oras 6
€v Gyopa airos dpyds dvtos €atat Sixaiws, Exec’ Gmws ot Te pvAwOpol mpds
Tas Tiwas TOV Kpdy Ta GAgira T@ANnTOVTW KTA.


XI: CONVENTIONS AND TRANSACTIONS 265


take into consideration the spirit rather than the letter of
laws, the equity and utility of business transactions rather
than their technical requirements. Public opinion in the
city—the ddga rhs méAews—was in the last resort the
decisive authority in the application of rules of private as
well as of public law.


At the close of this survey of the methods of Greek Summing
juridical thought it may not be amiss to sum up certain
points of comparison between the jurisprudence of our own —
days and that of classical Greece. Rules of law are rules
of conduct, and therefore they are necessarily surrounded
by an atmosphere of morality: with the Greeks the con-
nexion between ethics and the administration of justice
was especially close and productive of direct results. ‘The
distinction between external acts and inward intention
could not fail to express itself in practice, but it was not
prominent in theory, and the spiritual aspects of human
conduct—forethought, motive, character—were insisted
upon whenever possible in estimating actions. Compulsion
was regarded as a natural outcome of social life—the most
advanced thinkers felt as little hesitation in chastizing
or crushing a malefactor as they felt in fighting a
wolf or training a dog. Combines for the achievement
of common purposes—both transient and enduring—grew
up in exuberant profusion and commonly developed mystic
elements as expressions of superindividual aspirations.
Corporate life was represented in all kinds of: varieties—
in political intercourse as well as in business and culture.
But in all corporations or quasi-corporations the opposition
between the individuals and the collective body uniting
them was not insisted upon: on the contrary, the city and
any gild or group of worshippers were considered as iden-
tical with the members which constituted them for the
time being. The concentration of the State within the
narrow limits of a city made it possible to attempt govern-
ment by direct action of the people. Actual democracy
was, however, restricted to a comparatively small number
of privileged citizens, selected on the basis of descent.
While rules of expediency and agreement governed the


266 JURISPRUDENCE OF THE GREEK CITY


relations between members of different cities, a rule of
law was consistently applied to the relations between
citizens. In apportioning rights and duties, in delimiting
interests, in enforcing obligations, Greek law strove not
only to maintain order and to redress grievances, but also
to guarantee a just distribution of advantages and burdens.
The public character of property and possession was mani-
fested in various legal requirements, while private acquisi-
tion and rights of disposal were chiefly developed in the
course of business practice and did not give rise to rigid
doctrinal distinctions. In keeping with this fluid state of
the law of things, transactions and conventions came at an
early stage to be established by formless consent. This did
not prevent the growth of customary usages as to evidence,
in which written instruments were assigned a most impor-
tant part, and in this way a new kind of literal contract
was gradually evolved. In all departments of law stress
was laid on public opinion, express or implied. All kinds
of devices were used in order to secure preponderance to
enacted law, but as a matter of fact in many cases govern-
ment and the administration of justice depended on more
or less spontaneous decrees and on equitable estimates of
circumstances. There was as yet no call for natural law
as opposed to professional] legality, but there was ample
room for speculations as to a common law of reason rising
above the precepts of single cities.


BOOKS REFERRED TO IN VOL. II


A. Abbreviated Titles used in footnotes: see list B for
details.


Beauchet. Droit privé.

C.I.A. Corpus Inscer. Att.

C.I.G. Corpus Inser. Gr.

Dar. et S. Dictionnaire des antiquités gr. et rom.

Diels. Fragm. der Vorsokr.

Ditt. Syll. Inser. Gr.

Gercke und Norden. Einleitung.

Glotz. Solidarité.

Hermann-Swoboda, Hermann-Thalheim, Hermann-Thum-
ser. See Hermann, Lehrbuch.

Hicks. Gr. hist. inscr.

I.J.G. Ree. des inser. jurid. gr. Dareste.

Lipsius. Att. Recht.

Michel. Rec. des inser. gr.

R.-Ene. Pauly-Wissowa.

Schoémann-Lipsius. Griech. Alterth.

Z.S8. Zeitschrift der Sav.-Stift.


B. Full Titles.


Abhandlungen der ... K. sachs, Gesellschaft der Wissen-
schaften. See Mitteis.

Aischines. Speeches. Blass. Teubner.

Aischylos. Plays. Sidgwick. Script. Class. Bibl. Oxon.

American Journal of Archaeology. See Dennison Rogers
and Wheeler.

American Journal of Philology. See Morris.

Amira (K. von). Nordgermanisches Obligationenrecht,
Bd. III. Strassburg. 1897. Grundriss der  ger-
manischen Philologie. 1913.

Andokides. Speeches. Blass. Teubner.

Antiphon. Speeches. Blass. Teubner.

Antiphon the Sophist. Jn Oxyrhynchus Papyri, XI. Ed.
B. P. Grenfell and A. S. Hunt. Egypt Exploration
Fund. London. 1915.


268 BIBLIOGRAPHY


Aristotle. Atheniensium Respublica. F.G. Kenyon. Oxford.
1920.
TloXtrefa AOnvaiov. G. Kaibel et U. de
Wilamowitz-Moellendorff. Berlin. 1898.
—_——— Ethics (Nik.). I. Bywater. Oxford. 1890.
———— Politics. W. L. Newman. Oxford. 1887-1902.
—_— Rhetoric. E.M. Cope. Camb. 1877.
Other works. Bekker.
Beauchet (L.). Histoire du droit privé de la République
athénienne. Paris. 1897.
Beloch (K. J.). Griechische Geschichte. Strassburg. 1893.
Boeckh (A.). Die Staatshaushaltung der Athener. 3te
Aufi., M. Frankel. Berlin. 1886. ,
Brandileone (F.). Sulla supposita obligatio litterarum nel-
l antico diritto greco. Bologna. 1920.
Biichsenschiitz (—). Besitz und Erwerb im Alterthum.
Halle, 1869.
Buckland, W. W. A Text-Book of Roman Law. Cambridge.


1921.
Biirgel. Die pylaisch-delphische Amphiktyonie. Munchen.


1877.

Bulletin de correspondance hellénique. See Haussoullier,
Homolle. .

Burnet (J.). Ethics of Aristotle. London. 1900.

Busolt (G.). Der zweite attische Bund. Jahrbicher fur
Philologie, Suppl.-B. VII, 665 ff.

Bywater (I.). Heracliti Reliquiae. Oxford. 1877.

Caillemer (E.). La prescription 4 Athénes: études sur les
antiquités juridiques d’Athénes, No.7. Paris. 1869.

— Le droit de succession légitime & Athénes:

études sur les ant. jur., ete. Paris, 1879.

In Dar. et 8., s.v. diadikasia.

Calhoun (G. M.). The early history of crime and criminal
law in Greece, in Proceedings of the Classical Asso-
ciation, vol. XVIII (1921). London. 1922.

Oral and written pleadings in Athenian
Courts, ¢n Transactions of the American Philological

Association, vol. I (1919), pp. 177 ff.

Cloché (P.). Le conseil athénien des cing cents et la peine
de mort, 7 Revue des études grecques, XX XIII. 1920.


BIBLIOGRAPHY 269


Cope (E. M.). Commentary on Aristotle’s Rhetoric. Kd.
J. E. Sandys. Cambridge. 1887.

Corpus Inscriptionum Atticarum. I. A. Kirchhoff. Berlin.
bozo. TU Konic.  Berlin:. 1877.

Corpus Inscriptionum Graecarum. A. Boeckh, etc. Berlin.


1828-77.

Corpus juris civilis. P.Kriiger and Th.Mommsen. Berlin.
1893.

Cuq (E.). Les institutions juridiques des Romains. Paris.
1904.


Daremberg (C.) et Saglio (E.). Dictionnaire des antiquités
grecques et romaines. Paris. 1873-1917.

Dareste (R.). Plaidoyers civils de Démosthéne. 1875.

- ———~ Du droit de représailles, 72 Revue des études
grecques, II, p. 305. Paris. 1889.

Haussoullier (B.) and Reinach (Th.). Recueil

~ des inscriptions juridiques grecques. Paris. 1891-.
Demosthenes. Speeches. Blass. Teubner.
Butcher. Script. Class. Bibl.


Oxon. See also Weil.

Dennison Rogers (J.). Fragment of an Argive Inscription,
zm American Journal of Archaeology, New Series, V,
p. 159.: 1901.

Dictionnaire des antiquités gr.et rom. See Daremberg, etc.

Diels (H.). Die Fragmente der Vorsokratiker. 3te Aufl.
Berlin. 1912.

Digest. See Corpus juris civilis.

Dikaiarchos. Jn Fragmenta Historicorum Graecorum.

Dikaiomata herausg. von der Graeca Halensis. Berlin.
191s.

Diodorus Siculus. Histories. Dindorf. Teubner.

Dittenberger (G.). Sylloge Inscriptionum Graecarum. 3te
Aufl. Leipzig. 1915-.

Esmein (J. P.). Mélanges d’archéologie et dhistoire, VIII,
p. 426. Rome, Paris. 1888.

Euripides. Plays. Murray. Script. Class. Bibl. Oxon.

Foucart (P.). Des associations religieuses chez les Grecs.
Paris. 1873.

Frinkel (M.). Die attischen Geschworenengerichte
Berlin. 1877, See also Boeckh.


270 BIBLIOGRAPHY


Fragmenta Historicorum Graecorum. C. and Th. Muller.
Paris. 1841.

Francotte (H). La polis greeque. Studien zur Geschichte
und Kultur des Altertums, I. Paderborn, 1907.

Gai Institutiones; with translation and commentary by
Ed. Poste. 4th ed. E. A. Whittuck. Oxford. 1904.

Gellius, Aulus. Noctes Atticae. Hosius. Teubner.

Gercke (A.) und Norden (E.). Einleitung in die Altertums-
wissenschaft. Leipzig. 1910.

Gernet (L.). Hypotheses sur le contrat primitif en Gréce,
in Revue des études grecques, XXX, p. 249. Paris,
1917.

Gilbert (G.). Handbuch der griechischen Staatsaltertiimer.
Leipzig. 1893. |

Girard (P. F.). Manuel élémentaire de droit romain.
Paris. 1910.

Glotz (G.). La solidarité de la famille dans le droit criminel
en Gréce. Paris. 1904.

—_—— —— Le travail dans la Gréce ancienne. Paris. 1920.

Gneist. Die formellen Vertréage des neueren rdmischen
Obligationenrechts in Vergleichung mit den Geschichts-
formen des griechischen Rechts. 1844.

Gomperz (Th.). Greek Thinkers. Translated by L.
Magnus. London. 1901-12.

Griechischen Dialekt-Inschriften, Sammlung der. H. Collitz,
Gottingen. 1884.

Grimm (J.). Deutsche Rechtsalterthiimer. 4te Ausg.
Leipzig. 1899.

Guiraud (P.). La propriété fonciére en Gréce jusqu’a la
conquéte romaine. Paris. 1893.

Harpokration. Lexicon in decem oratores Atticos. Ed.
G. Dindorf. Oxford. 1853.

Haussoullier (B.). La vie municipale en Attique. Biblio-
theque des écoles frangaises d’Athénes et de Rome.
Fasc. 38. Paris. 1884,

Inscriptions de Chio: im Bulletin de

corr. hell., IIT, p. 280. See also Ree. des inser. jurid.

\ Hellenica Oxyrhynchia. Grenfell and Hunt. Script. Cl.
Bibl. Oxon.

Hermann (K.F.), Lehrbuch der griechischen Antiquitaten;


BIBLIOGRAPHY 271


neu herausg. von H. Bliimer und W. Dittenberger.
1, <Abt- 1, 2, V. ‘Thoneer: Abt 3, H. Swoboda.
II. Abt. 1, H. Thalheim. Freiburg. 1889-.

Herodotos. Histories. Dietsch-Kallenberg. ‘Teubner.

Hicks (E. L.) and Hill(G.F.). Manual of Greek Historical
Inscriptions. Oxford. 1901.

Hildenbrand (K.). Geschichte und System der Rechts- und
Staatsphilosophie. Leipzig. 1860.

Hillier von Gaertringen (F.). Inschriften von Priene.
Berlin. 1906.

Hinneberg (P.). See Wilamowitz-Moellendorff.

Hirzel (R.). Themis, Dike und Verwandtes. Leipzig. 1907.

Hitzig (H. F.). Altgriechische Staatsvertrige uber Rechts-
hilfe. Zurich. 1907.

Das griechische Pfandrecht. Miinchen. 1895.

Hogarth (J. G.). Naukratis, 1903. /n Journal of Hellenic
Studies. London. 1905.

Homer. Odyssey. Allen. Script. Class. Bibl. Oxon.

Homolle (T.). Les archives de l’intendance sacrée a Délos.
Bibliothéque des écoles frangaises d’Athenes et de Rome.
Fasc. 49, p. 1194. Paris. 1887.

Comptes des temples déliens, in Bulletin de

corr. hell., VI, p.1, and XIV, p. 389. Paris. 1882, 1890.

In Dar. et 8., 8. v. donarium.

Hypereides. Speeches. Kenyon. Script. Class. Bibl. Oxon.

Isaios. Speeches. Thalheim. Teubner.

Isokrates. Speeches. Blass. Teubner.

Jebb (R. C.). The Rhetoric of Aristotle translated. Cam-
bridge. 1909.

Journal of Hellenic Studies. See Hogarth.

Keil (B.). Jn Gercke und Norden, Einleitung.

Kenny (C. 8.). Outlines of Criminal Law. Cambridge.
1909.

Laurent (F.). Histoire du droit des gens et des relations
internationales. Gand et Paris. 1850-70.

Lécrivain (C.). Jn Dar. et S., s. v. ephesis.

Leist (G. A.). Der attische Eigentumsstreit im System der
Diadikasien. Jena. 1886.

Lexica Segueriana, Immanuelis Bekkeri anecdota Graeca,
Vol. I. Berol. 1814,


272 BIBLIOGRAPHY


Lipsius (J. H.). Das attische Recht und Rechtsverfahren.
Meier und Schémann. Leipzig. 1905-15,

Griechische Alterthiimer. G. F. Schémann.

4te Aufl. 1897-1902.

In Z. SS. Roman. Abth., XXXVII, p. 1
(1916), and XXXIX, p. 36 (1918).

Lykurgos. Speeches. Blass. Teubner.

Lysias. Speeches. Hude. Script. Class. Bibl. Oxon.

Meier. Sce Lipsius.

Meyer (Ed.). Geschichte des Alterthums. Stuttgart. 1893.

Forschungen zur alten Geschichte. Halle.


1892-99.

Meynial (E.). Des renonciations, in Nouvelle revue his-
torique de droit frangais et étranger. 1900, 1901,
1902, 1904. Paris.

Michel (C.). Recueil d’inscriptions grecques. — Bruxelles.
1897-1912.

Mitteis (L.), Rémisches Privatrecht, in Systematisches
Handbuch der deutschen Rechtswissenschaft. Ed.
K. Binding. Leipzig. 1908.

Reichsrecht und Volksrecht in den dstlichen

Provinzen des romischen Kaiserreichs. Leipzig. 1891.

Zur Geschichte der Erbpacht im Alterthum,

im Abhandl. der phil.-hist. Cl. der K. sfichs. Gesellschaft

der Wissenschaften, XX, no. 4. Leipzig. 1901.

Romanistische Papyrusstudien, in Z. SS.,
Roman. Abth., XXIII, p. 274 (1902).

Morris (C. D.). The jurisdiction of the Athenians over
their allies, in American Journal of Philology, V,
p. 298. Baltimore. 1884.

Muller (C. and T.). Fragmenta Historicorum Graecorum.
Paris. 1848.

Nettleship (R. L.). Lectures on the Republic of Plato.
London. 1910.

Newman (W. L.). The Politics of Aristotle. Oxford.
1887-1902,

Nouvelle revue de droit. See Meynial.

_ Ott (L.). Beitrige zur Kenntniss des griechischen Eides.
Leipzig. 1896.

Oxyrhynchus Papyri XI. Ed. B. P. Grenfell and A. S.
Hunt. London. 1915.


BIBLIOGRAPHY 273


Partsch (J.). Griechisches Biirgschaftsrecht. Leipzig.
1909.

Pauly (A. F. von). Real-Encyclopadie der classischen
Altertumswissenschaft, Ed. G. Wissowa. Stuttgart.
18938-.

Perrot (G.). Essai sur le droit public d’Athénes, Paris.
1867,

Philippi (A.). Der Areopag und die Epheten. Berlin. 1874,

Phillipson (Coleman). The international law and custom
of ancient Greece and Rome. London. 1911.

Philochoros. Jn Fragm. Hist. Graec.

Plato. Dialogues. Burnet. Script. Class. Bibl. Oxon.

Plutarch. Parallel Lives. Sintenis. Teubner.

Péhlmann (R. von). Geschichte der sozialen Frage und
des Sozialismus in der antiken Welt. Miinchen. 1912.

Poland (F.). Geschichte des griechischen Vereinswesens,
an Preisschriften .. . von der . . . Jablonowski’schen
Gesellschaft, XX XVIII. Leipzig. 1909.

Pollux (Julius). Onomasticon. Bekker. Berlin. 1846.

Polybios. Histories. Biittner-Dindorf. Teubner.

Preisschriften . . . von der fiirstlich Jablonowski’schen
Gesellschaft zu Leipzig. See Poland and Ziebarth.

Prinz (H.). Funde aus Naukratis, in Beitrage zur alten
Geschichte (Klio), 7tes Beiheft. Leipzig. 1908.

Proceedings of the Classical Association. See Calhoun.

Rabel (E.). 4ikn é€ovAns, rv Z. SS., Roman. Abth.,
XXXVI, p. 340 (1915), and XXXVIII, p. 296 (1917).

Real-Encyclopadie. See Pauly.

Recueil des inscriptions juridiques grecques. See Dareste.

Reinach (Th.). Jn Dar. et S., s.v. enovkiow dike.

Revue des études grecquer. See Cloché, Dareste, Gernet.

Riccobono (8s.). Stipulatio ed instrumentum, etc. InZ.SS.,
Roman. Abth., XX XV, p. 214 (1914).

Rikkert (H.), System der Philosophie. 1920.

Rohl (H.). Inscriptiones graecae antiquissimae. Berlin.
1882.

Rose (Valentin). Aristoteles Pseudepigraphus. Lips. 1863.

Salomon (M.). Der Begriff des Naturrechts bei den Sophi-
sten, in Z. SS., Roman. Abth. XXXII, p. 129 (1911).


2281-2 T


274 BIBLIOGRAPHY


Schmidt (L. V.). Ethik der alten Griechen. 1882.

Schomann (G. F.). See Lipsius.

Schulthess. Jn Real-Encycl., s.v. ypapparets.

Solon. Fragm., 7 Poetae Lyrici Graeci, Bergk. Leipzig.
1866.

Sophokles. Plays. Ed. R. C. Jebb. Cambridge, 1883-.

Stobaeus (Joannes). Florilegium, ed. A. Meineke. Lips.
1855-7.

Studien zur Geschichte und Kultur des Altertums. See
Francotte and Weber.

Swoboda (H.). See Hermann.

Szanto (E.). Das griechische Burgerrecht. Freiburg. 1892.

Anleihen griechischer Staaten, 7 Wiener

Studien, VII. Zeitschrift fiir die Osterreichischen

Gymnasien. Wien. 1885.

Hypothek und Scheinkauf im griechischen

Rechte, in Wiener Studien, IX.

In Real-Enceycl., s.v. €xexecpia.

Thalheim (Th.). Jn Real-Encycl., s.v. aviia and BAdBns
dixn. See also Hermann.

Theophrastos apud Stobaeum, q.v. ©

Thonissen (J. J.). Le droit pénal de la République
Athénienne. Bruxelles. 1875.

Thukydides. Histories. Stuart Jones. Script. Cl. Bibl.
Oxon.

Thumser (V.). See Hermann.

Tod(M.N.). International Arbitration amongst the Greeks.
Oxford. 1913.

Toepfier (J.). Attische Genealogie. Berlin. 1889.

Vinogradoff (P.). Outlines of Historical Jurisprudence, I.
Oxford. 1920.

The legal background of Demosthenes’
speech in Zenothemis v. Demon. Offprint from the
Revue d’histoire du droit. Haarlem. 1921.

Weber (H.). Attisches Prozessrecht in den attischen
Seebundstaaten. Studien zur Geschichte und Kultur

_ des Altertums, I, 5. Paderborn. 1908.

Weil (H.). Les plaidoyers politiques de Démosthéne. Paris.

1883.


BIBLIOGRAPHY 275


Weiss (E.). Recitatio und Responsum, ete, 7 Z. SS.,
Roman. Abth. XX XIII, p. 215 (1912).

Wheeler (J. R.). Some inscriptions from the Argive
Heraeum, in American Journal of Archaeology, First
Series, IX, p. 351. Baltimore. 1894.

Wide (S.). Griechische und romische Religion. /n Gereke
und Norden, Einleitung, Bd. 2. Leipzig. 1910.

Wiener Studien. See Szanto.

Wilamowitz-Moellendorff (U.von). Aristoteles und Athen.
Berlin. 1898.

Zum Aaltesten Straf-

recht der Kulturvolker. Leipzig. 1905,

In Kultur der Gegen-
wart, IJ. P. Hinneberg. Berlin. 1909.

Wundt, M. Geschichte der griechischen Ethik, I. Leipzig.
1908.

Wyse, W. The Speeches of Isaeus. Cambridge. 1904.

Xenophon. Hellenika and Memorabilia. Marchant. Script.
Cl. Bibl. Oxon.

Respublica Atheniensium. Teubner.

Zeitschrift der Savigny-Stiftung ftir Rechtsgeschichte,
Romanistische Abtheilung. Weimar. 1880-. See
Lipsius, Mitteis, Rabel, Riccobono, Salomon, Weiss.

Zeller (E.). Outlines of the history of Greek Philosophy,
translated by S. F. Alleyne and E. Abbott. London.
1901.


Socrates and the Socratic Schools, translated
by O. J. Reichel. London. 1868.

Ziebarth (E.). Das griechische Vereinswesen, in Preis-
schriften . .. von der . . . Jablonowski’schen Gesell-
schaft, XXXIV. Leipzig. 1896.

Zimmern (A. E.). The Greek Commonwealth. Oxford.
POL,


Tr 2


—


,
’
-
> ae
be z
o
-
.
:
= '
I:
f
'
7
7
1
\
:
wn ’
; 7
é
a
rf


INDEX TO VOLUME II


Absolute property, 198.
abuse, 176, 193 f.
acceptance of bribes, 168.
access to offices, 140.
accessories, 184.
accident
damage by, 195.
death by, 182 f.
definition of, 182 f.
accomplices, 184.
of Kylon, 181.
accusation, right of, 149, 152.
accusation, political, right of,
116.
‘accusation for illegality’, 137.
See also ypadpy tapavopwv.
accusation in writing, 165.
accusationsagainst officials, 176 f.
accountants, Athenian, 82 f.
accounts of guardians, 214.
Achilles, shield of, 89.
visit of Priamos to, 163.
acquisition jure Quiritium, 213.
acquisition of land by foreigners,
200 f.
acquisitive prescription in Roman
law, 213 f.
unknown in Greek law, 216.
act of the gods, death as, 183.
actio judicatt, 226.
action at law, elements of, 116.
action of disseisin, 224.
action, line of, determined, 146.
— communi dividundo, 51.
in vindication, 220.
actionable sale, 263; terms of
abuse, 194.
actions, choice of, 166 f.
kinds of, 191 ff.
time limit for, 161, 214.
See also dixar and ypadai.
aoeca, 113, 131.
ddixiov ypapy, 168.


Admetos, hearth of, 101, 163 nu’.

administration, control of, 140ff.

administration of justice, reci-
procity in, 4.

adoption, 6, 212, 219 f.

Adrastos, cult of, 97.

adultery, 47, 174 f.

of Ares, 234 f.
advantage, claims to, 48, 56.
distribution of, 140.

advocates, 133. See also ovvy-
yopot.

deupvyta, 180.

affatomia, 232.

affectus socialis, 33.

Agariste, wedding of, 236.

ayew, 154.

ager publicus, 254.

Agis III of Sparta, 9.

agnates and marriage of heiress,
209, 220.

agnatic clans, federations of, 6.

agnatic organization, 178,

agnatic relationship, 91.

ayaves atiuynro. and tiyrtoi, 49,
19}.

ayopa of corporation, 125.

Agoratos, speech against, 186 ;
sureties of, 249.

ayos, 162, 185.

aypapiov ypapy, 168.

aypaos vopos, 41 n°.

agreement for distress, 219.

agreement, international, 155.

agreements, business, 80 f.

agreements for immoral pur-
poses, 238.

agreements, international, sanc-
tions in, 161.

agricultural implements, 200.

aideraGar, 33.

aidds and déxy, 33, 37.

Aigina, 5.


278


Aiginetic speech of Isokrates, 4f.

Aigospotamoi, 111.

aixias dixn, 62, 174.

Aiolians, 208.

aidvov, applied to corporations,

124.

Aischines, family of, 178.
professional training of, 83.
speeches of, on ypady apa-

vopov, 138.
on fortune of Timarchos, 199,
201.
on loss of political rights, 190.
on morality of orators, 172.
Aischylos, on homicide, 185; on
matriarchal and patriarchal
ideas, 22 f.
Aixone, deme of, 257 n®, 258.
axovcia ouvadddypata, 46 f.,
230.
Alexander of Makedon, legisla-
tive reform of, 135 f.
restoration of exiles by, 86.
Alexandria, municipal law of, 5.
Alexandros, loan of, to Arkesine,
81.
alienation, prohibition of,in lease,
258.
of land in Sparta, 8.
by sale or foreclosure, 253.
aliens at Athens, 93 f.
Alkibiades, discussion of law by,
in Memorabilia, 31.
mutilation of Hermae by, 99.
allegiance of colony, 158.
allies of Athens, position of, in
League, 159.

ddoyiov ypapy, 168.

allotments of land, 52, 202, 216.

Amasis, king of Egypt, “ philhel-

lene ’’, 3, 4.
ambassadors, debt of, to treasury,
139.

amendment, power of, 132.

amendment of archaic law, 68.

Amorgos, 81, 108, 243.

Amphiktyonic league, 163.

Amphipolis, citizens of, and cult

of Brasidas, 58.


INDEX


dppurByreiy, 221.

augur Bytyoces, 58.

Amynos, corporation of, 122,
126.

dvarypapers, 82.

dvourxwria, 33.

avaxpiois, 50, 145 f., 179.

avaroypapouv petaddrXov ypady,
168.

Anaxagoras, condemnation of,
100; school of, 27.

Anaxikles, 261.

ancestral cults, 6, 206 f.

ancestral customs, justice in ac-
cordance with, 157.

ancestral property, 199, 201 f.

ancestors, cult of, 206 f.

ayxioreia, 90 ff., 211.

ayxuoreis, 178.

Andokides, speeches of, on éru-
pia, 189; on case of Leo-
goras, 84; on law of high
treason, 170; on vopor,
72 f.; on sureties, 249.

avoparroda picGopopoivra, 199.

avépes (thirty), 85.

avopoAnwia, 155.

Andromache of Euripides, 6.

avopodpovor, 180, 188.

avopodovos as actionable term,
194.

Androtion, accusation of, by
Demosthenes, 172.

illegal proposal of, 142.

aveyorns, 92.

animal, damage
194f.

death caused by, 185.

animals and criminals, 188.

avrioootis, 55.

Antigone of Sophokles, 25.

Antigonos, King, decree of, 5,
136.

avttypadevs, 82.

avturerrovOds, To, 45, 69 f.

Antiphon the Sophist, on Jus-
tice, 29 f,, 41 f.

Antiphon, speeches of,

on boy killed by spear, 183.


caused by,


INDEX


Antiphon, speeches of,
on murder of Herodes, 187.
on poisoning cases, 182, 184.
on procedure in murder trial,
LT;
on wounding to kill, 182.
araywyy, 147, 186, 190.
amarns Tov dnpov ypapy, 171.
Apaturia, 89, 97.
Apaturios, case of, 219, 244,
249 f.
Apellis, scribe, 83.
apaiperews cis eAevbepiay diky, 193.
apavys ovata, 202.
Aphobos, case of, 200.
aphrodisiac, poison as, 182.
Aphrodite, Homeric story of,
234; at Naukratis, 4.
amoukia, 202.
amrodextrat, 134,
Apollo, cult of, in Greek cities,
100.
at Naukratis, 4.
shrine of, at Athens, 185.
Apology of Plato, 38.
appeal by éfeous, 77, 147.
appeals to Council of League,
159.
‘‘ appeals to justice’, 65.
application of law of different
States, 157.
appropriation, 212 ff, 228,
of land for burial grounds,
206 f.
arbitrary seizure, 227,
arbitration, international, 50,
145, 160f.
arbitrator, 146 f.
and judge, 49 f.
dpxai (= magistrates), 128.
apxatar potpar of Sparta, 203.
archaic formalism in Greek law,
233 f.
archaic forms of criminal pro-
cedure, 177.
archaic law, amendment and in-
terpretation of, 68.
archaic laws of property, 206.


apxy, 53. :


279


Archelaos, doctrines of, 27.

apxepaviorat, 124.

Archidamos, on slavery and law
of nature, 28.

Archinos, 62.

Archon, admission of mother’s
claim by, 80.

avakpiows of, 1465 f.
as atvroxpatwp, 77.

apxwv Bacirevs, 100, 181.

Archon Eponymos, 203, 212.

Archons, Lysias on power of,
114.

the six minor, 129.

Archonship, doxiuacta for, 95.

Arevopagertikos of Isokrates, 17,
56.

Areiopagos, abolition of rights
of, 130.

discretionary power of, 115.

and Ephetae Courts, 185.

and guardianship of law, 137.

jurisdiction of, 47, 75, 167,
178 ff, 180 ff, 184.

Ares, Homeric story of, 234, 248.

apytas ypapy, 173.

Arginusae, reward for service
at, 96.

trial of commanders at, 62,
133, 151, 176.

Argive Inscription, 209.

Argos, 96, 157, 209.

Arvistarchos, succession of, 215.

apirtivonv aipefevres, 178, 181.

Aristogeiton, speech against, 18,
170.

Aristokrates, speech against,
138, 170, 177, 180 ff, 186.

Ariston, 166.

Aristophanes, caricature of dema-
gogue by, 1723 of litiga-
tion by, 77.

Aristophon, accusations of, by
ypapy tapavopwv, 138.
Aristotle, classification of demo-

cracies, 74; of justice, 44 ff.

definition of citizen and State,

-103; definition of justice,
19; of happiness, 14.


280
Aristotle, Encyclopaedia of, 41,
43


terminology of, 43 ff., 152.

works of, 43 n.

treatment of contract and de-
lict by, 46 f.

on action for assault and de-
tention, 62.

appropriationas natural source
of property, 213.

Archinos, 62.

associations, 119 f.

barbaric roots of
164.

compensation, 47.

conventions, 230 f.

correspondence of duties to
rights, 52.

delimitation of negligence and
accident, 183.

distribution of advantages,
140.

doxyacia for archonship, 95.

education of citizen, 16.

elements of the State, 13.

erixetporovia, 141.

érreixera, 64 ff.

equality in number and pro-
portion, 56.

épavixal dixar, 125.

exchange, 69 f.

functions of King Archon, 181.

ypappareis, 82.

guardianship of law, 137.

Heliastic procedure, 147.

Hippodamos of Miletos, 49.

individual and State, 102 f.

juridical life of city, 105.

juridical nature of State, 97 f.

Kleisthenes’ reforms, 9.

legislation of Oxylos, 253; by
decree, 130f.; in demo-
cracies and oligarchies, 8.

limits of city, 13.

Lysimachos, 63.

market supervision, 264.

measures to regulate property,
16,

vopos dypados, 41,


slavery,


INDEX


vopos KaBoAov, 129 f,

— xowos, 41.

— and Wyduopa, 74.

numbers of jury, 143 f.

origin of cities, 2.

principle of distribution, 55.

procedure for homicide, 177.

retaliation, 69 f.

social constitution of Athens,
85.

land law, 52, 212.

Spartan conception of citizen-
ship, 17.

Spartan institutions, 8.

standard of distribution, 53,
56.

standard of utility, 34.

treatment of wills, 67.

arithmetical proportion in cor-
rective justice, 47.
arithmetical scheme of society,

85 f.

apibpo, 56.

Arkadians, agreement of, with
Teians.

Arkesine in Amorgos, inscrip-
tions of, 231; loan to, 81,
108, 243, 246 f.; treaty of,
with Naxos, 247.

appyxtos (aypods), 217.

arrest of thief, 186; of debtors,
246 f.

arson, 75, 167, 181 f.

Artaxerxes Memnon, 204.

Artemis, 4, 97.

Artemis, women’s worship of,
124.

aoéBea, 99 f.

aceBeias ypapy, 173.

Asia Minor, Greek cities of, 136,
204; inscriptions of, 5.

assault, action for, 47, 166, 192.


assemblies of phratries and
demes, 124.

Assembly, administrative cases
in, 168.


attendance at, 139. .
decision of, in eicayyeAta, 169.
decrees of, 130 f.


INDEX


Assembly, denunciation in, 150f.
procedure in, 132 f.
Assembly, special, of 6,000, 131,
139.
assertion of private power over
things, 212 ff.
of property rights by diy
ovcias, 223.
assessment of damage, 49.
assessors, 156, 178.
associations, organization of, 124,
aotpateias ypady, 62, 169.
aovAia, 156.
asylum, 163.
Athene Polias as mistress of
Athens, 97.
property of, 112, 205, 218.
Athenian Constitution, Aris-
totle’s treatise on, 51. 53,
59, 62, 82, 95, 137, 141,
177, 254, 264.
Courts, practice of, 4, 216.
Courts and subjective element
in pleading, 65 f.
democracy, restoration of, un-
der Demetrios, 137.
Demos, attitude of, as regards
officials, 140 f.
fleet at Samos, 107.
jurisdiction, methods
principles of, 159.
jurors, 144.
law and property of foreigners,


and


201.
law as regards uBpis and po-
xéela, Lo:


League, juridical importance
On 4,7 7.:111;.168f.
State, continuity of, 104.
Athenians, confusion of Jaws
and decrees by, 131.
humanity and fairness of, 65.
religious doctrine of, 99.
Athenogenes, case of, 68, 244,
263.
Athens, centre of international
intercourse, 153.
contrasted with Rome as re-
gards property, 197 f.


281


democratic methods at, 191.
house of Athene at, 97.
influence of, on Greek law,
254,
the xAjpos at, 52.
land law at, 210.
legislation at, 129 f.
privileges of citizens at, 53 f.
supervision of markets at,
264.
and Chalkis, treaty between,
107; and Eretria, treaty
between, 107; and Phase-
lis, treaty between, 157;
and Selymbria, treaty be-
tween, 107.
atipnto. ayaves, 49, 191.
atiuta, for abuse of magistrates,
194,
of Andokides, 72 f.
breaches of, 148.
of debtors, 205.
as penalty for crime, 174,
188 ff.
of phratry, 88.
ariuor, arrest of, 187.
Attainder, Bill of, 62.
Attika, economic condition of,
210f., 245, 252 ff,
inscription of phratry from,


attribution of cases to Courts,
178 f.; of land, 202 f.

atrocities, 163.

auction of confiscated goods, 210.

auctor of ownership, 198, 261.

audit, 168.

auditorsof expenditure by magis-
trates, 141.

authorized private action, 246.

avroxpatwp, 77, 140.

avtopaxeiv, 258.

aéoves of Solon, 5, 120.


Babylon, 2.

Bacchiadae, 101.

bail after évdeés, 1875; bail a
_  chaptel, 259.

bailee and bailor, 257.


282


bailiffs, non-employment of, in
Greece, 220.
banishment, 191, 209.
banker, Alexandros, 81.
Pasion, error of, 194.
bankers, loans to cities by, 81,
108 f.
barbarian and Hellenic civiliza-
tion, 6, 164.
barren land, 217 f.
Baowr<is on shield of Achilles,
90.
bath-house, possession of, 227.
theft in, 176, 196.
battery, assault and, 192.
beam as cause of death, 185.
Beauchet on origin of property,
206; on éefovAns diy, 226 ;
on hypothecary securities,
252 n°; onovoias dix, 225 n.
BeBatwors, 216 n’.
bees, domestication of, 213.
Bendis at Athens, 126.
Bentham, aim of political union,
34, 113.
bequest, Solonian conditions of,
212.
bequests, 80.
betrothal, in Greek custom, 235.
better right, 198, 221.
Bia and vopos, 31, 129 n.
Biaa cvvadrAdypata, 47.
Biaiwv dikyn, 61 f., 192 f.
Bill of Attainder, 62.
BAraBys dixn, 182, 194 ff.
Blackstone on public and private
wrongs, 165.
Blass on inscription at Olympia,
83.
bloodshed, pollution of, 185.
blows, 174, 176.
death from, 182 f.
Boiotia, confederation of, 159 f.
Boiotian League, 118.
Boiotians, Four Councils of the,
119.
Boiotos, case of, 195.
Bokchoris, 245.
“ bootless”’ death, 182.


INDEX


boots and houses, equation of, 70.


Bosporos, 153.

BovAx, action of, in rpoBoAy, 150.
function of, 115, and see

Council.

Bovdjs, ypapparets THs, 82.

Bovdevdpevov, 76, 12

BovAeicews, trial, 185.

Brahmanic marriage, 233.


Brandileone on _ conventions,
241 fff.

Brasidas, cult of, at Amphipolis,
58.


Brea, colony of, decree concern-
ing, 52, 118, 189, 202.

breach of aripia, 148.

breach of contract, 46.

prosecution for, 79.

bribes, acceptance of, 168.

bride and bridegroom, 236.

British Museum, inscription in,
155.

burial grounds of family, 206.

Buselos, otkos of, 91 f.

business agreements, 80 f.; in-
tercourse, instruments in,
239 ff.

business practice as basis of law,
80.

business rules in Athenian law,
75.

Buzygae, rules of, 163.

by-laws of corporations, 125.


Caecilius quoted by Harpokra-
tion, 225-6.

Caillemer on dtadixacia, 221.

captivity, leading into, 154.

Caracalla, constitution, 241.

Carthaginians, custom of, in
Minos, 21.

cattle as property, 200 ; for par-
tition, 208 f.

causa of obligation, 243 f., 257.

cause, in convention, 237.

cautto, 243.

ceremonial acts in law, 232 f.

Chaladria, grant of citizenship
by, 117,


INDEX


Chaleion, agreement of, with
Oiantheia, 155 f.
Chalkis, lots formed at, 203.
treaty between Athens and,
107;
change in law by enlargement
of application, 80.
Charidemos, proposed honours
10; 430.
Charondas, land law of, 255;
on sale, 231, 263.
chartered companies, 103.
chattels, appropriation of, 213.
attribution of, 209.
disseisin of, 193.
and land, 199f.; as security,
250.
xe_poypagov, 238,
Chios, inscription of, 87.
restoration of democracy at,
136.
chirographa, 240.
choice of actions, 166 f., 192.
Choragos, Demosthenes as, 61 f.,
150, 166.
iN poisoning case, 184.
chorus, training of, 222.
Cicero, use of 76 dékarov by, 19.
circumstantial evidence, 239;
Isaios on, 66.
citizen, Aristotelian definition
of, 103:
“citizen of the world”, Hippias
and Demokritos, 28.
citizens, protection of,at Athens,
63.
representation
107 f., 109.
religious duties of, 98 f.
rights of, and public safety,
187.
citizenship, basis of, 91.
grants of, 86, 131.
incomplete forms of, 95 f.
legal conditions of, 94, 117 f.
privileges of, 53, 116 f.
city, corporate life of, 106.
limit of, 2.
obligation of, in loans, 108 f.


of city by,


283


city, part of, in conviction for
homicide, 180.
personification of, 101.
plenipotentiaries of, 257.
property of, 108 f.
representation of, for treaties
and loans, 107 ff.
religion of, 96 ff.; treatment
of debtors by, 245.
City Commonwealth, 2, 3.
City-State, 5 f.
civic justice, 44; public sym-
bolization of, 237.
rights, loss of, 187 ff.
civil actions, 191 fff.
civilization, Hellenic, 164.
civitas sine suffragio, 95.
claims to kinship, 59.
claim of liberty for slave, 193.
claims, enforcement of, against
members of another State,
154.
against the city, 110.
settled by diaducacia, 222.
classification of civil actions,
1Sié
of kinds of justice, 45.
of offences, 173 ff.
of State functions, 128.
of wrongs, 165 f.
clerks, 82 f.
“club” (€pavos), 122.
code civil, 200.
Code of Gortyn, see Gortyn.
Code Napoléon, 64, 213.
Codex of Justinian, 243 f.
colleges, formation of, 126; of
magistrates, 140.
colonia partiaria, 259.
colonies, foundation of, 52,
202.
colonization, and common law of
Greece, 158.
colony, allegiance of, 158.
combination of judicial and de-
liberative functions, 143 f.
— combines, 119ff.
in Hellenistic period, 127 f.
coutia, 237.


284


commanders at Arginusae, 62,
trial of, 133, 151, 176.
commanders representing city,

107.
commandments of Buzygae, 63.
commercial cases, 4, 122, 161;
credit, 263f.; debts, im-
prisonment for, 245.
laws, 158.
relations, 154.
common burial grounds, 120.
Common Law, 72, 78.
of Greece, 3, 11, 158.
of U.S.A., 78.
Common lawyers, 237,
common meals, 120.
of Dorians, 8.
community of legal principles,
5, 158.
of race, 96.
companies for profit, 119.
comparative proximity of rela-
tionship, 220.
— right, 221.
comparison of ancient Greek
with modern jurisprudence,
265.
compensation, 154, 161, 165f.,
1743191 ff.,195 f., 236,258.
Aristotle’s treatment of, 47 f.
competence of courts, how de-
termined, 178.
composition, payment of, 188.
compromise, 90, 177, 179.
compulsory sanctions, 163.
concealed property, 202.
concession of property by city,
198.
conclusion of sale, 262 ff.
conditional rights of property,
19%:
confarreatio, 237.
confederation of Boiotia, 159 f.
confirmation of legislative re-
form, 135.
confiscated property, claims to
part of, 222.
confiscation, 174,
204 f., 209.


189, 191,


INDEX


confiscation for debt to city, 110.
and land tenure, 203.
conflict of ideas in Supplices of
Aischylos, 22.
“ conflict of laws ”, rules of, 157,
159, 161.
conscience, 33.
consent in agreements, 233 f.,
257.
conservation of laws, 136.
consideration, doctrine of, 237 f.
considerations of justice, 68.
consolidated funds of city, 110.
conspiracy, 184 f.
constitution giving identity to
State, 98. See zoAureia.
of judicature, 143 f.
constitutional contrasts between
Greek cities, 8.
constitutional law, principles of,
128 f.
constitutions of dower, 261;
registration of, 237.
continuity of Greek custom
under Roman law, 255.
continuity, moral and legal, of
the State, 104.
contract, 192.
breach of, 46.
consensual, 234, 257.
of lease and hire, 256.
of service, 46.
in writing, 81.
contracts, fairness in dealing
with them, 66, 68 f.
law of, in the Imperial period,
241.
contractual obligation, interpre-
tation of terms, 46.
contractus, forum, 157.
lex, 160.
contrast between Greek and Ro-
man property law, 197 f.
between land and chattels,
199 f.
contributory negligence, 183.
control of administration, 140 ff.
controversies as to rights, 58 f.,
220 fff.


INDEX


contumelious aggression, action
for, 47 f. 166, 174.
convention of Hephaistos, 234;
of Orchomenos, 242 f.
conventions, 230 ff.; interpreta-
tion of, 157.
conveyancesof public and temple
property, 256.
corn, deficiency of, in Attika,
153.
law limiting purchase of,114.
corn freight, loan on, 78.
mortgage of, 222.
corndealers, speech of Lysias
against, 114.
corporal punishment, 191.
corporation, State as, 98.
corporations, 121 ff.
authorization of, by State,
rid.
by-laws of, 125.
continuous existence of, 122.
of public law, 103.
religious, 122 f.
corporative bodies, development
of, in Greece, 122.
corrective justice, 45 ff.
corruption of judges, 168.
Council of Five Hundred, ad-
ministrative supervision of,
142.
jurisdiction of, 168.
in eicayyedia, 169.
oath of, 115.
powers of, 62 f,.
mpoBovrAevpa Of, 132.
representation of city by, 107.
and Archinos, 115.
and Lysimachos, 114.
Council of Second Athenian
League, 159.
counter-accusation for false im-
prisonment, 175.
counter-action in distress, 156,
246 f.
Court, Federal, of Boiotia, 160.
Court of justice,,theft in, 196.
Courts, Athenian, discretionary
power of, 69.


285


Courts, Athenian, importance of,
owing to League, 77.
Courts, municipal, for inter-
municipal justice, 161.

Courts of corporations, 125.
cousinship in olkos of Buselos,
92.
cowardice, 172.
cowards, actions against, 169.
credit, 263 f. ; — agreements,
231,
creditor, execution by, 219,
246 f.
crime, elements of, 182 ff.
crime and tort, 165 ff.
criminal intention, 182 ff.
justice, 58.
law, treatment of, by Black-
stone, 165.
law, aim of, according to Pro-
tagoras, 35.
procedure, archaic forms of,
Lids
criminals, destruction of, 188.
crown, offer of, to Council, 142.
Crown, speech on, 138.
cult of ancestors and early land
law, 206 f.
cultivation as source of land
tenure, 212, 216 ff.
cultural aspect of Hellenic civi-
lization, 164.
cults as centres of political


groups, 97 f.
societies (corporations) for,
122.


Cumae, 254.

custom of Greeks, legal, 233;
and Roman law of mort-
gage, 255 ; custom and law,


customary law at Athens, 75 ff.
declaration of, 129.
customs, generalization and uni-
fication of, 158.
spread of, to colonies, 158.
variety of, 20; Celtic, German
and Slavonic, 232.
shipping and trade, 82, 161,


286


Damage, material, 48 f.~192,194.
moral, 48 f., 192.
damages, 175, 191, 225.
Dareios, King of Persia, 20.
Dareste on audio Byreiv, 221 n’.
Sarynrayv aipects, 51.
daughters, inheritance of, 208,
220.
de cujus, 214 f.
death caused by animal or in-
animate object, 185.
by fraud, 47.
death penalty, 151, 188.
debt, actions of, 214; execution
for, 245 ff.
in Attika, 210 ff.
debtor as juror, 188.
procedure against, by éuBa-
tevows, 219.
property of, claimed, 225.
debtors, seizure of, 245.
of the State, 139; and see pub-
lic debtors.
debts, cancellation of, 204 f.
decision a function of the People,
143.
decision of arbitrators, agree-
ment to abide by, 249.
of court, effect on trade, 79.
decree, legislation by, 130 f.
decrees, significant form of, 143.
and laws, 73 f.
defamation, 174.
defamatory  disfranchisement,
72 f.
defaulters, 225.
‘* defence of the realm”, 148.
defendant, status of, in conflict
of laws, 157.
deAla, 235.
deAlas ypady, 169.
Deinarchos, lost speeches of, 222,
225.
Sexacpod ypapy, 168.
Dekeleia, house of, 89, 178.
_ delation, 148.
delay in bringing action, 214 f.
delegation of executive power,
143..


INDEX


deliberation a function of the
People, 143.
deliberative aspect of power,128.
functions of the People, 128 ff.
delicts, Aristotle’s treatment of,
46.
— of officials, 168; of ship-
pers, &c., 161.
delictual obligations, sureties in,
249.
delivery, payment on, 231.
Delos, hypothecary mortgage at,
254.
temple accounts, 206 n°.
Delphi, Amphiktyonic League
of, 163.
inscriptions at, 87, 156, 254,
262.
oracle of, 75, 154.
Delphinion, 178 f., 181.
demagogues, 172.
demarchs, 124, 248.
demes, 120f., 124; representa-
tion of, 257.
and citizenship, 94.
Demeter, 97.
Demetrios of Phaleron, 137.
Synproupyds, 88.
demiurgi, 156.
democracy, restoration of, in
Chios, 136.
degenerate, 130.
and liberty, 16.
democratic tribunals, 143 f.
Demodokos, story of, 234 ff., 248.
Demokritos on destruction of
criminals, 188.
on natural justice and reason,
40.
on diaus and vopos, 26 f.
use of aidetoba by, 33.
Demon, case of, 146. _—_-
Demophantes, decree of, 170.
Sypomrpara, 205.
djpuos (= the State), 105.
Demos, action of, in kataxepo-
tovia, 149.
and debts left by the Thirty,
106.


INDEX


Demos in Athenian juridical
system, 69.
as tyrant, 74.
dypdoro, public slaves, 83, 126.
Demosthenes, fiscal policy of,
Si Li.
accusation of Meidias, 61 f.,
149 f., 166, 174.
charges of, against Androtion,
142, 172.
speeches of, on avridoats, 55.
on assessment in case of
Evander and Menippos, 50.
on betrothal, 236.
on choice of action in case of
Konon, 166, 176.
on claim to a name, 222.
on commercial law, 4, 82, 158.
on damage, 194 f.
on death by accident, 182.
definition of law, 18.
on delay in bringing claim,
214f.
on diadicacta, 221.
on duavynduots, 94.
on diky e€ovAns, 61.
on distinction between law and
decree, 131.
on duties of King Archon, 181.
On évorkiov dikn, 224.
on estate held in mortgage,
200.
on éaywyy, 227.
on execution for debt, 76, 247.
On ypady) tapavopwv, 138,170.
on inheritance, 59, 91 f., 224.
on loanto skipper of corn-ship,
78 f.
on vopobecia, 134.
on vopuos as ovvOyKyn, 18, 230.
on pardon of murderer, 186.
on procedure in homicide, 177.
on ovvOnKxa, 244; on sureties,
249 f.
on unprofitable legislation,
bei;
Demotionidae, 89, 178.
denizens, 95 f.
denunciation by, 148.


287


denunciation, latitude allowed to,
148.
— to Assembly, 150 f.
deposit of one-tenth, 221.
deposition of slave, agreement
to abide by, 249.

deposits in litigation, 162, 249 f.

deprivation of goods by violence,
193.

descent, purity of, 93 f.

despot, ukases of, 130.

destitute citizen, case of, 54.

determination of tribunals, 178 f.

development of corporations in
Greece, 122.

of Greek international law,

153.

of State from village, 2.

deviations from strict law in
Athenian Courts, 216.

dextrarum prehensio, 233.

diadixacia as class of action, 58 f,,
192.

after confiscation, 205.

for debts to city, 110.

decree of Demotionidae on, 90.

for inheritance, 221 f.

of Hagnias, 80, 145.

about a name, 195.
duutyrai, 50, 146 f.
duairntys, arbitration of, 145.
dialectics and rhetoric, 37.
duaveuntixov dikatov, 45.
diavoun, 53.
diawnduors, 55, 89, 94.
dictator ret publicae

twendae, 135.
dictatorial legislator, 135.
difference between free men and

slaves, 192.

Digest, 18, 82.
dikar and ypadai, 165.
Sika ao ovpordwv, 157, 161.

éupnvor, 146, 245.

€urropikat, 161 n.

épavixat, 122, 125, 127.

Kowwvikat, 122, 127.

mpos Tia and kara twos, 191f,

Tplakooratat, 217,


constt-


288


Dikaiarchos, 88.
duxarodocia, 156.
Dikaiogenes, succession of, 214,
216 n’.
dtkatov, 19.
Aristotelian use of, 44 f.
dixaoovvn, 18.
definition of, 19.
n KaOdAov, 57 ff.
dixacrai, decision of, on decrees,
135; functions of, 129,139,
143.
dixacrai kara Sypovs, 77, 148 f.
duxactypia, representative of
sovereign people, 69.
dixaorypiov, appeal to, 149.
decision of, in case of Hagnias,
93.
ducalov, ro, 128.
Sikn adpaipécews eis éAevOepiav,
193.
Braiwy, 61 f.
BraBys, 182, 194 ff.
évotxiov, 223 f., 228 f.
eEapéoews, 193.
ééovAns, 60f., 193, 220, 224ff.,
228 f.
Kaxyyopias, 193 f.
kakotexviov, 196.
Kaprov, 223 f., 228 f.
kXomrys, 196.
ovoias, 223 f., 228.
Tepi TOD TA TaTp@a SedwKevat,
201.
WevdoxAnreias, Wevdouaprupiov,
196.


Tpavpatwv éx mpovoias, 182.
dikn and aides, 33, 37.
Dio Chrysostom, 5 n?.
Dionysiac artists, union of, 127.
Dionysios of Halikarnassos on
patria potestas, 7.
Dionysodoros, case of, 78 f., 186.
Dionysos, franchise of, 246.
leases of lands of, 217 f.
Dionysos, patron of Apaturia, 97.
Diopeithes, decree of, concerning
impiety, 100.
SiopOwrixdv Sixasov, 45 ff.


INDEX


discipline of corporation, 125.
disfranchisement, defamatory,
TEE.
grounds for, 94.
dispossession, 224.
disputes (audio Byrjces), 58.
local settlement of, 149.
between citizens of different
states, 154 f.
under intermunicipal agree-
ment, 161.
disseisin, action of, 224 ff.; judge-
ment in, 247.
of a chattel, 193.
dissolution of corporations, 123.
distinction of dadicacia from
dikyn or ebOvva, 221,
of fixed and varying fines,
191.
of kinds of property, 199 ff.
of law and decree, 129 ff.
of murder and manslaughter,
183.
of principals and accomplices
in crime, 184,
distress, 154, 193, 219 f., 246 ff.
distribution of honours and pro-
perty, 51 ff.
of lots as basis of property,
195,
distributive justice, 45, 47, 51 ff.
divine origin of law and justice,
18, 20, 41.
division of functions in the State,
128.
divisions of justice, 44 f.
divorce, 201, 208.
documents, registration of, see
registration.
use of, in Courts, 147,
dogs, damage by, 195.
Soxipacia, 53.
for archonship, 95.
for atipia, 190.
of Council, 142.
of magistrates, 140 f., 168.
domicile of defendant, 157.
dominium ex jure Quiritium,
198.


INDEX *


donation, 222.
Dorians, common meals of, 8.
— and Ionians, 7.
dwpwv ypahy, 168.
dwordixta, 155 ff.
dos profecticia, 251.
dowry (dower), in code of Gor-
tyn, 201, 208; constitutions
of, 237, 261; property
pledged for, 219;  resti-
tution of, 251; as test of
legitimacy of marriage, 80.
double price as fine, 193.
ddga THs TOAEws, 35, 38 f., 265.
Drakon,
law of, on manslaughter, 76,
90, 177 ff, 180.
possible addition to, 180; re-
enactment of, 181.
and guardianship of law, 137.
as Jeopoberns, 74, 129.
Drakontides, accusation of Peri-
kles by, 132.
drama, illustrating public opi-
nion, 22 ff.
dream, made ground for eicay-
yeAia, 152.
dress, as property for partition,
208.
drugs, administering of, 184.
dualism, in judicial procedure,
145.
dualistic ownership, 209.
dvvacretat, 1,
duplication of price, 193.
duties of citizens,
religious, 98 f.
to State, according to Plato,40.


Earnest money in sale, 262.

€xew Kal kpareiv, 198.

economic condition of Attika,
210f.

education of citizen, 16.

Egypt, law of debt in, 245.

Egyptian papyri, 5, 242.

vessel as prize of war, 139.

Eikadets, trial of members by,

125.


2231-2


289


cicayyeAta, 62, 149ff, 169 f,,
171; abuse of, 152.
eicaywyn, 146.
ejectment, 225, 227.
éxyvin, 233 n’.
exkAnoia, function of, 69, 84,
115.
— xvpia, 141.
ekklesiasts as heliasts, 139.
exkAntos oXs, 160.
extnobar Kupiws, 204.
election by lot to offices, 140.
elements of an action at law,
116.
of crime, 182 ff.
of property, 197 f.
Eleusis, 97.
Eleusinian Mysteries, 72 f., 76.
éXevOepia, as basis of citizenship,
55, 57, 116.
eAcvGepiav, adaipecis eis, see
under dixn.
Eleven, the, 147, 186 f.
emancipatio, 233 n’.
euBarevors, 219 f., 248.
embezzlement, 168.
eminent control of Romans, 243.
domain of State, 203.
éupnvos dikyn, 146, 245.
euirevars, 217 f.
emphyteutic leases, 259.
€urropikat dcka, 161 n.
€utroptkov ovpPdAavov, 81 n.
‘en fait de meubles la possession
vaut titre’, 213.
ev 600, 183.
év péper Oikavov, TO, 45,
ev Ppeatrot, 185.
enacted law, 72 f.
Encyclopaedia of Aristotle, 41,
43.
évoeréts, 148, 187.
evéxupov, 250, 252.
enforcement of claims against
members of foreign States,
154; of legality, 115 f.; of
obligations, 245 ff.
English law of corporations,
ey:


290


English law, injunction in, 195.

judicial decisions in, 136.
English writ of right, 221 n‘.
eyyvav, eyyvn, eyy’ns, 234 ff.
eyyvnors emi dixaious, 236.
éyyuynrai, 236 n*, 262.
eyxtyots, 200.
évoixiov, action, 223 f.
evOvunpa, 28, 37.
enticing of slaves, 47.
entry (é€uBarevors), 219 f.
éx attopupw, 180, 186.
ephebos, oath of, 99.
épecis, 77, 147.

Ephesos, inscription on debts,
204 f.
Ephetae, 167, 178, 180f., 185.
Ephialtes as dictatorial legis-
lator, 135.
establishment of vowodivAakes
by, 137.
law of, dealing with Areiopa-
gos, 30, 167, 187.
and range of appeal to
Heliastic Courts, 77.
eridukacia, 215, 220 f.
érriduxos, 220.
érixepotovia of magistrates,
141f., 168.

— tov vopwv, 133.
Epicurean view of welfare, 14.
Epicurus, 13.
éerieixera, 45, 63 ff.

of Athenian jurors, 144.

Isokrates on, 106.
érvetkés, TO, In conventions, 239.
érikAnpwv KdKwows, 173.
é€rrikAnpos, 93, 215, 220.

in Solon’s legislation, 211.
Epiknemidian Lokri, 203.
érixtyta, 201.

Epikteta, society of, 122 f.
Epimenides of Krete, 185.
érurda, 199 f.

ervoratys, 134, 168.
erioratixy ypapy, 168.
éritdypata, 130.
Epizephyrian Lokrians, 228.
equality, principle of, 57.


INDEX


equation of boots and houses, 70.
equitable remedy, 239; equit-
able, the, 44.
equity, 45.
in Greek courts, 42, 144.
in Greek jurisprudence, 63 ff. ;
in treatment of contract,
239, 244 f.
épavot, 121 f.; épavos loan, 121 f.,
232.
épavixat dixat, 122, 125, 127.
Eraton, debt of, 110.
Eratosthenes, Lysias’ speech on
death of, 175.
Erechtheus, 97.
Eretria, treaty between Athens
and, 107.
Ergokles, deposit by, 250.
Erinyes, 185.
eristic method of Sokrates, 38,
41.
eppnyeia, 217.
Esmein, on convention, 234 ff.
Esprit des lois of Montesquieu,
10:
estates, actions about, 223 f.
estates in Attika, 203.
‘estimation ” (Soxpacia) of can-
didate, 53.
Eteobutadae, 178.
Eteobutad, Pyrrhos the, 188.
Ethics of Aristotle, 16, 51f.,
57, 64, 69f., 140,
Eubulides, in case of d:ayygrors,
94.
and inheritance of Hagnias,
S1f,
Eubulos, financial policy of, 112.
eddatpovia, 14,
Eukleides, archonship of, 73, 94.
Eumeleides, 63.
Eumolpidai, 76.
Eupatrid clans, 300 representa-
tives of, 181.
Kupatridai, 75 f.
evmpagia, 14.
Euripides, on dixaoovvy, 24.
on Greeks and barbarians, 6,
23.


INDEX


Euripides on tyranny and law,
73.
charge of impiety against, 100.
Euryptolemos, action in trials
of generals, 151. _
evOvva, 141 f,
evOuvos, 141 ; — of tribe, 168.
Euthyphron of Plato, 98.
Euxenippos, speech for, 151 f.,
169,
Euxitheos, case of, 94.
Evander the Thespian, case of,
S0f,, 147,
eviction, 227.
evidence, law of, 72.
treatment of, 145.
right to give, 196.
on oath, right to give, 189.
before arbitrator, 147.
‘evil livers” debarred from poli-
tical life, 190.
ex lege Aquilia de damno injuria
dato, 194.
ex post facto legislation, prohi-
bition of, 139.
eEaywyy, 227.
eEarpeoews dixn, 193.
examination of facts and pro-
cedural form, 151.
exception, 146.
based on prescription, 215 f.
exchange, justice in, 69 f.
of property, 55.
execution on city for non-pay-
ment of loan, 81, 108.
by creditor or mortgagee, 219,
245 f.
by judgement or magistrate’s
order, 219f., 261.
by private force, 227, 247 f.
exécution parée, 81,
execution of penalties by cor-
poration, 125; bydemarchas,
248,
executive officials, position of, at
Athens, 140 f.
power, delegation of, 143.
power of State, 128.
eEnyntal, T5f.


291


exile for murderers, 179 f.
efidAew, 60, 225.
eovAns diky, 601., 193, 220,
224 ff.
Beauchet on, 226.
explatory functions of Epimeni-
des, 185.
— rites for homicide, 185.
exploitation of barren land, 217;
of private property, 113.
export, prohibition of, in Attika,
153.
expropriation, 204 ff.
extra commercium, 206.
extravagance, 173.


Fair price, 70.
fairness, 45, 63 ff.
false evidence, 196.
false imprisonment as an adul-
terer, 175.
false witness, 47.
familia pecuniaque, 200, 209°.
Jamiliae erciscundae in Roman
law, 51.
familial source of land law, 206f.
families and holdings, 91 f.
family, the, impoverishment of,
94; offences against, 173 f.
family graves, 93.
groups and land tenure, 206.
law and religion, 6.
organization in city structure,
174,
property as basis of citizen-
ship, 91; in Attika, 211 f.
unity, religious, 93.
fate, idea of, in drama, 23.
Federal Court of Boiotia, 160.
governments in Greece, 118.
federation, forms of, 118.
of families, admission to, 95.
of kindreds, 85 f., 91, 178.
federations, 158.
fee, claim to, of commonwealth,
193, 196.
fictitious instruments, 242 f. ;
sale, 261 f.
fiduciary sales, 255,


U2


292


fields, ownership of; 207.
finance, machinery of, controlled
by Council, 142.
financial measure, action of vopo-
Gérar in, 134.
fine, claim to part of, by in-
former, 148.
fines, 190 f.
fixed or varying, 191.
of corporations, 125.
of phratry, 88 f.
as sanction in international
agreements, 161 f.
in case of defeat in ypady,
174, 176.
for failure to pay debt, 109 f.
for rape, 193.
for theft, 196.
First Archon, duties and func-
tions of, 51, 60, 77, 173.
First Athenian League, 4, 111,
Tos i.
fiscal policy of Athens, 110 f.
fiscus, 109.
fishing, 213.
Firodapuopyés, Furompd€evos, 117.
five years as time limit to claim,
214.
Fouxnes, succession of, 208 f. ;
tenancy of, 259.
force as the ultima ratio, 28 f.
foreclosure, 253, 261.
foreign cults at Athens, 126.
foreign imports, 153.
foreigner in case of zrpoBoAn, 150.
foreigners, prohibition of, to ac-
quire land, 201.
punishment of, 170, 191.
formalism in law, 232 f.
formulae in inscriptions concern-
ing dovdia, 156; of be-
trothal, 236; of oaths, 162.
formulation of law of treason,
151.
forum contractus, 157.
forum domicilit of defendant,
157.
Foucart on development of asso-
ciations in Greece, 126.


INDEX


Four Councils of Boiotia, 119.

Four Hundred, fall of, 90, 170.

four-footed animals, damage by,
195.

France, prohibition of social
combinations in, 119.

treatment of social groups in,

85.

fraud in delicts, 47.

free trade in land, 210 f.

freedmen and foreigners as
citizens, 117.

freedom in choice of action, 166.

French code civil, 200.

French law, exécution parée, 81 ;
seisin, 219.

— lawyers, on cause, 237.
friendly arrangements, 232.
functions of the people, delibera-

tive, 128 fff.

judicial, 143 ff.
funds for war, 111.

Funeral Oration of Perikles,
16.

funerals, enactment about, 88 f.

Sundus, 200.

furniture as property, 199 f.

Fustel de Coulanges on origin
of private ownership, 206 f.


Gage, 250 f.; seizure of, 219.
Gaius in Digest, law of Solon,
120.
on use of instruments, 240 f. ;
on obligations, 255.
games, national, of Greeks, 154.
garrisons, right to keep, 159.
yn kaprovoa and Wry, 217.
yevn, 85 ff., 124, 178.
general justice, 45.
generalization of customs and
laws, 157 f.
generals, election of, 140.
trial of, see Arginusae.
yervnra, 85 f.
geometrical proportion in dis-
tributive justice, 47.
geomori, 255.
yeovopuor, at Brea, 202.


INDEX 293


German law,
Gewere in, 227; hostages in,

235; “Kauf bricht Miete”,
258.

Gernet, on Homeric convention,
234 ff.

gift, épavos as, 232.

Glaukon and Glaukos in Hagnias
case, 146.

Glaukon in Republic, 29.

Glossary of Harpokration, 233 ff.

Glotz on duplication of price in

fines, 193n?; on Homeric
convention, 234 ff.

on reference in Politics to
Solon’s land law, 212 n.

Gneist, doctrine of, on conven-

tions, 240 ff.

yropuyn Sikaotary, 68.

Gods, cities as households of, 97.
justice as regards, 98.
property of, 205 f.

yovewv Kkakwows, 173.

good faith, 214; in sale, 263;

guarantees of, 260 f.

“good life’, 2, 14.

goods (wdpara), 209.

Gorgias, sophist, contrasted with

Sokrates, 37.
subjectivism of, 28, 40.

Gorgias of Plato, 29.

Gorgos and Minyon, grant of
citizenship to, 86.

Gortyn, law of,
on heiresses, 211.
on land, 207 f.
on possession of a slave, 228.
on property, 201.
on tariff for rape, 175, 193.
and Greek law in general, 7,

it.

Grace, 69,

ypappareis, 82 f.

granting of justice, 156 ff.

grants of citizenship, 86, 131.

ypapai, 165 ff.
aypapiov, ddroyiov, &c., &c.,

168 f.


iepoovAias, 173.


UBpews, 150, 174 f,, 192.

kAo7ys, 168, 174, 176, 196.

tapavopwv, 84, 133, 137 ff,
170, 189,

TOU py eriTndeiov vopov, 171.

graves, 93.

Greek betrothal,235; contracts,
binding force of, 233 ; cus-
tom, 233 f.

Greek customs under Roman
rule, 255.

Greek democracies and _prece-
dents, 78 f.

doctrine of property, summary
of, 228.
drama, legal conceptions in,
22 ff.
international _ law,
— games, 154.
Greek law, unity of, 3.
of combinations, 120; of con-
ventions, 230 ff.; works on,
256.
on derivation of title, 216;
gage in, 250.
Greek leases, contents of, 258 f.
— public law, 102 ff.
— wedding, 236.

Greeks and barbarians, 6.

Grotius, 33.

group psychology of city, 96.

guarantors of city’s debt, 109 ;
in sale, 262.

guardians of orphans, accounts
of, 214; obligation of, 251.

guardianship of laws, 136 ff.

yvia, 233.

Guiraud on origin of land tenure,
206.

yvvaikt meGopevos, 263.


154 ff.


Hagnias, estate of, 59, 80, 91 f,,
145, 221.
otxos of, 91 f.
Halia in Doric Greece, 69.
Halikarnassos, 139; debt of,
246; hypothecary mort-
gage at, 254; inscription
of, 198 n’, 204, 260.


294


Halimus, deme of, 94.

hand labourer (thes), 210.

handfasting, 233.

handicraft, Greek view of, 96.

happiness, Aristotle’s definition
of, 14.

Harpokration,on daryrav aipects,
51; on diy évoixiov, 224 ;
on — éfovAns, 60, 225 ff. ;
on —ovgias, &c., 223 ff.; on
Kataxeiporovia, 149,

hearth, ancestor worship at, 206.

as asylum, 101, 163.
establishment of, in plot, 203.
of the city, 100.

Hegepolis, scribe, 83.

Hegestratos, 222.

heiresses, marriage of, 6, 93,
209, 211 f.

heirs, wrongs to, 77.

éxovoia cvvadddypara, 46 f., 230.

Extypopo., 259.

Heliaea, jurisdiction of, 69, 168.

legislationas a function of, 129.
Heliastic commission for legisla-
tion, 134 f.
for zpoBoArn, 51.
Heliastic courts,
avaxpiots for, 50.
appeal to, 77.
limitation of procedure in, 147.
precedents in, 78.
size of, 49.
weakness and virtue of, 11, 12.

Heliastic decisions, influence of,
on law, 79.

heliasts in assembly, 139.

in criminal courts, 181.
oath of, 68, 205.

Hellenica Oxyrhynchia, 159.

Hellenika of Xenophon, 151.

Hellenion at Naukratis, 4.

Hellenism as badge of civiliza-
tion, 164.

Hellenistic period, associations
and corporations in, 127.

documents of, 240.

Hellenotamiae, 112.

"Evdexa, of, 147.


INDEX


Hephaistos, in Homer, 234, 238.
heptopada, 233.
Hera, 97.
Herakleitos on absolute good and
justice, 41.
on law, 19 ff.
Heraklea, leases of, 217 f.
herald, declaration by, 220.
heredes sui, 219.
Hermae, mutilation of, 84, 99,
249.
Hermione, 6.
hero worship, 122 f., 207.
Herodes, murder of, 20 f., 187.
Herodotos, history of,
on Naukratis, 3 f.
on variety of custom, 20 f.
on wedding of Agariste, 236.
Hestia, cult of, 100.
éoriomapwv, 209 n°,
Hesychios, 208.
éraipnows, 172, 189.
tepav dpyiwv, 120.
tepoovAias ypapy, 173.
hierarchy of judicial authorities,
78 n.
high treason, law of, 151 f.
penalty for, 189.
prosecution for, 169 f.
Hippias of Elis, “ citizen of the
world”, 28.
vopos and dias, 40 f.
Hippodamos of Miletos, 49, 144.
Hippolytos of Euripides, 100.
historical identity of State, 104.
— jurisprudence, task of, 10.
Hobbes, 33.
holdings, Plato’s 5,040, 9.
and families, 91 f., 203,
and see k\jpor.
Homer on adultery of Ares,
234 f.; on Kyklopes, 1. °
Homeric poems, influence of,
154,
homicide, 47, 75, 180 f., 177 ff.
men guilty of, 187.
see also manslaughter and
murder.
homo omnium mensura, 34.


INDEX


époydaAaktes, 86.
épotos (fellow-citizen), 17.
dporoyia, 238, 242.
dporado, 120.
honorary offices, access to, 140.
honour, loss of, see dtipia.
honours, distribution of, 51 f.
hoplites as representatives of
city, 107.
opou in Attika, 252 f.
hostages, taking of, 155, 162;
as sureties, 234 f., 248.
House of Lords, 78 n’.
housebreaking, 177.
household, 91 ff.
households and xAjpor, 91 f., 203.
of the gods, 97.
houses, actions about, 223 f.
and boots, equation of, 70.
as property, 199 f.
UBpis, 166, 190.
UBpews ypapy, 150, 174 f., 192.
humane tendencies of Greek life,
effect on law, 7.
humanity, principles of, 162 f.
— (diAavOpwrria) of the Athen-
lans, 65.
hunc fundum meum esse ato ex
jure Quiritiwm, 198.
hunting, 213.
brepnpepia, 251.
trrepnpepos, 219.
troOnKkn, 250 ff.
husband, right of, to dowry
property, 219.
Hygiainon, charge against Euri-
pides, 100.
Hyllaeans, tribe of, 210.
Hypereides, literary skill of, 12.
lost speeches of, 222.
speech of, on right of mutual
assistance of citizens, 116.
on contracts, 68.
on eicayyeAia, 151 f., 169.
on ypadpy) rapavopwv, 133 n;
on influence of women, 263;
on ovvOnKat, 244,
hypotheca, transitional use of,
253.


295


hypothecary gage, 250 ff. ; mort-
gage, 252 ff.; obligations,
219, 222.


Tasos, law of, 203 f., 260.
idealistic intellectualism of Sok-
rates, 41.
identity of the State, 97 f., 105 f.
illegal distress, 156.
illegality, accusation for, see
ypapy tapavopwv.
action for, right of bringing,
189.
ill-treatment of parents, &c.,
173.
emmeubles par destination, 200.
immoral purposes, agreements
for, 238.
immunity, 131.
Imperial rescripts, 243.
imperium, 113.
impiety, see adoéBeva.
imprisonment for debt, 245f.;
on évdeéis, 187.
as legal offence, 47.
as penalty, 190f.
of thief, 186.
inalienable holdings, 203, 210.
inanimate object, death caused
by, 185.
income from holding, 209.
incomplete forms of citizenship,
95 f.
inconvenience of law as ground
for ypady tapavopwv, 170f.
Indian custom and Greek, 21.
individual, the, and the group,
85 f.
and the State, 15 f., 85, 102f.
individualization of landed pro-
perty, 57, 210.
inequalities between classes of
population, 57.
infamia, 174, 188 ff. See also
aTipia.
infamy, infliction of, by phratry,
88.
infringement of old law by new,
136 f.


296


inheritance in law of Gortyn,
208 f.
by mother, 80.
speeches on, 59.

See also under Hagnias.
initiative in legislation, 131 f.
injunction in English law, 195.
injustice of law as ground for

ypapy tapavopwv, 170.
inscription of tenure, 198, 256ff.
inscriptions of Aixone deme

(leases), 257 f.

Argive, from Heraion, 209.

of Arkesine, 81, 108, 231.

of Asia Minor (conventions),
242,

Athenian, 95, 134.

of Brea, 118, 202.

of Chaladria, 117.

of Chaleion, 155.

of Chios, 136.

of Delphi, 87f., 156.

of Ephesos, 204 f.

of Halikarnassos, 198 n, 204,
260.

of Iasos, 204, 260.

of Kalymne, 160.

of Kos, 136, 160, 254.

of Lebedos, 136.

of Magnesia, 118.

of Mykonos, 255 n8,

of Mylasa, 204, 218.

of Oiantheia, 155.

of Olymos, 218.

of Olympia, 82 f.

of Orchomenos, 109, 242.

of Priene, 83.

of Smyrna, 118.

of Tenos, 204 n‘, 261.

of Teos, 136, 156.

of Thisbe, 218.

on citizenship, 86, 95, 117 f.

on debt, 109, 204, 242 f,,
246 f.

on leases, 257 f.

on manumission sales, 156,
262.

on payment to Peisitheides,
134.


INDEX


instruments, written, 239 ff.
instrumentum fundi, 200.
insulting behaviour, legislator’s
attitude towards, 175.
intention in contract, 234, 239;
in crime, 182 ff., 195.
interdict, 59, 227.
interests, protection of, 197,
intermunicipal humanity of
Greeks, 164.
— relations, 153.
international agreement, 155.
— arbitration, 160 f.
— justice, embodiment of, in
League, 163.
— law in Greece, develop-
ment of, 153 ff.; root of,
162.
— relations, 153 ff.
interpretation of archaic law, 68.
of conventions made at Athens
and outside, 157
of terms of contract, 46.
interpreters of law, 75 f.
intervention of patrons, 154.
intestate succession, 211.
intrusion, 224, 227.
inundation, damage by, 195.
Tonian cities, law of, 11.
Ionians, 208.
Isagoras, 97.
Isaios, dialectics of, 12.
lost speeches of, 222 f.
reference to, by Harpokration,
370.
on circumstantial evidence,
66.
on inheritance of Hagnias, 59,
80, 91f., 145, 221.
on mother’s claim, 80.
on property of Kiron, 199.
on time limit to claim of in-
heritance, 214 f.
on wills, 67.
island cities, 136.
Isokrates,
on associations under mon-
archy, 8.
on choice of action, 176.


INDEX


Isokrates,
~ on claim to Messenian terri-
tory, 213.
on contumely, 48.
on émveixeva of Athenians, 106.
on Hellenism, 164.
on identity of law of succes-
sion, 158.
on social ideal and equality,
17, 66
isolation of Greek states, 20,153.
icov, Aristotelian use of, 44.
ioomoAureta, 117.
ioria at Naupaktos, 203.
iteration of office, 140.


Jettison, law of, 82.
joining of hands, 233.
joint owners, 219.
judex, 145.
judge and arbitrator, 49 f.
judgement, execution on, 219 f.
judges, corruption of, 168.
local, 148.
judge-made law, 72.
judicature, constitution of, 143 f.
judicial arbitration on mort-
gaged estates, 205.
judicial aspect of power, 128.
authority, 78.
commission of voyobeérat, 134 f.
decisions, aim of, in English
law, 136.
functions of the People, 143 ff.
monopoly of State, 59.
judiciary power of State, 128.
judicio, procedure 7m, 145, 152.
jure, procedure zn, 145, 152.
juridical basis of marriage, 236 ;
forms, 232 f.
nature of the State, 97 f.
theory of property, 199 f.
juris periti, 76.
jurisconsults, 145.
jurisdiction of Athens in League,
159.
jurisprudence, Protagoras’ theory
of, 32.
Sokrates’ principles of, 38.


297


jurors, Athenian, judgement of,
144.
gus, 19.
civile, 2, 2343 gentewm and
honorarium, 234.
in rem, 57.
merum, 221 n4,
Quiritium, 3, 232.
justice, Aristotle’s terminology
and classification of, 44 ff.
common element in, 41.
definition of, 19.
divine origin of, 41.
granting of, 155 f.
notion of, 18.
standard of, 144 ff.
according to Antiphon the
Sophist, 29 (cf. 42).
and ancestral custom, 157.
as regards the gods, 98.
in general, 57 ff.
obtained by self-help, 155.
justification of law, 31 ff.
Justinian, Codex of, 243 f.


Kakyyoptas dixyn, 174, 193.
Kkakwous, 173.
Kaxotexviov Oikyn, 196.
Kakovpyot, 187, 190.
Kallikles, case of, 195.
in Gorgias, 29.
Kallistratos, convention of, with
Olympiodoros, 238.
Kallixenos, in Arginusae trial,
151.
fate of, 133.
Kalymna and Kos, case of, 160.
Kannonos, decree of, 151, 170.
kap7@, 209.
Kaptrov, action, 223.
Kaprovoa yn, 217.
Kaptepov eivat, 198.
Kat dvadoyiav, 47.
Kata THY apiuntikyy, 47.
Kataxeipotovia, 149.
KaTadeowkeval TA TaTpla, ypapi
tov, 173.
KatdAvors Tov Oyuov, 169.
kafoAov dikatov, TO, 45.


298


xaOoXov, ra, 129. .

“ Kauf bricht Miete”’, 258.

Kephallenia, order of magis-
trates of, 158.

Kephalos and ypad7 rapavopov,
138.


xépoos, 48.

Kerkyraians, complaint of, 160.

Kimon, trial of, 151.

kindreds, federation of, 85 f.,
91, 106.

kinds of property, 199 f.

king, function of, in murder
trials, 179 ff.

king, the, residuary justice of,
69.

king archon, function of, 100,
TOL.

kinship and property, 91 f.

kinsmen, solidarity between,
235.

Kiron, property of, 199.
KAapos, 202f., 208 f.,
See also xXjpos.

kAaporat, 208.
Kleisthenes of Athens, extension
of citizenship by, 94, 117.
social legislation of, 9, 86.
and cult of Dionysos, 97.
as dictatorial legislator, 135.
Kleisthenes of Sikyon and cult
of Adrastos, 97; in wedding
of Agariste, 236.
Kleomenes, king of Sparta, 9,
97.
Kleon, Aristophanes’ caricature
of, 172.
views of, 57.
Kleonymos, will of, 67.
xAnpot, number of, 86.
KAnpovoyia, 203, 216.
KAnpovopos, 203.
kXjpos, 6, 52, 61, 202 f., 210f.,
253.
— and oilkos, 91 f.
_KAnpodyxor, 202.
KAorhs Sypooiwy xpnpdtwv ypa-
$7, 168
kAors dixn, 176, 196.


210 f.


INDEX


KAowns ypapy, 174, 176, 196.

Klytidae, 87 f.

Knidos, trial in Court of, 160.

knights as representatives of
city, 107.

xown of law, 5.

Kowwvia woduTOv moAiTelas as
principle of State persona-
lity, 105.

kowwvikat dikat, 127.

Konon, Ariston v., 166, 176.

Korinth, custom of, in coloniza-
tion, 101.

relation of, to colonies, 118.

Korinthian war, the, 215.

Kos and Kalymna, case of, 160.

Kos, inscription of, 85f., 160.

xoopos (= the State), 105.

Kpatovy, To, 31.

Kretan oixyes, 208 f., 259.

Krete, law of Doric cities, 7,
208.

kpive, 143.

Kritias, Sophist, on vouos and
vous, 40.

Krito of Plato, 36, 239.

Krokonidae, d:adiucacia _ of,”
225 f:

Kronia, festival of, 99.

KTynpata, 224.

Ktesiphon, case of, 138.

kupia éxkAnoia, 141.

Kvpios in rape, 192; of bride and
dowry property, 219, 236.

kupiws kTnoOa, 198, 204.

Kyklopes, 1.

Kylon, 181.


Labour, products of, 225.
as basis of ownership, 197.

Labyadae, 87 f.

laesio enormis, 263.

Laissez-faire doctrine, 13.

Lakedaimonian rules on pro-
perty, 8.

Lakritos, speech against, 4, 82,
158, 231, 247.

land, acquisition of, by foreign-
ers, 200f.


INDEX


land, appropriation of, 206 f.
division of, 202.
property in, 91, 199f.
redemption of, in Attika,
252.
redivision of, 205.
right of acquisition of, in
League, 159.
bearing fruit, 217.
land holding, Athenian, 210 f.
Doric, 208 f.
land law, rights and remedies
in, 218 ff.
of Sparta, 8.
land reforms of Solon, 210 ff.
land tenure, 200 f.
creation of, 206 f.
early Doric, 208 ff.
sources of, 212 ff.
landed estate as security, 250 ;
property, individualization
of, in Attika, 210.
mpobecpia in trials as to,
214.
Lares compitales, 126.
Aabpata cvvadrAdypata, 47.
Laurion, silver mines of, 111.
law as compact, 18.
and decree, distinction be-
tween, 129 ff.
of citizenship at Athens, 94;
of contract, 256 ff.
ér’ avopt, 73.
of Gortyn, see Gortyn; of lease
and sale, 256 f.; of mort-
gage, 252 f.
of nature, 40, 42.
of persons, 57.
of procedure, 78.
of property, essence of, 197.
of Solon about societies, 120.
of succession, 206 ff. ; in Atti-
ka, 2114,
of things, 57.
of Zaleukos, 228.
divine origin of, 18, 20.
law-giver, 74.
laws, general revisions of, 135f.
guardianship of, 136 ff.


299


laws, generalization and justifica-
tion of, 158.

decrees, 74.

Luws of Plato, 1, 9, 16, 33, 85,
183, 188, 195.
— of Theophrastos, 259 ff.
“le mort saistt le vif”, 219.
League of Nations, embryonic,
163.

leagues and confederacies, unify-
ing action of, 158.

lease, law of, 256 ff.; sureties
in, 249; varieties of, 258 f.

leaseholders, liability of, 251,
254n1; rights conceded
to, 218.

leases of land, 217 f.

legal basis of sovereignty, 28.

conditions of citizenship,

1i7 f.

personality, 103.

redress, 46 ff.
legatees in law of fourth century,

80.
legislation at Athens, 129 ff.

ascription of, to Heliaea, 129.

initiative in, 131 f.

process of, 131, 133f.

responsibility for, 132 f.

by decree, 130 f.

under oath, 99.

ex post facto, 139.

at Ephesos, on debt, 204 f.
legislative function of State,


128.

legitimacy of marriage, 80,
236.

Neroupyia, property sufficient
for, 201.


Netoupyiat, 9, 55, 99.

Lemnos, formation of lots at,
203; mortgage at, 254.

Leochares, case of, 59, 221.

Leogoras, trial of, 84.

Leokrates, speech
12n}, 98f, 116.


against,


Leptines, speech against, 131,


ive ®
lessee, 224. See also lease.


300


lex, 19.
lex contractus, 160.
Lexica Sequeriana, on dadiKxacia,
58.
lexicographers, 168f.; use of
lost speeches by, 222 f.
liability, pecuniary, of citizens,
110; of lodgers, 251; of
sureties, 249; personal and
predial, 254 n?.
liberty and democracy, 16.
for a slave, claim of, 193.
limit of a city, 2.
limitation of actions, 214 ff.
line of action, determination of,
146.
Aurovautiov and Xuroorpatiov
ypapai, 169.

Auroragias ypapy, 62, 169.
Lipsius, on audio Byretv, 221 n’.
on choice of tribunal, 178.

on ypadhyn Tov py émurydeiov
vopov, 171.
on oveias dikyn, 225 n.
controversy of, with Rabel,
60 n.
literal contract, 239 ff.
loan to Arkesine, 81, 108.
loan by means of épavos, 121 f.,
232.
loans, city representation for,
108f.; non-payment of,
245f.; sureties in, 249.
loans, for corn trade, 78, 222.
loans, as property, 199.
local custom in transactions,
232; judges, 148.
locatio conductio, 256.
Lochites, Isokrates against, 176.
lodgers, liability of, 251.
Logic, rejection of, by Sophists,
28


Aoywrrai, 141, 168.
Aoyw and dpa, 56.
Lokrian cities of Chaleion and
_ Oiantheia, 155.
Lokrians, Epiknemidian, at Nau-
paktos, 203.
Epizephyrian, 228.


INDEX


long user, 216.
lot, election by, 140.
lots, distribution of, as basis of
property, 198.
vous, 252.
Lykophron and nobility of birth,
28.
Lykurgos, speeches of, against
Leokrates, 12 n’.
on elements of an action, 116.
on oath of allegiance, 98 f.
Lykurgos, law-giver, distribu-
tion of holdings by, 9.
Lysias on conditions of arrest,
186.
on corn law, 114.
on death of Eratosthenes, 175.
on destitute citizen, 54.
on dikn évoixiov, 224 ff.
on doxipacia, 53, 141.
on law of treason, 170; on
peceyyvn, 250; on rape,
193.
on unjust claim of State funds,
110.
on wounding to kill, 182 f.
lost speeches of, 222.
Lysimachos, case of, 63, 114.


Magistrate, dvaxpuors of, 50,145;
order of, execution on, 219.

magistrates, examination of,
168; help of, in execution
for debt, 248; position of,
in Greece and Rome, 113f.,
128; preliminary investiga-
tion of, 50,145; representa-
tion of city by, 109; of
phratries and demes, 124,
248.

Magnesia and Smyrna, union of,
118.

maiming, 47.

mildagi, 236.

Makartatos, speech against, 59,
91f.,.221.

Makedonian kings, legislative
reform under, 135.

male heirs, absence of, 220.


INDEX


malicious prosecution, action for,
172.

mancipatio, 232; — fiduciae
causa, 252.


manslaughter, juridical treat-
ment of, 47, 167, 177 ff.
Drakonian rules of, 90, 177.
those convicted of, 188.
Mantitheos, case of, 195.
manumission inscriptions at
Delphi, 156, 262.
manus mnjectio, 59, 232, 246.
Marcian, 255.
marriage, 236; Brahmanic, 233;
of cousins, 22 ; of heiresses,
93, 209, 212.
Massaliote ship and trader, 158.
material and moral damage, 48.
materials bearing on legal
institutions, 10.
matriarchal ideas in Oresteta, 23.
pn €x mpovotas, 90, 182 f.
pn émirndevos vouos, 171.
Péexpe aveiaddav, 93.
Medea of Euripides, 23.
mediaeval legal practice, 231.
medicinal drink, poison as, 182.
Megakles, wedding of, 236.
Meidias, case of, 50, 61 f., 149 f.,
166, 174.
Melanippos, substitution of, for
Adrastos, 97.
Melos, fate of, 163.
Memorabilia of Xenophon, 30,
41.
Menippos, complaint of, against
Evander, 50 f.
mens rea, 182 ff.
pyvvows, 148.
peceyyin, peréyyvos, 250.
Messenian territory claimed by
Sparta, 213.
métayage, 259.
Meter in Athens, worship of, 124.
pérotxot, loan by, 78.
position of, 95, 99, 201.
middleman, in transfer of pro-
perty, 250.
military clubs of Dorians, 8.


301


military offences, 169.
socialism of Sparta, 15.
Miltiades, trial of, 151, 171.
mines, exploitation of, 168.
minor cases, settlement of, 149.
minors, wrongs to, 77.
Minos, Platonic dialogue, 21.
Minyon and Gorgos, grant of
Samian citizenship to, 86.
miscreants, 186 f., 190.
pucbodopia, 77.
Mithridates, the war against,
204.
Mitteis, doctrine of, on con-
ventions, 241 f.
mnemones, 204, 260.
mobilization of landed property,
210.
porxaypia, 248.
porxeias ypapy, 174 f.
Molossos, satrap of Asia Minor,
204.
monarchical principle, its effect
on law, 8.
money as property, 200, 202.
money-lenders, 79.
monogamy, 6.
Montesquieu, Hsprit des Lois,
10.
on three factors of political
life, 128.
‘‘monthly trials”, 146, 245.
moral and legal duties, 38.
moral persons, 121 ff.
moral responsibility for crime,
184.
moral restraint, 163.
mortgage, estate in, 200; origin
of law of, 252 ff.
mortgagee, execution by, 219,
245 f.; right of, 251.
mortgages, 204 f., 250 ff.
mother, claim of, to succession,
80, 146.
municipal courts and intermuni-
cipal justice, 161.
— law of Alexandria, 5.


‘murder, as private wrong, 47,


58, 167.


802


murder and _ manslaughter,

borderland between, 183.
treatment of, 177ff.

murderers, 188.

Muses, shrine of, 123.

mutual consent in conventions,
Pe

Mykenai, 209.

Mylasa, 204, 218.

Mysteries, speech of Andokides
on, 72, 84, 170 n}, 189.

Mytilene, fate of, 163.


Name, action about, 195, 222.

“nation”, application of term to
Greek States, 96.

national games of Greece, 154.

natural obligations, 231.

naturalization, 95, 117.

nature, law of, 40.

Naukratis, 3 f.

Naupaktos, Lokrians at, 203.
Nausimachos, charge of Pan-
tainetos against, 194.

vadra, 120.

vavrodikat, 161.

navigation customs, 161.

Naxos, mortgage at, 254; treaty
of, with Arkesine, 247.

negligence and accident, delimita-
tion of, 183.

—, contributory, 183.
nexum, 232, 245, 254.
Nietsche, 34.

Nikarete, loan made by, 109,
242 f., 247.

Nikokles of Salamis, 8.

vopipa, Ta, 77.

vopipov, Aristotelian use of, 44.

— and vopilew, 19.
vopoypado., 136.
vopuot, of corporations, 125.

—, jurors’ judgement of, 44.
vopopvAakes, 137.
vopodvAaxia, 136 f.
vopos as source of law, 72 f.

definition of, 18 f., 129, 230.

— and dvors, 26 f.


— dypados, yeypappevos, 42 n.


INDEX


vopos ér’ dvdpi, 131, 138.

— xowvos and vdpor tdro1, 41.

— pn érurydevos, 171.

— of treason, 152.
vopobecia, 80, 99, 131, 133 f.
vopobéra, 134 f.

—, oath of, 135.
vopoberns, 74.
non-actionable transactions, 232.
Norman lawyers and interdict,

227.
nude pacts, 231.


Oath, of allegiance to State,
98 f.
in confirmation of treaties,
107f, 162.
in contract, 257, 261.
of corporation, 125.
of Council, 115.
of ephebes, &c., 99.
of Heliasts (dikasts), 68, 99,
143, 205.
of judges (Labyadae), 88.
of magistrates, 99, 115.
of vopobéra, 135.
evidence on, right of giving,
189,
legislation under, 99.
the quintuple, 156.
as ritual, 233.
ouths on hill of Ares, 185.
obligation, public, 162.
obligations, enforcement of,
245 ff.
obligations, ex contractu and ex
delicto, 230; hypothecary,
219.
occupation as basis of ownership,
197 f., 212f,, 216, 218.
occupier, claim of rent from,
224.
Odyssey, convention in, 234 ff.,
248.
offences, classification of, 173 ff.
offerings, marriage, birth, &c.,
88.
offices (public), 52 f.
officials, actions against, 167 f.


INDEX


officials, executive, position of, at
Athens, 140 f.
supervising registration of
sale, 260.
witnessing, 198, 204.
Oiantheia and Chaleion, 155 f.
oixirrys, 202.
otxos and xAnpos, 91 f.
olkov 6ppavikod Kdkwors, 173.
Old English wedding, 236,
oligarchical confederation of
Boiotia, 159 f.
olive trees, 218.
Olymos, 218.
Olympia, inscription of, 82 f.
Olympian Zeus, 162.
Olympiodoros, convention of,
238; speech against, 221,
224.
Onetor, property of, 200.
openly acknowledged property,
202.
dpetAopevov, 39.
orator, responsibility of, 132 f.
Orchomenos, loan to, 109, 242 f.,
246 f.
order of magistrate, execution
on, 219.
ordinary crimes, 174.
Oresteta of Aischylos, 22 f., 185.
“organic”, application of term
to State, 96.
organic continuity of national
life, 105.
organization of
124 f.
of power in Greek State,
129 f.
dpye@ves, 87, 124, 126, 178.
dpy.a, 87.
origins of doOnKy and mortgage,
252 ff; of ownership, 197,
206 f.
ornamental objects as property
for partition, 208.
orphans, obligation of guardians
of, 251.
wrongs to, 77.
éppavav Kaxwos, 173.


associations,


303


ostracism, 84, 130f., 139.
ovata, 198 f.; ddarvyns and davepa,
202.
ovoius dixy, 199, 223 f.
outlaw, murderer as, 180.
outlaws, arrest of, 187.
ownership, creation of, 197,
206 f., 213; retention of,
by debtor, 251.
—, public element in, 212.
—, rights of, 224.
— of house, 232.
Oxylos, legislation of, 253.
Oxyrhynchos fragment of Theo-
pompos, 159.


maXavrAoutot, 252 n*.
Palladion, 178 f., 181, 183.
Pallas, shrine of (= Palladion),
185.
Tapata = goods, 209.
Panathenaic festival, 99.
Pantainetos, speech against,
186, 194, 249.
papyri, 5, 81, 242.
tmapaypapy, 146, 215.
Tapavoias ypapy, 173.
Tapavopwv, see ypadi) 7.
TraparperBeias ypapy, 168.
pardon as bar to prosecution,
186.
parentelae in succession, 211.
parents, ill-treatment of, 173.
penalty for crimes against,
189 f.
wrongs to, 77.
Parliament, as channel of King’s
action, 69.
— and Statutory law, 73.
Paros, Militiades’ expedition to,
171,
part profit, leases for, 259.
Parthenon, 111.
partition, 208, 211.
partners, dishonesty of, 238.
partnerships and companies,
“20
Partsch on convention of He-
phaistos, 234 f.


304


Pasion, banker, error of, 194.
pasture-land, 207, 209.
paterfamilias, 200.
matpaAdotas, as actionable term,
194.
matpia, Ta, 75.
patria potestas, 7.
matpiav, 88. ;
patriarchal communities, 1.
— ideas in Oresteia, 23.
Patrias, a scribe, 83.
patricians and plebeians, strug-
gle between, 254.
patrimony, 190, 199.
Tatpios Toduteia, 137.
matp@a, 201.
Tatpwoxo, 209.
Patrokleides, decree of, 181.
patrons, intervention of, 154.
paumeée, 233.
payment of debt by Orchomenos
to Nikarete, 109.
payment to neighbours in sale,
260.
of price in sale, 262.
of rent, 224.
payments to citizens, 54.
pedsant and trader in Greece,
212 f,
Peiraieus, deme of, 87, 125.
Peisistratos, 77, 148.
Peisitheides, decree in favour of,
134.
Peloponnesian war, Athenian
funds for, 111, 111 n.
Peloponnesos, 2.
penal actions, 165 ff.
penalties of diarryrai, 147.
of magistrates, 115.
penalty in zpoBodry, 48, 150.
penestae of Thessaly, 210, 259.
pensions for Athenian citizen,
54.
TevTakoglopedyvol, 254.
People, functions of the, 73,
128 ff.
and responsibility of orators,
132 f.
See also Demos.


INDEX


perfumery shop, sale of, 263.
Perikles, charges against, 132,
168.
colonies in time of, 203.
his definition of law in Memora-
bilza, 30 f.
funeral oration of, 6.
law of, on citizenship, 89, 94,
reforms of, 167.
Perikles as otparnyds avdroxpa-
twp, 140.
Persian wars, economic effect of,
211.
persona ficta, 162.
personal arrest and imprison-
ment, 245 f.
dignity, Greek sense of, 163.
factor, in obligations from
delicts, 47 f.
liability, 254 n’.
motives in speeches, 138.
property, 199.
values in distributive justice,
47 f.
personality as standard in con-
flict of laws, 157.
legal or juridical, 103.
personification of the city, forms
of, 101.
persons, law of, 57.
persons of debtors, 245.
petitory remedies, 227.
Phainippos, case of, 55.
davepa oiaia, 199, 202,
Phaselis and Athens, treaty of,
LOT:
acts, 148.
garpiay, 88.
Pheidias, art of, 154,
pépew, 154,
diravOpwria of the Athenian,
65.
Philip of Makedon and legis-
lative reforms, 135.
Philippionassignmentto Courts,
178 n*; on case of Zeno-
themis, 227 n?.
Philochoros, 55 n.
on vonodiAaxes, 137.


INDEX


Philokrates, accusation of, by
Hypereides, 169.

Philothea, case of, 261.

Phoinissat of Euripides, 24.

Phoinix of Thera, shrine in

memory of, 123.

gpovixal dixat, 177.

ovos akovowos, 177 ff., 182.
— éxovovos, 179, 182.

gupd, 176.

dopo, 112.

paropes, 120.

phratriarch, 89, 124.

phratries, 85, 121, 124.

phratry, constitution of, 86 f.
duty of, in homicide, 178.

hpovyais, TO Ppoveiy, 41.

Phrynichos, reference to, of Har-

pokration, 226.
slayer of, 95.
vos and vouos, 26 f., 40.
phylae, 85.
pignoris capto, 59, 246.
pignus, 250, 254,
Plato, caricatures of, 29.
condemnation of juries by, 11.
on aidas and dvacyuytia, 33.
on consent in convention, 239.
on continuity of Athenian
State, 104.

on credit sales, 231, 263.

on cult of Hestia, 100.

on damages, 195,

on death from blows, 183.

and death penalty, 188.

on Dorian customs, 8.

on ddga THs 7oAews, 38.

on duties to State, 39 f.

on education of citizen, 16.

on equity, 64.

on jurisprudence and justice,
38.

on land law, 9.

on numbers in State, 85 f.

on religious obligation, 98.

on the sophistic doctrine, 25.

on tribal lordships, 1.

Platonic classes in the State,

39.


2231-2


305


Platonic dialogue of Minos on
custom, 21].
“ideas”, 41.
plea of self-defence, 186.
pleas of land, 214.
‘plebeians” in phratry, 86.
hn Go0s = complex of citizens,
113.
mAwTHpes, 119,
plots (of land) with slaves,
200.
Plutarch, on accusation of Peri-
kles, 132.
on colonies in time of Perikles,
203.
on procedure against homi-
cides, 177.
on Solon’s
194.
town, 188.
poisoning, 47, 167, 181f., 184.
Poland on associations, 123,
126f.
polianomot, 218.
police, interference of, 147.
policy of tyrants at Athens, 148f.
polis, the Greek, 2, 12 ff.
— execution on, 108. 6
— as moral personality, 104.
moXus éxkAntos, 160.
ToAuteia, relation of, to the State,
98, 106.
— = citizenship, 117 f.
political accusation, 166.
also zpoBoXy.
political allegiance of colony to
mother city, 158.
crimes, 169 f.
education, Protagoras on, 188.
privileges, loss of, 189 f.
psychology of Protagoras, 31 f.
trial, 62, see also civayyeXia.
Politics, 97,105 f., 129f., 143f,,
212, and see Aristotle.
moAutiKov dtkatov, 44.
pollution, 75, 185.
moAvKAnpot, 254.
Polybios, on case of seizure,
228.


law of abuse,


See


306


Polyeuktos, accuser of Euxe-
nippos, 169.
Poseidon, convention of, in
Homer, 234, 237, 248.
Poseidonios, 6/acos of, 122.
position of magistrates, 113 f.
positive law, justification of, by
Protagoras, 32.
legality in justice, 19.
possession, juridical value of,
227.
protection of, 60.
recovery of, 223 f.
rights of, 58.
security of, 226.
warrant of, by lessor, 258.
— of bath-house, 227.
of things withheld, 226.
— and property in gage, 250.
and title, law of, 59 f.
uncontested, 222.
possessory remedies, 227.
posthumously adopted son, claim
of kinship against, 59.
Praetorian law, development of,
59.
Pragmatism, 34.
mpacts emi Avoe, 250 ff., 261.
mpatwp, 261 f.
mpagis, 125, 246, 248.
Praxiteles, 154.
precedents in Greek law, 78 f.
prejudice in law, 12.
prejudicial proceedings, 171,
174.
declarations of right, 192.
settlement, 145 f.
trial, 133.
verdict, 63.
See also Siadicacia and mpo-
Body.
predial liability, 254 n}.
servitude, 253 f.
preliminary investigation by
magistrates, 50, 145f.,179.
steps of trial, 145.
premium for information, 222.
preparatory action in judicial
procedure, 145.


INDEX


prescription, 213 f.

preservation of laws, 136.

presiding magistrates, dvaxpicts
of, 50, 145 f., 179.

Priamos, visit of, to Achilles,
163.

price, payment of, in sale, 263.

receipt of, 231.
prices, regulation of, in Greece,


pride of race, 164.
Priene, inscriptions of, 83.
priestess, refusal of, to perform
sacrifice, 226.
priestess of Athene, warning of
to Kleomenes, 97.
priesthood, claimants to, 222.
priests and priestesses in or-
ganization of phratries and
demes, 124.
primitive collectivism, 206.
principals and accomplices, dis-
tinction between, 184.
principles of law and equity,
161.
of Greek public law, 102.
private accusation for public
wrongs, 61.
agreements and public rules,
230.
appropriation, 212 ff.
citizens, right of, to prosecute
magistrates, 115.
cults, privileges of, 9.
debts, cancellation of, 205.
enterprise, 212 f.
force, justification of, 187;
production of ownership
by, 197.
international law of Greece,
158.
ownership, origin of, 197,
206 f.
prosecution, 165.
violence and public danger,
186 f.
will, assertion of, 198.
wrongs, 47; legal redress of,
191 ff.


INDEX


privateering, 120.
privileges, grant of, 95, 134.


of citizenship, 53, 113 f., 117.


of individuals, 139.

political, loss of, 198 f.
mpoaywyeia, 174.
Proastriae of Phrynichos, 226.
probate, disinclination to grant,


probatio diabolica, 198.
Problemata of Aristotle, 67.
mpoBodry, 51, 63, 133, 149f,
166, 171, 174.
mpoBovrevpa of the Council,
132, 142f.
procedural limitations, object of,
216.
procedure in dikar éuropixal,
161 n.
in eiaayyeAia, 151, 169.
in évoergis, 187.
in grants of citizenship, 131.
in heliastic tribunal, limita-
tion of, 147.
in gudicio and in jure, 145.
in law, tradition in, 77.
in legislation, 133 ff.
in zpoBodry, 149 f.
in public affairs, place of re-
ligion in, 98 f.
in sale, 260 ff.
proceeds, attribution of, 209.
proclamation of sales, 255, 260.
procuration (procuring), 47,
174.
procureur, 165,
mpodocia, 169.
products of labour, recovery of,
226.
mpoedpixy) ypapy, 168.
mpoedpos, 134, 168.
prohibition of alienation by
lessor, 258.
of export, 153.
to legislate, 131.
as to offerings, 88.
mpoxataBoAy, 221.
Prometheus, 32.
promises, éyyvar, 234 f.


307


mpovora, 182 ff.
proofs of agreements, 239 f.,
257 ft.
property, acquisition of, from the
city, 205.
confiscation of, see confisca-
tion,
deprivation of, 193.
derivation of, 59.
distribution of, 51.
elements of, 197 ff.
exchange of, 55.
Greek doctrine of, 228.
juridical theory of, 199 f.
kinds of, 199 f.
natural source of, 213.
pledging of, for dowry, 219.
protection of, 57.
recovery of, 223 f.
rights of, assertion of, 58,
223.
squandering of, action for,
173.
of debtors, 245.
family, 91.
in land, Solonian law of, 52.
of temples, 205 f.
— and possession in gage,
250.
proportion, principle of, and 7d
avtimerov0ds, 70.
proportionate standards, 56.
Propylaea, 111.
proscription of individual, 139.
prosecution of magistrates, 115.
— by kinsmen, 76, 90. See
also homicide.
for religious offences, 100.
mpootiunows, 51, 150.
prostitution, 172, 189.
Protagoras, penal doctrine of,
35, 188.
political psychology of, 31 f.
relativism of, 27.
protection of possession, 60.
of property, 57.
of refugees, 163.
protectionist measures, 153.
mpolecpia, 214 ff, 229.


x2


308 INDEX


Protos, case of, 222.
proposal of, 213 n*.
provisional possession, 250.
protracted possession, 214 ff.
apotevia, 95.
Prytaneion, 98, 100.
Prytaneis, 132.
Prytanies, rules as to assemblies
in, 133.
Pseudo-Asconius on written in-
struments, 240f., 244.
WevdokAryreias dikn, 196.
Wevdopaprupidy, actions, 196.
pseudo - Xenophon, Athenian
Constitution of, 10.
Wri) yn, 217 i
Wydiopa er avdpi, 131.
— and vopos, 74.
Unpicpata, vopor and Oecpot,
129. ‘
— of corporations, 125.
psychological element in crime,


suggestions, influence of, in
Courts, 67.
unity of City, 96 f.
psychology of the Greek race, 6.
public assistance for Athenian
citizen, 54.
burdens, see Necrovpyiat.
danger from private violence,
186 f.
debtors, ariuia of, 189, 205.
debtors, inscription on roll of,
222, and see State debtors.
debts, cancellation of, 204.
duty, dvadiucacia about, 222.
See also Nevrovpyia.
element in property, 198 f.,
202 ff., 212.
executioner, 180.
public force producing owner-
ship, 197.
public force to right private
wrongs, 192.


_ public inscription of tenure,


198.
law, 57.
notaries, 204.


public obligation, guarantee of


fulfilment of, 162.
opinion in Athenian courts,
11, 66, 144.
opinion in convention, 265.
places, crimes in, 176, 196.
prosecutions by individuals,
220.
prosecutor, 165.
purse, method of filling by
confiscation, 9, 191.
rights, defence of, by private
accusation, 61 f.
safety, considerations of, 187,
228.
supervision of conventions,
160; of xAnpos, 211 f.
wrongs, 47, 61 f.
publicity in contracts, conven-
tions, and sales, 237, 258 ff.
punishment, Greek views of,
188 ff.
infliction of, by phratry, 88.
Protagoras’ doctrine of, 35,
188.
corporal, 191.
punishments apart from com-
pensation, 58.
purchase, derivation of property
from, 59.
purchaser, right of, to free dis-
posal, 251.
purification, rites of, 75, 101.
mupKaid, 182.
purity of descent, 93 f.
Pyrrhos the Eteobutad, 188.
Pyrrhos, succession of, 214.
IIv66xpnoro, 76.
Pythagorean conception of jus-
tice, 70.
doctrine of retribution, 45.
Pythagoreans, union of, 127.


querela inofficiosi testamenti, 79.
quintuple oath, 156.


Rabel, controversy of, with Lip-
sius, 60 n.


INDEX 309


race, community of, 96.
pride of, 164.
racial characteristics of Greek
cities, 7 f.
rack rents, leases at, 259.
ransom by é€pavos, 121.
of the wealthy as democratic
policy, 111.
rape, 47, 58, 175, 192 f.
ratio decidendi, 78.
real estate, securities based on,
255.
— property, 199 f.
reality of social combinations,
120.
“reception” of Attic law, 159.
reciprocity in administration of
justice, 4.
recognizances in stone in Attika,
210.
recovery of rent, possession, and
property, 223f.; of pro-
ducts of labour, 226; of
slaves, 226.
redemption of estates, 252.
redemption instruments, 261.
re-division of land, 205.
redress, 46 f.
of public wrongs, 165.
refusal of priestess to perform
rites, 226.
register of sales, 261.
Legister of Mykonos, 254 f. n.
of Tenos, 204, 261.
registration of documents of laud
tenure, 204, 216, 222.
of contracts, 237, 239.
of dowers, 237, 255.
of fiduciary sales, 255.
of leases and sales, 260.
rev vindicatio, 58, 199.
Reichsrecht und Volksrecht, 242.
relations between cities, 153 ff.
relative (comparative) property
rights, 198, 221.
relatives, claim of, to property,
19: :
relatives, prosecution by, 76,
See also homicide.


relativism, 27 f., 32.
religion, city, 96.
religion, offences against, 173.
religion and public procedure,
98 f.
religious authority of Delphi,
163
circles, 124.
corporations, 122 f.
doctrine at Athens, 99.
duties of citizens, 98 f.
element in land tenure, 206 f.
life of Greeks, international,
154.
obligation in Plato’s Luthy-
phron, 98.
rites, performance of, 226.
sanction of treaties, &c., 162.
teaching, 100.
remedies in land law, 218 ff.
possessory and petitory, 227.
remission of debt, 210.
rents, recovery of, 223 f.
renunciation of agreement, con-
sequences of, 263.
by Athens, of rights in allied
States, 159.
“ renunciations ”, 231.
representation of the city for
loans, 108 f.
for treaties, 107 f.
reprisals, right of, 154.
Republic of Plato, 28, 39 f.
repudiation of debts, 205.
requirements of substance, 237 f.
residuary justice of the Athenian
People, 69.
responsibility for aets of slave,
195;
for laws, 170 f.
for legislation, 132 f.
Respublica Atheniensium, 10,
Ob:
restriction of abuse, 194.
retail trade, Greek view of, 96.
Retaliation, 69 f.
Retribution, 69 f.
retroactive law, prohibition of,
140.


310


revision of citizen lists, 55, 89.
of laws, 73.
general, 153 f.
Rhetoric of Aristotle, 62, 64f.,
71, 183, 230.
Rhetoric, substitution of, for
logic, 28.
— and dialectics, 37.
Rhodos, 81 f.
right, better, comparative, or re-
lative, 198, 220f.
— of political accusation, im-
portance of, 116.
rights, loss of, 189.
of possession, 58, 217, 224 ff.,
227.
of property, 58, 197.
—and duties, 52; in Platonic
State, 39.
and remedies in land law,
218 ff.
road, slaying on the, 183.
robbery, action for, 166.
Roman actio judicati, 226.
agriculturalist and Greek
trader, 212.
appeal to the People, 114.
citizenship, grant of, to pro-
vinces, 241.
Empire, citizenship in, 95.
epoch, documents of, 240.
Roman law, damage in, 194.
familia pecuniaque in, 200.
heredes suz in, 219.
intention and consent in, 234.
necum in, 245.
pignus in, 250, 254.
recognition of long user in,
216.
treatment of property in, 197 f.
treatment of wills in, 79; of
succession in, 80.
usucapion in, 213.
of mortgage, influence of
Greek custom on, 255.
Roman legal notions contrasted
with Greek, 7.
procedure of adoption and
testament, 237.


INDEX


Roman procedure by interdict,
227.
tendency to formalism, 232.
verbal contract, 238, 241.
vindex, 156.
Rome, judex at, 145.
jus civile of, 2.
rowing in the fleet, 95.
rule of law, 113 ff.
— as to exception and pre-
scription, 215 f.
rules as to cultivation (in lease-
hold), 258. .
as to descent, 93.
of evidence, 145.
and requirements of lease, 257.
rural exploitation, system of, in
Gortyn Code, 209.


Sacerdotal office, claims to, 222.
sacral institutions and tradi-
tionary law, 75.
— regulation of phratry, 89.
sacrifices, associations for, 120.
refusal to perform, 226.
sacrilege, 173. |
sailors, 120.
— on neutral ships, slaughter
of, 163.
sale, conclusion of, 262.
law of, 256 ff.
prevalence of over lease, 258.
(pacts émt Aver) conditioned
by possible repayment,
250 ff.
in establishing title, 213.
after confiscation, 209 f.
- for inheritance, 208, 211.
Salic law, affatomia in, 232.
Salomon on vopos, 42 n.
Samos, formation of Athenian
commonwealth at, 107.
Hera at, 97.
inscription of, 85 f.
sanction, quasi-religious, 233.
sanctions in treaties and agree-
ments, 161 ff.
Saturnalia, 99.
Scandinavian mdldagi, 236.


INDEX


schematic arrangement of tribes,
&c.,. $6;

Schémann on religious doctrine
of the Athenians, 99.
scribes, influence of, on law, 82 f.

scrutiny of officials, 140.
search, right of, 176.
Second Athenian League, Coun-
cil and methods of, 159.
Statute of, 189.
Second Chamber, vopoférar as,
134.
security, for city loans, 108 f.
for private contracts, 250.
of possession, 226.
securities in land, 255.
secret ballot, 90.
ceirdxGea, 204, 252.
“seisin”” by sons, 219.
seizure by self-help, 219 f.
of goods for debt, 246 ff.
of subjects of litigation, 227 f.
self-acquired property, 199,
201 f.
self-consciousness, 33.
self-defence, 182, 227.
self-evident claims, 218.
self-help in business agreement,
61,246.
in case of adultery, 175.
against criminals, 147, 186 f.
in international cases, 154 ff.
in land law, 218 ff.
restriction of, 59, 227.
Selymbria, treaty between
Athens and, 107.
sentimentalism in law, 12.
separation of functions, 143.
serfs, 208.
service, contract of, 46.
sheep as property for partition,
08 f.


shield of Achilles, 89.
ship, provisional sale of, 250 f.
seizure of, by éuBarevors, 219.
shipping partnership, 119.
shipwreck, law of, 82.
shrines, connected with trials,
185.


dll


Siphnos in Keos, 5.
slander, 47.
slaughter in war, 163.
slave, deposition of, 249.
slaves, claim of liberty for, 193.
slaves, claim to possession of,
228; to recovery of, 225.
damage by, action for, 194 f.
denunciation by, 148.
UBpis against, 175.
participation of, in Kronia, 99.
in circle of citizenship, 94.
in religious societies, 126.
as property, 199 f.
slavery, sale into, 94,191, 245.
and law of nature, 28.
slaying on the road, 183.
sloth, action for, 173.
Smith, J. A., 129 n.
on éyyvy, 233 n'.
Smyrna and Magnesia, union of,
118.
social contract, 36 f.
and private agreements, 231.
social groups, 85 f., 96.
responsibility for punishment,
188.
type as basis of legal system,
197.
unrest in Greece, 21 f.
Socialism, 15 f.
societas, 127.
societies and unions, 119 ff.
Sokrates, 35 ff.
action of, in trial of generals,
bot,
doctrines of, 36 ff., 41.
intellectualism of, 37 f., 41.
Plato’s defence of, 98.
prosecution of, 36, 100, 173.
soldiers of fortune, 119.
sulemn words in law, 232 f.
solidarity between kinsmen, 235.
Solon, dgoves of, 5, 120.
constitution of, 137.
his gift of the right of litiga-
tion, 116.
intention of, as to Council,
143.


312


Solon, law of, about abpse, 194.
about damage by animals,


195.

about property in land,
52, 212.

about societies, 87, 120f,,
125.


about wills, 66 f., 263.
legislation of, concerning
debt, 204 f. ; concerning
land, 210 ff., 245, 252 ff.
Plutarch’s life of, 177.
as dictatorial legislator, 135.
as vopobérns, 74.
Solon’s Elegy, 129 n.
cwpara as opposed to goods, 189.
sons, inheritance of, 208.
Sophistic views in Euripides’
plays, 25.
Sophists, the, 25 ff.
sophistry in law, 12.
Sophokles, his idea of fate, 23.
on law of nature and the
State, 25.
sound mind in consent to con-
vention, 263; in wills, 212.
source of law, 72.
law of nature as, 42.
sovereign Demos, intervention
of, 152.
power and force of law, 31,
sovereignty, legal basis of, 28 f.
Sparta, dpxatar potpar of, 203.
claim of, to Messenian land,
213.
common meals at, 8.
equality of holdings at, 9.
military clubs at, 8.
socialism of, 15.
and Argos, treaty between, 157.
as a “nation”’, 96.
Spartan institutions, 8 f.
Spartans, complaint of Kerky-
raians against, 160.
special courts at Athens, 167,
specific rights, loss of, 189.
speeches of orators, evidence of,
144,
spendthrifts, action against, 201.


INDEX


Speusippos and Leogoras, case
of, 84.
Sponsalia, 235.
sponsio, 232, 235.
sponsor, 235.
squandering of property, 173,
190.
standard of justice, 44 f.
standard of truth in Gorgias’
philosophy, 28.
in Protagoras’ philosophy, 34.
standard of utility, 34.
standards of income, 253; of
value in distribution, 52 f.;
in price of persons, 193.
standing committee of Assem-
bly, Council as, 143. _
State colonization, economic ef-
fect of, 211.
debtors, 110, 187.
And see public debtors.
domains and temple property,
205.
morality and expediency, 58.
religion, idea of, 106.
slaves, 82.
trials, 149 ff., 187.
—, the, eminent domain of,
203.
functions of, 128 ff.
judicial monopoly of, 59.
juridical nature of, 97f., 103f.
non-interference of, in affairs
of corporations, 125.
right of, to set up legal stan-
dards, 38.
three elements of, 128 f.
— and the individual, 15 f.,
102 f.
as an educational institution,
16.
States, development of, from vil-
lages, 2.
isolation of, 20, 153.
Statute of Limitations, 215 f.
Statutory law, 72 f.
stepmother, poisoning by, 184.
stick, throwing of, as symbol of
possession, 232.


INDEX


stipulatio, 232, 238, 241.

Stobaeus,quotation of Theophras-
tos by, 259.

stock and farm leases, 259.

Stoicism, 42.

stone as cause of death, 185.

recognizances in, in Attika,

210, 252.

strangers as citizens, 94.

otparnyia, iteration of, 140.

otpatnyot, power of, to summon
Assembly, 132.

otpatnyos av’tokpatup, 140.

Stratokles, speech against, 225.

subjective element in Athenian
Courts, 65 f.

subjectivism in Sophists, 28.

substance, requirements of, 237 f.

succession, law of, 4, 206 ff.
in Attika, 211 f.
suggestio falsi, 238.
cvxopavrat, 115, 149, 152, 169,
172.

cuxodaytia, 61.

cvkopartias ypady, 172.

ovAdav, 154, 246.

ovpBodra 4, 157,

coup Pdorwv, dikat ad, 161.

summary actions for recovery of
land, 217.

— execution, 81.

— jurisdiction, 148.

— procedure, 122, 147 f.
ovepepovta, Ta, 239.
ovupToAiteta, 117 f.
cuvddXdaypa, 238.
avvadrdypata, 46 f., 230.
cvviyopoe of laws, 133.

of magistrates, 146.

of phratry, 89.
ovviyopos representing the peo-

ple, 150.
ovyypagai, 240 ff.
aovyypapy, 238 ff.
cvvokiopds of Attika, 100.
— of Smyrna and Magnesia,
118.

— of Teos and Lebedos, 136.

cvvOjKat, 244.


313


cvvOynky, 238,
——, vopos as, 18, 230.
ow nkav rapaBacews diKn, 256.
supervision of administration by
Council, 142.
supplementary judicial measures,


Supplices of Aischylos, 22 f.
of Euripides, 73.
suppressio veri, 238.
supremacy of State law, 37.
Supreme Court of U.S.A., 136.
sureties, 234 f., 248 ff., 262.
imprisonment of, 246.
for bail, 187.
surety (éyyvn), 234 ff.
suretyship, 249.
contract of, 243.
surplus value, compensation for,
251.
avootto, 120.
sykophants, see cvxopavra.
symbol of possession, 232.
symbolic objects, delivery of, as
pledge, 250.
symbolization of civic public,
237.
syngrapha, see cvyypadi.
synoikismos, see ovvokic pos.
Syrakuse, 158.
Szanto on hypothecary mort-
gage, 254n'.


Tagoi, 88.
tapiac in phratries, &c., 124; of
temple funds, 112 f.; tapiéas
Tov dypov, 134.
tariff for rape, 193.
Teians, agreement of, with Arka-
dians, 246.
temple funds, borrowing of, 113.
property, 205 f.
robbery, 48.
treasures, 112 f.
temples, leases by, 217 f.
plenipotentiaries of, 257.
tenant right at Heraklea, 217 f.
of Fouxjes, 209.
Tenos, Register of, 204 n‘, 261.


314


tenure, public inscription of, 198.
of land, see land tenure.
Teos, 136, 156, 246.
terms for convention, 238.
testament, adoption by, 220.
testaments, fairness in dealing
withthem, 66. See alsowills.
Thalheim, view of, on diécy BAd-
Bys, 195 n.
Theattetos of Plato, 34.
Thebes, hegemony of, in Boiotian
league, 160.
theft, 47, 58, 176, 196.
choice of action for, 167.
those convicted of, 189.
Themistokles, 101, 111, 163 n}.
Theokrines, 172.
compromise of, 179.
Theophemos, 76.
Theophrastos, treatise of, 223.
Theophrastos on sale, 259 ff.
Theopompos, /ellenica of, 159.
Bewpixov, 111 f., 142.
Thera, hypothecary mortgage at,
254.
society of Epikteta at, 122 f,
Thermopylae, 163.
Theseus, establishment of hearth
by, 100.
in Supplices of Euripides, 73.
Geapds and vopos, 74, 129.
Geopobérar in dixar ard ovpfo-
Lov, 162.
—and Heliastic Courts, 51,
114.
— suspension of, 142.
— title of, 129.
beopobérns, Drakon as, 74.
Thespiae, banker of, 242.
Thessaly, penestae of, 210.
Onres of Attika, 210.
Oiaca, 87, 122 ff.
Oiacos of Poseidonios, 122.
facta, 120.
Gacwrys and dpyedv, 124,
thief, arrest of, 186.
treatment of, 147, 176.
things, law of, 57.
thirty dicacrai, 149.


INDEX


thirty (tpiaxds), 85.

Thirty, the, debts left by, 106.
downfall of, 62, 105,107,170.
rule of, 141.

Thisbe (in Boiotia), 218.

Tholos, 100.

Thrasybulos of Kalydon, 95.

Thrasymachos in Republic, 28.

Thukydides on atrocities of war,

163.

on Boiotian league, 118 f.

on migration of tribes, 1.

on social unrest, 22.

on treaty between Sparta and
Argos, 157.

on Themistokles at hearth of
Admetos, 101, 163 n}

tysai, 51 f., 140.

Timarchos, property of, 200 f.
speech against, 190.

tipnpa, 192.

tipnots, 49.

Tiysntot ayaves, 49, 191.

Timokrates, speech against, 134,

138 f., 170.

timocratic classes of Solcn, 253.

constitutions, principle of jus-
tice in, 53.

government of Athens, Iso-
krates on, 56.

Timotheos, speech against, 239,

title, claims based on, 227.
derivation of, 198.
establishment of, 213, 224.
transfer of, 260 ff.
to property acquired from the

city, 205.
— and possession, 52, 227.

Tiryns, 209.

tort, actions in, 191 ff.

torts, Greek law of, 46 f.

town houses, inheritance of,

208 f.

trade customs, 158, 161.
partnerships, 119, 120,
routes, 153.
effect of Heliastic decision on,

(es
goods acquired by, 213.


INDEX 315


trader and peasant in Greece,
212s
tradesman as term of abuse, 194.
traditional law at Athens, 75 f.
transactions, 230 ff.
transfer of land, 216.
of use of houses, &c., 256.
transformism, theory of, 27.
Tpavpatwv ex mpovotas dixy, 182 f.
travellers from Greece, 20.
treason, see high treason.
treasurer of Demos, 134.
treasurers of temple funds, 112 f.
treasuries in temples, 112 f.
Treasury, claim against, 110.
clerks of, 142.
debt of ambassadors to, 139.
filling of, by confiscation, 205.
treaties, city representation for,
LOT i,
sanctions in, 161 f.
between Athens and Chalkis,
107.
Athens and Eretria, 107.
Athens and Phaselis, 157.
Athens and Selymbria, 107.
Elis and Heraia, 162.
Naxos and Arkesine, 247.
establishing joint citizenship,
118.
tpiakas, 85.
trials in tort, 191 ff.
tribal divisions, scheme of, 85.
institutions, effect of, on later
law, 206.
tribes, 85 f.
Tribonian, commission of, 18 n.
tribunals, dealing with homi-
cide, 178 f.
—, democratic, 144.
tribute, surplus revenue from,
112.
trierarch, defaulting, case of a,
76.
trierarchs, representation of city
by, 107.
trierarchy, 222. See also Ae-
Toupyiat.


truth, standard of, 34.


Tiihnen, von, on the “ isolated


State’, 20.
tyranny, legislation of, by decree,
130.


attempted, death penalty for,
188; trial for, 181.
—and law in Supplices of
Euripides, 73.
tyrants at Athens, policy of, 148.


Ukases of a despot, 130.
umpire, city or person, 160.
umpires to distribute property,
Sl.
uncontested possession, 222.
undue influence in regard to
wills, 67.
unification of customs and laws,
158.
uniformity of law in the Hellenic
world, 4.
United States of America, Com-
mon Law of, 78.
prohibition of retroactive law
in, 140.
Supreme Court of, 136.
as English colony, 158.
unity of Greek law, 3.
of the city, 96.
of the family, 93.
of political and judicial func-
tions, 143 f.
unpaid debts and fines, 226.
unpremeditated homicide, 177 ff.
unprotected transactions, 232.
unwritten law, 73.
“upper house”, Council as, 143.
usage, right of, 256.
use as giving title, 216.
use of name, claim to, 222.
use, transfer of, 256.
usucapion, 198, 213f., 216.
utt possidetis, 59, 228.
utility, standard of, 34; in treat-
ment of contract, 239.
utrubt, 59.


Value, of persons, 193.
—, standard of, in distribution,
52 f.


316 INDEX


“vendetta”, 180.
verbal contract, 238.
verdict of juries, 49, 144.
prejudicial, 63.
villages, development of, into
States, 2.
vinculum, 248.
vindex, intervention of, 156.
vindicatio ret, 199.
vindication, action in, 220.
of liberty of slave, 193.
of property even after five
years, 216.
vinestocks, 218.
Vinogradoff on Zenothemis v.
Demon, 222 n., 227 n.
violation of oaths, 162.
violence, defence against, 156.
in delicts, 47.
virtues of heliastic courts, 12.
vis major, pleaded in excuse,
79, 258.
voidable conventions, 237 f.
voluntary agreements, 80; sure-
ties in, 249.
— associations, 119, 125.
— jurisdiction, 80 ff.
voting in d.ayyduors, 94.


of juries, method of, 49, 144. |


Wagers in litigation, 162.
warranty, 216.
Wasps of Aristophanes, 77.
waste land reclaimed, 217 f.
wed, 250.
wedding, O.E. and Greek, 236.
welfare theaim of the State, 13 ff.
wergeld, 193.
will, disposal by, 212.
right to make, 66 f.
wills, ancient rules applied to,
79; law as to, 5.
wills, concurrence of, in agree-
ments, 233, 237, 244, 257.
witnesses, not really called in, 196.
Isaios on, 66.
in contract, 237, 239, 257.


witnessing officials, 198, 204.

women in religious societies,
124, 126.

World State, building up of, 164.

worship of men, 126.

of female deities, 124.

wounding to kill, 181 f.

wrestling match, death in, 182.

writ of execution, 81.

writing, use of, in contract, 81,
238 ff., 242.


written accusation, évdeéis, 187.


written instruments, 239 ff., 244.
— law, 73.
wrong (in law, not in equity), 63.
wrongs to parents, orphans,
heirs, and minors, 77.
wrongs, public and private, 47,
165.
Wyse on ‘“bamboozlement” of
juries, 12.
on Greek pleadings, 12.
sceptical conclusions of, on
pleadings, 65 f.


Eevias ypapy, 170.

Xenophon, on discussion of Bia
and vopos, 30f.; on doctrine
of Sokrates, 41; on trial


of Sokrates, 36; on trial —


after Arginusae, 151, 170.


Zaleukos, law of, 228.
Zenothemis, case of, 82, 146,
158, 213 n°, 222, 227.

Cevytra, 254.
Zeus, cult of, 100.
Olympian, 162.
Patroos, 87.
Phratrios, 89.
€évios, 163.
Cnpia, 48.
Ziebarth, monograph of, on asso-
ciations, 127.
on dissolution of corporations,
123 n.
Zur Hand gehen, 235.


PRINTED IN ENGLAND AT THE OXFORD UNIVERSITY PRESS


non - = cele Oe
ore gee Und peek oe hes ouger fieangy, nrg a= ie


”
. é
wa
———_——__—
2 ae. =~ siento to ee
nN eckiienaeee ——— Ons Senge, age es, So o
pe eee eee ee ee ee Senin Gel nae Siemens amin Aen, ee 7 ———
MO ae Ana ina Sesame nlitin (rt eal dota ae Ps spi —
re > A ny Saree inet ae er -
ied sel ea eens au oe ee — y= ~
— Ro ptm cc gp ont. ~ >. aa
? oS 9 Bae aS = :
™ lie? he tp ieee diene bol eS ee ee oe f
~ 4 ES EE i RL EOS Sete i, DA eee gee aD git ee ee oh ee — r
- « e 7 Ge? “aap yi Ta Psa “* ~
1° Pv enk.8 J > eRe EA) aA, s od =
-_ Ch i a wire —_
SS St kee Pe eee ” 5 pee re
aa eo o ‘a “7 aa
Sn eal Se eat orn At seen pe a * a le —_
eso ae ee es
Se . _ = Z-
° 7 ede aa “ —
- . ee. + m —
a eee er < =
; =


OAL Ir an Suxahe » sow svitys leew beers 1 eae paTeEAR: . * tee 9 eyes 93 ee,
ASA SS ESS SEAT EN sso
4Rte cs Siriaay RT sad Cents vy .
SAS AVA Mos
SRA RAH AN
‘ . Te
. WE
¥ SAN
.


TT


a3
=
*
x »
. S


XS
WN
S \


RK


ae t SNES SAN . NN


~ )
\
SS
Sy) SS


NY . SN


S


\


\ \\ A


SDAIN Tenn’ oo . ee SONY : NSS
