CELLULAR PATHOLOGY AS BASED UPON PHYSIOLOGICAL AND PATHOLOGICAL HISTOLOGY
Rudolf Virchow (1821-1902)
Twenty lectures delivered in Berlin, 1858; translated by Frank Chance. London: John Churchill, 1860.
Source scan: Internet Archive, identifier cellularpatholog00virc.
Prepared for the Tower of Babel library: scan artifacts trimmed and whitespace normalized per the VIEW TEXT standard. Public domain.

CELLULAR PATHOLOGY

AS BASED  UPON

PHYSIOLOGICAL AND PATHOLOGICAL
HISTOLOGY.

— ©-•-♦ — •
TWENTY LECTURES

DELIVERED IN  THE

PATHOLOGICAL INSTITUTE OF BERLIN

DURING THE

MONTHS  OF  FEBRUARY,  MARCH  AND  APRIL,  1858.
BY

RUDOLF VIRCHOW,

PUBLIC PROFESSOR IN  ORDINARY OF  PATHOLOGICAL ANATOMY, GENERAL PATHOLOGY  AND THERAPEUTICS IS

THE UNIVERSITY OF BERLIN  ; DIRECTOR OF THE PATHOLOGICAL  INSTITUTE, AND PHYSICIAN  TO

THE  CHARITE HOSPITAL, ETC.,  ETC.

TRANSLATED FROM THE SECOND EDITION OF THE ORIGINAL.

BY

FRANK  CHANCE,  B.A.,  M.B.,  Cantab.

LICENTIATE  OF THE ROYAL  COLLEGE OF  PHYSICIANS  ; PHYSICIAN TO  THE BLENHEIM FREE DISPENSABT

AND  INFIRMARY.

WITH

NOTES AND NUMEROUS  EMENDATIONS,

PRINCIPALLY FROM MS. NOTES OF THE AUTHOR,

AND

3WustraU&  fyp  III  SEiujrafcfncjs  on  SStoob.

NEW  YORK :
ROBERT M. DE  WITT, PUBLISHER,

13  FRANKFORT  STRXET

TO

JOHN GOODSTR, F.R.S.,  Etc.,

PROFESSOR  OF  ANATOMY  IN  THE  UNIVERSITY  OF  EDINBURGH,

AS  ONE  OP  THE  EARLIEST  AND  MOST  ACUTE  OBSERVERS  OV

CELL-LIFE,

BOTH PHYSIOLOGICAL AND PATHOLOGICAL.

THIS  WORK  ON

CELLULAR PATHOLOGY

AS A  SLIGHT  TESTIMONY  OF  HIS  DEEP  RESPECT

AND SINCERE ADMIRATION

BY

THE AUTHOR.

AUTHOR'S PREFACE.

The  lectures  which  I  herewith  lay  before  the  medical  public  at
large  were  delivered  in  the  early  part  of  this  year,  in  the  new  Pa-
thological Institute  of  the  University  of  Berlin,  in  the  presence  of
a  somewhat  numerous  assembly  of  medical  men,  for  the  most  part
physicians  practising  in  the  town.  The  object  chiefly  aimed  at  in
them,  illustrated  as  they  were  by  as  extensive  a  series  of  microscop-
ical preparations  as  it  was  in  my  power  to  supply,  was  to  furnish  a
clear  and  connected  explanation  of  those  facts  upon  which,  accord-
ing to  my  ideas,  the  theory  of  life  must  now  be  based,  and  out  of
which  also  the  science  of  pathology  has  now  to  be  constructed.
They  were  more  particularly  intended  as  an  attempt  to  offer  in  a
better  arranged  form  than  had  hitherto  been  done,  a  view  of  the
cellular  nature  of  all  vital  processes,  both  physiological  and  patho-
logical, animal  and  vegetable,  so  as  distinctly  to  set  forth  what  even
the  people  have  long  been  dimly  conscious  of,  namely,  the  unity  of
life*  in  all  organized  beings,  in  opposition  to  the  one-sided  humoral
and  neuristical  (solidistic)  tendencies  which  have  been .  transmitted
from  the  mythical  days  of  antiquity  to  our  own  times,  and  at  the
same  time  to  contrast  with  the  equally  one-sided  interpretations  of  a
grossly  mechanical  and  chemical  bias — the  more  delicate  mechanism
and  chemistry  of  the  cell.

In  consequence  of  the  great  advances  that  have  been  made  in  the
details  of  science,  it  has  been  becoming  continually  more  and  more

*  See  Lect.  I,  p.  40  and  Lect.  XIV.,  pp.  322-324.— Trans.

vi  AUTHOR'S  PREFACE.

difficult  to  the  majority  of  those  who  are  engaged  in  practice,  to
obtain  in  the  subjects  treated  on  in  these  lectures  that  amount  of
personal  experience  which  alone  can  guarantee  a  certain  degree  of
accuracy  of  judgment.  Day  by  day  do  those  who  are  obliged  to
consume  their  best  energies  in  the  frequently  so  toilsome  and  so  ex-
hausting routine  of  practice  find  it  becoming  less  and  less  possible  for
them,  not  only  to  closely  examine,  but  even  to  understand  the  more
recent  medical  works.  For  even  the  language  of  medicine  is  gra-
dually assuming  another  appearance ;  well-known  processes  to  which
the  prevailing  system  had  assigned  a  certain  place  and  name  in  the
circle  of  our  thoughts,  change  with  the  dissolution  of  the  system
their  position  and  their  denomination.  When  a  certain  action  is
transferred  from  the  nerves,  blood,  or  vessels  to  the  tissues,  when  a
passive  process  is  recognized  to  be  an  active  one,  an  exudation  to  be
a  proliferation,  then  it  becomes  absolutely  necessary  to  choose  other
expressions  whereby  these  actions,  processes,  and  products  shall  be
designated ;  and  in  proportion  as  our  knowledge  of  the  more  deli-
cate modes,  in  which  the  processes  of  life  are  carried  on,  becomes
more  perfect,  just  in  that  proportion  must  the  new  denominations  also
be  adapted  to  this  more  delicate  ground-work  of  our  knowledge.

It  would  not  be  easy  for  any  one  to  attempt  to  carry  out  the
necessary  reform  in  medical  opinion  with  more  respect  for  tradition
than  I  have  made  it  my  endeavour  to  observe.  Still  my  own  expe-
rience has  taught  me  that  even  in  this  there  is  a  certain  limit.  Too
great  respect  is  a  real  fault,  for  it  favours  confusion ;  a  well-selected
expression  renders  at  once  accessible  to  the  understanding  of  all,
what,  without  it,  efforts  prolonged  for  years  would  be  able  to  render
intelligible  at  most  only  to  a  few.  As  examples  I  will  cite  the  terms,
parenchymatous  inflammation,  thrombosis  and  embolia,  leukaemia
and  ichorrhsemia,  osteoid  and  mucous  tissue,  cheesy  and  amyloid
metamorphosis,  and  substitution  of  tissues.  New  names  cannot  be
avoided,  where  actual  additions  to  experimental  (empirical)  know-
ledge are  being  treated  of.

On  the  other  hand,  I  have  already  often  been  reproached  with
endeavouring  to  rehabilitate  antiquated  views  in  modern  science.
In  respect  to  this  I  can,  I  think,  say  with  a  safe  conscience  that  I  am
just  as  little  inclined  to  restore  Galen  and  Paracelsus  to  the  position

AUTHOR'S  TREFACE.  Vl'i

they  formerly  held,  as  I  am  afraid  openly  to  acknowledge  whatever
truth  there  is  in  their  views  and  observations.  In  fact,  I  find  not
only  that  the  physicians  of  antiquity  and  the  middle  ages  had  not
in  all  cases  their  senses  shackled  by  traditional  prejudices,  but  more
than  this,  that  among  the  people  common  sense  has  clung  to  certain
truths,  notwithstanding  the  criticism  of  the  learned  had  pronounced
them  overthrown.  What  should  hinder  me  from  avowing  that  the
criticism  of  the  learned  has  not  always  proved  correct,  that  system
has  not  always  been  nature,  and  that  a  false  interpretation  does  not
impair  the  correctness  of  the  fact  ?  Why  should  I  not  retain  good
expressions,  or  restore  them,  even  though  false  ideas  have  been
attached  to  them  ?  My  experience  constrains  me  to  regard  the  term
fluxion  (active  congestion — Wallung)*  as  preferable  to  that  of  con-
gestion ;  I  cannot  help  allowing  inflammation  to  be  a  definite  form
in  which  pathological  processes  display  themselves,  although  I  am
unable  to  admit  its  claims  to  be  regarded  as  an  entity ;  and  I  must
needs,  in  spite  of  the  decided  counter-statements  of  many  investi-
gators, maintain  tubercle  to  be  a  miliary  granule,  and  epithelioma  a
heteroplastic,  malignant  new-formation  (cancroid).

Perhaps  it  is  now-a-days  a  merit  to  recognise  historic  rights,  for  it
is  indeed  astonishing  with  what  levity  those  very  men,  who  herald
forth  every  trifle,  which  they  have  stumbled  upon,  as  a  discovery,
pass  their  judgment  upon  their  predecessors.  I  uphold  my  own
rights,  and  therefore  I  also  recognize  the  rights  of  others.  This  is
the  principle  I  act  upon  in  life,  in  politics  and  in  science.  We  owe
it  to  ourselves  to  defend  our  rights,  for  it  is  the  only  guarantee  for
our  individual  development,  and  for  our  influence  upon  the  commu-
nity at  large.  Such  a  defence  is  no  act  of  vain  ambition,  and  it
involves  no  renunciation  of  purely  scientific  aims.  For,  if  we  would
serve  science,  we  must  extend  her  limits,  not  only  as  far  as  our  own
knowledge  is  concerned,  but  in  the  estimation  of  others.  Now  this
estimation  depends  in  a  great  measure  upon  the  acknowledgment
accorded  to  our  rights,  upon  the  confidence  placed  in  our  investiga-
tions, by  others ;  and  this  is  the  reason  why  1  uphold  my  rights.

In  a  science  so  directly  practical  as  that  of  medicine,  and  at  a  time

*  See  the  Author's  'Handbuch  der  speciellen  Path,  und  Therapie,'  Vol.  I.  p.  141.

v[[{  AUTHOR'S  PREFACE.

when  such  a  rapid  accumulation  of  facts  is  taking  place,  as  there  is
in  ours,  we  are  doubly  bound  to  render  our  knowledge  accessible  to
the  whole  body  of  Our  professional  brethren.  We  would  have
reform,  and  not  revolution :  we  would  preserve  the  old,  and  add  the
new.  But  our  contemporaries  have  a  confused  idea  of  the  results
of  our  activity.  For  only  too  much  it  is  apt  to  appear  as  though
nought,  but  a  confused  and  motley  mass  of  old  and  new  would
thereby  be  obtained ;  and  the  necessity  of  combatting  rather  the
false  or  exclusive  doctrines  of  the  more  modern,  than  those  of  the
older  writers,  produces  the  impression  that  our  endeavours  savour
more  of  revolution  than  reformation.  It  is,  no  doubt,  much  more
agreeable  to  confine  oneself  to  the  investigation  and  simple  publica-
tion of  what  one  discovers,  and  to  leave  to  others  to  "  take  it  to
market"  (verwerthen — exploiter),  but  experience  teaches  us  that
this  is  extremely  dangerous,  and  in  the  end  only  turns  out  to  the
advantage  of  those  who  have  the  least  tenderness  of  conscience.
Let  us  undertake,  therefore,  every  one  of  us  to  fulfil  the  duties  both
of  an  observer  and  of  an  instructor.

The  lectures,  which  I  here  publish  with  the  view  of  accomplishing
this  double  purpose,  have  found  such  very  patient  auditors,  that
they  may  perhaps  venture  to  hope  for  indulgent  readers  likewise.
How  greatly  they  stand  in  need  of  indulgence,  I  myself  feel  very
strongly.  Every  kind  of  lecture  can  only  satisfy  the  actual  hearers ;
and  especially  when  it  is  chiefly  intended  to  serve  as  an  explanation
of  drawings  on  a  board,  and  microscopical  preparations,  it  must
necessarily  appear  heterogeneous  and  defective  to  the  reader.  When
the  intention  is  to  give  a  concise  view  of  a  comprehensive  subject,
it  necessarily  becomes  impossible  to  bring  forward  all  the  arguments
that  could  be  advanced,  and  to  support  them  by  the  requisite  quo-
tations. In  lectures  such  as  these  too  the  personal  views  of  the  lec-
turer may  seem  to  be  brought  forward  with  undue  exclusiveness,  but
as  it  is  his  business  to  give  a  clear  exposition  of  the  actual  state  of
the  science  of  which  he  treats,  he  is  obliged  to  define  with  precision
the  principles,  the  correctness  of  which  he  has  proved  by  his  own
experience.

I  trust  therefore  that  what  I  offer  may  not  be  taken  for  more  than
it  is  intended  to  be. Those,  who  have  found  leisure  enough  to  keep

AUTHORS  PREFACE.  VX

up  their  knowledge  by  reading  the  current  medical  literature,  will
find  but  little  that  is  new  in  these  lectures.  The  rest  will  not,  by
reading  them,  be  spared  the  trouble  of  being  obliged  to  study  the
subjects,  which  are  here  only  briefly  touched  upon,  more  closely  in
the  histological,  physiological  and  pathological  works.  But  they
will  at  least  be  in  possession  of  a  summary  of  the  discoveries  which
are  the  most  important  as  far  as  the  cellular  theory  is  concerned,  and
they  will  easily  be  able  to  add  their  more  accurate  study  of  the  in
dividual  subjects  to  the  connected  exposition  which  I  here  give  them
of  the  whole.  Nay,  this  very  exposition  may  perhaps  afford  a  direct
stimulus  for  such  more  accurate  study ;  and  if  it  do  but  this,  it  will
have  done  enough.

The  time  at  my  disposal  was  not  sufficient  to  enable  me  to  write
out  and  revise  a  work  like  this.  I  was  therefore  constrained  to  have
the  lectures  taken  down  in  short-hand,  just  as  they  were  delivered,
and  to  publish  them  with  but  slight  alterations.  Herr  Langenhaun
has  executed  his  stenographical  task  with  great  care.  As  far  as  the
shortness  of  the  time  permitted,  and  wherever  the  text  would  other-
wise have  been  difficult  of  apprehension  to  the  inexperienced,  I  have
had  woodcuts  made  from  the  drawings  on  the  board,  and  more  par-
ticularly from  the  microscopical  preparations  which  were  sent  round.
Completeness  in  this  respect  could  not  be  attained,  seeing  that,  even
as  it  is,  the  publication  of  the  work  has  been  delayed  some  months
in  consequence  of  the  preparation  of  the  woodcuts.

RUD.  VIRCHOW.

Misdboy,  August  20th,  1858.

~%to*^> fi~XS*>Tsis^t*wA^ tfClf-e^-r -l-«L-t>^ ay6</!i- "*"»

f\  zA- a*^-* t\  ^i^^o^o  n^u^i'—*" &l^^cs( l^l*  y7sw~

^csU>^Ji^~f<f7^~

AUTHOR'S PREFACE

TO THE

SECOND EDITION,

The  present  attempt  to  bring  the  results  of  my  experience,  winch
are  at  variance  with  what  is  ordinarily  taught,  before  the  notice  of
the  medical  public  at  large,  in  a  connected  form,  has  produced  unex-
pected results ;  it  has  found  many  friends  and  vigorous  opponents.
Both  of  these  results  are  certainly  very  desirable ;  for  my  friends
will  find  in  this  book  no  arbitrary  settlement  of  questions,  nothing
systematical  or  dogmatical,  and  my  opponents  will  be  compelled  at
length  to  abandon  their  fine  phrases  and  to  set  to  work  and  examine
the  matters  for  themselves.  Both  can  only  contribute  to  the  impul-
sion and  advancement  of  medical  science.

But  still  both  have  also  their  depressing  point  of  view.  When
one  has  laboured  for  ten  years  with  all  the  energy  and  zeal  of  which
he  was  capable,  and  has  laid  the  results  of  his  investigations  before
the  judgment  of  his  contemporaries,  one  is  only  too  apt  to  imagine
that  a  considerable  part,  that  perhaps  the  greater  and  more  import-
ant portion  of  them,  would  be  pretty  generally  known.  This  was,
as  I  have  learned  by  experience,  not  the  case  wTith  my  labours.  One
of  my  critics  attributes  it  to  my  bringing  forward  too  many  argu-
ments and  lengthy  cases  in  support  of  my  views.  It  may  be  so,  but
then  I  might  perhaps  have  been  allowed  to  expect  that  other  critics
would  have  sought  for  the  proofs,  which  they  did  not  find  here  in

Xii  AUTHOR'S  PREFACE  TO  THE  SECOND  EDITION.

sufficient  abundance,  in  the  original  works.  For  I  had  in  the  preface
to  the  first  edition  expressly  pointed  out  that  those  who  had  kept  up
their  knoAvledge,  by  reading  the  current  medical  literature,  would
here  find  but  little  that  was  new  to  them.

In  this  new  edition  I  have  contented  myself  with  improving  the
language,  with  expressing  in  more  precise  terms  what  was  liable  to
be  misunderstood,  and  with  expunging  repetitions.  There  no  doubt,
still  even  now,  remains  a  great  deal  requiring  correction ;  but  it
seemed  to  me  that  the  whole  ought  as  far  as  possible  to  preserve  the
fresher  impress  of  oral  discourse,  and  of  the  unshackled  range  of
thought  which  there  prevails,  if  it  were  for  the  future  still  to  serve
as  an  active  ferment  to  the  labourers  in  the  so  very  various  fields
of  medical  science  and  practice.  For  the  book  will  have  fulfilled  its
object,  if  it  assists  in  the  propagation,  not  of  cellular  pathology,  but
in  general  only  of  independent  thought  and  investigation.

RUD.  VIRCHOW.

Berlin,  June  7th,  1859.

TRANSLATOR'S PREFACE.

Professor  Virchow  and  his  works  are  so  well  known  wherever
the  science  of  medicine  is  studied,  that  I  think  it  quite  unnecessary
to  give  any  account  of  them  here.

When  I  arrived  in  Berlin  in  March,  1858,  these  lectures  were  in
the  course  of  delivery,  and  I  was  present  at  a  few  of  the  concluding
ones.  Subsequently,  whilst  attending  the  lectures,  classes,  and  post-
mortem examinations*  which  are  held  in  the  Pathological  Institute
by  Professor  Virchow,  I  had  ample  opportunities  for  seeing  practical
illustrations  of  most  of  the  doctrines  advocated  in  this  book.  It
was  natural,  therefore,  that  I  should  feel  a  desire  to  translate  these
lectures,  the  more  especially  as  I  had  every  reason  to  suppose  that
the  views  put  forward  in  them  still  remained  unknown — in  con-
sequence, no  doubt,  of  their  German  dress — to  a  large  proportion
of  the  English  medical  public,  although  they  had  already,  many  of
them  several '  years  previously,  appeared  in  Professor  Virchow's
larger  works.

The  translation  will  in  many  instances  be  found  to  differ  somewhat
from  the  original,  for  numerous  additions,  subtractions,  and  substi-
tutions have  been  made,  many  of  them  at  the  suggestion  of  the
Author,  many  at  my  own,  but  all  with  the  Author's  sanction.

A  few  notes  will  be  found,  especially  in  the  later  lectures.  Of
these  some  are  literal,  some  free  translations  of,  or  are  based  upon,
answers  I  received  from  Professor  Virchow  to  questions  I  had  put
to  him,  whilst  others  (pp.  352,  406,  415-416)  were  made  entirely  at

*  From  TOO  to  800  bodies  are  examined  annually  in  the  Institute.

xiii

xiv  TRANSLATOR'S  PREFACE.

his  own  suggestion,  and  are  literal  translations  of  his  words.  In  all
cases,  however,  the  notes  have  been  submitted  to  the  Author,  and
approved  by  him.

An  index  too,  I  thought  might  be  of  service,  and  I  have  therefore
added  a  tolerably  full  one.

I  cannot  sufficiently  thank  Professor  Virchow  for  the  very  great
trouble — a  trouble  of  which  nobody  but  myself  can  have  any  idea —
which  he  has  taken  in  revising  this  translation,  nor  for  the  exceeding
courtesy  and  kindness  with  which  he  has  replied  to  the  very  numer-
ous questions — many  of  them  put  for  my  own  private  information —
which  I  have  plagued  him  with.  He  has  written  me  fully  fifty  let
ters,  most  of  them  very  long  ones ;  and  when  I  reflect  that  he  daily
passes  eight  or  nine  hours  at  the  Charite,  that  he  reads  all  the  more
important  German,  French,  and  English  medical  works  which  appear,
and  is  besides  constantly  engaged  in  publishing  something  fresh,  I
can  scarcely  conceive  how  he  has  managed  to  find  time  to  write
these  letters,  of  which  a  large  proportion  reached  me  by  return  of
post.

To  Dr.  Harris  I  must  return  my  best  thanks  for  the  assistance  he
has  rendered  me  in  reading  the  proof-sheets,  and  correcting  any
errors  of  language  into  which  I  might  have  fallen,  and  also  for
kindly  permitting  me  to  consult  him  whenever  I  met  with  any  diffi-
culty— a  permission  of  Avhich  I  have  availed  myself  most  freely.

The  engravings  will,  I  think,  be  found  to  be  pretty  faithful  copies
of  the  original  woodcuts.

51  Wimpole  Street,  August  10th,  1860.

LIST  OF WOOD-ENGRAVINGS.

no.  paob

1.  Vegetable  cells  from  a  young  shoot  of  Solanura  tuberosum . . .31

2.  Cartilage-cells  from  the  margin  of  ossification  of  growing  cartilage . . 32

3.  Different  kinds  of  cells  and  cell-formations, a.  Hepatic  oell. b.  Con-

nective-tissue corpuscle, c.  Capillary  vessel, d.  Stellate  cell  from  a
lymphatic  gland, e.  Nerve-cell  from  the  cerebellum . . . .35

4.  Formation  of  vegetable  cells,  according  to  Schleiden . . . .36

5.  Pigment-cell  (from  the  eye),  smooth muscular  fibre-cell  (from  the  intes-

tines), portion  of  a  nerve-fibre  with  a  double  contour . . . .39

6.  Cartilage  from  the  epiphysis  of  the  humerus  of  a  child . . . .41

7.  Cortical  layer  of  a  tuber  of  Solanum  tuberosum 45

8.  Longitudinal  section  of  a  young  shoot  of  Syringa 47

9.  Pathological  proliferation  of  cartilage  from  a  costal  cartilage . . .48

10.  Young  ova  from  the  ovary  of  a  frog 49

11.  Cells  from  catarrhal sputa  (pus-  and mucus-corpuscles,  and  a  pigment-

cell) .  49

12.  Diagram  of  the  globular  theory 53

13.  Diagram  of  the  investment-  (cluster-)  theory ... . .  53

14.  Cylindrical  epithelium  from  the  gall-bladder ... . .  58

15.  Transitional  epithelium  from  the  urinary  bladder .....  59

16.  Perpendicular  section  through  the  surface  of  the  skin  of  a  toe  (epidermis,

rete  Malpighii,  papillae) 60

17.  Diagrammatic  representation  of  a  longitudinal  section  of  a  nail  in  normal

and  pathological  conditions 65

18.  A.  Development  of  sweat-glands. B.  Portion  of  the  duct  of  a  sweat-

gland 68

xv

xvi  LIST OF  ENGRAVINGS.

VIG.  PAGE

19.  A.  Bundle  of  ordinary  connective  tissue. B.  Development  of  connective

tissue  according  to  Schwann's plan. C.  Development of  connective

tissue  according  to  Henle's  plan 70

20.  Young  connective  tissue  from  the  embryo  of  a  pig 72

21.  Diagram  of  the  development  of  connective  tissue 73

22.  Section  through  the  growing  cartilage  of  a  patella .....  74

23.  Primitive  muscular  fasciculi  in  different  conditions 79

24.  Muscular  elements  from  the  heart  of  a  puerperal  woman  . . . .81

25.  Smooth  muscular  fibres  from  the  urinary  bladder 83

26.  Small  artery  from  the  base  of  the  cerebrum 86

27.  Diagrammatic  representations  of  hepatic  cells. A.  Physiological  appear-

ance. B.  Hypertrophy. 0.  Hyperplasy 94

28.  Portion  of  the  periphery  of  the  liver  of  a  rabbit,  with  the  vessels  in-

jected 102

29.  Natural  injection  of  the  corpus  striatum  of  a  lunatic ....  104

30.  Injected  preparation  from  the  muscular  coat  of  the  stomach . . .  105

31.  Vessels  in  the  cartilage  of  the  calcaneum  of  a  new-born  child  . . .  107

32.  Bone. Longitudinal  section  from  a  cortex  of  a  sclerotic  tibia  . .  108

33.  Bone. Transverse  section ....;....  109

34.  Bone-corpuscles  from  a  morbid  formation  of  bone  in  the  dura  mater  of

the  brain 110

35.  Section  of  an  osseous  plate  from  the  arachnoid  of  the  brain . . .114

36.  Longitudinal  and  transverse  section  from  the  semilunar  cartilage  of  the

knee-joint  of  a  child 117

37.  Transverse  section  from  the  tendo  Achillis  of  an  adult . . . .120

38.  Transverse  section  from  the  interior  of  the  tendo  Achillis  of  a  new-born

child 122

39.  Longitudinal  section  from  the  interior  of  the  tendo  Achillis  of  a  new-

born child 123

40.  The  abdominal  end  of  the  umbilical  cord  of  a  nearly  full-grown  foetus,

injected 126

41.  Transverse  section  through  a  part  of  the  umbilical  cord . . . .128

42.  Transverse  section  of  the  mucous  tissue  of  the  umbilical  cord. . .  130

43.  Elastic  networks  and  fibres  from  the  subcutaneous  tissue  of  the  abdomen  132

44.  Injection  of  the  vessels  of  the  skin ;  vertical  section ....  136

45.  Section  of  the  dartos 137

46.  Small  artery  from  the  tendinous  sheath  of  an  extensor  muscle  . . .  142

47.  A.  Epithelium  from  the  femoral  artery. B.  Epithelium  from  veins  of

considerable  size . . .145

48.  Epithelium  from  the  vessels  of  the  kidney. A. Flat,  spindle-shaped  cells

from  a  new-born  child. B.  Ribbon  like  plate  of  epithelium  from  an  adult  145

49.  Irregular  contraction  of  small  vessels  from  the  web  of  a  frog's  foot  after

the  application  of  stimuli. Copied  from  Wharton  Jones . . .  149

LIST  OF  ENGRAVINGS.  xvii

WO.  PAGE

60.  Coagulated  fibrine  from  human  blood .  168

51.  Nucleated  blood-corpuscles  from  a  human  foetus,  six  weeks  old . .  170

52.  Blood-corpuscles  from  an  adult .171

53.  Crystals  of  Haematoidine 175

54.  Pigment  from  an  apoplectic  cicatrix  in  the  brain 176

55.  Crystals  of  Haemine  from  human  blood . . . . . , . 177

56.  Colourless  blood-corpuscles 180

57.  Colourless  blood-corpuscles  in  variolous  leucocytosis  ....  182

58.  Fibrine  clot  from  the  pulmonary  artery,  and  a  portion  of  a  granule  com-

posed of  thickly  crowded  colourless  blood-corpuscles,  in  leucocytosis  .  184

59.  Capillary  stream  in  the  web  of  a  frog's  foot .185

60.  Diagram  of  a  bleeding-glass,  with  coagulated  hyperinotic  blood .  .187

61.  Sections  through  the  cortical  substance  of  human  mesenteric  glands  .  208

62.  Lymph-corpuscles from the interior  of the follicles  of a  lymphatic

gland 209

63.  Pus-corpuscles  and  their  nuclei  in  Gonorrhoea .213

64.  Inspissated,  cheesy  pus 214

65.  Inspissated, hemorrhagic  pus,  some  of  it  in  process  of  disintegration,

from  a  case  of  Empyema 215

66.  Pus  engaged  in  fatty  metamorphosis 216

67.  Section  through  the  cortex  of  an  axillary  gland  from  an  arm,  the  skin  of

which  had  been  tattooed 219

68.  Reticulum  of  an  axillary  gland,  filled  with  cinnabar,  from  an  arm  which

had  been  tattooed 220

69.  Valvular  thrombosis  of  the  saphenous  vein 232

70.  Puriform  mass  of  debris  from  softened  thrombi. A.  Granules  seen  in

disintegrating  fibrine.  B.  Colourless  blood-corpuscles  set  free  by
the  softening ;  some  of  them  engaged  in  retrograde  metamorphosis.
C.  Red  blood-corpuscles  undergoing  decolorization  and  disorganization 233

71.  Autochthonous  and prolonged thrombi  from  branches  of  the  femoral

veins 239

72.  Embolia  of  the  pulmonary  artery 241

73.  Ulcerative  endocarditis  affecting  the  mitral  valve,  from  a  puerperal  wo-

man 242

74 — 75.  Capillary  embolia  in  the  tufts  (penicilli)  of  the  splenic  artery  after

endocarditis .  243

76.  Melanaemia. Blood  from  the  right  heart 257

77.  Transverse  section  through  one  of  the  trunks  of  the  brachial  plexus .  266

78.  Grey  and  white  nerve-fibres 267

79.  Medullary  hypertrophy  of  the  optic  nerve  within  the  eye ....  268

80.  Drops  of  medullary  matter. A. From  the  medullary  sheath  of  cerebral

nerves  after  they  have  become  swollen  up  with  water.  B.  Drops  from
disintegrating  epithelium  from  the  gall-bladder 270

2

Xviii  LIST OF  ENGRAVINGS.

no.  pish

81.  Broad  and  narrow  nerve-fibres  with  the  medullary  matter  irregularly

swollen  up 272

82.  Vaterian  or  Pacinian  body  from  the  subcutaneous  tissue  of  the  end  of

a  finger 2*75

83.  Nervous  and  vascular  papillae  from  the  skin  of  the  end  of  a  finger  . .  277

84.  The  fundamental  substance  of  an  acuminate  condyloma  of  the  penis  with

abundant  growth  of  papilla? .........  282

85.  A.  Vertical section  through  the  whole  thickness  of  the  retina. B,  C

(after  H.  Muller). Isolated  radiating  fibres 286

86.  Division  of  a  primitive  nerve-fibre 289

87-  Nervous  plexus  from  the  submucous  tissue  of  the  intestinal  canal  of  a

child 292

88.  Elements  (ganglion-cells  and  nerve-fibres)  from  the  Gasserian  ganglion .  296

89.  Ganglion-cells  from  the  great  nervous  centres. Ay  2?,  C.  From  the  spinal

marrow. D.  From  the  cortex  of  the  cerebrum .....  298

90.  The  half  of  a  transverse  section  from  the  cervical  part  of  the  spinal

marrow 304

91.  Diagrammatic  representation  of  the  disposition  of  the  nerves  in  the  cortex

of  the  cerebellum,  after  Gerlach ........  307

92.  Transverse  section  through  the  spinal  marrow  of  Petromyzon  fluviatilis .  308

93.  Pale  fibres  from  the  spinal  marrow  of  Petromyzon  fluviatilis . . .  310

94.  Ependyma  ventriculorum  and  neuro-glia. Ca.  Corpora  amylacea . .313

95.  Cellular  elements  of  the  neuro-glia 316

96.  Diagrammatic  representation  of  a  transverse  section  of  the  spinal  marrow

in  partial,  grey  atrophy 319

97.  Diagram  of  the  condition  of  the  molecules  of  a  nerve,  A,  when  at  rest,

2?,  when  in  an  electrotonic  state — from  Ludwig .....  328

98.  Convoluted  tubule  from  the  cortex  of  the  kidney  in  morbus  Brightii .  335  •

99.  Parenchymatous  keratitis 341

100.  Perpendicular  section  of  the  cornea  of  the  ox,  from  His  ....  342

101.  Horizontal  section  of  the  cornea,  parallel  to  the  surface,  from  His . .  343

102.  Parenchymatous  keratitis 344

103.  Division  of  nuclei  in  the  cells  of  a  melanotic  tumour  of  the  parotid  gland  346

104.  Cells  from  the  marrow  of  bones,  after  Kolliker 347

105.  Division  of  nuclei  in  primitive  muscular  fasciculi  from  the  immediate

neighbourhood  of  a  cancerous  tumour 348

106.  Intra-capsular  multiplication  of  cells  in  the  central  substance  of  an  inter-

vertebral cartilage 349

107.  Adipose  cellular  tissue  from  the  panniculus  adiposus. A.  Ordinary  sub-

cutaneous tissue,  with  fat-cells. B.  Atrophic  fat 362

108.  Interstitial  growth  of  fat  in  muscle 364

109.  Intestinal  villi,  showing  the absorption  of  fat. A.  Normal intestinal

villus. B. Villus  in  a  state  of  contraction. C.  Human  intestinal  villus
during  the  absorption  of  chyle. B.  In  a  case  of  retention  of  chyle .  366

LIST OF  ENGRAVINGS.  xix

FIG.  PAGB

110.  The  adjoining  halves  of  two  hepatic  acini,  showing  the  zones  occupied  by

fat,  the  amyloid  matter  and  pigment 372

111.  Hair-follicle  with  sebaceous  glands  from  the  skin 375

112.  Mammary  gland  during  lactation,  milk  and  colostrum ....  3*76

113.  Fatty  degeneration  of  cerebral arteries. A.  Fatty metamorphosis of

the muscular cells  of  the circular-fibre coat. B.  Formation  of  fat-
granule  cells  in  the  connective-tissue  corpuscles  of  the  internal  coat .  381

114.  Fatty  degeneration  of  the  muscular  substance  of  the  heart  in  different

stages 384

115.  Corpora  lutea  in  the  human  ovary 386

116.  Vertical  section  through  the  walls  of  the  aorta  at  a  sclerotic  part,  in

which  an  atheromatous  depot  is  already  in  the  course  of  formation .  398

117.  The  pultaceous  atheromatous  matter  from  a  depot  in  the  aorta, act'.  Fluid

fat. b.  Amorphous  granularly-wrinkled  flakes  of  tissue, c,  c'.  Crystals

of  cholestearine 399

118.  Vertical  section  from  a  sclerotic  plate  in  the  aorta  (internal  coat),  in  pro-

cess of  fatty  degeneration 401

119.  Condylomatous  excrescences  of  the  mitral  valve .....  405

120.  Laminated  prostatic  amyloid  bodies  (concretions) .....  412

121.  Amyloid  degeneration  of  a  small  artery  from  the  submucous  tissue  of

the  small  intestines 416

122.  Amyloid  degeneration  of  a  lymphatic  gland ......  425

123.  Corpora  amylacea  from  a  diseased  lymphatic  gland 425

124.  Proliferation  of  the  growing  cartilage  of  the  diaphysis  of  the  tibia  of  a

child  (longitudinal  section) 443

125.  Endogenous new  formation ; cells containing vesicles (physaliphores).

A.  From  the  thymus  gland  of  a  new-born  child. 2?,  C.  Cancer-cells .  444

126.  Vertical  section  through  the  ossifying  border  of  a  growing  astragalus

(pathological  irritation) 455

127 — 128.  Horizontal  sections  through  the  growing  cartilage  of  the  tibia,  from

a  human  foetus  seven  months  old 459

129.  Line  of  demarcation  in  a  piece  of  necrosed  bone,  from  a  case  of  paedar-

throcace,  bone-territories 462

130.  Periosteal  growth  of  the  cranial  bones  (parietal  bone  of  a  child) . .  468

i31 — 132.  Soft  osteoma  from  the  jaw  of  a  goat 472,474

133 — 134.  Ricketty diaphysal cartilage, transformation into medullary  and

osteoid  tissue  ;  calcification  and  ossification 478,  480

135.  Fracture  of  the  humerus  in  process  of  healing;  formation  of  callus .  484

136.  Interstitial  formation  of  pus  in  puerperal  inflammation  of  muscle . .  490

137.  Purulent  granulation  from  the  subcutaneous  tissue  of  a  rabbit,  round

about  a  ligature 496

138.  Development of cancer from connective tissue in carcinoma  of  the

breast 499

XX  LIST  OF  ENGRAVINGS.

FIG.  PAQD

139.  Commencing  cauliflower  growth  (cancroid)  of  the  neck  of  the  uterus .  516

140.  Development  of  tubercle  from  connective  tissue  in  the  pleura  . . .  521

141.  Mass  of  cancroid  from  a  tumour  of  the  under  lip,  with  epidermic  pearls  .  528

142.  Cancer-cells 529

143.  Cancroid  of  the  orbit 530

144.  Sarcoma  of  the  breast t ,631

CONTENTS.

♦  •  ♦

*40B

Author's  Preface v

Author's  Preface  to  the  Second  Edition .  xi

Translator's  Preface xiii

List  of  Wood  Engravings xv

LECTURE  I. — Cells  and  the  Cellular  Theory  . . 27

Introduction  and  object.  Importance  of  anatomical  discoveries  in  the  his-
tory of  medicine.  Slight  influence  of  the  cell-theory  upon  pathology.
Cells  as  the  ultimate  active  elements  of  the  living  body.  Their  nature
more  accurately  defined.  Vegetable  cells  ;  membrane,  contents,  nucleus.
Animal  cells;  capsulated  (cartilage)  and  simple.  Nuclei  of.  Nucleoli  of.
Theory  of  the  formation  of  cells  out  of  free  cytoblastema.  Constancy
of  nucleus  and  its  importance  in  the  maintenance  of  the  living  cell.  'Di-
versity of  cell-contents  and  their  importance  as  regards  the  functions  of
parts.  Cells  as  vital  unities.  The  body  as  a  social  organization.  Cellu-
lar in  contradistinction  to  humoral  and  solidistic,  pathology. — Explana-
tion of  some  of  the  preparations.  Young  shoots  of  plants.  Growth  of
plants. Growth  of  cartilage. Young  ova. Young  cells  in  sputa.

LECTURE  IL— Physiological  Tissues . . . .51

Falsity  of  the  view  that  tissues  and  fibres  are  made  up  of  globules  (ele-
mentary granules).  The  investment  theory  (Umhiillungstheorie).  Equi-
vocal [spontaneous]  generation  of  cells.  The  law  of  continuous  deve-
lopment.— General  classification  of  the  tissues.  The  three  categories
of  General  Histology.  Special  tissues.  Organs  and  systems,  or  appara-
tuses.— The  Epithelial  Tissues.  Squamous,  cylindrical,  and  transitional
epithelium.  Epidermis  and  rete  Malpighii.  Nails,  and  their  diseases.
Crystalline  lens.  Pigment.  Gland-cells. — The  Connective  Tissues.  The
theories  of  Schwann,  Henle,  and  Reichert.  My  theory.  Connective
tissue  as  intercellular  substance.  Cartilage  (hyaline,  fibro-  and  reticular).
Mucous  tissue.  Adipose  tissue.  Anastomosis  of  cells ;  juice-conveying
system  of  tubes  or  canals.

xxi

xxli  CONTENTS.

PAG*

LECTUKE  III. — Physiological  and  Pathological  Tissues 77

The  higher  animal  tissues:  muscles,  nerves, vessels,  blood. — Muscles.  Striped
and  smooth.  Atrophy  of.  The  contractile  substance  and  contractility  in
general.  Cutis  anserina  and  arrectores  pilorum.  Vessels.  Capillaries.
Contractile  vessels.  Nerves. — Pathological  tissues  (Neoplasms),  and  their
classification.  Import  of  vascularity.  Doctrine  of  specific  elements.
Physiological  types  (reproduction).  Heterology  (heterotopy,  hetero-
chrony, heterometry),  and  malignity.  Hypertrophy  and  hyperplasy.
Degeneration.  Criteria  for  prognosis. — Law  of  continuity.  Histological
substitution  and  equivalents.  Physiological  and  pathological  substitution.

LECTUKE  IV. — Nutrition  and  its  Channels . .  101

Action  of  the  vessels.  Relations  between  vessels  and  tissues.  Liver.  Brain.
Muscular  coat  of  the  stomach.  Cartilage.  Bone. — Dependence  of  tissues
upon  vessels.  Metastases.  Vascular  territories  [Gefassterritorien]  (vas-
cular unities).  Conveyance  of  nutriment  in  the  juice-conveying  canals
(Saftkanale)  of  the  tissues.  Bone.  Teeth.  Fibro-cartilage.  Cornea.
Semilunar  cartilages.

LECTUKE  Y. — Nutrition,  and  Conveyance  of  the  Nu-
tritive Juices .  119

Tendons.  Cornea.  Umbilical  cord.— Elastic  tissue.  Corium. — Loose  con-
nective tissue.  Tunica  dartos. — Importance  of  cells  in  the  special  dis-
tribution of  the  nutritive  juices.

LECTUKE  VI. — Nutrition  and  Circulation  . . .  140

Arteries.  Capillaries.  Continuity  of  their  membrane.  Its  porosity.  Hae-
morrhage by  transudation  (per  diapedesin).  Veins.  Vessels  during  preg-
nancy.— Properties  of  the  walls  of  vessels :  1.  Contractility.  Rhythmical
movement.  Active  or  irritative  hyperaemia.  Ischsemia.  Counter  irritants.
2.  Elasticity  and  its  importance  as  regards  the  rapidity  and  uniformity
of  the  current  of  blood.  Dilatation  of  the  vessels.  3.  Permeability.
Diffusion.  Specific  affinities.  Relations  between  the  supply  of  blood
and  nutrition.  Glandular  secretion  (liver).  Specific  action  of  the  ele-
ments of  the  tissues. — Dyscrasia,  Its  transitory  character  and  local  •
origin. Dyscrasia  of  drunkards. Haemorrhagic  diathesis. Syphilis.

LECTUKE  VIL— The  Blood 166

Fibrine.  Its  fibrillae.  Compared  with  mucus,  and  connective  tissue.  Ho-
mogeneous condition. —  Red  blood-corpuseles.  Their  nucleus  and  con-
tents. Changes  of  form.  Blood-crystals  (Haematoidine,  Haemine,  Haa-
matocrystalline). — Colourless  blood-corpuscles.  Numerical  proportion.
Structure.  Compared  with  pus-corpuscles.  Their  viscosity  and  aggluti-
nation. Specific  gravity.  Crusta  granulosa.  Diagnosis  between  pus-
and  colourless  blood  corpuscles.

CONTENTS.  xxiii

PAGE

LECTURE  Yin.— Blood  and  Lymph . . . .189

Change  and  replacement  of  the  constituents  of  the  blood.  Fibrine.  Lymph
and  its  coagulation.  Lymphatic  exudation.  Fibrinogenous  substance.
Formation  of  the  buffy  coat.  Lymphatic  blood,  hyperinosis,  phlogistic
crasis.  Local  formation  of  fibrine.  Transudation  of  fibrine.  Forma-
tion of  fibrine  in  the  blood.  —  Colourless  blood-corpuscles  (lymph-corpus-
cles). Their  increase  in  hyperinosis  and  hypinosis  (Erysipelas,  pseudo-
erysipelas,  typhoid  fever).  Leucocytosis  and  leukaemia.  Splenic  and
lymphatic  leukaemia. — The  spleen  and  lymphatic  glands  as  blood-making
organs. Structure  of  lymphatic  glands.

LECTURE  IX. — Pyemia  and  Leucocytosis . . .  211

Comparison  between  colourless  blood-  and  pus-corpuscles.  Physiological
reabsorption  of  pus;  incomplete  (inspissation,  cheesy  transformation),
and  complete  (fatty  metamorphosis,  or  milky  transformation).  Intra vasa-
tion  of  pus. — Pus  in  the  lymphatic  vessels.  Retention  of  matters  in  the
lymphatic  glands.  Mechanical  separation  (filtration).  Coloration  by  tat-
tooing. Chemical  separation  (attraction):  Cancer,  Syphilis.  Irritation  of
lymphatic  glands,  and  its  relation  to  leucocytosis. — Digestive  and  puer-
peral (physiological)  leucocytosis.  Pathological  leucocytosis  (Scrofulosis,
typhoid  fever,  cancer,  erysipelas). — Lymphoid  apparatuses:  solitary  and
Peyerian  follicles  of  the  intestines.  Tonsils  and  follicles  of  the  tongue.
Thymus.  Spleen. — Complete  rejection  of  pyaemia  as  a  dyscrasia  suscep-
tible of  demonstration  morphologically.

LECTURE  X.— Metastatical  Dyscrasle . . .  230

Pyaemia  and  phlebitis.  Thrombosis.  Puriform  softening  of  thrombi.  True
and  false  phlebitis.  Purulent  cysts  of  the  heart. — Embolia.  Import  of
prolonged  thrombi.  Pulmonary  metastases.  Crumbling  away  of  the
emboli.  Varying  character  of  the  metastases.  Endocarditis  and  capil-
lary embolia.  Latent  pyaemia. — Infectant  fluids.  Diseases  of  the  lym-
phatic apparatuses  and  secreting  organs.  Chemical  substances  in  the
blood  ;  salts  of  silver.  Arthritis.  Calcareous  metastases.  Diffuse  me-
tastatic processes.  Ichorrhaemia.  Pyaemia  as  a  collective  name. —
Chemical  dyscrasiae.  Malignant  tumours,  especially  cancer.  Diffusion
by  means  of  contagious  parenchymatous  juices.

LECTURE XL — Pigmentary Elements in the Blood.

Nerves 255

Melanaemia.  Its  relation  to  melanotic  tumours  and  colorations  of  the
spleen. — Red  blood-corpuscles.  Origin.  Melanic  forms.  Chlorosis —
Paralysis  of  the  respiratory  substance.  Toxicaemia. — The  nervous  sys-
tem. Its  pretended  unity. — Nerve-fibres.  Peripheral  nerves  :  their  fas-
ciculi, primitive  fibres,  and  perineurium.  Axis-cylinder  (electrical  sub-
stance). Medullary  substance  (Myeline).  Non-medullated  and  medul-
lated  fibres.  Transition  from  the  one  kind  to  the  other:  hypertrophy
of  the  optic  nerve.  Different  breadth  of  the  fibres.  Their  terminations.
Pacinian  and  tactile  bodies.

xxiv  CONTENTS.

PAGE

LECTURE  XII.— The  Nervous  System  . . . .280

Peripheral  terminations  of  the  nerves.  Nerves  of  special  sense.  The  skin
and  the  distinction  of  vessel-,  nerve-,  and  cell-territories  in  it.  Olfactory
mucous  membrane.  Retina.  Division  of  nerve-fibres.  The  electrical
organ  of  fishes.  Muscles.  Further  consideration  of  nerve-territories. —
Nervous  plexuses  with  ganglioniform  enlargements.  Intestines. — Errors
of  the  neuro-pathologists. — The  great  nervous  centres.  Grey  substance.
Ganglion-  [nerve-]  cells  containing  pigment.  Varieties  of  ganglion-
cells  ;  sympathetic  cells  in  the  spinal  marrow  and  brain,  motor  and  sensi-
tive cells.  Multipolar  (polyclonous)  ganglion-cells.  Different  nature  of
the  processes  of  ganglion-cells.

LECTURE  XIIL— Spinal  Coed  and  Brain . . .302

The  spinal  cord.  White  and  grey  matter.  Central  canal.  Groups  of  gang-
lion-cells. White  columns  and  commissures. — The  medulla  oblongata
and  the  brain.  Its  granular  and  bacillar  layer. — The  spinal  cord  of  the
petromyzon  and  its  non-medullated  fibres. — The  intermediate  substance
(interstitial  tissue).  Ependyma  ventriculorum.  Neuro-glia.  Corpora
amylacea.

LECTURE  XIY. — Activity  and  Irritability  of  Cellu-
lar Elements. Different  Forms  of  Irritation .  321

Life  of  individual  parts.  The  unity  of  the  neurists.  Consciousness.  Activ-
ity of  individual  parts.  Excitability  (irritability)  a3  a  general  criterion  of
life.  Meaning  of  irritation.  Partial  death.  Necrosis. — Function,  nutri-
tion, and  formation,  as  general  forms  of  vital  activity.  Difference  of
irritability  according  to  the  different  forms  of  activity. — Functional  irri-
tability. Nerves,  muscles,  ciliated  epithelium,  glands.  Fatigue  and  func-
tional restitution.  Stimuli.  Their  specific  relations.  Muscular  irritabi-
lity.— Nutritive  irritability.  Maintenance  and  destruction  of  elements.
Inflammation.  Cloudy  swelling.  Kidney  (morbus  Brightii)  and  cartilage.
Neuro-pathological  doctrines.  Skin,  cornea.  The  humoro-pathological
doctrines.  Parenchymatous  exudation,  and  parenchymatous  inflamma-
tion.— Formative  irritation.  Multiplication  of  nucleoli  and  nuclei  by
division.  Multi-nuclear  cells;  marrow-cells  and  myeloid  tumours.  Com-
parison between  formative  muscular  irritation  and  muscular  growth.
Multiplication  (new  formation)  of  cells  by  division.  The  humoro-  and
neuro-pathological  doctrines. — Inflammatory  irritation  as  a  compound
phenomenon. Neuro-paralytical  inflammation  (Vagus,  Trigeminus).

LECTURE XY. — Passive Processes. Fatty  Degene-
ration  356

Passive  processes  in  their  two  chief  tendencies  to  degeneration  ;  Necrobi-
osis (softening  and  disintegration)  and  induration. — Fatty  degeneration.
Histological  history  of  fat  in  the  animal  body  ;  fat  as  a  component  of  the
tissues,  as  a  transitory  infiltration,  and  as  a  necrobiotic  matter. — Adipose
tissue. Polysarcia. Fatty  tumours. Interstitial  formation  of  fat. Fatty

i  CONTENTS.  XXv

PAGB

degeneration  of  muscles. — Fatty  infiltration.  Intestines  ;  structure  and
functions  of  the  villi.  Reabsorption  and  retention  of  the  chyle.  Liver;
intermediate  interchange  of  matter  by  means  of  the  biliary  ducts.  Fatty
liver. — Fatty  metamorphosis.  Glands ;  secretion  of  sebaceous  matter  and
milk  (colostrum).  Granule-cells  and  granule-globules.  Inflammatory
globules. Arteries;  fatty  usure  and  atheroma  in  them. Fatty  debris.

LECTUKE XVI. — A  more  Precise  Account  of  Fatty

Metamorphosis ........  383

Fatty  degeneration  of  muscles.  Fatty  metamorphosis  of  the  substance  of
the  heart.  Formation  of  fat  in  the  muscles  in  distortions. — Corpus  lu-
teum  of  the  ovary.  Fatty  metamorphosis  of  pulmonary  epithelium.
Yellow  softening  of  the  brain.  Arcus  senilis. — Optical  properties  of
fattily  degenerated  tissues.  Renal  epithelium  in  Bright's  disease.  Succes-
sive stages  (cloudy  swelling,  fatty  metamorphosis,  fatty  detritus  (debris),
atrophy).  Inflammatory  globules.  Similarity  of  the  result  in  inflamma-
tory and  non-inflammatory  changes. — Atheromatous  process  in  arteries.
Its  relation  to  ossification.  Inflammatory  character  of  the  process ;  its
analogy  with  endocarditis.  Formation  of  the  atheromatous  deposit.  Ap-
pearance of  cholestearine.  Arterio-sclerosis.  Endoarteritis.  Calcifica-
tion and  ossification  of  arteries. — Mixed,  activo-passive  processes.

LECTURE XVII. — Amyloid  Degeneration. Inflamma-
tion .  409

Amyloid  (lardaceous  or  waxy)  degeneration.  Different  nature  of  amyloid
substances :  concentric  and  laminated  amyloid  bodies  (brain,  prostate),
and  amyloid  degeneration  properly  so  called.  Its  course.  Commence-
ment of  the  affection  in  the  minute  arteries.  Waxy  liver.  Cartilage.
Dyscrasie  (constitutional)  character  of  the  disease.  Intestines.  Kidneys:
the  three  forms  of  Bright's  disease  (amyloid  degeneration,  parenchyma-
tous, and  interstitial  nephritis),  Lymphatic  glands.  Functional  disturb-
ances of  the  affected  organs.—  Inflammation.  The  four  cardinal  symptoms
and  their  predominance  in  the  different  schools:  the  thermic  and  vascu-
lar theory  ;  the  neuro-pathologists,  exudations.  Inflammatory  stimuli.
Lesion  of  function.  Exudation  as  a  consequence  of  the  activity  of  the
tissues  ;  mucus  and  fibrine.  Inflammation  as  a  complex  irritative  pro-
cess. Parenchymatous  and  exudative  (secretory)  form.

LECTURE XVIIL— Normal and Pathological New

Formation 438

The  theory  of  continuous  development  in  opposition  to  the  blastema  and
exudation  theory — Connective  tissue  and  its  equivalents  as  the  most
general  germ-store  of  new  formations.  Correspondence  between  embry-
onic and  pathological  new  formation.  Cell-division  as  the  most  general
starting-point  of  new-formations. — Endogenous  formation.  Physalides.
Brood-cavities. — Different  tendencies  of  new-formations.  Hyperplasia,
direct  and  indirect.  Heteroplasia.  Pathological  formative  cells.  Differ-
ence in  their  size  and  in  the  time  required  for  their  full  development. —
Description  of  the  development  of  bone  as  a  model-formation. Differ-

XXV]

CONTENTS.

PAQK

ence  beiween  formation  and  transformation.  Fresh  and  growing,  in
opposition  to  macerated,  bone.  Nature  of  medullary  tissue — Growth  in
length  of  tubular  [long]  bones ;  proliferation  of  cartilage.  Formation
of  marrow  as  a  transformation  of  tissue ;  red  and  yellow,  normal  and
inflammatory  marrow.  Osseous  tissue,  calcified  cartilage,  osteoid  tissue.
Bone-territories:  caries,  degenerative  ostitis.  Granulations  in  bone.
Suppuration  of  bone.  Maturation  of  pus.  Ossification  of  marrow. —
Growth  of  long  bones  in  thickness :  structure  and  proliferation  of  the
periosteum. — Granulations  as  analogous  to  the  medulla  of  bones,  and  as
the  starting-point  of  all  heteroplastic  development.

LECTURE XIX. — Pathological,  and  especially  Hete-
rologous, New  Formation 471

Consideration  of  some  forms  of  pathological  formation  of  bone.  Soft  oste-
oma of  the  maxillae.  Rickets.  Formation  of  callus  after  fracture. —
Theory  of  substitutive  new  formation  in  opposition  to  exudative.  De-
structive nature  of  new-formations.  Homology  and  heterology  (malig-
nity). Ulceration.  Mollities  ossium.  Proliferation  and  luxuriation.
Medulla  of  bones,  and  pus. — Suppuration.  Its  two  forms :  superficial,
occurring  in  epithelium  ;  and  deep,  in  connective  tissue.  Eroding  suppu-
ration (skin,  mucous  membrane)  :  pus-  and  mucus-corpuscles  in  their
relations  to  epithelium.  Ulcerative  suppuration.  Solvent  properties  of
pus. — Connection  of  destruction  with  pathological  growth  and  prolifera-
tion. Correspondence  of  the  first  stage  in  pus,  cancer,  sarcoma,  etc.
Possible  duration  of  the  life  of  pathologically  new-formed  elements,  and  of
pathological  new-formations  considered  as  wholes  (tumours).  Compound
nature  of  the  larger  tuberous  tumours  (Geschwulstknoten),  and  miliary
character  of  the  real  foci  (Heerde).  Conditions  of  growth  and  recurrence :
contagiousness  of  new-formations  and  import  of  the  anastomoses  of  cells.
Cellular  pathology  in  opposition  to  the  humoral  and  neuristic.  General
infection  of  the  body. Parasitism  and  autonomy  of  new-formations.

LECTURE XX. — Form  and Nature  of  Pathological

New-formations  ........  507

Nomenclature  and  classification  of  pathological  new-formations.  Consist-
ence as  a  principle  of  division.  Comparison  with  individual  parts  of  the
body.  Histological  division.  Apparent  heterology  of  tubercle,  colloid,  etc.
— Difference  of  form  and  nature  :  Colloid,  Epithelioma,  Papillary  tumour,
Tubercle. — Papillary  tumours :  simple  (condylomata,  papillomata)  and
specific  (villous  cancer  and  cauliflower-tumour). — Tubercle  :  infiltration
and  granulation.  Inflammatory  origin  of  tubercle.  Its  production  from
connective  tissue.  Miliary  granules,  and  solitary  masses.  The  cheesy
metamorphosis. — Colloid  :  myxoma.  Collonema.  Mucous  or  gelatinous
cancer. — Physiological  types  of  heterologous  new-formations  :  lymphoid
nature  of  tubercle,  haematoid  of  pus,  epithelioid  of  cancer,  cancroid,  pearly
and  dermoid  tumours,  and  connective-tissue-like  of  sarcoma.  Infec-
tiousness according  to  the  amount  of  juice. — Comparison  between  patho-
logical new-formations  in  animals  and  vegetables. Conclusion.

LECTURE I.

FEBRUARY  10, 1858.
CELLS  AND  THE  CELLULAR  THEORY.

Introduction  and  object — Importance  of  anatomical  discoveries  in  the  history  of
medicine — Slight  influence  of  the  cell-theory  upon  pathology — Cells  as  the  ulti-
mate active  elements  of  the  living  body — Their  nature  more  accurately  defined
— Vegetable  cells ;  membrane,  contents,  nucleus — Animal  cells ;  capsulated
(cartilage)  and  simple — Nuclei  of — Nucleoli  of — Theory  of  the  formation  of
cells  out  of  free  cytoblastema — Constancy  of  nucleus  and  its  importance  in  the
maintenance  of  the  living  cell — Diversity  of  cell-contents  and  their  importance
as  regards'the  functions  of  parts — Cells  as  vital  unities — The  body  as  a  social
organization — Cellular,  in  contradistinction  to  humoral  and  solidistic,  pathology.

Explanation  of  some  of  the  preparations — Young  shoots  of  plants — Growth  of  plants
— Growth  of  cartilage — Young  ova — Young  cells  in  sputa.

Gentlemen, — Whilst  bidding  you  heartily  welcome  to
benches  which  must  have  long  since  ceased  to  be  familiar
to  you,  I  must  begin  by  reminding  you,  that  it  is  not  my
want  of  modesty  which  has  summoned  you  hither,  but
that  I  have  only  yielded  to  the  repeatedly  manifested
wishes  of  many  among  you.  Nor  should  I  have  ventured
either  to  offer  you  lectures  after  the  same  fashion  in  which
I  am  accustomed  to  deliver  them  in  my  regular  courses.
On  the  contrary,  I  will  make  the  attempt  to  lay  before  you
in  a  more  succinct  manner  the  development  which  I  my-
self, and,  I  think,  medical  science  also,  have  passed  through
in  the  course  of  the  last  fifteen  years.  In  my  announce-
ment of  these  lectures,  I  described  the  subject  of  them  in

27

28  LECTURE  I.

such  a  way  as  to  couple  histology  with  pathology  ;  and
for  this  reason,  that  I  thought  I  must  take  it  for  granted
that  many  busily  occupied  physicians  were  not  quite
familiar  with  the  most  recent  histological  changes,  and  did
not  enjoy  sufficiently  frequent  opportunities  of  examining
microscopical  objects  for  themselves.  Inasmuch  as,  how-
ever, it  is  upon  such  examinations  that  the  most  import-
ant conclusions  are  grounded  which  we  now  draw,  you
will  pardon  me  if,  disregarding  those  among  you  who
have  a  perfect  acquaintance  with  the  subject,  I  behave
just  as  if  you  all  were  not  completely  familiar  with  the
requisite  preliminary  knowledge.

The  present  reform  in  medicine,  of  which  you  have  all
been  witnesses,  essentially  had  its  rise  in  new  anatomical
observations,  and  the  exposition  also,  which  I  have  to
make  to  you,  will  therefore  principally  be  based  upon
anatomical  demonstrations.  But  for  me  it  would  not  be
sufficient  to  take,  as  has  been  the  custom  during  the  last
ten  years,  pathological  anatomy  alone  as  the  groundwork
of  my  views  ;  we  must  add  thereto  those  facts  of  general
anatomy  also,  to  which  the  actual  state  of  medical  science
is  due.  The  history  of  medicine  teaches  us,  if  we  will
only  take  a  somewhat  comprehensive  survey  of  it,  that
at  all  times  permanent  advances  have  been  marked  by
anatomical  innovations,  and  that  every  more  important
epoch  has  been  directly  ushered  in  by  a  series  of  import-
ant discoveries  concerning  the  structure  of  the  body.  So
it  was  in  those  old  times,  when  the  observations  of  the
Alexandrian  school,  based  for  the  first  time  upon  the
anatomy  of  man,  prepared  the  way  for  the  system  of
Galen  ;  so  it  was,  too,  in  the  Middle  Ages,  when  Vesa-
lius  laid  the  foundations  of  anatomy,  and  therewith  be-
gan the  real  reformation  of  medicine  ;  so,  lastly,  was  it
at  the  commencement  of  this  century,  when  Bichat  deve-
loped the  principles  of  general  anatomy.  What  Schwann,

IMPORT OF  THE CELL-THEORY.  29

however,- has  done  for  histology,  has  as  yet  been  but  in
a  very  slight  degree  built  up  and  developed  for  pathology,
and  it  may  be  said  that  nothing  has  penetrated  less
deeply  into  the  minds  of  all  than  the  cell-theory  in  its
intimate  connection  with  pathology.

If  we  consider  the  extraordinary  influence  which  Bichat
in  his  time  exercised  upon  the  state  of  medical  opinion,
it  is  indeed  astonishing  that  such  a  relatively  long  period
should  have  elapsed  since  Schwann  made  his  great  dis-
coveries, without  the  real  importance  of  the  new  facts
having  been  duly  appreciated.  This  has  certainly  been
essentially  due  to  the  great  incompleteness  of  our  know-
ledge with  regard  to  the  intimate  structure  of  our  tissues
which  has  continued  to  exist  until  quite  recently,  and,  as
we  are  sorry  to  be  obliged  to  confess,  still  even  now
prevails  with  regard  to  many  points  of  histology  to  such
a  degree,  that  we  scarcely  know  in  favour  of  what  view
to  decide.

Especial  difficulty  has  been  found  in  answering  the
question,  from  what  parts  of  the  body  action  really  pro-
ceeds— what  parts  are  active,  what  passive  ;  and  yet  it  is
already  quite  possible  to  come  to  a  definitive  conclusion
upon  this  point,  even  in  the  case  of  parts  the  structure
of  which  is  still  disputed.  The  chief  point  in  this  appli-
cation of  histology  to  pathology  is  to  obtain  a  recognition
of  the  fact,  that  the  cell  is  really  the  ultimate  morpholo-
gical element  in  which  there  is  any  manifestation  of  life,
and  that  we  must  not  transfer  the  seat  of  real  action  to
any  point  beyond  the  cell.  Before  you,  I  shall  have  no
particular  reason  to  justify  myself,  if  in  this  respect  I
make  quite  a  special  reservation  in  favour  of  life.  In  the
course  of  these  lectures  you  will  be  able  to  convince
yourselves  that  it  is  almost  impossible  for  any  one  to
entertain  more  mechanical  ideas  in  particular  instances
than  I  am  wont  to  do,  when  called  upon  to  interpret  the

30  LECTURE  I.

individual  processes  of  life.  But  I  think  that  we  must
look  upon  this  as  certain,  that,  however  much  of  the
more  delicate  interchange  of  matter,  which  takes  place
within  a  cell,  may  not  concern  the  material  structure
as  a  whole,  yet  the  real  action  does  proceed  from  the
structure  as  such,  and  that  the  living  element  only  main-
tains its  activity  as  long  as  it  really  presents  itself  to  us
as  an  independent  whole.

In  this  question  it  is  of  primary  importance  (and  you
will  excuse  my  dwelling  a  little  upon  this  point,  as  it  is
one  which  is  still  a  matter  of  dispute)  that  we  should
determine  what  is  really  to  be  understood  by  the  term
cell.  Quite  at  the  beginning  of  the  latest  phase  of  his-
tological development,  great  difficulties  sprang  up  in
crowds  with  regard  to  this  matter.  Schwann,  as  you  no
doubt  recollect,  following  immediately  in  the  footsteps
of  Schleiden,  interpreted  his  observations  according  to
botanical  standards,  so  that  all  the  doctrines  of  vegetable
physiology  were  invoked,  in  a  greater  or  less  degree,  to
decide  questions  relating  to  the  physiology  of  animal
bodies.  Vegetable  cells,  however,  in  the  light  in  which
they  were  at  that  time  universally,  and  as  they  are  even
now  also  frequently  regarded,  are  structures,  whose
identity  with  what  we  call  animal  cells  cannot  be  ad-
mitted without  reserve.

When  we  speak  of  ordinary  vegetable  cellular  tissue,
we  generally  understand  thereby  a  tissue,  which,  in  its
most  simple  and  regular  form  is,  in  a  transverse  section,
seen  to  be  composed  of  nothing  but  four-  or  six-sided,
or,  if  somewhat  looser  in  texture,  of  roundish  or  poly-
gonal bodies,  in  which  a  tolerably  thick,  tough  wall
(membrane)  is  always  to  be  distinguished.  If  now  a
single  one  of  these  bodies  be  isolated,  a  cavity  is  found,
enclosed  by  this  tough,  angular,  or  round  wall,  in  the
interior  of  which  very  different  substances,  varying  ac-

VEGETABLE CELLS.  31

cording  to  circumstances,  may  be  deposited,  e.  g.  fat,
starch,  pigment,  albumen  (cell-contents).  But  also,  quite
independently  of  these  local  varieties  in  the  contents,  we
are  enabled,  by  means  of  chemical  investigation,  to
detect  the  presence  of  several  different  substances  in  the
essential  constituents  of  the  cells.

The  substance  which  forms  the  external  membrane,
and  is  known  under  the  name
of  cellulose,  is  generally  found
to  be  destitute  of  nitrogen,  and
yields,  on  the  addition  of  iodine
and  sulphuric  acid,  a  peculiar,
very  characteristic,  beautiful
blue  tint.  Iodine  alone  produces  no  colour  ;  sulphuric
acid  by  itself  chars.  The  contents  of  simple  cells,  on  the
other  hand,  do  not  turn  blue  ;  when  the  cell  is  quite  a
simple  one,  there  appears,  on  the  contrary,  after  the  addi-
tion of  iodine  and  sulphuric  acid,  a  brownish  or  yellowish
mass,  isolated  in  the  interior  of  the  cell-cavity  as  a  spe-
cial body  (protoplasma),  around  which  can  be  recognised
a  special,  plicated,  frequently  shrivelled  membrane  (pri-
mordial utricle)  (fig.  1,  c).  Even  rough  chemical  analysis
generally  detects  in  the  simplest  cells,  in  addition  to
the  non-nitrogenized  (external)  substance,  a  nitrogenized
internal  mass  ;  and  vegetable  physiology  seems,  there-
fore, to  have  been  justified  in  concluding,  that  what  really
constitutes  a  cell  is  the  presence  within  a  non-nitro-

Fig.  1.  Vegetable  cells  from  the  centre  of  the  young  shoot  of  a  tuber  of
Solatium  tuberosum.  a.  The  ordinary  appearance  of  the  regularly  polygonal,
thick-walled  cellular  tissue,  b.  An  isolated  cell  with  finely  granular-looking  cavity,
in  which  a  nucleus  with  nucleolus  is  to  be  seen.  c.  The  same  cell  after  the  addition
of  water;  the  contents  (protoplasma)  have  receded  from  the  wall  (membrane,
capsule).  Investing  them  a  peculiar,  delicate  membrane  (primordial  utricle)
has  become  visible,  d.  The  same  cell  after  a  more  lengthened  exposure  to  the
action  of  water ;  the  interior  cell  (protoplasma  with  the  primordial  utricle  and
nucleus)  has  become  quite  contracted,  and  remains  attached  to  the  cell-wall  (cap-
Bule)  merely  by  the  means  of  fine,  some  of  them  branching,  threads.

32  LECTURE  I.

genized  membrane  of  nitrogenized  contents  differing
from  it.

It  had  indeed  already  long  been  known,  that  other
things  besides  existed  in  the  interior  of  cells,  and  it  was
one  of  the  most  fruitful  of  discoveries  when  Robert
Brown  detected  the  nucleus  in  the  vegetable  cell.  But
this  body  was  considered  to  have  a  more  important
share  in  the  formation  than  in  the  maintenance  of  cells,
because  in  very  many  vegetable  cells  the  nucleus  be-
comes extremely  indistinct,  and  in  many  altogether  dis-
appears, whilst  the  form  of  the  cell  is  preserved.

These  observations  were  then  applied  to  the  consider-
ation of  animal  tissues,  the  correspondence  of  which
with  those  of  vegetables  Schwann  endeavoured  to  de-
monstrate. The  interpretation,  which  we  have  just
mentioned  as  having  been  put  upon  the  ordinary  forms
of  vegetable  cells,  served  as  the  starting-point.  In  this,
however,  as  after-experience  proved,  an  error  was
committed.  Yegetable  cells  cannot,  viewed  in  their
entirety,  be  compared  with  all  animal  cells.  In  animal
cells,  we  find  no  such  distinctions  between  nitrogenized
and  non-nitrogenized  layers  ;  in  all  the  essential  con-
stituents of  the  cells  nitrogenized  matters  are  met  with.
But  there  are  undoubtedly  certain  forms  in  the  animal
body  which  immediately  recall  these  forms  of  vegetable
cells,  and  among  them  there  are  none  so  characteristic
as  the  cells  of  cartilage,  which  is,  in  all  its  features,  ex-
tremely different  from  the  other  tissues  of  the  animal
body,  and  which,  especially  on  account  of  its  non-vascu-
larity,  occupies  quite  a  peculiar  position.  Cartilage  in
every  respect  stands  in  the  closest  relation  to  vegetable
tissue.  In  a  well-developed  cartilage-cell  we  can  dis-
tinguish a  relatively  thick  external  layer,  within  which,
upon  very  close  inspection,  a  delicate  membrane,  con-
tents, and  a  nucleus  are  also  to  be  found. Here,  there-

ANIMAL CELLS.

33

fore,  we  have  a  structure  which  entirely  corresponds
with  a  vegetable  cell.

It  has,  however,  been  customary  with  authors,  when
describing  cartilage,  to  call  the  whole  of  the  structure
of  which  I  have  just  given  you  a  sketch  (fig.  2,  a — d)
a  cartilage-corpuscle,  and  in  consequence  of  this  having
been  viewed  as  analogous  to  the  cells  in  other  parts  of
animals, difficulties have arisen  FlG  2

by  which  the  knowledge  of  the
true  state  of  the  case  has  been
exceedingly  obscured.  A  carti-
lage-corpuscle, namely,  is  not,  as
a  whole,  a  cell,  but  the  external  (S^s*

layer,  the  capsule,  is  the  product

of  a  later  development  (secretion,  excretion).  In  young
cartilage  it  is  very  thin,  whilst  the  cell  also  is  generally
smaller.  If  we  trace  the  development  still  farther  back,
we  find  in  cartilage,  also,  nothing  but  simple  cells,  iden-
tical in  structure  with  those  which  are  seen  in  other
animal  tissues,  and  not  yet  possessing  that  external
secreted  layer.

You  see  from  this,  gentlemen,  that  the  comparison
between  animal  and  vegetable  cells,  which  we  certainly
cannot  avoid  making,  is  in  general  inadmissible,  because
in  most  animal  tissues  no  formed  elements  are  found
which  can  be  considered  as  the  full  equivalents  of  vege-
table cells  in  the  old  signification  of  the  word  ;  and  be-
cause in  particular,  the  cellulose  membrane  of  vegetable
cells  does  not  correspond  to  the  membrane  of  animal
ones,  and  between  this,  as  containing  nitrogen,  and  the
former,  as  destitute  of  it,  no  typical  distinction  is  pre-
sented. On  the  contrary,  in  both  cases  we  meet  with  a

Fig.  2.  Cartilage-cells  as  they  occur  at  the  margin  of  ossification  in  growing
cartilage,  quite  analogous  to  vegetable  cells  (cf.  the  explanation  to  fig.  1).  a — c.  In
a  more  advanced  stage  of  development, d.  Younger  form.

3

34  LECTURE I.

body  essentially  of  a  nitrogenous  nature,  and,  on  the
whole,  similar  in  composition.  The  so-called  membrane
of  the  vegetable  cell  is  only  met  with  in  a  few  animal
tissues,  as,  for  example,  in  cartilage  ;  the  ordinary  mem-
brane of  the  animal  cell  corresponds,  as  I  showed  as  far
back  as  1847,  to  the  primordial  utricle  of  the  vegetable
cell.  It  is  only  when  we  adhere  to  this  view  of  the
matter,  when  we  separate  from  the  cell  all  that  has  been
added  to  it  by  an  after-development,  that  we  obtain  a
simple,  homogeneous,  extremely  monotonous  structure,
recurring  with  extraordinary  constancy  in  living  organ-
isms. But  just  this  very  constancy  forms  the  best  crite-
terion  of  our  having  before  us  in  this  structure  one  of
those  really  elementary  bodies,  to  be  built  up  of  which
is  eminently  characteristic  of  every  living  thing — without
the  pre-existence  of  which  no  living  forms  arise,  and  to
which  the  continuance  and  the  maintenance  of  life  is
intimately  attached.  Only  since  our  idea  of  a  cell  has
assumed  this  severe  form — and  I  am  somewhat  proud  of
having  always,  in  spite  of  the  reproach  of  pedantry,
firmly  adhered  to  it — only  since  that  time  can  it  be  said
that  a  simple  form  has  been  obtained  which  we  can
everywhere  again  expect  to  find,  and  which,  though
different  in  size  and  external  shape,  is  yet  always
identical  in  its  essential  constituents.

In  such  a  simple  cell  we  can  distinguish  dissimilar
constituents,  and  it  is  important  that  we  should  accurately
define  their  nature  also.

In  the  first  place,  we  expect  to  find  a  nucleus  within
the  cell ;  and  with  regard  to  this  nucleus,  which  has
usually  a  round  or  oval  form,  we  know  that,  particularly
in  the  case  of  young  cells,  it  offers  greater  resistance  to
the  action  of  chemical  agents  than  do  the  external  parts
of  the  cell,  and  that,  in  spite  of  the  greatest  variations  in
the  external  form  of  the  cell,  it  generally  maintains  its

THEORY OF FREE CELL-FORMATION.

35

form.  The  nucleus  is  accordingly,  in  cells  of  all  shapes,
that  part  which  is  the  most  constantly  found  unchanged.
There  are  indeed  isolated  cases,  which  lie  scattered
throughout  the  whole  series  of  facts  in  comparative
anatomy  and  pathology,  in  which  the  nucleus  also  has  a
stellate  or  angular  appearance  ;  but  these  are  extremely
rare  exceptions,  and  dependent  upon  peculiar  changes
which  the  element  has  undergone.  Generally,  it  may  be
said  that, as  long  as  the  life  of  the  cell  has  not  been

Fig.  3.

brought  to  a  close,  as  long  as  cells  behave  as  elements
still  endowed  with  vital  power,  the  nucleus  maintains  a
very  nearly  constant  form.

The  nucleus,  in  its  turn,  in  completely  developed  cells,
very  constantly  encloses  another  structure  within  itself
— the  so-called  nucleolus.  With  regard  to  the  question
of  vital  form,  it  cannot  be  said  of  the  nucleolus  that  it
appears  to  be  an  absolute  requisite  ;  and,  in  a  considera-
ble number  of  young  cells,  it  has  as  yet  escaped  detec-
tion. On  the  other  hand,  we  regularly  meet  with  it  in
fully  developed,  older  forms  ;  and  it,  therefore,  seems  to
mark  a  higher  degree  of  development  in  the  cell.  Ac-
cording to  the  view  which  was  put  forward  in  the  first
instance  by  Schleiden, and  accepted  by  Schwann,  the

Fig.  3.  a.  Hepatic  cell.  b.  Spindle-shaped  cell  from  connective  tissue,  c.  Ca-
pillary vessel,  d.  Somewhat  large  stellate  cell  from  a  lymphatic  gland,  e.  Ganglion-
cell  from  the  cerebellum. The  nuclei  in  every  instance  similar.

36  LECTURE I.

connection  between  the  three  coexistent  cell-constituents

was  long  thought  to  be  on  this  wise  :  that  the  nucleolus

was  the  first  to  shew  itself  in  the  development  of  tissues,

by  separating  out  of  a  formative fluid  (blastema,  cyto-

blastema),  that  it  quickly  attained  a  certain  size,  that  then

fine  granules  were  precipitated  out  of  the  blastema  and

settled  around  it,  and  that  about  these  there  condensed

a  membrane. That  in  this  way  a  nucleus  was  completed,

about  which  new  matter  gradually  gathered,  and  in  due

time  produced  a  little  membrane  (the  celebrated  watch-

Fig.  4.  glass  form,  fig.  4,  d'). This  descrip-

a  o,  o  .Is ;.;.•; .  tion  of  the  first  development  of  cells

:^°l?8Sw:., out of  free blastema, according  to

f^:*$gj£.  /£*?TVo which  the  nucleus  was  regarded  as

g\& ^pp^wj^ife* preceding  the  formation  of  the  cell,

and  playing  the  part  of  a  real  cell-
former  (cytoblast),  is  the  one  which  is  usually  concisely
designated  by  the  name  of  the  cell-theory  (more  accu-
rately, theory  of  free  cell-formation), — a  theory  of  deve-
lopment which  has  now  been  almost  entirely  abandoned,
and  in  support  of  the  correctness  of  which  not  one  sin-
gle fact  can  with  certainty  be  adduced.  With  respect  to
the  nucleolus,  all  that  we  can  for  the  present  regard  as
certain,  is,  that  where  we  have  to  deal  with  large  and
fully  developed  cells,  we  almost  constantly  see  a  nucleo-
lus in  them  ;  but  that,  on  the  contrary,  in  the  case  of
many  young  cells  it  is  wanting.

You  will  hereafter  be  made  acquainted  with  a  series

Fig.  4.  From  Schleiden,  '  Grundzuge  der  wiss.  Botanik,'  I,  fig.  1.  "  Contents  of
the  embryo-sac  of  Vicia  faba  soon  after  impregnation.  In  the  clear  fluid,  con-
sisting of  gum  and  sugar,  granules  of  protein-compounds  are  seen  swimming  about
(a),  among  which  a  few  larger  ones  are  strikingly  conspicuous.  Around  these  lat-
ter the  former  are  seen  conglomerated  into  the  form  of  a  small  disc  (6,  c).  Around
other  discs  a  clear,  sharply  denned  border  may  be  distinguished,  which  gradually
recedes  farther  and  farther  from  the  disc  (the  cytoblast),  and,  finally,  can  be  dis-
tinctly recognised  to  be  a  young  cell  (d}  e)."

IMPORT OF  THE NUCLEUS  AND CELL-CONTENTS.  37

of  facts  in  the  history  of  pathological  and  physiological
development,  which  render  it  in  a  high  degree  probable
that  the  nucleus  plays  an  extremely  important  part
within  the  cell — a  part,  I  will  here  at  once  remark,  less
connected  with  the  function  and  specific  office  of  the
cell,  than  with  its  maintenance  and  multiplication  as  a
living  part.  The  specific  (in  a  narrower  sense,  animal)
function  is  most  distinctly  manifested  in  muscles,  nerves,
and  gland-cells  ;  the  peculiar  actions  of  which — con-
traction, sensation,  and  secretion — appear  to  be  con-
nected in  no  direct  manner  with  the  nuclei.  But  that,
whilst  fulfilling  all  its  functions,  the  element  remains
an  element,  that  it  is  not  annihilated  nor  destroyed
by  its  continual  activity — this  seems  essentially  to
depend  upon  the  action  of  the  nucleus.  All  those
cellular  formations  which  lose  their  nucleus,  have  a
more  transitory  existence  ;  they  perish,  they  disap-
pear, they  die  away  or  break  up.  A  human  blood  cor-
puscle, for  example,  is  a  cell  without  a  nucleus  ;  it  pos-
sesses an  external  membrane  and  red  contents  ;  but
herewith  the  tale  of  its  constituents,  so  far  as  we  can
make  them  out,  is  told,  and  whatever  has  been  recounted
concerning  a  nucleus  in  blood-ceils,  has  had  its  founda-
tion in  delusive  appearances,  which  certainly  very  easily
can  be,  and  frequently  are,  occasioned  by  the  production
of  little  irregularities  upon  the  surface  (Fig.  52).  We
should  not  be  able  to  say,  therefore,  that  blood-corpuscles
were  cells,  if  we  did  not  know  that  there  is  a  certain
period  during  which  human  blood-corpuscles  also  have
nuclei  ;  the  period,  namely,  embraced  by  the  first
months  of  intra-uterine  life.  Then  circulate  also  in  the
human  body  nucleated  blood-cells,  like  those  which  we
see  in  frogs,  birds,  and  fish  throughout  the  whole  of  their
lives.  In  mammalia,  however,  this  is  restricted  to  a  cer-
tain period  of  their  development,  so  that  at  a  later  stage

38  LECTURE  I.

the  red  blood-cells  no  longer  exhibit  all  the  characteris-
tics of  a  cell,  but  have  lost  an  important  constituent  in
their  composition.  But  we  are  also  all  agreed  upon
this  point,  that  the  blood  is  one  of  those  changeable
constituents  of  the  body,  whose  cellular  elements  possess
no  durability,  and  with  regard  to  which  everybody
assumes  that  they  perish,  and  are  replaced  by  new  ones,
which  in  their  turn  are  doomed  to  annihilation,  and
everywhere  (like  the  uppermost  cells  in  the  cuticle,  in
which  we  also  can  discover  no  nuclei,  as  soon  as  they
begin  to  desquamate)  have  already  reached  a  stage  in
their  development,  when  they  no  longer  require  that
durability  in  their  more  intimate  composition  for  which
we  must  regard  the  nucleus  as  the  guarantee.

On  the  other  hand,  notwithstanding  the  manifold  inves-
tigations to  which  the  tissues  are  at  present  subjected,
we  are  acquainted  with  no  part  which  grows  or  multi-
plies, either  in  a  physiological  or  pathological  manner,  in
which  nucleated  elements  cannot  invariably  be  demon-
strated as  the  starting-points  of  the  change,  and  in  which
the  first  decisive  alterations  which  display  themselves,  do
not  involve  the  nucleus  itself,  so  that  we  often  can  deter-
mine from  its  condition  what  would  possibly  have  become
of  the  elements.

You  see  from  this  description  that,  at  least,  two  differ-
ent things  are  of  necessity  required  for  the  composition
of  a  cellular  element ;  the  membrane,  whether  round,
jagged  or  stellate,  and  the  nucleus,  which  from  the  out-
set differs  in  chemical  constitution  from  the  mem-
brane. Herewith,  however,  we  are  far  from  having
enumerated  all  the  essential  constituents  of  the  cell,
for,  in  addition  to  the  nucleus,  it  is  filled  with  a  rela-
tively greater  or  less  quantity  of  contents,  as  is  like-
wise commonly,  it  seems,  the  nucleus  itself,  the  contents
of  which are also  wont to differ  from  those of the

IMPORT OF  THE  NUCLEUS AND CELL-CONTENTS.  39

cell.  Within  the  cell,  for  example,  we  see  pigment,
without  the  nucleus  containing  any.  Within  a  smooth
muscular fibre-cell, the contractile sub-  FlQ  <

stance  is  deposited,  which  appears  to  be
the  seat  of  the  contractile  force  of  mus-
cle ;  the  nucleus,  however,  remains  a
nucleus.  The  cell  may  develop  itself  into
a  nerve-fibre,  but  the  nucleus  remains,
lying  on  the  outside  of  the  medullary
[white1]  substance,  a  constant  constituent.
Hence  it  follows,  that  the  special  peculiar-
ities which  individual  cells  exhibit  in
particular  places,  under  particular  circum-
stances, are  in  general  dependent  upon  the
varying  properties  of  the  cell-contents,
and  that  it  is  not  the  constituents  which
we  have  hitherto  considered  (membrane
and  nucleus),  but  the  contents  (or  else  the  masses
of  matter  deposited  without  the  cell,  intercellular),
which  give  rise  to  the  functional  (physiological)  dif-
ferences of  tissues.  For  us  it  is  essential  to  know
that  in  the  most  various  tissues  these  constituents,
which,  in  some  measure ,  represent  the  cell  in  its  abstract
form,  the  nucleus  and  membrane,  recur  with  great  con-
stancy, and  that  by  their  combination  a  simple  element
is  obtained,  which,  throughout  the  whole  series  of  living
vegetable  and  animal  forms,  however  different  they  may
be  externally,  however  much  their  internal  composition
may  be  subjected  to  change,  presents  us  with  a  structure

Fig.  5.  a.  Pigment-cell  from  the  choroid  membrane  of  the  eye.  b.  Smooth  mus-
cular fibre-cell  from  the  intestines,  c.  Portion  of  a  nerve-fibre  with  a  double  con-
tour, axis-cylinder,  medullary  sheath  and  parietal,  nucleolated  nucleus.

1  All  words  included  in  square  brackets  have  been  inserted  by  the  Translator,  and
are  intended  to  be  explanatory.

4-0  LECTURE I.

of  quite  a  peculiar  conformation,  as  a  definite  basis  for
all  the  phenomena  of  life.

According  to  my  ideas,  this  is  the  only  possible  start-
ing-point for  all  biological  doctrines.  If  a  definite  cor-
respondence in  elementary  form  pervades  the  whole  series
of  all  living  things,  and  if  in  this  series  something  else
which  might  be  placed  in  the  stead  of  the  cell  be  in  vain
sought  for,  then  must  every  more  highly  developed
organism,  whether  vegetable  or  animal,  necessarily,
above  all,  be  regarded  as  a  progressive  total,  made  up  of
larger  or  smaller  number  of  similar  or  dissimilar  cells.
Just  as  a  tree  constitutes  a  mass  arranged  in  a  definite
manner,  in  which,  in  every  single  part,  in  the  leaves  as
in  the  root,  in  the  trunk  as  in  the  blossom,  cells  are  dis-
covered to  be  the  ultimate  elements,  so  is  it  also  with
the  forms  of  animal  life.  Every  animal  presents  itself  as
a  sum  of  vital  unities,  every  one  of  which  manifests  all
the  characteristics  of  life.  The  characteristics  and  unity
of  life  cannot  be  limited  to  any  one  particular  spot  in  a
highly  developed  organism  (for  example,  to  the  brain  of
man),  but  are  to  be  found  only  in  the  definite,  constantly
recurring  structure,  which  every  individual  element  dis-
plays. Hence  it  follows  that  the  structural  composition
of  a  body  of  considerable  size,  a  so-called  individual,
always  represents  a  kind  of  social  arrangement  of  parts,
an  arrangement  of  a  social  kind,  in  which  a  number  of
individual  existences  are  mutually  dependent,  but  in
such  a  way,  that  every  element  has  its  own  special
action,  and,  even  though  it  derive  its  stimulus  to  activity
from  other  parts,  yet  alone  effects  the  actual  performance
of  its  duties.

I  have  therefore  considered  it  necessary,  and  I  believe
you  will  derive  benefit  from  the  conception,  to  portion
out  the  body  into  cell-territories  (Zellenterritorien).  I
say  territories,  because  we  find  in  the organization  of

CELL-TERRITORIES AND INTERCELLULAR  SUBSTANCE.

41

animals  a  peculiarity  which  in  vegetables  is  scarcely  at
all  to  be  witnessed,  namely,  the  development  of  large
masses  of  so-called  intercellular  substance.  Whilst  vege-
table cells  are  usually  in  immediate  contact  with  one
another  by  their  external  secreted  layers,  although  in
such  a  manner  that  the  old  boundaries  can  still  always

Fig  6.

be  distinguished,  we  find  in  animal  tissues  that  this
species  of  arrangement  is  the  more  rare  one.  In  the
often  very  abundant  mass  of  matter  which  lies  between
the  cells  [intermediate,  intercellular  substance),  we  are
seldom  able  to  perceive  at  a  glance,  how  far  a  given
part  of  it  belongs  to  one  or  another  cell ;  it  presents  the
aspect  of  a  homogeneous  intermediate  substance.

According  to  Schwann,  the  intercellular  substance  was
the  cytoblastema,  destined  for  the  development  of  new
cells.  This  I  do  not  consider  to  be  correct,  but,  on  the
contrary,  I  have,  by  means  of  a  series  of  pathological
observations,  arrived  at  the  conclusion  that  the  intercel-
lular substance  is  dependent  in  a  certain  definite  manner
upon  the  cells,  and  that  it  is  necessary  to  draw  bounda-

Fig.  6.  Cartilage  from  the  epiphysis  of  the  lower  end  of  the  humerus  of  a  child.
The  object  was  treated  first  with  chromate  of  potash,  and  then  with  acetic  acid.  In
the  homogeneous  mass  (intercellular  substance)  are  seen,  at  a,  cartilage-cavities
(Knorpelhohlen)  with  walls  still  thin  (capsules),  from  which  the  cartilage-cells,  pro-
vided with  a  nucleus  and  nucleolus,  are  separated  by  a  distinct  limiting  membrane.
b.  Capsules  (cavities)  with  two  cells  produced  by  the  division  of  previously  simple
ones.  c.  Division  of  the  capsules  following  the  division  of  the  cells,  d.  Separa-
tion of  the  divided  capsules  by  the  deposition  between  them  of  intercellular  sub-
stance— Growth  of  cartilage.

42  LECTURE  I.

ries  in  it  also,  so  that  certain  districts  belong  to  one  cell,
and  certain  others  to  another.  Yow  will  see  how  sharply
these  boundaries  are  defined  by  pathological  processes
(Fig.  129),  and  how  direct  evidence  is  afforded,  that  any
given  district  of  intercellular  substance  is  ruled  over  by
the  cell,  which  lies  in  the  middle  of  it  and  exercises
influence  upon  the  neighbouring  parts.

It  must  now  be  evident  to  you,  I  think,  what  I  under-
stand by  the  territories  of  cells.  But  there  are  simple
tissues  which  are  composed  entirely  of  cells,  cell  lying
close  to  cell.  In  these  there  can  be  no  difficulty  with
regard  to  the  boundaries  of  the  individual  cells,  yet  it  is
necessary  that  I  should  call  your  attention  to  the  fact
that,  in  this  case,  too,  every  individual  cell  may  run  its
own  peculiar  course,  may  undergo  its  own  peculiar
changes,  without  the  fate  of  the  cell  lying  next  it  being
necessarily  linked  with  its  own.  In  other  tissues,  on  the
contrary,  in  which  we  find  intermediate  substance,  every
cell,  in  addition  to  its  own  contents,  has  the  superin-
tendence of  a  certain  quantity  of  matter  external  to  it,
and  this  shares  in  its  changes,  nay,  is  frequently  affected
even  earlier  than  the  interior  of  the  cell,  which  is  ren-
dered more  secure  by  its  situation  than  the  external
intercellular  matter.  Finally,  there  is  a  third  serie*  of
tissues,  in  which  the  elements  are  more  intimately  con-
nected with  one  another.  A  stellate  cell,  for  example,
may  anastomose  with  a  similar  one,  and  in  this  way  a
reticular  arrangement  may  be  produced,  similar  to  that
which  we  see  in  capillary  vessels  and  other  analogous
structures.  In  this  case  it  might  be  supposed  that  the
whole  series  was  ruled  by  something  which  lay  who
knows  how  far  off ;  but  upon  more  accurate  investiga-
tion, it  turns  out  that  even  in  this  chainwork  of  cells  a
certain  independence  of  the  individual  members  prevails,
and  that  this  independence  evinces  itself  by  single  cells

CELLULAR  PATHOLOGY.  43

undergoing,  in  consequence  of  certain  external  or  internal
influences,  certain  changes  confined  to  their  own  limits,
and  not  necessarily  participated  in  by  the  cells  immedi-
ately adjoining.

That  which  'I  have  now  laid  before  you  will  be  suffi-
cient to  show  you  in  what  way  I  consider  it  necessary  to
trace  pathological  facts  to  their  origin  in  known  histolo-
gical elements  ;  why,  for  example,  I  am  not  satisfied
with  talking  about  an  action  of  the  vessels,  or  an  action
of  the  nerves,  but  why  I  consider  it  necessary  to  bestow
attention  upon  the  great  number  of  minute  parts  which
really  constitute  the  chief  mass  of  the  substance  of  the
body,  as  well  as  upon  the  vessels  and  nerves.  It  is  not
enough  that,  as  has  for  a  long  time  been  the  case,  the
muscles  should  be  singled  out  as  being  the  only  active
elements  ;  within  the  great  remainder,  which  is  generally
regarded  as  an  inert  mass,  there  is  in  addition  an  enor-
mous number  of  active  parts  to  be  met  with.

Amid  the  development  which  medicine  has  undergone
up  to  the  present  time,  we  find  the  dispute  between  the
humoral  and  solidistic  schools  of  olden  times  still  main-
tained. The  humoral  schools  have  generally  had  the
greatest  success,  because  they  have  offered  the  most  con-
venient explanation,  and,  in  fact,  the  most  plausible
interpretation  of  morbid  processes.  We  may  say  that
nearly  all  successful  practical,  and  noted  hospital,  physi-
cians have  had  more  or  less  humoro-pathological  tenden-
cies ;  aye,  and  these  have  become  so  popular,  that  it  is
extremely  difficult  for  any  physician  to  free  himself  from
them.  The  solido-pathological  views  have  been  rather
the  hobby  of  speculative  inquirers,  and  have  had  their
origin  not  so  much  in  the  immediate  requirements  of
pathology,  as  in  physiological  and  philosophical,  and
even  in  religious  speculations.  They  have  been  forced
to  do  violence  to  facts,  both  in  anatomy  and  physiology,

44  LECTURE  I.

and  have  therefore  never  become  very  widely  diffused.
According  to  my  notions,  the  basis  of  both  doctrines  is
an  incomplete  one  ;  I  do  not  say  a  false  one,  because  it
is  really  only  false  in  its  exclusiveness  ;  it  must  be
reduced  within  certain  limits,  and  we  must  remember
that,  besides  vessels  and  blood,  besides  nerves  and  ner-
vous centres,  other  things  exist,  which  are  not  a  mere
theatre  (Substrat)  for  the  action  of  the  nerves  and  blood,
upon  which  these  play  their  pranks.

Now,  if  it  be  demanded  of  medical  men  that  they  give
their  earnest  consideration  to  these  things  also  ;  if,  on
the  other  hand,  it  be  required  that,  even  among  those
who  maintain  the  humoral  and  neuro-pathological  doc-
trines, attention  at  last  be  paid  to  the  fact,  that  the  blood
is  composed  of  many  single,  independent  parts,  and»that
the  nervous  system  is  made  up  of  many  active  individual
constituents — this  is,  indeed,  a  requirement  which  at  the
first  glance  certainly  offers  several  difficulties.  But  if
you  will  call  to  mind  that  for  years,  not  only  in  lectures,
but  also  at  the  bedside,  the  activity  of  the  capillaries
was  talked  about — an  activity  which  no  one  has  ever
seen,  and  which  has  only  been  assumed  to  exist  in  com-
pliance with  certain  theories — you  will  not  find  it  unrea-
sonable, that  things  which  are  really  to  be  seen,  nay  are,
not  unfrequently,  after  practice,  accessible  even  to  the
unaided  eye,  should  likewise  be  admitted  into  the  sphere
of  medical  knowledge  and  thought.  Nerves  have  not
only  been  talked  about  where  they  had  never  been
demonstrated  ;  their  existence  has  been  simply  assumed,
even  in  parts  in  which,  after  the  most  careful  investiga-
tions, no  trace  of  them  could  be  discovered,  and  activity
has  been  attributed  to  them  in  parts  where  they  abso-
lutely do  not  penetrate.  It  is  therefore  certainly  not
unreasonable  to  demand,  that  the  greater  part  of  the
body  be  no  longer  entirely  ignored  ;  and  if  no  longer

GROWTH  OF  PLANTS.

45

ignored,  that  we  no  longer  content  ourselves  with  merely
regarding  the  nerves  as  so  many  wholes,  as  a  simple,
indivisible  apparatus,  or  the  blood  as  a  merely  fluid  ma-
terial, but  that  we  also  recognise  the  presence  within  the
blood  and  within  the  nervous  system  of  the  enormous
mass  of  minute  centres  of  action.

In  conclusion,  I  have  still  some  preparations  to  ex-
plain, and  will  begin  with  a  very  common  object  (Fig.  7).
It  has  been  taken  from  the  tuber  of  a  potato,  at  a  spot
where  you  can  view  in  its  pefection
the  structure  of  a  vegetable  cell,
where  the  tuber,  namely,  is  begin-
ning to  put  forth  a  new  shoot,  and
there  is,  consequently,  a  probability
of  young  cells  being  found,  at  least,
if  we  suppose  that  all  growth  con-
sists in  the  development  of  new
cells.  In  the  interior  of  the  tuber
all  the  cells  are,  as  is  well  known,  stuffed  full  with
granules  of  starch  ;  in  the  young  shoot,  on  the  other
hand,  the  starch  is  used  up,  in  proportion  to  the  growth,
and  the  cell  is  again  exhibited  in  its  more  simple  form.
In  a  transverse  section  of  a  young  sprout  near  its  exit
from  the  tuber,  about  four  different  layers  may  be  dis-
tinguished— the  cortical  layer,  next  a  layer  of  larger,
then  a  layer  of  smaller,  cells,  and  lastly,  quite  on  the
inside,  a  second  layer  of  larger  cells.  Here  we  see
nothing  but  regular  structures  ;  thick  capsules  of  hex-

Fig.  7.  From  the  cortical  layer  of  a  tuber  of  solatium  tuberosum,  after  treatment
with  iodine  and  sulphuric  acid.  a.  Flat  cortical  cells,  surrounded  by  their  capsule
(cell-wall,  membrane),  b.  Larger,  four-sided  cells  of  the  same  kind  from  the  cam-
bium; the  real  cell  (primordial  utricle),  shrunken  and  wrinkled,  within  the  capsule.
c.  Cells  with  starch-granules  lying  within  the  primordial  utricle.

46  LECTURE  I.

agonal  form,  and  within  them  one  or  two  nuclei  (Fig.  1).
Towards  the  cortex  (corky  layer)  the  cells  are  four-sided,
and  the  farther  one  proceeds  outwards,  the  flatter  do
they  become  ;  still,  nuclei  may  be  distinctly  recognised
in  them  also.  Wherever  the  so-called  cells  come  in  con-
tact, a  boundary  line  may  be  recognised  between  them  ;
then  comes  the  thick  layer  of  cellulose,  in  which  fine
streaks  may  be  observed  ;  and  in  the  interior  of  the
capsular  cavity  you  see  a  compound  mass,  in  which  a
nucleus  and  nucleolus  may  be  easily  distinguished,  and
after  the  application  of  reagents  the  primordial  utricle
also  makes  its  appearance  as  a  plicated,  wrinkled  mem-
brane. This  is  the  perfect  form  of  a  vegetable  cell.  In
the  neighbouring  cells  lie  a  few  larger,  dimly  lustrous,
laminated  bodies,  the  remains  of  starch  (Fig.  7,  c).  The
next  object  is  of  importance  in  my  eyes,  because  I  shall
afterwards  have  to  refer  to  it  when  instituting  a  com-
parison with  new  formations  in  animals.  It  is  a  longi-
tudinal section  of  a  young  lilac  bud,  developed  by  the
warm  days  we  have  had  this  month  (February).  In  the
bud  a  number  of  young  leaves  have  already  begun  to
develop  themselves,  each  composed  of  numerous  young
cells.  In  these,  the  youngest  parts,  the  external  layers,
are  composed  of  tolerably  regular  layers  of  cells,  which
have  a  rather  flat,  four-sided  appearance,  whilst  in  the
internal  layers  the  cells  are  more  elongated,  and  in  a
few  parts  spiral  vessels  show  themselves.  Especially
would  I  call  your  attention  to  the  little  oat-growths
(leaf-hairs — Blatthaare),  which  protrude  everywhere
along  the  border,  and  very  much  resemble  certain  ani-
mal excrescences,  e.  g.,  in  the  villi  of  the  chorion,  where
they  mark  the  spots  at  which  young,  secondary  villi
will  shoot  out.  In  our  preparation,  you  see  the  little
club-shaped  protuberances,  which  are  repeated  at  cer-

GROWTH OF PLANTS.

47

Fig.  8.

tain  intervals  and  are  connected  internally  with  the
rows  of  cells  in  the  cambium.  They  are  structures  in
which  the  more  delicate  forms  of  cells  can  best  be
distinguished,  and,  at  the  same  time  the  peculiar  mode
of  growth  be  discovered.
This  growth  is  effected  thus  :
a  division  takes  place  in
some  of  the  cells,  and  a
transverse  septum  is  formed  ;
the  newly-formed  parts  con-
tinue to  grow  as  indepen-
dent elements,  and  gradu-
ally increase  in  size.  Not
unfrequently  divisions  take
place  also  longitudinally,  so
that  the  parts  become  thicker
(Fig.  8,  c).  Every  protu-
berance is  therefore  origi-
nally a  single  cell,  which,  by
continual  subdivison  in  a
transverse  direction  (Fig.  8.
a,  b),  pus"hes  its  divisions  for-
wards, and  then,  when  occa-
sion offers,  spreads  out  also

in  a  lateral  direction.  In  this  way  the  hairs  shoot  out,
and  this  is  in  general  the  mode  of  growth,  not  only  in
vegetables,  but  also  in  the  physiological  and  pathologi-
cal formations  of  the  animal  body.

vmL®Zh

Fig.  8.  Longitudinal  section  of  a  young  February-s'hoot  from  the  branch  of  a
syringa.  A.  The  cortical  layer  and  cambium  ;  beneath  a  layer  of  very  flat  cells  are
seen  larger,  four-sided,  nucleated  ones,  from  which,  by  successive  transverse  divi-
sion, little  hairs  (a)  shoot  out,  which  grow  longer  and  longer  (6),  and,  by  division  in
a  longitudinal  direction  (c),  thicker.  B.  The  vascular  layer,  with  spiral  vessels.
C.  Simple,  four-sided,  oblong,  cortical  cells. — Growth  of  Plants.

48

LECTURE  I.

Fig.  9.

In  the  following  preparation — a  piece  of  costal  carti-
lage, in  a  state  of  morbid  growth — changes  are  evident
even  to  the  naked  eye,  namely,  little  protuberances  upon

the  surface  of  the  cartilage.  Cor-
responding to  these  the  microscope
shows  a  proliferation  of  cartilage-
cells,  and  we  find  the  same  forms
as  in  the  vegetable  cells  ;  large
groups  of  cellular  elements,  each
of  which  has  proceeded  from  a
single  previously  existing  cell,
arranged  in  several  rows,  and  dif-
fering from  proliferating  vegetable
cells  only  in  this — that  there  is
intercellular  substance  between  the  individual  groups.
In  the  cells  we  can  as  before  distinguish  the  external
capsule,  which,  indeed,  in  the  case  of  many  cells,  is  com-
posed of  two,  three,  or  more  layers,  and  within  them
only  does  the  real  cell  come  with  its  membrane,  contents,
nucleus,  and  nucleolus.

In  the  following  object  you  see  the  young  ova  of  a
frog,  before  the  secretion  of  the  yolk-granules  has  begun.
The  very  large  ovum  (Eizelle)  (Fig.  10,  C)  contains  a
nucleus  likewise  very  large,  in  which  a  number  of  little
vesicles  are  dispersed — and  tolerably  thick,  opaque  con-
tents, beginning,  at  a  certain  spot,  to  become  granular
and  brown.  Around  the  cell  may  be  remarked  the  rela-
tively thin,  connective  tissue  of  the  Graafian  vesicle,
with  a  hardly  visible  layer  of  epithelium. In  the  neigh-

Fig.  9.  Proliferation  of  cartilage  ;  from  the  costal  cartilage  of  an  adult.  Large
groups  of  cartilage-cells  within  a  common  envelope  (wrongly  so-called  parent-
cells),  produced  from  single  cells  by  successive  subdivisions.  At  the  edge,  one  of
these  groups  has  been  cut  through,  and  in  it  is  seen  a  cartilage-cell  invested  by  a
number  of  capsular  layers  (external  secreted  masses). 300  diameters.

LARGE  AND SMALL ANIMAL CELLS.

49

bourhood  are  lying  several  smaller  ova,  which  show  the
gradual  progress  of  their  growth.

Fig.  10.

Fig.  11.
„  A

^

As  a  contrast  to  these  gigantic  cells,  I  place  before
you  an  object  from  the  bed-side  ;  cells  from
fresh  catarrhal  sputa.  You  see  cells  in  com-
parison very  small,  which  with  a  higher  power,
prove  to  be  of  a  perfectly  globular  shape,  and,
in  which,  after  the  addition  of  water  and  re-
agents, a  membrane,  nuclei,  and,  when  fresh,
cloudy  contents  can  clearly  be  distinguished. Most  of

j?

h

Fig.  10.  Young  ova  from  the  ovary  of  a  frog.  A.  A  very  young  ovum.  B.
A  larger  one.  C.  A  still  larger  one,  with  commencing  secretion  of  brown  granules
at  one  pole  (e),  and  shrunken  condition  of  the  vitelline  membrane  from  the  imbi-
bition of  water,  a.  Membrane  of  the  follicle,  b.  Vitelline  membrane,  c.  Mem-
brane of  the  nucleus, d.  Nucleolus. S.  Ovary. ]  50  diameters.

Fig.  11.  Cells  from  from  fresh  catarrhal  sputa.  A.  Pus-corpuscles,  a.  Quite
fresh,  b.  When  treated  with  acetic  acid.  Within  the  membrane  the  contents
have  cleared  up,  and  three  little  nuclei  are  seen.  B.  Mucus-corpuscles,  a.  A  sim-
ple one. b.  Containing  pigment  granules. 300  diameters.

4

50  LECTURE  I.

the  smal]  cells  belong,  according  to  the  prevailing  termi-
nology, to  the  category  of  pus-corpuscles  ;  the  larger
ones,  which  we  may  designate  mucus-corpuscles  or  ca-
tarrhal cells,  are  partly  filled  with  fat  or  greyish-black
pigment,  in  the  form  of  granules.

These  structures,  however  small  their  size,  possess  all
the  typical  peculiarities  of  the  large  ones  ;  all  the  charac-
ters of  a  cell  displayed  by  the  large  ones  again  present
themselves  in  them.  But  this  is,  in  my  opinion,  the
most  essential  point — that,  whether  we  compare  large  or
small,  pathological  or  physiological,  cells,  we  always  find
this  correspondence  between  them.

LECTURE II.

FEBRUARY 17, 1858.

PHYSIOLOGICAL  TISSUES.

Falsity  of  the  view  that  tissues  and  fibres  are  made  up  of  globules  (elementary
granules) — The  investment  theory  (Umhiillungstheorie) — Equivocal  [spontane-
ous] generation  of  cells — The  law  of  continuous  development.

General  classification  of  the  tissues — The  three  categories  of  General  Histology —
Special  tissues — Organs  and  systems,  or  apparatuses.

The  Epithelial  Tissues — Squamous,  cylindrical,  and  transitional  epithelium —
Epidermis  and  rete  Malpighii — Nails,  and  their  diseases — Crystalline  lens —
Pigment — Gland-cells.

The  Connective  Tissues — The  theories  of  Schwann,  Henle,  and  Reichert — My
theory — Connective  tissue  as  intercellular  substance — Cartilage  (hyaline,  fibro-
and  reticular) — Mucous  tissue — Adipose  tissue — Anastomosis  of  cells  ;  juice-
conveying  system  of  tubes  or  canals.

In  my  first  lecture,  gentlemen,  I  laid  before  you  the
general  points  to  be  noted  with  regard  to  the  nature  and
origin  of  cells  and  their  constituents.  Allow  me  now  to
preface  our  further  considerations  with  a  review  of  the
animal  tissues  in  general,  and  this  both  in  their  physio-
logical and  pathological  relations.

The  most  important  obstacles  which,  until  quite
recently,  existed  in  this  quarter,  were  by  no  means
chiefly  of  a  pathological  nature.  I  am  convinced  that
pathological  conditions  would  have  been  mastered  with
far  less  difficulty  if  it  had  not,  until  quite  lately,  been
utterly  impossible  to  give  a  simple  and  comprehensive
sketch of  the physiological tissues. The old views,

51

52  LECTURE  II.

which  have  in  part  come  down  to  us  from  the  last  cen-
tury, have  exercised  such  a  preponderating  influence
upon  that  part  of  histology  which  is,  in  a  pathologi-
cal point  of  view,  the  most  important,  that  not  even  yet
has  unanimity  been  arrived  at,  and  you  will  therefore
be  constrained,  after  you  have  inspected  the  prepara-
tions I  shall  lay  before  you,  to  come  to  your  own  con-
clusions as  to  how  far  that  which  I  have  to  communicate
to  you  is  founded  upon  real  observation.

If  you  read  the  '  Elementa  Physiologise  '  of  Haller,  you
will  find,  where  the  elements  of  the  body  are  treated  of,
the  most  prominent  position  in  the  whole  work  assigned
to  fibres,  the  very  characteristic  expression  being  there
made  use  of,  that  the  fibre  (fibra)  is  to  the  physiologist
what  the  line  is  to  the  geometrician.

This  conception  was  soon  still  further  expanded,  and  the
doctrine  that  fibres  serve  as  the  groundwork  of  nearly  all
the  parts  of  the  body,  and  that  the  most  various  tissues
are  reducible  to  fibres  as  their  ultimate  constituents,
was  longest  maintained  in  the  case  of  the  very  tissue  in
which,  as  it  has  turned  out,  the  pathological  difficulties
were  the  greatest — in  the  so-called  cellular  tissue.

In  the  course  of  the  last  ten  years  of  the  last  century
there  arose,  however,  a  certain  degree  of  reaction  against
this  fibre-theory,  and  in  the  school  of  natural  philoso-
phers another  element  soon  attained  to  honour,  though
it  had  its  origin  in  far  more  speculative  views  than  the
former,  namely,  the  globule.  Whilst  some  still  clung  to
their  fibres,  others,  as  in  more  recent  times  Milne
Edwards,  thought  fit  to  go  so  far  as  to  suppose  the
fibres,  in  their  turn,  to  be  made  up  of  globules  ranged
in  lines,  This  view  was  in  part  attributable  to  optical
illusions  in  microscopical  observation.  The  objection-
able method  which  prevailed  during  the  whole  of  the
last  and  a  part  of  the  present  century — of  making  obser-

ELEMENTARY  FIBRES  AND GLOBULES.  53

vations  (with  but  indifferent  instruments)  in  the  full
glare  of  the  sun — caused  a  certain  amount  of  dispersion
of  light  in  nearly  all  microscopical  objects,  and  the
impression  communicated  to  the  observer  was,  that  he
saw  nothing  else  than  globules.  On  the  other  hand,
however,  this  view  corresponded  with  the  ideas  common
amongst  natural  philosophers  as  to  the  primary  origin
of  everything  endowed  with  form.

These  globules  (granules,  molecules)  have,  curiously
enough,  maintained  their  ground,  even  in  modern  histo-
logy, and  there  are  but  few  histological  works  which  do
not  begin  with  the  consideration  of  elementary  granules.
In  a  few  instances,  these  views  as  to  the  globular  nature
of  elementary  parts  have,  even  not  very  long  ago,  ac-
quired such  ascendancy,  that  the  composition,
both  of  the  primary  tissues  in  the  embryo  and  h

also  of  the  later  ones,  was  based  upon  them.  A
cell  was  considered  to  be  produced  by  the
globules  arranging  themselves  in  a  spherical
form,  so  as  to  constitute  a  membrane,  within
which  other  globules  remained,  and  formed  the  contents.
In  this  way  did  even  Baumg'artner  and  Arnold  contend
against  the  cell  theory.

This  view  has, in  a certain  manner,  found  support
even  in  the  history  of  development — in  the  so-called
investment -theory  (Umhiillungstheorie) — a  doctrine  which
for  a  time  occupied  a  very  promi-
nent position. The upholders  of  Fig.  is.
this  theory  imagined, that origi- 0o°0  on &
nally a number of elementary °°00°0o ?f|§
globules  existed  scattered  through

Fig.  12.  Diagram  of  the  globular  theory.  a.  Fibre  composed  of  elementary
granules  (molecular  granules)  drawn  up  in  a  line.  b.  Cell  with  nucleus  and  spheri-
cally arranged  granules.

Fig.  13.  Diagram  of  the  investment-  (cluster-)  theory, a.  Separate  elementary

54  LECTURE  II.

a  fluid,  but  that,  under  certain  circumstances,  they
gathered  together,  not  in  the  form  of  vesicular  mem-
branes, but  so  as  to  constitute  a  compact  heap,  a  globe
(mass,  cluster — Klumpchen),  and  that  this  globe  was  the
starting  point  of  all  further  development,  a  membrane
being  formed  outside  and  a  nucleus  inside,  by  the  diffe-
rentiation of  the  mass,  by  apposition,  or  intussusception.
At  the  present  time,  neither  fibres,  nor  globules,  nor
elementary  granules,  can  be  looked  upon  as  histological
starting-points.  As  long  as  living  elements  were  con-
ceived to  be  produced  out  of  parts  previously  destitute
of  shape,  such  as  formative  fluids,  or  matters  {plastic
matter,  blastema,  cytoblastema),  any  one  of  the  above
views  could  of  course  be  entertained,  but  it  is  in  this
very  particular  that  the  revolution  which  the  last  few
years  have  brought  with  them  has  been  the  most
marked.  Even  in  pathology  we  can  now  go  so  far  as  to
establish,  as  a  general  principle,  that  no  development  of
any  hind  begins  de  novo,  and  consequently  as  to  reject
the  theory  of  equivocal  [spontaneous]  generation  just  as
much  in  the  history  of  the  development  of  individual  parts
as  we  do  in  that  of  entire  organisms.  Just  as  little  as
we  can  now  admit  that  a  taenia  can  arise  out  of  saburral
mucus,  or  that  out  of  the  residue  of  the  decomposition
of  animal  or  vegetable  matter  an  infusorial  animalcule,  a
fungus,  or  an  alga,  can  be  formed,  equally  little  are  we
disposed  to  concede  either  in  physiological  or  pathologi-
cal histology,  that  a  new  cell  can  build  itself  up  out  of
any  non-cellular  substance.  Where  a  cell  arises,  there  a
cell  must  have  previously  existed  (omnis  cellula  e  cellula),
just  as  an  animal  can  spring  only  from  an  animal,  a
plant  only  from  a  plant. In  this  manner,  although  there

granules, b.  Heap of  granules (cluster), c.  Granule-cell, with membrane and
nucleus.

LAW  OF CONTINUOUS  DEVELOPMENT.  55

are  still  a  few  spots  in  the  body  where  absolute  demon-
stration has  not  yet  been  afforded,  the  principle  is
nevertheless  established,  that  in  the  whole  series  of
living  things,  whether  they  be  entire  plants  or  animal
organisms,  or  essential  constituents  of  the  same,  an
eternal  law  of  continuous  development  prevails.  There  is
no  discontinuity  of  development  of  such  a  kind  that  a
new  generation  can  of  itself  give  rise  to  a  new  series  of
developmental  forms.  No  developed  tissues  can  be
traced  back  either  to  any  large  or  small  simple  element,
unless  it  be  unto  a  cell.  In  what  manner  this  continuous
proliferation  of  cells  (Zellenwucherung),  for  so  we  may
designate  the  process,  is  carried  on,  we  will  consider
hereafter  ;  to-day,  my  especial  object  only  was  to  deter
you  from  assuming  as  the  groundwork  of  any  views  you
might  entertain  with  regard  to  the  composition  of  the
tissues,  these  theories  of  simple  fibres  or  simple  globules
(elementary  fibres  or  elementary  globules). —

If  it  be  wished  to  classify  the  normal  tissues,  a  very
simple  point  of  view,  founded  upon  marked  characteris-
tics, offers  itself,  upon  which  their  division  into  three
categories  may  be  based.

We  either  have  tissues  which  consist  exclusively  of
cells,  where  cell  lies  close  to  cell — in  fact,  cellular  tissue
in  the  modern  sense  of  the  word — or  we  find  tissues,  in
which  one  cell  is  regularly  separated  from  the  other  by  a
certain  amount  of  intermediate  matter  (intercellular
substance),  and,  therefore,  a  kind  of  uniting  medium
exists,  which,  while  it  visibly  connects  the  individual
elements,  yet  holds  them  separate.  To  this  class  belong
the  tissues  which  are  now-a-days  generally  comprehended
under  the  name  of  connective  tissues  (Gewebe  der  Bin-
desubstanz),  and  of  which  what  was  formerly  universally
called  cellular  tissue  constitutes  the  chief  portion,
Finally,  there is  a  third  group  of  tissues,  in  which  the

56  LECTURE  II.

cells  have  attained  specific,  higher  forms  of  development,
by  means  of  which  their  constitution  has  acquired  a
type  entirely  peculiar  ;  indeed,  in  part  so  peculiar,  as  to
appertain  exclusively  to  the  animal  economy.  These  are
the  tissues  which  are  really  characteristic  of  animals,
although  a  few  among  them  exhibit  transitions  of  vege-
table forms.  To  this  class  belong  the  nervous  and
muscular  systems,  the  vessels  and  the  blood.  Herewith
is  the  list  of  tissues  concluded.

You  must  now  proceed  to  consider,  in  what  respect,
in  this  summary  of  the  result  of  histological  researches,
a  contrast  is  afforded  to  what  was  formerly,  chiefly  in
imitation  of  Bichat,  regarded  as  constituting  a  tissue.
Bichat's  tissues  would,  for  the  most  part,  not  so  much
represent  what  we  now  regard  as  the  subjects  of  General
Histology,  as  what  we  must  rather  designate  as  be-
longing to  Special  Histology.  For,  if  we  regard  the
tissues  in  the  light  they  were  formerly  regarded  ;  if  we,
for  example,  separate  tendons,  bones,  and  facile,  from
one  another,  we  then  obtain  an  extraordinary  variety
of  categories  (Bichat  had  twenty-one),  but  there  are
not  quite  as  many  simple  forms  of  tissue  to  correspond
to  them.

In  accordance  with  modern  notions,  the  whole  domain
of  anatomy  should  first  be  divided  into  the  categories  of
General  Histology  {tissues  properly  so  called).  Special
Histology,  then,  takes  up  the  instances,  in  which  a  com-
bination of  tissues,  sometimes  very  different,  into  a
single  whole  (organ)  takes  place.  Thus  we  speak,  for
example,  of  osseous  tissue  ;  but  this  tissue,  the  tela
ossea  of  general  histology,  does  not  of  itself  form  bone,
for  no  bone  consists  entirely  of  tela  ossea,  but  it  has
necessarily  superadded  at  least  periosteum  and  vessels.
Nay,  and  from  this  simple  conception  of  a  bone,  every
bone of  considerable  size, for example, a  long bone

EPITHELIAL FORMATIONS.  57

differs  ;  for  that  is  a  real  organ,  in  which  we  can  distin-
guish at  least  four  different  tissues.  We  have  in  it  the
tela  ossea  properly  so  called,  the  cartilaginous  layer,  the
stratum  of  connective  tissue  belonging  to  the  periosteum,
and  the  peculiar  medullary  tissue.  These  several  parts
again  are  exceedingly  heterogeneous  in  their  nature,
inasmuch  as,  for  example,  vessels  and  nerves  enter  into
the  composition  of  the  marrow,  the  periosteum,  etc.  All
these  must  be  taken  together  to  constitute  the  entire
organism  of  a  bone.  Before  we  come,  therefore,  to
systems  or  apparatuses,  properly  so  called,  the  special
subject  of  descriptive  anatomy,  a  long  series  of  grada-
tions must  be  traversed,  and  in  discussions  we  must
always  begin  by  having  a  clear  idea  of  what  the  question
is.  When  bone  and  osseous  tissue  are  confounded  to-
gether, the  extremest  confusion  is  occasioned,  and  so  also
when  it  is  sought  to  identify  nervous  with  cerebral
matter.  The  brain  contains  many  things  which  are  not
of  a  nervous  nature,  and  its  physiological  and  pathologi-
cal conditions  cannot  be  comprehended  if  they  are
regarded  as  occurring  in  an  aggregation  of  purely  ner-
vous parts,  and  no  consideration  is  paid  to  the  membranes,
the  interstitial  substance,  and  the  vessels,  as  well  as  the
nerves.

If,  now,  we  consider  the  first  of  the  classes  into  which
we  have  divided  General  Histology,  namely,  the  simple
cellular  tissues,  a  little  more  attentively,  we  find  that
those  of  which  we  can  best  obtain  a  general  idea  are
unquestionably  the  epithelial  formations,  such  as  we  meet
with  in  the  epidermis  and  the  rete  Malpighii,  upon  the
external  surface  of  the  body,  and  in  the  cylindrical  and
scaly  epithelium  of  mucous  and  serous  membranes.
Their  general  plan  is,  that  cell  lies  close  to  cell,  so  that
m  the  most  favorable  specimens,  as  in  plants,  four-  or
six-sided  cells  lie  in  immediate  apposition  one  to  the

58

LECTURE II.

other,  and  nothing  at  all  is  found  between  them.  The
same  is  the  case  in  many  places  with  the  scaly  or  pave-
ment-epithelium (Fig.  16).  These  forms  are  evidently
in  a  great  measure  due  to  pressure.  For  all  the  elements
of  a  cellular  tissue  to  possess  perfect  regularity  of  form,  it
is  requisite  that  they  should  all  grow  in  a  perfectly  uni-
form manner,  and  simultaneously.  If  their  development
takes  place  under  circumstances  such  that  less  resistance
is  offered  in  one  direction,  it  then  may  come  to  pass
that,  as  in  the  case  of  columnar  or  cylindrical  epithelium,
the  cells  will  shoot  out  in  this  one  direction  and  become
very  long,  whilst  in  the  other  direction  they  remain  very

narrow.  But  even  one  of
these  cells,  when  seen  in
transverse  section,  will  pre-
ent  an  hex  agonal  shape,
and  if  we  look  down  upon
the  free  surface  of  cylindri-
cal epithelium,  we  see  in  it,
too,  regularly  polygonal  forms  (Fig.  14,  b).

Contrasting  with  these,  singularly  irregular  forms  are
met  with  in  places  where  the  cells  shoot  up  in  an  irregu-
lar manner,  and  accordingly  they  are  found  with  remark-
able constancy  on  the  surface  of  the  urinary  passages,  in
their  whole  extent  from  the  calyces  of  the  kidneys  down
to  the  urethra.  In  all  these  parts  it  is  very  common  to
meet  with  instances  in  which  a  cell  is  round  at  one  end,
whilst  at  the  other  it  terminates  in  a  point,  or  where  it
exhibits  the  appearance  of  a  somewhat  thick  spindle,  or  is

Fig.  14.  Columnar  or  cylindrical  epithelium  from  the  gall-bladder,  a.  Four  con-
tiguous cells  seen  in  profile,  each  with  a  nucleus  and  nucleolus,  their  contents
slightly  marked  with  longitudinal  striae ;  along  the  free  (upper)  edge,  a  thickish
border,  marked  with  fine,  radiated  lines,  b.  Similar  cells,  with  their  free  (upper,
outer)  surface  seen  obliquely,  so  as  to  show  the  hexagonal  form  of  a  transverse
section,  and  their  thick  border,  c.  Cells  altered  by  imbibition,  somewhat  swollen
up  and  with  the  upper  border  split  into  fibrils.

EPIDERMIS.

59

slightly  rounded  on  one  side  and  excavated  on  the  other,
or  where  a  cell  is  so  thrust  in  between  others  as  to  assume
a  clubbed  or  jagged  form.
But  in  these  cases  also  the
one  cell  always  corresponds
with  the  other  in  form,  and
it  is  not  any  peculiarity  in
the  cell  which  gives  rise  to
its  shape,  but  the  way  in
which  it  lies,  its  relations
to  the  neighbouring  cells,
and  its  having  to  adapt
itself  to  the  arrangement  of  the  parts  next  to  it.  In
the  direction  of  the  least  resistance  the  cells  acquire
points,  jaggs  and  projections  of  the  most  manifold  descrip-
tion. As  they  did  not  well  admit  of  classification,  Henle
gave  them  the  name,  which  has  since  been  adopted,  of
transitional  epithelium,  to  express  their  gradual  transi-
tion into  distinct  scaly  and  cylindrical  epithelium.  Some-
times, however,  this  is  not  the  case,  and  another  name
for  them  might  just  as  well  have  been  adopted.

On  account  of  the  importance  of  the  subject,  I  will
just  add  a  few  words  with  regard  to  the  cuticle  (epider-
mis). In  this  it  fortunately  happens  that,  what  is  not
the  case  in  many  mucous  membranes,  many  layers  of
cells  lie  one  above  the  other,  and  that  the  young  layers
(the  rete  Malpighii  [mucosum])  can  easily  and  con-
veniently be  separated  from  the  older  ones  (the  epider-
mis proper).

Fig.  15.  Transitional  epithelium  from  the  urinary  bladder,  a.  A  large  cell,  with
excavations  along  its  border,  into  which  more  delicate  club-  and  spindle-shaped
cells  fit.  6.  The  same ;  the  larger  cell  with  two  nuclei,  c.  A  larger,  irregularly-
angular  cell,  with  four  nuclei,  d.  A  similar  cell,  with  two  nuclei  and  nine  depres-
sions, as  seen  from  above,  corresponding  to  the  excavations  of  the  border.  (Comp.
4  Archiv.  fur  path.  Anat.  und  Phys.,'  vol hi.,  plate  i.,  fig.  8.)

-'

.

60

LECTURE II.

On  examining  a  perpendicular  section  of  the  surface
of  the  skin,  we  for  the  most  part  see  externally  a  very
dense  stratum,  of  variable  thickness,  which  at  the  first
glance  is  discovered  to  consist  of  nothing  but  flattened
cells,  that,  when  viewed  edgeways,  look  like  lines.
They  might  be  taken  for  fibres,  piled  up  one  above  the
other,  and  with  slight  differences  of  level  making  up  the
the  whole  external  layer.  Beneath  these  layers  we  find,
differing  in  thickness  and  substance,  the  so-called  rete
Malpighii,  and  next  to  this,  in  a  downward  direction,
the  papillae  of  the  skin.  If,  now,  we  examine  the
boundary  between  the  epidermis  and  the  rete,  the  result
we  obtain  by  nearly  every  method of  examination  is,

Fig.  16.

Fig.  16.  Perpendicular  section  through  the  surface  of  the  skin  of  a  toe,  treated
with,  acetic  acid. P.  P.  Extremities  of  cut  papillae,  in  each  of  which  a  vascular  loop,

NAILS.  6  J

that  to  the  innermost  layer  of  the  epidermis,  very  closely
and  almost  abruptly,  there  succeed  cells,  which  at  first
are  also  flattened,  but  in  a  less  degree,  and  within  which
very  distinct  nuclei  may  be  distinguished.  These  tole-
rably large  cells  mark  the  transition  from  the  oldest
layers  of  the  rete  Malpighii  to  the  youngest  of  the  epi-
dermis. This  is  the  point  from  which  proceeds  the  re-
generation of  the  epidermis,  in  itself  an  inert  mass, which
is  gradually  removed  from  the  surface.  And  here  is
also  generally  the  boundary,  at  which  pathological  pro-
cesses set  in.  The  farther  we  advance  inwards,  the
smaller  do  the  cells  become  ;  the  last  of  them  standing
in  the  form  of  little  cylinders  upon  the  surface  of  the
papillas  (Fig.  16  r,  r).

On  the  whole,  the  relations  of  the  individual  parts
throughout  the  whole  surface  of  the  skin  are  everywhere
the  same,  however  manifold  the  peculiarities  of  detail
may  be,  which  the  individual  layers  offer  in  respect  to
thickness,  position,  firmness,  and  connection.  A  section
of  a  nail,  for  example,  which  in  its  external  appearance
certainly  widely  differs  from  ordinary  epidermis,  pre-
sents, nevertheless,  on  the  whole,  the  same  conformation,
and  has  only  one  essentially  distinctive  feature,  that,
namely,  in  it  two  different  epidermoidal  structures  are
thrust,  the  one  over  the  other,  and  thus  a  complication
arises,  which,  if  not  duly  attended  to,  may  lead  to  the
assumption  of  certain  specific  differences  between  it  and
other  parts  of  the  epidermis,  whilst  it  really  consists  only
in  a  peculiar  change  in  the  position  of  certain  layers  of

and  near  it  little  spindle-shaped,  connective-tissue  corpuscles,  displaying  at  the  base
a  reticulated  arrangement,  may  be  observed;  to  the  left,  a  bulging  out  of  the  pa-
pilla?, corresponding  to  a  tactile  corpuscle,  no  longer  visible,  and  situated  at  a
deeper  level.  R.  R.  The  rete  Malpighii ;  immediately  around  the  papilla  a  very
dense  layer  of  small,  cylindrical  cells  (r,  r) ;  more  externally,  polygonal  cells,  gra-
dually increasing  in  size.  E.  Epidermis,  consisting  of  flat  and  more  closely  packed
layers  of  cells. &  S.  Duct  of  a  sweat  gland  passing  through. 300  diameters.

(52  LECTURE  li.

the  epidermis  with  regard  to  one  another.  The  extremely
dense  and  hard  scales,  which  constitute  the  uppermost
part,  the  so-called  body  of  the  nail  (Nagelblatt),  may,  by
different  methods,  be  restored  to  forms  in  which  they
present  the  ordinary  appearances  of  cells  ,  and  this  is
best  seen  after  treatment  with  an  alkali,  when  every
scale  swells  up  into  a  large,  broadly  oval,  cell.

In  the  uppermost  layers  of  the  epidermis  the  cells  be-
come everywhere  flatter,  and  towards  the  external  surface
no  more  nuclei  at  all  can  be  discovered  in  them.  Still
there  is  no  original  difference  between  the  epidermis  and
the  rete  Malpighii  ;  the  latter  is  only  the  matrix  of  the
epidermis,  or  indeed  its  youngest  layer,  inasmuch  as
from  it  there  is  a  constant  apposition  of  new  parts  tak-
ing place,  which  gradually  become  flatter  and  flatter,  and
move  upward  as  fast  as  the  scales  on  the  outside  disap-
pear through  friction  of  the  surface,  washing,  or  rubbing.
But  between  the  lowest  layer  of  the  rete  and  the  sur-
face of  the  cutis  vera  there  are  no  intervening  layers  ;
there  is  no  amorphous  fluid  or  blastema  to  be  found
there  in  which  the  cells  could  be  generated,  but  they  lie
in  direct  contact  with  the  papillae  of  connective  tissue  of
the  cutis.  There  is  therefore  nowhere  any  space  here,
as  there  was  thought  to  be  even  a  short  time  ago,  into
which  fluid  transudes  from  the  papillae  and  the  vessels
contained  therein,  in  order  that  new  cells  may  arise  and
develop  themselves  out  of  it.  Of  such  a  fluid  there  is
absolutely  nothing  discernible,  but  throughout  the  whole
series  of  the  layers  of  cells  of  the  rete  and  epidermis  the
same  relations  exist  that  we  are  familiar  with  in  the
bark  of  a  tree.  The  cortical  layer  of  a  potato  (Fig.  7)
exhibits  in  a  similar  manner,  externally,  corky,  epider-
moidal  cells,  and  underneath,  as  in  the  rete  Malpighii,  a
layer  of  nucleated  cells,  the  cambium,  constituting  the
matrix  for  the  subsequent  growth  of  the  cortex.

NAILS.  63

Very  much  the  same  is  the  case  with  the  nails.  On
examining  the  section  of  a  nail,  made  transversely  to  the
long  axis  of  the  finger,  we  see  virtually  the  same  struc-
ture as  in  ordinary  skin,  only  every  single  indentation  of
the  inferior  surface  does  not  correspond  to  a  conical
prolongation  of  the  cutis,  or  papilla,  but  to  a  ridge  which
runs  along  the  entire  length  of  the  bed  of  the  nail,  and
may  be  compared  with  the  ridges  which  are  to  be  seen
upon  the  palmar  surface  of  the  fingers.  Upon  these
ridges  of  the  bed  of  the  nail  are  dwarfish,  stunted  papillae,
and  upon  them  rests  the  rather  cylindrically  shaped
youngest  layer  of  the  rete  Malpighii ;  then  follow  cells
continually  increasing  in  size,  until  at  last  the  really
hard  substance  comes,  which  corresponds  to  the  epi-
dermis.

Nevertheless — to  discuss  the  subject  at  once,  seeing
that  I  shall  not  again  have  occasion  to  mention  it — the
structure  of  the  nails  has  been  difficult  to  make  out,
because  they  were  conceived  to  be  a  simple  formation.
Nearly  all  the  discussions,  therefore,  which  have  taken
place,  have  turned  upon  the  question  where  the  matrix
of  the  nail  was,  and  whether  the  growth  of  the  latter
took  place  from  the  whole  surface  or  from  the  little  fold
into  which  it  is  received  behind.  If  we  consider  the  nail
with  respect  to  its  proper  firm  substance,  its  compact
body  (Nagelblatt),  this  only  grows  from  behind,  and  is
pushed  forwards  over  the  surface  of  the  so-called  bed  of
the  nail  (Nagelbett),  but  this  in  its  turn  also  produces  a
definite  quantity  of  cellular  elements,  which  are  to  be
regarded  as  the  equivalents  of  an  epidermic  layer.  On
making  a  section  through  the  middle  of  a  nail,  we  come,
most  externally,  to  the  layer  of  nail  which  has  grown
from  behind,  next  to  the  substance  which  has  been
secreted  by  the  bed  of  the  nail,  then  to  the  rete  Malpi-
ghii, and  lastly  to  the  ridges  upon  which  the  nail  rests.

tf4  LECTURE II.

Thus  the  nail  lies  in  a  certain  measure  loose,  and  can
easily  move  forwards,  pushing  itself  over  a  moveable
substratum,  while  it  is  kept  in  place  by  the  ridges  with
which  its  bed  is  beset.  When  a  section  is  made  trans-
versely through  a  nail,  we  see,  as  already  mentioned,
essentially  the  same  appearance  presented  as  that  offered
by  the  skin,  only  that  a  long  ridge  corresponds  to  every
single  papilla  seen  in  ordinary  sections  of  the  skin  ;  the
undermost  part  of  the  nail  has  slight  indentations  cor-
responding to  these  ridges,  so  that,  while  gliding  along
over  them,  it  can  execute  lateral  movements  only  within
certain  limits.  In  this  manner,  the  body  of  the  nail
which  grows  from  behind  moves  forwards  over  a  cushion
of  loose  epidermic  substance  (Fig.  17,  a)  in  grooves
which  are  provided  by  the  ridges  and  furrows  of  the  bed
of  the  nail.  The  uppermost  part  of  the  nail,  if  examined
when  fresh,  is  composed  of  so  dense  a  substance  that  it
is  scarcely  possible  to  distinguish  individual  cells  in  it
without  applying  reagents,  and  at  many  points  an
appearance  is  presented  like  that  which  we  see  in  car-
tilage. But  by  treating  it  with  potash,  we  can  convince
ourselves  that  this  substance  is  composed  of  nothing  but
epidermis-cells.  From  this  mode  of  development  you
will  see  how  easily  intelligible  distinctions  may  be  drawn
between  the  different  diseases  of  the  nails.

There  are  diseases  of  the  bed  of  the  nail  which  do  not
affect  the  growth  of  its  body,  but  may  give  rise  to
changes  in  its  position.  When  there  is  a  very  abun-
dant development  of  cells  in  the  bed  of  the  nail,  the  body
may  be  pushed  upwards  (Fig.  17,  b) ;  nay,  it  sometimes
happens  that  the  nail,  instead  of  growing  horizontally,
shoots  perpendicularly  upwards,  the  space  underneath
being  filled  with  a  thick  accumulation  of  the  loose
cushiony  substance  (Polstermasse)  (Fig.  17,  c).  Thus
suppuration  may  take  place  in  the  bed  of  the  nail  with-

CRYSTALLINE LENS

65

Fig.  11.

out  the  development  of  its  body  being  thereby  impeded.
The  most  singular  changes  occur  in  small  pox.  When
a  pock  forms  upon  the  bed  of  the
nail,  there  is  nothing  to  be  seen
but  a  yellowish,  somewhat  uneven,
spot  ;  but  if,  on  the  other  hand,
it  is  developed  upon  the  fold,  then
its  traces  are  left  in  the  shape  of
a  circularly  depressed,  and,  as  it
were,  excavated  spot  in  the  body
of  the  nail  as  it  gradually  advances,
a  proof  of  a  loss  of  substance  pre-
cisely similar  to  that  which  takes
place  in  the  epidermis.

I  will  not  to-day,  gentlemen,
enter  more  particularly  into  the  spe-
cial history  of  the  formation  of  epi-
dermis and  epithelium,  although  it  is  of  great  importance
for  the  right  comprehension  of  many  pathological  pro-
cesses, but  content  myself  with  calling  your  attention  to
the  fact,  that,  under  particular  circumstances  epithelial
cells  may  undergo  a  series  of  transformations,  through
which  they  become  extremely  unlike  what  they  originally
were,  and  gradually  assume  appearances  which  render  it
impossible  for  those  who  are  unacquainted  with  the  history
of  their  development  to  realize  their  original  epidermic
nature.  The  greatest  abnormity  of  the  kind  is  met  with
in  the  crystalline  lens  of  the  eye,  which  is  originally  a  mere

Fig.  17.  Diagrammatic  representation  of  a  longitudinal  section  of  a  nail.  a.  The
normal  condition  ;  a  gently  curved,  horizontal  nail,  implanted  in  its  fold,  and  sepa-
rated from  its  bed  by  a  thin  cushion,  b.  A  more  markedly  curved  and  somewhat
thicker  nail,  with  great  thickening  of  the  cushion,  and  much  increased  curvation
of  the  bed,  the  fold  being  shorter  and  wider,  c.  Onychogryphosis ;  the  nail,  short
and  thick,  reared  up  at  a  considerable  angle,  the  fold  short  and  wide,  the  bed  fur-
rowed on  its  surface,  the  cushion  very  thick  and  composed  of  layers  of  loose  cells,
piled  up  one  above  the  other.

66  LECTURE  II.

accumulation  of  epidermis.  It  has  its  origin,  as  is  well
known,  in  a  saccular  involution  of  the  external  skin.  At
first  its  connection  with  the  external  parts  continues  to
be  maintained  by  means  of  a  delicate  membrane,  the
membrana  capsulo-pupillaris ;  afterwards  this  atrophies
and  leaves  the  lens  isolated  in  the  interior  of  the  eye.
The  fibres  of  the  lens  are  therefore,  as  C.  Yogt  has
shown,  nothing  more  than  epidermoidal  colls  which  have
been  developed  in  a  peculiar  manner,  and  their  regene-
ration, after  the  extraction  of  a  cataract  for  example,  is
only  possible  as  long  as  there  still  remains  epithelium  in
the  capsule  to  undertake  the  new  formation,  and  to
represent,  as  it  were,  a  thin  layer  of  rete  Malpighii.
This  reproduces  the  lens  in  the  same  way  that  the  ordi-
nary rete  Malpighii  of  the  external  surface  does  the
cuticle.  Amongst  the  other  changes  of  epithelial  struc-
tures we  shall  in  clue  time  revert  to  the  peculiar  pig-
ment cells  that  are  produced  in  the  most  different  parts
by  the  direct  transformation  of  epidermic  cells,  the  con-
tents of  which  either  become  coloured  by  imbibition,  or
have  pigment  engendered  in  them  by  a  (metabolic)
transposition  of  their  elements.

With  the  history  of  epithelial  elements  properly  so
called  is  immediately  connected  that  of  a  peculiar  class
of  structures  which  play  a  very  important  part  in  the
accomplishment  of  the  functions  of  an  animal,  namely
the  glands.  The  really  active  elements  of  these  organs
are  essentially  of  an  epithelial  nature.  One  of  Remak's
greatest  merits  consists  in  his  having  shown  that  in  the
normal  development  of  the  embryo  the  outer  and  inner
of  the  well-known  three  layers  of  the  germinal  mem-
brane chiefly  produce  epithelial  structures,  from  a  gra-
dual proliferation  of  the  elements  of  which  glandular
structures  arise.  Other  observers,  for  example,  Kolliker,
had  indeed  before  him  made  similar  observations,  but  by

GLANDS.  67

Remak  was  first  established  the  law  that  the  formation
of  glands  in  general  must  be  regarded  as  consequent
upon  a  direct  process  of  proliferation  on  the  part  of
epithelial  structures.  Previously  large  quantities  of
cytoblastema  had  been  conceived  to  exist,  in  which,
spontaneously,  glandular  substance  took  its  rise  ;  but,  with
the  exception  of  the  lymphatic  glands,  and  perhaps  those
belonging  to  the  sexual  organs,  their  mode  of  origin  is
everywhere  this — that  at  a  certain  point,  in  a  manner
very  similar  to  that  which  I  described  to  you  in  the  fore-
going lecture,  when  speaking  of  the  excrescences  of
plants,  an  epithelial  cell  begins  to  divide,  and  goes  on
dividing  again  and  again,  until  by  degrees  a  little  process
composed  of  cells  grows  inwards,  and,  spreading  out
laterally,  gives  rise  to  the  development  of  a  gland,  which
thus  straightway  consitutes  a  body  continuous  with  lay-
ers of  cells  originally  external.  Thus  arise  the  glands  of
the  surface  of  the  body  (the  sudoriferous  and  sebaceous
glands  of  the  skin  and  the  mammary  gland),  and  thus
also  arise  the  internal  glands  of  the  digestive  tract  (the
stomach  glands  and  liver.)  The  most  simple  forms  which
glands  can  present  do  not  occur  at  all  in  man.  In  infe-
rior animals,  however,  uni-cellular  glands  have  recently
been  discovered.  The  glands  of  the  human  body  are
invariably  made  up  of  a  number  of  elements,  which  can,
however,  ultimately  be  traced  back  to  a  nearly  simple
type.  Besides,  in  our  own  glands,  in  consequence  of
their  size  and  complicated  structure,  other  necessary
constituents  generally  enter  into  their  composition,  so
that,  regarded  as  organs,  they  certainly  do  not  consist  of
gland-cells  only.  But  all  parties  are  now  pretty  well
agreed  that  the  gland-cells  are  the  really  essential  ele-
ments, just  as  the  primitive  bundles  are  in  muscle,  and
that  the  specific  action  of  a  gland  is  dependent  upon  the
properties  and  peculiar  arrangement  of  these  elements.

68

LECTURE II.

Generally  speaking,  therefore,  glands  consist  of  accu-
mulations of  cells,  which  usually  form  open  canals. With

Fig.  18.

the  exception  of  the  glands,  whose  functions  are  uncer-
tain, such  as  the  thyroid  body  and  supra-renal  capsules,
there  are  in  the  human  body  only  the  ovaries  which  form
an  exception  to  this  rule,  inasmuch  as  their  follicles  are
only  open  at  times  ;  yet  they  too  must  be  open  when
the  specific  secretion  of  the  ova  has  to  take  place.  In
most  glands  there  is  found  indeed  besides  a  certain  quan-
tity of  transuded  fluid,  but  this  only  constitutes  the
vehicle  which  floats  off  either  the  cells  themselves,  or
their  specific  products.  Suppose,  for  example,  that  in
one  of  the  ducts  of  the  testicle  a  cell,  in  which  there  is
a  production  of  spermatozoa,  becomes  detached,  then  there
transudes  at  the  same  time  a  certain  quantity  of  fluid,
which  carries  them  away  ;  but  what  makes  the  semen,
semen,  and  constitutes  the  specific  character  of  the  action

Fig.  18.  A.  Development  of  sweat-glands  by  means  of  the  proliferation  of  the
cells  of  the  rete  Malpighii  in  an  inward  direction,  e.  Epidermis,  r.  Rete  Malpighii.
g  g.  Solid  process,  constituting  the  first  rudiments  of  a  gland. After  Kolliker.

B.  Portion  of  the  duct  of  the  sweat-gland  in  a  state  of  complete  development.
t  t.  Tunica  propria, e  e.  Layers  of  epithelium.

THEORIES  RESPECTING  CONNECTIVE TISSUE.  69

is  the  peculiar  power  of  the  cell ;  the  mere  transuda-
tion from  vessels  is  no  doubt  a  means  of  conveyance
onwards,  but  does  not  constitute  the  specific  action  of
the  gland  nor  the  real  secretion.  In  an  analogous  man-
ner, in  all  the  glands  of  which  we  can  follow  the  action
in  all  its  details  with  precision,  the  essential  peculi-
arities of  their  energy  are  derived  from  the  development
and  transformation  of  epithelial  cells.

The  second  histological  group  is  formed  by  the  con-
nective tissues  (Gewebe  der  Bindesubstanz).  This  is  the
subject  in  which  I  take  the  most  interest,  because  it  was
here  that  my  own  observations,  which  have  led  to  the
result  to  which  I  directed  your  attention  at  the  begin-
ning of  these  lectures,  originated.  The  alterations  which
I  have  succeeded  in  introducing  in  the  views  of  histolo-
gists  with  regard  to  the  whole  group  have,  at  the  same
time,  enabled  me  to  give  a  certain  degree  of  roundness
and  completeness  to  the  cellular  theory.

Previously,  connective  tissue  had  nearly  universally
been  regarded  as  essentially  composed  of  fibres.  On
examining  loose  connective  tissue  in  different  re-
gions, as,  for  example,  beneath  the  corium,  in  the  pia
mater,  subserous  and  submucous  cellular  tissue,  we  find
wavy  bundles  of  fibres,  the  so-called  wavy  connective  tis-
sue (Fig.  19,  A).  This  wavy  character,  which  is  inter-
rupted at  certain  intervals,  so  as  to  give  rise  to  a  kind
of  fasciculation,  could,  it  was  thought,  with  the  less  hesi-
tation be  attributed  to  the  presence  of  separate  fibres,
because  at  the  end  of  each  bundle  isolated  filaments
could  in  reality  be  seen  to  protrude.  In  spite  of  this,
however,  an  attack  was  made  upon  this  very  hypothesis,
somewhat  more  than  ten  years  ago,  and  has  proved  of
very  great  importance,  though  in  a  manner  different  to
to  that  which  was  intended.  Reichert  endeavoured,
namely,  to  show  that  the  fibres  were only  an optical

70

LECTURE II.

illusion  produced  by  folds,  and  that  connective  tissue  in
all  parts  formed  a  homogeneous  mass,  endowed  with  a
great  tendency  to  the  formation  of  folds.

Fig.  19.

Schwann  had,  in  reference  to  the  formation  of  con-
nective tissue,  assumed  that  there  originally  existed  spin-
dle-shaped cells,  the  caudate  corpuscles  (geschw'anzte
Korperchen)  (fibro-plastic  corpuscles  of  Lebert),  which
afterwards  became  so  famous  ;  and  that  out  of  these  cells
fasciculi  of  connective  tissue  were  directly  developed  by
the  splitting  up  of  the  body  of  the  cell  into  distinct  fi-
brils, whilst  the  nucleus  remained  as  such  (Fig.  19,  B).
Henle,  on  the  other  hand,  thought  the  only  conclusion
his  observations  would  warrant  was,  that  there  were
originally  no  cells  at  all,  but  that  nuclei  only  were
formed  in  the  blastema  at  certain  intervals  ;  whilst  the

Fig.  19.  A.  Bundle  of  common,  wavy,  connective  tissue  (intercellular  substance),
splitting  at  its  end  into  fine  fibrils.

B.  Diagram  of  the  development  of  connective  tissue  according  to  Schwann,  a.
Spindle-shaped  cell  (caudate  corpuscle,  fibro-plastic  corpuscle  of  Lebert),  with  nu-
cleus and  nucleolus. 6.  Cleavage  of  the  body  of  the  cell  into  fibrils.

C.  Diagram  of  the  development  of  connective  tissue,  according  to  Henle.  a.
Hyaline  matrix  (blastema),  with  nucleolated  nuclei  regularly  distributed  through  it.
b.  Fibrillation  of  the  blastema  (direct  formation  of  fibrils),  and  transformation  of
the  nuclei  into  nucleus-fibres.

THEORIES  RESPECTING  CONNECTIVE  TISSUE.  71

fibres,  which  afterwards  appeared,  were  produced  by  a
direct  fibrillation  of  the  blastema  ;  and  that,  whilst  the
intermediate  substance  was  thus  being  differentiated  into
fibres,  the  nuclei  gradually  became  elongated,  so  as  at
length  to  run  into  one  another,  and  thus  give  rise  to
peculiar  longitudinal  fibres,  nucleus -fibres  (Kernfasern)
(Fig.  19,  C).  Reichert  took  an  extremely  important
step  in  opposition  to  these  views.  He  showed,  namely,
that  originally  there  were  only  cells,  and  those  in  great
abundance,  between  which  intercellular  substance  was
deposited.  But  the  membrane  of  the  cells  became,  he
thought,  at  a  certain  period,  blended  with  the  intercel-
lular tissue,  and  then  a  stage  was  reached  analogous  to
that  described  by  Henle,  in  which  there  no  longer  ex-
isted any  boundary  between  the  original  cells  and  the
intermediate  substance.  And,  finally,  he  imagined  that
the  nuclei,  too,  entirely  disappeared  in  some  instances,
whilst  they  were  preserved  in  others.  Od  the  other
hand,  he  positively  denied  the  occurrence  of  the  spindle-
shaped  cells  of  Schwann,  and  declared  all  such,  as  well
as  the  caudate  and  jagged  cells,  to  be  just  as  much
artificial  products  as  the  fibres,  which  were  said  to  be
seen  in  the  intervening  substance,  were  a  false  interpre-
tation of  an  optical  image.

Now,  my  own  investigations  have  shown,  that  both
Schwann's  and  Reichert's  observations,  up  to  a  certain
point,  have  some  foundation  in  truth.  That,  in  the  first
place,  in  opposition  to  Reichert,  spindle-shaped  and  stel-
late cells  indisputably  do  exist  (Fig.  20)  ;  and  secondly,
in  opposition  to  Schwann,  and  with  Reichert,  that  a
direct  splitting  up  of  the  cells  into  fibres  does  not  take
place,  but  that  on  the  contrary,  what  is  afterwards  pre-
sented to  our  sight  as  connective  tissue  has  really  taken
the  place  of  the  previously  homogeneous  intercellular
substance. I have found, moreover, that Reichert,

.72

LECTURE  II.

Henle, and Schwann,  were  wrong  in  maintaining  that
ultimately  at  best  only  nuclei  or  nucleus-fibres  remained  ;

Fig.  20.

and  that,  on  the  contrary,  in  most  cases  the  cells  them-
selves preserve  their  integrity.  The  connective  tissue
of  a  later  period  is  therefore  not  distinguished  in  its
general  structure  and  disposition  in  any  respect  from
that  of  an  earlier  date.  There  is  not  an  embryonic  con-
nective tissue  with  spindle-shaped  cells  and  a  perfectly
developed  one  without  them,  but  the  cells  remain  the
same,  although  they  are  often  not  easy  to  see.

Essentially,  therefore,  this  whole  series  of  lower  tis-
sues may  be  reduced  to  one  simple  plan.  Usually,  the
greater  part  of  the  tissue  is  composed  of  intercellular
substance,  in  which,  at  certain  intervals,  cells  lie  imbed-
ded, which  in  their  turn  present  the  most  manifold  forms.
But  these  tissues  cannot  be  distinguished  by  one's  con-
Fig.  20.  Connective  tissue  from  the  embryo  of  a  pig,  after  long-continued  boil-
ing. Large  spindle-shaped  cells  (connective-tissue  corpuscles  (Bindegewebskorper-
chen)),  some  isolated,  some  still  imbedded  in  the  basis-substance,  and  anastomosing
one  with  the  other.  Large  nuclei,  with  their  membrane  detached  ;  cell-contents  in
some  cases  shrunken. 350  diameters.

FORMATION  OF  CONNECTIVE  TISSUE.

73

taining  only round, another's, on  the contrary, only
caudate  or  stellate,  cells,  but  in  all  connective  tissues

Fig.  21.

B h

round,  long  and  angular  cells  may  occur.  The  simplest
case  is  where  round  cells  lie  at  certain  intervals,  and
intercellular  substance  appears  between  them.  This  is
the  form  which  we  see  most  beautifully  shown  in  hyaline
cartilage,  as  in  that  lining  the  joints,  for  example,  in
which  the  intercellular  matter  is  perfectly  homogeneous,
and  we  see  nothing  but  a  substance  which,  though,  per-
haps, slightly  granulated  here  and  there,  is  on  the  whole
quite  as  clear  as  water,  so  that  as  long  as  we  do  not  see
the  edges  of  the  preparation,  doubt  may  arise  as  to  whe-
ther anything  at  all  exists  between  the  cells.

This  substance  is  characteristic  of  hyaline  cartilage.
Now  we  find  that,  under  certain  circumstances,  the  round
cells  became  even  in  cartilage  transformed  into  oblong

Fig.  21.  Diagram  of  the  development  of  connective-tissue,  according  to  my  inves-
tigations. A.  Earliest  stage.  Hyaline  basis-  (intercellular)  substance,  with  largish
cells  (connective-tissue  corpuscles);  the  latter  drawn  up  in  rows  at  regular  intervals;
at  first  separated,  spindle-shaped,  and  simple  ;  at  a  later  period  anastomosing  and
branched.  B.  More  advanced  stage ;  at  a,  the  basis-substance  which  has  become
striated  (fibrillated),  presents  a  fasciculated  appearance  on  account  of  the  cells
imbedded  in  it  in  rows,  the  cells  becoming  narrower  and  smaller  ;  at  b,  the  striation
of  the  basis-substance  has  disappeared  under  the  influence  of  acetic  acid,  and  the
fine  and  long  anastomosing  fibre-cells  (connective-tissue  corpuscles),  still  retaining
their  nuclei,  are  seen.

74

LECTURE  II.

Fig.  22.

nf^^^&A

f^a

spindle-shaped  ones,  as,  for  example,  with  great  regula-
rity in  the  immediate  neighbourhood  of  the  articular

surfaces. The  nearer,  in  the
examination  of  articular  car-
tilage,  we approach to  the
free  surface  (Fig.  22,  a,)  the
smaller  do  the  cells  become  ;
and,  at  last,  nothing  more  is
seen  but  small,  flatly  lenti-
cular  bodies,  the substance
intervening between which
sometimes  presents  a  slightly
striated  appearance. Here,  therefore,  without  the  tis-
sue's having  ceased  to  be  cartilage,  a  new  type  displays
itself,  which  we  much  more  regularly  meet  with  in  pure
connective  tissue,  and  hence  the  idea  might  easily  arise
that  articular  cartilage  is  invested  with  a  special  mem-
brane. This  is,  however,  not  the  case,  for  there  is  no
synovial  membrane  spread  over  the  cartilage,  but  its
boundary  towards  the  cavity  of  the  joint  is  everywhere
formed  of  cartilage  itself. The  synovial  membrane  only
begins  where  the  cartilage  ceases — at  the edge  of  the
bone. On  the  other  hand,  we  see  that  at  certain  points
the  cartilage  passes  directly  into  forms  in  which  the  cells
become  stellate, and  the  way  is  paved  for  their  final
anastomosis  ;  ultimately,  spots  are  met  with  at  which  it
is  no  longer  possible  to  say  where  the  one  cell  ends  and
the other begins, inasmuch as they  communicate so
directly  one  with  another  that  it  is  impossible  to  detect
a  line  of  separation  between  their  membranes. When

Fig.  22.  Perpendicular  section  through  the  growing  cartilage  of  a  patella,  a.  The
articular  surface,  with  spindle-shaped  cells  (cartilage-corpuscles)  disposed  in  layers
parallel  to  it.  b.  Incipient  proliferation  of  the  cells,  c.  Advanced  proliferation ;
large,  roundish  groups — within  the  enlarged  capsules  a  continually  increasing  num-
ber of  round  cells. 50  diameters.

CARTILAGE— MUCODS  TISSUE.  75

such  a  case  occurs,  the  cartilage,  which  up  to  that  time
had  remained  hyaline  and  homogeneous,  becomes  hete-
rogeneous and  striated,  and  has  long  since  been  called
ftbro-cartilage.

From  these  forms  a  third  has  been  distinguished,  the
so-called  reticular  [yellow  or  spongy]  cartilage,  as  seen
m  the  ear  and  nose,  in  which  the  cells  are  round,  but
encircled  by  a  peculiar  kind  of  thick,  stiff  fibres,  whose
mode  of  production  has  not  yet  been  thoroughly  made
out,  but  they  are,  perhaps,  derived  from  the  metamor-
phosis of  the  intercellular  substance.

Under  these  different  types,  presented  by  cartilage  in
its  different  localities,  all  the  different  aspects  which  the
other  connective  tissues  offer  are  included.  There  is
also  true  connective  tissue  with  round,  long,  and  stellate
cells.  Just  in  the  same  manner  we  find,  for  example,
in  the  peculiar  tissue  which  I  have  named  mucous  tissue
(Schleimgewebe),  round  cells  in  a  hyaline,  or  spindle-
shaped  ones  in  a  striated,  or  reticular  ones  in  a  meshy,
basis-substance.  The  only  criterion  we  possess  for  dis-
tinguishing them  consists  in  the  determination  of  the
chemical  constitution  of  the  intercellular  substance.
Every  tissue  is  called  connective  tissue  whose  basis-
substance  yields  gelatine  when  boiled  ;  the  intercellular
substance  of  cartilage  produces  chondrine  ;  mucous  tis-
sue, on  expression,  a  substance,  mucin,  precipitable  by
acetic  acid,  and  insoluble  in  an  excess  of  it,  though  dis-
solving in  muriatic  acid  when  added  in  considerable
quantity.

Besides  these,  a  few  solitary  points  of  difference  in
regard  to  peculiarity  of  form  and  contents  may  be  pre-
sented by  individual  cells  at  some  later  period  of  their
existence.  What  we  concisely  designate  fat  is  a  tissue
which  is  intimately  connected  with  those  of  which  we
have  been  treating,  and  is  distinguished  from  the  rest  by

76  LECTURE  II.

the  fact  that  some  of  the  cells  enlarge  and  become  stuffed
full  of  fat,  the  nucleus  being  thereby  thrust  to  one  side.
In  itself,  however,  the  structure  of  adipose  tissue  is  pre-
cisely the  same  as  that  of  connective  tissue,  and,  under
certain  circumstances,  the  fat  may  so  completely  disap-
pear that  the  adipose  tissue  is  once  more  reduced  to  the
state  of  simple,  gelatinous  connective,  or  mucous  tissue.
Amongst  these  different  species  of  connective  tissue
the  most  important  for  our  present  pathological  views,
are,  generally  speaking,  those  in  which  a  reticular  ar-
rangement of  the  cells  exists,  or,  in  other  words,  in  which
they  anastomose  with  one  another.  Wherever,  namely,
such  anastomoses  take  place,  wherever  one  cell  is  con-
nected with  another,  it  may  with  some  degree  of  cer-
tainty be  demonstrated  that  these  anastomoses  constitute
a  peculiar  system  of  tubes  or  canals  which  must  be
classed  with  the  great  canalicular  system  of  the  body,
and  which  particularly,  forming  as  they  do  a  supplement
to  the  blood-  and  lymphatic  vessels,  must  be  regarded  as
a  new  acquisition  to  our  knowledge,  and  as  in  some  sort
filling  up  the  vacancy  left  by  the  old  vasa  serosa  which
do  not  exist.  This  reticular  arrangement  is  possible  in
cartilage,  connective  tissue,  bone  and  mucous  tissue  in
the  most  different  parts  ;  but  in  all  cases  those  tissues
which  possess  anastomoses  of  this  description  may  be
distinguished  from  those  whose  elements  are  isolated,  by
the  greater  energy  with  which  they  are  capable  of  con-
ducting different  morbid  processes.

LECTURE III.

FEBRUARY  20,  1858.
PHYSIOLOGICAL  AND  PATHOLOGICAL  TISSUES.

The  higher  animal  tissues  :  muscles,  nerves,  vessels,  blood.

Muscles — Striped  and  smooth — Atrophy  of — The  contractile  substance  and  con-
tractility in  general — Cutis  anserina  and  arrectores  pili.

Vessels — Capillaries — Contractile  vessels — Nerves.
Pathological  tissues  (Neoplasms),  and  their  classification — Import  of  vascularity —

Doctrine  of  specific  elements — Physiological  types  (reproduction) — Heterology

(heterotopy), heterochrony  (heterometry),  and  malignity — Hypertrophy  and

hyperplasy — Degeneration — Criteria  for  prognosis.
Law of continuity — Histological  substitution  and  equivalents — Physiological and

pathological  substitution.

In  my  last  lecture  I  portrayed  to  you  the  first  two
groups  of  tissues,  the  one  embracing  epithelium  or  epi-
dermis, and  the  other  the  different  kinds  of  connective
tissue.  What  still  remains  forms  a  somewhat  heteroge-
neous group,  the  individual  members  of  which  do  not,
indeed,  in  the  degree  that  is  the  case  with  epithelium
and  connective  tissue,  bear  a  real  relationship  to  one
another,  yet,  on  the  whole,  present  a  certain  correspon-
dence, in  that  they  constitute  the  higher  animal  struc-
tures, and  are  distinguished  by  their  specific  mode  of
development  from  the  less  highly  organized  epithelial
and  connective  tissues.  Moreover,  most  of  them  appear
under  the  form  of  connected,  more  or  less  tubular,  struc-
tures. If  a  comparison  be  instituted  between  muscles,
nerves,  and  vessels,  the  idea  very  readily  suggests  itself

77

78  LECTCTRE  III.

that  we  have  in  all  three  structures  to  deal  with  real
tubes,  filled  with  now  more,  now  less,  moveable  contents.
But  this  notion,  however  well  it  may  accord  with  a
superficial  view  of  the  matter,  does  not  express  the
whole  truth,  inasmuch  as  we  cannot  compare  the  con-
tents of  the  different  tubes.

The  blood  which  is  contained  in  the  vessels,  cannot,
at  least  at  present,  be  regarded  as  analogous  to  the  axis-
cylinder,  or  the  medullary  [white]  substance  of  a  nerve-
tube,  or  to  the  contractile  substance  of  a  primitive  mus-
cular fasciculus  (Muskelprimitivbundel  [muscular  fibre]).
I  must,  indeed,  here  remark,  that  the  original  develop-
ment of  all  the  structures  which  may  be  included  in  this
group  is  still  a  subject  of  great  controversy,  and  that
the  view  maintaining  the  simply  cellular  structure  of
most  of  these  elements  is  by  no  means  completely  estab-
lished. This  much,  however,  appears  to  be  certain,  that,
at  any  rate  in  foetal  parts,  the  blood-corpuscles  are  just
as  much  cells  as  the  individual  constituents  of  the  walls
of  the  vessels  within  which  the  blood  flows  ;  and  that  the
vessel  cannot  be  designated  as  a  tube  which  invests  the
blood-corpuscles,  as  the  cell-membrane  does  its  contents.
It  is  therefore  necessary  in  the  case  of  the  vessels  to
draw  a  line  between  their  contents  and  proper  walls,
and  to  repudiate  the  seeming  resemblance  between  the
vessels,  and  the  nerves  and  muscular  fibres.  Again,  if
we  wished  to  adopt  the  mode  of  origin  of  the  several
tissues  as  the  basis  of  our  classification,  we  should,  in
accordance  with  prevailing  views,  have  to  associate  the
lymphatic  glands  also  with  the  blood,  and  might  be
rather  reminded  of  a  connection  such  as  we  have  seen
to  exist  in  the  relations  between  the  epidermis  and  the
rete  mucosum.  But  here  I  must  once  more  impress
upon  you  that  the  lymphatic  glands  are  distinguished
from  glands properly  so  called, not  only  by  their  not

THE  HIGHER  ANIMAL  TISSUES.

79

possessing  any  excretory  duct  in  the  ordinary  sense  of
the  word,  but  also  because  from  the  mode  of  their  deve-
lopment they  by  no  means  occupy  the  same  position
as  ordinary  glands,  but  are  on  the  contrary  at  every
period  of  their  existence  nearly  allied  to  the  connective
tissues,  and  that,  therefore,  the  temptation  would  rather
be  to  class  them  with  the  tissues  which  we  see  produced
by  the  transformation  of  the  connective  tissues.  Yet
this  would  at  the  present  moment  be  still  rather  a  ven-
turous undertaking.

Amongst  all  the  forms  of  which  we  have  here  to  treat,
the  elements  of  muscle  have  generally  been  regarded  as
the  most  simple.  If  we  examine  an  ordinary  red  muscle
(I  do  not  say  a  voluntary  one,  inasmuch  as  in  the  heart
also  we  meet  with  fibres  of  the  fig.  23.

same  form)  we  find  it  to  be  essen-
tially composed  of  a  number  of
cylinders,  for  the  most  part  of
equal  thickness  (primitive  fasci-
culi [fibres]),  which  on  a  trans-
verse section  are  seen  to  have  a
cylindrical  form,  and  on  which  we
at  once  perceive  the  well-known
transverse  striae,  that  is,  broad
lines  which  generally  run  transversely  through  the  fasci-
culus with  a  somewhat  wavy  outline,  and  are  almost  as
broad  as  the  intervals  that  separate  them.  In  addition
to  this  transverse  striation  we  also  see,  especially  when
certain  modes  of  preparation  have  been  adopted,  striae  fol-

Fig.  23.  A  group  of  primitive  muscular  fasciculi  [fibres],  a.  The  natural  appear-
ance of  a  fresh  primitive  fasciculus,  with  its  transverse  striae  (bands  or  discs),  b.
A  fasciculus  gently  acted  upon  by  acetic  acid ;  the  nuclei  stand  out  distinctly,  and
in  one  of  them  two  nucleoli  are  visible,  whilst  in  another  the  division  is  complete.
c.  A  fibre  acted  upon  more  strongly  by  acetic  ac:d ;  the  contents  are  swollen  up  at
the  end,  so  as  to  protrude  from  the  sheath  (sarcolemma).  d.  Fatty  atrophy.  300
diameters.

80  LECTURE  III.

lowing  a  longitudinal  direction,  and  these,  indeed,  in
some  preparations  preponderate  to  such  a  degree,  that  the
muscular  fasciculus  appears  to  be  striated  almost  exclu-
sively in  this  direction.  If  now  we  add  acetic  acid,  there
are  forthwith  disclosed  immediately  beneath  the  sheath,
and  now  and  then  also  more  towards  the  centre,  nuclei
which  are  tolerably  large,  and  mostly  contain  large  nucle-
oli in  greater  or  less  number.  In  this  manner,  therefore,
after  we  have  cleared  up  the  internal  substance  by  the
application  of  acetic  acid,  we  again  obtain  an  appearance
which  reminds  us  of  the  original  cell-form  ;  and  there
has  been  the  greater  tendency  to  regard  the  whole  of  a
primitive  fasciculus  as  having  sprung  from  a  single  cell,
because,  according  to  the  view  which  was  formerly
entertained,  the  individual  primitive  fasciculi  of  every
muscle  were  thought  to  extend  from  the  point  of  origin
to  that  of  insertion,  and  were  therefore  held  to  be
as  long  as  the  muscle  itself.  This  latter  supposition
has,  however,  been  shaken  by  investigations  which
were  set  on  foot  in  Yienna,  under  Briicke's  direction
by  Rollet,  for  he  demonstrated  that  in  the  course  of
muscles  the  ends  of  primitive  fasciculi  are  to  be  seen
running  into  points,  so  that  a  primitive  muscular  fasci-
culus would  comport  itself  like  a  large  fibre-cell  (Fig.
105,  A).  These  ends  fit  one  into  the  other,  and,  accord-
ing to  this,  the  length  of  a  primitive  fasciculus  would  by
no  means  correspond  to  the  whole  extent  of  the  muscle.
On  the  other  hand,  I  must  remark,  that  observations
have  been  made  in  different  quarters  quite  recently,
which  are  rather  of  a  nature  to  throw  doubts  upon  the
uni-cellular  nature  of  these  elements.  Leydig  regards
them  as  rather  containing  a  series  of  cells  of  a  smaller
kind,  between  which  the  contractile  substance  is  lodged,
his  idea  being  based  upon  the  circumstance  that  every
nucleus  (Figs.  23,  b,  c;  24,  B)  is  enclosed  in  a  special

TRANSVERSELY  STRIATED  MUSCLES.

81

Fig.  24.

B

elongated  cavity.1  In  discussions  respecting  these  ulti-
mate elements  of  muscle,  extremely  difficult  relations
are  involved,  and  I  for  my  own  part  must  confess  that,
however  much  I  am  inclined  to  admit  the  uni-cellular
nature  of  the  primitive  fasciculi,  I  am  still  too  familiar
with  the  peculiar  appearances  in  their  interior  not  to  be
obliged  to  allow  that  another
view  may  be  advanced.  For
the  present,  however,  we
must  bear  in  mind  that  we
have  to  do  with  a  structure
in  which  an  external  mem-
branous sheath  (sarcolem-
ma)  and  contents  are  to  be
distinguished.  In  the  latter,  acetic  acid  causes  nuclei
to  show  themselves,  and,  when  they  (the  contents)  are
in  their  natural  condition,  the  peculiar  transverse  and
longitudinal  striation  may  be  recognised  in  them. This

Fig.  24.  Muscular  elements  from  the  heart  of  a  puerperal  woman.  A.  Peculiar
spindle-shaped  cells  precisely  like  the  fibre-cells  of  the  pulp  of  the  spleen,  probably
belonging  to  the  sarcolemma  and  set  free  in  teasing  out  the  preparation,  a.  Cres-
centically  curved  cell,  somewhat  flat  at  one  end,  viewed  on  its  surface,  b.  A
similar  one,  seen  in  profile,  with  flat  nucleus,  c,  d.  Cells,  the  nuclei  of  which  lie
in  a  hernial  protrusion  of  the  membrane,  e.  A  similar  cell,  viewed  on  its  sur-
face, with  its  nucleus,  as  it  were,  lying  upon  it.  B.  A  primitive  fasciculus,  without
its  sheath  (sarcolemma),  with  distinct  longitudinal  fibrils  and  large,  roundish  nuclei,
of  which  one  contains  two  nucleoli  (incipient  partition).  C.  A  primitive  fasciculus,
which  has  been  teased  asunder  and  slightly  cleared  up  by  acetic  acid  ;  besides  a
divided  nucleus,  fine,  awl-shaped,  nucleus-like  bodies  are  seen  imbedded  between
the  longitudinal  fibrils. 300  diameters.

1  This  cavity  Leydig  supposes  to  be  lined  by  a  membrane,  and  therefore  really
to  constitute  a  cell  (connective-tissue  corpuscle).  The  nuclei  of  every  primitive
fasciculus  would,  therefore,  according  to  this  view,  be  the  nuclei  of  connective-
tissue  corpuscles,  and  the  contractile  substance,  lying  between  these,  would  be
equivalent  to  the  intercellular  substance  of  ordinary  connective  tissue.  The  nuclei
here  alluded  to  are  the  ordinary  nuclei  of  muscle,  as  seen  in  the  figs,  quoted  above
and  must  not  be  confounded  with  the  awl-shaped  bodies  represented  in  fig.  24,  C,,
lying  between  the  fibrils  ;  for,  though  these  bodies  look  like  nuclei,  they  are  really,
according  to  Leydig,  portions  of  the  divided  processes  of  some  of  his  connective-
tissue  corpuscles. — From  a  MS.  note  by  the  Author.

6

82  LECTURE  III.

striation  is  altogether  internal  and  not  external.  The
membrane  in  itself  is  perfectly  smooth  and  even  ;  the
transverse  striation  belongs  to  the  contents,  which,  when
seen  in  a  mass,  form  the  red  substance  of  the  muscle.

Now  it  is  this  substance  which  has  the  property  of
contractility  indubitably  inherent  in  it,  and  even  varies
in  appearance  according  to  its  state  of  contraction,  be-
coming broader  when  contracted,  whilst  the  intervals
between  the  individual  transverse  bands  become  some-
what narrower,  so  that  a  change  in  the  arrangement  of
its  minutest  constituents  takes  place,  and  this,  as  seems
probable  from  the  investigations  of  Briicke,  not  merely
in  the  case  of  its  physical  molecules,  but  also  in  that  of
its  visible  anatomical  constituents,  Briicke,  namely,
by  examining  muscle  by  polarized  light,  has  discovered
different  optical  properties  in  the  individual  layers  of
substance — in  those  which  compose  the  transverse  striae
and  those  which  form  the  intervening  mass.  On  the
adoption  of  certain  methods  of  preparation,  every  pri-
mitive muscular  fasciculus  appears  to  be  made  up  of
plates  or  discs  of  a  different  nature,  piled  up  one  above
another,  and  these  in  their  turn  to  be  entirely  composed
of  minute  granules  (Bowman's  sarcous  elements).  In
reality,  however,  the  contents  of  a  primitive  fasciculus
consist  of  a  certain  number  of  fine,  longitudinal  fibrils,
every  one  of  which  contains  minute  granules  correspond-'
ing  in  position  to  the  transverse  striae  or  apparent  discs
of  the  primitive  fasciculus,  and  held  together  by  a  pale,
intervening  substance.  Now,  since  a  considerable  num-
ber of  primitive  fibrils  lie  in  apposition  side  by  side,
there  arises,  in  consequence  of  the  symmetrical  position
of  the  little  granules,  this  very  appearance  of  discs  which
really  do  not  exist.  In  proportion  to  the  activity  of  the
muscle  these  parts  assume  an  altered  position  with  re-
gard to  one  another  ; during  contraction  the  granules

SMOOTH  MUSCLES.

83

are  approximated,  whilst  the  intervening  substance  be-
comes shorter  and,  at  the  same  time,  broader.

Compared  with  this,  the  structure  of  the  smooth,  or-
ganic, or,  although  this  is  a  less  expressive  term,  invo-
luntary muscular  fibres,  appears  much  more  simple.  On
examining  any  part  of  those  organs  in  which  smooth
muscular  fibres  are  contained,  we  find  in  the  majority  of
cases,  first  of  all,  just  as  was  the  case  with  the  transversely
striated  muscles,  little  fasciculi — as,  for  example,  in  the
muscular  coat  of  the  urinary  bladder.  Within  these
fasciculi,  upon  further  investigation,  a  series  of  distinct
elements  can  be  distinguished,  of  which  a  certain  num-
ber, six,  ten,  twenty,  or  more,  are  held  together  by  a
common  connective  substance.  According  to  the  notion
which  universally  prevailed  FlG  25>

until  quite  recently,  every
one  of  these  elements  was
analogous  to  the  primitive
fasciculus  of  striped  muscle.
For  as  soon  as  we  succeed
in  separating  these  fasciculi
of  smooth  muscle  into  their  V5*i
more  minute  constituents,
we  find  their  ultimate  ele-
ments to  consist  of  long,
spindle-shaped  cells,  which
usually  contain  a  nucleus  in

their  centre  (Fig.  5,  J).  According  to  the  view  on  the
contrary,  which,  especially  in  consequence  of  the  impul-
sion given by  Leydig's  investigations,  has  quite  lately

Fig.  25.  Smooth  muscular  fibres  from  the  parietes  of  the  urinary  bladder.  A.
Fasciculus  still  coherent,  out  of  which  at  a,  a  single  isolated  fibre-cells  protrude,
whilst  at  b  their  simple  divided  ends  appear.  B.  A  similar  fasciculus  after  being
treated  with  acetic  acid,  whereby  the  long  and  narrow  nuclei  have  become  evident,
a.  and  b,  as  above. 300  diameters.

84:  LECTURE  III.

begun  to  be  mooted  in  various  quarters,  we  should  have
to  regard  the  bundle,  in  which  a  whole  series  of  fibre-
cells  is  contained,  rather  as  analogous  to  a  transversely
striated  primitive  fasciculus.  Until,  however,  this  point
has  been  satisfactorily  settled,  I  consider  it  advisable  and
more  in  accordance  with  known  facts  to  regard  each
fibre-cell  as  the  equivalent  of  a  primitive  fasciculus.
Should,  however,  any  change  of  opinion  shortly  occur,
you  will  now  at  any  rate  be  prepared  for  it.

In  one  of  these  spindle-shaped  or  fibre- cells  it  is  diffi-
cult to  distinguish  anything  particular.  In  very  large
cells  of  this  kind,  and  with  a  high  magnifying  power,  we
can  certainly  frequently  distinguish  a  fine  longitudinal
striation  (Fig.  5,  b),  so  that  it  looks  as  if  here,  too,  fibrils
of  some  sort  were  disposed  lengthways  in  the  interior,
whilst  ordinarily  no  trace  of  any  transverse  strise  is  per-
ceptible. Yet  the  pale,  smooth  muscles  exhibit,  chemi-
cally speaking,  a  pretty  close  agreement  with  the  trans-
versely striped  ones,  since  a  similar  substance  (the
so-called  Syntonian  of  Lehmann)  can,  by  the  help  of  di-
luted hydrochloric  acid,  be  extracted  from  both  ;  and
one  of  the  most  characteristic  substances  which  is  met
with  in  red  muscles,  namely  Creatine,  is  met  with  also,
according  to  the  investigations  of  Gr.  Siegmund,  in  the
smooth  muscular  fibres  of  the  uterus.

One  of  the  preparations  of  red  muscle  which  I  have
placed  before  you  exhibits  an  appearance  which  is  also
pathologically  interesting  ;  among  the  fasciculi,  namely,
is  one  which  presents  the  condition  of  the  so-called  pro-
gressive (fatty)  atrophy.  The  degenerated  fasciculus  is
smaller  and  narrower,  and  at  the  same  time  little
fat-globules  are  seen  arranged  in  rows  between  the  lon-
gitudinal fibrils  (Fig  23,  d).  Atrophy  in  muscles  is
chiefly  characterized  by  a  diminution  in  the  diameter  of
the primitive  fasciculi  affected  ; in fatty atrophy  the

CONTRACTILITY.  85

more  palpable  change  is  added,  that  little  rows  of  fat-
globules  appear  in  the  interior  of  the  primitive  fascicu-
lus, during  the  accumulation  of  which  the  proper  con-
tractile substance  decreases  in  bulk.  The  more  fat  there
is,  the  less  contractile  substance  ;  or,  in  other  words,
the  muscle  becomes  less  capable  of  performing  its  func-
tions in  proportion  as  the  normal  contents  of  its  fibres
diminish.  Pathological  experience,  therefore,  also  de-
signates as  the  seat  of  the  contractile  power  a  definite
substance,  the  occurrence  of  which,  as  especially  the  im-
portant investigations  of  Kolliker  have  taught  us,  is  con-
nected with  certain  histological  elements..  Whilst  for-
merly many  other  things  besides  the  substance  of  muscle,
as  for  example,  certain  forms  of  connective  tissue,  were
assumed  to  be  contractile,  lately  the  whole  theory  of
contractility  in  the  human  body  has  been  withdrawn
within  the  limits  of  that  substance,  and  observers  have
succeeded  in  tracing  back  nearly  all  the  peculiar  pheno-
mena of  motion  to  the  existence  of  minute  parts  of  a
really  muscular  nature.  Thus,  in  the  human  skin  there
lie  little  muscles  about  as  large  as  the  smallest  fasciculi
in  the  parietes  of  the  urinarybladder,  bundles  consisting
of  diminutive  fibre-cells,  which  run  from  the  base  of  the
hair-follicles  towards  the  surface  of  the  skin,  and,  when
they  contract,  approximate  the  two.  The  result  of  this
is  naturally  that  the  skin  becomes  uneven,  and  we  get
what  is  called  a  goose-skin.  This  singular  phenomenon,
which  was  previously  regarded  as  inexplicable,  has  been
simply  explained  by  the  demonstration  of  these  purely
microscopical  muscles,  the  arrectores  pilorum.

So  also  we  now  know  that  the  greater  part  of  the
muscular  layers  in  vessels  is  composed  of  elements  of
this  kind,*  and  that  the  phenomena  of  contraction  exhi-
bited by  the  vessels  must  be  referred  solely  and  exclu-
sively to  the  action  of  muscular  fibres,  which  are  con-

86

LECTURE  III.

tained  in  them  in  the  form  of  circular  or  longitudinal
layers.  A  small  vein  or  a  small  artery  can  contract  only
in  proportion  to  the  quantity  of  muscle  with  which  it  is
provided,  and  they  are  only  distinguished  by  the  circum-
stance that  either  the  longitudinal  or  the  transverse  mus-
cular layers  are  the  more  strongly  developed.

I  have  called  your  attention  to  this  point  because  you

can  see  from  it,  how  a  simple  anatomical  discovery  may
supply  the  most  important  information  with  regard  to

Fig.  26.  Small  artery  from  the  base  of  the  cerebrum  after  the  application  of  acetic
acid.  A.  Small  trunk ;  B  and  (7,  larger  branches ;  D  and  E,  branches  of  the
smallest  size  (capillary  arteries),  a,  a.  External  coat,  with  nuclei,  which  run  in  the
direction  of  the  length  of  the  vessel,  and  are  seen  first  in  a  double  and  afterwards
in  a  single  layer,  with  a  striated  basis-substance  ;  at  J)  and  E  the  coat  is  reduced
to  a  single  layer,  with  longitudinal  nuclei,  which  here  and  there  have  been  replaced
by  masses  of  fat-granules  (fatty  degeneration).  6,  b.  Middle  coat  (circular  fibrous,
or  muscular,  coat),  with  long,  cylindrical  nuclei,  which  run  transversely  around  the
vessel,  and  at  its  borders  (where  they  look  as  though  they  had  been  cut  across)
present  the  appearance  of  round  bodies  ;  at  D  and  E  transverse  nuclei  of  the  middle
coat  becoming  continually  scarcer,  e,  c.  Internal  coat,  at  D  and  E  with  longitudi-
nal nuclei. 300  diameters.

VESSELS.  87

physiological  facts,  which  are  widely  separated  from  one
another,  and  how  the  demonstration  of  definite  morpho-
logical elements  may  at  once  most  essentially  contribute
to  the  elucidation  of  functions,  which,  without  any  such
data,  would  be  utterly  incomprehensible.

I  will  omit  to  speak  here  of  the  more  intimate  struc-
ture of  the  nervous  system,  because  I  shall  have  occasion
hereafter  to  consider  it  in  a  more  connected  form,  else
this  would  be  the  subject  which  would  most  suitably
come  next,  seeing  that  there  exist  many  points  of  resem-
blance in  the  structure  of  muscular  and  nerve-fibres.
But  in  the  nervous  system  we  find,  in  addition,  nerve-
cells  (Ganglienzellen),  which  connect  the  individual  fibres
with  one  another,  and  must  be  regarded  as  the  most
important  storehouses  for  all  nervous  energy.

Concerning  the  structure  of  the  vascular  system  also  I
will  not  here  treat  in  detail,  but  will  only  say  as  much
as  is  necessary  to  give  a  cursory  view  of  the  matter.

A  capillary  vessel  is  a  simple  tube  (Fig.  3,  c),  in  which
we  have,  with  the  aid  of  our  present  appliances,  hitherto
only  been  able  to  discover  a  simple  membrane,  beset  at
intervals  with  flattened  nuclei,  which,  when  seen  in  the
middle  of  the  surface  of  the  vessel,  present  the  same  ap-
pearance as  in  the  elements  of  muscle,  only  that  they  usu-
ally lie  more  at  the  sides,  and  therefore  frequently  have
an  awl-shaped  appearance,  from  their  sharp  border  alone
being  perceived.  It  is  this,  the  most  simple  class  of
vessels,  which  we  now-a-days  solely  and  exclusively  call
capillaries,  and  with  regard  to  them  we  cannot  say  that
they  become  wider  or  narrower  by  means  of  any  action
of  their  own,  but  at  most  that  their  elasticity  renders  a
certain  degree  of  contraction  possible.  Nowhere  are
there  to  be  witnessed  in  them  genuine  processes  of  con-
traction or  relaxation  succeeding  it.  The  discussions
which  formerly  took  place  with  regard  to  the  contracti-

88  LECTURE  III.

lity  of  the  capillaries  really  had  reference  to  small  arte-
ries and  veins,  the  calibre  of  which  grows  narrower
through  the  contraction  of  their  muscular  coats,  or  wider
upon  the  occurrence  of  relaxation  in  consequence  of  the
pressure  of  the  blood.  This  is  one  of  the  first  facts,  and
an  important  one  it  is,  which  have  resulted*  from  the
more  accurate  histological  knowledge  of  the  smaller  and
larger  vessels,  and  it  shows  us  that  we  cannot  speak  of
the  general  properties  of  vessels,  inasmuch  as  the  capil-
laries differ  essentially  in  structure  from  the  small  arte-
ries and  veins.  These  are  composite  structures,  partak-
ing of  the  nature  of  organs,  whilst  a  capillary  vessel  is
rather  a  simple  histological  element.

Now  that  we  have,  gentlemen,  completed  a  very
general  survey  of  the  physiological  tissues,  the  question
arises,  how  the  pathological  ones  in  their  turn  comport
themselves.  By  pathological  tissues,  of  course,  those
only  can  be  meant  which  really  constitute  pathological
new  formations,  and  not  physiological  parts  which  have
simply  undergone  alteration  in  consequence  of  some
deviation  from  the  normal  processes  of  nutrition.  We
have  in  them  to  deal  with  genuine  neoplasms,  with  the
additional  matter  furnished  by  the  growth  of  new  tissues
in  the  course  of  pathological  processes,  and  the  question
is,  whether  the  general  types  which  we  have  established
for  the  physiological  tissues  will  also  be  found  to  hold
good  in  the  case  of  the  pathological  ones.  To  this  I  un-
reservedly reply,  yes  ;  and  however  much  I  herein  differ
from  many  of  my  living  contemporaries,  however  posi-
tively the  peculiar  (specific)  nature  of  many  pathological
tissues  has  been  insisted  upon  during  the  last  few  years,
I  will  nevertheless  endeavour  in  the  course  of  these  lec-
tures to  furnish  you  with  proofs  that  every  pathological
structure  has  a  physiological  prototype,  and  that  no
form  of  morbid  growth  arises  which  cannot  in  its  ele-

CLASSIFICATION  OF  NEOPLASMS.  89

merits  be  traced  back  to  some  model  which  had  pre-
viously maintained  an  independent  existence  in  the
economy.

The  classification  of  pathological  new  formations,  of
genuine  neoplasms,  was  formerly  by  most  observers
attempted  *to  be  based  upon  their  different  degrees  of
vascularity.  If  you  examine  the  different  treatises  which
appeared  upon  this  subject  up  to  the  time  of  the  cell-
theory,  you  will  find  that  the  question  of  organization
was  always  decided  by  that  of  vascularity.  Every  part
which  contained  vessels  was  regarded  as  organized,  and
every  part  as  unorganized  which  was  destitute  of  ves-
sels. But  this,  according  to  present  notions,  is  an
incorrect  view  of  the  matter,  inasmuch  as  we  have  also
physiological  tissues  without  vessels,  as  for  example,
cartilage.

But  at  a  time  when  the  more  minute  elements  of
tissues  were  at  most  only  known  as  globules,  and  when
very  different  virtues  were  attributed  to  these  globules,
it  was  quite  excusable  that  everything  should  be  referred
to  the  vessels,  particularly  after  the  comparison  John
Hunter  made  between  pathological  new  formations  and
the  development  of  the  chick  in  the  egg,  when  he  endea-
voured to  show  that,  just  as  the  punctum  saliens  in  the
hen's  egg  constitutes  the  first  phenomenon  of  life,  the
vessels  also  where  the  first  things  to  show  themselves  in
pathological  formations.  You  no  doubt  still  remember
how  several  "parasitical"  new  formations  were  de-
scribed by  Rust  and  Kluge  as  provided  with  an  inde-
pendent vascular  system,  which  without  having  any
connection  with  the  old  vessels,  developed  itself  quite
independently,  as  is  the  case  in  the  chick.  Many
attempts  had  indeed  been  made  even  before  this  to
refer  the  apparently  so  irregular  forms  of  new  formations
to  physiological  paradigms,  and  herein  essential  service

90  LECTURE  III.

has  been  rendered  by  natural  philosophers.  At  the  time
when  theromorphism  played  a  conspicuous  part,  and
many  analogies  were  discovered  between  pathological
processes  and  the  normal  states  of  inferior  animals,  com-
parisons also  began  to  be  instituted  between  new  for-
mations and  familiar  parts  of  the  body.  Thus,  Johann
Friedr.  Meckel,  the  younger,  spoke  of  mammary  and
pancreatic  sarcoma.  What  has  very  recently  been
described  in  Paris  as  heteradenia  (Heteradenie),  or  a
heterologous  formation  of  glandular  substance,  was  in
the  school  of  the  natural  philosophers  a  pretty  generally
accepted  fact.

Since  the  study  of  embryology  has  been  prosecuted  in
a  more  histological  manner,  the  conviction  has  gradually
more  and  more  been  acquired,  that  most  new  formations
contain  parts  which  correspond  to  some  physiological
tissue,  and  in  the  micrographical  schools  of  the  west  a
certain  number  of  observers  have  come  to  the  conclusion,
that  in  the  whole  series  of  new  formations  there  is  only
one  particular  structure  which  is  specifically  different
from  natural  formations,  namely  cancer.  With  regard
to  this,  the  most  important  points  urged  are,  that  it
differs  altogether  from  every  other  tissue,  and  that  it
contains  elements  sui  generis,  whilst,  singularly  enough,
a  second  formation,  between  which  and  cancerous  tissue
the  older  writers  were  wont  to  draw  parallels,  namely
tubercle,  has — although  to  it  too  nothing  strictly  analo-
gous could  be  discovered — been  much  neglected,  owing
to  its  having  been  regarded  as  an  incomplete  and  some-
what crude  product,  and  as  a  structure  which  had  never
become  properly  organized.  Yet,  upon  a  more  careful
examination  of  cancer  or  tubercle,  we  snail  find  that
everything  depends  upon  our  searching  for  that  stage  in
their  development,  in  which  they  are  exhibited  in  their
perfect form. We  must  not  examine at  too early a

CLASSIFICATION  OF  NEOPLASMS.  91

period,  when  their  development  is  incomplete,  nor  yet
at  too  late  a  one,  when  it  has  proceeded  beyond  its
highest  point.  If  we  restrict  our  observations  to  the
time  when  development  is  really  at  its  height,  a  phy-
siological type  may  be  found  for  every  pathological
formation,  and  it  is  just  as  possible  to  discover  such
types  for  the  elements  of  cancer  as  to  find  them,  for
example,  for  pus,  which,  if  it  be  sought  to  maintain  the
specific  nature  of  certain  formations,  is  just  as  much
entitled  to  be  regarded  as  something  peculiar  as  cancer.
Both  of  them  stand  upon  precisely  the  same  footing  in
this  respect,  and  when  the  older  writers  spoke  of  cancer-
pus  they  were  in  a  certain  measure  right,  inasmuch  as
cancer-juice  is  only  distinguished  from  pus  by  the  higher
degree  of  development  to  which  its  individual  elements
have  attained.

A  classification  of  pathological  structures  also  may  be
made  upon  exactly  the  same  plan  as  that  which  we  have
already  ventured  upon  in  the  case  of  the  physiological
tissues.  In  the  first  place,  there  are  also  among  these
structures  some  which,  like  the  epithelial  ones,  are  essen-
tially composed  of  cellular  elements,  without  the  addition
of  anything  else  of  consequence.  In  the  second  place,
we  meet  with  tissues  which  are  allied  to  those  called
connective,  inasmuch  as  in  addition  to  the  cells  a  certain
quantity  of  intercellular  substance  is  present.  In  the
third  and  last  place  come  those  formations  which  are
akin  to  the  more  highly  organized  structures,  blood,
muscles,  nerves,  etc.  Now,  a  point  to  which  I  must  at
once  direct  your  attention  is,  that  in  pathological  forma-
tions those  elements  the  more  frequently  exist,  and  the
more  decidedly  prevail,  which  do  not  represent  the
higher  grades  of  really  animal  development,  and  that,
therefore,  on  the  whole,  those  elements  are  most  rarely
imitated  which  belong  to  the  more  highly  organized,  and

92  LECTURE  III.

especially,  to  the  muscular  and  nervous,  systems.  Still,
these  formations  are  by  no  means  excluded  ;  we  find
pathological  new  formations  of  every  description,  no
matter  to  what  tissue  they  may  be  analogous,  provided  it
possesses  distinctive  features.  It  is  only  with  regard  to
their  frequency  and  importance  that  a  difference  prevails,
and  this  is  of  such  a  nature  that  the  great  majority  of
pathological  productions  contain  cells  analogous  to  epi-
thelial cells,  or  to  the  corpuscles  of  the  connective
tissues,  and  that  of  those  structures  which  we  have
included  in  the  last  class  of  normal  tissues,  the  vessels
and  parts  which  may  be  compared  with  lymph  and
lymphatic  glands  are  the  most  frequently  met  with  as
new  formations,  whilst  real  blood,  muscles,  and  nerves,
are  the  most  seldom  found  as  such.

But,  if  we  ultimately  arrive  at  such  a  simple  view  of
the  matter,  the  question  of  course  arises,  what  becomes
of  the  doctrine  of  the  heterology  of  morbid  products,  to
the  upholding  of  which  we  have  long  been  accustomed,
and  to  which  the  most  simple  reflection  almost  inevita-
bly conducts  us.  Hereunto  I  can  return  no  other  an-
swer than  that  there  is  no  other  kind  of  heterology  in
morbid  structures  than  the  abnormal  manner  in  which
they  arise,  and  that  this  abnormity  consists  either  in  the
production  of  a  structure  at  a  point  where  it  has  no
business,  or  at  a  time  when  it  ought  not  to  be  produced,
or  to  an  extent  which  is  at  variance  with  the  typical
formation  of  the  body.  So  then,  to  speak  with  greater
precision,  there  is  either  a  Heterotopia,  an  aberratio  loci,
or  an  aberratio  temporis,  a  Heterochronia,  or  lastly,  a
mere  variation  in  quantity,  Heterometria.  But  we  must
be  very  careful  not  to  connect  this  kind  of  heterology  in
the  more  extended  sense  of  the  word  with  the  notion
of  malignity.  Heterology  is  a  term  that,  in  its  histolo-
gical meaning  may  be  applied  to  a  large  proportion  of

HYPERTROPHY  AND  HYPERPLASY.  93

pathological  new  formations,  which,  as  far  as  the  prog-
nosis is  concerned,  may  unquestionably  be  called  benig-
nant ;  it  is  not  rare  for  a  new  formation  to  occur  at  a
point  where  it  is  certainly  entirely  misplaced,  but  at  the
same  time  does  not  occasion  any  considerable  mischief.
A  lump  of  fat  may  very  likely  arise  in  a  place  where  we
should  expect  no  fat,  as,  for  example,  in  the  submucous
tissue  of  the  small  intestines,  but,  let  the  worst  come  to
the  worst,  the  result  is  only  a  polypus,  which  protrudes
on  the  inner  surface  of  the  bowel,  and  may  become
tolerably  large  without  giving  rise  to  any  symptoms  of
disease.

If  we  consider  the  structures  which  are  called
heterologous  in  the  more  restricted  sense  of  the  word,
with  reference,  namely,  to  the  points  at  which  they
arise,  they  may  be  easily  separated  from  the  homo-
logous ones  (homoeoplastic  ones  of  Lobstein),  by  their
deviating  from  the  type  of  the  part  in  which  they  arise.
When  a  fatty  tumour  arises  in  fatty  tissue,  or  a  connec-
tive tissue  (fibrous)  tumour  Bindegewebs-G-eschwulst)  in
connective  tissue,  the  type  followed  in  the  formation  of
the  new  structure  is  homologous  to  the  type  followed  in
the  formation  of  the  old  one.  All  such  formations  are,
as  usually  designated,  included  under  the  term  hyper-
trophy, or  under  that  of  htjperplasia,  if  we  adopt  the
name  I  have  proposed  for  the  sake  of  more  accurate  dis-
tinction. Hypertrophy,  according  to  the  meaning  which
I  attach  to  the  word,  designates  those  cases  in  which  the
individual  elements  af  a  structure  take  up  a  considerable
amount  of  matter,  and  thereby  become  larger  ;  and  in
consequence  of  the  simultaneous  enlargement  of  a  num-
ber of  elements,  at  last  the  whole  of  an  organ  may  be-
come swollen.  When  a  muscle  becomes  thicker,  all  its
primitive  fasciculi  become  thicker.  A  liver  may  become
hypertrophied  simply  in  consequence  of  a  considerable

94:

LECTURE  III.

enlargement  of  its  individual  cells. In  this  case  there
is real hypertrophy  without, properly speaking, any

new  formation.  Essentially  different  from  this  process
are  the  cases  in  which  an  enlargement  takes  place  in
consequence  of  an  increase  in  the  number  of  the  elements.
A  liver,  namely,  may  also  become  enlarged  by  a  very
abundant  development  of  a  series  of  small  cells  in  the
place  of  the  ordinary  ones.  Thus,  when  simply  hyper-
trophied,  we  see  the  panniculus  adiposus  of  the  skin  swell
up  in  consequence  of  every  single  fat-cell's  absorbing  a
larger  quantity  of  fat  than  usual,  and  when  this  takes
place  in  thousands  upon  thousands,  nay,  we  may  say,
in  hundreds  of  thousands  and  millions  of  cells,  the  re-
sult is  very  obvious  and  strikes  the  eye  (polysarcia).
but  it  is  just  as  possible  for  new  cells  to  form  in  addi-
tion to  the  old  ones,  and  for  an  increase  of  size  to  take
place  without  any  enlargement  of  the  individual  cells.

Fig.  27.  Diagrams  of  hepatic  cells.  A.  Their  simple  physiological  appearance.
B.  Hypertrophy  :  a,  simple;  6,  with  accumulation  of  fat  (fatty  degeneration,  fatty
liver).  C.  Hyperplasy  (numerical  or  adjunctive  hypertrophy),  a.  Cell  with  nucleus
and  divided  nucleolus, b.  Divided  nuclei, c,  c.  Divided  cells.

DEGENERATIVE  NEW  FORMATIONS.  95

These are essentially different  processes, and  may  be
styled  simple  and  numerical  hypertrophy.

Hyperplastic  processes  (numerical  hypertrophy)  in  all
cases  produce  a  tissue  similar  to  that  of  the  original
part  ;  hyperplasia  of  the  liver  gives  rise  to  new  hepatic
cells  ;  that  of  a  nerve  to  new  nerve-substance  ;  that  of
the  skin  to  a  fresh  production  of  the  elements  of  the
skin.  A  heteroplastic  process,  on  the  contrary,  engen-
ders histological  elements  which  correspond,  indeed,  to
natural  forms,  elements,  for  example,  resembling  in
structure  those  peculiar  to  glands,  nerve-substance,  the
connective  and  epithelial  tissues,  but  these  elements  do
not  arise  in  consequence  of  a  simple  increase  in  the
number  of  such  as  previously  existed,  but  in  conse-
quence of  a  change  in  the  original  type  of  the  parent
tissue.  When  cerebral  matter  forms  in  the  ovary,  it
does  not  arise  out  of  pre-existing  cerebral  matter,  nor
through  any  act  of  simple  cell-proliferation  ;  when  epi-
dermis springs  up  in  the  muscular  substance  of  the
heart,  however  much  it  may  correspond  to  that  on  the
external  surface  of  the  skin,  it  is,  notwithstanding,  a
heteroplastic  structure.  When  we  find  hairs  quite  natu-
ral in  structure  in  the  substance  of  the  brain,  however
great  the  correspondence  they  exhibit  with  the  hairs  of
the  external  surface,  they  will  nevertheless  be  hetero-
plastic hairs.  In  like  manner  we  see  cartilaginous  tis-
sue arise,  without  the  existence  of  any  essential  differ-
ence between  it  and  ordinary,  familiar  cartilage,  as,  for
example,  an  enchondromata.  Still,  an  enchondroma  is
a  heteroplastic  tumour,  even  when  occurring  in  bone,
for  perfect  bone  has  no  longer  any  cartilage  in  the  parts
where  the  enchondroma  forms,  and  the  term  cartilage  of
bone  (Knochenknorpel),  as  a  designation  for  the  organic
basis  of  bone,  is  nothing  but  a  term.  It  is  either  from
osseous or medullary tissue that the enchondroma

96  LECTURE III.

springs,  and  at  the  very  point  where  real  cartilage  ex-
ists, for  example,  at  the  articular  ends  of  the  bone,  no
cartilaginous  tumours,  in  the  ordinary  sense  of  the  word,
arise.  It  is  not,  therefore,  with  an  hypertrophy  of  pre-
existing cartilage  that  we  have  here  to  deal,  but  with  a
genuine  new  formation,  which  begins  with  a  change  in
the  local  histological  type.  According  to  this  manner
of  viewing  the  subject  which  is  essentially  different  from
that  previously  current,  no  attention  is  therefore  paid,
in  considering  the  question  of  the  heterologous  nature  of
a  new  formation,  to  the  composition  of  the  structure  as
such,  but  only  to  the  relations  which  subsist  between  it
and  the  parent  soil  from  which  it  springs.  Heterology,
in  this  sense,  designates  the  difference  of  development
in  the  new,  as  contrasted  with  the  old,  tissue,  or,  as  we
are  wont  to  say,  a  degeneration,  a  deviation  from  the
typical  conformation.

This  is,  as  you  will  see,  also  really  the  most  important
point  upon  which  we  can  ground  our  prognosis.  We
find  tumours,  which  present  the  most  striking  resem-
blance to  the  most  familiar  physiological  tissues.  An
epidermic  [epithelial]  tumour  (Epidermis-Geschwulst)
may,  as  I  have  already  pointed  out,  in  its  elementary
structure  entirely  correspond  to  ordinary  epidermis,  but
in  spite  of  this  it  is  not  always  a  benignant  tumour  of
merely  local  import,  which  may  be  traced  to  a  merely
hyperplastic  increase  in  pre-existing  tissues,  for  it  some-
times arises  in  the  midst  of  parts  which  are  far  from
containing  epidermis  or  epithelium,  as,  for  example,  in
the  interior  of  lymphatic  glands,  or  in  that  of  thick
layers  of  connective  tissue,  which  are  at  a  distance  from
any  surface,  and  even  in  bone.  In  these  cases  the  for-
mation of  epidermis,  is  certainly  quite  as  heterologous  as
it  is  possible  to  conceive  anything  to  be.  But  practical
experience  has  shown  us  that  it  was  altogether  incorrect

REPRODUCTION  OF  PHYSIOLOGICAL  TISSUES.  97

to  conclude  from  the  mere  correspondence  of  the  patho-
logical tissue  with  a  physiological  one,  that  the  case  would
continue  to  follow  a  benignant  course.

It  has  been,  as  I  must  remark  with  particular  empha<
sis,  one  of  the  greatest,  and  at  the  same  time  best-founded,
reproaches  which  have  been  levelled  against  the  most
recent  micrographical  doctrines,  that,  regarding  the  sub-
ject from  the  certainly  excusable  point  of  view,  namely,
the  correspondence  between  many  normal  and  abnormal
structures,  they  have  declared  every  pathological  new
formation  to  be  innocuous  which  exhibits  a  reproduction
of  pre-existing  and  familiar  tissues  of  the  body.  If  what
I  have  communicated  to  you  as  my  view  be  correct,
namely,  that  throughout  the  whole  range  of  pathological
growths  no  structure  of  an  absolutely  new  form  is  to  be
found,  but  that  we  everywhere  meet  with  structures
which  may  in  one  way  or  another  be  regarded  as  the
reproduction  of  physiological  tissues,  then  this  point  of
view  falls  to  the  ground.  In  support  of  my  view,  I  can
at  least  adduce  the  fact  that  I  have,  in  all  disputes  con-
cerning the  innocent  or  malignant  nature  of  definite
forms  of  tumours,  up  to  the  present  time  always  proved
to  be  in  the  right.

Before  we  quit  the  consideration  of  General  Histology,
I  would  invite  your  attention  for  a  few  moments  to  a
few  points  of  primary  importance  which  obtrude  them-
selves upon  us  on  nearly  every  occasion.  Whilst,  namely,
the  animal  tissues  were  being  studied  in  their  affinities
to  one  another,  questions  relating  to  these  affinities  were
at  different  times  stumbled  upon,  which  gave  rise  to
generalizations  that  were  more  of  a  physiological  cha~
racter.

When  Reichert  undertook  to  collect  the  connective-
tissues  into  one  larger  group,  he  set  out  with  this  position
chiefly,  that  the  demonstration  of  the  continuity  of  its-

7

98  LECTURE  III.

sues  must  be  regarded  as  a  decisive  proof  of  their  inti-
mate relationship.  .  That  as  soon  as  one  part  could
be  made  out  to  be  continuously  (by  union,  not  mere,
juxtaposition)  connected  with  another,  both  must  be
regarded  as  parts  of  a  common  whole.  In  this  manner  he
sought  to  prove  that  cartilage,  periosteum,  bone,  tendons,
fasciae,  etc.,  really  formed  a  continuous  mass,  a  kind  of
basis-tissue  (Grundgewebe)  for  the  body,  a  connective  sub-
stance, which  had  only  experienced  certain  changes  in
these  different  localities,  without  their  being,  however,
of  such  a  nature  as  to  destroy  the  character  of  the  tis-
sue as  such.  This  so-called  law  of  continuity  soon  suf-
fered the  most  violent  shocks,  and  quite  recently  such  a
terrible  breach  has  been  made  in  it,  that  it  can  scarcely
any  longer  be  possible  to  derive  therefrom  any  general
criterion  for  the  determination  of  the  nature  of  a  tissue.
On  the  other  hand,  namely,  new  facts  have  been  con-
tinually brought  forward  in  support  of  the  continuity  ot
such  histological  elements  as,  according  to  Reichert,  would
be  separated  toto  ccelo  from  one  another,  as,  for  example,
of  epithelial  and  connective  tissue  ;  and  there  has  been
a  continually  increasing  mass  of  evidence  in  support  of
the  assertion  that  cylindrical  epithelium  is  capable  of
becoming  elongated  into  fibres,  which  in  the  shape  of
filaments  anastomose  with  connective-tissue  corpuscles.
Nay,  it  has  been  quite  recently  asserted  by  a  whole
series  of  observers  that  these  superficial  cells  are  pro-
longed inwardly,  and  then  enter  into  direct  connection
with  nerve-fibres.  With  regard  to  this  last  point,  I
must  confess  that  I  am  not,  yet  convinced  of  the  correct-
ness of  the  representation  ;  but  with  respect  to  the  for-
mer one,  that  is  a  matter  which  will  probably  end  in  the
demonstration  of  the  real  continuity  of  the  elements.
It  would  seem,  therefore,  that  it  is  even  now  no  longer
possible  to  mark  out  the  exact  limits  which  divide  every

HISTOLOGICAL  EQUIVALENTS  AND  SUBSTITUTIONS.  99

kind  of  epithelium  from  every  kind  of  connective  tissue,
but  only  where  scaly  epithelium  is  met  with,  whilst  the
limits  are  doubtful  wherever  cylindrical  epithelium  exists.

Just  in  the  same  manner  elsewhere  also  .do  the  bound-
ary lines  become  obliterated.  Whilst  formerly  the  lim-
its which  separate  the  elements  of  muscle  from  those  of
tendon  were  considered  to  be  most  distinctly  defined,
extremely  decisive  proofs  have  in  this  case  also  been
afforded,  and  first  by  Hyde  Salter  and  Huxley,  that  fibres
proceed  from  connective-tissue  corpuscles,  which  whilst
pursuing  their  course  in  an  inward  direction,  all  at  once
assume  the  character  of  transversely  striped  muscle.  So,
then,  in  the  case  of  connective  tissue,  it  would  seem
there  exists  a  continuous  connection  between  the  ele-
ments of  the  surface  and  the  more  highly  developed  ones
of  the  deeper  parts.  Now  if,  on  the  other  hand,  it  has
turned  out  to  be  very  probable  that  the  corpuscles  of
connective  tissue  have  definite  relations  to  the  vascular
system,  we  are,  as  you  see,  almost  justified  in  regarding
this  tissue  as  a  kind  of  neutral  ground  for  parts  to  meet
upon  (indifferenter  Samelpunkt),  as  a  peculiar  arrange-
ment for  their  intimate  connection,  an  arrangement
which,  though  certainly  not  exercising  any  great  influence
upon  the  higher  functions  of  the  animal,  is  yet  of  great
importance  as  far  as  its  nutrition  is  concerned.

In  the  place  of  the  law  of  continuity,  therefore,  we
must  necessarily  put  something  else.  And  here,  I  think,
the  doctrine  which  has  the  strongset  claims  to  our  atten-
tion is  that  of  histological  substitution.  In  the  case  of
all  tissues  of  a  like  nature  it  is  quite  possible,  even
whilst  confining  our  attention  to  what  occurs  physiologi-
cally in  the  various  classes  of  animals,  to  find  one  tissue
at  a  certain  fixed  point  of  the  body  replaced  by  an  analo-
gous one  belonging  to  the  same  group,  or,  in  other
words,  by  an  histological  equivalent.

A  spot  invested  with  cylindrical,  may  acquire  scaly.

100  LECTURE  III.

epithelium.  A  surface  upon  which  cilia  were  originally
seen,  may  afterwards  be  found  to  have  ordinary  epithe-
lium. Thus,  on  the  surface  of  the  ventricles  of  the  brain
we  meet  at  first  with  ciliated,  and  at  a  later  period  with
simple  scaly,  epithelium.  Thus,  too,  we  see  the  mucous
membrane  of  the  uterus  usually  covered  with  ciliated
epithelium,  but  during  pregnancy  we  find  the  layer  of
ciliated  cylinders  replaced  by  one  of  squamous  epithe
Hum.  Thus,  also,  in  places  where  soft  epithelium  ordi-
narily is  found,  epidermis  may,  under  particular  circum-
stances, be  generated,  as,  for  example,  in  the  prolapsed
vagina.  Thus,  again,  in  the  sclerotic  coat  of  the  eyes
of  fish,  cartilage  is  found,  whilst  in  man  this  tunic  con-
sists of  dense  connective  tissue  ;  in  many  animals  bone
is  found  in  parts  of  the  skin,  where  in  man  there  is  only
connective  tissue  ;  but  in  man,  too,  in  many  places
where  there  was  original  cartilage,  osseous  tissue  is
afterwards  discovered.  But  the  most  striking  instances
of  such  substitutions  are  met  with  in  muscles.  One
animal  has  transversely  striped  muscular  fibres  in  the
same  place  that  another  has  smooth  ones.

In  diseased  conditions  pathological  substitutions  occur,
in  which  a  given  tissue  is  replaced  by  another  ;  but  even
when  this  new  tissue  is  produced  from  the  previously
existing  one,  the  new  formation  may  deviate  more  or
less  from  the  original  type.  There  is  therefore  a  great
chasm  between  physiological  and  pathological  substitu-
tion, or  at  least,  between  the  physiological  and  certain
forms  of  the  pathological  one.

Physiologically,  the  substitution  is  constantly  effected
by  the  introduction  of  another  tissue  of  the  same  group
(homology) ;  pathologically,  very  frequently  by  the
agency  of  a  tissue  belonging  to  another  (heterology).  To
this  we  must  reduce  the  whole  doctrine  of  the  specific
elements  of  pathology  which  have  played  so  conspicuous
a  part  in  the  last  twenty  years.

LECTURE IV.

FEBRUARY  24,  1858.
NUTRITION AND ITS CHANNELS.

Action  of  the  vessels — Relations  between  vessels  and  tissues — Liver — Brain — Mus

cular  coat  of  the  stomach — Cartilage — Bone.
Dependence  of  tissues  upon  vessels — Metastases — Vascular  territories  [Gefassterri

torien] (vascular  unities) — Conveyance  of  nutriment  in  the  juice-conveying

canals  (Saftkanale)  of  the  tissues— Bone — Teeth — Fibro-cartilage — Cornea —

Semilunar  cartilages.

*

According  to  the  ideas  usually  entertained  with  re-
gard to  nutrition,  the  vessels  are  regarded  as  the  canals
by  means  of  which  not  only  the  interchange  of  material
(Stoffverkehr)  is  accomplished,  but  upon  the  assistance
of  which,  sometimes  actively  and  sometimes  passively
afforded,  reliance  is  placed  whenever  it  is  required
to  control  an  individual  part  in  its  interchange  of
material.  The  regulating  principle  in  the  process  of
nutrition  was  long  designated  by  an  expression  which
has  even  crept  into  the  language  of  the  present  day,
namely,  the  "  action  of  the  vessels,'''  as  if  they  were
endowed  with  a  special  power  of  actively  influencing  the
condition  of  the  neighbouring  histological  constituents.

As  I  pointed  out  to  you  the  last  time,  when  upon  the
subject  of  muscular  fibres  (p.  85),  we  can  now-a-days
only  speak  of  action  in  the  vessels  as  far  as  muscular
fibres  are  present  in  them, and the  vessels  are thus

m

102

LECTURE IV.

enabled  by  the  contraction  of  these  fibres  to  grow  narrower
or  shorter.  This  narrowing  of  their  channel  may  have
the  effect  of  impeding  transudation  of  fluids,  whilst,  on
the  contrary,  in  the  case  of  the  relaxation  or  paralysis  of
the  muscular  fibres,  the  widening  of  the  vessel  may
favour  such  transudation.  Let  us  admit  this  for  the  pre-
sent, but  allow  me,  before  proceeding  farther,  to  enter
somewhat  into  the  analysis  of  the  mass  of  tissue  which
lies  around  the  vessels,  and  is  generally  conceived  to  be
of  a  very  simple  and  uncomplicated  nature.

If  we  select  parts  where  the  vessels  lie  very  closely
packed,* and  there  is  perhaps  nearly  as  much  vessel  as
tissue,  as,  for  example,  the  liver,  in  which  this  condition
really  does  occur  (for  a  liver,  when  its  vessels  are  full,
contains  nearly  as  large  a  volume  of  vessels  as  it  does  of
proper  hepatic  substance),  we  see  that  the  interstices
which  are  left  between  the  vessels  are  filled  with  quite  a
small  number  of  cells.

If  we  examine  a  single  acinus  of  the  liver  by  itself,
we  find,  when  a  very  lucky  transverse  section  has  been
obtained, in its centre the  FlG>  28>

vena  centralis  or  intralobula-
ris,  which  runs  into  the  hepa-
tic vein,  at  the  periphery
branches  of  the  portal  vein,
which  send  capillary  twigs  in-
to the  interior.  These  at
once  form  a  network,  which
at  first  has  long,  but  after-
wards more  regularly  shaped,  meshes,  and  extends  in
the  direction  of  the  central  (or  hepatic)  vein,  and  at  last
terminates  in  it. The  blood,  therefore,  after  it  has  en-

Fig.  28.  Section  from  the  periphery  of  the  liver  of  a  rabbit ;  the  vessels  com-
pletely injected. 11  diameters.

CAPILLARY  VESSELS  OF  THE  LIVER.  108

tered  by  the  interlobular  (or  portal)  vein,  flows  through
the  capillary  network  into  the  intralobular  vein,  whence,
by  means  of  the  hepatic  veins,  it  is  conducted  back  again
to  the  heart.  Now,  in  the  case  of  an  injected  liver,  this
network  is  seen  to  be  so  close  that  what  interstices  there
are  left  seem  almost  to  occupy  less  room  than  the  ves-
sels themselves.  We  can  thus  easily  imagine  how  the
older  anatomists,  such  as  Ruysch,  came  to  be  led  by
their  injections  to  the  supposition  that  nearly  everything
in  the  body  was  made  up  of  vessels,  and  that  the  differ-
ent organs  were  only  distinguished  by  differences  in  the
arrangement  of  their  vessels.  But  just  the  opposite  to
what  is  observed  in  an  injected  preparation  does  the
proportion  between  vessel  and  tissue  appear  to  be  in  an
ordinary  specimen  from  a  liver.  In  this  the  vessels  are
scarcely  perceptible.  A  similar  network  is  indeed  seen,
but  it  is  the  network  formed  by  the  hepatic-cells  (Fig.
27),  which,  closely  crowded,  one  against  the  other,  fill
up  all  the  inter-spaces  of  the  vessels.  It  is  plain,  there-
fore, that  the  capillary  and  hepatic-cell  networks  are
interwoven  in  the  most  intricate  manner,  so  that  cells
belonging  to  the  parenchyma  of  the  liver  everywhere  lie  in
almost  immediate  contact  with  the  walls  of  the  vessels,
there  being  at  most  a  fine  layer  between  the  cells  and
the  walls,  concerning  which  it  is  still  a  matter  of  dispute
amongst  histologists  whether  it  is  to  be  regarded  as  a
peculiar  coat,  constituting  the  finest  gall-ducts,  or  only
as  a  very  small  quantity  of  connective  tissue  accom-
panying the  vessels.

In  this  extremely  simple  case,  a  tolerably  simple  rela-
tion may  certainly  be  assumed  to  exist  between  the  ves-
sels and  the  cells  ;  it  may  be  conceived  that  the  blood
which  flows  through  the  vessels  may,  in  proportion  to
the  degree  in  which  they  are  contracted  or  dilated,  and
to  its  own  quantity,  exercise  a  direct  influence  upon  the

104:

LECTURE IV.

adjoining  cells.  It  might  indeed  be  objected,  with  re-
gard to  the  conditions  of  nutrition,  that  we  have  here
to  deal  with  quite  a  peculiar  arrangement  of  the  vessels,
which  are  essentially  of  a  venous  nature,  as  being  com-
posed of  ramifications  of  the  portal  and  hepatic  veins,  but
the  hepatic  artery  also  enters  into  the  formation  of  this
capillary  network,  so  that  the  blood  in  it  cannot  be
resolved  into  its  individual  arterial  and  venous  consti-
tuents. Injections  from  each  of  the  vessels  named  ulti-
mately find  their  way  into  the  same  capillary  network.
In  most  parts,  however,  the  relations  do  not  present
such  a  simple  form  as  in  the  liver  ;  considerable  inter-
spaces often  separate  the  individual  cells,  and  no  incon-
siderable quantities  of  these  elements  are  enclosed  in
every  capillary  mesh.  I  show  you  here  a  second  object
derived  from  a  fresh  human  brain — from  a  lunatic  who
died  with  his  cerebrum in  a highly  hypersemic  state.

Fig.  29.

The  section  has  been  made  through  the  corpus  striatum,
which  was  of  a  deep  red  colour. You  have  a  good  view

Fig.  29.  Natural  injection  of  the  corpus  striatum  of  a  lunatic,  a,  a.  Gaps  desti-
tute of  vessels,  and  corresponding  to  the  strands  of  nervous  fibres  which  traverse  the
ganglion. 80  diameters.

MUSCULAR  COAT  OF  THE  STOMACH.  105

of  the  naturally  injected  vessels  ;  and  the  width  of  the
individual  meshes  of  the  capillary  network  may  be
clearly  seen.  The  section  has  been  carried  transversely
through  the  corpus  striatum,  and  at  certain  intervals
large,  roundish  spots  may  be  distinguished,  which  ap-
pear dark  by  transmitted  light  (Fig.  29,  a,  a,  a),  but  by
reflected  light  and  to  the  naked  eye  look  white,  and  are
formed  by  transverse  sections  of  the  nervous  fibres
which  run  in  long  strands  towards  the  spinal  marrow.
The  vessels  scarcely  penetrate  into  them.  The  rest  of
the  mass,  on  the  other  hand,  consists  of  the  proper  grey
substance  of  the  corpus  striatum,  within  which  a  vascu-
lar network  with  very  fine  meshes  is  distributed,  the
grey  substance  of  the  nervous  centres  being  everywhere,
both  in  their  interior  and  in  their  cortical  substance,  dis-
tinguished from  the  white  by  its  greater  vascularity.  A
few  large  vessels  are  observable  in  the  object,  giving  off
branches,  the  ramifications  of  which  continually  dimi-
nish in  size,  until  at  last  they  terminate  in  capillary  net-
works with  very  fine  meshes.  Still,  however  close  this
network  may  be,  every  element  of  the  substance  of  the
brain  by  no  means  comes  into  immediate  contact  with
a  capillary  vessel.

The  third  object  is  a  very  slightly  magnified  injected
preparation  from  the  mus-  FlG  30

cular  coat  of  the  stomach,
in  which,  with  a  high  power,
the  direction  of  the  muscu-
lar fibres  is  indicated  by
fine  longitudinal  striae  ;  here
the  vessels  form  tolerably
regular  networks,  connect-
ed with one another by

Fig.  30.  Injected  preparation  from  the  muscular  coat  of  the  stomach  of  a  rabbit,
magnified  11  diameters.

106  LECTURE  IV.

transverse  anastomoses,  and  splitting  up  into  smaller
and  smaller  vessels,  which  form  fine  networks  within
the  tissue,  so  that  the  whole  of  it  is  by  this  means  map-
ped out  into  a  series  of  irregularly  four-sided  divisions.
To  each  of  the  ultimate  intervascular  snaces  is  allotted
a  certain  number  of  muscular  elements,  so  that  the  ves-
sels are  in  some  parts  in  contact  with  the  muscular
fibres,  whilst  in  others  they  lie  at  a  greater  distance
from  them.

If  we  go  on  in  this  way  examining  the  structure  of  the
different  organs  and  tissues,  we  pass  from  such  as,  when
injected,  seem  to  consist  almost  entirely  of  vessels,  in
time  to  those  which  contain  scarcely  any,  and  at  last  to
such  as  really  have  none  at  all.  This  is  most  strikingly
the  case  with  the  connective  tissues,  and  the  most  im-
portant amongst  these  are  bone  and  cartilage.  Perfectly
developed  cartilage  has  no  longer  any  vessels  at  all  ;
perfectly  developed  bone  certainly  contains  vessels,  but
in  a  very  variable  degree.  That  perfectly  developed
cartilage  contains  no  vessels,  you  will  not,  I  suppose,  call
upon  me  to  convince  you  by  any  additional,  special
proofs,  inasmuch  as  you  have  seen  various  prepara-
tions of  cartilage,  in  which  not  a  trace  of  them  was  to
be  observed.  (Figs.  6,  9,  22.)  I  now  place  before  you
a  piece  of  young  cartilage,  because  you  can  see  in  it
what  the  arrangement  of  the  vessels  in  cartilage  is  at
an  earlier  period.  It  is  a  section  from  the  calcaneum  of
a  new-born  child,  and  in  it  the  vessels  run  up  from  the
already-formed  central  osseous  mass  into  the  cartilage
which  still  remains.  The  preparation  shows  along  the
outermost  surface  of  the  cartilage  the  transition  from  it
into  the  perichondrium,  whilst  the  lower  part  of  the  sec-
tion is  taken  from  the  border  of  the  already-formed
bone.  From  this  part  large  vessels  are  seen  running
up  and terminating  in  the  middle  of  the  cartilage  by

VESSELS  IN  CARTILAGE.

107

the  formation  of  loops  and  plexuses,  as  it  were  a  tree
of  villi  (Zottenbaum)  in  the  cartilage,  and  very  much
resembling  a  villus  of  the  chorion  of  the  ovum.  In  fact,
the  vessels  mount  up  into  the  cartilage  from  the  nutrient
artery  of  the  bone,  but  only  to  a  certain  height.  There
they  form  real  loops,  and  at  length  break  up  into  a  fine

Fig.  31.

plexus  of  capillaries,  out  of  which  veins  are  ultimately
formed,  and  run  out  again  pretty  near  the  spot  where
the  artery  entered.  But  the  whole  of  the  rest  of  the
mass  consists  of  non- vascular  cartilage,  the  corpuscles  of
which,  with  a  low  power,  look  like  fine  points.  Thus
there  is  a  whole  host  of  cartilage-corpuscles  lying  be-
tween the  terminal  loops  and  the  external  surface,  and
the  whole  of  this  layer  is  therefore dependent  for  its

Fig.  31.  Section  of  cartilage  from  the  calcaneum  of  a  new-born  child.  O.  The
cartilage,  with  its  cells  indicated  by  fine  points.  P.  Perichondrium  and  adjoining
fibrous  tissue,  a.  Inferior  border  very  near  to  the  line  of  junction  between  the
cartilage  and  the  bone,  with  the  vascular  loops  ascending  from  the  nutrient  artery.
6,  b.  Vessels  which  make  their  way  through  the  perichondrium  in  the  direction  of
the  cartilage. 11  diameters.

108

LECTURE  IV.

nutrition  upon  the  juice  which  exudes  from  the  terminal
loops  and  permeates  the  tissue,  though  to  a  trifling  ex-
tent also  upon  the  materials  which  the  scanty  vessels  of
the  perichondrium  convey  to  it.  The  vessels  which
spring  from  the  nutrient  artery  mark  in  all  bones,  at  a
tolerably  early  period,  pretty  exactly  the  limits  to  which
the  ossification  subsequently  proceeds,  whilst  the  rem-
nants of  the  cartilage  which  remain  bordering  upon  the
joint  never  contain  vessels.

With  regard  to  the  bones  themselves,  the  disposition
of  their  blood-vessels  is  in  itself  tolerably  simple,  but  at

Fig.  32.

the  same  time  very  characteristic.  If  we  examine  the
compact  substance,  we  can  usually,  even  with  the  naked
eye,  distinguish  upon  its  surface  small  openings  through
which  vessels  enter  from  the  periosteum.  With  a  mode-
Fig.  32.  Longitudinal  section  from  the  cortex  of  a  sclerotic  tibia,  a,  a.  Medullary
(vascular  [Haversian])  canals,  between  them  the  bone-corpuscles  for  the  most  part
parallel ;  but  at  b  (in  transverse  section)  concentrically  arranged. 80  diameters.

BONE-CORPUSCLES

109

rately  high  power  we  discover  that  these  vessels  (Fig.
32,  a)  immediately  beneath  the  surface  form  a  network
with  somewhat  long  meshes,  or  a  series  of  tubes  anasto-
mosing with  one  another  and,  generally  speaking,  run-
ning longitudinally,  for  though  they  sometimes  take  a
somewhat  more  oblique  course  inwardly,  they  still
essentially  maintain  a  longitudinal  direction.  Between
these  meshes  there  remain  comparatively  wide  inter-
spaces, within  which,  precisely  as  we  before  saw  the
cartilage  cells,  we  here  see  the  bone-corpuscles,  and
indeed  also  in  a  longitudinal  direction,  parallel  to  the
surface.  If  the  same  part  be  examined  in  transverse
section,  we  of  course  see,  where  the  longitudinal  canals
were  previously  observed,  nothing  but  their  transverse
sections  here  and  there  united  by  oblique  communica-
tions !  Between  them  lies  the  proper  osseous  tissue,
deposited  in  lamellar  layers,  some  of  them  parallel  to

Fig.  33.

the  surface, some concentrically  arranged around  the
vessels. In  the  deeper  layers  of  the  compact  substance

Fig.  33.  Section  of  bone.  a.  Transverse  section  of  medullary  (vascular  [Haver-
sian]) canal,  around  which  the  concentric  lamellae,  I,  lie  with  bone-corpuscles  and
anastomosing  canaliculi.  r.  Lamellae  divided  longitudinally  and  parallel,  i.  Irre-
gular arrangement  in  the  oldest  layers  of  bone. v.  Vascular  canal. 280  diameters.

110

LECTURE  IV.

this  concentric  arrangement  around  the  vessels  con-
stantly prevails.

Between  these  more  lamellated  parts  is  left  a  small
quantity  of  osseous  substance  (Fig.  33,  i)  which  does  not
present  the  same  structure,  but  is  arranged  upon  another,
and  independent,  plan.  Upon  more  accurate  examina-
tion it  is  seen  to  be  formed  of  little  columns,  which  are
generally  perpendicular  to  the  long  axis  of  the  bone,  but
sometimes  curve  round,  and  so  become  parallel  to  the
long  axis.  These  are  the  remains  of  the  spicula  first
formed  during  the  growth  of  the  bone  in  thickness,  and
are  therefore  of  older  date.

As  in  the  sections  which  are  obtained  by  grinding
down  bone,  the  vessels  themselves  cannot  for  the  most
part  any  longer  be  distinguished,  the  cavities  [Haversian

Fig.  34.

canals] (Fig.  32,  a,  33,  a,  v,)  in  which  they  run  have
been  named  medullary  canals,  improperly,  inasmuch  as

Fig.  34.  Bone-corpuscles  from  a  morbid  formation  of  bone  in  the  dura  mater  of
the  brain.  Their  branching  and  anastomosing  prolongations  (canaliculi)  are  seen,
as  well  us  minute  spots  upon  their  walls,  marking  the  funnel-shaped  commence-
ments of  the  canaliculi. 600  diameters.

VASCULAR  CANALS  OF  BONES.  HI

there  is  usually  no  marrow  contained  in these  narrow
channels  ;  they  should  properly  be  called  vascular  canals  ;
still  the  other  term  is  so  universally  received,  that  it  is
even  employed  in  cases  where  the  wall  of  the  vessel  is  in
immediate  contact  with  the  internal  surface  of  the  cavity.
Immediately  surrounding  these  canals  we  see  a  series  of
peculiar  structures  ;  oblong  or roundish bodies  which
usually  appear  black  when  the  object  is  not  fully  brought
into focus, and  are  provided  with  jaggs  or processes.
They  used  to  be  called  bone-corpuscles,  and  their  pro-
cesses bone-canals  (canaliculi  ossei)  ; and  as  the  view
was originally  entertained that  the calcareous  matter
was  really  deposited  in  them,  and  that  the  dark  appear-
ance which  they  usually  present  when  viewed  by  trans-
mitted light  resulted  from  the  presence  of  this  matter,
the  canals  were  also termed  canaliculi  chalicophori,  a
name  which  has  now  been  altogether  abandoned,  because
convincing  proofs  have  been  obtained  that,  so  far  from
being  contained  in  them,  the  lime  is,  on  the  contrary,
diffused throughout the homogeneous basis-substance
which  lies  between  them.

As  soon  as  this  discovery  was  made,  that,  namely,  the
distribution  of  the  lime  in  the  osseous  tissue  took  place
in  a  manner  just  the  reverse  of  that  in  which  it  had  been
supposed  it  did,  the  other  extreme  was  immediately  run
into,  and  for  the  name  of  bone-corpuscles  that  of  bone-
cavities  (lacunae)  was  substituted,  and  it  was  assumed
that  bone  contained  nothing  but  a  series  of  empty  cavi-
ties and  canals,  which  were  indeed  penetrated  by  a
fluid,  but  still  were  really  nothing  more  than  fissures  in
the  bone.  Some  few  observers  indeed  actually  called
them  bone  fissures  Now  I  have  endeavoured  to  demon-
strate in  various  manners  that  they  are  real  corpuscles,
and  not  mere  cavities  in  a  dense  basis-tissue,  but  struc-
tures provided  with  special  walls  and  boundaries  of  their

s

112  LECTURE  IV.

own,  which  separate  them  from  the  intermediate  sub-
stance. For  by  the  help  of  chemical  reagents  (concen
trated  mineral  acids,  and  particularly  hydrochloric  acid)
we  are  enabled,  by  dissolving  the  basis-substance,
namely,  to  disengage  the  corpuscles  from  it.  In  this  way
we  furnish,  I  think,  the  most  complete  demonstration
that  they  are  really  independent  structures.  Besides,  a
nucleus  may  be  distinguished  within  these  bodies  ;  and,
even  without  entering  into  the  history  of  their  develop-
ment, we  discover  that  here  too  we  have  once  more  to
deal  with  cellular  elements  of  a  stellate  form.  Bone
therefore  exhibits  in  its  composition  a  tissue,  containing,
in  an  apparently  altogether  homogeneous  basis-substance,
peculiar,-  stellate  bone-cells  distributed  in  a  very  regular
manner.

The  intervals  which  exist  between  every  two  of  the
vessels  in  bone  are  often  very  considerable  ;  whole  sys-
tems of  lamellae,  beset  with  numerous  bone-corpuscles,
thrust  themselves  in  between  the  medullary  canal.  Here
it  is  certainly  difficult  to  conceive  the  nutrition  of  so
complicated  an  apparatus  to  depend  upon  the  action  of
vessels  some  of  them  so  remote,  and  especially  so,  to  un-
derstand how  every  individual  particle  of  this  extensive
compound  mass  can  manage  to  maintain  a  special  rela-
tion of  nutrition  to  the  vessels.  For  experience  shows
us  that  every  single  bone-corpuscle  really  possesses  con-
ditions of  nutrition  peculiar  to  itself.

I  have  laid  these  details  before  you,  in  order  to  point
out  to  you  the  gradual  transition  which  takes  place  from
the  vascular  and  abundantly  vascular,  to  the  scantily
vascular  and  non-vascular  parts.  If  we  would  form  a
simple  conception  of  the  conditions  of  nutrition,  I  think
we  must  lay  it  down  as  a  logical  principle,  that  what-
ever is  enunciated  with  regard  to  the  nutrition  of  very
vascular  parts,  must  also  hold  good  for  that  of  scantily

DEPENDENCE  OV  TISSUES  UPON  THE  VESSELS.  H3

and  non-vascular  parts  ;  and  that,  if  the  nutrition  of
individual  parts  is  considered  to  be  directly  dependent
upon  the  vessels  or  the  blood,  it  must  at  all  events  be
demonstrated  that  all  the  elements  which  stand  in  im-
mediate connection  with  one  and  the  same  vessel,  and
are  assigned  to  a  single  vessel  for  their  support,  present
conditions  of  life  essentially  similar.  In  the  case  of  bone
it  would  be  necessary  to  show  that  every  system  of
lamellae  which  has  only  one  vessel  for  its  nutrition,
always  exhibits  a  similar  state  of  nutrition.  For  if  that
vessel,  or  the  blood  which  circulates  in  it,  be  the  active
agent  concerned  in  the  nutrition,  the  utmost  that  can  be
admitted  is,  that  one  part  of  the  elements  may  be  more,
another  less,  subjected  to  their  influence  ;  but  still  it
must  essentially  be  a  common  and  similar  influence
which  they  experience.  That  this  is  no  unreasonable
requirement,  that  a  certain  dependency  of  definite  terri-
tories of  tissue  upon  definite  vessels  must  undoubtedly
be  admitted,  the  most  beautiful  illustrations  are  afforded
us  in  the  doctrine  of  metastases,  in  the  study  of  the
changes  which  are  effected  by  the  occlusion  of  single
capillary  vessels,  and  with  which  we  have  become  ac-
quainted from  the  history  of  capillary  embolia.  In  such
cases,  in  fact,  we  see  that  a  whole  portion  of  tissue,  as
far  as  its  immediate  connection  with  a  vessel  extends,  in
its  pathological  relations  also  constitutes  a  whole — a  vas-
cular unity.  But  this  vascular  unity  to  a  finer  appre-
hension still  appears  a  compound,  and  it  is  not  sufficient
to  split  up  the  body  into  vessel-territories  (Gef  assterri-
torien)  alone,  but  within  them  a  further  division  must  be
made  into  cell-territories  (Zellenterritorien).

This  view  has,  I  think,  been  essentially  furthered  by
our  having  discovered,  as  I  lately  pointed  out  to  you  (p.
76),  the  existence  of  a  special  system  of  anastomosing  ele-
ments in  the  connective-tissues,  and  by  our  having  in

8

114

LECTURE  IV.

this  manner  filled  the  place  of  the  vasa  serosa  (which  the
older  writers  imagined  as  a  complement  to  the  capilla-
ries for  these  ultimate  purposes  of  nutrition)  with  some-
thing definite,  by  means  of  which  the  circulation  of  nu-
tritive juices  is  rendered  possible  in  parts  which  are  in
themselves  poor  in  vessels. To  keep  to  bone,  we  should

Fig.  35.

scarcely  be  justified  in  assuming  the  existence  of  vasa
serosa  in  it. The  hard  basis-substance  is  throughout

Fig.  35.  Section  of  an  osseous  plate  from  the  arachnoid  of  the  cerebrum,  but
quite  normal  in  its  structure.  A  branching  vascular  (medullary)  canal  is  seen  with
canaliculi  opening  into  it,  and  leading  to  the  bone  corpuscles. 350  diameters.

NUTRITION OF BONE.  115

uniformly  filled  with  calcareous  salts,  so  uniformly  indeed,
that  no  interval  can  be  perceived  between  the  indivi-
dual calcareous  particles.  Though  some  few  writers
have  assumed  that  little  granules  can  be  distinguished  in
it,  this  is  an  error.  The  only  differentiation  which  can
be  seen  is  caused  by  the  prolongation  into  the  basis-sub-
stance of  the  canaliculi,  which  all  ultimately  lead  back  to
the  bodies  of  the  bone-cells  (bone-corpuscles)  and  in
their  turn  give  out  branches.  The  peripheral  extremi-
ties of  these  little  branches  or  processes  extend  right  up
to  the  surface  of  the  vascular  (medullary)  canal.  They
are  therefore  inserted  exactly  where  the  membrane  of
the  vessel  begins  (Fig.  35),  for  they  can  be  distinctly
perceived  as  very  minute  orifices  upon  the  wall  of  the
canal.  Now  since  the  different  bone-corpuscles  are  in
their  turn  distinctly  connected  with  one  another,  means
are  afforded  by  which  a  certain  quantity  of  juice  taken
up  from  the  surface  of  the  vascular  canal  is  not  diffused
throughout  the  whole  mass  of  tissue,  but  confined  to
these  delicate,  continuous,  and  specially  provided  chan-
nels, and  forced  to  move  onwards  in  canals  which  are
inaccessible  to  injections  from  the  vessel.  For  a  time  it
was  believed  that  the  canaliculi  could  be  injected  from
the  vessel,  but  this  is  only  possible  when  the  vascular
canal  has  become  empty  by  maceration.

This  is  a  condition  precisely  similar  to  what  we
observe  in  the  teeth,  in  which  the  canaliculi  can  be  in-
jected from  the  pulp-cavity  when  empty.  If  a  solution
of  carmine  be  injected  into  this  cavity,  the  dental  canali-
culi are  displayed  in  the  form  of  numerous  tubules  run-
ning up  to  the  surface  side  by  side  in  a  radiated  maimer.
The  substance  of  the  teeth  also  forms  a  tolerably  broad
layer  of  non-vascular  material.  Vessels  are  found  no-
where but  in  the  pulp -cavity,  in  proceeding  from  which
outwards  we  find  nothing but  the  proper  substance  of

116  LECTURE  IV.

the  tooth  (dentine)  with  its  system  of  tubes,  which  ex-
tend nearly  up  to  the  surface,  and  in  the  root  of  the
tooth  are  directly  continuous  with  a  layer  of  real  bony
substance  (cement)  the  corpuscles  of  which  are  seated
upon  the  ends  of  the  tubes.  A  provision  for  the  con-
veyance of  the  juices  similar  to  that  which  in  bone  ori-
ginates in  the  marrow,  here  takes  its  rise  in  the  pulp,
whence  the  nutritive  fluid  can  be  conveyed  up  to  the
surface  by  the  means  of  tubes.

These  systems  of  tubes  which  are  found  in  such  a  very
marked  form  in  bone  and  the  teeth,  are  to  be  seen  with
far  less  distinctness  in  the  soft  structures,  and  it  is  chiefly
for  this  reason,  I  imagine,  that  the  analogy  which  exists
between  the  soft  connective  tissues  and  the  hard  texture
of  bone  has  not  been  clearly  comprehended.  These  sys-
tems are  most  distinctly  seen  in  parts  which  are  more  of  a
cartilaginous  nature,  as,  for  example,  in  fibro-cartilage.
But  it  is  a  fact  of  great  significance  that  we  find  a  series
of  transitional  forms  between  cartilage  and  the  other
connective  tissues,  in  which  the  same  conditions  are  con-
stantly repeated.  In  the  first  place,  parts  which  chemi-
cally belong  to  the  class  of  cartilages,  for  example,  the
cornea,  which  yields  chondrine  when  boiled,  although
nobody  regards  it  as  real  cartilage.  But  more  striking
is  the  arrangement  in  those  parts  in  which  the  external
appearance  speaks  in  favour  of  a  cartilaginous  nature,
but  the  chemical  properties  do  not  correspond,  as  for
example,  in  the  semi-lunar  cartilages  (Bandscheiben)  of
the  knee-joint,  which  are  interposed  between  the  femur
and  tibia  for  the  purpose  of  protecting  the  articular
cartilages  from  too  violent  contact.  These  parts,  which
even  now  are  generally  described  as  cartilage,  yield  no
chondrine  on  boiling,  but  gelatine  ;  and  yet,  in  this  hard
connective  tissue,  we  meet  with  the  same  system  of  anas-
tomosing corpuscles  that  prevails  in  the  cornea  and  in

CANALS IN THE SEMI-LUNAR CARTILAGES.

117

Fig.  36.

fibre-cartilage,  and  it  is  displayed  with  unusual  distinct-
ness and  clearness.  Vessels  are  almost  entirely  wanting
in  these  cartilages,  but  in  ex-
change they  contain  a  system
of  tubes  of  rare  beauty.  On
making  a  section,  we  see  that
the  whole  is  in  the  first  place
mapped  out  into  large  divi-
sions, exactly  like  a  tendon  ;
these  are  subdivided  into
smaller  ones,  and  these  are
pervaded  by  a  fine,  stellate
system  of  tubes,  or,  if  you
will,  of  cells,  inasmuch  as  the
notion  of  a  tube  and  that  of  a
cell  here  quite  coincide.  The
networks  of  cells  which  here
form  the  system  of  tubes,  terminate  externally  in  the  septa
bounding  the  individual  divisions,  and  we  here  see  in  close
proximity  considerable  collections  of  spindle-shaped  cells.
In  these  cartilages,  too,  the  whole  mass  of  tissue  is  only
connected  by  its  exterior  with  the  circulatory  system  ;
everything  that  penetrates  into  the  interior  must  pass
by  a  very  circuitous  route  through  a  system  of  canals
with  numerous  anastomoses,  and  the  nutrition  of  the  in-
ternal parts  is  altogether  dependent  upon  this  mode  of
conveyance.  The  semi-lunar  cartilages  are  structures  of
considerable  extent  and  great  density,  and  as  they  are
entirely  dependent  for  their  nutrition  upon  this  ultimate,
minute  system  of  cells,  we  have  in  them, much  more

Fig.  36.  Section  from  the  serai-lunar  cartilage  of  the  knee-joint  of  a  child,  a.
Bands  of  fibres,  with  spindle-shaped,  parallel  and  anastomosing  cells  (seen  in  longi-
tudinal section),  b.  Cells,  forming  a  network,  with  broad,  branching,  and  anasto-
mosing canaliculi  (seen  in  transverse  section).  Treated  with  acetic  acid.  350
diameters.

118  LECTURE  IV.

than  in  cartilage,  to  deal  with  such  an  arrangement  for
the  supply  of  nutritive  juices,  as  cannot  be  under  the
direct  control  of  the  vessels.

For  the  sake  of  elucidation,  I  will  merely  add  that  the
ultimate  elements  are  seen  to  consist  of  very  delicate
cells,  which  are  prolonged  into  fine  filaments,  that  in
their  turn  ramify,  and  look,  when  cut  across,  like  small
points  in  which  a  clear  centre  can  be  recognised.  The
filaments  can  ultimately  be  very  distinctly  traced  back  to
the  common  cell  just  as  in  bone.  They  are  extremely
fine  tubes  which  are  intimately  connected  with  one  an-
other, only  that  here  they  are  in  certain  spots  collected
into  large  groups,  by  means  of  which  the  conveyance  of
the  nutritive  juice  is  principally  effected,  and  that  the
intercellular  substance  in  no  instance  becomes  infiltrated
with  lime,  but  always  preserves  its  character  as  connec-
tive tissue.

LECTURE V.

FEBRUARY  27, 1858.
NUTRITION,  AND  CONVEYANCE  OF  THE  NUTRITIVE  JUICES.

Tendons — Cornea — Umbilical  cord.

Elastic  tissue — Corium.

Loose  connective  tissue — Tunica  dartos.

Importance  of  cells  in  the  special  distribution  of  the  nutritive  juices.

Allow  me,  gentlemen,  as  a  supplement  to  what  we
saw  and  discussed  in  the  preceding  lecture,  to  lay  before
you  a  few  more  preparations  in  illustration  of  that  pecu-
liar species  of  nutritive  arrangement  which  we  have
already  seen  to  exist  in  various  tissues,  and  which,  I
hope,  will  appear  to  you  of  very  great  importance  in
pathological  processes  also.

You  will  remember  that  the  last  object  of  our  con-
sideration was  a  ligamentous  disc  (Bandscheibe),  as  it
occurs  in  its  most  marked  form  in  the  knee-joint  in  the
so-called  semi-lunar  cartilages,  which  are  really  no  car-
tilages at  all.  On  the  contrary,  they  possess  the  qualities
of  a  flat  tendon,  and  the  individual  structural  relations
which  we  found  in  them,  are  repeated  throughout  the
whole  of  the  transverse  section  of  a  tendon.

We  have  to-day  a  series  of  objects  from  the  tendo
Achillis,  both  of  the  adult  and  the  child,  displaying  the
different  stages  of  its  development ;  and  as  this  is,  more-

119

120

LECTURE  V.

over  a  tendon  which  is  of  importance  in  more  than  one
way  in  an  operative  point  of  view,  I  may,  I  am  sure,  be
excused  for  speaking  a  little  more  at  length  concern-
ing it.

On  the  surface  of  a  tendon  we  see,  as  you  well  know,
with  the  naked  eye,  a  series  of  parallel,  whitish  striae
which  run  pretty  close  to  one  another  in  a  longitudinal
direction,  and  give  rise  to  the  characteristic  glossy  ap-
pearance. In  a  microscopical  longitudinal  section  these
striae lie farther  apart,  so  that  the tendon  presents  a

Fig.  37.

somewhat  fasciculated  appearance  and  looks  less  homo-
geneous than  on  the  surface.  This  becomes  much  more
evident  in a  transverse section, in  which a series  of

Fig.  37.  Transverse  section  from  the  tendo  Achillis  of  an  adult.  From  the  sheath
of  the  tendon,  septa  are  seen  at  a,  by  and  c,  running  inwardly,  and  uniting  into  a
network  so  as  to  form  the  boundaries  of  the  primary  and  secondary  fasciculi.  The
larger  ones  (a  and  b)  generally  contain  vessels,  the  smaller  ones  (c)  do  not.  Within
the  secondary  fasciculi  is  seen  the  delicate  network  formed  by  the  tendon-corpus-
cles (reticulating  cells — Netzzellen),  or  the  intermediate  system  of  juice-conveying
canals  (Saftkanalsystem). 80  diameters.

TENDONS.  121

smaller and larger divisions (bundles, fasciculi) are
offered  to  the  view.

On  magnifying  the  object,  an  internal  arrangement  is
shown  almost  exactly  corresponding  to  that  which  we
have  observed  in  the  semi-lunar  cartilages.  Externally,
the  tendon  is  invested  in  its  whole  circumference  by  a
fibrous  mass,  in  which  the  vessels  are  contained,  that  are
entwined  around  the  tendon.  From  these  at  different
points  vessels  proceed  into  the  interior,  where  they  are
to  be  seen  in  the  larger  partitions  which  separate  the
fasciculi  (Fig.  37,  a)  ;  but  into  the  interior  of  the  fasci-
culi themselves  no  trace  of  a  vessel  enters,  any  more
than  it  does  into  the  interior  of  the  semi-lunar  cartilages  ; .
there,  on  the  contrary,  we  again  meet  with  the  network
of  cells  we  have  been  talking  about,  or,  in  other  words,
the  peculiar  system  of  juice-conveying  canals  of  which
we  lately  considered  the  import  in  bone.

Tendons  may  therefore  in  the  first  place  be  divided
into  larger  (primary)  bundles,  and  these  in  their  turn
into  a  certain  number  of  smaller  (secondary)  fasciculi,
which  are  separated  by  broadish  bands  of  a  fibrous  sub-
stance containing  vessels  and  fibre-cells,  so  that  a  trans-
verse section  of  a  tendon  presents  a  meshed  appearance.
From  this  intervening  substance,  which  must  not,  how-
ever, be  regarded  as  a  tissue  of  a  peculiar  description,
there  pass  into  the  interior  of  the  fasciculi  stellate  cells
(tendon-corpuscles)  which  anastomose  with  another  and
establish  a  communication  between  the  external  vascular,
and  the  internal  non-vascular,  parts  of  the  fasciculi.
This  relation  is,  of  course,  much  more  evident  in  the
tendons  of  children  than  in  those  of  adults.  The  older  \
the  parts  become,  namely,  the  larger  and  finer  do  the
processes  of  the  cells  in  general  become,  so  that  in  many
sections  we  do  not  meet  with  the  real  bodies  of  the  cells,
but  only  see  minute  speck which,  by  altering  the  focus.

122

LECTURE  V.

may  be traced into filaments — or point-like orifices.
The  individual  cells,  therefore,  come  to  be  more  widely

Fig.  38.

separated,  and  it  becomes  more  and  more  difficult  to
obtain  a  view  of  the  whole  of  a  cell  at  once.  Besides,
we  must  first  obtain  a  clear  notion  of  the  relation  be-
tween a  longitudinal  and  a  transverse  section.  Where,
namely,  in  a  longitudinal  section,  there  are  spindle-
shaped  cells,  in  a  transverse  section  will  be  seen  stellate
ones,  and  to  the  network  of  cells  displayed  in  the  trans-
verse section  corresponds  the  regular  succession  of
spindle-shaped  corpuscles,  arranged  in  rows  which  we
see  in  a  longitudiual  section,  entirely  in  correspondence
with  the  plan  which  we  have  shown  to  be  followed  in
connective  tissue.  The  cells,  therefore,  are  here  also
only  apparently  simply  spindle-shaped,  when  an  exactly
longitudinal section is examined  ; but  if  it  has  been

Fig.  38.  Transverse  section  from  the  interior  of  the  tendo  Achillis  of  a  new-born
child,  a.  The  intervening  mass  which  separates  the  secondary  fasciculi  (corres-
ponding to  Fig.  37,  c),  and  entirely  composed  of  densely  aggregated  spindle-shaped
cells.  Directly  anastomosing  with  these,  we  see  on,  both  sides  at  6,  b,  reticulating
and  spindle-shaped  cells  running  into  the  interior  of  the  fasciculi. 300  diameters.

TENDONS— THEIR NUTRITION.

123

made  a  little  obliquely,  the  lateral  processes  are  per-
ceived, by  means  of  which  the  cells  of  one  row  commu-
nicate with  those  of  another.

Up  to  the  present  moment  the  progress  of  the  growth
of  tendons  after  birth  has  not  been  made  the  subject  of
a  regular  investigation,  and  it  is  unknown  whether  any
further  multiplication  of  the  cells  takes  place  in  them  ;
this  much,  however,  is  certain,  that  the  cells  in  many
places  afterwards  become  much  elongated,  and  the  inter-
vals between  the  individual  nuclei  extremely  great.
The  actual  structural  relations,  however,  do  not  thereby
experience  any  change  ;  the  original  cells  also  continue
members  of  the  great  system  of  tubes,  which  in  the  per-
fectly  developed tendon pervades the whole tissue.

Fig.  39.  Longitudinal  section  from  the  interior  of  the  tendo  Achillis  of  a  new-
born child.  «,  a,  a.  Intervening  bands.  b,  b.  Fasciculi.  In  both  we  see  spindle-
shaped,  nucleated  cells,  partially  anastomosing,  with  an  inter-cellular  substance
slightly  striated  in  a  longitudinal  direction,  the  cells  being  more  crowded  in  the
bands,  and  less  numerous  in  the  fasciculi,  c.  Section  of  an  interstitial  blood-vessel.
250  diameters.

124  LECTURE V.

Hence  we  see  how,  although  the  tendon  contains  no
vessels  in  its  most  internal  parts,  and,  as  may  be  ob-
served in  every  case  of  tenotomy,  receives  but  little
blood  by  the  external  vessels  of  its  sheath,  and  by  the
internal  vessels  of  the  septa  between  the  larger  fasciculi,
it  is  possible,  notwithstanding,  for  a  uniform  nutrition
of  the  parts  to  take  place.  This  we  cannot  imagine  to
be  effected  in  any  other  way  than  by  the  distribution  of
nutritive  juices  in  a  regular  manner  throughout  the
entire  substance  of  the  tendon  by  means  of  special  canals
distinguishable  from  the  vessels.  The  natural  divisions
of  the  tendon  are,  however,  nearly  entirely  symmetrical,
so  that  an  equally  large  quantity  of  intercellular  sub-
stance falls  to  the  share  of  every  cellular  element,  and
as  the  cell-networks  in  the  interior  can  be  directly
traced  into  the  dense  bundles  of  cells  of  the  septa,  and
these  in  their  turn  up  to  the  vessels  (Figs.  37,  38),  we
may,  I  think,  unhesitatingly  regard  these  reticulating
cells  as  the  channels  for  the  transmission  of  this  inter-
mediate current  of  nutritive  juice,  which  has  no  commu-
nication by  means  of  orifices  with  the  general  circu-
lation.

You  have  here  a  fresh  instance  in  support  of  my  view
with  regard  to  cell-territories.  I  would  parcel  out  the
whole  tendon,  not  into  primary  and  secondary  fasciculi,
but  rather  into  certain  series  of  cells,  connected  in  a  reti-
form  manner  ;  to  each  series,  moreover,  I  would  assign
a  certain  district  of  tissue,  so  that  in  a  longitudinal  sec-
tion, for  example,  about  half  of  each  band  of  basis-sub-
stance would  belong  to  one,  the  other  half  to  another
series  of  cells.  What  is,  therefore,  regarded  as  consti-
tuting the  proper  fasciculi  of  the  tendon,  would,  accord-
ing to  this  view,  have  really  to  be  split  up,  and  the  ten-
don portioned  out  into  a  great  number  of  nutritive
districts  (Ernahrungs-Territorien).

CORNEA— UMBILICAL  CORD.  1^5

This  is  the  condition  which  we  everywhere  find  recur-
ring in  these  tissues,  and  upon  it  will  at  the  same  time
be  found  to  depend,  as  I  hope  you  will  convince  your-
selves by  direct  observation,  Xhe  size  of  the  districts
invaded  by  disease  ;  every  disease  which  essentially
depends  upon  a  disturbance  in  the  internal  disposition  of
the  tissues  is  always  made  up  of  the  sum  of  the  separate
changes  occurring  in  such  territories.  But  at  the  same
time  the  pictures  which  are  here  offered  to  us  afford  a
really  aesthetical  enjoyment  through  the  delicacy  of  this
arrangement,  and  I  cannot  deny  that,  as  often  as  I  look
at  a  section  of  tendon,  it  is  with  a  peculiar  feeling  of
satisfaction  that  I  contemplate  these  reticular  arrange-
ments, which  effect  a  union  between  the  exterior  and
the  interior,  and,  excepting  in  bone,  can  in  no  structure
be  demonstrated  with  greater  distinctness  and  clearness
than  in  tendons.

Considering  the  structure  of  the  cornea  and  the  dispo-
sition of  its  parts,  it  would  be  most  convenient,  gentle-
men, to  proceed  at  once  to  the  consideration  of  its  his-
tory, still  I  prefer  reverting  to  it  hereafter,  inasmuch  as
it  is  at  the  same  time  the  most  suitable  object  for  the
demonstration  of  pathological  changes.  I  will  therefore
only  observe  here,  that  in  the  same  way  that  tendons
have  their  peripheral  system  of  vessels,  and  that  their
internal  parts  are  nourished  by  a  delicate  juice-conVey-
ing  system  of  tubes,»  so  also  in  the  cornea  only  the  most
minute  vessels  extend  a  few  lines  over  its  border,  so  that
the  central  parts  are  completely  destitute  of  vessels,  as
indeed  they  were  obliged  to  be,  in  order  to  allow  of  the
transparency  of  the  tissue.

I  should  like,  on  the  other  hand,  in  connection  with
the  foregoing  tissues,  to  speak  of  one  which  has  gene-
rally met  with  but  little  special  preference  in  histology,
but  is  perhaps  more  likely  to  have  some  interest  in  your

126

LECTURE  V.

eyes,  I  mean  the  umbilical  cord.  Its  substance  (the  so-
called  jelly  (gelatina)  of  Wharton*)  is  also  formed  by
one  of  those  tissues  which  certainly  contain  vessels,  but
)  yet  really  possess  none.  The  vessels  which  are  trans-
mitted through  the  umbilical  cord,  do  not  immediately
contribute  to  its  nourishment,  at  least  not  in  the  sense  in
which  we  speak  of  nutrient  vessels  in  other  parts.  For
when  we  speak  of  nutrient  vessels,  we  always  mean  ves-
sels which  have  capillaries  in  the  parts  which  are  to  be
nourished.  The  thoracic  aorta  is  not  the  nutrient  ves-
sel of  the  thorax,  any  more  than  the  abdominal  aorta,  or
the  vena  cava,  is  that  of  the  abdominal  viscera.  We
should  expect,  therefore,  in  the  case  of  the  umbilical
cord  to  find  umbilical  capillaries  in  addition  to  the  two

umbilical  arteries  and  the  umbilical
vein.  But  these  arteries  and* this  \
vein  run  their  course  to  the  placenta,
without  giving  off  a  single  small
vessel,  and  it  is  only  when  they  have
reached  that  body  that  they  begin  to
ramify.  The  only  capillary  vessels
which  are  found  in  the  whole  length
of  the  umbilical  cord  of  a  somewhat
developed  foetus  do  not  extend  more
than  about  four  or  five  lines  (in  rare
instances  a  little  farther),  beyond  the
abdominal  walls  into  that  part  of  the
cord  which  remains  after  birth. The

Fig.  40.

Fig.  40.  The  abdominal  end  of  the  umbilical  cord  of  a  nearly  full-grown  foetus,
injected.  A.  The  abdominal  wall.  B.  The  permanent  part  of  the  cord  with  a
congeries  of  injected  vessels  along  its  border.  O.  Its  deciduous  portion  with  the
convolutions  of  the  umbilical  vessels, v.  The  limits  of  the  capillaries.

*  Lymphaeductus,  vel  gelatina,  qua;  eorum  vices  gerit,  alterum  succum  albumini
ovorum  similorem  abducit  (a  placenta)  ad  funiculum  umbilicalem.  (Thorn.  Whart.
Adenographia,  Amstelaedami,  1659,  p.  233.)

THE UMBILICAL CORD.  127

farther  up  this  vascular  part  extends,  the  greater  the
development  of  the  navel.  When  the  vascular  layer  is
prolonged  but  a  very  short  distance  the  navel  is  greatly
depressed  ;  when  it  reaches  a  long  way  up,  a  prominent
navel  is  the  result.  The  capillaries  mark  the  limits  of
the  permanent  tissue  ;  the  deciduous  portion  of  the  cord
has  no  vessels  of  its  own.

This  condition,  which  seems  to  be  of  great  importance
as  regards  the  theory  of  nutrition,  can  be  very  easily
seen  with  the  naked  eye  in  injected  foetuses  of  five
months  and  upwards,  and  in  new-born  children.  The
vascular  layer  terminates  by  a  nearly  straight  line.

Preparations  of  this  sort  do  not,  to  be  sure,  furnish
absolute  proof,  for  there  might  happen  to  be  a  few
minute  vessels  proceeding  farther  up,  but  invisible  to
the  naked  eye.  But  I  formerly  made  this  very  point
the  subject  of  special  investigation,  and  although  I  in-
jected a  number  of  umbilical  cords,  some  from  the  arte-
ries, and  others  from  the  veins,  I  never  succeeded  in
discovering  a  single  collateral  vessel,  however  minute,
that  passed  the  limits  of  the  persistent  layer.  The  whole
of  the  deciduous  portion  of  the  umbilical  cord,  that  long
portion  which  lies  between  its  cutaneous  end  and  its  ter-
mination in  the  placenta,  is  entirely  destitute  of  capilla-
ries, and  there  really  exist  no  other  vessels  in  it  than
the  three  large  trunks.  Now  these  are  all  of  them  re-
markable for  the  great  thickness  of  their  walls,  which,
as  we  have  really  only  known  since  the  investigations  of-
Kolliker,  are  enormously  rich  in  muscular  fibres.

In  a  transverse  section  of  the  umbilical  cord  it  may  be
observed,  that  the  thick  middle  coat  of  the  vessels  is
entirely  composed  ot  smooth  muscular  fibres,  lying  in
immediate  contact  one  with  the  other,  and  in  such  abun-
dance as  is  scarcely  to  be  seen  in  any  completely
developed  vessel. This  peculiarity  explains  the extra-

128

LECTURE  V.

ordinary  great  contractility  of  the  umbilical  vessels,
which  can  be  so  readily  seen  in  action  on  a  large  scale
when  mechanical  stimuli  are  applied,  when  the  vessels
are  divided  with  scissors  or  are  pinched,  or  after  the
employment  of  electrical  stimuli.  Sometimes,  upon  the
application  of  external  stimuli,  they  even  contract  to
such  a  degree  that  their  canal  is  entirely  closed,  and  thus
after  birth,  even  without  the  application  of  a  ligature,
as  when,  for  example,  the  umbilical  cord  has  been  torn
asunder,  the  bleeding  may  stop  of  itself.  The  thickness
of  the  walls  of  these  vessels  is,  therefore,  easily  compre-
hensible, for  in  addition  to  the  muscular  coat,  which  is
of  itself  so  thick,  there  is  an  internal,  and,  though  it  is
certainly  not  very  strongly  developed,  an  external  coat ;
and  only  after  this  do  we  come  to  the  gelatinous,  jelly-
like tissue  {mucous  tissue  (Schleimgewebe) )  of  the  umbili-
cal cord.  Through  these  layers,  therefore,  nutrition
would  have  to  take  place,  if  the  umbilical  vessels  were
the  nutrient  vessels  of  the  cord. Now  I  certainly  can-

Fig.  41.

Fig.  41.  Transverse  section  through  a  part  of  the  umbilical  cord.  On  the  left  is
seen  the  section  of  an  umbilical  artery,  with  a  very  thick  muscular  coat,  and  to  this,
as  one  proceeds  outwards,  succeeds  the  gradually  widening  network  of  cells  of  the
mucous  tissue  of  the  cord. 80  diameters.

THE  MUCOUS TISSUE OF THE UMBILICAL  CORD.  129

not  say  with  certainty  whence  the  tissue  of  the  umbilical
cord  derives  its  nourishment ;  perhaps  it  receives  nutri-
tive matter  from  the  liquor  amnii,  nor  am  I  inclined  to
deny  the  possibility  of  nutriments  passing  through  the
walls  of  the  vessels,  or  of  the  onward  conveyance  of
nutritive  materials  from  the  small  capillaries  of  the  per-
sistent portion.  In  any  case,  however,  a  large  extent  of
tissue  lies  at  a  distance  from  all  vessels  and  from  the
surface,  and  is  nourished  and  supported  without  the  pre-
sence of  any  minute  system  of  blood-vessels  in  it.  For  a
long  space  of  time,  indeed,  no  one  troubled  himself  any
further  about  this  tissue,  because  it  was  designated  by
the  name  of  jelly,  and  thereby  summarily  ejected  from
the  number  of  the  tissues  and  thrust  into  the  ambiguous
group  of  mere  accumulations  of  organic  materials.  I
was  the  first  to  show  that  it  is  really  a  well-constructed
tissue  of  a  typical  form,  and  that  what  constitutes  the
ielly  in  the  more  restricted  sense  of  the  term,  is  the
expressible  part  of  the  intercellular  substance,  after  the
removal  of  which  there  remains  a  tissue  containing  a
delicate  network  of  anastomosing  cellular  elements,  simi-
lar to  that  which  we  have  seen  to  exist  in  tendons  and
other  parts.  A  section  through  the  external  layers  of
the  umbilical  cord  exhibits  a  structure  bearing  great
resemblance  to  the  external  layers  of  the  cornea  ;  first,
an  epidermoidal  stratum,  beneath  it  a  somewhat  denser
dermoid  layer,  and  then  the  Whartonian  jelly,  which
corresponds  in  texture  to  the  subcutaneous  cellular  tissue,
and  is  in  some  sort  equivalent  to  it.  This  has  a  pecu-
liarly interesting  bearing  upon  the  tissues  of  a  more
advanced  period,  inasmuch  as,  by  thus  ranking  the  jelly
with  subcutaneous  tissue,  we  at  the  same  time  establish
its  very  close  relationship  to  the  vitreous  body,  which  is
the  only  remnant  of  tissue  that,  as  far  as  I  have  until
now  been  able  to  make  out,  persists  in  man  in  this  con-

9

I

130  LECTURE V.

dition  of  jelly.  It  is  the  last  remnant  of  the  embryonic
subcutaneous  tissue  which  in  the  development  of  the  eye
is  inverted  with  the  lens  (which  was  originally  epidermis,
p.  38).

The  proper  substance  of  the  umbilical  cord  consists  of
a  reticulated  tissue,  the  meshes  of  which  contain  mucus
(mucin)  and  a  few  roundish  cells,  whilst  its  trabeculae  are
composed  of  a  striated  fibrous  substance.  In  this  lie
stellate  corpuscles,  and  when  a  good  preparation  has
been  obtained  by  treatment  with  acetic  acid,  a  symme-
trical network  of  cells  is  brought  to  view,  which  splits  up
the  mass  into  such  regular  divisions,  that  by  means  of
the  anastomoses  which  subsist  between  these  cells
throughout  the  whole  of  the  umbilical  cord,  a  uniform

Fig.  42.

distribution  of  the  nutritive  juices  throughout  the  whole
of  its  substance  is  in  this  instance  also  rendered  possible.

Fig.  42.  Transverse  section  of  the  mucous  tissue  of  the  umbilical  cord,  exhibiting
the  network  formed  by  the  stellate  corpuscles,  after  the  application  of  acetic  acid
and  glycerine. 300  diameters.

CONNECTIVE (CELLULAR) TISSUE.  131

I  have  up  to  the  present  time,  gentlemen,  brought  to
your  notice  a  series  of  tissues  all  of  which  agree  in  con-
taining either  very  few  capillary  vessels,  or  none  at  all.
In  all  these  cases  the  conclusion  to  be  drawn  seems  to  be
very  simple — that,  namely,  the  peculiar  cellular,  canali-
cular arrangement  which  they  possess  serves  for  the  cir-
culation of  juices.  It  might,  however,  be  supposed  that
this  was  an  exceptional  property,  appertaining  only  to
the  non-  or  scantily-vascular  and,  generally  speaking,
hard,  parts  ;  and  I  must  therefore  add  a  few  words  con-
cerning the  soft  textures  which  possess  a  similar  struc-
ture. All  the  tissues  which  we  have  hitherto  considered,
belong,  in  accordance  with  the  classification  which  I  have
already  given  you,  to  the  series  of  connective  tissues  ;
fibro-cartilage,  fibrous  or  tendinous  tissue,  mucous  tissue,
bone  and  the  teeth,  must  one  and  all  be  considered  as
belonging  to  the  same  class.  But  to  the  same  category
belongs  also  the  whole  mass  of  what  has  usually  been
included  under  the  name  of  cellular  tissue  (Zellgewebe),
and  for  which  the  name  proposed  by  Johannes  Miiller,
connective  tissue  (Bindegewebe)  is  the  most  appropriate  ;
that  substance,  which  fills  up  the  interstices  in  the  most
different  organs,  sometimes  in  greater,  sometimes  in  less,
quantity — which  renders  the  gliding  of  parts  one  upon
the  other  possible,  and  formerly  was  imagined  to  enclose
considerable  spaces  (cells  in  an  inexact  sense  of  the
word),  filled  with  a  gaseous  vapor  or  with  moisture.

Of  this  kind  is  the  peculiar  interstitial,  or  connective,
tissue,  such  as  we  meet  with  in  the  interior  of  the  larger
muscles  between  the  several  primitive  fasciculi  and  in  a
still  larger  quantity  between  the  several  parcels,  or
bundles,  of  primitive  fasciculi.  Numerous  arteries,
veins,  and  capillaries  lie  in  it ;  and  the  arrangements  for
its  nutrition  are  the  most  favorable  that  can  be  imagined.
Notwithstanding  this,  however,  there  exists  in  it  also,  in

132

LECTURE V.

addition  to  its  blood-vessels,  a  more  delicate  system  of
nutrient  channels,  precisely  similar  to  that  with  which
we  have  just  become  acquainted  ;  only  that,  wherever  it
is  specially  required,  in  particular  parts  a  peculiar
change  takes  place  in  the  cells,  the  place  of  the  simple
cell-networks  and  -fibres  being  gradually  occupied  by  a
more  compact  structure,  which  originates  in  a  direct
transformation  of  them,  namely,  the  so-called  elastic
tissue .

A  few  months  after  I  had  made  known  my  first  obser-
vations concerning  the  systems  of  tubes  existing  in  the
connective  tissues,  .Donders  published  his  concerning  the
transformation  of  the  cells  of  connective,  into  the  ele-
ments of  elastic,  tissue — a  discovery  which  has  essen-
tially contributed  to  the  completion  of  the  history  of
connective  tissue.  If  this  tissue,  namely,  be  examined
at  points  where  it  is  liable  to  be  much  stretched,  and
'where  consequently  it  must  be  endowed  with  great  power
af  resistance,  the  elastic  fibres  will  be  found  arranged
and  distributed  in  it  in  the  same  way  that  the  cells  and

Fig.  43.

Fig.  43.  Elastic  networks  and  fibres  from  the  subcutaneous  tissue  of  the  abdomen
of  a  woman.  a)  a.  Large  elastic  bodies  (cell-bodies),  with  numerous  anastomosing
processes.  6,  b.  Dense  elastic  bands  of  fibres,  on  the  border  of  larger  meshes,  c,  c.
Moderately  thick  fibres,  spirally  coiled  up  at  the  end.  d,  d.  Finer  elastic  fibres,  at  e
with  more  minute  spiral  coils. 300  diameters.

FIBRES  OF ELASTIC  TISSUE.  133

cell-tubules  of  connective  tissue  usually  are,  and  the
transformation  of  these  latter  into  the  former  can  gradu-
ally be  traced  with  such  distinctness,  that  there  remains
no  doubt,  that  even  the  coarser  elastic  fibres  directly
result  from  a  chemical  change  and  condensation-  of  the
walls  of  the  cells  themselves.  Where  originally  there
lay  a  cell,  provided  with  a  delicate  membrane  and
elongated  processes,  there  we  see  the  membrane  gradu-
ally increasing  in  thickness  and  refracting  the  light  more
strongly,  whilst  the  proper  cell-contents  continually
decrease  and  finally  disappear.  The  whole  structure
becomes  in  this  way  more  homogeneous,  and  to  a  certain
extent  sclerotic,  and  acquires  an  incredible  power  of
resisting  the  influence  of  reagents,  so  that  it  is  only
after  long-continued  action  that  even  the  strongest
caustic  substances  are  able  to  destroy  it,  whilst  it  com-
pletely resists  the  caustic  alkalies  and  acids  in  the
degree  of  concentration  usually  employed  in  microscopi-
cal investigations.  The  farther  this  change  advances,
the  more  does  the  elasticity  of  the  parts  increase,  and  in
sections  we  usually  find  these  fibres  not  straight  or
elongated,  but  tortuous,  curled  up,  spirally  coiled,  or
forming  little  zigzags  (Fig.  43,  c,  e).  These  are  the
elements  which  in  virtue  of  their  great  elasticity  cause
retraction  in  those  parts  in  which  they  are  found  in  con-
siderable quantity,  as,  for  example,  in  the  arteries.
The  fine  elastic  fibres,  which  are  those  that  possess  the  I
greatest  extensibility,  are  usually  distinguished  from  the
broader  ones  which  certainly  do  not  present  themselves
in  tortuous  forms.  As  far  as  regards  their  origin,  how-
ever, there  seems  to  be  no  difference  between  the  two
kinds  ;  both  are  derived  from  connective-tissue  cells,
and  their  subsequent  arrangement  is  only  a  reproduction
of  the  original  plan.  In  the  place  of  a  tissue,  consisting
of  a  basis-substance  and  anastomosing,  reticulated  cells,

Y.,  .  .. j

134  LECTURE  V.

there  afterwards  arises  a  tissue  with  its  basis-substance
mapped  out  by  large  elastic  networks  with  extremely
compact  and  tough  fibres.

It  has  not  up  to  the  present  time  positively  been
determined,  whether  in  the  course  of  this  transformation
the  condensation  (sclerosis)  of  the  walls  of  the  cells  pro-
ceeds to  such  a  pitch  as  entirely  to  obliterate  their
cavity,  and  thus  completely  destroy  their  powers  of
conduction,  or  whether  a  small  cavity  remains  in  their
interior.  In  transverse  sections  of  fine  elastic  fibres,
it  looks  as  if  the  latter  were  the  case,  and  there  is
therefore  ground  for  the  supposition,  that  in  the  trans-
formation of  the  corpuscles  of  connective  tissue  into
elastic  fibres,  nothing  more  than  a  condensation  and
thickening,  and  at  the  same  time  a  chemical  metamor-
phosis of  the  membrane,  takes  place,  but  that  ultimately,
however,  a  very  small  portion  of  the  cell-cavity  remains.
What  sort  of  a  substance  it  is  that  constitutes  the  elastic
parts,  has  not  been  determined,  because  it  is  not  possible
to  accomplish  their  solution  by  any  means ;  with  a  part
of  the  products  of  the  decomposition  of  this  tissue  we
are,  indeed,  acquainted,  but  nothing  further  is  known
concerning  its  chemical  constitution.  But  from  this  no
decision  can  be  arrived  at  with  respect  either  to  its  com-
position, or  position  in  a  chemical  point  of  view  with
regard  to  other  tissues.

This  kind  of  transformation  prevails  to  an  extraordi-
nary extent  in  the  skin,  especially  in  the  deeper  layers
of  the  corium  proper,  and  to  it  is  chiefly  owing  the
extraordinary  resistance  of  this  tissue  which  we  so
gratefully  acknowledge  when  daily  testing  it  in  the  soles
of  our  shoes.  For  the  firmness  of  the  individual  layers
of  the  skin  depends  essentially  upon  the  greater  or  less
quantity  of  elastic  fibres  contained  in  them.  The  most
superficial  part  of  the  corium  immediately  beneath  the

ELASTIC  TISSUE  OF  THE SKIN-  135

rete  mucosum  is  formed  by  the  papillary  portion  (Papil-
larkorper),  by  which  we  are  to  understand  not  only  the
papillae  themselves,  but  also  a  continuous  layer  of  cori-
aceous substance  running  along  horizontally  beneath
them  ;  it  is  under  this  that  the  coarse  elastic  networks
begin,  whilst  only  fine  elastic  fibres,  and  these  in  a  fasci-
cular form,  ascend  into  the  papillae  themselves,  at  the
base  of  which  they  begin  to  form  fine  and  close-meshed
networks  (Figs.  16,  P,  P;  83,  A.  e;  D,  c).  These  latter
are  connected  inferiorly  with  the  very  thick  and  coarse
elastic  network  which  pervades  the  middle  and  toughest
portion  of  the  skin,  the  corium  proper  ;  below  this  comes
a  more  coarsely  meshed  network  within  the  less  firm,
but  nevertheless  very  solid,  undermost  layer  of  the  cutis,
which  passes  inferiorly  into  the  adipose  or  subcutaneous
tissue.

In  the  places  where  such  a  transformation  into  elastic
tissue  has  taken  place,  there  are  frequently  scarcely  any
distinct  cells  to  be  found.  This  is  the  case  not  merely
in  the  skin,  but  also  especially  in  certain  parts  of  the
middle  coat  of  arteries,  and  particularly  in  the  aorta.
Here  the  network  of  elastic  fibres  attains  such  a  prepon-
derance, that  it  is  only  with  great  care  that  minute  cellu-
lar elements  can  here  and  there  be  detected.  In  the
skin,  on  the  other  hand,  in  addition  to  the  elastic  fibres,
a  somewhat  greater  number  of  small  corpuscles  are
found,  which  have  retained  their  cellular  nature,  though
they  are  certainly  so  extremely  minute  that  they  must
be  specially  sought  for.  They  generally  lie  in  the  inter-
stices of  the  large-meshed  networks,  where  they  either
form  a  system  with  perfect  anastomoses  and  small
meshes,  or  else  appear  in  the  shape  of  more  isolated,
roundish  bodies,  in  consequence  of  the  individual  cells
not  being  very  distinctly  connected  with  one  another.
This  is  especially  the  case  in  the  papillary  portion  of  the

136

LECTURE  V.

skin,  which  both  in  its  continuous  layer  and  in  the
papillae  contains  nucleated  cells,  in  direct  contrast  with
the  corium  proper,  which  at  the  same  time  is  less  vascu-
lar. But  a  far  greater  number  of  vessels  was  certainly
needed  in  the  former  part,  inasmuch  as  they  have  at  the
same  time  to  furnish  nutritive  material  for  the  whole

Fig.  44.

stratum  of  cuticle  which  lies  above  the  papillae  ;  never-
theless, however,  there  is  left  only  a  small  quantity  of
juice  at  the  disposition  of  the  papillae  as  such.  Every
papillae,  therefore  corresponds  to  a  certain  (vascular)
district  of  the  superjacent  cuticle,  whilst  on  the  other
hand  it  is  itself  resolved  into  as  many  elementary  (histo-
logical) districts  as  there  are  elements  (cells)  in  it.

In  the  scrotum  the  subcutaneous  tissue  (the  da?~tos)
presents  peculiar  interest,  from  the  fact  of  its  being  par-
ticularly rich  in  vessels  and  nerves,  quite  in  accordance
with  the  peculiar  import  of  the  part ;  and  besides  from
its  possessing  an  enormous  quantity  of  muscular  tissue,
consisting,  in  fact,  of  those  little  cutaneous  muscles,
which  I  lately  described  to  you  (p.  58).  These  are  the
really  active  elements  of  the  contractile  tunica  dartos.
In  this  very  part  in  which  formerly  a  contractile  connec-
tive substance  was  considered  to  exist,  the  quantity  of
the  little  cutaneous  muscles  is  extremely  large,  and  the

Fig.  44.  Vertical  section  from  an  injected  preparation  of  the  skin.  E.  Epider-
mis. R.  Rete  mucosum.  P.  Papillae  of  the  skin,  with  their  .ascending  and
descending  vessels  (  loops). C.  Cutis. 11  diameters.

THE  DARTOS.

137

rugae  of  the  scrotum  are  produced  solely  and  exclusively
by  the  contraction  of  these  minute  fasciculi,  which,  espe-
cially after  they  have  been  coloured  with  carmine,  can
very  easily  be  distinguished  from  the  connective  tissue.

Fig.  45.

They  are  of  pretty  nearly  the  same  breadth,  broader  for
the  most  part  than  the  bundles  of  connective  tissue  ;  and
in  them  the  individual  elements  are  arranged  in  the
shape  of  long,  smooth  fibre-cells.  Every  muscular  fasci-
culus, after  it  has  been  treated  with  acetic  acid,  presents
at regular intervals those peculiar, long, frequently

Fig.  45.  Section  from  the  tunica  dartos  of  the  scrotum.  Side  by  side  and  paral-
lel are  seen,  an  artery  (a),  a  vein  (v),  and  a  nerve  (n)  ;  the  first  two  with  small
branches.  On  the  right  and  left  of  them  organic  muscular  fasciculi  (m,  wi),  and  in
the  interspaces  soft  connective  tissue  (c,  c),  with  large  anastomosing  cells  and  fine
elastic  fibres. 300  diameters.

,38  LECTURE  V.

staff-shaped  nuclei,  and  between  them  is  seen  a  delicate
division  of  the  substance  into  separate  cells,  the  contents
of  which  have  a  slightly  granular  appearance.  These
are  the  wrinklers  of  the  scrotum  (corrugatores  scroti).
Besides,  we  also  find  in  the  extremely  soft  membrane  a
certain  number  of  fine  elastic  elements,  and  in  greater
quantity  the  ordinary,  soft,  wavy  connective  tissue,  with
a  great  number  of  relatively  voluminous,  spindle-shaped
and  reticulated,  granular,  nucleated,  cells.

These  persistent  cells  of  connective  tissue  had  pre-
viously been  totally  overlooked,  its  fibrils  having  been
regarded  as  its  real  elements. If,  namely,  the  individual
constituents  of  connective  tissue  be  separated  from  one
another,  little  bundles  are  obtained  of  a  wavy  form  and
streaky, fibrillar appearance. According  to Reichert,
indeed,  this  appearance  is  merely  due  to  the  formation
of  folds,  an  idea  which  ought  not  perhaps  to  be  admitted
to  the  extent  in  which  it  was  advanced,  but  which  has
not  been  altogether  refuted,  inasmuch  as  a  complete  iso-
lation of  the  fibrils  can  never  be  effected  excepting  by
artificial means. At  all  events  a  homogeneous basis-
substance,  which  holds  the  fasciculi  together,  must  be
assumed  to  exist  in  addition  to  the  fibrils. This,  how-
ever, is  a  question  of  subordinate  importance. On  the
other  hand, it  is extremely important  to know, that
wherever  this  lax  tissue  is  met  with,  whether  beneath
the  cutis,  in  the  interspaces  of  muscle,  or  in  serous  mem-
branes, it  is  pervaded  by  cells  which  for  the  most  part
anastomose  (so  as  in  longitudinal  sections  to  form  paral-
lel rows,  in  transverse  ones  networks),  and  separate  the
bundles  of  connective  tissue  from  one  another,  in  much
the  same  way  that  the corpuscles  of  bone  separate  its
different  lamellae.  In  addition,  the  most  manifold  vascular
connections  are  everywhere  met  with  ;  indeed,  the  ves-
sels are  so  numerous,  that  a  special  nutrient  canalicular

THE  DARTOS.

130

system  in  the  tissue  might  even  appear  altogether  unne-
cessary. But  this  tissue  also,  however  favourably  its
capillary  channels  may  be  disposed,  stands  in  need  of  an
arrangement  of  such  a  nature  as  to  render  a  special  dis-
tribution of  the  nutritive  juices  to  the  separate  cellular  dis-
tricts possible.  It  is  only  when  we  conceive  the  absorp-
tion of  nutritive  matter  to  be  a  consequence  of  the
activity  (attraction)  of  the  elements  of  the  tissue  them-
selves, that  we  are  able  to  comprehend  how  it  is  that
the  individual  districts  are  not  exposed  every  moment  to
an  inundation  on  the  part  of  the  blood,  but  the  proffered
material  is,  on  the  contrary,  taken  up  into  the  parts  only
in  accordance  with  the  requirements  of  the  moment,  and
is  conveyed  to  the  individual  districts  in  such  a  quantity,
that  in  general  at  least,  as  long  as  any  possibility  of  its
maintenance  exists,  one  part  cannot  be  essentially  de-
frauded by  the  others.

•

i *

.

t /

7 H  *\A. &>*jl**-

■  t

■
/ . /

/

•

Ova

LECTURE VI.

MARCH  3,  1858.

NUTRITION  AND  CIRCULATION.

Arteries — Capillaries — Continuity  of  their  membrane — Its  porosity — Haemorrhage

by  transudation  (per  diapedesin) — Veins — Vessels  during  pregnancy.
Properties  of  the  walls  of  vessels  :

1.  Contractility — Rhythmical movement — Active or irritative hyperemia—

Ischsemia — Counter  irritants.

2.  Elasticity  and  its  importance  as  regards  the  rapidity  and  uniformity  of  the

current  of  blood — Dilatation  of  the  vessels.

3.  Permeability — Diffusion — Specific affinities — Relations  between  the  supply

of  blood  and  nutrition — Glandular  secretion  (liver) — Specific  action  of  the
elements  of  the  tissues.
Dyscrasia — Its transitory  character and local origin — Dyscrasia of  drunkards—
Haemorrhagio  diathesis — Syphilis.

I  have  endeavoured,  gentlemen,  in  the  last  two  lectures,
to  present  to  you  a  somewhat  detailed  picture  of  the
more  delicate  arrangements  which  prevail  in  the  body
for  the  conveyance  of  the  different  currents  of  nutritive
juices,  and  particularly  for  the  conveyance  of  those  cur-
rents in  which  the  juices  themselves  are  more  hidden
from  observation.  Allow  me  to-day  to  pass  on  to  the
consideration  of  the  larger  channels  and  nobler  juices,
which,  according  to  prevailing  opinion,  stand  more  in  the
foreground.

The  distribution  of  the  blood  takes  place,  as  is  well
known,  within  the  vessels  in  the  following  manner  :  The
arteries  divide  into  finer  and  finer  branches,  and  whilst

140

ARTERIES.  141

they  thus  divide,  the  character  of  their  walls  gradually
undergoes  such  alterations,  that  at  last  minute  canals,
the  so-called  capillary  vessels,  appear,  provided  with  a
membrane  as  simple  as  any  that  is  ever  met  with  in  the
body.  The  histological  appearances  which  present  them-
selves in  these  different  vessels  are  as  follows  :

On  isolating  an  artery  we  find  that  its  walls  are  rela-
tively very  thick,  and  in  those  arteries  which  can  be  fol-
lowed with  the  naked  eye,  not  only  the  well-known
three  coats  are  distinguished  with  the  help  of  the  micro-
scope, but  in  addition  to  these,  a  fine  epithelial  layer^
which  invests  the  internal  surface  and  is  not  wont  to  be
included  in  the  class  of  structures  usually  termed  coats
The  internal  and  external  coats  are  essentially  forma-
tions of  connective  tissue,  which  in  the  larger  arteries
display  a  continually  increasing  quantity  of  elastic  fibres  ;
between  them  lies  the  relatively  thick  middle,  or  circu-
lar-fibre, coat,  which,  as  being  the  seat  of  the  muscular
fibres,  constitutes  what  may  be  almost  termed  the  most
important  component  of  the  arterial  walls.  These  mus-
cular fibres  are  found  in  the  greatest  abundance  in  the
middle-sized  and  smaller  arteries,  whilst  in  the  very
large  ones,  and  especially  in  the  aorta,  elastic  layers  form
the  predominant  constituent  even  of  the  circular-fibre
coat.  In  small  arteries,  on  microscopical  examination,
there  may  be  easily  observed  within  this  coat  (Comp.
Figs.  26,  b,  b  ;  45,  a)  little  transverse  striations,  corres-
ponding to  the  individual  fibre-cells,  and  encircling  the
vessel  in  such  dense  array  that  we  find  fibre -cell  by  the
side  of  fibre-cell  without  any  interruption.  The  thick-
ness of  this  layer  can  be  readily  estimated  in  conse-
quence of  the  well-marked  limits  set  to  it  upon  the  in-
and  out-side  by  the  longitudinal-fibre  coats  ;  the  only
deceptive  appearance  is  presented  by  certain  round
bodies,  which  are  to  be  seen  here  and  there  in  the  sub-

i42

LECTURE VI.

stance  of  the  circular-fibre  coat,  but  only  at  the  border  of
the  vessel  (Figs.  26,  b,  b  ;  46  )ra)  m),  and  which  look  like
round  cells  or  nuclei  scattered  through  the  tissue.  These
are  fibre-cells  seen  in  apparent  transverse  section.  The
layer  formed  by  the  middle  coat  may  be  most  distinctly
seen,  however,  after  the  addition  of  acetic  acid,  which
causes  the  appearance  of  a  great  number  of  oblong
nuclei.

It  is  this  layer  which,  generally  speaking,  confers  upon
the  arteries  their  specific  character,  and  distinguishes
them  most  clearly  from  the  veins.  There  are,  indeed,
numerous  veins  in  the  body  which  possess  considerable
layers  of  muscular  tissue — for  example,  the  superficial
cutaneous  veins  ;  still,  in  the  case  of  the  smaller  vessels,
the  occurrence  of  a  distinctly  marked  circular-fibre  coat

Fig.  46.

ami

is  so  peculiarly  characteristic  of  arterial  vessels,  that,
wherever  we  meet  with  such  a  structure,  we  are  at  once
inclined  to  assume  the  vessel  to  be  arterial.

These  vessels,  which  must be included among the

Fig.  46.  A  minute  artery  from  the  sheath  of  the  tendon  of  one  of  the  extensors
of  a  hand  just  amputated,  a,  a.  External  coat.  ?n,  m.  Middle  coat,  with  well-
developed  muscular  layer,  i,  i.  Internal  coat,  partly  with  longitudinal  folds,  partly
with  longitudinal  nuclei,  in  the  side-branch  brought  well  into  view  in  consequence
of  the  two  external  coats  having  been  torn  away. 300  diameters.

ARTERIES  AND CAPILLARIES.  143

larger  ones,  although  even  when  full  of  blood  they  only
appear  to  the  naked  eye  like  red  filaments,  pass  gradually
into  smaller  ones,  and  with  a  power  magnifying  three
hundred  diameters,  we  see  them  breaking  up  into
branches,  into  which,  even  when  they  are  very  small,  the
three  coats  are  at  first  continued.  It  is  only  in  the
smallest  branches  that  the  muscular  coat  finally  disap-
pears, the  intervals  between  the  individual  transverse
fibres  becoming  wider  and  wider,  and  the  internal  coat
(the  nuclei  of  which  lie  in  a  longitudinal  direction  and
cross  those  of  the  middle  coat  at  right  angles  (Fig.  26,
D,  -E1,)),  at  the  same  time  appearing  more  and  more
distinctly  through  it.  The  external  coat  also  may  be
followed  for  a  short  distance  farther  (being  in  many
places,  as  in  the  brain,  rendered  more  evident  by  the  in-
terspersion  of  pigment  or  fat,  Fig.  26,  D,  E),  till  at  last
it  also  becomes  lost  to  view,  and  only  a  simple  capillary
remains  (Fig.  3,  c).  The  general  supposition,  therefore,
is  that  the  proper  capillary  membrane  most  nearly  cor-
responds to  the  internal  coat  of  the  larger  vessels,  and  it
is  usually  considered  that  the  more  complete  a  vessel
becomes,  the  greater  is  the  number  of  the  coats  which
develop  themselves  around  it.  The  real  developmental
relations  which  these  parts  bear  to  one  another  have,
however,  been  by  no  means  accurately  determined.

Within  the  true  capillary  region  there  is  nothing
further  worthy  of  notice  in  the  vessels  than  the  nuclei  I
have  previously  mentioned,  which  correspond  to  the
longitudinal  axis  of  the  vessel,  and  are  so  imbedded  in
its  membrane,  that  it  is  impossible  to  discover  any  traces
of  a  surrounding  cell-wall.  The  capillary  membrane  is
seen  to  be  quite  uniform,  absolutely  homogeneous  and
continuous  (Fig.  3,  c).  Whilst  even  as  lately  as  twenty
years  ago,  it  was  a  matter  of  discussion  whether  there
did  not  exist  vessels  which  were  destitute  of  true  walls,

144  LECTURE  VI.

and  were  nothing  more  than  channellings  or  excava-
tions in  the  parenchyma  of  organs,  as  well  as  whether
vessels  could  not  be  produced  by  the  formation  of  new
tracks  in  communication  with  the  old  channels  by  the
forcing  asunder  of  the  neighboring  parenchyma  ;  there
can,  at  the  present  time,  be  no  longer  any  doubt  as  to
the  vascular  system's  being  everywhere  continuously
closed  by  membranes.  In  these  it  is  not  possible  to
descry any  porosity, Even the minute pores, which

>  have  recently  been  observed  in  different  parts,  have  not,
up  to  the  present  time,  met  with  their  counterparts  in

l  the  capillary  membrane,  and  when  the  porosity  of  this
membrane  is  spoken  of,  the  expression  can  only  be
admitted  in  a  physical  sense,  as  applying  to  invisible,
really  molecular  interstices.  A  film  of  collodion  is  not
more  homogeneous,  nor  more  continuous,  than  the  mem-
brane of  a  capillary.  A  series  of  possibilities,  which
used  to  be  admitted,  as  that,  for  example,  the  continuity
of  the  capillary  membrane  did  not^xist  at  certain  points,
simply  fall  to  the  ground.  A  "  transudation  "  or  dia-
pedesis  of  the  blood  through  the  walls  of  vessels  without
the  occurrence  of  any  rupture  cannot  for  an  instant  be
admitted  ;  and  although  we  cannot  in  every  individual
case  point  out  the  exact  site  of  the  rupture,  it  is,  not-
withstanding, quite  inconceivable  that  the  blood  with  its
corpuscles  should  be  able  to  pass  through  the  walls  in
any  other  way  than  through  a  hole  in  them.  This  is
such  a  very  natural  deduction  from  ascertained  histolo-
gical facts,  that  all  discussion  upon  the  point  is  impos-
sible.

After  the  capillaries  have  pursued  their  course  for  a
time,  small  veins  begin  gradually  to  form  out  of  them,
and  generally  run  back  in  the  neighbourhood  of  the  arte-
ries (Fig.  45,  v).  In  them  the  characteristic  circular-
fibre  coat  of  the  arteries  is  in  general  wanting,  or  at  least

SMALL  VEINS.

145

it  is  very  much  less  developed.  In  its  place  we  find  in
the  middle  coat  of  the  larger  veins  toughish  layers,  which
are  not  characterized  so  much  by  the  absence  of  muscu-
lar elements  as  by  the  greater  abundance  of  elastic  ele-
ments which  run  in  a  longitudinal  direction  and  are
found  in  greater  or  less  quantity  in different  localities.

Fig.  41.

In  an  inward  direction  there  follow  next  the  softer  and
more  delicate  layers  of  connective  tissue  of  the  internal

Fig.  48.

Fig.  41.  A.  Epithelium  from  the  femoral  artery  (« Archiv  f.  path.  Anat.,'  vol.  in.,
figs.  9  and  12,  p.  596). a.  Division  of  nucleus.

B.  Epithelium  from  veins  of  considerable  size,  a,  a.  Largish,  granular,  round,
uni-nuclear  cells  (colourless  blood- corpuscles?)  b,  b.  Oblong  and  spindle-shaped
cells,  with  divided  nuclei  and  nucleoli,  c.  Large,  flat  cells,  with  two  nuclei,  of
which  each  has  three  nucleoli,  and  is  in  process  of  division,  d.  Coherent  epithe-
lium, with  the  nuclei  in  a  state  of  progressive  division,  one  cell  having  six  nuclei.
320  diameters.

Fig.  48.  Epithelium  from  the  vessels  of  the  kidney.  A.  Flat,  spindle-shaped
cells  with  longitudinal  folds  and  large  nuclei  from  a  new-born  child.  B.  Ribbon-
like, nearly  homogeneous,  plate  of  epithelium  with  longitudinal  nuclei  from  an
adult. 350  diameters.

10

146  LECTURE  VI.

coat,  and  lying  on  this  is  found,  in  the  last  place,  a  flat,
extremely  translucent  layer  of  epithelium,  which  is  very
prone  to  protrude  out  of  the  cut  end  of  the  vessel,  and
gives  the  impression  of  spindle-shaped  cells,  so  that  it
may  easily  be  mistaken  for  spindle-shaped  muscular  cells.
The  smallest  veins  likewise  possess  this  epithelium,  but,
with  this  exception,  are,  properly  speaking,  entirely  com-
posed of  connective  tissue  provided  with  longitudinal
nuclei  (Fig.  45,  v).

These  relations  undergo  no  essential  change  even  when
the  individual  constituents  of  the  vascular  system  expe-
rience the  most  extreme  enlargement.  This  is  best  seen
in  pregnane!/,  in  which  not  merely  in  the  uterus,  but  also
in  the  vagina,  the  Fallopian  tubes,  the  ovaries,  and  the
ligaments  of  the  uturus,  both  the  large  and  small  arteries
and  veins,  as  well  as  the  capillaries,  exhibit  a  very  high
degree  of  dilatation,  so  that  the  rest  of  the  tissue,  in  spite
of  its  having  likewise  in  no  inconsiderable  degree  become
enlarged,  is  thereby  virtually  thrust  into  the  back-
ground. Nevertheless,  however,  parts  of  this  puerperal
sexual  apparatus  are  extremely  well  adapted  for  display-
ing the  relation  between  the  histological  elements  and
the  vascular  (arterial)  districts.  In  the  fimbriae  of  the
Fallopian  tubes,  for  example,  every  plexus  or  loop
formed  towards  the  borders  by  the  greatly  dilated  capil-
laries encloses  a  certain  number  of  large  connective  tis-
sue cells,  of  which  only  a  few  lie  in  immediate  contact
with  the  vessels.  In  the  alse  vespertilionum  we  find,
moreover,  very  beautifully  displayed,  a  condition  which
is  of  frequent  occurrence  in  the  appendages  of  the  gene-
rative organs,  and  similar  to  what  we  lately  considered
in  the  scrotum  ;  the  vessels,  namely,  are  accompanied
by  flat  bundles  of  smooth  muscle  in  considerable  quan-
tity which  do  not  belong  to  them,  but  only  follow  the
course  of  the  vessels, and  in  part  receive  the  vessels

MUSCULAR  ELEMENTS.  14-7

into  them.  This  is  an  extremely  important  feature,  in-
asmuch as  the  contraction  of  these  ligaments,  in  which
muscular  tissue  is  not  generally  considered  to  exist,  is
by  no  means  solely  to  be  ascribed  to  the  blood-vessels,
as  James  Traer  only  a  short  time  ago  endeavoured  to
establish  ;  on  the  contrary,  we  find  thickish,  flat  bundles
of  muscle  which  run  through  the  middle  of  the  liga-
ments, and  during  menstrual  excitement  enable  contrac-
tions to  take  place,  similar  to  those  which  we  can  follow
with  such  great  distinctness  in  external  portions  of  the
genital  passages.

If  now  the  question  be  raised  how  far  the  individual
elements  of  the  vessels  are  of  importance  in  the  body,  it
is  at  once  evident  that  the  contractile  elements  play  the  /
most  important  part  in  the  coarser  processes  of  the  cir-
culation, whilst  the  elastic  constituents  come  next,  and
the  simply  permeable,  homogeneous  membranes  last.
Let  us  first  consider  the  import  of  the  muscular  elements,
and  more  particularly  in  those  vessels  which  are  chiefly
provided  with  them,  namely  the  arteries.

When  an  artery  is  acted  upon  by  any  influence  which
causes  a  contraction  of  its  muscular  tissue,  it  must  of
course  become  narrower,  inasmuch  as  the  contractile
cells  lie  in  rings  around  the  vessel ;  this  contraction  may
under  certain  circumstances  proceed  until  the  canal  is
almost  entirely  obliterated,  and  the  natural  consequence
then  is  that  less  blood  penetrates  into  the  corresponding
part  of  the  body.  When,  therefore,  an  artery  is  in  any
way  exposed  to  a  pathological  irritant,  or  when  it  is
excited  by  some  physiological  stimulus,  its  proper  action
cannot  be  displayed  in  any  other  way  than  by  its  becom-
ing narrower.  Now,  indeed,  that  the  muscular  elements
of  the  walls  of  the  vessels  have  become  known,  the  old
doctrine  might  again  be  taken  up,  that,  namely,  the  vessels,

148  LECTURE  VI.

like  the  heart,  originated  a  kind  of  rhythmical  pulsating
movement,  which  was  capable  of  directly  furthering  the
onward  movement  of  the  blood,  so  that  an  arterial  hyper-
aemia  would  be  the  result  of  an  increased  pulsation  in
the  vessels.

"We  are  indeed  acquainted  with  one  isolated  fact  which
is  a  proof  that  a  real  rhythmical  movement  does  take
place  in  the  arterial  walls  ;  and  this  was  first  observed
by  SchifF  in  the  ears  of  rabbits.  Its  rhythm,  however,
does  not  at  all  correspond  with  that  of  the  well-known
arterial  pulsation  ;  the  only  counterpart  to  it  exists  in
the  movements  which  had  previously  been  observed  by
Wharton  Jones  in  the  veins  of  the  wings  of  bats,  and
proceed  in  an  extremely  slow  and  quiet  manner.  I  have
studied  these  phenomena  in  bats,  and  convinced  myself
that  the  rhythm  coincindes  neither  with  the  cardiac  nor
the  respiratory  movements  ;  it  is  quite  a  peculiar,  but
comparatively  not  very  forcible,  movement,  and  takes
place  after  tolerably  long  pauses,  longer  ones  than  are
observed  in  the  case  of  the  circulation  and  shorter  than
those  which  occur  in  respiration.  In  the  ears  of  rabbits,
also,  the  contractions  of  the  arteries  are  far  slower  than
the  cardiac  and  respiratory  movements.

After  excluding  these  phenomena,  which  manifestly
ought  not  to  be  explained  in  such  a  way  as  to  support
the  old  view  of  the  local  occurrence  of  pulsation,  the
essential  fact  remains,  that  the  muscular  fibres  of  a  ves-
sel contract  upon  the  application  of  every  stimulus  which
sets  them  in  action,  but  that  this  contraction  is  not  pro-
pagated in  a  peristaltic  manner,  but  is  confined  to  the
spot  irritated,  or,  at  most,  extends  a  little  beyond,  and
continues  for  a  certain  length  of  time  at  this  spot.  The
more  muscular  the  vessel  is,  the  more  lasting  and  forcible
is  the  contraction  and  the  greater  is  the  obstruction
experienced  by  the  current  of  blood. The  smaller  the

CONTRACTION OF ARTERIES.

149

vessels,  the  more  rapidly,  on  the  contrary,  do  we  see  the
contraction  succeeded  by  a  dilatation,  which,  however,
is  not  in  its  turn  followed  by  a  contraction,  as  it  would
have  to  be  to  constitute  a  pulsation,  but  persists  for  a
longer  or  shorter  time.  This  dilatation  is  not  of  an
active,  but  of  a  passive  nature,  and  results  from  the
pressure  of  the  blood  upon  the  wall  of  the  vessel  which
has  become  fatigued  and  opposes  less  resistance.

If  we  now  proceed  to  examine  the  phenomena  which

Fisr.  49.

Fig.  49.  Irregular  contraction  of  small  vessels  from  the  web  of  a  frog's  foot  after
the  application  of  stimuli. Copied  from  Wharton  Jones.

150  LECTURE  VI.

are  usually  grouped  together  under  the  title  of  active
hyperemia,  there  can  be  no  doubt  but  that  the  mus-
cular tissue  of  the  arteries  is  generally  essentially  con-
cerned therein.  We  very  commonly  find  we  have  to
deal  with  processes  in  which  the  muscular  fibres  of  the
vessels  have  really  been  stimulated,  and  the  contraction
is  succeeded  by  a  state  of  relaxation,  such  as  scarcely
ever  occurs  in  an  equally  marked  manner  in  the  rest  of
the  muscles — a  state  which  is  manifestly  the  expression
of  a  kind  of  fatigue  and  exhaustion,  and  is  the  longer
persistent,  the  more  energetic  the  stimulus  which  was
applied.  In  small  vessels  with  few  muscular  fibres,
therefore,  it  often  seems  as  if  the  stimuli  really  induced
no  contraction,  in  consequence  of  the  extreme  rapidity
with  which  a  state  of  relaxation  is  seen  to  set  in,  con-
tinuing for  a  considerable  time,  and  allowing  of  an  in-
creased influx  of  blood.

This  same  condition  of  relaxation  we  can  experiment-
ally most  easily  produce  by  cutting  the  nerves  supplying
the  vessels  of  a  part,  whilst  the  contraction  can  be
effected  to  a  very  great  extent  by  submitting  these
nerves  to  a  very  energetic  stimulus.  That  our  acquaint-
ance with  this  kind  of  contraction  is  of  so  late  a  date,  is
explained  by  the  fact  that  the  stimuli  applied  to  the
nerves  must  be  very  powerful,  and  that,  as  Claude  Ber-
nard has  shown,  only  strong  electric  currents  are  suffi-
cient for  the  purpose.  On  the  other  hand,  the  condi-
tions which  ensue  upon  the  section  of  the  nerves  are  in
most  parts  so  complicated,  that  the  dilatation  escaped
observation,  until  the  lucky  spot  was  discovered  also  by
Bernard,  and  by  the  section  of  the  sympathetic  nerves
in  the  neck  a  reliable  and  convenient  field  for  observa-
tion was  thrown  open  to  experiment.

We  obtain  therefore  the  important  fact  that,  whether
the  widening of  the  vessel, or, in other words, the

ACTIVE HYPEREMIA.  151

relaxation  of  its  muscular  fibres,  be  produced  directly
by  a  paralysis  of  the  nerve  or  an  interruption  of  the
nervous  influence,  or  whether  it  be  the  indirect  result  of
a  previous  stimulation,  giving  rise  to  exhaustion — that,
I  say,  in  every  case  we  have  to  deal  with  a  kind  of
paralysis  of  the  walls  of  the  vessel,  and  that  the  process
is  incorrectly  designated  active  hyperemia,  inasmuch  as
the  condition  of  the  vessels  in  it  is  always  a  completely
passive  one.  All  that  has  been  built  up  upon  this
assumed  activity  of  the  vessels,  is,  if  not  exactly  built
upon  sand,  still  of  an  extremely  ambiguous  nature,  and
all  the  conclusions  that  have  besides  been  drawn  with
regard  to  the  important  influence  which  the  activity  of
the  vessels  was  supposed  to  have  upon  the  conditions  of
nutrition  of  the  parts  themselves,  fall  at  the  same  time
to  the  ground.

When  an  artery  is  really  in  action,  it  gives  rise  to  no
hyperemia  ;  the  more  powerfully  it  acts,  the  more  does
it  occasion  anaemia,  or,  as  I  have  designated  it,  ischcemia,
and  the  less  or  greater  degree  of  activity  in  the  artery
determines  the  greater  or  less  quantity  of  blood  which
in  a  unit  of  time  can  stream  into  a  given  part.  The
more  active  the  vessel,  the  less  the  supply  of  blood.  If,  then,
we  have  to  deal  with  an  hyperemia  the  result  of  irrita-
tion, the  most  important  point,  therapeutically,  is  just
this  :  to  place  the  vessels  in  such  a  state  of  activity  as
will  enable  them  to  offer  resistance  to  the  onward  rush
of  blood.  This  we  can  accomplish  by  means  of  what  is
called  counter-irritation,  a  higher  degree  of  irritation  in
an  already  irritated  part,  stimulating  the  fatigued  mus-
cular fibres  of  the  vessel  to  persistent  contraction,  and
thereby  diminishing  the  supply  of  blood  and  leading  the
way  to  a  regulation  of  the  disturbance.  In  the  very
cases  in  which  reaction,  that  is,  regulatory  activity,  is
most  called  for,  the  chief  point  is  to  overcome  that  state

152  LECTURE  VI.

of  passiveness  which maintains  the  (so-called active)
hypersemia.

If  we  now  pass  from  the  muscular  to  the  elastic  con-
stituents of  the  vessels,  we  meet  with  a  property  which
is  of  very  great  importance,  on  the  one  hand  in  the
veins,  the  activity  of  which  is  in  many  cases  to  be  wholly
referred  to  their  elastic  elements,  on  the  other  hand,  in
the  arteries,  and  particularly  in  the  aorta  and  its  larger
branches.  In  these  the  elasticity  of  the  walls  has  the
effect  of  compensating  for  the  loss  which  the  pressure  of
the  blood  experiences  from  the  systolic  dilatation  of  the
vessels,  and  of  converting  the  uneven  current  produced
by  the  jerking  movements  of  the  heart  into  an  even  one.
If  the  walls  of  the  vessels  were  not  elastic,  the  stream
of  the  blood  would  unquestionably  be  rendered  very
much  slower,  and  at  the  same  time,  pulsation  would
take  place  throughout  the  whole  extent  of  the  vascular
apparatus  as  far  as  the  capillaries,  for  the  same  jerking
movement  which  is  communicated  to  the  blood  at  the
commencement  of  the  aortic  system  would  continue  even
into  the  smallest  ramifications.  But  every  observation
we  make  in  living  animals  teaches  us  that  within  the
capillaries  the  stream  is  a  continuous  one.  This  equable
onward  movement  is  effected  by  the  elasticity  of  the
walls  of  the  arteries,  in  virtue  of  which  they  return  the
impulse  which  they  receive  from  the  in-rushing  blood
with  the  same  force,  and  by  this  means  maintain  a  regu-
lar onflow  of  the  blood  during  the  time  occupied  by  the
following  diastole  of  the  heart.

If  the  elasticity  of  the  vessel  be  considerably  dimin-
ished, without  its  becoming  stiff  and  immoveable  (from
calcareous  incrustations)  in  the  same  degree,  the  dilata-
tion, which  it  undergoes  from  the  pressure  of  the  blood,
is not again compensated ; the  vessel remains in a

ELASTICITY OF  THE COATS  OF  VESSELS.  153

dilated  condition,  and  thus  are  gradually  produced  the
well-known  forms  of  ecstasis,  such  as  we  are  familiar
with  in  the  arteries  under  the  name  of  aneurysms,  and
in  the  veins  under  that  of  varices.  In  these  processes,
we  have  not  so  much,  as  has  been  represented  of  late,
to  deal  with  primary  disease  of  the  inner  coat,  as  with
changes  which  are  situated  in  the  elastic  and  muscular
middle  coat.

If  therefore  it  is  the  muscular  elements  of  the  arteries
that  have  the  most  important  influence  upon  the  quan-
tity of  blood  to  be  distributed,  and  the  mode  of  its  dis-
tribution, in  the  several  organs,  and  the  elastic  elements
that  are  chiefly  concerned  in  the  production  of  a  rapid
and  equable  stream,  they  nevertheless  exercise  only  an
indirect  influence  upon  the  nutrition  of  the  parts  which
lie  outside  the  vessels  themselves,  and  in  this  matter,  we
are  obliged  to  betake  ourselves,  as  a  last  resource,  to  the
simple,  homogeneous  membrane  of  the  capillaries,  without
which  indeed  not  even  the  constituents  of  the  walls  of
the  larger  vessels  provided  with  vasa  vasorum  would  be
able  to  maintain  themselves  for  any  lengthened  period.
The  difficulty  which  here  presents  itself  has,  as  you
know,  during  the  last  ten  years,  been  chiefly  got  over  by
the  assumption  of  the  existence  of  diffusive  currents
(endosmosis  and  exosmosis)  between  the  contents  of  the
vessels  and  the  fluid  in  the  tissues  ;  and  by  regarding  the
capillary  wall  as  a  more  or  less  indifferent  membrane,
forming  merely  a  partition  between  two  fluids,  which
enter  into  a  reciprocal  relation  with  one  another  ;  while
the  nature  of  this  relation  would  be  essentially  deter-
mined by  the  state  of  concentration  they  are  in  and  their
chemical  composition,  so  that,  according  as  the  internal
or  the  external  fluid  was  the  more  concentrated,  the  dif-
fusive  stream would  run inwardly  or outwardly,  and,

154:  LECTURE  V..

according  to  the  chemical  peculiarities  of  the  individual
juices,  certain  modifications  would  arise  in  these  currents.
Generally  speaking,  however,  the  chemical  side  of  this
question  has  been  but  little  regarded.

It  cannot  be  denied  that  there  are  certain  facts  which
cannot  well  be  explained  in  any  other  manner,  especially
in  cases  where  essential  alterations  have  taken  place  in
the  state  of  concentration  of  the  juices,  for  example,  in
that  form  of  cataract  which  Kunde  has  artificially  pro-
duced in  frogs  by  the  introduction  of  salt  into  their  intes-
tinal canal  or  subcutaneous  cellular  tissue.  But  in  pro-
portion as,  after  a  physical  study  of  the  phenomena  of
diffusion,  the  conviction  has  been  acquired  that  the  mem-
brane which  separates  the  fluids  is  not  an  indifferent
substance,  but  that  its  nature  exercises  a  directly  con-
trolling influence  upon  the  permeating  powers  of  the
fluids,  it  becomes  impossible  that  a  like  influence  should
be  denied  the  capillary  membrane.  We  must  not,  how-
ever, go  so  far,  as  to  ascribe  to  this  membrane  all  the
peculiarities  observable  in  the  interchange  of  material,
and  so  explain  how  it  happens,  that  certain  matters
which  enter  into  the  composition  of  the  blood  are  not
distributed  in  equal  proportion  to  every  part,  but  leave
the  vessels  at  some  points  in  greater,  at  others  in  less,
quantity,  and  at  others  not  at  all.  These  peculiarities
depend,  manifestly,  on  the  one  hand,  upon  the  differ-
ent degrees  of  pressure  to  which  the  column  of  blood  is
subjected  in  certain  parts,  and,  on  the  other,  upon  spe-
cial properties  of  the  tissues  ;  and  we  are  irresistibly  com-
pelled, both  by  the  consideration  of  simply  pathological,
and  particularly  by  that  of  pharmaco-dynamical,  pheno-
mena to  admit  that  there  are  certain  affinities  existing
between  definite  tissues  and  definite  substances,  which
must  be  referred  to  peculiarities  of  chemical  constitution,
in  virtue  of  which  certain  parts  are  enabled  in  a  greater

INFLUENCE OF  THE  VESSELS  UPON  NUTRITION.  155

degree  than  others  to  attract  certain  substances  from  the
neighbouring  blood.

If  we  consider  the  possibility  of  such  attraction  with  a
little  more  attention,  it  is  peculiarly  interesting  to  ob-
serve the  behaviour  of  parts,  which  are  at  a  certain  dis-
tance from  the  vessel.  If  we  apply  a  definite  stimulus,
for  example,  a  chemical  substance,  a  small  quantity  of
an  alkali  I  will  suppose,  directly  to  any  part,  we  see  that
this  shortly  afterwards  takes  up  more  nutritive  matter,
so  that  even  in  a  few  hours  its  size  becomes  considerably
increased,  and  that,  whilst  before  we  were  perhaps
scarcely  able  to  distinguish  anything  in  its  interior,  we
now  find  an  abundant,  relatively  opaque  material  within
it,  in  no  wise  composed  of  alkali  which  had  made  its  way
in,  but  essentially  containing  substances  of  an  albuminous
nature.  Observation  shows  that  the  process  in  all  vas-
cular parts  begins  with  hyperaemia,  so  that  the  idea  rea-
dily presents  itself  that  the  hyperaemia  is  the  essential  and
determining  cause.  But  if  we  investigate  the  matter
more  minutely,  we  find  it  difficult  to  understand  how  the
blood,  which  is  in  the  hyperaemic  vessels,  can  contrive
only  to  act  just  upon  the  irritated  part,  whilst  other
parts  lying  in  the  immediate  vicinity  are  not  affected  in
the  same  manner.  In  all  cases  in  which  the  vessels  are
the  immediate  originators  of  disturbances  which  take
place  in  a  tissue,  these  are  most  marked  in  the  immediate
neighbourhood  of  the  vessels  and  in  the  district  which  they
supply  (vascular  (or  vessel-)  territory).  If  we  introduce
an  irritating,  as,  for  example,  a  decomposing  body  into
a  blood-vessel,  a  fact  that  has  been  established  by  me
upon  a  large  scale  when  tracing  out  the  history  of  em-
bolia,  we  by  no  means  see  that  the  parts  at  a  distance
from  the  vessel  are  the  principal  seats  of  active  change,
but  that  this  is  in  the  first  instance  manifested  in  the  wall
of  the  vessel  itself  and  then  in  the  adjoining  histological

156  LECTURE  VI.

elements.  But  if  we  apply  the  stimulus  directly  to  the
tissue,  the  central  point  of  the  disturbance  will  always
continue  to  be  that  at  which  the  stimulus  produced  its
effect,  just  the  same  whether  there  are  vessels  in  the
neighbourhood  or  not.

We  shall  hereafter  have  occasion  to  return  to  this  sub-
ject, and  my  only  object  here  was  to  lay  this  fact  before
you  in  its  general  features,  and  thus  repel  the  ordinary
conclusion,  which  is  as  convenient  as  it  is  fallacious,  that
hyperemia  (in  itself  passive)  exercises  a  directly  regulat-
ing influence  upon  the  nutrition  of  tissues.

If  a  special  proof  were  still  required  in  order  to  com-
plete the  refutation  of  this  assumption,  which  in  an  ana-
tomical point  of  view  is  utterly  untenable,  we  find  a
most  apposite  argument  in  the  experiment  above  men-
tioned of  the  section  of  the  sympathetic.  In  an  animal
the  sympathetic  may  be  divided  in  the  neck  ;  thereupon
a  state  of  hyperemia  ensues  in  the  whole  of  that  half  of
the  head,  the  ears  become  dark  red,  the  vessels  greatly
dilated,  the  conjunctiva  and  nasal  mucous  membrane
turgidly  injected.  This  may  continue  for  days,  weeks,
or  months,  without  the  least  appreciable  nutritive  dis-
turbance necessarily  arising  therefrom ;  the  parts,
although  gorged  with  blood,  are  yet,  as  far  at  least  as
we  are  at  present  able  to  judge  of  this,  in  the  same  state
of  nutrition  as  before.  If  we  apply  stimuli  sufficient  to
produce  inflammation  to  these  parts,  the  only  thing  that
we  remark  is,  that  the  inflammation  runs  its  course  more
quickly,  without  exhibiting  either  in  itself  or  in  the  na-
ture of  its  products  anything  essentially  unusual.

The  greater  or  less  quantity  of  blood,  therefore,  which
flows  through  a  part  is  not  to  be  regarded  as  the  only
cause  of  the  changes  in  its  nutrition.  There  is,  I  sup-
pose, no  doubt  that,  when  a  part,  which  is  in  a  state  of
irritation,  receives  more  blood  than  usual,  it  is  also  able

INFLUENCE  OF THE VESSELS UPON  NUTRITION.  157

to  attract  a  larger  quantity  of  material  from  the  blood
with  greater  readiness  than  it  otherwise  would  have
done,  or  than  it  would  be  able  to  do,  if  the  vessels  were
in  a  state  of  contraction  or  less  filled  with  blood.  If,
therefore,  it  were  to  be  objected  to  my  view  that  in  such
conditions  the  most  favorable  effects  are  often  produced
by  local  abstractions  of  blood,  this  would  be  no  proof  of
its  incorrectness.  If  we  cut  off  or  diminish  the  supply
of  nutritive  matter,  we  must,  of  course,  prevent  the  part
from  absorbing  more  than  its  wont,  but,  vice  versa,  we
cannot  by  offering  it  a  larger  quantity  of  nutritive  mate-
rial straightway  compel  it  to  take  up  more  than  it  did  ;
these  are  two  entirely  independent  cases.  However  apt
one  may  be  to  conclude  (and  however  much  I  may  be
disposed  to  allow,  that  at  the  first  glance  there  is  some-
thing very  plausible  in  such  a  conclusion)  that,  from  the
favourable  effect  which  the  cutting  off  of  the  supply  of
blood  has  in  putting  a  stop  to  a  process  which  arose  from
an  increase  of  it,  the  process  depended  upon  this  increased
supply,  yet  I  am  of  opinion  that  the  practical  fact  can-
not be  interpreted  in  this  way.  It  is  not  so  much  an
increase  of  quantity,  either  in  the  blood  as  a  whole  or  in
that  portion  of  it  contained  in  an  individual  part,  which
is  required  in  order  that  a  like  increase  should  forthwith
take  place  in  the  nutrition  of  that  part,  or  of  the  whole
body,  as  that,  in  my  opinion,  particular  conditions  should
obtain  in  the  tissues  (irritation)  altering  the  nature  of
their  attraction  for  the  constituents  of  the  blood,  or  that
particular  matters  should  be  present  in  the  blood  (specific
substances),  upon  which  definite  parts  of  the  tissues  are
able  to  exercise  a  particular  attraction.

If  you  apply  this  doctrine  to  the  humoro-pathological
conception  of  the  processes,  you  will  be  able  to  deduce
from  it  that  I  am  far  from  contesting  the  correctness  of
the  humoral  explanations  in  general,  and  that  I  rather

158  LECTURE  VI.

cherish  the  conviction  that  particular  substances  which
find  their  way  into  the  blood  are  able  to  induce  particu-
lar changes  in  individual  parts  of  the  body  by  their  be-
ing taken  up  into  them  in  virtue  of  the  specific  attraction
of  individual  parts  for  individual  substances.  "We  know,
for  example,  that  a  number  of  substances  are  introduced
into  the  body  which  possess  special  affinities  for  the  ner-
vous system,  and  that  among  this  number  again  there
are  some  which  stand  in  a  closer  connection  with  certain
very  definite  parts  of  the  nervous  system,  as  for  instance
with  the  brain,  the  spinal  cord  or  sympathetic  ganglia,
and  others  again  with  particular  parts  of  the  brain,  spi-
-;  nal  cord,  etc.  On  the  other  hand,  we  see  that  certain
materials  have  some  special  relation  to  definite  secreting
organs  ;  that  they  penetrate  and  pervade  them  by  a  kind
of  elective  affinity  ;  that  they  are  excreted  by  them  ;
and  that,  when  there  is  a  too  abundant  supply  of  such
materials,  a  state  of  irritation  is  produced  in  these  or-
gans. But  an  essential  condition  in  all  these  cases  is,
that  the  parts  which  are  believed  to  have  a  particular
elective  affinity  for  particular  matters,  should  really  exist,
for  a  kidney  which  loses  its  epithelium  is  thereby  de-
prived of  its  secreting  power.  Another  condition  is  that
the  parts  should  possess  a  relation  of  affinity,  for  neither
a  diseased,  nor  a  dead,  kidney  has  any  longer  the  affinity
for  particular  substances  which  the  gland,  when  living
and  healthy,  possessed.  The  power  of  attracting  and
transforming  definite  substances  can  be  maintained  at
most  for  a  short  time  in  an  organ,  which  no  longer  con-
tinues in  a  really  living  condition.  We  are  therefore,  in
the  end,  always  compelled  to  regard  the  individual  ele-
ments as  the  active  agents  in  these  attractions.  An
hepatic  cell  can  attract  certain  substances  from  the  blood
which  flows  through  the  nearest  capillary  vessel,  but  it
must  in  the  first  place  exist,  and  in  the  next  be  in  the

SPECIFIC AFFINITIES— LIVER.  159

ejoyment  of  its  special  properties,  in  order  to  exercise
this  attraction.  If  the  living  element  become  altered,  if
a  disease  set  in  which  causes  changes  in  its  molecular,
physical,  or  chemical  peculiarities,  then  its  power  of  ex-
arcising  this  special  attraction  will  at  the  same  time  also
be  impaired.

Let  us  consider  this  example  with  still  greater  atten^
tion.  The  hepatic  cells  are  almost  in  direct  contact  with
the  walls  of  the  capillaries,  from  which  they  are  only  sepa-
rated by  a  thin  layer  of  delicate  connective  tissue.  If
now  we  were  to  imagine  that  the  peculiar  property  pos-
sessed by  the  liver  of  secreting  bile,  merely  consisted  in
a  particular  disposition  of  the  vessels  of  the  organ,  we
should  indeed  in  no  wise  be  justified  in  doing  so.  Simi-
lar networks  of  vessels,  in  a  great  measure  of  a  venous
nature,  are  found  in  several  other  places,  for  example,
in  the  lungs.  But  .the  peculiarity  of  the  secretion  of  bile
manifestly  depends  upon  the  liver-cells,  and  only  so  long
as  the  blood  flows  past  in  the  immediate  neighbourhood
of  the  hepatic  cells,  does  the  particular  attraction  of  mat-
ter continue  which  characterizes  the  action  of  the  liver.

When  the  blood  contains  free  fat,  we  see  that  after  a
time  the  hepatic  cells  take  it  up  in  minute  particles,  and
that  if  the  supply  continues,  the  fat  becomes  more  abun-
dant and  is  gradually  separated  in  the  form  of  largish
drops  within  the  hepatic  cells  (Fig.  27,  B,  b).  That
which  we  see  in  the  case  of  fat  in  a  more  palpable  form,
we  must  conceive  to  occur  in  the  case  of  many  other
substances  in  a  state  of  more  minute  division.  Thus  for
the  due  performance  of  secretion  it  will  always  be  essen-
tial that  the  cells  exist  in  a  certain,  special  condition  ;  if
they  become  diseased,  if  a  condition  be  developed  in
them  connected  with  some  important  chemical  change  in
their  contents,  for  example,  an  atrophy,  ultimately  caus-
ing the  destruction of  the  parts,  then  the  power pos-

160  LECTURE  VI.

sessed  by  the  organ  of  forming  bile  will  at  the  same  time
continually  become  more  limited.  We  cannot  conceive
a  liver  without  liver-cells  ;  they  are,  as  far  as  we  know,
the  really  active  elements,  since  even  in  cases  in  which
the  supply  of  blood  has  become  limited  owing  to  obstruc-
tion in  the  portal  vein,  the  hepatic  cells  are  able  to  pro-
duce bile,  although  perhaps  not  in  the  same  quantity.

This  fact  derives  peculiar  value  from  its  occurrence  in
the  liver,  because  the  matters  which  constitute  the  bile
do  not,  as  is  well  known,  exist  pre-formed  in  the  blood,
and  we  must  therefore  suppose  the  constituents  of  the
bile  to  arise  not  by  a  process  of  simple  secretion,  but  by
one  of  actual  formation  in  the  liver.  This  question  has,
as  you  are  aware,  recently  become  invested  with  a  still
greater  degree  of  interest  in  consequence  of  the  observa-
tion of  Bernard  that  the  property  of  producing  sugar  is
I  also  inherent  in  these  elements,  whereby  the  blood  is
supplied  upon  so  gigantic  a  scale  with  a  substance  which
has  the  most  decided  influence  upon  the  internal  meta-
morphic  processes  and  upon  the  production  of  heat.  If,
therefore,  we  speak  of  the  action  of  the  liver,  we  can,
both  in  regard  to  the  formation  of  sugar  as  well  as  that
of  bile,  mean  nothing  but  the  action  of  its  individual  ele-
ments (cells),  an  action  which  consists  in  their  attracting
matters  from  the  passing  current  of  blood,  in  their  effect-
ing within  their  cavity  a  transmutation  of  these  matters,
and  returning  them  in  this  transmuted  form  either  to
the  blood,  or  yielding  them  up  to  the  bile-ducts  in  the
shape  of  bile.

Now  I  demand  for  cellular  pathology  nothing  more
than  that  this  view,  which  must  be  admitted  to  be  true
in  the  case  of  the  large  secreting  organs,  be  extended  also
to  the  smaller  organs  and  smaller  elements  ;  and  that,  for
example,  an  epidermis-cell,  a  lens-fibre  or  a  cartilage-cell
be,  to  a  certain  extent,  admitted  to  possess  the  power  of

THE NOBLER JUICES.  161

deriving  from  the  vessels  nearest  to  them  (not  always
indeed  directly,  but  often  by  transmission  from  a  dis
tance),  in  accordance  with  their  several  special  require-
ments, certain  quantities  of  material  ;  and  again  that,
after  they  have  taken  this  material  up,  they  be  held  to
be  capable  of  subjecting  it  to  further  changes  within
themselves,  and  this  in  such  a  manner  that  they  either
derive  therefrom  new  matter  for  their  own  development ;
or  that  the  substances  accumulate  in  their  interior,  with-
out their  reaping  any  immediate  benefit  from  it  ;  or
finally  that,  after  this  imbibition  of  material,  even  decay
may  arise  in  their  structure  and  their  dissolution  ensue.
At  all  events  it  seems  necessary  to  me  that  great  promi-
nence should  be  assigned  to  this  specific  action  of  the  ele-
ments of  tissues,  in  opposition  to  the  specific  action  of  the
vessels,  and  that  in  studying  local  processes  we  should
principally  devote  ourselves  to  the  investigation  of  pro-
cesses of  this  nature.

It  will  now,  I  think,  be  most  suitable  for  us  next  to
enter  a  little  more  in  detail  upon  the  consideration  of
the  facts  which  form  the  basis  of  the  humoro-pathologi-
cal  system — upon  the  study  of  the  so-called  nobler  juices.
If  the  blood  be  considered  in  its  normal  influence  upon
nutrition,  the  most  important  point  is  not  its  movement,  .
nor  the  greater  or  less  afflux  of  it,  but  its  intimate  com-
position. When  the  quantity  of  blood  is  great,  but  its
composition  does  not  correspond  to  the  natural  require-
ments of  the  parts,  nutrition  may  suffer  ;  when  the  quan-
tity is  small,  nutrition  may  proceed  in  a  comparatively
very  favourable  manner,  if  every  single  particle  of  the
blood  contain  its  ingredients  mixed  in  the  most  favorable
proportions.

If  the  blood  be  considered  as  a  whole  in  contradistinc-
tion to  other  parts,  the  most  dangerous  thing  we  can  do

ll

162  LECTURE  VI.

is  to  assume  what  has  at  all  times  created  the  greatest
confusion,  namely,  that  we  have  in  it  to  deal  with  a  fluid
in  itself  independent,  but  upon  which  the  great  mass  of
tissues  more  or  less  depend.  The  greater  number  of  the
humoro-pathological  doctrines  are  based  upon  the  sup-
position, that  certain  changes  which  have  taken  place  in
the  blood  are  more  or  less  persistent  ;  and  just  in  the
very  instance  where  these  doctrines  have  practically  ex-
ercised the  greatest  influence,  in  the  theory,  namely,  of
chronic  dyscrasise,  it  is  usually  conceived  that  the  change
is  continuous,  and  that  by  inheritance  peculiar  altera-
tions in  the  blood  may  be  transmitted  from  generation
to  generation,  and  be  perpetuated.

This  is,  I  think,  the  fundamental  mistake  of  the  humo-
ralists,  the  real  hinge  upon  which  their  errors  turn.  Not
that  I  doubt  at  all  that  a  change  in  the  composition  of
the  blood  may  pertinaciously  continue,  or  that  it  may
propagate  itself  from  generation  to  generation,  but  I  do
not  believe  that  it  can  be  propagated  in  the  blood  itself
and  there  persist,  and  that  the  blood  is  the  real  seat  of
the  dyscrasia.

My  cellulo-pathological  views  differ  from  the  humoro-
pathological  ones  essentially  in  this,  that  I  do  not  regard
the  blood  as  a  permanent  tissue,  in  itself  independent,
regenerating  and  propagating  itself  out  of  itself,  but  as
in  a  state  of  constant  dependence  upon  other  parts.  We
need  only  apply  the  same  conclusions  which  are  univer-
sally admitted  to  be  true  as  regards  the  dependence  of
the  blood  upon  the  absorption  of  new  nutritive  matters
from  the  stomach,  to  the  tissues  of  the  body  themselves
also.  When  the  drunkard's  dyscrasia  is  spoken  of,  no-
body of  course  imagines  that  every  one  who  has  once
been  drunk  labours  under  a  permanent  alcoholic  dyscra-
sia, but  the  common  opinion  is,  that,  when  continually
fresh  quantities  of  alcohol  are  ingested,  continually  fresh

THEORY OF  DYSCR ASIA— ITS  LOCAL ORIGIN.  163

changes  also  declare  themselves  in  the  blood,  so  that  its
altered  state  must  continue  as  long  as  the  supply  of  fresh
noxious  matters  takes  place,  or  as,  in  consequence  of
a  previous  supply,  individual  organs  remain  in  a  diseased
condition.  If  no  more  alcohol  be  ingested,  if  the  organs
which  had  been  injured  by  the  previous  indulgence  in  it
be  restored  to  their  normal  condition,  there  is  no  doubt
but  that  the  dyscrasia  will  therewith  terminate.  This  ex-
ample, applied  to  the  history  of  all  the  remaining  dyscra-
siae,  elucidates  in  a  very  simple  manner  the  proposition,
that  every  dyscrasia  is  dependent  upon  a  permanent  supply
of  noxious  ingredients  from  certain  sources.  As  a  con- 1
tinual  ingestion  of  injurious  articles  of  food  is  capable  of
producing  a  permanently  faulty  composition  of  the  blood,
in  like  manner  persistent  disease  in  a  definite  organ  is
able  to  furnish  the  blood  with  a  continual  supply  of  mor-
bid materials.

The  essential  point,  therefore,  is  to  search  for  the
local  origins  of  the  different  dyscrasiae,  to  discover  the
definite  tissues  or  organs  from  which  this  derangement
in  the  constitution  of  the  blood  proceeds.  Now  I  am  quite
willing  to  confess  that  it  has  not  in  many  cases  hitherto
been  possible  to  find  out  these  tissues  or  organs.  In
many  cases,  however,  success  has  been  obtained,  although
it  cannot  be  said  in  every  instance  in  what  way  the  blood
has  become  changed.  Thus  we  have  that  remarkable
condition,  which  may  very  well  be  referred  to  a  dyscra-
sia, the  scorbutic  condition,  purpura,  and  the  petechial
dyscrasia.  In  vain  will  you  look  around  for  decisive  in-
formation as  to  the  nature  of  this  dyscrasia,  and  as  to  the
kind  of  change  experienced  by  the  blood  when  purpura
or  scurvy  show  themselves.  What  has  been  found  by
one  has  been  contradicted  by  another,  and  it  has  even
been  shown  that  sometimes  no  change  had  taken  place
in  the proportions of  the grosser  constituents  of  the

164  LECTURE VI.

blood.  There  remains  in  this  case,  therefore,  a  quid  ig-
notum,  and  you  will,  I  am  sure,  deem  it  excusable,  if  we
are  unable  to  say  whence  a  dyscrasia  proceeds,  of  which
we  are  altogether  unacquainted  with  the  nature.  How-
ever, the  knowledge  of  the  nature  of  the  change  in  the
blood  does  not  involve  an  insight  into  the  requisite  con-
ditions for  the  dyscrasia,  and  just  as  little  is  the  reverse
the  case.  In  the  case  of  the  haemorrhagic  diathesis,  also,
it  must  at  all  events  be  regarded  as  an  important  step  in
advance,  that  we  are  in  a  number  of  instances  able  to
point  to  a  definite  organ  as  its  source,  as,  for  example,
to  the  spleen  or  liver.  The  chief  point  now  is  to  deter-
mine what  influence  the  spleen  or  the  liver  exercises
upon  the  special  composition  of  the  blood.  If  we  were
acquainted  with  the  nature  of  the  changes  effected  in  the
blood  by  the  influence  of  these  organs,  it  might  not
perhaps  be  difficult  from  our  knowledge  of  the  dis-
eased organ  also  at  once  to  infer  what  kind  of  change
the  blood  would  experience.  But  it  is  nevertheless  an
important  fact  that  we  have  got  beyond  the  mere  study
of  the  changes  in  the  blood,  and  have  been  able  to  ascer-
tain that  there  are  definite  organs  in  which  the  dyscrasia
has  its  root.

In  conformity  herewith  we  must  conclude  that,  if
there  is  a  syphilitic  dyscrasia  in  which  a  virulent  sub-
stance circulates  in  the  blood,  this  cannot  be  perma-
nently present  there,  but  that  its  existence  must  be  due
to  the  persistence  of  local  depots  (Heerde),  whence  new
quantities  of  noxious  matter  are  continually  being  intro-
duced into  the  blood.  By  following  this  track  we  arrive
at  the  conclusion  which  we  have  already  mentioned,  and
which  is  of  extreme  importance  in  a  practical  point  of
view,  that,  namely,  every  permanent  change  which  takes
place  in  the  condition  of  the  circulating  juices,  must  be
derived  from  definite  points  in  the  body,  from  individual

LOCAL  ORIGIN  OF  DYSCRASIA.  165

organs  or  tissues  ;  and  this  fact,  moreover,  is  educed,
that  certain  organs  and  tissues  exercise  a  more  marked
influence  upon  the  composition  of  the  blood  than  others  ;
that  some  bear  a  necessary  relation  to  this  fluid,  others
only  an  accidental  one.

«/-

P

1

'  '  ' ^ -

<< O  J^

'

LECTURE VII.

MARCH 6, 1858.
THE  BLOOD.

Fibrine — Its  fibrillae — Compared  with  mucus,  and  connective  tissue — Homogeneous
condition.

Red  blood-corpuscles — Their  nucleus  and  contents — Changes  of  form — Blood-crys-
tals (Haematoidine,  Hgemine,  Haematocrystalline).

Colourless  blood-corpuscles — Numerical  proportion — Structure — Compared  with  pus-
corpuscles — Their  viscosity  and  agglutination — Specific  gravity — Crusta  granu-
losa— Diagnosis  between  pus-,  and  colourless  blood-corpuscles.

I  intend  to  lay  before  you  to-day,  gentlemen,  some
further  particulars  with  regard  to  the  history  of  the  blood.

I  concluded  my  last  lecture  by  impressing  upon  you
the  necessity  of  localizing  the  different  dyscrasise  ;  em-
ploying the  term  localize,  not  in  its  ordinary  sense,  as
the  dyscrasiae  have  heretofore  been  considered  as  local-
ized, but  rather  in  a  genetical  meaning,  in  accordance
with  which  we  constantly  refer  the  dyscrasiae  to  a  pre-
existing local  affection,  and  regard  some  one  tissue  as
the  source  of  the  persistent  changes  in  the  blood.

If  now  we  consider  the  different  dyscrasise  with  regard
to  their  importance  and  their  source,  two  great  categories
of  dyscrasic  conditions  may  at  the  very  outset  be  distin-
guished, according  namely  as  the  morphological  elements
of  the  blood  become  changed,  or  the  deviation  is  more
of  a  chemical  one,  and  seated  in  the  fluid  constituents.

Among  these  latter,  it  is  the  fibrine,  which,  in  conse-

166

FIBRINE. «  167

quence  of  its  coagulability,  first,  and  that  very  soon
after  the  blood  has  been  removed  from  the  living  body,
assumes  a  visible  form,  and  which  for  this  reason  has
frequently  passed  for  a  morphological  constituent  of
the  blood.  This  notion  concerning  it  has  of  late  been
maintained  in  many  quarters,  and  has  indeed  always  had
a  traditional  existence  in  medicine,  inasmuch  as  from
ancient  times  fibrine  was  constantly  brought  forward  in
addition  to  the  red  constituents  of  the  blood  as  a  special
element,  and  it  was  the  custom  to  estimate  the  quality
of  the  blood,  not  only  from  the  number  of  the  blood-
corpuscles,  but  frequently  in  a  much  more  positive  man-
ner from  the  amount  of  fibrine.

This  dissociation  of  fibrine  from  the  other  fluid  consti-
tuents of  the  blood  is,  to  a  certain  extent,  of  real  value,
because  fibrine,  like  the  blood-corpuscles,  is  quite  a
peculiar  substance,  and  so  exclusively  confined  to  the
blood  and  the  most  closely  allied  juices,  that  it  really
may  be  viewed  as  connected  rather  with  the  blood-cor-
puscles than  with  the  mere  fluids  which  circulate  as
serum.  If  we  consider  the  blood  in  its  really  specific
constituents,  in  those,  by  means  of  which  it  becomes
blood,  and  is  distinguished  from  other  fluids,  it  cannot
be  denied  that,  on  the  one  hand,  the  corpuscles  with
their  haematine,  and,  on  the  other,  the  fibrine  of  the
liquor  sanguinis  are  the  elements  in  which  the  specific
differences  must  be  sought  for.

If  now  we  next  proceed  to  consider  these  constituents
a  little  more  closely,  the  morphological  description  of
fibrine  is  comparatively  rapidly  made.  On  examining
it,  as  it  appears  in  blood-coagula,  it  is  nearly  always
found  in  the  form  described  by  Malpighi,  the  fibrillar.
Its  fibres  generally  form  extremely  fine  interlacements,
delicate  networks,  in  which  they  usually  cross  and  join
one  another  in  a  somewhat  tortuous  form. The  greatest

168

♦LECTURE VII.

variations  exhibited  by  these  fibres  when  forming  out  of
the  blood have  reference  to  their  size  and breadth  ;

these  are  peculiarities  con-
cerning which  it  has  not
hitherto  been  possible  to  form
any  certain  judgment.  I  meet
with  these  variations  pretty
frequently,  but  without  being
in  a  position  to  assign  the  causes  which  determine  them.
The  extremely  fine  and  delicate  fibres  are  those  usually
met  with  ;  but  sometimes  we  find  far  broader,  and
almost  ribbon-like  fibres,  which  are  much  smoother,  but
in  other  respects,  cross  and  interlace  in  pretty  nearly
the  same  manner.  Essentially,  therefore,  there  is  always
present  in  a  clot  a  network  composed  of  fibres,  in  the
meshes  of  which  the  blood-corpuscles  are  enclosed.  If
a  drop  of  blood  be  allowed  to  coagulate,  fine  filaments
of  fibrine  can  be  seen  everywhere  shooting  up  between
the  blood-corpuscles.

With  regard  to  the  nature  of  these  fibres,  we  may
observe  that  there  are  only  two  other  kinds  which,  his-
tologically speaking,  bear  at  all  a  near  resemblance  to
them.  The  one  kind  occurs  in  a  substance  which,
singularly  enough,  effects  an  approximation  between  the
most  ancient,  perfectly  antique,  craseological  ideas  and
the  modern  ones,  namely  in  mucus.  In  the  old  Hippo-
cratical  system  of  medicine  the  whole  mass  of  fibrine  is,
as  is  well  known,  included  under  the  terms  phlegma,
mucus,  and  when  we  compare  mucus  with  fibrine,  we
are  obliged  to  confess  that  there  does  indeed  exist  a
great  similarity  between  them  in  the  form  they  assume
upon coagulation. In a similar manner to fibrine,

Fig.  50.  Coagulated  fibrine  from  human  blood,  a,  Fine,  b,  coarser  and  broader
fibrils,  c,  Red  and  colourless  blood-corpuscles  enclosed  in  the  coagulum.  280
diameters.

FIBRINE, MUCUS AND CONNECTIVE TISSUE.  169

mucus  also  forms  into  fibres,  which  frequently  become
isolated  and  then  coalesce,  so  as  to  give  rise  to  certain
figures.  The  other  substance  which  belongs  here  is  the
intercellular,  or,  if  you  will,  the  gelatine-yielding  sub-
stance of  connective  tissue,  the  collagen  (gluten  of  earlier
writers).  The  fibrils  of  connective  tissue  only  differ  in
that  they  are  not  usually  reticulated,  but  run  a  parallel
course,  whilst  in  other  respects  they  resemble  those  of
fibrine  in  a  high  degree.  The  intercellular  substance  of
connective  tissue  presents  another  point  of  resemblance
with  fibrine  in  the  great  analogy  of  its  behaviour  with
reagents.  When  we  expose  it  to  the  action  of  diluted
acids,  especially  the  ordinary  vegetable  acids,  or  also
weak  mineral  acids,  the  fibres  swell  up  and  disappear
before  our  eyes,  so  that  we  are  no  longer  able  to  say
where  they  are.  The  mass  swells  up,  every  interspace
disappears,  and  it  looks  as  if  the  whole  were  composed
of  a  perfectly  homogeneous  substance.  If  we  slowly
wash  it  and  again  remove  the  acid,  a  fibrous  tissue  may,
if  the  action  have  not  been  too  violent,  once  more  be
obtained,  after  which  the  previous  condition  can  be  pro-
duced afresh,  and  changed  again  at  pleasure.  This
behaviour  has  hitherto  remained  unexplained,  and  for
this  very  reason  Reichert's  view,  which  I  have  already
mentioned,  that  the  substance  of  connective  tissue,  is
really  homogeneous  and  the  fibres  are  only  an  artificial
product,  or  an  optical  delusion,  has  something  alluring
in  it.  In  fibrine,  however,  the  individual  fibres  can,
much  more  distinctly  than  is  the  case  with  connective
tissue,  be  so  completely  isolated,  that  I  cannot  help
saying  that  I  regard  the  separation  into  single  fibres  as
really  taking  place,  and  not  merely  as  an  artificial  one,
or  as  a  delusion  on  the  part  of  the  observer.

But  it  is  very  interesting  to  observe  that  this  fibrillar
stage  of  fibrine  is  invariably  preceded  by  a  homogeneous

170  LECTURE VII.

one,  just  as  connective  tissue  originally  wears  the  form
of  a  homogeneous  intercellular  substance  (mucus)  from
which  fibres  are  only  by  degrees,  if  I  may  so  express
myself,  excreted,  or,  to  employ  the  usual  term,  differen-
tiated. So  fibrine,  too,  which  is  first  of  all  gelatinous,
becomes  differentiated  into  a  fibrillar  mass.  And  indeed
in  the  case  of  inorganic  substances  also  we  find  certain
analogous  appearances.  From  deposits  of  calcareous
salts  or  silicic  acid,  which  were  originally  perfectly  gela-
tinous and  amorphous,  solid  granules  and  crystals  are
gradually  separated.

The  name  fibrils  may  therefore  still  be  retained  to
designate  the  usual  form  in  which  fibrine  presents  itself,
but  at  the  same  time  it  must  be  borne  in  mind,  that  this
substance  originally  existed  in  a  homogeneous,  amor-
phous, gelatinous  condition,  and  can  again  be  reduced
to  it.  This  reduction  can  not  only  be  effected  artificially,
but  takes  place  also  naturally  in  the  body  itself,  so  that
where  we  have  previously  found  fibrils,  we  may  after-
wards meet  with  the  fibrine  in  a  homogeneous  condi-
tion, as,  for  example,  in  the  vessels,  where  aneurysmal
coagula,  and  others,  are  gradually  converted  into  a
homogeneous  mass  of  cartilaginous  density.

Now, with reference to the second portion of  the

blood,  the  blood- corpuscles,  I  may  express  myself  briefly,

as they are well-known elements. I have already

remarked  that  nearly  all  the  histologists  of  the  present

„ e.  time  are  agreed  that  the  co-

Fig.  ol.  &

a,  loured  corpuscles  of  the  blood

Q)  (G)  a

®  (o)  ©  O  ^®  O^&P^  °f  man  aRd  the  higher  mam-
M.J?@f  ®^® malia  contain no nuclei, but

that  they  are  simple  vesicles,

Fig. 51. Nucleated blood-corpuscles from a human foetus, six weeks old.
a.  Homogeneous  cells  varying  in  size,  with  simple,  relatively  large  nuclei,  of  which

RED  BLOOD-CORPUSCLES  AND THEIR CONTENTS.  171

concerning  the  cellular  nature  cf  which  doubts  might
be  permitted,  if  we  did  not  happen  to  know  that,  at
certain  periods  of  the  development  of  the  embryo,  they
do  contain  nuclei.  An  ordinary  red  blood-corpuscle  must
therefore  be  considered  as  composed  of  a  closed  mem-
brane, containing  a  tolerably  tough  mass,  which  is  the
seat  of  the  colour.  Now,  in  man  the  blood-corpuscles
are,  as  is  well  known,  flat,  disc-  or  plate-  „

shaped  bodies,  with  a  central  depression

(V  c

on  each  surface, and,  when  regular  m 2a"  J.

form,  constitute,  as  it  were,  a  ring,  in  the  ^

centre  of  which  the  colour  is  fainter  from  ^

the  diminished  thickness.  The  contents  are  generally
somewhat  summarily  regarded  as  consisting  of  haema-
tine,  or  the  colouring  matter  of  the  blood.  They  are,
however,  unquestionably  very  complex,  and  what  is
called  haematine  forms  merely  a  part  of  them  ;  how  great
a  part  it  has  not  been  hitherto  possible  to  determine.
Whatever  other  matters  are  contained  within  the  blood-
corpuscle  belong  entirely  to  its  chemistry.  Certain
changes  produced  by  the  action  of  external  media  con-
stitute all  that  can  be  seen  of  them.  We  observe  that
the  blood-corpuscles,  according  as  they  imbibe  oxygen,
or  contain  carbonic  acid,  appear  light  or  dark,  whilst
they  alter  their  form  a  little. We  know,  further,  that

a  few  are  slightly  granular,  but  the  greater  number  more  homogeneous ;  at  *  a
colourless  corpuscle,  b.  Cells  with  extremely  small,  but  well  defined  nuclei,  and
distinctly  red  contents,  c.  After  the  addition  of  acetic  acid  the  nuclei  are  seen  in
some  instances  shrivelled  and  jagged,  in  several,  double  ;  at  *  a  granular  corpuscle.
280 diameters.

Fig.  52.  Human  blood-corpuscles  from  an  adult,  a.  An  ordinary  disc-shaped,
red  blood-corpuscle ;  b,  a  colourless  one  ;  c,  red  corpuscles  seen  in  profile,  and
standing  upon  their  rims.  d.  Red  corpuscles  arranged  in  the  form  of  rouleaux  of
money,  e.  Red  corpuscles  which  have  become  irregular  in  outline,  and  shrivelled
through  loss  of  water  (exosmosis).  /.  Shrivelled  red  corpuscles,  with  tuberculated
margins,  and  a  projection,  like  that  produced  by  a  nucleus,  upon  the  flat  surface  of
the  disc.  g.  A  still  more  shrivelled  state,  h.  The  highest  degree  of  shrivellin°-
(melanic  corpuscles). Magnified  280  diameters.

0^.  '  •
172  LECTURE  VII.

by  the  action  of  chemical  fluids,  certain  quantities  of
water  are  abstracted  from  the  corpuscles,  and  that  they
then  shrivel  up  and  experience  peculiar  changes  in  form,
which  might  very  easily  give  rise  to  errors.  These  are
not  unimportant  conditions,  and  I  will  therefore  now  add
a  few  words  concerning  them.

When  a  blood-corpuscle  is  exposed  to  a  loss  of  water
by  the  action  of  a  strongly  concentrated  liquid  upon  it,
the  first  thing  we  observe  is  that,  as  fast  as  fluid  exudes,
little  prominences  arise  on  the  surface  of  the  corpuscle,
at  first  very  much  scattered,  sometimes  at  the  border,
sometimes  more  towards  the  middle,  and  in  the  latter
case,  occasionally  bearing  a  deceptive  resemblance  to  a
nucleus  (Fig.  52,  e,f).  This  has  been  the  source  of  the
erroneous  assumption  of  nuclei,  which  have  been  so
much  described.  If  a  blood-corpuscle  be  watched  for  a
considerable  time  whilst  under  the  action  of  concentrated
media,  more  and  more  protuberances  are  seen  to  arise,
and  the  surface  of  the  corpuscle  becomes  less  in  diameter.
At  the  same  time,  little  folds  and  knobs  form  with  con-
tinually increasing  distinctness  on  the  surface,  and  the
cell  becomes  jagged,  stellate,  and  angular  (Fig.  52,  g).
Jagged  bodies  of  this  sort  are  to  be  seen  every  moment
on  examining  blood  which  has  been  for  some  time  ex-
posed to  the  air.  Even  mere  evaporation  will  produce
this  change.  We  can  effect  it  with  great  rapidity  by
altering  the  composition  of  the  serum  by  the  addition  of
salt  or  sugar.  If  the  abstraction  of  water  continue,  the
corpuscle  grows  smaller  still,  and  ultimately  becomes
smooth  again,  and  at  the  same  time  globular  (Fig.  52,  h),
or  even  perfectly  spherical,  whilst  its  colour  appears
much  more  intense,  and  the  contained  mass  assumes
quite  a  deep  blackish-red  hue.  Hence  we  are  able  to
draw  the  not  uninteresting  conclusion,  that  this  exos-
mosis  consists  essentially  in  a  withdrawal  of  water,  dur-

EFFECTS  OF  FLUIDS  UPON  THE RED CORPUSCLES.  173

ing  which  perhaps  one  or  more  other  matters  pass  out.
as,  for  example,  salt,  but  the  essential  constituents
remain  behind.  The  hsematine  does  not  follow  the
water  ;  the  membrane  of  the  blood-corpuscles  keeps  it
back,  so  that  when  a  large  quantity  of  fluid  is  lost,  the
hsematine  in  the  interior  must  of  course  become  propor-
tionately increased  in  density.

The  reverse  is  the  case  when  we  employ  diluted  fluids.
The  more  diluted  the  fluid,  the  more  does  the  blood-cor-
puscles enlarge  ;  it  swells  up  and  becomes  paler.  On
treating  blood-corpuscles,  which  have  become  smaller
from  the  action  of  concentrated  fluids,  with  water,  we
see  them  pass  back  from  the  globular  into  the  angular
form,  and  from  this  into  the  discoidal  one  ;  after  which
they  continually  become  more  and  more  globular,  often
assume  very  peculiar  shapes,  and  again  grow  paler.
This  process  may,  if  the  dilution  of  the  blood  be  effected
with  great  precaution,  be  continued  until  the  blood-cor-
puscles scarcely  seem  to  retain  a  trace  of  colour,  though
they  still  remain  visible.  In  ordinary  cases,  when  much
liquid  is  added  at  once,  such  a  violent  revolution  is  pro-
duced in  the  economy  of  the  blood-corpuscle,  that  an
escape  of  the  hsematine  immediately  ensues.  We  then
obtain  a  red  solution,  in  which  the  colouring  matter  is
free  and  dissolved  in  the  fluid.  I  call  your  attention  to
this  peculiarity,  because  it  is  continually  occurring  in  the
course  of  investigations,  and  because  it  explains  one  of
the  most  important  phenomena  in  the  formation  of
pathological  deposits  of  pigment,  in  which  we  meet  with
a  precisely  similar  escape  of  hsematine  from  the  blood-
corpuscles  (Fig.  54,  a).  The  expression  generally  made
use  of  under  such  circumstances  is,  that  the  blood-
corpuscles  are  dissolved,  but  it  has  long  been  a  well-
known  fact  that,  as  was  first  shown  by  Carl  Heinricfc
Schultz,  although  there  apparently  no  longer  exist  any

174  LECTURE VII.

cells,  yet  their  membranes  may,  by  means  of  an  aqueous
solution  of  iodine,  again  be  rendered  visible,  whence  it
is  evident  that  it  was  only  the  high  degree  of  distension
and  the  extraordinary  thinness  of  the  membranes  which
prevented  the  corpuscles  from  being  seen.  Indeed,  very
violent  action  on  the  part  of  substances  chemically  dif-
ferent is  required,  in  order  to  effect  a  real  destruction  of
the  blood-corpuscles.  If,  immediately  after  they  have
been  treated  with  a  very  concentrated  solution  of  salt,
water  be  added  in  large  quantity ,  we  may  succeed  in
bringing  things  to  such  a  pass  that  the  contents  of  the
corpuscles  are  abstracted  without  their  swelling  up,  and
their  membranes  remain  behind  visible.  This  was  the
reason  why  Denis  and  Lecanu  asserted  that  the  blood-
corpuscles  contained  fibrine  ;  for  they  believed  that,  by
treating  them  first  with  salt  and  then  with  water,  they
were  able  to  demonstrate  its  presence  in  them.  This  so-
called  fibrine  is,  however,  as  I  have  shown,  nothing  more
than  the  membranes  of  the  blood-corpuscles  ;  real  fibrine  is
not  contained  in  them,  although  their  walls  are  certainly
composed  of  a  substance  which  has  more  or  less  affinity
to  albuminous  matters,  and  may,  when  obtained  in
large  masses,  present  appearances  reminding  one  of
fibrine.

Now  with  regard  to  the  substances  contained  in  the
blood-corpuscles,  they  happen  quite  recently  to  have
become  invested  with  great  interest  in  consequence  of
the  more  morphological  products  which  have  been
observed  to  arise  out  of  them,  and  which  have  produced
a  kind  of  revolution  in  the  whole  theory  of  the  nature  of
organic  matters.  I  refer  here  to  the  peculiar  forms  of
coloured  crystals,  which  can,  under  certain  circumstances,
be  obtained  from  the  colouring  matter  of  the  blood,  and
which  have  acquired  not  only  on  their  own  account  great
chemical,  but  also  very  considerable practical,  interest.

•
i

ILEMATOIDINE.  175

t

We  have  already  become  acquainted  with  three  different
kinds  of  crystals,  of  which  hoematine  seems  to  be  the
common  origin.

To  the  first  form,  with  which  I  at  one  time  busied
myself  much,  I  have  given  the  name  of  Hcematoidine.
This  is  one  of  the  most  frequent  of  metamorphic  products,
and  is  spontaneously  formed  in  the  body  out  of  hsema-
tine,  and  that  indeed  often  in  such  large  quantities  that
its  excretion  can  be  perceived  with  the  naked  eye.  This
substance  in  its  perfect  form  presents  itself  in  the  shape
of  oblique  rhombic  columns,  and  is  of  a  beatiful  yellow-
ish-red, or  frequently,  when  in  thicker  pieces,  deep  ruby-
red,  colour,  and  forms  one  of  the  most  beauti-

'  '  m  Fig.  53.

ful  crystals  we  are  acquainted  with. In  little  ^

plates  too  it  is  not  uncommonly  met  with,  and  **  ^
frequently  bears  a  considerable  resemblance  ^lj|^/
to  the  crystalline  forms  of  uric  acid.  In  the
majority  of  cases  the  crystals  are  very  small,
not  merely  microscopical,  but  even  somewhat  difficult  of
observation  with  the  microscope.  A  man  must  either  be
a  very  keen  observer,  or  provided  with  special  prepara-
tory knowledge,  else  he  will  frequently  discover  in  the
spots  where  the  hsematoidine  is  lying  nothing  more
than  little  streaks,  or  an  apparently  shapeless  mass.
But,  upon  more  accurate  inspection,  the  streaks  resolve
themselves  into  minute  rhombic  columns,  the  mass  into
an  aggregation  of  crystals.  This  substance  may  be  con-
sidered as  the  regular,  typical,  ultimate  form  into  which
hsematine  is  converted  in  any  part  of  the  body  where
large  masses  of  blood  continue  to  lie  for  any  length  of
time.  An  apoplectic  effusion  in  the  brain,  for  example,
cannot  be  repaired  by  any  other  process  than  by  a  large
portion  of  the  blood  undergoing  this  form  of  crystalliza-

Fig.  53.  Crystals  of  Haematoidine  in  different  forms  (Comp.  '  Archiv.  f.  path.
Anat .,'  vol.  i,  p.  391,  plate  iii,  fig.  11). Magnified  300  diameters.

176

LECTURE  VII.

tion,  and  if  we  afterwards  find  a  coloured  cicatrix  at  the
spot,  we  may  feel  perfectly  assured  that  the  colour  is
dependent  upon  the  presence  of  haematoidine.  When
a  young  woman  menstruates,  and  the  cavity  of  the
Graafian  vesicle,  from  which  the  ovum  has  been  ex-
truded, becomes  filled  with  coagulated  blood,  the  haema-
tine  is  gradually  converted  into  haematoidine,  and  we
afterwards  find  at  the  spot  where  the  ovum  had  lain,  the
beautiful  deep-red  colour  of  the  haematoidine  crystals,
which  remain  as  the  last  memorials  of  this  episode.  In
this  manner  we  can  count  the  number  of  apoplectic
attacks,  or  calculate  how  often  a  young  girl  has  menstru-
ated. Every  extravasation  may  leave  behind  its  little  con-
tingent of  haematoidine  crystals,  and  these,  once  formed,

Fig.  54.
c

remain  in  the  interior  of  the  organ,  in  the  shape  of
compact  bodies  endowed  with  the  greatest  powers  of
resistance.

With  respect  to  the  peculiarities  of  haematoidine,  it  has,
in  a  theoretical  point  of  view,  another  special  claim  to

Fig.  54.  Pigment  from  an  apoplectic  cicatrix  in  the  brain  ('  Archiv,'  vol.  i,  pp.
401,  454,  plate  iii,  fig.  7).  a.  Blood-corpuscles  which  have  become  granular  and
are  in  process  of  decolorization.  b.  Cells  from  the  neuroglia,  some  of  them  pro-
vided with  granular  and  crystalline  pigment,  c.  Pigment-granules,  d.  Crystals  of
Haematoidine.  /.  Obliterated  vessel  with  its  former  channel  filled  with  granular  and
crystalline  red  pigment. 300  diameters.

ILEMINE.  177

our  interest,  from  its  presenting  to  us  a  series  of  proper-
ties, which  render  it  conspicuous  as  the  only  substance  in
the  body,  at  least,  that  we  are  as  yet  acquainted  with,
which  is  allied  to  the  colouring  matter  of  the  bile  (Chole-
pyrrhine).  By  the  direct  action  of  mineral  acids,  or  after
previous  treatment  and  preparation  by  means  of  alkalies,
the  same,  or  precisely  similar,  colour-tests  are  obtained,
which  are  yielded  by  the  colouring  matter  of  the  bile
when  treated  with  mineral  acids,  and  it  seems  also  from
other  facts,  that  we  have  here  a  body  before  us,  which  is
very  intimately  connected  with  the  colouring  matter  of
the  bile.  This  circumstance  derives  its  especial  interest
from  its  being  supposed,  for  other  reasons  also,  that  the
coloured  constituents  of  the  bile  are  products  of  the  de-
composition of  the  red  colouring  matter  of  the  blood. ,
In  the  interior  of  extravasations  there  really  does  arise  a
yellowish  red  substance  which  may  be  designated  as  a
newly  formed  kind  of  biliary  colouring  matter.

The  second  kind  of  crystals  which  arise  out  of  hema*;
"tine  was  discovered  later  ;  they  are  very  similar  to  the
preceding  ones,  but  differ  from  them  in  that  they  do  not
occur  as  a  spontaneous  product  in  the  body,  but  must  be
artificially  produced. They  are  more  of  a  dark  brownish

Fig.  55.

colour  and  usually  form  flat  rhombic  plates  with  more
acute  angles  ;  they  are  in  an  extraordinary  degree  capa-
ble of  resisting  tests,  and  also  do  not,  when  acted  upon

Fig.  55.  Crystals  of  Haemine,  artificially  procured  from  human  blood. 300  dia-
meters.

12

178  LECTURE  VII.  0

by  the  mineral  acids,  exhibit  the  peculiar  play  of  colours
afforded  by  haematoidine.  This  second  kind  of  crystals
has  received  the  name  of  Hcemine  from  their  discoverer
Teichmann.  Quite  recently  Teichmann  has  himself  be-
gun to  entertain  doubts  as  to  whether  it  is  not  really  a
sort  of  haematine.  These  forms  do  not  present  as  yet
the  slightest  pathological  interest,  but,  on  the  other  hand,
they  have  proved  of  very  great  importance  in  forensic
medicine  on  account  of  their  having  been  recently  em-
ployed as  one  of  the  surest  tests  for  the  examination  of
blood-stains.  I  myself  have  been  in  a  position  to  make
experiments  of  this  sort  in  forensic  cases.  For  this  pur-
pose the  best  mode  of  proceeding  is  to  mix  dried  blood  in
as  compact  a  form  as  possible  with  dry,  crystallized,
powdered  common  salt,  and  then  to  add  to  this  mixture
glacial  acetic  acid,  and  evaporate  at  a  boiling  heat.
When  this  has  been  done,  crystals  of  hgemine  are  found
where  the  blood-corpuscles  or  the  substance  previously
lay,  in  which  the  presence  of  haamatine  was  doubtful.
This  is  a  reaction  which  must  be  ranked  among  the  most
certain  and  reliable  ones  with  which  we  are  acquainted.
There  is  no  other  substance  in  which  we  know  such  a
transformation  to  take  place,  but  haematine.  This  test
is  extremely  important,  because  it  is  applicable  in  the
case  of  extremely  minute  quantities,  only  they  must  not
be  spread  over  too  large  a  surface.  It  would  therefore
not  be  easy  of  application  in  a  case  where  we  had  to  deal
with  a  cloth  which  had  been  dipped  into  a  thin,  watery,
fluid  coloured  with  blood.  Yet  I  was  able,  in  the  case
of  a  murdered  man,  on  the  sleeve  of  whose  coat  blood
had  spurted,  and  where  some  of  the  drops  were  only  a
line  in  diameter,  from  these  minute  specks  to  produce
innumerable  crystals  of  haemine,  though  of  course  micro-
scopical ones.  In  cases  in  which  the  ordinary  chemical
tests  would  necessarily  absolutely  fail  on  account  of  the

HiEMATO-CRYSTALLINfc.  179

smallness  of  the  quantity,  we  are  still  able  to  obtain
haBmine.  When  the  mass  of  blood  is  so  very  small,  the  size
of  the  crystals  is  certainly  also  extremely  minute,  and  we
then  find,  as  in  the  case  of  haematoidine,  small  needles  of
an  intensely  brown  colour  and  provided  with  acute  angles.
The  third  substance  which  belongs  to  this  series,  is  the
so-called  Hcemato-crystattine,  a  substance  about  the  dis-
covery of  which  the  learned  still  dispute,  for  the  simple
reason  that  it  was  found  out  piecemeal.  The  first  obser-
vation concerning  it  was  made  by  Reichert  in  extrava-
sations in  the  uterus  of  the  guinea-pig,  in  a  preparation
which,  I  think,  had  already  lain  for  some  little  time  in
spirits.  This  observation  of  his  acquired  especial  signifi-
cance because  he  showed  that  these  crystals  in  certain
respects  behaved  like  organic  substances,  inasmuch  as
they  became  larger  through  the  action  of  certain  agencies,
and  smaller  through  that  of  others,  without  any  change
of  form,  a  phenomenon  which,  up  to  that  time,  had  not
been  known  to  take  place  in  crystals.  Afterwards  these
crystals  were  again  discovered  by  Kolliker,  but  Funke,
Kunde,  and  especially  Lehmann,  have  examined  them
more  closely.  The  result  has  been  that  they  are  very
different  in  different  classes  of  animals,  but  hitherto  it  has
not  been  possible  to  discover  any  definite  reason  for  their
existence,  or  to  obtain  any  insight  into  the  nature  of  the
substance  itself.  In  man  the  crystals  are  tolerably  large.
At  first  it  was  believed  that  they  only  occurred  in  the
blood  of  certain  organs,  but  it  has  since  turned  out  that
they  occur  everywhere,  though  they  are  obtained  with
greater  readiness  in  certain  morbid  conditions.  In  a  few
very  rare  cases  it  happens  that  they  are  found  already
formed  in  the  blood  of  the  dead  bodies  of  animals.  These
crystals  are  very  easily  destructible  ;  both  when  they  dry
up  and  when  they  become  moist,  or  are  brought  into
contact  with  any  fluid  medium,  they  perish,  and  they  are

180  LECTURE VII.

therefore  only  observed  in  certain  transitional  stages,
which  must  be  exactly  hit  upon,  in  the  destruction  of
blood-corpuscles.  The  well-developed  forms  in  man  are
perfectly  rectangular  bodies  ;  but  very  frequently  they
are  extremely  small,  and  nothing  is  seen  but  simple
spicules  which  shoot  up  into  the  object  at  certain  spots
in  large  masses.  There  is  besides  this  peculiarity  about
them,  that  they  retain  the  property  which  haBmatine
itself  has  of  becoming  bright  red  with  oxygen  and  dark
red  with  carbonic  acid.  It  is  still,  however,  a  frequent
subject  of  discussion  whether  their  whole  substance  is
composed  of  colouring  matter,  or  whether  in  this  case
also  the  crystals  are  really  colourless  and  merely  impreg-
nated with  pigment ;  this  much,  however,  may  be  regarded
as  certain,  that  the  colour  has  something  very  character-
istic about  it,  and  that  the  existence  of  a  close  connec-
tion between  it  and  the  ordinary  colouring  matter  of  the
blood  cannot  be  doubted.

If  we  now  revert  to  the  natural  morphological  ele-
ments of  the  blood,  we  meet  with  the  colourless  corpus-
cles as  its  third  constituent.  They  are  present  in  compa-
ratively small  quantity  in  the  blood  of  a  healthy  man.
To  three  hundred  red  corpuscles  we  reckon  about  one
colourless  one.  As  they  generally  present  themselves  in
the  blood,  they  are  spherical  corpuscles,  which  are  some-
times a  little  larger,  sometimes  a  little  smaller  than,  or

of the same size  as, ordinary
red  blood-corpuscles,  from  which
©i ©j©  ~h they are, however, strikingly

s>)  O)  fe)

o

7®  (§^4  rv(i  $kr distinguished  by  the  want  of  all

2pi|fcjD  *  colour and  by  their perfectly

spherical  form.
In  a  drop  of  blood  which  has  become  quiet,  the  red  cor-
ing. 56. Colourless  blood-corpuscles  from  a  vein  of  the  pia-mater  of  a  lunatic.
A.  Examined  when  fresh  ;  a  in  their  natural  fluid,  b  in  water. B. After  the  addi-

COLOURLESS BLOOD-CORPUSCLES.  181

puscles  are  usually  found  aggregated  in  rows,  presenting
the  familiar  form  of  rouleaux  of  money,  with  their  flat
discs  one  against  the  other  (Fig.  52,  d)  ;  in  the  interspaces
may  be  observed  here  and  there  one  of  these  pale,  spheri-
cal bodies,  in  which  in  the  first  instance,  when  the  blood  is
quite  fresh,  nothing  more  can  be  distinguished  than  an
occasionally  slightly  granular-looking  surface.  If  water
be  added,  the  colourless  corpuscles  are  seen  to  swell  up,  and
in  proportion  as  they  absorb  the  water,  a  membrane  first
becomes  distinct ;  then  granular  contents  gradually  come
into  view  with  more  and  more  clearness,  and  at  last  some
indication  is  perceived  of  the  presence  of  one  or  several
nuclei.  The  apparently  homogeneous  globule  is  gradu-
ally transformed  into  a  structure  with  delicate  walls,  and
often  so  fragile,  that  when  water  is  incautiously  added,
the  external  parts  begin  to  fall  to  pieces,  and  in  the  in-
terior a  somewhat  granular  mass  displays  itself,  which
becomes  looser  and  looser,  and  discloses  within  it  a  nu-
cleus generally  in  process  of  division,  or  several  nuclei.
These  may  be  made  to  display  themselves  with  much
greater  rapidity,  by  treating  the  object  with  acetic  acid,
which  renders  the  membrane  translucent,  dissolves  the
nebulous  contents,  and  causes  the  nucleus  to  coagulate
and  shrivel  up.  The  nuclei  then  are  seen  to  be  dark  bo-
dies with  sharply  defined  outlines,  and  one  or  more  in
number  according  to  circumstances.  In  short,  we  ob-
tain in  this  way  in  the  majority  of  cases  the  view  of  an
object  which  presents  the  peculiar  appearance  that  one
of  our  confreres  now  present,  Dr.  Gliterbock,  first  pro-
claimed to  be  the  special  characteristic  of  pus-corpuscles.
The  question  concerning  the  resemblance  or  want  of  re-

tion  of  acetic  acid  :  a — c,  cells  with  a  single,  granular  nucleus,  which  becomes  pro-
gressively larger,  and  is  finally  provided  with  a  nucleolus,  d.  Simple  division  of  the
nuclei,  e.  A  more  advanced  stage  of  the  division.  / — h.  Gradual  division  of  the
nuclei  into  three  parts. i — k.  Four  and  more  nuclei. 280  diameters.

182  LECTURE VII.

semblance  between  the  colourless  cells  of  the  blood  and
pus-corpuscles  still  continues  to  occupy  the  attention  of
observers,  and  it  will  probably  still  require  a  number  of
years  before  the  views  entertained  with  regard  to  the
connection  between  the  colourless  corpuscles  and  pyaemia
have  been  rendered  so  clear  that  relapses  on  one  side
or  the  other  will  not  now  and  then  recur.  There  is
namely  this  source  of  error,  that  upon  examining  a  num-
ber of  persons,  in  the  blood  of  several  among  them  cor-
puscles will  be  found  which  have  only  a  single  nucleus,
and  that  a  very  large  one  and  not  unfrequently  provided
with  a  nucleolus,  whilst  in  the  blood  of  others  no  corpus-
cles will  be  seen  which  do  not  contain  several  nuclei.
Now,  since  these  latter  bear  a  great  resemblance  to  pus-
corpuscles,  those  observers,  who  had  previously  chanced
to  meet  with  nothing  but  uni-nuclear  corpuscles  in  nor-
mal blood,  cannot  be  blamed  for  believing,  in  another
case  in  which  they  see  multi-nuclear  ones,  that  they  have
something  essentially  different  before  them,  namely,  pus-
corpuscles  in  the  blood,  and  that  the  case  is  one  of  pyae-
mia. But,  strange  to  say,  the  corpuscles  with  one  nu-
cleus form  the  exception,  and  you  may  look  for  a  long
time  without  finding  blood  in  which  all  the  cells  have
only  one  nucleus.  Oddly  enough  to-day,  while  occu-
pied in  preparing  the  microscopical  objects,  I  stumbled
upon  a  specimen  of  blood,  in  which  scarcely
anything  but  cells  with  one  nucleus  are  to  be
@JI©  met  with,  and  these  in  extremely  large  num-
b&  %0ab^  ber  ;  it  was  taken  from  a  man  who  died  of
smallpox,  and  in  whom  a  very  highly  remark-
able acute  hyperplasia  of  the  bronchial  glands  existed.
Now,  one  might  be  inclined  to  believe  that  these  are

Fig.  57.  Colourless  blood-corpuscles  in  variolous  leucocytosis.  a.  Free  or  naked
nuclei.  6,  b.  Colourless  cells  with  small,  simple  nuclei,  c.  Larger,  colourless  cells,
with  large  nuclei  and  nucleoli. 300  diameters.

PROPERTIES  OF COLOURLESS BLOOD-CORPUSCLES.  183

different  qualities  of  blood.  But  in  opposition  to  such
an  idea  it  must  be  remarked,  that,  although  in  the  cases
in  which  the  one  or  the  other  kind  of  corpuscles  exist  in
large  quantities,  we  have  to  deal  with  a  pathological  phe-
nomenon, yet  that,  when  we  do  not  find  such  large
quantities,  we  have  before  us  only  an  earlier  or  a  later
stage  of  the  development  of  the  elements.  For  one  and
the  same  blood-corpuscle  may,  in  the  course  of  its  life,
have  one  or  several  nuclei,  the  one  belonging  to  an
earlier,  the  several  to  a  later,  stage  of  its  existence.
You  must  always  bear  in  mind,  that  the  change  is  seen
to  take  place  in  the  same  individual  in  a  short  time,  in-
deed often  in  the  course  of  a  few  hours,  so  that  in  blood
which  had  previously  only  contained  one  sort,  after-
wards quite  a  different  one  may  be  found — a  proof  of  the
rapidity  of  the  change  to  which  these  bodies  are  sub-
jected.

Allow  me,  gentlemen,  to  add  a  few  words  with  regard
to  the  more  palpable  relations  which  the  individual  con-
stituents of  the  blood  present  towards  one  another.  It
is,  as  you  well  know,  generally  assumed  that  of  the  mor-
phological constituents  only  two  are  accessible  to  the
grosser  perception  of  the  naked  eye,  namely,  the  red
corpuscles  in  the  clot,  and  the  masses  of  fibrine,  which
under  certain  circumstances  form  a  buffy  coat,  but  that,
on  the  other  hand,  the  colourless  cells  are  not  to  be  per-
ceived by  the  unaided  sight.  This  is  a  notion  which  I
consider  myself  bound  to  correct.  The  colourless  cor-
puscles, whenever  they  are  present  in  considerable  num-
bers, become  very  distinctly  manifest  to  the  more  prac-
tised eye  during  the  separation  of  the  constituents  of  the
blood,  and  especially  when  the  coagulation  is  accompanied
by  movement ;  and  they  then  exhibit  a  peculiarity,
with  which  it  is  as  well  that  one  should  be  acquainted
when  one  is  required  to  pass  judgment  upon  specimens  de-

184:

LECTURE  VII.

Fm.  58.

rived  from  post-mortem  examinations,  and  the  ignorance
of  which  has  led  to  great  errors.  The  colourless  cor-
puscles possess  namely,  as  was  brought  to  light  in  the
discussion  which  Herr  Ascherson,  now  here  present,  had
some  time  ago  with  E.  H.  Weber,  the  peculiar  property

of  being  sticky,  so  that  they
readily  adhere  to  one  another,
and  under  certain  circumstances
also  cling  fast  to  other  parts,
when  the  red  corpuscles  do  not
present  this  phenomenon.  This
tendency  to  adhere  to  other
parts  is  particularly  evident
when  several  of  the  corpuscles
are  at  the  same  time  placed  in  a  position  which  enables
them  to  stick  together.  Thus,  in  blood  in  which
there  is  an  actual  increase  in  the  number  of  colourless
cells,  it  is  extremely  common  for  agglutinations  to  take
place  among  them,  as  soon  as  the  pressure,  under  which
the  blood  flows,  is  diminished  ;  in  every  vessel,  in  which
the  stream  becomes  slower,  and  the  pressure  weaker,
an  agglutination  of  the  corpuscles  may  take  place.

The  adhesiveness  (viscosity)  of  the  colourless  blood-
corpuscles  produces  besides  this  effect,  that,  as  has  been
shown  by  Herr  Ascherson,  when  the  blood  is  flowing  as
usual  through  the  capillary  vessels,  the  colourless  cor-
puscles generally  float  rather  more  slowly  than  the  red,
and  that,  whilst  these  move  along  more  in  the  centre  of
the  vessel  in  a  continuous  stream,  a  comparatively  large
vacuity  is  left  at  the  circumference,  within  which  the

Fig.  58.  A.  Fibrine  clot  from  the  pulmonary  artery,  and  corresponding  to  its
terminal  branches ;  at  a,  a  beset  with  largish  patches,  composed  of  heaps  of  white
cells ;  at  6,  6,  b  with  specks  of  an  analogous  nature. Natural  size.

B.  A  portion  of  one  of  these  specks  or  heaps,  composed  of  thickly  crowded,
colourless  blood-corpuscles. Magnified  280  diameters.

AGGLUTINATION OF COLOURLESS  BLOOD-CORPUSCLES.

185

Fig.  59.

colourless  corpuscles  move,  and  that  indeed  often  with
such  constancy,  that  Weber  came  to  the  conclusion  that
every  capillary  lay  within  a  lymphatic  vessel,  in  the  inside
of  which  the  colourless  blood-  or  lymph-corpuscles
floated.  But  there  cannot  be  the  least  doubt  but  that
the  canals  in  question  are  single  ones,  in  which
the  colourless  corpuscles  float  along  closer  to
the  walls  than  the  red  ones  ;  and  it  is  in  this
peripheral  space  that,  whilst  the  corpuscles
move  on,  we  see  one  here  and  there  stick  fast
for  a  moment,  then  tear  itself  away  and  again
move  on  slowly,  so  that  the  name  of  the  slug-
gish layer  (tr'age  Schicht),  applied  to  this  part
of  the  stream,  has  been  universally  adopted.

These  two  peculiarities,  first,  that,  when  the
current  becomes  weaker,  the  corpuscles  here  and  there
cling  to  the  walls  of  the  vessel,  and  in  some  measure
adhere  to  them,  and,  secondly,  that  they  gather  together
and  become  conglomerated  into  largish  masses,  combine
to  produce  this  effect,  that,  when  there  exists  a  large
number  of  colourless  corpuscles  in  the  blood,  and  death
occurs,  as  it  does  in  ordinary  cases,  after  a  gradual
weakening  of  the  propelling  force,  the  colourless  cor-
puscles collect  in  vessels  of  every  description,  into  small
heaps,  and  generally  lie  upon  the  outside  of  the  later
formed  blood-clot.

If,  for  example,  we  pull  out  of  the  pulmonary  artery
the  generally  very  tough  clot  of  blood  which  fills  it,
minute  granules  will  perchance  be  found  upon  its  surface
(Fig.  58,  A),  little  beads  of  a  white  colour,  which  look
like  specks  of  pus,  or  are  connected  several  of  them  toge-
ther in  the  form  of  a  string  of  pearls. This  appearance

Fig.  59.  Capillary  vessel  from  the  web  of  a  frog's  foot.  r.  The  central  stream
of  red  corpuscles.  /,  /,  /.  The  sluggish,  peripheral  layer  of  the  stream  with  the
colourless  corpuscles. Magnified  280  diameters.

186  LECTURE  VII.

most  frequently  presents  itself  at  those  points  where  the
number  of  the  bodies  is  normally  the  largest,  namely  in
the  interval  between  the  orifice  of  the  thoracic  duct,  and
the  capillaries  of  the  lungs.  The  naked  eye  can  with
tolerable  ease  detect  in  these  clots  the  greater  or  less
quantity  of  colourless  corpuscles.  Under  circumstances
inducing  the  presence  of  a  very  large  number  of  them,
whole  heaps  of  them  may  be  seen,  investing  different
parts  of  the  coagulum  like  a  sheath,  and  if  one  of  these
heaps  be  placed  under  the  microscope,  many  thousands
of  colourless  corpuscles  are  seen  crowded  together.

If  the  coagulation  of  the  blood  takes  place,  when  it  is
more  at  rest,  another  appearance  is  presented  with  great
distinctness,  as  may  be  seen  in  the  vessels  used  to  receive
the  blood  after  venisection.  When  the  fibrine  does  not
coagulate  very  quickly,  as  is  the  case  in  inflammatory
blood,  the  blood-corpuscles  begin,  in  consequence  of
their  greater  specific  gravity,  to  sink  through  the  fluid.
This  subsidence  proceeds,  as  is  well  known,  to  such  a
pitch,  that,  after  the  fibrine  has  been  removed  by  stir-
ring, the  serum  becomes  perfectly  clear,  in  consequence
of  the  corpuscles'  falling  to  the  bottom.  On  defibrinating
blood  rich  in  colourless  corpuscles,  and  allowing  it  to
stand,  a  double  sediment  forms,  a  red  and  a  white  one.
The  red  one  constitutes  the  deeper,  the  white  one  the
more  superficial  stratum,  and  the  latter  looks  exactly  as
if  a  layer  of  pus  were  lying  upon  the  blood.  When  the
blood  has  not  been  deprived  of  its  fibrine,  yet  coagulates
slowly,  the  subsidence  of  the  corpuscles  does  not  take
place  so  completely,  but  only  the  highest  part  of  the
liquor  sanguinis  becomes  free  from  corpuscles  ;  and  when
after  this  the  fibrine  coagulates,  we  obtain  the  well-known
crusta  phlogistica,  the  huffy  coat,  and  on  looking  for  the
colourless  corpuscles,  we  find  them  forming  a  separate
layer  at  the  lower  border  of  the  buffy  coat. This  j3ecu-

KED,  WHITE AND COLOURLESS BLOOD-CORPUSCLES.

187

Fig.  60.

liarity  is  simply  explained  by  the  different  specific  gravity
of  the  two  kinds  of  blood-corpuscles.  The  colourless
ones  are  always  light,  poor  in  solid  matter  and  very  deli-
cate in  structure,  whilst  the  red  ones  are  as  heavy  as
lead  in  comparison,  owing  to  their  richness  in  haematine.
They  therefore  reach  the  bottom
with  comparatively  great  rapidity,
whilst  the  colourless  ones  are  still
engaged  in  falling.  If  two  bodies  of
different  specific  gravities  be  allowed
to  fall  from  a  sufficient  height  in  the
open  air,  the  lighter  one  will,  you
know,  in  a  similar  manner,  reach  the
ground  after  the  other,  owing  to  the
resistance  of  the  air.

In  the  coagulation  which  takes
place  in  blood  derived  from  venisection,  this  white  clot
does  not  usually  form  a  continuous,  but  an  interrupted,
layer,  composed  of  little  heaps  or  nodules  adhering  to  the
under  side  of  the  buffy  coat.  Hence  Piorry,  who  was
the  first  to  observe  this  appearance,  but  completely  mis-
interpreted it,  seeing  that  he  referred  it  to  an  inflamma-
tion of  the  blood  itself  (Hsemitis)  and  established  the
doctrine  of  Pysemia,  upon  it,  termed  this  form  of  buffy
coat  crusta  granulosa.  It  really  consists  of  nothing  more
than  large  accumulations  of  colourless  corpuscles.

Under  all  circumstances  this  layer  resembles  pus  in
appearance,  and  since,  as  we  have  already  seen,  the
colourless  blood-cells  individually  are  constituted  like
pus-corpuscles,  you  see  that  we  are  liable  not  only  in  the
case  of  a  healthy  person  to  take  colourless  blood-cells  for

Fig.  60.  Diagram  of  a  bleeding-glass  with  coagulated  hyperinotic  blood,  a.  The
level  of  the  liquor  sanguinis,  c.  The  cup-shaped  buffy  coat.  I.  The  layer  of  lymph
(Cruor  lymphaticus,  Crusta  granulosa),  with  the  granular  and  mulberry-like  accumu-
lations of  colourless  corpuscles, r.  The  red  clot.

188  LECTURE  VII.

pus-corpuscles,  but  still  more  so  in  pathological  condi-
tions when  the  blood  or  other  parts  are  full  of  these  ele-
ments. You  can  imagine  how  apt  the  question  is  to
present  itself,  which  has  already  been  seriously  raised  by
Addison  and  Zimmermann,  whether  pus-corpuscles  are
not  merely  extravasated  colourless  blood-cells,  or  vice
versa,  whether  the  colourless  blood-cells  found  within
the  vessels  are  not  pus-corpuscles  which  have  been  ad-
mitted into  them  from  the  exterior.  We  are  here  called
upon  for  the  first  time  to  make  the  practical  application
of  the  principles  which  I  laid  down  with  regard  to  the
specific  nature  and  heterology  of  elements  (p.  92.)  A
pus-corpuscle  can  be  distinguished  from  a  colourless
blood-cell  by  nothing  else  than  its  mode  of  origin.  If
you  do  not  know  whence  it  has  come,  you  cannot  say
what  it  is  ;  you  may  conceive  the  greatest  doubt  as  to
whether  you  are  to  regard  a  body  of  the  kind  as  a  pus-
or  a  colourless  blood-corpuscle.  In  every  case  of  the
sort  the  points  to  be  considered  are,  where  the  body
belongs  to,  and  where  its  home  is.  If  this  prove  to  be
external  to  the  blood,  you  may  safely  conclude  that  it  is
pus  ;  but  if  this  is  not  the  case,  you  have  to  do  with
blood-cells.

v^^t.

LECTUEE VIII.

MARCH  10,  1858.
BLOOD  AND  LYMPH.

Change  and  replacement  of  the  constituents  of  the  blood — Fibrine — Lymph  and  its
coagulation — Lymphatic  exudation — Fibrinogenous  substance — Formation  of
the  buffy  coat — Lymphatic  blood,  hyperinosis,  phlogistic  crasis — Local  forma-
tion of  fibrine — Transudation  of  fibrine — Formation  of  fibrine  in  the  blood.

Colourless  blood-corpuscles  (lymph-corpuscles) — Their  increase  in  hyperinosis  and
hypinosis  (Erysipelas,  pseudo-erysipelas,  typhoid  fever) — Leucocytosis  and
leukaemia — Splenic  and  lymphatic  leukaemia.

The  spleen  and  lymphatic  glands  as  blood-making  organs — Structure  of  lymphatic
glands.

The  last  time,  gentlemen,  I  introduced  to  your  notice
the  individual  morphological  elements  of  the  blood,  and
endeavored  to  portray  their  special  peculiarities.  Allow
me  to  begin  to-day  with  a  few  words  concerning  their
origin.

From  the  facts  which  have  been  ascertained  with
regard  to  the  first  development  of  the  elements  of  the
blood,  important  conclusions  may  be  drawn  respecting
the  nature  of  the  changes  which  take  place  in  the  mass
of  the  blood  in  deceased  conditions.  Formerly  the  blood
was  regarded  more  as  a  juice  shut  up  by  itself,  which
was  indeed  to  a  certain  extent  connected  with  the  parts
external  to  it,  but  yet  was  in  itself  endowed  with  real
durability,  and  it  was  assumed  that  it  could  retain  pecu-

189

190  LECTURE  VIII.

liar  properties  for  lengthened  periods,  nay,  that  these
might  cling  to  it  for  many  years.  Of  course  it  was  im-
possible at  the  same  time  to  entertain  the  opinion,  that
the  constituents  of  the  blood  were  of  a  perishable  nature,
and  that  new  elements  were  added  to  it,  to  replace  the  old
ones.  For  the  durability  of  a  part  as  such  presupposes
either  that  all  its  individual  particles  are  durable,  or  that
these  individual  particles  are  continually  producing  fresh
ones  within  the  part  which  bear  impressed  upon  them  all
the  peculiarities  of  the  old  ones.  In  the  case  of  the
blood,  therefore,  one  would  have  to  assume  that  its  con-
stituents really  did  subsist  for  years,  and  could  for  years
present  the  same  changes,  or  one  would  have  to  imagine
that  the  blood  transmitted  something  from  one  particle
to  another,  and  that  from  a  parent  blood-cell  to  its  pro-
geny something  hereditary  was  handed  down.  Of  these
possibilities  the  former  has,  I  believe,  at  the  present  time
been  pretty  generally  discarded.  No  one,  I  think,  now
imagines  that  the  individual  constituents  of  the  blood  last
on  for  years.  On  the  other  hand,  the  possibility  that  the
corpuscles  of  the  blood  are  renewed  by  propagation,
and  that  certain  peculiarities  which  are  introduced  into
the  blood  at  a  certain  time,  are  transmitted  from  cor-
puscle to  corpuscle,  cannot  straightway  be  rejected.
But  the  only  phenomena  pointing  to  such  a  propagation
of  the  blood,  concerning  which  we  possess  any  positive
information,  belong  to  an  early  period  of  embryonic  life.
There  it  appears  from  observations  which  were  only  the
other  day  again  confirmed  by  Remak,  the  existing  blood-
corpuscles  undergo  direct  division,  the  process  being  that,
in  a  corpuscle  which  during  the  early  stages  of  its  deve-
lopment had  displayed  itself  as  a  nucleated  cell,  first  of
all  a  partition  of  the  nucleus  takes  place  (Fig.  51,  c)  ;
and  that  then  the  whole  cell  becomes  constricted  in  the
middle,  and  gradually  is  really  seen  to  pass  into  a  state

ORIGIN  OF  BLOOD-CORPUSCLES— LrMPH.  191

of  complete  division.  At  this  early  period  it  is  therefore
certainly  allowable  to  regard  a  blood- corpuscle  as  en-
dowed with  qualities  which  are  propagated  from  the  first
series  of  cells  to  the  second,  and  from  this  to  the  third,
and  so  on.

In  the  blood  of  a  fully  developed  human  being,  nay
even  in  that  of  a  foetus  in  the  later  months  of  pregnancy,
these  phenomena  of  partition  are  no  longer  known,  and
not  a  single  one  of  the  facts  which  can  be  adduced  from
the  history  of  development  speaks  in  favour  of  an  increase
of  the  cellular  elements  taking  place  in  fully  developed
blood  by  means  of  direct  division,  or  any  other  formative
process  taking  its  rise  in  the  blood  itself.  As  long  as  the
possibility  was  regarded  as  demonstrated,  that  cells  might
arise  out  of  simple  cytoblastema  by  means  of  the  direct
precipitation  of  different  substances,  so  long  was  it  pos-
sible to  conceive  new  precipitates  as  forming  in  the  liquor
sanguinis  from  which  cells  were  produced.  But  this
view  also  has  been  abandoned.  All  the  morphological
elements  of  the  blood,  whatever  may  be  their  nature,  are
at  present  considered  to  be  derived  from  sources  external
to  the  blood.  On  all  hands  recourse  is  had  to  organs
which  do  not  communicate  with  the  blood  directly,  but
rather  by  the  means  of  intermediate  channels.  The
principal  organs  which  here  come  into  play  are  the
lymphatic  glands.  Lymph  is  the  fluid  which,  whilst  it  ■
conveys  certain  substances  to  the  blood  which  come  from
the  tissues,  at  the  same  time  brings  along  with  it  the
corpuscular  elements  out  of  which  the  blood- cells  con-
tinually recruit  their  numbers.

With  regard  to  two  of  the  constituents  of  the  blood,
there  can,  I  think,  be  scarcely  any  doubt  but  that  this  is
the  view  which  is  perfectly  warranted,  I  mean  with
regard  to  the  fibrine  and  the  colourless  corpuscles.  As
for  the  fibrine,  the  properties  of  which  I  brought  to  your

^  •

*

192  LECTURE  VIII.

notice  last  time,  it  is  a  very  essential  and  important  fact
that  the  fibrine  which  circulates  in  lymph  differs  in  cer-
tain respects  from  that  contained  in  the  blood,  which  we
see  on  examining  different  extravasations,  or  blood  drawn
from  a  vein.  The  fibrine  of  lymph  has  this  special  pecu-
liarity, that  under  ordinary  circumstances  it  coagulates
within  the  lymphatic  vessel  neither  during  life  nor  after
death,  whilst  blood  in  many  instances  coagulates  even
during  life,  and  regularly  does  so  after  death,  so  that
coagulative  power  is  attributed  to  blood  as  being  one  of
its  regular  properties.  In  the  lymphatics  of  a  dead  ani-
mal or  human  corpse,  no  coagulated  lymph  is  met  with,
yet  the  coagulation  takes  place  directly  the  lymph  is
brought  into  contact  with  the  air,  or  has  changes  imparted
to  it  by  some  diseased  organ.

The  explanation  of  this  peculiarity  has  been  attempted
in  very  different  ways.  For  my  own  part  I  must  still
adhere  to  the  view  that  there  is,  properly  speaking,  no
perfectly  developed  fibrine  contained  in  lymph,  but  that
it  becomes  perfect  either  by  contact  with  the  atmosphe-
ric air,  or  in  abnormal  conditions  by  the  introduction  into
it  of  altered  matters.  Normal  lymph  contains  a  substance
which  is  very  readily  converted  into  fibrine,  and  is,  when
it  has  once  coagulated,  scarcely  to  be  distinguished  from
fibrine,  but  which,  as  long  as  it  continues  to  circulate
with  the  ordinary  stream  of  lymph,  cannot  be  regarded
as  really  perfect  fibrine.  This  is  a  substance,  of  which  I
had  demonstrated  the  presence  in  various  exudations,
especially  in  pleuritic  fluids,  long  before  my  attention  had
been  drawn  to  its  occurrence  in  lymph.

In  many  forms  of  pleurisy  the  exudation  long  remains
fluid,  and  a  number  of  years  ago  a  peculiar  case  came
under  my  notice,  in  which  on  puncturiug  the  thorax  a
liquid  was  evacuated  which  was  perfectly  clear  and  fluid,
but  in  a  short  time  after  its  evacuation  had  its  whole

i

FIBRINE OF  LYMPH.  193

mass  pervaded  by  a  coagulum,  as  is  often  enough  the
case  with  fluids  from  the  abdominal  cavity.  After  I  had
removed  this  coagulum  from  the  liquid  by  stirring  it,  in
order  to  convince  myself  of  its  identity  with  ordinary
fibrine,  the  next  day  a  fresh  coagulum  displayed  itself,
and  this  took  place  also  on  the  following  days.  This  co-
agulative  power  lasted  fourteen  days,  although  the  ope-
ration had  been  performed  in  the  midst  of  the  heat  of
summer.  This  therefore  was  a  phenomenon  essentially
differing  from  the  ordinary  coagulation  of  the  blood,  and
somewhat  difficult  to  explain  upon  the  supposition  that
real  fibrine  existed  completely  developed  in  the  fluid,
but  it  seemed  to  indicate  that  it  was  only  under  the  influ-
ence of  the  atmospheric  air  that  the  fibrine  was  produced
from  a  substance  which  must  indeed  have  been  nearly
related  to  fibrine,  but  yet  could  not  be  real  fibrine.  I
therefore  propose  to  give  it  the  distinctive  name  oifibri-
nogenous  substance,  and  when  I  afterwards  had  come  to
the  conclusion  that  it  was  the  same  substance  which  we
find  in  lymph,  I  was  enabled  to  extend  my  view  so  as  to
include  the  proposition,  that  in  lymph  also  fibrine  is  not
contained  in  a  perfect  form.

This  same  substance,  which  is  distinguished  from  ordi-
nary fibrine  by  its  requiring  to  be  a  longer  or  shorter
time  in  contact  with  atmospheric  air  before  it  can  become
coagulable,  is  also  found  under  certain  circumstances  in
the  blood  of  the  peripheral  veins,  so  that  even  by  an
ordinary  venisection  performed  on  the  arm  blood  may
be  obtained,  distinguished  from  ordinary  blood  by  the
slowness  of  its  coagulation.  Polli  named  this  coagula-
tive  substance  brady  fibrine.  Such  cases  occur  especially
in  inflammatory  diseases  of  the  respiratory  organs,  and
most  frequently  give  rise  to  the  formation  of  a  huffy  coat
(crusta  pleuritica,  crusta  phlogistica).  You  all  know  that
the ordinary  crusta  phlogistica  forms  in  the  blood  of

13

194  LECTURE  VIII.

pneumonia  or  pleurisy  the  more  readily  the  greater  the
wateriness  of  the  liquor  sanguinis,. and  the  poorer  the  blood
is  in  solid  constituents,  but  it  is  an  essential  requisite  that
the  librine  should  coagulate  slowly.  If  the  duration  of
the  process  be  noted  watch  in  hand,  the  conviction  will
soon  be  acquired  that  a  very  much  longer  time  passes
than  is  requisite  for  ordinary  coagulation.  From  this
frequent  phenomenon,  as  it  is  met  with  in  the  ordinary
formation  of  a  crust  upon  the  surface  of  inflamed  blood,
gradual  transitions  are  observed  to  a  greatly  increased
prolongation  of  the  period  during  which  fluidity  is  re-
tained.

The  most  extreme  instance  of  this  kind  as  yet  known
occurred  in  a  case  observed  by  Polli.  In  a  vigorous  man,
suffering  from  pneumonia,  who  came  under  treatment  in
the  summer,  at  a  time  which  does  not  offer  the  external
conditions  most  favourable  to  slowness  of  coagulation,  the
blood,  which  flowed  from  the  opened  vein,  took  a  week
before  it  began  to  coagulate,  and  not  until  the  end  of  a
fortnight  was  the  coagulation  complete.  In  this  case,
too,  occurred  the  other  phenomenon  which  I  had  ob-
served in  the  pleuritic  exudations,  namely,  that  decom-
position (putrefaction)  took  place  in  the  blood  at  an
unusally  late  period  in  proportion  to  this  lateness  of
coagulation.

Now  since  phenomena  of  this  kind  are  observed  to
occur  with  especial  frequency  in  chest  affections,  a  fre-
quency so  especial  indeed  that  the  buffy  coat  was  long
since  designated  Crusta  pkuritica,  there  would  seem  to
be  some  grounds  for  inferring  from  this,  that  the  function
of  respiration  has  a  definite  influence  upon  the  occur-
rence or  non-occurrence  of  the  fibrinogenous  substance
in  the  blood.  At  all  events,  the  peculiarity  possessed  by
the  lymph  is  under  certain  circumstances  transmitted  to
the  blood,  so  that  either  the  whole  of  the  blood  partakes

FIBRINE REGARDED  AS  A  LOCAL PRODUCTION.  195

of  it,  and  that  in  a  higher  degree,  the  greater  the  disturb-
ance under  which  the  respiration  labours  ;  or,  in  addi-
tion to  the  ordinary,  quickly  coagulating  matter,  a  second
which  coagulates  more  slowly  is  found.  It  frequently
happens,  namely,  that  two  sorts  of  coagulation  subsist
side  by  side  in  the  same  blood,  one  early  and  the  other
late,  especially  in  the  cases  in  which  direct  analysis  shows
an  increase  of  fibrine,  a  hyperinosis.  These  hyperinotic
conditions  appear  therefore  to  indicate  that  in  them  an
increased  supply  of  lymphatic  fluid  is  introduced  into  the
blood,  and  that  the  matters  which  are  afterwards  found
in  the  blood  are  not  the  products  of  an  internal  transfor-
mation of  its  constituents,  and  that  therefore  the  ori-
ginal source  of  the  fibrine  must  not  be  sought  for  in  the
blood  itself,  but  in  those  parts  from  which  the  lymphatic
vessels  convey  the  increased  supply  of  fibrine.

In  explanation  of  these  phenomena,  I  have  ventured  to
advance  the  hypothesis,  somewhat  bold  perhaps,  though
I  consider  it  perfectly  able  to  sustain  discussion,  namely,
that  fibrine  generally,  wherever  it  occurs  in  the  body  exter-
nal to  the  blood,  is  not  to  be  regarded  as  an  excretion  from
the  blood,  but  as  a  local  production  ;  and  I  have  endea-
vored to  introduce  an  important  change  in  the  views  en-
tertained with  regard  to  the  so-called  phlogistic  crasis  in
relation  to  its  localization.  Whilst  it  had  previously  been
the  custom  to  regard  the  altered  composition  of  the  blood
in  inflammation  as  a  condition  existing  from  the  very
outset,  and  especially  denoted  by  a  primary  increase  in
the  fibrine,  I  on  the  contrary  have  shown  the  crasis  to
be  an  occurrence  dependent  upon  the  local  inflammation.
Certain  organs  and  tissues  have  inherent  in  them  in  a
higher  degree  the  power  of  producing  fibrine  and  of  fa-
vouring the  occurrence  of  large  quantities  of  fibrine  in
the  blood,  whilst  other  organs  are  by  far  less  adapted
for  its  production.

196  LECTURE VIII

I  have,  moreover,  pointed  out  the  fact,  that  those  or-
gans which  with  especial  frequency  exhibit  this  peculiar
combination  of  a  so-called  phlogistic  state  of  the  blood
with  a  local  inflammation  are  generally  abundantly  pro-
vided with  lymphatic  vessels  and  connected  with  large
masses  of  lymphatic  glands,  whilst  all  those  organs  which
either  contain  very  few  lymphatics,  or  in  which  these
vessels  are  scarcely  known  to  exist,  do  not  exercise  any
influence  worth  naming  upon  the  amount  of  fibrine  in
the  blood.  Former  observers  had  already  remarked
that  there  were  inflammations  occurring  in  very  import-
ant organs,  as  for  example,  in  the  brain,  in  which  the
phlogistic  crasis  was,  properly  speaking,  not  at  all  met
with.  Now  it  is  precisely  in  the  brain  that  we  have
scarcely  any  evidence  of  the  existence  of  lymphatics.  In
those  cases,  on  the  contrary,  in  which  the  composition  of
the  blood  is  earliest  altered,  namely,  in  diseases  of  the
respiratory  organs,  we  find  an  unusually  abundant  net-
.  work  of  lymphatics.  Not  merely  the  lungs  are  pervaded
by,  and  covered  with,  them,  but  the  pleura  also  has  ex-
tremely numerous  connections  with  the  lymphatic  sys-
tem, and  the  bronchial  glands  constitute  almost  the  great-
est accumulations  of  lymphatic-gland  substance  possessed
by  an  organ  in  the  whole  body.

On  the  other  hand,  we  are  acquainted  with  no  fact
which  shows  it  to  be  possible  that,  in  consequence  of  a
simple  increase  of  the  pressure  of  the  blood,  or  of  a
simple  change  in  the  conditions  which  influence  its  cir-
culation, an  exudation  of  fibrinous  fluids  could  in  any
organ  take  place  into  its  parenchyma,  or  upon  its  sur-
face, from  the  blood.  It  is  certainly  generally  imagined
that,  when  the  current  of  the  blood  attains  a  certain
strength,  fibrine  begins  to  appear  in  the  exudation,  but
this  has  never  been  proved  by  experiment.  Nobody  has
ever  been  able,  by  the  production  of  a  mere  change  in

LOCAL FORMATION OF FIBRINE.  197

the  force  of  the  current  of  the  blood,  to  induce  the
fibrine  to  transude  directly  as  it  is  wont  to  do  in  certain
inflammatory  processes  ;  for  this  some  irritation  is
always  required.  The  greatest  obstructions  may  be  in-
duced in  the  circulation,  exudations  of  serous  fluids  may
be  experimentally  produced  upon  the  largest  scale,  but
that  peculiar  fibrinous  exudation  which  the  irritation  of
certain  tissues  provokes  with  so  much  ease,  never  ensues
upon  these  occasions.

That  the  fibrine  in  the  blood  itself  is  produced  by  a
transformation  of  the  albumen,  is  a  chemical  theory,
which  has  no  other  evidence  in  its  favour  than  the  fact
that  albumen  and  fibrine  have  a  strong  chemical  resem-
blance, and  that,  on  comparing  the  questionable  formula
for  fibrine  with  the  equally  questionable  one  for  albu-
men, it  is  very  easy  to  imagine  how,  by  the  abstraction
of  a  couple  of  atoms,  the  transition  from  albumen  to
fibrine  might  be  effected.  But  our  being  able  in  this
manner  to  deduce  one  of  the  formulae  from  the  other
does  not  afford  the  slightest  proof  that  an  analogous
transformation  occurs  in  the  blood.  It  may  possibly
take  place  in  the  body,  but  even  then  it  would  at  any
rate  be  more  probable  that  it  was  accomplished  in  the
tissues,  and  that  from  them  the  fibrine  was  conveyed
away  into  the  blood  by  means  of  the  lymph.  This  is,
however,  the  more  doubtful,  because  rational  formulae
for  the  chemical  composition  of  albumen  and  fibrine  have
not  yet  been  determined,  and  the  incredibly  high  atomic
numbers  in  the  empirical  formulae  point  to  a  very  com-
plex grouping  of  the  atoms.

Let  us  therefore  hold  fast  the  well-ascertained  fact
that  fibrine  can  only  be  made  to  exude  upon  any  surface
by  the  occurrence  of  some  irritation,  that  is,  local
change,  in  addition  to  the  disturbance  in  the  circulation.
This  local  change,  however,  is,  as  results from  experi-

198  LECTURE  VIII.

ment,  alone  sufficient  to  cause  the  exudation  of  fibrine,
even  when  no  obstruction  arises  in  the  circulation.  Such
obstruction  is  not  therefore  in  any  way  needed  in  order
that  the  production  of  fibrine  may  commence  at  any
given  point.  On  the  contrary,  we  see  that  the  cause  of
the  greatest  differences  in  the  nature  of  exudations  is  to
be  found  in  the  special  constitution  of  the  irritated  parts.
On  the  simple  application  of  an  irritating  substance  to
the  surface  of  the  skin,  there  arises,  when  the  irritation,
whether  chemical  or  mechanical  in  its  nature,  is  only
slight  in  degree,  a  vesicle,  a  serous  exudation.  If  the
irritation  is  more  violent,  a  liquid  exudes,  which  in  the
vesicle  appears  quite  fluid,  but  coagulates  after  its  eva-
cuation. If  the  fluid  from  a  blister  raised  by  a  cantha-
rides-plaster  be  received  into  a  watch-glass  and  exposed
to  the  air,  a  coagulum  forms,  showing  that  there  is
fibrinogenous  substance  in  the  fluid.  But  we  sometimes
meet  with  conditions  of  the  body,  in  which  an  external
stimulus  is  sufficient  for  the  production  of  blisters  con-
taining a  fluid  which  directly  coagulates.  I  had,  last
winter,  a  patient  in  my  wards,  whose  feet  had  remained
ji  a  state  of  anaesthesia  ever  since  they  had  been  frozen,
and  I  employed  as  a  remedy,  amongst  other  things,
local  baths  containing  aqua  regia.  After  a  certain  num-
ber of  these  baths,  blisters,  which  varied  in  diameter  up
to  two  inches,  and  were  found,  when  opened,  to  be  filled
with  large,  jelly-like  masses  of  coagulum,  formed  upon
every  occasion  on  the  anaesthetic  part  of  the  soles  of  the
feet.  In  other  persons  probably  ordinary  blisters  would
have  formed,  containing  a  fluid,  which  would  not  have
coagulated  until  after  its  evacuation.  Such  a  difference
manifestly  depends  upon  a  difference,  not  in  the  com-
position of  the  blood,  but  in  the  disposition  of  the  part
affected.  The  difference  between  that  form  of  pleurisy,
which  from  its  very  commencement  furnishes  coagulable

LOCAL  FORMATION  OF  FIBRINE.  199

and  coagulating  fluids,  and  that  in  which  the  exudation
is  coagulable,  but  not  coagulating,  certainly  points  to
peculiarities  in  the  local  irritation.

I  do  not  think  therefore  that  we  are  entitled  to  con-
clude that  in  a  person  who  has  an  excess  of  fibrine  in  his
blood,  there  is  on  that  account  also  a  greater  tendency  to
fibrinous  transudation  ;  on  the  contrary,  I  should  rather
expect  that  in  a  patient  who  produces  at  a  certain  point
a  large  quantity  of  fibrine -forming  substance,  much  of
it  would  pass  from  that  point  into  the  lymph  and  finally
into  the  blood.  The  exudation  may  therefore  in  such
cases  be  regarded  as  the  surplus  of  the  fibrine  formed  in
loco,  for  the  removal  of  which  the  lymphatic  circulation
did  not  suffice.  As  long  as  the  current  of  ]ymph  does
suffice,  all  the  foreign  matters  which  are  formed  in  the
irritated  part  are  conveyed  into  the  blood  ;  but,  as  soon
as  the  local  production  becomes  excessive,  the  products
accumulate,  and  in  addition  to  the  hyperinosis,  a  local
accumulation  of  fibrinous  exudation  will  also  take  place.
On  account  of  the  shortness  of  the  time  which  is  allotted
to  us,  we  cannot  follow  up  this  subject  in  its  whole
extent,  but  still  I  hope  that  you  will  at  least  completely
grasp  the  fundamental  idea  which  has  guided  me.  Here,
too,  we  have  another  example  of  that  dependence  of  a
dyscrasia  upon  a  local  disease  to  which  I  but  a  short
time  ago  called  your  attention  as  being  the  most  impor-
tant result  of  all  our  investigations  concerning  the  blood.

Now  it  is  a  very  remarkable  fact,  and  one  which  adds
weight  to  this  very  view  of  mine,  that  it  is  very  rarely
that  a  considerable  increase  of  fibrine  takes  place  without
a  simultaneous  increase  in  the  colourless  blood-corpuscles,
and  that  therefore  the  two  essential  constituents  which
we  find  in  the  lymph  we  again  meet  with  in  the  blood.
In  every  case  of  hyperinosis  we  may  rely  upon  discover-
ing an  increase  in  the  colourless  corpuscles,  or,  in  other

200  LECTURE VIII.

words,  every  irritation  of  a  part,  which  is  abundantly
provided  with  lymphatics,  and  freely  connected  with
lymphatic  glands,  occasions  also  the  introduction  of  large
numbers  of  colourless  cells  (lymph-corpuscles)  into  the
blood.

This  fact  is  especially  interesting,  inasmuch  as  you
will  perceive  from  it,  that  not  only  organs  richly  pro-
vided with  lymphatic  vessels  can  occasion  this  increase,
but  that  certain  processes  also  are  more  calculated  than
others  to  lead  to  the  introduction  of  considerable  quantities
of  these  elements  into  the  blood,  namely  all  those  which
are  early  conjoined  with  serious  disease  in  the  lymphatic
system.  If  you  compare  an  erysipelatous,  or  a  diffuse
phlegmonous  (according  to  Rust  pseudo-erysipelatous),
inflammation  in  its  effects  upon  the  blood  with  a  simple
superficial  inflammation  of  the  skin,  such  as  occurs  in  the
course  of  the  ordinary  acute  exanthemata,  or  after  trau-
matic or  chemical  irritation,  you  will  at  once  see  how
great  the  difference  is.  Every  erysipelatous  or  diffuse
phlegmonous  inflammation  has  the  peculiarity  of  early
affecting  the  lymphatic  vessels  and  producing  swellings
in  the  lymphatic  glands.  In  such  a  case  we  may  feel
assured  that  an  increase  in  the  number  of  the  colourless
corpuscles  is  taking  place.  Further,  we  find  the  signifi-
cant fact,  that  there  are  certain  processes  which  simul-
taneously cause  an  increase  of  fibrine  and  colourless  cor-
puscles, and  others  again  which  only  occasion  an  increased
production  of  the  latter.  To  this  latter  category  belong
the  whole  series  of  simple  diffuse  inflammations  of  the
skin,  in  which  also  no  considerable  formation  of  fibrine
takes  place  in  the  diseased  parts.  On  the  other  hand,  a
number  of  conditions  belong  to  it,  which  with  regard  to
the  quantity  of  fibrine  may  be  designated  as  hypinoti-
cal,  all  the  processes  namely  which  belong  to  the  typhoid
class,  and  agree  in  producing  considerable  swelling  now

LEUCOCYTOSIS  AXD  LEUK^M.A.  201

of  one,  and  now  of  another,  kind  in  the  lymphatic  glands,
but  do  not  produce  any  local  exudation  of  fibrine.  Thus
typhoid  fever  causes  these  changes  not  only  in  the  spleen,
but  also  in  the  mesenteric  glands.

The  condition  in  which  the  increased  proportion  of
colourless  corpuscles  in  the  blood  appears  to  be  depend-
ent upon  an  affection  of  the  lymphatic  glands,  I  have  de-
signated by  the  name  of  Leucocytosis.  Now  you  know
that  another  matter  has  long  been  the  subject  of  my  stu-
dies, the  affection  named  by  me  Leukcemia,  and  our  next
business  must  be  to  determine  how  far  genuine  leukae-
mia differs  from  these  leucocytotical  conditions.  In  the
very  first  cases  of  leukaemia  which  came  before  me,  a  very
essential  property  was  discovered  to  exist,  namely,  that
there  was  no  essential  variation  in  the  proportion  of
fibrine  in  the  blood.  Afterwards  it  was  found  out  that
the  proportion  of  fibrine  might,  according  to  the  parti-
cular circumstances  of  the  case,  be  greater  or  less  than,
or  the  same  as,  usual,  but  that  a  continually  augmenting
increase  of  the  colourless  blood-corpuscles  invariably  took
place  ;  and  that  the  coincidence  of  this  increase  with  a
diminution  in  the  number  of  the  coloured  (red)  corpus-
cles became  more  and  more  marked,  so  that  as  a  final
result  a  condition  was  attained,  in  which  the  number  of
the  colourless  corpuscles  was  almost  equal  to  that  of  the
red  ones,  and  striking  phenomena  were  displayed,  even
when  the  coarser  modes  of  observation  were  employed.
Whilst  in  ordinary  blood  we  can  seldom  count  more  than
one  colourless  corpuscle  to  about  three  hundred  coloured
ones,  there  are  cases  of  leukaemia  in  which  the  increase
of  the  colourless  ones  reaches  such  a  height,  that  to  every
three  red  corpuscles  there  is  one  colourless  one,  or  even
two  ;  or  in  which  indeed  the  greater  numbers  are  in
favour  of  the  colourless  corpuscles.

In  dead  bodies  the  increase  in  the  colourless  corpus-

202  LECTURE  VIII.

cles  generally  appears  more  considerable  than  it  really  is,
from  reasons  which  I  but  a  short  time  ago  pointed  out
to  you  (p.  184)  ;  for  these  corpuscles  possess  extraordi-
nary adhesiveness  and  accumulate  in  considerable  masses
wherever  there  is  a  retardation  in  the  stream  of  blood,
so  that  in  the  dead  body  the  greatest  number  is  always
found  in  the  right  heart.  Once,  before  I  left  Berlin,  this
singular  case  occurred  to  me,  that,  when  I  punctured
the  right  auricle,  the  physician  who  had  treated  the  case
cried  out,  astonished,  "  Why,  there's  an  abscess  there  !"
So  like  pus  did  the  blood  appear.  This  puriform  condi-
tion of  the  blood  does  not  indeed  pervade  the  entire  cir-
culating stream  ;  the  whole  of  the  blood  never  looks  like
pus,  because  a  comparatively  large  number  of  red  cor-
puscles always  continues  to  exist ;  still  it  sometimes  hap-
pens that  blood  flowing  from  a  vein  even  during  life
exhibits  whitish  streaks,  and  that,  when  the  fibrine  has
been  removed  by  stirring,  and  the  defibrinated  blood  is
allowed  to  stand,  a  voluntary  separation  at  once  takes
place,  the  whole  of  the  blood-corpuscles,  red  and  colour-
less, gradually  sinking  to  the  bottom  of  the  vessel,  and  there
forming  a  double  sediment,  a  lower  red  stratum,  covered
by  an  upper,  white  and  puriform  one.  This  is  explained
by  the  difference  in  the  specific  gravity  of  the  two  kinds
of  corpuscles  and  the  time  they  take  to  sink  (p.  186).  In
this  way  too  we  are  enabled  very  readily  to  distinguish
leukemic  from  chylous  (lipsemic)  blood  in  which  a  milky
appearance  of  the  liquor  sanguinis  is  produced  by  the
admixture  of  fat,  for,  if  the  fibrine  be  removed,  after
some  time  there  forms  not  a  white  sediment,  but  a
cream-like  layer  on  the  surface.

In  the  histories  of  all  the  known  cases  of  leukaemia  we
only  find  it  once  as  yet  recorded  that  the  patient,  after
he  had  been  for  some  time  the  subject  of  medical  treat-
ment, left  the  hospital  considerably  improved  in  health.

LETJOEMIA.  203

Iii  all  the  other  cases  the  result  was  death.  I  do  not
wish  by  any  means  to  infer  from  this  that  the  disease  in
question  is  absolutely  incurable  ;  I  hope  on  the  contrary
that  for  it  too  remedies  will  at  length  be  discovered  ;  but
it  is  certainly  a  very  important  fact  that  we  have  in  it,
much,  as  in  the  progressive  atrophy  of  muscles,  to  deal
with  conditions,  which,  when  abandoned  to  themselves,
or  subjected  to  any  one  of  the  hitherto  known  methods
of  treatment,  continually  grow  worse  aiid  ultimately  lead
to  death.  These  cases  possess,  in  addition,  the  remark-
able peculiarity  that,  usually  towards  the  close  of  life,  a
genuine  hemorrhagic  diathesis  is  developed  and  haemor-
rhages ensue,  which  occur  with  especial  frequency  in  the
nasal  cavity  (under  the  form  of  exhausting  epistaxis)  but
may  also,  under  certain  circumstances,  take  place  in
other  parts  of  the  body,  as  for  example  on  a  very  large
scale  in  the  form  of  apoplectic  clots  in  the  brain,  or  of
melsena  in  the  intestinal  canal.

Now,  upon  investigating  whence  this  curious  change  in
the  blood  takes  its  origin,  we  find  in  the  great  majority
of  cases  that  it  is  a  certain,  definite  organ  which  presents
itself  over  and  over  again  with  convincing  constancy  as
the  one  essentially  diseased,  an  organ  which  frequently,
even  at  the  outset  of  the  malady,  forms  the  chief  object
of  the  complaints  and  distress  of  the  patients,  namely,
the  spleen.  In  addition,  a  number  of  lymphatic  glands
are  very  frequently  diseased,  but  the  affection  of  the
spleen  stands  in  the  foreground.  Only  in  a  few  cases
have  I  found  the  change  in  the  spleen  the  less  and  that
in  the  lymphatic  glands  the  more  prominent,  and  in
these,  matters  had  proceeded  to  such  a  pitch,  that
lymphatic  glands,  at  other  times  scarcely  observable,  had
developed  themselves  into  lumps  the  size  of  walnuts,  and
that  indeed  in  some  few  places  there  appeared  to  be
scarcely  anything  else  than  glandular  substance.  Of  the

204  LECTURE VIII.

glands  which  lie  between  the  inguinal  and  lumbar  glands
we  are  wont  to  hear  but  little,  nor  have  they  indeed  even
a  suitable  name.  Some  of  them  lie  in  the  course  of  the
iliac  vessels,  and  some  in  the  real  pelvis.  But  in  two  of
these  cases  of  leukaemia  I  found  them  so  enlarged  that
the  whole  cavity  of  the  pelvis  proper  was,  as  at  were,
stuffed  full  of  glandular  substance,  between  which  the
rectum  and  the  bladder  only  just  dipped  in.

I  have  therefore'  distingushed  two  forms  of  leukaemia,
namely,  the  ordinary  splenic,  and  the  lymphatic,  form,
which  are  certainly  not  unfrequently  combined.  The
distinction  rests  not  only  upon  the  circumstance,  that  in
the  one  case  the  spleen,  in  the  other  the  lymphatic  glands,
constitute  the  starting  point  of  the  disease,  but  also  upon
the  fact  that  the  characteristic  morphological  elements
which  are  found  in  the  blood  are  not  precisely  similar.
Whilst  namely  in  the  splenic  forms  these  elements  are
generally  comparatively  large  and  perfectly  developed
cells  with  one  or  more  nuclei,  and  in  many  cases  bear  a
particularly  great  resemblance  to  the  cells  of  the  spleen,
we  notice  in  the  well-marked  lymphatic  forms  that  the
cells  are  small,  the  nuclei  large  in  proportion  and  single,
usually  sharply  defined,  with  dark  outlines  and  somewhat
granular,  whilst  the  cell- wall  is  frequently  in  such  close
apposition  to  them  that  an  interval  can  scarcely  be  de-
monstrated. In  many  instances  it  looks  as  if  perfectly
free  nuclei  were  contained  in  the  blood.  In  these  (the
lymphatic)  cases,  therefore,  it  seems  that  the  enlarge-
ment of  the  glands  alone,  which  is  accompanied  in  its
progress  by  a  real  increase  in  the  number  of  their  ele-
ments (hyperplasia),  also  conveys  a  larger  number  of  cel-
lular elements  into  the  lymph  and  through  this  into  the
blood,  and  that,  just  in  proportion  to  the  predominance
of  these  elements,  the  formation  of  the  red  cells  suffers
obstruction. This  is  in  a  few  words  the  history  of  these

HYPERINOSIS, LEUCOCYTOSIS  AND LEUKAEMIA.  205

processes.  Leukaemia  is  thus  a  sort  of  permanent,  pro-
gressive leucocytosis,  whilst  this  on  the  other  hand  in  its
simple  forms  constitutes  a  transitory  process,  connected
with  fluctuating  conditions  in  certain  organs.

You  see  therefore  that  there  are  at  least  three  different
conditions  here,  bordering  one  upon  the  other  :  hyperino-
sis,  leucocytosis  and  leukaemia,  between  which  and  the
lymphatic  fluids  there  exists  an  intimate  connection.
The  one  series,  that  namely  which  is  distinguished  by  an
increase  in  the  quantity  of  fibrine,  is  rather  to  be  referred
to  the  accidental  condition  of  the  organs  from  which  the
lymphatic  fluids  are  derived,  whilst  those  states  which  are
induced  by  an  increase  in  the  number  of  cellular  ele-
ments are  rather  regulated  by  the  condition  of  the  glands
through  which  these  fluids  have  flowed.  These  facts  can
hardly,  I  think,  be  interpreted  in  any  other  manner  than
by  supposing  that  the  spleen  and  lymphatic  glands  are
really  intimately  concerned  in  the  devehypment  of  the
blood.  This  has  become  still  more  probable  since  we
have  succeeded  in  obtaining  chemical  evidence  also  in
support  of  it.  Herr  Scherer  upon  two  occasions  ex-
amined leukemic  blood  which  I  had  submitted  to  him,
in  order  to  compare  it  with  the  matters  he  had  discovered
in  the  spleen,  and  the  result  was  that  hypoxanthine,
leucine,  uric,  lactic,  and  formic,  acid,  were  found  there.
In  one  case  of  leukaemia  a  liver  which  I  had  kept  for
several  days  became  entirely  covered  with  granules  of
tyrosine  ;  in  another,  leucine  and  tyrosine  crystallized  in
large  masses  out  of  the  contents  of  the  intestines.  In
short,  everything  points  to  an  increased  action  in  the
spleen,  which  normally  contains  these  substances  in  con-
siderable quantity.

A  good  many  years  elapsed  (after  1845)  during  which
I  found  myself  pretty  nearly  alone  in  my  views.  It  has
only  been  by  degrees  and  indeed,  as  I  am  sorry  to  be

I

/

1

206  LECTURE VIII.

obliged  to  confess,  in  consequence  rather  of  physiological
than  pathological  considerations,  that  people  have  come
round  to  these  ideas  of  mine,  and  only  gradually  have
their  minds  proved  accessible  to  the  notion,  that  in  the
ordinary  course  of  things  the  lymphatic  glands  and  the
spleen  are  really  immediately  concerned  in  the  produc-
tion of  the  formed  elements  of  the  blood  ;  and  that  in
particular  the  corpuscular  constituents  of  this  fluid  are
really  descendants  of  the  cellular  bodies  of  the  lymphatic
glands  and  the  spleen  which  have  been  set  free  in  their
interior  and  conveyed  into  the  current  of  the  blood.
And  let  this  serve  as  an  introduction  to  the  consideration
of  the  question  of  the  origin  of  the  blood-corpuscles
themselves.

You  will  probably  recollect,  gentlemen,  from  the  time
of  your  studies,  that  the  lymphatic  glands  used  to  be
regarded  as  coils  of  lymphatic  vessels.  The  afferent
lymphatics  may,  as  is  well  known,  even  with  the  naked
eye  be  seen  breaking  up  into  smaller  branches,  disappear-
ing within  the  glands,  and  finally  again  emerging  from
them.  From  the  results  of  the  mercurial  injections
which  even  in  the  last  century  were  made  with  such
great  care,  the  only  inference  to  be  drawn  appeared  to
be,  that  the  afferent  lymphatic  vessel  formed  a  number
of  convolutions,  which  interlaced  in  various  ways  and
were  finally  continued  into  the  efferent  vessel,  so  that  the
gland  was  composed  of  nothing  else  than  the  thickly
crowded  coils  of  the  afferent  vessels.  The  whole  atten-
tion of  modern  histologists  has  been  directed  to  the  task
of  confirming  this  tortuous  transit  of  the  lymphatic  ves-
sels through  the  gland,  but  after  many  years  of  labour
spent  in  vain,  the  attempt  was  at  length  abandoned.

At  the  present  moment  there  is,  I  should  suppose,
scarcely  an  histologist  who  believes  in  the  perfect  conti-
nuity of  the  lymphatic  vessels  throughout  the  gland,  but

STRUCTURE  OF LYMPHATIC GLANDS.  207

Kolliker's  view  is  generally  adopted,  that  the  lymphatic
glands  interrupt  the  current  of  the  lymph,  the  afferent
vessel  resolving  itself  into  the  parenchyma  of  the  gland
and  reconstituting  itself  out  of  it.  This  condition  we
cannot  well  compare  with  anything  else  than  a  kind  of
filtering  apparatus,  something  like  our  ordinary  sand  or
charcoal  filters.

When  a  gland  is  cut  across,  a  structure  is  frequently
brought  to  view  resembling  that  of  a  kidney.  At  those
points  where  the  afferent  vessels  break  up,  a  firmer  sub-
stance is  seen  to  lie,  half  surrounded  by  which  a  kind  of
hilus  marks  the  spot  at  which  the  lymphatic  vessels  again
forsake  the  gland.  Here  there  is  found  a  reticular  tissue
with  an  often  distinctly  areolar  or  cavernous  structure,
into  which,  besides  the  efferent  lymphatic  vessels,  blood-
vessels also  enter  on  their  way  into  the  proper  substance
of  the  gland.  Kolliker  has  accordingly  distinguished  a
cortical  and  a  medullary  substance  ;  but  the  so-called
medullary  substance  scarcely  retains  the  character  of
glandular  tissue.  This  is  found  chiefly  in  the  cortical
substance,  which  is  of  greater  or  less  thickness,  and  it  is
therefore  -best  to  call  the  medullary  substance  simply  the
hilus,  since  afferent  and  efferent  vessels  lie  there  in  close
contact,  just  as  in  the  hilus  of  the  kidneys  the  ureters  and
veins  emerge,  whilst  the  arteries  enter.  The  essential
part  of  the  gland  is  therefore  the  periphery,  the  often
kidney-like  cortical  substance.

In  this  can  be  distinguished,  whenever  the  gland  is  at
all  well  developed  (and  in  some  cases  of  pathological  en-
largement it  is  extremely  distinct)  even  with  the  naked
eye,  little,  roundish,  white  or  grey  granules  lying  side
by  side.  When  the  part  is  moderately  well  filled  with
blood,  around  each  granule  may  be  pretty  nearly
always  discerned  a  reel  circle  of  vessels.  These  granules
have long been called  follicles^ but it was doubtful

208

LECTURE VIII.

whether  they  were  distinct  formations  or  mere  convolu-
tions of  the  lymphatic  vessel  protruding  on  the  surface.

Upon  more  delicate  microscopical
examination,  the  proper  (glandu-
lar) substance  of  the  follicles  can
easily  be  distinguished  from  the
fibrous  meshwork  (stroma)  which
bounds  them  on  all  sides,  and  is
externally  continuous  with  the
connective  tissue  of  the  capsule.
The  internal  substance  is  chiefly
composed  of  little  cellular  ele-
ments, which  lie  pretty  loosely,
being  merely  enclosed  in  a  fine
network  of  star-shaped,  often  nu-
If  we  attempt  to  search  for  the
lymphatic  vessels  in  the  cortical  substance,  but  very
little  can  be  discovered  of  them  in  the  stroma,  and  if  a
gland  be  injected,  the  injection  penetrates  right  into
the  middle  of  the  follicles.  If  a  mesenteric  gland  be
examined  during  chylification,  that  is  perhaps  three  or
four  hours  after  a  meal  at  which  fat  has  been  taken  in
abundance,  its  whole  substance  appears  white  and  per-
fectly milky,  and  on  examining  individual  parts  of  it
microscopically,  the  minute  fat- drops  of  the  chyle  may
be  detected  every  where  lying  between  the  cellular  ele-
ments of  the  follicles.  It  seems,  therefore,  that  the  cur-
rent of  lymph  forces  its  way  between  these  elements,  and

cleated trabecule.

Fig.  61.  Sections  through  the  cortical  substance  of  human  mesenteric  glands.
A.  View  of  the  whole  cortical  substance  slightly  magnified:  P,  investing  adipose
tissue  and  capsule,  through  which  blood-vessels  v,  v,  v  enter.  F,  F,  F.  Follicles  of
the  gland,  into  which  the  blood-vessels  in  part  plunge,  at  iy  i  the  interstitial  tissue
separating  the  follicles  (stroma).

B.  More  highly  magnified  (280  times).  C.  The  tissue  of  the  capsule  with  paral-
lel fibrils,  a,  a.  The  reticulum,  partly  empty,  partly  filled  with  the  nucleated  con-
tents. The  whole  corresponds  to  the  outer  part  of  a  follicle.

STRUCTURE OF LYMPHATIC GLANDS.  209

that  no  really  free  channel  for  it  exists,  seeing  that  the
elements  lie  crowded  together  like  the  particles  in  a
charcoal  filter,  so  that  the  lymph  trickles  out  again  on
the  other  side  in  a  more  or  less  purified  sta.te.  The  fol-
licles should  accordingly  be  regarded  as  spaces  filled  with
cellular  elements  but  variously  intersected  by  a  trabecu-
lar network,  and  thus  they  can  no  longer  be  held  to  be
convolutions  or  dilatations  of  the  lymphatics,  but  must
be  viewed  as  interposing  themselves  in  the  course  of
these  vessels  after  they  have  broken  up  into  a  series  of
ramifications  continually  increasing  in  minuteness.

Of  the  minute  elements  contained  in  the  follicles,  the
cells  of  the  parenchyma,  some  appear  to  become  separated

Fig.  62.

a  mB  *

and  afterwards  to  mingle  with  the  blood  as  colourless
blood-  or  lymph-corpuscles.  The  more  the  glands  be-
come enlarged,  the  more  numerous  are  the  cellular  ele-
ments which  pass  into  the  blood,  and  the  larger  and  more
perfectly  developed  are  the  individual  colourless  cells  of
the  blood  wont  to  be.

The  same  condition  seems  to  prevail  in  the  spleen.  ,
Originally  we  all  imagined  that  the  veins  were  the  chan-

Fig.  62.  Lymph-corpuscles  from  the  interior  of  the  follicles  of  a  lymphatic  gland.

A.  As  usually  seen ;  a,  free  nuclei,  with  and  without  nucleoli,  simple  and  divided.
b.  Cells  with  smaller  and  larger  nuclei,  which  are  closely  invested  by  the  cell-wall.

B.  Enlarged  cells  from  a  hyperplastic  bronchial  gland  in  a  case  of  variolous  pneu-
monia (comp.  in  Fig.  57  the  colourless  blood-corpuscles  from  the  same  source),  a.
Largish  cells  with  granules,  and  single  nuclei,  b.  Club-shaped  cells,  c.  Larger
cells  with  larger  nuclei  and  nucleoli,  d.  Division  of  nuclei,  e.  Club-shaped  cells
in  close  apposition  (cell-division  ?).  O.  Cells  with  an  endogenous  brood.  300
diameters.

14

21q  LECTURE  Vin.

nels  by  which  the  colourless  corpuscles  were  conveyed
away  from  the  spleen  ;  but  in  this  instance  also  I  have
come  to  the  conclusion  that  their  removal  is  in  all  proba-
bility effected  by  means  of  the  lymphatic  vessels.

'

(

■

•-

TT*^

K

7

i

LECTURE IX.

MARCH  13,  1858.

PYAEMIA  AND  LEUCOCYTOSIS.

Comparison  between  colourless  blood-  and  pus-corpuscles — Physiological  re-absorp-
tion of  pus ;  incomplete  (inspissation,  cheesy  transformation),  and  complete
(fatty  metamorphosis,  or  milky  transformation). Intra vasation  of  pus.

Pus  in  the  lymphatic  vessels — Retention  of  matters  in  the  lymphatic  glands — Me-
chanical separation  (nitration) — Coloration  by  tattooing — Chemical  separation
(attraction) :  Cancer,  Syphilis — Irritation  of  lymphatic  glands,  and  its  relation  to
leucocytosis.

Digestive  and  puerperal  (physiological)  leucocytosis — Pathological  leucocytosis
(Scrofulosis,  typhoid  fever,  cancer,  erysipelas).

Lymphoid  apparatuses :  solitary  and  Peyerian  follicles  in  the  intestines — Tonsils
and  follicles  of  the  tongue — Thymus— Spleen.

Complete  rejection  of  pyaemia  as  a  dyscrasia  susceptible  of  demonstration  morpho-
logically.

In  a  practical  point  of  view  the  question  of  pycemia
forcibly  intrudes  itself  upon  us  in  connection  with  the
changes  which  we  have  last  considered,  and  as  this  must
still  be  reckoned  among  the  most  controvertible  of  sub-
jects, you  will,  I  hope,  allow  me  to  enter  a  little  more
particularly  into  its  details.

What  is  to  be  understood  by  pyaemia  ?  It  has  gene-
rally been  conceived  to  be  a  condition,  in  which  the
blood  contains  pus,  and  as  pus  is  essentially  characterized
by  its  morphological  constituents,  what  is  meant  of
course  is,  that  pus-corpuscles  are  to  be  seen  in  the  blood.
Now  that  we  have  found  out,  however,  that  the  colour-

211

L

212  LECTURE  IX.

less  corpuscles  of  the  blood  as  they  usually  appear  and
are  to  be  observed  in  people  in  the  best  state  of  health,
resemble  pus-corpuscles  in  every  respect  (p.  180),  one
essential  point  in  the  question  is  thus  at  the  very  outset
got  rid  of.  In  order,  however,  to  render  the  subject  to
some  extent  perspicuous,  it  is  necessary  to  enter  into  the
consideration  of  the  different  points  of  view  which  are
here  involved  a  little  more  in  detail.
y£  Colourless  blood-cells  are  so  like  pus-corpuscles  as  easily

to  be  mistaken  for  them,  so  that  if  in  any  specimen  we
meet  with  such  elements,  we  can  never  say  with  certainty
off-hand  whether  we  have  to  deal  with  colourless  blood-,
or  pus-corpuscles.  Formerly,  and  to  some  extent  even
up  to  our  own  times,  the  view  was  very  generally  enter-
tained that  the  constituents  of  pus  pre-existed  in  the
blood  ;  that  pus  was  only  a  kind  of  secretion  from  the
blood,  in  somewhat  the  same  way  that  urine  is  ;  and  that
it  could  also  like  a  simple  fluid  return  into  the  blood.
This  view  explains,  you  see,  the  conception  which  has
been  so  long  preserved  in  the  doctrine  of  the  so  called
physiological  reabsorption  of  pus.

It  was  imagined  that  the  pus  might  be  again  taken  up
into  the  blood  from  the  different  points  at  which  it  had
been  deposited,  and  that  a  favourable  turn  was  thereby
effected  in  the  disease,  inasmuch  as  the  reabsorbed  pus
was  thus  at  last  removed  from  the  body.  The  tale  went
that  in  the  case  of  a  patient  with  pus  in  the  cavity  of  the
pleura  the  disease  might  terminate  in  the  evacuation  of
purulent  urine  or  purulent  faeces,  without  the  pus  having
previously  made  its  way  directly  from  the  pleura  into  the
urinary  passages  or  the  intestinal  canal.  It  is  therefore
admitted  to  be  possible  that  pus  may  be  reabsorbed  and
conveyed  away  in  substance.  Afterwards,  when  the  doc-
trine of  pyaemia  had  more  and  more  gained  ground,  these
cases  were  distinguished  by  the  name  of  physiological  re-

REABSORPTION OF PUS.  213

absorption  of  pus,  from  that  which  was  considered  to  be
pathological,  and  the  only  question  that  remained  was,
in  what  way  the  first  process  with  its  favourable  and  the
second  with  its  malignant  issue  could  be  accounted  for.
This  matter  finds  its  simple  solution  in  the  fact  that  pus
as  pus  is  never  reabsorbed.  There  is  no  form,  by  which
pus  in  substance  can  disappear  by  the  way  of  reabsorp-
tion  ;  it  is  always  the  fluid  part  of  the  pus  which  is  taken
up,  and  therefore  what  is  called  the  reabsorption  of  pus
may  be  referred  to  the  two  following  possibilities.

In  the  first  case,  the  pus  with  its  corpuscles  is  at  the
time  of  the  reabsorption  still  more  or  less  intact.  Then
the  pus  becomes  of  course  thicker  in  proportion  as  the
fluid  disappears.  This  constitutes  the  long  known  thick-
ening (inspissation)  of  pus,  whereby  is  produced  what  the
French  term  "  pus  concret,"  which  consists  of  a  thick
mass,  containing  the  pus-corpuscles  in  a  shrivelled  con-
dition, when  not  only  the  fluid  between  the  pus-corpus-
cles (pus-serum)  but  a  part  also  of  that  present  in  them
has  disappeared.

Fig.  63.
w ^ -it

J3

Fig.  63.  A.  Pus-corpuscles,  a  fresh,  b  after  the  addition  of  a  little  water,  c — e
after  treatment  with  acetic  acid,  the  contents  cleared  up,  the  nuclei  which  were  in
process  of  division,  or  already  divided,  visible,  at  e  with  a  slight  depression  on
their  surface.  B.  Nuclei  of  pus- corpuscles  in  gonorrhoea ;  a  simple  nucleus  with
nucleoli,  b  incipient  division,  with  depressions*  on  the  surface  of  the  nuclei,  c  pro-
gressive bi-partition,  d  tri-partition.  G.  Pus-corpuscles  in  their  natural  position
with  regard  to  one  another. 500  diameters.

*  By  many  held  to  be  nucleoli.

214  LECTURE  IX.

Pus  consists  essentially  of  cells,  which  in  their  ordinary
condition  lie  close  to  one  another  (Fig.  63,  (7,  and  be-
tween which  a  small  quantity  of  intercellular  fluid  (pus-
serum)  exists.  Within  the  pus-corpuscles  themselves  lies
a  substance  which  is  likewise  provided  with  a  great  quan-
tity of  water  ;  for  nearly  every  specimen  of  pus,  although
it  may  look  very  thick  when  fresh,  contains  such  a  large
amount  of  water  that  it  loses  a  great  deal  more  by  eva-
poration than  a  corresponding  quantity  of  blood.  The
latter  only  gives  the  impression  of  being  more  watery
because  it  contains  a  great  deal  of  free  (intercellular),
but  relatively  little  intracellular,  fluid,  whilst  in  pus  on  the
contrary  there  is  a  greater  quantity  of  water  in  the  cells,
and  less  without  them.  When  then  reabsorption  takes
place,  the  greatest  part  of  the  intercellular  fluid  first  dis-
appears, and  the  pus-corpuscles  draw  nearer  to  one  an-
other ;  soon,  however,  a  part  of  the  fluid  from  the  cells
themselves  also  vanishes,  and  in  propor-
tion as  this  is  the  case,  they  become
\  smaller,  more  irregular,  angular,  and  un-

g@ even, they assume the most singular
forms, lie  closely  pressed  together,  re-
fract the  light  more  strongly  on  account
of  their  containing  a  greater  quantity  of
solid  matter,  and  present  a  more  homogeneous  appear-
ance.

This  kind  of  inspissation  is  by  no  means  so  rare  a  pro-
cess as  it  is  often  assumed  to  be,  but  on  the  contrary  of
extremely  frequent  occurrence,  and  almost  even  more
important  than  frequent.  This  is  namely  one  of  the  pro-
cesses which  lead  to  the  formation  of  the  much  discussed

Fig.  64.  Inspissated,  cheesy  pus.  a.  Shrivelled  pus-corpuscles,  diminished  in
size,  somewhat  distorted,  and  looking  more  homogeneous  and  solid  than  usual.
6.  Similar  corpuscles  with  fat  granules,  c.  Their  natural  position  with  regard  to
one  another. 300  diameters.

a

INSPISSATION (TUBERCULIZATION) OF  PUS.  215

cheesy  products  which  have  recently  been  all  included
under  the  term  tubercle,  and  concerning  which  it  has
been  shown,  especially  by  Reinhardt,  that  they  must  to
a  very  considerable  extent  really  be  referred  to  pus  as
their  origin,  and  therefore  be  regarded  as  inflammatory
products.  Hereafter,  we  shall  see  that  these  observa-
tions have  been  employed  for  the  deduction  of  false  con-
clusions concerning  tubercle  itself ;  but  that  by  inspissa-
tion inflammatory  products  can  be  converted  into  things
which  are  called  tubercles,  is  indubitable.  It  is  precisely
in  the  history  of  pulmonary  tuberculosis  that  this  opera-
tion plays  a  very  prominent  part.  You  have  only  to
imagine  shrivelled-up  cells  like  these  inclosed  within  the
alveoli  of  the  lungs  and  undergoing  inspissation  of  their
contents  in  one  alveolus  after  another,  and  you  will  at
length  obtain  a  cheesy  hepatization  such  as  is  usually
described  under  the  name  of  tubercular  infiltration..

This  imperfect  reabsorption,  in  which  only  the  fluid
constituents  are  reabsorbed,  leaves  the  mass  of  solid  con-
stituents lying  in  the  part  as  a  caput  mortuum,  as  a  mass
deprived  of  vitality  and  no  longer  capable  of  life.  This
is  the  kind  of  inspissation  which  we  see  occur  on  a  large
scale  in  the  case  of  imperfect  reabsorption  of  pleuritic
exudations,  when  very  large  layers  of  a  crumbling  sub-
stance remain  behind  in  the  sac  of  the  pleura  ;  and  also
round  about  the  vertebral  column  in  caries  of  the  verte-

Fig.  65.

®  ©

Fig.  65.  Inspissated  hemorrhagic  pus  from  a  case  of  empyema,  some  of  it  in  pro-
cess of  disintegration,  a.  The  natural  mass,  containing  granular  debris,  shrivelled
pus-  and  blood-corpuscles,  b.  The  same  mass  treated  with  water ;  a  few  granular,
decolorized  blood-corpuscles  have  become  evident,  c  and  d.  After  the  addition  of
acetic  acid. 300  diameters,  and  at  d  520.

216  LECTURE  IX.

brae  (Spondylarthocace),  cold  abscesses,  etc.  In  all
these  cases  the  reabsorption  is  at  an  end  as  soon  as  the
fluid  has  disappeared.  Herein  consists  the  evil  import
of  these  processes.  For  the  solid  parts  which  are  not
reabsorbed,  either  remain  lying  in  the  part  as  such,  or
they  may  afterwards  soften,  in  which  case,  however,  they
do  not  usually  undergo  reabsorption,  but  for  the  most
part  give  rise  to  ulceration.  At  all  events  what  is  reab-
sorbed is  not  pus,  but  a  simple  fluid  composed  in  great
part  of  water,  a  few  salts,  and  a  very  small  quantity  of
albuminous  matter,  and  there  can  be  no  question  but
that  we  have  here  presented  to  us  one  of  the  most  incom-
plete forms  of  reabsorption.

The  second  form  of  purulent  reabsorption  is  that  which
constitutes  the  most  favourable  case,  when  the  pus  really
disappears  and  no  essential  part  of  it  need  remain  be-
hind. But  here  too  the  pus  is  not  reabsorbed  as  pus,
but  first  undergoes  a  fatty  metamorphosis  ;  every  single
cell  sets  fatty  particles free  within it,
breaks  up and at  last  nothing  further
||§|  HH remains  than  fatty  granules  aod  inter-
ns e venins;  fluid. Then  therefore  there  exist
%¥§0$M0? no  longer  either  cells  or  pus  :  and  their
place  is  occupied  by  an  emulsive  mass,  a
kind  of  milk,  composed  of  water,  some  albuminous  mat-
ter and  fat,  and  in  which  even  sugar  has  on  various  occa-
sions been  demonstrated,  whereby  a  still  greater  analogy
with  real  milk  is  brought  about. It  is  this  pathological
milk  which  afterwards comes  to be  reabsorbed — once
more  therefore  not  pus,  but  fat,  water,  and  salts. These
are  the  processes  which  may  be  denominated  "  physiolo-

Fig.  66.  Pus  engaged  in  retrograde  fatty  metamorphosis  (fatty  degeneration),  a.
Commencement  of  the  change,  b.  Fat-granule  cells  with  nuclei  still  distinct.
c.  Granule-globule  (inflammatory  globule),  d.  Disintegration  of  the  globule,  e.
Emulsion,  milky  debris. 350  diameters.

PUS  IN  THE LYMPHATIC  VESSELS.  217

gical  reabsorption  of  pus  f  a  reabsorption,  in  which  pus
is  not  reabsorbed  as  such,  but  either  only  its  fluid  consti-
tuents, or  its  solid  ones  after  they  have  been  considerably
altered  by  an  internal  transformation.

There  is  however  certainly  one  case  in  which  pus  in
substance  may  become  the  object,  not  exactly  of  a  reab-
sorption, but  at  any  rate  of  an  intravasation,  and  where
this  intravasated  pus  may  circulate  within  the  vessels  ;  I
mean  the  case  in  which  a  vessel  receives  a  wound  or  is
perforated  and  pus  passes  through  the  opening  into  its
interior.  An  abscess  may  lie  close  to  a  vein,  burst
through  the  walls,  and  evacuate  its  contents  into  the  ves-
sel. Still  more  easily  can  such  a  transit  be  effected  in
lymphatic  vessels  which  run  into  open  abscesses.  The
only  question  therefore  is  how  far  we  are  entitled  to  con-
sider this  case  as  a  frequent  one.  As  far  as  the  veins  are
concerned,  the  possibility  of  such  an  occurrence  has  been
for  the  last  twenty  years  confined  within  somewhat  nar-
row limits,  and  the  notion  of  the  reabsorption  of  pus  in
substance  through  the  medium  of  the  veins  has  been
more  and  more  abandoned  ;  but  about  its  taking  place
by  means  of  the  lymphatics  people  still  pretty  fre-
quently talk,  and  indeed  they  have  frequently  occasion
to  do  so.

But  it  is  almost  a  matter  of  indifference  whether  the
pus  really  finds  its  way  into  lymphatic  vessels  from  the
outside,  or,  whether,  as  others  assume  to  be  the  case,  it
owes  its  origin  to  inflammation  in  the  lymphatic  vessels  ;
uHimately,  the  question  is  always  this,  how  far  a  lymph-
atic vessel  filled  with  pus  is  capable  of  effecting  an  eva-
cuation of  its  contents  into  the  circulating  stream  of
blood,  and  producing  a  genuine  pyaemia.  The  possibility
of  such  an  occurrence  must  as  a  rule  be  denied,  and  in-
deed for  a  very  simple  reason.  All  the  lymphatic  ves-
sels which  are  in  a  condition  to  take  up  pus  in  this  way

¥■

218  LECTURE  IX.

are  peripheral  ones,  whether  they  arise  from  external  or
internal  parts,  and  only  after  a  somewhat  lengthened
course  do  they  gradually  reach  the  blood-vessels.  In  all,
interruptions  are  formed  by  the  lymphatic  glands,  and
since  we  know  that  the  lymphatic  vessels  do  not  pass
through  the  glands  as  wide,  tortuous,  and  interlacing
canals  (p.  208),  but  that,  after  they  have  broken  up  into
fine  branches,  they  enter  into  spaces  which  are  filled  with
cellular  elements,  it  is  manifest,  that  no  pus-corpuscle
can  pass  a  gland.

This  is  a  very  important  point  of  view  which  curiously
enough  is  generally  overlooked,  although  it  meets  with
the  best  possible  confirmation  in  the  daily  experience  of
the  practical  physician.  In  proof  of  the  inevitable  ob-
struction to  the  passage  of  solid  particles  through  the
lymphatic  glands,  a  very  pretty  experiment  is  afforded
by  a  custom  prevalent  amongst  the  lower  classes  of  our
population,  the  well-known  practice  of  tattooing  the  arms
and  occasionally  other  parts.  When  a  workman  or  a
soldier  has  a  number  of  punctures  made  upon  his  arm,
and  arranged  so  as  to  represent  letters,  signs,  or  figures,
nearly  always,  in  consequence  of  the  great  number  of
punctures,  some  of  the  superficial  lymphatic  vessels  are
injured.  It  could  not  indeed  well  happen  otherwise  than
that,  when  whole  regions  of  skin  are  circumscribed  by
the  pricks  of  a  needle,  at  least  some  few  lymphatic  ves-
sels should  be  hit  upon.  Afterwards  a  substance  is  rub-
bed in  which  is  insoluble  in  the  fluids  of  the  body,  such
as  cinnabar,  gunpowder,  or  the  like,  and  which,  remain-
ing in  the  parts,  causes  a  permanent  coloration  of  them.
But  in  the  rubbing  in  a  certain  number  of  the  particles
find  their  way  into  lymphatic  vessels,  are  carried  along
in  spite  of  their  heaviness  by  the  current  of  lymph,  and
reach  the  nearest  lymphatic  glands,  where  they  are  sepa-
rated by  filtration. We  never  find  that  any  particles  are

DEPOSITS IN LYMPHATIC GLANDS AFTER  TATTOOING.

219

conveyed  beyond  the  lymphatic  glands  and  make  their
way  to  more  distant  points,  or  that  they  deposit  them-
selves in  any  way  in  the  parenchyma  of  internal  organs.
No,  the  mass  always  settles  in  the  nearest  group  of
glands.  On  examining  the  infiltrated  glands  it  is  easy  to
convince  oneself  that  the  size  of  the  deposited  particles
is  less  than  that  even  of  the  smallest  pus-corpuscle.

Fig.  67.

In  the  object  which  I  place  before  you  (Fig.  67)  the  spot
has  accidentally  been  hit  upon,  at  which  the  lymphatic
vessel  enters  into  the  gland,  and  whence,  enclosed  within
the  trabeculse  of  connective  tissue  which  are  prolonged
from  the  capsules  between  the  follicles,  it  proceeds  in  a
spiral  form,  and  finally  breaks  up  into  its  branches.  Where
these  pass  into  the  neighbouring  follicles,  which  are  here

Fig.' 67.  Section  through  the  cortical  substance  of  an  axillary  gland  from  an  arm,
the  skin  of  which  had  been  tattooed.  A  large  lymphatic  vessel  is  seen  entering
from  the  cortical  substance,  gently  winding  and  breaking  up  into  fine  branches.
Round  about  are  follicles,  for  the  most  part  filled  with  connective  tissue.  The  dark,
finely  granular  mass  represents  the  deposit  of  cinnabar. 80  diameters.

220  LECTURE  IX.

indeed  in  great  part  filled  with  connective  tissue,  they
have  poured  out  the  whole  mass  of  cinnabar,  so  that  in
part  it  still  lies  within  the  intervening  trabecular,  but  yet
in  part  has  penetrated  into  the  follicles  themselves.  The
preparation  comes  from  the  arm  of  a  soldier  who  had  the
figures  rubbed  in  in  1809,  so  that  the  mass
has  remained  nearly  fifty  years  in  the
same  place.  None  of  it  has  penetrated
farther  than  this  spot ;  even  the  next
layer  of  follicles  does  not  contain  any.
The  particles  are  however  so  small,  and
the  majority  of  them  so  minute  in  com-
parison with  the  cells  of  the  gland,  that
they  cannot  at  all  be  compared  to  pus-
corpuscles.  Now  when  such  molecules  as  these  are  un-
able to  pass,  when  such  extremely  minute  particles  cause
an  obstruction,  it  would  be  somewhat  bold  to  imagine
that  pus-corpuscles,  which  are  relatively  large,  could
effect  a  passage.
s<;  This  arrangement,  gentlemen,  by  means  of  which  the

free  current  of  fluid  is*  interrupted  in  the  lymphatic
glands,  and  the  coarser  particles  are  retained  there  in
quite  a  mechanical  manner,  admits,  as  may  readily  be
conceived,  of  no  other  kind  of  reabsorption  from  the  pe-
riphery through  the  medium  of  the  lymphatic  vessels  than
that  of  simple  fluids.  We  should  indeed  be  mistaken,  if
we  were  to  consider  the  whole  action  of  the  lymphatic
glands  to  consist  merely  in  their  being  interposed  like
filters  between  the  different  portions  of  the  lymphatic  ves-
sels. They  have  manifestly  another  part  to  play,  inas-
much as  the  substance  of  the  glands  indubitably  takes  up

Fig.  68.  Reticulum  of  an  axillary  gland  filled  with  cinnabar,  from  an  arm  which
had  been  tattooed  (Fig.  67). a.  Part  of  an  inter-follicular  trabecula  with  a  lymph-
atic vessel ;  b  one of  its  larger  branches  entering  into  a  follicle ;  c,  c  the  anasto-
mosing, nucleated  networks  of  the  reticulum ;  the  dark  granules  are  particles  of
cinnabar. 300  diameters.

LYMPHATIC GLANDS  IN CANCER  AND SYPHILIS.  221

into  itself  certain  ingredients  from  the  fluid  mass  of  the
lymph,  retains  them,  and  thereby  also  alters  the  chemi-
cal constitution  of  the  fluid,  so  that  it  quits  the  gland  all
the  more  altered  because  it  must  at  the  same  time  be
assumed  that  the  gland  yields  up  certain  constituents  to
the  lymph,  which  did  not  previously  exist  in  it.

I  will  not  here  enter  into  minute  details,  since  the  his-
tory of  every  malignant  tumour  affords  the  best  examples
in  support  of  this  position.  When  an  axillary  gland  be-
comes cancerous,  after  previous  cancerous  disease  of  the
mamma,  and  when  during  a  long  period  only  the  axil-
lary gland  remains  diseased  without  the  group  of  glands
next  in  succession  or  any  other  organs  becoming  affected
with  cancer,  we  can  account  for  this  upon  no  other  sup-
position than  that  the  gland  collects  the  hurtful  ingredi-
ents absorbed  from  the  breast,  and  thereby  for  a  time
affords  protection  to  the  body,  but  at  length  proves  insuf-
ficient, nay,  perhaps  at  a  later  period  itself  becomes  a
new  source  of  independent  infection  to  the  body,  inas-
much as  a  further  propagation  of  the  poisonous  matter
may  take  place  from  the  diseased  parts  of  the  gland.
Equally  instructive  examples  are  afforded  by  the  his-
tory of  syphilis,  in  which  a  bubo  may  for  a  time  become
the  depository  of  the  poison,  so  that  the  rest  of  the  eco-
nomy is  affected  in  a  comparatively  trifling  degree.  As
Ricord  has  shown,  it  is  precisely  in  the  interior  of  the
real  substance  of  the  gland  that  the  virulent  matter  is
found,  whilst  the  pus  at  the  circumference  of  the  bubo  is
free  from  it ;  only  so  far  as  the  parts  come  into  contact
with  the  lymph  conveyed  from  the  diseased  part,  do  they
absorb  the  virulent  matter.

If  we  apply  these  facts  to  the  reabsorption  of  pus,  we
are  not,  even  in  the  case  when  it  has  really  made  its  way
into  lymphatic  vessels,  at  all  entitled  to  conclude  that  as
an  immediate  consequence  of  this  irruption  the  blood  be-

222  LECTURE  IX.

comes  infected  with  the  constituents  of  pus  ;  on  the  con-
trary a  retention  of  the  pus-corpuscles  will  probably  take
place  within  the  glands,  and  even  the  fluids  which  suc-
ceed in  passing  them,  will  during  that  passage  lose  a
great  part  of  their  noxious  properties.  Secondary  glan-
dular swellings  show  themselves  in  various  forms  after
peripheral  infection.  How  can  they  be  explained  other-
wise than  upon  the  supposition,  that  every  contaminat-
ing (miasmatic)  substance,  which  is  to  be  regarded  as
essentially  foreign  or,  if  I  may  so  express  myself,  hostile,
to  the  body,  by  penetrating  into  the  substance  of  the
gland,  produces  in  it  a  state  of  more  or  less  marked  irri-
tation which  very  frequently  increases  to  a  real  inflam-
mation of  the  gland  ?  I  shall  hereafter  revert  to  the  sub-
ject of  irritation  and  enter  a  little  more  fully  into  the  con-
sideration of  the  meaning  which  should  be  attached  to  it,
and  I  will  therefore  here  only  make  this  remark,  that
according  to  my  investigations  the  irritation  of  a  gland
consists  in  its  falling  into  a  state  in  which  there  is  an
increased  formation  of  cells  in  it — its  follicles  becoming
enlarged,  and  after  a  time  exhibiting  a  much  greater
number  of  cells  than  before.  In  proportion  to  the  extent
of  these  processes  we  then  see  the  colourless  elements  of
the  blood  also  increase.  Every  considerable  irritation  of
a  gland  is  followed  by  an  increase  in  the  proportion  of
lymph-corpuscles  in  the  blood,  and  every  process  there-
fore which  is  accompanied  by  glandular  irritation,  will
also  have  the  effect  of  supplying  the  blood  with  larger
quantities  of  colourless  blood-corpuscles,  or,  in  other
words,  of  producing  a  leucocytotic  condition.  If  then  the
opinion  be  entertained  that  pus  has  been  absorbed,  and
that  pus  is  the  cause  of  the  disturbances  which  have  de-
clared themselves,  nothing  is  easier  than  to  demonstrate
the  presence  of  cells  in  the  blood  which  have  the  appear-
ance of  pus-corpuscles  and  are  often  present  in  such  large

LEUCOCYTOSIS  CONFOUNDED  WITH  PYAEMIA.  223

quantities  as  to  form  accumulations  (Fig.  58)  which  may
be  seen,  in  the  dead  body,  with  the  naked  eye,  looking
like  minute  spots  of  pus  ;  or  as  to  constitute  large,  con-
tinuous or  granular  layers  on  the  inferior  surface  of  the
bufFy  coat  of  blood  taken  from  a  vein  (Fig.  60).  Appa-
rently the  proof  is  as  plausible  as  possible.  The  observer
starts  with  the  supposition  that  pus  has  found  its  way  into
the  blood  ;  he  examines  the  blood  and  really  discovers
elements,  having  all  the  appearance  of  pus-corpuscles,  and
in  very  great  numbers.  Even  if  it  be  admitted  that
colourless  blood- cells  may  look  like  pus-corpuscles,  still
the  conclusion  which  has  been  repeatedly  arrived  at  in
cases  of  pyaemia,  is  very  seductive,  namely,  that  on  ac-
count of  the  great  multitude,  they  cannot  possibly  be
colourless  blood-,  but  must  be  pus-corpuscles.  This  was
the  conclusion  arrived  at  years  ago  by  Bouchut  on  the
occasion  of  an  epidemic  of  puerperal  fever  which  he  then
took  to  be  pyaemia,  but  has  very  recently,  founding  his
opinion  upon  the  same  observations,  declared  to  have
been  acute  leukaemia.  It  is  moreover  the  same  conclu-
sion which  Bennett  came  to  in  the  much-discussed  matter
of  priority  between  us,  when  he  observed  a  case  of  in-
dubitable leukaemia  some  months  before  I  saw  my  first
case,  and  inferred  from  the  presence  of  colourless  corpus-
cles in  larger  numbers  than  in  any  instance  upon  record,
that  it  was  a  case  of  "  suppuration  of  the  blood."  This
conclusion  of  his  indeed  was  not  original,  but  was  based
upon  the  haemitis  of  Piorry  of  which  I  lately  spoke  (p.
187),  this  physician  having  conceived  the  blood  itself  to
become  inflamed  and  engender  pus,  a  state  which  was
afterwards  denominated  spontaneous  pyaemia  by  the
Vienna  school.

Now  all  these  errors  proceeded  from  the  circumstance
that  such  an  enormously  great  number  of  colourless  cor-
puscles were  found in  the  blood. Now-a-days  their

224  LECTURE  IX.

occurrence  can  be  just  as  simply  explained  according  to
our  theory  of  haematopoiesis,  as  it  previously  seemed
explicable  only  according  to  that  of  pyaemia.  Irritation
of  the  lymphatic  glands  explains  without  any  difficulty
the  increase  in  the  colourless,  pus-like  cells  in  the  blood,
and  that  too  in  all  cases — not  only  in  those  where
pyaemia  was  expected  to  be  found,  but  also  in  those
where  it  was  not  expected,  but  where  the  blood,  not-
withstanding, exhibited  the  same  quantity  of  colourless
corpuscles  as  in  genuine  pyaemia  answering  to  our
clinical  notions  of  the  disease

Thus  it  has  been  shown  that  every  meal  produces  a
certain  state  of  irritation  in  the  mesenteric  glands,  inas-
much as  the  constituents  of  the  chyle  which  are  conveyed
to  these  bodies,  act  as  a  physiological  stimulus  to  them.
The  milk  which  we  drink,  the  fatty  matters  in  our  soups,
the  various  kinds  of  fat  distributed  in  a  state  of  minute
division  throughout  the  more  solid  articles  of  our  food,
find  their  way  in  the  form  of  extremely  minute  globules
into  the  lacteals  and  diffuse  themselves  there  just  like  the
cinnabar  in  the  glands  ;  but  the  smallest  of  the  fatty
molecules  after  a  time  force  their  way  through  the  gland.
For  such  minute  bodies  therefore  there  still  exists  a  real
permeability  in  the  channels  of  the  gland,  but  even  they
are  for  a  time  retained,  and  it  always  takes  a  long  time
before  the  mesenteric  glands  after  a  meal  again  become
entirely  free  from  fat,  and  the  propulsion  of  this  sub-
stance through  them  is  manifestly  effected  by  a  propor-
tionately strong  pressure.  At  the  same  time  we  observe
an  enlargement  of  the  gland,  and  likewise  after  every
meal  an  increase  in  the  number  of  colourless  corpuscles
in  the  blood — a  physiological  leucocytosis,  but  no  pyaemia.

In  proportion  as  pregnancy  advances,  as  the  lymphatic
vessels  in  the  uterus  dilate,  and  the  interchange  of  mate-
rial in  the  organ  increases  with  the  development  of  the

PHYSIOLOGICAL AND  PATHOLOGICAL  LEUCOCYTOSIS. 225

foetus,  the  lymphatic  glands  in  the  inguinal  and  lumbar
regions  become  considerably  enlarged,  and  that  some-
times to  such  an  extent,  that,  if  we  were  to  find  them  in
a  similar  state  at  any  other  time,  we  should  regard  them
as  inflamed.  This  enlargement  conveys  into  the  blood
an  increased  quantity  of  fresh  particles  of  a  cellular  na-
ture, and  thus  from  month  to  month  the  number  of
colourless  corpuscles  augments.  At  the  time  of  birth
we  may  see  in  the  defibrinated  blood  of  nearly  every
puerperal  woman,  whether  suffering  from  pyaemia  or  not,
the  colourless  corpuscles  forming  a  pus-like  sediment.
This  too  is  a  physiological  form  which  is  far  from  being  a
pyaemic  one.  But  if  care  be  taken  to  select  a  puerperal
woman,  offering  symptoms  of  disease  which  correspond
with  those  usually  presented  by  pyaemia,  nothing  is  easier
than  to  find  these  numerous  colourless  multi-nuclear  cells,
which  are  precisely  such  as  are  supposed  to  corroborate
the  presence  of  pyaemia.  These  are  fallacious  conclu-
sions which  result  from  imperfect  knowledge  of  the  nor-
mal conditions  of  life  and  development.  As  long  as  we
are  exclusively  bent  upon  proving  the  presence  of  pyae-
mia, all  this  may  have  the  appearance  of  being  a  great  and
new  occurrence,  and  we  may,  when  we  examine  the
blood  of  a  woman  in  child-bed,  consider  ourselves  justi-
fied in  concluding  that  she  has  pyaemia  even  before  its
symptoms  declare  themselves.  But  we  may  examine
when  we  will,  we  shall  always  find  some  traces  of  leuco-
cytosis,  just  as  it  has  already  long  been  known  that  it  is
very  common  for  a  bufify  coat  to  form  in  the  case  of  preg-
nant women,  because  their  blood  generally  has  conveyed
into  it  a  larger  quantity  than  usual  of  a  more  slowly  con-
tracting fibrine  (hyperinosis).  This  is  accounted  for  by
the  increased  nutrition  of  the  uterus,  and  by  the  changes,
so  nearly  allied  to  inflammatory  processes,  which  are  go-
ing on  in  the  uterine  system,  and  are  associated  with  a

15

226  LECTURE  IX.

certain  amount  of  irritation  in  the  lymphatic  glands  im-
mediately in  connection  with  it.

If  we  proceed  a  step  farther  and  consider  pathological
cases,  we  meet  with  these  leucocytotic  conditions  in  the
whole  of  that  series  of  diseases  which  are  complicated
with  glandular  irritation,  and  in  which  the  irritation  does
not  lead  to  a  destruction  of  the  glandular  substance.
During  the  progress  of  an  attack  of  scrofula,  in  which,
if  the  disease  run  a  somewhat  unfavourable  course,  the
glands  are  destroyed,  either  by  ulceration,  or  cheesy
thickening,  calcification,  etc.,  an  increased  introduction  of
corpuscles  into  the  blood  can  only  take  place  as  long  as
the  irritated  gland  is  still  in  some  degree  capable  of  per-
forming its  functions,  or  still  continues  to  exist  ;  as  soon
however  as  the  gland  is  withered  or  destroyed,  the  for-
mation of  lymph-cells  likewise  ceases  and  with  it  the  leu-
cocytosis.  In  all  cases,  on  the  other  hand,  in  which  a
more  acute  form  of  disturbance  prevails,  connected  with
inflammatory  tumefaction  of  the  glands,  an  increase  in
the  colourless  corpuscles  always  takes  place  in  the  blood.
So  it  is  in  typhoid  fever,  in  which  we  observe  such  ex-
tensive medullary  (markige)  swellings  of  the  abdominal
glands  ;  so  it  is  in  cancer  patients,  when  irritation  of  the
lymphatic  glands  manifests  itself ;  so,  lastly  is  it  in  the
course  of  the  processes  which  come  under  the  denomina-
tion of  malignant  erysipelas  and  are  so  early  wont  to  be
accompanied  by  glandular  swellings.  Such  is  the  mean-
ing of  this  increase  in  the  colourless  elements  which  ulti-
mately always  refers  us  to  an  increased  development  of
lymph-corpuscles  within  the  irritated  glands.

It  is  now  of  importance  that  I  should  point  out  to  you,
that  at  present  our  conceptions  concerning  lymphatic
glands  are  much  more  comprehensive  than  they  were  a
short  time  ago.  The  most  recent  histological  investiga-
tions have  shown  that,  in  addition  to  the  ordinary  well-

LYMPHOID ORGANS.  227

known  lymphatic  glands,  which  are  of  a  certain  size,  a
great  number  of  smaller  apparatuses  exist  in  the  body
which  possess  precisely  the  same  structure,  but  do  not
exhibit  such  a  complex  arrangement  as  we  find  in  a
lymphatic  gland.  To  this  class  belong  above  all  the  fol-
licles of  the  intestines,  both  the  solitary  and  the  Peyerian.
A  Peyer's  patch  is  nothing  more  than  a  lymphatic  gland
spread  out  as  it  were  upon  the  surface  ;  the  individual
follicles  of  the  patch,  just  as  the  solitary  follicles  of  the
digestive  tract,  correspond  to  the  individual  follicles  of  a
lymphatic  gland,  only  that  the  former,  in  man  at  least,
are  disposed  in  a  single  layer,  the  latter  in  several.  The
solitary  and  Peyerian  glands  have  therefore  nothing  at
all  in  common  with  the  ordinary  glands  which  pour  their
secretions  into  the  intestinal  canal  ;  on  the  contrary,  they
rather  hold  the  position,  and  manifestly  also  fulfil  the
functions,  of  lymphatic  glands.

To  the  same  category  belong  in  all  probability  also
the  analogous  apparatuses  which  we  find  grouped  to-
gether in  such  large  masses  in  the  upper  part  of  the
digestive  tract,  where  they  form  the  tonsils  and  the  folli-
cles of  the  root  of  the  tongue.  Whilst  in  the  intestine  the
follicles  lie  spread  out  on  an  even  surface,  in  these  parts
the  surface  is  inverted  and  the  individual  follicles  lie
around  the  involuted  membrane.

To  the  same  category  belongs  moreover  the  thymus
gland,  which  in  its  interior  exhibits  no  other  differences
of  structure  excepting  that  the  aggregation  of  the  folli-
cles reaches  a  still  higher  degree  than  in  the  lymphatic
glands.  Whilst  in  most  of  the  lymphatic  glands  we  have
a  hilus,  where  there  are  no  follicles,  this  ceases  to  be  the
case  in  the  thymus  gland  which  has  no  hilus.

Finally,  to  the  same  class  belongs  also  a  very  essential
constituent  of  the  spleen,  namely,  the  Malpighian  or  white
bodies,  which  in  different  persons  are  distributed  in  just

228  LECTURE  IX.

as  different  numbers  throughout  the  parenchyma  of  the
spleen,  as  the  solitary  and  Peyerian  follicles  in  the  intes-
tine. In  a  section  through  the  spleen  we  see  the  trabe-
cule radiating  from  the  hilus  towards  the  capsule  and
enclosing  certain  districts  of  glandular  substance,  within
which  the  red  spleen  pulp  lies,  interrupted  here  and  there
by  a  sometimes  greater,  sometimes  less,  number  of  white
bodies  (follicles)  of  larger  or  smaller  size,  single  or  in
groups,  and  sometimes  almost  clustered.  The  structure
of  these  follicles  agrees  exactly  with  that  of  the  follicles
of  lymphatic  glands.

We  may  therefore  regard  this  whole  series  of  appara-
tuses as  nearly  equivalent  to  the  lymphatic  glands  pro-
perly so  called,  and  a  swelling  of  the  spleen  will,  under
certain  circumstances,  furnish  just  as  abundant  a  supply
of  colourless  blood-corpuscles,  as  is  the  case  when  a
lymphatic  gland  enlarges.  This  possibility  explains  how
it  is  that,  for  example,  in  cholera,  where  the  change  in
the  solitary  glands  and  Peyer's  patches  forms  the  chief
part  of  the  disease,  and  where  the  swelling  of  the  other
lymphatic  glands  is  much  less  marked,  we  meet  at  an
extremely  early  period  with  a  considerable  increase  in
the  colourless  corpuscles.  Hereby  is  explained  moreover
why,  in  such  cases  of  pneumonia  as  are  connected  with
great  swelling  of  the  bronchial  glands,  an  increase  in  the
number  of  colourless  blood-corpuscles  likewise  takes
place,  which  is  generally  wanting  in  those  forms  of  pneu-
monia which  are  not  connected  with  such  swelling.  The
more  the  irritation  extends  from  the  lung  to  the  lymph-
atic glands,  the  more  abundantly  noxious  fluids  are  con-
veyed from  the  lung  to  the  glands — the  more  manifestly
does  the  blood  undergo  this  change.

Upon  examining  these  different  pathological  processes
in  this  manner  one  by  one,  it  is  really  impossible  to  dis-
cover anything  at  all,  which  in  a  morphological  point  of

REFUTATION OF  A MORPHOLOGICAL PYEMIA.  229

view,  could  even  in  a  remote  degree  justify  the  assump-
tion of  a  condition  such  as  might  be  called  pyaemia.  In
the  extremely  rare  cases,  in  which  pus  breaks  through
into  veins,  purulent  ingredients  may,  without  doubt,  be
conveyed  into  the  blood,  but  in  such  instances  the  intro-
duction of  pus  occurs  for  the  most  part  but  once.  The
abscess  empties  itself,  and  if  it  be  large,  an  extravasation
of  blood  is  more  apt  to  ensue  than  the  establishment  of  a
persistent  pyaemia.  Perhaps  we  shall  at  some  future
time  succeed,  in  the  course  of  such  a  process,  in  discover-
ing pus-corpuscles  with  well-defined  characters  in  the
blood  ;  at  present,  however,  the  matter  stands  thus,  that
it  can  most  positively  be  maintained  that  nobody  has  hith-
erto succeeded  in  demonstrating,  by  arguments  capable
of  supporting  even  gentle  criticism,  the  existence  of  a
morphological  pyaemia.  This  name  therefore  must,  as
designating  a  definite  change  in  the  blood,  be  entirely
abandoned.

J>U  u  ft*  .

LECTURE X.

MARCH  17,  1858.
METASTATIOAL DYSCRASLE.

Pyaemia  and  phlebitis — Thrombosis — Puriform  softening  of  thrombi — True  and  false
phlebitis — Purulent  cysts  of  the  heart.

Embolia — Import  of  prolonged  thrombi— Pulmonary  metastases — Crumbling  awaj
of  the  emboli — Varying  character  of  the  metastases — Endocarditis  and  capillary
embolia — Latent  pyaemia.

Infectant  fluids — Diseases  of  the  lymphatic  apparatuses  and  secreting  organs —
Chemical  substances  in  the  blood  ;  salts  of  silver — Arthritis — Calcareous  metas-
tases— Diffuse  metastatic  processes — Ichorrhaemia — Pyaemia  as  a  collective  name.

Chemical  dyscrasiae — Malignant  tumours,  especially  cancer — Diffusion  by  means  of
contagious  parenchymatous  juices.

Gentlemen, — I  was  interrupted  the  last  time  in  my
description  of  pyaemia  by  the  termination  of  the  lecture,
just  as  I  was  about  to  discuss  the  nature  of  the  connection
between  this  disease  and  certain  affections  of  the  vessels.

As  soon  as  it  was  found  necessary  to  abandon  the  ori-
ginal view,  in  accordance  with  which  the  mass  of  pus
wmich  was  believed  to  be  seen  in  a  vein,  was  considered
to  have  made  its  way  in  (been  absorbed)  through  an
opening  in  its  walls,  or  through  its  yawning  extremity,
recourse  was  had  to  the  doctrine  of  phlebitis,  which  is
still  the  one  most  current.  It  was  imagined  that  the  pus
which  was  regarded  as  the  really  noxious  matter,  was
furnished  as  a  product  of  secretion  by  the  wall  of  the

PHLEBITIS.  231

vessel  (John  Hunter).  This  doctrine,  however,  presented
some  difficulty,  because  it  was  soon  pretty  generally
allowed  that  a  primary  purulent  inflammation  of  the  veins
did  not  occur,  but  that,  as  was  first  distinctly  shown  by
Cruveilhier,  at  the  commencement  a  clot  of  blood  is
always  present.  Cruveilhier  himself  was  so  greatly  sur-
prised at  this  observation  of  his,  that  he  connected  a  the-
ory with  it  which  was  beyond  all  medical  comprehension.
He  concluded  namely  from  the  impossibility  of  explain-
ing why  inflammations  of  the  veins  began  with  coagula-
tion of  the  blood,  that  inflammation  in  every  case  what-
ever consisted  in  a  coagulation  of  the  blood.  The  impos-
sibility of  explaining  phlebitis  seemed  to  him  to  be  got
over  by  raising  coagulation  into  a  general  law,  and  by
referring  every  inflammation  to  a  phlebitis  on  a  small
scale  (capillary  phlebitis).  Cruveilhier  was  the  more  in-
duced to  assert  this  in  consequence  of  his  entertaining
similar  views  with  regard  to  other  morbid  processes,  and
believing  that  cysts,  tubercles,  cancer,  and  in  short  all
important  processes,  accompanied  by  changes  susceptible
of  anatomical  demonstration,  really  ran  their  course
within  special,  minute  veins  imagined  by  him.  This  man-
ner of  thinking,  however,  continued  so  entirely  alien  to
that  of  the  great  majority  of  learned  and  unlearned  phy-
sicians, that  the  separate  conclusions  propounded  by  Cru-
veilhier, which  were  adopted  in  medical  science  in  part
as  drawn  up  by  him,  were  altogether  misunderstood.

Cruveilhier  was  right  in  this  point,  as  indeed  has  since
been  more  and  more  acknowledged,  namely,  that  the  so-
called  pus  in  the  veins  in  the  first  instance  never  lies
against  the  wall  of  the  vein,  but  always  first  appears  in
the  centre  of  the  previously  existing  clot  of  blood  which
marks  the  outset  of  the  process.  He  imagined  that  the
pus  was  secreted  from  the  wall  of  the  vessel,  but  that  it
did  not  remain  there,  but  by  means  of  "  capillary  attrac-

232

LECTURE  X.

Fig.  69.

tion  "  made  its  way  to  the  centre  of  the  clot.  This  was
a  very  singular  theory,  which  can  only  be  approxima-
tively  comprehended  by  assuming,  as  it  was  still  the  cus-
tom to  do  in  Cruveilhier's  time,  pus  to  be  a  simple  fluid.
But  apart  from  these  extremely  obscure  interpretations,
the fact  remains constant,  against  which  even  now  no

argument  can  be  advanced,  that
before  a  trace  of  inflammation
is  visible,  we  find  a  clot,  and
that  shortly  afterwards  in  the
middle  of  this  clot  a  mass  dis-
plays itself,  which  differs  in  ap-
pearance from  the  clot,  whilst
on  the  other  hand  it  exhibits  a
greater  or  less  resemblance  to
pus.

With  this  observation  as  my
starting  point,  I  have  endea-
voured to  clear  up  the  doctrine
of  phlebitis,  as  far  as  lies  in  my
power,  by  substituting  for  the
mysticism  which  pervaded  Cru-
veilhier's  interpretation,  merely  a  statement  of  the  real
facts.  We  do  not  know  that  inflammation  as  such  has
any  necessary  connection  with  coagula  ;  on  the  contrary,
it  has  turned  out  that  the  doctrine  of  stasis  rests  upon
manifold  misinterpretations.  Inflammation  may  un-
questionably exist  when  the  current  of  blood  within  the
vessels  of  the  affected  part  is  perfectly  free  and  unob-
structed. If  we  therefore  leave  inflammation  on  one
side  and  confine  our  attention  simply  to  the*' coagulation

Fig.  69.  Thrombosis  of  the  saphenous  vein.  S.  Saphenous  vein.  T.  Thrombus  :
v,  v'  thrombi  seated  on  the  valves  (valvular)  in  process  of  softening,  and  connected
by  more  recent  and  thinner  portions  of  coagulum.  C.  Prolongation  of  the  plug,
projecting  beyond  the  mouth  of  the  vessel  into  the  femoral  vein  C.

PURIFORM SOFTENING OF THROMBI.  233

of  the  blood,  to  the  formation  of  the  clot  (thrombus),  it
seems  most  convenient  to  comprehend  the  whole  of  this
process  under  the  term  Thrombosis.  I  have  proposed  to
substitute  this  term  for  the  different  names,  phlebitis,  ar-
teritis, etc.,  inasmuch  as  the  affection  essentially  consists
in  a  real  coagulation  of  the  blood  at  a  certain  fixed  spot.
Upon  investigating  the  history  of  these  thrombi,  we
find  that  the  puriform  mass  which  is  met  with  in  their
interior  does  not  originate  in  the  wall,  but  is  produced
by  a  direct  transformation  of  the  central  layers  of  the
clots  themselves,  a  transformation  indeed  which  is  of  a
chemical  nature,  and  during  which,  with  a  result  similar
to  that  which  can  be  artificially  obtained  by  the  slow
digestion  of  coagulated  fibrine,  the  fibrine  breaks  up  into
a  finely  granular  substance  and  the  whole  mass  becomes
converted  into  debris.  This  is  a  kind  of  softening  and
retrograde  metamorphosis  of  the  organic  substance,  in
the  course  of  which  from  the  \ery  commencement  a  num-
ber of  extremely  minute  particles
become  visible  ;  the  large  threads
4  b  of  fibrine  crumble  into  pieces,  these

s'VP  ^Jm  mk0)  again  into  smaller  ones,  and  so  on

00 w(|p  "'/jg)(*p until after a certain time has
c (©) elapsed  the  chief  part  of  the  mass
€Jp  is  found  to  be  composed  of  small,

®©*|®  fine, pale granules (Fig.  70, A).

In  cases  in  which  the  fibrine  is
comparatively  very  pure,  we  frequently  see  scarcely
anything  else  than  these  granules.

Fig.  70.  Puriform  mass  of  debris  from  softened  thrombi.  A.  The  granules  seen
in  disintegrating  fibrine,  varying  in  size,  and  pale.  B.  The  colourless  blood-cor-
puscles set  free  by  the  softening,  some  of  them  in  process  of  retrograde  metamor*
phosis ;  a,  with  multiple  nuclei,  6,  with  simple,  angular  nuclei  and  a  few  fat-gra-
nules, c,  non-nucleated  (pyoid)  corpuscles,  in  a  state  of  fatty  metamorphosis.  C.
Red  blood-corpuscles  undergoing  decolorization  and  disorganization.  350  diame-
ters.

234:  LECTURE X.

You  see,  gentlemen,  the  microscope  solves  the  difficul-
ties in  a  very  simple  manner,  by  demonstrating  that  this
mass,  which  looks  like  pus,  is  not  pus.  For  we  under-
stand by  pus  a  fluid  essentially  provided  with  cellular
elements.  Just  as  little  as  we  can  imagine  blood  with-
out blood-corpuscles,  just  as  little  can  pus  exist  without
pus  corpuscles.  But  when,  as  in  the  present  instance,
we  find  a  fluid  which  is  nothing  more  than  a  mass  per-
vaded by  granules,  this  may  indeed,  as  far  as  external
appearance  goes,  look  like  pus,  but  never  ought  to  be
regarded  as  real  pus.  It  is  a  puriform,  but  not  a  puru-
lent substance.

But  now  we  frequently  see  that  in  addition  to  these  gra-
nules a  certain  proportion  of  other  structures  show  them-
selves, for  example,  really  cellular  elements  (Fig.  70,  B),
which  are  round  (spherical),  or  angular,  present  one,  two,
or  more  nuclei,  frequently  lie  tolerably  close  to  one  an-
other, and  in  reality  exhibit  a  great  similarity  to  pus-
corpuscles,  the  distinction  at  most  being  that  very  often
fat-granules  occur  in  them,  indicating  that  a  process  of
disintegration  is  going  on.  Whilst  therefore  in  individual
cases  there  can,  on  account  of  the  often  very  greatly  pre-
ponderating mass  of  debris,  exist  no  doubt  as  to  what  the
observer  has  before  him,  in  others  considerable  doubts
may  exist  as  to  whether  real  pus  is  not  present.  These
doubts  cannot  be  removed  in  any  other  way  than  by  an
examination  into  the  history  of  the  development  of  the
puriform  mass.  Now  that  we  have  already  seen  that
colourless  blood-  and  pus-corpuscles  perfectly  agree  with
one  another  in  form,  so  that  it  is  impossible  to  draw  a
real  distinction  between  them,  the  question  which  sug-
gests itself  in  cases  where  we  find  round,  colourless  cells
in  a  clot  of  blood,  whether  these  cells  are  colourless
blood-  or  pus-corpuscles,  can  only  be  decided  by  deter-
mining  whether the corpuscles were present in the

DISAPPEARANCE OF RED CORPUSCLES IN  THROMBI.  235

thrombus  from  its  very  commencement,  or  only  sprang
up  in  it  afterwards,  or  found  their  way  into  it  in  some
other  manner.  Now  upon  accurately  following  up  the
different  stages  of  the  process,  the  very  positive  result  is
obtained  that  the  corpuscles  pre-exist,  and  that  they  do
not  arise  within  the  clot,  and  are  not  forced  into  it.  Even
when  quite  recent  thrombi  are  examined,  the  corpuscles
are  found  in  many  places  heaped  up  in  great  masses,  so
that,  when  the  fibrine  breaks  up,  they  are  set  free  in  such
numbers,  that  the  debris  are  nearly  as  rich  in  cells  as  pus.
It  is  with  this  process  just  as  when  water  which  is  tho-
roughly impregnated  with  solid  particles  is  frozen  and
then  exposed  to  a  higher  temperature  ;  when  the  ice
melts  the  enclosed  particles  must  of  course  again  come  to
light.

To  this  view  of  the  matter  one  objection  may  be  raised,
to  wit,  that  we  do  not  see  the  red  blood-corpuscles  set
free  in  a  similar  manner.  The  red  corpuscles,  however,
perish  very  early  ;  they  are  soon  seen  to  grow  pale  ;  they
lose  a  portion  of  their  colouring  matter  and  become
smaller,  whilst  numerous  dark  granules  appear  at  their
circumference  (Figs.  54,  a  ;  70,  C),  and  in  the  majority
of  cases  they  entirely  disappear,  nothing  but  these  gra-
nules at  last  remaining.  Still  there  are  also  cases  in
which  the  red  corpuscles  retain  their  integrity  within  the
softening  mass.  As  a  rule  they  certainly  perish,  and  it
is  precisely  upon  this  that  depends  the  peculiarity  of  the
transformation,  by  means  of  which  a  yellowish  white
fluid  arises  bearing  the  external  appearance  of  pus.  And
for  it  too  an  explanation  may  be  found  without  any  par-
ticular difficulty,  if  it  be  borne  in  mind  how  very  trifling
is  the  power  possessed  by  the  red  blood-corpuscles  of
resisting  the  most  various  reagents.  If  to  a  drop  of
blood  you  add  a  drop  of  water,  you  see  the  red  corpus-

236  LECTURE  X.

cles  disappear  before  your  eyes  while  the  colourless  ones
remain  behind.

That  therefore,  which  according  to  the  ordinary  nomen-
clature is  called  suppurative  phlebitis,  is  neither  suppu-
rative, nor  yet  phlebitis,  but  a  process  which  begins  with
a  coagulation,  with  the  formation  of  a  thrombus  in  the
blood,  and  afterwards  presents  a  stage  in  which  the
thrombi  soften,  so  that  the  whole  history  of  the  process
is  contained  in  the  history  of  the  thrombus.  But  here  I
must  impress  upon  you  that  I  do  not,  as  has  been  said  of
me  in  different  quarters,  deny  the  possibility  of  a  real
phlebitis,  and  that  I  have  not  in  any  way  discovered  that
there  is  no  such  thing  as  phlebitis.  No  !  phlebitis  cer-
tainly does  exist.  But  it  is  an  inflammation  which  really
affects  the  walls,  and  not  the  contents  of  a  vessel.  In
the  larger  vessels  the  most  different  layers  of  their  walls
may  become  inflamed  and  enter  upon  every  possible
phase  of  inflammation,  and  yet  all  the  while  their  chan-
nel remain  entirely  unaltered.  In  accordance  with  the
views  generally  entertained  the  internal  coat  of  the  ves-
sels was  thought  to  be  like  a  serous  membrane,  and  as
this  readily  furnishes  fibrinous  exudations  or  purulent
masses,  the  same  was  supposed  to  be  the  case  with  the
internal  coat.  Concerning  this  point  a  series  of  investi-
gations was  years  ago  set  on  foot,  and  I  too  have  occu-
pied myself  at  various  times  with  it,  but  hitherto  no  ex-
perimenter, who  carefully  prevented  the  blood  from
streaming  into  the  vessels,  has  succeeded  in  producing  an
exudation,  which  was  deposited  in  their  cavity.  On  the
contrary,  when  the  wall  is  inflamed,  the  "exuded  mat-
ter" (Exsudatmasse)  passes  into  the  wall,  which  becomes
thicker,  cloudy,  and  subsequently  begins  to  suppurate.
Nay,  even  abscesses  may  form,  which  cause  the  wall  to
bulge  on  both  sides  like  a  variolous  pustule,  without  any
coagulation  of  the  blood  ensuing  in  the  cavity  of  the  ves-

PURULENT  CYSTS  IN  THE  HEART.  237

sel.  At  other  times,  certainly,  phlebitis,  properly  so
called  (and  in  like  manner  arteritis  and  endocarditis),  is
the  cause  of  thrombosis,  in  consequence  of  the  formation
of  inequalities,  elevations,  depressions,  and  even  ulcera-
'tions  upon  the  inner  wall  which  favour  the  production  of
the  thrombus.  Still,  wherever  phlebitis,  in  the  usual
sense  of  the  word,  takes  place,  the  alteration  in  the  coat
of  the  vessel  is  almost  always  a  secondary  one,  and  in-
deed occurs  at  a  comparatively  late  period.

The  process  runs  its  course  in  such  a  way  that  the  most
recent  parts  of  the  thrombus  always  consist  of  the  blood
which  has  most  lately  coagulated.  The  softening,  the
partial  liquefaction,  generally  commences  in  the  centre,
in  the  oldest  layers,  so  that,  when  the  thrombus  has
attained  a  certain  size,  there  exists  in  the  midst  of  it  a
cavity  of  larger  or  smaller  dimensions,  which  gradually
enlarges  and  keeps  approaching  more  and  mdre  closely
to  the  wall  of  the  vessel.  But  in  general  this  cavity  is
shut  off  in  an  upward  and  downward  direction  by  means
of  a  more  recent  and  tougher  portion  of  the  clot  which,
after  the  manner  of  a  cap,  takes  care  that,  as  Cruveilhier
expresses  himself,  the  "pus"  remains  sequestered,
and  all  contact  between  the  debris  and  the  circulating
blood  is  prevented.  Only  sideways  does  the  softening
extend  until  it  at  last  reaches  the  wall  of  the  vessel  itself  ;
this  becomes  altered,  it  begins  to  grow  thicker  and  at
the  same  time  cloudy,  and  ultimately  even  suppuration
takes  place  within  the  walls.

The  same  thing  which  we  have  hitherto  considered  in
the  veins  occurs  also  in  the  heart.  In  the  right  ventricle
especially  we  not  unfrequently  see  what  are"  called  puru-
lent cysts  between  the  trabeculse  of  its  wall.  They  pro-
ject into  the  cavity  like  small  rounded  knobs,  and  form
little  pouches  which,  when  cut  open,  contain  a  soft  pulp
that may present a completely pus-like appearance.

•238  LECTURE  X.

People  have  plagued  themselves  to  an  indefinite  extent
about  these  purulent  cysts  and  invented  all  possible  the-
ories to  account  for  them,  until  at  length  the  simple  fact
came  out,  that  their  contents  are  frequently  nothing
more  than  a  finely  granular  pulp  of  an  albuminous  sub-
stance, which  does  not  offer  even  the  slightest  resem-
blance in  its  more  intimate  structure  to  pus.  This  was
so  far  tranquillizing,  as  there  is  no  observation  as  yet  on
record  of  the  death  of  any  patient  from  pyaemia  who  had
sacs  of  this  description  even  in  pretty  considerable  num-
ber, but  it  ought  to  have  struck  those  who  are  so  much  in-
clined to  establish  a  connection  between  peripheral  throm-
boses, which  are  however  just  the  same  thing,  and  pyaemia.

For  the  question  naturally  arises  how  far  particular
disturbances  that  can  be  designated  by  the  name  of  pyae-
mia may,  in  consequence  of  the  softening  of  the  thrombi,
be  evoked  in  the  body.  To  this  in  the  first  place  we  may
answer  that  secondary  disturbances  certainly  are  very
frequently  occasioned,  bot  not  so  much  by  the  immediate
introduction  of  the  softened  masses  as  fast  as  they  be-
come liquid  into  the  blood,  as  by  the  detachment  of  lar-
ger or  smaller  fragments  from  the  end  of  the  softening
thrombus  which  are  carried  along  by  the  current  of  blood
and  driven  into  remote  vessels.  This  gives  rise  to  the
very  frequent  process  upon  which  I  have  bestowed  the
name  of  Embolia.

This  is  an  occurrence  which  we  can  here  only  briefly
touch  upon.  In  the  peripheral  veins  the  danger  pro-
ceeds chiefly  from  the  small  branches.  By  no  means
rarely  do  these  become  quite  filled  with  masses  of  coagu-
lum.  As  long  however  as  the  thrombus  is  confined  to
the  branch  itself,  so  long  the  body  is  not  exposed  to  any
particular  danger  ;  the  worst  that  can  happen  is  that,  in
consequence  of  a  peri- or  meso-phlebitis,*  an abscess

*  See  the  Author's  "  Gesammelte  Abhandl.,"  p.  484.

EMBOLIA— PROLONGED THROMBI  AND  THEIR IMPORT.

239

may  form  and  open  externally.  Only  the  greater  num-
ber of  the  thrombi  in  the  small  branches  do  not  content
themselves  with  advancing  up  to  the  level  of  the  main
trunk,  but  pretty  constantly  new  masses  of  coagulum  de-
posit themselves  from  the  blood  upon  the  end  of  the
thrombus  layer  after  layer,  the  thrombus  is  prolonged
beyond  the  mouth  of  the  branch  into  the  trunk  in  the
direction  of  the  current  of  the  blood,  shoots  out  in  the
form  of  a  thick  cylinder  farther  and  farther,  and  becomes
continually  larger  and  larger.  Soon  this  prolonged
thrombus  (Fig.  71,  t)  no  longer  bears  any  proportion  to
the  original  (autochthonous)  thrombus  (Fig.  71,  c),  from
which  it  proceeded.  The  prolonged  thrombus  may  have
the  thickness  of  a  thumb,  the  original  one  that  of  a  knit-
ting-needle. From  a  lumbar  vein,  for  example,  a  plug
may  extend  into  the  vena  cava  as  thick  as  the  last  pha-
lanx of  the  thumb.

Fig.  11.

It  is  these  prolonged  plugs  that  constitute  the  source
of  real  danger  ;  it  is  in  them  that  ensues  the  crumbling
away  which  leads  to  secondary  occlusions  in  remote  ves-
sels. They  are the  parts  from  which  larger  or  smaller

Fig.  71.  Autochthonous  and  prolonged  thrombi,  c,  c'.  Smallish,  varicose,  lateral
branches  (circumflex  veins  of  the  thigh),  filled  with  autochthonous  thrombi  which
project  beyond  the  orifices  into  the  trunk  of  the  femoral  vein.  t.  Prolonged
thrombus  produced  by  concentrically  apposed  deposits  from  the  blood,  f.  Pro-
longed thrombus,  as  it  appears  after  fragments  (emboli)  have  become  detached  from
it.

240  LECTURE  X.

particles  are torn  away  by  the  blood  as  it  streams  by
(Fig.  71,  f).

Through  the  vessel  originally  occluded  no  blood  at  all
flows  ;  in  it  the  circulation  is  entirely  interrupted  :  but
in  the  larger  trunk  through  which  the  blood  still  con-
tinues its  course,  and  into  which  only  at  intervals  the
thrombus-plugs  project,  the  stream  of  blood  may  detach
minute  particles,  hurry  them  away  with  it,  and  wedge
them  tightly  into  the  nearest  system  of  arteries  or  capil-
laries.

Thus  we  see,  that  as  a  rule  all  the  thrombi  at  the  pe-
riphery of  the  body  produce  secondary  obstructions  and
metastatic  deposits  in  the  lungs.  I  long  entertained
doubts  whether  I  ought  to  consider  the  metastatic  inflam-
mations of  the  lungs  one  and  all  as  embolical,  because  it
is  very  difficult  to  examine  the  vessels  in  the  small  me-
tastatic deposits,  but  I  am  continually  becoming  more
and  more  convinced  of  the  necessity  of  regarding  this
mode  of  origin  as  the  rule.  When  a  considerable  num-
ber of  cases  are  compared  statistically,  the  result  ob-
tained is  that  every  time  metastatic  deposits  occur,
thrombosis  is  also  present  in  certain  vessels.  Quite  re-
cently, for  example,  we  have  had  a  tolerably  severe
epidemic  of  puerperal  fever,  and  in  this  it  was  found
that,  however  manifold  the  forms  the  disease  assumed,
yet  all  those  cases  which  were  accompanied  by  metas-
tases in  the  lungs,  were  also  attended  with  thrombosis  in
the  region  of  the  pelvis  or  in  the  lower  extremities,  whilst
in  the  inflammations  of  lymphatic  vessels  the  pulmonary
metastases  were  wanting.  Such  statistical  results  carry,
with  them  a  certain  amount  of  compulsory  conviction,
even  where  strict  anatomical  proof  is  wanting.

Into  the  pulmonary  artery  the  introduced  fragments  of
thrombus  of  course  penetrate  to  different  depths  accord-
ing to  their  size. Usually  a  fragment  of  the  kind  sticks

DIFFERENT  VARIETIES  OF  METASTATIC  DEPOSITS.  241

fast  where  a  division  of  the  vessel  takes  place  (Fig.  72,  E),
because  the  diverging  vessels  are  too  small  to admit  it.
In  the  case  of  very  large  fragments  even
the principal  trunks  of  the pulmonary  IG'

artery  are  blocked  up,  and  instantaneous
asphyxia  ensues  ;  other  fragments  again
penetrate  into  the  most  minute  arteries
and  there  give  rise  to  very  minute,  and
sometimes  miliary  inflammations  of  the
parenchyma.  In  explanation  of  these
small  and  often  very  numerous  deposits,
I  must  mention  a  conjecture  which  only
occurred  to  me  whilst  engaged  in  my  more  recent
observations,  but  which  I  do  not  scruple  to  declare  to  be
a  necessary  inference.  I  believe  namely  that,  when  a
considerable  fragment  of  a  thrombus  becomes  wedged  at
a  certain  point  in  an  artery,  it  may  in  its  turn  crumble
away  through  the  onward  pressure  of  the  blood,  and  thus
the  minute  particles  to  which  this  crumbling  of  the  lar-
ger plug  gives  rise  be  conveyed  into  the  small  branches
into  which  the  vessel  breaks  up.  Thus  alone  does  it
seem  to  me  that  the  fact  can  be  explained,  that  in  the
district  supplied  by  an  artery  of  considerable  size  a  num-
ber of  little  deposits  of  the  same  sort  are  often  found.

This  whole  series  of  cases  has  nothing  whatever  to  do
with  the  question,  whether  there  is  pus  in  the  blood  or
not.  We  have  in  them  to  deal  with  bodies  of  quite  a
different  nature,  with  fragments  of  coagula  in  a  more  or
less  altered  condition,  and  according  as  this  alteration
has  assumed  this  or  that  character,  the  nature  of  the  pro-
Fig.  *72.  Embolia  of  the  pulmonary  artery.  P.  Moderately  large  branch  of  the
pulmonary  artery.  E.  The  embolus,  astride  upon  the  angle  (spur — Sporn),  formed
by  the  division  of  the  artery,  t,  t'.  The  capsulating  (secondary)  thrombus  :  £,  the
portion  in  front  of  the  embolus  reaching  to  the  next  highest  collateral  vessel  c ;
t\  the  portion  behind  the  embolus,  in  a  great  measure  filling  up  the  diverging
branches  r,  r',  and  ultimately  terminating  in  the  form  of  a  cone.

16

242

LECTURE  X.

cesses  which  arise  in  consequence  of  the  obstruction  may
also  be  very  different.  If,  for  example,  a  gangrenous
softening  has  taken  place  at  the  original  site  of  the  coa-
gulum,  the  metastatic  deposit  will  also  assume  a  gangre-
nous character,  just  as  this  would  be  the  case  if  gangre-
nous matter  were  inoculated.  So,  vice  versa,  it  also
happens  that  the  secondary  disturbances,  like  those  at
the  spot  whence  the  fragments  were  detached,  run  a  very
favourable  course,  the  embolus  like  the  thrombus  becom-
ing converted  into  pigment  and  connective  tissue,  and  at
the  same  time  growing  smaller.

This  group  of  processes  must  be  separated  from  those
ordinarily  occurring  in  pyaemia  all  the  more,  because  the
same  processes  are  also  met  with  on  the  other  side  of  the

Fig.  73.

lungs  in  the  regions  belonging  to  the  left  side  of  the  cir-
culation, where  they  often  run  the  same  course  and  pre-

Fig.  *73.  Ulcerative  endocarditis  affecting  the  mitral  valve,  a.  The  free,  smooth
surface  of  the  mitral  valve,  beneath  which  the  connective-tissue-corpuscles  are  en-
larged and  clouded,  whilst  the  intervening  tissue  is  denser  than  usual,  b.  A  con-
siderable hilly  swelling  caused  by  increasing  enlargement  and  cloudiness  of  the  tis-
sue, c.  A  swollen  part  which  has  already  begun  to  soften  and  break  up.  d,  d.  The
tissue  at  the  lower  part  of  the  valves  which  is  stil  but  little  altered,  with  numerous
corpuscles,  the  results  of  proliferation,  e,  e.  The  commencement  of  the  enlarge-
ment, cloudiness,  and  proliferation  of  the  corpuscles. 80  diameters.

CAPILLARY EMBOLIA.

243

sent  the  same  results,  but  are  still  less  dependent  upon
an  original  phlebitis.  Thus,  for  example,  endocarditis
by  no  means  seldom  forms  the  starting  point  of  such  me-
tastases. Ulceration  takes  place  in  one  of  the  valves  of
the  heart,  not  by  means  of  the  formation  of  pus,  but  in
consequence  of  an  acute  or  chronic  softening  ;  crumbling
fragments  of  the  surface  of  the  valve  are  borne  away  by
the  stream  of  blood  and  reach  with  it  far  distant  points.
The  kind  of  obstruction  which  these  masses  produce  is
altogether  similar  to  that  which  the  thrombi  in  the  veins
give  rise  to,  but  they  present  a  different  chemical  consti-
tution. Their  minuteness  also  and  their  friability  favour
their  penetration  into  the  smallest  vessels  in  a  high  de-
gree. Therefore  we  do  not  so  very  unfrequently  find
the  obstructing mass in minute microscopical  vessels

Fig.  74.

Fig.  75.

Fig.  74 — 75.  Capillary  embolia  in  the  tufts  (penicilli)  of  the  splenic  artery  after
endocarditis  (Cf.  Gesammelte  Abhandlungen  zur  wiss.  Medicin.  1856,  p.  716).
74.  Vessels  of  a  tuft  magnified  10  times,  in  order  to  show  the  position  of  the  oc-
cluding emboli  in  the  arterial  district.  75.  An  artery  filled  a  little  before  its  divi-
sion, and  in  the  branches  into  which  it  next  divides,  with  fragments  of  the  finely
granular  embolic  mass  (Cf.  Fig.  73,  c). 300  diameters.

244  LECTURE  X.

which  are  no  longer  to  be  followed  with  the  naked  eye,
and  in  them  it  usually  extends  as  far  down  as  a  point  of
division  and  somewhat  beyond.  This  mass  constantly
presents  a  finely  granular  appearance,  and  does  not  con-
sist of  the  coarse  debris  that  we  find  in  the  veins,  but  of
a  very  fine,  yet  at  the  same  time  dense,  granular  matter ;
chemically,  it  possesses  the  extremely  convenient  quality
for  examination  of  being  remarkably  resistant  to  the  ordi-
nary tests,  and  thus  readily  distinguished  from  other  mat-
ters. This  is  capillar]/  embolia  properly  so  called,  one  of
the  most  important  forms  of  metastasis,  which  frequently
gives  rise  to  minute  deposits  in  the  kidney,  the  spleen,
and  the  substance  of  the  heart  itself ;  in  certain  cases
occasions  sudden  occlusions  in  the  vessels  of  the  eye  or
brain,  and  according  to  circumstancs  produces  metastatic
deposits  or  sudden  functional  disturbances  (amaurosis,
apoplexy).  Here  too  one  can  clearly  convince  oneself
that  in  recent  cases  the  wall  of  the  vessel  is  quite  unal-
tered at  the  seat  of  the  affection  ;  nay  here  indeed  the
doctrine  of  phlebitis  would  no  longer  suffice,  since  these
are  not  vessels  which  possess  vasa  vasorum,  and  concern-
ing which  it  might  be  assumed  that  a  secretion  proceeded
from  the  wall  inwards.  In  these  cases  it  is  impossible  to
regard  the  occluding  mass  in  any  other  light  than  as  one
primarily  existing  in  the  vessel,  and  in  no  wise  depend-
ent upon  the  condition  of  its  wall.

Perhaps  this  description  has  convinced  you,  gentlemen,
that  two  essential  errors  have  existed  in  the  doctrine  of
pyaemia  ;  the  one,  that  people  thought  they  had  found
pus-corpuscles  in  the  blood,  when  only  colourless  blood-
corpuscles  were  really  present  ;  the  second,  that  they
thought  they  had  found  pus  in  vessels  in  which  nothing
more  than  the  products  of  the  softening  of  fibrine  existed.
Yet  we  have  ascertained  that  this  last  class  of  cases  cer-
tainly furnishes  the  most  important  source  of  genuine

METASTASES  DUE TO INFECT  ANT MATTERS.  245

metastatic  deposits.  But  in  my  opinion,  the  history  of
the  processes  which  have  been  called  pyaemia  is  not  con-
fined to  these  conditions.  When  the  process  runs  its
course  free  from  all  complication,  so  that  from  the  origi-
nal seat  of  the  disease  (thrombosis  in  a  vein,  endocarditis,
etc.),  only  solid  masses  in  an  undecomposed  state  are  de-
tached and  cause  obstructions,  the  real  process  is  in
many  cases  brought  to  notice  only  in  consequence  of  the
metastasis.  There  are  cases  which  run  their  course  so
latently  that  all  the  earlier  stages  of  the  affection  are  en-
tirely overlooked,  and  that  the  first  rigors  which  declare
themselves- announce  that  the  development  of  the  meta-
static processes  has  already  set  in.  Usually,  however,
another  condition  must  be  taken  into  consideration,
which  is  not  directly  accessible  either  to  the  coarser  or
more  delicate  modes  of  anatomical  investigation  ;  I  mean
certain  fluids,  which  in  themselves  bear  no  immediate  and
necessary  relation  to  pus  as  such,  but  manifestly  differ
very  much  from  one  another  in  their  nature  and  origin.

Whilst  I  was  engaged  in  the  consideration  of  the
changes  which  lymph  undergoes,  I  pointed  out  to  you
(p.  220),  that  fluids  which  were  taken  up  by  lymphatic
vessels  were  not  only  freed  in  the  filters  of  the  lymphatic
glands  from  corpuscular  elements,  but  were  also  in  part
attracted  and  retained  by  the  substance  of  the  glands,  so
as  to  display  some  activity  within  them.  Similar  effects
appear  to  take  place  also  elsewhere  than  in  the  glands.
Where  the  re  absorption  was  primarily  effected  by  the
veins,  this  must,  of  course,  always  be  the  case.  There  is
namely  a  series  of  peculiar  phenomena  which  pervade  all
infectious  processes  as  a  constant  element.  These  are
on  the  one  hand  the  changes  which  the  lymphatic  and
lymphoid  glands  may  undergo  not  so  much  at  the
seat  of  the  primary  affection  as  rather  in  the  body  gene-
rally, and  on  the  other  hand the changes  which  the

246  LECTURE X.

secreting  organs  offer,  through  which  the  matters  have
to  be  excreted.

It  was  for  some  time  believed  that  tumefaction  of  the
spleen  was  characteristic  of  typhoid  fever,  inasmuch  as  it
formed  a  parallel  to  the  swellings  of  the  mesenteric
glands  occurring  in  that  disease.  But  more  accurate
observation  has  shown  that  a  great  number  of  feverish
conditions  which  follow  a  more  or  less  typhoid  course,
and  affect  the  nervous  system  in  such  a  manner  that  a
state  of  depression  is  brought  about  in  its  most  important
central  organs,  set  in  with  swelling  of  the  spleen.  The
spleen  is  a  remarkably  sensitive  organ,  which  swells  not
only  in  intermittent  and  typhoid  fever,  but  also  in
most  other  processes  in  which  noxious,  infectant  matters
have  been  freely  taken  up  into  the  blood.  No  doubt  the
spleen  must  always  be  considered  in  its  near  relationship
to  the  lymphatic  system,  but  its  diseases  in  addition  usu-
ally bear  a  very  direct  relation  to  analogous  diseases  of
the  important  glands  in  its  vicinity,  especially  the  liver
and  the  kidneys.  In  most  cases  of  infection  do  these
three  organs  exhibit  corresponding  enlargement  con-
nected with  real  changes  in  their  interior  ;  but  since  these
changes  do  not,  even  on  microscopical  examination,  ap-
parently present  anything  remarkable,  the  attention  of
the  observer  is  chiefly  attracted  by  the  result  which  is
obvious  to  the  naked  eye,  namely,  the  great  swelling.
On  careful  comparison,  however,  a  good  deal  is  disco-
vered, so  that  we  can  affirm  with  certainty  that  the  gland-
cells  quickly  become  changed,  and  that  disturbances
early  show  themselves  in  the  elements  by  means  of  which
the  secretion  is  to  be  accomplished.  I  shall  revert  to
this  subject  hereafter.  Allow  me  now,  in  elucidation  of
these  conditions,  in  the  first  place  to -ad  vert  to  one  or  two
more  obvious  examples  which  are  accessible  to  direct
observation.

DEPOSITION OF SILVER IN THE TISSUES.  247

We  know  that  when  anyone  takes  salts  of  silver,  they
penetrate  into  the  different  tissues  of  his  body  ;  and  if  we
do  not  employ  them  in  a  really  corrosive  and  destructive
manner,  the  silver  penetrates  into  the  elements  of  the
tissues  in  a  state  of  combination,  the  nature  of  which  has
not  yet  been  satisfactorily  made  out,  and,  when  it  has
been  made  use  of  long  enough,  produces  a  change  of
colour  at  the  point  of  application.  A  patient  who  had
in  Dr.  Yon  Graefe's  out-patient  room  on  the  10th  No-
vember received  a  solution  of  nitrate  of  silver  as  a  lotion,
very  conscientiously  employed  the  remedy  up  to  the  pre-
sent time  (17th  March)  ;  the  result  of  which  was  that  his
conjunctiva  assumed  an  intensely  brown,  nearly  black
appearance.  The  examination  of  a  piece  cut  out  of  it
showed  that  silver  had  been  taken  up  into  the  paren-
chyma, and  indeed  in  such  a  manner  that  the  whole  of
the  connective  tissue  had  a  slightly  yellowish  brown  hue
upon  the  surface,  whilst  in  the  deeper  parts  the  deposi-
tion had  only  taken  place  in  the  fine  elastic  fibres  of  the
connective  tissue,  the  intervening  parts,  the  proper  basis-
substance,  being  perfectly  free.  But  deposits  of  an  en-
tirely similar  nature  take  place  also  in  more  remote
organs.  Our  collection  contains  a  very  rare  preparation
from  the  kidneys  of  a  person  who  on  account  of  epilepsy
had  long  taken  nitrate  of  silver  internally.  In  it  may  be
seen  the  Malpighian  bodies,  in  which  the  real  secretion
takes  place,  a  blackish  blue  colouring  of  the  whole  of  the
membrane  of  the  coils  of  the  vessels,  limited  to  this  part
in  the  cortex,  and  appearing  again,  in  a  similar,  though
less  marked  form,  only  in  the  intertubular  stroma  of  the
medullary  substance.  In  the  whole  kidney,  therefore,
besides  the  parts  which  constitute  the  real  seat  of  their
secretion,  those  only  are  altered  which  correspond  to  the
ultimate  system  of  capillaries  in  the  medullary  substance.

248  LECTURE  X.

Of  the  well-known  discoloration  of  the  skin  by  silver  I
need  not  speak  here.

Another  instance  is  afforded  us  by  gout.  If  we  exa-
mine the  concretions  (tophi)  in  the  joints  of  a  gouty  per-
son, we  find  they  are  composed  of  very  delicate,  needle-
shaped,  crystalline  deposits  of  all  possible  sizes,  and  con-
sisting of  urate  of  soda,  with  at  most  here  and  there  a
pus-  or  blood-corpuscle  lying  between  them.  We  have
here  therefore  also,  as  when  silver  has  been  employed,
to  deal  with  a  material  substance  which  is  usually  ex-
creted by  the  kidneys,  and  that  indeed  not  rarely  in  such
large  quantities,  that  deposits  form  even  within  the  kid-
ney itself  and  large  crystals  of  urate  of  soda  accumulate,
especially  in  the  uriniferous  tubules  of  the  medullary
portion,  so  as  sometimes  to  lead  even  to  an  occlusion  of
the  tubules.  If,  however,  this  secretion  does  not  pro-
ceed in  a  regular  manner,  the  immediate  result  is  an  ac-
cumulation of  urates  in  the  blood,  as  has  been  shown  in
a  very  able  manner  by  Garrod.  Then  at  last  deposits
begin  to  form  at  other  points,  not  throughout  the  whole
body,  nor  uniformly  in  all  parts,  but  at  certain  definite
points  and  in  accordance  with  certain  rules.

Here  we  have  to  do  with  very  different  forms  of  meta-
stasis from  those  with  which  we  became  acquainted
whilst  considering  the  nature  of  embolia.  That  the
changes  which  ensue  in  the  substance  of  the  kidney,  in
consequence  of  the  absorption  of  silver  from  the  «tomach.
accord  with  what  has  in  pathology  since  times  of  old
been  termed  metastasis  is  unquestionable.  This  consists
in  a  transferrence  of  matter  from  one  spot  to  another,  so
that  the  same  substance  which  had  previously  been  pre-
sent in  the  first  comes  and  lodges  in  the  second,  and  the
secreting  organ  takes  up  minute  particles  of  the  matter
into  its  own  tissue. This  is  what  we  find constantly

METASTASIS.  249

recurring  in  the  history  of  all  metastatic  deposits  of  this
kind,  in  which  only  matters  in  solution  and  not  particles  of
a  visible  and  mechanical  nature  are  present  in  the  blood.
The  urate  of  soda  cannot  be  directly  seen  in  the  blood
of  the  gouty  person,  unless  it  have  previously  been  col-
lected by  the  help  of  chemical  processes  ;  and  just  as  lit-
tle the  salts  of  silver.

I  have  moreover  described  a  new  form  of  metastasis
which  is  certainly  more  rare  but  yet  belongs  to  the  same
category.  When  calcareous  salts  are  reabsorbed  from  the
bones  in  large  quantity,  the  bone-earth  is  generally  ex-
creted by  the  kidneys,  likewise  in  large  quantity,  so  that
sediments  form  in  the  urine,  the  knowledge  of  which  has
straggled  down  to  us  in  the  history  of  osteomalacia
[mollities  ossium],  from  the  notorious  Mme.  Supiot  in
the  last  century.  But  this  regular  excretion  of  the  cal-
careous salts  is  not  unfrequently  impaired  by  disturb-
ances in  the  functions  of  the  kidneys,  in  the  same  way
as  in  arthritis  the  excretion  of  urate  of  soda  ;  then  there
also  arise  metastatic  deposits  of  bone-earth,  but  at  other
points,  namely  the  lungs  and  the  stomach.  Considerable
portions  of  the  lungs  sometimes  become  calcified  without
any  injury  to  the  permeability  of  the  respiratory  pas-
sages ;  the  diseased  parts  look  like  fine  bathing  sponge.
The  mucous  membrane  of  the  stomach  becomes  filled  in
like  manner  with  calcareous  salts,  so  that  it  feels  like  a
rasp  and  grates  under  the  knife  without  the  glands  of  the
stomach  becoming  directly  implicated  ;  they  are  merely
imbedded  in  a  stiffened  mass,  and  possibly  even  thus
secretion  might  take  place  from  them.

To  these  kinds  of  metastasis  in  which  definite  sub-
stances, though  not  in  a  palpable  form,  but  in  solution,
find  their  way  into  the  mass  of  the  blood,  careful  atten-
tion must  at  all  events  be  paid  when  we  endeavour  to
unravel  the  complex  mass  of  conditions  which  are  com-

>  £r  v£^_/Coc

o  Oi.  ■ &*.  J/1*  I

t

,-<^v'" a/^tA^ -4-^si
250  LECTURE  X.  ^

I

prehended  under  the  term  pyaemia.  I  see  at  least  no  other
possible  way  of  explaining  certain  more  diffuse  processes,
which  do  not  present  themselves  in  the  form  of  the  ordi-
nary circumscribed  metastatic  deposits.  To  this  class  be-
longs that  metastatic  pleurisy  which  develops  itself  with-
out any  metastatic  abscesses  in  the  lungs — that  seemingly
rheumatic  articular  affection,  in  which  no  distinct  deposit
is  found  in  the  joints — that  diffuse  gangrenous  inflamma-
tion of  the  subcutaneous  connective  tissue  which  cannot
well  be  accounted  for  unless  we  suppose  a  more  chemical
mode  of  infection.  Here  we  have,  as  may  be  seen  in
cases  of  variolous  and  cadaveric  infection,  to  deal  with  a
transferrence  of  corrupted,  ichorous  juices  into  the  body  ;
and  we  must  admit  the  existence  of  a  dyscrasia  {ichorous
infection)  in  which  this  ichorous  substance  which  has
made  its  way  into  the  body,  displays  its  effects  in  an
acute  form  in  the  organs  which  have  a  special  predi-
lection for  such  matters.

Now  it  may  possibly  happen  that  in  the  course  of  the
same  case  of  illness  the  three  different  changes  which  we
have  considered  may  coexist.  An  increase  in  the  num-
ber of  the  colourless  corpuscles  (leucocytosis)  may  take
place  to  such  an  extent  as  to  tempt  one  to  believe  in  the
presence  of  a  morphological  pyaemia.  This  will  at  all
events  always  be  the  case  when  the  process  has  been  con-
nected with  extensive  irritation  of  the  lymphatic  glands.
The  formation  of  thrombi,  moreover,  and  embolia  with
metastatic  deposits  may  occur.  And  finally  there  may
at  the  same  time  be  taking  place  an  absorption  of  icho-
rous or  putrid  juices  (ichorrhaemia,  septhaemia).  These
three  different  conditions  may  present  themselves  as  com-
plications one  of  the  other,  but  do  not  necessarily  coin-
cide. If  it  be  wished  therefore  to  retain  the  term  pyae-
mia, let  it  be  reserved  for  such  complications  as  these,
only  we  must  not  seek  for  a  common  central  point  in  a

.

*

t*

J

ICHORRHJEMIA— CANCEROUS  DYSCRASIA.  251

purulent  infection  of  the  blood,  but  the  term  must  be  re-
garded as  a  collective  name  for  several  processes  dissimi-
lar in  their  nature.

I  hope,  gentlemen,  that  what  I  have  now  imparted  to
you  will  be  sufficient  to  put  you  in  possession  of  the  chief
bearings  of  the  subject.  Of  course  no  real  demonstra*
tion  can  be  afforded  without  reference  to  distinct  cases.
You  will,  however,  yourselves  have  sufficient  opportunity
for  testing  the  exactitude  of  this  description  of  mine,  and
I  shall  be  glad  if  you  find  that  important  data  have
thereby  also  been  furnished,  by  which  clearer  conceptions
with  regard  to  the  really  practical,  and  especially  the
therapeutical,  questions  arising  out  of  the  subject,  may
be  obtained.

Now  that  we  have  become  acquainted  not  only  with
corporeal  particles,  but  also  with  certain  chemical  sub-
stances as  the  originators  of  dyscrasia,  lasting  for  a  lon-
ger or  shorter  time  according  as  the  supply  of  these  par-
ticles and  substances  continues  for  a  longer  or  shorter  pe-
riod, we  may  briefly  revert  to  the  question,  whether,  in
addition  to  these  forms,  a  kind  of  dyscrasia  can  be  shown
to  exist  in  which  the  blood  is  the  permanent  seat  of  definite
changes.  We  must  answer  this  question  in  the  negative.
The  more  marked  a  really  demonstrable  contamination
of  the  blood  with  certain  matters  is,  the  more  manifest
is  the  relatively  acute  course  of  the  process.  Just  the
very  forms  *  in  which  medical  men  are  most  apt  to  con-
sole themselves — especially  for  the  shortcomings  of  the
therapeutical  results,  with  the  reflection  that  they  have
to  do  with  the  deeply  rooted  and  incurable  chronic  dys-
crasia— just  these  forms  depend,  I  imagine,  least  of  all
upon  an  original  change  in  the  blood  ;  for  these  are  pre-

*  Tubercle,  cancer,  purpura,  syphilis,  etc.

252  LECTURE  X.

cisely  the  cases,  in  the  majority  of  which  extensive  alte-
rations are  discovered  in  certain  organs  or  in  individual
parts.  I  cannot  assert  that  investigation  has  in  this  mat-
ter in  any  way  been  pushed  to  its  utmost  limits,  I  can
only  say  that  every  resource  afforded  by  microscopical
or  chemical  analysis  has  hitherto  been  fruitlessly  em-
ployed in  investigating  the  part  played  by  the  blood  in
these  processes  ;  and  that,  on  the  other  hand,  we  are  in
most  of  them  able  to  demonstrate  important  changes  in
larger  or  smaller  groups  of  the  ultimate  constituents  of
organs  ;  and  that  on  the  whole  the  probability  that  the
dyscrasia  should  in  these  instances  also  be  regarded  as
secondary,  and  as  derived  from  definite  points  in  organs,
becomes  stronger  every  day.  I  shall  have  to  examine
this  question  a  little  more  closely  when  I  come  to  con-
sider the  theory  of  the  propagation  of  malignant  tumours,
in  the  case  of  which  recourse  is,  you  know,  so  often  had
to  the  supposition  that  the  malignancy  has  its  root  in  the
blood  which  gives  rise  to  the  local  affections.  And  yet
it  is  precisely  in  the  course  of  these  processes  that  it  is
comparatively  most  easy  to  show  the  mode  of  propaga-
tion, both  in  the  immediate  neighbourhood  of  the  dis-
eased part,  and  in  remote  organs  ;  and  it  is  in  them  we
find,  that  there  is  one  circumstance  which  especially
favours  the  extension  of  such  processes,  namely  the
abundance  of  parenchymatous  juices  in  the  pathological
formation.  The  drier  a  new  formation  is,  the  less  in
general  are  its  powers  of  infecting,  both  nearer  and  more
distant  parts.  The  mode  of  propagation  itself  commonly
entirely  agrees  with  what  we  have  already  said  ;  first  of
all,  a  conveyance  of  the  morbid  matter  though  the
lymphatic  channels,  and  then  an  affection  of  the  lymph-
atic glands,  takes  place,  and  it  is  only  by  degrees  that
processes  of  a  similar  nature  declare  themselves  in  more
remote  organs. Or  the  process  may  here  too  in  the  first

■  o  ^ ,

■

DIFFUSION  BY MEANS  OF CONTAGIOUS  JUICES.  253

instance  encroach  upon  the  walls  of  the  veins,  so  that
they  become  really  cancerous,  and  after  a  certain  time
the  cancer  either  grows  directly  through  the  walls  into
the  vessel  and  there  continues  its  course,  or  a  thrombus
forms  at  the  point,  which  invests  the  cancerous  plug  in
a  greater  or  less  degree  and  into  which  the  mass  of  can-
cer grows.  Here,  therefore,  we  see  a  diffusion  of  the
disease  may  possibly  take  place  in  two  different  manners,
but  the  diffusion  of  corpuscular  elements  only  in  one,
when,  namely,  an  irruption  ensues  into  the  veins.  An
absorption  of  cancer- cells  by  means  of  the  lymphatics
cannot  indeed  in  itself  be  ranked  amongst  impossibilities,
but  at  all  events  this  much  is  certain,  that  no  propaga-
tion of  the  disease  can  take  place  until  the  lymphatic
glands  have  in  their  turn  undergone  a  complete  cancer-
ous transformation,  and  similar  masses  of  cancer  push  on
their  growth  from  them  into  their  efferent  vessels.  In
no  case  can  a  peripheral  lymphatic  vessel  sweep  along
into  the  blood  the  cells  of  the  cancer  so  simply  as  it  does
the  fluid  parts  ;  this  is  only  conceivable  and  possible  in*
the  case  of  the  veins.  But  even  in  that  case  there  is  not
the  slightest  probability  that  noxious  matters  are  fre-
quently diffused  by  their  means,  and  for  the  simple  rea-
son that  the  metastases  of  cancer  very  frequently  do  not
correspond  with  those  with  which  we  have  become  ac-
quainted as  occurring  in  embolia.  The  usual  form  of
metastatic  diffusion  in  cancer  follows  rather  the  direction
of  the  secreting  organs.  The  lungs,  as  is  well  known,  are
much  more  rarely  invaded  by  cancerous  disease  than  the
liver,  not  only  after  gastric  and  uterine,  but  also  after
mammary  cancer  which  would  necessarily  rather  produce
cancer  in  the  lungs,  if  it  were  anything  corpuscular  which
was  conveyed  away,  became  stagnant  and  gave  rise  to  a
new  eruption  of  the  disease.  The  manner  in  which  the
metastatic  diffusion  takes  place  seems,  on  the  contrary,

'  /.

254  LECTURE  X.

to  render  it  probable  that  the  transferrence  takes  place  by
means  of  certain  fluids,  and  that  these  possess  the  power
of  producing  an  infection  which  disposes  different  parts
to  a  reproduction  of  a  mass  of  the  same  nature  as  the
one  which  originally  existed.  We  need  only  imagine  a
process  similar  to  that  which  we  see  upon  a  large  scale
in  small  pox.  The  pus  of  small  pox  when  directly  ino-
culated does  indeed  induce  the  disease,  but  the  conta-
gium*  is  also  volatile,  and  a  person  may  have  pustules
over  his  skin  after  merely  breathing  air  of  a  certain  cha-
racter. A  similar  state  of  things  seems  to  prevail  in
cases,  in  which,  in  the  course  of  heteroplastic  processes,
dyscrasiae  occur  which  do  not  burst  out  afresh  at  points
which,  according  to  the  direction  of  the  current  of  blood
or  lymph,  would  be  most  directly  exposed  to  them,  but
at  remote  spots.  As  the  salts  of  silver  do  not  deposit
themselves  in  the  lungs,  but  pass  through  them  to  be
precipitated  only  when  they  reach  the  kidneys  or  the
skin,  so  an  ichorous  juice  may  pass  from  a  cancerous
fumour  through  the  lungs  without  producing  any  change
in  them,  and  yet  at  a  more  remote  point,  as  for  example
in  the  bones  of  a  far  distant  part,  excite  changes  of  a
malignant  nature.

*  i.  e.  Contagious  matter. — Transl.

■
i

■•'.

*K-v

LECTURE XI.

MARCH  27,  1858.
PIGMENTARY  ELEMENTS  IN  THE  BLOOD. NERVES.

Melanaemia — Its  relation  to  melanotic  tumours  and  colorations  of  the  spleen.

•Red  blood-corpuscles— Origin— Melanic  forms— Chlorosis— Paralysis  of  the  respira-
tory substance — Toxicaemia.

The  nervous  system — Its  pretended  unity.

Nerve-fibres— Peripheral  nerves  :  their  fasciculi,  primitive  fibres,  and  perineurium
— Axis-cylinder  (electrical  substance) — Medullary  substance  (Myeline)*-Xon-
medullated  and  medullated  fibres— Transition  from  the  one  kind  to  the  other:
hypertrophy  of  the  optic  nerve— Different  breadth  of  the  fibres— Their  termina-
tions— Pacinian  and  tactile  bodies.

Gentlemen, — I  have  still  some  observations  to  make
to  you  in  reference  to  the  changes  of  the  blood,  more  for
the  sake  of  completeness  than  because  I  am  able  to  offer
to  you  in  doing  so  any  decisive  points  of  view.

In  the  first  place  I  wish  to  mention  one  other  condi-
tion which  has  recently  been  a  great  deal  talked  about,
and  might,  when  occasion  offered,  present  increased  in-
terest to  you,  the  so-called  melancemia.  This  is  a  condi-
tion most  nearly  connected  with  leukaemia,  inasmuch  we
have  in  it  to  deal  with  elements,  which,  like  the  colour-
less corpuscles  in  leukaemia,  make  their  way  from  defi-
nite organs  into  the  blood  and  circulate  with  it.  The
number  of  recorded  observations  concerning  this  matter
is  already  tolerably  large,  indeed  I might  almost  say,

i

256  LECTURE  XL

larger  than  perhaps  is  necessary,  for  it  seems  indeed  that
here  and  there  mistakes  have  slipped  in,  which  should,  I
think,  be  again  removed  from  the  history  of  the  affection.
But  unquestionably  there  is  a  state  in  which  coloured
elements  are  met  with  in.  the  blood  that  do  not  belong  to
it.  Isolated  observations  in  support  of  this  fact  have
already  for  a  considerable  length  of  time  *  been  upon
record,  and  indeed  first  occur  in  the  history  of  melanotic
tumours,  concerning  which  it  has  frequently  been  de-
clared that  in  their  neighbourhood  minute  black  particles
are  met  with  in  the  vessels,  and  the  opinion  put  forward
that  from  this  source  the  melanotic  dyscrasia  arose.  But
this  is  not  quite  the  condition  which  is  meant  when  me-
lanaemia  is  now-a-days  spoken  of.  In  the  last  ten  years
not  a  single  observation  has  been  made  known  which  in
any  way  adds  to  our  knowledge  concerning  the  passage
of  the  particles  of  melanotic  tumours  into  the  blood.

The  first  observation  concerning  that  class  of  diseases
which  in  a  narrower  sense  of  the  word  is  designated  me-
lanaemia,  was  made  by  Heinrich  Meckel  in  the  case  of  a
lunatic  a  short  time  after  I  had  published  my  description
of  leukaemia.  Meckel  found  that  here  too  the  spleen  was
enlarged  in  a  very  considerable  degree  and  pervaded  by
black  pigment,  and  he  therefore  ascribed  the  change  in
the  blood  to  an  absorption  of  coloured  particles  from  the
spleen.  The  next  observation  I  made  myself  (and  that
too  in  a  class  of  cases  which  afterwards  proved  very  fruit-
ful) in  the  case  of  an  ague-patient,  who  had  long  been
afflicted  with  a  considerable  enlargement  of  the  spleen  ;
for  I  found  in  the  blood  of  his  heart  cells  containing  pig-
ment. Meckel had only  observed free granules  and

*  Dr.  Stiebel,  sen.,  of  Frankfort-on-the-Maine,  calls  my  attention  to  the  fact  that
he  had  already  in  a  review  of  Schonlein's  Clinical  Lectures  (in  Haser's  '  Archiv*),
mentioned  the  occurr  nee  of  |  igment-cells  in  the  blood.

Note  to  the  Second  Edition.

MELAN^EMIA.  257

flakes  (Schollen)  containing  pigment.  The  cells  which  I
discovered  in  many  respects  bore  a  resemblance  to  colour-
less blood-corpuscles  ;  they  were  spherical,  but  frequently
also  rather  oblong,  nucleated  cells,  within  which  a
greater  or  less  number  of  large  black  granules  were  to
be  seen.  In  this  case  also  the  occurrence  of  a  large  black
spleen  was  again  verified.  Since  that  time  attention  has
been  continually  more  and  more  drawn  to
Fig.  76.  these  conditions  by  Meckel  himself  and

by  a  number  of  other  observers  in  Ger-
many, and  last  of  all  by  Frerichs,  and
in  Italy  by  Tigri.  Tigri  has  not  scrupled
to  designate  the  disease  milza  nera,  from
the  blackness  of  the  spleen  in  it,  whilst
according  to  the  view  of  Meckel  which  has  been  ex-
panded by  Frerichs,  it  is  rather  one  of  the  more  severe
forms  of  intermittent  fever  which  is  to  be  explained  in
this  way.

It  has  been  attempted  to  explain  the  serious  import  of
these  affections  by  supposing  that  the  elements,  which
find  their  way  into  the  blood,  accumulate  at  certain
points  in  the  more  minute  capillary  districts,  and  there
produce  stagnation  and  destruction.  This  was  especially
held  to  be  the  case  in  the  capillaries  of  the  brain,  in
which  they  were  said  to  attach  themselves  after  the  man-
ner of  emboli  to  the  points  of  division,  and  so  occasion
sometimes  capillary  apoplexies,  sometimes  the  comatose
and  apoplectic  forms  of  severe  intermittent  fever.  Fre-
richs has  added  a  new  and  important  kind  of  obstruction,
namely,  that  of  the  minute  hepatic  vessels,  which  is  said
ultimately  to  give  rise  to  atrophy  of  the  parenchyma  of
the  liver.

Fig.  76.  Melanaemia.  Blood  from  the  right  heart  (Cf.  •  Archiv  f.  pathol.  Anato.
mie  und  Physiologie,'  vol.  ii.,  fig.  8,  p.  594).  Colourless  cells  of  various  shapes
filled  with  black,  and  in  part  angular,  pigment-granules. 300  diameters.

IT

258  LECTURE  XI.

«  If  all  this  be  the  case,  there  would  seem  to  exist  an
extremely  important  series  of  conditions  directly  depend-
ent upon  the  dyscrasia.  Unfortunately  I  can  myself  say
but  little  concerning  the  matter,  inasmuch  as  I  have  not
since  my  first  case  again  been  in  a  position  to  observe
anything  similar.  I  cannot  therefore  form  a  decided
opinion  with  regard  to  the  value  of  the  relations  which
have  been  laid  down  with  respect  to  the  connection  of
the  secondary  changes  with  the  contamination  of  the
blood.  I  only  wish  to  remark  that  all  the  facts  with
which  we  are  acquainted  concerning  these  conditions,  in
dicate  that  the  contamination  of  the  blood  has  its  rise  in
a  definite  organ,  and  that  this  organ,  as  in  the  case  of  the
colourless  blood-corpuscles,  is  generally  the  spleen.

In  the  course  of  my  description  of  the  blood  I  have
hitherto  scarcely  made  any  mention  of  the  changes  which
take  place  in  the  red  corpuscles,  not  by  any  means  be-
cause I  regarded  them  as  unimportant  constituents  of
that  fluid,  but  because  as  yet  remarkably  little  is  known
concerning  their  changes.  The  whole  history  of  the  red
blood-corpuscles  is  still  invested  with  a  mysterious  obscu-
rity, inasmuch  as  no  positive  information  has  even  at  the
present  time  been  obtained  with  regard  to  the  origin  of
these  elements.  We  only  know  this  much  with  certainty,
as  I  have  already  (p.  190)  had  occasion  to  remark,  that
a  part  of  the  original  corpuscular  elements  of  the  blood
proceed  just  as  directly  from  the  embryonic  formative
cells  of  the  ovum,  as  all  the  other  tissues  which  build
themselves  up  out  of  them.  We  know,  moreover,
that  in  the  first  months  of  the  existence  even  of  the
human  embryo,  divisions  take  place  in  the  cells,
whereby  an  increase  in  the  number  of  them  present  in
the  blood  itself  is  produced.  But  after  this  time  all  is
obscure,  and  this obscurity  indeed  corresponds  pretty

RED BLOOD-CORPUSCLES— THEIR ORIGIN.  259

exactly  with  the  period  at  which  the  corpuscles  in  the
blood  of  man  and  the  mammalia  cease  to  exhibit  nuclei.
We  can  only  say  that  we  are  acquainted  with  no  fact
whatever  which  speaks  in  favour  of  a  further  independ-
ent development,  or  of  a  cell-division,  in  the  blood,  but
that  everything  points  to  the  probability  of  a  supply
from  without.  The  only  hypothesis  which  has  in  more
recent  times  been  advanced  with  regard  to  the  independ-
ent development  of  the  blood-corpuscles  in  the  blood
itself,  is  that  of  Gr.  Zimmermann,*  who  assumed  that
there  were  little  vesicles  present  in  the  blood,  which  gra-
dually grew  by  intussusception  whilst  circulating  with  it,
and  ultimately  constituted  the  real  blood-corpuscles.
Now  little  corpuscles  certainly  do  occur  in  the  blood  (Fig.
52,  h),  only,  when  they  are  more  accurately  examined,
a  peculiarity  reveals  itself  which  is  unknown  in  young
embryonic  forms,  namely  that  they  oppose  an  extraordi-
nary degree  of  resistance  to  the  most  different  agencies.
In  their  ordinary  state  they  are  of  a  beautiful  dark  red,
the  colour  being  very  intense  and  frequently  nearly
black  ;  if  they  are  treated  with  water  or  acids  which  dis-
solve the  ordinary  red  corpuscles  with  ease,  it  is  observed
that  the  little  bodies  require  a  very  much  longer  time
before  they  disappear.  Upon  adding  a  large  quantity  of
water  to  a  drop  of  blood,  they  will  be  seen  to  remain  for
a  considerable  time  after  the  other  corpuscles  have  dis-
appeared. This  peculiarity  accords  best  with  what  occurs
in  the  changes  which  take  place  in  the  blood,  when  it  is

*  Zimmermann  has  recently  ('  Archiv  f.  path.  Anat.  und  Phys.,'  vol.  xviii.,  pp.
221-242)  given  us  a  more  explicit  statement  of  his  views,  and  from  it  we  gather
that  he  considers  the  blood-corpuscles  to  originate  in  small,  colourless  vesicles
which  are  introduced  from  the  chyle  into  the  blood  and  may  be  seen  in  it  when  its
fluidity  has  been  preserved  by  means  of  salts.  But  probably  these  vesicles  are  only
artificial  products,  similar  to  those  described  nearly  ten  years  ago  by  Harting
('Nederl.  Lancet,'  1851,  3d  ser.,  1st  Jaarg.,  p.  224).—  From  a  MS.  Note  by  the
Author.

260  LECTURE XI.

extravasated  or  remains  for  a  long  time  stagnant  within
the  vessels.  Such  changes  undoubtedly  lead  to  a  de-
struction of  the  corpuscles,  so  that  in  the  case  of  the  cir-
culating blood  also  the  conclusion  may  with  great  proba-
bility be  drawn,  that  the  bodies  in  question  are  not  young
forms,  engaged  in  development,  but  on  the  contrary  old
ones  in  process  of  decay.  I  agree  therefore  essen-
tially with  Karl  Heinrich  Schultz's  view,  who  has  de-
scribed these  bodies  under  the  name  of  melanic  (mela-
nose)  blood-corpuscles,  and  regards  them  as  the  precur-
sors of  the  moulting  of  the  blood  (Blutmauserung) — pre-
paring for  the  really  excrementitious  transformations.

There  are  certain  conditions  in  which  the  number  of
these  corpuscles  becomes  extremely  large.  In  very
healthy  individuals  very  few  of  them  are  found,  only  in
the  blood  of  the  vena  portse  Schultz  believes  he  has
always  observed  a  considerable  number.  It  is  certain,
however,  that  there  are  diseased  conditions  in  which  their
number  becomes  so  large,  that  a  greater  or  smaller  quan-
tity of  them  is  met  with  in  nearly  every  drop  of  blood.
These  conditions  cannot  however  as  yet  be  classed  in  de-
finite categories,  because  but  little  attention  has  been
excited  with  regard  to  them.  They  are  found  in  slight
forms  of  intermittent  fever,  in  cyanosis  after  cardiac  dis-
ease, in  typhoid-fever  patients,  in  the  fever  accompany-
ing ichorous  infection  after  operations,  and  in  the  course
of  epidemic  disorders,  still  always  in  such  diseases  as  are
accompanied  by  a  rapid  exhaustion  of  the  mass  of  blood
and  give  rise  to  cachectic  and  anaemic  states.  This  is  one
of  the  processes  in  which  clinical  observation  also  might
lead  to  the  conclusion  that  an  abundant  destruction  was
going  on  in  the  constituents  of  the  blood  within  the  ves-
sels.

In  addition  to  these  changes  we  have  precise  know-
ledge concerning  another  class  distinguished  by  quantita-

CHLOROSIS.  261

tive  changes  in  the  number  of  the  corpuscles.  These
conditions,  of  which  Chlorosis  is  the  principal  represen-
tative, offer  a  certain  resemblance  to  those  which  are
accompanied  by  an  increase  in  the  number  of  the  colour-
less blood-corpuscles,  to  leukaemia  in  a  narrower  sense
of  the  word  and  the  merely  leucocytotic  states.  Chlo-
rosis is  distinguished  from  leukaemia  by  the  circumstance
that  the  entire  number  of  the  corpuscles  is  smaller.
Whilst  in  leukaemia  colourless  corpuscles  in  some  sort
take  the  place  of  the  red  ones  and  a  real  diminution  in
the  number  of  the  cellular  elements  in  the  blood  is  not
produced,  in  chlorosis  the  elements  of  both  kinds  become
less  numerous,  without  the  occurrence  of  any  definite
disturbance  in  the  numerical  relation  existing  between
the  coloured  and  colourless  corpuscles.  This  points  to  a
generally  diminished  formation,  and,  if  we  may  conclude
(as  I  certainly  think  one  can  at  the  present  moment
scarcely  help  doing),  that  the  red  corpuscles  also  are
brought  to  the  blood  from  the  spleen  and  lymphatic
glands,  all  this  would  indicate  that  in  chlorosis  a  dimin-
ished formation  takes  place  in  the  blood-glands.  Leukae-
mia is  of  course  much  more  easily  explained,  inasmuch
as  in  it  we  find  representatives  of  the  whole  mass  of  cel-
lular elements  and  can  imagine  that  a  part  of  them,
instead  of  being  transformed  into  red  corpuscles,  are
pursuing  their  development  as  colourless  ones.  In  the
history  of  chlorosis,  on  the  contrary,  much  obscurity  still
prevails,  since  we  cannot  positively  demonstrate  the  ex-
istence of  a  primary  affection  of  the  blood-glands.  Ana-
tomical observations  indicate  that  the  foundations  of  the
chlorotic  ailment  are  very  early  laid  ;  for  the  aorta  and
the  larger  arteries  are  usually,  and  the  heart  and  sexual
organs  frequently,  found  imperfectly  developed,  facts
which  lead  us  to  infer  that  the  disposition  is  either  con-
genital or  formed  in  early  youth.

262  LECTURE XI.

A.  third  series  of  conditions  may  here  too  be  men-
tioned, which,  however,  do  not  affect  the  form  of  the
blood-corpuscles,  that,  namely,  in  which  the  internal  con-
stitution of  these  elements  has  undergone  changes,  with-
out the  production  of  any  definite  morphological  effect.
Here  we  have  essentially  to  deal  with  functional  disturb-
ances which  are  probably  connected  with  more  subtle
changes  in  the  composition  of  the  blood,  changes  in  the
proper  respiratory  substance  (respiratorische  Substanz).
For  just  as  in  muscles  we  find  the  substance  of  the  pri-
mitive fasciculus,  the  compact  mass  of  syntonine,  to  be
the  contractile  substance,  so  in  the  contents  of  the  red
corpuscles  do  we  recognize  the  presence  of  the  really
active,  respiratory  substance.  This  under  certain  cir-
cumstances undergoes  changes  which  render  it  incapable
of  continuing  its  functions,  a  kind  of  paralysis,  if  you
will.  That  something  of  the  kind  has  occurred  we  see
from  the  fact  that  the  corpuscles  are  no  longer  capable
of  absorbing  oxygen,  as  may  be  directly  proved  by  expe-
riment. That  molecular  changes  in  the  composition  of
the  blood  are  here  really  at  work,  we  find  satisfactory
evidence  in  the  action  of  poisonous  substances  which,
even  in  extremely  minute  quantity,  so  change  the  hgema-
tine  that  it  is  thrown  into  a  kind  of  paralysis.  To  these
substances  belong  a  part  of  the  volatile  compounds  of
hydrogen,  for  example,  arseniuretted  and  cyanuretted
hydrogen,  and  further,  according  to  Hoppe's  investiga-
tions, carbonic  oxide,  of  all  of  which  comparatively  very
small  quantities  are  sufficient  to  diminish  the  respiratory
power  of  the  corpuscles.  Analogous  conditions  have
already  long  since  been  observed  by  many  in  the  course
of  typhoid  fevers,  in  which  the  capability  of  taking  up
oxygen  decreases  in  proportion  as  the  disease  assumes  a
severe  and  acute  character.  Microscopically,  however,
with  the  exception  of  a  few  melanic  corpuscles,  scarcely

THE  NERVOUS  SYSTEM.  263

anything  is  to  be  seen  ;  chemical  experiment  and  the
coarse  perception  of  the  naked  eye  in  this  instance  alone
discover  the  occurrence  of  peculiar  changes.  It  may
therefore  be  said  that  in  this  quarter  really  the  most  has
yet  to  be  done.  We  have  rather  presumptive  evidence
than  facts.

If  now  we  briefly  sum  up  what  I  have  laid  before  you
concerning  the  blood,  we  see,  either  that  certain  sub-
stances find  their  way  into  it,  which  exercise  an  injurious
influence  upon  its  cellular  elements  and  render  them  in-
capable of  performing  their  functions  ;  or  that  from  a
definite  point,  either  from  sources  external  to  the  body,
or  from  some  organ,  matters  are  conveyed  into  it,  which
thence  exercise  an  injurious  influence  upon  other  organs  ;
or  finally  that  its  constituents  are  not  replaced  and  rege-
nerated in  a  regular  manner.  Nowhere  in  this  whole
series  do  we  find  any  one  condition,  indicating  that  defi-
nite changes  once  set  on  foot  in  the  blood  itself  can  be
permanently  maintained,  in  other  words  that  a  perma-
nent dyscrasia  is  possible,  unless  new  agencies  derived
from  a  definite  source  are  continually  brought  to  bear
upon  the  blood.  This  is  the  reason  why  I  began  by  call-
ing your  attention  to  this  point  of  view,  which  I  conceive
to  be  of  extreme  importance  in  practice  also,  namely,
that  in  all  forms  of  dyscrasiae  the  chief  point  is  to  search
for  their  local  origin.

Let  us  now  proceed  to  the  consideration  of  another
subject  which  comes  next  in  historical  importance,  namely
the  structure  and  arrangement  of  the  nervous  system .

The  great  mass  of  the  nervous  system  consists  of
fibrous  constituents.  It  is  to  them  that  nearly  all  the
finer  physiological  discoveries,  which  the  last  fifteen
years  have  brought  with  them,  have  reference,  whilst
the  remaining  portion  of  the  nervous  system,  in  quantity

264:  LECTURE  XL

much  smaller,  namely,  the  grey,  or  ganglionic,  substance,
has  hitherto  opposed  difficulties  even  to  histological  in-
vestigation which  are  still  far  from  being  overcome,  so
that  the  experimental  examination  of  this  substance  has
scarcely  been  able  to  be  taken  in  hand.  It  is  indeed
often  maintained  that  a  great  deal  is  now  known  about
the  nervous  system,  but  our  knowledge  is  for  the  most
part  confined  to  the  white  substance,  the  fibrous  portion,
whilst  we  are  unfortunately  obliged  to  confess  that,  both
in  an  anatomical,  but  more  especially  in  a  physiological
point  of  view,  we  are  still  involved  in  the  greatest  uncer-
tainties with  regard  to  the  grey  substance,  which,  as  far
as  its  functions  are  concerned,  manifestly  holds  a  much
higher  position.

As  soon  as  we  consider  the  question  of  the  influence
exercised  by  the  nervous  system  in  the  different  pro-
cesses of  life,  anatomically,  a  single  glance  suffices  to  show,
that  the  point  of  view  which  neuro-pathologists  have
been  accustomed  to  set  out  with,  is  a  very  erroneous  one.
For  they  fancied  they  saw  in  the  nervous  system  an  un-
usually simple  whole,  from  the  unity  of  which  resulted
the  unity  of  the  body  in  general,  of  the  whole  organism.
But  even  though  one  has  nothing  but  very  rough  anato-
mical ideas  concerning  the  nerves,  still  one  ought  not  to
shut  one's  eyes  to  the  fact  that  this  unity  is  in  a  very
sorry  plight,  and  that  even  the  scalpel  demonstrates  the
nervous  system  to  be  an  apparatus  composed  of  an  ex-
tremely large  number  of  parts  of  relatively  equal  value
without  any  single  discoverable  central  point.  The  more
accurately  we  make  our  histological  investigations,  the
more  do  the  elements  multiply,  and  the  ultimate  compo-
sition of  the  nervous  system  proves  to  be  disposed  upon
a  plan  analogous  to  that  which  has  been  followed  in  all
the  other  parts  of  the  body.  An  infinite  quantity  of
cellular  elements  manifest  themselves  side  by  side,  more

THE NERVOUS  SYSTEM— PERINEURIUM.  26£

or  less  autonomous,  and  in  a  great  measure  independent
of  one  another.

If  in  the  first  instance  we  exclude  the  ganglionic  sub-
stance and  confine  ourselves  simply  to  the  fibrous  matter,
we  have  on  the  one  hand  the  real  (peripheral)  nerves  in
the  narrower  sense  of  the  word,  and  on  the  other  the
large  accumulations  of  white  medullary  substance,  of  which
the  greater  part  of  the  cerebrum,  cerebellum,  and  the
columns  of  the  spinal  marrow  is  composed.  The  fibres
of  these  different  parts  are  indeed  on  the  whole  similarly
constructed,  but  disclose  in  their  intimate  structure  such
numerous,  and  in  part,  such  considerable  differences,  that
there  are  spots,  with  regard  to  which  even  at  this  very
moment  we  cannot  say  with  certainty  whether  the  ele-
ments we  have  before  us  are  really  nerves,  or  belong  to
an  altogether  different  kind  of  fibres.  The  greatest  cer-
tainty has  been  acquired  with  regard  to  the  structure  of
the  ordinary  peripheral  nerves  ;  in  them  the  following
can  generally  be  distinguished  with  tolerable  facility.

All  the  nerves  which  can  be  followed  with  the  naked
eye  contain  a  certain  number  of  subdivisions,  or  fasci-
culi, which  afterwards  separate  in  the  form  of  branches
or  twigs.  On  tracing  out  these  individual  twigs  which
keep  continually  dividing,  we  find  that  the  nerve  under
nearly  all  circumstances  retains  a  fascicular  arrangement
until  nearly  its  ultimate  divisions,  so  that  every  fascicu-
lus in  its  turn  comprises  a  greater  or  less  number  of  so-
called  primitive  fibres.  The  term,  primitive  fibre,  which
is  here  employed,  was  originally  selected,  because  a
nerve-fasciculus  was  regarded  as  analogous  to  the  primi-
tive fasciculus  of  a  muscle.  This  notion  afterwards  be-
came almost  obsolete,  and  Robin  was  the  first  who  in
more  recent  times  again  directed  attention  to  the  sub-
stance which  holds  the  fasciculus  together  and  which  he
called  perineurium. It  consists  of  very  dense  connective

266

LECTURE XL

Fig.  77.

tissue,  which  upon  the  addition  of  acetic  acid,  it  seen  to
contain  small  nuclei,  and  is  different  from  the  looser  con-
nective tissue  which  in  its
turn  holds  the  fasciculi  to-
gether and  constitutes  the  so-
called  neurilemma.

When  we  use  the  term
nerve-fibre  alone  in  its  histo-
logical sense,  we  always  mean
the  primitive  fibres,  and  not
the  fasciculi  which  to  the
naked  eye  look  like  fibres.
These  ultimate  fibres  in  their  turn  possess,  one  and  all,
a  special  external  membrane,  which,  when  it  has  been
entirely  freed  from  its  contents — a  matter  certainly  very
difficult  to  accomplish,  but  sometimes  occurring  sponta-
neously in  pathological  conditions,  as  for  example  in  cer-
tain states  of  atrophy — displays  nuclei  upon  its  walls
(Fig.  5,  c).  Within  these  membranous  tubes  lie  the  pro-
per nerve-contents,  which  in  ordinary  nerves  may  again
be  divided  into  constituents  of  two  descriptions.  These
can  scarcely  be  distinguished  apart  in  a  nerve  which  is
quite  fresh  ;  but  in  a  short  time  after  it  has  perished  or
been  cut  out,  or  after  the  action  of  any  medium  upon  it,
they  at  once  separate  very  distinctly  from  one  another,
one  of  the  constituents  undergoing  a  rapid  change  which
has  generally  been  termed  coagulation,  and  by  means  of
which  it  is  marked  off  from  the  other  constituent  (Fig.
78).  When  this  has  taken  place  there  is  distinctly  seen
in  the  interior  of  the  nerve-fibre,  the  so-called  axis-cylin-

Fig.  77.  Transverse  section  through  one  of  the  trunks  of  the  brachial  plexus.
ly  /.  Neurilemma,  from  which  one  thicker  partition  V  and  finer  prolongations,  indi-
cated by  light-coloured  lines,  run  through  the  nerve  and  divide  it  into  small  fasci-
culi. These  exhibit  the  dark,  punctated,  transverse  sections  of  the  primitive  fibres,
and  between  them  is  seen  the  perineurium. 80  diameters.

NERVE-FIBRES— AXIS-CYLINDER— MEDULLARY SHEATH.

267

Fig.  IS.

der  (the  primitive  band  of  Remak),  a  very  fine,  delicate,
pale  structure  ;  and  round  about  it  a  tolerably  firm,
dark  mass,  here  and  there  run-
ning together,  the  nerve-me-
dulla or  medullary  sheath  [white
substance  of  Schwann]  ;  this
fills  up  the  space  between  the
axis- cylinder  and  the  external
membrane.  But  the  nerve-
tube  is  generally  so  tightly
filled  with  its  contents  that,
when  viewed  in  the  ordinary
way,  scarcely  anything  is  seen
of  the  separate  constituents,
the  axis  cylinder  being  always
with  difficulty  visible  within  the
medullary  substance.  Hence
the  fact  may  be  accounted  for,

that  its  very  existence  was  disputed  for  years  and  the
view  proclaimed  by  many,  that  it  was  also  an  appearance
due  to  coagulation,  produced  by  a  separation  of  the  ori-
ginally homogeneous  contents  into  an  internal  and  exter-
nal mass.  This  view  is  however  unquestionably  incor-
rect :  every  mode  of  examination  at  last  discloses  this
primitive  band  ;  even  in  transverse  sections  of  nerves  the
axis-cylinder  is  very  distinctly  seen  in  the  interior,  with
the  medulla  round  about  it.

It  is  the  so-called  nerve-medulla  which  gives  the  nerve-
fibres  in  general  their  white  appearance  ;  wherever  the
nerves contain this constituent, they look white  ;

Fig.  78.  Grey  and  white  nerve-fibres.  A.  A  grey,  gelatinous  nerve-fasciculus
from  the  root  of  the  mesentery,  after  the  addition  of  acetic  acid.  B.  A  broad  white
primitive  fibre  from  the  crural  nerve  :  a  the  axis-cylinder  laid  bare,  v,  v  a  varicose
state  of  the  fibre  with  its  medullary  sheath  ;  at  the  end  at  m,  m  the  medullary  mat-
ter (myeline)  protruding  in  convoluted  forms.  C.  A  fine,  white  primitive  fibre
from  the  brain,  with  its  axis-cylinder  protruding. 300  diameters.

268

LECTURE XI.

wherever  it  is  wanting,  they  appear  translucent  and  grey.
There  are  therefore  nerves  which  are  akin  in  colour  to
ganglionic  matter,  are  comparatively  transparent  and
possess  a  more  clear  and  gelatinous  appearance  than  the
others  ;  and  they  have  thence  been  called  grey  or  gela-
tinous nerves  (Fig.  78,  A).  Between  the  grey  and  white
nerve-substance  therefore  there  does  not  exist  the  differ-
ence that  the  one  is  ganglionic  and  the  other  fibrous,
but  only  this,  that  the  one  contains  medulla  and  the  other
,  does  not.  In  general  the  absence  of  medulla  in  a  nerve
stamps  it  as  one  of  a  lower  and  more  imperfect  kind,
whilst  the  presence  of  this  substance  announces  a  more
abundant  nutrition  and  a  higher  development  in  the
part.

Not  long  ago  I  made  an  observation  in  which  a  direct
illustration  of  the  practical  importance  of  these  two  con-
ditions was displayed in  a
very  unexpected  manner,  the
usually  translucent  grey  nerve
substance  having  been  trans-
formed into  an opaque  and
white matter,  namely  in  the
retina.  I  found  namely  entire-
ly by  accident  one  day,  in  the
eyes  of  a  man  in  whom  I  was
looking  for  changes of  quite
another kind — round  about
the  papilla  of  the  optic  nerve,  where  the  uniformly  trans-
lucent retina  is  ordinarily  seen — a  number  of  whitish,

Fig.  79.

Fig.  79.  Medullary  hypertrophy  of  the  optic  nerve  within  the  eye  (Cf.  '  Archiv  f.
pathologische  Anatomie  und  Physiologic'  vol.  x.,  p.  190).  A.  The  posterior  half
of  the  globe  of  the  eye,  seen  from  before  ;  from  the  papilla  of  the  optic  nerve  pro-
ceed in  four  directions  radiating  striae  of  white  fibres.  B.  Fibres  from  this  optic
nerve  in  the  retina,  magnified  300  times :  a,  a  pale,  ordinary,  slightly  varicose  fibre,
6,  one  with  a  gradually  thickening  medullary  sheath,  c,  a  similar  one  with  its  axis-
cylinder  protruding.

MEDULLATED AND NON-MEDULLATED NERVES.  269

radiating  striae  like  those  which  one  sometimes  meets
with  upon  a  small  scale  in  dogs,  and  pretty  constantly  in
rabbits  in  different  directions.  The  microscopical  exa-
mination showed  that,  like  as  in  these  animals,  medullated
fibres  had  developed  themselves  in  the  retina,  and  that
its  fibrous  layer  had  become  thicker  and  opaque  in  con-
sequence of  the  assumption  of  medullary  substance."  On
examining  the  individual  fibres  I  found,  on  tracing  them
from  the  fore  and  middle  parts  of  the  retina  backwards
towards  the  papilla,  that  they  gradually  increased  in
breadth,  and  at  the  same  time  displayed,  at  first  in  an
almost  imperceptible,  but  afterwards  in  a  very  striking
manner,  an  investing  layer  of  medulla.  This  is  a  kind
of  transformation,  therefore,  which  essentially  impairs
the  functions  of  the  retina,  for  this  delicate  membrane
becomes  thereby  more  and  more  impervious  to  light,  in-
asmuch as  the  white  substance  does  not  suffer  the  rays
of  light  to  pass  through.

The  same  change  occurs  in  nerves  during  their  deve-
lopment. A  young  nerve  is  a  delicate,  tubular  structure,
provided  with  nuclei  at  certain  intervals  and  containing
a  pale  grey  substance.  The  medulla  does  not  appear
until  afterwards,  and  then  the  nerve  becomes  broader
and  the  axis-cylinder  becomes  distinctly  defined.  It  may
be  said  therefore  that  the  medullary  sheath  is  not  an
absolutely  necessary  constituent  of  a  nerve,  but  is  added
to  it  only  when  it  has  arrived  at  a  certain  stage  in  its
development.

Hence  it  follows  that  this  substance,  which  was  for-
merly regarded  as  the  essential  constituent  of  a  nerve,
according  to  present  views  plays  a  subordinate  part.
Those  only  who  do  not  even  now  admit  the  existence  of
the  axis-cylinder,  regard  the  white  substance  of  course
*iot  only  as  the  greatly  predominating  constituent,  but
also  as  the  really  active  element  of  the  nerve-contents.

i

270  LECTURE XI.

Now  it  is  very  remarkable  that  this  same  substance  is  one
which  most  extensively  prevails  in  the  animal  body.  I
had,  curiously  enough,  in  the  first  instance  in  the  exami-
nation of  lungs  come  across  forms  which  presented  very
similar  qualities  to  those  which  we  observe  in  the  me-
dulla of  the  nerves.  Although  this  was  very  surprising,
yet  I  did  not  really  think  there  was  an  actual  correspond-
ence, until  I  was  gradually  led  by  a  series  of  further  ob-
servations which  accumulated  in  the  course  of  several
years,  to  examine  a  number  of  tissues  chemically.  The
result  showed,  that  there  scarcely  exists  a  tissue  rich  in
cells  in  which  this  substance  does  not  occur  in  large
quantity  ;  still  it  is  only  in  the  nerve-fibre  that  we  ob-
serve the  peculiarity,  that  the
substance  separates  as  such,  whilst
^  B  in all  other  cellular  parts  it  is

/  ®  W § contained  in  a  finely  divided  state
f  j)§ © in  the  interior  of  the  cells,  and  is
*  fl  only  set  free  when  the  contents

undergo  a  chemical  change,  or  are  subjected  to  the  action
of  chemical  reagents.  From  blood-cells,  from  pus-cor-
puscles, from  the  epithelial  cells  of  the  most  various  glan-
dular parts,  from  the  interior  of  the  spleen  and  similar
glands  unprovided  with  excretory  ducts,  this  substance
can  in  every  case  be  obtained  by  extraction.  It  is  the
same  substance  which  forms  the  principal  constituent  of
the  yellow  mass  of  yolk  in  the  hen's  egg}  whence  its  taste
and  peculiarities,  especially  its  peculiar  tenacity  and  vis-
cidity which  are  employed  for  the  higher  technical  pur-
poses of  the  kitchen,  are  familiar  to  every  one. It  is  this

substance,  for  which  I  have  proposed  the  name  of  medul-

■

Fig.  80.  Drops  of  medullary  matter  (myelitic — according  to  Gobley,  lecithine).
A.  Differently  shaped  drops  from  the  medullary  sheath  of  cerebral  nerves,  after  they
have  become  swollen  up  with  water.  B.  Drops  from  decomposing  epithelium  from
the  gall-bladder  in  their  natural  fluid. 300  diameters.

,0°

Pi tofsTV.

AXIS-CYLINDER  (ELECTRICAL SUBSTANCE).  271

lary  matter  (Markstoff),  or  rnyeline,  that  in  extremely ^
large  quantity  fills  up  the  interval  between  the  axis-
cylinder  and  the  sheath  in  primitive  nerve-fibres.

If  the  nutrition  of  a  nerve  suffer  disturbance,  this  sub-
stance diminishes  in  quantity  and  indeed  may  under  cer-
tain circumstances  totally  disappear,  so  that  a  white
nerve  may  be  again  reduced  to  the  condition  of  a  grey
or  gelatinous  one.  This  constitutes  grey  atrophy,  or
gelatinous  degeneration,  in  which  the  nerve-fibre  in  itself
continues  to  exist,  and  only  the  peculiar  accumulation
of  medullary  matter  has  been  affected.  Herein  you  may
seek  for  an  explanation  of  the  circumstance,  that  in  many
cases  where,  in  accordance  with  the  results  of  anatomical
investigation,  it  was  formerly  thought  one  might  expect
to  find  a  part  completely  incapable  of  fulfilling  its  func-
tions, proof  has  been  afforded  by  means  of  clinical  obser-
vation, aided  by  electricity,  that  the  nerve  is  still  capa-
ble of  performing  its  functions,  although  in  a  less  degree
than  normal.  Hence  too  it  is  manifest  that  the  medulla
cannot  be  the  constituent  in  which  lie  vested  the  func-
tions of  the  nerve  as  such.  To  the  same  conclusion  phy-
sical investigations  also  have  generally  led,  and  at  the
present  time  therefore  the  axis-cylinder  is  pretty  gene-
rally looked  upon  as  the  really  essential  constituent  of
the  nerve,  which  is  also  present  in  pale  nerves,  whilst  in
white  ones  it  can  only  be  distinctly  isolated  by  the  sepa-
ration of  the  investing  medullary  sheath.  The  axis-cylin-
der would  therefore  seem  to  be  the  real  electrical  sub-
stance of  natural  philosophers,  and  we  may  certainly
admit  the  hypothesis  which  has  been  advanced,  that  the
medullary  sheath  rather  serves  as  an  isolating  mass,  which
confines  the  electricity  within  the  nerve  itself,  and  allows
its  discharge  to  take  place  only  at  the  non-medullated  ,
extremities  of  the  fibres.

The  peculiar  nature  of  the  medullary  matter  most  fre

\<br4-J.*~* '  AAA.

»

1

272

LECTURE  XI.

quently  displays  itself  in  this  way,  that  when  a  nerve  is
torn  across  or  cut  (Fig.  78,  m,  m),  the  medulla  usually
protrudes  from  it,  presenting,  especially  after  it  has  been
acted  upon  by  water,  a  peculiar  striated  appearance  (Fig.
80,  A).  It  takes  up  water  namely,  which  is  a  proof  that
it  is  not  a  neutral  fatty  substance  in  the  ordinary  sense
of  the  term,  but  can  at  most,  on  account  of  its  great
power  of  swelling  up,  be  compared  to  certain  saponace-
ous compounds.  The  longer  the  action  of  the  water  lasts,
the  longer  are  the  masses  which  protrude  from  the  nerve.
They  have  a  peculiar,  ribbon-like  appearance,  keep  con-
tinually acquiring  new  streaks  and  layers,  and  give  rise
to  the  most  singular  shapes.  Frequently  also  fragments
become  detached  and  swim  about,  forming  peculiar,  stra-
tified bodies,  which  in  recent  times  have  been  confounded
with  corpora  amy  lace  a,  but  are  distinguished
from  them  in  the  most  positive  manner  by  their
chemical  reactions.

With  regard  to  the  histological  varieties  of
nerves  amongst  themselves,  investigation  shows
that  in  different  parts  more  or  less  highly  deve-
loped forms  greatly  predominate.  On  the  one
hand,  namely,  the  nerves  are  essentially  distin-
guished by  the  breadth  of  their  primitive  fibres,
on  the  other  hand,  by  the  presence  of  medulla.
We  have  very  broad,  middle-sized  and  small
white  fibres,  and  in  like  manner  broad  and  fine
grey  fibres.  A  very  considerable  size  is  generally  speaking
but  seldom  attained  by  the  grey  ones,  because  the  size
of  a  nerve  depends  more  upon  the  greater  or  less  quan-
tity of  medulla  it  contains  than  upon  the  volume  of  the
axis-cylinder, but still variations present  themselves

Fig.  81.

Fig.  81.  Broad  and  narrow  nerve-fibres  from  the  crural  nerve  with  the  medullary
substance  irregularly  swollen  up. 300  diameters.

VARIETIES OF  NERVE FIBRES,  27b

everywhere,  so  that  some  nerves  are  coarser  and  others
finer.

Generally,  we  may  say,  that  the  primitive  fibres  usu-
ally become  finer  in  the  terminal  portions  of  nerves,  and
that  the  ultimate  ramifications  of  these  latter  are  wont  to
contain  comparatively  the  finest  fibres  ;  still  this  is  not
an  absolute  rule. In  the  optic  nerve  we  commonly  find
from  the  very  moment  of  its  entrance  into  the  eye  only
very  narrow,  pale  fibres  (Fig.  79,  a),  whilst  the  tactile
nerves  of  the  skin  present  quite  up  to  their  terminations
comparatively  broad  and  dark  bordered  fibres  (Fig.  83).
It  has  not  yet  been  found  possible  to  arrive  at  any  cer-
tain opinion  with  regard  to  the  import  of  the  different
kinds  of  fibres  from  their  breadth  and  the  proportion  of
medulla  they  contain. For  a  time  it  was  believed  that
a  distinction  of  this  sort  could  be  established  between
them,  namely,  that  the  broad  fibres  were  to  be  regarded
as  derived  from  the real  cerebro-spinal  parts,  the  fine
ones  as  parts  of  the  sympathetic  ;  but  this  is  not  found
to  be  borne  out  by  facts,  and  all  that  can  be  said  is,  that
the  ordinary  peripheral  nerves  certainly  are  abundantly
provided  with  broad  fibres,  whilst  the  sympathetic  nerves
contain  a  comparatively  larger  portion  of  fine  ones. In
many  places,  as  for  example  in  the  abdomen,  grey,  broad
fibres  predominate  (Fig.  78,  A),  with  regard  to  the  ner-
vous nature  of  which doubts are  still  entertained by
some. For  the present,  therefore,  no definite  conclu-
sions can  be  drawn  as  to  any  difference  in  the  functions
of  a nerve  from its  mere  structure, although  it can
scarcely  be  doubted  that  such  differences  must  exist,  and
that  a  broad  fibre  must  exhibit  other  properties,  even  if
only  quantitatively  different,  than  a  fine  one,  a  medul-
lated  fibre  others  than  a  non-medullated  one. However
concerning  all  this  nothing  is  at  present  known  with  cer-
tainty ;  and  since  it  has  been demonstrated  by  more

18

274  LECTURE  XI.

delicate  physical  investigations  that  the  nerves,  which
had  been  previously  assumed  only  to  conduct  in  the  one
or  the  other  direction,  possess  the  power  of  conduction
in  both  directions,  I  should  not,  I  think,  be  justified  in
here  advancing  any  hypotheses  with  regard  to  their  cen-
tripetal or  centrifugal  conduction.

The  great  difference,  gentlemen,  which  is  to  be  re-
marked in  regard  to  the  functions  of  individual  nerves,
cannot  as  yet  be  referred  so  much  to  any  difference  of
structure  in  them,  as  to  the  peculiarity  of  the  structures
with  which  the  nerve  is  connected.  Thus  on  the  one
hand  the  special  function  of  the  central  organ  from
which  the  nerve  proceeds,  and  on  the  other,  the  special
nature  of  its  distal  termination,  afford  a  clue  to  its  own
specific  functions.

With  reference  to  the  terminations  which  the  nerves
present  at  their  peripheral  extremities,  histology  has,  I
should  say,  in  the  course  of  the  last  few  years  celebrated
its  most  brilliant  triumphs.  Previously  it  was,  as  you
well  know,  a  matter  of  dispute  whether  the  nerves  ended
in  loops  or  in  plexuses,  or  whether  their  terminations
were  free,  and  the  one  or  the  other  opinion  was  held
with  equal  exclusiveness.  Now,  we  have  examples  of
most  of  these  modes  of  termination,  but  the  fewest  of
that  form  which  was  for  a  time  regarded  as  the  regular
one,  namely  the  termination  in  loops.

The  most  manifest  form  of  termination,  though  the
one  whose  functions  are,  singularly  enough,  even  now  the
least  known,  is  that  in  the  so-called  Pacinian  or  Valerian*
bodies — organs,  concerning  the  import  of  which  we  are
still  unable  to  make  any  statement.  They  are  found  in
man  comparatively  most  marked  in  the  adipose  tissue
of  the  ends  of  the  fingers,  but  also in  tolerably  large

*  Vater  was  professor  at  Wittenberg,  and  died  in  1751.

PACINIAN  BODIES.

275

Fig.  82.

numbers  at  the  root  of  the  mesentery  ;  most  distinctly
and  readily,  however,  in  the  mesentery  of  the  cat,  in
which  they  extend  a  considerable  distance  up,  whilst  in
the  human  body  they  are  situated  only  at  the  root  of  the
mesentery,  where  the  duodenum  comes  in  contact  with
the  pancreas  in  the  neighborhood  of
the  solar  plexus.  Moreover  they  pre-
sent great  variations  in  different  indi-
viduals. Some  have  very  few,  others
a  great  number,  of  them,  and  it  is  very
possible  that  certain  individual  pecu-
liarities result  therefrom.  Thus  I
have,  for  example,  on  several  occasions
found  a  great  number  of  these  bodies
in  lunatics,  though  I  do  not  wish  at
present  to  lay  any  great  stress  upon
this  discovery.

A  Pacinian  body,  as  seen  with  the
naked  eye,  is  of  a  whitish  colour,  usu-
ally oval  and  somewhat  pointed  at  one
end,  from  a  line  to  a  line  and  a  half
(1 — li'")  long,  and  firmly  attached  to
a  nerve  in  such  a  way  that  a  single
primitive  fibre  passes  into  each  body.
It  presents  a  comparatively  large  num-
ber of  elliptical  and  concentrical  layers,
which  at  the  upper  end  are  in  pretty  close  contact,  but
at  the  other  are  separated  by  a  wider  interval,  and  en-
close in  their  interior  an  oblong  space  generally  some-
Fig.  82.  Vaterjan  or  Pacinian  body  from  the  subcutaneous  adipose  tissue  of  the
end  of  a  finger.  S.  The  peduncle,  consisting  of  a  dark-bordered,  medullated  pri-
mitive nerve-fibre  w,  and  the  thick  perineurium  jo,  p  provided  with  longitudinal
nuclei.  C.  The  body  itself  with  the  concentric  layers  of  the  perineurium  which  is
swollen  out  into  a  bulbous  shape — and  the  central  cavity,  within  which  the  pale
axis-cylinder  is  seen  running  along  and  terminating  in  a  free  extremity.  150
diameters.

276  LECTURE XI.

what  more  pointed  towards  the  upper  end.  Within
these  layers  nuclei  can  be  distinctly  seen  disposed  in
regular  order,  and  on  following  the  layers  towards  the
stem  of  the  nerve,  they  are  there  observed  finally  to  pass
into  the  perineurium  which  is  in  this  part  very  thick.
They  may  therefore  be  regarded  as  gigantic  developments
of  the  perineurium,  which  however  only  enclose  a  single
nerve-fibre.  Now  on  tracing  the  nerve-fibre  itself  we
observe  that  its  medullated  portion  usually  extends  only
up  to  the  beginning  of  the  body,  when  the  medulla  dis-
appears and  the  axis-cylinder  is  seen  continuing  its
course  alone.  It  then  runs  on  through  the  central  cavity,
and  terminates  at  no  great  distance  from  the  upper  end
generally  simply,  yet  often  in  a  little  bulbous  swelling*
and  in  the  mesentery  very  frequently  in  a  spiral  coil.
In  rare  cases  it  happens  that  the  nerve  divides  and  seve-
ral branches  pass  into  the  body.  But  in  every  case  we
seem  to  have  before  us  a  mode  of  termination.  What
these  bodies  signify,  what  office  they  perform,  whether
they  have  anything  to  do  with  the  function  of  sensation,
or  whether  their  province  is  to  develop  any  one  of  the
properties  of  the  nervous  centres,  we  are  as  yet  entirely
ignorant.

A  certain  degree  of  resemblance  to  these  structures  is
exhibited  by  the  tactile  bodies  which  have  been  recently
so  much  the  subject  of  discussion.  When  the  skin  and
more  especially  the  sensitive  part  of  it  is  microscopically
examined,  two  sorts  of  papilke,  as  was  first  discovered  by
Meissner  and  Rud.  Wagner,  are  distinguished,  the  one
narrower,  the  other  broader,  though  certainly  interme-
diate forms  are  met  with  (Fig.  83).  In  the  narrow  ones
we  constantly  find  a  simple,  in  broader  ones  of  the  same
class  a  branching, vascular  loop, but  no  nerve. This

*  Quite  recently  Jacubowitsch  has,  as  he  thinks,  discovered  a  ganglion  cell  in
this  part. — MS.  Note  of  Author.

TACTILE BODIES.

277

point  is  so  far  of  importance,  that  we  have,  by  means  of
these  observations,  been  made  acquainted  with  a  new
nerveless  structure.  In  the  other  kind  of  papillae  we  very
frequently  find  no  vessels  at  all,  but  on  the  other  hand
nerves,  and  those  peculiar  structures  which  have  been
designated  tactile  bodies.

A  tactile  body  manifests  itself  as  an  oblong-oval  struc-
ture, tolerably  distinctly  marked  off  from  the  remainder
of  the  papilla,  and  has,  with  some  degree  of  boldness  in-
deed, been  compared  by  Wagner  to  a  fir-cone.  It  is
generally  rounded  off  at  the  upper  and  lower  end,  and
does  not  exhibit  a  longitudinal  striation,  as  the  Pacinian
bodies  do,  but  on  the  contrary  transverse  nuclei.  Now  a
nerve  runs  up  to  every  one  of  these  bodies,  and  from
every  one  of  them  a  nerve  returns,  or  more  correctly,
we  usually  see  two  nervous  filaments,  generally  pretty

Fig.  83.

Fig.  83.  Nervous  and  vascular  papillae  from  the  skin  of  the  end  of  a  finger,  after
the  separation  of  the  epidermis  and  rete  Malpighii.  A.  Nervous  papilla  with  a  tac-
tile body,  up  to  which  ascend  two  primitive  nerve-fibres  n;  at  the  base  of  the  pa-
pilla fine  elastic  networks  e,  from  which  fine  fibres  radiate,  between  and  on  which
connective-tissue-corpuscles  are  to  be  seen.  B,  C,  D.  Vascular  papillae,  with,  at  C,
simple,  at  B  and  /),  branching  vascular  loops,  and  in  addition  fine  elastic  fibres  and
eonnective-tissue-corpuscles  ;  p.  the  papillary  body  running  its  horizontal  course,  at
c  fine  stellate  cells  belonging  to  the  cutis  proper. 300  diameters.

278  LECTURE XL

close  to  one  another,  which  can  be  readily  traced  up  to
the  side  or  base  of  the  body.  After  this  point  their
course  is  very  doubtful,  and  in  different  cases  the  condi-
tions vary  so  much  that  we  have  not  yet  succeeded  in
making  out  with  certainty  the  relation  of  the  nerves  to
these  bodies.  In  many  cases,  namely,  the  nerve  is  very
distinctly  seen  to  ascend  and  also  to  entwine  itself
around  the  body.  Sometimes  it  seems  as  if  the  body
really  lay  in  a  nervous  loop,  and  thus  the  possibility  of  a
more  concentrated  action  on  the  part  of  external  agen-
cies upon  the  surface  of  the  nerve  was  provided  for.  At
other  times  again  it  looks  as  if  the  nerve  came  to  a  ter-
mination much  sooner,  and  buried  itself  in  the  body.
Some  have  assumed,  with  Meissner,  that  the  body  itself
belongs  to  the  nerve  which  resolves  itself  into  it.  This
I  do  not  hold  to  be  correct,  and  the  only  point  which
seems  to  me  to  be  doubtful  is,  whether  the  nerve  ends
in  the  body  or  forms  a  loop  around  it.

Apart  from  anatomical  and  physiological  considera-
tions, this  example  is  of  great  value  in  the  interpreta-
tion of  pathological  phenomena,  because  we  here  find
two  complete  contrasts  in  parts  which  in  themselves  are
quite  analogous  ;  for,  on  the  one  hand,  we  have  nerve-
less but  vascular,  on  the  other,  non-vascular,  papillae,
yet  provided  with  nerves.  The  peculiar  relations  which
the  layers  of  the  rete  mucosum  and  epidermis  bear  to
the  two  kinds  of  papillse,  do  not  appear  to  present
any  essential  differences.  They  are  nourished  just  as
perfectly  over  the  one  sort  as  over  the  other,  and  seem
to  be  just  as  little  provided  with  nerves  over  the  one  as
over  the  other.

These  are  facts  which  indicate  a  certain  independence
in  individual  parts  and  furnish  distinct  evidence  that
parts  of  considerable  size  and  even  richly  provided  with
nerves  can  subsist,  maintain  their  existence  and  perform

TACTILE BODIES.

279

their  functions  without  vessels,  and  that  on  the  other
hand  parts  which  relatively  contain  numerous  vessels,  can
absolutely  dispense  with  nerves  without  incurring  any
disturbance  in  the  state  of  their  nutrition.

c-y>  n^

.*••'  *'WJf<T^'«0-V vk^+s'lr

S'-'-i-

f

j

y  /  '  fa***'

.  ■■■

/iu ,

LECTURE XII.

MARCH  31,  1858.
THE  NERVOUS  SYSTEM.

Peripheral  terminations  of  the  nerves — Nerves  of  special  sense — The  skin  and  the
distinction  of  vessel-,  nerve-,  and  cell-territories  in  it — Olfactory  mucous  mem-
brane— Retina — Division  of  nerve-fibres — The  electrical  organ  of  fishes — Mus-
cles— Further  consideration  of  nerve-territories — Norvous  plexuses  with  gan-
glioniform  enlargements — Intestines — Errors  of  the  neuro-pathologists.

The  great  nervous  centres — Grey  substance — Ganglion-  [nerve-]  cells  containing
pigment — Varieties  of  ganglion-cells  ;  sympathetic  cells  in  the  spinal  marrow
and  brain,  motor  and  sensitive  cells.  Multipolar  (polyclonous)  ganglion-cells —
Different  nature  of  the  processes  of  ganglion-cells.

I  return,  gentlemen,  to-day  once  more  to  the  skin.
The  difference  which  exists  between  the  individual  pa-
pillae of  the  skin  seems  to  me  so  important  theoretically,
that  I  think  I  must  claim  your  special  attention  to  it.  In
the  greater  number  of  the  papillae  we  see,  as  I  mentioned
to  you  the  last  time,  a  single  or,  when  the  papilla  is  very
large,  a  branched,  vascular  loop.  The  majority  of  these
vascular  papillae  have  no  nerves  ;  others  again  which
contain  tactile  bodies, '  no  vessels.  If  we  imagine  the
vessels  and  tactile  bodies  removed,  there  remains  only  a
very  small  quantity  of  substance  in  the  papilla,  but  within
it  there  still  are  morphological  elements,  and  it  is  easy
to  convince  oneself  that  connective  tissue  with  its  corpus-
cles (which  latter  after  injection  are  very  easily  distin-

280

NERVES  OF  SPECIAL  SENSE.  281

guishedfrom  the  vessels),  is  in  immediate  contact  with  the
cells  of  the  rete  mucosum  (Fig.  83).  The  case  is  espe-
cially favourable  when,  in  consequence  of  any  disease,  as
for  example  small-pox,  a  slight  tumefaction  of  the  whole
thickness  of  the  skin  in  the  parts  affected  has  taken  place,
and  the  corpuscles  are  a  little  larger  than  they  normally
are.  In  ordinary  papillae  it  is  somewhat  more  difficult
to  discover  these  elements,  still  upon  closer  examination
they  may  be  seen  everywhere,  even  by  the  side  of  the
tactile  bodies.

Thus,  even  in  the  finest  of  these  prolongations  of  the
cutis,  it  is  not  an  amorphous  mass  which  is  found,  bear-
ing a  constant  relation  to  the  vessels  and  nerves  ;  on  the
contrary  this  mass  of  connective  tissue  always  manifests
itself  as  the  one  thing  invariably  present  in  the  structure,
as  the  real  fundamental  constituent  of  the  different  (vas-
cular and  nervous)  papillae,  and  the  individual  papillae  do
not  acquire  a  different  character  until  in  the  one  case
vessel,  in  the  other  nerves,  are  added  to  this  funda-
mental substance.

We  certainly  know  little  concerning  the  special  rela-
tions which  the  vascular  papillae  bear  to  the  functions  of
the  skin,  still  it  can  scarcely  be  doubted  that  an  import-
ant relation  must  exist,  and  that  as  soon  as  we  are  better
able  to  separate  the  different  offices  of  the  skin,  greater
importance  will  be  attached  to  the  vascular  papillae  also.
This  much  however  we  can  even  now  say,  that  it  is  incor-
rect to  imagine  that  a  special  nervous  branch  exists  in
every  anatomical  division  of  the  skin  :  just  as  physiolo-
gical experiments*  show  that  considerable  sensitive  dis-
tricts exist  in  the  skin,  so  also  more  minute  histological  In-
vestigation teaches  us  that  there  is  a  relatively  scanty  ter-
mination of  nerves  upon  the  surface.  If  therefore  we
think  fit  to  divide  the  skin  into  definite  territories,  those

*  The  allusion  is  to  Weber's  experiments  with  compasses. — Trans.

282

LECTURE  XII.

appertaining  to  the  nerves  will,  as  a  matter  of  course,  be
larger  than  those  belonging  to  the  vessels.  But  every
vessel  territory  (papilla)  also  which  is  marked  out  by  a
single  capillary  loop  is  divided  into  a  series  of  smaller
(cell-)  territories,  all  of  which  certainly  lie  along  the
banks  of  the  same  vessel,  but  still  have  an  independent
existence,  each  of  them  being  provided  with  a  special  cel-
lular element.

In  this  manner  it  is  very  easy  to  explain  how  within  a
papilla  a  single  (cell-)  territory  may  become  diseased.
Suppose,  for  example,  that  such  a  territory  swells  up,  in-
creases in  size,  and  continually  keeps  shooting  farther
and  farther  upwards,  then  arborescent  ramifications  may

Fig.  84.

arise (accuminate [spitzes] condyloma*)  without the
whole  papilla's  being  affected  in a  like  manner. The

Fig.  84.  The  fundamental  substance  (connective  tissue)  of  an  acuminate  condy-
loma of  the  penis  with  freely  budding  and  branching  papillae,  after  the  epidermis
and  the  rete  mucosum  have  been  completely  detached. 12  diameters.

*  The  Germans  speak  of  condylomata  lata  and  acuminata.  The  condyloma  latum
is  invariably  of  syphilitic  origin,  and  is  identical  with  the  plaque  mugueuse  of  the
French,  who  never  use  the  term  condylome  in  thin  sense.  Condyloma  acuminatum,  on
the  contrary  (by  the  French  termed  simply  condylome),  is  not  syphilitic  in  its  nature,
but  frequently  occurs  in  gonorrhoea,  though  it  is  also  met  with  independently  of  this
disease. — From  a  MS.  Note  by  the  Author.

VESSEL-,  NERVE- AND CELL-TERRITORIES.  283

vessel  does  not  shoot  up  until  later  and  forces  its  way
into  the  branches  when  they  have  already  attained  a  cer-
tain size.  It  is  not  the  vessel  which  pushes  out  the  parts
by  its  development,  but  the  first  signs  of  development
always  show  themselves  in  the  connective  tissue  of  the
papilla.  The  study  of  the  conditions  of  the  skin  therefore
affords  special  interest  to  those  who  wish  to  devote  them-
selves to  the  critical  examination  of  the  doctrines  held
concerning  general  pathology.  And  first  with  regard  to
the  neuro-pathological  views,  it  is  quite  inconceivable
how  a  nerve  which  lies  in  the  middle  of  a  whole  group
of  nerveless  parts,  can  contrive  to  force  a  single  papilla
from  among  this  group,  with  which  it  has  not  the  slightest
connection,  into  a  state  of  pathological  activity  in  which
the  remaining  papillae  of  the  same  nerve-territory  take
no  share.  Just  as  difficult  is  it,  in  the  diseases  of  non-
vascular papillae,  to  find  an  explanation  which  shall
accord  with  the  views  of  a  humoro-pathologist.  Even
when  in  a  vascular  papilla  the  different  cell-territories
attain  different  states,  these  would  not  admit  of  a  ready
explanation,  if  we  were  to  regard  the  whole  process  of
nutrition  in  a  papilla  as  directly  dependent  upon  the
general  condition  of  the  vessel  which  supplies  it.

Similar  considerations  might  be  entered  upon  with
regard  to  all  points  of  the  body.  Still  we  have  in  the
skin  a  particularly  favourable  example  for  demonstrating
how  very  incorrect  it  is  to  regard  all  vessels  as  subject
to  a  particular  nervous  influence.  There  are  a  number
of  vessels  which  are  entirely  removed  from  the  influence
of  all  nerves,  and,  if  we  still  confine  our  attention  to
the  skin,  the  influence  which  a  nerve  is  in  a  condition  to
exercise,  is  limited  to  this,  that  the  afferent  artery,  which
supplies  a  whole  series  of  papillae  in  common  (Fig.  44)
may  by  its  means  be  brought  into  an  altered  condition,
so  that  a  contraction  or  dilatation,  and  in  correspondence

284  LECTURE  XII.

with  these  states  a  diminished  or  increased  supply  of
blood  to  a  considerable  district,  takes  place.

If  now  we  return  from  this  digression  to  our  real  sub-
ject, you  will  recollect  that  I  had  described  to  you  my
ignorance  concerning  the  real  mode  of  termination  which
the  nerves  have  in  the  tactile  bodies.  Whether  the
nerve  ultimately  forms  a  loop,  or  in  any  manner  directly
terminates  in  the  internal  substance  of  the  body,  is  not,  I
think,  as  yet  absolutely  decided.

If  now  we  consider  other  instances  of  the  terminations
of  nerves,  nowhere  does  any  probability  manifest  itself
that  they  really  do  form  loops.  In  every  case  in  which
more  certain  knowledge  has  been  acquired,  the  proba-
bility has  on  the  contrary  always  become  greater,  that  the
nerves  either  terminate  in  a  large  plexus  or  recticular
expansion  ;  or  that  they  end  in  special  apparatuses,  con-
cerning which  it  is  still  doubtful  whether  they  are  pecu-
liar processes  of  a  particular  shape,  into  which  the  nerves
shoot  out  at  their  extremities,  or  whether  they  consti-
tute peculiar  parts,  non-nervous  in  their  nature,  to  which
the  nerves  attach  themselves.  This  latter  mode  of  ter-
mination is,  it  would  appear,  characteristic  of  most  of  the
higher  organs  of  sense,  but  in  no  single  instance,  in  con-
sequence of  the  extreme  difficulty  which  the  investigation
of  these  parts  presents,  have  any  views  been  proposed
which  have  met  with  universal  assent.  Notwithstanding
the  numerous  investigations  into  the  structure  of  the
retina  and  cochlea,  the  mucous  membrane  of  the  nose
and  mouth,  that  have  been  made  in  the  course  of  the  last
few  years,  it  must  be  confessed  that  the  ultimate  points
of  histological  detail  have  not  as  yet  been  altogether
satisfactorily  settled.  In  nearly  all  cases  there  remain
two  possible  ways  in  which  the  nerves  may  terminate.
According  to  some  their  terminations  are  connected  with
special structures which, according to the language

RETINA.  285

hitherto  employed,  cannot  be  regarded  as  being  of  a  ner-
vous nature,  but  are  peculiar  appendages  of  the  nerves,
though  they  are  certainly  stated  by  other  observers  to
be  directly  connected  with  nerve -fibres,  as  for  example
in  the  nasal  mucous  membrane.  This  namely  is  regu-
larly clothed  with  cylindrical  epithelium,  which  is  plen-
tifully provided  with  cilia  and  forms  several  layers,  lying
one  above  the  other,  so  that  there  are  several  rows  of
cells  covering  one  another.  In  these,  according  to  seve-
ral recent  observers,  cells  are  met  with,  which  terminate
in  a  somewhat  long  filament,  and  do  not,  like  other  epi-
thelial cells,  end  upon  the  surface,  but  run  in  an  inward
direction,  so  as  to  become  directly  continuous  with  the
ends  of  the  nerves.  According  to  others,  particularly
Max.  Schultze,  on  the  contrary,  and  this  view  seems  to
be  the  more  correct  one,  peculiar  filiform  ends  of  nerves
force  their  way  out  between  the  epithelium.  The  objects
of  smell  would  therefore  according  to  both  views  really
come  directly  in  contact  with  the  structures  forming  the
terminations  of  the  nerves.  Similar  epithelium-like  struc-
tures have  recently  been  described  as  occurring  also  in
the  mucous  membrane  of  the  tongue,  seated  upon  pecu-
liar papillae,  which  appear  to  possess  a  pre-eminently
nervous  character.

These  structures  moreover  might  lay  claim  to  a  certain
resemblance  with  the  ultimate  terminations  which  we  find
in  the  case  of  the  optic  nerve  in  the  retina,  and  in  that
of  the  auditory  nerve  especially  in  the  cochlea — termina-  !
tions,  which  may  in  the  latter  case,  as  far  as  their  exter-
nal shape  is  concerned,  be  compared  to  long-tailed  epi-
thelial cells,  whilst  those  in  the  retina  constitute  struc-
tures of  peculiar  delicacy.  In  the  retina  namely  the
optic  nerve,  after  its  entrance  into  the  interior  of  the
globe  of  the  eye,  spreads  out  in  such  a  way,  that  its  fibrous
elements  run  along  on  the  anterior  side  of  the  retina,  that

.

286

LECTURE  XII.

side,  namely,  which  is  turned  towards  the  vitreous  body
(Fig.  85,  f)  ;  posteriorly,  there  follows  a  stratum  of  vary-
ing thickness,  which  belongs  to  the  retina  indeed,  but  in
no  wise  proceeds  from  the  direct  expansion  of  the  optic
nerve.  In  this  layer  we  see,  where  it  borders  upon  the
layer  of  pigment-cells  of  the  choroid  coat,  and  in  imme-
diate contact  with  these  cells,  a  peculiar  stratum  which
has  been  subjected  to  a  strange  destiny,  inasmuch  as  it
was  for  a  considerable  time  transplanted  to  the  anterior

Fig.  85.

side  of  the  retina — the  famous  bacillar  layer  (layer  of
rods — Stabchenschicht  [membrana  Jacobi])  (Fig.  85,  s).
This  layer,  which  belongs  to  the  most  easily  injured
parts  of  the  eye,  and  for  this  reason  in  many  instances
escaped  the  notice  of  earlier  observers,  consists,  when
viewed  in  profile,  of  a  very  large quantity  of  closely

Fig.  85.  A.  Vertical  section  through  the  whole  thickness  of  the  retina,  after  it
had  been  hardened  in  chromic  acid.  /.  Membrana  limitans,  with  the  ascending,
supporting  fibres.  /.  Fibrous  layer  of  the  optic  nerve,  g.  Layer  of  ganglion-cells.
n.  Grey,  finely  granular  layer,  with  the  radiating  fibres  passing  through  it.  k.  In-
ternal (anterior)  granular  layer,  i.  Intermediate,  or  intergranular,  layer,  k'.  Ex-
ternal (posterior)  granular  layer,  s.  Layer  of  rods  and  cones.  300  diameters.
By  C  (after  H.  Miiller).  Isolated  radiating  fibres.

RETINA.  287

packed  little  rods,  arranged  in  a  radiated  form,  and  be-
tween which  at  certain  intervals  appear  broader,  conical
bodies.  When  the  retina  is  viewed  from  behind,  i.  e.,
from  the  choroid  coat,  we  see  regularly  arranged  between
these  cones  fine  points  which  correspond  to  the  ends  of
the  little  rods.

Now  that  which  intervenes  between  this  bacillar  layer
and  the  proper  expansion  of  the  optic  nerve,  is  likewise
a  very  complex  affair,  in  which  a  series  of  layers  follow-
ing one  another  in  regular  succession  can  be  distin-
guished. Immediately  in  front  of  the  bacillar  layer
comes  a  comparatively  thick  stratum,  which  appears  to
be  nearly  entirely  made  up  of  coarse  granules,  the  so-
called  external  granular  layer  (Fig.  85,  k').  Then  comes
a  thinner  layer  which  generally  presents  a  tolerably
amorphous  appearance,  the  inter-granular  layer  (Fig.
85,  i).  Then  we  again  have  coarsish  granules  (the  inter-
nal granular  layer)  ;  these  bodies  in  both  layers  having
much  the  appearance  of  nuclei  (Fig.  85,  k).  Next  fol-
lows a  second  layer  of  a  more  uniform,  finely  granular  or
finely  striated  appearance,  and  of  a  more  greyish  hue
(Fig.  85,  n),  and  then  only  the  tolerably  thick  stratum
of  the  optic  nerve,  which  in  its  turn  is  bounded  by  a
membrane,  the  membrana  limitans  (Fig.  85,  /),  which  is
in  close  apposition  to  the  vitreous  body.  Within  this
last  layer  we  see,  besides  the  fibres  of  the  optic  nerve,
and  situated  behind  them,  a  number  of  largish  cells,
which  have  the  appearance  of  nerve-cells  (Fig.  85,  g).

This  extremely  complex  structure  in  a  membrane  which  ,
at  first  sight  is  so  simple  and  so  delicate,  readily  accounts
for  its  being  extremely  difficult  to  ascertain  with  cer-
tainty all  the  relations  of  its  individual  parts.  It  was
one  of  the  most  important  advances  towards  the  know-
ledge of  these  relations  which  was  made  by  the  discovery
of  Heinrich Muller,  that  namely  from  behind,  from  the

288  LECTURE XII.

bacillar  layer  into  the  most  anterior  layers,  a  series  of
rows  of  fine  fibres  could  be  traced  {radiating  fibres,  also
called  Mullerian  fibres),  which  both  receive  the  granules,
and  support  the  cones  and  rods  (Fig.  85,  B,  C).  This
very  complicated  apparatus  is  placed  as  nearly  as  possible
perpendicularly  to  the  course  of  the  fibres  of  the  optic
nerve.  The  greatest  difficulty  which  exists  with  regard
to  the  anatomical  connection  of  the  parts,  is  to  determine
whether  the  radiating  fibres,  either  by  bending  directly
round,  or  by  a  lateral  anastomosis,  become  continuous
with  the  optic  or  ganglionic  fibres,  and  are  thus  them-
selves nervous,  or  whether  only  an  intimate  apposition
takes  place,  and  so  the  nerves  bear  no  other  relation  to
the  radiating  fibres  than  those  of  proximity.  A  tactile
body  may  also,  you  know,  be  either  regarded  as  a  body
formed  by  a  swelling  of  the  nerve  itself,  or  as  a  special
structure  up  to  which  the  nerve  only  proceeds  or  into
which  it  enters.  This  question  (of  the  connections  of  the
radiating  fibres)  has  not  yet  been  definitively  settled.  At
one  time  the  probability  became  rather  stronger  that
direct  communications  existed,  at  another  that  nothing
more  than  a  mere  apposition  took  place.  It  can,  how-
ever, even  now  no  longer  be  doubted,  that  this  appara-
tus is  essential  to  the  perception  of  light,  and  that  the
optic  nerve  might  exist  with  all  its  parts  without  in  any
way  possessing  the  power  of  receiving  impressions  of
light,  if  it  were  not  connected  with  this  apparatus.  It  is
well  known  that  just  that  point  in  the  background  of  the
eye,  where  there  are  only  optic  fibres  and  no  such  appa-
ratus, is  the  only  one  which  does  not  receive  impressions
of  light  (the  blind  spot).  In  order  therefore  that  the
light  may  be  rendered  at  all  capable  of  acting  upon  the
optic  nerve,  it  unquestionably  requires  to  be  collected
by  means  of  this  apparatus  of  fibres,  and  it  is  therefore
an  extremely  interesting  question  for  delicate  physical

THE PLEXIFORM DISTRIBUTION.

289

Fig.  86.

researches,  whether  the  nerve  itself  receives  at  its  ex-
treme ends  the  vibrations  of  the  waves  of  light,  or
whether  another  part  exists,  the  oscillations  of  which  act
upon  the  optic  nerve  and  produce  a  peculiar  excitation
in  it.  At  all  events  there  do  ascend  from  the  mem-
brana  limitans  slightly  curved  fibres  (Fig.  85,  /),  proba-
bly connective  tissue  with  its  corpuscles,  which  afford  a
kind  of  stay  or  support  to  the  whole  apparatus  (support-
ing fibres  [Stiitzfasern]),  and  are  not,  I  should  suppose,
freely  connected  with  the  rest  of  it.

We  have,  gentlemen,  by  the  consideration  of  these  re-
lations brought  out  the  fact,  that  the  specific  energy  of
individual  nerves  does  not  so  much  depend  upon  the  pe-
culiarity of  the  internal  structure  of  their  fibres  as  such,
but  that  a  great  deal  must  be  attributed  to  the  special
terminal  arrangement,  with  which  the  nerve  is  connected,
either  directly  or  by  contact,  and  from
which  the  different  nerves  of  sense  de-
rive their  peculiar  powers.  If  for  exam-
ple we  examine  a  transverse  section  of
the  optic  nerve  external  to  the  eye,  it
offers  no  peculiarities  as  compared  with
other  nerves,  which  could  at  all  account
for  this  particular  nerve's  being  better
able  to  conduct  light  than  other  nerves,
whilst  on  the  other  hand  the  peculiar
manner  in  which  its  extreme  ends  are
distributed  sufficiently  explains  the  un-
usually great  sensitiveness  of  the  retina
to  light.

With  regard  to  the  terminations  of
nerves,  there  is  still  one  mode  to  be  men-
tioned ;  the  plexiform  distribution. This

Fig.  86.  Division  of  a  primitive  nerve-fibre  at  ty  where  we  find  a  constriction ;
&',  b"  branches, a.  Another  fibre,  crossing  the  former  one. 300  diameters.

290  LECTURE XIL

is  a  point  to  which  more  recent  researches  have  been
principally  directed  by  Rudolph  Wagner,  inasmuch  as
this  inquirer  instituted  investigations  into  the  distribu-
tion of  the  nerves  in  the  electrical  organ  of  fishes,  and
in  so  doing  gave  the  chief  impulse  to  the  doctrine  of  the
ramification  of  nerve-fib tes.  Up  to  that  time  nerves  had
been  regarded  as  continuous,  single  tubes,  which  re-
mained single  throughout  the  whole  of  their  course  from
a  nervous  centre  to  their  termination.  At  present  we
know  that  nerves  are  distributed  like  vessels.  Now  see-
ing that  nerve-fibres  directly  divide,  usually  dichoto-
mously,  and  their  branches  again  divide  and  subdivide,
extremely  abundant  ramifications  may  in  this  way  in
time  arise,  the  import  of  which  is  extremely  different,
according  as  the  nerve  is  motor  or  sensitive,  and  either
collects  impressions  from,  or  diffuses  motor  impulses  to,
a  considerable  extent  of  surface.  A  truly  marvellous
instance  has  lately  come  to  our  knowledge  in  the  electri-
cal nerve  of  the  electrical  silurus  (malapterurus),  which
has  become  so  celebrated  by  the  interesting  experiments
•of  Dubois-Reymond.  Here  Bilharz  has  shown  that  the
nerve  which  supplies  the  electrical  organ  is  in  the  first  in-
stance only  a  single  microscopical  primitive  fibre,  which
keeps  continually  dividing  until  it  finally  resolves  itself
into  an  enormously  great  number  of  ramifications  which
spread  themselves  out  upon  the  electrical  organ.  Here
therefore  the  nervous  influence  must  all  at  once  diffuse
itself  from  one  point  over  the  whole  extent  of  the  elec-
trical plates.

In  man  we  are  still  in  want  of  distinct  evidence  with
regard  to  this  question,  because  the  immense  distances,
over  which  individual  nerves  extend,  render  it  almost
impossible  to  follow  any  single  given  primitive  fibres
from  their  central  origin  to  their  extreme  peripheral  ter-
mination. But  it  is  not  at  all  improbable  that  in  man

NERVOUS  PLEXUSES.  291

too  analogous  arrangements  exist  in  some  organs,
although  perhaps  not  such  striking  ones.  If  we  compare
the  size  of  the  nervous  trunks  in  certain  parts  with  the
total  number  of  operations  which  are  effected  in  an
organ,  for  example,  in  a  gland,  it  can  scarcely  appear
doubtful  that  at  least  analogous  arrangements  exist  there
also.  This  mode  of  distribution  offers  peculiar  interest
in  this  respect,  that  many  parts  which  are  separated  by
intervals  of  space  are  thereby  connected  with  one  an-
other. The  electrical  organ  is  composed  of  a  number  of
plates,  but  not  every  plate  is  supplied  with  nerves  pro-
ceeding from  the  centre  and  intended  only  for  it.  The
silurus  does  not  set  one  or  other  of  its  plates  in  motion;
but  is  obliged  to  set  the  whole  of  them  in  motion  ;  it  is
quite  unable  to  divide  the  action.  It  can  increase  or
diminish  the  intensity,  but  must  always  call  the  whole
into  operation.  If  in  like  manner  we  consider  the  ar-
rangements which  prevail  in  certain  muscles,  we  find
there  is  no  evidence  to  justify  us  in  assuming  that  every
portion  of  a  muscle  receives  special,  independent  nerve-
fibres.  On  the  contrary,  a  special  division  of  nervous
action  in  muscles  only  exists  to  a  very  limited  extent,  as
we  know  from  our  experience  in  our  own  bodies.  The
neuro-pathological  doctrines  would  lead  us  to  infer  that
the  will,  or  the  soul,  or  the  brain  is  able  by  means  of  spe-
cial fibres  to  act  upon  every  single  part,  but  in  reality
this  is  by  no  means  the  case,  for  the  nervous  centres
have  mostly  only  one  single  path  by  which  they  can
communicate  with  a  certain  number  of  similar  element-
ary apparatuses.

Now  with  regard  to  nervous  plexuses,  we  are  at  the  pre-
sent time  acquainted  with  most  extensive  arrangements
of  the  kind  in  man,  in  the  submucous  tissue  of  the  intes-
tines, where  the  relations  have  recently  been  more  closely
investigated,  in  the  first  instance  by  Meissner  and  after-

292

LECTURE Xlt

wards  by  Billroth. The  submucous  layer  of  the  intes-
tines is  therefore,  as  Willis  long  ago  declared  it  to  be,  a

Fig.  87.

Max''  '  r> 8fc>w\

nervous  tunic,.  On  following  up  the  afferent  nerves,  they
are  seen,  after  having  divided,  at  last  to  break  up  into
real  networks  ;  these  in  new-born  infants  present  at  cer-
tain points  very  large  nodules,  from  which  the  nerve-
fibres  spread  out  into  interlacements,  so  that  a  certain
resemblance  is  thereby  produced  to  a  network  of  capil-
laries.

To  what  extent  such  arrangements  prevail  in  the  body
generally  has  not  yet  been  determined  ;  for  these  facts
also  are  almost  entirely  new,  and  have  only  recently
attracted the attention  of  observers,  but  probably  the

Fig.  87.  Nervous  plexus  from  the  submucous  tissue  of  the  intestinal  canal  of  a
child,  from  a  preparation  of  Herr  Billroth's.  w,  n,  n.  Nerves  which  unite  to  form  a
network,  and  exhibit  at  their  points  of  junction  glanglioniform  swellings  abounding
in  nuclei,  v,  v.  Vessels,  and  in  the  intervals  nuclei  belonging  to  the  connective
tissue. Magnified  180  diameters.

NERVE-PLEXUSES— INTESTINES.  293

number  of  these  nervous  membranes  will  eventually  be
augmented.  In  order,  however,  to  avoid  any  misunder-
standing, I  must  at  once  add  that  these  plexiform  expan-
sions are  by  no  means  simple,  but  that  the  large  nodules
I  have  mentioned  have  the  appearance  of  ganglions,  so
that  we  have  here  in  some  sort  new  nervous  centres  pre
senting  themselves,  and  affording  the  possibility  of  a
reinforcement  of,  or  obstruction  to,  the  original  impulses.
For  the  functions  of  the  part  this  arrangement  is  mani-
festly of  great  importance,  for  we  should  not  well  be  able
to  explain  the  peristaltic  movements  of  the  intestinal
canal,  if  some  contrivance  did  not  exist  by  which  stimuli,
that  in  the  first  instance  were  conveyed  only  to  one  spot
in  the  canal,  could  be  transferred  from  network  to  net-
work and  from  part  to  part.  The  modes  of  distribution
of  nerves,  with  which  we  were  till  recently  acquainted,
were  not  sufficient  to  afford  anything  approaching  an  ex-
planation of  the  nature  of  peristaltic  action,  whilst  these
investigations  of  Meissner's  have  at  once  furnished  us
with  a  most  suitable  groundwork  for  an  interpretation  of
it.  So  much  concerning  the  general  forms  which  are,  as
far  as  we  know  at  present,  assumed  by  the  peripheral
terminations  of  the  nerves.

On  the  whole,  these  results  correspond  but  little  with
the  opinions  which  were  formerly  entertained,  and  with
the  hypotheses  still  advanced  by  the  neuro-pathologists.
The  views  of  a  neuro-pathologist  of  pure  water  amount,
as  is  well  known,  to  this,  that  a  nervous  centre  is  able,
by  means  of  nerve-fibres,  to  produce  particular  effects
upon  all,  even  the  smallest,  particles  of  the  territory  un-
der its  sway.  If  a  mass  of  cancer  or  pus  is  to  spring  up
in  any  little  spot  in  the  body,  or  merely  a  simple  dis-
turbance of  nutrition  to  ensue,  the  neuro-pathologist  re-
quires a  special  arrangement,  by  means  of  which  the
nervous  centre  is  enabled  to  have  its  influence  conveyed

294  LECTURE  XII.

into  even  the  most  minute  districts  of  the  periphery,  and
some  route  along  which  the  messengers  can  travel  who
have  been  appointed  to  bear  the  order  to  the  remotest
points  of  the  organism.  Actual  experience  teaches  us
nothing  of  the  kind.  At  those  very  spots  where  we
know  such  an  extremely  complicated  arrangement  of  the
terminal  apparatuses  to  exist,  as  I  have  described  to  you
in  the  organs  of  sense,  the  nerves  have  no  connection
with  the  nutrition  of  the  parts,  and  especially  no  demon-
strable influence  upon  the  elementary  structures.  In
nearly  all  other  places,  either  whole  surfaces,  or  parts  of
organs  are  supplied  with  nerves  in  a  uniform  manner,  or
from  these  surfaces  and  parts  of  organs  collective  impres-
sions are  conveyed  to  the  centres.  In  many  parts  con-
cerning which  we  can  certainly  demonstrate  that  nervous
influence  is  exercised  upon  them,  as  for  example  in  mid-
dle-sized and  small  vessels,  we  do  not  yet  at  all  know  to
what  extent  their  individual  constituents  receive  special
nerve-fibres.  So  bad  are  the  anatomical  foundations  of
the  neuro-pathological  doctrines.

There  still  remains  for  us,  gentlemen,  now  that  we
have  discussed  the  terminal  arrangements  of  the  periphe-
ral nerves,  to  consider  the  important  series  of  nervous
centres,  or  in  a  more  restricted  sense  of  the  term,  gangh*
onic  apparatuses.  As  I  lately  remarked  to  you,  we  find
these  predominating  in  those  parts  of  the  nervous  centres
in  which  there  is  grey  matter.  Still  the  mere  grey  hue
of  a  part  is  not  decisive  proof  of  its  ganglionic  nature  ;
and  in  particular  we  must  not  suppose  that  the  ganglion-
cells  are  at  all  essentially  concerned  in  the  production  of
the  grey  colour,  seeing  that  we  find  grey  matter  in  many
places  where  ganglion-cells  do  not  exist.  Thus,  the  most
external  layer  of  the  cortex  of  the  cerebrum  does  not
contain  any  well-marked  ganglion-cells,  although  it  looks

NERVOUS  CENTRES— GANGLION-CELLS.  295

grey  ;  but  we  find  there  a  translucent  connective  sub-
stance, pervaded  by  a  large  number  of  delicate  vessels,
and  assuming,  in  proportion  as  these  are  more  or  less
full,  at  one  time  more  a  reddish  grey,  at  another  more  a
whitish  grey  hue.  On  the  other  hand  it  frequently  hap-
pens that,  where  there  are  ganglion-cells,  the  substance
really  does  not  look  grey,  but  has  a  positive  colour  vary-
ing between  brownish  yellow  and  blackish  brown.  Thug
we  find  spots  in  the  brain,  which  have  long  been  known
by  the  names  of  substantia  nigra,  fusca,  etc.,  in  which  the
black  or  brown  colour,  which  we  perceive  with  the  naked
eye,  is  dependent  upon  the  ganglion-cells,  which  form
really  coloured  points.

This  coloration  appears  only  in  the  course  of  years.
The  older  an  individual  becomes,  the  more  conspicuously
do  the  colours  show  themselves  ;  still  under  certain  cir-
cumstances pathological  processes  also  seem  to  accelerate
their  manifestation.  Thus  in  the  ganglia  of  the  sympa-
thetic it  is  a  striking  phenomenon,  that  certain  morbid
processes,  for  example,  typhoid  fever,  appear  to  exercise
a  powerful  influence  in  producing  an  early  deposit  of  pig-
ment. Since  the  pigment  however  constitutes  a  rela-
tively foreign  mass  in  the  internal  economy  of  the  gan-
glion-cells, and  is  not,  as  far  as  we  know,  subservient  to
their  proper  functions,  but  has  all  the  characters  of  an
inert  accidental  deposit,  it  may  really  be  quite  possible
that  these  conditions  should  be  regarded  as  a  kind  of
premature  senescence  in  the  ganglia.  In  these  cases  we
discern  in  the  ganglion-cells  (Fig.  88,  a)  in  addition  to  the
very  distinct,  large  nucleus  with  its  large,  bright  nucleo-
lus, the  contents  properly  so-called,  which  consist  of  a
finely  granular  substance,  and  at  a  certain  spot  enclose
the  pigment  which  is  generally  deposited  excentrically,
but  sometimes  around  the  nucleus.  Under  certain  cir-
cumstances this  deposit  increases  to  such  an  extent  that

290  LECTURE XII.

a  great  part  of  the  cell  is  filled  up  with  it.  The  more
abundant  it  is,  the  darker  does  the  whole  spot  appear  to
the  naked  eye.

Formerly  it  was  imagined  that  the  majority  of  ganglion-
cells  were  merely  round  bodies,  but
Fig.  88.  ^ conviction has been gradually

gaining  strength,  that  this  form  is  an
artificial  one,  and  that  the  real  state
of  the  case  is  rather,  that  processes
strike  out  from  the  cell  in  various
directions,  and  ultimately  become
continuous  with  nerves  or  other
ganglion- cells.  These  processes  are
in  the  first  instance  pale,  and  even  where  their  transition
into  ordinary,  darkly-contoured  nerve-fibres  can  be
traced,  they  are  observed  (but  generally  not  until  a  cer-
tain distance  from  the  ganglion-cell)  to  become  thicker
and  gradually  to  provide  themselves  with  a  medullary
sheath.  This  circumstance  which  was  formerly  unknown
explains  how  it  was,  that  during  so  long  a  period  so
much  obscurity  prevailed  with  regard  to  these  conditions.
In  the  first  part  of  their  course,  therefore,  the  processes
of  the  glanglion-cells,  especially  in  the  brain  and  spinal
marrow,  are  not  nerves  in  the  ordinary  meaning  of  the
word,  but  pale  fibres  which  frequently  bear  scarcely  any
resemblance  to  the  non-medullated  fibres  I  have  already
described  to  you,  and  have  rather  the  appearance  of  pale
axis-cylinders  (Fig.  88,  a,  b).

It  was  long  believed  that  essential  differences  existed
between  the  ganglion-cells  according  as  they  belonged  to
one or  other of  the three  principal divisions of  the

Fig.  88.  Elements  from  the  Gasserian  ganglion,  a.  Ganglion-cell  with  nucleated
sheath,  which  is  prolonged  around  the  efferent  nerve-process ;  in  the  interior,  the
large,  clear  nucleus  with  its  nucleolus,  and  round  about  it  an  accumulation  of  pig-
ment. 6.  Isolated  ganglion-cell  with  a  pale  process  proceeding  up  to  it.  c.  Deli-
cate nerve-fibre  with  pale  axis-cylinder. 300  diameters.

GANGLION-CELLS  IN THE  SPINAL  CORD.  297

nervous  system,  and  therefore  especially  between  the
cells  of  the  sympathetic  and  those  of  the  brain  and  spinal
marrow.  But  in  this  point  also  the  contrary  has  proved
to  be  the  case,  especially  since  Jacubowitsch  has  brought
to  our  knowledge  the  new  fact,  of  the  correctness  of
which  I  have  fully  convinced  myself,  namely,  that  struc-
tures which  are  perfectly  analogous  to  the  ordinary  gan-
glion-cells of  the  sympathetic,  also  occur  in  the  middle
of  the  spinal  marrow  and  several  parts  which  are  consi-
dered to  belong  to  the  brain.  It  may  therefore  be  said,
that  cells  belonging  to  the  sympathetic  nerve,  concerning
which  it  has  already  long  been  known  that  a  great  part
of  its  fibres  have  their  origin  in  the  spinal  marrow,  are
really  also  met  with  in  the  spinal  marrow,  and  that  in  this
respect  also  the  cord  does  not  form  a  simple  and  neces-
sary contrast  to  the  main  trunk  of  the  sympathetic.

If  we  examine  the  spinal  marrow,  which  affords  the
clearest  representation  of  the  plan  of  a  true  nervous  cen-
tre in  the  narrowest  meaning  of  the  word,  a  little  more
closely,  we  everywhere  find  in  its  grey  substance  (the
horns),  and  indeed  in  nearly  every  transverse  section,
different  kinds  of  ganglion-cells.  Jacubowitsch  has,  and
I  believe  him  to  be  in  the  main  correct,  distinguished
three  different  forms,  of  which  he  calls  the  one  motor,
the  second  sensitive,  and  the  third  sympathetic.  These
lie  generally  in  separate  groups.

I  shall  revert  to  this  subject  when  I  come  to  speak
more  at  length  concerning  the  spinal  marrow  ;  here  I
only  wish  to  speak  about  the  different  forms  of  ganglion-
cells.  The  so-called  unipolar  forms,  are,  in  proportion
as  the  examinations  are  conducted  with  more  care,  con-
tinually becoming  more  and  more  rare.  In  the  great
nervous  centres  most  of  the  cells  possess  at  least  two  pro-
cesses, and  very  many  are  multipolar  or,  more  accurately,

298

LECTURE XII.

Fig.  89.

MOTOR, SENSITIVE  AND SYMPATHETIC CELLS.  299

many-branched  (polyclonous)*  A  multipolar  cell  is  a
body  with  a  large  nucleus,  granular  contents  and,  if  it
be  particularly  large,  a  spot  of  pigment,  and  is  provided
with  processes  running  in  different  directions.  These
processes  often  divide  into  twigs  and  thus  commences  the
condition  of  which  I  have  already  spoken  (p.  290),  that
whole  masses  of  filaments  or  fibres  proceed  from  one
point — a  condition  which  indicates,  that,  in  the  first  in-
stance indeed  according  to  circumstances,  one  path  or
another  can  be  made  use  of,  but  that,  when  once  a  path
has  been  chosen  leading  in  the  direction  of  the  periphery,
the  impulse  must  be  propagated  in  a  relatively  equable
manner  throughout  the  whole  series  of  ramifications.
These  multipolar  forms  (Fig.  89,  ^4)  are  mostly  compara-
tively large,  and  lie  accumulated  in  those  parts  which
are  subservient  to  the  motor  functions !  and  they  there-
fore may  be  briefly  designated  motor  cells.

Those  forms  which  correspond  to  the  sensitive  spots
(Fig.  89,  B)  are  usually  smaller  and  do  not  present  such
an  extraordinary  luxuriance  of  ramification  as  the  larger
ones.  A  large  portion  of  them  possess  only  three,  or
perhaps,  four  branches.  Those  which  Jacubowitsch  has
called  sympathetic  are,  on  the  other  hand  again,  larger,
but  have  still  fewer  branches  and  are  distinguished  by  a
greater  roundness  of  shape.  These  are  differences  which
are  certainly  not  so  decided,  as  to  enable  us  already  at
once  to  determine  in  every  single  case  from  the  appear-
ance of  a  ganglion-cell  to  which  category  it  belongs  ;  but
still,  if  we  consider  the  individual  groups,  they  are  so

Fig.  89.  Ganglion-cells  from  the  great  nervous  centres  ;  A,  B,  C  from  the  spinal
cord,  from  preparations  belonging  to  Herr  Gerlach,  D  from  the  cortex  of  the  cere-
brum. A.  Large,  many-rayed  cell  (multipolar,  polyclonous)  from  the  anterior
horns  (motor  cell).  B.  Smaller  cells  with  three  large  processes,  from  the  posterior
horns  (sensitive  cells).  C.  Two-rayed  (bipolar,  diclonous),  more  rounded  cell,
from  the  neighbourhood  of  the  posterior  commissure  (sympathetic  cell).  300  dia-
meters.

*  /cAwv,  wv.ic,  a  shoot,  twig. — Tn.

300  LECTURE  XII.

striking,  as  to  incite  the  observer  to  reflection  upon  the
different  qualities  of  these  groups.

In  the  course  of  time  probably  further  distinctions,
perhaps  even  in  the  internal  economy  of  these  cells,
will  be  detected,  but  at  present  nothing  more  can  be
stated  concerning  them.  This  is  a  very  great  and
lamentable  void  in  our  knowledge,  and  a  void  which
we  now  particularly  feel,  because  this  is  just  the  place
where  we  should  have  to  discuss  the  ,r pacific  action  of
these  different  elements.  But  it  must  not  be  overlooked
that  these  conditions  are  among  the  most  difficult  which
are  ever  submitted  to  anatomical  investigation,  and  that
one's  endeavors  to  produce  specimens  of  a  character  to
convince  one's  own  eyes  alone,  nearly  always  fail,  because
it  is  scarcely  possible  to  succeed  in  effecting  a  real  isola-
tion of  the  cells  with  all  their  processes  and  connections,
and  because,  on  account  of  the  extraordinary  fragility  of
these  bodies,  one  is  nearly  always  compelled  to  trace  them
out  in  hardened  sections.  When  sections  are  made  of
structures  which  to  a  great  extent  are  composed  of  fibres
and  in  which  these  run  in  a  longitudinal,  a  transverse,  or
an  oblique  direction,  so  that  an  interlacement  is  always
presented  to  the  view,  it  depends  of  course  entirely  upon
a  happy  chance  whether  in  a  section  the  course  of  a  sin-
gle fibre  can  be  followed  up  over  a  large  space  with  a
certain  degree  of  distinctness.  This  difficulty  can  certainly
be  lessened  by  making  the  sections  in  all  possible  direc-
tions and  thus  increasing  the  probability  of  at  last  stum-
bling upon  the  direction  followed  by  the  divisions  of  a
branch,  but  even  then  the  obstacles  still  remain  so  great
that  one  can  hardly  expect,  ever  to  be  able  to  take  in  at
one  view  the  whole  of  the  ramifications  and  connections
of  a  cell  belonging  to  the  great  nervous  centres,  that  is
provided  with  at  all  a  large  number  of  branches.

In  this  respect  also  the  electrical  organ  of  fishes  has

/

w4

A-

PROCESSES OF  THE GANGlvOK-CELLS.  301

become  a  particularly  interesting  subject  for  investiga-
tion, inasmuch  as  the  one  fibre  which  supplies  the  organ
has  been  traced  back  by  Bilharz  to  a  single  central  gan-
glion-cell, which  is  so  large  that  it  can  be  dissected  out
with  the  naked  eye.  This  ganglion-cell  has  also  delicate
offsets  in  other  directions,  but  it  has  not  hitherto  been
possible  to  determine  their  ultimate  relations  any  more
than  we  are  able  to  obtain  a  definite  notion  of  the  minute
anatomy  of  the  human  brain,  and  especially  to  discover,
to  what  extent  connections  take  place  there  between  the
different  cells.  By  the  investigations  which  have  been
instituted  into  the  structure  of  the  spinal  cord,  it  has  been
shown  to  be  extremely  probable,  that  all  the  processes
of  the  individual  ganglion-cells  do  not  become  continu-
ous with  nerve-fibres,  but  that  a  part  of  them  run  to
other  ganglion-cells  and  thus  establish  a  communication
between  the  cells.  Moreover  at  certain  points,  espe-
cially in  several  parts  of  the  surface  of  the  brain,  still
finer  processes  are  found,  which  proceed  from  ganglion-
cells  and  are  connected  with  peculiar,  quite  characteris-
tic apparatuses  (bacillar  layer  of  the  cerebellum  and  cere-
brum), which  offer  the  greatest  resemblance  to  those  in
the  retina,  those  extremely  delicate,  vibratory  arrange-
ments of  the  radiating  fibres.

The  processes  of  the  ganglion  cells  might  therefore,  I
think,  be  divided  into  three  categories  ;  genuine  nerve-
processes,  ganglion-processes,  and  those  of  which  the  im-
port is  entirely  unknown  and  which,  it  would  seem,  are
connected  with  peculiar  and  altogether  specific  appara-
tuses, concerning  wThich  it  is  for  the  present  uncertain,
whether  they  are  to  be  regarded  as  the  terminations  of
the  nerves,  or  only  as  structures  placed  in  apposition  to
them.

LECTURE XIII.

APRIL  3,  1858.

SPINAL  CORD  AND  BRAIN.

The  spinal  cord — White  and  grey  matter — Central  canal — Groups  of  ganglion-cells
— White  columns  and  commissures.

The  medulla  oblongata  and  the  brain — Its  granular  and  bacillar  layer.

The  spinal  cord  of  the  petromyzon  and  its  non-medullated  fibres.

The  intermediate  substance  (interstitial  tissue) — Ependyma  ventriculorum — .Neuro-
glia— Corpora  amylacea.

The  last  time,  gentlemen,  I  laid  before  you  the  results
of  the  most  recent  observations  concerning  the  nature  and
distribution  of  the  ganglion-cells  in  the  great  nervous
centres  ;  allow  me  now  to  dwell  a  moment  upon  that
organ  which  serves  as  a  type  in  the  development  of  the
vertebratae,  and  is  at  the  same  time  the  one  whose  struc-
ture we  can  best  take  in  at  one  view,  namely,  the  spinal
cord.

The  spinal  cord  presents,  as  is  well  known,  and  can
with  ease  be  seen  by  the  naked  eye  in  any  transverse
section,  in  different  parts  of  its  course,  a  different  amount
of  white  matter,  though  nearly  everywhere  the  white
matter  predominates  over  the  grey.  This  appears  in
transverse  sections  in  the  form  of  the  well-known  horns,
which  are  distinctly  marked  off  from  the  pure  white  of
the  rest  of  the  mass  by  their  sometimes  pale  grey,  some-

302

SPINAL  CORD— GREY MATTER -CENTRAL CANAL.  303

times  reddish  grey  colour.  Wherever  then  the  substance
appears  white  to  the  naked  eye,  it  is  essentially  composed
of  real,  medullated  nerve-hbres,  in  which  only  here  and
there  a  few  ganglion-cells  are  imbedded  ;  and  indeed  a
large  proportion  of  these  fibres  are  of  considerable  breadth,
so  that  the  quantity  of  medullary  matter  is  at  certain
points  extremely  large.

The  grey  matter  of  the  horns  is  the  real  seat  of  the
ganglion-cells,  but  here  too  the  grey  colour  is  by  no
means  to  be  entirely  ascribed  to  the  accumulation  of
ganglion-cells  ;  on  the  contrary,  they  never,  as  you  will
afterwards  see,  form  more  than  a  small  portion  of  this
matter,  and  the  grey  hue  is  chiefly  due  to  there  generally
being  in  these  parts  no  separation  of  that  opaque,  strongly
refractive  substance  (myeline,  medullary  matter)  which
fills  the  white  nerves.

It  is  in  the  centre  of  the  grey  substance  that,  as  Still-
ing, especially,  has  shown,  the  central  canal  (canalis  spi-
nalis) actually  exists,  which  had  previously  been  so  com-
monly supposed  to  be  present,  and  had  also  frequently
been  described  as  of  constant  occurrence,  but  of  which
nevertheless  no  one  had  ever  previously  been  able  to
furnish  a  regular  demonstration.  In  the  case  of  the  old
observers,  as  for  example  Portal,  their  investigations  were
in  every  instance  confined  to  a  few  pathological  speci-
mens, from  which  they  derived  all  the  information  they
possessed  upon  the  subject,  and  from  which  they  inferred
in  a  somewhat  arbitrary  manner  that  the  presence  of  a
canal  was  the  rule.

This  central  canal  is  so  minute  that  extremely  success-
ful sections  are  required  in  order  that  it  maj/  clearly  be
perceived  by  the  naked  eye.  Usually  nothing  more  than
a  rounded  grey  spot  can  be  detected,  which  is  distin-
guished from  the  surrounding  parts  by  its  somewhat
greater  density. It is by microscopical  examination

304

LECTURE  XIII.

alone  that  we  can  detect  in  this  spot  the  transverse  section
of  the  canal  in  the  shape  of  a  minute  hole  (Fig.  90,  c,  c),
which,  like  nearly  all  the  free  surfaces  of  the  body,  is  in-
vested with  a  layer  of  epithelium.  It  has  now  taken  up
its  stand  as  a  really  regular,  constant  and  persistent  ca-
nal. It  is  continued  throughout  the  whole  extent  of  the
spinal  marrow  from  the  filum  terminale,  where  it  cannot
at  all  times  be  very  distinctly  demonstrated,  up  to  the
fourth  ventricle,  where  the  orifice  by  which  it  opens  into
the  so-called  sinus  rhomboidalis*  is  situated  in  the  gela-
tinous substance  of  the  calamus  scriptorius. Here  it  may

Fig.  90.  The  half  of  a  transverse  section  from  the  cervical  part  of  the  spinal  mar-
row, fa.  Anterior  fissure ;  fp,  posterior  fissure,  cc.  Central  canal  with  the
central  thread  of  ependyma.  ca.  Anterior  commissure  with  nerve-fibres  crossing
one  another ;  cpy  posterior  commissure,  ra.  Anterior  roots  ;  rp,  posterior  ones.
gm.  Accumulation  of  motor  cells  in  the  anterior  horns  ;  gs,  sensitive  cells  of  the
posterior  horns  ;  gs\  sympathetic  cells.  The  black,  dotted  mass  represents  a  trans-
verse section  of  the  white  substance  of  the  cord  (the  nerve-fibres  belonging  to  the
anterior,  lateral  and  posterior  columns)  and  its  lobular  divisions. 12  diameters.

A  name  given  to  the  floor  of  the  fourth  ventricle.

WHITE  MATTER OF THE SPINAL CORD.  305

y

in  the  first  instance  be  traced  as  a  direct  continuation
from  the  floor  of  the  fourth  ventricle  into  a  minute  fun-
nel-shaped fissure  or  line.

As  for  the  ganglion- cells,  they  are  generally  found  in
the  largest  number  in  the  anterior  and  lateral  parts  of
the  anterior  horns.  It  is  at  this  spot  that  we  chiefly  meet
with  the  large  many-rayed  corpuscles  which  we  consi-
dered the  last  time — corpuscles,  which  have  in  great  part
been  traced  into  efferent  nerves  of  the  anterior  root,  and
therefore  give  origin  to  motor  nerves.

An  analogous,  but  less  distinctly  grouped  accumulation
is  found  in  the  direction  of  the  posterior  horns,  but  there
the  cells  are  rather  the  small,  many-rayed  ones,  such  as
those  I  lately  described  to  you  ;  they  are  connected  with
the  fibres  which  run  into  the  posterior  root,  and  are
therefore  probably  subservient  to  the  functions  of  sensa-
tion. Besides,  there  is  generally  a  third,  sometimes  more
closely  aggregated,  at  others  more  scattered,  group  of
cells  to  be  seen,  which  in  their  whole  conformation  re-
mind us  of  the  familiar  cell-forms  we  meet  with  in  the
ganglia  (Figs.  89,  C ;  90,  gs).  Their  special  position  in
the  spinal  marrow  is  certainly  not  so  clearly  defined  as
that  of  the  other  parts  ;  perhaps  they  should  be  regarded
as  the  origin  of  the  sympathetic  roots  which  run  from  the
spinal  marrow  to  the  main  trunk  of  the  sympathetic,  but
this  is  as  yet  by  no  means  clearly  made  out.

In  the  white  substance  of  the  anterior,  lateral  and  pos-
terior columns  are  found  the  medullated  nerve-fibres,
which  in  general  follow  an  ascending  or  descending
course,  so  that  in  transverse  sections  of  the  spinal  mar-
row we  scarcely  gain  sight  of  anything  else  than  trans-
verse sections  of  the  nerve- fibres.  Under  the  microscope
therefore  we  generally  see  dark  points,  every  one  of
which  corresponds  to  a  nerve-fibre. The  whole  mass  of

fibres  constituting  the  columns  of  the  spinal  cord  is,  from

20

306  LECTURE XIII.

4

within  outwardly,  split  up  into  a  series  of  groups  or  seg-
ments chiefly  following  a  radiating  arrangement,  or  in
some  sort  into  wedge-shapes  lobules,  in  consequence  of  a
sometimes  smaller,  sometimes  larger  quantity  of  connec-
tive tissue  with  vessels  pushing  its  way  in  between  the
separate  divisions,  which  are  of  a  fascicular  nature  like
those  of  the  peripheral  nerves.  This  connective  tissue  is
directly  connected  with  the  more  abundant  mass  of  it
present  in  the  grey  matter.  Now  with  regard  to  the
nerve-fibres  themselves,  it  is  probable  that  a  certain  num-
ber of  them  proceed  throughout  the  whole  length  of  the
spinal  marrow,  but  it  ought  certainly  not  to  be  assumed
that  they  are  all  derived  from  the  brain  ;  a  probably
considerable  portion  no  doubt  have  their  origin  in  the
ganglion-cells  of  the  spinal  marrow  itself,  and  then  bend
round  into  the  anterior  or  posterior  columns.  Besides,
the  conviction  has  more  and  more  gained  ground,  that,
both  between  the  two  halves  of  the  spinal  marrow  and
between  the  separate  groups  of  ganglion-cells,  direct
communications,  commissures,  exist — fibres  passing  across
from  one  cell  to  another  and  from  one  side  to  the  other,
some  so  as  to  cross  with  those  of  the  opposite  side  (ante-
rior commissure),  and  some  so  as  to  run  in  a  straight  and
parallel  direction  (posterior  commissure).

With  the  help  of  these  anatomical  observations  a  no-
tion, though  indeed  as  yet  a  very  unsatisfactory  one,  can
be  formed  of  the  routes  along  which  the  different  pro-
cesses are  carried  on  within  the  nervous  centres.  Every
special  function  possesses  its  special  elementary,  cellular
organs ;  every  mode  of  conduction  finds  paths  distinctly
traced  out  for  it.  In  general  too,  well-defined  peculiari-
ties in  the  structure  of  the  individual  nervous  centres
correspond  to  the  differences  of  function,  and  particularly
the  posterior  horns  become  gradually  more  and  more
strongly  developed  as  we  ascend  ;  and  in  proportion  as

BACILLAR  LAYER  OF  CEREBRUM  AND  CEREBELLUM.

307

this  development  proceeds,  we  see  the  medulla  oblongata,
the  cerebellum  and  cerebrum,  coming  into  view,  whilst
the  motor  parts  withdraw  more  and  more  into  the  back-
ground and  ultimately  almost  entirely  disappear.  All
nervous  centres,  the  lowest  as  well  as  the  most  highly
developed,  are  disposed  upon  an  analogous  plan  ;  the
only  thing  which,  at  least  as  yet,  can  be  regarded  as  an
especially  characteristic  peculiarity  of  the  encephalon,  is
the  circumstance,  to  which  I  called  your  attention  in  the
last  lecture,  namely,  that  in  the  cerebrum  and  cerebel-
lum processes  from  ganglion-cells  are  connected  with  par-
ticularly complicated  apparatuses,  which  most  resemble

Fig.  91.

Fig.  91.  Diagrammatic  representation  of  the  disposition  of  the  nerves  in  the  cor-
tex of  the  cerebellum,  after  Gerlach  ('  Mikroscopische  Studien,'  plate  I.,  fig.  3)t
A.  White  matter. By  (7,  grey  matter,  2?,  granular  layer,  C,  cellular  layer.

30S  LECTURE XIII.

the  granular  and  bacillar  layers  of  the  retina  (Fig.  91)
which  I  have  brought  before  your  notice.  For  here  too
we  find  branched,  almost  arborescent  filaments,  which
bear  upon  them  minute  granules,  often  in  several  rows,
and  attach  themselves  to  the  ganglion-cells  in  a  manner
essentially  differing  from,  and  much  more  delicate  than
that  observed  in  the  case  of  the  proper  nerve-processes.
This  kind  of  ganglion-cells  may  very  likely  stand  in  some
close  connection  with  the  psychical  functions,  but  at  pre-
sent we  have  no  accurate  information  upon  the  subject,
and  it  will,  I  expect,  still  be  a  long  time  before  anything
positive  can  be  made  out  about  it,  seeing  that  parts  which
are  much  more  accessible  to  investigation,  like  the  retina,
present  the  very  greatest  difficulties  to  those  who  seek
to  discover  the  functions  of  the  individual  segments.

The  conformation  which  we  have  found  to  exist  in  the
spinal  marrow  of  man  is  essentially  the  same  throughout
the  whole  series  of  vertebrate  animals,  only  that  in  man
it  is  generally  more  complicated,  and  exhibits  a  greater
abundance  both  of  nerve-fibres  and  ganglionic  matter. I

Fig.  92.

J  c -=  as

Eig.  92.  Transverse  section  through  the  spinal  marrow  of  Petromyzon  fluviatilis.
F.  Anterior  fissure,  F\  posterior  fissure,  c,  central  canal  with  epithelium,  gm,  large
many-rayed  ganglion-cells  with  processes  in  the  direction  of  the  anterior  roots,
gp,  smaller,  many-rayed  cells  with  processes  running  to  the  posterior  roots,  gs,  large,
roundish  cells  in  the  neighbourhood  of  the  posterior  commissure  (sympathetic  cells).
n,  n.  Transverse  sections  of  the  large,  pale  nerve-fibres  (Mullerian  fibres),  n\  gaps
out  of  which  the  large  nerves  have  gallen  ;  n".  gaps  belonging  to  smaller  fibres.
Besides,  the  cut  ends  of  numerous  finer  and  coarser  fibres.

;

SPINAL MARROW OF  THE LAMPREY.  309

have  brought  you  for  comparison  a  section  from  the  spi-
nal marrow  of  one  of  the  lowest  of  the  vertebratae,  namely
the  lamprey  (petromyzon).  In  this  animal  the  spinal
marrow  forms  a  very  small,  flat  band  which  has  some-
what of  a  depression  on  the  surface,  and  at  first  sight
looks  like  a  real  ligament.  On  making  a  transverse  sec-
tion of  it,  it  is  found  to  contain  the  same  parts  that  we
see  in  man,  but  all  only  in  a  rudimentary  form.  What
in  ourselves  we  call  grey  matter,  is  also  found  there  on
both  sides  in  the  shape  of  a  flattened  oblong  lobe  which
contains  a  few  scattered  ganglion-cells,  but  only  very
few,  so  that  perhaps  only  four  or  five  are  met  with  on
each  side  of  the  transverse  section.  In  the  centre  a  cen-
tral canal  can  likewise  be  detected,  and  that  too  lined
with  an  epithelial  layer  similar  to  that  which  occurs  in
man.  Below  and  in  front  of  it  generally  lie  a  number  of
largish,  round  cavities,  which  correspond  to  unusually
large,  non-medullated  nerve-fibres  (Fig.  93,  a),  which
were  first  seen  by  Joh.  Miiller.  Farther  outwards  lie  a
few  other  thick  fibres,  but  greatly  exceeding  these  in  num-
ber a  large  quantity  of  very  fine  fibres  which  give  the
transverse  section  a  very  diversified,  regularly  dotted  ap-
pearance. Among  the  ganglion-cells  three  different  kinds
can  here  also  be  distinguished.  Towards  the  outside  of
the  grey  matter  lie  many-rayed  cells,  larger  anteriorly,
smaller  and  more  simple  posteriorly.  More  internally
and  posteriorly  on  the  other  hand  we  find  larger,  more
rounded,  seemingly  diclonous  (bipolar)  cells,  comparable
to  the  sympathetic  forms.  These  cells  communicate
across  the  middle-line  by  means  of  real  fibres,  and  be-
sides we  find  processes  which  run  out  from  the  spinal
marrow  forwards  and  backwards  and  form  the  anterior
and  posterior  roots.  This  is  the  simplest  plan  we  have,
displaying  these  relations  ;  it  is  the  general  type  of  the
anatomical  structure  of  these  parts.

310

LECTURE  XIII.

Fig.  93.

A  circumstance  worthy  of  particular  observation  here
is  that  in  the  petromyzon,  in  the  whole  substance  of  the
spinal  marrow,  no  medullary  matter  exists  in  an  isolated
form,  as  is  the  case  in  man  ;  we  only  find  simple,  pale

fibres,  which  Stannius  has  without
hesitation  pronounced  to  be  naked
axis- cylinders.  But  without  taking
into  account  the  fact  that  some  of
them  have  an  enormous  diameter,  we
find  upon  more  accurate  examination,
as  in  the  case  of  the  gelatinous  grey
fibres  in  man,  a  membrane  very
clearly  seen  in  transverse  sections,
especially  after  it  has  been  coloured
with  carmine — and  in  the  centre  a
finely  granular  matter,  so  that  they
seem  rather  to  correspond  to  entire
nerve-fibres.

Hitherto,  gentlemen,  in  considering  the  nervous  sys-
tem, I  have  only  spoken  of  the  really  nervous  parts  of  it.
But  if  we  would  study  the  nervous  system  in  its  real  rela-
tions in  the  body,  it  is  extremely  important  to  have  a
knowledge  of  that  substance  also  which  lies  between  the
proper  nervous  parts,  holds  them  together  and  gives  the
whole  its  form  in  a  greater  or  less  degree.

It  is  by  no  means  very  long  ago  since  the  existence  of
such  interstitial  masses  of  tissue  was  really  only  conceded
in  the  case  of  peripheral  nerves,  and  since  the  neurilemma
was  only  traced  back  as  far  as  the  membranes  of  the  spi-
nal cord  and  brain,  such  an  enveloping  tissue  being  at
most  allowed  to  exist  within  the  ganglia  and  in  the  sym-
pathetic. In  the  nervous  centres  properly  so  called,  and

Fig.  93.  Pale  fibres  from  the  spinal  marrow  of  Petromyzon  fluviatilis.  A.  Broad,
narrow,  and  extremely  fine  fibres.  B.  Transverse  sections  of  broad  fibres  with  a  dis-
tinct membrane  and  granular  centre. 300  diameters.

LINING  MEMBRANE OF  THE CEREBRAL  VENTRICLES. 3H

especially  in  the  brain,  this  interstitial  matter  of  ours  was
regarded  as  essentially  nervous,  for  a  substance  of  the
kind  appeared  a  natural  desideratum,  as  long  as  a  direct
transferrence  of  impulses  from  fibre  to  fibre  was  admitted
to  take  place,  as  long  therefore  as  the  necessity  for  a
real  continuity  of  conduction  within  the  nerves  them-
selves was  not  recognized.  Thus  in  the  brain  a  finely
granular  substance  was  spoken  of  as  existing,  which  in-
sinuated itself  between  the  fibres,  and  though  it  certainly
did  not  establish  a  complete  connection  between  them,
inasmuch  as  it  occasioned  a  certain  difficulty  in  the  trans-
ferrence of  impulses,  yet  nevertheless  seemed  to  rendor
a  certain  amount  of  conduction  possible,  so  that  when
the  impulse  reached  a  certain  degree  of  intensity,  a
direct  transferrence  from  fibre  to  fibre  could  take  place.
This  substance  is  however  unquestionably  not  of  a  ner-
vous nature,  and  if  inquiry  be  made  as  to  the  relation
which  exists  between  it  and  the  familiar  groups  of  physi-
ological tissues,  it  is  impossible  to  doubt  but  that  the
substance  in  question  is  a  kind  of  connective  tissue  ;  and
therefore  an  equivalent  of  that  tissue  with  which  we  be-
came acquainted  in  the  shape  of  perineurium  (p.  265).
But  the  appearance  of  this  substance  is  certainly  very  dif-
ferent from  that  .of  what  we  call  perineurium  or  neurilem-
ma. These  are  comparatively  firm,  and  often  indeed  hard
and  tough  tissues,  whilst  the  substance  in  question  is  ex-
tremely soft  and  fragile,  so  that  it  is  only  with  very  great
difficulty  that  we  can  succeed  in  making  out  its  structure.
I  first  had  my  attention  directed  to  its  peculiarities  in
investigations  which  I  many  years  ago  (1846)  instituted
into  the  nature  of  the  so-called  lining  membrane  of  the
cerebral  ventricles  (Ependyma).  At  that  time  the  view
was  generally  held,  which  had  been  put  forward  first  by
Purkinje  and  Yalentin,  and  afterwards  especially  by
Henle,  that  a  real  lining  membrane  did  not  exist  in  the

312  LECTURE  XIII.

ventricles  of  the  brain,  but  only  an  epithelial  covering,
the  epithelial  cells  directly  resting  upon  the  surface  of
the  horizontally  disposed  nerve-fibres.  This  epithelial
layer  was  what  Purkinje  called  ependyma  ventriculo-
rum.*  This  assumption,  it  is  true,  was  never  shared  in
by  pathologists.  Pathological  observation  held  on  its
course  pretty  unconcernedly  by  the  side  of  these  histolo-
gical assertions.  However,  it  appeared  desirable  that
some  understanding  should  be  come  to  on  the  subject,
since  in  a  merely  epithelial  ependyma  an  inflammation
would  scarcely  take  place,  like  that  which  is  wont  to  be
attributed  to  serous  membranes.  The  result  of  my  in-
vestigations was,  that  there  certainly  does  exist  a  layer
beneath  the  epithelium  of  the  ventricles,  which  in  many
parts  has  quite  the  character  of  connective  tissue,  but  in
other  places  possesses  great  softness,  so  that  it  is  ex-
tremely difficult  to  give  a  description  of  its  appearance.
Every,  even  the  slightest,  traction  of  the  part  alters  its
appearance,  and  a  substance  now  granular,  now  striated,
now  reticulated,  now  of  any  other  form,  is  seen.

At  first  I  thought  I  had  succeeded  in  showing  that  a
tissue  analogous  to  connective  tissue  did  actually  exist  in
this  part,  and  that  the  presence  of  a  membrane  could  be
demonstrated.  But,  the  more  I  occupied  myself  with
the  examination  of  it,  the  more  did  I  become  convinced
that  a  real  boundary  between  this  membrane  and  the
deeper  layers  of  tissue  did  not  exist,  and  that  a  mem-
brane could  only  be  spoken  of  improperly,  inasmuch  as
the  notion  of  a  membrane  involves  the  supposition  that
it  is  more  or  less  different  from  the  parts  beneath  it,  and
constitutes a  separable  object. Now in  the present

*  This  term  has  had  its  signification  extended  by  the  Author,  who  takes  it  to
include  the  whole  of  the  layer  (connective  tissue  as  well  as  epithelium),  which  rests
upon  the  nerve-fibres  and  is  interposed  between  them  and  the  cavity  of  the  ventri-
cles. — From  a  MS.  Note  by  the  Author.

EPENDYMA  OF  THE  VENTRICLES  OF  THE  BRAIN. 31 3

instance  a  separation  of  a  rough  kind  may  certainly  not
unfrequently  be  effected,  but  a  more  delicate  kind  of
separation  is  altogether  impossible.  When  the  surface  of
any  section  of  the  ventricular  wall  is  examined  with  a
tolerably  high  power,  the  first  thing  noticed  on  the  sur-
face is  an  epithelium,  sometimes  in  a  better,  sometimes
in  a  worse  state  of  preservation  (Fig.  94,  E).  In  the
most  favourable  cases  we  find  cylindrical  epithelium  with
cilia,  extending  throughout  the  whole  extent  of  the
cavity  of  the  spinal  marrow  (central  canal)  and  of  that
of  the  brain  (ventricles).  Beneath  this  layer  follows  a
sometimes  more,  sometimes  less  pure  layer  of  a  structure
resembling  connective  tissue,  which  at  first  sight  cer-
tainly appears  to  be  separated  by  a  sharp  outline  from

Fig.  94.

^TlsllISB

m®rk  -  Hi  ill  MHMIlllfepll

Fig.  94.  Ependyma  ventriculorum  and  neuro-glia  from  the  floor  of  the  fourth
cerebral  ventricle.  E,  Epithelium,  V,  nerve-fibres.  Between  them  the  free  portion
of  the  neuro-glia  with  numerous  connective-tissue-corpuscles  and  nuclei,  at  v  a  ves-
sel. In  addition,  numerous  corpora  amylacea,  which  are  moreover  represented
separately  at  ca. 300  diameters.

314;  LECTURE  XIII.

the  deeper  parts,  for  even  with  the  naked  eye,  and  espe-
cially after  the  addition  of  acetic  acid,  an  external  grey
and  translucent  layer  is  very  distinctly  seen,  whilst  the
deeper  layer  looks  white.  This  white  appearance  is  due
to  the  presence  of  medullated  nerve-fibres  which  first
occur  singly,  then  continually  become  more  numerous
and  closely  aggregated,  and  as  a  rule  run  parallel  to  the
surface.  Thus  it  may  certainly  appear  as  if  a  particular
membrane  existed  here,  which  could  be  separated  from
the  uppermost  nerve-fibres.  But  now,  if  we  compare
the  substance  which  advances  to  the  surface  with  that
which  lies  between  the  nerve-fibres,  no  essential  diffe-
rence presents  itself ;  on  the  contrary,  it  turns  out  that
the  superficial  layer  is  nothing  more  than  an  extension
upwards,  beyond  the  nervous  elements,  of  a  portion  of
the  interstitial  tissue  which  is  everywhere  present  be-
tween them,  but  in  this  layer  alone  is  seen  in  all  its
purity. The  connection  therefore  is  a  continuous  one.

You  see  from  this  description  that  it  was  a  very  idle
dispute,  when  it  was  discussed  for  years,  whether  the
membrane  which  clothed  the  ventricles  was  a  continua-
tion of  the  arachnoid  or  pia  mater,  or  was  a  special  mem-
brane. There  is,  strictly  speaking,  no  membrane  at  all
present,  but  it  is  the  surface  of  the  brain  itself  which
directly  meets  the  eye.  In  the  case  of  articular  cartilage
also  we  must  call  it  idle  to  dispute  what  kind  of  mem-
brane invests  the  cartilage,  since  the  cartilage  itself  ad-
vances right  up  to  the  free  surface  of  the  joint.  Neither
is  there  any  prolongation  from  the  arachnoid  or  the  pia
mater  to  the  surface  of  the  ventricle  ;  the  last  processes
which  these  membranes  send  inwardly  are  the  choroid
plexuses  and  the  tela  chorioides  [velum  interpositum].
Beyond  these  there  is  no  serous  covering  found  investing
the  internal  surface  of  the  ventricles  of  the  brain.  For
this  reason  the  conditions  of  the  cerebral  cavities  cannot

NEURO-GLIA  -ITS  CELLULAR  ELEMENTS. 315

be  exactly  compared  with  those  of  ordinary  serous  sacs.
In  the  tela  chorioides  or  the  plexuses,  a  series  of  pheno-
mena may  certainly  manifest  themselves,  which  are  pa-
rallel to  the  diseases  of  other  serous  parts,  but  this  can
never  take  place  in  the  same  manner  on  the  ventricular
surface  of  the  brain.

This  peculiarity  of  the  membrane,  namely,  that  it  be-
comes continuous  with  the  interstitial  matter,  the  real
cement,  which  binds  the  nervous  elements  together,  and
that  in  all  its  properties  it  constitutes  a  tissue  different
from  the  other  forms  of  connective  tissue,  has  induced
me  to  give  it  a  new  name,  that  of  neuro-glia*  (nerve-
cement).  The  view  that  the  substance  in  question  be-
longs to  the  class  of  connective  tissues  has  recently  been
admitted  on  nearly  all  sides,  but  with  regard  to  the  ex-
tent to  which  any  isolated  structures  that  occur  in  it  are
to  be  considered  as  belonging  to  this  substance,  opinions
are  still  divided.  Even  when  I  instituted  my  first  spe-
cial investigations  into  the  structure  of  the  ependyma  of
the  brain  and  spinal  cord,  it  turned  out  that  certain  stel-
late cells  which  are  met  with  in  the  middle  of  the  spinal
marrow  (in  the  wall  of  the  central  canal,  the  existence  of
which  was  afterwards  more  accurately  demonstrated,
namely,  in  what  I  called  the  central  thread  of  ependyma),
and  which  up  to  that  time  had  been  regarded  as  nerve-
cells,  unquestionably  belonged  to  the  neuro-glia.  After-
wards, and  especially  by  the  Dorpat  school  with  Bidder
at  its  head,  a  series  of  investigations  were  published,  in
which  a  great  number  of  cells  in  the  spinal  marrow  were
set  down  as  belonging  to  this  connective  tissue.  Bidder
himself  was  ultimately  led  to  regard  all  the  cells  which
are  found  in  the  posterior  half  of  the  spinal  marrow,  and
therefore  those  sympathetic  and  sensitive  cells  also  which
you  have  just  seen,  as  connective-tissue-corpuscles. On

*  y/Ua,  glue. — Tr.

316  LECTURE XIII.

the  other  hand,  Jacubowitsch  has  utterly  denied  the  oc-
currence of  the  cellular  elements  of  connective  tissue  in
any  part  of  the  brain  or  spinal  cord,  and  has  asserted
that  the  interstitial  tissue,  which  by  him  too,  indeed,  is
regarded  as  connective  tissue,  is  an  altogether  amorphous,
finely  granular  or  reticulated  matter,  which  nowhere
contains  a  single  corpuscular  element.  Between  these
extremes,  I  think,  we  are  perfectly  justified  by  experi-
ence in  steering  a  middle  course.  There  can,  according
to  my  firm  conviction,  be  no  doubt  but  that  the  larger
cells  which  pervade  the  posterior  horns  of  the  spinal  mar-
row are  nerve-cells  ;  but,  on  the  other  hand,  it  must  be
maintained  with  equal  positiveness,  that,  where  neuro-
glia is  met  with,' it  also  contains  a  certain  number  of  cel-
lular elements.  Immediately  beneath  the  surface  of  the
cerebral  ventricles  we  commonly  meet  with  spindle-
shaped  cells  lying  parallel  to  it,  just  like  those  which  are
found  in  other  kinds  of  connective  tissue  ;  these  become
larger  under  certain  circumstances,  and,  in  oblique  sec-
tions, often  display  themselves  in  the  form  of  stellate
cells  (Fig.  94).

A  substance  altogether  similar  in  structure to  that,

with  which  we  have  already  become  fa-

IG*  9o"  miliar in connective  tissue — especially

a> b  c. as  far  as  its  cells  are  concerned — is  also

6 ^0 ®  <§) found  between  the  nerve-fibres  of  the

^P @  @ cerebrum  ;  only  the  cells  are  so  soft  and

fragile,  that  generally  nothing  but  nu-
clei can  be  perceived,  scattered  at  certain  intervals
throughout  the  mass.  On  making  a  careful  search,  how-
ever, even  in  fresh  (not  artificially  hardened)  specimens,
soft  cellular  bodies  of  a  roundish  or  lenticular  form  can

Fig.  95.  Elements  of  the  neuro-glia  from  the  white  substance  of  the  cerebral
hemispheres  of  a  human  subject,  a.  Free  nuclei  with  nucleoli,  6,  nuclei  with  the
granular  remnants  of  the  cellular  parenchyma  broken  up  in  making  the  preparation,
c,  perfect  cells. 300  diameters.

PERINEURIUM AND NEURO-GLIA.  31 7

be  detected,  which  possess  finely  granular  contents  and
large  granulated  nuclei  with  nucleoli,  and  lie,  certainly
in  no  very  great  number,  between  the  nervous  elements.
At  certain  spots  it  has  indeed  been  hitherto  impossible
to  draw  a  well-defined  boundary-line  between  the  two
tissues,  and  especially  so  at  the  surface  of  the  cerebel-
lum and  cerebrum,  between  the  granules  which  I  have
already  (p.  307)  described  to  you  as  connected  with  large
ganglion-cells,  and  the  nuclei  of  the  connective  tissue.
Wherever  the  parts  are  seen  severed  from  their  connec-
tions, it  is  not  easy  to  make  the  distinction,  and  a  posi-
tive decision  is  only  possible  as  long  as  the  parts  are
viewed  in  their  natural  position.

Now  it  is  certainly  of  considerable  importance  to  know
that  in  all  nervous  parts,  in  addition  to  the  real  nervous
elements,  a  second  tissue  exists,  which  is  allied  to  the
large  group  of  formations,  which  pervade  the  whole  body,
and  with  which  we  have  in  the  previous  lectures  become
acquainted  under  the  name  of  connective  tissues.  In
considering  the  pathological  or  physiological  conditions
of  the  brain  or  spinal  marrow,  the  first  point  is  always  to
determine  how  far  the  tissue  which  is  affected,  attacked
or  irritated,  is  nervous  in  its  nature,  or  merely  an  inter-
stitial substance.  We  thus  obtain  at  the  very  outset  the
important  criterion  for  the  interpretation  of  morbid  pro-
cesses, that  the  affections  of  the  brain  and  spinal  marrow
may  sometimes  be  rather  interstitial,  at  others  rather
parenchymatous,  and  experience  shows  us  that  this  very
interstitial  tissue  of  the  brain  and  spinal  marrow  is  one
of  the  most  frequent  seats  of  morbid  change,  as  for  ex-
ample, of  fatty  degeneration.

Within  the  neuro-glia  run  the  vessels,  which  are
therefore  nearly  everywhere  separated  from  the  nervous
substance  by  a  slender  intervening  layer,  and  are  not  in
immediate  contact  with  it. The  neuro-glia  extends  in

318  LECTURE  XIII.

the  peculiarly  soft  form,  which  it  presents  in  the  great
nervous  centres  and  particularly  in  the  brain,  only  to
those  parts  which  must  be  regarded  as  direct  prolonga-
tions of  the  cerebral  substance,  namely  to  the  higher
nerves  of  sense.  The  olfactory  and  auditory  nerves  also
contain  interstitial  substance  of  the  same  character,  whilst
in  all  the  rest,  and  even  in  the  optic  nerve  itself,  an  in-
creasing mass  of  a  tougher  tissue  displays  itself,  which
assumes  quite  the  character  of  perineurium.

Perineurium  and  neuro-glia  are  therefore  equivalent
parts,  the  only  difference  being  that  the  one  is  of  a  soft,
medullary,  fragile  nature,  whilst  the  other  is  akin  to  the
well-known  fibrous  tissues.  The  neurilemma  stands  in
the  same  relation  to  the  perineurium  that  the  membranes
of  the  brain  and  spinal  cord  do  to  the  neuro-glia.

Wherever  neuro-glia  exists,  a  very  singular  peculiarity
presents  itself  which  it  has  as  yet  been  impossible  to
explain  either  chemically  or  physically,  namely,  that  in
every  such  case  those  peculiar  bodies  may  be  met  with,
which  even  in  their  structure  remind  one  of  granules  of
vegetable  starch,  whilst  in  their  chemical  reactions  they
altogether  correspond  to  them — the  much  discussed  cor-
pora amylacea  (Fig.  94,  ca).  They  are  found  to  the
greatest  extent  and  in  the  greatest  numbers  in  the  epen-
dyma  of  the  ventricles  and  spinal  canal,  and  are  the
more  abundant  the  greater  the  thickness  of  the  ependyma.
In  many  places  but  very  few  of  them  are  found,  whilst
in  others  again  their  numbers  increase  so  greatly,  that
the  whole  thickness  of  the  ependyma  is  filled  with  them
to  such  a  degree,  that  it  looks  as  if  a  pavement  were  be-
fore one.  They  display  themselves,  however,  strangely
enough,  in  pathological  conditions  also,  frequently  in
great  numbers,  when,  in  consequence  of  some  disturb-
ing cause,  the  quantity  of  neuro-glia  becomes  increased
in proportion to  that of nervous substance, as for

CORPORA AMYLACEA.  319

example  after  atrophic  processes.  In  tabes  dorsalis,  as
one  used  to  say,  or  the  atrophy  of  single  columns  of  the
cord,  as  we  now  usually  interpret  the  old  expression,  we
find,  in  proportion  as  the  atrophy  progresses,  and  the
nerves  in  certain  directions  perish — cuneiform  segments,
in  which  the  substance  up  to  that  time  white  becomes
from  without  inwards  grey  and  translucent — there  being
apparently  a  production  of  grey  matter.  This  degene-
ration is  most  frequent  in  the  posterior  columns,  gene-
rally in  the  immediate  vicinity  of  the  posterior  fissure,
and  here  it  may  go  on,  and  generally  does  go  on,  in  such
a  manner  that  the  wedge  penetrates  deeper  and  deeper
and  at  the  same  time  increases  in  width. In  these  parts

then  the  whole  substance  of  the  medullated  fibres  gradu-
ally disappears,  and  distinct  nerves  are  no  longer  disco-
verable— the  whole  spot  generally  consisting  of  neuro-glia
with  an  enormous  accumulation  of  corpora  amylacea.

Nowhere  in  the  body  has  there  as  yet  been  found  any-
thing completely  analogous  to  structures  of  this  sort,  ex-
cepting, as  I  have  said,  in  those  parts  which  appear  to
be  direct  protrusions  of  the  cerebral  substance,  namely
in  the  higher  organs  of  sense,  in  the  case  of  which  origi-
nally a  certain  quantity  of  central  nervous  matter  entered
into  the  sensorial  capsules  (Sinneskapseln)  of  the  embryo.
In  the  cochlea  too,  and  the  retina,  bodies  occur,  which

Fig.  96.  Section  of  the  spinal  marrow  in  partial  (lobular),  grey  or  gelatinous  atro-
phy (degeneration).  /.  Posterior  longitudinal  fissure,  s,  s  posterior,  m,  m  anterior
nerve-roots,  communicating  with  the  grey  substance  of  the  horns.  In  A  a  slighter
in  B  a  more  marked  degree  of  atrophy,  which  is  shown  in  the  posterior  columns
around  the  central  fissure  /,  and  iu  the  lateral  columns  at  I. Natural  size.

l^uvC  -•

320  LECTURE  XIII.  ,

are  allied  to  the  corpora  amylacea,  although  the  chemi-
cal tests  have  as  yet  only  proved  successful  in  the  case
of  those  found  in  the  internal  ear.

When  these  bodies  are  isolated,  they  exhibit  in  every
respect  such  a  complete  analogy  to  vegetable  starch  that,
long  before  I  succeeded  .in  discovering  the  analogy  in
chemical  reaction,  Purkinje  had  already  introduced  the
term  corpora  amylacea  on  account  of  the  morphological
resemblance.  You  are  no  doubt  aware,  that  the  chemi-
cal correspondence  has  in  many  quarters  been  doubted  ;
the  late  Heinrich  Meckel  especially  had  great  doubts
upon  the  subject,  and  supposed  them  to  have  a  greater
affinity  to  cholesterine.  In  more  recent  times,  however,
the  matter  has  been  investigated  even  by  professed
botanists,  and  every  one  who  has  bestowed  close  atten-
tion upon  it,  has  as  yet  acquired  the  same  conviction
which  I  published  as  my  own.  N'ageli  pronounces  these
bodies  to  be  really  and  truly  starch.

Morphologically,  they  present  themselves  either  as  per-
fectly circular  bodies  with  regular,  concentric  layers,  or
their  centre  is  a  little  on  one  side  ;  or  we  find  twin
bodies  ;  or  again  the  bodies  are  more  homogeneous,  pale,
with  a  dim  lustre,  like  fatty  substances.  When  they  are
cautiously  treated  with  a  dilute  solution  of  iodine,  they
assume  a  pale  bluish,  or  greyish  blue  colour,  though  a
great  deal  certainly  depends  upon  the  proper  degree  of
concentration  of  the  test.  If  afterwards  we  very  cau-
tiously add  sulphuric  acid,  we  obtain,  when  the  proper
effect  is  produced,  a  beautiful  blue,  which  is  best  shown
by  allowing  the  reagent  to  act  very  slowly.  When  sul-
phuric acid  acts  violently  upon  them,  a  violet  tint,  which
speedily  becomes  brownish  red  or  blackish,  is  obtained,
presenting  a  most  decided  contrast  to  the  neighbouring
parts,  which  become  yellow  or  at  most  yellowish  brown.

LECTURE XIV.

APRIL  7,  1858.

ACTIVITY AND IRRITABILITY OF CELLULAR ELEMENTS.
DIFFERENT FORMS OF IRRITATION.

Life  of  individual  parts — The  unity  of  the  neurists — Consciousness — Activity  of
individual  parts — Excitability  (irritability)  as  a  general  criterion  of  life — Mean-
ing of  irritation — Partial  death — Necrosis.

Function,  nutrition,  and  formation,  as  general  forms  of  vital  activity — Difference
of  irritability  according  to  the  different  forms  of  activity.

Functional  irritability — Nerves,  muscles,  ciliated  epithelium,  glands — Fatigue  and
functional  restitution — Stimuli — Their  specific  relations — Muscular  irritability.

Nutritive  irritability — Maintenance  and  destruction  of  elements — Inflammation-
Cloudy  swelling — Kidney  (morbus  Brightii)  and  cartilage — Neuro-pathologica]
doctrines — Skin,  cornea — The  humoro-pathological  doctrines — Parenchymatous
exudation,  and  parenchymatous  inflammation.

Formative  irritation — Multiplication  of  nucleoli  and  nuclei  by  division — Multi«
nuclear  cells  ;  medullary  cells  and  myeloid  tumours — Comparison  between  for«
mative  muscular  irritation  and  muscular  growth — Multiplication  (new  forma-
mation)  of  cells  by  division — The  humoro-  and  neuro-pathological  doctrines.

Inflammatory  irritation  as  a  compound  phenomenon- -Neuro-paralytical  inflamma-
tion (Vagus,  Trigeminus).

I  have  given  you,  gentlemen,  a  somewhat  lengthy-
sketch  of  the  histological  arrangements  of  the  body,  in
order  to  make  the  inference  plain  to  you,  which  in  my
opinion  must  be  the  starting  point  of  all  future  conside-
rations that  are  instituted  concerning  life  and  vital  ac-
tivity— that,  namely,  in  all  parts  of  the  body  a  splitting
up  into  a  number  of  small  centres  takes  place,  and  that
nowhere,  as  far  as  our  experience  extends,  does  a  single

21  321

322  LECTURE  XIV.

I  central  point  susceptible  of  anatomical  demonstration
exist,  from  which  the  operations  of  the  body  are  carried
on  in  a  perceptible  manner.  And  even  if  we  appeal  to
the  experience  which  every  one  daily  stores  up  around
him,  we  shall  find  that  this  is  the  only  view  which  con-
cedes life  to  the  individual  parts  of  an  organism,  or
allows  it  to  the  plant — the  only  view  which  enables  us
to  institute  a  comparison  both  between  the  collective
life  of  the  developed  animal  and  the  individual  life  of
its  smallest  parts  ;  and  also  between  the  life  of  a  plant-
as  a  whole  and  the  life  of  the  individual  parts  of  a
plant.

The  opposite  view  which  at  this  very  moment  is  mani-
festing itself  with  a  certain  degree  of  energy — that
namely,  which  beholds  in  the  nervous  system  the  real
central  point  of  life — is  met  by  this  extremely  great
difficulty,  that,  in  the  very  same  apparatus,  in  which  it
places  its  unity,  it  again  finds  the  same  splitting  up  into
an  infinite  number  of  separate  centres,  which  is  pre-
sented by  the  rest  of  the  body  ;  and  that  in  no  part  of
the  whole  nervous  system  it  can  show  the  real  central
point,  from  which,  as  from  a  seat  of  government,  man-
dates are  issued  to  all  quarters.

It  may  seem  very  convenient  to  say  that  the  nervous
system  constitutes  the  real  unity  of  the  body,  inasmuch
as  there  is  certainly  no  other  system  which  enjoys  such
a  complete  dissemination  throughout  the  most  various
peripheral  and  internal  organs.  But  even  this  wide  dis-
semination and  the  numerous  connections  which  exist
between  the  individual  parts  of  the  nervous  system,  are
by  no  means  calculated  to  show  it  to  be  the  centre  of  all
organic  actions.  We  have  found  in  the  nervous  system
definite  little  cellular  elements  which  serve  as  centres  of
motion,  but  we  do  not  find  any  single  ganglion-cell  in

which  alone  all  movement  in  the  end  originates. The

c

•  /  /

THE UNITY OF THE NEURISTS— CONSCIOUSNESS.  323

most  various  individual  motory  apparatuses  are  connected
with  the  most  various  individual  motory  ganglion-cells.
Sensations  are  certainly  collected  in  definite  ganglion-
cells,  still  among  them  too  we  do  not  find  any  single  cell
which  can  in  any  way  be  designated  the  centre  of  all
sensation,  but  we  again  meet  with  a  great  number  of
very  minute  centres.

All  the operations  which  have their source in  the
nervous system, and  there certainly  are  a  very  great
number  of  them,  do  not  allow  us  to  recognise  a  unity
anywhere  else  than  in  our  own  consciousness  ;  an  ana-
tomical or  physiological  unity  has  at  least  as  yet  been
nowhere demonstrable. If we really were to set
down  the  nervous system  with  its numerous separate
centres  as  the  central  point  of  all  organic  actions,  even
then  the  thing  actually  sought  for,  a  real  unity,  would
not  have been  obtained. If  a  clear  idea  is  formed  of
the  difficulties  which  stand  in  the  way  of  such  a  unity,
it  can  scarcely  be  doubted,  but  that  we  are  continually
led  astray  by  the  spiritual  phenomena  displayed  in  our
own  persons,  in  the  interpretation  of  organic  processes.
Peeling  ourselves  to  be  something  simple  and  indivisible,
we  always  start  with  the  presumption  that  everything
else must be regulated by this indivisible principle.
But if we trace the  development  of  any  given  plant
from  its  first  germ  up  to  the  highest  point  in  its  evolu-
tion, we meet with a series of processes altogether
analogous,  without  our  being  able  to  entertain  the  suppo-
sition for  a  moment,  that  such  a  unity  exists  in  it,  as  we
are  led  by  our  consciousness  to suppose  exists  in  us.
Nobody  has  been  able  to  detect  a  nervous  system  in  plants  ;
in  no  case  has  it  been  discovered  that  the  whole  of  the
fully  developed  plant  was  governed  from  a  single  point.
All  the  vegetable  physiology  of  the  present  day  is  based
upon  the investigation  of  the activity  of cells,  and  if

324  LECTURE  XIV.

violent  opposition  is  still  made  to  the  introduction  of  the
same  principle  also  into  the  animal  economy,  there  is,  I
think,  no  other  difficulty  in  the  way  but  the  one,  that  ses-
thetical  and  moral  scruples  cannot  be  overcome.

It  cannot  of  course  here  be  our  business  either  to
refute  these  scruples  or  to  point  out  how  they  might  be
reconciled  with  the  views  I  advocate.  I  have  only  to
show  in  how  great  a  degree  the  pathological  processes
which  especially  interest  us,  in  all  cases  conduct  us  back
to  the  same  cellular  principle,  and  how  much  they  are
in  every  case  opposed  to  that  notion  of  a  single  con-
trolling principle,  which  is  sought  to  be  established  by
the  neuro-pathologists.  This  opinion  of  mine  has  after
all  really  nothing  new  or  uncommon  in  it.  If  for  thou-
sands of  years  the  life  of  the  individual  parts  of  the
body  has  been  talked  about,  if  the  position  is  admitted,
that  in  diseased  conditions  the  death  of  individual  parts,
necrosis  or  gangrene  in  them  may  take  place,  whilst  the
whole  still  continues  to  exist — the  inference  is,  that
something  of  our  way  of  thinking  had  long  been  ex-
pressed in  the  views  held  by  the  world  in  general :  only
people  had  not  formed  very  clear  notions  upon  the  subject.
If  we  speak  of  the  life  of  the  individual  parts  of  a
body,  we  must  also  know  in  what  way  life  manifests
itself,  and  whereby  it  is  essentially  characterized.  This
characteristic  we  find  in  activity,  an  activity  indeed,  in
which  there  is  displayed  by  every  single  part,  whilst  it
contributes  its  contingent,  according  to  its  peculiarities,
to  the  general  activity  of  the  body — something  identical
with  the  life  of  the  other  parts  ;  for  else  we  should  be  in
no  way  justified  in  regarding  life  as  something  in  every
case  similar,  and  derivable  from  some  common  origin.

This  vital  activity  is,  as  far  at  least  as  we  are  able  to
judge,  nowhere,  in  no  part  whatever,  carried  on  by
means  of  any  cause  allotted  to  it  from  the  very  begin-

-

'utXx

L~  fi  jpn  '  ~^

IRRITABILITY.  325

ning,  and  entirely  confined  to  it,  but  we  everywhere  see
that  a  certain  excitation  is  necessary  for  its  production.
Every  vital  action  presupposes  an  excitation,  or  if  you
like  an  irritation.  The  irritability  of  a  part,  therefore
appears  to  us  the  criterion,  by  which  we  can  judge
whether  it  is  alive  or  not.  Whether,  for  example,  a
nerve  be  alive  or  dead,  we  cannot  immediately  deter-
mine by  an  anatomical  examination  of  it,  conducted
either  microscopically  or  macroscopically.  In  the  out-
ward appearance,  in  the  more  obvious  structural  ar-
rangements, which  we  are  able  to  decipher  by  the  aid
of  our  auxiliaries,  we  rarely  find  sufficient  to  enable  us
to  come  to  a  decision  upon  a  point  such  as  this.
Whether  a  muscle  is  alive  or  dead,  we  are  but  little
able  to  judge,  inasmuch  as  we  find  its  structure  still
preserved  in  parts  which  perished  years  ago.  I  found
in  a  foetus,  which,  in  a  case  of  extra-uterine  pregnancy,
had  lain  thirty  years  in  the  body  of  its  mother,  the
structure  of  the  muscles  as  intact  as  if  it  had  just  been
born  at  its  full  time.  Czermak  examined  parts  of
mummies,  and  found  in  them  a  number  of  tissues  which
were  in  a  state  of  such  perfect  preservation,  that  the
conclusion  might  very  well  have  been  come  to,  that  the
parts  had  been  taken  from  a  living  body.  Our  notion
of  the  death,  decease,  or  necrosis  of  a  part,  is  based
upon  nothing  more  or  less  than  this,  that  whilst  its  form
is  preserved,  and  indeed  in  spite  of  it,  we  can  no  longer
detect  any  irritability  in  it.  This  has  been  most  clearly
shown  quite  recently  in  the  course  of  some  investigations
into  the  more  hidden  properties  of  nerves.  Now  that,
by  the  investigations  of  Dubois-Reymond,  activity  has
been  shown  to  exist  in  nerves  even  when  in  a  so-called
state  of  repose,  and  that  it  has  been  discovered,  that  in
a  nerve,  even  when  seemingly  at  rest,  electrical  pro-
cesses are  continually  going  on,  and  that  it  constantly

>

<*&

326  LECTURE XIV.

produces  an  effect  upon  the  magnetic  needle — now  we
are  able,  by  means  of  this  physical  experiment,  with
certainty  to  judge  when  a  nerve  is  dead,  for,  as  soon  as
death  has  stepped  in,  those  qualities  cease,  which  are  in-
separably connected  with  the  life  of  the  nerve.

This  peculiarity  which  we  find  in  some  parts  exhibited
in  such  a  marked  degree  and  so  evidently  demonstrable,
becomes  less  and  less  apparent,  the  more  lowly  the  or-
ganization of  the  part,  and  our  criteria  are  least  to  be

depended  upon  in  the  case  of  the  class  of  connective
tissues  ;  for  we  are,  indeed,  really  frequently  much  puz-
zled to  decide  whether  a  part  composed  of  one  of  them
is  still  alive  or  has  already  perished.

If  now  we  proceed  with  our  analysis  of  what  is  to  be
included  in  the  notion  of  excitability,  we  at  once  dis-
I  cover,  that  the  different  actions  which  can  be  provoked
by  the  influence  of  any  external  agency,  are  essentially
of  three  kinds  ;  and  I  consider  it  of  great  importance
that  you  should  pay  particular  attention  to  this  point,  as
it  will  greatly  assist  you  in  the  classification  of  patholo-
gical conditions,  and  because  it  is  not  wont  to  be  set  forth
with  particular  distinctness.

When,  namely,  a  given  action  is  called  into  play,  we
have  to  deal  with  a  manifestation  either  of  the  function,
the  nutrition,  or  the  formation  of  a  part.  It  certainly
cannot  be  denied  that  at  certain  points  the  boundaries
between  these  different  processes  disappear,  and  that
between  the  nutritive  and  formative  processes  and  also
between  the  functional  and  nutritive  ones,  there  are  tran-
sitional stages  ;  still,  when  they  are  typically  performed,
there  is  a  very  marked  difference  between  them  ;  and
the  internal  changes  which  the  individual  excited  part
undergoes,  according  as  it  only  performs  its  functions,  or
is  subjected  to  a  special  nutrition,  or  becomes  the  seat
of  special  formative  processes,  exhibit  considerable  dif-

FUNCTIONS OF CELLS— CELL-CONTENTS.  327

ferences.  The  result  of  an  excitation,  or  if  you  will,  an
irritation,  may,  according  to  circumstances,  be  either  a
merely  functional  process  ;  or  the  effect  may  be  that  a
more  or  less  increased  nutrition  of  the  part  is  induced
without  there  necessarily  being  any  excitation  of  its  func-
tions ;  or  a  formative  process  may  set  in,  giving  rise  to  a
greater  or  less  number  of  new  elements.  These  differ-
ences manifest  themselves  with  greater  or  less  distinct-
ness in  proportion  as  the  individual  tissues  of  the  body  \
are  more  or  less  capable  of  responding  to  the  one  or  other
kind  of  excitation.  When,  namely,  we  speak  of  the
functions  of  parts — in  the  case  of  a  considerable  num-
ber of  tissues  the  real  functions  shrink  into  a  very  small
compass  ;  we  are  on  the  whole  able  to  say  but  very  little
concerning  the  real  functions,  in  the  higher  sense  of  the
word,  of  nearly  all  the  connective  tissues,  and  of  the
great  majority  of  epithelial  cells.  We  are  no  doubt
able  to  say  what  their  use  under  particular  circum-
stances is,  still  they  always  rather  appear  to  be  rela-
tively inert  masses,  which  scarcely  perform  any  real
functions  in  the  ordinary  meaning  of  the  word,  but
rather  serve  as  supports  to  the  body,  or  as  coverings  to
the  different  surfaces,  or,  in  other  localities,  according
to  circumstances,  act  as  media  of  union,  intervention,  or
separation.

The  case  is  different,  on  the  other  hand,  with  those
parts,  which,  owing  to  the  peculiar  nature  of  their  inter-
nal arrangement,  are  liable  to  a  more  rapid  change,
such  as  the  nerves,  muscles,  and  muscular  organs,  glands
and  a  few  other  structures,  as,  for  example,  among  the
epithelia,  ciliated  epithelium.  In  all  these  tissues,  which
are  subservient  to  important  functions,  we  find  that
these  functions  are  chiefly  due  to  very  delicate  changes
of  arrangement,  or  if  you  wish  it  expressed  in  more
precise  terms,  to  minute  changes  of  place,  in  the  minute

328  LECTURE XIV.

particles  of  the  internal  matter,  the  cell-contents.  In  these
cases  therefore  it  is  not  so  much  the  real  cell  in  its  pure
form  which  decides  the  question,  as  the  specific  matters
with  which  it  is  provided  internally  ;  *the  chief  agent  is
not  so  much  the  membrane  or  the  nucleus  of  the  cell,  as
the  contents.  It  is  these  which,  when  exposed  to  cer-
tain influences,  become  comparatively  rapidly  changed,
without  our  being  always  able  morphologically  to  de-
tect any  trace  of  a  change  in  the  arrangement  of  the
contained  particles.  The  utmost  that  we  can  observe  in
the  shape  of  a  palpable  result  is  a  real  locomotion  of
small,  visible  particles,  but  we  cannot  push  our  analysis
to  such  an  extent,  as  to  enable  us  to  form  any  opinion
as  to  the  internal  cause,  in  virtue  of  which  this  locomo-
tion is  effected  by  the  ultimate  particles  which  compose
the  cell-contents.  When  an  excitation  takes  place  in  a
nerve,  we  now  know  that  a  change  in  its  electrical  state
is  connected  with  it,  a  change  which,  from  all  that  is
known  to  us  concerning  electrical  excitation  in  other
bodies,  must  of  necessity  be  referred  to  a  change  in  the
position  which  the  individual  molecules
assume  to  one  another. If  we  conceive

^M'^^^M-  ^ne  axis_cylm(^er  t0  be  made  up  of  elec-
v — *>^_-^i_> trical  molecules,  we can easily  imagine

ffiffiffififtft  that  every  two  of  these  molecules  take
up  an  altered  position  with  regard  to
one  another  at  the  moment  the  stimulus  is  applied.  Of
these  processes  we  see  nothing.  The  axis-cylinder  looks
just  as  usual.  If  we  watch  a  muscle  during  its  contrac-
tion, we  remark,  it  is  true,  that  the  intervals  which  sepa-
rate the  individual  so-called  discs  (p.  82)  become  shorter  ;
and  as  we  now  know  that  the substance  of  the mus-

Fig.  97.  Ideal  diagram  of  the  condition  of  the  molecules  of  a  nerve  when  it  is
at  rest  (in  a  peripolar  state,  A),  or  in  an  electrotonic  (dipolar)  state,  B.  From  Lud-
wig,  «  Physiolog.,'  I,  p.  103.

FUNCTIONAL  IRRITABILITY.  329

cle  consists  of  a  series  of  minute  fibrils,  which  in  their
turn  contain  little  granules  at  certain  intervals  corres-
ponding to  these  discs,  we  conclude  therefrom  with  some
degree  of  assurance  that  really  local  changes  take  place
in  the  minutest  elements,  though  they  cannot  be  further
referred  to  any  visible  or  directly  recognizable  cause.
We  cannot  perceive  any  definite  chemical  change,  or
any  alteration  in  the  state  of  nutrition  of  the  parts  ;
we  only  see  a  displacement,  a  dislocation  of  the  parti-
cles, which,  however,  probably  depends  upon  some
slight  chemical  change  in  the  molecules  composing  them.

In  the  case  of  ciliated  epithelium  you  see  how  the
fine  cilia,  which  are  seated  upon  the  surface  of  the  cells,
move  in  a  certain  direction,  and  in  this  direction  exercise
a  locomotory  effect  upon  the  little  particles  which  come
near  to  them.  If  we  isolate  the  individual  cells,  we
see  that  every  one  of  them  has  at  its  upper  end  a  bor-
der of  a  certain  thickness,  from  which  little  hair-
shaped  prolongations  run  out.  These  all  move  in  such
a  way  that  a  cilium  which,  whilst  quiet,  stands  quite
upright,  bends  forwards  and  then  throws  itself  back-
wards. But  we  are  unable  to  perceive  any  changes
within  the  individual  cilia,  by  means  of  which  the  move-
ment is  effected.

Just  the  same  is  the  case  with  gland-cells,  con-
cerning which  we  cannot  entertain  the  least  doubt  that
they  produce  a  definite  locomotory  effect.  For  since
Ludwig  has  shown  in  his  researches  on  the  salivary
glands,  that  the  pressure  of  the  outward  current  of
saliva  is  greater  than  that  of  the  inward  stream  of  blood,
the  only  conclusion  that  is  left  us  is,  that  the  gland-cells
exercise  a  definite  motor  influence  upon  the  fluid  ;  and
that  the  secretion  is  driven  out  with  a  definite  force,
which  is  not  due  to  the  pressure  of  the  blood,  or  any
special  muscular  action,  but  to  the  specific  energy  of  the

330  LECTURE  XIV.

cells  as  such.  Still  we  are  just  as  little  able  to  discern
in  a  gland  cell,  whilst  performing  its  functions,  that  its
constituent  particles  are  engaged  in  any  peculiar  material
process,  as  we  were  in  the  case  of  the  nerves,  or  ciliated
epithelium.

These  facts  derive  great  support  from  the  circumstance
that  we  are  able  to  perceive,  that  the  functional  activity
of  individual  parts  does  experience  a  certain  amount  of
impairment,  if  it  is  continued  for  too  long  a  time.  In
all  parts  certain  states  of  fatigue  manifest  themselves,
states,  during  which  the  part  is  no  longer  able  to  origi-
nate the  same  amount  of  movement,  that  up  to  that
time  could  be  perceived  in  it.  But,  in  order  that  they
may  again  become  competent  to  perform  their  functions,
these  parts  by  no  means  always  require  a  new  supply  of
nutriment,  a  fresh  absorption  of  nutritive  material  ;  rest
alone  is  sufficient  to  enable  them  to  resume  their  activity
in  a  short-  space  of  time.  A  nerve,  which  has  been  cut
out  of  the  body,  and  used  for  experiment,  after  a  cer-
tain lapse  of  time  becomes  incapable  of  discharging  its
functions  ;  but  if  it  be  allowed  to  repose  under  favour-
able circumstances,  which  prevent  it  from  drying  up,  it
gradually  regains  its  powers.  This  restitution  of  func-
tional power  (functional  restitution),  which  takes  place
without  any  proper  nutritive  action,  and  in  all  proba-
bility depends  upon  the  circumstance,  that  the  mole-
cules which  had  quitted  their  usual  position  gradually
revert  to  it — we  can  produce  in  different  parts  by
means  of  certain  stimuli.  According  to  the  views  of
the  neuro-pathologists  these  stimuli  would  only  act
upon  the  nerves,  and  through  the  medium  of  the  nerves
upon  the  other  parts  ;  but  with  reference  to  this  very
point  we  have  some  facts  which  cannot  well  be  explained
in  any  other  way  than  by  the  assumption,  that  an  in-
fluence is  really  exercised  upon  the  parts  themselves.

FUNCTIONAL IRRITATION.  331

If  we  take  a  single  ciliated  cell,  and,  after  entirely
isolating  it  from  the  body,  allow  it  to  swim  about,  and
wait  until  a  state  of  complete  repose  has  declared  itself,
we  can  again  call  forth  the  peculiar  movements  of  its
cilia  by  adding  a  small  quantity  of  potash  or  soda  to
the  fluid,  a  quantity  not  large  enough  to  produce  corro-
sive effects  upon  the  eel],  but  sufficient,  upon  penetra-
tion into  it,  to  induce  a  certain  change  in  its  contents.
A  peculiarly  interesting  fact,  however,  is  that  the  num-
ber of  substances  which  will  act,  as  stimuli,  upon  ciliated
epithelium,  is  limited  to  these  two.  This  explains  how
it  happened  that  Purkinje  and  Valentin  (who,  it  is  well
known,  first  made  experiments,  and  those  upon  a  very
extensive  scale,  upon  ciliary  movement),  although  they
experimented  with  a  very  large  number  of  substances,
at  last,  after  they  had  tried  all  sorts  of  things — mechan-
ical, chemical  and  electrical  stimuli — came  to  the  con-
clusion that  there  was  no  stimulus  whatever,  which
could  provoke  the  ciliary  movement.  I  had  the  good
fortune  incidentally  to  stumble  upon  the  joeculiar  fact,
that  potash  and  soda  are  such  stimuli.  Here  we  cer-|
tainly  cannot  call  in  any  nervous  influence  to  our  aid,
and  such  influence  appears  to  be  the  less  admissible  for
the  reason  that,  in  accordance  with  the  well-known  ex-
periments, the  ciliary  movement  is  maintained  in  the
dead  body  at  a  time  when  other  parts  have  already  be-
gun to  putrefy.  The  ciliated  epithelium  of  the  frontal
sinuses  and  the  trachea  is  found  in  human  corpses  in  a
state  of  perfect  excitability  thirty-six  to  forty-eight
hours  after  death,  when  every  trace  of  irritability  has
long  vanished  from  the  remainder  of  the  body.

Much  the  same  is  the  case  with  all  other  excitable
parts.  We  see  nearly  everywhere  that  certain  excitants
act  more  readily  than  others,  and  that  many  are  totally
incapable of  producing  any  particular  effect. Nearly

332  LECTURE  XIV.

everywhere  do  we  find  specific  relations  or  affinities  to
exist.  If  we  cast  our  eyes  upon  the  glands,  it  is  a  well-
known  fact  that  there  are  specific  substances,  by  which
we  are  enabled  to  act  upon  one  gland,  and  not  upon
another  ;  to  rouse  the  specific  energy  of  one  gland,
whilst  all  the  rest  remain  unaffected.  In  the  case  of
glands  it  is  certainly  much  more  difficult  to  exclude  the
influence  of  the  nerves,  than  in  that  of  ciliated  epithe-
lium, still  certain  experiments  are  recorded,  in  which,
after  the  section  of  all  the  nerves,  say  of  the  liver
(G.  Harting),  it  was  found  possible,  by  means  of  the
injection  of  irritating  substances  into  the  blood  (these
being  such  as  experience  had  shown  to  bear  some  inti-
mate relation  to  the  organ),  to  provoke  an  increased
secretion  in  the  organ.

The  discussion  of  this  subject  has,  as  you  no  doubt
are  well  aware,  recently  chiefly  become  centred  in  the
question  of  the  irritability  of  muscle,  a  question  which
has  proved  so  difficult  for  the  very  reason  that  the  pos-
session of  irritability  was  restricted  by  Haller  with  great
exclusiveness  to  muscle.  Haller  with  the  greatest  ob-
stinacy combated  the  opinion  that  any  other  part  was
irritable  ;  and  curiously  enough  he  even  contested  the
irritability  of  parts,  which,  as  the  minuter  investigations
of  later  observers  have  shown,  contain  muscular  ele-
ments, as  for  example,  the  middle  coat  of  the  vessels.
Indeed,  he  made  use  of  tolerably  energetic  expressions
when  repudiating  the  excitability  of  the  vessels,  which
even  then  was  maintained  by  others.  I  have  already
informed  you  that  there  are  large  tracts  in  the  vascular
system  (for  example,  in  the  umbilical  vessels  of  the  foe-
tus, where  they  are  particularly  well  marked)  in  which
enormous  accumulations  of  muscular  fibres  are  found,
but  not  a  trace  of  any  nerves.  Here  irritability  exists
in  a  high  degree  ;  we  can  produce  contractions  of  the

NUTRITIVE IRRITABILITY.  333

muscles  mechanically,  chemically  and  electrically.  Just
the  same  is  the  case  with  many  other,  small  vessels,
which  by  no  means  exhibit  nerve-fibres  in  all  their  parts.
In  them  too  we  can  at  every  single  point  where  muscles
exist,  at  once  provoke  contraction.

The  solution  of  this  question  has  recently,  as  is  well
known,  been  particularly  promoted  by  the  fact  that,  by
the  employment  of  certain  poisons,  especially  the  woo-
rara  poison,  observers  have  succeeded  in  paralyzing  the
nerves  right  down  to  their  extreme  terminations,  or  at
least  as  far  as  these  were  accessible  to  the  experiment  ;
and  this  in  such  a  manner,  that  the  objection  cannot
well  be  raised,  that  the  excitability  of  the  extreme  ter-
minations of  the  nerves  contained  in  the  muscle  is  pre-
served. The  paralysis  produced  by  the  woorara  poison
is  completely  confined  to  the  nerves,  whilst  the  muscles
just  as  completely  retain  their  irritability.  Whilst  the
most  violent  electrical  currents  were  made  to  act  upon
the  nerve  in  vain,  without  the  production  of  the  least
movement,  the  slightest  mechanical,  chemical  or  electri-
cal stimuli  are  sufficient  to  throw  the  muscle  experi-
mented upon  into  a  state  of  excitation.

I  have  mentioned  these  facts  to  you,  in  order  that  I
might  not  be  thought  to  treat  the  different  divisions  of
my  subject  too  unequally.  The  question  of  function,
however,  interests  us  less  here.  Nevertheless,  you  will
be  able  to  gather  from  what  I  have  communicated  to  you,
that  now-a-days  it  can  no  longer  be  said  with  any  show
of  reason  that  the  nerves  alone  are  irritable  parts,  but
that  we  are  irresistibly  led  to  consider  functional  irritabi-
lity, at  least,  as  a  property  belonging  to  whole  series  of
organs.

Far  less  known,  gentlemen,  is  that  clearly  demonstra-
ble series  of  processes  in  which  nutritive  irritability  mani-
fests itself — that  power  possessed  by  individual  parts  of

334  LECTURE  XIV.

,  taking  up,  when  excited  by  definite  stimuli,  more  or  less
matter  and  transforming  it.  This  constitutes  at  the  same
time  the  first  step  in  the  most  important  processes  which
we  have  to  follow  into  the  domain  of  pathologico-anato-
mical  facts.

A  part,  which  nourishes  itself,  can  in  doing  so  either
limit  itself  to  a  mere  maintenance  of  its  existence,  or  it
may,  as  is  especially  seen  in  pathological  cases,  take  up
into  itself  a  larger  quantity  of  nutritive  material  than  is
wont  to  happen  in  the  ordinary  course  of  things.  If  we
investigate  these  processes  of  absorption  more  closely,  we
always  find  that,  as  I  have  already  had  occasion  to  re-
mark to  you,  the  number  of  histological  elements  remains
the  same  before  and  after  the  occurrence  of  the  excita-
tion ;  and  we  thus  distinguish  simple  hypertrophies  from
the  hyperplastic  conditions,  to  which,  in  their  external
effects,  they  often  bear  so  great  a  resemblance  (p.  94,
Fig.  27,  JB).  It  is,  however,  of  extreme  importance  for
the  attainment  of  correct  pathological  notions,  that  we
should  know  that  a  part,  which  in  virtue  of  some  inhe-
rent power,  takes  up  a  large  quantity  of  material,  need
not  on  that  account  necessarily  fall  into  a  permanent
condition  of  enlargement,  but  that  on  the  contrary,  under
these  very  circumstances  there  often  arises  subsequently
in  its  internal  economy  a  disturbance  which  imperils  the
persistence  of  the  part  and  becomes  the  proximate  cause
of  its  destruction.  There  are,  as  we  know  from  experi-
ence, certain  limits  to  the  enlargement  of  every  tissue,
within  which  it  is  able  to  maintain  a  regular  existence  ;
if  these  limits  be  exceeded,  and  especially,  if  suddenly,
we  always  see  that  obstacles  spring  up  impeding  the  fur-
ther life  of  the  part,  and  that  when  the  process  runs  a
particularly  acute  course,  a  weakening  of  the  part  sets
in,  proceeding  to  a  complete  destruction  of  it.

Processes  of  this  kind  form  a  part  of  that  domain  which

CLOUDY SWELLING.

335

Fig.  98.

in  ordinary  life  is  assigned  to  inflammation.  A  number
of  inflammatory  processes  on  their  first  appearance  really
exhibit  nothing  more  than  an  increased  assumption  of
material  into  the  interior  of  the  cells,  entirely  resembling
what  we  find  in  simple  hypertrophy.  If,  for  example,
we  consider  the  history  of  Bright's  disease  in  its  ordinary
course,  we  constantly  find,  that  the  very  first  thing  which
can  be  detected  in  a  kidney  affected  with  this  disease,
consists  in  this,  that  in  the  interior  of  the  uriniferous  tu-
bules whilst  still  quite  intact,  the  individual  epithelial
cells  which  are,  as  is  well  known,  even  in  their  normal
state  tolerably  large,  become  still  larger.  These  epithe-
lial cells  which  fill  up  the  tubules  are  not  only  large,  but

at  the  same  time  also  present  a  very
cloudy  appearance,  inasmuch  as  a  larger
quantity  of  material  than  usual  has
everywhere  been  taken  up  into  the  cells.
The  entire  uriniferous  tubule  is  thereby
rendered  broader,  and  appears  even  to
the  naked  eye  as  a  convoluted,  whitish,
opaque  body.  If  we  isolate  the  indi-
vidual cells,  which  is  somewhat  difficult,
as  the  cohesion  of  the  particles  compos-
ing them  has  usually  begun  to  suffer,  we  find  in  them  a
granular  mass  apparently  containing  nothing  else  than
the  granules  which  are  normally  present  in  the  interior
of  the  cells,  but  which  accumulate  in  greater  numbers  the
greater  the  energy  with  which  the  process  is  carried  on,
so  that  even  the  nucleus  gradually  grows  indistinct.  This
is  the  condition  of  cloudij  swelling  (triibe  Schwellung),  as
it  is  met  with  in  many  irritated  parts,  as  an  expression

Fig.  98.  Convoluted  urinary  tubule  from  the  cortex  of  the  kidney  in  morbus
Brightii.  a.  Tolerably  normal  epithelium,  6,  state  of  cloudy  swelling,  c,  com-
mencing fatty  metamorphosis  and  disintegration.  At  b  and  c  increased  breadth  of
the  tubule. 300  diameters.

336  LECTURE XIV.

of  the  irritation  which  attends  many  forms  of  what  is
called  inflammation.  From  these  processes  backwards  to
the  phenomena  of  simple  hypertrophy  we  find  no  recog-
nizable boundaries  at  all.  We  cannot  at  once  say,  when
we  meet  with  a  part  enlarged  in  this  way,  and  contain-
ing a  greater  amount  of  matter  than  usual,  whether  it
will  retain  its  life  or  perish  ;  and  therefore  it  is  extremely
difficult  in  very  many  cases,  when  nothing  at  all  is  known
concerning  the  process  through  which  such  a  change  has
been  produced,  to  distinguish  simple  hypertrophy  from
those  forms  of  inflammatory  processes  which  are  essen-
tially accompanied  by  an  increased  absorption  of  nutri-
tive material.

In  these  processes  too  it  is  scarcely  possible  to  refuse
the  individual  elements,  when  incited  by  a  stimulus
directly  applied  to  them,  the  power  of  taking  up  an
increased  quantity  of  material  ;  at  least  it  is  opposed  to
all  the  results  of  experience,  to  assume  that  such  an  in-
creased absorption  must  be  due  to  a  special  innervation.
If  we  select  a  part  which,  in  accordance  with  all  observa-
tion, is  entirely  destitute  of  nerves,  as  for  example,  the
surface  of  an  articular  cartilage,  we  can,  as  was  shown
many  years  ago  by  the  beautiful  experiments  of  Redfern,
produce  altogether  similar  effects  by  means  of  direct
stimuli.  In  precisely  the  same  way,  there  are  not  un-
frequently  observed,  in  chronic  diseases  of  cartilage,  no-
dular elevations  of  the  surface  ;  and  upon  examining
such  spots  microscopically  we  find  the  same  thing  that  I
showed  you  in  a  former  lecture  in  a  costal  cartilage
(p.  48,  Fig.  9),  namely,  that  the  cells  which  at  other
times  are  very  delicate,  small,  lenticular  bodies,  increase
in  size,  swell  up  into  large,  round  corpuscles,  and  in  pro-
portion as  they  take  up  more  matter,  enlarge  in  all  direc-
tions, so  that  at  last  the  whole  spot  forms  a  little  protu-
berance above  the surface. Now  in  articular  cartilage

DIRECT IRRITATION OF  TISSUES.  337

no  nerves  at  all  are  found ;  the  terminal  ramifications  of
those  nearest  to  it  are  at  best  situated  in  the  medulla  of
the  bone  immediately  adjoining,  and  that,  perhaps,  is
separated  from  the  irritated  spot  of  the  surface  by  an  in-
tact, intervening  layer  of  cartilaginous  tissue  one  or  two
lines  in  thickness.  Now  it  would  indeed  be  contrary  to
all  experience  to  conceive  that  a  nerve  could  from  the
medulla  of  the  bone  exercise  a  special  action  upon  the
cells  of  the  surface  of  the  cartilage,  which  were  the  seat
of  irritation,  without  a  simultaneous  affection  of  the  cells
lying  between  the  nerve  and  the  irritated  spot.  If  we
draw  a  thread  through  a  cartilage,  so  that  merely  a  trau-
matic irritation  is  produced,  we  see  that  all  the  cells
which  lie  close  to  the  thread  become  enlarged  through
an  increased  absorption  of  material.  The  irritation  pro-
duced by  the  thread  extends  only  to  a  certain  distance
into  the  cartilage,  whilst  the  more  remote  cells  remain
altogether  unaffected.  Such  observations  cannot  be  ex-
plained otherwise  than  by  assuming  that  the  stimulus
really  acts  upon  the  parts  to  which  it  is  applied  ;  it  is
impossible  to  conclude  that  it  is  conducted  to  the  nerve
by  any  channel  perhaps  more  in  accordance  with  the
neuro-pathological  doctrine,  and  then  only  by  reflex
action  conveyed  back  again  to  the  parts.

There  certainly  are  but  few  tissues  in  the  body  which
are  so  completely  destitute  of  nerves  as  cartilage,  but
even  when  we  observe  what  happens  in  the  parts  most
abundantly  supplied  with  nerves,  we  find  in  every  case,
that  the  extent  of  the  irritation,  or  to  speak  more  accu-
rately, the  extent  of  the  irritated  area,  by  no  means  cor-
responds to  the  size  of  any  particular  nerve-territory,  but
that  in  a  tissue  in  other  respects  normal  the  size  of  the
affected  area  essentially  corresponds  to  that  of  the  local
irritation.  If  we  make  the  experiment  with  the  thread,
upon the skin,  a  whole series  of  nerve-territories  are

22

338  LECTURE XIV.

intersected  by  it.  Still  the  whole  of  the  territories  be-
longing to  the  nerves  which  lie  along  the  thread,  are  not
thrown  into  the  same  morbid  condition,  but  the  nutritive
irritation  is  limited  to  the  immediate  vicinity  of  the
thread.  No  surgeon  expects  in  operations  of  the  kind,
that  all  the  nerve-territories  traversed  by  the  thread,
will  become  diseased  in  their  whole  extent.  Great  com-
plaints would  have  to  be  raised  against  nature,  if  every
ligature,  every  seton  were  to  exercise  an  irritating  influ-
ence, beyond  the  limits  of  the  parts  with  which  it  is  in
immediate  contact,  upon  the  whole  extent  of  the  nerve-
districts  which  it  passes  through.  Thus  we  see  in  a  tis-
sue in  which  what  takes  place  in  such  a  case  can  be  very
clearly  traced,  namely  in  the  cornea,  that  in  parts  of  it
to  which  no  vessels  extend,  there  are  certainly  still  nerves
which  possess  a  reticular  arrangement,  and  leave  larger
and  smaller  districts  of  tissue  between  them  altogether
devoid  of  nerves.  Now  if  we  apply  any  stimulus  directly
to  the  cornea,  as  for  example,  a  red  hot  needle,  or  lunar
caustic,  the  district  which  is  thereby  set  in  morbid  action
by  no  means  corresponds  to  the  distribution  of  any  nerve.
It  once  happened  to  me  with  a  rabbit  that  the  cautery
lighted  precisely  upon  a  nervous  filament,  but  the  mor-
bid action  remained  confined  to  the  immediate  vicinity
of  this  spot,  and  by  no  means  spread  over  the  whole  dis-
trict appertaining  to  the  nerve.

It  is  therefore  utterly  impossible,  even  if  observations,
like  those  on  cartilage  which  I  have  laid  before  you,
are  not  allowed  to  have  any  weight,  not  to  admit  that
the  phenomena  of  irritation  in  parts  supplied  with
nerves  are  in  no  respect  different  from  those  which
occur  in  nerveless  parts,  and  that  the  immediate  effects
essentially  depend  upon  the  enlargement  and  tumefac-
tion of  the  surrounding  elements,  so  that  when  there  are
many  of  them,  a  visible  swelling  of the  whole  part  is

PARENCHYMATOUS KERATITIS.  539

the  result.  This  is  what  you  observe  when  a  ligature  is
anywhere  drawn  through  the  skin.  If  on  the  following
day  the  immediate  vicinity  of  the  thread  be  examined,
an  active  enlargement  of  the  cellular  elements  is  found,
quite  irrespective  of  the  distribution  of  vessels  and
nerves  in  the  part.

There  is,  as  you  see,  an  essential  difference  between
what  I  here  lay  down  and  the  opinions  which  have  gene-
rally been  advanced  with  regard  to  the  proximate  causes
of  these  swellings.  According  to  the  old  maxim  :  ubi
stimulus,  ibi  affluxus,  it  was  generally  conceived  that
the  first  thing  which  took  place  was  an  increased  afflux
of  blood  (which  was  itself  referred  by  the  neuro-patho-
logists  to  the  excitation  of  sensitive  nerves),  and  then
that  the  immediate  consequence  of  the  increased  afflux
was  an  increased  excretion  of  fluid  from  the  blood,
constituting  the  exudation  which  filled  the  part.

In  the  first  timid  attempts  which  I  made  to  alter  this
conception,  I  employed  the  expression  parenchymatous*
exudation,  retaining  the  term  exudation,  out  of  deference
to  prevailing  opinion.  I  had,  namely,  convinced  my-
self that  in  many  places  where  a  swelling  had  occurred,
there  was  absolutely  nothing  else  to  be  seen  than  tissue.
In  a  tissue  which  consisted  of  cells,  I  could,  after  the
swelling  (exudation)  had  taken  place,  still  see  nothing

*  The  term  Parenchyma  was  first  employed  by  Erasistratus  of  Alexandria  to  de-
signate the  mass  of  tissue  which  lies  between  the  vessels  of  apart,  and  in  his  opinion
formed  a  kind  of  affusion  from  them.  Thus  Galen  8ays  (Isagoge  s.  Introductio,
cap.  xi.):  "Cerebrum  ex  nullo  principali  vase  compositum  esse  videtur  Erasistrato,
eoque  nutrimenti  parenchyma,  i.  e.,  affusio,  ipsi  esse  videtur."  In  the  same  way
the  word  is  used  by  Vesalius  (De  humani  corp.  fabrica,  lib.  V.,  cap.  7)  and  by
Thorn.  Bartholin  (Anatome,  lib.  I.,  cap.  14),  for  the  proper  substance  of  the  liver,
lying  external  to,  or  between,  the  vessels.  It  therefore  essentially  denotes  the
tissue  of  which  an  organ  is  constituted.  In  a  narrower  sense  those  constituents  of
an  organ  which  are  peculiar  to  it,  and  give  it  its  specific  character,  may  be  distin-
guished as  its  proper  parenchyma,  in  contra-distinction  to  its  merely  interstitial
tissue.  In  my  book  the  term  has  been  used  in  both  of  these  senses.—  From  a  MS.
Note  by  the  Author

340  LECTURE  XIV.

but  cells ;  in  tissues  composed  of  cells  and  intercellular
substance,  nothing  but  cells  and  intercellular  substance  ;
the  individual  elements  indeed  were  larger,  fuller  and
filled  with  a  quantity  of  matter  with  which  they  ought
not  to  have  been  filled,  but  there  was  no  exudation  in
the  manner  in  which  it  had  been  imagined  to  exist,
namely  free,  or  in  the  interstices  of  the  tissue.  All  the
matter  was  contained  in  the  elements  of  the  tissues
themselves.  This  was  what  I  intended  to  express  by
the  term,  parenchymatous  exudation,  and  hence  the
name,  parenchymatous  inflammation,  is  derived — a  name
which  was,  indeed,  used  in  former  times,  but  in  quite
another  sense  from  that  I  meant — and  which  is  now
more  generally  employed  than  is  perhaps  desirable.  It
is,  however,  at  all  events  important  that  you  should
draw  a  distinct  line  of  demarcation  between  this  form
of  irritation  as  a  general  standard  and  the  other  forms
(especially  the  formative  one),  inasmuch  as  in  it  only
the  constituent  elements  of  a  tissue  already  existing
in  the  body  take  up  a  larger  quantity  of  material,  and
besides  these  enlarged  elements  nothing  else  is  present.
I  will  immediately  send  round  a  preparation  to  you,
in  which  you  will  see  a  very  characteristic  example  of
such  an  inflammation.  It  is  almost  the  most  striking
example  which  for  a  long  time  has  come  before  me.  It
is  a  specimen  from  a  case  of  so-called  Keratitis,  from
one  of  Herr  von  Graefe's  patients,  in  whom,  after  vio-
lent, diffuse  phlegmonous  inflammation  of  the  extremi-
ties, an  extremely  rapid  inflammatory  opacity  of  the
cornea  took  place.  When  the  cornea  was  put  into  my
hands,  it  seemed  to  me  as  if  it  were  opaque  and  swollen
in  its  whole  thickness.  The  vessels  of  the  borders  were
very  full  of  blood.  But  when  I  made  a  section  through
the  part,  it  at  once  became  evident,  even  with  a  low
power,  that the opacity  extended by  no means uni-

PARENCHYMATOUS  KERATITIS.

341

formly  throughout  the  whole  cornea,  but  was  limited
to  a  definite  portion  of  the  tissue.  This  portion  is  so
characteristic  in  reference  to  the  different  explanations
possible,  that  the  case,  I  think,  presents  especial  inter-
est theoretically.

It  turned  out  namely  that  the  opacity  began  in  the
immediate  proximity  of  the  posterior  surface  and  at  the
circumference  of  the  cornea,  close  to  the  membrane  of
Descemet  [posterior  elastic  lamina  of  Bowman]  at  the
point  where  the  iris  is  attached.  Thence  the  opacity,
assuming  almost  the  shape  of  a  flight  of  steps,  mounted
up  into  the  cornea  till  within  a  certain  distance  of  the
external  surface.  Then  it  proceeded  at  the  same  level,
till  it  descended  upon  the  other  side  again  in  a  similar
manner.  Thus  an  opaque  bow  was  formed  throughout
the  whole  substance  of  the  cornea,  without  reaching  the
external  (anterior)  surface  and  without  encroaching
upon  the  central  parts  of  the  posterior  surface. If  we

Fig.  99.

imagine  the  nutrition  of  the  cornea  to  proceed  from  the
aqueous humour,  the  opacity  did  not  assume  the  form

Fig.  99.  Parenchymatous  keratitis.  A,  A,  Anterior  (external),  B,  B,  posterior
(internal)  side  of  the  cornea.  C,  C.  The  clouded  zone  with  enlarged  cornea-cor-
puscles. 18  diameters.

342

LECTURE XIV.

that  might  have  been  looked  for,  for  then  we  should
rather  have  expected  that  the  hindermost  layer  would  be
the  first  to  undergo  the  change.  If  any  influence  from
without  had  been  here  in  operation,  the  opacity  must
have  been  seated  in  the  most  anterior  layers  ;  if  again
the  opacity  were  one  which  essentially  proceeded  from  the
vessels,  we  might,  inasmuch  as  they  chiefly  lie  along  the
border  and  nearer  to  the  anterior  surface,  have  expected
to  find  the  principal  disease  there.  Finally,  if  the
changes  had  their  origin  in  the  nerves,  we  should  have
found  the  opacity  spread  in  the  form  of  a  network  on
the  surface — and  not  a  bow  of  this  kind.

The  substance  of  the  cornea  consists,  you  know,  ac-
cording to  general  opinion,  of  lamellae  (plates)  which
run  in a  more or  less  parallel  direction  through  the

Fig.  100.

cornea. Now  if  this opinion  be the correct  one, we
should  have  to  deal  with  a  process  which,  whilst  advanc-

Fig.  100.  Perpendicular  section  of  the  cornea  of  the  ox,  for  the  purpose  of  showing
the  form  and  anastomoses  of  its  cells  (corpuscles).  Here  and  there  are  seen  the
cut  ends  of  some  of  the  processes  of  the  cells,  looking  like  fibres  or  points.  500
diameters. From  His,  'Wiirzb.  Verhandl,'  IV.,  plate  IV.,  fig.  I.

STRUCTURE  OF  THE  CORNEA.

343

ing  from  lamella  to  lamella,  each  time  moved  a  little
farther  on.  Only  the  cornea  is  not  composed  of  perfect
lamellae,  but  of  layers,  which  certainly  are  on  the
whole  placed  -one  against  the  other  in  a  lamellar  form,
but  yet  are  connected  with  one  another  ;  they  do  not
lie  any  how,  more  or  less  firmly  or  loosely  upon  one
another,  but  there  exist  direct  connections  between
them.  It  is  therefore  rather  a  large  coherent  mass,
which  is  interrupted  in  certain  directions  by  cellular  ele-
ments, just  as  is  the  case  in  the  very  different  tissues
which  we  have  already  specially  considered.  A  vertical
section  discloses  spindle-shaped  cells  which  anastomose
with  one  another,  but  at  the  same  time  also  possess
lateral  processes  ;  and  in  consequence  of  their  being
regularly  imbedded  in  the  basis  substance,  this  lamellar,
foliated  or  plate-like  arrangement  of  the  whole  tissue  is
produced.  When  viewed  upon  the  surface,  in  horizontal
section,  they  show  themselves  in  the  form  of  many-rayed,
stellate  but  very  flat  cells,  which  may  be  compared  to
bone-corpuscles.

Fig.  101.

If  now  in  this  case  of  ours  we  follow  the  process  with
a  higher  power,  we  discover,  what  may  easily  be  shown

Fig.  101.  Horizontal  section  of  the  cornea,  parallel  to  the  surface  and  showing
the  stellate,  flat  corpuscles,  with  their  anastomosing  processes.  From  His,  loc.  cit.,
fig.  II.

344:

LECTURE XIV.

to  be  the  case  in  every  form  of  keratitis,  that  the  change
is  essentially  seated  in  the  corpuscles  or  cells  of  the  cor-
nea, and  that  in  proportion  as  we  approach  the  clouded
spot  either  from  without  or  within,  the  little  narrow  cells
continually  become  larger  and  more  cloudy.  At  last  we
find  them  presenting  almost  the  appearance  of  sacculated
canals  or  tubes.  Whilst  this  enlargement  of  the  elements,
this  acute  hypertrophy,  if  you  will,  is  going  on,  the  con-
tents of  the  cells  are  at  the  same  time  becoming  more
cloudy,  and  it  is  this  cloudiness  of  the  contents  which  in
its  turn  occasions  the  opacity  of  the  whole  coat,  for  the
proper  basis-substance appears  to be altogether  unaf-

Fig.  102.

fected.  This  cloudiness  of  the  contents  is  in  part  occa-
sioned by  particles  which  are  of  a  fatty  nature,  so  that
the  process  seems  to  have  begun  to  assume  the  character
of  a  degenerative  disease.  I  should  have  had  no  hesita-
tion in  believing  that  a  destruction  of  the  cornea  had  here

Fig.  102.  Parenchymatous  keratitis  (cf.  Fig.  99),  seen  with  a  higher  power.  At
A  the  cornea-corpuscles  in  a  nearly  normal  condition,  at  B  enlarged,  at  C  and  D
still  more  enlarged,  and  at  the  same  time  clouded, 350  diameters.

NUTRITIVE AND FORMATIVE IRRITATION.  34.5

really  set  in,  but  Herr  v.  Graefe  assures  me  that,  from
what  he  has  seen,  such  conditions  may,  when  the  disease
runs  a  favourable  course,  terminate  in  resolution.  And
there  is  really  nothing  at  all  in  the  matter  at  variance
with  this  possibility  ;  for,  since  the  cells  still  exist  and
the  only  thing  required  is  that  their  changed  contents
be  get  rid  of,  a  complete  restitution  may  no  doubt  take
place.

Now  just  this  doctrine  of  a  simplij  nutritive  restitutional
power  is  of  very  great  importance  practically.  In  such  a
case  as  this,  where  nothing  has  taken  place  excepting
that  the  cells,  without  ceasing  to  display  their  activity,
have  accumulated  in  their  cavities  a  larger  quantity  of
material  than  usual,  everything  is  prepared  for  the  pro-
cess which  we  call  reabsorption  ;  the  cells  can  transform
a  certain  quantity  of  the  material  and  convert  it  into
soluble  substances,  and  the  material  in  this  form  may  dis-
appear in  the  very  same  way  in  which  it  came.  The
structure  in  the  main  remains  the  same  all  the  while
nothing  foreign  has  thrust  itself  in  between  the  parts
the  tissue  presents  throughout  its  original  constituents.

From  the  phenomena  of  this  nutritive  irritation  direct
transitions  to  incipient  formative  changes  are  often  seen.
If  namely,  we  follow  up  the  higher  degrees  of  irritation
which  take  place  in  a  part,  we  find  that  the  cellular  ele-
ments, shortly  after  they  have  experienced  the  nutritive
enlargement,  exhibit  further  changes  which  begin  in  the
interior  of  the  nuclei,  generally  in  such  a  manner  that  the
nucleoli  become  unusually  large,  in  many  cases  some-
what oblong,  and  sometimes  staff-shaped.  Then  as  the
next  stage  we  usually  see  that  the  nucleoli  become  con-
stricted in  the  middle,  and  assume  the  form  of  a  finger-
biscuit  (Bisquit),  and  a  little  later  two  nucleoli  are  found.
This  division  of  the  nucleoli  is  an  indication  of  the  impend-
ing division  of  the  nucleus  itself,  and  the  next  stage  is,

346  LECTURE XIV.

that  about  such  a  divided  nucleolus  the  finger-biscuit-like
constriction,  and  afterwards  the  real  division,  of  the  nu-

cleus takes  place,  as  we  have  already  seen  in  colourless
blood-  and  pus-corpuscles  (Figs.  11,  A,  b  ;  56,  63).  Here
we  manifestly  have  to  deal  with  something  essentially
different  from  what  we  had  before.  In  the  simple  hy-
pertrophy consequent  upon  nutritive  irritation,  the  nu-
cleus may  remain  quite  intact ;  here,  on  the  other  hand,
we  frequently  see  that  the  contents  display  a  relatively
slight  amount  of  change,  the  utmost  being  that  the  cells
become  larger,  whence  we  infer  that  a  quantity  of  new
material  has  been  taken  up  into  them.

In  many  cases  the  changes  are  limited  to  this  series  of
transformations,  of  which  the  division  of  the  nucleus  must
be  regarded  as  the  conclusion.  This  may  be  repeated,
so  that  three,  four  or  more  nuclei  arise  (Fig.  15,  b,  c,  d).
Thus  it  comes  to  pass  that  we  sometimes  find  cells — not
merely  in  pathological  conditions,  but  also  not  unfre-
quently  where  the  development  is  altogether  normal —
which  contain  twenty  to  thirty  nuclei  or  more.  Recently
in  the  marrow  of  bones,  especially  in  young  children,
cells  have  been observed,  where  the  entire  structure  is

Fig.  103.  Cells  from  a  melanotic  tumour  of  the  parotid  gland  extirpated  in  1851
by  Herr  Textor.  A.  Free  cells  with  division  of  the  nucleoli  and  nuclei.  B.  Net-
work of  connective  tissue-corpuscles  with  division  of  their  nuclei. 300  diameters.

DIVISION OF NUCLEOLI.

347

full  of  nuclei,  which  often  attain  the  size  of  the  whole
original  cell. Such  formations  occur  in  many  tumours  in

Fig.  104.

m  a

'1 ■-

such  large  quantities,  that  in  England  a  particular  species
is  thereby  distinguished,  and  on  the  proposal  of  Paget  a
myeloid  tumour  (medullary  swelling)  has  been  received
into  the  classification.  This  formation  is  not,  however,
confined  to  the  medulla  of  the  bones,  but  occasionally
occurs  in  nearly  all  situations.

Muscle,  upon  irritation,  exhibits  precisely  similar  forms.
"Whilst  transversely  striated  muscles  are  generally  pro-
vided with  nuclei  at  certain  intervals,  though  in  no  great
abundance,  we  find,  on  examining  a  muscle  in  the  neigh-
bourhood of  an  irritated  part,  as  for  example,  a  wound,
a  corroded  or  ulcerated  surface,  that  a  multiplication  of
the  nuclei  is  going  on  in  it ;  we  see  nuclei  with  two  nu-
cleoli ;  then  come  constricted,  and  then  divided,  nuclei
(Comp.  Figs.  23,  b,  c  ;  24,  B,  C),  and  so  it  goes  on,  until
we  find  in  different  places  whole  groups  of  nuclei  lying
side  by  side,  in  which  the  divisions  have  taken  place  to  a
large  extent,  or  else  whole  rows  of  them,  one  behind  the
other.  In  the  most  marked  cases  of  this  sort  the  num-
ber of  nuclei  increases  to  such  a  degree,  that  at  first  sight
we  can  scarcely  believe  we  are  looking  at  muscles  ;  and
that  fragments  of  the  primitive  fasciculi  offer  the  greatest

Fig.  104.  Cells  from  the  marrow  of  bones,  a.  Small  cells  with  single  and  divided
nuclei.  6,  b.  Large,  many-nucleated  cells.  350  diameters.  From  Kolliker,  '  Mikr.
Anat.,'  I.,  p.  364,  fig.  113.

348

LECTURE XIV.

Fig.  105.

resemblance  to  those  plaques  a  plusieurs  noijaux  which
Robin  has  described  in  the  marrow  of  bones.  This  is
something  quite  peculiar  which  looks  extremely  like  the
commencement  of  a  real  new-
formation,  only  that  new-forma-
tions in  the  ordinary  sense  of
the  word  are  not  limited  to  sin-
gle cell-constituents.  Besides
we  must  bear  in  mind  this  very
important  fact,  that  exactly  the
same  limitation  takes  place  in  the
earliest  embryonic  development
of  muscle,  in  the  course  of  the
first  growth  of  the  primitive
muscular  fasciculi.  For  this  is
the  manner  in  which  muscle
originally  grows.  If  a  growing
muscle  be  watched,  the  same
division  of  the  nuclei  is  wit-
nessed, and after groups and

rows  of  nuclei  have  arisen  in  it,  they  are,  in  the  course
of  growth,  gradually  thrust  farther  and  farther  asunder
by  the  continual  increase  of  the  intermediate  sarcous  sub-
stance. Now  although  a  growth  in  length  has  not  as  yet
been  demonstrated  with  certainty  in  a  pathologically  irri-
tated muscle — I  say  demonstrated,  because  there  really
is  a  probability  that  something  of  the  kind  may  yet  be
proved  to  be  the  case — we  must  still  hold  the  perfect
analogy  of  morbid  irritative  processes  with  the  natural
ones  of  growth  to  be  a  well-ascertained  fact.  For  the
formative  act  of  real  growth  begins  with  a  multiplication

Fig.  105.  Division  of  nuclei  in  primitive  muscular  fasciculi  from  the  immediate
neighbourhood  of  a  cancerous  tumour  in  the  thigh.  At  A  a  primitive  fasciculus,
the  transverse  striation  of  which  is  not  represented  all  the  way  down,  with  its  na-
tural, spindle-shaped  extremity  f,  and  incipient  multiplication  of  the  nuclei.  B.
Strongly  marked  proliferation  of  nuclei. 300  diameters.

.NEW FORMATION OF CELLS.

349

of  the  centres,  inasmuch  as  the  nuclei  must,  as  was  long
since  shown  by  John  Goodsir,  be  regarded  as  the  central
organs  of  the  cells.

If  now,  gentlemen,  we  advance  a  step  further  in  these
processes,  we  come  to  the  new  formation  of  the  cells  them-
selves. After  the  multiplication  of  the  nuclei  has  taken
place,  the  cell  may  certainly,  as  we  have  seen,  continue  to
subsist  as  a  coherent  structure  ;  still  the  rule  is,  that  even
after  the  first  division  of  the  nuclei,  the  cells  themselves
undergo  division,  and  that  after  some  time  two  cells  are
found  lying  closely  side  by  side,  separated  by  a  more  or
less  straight  partition,  and  each  provided  with  a  nucleus
of  its  own  (Fig.  6,  b,  b).  This  is  the  natural,  regular
manner  in  which  the  real  multiplication  of  cellular  ele-
ments takes  place.  Then,  the  two  cells  may  separate,  if
the  tissue  is  one  which  possesses  intercellular  substance
(Fig.  6,  c,  d)  ;  or  may  remain  lying  close  to  one  another,
in  the  case  of  a  tissue  simply  composed  of  cells  (Fig.  27,
C).  This  series  of  processes,  which  in  their  subsequent
course  lead  to  a  continually  proceeding  division  of  the

Fig.  106.

cells,  and  to  the  production  of  large  groups  of  cells  from
single  ones  (Figs.  9,  22),  occurs  in  the  adult  body  just  as
unquestionably  as  the  result  of  a  direct  irritation  of  the
tissues,  as  the  class  we  spoke  of  before.  If,  for  example,
we  follow  up  a  little  farther  the  case  which  we  before
considered,  of  the  production  of  a  simple  mechanical
irritation  by  drawing  a  thread  through  the  parts,  we  usu-

Fig.  106.  Cells  from  the  central substance  of  an  intervertebral  cartilage  of  an
adult. Intra-capsular  multiplication  of  cells. 300  diameters.

350  LECTURE XIV.

ally  observe  that  the  swelling  is  not  simply  limited  to
the  enlargement  of  the  existing  cells,  but  that  they  divide
and  multiply.  Round  about  a  thread,  which  we  draw
through  the  skin,  a  number  of  young  cells  generally  show
themselves  as  early  as  the  second  day.  The  same  change
may  be  brought  about  by  the  application  of  a  chemical
stimulus.  If,  for  example,  caustics  be  applied  to  the  sur-
face of  a  part,  the  first  thing  that  happens  is  that  the
cells  swell  up  and  then,  when  the  process  follows  a  regu-
lar course,  divide,  and  begin  to  proliferate  more  or  less
abundantly.  Here  too  we  have  still  to  deal  with  actions
which  do  not  exhibit  the  slightest  difference  in  the  real
mode  of  their  accomplishment,  whether  the  part  be  pro-
vided with  nerves,  or  destitute  of  them,  whether  it  con-
tain vessels  or  not.

Accordingly,  we  cannot  say  that  any  part  of  these
processes  appears  to  be  necessarily  dependent  upon  ner-
vous or  vascular  influence,  but,  on  the  contrary,  we  are
in  all  these  cases  referred  to  the  parts  themselves.  The
relation  of  the  vessels  is  not  by  any  means  to  be  ex-
plained in  the  way  in  which  it  is  ordinarily  done  ;  the
absorption  of  matter  into  the  interior  of  the  cells  is  un-
questionably an  act  of  the  cells  themselves,  for  we  are
as  yet  acquainted  with  no  method  enabling  us  to  pro-
duce this  kind  of  proliferation  in  the  body,  by  any  mode
of  experimentation,  through  the  medium  of  an  agency
primarily  affecting  either  the  nerves  or  the  vessels.  The
circulation  may  be  heightened  in  the  parts  as  far  as  it  is
possible  to  heighten  it,  without  the  production  of  such
an  increased  nutrition  of  the  parts  as  to  give  rise  to  any
swelling  or  multiplication  of  the  elements  themselves.
Those  very  experiments  too  upon  the  section  of  the
sympathetic  nerve  which  I  have  already  mentioned,
have,  as  is  well  known,  proved  (I  myself  have  very  fre-
quently performed this experiment and watched its

NEURO-PARALYTICAL INFLAMMATION.  351

effects  with  this  especial  object)  that  an  increased
afflux  of  blood  may  last  for  weeks — an  afflux  of  blood
accompanied  by  a  marked  elevation  of  temperature  and
corresponding  redness,  as  great,  both  of  them,  as  we
ever  meet  with  in  inflammations — without  the  produc-
tion of  the  least  enlargement  in  the  cells  of  the  part,  or
the  excitation  of  any  process  of  proliferation  in  them.
Irritation  of  the  nerves  may  be  combined  therewith.
But  when  the  tissues  themselves  are  not  irritated,  when
the  irritation  is  not  made  to  act  upon  the  parts  them-
selves, either  by  the  direct  application  of  the  irritating
matters,  or  by  their  introduction  into  the  blood,  the
occurrence  of  these  changes  cannot  be  relied  upon.
This  is  a  most  important  argument,  from  which  I  draw
the  conclusion  that  these  active  processes  have  their
foundation  in  the  special  action  of  the  elementary  parts,
an  action  which  does  not  depend  upon  an  increased
afflux  of  blood  or  any  excitation  of  the  nerves,  but
which  is  certainly  promoted  by  them,  though  it  can  also
continue  entirely  independent  of  them,  and  manifests
itself  with  just  as  great  distinctness  in  a  paralyzed  and
nerveless  part.

In  support  of  these  positions  I  will  only  add  that
more  recent  observations  have  gradually  done  away
with  the  whole  class  of  the  so-called  neuro-paralytical
inflammations.  The  two  nerves  with  which  we  are
almost  exclusively  concerned  in  the  discussion  of  inflam-
matory phenomena,  are  the  pneumogastric  and  the  fifth
pair,  after  the  section  of  which,  in  one  case,  pneumonia,
in  the  other,  those  celebrated  changes  in  the  eyeball
have  been  observed  to  declare  themselves.  These  ob-
servations have  now  been  explained  in  this  way.  that
inflammations  certainly  may  come  on  after  such  sections,
but  that  the  real  interpretation  to  be  put  upon  them  is,

352  LECTURE  XIV.

that  they  manifest  themselves  in  spite  of  the  section*
With  regard  to  the  pneumogastric  it  was,  as  is  well
known,  long  since  shown  by  Traube  that  the  paralysis
of  the  rima  glottidis,  whereby  the  entrance  of  the  buc-
cal fluids  into  the  air-passages  is  facilitated,  is  the
principal  source  of  the  inflammation  ;  besides,  the  more
accurate  interpretation  of  the  pathological  specimens
has  determined,  that  a  great  part  of  what  had  been
called  pneumonia,  was  really  nothing  more  than  atelec-
tasis with  hyperemia  of  the  lungs  ;  actual  pneumonia
may  with  certainty  be  avoided,  if  the  possibility  of  the
penetration  of  foreign  bodies  into  the  bronchi  is  cut  off.
The  same  has  been  ascertained  to  be  the  case  with  the
inflammations  coming  on  after  the  section  of  the  fifth
pair,  and  indeed  by  means  of  a  very  simple  experiment.
After  a  number  of  attempts  of  the  most  varied  kind
had  been  made  for  the  purpose  of  removing  the  different
disturbing  influences  affecting  the  eye  that  was  deprived
of  its  sensibility,  a  very  simple  method  was  at  last  dis-
covered in  Utrecht  for  providing  the  eye  with  a  substi-
tute for  its  sensitive  apparatus  ;  for  Snellen  sewed  be-
fore the  eyes  of  animals,  in  which  he  had  cut  the  fifth
pair,  their  still  sensitive  ears.  From  that  time  the  ani-
mals had  no  more  attacks  of  inflammation,  inasmuch  as
on  the  one  hand  a  direct  protection  was  afforded  to  the
eye,  and  on  the  other  the  animals  were  preserved  by
the  presence  of  a  sensitive  covering  from  all  traumatic
influences.  As  soon  as  sensation  was  re-established,  not
in  the  eye  itself,  but  only  before  the  eye,  what  was
really  nothing  more  than  a  traumatic  inflammation  was
got  rid  of.f

*  For  if,  as  the  neuro-pathologists  assume,  irritation  produces  inflammation
through  the  medium  of  the  nerves,  then,  when  the  nerves  are  cut,  all  inflammation
ought  to  be  impossible.

\  In  the  text  the  influence  of  the  section  of  nerves  is  perhaps  not  described  with

NEURO-PARALYTICAL  INFLAMMATION.  35*

We  can  therefore  now  say,  there  is  no  form  of  dis-
turbance of  this  kind  known  which  can  be  traced  to  the
abolition  of  the  action  of  a  nerve.  A  part  may  be  para-
lyzed without  becoming  inflamed  ;  it  may  be  anaesthetic
without  becoming  exposed  to  this  danger.  There  is
always  required  in  addition  some  special  irritation,  either
of  a  mechanical  or  chemical  nature,  and  proceeding
either  from  without  or  from  the  blood,  in  order  to  pro-
duce the  peculiar  liability.

In  this  manner  therefore  we  have,  as  you  see,  a  series
of  connecting  links  between  facts  eminently  pathological
and  the  most  common  processes  of  physiological  life
facts  of  which  the  special  import  can,  however,  only  be
understood  and  defined,  when  the  distinctions  are  made
to  which  I  called  your  attention  at  the  commencement
of  the  lecture,  that  is,  when  the  different  kinds  of  irrita-
tion are  separated  according  to  their  functional,  nutritive

sufficient  minuteness.  According  to  the  author's  views,  of  which  a  more  detailed
account  may  be  found  in  his  Handbuch  der  spec.  Pathologie  und  Ther.  Erlangen,
1854  (Vol.  I.,  pp.  31,  50,  80,  276,  314,  319),  the  section  and  paralysis  of  nerves
certainly  exercise  some  influence  upon  the  nutrition  of  the  tissues,  although  per-
haps only  an  indirect  one.  The  states  arising  from  such  causes  he  has  classed
together  under  the  name  of  Neurotic  Atrophy.  Parts  which  have  in  this  way
suffered  derangement  in  their  nutrition,  and  as  a  consequence  have  become  weak-
ened, are  less  capable  of  controlling  the  disorders  by  which  they  are  attacked,  and
accordingly  simple  irritation  in  them  readily  becomes  aggravated  into  inflammation
(asthenic  inflammation).  But  in  these  cases  the  inflammation  is  always  the  conse-
quence of  some  special  irritation,  never  the  direct  result  of  the  section  of  the
nerves.  Still,  as  in  the  case  of  the  fifth  pair  and  the  pneumogastric,  such  section
may  be  the  cause  of  irritants'  (foreign  bodies  and  other  agents)  more  readily  acting
upon  the  anaesthetic  or  paralyzed  parts.  CI.  Bernard  has  recently  declared  that  the
section  or  irritation  of  nerves  in  weakened  parts  produces  effects  which  cannot  be
elicited  in  healthy  ones.  We  have  therefore  here  to  deal  with  a  very  complicated
state  of  things.  The  change  in  the  nerve  is  generally  succeeded  by  a  disturbance
in  the  function  or  circulation  of  the  part,  or  in  both,  and  when  the  part  is  already
weakened  (i.  e.,  altered  in  its  nutrition)  this  disturbance  may  prove  a  source  of
irritation  to  it,  and  thus  the  effects  be  produced  which  Bernard  ascribes  to  other
causes.  In  quite  a  similar  manner  we  see  that,  even  when  the  nervous  supply  is  in
its  normal  state,  purely  mechanical  disturbances  in  the  circulation  act  upon  weak-
ened parts  as  morbid  irritants. — From  a  MS.  Note  by  the  Author.

23

354  LECTURE  XIV.

or  formative  nature.  If  they  are  jumbled  together,  as
they  have  been  b}7  the  neurists,  and  especially,  if  the
formative  and  nutritive  processes  are  not  kept  apart,
then  it  is  impossible  to  arrive  at  any  simple  explanation
of  the  phenomena.

Those  states  of  irritation  which  we  witness  in  the
course  of  the  severer  forms  of  disease — the  really
inflammatory  hinds  of  irritation — never  in  any  case
admit  of  a  simple  explanation.  In  inflammation  we
find  side  by  side  all  the  forms  of  irritation  of  which  I
have  given  you  an  analysis.  Indeed,  we  very  frequently
see,  that  when  the  organ  itself  is  made  up  of  different
parts,  one  part  of  the  tissue  undergoes  functional  or
nutritive,  another  formative  changes.  If  we  consider
what  happens  in  a  muscle,  a  chemical  or  traumatic
stimulus  will  perhaps  in  the  first  instance  produce  a
functional  irritation  of  the  primitive  fasciculi  ;  the  mus-
cle contracts,  but  then  nutritive  disturbances  declare
themselves.  On  the  other  hand  in  the  interstitial  con-
nective tissue,  which  binds  the  individual  fasciculi  of  the
muscle  together,  real  new-formations  are  readily  pro-
duced, commonly  pus.  Here  we  have  to  deal  with  a
formative  irritation,  whilst  the  inflamed  primitive  fasci-
culus commonly  produces  no  pus,  any  more  than  it  does
new  muscular  substance  ;  on  the  contrary  we  most  fre-
quently see,  when  the  irritation  has  attained  a  certain
height,  degenerative  processes  set  in.  In  this  manner
the  three  forms  of  irritation  may  be  distinguished  in  one
part.  Of  course  there  may  be  in  addition  also  an  irri-
tation of  the  nerves,  but  this  has,  at  least  if  we  do
not  take  function  into  account,  no  connection  of  cause
and  effect  with  the  processes  going  on  in  the  tissue
proper,  but  is  nothing  more  than  a  collateral  effect  of
the  original  disturbance.  This  must,  in  my  opinion,
be  regarded  as  the  most  important  result  derived  from

INFLAMMATORY IRRITATION.  355

the  facts  of  Special  Histology,  and  it  is  all  the  more
certain  because  it  can  be  tested  both  by  experiment  and
by  physiological  and  pathological  experience.

Soon,  I  will  show  you  how  in  the  study  of  inflamma-
tory processes  a  clearer  apprehension  of  their  nature
may  hereby  be  obtained.

LECTURE XV.

APRIL 10,  1858.

PASSIVE  PKOCESSES. FATTY  DEGENERATION.

Fassive  processes  in  their  two  chief  tendencies  to  degeneration ;  Necrobiosis  (soft

ening  and  disintegration)  and  induration.
Fatty  degeneration — Histological  history  of  fat  in  the  animal  body;  fat  as  a  com-
ponent of  the  tissues,  as  a  transitory  infiltration,  and  as  a  necrobiotic  matter.
Adipose  tissue — Polysarcia — Fatty  tumours — Interstitial  formation  of  fat — Fatty

degeneration  of  muscles.
Fatty  infiltration — Intestines ;  structure  and  functions  of  the  villi — Reabsorption

and  retention  of  the  chyle — Liver ;  intermediate  interchange  of  matter  by

means  of  the  biliary  ducts. Fatty  liver.
Fatty  metamorphosis — Glands ;  secretion  of  sebaceous  matter  and  milk  (colostrum)

— Granule-cells  and  granule-globules — Inflammatory  globules — Arteries ;  fatty

usure  and  atheroma  in  them — Fatty  debris.

We  have,  gentlemen,  hitherto  nearly  always  spoken
of  the  actions  of  cells  and  the  processes  which  manifest
themselves  in  them,  when,  in  consequence  of  any  exter-
nal influence,  they  give  signs  of  their  vitality.  There
take  place  in  the  body,  however,  also  a  tolerably  large
number  of  passive  processes,  in  which,  as  far  at  least  as
can  be  demonstrated,  there  is  no  particular  activity  dis-
played by  the  cells.  Allow  me  therefore,  before  we
proceed  farther  in  the  description  of  the  active  processes,
to  speak  a  little  more  in  detail  concerning  these  passive
processes.  For  the  history  of  the  affections  of  cells,  as
they  are exhibited  to  us  in  our  patients,  is  generally

866

DEGENERATION.  357

composed  of  processes,  which  belong,  some  of  them,
rather  to  the  active  class,  and  some  of  them,  rather  to
the  passive  one  ;  and  the  obvious  results  are  in  many
cases  apparently  so  similar  in  both  classes,  that  the  ulti-
mate changes  which  we  meet  with,  after  the  continuance
of  the  process  for  a  certain  time,  may  very  nearly  be
the  same.  Here  particularly  it  was  for  a  time,  very
difficult  to  define  the  boundaries,  and  a  great  part
of  the  confusion  which  marked  early  microscopical
efforts,  was  occasioned  by  the  extraordinary  difficulty
there  was  in  separating  active  and  passive  disturbances.

Passive  disturbances  I  call  those  changes  in  cellular
elements,  whereby  they  at  once  either  merely  lose  a  por-
tion of  their  activity,  or  are  so  completely  destroyed,  that
a  loss  of  substance,  a  diminution  in  the  sum  total  of  the
constituents  of  the  body  is  produced.  Both  series  of  pas-
sive processes,  taken  together,  viz.,  those  which  are  in  the
first  instance  marked  by  an  essential  diminution  of  power,
and  those  which  terminate  in  a  complete  destruction  of
the  parts,  constitute  the  chief  part  of  the  domain  of  what
is  called  degeneration,  although — a  point  that  we  must
hereafter  consider  more  closely — a  great  part  of  what
must  be  called  degeneration  must  be  transferred  to  the
series  of  active  processes.

It  makes  of  course  an  extremely  great  difference  whe-
ther a  vital  element  continues  to  subsist  as  such,  or  whe-
ther it  entirely  and  completely  perishes  :  whether  at  the
conclusion  of  the  process,  it  still  exists,  even  though  in  a
condition  of  much  diminished,  functional  power,  or  whe-
ther it  is  altogether  destroyed.  And  here  we  have  the
important  practical  distinction,  that  in  the  one  series  of
processes  there  is  a  possibility  of  a  repair  of  the  cells,
whilst  in  the  other  direct  repair  is  impossible,  and  a  rege-
neration can  only  take  place  by  means  of  a  substitution
of  new  cells  from  the  neighbourhood. For  when  a cell

358  LECTURE XV.

has  perished,  it  is  of  course  impossible  for  any  further
development  to  originate  in  it.

This  latter  category,  where  the  cells  are  destroyed
during  the  course  of  the  process,  I  proposed  a  few  years
ago  to  designate  by  a  term  which  has  been  employed  to
express  disease  generally  by  K.  H.  Schultz,  viz.,  Necro-
biosis* For  we  have,  namely,  always  here  to  deal  with
a  gradual  decay  and  death,  a  dissolution,  we  might  almost
say,  a  necrosis.  But  the  idea  of  necrosis  really  does  not
offer  any  analogy  to  these  processes,  inasmuch  as  in  ne-
crosis we  conceive  the  mortified  part  to  be  preserved
more  or  less  in  its  external  form.  Here  on  the  contrary
the  part  vanishes,  so  that  we  can  no  longer  perceive  it
in  its  previous  form.  We  have  no  necrosed  fragment  at
the  end  of  the  process,  no  mortification  of  the  ordinary
kind,  but  a  mass  in  which  absolutely  nothing  of  the  pre-
viously existing  tissues  is  preserved.  The  necrobiotic  pro-
cesses, which  must  be  completely  separated  from  necrosis,
are  in  general  attended  by  softening  as  their  ultimate  re-
sult. This  commences  with  a  friability  of  the  parts  ;  they
lose  their  coherence,  at  last  really  liquefy,  and  more  or  less
moveable,  pulpy  or  fluid  products  take  their  place.  We
might  therefore  without  more  ado  name  this  whole  series
of  necrobiotic  processes  softenings,  if  a  number  of  them
did  not  run  their  course,  without  the  malacia's  ever  be-
coming apparent  to  the  naked  eye.  As  soon,  namely,
as  a  process  of  this  sort  sets  in  in  a  compound  organ,  as
for  example,  a  muscle,  a  palpable  myo-malacia  is  cer-
tainly produced  when  all  the  muscular  elements  at  a
given  point  are  at  once  affected  ;  but  it  happens  far  more
frequently  that,  in  the  course  of  a  muscle,  only  a  compa-
ratively small  number  of  primitive  fasciculi  are  affected,

*  Necrobiosis  is  death  brought  on  by  (altered)  life — a  spontaneous  wearing  out
of  living  parts— the  destruction  and  annihilation  consequent  upon  life — natural  as
opposed  to  violent  death  (mortification.)—  From  a  MS.  Note  by  the  Author.

FATTY DEGENERATION.  359

whilst  the  others  remain  almost  intact.  Then  indeed  a
softening  really  does  occur,  but  such  a  minute  one,  that
it  is  altogether  imperceptible  to  the  naked  eye  and  can
only  be  demonstrated  microscopically.  In  this  case  we
generally  make  use  of  the  expression,  atrophy  of  muscle,
although  the  process  which  has  attacked  the  individual
primitive  fasciculi,  does  not  in  any  way  differ  in  its  na-
ture from  the  processes  which  we  at  other  times  term
softening  of  muscle.

This  is  the  reason,  why  the  term  softening,  which  must
be  reserved  for  coarse  pathological  anatomy,  cannot  sim-
ply be  applied  to  histological  processes,  and  why  it  is
better  to  say  necrobiosis,  when  we  have  to  do  with  these
more  delicate  processes.  The  common  feature  of  all  the
varieties  of  the  necrobiotic  process  is,  you  know,  that  the
affected  part  at  the  close  of  the  process  is  destroyed,  nay
annihilated.

A  second  class  of  passive  processes  is  formed  by  the
simply  degenerative  forms,  in  which,  at  the  conclusion  of
the  process,  the  affected  part  is  in  some  condition  or  other
less  fitting  it  for  action,  and  has  generally  become  more
rigid.  This  group  might  therefore  be  termed  hardenings
(indurations)  and  thus  a  group  be  formed  distinguishable
even  externally  from  the  necrobiotic  processes.  Only
the  term  induration  also  would  easily  be  misunderstood,
inasmuch  as  in  this  class  likewise  many  conditions  occur,
in  which  the  hardness  of  the  organ  on  the  whole  at  least
does  not  become  more  considerable,  but  only  isolated,
very  minute  parts  undergo  change,  so  that  no  very  strik-
ing effects  are  apparent  to  the  sense  of  touch.

Allow  me  now  to  hold  up  to  you  as  types  a  few  of  the
processes  belonging  to  this  class,  which  are  of  the  great-
est importance  in  a  directly  practical  point  of  view.

Among  the  necrobiotic  processes  the  one  which  is  un-

360  LECTURE  XV.

questionably  the  most  widely  spread  and  the  most  im-
portant in  the  course  of  all  cellular  disturbances,  is  fatty
metamorphosis,  or  as  it  has  also  long  been  wont  to  be
called,  fatty  degeneration.  This  process  is  attended  by  a
continually  increasing  accumulation  of  fat  in  different
organs.  Even  the  old  notion  of  fatty  degeneration  in-
volved the  idea  of  a  continually  increasing  change  of  such
a  nature  that  pure  fat  at  last  took  the  place  of  whole
parts  of  organs.  It  has  turned  out,  however,  that  thi$
old  notion,  which  is  even  now  retained  by  many  in  the
language  of  pathology,  includes  a  great  number  of  com-
pletely different  processes,  and  that  errors  would  inevit-
ably be  committed  if  it  were  sought  to  interpret  the  whole
group  from  a  pathogenical  point  of  view,  in  a  simple
manner.

The  history  of  fat  in  its  relation  to  the  tissues  may,  gene-
rally speaking,  be  considered  under  three  aspects.  We
find  namely  one  class  of  tissues  in  the  body,  which  serve
as  physiological  reservoirs  for  fat,  and  in  which  the  fat  is
contained  as  a  kind  of  necessary  appurtenance,  without
however  their  own  permanency  being  in  any  way  en-
dangered by  its  presence.  On  the  contrary,  we  are  actu-
ally accustomed  to  estimate  the  well-being  of  an  indivi-
dual by  the  amount  of  fat  contained  in  certain  tissues,
and  to  regard  the  degree  of  fulness  presented  by  the  in-
dividual fat-cells  as  a  criterion  of  the  successful  progress
of  the  interchange  of  matter  generally.  This  forms  there-
fore a  complete  contrast  to  the  necrobiotic  processes,  in
which  the  part,  in  consequence  of  the  accumulation  of  fat,
really  altogether  ceases  to  exist.

A  second  series  of  tissues  do  not  constitute  regular  re-
servoirs for  fat,  on  the  contrary  fat  is  found  in  them  only
at  certain  times  and  transitorily,  for  after  a  short  time  it
again  disappears  from  them,  without  their  being  on  that
account  left  in  an  altered  state. This  is  the  case  in  the

PHYSIOLOGICAL FATTY METAMORPHOSIS.  361

ordinary  absorption  of  fat  from  the  intestinal  canal.
When  we  drink  milk,  we  expect  in  accordance  with  old
experience  that  it  will  gradually  pass  from  the  intestines
into  the  lacteals,  and  thence  be  conveyed  into  the  blood  ;
we  know  that  the  passage  of  digested  matters  from  the
intestines  into  the  lacteals  takes  place  through  the  epithe-
lium and  the  villi,  and  that  some  hours  after  a  meal  the
epithelium  and  the  villi  are  full  of  fat.  Now,  with  respect
to  such  a  fat- containing  villus  or  epithelial  cell,  we  take
for  granted  that  in  the  natural  course  of  events  it  will  at
last  yield  up  its  fat,  and  after  some  time  again  become
perfectly  free  from  it.  This  is  fatty  infiltration  of  a
purely  transitory  character.

Finally,  we  have  a  third  series  of  processes,  namely,
those  which  lead  to  necrobiosis  and  which  have  of  late
frequently  been  regarded  as  peculiarly  pathological  ones.
But,  as  it  has  been  shown  to  be  the  case  in  all  other  con-
ditions that  pathological  processes  are  not  specific  ones,
but,  on  the  contrary,  that  others  analogous  to  them  exist
in  normal  life,  so  also  the  conviction  has  been  acquired
that  this  necrobiotic  development  of  fat  is  an  entirely
regular  and  typical  process  in  certain  parts  of  the  body,
nay  that  it  is  even  met  with  in  very  obvious  forms  in
physiological  life.  The  most  important  types  of  this  pro-
cess we  find  on  the  one  hand  in  the  secretion  of  milk,
the  sebaceous  matter  of  the  skin,  the  cerumen  of  the  ears,
etc.,  and  on  the  other  in  the  formation  of  the  corpus  lu-
teum  in  the  ovaries.  In  all  these  parts  a  development
of  fat  takes  place  precisely  in  the  same  manner  that  we
meet  with  it  in  the  nbcrobiotic  fatty  metamorphosis
occurring  from  morbid  causes,  and  in  what  we  call  seba-
ceous matter,  milk  or  colostrum  we  have  formations  ana-
logous to  the  pathological  masses  of  fat  which  constitute
fatty  softening.  If  in  any  person  milk  is  manufactured
in  the  brain  instead  of  in  the  mammary  gland,  this  con-

362

LECTURE XV.

stitutes  one  form  of  cerebral  softening  ;  the  product  may
morphologically  exactly  correspond  with  what  in  the
mammary  gland  would  have  been  quite  normal.  The  great
difference,  however,  is  this,  that,  whilst  in  the  mammary
gland  the  cells  which  perish  are  replaced  by  a  succession
of  new  cells,  the  disintegration  of  elements  in  an  organ
which  is  not  arranged  so  as  to  furnish  such  a  succession,
leads  to  a  permanent  loss  of  substance.  The  same  process
which  in  one  organ  yields  the  happiest,  nay  the  sweetest,
results,  brings  along  with  it  in  another,  painful  lesions.

If  then  you  picture  to  yourselves  these  three  different
physiological  types,  we  have  in  the  first  case  an  accumu-
lation of  fat  in  the  cells  in  such  a  way,  that  at  the  close
of  the  process  every  single  cell  is  entirely  full  of  it.  This
yields  us  the  type  of  the  so-called  adipose  cellular  tissue,
or  simply,  adipose  tissue,  as  it  occurs  in  such  large  masses
especially  in  the  subcutaneous  tissue,  where  it  on  the
one  hand  gives  rise  to  beauty,  particularly  in  the  female
figure,  and  on  the  other  to  the  pathological  conditions  of
obesity  or  polysarcia.  Fat-cells  always  possess  a  mem-
brane and  fatty  contents,  but  the  fat  so  completely  fills
up  the  interior,  and  the  membrane  is  so  extremely  thin,
delicate  and  tense,  that  usually  nothing  else  is  seen  than

Fig.  107.

Fig.  107.  Adipose  cellular  tissue  from  the  panniculus  [adiposus.]  A.  Ordinary
subcutaneous  tissue,  with  fat-cells,  some  interstitial  tissue,  and  at  b  vascular  loops  ;
a,  an  isolated  fat-cell  with  membrane,  nucleus  and  nucleolus.  B.  Atrophic  fat  in
phthisis. 300  diameters.

ADIPOSE TISSUE— FATTY DEGENERATION OF MUSCLES. 363

the  drop  of  fat,  and  thus  it  was,  until  very  recently,  still
a  matter  of  discussion  whether  the  fat-cells  really  were
cells. It  is  in  reality  very  difficult  to  come  to a  distinct
decision  upon  the  subject,  but  supporting  testimony  of  a
very  beautiful  character  is  supplied  in  the  course  of  natu-
ral processes. When  a  person  becomes  thinner,  the fat
gradually  disappears,  the  membrane  loses  somewhat  of
its  tension,  is  no  longer  so  thin  and  delicate,  and  thus
becomes  more  clearly  manifest,  being  sometimes  distinctly
separated  from  the  drop  of  fat,  and  even  provided  with  a
recognizable nucleus  (Fig.  107,  A,  a). We  have here
therefore  a  real,  complete  cell  with  nucleus  and  mem-
brane, though  the  contents  have  been  almost  entirely  sup-
planted by  the  fat  it  has  taken  up. This  so-called  adi-
pose cellular  tissue  is  a  form  of  connective  tissue  (p.  76),
and  when  it  undergoes  retrogressive  metamorphosis,  it  is
clearly  seen  to  be  reduced  to  connective  or  mucous  tis-
sue, for  between  the  cells  a  small  quantity  of  intercellu-
lar substance  again  becomes  apparent  (Fig.  107,  A,  b,  B).
This  species  of  adipose  tissue  it  is,  gentlemen,  which
under  certain  circumstances  not  only  gives  rise  to  poly-
sarcia  and  obesity,  from  continually  increasing  quantities
of  connective  tissue  becoming  involved  in  this  accumu-
lation of  fat,  but  is  also  the  foundation  of  all  anomalous
fatty  structures,  for  example,  of  lipomata. The  differ-
ent forms  of  these  structures,  and  particularly  real  fatty
tumours, are  distinguished  from one  another  only  by
the greater  or  less  quantity  of  interstitial connective
tissue,  which  the  tumour  contains,  and  upon  which  their
greater or less consistence  depends. It is the same
form  of  accumulation  of  fat  which  we see  appear  in
morbid  conditions  in  a  series  of  cases  which,  in  compli-
ance with  old  tradition,  are  still  called  fatty  degenera-
tion ;  and  it  is  indeed  particularly  the  fatty  degeneration
of  muscles  which  in  many  instances presents nothing

364  LECTURE  XV.

else  than  a  more  or  less  advanced  development  of  adi-
pose cellular  tissue  between  the  primitive  muscular
fasciculi.  It  is  a  similar  process  to  that  which  we  meet
with  in  the  fattening  of  animals,  and  which  is  often
exhibited  in  simply  fattened  muscles  in  the  human  body.
Fat-cells  insinuate  themselves  between  the  primitive
muscular  fasciculi,  and  lie  of  course  in  stripes  in  the
direction  of  the  muscular  fibres,  which  may  remain
unchanged.  The  development  in  this  case  has  its  origin
in  the  interstitial  tissue  of  the  muscle.  At  the  com-
mencement of  the  development,
and  when  it  proceeds  with  very
great  regularity,  it  may  happen,
that  single  rows  of  fat-cells
lying  one  behind  the  other  al-
ternate with  the  rows  of  muscu-
lar elements.  In  this  case,
where  the  primitive  fasciculi  are
forced  asunder,  and  the  circu-
lation in  the  muscle  is  generally
disturbed  in  consequence  of  the  abundant  development
of  fat,  so  that  the  flesh  becomes  pale — it  looks  to  the
naked  eye  as  if  there  no  longer  existed  any  muscular
tissue  whatever.  If,  for  example,  in  an  inferior  ex-
tremity, which  in  consequence  of  an  anchylosis  of  the
knee  has  remained  unexercised,  the  gastrocnemii  are
examined,  we  find  nothing  but  a  yellowish  mass  exhi-
biting scarcely  any  striae  and  without  any  appearance
of  flesh,  but  upon  a  more  minute  examination  it  is  dis-
covered, that  the  primitive  muscular  fasciculi  still  pass,
essentially  unaltered,  through  the  fat.  In  this  case  the
fat  forms  an  impediment  to  the  use  of  the  muscle,  but
the  primitive  fasciculi  still  exist  and  are  to  a  certain

Fig.  108.  Interstitial  growth  of  fat  in  muscle  (fattening), ff.  Rows  of  intersti-
tial fat-cells ;  m,  m,  m,  primitive  muscular  fasciculi. 300  diameters.

TRANSITORY FATTY INFILTRATION.  365

extent  capable  of  action.  This  process  therefore  is
essentially  different  from  necrobiosis,  where  the  muscu-
lar fibres  as  such  completely  perish.  Here  we  have  a
purely  interstitial  formation  of  adipose  tissue,  ordinary
connective  tissue  becoming  converted  into  adipose  tissue,
and  the  term,  fatty  degeneration,  which  is  so  very  liable
to  be  misunderstood,  should  be  avoided.

This  form  occurs  pretty  frequently,  especially  in  the
heart,  and  may,  when  it  attains  a  great  extent,  produce
considerable  derangement  in  the  motor  power  of  the
muscular  substance  of  this  organ,  but  in  pathological
importance  it  stands  far  below  real  fatty  metamorphosis,
although  this  again  in  its  outwardly  visible  results  much
resembles  it.  The  hearts  described  by  the  old  anato-
mists as  fatty  were  in  a  great  measure  only  hearts  infil-
trated with  fat ;  on  the  other  hand,  what  is  meant  at
the  present  day  when  genuine  fatty  degeneration  (meta-
morphosis) of  the  heart  is  spoken  of,  is  not  this  obesity
of  the  heart,  this  interlarding  of  its  fibres  with  fat-cells,
but  rather  a  real  transformation  of  its  substance,  going
on  in  the  interior  of  the  fibres  (Fig.  23).  In  the  latter
case  the  fat  lies  in,  in  the  former  between  the  primitive
fasciculi.

The  second  series  of  processes  consists  in  the  transi-
tory accumulation  of  fat  in  certain  organs,  as  we  meet
with  it  in  a  typical  form  in  digestion.  When  a  fatty
substance  has  been  eaten,  and  has  passed  into  the  state
of  emulsion,  we  find  that,  when  it  has  reached  the
upper  end  of  the  jejunum,  and  to  some  extent  even  in
the  duodenum,  the  villi  of  the  mucous  membrane  be-
come whitish,  clouded  and  thick,  and  more  minute
examination  shows,  that  they  are  filled  with  extremely
minute  granules,  much  more  minute  than  can  be  pro-
duced by  any  artificial  emulsion.  These  granules,
which  are  found even  in  the  chyme,  come  in  the  first

366

LECTURE XV.

instance  into  contact  with  the  cylindrical  epithelium
with  which  every  single  intestinal  villus  is  invested.  On
the  surface  of  every  epithelial  cell  we  find,  as  was  first
discovered  by  Kolliker,  a  peculiar  border  which,  when
the  cell  is  seen  in  profile,  exhibits  minute  and  fine  stride  ;
when  viewed  from  above,  and  seen  upon  the  surface,
the  cell  appears  hexagonal  and,  as  it  were,  dotted  over
with  a  number  of  minute  points  (Comp.  the  epithelium
of  the  gall-bladder,  Fig.  14,  and  also  Fig.  109,  A).
Kolliker  has  put  forward  the  conjecture,  that  these  fine
striae  and  dots  correspond  to  minute  pore-canals,  and
that  the  absorption  of  the  fat  is  effected  by  its  minute
particles  being  taken  up  through  these  minute  pores
upon  the  surface  of  the  epithelial  cells.  But  the  object
is  one  which  is  accessible  only  to  the  highest  powers  of
our  optical  instruments,  and  it  has  therefore  hitherto
been  impossible  to  obtain  perfectly  clear  notions  as  to
whether  the  striae  really  correspond  to  fine canals,  or

Fig.  109.

Fig.  109.  Intestinal  villi,  showing  the  absorption  of  fat.  A.  Normal  human
intestinal  villus  from  the  jejunum  ;  at  a  the  cylindrical  epithelium  in  part  still
investing  it  with  the  delicate  border  and  nuclei ;  c,  the  central  lacteal  vessel ;
v,  v,  blood-vessels  ;  in  the  rest  of  the  parenchyma  the  nuclei  of  the  connective  and
muscular  tissue.  B.  Villus  in  a  state  of  contraction,  from  a  dog.  C.  Human
intestinal  villus  during  the  absorption  of  chyle,  i>,  in  a  case  of  retention  of  chyle  ;
at  the  apex  a  large  fat-drop,  emerging  from  a  crystalline  envelope. 280  diameters.

ABSORPTION  OF  FAT IN  THE INTESTINES.  367

whether,  as  Briicke  supposes,  the  truth  is  rather  that
the  whole  of  this  upper  border  is  composed  of  little
rods  or  pillars  resembling  cilia.  I  must  confess  that  my
own  investigations  also  have  rather  disposed  me  to
adopt  this  latter  opinion,  especially  as  comparative  his-
tology shows  us  real  ciliated  epithelium  to  be  the  equi-
valent structure  in  the  same  parts.  At  all  events  this
much  is  certain,  that,  a  short  time  after  digestion  has  taken
place,  the  fat  no  longer  lies  only  outside,  but  is  found
also  inside,  the  cells,  and  first  at  their  outer  end  ;  then
it  gradually  advances  farther  and  farther  inwards  in  the
cells,  and  indeed  so  distinctly  in  rows,  that  it  might
easily  give  rise  to  the  impression,  that  fine  canals  ran
throughout  the  whole  length  of  the  cells  themselves
(Fig.  109,  C,  a).  But  this  too  is  a  question  which  will
not,  I  think,  with  our  present  optical  instruments,  be  so
very  speedily  settled.  At  any  rate,  the  plain  fact  re-
mains, that  the  fat  passes  through  the  cells-,  and  this
indeed  in  such  a  way,  that  at  first  only  their  outer  end
is  filled  with  it,  then  a  time  comes  when  they  are  quite
full  of  fat,  then  a  little  later  the  outer  part  again  be-
comes entirely  free  from  it,  whilst  the  inner  still  con-
tains a  little,  until  at  last  all  the  fat  entirely  vanishes
from  the  cells.  In  this  manner  its  gradual  progress  may
be  followed  from  hour  to  hour.  After  the  fat  has  ad-
vanced as  far  as  the  inner  extremity  of  the  cells,  it
begins  to  pass  into  the  so-called  parenchyma  of  the
villus  (Fig.  109,  C).  Whether  the  epithelial  cells  have
an  orifice  below,  and  whether,  as  has  been  quite  re-
cently maintained  by  Heidenhain  junior,  they  are  con-
nected with  extremely  minute  canals  formed  by  the  con-
nective-tissue-corpuscles, is  not  quite  decided,  though  it
is  very  probable.  It  is  extremely  difficult  to  come  to
any  definite  conclusions  with  regard  to  these  extremely
minute  arrangements  of  the  substance  of  tissues. In

368  LECTURE  XV.

the  interior  of  the  villi  we  generally  find  the  network
of  blood-vessels  a  little  below  the  surface  (Fig.  109,
A,  v,  v),  whilst  in  its  axis  there  is  a  tolerably  wide  cana-
licular cavity  with  a  blunt  extremity,  the  commence-
ment of  the  lacteal  vessel,  as  far  as  it  can  at  present  be
determined  with  certainty  (Fig.  109,  A,  c).  At  the
periphery  of  the  villi  Briicke  has  discovered  a  layer  of
muscular  fibres,  which  is  of  great  importance  in  diges-
tion, inasmuch  as  by  its  help  an  approximation  of  the
apex  of  the  villus  to  its  base,  a  shortening  is  effected,
as  may  very  readily  be  seen.  Upon  cutting  off  villi
from  the  intestine  of  an  animal  just  killed,  they
may  be  seen  under  the  microscope  to  contract,  become
wrinkled,  thicker  and  shorter  (Fig.  109,  B) ;  thereby  a
pressure  from  without  inwards  is  manifestly  produced,
which  promotes  the  onward  movement  of  the  juices.
So  far  the  matter  is  tolerably  clear,  only  what  sort  of
a  structure  the  rest  of  the  parenchyma  has,  it  is  ex-
tremely difficult  to  see.  Upon  the  outer  side  of  the
muscular  layer,  smallish  nuclei  are  seen,  which,  as  I
pointed  out  many  years  ago,  are  now  and  then  pretty
distinctly  enclosed  in  fine,  cellular  elements.  But
whether  these  parenchymatous  cells  anastomose  with
one  another  so  as  to  form  a  special  network,  I  am
unable  to  say.  During  the  process  of  absorption  it
looks  as  if  the  fat  which  keeps  penetrating  farther  and
farther  into  the  interior  of  the  villi,  filled  up  the  whole
parenchyma.*  At  last  it  reaches  the  central  lacteal,  and
there  the  regular  current  of  chyle  begins.

The  whole  process  therefore  presupposes  an  emulsive
condition  of  the  fat,  which  penetrates  through  the  parts

*  I  have  quite  recently  convinced  myself  by  the  examination  of  transverse  sec-
tions of  villi,  filled  with  chyle,  in  man,  that  the  fat  does  not  lie  scattered  in  the
parenchyma,  but  forms  deposits  in  the  interior  of  special  minute  cavities  (cells ?).--
Note  to  the  Second  Edition.

RETENTION OF CHYLE.  369

everywhere  in  a  state  of  extremely  minute  division  ;  in
the  regular  course  of  events  the  particles  are  so  ex-
tremely minute,  that  if  the  chyle  is  examined  when  fresh
and  still  warm,  scarcely  a  trace  of  the  solid  particles
can  be  detected  in  it.  But  every  disturbance  which
occurs  in  the  process  of  absorption,  and  impedes  the
onward  movement  of  the  fatty  particles,  causes  them  to
run  together  ;  larger  granules  separate  in  the  tissues,
drops  appear  which  continually  increase  in  volume,  until
at  length  they  attain  quite  a  large  size.  These  are
found  even  in  the  epithelial  cells  or  within  the  tissue  of
the  villi,  and  indeed  it  sometimes  happens  that  the  ends
of  the  lacteals  grow  wider,  and  swell  out  into  a  bulbous
form  from  the  great  accumulations  of  fat,  so  as  to  be
recognized  even  by  the  naked  eye.  Nowhere  have  they
been  so  frequently  witnessed  in  a  striking  form,  as  in
cholera,  and  a  good  description  of  these  appearances  as
occurring  in  this  disease  was  published  as  far  back  as
1837  by  Bohn.  They  indicate  nothing  more  than  an
obstruction  to  the  current  of  lymph  in  consequence  of
the  disturbances  in  the  respiration  and  circulation  (Fig.
109,  D).  Since  attacks  of  cholera  are  well  known  to
occur  with  preponderating  frequency  during  digestion
and  are  attended  by  greatly  impeded  respiration,  which
makes  itself  felt  throughout  the  wdiole  venous  system,
they  must  of  course  also  react  upon  the  stream  of  chyle.
Thus  the  enormous  accumulation  (retention)  of  fat  in
the  villi  is  explained.  This  is  therefore,  if  you  will,  a
pathological  condition,  but  it  only  depends  upon  a  tran-
sitory obstruction,  and  we  have  every  reason  to  suppose
that,  when  the  current  again  becomes  free,  these  large
drops  of  fat  are  gradually  removed.  But  here  we  set
foot  upon  other  domains,  where  the  boundaries  of  patho-
logy can  only  be  traced  with  great  difficulty,  and  this  is
particularly  the  case  with  the  liver.

24

370  LECTURE  XV.

It  has  been  known  from  of  old  that  the  liver  is  the
organ,  which  is  by  far  the  most  liable  to  fall  into  a  state
of  fatty  degeneration,  and  the  knowledge  of  this  state
has  long  been  derived  from  popular  experiment.  The
history  of  the  pates  de  foie  gras  proves  this  in  the  most
agreeable  manner,  although  M.  Lereboullet  of  Strasburg
maintains  that  the  fatty  livers  of  geese  are  physiological
ones,  essentially  different  from  the  pathological  ones
which  are  not  eaten,  but  only  observed.  However,  I
must  confess  that  I  have  hitherto  been  unable  to  discover
the  difference  between  physiological  and  pathological  fatty
livers  ;  on  the  contrary,  I  believe  that  it  is  only  by  ad-
mitting the  identity  of  the  two  that  correct  notions  with
regard  to  the  pathological  fatty  liver  can  be  obtained.
We  are  namely  acquainted  with  a  fact  which  was  like-
wise first  observed  by  Kolliker,  that  in  sucking  animals,
a  few  hours  after  digestion  has  taken  place,  a  kind  of
fatty  liver  is  a  constant  physiological  occurrence.  When
of  the  same  litter  of  animals  some  are  made  to  fast,
while  others  are  allowed  to  suck,  those  which  have
sucked  have  a  fatty  liver  a  few  hours  afterwards,  whilst
the  others  have  not.  The  fatty  liver  appears  quite  pale,
though  certainly  not  so  white  as  a  goose's  liver.  This
observation  led  me  to  examine  the  question  of  the  rela-
tion of  the  fat  to  the  liver  a  little  more  minutely,  and  1  cer-
tainly think  we  may  positively  conclude  that  there  does
exist  a  close  connection  between  the  physiological  and
pathological  forms.

I  found,  namely,  that  a  short  time  after  the  hepatic  cells
display  this  repletion  with  fat,  a  similar  condition  is  found
in  the  course  of  the  biliary  ducts,  and  that  both  in  them
and  in  the  gall-bladder  the  epithelium  presents  the  same
appearances  which  we  have  witnessed  in  the  intestinal  epi-
thelium during  the  absorption  of  fat.  You  only  require
therefore  to  invert  the  picture  we  just  now  considered

FATTY  LIVER.  37I

(Fig.  109)  ;  instead  of  a  villus,  invested  externally  with
epithelial  cells,  imagine  a  canal  clothed  on  the  inside  with
epithelium.  The  delicate  cylindrical  epithelium  in  the
gall-bladder  has  the  same  striated  border  as  that  in  the
intestine  (Fig.  14),  and  the  fat  is  seen  in  the  same  way  to
penetrate  into  it  from  without,  to  pursue  its  course  down-
wards and  after  a  time  to  pass  into  the  wall  of  the  gall-
bladder. The  same  may  be  said  of  the  biliary  passages
(duct,  biliferi,  hepat.,  cystic,  choledoch.),  which  are  also
provided  with  cylindrical  epithelium  of  a  similar  struc-
ture. I  have  watched  the  same  process  also  in  young
sucking  animals  after  digestion,  and  there  it  is  easy  to
convince  oneself  that  the  fat,  which  for  a  time  is  con-
tained in  the  hepatic  cells,  is  manifestly  excreted  from
them  into  the  biliary  ducts,  but  that  in  the  course  of
these  ducts  the  fat  is  reabsorbed  and  thus  a  second  time
returns  into  the  circulation.

Such  an  intermediate  interchange  of  matter  as  this,
where  the  fat  passes  from  the  intestine  into  the  blood,
from  the  blood  into  the  liver,  from  the  liver  into  the  bile,
and  thence  again  into  the  lymphatics,  or  into  the  capilla-
ries which  conduct  the  blood  back  to  the  hepatic  veins  and
to  the  heart,  presupposes  of  course,  just  as  absorption  in
the  intestines  does,  that  the  conveyance  back  again  must
take  place  under  favourable  circumstances  ;  if  any  dis-
turbing cause  arises,  a  retention  will  of  course  ensue,  and
the  place  of  the  fine  granules  will  gradually  be  occupied
by  large  drops.  But  this  is  the  mode  of  proceeding  as
it  can  really  be  traced  in  the  fatty  liver.

Upon  studying  a  fatty  liver,  it  is  generally  seen  that
the  fat  is  first  deposited  in  that  zone  of  the  acini  which  is
immediately  contiguous  to  the  capillaries  into  which  the
branches  of  the  portal  vein  break  up  (Fig,  110.  c,  c).
When  sections  of  the  organ  are  carefully  examined  with
the  naked  eye,  it  looks  in  many  parts  as  if  one  had  an

372  LECTURE XV.

oak-leaf  with  its  ribs  and  indentations  before  one  ;  the
ramifications  of  the  branches  of  the  portal  vein  correspond

to  the  ribs,  the  fatty  zone  to  the  sub-
stance of  the  leaf.  The  more  abun-
dant the  infiltration,  the  broader  does
the  fatty  zone  become,  and  there  are
cases  in  which  the  fat  fills  the  whole
of  the  acini  up  the  central  (intralobu-
lar) hepatic  vein  (Fig.  110,  h)  and
every  single  cell  is  crammed  full  of
fat.  In  rare  cases  it  certainly  happens,  that  we  find  just
the  reverse,  and  that  the  fat  lies  around  the  central
vein  ;  these  are  cases  which  are  probably  to  be  explained
by  supposing  that  the  fat  is  already  in  process  of  excre-
tion and  only  the  last  cells  still  retain  a  little  of  it.  Only
we  must  take  care  not  to  confound  with  this  condition  a
kind  of  fatty,  necrobiotic  atrophy  which  occurs  particu-
larly in  chronic  cyanosis.*

If  now  we  consider  the  process  in  detail,  we  find  that
the  manner  in  which  the  hepatic  cells  fill  themselves,  en-
tirely corresponds  to  that,  in  which  an  epithelial  cell  in
the  intestine  becomes  filled  with  fat.  At  first  we  find
fat-granules  widely  scattered,  and  indeed  very  small.
They  become  more  numerous,  more  closely  aggregated,
and  after  a  time  larger  ;  at  the  same  time  the  cells  be-

Fig.  110.  The  adjoining  halves  of  two  hepatic  acini, p.  A  branch  of  the  portal
vein  with  braches  p  p",  corresponding  to  the  interlobular  veins, h,  h.  Transverse
sections  of  the  intralobular,  or  hepatic,  vein. a.  The  pigment  zone,  b  the  amyloid
zone,  c  the  fat  zone. 20  diameters.

*  Cyanosis  (chronic)  is  here  used  to  express  the  general  venous  congestion  which
is  consequent  upon  chronic  affections  of  the  lungs  and  heart.  "  Since  (as  the  Au-
thor says  in  a  MS.  note)  it  has  become  known  that  cyanosis,  even  when  produced
by  congenital  malformation  of  the  heart,  docs  not  arise  from  a  commingling  of
arterial  and  venous  blood,  but  from  an  obstruction  to  the  venous  circulation,  it  has
seemed  reasonable  to  designate  every  more  general  hyperemia,  due  to  such  ob-
struction, by  the  same  term."  "  Acute  cyanosis,"  he  adds,  "  occurs  in  acute  affec-
tions of  the  lungs,  as  for  example,  in  pertussis."— Tk.

m

FATTY  LIVER.  373

come  larger,  swell  up,  and  larger  and  smaller  drops  of  fat
are  found  in  them  (Fig.  27,  B,  b),  until,  when  filled  to
the  utmost,  they  present  the  same  appearance  as  those
of  adipose  tissue  ;  scarcely  any  membrane,  and  scarcely
ever  a  nucleus  is  seen,  nevertheless  they  both  still  con-
tinue to  exist.  This  is  the  condition  which  is  called  fatty
liver,  in  the  proper  sense  of  the  word.

In  it  too  we  have  what  we  found  to  be  the  case  in  adi-
pose tissue — a  persistence  of  the  cells.  There  is  no  such
thing  as  a  fatty  liver  in  which  the  cells  have  ceased  to
exist ;  these  constituents  of  the  organs  always  exist,  only
they  are  almost  entirely  filled  with  drops  of  fat  instead
of  with  their  ordinary  contents.  It  can  scarcely  be
doubted  but  that  even  in  this  condition  they  still  contain
a  certain  amount  of  matter  capable  of  performing  its
functions.  For  in  many  animals,  as  for  example  the
cod-fish  from  which  liver-oil  is  obtained,  the  functions  of
the  organ  are  still  performed,  however  large  the  quantity
of  oil  contained  in  the  cells.  In  man  too,  even  in  the
most  advanced  stage  of  fatty  liver ,  we  still  find  bile  in  the
gall-bladder.  So  far  therefore  these  conditions  can  in  no
respect  be  compared  to  the  necrobiotic  conditions,  which
are  found  in  the  course  of  fatty  degeneration  in  so  many
other  parts,  and  in  which  the  elements  perish.  In  fatty
degeneration,  in  the  ordinary  sense  of  the  word,  we  find,
in  the  later  stages  of  the  affection,  somewhere  or  other,
friable,  softened  places,  where  the  fat  is  contained  in  free
drops — in  some  sort  fatty  abscesses.  It  is  therefore  a
fact  of  extreme  importance,  and  one  which  I  consider  to
afford  very  decided  indications  for  the  correct  apprecia-
tion of  this  form  [fatty  liver] ,  that  in  it  there  is  always  a
persistence  of  the  histological  constituents,  and  that,  how-
ever much  these  constituents  may  become  filled  with
foreign  substances,  they  still  continue  to  exist  as  cells.
Hence  it  follows,  that  a  fatty  condition  of  the  liver  may

374  LECTURE  XV.

be  removed,  that  it  is  curable,  without  any  particular
regenerative  processes  being  required  for  the  cure.  The
only  requisite  is,  that  the  causes  of  the  retention  be  re-
moved, and  the  hepatic  cells  be  freed  from  fat.  It  is  true
we  have  no  positive  information  respecting  either  the  one
or  the  other  of  these  points.  We  are  not  acquainted  with
the  states  which  lead  to  the  retention  of  the  fat,  nor  with
the  conditions  under  which  it  can  again  be  expelled.
However,  now  that  we  have  got  so  far,  it  will  probably
also  be  possible  to  make  out  the  remaining  facts.  For  it
is  conceivable,  for  example,  that  simply  the  elasticity  of
the  histological  elements  is  of  importance  ;  that  when  the
cell  walls  become  relaxed,  they  may  readily  admit  a
quantity  of  matter,  and  tolerate  its  presence  in  them,
whilst,  if  they  are  very  elastic,  a  removal,  an  expression
of  their  contents,  may  be  more  likely  to  ensue.  The
state  of  the  circulation  also  is  certainly  of  importance,
and  the  frequent  occurrence  of  fatty  liver  in  chronic  affec-
tions of  the  lungs  and  heart  is  certainly  in  no  small  de-
gree to  be  ascribed  to  the  increased  pressure  to  which
the  venous  blood  is  subjected.

What  I  was  particularly  anxious,  gentlemen,  to  render
evident  to  you,  was  the  great  difference  which  this  kind
of  fatty  degeneration  presents  from  that  which  we  have
previously  considered.  Whilst  there  we  saw  arise  be-
tween the  proper  specific  constituents  of  the  organ — fat-
cells  which  belonged  to  the  connective  tissue,  here  it  is
the  specific  gland  cells  themselves  which  are  the  seat  of
the  fat.  On  the  other  hand,  you  must  take  into  consider-
ation the  great  difference  from  the  necrobiotic  processes
of  fatty  degeneration,  in  which  the  cells  as  such  disap-
pear.

We  have  now,  gentlemen,  to  consider  this  third  series
of  fatty  conditions  a  little  more  closely,  those,  I  mean,
which  are  attended  by  a  destruction  of  the  elements,  and

FORMATION OF SEBACEOUS MATTER.

375

Fig.  111.

of  which  we  have  set  up  the  secretion  of  milk  and  seba-
ceous matter  as  the  true  types.  That  these  two  secre-
tions are  analogous  to  one  another,  is  simply  explained
by  the  circumstance  that  the  mammary  gland  is  really
nothing  more  than  an  enormously  developed  and  pecu-
liarly formed  accumulation  of  cutaneous  (sebaceous)
glands.  In  their  development  both  classes  are  perfectly
analogous.  Both  are  produced,  by  means  of  a  progres-
sive proliferation,  from  the  internal  layers  of  the  epider-
mis (p.  68 ,  Fig.  18,  A).  To  the  same  category  also  be-
long the  ceruminous  glands  of  the  ear,  and  the  large
glands  of  the  axilla.  In  all  these
cases  the  fat,  which  constitutes  the
chief  constituent  of  milk,  at  least  as
far  as  its  external  appearance  is
concerned,  and  which  furnishes  the
sebaceous  secretion,  originates  in
the  interior  of  epithelial  cells
which  gradually  perish  and  set  the
fat  free,  whilst  scarcely  a  trace  of
the  cells  is  preserved.  The  se-
baceous glands  are  generally  seated
on  the  sides  of  the  hair-follicles
at  some  depth  below  the  surface  ;
we  there  find  a  series  of  mi-
nute lobules,  into  which  a  prolon-
gation of  the  rete  mucosum  is  un-
interruptedly continued.  The  cells
of  this  become  more  numerous  and
larger,  so  as  to  fill  the  gland-sacs
with  a  nearly  solid  matter. Then  the  fat  begins  to  be

Fig.  111.  Hair-follicle  with  sebaceous  glands  from  the  skin.  c.  The  hair,  b  its
bulb,  e,  e,  the  layers  of  cells  dipping  down  from  the  epidermis  into  the  hair-follicle.
g  g.  Sebaceous  glands  in  the  act  of  secreting  sebaceous  matter  ;  at  /,  the  secretion
mounting  up  by  the  side  of  the  hair  and  accumulating. 280  diameters.

376  LECTURE XV

secreted  into  their  interior,  at  first  in  small  particles,
which  soon  become  larger,  and  after  a  short  time  the
individual  cells  can  no  longer  be  distinctly  perceived,
but  only  conglomerations  of  large  drops,  which  rise  up
out  of  the  gland  into  the  hair-follicle.  If  we  unravel
the  gland  so  as  to  form  a  flat  surface,  its  layers  of  cells
would  have  the  appearance  of  epidermis,  only  that  the
oldest  cells  do  not  become  horny,  but  are  destroyed  by
fatty  metamorphosis.  The  secretion  is  a  purely  epi-
thelial one,  like  the  seminal  secretion.

This  process  furnishes  us  at  the  same  time  with  an
accurate  representation  of  the  formation  of  milk.  You
need  only  imagine  the  ducts  much  lengthened,  and  the
terminal  acini  greatly  developed  ;  the  process  remains
essentially  the  same  :  the  cells  multiply  abundantly ;  the
multiplied  cells  undergo  fatty  degeneration,  and  ulti-
mately there  remains  scarcely  any  material  traces  of
these  cells  excepting  the  drops  of  fat.  The  closest  re-
semblance to  the  manner  in  which  the  secretion  of  seba-
ceous matter  ordinarily  takes  place,  is  presented  by  the
earliest  period  of  lactation  when  the  so-called  colostrum
is  yielded.  A  colostrum-corpuscle  (Fig.  112,  C)  is  the
still  coherent  globule  which  results  from  the  fatty  de-
generation of  an  epithelial  cell. The  formation  of  colos-

'.0.  P.'cV  .

O  *

c

Fig.  112.  Mammary  gland  during  lactation,  and  milk.  A.  Lobule  of  the  mam-
mary gland,  with  milk  issuing  out  of  it.  B.  Milk  globules.  C.  Colostrum,  a,  a  dis-
tinct fat-granule  cell,  6,  the  same  with  evanescent  nucleus. 280  diameters.

COLOSTRUM- AND MILK-CORPUSCLES.  377

trum  and  sebaceous  matter  differs  in  this  respect  only,
that  the  fat-granules  remain  smaller  in  the  former  case,
and  that  whilst  large  drops  very  soon  show  themselves
in  sebaceous  matter,  in  colostrum  the  last  cells  which
are  observed,  usually  contain  only  minute  fat-granules,
very  densely  aggregated,  whereby  the  whole  cell  ac-
quires a  somewhat  brownish  appearance,  although  the
fat  has  no  actual  colour.  This  is  the  granular  corpuscle
(corps  granuleux)  of  Donne.

Foi  the  discovery  of  this  gradual  transformation  of
cellular  bodies  into  fat-granule  masses  we  are  indebted
to  Bernhardt.  Still  he  shrank  from  extending  this
important  discovery  of  the  formation  of  colostrum  to
the  history  of  milk  in  general,  for  the  reason,  that,
during  the  later  periods  of  lactation  properly  so-called,
granulated  bodies  are  no  longer  met  with.  It  is,  how-
ever, unquestionable,  that  between  the  earlier  formation
of  colostrum- corpuscles  and  the  later  one  of  milk,  there
is  no  other  difference  than  this,  that  in  the  formation  of
colostrum  the  process  goes  on  more  slowly,  and  that  the
cells  maintain  their  cohesion  longer,  whilst  in  the  secre-
tion of  milk  the  process  is  acute  and  the  cells  more
speedily  perish.  Perfectly  developed  colostrum  con-
tains an  extremely  large  number  of  granulated  cor-
puscles, milk  nothing  more  than  a  number  of  compara-
tively large  and  small  drops  of  fat,  mixed  up  together,
the  so-called  milk- corpuscles  (Fig.  112,  B),  which  are
nothing  more  than  drops  of  fat,  and  like  the  majority  of
the  drops  of  fat  that  occur  in  the  animal  body  are  sur-
rounded by  a  delicate,  albuminous  membrane,  called  by
Ascherson  the  haptogenic*  membrane  (haptogenmem-
bran).  But  the  individual  drops  (milk-corpuscles)  cor-
respond to  the  drops  which  we  find  in  the  secretion  of

*  1.  e.,  produced  by  contact. — Transl.

378  LECTURE XV.

sebaceous  matter  ;  they  are  produced  by  the  coalescence
of  the  minute  granules  which  appear  in  the  secretion  of
colostrum.

Now  that  we  have  seen  these  types  of  physiological
transformation,  gentlemen,  the  description  of  the  patho-
logical changes  no  longer  offers  any  difficulty.  With
the  exception  of  very  few  structures,  as  for  example,
red  blood-corpuscles  and  the  nerve-fibres  in  the  great
nervous  centres,  nearly  all  other  cellular  parts  may
under  certain  circumstances  undergo  a  similar  metamor-
phosis, which  displays  itself  in  a  precisely  similar  man-
ner, that  is,  isolated,  extremely  minute  globules  of  fat
appear  in  the  cell-contents,  become  more  abundant,  and
gradually  fill  up  the  cell-cavity,  without,  however,  run-
ning together  into  such  large  drops,  as  is  the  case  in
fatty  infiltration  and  in  the  adipose-tissue  formations.
Usually,  the  development  of  the  fat-granules  first  de-
clares itself  at  some  distance  from  the  nucleus  ;  very
seldom  does  it  begin  at  the  nucleus.  This  is  the  cell
which  has  long  been  called  the  granule-cell.  Then
comes  a  stage,  in  which  the  nucleus  and  membrane  are
indeed  still  to  be  seen,  but  the  fat-granules  lie  as  close
to  one  another  as  in  colostrum  corpuscles  ;  only  at  the
spot  where  the  nucleus  lay,  there  is  still  a  little  gap
(Fig.  66,  b).  From  this  stage  there  is  but  a  short  step
to  the  complete  destruction  of  the  cell.  For  a  cell
never  remains  for  any  length  of  time  in  the  state  of  a
granule-cell,  but  as  soon  as  it  has  once  entered  into  this
stage,  the  nucleus  generally  disappears  at  once,  and
ultimately  the  membrane  also,  probably  by  a  species  of
solution.  Then  we  have  the  simple  granule- globule,  or  as
it  was  formerly  called,  inflammatory  globule  [exudation-
corpuscle],  which  Gluge  first  described  under  this  name
(Fig.  66,  e).

Gluge  in  this  made  one  of  those  mistakes  which  not

GRANULE-CELLS— GLOBULES.  379

unfrequently  marked  the  early  periods  of  microscopy.
He  saw,  when  examining  a  kidney,  bodies  of  this  sort
in  the  interior  of  a  canal,  which  he  took  for  a  blood-
vessel ;  this  happening  at  a  time  when  the  doctrine  of
stasis  was  most  in  vogue,  he  imagined  he  had  before
him  a  vessel  with  stagnating  contents  which  were  disin-
tegrating, and  generating  inflammatory  globules.  Un-
fortunately the  blood-vessel  was  a  uriniferous  tubule  ;
what  he  took  to  be  parts  of  disintegrating  blood-corpu-
scles, was  fat  ;  and  what  he  called  inflammatory  glo-
bules, fatty  degenerated  renal  epithelium.  One  might
easily  have  spared  oneself  this  error  in  the  history  of
stasis,  but  at  that  time  there  were  few  people  who  knew
what  was  the  appearance  of  uriniferous  tubules  and
how  they  might  be  distinguished  from  vessels,  and  thus
some  time  elapsed  before  this  theory  of  inflammation
was  put  down.

At  present  we  call  the  body  a  granule -globule  and
regard  it  as  the  first  distinct  proof  of  degeneration,
when  the  cell  no  longer  retains  its  existence  as  a  cell,
but  merely  its  former  shape  remains,  after  the  parts
which  really  constitute  a  cell,  namely  the  membrane  and
the  nucleus,  have  completely  passed  away.  After  this,
in  accordance  with  external  circumstances,  either  a  com-
plete destruction  of  the  parts  ensues,  or  they  may  still
persist,  coherent.  If,  namely,  we  have  to  deal  with  very
soft  parts,  in  which  much  fluid  or  juice  has  been  present
all  along,  the  granules  fall  asunder.  The  medium
which  bound  them  together  and  enabled  them  to  retain
the  globular  form,  namely,  a  remnant  of  the  old  cell-
contents,  is  gradually  dissolved.  The  globule  breaks  up
into  a  crumbling  mass,  which  is  often  still  somewhat  co-
herent in  places,  but  from  which  one  drop  of  fat  after
another  is  detached,  so  that  the  correspondence  with
milk  is  very  beautifully  displayed.

380  LECTURE XV.

This  is  the  manner  in  which  the  disintegration  of
nearly  all  parts  takes  place,  which  essentially  consist  of
cells  and  naturally  contain  a  good  deal  of  fluid,  as  for
example  pus  among  familiar  pathological  products
(p.  216,  Fig.  66).  If,  on  the  contrary,  the  parts  are  in
themselves  somewhat  more  rigid,  so  that  movement  in
and  displacement  of,  the  fatty  mass  takes  place  with  less
facility,  the  fat  remains  in  the  form  of  the  previous  cell.
Of  this  we  meet  with  an  example  in  the  fatty  degenera-
tion of  the  walls  of  arteries.

In  the  aorta,  the  carotids  and  the  cerebral  arteries,
changes  of  the  inner  coat  are  often  seen  with  the  naked
eye  of  such  a  nature,  that  small,  whitish  spots  of  a
rounded  or  angular  form,  occasionally  running  one
into  the  other,  project  somewhat  above  the  surface.
If  an  incision  is  made  at  these  spots,  it  is  found  that
they  are  quite  superficial,  that  they  lie  in  the  innermost
layer  of  the  internal  coat  and  must  not  be  confounded
with  the  really  atheromatous  condition.  If  such  a  spot
be  cut  out,  it  is  found  that  a  fatty  degeneration  of  the
connective-tissue-corpuscles  of  the  innermost  coat  has
taken  place  ;  and  since  they  are  branched  cells,  we  do
not  here  have  granule-cells  in  their  ordinary  rounded
form,  but  often  very  long,  fine  bodies,  which  here  and
there  swell  up  into  the  form  of  a  spindle  or  star,  and  in
which  the  fat-granules  lie  heaped  up  like  strings  of
pearls,  whilst  between  there  still  remains  intermediate
substance  quite  intact.  It  is  the  cellular  elements  of  the
connective  tissue  which  in  these  cases  undergo  the
change  in  their  totality.  Afterwards  the  intermediate
substance  also  softens,  the  cellular  fat-granule  masses
fall  asunder,  and  the  current  of  blood  carries  away  the
particles  of  fat  with  it.  In  this  way  a  number  of  un-
even places  are  produced  upon  the  surface  of  the  vessel,
which  swell  up  as  long  as  the  process  continues,  after-

FATTY METAMORPHOSIS.

381

wards  become  worn  away  (usurirt),  and  acquire  a  slightly
velvety  appearance,  without  there  being  any  ulceration

Fig.  113.

in  the  proper  sense  of  the  word.  This  is  a  particular
form  of  fatty  usure  which  occurs  in  many  parts,  as  for
example  in  articular  cartilages,  and  even  on  the  surface
of  mucous  membranes,  for  example,  that  of  the  stomach
(Fox).  But  at  no  time  does  the  matter  accumulate  in
such  abundance  as  is  the  case  in  abcesses  which  have
undergone  fatty  degeneration.  If,  on  the  other  hand,  a
similar  process  commences  beneath  the  surface,  as  in
the  atheromatous  process,  the  fatty  degeneration  then
proceeds  from  below  upwards,  and  the  surface  is  not
reached  until  the  last.  By  softening,  the  so-called  athe-
romatous deposit  (Heerd*)  is  produced,  which  contains  a
softened  mass  resembling  the  contents  of.  atheromata
[sebaceous, f  or epidermic,  cysts] of  the  skin,  in  which

Fig.  113.  Fatty  degeneration  of  cerebral  arteries.  A.  Fatty  metamorphosis  of  the
muscular  cells  of  the  circular-fibre  coat.  B.  Formation  of  fat-granule  cells  in  the
connective-tissue-corpuscles  of  the  internal  coat. 300  diameters.

*  Heerd  (hearth)  in  the  sense  in  which  it  is  here  employed,  has  no  precise  equiva-
lent in  English,  although  it  exactly  corresponds  to  the  French  foyer.  u  It  denotes,"
says  the  Author,  "  the  spot,  where  the  fire  of  the  disease  burns,  but  expresses  at  the
same  time  that  this  spot  is  a  limited  one."  I  have  therefore  translated  it  by  various
words,  such  as  deposit,  depot,  seat  (of  the  disease),  collection,  patch  (atheromatous),
focus,  &c. — Transl.

f  These  cysts  are  wrongly  called  sebaceous,  inasmuch  as  they  are  essentially
epidermic,  and  are  generally  derived,  not  from  the  sebaceous  glands,  but  from  the
hair-follicles.  The  atheromatous  matter  is  in  these  cases  chiefly  composed  of  degene-
rated and  disintegrated  epithelium. — From  a  MS.  Note  by  the  Author.

382  LECTURE  XV.

the  mixture  of  sebaceous  matter  and  epidermis  pro-
duces a  pultaceous  mass.  What  we  find  in  the  arteries
is  a  mixture  of  fatty  debris  with  softened  intermediate
substance  ;  and,  since  the  fatty  mass  is  shut  off,  a  kind
of  enclosed  deposit  results — as  it  were  an  abscess.  It
is  only  after  the  softening  has  proceeded  to  some  extent
that  the  surface  gives  way,  and  matters  issue  from  the
cavity  into  the  vessel,  whilst  others  proceed  from  the
blood  into  the  cavity.

In  this  manner  destruction,  demolition,  ulceration  is
produced,  and  ultimately  the  atheromatous  ulcer,  a  species
of  ulcer  very  nearly  allied  to  the  ordinary  forms  of  ul-
ceration, but  indebted  for  its  origin  to  fatty  metamor-
phosis alone.  It  is  a  product  of  the  [atheromatous]
deposit,  but  it  no  longer  contains  any  formed  elementary
parts.  Cholestearine  indeed  may  still  be  set  free,  but
we  have  really  and  truly  to  deal  with  a  destructive  and
ultimately  ulcerative  process.  It  is  only  in  those  parts,
in  which,  as  in  the  mammary  and  sebaceous  glands,  there
is  a  succession  of  new  cells,  that  the  process  of  fatty
metamorphosis  can  continue  for  any  length  of  time
without  leading  to  such  an  annihilating  result.  But,
even  in  these  instances,  the  different  cells  affected  ulti-
mately perish  and  break  up,  as  in  the  really  fatty  de-
generation.

LECTURE XVI.

APRIL  14,  1858.
A  MORE  PRECISE  ACCOUNT  OF  FATTY  METAMORPHOSIS.

Fatty  degeneration  of  muscles— Fatty  metamorphosis  of  the  substance  of  the  heart
— Formation  of  fat  in  the  muscles  in  distortions.

Corpus  luteum  of  the  ovary — Fatty  metamorphosis  of  pulmonary  epithelium — Yel-
low softening  of  the  brain — Arcus  senilis.

Optical  properties  of  fattily  degenerated  tissues — Renal  epithelium  in  Bright's  dis-
ease— Successive  stages  (cloudy  swelling,  fatty  metamorphosis,  fatty  detritus
[debris],  atrophy) — Inflammatory  globules — Similarity  of  the  result  in  inflam-
matory and  non-inflammatory  changes.

Atheromatous  process  in  arteries — Its  relation  to  ossification — Inflammatory  cha-
racter of  the  process ;  its  analogy  with  endocarditis — Formation  of  the  athe-
romatous deposit — Appearance  of  cholestearine — Arterio-sclerosis — Endoarte-
ritis — Calcification  and  ossification  of  arteries.

Mixed,  activo-passive  processes.

To-day,  gentlemen,  I  have  sent  round  a  few  specimens
of  fatty  degenerations,  in  part  to  serve  as  a  supplement
to  what  you  saw  at  the  last  lecture.

One  or  two  of  these  preparations  are  intended  to  dis-
play the  fatty  degeneration  of  the  substance  of  the  heart.
You  will  observe  that,  even  with  the  naked  eye,  certain
changes  can  be  recognized  in  the  heart,  namely,  a  disco-
loration of  its  whole  substance  (which  no  longer  presents
the  red  hue  of  muscle,  but  wears  a  pale  yellow  tint),  and
besides  peculiar  spots  on  the  papillary  muscles.  If  you
examine  these  more  closely,  you  will  perceive,  in  the
direction of the primitive fasciculi, short, yellowish

384

LECTURE XVI.

Fig.  114.

streaks  which  communicate  so  as  almost  to  present  a
plexiform  arrangement,  and  pervade  the  substance  of  the
papillary  muscles,  whilst  they  offer  a  striking  contrast  to
the  reddish  colour  of  proper  muscular  substance.  This
is  the  perfect  form  of  genuine  fatty  metamosphoris  of  the
real  muscular  substance  of  the
'  heart,  which  differs  most  essentially
from  obesity  of  the  heart,  in  which
this  organ  becomes  extremely  fat
and  adipose  tissue  here  and  there
so  infiltrates  its  walls,  that  scarcely
any  muscle  is  to  be  perceived.  Be-
tween the  two  conditions  there
always  remains  the  notable  diffe-
rence, that  in  the  former  case  whole
portions of  active substance are

interrupted  by  parts which are manifestly  no  longer
capable  of  action.

I  have  besides  brought  you  another  specimen  of  mus-
cle we  obtained  yesterday  at  the  suggestion  of  our  con-
frere Berend.  A  body,  namely,  with  posterior  (angular)
and  lateral  curvature  (Kypho-Skoliose)  was  brought  for
post-mortem  examination,  and,  when  we  examined  the
muscles  at  the  point  of  curvature,  we  found  the  longissi-
mus  dorsi  at  the  spot  where  it  passed  over  the  projec-
tion, converted  into  quite  a  flat,  thin,  pale  yellowish
mass.  At  one  point  the  muscle  has,  with  the  exception
of  a  membranous  layer,  entirely  disappeared,  its  red  hue
has  altogether  vanished  ;  towards  the  lower  part  the
muscle  also  presents  an  abnormal  appearance,  but  there
it  is  composed  of  alternate  longitudinal  red  and  yellow
streaks.  This  is  the  form  exhibited  by  most  fattily  de-
generated muscles  which  we  find  in  distortions  of  the

*  Fig.  114.  Fatty  degeneration  of  the  muscular  substance  of  the  heart  in  its  dif-
ferent stages. 300  diameters.

FATTY  DEGENERATION  OF  MUSCLES.  3S5

limbs,  as  for  example,  in  the  different  kinds  of  club-foot.
In  these  it  generally  turns  out,  that,  in  the  parts  corres-
ponding to  the  yellow  streaks,  there  is  not  only  a  real
transformation  of  the  muscular  substance,  but  that  an  in-
terstitial development  of  adipose  tissue  has  also  nearly
constantly  taken  place  there,  so  that  it  lies  in  rows  be-
tween the  primitive  muscular  fasciculi,  and  thereby  pro-
duces a  striation  which  looks  yellowish  to  the  naked  eye,
and  is  due  to  an  arrangement  very  similar  to  that  which
gives  rise  to  the  red  striation  of  genuine  muscular  tissue.*
This  is  precisely  how  matters  stood  in  the  case  I  spoke
of  recently  (p.  364,  Fig.  108),  where  we  found  a  row  of
fat-cells  between  every  two  primitive  fasciculi  ;  the  yel-
low that  you  saw  there,  was  not  altered  muscle,  but  a
mass  of  fat  which  had  grown  in  between  the  muscular
fibres.  But  in  addition  to  such  interstitial  adipose  tissue
there  is  in  the  case  now  before  us  a  parenchymatous  de-
generation in  the  same  muscle  ;  the  substance  of  the  mus-
cle is  also  really  in  a  state  of  fatty  degeneration.  The
degenerated  fibres  are,  however,  only  to  be  seen  with
the  naked  eye  in  the  lower  parts  of  the  muscle,  whilst
the  portion  which  lay  in  immediate  contact  with  the
greatest  projection  of  the  thorax  and  had  been  subjected
to  the  greatest  tension,  to  the  naked  eye  presents  no
trace  of  muscular  tissue.  Under  the  microscope,  how-
ever, we  even  there  find  isolated  muscular  fibres  lying
close  to  one  another  and  still  distinctly  transversely  stri-
ated, and  others  plentifully  filled  with  fat.  You  see,
therefore,  that  these  are  two  different  conditions  ;  the
one  form,  where  the  muscle  is  interrupted  in  the  course
of  its  primitive  fasciculi  by  degenerated  places,  and  where

*  For,  as  each  row  of  fat-cells  lies  between  two  primitive  fasciculi  (Fig.  108),  the
fat  (like  the  substance  of  the  fasciculi,  the  cyntonine)  has  a  layer  of  sarcolemma
upon  each  side  of  it,  so  that,  if  the  syntonine  atrophies,  the  fat  appears  to  have
taken  its  place  and  to  lie  within  the  primitive  fasciculi,  and  many  well  known  au-
thors have  taken  this  to  be  the  case. — From  a  MS.  Note  by  the  Author.

25

386

LECTURE XVI.

therefore  the  same  primitive  fasciculus,  is,  as  it  pursues
its  course,  now  in  a  state  of  degeneration,  now  preserved
in  all  its  integrity  ;  the  other  form  in  which  the  disease
sweeps  along  the  primitive  fasciculus,  and  this  undergoes
the  change  in  its  whole  extent  at  once,  and  where  there-
fore normal  and  degenerated  fasciculi  lie  side  by  side,
and  may  alternate  with  one  another.

Here  is  another  specimen  from  a  young  female  (who
died  shortly  after  menstruation  in  consequence  of  a  burn)
in  which  you  will  find  a  very  beautiful  corpus  luteum  in
the  ovary.  I  lay  it  before  you  because  you  will  be  able
to  see,  from  it,  how  obviously  fatty  metamorphosis  may
display  itself  to  the  unaided  eye.  The  incision  into  the
ovary  has  been  made  perpendicularly  to  the  surface,  at  a
point  where  a  little  prominence  and  slight  rent  upon  the
surface  mark  the  place  at  which  the  ovule  has  emerged
(Fig.  115,  B).  From  the  point  in  the  tunica  albuginea
where the  follicle  has  burst,  the  very  broad,  yellowish

Fig.  115.

A

white  layer  (Fig.  115,  A,  b),  from  which  the  body  derives
its  name,  is  seen  running  around  a  red  mass. It  is  this

Fig.  115.  Formation  of  corpora  lutea  in  the  human  ovary.  A.  Section  of  an
ovary  :  a,  a  follicle  recently  burst  and  filled  with  coagulated  blood  (extravasation,
thrombus),  and  around  it  the  thin  yellow  layer  ;  b,  a  follicle,  which  had  burst  at  an
earlier  period,  already  corrugated,  and  provided  with  a  diminished  thrombus  and
thickened  wall ;  c,  d  a  still  more  advanced  stage  of  retrogressive  metamorphosis.
B.  External  surface  of  the  ovary,  with  the  fresh  rent  caused  by  the  bursting  of  the
follicle,  from  the  cavity  of  which  the  thrombus  is  seen  peeping  out. Natural  size.

FATTY METAMORPHOSIS OF PULMONARY EPITHELIUM. 3S7

layer  which,  in  a  puerperal  corpus  luteum,  is  of  very
great  breadth  and  has  a  rather  reddish  yellow  tint  ;  in  a
menstrual  corpus  luteum  it  is  narrower,  and  very  dis-
tinctly separated  on  the  inner  side  from  the  freshly  ex*
travasated  contents  which  have  filled  up  the  follicle  emp-
tied by  the  extrusion  of  the  ovule.  This  internal  red
mass  consists  entirely  of  thrombus,  or  blood-clot.  The
external  layer  essentially  consists  of  fattily  degenerated
cells,  and  the  yellow  colour  which  it  bears  is  occasioned
by  the  refraction  produced  by  the  numerous  minute  par-
ticles of  fat.  This  is  not  a  real  colour,  but  a  phenome-
non of  interference.

A  similar  change  you  see  in  a  lung  which  we  took  to-
day out  of  the  body  of  a  man  who,  after  caries  of  the  in-
ternal ear,  had  a  thrombosis  of  the  transverse  sinus  with
gangrenous  metamorphosis,  and,  in  consequence,  gan-
grene of  the  lung.  The  cells  we  have  here  to  deal  with
were  not  taken,  however,  from  the  actual  seat  of  the  gan-
grene itself,  but  from  a  condensed  spot  in  the  neighbour-
hood, whece  a  very  abundant  accumulation  of  masses  of
proliferating  epithelium  (catarrhal  pneumonia)  had  taken
place.  In  this  case  you  can  see  the  difference  between
fat-granule- cells  (Fig.  66),  and  other  forms  of  granule-
cells,  very  prettily  shown.  For  in  these  masses  of  epi-
thelium which  have  filled  up  the  alveoli  of  the  lung,  you
find  extremely  numerous  pigment-cells,  such  as  in  cases
like  this  are  brought  up  in  great  quantity  in  the  sputa,
which  are  indebted  to  them  for  the  well-known  smoky
grey  spots  (Fig.  11,  b).  At  first  sight  it  is  difficult  to
make  a  distinction  between  fat-granule-,  and  pigment-
cells,  inasmuch  as  in  both  cases  apparently  the  same
image  is  offered  to  our  view.  In  the  one  case  the  cells
appear  as  brownish  yellow  corpuscles,  although  their  indi-
vidual particles  have  no  positive  colour  ;  in  the  other,  on
the  contrary,  they  contain  unquestionable,  grey,  brown,

388  LECTURE  XVI.

or  black,  pigment.  The  diagnosis  of  ordinary  granule-
cells,  by  which  fat-granule-cells  are  always  meant,  is,
however,  very  important,  because  in  other  parts  also,  as
for  example,  in  the  brain,  we  find  both  sorts  of  granule-
cells,  those  containing  fat  and  those  containing  pigment,
side  by  side  ;  and  even  when  the  affection  is  limited  to
very  small  spots  in  this  organ,  it  is  very  important*  for
the  interpretation  of  the  objects  found  to  know  whether
they  belong  to  the  one  or  the  other  class.  For  in  the
brain  also  the  accumulation  of  a  number  of  minute  par-
ticles of  fat  may  on  the  whole,  through  the  multiplication
of  the  refracting  points,  occasion  an  intense  yellow  colour.
The  different  proportion  of  fat  and  the  degree  of  its  divi-
sion produce  a  greater  number  of  varieties  of  colour  which
at  last  manifest  themselves  very  distinctly  to  the  naked
eye,  so  that  the  more  minute  and  the  more  closely  ag-
gregated the  fatty  particles  are,  the  more  marked  is  the
production  of  a  pure  yellow  or  brownish-yellow  hue  even
to  the  naked  eye.  What  we  call  yellow  softening  of  the
brain  is  also  really  nothing  more  than  a  form. of  fatty  de-
generation, where  the  yellow  appearance  of  the  affected
spot  is  owing  to  the  accumulation  of  finely  granular  fat.
As  soon  as  this  is  removed,  the  colour  also  disappears,
although  the  fat  thus  extracted  is  by  no  means  of  so  deep
a  hue  as  the  spot  whence  it  was  derived.  The  refraction
of  light  between  the  extremely  minute  particles  is  the
chief  cause  of  this  phenomenon  of  colour.

It  is  self-evident  that  at  every  point,  where  the  fatty
degeneration  attains  a  high  pitch,  great  opacity  will
always  present  itself.  A  transparent  part  becomes
opaque  when  it  undergoes  fatty  degeneration  ;  this  we
see,  for  example,  in  the  cornea,  the  fatty  clouding  of
which  may  become  so  marked  in  arcus  senilis,  that  an  en-

*  For  the  pigment  would  point  to  apoplexy,  the  fat  to  softening

FATTY DEGENERATION OF  RENAL EPITHELIUM.  389

tirely  opaque  zone  is  thereby  produced.  Even  in  places,
where  the  parts  were  originally  not  transparent,  but
only  translucent,  a  complete  opacity  may  be  seen  to  de-
clare itself  in  proportion  as  the  process  of  fatty  degene-
ration progresses.

Consider,  for  example,  a  kidney  in  the  stage  of  fatty
degeneration.  I  show  you  here  a  preparation  which
does  not  present  the  ordinary  granular  atrophy  of
Bright's  disease,  but  a  more  chronic  and  smooth  form.
The  convoluted  uriniferous  tubules  of  the  cortex  are
very  much  enlarged,  and  the  whole  of  its  epithelium  is
in  a  state  of  fatty  degeneration,,  so  that  within  the  tu-
bules there  is  really  nothing  else  to  be  seen  than  a
densely  crowded  mass  of  fat-granules.  If  however
microscopical  sections  are  very  carefully  prepared,  the
fat-granules  are  in  the  first  instance  still  seen  collected
in  isolated  groups  (as  granule-cells  or  granule-globules,
Fig.  98)  ;  but  upon  slight  pressure  the  mass  disperses  in
such  a  way,  that  the  whole  uriniferous  tubule  is  uni-
formly filled  with  finely  emulsive  contents.  Even  with
the  naked  eye  you  can  distinctly  recognize  the  change  ;
and  as  soon  as  one  has  become  accustomed  to  discri-
minate with  some  degree  of  accuracy  between  these
less  obvious  conditions,  there  is  not  the  slightest  diffi-
culty in  discovering  from  the  aspect  of  such  a  part  the
presence  of  a  change  in  the  renal  epithelium,  and  that
indeed  of  this  particular  kind,  for  there  is  no  other  form
of  change  which  could  be  compared  to  it.  If  you
examine  the  surface  of  the  kidney  you  will  perceive
that  over  the  rather  greyish,  transculent  ground,  upon
which  the  Stelluloe  Verheynii*  stand  out,  small  opaque
spots  are  scatterred  in  the  most  varied  manner,  most  of
them  forming  not  real  points,  but  usually  small  segments
of  an  arc. These  will  always  be  found  to  be  parts  of

*  The  stellate  veins. — Transl.

390  LECTURE XVI.

the  convolutions  of  uriniferous  tubules  which  have
mounted  up  to  the  surface.  These  yellowish,  opaque-
looking  convolutions  correspond  to  fattily  degenerated
uriniferous  tubules,  or  to  sj)eak  more  accurately,  to
uriniferous  tubules  filled  with  fattily  degenerated  epithe-
lium. If  a  section  be§  compared  with  the  surface,  the
same  markings  are  very  distinctly  seen  to  run  through
the  whole  of  the  cortex,  from  the  periphery  down  to  the
upper  borders  of  the  medullary  cones,  and  to  invest  the
individual  cones  formed  by  the  tubuli  recti  which  are
prolonged  into  the  cortical  substance — at  pretty  regular
intervals.

If  sections  are  made  in  such  a  case  in  the  neighbour-
hood of  the  surface  and  parallel  to  it,  we  readily  obtain
a  view  embracing  the  fattily  degenerated  tubules  by  the
side  of  more  normal  ones,  and  of  unaffected  glomeruli.
With  a  lower  power  and  by  transmitted  light,  we  see
close  to  the  Malpighian  bodies  which  appear  as  large,
light,  globular  structures,  ,the  convolutions  of  the  de-
generated uriniferous  tubules  interlacing  in  various  ways,
and  the  convoluted  tubules  distinguished  by  their  opaque,
shaded  appearance  from  the  straight  ones,  which  are
lighter  and  more  translucent.

I  will  here  call  your  attention  to  the  circumstance,
that  in  all  fatty  parts,  where,  by  reflected  light  and  as  we
usually  view  objects  with  the  naked  eye,  we  see  whitish,
yellowish,  or  brownish-yellow  parts — by  transmitted
light,  as  generally  employed  for  microscopes,  and  espe-
cially with  the  higher  powers,  either  black,  or  brownish
black,  or  at  least  very  dark  parts,  surrounded  by
sharply-defined  shadows,  appear.  A  granule -globule
which,  when  lying  together  with  several  others,  pro-
duces a  spot  white  and  opaque  to  the  naked  eye,  will,
when  viewed  by  transmitted  light,  display  a  nearly  black
appearance.

GENUINE  FATTY METAMORPHOSIS.  391

"We  have  now  compared  a  series  of  examples  of  fatty
degeneration,  and  may  henceforth  confine  ourselves  to
the  consideration  of  genuine  fatty  metamorphosis,  in
which  the  normal  structure  of  the  part  is  ultimately
destroyed,  and  the  place  of  the  histological  elements  is
gradually  occupied  by  a  purely  emulsive  mass,  or,  more
concisely,  fatty  debris.  It  makes  no  difference  whether
it  is  a  pus-cell,  a  connective-tissue-corpuscle,  a  nerve-  or
muscular  fibre,  or  a  vessel  which  experiences  the  change  ;
the  result  is  always  the  same  ;  namely,  milky  debris.
an  amorphous  accumulation  of  "fatty  particles  in  a  more
or  less  highly  albuminous  fluid.  But  though  we  hold  to
the  agreement  of  all  cases  of  fatty  metamorphosis  in
this  respect,  it  by  no  means,  however,  follows  that  the
importance  of  this  change  as  a  morbid  process  is  in
every  case  the  same.  This  you  may  at  once  infer  from
the  circumstance,  that,  whilst  I  have  introduced  this
process  to  your  notice  in  the  category  of  purely  passive
disturbances,  one  of  the  very  structures  which  we  most
frequently  find  in  it,  the  granule-globule,  has  been  re-
garded as  a  specific  element  of  inflammation.  For
years  an  inflammatory  globule  [exudation  corpuscle]
was  looked  upon  as  an  essential  phenomenon  in  the
process  of  inflammation,  and  in  fact,  the  frequency  with
which  cells  in  a  state  of  fatty  degeneration  are  found  in
inflamed  parts,  affords  sufficient  proof,  that  in  the  course
of  inflammatory  processes,  which  it  is  impossible  we
should  ever  regard  as  simply  passive  processes,  such
transformations  must  take  place.  It  is  therefore  very
essential  to  find  a  means  of  distinguishing  between  the
two  classes.  This  offers  indeed  in  particular  cases  very
great  difficulties,  and  according  to  my  conviction  the
only  possible  method  by  which  clear  notions  upon  the
subject  can  be  obtained,  consists  in  examining  whether
the  condition  of  fatty  degeneration  is  a  primary  or  se-

392  LECTURE  XVI.

condary  one,  whether  it  sets  in  as  soon  as  the distur-
bance can  be  perceived,  or  whether  it  does  not  occur
until  some  other  perceptible  disturbance  has  gone  before.
Secondary fatty degeneration, or that in  which this
peculiar  transformation  occurs  only  in  the  second  place,
generally  succeeds  to  a  first  and  active stage  ;  a  whole
series  of  those  processes  which  we  do  not  scruple  to  call
inflammations  run  their  course  in  such  a  way,  that  a
fatty  metamorphosis  sets  in  as  the  second  or  third  ana-
tomical stage  of  the  change. Here  therefore  the  fatty
degeneration  does  not  arise  as  a  direct  result  of  the
irritation  of  the  part,  but  where  we  have  the  opportu-
nity of more accurately tracing the history of the
changes,  it  nearly  always  turns  out,  that  the  stage  of
fatty  degeneration  has  been  preceded  by  another  stage,
namely that of cloudy swelling, in which the parts
enlarge and  increase  in  extent  and density,  in  conse-
quence of  their  absorbing  a  large quantity  of  matter
into themselves. Absorbing  1  say  advisedly,  because  I
hold  it  to  be  untrue  that  the  part  is  in  any  way  forced
by  external  influences  to  take  up  this  matter,  or  that  it
is  inundated  with  exudation  proceeding  from  the  vessels,
for  the same phenomena present themselves also in
parts  which  have  no  vessels. It  is  only  when  the  ac-
cumulation has attained such dimensions, that the
natural  constitution  of  the  part  is  thereby  endangered,
that  a  fatty  disintegration  is  set  up  in  the  interior  of
the  elements. Thus  we  may  designate  fatty  degenera-
tion of  the  renal  epithelium  as  a  stage  of  Bright's  dis-
ease (or  as  I  say,  parenchymatous  nephritis),  which  has
been  preceded  by  a  stage  of  hypersemia  and  swelling,
in which every epithelial cell accumulated a large
quantity  of  cloudy  matter  in  itself,  without  there  having
been originally  a trace of  a  drop of  fat observable.
Thus we  see that a muscle under the influence of

INFLAMMATORY  FATTY  DEGENERATION.  393

agencies  which  it  is  universally  conceded  produce  in-
flammation, as  for  example  after  wounds,  and  chemical
corrosions,  swells  up,  that  its  primitive  fasciculi  become
broader  and  more  clouded,  and  that  as  a.  second  stage
the  same  fatty  degeneration  commences  in  them,  which
at  other  times  we  see  primarily  arise.

It  may  therefore  certainly,  when  quite  general  terms
are  used,  be  said,  that  there  does  exist  an  inflammatory
form  of  fatty  degeneration  ;  still,  strictly  speaking,  this
inflammatory  form  is  never  anything  more  than  a  later
stage,  a  termination,  which  announces  the  commencing
disintegration  of  the  structure  of  the  tissue,  when  the
part  is  no  longer  in  a  condition  to  continue  a  separate
existence,  but  is  to  such  an  extent  abandoned  to  the
play  of  the  chemical  forces  of  its  constituent  parts,  that
the  next  result  is  its  really  complete  dissolution.  Now
inflammatory  conditions  of  this  kind  are  of  very  great
importance,  because  in  all  parts  whose  essential  ele-
ments become  changed  in  this  manner,  no  immediate
restitution  is  possible.  When  inflammation  takes  place
in  a  muscle  and  in  its  course  the  primitive  muscu-
lar fasciculi  fall  into  a  state  of  fatty  degeneration,  as  a
rule  they  also  perish,  and  we  afterwards  find  a  loss  of
substance  in  the  muscle  at  the  spot  where  the  degenera-
tion took  place.  The  kidney,  whose  epithelium  has
passed  into  a  state  of  fatty  degeneration,  nearly  always
shrivels  up,  and  the  result  is  a  permanent  atrophy.  In
exceptional  cases  something  perhaps  occurs,  which
reminds  us  of  a  regeneration  of  the  epithelium,  but
usually  a  collapse  of  the  entire  structure  ensues.
The  same  thing  is  witnessed  in  the  brain  in  yellow
softening,  no  matter  how  it  may  have  been  caused.
Whether  there  have  been  inflammation  or  not,  a  va-
cuity is  formed,  which  is  never  again  filled  up  with
nervous  matter. Perhaps  a  simple  fluid  may  replace

394:  LECTURE XVI.

the  wanting  tissues,  but  as  to  any  reproduction  of  a
new,  functionally  active  part,  that  must  ever  be  out  of
the  question.

Herein  you  must  seek  the  explanation  of  the  circum-
stance, that  conditions  apparently  very  similar,  and
which  from  a  pathologico-anatomical  point  of  view
might  be  declared  to  be  identical,  in  a  clinical  point  of
view  lie  widely  apart,  and  that  the  same  forms  of
changes  are  met  with  in  analogous  parts,  without,  how-
ever the  whole  process,  to  which  they  belong,  being  the
same.  When  a  muscle  falls  into  a  state  of  simple  fatty
degeneration,  its  primitive  muscular  fasciculi  may  have
just  the  same  appearance  as  if  inflammation  or  perma-
nent tension  had  acted  upon  it.  Myocarditis  generates
forms  of  fatty  degeneration  in  the  substance  of  the
heart  altogether  analogous  to  those  due  to  excessive
dilatation  of  the  cardiac  cavities.  When  one  of  these,  for
example,  either  through  some  obstruction  to  the  current
of  the  blood,  or  from  insufficiency  of  the  valves,  is  per-
manently much  dilated,  fatty  degeneration  of  the  muscu-
lar tissue  constantly  manifests  itself  in  the  part  which
has  been  most  stretched.  This  form,  morphologically
speaking,  completely  resembles  the  early  stages  of  my-
ocarditis, and  in  many  cases  it  is  utterly  impossible
to  say  with  certainty  in  what  way  the  process  may
have  arisen.

I  have,  in  order  to  clear  up  to  some  extent  these  diffi-
culties, as  they  are  presented  by  an  important,  frequent
and  at  the  same  time  much  misunderstood  process,  pre-
pared a  series  of  specimens  exhibiting  really  atheromatous
conditions  of  the  arteries.  For  it  is  particularly  in  the
case  of  these  conditions  that  the  confusion,  which  has  pre-
vailed with  regard  to  the  interpretation  of  the  change,
has  perhaps  been  the  greatest.

At  no  period  in  the  course  of  this  century  has  a  com-

ATHEROMATOUS AFFECTION OF  ARTERIES.  395

plete  understanding  ever  been  come  to  as  to  what  was  to
be  understood  by  the  expression  atheromatous  change  in
a  vessel.  Some  have  taken  the  term  in  a  wider,  others
in  a  narrower  sense,  but  still  it  has  perhaps  been  taken
in  too  wide  a  sense  by  all.  When,  namely,  the  anato-
mists of  the  last  century  applied  the  name  of  atheroma
to  a  definite  change  in  the  coats  of  arteries,  they  of
course  had  in  their  minds  a  condition  similar  to  that  of
the  skin,  to  which  ever  since  the  days  of  ancient  Greece,
the  name  of  atheroma,  grit-follicle,  (Griitzbalg)  [sebace-
ous or  epidermic  cyst],  had  been  assigned.  It  is  self-
evident,  therefore,  that  the  idea  of  atheroma  presupposes
a  closed  sack.  Nobody  ever  called  anything  in  the  skin
an  atheroma  that  lay  open  and  uncovered.  It  was  there-
fore a  curious  misapprehension  when  people  recently  be-
gan to  call  changes  in  the  vessels  atheromata,  which  were
not  seated  below  the  surface  and  shut  off  from  the  sur-
rounding parts,  but  belonged  to  the  surface.  Thus  it  has
come  to  pass  that,  instead  of  an  enclosed  deposit  being,
in  accordance  with  the  original  meaning  of  the  term,
called  atheromatous,  a  change  has  frequently  been  so
termed  which  commences  quite  at  the  surface  of  the  in-
ternal arterial  coat.  When  the  matter  began  to  be  exa-
mined more  minutely,  and  fatty  particles  (Fig.  113)  were
found  at  very  different  points  in  the  walls  of  the  vessels,
both  when  atheroma  was,  and  was  not,  present — when
at  last  the  conviction  was  obtained,  that  the  process  of
fatty  degeneration  was  always  the  same  and  was  identi-
cal with  the  atheromatous  change,  it  became  the  custom
to  unite  all  the  forms  of  the  fatty  degeneration  of  arte-
ries under  the  designation  atheroma.  Gradually,  peo-
ple even  came  to  speak  of  an  atheromatous  change  in
vessels,  that  only  possessed  a  single  coat,  for  in  them  too
we  meet  with  fatty  processes.

At  all  times  there  have  moreover  been  observers  who

396  LECTURE XVI.

regarded  the  ossification  of  vessels  as  a  change  belonging
to  the  same  category  as  atheroma.  Haller  and  Crell  be-
lieved that  the  ossification  proceeded  from  the  athero-
matous matter,  and  that  this  was  a  juice  which,  like  that
exuding  under  the  periosteum  of  bone,  was  capable  of
generating  plates  of  bone  out  of  itself.  Afterwards  it
was  recognized  that  atheromasia  and  ossification  were  two
parallel  processes,  which,  however,  might  be  referred  to
a  common  origin.  Now  it  would,  I  think,  have  been
logical,  if  in  the  next  place  an  understanding  had  been
come  to  as  to  what  this  origin  was,  from  which  the  athe-
romatous change  and  the  ossification  proceeded.  But,
instead  of  this,  the  track  of  fatty  degeneration  was  pur-
sued, and  thus  the  atheromatous  process  was  extended
to  a  number  of  vessels,  in  which,  on  account  of  the  thin-
ness and  the  simple  structure  of  their  walls,  the  forma-
tion of  any  dep6t,  which  could  really  be  compared  to  an
atheromatous  cyst  of  the  skin,  was  altogether  impossible.
The  state  of  the  matter  here  also  is  more  or  less  very
simply  this,  that  two  processes  must  be  distinguished  in
the  vessels,  which  are  very  analogous  in  their  ultimate
results  ;  first,  the  simple  fatty  metamorphosis,  which  sets
in  without  any  discoverable  preliminary  stage,  and  in
which  the  existing  histological  elements  pass  directly  into
a  state  of  fatty  degeneration  and  are  destroyed,  so  that  a
larger  or  smaller  proportion  of  the  constituents  of  the
walls  of  the  vessel  perishes  ;  and,  in  the  next  place,  a
second  series  of  changes,  in  which  we  can  distinguish  a
stage  of  irritation  preceding  the  fatty  metamorphosis,
comparable  to  the  stage  of  swelling,  cloudiness,  and  en-
largement which  we  see  in  other  inflamed  parts.  I  have
therefore  felt  no  hesitation  in  siding  with  the  old  view  in
this  matter,  and  in  admitting  an  inflammation  of  the  in-
ner arterial  coat  to  be  the  starting  point  of  the  so-called
atheromatous  degeneration  ;  and  I  have  moreover  en-

THE  ATHEROMATOUS  PROCESS.  397

deavoured  to  show  that  this  kind  of  inflammatory  affec-
tion of  the  arterial  coat,  is  in  point  of  fact  exactly  the
same  as  what  is  universally  termed  endocarditis,  when  it
occurs  in  the  parietes  of  the  heart.  There  is  no  other
difference  between  the  two  processes  than  that  the  one
more  frequently  runs  an  acute,  the  other  a  chronic,
course.

By  the  establishment  of  this  distinction  between  the

»

different  processes  which  occur  in  the  arteries,  the  differ-
ence of  the  course  they  pursue  is  at  once  accounted  for.
Last  time  I  laid  an  artery  before  you,  on  the  inner  sur-
face of  which  you  saw  little  whitish  patches,  which  were
due  to  simple  fatty  transformation.  To-day  you  see  very
extensive  patches  in  the  aorta,  in  which  the  atheromatous
change  has  taken  place.  But,  as  is  wont  to  be  the  case
in  changes  of  this  kind,  in  addition  to  the  specific  trans-
formation attendant  upon  the  chronic  inflammatory  pro-
cesses going  on  in  the  deeper  parts,  you  find  on  the  sur-
face also  a  simply  fatty  change,  so  that  we  have  the  two
processes  occurring  together.  If  now  we  examine  athe-
romasia  a  little  more  minutely,  for  example  in  the  aorta,
where  the  process  is  the  most  common,  the  first  thing  we
see  present  itself  at  the  spot  where  the  irritation  has  taken
place,  is  a  swelling  of  larger  or  smaller  size  and  not  unfre-
quently  so  large  as  to  form  a  really  hump-like  projection
(Buckel)  above  the  level  of  the  internal  surface.  These
projections  are  distinguished  from  the  neighbouring  parts
by  their  translucent,  cornea-like  appearance.  In  their
deeper  parts  they  look  more  opaque.  When  the  change
has  lasted  for  a  certain  time,  the  first  further  metamor-
phoses do  not  show  themselves  at  the  surface,  but  just
where  the  internal  comes  into  contact  with  the  middle
coat  as  has  been  very  well  described  by  the  old  writers.
How  often  have  they  distinctly  contended  that  the
internal  coat  could  be  stripped  off  over  the  affected  spot !

398

LECTURE XVI.

Hence  arose  the  description  of  Haller,  that  the  pultace-
I  ous,  atheromatous  mass  lay  in  a  close  cavity,  as  it  were
a  little  cystic  tumour  between  the  internal  and  middle
coat.  The  only  mistake  was,  that  the  tumour  was  re-
garded as  a  distinct  body  separable  from  the  coats  of  the
vessels.  It  is  rather  the  internal  coat  itself  which  without
any  well  defined  limits  passes  into  a  state  of  degeneration
within  the  prominent  spot.  The  farther  this  degeneration
advances,  the  more  distinctly  does  an  enclosed  collec-
tion arise  out  of  the  destruction  of  the  deepest  layers  of
the  internal  coat ;  and  at  last  it  may  be  that  the  swelling
fluctuates,  and  that  upon  cutting  into  it  the  pultaceous
matter  is  evacuated,  like  the  pus,  when  an  abscess  is  cut
into. Now  if  the  mass  be  examined  which  is  present  at

Fig.  116.  Vertical  section  through  the  walls  of  the  aorta  at  a  sclerotic  part  in
which  atheromatous  matter  is  already  in  the  course  of  formation,  m  m'.  Middle
coat,  i  i'  i'\  internal  coat.  At  s  the  highest  point  of  the  sclerotic  part  where  it  pro-
jects into  the  cavity  of  the  vessel,  i  the  innermost  layer  of  the  internal  coat  running
over  the  whole  depot,  i'  the  proliferating,  sclerosing  layer,  preparing  for  fatty  dege-
neration, i"  the  layer  immediately  adjoining  the  middle  coat  which  has  already  un-
dergone fatty  degeneration,  and  at  e,  e,  is  in  process  of  direct  softening.

ATHEROMATOUS  DEPOSITS  IN ARTERIES.

399

Fig.  117.

the  close  of  this  process,  numerous  plates  of  cholestea-
rine  are  seen,  which  display  themselves  even  to  the  naked
eye  as  glistening  lamellae  ;  large  rhombic  tablets,  which
lie  together  in  large  numbers,  side  by  side,  or  covering
one  another,  and  altogether  produce  a  glittering  reflec-
tion. In  addition  to  these  plates,  we  find  under  the
microscope  black-looking  granule-globules,  in  which  the
individual  fat-granules  are  at  first  very  minute.  These
globules  are  often  present  in
very  large  quantity  ;  some  of
them  are  seen,  breaking  up,
and  falling  to  pieces,  parti-
cles of  them  swimming  about,
as  in  milk.  Besides  these
there  are  amorphous  frag-
ments of  tissue  of  larger  or
smaller  size  which  still  cohere,
and  are  rather  due  to  the  soft-
ening of  the  rest  of  the  sub-
stance of  the  tissue  which  has

not  undergone  fatty  degeneration  ;  and  in  them  heaps
of  granules  are  here  and  there  imbedded.  It  is  these
three  constituents  together,  the  chokstearine,  the  granule-
cells  and  fat -granules,  and  finally  the  large  lumps  of  half-
softened  substance,  which  give  the  atheromatous  matter  its
pultaceous  character,  and  really  produce  a  certain  degree
of  resemblance  to  the  contents  of  a  pultaceous  [sebace-
ous, epidermic]  cyst  (Grutzbeutel)  of  the  skin.  With
regard  to  the  cholestearine,  it  is  by  no  means  a  specific
product,  appertaining  to this  kind  of  fatty  transforma-

Fig.  117.  The  pultaceous  atheromatous  matter  from  a  patch  in  the  aorta,  a  a'.  Fluid
fat,  the  product  of  the  fatty  metamorphosis  of  the  cells  of  the  internal  coat  (a),
which  become  transformed  into  granule-globules  (a'  a'),  then  disintegrate  and  set
free  large  and  small  drops  of  oil  (fatty  debris),  b.  Amorphous,  granularly-wrinkled
flakes  of  tissue  softened  and  swollen  by  imbibition.  c,  c'.  Crystals  of  cholestea-
rine ;  c  large  rhombic  plates  ;  c,  c'  fine  rhombic  needles. 300  diameters.

400  LECTURE  XVI.

tion  alone.  On  the  contrary,  we  see  in  every  case,
where  fatty  products  remain  stagnant  for  a  considerable
time  within  a  closed  cavity  in  which  but  little  inter-
change of  matter  can  go  on,  that  the  fat  sets  free  cho-
lestearine.  All  the  masses  of  fat  which  we  meet  with
in  the  body  contain  a  certain  quantity  of  cholestearine
in  combination.  As  to  whether  the  cholestearine  which
is  set  free  had  already  previously  existed,  or  whether  a
real  new  formation  of  it  takes  place  in  the  parts,  not
a  word  can  as  yet  be  said,  inasmuch  as  no  chemical
fact  has,  it  is  well  known,  been  made  out,  which  throws
any  light  upon  the  manner  in  which  the  formation  of
cholestearine  is  effected,  or  upon  the  substances,  out  of
which  cholestearine  may  be  formed.  This  much,  how-
ever, we  must  hold  fast,  that  cholestearine  is  a  product
set  free  at  a  late  period  from  stagnating,  and,  particularly,
from  fatty  matters.

I  may  take  this  opportunity  to  mention  the  reaction
of  cholestearine  with  iodine  and  sulphuric  acid,  which
has  recently  become  important,  and  is  similar  to  that
which  we  have  already  (p.  31)  considered  when  speak-
ing of  the  cellulose  of  plants.  When,  namely,  iodine
alone  is  added  to  cholestearine,  no  change  is  seen  any
more  than  in  cellulose,  under  similar  circumstances  ;
but  when,  on  the  other  hand,  sulphuric  acid  is  applied
to  the  iodized  mass  of  cholestearine,  its  plates  become
coloured  and  assume,  particularly  at  first,  a  brilliant
indigo-blue  tint,  which  gradually  passes  into  a  yellowish
brown,  until  the  cholestearine  is  converted  into  a  brown-
ish drop.  Sulphuric  acid  alone  produces  a  fatty-looking
substance  which  is  neither  cholestearine,  nor  any  special
combination  of  cholestearine  and  sulphuric  acid,  but  a
product  of  the  decomposition  of  the  former.  Sulphuric
acid  alone  also  produces  very  beautiful  phenomena  of
colour  with  cholestearine.

FORMATION  OF ATHEROMA IN ARTERIES.

401

If  now,  gentlemen,  we  trace  the  development  of  the
atheromatous  condition  a  little  further  back,  we  come —
anteriorly  to  the  period  when  the  pultaceous  matter  is
found  in  the  seat  of  the  atheroma — across  a  stage,
where  nothing  more  is  found  than  fatty  degeneration  in
its  ordinary  form  of  granule-cells,  and  we  distinctly  con-
vince ourselves,  that  the  process  in  this  stage  absolutely
differs  in  no  respect  from  that  which  in  the  case  of  the
heart  and  kidney  we  have  just  declared  to  constitute  the
stage  of  fatty  metamorphosis.  At  this  period,  imme-
diately before  the  formation  of  the  depot,  the  state  of
matters,  as  seen  with  a  high  power,  is  about  as  follows.
On  making  a  section  we  see  the  fatty  cells  which  are
interspersed  through  the  tissue  becoming  larger  towards
the  middle  and  lying  more  closely  together,  but  gene-

Fig.  118.

rally  bearing  the  form  of  cells  ;  but,  as  we  proceed
from  within  outwards  they  become  smaller  and  less
numerous.  All  these  cells  are  filled  with  small,  fatty
granules  which  strongly  reflect  the  light.  Hereby  is
produced  what  looks  to  the  eye  in  a  section  like  a  whitish
spot. Between these fatty  corpuscles  runs  a  meshed

Fig.  118.  Vertical  section  from  a  sclerotic  plate  in  the  aorta  (internal  coat,  inner
surface)  in  process  of  fatty  degeneration  ;  i,  the  innermost  part  of  the  coat  with
round  nuclei,  isolated,  and  in  groups  of  several  (divided),  h.  The  layer  of  en-
larging cells ;  networks  are  seen  with  spindle-shaped  cells  which  enclose  sections
of  cells  resembling  those  of  cartilage,  p.  Proliferating  layer ;  division  of  the
nuclei  and  cells,  a,  a'.  The  layer  which  is  becoming  atheromatous ;  a,  the  com-
mencement of  the  process,  a',  the  advanced  stage  of  fatty  degeneration.  300
diameters.

402  LECTURE  XVI.

basis-substance,  the  really  fibrous  stroma  of  the  internal
coat,  which  we  plainly  see  continued  towards  the  exte-
rior into  the  normal  internal  coat.  This  fact,  that  we
are  able  to  acquire  the  direct  conviction  that  the  fibrous
layer  which  lies  over  the  depdt,  is  continued  into  the
fibrous  layer  of  the  neighbouring  normal  portions  of  the
internal  coat,  is  one  of  especial  value  in  the  interpretation
of  these  processes.  In  this  manner  the  view  which  was
for  a  considerable  time  defended  by  Rokitansky  also,
that  the  affection  consists  in  a  deposit  upon  the  internal
coat,  is  refuted.  In  a  vertical  section  it  is  distinctly
seen  that  the  most  external  layers  run  in  a  curve  over
the  whole  swelling  and  return  into  the  internal  coat,  and
the  old  writers  were  quite  right  when  they  said — speak-
ing of  a  stage  in  which  the  formation  of  the  athero-
matous dep6t  had  already  made  considerable  progress —
that  the  internal  coat  over  the  whole  of  the  depOt  could
be  stripped  off  in  a  piece.  On  the  other  hand,  however,
we  can  convince  ourselves,  that  the  inferior  layers  of
the  internal  coat  run  directly  into  the  depOt,  and  that
their  continuity  has  been  broken  by  their  degeneration,
so  that  we  have  not  to  deal  either  with  an  interjacent
deposit  (between  the  internal  and  middle  coat),  as  the
old  writers  supposed,  but  the  whole  of  what  we  have
before  us  is  degenerated  internal  coat.

In  some  particularly  violent  cases  the  softening  mani-
fests itself  even  in  the  arteries  not  as  the  consequence
of  a  really  fatty  process,  but  as  a  direct  product  of
inflammation.  Whilst  at  the  circumference  a  fatty
softening  takes  place,  in  the  centre  of  the  seat  of  change
a  yellowish  cloudy  appearance  is  seen  to  arise,  where-
upon the  substance  almost  immediately  softens  and  dis-
integrates, and  a  mass  of  coarse,  crumbling  fragments  is
found  (Fig.  116,  e,  e)  which  fills  the  centre  of  the  athe-
romatous d£pot.

SCLEROSIS  AND OSSIFICATION OF ARTERIES.  403

In  the  last  place,  it  is  a  question  where  the  seat  of
the  fatty  degeneration  really  is.  Here  too  again  (as  in
the  cornea)  it  maybe  imagined  that  the  fat  is  deposited  in
spaces  intervening  between  the  lamelke  ;  and  even  now
there  are  still  a  small  number  of  histologists  who  will
not  admit,  that  connective  tissue  contains  only  cells,
and  no  empty  spaces.  But  if  a  section  through  one  of
these  (atheromatous)  patches  be  examined  from  below
upwards,  it  is  seen  that  the  same  structure  which  pre-
sents itself  in  the  fatty  parts,  shows  itself  also  in  the
merely  horny  or  half  cartilaginous  layers.  Bands  of
fibres,  in  the  intersections  of  which  small  lenticular
cavities  appear,  are  found  there  as  they  are  also  in  the
normal  condition  of  the  internal  coat ;  but  in  the  cavities
and  in  the  bands  of  fibres  lie  cellular  elements  (Fig.
118).  The  enlargement  which  the  part  undergoes  in
consequence  of  the  process  and  which  we  call  sclerosis,
depends  upon  this  ;  the  cellular  elements  of  the  coat
increase  in  size  and  a  multiplication  of  their  nuclei
takes  place,  so  that -spaces  are  not  unfrequently  found
in  which  whole  heaps  of  nuclei  are  lying.  This  is  the
mode  in  which  the  process  sets  in.  In  many  cases
division  occurs  in  the  cells,  and  a  great  number  of
young  cells  are  met  with.  These  afterwards  become  the
seat  of  the  fatty  degeneration  (Fig.  118,  a,  a'),  and  then
really  perish.  Thus  we  have  here  an  active  process,
which  really  produces  new  tissues,  but  then  hurries  on
to  destruction  in  consequence  of  its  own  development.
But  one  who  knows  that  the  fatty  degeneration  is  here
only  a  termination,  and  that  the  process  is  really  a
formative  one,  inasmuch  as  it  begins  with  a  proliferation
— he  can  readily  imagine  the  possibility  of  another  ter-
mination, namely  ossification.  For  here  we  have  really
to  do  with  an  ossification,  and  not  merely,  as  has  re-
cently been  maintained,  with  a  mere  calcification  ;  the

404  LECTURE  XVI.

plates,  which  pervade  the  inner  wall  of  the  vessel,  are
real  plates  of  bone.  Since  they  form  out  of  the  same
sclerotic  substance  from  which  in  other  cases  the  fatty
mass  arises,  and  since  a  real  tissue  can  only  arise  out  of
a  pre-existing  one,  it  follows  of  course  that,  when  the
process  terminates  in  fatty  metamorphosis,  we  cannot
assume  this  to  consist  in  a  simple  dissemination  of  fatty
particles  which  has  taken  place  in  whatever  interspaces
we  like  to  fix  upon.

The  essential  difference  which  exists  in  a  large  vessel,
as  for  example,  the  aorta,  between  this  process  [athe-
roma] and  simple  fatty  degeneration  is  therefore  this,
that  in  the  latter  a  very  slight  swelling  arises  on  the
surface  of  the  internal  coat,  a  swelling,  which  at  once
disappears  if  the  superficial  layers  be  removed  by  a
horizontal  section,  and  beneath  which  there  still  remains
a  portion  of  the  coat  unaltered.  In  the  other  case,  on
the  contrary,  we  have  in  the  extreme  stage  a  dep6t
which  lies  deep  beneath  the  comparatively  normal  sur-
face, afterwards  bursts,  discharges  its  contents  and  forms
the  atheromatous  ulcer.  This  commences  as  a  small  hole
in  the  internal  coat,  through  which  the  thick,  viscous
contents  of  the  atheromatous  depot  are  squeezed  out
on  to  the  surface  in  the  form  of  a  plug  ;  gradually
more  and  more  of  these  contents  is  evacuated  and
carried  away  by  the  stream  of  blood,  until  at  last  there
remains  a  larger  or  smaller  ulcer  which  may  extend  as
far  as  the  middle  coat,  and  indeed  not  unfrequently
involves  it.  We  have  therefore  always  to  deal  with
serious  disease  of  the  vessel  leading  to  just  as  destruc-
tive results,  as  we  see  in  the  course  of  other  violent
inflammatory  processes.  You  need  only  apply  these
observations  to  the  history  of  endocarditis,  and  you  will
have  a  correct  notion  of  all  that  goes  on  there  also..

In  the  valves  of  the  heart  also  we  find  simple  fatty

ENDOCARDIAL  EXCRESCENCES.

405

degeneration  taking  place  both  at  the  surface  and  deep
beneath  it.  The  process  generally  pursues  its  course  so
latently  that  no  disturbance  is  perceptible  during  life,
nor  are  we  able,  in  the  present  state  of  our  knowledge,
to  name  any  very  obvious  anatomical  change  as  being
the  subsequent  result  of  it.  On  the  other  hand,  what
we  call  endocarditis,  what  can  be  demonstrated  to  arise
in  the  course  of  rheumatism,  and  may  indubitably  ap-
pear as  a  sort  of  equivalent  to  the  rheumatism  of  the
peripheral  parts,  begins  with  a  swelling  of  the  deceased
spot  itself.  There  is,  namely,  no  exudation,  but  the
cellular  elements  take  up  a  greater  quantity  of  material,
and  the  spot  becomes  uneven  and  rugged.  Then  we
see,  when  the  process  runs  its  course  somewhat  slowly,

Fig.  119

either  that  an  excrescence,  a  condyloma  arises,  or  that
the  swelling  assumes  a  more  mammillated  form,  and  af-
terwards becomes  the  seat  of  a  calcification  which  may
produce  real  bone.  If  the  process  runs  a  more  acute
course,  the  result  is  either  fatty  degeneration  or  soften-
ing. The  latter  gives  rise  to  the  ulcerative  forms,  in
which  the  valves crumble  to  pieces,  drop  off,  and  em-

Fig.  119.  Condylomatous  excrescences  of  the  mitral  valve;  simple,  granular
swellings  (granulations)  and  larger  prominences  (vegetations),  some  villous,  others
branched  and  putting  forth  secondary  buds  ;  in  all  elastic  fibres  running  upwards.
70  diameters.

406  LECTURE  XVI.

bolical  deposits  are  produced  in  remote  parts  (Fig.  73,
p.  242).*

Only  in  this  manner,  by  observing,  namely,  the  earli-
est stages  of  the  changes,  is  it  possible  to  form  certain
and  practically  useful  opinions  with  regard  to  pathologi-
cal processes.  Never  ought  one,  basing  oneJs  opinion
•flpon  the  difference  of  the  processes  in  a  clinical  point
of  view,  to  allow  oneself  to  be  induced  to  regard  their
ultimate  products  as  necessarily  different.  The  most
violent  inflammatory  processes  which  run  their  course
in  quite  a  short  time,  may  have  the  same  terminations
as  those  which,  in  other  cases,  are  brought  about  more
slowly.

It  is  not  my  intention  to  go  through  the  series  of  the
different  passive  disturbances  which  may  possibly  arise
in  the  later  stages  of  irritative  conditions,  in  detail.
Else  we  should  be  able  to  discover  analogous  instances
in  the  history  of  nearly  all  degenerative  atrophies.  In
all  cases  we  must  discriminate  between  the  conditions  in
which  a  part  becomes  directly  the  seat  of  such  a  retro-
grade metamorphosis,  and  those  in  which  it  previously
underwent  an  active  change.

The  description  which  I  have  given  you  of  the  fatty
processes  directly  applies  to  the  class  of  calcifications.
If  it  be  wished  to  discriminate  between  ossification  and
calcification,  it  is  not  sufficient  to  keep  the  ultimate  re-
sult in  one's  eye. A  part  does  not  become  true  bone,

*  This  theory  of  the  detachment  of  fragments  from  the  valves  of  the  heart,  and
of  the  consequent  secondary  occlusions  (embolia)  was  propounded  by  me,  with
illustrations  from  the  histories  of  patients  and  the  results  of  post-mortem  examina-
tions (Archiv  f.  path.  Anat.  und  Phys.  vol.  L,  p.  134)  as  far  back  as  1847,  or  five
years  before  Dr.  Kirkes,  to  whom  the  honour  of  this  discovery  is  still  generally
ascribed  in  England,  published  his  papers  on  the  subject.  My  observations  con-
cerning the  detachment  of  the  thrombi  in  the  veins  were  published  a  year  earlier
than  this,  viz.,  in  1846,  and  I  then  hinted  at  the  occurrence  of  the  same  process  in
the  arteries,  although  I  did  not  give  a  full  account  of  it  until  1847. — From  a  MS
Note  by  the  Author,

CALCIFICATION  AND OSSIFICATION OF  ARTERIES.  407

because  it  takes  up  lime  into  its  intercellular  substance
and  has  stellate  cells  present  in  it ;  it  may  in  spite
of  all  this  be  nothing  more  than  calcined  connective
tissue.  When  we  speak  of  pathological  ossification,  we
always  presuppose  that  the  mass  which  ossifies  has  been
called  into  existence  by  an  active  process,  an  irritation,
and  not  that  a  previously  existing  tissue  assumes  the
form  of  bone,  by  absorbing  calcareous  salts.  We  have
therefore  calcifications  and  ossifications  in  the  vessels.
In  ancient  times  everything  was  called  ossification.
Many  of  the  more  recent  observers  have  denied  that  it
ever  does  occur  in  vessels.  Ossification  does  however
really  occur,  but  so  does  mere  calcification,  or,  as  I  will
briefly  term  it,  petrifaction.  The  latter  is  compara-
tively more  frequent  in  the  peripheral  arteries,  so  that
the  condition  which  is  generally  regarded  as  a  special
criterion  of  the  atheromatous  process  and  in  which  the
radial  artery  is  felt  to  be  hard  and  calcareous,  and  the
femoral  or  popliteal  is  perceived  to  have  hard  and  rigid
walls,  is  no  proof  at  all  that  the  process  is  an  atheroma-
tous one.  Very  frequently  this  induration  has  its  seat
in  the  middle  coat.  In  this  case  the  calcification  really
invades  the  muscular  elements,  so  that  the  fibre-cells
of  the  circular-fibre  coat  are  transformed  into  calcareous
spindle-shaped  bodies.  The  calcareous  matter  may  in
these  cases  also  invade  the  neighbouring  parts,  but  the
internal  coat  may  possibly  remain  quite  unaltered.  This
is  a  process  therefore,  which  differs  more  from  what  is
termed  the  atheromatous  process  than  periostitis  from
ostitis.  This  species  of  calcification  has  no  necessary
connection  whatever  with  an  inflammation  of  the  artery ,
it  occurs  most  commonly  in  cases  where  there  is  a  ten-
dency to  calcifications  generally,  and  where  calcareous
salts  are  set  free  at  other  points  in  the  economy  and  cir-
culate with  the  juices. This  much  at  least  can  with  cer-

40S  LECTURE  XVI.

tainty  be  affirmed,  that  we  are  as  yet  acquainted  with  no
stage  in  these  changes,  which  is  at  all  akin  to  inflammation.

On  the  contrary,  we  see  ossification  declare  itself  in
the  Internal  coat  of  vessels  in  precisely  the  same  manner
as  when  an  osteophyte  forms  on  the  surface  of  bone
amidst  all  the  phenomena  of  inflammation.  The  oste-
ophytes of  the  inner  table  of  the  skull  and  of  the  cere-
bral membranes  follow  the  same  course  of  development
as  the  ossifying  plates  of  the  internal  coat  of  the  aorta
and  even  of  the  veins.  They  always  begin  with  a  pro-
liferation of  the  pre-existing  connective  tissue,  whereby
partial  swellings  are  produced,  in  which  the  deposition
of  the  calcareous  salts  does  not  take  place  until  a  late
period.  As  soon  as  this  real  ossification  exists,  we
cannot  help  regarding  the  process  as  one  which  has
arisen  out  of  an  irritation  of  the  parts,  stimulating
them  to  new,  formative  actions ;  so  far  therefore  it
comes  under  our  ideas  of  inflammation,  or  at  least  of
those  processes  which  are  extremely  nearly  allied  to  in-
flammation. When  a  process  of  this  sort  is  accessible  to
treatment,  we  have  always  other  indications  for  practice,
than  in  those  cases,  in  which  our  object  is,  by  the  agency
of  stimulating  substances,  to  prevent  the  occurrence  of
certain  passive  disturbances  which  hinder  the  part  from
discharging  its  natural  functions.

What  I  have  said  will  suffice,  I  think,  to  make  these,
in  my  opinion,  extremely  important  distinctions  clear  to
you.  In  the  next  lecture  I  will  lay  before  you  that  one
among  the  degenerative  processes  which  is  at  the  present
moment  the  least  clear,  namely  the  lardaceous  or  amyloid
degeneration.

LECTURE XVII.

APRIL  17,  1858.
AMYLOID  DEGENERATION. INFLAMMATION.

Amyloid  (lardaceous  or  waxy)  degeneration — Different  nature  of  amyloid  sub-
stances :  concentric  and  laminated  amyloid  bodies  (brain,  prostate),  and  amy-
loid degeneration  properly  so-called — Its  course— Commencement  of  the  affec-
tion in  the  minute  arteries — Waxy  liver — Cartilage — Dyscrasic  (constitutional)
character  of  the  disease — Intestines — Kidneys:  the  three  forms  of  Bright's
disease  (amyloid  degeneration,  parenchymatous,  and  interstitial  nephritis) —
Lymphatic  glands — Functional  disturbances  of  the  affected  organs.

Inflammation — The  four  cardinal  symptoms  and  their  predominance  in  the  different
schools:  the  thermic  and  vascular  theory  ;  the  neuro-pathologists,  exudations
— Inflammatory  stimuli — Lesion  of  function — Exudation  as  a  consequence  of
the  activity  of  the  tissues ;  mucus  and  fibrine — Inflammation  as  a  complex
irritative  process — Parenchymatous  and  exudative  (secretory)  form.

I  will  to-day,  gentlemen,  from  among  the  changes
which  must  in  general  be  rather  ranked  with  that  class
of  degenerations  which  are  attended  with  a  diminution
of  functional  power,  introduce  to  your  notice  one,  which
has  recently  acquired  especial  interest,  namely  that
which  has  been  by  some  called  the  lardaceous  (bacony —
speckig),  by  others  the  waxy,  whilst  I  have  given  it  the
name  of  the  amyloid,  change.  The  term  lardaceous
change  has  again  come  more  into  use  chiefly  through
the  instrumentality  of  the  "Vienna  school.  You  know
that  the  term  itself  is  of  tolerably  ancient  date  in  medi-
cine as  a  denomination  for  a  firm,  compact,  homogeneous

409

410  LECTURE  XVII.

appearance  of  parts.  We  find  it  has  been  employed  for
centuries,  and  even  in  recent  times  tumours  have  been
termed  lardaceous.  Still  the  term,  lardaceous  changes,
as  now  used,  has  but  very  little  to  do  with  these  tu-
mours, and  rather  refers  to  things,  upon  which  the  old
writers,  who,  I  think,  were  better  connoisseurs  in  bacon
than  our  friends  in  Yienna,  would  hardly  have  bestowed
such  a  name.  The  appearance  of  such  organs,  namely,
as  in  accordance  with  Viennese  ideas,  are  said  to  look
like  bacon,  bears,  according  to  northern  notions,  a  much
greater  resemblance  to  wax,  and  I  have  therefore  now
for  a  long  time,  like  the  Edinburgh  school,  made  use  of
the  term  waxy  change  instead.  When  we  look  at  a
liver  or  lymphatic  gland  which  constitutes  a  well-
marked  specimen  of  this  condition,  what  strikes  the
naked  eye  most,  is  the  translucent,  but  at  the  same  time,
dull  appearance  which  the  cut-surfaces  exhibit ;  the
natural  colour  of  the  parts  is  also  more  or  less  lost,  so
that  a  material,  at  first  more  of  a  grey  tint,  but  after-
wards perfectly  colourless,  seems  to  fill  the  parts.  The
translucent  nature  of  the  tissue  allows,  however,  the  red
of  the  vessels  and  the  natural  hue  of  the  neighbouring
parts  to  glimmer  through,  so  that  the  altered  spots  in
different  organs  have  rather  a  yellowish,  reddish,  or
brownish  tinge  ;  but  this  is  not  a  colour  belonging  to  the
substance  deposited.

The  first  facts,  by  the  help  of  which  we  were  enabled
to  determine  more  accurately  the  nature  of  this  sub-
stance which  had  previously  been  taken,  sometimes  for
a  peculiar  fatty  matter,  sometimes  for  albumen  or
fibrine,  sometimes,  finally,  for  a  colloid  substance,  were
furnished  by  the  application  of  iodine  to  animal  tissues.
It  will  now  soon  be  five  years  since  I  first  discovered  the
peculiar  reaction  of  the  corpora  amylacea  found  in
the  nervous  centres  with  iodine,  which  I  have  already

LAMINATED  AMYLOID-BODIES  (BRAIN,  PROSTATE).  41 1

described  to  you,  and  since  I  had  my  attention  directed
to  the  extraordinary  resemblance  which  these  bodies
present  to  vegetable  structures — a  resemblance  such
that  they  have  been  regarded,  now  rather  as  real  starch,
now  rather  as  analogous  to  cellulose.  The  next  organ
I  came  across,  although  there  is  no  close  resemblance  in
external  appearance  between  it  and  the  ependyma,  was
the  spleen  and  indeed  a  condition  of  it,  in  which  its
follicles  were  wholly  converted  into  this  translucent,
waxy  matter  (sagoey  spleen — Sagomilz).  Soon  after-
wards H.  Meckel  published  his  well-known  observations
which  demonstrated  the  occurrence  of  this  substance
in  several  places,  but  especially  in  the  kidneys,  the  liver
and  the  bowels,  and  we  afterwards  succeeded  in  finding
it  in  different  other  parts,  in  the  lymphatic  glands,
throughout  the  whole  of  the  digestive  tract,  in  the
mucous  membranes  of  the  urinary  passages,  and  finally
even  in  the  substance  of  the  muscular  organs — the  heart,
and  the  uterus — as  well  as  in  the  interior  of  cartilages —
so  that  at  the  present  moment  there  are  but  few  parts
of  the  body  that  we  do  not  know  may  undergo  this  pe-
culiar change.

If  we  investigate  the  matter  more  closely,  it  seems
that  two  allied,  but  not  identical,  substances  must  be
distinguished.  In  the  first  place  we  find  bodies  which
in  their  chemical  properties  are  more  analogous  to  real
vegetable  starch,  and  in  form  too  bear  an  extraordinary
resemblance  to  vegetable  starch-granules,  inasmuch  as
they  constitute  more  or  less  round,  or  oval  structures,
formed  by  a  succession  of  concentric  layers.  To  this
class  belong,  above  all,  the  corpora  amylacea  of  the  ner-
vous system  (Fig.  94).  Many  of  the  laminated  amyloid
bodies  are  of  very  large  size  ;  their  diameter  may  be-
come so  considerable,  that  they  may  be  very  distinctly
recognized  with  the  naked  eye. To  this  category  be-

412

LECTURE XVII.

long,  in  particular,  a  part  of  the  laminated  bodies,  that
are  found  in  the  prostate  of  every  adult  man  and  under
certain  circumstances  accumulate  in  large  quantities,  so
as  to  form  the  so-called  prostatic  concretions  ;  and  also
rare  forms  of  a  similar  kind  which  have  been  shown  by
Frederich  to  occur  in  several  conditions  of  the  lungs.

These  formations  vary  in  size  from  very  small,  simple,
homogeneous  looking  structures  up  to  gigantic  bodies,  in
which,  when  they  are  regularly  formed,  we  see  a  suc-
cession of  very  numerous  layers.  Just  as  the  small
amyloid  corpuscles  of  the  nervous  system  are  frequently
composed  of  two  separate  ones  and  constitute  twin
structures,  it  very  frequently  happens  here  also,  that  a
common  envelope  encloses  separate  centres  (Fig.  120,
d,  e).  Nay,  in  isolated  cases  this  goes  on  to  such  an
extent,  that  whole  heaps  of  smaller  bodies  are  held
together  by  larger  common  layers. These  very  large

Fig.  120.

Fig.  120.  Laminated  prostatic  amyloid  bodies  (concretions) ;  a,  oblong,  pale
homogeneous  corpuscle,  with  a  nucleus-like  body.  b.  A  larger,  laminated  corpuscle
with  pale  centre,  c.  A  still  larger  corpuscle  with  several  layers  and  a  coloured
centre.  <7,  e.  Bodies  Avith  two  and  three  centres,  in  d  of  a  deeper  colour.  /.  Large
concretion  with  a  dark-brown,  large  centre. Magnified  300  diameters.

THE TRUE AMYLOID DEGENERATION.  413

though  certainly  more  rare,  forms  may  attain  a  diameter
of  two  lines,  so  that  they  can  easily  be  isolated  from  the
tissue  in  which  they  lie,  and  be  subjected  to  examination
even  with  the  naked  eye.  There  seems  to  be  scarcely
any  doubt,  but  that  in  these  cases  a  substance  is  set
free,  which  gradually  adheres  to  the  outside  of  pre-ex-
isting bodies  all  round,  and  that  therefore  we  have  not
here  to  deal  with  the  degeneration  of  a  definite  tissue,
but  with  a  kind  of  separation  and  precipitation,  such  as
we  see  occur  in  the  case  of  other  concretions  from
fluids.  It  may,  with  some  probability  be  concluded,
that  the  prostate,  through  the  dissolution  of  its  elements,
furnishes  a  fluid  which,  by  the  gradual  formation  of  de-
posits, produces  these  particular  forms.

Now  the  peculiarity  of  these  structures  is,  that  by  the
simple  action  of  iodine  they  very  frequently  assume  just
as  blue  a  colour  as  vegetable  starch  does.  According  as
the  substance  is  more  or  less  pure,  its  colour  changes,  so
that  when,  for  example,  there  is  much  albuminous  matter
mixed  up  with  it,  it  becomes  green  instead  of  blue  ;  for
the  nitrogenous  substance  is  rendered  yellow  by  iodine,
and  the  amyloid  blue,  so  that  the  whole  effect  produced
is  green.  The  greater  the  quantity  of  nitrogenous  mat-
:er,  the  browner  does  the  colour  become,  and  not  unfre-
quently  do  we  find,  side  by  side  in  the  prostate,  concre-
tions, which,  after  the  application  of  the  iodine,  present
the  most  varied  colours.  So  far  these  formations  are
distinguished  from  those  little  amylaceous  corpuscles
of  the  nervous  system,  which,  one  and  all,  assume  a  blue
or  bluish  grey  colour  on  the  addition  of  iodine.  It  must
also  be  remarked,  that  many  prostatic  bodies,  though
quite  analogous  in  their  structure,  only  become  yellow  or
brown  upon  the  addition  of  iodine,  and  consequently  dif-
fer in  chemical  constitution.

414  LECTURE  XVII.

Essentially  different  from  this  separation  of  starch-like
matter,  which  lies  between  the  elements,  are  the  degene-
rations of  the  tissues  themselves,  in  which  all  their  con-
stituents (parenchyma  and  interstitial  tissue),  as  such,
become  directly  filled  with  a  substance  also  of  an  amy-
loid nature,  and  are  gradually  infiltrated  with  it  just  as
tissues  become  infiltrated  with  lime  in  calcification.  No
two  things  can  be  more  justly  compared  than  calcification
and  the  amyloid  change  (lignification).  This  (amyloid)
substance,  which  produces  the  real  degeneration  of  the
tissue,  exhibits  the  peculiarity,  that  it  never  becomes  blue
under  the  influence  of  iodine  alone.  At  least  no  case  is
as  yet  known,  in  which  the  substance  has  yielded  this
colour  with  iodine  in  the  parenchyma  of  tissues.  On  the
contrary,  a  peculiar  yellowish  red  colour  is  seen  to  arise,
which  it  is  true  in  many  cases  has  a  slight  tinge  of  red-
dish violet,  so  that  a  certain  approximation  is  manifested
to  the  blue  of  real  starchy  matter.  On  the  other  hand,  it
displays  pretty  regularly  a  real,  either  perfectly  blue,  or
violet  colour,  when  the  application  of  iodine  is  followed
by  the  very  cautious  addition  of  sulphuric  acid.  A  certain
degree  of  practice  indeed  is  requisite  ;  the  exact  propor-
tion must  be  hit  upon,  inasmuch  as  the  sulphuric  acid
generally  destroys  the  substance  very  quickly,  and  either
very  indistinct  colorations  are  obtained,  or  the  colour
manifests  itself  only  for  a  moment,  and  then  immediately
disappears  again.  Thus  this  substance  is  less  nearly  allied
to  starch  properly  so-called  and  more  akin  to  cellulose,  as
I  have  already  described  it  (p.  31).  But  from  cellulose
again  it  is  also  distinguished  by  the  fact  of  its  becoming
coloured  upon  the  application  of  pure  solution  of  iodine,
whilst  real  cellulose  is  not  at  all  coloured  by  iodine  alone.
Cellulose  behaves  precisely  like  cholestearine  which  re-
mains colourless  when  treated  with  iodine,  but  on  the

AMYLOID DEGENERATION  OF  MINUTE  ARTERIES.  415

other  hand  assumes  a  blue,  or  under  certain  circum-
stances a  red,  or  orange  colour  upon  the  addition  of
iodine  and  sulphuric  acid  (p.  400).

Owing  to  this  multiplicity  of  reactions  it  is  really  still
very  difficult  to  say  with  certainty  to  what  class  the  sub-
stance belongs.  Meckel  has  followed  up  the  idea  with
great  care,  that  we  have  to  deal  with  a  kind  of  fat  which
is  more  or  less  identical  with  cholestearine  ;  but  we  are  as
yet  unacquainted  with  any  kind  of  fat  which  combines  in
itself  the  three  qualities  of  becoming  coloured  upon  the
addition  of  iodine  alone,  of  remaining  colourless  upon  the
addition  of  sulphuric  acid  alone,  and  of  assuming  a  blue
colour  when  acted  upon  by  iodine  and  sulphuric  acid.
Besides  the  substance  itself  does  not  in  any  way  behave
like  a  fatty  matter ;  it  does  not  possess  the  solubility
which  characterizes  fat ;  and  in  particular  no  substance
can  be  obtained  from  these  parts  by  extraction  with
alcohol  and  ether,  which  possesses  the  peculiarities  of  the
original  one.  According  to  all  this  there  is  rather  a
correspondence  with  vegetable  forms,  and  the  view  may
still  be  maintained,  that  we  have  here  to  deal  with  a
process  comparable  to  that  which  we  see  set  in  during
the  development  of  a  plant,  when  the  simple  cell
becomes  invested  with  capsular  layers,  and  gradually
grows  woody.*

*  The  analyses  of  amyloid  spleens  recently  made  by  Kekule  and  Carl  Schmidt
have  yielded  such  a  large  proportion  of  Nitrogen,  that  both  these  chemists  have
come  to  the  conclusion  that  the  amyloid  substance  is  of  an  albuminous  nature.  We
know,  however,  from  experience,  that  the  results  furnished  by  these  analyses  of
whole  organs  are  very  little  to  be  depended  upon,  so  little  indeed,  that  no  chemist
was  ever  able  to  infer  from  any  analyses  he  had  made  of  the  liver,  that  it  was  rich
in  Glycogen.  Only  when  we  have  discovered  the  means  of  isolating  the  amyloid
substance,  shall  we  be  able  to  come  to  any  definite  conclusion  with  regard  to  its
nature.

To  Schmidt's  analyses  of  the  corpora  amylacea  of  the  brain  we  cannot  attach  the
slightest  importance,  because  his  statements  concerning  them  were  founded  upon
an  error.  He  says,  namely,  he  selected  for  his  analyses  a  choroid  plexus  (from  a
humau  brain)  rich  in  corpora  amylacea. But  corpora  amylacea  are  never  found  in

-

M

416

LECTURE XVII.

These  changes  can  be  best  followed  in  those  structures
which  must  on  the  whole  be  regarded  as  the  most  fre-
quent and  the  earliest  seat  of  this  change,  namely  the
smallest  arteries.  These  first  undergo  the  transformation,
and  only  after  the  constitution  of  their  walls  has  become
changed,  is  the  infiltration  wont  to  extend  to  the  sur-
rounding parenchyma,  until  at  last  the  whole  district  of
tissue  to  which  the  artery  leads  has  experienced  the
change.  If  in  an  amyloid  spleen  we  trace  one  of  these
small  arteries,  whilst  it  breaks  up  into  so-called  penicillus,
we  see  how  its  wall,  in  itself  already  a  thick  one,  becomes
thicker  in  proportion  as  the  change  advances,  and  how
at  the  same  time  the  calibre  of  the  vessel  becomes  con-

Fig.  121.

siderably  diminished.  This  accounts  for  the  circum-
stance, that  all  organs  which  experience  the  amyloid
change  in  a  considerable  degree,  look  extremely  pale  ;  an

Fig.  121. Amyloid  degeneration  of  a  small  artery  from  the  submucous  tissue  of
the  intestine,  with  its  trunk  still  intact. 300  diameters.

large  numbers  in  these  plexuses — indeed  it  seems  to  me  doubtful  whether  they  are
ever  formed  there.  The  concentric  corpuscles  which  Schmidt  examined  were
therefore  probably  those  sabulous  bodies  (Sandkbrper — acervulus  cerebri,  brain-
sand)  which  are  nearly  always  present  in  the  choroid  plexuses  and  so  greatly  re-
semble the  corpora  amylacea  in  structure,  that  they  were  actually  taken  by  Remac
to  be  such.  Schmidt,  thinking  he  had  the  same  substance  before  him  in  the  spleen,
published  his  two  analyses  with  the  idea  that  he  was  thereby  furnishing  a  doubly
strong  proof  of  the  albuminous  nature  of  this  animal  amyloid  substance. — From  a
MS.  Note  by  the  Author.

AMYLOID DEGENERATION  OF THE LIVER.  417

ischaemia  of  the  parts  is  produced  by  the  obstruction
which  the  narrowed  vessels  oppose  to  the  influx  of  blood.
If  now  we  examine  in  which  of  the  histological  elements
of  the  vessels  the  substance  is  first  found,  it  seems  to  be

{>retty  constantly  seated  in  the  little  muscles  of  the  circu-
ar-fibre  coat.  First  of  all  the  place  of  every  fibre-cell  is
occupied  by  a  compact,  homogeneous  body,  in  which  the
centre  of  the  nucleus  at  first  still  appears  as  a  hole,  but
gradually  every  trace  of  a  cellular  structure  is  lost,  so
that  at  last  a  kind  of  spindle-shaped  flake  (Scholle)  re-
mains, in  which  neither  membrane,  nucleus  nor  contents
can  be  distinguished.  In  the  calcification  of  small
arteries  exactly  the  same  process  takes  place  ;  the  indi-
vidual fibre-cells  of  the  middle  coat  take  up  calcareous
salts,  at  first  in  a  granular,  afterwards  in  a  homogeneous
form,  until  they  are  at  last  transformed  into  homogeneous-
looking  calcareous  bodies,  of  a  spindle-shaped  form,  which
coalesce  and  produce  plates  of  a  considerable  size.  In  like
manner  the  amyloid  substance  pervades  whole  tracts  of
tissue,  and  the  walls  of  the  artery  are  transformed  into  a
mass  at  last  nearly  completely  homogeneous,  compact,
shining  with  reflected  light  and  colourless,  which  not
only  does  not  possess  the  hardness  of  calcified  parts,  but
on  the  contrary  exhibits  a  high  degree  of  friability.

Now  when  a  change  of  this  nature  has  advanced  to  a
certain  height,  an  analogous  change  takes  place  also  in
the  parenchyma  of  the  organs.  This  can  nowhere  be  so
distinctly  traced  as  in  the  liver.  Here  it  sometimes
happens,  that  we  meet  with  stages,  where  nothing  else
in  the  whole  organ  is  altered,  excepting  the  minute
branches  of  the  hepatic  artery.  On  making  fine  sections
through  the  liver,  carefully  washing  them  and  applying
iodine,  we  sometimes  see,  even  with  the  naked  eye,  the
small iodine-red lines and points which correspond

to  the  cut  brandies  of  the  hepatic  axlery. In  a  later

21

418  LECTURE XVII.

stage,  however,  it  is  essentially  the  hepatic  cells  which
are  affected  by  the  change  ;  and  indeed,  what  is  again
very  characteristic,  just  those  hepatic  cells,  between
which  lie  the  capillary  ramifications  of  the  hepatic  ar-
tery. If  namely  we  picture  to  ourselves  a  single  acinus
of  the  liver,  we  can,  in  accordance  with  the  pathologi-
cal changes  which  may  often  be  recognized  even  with
the  naked  eye,  distinguish  three  different  zones  within
each  acinus  (Fig.  110).  The  most  external  part,  which
lies  next  to  the  branches  of  the  portal  vein,  is  the  chief
seat  of  fatty  infiltration  ;  the  intermediate  part,  which  re-
ceives the  capillary  terminations  of  the  hepatic  artery,
belongs  to  the  amyloid  degeneration,  and  the  central
part  of  the  acinus  around  the  vena  hepatica  is  the  most
common  seat  of  pigmentary  infiltration.  Even  with
the  naked  eye  the  pale  colourless,  translucent  and  re-
sistant zone  of  the  waxy  or  amyloid  change  is  sometimes
recognized  between  the  most  external  yellowish  white,
and  the  most  internal  yellowish,  or  greyish  brown,  layer.
If  a  single  hepatic  cell  be  watched,  its  previous  granu-
lar contents,  which  give  every  hepatic  cell  a  slightly
cloudy  appearance,  are  seen  gradually  to  become  homo-
geneous ;  the  nucleus  and  cell- wall  gradually  disappear,
and  at  last  a  stage  sets  in  in  which  nothing  more  can
be  perceived  than  an  absolutely  homogeneous,  slightly
shining  body,  if  you  will,  a  simple  flake  (Scholle).  In
this  manner  the  whole  of  the  hepatic  cells  in  the  zone
I  have  described  are  sometimes  converted  into  amyloid
flakes,  and  if  the  process  attains  a  very  high  pitch,  the
change  at  last  even  oversteps  this  zone,  and  it  may  hap-
pen, that  nearly  the  whole  substance  of  the  acinus  is
transformed  into  an  amyloid  mass.  Thus  out  of  the
hepatic  cells  there  is  at  last  produced  in  these  cases  a
kind  of  corpora  amylacea,  only  they  are  not  laminated
like  those  we  have  already  spoken  of,  but  form  uniform,

DYSCRASIC  NATURE  OF  THE  AMYLOID  DEGENERATION. 419

homogeneous  bodies,  in  which  no  internal  division,  no
indication  of  the  peculiar  course  of  their  formation  can
be  recognized.

If  we  take  all  these  facts  together,  it  appears  pretty-
probable,  that  we  have  here  to  deal  with  a  gradual  infil-
tration of  the  parts  with  a  substance  which  has  been
conveyed  to  them  from  without.  This  is  a  view  which
derives  essential  support  from  the  fact,  that  nearly
always  when  this  change  declares  itself,  a  considerable
number  of  organs  are  affected,  and  that  the  process  is
not  confined  to  a  single  spot,  but  that  many  places  in
the  body  are  simultaneously  affected.  Hereby  the
whole  process  really  acquires  an  essentially  dyscrasic
appearance.  The  only  place,  where,  until  now  at  least,
an  entirely  independent  development  of  this  change  has
been  observed  by  me,  and  where  it  may  therefore  with
some  degree  of  probability  be  assumed  that  the  forma-
tion is  autochthonous  and  not  imported  from  without,
is  'permanent  cartilage.  The  cartilages,  particularly  in
people  somewhat  advanced  in  life,  assume  in  various
places — as  for  example,  the  sterno-clavicular  articula-
tions, the  symphyses  of  the  pelvis,  and  the  interverte-
bral cartilages — a  peculiarly  pale -yellowish  hue,  and
then  we  may  be  tolerably  certain,  that  if  we  try  the
iodine  test  with  them,  we  shall  obtain  the  peculiar
coloration.  These  colours  are  not  seen  so  much  in  the
cartilage-cells  as  in  the  intercellular  substance,  and  as
cases  of  the  sort  do  not  occur  simultaneously  with  amy-
loid degeneration  of  large  internal  organs,  but  quite  in-
dependently, in  individuals,  who  in  the  rest  of  their  body
manifest  nothing  of  the  kind — it  seems  that  we  really
have  here  to  deal  with  a  direct  transformation,  and  not
with  any  importation  from  without.

But  in  vain  have  I  hitherto  endeavoured  to  detect  any
definite  change  in  the  blood,  from  which  the  inference

!

420  LECTURE  XVII.

might  be  drawn,  that  this  was  really  the  source  of  the
deposits.  There  exists  as  yet  but  one  single  observa-
tion, that  points  to  the  presence  of  analogous  bodies  in
the  blood,  and  this  is  so  strange  an  one,  that  we  can
scarcely  attempt  to  ground  an  explanation  of  the  pro-
cess upon  it.  A  physician  of  Toronto  in  Canada  had
namely,  in  compliance  with  the  wish  of  a  patient  suffer-
ing from  epilepsy,  examined  his  blood  and  discovered  in
it  peculiar,  pale  bodies.  When  then  he  read  of  my  ob-
servations with  regard  to  the  coloration  of  the  corpora
amylacea  of  the  brain  by  iodine,  his  patient  recurred  to
his  mind,  and,  I  think  after  the  lapse  of  five  years,  he
again  took  blood  from  him,  and  again  found  the  bodies,
which  are  really  said  to  have  exhibited  the  reaction.
In  opposition  to  this  observation,  it  is  strange  that
nobody  else  has  ever  seen  anything  of  the  kind,  and
as  an  extremely  persistent  dyscrasia  must  here  have
been  in  operation,  we  should  scarcely  be  justified  in
drawing  conclusions  from  this  observation,  with  regard
to  the  cases  we  are  considering,  where  the  disease  at-
tains its  height  in  a  much  shorter  time,  and  we  have  in
the  blood  at  least  been  able  to  detect  nothing  of  the
kind.  Moreover  great  doubts  must  be  entertained  with
respect  to  the  accuracy  of  the  observation.  Starch-
granules  may  very  easily  find  their  way  into  different
microscopical  objects,  so  that  (with  all  due  respect  for
the  observer)  as  long  as  matter  turns  upon  a  solitary
observation,  it  must  be  admitted  to  be  possible  that
there  was  perhaps  an  error.*  I  am  as  yet  much  more
inclined  to  admit,  that  the  blood  in  this  disease  under-

*  Dr.  Carter  of  Edinburgh,  and  after  him,  M.  Luys  of  Paris,  fell  into  a  similar
error,  when  they  imagined  they  were  in  a  condition  to  prove  that  an  excretion  of
starch  took  place  through  the  skin.  M.  Rouget  (Journal  de  Physiologic  par
Brown-Sequard,  Tom.  ii.,  p.  85)  has  shown  that  this  starch  is  derived  from  external
sources,  from  articles  of  food,  and  that  its  presence  upon  the  skin  therefore  is
merely  accidental.—  From  a  MS.  Note  by  the  Author.

DYSCRASIC  NATURE OF  THE  AMYLOID  DEGENER  A/TION. 421

goes  a  chemical  alteration  in  its  fluid  constituents,  than  that
it  contains  the  pathological  substances  in  a  material  form.

At  all  events  it  is  unquestionable,  that  the  amyloid
change  even  now  holds  a  very  high  place  among  patho-
logical processes.  The  inevitable  result  of  the  affection
is,  that  the  parts  which  are  the  seat  of  it,  become  totally
incapable  of  discharging  their  special  functions  ;  that,
for  example,  gland  cells  which  are  changed  in  this  man-
ner, are  no  longer  in  a  condition  to  perform  their  special
glandular  functions,  and  that  vessels  can  no  longer
subserve  the  nutrition  of  the  tissues,  or  the  secretion
of  the  fluids,  the  duties  they  had  been  in  the  habit  of
performing.

These  considerations  afford  a  ready  explanation  of  the
circumstance  that  clinical  disturbances  so  regularly  con-
cur with  these  anatomical  ones.  We  find,  on  the  one
hand,  well-marked  conditions  of  cachexia,  and  on  the
other,  with  extreme  frequency,  dropsy  with  the  whole
complex  group  of  changes,  which  are  usually  included  in
the  idea  we  form  of  Bright's  disease.  In  nearly  every
instance,  in  which  the  amyloid  affection  reaches  an  ad-
vanced stage,  the  patients  are  in  a  state  of  great  maras-
mus. There  are  cases  where  the  whole  extent  of  the
digestive  tract  from  the  buccal  cavity  to  the  anus  does
not  contain  a  single  minute  artery,  which  is  not  affected
with  this  disease,  and  wherein  every  part  of  the  oeso-
phagus, stomach,  small  and  large  intestines,  the  small
arteries  of  its  mucous  membrane  are  found  changed  in
this  way.

Now  this  state  of  things  is  very  apt  to  escape  obser-
vation, because  this  kind  of  metamorphosis,  which
exercises  such  a  decided  influence  upon  the  functions
of  the  intestines  (causing  deficiency  of  absorption,  an^
tendency  to  diarrhoea),  produces  scarcely  any  effect  per-
ceptible to  the  naked  eye. The  intestines  are  pale  and

422  LECTURE XVII.

have  a  grey,  translucent,  sometimes  slightly  wax-like
appearance  ;  but  this,  however,  is  so  little  characteristic,
that  no  inference  can  with  certainty  be  drawn  from  it
with  regard  to  the  internal  changes,  and  the  only  possi-
bility of  determining  the  point,  when  one  has  no  mi-
croscope at  hand,  consists  in  the  direct  application  of  the
test.  One  need  only  brush  a  little  iodine  upon  the
surface,  and  a  number  of  densely  aggregated,  yellow-
ish- or  brownish-red  spots  are  soon  seen  to  start  up,
whilst  the  interjacent  mucous  membrane  merely  looks
yellow.  These  red  points  are  the  villi  of  the  intestine,
and  if  one  of  them  be  placed  under  the  microscope,  the
walls  of  the  small  arteries  and  even  of  the  capillaries,
which  ramify  in  them,  and  sometimes  also  the  parenchy-
ma, are  seen  to  be  coloured  iodine-red.

The  most  important  disturbances  of  this  kind  with
which  we  are  as  yet  acquainted,  are  those  which  arise  in
the  kidney.  A  large  proportion  of  the  cases  of  Bright's
disease,  especially  of  the  chronic  ones,  are  assignable  to
this  change,  and  must  therefore  be  separated  from  many
other  similar  forms  as  constituting  a  special,  altogether
peculiar  affection.  Kidneys  affected  in  this  way  were
called  in  Yienna,  at  a  time  when  the  chemical  reaction
was  not  yet  known,  lardaceous  kidneys  (Specknieren).
I  must  however  again  remark  that  it  is  impossible  to
distinguish  immediately  with  the  naked  eye,  whether
this  particular  change  has  taken  place  or  not,  and  that  a
part  of  the  so-called  lardaceous  kidneys  exhibit  nothing
more  than  a  kind  of  induration.  Not  until  iodine  has
been  employed  can  a  diagnosis  be  readily  made.  If  a
solution  of  iodine  be  applied  to  a  quite  ansemic  cortex,
a  number  of  red  points  usually  first  appear  which  cor-
respond to  the  glomeruli,  and  sometines  fine  streaks  also>
which  are  the  afferent  arteries  ;  and  next  to  this,  when
the disease  is  very  severe,  red  parallel  lines  are  also

AMYLOID  DEGENERATION  OF  THE  KIDNEYS.  423

seen  within  the  medullary  cones,  lying  very  close  to  one
another.  These  are  all  arteries.  The  affection  of  the
arteries  becomes  sometimes  so  severe,  that,  after  the
application  of  the  test,  a  clear  view  of  the  whole  course
of  the  vessels  is  obtained,  as  if  one  had  a  very  complete
artificial  injection  before  one.  But  in  these  very  kid-
neys an  injection  is  hardly  practicable.  Even  the  finer
materials  which  we  employ  as  injections,  are  much  too
coarse  to  be  able  to  pass  through  the  narrowed  vessels.
Upon  examining  one  of  these  glomeruli  microscopically,
we  see  that  from  the  point,  where  the  afferent  artery
breaks  up,  the  loops  are  no  longer  the  fine,  delicate
tubes  that  they  formerly  were  ;  on  the  contrary  they
appear  compact  and  nearly  solid.  Now  as  these  are
just  the  parts  which  manifestly  constitute  the  real
points  at  which  the  secretion  of  the  fluid  portion  of  the
urine  is  effected,  we  can  easily  conceive  that  in  such
cases  disturbances  in  the  secretion  of  urine  must  arise.
Unfortunately  we  have  as  yet  no  completely  satisfactory
analyses,  but  it  seems  that  many  cases  of  albuminu-
ria, which  are  attended  with  a  considerable  diminution
in  the  secretion  of  urea,  are  connected  with  these  very
conditions,  and  that  the  excretion  becomes  more  and
more  scanty  in  proportion  as  the  disease  increases  in
intensity.* These  cases  are  very  frequently  complicated

*  This  is  what  we  might  expect  to  take  place,  wherever  we  suppose  the  urea  to
be  secreted.  If  it  is  secreted  by  the  epithelium,  the  epithelium  must  take  it  up
out  of  the  blood  which  circulates  in  the  intertubular  capillaries.  But  if  the  glo-
meruli only  allow  a  small  quantity  of  blood  to  pass  through  them,  a  small  quantity
only  finds  its  way  into  these  capillaries,  and  so  but  little  urea  can  be  taken  up  and
excreted.  In  those  cases  in  which  there  is  an  abundant  flow  of  watery  urine,  the
water  is  chiefly  derived  from  the  vessels  of  the  medullary  substance,  in  conse-
quence of  the  increased  (collateral)  pressure  upon  them.  Thus  the  amyloid  de-
generation of  the  Malpighian  bodies  and  their  afferent  arteries  has  much  less
influence  upon  the  excretion  of  water,  than  upon  that  of  urea.  The  peculiar  views
first  put  forward  by  the  Author  concerning  the  circulation  in  the  medullary  sub-
stance of  the  kidney,  and  the  common  origin  (from  the  same  branches  of  the
renal  artery)  of  the  arteriaa  rectae  of  the  medullary  cones  (pyramids),  and  of  the

424  LECTURE  XVII.

with  anasarca  and  with  dropsy  of  the  different  cavities,
and  may  exhibit  in  the  completest  manner  ail  the  symp-
toms of  B  right's  disease.  They  differ  however  es-
sentially from  the  simply  inflammatory  form  of  Bright's
disease,  which  I  designate  parenchymatous  nephritis,  in
this  respect,  that  in  the  latter  the  disease  has  not  so  much
its  seat  in  the  glomeruli  or  the  arteries,  as  in  the  epithe-
lium of  the  kidney,  and  that  the  change  is  often  for  a
long  time  confined  to  the  epithelium,  whilst  the  glome-
ruli themselves  may  in  such  cases  still  appear  unchanged
when  there  is  scarcely  any  epithelium  remaining  in  the
substance  of  the  cortex.  From  these  forms  a  third
again  must  be  distinguished,  where  the  interstitial  tissue
is  predominantly  affected,  where  thickenings  take
place  around  the  capsules  and  uriniferous  tubules,  con-
strictions and  contractions  are  effected,  and  thereby
mechanical  obstructions  to  the  current  of  the  blood  are
produced,  which  must  naturally  be  attended  by  secre-
tory changes.

It  is  very  important  that  you  should  discriminate
between  these  different  varieties  which  exist  in  what  is
apparently  a  single  disease,  because  you  will  hence  see
how  it  is  that  the  facts  which  have  been  ascertained  con-
cerning the  one  class  cannot  forthwith  be  applied  to  the
other  classes,  and  that  neither  the  same  physiological
inferences  nor  the  same  therapeutical  maxims  are  equally
applicable  in  every  one  of  these  several  conditions.  At
the  same  time,  however,  it  must  not  be  overlooked  that
these  three  different  forms  by  no  means  always  appear

afferent  arteries  of  the  cortex,  whereby,  in  the  case  of  a  diminished  flow  of  blood
through  the  latter  set  of  vessels,  an  increased  circulation  takes  place  through  the
former — will  be  found  in  his  Archiv.  f.  path.  Anat.  und  Phys.  vol.  xii.,  p.  310,  and
investigations  confirmatory  of  them  have  recently  been  published  by  Dr.  Beale
(Arch,  of  Med.,  1859,  No.  IV.,  p.  300.  According  to  those  (e.  #.,  Bowman)  who
make  all  the  arterial  blood  pass  through  the  glomeruli,  no  such  collateral  rela-
tionship could  exist  between  the  cortex  and  medulla. — From  a  MS.  Note  by  the
Author.

AMYLOID  DEGENERATION  OF  THE  LYMPHATIC  GLANDS. 425

unmixed,  but  that  on  the  contrary  frequently  two,  and
sometimes  all  three,  of  them  exist  simultaneously  in  the
same  kidney.

Amongst  the  other  preparations  which  I  place  before
you  I  have,  especially  on  account  of  its  distinctness,  chosen
the  amyloid  disease  of  the  hjmphatic  glands.  In  these
the  state  of  things  is  much  the  same  as  in  the  spleen.  We
see  on  the  one  hand  the  small  arteries,  on  the  other  the
essential  substance  of  the  glands  (i.  e.,  the  mass  of  minute
cells  which  fill  the  follicles),  undergoing  the  change.  You
will  remember  from  a  previous  occasion  (p.  208,  Fig.  61),
that  there  are  follicles  lying  beneath  the  proper  capsule
of  the  gland,  and  that  these  follicles  are  made  up  of  a

Fig.  122.

Fig.  123.

Fig.  122.  Amyloid  degeneration  of  a  lymphatic  gland,  from  a  drawing  made  by
Dr.  Fripp  of  Bristol,  a,  6,  b.  Vessels  with  gr-eatly  thickened,  shining,  infiltrated
walls,  c.  A  layer  of  fat-cells  at  the  circumference  of  the  gland,  c?,  d.  Follicles  with
their  delicate  reticulum  and  corpora  amylacea.  200  diameters.  Compare  Wiirz-
burger  Verhandlungen,  Vol.  VII,  Plate  III.

Fig.  123.  Isolated  corpora  amylacea  of  different  sizes,  some  of  them  ruptured,
from  the  gland  represented  in  Fig.  122. 350  diameters.

426  LECTURE  XVII.

delicate  network,  in  which  the  small  cells  of  the  gland  are
heaped  up,  cells,  which  seem  to  have  a  double  duty  to
perform,  inasmuch  as  they  discharge  their  own  special
functions  as  gland-cells,  and  at  the  same  time,  as  we  sup-
pose, serve  as  the  starting-points  for  the  development  of
blood-corpuscles.  The  arteries  run  first  in  the  inter-
stices of  the  follicles,  and  there  break  up  into  capillaries
which  form  a  web  round  the  follicles,  and  sometimes  even
penetrate  into  their  interior.  Now  the  amyloid  disease
consists  on  the  one  hand  in  a  thickening  and  narrowing  of
these  arteries,  so  that  they  convey  less  blood,  and  on  the
other  hand  in  the  conversion  of  the  small  cells  contained
in  the  individual  meshes  of  the  follicles  into  corpora  amy-
lacea,  so  that  afterwards  instead  of  a  number  of  cells  in
every  mesh  of  the  follicle,  a  single  large  corpus  amylaceum
is  met  with.  Thereby  the  gland  acquires  even  to  the
naked  eye  the  appearance  as  if  it  were  sprinkled  all  over
with  little  spots  of  wax,  and  when  examined  microscopi-
cally, it  looks  as  if  the  contents  of  the  follicles  were  a
pavement  of  closely  set  stones.

Concerning  the  importance  of  these  changes,  empiri-
cally not  much  can  be  affirmed  ;  but,  if  the  contents  of
the  follicles  are  the  essential  components  of  a  lymphatic
gland,  and  if  from  them  proceeds  the  development  of  the
new  constituents  of  the  blood,  we  must,  I  think,  conclude,
that  this  disease  of  the  lymphatic  glands  and  the  spleen
(in  which  the  follicles  are  likewise  generally  affected),
must  exercise  a  directly  injurious  influence  upon  the  for-
mation of  the  blood  ;  and  that  the  effects  therefore  pro-
duced by  the  disease  are  not  remote  ones,  but  that  the
formation  of  the  blood  immediately  suffers  an  alteration,
so  that  anaemic  conditions  must  ensue.  To  the  stream
of  lymph  also  an  obstruction  may  arise,  and  in  this  wajr
again  deficiency  of  absorption,  tendency  to  dropsy,  etc.,
be  produced.

INFLAMMATION.  427

If  we  apply  iodine  to  sections  of  such  glands  as  these,
all  the  diseased  parts  become  coloured  red,  whilst  every
part  that  retains  its  normal  structure  merely  becomes
yellow.  The  capsule,  which  consists  of  connective  tissue,
the  fibrous  trabecule  between  the  follicles,  the  delicate
intrafollicular  network  which  separates  the  different  cor-
pora amylacea,  and  lastly  those  follicles  which  contain
normal  cells,  remain  yellow.  All  the  other  parts  assume
the  iodine-red  hue.  If  we  add  sulphuric  acid,  these  parts
become  of  a  dark  reddish  brown,  or  violet  red — or  if  one
hits  the  mark,  pure  blue  ;  but  if  there  are  still  nitro-
genous particles  present,  the  colour  becomes  green  or
brownish  red.

Now,  gentlemen,  that  we  have  established  the  classifi-
cation of  morbid  disturbances  generally  according  to  the
difference  of  action  in  the  tissues,  I  think  of  treating
more  in  detail  of  the  process,  which  the  practical  physi-
cian, according  to  the  ordinary  mode  of  speaking,  most
frequently  meets  with,  namely  inflammation.

Our  notions  of  inflammation  have  undergone  an  essen-
tial change  in  consequence  of  the  observations,  of  which
you  have  now  heard  a  certain  part.  Whilst  until  quite
recently  it  was  the  custom  to  look  upon  inflammation  as
a  real  entity,  as  a  process  everywhere  identical  in  its
essence,  after  I  made  my  investigations  no  alternative
remained,  but  to  divest  the  notion  of  inflammation  of  all
that  was  ontological  in  it,  and  no  longer  to  look  upon
the  process  as  one  differing  in  its  essence  from  other
pathological  processes,  but  only  to  regard  it  as  one  differ-
ing in  its  form  and  course.

In  the  descriptions  given  of  inflammation  by  the  old
writers — as  preserved  to  us  in  the  dogmatical  writings  of
Galen — among  the  four  cardinal  symptoms  (calor,  rubor,
tumor,  dolor)  heat  is,  as  is  well  known,  the  most  promi

428  LECTURE  XVII.

nent,  for  it  is  the  symptom  from  which  the  process  has
acquired  its  name.  Afterwards,  in  proportion  as  the
question  of  animal  heat  in  general,  and  of  heat  in  patho-
logical conditions  in  particular,  withdrew  into  the  back-
ground, great  importance  was  attached  to  the  redness,
and  thus  it  happened  that  even  in  the  last  century,  at  the
time  when  mechanical  theories  were  in  vogue,  when
especially  Boerhaave  considered  inflammation  to  consist
in  an  obstruction  of  the  vessels,  and  in  the  stasis  of  the
blood  consequent  upon  it,  the  notion  of  inflammation  was
more  or  less  grounded  upon  supposed  conditions  of  the
vessels.  After  the  facts  of  pathological  anatomy  had
extended  their  compass,  hyperemia  was,  especially  in
France,  declared  to  be  the  necessary  and  regular  starting
point  of  inflammation.  The  exclusiveness,  with  which
this  view  has  been  maintained  even  up  to  our  own  times,
was  in  a  great  measure  an  after-effect  of  Broussais'  views
which  became  the  prevailing  ones  in  consequence  of  the
development  of  the  pathologico-anatomical  school.  Hy-
peremia gradually  superseded  all  the  other  essential
symptoms.

A  change  in  the  doctrine  on  a  grand  scale  has  really
only  been  attempted  by  the  Vienna  school,  for  they  too,
like  the  French  school,  grounding  their  system  of  patho-
logy upon  pathological  anatomy,  have  put  the  products
of  inflammation  in  the  place  of  the  symptoms  of  inflam-
mation. What,  basing  their  opinion  upon  their  own
experience,  they  especially  had  in  view,  and  sought  to
establish  as  the  essence  of  inflammation,  was  the  product,
which,  in  accordance  with  traditional  notions,  was  desig-
nated as  one  which  had  necessarily  proceeded  from  the
vessels — as  an  exudation.  In  the  old  classification  of
symptoms,  the  swelling,  corresponded  pretty  nearly  with
the  exudation  of  the  Vienna  school,  and  it  might  there-
fore be  said  that,  as  previously,  first  the  heat,  and  then

INFLAMMATION.  429

the  redness,  had  held  the  first  place,  so  now  the  swelling
occupied  the  foremost  rank.  It  is  only  in  the  more
speculative  views  of  the  neuro-pathologists  that  the  pain
is,  as  is  well  known,  regarded  as  the  essential  and  origi-
nal change  in  the  act  of  inflammation.

There  can  be  no  doubt,  but  that  of  these  different  posi-
tions the  anatomical  doctrine  of  the  Vienna  school  would
be  the  most  correct,  if  it  could  be  demonstrated,  that,  as
the  language  of  most  of  the  physicians  of  the  present  day
would  lead  us  to  believe,  an  exudation  really  does  take
place,  in  every  case  of  inflammation  ;  that  the  swelling  is
essentially  occasioned  by  this  exudation  ;  and  especially,
that  this  exudation  ought  to  be  regarded  as  a  constant
and  typical  one,  and  the  quantity  of  fibrine  contained  in
it  as  a  criterion  of  its  inflammatory  nature.

I  have  already,  in  the  previous  lectures,  endeavoured
to  show  you,  in  what  a  considerably  restricted  sense  the
term  exudation  must  be  employed,  and  how  essentially
the  activity  of  the  elements  of  the  tissues  themselves  is
concerned  in  the  appearance  of  matters,  which  we  cer-
tainly must  regard  as  derived  from  the  vessels  and  depo-
sited in  the  parts  affected.  A  good  deal  is,  as  we  have
seen,  not  so  much  exudation,  as,  if  I  may  so  express
myself,  an  educt  from  the  vessels  in  consequence  of  the
activity  of  the  histological  elements  themselves.

Irritation  must,  I  believe,  be  taken  as  the  starting-point
in  the  consideration  of  inflammation,  and  it  is  because
Broussais  and  Andral  regarded  the  matter  in  this  light,
that  I  consider  the  views  advanced  by  them  to  be  the
most  correct.  We  cannot  imagine  inflammation  to  take
place  without  an  irritating  stimulus  (irritament),*  and  the

*  The  term  irritament  (Reiz,  which,  however,  sometimes  means  irritant,  stimu-
lus) is  intended  to  express  the  change  (mechanical  or  chemical,  palpable  (anatomi-
cal) or  molecular)  which  takes  place  in  a  tissue  in  consequence  of  the  action  of  an
irritant — a  change,  therefore,  which  is  of  a  purely  passive  nature  (lesion),  and  which

430  LECTURE  XVII.

first  question  is,  what  conception  we  are  to  form  of  such
a  stimulus.

We  have  already  seen  that  the  irritation  may  in  gene-
ral be  traced  to  one  of  three  different  sources,  accord-
ing as  it  is  a  functional,  nutritive  or  formative  irritation
which  has  taken  place.  Now  there  can  be  no  doubt,
but  that  functional  stimuli  (irritaments)  do  «tet  play  an
essential  part  in  inflammation,  and  for  the  simple  reason,
that — a  point  upon  which  all  the  more  recent  schools  at
least  are  agreed — to  the  four  characteristic  symptoms
lesion  of  function  (functio  lsesa)  must  be  added.

If  there  be  a  disturbance  of  function  in  inflammation,
this  presupposes  that  the  inflammatory  stimulus  (irrita-
ment)  must  be  of  such  a  nature  as  to  cause  changes  in
the  composition  of  the  part  which  render  it  less  capable
of  performing  its  functions.  Nobody  would  expect  a
muscle  which  is  inflamed,  to  perform  its  functions  nor-
mally ;  every  one  supposes  that  the  contractile  sub-
stance of  the  muscle  has  thereby  experienced  certain
changes.  Nobody  would  expect  an  inflamed  gland-cell
could  secrete  normally,  but  we  should  look  upon  the
disturbance  of  secretion  as  a  necessary  consequence  of
the  inflammation.  Nobody  could  expect  an  inflamed
ganglion-cell  or  nerve  to  discharge  its  functions,  or  nor-
mally to  respond  to  stimuli. The  conclusion,  therefore,

(subsequently)  provokes  changes  in  the  neighbouring  parts  not  directly  altered  by
the  irritant — the  consequence  of  which  is  their  action  or  reaction.  This  condition,
which  is  an  active  one,  based  upon  the  physiological  powers  of  the  parts,  represents
irritation  in  the  proper  sense  of  the  word,  and  as  the  starting-point  in  every  form
of  inflammation.  See  Archiv  f.  path.  Anat.  und  Phys.  vol.  xiv.,  p.  i.  (Reizung  und
Reizbarkeit).

The  matter  will  perhaps  be  rendered  clearer  by  the  following  familiar  illustration  :
— Suppose  three  people  were  sitting  quietly  on  a  bench,  and  suddenly  a  stone  came
and  injured  one  of  them,  the  others  would  be  excited,  not  only  by  the  sudden
appearance  of  the  stone,  but  also  by  the  injury  done  to  their  companion,  to  whose
help  they  would  feel  bound  to  hasten.  Here  the  stone  would  be  the  irritant,  the
injury  the  irritam.ent,  the  help  an  expression  of  the  irritation  called  forth  in  the
bystanders. — From  a  MS.  Note  by  the  Author.

INFLAMMATORY  EXUDATION.  431

that  must  in  accordance  with  the  commonest  experience
be  necessarily  drawn  from  all  this  is,  that  changes  must
have  occurred  in  the  composition  of  the  cellular
elements  altering  their  natural  functional  power.  >&
Such  changes,  when  they  occur  after  the  application  of
stimuli  which  are  not  powerful  enough  to  destroy  the
parts  at  once,  or  to  exhaust  their  functional  power,  are
only  possible  when  the  stimuli  are  either  nutritive  or
formative.  And  in  fact  this  conclusion  is  confirmed  by
what  occurs  in  inflammation.  For  now-a-days  we  find
the  view  is  already  pretty  generally  spread,  that  in  inflam-
mation we  have  in  the  main  to  deal  with  a  change  in  the
act  of  nutrition,  nutrition  being  here  indeed  regarded
as  embracing  the  formative  and  nutritive  processes.

If  therefore  we  speak  of  an  inflammatory  stimulus
(irritament),  we  cannot  properly  intend  to  attach  any
other  meaning  to  it,  than  that,  in  consequence  of  some
cause  or  other  external  to  the  part  which  falls  into  a
state  of  irritation,  and  acting  upon  it  either  directly  or
through  the  medium  of  the  blood — the  composition  and
constitution  of  this  part  undergo  alterations  which  at
the  same  time  alter  its  relations  to  the  neighbouring
parts  (whether  they  be  blood-vessels  or  other  structures)
and  enable  it  to  attract  to  itself  and  absorb  from  them  a
larger  quantity  of  matter  than  usual,  and  to  transform
it  according  to  circumstances.  Every  form  of  inflamma-
tion with  which  we  are  acquainted,  may  be  naturally  ex-
plained in  this  way.  With  regard  to  every  one,  it  may  be
assumed  that  it  begins  as  an  inflammation  from  the  mo-
ment that  this  increased  absorption  of  matters  into  the
tissue  takes  place,  and  the  further  transformation  of  these
matters  commences.

This  view  accords  to  a  certain  extent,  as  you  no  doubt
see,  with  that  which  has  been  maintained  by  the  up-
holders of  the  vascular  theory,  according  to  which  the

I

432  LECTURE XVII.

exudation  is  regarded  as  an  immediate  consequence  of
the  hyperemia,  and  in  which  it  is  assumed  that  inflam-
mation, when  it  has  once  declared  itself,  is  characterized
by  the  presence  of  a  substance  more  or  less  foreign  to
the  natural  composition  of  the  part.  The  only  question
is  whether  the  hyperemia  really  forms  the  actual  com-
mencement of  these  processes.

If  inflammation  were  necessarily  dependent  upon  hy-
peremia, you  can  well  imagine  that  it  would  be  logically
impossible  to  speak  of  inflammations  in  parts  which  do
not  stand  in  an  immediate  relation  to  vessels.  We  could
not  imagine  an  inflammation  taking  place  at  a  certain
distance  from  a  vessel.  It  would  be  completely  impossi-
ble to  speak  of  an  inflammation  of  the  cornea  (excepting
as  occurring  at  its  border)  ;  of  an  inflammation  of  car-
tilage (excepting  as  occurring  in  the  parts  immediately
adjoining  the  bone)  ;  or  of  an  inflammation  in  the
internal  substance  of  a  tendon.  But  if  we  compare  the
processes  which  present  themselves  in  these  parts  with
those  which  are  ordinarily  seen  in  inflamed  parts,  the
result  is  unquestionably  that  the  same  inflammatory
processes  may  occur  everywhere  alike,  and  that  the
changes  in  the  vascular  parts  can  in  no  essential  parti-
cular be  distinguished  from  those  which  take  place  in  the
non-vascular  ones.

The  term  inflammatory  (t.  e.,  according  to  the  common
definition,  fibrinous)  exudation,  has,  as  you  are  aware,
been  somewhat  loosely  applied,  inasmuch  as  it  has  been
taken  to  include  different  kinds  of  exudation  (fibrinous
and  non-fibrinous)  furnished  by  different  processes,  upon
all  of  which,  however,  the  common  name  of  inflamma-
tion has  been  bestowed.  When,  for  example,  inflam-
mations of  mucous  membranes  are  spoken  of,  it  is  not
generally  supposed,  that  the  mucous  membrane  will
furnish a fibrinous exudation. We are indeed ac-

FIBRINOUS  EXUDATIONS.  433

quainted  with  mucous  membranes,  where  fibrinous  ex-
udations are  of  pretty  frequent  occurrence,  for  example,
the  mucous  membrane  of  the  respiratory  organs.  But
we  know  also  that  free  (superficial)  fibrinous  exudations
are  scarcely  to  be  met  with  on  the  mucous  membrane
of  the  digestive  tract,  and  that  they  at  most  accompany1
the  more  serious,  and  especially  the  gangrenous  and
specific  forms.  When  laryngitis  is  spoken  of,  the  pre-
sence of  croup  is  not  immediately  inferred.  In  a  case
of  cystitis,  we  do  not  expect  to  find  the  inner  surface  of
the  bladder  covered  with  a  fibrinous  layer.  In  the
whole  series  of  so-called  gastric  inflammations  we  find,
especially  at  the  commencement  of  the  process,  scarcely
anything  more  than  an  abundant  secretion  of  mucus.
If  therefore  we  still  call  these  catarrhal  inflammations,
inflammations,  if  we  do  not  wish  entirely  to  cast  them
out  of  the  class  of  inflammations,  we  must  admit  that
there  may  exist  a  mucous  as  well  as  fibrinous  exudation
in  inflammations,  and  that  the  inflammations  with  a  mu-
cous exudation  form  a  special  category,  appertaining  to
certain  organs.  For,  as  is  well  known,  we  do  not  find
them  in  all  the  tissues  of  the  body,  but  nearly  exclusively
on  mucous  membranes.

If  now  you  consider  the  fibrinous  exudations  a  little
more  closely,  there  can  be  no  doubt  at  all,  but  that  in
this  point  they  entirely  agree  with  the  mucous  ones.
For  we  do  not  meet  with  fibrinous  exudations  in  all
parts  of  the  body  ;  we  know  of  no  form  of  exudative
encephalitis,  for  example,  which  furnishes  a  fibrinous
exudation.  Just  as  little  is  there  a  form  of  hepatitis
known,  in  which  fibrinous  exudations  occur.  There  is
indeed  an  inflammation  of  the  investing  membrane  of
the  liver  (perihepatitis),  just  as  there  is  an  inflamma-
tion of  the  membrane  of  the  brain,  in  which  fibrine
may  be  set  free,  but  nobody  has  ever  met  with  fibrine  in

28

434  LECTURE  XVII.

a  case  of  genuine  hepatitis.  Just  as  little  is  there
fibrine  to  be  found  in  the  ordinary  inflammation  of  the
substance  of  the  heart  (myo-carditis).

On  the  other  hand,  you  must  bear  in  mind  that,
starting  with  certain  preconceived  notions,  observers
have  imagined  fibrinous  exudations  to  take  place  in
many  parts,  where  they  are  not  really  to  be  seen.  If
because  pus  has  been  obtained  from  a  fibrinous  exuda-
tion, it  is  therefore  imagined  that,  wherever  pus  shows
itself,  a  fibrinous  exudation  must  be  regarded  as  its
source,  no  very  great  power  of  observation  is  required
to  convince  oneself,  that  this  is  an  error.  Take  any
ulcerated  surface  you  please,  wipe  off  the  pus,  and  col-
lect what  then  comes  out ;  you  will  either  have  a  serous
fluid  or  pus,  but  you  will  not  see  that  the  surface  you
have  wiped  becomes  covered  with  a  fibrinous  layer.  If
we  confine  ourselves  to  those  parts,  where  inflammations
with  real,  unquestionable  fibrinous  exudation  do  occur,
we  have  a  category  nearly  as  limited  as  that  of  the  mucous
inflammations.  In  such  a  category  the  first  place  is
occupied  by  the  serous  membranes  proper,  which  even
upon  slight  inflammatory  irritation  generally  produce
fibrine  ;  the  second  place  is  filled  by  certain  mucous
membranes,  in  which,  in  a  great  number  of  cases,
fibrinous  inflammations  unmistakably  arise,  as  an  aggra-
vation out  of  mucous  ones.  Ordinary  croup  does  not
generally  at  its  very  outset  manifest  itself  in  the  form  of
fibrinous  croup  ;  at  the  commencement,  at  a  time  when
the  danger  may  already  be  very  considerable,  there  is
often  nothing  else  found  than  a  mucous  or  muco-purulent
false  membrane.  Not  until  after  a  certain  lapse  of  time
does  the  fibrinous  exudation  set  in,  and  then  it  does  so
in  such  a  manner,  that  we  can  trace  the  transitions  in
the  same  false  membrane,  and  see  that  a  certain  portion
is  manifestly  mucous,  another  manifestly  fibrine,  whilst

PARENCHYMATOUS  AND  SECRETORY  INFLAMMATION". 435

in  a  third  part  it  can  no  longer  be  affirmed  with  cer-
tainty whether  the  one  or  the  other  is  present.  Here
therefore  both  substances  appear  as  substitutes  for  one
another.  Where  the  inflammatory  irritation  is  more
violent,  we  see  fibrine,  where  slight,  mucus,  appear.

With  regard  to  mucus,  however,  we  know,  that  it
does  not  exist  in  the  blood  like  fibrine.  Although  a
mucous  membrane  produces  incredibly  large  masses  of
mucus  in  a  short  time,  they  are  nevertheless  products
of  the  membrane  itself ;  the  membrane  is  not  infiltrated
with  mucus  coming  from  the  blood,  but  the  peculiar
mucin  matter,  the  principle  of  mucus,  is  a  product  of
the  membrane,  and  is  conveyed  to  the  surface  by  means
of  the  fluid  oozing  through  (transuding)  from  the  blood.
In  the  same  manner  I  have  also  attempted,  as  I  inti-
mated to  you  on  a  former  occasion  (p.  195),  to  over-
throw the  opinion,  which  is  wont  to  be  entertained  with
regard  to  the  origin  of  fibrine.  Whilst  until  now  fibrine
has  been  regarded  as  a  real  transudation  from  the
liquor  sanguinis,  as  the  outflowing  plasma,  I  have  pro-
posed the  explanation,  that  the  fibrine,  like  the  mucus,
is  a  local  product  of  those  tissues,  on  and  in  which  it  is
found,  and  that  it  is  conveyed  to  the  surface  in  the  same
way  as  the  mucus  of  the  mucous  membrane.  I  then
showed  you,  how  we  have  in  this  way  a  most  ready
explanation  of  the  fact,  that  in  proportion  as,  in  a  given
tissue,  the  production  of  fibrine  increases,  so  also  the
amount  of  fibrine  in  the  blood  increases ;  and  that  the
fibrinous  crasis  is  just  as  much  a  product  of  the  local
disease,  as  the  fibrinous  exudation  is  a  local  product  of
the  local  metamorphosis  of  matter.  Never  has  any  one
— any  more  than  it  is  possible  for  him  by  a  change  of
pressure  directly  to  produce  mucus  from  the  blood  in
any  place  which  does  not  itself  produce  mucus — been
able  to  produce  fibrine  by  any  change  in  the  pressure  of

436  LECTURE  XVII.

the  blood  ;  what  transudes  never  consists  of  anything
but  serous  fluids.

I  am  accordingly  of  opinion,  that,  in  the  sense  in  which
it  has  usually  been  assumed  to  exist,  there  is  no  inflam-
matory  exudation  at  all,  but  that  the  exudation  which
we  meet  with,  is  essentially  composed  of  the  material
which  has  been  generated  in  the  inflamed  part  itself
through  the  change  in  its  condition — and  of  the  trans-
uded fluid  derived  from  the  vessels.^  If  therefore  a  part
possesses  a  great  number  of  vessels,  and  particularly  if
they  are  superficial,  it  will  be  able  to  furnish  an  exuda-
tion, since  the  fluid  which  transudes  from  the  blood  con-
veys the  special  products  of  the  tissue  along  with  it  to
the  surface.  If  this  is  not  the  case,  there  will  be  no
exudation,  but  the  whole  process  will  be  limited  to  the
occurrence  in  the  real  substance  of  the  tissue  of  the
special  changes  which  have  been  induced  by  the  inflam-
matory stimulus.

In  this  manner,  two  forms  of  inflammation  can  be
separated  from  one  another;  the  purely  parenchimatous
inflammation,  where  the  process  runs  its  course  in  the
interior  of  the  tissue,  without  our  being  able  to  detect
the  presence  of  any  free  fluid  which  has  escaped  from  the
blood  j  and  the  secretory  (exudative)  inflammation  (which
belongs  more  to  the  superficial  organs)  where  an  increased
escape  of  fluid  takes  place  from  the  blood  and  conveys
the  peculiar  parenchymatous  matters  along  with  it  to  the
surface  of  the  organs.  That  there  are  two  different  forms
is  clearly  shown  by  the  fact  that  they  occur  for  the  most
part  in  different  organs.  There  are  certain  organs  which,
under  all  circumstances,  only  suffer  from  the  parenchy-
matous affection,  and  others  again  which  in  nearly  every
instance  exhibit  a  superficial  exudative  inflammation.

The  distinction  into  adhesive  and  purulent  forms,  which
has  generally  been  made  in  accordance  with  the  example

PARENCHYMATOUS  AND  SECRETORY  INFLAMMATION.  437

of  Hunter,  has  reference  to  a  much  later  stage  in  the
process  ;  the  first  point  to  be  considered  is  always,  how
far  the  tissues  themselves  become  changed  and  their  pro-
ducts assume  a  degenerative  character,  or  how  far,  through
the  passage  of  the  fluids,  the  part  is  again  freed  from  what
it  has  generated  in  itself,  and  how  far  thereby  the  dege-
neration of  the  part  is  avoided.  Every  parenchymatous
inflammation  has  from  its  outset  a  tendency  to  alter  the
histological  and  functional  character  of  an  organ.  Every
inflammation  with  free  exudation  in  general  affords  a
certain  degree  of  relief  to  the  part  ;  it  conveys  away  from
it  a  great  part  of  the  noxious  matters  with  which  it  is
clogged,  and  the  part  therefore  appears  comparatively
to  suffer  much  less  than  that  which  is  the  seat  of  a
parenchymatous  disease.

LE  CTUEE XVIII.

APRIL  21,  1858.
NORMAL  AND PATHOLOGICAL NEW-FORMATION.

The  theory  of  continuous  development  in  opposition  to  the  blastema-  and  exuda-
tion-theory— Connective  tissue  and  its  equivalents  as  the  most  general  germ-
store  of  new  formations — Correspondence  between  embryonic  and  pathologi-
cal new  formation — Cell-division  as  the  most  general  starting-point  of  new
formations.

Endogenous  formation — Physalides — Brood-cavities.

Different  tendencies  of  new-formations — Hyperplasia,  direct  and  indirect — Hetero-
plasia — Pathological  formative  cells — Difference  in  their  size  and  in  the  time
required  for  their  full  development.

Description  of  the  development  of  bone  as  a  model  formation — Difference  between
formation  and  transformation — Fresh  and  growing,  in  opposition  to  macerated,
bone — Nature  of  medullary  tissue — Growth  in  length  of  tubular  [long]  bones ;
proliferation  of  cartilage — Formation  of  marrow  as  a  transformation  of  tissue ;
red  and  yellow,  normal  and  inflammatory  marrow — Osseous  tissue,  calcified
cartilage,  osteoid  tissue — Bone  territories:  caries,  degenerative  ostitis — Granu-
tions  in  bone — Suppuration  of  bone — Maturation  of  pus — Ossification  of  mar-
row— Growth  of  long  bones  in  thickness :  structure  and  proliferation  of  the
periosteum.

Granulations  as  analogous  to  the  medulla  of  bones,  and  as  the  starting-point  of  all
heteroplastic  development.

Gentlemen, — I  propose  to-day,  in  illustration  of  for-
mative irritation,  to  portray  to  you  the  most  import-
ant features  in  the  history  of  pathological  new-forma-
tions, for  a  knowledge  of  these  will  throw  light  upon  a
series  of  events  which  present  themselves  both  in  the
more  complicated  formation  of  tumours,  and  in  the
more  simple  inflammatory  irritative  processes. That  I

438

TYPHOUS  MATTER. TEE CONNECTIVE-TISSUES.  4.39

at  present  entirely  reject  the  blastema  doctrine  in  its
original  form,  you  have  no  doubt  already  gathered  from
the  previous  lectures.  In  its  place  I  have  put  the  very
simple  doctrine  of  the  continuous  development  of  tissues
out  of  one  another.  The  chief  point  therefore  in  indi-
vidual cases  is  to  determine  the  particular  manner  in
which  the  various  tissues  arise,  and  by  means  of  definite
examples  to  make  oneself  acquainted  with  all  the
different  directions  which  it  is  possible  this  development
may  follow.

My  first  observations,  in  consequence  of  which  I  began
to  entertain  doubts  with  respect  to  the  prevailing  blaste-
ma and  exudation  doctrine — as  to  how  far  namely,  new-
formations  could  be  derived  from  this  source — date  from
researches  of  mine  on  tubercle*  I  found  namely  that  a
series  of  tubercular  deposits  in  different  organs,  espe-
cially in  the  lymphatic  glands,  the  membranes  of  the
brain  and  the  lungs,  never  at  any  time  exhibited  a
discernible  exudation,  but  always,  during  the  whole
course  of  their  development,  presented  organized  ele-
ments, without  its  ever  being  possible  to  observe  either
in  them,  or  before  they  existed,  any  stage  in  which
amorphous,  shapeless  matter  was  present.  As  long  as
eight  years  ago  I  discerned  that  the  development  which
takes  place  in  the  lymphatic  glands  upon  the  occurrence
of  the  well-known  scrofulous  changes,  begins  in  such  a
way,  that  the  first  conditions  met  with  entirely  corres-
pond to  those  which  in  other  instances  are  designated
by  the  name  of  hypertrophy ;  for  nuclei  and  cells  are
found  in  great  abundance,  though  they  afterwards  break
up  and  directly  supply  the  material  for  the  final  accumu-
lation of  cheesy  substance. The  view  which  I  derived

*  See  a  paper  on  tuberculosis  and  its  relations  to  inflammation,  scrofulosis  and
typhoid  fever.  Verliandlungen  der  physikalisch  medic.  Gesellschaft  zu  Wurzburg,
1850,  vol.  i.,  p.  81.

440  LECTURE XVIII.

from  these  investigations  of  mine,  namely,  that  a  tissue
undergoing  hypertrophy  may  supply  a  completely  ab-
normal, diseased  product,  appeared  to  me  all  the  more
significant,  because  I  had  simultaneously  detected  an
altogether  similar  series  of  developmental  changes
whilst  examining  an  entirely  different  body,  namely,  the
so-called  typhous  matter  (Typhus-masse).  At  that  time
the  view  of  the  Vienna  school  had  been  universally
adopted,  that,  in  the  different  typhous  processes,  an  exu-
dation of  an  albuminous  nature  and  soft,  medullary  charac-
ter filled  the  parts,  and  that  thereby  swellings  of  a
medullary  appearance  were  produced.  But  whether
the  typhous  matter  be  examined  in  the  lymphatic  glanda
of  the  mesentery,  or  round  about  the  follicles  of  Peyer's
patches,  no  exudation  capable  of  organization  is  at  any
time  met  with,  but  always  a  directly  continuous  deve-
lopment from  the  pre-existing  cellular  elements  of  the
glands,  the  follicles  and  the  connective  tissue,  to  the  ty-
phous matter.

These  observations  were  of  course  as  yet  insufficient
to  justify  me  in  setting  about  effecting  a  general  change
in  the  existing  doctrine,  because  we  see  organic  elements
arise  at  numberless  points,  where  at  that  time  at  least
cellular  elements  were  altogether  unknown  to  exist  as
normal  constituents,  and  there  was  therefore  scarcely
any  other  explanation  possible  than  that  new  germs
were  formed  by  a  kind  of  generatio  sequivoca  [sponta-
neous generation]  out  of  the  mass  of  blastema.  The
only  places  besides  the  glands,  where  such  a  develop-
ment arising  out  of  previously  existing  elements  might
have  been  inferred  with  some  degree  cf  probability  to
take  place,  were  the  surfaces  of  the  body  with  their
epithelial  elements.  Then  it  was,  that  my  investigations
into  the  nature  of  the  connective  tissues,  with  which  I
have  already  so  much  plagued  you,  proved  entirely  de-

PATHOLOGICAL  AND  EMBRYONIC  NEW-FORMATION.  441

cisive.  From  the  moment  that  I  was  able  to  maintain
that  there  was  scarcely  any  part  of  the  body  which  did
not  possess  cellular  elements — that  I  could  show  that
bone -corpuscles  were  real  cells,  and  that  connective
tissue  in  different  places  contained,  now  a  larger,  now  a
smaller,  number  of  really  cellular  elements — from  that
moment  germs  in  abundance  were  supplied  from  which
new  tissues  might  possibly  be  developed.  In  fact,  the
more  the  number  of  observers  increased,  the  more  dis-
tinctly was  it  shown,  that  by  far  the  greater  number  of
the  new-formations  which  arise  in  the  body  proceed  from
connective  tissue  and  its  equivalents.  From  this  rule
comparatively  few  pathological  new-formations  are  ex-
cepted, and  these  belong  on  the  one  hand  to  the  class  of
epithelial  formations,  and  on  the  other  are  connected
with  the  more  highly  organized  tissues  of  a  specific,  ani-
mal (p.  55)  nature,  for  example,  the  vessels.  We  may
therefore,  with  trifling  restriction,  substitute  for  the  plastic
lymph,  the  blastema  of  the  earlier,  the  exudation  of  the
writers,  connective  tissue  with  its  equivalents  as  the  common
stock  of  germs  (Keimstock)  of  the  body,  and  directly
trace  to  it  as  the  general  source  the  development  of
new-formations.

If  we  take  a  definite  internal  organ,  for  example,  the
brain  or  the  liver,  it  was  scarcely  possible,  as  long  as
people  saw  nothing  more  than  nervous  matter  in  the
brain,  and  admitted  the  existence  of  nothing  more  than
vessels  and  hepatic  cells  in  the  liver,  to  imagine  the  oc-
currence of  a  new-formation  in  them  without  the  inter-
vention of  a  special  formative  matter.  For  it  was  of
course  easy  to  convince  oneself  that  new-forrnations  do
not  in  the  liver  usually  proceed  from  the  hepatic  cells  or
the  vessels.  And  that  in  the  substance  of  the  brain,  the
nerves  as  such  do  not  give  rise  to  new-formations,  has
been  known  ever  since  the  microscope  has  been  em-

?t

442  LECTURE  XVIII.

ployed,  for  since  that  time  it  has  been  known  that
medullary  cancers  are  not  due  to  the  proliferation  of
nervous  matter,  but  consist  of  cellular  elements  of
another  kind.  In  fact,  the  body  appears  to  us  at  the
present  day,  as  Reichert  was  the  first  to  note,  to  be
made  up  of  a  more  or  less  continuous  mass  of  connec-
tive tissue-like  constituents,  in  which  at  certain  points
other  things,  such  as  muscles  and  nerves,  are  imbedded.
Now  it  is  in  this  more  or  less  connected  frame-work,
that,  according  to  my  investigations,  genuine  new-forma-
tion goes  on,  and  that  in  accordance  with  the  same  law,
which  regulates  embryonic  development.

This  law  of  the  correspondence  between  embryonic
and  pathological  development  was,  as  you  know,  laid
down  by  Johannes  Muller,  who  continued  the  investiga-
tions commenced  by  Schwann.  But  at  that  time  the
contents  of  an  ovum  were  placed  on  a-  level  with
blastema  ;  it  occurred  to  no  one  that  the  whole  process
of  development  in  the  ovum  took  place  within  the  limits
of  a  cell,  but  it  was  concluded  simply,  that  there  was
a  certain  quantity  of  organizable  material  in  the  ovum,
which — in  virtue  of  a  peculiar  power  innate  in  it,  by
means  of  some  organizing  force,  or  as  those  would
have  it  who  regard  the  matter  from  a  "  higher"  point
of  view,  impelled  by  an  organizing  idea — transformed
itself  into  this  or  that  particular  shape.  But  here  too
the  conviction  has  been  gradually  acquired,  that  the
matter  in  question  is  a  cellular  substance,  and  if  what
has  been  most  rigidly  maintained  by  Remak  is  correct,
namely,  that  the  cleavage  of  the  yolk  also  is  due  to  a
visible  division  of  cells,  to  the  growing  in  of  mem-
branous partitions  into  the  interior  of  the  ovum,  and
their  coalescence,  we  have  not  here  to  deal  with  a  free
organizing  impulse  taking  place  within  the  yolk,  but
with  progressive acts  of  division on  the part  of  the

:  y — vv-

ENDOGENOUS  CELL-FORMATION. BROOD-CAVITIES.

-

&l.  i.-n

443

originally  single  cell.  But  long  before  this  simple  view
of  the  process  of  the  cleavage  in  the  yolk  Jiad  been
arrived  at,  it  had  been  very  distinctly  perceptible  that  in
pathological  processes  a  comparison  between  plastic  exu-
dations, or  blastema,  with  the  matters  contained  in  the
ovum,  was  obviously  inadmissible,  and  that,  where  really
formed  parts  were  found,  they  had  proceeded  from  a
pre-existing  part,  a  cell.

The  mode  of  origin  of  new  formations  is,  as  it  seems,
a  double  one.  We  have,  namely,  either  to  do  with  a
simple  division,  such  as  we  discussed  when  treating  of
irritation  (p.  346). We  then  see  the  whole  series  of

Fig.  124.

f/"-*^-' ....

Fig.  124.  Proliferation  of  the  growing  cartilage  of  the  diaphysis  of  the  tibia  of
a  child.  Longitudinal  section,  a.  The  cartilage-cells  on  the  border  of  the  epiphy-
sis, some  of  them  simple,  some  of  them  in  a  state  of  commencing  proliferation.

b.  Groups  of  cells  that  have  arisen  from  the  repeated  division  of simple  cells.

c.  Groups  of  cells  lying  near  the  calcifying  border  of  the  diaphysis,  and  considera-
bly developed  through  the  growth  and  enlargement  of  the  individual  cells ;  the
intercellular  substance  growing  continuallv  more  and  more  scanty,  d.  Section  of  a
bloodvessel. 150  diameters.

Ce  J- U I  &

444

LECTURE XVIII.

changes  from  the  division  of  the  nucleolus  to  the  final
division  6f  the  cell.  If  an  epithelial  cell  acquires  two
nuclei,  divides  and  this  process  is  repeated,  a  long  series
of  developmental  changes  may,  by  means  of  a  continual
repetition,  be  produced.  If  the  skin  becomes  irritated
in  consequence  of  continued  friction,  and  the  irritation
is  increased  to  a  certain  point,  the  epithelium  will
thicken,  and  if  the  proliferation  is  very  energetic,  it  may
lead  to  the  production  of  tolerably  large  tumour-like
formations.  The  same  mode  of  development  which  is
presented  by  layers  of  epithelium,  we  meet  with  also  in
the  interior  of  organs.  In  cartilage,  for  example,  where
the  individual  cellular  elements  are  inclosed  in  an  inter-
cellular substance,  the  place  of  each  of  them  is  at
last  occupied  by  an  accumulation  of  numerous  cells,
the  whole  group,  like  the  cell  from  which  it  proceeded,
being  shut  off  from  its  neighbors  by  the  intercellular
substance.  This  mode  of  development,  therefore,  is
one  which,  though  very  simple  in  itself,  may,  since  it
originates  in  dissimilar  parts,  produce  very  different
results.

But  we  have  besides  another  class  of  new-formations

Fig.  125.

Fig.  125.  Endogenous  new  formation  ;  cells  containing  vesicles  (physaliphores).

A.  From  the  thymus  gland  of  a  new-born  infant  together  with  epithelioid  cells:  in
the  interior  of  a  vesicle  which  has  a  double  contour  (more  distinctly  marked  in  C)
and is besides surrounded by  a  cell-like border, lies a perfect nucleated  cell.

B.  C.  Cancer-cells  (Cf.  Archiv.  fur  pathol.  Anatomie,  Vol.  I.,  PI.  II.,  and  Vol.  III.
PI.  II.)  B,  one  with  two  nuclei ;  (7,  one  with  a  physalid  which  nearly  fills  tne
whole  cell  and  another,  where  the  physalid  (brood-cavity)  again  encloses  a  perfect
nucleated  cell. 300  diameters.

BROOD-CAVITIES.  445

in  the  body  which  are  indeed  much  less  well  known,  and
of  which  the  special  peculiarities  cannot  as  yet  be  seized
with  such  great  precision.  These  are  processes,  where
we  see  endogenous  changes  set  in  in  the  interior  of  pre-
existing cells.  In  a  simple  cell  a  vesicular  cavity  forms,
which,  contrasted  with  the  somewhat  cloudy  and  gene-
rally slightly  granular  contents  of  the  cell,  presents  a
very  clear,  bright,  homogeneous  appearance.  In  what
manner  cavities  of  this  first  kind,  which  I  class  together
under  the  name  of  physalides,  arise,  is  not  yet  altogether  0i
certain.  The  greatest  probabilities  are  in  favour  of  the
nuclei  being,  in  certain  forms,  likewise  the  starting-point
of  these  formations.  For,  beside  these  cells,  others  are
seen  with  two  nuclei,  one  of  which,  in  several  of  them,
has  become  somewhat  larger  and  brighter  than  usual,
though  still  preserving  the  character  of  a  nucleus.  Sub-
sequently, this  vesicle  becomes  so  large  that  the  cell  is
gradually  almost  entirely  filled  with  it,  and  its  former
contents  with  the  nucleus  only  look  like  a  little  appen-
dage to  the  vesicle.  So  far  the  process  is  tolerably  sim-
ple. But  besides  these  vesicles,  thus  growing  and  filling
the  cells,  others  are  met  with,  in  the  interior  of  which
elements  of  a  cellular  nature  are  enclosed.  This  is  of
pretty  frequent  occurrence  in  cancerous  tumours,  but
also  in  normal  parts,  for  example  in  the  thymus  gland.
This  form  seems  to  indicate,  that  in  fact  by  means  of  a
process  which  cannot  be  directly  traced  to  any  division
of  the  pre-existing  cells,  and  indeed  in  peculiar  vesicular
cavities  (which  I  have  named  brood-cavities  (or  -vesicles
— Brutr'aume), )  in  the  interior  of  cellular  elements,  new
elements  of  a  similar  kind  may  be  developed.  How-
ever, this  is  at  all  events  a  condition  which  plays  but  a
subordinate  part  in  the  whole  history  of  new-formations  ;
the.  regular  form  is  the  one  first  described.  There  are
only  a  few  pathological  new-formations,  in  the  history  of

446  LECTURE  XVIII.

which  this  endogenous  development  plays  any  distinct
part,  whilst  in  nearly  all  forms  cell-division  is  met  with
to  a  great  extent.

The  essential  points  of  difference  between  the  several
modes  of  development  of  cells  are  therefore  these  :  in
one  class  of  formations  the  divisions  proceed  with  a  cer-
tain regularity,  so  that  the  ultimate  products  from  their
very  beginning  exhibit  a  complete  correspondence  with
the  parent  structures,  and  the  young  structures  at  no
time  deviate  in  any  remarkable  degree  from  the  parent-
cells.  Such  processes  are  in  ordinary  life  mostly  desig-
nated as  hypertrophies,  but  I  have,  in  order  to  express
the  nature  of  the  change  more  accurately,  proposed
the  name  of  hyperplasia,  inasmuch  it  is  not  an  increase
in  the  nutrition  of  existing  parts  that  takes  place,  but  a
real  formation  of  new  elements  (p.  94).

In  another  class  the  development  proceeds  in  such  a
way,  that  divisions  certainly  also  do  take  place,  but  make
very  rapid  progress  and  produce  cells  which  gradually
decrease  in  size,  and  ultimately  in  some  instances  be-
come so  small,  that  they  can  scarcely  be  distinguished  to
be  cells.  The  proliferation  may  cease  at  this  point,  and
then  the  cells  severally  begin  to  grow,  and  to  become
larger ;  and  under  certain  circumstances  a  structure
may  in  this  case  again  also  be  produced  analogous  to
that  in  which  the  development  originated.  This,  how-
ever, is  not  usually  the  case  ;  generally,  the  young  cells
pursue  a  somewhat  different  course  of  development,  and
a  heterologous  structure  begins  to  form.

The  mode  of  development,  which  I  here  describe  to
you,  may  also  run  its  course  in  such  a  way,  that  th£
cells  do  not  at  once  begin  to  divide,  but  the  nuclei  first
greatly  multiply,  becoming  continually  more  numerous
and  at  the  same  time  smaller.  We  find  something  simi-
lar to  this  in  pus,  in  which  a  division  of  the  nuclei  very

HOMOLOGOUS  AND  HETEROLOGOUS  DEVELOPMENT.  447

rapidly  takes  place,  and  generally  in  such  a  way,  that
the  originally  single  nuclei  at  once  divide  into  a  consi-
derable number  of  smaller  ones,  which  at  first  remain
coherent.  But  in  pus  it  is  not  certain  whether  the  divi-
sion of  the  nucleus  is  succeeded  by  a  real  division  in  the
cell,  whilst  in  other  new-formations  this  is  certainly  the
case — only  the  complete  division,  or  if  you  will,  the
cleavage,  of  the  cells  is  delayed  for  a  long  time,  and
this  intermediate  stage  of  the  mere  division  of  the  nu-
clei continues  for  a  disproportionately  long  period,  and
seems  to  occur  in  some  sort  independently.

These  two  plans  are  the  ones  regularly  followed  by  all
those  kinds  of  new-formations  which  do  not  directly  lead
to  hyperplasia  ;*  the  normal  condition  is  here  in  the  first
instance  interrupted  by  an  intermediate  state,  in  which
the  tissue  appears  essentially  changed,  without  one's
being  able  straightway  to  determine  whether  a  growth
of  a  benignant  or  malignant  nature  will  be  developed
out  of  it.  This  is  a  stage  of  seemingly  absolute  indif-
ference ;  from  the  appearance  of  the  individual  ele-
ments it  cannot  at  all  be  inferred  what  their  real  destiny
is  ;  they  behave  exactly  like  the  so-called  formative  cells
of  the  embryo,  which  also  at  first  exactly  resemble  one
another,  no  matter  whether  a  muscular  or  nervous  ele-
ment, or  anything  else,  is  about  to  proceed  from  them.
Nevertheless  I  regard  it  as  very  probable  that  delicate
internal  differences  do  really  exist,  which  to  a  certain
extent  determine  beforehand  the  subsequent  metamor-
phoses— not  merely  potential  differences  in  the  forma-
tive cells, but  really  material differences, only of  so

*  There  are  processes  which  begin  with  Hyperplasia  and  end  with  Heteroplasia,
and  others  again,  which  begin  with  Heteroplasia  and  end  with  Hyperplasia.  The
new  formation  of  vessels,  for  example,  never  begin  straightway  with  the  formation
of  vessels,  but  first  of  all  cells  are  formed  (heteroplasia),  and  afterward  vessels  (hy-
perplasia) are  developed  out  of  these  (sells. — From  a  MS.  Note  by  the  Author.

44:g  LECTURE  XVIII.

delicate  a  nature,  that  we  are  not  as  yet  able  to  demon-
strate them.

In  the  development  of  the  embryo  a  phenomenon  has
been  known  for  years  which  positively  indicates  the  ex-
istence of  such  differences  in  the  formative  cells,  inas-
much as  the  different  segments  of  the  ovum  run  through
their  phases  of  development  with  different  degrees  of
rapidity,  and  especially  those  parts  which  are destined
to  form  the  higher  organs,  run  through  their  individual
stages  with  much  greater  celerity  than  those  whose  lot  it
is  to  form  the  lower  tissues. In  the  size  of  the  cells
also  differences  seem  to  exist. In  a  similar  manner  we
frequently  see  that  in  pathological  formations  also  differ-
ences occur  in  reference  to  the  time  occupied  in  their  de-
velopment. Whenever the development of the cells
takes  place  with  great  rapidity,  we  may  be  sure  it  is  a
more or  less  heterologous development. An homolo-
gous, hyperplastic  formation  always  presupposes  a  cer-
tain tardiness  in  the  processes  which  give  rise  to  it;
the  cells  generally  remain  of  a  larger  size,  since  the  di-
visions do  not  usually  proceed  until  very  small  forms  are

produced.

Though  so  extremely  simple  in  nature  and  in  theory,
these  modes  of  development  are  certainly  extremely  dif-
ficult of  demonstration  in  individual  places.  The  parts
which  apparently  ought  to  be  the  most  conveniently
situated  for  the  purpose  of  investigation,  and  in  which
Henle  indeed,  as  long  as  twenty  years  ago,  all  but  made
the  discovery  of  such  a  development,  are  the  epitheha.
Here,  where  a  development  often  so  abundant  takes
place  upon  the  surface  of  a  membrane,  one  would  sup-
pose it  must  be  extremely  easy  to  trace  its  course  accu-
rately in  the  individual  cells.  Henle,  you  know,  en-
deavoured to  show  that  mucus-corpuscles,  and  indeed
many  forms  which  belong  to  pus,  were  produced  on  the

EPITHELIOID NEW  FORMATION.  449

surface  of  mucous  membranes  along  with  the  epithelium
in  such  a  way,  that  no  real  difference  was  to  be  per-
ceived between  the  two  classes  in  their  earliest  stages,
and  that  the  mucus-corpuscles  must  therefore  in  some
sort  be  looked  upon  as  epithelial  cells  that  had  gone
astray,  as  children  that  had  turned  out  ill,  that  had  been
impeded  in  the  progress  of  their  development  by  some
early  disturbance,  but  really  were  intended  to  become
epithelial  cellr,. Unfortunately  the  notion  was  then  and
long  afterwards  prevalent,  that  epithelium  like  all  other
tissues  was  normally  developed  out  of  a  blastema. It
was,  you  know,  imagined  that  on  the  surface  of  every
mucous  membrane  in  the  first  instance  there  transuded  a
plastic  fluid  from  the  vessels  running  to  the  surface,  and
that  the  epithelial  cells  were  formed  out  of  it. Schlei-
den's  theory  was  steadfastly  adhered  to,  that  nuclei  first
form  in  a  fluid,  and  that  membranes do  not  develop
around  them  until  afterwards. At  present, however
much  the  different  surfaces  presented  by  the  skin  and
the  mucous  and  serous  membranes  are  examined,  the
conviction  is  everywhere  unmistakeably  acquired,  that
the  cellular  elements  extend  clown  to  the  very  surface  of
the  connective  tissue,  and  that  there  is  nowhere  a  spot,
where  free nuclei,  blastema  or  fluid  exist,  but  that  on
the contrary  it  is  especially  the deepest  layers  which
contain  the  most  densely  crowded  cells. If,  at  the  time
when  Henle  made  his  investigations,  it  had  been  known,
that  no  blastema  ever  exists  in  these  parts,  and  that  no
development  de  novo  ever  takes  place  there,  but  that
the  epithelial  cells  there  present  must  have  been  deve-
loped either  from  old  cells  or  from  the  connective  tissue
underneath them, he too  would certainly  also have
come to  the  conclusion,  that  mucus-  or  pus-corpuscles
which  are  not  furnished  by  an  ulcerating  surface  (which
would  of course  be  destitue of  epithelium) must  be

29

450  LECTURE  XVIII.

derived  by  direct  descent  from  pre-existing  epithelial
cells.

So  nearly,  even  at  that  time,  had  correct  views  upon
the  subject  been  obtained,  but  the  blastema  theory
enthralled  men's  minds,  and  we  all  stood  under  its  in-
fluence. Besides,  it  appeared  impossible  to  point  out
everywhere  in  the  interior  of  the  tissues  the  requisite
antecedent  structures.  Not  until  cellular  elements  had
been  shown  to  exist  in  connective  tissue  did  it  become
possible  to  produce  a  germinal  tissue  (Keimgewebe)
which  is  at  present  everywhere,  and  from  which  in  the
most  various  organs  similar  growths  may  be  developed.
Now  that  we  know  that  connective  tissue — or  tissues
equivalent  to  it — exists  in  the  brain,  the  liver,  the  kid-
neys, in  muscle,  cartilage,  skin,  etc.,  now  there  is  of
course  no  longer  any  difficulty  in  conceiving  how  the
same  pathological  product  may  arise  in  all  these  appa-
rently so  dissimiliar  structures.  No  specific  blastema  of
any  sort,  deposited  in  all  these  parts,  is  at  all  required,
but  only  the  application  of  a  similar  stimulus  to  the  con-
nective tissue  of  the  different  localities.

Now  with  regard  to  the  details  of  this  doctrine,  allow
me  in  the  first  place  to  bring  to  your  notice  a  concrete
example  of  normal  development,  which  will  perhaps  be
the  best  calculated  to  supply  you  with  a  picture  of  the
often  so  complicated  processes  with  which  we  are  here
concerned.  I  choose  as  my  example  that  organ,  in
which  the  process  of  development  is  in  itself  best
known,  and  which  at  the  same  time  on  account  of  the
peculiarity  of  its  structure  least  admits  of  misinterpreta-
tion, namely  the  bones.  They  are  too  hard  and  thick
for  any  one  to  talk  about  the  presence  of  blastema  or
exudation  in  their  proper  parenchyma.  The  growth  of
the  bones  at  the  same  time  affords  us  direct  standards
wherewith to compare the different new-formations,

GROWTH OF  BONE.  451

which  may  occur  in  the  bones  in  morbid  conditions,  for
every  one  of  these  new-formations  finds  a  certain  proto-
type in  the  normal  development  of  bone.

All  the  larger  bones  grow,  as  is  well  known,  in  two
directions.  This  is  most  simply  shown  in  the  long  bones,
which  gradually  increase  in  length  and  thickness.  The
growth  in  length  takes  place  from  cartilage,  that  in
thickness  from  periosteum.  But  a  flat  bone  also  is  in-
vested on  the  one  hand  with  cartilaginous  parts  or  their
equivalents  (sutures)  and  on  the  other  with  membranes
which  correspond  to  periosteum.  A  growth  from  carti-
lage and  a  growth  from  periosteum  can  therefore  be
distinguished  in  every  bone.  This  furnishes  us  with  a
plan  of  the  development  of  long  bones,  which  is  found
even  in  the  writings  of  Havers,  and  according  to  which
the  new  layers  of  bone  incapsulate  the  old  ones,  and
every  more  recent  layer  is  not  only  wider  but  longer
than  that  next  above  it  in  age.  Every  new  layer  of
osseous  substance  which  is  formed  out  of  periosteum  is
longer  (higher)  than  the  one  immediately  preceding  it,
inasmuch  as  new  layers  of  perichondrium  are  being
continually  converted  into  periosteum.  At  the  same
time  every  new  layer  of  osseous  substance  which  grows
out  of  cartilage  is  broader  (thicker)  than  that  which  went
before  it,  inasmuch  as  every  new  layer  of  the  (growing)
cartilage  which  proceeds  to  ossification  surpasses  its  pre-
decessor in  breadth  (thickness).  The  growth  from  car-
tilage, however,  can  only  take  place  in  the  direction  of
the  extremities  of  the  bone,  inasmuch  as  the  cartilage
of  its  diaphysis  is,  at  a  very  early  period  of  intra- uterine
life,  so  completely  ossified,*  that  no  cartilage  remains  ex-

*  This  complete  ossification  in  long  bones  is  not  confined  to  intra-uterine  life,  but
every  new  layer  of  cartilage  which  grows  out  of  the  terminal  cartilage  up  to  the
age  of  puberty  ossifies  (when  matters  follow  a  normal  course)  throughout  its  whole
thickness,  so  that  no  cartilage  remains  at  the  circumference  of  the  bone. — From  a
MS.  Note  by  the  Author.

J

■

■

■

^2  LECTURE XVIII.

■X

cepting  at  the  two  ends. Now  a  tissue  once ossified
ceases  (save  under  exceptional  circumstances) to  grow
so  that  any  increase  of  thickness  in  the  diaphysis  must
be  wholly  due  to  a  development  out  of  periosteum,  in
which  growth  proceeds  much  more  slowly  than  in  car-
tilage. This  is  the  reason  why  the  shaft  of  a  long  bone
is  narrower  than  its  extremities.* Whilst  in  this  way
parts  which  were  previously  either  connective  tissue  or
cartilage,  are  converted  into  bone,  the  development  of
the  medullary  tissue  is  going  on  within  the  bone. The
original  bone  is  extremely  dense,  a  very  solid  and  rela-
tively compact  mass. Subsequently  the substance of
the  bone  disappears  more  and  more,  one  part  of  it  after
another  is  dissolved,  and  the  medullary  cavity  [canal]
arises,  the  size  of  which  is  not  in  any  way  restricted  to
that  of  the  original  osseous  rudiment,  but  often  conside-
rably exceeds  it/ Thus  the  development  of  bone,  when
taken  as  a  whole,  does  not  consist  merely  in  the  gradual
apposition  of  a  succession  of  fresh  osseous  layers  derived
from  periosteum  and  cartilage,  but  also  in  the  continual  re-
placement of  the  innermost  layers  of  the  bone  by  masses

of  marrow.

In  the  interpretation  of  these  facts  the  blastema  the-
ory was  long  appealed  to  as  the  great  authority.  Havers
and  Duhamel,  who  made  excellent  investigations  into
the  history  of  bone,  started  with  the  supposition  that  a
nutritious  juice  (succus  nutritius)  was  secreted,  from
which  the  new  masses  arose.  The  development  of  the
marrow  was  imagined  to  consist  in  a  formation  of
cavities,  into  which  first  a  viscous  juice  and  then  a  fatty
matter  was  secreted— cavities  which  were  invested  by
the medullary  membrane, and  whose contents  varied

*  For  a  diagram  of  the  growth  of  long  bones,  see  Havers (Osteologia  nova.
Francof.  1692,  Tab.  I.,  fig.  1),  and  Kolliker  (Handbuch  d.  Gewebelehre,  3d  edit.,

Leipzig,  1859,  p.  259).

FORMATION OF THE MARROW OF BONES.  453

with  age.  However,  as  I  have  already  pointed  out  to
you,  there  are  no  sacs  in  the  areolae  of  the  bones,  but  a
continuous  tissue,  the  medullary  tissue,  which  fills  the
medullary  spaces  [cancelli]  and  cavities  and  belongs  to
the  class  of  connective  tissues,  although  it  considerably
differs  from  ordinary  connective  tissue.  We  have  there-
fore here  to  deal,  as  you  see  from  this  simple  fact,  with
a  substitution  of  tissues.  As  osseous  tissue*  is  formed
out  of  periosteum  and  cartilage,  so  marrow  is  formed
from  osseous  tissue,  and  the  development  of  a  bone
consists  not  merely  in  the  formation  of  osseous  tissue,
but  it  presupposes  that  the  series  of  transformations
goes  beyond  the  stage  of  bone,  and  that  medullary
tissue  is.  then  produced.  Medullary  tissue  therefore
constitutes  in  some  sort  the  physiological  termination  of
the  formation  of  bone  as  an  organ.

However  simple  this  view  may  be,  still  it  furnishes  us
with  a  picture  of  the  growth  and  history  of  bone  dif-
ferent from  the  traditional  one.  Formerly,  observers
nearly  always  contented  themselves  with  viewing  the
matter  much  in  the  same  light  that  osteologists  are  wont
to  do ;  they  took  a  macerated  bone,  examined  it  when
divested  of  all  its  soft  parts,  and  built  up  the  processes
accordingly.  It  is,  however,  necessary  that  the  relations
should  be  traced  in  the  moist,  living  healthy  or  diseased
bone,  and  that  one  should  pay  attention  not  only  to  the
development  of  bone  upon  the  outside  from  the  growing
layers  of  the  cartilage  and  periosteum,  but  also  to  that
of  the  medulla  on  the  inside,  as  the  ultimate  product  of
the  development  in  this  class  of  tissues,  even  if  it  be
not  the  noblest  one. The  most  important  and  really

*  Osseous  tissue  (tela  ossea,  tissu  osseux)  =  bone  corpuscles  -f-  calcified  inters
cellular  substance.  Bone  as  an  organ  =  osseous  tissue  -f-  medullary  tissue  -|-  peri'
osteum  -}-  vessels  -f-  nerves.  Osseous  substance  is  sometimes  taken  to  mean  a  por-
tion of  bone  considered  as  an  organ. — From  a  MS.  2)ToU  by  the  Author.

454  LECTURE  XVIII.

decisive  point,  through  which  the  whole  subject  of  bone
acquires  another  aspect,  is,  I  consider,  this,  that  the
bone  in  the  formation  of  marrow  is  not  simply  dissolved
and  its  place  taken  by  some  exudation  or  blastema,  but
that  the  dissolution  of  the  osseous  substance  is  a  trans-
formation of  the  osseous  tissue,  and  that  the  dissolution
results  from  a  transformation  of  the  intercellular  sub-
stance of  the  bone  into  a  soft  mass  of  tissue  which  is  no
longer  in  a  condition  to  retain  the  calcareous  salts.  If
therefore  you  ask  whence  the  new  elements  come  which
arise  in  the  midst  of  osseous  tissue,  or  how  a  cancer  or
collection  of  pus  can  form  in  the  middle  of  the  compact
cortex  of  bone,  I  return  you  the  very  simple  answer,
that  they  arise  in  precisely  the  same  manner,  that  in  the
course  of  the  natural  and  normal  development  of  bone
the  marrow  arises.  In  no  part  does  the  osseous  tissue
first  dissolve,  then  an  exudation,  and  next  a  new-forma-
tion, follow,  but  the  existing  tissue  is  directly  converted
into  the  succeeding  one.  The  existing  osseous  tissue  is
the  matrix  of  the  succeeding  cancerous  tissue,  the  cells
of  the  cancer  are  the  immediate  descendants  of  the  cells
of  the  bone.

If  now  we  consider  the  course  of  the  formation  of
bone  a  little  more  in  detail,  we  find,  as  we  have  already
in  part  seen,  that  the  cartilage  prepares  for  ossification
in  such  a  way,  that  its  cells  in  the  first  instance  become
larger  ;  that  divisions  then  take  place  in  them,  first  in
the  nuclei  and  afterwards  in  the  cells  themselves  ;  that
these  divisions  then  proceed  with  great  rapidity,  so  that
we  obtain  larger  and  larger  groups  of  cells,  and  in  a
comparatively  short  time  the  place  of  a  single  cell  is
occupied  by  a  relatively  very  large  group  of  cells  (Fig.
124).  You  will  remember  from  my  first  lecture  (p.  33),
that  a  cartilage -cell  is  distinguished  from  most  other
cells  by  its  secreting  a  special  membranous  capsule  in

GROWTH  OF  CARTILAGE.

455

which  it  is  inclosed.  This  membranous  capsule,  on  the
division  of  the  cells  which  it  contains,  sends  in  septa
between  them,  which  serve  as  new  envelopes  for  the
young  cells,  yet  in  such  a  way,  that  even  the  gigantic
groups  of  cells,  which  proceed  from  each  of  the  original
cells,  are  still  enclosed  in  the  greatly  enlarged  parent
capsule.

It  is  manifest,  that  the  greater  the  number  of  cells
which  undergo  this  change,  the  larger  the  cartilage  will
become, and  that  the  height  to  which  any  one  of  us

Fig.  126.  Vertical  section  through  the  ossifying  border  of  a  growing  astragalus.
c.  Cartilage  with  smallish  groups  of  cells,  p,  the  layer  where  the  proliferation  and
enlargement  are  the  most  marked  along  the  line  of  calcification.  In  the  cartilage-
cavities  are  seen,  partly  complete  nucleated  cells,  partly  shrivelled,  angular  and
granular  looking  bodies  (artificially  altered  cells).  The  dark  mass  advancing  into
the  intermmediate  substance  represents  the  deposition  of  calcareous  salts,  behind
which  the  formation  of  medullary  spaces  («,  m,  m)  and  osseous  trabeculse  [spicula]
is  here  beginning  with  unusual  rapidity.  The  marrow  has  been  removed ;  round
the  cavities  which  lie  farthest  back,  the  trabecule  are  surrounded  by  a  lighter  bor-
der of  young  osseous  tissue  (produced  from  marrow.) 300  diameters.

456  LECTURE  XVIII.

attains,  essentially  depends  upon  the  extent  to  which
growth  occurs  in  the  individual  groups  of  cartilage -cells.
Whether  we  ultimately  become  tall  or  short,  is,  if  I  may
say  so,  left  entirely  to  the  discretion  of  these  elements.
When  the  growth  of  the  proliferating  cartilage  has
reached  this  point,  the  cellular  elements  are  very  close
together,  so  that  a  comparatively  trifling  quantity  of
intercellular  substance  lies  between  them  (Fig.  124).
The  farther  the  development  advances,  the  more  does
the  appearance  of  the  cartilage  alter,  and  at  last  it  looks
almost  like  dense-celled  vegetable  tissue.  The  cells
themselves  however  are  difficult  to  be  seen,  because  they
are  extremely  sensitive  ;  they  readily  shrivel  up  upon
the  addition  of  the  mildest  fluids  and  then  appear  like
angular  and  jagged  corpuscles,  almost  analogous  to  those
of  bone,  with  which  however  they  have  at  this  time
nothing  to  do.

The  cells  which  have  sprung  from  this  excessive  proli-
feration of  the  originally  simple  cartilage  cells,  consti-
tute the  parent  structures  from  which  proceeds  all  that
afterwards  arises  in  the  longitudinal  axis  of  the  bone,
and  especially  the  osseous  and  medullary  tissue.  The
cartilage -cells  may  be  converted  by  a  direct  transforma-
tion into  marrow-cells  and  continue  as  such  ;  or  they
may  first  be  converted  into  osseous,  and  then  into  me-
dullary, tissue  ;  or  lastly  they  may  first  be  converted
into  marrow  and  then  into  bone.  So  variable  are  the
permutations  of  these  tissues  in  themselves  so  nearly
allied,  and  yet  in  their  external  appearance  so  com-
pletely distinct.  When  a  direct  transformation  into
marrow  is  the  first  effected,  the  old  intercellular  sub-
stance of  the  cartilage  at  the  border  next  to  the  bone
begins  first  of  all  to  grow  soft ;  then  some  of  the  ad-
joining capsules  usually  also  very  soon  experience  this
change,  so  that  the  cellular  elements  come  to  be  more

TRANSFORMATION OF CARTILAGE.  457

or  less  set  free  in  a  softer  basis-substance.  Simultane-
ously with  the  occurrence  of  this  softening  the  chemical
reaction  of  this  tissue  also  becomes  altered,  and  we
always  obtain  the  distinct  reaction  of  mucin.  At  the
same  time  divisions  begin  to  take  place,  and  this  not  in
the  same  way  as  previously,  when  the  cellular  elements
at  once  separated  into  two  new  analogous  cells  (hyper-
plasia), but  rather  in  such  a  way,  that  a  number  of  little
nuclei  arise  in  them  (physiological  heteroplasia).  Sub-
sequently, in  proportion  as  this  process  of  transforma-
tion reaches  a  higher  and  higher  pitch,  and  fresh  por-
tions of  the  intercellular  substance  are  continually  being
converted  into  this  more  homogeneous  and  soft  matter,
the  cells  generally  divide,  and  we  obtain  a  number  of
smaller  ones,  which  are  very  minute  in  comparison  to
the  large  cartilage-cells,  from  which  they  proceeded,  and
contain  either  a  single  nucleus  with  a  nucleolus,  or
sometimes  also,  like  pus-corpuscles,  several  nuclei.
Thus  gradually  arises  a  tissue  extremely  rich  in  cells,
the  young,  red,  medullary  tissue,  as  we  generally  find  it
in  the  marrow  of  new-born  infants.  If  the  process
stops  here,  the  size  of  the  transformed  spot  indicates
at  the  same  time  the  extent  of  the  subsequent  medul-
lary space.  Subsequently,  these  little  cells  may  take  up
fat,  and  then  it  appears,  first  in  small  granules,  but  by
degrees  in  large  drops,  and  at  last  to  such  an  extent  that
the  cells  are  entirely  filled  with  them.  Thereby  the
original  medullary  tissue  is  transformed  into  adipose
tissue  }  the  fat,  however,  is  always  contained  in  the
interior  of  the  marrow-cells,  as  it  is  in  the  cells  of  the
panniculus  adiposis.  But  this  yelhw,  fatty  marrow  does
not  occur  in  all  bones.  In  the  bodies  of  the  vertebraB
we  almost  always  find  the  small  cells.  In  the  long
bones  of  the  adult  the  fatty  marrow  always  occurs
normally, but  in pathological conditions it  may  very

458  LECTURE  XVIII.

rapidly  yield  up  its  fat,  the  elements  may  divide  and  we
then  again  have  red,  but  inflammatory,  marrow.

In  this  whole  series  of  allied  processes  from  the  first
development  of  marrow  out  of  cartilage  until  the  pro-
duction of  inflammatory  marrow — the  last  disturbance
which  manifests  itself  in  injured  bones  (as  we  see  in
amputations) — there  at  no  time  exists  any  amorphous
substance,  blastema  or  exudation  ;  we  can  always  trace
the  descent  of  one  cell  from  another  ;  every  one  of  them
has  been  directly  developed  from  an  earlier  one,  and
will  have  as  long  as  the  proliferation  continues,  a  direct
progeny  of  cells.

The  second  series  of  transformations  in  the  longitudi-
nal axis  of  the  cylindrical  [long]  bones  is  furnished  by
the  osseous  tissue,  which  may  arise  out  of  marrow  and
cartilage.  In  the  one  case  the  marrow-,  in  the  other,
the  cartilage-cells,  become  the  subsequent  bone  cells.
This  act  of  real  ossification,  the  production  of  the  osse-
ous tissue,  is  extremely  difficult  to  observe,  chiefly  for
the  reason,  that  what  first  takes  place  in  the  course  of
these  processes,  is  not  the  production  of  real  osseous
tissue,  but  only  the  deposition  of  calcareous  salts.  Gene-
rally, namely,  there  first  of  all  takes  place  in  the  imme-
diate vicinity  of  the  border  of  the  bone  a  calcification
of  the  cartilage,  which  gradually  advances,  first  along
the  borders  of  the  larger  groups  of  cells,  and  then
around  the  individual  cells,  always  following  the  sub-
stance of  the  capsules,  so  that  every  individual  cartilage-
cell  is  surrounded  by  a  ring  of  calcareous  substance.
But  this  is  not  yet  bone,  it  is  nothing  more  than  calcified
cartilage,  for,  upon  dissolving  the  calcareous  salts,  the
old  cartilage  is  again  brought  into  view — and  indeed  it
offers  no  analogy  to  bone  in  any  other  respect  excepting
in  the  presence  of  calcareous  salts.

Now,  in  order  that  this  calcified  cartilage  may  become

CALCIFICATION OF CARTILAGE.

459

Fig.  127.

Fig.  128.

CO

JPig.  127.  Horizontal  section  through  the  growing  cartilage  of  the  diaphysis  of
the  tibia  of  a  seven  months'  foetus.  C  c.  The  cartilage  with  groups  of  cells  that
have  undergone  proliferation  and  enlargement ;  p  p,  perichondrium,  k.  Calcified
cartilage,  in  which  the  individual  groups  of  cells,  and  cells,  are  enclosed  in  calcare-
ous rings ;  at  k'  larger  rings,  at  k"  progress  of  the  calcification  along  the  perichon-
drium. 150  diameters.

Fig.  128.  Right  corner  of  Fig.  127,  more  highly  magnified, co.  Calcified  cartilage
co'  commencement  of  calcification,  p  perichondrium. 350  diameters.

460  LECTURE  XVIII.

real  bone,  it  is  necessary  that  the  cavity  in  which  every
cartilage -cell  lies,  be  converted  into  the  well-known,
radiated,  jagged  bone-cavity  [lacuna].  This  process  is
so  extremely  difficult  to  obtain  a  sight  of,  because  on
making  sections  the  masses  of  lime  crumble  away  before
the  knife,  and  furnish  debris  within  which  it  is  impossi-
ble to  see  well  what  really  is  present.  In  this  circum-
stance you  must  seek  for  an  explanation  of  the  fact,  that
up  to  the  present  time  there  are  still,  and  probably  still
will  be  for  several  years,  continual  disputes  with  regard
to  the  mode  of  origin  of  bone  corpuscles.  I  hold  that
view  to  be  correct,  according  to  which  the  bone-cor-
puscles* in  certain  places  directly  originate  out  of  the
the  cartilage-corpuscles,  and  indeed  in  this  way,  that  in
the  first  place  the  cavity  of  the  capsule  which  invests
the  cartilage-cell,  becomes  narrower,  manifestly  because
fresh  capsular  matter  is  deposited  on  the  inside.  But
in  proportion  as  this  takes  place,  the  inner  border  of  the
capsular  cavity  begins  to  assume  a  distinctly  indented  ap-
pearance")* (Fig.  133,  c')  and  the  space  occupied  by  the
original  cell  is  thereby  considerably  diminished. In  rare

*  Cartilage-corpuscle  =  capsule  -f-  cartilage-cell ;  bone-corpuscle  =  bone-cell. —
Transl.

\  The  lacunae  may  be  said  really  to  have  no  existence  in  living  bone  (or  osteoid
tissue) ;  they  are  merely  the  gaps  (holes)  in  the  intercellular  substance  in  which
the  bone-  (or  osteoid-)  cells  lie,  and  are  normally  so  entirely  filled  by  these  cells,
that  it  is  impossible  to  give  the  outlines  of  both  in  a  drawing.  The  outline  of  the
cell  is  the  outline  of  the  lacuna.  Who,  in  drawing  a  deal-board,  would  ever  think
of  giving  a  second  contour  to  every  knot,  in  order  to  represent  the  outline  of  the
gap  which  would  result  from  the  falling  out  of  the  knot !  Hence  Authors  have
come  to  speak  of  the  nuclei  of  lacunae,  whereby  of  course  they  mean  the  nuclei  of
the  cells  which  fill  the  lacunae,  but  which,  thanks  to  the  deeply  rooted  but  errone-
ous impression  left  upon  their  minds  by  microscopical  sections  of  macerated  bone,
they  have  failed  to  recognize,  or  have  not  even  sought  for,  taking  for  granted  they
had  lacunae  before  them.  In  the  preparation  of  sections,  however,  the  cells  frequently
shrink,  oo  that  an  interval  is  left  between  them  and  the  walls  of  the  lacunae.

What  is  here  said  of  the  lacunae  of  course  equally  applies  to  the  canaliculi.
Both  represent  the  margins  of  the  calcified  intercellular  substance,  where  it  comes
into  contact  with  the  bone-cells  and  their  processes. — Based  upon  MS.  Notes  by  the
Author.

FORMATION"  OF  BONE-  CORPUSCLES.  461

cases,  we  still  succeed  in  finding  cartilage-corpuscles,  in
which  the  capsular  cavity  has  (without  the  occurrence
of  calcification)  become  diminished  in  consequence  of
the  deposition  of  new  capsular  matter,  so  as  to  assume
the  form  of  a  bone  cavity  (lacuna) — which  it  generally
assumes  only  after  ossification — whilst  the  old  cellular
element  (the  cartilage-cell  with  its  nucleus)  still  remains
in  it.  After  this — still  without  the  occurrence  of  any
calcification — the  boundary  disappears  which  originally
existed  between  the  capsules  of  the  cartilage-cells  and
the  basis-substance,  and  we  find  jagged  elements*  (the
future  bone-cells)  in  an  apparently  entirely  homogeneous
substance — in  other  words,  a  tissue  still  soft,  though  in
structure  like  bone  (osteoid  tissue,  Fig.  133,  o).  Usually
this  process  is  concealed  by  means  of  the  early  calcifi-
cation of  the  cartilage  and  only  certain  processes,  for
example,  rickets,  give  us  the  opportunity  of  seeing  the
osteoid  transformation  take  place  in  just  the  same  man-
ner in  those  parts  of  the  cartilage  also  which  are  begin-
ning to  calcify.

But  the  old  limits  of  the  capsule  still  represent  the  real
district  which  is  under  the  sway  of  the  bone-corpuscule,
and,  as  I  pointed  out  to  you  at  the  commencement  of  my
lectures  (p.  41)  with  an  especial  reference  to  this  point,
in  pathological  conditions  this  district  comes  again  not  only
in  force  but  also  into  view.  Within  these  limits  we  see
the  bone-corpuscle  accomplish  its  peculiar  destinies.  If,
for  example,  the  bone  is  by  any  cause  impelled  to  enter

*  The  cartilage-cells  (and  the  same  holds  good  of  the  marrow -cells)  during  ossi-
fication  throw  out  processes  (become  jagged)  in  the  same  way  that  conneetire-tis-
sue  corpuscles,  which  are  also  originally  round,  do,  both  physiologically  and  patho-
logically. These  processes — which  in  the  case  of  the  cartilage-cells  are  generally
formed  after,  but  in  that  of  the  marrow-cells  frequently  before,  calcification  has  taken
place — bore  their  way  into  the  intercellular  substance,  like  the  villi  of  the  chorion
do  into  the  mucous  membrane  and  into  the  vessels  of  the  uterus,  or  like  the  pac-
chionian granulations  (glands)  of  the  pia  mater  of  the  brain  into  (and  occasionally
through)  the  calvarium. — From  a  MS.  Note  by  the  Author.

462

i
LECTURE  XVIII.

upon  new  transformations,  one  bone-corpuscle  after
another  with  its  territory  experiences  the  change.  At
the  border  of  necrosed  portions  of  bone,  when  the  line  of
demarcation  forms,  we  may  distinctly  observe,  that  the
surface  of  the  bone,  when  viewed  along  the  edge,  becomes
marked  with  excavations,  the  extent  of  which  corresponds
to  the  original  cells.  Upon  the  surface  vacuities  are
observable,  which  in  some  instances  run  together  and
form  holes.  The  bone-corpuscle  which  formerly  occu-
pied the  site  of  the  hole  has,  in  proportion  as  it  under-

Fig.  129.*

Fig.  129.  Line  of  demarcation  in  a  piece  of  necrosed  bone  from  a  case  of  psedar-
throcase ;  f  -a,  a,  a  the  necrosed  bone  with  very  much  enlarged  osseous  corpuscles
and  canaliculi ;  here  and  there  slight  indications  of  excavations  upon  the  surface,
ft,  ft.  The  vacuities,  which  have  taken  the  place  of  the  cell-districts  of  the  bone  (Cf.
Fig.  134),  seen  at  the  side  of  the  object  on  a  different  level ;  here  and  there  enlarged
bone-corpuscles  still  to  be  seen  through  a  layer  of  basis-substance  which  covers
them, c,  c.  Completely  empty  cavities. 300  diameters.

*  The  drawing  was  made  from  a  somewhat  thick  preparation,  and  does  not  repre-
sent one  level  surface,  but  three  different  planes  which  form,  as  it  were,  terraces,
one  above  the  other.  Of  these  c  is  distinctly  in  focus  ;  b  is  on  a  lower  (or  higher)
level,  and  is  less  distinctly  seen ;  a  is  lower  (or  higher)  still,  and  is  therefore  still
more  out  of  focus.  Hence  it  is  that  the  canaliculi  (which  besides  are  badly  repre-
sented), are  not  clearly  seen. — From  a  MS.  Note  by  the  Author.

f  Necrosis  (scrofulous)  of  the  fingers  in  children.

CARIES.  46

q

went  transformation  itself,  also  determined  the  surround-
ing parts  to  enter  upon  the  change.  These  are  the
processes,  without  the  aid  of  which  it  is  impossible  to
comprehend  the  history  of  caries.  For  the  whole  essence
of  caries  consists  in  this  :  the  bone  breaks  up  into  its  ter-
ritories, the  individual  corpuscles  undergo  new  develop-
mental changes  (granulation,  suppuration),  and  remnants  *
composed  of  the  oldest  basis-substance  remain  in  the  form
of  small,  thin  shreds  in  the  midst  of  the  soft  substance.
I  traced  this  out  again  only  to-day  in  a  stump,  in  which,
a  fortnight  after  amputation,  periostitis  with  slight  sup-
puration and  incipient  peripheral  caries  was  found  to
exist.  When  in  such  a  case  the  thickened  periosteum  is
stripped  off,  we  see,  at  the  moment  it  quits  the  surface
and  the  vessels  are  drawn  out  from  the  cortex  of  the  bone,
not,  as  in  normal  bone,  mere  threads,  but  little  plugs,
thicker  masses  of  substance  ;  and  if  they  have  been
entirely  drawn  out,  there  remains  a  disproportionately
large  hole,  much  more  extensive  than  it  would  be  under
normal  circumstances.  On  examining  one  of  these  plugs
you  will  find  that  around  the  vessel  a  certain  quantity  of
soft  tissue  lies,  the  cellular  elements  of  which  are  in  a
state  of  fatty  degeneration.  At  the  spot  where  the  vessel
has  been  drawn  out,  the  surface  does  not  appear  even,  as
in  normal  bone,  but  rough  and  porous,  and  when  placed

*  In  ossiGcation  (in  cartilage)  there  is  a  portion  of  the  original  intercellular  sub
stance  of  the  cartilage — that,  namely,  which  lies  between  the  large  groups  of  carti-
lage-cells (secondary  cells — Tochterzellen) — which,  though  it  belongs  to  the  groups
as  wholes,  yet  when  these,  in  the  course  of  ossification,  are  transformed  into  a  num-
ber of  isolated  bone-cells,  becomes,  comparatively  speaking,  almost  entirely  inde-
pendent of  these  cells  individually  (which  have  their  own  immediate  intercellular
substance  to  attend  to,  and  from  most  of  which  it  must  be  separated  by  a  considera-
ble interval),  and  therefore  escapes  the  changes  which  befall  them.  It  is  this
portion  (well  shown  in  Fig.  126,  where  it  is  represented  by  the  trabeculae  separating
the  medullary  spaces  m),  which  remains  behind  in  caries,  whilst  the  secondary  inter-
cellular substance  perishes.  In  other  processes,  however,  which  run  a  more  chronic
course  (in  cancer,  for  example),  everything  is  destroyed. — Based  upon  MS.  notes  by
the  Author.

464:  LECTURE XVIII.

under  the  microscope,  you  remark  those  excavations,
those  peculiar  holes,  which  correspond  to  the  liquefying
bone-territories.  If  it  be  asked  therefore  in  what  way
bone  becomes  porous  in  the  early  stage  of  caries,  it  may
be  said  that  the  porosity  is  certainly  not  due  to  the  for-
mation of  exudations,  seeing  that  for  these  there  is  no
room,  inasmuch  as  the  vessels  within  the  medullary  canals
(Figs.  32,  33)  are  in  immediate  contact  with  the  osseous
tissue.  On  the  contrary,  the  substance  of  the  bone  in
the  cellular  territories  liquefies,  vacuities  form,  which  are
at  first  filled  with  a  soft  substance,  composed  of  a  slightly
streaky  connective  tissue  with  fattily  degenerated  cells.
If  round  about  a  medullary  canal  the  territory  of  one
bone-corpuscle  after  another  liquefies,  you  will  after  a
time  find  the  canal  bounded  on  all  sides  by  a  lacunar
structure.  In  the  middle  of  it  the  vessel  conveying  the
blood  still  remains,  but  the  substance  around  about  is  not
bone  or  exudation,  but  degenerate  tissue.  The  whole
process  is  a  degenerative  ostitis,  in  which  the  osseous  tissue
changes  its  structure,  loses  its  chemical  and  morphological
characters,  and  so  becomes  a  soft  tissue  which  no  longer
contains  lime.  The  tissue,  which  fills  the  resulting
vacuity  in  the  bone,  may  vary  extremely  according  to
circumstances,  consisting  in  one  case  of  a  fattily  degene-
rating and  disintegrating  substance  (the  bone-corpuscles
perishing),  and  in  another  of  a  substance  rich  in  cells  and
containing  numerous  young  cells  ;  this  latter  is  formed  by
the  division  and  proliferation  of  the  bone-corpuscles,  and
the  newly  produced  substance  is  very  analogous  to  mar-
row. Under  certain  circumstances  this,  substance  may
grow  to  such  an  extent,  that — if  we  again  borrow  our
illustration  from  the  surface  of  the  bone,  where  a  vessel
sinks  in — the  young  medullary  matter  sprouts  out  by  the
side  of  the  vessel,  and  appears  as  a  little  knob,  filling  one
of  the  pits  in  the  surface. This  we  call  a  granulation.

GRANULATIONS, PUS.  465

When  we  examine  granulations  for  the  purpose  of
comparing  them  with  medullary  tissue,  we  find  that  no
two  descriptions  of  tissue  more  closely  correspond.  The
marrow  of  the  bones  of  a  new-born  infant  could  at  any
time,  both  chemically  and  microscopically,  be  passed  off
as  a  granulation.  Granulations  are  nothing  more  than  a
young,  soft,  mucous  tissue,  analogous  to  marrow.  There
is  an  inflammatory  osteoporosis,  which,  as  has  been  cor-
rectly stated,  merely  depends  upon  an  increased  produc-
tion of  medullary  spaces,  so  that  the  process  which  is
quite  normal  in  the  interior  of  a  medullary  cavity,  is  met
with  also  more  externally  in  the  compact  cortex.  It  (the
osteoporosis)  is  distinguished  from  granulating  peripheral
caries  only  by  its  seat.  If  you  go  a  step  further  and
suppose  the  cells,  which  in  osteoporosis  are  present  in
moderately  large  numbers,  to  become  more  and  more
abundant,  whilst  the  intercellular  substance  constantly
becomes  softer  and  diminishes  in  quantity,  we  have  pus.
The  pus  is  here  no  special  product,  separable  from  the
other  products  of  -proliferation  and  formation  ;  it  is  cer-
tainly not  identical  with  the  pre-existing  tissues,  but  its
origin  can  be  directly  traced  back  to  the  elements  of  the
pre-existing  tissue.  It  is  not  produced  by  any  special
act,  by  any  creation  de  novo,  but  its  development  pro-
ceeds from  generation  to  generation  in  a  perfectly  regular
and  legitimate  manner.

We  have  therefore  before  us  a  whole  series  of  trans-
formations ;  the  bone  first  produced  and  proceeding  from
cartilage  may  undergo  a  transformation  into  marrow,
then  into  granulation-tissue,  and  finally  into  nearly  pure
pus.  The  transitions  are  here  so  gradual,  that  the  pus
which  is  in  immediate  contact  with  the  granulations,  con-
stitutes, as  is  well  known,  a  more  mucous,  stringy,  and
tenacious  matter,  which  really  contains  mucin  like  the

granulation-tissue,  and  only  when  we  proceed  farther  out-

30

466  LECTURE XVIII.

wards,  exhibits  the  properties  of  completely  developed
pus.  The  perfect  pus  of  the  surface  gradually  passes,  as
we  descend,  into  crude  pus,  the  mucous,  tenacious,  imma-
ture pus  of  the  deeper  layers,  and  what  we  call  matura-
tion depends  simply  upon  the  gradual  conversion  of  the
mucous  intercellular  substance  of  the  originally  tenacious
pus,  which  is  allied  in  structure  to  granulations,  into  the
albuminous  intercellular  substance  of  pure  pus.  The
mucus  dissolves  and  the  creamy  fluid  is  produced.  The
maturation  is  therefore  essentially  a  softening  of  the  inter-
cellular substance.  So  direct  is  the  connection  which  sub-
sists between  development,  and  retrograde  metamor-
phosis, physiological  and  pathological  conditions.

In  just  the  same  manner  that  the  cartilage-cell  may
become  a  bone  corpuscle,  the  marrow-cell  also  may  become
a  bone-corpuscle.  In  the  medullary  spaces  of  bone  those
marrow-cells  which  are  situated  at  the  circumference,
generally  assume  at  a  later  period  a  more  oblong  form,
and  take  a  direction  parallel  to  the  internal  surface  of
the  medullary  spaces,  and  the  medullary  tissue  in  this
situation  has  a  more  fibrous  appearance  and  has  indeed
been  regarded  as  a  medullary  membrane,  but  it  should
not  be  separated  from  the  marrow  in  the  centre  of  the
spaces,  and  only  constitutes  the  most  compact  layer  of
the  medullary  tissue.  Now  as  soon  as  osseous  tissue  is
about  to  form,  the  nature  of  the  basis-substance  alters.
It  becomes  firmer,  more  cartilaginous,  and  the  individual
cells  appear  to  lie  in  largish  cavities.  Gradually  they
become  jagged,  from  sending  out  little  processes,  and
then  nothing  more  is  required  than  that  calcareous  salts
should  deposit  themselves  in  the  basis-substance — and
the  bone  is  complete.  Thus  here  again  also  the  osseous
tissue  is  formed  by  a  very  direct  transformation  ;  and  by
the  deposition  of  one  such  osteoid  *  layer  after  another

*  Osteoid  I  call  the  tissue  which,  when  it  takes  up  calcareous  salts,  becomes  bone,

DEVELOPMENT OF  BOXE  OUT OF  PERIOSTEUM.  467

from  the  medulla,  a  compact  substance  is  produced,  like
that  of  the  cortex,  which  is  always  characterized  by  the
lamellar  deposition  of  osseous  tissue  in  the  previously  ex-
isting medullary  spaces.  The  original  bone  is  always
pumice-stone-like,  and  porous  ;  its  porosities  become  filled
by  the  subsequent  development  of  osseous  lamellae  from
the  layers  of  the  marrow,  the  process  continuing  until
the  vessel,  which  does  not  admit  of  ossification,  alone  re-
mains.

Now  with  regard  to  the  development  of  bones  in  thick-
ness, the  process  is  in  itself  much  simpler,  but  it  is  also
at  the  same  time  very  much  more  difficult  to  see,  be-
cause ossification  here  proceeds  very  rapidly,  and  the
proliferating  periosteal  layer  is  so  thin  and  delicate,  that
extremely  great  care  is  required  in  order  to  catch  sight
of  it  at  all.  Pathology  furnishes  us  with  an  incompara-
bly better  opportunity '  for  studying  the  process  than
physiology.  For  it  is  just  the  same  whether  the  bone
grows  physiologically  in  thickness,  or  pathologically  in
consequence  of  periostitis  ;  the  difference  is  only  one  of
quantity  and  time.

When  fully  developed,  the  periosteum  consists  for  the
most  part  of  a  very  dense  connective  tissue  which  con-
tains an  extremely  large  quantity  of  elastic  fibres,  and
in  which  the  vessels  ramify,  before  they  pass  on  into
the  cortex  of  the  bone  itself.  Now  when  the  growth
of  the  bone  in  thickness  commences,  we  see  that  the
most  internal,  vascular  layer  (of  the  periosteum)  in-
creases in  thickness  and  swells  up,  and  then  it  is  said  an
exudation  has  taken  place,  it  being  taken  for  granted,
that  every  swelling  proves  the  occurrence  of  an  exuda-
tion, and  that  the  exudation  here  lies  between  the  peri-
osteum  and the bone. But if  you set  to  work  and

— in  other  words,  soft,  uncalcified,  osseous  tissue. — From  a  MS.  Note  by  the
Author.

46S

LECTURE XVIII.

Fig.  130.

analyze  the  substance  deposited,  no  trace  of  any  plastic
exudation  is  found  ;  the  swollen  spot  appears  on  the
contrary  organized  in  its  whole  thickness  from  without
^nwards,  and  this  most  distinctly  close  to  the  bone,
whilst  towards  the  surface  of  the  periosteum  the  struc-
tural relations  can  be  less  readily  unravelled.  This
swelling  may  under  certain  circumstance  increases  to  a

very  considerable  extent. In
periostitis  we do not unfre-
quently  see,  you  know,  regu-
lar  nodes formed, and one
need only recall the more
physiological  history  of  callus
after  fracture. In either of
these cases  we seek  in  vain
for an exudation. If the
thickened  layers  are  traced  in
the  direction  of  that  part  of
the  periosteum  which  still  re-
mains unthickened, we can
very  distinctly  see  what  Du-
hamel  long  ago exhibited  in  a  very  beautiful  manner,
but  is  forgotten  over  and  over  again,  namely,  that  the
layers  which  constitute  the  thickening  are  ultimately  all
of  them  continued  into  the  layers  of  the  periosteum.
As  little  as  the  periosteum  is  unorganized,  so  little  are
the  thickened  layers  without  organization. Microscopi-
cal examination shows at the surface  of  the  bone  a
slightly  striated basis-substance, and  in it,  numerous,

Fig.  130.  Vertical  section  through  the  periosteum  and  periosteal  surface  of  a
parietal  bone  from  a  child.  A.  The  proliferating  layer  of  the  periosteum  with
anastomosing  networks  of  cells  and  division  of  nuclei.  B.  Formation  of  the
osteoid  layer  by  means  of  the  sclerosis*  of  the  intercellular  substance.  300
diameters.

*  Sclerosis  signifies  thickening  with  condensation. — From  a  MS.  Note  by  the
Author.

OSTEOID TISSUE.  469

small,  cellular  elements  ;  the  farther  we  recede  from  the
bone,  the  more  do  divisions  of  cells  occur,  and  at  last
we  meet  with  the  simple,  very  small  connective-tissue-
corpuscles  of  the  periosteum.  The  division  follows  the
same  course  as  in  cartilage,  only  that  the  dividing  cells
of  the  periosteum  are  very  delicate.  The  greater  thp
irritation,  the  greater  also  the  proliferation,  and  the
more  considerable  the  swelling  of  the  growing  spot.

The  cells  which  thus  result  from  the  proliferation  of
the  periosteal  corpuscles  are  converted  into  bone-cor-
puscles exactly  in  the  way  I  described  when  speaking
of  the  marrow.  In  the  neighbourhood  of  the  surface  of
the  bone  the  intercellular  substance  grows  dense  and
becomes  almost  cartilaginous,  the  cells  throw  out  pro-
cesses, become  stellate,  and  at  last  the  calcification  of
the  intercellular  substance  ensues.  If  the  irritation  is
very  great,  the  corpuscles  grow  very  considerably,  and
then  real  cartilage  is  produced  ;  the  corpuscles  enlarge
to  such  an  extent  that  they  grow  into  large,  oval  or
round  cells,  and  each  of  these  forms  a  capsule  around
itself  by  secretion.  In  this  manner  cartilage  may  arise
in  the  periosteum  also,  by  means  of  a  direct  transforma-
tion of  its  proliferating  layers,  but  it  is  by  no  means
necessary  that  real,  true  cartilage  should  be  produced  ;
generally  only  the  osteoid  transformation  takes  place,
when  the  intercellular  substance  becomes  sclerotic  and  at
once  calcifies.

Thus  it  is,  that  on  the  surface  of  every  growing  bone,
as  Flourens  particularly  has  shown,  new  bone  is  continu-
ally deposited  layer  after  layer,  and  that  the  new  layers
grow  round  the  old  bone  in  such  a  way,  that  a  ring,
which  is  early  put  around  the  bone,  after  a  time  lies
inside  it,  enclosed  by  the  young  layers  which  have
formed  outeide  around  it.  These  are  connected  with
the  old  bone  by  means  of  little  columns  which  give  the

470  LECTURE  XVIII.

whole  a  pumice-stone  like  appearance,  and  here  too  the
subsequent  condensation  into  cortical  substance  is  ac-
complished by  means  of  the  formation — within  the
individual  cavities  bounded  by  the  little  columns — of
concentric  layers  of  osseous  substance  out  of  the  perios-
teal marrow.

These  are  the  normal  and  pathological  processes  which
we  recognize  in  the  formation  of  bone.  From  them  you
may  gather,  that  we  have  in  them  to  do  with  a  series  of
permutations  or  substitutions,  which  lead  in  one  case  to
a  higher,  in  another,  to  a  lower  form  of  structure,  but
are  however  constantly  connected  with  one  another,
and,  according  to  the  conditions  which  operate  upon  the
parts,  assume  sometimes  one  aspect,  sometimes  another.
It  is  in  our  power  to  incite  individual  portions  of  carti-
lage to  ossify,  or  to  transform  themselves  into  a  soft
tissue.  In  this  whole  series  the  marrow  stands  alone  as
the  type  of  the  heterologous  forms,  inasmuch  as  it  con-
tains the  smallest  and  least  characteristic  cells.  The
young  medullary  tissue  presents  the  same  structure  as
the  young  formations,  with  which  all  heterologous
tissues  begin,  and  since,  as  I  have  already  hinted,  it  at
the  same  time  constitutes  the  real  type  of  all  granula-
tions, it  may  be  said  that,  wherever  new-formations  are
about  to  arise  on  a  large  scale,  a  substitution  analogous  to
the  type  of  young  medullary  tissue  {granulation)  also  takes
place ;  and  that,  no  matter  how  great  the  solidity  pos-
sessed by  the  old  tissue,  a  hind  of  proliferation  neverthe-
less always  takes  place,  which  produces  the  germs  of  the
subsequent  elements.

LECTURE XIX.

APRIL  24,  1858.

PATHOLOGICAL,  AND  ESPECIALLY  HETEROLOGOUS NEW-
FORMATION.

Consideration  of  some  forms  of  pathological  formation  of  bone.  Soft  osteoma  ol
the  maxillte — Rickets — Formation  of  callus  after  fracture.

Theory  of  substitutive  new-formation  in  opposition  to  exudative — Destructive
nature  of  new-formations — Homology  and  heterology  (malignity)— Ulcera-
tion— Mollities  ossium — Proliferation  and  luxuriation — Medulla  of  bones,  and
pus.

Suppuration — Its  two  forms:  superficial,  occurring  in  epithelium;  and  deep,  in  con-
nective tissue — Eroding  suppuration  (skin,  mucous  membrane)  :  pus  and  mucus-
corpuscles  in  their  relations  to  epithelium — Ulcerative  suppuration — Solvent
properties  of  pus.

Connection  of  destruction  with  pathological  growth  and  proliferation — Correspon-
dence of  the  first  stage  in  pus,  cancer,  sarcoma,  etc. — Possible  duration  of  the
life  of  pathologically  new-formed  elements,  and  of  pathological  new-formations
considered  as  wholes  (tumours) — Compound  nature  of  the  larger  tuberous*  tu-
mours (Geschwulstknoten),  and  miliary  character  of  the  real  foci  (Heerde) —
Conditions  of  growth  and  recurrence  :  contagiousness  of  new-formations  and
importance  of  the  anastomoses  of  cells — Cellular  pathology  in  opposition  to
the  humoral  and  neuristic — General  infection  of  the  body — Parasitism  and
autonomy  of  new-formations.

Gentlemen, — I  will  to-day  begin  by  laying  some
pathological  preparations  before  you,  for  which  I  re-
mained in  your  debt  last  time.

I  begin  with  an  interesting  object  which  has  lately
come into  my  hands,  and  exhibits  with a  distinctness

*  Tuberous,  in  contradistinction  to  infiltrated,  tumours (infiltrations). — From  a
MS.  Note  by  the  Author.

471

472

LECTURE XIX.

which  I  have  rarely  had  occasion  to  witness,  the  transi-
tions from  periosteal  connective  tissue  into  osteoid  tis-
sue, and  this  too  with  a  peculiar  modification,  inasmuch
as  calcification  has  not  taken  place  in  large  portions  of
the  parts  which  already  possess  a  structure  of  bone.  The
preparation  comes  from  a  tumour  in  the  jaw  of  a  goat,
and  contributes  towards  our  knowledge  of  the  transi-
tions from  connective  tissue  into  osteoid  tissue  about
the  same  information,  that  the  history  of  rickets  has
supplied  us  with  concerning  the  transformation  of  carti-
lage. The  tumour  which  affected  the  superior  and  infe-
rior maxillae,  but  each  separately,  has  such  little  density,
that  it  can  be  cut  with  great  facility,  and  only  in  a  few
places  does  the  knife  meet  with  greater  resistance.  On
making  thin  sections,  we  see,  even  with  the  naked  eye,
that  the  more  and  less  dense  portions  alternate  with
each  other,  so  that  the  whole  has  a  reticular  appearance.
When  examined  under  the  microscope  with  a  low  power,

Fig.  131.

Fig.  131.  Section  from  the  soft  osteoma  from  the  jaw  of  a  goat — showing  the
characters  of  periosteal  ossification.  Networks  of  osteoid  trabeculae  with  jagged
cells  enclose  primary  medullary  spaces,  filled  with  fibrous  connective  tissue.  The
dark  parts  represent  calcified  and  completely  developed  osseous  tissue.  150  dia-
meters.

PERIOSTEAL OSSIFICATION.  473

it  is  at  once  perceived  that  the  disposition  of  the  con-
stituent parts  is  entirely  that  of  a  bone,  for  (primary*)
medullary  spaces  and  trabecular  networks  alternate  witli
each  other,  just  as  if  the  observer  had  before  him  the
medullary  spaces  and  trabecules  of  a  spongy  bone,
The  substance  which  forms  the  trabecular  networks,
is  on  the  whole  dense,  and  is  therefore  readily  distin-
guishable, even  with  a  low  power,  from  the  more  deli-
cate substance  which  is  enclosed  by  the  trabeculae  and
fills  the  cavities  of  the  meshes.  This  latter  substance
presents,  when  more  highly  magnified,  a  finely  striated
fibrous  appearance.  The  bands  of  fibres  in  part  run
parallel  to  the  borders  of  the  trabecule.  In  these  latter
the  same  structures  can  be  seen  with  a  high  power,  thafc
are  usually  presented  by  the  bone,  namely  jagged  cor-
puscles, distributed  with  great  regularity.

This  structure  exactly  corresponds  to  that  which  we
have  seen  in  the  development  of  bone  from  periosteum  ;
it  is,  in  short,  the  plan  followed  in  the  growth  of  bone  in
thickness.  Wherever  young  periosteal  deposits  are  ex-
amined, there  is  found  in  the  meshes  of  the  network,
formed  by  the  osteoid  substance,  this  primary  marrow
containing  fibres,  but  no  cells,  as  is  the  case  at  a  later
period.  This  primary  marrow  consists  of  the  remains  of
the  periosteum  itself  (after  its  proliferation),  which  have
not  }^et  undergone  the  transformation.  The  transforma-
tion into  osteoid  tissue  advances  into  the  proliferating
periosteum  in  the  first  instance  always  in  such  a  way,

*  The  primary  medullary  spaces  formed  out  of  periosteum  are  subsequently
all  filled  with  compact  bone,  and  it  is  by  the  conversion  of  this  into  true  mucous
medullary  tissue,  abounding  in  cells  (which  afterwards  take  up  fat)  that  tlic
secondary  medullary  spaces  are  formed.  Of  the  primary  medullary  spaces  formed
out  of  cartilage,  however,  a  considerable  number  do  not  pass  through  any
such  intermediate  stage  as  that  just  described  as  occurring  in  periosteal  ossifi-
cation, but  become  at  once  filled  with  true  medullary  tissue  and  are  therefore
equivalent  to  the  ordinary,  secondary  medullary  spaces. — From  a  MS.  Note  by  the
A  uthor.

474

LECTURE  XIX.

that  the  fibrous  tissue  becomes  condensed  (sclerotic),
though  only  partially  so,  the  condensation  beginning  at
the  bone  and  proceeding  outwards  in  certain  directions  ;
in  this  way  there  arise,  at  first  resting  like  columns  upon
the  bone,  hardish  cones  *  which  are  united  by  transverse
bands,  parallel  to  the  surface  of  the  bone,  and  thus  con-

Fig.  132.

stitute  this  network.  If  now  acetic  acid  be  applied  to
these  parts,  we  see  at  once  that  the  whole  fibrous  mass
which  fills  the  alveoli,  contains  the  most  wonderful  con-
nective-tissue-corpuscles, which  are  so  arranged,  that
next  to  the  trabecule  all  around  they  lie  in  concentric
rows,  whilst  in  the  most  internal  parts  of  the  marrow
they  constitute  stellate  corpuscles  which  anastomose  with
one  another,  as  you  have  already  seen  on  many  occasions.
But  that  in  some  parts  the  trabecule  have  already
become  true bone,  one  may  very  beautifully  convince

Fig.  132.  A  portion  of  Fig.  131,  more  highly  magnified,  o,  o.  The  osteoid  tra-
becule ;  m,  m,  m  the  primary  medullary  spaces  with  spindle-shaped  and  reticulating
cells. 300  diameters.

*  These  are  the  little  columns  mentioned  in  p.  110  as  being  perpendicular  to  the
long  axis  of  the  bone,  and  as  intervening  between  the  Haversian  system — Transl.

FORMATION OF  BONE FROM CONNECTIVE TISSUE.  475

oneself  at  the  spots,  where  calcareous  salts  are  really
deposited  in  them.  Whilst  the  periphery  of  such  calcified
trabeculse  (Fig.  131)  offers  a  brilliant,  almost  cartilagi-
nous appearance,  in  their  middle  an  opaque,  finely  gra-
nular matter  presents  itself  which  pervades  the  intercel-
lular substance,  and  towards  the  interior  of  the  trabecule
passes  into  a  nearly  homogeneous,  calcareous  layer,  in
which  at  intervals  the  osseous  corpuscles  may  be  recog-
nized. Here  we  have  therefore  already  a  complete
osseous  network,  and  at  the  same  time  an  exact  picture
of  the  regular  growth  of  bone  in  thickness.

If,  however,  the  spots  are  very  carefully  examined,
where  the  borders  of  these  trabeculse  and  bands  of  bone
come  into  contact  with  the  fibrous  substance  of  the
meshes,  it  is  seen  that  no  perfectly  defined  limit  exists
there,  but  that  the  intercellular  substance  of  the  osteoid
tissue  is  gradually  lost  in  the  intercellular  substance  of  the
fibrous  marrow,  so  that  here  and  there  a  few  of  the  con-
nective-tissue-corpuscles of  the  fibrous  connective  tissue
are  included  in  the  sclerotic  substance  of  the  trabeculse.
Hence  you  may  infer,  that  the  formation  of  the  real  osse-
ous substance  from  connective  tissue  is  essentially  effected
by  the  gradual  change  of  the  intercellular  substance,  and
that  this  loses  its  originally  fibrous  nature  and  becomes
converted  into  a  dense,  shining,  cartilaginous  mass,  with-
out its  ever  really  attaining  however  to  the  structure  of
cartilage.  Here  there  is  never  a  stage  exactly  corres-
ponding to  any  of  the  known  forms  of  cartilage,  but  it  is
out  of  connective  tissue  that  we  see  the  osteoid  substance
directly  arise,  which  in  cartilage  also  and  marrow  is  the
first  to  arise  when  they  become  bone.  This  is  so  far  very
important,  that  you  can  from  all  these  instances  acquire
the  conviction  that  people  have  been  mistaken  in  speak-
ing of  the  cartilage  of  bone  (Knochenknorpel).  Cartilage
as  such  can  only  calcify  ;  when  it  is  to  become  bone,  a

476  LECTURE XIX.

transformation  of  its  tissue  must  take  place,  the  chon-
drine-containing  basis-substance  must  become  converted
into  a  gelatine-yielding  intercellular  substance.

I  have,  moreover,  gentlemen,  made  a  series  of  prepa-
rations from  ricketty  bones  for  you — on  the  one  hand,
because  rickets  above  all  offers  an  especially  favourable
opportunity  for  obtaining  an  insight  into  several  processes
of  the  normal  growth  of  bone,  which  in  other  cases  are
obscured  by  the  presence  of  calcareous  salts — and  on  the
other  hand,  because  you  will  thus  form  some  idea  of  the
peculiarity  of  this  process,  as  such.

Rhachitis,  has,  as  you  are  aware,  by  more  accurate
investigation  been  shown  to  consist  not  in  a  process  of
softening  in  the  old  bone,  as  it  had  previously  generally
been  considered  to  be,  but  in  the  non-solidification  of  the
fresh  layers  as  they  form  ;  the  old  layers  being  consumed
by  the  normally  progressive  formation  of  medullary  cavi-
ties, and  the  new  ones  remaining  soft,  the  bone  becomes
brittle.  But  besides  this  essential  feature  of  the  non-
occurrence of  calcification  in  the  parts,  there  is  displayed
also  a  certain  irregularity  in  growth,  so  that  stages  in  the
development  of  bone  which,  when  the  formation  is  nor-
mal, ought  to  set  in  late,  set  in  at  a  very  early  period.
In  normal  growth,  the  pointed  processes,  in  which  shape
the  calcareous  salts  shoot  up  into  the  cartilage,  form,  along
the  margin  of  calcification,  such  a  completely  straight  line,
that  it  should  almost  be  described  as  mathematically
regular.  This  condition  ceases  to  obtain  in  rickets,  and
the  more  so,  the  greater  the  severity  of  the  case  ;  inter-
ruptions occur  in  such  a  way,  that  in  some  places  the
cartilage  still  reaches  a  long  way  down,  whilst  in  others
the  calcification  has  mounted  up  to  a  considerable  height.
These  uncalcified  parts  sometimes  become  so  completely
separated  from  one  another,  that  they  remain  forming
specks of  cartilage  in  the  midst  of  the bone,  and  sur-

RICKETS.  477

rounded  on  all  sides  by  it — and  that  cartilage  is  still
found  at  points  where  the  bone  ought  long  since  to  have
become  transformed  into  medullary  tissue/  The  farther
the.  process  advances,  the  more,  however,  do  we  also  meet
with  isolated,  scattered  masses  of  lime  in  the  cartilage,  in
many  instances  to  such  a  degree,  that  the  whole  of  the
cartilage  on  section  appears  dotted  with  white  points.  The
irregularity  of  the  process  is  further  shown  in  this,  that
whilst  in  the  normal  course  of  things  the  medullary  spaces
should  begin  to  form  only  at  a  short  distance  behind  the
margin  of  calcifiation  (Fig.  126),  they  here  exceed  these
limits,  and  in  many  cases  a  series  of  connective  cavities
extends  far  beyond  the  border  of  calcification,  which  are
filled  with  a  soft,  slightly  fibrous  tissue,  and  besides  have
vessels  running  up  into  them.  Medullary  spaces  and
vessels  are  therefore  met  with,  where  normally  and  pro-
perly not  a  single  medullary  cell,  and  scarcely  a  single
vessel  ought  to  be  found.

In  this  manner  there  may  at  all  times  be  found  side  by
side  in  the  parts,  where  the  process  has  attained  its  height,
a  whole  series  of  different  histological  conditions.  Whilst
in  other  cases  we  find  at  a  certain  definite  point  cartilage,
at  another  calcification,  at  a  third,  bone,  or  medullary
tissue,  here  everything  lies  in  the  greatest  confusion  ;  in
one  place,  medullary  tissue,  above  it  osteoid  tissue,  or
bone,  by  its  side  calcified  cartilage,  and  below  it,  perhaps,
cartilage  still  retaining  its  original  condition.  The  whole
of  the  rhachitic  portion  of  the  diaphysal  cartilage — and  it
may  extend  for  a  considerable  distance — of  course  acquires
no  real  firmness,  and  this  is  one  of  the  chief  causes  of  the
liability  to  distortion,  which  ricketty  bones  exhibit,  not
in  the  continuity  of  the  diaphyses,  but  at  the  articular
ends.  This  is  in  many  cases  extremely  considerable  and
is  the  sole  cause  of  many  a  deformity,  as,  for  example,
in  the  thorax. The  curvatures  in  the  continuity  of  the

478

LECTURE  XXX.

bones  are  always  infractions,*  those  of  the  epiphyses  are
due  to  the  proliferation  of  the  cartilage  and  constitute
simple  inflexions  ;  and  it  is  easy  to  conceive  that  parts,
which  are  so  entirely  deprived  of  their  regular  develop-
ment (as  they  are  in  rickets),  and  ought,  properly,  to  be
densely  impregnated  with  calcareous  salts,  must  retain
great  mobility.

Fig.  133.

Fig.  183.  Vertical  section  of  cartilage  from  the  diaphysis  of  a  ricketty,  growing
tibia  from  a  child  two  years  old.  A  large  conical  process  of  medullary  tissue,  send-
ing out  a  lateral  band  on  the  left  side,  extends  from  m  up  into  the  cartilage ;  it  con-
sists of  fibrous  basis-substance  with  spindle-shaped  cells.  At  the  circumference,  at
c,  c,  c  the  cartilage  in  a  state  of  proliferation  with  large  cells  and  groups  of  cells;
at  c',  c'  commencing  thickening  and  internal  indentation  of  the  cartilage-capsules
which  at  o,  o  coalesce  and  form  osteoid  tissue. 300  diameters.

*  By  infraction  I  understand  an  incomplete  fracture  (solution  of  continuity)  within
the  periosteum,  which  remains  intact. — From  a  MS.  Note  by  the  Author.

RICKETTY CARTILAGE.  479

The  enlargement  and  multiplication  of  the  individual
cells  takes  place  in  the  same  manner,  as  in  the  cases  we
have  already  considered  ; but  inasmuch as  at  a  later
period  individual  parts  in  the  cartilages,  that  properly
ought  to  have  become  bone,  do  not  calcify,  and  especially
a  formation  of  medullary  spaces  often  takes  place  a  long
way  up  above the border  of  calcification — in  many  of
these  rhachitic  parts  the  whole  history  of  the  develop-
ment of  bone  is  clearly  revealed  in  a  connected  form.
Large and often very vascular conical processes of
fibrous  medullary  tissue  are  seen  extending  upwards  from
the  bone  into  the  cartilage,  and  it  may  be  very  distinctly
perceived,  that  these  processes  do  not  force  their  way
into  the  cartilage  from  without,  but  that  they  owe  their
origin  to  a  fibrillation  of  the  intercellular  substance  of  the
cartilage  itself. It  is  around  them  chiefly  that  the  osteoid
transformation  of  cartilage  also can  best  be  seen,  and
particularly  that  the  gradual  conversion  of  a  cartilage-
corpuscle  into  a  bone-corpuscle  can  very distinctly  be
witnessed. Out  of  the  cartilage-corpuscle  which  has  a
moderately  thick  capsular  membrane,  arises  a  structure,
provided  with  a  capsule  continually  increasing  in  thick-
ness,  within  which  the  space for the cell constantly
grows  smaller,  and  which,  when  it  has  attained  a  certain
degree  of  thickness,  acquires  indentations  on  its  inner  wall,
like  the  so-called  dotted  canals  of  vegetable  cells. Such
is  the  mode  in  which  the  first  rudiments  of  the  bone-cor-
puscle are  traced,  after  which  a  fusion  of  the  capsule  with
the  basis-substance  very  generally  ensues,  and  with  the
production  of  anastomosing  processes  from  the  cells  the
formation  of  the  bone-corpuscle  is  completed. At  times
isolated  osteoid  cartilage-corpuscles  calcify  alone  without
the  occurrence  of  any  fusion  ;  and  whilst  between  them
lies  the  ordinary  intercellular  substance  of  cartilage,  the
capsules  of  the  osteoid  corpuscles  fill  themselves  com-

480

LECTURE XIX.

pletely  with  calcareous  salts.  In  other  places  on  the  con-
trary the  fusion  of  the  capsules  with  the  intercellular
substance  takes  place  very  rapidly  ;  the  new  intercellular
substance  formed  by  this  fusion  assumes  a  coarsely  fibrous
appearance,  and  in  the  place  of  several  groups  of  carti-
lage-cells we  see  a  fibrous  mass,  containing  jagged  osse-
ous (bone-),  or  osteoid  corpuscles.  There  is  therefore  no
sharply  defined  boundary  in  the  tissue,  but  the  condensed
or  fibrous  substance,  which  surrounds  the  jagged  bodies,
is  directly  continuous  with  the  translucent  substance
which  holds  the  cartilage  together.  Essentially,  however,
it  is  the  same  structure.*

This isolated  transformation of  single  cartilage-cells
into  bone  corpuscles  is  obviously  of  the  greatest  impor-

Fig.  134.

.Fig.  134.  Insular  ossification  in  ricketty  diaphysal  cartilage,  c,  c.  Ordinary
growing  (proliferating)  cartilage,  c',  increasing  thickening  of  the  capsules  with  for-
mation of  an  indented  cavity  (osteoid  cartilage-cells),  co\  calcification  of  similar,
still  isolated  cartilage-cells,  eo,  commencing  fusion  of  the  capsules  of  calcified  carti-
lage-cells, o,  osseous  substance.  300  diameters.  (Of.  Archiv.  f.  path.  Anat ,  Vol.
XIV,  Plate  I.

*  The  following  section,  including  the  history  of  the  formation  of  callus,  has  been
transferred  to  this  place  from  the  next  lecture,  inasmuch  as  a  better  understanding
of  it  is  thus  insured.

OSSIFICATION IN CARTILAGE.  481

tance  to  the  cellular  theory  in  general.  In  this  speci-
men (Fig.  134)  the  whole  series  of  these  processes  is
seen  at  a  glance.  Where  the  completely  ossified  por-
tion, in  which  the  bone-corpuscles  are  developed  with
perfect  regularity,  adjoins  the  cartilage,  you  see  a  zone
where  the  conversion  of  cartilage -corpuscles  into  perfect
osseous  substance  may  be  viewed  within  the  limits  of  a
very  short  space.  At  the  point  of  transition  a  number
of  corpuscles  are  found  lying  close  to  one  another  like
hazel-nuts — distinguished  from  ordinary  cartilage-cor-
puscles by  their  dark  contours,  hard  appearance,  and
unusually  great  brilliancy,  and  enclosing  in  a  small,
indented  cavity  a  little  cell ;  these  little  cells  are  the
still  isolated*  bone-corpuscles  with  calcified  capsules
which  they  have  retained  from  that  earlier  period  in
their  existence  when  they  were  cartilage-cells.  It  is
especially  important  that  you  should  see  these  bodies
thus  isolated — in  situ,  in  order  that  you  may  compre-
hend those  other  processes,  in  which  in  bone  the  terri-
toriesf  belonging  to  the  bone-cells  fall  out  (p.  462,  Fig.
129).  When  an  object  of  this  kind  has  once  been  accu-
rately examined,  it  is  impossible  that  doubts  can  any
longer  arise  as  to  whether  cartilage-cells  can  become
bone-corpuscles,  and  I  cannot  conceive  how  it  is  that
even  the  most  recent  (and  those  very  careful)  observers
still  start  the  question,  whether  bone-corpuscles  are  not
in  all  cases  structures  obtained  by  a  circuitous  route,  and
not directly  produced  from  cartilage-corpuscles. It  is

*  Isolated,  because  their  capsules  have  not  yet  become  fused  with  the  basis-sub-
stance.— From  a  MS.  Note  by  the  Author.

\  In  bone  formed  directly  (i.  e.,  without  the  intervention  of  medullary  tissue)  out
of  cartilage,  the  territories  of  the  bone-cells  correspond  to  the  cartilage-capsules.
But  when  bone  is  developed  out  of  any  other  tissue,  the  limits  of  these  territories
cannot  be  distinguished  at  all  during  growth,  and  it  is  only  when  gaps  arise  (through
disease)  in  the  bone  around  the  bone-cells  that  these  limits  are  defined. — From  a
MS.  Note  by  the  Author.

31

4:82  LECTURE XIX.

no  doubt  true,  that  in  the  case  of  the  normal  growth  in
length  of  bone  most  of  the  bone-corpuscles  do  not  directly
proceed  from  cartilage-corpuscles,  but  are  immediately
derived  from  marrow-cells  and  only  mediately  from
cartilage -cells  ;  but  it  is  just  as  true  that  cartilage -cells
also  can  be  transformed  straightway  into  bone-cor-
puscles. It  is  now  a  long  time  since  I  called  attention
to  one  spot  in  particular,  where  the  conversion  of  carti-
lage into  osteoid  tissue  can  be  very  distinctly  viewed,
namely  at  the  points  of  transition  from  cartilage  to  peri-
chondrium in  the  neighbourhood  of  the  border  of  calcifi-
cation of  growing  bones.  Here  the  boundaries  between
the  different  forms  of  tissue  are  completely  obliterated,
and  all  sorts  of  transitions  between  round  (cartilaginous)
and  jagged  (osteoid)  cells  are  seen.

The  next  preparations  have  reference  to  the  patholo-
gical new  formation  of  bone,  or,  if  you  will,  to  the  physio-
logical formation  of  callus.  They  are  derived  from  a
very  recent  fracture  of  the  ribs,  around  which  a  thick
mass  of  callus  has  been  deposited.  In  reference  to  this
process  I  will  add  a  few  words,  as  it  is  one  that  has  been
much  discussed  and  is  very  important  in  a  surgical  point
of  view.

You  have  seen  from  what  I  have  just  been  describing
to  you,  that  there  are  several  ways  in  which  the  new
formation  of  bone  is  effected,  and  that  the  old  supposi-
tion that  either  the  one  or  the  other  mode  must  be
considered  as  the  only  prevailing  one,  is  incorrect.
The  pre-existence  of  cartilage  is  by  no  means  necessary
for  the  formation  of  bone  ;  on  the  contrary,  an  osteoid
substance  is  very  frequently  formed  by  a  direct  sclerosis
in  connective  tissue,  nay,  ossification  is  thus  really  more
easily  effected  than  when  it  takes  place  in  real  cartilage.
We  see  also  by  the  history  of  the  theories  concerning
callus, that  the endeavour  to show  that it is  always

FORMATION OF CALLUS AFTER FRACTURE.  483

developed  in  the  same  way  or  out  of  the  same  substance
(e.  g.  extravasated  blood,  periosteum,  medullary  tissue,
exuded  fluids,  etc.)  has  proved  the  greatest  obstacle  t(
the  true  perception  of  the  real  state  of  things,  and  thst
all  have  really  had  right  upon  their  side,  inasmuch  as
new  bone  in  fact  builds  itself  up  out  of  the  most  differ-
ent materials.  Unquestionably,  when  the  case  rui*s  a
very  favourable  course,  that  path  is  chosen  in  whica  the
new  formation  can  be  most  conveniently  effected  and
it  is  by  far  the  most  convenient  way,  when  the  peri-
osteum produces  a  very  large  portion  of  the  whole.
This  takes  place  in  the  following  manner  :  tie  perios-
teum grows  dense  towards  the  edges  of  th^  fracture,
and  there  gradually  swells  up,  the  swelling  being  of
such  a  nature,  that  separate  layers  or  strata  can  after-
wards pretty  clearly  be  distinguished  ii  it.  These
continually  become  thicker  and  more  nunerous,  in  con-
sequence of  the  constant  proliferation  o4  the  innermost
parts  of  the  periosteum — and  of  th3  formation,  by
means  of  a  multiplication  of  their  ceHular  elements,  of
new  layers,  which  accumulate  between  the  bone  and  the
relatively  still  normal  parts  of  the  periosteum.  These
layers  may  become  cartilage,  but  it  is  not  necessary,
nor  yet  the  rule.  For  we  find  that,  in  the  greater  num-
ber of  favourable  cases  of  fracture,  where  cartilage  is
produced,  not  the  whole  mass  of  the  periosteal  callus
is  produced  from  cartilage,  but  a  greater  or  less  portion
of  it  is  alwaj^s  formed  out  of  connective  tissue.  The
layers  of  cartilage  generally  lie  next  to  the  bone,  whilst
the  farther  we  proceed  outwards,  the  h?s  does  the  for-
mation out  of  cartilage,  and  the  m(ve  a  direct  transfor-
mation of  connective  tissue,  prev*d.

The  formation  of  bone  i&  however,  by  no  means
restricted  to  the  limits  o?  the  periosteum — very  com-
monly it  extend*  beyond  them  in  an  outward  direction,

4S4

LECTURE  XIX.

and  often  penetrates,  in  the  form  of  spicula,  nodules,
and  protuberances,  to  a  very  considerable  depth  into
'"he  neighbouring  soft  parts.  It  is  self-evident  that  in
taese  cases  we  have  by  no  means  to  deal  with  any  proli-
feration of  the  periosteum  in  any  outward  direction,  but
tha\  an  ossifiable  tissue  arises  out  of  the  interstitial  con-
nective tissue  of  the  neighbouring  parts.  Of  this  it  is
very  \asy  to  convince  oneself,  because  osseous  spicula
are  fo\md  shooting  up  in  the  interstitial  tissue  of  the
neighbouring  muscles.  In  the  preparation  from  the
fracture^  ribs  places  are  still  to  be  found  in  the  external

parts,  where  fat  has  been 'included
in  the  ossification.  It  cannot  be  said
therefore  that  the  formation  of  callus
around  fractured  parts  is  altogether
a  periosteal  formation  ;  in  all  cases
where  it  takes  place  with  a  certain
abundance,  it  transgresses  the  limits
of  the  periosteum,  and  invades  the
connective  tissue  of  the  surrounding
soft  parts.

There  is  a  second  kind  of  callus-
formation  completely  different  to
this  —  that  namely,  which  takes
place  in  the  midst  of  the  bone  from
the  medullary  tissue.
At  the moment  when  the  bone  in  a  case  of  fracture

Fig.  135.  Transverse  fracture  of  the  humerus  with  formation  of  callus,  about
fourteen  days  old.  On  tho  outside  is  seen  the  porous  capsule  of  the  callus  pro-
duced from  the  periosteum  a*4  soft  parts,  the  innermost  layer  on  the  right  side
being  still  cartilaginous.  On  th*.  left  lies  detached  a  fragment  shivered  off  from
the  cortex  of  the  bone.  The  two  fractured  ends  are  connected  by  a  (dark-red)
fibrinous  layer  of  hemorrhagic  origin,  tne  medulla  on  both  sides  is  very  dark
(owing  to  hyperemia  and  extravasation ;,m  tne  iower  fragment  several  porous
islands  of  callus  are  seen  which  have  been  xoducec  by  the  ossification  of  the
medulla.

FORMATION  OF  CALLUS  AFTER  FRACTURE. 485

is  shivered,  a  number  of  little  medullary  spaces  are
naturally  opened.  In  the  neighbourhood  of  these,  the
still  closed  medullary  spaces  are  seen  nearly  invariably,
when  matters  follow  a  regular  course,  to  become  filled
with  callus,  new  lamellae  of  bone  attaching  themselves  to
the  internal  surface  of  the  osseus  trabecule  which  bound
the  spaces,  just  as  in  the  ordinary  growth  of  bone  in
thickness,  the  originally  pumicestone-like  layers  become
compact  by  the  deposition  of  concentric  lamellae.  In
this  manner  it  happens,  that  after  some  time  a  larger
or  smaller  new  layer  of  bone  is  found,  filling  up  the  end  of
the  medullary  canal  of  each  fragment,  so  as  to  occasion  its
occlusion.  This  is  a  kind  of  a  new  formation  which  has
nothing  in  common  with  the  former  one,  as  far  as  their
starting  points  are  concerned,  but  has  its  origin  in  quite
another  tissue,  and  is  altogether  different  in  its  palpable
result,  inasmuch  as  it  produces,  within  the  confines  of
its  own  bone,  a  condensation  of  that  portion  of  the  mar-
row which  lies  in  the  immediate  vicinity  of  the  fracture.
Even  in  cases  where  the  ends  of  the  bones  perfectly  co-
incide, an  internal  formation  of  bone  such  as  I  have
described  takes  place  in  the  medullary  canal  of  each
fragment,  producing  its  occlusion.

These  two  kinds  are  the  usual  and  normal  ones.
Around  the  two  fractured  ends  the  swelling  takes  place,
In  the  interior,  the  condensation.  Gradually,  in  pro-
portion as  the  extravasated  blood  is  absorbed — the  new
masses  of  tissue  which  have  been  developed  between
the  broken  ends  draw  nearer  to  one  another,  and  round
about  the  fracture  forms  a  bridge-  or  capsule-like  com-
munication by  means  of  the  ossification  of  the  soft  parts.
There  is  therefore  but  little  reason  to  ask  whether  the
callus  proceeds  from  free  exuded  or  extravasated  mat-
ter. No  doubt  an  extravasation  takes  place  in  the  first
instance  into  the  space  between  the  fractured  ends,  but

486  LECTURE  XIX.

the  extravasated  blood  is  generally  pretty  completely
reabsorbed,  and  it  contributes  comparatively  but  very
little  to  the. real  formation  of  the  subsequent  uniting
media.

We  discussed,  gentlemen,  last  time,  the  chief  points
in  the  history  of  new-formations.  You  remember  that,
according  to  our  ideas,  every  kind  of  new-formation —
inasmuch  as  it  has  its  origin  in  pre-existing  cellular  ele-
ments and  takes  their  place — must  necessarily  be
connected  with  a  change  in  the  given  part  of  the  body.
It  is  no  longer  possible  to  defend  an  hypothesis  such  as
that  which,  based  upon  the  supposed  existence  of  plastic
matters,  was  formerly  maintained,  namely,  that  a  sub-
stance was  deposited  between  and  upon  the  existing
elements  of  the  body,  which  produced  a  new  tissue  out
of  itself  and  thus  represented  a  clear  accession  to  the
body.  If  it  is  true  that  every  new-formation  proceeds
from  definite  elements,  and  that  usually  divisions  of  the
cells  are  the  means  by  which  the  new-formation  is  pro-
duced, it  becomes  of  course  self-evident  that  where  a
new -formation  takes  place,  certain  histological  elements  of
the  body  must  generally  also  cease  to  exist.  Even  a  cell,
which  simply  divides  and  out  of  itself  produces  two  new
cells  like  itself,  thereby  ceases  to  exist,  even  though
the  whole  result  is  only  the  apparent  apposition  of  a
cell.  This  holds  good  for  all  kinds  of  new-formations,
both  for  benignant  as  well  as  for  malignant  ones,  and  it
may  therefore  in  a  certain  sense  be  said,  that  every  hind
of  new-formation  is  really  destructive,  and  that  it  destroys
something  of  what  previously  existed.  But  we  are,  as  it
is  well-known,  accustomed  to  judge  of  destruction
according  to  the  more  obvious  effects  produced,  and
when  we  speak  of  destructive  formations,  we  do  not  so
much  mean  those,  in  which  the  result  of  the  new-forma-

HOMOLOGOUS  AND HETEROLOGOUS NEW  FORMATION. 487

tion  is  analogous  to  the  old  one,  as  some  product  or
other  deviating  more  or  less  from  the  original  type  of
the  part.  This  is  the  point  of  view  to  which  I  have
already  (p.  93)  directed  your  attention  when  treating  of
the  classification  of  pathological  new-formations.  By  it
is  a  reason,  sensible  and  in  correspondence  with  the  facts,
afforded  for  the  separation  of  all  new-formations  into
homologous  and  heterologous  ones.

Heterologous  we  may  call  not  only  malignant,  degene-
rative neoplasms,  but  we  must  also  thus  designate  every
tissue  which  deviates  from  the  recognized  type  of  the
part,  whilst  we  should  call  all  that  homologous,  which,
although  new-formed,  still  reproduces  the  type  of  its
parent  soil.  We  find,  for  example,  that  the  so  ex-
tremely common  form  of  uterine  tumour,  which  has
been  designated  fibrous  or  fibroid,  has  in  every  respect
the  same  structure  that  the  walls  of  the  "  hypertro-
phic d  "  uterus  have,  inasmuch  as  it  consists  not  only  of
fibrous  connective  tissue  and  vessels,  but  also  of  muscu-
lar fibre- cells.  The  tumour  may,  as  it  is  well-known,
become  so  large,  as  not  only  to  embarrass  the  uterus
in  all  its  functions  in  an  extreme  degree,  but  also  to
exercise  through  pressure  the  most  injurious  influence
upon  the  neighbouring  parts.  In  spite  of  this,  it  must
always  be  considered  an  homologous  structure.  On  the
other  hand  we  cannot  help  employing  the  term  hetero-
logous formation,  as  soon  as,  by  means  of  a  prooess
which  at  first  seems  to  represent  a  simple  multiplication
of  the  parts,  a  result  is  obtained  which  is  essentially
different  from  the  original  condition  of  the  spot.  A
catarrh  for  example  in  its  simple  form  may  be  attended
by  a  multiplication  of  the  cellular  elements  on  the  sur-
face of  the  mucous  membrane,  without  the  new  cells'
being  essentially  different  from  the  pre-existing  ones.
Thus  I  brought  along  with  me  for  you  last  time  a  vagina

488  LECTURE XIX.

with  very  marked  leucorrhcea.  You  saw  there  no
doubt  that  the  cells  in  leucorrhcea  very  closely  resemble
those  of  epithelium  of  the  part,  although  they  no  longer
entirely  retain  the  typical  form  of  pavement  epithelium.
The  less,  however,  they  approach  in  their  development
the  typical  forms  of  the  epithelium  of  the  part,  the  more
incapable  do  they  become  of  performing  their  functions.
They  are  moveable  upon  a  surface,  to  which  they  ought
properly  to  adhere,  they  flow  down*  and  produce  re-
sults which  are  incompatible  with  the  integrity  of  the
parts.

In  the  narrower  sense  of  the  word  heterologous  new-
formations  are  no  doubt  alone  destructive.  The  homo-
logous ones  may  accidentally  bee  ome  very  injurious,  but
still  they  do  not  possess  what  can  properly  be  called  a
destructive  (in  the  unscientific  and  traditional  sense  of
the  word),  or  malignant  character.  On  the  other  hand
every  kind  of  heterologous  formation,  whenever  it  has
not  its  seat  in  the  entirely  superficial  parts,  has  a  certain
degree  of  malignity  clinging  to  it.  And  even  superficial
affections,  though  entirely  confined  to  the  most  external
layers  of  epithelium,  may  gradually  exercise  a  very
prejudicial  influence.  Let  us  only  reflect  what  happens
when  a  large  surface  of  mucous  membrane  continually
secretes,  and  heterologous  products  are  constantly  engen-
dered upon  it  which  do  not  become  persistent  epithelium,
but  continually  keep  flowing  down  from  the  surface  of
the  mucous  membrane.  In  such  a  case,  in  addition  to
the  blennorrhcea  (and  its  consequences,  anaemia,  neural-
gia, etc.),  we  find  erosions.

It  seems  to  me  important  that  I  should  bring  before
you  a  definite  example  of  the  mode  in  which  destruction
in  its  more  obvious  forms  is  effected,  in  order  that  you

*  Karappeu  (catarrh!

LUXURIATION.  489

may  see  how  it  leads  to  ulceration  and  to  the  formation
of  cavities  in  the  interior  of  parts.  It  does  indeed
appear  like  a  contradiction  to  say  that  a  process,  which
produces  new  elements,  destroys,  but  this  contradiction
nevertheless  is  merely  a  seeming  one.  If  you  imagine  in
a  part,  which  had  previously  been  firm,  a  new-formation
to  arise  of  which  the  individual  constituents  are  loose
and  easily  moveable  one  upon  the  other,  the  process
will  of  course  always  be  attended  by  a  very  important
change  in  the  usefulness  of  the  part.  The  simple  con-
version of  bone  into  medullary  tissue  (pp.  452,  453)
may  become  the  cause  of  great  fragility  in  the  bones,
and  osteomalacia  [mollities  ossium]  essentially  depends
upon  nothing  else  than  the  conversion  of  compact  osse-
ous substance  into  medullary  tissue.  An  excessive
formation  of  medullary  spaces  gradually  advances  from
the  interior  of  the  bone  towards  the  surface,  deprives
the  bone  of  its  firmness,  gives  rise  to  a  tissue  in  itself
quite  normal,  but  of  no  service  in  maintaining  the
necessary  firmness  of  the  parts,  and  thus  in  some  sort
inevitably  leads  to  a  loss  of  cohesion.  Marrow  is  an
extraordinarily  soft  tissue,  which  in  those  conditions,
where  it  is  red  and  rich  in  cell,  or  atrophied  and  gela-
tinous, becomes  nearly  fluid.  From  marrow  to  perfectly
fluid  tissues  is  only  a  short  step,  and  the  boundaries
separating  marrow  and  pus  cannot  in  many  places  be
assigned  with  any  degree  of  certainty.  Pus  is  in  our
eyes  a  young  tissue,  in  which,  amidst  the  rapid  develop-
ment of  cells,  all  solid  intercellular  substance  is  gra-
dually dissolved.  A  single  connective-tissue  cell  may  in
an  extremely  short  space  of  time  produce  some  dozens
of  pus-cells,  for  the  development  of  pus  follows  an  ex-
tremely hurried  course.  But  the  result  is  of  no  service.
to  the  body,  proliferation  becomes  luxuriation.  Suppura-
tion is  a  pure  process  of  luxuriation,  by  means  of  which

, ,  <X<~

/(•»  *

CA^iX^.  -\,(  toU^  I  A^Vv^/f '

*

490

^  -WW

LECTURE  XIX.

:

I

+a

FiG.  136.

superfluous  parts  are  produced,  which  do  not  acquire
that  degree  of  consolidation,  or  permanent  connection
with  one  another  and  with  the  neighbouring  parts,  which
is  necessary  for  the  existence  of  the  body.

If  now  in  the  next  place  we  investigate  the  history  of
suppuration,  we  immediately  discover  that  we  must  dis-
tinguish two  different  modes  of  pus-formation,  according
namely  as  the  pus  proceeds  from  tissues  of  the  first  two
kinds  mentioned  in  our  classification  (p.  55),
i.  e.,  from  epithelium  or  from  connective
tissue.  Whether  there  are  also  forms  of
suppuration  proceeding  from  a  tissue  of  the
third  class,  from  muscles,  nerves,  vessels,
etc.,  is  at  least  doubtful,  because  of  course
the  elements  of  connective  tissue  which
enter  into  the  composition  of  the  larger
vessels,  the  muscles  and  the  nerves,  must
be  eliminated  from  the  really  muscular,  ner-
vous and  vascular  (capillary)  elements.  With  this  reser-
vation we  can  for  the  present  only  maintain  the  possibil-
ity of  two  modes  of  pus-formation.

As  long  as  the  pus  is  formed  out  of  epithelium,  it  is  '
naturally  produced  without  any  considerable  loss  of  sub-
stance and  without  ulceration.  But  this  is  in  every
instance  the  case,  where  pus  is  produced  in  connective
tissue.  The  real  state  of  the  matter  therefore  is  exactly
the  reverse  of  what  it  was  previously  imagined  to  be,
when  a  solvent  property  was  ascribed  to  pus.  Pus  is  not
the  dissolving,  but  the  dissolved,  i.  e.,  the  transformed,  tissue.
A  part  becomes  soft,  and  liquefies  whilst  suppurating,
but  it  is  not  the  pus  which  occasions  this  softening,  on

Fig.  136.  Interstitial  purulent  inflammation  of  muscle  in  a  puerperal  woman.
»i,  m-  Primitive  muscular  fibres,  i,  i.  Development  of  pus-corpuscles  by  means  of
the  proliferation  of  the  corpuscles  of  the  interstitial  connective  tissue.  280  dia-
meters.

\f^**

Lr^tU"£-> J

EPITHELIAL SUPPURATION.  49 1

the  contrary,  it  is  the  pus  which  is  produced  as  the  result
of  the  proliferation  of  the  tissue.

The  development  of  pus  we  daily  see  upon  different
surfaces,  both  on  the  skin,  and  on  mucous  and  serous
membranes.  We  can  observe  its  development  most
surely  where  stratified  epithelium  naturally  exists.  If
you  follow  the  development  of  pus  upon  the  skin,  when
the  process  is  unaccompanied  by  ulceration,  you  will
constantly  see  that  the  suppuration  proceeds  from  the
rete  Malpighii.  It  consists  in  a  growth  and  develop-
ment of  new  cells  in  this  part  of  the  cuticle.  In  pro-
portion as  these  cells  proliferate,  a  separation  of  the
harder  layers  of  the  epidermis  ensues,  and  they  are  lifted
up  in  the  form  of  a  vesicle  or  pustule.  The  place  where
the  suppuration  chiefly  occurs  corresponds  to  the  super-
ficial layers  of  the  rete,  which  are  already  in  process
of  conversion  into  epithelium  ;  if  the  membrane  of  the
vesicle  be  stripped  off,  these  (layers)  usually  adhere  to
the  epidermis  and  are  stripped  off  with  it.  In  the
deeper  layers  we  may  watch  how  the  cellular  elements,
which  originally  have  only  a  single  nuclei,  divide,  how
the  nuclei  become  more  abundant,  and  single  cells  have
their  places  taken  by  several,  which  in  their  turn  again
provide  themselves  with  dividing  nuclei.  Here  too
people  have  generally  helped  themselves  out  of  the
difficulty  by  assuming  that  in  the  first  instance  an  exu-
dation was  poured  out,  which  produced  the  pus  in  itself,
and  this  is  the  reason  why,  as  you  well  know,  most
investigators  into  the  development  of  pus  especially  se-
lected fluids  which  were  secreted  from  injured  surfaces.
It  was  very  conceivable  that,  as  long  as  no  doubts  were
entertained  with  regard  to  the  discontinuous  formation
of  cells,  the  young  cells  should  without  more  ado  be
looked  upon  as  independent  new -formations,  and  that
the  notion  should  be  entertained  that  germs  arose  in  the

492  LECTURE  XIX.

exuded  fluids,  and  gradually  becoming  more  numerous,
supplied  the  pus.  But  the  matter  is  on  this  wise,  that,
the  longer  the  suppuration  lasts,  the  more  certainly  is
one  series  of  cells  after  the  other  in  the  rete  involved
in  the  process  of  proliferation,  and  that,  whilst  the
vesicle  is  rising  up,  the  quantity  of  the  cells  which  grow
into  its  cavity  is  constantly  becoming  greater.  When
a  variolous  pustule  forms,  there  is  at  first  only  a  drop
of  clear  fluid  present,  but  nothing  arises  in  it  ;  it  only
loosens  the  neighbouring  parts  of  the  rete  Malpighii.

Precisely  the  same  is  the  case  with  mucous  membranes.
There  is  not  a  single  mucous  membrane  which  may  not
under  certain  circumstances  furnish  puriform  elements.
But  here  too  a  certain  difference  always  presents  itself.
A  mucous  membrane  is  all  the  more  in  a  condition  to
produce  pus  without  ulceration,  the  more  completely  the
epithelium  it  possesses  is  stratified.  All  mucous  mem-
branes with  a  single  layer  of  cylindrical  epithelium  (intes-
tines),* are  much  less  adapted  for  the  production  of  pus  ;
that  which  is  produced  on  them,  even  though  it  have
quite  the  appearance  of  pus,  frequently  turns  out  upon
close  examination  to  be  only  epithelium.  The  intestinal
mucous  membrane,  especially  that  of  the  small  intestine,
scarcely  ever  produces  pus  without  ulceration.  The
mucous  membrane  of  the  uterus,  and  of  the  fallopian
tubes,  though  it  is  frequently  covered  with  a  thick  mass
of  quite  a  puriform  appearance,  almost  always  secretes  f

*  In  the  air  passages  (nose,  larynx,  trachea,  bronchi)  we  commonly  find  several
layers  of  cylindrical  epithelium  lying  one  above  the  other. — From  a  MS.  Note  by  the
Author.

f  Secrete  in  this  and  similar  places  does  not  of  course  mean  to  separate  from  the
blood,  but  from  the  tissue  itself,  whose  elements  (cells)  are  separated  (detached)  at
the  surface,  and,  when  mixed  with  the  serous  effusion  from  the  blood,  removed.
The  detachment  of  the  cells  is  effected  sometimes  by  means  of  the  fluid  which  trans-
udes from  the  blood,  sometimes  by  the  continual  growth  of  a  succession  of  new  cells
beneath  them,  and  sometimes  in  consequence  of  their  own  round  form.  In  desqua-
mation of  the  cuticle  the  second  of  these  methods,  in  several  forms  of  catarrh  the

RELATION  OF  PUS  AND MUCUS  TO EPITHELIUM.  493

epithelial  cells  only,  whilst  on  the  other  mucous  mem-
branes, as  for  example  on  that  of  the  urethra,  we  see
enormous  quantities  of  pus  secreted,  as  in  gonorrhoea
(Fig.  63)  without  even  the  slightest  ulceration  being  pre-
sent on  the  surface.  This  depends  essentially  upon  the
presence  of  several  strata  of  cells,  the  upper  forming  a
kind  of  protection  to  the  deeper  ones,  of  which  the  pro-
liferation is  thus  for  a  time  secured.  The  pus  is  at  last
either  borne  away  by  the  production  of  new  masses  of
pus  beneath  it,  or  there  occurs  simultaneously  a  transuda-
tion of  fluid,  which  removes  the  pus-cells  from  the  surface,
just  as  in  the  secretion  of  semen  the  epithelial  elements
of  the  seminal  tubules  furnish  the  spermatozoa,  and  in
addition  a  fluid  transudes  which  sweeps  them  away.  But
the  spermatozoa  do  not  arise  in  the  fluid — this  is  only  the
vehicle  for  their  onward  movement.  In  this  manner  we
frequently  see  fluid  exude  on  the  surface  of  the  body,
without  our  being  able  to  regard  it  as  a  6'ytoblastema.
If  a  proliferation  of  epithelium  simultaneously  takes  place
upon  the  surface,  the  elements  detached  by  the  transuded
fluid  will  also  be  found  to  consist  of  nothing  but  prolife-
rating epithelium.

If  now  pus-,  mucus-  and  epithelial  cells  be  compared  with
one  another,  it  appears  that  there  certainly  does  exist  a  se-
ries of  transitional  forms,  or  intermediate  stages,  between
pus-corpuscles  and  the  ordinary  epithelial  structures.
By  the  side  of  perfectly  formed  pus-corpuscles,  provided
with  several  nuclei,  are  very  commonly  found  somewhat
larger,  round,  granular  cells  with  single  nuclei,  the  so-
called  mucus-corpuscles  (Fig.  11  B)  ;  a  little  further  on
we  see  perhaps  still  larger  cells  of  a  typical  form  and  with
single,  large  nuclei,  and  these  we  call  epithelial  cells.
But  the  epithelial  cells  are  flat,  angular,  or  cylindrical,

third,  on  many  serous  membranes,  the  first,  is  the  one  pursued. Any  two,  or  all
three  of  them,  however,  may  of  course  coincide. — From  a  MS.  Note  by  the  Author.

494  LECTURE  XIX.

whilst  mucus-  and  pus-corpuscles  under  all  circumstances
remain  round.  Even  from  this  circumstance  may  be
derived  an  explanation  of  the  fact  that,  whilst  the  epithe-
lial cells,  which  cover,  and  are  in  close  apposition  to,  one
another,  acquire  a  certain  firmness  of  cohesion,  mucus-
and  pus-corpuscles  which  lie  but  loosely  one  against  the
other,  and  are  of  a  spherical  shape,  retain  a  great  degree
of  mobility  and  are  easily  displaced.

It  has  been  said  before  now  that  mucus-corpuscles  are
nothing  more  than  young  epithelium  ;  another  step  and
pus-corpuscles  would-be  nothing  more  than  young  mucus-
corpuscles.  This  is  a  somewhat  erroneous  notion.  It
cannot  be  maintained  that  a  cell,  which  up  to  the  point
when  it  becomes  a  so-called  mucus  corpuscle  has  pre-
served its  form  as  a  spherical  body,  is  still  in  a  condition
to  assume  the  typical  form  of  the  epithelium,  which  ought
to  exist  in  the  part ;  and  just  as  little  can  it  be  said  that
a  pus-corpuscle,  after  it  has  developed  itself  in  the  regu-
lar manner,  is  capable  of  again  entering  upon  a  course  of
development  calculated  to  produce  a  relatively  perma-
nent element  of  the  body.  The  cells,  in  which  the  deve-
lopment of  epithelial,  mucus-,  and  pus-cells  originates,
are  young  forms,  but  they  are  not  pus-corpuscles.  In
pus  every  new  cell  at  a  very  early  period  sets  about
dividing  its  nucleus  ;  after  a  short  time  the  division  of
the  nucleus  reaches  a  high  pitch,  without  any  further
growth  on  the  part  of  the  cell.  In  mucus  the  cells  are
wont  merely  to  grow,  and  in  some  instances  to  become
very  large,  but  they  do  not  pass  certain  limits,  and  above
all  they  do  not  assume  any  typical  form.  In  epithelium,
on  the  contrary,  the  elements  begin  even  at  a  very  early
period,  to  assume  their  particular  form,  for  "  what  is  to
become  a  hook,  right  early  gets  a  crook."  The  very
youngest  elements  however,  which  are  found  in  patholo-
gical conditions,  cannot  be called  epithelial  cells,  or  at

SUPPURATION  IN CONNECTIVE  TISSUE.  495

least  they  have  as  yet  nothing  typical  about  them,  but
are  indifferent  formative  cells,  which  might  also  become
mucus-  or  pus-corpuscles.  Pus-,  mucus-  and  epithelial
cells  are  therefore  pathologically  equivalent  parts  which
may  indeed  replace  one  another,  but  cannot  perform
each  other's  functions.

Even  from  this  it  follows  that  the  distinction  which  it
has  been  sought  to  establish  between  mucus-  and  pus-
corpuscles,  and  for  the  discovery  of  which  prizes  were
proposed  in  the  last  century,  really  could  not  be  found
out,  and  that  the  "  tests  "  could  never  be  otherwise  than
insufficient,  inasmuch  as  the  cells  developed  upon  mucous
membranes  do  not  always  possess  a  purely  purulent,
purely  mucous,  or  purely  epithelial  character,  but  on  the
contrary  in  a  great  majority  of  cases  a  mixed  condition
exists.  Nearly  always,  when  a  catarrhal  process  deve-
lopes  itself  upon  a  large  mucous  surface,  as,  for  example,
in  the  urinary  passages,  quantities  of  puriform  matter  are
produced,  but  its  production  is  confined  within  certain
limits,  beyond  which  only  mucus  is  secreted,  and  the
secretion  of  mucus  also  at  some  point  changes  into  a
formation  of  epithelium.  This  mode  of  suppuration  must
of  course  always  have  for  its  result,  that,  in  places  where
it  reaches  a  certain  height,  the  natural  coverings  of  the
surface  do  not  attain  their  full  development,  or  that,
where  they  possess  a  certain  degree  of  solubility,  they
are  removed  and  destroyed.  A  pustule  on  the  skin
destroys  the  epidermis,  and  so  far  we  may  assign  a
degenerative  character  to  these  forms  of  suppuration
also.

But  degeneration  in  the  usual  sense  of  the  word,  only
occurs  when  deeper  parts  are  attacked.  This  more  deeply
seated  pus-formation  regularly  takes  place  in  the  connec-
tive tissue.  In  it  there  first  occurs  an  enlargement  of  the
cells  (connective-tissue  corpuscles),  the  nuclei  divide  and

•7 1 1  -w

49G

LECTURE XIX.

Fig.  137.

for  some  time  multiply  excessively.  The  first  stage  is
then  very  soon  followed  by  divisions  of  the  cells  them-
selves. Round  about  the  irritated  parts,  where  before
single  cells  lay,  pairs  or  groups  of  cells  are  subsequently
found,  out  of  which  a  new-formation  of  an  homologous
kind  (connective  tissue)  usually  constructs  itself.  More
in  the  interior  on  the  contrary,  where  the  cells  were
early  abundantly  filled  with  nuclei,  heaps  of  little  cells
soon  appear,  which  at  first
still  preserve  the  direction
and  forms  of  the  previous
connective-tissue  corpus-
cles. Somewhat  later  we
find  here  roundish  collec-
tions, or  diffuse  ' '  infiltra-
tions," in  which  the  inter-
mediate tissue  is  extremely
scanty  and  continually  liquefies  *  more  and  more,  in  pro-
liferation of  the  cells  extends.

If  this  process  takes  place  beneath  a  surface  which
does  not  participate  in  the  morbid  change,  the  layers  of
epithelium  are  sometimes  seen,  still  perfectly  coherent,  to
run  over  the  irritated  and  somewhat  swollen  part.  The
outermost  layer  of  the  intercellular  substance  is  also  often
long  preserved,  whilst  all  the  deeper  parts  of  the  connec-
tive tissue  are  already  filled  with  pus-corpuscles,  are
"  infiltrated,"  or  "absceded"f  (abscedirt). At  last  the

Fig.  13*7.  Purulent  granulation  from  the  subcutaneous  tissue  of  a  rabbit,  round
about  a  ligature,  a.  Connective-tissue  corpuscles,  b.  Enlargement  of  the  corpus-
cles with  division  of  the  nuclei,  c.  Division  of  the  cells  (granulation),  d,  Develop-
ment of  the  pus-corpuscles. 300  diameters.

*  This  liquefaction  (and  the  same  is  true  of  the  liquefaction  we  have  described  as
occurring  in  bone,  p.  465)  is  a  purely  chemical  process;  the  collagenous  (gelatine-
yielding)  substance  is  first  transformed  into  mucus,  and  then,  becoming  converted
into  an  albuminous  fluid,  liquefies. — From  a  MS.  Note  by  the  Author.

f  I.e..  converted  into  an  abscess. — Transl.

GRANULATION,  ULCERATION.  497

surface  gives  way,  or  without  giving  way  is  directly
transformed  into  a  soft,  diffluent  mass.  This  mode  of
suppuration  gradually  yields  the  so-called  granulations
which  always  consist  of  a  tissue,  where,  in  a  small  quan-
tity of  soft  intercellular  substance,  more  or  less  numerous,
and,  at  least  in  the  strictly  proliferating  stage  of  the
granulations,  round,  cellular  elements  are  imbedded.
The  nearer  we  come  to  the  surface,  the  more .  do  the
cells,  which  in  the  deeper  parts  were  mostly  uni-nuclea-
ted,  present  divisions  in  their  nuclei,  and  on  the  extreme
confines  they  can  no  longer  be  distinguished  from  pus-
corpuscles.  Then  a  detachment  of  the  epithelium  is
wont  to  take  place,  and  finally  it  may  be  that  the  basis-
substance  liquefies  and  the  individual  elements  are  set  free.
If  the  proliferation  continues  abundant,  the  mass  keeps
constantly  breaking  up,  the  cells  pour  themselves  out
upon  the  surface,  and  a  destruction  takes  place,  which
makes  deeper  and  deeper  inroads  into  the  tissue,  and
throws  up  more  and  more  of  its  cells  upon  the  surface.
This  is  an  ulcer  properly  so  called.

According  to  the  common  notion,  which  supposed  the
pus  to  be  derived  from  some  exudation  or  other,  this
kind  of  ulceration  was  not  at  all  easy  of  comprehension  ;
people  always  found  themselves  obliged  to  assume  a
special  kind  of  transformation  in  the  tissue  in  addition  to
the  suppuration,  and  at  last  they  went  so  far  as  to  attri-
bute a  certain  chemical  solvent  power  to  pus.  But  by
surgical  experiments  the  conviction  has  long  since  been
acquired  in  the  most  manifold  ways  that  pus  has  no  sol-
vent power.  Bones  have  been  placed  in  cavities  full  of
pus  and  left  there  for  weeks,  and  when  they  were  after-
wards weighed,  they  had  if  anything  become  heavier,
through  the  absorption  of  fluid  matters,  but  no  softening
had  been  produced  excepting  that  occasioned  by  decom-
position. How  far  the  tissue  is  destroyed  by  real  solu-

32

1 Vt^L

498  LECTURE XIX.

tion,  chiefly  depends  upon  whether  the  basis-substance
which  surrounds  the  young  cells,  becomes  completely
fluid.  If  it  retains  a  certain  degree  of  consistence,  the
process  is  confined  to  the  production  of  granulations,  and
these  may  just  as  well  proceed  from  a  surface  whose
continuity  is  perfect,  as  from  one  where  there  is  a  breach
of  it.  In  surgery  it  is  generally  assumed  that  granula-
tions form  upon  the  walls  of  the  breach  occasioned  by  a
loss  of  substance,  but  in  every  case  they  arise  directly
out  of  the  tissue.  They  are  found  directly  seated  upon
bone  without  any  loss  of  substance  in  it  having  preceded
them.  They  are  found  also  in  direct  contact  with  the
cutis  under  the  intact  epidermis,  and  with  mucous  mem*
branes.  Only  in  proportion  as  they  become  developed,
do  the  mucous  membranes  lose  their  normal  character.

Every  development  of  the  kind  gives  rise,  as  it  pro-
ceeds, to  separate  masses  (foci — Heerde)  of  new  tissue,
just  in  the  same  way  indeed  that  growing  cartilage
produces,  in  the  immediate  vicinity  of  the  margin  of
ossification,  those  large  groups  of  cells  (Fig.  124),  each
of  which  corresponds  to  a  single  pre-existing  cartilage-
cell.  We  have  in  fact  to  do  with  a  process  which  finds
its  counterpart  in  the  ordinary  phenomena  of  growth.
As  a  cartilage,  when  it  does  not  calcify,  as  for  example,
in  rickets,  at  last  becomes  so  moveable  that  it  can  no
longer  perform  its  functions  as  a  supporting  structure,
so  we  see  everywhere  that  the  firmness  of  a  tissue  gra-
dually disappears  through  the  development  of  granula-
tions, and  during  suppuration.  However  different  there-
fore these  processes  of  destruction  apparently  are  from  the
processes  of  growth,  at  a  certain  point  nevertheless
they  entirely  coincide.  There  is  a  stage,  when  it  is  im-
possible to  decide  with  certainty,  whether  we  have  in  a
part  to  deal  with  simple  processes  of  growth,  or  with  the
development  of  a  heteroplastic,  destructive  form.

DURATION OF  LIFE OF INDIVIDUAL ELEMENTS.

499

This  mode  of  development,  which  I  have  just  de-
scribed to  you,  is  not,  however,  in  any  way  peculiar  to
pus  alone,  but  characterizes  every  heteroplastic  forma-
tion ;  the  first  changes  which  we  have  shown  to  take
place  are  found  occurring  in  exactly  the  same  manner  in
heteroplasms  of  every  sort  up  to  the  most  extreme  and
malignant  forms.  The  first  development  of  cancer,  of
cancroid  and of  sarcoma  exhibits  the  same  stages  ;  if

the  course  of  their  deve-
lopment be  traced  suffi-
ciently far  back,  we  at  last
always  come  across  a  stage,
in  which,  in  the  younger
and  deeper  layers,  indif-
ferent cells  are  met  with,
which  do  not  until  a  later
period,  according  to  the
particular  nature  of  the
irritation  to  which  they  are  exposed,  assume  the  one  or
the  other  type.  We  may  therefore,  taking  new-forma-
tions in  general,  consider  the  history  of  the  greater
number,  and  especially  of  those  which  principally  con-
sist of  cells,  from  an  entirely  similar  point  of  view.
The  form  of  ulceration  which  is  presented  by  cancer  in
its  latest  stages,  bears  so  great  a  resemblance  to  its  sup-
purative ulceration,  that  the  two  things  have  long  since
been  compared,  and quite  in  the  olden  time  a  parallel

Fig.  138.  Development  of  cancer  from  connective-tissue  in  carcinoma  of  the
breast,  a.  Connective-tissue  corpuscles,  6,  division  of  the  nuclei,  c,  division  of  the
cells,  c?,  accumulation  of  the  cells  in  rows,  e,  enlargement  of  the  young  cells  and
formation  of  the  groups  of  cells*  (foci— Zellenheerde)  which  fill  the  alveoli  of  can-
cer,/,  further  enlargement  of  the  cells  and  the  groups,  g.  The  same  developmental
process  seen  in  transverse  section. 300  diameters.

*  When  these  groups  of  cells  fall  out,  the  alveoli  (loculi)  of  cancer  appear,  the
relation  of  the  group  to  the  alveolus  being  the  same  as  that  of  the  bone-cell  to  the
lacuna. — From  a  MS.  Note  by  the  Author.

500  LECTURE  XIX.

was  drawn  between  the  eroding  form  of  suppuration,  or
chancre,  and  the  "suppuration'7  or  sanious  ulceration*
(Yerjauchung)  of  cancer.

But  there  are  essential  differences  between  the  indi-
vidual species  of  new-formations  in  consequence  of  their
elements'  attaining  to  very  different  degrees  of  develop-
ment, or  to  express  myself  otherwise,  in  consequence
of  the  length  of  time  their  elements  are  calculated  to
last — the  average  duration  of  the  life  of  the  individual
elements — being  extremely  different.  We  know,  that  if
we  examine  a  spot  a  month  after  suppuration  has  taken
place  in  it,  although  the  pus  is  apparently  still  present,
we  can  no  longer  rely  upon  finding  unaltered  pus
in  the  collection.  Pus  which  has  lain  anywhere  for
weeks  and  months  is,  strictly  speaking,  no  longer  pus,
but  disintegrated  matter,  debris,  dissolving  particles  of
pus,  which  have  become  altered  by  fatty  degeneration,
putrefying  processes,  calcareous  deposits  and  the  like.
On  the  contrary  we  find  that  a  cancerous  tumour  may
last  for  months,  yet  still  contain  the  whole  of  its  ele-
ments intact.  We  can  therefore  positively  affirm,  that
a  cancer-cell  is  capable  of  existing  longer  than  a  pus-
corpuscle,  just  as  we  know  that  the  thyroid  body  exists
longer  than  the  thymus  gland,  and  that  certain  organs,
for  example  individual  parts  of  the  sexual  organs,  early
perish  in  the  course  of  ordinary  life,  whilst  others  retain
their  existence  throughout  the  whole  of  life.  So  it  is
also  with  pathological  new-formations.  At  a  time  when
certain  forms  have  long  since  entered  upon  their  course
of  retrogressive  metamorphosis,  others are  just  begin-

*  Jauche  (sanies)  always  conveys  the  idea  of  decomposition.  We  call  Mist
jauche  the  fluid  obtained  by  the  maceration  of  manure.  Verjauchung  is  the  pro-
cess during  which  the  substances  are  decomposed  which  subsequently  furnish  the
Jauche.  The  French  putrilage  is  nearly  equivalent  to  Jauche  in  its  pathological
acceptation,  only  the  latter  is  rather  thinner  and  more  liquid. — From  a  MIS.  Note
by  the  Author

COMPOUND  NATURE OF  TUMORS.  501

ning  to  attain  their  full  development.  In  the  case  of
many  new-formations,  retrograde  metamorphosis  begins
comparatively  so  early,  nay  constitutes  to  such  a  degree
what  is  ordinarily  met  with,  that  the  best  investigators
have  looked  upon  its  different  stages  as  the  really
characteristic  ones.  In  the  case  of  tubercle,  for  exam-
ple, we  find  that  the  majority  of  all  modern  observers
who  have  made  it  their  professed  study,  have  taken  its
stage  of  retrograde  metamorphosis  for  the  real  tj^pical
one,  and  that  inferences  have  hence  been  drawn  with
regard  to  the  nature  of  the  whole  process,  which  with
equal  right  might  have  been  drawn  with  regard  to  the
different  stages  of  the  retrograde  metamorphosis  of  pus
and  cancer.

We  are  as  yet  able  in  the  case  of  very  few  elements
to  give  in  numbers  with  absolute  certainty  the  average
length  of  their  life.  There  manifestly  exist  variations
similar  to  those  we  meet  with  in  normal  organs.  But
among  all  pathological  new-formations  with  fluid  inter-
cellular substance  there  is  not  a  single  one,  which  is
able  to  preserve  its  existence  for  any  length  of  time,
not  a  single  one,  whose  elements  can  become  permanent
constituents  of  the  body,  or  exist  as  long  as  the  indi-
vidual. This  may  no  doubt  seem  doubtful,  because
many  forms  of  malignant  tumours  subsist  for  many
years,  and  the  individual  retains  them  from  the  time  of
their  development  until  his  death,  which  may  perhaps
occur  at  a  very  advanced  age.  But  the  tumour  as  a
whole  must  be  distinguished  from  its  individual  parts.  In
a  cancerous  tumour  which  lasts  for  many  years,  the
same  elements  do  not  last  the  whole*  time,  but  within
its  limits  there  occurs  a  frequently  very  numerous  suc-
cession of  fresh  formations.  The  first  development  of  a
tumour  takes  place  at  a  definite  point,  but  its  subse-
quent growth  does  not  consist  in the  production  of  a

>v

502  LECTURE XIX.

constant  succession  of  new-formations  from  this  point,
and  in  the  occurrence  there  is  an  intus-susception  (ab-
sorption) of  material,  by  means  of  which  the  existing
parts  enlarge  and  so  the  whole  tumour  grows.  On  the
contrary  around  the  original  focus*  (Heerd),  little  new  foci
are  formed,  which  increasing  in  size,  group  themselves
around  the  first,  and  so  gradually  give  rise  to  a  continually
progressing  enlargement  of  the  existing  tuber.*)*  If  the
tuber  is  seated  on  the  surface,  we  find  on  section  a  semicir-
cular zone  of  the  most  recently  formed  matter,  at  its
periphery  •  if  it  is  in  the  middle  of  an  organ,  the  newly
apposed  foci  form  a  spherical  cortex  around  the  older
centre.  If  we  examine  a  tumour  after  it  has  existed
perhaps  a  year,  it  usually  turns  out  that  the  elements  first
formed  no  longer  exist  in  the  centre.  There  we  find  the
elements  disintegrating,  dissolved  by  fatty  changes.  If
the  tumour  is  seated  on  a  surface,  it  often  presents  in
the  centre  of  its  most  prominent  part  a  navel-shaped
depression,  and  the  portions  immediately  under  this
display  a  dense  cicatrix  which  no  longer  bears  the  ori-
ginal character  of  the  new -formation.  These  retrograde
forms  I  have  described  as  occurring  in  cancer,  especially
in  the  liver,  lungs  and  intestines,  where  they  are  not
unfrequently  met  with,  and  can  readily  be  demon-
strated.

It  is  always  possible  to  convince  oneself,  that,  what  is
called  a  tumour,  constitutes  a  conglomerate  mass1  often
extraordinarily  large,  made  up  of  a  number  of  little  mili-
ary foci  (lobules),  of  which  every  single  one  must  be
referred  to  a  single  or  a  few  parent  elements.  Inas-
much as  the  formations  progress  in this manner,  no

*  Focus  here  signifies  the  first  rudiment  of  a  tumour,  produced  by  the  prolifera-
tion of  a  limited  group  of  cells.  See  note  on  Heerd,  p.  381. — From  a  MS.  Note  by
the  Author.

\  Tuber  =  tuberous  tumour. See  note,  p.  471.

TRANSFERRENCE OF INFECTION.  503

matter  whether  they  consist  of  pus,  tubercle  or  cancer,
new  young  zones  are  being  constantly  added  on  to  the
old  ones,  and  we  may,  it  we  intend  to  trace  the  course
of  development,  calculate  with  great  certainty  upon
always  finding  the  young  parts  at  the  extreme  circum-
ference, the  old  ones  always  in  the  centre.  But  the
zone  produced  at  the  latest  period  of  the  disease  extends  to
a  considerable  distance  beyond  the  zone  of  degeneration
that  can  be  discerned  by  the  naked  eye.  If  we  examine
any  proliferating  tumour  of  a  cellular  character,  we
often  find,  three  to  five  lines  beyond  its  apparent  limits,
the  tissues  already  in  a  state  of  disease,  and  exhibiting
the  first  traces  of  a  new  zone.  This  is  the  chief  source
of  local  recurrence  after  extirpation,  for  it  proceeds
from  the  zone  that  cannot  be  detected  by  the  naked  eye,
beginning  to  grow  in  consequence  of  the  increased  sup-
ply of  nutritive  material  which  results  from  the  removal
of  the  original  tumour.  No  new  deposit  from  the  blood
takes  place  there,  but  the  new-formed  germs,  which
already  lie  in  the  neighbouring  tissue,  run  through  their
further  development  in  the  same  manner  that  it  would
otherwise  have  taken  place,  or  perhaps  even  still  more
quickly.

This  fact  I  regard  as  extremely  important,  because  it
shows  us  that  all  these  formations  have  essentially  a
contagious  character.  As  long  as  it  was  imagined  that
the  mass  once  formed  increased  only  by  the  growth  of
its  constituents,  it  would  of  course  look  as  if  all  one  had
to  do  for  the  purpose  of  getting  rid  of  it  was  merely  to

cut  off  from  the  tumour  all  further  supply  of  material.
But  there  is  manifestly  a  contagious  matter  formed  in
the  tumour  itself,  and  when  the  cells,  which  are  in  its
immediate  neighbourhood  and  are  connected  by  anasto-
moses with  the  diseased  cells,  likewise  enter  upon  the
heterologous  proliferation,  it  is  impossible,  I  think,  to

)

504  LECTURE  XIX.

come  to  any  other  conclusion  in  the  matter,  than  that
the  degeneration  ot  the  neighbouring  parts  arises  in
precisely  the  same  manner  as  that  of  the  nearest  lym-
phatic glands  which  lie  in  the  course  of  the  stream  of
lymph  which  proceeds  from  the  diseased  part.  The
more  anastomoses  the  parts  possess,  the  more  readily  do
they  become  diseased,  and  vice  versa.  In  cartilage  ma-
lignant affections  are  so  rare,  that  it  is  usually  assumed
to  be  altogether  insusceptible  of  them.  Thus  in  a  joint
the  cartilaginous  investment  alone  is  sometimes  found
intact,  whilst  everything  else  has  been  destroyed.  Thus
too  we  see  that  fibrous  parts  which  are  rich  in  elastic
elements,  are  very  little  disposed  to  become  diseased  by
contagion.  On  the  other  hand,  the  softer  a  basis-sub-
stance is  and  the  better  the  conveyance  can  take  place,
the  more  certainly  we  may  expect,  that,  when  occasion
offers,  new  foci  of  disease  will  arise  in  the  part.  I  have
therefore  come  to  the  conclusion — the  only  one  I  think
the  facts  warrant — that  the  infection  is  directly  trans-
ferred by  the  means  of  the  morbid  juices  from  the
original  seat  of  the  disease  to  the  anastomosing  ele-
ments in  the  neighbourhood,  without  the  intervention  of
vessels  and  nerves.  The  nerves  are  indeed  often  the
best  conductors  for  the  propagation  of  contagious  new-
formations,  only  not  as  nerves,  but  as  parts  with  soft  in-
terstitial tissue.

Here  we  have  the  importance  of  the  anastomosing  cel-
lular elements  of  tissues,  and  the  value  of  the  cellular
theory  most  clearly  exhibited,  and,  when  once  we  have
become  acquainted  with  this  mode  of  conduction,  we  are
afterwards  able  with  a  certain  degree  of  probability  to
foresee  in  what  direction,  in  parts  possessing  this  means
of  conveyance,  the  disease  will  extend,  and  where  finally
the  greater  or  less  danger  lies.  It  has  hitherto  been  im-
possible to  prove  whether  the  infection  of  remote  parts

^Lvv^A  ^*  " ''

PARASITISM.

505

is  effected  by  the  conveyance  of  juices,  in  the  same  way
that  the  infection  of  neighbouring  parts  is,  and  especially
whether  the  blood  takes  up  anything  noxious  from  the
diseased  spot  and  conveys  it  to  a  distant  place.  I  must
confess  that  I  am  acquainted  with  no  sufficiently  con-
vincing facts  bearing  upon  the  matter,  and  must  still
allow  it  to  be  possible  that  the  diffusion  by  means  of  ves-
sels may  depend  upon  a  dissemination  of  cells  from  the
tumours  themselves.  There  are,  however,  many  facts,
which  speak  but  little  in  favour  of  the  infection's  taking
place  by  means  of  really  detached  cells,  for  example,  the
circumstance  that  certain  processes  advance  in  a  direc-
tion contrary  to  that  of  the  current  of  lymph,  so  that
after  a  cancer  of  the  breast,  disease  of  the  liver  takes
place  whilst  the  lung  remains  unaffected.  Here  it  seems
pretty  probable  that  juices  are  taken  up,  which  occasion
a  further  propagation  (p.  254).

Allow  me  still  to  add  a  few  words  upon  a  subject  which
can  here  be  dispatched  off  hand,  namely,  the  so-called
parasitism  of  new-formations.

It  is  self-evident,  that  the  view  taken  of  parasitism  by
the  old  writers  who  held  it  to  be  applicable  to  a  large
proportion  of  new-formations,  is  completely  borne  out  by
facts,  and  that  in  reality  every  new-formation  which  con-
tributes to  the  body  no  serviceable  structures,  must  be
regarded  as  a  parasitical  element  in  the  body.  Only  bear
in  mind  that  the  idea  conveyed  by  parasitism  does  not
differ  from  that  conveyed  by  the  autonomy  of  every  part
of  the  body  excepting  in  degree,  and  that  every  single
epithelial  and  muscular  fibre-cell  leads  a  sort  of  parasiti-
cal existence  in  relation  to  the  rest  of  the  body,  just  as
much  as  every  individual  cell  in  a  tree  has  in  relation  to
the  others  a  special  existence,  appertaining  to  itself  alone
and  deprives  the  remaining  cells  of  certain  matters. Pa-
rasitism in  a  narrower  sense  of  the  word,  develops  itself

>v

506

LECTURE  XIX.

out  of  this  idea  of  the  independence  of  individual  parts.
As  long  as  the  requirements  of  the  remaining  parts  de-
mand the  existence  of  a  part,  as  long  as  this  part  is  in
any  way  useful  to  the  other  parts,  so  long  will  it  not  be
termed  a  parasite  ;  but  it  becomes  so  from  the  moment
that  it  becomes  foreign  or  injurious  to  the  body.  The
epithet,  parasitical,  must  therefore  not  be  restricted  to  a
single  class  of  tumours,  but  applies  to  all  heteroplastic
forms,  which  do  not  in  the  course  of  their  further  meta-
morphoses give  rise  to  homologous  products,  but  furnish
neoplasms  which  in  a  greater  or  less  degree  are  alien  to
the  composition  of  the  body.  Every  one  of  their  ele-
ments will  withdraw  matters  from  the  body  which  might
be  used  for  other  purposes,  and  as  it  has  at  the  very  out-
set destroyed  normal  parts  and  even  its  first  develop-
ment presupposes  the  destruction  of  its  parent  structures
it  both  plays  a  destructive  part  at  the  commencement  of
its  career,  and  a  depredatory  one  throughout  its  course.

LECTURE XX.

APRIL  2*7,  1858.
FORM  AND  NATURE  OF  PATHOLOGICAL  NEW-FORMATIONS.

Nomenclature  and  classification  of  pathological  new-formations — Consistence  as  a
principle  of  division-  Comparison  with  individual  parts  of  the  body — Histolo-
gical division — Apparent  heterology  of  tubercle,  colloid,  etc.

Difference  of  form  and  nature  :  Colloid,  Epithelioma,  Papillary  tumour,  Tubercle.

Papillary  tumours  :  simple  (condylomata,  papillomata)  and  specific  (villous  cancer
and  cauliflower-tumour).

Tubercle  :  infiltration  and  granulation — Inflammatory  origin  of  tubercle — Its  origin
from  connective  tissue — Miliary  granules,  and  solitary  masses — The  cheesy
metamorphosis.

Colloid:  myxoma — Collonema — Mucous  or  gelatinous  cancer.

Physiological  types  of  heterologous  new-formations :  lymphoid  nature  of  tubercle,
haematoid  of  pus,  epithelioid  of  cancer,  cancroid,  pearly  and  dermoid  tumours,
and  connective-tissue-like  of  sarcoma — Infectiousness  according  to  the  amount
of  juice.

Comparison  between  pathological  new-formations  in  animals  and  vegetables — Con-
clusion.

If,  gentlemen,  we  prosecute  the  train  of  thought  which
we  have  pursued  in  the  last  lectures,  it  seems  to  me  that
the  question  which  you  will  perhaps  next  ask  me,  is,  at
what  point  the  differentiation  of  new-formations  really
begins.  You  will  remember  that,  according  to  our  views
the  great  majority  of  new-formations  have  their  origin  in
connective  tissue  or  parts  equivalent  to  connective  tissue,
and  that  the  first  rudiments  of  all  new-formations  are
nearly  of  the  same  nature,  and  that  in  particular  the
division  of  the  nuclei,  their  multiplication,  and  the  final

507

508  LECTURE XX.

division  of  the  cells  show  themselves  in  nearly  all  new-
formations,  in  the  benignant  as  well  as  in  the  malignant,
in  the  hyperplastic  as  well  as  in  the  heteroplastic  ones,
in  the  self-same  manner.  Unquestionably,  however,  this
similarity  of  nature  is  transitory  ;  it  is  not  long  before
some  one  characteristic  feature  displays  itself  in  each  in-
dividual structure,  whereby  we  are  enabled  distinctly  to
recognize  its  nature.

With  regard  to  this  question  of  the  criteria  of  new-
formations,  no  agreement  in  opinion  has  indeed  even  at
the  present  moment  been  come  to,  and  here  too  there-
fore it  is  incumbent  upon  me  now  to  show  how  I  have
arrived  at  my  views,  which  in  many  respects  so  widely
differ  from  those  generally  held,  and  for  what  reasons  I
have  deemed  myself  obliged  to  quit  the  beaten  track.

The  names  which  have  been  bestowed  upon  individual
new-formations,  have,  as  you  know,  often  been  based
pretty  much  upon  accidental  peculiarities,  and  not  so  very
unfrequently  selected  in  quite  an  arbitrary  manner.  The
attempts  to  establish  a  regular  nomenclature,  which  were
formerly  made,  were  really  only  based  upon  the  consis-
tence of  tumours,  reasons  for  classification  having  been
derived  from  the  circumstance  that  the  substance  of  new-
formations  was  found  to  be  sometimes  hard,  at  others
soft,  fluid,  pultaceous,  gelatinous,  etc.,  and  thus  meliceris,
atheromata,  steatomata,  scirrhi,  etc.,  were  separated  from
one  another.  It' is  self-evident  that  the  ideas  which  are
now  attached  to  several  of  these  things  must  be  done
away  with,  if  it  be  wished  to  understand  the  original
meaning  of  these  designations.  When  the  presence  of
an  atheromatous  process  is  now-a-days  spoken  of,  some-
thing is  meant  thereby  of  which  the  old  observers  were
far  from  having  any  idea.  When  the  tumour  anatomists
of  the  present  day  labour  hard  to  revive  the  name  stea-
toma  and  would  have  it  designate  a  firm  fatty  tumour,

NOMENCLATURE OF  NEW-FORMATIONS.  509

you  must  remember  that  the  manufacture  of  stearine  was
not  known  at  the  time  when  the  term  steatoma  first  came
into  use,  and  that  the  old  observers  never  entertained  the
notion,  which  the  tumour  teachers  of  the  present  day
cannot  get  out  of  their  heads — that  a  steatoma  *  was  a
stearine-  or  indeed  a  fatty,  tumour  at  all.

The  improved  nomenclature  which  was  introduced  at
the  commencement  of  this  century,  was  based  more  upon
comparisons  which  were  instituted  between  the  new-for-
mations and  individual  parts  or  tissues  of  the  body.  The
term  "medullary  fungus"  (Markschwamm)  originally
arose  out  of  the  idea  that  medullary  cancers  originated
in  the  nerves  and  resembled  nervous  matter  in  their  com-
position. These  comparisons  have,  however,  until  re-
cently been  always  very  arbitrary,  because  they  were
founded  upon  more  or  less  rough  resemblances  in  exter-
nal appearance,  without  a  due  appreciation  of  the  more
delicate  peculiarities  of  structure,  and  particularly  of  the
really  histological  composition.

Recently  attempts  have  been  made,  and  here  and  there
even  with  great  affectation,  to  make  use  of  normal  struc-
tures as  aids  in  terminology.  Many  attach  a  certain  de-
gree of  importance  to  this,  and  consider  it  more  scientific
to  say  epithelioma,  where  others  say  cancroid  or  epithe-
lial cancer.  Thus  in  France  great  stress  has,  it  is  well
known,  been  laid  upon  calling  sarcomata  fibro-plastic  tu-
mours, because  Schwann  and  his  followers  looked  upon
caudate  corpuscles  as  directly  producing  the  fibres  of  con-
nective tissue — which,  in  my  opinion  (p.  70),  is  an  error.
But  in  spite  of  these  errors  we  must  consider  the  histo-
logical point  of  view  as  the  true  one,  only  it  is  not,  I
think,  advisable,  in  accordance  with  this  principle,  at
once  to  proceed  to  create  new  names  for  everything,  and

*  The  ancients  called  any  firm  tumour  (e.  g.,  an  enchondroma)  a  steatoma.—
From  a  MS.  Note  by  the  Author.

I

510  LECTURE XX.

by  means  of  these  new  names  to  render  things  which
have  long  been  known  strange  to  the  minds  of  people  in
general.  Even  new-formations  which  very  evidently  fol-
low the  type  of  some  definite  normal  tissue,  still  for  the
most  part  possess  peculiarities,  whereby  they  may  be
more  or  less  distinguished  from  this  tissue,  so  that  in  the
majority  of  cases,  at  least,  it  is  by  no  means  necessary  to
see  the  whole  of  the  new-formation  in  order  to  know
that  this  is  not  the  normal,  regular  development  of  the
tissue,  but  that  on  the  contrary  there  is  something  in  it,
although  it  does  not  lose  the  type,  which  deviates  from
the  ordinary  course  of  homologous  development.  Be-
sides there  still  remain  even  at  the  present  time  a  certain
number  of  new-formations,  the  external  appearance  or
clinical  character  of  which  has,  in  part  from  the  want  of
known  physiological  types,  been  retained  as  the  basis  for
their  names.

We  still  continue  to  speak  of  tubercle,  and  the  name
which  Fuchs  has  invented  as  a  substitute,  the  only  new
one,  as  far  as  I  know,  which  it  has  been  attempted  to
introduce  in  its  stead,  Phyma,  is  so  very  indefinite,  so
readily  applicable  to  every  "  growth,"  that  it  has  met
with  no  great  favour.  Several  other  names  have  been
recently  used  to  a  continually  increasing  extent,  which
are  also  nothing  more  than  stop-gags,  as  for  example  that
of  Colloid.  This  name  was  invented  at  the  commence-
ment of  the  present  century  by  Laennec  to  designate  a
form  of  tumour  which  he  described  as  analogous  in  con-
sistence to  half-set  glue  ;  in  its  well-developed  form  it
constitutes  a  half- trembling  gelly,  colourless  or  of  slightly
yellowish  hue,  which  on  the  whole  conveys  the  impres-
sion of  a  nearly  complete  absence  of  all  structure.  Whilst
people  formerly  declared  themselves  perfectly  content,
when  tumours  of  this  kind  were  designated  jelly-like,  or
gelatinous,  to  many  of  the  more  recent  observers  it  has

TUBERCLE— COLLOID.  511

appeared  a  proof  of  superior  penetration  to  say,  instead
of  gelatinous  tumour  or  gelatinous  mass,  colloid  tumoui
or  colloid  mass.  But  you  must  not  think  that  those,  who
have  these  denominations  the  most  constantly  In  their
mouths,  intend  to  express  anything  else  by  them,  than
what  most  others  call  simply  a  jelly-like  tumour,  or  only
jelly.  It  is  just  the  same  with  it,  as,  in  the  time  of
Homer,  with  the  herb  Mw/lv,  which  was  so  called  in  the
language  of  the  gods,  but  by  another  name  by  men.*  It
is,  however,  very  advisable,  that  these  really  unmeaning
and  only  high-sounding  expressions  should  not  be  unne-
cessarily diffused,  and  that  the  habit  should  be  acquired
of  conveying  a  precise  meaning  by  every  expression,  and
that  therefore  from  the  moment  one  really  aspires  to
make  histological  divisions,  one  should  no  longer  employ,
when  speaking  of  every  jelly-like  tumour,  the  term  col-
loid which  has  no  histological  value  whatever,  but  merely
designates  an  external  appearance  which  tissues  of  the
most  different  nature  may  under  certain  circumstances
present.  Laennec  himself  inaugurated  the  somewhat
pernicious  practice,  by  speaking  of  a  colloid  transforma-
tion of  fibrinous  exudations  of  the  pleura.

The  chief  difficulty,  which  here  presents  itself,  consists
in  this,  that  people  do  not  know  how  to  discover  any
difference  between  the  mere  form  and  the  true  nature.
The  form  ought  only  to  be  admitted  as  a  decisive  crite-
rion for  the  diagnosis  of  new-formations,  when  it  is  con-
joined with  a  real  difference  in  the  tissue,  and  does  not
result  from  accidental  peculiarities  of  situation  or  posi-
tion. If,  for  example,  you  wish  to  make  use  of  the  name
colloid,  you  can  do  so  in  two  ways.  You  can  either
employ  it  to  designate  nothing  more  than  a  kind  of
appearance,  and  then  you  will  certainly  be  able  to  find

*  Odyss.  X.  305. Note  of  the  Stenograph.

512  LECTURE XX.

different  tumours  which  you  can  distinguish  from  other
tumours  of  the  same  genus  by  means  of  the  addition
"colloid."  You  may  therefore  say  :  colloid  cancer,  col-
loid sartoma,  colloid  fibroma  [fibrous  (connective-tissue)
tumour].  Here  colloid  means  nothing  more  than  jelly-
like. Or  you  must  have  a  distinct  notion  of  the  nature,
of  the  chemical  or  physical  peculiarities  of  the  colloid
substance,  or  of  the  morphological  nature  of  the  colloid
tissue,  and  then  it  will  be  impossible  for  you  to  class
together  two,  chemically  and  morphologically,  entirely
different  products,  such  as  the  colloid  of  the  thyroid  body
and  colloid  cancer.

In  just  the  same  manner  we  see  that  a  great  number
of  tumours,  when  they  are  seated  on  the  surface,  give
rise  to  excretions,  which,  according  to  the  nature  of  the
surface,  appear  in  the  form  of  villi,  papillae  or  warts.  All
these  tumours  may  be  comprised  under  one  name  and
called  papillomata,  but  the  tumours  which  have  this  form
often  differ  to  to  coelo  from  one  another.  AVhilst  in  the
one  case  we  have  a  true  hyperplastic  development,  we
find  in  another,  at  the  base  of  these  villi  where  they  rest
upon  the  skin  or  mucous  membrane,  some  specific  form
of  tumour.  In  many  cases  even  the  villi  themselves  are
filled  with  a  substance  analogous  to  that  of  the  tumour.
This  is  a  very  important  difference.  If,  for  example,  you
examine  a  broad  condyloma,  the  mucous  tubercle  or
plaque  muqueuse  of  Ricord,  you  will  find,  under  the
epidermis  which  still  remains  smooth,  the  papilla?  enlarg-
ing and  ultimately  growing  out  into  branched  figures  so
as  to  represent  regular  trees.  Cancer,  however,  may  give
rise  to  excrescences  of  the  same  shape  as  these  condy-
lomata. This  we  see  comparatively  less  frequently  occur
on  the  skin  than  on  the  different  mucous  surfaces.  In
these  cases  it  may  happen  that  real  cancer  is  seated  in
the  villi. Nor  is  this  in  itself  indeed  at  all  surprising

PAPILLOMATA,  (CONDYLOMATOUS  AND  CANCEROUS).  513

The  papilke  consists  of  connective  tissue  like  the  skin,  or
the  mucous  membrane,  upon  which  they  are  seated  ;
within  the  papillae  therefore  a  cancerous  mass  may
develop  itself  out  of  the  connective  tissue,  as  out  of  the
connective  tissue  of  the  skin  or  mucous  membrane.
Moreover,  it  cannot  be  denied  that  this  peculiarity  of
superficial  formation  very  frequently  explains  certain
peculiarities  in  the  course  of  the  disease,  whereby  a  papil-
lary tumour  is  strikingly  distinguished  from  the  same
kind  of  tumour  when  not  papillary.  Any  one  may  have
a  cancer  of  the  bladder — if  it  be  merely  seated  in  the  pa-
rietes — for  a  very  long  time,  without  any  other  changes
being  necessarily  displayed  in  the  nature  of  the  secretion,
which  must  be  evacuated  with  the  urine,  than  those
exhibited  in  a  simple  catarrh.  As  soon,  on  the  contrary,
as  a  formation  of  villi  takes  place  upon  the  surface,  nothing
is  more  common  than  for  hematuria  to  arise  as  a  com-
plication, from  the  simple  reason,  that  every  villus  upon
the  walls  of  the  urinary  bladder  is  not  clothed  with  a
firm  layer  of  epidermis,  but  lies  almost  bare  under  a
loose  epithelial  covering.  Into  the  interior  of  the  villi
ascend  large  vascular  loops  which  reach  quite  up  to  the
surface,  and  therefore  very  considerable  mechanical  irri-
tation supplies  a  condition  for  the  production  of  hy-
peremia and  the  rupture  of  the  villi.  A  spasmodic
contraction  of  the  bladder  drives  the  blood  up  into  the
apices  of  the  villi,  in  consequence  of  the  shortening  of  the
surface  on  which  they  are  seated,  and  when  to  this  is
added  the  mechanical  friction  of  the  surfaces,  nothing  is
more  likely  to  ensue  than  a  sometimes  more,  sometimes
less  considerable  effusion  of  blood.  But  in  order  that
such  haemorrhage  should  take  place  it  is  altogether  unne-
cessary that  the  papillary  tumour  should  be  cancerous.  I
have  seen  cases  in  which,  for  years,  uncontrollable  bleed-
ings recurred  from  time  to  time,  through  which  at  last  the

33

514  LECTURE  XX.

patients  died  anaemic,  and  yet  no  trace  of  any  cancerous
infiltration  of  the  base  of  the  growth  or  of  the  villi  ex-
isted, but  the  tumour  was  quite  a  simple  papillary  one,  a
benignant  formation,  which  on  the  surface  of  the  skin
could  easily  have  been  removed  by  the  knife  or  ligature,
but  which,  owing  to  its  concealed  position,  was  in  these
cases  attended  with  a  series  of  phenomena,  which  during
life  it  seemed  impossible  to  refer  to  anything  else  than  a
really  malignant  new  formation.

Just  the  same  is  the  case  with  the  much-discussed
cauliflower -tumours,  as  they  are  seen  on  the  surface  of  the
genital  organs,  both  in  man  and  woman.  In  men,  these
papillary  tumours,  which  proceed  from  the  prepuce  and
surround  the  corona  glandis,  are  for  the  most  part  covered
by  a  very  thick  layer  of  epidermis,  so  that,  when  they
ulcerate,  they  yield  but  a  very  trifling  amount  of  secre-
tion. In  women,  on  the  contrary,  the  tumour  being
seated  on  the  neck  of  the  uterus — a  very  vascular  part,
provided  with  a  thin  stratum  of  epithelium,  and  natu-
rally beset  with  a  thick  layer  of  numerous  and  large
papillae — for  the  most  part  very  early  occasions  abun-
dant transudations  and  occasionally  haemorrhagical  exu-
dations of  a  fluid,  like  water  in  which  raw  meat  has  been
soaked,  or  really  red  and  bloody.  In  these  cases  there
frequently  exists  doubts  as  to  the  nature  of  the  disease.
I  myself  was  present  when  a  very  renowned  surgeon
came  to  DiefFenbach's  operating  room,  just  as  that  ope-
rator had  amputated  a  penis  on  account  of  a  "  carcinoma  "
— and  when  the  stranger  afterwards  declared  it  to  have
been  a  simple  condyloma.  On  the  other  hand  I  have
examined  cases,  in  which  growths  of  this  sort  had  been
doctored  about  for  years  as  if  they  had  been  syphilitic
condylomata,  because  the  external  appearance  is  so  ex-
tremely analogous,  and  it  is  so  extremely  difficult  to  dis-
cover a  criterion  by  which  it  can  be  accurately  determined

CAULIFLOWER  TUMOURS.  515

whether the formation only  involves the surface, or
whether  it  is  complicated  with  disease  of  the  subjacent
tissue. There are  certainly  at  the  present time  very
many  anatomists  and  surgeons  who  entertain  the  notion
that  cells  may  grow  on  the  surface  exactly  similar  to
those  which  are  usually  only  found  in  the  interior  of  dis-
eased organs — that,  for  example,  a  villous  tumour  must
be termed  cancerous,  if  it  is  covered  over  with  cancer-
cells  as  with  an  epithelium,  without  any  development  of
cancerous matter having  shown  itself  in the interior
of  the  villi. In  fact,  villi,  which  are  very  delicate  and
scarcely  contain  enough  connective-tissue  to  envelop  the
vessels  that  run  up in  them,  are  sometimes  met  with,
enclosed  in  a  thick  layer  of  cells  which,  from  the  irregu-
larity of  their  form,  the  size  of  their  nuclei,  and  their  own
large  dimensions,  present  rather  the  character  of  cancer
than  that  of  epithelium. But  I  must  confess  that  I  have
not  as  yet  been  able  to  convince  myself  that  cancer-cells
are  able  to  arise  upon  the  free  surfaces  of  membranes,
and  that  they  can  be  produced  simply  from  epithelium  ;
on  the  contrary,  I  believe  from  all  that  I  have  seen,  that
a  very  strict  line  of  demarcation  must  be  drawn  between
the  cases,  where  masses  of  cells,  however  abundant  and
curiously  shaped  they  may  be,  are  found  seated  upon  a
basis-tissue  in  itself  unaltered,  and  those,  where  the  cells
have  been  formed  in  the  parenchyma  of  the  parts  them-
selves.

The  pathological  importance  of  a  papillary  tumour  is,
at  least  as  far  as  I  know,  determined  by  the  condition
of  its  basis-substance,  or  by  that  of  the  parenchyma  of  the
villi  themselves  ;  and  a  formation  can  only  be  pronounced
to  be  cancroid  or  carcinoma  when,  in  addition  to  the
growth  of  the  surface,  the  peculiar  degenerations  which
characterize  these  two  kinds  of  tumours,  take  place  also
in  the  deeper  layers  or  in  the  villi  themselves. I  think,

516

LECTURE XX.

therefore,  that  all  these  external  differences  of  form  can
only  serve  to  distinguish  different  species  of  the  same
genus  of  tumours,  but  by  no  means  different  tumours,
from  one  another.  There  are  connective-tissue  [fibrous]
tumours  of  the  surface,  which  manifest  themselves  in  the
form  of  simple  tubera  (Knoten  *),  others  which  show
themselves  in  the  form  of  warts  and  papillary  tumours.
In  just  the  same  manner,  there  are  cancerous  formations

Fig.  139.

Fig.  139.  Vertical  section  through  a  commencing  cauliflower  growth  (cancroid)
of  the  neck  of  the  uterus.  On  the  still  unchanged  surface  the  tolerably  large
papillae  of  the  os  uteri  are  seen  invested  by  a  homogeneous,  stratified  layer  of  epi-
thelium. The  disease  begins  first  on  the  other  side  of  the  mucous  membrane  in  the
real  parenchyma  of  the  cervix,  where  large,  roundish  or  irregular,  scattered  groups
of  cells  (contained  in  alveoli)  are  disseminated  throughout  the  tissue.  150  diame-
ters.

*  The  term  Kuoten  (Eng.  knot,  Lat.  tuber)  having  reference  rather  to  the  form
than  to  the  size  of  the  tumour,  is  used  in  this  work  as  a  designation  for  all  sorts  of
tuberiform  tumors,  even  the  largest. — Trans.

PAPILLARY TUMORS.  517

and  cancroid  formations  which  may  assume  this  form,
and  others  again,  which  do  not  do  so.

With  reference  to  the  relation  of  form  and  nature,  there
is  a  question  of  really  cardinal  importance,  concerning
which,  in  the  interest  of  mankind,  a  certain  degree  of
unanimity  ought  soon  to  be  arrived  at,  namely,  what  is
properly  to  be  understood  by  the term  tubercle. The
same  difficulties  which  I  have  just  described  to  you,  are
again  encountered  in  the  case  of  tubercle  in  a  still  higher
degree. The  old  writers  introduced  the  name  tubercle
merely  to  express  an  external  form. Everything  was
called  a  tubercle  which  manifested  itself  in  the  shape  of
a  small  knot. It  is,  as  you  are  no  doubt  aware,  by  no
means  so  very  long  since  this  term  was  employed  in  the
most  loose  manner. Carcinomatous  and  scirrhous  tuber-
cles were  talked  about,  scrofulous  and  syphilitic  tubercles
were  distinguished  from  one  another,  and  these  terms  are
still  preserved  in  France. Cancer  too,  you  know,  in  old
times  was  not  by  any  means exclusively  employed  to
designate  a  real  tumour,  but  noma  (cancer  aquaticus)  was
considered  to  have  as  much  right  to  the  appellation  as  a
chancre  (cancer  syphiliticus).

Now  in  the  course  of  the  present  century  endeavours
have  been  made  gradually  to  exchange  these  somewhat
superficial  views  for  more  accurate  conceptions,  and  here
also  it  is  to  Laennec  especially  that  credit  is  due  for  hav-
ing sought  for  precise  denominations.  Still  he  himself
in  his  turn  has  been  the  cause  of  this  matter's  having
fallen  into  a  state  of  nearly  irremediable  confusion.  For,
as  you  no  doubt  recollect,  he  asserted  that  tubercle  pre-
sented itself  in  the  lungs  under  two  different  aspects,  the
so-called  tubercular  infiltration,  and  tubercular  granula-
tion. Now,  inasmuch  as  infiltration  signifies  something
completely  at  variance  with  the  old  notion  of  tubercle,
since  it  does  not  at  all  imply  the  presence  of  small  knots

518  LECTURE XX.

(Knotchen),  but  expresses  an  equable  pervasion  of  the
whole  parenchyma,  a  track  was  hereby  opened,  in  follow-
ing which  the  old  idea  of  tubercle  has  more  and  more
been  departed  from.  As  soon  as  the  infiltration  of  tuber-
cle had  once  been  created  and  the  form  of  the  neoplasm
had  thereby  been  abandoned,  the  infiltration  was  gene-
rally, as  being  more  extensive  and  therefore  more  instruc-
tive, taken  as  the  basis  of  subsequent  descriptions,  and
attempts  were  made  to  find  out  in  what  respects  it  really
agreed  with  the  other,  previously  known  forms  of  tuber-
cle. It  was  in  this  way,  that  the  cheesy  stage  of  tubercle
came  to  be  gradually  adopted  as  the  common  generic
characteristic  of  all  tuberculous  products,  not  merely  as
the  principal  aid  in  diagnosis,  but  as  the  starting-point
for  the  interpretation  of  the  process  in  general.  It  was
in  this  way,  in  particular,  that  the  idea  came  to  be  enter-
tained, that  tubercles  could  arise  simply  by  any  exuda-
tion's losing  its  water  constituents,  growing  thick,  turbid,
opaque,  cheesy,  and  remaining  in  this  condition.

The  term,  tubercle-corpuscles  (corpuscules  tubercu-
leux),  which  is,  you  know,  still  in  very  frequent  use,  has
reference  to  just  this  cheesy  stage,  and  the  accurate  de-
scription which  Lebert  has  given  of  them  amounts  to  this
— that  they  are  formations  which  correspond  with  none
of  the  known  organic  forms,  and  are  neither  cells,  nor
nuclei,  nor  anything  else  of  an  analogous  nature,  but
appear  in  the  form  of  little,  roundish,  solid  corpuscles,
which  frequently  have  particles  of  fat  scattered  through
them  (Fig.  64).  But  if  the  development  of  these  corpus-
cles be  investigated,  it  is  easy  to  convince  oneself  that,
wherever  they  occur,  they  arise  out  of  previous  organic
morphological  elements,  and  that  they  are  not  by  any
means  the  first  bungling  products,  unfortunate  essays  of
organization,  but  that  they  were  once  well-grown  elements,
which  by  an  unhappy  chance  were  early  checked  in  their

TUBERCLES.  519

development  and  early  succumbed  to  a  process  of  shri-
velling. You  may  with  certainty  assume  that,  where
you  meet  with  a  largish  corpuscle  of  this  description,  a
cell  had  previously  existed,  and  where  you  find  a  small
one,  there  once  had  been  a  nucleus,  enclosed  perhaps
within  a  cell.

Upon  examining  the  point  which  has  been  the  leading
one  in  the  doctrine  of  tuberculosis  recently  advanced,
namely  tubercular  infiltration  of  the  lungs,  we  readily
arrive  at  the  result  which  Reinhardt  has  set  down  as  the
final  one,  namely,  that  tuberculosis  ijs  nothing  more  than
one  of  the  forms  presented  by  inflammatory  products
when  undergoing  transformation,  and  especially  that  all
tuberculous  matter  is  really  inspissated  pus.  In  fact,
what  has  been  termed  tubercular  infiltration,  can  with
few  exceptions  be  traced  to  an  originally  inflammatory,
purulent  or  catarrhal  mass  which  has  gradually,  in  con-
sequence of  incomplete  reabsorption,  fallen  into  the  shri-
velled and  shrunken  state  in  which  it  afterwards  remains.
But  Reinhardt  was  deceived  when  he  thought  he  was  ex-
amining tubercle.  He  was  led  astray  by  the  false  direc-
tion which  had  been  given  to  the  whole  doctrine  of  tu-
berculosis from  the  time  of  Laennec  until  his  own,  espe-
cially through  the  fault  of  the  Vienna  school.  If  he  had
confined  himself  in  his  investigations  to  the  form  of  old
assigned  to  tubercle,  and  knot  (granule),  if  he  had  ex-
amined the  constitution  of  the  knot  in  its  different  stages
and  had  afterwards  compared  the  different  organs  in
which  knotted  (granular)  tubercle  occurs,  he  would  un-
questionably have  arrived  at  a  different  result.

It  may,  at  least  according  to  what  I  consider  to  be  the
correct  view  of  the  matter,  certainly  be  said,  that  the
greatest  part  of  whatever  in  the  course  of  tuberculosis
does  not  appear  in  the  form  of  granules,  is  an  inspissated
inflammatory  product,  and  has  at  any  rate  no  direct  rela-

520  LECTURE  XX.

tion  to  tubercle.  But  by  the  side  of  these  inflammatory
products,  or  also  independently  of  them,  we  find  a  pecu-
liar structure  [the  knot,  granule]  which,  if  they  are  to
be  regarded  as  real  tubercle,  would  no  longer  be  included
in  the  ordinary  classification  ;  and  it  is  certainly  an  ex-
tremely characteristic  circumstance  that  in  France,  where
the  terminology  of  Lebert  has  become  the  prevailing  one,
and  the  corpuscules  tuberculeux  are  wont  to  be  regarded
as  the  necessary  accompaniments  of  tuberculosis — bodies,
concerning  the  tuberculous  nature  of  which  there  can  be
no  doubt,  have  quite  recently  been  set  down  as  some-
thing altogether  peculiar  and  which  had  hitherto  re-
mained undescribed.  For  one  of  the  best,  nay  perhaps
the  best,  micrographer  France  possesses,  Robin,  has,  in
his  examinations  of  cases  of  tubercular  meningitis,  deemed
it  impossible  to  regard  the  little  granules  in  the  arach-
noid* [pia  mater]  which  every  body  looks  upon  as  tu-
bercles, as  being  really  tubercles,  because  the  dogma
now  prevails  in  France  that  tubercle  consists  of  solid
non-cellular  corpuscles,  and  in  the  tubercles  of  the  cere-
bral membrane  cells  in  a  state  of  perfect  preservation  are
met  with.  To  such  curious  aberrations  does  this  track
lead  that  one  ends  by  being  unable  to  find  a  name  for
real  tubercle,  because  so  many  accidental  objects  have
been  confounded  with  it,  that  what  was  sought  for,  or
even  what  had  been  found  and  was  already  grasped,  has,

*  The  so-called  visceral  (cerebral)  layer  of  the  arachnoid  is  only  the  superficial
layer  of  the  pia  mater  which  is  spread  evenly  over,  and  does  not  dip  in  between,
the  convolutions,  and  being  (as  the  name,  arachnoid,  implies),  of  a  reticulated  tex-
ture contains  spaces  (subarachnoid  spaces).  The  so-called  parietal  layer  of  the
arachnoid  is  only  the  inner  superficial  layer  of  the  dura  mater  with  the  epithelium
lining  it.  The  Author  employs  the  term  arachnoid  in  general  only  for  the  purpose
of  making  himself  more  intelligible  to  others,  but  as  this  superficial  layer  of  the
dura  mater  does  not  possess  a  reticulated  structure  and  is  everywhere  inseparably
connected  with  the  rest  of  the  membrane,  and  as  epithelial  coverings  are  not  wont
to  be  designated  by  special  names,  he  of  course  always  uses  the  term  of  the  pia
mater.  Such  expressions,  therefore,  as  the  "  sac  "  or  "  cavity  of  the  arachnoid  "
are  incorrect. — Based  upon  MS.  Notes  by  the  Author.

TUBERCLES.

521

in  consequence  of  the  attention  of  observers  being
diverted  by  these  objects,  been  allowed  to  slip  out  of
one's  hand  again.  I  am  of  opinion  that  a  tubercle  is  a
granule,  or  a  knot,  and  that  this  knot  constitutes  a  new-
formation,  and  indeed  one,  which  from  the  time  of  its
earliest  development  is  necessarily  of  a  cellular  nature,
and  generally,  just  like  all  other  new-formations,  has  its
origin  in  connective  tissue,  and  which,  when  it  has
reached  a  certain  degree  of  development,  constitutes  a
minute  knot  within  this  tissue,  that,  when  it  is  at  the  sur-
face, projects  in  the  form  of  a  little  protuberance,  and
consists  throughout  its  whole  mass  of  small  uni-  or  multi-
nuclear  cells.  What  especially  characterizes  this  forma-
tion is  the  circumstance,  that  it  is  extremely  rich  in  nu-
clei, so  that  when  it  is  examined  as  it  lies  imbedded  in

Fig.  140.

^SS?^

^r-asfep

;^l^%

the  tissue  which  invests  it,  at  the  first  glance  there  seems
to  be  scarcely  anything  else  than  nuclei.  But  upon  iso-
lating the  constituents  of  the  mass,  either  very  small  cells
provided  with  one  nucleus  are  obtained — and  these  are
often  so  small  that  the  membrane  closely  invests  the  nu-
cleus— or  larger  cells  with  a  manifold  division  of  the  nu-

Fig.  140.  Development  of  tubercle  from  connective  tissue  in  the  pleura.  The
whole  succession  of  transitions  is  seen  from  the  simple  connective-tissue  corpuscles,
the  division  of  the  nuclei  and  cells  up  to  the  production  of  the  tubercle-granule,  the
cells  of  which  in  the  middle  are  disintegrating  into  fatty  granular  debris.  300
diameters.

522  LECTURE  XX.

clei,  so  that  from  twelve  to  twenty-four  or  thirty  are
contained  in  one  cell,  in  which  case,  however,  the  nuclei
are  always  small  and  have  a  homogeneous  and  somewhat
shining  appearance.

This  structure,  which  in  its  development  is  compara-
tively most  nearly  related  to  pus,  inasmuch  as  it  has  the
smallest  nuclei  and  relatively  the  smallest  cells,  is  distin-
guished from  all  the  more  highly  organized  forms  of  can-
cer, cancroid  and  sarcoma,  by  the  circumstance,  that
these  contain  large,  voluminous,  nay  often  gigantic  cor-
puscles with  highly  developed  nuclei  and  nucleoli.  Tu-
bercle, on  the  contrary,  is  always  a  pitiful  production,  a
new-formation  from  its  very  outset  miserable.  From  its
very  commencement  it  is,  like  other  new-formations,  not
unfrequently  pervaded  by  vessels,  but  when  it  enlarges,
its  many  little  cells  throng  so  closely  together,  that  the
vessels  gradually  become  completely  impervious  and  only
the  larger  ones,  which  merely  traverse  the  tubercle,  re-
main intact.  Generally  fatty  degeneration  sets  in  very
early  in  the  centre  of  the  knot  (granule),  where  the  oldest
cells  lie  (Fig.  140),  but  usually  does  not  become  com-
plete. Then  every  trace  of  fluid  disappears,  the  corpus-
cles begin  to  shrivel,  the  centre  becomes  yellow  and
opaque,  and  a  yellowish  spot  is  seen  in  the  middle  of  the
grey  translucent  granule.  This  is  the  commencement  of
the  cheesy  metamorphosis  which  subsequently  characterizes
the  tubercle.  This  change  advances  from  cell  to  cell  far-
ther and  farther  outwards,  and  it  not  unfrequently  hap-
pens that  the  whole  granule  is  gradually  involved  in  it.

Now,  the  reason  why  I  think  that  the  name  of  tuber-
cle must  be  specially  retained  for  this  formation  as  being
extremely  characteristic  of  it,  is  this — that  the  tubercle -
granule  never  attains  any  considerable  size,  and  that  a
tuber  never  arises  out  of  it.  Those  which  are  wont  to  be
termed  large  tubercles,  and  attain  the  size  of  a  walnut,  or

SOLITARY  TUBERCLES OF  THE  BRAIN.  ~23

a  Borsdorf  apple,*  as  for  example  in  the  brain — those
are  not  simple  tubercles.  You  will  generally  find  the
tubercles  in  the  brain  described  as  being  solitary,  but
they  are  not  simple  bodies  ;  every  such  mass  (tuber)
which  is  as  large  as  an  apple,  or  even  not  larger  than  a
walnut,  contains  many  thousands  of  tubercles  ;  it  is  quite
a  nest  of  them  which  enlarges,  not  by  the  growth  of  the
original  focus  (granule),  but  rather  by  the  continual  for-
mation and  adjunction  of  new  foci  (granules)  at  its  cir-
cumference. If  we  examine  one  of  these  perfectly  yel-
lowish white,  dry,  cheesy  tubera,  we  find  immediately
surrounding  it  a  soft,  vascular  layer  which  marks  it  off
from  the  adjoining  cerebral  substance — a  closely  invest-
ing areola  of  connective  tissue  and  vessels.  In  this  layer
lie  the  small,  young  granules,  now  in  greater,  now  in
less,  number.  They  establish  themselves  externally  [to
the  previously  existing  ones]  and  the  large  tuber  grows
by  the  continual  apposition  of  new  granules  (tubercles),
of  which  every  one  singly  becomes  cheesy  ;  the  whole
mass,  therefore,  cannot  in  its  entirety  be  regarded  as  a
simple  tubercle.  The  tubercles  themselves  remain  really
minute,  or  as  we  are  wont  to  say,  miliary.  Even  when
on  the  pleura,  by  the  side  of  quite  small  granules,  large
yellow  plates,  looking  as  if  they  were  deposited  upon  the
surface,  are  met  with,  these  too  are  not  simple  tubercles,
but  masses  composed  of  a  large  aggregate  of  originally
separate  granules.

Here,  you  see,  form  and  nature  are  in  reality  insepara-
bly connected.  The  form  is  produced  by  the  growth  of
the  tubercle  from  single  cells  of  connective  tissue,  by  the
degenerative  proliferation  of  single  groups  of  connective-
tissue corpuscles. Thus,  without  more  ado,  it  appears

*  Borsdolf  apples  are  very  constant  in  their  size,  and  measure  from  an  inch  and  a
half  to  an  inch  and  three  quarters  (1J" — If")  in  diameter. — From  a  MS.  Note  by
the  Author.

\

524  LECTURE XX.

at  once  in  the  shape  of  a  granule.  As  soon  as  it  has
once  attained  a  certain  size,  as  soon  as  the  generation  of
new  corpuscles  which  develop  themselves  out  of  the  old
histological  elements  by  a  continual  succession  of  divi-
sions, at  last  lie  so  close  to  one  another  as  to  cause  a
mutual  arrest  of  development,  gradually  to  induce  the
disappearance  of  the  vessels  of  the  tubercle,  and  thereby
to  cut  off  their  own  supplies,  then  they  begin  to  break  up,
they  die  away  and  nothing  remains  behind  but  debris —
shrunken,  disintegrated,  cheesy  material.

The  cheesy  transformation  is  the  regular  termination
of  tubercle,  but,  on  the  one  hand,  it  is  not  the  necessary
one,  inasmuch  as  there  are  rare  cases,  in  which  tubercles,
in  consequence  of  their  undergoing  a  complete  fatty  me-
tamorphosis, become capable  of  reabsorption  ;  and,  on
the  other  hand,  the  same  cheesy  metamorphosis  befalls
other  kinds  of  cellular  new-formations  ;  for  pus  may  be-
come  cheesy,  and  likewise cancer  and  sarcoma. This
metamorphosis,  therefore,  being  common  to  more  than
one  formation,  cannot  well  be  set  down  as  a  criterion  for
the  diagnosis  of  any  particular  structure,  such  as  tuber-
cle ;  on  the  contrary,  there  are  certain  stages  in  its  re-
trograde metamorphosis,  where  one  cannot  help  confess-
ing that  it  is  not  always  possible  to  come  to  a  decision.
If  a  lung  be  laid  before  you  with  cheesy  masses  scattered
through  it,  and  you  are  asked  if  that  be  tubercle  or  no,
you  will  frequently  be  unable  to  say  with  certainty  what
the  individual  masses  originally  were. There  are  periods
in  the  course  of  development,  when  that  which  is  inflam-
matory and  that  which  is  tuberculous  can  with  precision
be  distinguished  from  one  another  ;  but,  at  last,  there
comes  a  time,  when  both  products  become  confounded,
and  when,  if  one  does  not  know  how  the  whole  arose,  no
opinion  can  any  longer  be  formed  as  to  what  its  nature
is. In  the  midst  of  cancerous  masses  also  cheesy  spots

CHEESY  METAMORPHOSIS  (TUBERCLE, CANCER).  525

occur  which  look  exactly  like  tubercles.  I  have  demon-
strated that  it  is  by  the  gradual  transformation  of  the
elements. of  cancer  that  this  cheesy  matter  is  produced.
But  if  we  did  not  positively  know  from  the  history  of
their  development  that  cancer-cells  disintegrate  step  by
step,  and  that  no  tubercles  form  in  the  middle  of  cancer,
we  should  in  many  cases  be  altogether  unable  to  arrive
at  any  decision  from  merely  examining  the  specimen.

If  those  difficulties  be  surmounted  which  lie  in  the
external  appearance  of  the  formation,  and  lead  the  ob-
server astray  not  only  when  he  considers  its  grosser
features,  but  also  when  he  investigates  its  more  intimate
composition,  there  remains  nothing  else  to  assist  us  in
coming  to  a  right  conclusion  than  the  investigation  of  the
type  of  development  displayed,  by  the  individual  new-for-
mations during  the  stages  of  their  actual  development,
not  during  those  of  their  retrograde  metamorphosis.
The  nature  of  tubercle  cannot  be  studied  after  the  period
when  it  becomes  cheesy,  for  from  that  time  its  history  is
identical  with  the  history  of  pus  which  is  becoming
cheesy  ;  an  earlier  period  must  be  chosen  when  it  is
really  engaged  in  proliferation.  So  in  the  case  of  other
formations,  that  period  must  be  studied  which  is  com-
prised between  their  origin  and  their  culminating  point,
and  we  must  see  with  what  normal  physiological  types
they  agree.  Then  it  is,  I  think,  certainly  possible  for  us
to  arrive  at  a  just  conclusion  with  the  aid  of  the  simple
principles  of  histological  classification,  which  I  have
already  propounded  to  you  (p.  91).  Heterologous  tissues
also  have  phijsiological  types.

A  colloid  growth,  if  we  really  take  it  to  mean  what
Laennec  did — a  gelatinous  organized  new-formation —
must  necessarily  correspond  to  some  type  to  be  met  with
in  the  body  when  in  its  normal  condition.  Thus  there
are  a  series  of  tumours,  that  have  been  included  in  the

526  LECTURE XX.

colloid  class,  which  have  altogether  the  structure  of  the
umbilical  cord,  and  which,  like  this  part,  essentially  con-
tain mucus  in  their  intercellular  substance.  Now  since  I
had  named  the  tissue  of  the  umbilical  cord  and  analogous
parts,  mucous  tissue,  it  is  a  very  simple  step  for  me  to
call  these  tumours  Mucous  tumours  (Schleimgeschwulste),
Myxomata.  When  we  demonstrate  the  occurrence  of
tumours  exhibiting  the  histological  type  of  the  umbilical
cord  in  the  midst  of  the  adult  body,  the  striking  charac-
ter of  the  phenomenon  is  in  no  wise  lessened,  but  we
have  found  for  them  a  type  among  the  normal  tissues  of
the  body.  Another  form  of  colloid,  or  as  Johannes  Mul-
ler  has  called  it,  Collonema,  turns  out  to  be  merely  cede-
matous  connective  tissue.  We  find  nothing  more  than  a
very  soft  tissue,  soaked  in  an  albuminous  fluid.  Such  a
tumour  cannot  be  separated  from  connective-tissue
[fibrous]  tumours  generally,  whether  they  be  denomi-
nated gelatinous,  cedematous,  or  sclerematous*  connec-
tive-tissue tumours,  and  I  think  there  is  no  occasion  to
estrange  it  from  the  mind  by  bestowing  upon  it  the  name
of  collonema.  So,  again,  we  find  certain  forms  of  can-
cer, in  which  the  stroma,  instead  of  being  composed
simply  of  connective  tissue,  consists  of  the  same  mucous
tissue  which  we  meet  with  in  a  simple  mucous  tumour.
These  we  may  simply  name  Mucous  Cancer  (Gelatinous
or  Colloid  Cancer).  We  then  know  exactly  what  we
have  before  us.  We  know  it  is  a  cancer,  but  that  its
stroma  differs  in  its  containing  mucus  and  in  its  gelati-
nous nature  from  the  ordinary  stroma  of  cancers.

To  revert  once  more  to  the  consideration  of  tubercle —
it  would  certainly  be  something  completely  abnormal  if
it  were  composed  of  corpuscles  tuberculeux ;  but  if  you
compare  the  cells  which  are,  as  at  least  I  must  assume  to

*  Scleremas  oedema  durum.

LYMPHOID  NATURE  OF  TUBERCLE.  527

be  the  case,  the  real  constituents  of  the  granule,  with
normal  tissues  of  the  body,  you  will  remark  the  most  com-
plete correspondence  between  them  and  the  corpuscles
of  the  lymphatic  glands,  and  this  is  a  correspondence
which  is  neither  accidental  nor  unimportant,  for  was  it
not  known  even  of  old,  that  lymphatic  glands  have  an
especial  tendency  to  undergo  the  cheesy  degeneration  ?
Even  the  old  writers  have  stated  that  a  lymphatic  consti-
tution disposes  to  processes  of  this  kind.

With  regard  to  pus,  I  need  only  remind  you  that  we
have  been  occupied  during  several  lectures  in  discussing
the  question  of  the  possibility  of  diagnosing  between
pyaemia  and  leucocytosis,  and  that  we  have  recognized
in  the  colourless  corpuscles  of  the  blood  bodies  so  per-
fectly analogous  to  pus-corpuscles,  that  some  have  thought
they  saw  pus  when  they  had  colourless  blood-corpuscles
before  them,  whilst  Addison  and  Zimmermann,  on  the
contrary,  imagined  they  had  found  colourless  blood-cor-
puscles when  they  really  were  looking  upon  pus.  Both
have  a  like  type  of  formation.  It  may  therefore  be  said
that  pus  has  a  hamatoid  form,  nay,  the  old  doctrine  may
be  revived  afresh,  namely,  that  pus  is  the  blood  of  patho-
logy. But  if  one  would  seek  a  distinction,  if  one  would
be  able  to  say  in  individual  cases  what  is  pus  and  what
blood-corpuscles,  there  is  no  other  criterion  than  to  deter-
mine whether  the  cell  arose  at  a  spot  where  a  colourless
blood-corpuscle  might  be  expected  to  arise,  or  at  one
where  it  ought  not  be  produced.

So,  moreover,^  we  find  amongst  pathological  new-for-
mation a  large  category,  the  natural  type  of  which  is
epithelium — Epitheliomata,  if  you  will.  But  the  term
epithelioma,  which  has  recently  been  introduced  by  Han-
nover, is  completely  inadmissible  in  the  case  of  the  par-
ticular kind  of  tumour  which  it  was  intended  to  designate,
because  the  epithelioma  is  by  no  means  the  only  tumour
whose  elements  bear  the  character  of  epithelial cells.

52S

LECTURE XX.

Epithelioma  cannot  be  distinguished  from  other  tumours
by  its  elements'  having  the  character  of  epithelium  whilst
those  of  the  others  have  it  not.  The  tumour  that
[Johannes]  Muller  called  Cholesteatoma,  Cruveilhier,
tumeur  perlee — which  I  have  translated  Perlgeschwulst
[pearly  tumour] — this  tumour  has  exactly  the  same  epi-

Fig.  141.  Solid  mass  of  cancroid  from  a  tumour  of  the  underlip.  Closely  packed
layers  of  cells  at  the  circumference,  presenting  all  the  characters  of  the  rete  Mai  pi-
ghii :  in  one  of  the  processes,  globules  glistening  like  fat;  in  the  middle  of  the  body
of  the  growth,  a  horny,  epidermoidal,  hair-like  structure,  with  onion-like  globules
(pearls,  globes  epidermiques). 300  diameters.

EPITHELIOID NEW-FORMATIONS.

529

Fig.  142.

thelial  structure  as  that  which  Hannover  has  called
epithelioma,  nay,  ordinary  epithelioma  very  commonly
engenders  in  itself  little  pearly  globules  in  an  often
astonishingly  great  number.  Yet  both  exhibit  very
essential  points  of  difference.  Never  as  yet  have  any
pearly  tumours  been  seen  which,  after  existing  in  one
place,  recurred  in  remote  places,  and  behaved  like  malig-
nant tumours  ;  never  did  anything  else  occur  than  a  slight
extension — and  that  at  an  extremely  slow  rate — to  the
immediate  neighborhood  of  the  tumour.  In  the*case  of
epitheliomata  on  the  other  hand,  or  as  they  are  otherwise
called,  epithelial  cancer  or  cancroid,  we  see  a  very
marked  malignity,  for  not  only  are  they  liable  to  recur  at
their  original  site,  but  they  also  reproduce  themselves  in
distant  parts.  In  many  cases  nearly  all  the  organs  of  the
body  are  metastatically  filled  with  masses  of  cancroid.

Again,  if  you  attempt  to  dis-
tinguish cancroid  growths  from
real  cancer  by  the  epithelial
structure  of  their  elements,  you
will  herein  too  give  yourselves
trouble  in  vain.  Cancer  proper
has  also  elements  of  an  epithelial
character,  and  you  need  only
turn  to  those  parts  of  the  body,
where  the  epithelial  cells  are
irregularly  developed,  as  for  ex-
ample in  the  urinary  passages
(Fig.  15),  and  you  will  meet  with
the  same  curious  bodies,  provided

with  large  nuclei  and  nucleoli,  which  are  described  as
the  specific,  polymorphous  cells  of  cancer.  Cancer,  can-
croid or  epithelioma,  pearly  tumours  or  cholesteatoma,  nay

Fig.  142.  Various,  polymorphous  cancer-cells,  some  of  them  in  a  state  of  fatty
degeneration,  two  with  multiplication  of  nuclei. 300  diameters.

34

530

LECTURE XX.

/

perhaps  the  dermoid  growths  which  produce  hairs,  teeth,
and  sebaceous  glands,  and  so  frequently  occur  in  the  ovary
— all  these  are  formations  in  which  there  is  a  pathological
production  of  epithelial  cells,  but  they  constitute  a  gradu-
ated series  of  different  kinds,  which  extend  from  those
which  are  entirely  local,  and,  in  the  usual  meaning  of  the
word,  perfectly  benignant,  to  the  extremest  malignity.
The  mere  form  of  the  cells  which  compose  a  structure,  is
of  no  decisive  value.  Cancer  is  not  malignant  because
it  contains  heterologous  cells,  nor  cancroid  benignant
because  its  cells  are  homologous — they  are  both  malig-
nant, and  their  malignity  only  differs  in  degree.

The  forms  which  yield  dry,  juiceless  masses,  are  rela-
tively benignant.  Those  which  produce  succulent  tissues
have  always  more  or  less  a  malignant  character  (p.  251).
The  pearly  tumour,  for  example,  yields  perfectly  dry  epi-
thelial masses,  almost  without  a  trace  of  moisture,  and  it
only  infects  locally. Cancroid  remains  for  a  very  long

Fig.  143.

(

Fig.  143.  Section  through  a  cancroid  of  the  orbit.  Large  epidermic  globules
(pearls),  laminated  after  the  manner  of  an  onion,  in  a  closely  packed  mass  of  cells,
which  have  partly  the  character  of  epidermis,  partly  that  of  rete  Malpighii.  150
diameters.

SARCOMA.

531

Fig.  144.

time  local,  so  that  the  nearest  lymphatic  glands  often  do
not  become  affected  until  after  the  lapse  of  years,  and  then
again  the  process  is  for  a  longtime  confined  to  the  disease
of  the  lymphatic  glands,  so  that  a  general  outbreak  of  the
disease  in  all  parts  of  the  body  does  not  take  place  until
late,  and  only  in  rare  instances.  In  cancer  proper  the
local  progress  is  often  very  rapid  and  the  disease  early
becomes  general  ;  a  cure,  even  for  a  short,  time  is  so  rare,
that  in  France  the  complete  incurability  of  cancer  properly
so  called  has  been  asserted  and  maintained  with  success.

Among  the  formations  also  which
are  analogous  to  the  ordinary  con-
nective tissues,  and  are  therefore
apparently  perfectly  homologous  and
benignant,  the  succulent  ones  prove
to  be  much  more  capable  of  commu-
nicating infection  than  the  dry  ones.
A  myxoma  which  has  always  a  good
deal  of  juice  about  it,  is  at  all  times
a  suspicious  tumour,  and,  in  propor-
tion to  the  quantity  of  juice  it  con-
tains, is  its  liability  to  recur.  Car-
tilaginous tumours  (Enchondromata)
which  were  formerly  described  as
unquestionably  benignant,  sometimes
occur  in  soft  and  rather  gelatinous
forms,  which  may  occasion  just  such
internal  metastases  as  cancer  pro-
perly so-called.  Even  connective-
tissue  *  [fibrous]  tumours  become,
under  certain  circumstances,  richer
in  cells  and  enlarge,  whilst  their
interstitial  connective  tissue  becomes

Fig.  144.  Diagrammatic  representation  of  the  development  of  sarcoma,  as  it  may
very  well  be  seen  in  sarcoma  of  the  breast. 350  diameters.

*  Fibrous  tissue  is  dense  connective  tissue. It  is  not  a  special  tissue,  but  only  a

532  LECTURE XX.

more  succulent,  nay  in  many  cases  disappears  so  com-
pletely, that  at  last  scarcely  anything  but  cellular  ele-
ments remain.  This  is  the  kind  of  tumour  which,
according  to  my  opinion,  ought  to  be  designated  by  the
old  name  of  Sarcoma.  These  sarcomata  are  frequently,
indeed  benignant,  still  they  do  not  unfrequently  recur,
like  epithelial  cancer,  at  their  original  site,  whilst  under
certain  circumstances  they  appear  secondary  in  the  lym-
phatic glands,  and  in  many  cases  occur  throughout  the
whole  body  metastatically  to  such  an  extent,  that  scarcely
any  organ  is  spared  by  them.

In  the  case  of  all  these  formations,  every  one  of  which
corresponds  more  or  less  completely  to  a  normal  tissue,
investigations  ought  not  to  be  conducted  with  a  view  to
determine  whether  they  have  a  physiological  type,  or
whether  they  bear  a  specific  stamp  impressed  upon  them  ;
our  final  decision  depends  upon  the  answer  to  the  ques-
tion, whether  they  arise  at  a  spot  to  which  they  belong,  or
not,  and  whether  they  produce  a  fluid,  winch,  when  brought
into  contact  with  the  neighbouring  parts,  may  there  exercise
an  unfavourable,  contagions  or  irritative  influence.

It  is  with  these  formations  as  with  vegetable  ones.
The  nerves  and  vessels  have  not  the  slightest  direct  influ-
ence. They  are  only  of  importance  so  far  as  they  deter-
mine the  greater  or  less  abundance  of  supply  ;  they  are
altogether  unable  to  impel  to  the  development  of  tumours,
to  produce  them  or  to  modify  them  in  a  direct  manner.
A  pathological  tumour  in  man  forms  in  exactly  the  same
way  that  a  swelling  on  a  tree  does,  whether  on  the  bark,
or  on  the  surface  of  the  trunk  or  a  leaf,  where  any  patho-
logical irritation  has  occurred. The  gall-nut  which  arises

form  of  connective  tissue.  Periosteum,  perichondrium,  tendons  &c.  all  of  them  con-
sist of  connective  tissue,  in  which,  however,  the  cells  have  in  part  become  converted
into  elastic  fibres  and  network.  In  Germany  indeed  connective  (cellular)  tissue  has
ever  since  the  time  of  Treviranus  (1835)  been  divided  into  formed  and  formless,  the
former  including  tendons,  fasciae,  ligaments,  &c. — From  a  MS.  Note  by  the  Author-

TUMOURS  OF  PLANTS.  533

in  consequence  of  the  puncture  of  an  insect,  the  tuberous
swellings  which  mark  the  spots  on  a  tree  where  a  bough
has  been  cut  off,  and  the  wall-like  elevation  which  forms
around  the  border  of  the  wounded  surface  produced  by
cutting  down  a  tree,  and  which  ultimately  covers  in  the
surface — all  of  them  depend  upon  a  proliferation  of  cells
just  as  abundant  and  often  just  as  rapid  as  that  which
we  perceive  in  a  tumour  of  a  proliferating  part  of  the
human  body.  The  pathological  irritation  acts  in  both
cases  precisely  in  the  same  manner  ;  the  processes  in
plants  conform  entirely  to  the  same  type,  and  just  as  lit-
tle as  the  tree  produces  on  its  bark  or  leaves  cells  of  a
kind,  which  it  could  not  bring  forth  at  other  times,  just
as  little  does  the  animal  body  do  this.

But  if  you  consider  the  history  of  a  vegetable  tumour,
you  will  see  there  also  that  it  is  above  all  the  diseased
spots  which  become  unusually  rich  in  specific  constitu-
ents, and  absorb  and  store  up  the  peculiar  substances
which  the  tree  produces,  in  more  than  average  quantity.
The  vegetable  cells  which  form  on  an  oak-leaf  round  the
puncture  made  by  an  insect  contains  much  more  tannic
acid  than  any  other  part  of  the  tree.  The  tumour-cells
which  form  with  such  exuberance  in  a  pine  at  the  spot
where  an  insect  has  buried  itself  in  the  young  trunk,  are
stuffed  completely  full  of  resin.  The  peculiar  formative
energy  which  is  developed  at  these  spots,  occasions  also
an  unusually  abundant  accumulation  of  juices.  There
is  no  need  of  any  nerves  or  vessels  to  instigate  the  cells
to  an  increased  absorption  of  matter.  It  is  by  their  own
action — by  means  of  the  attraction  which  they  exercise
upon  the  neighboring  fluids — that  they  draw  in  the  most
serviceable  materials.  The  great  importance,  which  a
knowledge  of  botany  possesses  for  the  pathologist  also,  lies
in  this — that  it  enables  him  to  discover  in  all  these  pro-
cesses the  existence  of  an  inward  correspondence  in  the

534:  LECTURE  XX.

whole  series  of  vital  phenomena,  and  to  show  how  the
lowest  formations  may  serve  to  explain  the  history  of  the
most  perfect  and  complex  parts.

I  have  in  the  course  of  these  lectures,  gentlemen,  deve-
loped to  you  as  completely  as  it  was  possible  for  me
here  to  do,  the  principles  by  means  of  which  alone  it  is,
according  to  my  experience,  possible  to  come  to  any  cor-
rect decision  in  the  case  of  pathological  processes.  I
heartily  thank  you  for  the  lively  interest  which  you  have
testified  to  me  up  to  the  last  moment.  I  perfectly  know
how  to  aj)preciate  the  fact  that  men  like  you,  whose  time
is  taken  up  by  such 'manifold  labours,  still  retain  a  taste
for  discussions  of  this  kind,  and  I  only  wish  that  many  a
useful  view  of  recent  date  may  have  been  rendered  more
intelligible  to  you  by  these  lectures,  and  that  the  facts  I
have  laid  before  you  may  furnish  you  with  recollections
which  may  prove  of  service  in  your  practice.

INDEX.

Abscesses,  cold,  inepissation  of  pus  in,
216;  formation  of,  496-497.

Absorption,  increased,  of  parts  upon
the  application  of  stimuli,  155,  336,
etc.

Activity,  the  essential  characteristic  of
life,  324 ;  see  Vital  activity.

Addison,  Mr.,  on  the  relation  between
pus-,  and  colourless  blood-corpuscles,
188,  527.

Adipose  Tissue. See  Fat.

Affinities,  certain,  between  definite  tis-
sues (parts)  and  definite  substances,
154,  158;  specific,  of  different  exci-
tants (stimuli),  332.

Ague,  melangemia  in,  256-257.

Alae  vespertitionum,  smooth  muscle  in,
146,  147.

Alveoli,  of  cancer,  how  produced,  499.

Amaurosis,  from  capillary  embolia,  244.

Amyloid  (lardaceous,  waxy)  Degenera-
tion, 409-427  ;  appearance  of  organs
affected,  410 ;  occurs  in  most  parts  of
body,  411  ;  of  minute  arteries,  416-
417  ;  of  liver  (hepatic  artery,  hepatic
cells),  417-418  ;  its  concomitants,  421  ;
of  digestive  tract  from  mouth  to  anus
(minute  arteries,  villi),  422  ;  of  kidney,
(glomeruli,  afferent  arteries),  422;  of
lymphatic  glands  (minute  arteries,
gland  cells),  425-427  ;  of  spleen  (folli-
cles), 411,  426.

Amyloid  Substance,  its  appearance,  410;
two  kinds  of,  the  one  analogous  to
vegetable  starch  (corpora  amylacea,
prostatic  concretions),  the  other,  more
akin  to  cellulose,  41 1-415  ;  their  chemi-
cal reactions,  413,  414;  the  latter,
homogeneous,  probably  imported  from
without,  419,  but  independent  (au-
tochthonous) formation  of  in  perma-
nent cartilage,  419  ;  not  hitherto  de-
tected in  blood,  419-420.

Anaemia,  occasioned  by  action  of  arte-
ries, 151.

Anastomosing  Corpuscles,  systems  of.
See  Juice-conveying  canals,  and  con-
nective-tissue corpuscles.

Andral,  on  inflammation,  429.

Aneurysms,  how  produced,  155  ;  conver-
sion of  coagula  of,  into  homogeneous,
cartilaginous  masses,  170.

Aorta,  elastic  tissue  of,  135,  152;  mid-
dle coat  of,  141  ;  imperfect  develop-
ment of,  in  chlorosis,  261  ;  atheroma
of,  398-399.

Apoplexy,  from  leukaemia,  203 ;  from
capillary  embolia,  244 ;  from  melanae-
mia,  257.

Arcus  senilis,  388.

Arnold,  53.

Arrectores  pilorum,  85.

Arteries,  distinction  between  small,  and
small  veins,  86,  87-88 ;  elastic  tissue  of
middle  coat  of,  135;  muscular  fibre
cells  of  middle  coat  of,  141-142;
structure  of,  141-143  ;  epithelium  of,
146 ;  muscular  tissue  of,  147-151  ;
contraction  of,  147-151  ;  rhythmical
movements  of,  in  ears  of  rabbits,  147-

148  ;  dilatation  of,  not  active,  but
passive,  and  due  to  fatigue  of  walls,

149  ;  fatigue  of  muscular  coat  of,  150-
151  ;  passive  condition  of,  in  so-called
active  hyperemia,  151;  elasticity  of,
152;  aneurysms  of,  how  produced,
153;  simple  fattv  degeneration  of,
380,  396-397,  4l)4;  fattv  usure  of,
381;  atheroma  of,  381-382,394-402;
sclerosis  and  ossification  of,  403  404;
calcification  (petrifaction)  of,  406-407  ;
minute — amyloid  degeneration  of,  416-
417.

Ascherson,  on  stickiness  of  white  blood-
corpuscles,  184-185  ;  his  haptogenic
membrane,  377.

585

536

INDEX.

Atheroma  of  Arteries,  381-382;  394-402;
different  meanings  attached  to  term,
394 ;  its  relation  to  ossification,  395-

396,  403  ;  false  notions  respecting,
394-395 ;  a  compound  process,  the
fatty  metamorphosis  being  the  second
stage,  and  inflammation  of  the  inter-
nal arterial  coat,  the  first,  396 :  to  be
distinguished  therefore  from  simple
fatty  metamorphosis  of  internal  coat,

397,  404 ;  inflammatory  stage  of,  cor-
responds to  endocarditis,  only  gene-
rally chronic,  397 ;  concurrence  of
simple  fatty  change  with,  397  ;  exter-
nal appearance  of  patches  in  early
stage  of,  397  ;  seat  of  change  in,  398;
nature  of  deposit,  399;  formation  of,
401-402;  acute  form  of,  403-404  ;  seat
of  the  process  in  cellular  elements  of
connective  tissue  of  internal  coat,  403.

Atheromata  of  skin.  See  Epidermic  cysts.
Atheromatous ulcer, 382  ; description

of,  404.
Atrophy,  grey,  of  nerves,  271.
Attraction  exercised  by  different  tissues

upon  different  substances,  154,  157.
Auditory Nerve, terminations of, in

cochlea,  285.

Bacillar  Layer,  of  retina,  285,  286  ;  of
cerebrum  and  cerebellum,  301,  more
accurately  described,  307-308.

Bats,  rhythmical  movements  in  veins  of
wings  of,  149.

Baumgartner,  53.

Beale,  Dr.  Lionel,  on  circulation  of  kid-
ney, 424.

Bennett,  Prof.,  his  "suppuration  of  the
blood"  (leukaemia),  223.

Berend,  384.

Bernard,  Claude,  on  contraction  of  ves-
sels from  stimulation  of  their  nerves,
150  ;  on  dilatation  of  vessels  from  sec-
tion of,  sympathetic  nerves,  150 ;  on
the  section  and  irritation  of  nerves  in
weakened  parts,  353.

Bichat,  28-29  ;  his  classification  of  tis-
sues, 56.

Bidder,  on  cells  found  in  posterior  half
of  spinal  marrow,  315.

Bile,  its  elements  not  pre-formed  in
blood,  but  formed  in  liver,  160;  rela-
tion of  colouring  matter  of,  to  haema-
toidine,  176-177.

Bilharz,  on  distribution  of  nerve-fibre
supplying  electrical  organ  of  silurus
(malapterurus),  290,  302.

Billroth,  on  nervous  plexuses  in  submu-
cous tissue  of  intestines,  291-292.

Bladder,  papillary  tumours  (cancerous
.v nd  non-cancerous)  of,  513.

Blastema,  35-36  ;  54;  448-450  ;  548,  etc.

Blastema  doctrine,  rejection  of,  439  •
449,  457.

Blind  spot  in  retina,  288.

Blood,  little  durability  of  cells  of.  37  ;
compared  with  muscle  and  nerve-fibres,
78  ;  seldom  found  as  a  new  formation,
92;  circulation  of,  141,  144;  no
transudation  of,  through  capillary
membrane,  144;  not  the  real  seat  of
permanent  dyscrasioe,  162  ;  not  a  per-
manent and  independent  tissue,  162-
163  ;  origin  of  its  dyscrasic  conditions
not  to  be  sought  for  in  itself,  but  in
external  causes,  163-165;  fibrine  of,
166-170;  red  corpuscles  of,  their  con-
tents and  crystals  formed  out  of  them,
170-180  ;  colourless  corpuscles  of,
170-187;  formerly  regarded  as  inde-
pendent fluid,  189  ;  constantly  chang-
ing, 190;  renewed  by  propagation  in
embryo,  190,  but  not  even  in  later
months  of  pregnancy  or  afterwards,
191  ;  its  corpuscular  elements  derived
from  lymph,  191  ;  late  coagulation  of,
its  cause,  193-194;  fibrinogenous  sub-
stance in,  1 94 ;  late  coagulation  of,
in  pneumonia,  its  cause  and  its  coin-
cidence with  lateness  of  decomposition,
195  ;  occasional  coexistence  of  the
two  sorts  of  coagulation  (early  and
late)  in  same  blood,  195;  matters  found
in,  in  leukaemia,  205 ;  infectaut  mat-
ters in,  245 ;  chemical  substances  in,
247-248  ;  in  no  case  permanent  seat  of
definite  changes,  249 ;  extravasated,
in  fractures,  of  little  importance  in
formation  of  callus,  485.

Blood-Corpuscles,  Red,  reason  why  have
no  nucleus,  37  ;  nucleated  in  foetus,
37,78,  171,  258;  real  cells,  37,  78,
171;  cannot  pass  through  capillary
membrane  without  rupture,  144  ;
structure  and  contents  of,  171 ;  effects
of  fluids  of  different  densities  upon,
172-174;  do  not  contain  fibrine,  174;
crystals  produced  from  haematine  of,
175-179  ;  aggregation  of,  in  rouleaux,
171,  181;  granular  and  decolorized,
177,  215,  223;  origin  of,  uncertain,
258 ;  Zimmermann's  theory  of  develop-
ment of,  259 ;  respiratory  substance*
of,  265-263  ;  its  paralysis,  263.

Colourless,  180-187;

proportion  of,  to  red,  180;  action  of
water  on,  181 ;  of  acetic  acid  on,  181 ;
their  nuclei,  one  or  several,  182-183  ;
great  resemblance  of,  to  pus-corpus-
cles, 181-182,  212,  527;  sometimes
visible  to  naked  eye,  183  ;  their  sticki-
ness, 184-185 ;  in  post-mortem  clots,

INDEX.

537

185  ;  in  blood  obtained  by  venresec-
tion,  186-187;  diagnosis  of,  from  pus-
corpuscles,  188,  527  ;  increase  in
number  of,  almost  constantly  accom-
panying byperiuosis,  199;  increase  of,
in  leucocytosis  and  leukaemia  due  to
affection  of  lymphatic  glands,  201,
204,  '222,  and  of  spleen,  204;  increase
of,  in  scrofulosis,  226 ;  in  cancer  (with
affection  of  glands),  typhoid  fever  and
malignant  erysipelas,  226.

Blood-Crystals,  174-179.

Body,  the,  as  a  social  organization,  40.

Boerhaave,  on  inflammation,  428.

Bohm,  on  retention  of  fat  in  intestinal
villi,  in  cholera,  369.

Bone,  organic  basis  of,  not  cartilage,  96,
475 ;  epithelium  in,  96  ;  found  in  skin
of  many  animals,  where  in  man  con-
nective tissue,  101 ;  vessels  of,  108-
112;  structure  of,  109-112;  nutrition
of,  115  ;  formation  of  real,  in  arteries,
403-404 ;  development  of,  different
processes  concerned  in,  450-485 ;
growth  of,  in  length  and  thickness,
451-452  ;  fresh  and  living,  contrasted
with  macerated,  453 ;  formation  of,
from  cartilage,  455-456,  459-461  ;
caries  and  necrosis  of,  462-464  ;  lique-
faction of,  464,  496  ;  territories  of,  42,
462-464,  481 ;  granulation  of,  465-466  ;
suppuration  of,  465-466  ;  formation  of,
out  of  medullary  tissue,  466-467  ;  for-
mation of,  out  of  periosteum  (connec-
tive tissue)  467-470,  pathological,  472-
475;  development  of,  in  rickets,  476-
482  ;  new  formation  of  (callus)  after
fracture,  4S2-485.

Bone-Corpuscles  (cells),  109-112;  real
nucleated  cells,  111-112;  indirect  ori-
gin of  (through  marrow-cells)  from
cartilage-cells,  457  ;  direct  formation
of,  from  cartilage-cells,  458-561  ;  ter-
ritories of  (in  bone  formed  out  of
cartilage)  correspond  to  capsules  of
cartilage-cells  out  of  which  formed,
462-463  ;  limits  of  territories  of,  well
marked  in  caries,  and  necrosis,  462-
464;  formation  of,  from  marrow-cells,
466-467  ;  from  periosteal  (connective-
tissue)  corpuscles,  469,  474-475  ;  form-
ation of,  out  of  cartilage-corpuscles,  in
rickets,  479-481.

Bone-  (cell)  territories.  See  Cell-territo-
ries, and  Bone.

Bone-cells. See  Bone-corpuscles.

Bones,  of  considerable  size,  real  organs,
57  ;  distortions  of,  in  rickets,  477-478  ;
see  Long  Bones.

Bouchut,  on  pyaemia  (leukaemia)  in  puer-
peral fever,  223.

Bowman,  Mr.  his  sarcous  elements,  82*
on  circulation  in  kidney,  424.

Brady-fi  brine,  193.

Brain,  hair  in,  95  ;  substitution,  in  ven
triclcs,  of  simple,  scaly  epithelium  for
ciliated,  100  ;  sudden  occlusion  of  ves-
sels in,  244  ;  yellow  softening  of,
merely  fatty  degeneration,  3S8  ;  im-
port of  pigment-cells  in,  388  ;  solitary
tubercles  of,  523-524  ;  see  Cerebrum.

Bright's  disease  of  the  kidney,  335  ;
389-390;  392;  large  proportion  of
cases  of,  due  to  amyloid  degeneration,
422  ;  three  forms  of  (parenchymatous
nephritis,  amyloid  degeneration,  inter-
stitial nephritis),  424,  possible  coexist-
ence of  two,  or  all  three  of  them,  424.

Brood-cavities  (physalides)  444-445.

Broussais,  on  inflammation,  428,  429.

Brown,  Robert,  on  nuclei  of  vegetable
cells,  32.

Brown-Sequard,  420.

Brucke,  80  ;  on  optical  properties  of
different  constituents  of  primitive
fasciculi  of  muscle,  82 ;  on  striated
border  of  cylindrical  epithelium  of  in-
testinal villi,  367  ;  on  muscular  fibres
of  intestinal  villi,  367.

Bubo,  syphilitic,  seat  of  virus  in,  221.

Buflfy  coat,  186 ;  in  inflammations  of
respiratory  organs  (pneumonia,  pleu-
risy), 193;  due  to  presence  of  fibrino-
genous  substance  in  blood,  194.

Calcareous  metastases,  248-249.

Calcareous  salts,  170 ;  metastases  of,
248-249.

Calcification,  of  arteries  (pe'trifaction),
its  course  described,  407  ;  distinction
between,  and  ossification,  407  ;  of  car-
tilage, 455,  458-460 ;  irregularity  of,
in  rickety  bones,  476.

Callus,  formation  of,  482-485.

Canaliculi  of  Bone,  111;  cannot  be  in-
jected from  Haversian  canals,  115  ;
no  real  existence  in  living  bone,  in
which  completely  filled  up  by  pro-
cesses of  bone-cells,  461.

Canaliculi  chalicophori,  111

Canaliculi  of  teeth,  115.

Cancer,  supposed  specific  nature  of,  90  ,
existence  of  physiological  type  for,
91,  cf.  529;  lymphatic  glands  in,  221  ;
rapidity  of  propagation  of,  dependent
upon  greater  or  less  abundance  of
parenchymatous  juices  in,  252,  530  ;
two  possible  modes  of  propagation  of,
252 ;  its  metastases  follow  direction  of
secreting  organs,  253,  cf.  505  ;  propa-
gation of,  probably  due  to  certain
fluids,  25b ;  irregularity  observed  in

538

INDEX.

metastasis  of,  thus  explained,  253;  en-
dogenous cell-formation  in,  444-445 ;
in  bone,  formed  by  direct  transition
out  of  osseous  tissue,  453-454  ;  corre-
spondence between  first  stage  of,  and
that  of  pus,  499 ;  development  of,  from
connective  tissue,  499 ;  papillary  (vil-
lous) form  of,  512-513;  cells  of,  how
distinguished  from  those  of  tubercle,
521 ;  cheesy  metamorphosis  of,  524 ;
proper,  malignity  of,  529-530.

Cancer  Aquaticus,  517.

Syphiliticus,  517.

Cancer-Juice,  compared  with  pus,  91.

Cancroid,  correspondence  between  first
stage  of,  and  that  of  pus,  499,  527-
529 ;  malignant  nature  of,  529,  its  de-
gree, 530.

Capillary  Arteries,  87  ;  fat  in  external
coat  of,  87,  143,  pigment  in  do.,  143.

Capillary  Blood-vessels,  35  ;  structure
of,  87 ;  non-contractility  of,  87 ;  of
liver,  102-104  ;  of  cerebrum  (corpus
striatum),  104-105  ;  of  muscular  coat
of  stomach,  105-106  ;  in  cartilage  of
new-born  child,  107-108;  membrane
of,  supposed  to  be  equivalent  to  inter-
nal coat  of  arteries,  143,  its  importance
in  nutrition,  153 ;  sluggish  layer  in,
185.

Capillary  Membrane,  complete  absence
of  pores  in,  144 ;  its  importance  in  nu-
trition, 153-154.

Carbonic  Oxide,  paralyzing  effects  of,  on
respiratory  substance  of  red  blood-
corpuscles,  262.

Caries,  course  of,  463-464;  changes  (de-
structive or  developmental)  of  bone-
cells  in,  463,  465  ;  liquefaction  of
bone-(cell)  territories  in,  464 ;  a  de-
generative ostitis,  464  ;  production  of
granulations  in,  465.

Caries  of  vertebras.  See  Spondylar-thro-
cace.

Carter,  Dr.,  on  excretion  of  starch
through  skin,  420.

Cartilage,  corpuscles  and  cells  of,  32-33 ;
41 ;  proliferation  of  cells  of,  48  ;  hya-
line, 73 ;  fibro-j  74 ;  reticular  (yellow
or  spongy),  74  ;  non-vascularity  of
perfectly  developed,  89,  107  ;  not  or-
ganic basis  of  bone,  95,  475;  vessels
in,  in  new-born  child,  106-108 ;  nutri-
tion of,  in  new-born  child,  107  ;  effects
of  irritation  upon  (nutritive  irritation
of),  335-336  ;  permanent — autochtho-
nous formation  of  amyloid  substance
in,  419 ;  proliferation  of,  when  pre-
paring for  ossification,  443,  455-456,
sensitiveness  of  cells  at  that  time,
455-456;  transformation  of — into  mar-

row, direct,  457  459,  indirect  (through
osseous  tissue),  457 — into  bone,  indi-
rect (through  marrow),  457,  direct,
458-460;  calcification  of,  456,  458-
460  ;  formation  of,  out  of  periosteum,
469,  483  ;  rarity  of  malignant  affections
in,  and  its  cause,  504.

Cartilage-Cells,  structure  of,  32-33  ;  pro-
liferation of,  48,  during  ossification,
443,  454  ;  transformation  of,  into
marrow-cells,  direct,  457-459,  indirect
(through  bone-cells),  457 — into  bone-
cells,  indirect  (through  marrow-cells),
457,  465-466,  direct,  458-461  ;  throw
out  processes  (become  jagged)  during
ossification,  461.

Cartilage-Corpuscles,  structure  of,  33 ;
definition  of,  458-460 ;  conversion  of,
into  bone-corpuscles,  in  rickets,  479-
482.

Cataract,  production  of,  in  frogs  by  in-
jection of  salt,  154.

Cauliflower  Tumours,  of  penis  and  neck
of  uterus,  514.

Cell-contents,  importance  of,  in  deter-
mining functions  of  parts,  39 ;  func-
tions of  parts  due  to  minute  changes
of  place  in,  327.

Cells,  ultimate  active  elements  of  living
body,  29  ;  theory  of  formation  of,  out
of  free  blastema,  35-36  ;  as  vital  uni-
ties, 39  ;  territories  of,  40-41,  see  Cell-
territories;  difference  in  size  of,  48-
50  ;  proliferation  of  (cartilage),  48  ;
origin  of  all  developed  tissues,  55  ;
increased  absorption  of  matter  by,
336,  &c.  ;  intra-capsular  multiplication
of  (in  intervertebral  cartilage),  349  ;
division  of,  349-350,  see  Division  of
cells  ;  new  formation  of,  by  means  of
simple  division,  443-444,  endogenous
(brood-cavities),  444-445,  hyperplastic
(direct  and  indirect),  and  heteroplas-
tic, 446-448.

Animal,  32-50  ;  capsulated  (car-
tilage), 32-33  ;  simple,  34  ;  nucleus  of,
34-38  ;  nucleus  of,  35-36  ;  contents  of,
38-39.

Vegetable,  30-32,  45-47 ;  capsule

and  membrane  of,  30-31 ;  contents  of,
30-31  ;  nucleus  of,  32  ;  growth  of,  46-
47.

Cell-Territories,  40-41,  114, 124;  in  skin,
281-282  ;  limits  of,  in  bone,  well-shown
in  caries  and  necrosis,  462-464 ;  of
bone,  481.

Cell-theory,  36,  89

Cellular  districts. See  Cell  territories.

Cellular  Elements,  activity  and  excita-
bility (irritability)  of,  324-325  ;  in-
creased quantity  of  material  taken  up

INDEX.

539

by  when  irritated,  336,  &c  ;  anasto-
mosing, of  tissues,  importance  of,  in
conveyance  of  infection,  504-505.

Cellular  Pathology,  contrasted  with  Hu-
moral and  Solidistic,  40-42,  162,  504
et  passim.  See  Humoralism  and  So-
lidisrn.

CeUular  Tissue. See  Connective  Tissue.

Cellulose,  reaction  of,  with  iodine  and
sulphuric  acid,  31,  similar  to  that  of
cholestearine  with  same  reagents,  400,
414  ;  analogy  of,  to  amyloid  substance,
414.

Cerebellum,  bacillar  layer  of,  301,  307-
308.

Cerebrum,  bacillar  layer  of,  301,  SOY-
SOS  ;  ganglion-cells  of,  295,  298-299  ;
see  Brain.

Chancre,  500,  517.

Cheesy  metamorphosis,  of  pus,  213-215  ;
of  tubercle,  522  524  ;  of  cancer,  524  ;
of  sarcoma,  524.

Chlorosis,  260-261  ;  distinction  between,
and  leukaemia,  261  ;  imperfect  deve-
lopment of  different  organs  in,  261  ;
congenital,  or  coming  on  in  early
youth,  261.

Cholepyrrhine,  allied  to  Haematoidine,
177.

Cholera,  leucocytosis  in,  228  ;  retention
of  fat  in  intestinal  villi  in,  369.

Cholestearine,  in  atheromatous  deposits,
382,  399-400  ;  its  reaction  with  iodine
and  sulphuric  acid,  400,  similar  to
that  of  cellulose  with  the  same  re-
agents, 400,  414.

Cholesteatoma,  528..

Chvle,  absorption  of,  367,  368  ;  retention
of,  369.

Ciliary  movement,  persistence  of,  after
death,  331  ;  provoked  by  soda  and
potash,  331.

Classification,  of  normal  tissues,  the  au-
thor's, 55,  Bichat's,  56  ;  of  pathologi-
cal new-formations,  91-92,  508-510.

Cloudy  Swelling,  335  ;  in  cornea,  344  ;
in  kidney  and  muscle,  392  ;  &c.

Club-foot,  fatty  degeneration  of  muscles
in  different  kinds  of,  384.

Cochlea,  terminations  of  auditory  nerve
in,  285 ;  bodies  found  in,  allied  to
corpora  amylacea,  319-320.

Colloid,  definition  of  the  term,  510-512  ;
different  forms  of,  525-526.

Collonema,  526.

Colostrum,  376-377  ;  compared  with  se-
baceous matter,  376,  with  milk,  377.

Condylomata,  acuminate  (non-syphilitic)
and  broad,  flat  (plaques  muqueuses —
syphilitic),  282,  512.

Connective  substance,  98.

Connective  Tissue,  69-70 ;  fibres  of,  69
70,  138  ;  Reichert's  theory  of  forma-
tion of,  70-72,  Henle's,  71-62,
Schwann's,  71-72,  the  author's,  71-72  ;
nutrition  of,  131  ;  interstitial,  in  mus-
cles, 131 ;  loose,  in  dartos,  136-137  ;
structure  of,  137-139  ;  resemblance  of
intercellular  substance  of,  to  fibrine,
169;  action  of  vegetable,  and  diluted
mineral  acids  upon,  169;  of  intestinal
villi,  366-367  ;  and  its  equivalents,
common  stock  of  germs  of  body,  441 ;
general  source  of  pathological  new-
formations,  441  ;  transformation  of,
into  osteoid  tissue  and  bone,  467-469,
472-475  ;  formation  of  callus  out  of,
483-484 ;  development  of  pus  out  of,
495  ;  development  of  cancer  out  of,
499,  of  tubercle  out  of,  522,  of  sarcoma
out  of,  531.

Connective-Tissue  Corpuscles,  35,  72-73,
138  ;  at  base  of  papillae  in  corium,  61,
277  ;  anastomosing  systems  of,  a  sup-
plement to  blood-  and  lymphatic  ves-
sels, 79,  in  bone,  111-112,  in  teeth,
115,  in  semilunar  cartilages,  116-117,
in  tendons,  121-124,  in  cornea,  125,
342-344,  in  umbilical  cord,  130,  in  dar-
tos, 136,  1 37,  in  melanotic  tumour  from
parotid  gland,  346,  in  periosteum,
468,  473 ;  proliferation  of  (in  suppu-
ration) in  interstices  of  muscle,  489,
in  subcutaneous  tissue,  495-496,  in
development  of  cancer,  499,  in  deve-
lopment  of  tubercle,  521,  in  develop-
ment of  sarcoma,  531.

Connective  Tissues,  69-76  ;  connective
tissue  proper,  69-72  ;  cartilage,  74-75;
mucous  tissue,  75;  reticular  arrange-
ment of  cells  in  (connective  tissue,
bone,  mucous  tissue,  &c),  76  ;  its  ob-
ject, 76  ;  kind  of  neutral  ground,  99  ;
strictly  speaking,  scarcely  any  real
function,  327 ;  source  of  nearly  all
new-formations,  441.

Connective-Tissue  Tumours.  See  Fibrous
Tumours.

Consciousness;  323-324.

Contagious  Juices,  infection  by  means
of,  254,  504-505.

Continuity  of  Tissues,  law  of  (Reichert's),
97-99.

Continuous  Development,  law  of,  54-55  ;
in  opposition  to  blastema  and  exuda-
tion doctrine,  439.

Contractility,  of  muscle,  81,  84-85 ;  of
arteries,  147.

Contraction,  of  muscle,  81-82  ;  of  arte-
ries and  its  effects,  147-151. See  p.  85.

Cord,  umbilical. See  Umbilical  cord.

Corium,  60, 62 ; papillary  portion of,

540

INDEX.

135  ; elastic networks of, 135-136,
277.

Cornea,  nutrition  of,  116,  125  ;  vessels
of,  125  ;  inflammatory  opacity  of  (ke-
ratitis), 340-341,  343-344,  may  termi-
nate favorably,  344  ;  structure  of,  342,
343.

Corpora  Amylacea,  313,  318-320;  where
chiefly  found,  318-319  ;  reactions  of,
320;  nature  of,  411-412;  analyses
(Schmidt's)  of,  415  ;  confounded  with
sabulous  bodies  found  in  choroid  plex-
uses, 415  ;  said  in  one  instance  to  have
been  found  in  blood,  419.

Corpora  Lutea,  formation  of,  386-387  ;
difference  between  puerperal  and  men-
strual, 386.

Corpus  Striatum,  arrangement  of  capil-
laries in,  104-105.

Corpuscules  Tuberculeux,  518,  520,  526.

Counter-irritation,  its  effects  explained,
151.

Crasis,  Phlogistic,  dependent  upon  local
inflammation,  195;  its  connection  with
lymphatic  vessels,  196;  not  met  with
in  inflammation  of  the  brain,  196.

Creatine,  in  smooth  muscular  fibres  of
uterus,  84.

Crell,  on  ossification  of  vessels,  396.

Croup,  exudation  in,  generally  first  mu-
cous, then  fibrinous,  434.

Crusta  granulosa,  187.

Crusta  phlogistica. See  Buffy  coat,  180.

Cruveilhier,  on  phlebitis,  inflammation,
&c,  231,  232,  237  ;  his  tumeur  perlee,
528.

Crystalline  Lens. See  Lens.

Curvature,  lateral  and  posterior  (angu-
lar), fatty  degeneration  of  longissimus
dorsi  in,  384-385.

Cuticle. See  Epidermis.

Cutis. See  Corium.

Cyanosis,  acute  and  chronic,  372.

Cysts,  so-called  purulent,  in  heart,  237-
238  ;  sebaceous  (epidermic),  see  these
words.

Cytoblastema,  35-36,  54,  67,  493.

Czermak,  on  the  preservation  of  tissues
in  mummies,  325.

Dartos,  136-137.

Degeneration,  composed  of  active  and
passive  processes,  357  ;  fatty,  359-406  ;
amyloid,  409,  427  ;  see  special  names.

Denis,  on  presence  of  fibrine  in  blood-
corpuscles,  174.

Descemet,  Membrane  of,  341.

Destructive  Processes,  488  ;  connection
between,  and  processes  of  growth,  498.

Diarrhoea,  in  amyloid  degeneration  of
intestines,  421.

Dieffenbach,  514.

Diffuse  phlegmonous  (pseudo-erysipela-
tous)  inflammation,  hyperinosis  and
leucocytosis  in,  200.

Dipolar  state  of  nerves.  See  Electrotonic
state  of  nerves.

Distortions,  fatty  degeneration  of  mus-
cles in,  384.

Division  of  Cells,  in  red  blood-corpuscles
in  foetus,  258 ;  in  lymph-corpuscles,
212  ;  in  intervertebral  cartilage,  399  ;
from  direct  irritation,  349-3o0  ;  most
common  mode  of  origin  of  new-forma-
tions, 445  ;  sometimes  delayed  for  a
long  time,  446 ;  in  pus  (uncertain),
446  ;  in  development  of  cancer,  449,
of  tubercle,  521,  of  sarcoma,  531 ;  ct
passim.

Division  of  Nuclei,  in  muscle,  79,  81 ;  in
colourless  blood-corpuscles,  180-1S1  ;
in  lymph-corpuscles,  208  ;  in  pus-cor-
puscles, 213,  446;  in  formative  irrita-
tion, 345-348  (marrow,  346,  muscle,
346-348) ;  in  development  of  cancer,
499,  of  tubercle,  521,  of  sarcoma,  531 ;
et  passim.

Division  of  Nucleoli,  in  formative  irrita-
tion, 345.

Donders,  on  conversion  of  cells  of  con-
nective, into  elements  of  elastic,  tis-
sue, 131.

Donne,  his  corps  granuleux.  377.

Drunkard's  dyscrasia,  162.

Dubois-Reymond,  his  experiments  ox:
electrical  silurus,  290 ;  on  activity  of
nerves  even  when  seemingly  at  rest,
325.

Duhamcl,  on  development  of  bone,  452 ;
on  periostitis,  468.

Dyscrasias,  their  local  origin,  162-164;
two  great  categories  of,  166-167  ;  ex-
ample of  local  origin  of,  afforded  by
hyperinosis,  199 ;  seat  of,  never  in
blood,  but  always  due  to  changes  in
some  organ  or  organs,  251.

Ectasis  of  arteries  and  veins,  153.

Edwards,  Milne-,  his  globule  theory,  52.

Elastic  Tissue,  132-136  ;  its  fibres  formed
out  of  cells  of  connective-tissue,  132*
134;  arrangement  of  fibres  in,  132;
its  extraordinary  power  of  resisting
reagents,  133  ;  probably  small  central
cavity  in  fibres  of,  133;  in  corium,
132-136,  277;  in  middle  coat  of  arte-
ries, 135,  152  ;  in  aorta,  135,  152  ;  in
veins,  144,  152.

Elasticity  of  Arteries,  its  influence  upon
current  of  blood,  152.

Electrical  organ  of  fishes  (Silurus),  plexi-
forni  distribution  of  uerve-fibres  in,

INDEX.

541

290 ;  nerves  of,  all  derived  from  one
ganglion-cell,  301.
Electro-tonic (dipolar)  state  of  nerves,

328.
Elements  of  tissues,  their  specific  action,

161.
Emboli,  240-244  ; retrograde  metamor-
phosis of,  241 ;  gangrenous  softening
of,  242.
Embolia,  238-244 ; from thrombosis  in
veins,  233-240  ;  from  endocarditis,  243,
405-400  ;  capillary,  244.
Embryo,  formative  cells  of,  difference  in
size  and  in  time  required  for  develop-
ment, 448.
Empyema,  inspiration  of  pus  in,  215.
Enchondroma, a heteroplastic  tumour.

95-96  ;  occasional  malignity  of,  531.
Endoarteritis,  40'>40S.
Endocarditis,  not  unfrequently  cause  of
embolia,  243  ;  its  analogy  to  atheroma
of  arteries,  39*7,  404-405  ;  description
of  its  course,  405.
Endogenous  cell-formation,  444-445  ; a
rare  mode  of  origin  of  new-formations,
445.
Endosmosis,  153.

Ependyma,  of  ventricles  of  brain,  311-
314;  original,  and  extended  definition
of,  311-312  ;  strictly  speaking  not  a
membrane,  312-313 ;  central  thread
of,  in  spinal  cord,  305,  315.
Epidermic  Cysts,  381,  395.

Globules,  in  epithelial  cancer

and  pearly  tumours,  528,  530.
Epidermis,  57,  59-61 ;  formation  of  crys-
talline lens  from,  65,  of  pigment-cells
from, 66  ; in  muscular  substance of
heart,  95  ;  substitution  of,  in  prolapsed
vagina  for  soft  epithelium,  100;  for-
mation of  pus  in,  491-492.
Epithelial  Cancer. See  Cancroid.
Epithelial  Cells,  formation  of  glands  from,
66,  67;  relation  of,  to  mucus-  and  pus-
corpuscles,  493-494.
Epithelial (epidermic)  tumours,  in  lym-
phatic  glands,  connective tissue and
bone,  95.
Epithelioma. See  Epithelial  cancer,  and

Cancroid.
Epithelium,  ciliated :  substitution  of
squamous  epithelium  for,  in  ventricles
of  brain,  and  also  in  uterus  in  preg-
nancy, 100  ;  movements  of  cilia  unex-
plained, 329  ;  provoked  by  soda  and
potash,  331.
.  cylindrical,  58  ; connection of,

with  connective  tissue  corpuscles,  98,
with  nerve-fibres,  98  ;  of  villi,  365-366  ;
of  gall-bladder  and  biliary  ducts,  58,
S70.

Epithelium,  formation  of  pus  in,  489-490.

of  arteries,  145.

of  veins,  145.

of  vessels  of  kidney,  145.

■ pulmonary,  pigmentary  and  fatly

degeneration  of,  387.

renal,  fatty  degeneration  of,  389.

scaly,  distinctly  separated  from

connective  tissues,  99.

transitional,  58-59.

Erasistratus,  339.

Erysipelas,  hvperinosis  and  leucocytosis
in,  200.

Exanthemata,  acute,  leucocytosis  in,
without  any  considerable  formation  of
fibrine,  200.

Excitability. See  Irritability.

Exosmosis,  153.

Exudation,  inflammatory,  great  part  of
what  called  due  to  activity  of  elements
of  tissues,  429  ;  both  mucous  and
fibrinous,  each  confined  for  most  part
to  certain  tissues,  432-435  ;  no  exist-
ence in  usual  sense  of  term,  436 ;
non-occurrence  of,  in  periostitis  and
formation  of  callus  after  fracture,  408.

parenchymatous,  339-340.

Exudation-corpuscles.  See  Granule-glo-
bules.

Exudation  doctrine,  rejection  of,  438-
439.

Fat,  structure  of,  same  as  that  of  con-
nective tissue,  76  ;  the  three  aspects
under  which  it  appears,  300-362  ;
structure  and  retrogressive  metamor-
phosis of,  302-303  ;  transitory  infiltra-
tion with  (villi,  liver),  305-374  ;  seat
of,  in  acini  of  liver  (fat-zone),  372;
accumulation  of  in,  and  re-absorption
of  from,  marrow-cells,  458.

Fatigue,  of  muscular  coat  of  arteries,
148,  149-150  ;  result  of  functional  ac-
tivity, 330.

Fatty  Degeneration,  of  pus-corpuscles,
210 ;  general  view  of,  359-800 ;  of
muscles,  interstitial  and  intrinsic,  303-
305  ;  of  heart,  305,  383-384,  from  ex-
cessive dilatation  of  its  cavities,  393-
394;  of  liver,  370-374;  of  cells  of
sebaceous  glands,  375  ;  of  cells  of
mammary  gland,  370-377  ;  of  arteries,
380;  of  muscles,  384-385  ;  of  corpora
lutea,  3SG-387  ;  of  pulmonary  epithe-
lium, 348  ;  of  renal  epithelium,  388-
390 ;  primary  and  secondary,  391 ;
secondary  (inflammatory)  nearly  al-
ways preceded  by  cloudy  swelling,
392-393  ;  similarity  of  result  in  non-
inflammatory and  inflammatory  kind,
393  ;  of  substance  of  heart  from  ex-

542

INDEX.

cessive  dilatation  of  its  cavities,  392-
394  ;  simple — distinction  between,  and
atheroma,  404  ;  simple,  superficial  and
deep,  of  valves  of  heart,  404-405.

Fatty  Infiltration,  transitory  (villi,  liver),
365-374.

Metamorphosis. See  Fatty  Dege-
neration.

Tumours,  363.

Usure,  381.

Fibres,  undue  prominence  assigned  to,
52.

Fibrine,  really  one  of  specific  constitu-
ents of  blood,  167  ;  its  fibrillae,  167-
170,  compared  with  those  of  mucus,
168,  with  those  of  connective  tissue,
169  ,  fibrillar  stage  of,  always  preceded
by  homogeneous  one,  168 ;  in  aneu-
rysmal coagula,  170  ;  notion,  that  con-
tained in  red  blood-corpuscles,  erro-
neous, 174  ;  coagulation  of,  giving
rise  to  buffy  coat,  186  ;  of  lymph,  how
it  differs  from  that  of  blood,  192  ;  not
formed  in  blood,  but  in  tissues,  196-
198,  435  ;  exudation  of,  never  result
of  pressure,  197,  435  ;  but  always  due
to  irritation,  197  ;  no  evidence  that
produced  by  transformation  of  albu-
men, 197  ;  see  Hyperinosis  and  Hypi-
nosis.

Fibrinogenous  substance,  in  pleuritic
fluids,  192-193  ;  in  lymph,  193  ;  in
blood  of  peripheral  veins,  193  ;  in
fluid  of  blisters  raised  by  cantharides-
plasters,  198.

Fibro-cartilage,  nutrition  of,  116.

Fibro-plastic  Tumours,  509.

Fibrous  Tissue,  definition  of,  531.

Fibrous  Tumours,  of  Uterus,  487,  516-
517,  526;  occasional  conversion  of,
into  sarcomata,  532-533.

Fifth  Pair  of  Nerves,  effects  of  section
of,  explained,  350-351.

Flourens,  on  growth  of  bones,  569.

Focus,  definition  of,  502  ;  cf.  381,  note
on  Heerd.

Follicles,  of  lymphatic  glands,  207-209  ;
of  intestines  (solitary  and  Peyerian)
and  of  root  of  tongue,  really  lymphatic
glands,  226-227.

Formative  Irritation,  344,  often  conjoin-
ed with  nutritive  irritation,  344  ;  divi-
sion of  nucleoli  in,  345,  of  nuclei,  345-
347,  of  cells,  34y-350.

Formic  acid,  in  leukaemic  blood,  205  ;  in
spleen,  205.

Fox,  Dr.  Wilson,  on  fatty  usure  of  gas-
tric mucous  membrane,  381.

Fractures,  formation  of  callus  in,  4S2-4S5.

Frerichs,  on  melauaemia  and  its  results,
257.

Friedreich,  on  occurrence  of  lairfnated
bodies  in  lungs,  412.

Fripp,  Dr.,  425.

Frog,  ova  of,  48-49  ;  irregular  contrac-
tion of  vessels  in  web  of  foot  of,  149.

Fuchs,  his  new  name  for  tubercle,  510.

Function,  lesion  of,  an  accompaniment
of  inflammation,  430.

Functional  Activity,  impairment  of  (fa-
tigue), through  long  continuance,  330.

Irritability,  327-333.

Irritation^  330-331.

Restitution,  330.

Funke,  on  Haeinato-crystalline,  179.

Galen,  28  ;  339  ;  on  inflammation,  428.

Gall-bladder,  epithelium  of,  58,  370.

Ganglion-cells,  deposition  of  pigment  in,
294-296  ;  very  rarely  round,  almost
always  branched,  296  ;  three  different
kinds  of  (motor,  sensitive,  sympathe-
tic) in  spinal  marrow  (horns),  296-300  ;
three  categories  of  processes  of,  301  ;
in  cortex  of  cerebrum  and  cerebellum,
298,  299,  307,  308;  in  spinal  marrow
of  Petromyzon  fluviatilis,  308,  309.

Ganglionic  apparatuses,  294 ;  see  Ner-
vous Centres.

Gangrene  of  Lungs,  from  gangrenous
metamorphosis  of  thrombus  in  trans-
verse sinus,  387,  cf.  241.

Garrod,  Dr.,  his  able  method  for  the
detection  of  urates  in  the  blood,  248.

Gastric  (so-called)  inflammations,  secre-
tion in,  433.

Gelatinous  degeneration,  of  nerves,  271 ;
of  spinal  cord,  319-320.

Generation,  equivocal  or  spontaneous,
non-existence  of,  54,  &c.

Gerlach,  on  ganglion-cells  met  with  in
spinal  cord,  299  ;  on  disposition  of
nerves  in  cortex  of  cerebellum,  307.

Gland-cells,  essential  elements  of  glands,
68  ;  locomotory  effect  produced  by,
329.

Glands,  active  elements  of,  essentially
of  epithelial  nature,  6*7  ;  development
of  (sudoriferous,  sebaceous,  mammary,
stomach-,  liver),  68-69  ;  uni-cellular,
6*7  ;  object  of  transuded  fluid  in,  68  ;
lymphatic,  78,  205-210  ;  lymphoid,
226-228  ;  salivary,  Ludwig's  researches
on,  329.

Globes  epidermiques,  528,  530.

Globules,  elementary,  false  notions  re-
specting, 52 ;  laminated,  see  Epidermic
globules.

Globules,  inflammatory.  See  Inflamma-
tory globules.

Gluge,  his  inflammatory  globules,  378.

Gobley,  on  lecithine  (myeline;  270.

INDEX.

543

Goodsir,  Prof.,  on  nuclei,  349.

Gout,  metastatic  deposits  in,  248.

Graefe,  247,  340,  on  parenchymatous
keratitis,  345.

Granulation  of  bone,  465.

Granulations,  close  correspondence  be-
tween, and  medullary  tissue,  465;
transformation  of,  into  pus,  465-466  ;
starting-point  of  all  heteroplastic  de-
velopment, 470  ;  formation  of.  in  sup-
puration of  connective  tissue,  497.

Granule-  (Fat-granule-)  Cells,  377-378 ;
diagnosis  between,  and  pigment-cells,
387-388.

Granule  Globules  [exudation-corpuscles],
379,  391  ;  in  atheromatous  deposits,
392.

Granules,  elementary,  47.

Growth,  connection  between,  and  de-
structive, heteroplastic  processes,  498.

Giiterbock,  on  pus-corpuscles,  181.

Hcematine,  171  ;  three  kinds  of  crystals
derived  from,  174;  hsematoidine,  175-
177;  haemine,  177-179;  haemato-crys-
talline,  179-180.
Haemato-crystalline, 179-180;  very  per-
ishable, 179,  alfeeted by  oxygen and
carbonic  acid  in same  way  as  haeaia-
tine,  180.
Haematoidine, 175-177  ; spontaneously
formed  from  hsematine,  175  ;  crystals
extremely  minute,  175;  formation  of,  in
apoplectic  clots  and  Graafian  vesicles,
176  ;  allied  to  colouring  matter  of  bile,
177.
Hematuria,  from papillary tumours  of

bladder,  513.
Haemine, 177-179 ; not a spontaneous
product,  177  ;  of  great  importance  in
forensic  medicine,  178-179.
Haemitis,  Piorry's  doctrine  of,  187,  223.
Haemorrhage,  cannot  occur  by  transuda-
tion (per  diapedesinj  without  rupture,
144.
Haamorrhagic  diathesis,  its  origin  often
to  be  sought  for  in  spleen  or  liver,
164  ;  in  leukaemia,  203.
Hair,  in  brain,  95.

Hair-follicle,  with  sebaceous  glands,  375.
Haller,  importance  assigned  to  fibres  by,
52  ; on  irritability,  332  ; on ossifica-
tion of  vessels,  396;  on  atheroma,  398.
Hannover,  on  epitheliomata,  527.
Haptogenic  Membrane,  877.
Harting,  G.,  on  vesicles  found as  artifi-
cial products  in  blood,  259  ;  on  secre-
tion of  liver  after  section  of  its  nerves,
332.
Havers,  on  development  of  long  bones,
451,  452.

Haversian  canals,  108-110;  their  con-
nection with  bone-corpuscles,  114-115.

Heart,  so-called  purulent  cysts  of,  237-
238  ;  inflammation  of  valves  of,  243,
404,  405  ;  fatty  degeneration  of,  two
kinds,  365,  from  excessive  dilatation
of  its  cavities,  393-394,  of  valves  of,
404,  405.

Heerd,  definition  of,  381 ;  cf.  502.

Heidenhain,  Junr.,  on  epithelium  of  in-
testinal villi,  367.

Henle,  on  transitional  epithelium,  59  ;
his  theory  of  the  formation  of  connec-
tive tissue,  70-71 ;  on  lining  membrane
of  cerebral  ventricles,  310  ;  on  deve-
lopment of  mucus-  and  pus-corpuscles
on  mucous  membranes,  448,  449.

Hepatic  Artery,  supplies  branches  to
capillary  network  of  acini  of  liver,
104 ;  amyloid  degeneration  of  termi-
nal ramifications  of,  418.

Hepatic  Cells,  arrangement  of,  and  rela-
tion to  capillaries  of  liver,  103  ;  really
active  elements  of  liver,  158  ;  absorp-
tion of  fat  by,  159;  formation  of  sugar
by,  160  ;  accumulation  of  fat  in  (fatty
degeneration),  372;  amyloid  degene-
ration of,  418-419.

Hepatitis,  no  fibrine  found  in  genuine,
390.

Heteradenia,  90.

Heterochronia,  92.

Heterologous  New-formations,  not  ne-
cessarily malignant,  92,  529;  developed
with  great  rapidity,  449  ;  granulations
the  starting-point  of,  470  ;  definition
and  examples  of,  486-488  ;  develop-
ment of,  similar  to  that  of  pus,  499  ;
parasitical  nature  of,  505-506  ;  physi-
ological types  of,  525  ;  infectiousness
of,  according  to  amount  of  juice,  252,
530-531.

Heterology,  definition  of,  92-93,  96  ;  not
to  be  confounded  with  malignity,  92,
529.

Heterometria,  92.

Heteroplasia,  see  Heterology,  contrasted
with  Hyperplasia,  95-96  ;  a  rapid  pro-
cess, 449.

Heterotopia,  92.

His,  on  structure  of  cornea,  342,  343.

Histological  Equivalents,  99-100.

Histological  Substitution,  99-100;  how
it  differs  from  pathological  substitu-
tion, 100.

Histology,  General,  56  ;  Special,  56.

Homologous  New-formations,  definition
of,  93,  486-487 ;  usually  included  under
the  terms  Hypertrophy,  Hvperplasy,
93.

Hoppe,  on  effects  of  carbonic  oxide  upon

544

INDEX.

respiratory  power  of  red  blood-corpus-
cles, 262.  *

Humoralism,  43-44;  157;  160;  283;
339  ;  349-350  ;  504,  533.

Hunter,  John,  on  development  of  ves-
sels in  pathological  formations,  89 ;
on  secretion  of  pus  from  walls  of  veins
in  phlebitis,  231  ;  his  division  of  in-
flammations, 437.

Huxley,  Prof.,  connection  between  ten-
don and  muscle,  99.

Hydrogen,  cyanuretted  and  arseniuret-
ted,  their  action  upon  respiratory  sub-
stance of  red  blood-corpuscles,  262.

Hyperemia,  so-called  active,  vessels  in,
in  passive  condition,  149-151  ;  has  no
directly  regulating  influence  upon  nu-
trition of  tissues,  155;  produced  by
section  of  sympathetic  in  the  neck,
156.

Hyperinosis  (increase  of  fibrine  in  blood)
dependent  upon  local  inflammation
and  not  due  to  changes  in  constituents
of  blood,  195;  generally  dependent
upon  inflammation  of  organs  well  sup-
plied with  lymphatic  vessels  and  con-
nected with  large  masses  of  lymphatic
glands,  195  ;  not  met  with  in  inflam-
mation of  brain,  196  ;  when  consider-
able almost  always  accompanied  by
increase  in  number  of  colourless  blood-
corpuscles,  199;  in  erysipelas,  diffuse
phlegmonous  (pseudo-erysipelatous)  in-
flammation, 200-201  ;  in  pregnancv,
225.

Hyperplasia,  distinguished  from  Hyper-
trophy, 93-94,  445-446  ;  contrasted
with  Heteroplasia,  95-96 ;  a  rather
tardy  process,  449.

Hypertrophy,  distinguished  from  Hyper-
plasia, 93-94  ;  simple,  scarcely  to  be
distinguished  from  results  of  nutritive
irritation,  336.

Hypinosis  (diminution  of  quantity  of
fibrine  in  blood)  in  fevers  of  typhoid
class,  200.

Hypoxanthine,  in  leukemic  blood,  205 ;
m  spleen,  205.

Ichorrhaemia,  250-251.  Cf.  252,  254,
504-505,  529-530.

Induration,  a  form  of  (passive)  degene-
ration, 359.

Infection,  by  means  of  contagious  juices,
254,  504-505. Cf.  252,  529-530.

Inflammation,  its  course  in  previously
hyperaeniic  tissues,  156;  diffuse  phleg-
monous, hyperinosis  and  leucocytosis
in,  200 ;  part  of  what  is  ordinarily
called,  included  in  nutritive  irmution,
335  ;  neuro-paralytical  (resulting  from

abolition  of  action  of  nerves  by  sec-
tion, &c.)  done  away  with,  351-353  ;  a
compound  of  the  three  forms  of  irrita-
tion (functional,  nutritive,  formative),
354  (but  cf.  431);  no  longer  to  be
considered  as  a  real  entity,  427  ;  each
of  its  four  cardinal  symptoms  (heat,
redness,  swelling,  pain)  in  its  turn  re-
garded as  the  essential  one,  428-429 ;
irritation,  starting-point  in  every  form
of,  429,  430  ;  cannot  occur  without  an
irritating  stimulus  (irritament),  429  ;
lesion  of  function,  an  accompaniment
of,  430  ;  in  every  case  begins  with  an
increased  absorption  of  matters  into
the  tissue,  431,  not  dependent  upon
hyperemia,  may  occur  both  in  vascu-
lar and  non-vascular  parts,  432  ;  exu-
dation in,  both  mucous  and  fibrinous,
433 ;  two  forms  to  be  distinguished,
the  purely  parenchymatous  (where  no
exudation)  and  the  secretory  (exuda-
tive), 436,  occurring  for  the  most  part
in  different  organs,  and  the  former
more  serious  than  the  latter,  436-437.

Inflammatory  Globules  (see  Granule-
globules),  379;  391.

Inflexion,  of  bones,  in  rickets,  477.

Infraction,  of  bones,  in  rickets,  477.

Intercellular  substances,  division  of,  into
districts,  territories  (cell-territories),
40-41.

Intermittent  fever,  melanaemia  in,  256-
257  ;  melanic  corpuscles  in  blood  in,
260  ;  see  Ague.

Interstitial  Nephritis,  424.

Intestines,  solitary  follicles  of,  equiva-
lent to  follicles  of  lymphatic  glands,
226,  227 ;  nervous  plexuses  in  sub-
mucous tissue  of,  291-292  ;  amyloid
degeneration  of,  giving  rise  to  defi-
ciency of  absorption  and  diarrncea
421  ;  suppuration  in  mucous  mem-
brane of  small,  492-493.

Investment-theory,  53.

Iodine,  action  of  (alone  and  with  sul-
phuric acid)  on  cellulose,  31,  on  cor-
pora amylacea  of  brain,  320  (cf.  413);
on  cholestearine,  400  ;  (alone)  ou  amy-
loid prostatic  concretions,  413;  on
amyloid  substance,  (alone  and  with
SO:/),  422,  427.

Irritability,  criterion  of  life,  325  ;  func-
tional (nerves,  muscles,  ciliated  epi-
thelium, glands),  327-333  ;  muscular,
independent  of  nerves,  333  ;  nutritive,
334-345.

Irritament,  definition  of,  430,  431.

Irritation,  increased  absorption  produced
by,  155;  influence  in  producing  in-
creased nutrition,  157  ; essential  foi

INDEX.

545

the  production  of  every  vital  action,
825 ;  results  of,  either  functional,  nu-
tritive, or  formative,  326-327  ;  func-
tional, 330  ;  nutritive,  334-345  ;  for-
mative, 345-35U  ;  inflammatory,  a
compound  phenomenon,  354  ;  the
starting-point  in  every  form  of  inflam-
mation, 430-431  ;  definition  of,  431.
Ischannia,  result  of  action  of  arteries,  151.

Jacubowitsch,  on  the  presence  of  a  gang-
lion-cell in  the  bulbous  swelling  in
which  the  nerve  of  a  Pacinian  body
terminates,  276;  on  the  three  kinds
of  ganglion-cells  met  with  in  the
spinal  cord,  297,  298,  315.

Jauche  (sanies)  definition  of,  500.

Jelly  of  Wharton,  126;  its  close  rela-
tionship to  vitreous  body,  129.

Jones,  Mr. Wharton,  on  rhythmical  move-
ments of  veins  of  bat's  wing,  148  ;  on
irregular  contraction  of  small  vessels
in  frog's  web,  149.

Juice-conveying  Canals  or  Tubes,  in  pa-
pillae of  skin,  62,  277 ;  a  supplement
to  blood-  and  lymphatic  vessels,  76  ;
in  bone,  115;  in  teeth,  115;  in  semi-
lunar cartilages,  116  ;  in  cornea,  116  ;
in  tendon,  120-124;  in  umbilical  cord
(mucous  tissue),  130-131  ;  in  dartos,
136-137;  in  connective  tissues,  131;
in  connective  tissue-proper,  138  ;  see
346,  504.

Juices,  conveyance  of  infection  by  means
of  morbid,  257,  504-505.  Cf.  254,
530-531.

Kekule,  his  analysis  of  amyloid  spleens,
415.

Keratitis  (parenchymatous),  340-341,
343-344.

Kidney,  epithelium  of  vessels  of,  145  ;
action  of,  due  to  its  epithelium,  158  ;
minute  metastatic  deposits  in,  from
endocarditis,  244 ;  swelling  of,  and
changes  in,  from  infectant  matters  in
blood,  246  ;  deposition  of  silver  in
Malpighian  bodies  and  medullary  sub-
stance of,  247  ;  deposition  of  urate  of
soda  in,  in  gout,  248  ;  changes  in,  in
Bright's  disease,  335-336  ;  appearance
of  convoluted  tubules  in  fatty  degene-
ration of,  389  ;  inflammatory  (second-
ary) fatty  degeneration  of  epithelium
of  (392),  leading  to  atrophy,  393  ;
amyloid  degeneration  of  Malpighian
bodies  of,  with  their  afferent  arteries,
423  ;  circulation  in,  424.

Kirkes,  Dr.,  406.

Kluge,  on  independent  vascular  system
of  new-formations,  89.

35

Kolliker,  67,  68 ;  on  contractile  sub-
stances of  muscle,  85;  on  muscular
fibres  of  umbilical  vessels,  127;  on
Haemato-crystalline,  179  ;  on  lympha-
tic glands,  207 ;  on  many-nucleated
cells  in  marrow  of  bones,  347  ;  on
striated  border  of  cylindrical  epithe-
lium of  intestinal  villi,  366-367  ;  on
physiological  fatty  liver  in  sucking
animals,  370.

Kunde,  on  production  of  cataract  in
frogs  by  introduction  of  salt  into  in-
testinal canal  or  subcutaneous  tissue,
154;  on  Haemato-crystalline,  179.

Lactic  acid,  in  leukaemie  blood,  205 ;  in
spleen,  205.

Lacunas,  no  real  existence  in  living  bone,
in  which  entirely  filled  up  by  bone-
cells,  458-460 ;  see  Bone.

Laennec,  on  colloid,  510-511,  525;  on
tubercle,  517,  519.

Lardaceous  (Bacony)  Degeneration.  See
Amyloid  Degeneration.

Lebert,  his  fibro-plastic  corpuscles,  70-
71;  on  the  corpuscles  tuberculeux,
518-519.

Lecanu,  on  presence  of  fibrine  in  red
blood-corpuscles,  174.

Lecithine. See  Myeline.

Lehmann,  on  Syntonin,  84  ;  on  Haemato-
crystalline,  179.

Lens,  Crystalline,  origin  of,  65 ;  fibres
of,  epidermoidal  cells,  66 ;  reproduc-
tion of,  after  extraction  for  cataract,
66 ;  see  Cataract.

Lereboullet,  on  the  fatty  livers  of  geese,
370.

Leucine,  in  leukaemie  blood,  205 ;  in
contents  of  intestines,  205 ;  in  spleen,
205.

Leucocytosis,  definition  of,  201 ;  con-
founded with  pyaemia,  223 ;  physiolo-
gical, in  digestion,  224  ;  in  pregnancy,
224-225  ;  pathological,  in  scrofulosis,
226,  typhoid-fever,  cancer,  malignant
erysipelas,  226  ;  see  526-527.

Leucorrhoea,  heterologous  nature  of  se-
cretion in,  488-489.

Leukaemia,  201-205  ;  accompanied  either
by  hyperinosis  or  hypinosis,  201 ;
blood  in,  how  distinguished  from  chy-
lous blood,  202  ;  fatal  tendency  of,
203  ;  haemorrhagic  diathesis  in,  203  ;
epistaxis,  apoplexy,  melaena  in,  203 ;
splenic  and  lymphatic  forms,  204 ;
difference  of  morphological  elements
in  blood  in  these  two  forms,  204 ;  is  a
permanent,  progressive  leucocytosis,
205 ;  substances  found  in  blood  in,
205 ;  confounded  with  pyaemia,  223 ;

546

INDEX.

distinction  between,  and  chlorosis,
261.

Leydig,  on  structure  of  muscle,  80,  83.

Life,  characteristics  of,  324  ;  duration  of
in  different  elements,  500-501.

Lipomata,  363.

Liquefaction,  of  bone,  464,  496  ;  of  in-
tercellular substance  of  connective  tis-
sue, 496.

Liver,  hypertrophy  and  hyperplasy  of,
94 ;  arrangement  of  capillary  vessels
in  acini  of,  and  their  relation  to  hepa-
tic cells,  102-103  ;  the  three  constitu-
ents of  capillary  network  in  acini,  103  ;
secretion  of,  due  to  hepatic  cells,  159;
its  connection  with  the  hasmorrhagic
diathesis,  164  ;  enlargement  of,  and
changes  in,  from  infectant  matters  in
blood,  246 ;  secondary  cancer  more
frequent  in,  than  in  lungs,  253,  505  ;
increased  secretion  provoked  in,  by
injection  of  irritating  substances  into
blood,  331  ;  fatty  physiological  and
pathological,  37o-374;  intermediate  in-
terchange of  matter  in,  by  means  of
biliary  ducts,  371-372  ;  three  zones  of
change  (fat,  amyloid  matter,  pigment),
in  acini  of,  371-372 ;  persistence  of
cells,  in  fatty,  373-374 ;  curability  of
fatty  condition  of,  374;  amyloid  de-
generation of,  417-418.

Lobstein,  93.

Loculi,  of  cancer,  how  produced,  499.

Locus  Niger,  295.

Long  Bones  {i.  e.,  osseous  tissue  of),
growth  in  length  of,  from  cartilage,
in  thickness,  from  periosteum,  451-
452.

Ludwig,  on  molecules  of  nerves  when  at
rest,  328  ;  on  salivary  glands,  329.

Lungs,  metastases  (metastatic  deposits)
in,  as  a  rule  due  to  peripheral  throm-
bosis, 240,  deposition  of  bone-earth  in,
in  mollities  ossium,  249;  secondary
cancer  less  frequent  in,  than  in  liver,
253-505;  myeline  in,  270;  fatty  and
pigmentary  degeneration  of  epithelium
of  air-cells  of,  387 ;  gangrene  of,  from
gangrenous  metamorphosis  of  throm-
bus in  transverse  sinus  after  caries  of
internal  ear,  387  ;  laminated  bodies  in,
412.

Luxuriation,  489.

Luys,  on  excretion  of  starch  through
skin,  420.

Lymph,  conveys  corpuscular  elements  to
blood,  191  ;  tibrine  of,  how  it  differs
from  fibrine  of  blood,  192,  not  perfect
fibrine,  192.

Lymph-eorpuscles,  209.

Lvmphat'£ Glands, how distinguished

■  from  ordinary  secreting  glands,  78 ;
supply  blood  with  its  corpuscular
elements,  191,  204;  affection  of,  in
erysipelas  and  diffuse  phlegmonous
inflammation, 200,  in  typhoid  fever,

200  ;  leucocytosis  due  to  affection  of,

201  ;  swelling  of,  in  leukaemia,  203-
204  ;  structure  of,  206-210  ;  no  pass-
age for  pus-corpuscles  through,  218;
deposits  in,  from  tattooing,  218-220  ;
deposition  of  cancerous  matter  in,
221,  of  syphilitic  virus  in,  221  ;  irrita-
tion of,  in  what  consists,  222  ;  physio-
logical irritation  of,  in  digestion,  224,
in  pregnancy,  224-225  ;  affection  of,
in  scrofulosis,  226  ;  category  of,  ex-
tended, 227  ;  diseases  of,  from  action
of  infectant  fluids,  245  ;  amyloid  dege-
neration of  (minute  arteries  and  gland-
cells)  425-427  ;  scrofulous  changes  in,
439 ;  complete  correspondence  be-
tween corpuscles  of,  and  constituents
of  tubercle,  526.

Lymphatic  Vessels,  connection  of,  with
phlogistic  crasis  or  hyperinosis,  196  ;
introduction  of  pus  into,  217.

Lymphoid  Organs,  226-228  ;  diseases  of,
from  action  of  iniectant  fluids,  245.

Magnetic  needle,  action  of  nerves  upon,
325.

Malignity,  not  to  be  confounded  with
heterology,  92,  529.

Malpighi,  on  fibrine,  167.

Malpighian  Bodies,  (spleen)  equivalen
to  follicles  of  lymphatic  glands,  227  ;
amyloid  degeneration  of,  411,  415.

(kidney)  deposition  of  silver  in,

247  ;  amyloid  degeneration  of,  and  of
their  afferent  arteries,  421-424.

Marrow,  multi-nuclear  cells  in,  346-347  ;
a  connective  tissue,  452  ;  formed  from
osseous  tissue,  452 ;  ultimate  product
of  development  of  bone,  452 ;  formed
from  cartilage  either  directly,  457-459,
or  indirectly  (through  osseous  tissue)
457  ;  fatty,  formation  of,  458,  normal
in  long  bones,  458;  in  bodies  of  ver-
tebras nearly  always  only  small  cells
of,  without  fat,  458  ;  inflammatory,
458 ;  very  close  correspondence  be-
tween, and  granulations,  464;  formn-
tion  of  osteoid  tissue  and  bone  from,
465-466 ;  young  (granulations)  start-
ing-point of  all  heteroplastic  develop-
ment, 470  ;  formation  of  bone  out  of,
in  fractures,  483-484  ;  undue  forma-
tion of,  in  osteomalacia,  489-490 ;  very
close  relation  of,  to  pus,  490.

Marrow-cells,  throw  out  processes  (be-
come jagged)  during  ossiiication,  461,

INDEX.

547

466;  transformation  of,  into  bone-
corpuscles,  466-46*7.

Maturation  of  Pus,  consists  in  a  soften-
ing of  the  intercellular  substance,  466.

Meckel,  H.,  on  melanaemia,  225,  226  ;  on
corpora  amylacea,  320 ;  on  the  amy-
loid substance,  411,  415.

Meckel,  J.  F.,  Junr.,  on  classification  of
neoplasms,  90.

Medullary  Canals  of  bone.  See  Haver-
sian canals.

Medullary  Cancer,  509.

Fungus. See  Medullary  Cancer.

Spaces,  primary  and  secondary,

4*73 ;  irregular  formation  of,  in  rickets,
477  ;  excessive  formation  of,  in  osteo-
malacia, 4S9-490.

Tissue. See  Marrow.

Meissner,  on  the  two  sorts  of  papillae  in
skin,  276  ;  on  tactile  bodies,  278  ;  on
nervous  plexuses  in  submucous  tissue
of  intestines,  291.

Melaena,  in  leukaemia,  203.

Melanaemia,  255-258.

Melanic  corpuscles,  170;  259-260;  found
in  intermittent  fever  (slight  forms),
cyanosis,  typhoid  fever,  &c,  260.

Membrana  capsulo-pupillaris,  66.

Meningitis,  Tubercular,  520.

Mesenteric  Glands,  swelling  of,  in  ty-
phoid fever,  201,  226;  physiological  ir-
ritation of,  producing  leucocytosis,  224.

Metastases  (metastatic  deposits),  240-
254  ;  in  lungs,  generally  due  to  throm-
bosis in  peripheral  veins,  210  ;  different
varieties  of,  dependent  upon  condition
of  thrombus  to  which  due,  242,  cf.
387  ;  not  unfrequently  caused  by  en-
docarditis on  left  side  of  circulation,
243  ;  in  kidney,  spleen,  heart,  eye  and
brain,  244 ;  from  infectant  matters,
245  ;  from  presence  of  chemical  sub-
stances in  blood,  in  gout,  &c,  247-
248  ;  calcareous,  249-250  ;  from  diffu-
sion of  ichorous  juices,  250,  in  cancer,
253,  505.

Milk,  formation  of,  376-378.

Milza  nera,  257.

Mitral  valve,  ulceration  of,  243  ;  excres-
censes  of,  405.

Mollities  ossium,  calcareous  deposits  in
lungs  and  stomach  in,  249-250;  in
what  it  consists,  489-490.

Morbid  Growths.  See  Pathological  Tis-
sues.

Morbus  Brightii. See  Bright's  disease.

Mucin,  75-76.

Mucous  (Gelatinous,  Colloid)  Cancer,  526.

Mucous  Membranes,  fatty  usure  of,  381 ;
suppuration  in,  492-495;  development
of  papillary  tumours  on,  512-513.

Mucous  Tissue  of  Umbilical  Cord,  74  ;
yields  mucin  on  expression,  75 ;  struc-
ture of,  128-130  ;  its  close  relationship
to  vitreous  body,  129.

Mucous  Tubercle,  512.

Mucous  Tumours.  See  Myxomata,  526,
531.

Mucus,  fibrils  of  compared  with  those  of
fibrine,  168;  a  product  of  mucous
membranes  and  not  present  in  blood,
435.

Mucus-Corpuscles,  49-50  ;  development
of,  on  surface  of  mucous  membranes,
448-449  ;  relation  of,  to  pus-corpuscles
and  epithelial  cells,  495-496.

Miiller,  Heinrich,  on  radiating  fibres  of
retina,  287.

Miiller,  Johannes,  proposer  of  name,
connective  tissue,  131 ;  first  observer
of  the  large,  pale  nerve-fibres  seen  in
spinal  cord  of  Petromyzon  fluviatilis,
309  ;  on  correspondence  between  em-
bryonic and  pathological  development,
442-443  ;  on  collonema,  526  ;  on  cho-
lesteatoma, 528.

Mummies,  preservation  of  tissues  in,  325.

Muscle  :  seldom  found  in  new-formations,
91  ;  irritability  of,  332.

Striated  (red),  79-83;  transverse

and  longitudinal  striae  of,  79  ;  nuclei
of,  79-80  ;  origin  of  primitive  fasciculi
of,  80  ;  contractility  of  contents,  81,
84-85,  their  structure,  82  ;  progressive
(fatty)  atrophy  of,  84;  hypertrophy
of,  93  ;  substitution  of,  for  smooth,
100 ;  changes  produced  in  ultimate
elements  of,  by  excitation  (irritation),
328  ;  division  of  nuclei  of,  from  irrita-
tion, 347-348  ;  in  embryonic  develop-
ment, 359  ;  softening  of,  358-359  ;
interstitial  so-called  fatty  degenera-
tion, or  rather  fattening  of,  363-365  ;
parenchymatous  fatty  degeneration  of,
simple,  383-385,  inflammatory  (second-
ary) 393;  suppuration  in  interstitial
tissue  of,  490.

Smooth (organic, involuntary)

83-84  ;  fascicular  arrangement  of,  83  ;
comparison  between  fibre-cells  of,  and
primitive  fasciculi  of  striated  muscle,
83  ;  nuclei  of,  39,  83  ;  of  skin  (arrec-
tores  pilorum),  83 ;  contraction  of
vessels,  due  to,  85  ;  substitution  of
striped  for,  100;  of  dartos,  138;  of
arteries,  141-142;  in  alae  vespertitio-
num,  146-147  ;  new  formation  of,  in
fibrous  tumours  of  uterus,  487.

Myeline,  270-271.

Myeloid  Tumours,  347.

Myo-carditis,  no  fibrine  set  free  in,  433,
cf.  393-394.

548

INDEX.

Myomalacia,  858-359.
Myxomata,  526-531.

Nageli,  on  corpora  amylacea,  320.

Nails,  body  of,  composed  of  cells,  61,
65  ;  structure  of,  63  ;  growth  of,  63  ;
disease  of,  64-65.

Navel,  varieties  of,  how  produced,  126.

Necrobiosis,  definition  of,  356  ;  how  dis-
tinguished from  necrosis,  358  ;  ends  in
softening  and  disintegration,  358-359.

Necrosis,  distinction  between,  and  necro-
biosis, 358;  of  bone,  limits  of  territo-
ries of  bone-cells  well  shown  in,  462-463.

Neoplasms. See  New-Formations.

Nephritis,  parenchymatous  and  intersti-
tial, 424.

Nerve-cells. See  Ganglion-cells.

Nerve-fibres,  primitive,  their  membrane,
medullary  sheath,  and  axis-cylinder,
267  ;  white  and  grey,  distinction  be-
tween, 267-268  ;  myeline  of,  269-271  ;
grey  atrophy  of,  271  ;  axis-cylinder
(electrical  substance)  essential  consti-
tuent of,  271  ;  different  breadth  of;
272-273;  terminations  of,  274-292— in
Pacinian  bodies,  274-276 — in  tactile
bodies,  276-278 — in  loops,  nowhere
met  with,  284,  cf.  274,  278 — supposed
in  epithelium-like  structures  (in  mu-
cous membrane  of  nose  and  tongue)
284-285 — in  cochlea,  285 — in  retina,
285-289 — in  plexuses  (electrical  organ
of  silurus,  290,  and  submucous  tissue
of  intestines  (human)  291-292  ;  rami-
fication of,  289-290  ;  course  and  origin
of,  in  spinal  cord,  305-306.

Nerve-territories,  in  skin  larger  than
vessel-territories,  281.

Nerves,  seldom  found  in  new-formations,
92 ;  peripheral,  structure  of,  265 ;  fas-
cicular arrangement  of,  265  ;  intersti-
tial tissue  of,  265,  317-318  ;  grey  atro-
phy of,  271 ;  terminations  of,  274-292;
of  special  sense  (olfactory,  auditory,
optic)  284-289  ;  electrical  processes
constantly  going  on  in,  325  ;  changes
in  electrical  state  of,  produced  by  ex-
citation (irritation),  328.

Nervous  Centres,  294-320  ;  colour  of
grey  matter  of,  not  due  to  ganglion-
cells,  294  ;  different  kinds  of  ganglion-
cells  in,  296-300  ;  interstitial  substance
of  (neuro-glia)  not  nervous  but  a  kind
of  connective  tissue,  310-311 ;  corpora
amylacea  of,  317-320  ;  made  up  of  an
infinite  number  of  separate,  very  mi-
nute centres,  322-333.

Nervous  Plexuses,  in  Silurus,  290,  300-
301 ;  in  submucous  tissue  of  intestines,
291-292.

Nervous  System,  87,  263-320;  its  pre-
tended unity,  266,  322-323  ;  its  com-
position, 263-264  ;  fibrous  constituents
of,  265-294 ;  nervous  centres  (ganglio-
nic apparatuses),  294-320.

Neurilemma,  266  ;  its  relation  to  peri-
neurium, 318.

Neuro-glia,  313;  315-316  (see  310-311) ;
definition  of,  315  ;  a  kind  of  soft  con-
nective tissue  with  corpuscles,  315-
316,  cf.  313;  also  found  in  olfactory
and  auditory  nerves,  317-318.

Neuro-Pathology. See  Solidism.

New  Formation,  correspondence  between
embryonic  and  pathological,  442-443
by  means  of  simple  cell-division,  443
444 ; endogenous,  of  cells,  444-445
different  kinds  of — hyperplastic  (direct
and  indirect) and  heteroplastic,  446-
448  ;  of  vessels,  first  heteroplastic  and
then  hyperplastic,  447.

New-Formations.  See  Pathological  Tis-
sues.

Nitrate  of  Silver,  results  of  external  and
internal  use  of,  247-248,  cf.  254.

Noma,  517.

Nuclei,  constancy  of  form  of,  34  ;  forma-
tion of  (Schleiden's  theory),  35-36 ;
their  importance  in  maintaining  life  of
cells  or  other  elements  containing
them,  37  ;  essential  to  growth  of  parts,
38  ;  division  of,  see  Division  of  nuclei.

Nucleoli,  origin  of  (according  to  Schlei-
den  and  Schwann),  35 ;  division  of,  in
formative  irritation,  345.

Nutrition:  its  channels,  101-118;  con-
veyance of  nutritive  juices,  119-139;
and  circulation,  140-1 65 ;  of  liver,  102-
104;  of  bone,  115;  of  teeth,  115;  of
cornea,  116  ;  of  semi-lunar  cartilages,
116;  of  tendons,  120,  123  ;  of  mucous
tissue  of  umbilical  cord,  127-130  ;  im-
portance of  capillary  membrane  in,
153  ;  no  directly  regulating  influence
exercised  upon,  by  hyperemia,  156-
157.

Nutritive  districts,  in  tendon,  124 ;  see
Cell-territories.

Nutritive  Irritability,  334-345 ;  often
tends  to  death  of  a  part,  334  ;  a  pro-
perty of  individual  elements  of  parts,
not  effect  of  nervous  influence,  336.

Nutritive  Irritation,  334-345 ;  number
of  constituent  elements  of  a  part  not
increased  in,  334  ;  often  cause  of  death
of  a  part,  334 ;  comprises  a  part  of
what  is  ordinarily  called  inflammation,
335  ;  in  kidney,  335-336  ;  in  cartilage,
336-337 ;  in  skin,  337 ;  in  cornea,
338,  340-342,  344-345  ;  effects  of,  not
due  to  nervous  influenc0,  but  to  action

INDEX.

54:)

of  individual  elements  of  parts,  336-
339  ;  often  accompanied  by  formative
changes,  344.
Nutritive  Restitution  (nutritive  restitu-
tional  power),  345.

Olfactory  Nerve,  its  termination  in  nasal
mucous  membrane,  283-284 ;  neuro-
glia in,  317-318.

Optic  Nerve,  medullary  hypertrophy  of,
in  retina,  268  ;  termination  and  con-
nections of,  in  retina,  2S5-287  ;  action
of  light  upon,  how  rendered  possible,
288.

Osseous  Tissue,  definition  of,  453 ;  me-
dullary tissue  developed  out  of,  453-
454  ;  cancer  and  pus  in  bone  formed
by  direct  conversion  of,  454  ;  may  be
formed  out  of  marrow  and  cartilage,
458  ;  see  Bone.

Ossification,  of  arteries,  real  bone  formed
in,  403-404,  how  distinguished  from
calcification,  407  ;  an  inflammatory
process,  408 ;  of  cartilage,  454-456,
459-461 — of  marrow,  466-467 — of  pe-
riosteum, 467-470,  472.

Osteoid  Tissue,  formation  of,  in  cartilage,
461,  in  medullary  tissue,  466-467,  in
periosteum,  469,  472,  473  ;  definition
of,  467.

Osteoma,  soft,  of  the  maxillae,  472.

Osteomalacia. See  Mollities  ossium.

Osteoporosis,  465.

Ovary,  cerebral  matter  in,  95 ;  corpora
lutea  of,  386-387.

Pacinian  (Vaterian)  bodies,  274-276.

Psedarthrocace  (scrofulous  necrosis  of
the  fingers  in  children)  462.

Paget,  Mr.,  on  myeloid  tumours,  347.

Panniculus  adiposus,  simple  hypertrophy
of,  94.

Papilla?  of  Skin,  network  of  connective
tissue  corpuscles  in,  60-62,  62,  277  ;
fine  elastic  fibres  in,  135,  277  ;  nu-
cleated cells  in,  135  ;  nutrition  of,  136.

of  bed  of  nails,  62.

Papillary  portion  of  skin,  135  ;  nucleated
cells  in,  13^.

Tumours. See  Papillomata.

Papillomata,  512-516.
Parasitism  of  New-Formations,  505-506.
Parenchyma,  definition  of  term,  339.
Parenchymatous  Exudation,  339-340.

Inflammation,  436.

Nephritis,  its  seat  in  epithelium

of  cortex  of  kidney,  424.

Passive  Processes.  356  427  ;  definition
of,  357;  different  forms  of:  necrobio-
sis (softening),  358-359,  induration,
360,  fat'y metamorphosis  (degenera-

tion)— a  necrobiotic  process — 359,
amyloid  degeneration,  409-427.
Pathological  Substitutions,  how  they  dif-
fer from  histological  ones,  100.
Pathological  Tissues  (New-Formations),
89-97  ;  definition  of,  88 ;  every  one
a  physiological  prototype,  88;  John
Hunter's  comparison  of,  89 ;  vessels
in,  Hunter,  Rust,  and  Kluge's  notions
respecting,  89 ;  classification  of,  91-
92  ;  rarely  contain  elements  belong-
ing to  more  highly  organized,  and
especially  to  muscular  and  nervous,
systems,  91-92  ;  chief  constituents,
cells  analogous  to  epithelial  cells  and
corpuscles  of  connective  tissues,  91-
92  ;  not  necessarily  benignant  because
correspond  to  physiological  tissues,
97,  really  reproduction  of  these  tis-
sues, 97  ;  greater  dryness  of,  less
power  of  infection,  252,  530-531  ;
nearly  all  derived  from  connective
tissue  and  its  equivalents,  441 ;  mode
of  origin  of,  a  double  one  (simple  cell-
division,  endogenous  formation  of
cells),  443-448  ;  really  destructive  na-
ture of  every  kind  of,  486  ;  division
of,  into  homologous  and  heterologous,
486 ;  different  duration  of  life  of  indi-
vidual elements  of,  500 ;  contagious
character  of,  503-505  ;  parasitism  and
autonomy  of,  505-506  ;  nearly  all  be-
gin with  a  proliferation,  507-508  ;  no-
menclature and  classification  of,  508-
510  ;  difference  between  form  and
nature  of,  511;  comparison  between,
in  animals  and  vegetables,  532.

Pearly  Tumours,  528-529 ;  only  infect
locally,  530.

Penis,  cauliflower  tumours  of,  514.

Perihepatitis,  433.

Perineurium,  265  ;  compared  with  neuro-
glia, 318;  its  relation  to  neurilemma,
318.

Periosteum,  structure  of,  467,  531  ;  de-
velopment of  bone  out  of,  467-470  ;
(see  451-452);  conversion  of,  into  car-
tilage, 469 ;  transformation  (patholo-
gical) of,  into  osteoid  tissue  and  bone,
472;  formation  of  bone  out  of,  iu
fractures,  483.

Periostitis,  467-468.

Peripolar  state  of  nerves,  328.

Peristaltic  Movements  of  intestines,  29l.

Petrifaction  of  Arteries,  407.

Petromyzon  fluviatilis  (lamprey),  spina!
cord  of,  its  structure,  308-310,  no  me-
dullary matter  in,  only  simple,  pale,
nerve-fibres,  310.

Peyer's  patches,  really  lvmphatic  glands.
226-227.

51)0

INDEX.

Phlebitis,  supposed  formation  of  pus  in
veins  in,  230-231 ;  substitution  of  term
thrombosis  for,  233  ;  an  inflammation
affecting  walls  and  not  contents,  of  a
vessel,  236  ;  no  necessary  coagulation
of  blood  in  vessel  at  part  affected,  236.

Phlogistic  Crasis. See  Crasis.

Phyma,  510.

Physalides  (brood-cavities)  444-445.

Physaliphores  (cells  containing  vesicles)
444.

Physiological  Types,  all  pathological  tis-
sues (neoplasms,  new-formations)  to
be  referred  to,  88. Cf.  532-533.

Pigment,  in  cells  of  choroid  membrane,
39  ;  in  mucus-corpuscles,  49-50 ;  seat
of,  in  acini  of,  liver  (pigment-zone)
372  ;  in  pulmonary  epithelium,  387.

Pigment-cells,  produced  by  transforma-
tion of  epidermic  cells,  66-67  ;  in  blood
in  ague,  and  melanaemia,  256-257 ;
distinction  between,  and  fat-granule
cells,  387-388  ;  in  catarrhal  pneumo-
nia, 387.

Piorry,  his  crusta  granulosa  (Haemitis)
187,  223.

Plants,  growth  of,  45-47  ;  tumours  of,
532-533.

Plaques  Muqueuses,  282,  512.

Pleurisy,  fibrine  produced  in  exudation
of,  192-193;  buffy  coat  in,  193-194;
inspissation  of  pus  in,  214  ;  metastatic,
due  to  ichorrhaemia,  249-250.

Plexuses,  nervous,  in  Silurus,  291,  301 ;
in  submucous  tissue  of  intestines,  291-
292.

Pneumogastric  Nerve,  effects  of  section
of,  explained,  351-352.

Pneumonia,  buffy  coat  in,  193-194  ;  in-
crease of  colourless  corpuscles  in,  when
accompanied  by  swelling  of  bronchial
glands,  228  ;  how  caused  by  section
of  pneumogastric,  352  ;  catarrhal,  for-
mation of  pigment  in,  387.

Polli,  on  slowly  coagulating  (brady-)
fibrine,  193,  194.

Polysarcia,  how  produced,  94,  363.

Portal,  on  central  canal  of  spinal  cord,
303.

Potash,  provocative  of  ciliary  movement,
231.

Pregnancy,  enlargement  of  vessels  in,
146;  leucocytosis  in,  224-225  ;  hyperi-
nosis  in,  accounted  for,  225.

Prostate,  concretions  of.  See  Prostatic
concretions.

Prostatic  Concretions  (laminated  amy-
loid bodies)  of,  411-413;  appearance
and  size  of,  412;  reactions  of,  with
iodine,  413.

Puerperal fever,  so  called pyaemia in,

223-225 ;  embolical  metastases  in  lunga
in,  240.

Pulmonary  Artery,  embolia  of,  240-241.

Purkinje,  on  lining  membrane  of  cere-
bral ventricles,  311-312;  on  corpora
amylacea,  320  ;  on  ciliary  movement,
331.

Purpura,  163-164.

Pus,  corpuscles  of,  see  Pus-Corpuscles ;
compared  with  cancer-juice,  91 ;  for-
merly thought  to  be  secretion  from
blood,  212  ;  physiological  reabsorp-
tion  of,  212;  is  never  reabsorbed  as
pus,  213  ;  fluid  part  of,  reabsorbed,
213 ;  inspissation  (cheesy  metamor-
phosis) of,  213,  215;  serum  of,  213-
214 ;  fatty  metamorphosis  of  corpus-
cles of,  216  ;  reabsorption  of,  in  shape
of  emulsion  (pathological  milk)  216  ;
intravasation  of,  into  veins  and  lym-
phatic vessels,  217  ;  not  present  in
softening  thrombi,  334  ;  in  bone,
formed  by  direct  transition  out
of  osseous  tissue,  453-454 ;  maturation
of,  466 ;  very  close  relation,  of,  to
medullary  tissue,  490,  and  granula-
tions, 466,  497  ;  formation  of,  out  of
epithelium  (skin,  491-492,  mucous
membranes,  482-493),  490-494 — out
of  connective  tissue,  490,  495-496  ;
no  solvent  power,  491-497  ;  corre-
spondence of  first  stage  of,  to  that  of
cancer,  cancroid  and  sarcoma,  499  ;
relation  of,  to  tubercular  infiltration,
519  (cf.  215) ;  resemblance  of  its  cells
and  nuclei  to  those  of  tubercle,  521  ;
haematoid  nature  of,  527.

Pus-Corpuscles,  49-50 ;  great  resemblance
between,  and  colourless  blood-corpus-
cles, 182,  212,  how  they  can  be  distin-
guished, 188,  527  ;  structure  of,  213  ;
shrivelling  of,  214;  fatty  degeneration
of,  216;  cannot  pass  through  lympha-
tic glands,  218  ;  when  not  furnished
by  an  ulcerating  surface,  derived  from
epithelial  cells,  449  ;  development  of,
from  epithelial  cells,  491-493  ;  relation
of,  to  mucus-  and  epithelial  cells,  493-
494 ;  development  of,  from  connec-
tive tissue  corpuscles,  490,  495-496.

Pustules,  formation  of,  491-492  ;  vario-
lous, 492.

Putrilage,  definition  of,  500.

Pyaemia,  211-251  ;  definition  of,  211  ;
confounded  with  leucocytosis  and  leu-
kaemia, 223  ;  no  pus-corpuscles  in
blood  in,  excepting  when  an  abscess
has  emptied  itself  into  a  vein,  228-
229;  latent,  244;  if  retained,  to  be
used  as  a  collective  name  for  seve-
ral dissimilar  processes  (leucocytosis,

INDEX.

551

thrombosis,  ichorrhaemia)  250.  See
Phlebitis,  Thrombosis,  Leukaemia,
Leucocytosis,  Ichorrhaemia.

Rabbits,  rhythmical  movements  in  arte-
ries of  ears  of,  148.

Recurrence,  local,  of  tumours,  after  ex-
tirpation, 503.

Redfern,  Dr.,  his  experiments  on  cartil-
age, 336.

Reichert,  on  the  fibres  of  connective  tis-
sue, 70  ;  his  theory  of  the  formation
of  connective  tissue,  '71-72.  138,  169;
on  the  continuity  of  tissues,  97-98 ;
discoverer  of  Haemato-crystalline,  179-
180;  on  the  connective-tissue  frame-
work of  the  body,  441-442.

Reinhardt,  on  origin  from  pus  of  much
of  what  is  called  tubercle,  215  (cf.
519);  on  fat-granule  masses,  377;  on
tuberculosis  and  tuberculous  matter,
519.

Remak,  on  germinal  membrane  in  con-
nection with  formation  of  glands,  66  ;
on  division  of  blood-corpuscles  in  em-
bryo, 190  ;  his  mistake  with  regard  to
brain-sand,  416  ;  on  cleavage  of  yolk,
442.

Respiratory  Substance  of  red  blood- cor-
puscles, 262-263  ;  paralysis  of,  in  ty-
phoid fevers,  262,  from  the  action  of
different  chemical  substances,  262.

Rete  Malpighii  (mucosum)  57,  60,  61,
62,  &e.

Retina,  medullary  hypertrophy  of  optic
nerve  in,  268  ;  structure  of,  285-289  ;
its  sensibility  to  light,  what  due  to,
288  ;  blind  spot  in,  288  ;  bodies  akin
to  corpora  amylacea  found  in,  320.

Rhachitis. See  Rickets.

Rickets,  development  of  bone,  best  ob-
served in,  461 ;  different  processes  of
growth  of  bone,  as  seen  in,  476-481  ;
in  what  it  consists,  476  ;  irregularity
of  calcification  in,  476  ;  infractions
and  inflexions  of  bones  in,  478  ;  irre-
gular formation  of  medullary  spaces
in,  477.

Ricord,  on  seat  of  virus  in  bubo,  221-512.

Robin,  on  perineurium,  265  ;  his  plaques
a phcsieurs  noyaux  in  marrow  of  bones,
348  ;  on  tubercular  meningitis,  520.

Rokitansky,  on  atheroma,  402.

Rollet,  on  structure  of  muscle,  80.

Rouget,  his  explanation  of  supposed  ex-
cretion of  starch  through  skin,  420.

Rust,  on  independent  vascular  system  of
new-formations,  89;  200.

Ruysch,  on  blood-vessels,  103.

Salt,  production  of  cataract  in  frogs  by

injection  of,  154;  its  action  upon  red
blood-corpuscles,  173.

Salter,  Dr.  Hyde,  on  connection  between
tendon  and  muscle,  99.

Sarcoma,  mammary,  90  ;  pancreatic,  90,
correspondence  between  first  stage  of
and  that  of  pus,  499  ;  in  France  called
fibro-plastic  tumour,  509  ;  cheesy  me-
tamorphosis of,  524 ;  definition  of,  532  ■
not  unfrequently  malignant,  532.

Scherer,  on  correspondence  between  sub-
stances found  in  leukaemic  blood,  and
in  spleen,  205.

Schiff,  on  rhythmical  movements  of  arte-
ries, 148.

Schleiden,  30  ;  on  development  of  nu-
cleoli, nuclei  and  cells,  out  of  free
blastema,  35-36,  449.

Schmidt,  Carl,  his  analyses  of  amyloid
spleens,  415.

Schuhz,  Carl  Heinrich,  on  effects  of  ad-
dition of  aqueous  solution  of  iodine  to
blood-corpuscles,  173  ;  on  melanic
blood-corpuscles,  260  ;  on  necrobiosis,
358.

Schultze,  Max.,  on  termination  of  nerves
of  nasal  mucous  membrane,  285.

Schwann,  29  ;  30  ;  35  ;  on  intercellular
substance  of  tissues,  41  ;  his  theory
of  the  formation  of  connective  tissue,
70-71  ;  on  embryonic  and  pathological
development,  442  ;  509.

Sclerema,  definition  of,  526.

Sclerosis,  of  arteries,  403  ;  definition  of,
468  ;  of  intercellular  substance  of  pe-
riosteum, 469.

Scrofulosis,  leucocytosis  in,  226  ;  changes
in  lymphatic  glands  in,  439.

Scrotum,  rugae  of,  137.

Scurvy,  163-164.

Sebaceous  Cysts. See  Epidermic  Cysts.

Glands,  374-375.

Matter,  compared  with  colos-
trum, 376.

Secreting  organs,  specific affinities of,

157-159,  332.
Secretion,  definition  of,  492-493.
Secretory  (Exudative)  Inflammation,  436.
Section  of  nerves,  effects  of,  explained

and  analvzed.  351-352; cf.  150,  156,

332.
Semi-lunar  Cartilages,  nutrition  of,  117

118  ;  not  cartilage  at  all,  but  tendon

119.
Septhaemia. See  Ichorrhaemia.
Siegmund,  G.,  on  presence  of  creatine  in

muscular  fibres  of  uterus,  84.
Silicic  acid,  170.

Silurus  (malapterurus),  plexiform  ar-
rangement of  nerve-fibres  in  electrical

organ  of,  290,  300.

552

INDEX.

Silver,  salts  of,  deposition  of,  in  skin  and
kidneys,  274,  cf.  254.

Skin,  papillae  of,  see  Papillae  ;  effect  of
direct  irritation  of,  not  limited  to  par-
ticular nerve-territories,  338  ;  see  Co-
rium  and  Cuticle.

Sluggish  layer  in  capillaries,  185.

Small  Pox,  effects  of,  upon  nails,  65  ;
contagion  of,  254 ;  pustules  of,  492.

Snellen,  on  section  of  fifth  pair  of  nerves,
352.

Soda,  provocative  of  ciliary  movement,
331.

Softening  (malacia)  a  form  of  (passive)
degeneration,  358.

Solidism  (Neuro-pathologv),  44  ;  264  ;
283  ;  291  ;  293  ;  322-324  ;  336-339  ;
349-350;  504;  533.

Specific  affinities,  157-159,  332.

Spinal  Cord,  three  kinds  of  ganglion-
cells  in  grey  matter  of,  motor,  sensi-
tive and  sympathetic,  296-300  ;  white
and.  grey  matter  of,  302-303;  central
canal  of,  303-304 ;  distribution  of  the
three  kinds  of  ganglion-cells  in,  305  ;
lobular  arrangement  of  fibrous  consti-
tuents of,  305-306 ;  commissures  of,
306 ;  of  petromyzon  (lamprey),  308-
309  ;  central  thread  of  ependyma  of,
304,  315  ;  grey  (gelatinous)  atrophy
of,  319.

Spleen,  its  connection  with  the  haemor-
rhagic  diathesis,  164;  swelling  of,  in
typhoid  fever,  200  ;  in  leukaemia,  203  ;
intimately  concerned  in  development
of  blood,  204  ;  increased  action  of,  in
leukaemia,  205  ;  colourless  corpuscles
conveyed  away  from,  by  lymphatics,
not  by  veins,  209  ;  a  lymphoid  organ,
its  Malpighian  bodies  being  equivalent
to  follicles  of  a  lymphatic  gland,  227-
228 ;  minute  metastatic  deposits  in,
243-244  ;  tumefaction  of,  presence  of
noxious  matters  in  blood,  246  ;  con-
nection between  its  diseases  and  those
of  liver  and  kidney,  246  ;  enlargement
of,  in  ague  and  melanaemia,  256-257  ;
occurrence  of  pigment-cells  in  blood
generally  due  to  affection  of,  258 ;
myeline  in,  271  ;  amyloid  degenera-
tion of  (sagoey  spleen)  411  ;  analyses
of  amyloid  spleens,  415.

Spondylarthrocace  (caries  of  vertebras),
inspissation  of  pus  in,  215-216.

Stannius,  on  pale  nerve-fibres  met  with
in  spinal  marrow  of  Petromyzon  flu-
viatilis,  310.

Starch,  in  vegetable  cells,  45-46  ; sup-
posed excretion of  through  skin  ac-
counted for,  420.
Steatomu,  508-509.

Stellulae  Verheynii,  389.

Stiebel,  on  pigment-cells  in  blood  (me-
lanaemia), 256.

Stilling,  on  central  canal  of  spinal  cord,
303.

Stimuli,  specific  relations  or  affinities  of,
332;  irritating  or  inflammatory  (irri-
taments)  necessary  for  production  of
inflammation,  429.

Stomach,  arrangement  of  capillaries  in
muscular  coat  of,  30 ;  deposits  of  bone-
earth  in  mucous  membrane  of,  in
mollities  ossium,  249  ;  fatty  usure  of
mucous  membrane  of,  381 ;  inflamma-
tions of,  433.

Subcutaneous  tissue,  diffuse  gangrenous
inflammation  of,  from  ichorrhaemia,
250.

Substantia  nigra,  295.

fusca,  295.

Substitution  of  Tissues,  histological,  99-
100  ;  pathological,  100  ;  in  bone,  452,
470.

Sugar,  its  action  upon  red  blood-corpus-
cles, 172.

Sulphuric  Acid,  action  of,  on  cellulose
(after  application  of  iodine  and  alone),
31 — on  corpora  amylacea  of  brain
with  iodine),  320 — on  cholestearine
(with  iodine  and  alone),  400.

Supiot,  Mme.,  249.

Suppuration,  in  bone,  465  ;  a  pure  pro-
cess of  luxuriation,  489  ;  two  forms
of,  superficial,  in  epithelium,  490,
and  deep,  in  connective  tissue,  490,
495-496 ;  ulcerative,  497  ;  eroding
form  of,  500.

Sympathetic  Nerve,  effects  of  section  of,
150,  156  ;  ganglion-cells  of,  in  spinal
cord  (of  man),  297-300,  305,  (of  pe-
tromyzon fluviatilis)  308-309,  deposi
tion  of  pigment  in,  295-296.

Syntonin,  found  in  striated  and  non-
striated  muscle,  84.

Tabes  dorsalis,  319.

Tactile  bodies,  276-278,  283,  288.

Tattooing,  deposits  caused  by,  in  lym-
phatic glands,  218-220.

Teeth,  nutrition  of,  115.

Teichmann,  on  Haemine,  178.

Tendo  Achillis,  119-123.

Tendons,  connection  of,  with  muscles,
99  ;  structure  of,  120-122  ;  growth  of,
123;  nutrition  of,  124  ;  nutritive  dis-
tricts of,  124.

Textor,  346.

Thrombi,  puriform  softening  of,  233,
237  ;  colourless  corpuscles  found  in,
not  pus-,  but  blood-corpuscles,  834-
335 ; speedy disappearance of red

IXDEX.

553

blood-corpuscles  from,  235 ;  detach-
ment of  fragments  from  softening,
238,  406 ;  prolonged,  and  their  im-
port, 239  ;  autochthonous,  239  ;  con-
dition of,  important  in  determining
character  of  metastatic  deposits  arising
from,  241,  cf.  387.

Thrombosis,  232-238 ;  may  arise  from
phlebitis,  arteritis,  endocarditis,  236 ;
of  transverse  sinus,  from  caries  of  in-
ternal ear,  387.

Thymus  Gland,  essentially  a  lymphatic
gland,  227  ;  endogenous  cell-formation
in,  444-445. -

Tigri,  on  melanaemia,  257.

Tissues,  classification  of  normal,  55-56,
of  pathological,  91-92,  509-510.

Tongue,  follicles  of  root  of,  equivalent  to
follicles  of  lymphatic  glands,  227  ;  ter-
minations of  nerves  in  mucous  mem-
brane of,  285.

Tonsils,  really  lymphatic  glands,  227.

Traer,  Mr.  James,  on  contraction  of  alae
vespertilionum,  147.

Traube,  on  section  of  pneumogastric
nerve,  332.

Trigeminus  (fifth  pair  of  nerves)  effects
of  section  of,  explained,  351-352.

Tuber,  definition  of,  502.

Tubercle,  neglected  as  being  a  crude  pro-
duct, 90 ;  cheesy  products  regarded  as,
in  great  measure  really  derived  from
pus,  215,  cf.  520;  phyma,  as  a  new
name  for,  510;  as  a  designation  for  an
external  form,  517  ;  infiltration  and
granulation  of,  517  ;  corpuscles  of,
518 ;  real,  only  exist  in  a  knotted  or
granular  form,  519-520  ;  its  origin
from  connective  tissue,  520-521 ;  nu-
clei and  cells  of,  how  they  resemble
those  of  pus  and  differ  from  those  of
cancer,  522;  fatty  degeneration  (cheesy
metamorphosis)  of,  522 ;  solitary,  of
brain,  522-523  ;  obliteration  of  vessels
of,  523-524;  lymphoid  nature  of,  527.

Tubercle,  mucous,  512.

Tubercle-corpuscles,  518.

Tubercular  Infiltration  of  lungs,  due  to
presence  within  alveoli  of  shrivelled-up
pus-cells,  215,518;  inflammatory  ori-
gin and  non-tuberculous  nature  of,  519.

Tubercular  Meningitis,  520.

Tuberculization,  of  Pus,  215.

Tumeur  perlee,  528.

Tumours  :  see  the  specific  names ;  tu-
berous and  infiltrated,  471 ;  compound
nature  of  tuberous,  and  mode  of  their
enlargement,  501-502 ;  local  recur-
rence of,  after  extirpation,  its  cause,
503  ;  vegetable,  533.

Typhoid-fever, hypinosis in, 200  ; in-

crease of  colourless  corpuscles  in,  200 ;
swelling  of  mesenteric  glands  and
spleen  in,  201,  cf.  226;  melanic  cor-
puscles in  blood  in,  260 ;  deposition
of  pigment  in  ganglia  of  sympathetic
in,  295. See  439.

Typhoid  fevers,  diminution  of  respiratory
power  of  red  blood-corpuscles  in,  262.

Typhous  matter,  not  an  exudation,  440.

Tyrosine,  on  liver,  205  ;  in  contents  of
intestines,  205  ;  in  spleen,  205.

Ulcer,  atheromatous,  382 ;  description
of,  404.

Ulceration,  497  ;  sanious,  500.

Umbilical  Cord,  125-130;  really  non-
vascular, 125 ;  capillaries  of,  126  ;  per-
sistent portion  of,  its  limits,  how  de-
termined, 127;  deciduous  portion  of,
127;  mucous  tissue  of,  128-130;  nu-
trition of,  128-130;  structure  of,  128-
129.

Vessels,  their  relation  to  umbili-
cal cord,  126  ;  great  thickness  of  mus-
cular coat  of,  127.

Urate  of  Soda,  in  gout,  248  ;  deposition
of,  in  kidney,  248.

Urea,  diminution  of  secretion  of,  in  amy-
loid degeneration  of  kidney,  423-424.

Uric  acid,  in  leukaemic  blood,  205 ;  in
spleen,  205.

Uterus,  creatine  in  muscular  fibres  of,
84 ;  ciliated  epithelium  of  mucous
membrane  of,  replaced  by  squamous,
epithelium  in  pregnancy,  100 ;  new
formation  of  muscular  fibres,  in  fibrous
tumours  of,  487  ;  cauliflower  tumours
of  neck  of,  514-516.

Utricle,  primordial,  31  ;  45-46.

Vagina,  substitution,  in  prolapsed,  of
epidermis  for  epithelium,  100.

Vagus  (pneumogastric  nerve)  effects  of
section  of,  explained,  351-352.

Valentin,  on  lining  membrane  of  cere-
bral ventricles,  311  ;  on  ciliary  move-
ment, 331.

Varicose  veins,  how  produced,  153.

Vasa  Serosa,  substitute  for,  75,  114.

Vascular  canals  of  bone.  See  Haversian
or  Medullary  canals.

System, everywhere closed by

membranes,  144.

territories. See  Vessel-territo-

ries.

theory  (of  inflammation)  428.

Vascularity,  import  of,  87-88.

Vegetable  Tumours,  532-533.

Veins,  longitudinal  muscular  layers  in,
86 ;  muscular  tissue  in  superficial  cu-
taneous, 142 ; small,  formation and

554

INDEX.

course  of,  144-145  ;  middle  coat  of,
144-145;  epithelium  of,  145;  cmallest,
entirely  composed  of  connective  tissue
and  epithelium,  146  ;  rhythmical  move-
ments of,  in  wings  of  bats,  148;  ac-
tivity of,  chiefly  and  sometimes  wholly
due  to  their  elastic  tissue,  152 ;  vari-
cose, how  produced,  153  ;  introduction
of  pus  into,  217.

Verjauchung,  definition  of,  500.

Vertebrae,  caries  of.  See  Spondylar-
throcace.

Vesalius,  28,  339.

Vessels,  development  of,  in  new-forma-
tions, 89,  cf.  447  ;  action  of,  in  what
really  consists,  101-102;  transudation
from,  how  perhaps  favoured  and  how
impeded,  102  ;  of  liver,  102-104 ;  of
brain,  104-105  ;  of  muscular  coat  of
stomach,  105-106  ;  in  cartilage  of  new-
born child,  107;  of  bone,  108-112;
not  all  subject  to  special  nervous  in-
fluence, 283 ;  new  formation  of,  447
(note).

Vessel-Territories  (districts  of  tissue  be-
longing to  vessels),  114;  146;  l':>6;
281-282.

Vienna  School,  on  pyemia,  223  ;  on
amyloid  degeneration,  409,  410 ;  on
inflammation,  428-429  ;  on  typhous
matter,  440  ;  on  tubercle,  51!).

Villi,  Intestinal.  365-369  ; structure  of,

366;  absorption  of  fat  bj,  367-368;
muscular  fibres  and  contractility  of
367-368  ;  retention  of  fat  in,  368-369  j
amyloid  degeneration  in,  422.

Villous  Tumours. See  Papillomata.

Vital  Activity,  irritation  essential  to  pro-
duction of,  325 ;  general  forms  of
(function,  nutrition,  formation),  326.

Vitreous  body,  its  relationship  to  jelly
of  Wharton  (mucous  tissue)  129.

Vogt,  C,  on  fibres  of  lens,  66.

Wagner,  Rud.,  on  the  two  sorts  of  pa-
pillae in  skin,  276  ;  on  tactile  bodies,
277 ;  on  ramification  of  nerve-fibres,
290.

Waxy  Degeneration.  See  Amyloid  De-
generation.

Weber,  E.  H.,  on  colourless  blood-cor-
puscles, 184,  185.

Wharton,  so-called  jelly  of,  126,  129.

Willis,  Thomas,  on  submucous  layer  of
intestines,  292.

Woorara,  effects  of,  in  paralyzing  nerves,
333.

"Yolk,  cleavage  of,  442.

Zimmermann,  on  relation  between  pus-,
and  solourless  blood-corpuscles,  188.
527 ;  on  dovelopment  of  red  blood-
corpuscieR,  259.

\ .  MVv o  ■  3
