The Complete Works of Swami Vivekananda, Vol. 2 (Swami Vivekananda, 1908)
==========================================================
Second volume of Vivekananda's Complete Works (1908) — Jnana Yoga, writings, and the philosophy of the Vedanta societies. Public domain. Source: Internet Archive.

»y^Qr=?4 A 


?r7W qfgrTT 7F-fn 

L.B.S. National Academy of Administration 


MUSSOORIE 

LIBRARY 


'f’m 
Accession No. 

yjUTi 
C/ass No. 


MMa 

xqns^m 


Book No. 


i4/tf 


«9Eg»C5i» o^^oC^o •iSDoOfr o7=E)oC^S» o>==r>o(p=?o 


294.66*S , 
Viv eth.ed V.5 


lbsnaa 


CDe 

Complete ^iSEorfes 

OF 


SWAMI VIVEKANANDA 


Mayavati Memorial Edition 


VOLUME V 


ADVAITA ASHRAMA 

Mayavati, Almora, Himalayas 

1954 


Published by 
SwAMi Gambiiiranan]ja 
President 
Advaita Ashrama 
Mayavati, Almora^ Uimaiavxs 


Copyright Registered under Act XX of 1847 
Sixth Edition 


Printed in IndiA 
By P. C. Chati'erjke, 
At Modern Arl Pre=> 
6, Bentinck Street, 
Calcutta I 

Board Rs. 6/- 
Cloth Rs. 7/8/- 


C O N T E N 1 S 


Pages 

EPISTLES —First Series (Original and Iranslated) 


l—LXX .1 — 114 

INIERVIEWS 

AN INDIAN YOGI IN LONDON.115 

India's mission . llfi, . 

INDIA AND ENGLAND.1?J 

INDIAN missionary's MISSION . ) ENGLAND . . . . i 3 i 

AN HOUR WITH THE SWAMI VIVEKAN\NDA AT 

MADURA 134 

THE ABROAD AND THE PROBl.EMS \l' HOME . . 139 

THE MISSIONARY WORK OF THE FIRS! HINDU 
SANNYASIN TO THE WEST AND PL.AN OF 

REGENERATION OF ^ INDi^V .148 

REAWAKENING OF HINDUISM (JN NATIONAL BASIS . 155 

ON INDIAN WOMEN—FHEIR PAST, PRESENT AND 

FUTURE .1 

ON THE BOUNDS OF HINDUISM.162 

NOTES FROM LECl'URES AND DISCOURSES 

ON KARMA-VeXA .|66 

ON FANATICISM .169 

WORK IS WORSHIP ..172 

WORK WITHOUT MOTIVF..173 

SADHANAS OR PREPARATIONS TO HIGHER LIFE . . 176 

THE COSMOS AND THE SELF.182 

WHO IS A REAL GURU .184 

ON ART.185 

ON LANGUAGE.186 

THE SANNYASIN .187 

THE SANNYASIN AND THE HOUSEHOLDER .... 188 

THE EVILS OF ADHIKARIVADA.. 190 

ON BHAKTI-YOGA.192 

ISHVARA AND BRAHMAN.196 

ON JNANA-YOGA.. 

WHAT is THE CAUSE OF ILLUSION?.203 

EVOLUTION. 904 


i iv ) 

Pages 

BUDDHISM AND XEDANTA.206 

ON THE VEDANTA PHILOSOPHY ....... 208 

' THE LAW AND T HEEDOM.214 

I HE GOAL AND METHODS OF REALISATION . . . . 219 

QltSnONS AND ANSWERS 

D1>.C L SSION AT THE GRADUATE PHILOSOPHICAL 

SOCIETY HARVARD UNIX ERSITY, U. S. A. . . . 221 

- \T THE [WENIIETH CENri'RY CLUB OF BOSTON, 

U. S. A.234 

--AT THE BROOKLYN ETHICAL SOCIETY, BROOK!ON, 

A. 236 

SELECTIONS FROM THE MATH DIARY.238 

(XONVERSAnONS AND DIALOGUES (Recorded 

BY DISCIP1.es)-— I—(Trans/afec/) 

L SRI SL RENDRA NAIH DAS GUPTA.244 

IE—V. SRI SURENDRA NATH SEN,—FROM 

PRIVAIE DIARA'.247 

\L—X. SRI PHh'A NATH SINHA.265 

XL—X\ . 1 ROM THE DIARA' OF A DISCIPLE, SRI 

SARAT CHANDRA CHAKRAV'ARTl, B. A. . . 295 

SAMNGS AND U I l ERANCES—1.323 

WRl riNG—PROSE AND POEMS—ll. 

PROSE 

I HE MESSAGE OF DI\ INE WISDOM 
1. BONDAGE; II. [HE LAW; III. THE ABSOLUTE 

AND THE AI TAINMENT OF I-REEDOM . . . 331 

I HE BEl.L'R MATH: \N APPEAL.338 

THE AIAV AITA ASHRAMA, HI.MALAA'AS.339 

HIE R\MAKR!SHNA HOME OF SERVICE, BENARES: 

AN APPEAl. 34Q 

f^OE.MS 

WHO KNOWS HOW MOTHER PLAYS !.342 

TO THE FOURTH OF JULY.342 

i RANSLAI'IONS OF WRITINGS—PROSE 
AND POEMS—II. 

THE EAST AND THE WEST.344 


EPISTLES 

FIRST SERIFS 


Extracts 


I 

Bombay, 

20th Septemb er, 

Dear Panditji Maharaj, 

Youir letter has reached me duly. 1 do not know 
why 1 should be undeservingly praised. ‘ None is good, 
save One, that is, God.** as the Lorti jesus hath said. The 
rest are only tools in His hands. “Gloria in Excelsis,’ 
“Glory unto God in the highest,** and unto men that 
deserve, but not to such an undeserving one like me. 
Here, “The servant is not worthy of the h^re,** and a Fakir, 
especially, has no right to any praise whatsoever, for would 
you praise your servant for simply doing his duty ? 

. . . My unbounded gratitude to Pandit S-, and 

to my Professor^ for this kind remembrance of me. 

Now 1 would tell you something else. ) he Hindu 
mind was ever deductive and never synthetic or inductive. 
In all our philosophies, we always find hair-splitting argu¬ 
ments, taking for granted some general proposition, but the 
proposition itself may be as childish as possible. Nobody 
ever asked or searched the truth of these general proposi¬ 
tions. Therefore, independent thought we have almost 
none to speak of, and hence the dearth of those sciences 
which are the results of observation and gneralisation. 
And why was it thus?—From two causes:—The tremen¬ 
dous heat of the climate forcing us to love rest and 
contemplation better than activity, and the Brahmeinas 
1 With whom he read the Mahabhashya on Panini. 

y—1 


2 


SWA MI VIVEKANANDA'S WORKS 


as priests never undertaking journeys or voyages to distant 
lands. I here were v'oyagers and people who travelled 
far; but they were almost always traders, i.e., people 
from whom priestcraft and their own sole love for gain 
had taken away all capacity for intellectual development. 
So their observations, instead of adding to the store of 
human knowledge, rather degenerated it. For, their 
observations were bad, and their accounts exaggerated 
and tortured into fantastical shapes, until they passd all 
recognition. 

So you see, we must travel, we must go to foreign 
parts. We must see how the engine of society works in 
other countries, and keep free and open communication 
with what is going on in the minds of other nations, if 
we really want to be a nation again. And over and 
above all, we must cease to tyrannise. To what a ludi¬ 
crous state are we brought ! If a Bhangi comes to any¬ 
body as a Bhangi, he would be shunned as the plague ; 
but no sooner docs he get a, cupful of water poured upon 
his head with some mutterings of players by a Padri, and 
get a coat to his back, no matter how threadbare, and 
come into the room of the most orthodox Hindu—1 don’t 
see the man who then dare refuse him a chair and a 
hearty shake of the hands I Irony can go no further. 
And come and see what they, the Padris, are doing here 
in the Dakshin (south). 1 hey are converting the lower 
classes by lakhs ; and in Fravancore, the most priest- 
ridd en country in India—where every bit of land is owned 
by the Brahmins, and the females, even of the royal 
family, hold it as high honour to live in concubinage with 
the Brahmins—nearly one-fourth has become Christian ! 
And 1 cannot blame them ; what part have they in David 
and what in Jesse ? When, when, O Lord, shall man be 
brother to man} 

Yours, 

ViVEKANANDA. 


EPISTLES 


3 


II 


KHETRI, 

27th April 1893. 


Dear Doctor. 

Your letter has just reached me. 1 am very much 
gratified by your love for unworthy self. So, so sorry 

to learn that) poor B-has lost his son. “The Lord gave 

and the Lord hath taken away ; blessed be the name of 
the L.ord.** We only know that nothing is lost or can be 
lost. For us is only submission, calm and perfect. The 
soldier has no right to complain, nay murmur, if the 
general orders him into the cannon’s mouth. May He 

comfort B-in his grief, and may it dra’v him closer and 

closer to tbe breast of the All-merciful Mother I 

As to my taking ship I have already made arrange¬ 
ments from Bombay. Tell B-that the Raja^ or my 

Gurubhais would be the last men to put any obstacles in 
my way. As for the Rajaji, his love for me is simply 
without limit. 

May the Giver of all good bless you all here and 
hereafter, will be the constant prayer of. 

VlVEKANANDA. 


Ill 


YOKOHAMA, 

lOth July, 1893. 

Dear A—, B—, G—, and all my Madras Friends, 

Excuse my not keeping you constantly informed of 
my movements. One is so busy every day, and especially 
myself who am quite new to the life of possessing things 
and taking care of them. That consumes so much of my 
energy. It is really an awful botheration. 

From Bombay we reached Colombo. Our steamer 
1 The Maharaja of Khetri, Rajputana. 


4 


SWAMI VIVEKANANDA^S WORKS 


remained in port for nearly the whole day, and we took 
the opportunity of getting off to have a look at the town. 
We drove through the streets and the only thing I rernem¬ 
ber was a temple in which was a very gigantic Murti 
(linage) of the Lord Buddha in a reclining posture, 
entering Nirvana. . . 

1 he next station was Penang, which is only a strip of 
land along the sea in the body of the Malay Peninsula. 
The Malayas are all Mohammedans, and in old days were 
noted pirates and quite a dread to merchantmen. But now 
the leviathan guns of modern turreted battleships have 
forced the Malayas to look about for more peaceful pur¬ 
suits. On our way from Penang to Singapore, we had 
glimpses of Sumatra with its high mountains, and the 
Captain pointed out to me several places as tlfe favourite 
haunts of pirates in days gone by. Singapore is the 
capital of th(‘ Straits Settlements. It has a fine botanical 
garden with the most splendid collection of palms. TTie 
beautiful fan-like palm called the traveller’s palm, grows 
here in abundance, and the bread-fruit tree everywhere. 

1 he celebrated mangosteen is as plentiful here as mangoes 
in Madras, but mango is nonpareil. The people here are 
not half so dark as the people of Madras, although so near 
the line. Singapore possesses a fine museum too. 

1 longkong next. You feel that you have reached 
China, the Chinese element predominates so much. All 
labour, all trade seems to be in their hands. And Hong¬ 
kong is real China. As soon as the steamer casts anchor, 
you are besieged w'th hundreds of Chinese boats to carry 
\'on to the land. These boats with two helms are rather 
peculiar. 1 he boatman lives in the boat with his family. 
Almost always, the wife is at the helms, managing one 
with her hands and the other with one of her feet. And 
in ninety per cent of cases, you find a baby tied to her 
back, with the hands and feet of the little Chin left free. 

It is a quaint sight to see the little John Chinaman dang- 


EPISTLES 


5 


ling very quietly from his mother’s back, whilst she is now 
setting with might and main, now pushing heavy loads, or 
jumping with wonderful agility from boat to boat. And 
there is such a rush of boats and steam-launches coming 
in and going out. Baby John is every moment put into 
the risk of having his little head pulverised, pigtail and 
all ; but he does not care a fig. This busy life seems to 
have no charm for him, and he is quite content to learn 
the anatomy of a bit of rice-cake given to him from time 
to time by the madly busy mother. The Chinese child is 
quite a philosopher and calmy goes to work at an age 
when your Indian boy can hardly crawl on all fours. He 
has learned the philosophy of necessity too well. Their 
extreme poverty is one of the causes why ttie Chinese 
and the Indians have remained in a sI.lIc of mummified 
civilisation. To an ordinary Hindu or Chinese, everyday 
necessity is too hideous to allow him to think of anything 
else. 

Hongkong is a very beautiful town. It is built on the 
slopes of hills and on the tops too, which are much cooler 
than the city. I here is an almost perpendicular tramway 
going to the top of the hill, dragged by wire-rope and 
steam-power. 

We remained three days at Hongkong and went to 
see Canton, which is eighty miles up a river. What a 
scene of bustle and life ! What an immense number of 
boats almost covering the waters ! And not only those 
that are carrying on the trade, but hundreds of others 
which serve as houses to live in. And quite a lot of them 
so nice and big. In fact, they are big houses two or three 
storeys high, with verandahs running round and streets 
between, and all floating! 

We landed or> a strip of ground given by the Chinese 
Government to foreigners to live in. Around us on both 
sides of the river for miles and miles is the big city—a 
wilderness of human beings, pushing, struggling, surging. 


6 


SWAMI VIVEKANANDA'S WORKS 


roaring. But with all its population, all its activity, it is 
the dirtiest town I saw, not in the sense in which a town is 
called dirty in India, for as to that not a speck of filth is 
allowed by the Chinese to go waste ; but because of the 
Chinaman, who has, it seems, taken a vow never to bathe I 
Every house is a shop, people living only on the top-flooi. 
The streets are very very narrow, so that you almost touch 
the shops on both sides as you pass. At every ten paces 
you find meat-stalls, and there are shops which sell cat s 
and dog’s meat. Of course, only the poorest classes of 
CTinamen eat dog or cat. 

The Chinese ladies can never be seen. They have got 
as strict a Zenana as the Mindus of Northern India; only 
the women of the labouring classes can be seen. Even 
amongst these, one sees now and then a woman with feet 
smaller than those of your youngest child, and of course 
they cannot be said to walk, but hobble. 

1 went to see several Chinese temples. The biggest in 
Canton is dedicated to the memory of the first Buddhistic 
Emperor and the five hundred first disciples of Buddhism. 
ITie central figure is of course Buddha, and next beneath 
Him is seated the Emperor, and ranging on both sides are 
the statues of the disciples, all beautifully carved out of 
wood. 

I’ rom Canton back to Hongkong, and from thence to 
Japan. 1 he first port we touched was Nagasaki. We 
landed for a few hours and drove through the town. What 
a contrast ! 1 he Japanese are one of the cleanliest peoples 

on earth. Everything is neat and tidy. Their streets are 
nearly all broad, straight and regularly paved. Their little 
houses are cage-like, and their pine-covered evergreen 
little hills foim the background of almost every town and 
village. The short-statured, fair-skinned, quaintly-dressed 
Japs, their movements, attitudes, gestures, everything is 
picturesque. Japan is the land of the picturesque ! 
Almost every house has a garden at the back, very nicely 


EPISTLES 


7 


laid out according to Japanese fashion with small shrubs* 
grass-plots, small artificial waters and small stone bridges. 

From Nagasaki to Kobe. Here I gave up the steamer 
and took the land-route to Yokohama, with a view to see 
the interior of japan. 

1 have seen three big cities in the interior—Osaka, 
a great manufacturing town, Kioto, the former capital, 
and 1 okio, the present capital. Fokio is nearly twice the 
size of Calcutta with nearly double the population. 

No foreigner is allowed to travel in the interior with 
out a passport. 

The Japanese seem now to have fully awakened 
themselves to the necessity of the present times. fhey 
have now a thoroughly organised arm'^ equipped with 
guns, which one of their own officers has invented, and 
which is said to be second to none. 1 hen, they are 
continually increasing their navy. 1 have seen a tunnel 
nearly a mile long, bored by a Japanese engineer. 

1 he match factories are simply a sight to see, and 
they are bent upon making everything they want in their 
own country. There is a Japanese line of steamers plying 
between China and Japan, which shortly intends running 
between Bombay and Yokohama. 

1 say quite a lot of temples. In every temple there 
are some Sanskrit Mantras written in Old Bengali charac¬ 
ters. Only a few of the priests know Sanskrit. But they 
are an intelligent sect. The modern rage for progress has 
penetrated even the priesthood. I cannot write what I 
have in my mind about the Japs in one short letter. Only 
1 want that numbers of our young men should pay a visit 
to Japan every year. To the Japanese, India is Still the 
dreamland of everything high and good. And you, what 
are you? . . . talking twaddle all your lives, vain talkers, 
what are you? Come, see these people and then go and 
hide your faces in shame. A race of dotards, you lose 


8 


SWAMI VIVEKANANDA'S WORKS 


your caste if you come out! Sitting down these hundreds 
of years with an ever-increasing load of crystallised 
superstition on your heads, for hundreds of years spending 
all your energy upon discussing the touchableness or 
untouchableness of this food or that, with all humanity 
crushed out of you by the continuous social tyranny of 
ages—what are you? And what are you doing now? . . . 
promenading the sea-shores with books in your hands— 
repeating undigested stray bits of European brainwork, 
and the whole soul bent upon getting a thirty-rupee clerk¬ 
ship, or at best becoming a lawyer—the height of young 
India’s ambition—and every student with a whole brood 
of hungry children cackling at his heels and asking for 
bread ! Is there not water enough in the sea to drown 
you, books, gowns, university diplomas, and all? 

Come, he men ! Kick out the priests who are always 
against progress, because they would never mend, their 
hearts would never become big, 1 hey are the offspring 
of cenlur'es of sin:5crstition and tyranny. Root out priest¬ 
craft first, ("orne, be men t Come out of your narrow 
holes and have a look abroad. See how nations are on 
the march ! Do you love man ? Do you love your 
country? 1 hen come, let us struggle for higher and better 
things; look not back, no, not even if you see the dearest 
and nearest cry. Look not back, but forward ! 

India wants the sacrifice of at least a thousand of her 
young men—men, mind, and not brutes. The English 
Government has been the instrument, brought over here 
by the Lord, to break your crystallised civilisation, and 
Madras supplied the first men who helped in giving the 
English a footing. How many men, unselfish, thorough¬ 
going men, is Madras ready now to supply, to struggle 
unto life and death to bring about a new state of things— 
sympathy for the poor—and bread to their hungry mouths 
—enlightenment to the people at large—and struggle unto 


EPISTLES 


9 


death to make men of them who have been brought to the 
level of beasts, by the tyranny of your forefathers? 

Yours etc., 
ViVF.KANANDA. 

P. S. Calm and silent and steady work, and no 
newspaper humbug, no name-making, you must always 
remember. 

V. 


IV 

BREEZY MEADOW.S, 
METCALF, M\SS. 

20th August, 1^93. 

Dear-, 

Received your letter yesterday. Perhaps you have by 
this time got my letter from Japan. From Japan I reached 
Vancouver. The way was by the Northern Pacific. It was 
very cold and I suffered much for want of warm clothing. 
However. 1 reached Vancouver anyhow, and thence went 
through Canada to Chicago, 1 remained about twelve days 
in Chicago. And almost every day I used to go to the 
Fair. It is a tremendous affair. One must take at least 

ten days to go through it. I he lady to whom B- 

introduced me, and her husband, belong to the highest 
Chicago society, and they were so very kind to me. 1 took 
my departure from Chicago and came to Boston. Mr. L— 
was with me up to Boston. He was very kind to me. 

1 he expense I am bound to run into here is awful . . . 
On an average it costs me £1 every day ; a cigar costs 
eight annas of our money. The Americans are so rich 
that they spend money like water, and by forced legisla¬ 
tion keep up the price of everything so high that no 
other nation on earth can approach it. Every common 
coolie earns nine or ten rupees a day, and spends it. All 
those rosy ideas we had before starting have melted, and 


10 


SWAMI VIVEKANANDA^S WORKS 


1 have now to fight against impossibilties. A hundred 
times I had a mind to go out of the country and go back 
to India. But 1 am determined, and 1 have a call from 
Above ; 1 see no way, but His eyes see. And 1 must stick 
to my guns, life or death. . . . 

Just now I am living as the guest of an old lady in a 
village near Boston. 1 accidentally made her acquaintance 
in the railway train, and she invited me to come over and 
live with her. 1 have an advantage in living with her, in 
saving for some time my expenditure of £1 per day, and 
she has the advantage of inviting her friends over here, 
and showing them a curio from India ! And all this must 
be borne. Starvation, cold, hooting in the streets on 
account of my quaint dress, these are what 1 have to fight 
against. But, rny dear boy, no great things were ever 
done without great labour 

. . . Know, then, that this is the land of Christians, 
and any other influence than that is almost zero. Nor do 
1 care a bit for the enmity of anj^—ists in the world. 1 am 
here amongst the children of the Son of Mary, and the 
Lord Jesus will help me, I hey like much the broad view’s 
of Hinduism and my love for the Prophet of Nazareth, I 
tell them that 1 preach nothing against the Great One of 
Galilee. 1 only ask the Christians to take in the Great Ones 
of Ind along with the Lord Jesus, and they appreciate it. 

Winter is approaching and 1 shall have to get all sorts 
of warm clothing, and we require more warm clothing 
than the natives. . . . Look sharp, my boy, take courage. 
We are destined by the Lord to do great things in India. 
Have faith. We will do. We, the poor and the despised, 
who really feel, and not those. . . . 

In C hicago, the other day, a funny thing happened. 
The Raja of K was here, and he was being lionised by 
some portion of Chicago society. I once met the Raja in 
the Fair grounds, but he was too big to speak with a poor 
Fakir. I here was an eccentric Mahratta Brahmin selling 


EPISTLES 


II 


nail-made pictures in the Fair, dressed in a Dhoti. This 
fellow told the reporters all sorts of things against the 

Raja-, that he was a man of low caste, that those Rajas 

were nothing but slaves, and that they generally led 
immoral lives, etc., etc. And these truthful (?) editors 
which America is famous, wanted to give to the boy s 
stories some weight ; and so the next day they wrote huge 
columns in their papers about the description of a man of 
wisdom from India, meaning me—extolling me to the 
skies, and putting all sorts of words in my mouth,, which 
1 never even dreamt of, and ascribing to me all those 
remarks made by the Mahratta Brahmin about the Raja 

of K-. And it was such a good brushing th it Chicago 

society gave up the Raja in hot haste ... 1 hese news¬ 
paper editors made capital out of me to give my country¬ 
man a brushing. That shows, however, that in this country 
intellect carries more weight than all the pomp of money 
and title. 

Yesterday Mrs.-, the lady superintendent of the 

women’s prison, was here. They don’t call it prison but 
reformatory here. It is the grandest thing 1 have seen in 
America. How the inmates are benevolently treated, how 
they are reformed and sent back as useful members of 
society ; how grand, how beautiful, you must see to 
believe ! And, oh, how my heart ached to think of what 
we think of the poor, the low, in India. They have no 
chance, no escape, no way to climb up. The poor, the 
low, the sinner in India have no friends, no help—they 
cannot rise, try however they may. They sink lower and 
lower every day, they feel the blows showered upon them 
by a cruel society, and they do not know whence the blow 
comes. They have forgotten that they too are men. And 
the result is slavery. Thoughtful people within the last 
few years have seen it, but unfortunately laid it at the door 
of the Hindu religion, and to them, the only way of better¬ 
ing is by crushing this grandest religion of the world. Hear 


12 


SWAMl VIVEKANANDA’S WORKS 


me, my friend, I have discovered the secret through the 
grace of the Lord. Religion is not at fault. On the other 
hand, your religion teaches you that every being is only 
your own self multiplied. But it was the want of practical 
application, the want of sympathy—the want of heart. 
The L.ord once more came to you as Buddha and taughJ 
you how to feel, how to sympathise with the poor, the 
miserable, the sinner, but you heard Him not. Your priests 
invented the horrible story that the Lord was here foT 
deluding demons with false doctrines ! True indeed, but 
we are the demons, not those that believed. And just 
as the Jews denied the Lord Jesus and are since that day 
wandering over the world as homele.ss beggars, tyrannised 
over by everybody, so you, are bond-slaves to any nation 
that thinks it worth while to rule over you. Ah, tyrants ! 
you do not know that the obverse is tyranny, and the 
revtrse, slavery. 1 he slave and the tyrant are synonymous. 

B— and Cj may remember one evening at 
Pondicherry—we were discussing the matter of sea-voyage 
with a Pandit, and 1 shall always remember his brutal 
gestures and his Kadapi Na (never)! 1 hey do not know 
that India is a very small part of the world, and the whole 
world looks down with contempt upon the three hundred 
millions of earth-worms crawling upon the fair soil of 
India and trying to oppre.ss each other. This state of 
things must be removed, not by destroying religion but 
by following the great teachings of the Hindu faith, and 
joining with it the wonderful sympathy of that logical 
development of 1 linciuism—Buddhism. 

A hundred thousand men and women, fired with the 
zeal of holiness, fortified with eternal faith in the Lord, 
and nerved to lion’s courage by their sympathy for the 
poor and the fallen and the down-trodden, will go over 
the length and breadth of the land, preaching the gospel 
of salvation, the gospel of help, the gospel of social 
laising-up—the gospel of Equality. 


EPISTLES 


13 


No religion on earth preaches; the dignity of humanity 
in such a lofty strain as Hinduism, and no religion on 
earth treads upon the necks of the poor and the low in 
such a fashion as Hinduism. The Lord has shown me 
that religion is not at fault, but it is the Pharisees and 
Sadducees in Hinduism, hypocrites, who invent all sorts 
of engines of tyranny in the shape of doctrines of 
Paramarthika and Vyavaharika. 

Despair not ; remember the Lord says in the Gita, “ To 
work you have the right, but not to the result.’* Gird ep 
your loins, my hoy. I am called by the Lord for this. 1 
have been dragged through a whole life fell of crosses and 
tortures. I have seen the nearest and dearest die, almost of 
starvation; 1 have been ridiculed, distruslcU, and have 
suffered for my sympathy for the very men who scoff and 
scorn. Well, my boy, this is the school of misery, which 
is also the school for great souls and prophets for the 
cultivation of sympathy, of patience, and, above all, of an 
indomitable iron will which quakes not even if the universe 
be pulverised at our feet. 1 pity them. It is not their fault. 
They are children, yea, veritable children, though they be 
great and high in society. Their eyes see nothing beyond 
their little horizon of a few yards—the routine-work, eat¬ 
ing, drinking, earning and begetting, following each other 
in mathematical precision. They know nothing beyond, 
happy little souls! Their sleep is never disturbed. Their 
nice little brown studies of lives never rudely shocked 
by the wail of woe, of misery, of degradation and poverty, 
that has filled the Indian atmosphere—the result of 
centuries of oppression. They little dream of the ages of 
tyranny, mental, moral and physical, that has reduced the 
image of God to a mere beast of burden; the emblem of 
the Divine Mother, to a slave to bear children; and life 
itself, a curse. But there are others who see, feel, and 
shed tears of blood in their hearts, who think that there is 
a remedy for it, and who are ready to apply this remedy at 


14 


SWAM! VIVEKANANDA'S WORKS 


any cost, even to the giving up of life. And “Of such is 
the kingdom of f"leaven.“ Is it not then natural, my 
friends, that they have no time to look down from their 
heights to the vagaries of these contemptible little insects, 
ready every moment to spit their little venoms? 

1 rust not to the so-called rich, they are more dead 
than alive. 1 he hope lies in you—in the meek, the lowly, 
but the faithful. Have faith in the Lord ; no policy, it is 
nothing. Feel for the miserable and look up for help—it 
shall come. I have travelled twelve years with this load 
in my heart and this idea in my head. 1 have gone from 
door to door of the so-called rich and great. With a 
bleeding heart 1 have crossed half the world to this strange 
land, seeking for help. The Lord is great. 1 know He will 
help me. I may perish of cold or hunger in this land, but 
1 bequeath to you, young men, this sympathy, this struggle 
for the poor, the ignorant, the oppressed. Go now this 
minute to the temple of Parthasarathi, and before Him 
who was friend to the poor and lowly cowherds of Gokula, 
who never shrank to embrace the Pariah Guhaka, who 
accepted the invitation of a prostitute in preference to that 
of the nobles and saved her in His incarnation as Buddha 
—yea, down on your faces before Him, and make a great 
sacrifice, the sacrifice of a whole life for them, for whom 
He comes from time to time, whom He loves above all, the 
poor, the lowly, the oppressed. Vow, then, to devote your 
whole lives to the cause of the redemption of these three 
hundred millions, going down and down every day. 

It is not the work of a day, and the path is full of the 
most deadly thorns. But Parthasarathi is ready to be our 
Sarathi, we know that, and in His name and with eternal 
faith in Him, set fire to the mountain of misery that has 
been heaped upon India for ages—and it shall be burned 
down. Come then, look it in the face, brethren, it is a 
grand task, and we are so low. But we are the sons of 
Light and children of God. Glory unto the Lord, we will 


EPISTLES 


15 


succeed. Hundreds will fall in the struggle, hundreds will 
be ready to take it up. 1 may die here unsuccessful, 
another will take up the task. You know the disease, you 
know the remedy, only have faith. Do not look up to the 
so-called rich and great ; do not care for the heartless 
intellectual writers, and their cold-blooded newspaper 
articles. Faith, sympathy—fiery faith and fiery sympathy I 
Life is nothing, death is nothing, hunger nothing, cold 
nothing. Glory unto the Lord—march on, the Lord is our 
General. Do not look back to see who falls—forward— 
onward ! Thus and thus we shall go on, brethren. One 
falls, and another takes up the work. 

From this village I am going to Boston to-morrow. I 
am going to speak at a big Ladies’ Club here, which is 
helping Ramabai. 1 must first go and buy some clothing 
in Boston. If 1 am to live longer here, my quaint dress 
will not do. People gather by hundreds in the streets to 
see me. So what 1 want is to dress myself in a long black 
coat, and keep a red robe and turban to wear when 1 
lecture. This is what they advise me to do. ... It is 
necessary to remain here for some time to gain any 
influence. . . . 

In America, there are no classes in the railway except 
in Canada. So I have to travel first-class, as that is the 
only class ; but I do not venture in the Pullmans. They 
are very comfortable—you sleep, eat. drink, even bathe in 
them, just as if you were in a hotel—but they are too 
expensive. 

It is very hard work getting into society and making 
yourself heard. Now nobody is in the towns, they are all 
away in summer places. They will all come back in 
winter. 1 herefore 1 must wait. After such a struggle 
1 ami not going to give up easily. Rome was not built in a 
day. If you can keep me here for six months at least, 
I hope everything will come right. In the meantime I am 
trying my best to find any plank I can float upon. 


16 


SWAM I VIVEKANANDA'S WORKS 


Even now it is so cold in New England that every day 
we have fires night and morning. Canada is still colder. 
1 never saw snow on such low hills as there. 

Gradually 1 can make my way ; but that means a 
longer residence in this horribly expensive country. Just 
now the raising of the Rupee in India has created a panic 
in this country, and lots of mills have been stopped . . . 

1 must wait. 

I must try to the end, and even if 1 die of cold or 
disease or liungcr here, you take up the task. Holiness, 
sincerity and faith. First 1 will try in America, and if 1 
fail, 1 will try in England; if 1 fail there too, 1 can go back 
to India and wait for further commands from On High, 

Yours, 

ViVEKANANDA 


V' 


CHICAGO, 

2nd November^ 1893. 


Dear-, 

1 am so sorry that a moment’s weakness on my part 
should cause you so much trouble; I was out of pocket at 
that time. Since then the Lord sent me friends. At a 
village near Boston I made the acquaintance of Dr. Wright, 
Professor of Greek in the Harvard University. He sym- 
pathised with me very much and urged upon me the 
necessity of going to the Parliament of Religions, which he 
thought would give me an introduction to the nation. As 
1 was not acquainted with anybody, the Professor under¬ 
took to arrange everything for me, and eventually 1 came 
back to Chicago. Here 1, together with the oriental and 
occidental delegates to the Parliament of Religions, were 
all lodged in the house of a gentleman. 

On the morning of the opening of the Parliament, we 


EPISTLES 


17 


all assembled in a building called the Art Palace, where 
one huge, and other smaller temporary halls were erected 
for the sittings of the Parliament. Men from all nations 
were there. From India were Mazoomdar of the Brahmo 
Samaj, and Nagarkar of Bombay, Mr. Gandhi representing 
the Jains, and Mr. Chakravarti representing Theosophy 
with Mrs. Annie Besant. Of these, Mazoomdar and I w^ere, 
of course, old friends, and Chakravarti knew me by name. 
There was a grand procession, and we were all marshalled 
on to the platform. Imagine a hall below and a huge 
gallery above, parked with six or seven thousand men and 
women representing the best culture of the country, and 
on the platform learned men of all the nations of the earth. 
And I, who never spoke in public in my life, to address 
this august assemblage ! It was opened in great form 
with music and ceremony and speeches; then the delegates 
were introduced one by one, and they stepped up and 
spoke. Of course my heart was fluttering and my tongue 
nearly dried up; I was so nervous, and could not venture 
to speak in the morning. Mazoomdar made a nice speech, 
—Chakravarti a nicer one, and they were much applaud¬ 
ed. They were all prepared and came with ready-made 
speeches. I was a fcol and had none, but bowed down to 
Devi Saraswati and stepped up, and Dr. Barrows intro¬ 
duced me. I made a short speech. 1 addressed the assembly 
as, “Sisters and Brothers of America,’*—a deafening 
applause of two minutes followed, and then I proceeded, 
and when it was finished 1 sat down, almost exhausted 
with emotion. 1 he next day all the papers announced 
that my speech was the hit of the day, and 1 became 
known to the whole of America. I ruly has it been said 
by the great commentator Sridhara— 

“Who maketh the dumb a/fluent speaker.’’ His name be 
praised ! From that day I became a celebrity, and the 
day I read my paper on Hinduism, the hall was packed 
as it had never been before. I quote to you from one of 

V-2 


18 


SWAMI VIVEKANANDA^S WORKS 


the papers: “Ladies, ladies, ladies packing every place 
—filling every corner, they patiently waited and waited 
while the papers that separated them from Vivekananda 
were read,“ etc. You would be astonished if 1 sent over 
to you the newspaper cuttings, but you already know that 
1 am a hatei of celebrity. Suffice it to say, that whenever 
1 went on the platform a deafening applause would be 
raised for me. Nearly all the papers paid high tributes to 
me, and even the most bigoted had to admit that “ I his 
man with his handsome face and magnetic presence and 
wonderful oratory is the most prominent figure in the 
Parliament,*’ etc., etc. 

And how to speak of their hln<lnes&? I have no more 
wants now, I arn well-off, and all the money that I require 
to visit Europe I shall get from here. ... A boy called 

N-Acharya has Ciopped up in our midst, hie has been 

loafing about the city for the last three years. Loafing or 
no loafing, I like him, but please write to me all about 
him, if you knov/ anything. He knows you. He came in 
the year of the Pairs Exhibition to Europe. . . . 

I am now out of want. Many of the handsomest 
houses in this city arc open to me. All the time I am living 
as a guest of somebody or other. I here is a curiosity in 
this nation, such as you meet with nowhere else. They 
want to know everything, and their women—they are the 
most advanced in the world. The average American 
woman is far more cultivated than the average .American 
man. The men slave all their life for money, and the 
women snatch every opportunity to improve themselves. 
And they are a very kind-hearted, frank people. Every¬ 
body who has a fad to preach comes here, and I am sorry 
to sa3^ that most of these are not sound. The Americans 
have their faults too, and what nation has not? But this is 
my summing up. Asia laid the germs of civilisation, 
Europe developed man, and America is developing 
woman and the masses. It is the paradise of the woman 


EPISTLES 


19 


and the labourer. Now contrast the American masses 
and women with curs, and you get the idea at once. The 
Americans are fast becoming liberal. Judge them not by 
the specimens of hard-shelled Christians (it is their own 
phrase) that you see irr India. 1 here are those here too, 
but their number is decreasing rapidly, and this great 
nation is progressing fast towards that spirituality which is 
the standard boast of the Hindu. 

1 he Hindu must not give up his religion, but must 
keep religion within its proper limits and give freedom to 
society to grow. All the reformers in India made the 
serious mistake of holding religion accountable for all the 
horrors of priestcraft and degeneration, and went forthwith 
to pull down the indestructible structu^ , and what was 
the result? Failure! Beginning from Buddha down to 
Ram Mohan Roy, everyone made the mistake of holding 
caste to be a religious institution and tried to pull down 
religion and caste all together, and failed. But in spite of 
all the ravings of the priests, caste is simply a crystallised 
social institution, which after doing its service is now 
filling the atmosphere of India with its stench, and it can 
only be removed by giving back to the people their lost 
social individuality. Every man born here knows that he 
is a man. Every man born in India knows that he is a 
slave of society. Now, freedom is the only condition of 
growth; take that off, the result is degeneration. With the 
introduction of modern competition, see how caste is dis¬ 
appearing fast I No religion is now necessary to kill it. 
The Brahmana shopkeeper, shoemaker and wine-distiller 
are common in Northern India. And why? Because of 
competition. No man is prohibited from doing anything 
he pleases for his livelihood under the present Govern¬ 
ment, and the result is neck and neck competition, and 
thus thousands are seeking and finding the highest level 
they were born for. instead of vegetating at the bottom. 

I must remain in this country at least through the 


20 


SWAMI VIVEKANANDA’S WORKS 


winter, and then go to Europe. The Lord will provide 
everything for me. You need not disturb yourself about 
it. 1 cannot express my gratitude for your love. 

Day by day I am feeling that the Lord is with me, 
and I am trying to follow His direction. His will be 
done. . . . We will do great things for the world, and that 
for the sake of doing good and not for name and fame. 

Ours not to reason why, ours but to do and die.” 
Be of good cheer and believe that we are selected by the 
Lord to do great things, and we will do them. Hold your¬ 
self m readiness, i.e., be pure and holy, and love for 
love s sake. Love the poor, the miserable, the down¬ 
trodden, and the Lord will bless you. 

See R-and others from time to time, and urge them 

to sympathise with the masses of India. Tell them how 
they are standing on the neck of the poor, and that they 
are not fit to be called men if they do not try to raise them 
up. Be fearless, the Lord is with you, and He will yet 
raise the starving and ignorant millions of India. A rail¬ 
way porter here is better educated than many of your 
young men and most of your princes. Every American 
woman has far better education than can be conceived of 
by the majority of ffindu women. W^hy cannot we have 
the same education? We must. 

1 hink not that you are poor; money is not power, but 
goodness, holiness. Come and see how it is so all over 
the world. 

Yours with blessings, 

VlVEKANANDA. 

P. S. By the bye,-s paper was the most curious 

phenomenon 1 ever saw. It was like a tradesman’s 
catalogue, and it was not thought fit to be read in the 

Parliament. So N-read a few extracts from it in a side- 

hall and nobody understood a word of it. Do not tell 
him of it. It is a great art to press the largest amount of 
thought into the smallest number of words. Even_’s 


EPISTLES 


21 


paper had to be cut very short. More than a thousand 
papers were read, and there was no time to give to such 
wild perorations. I had a good long time given to me over 
the ordinary half hour, . . . because the most popular 
speakers were always put down last, to hold the audience 
And Lord bless them, what sympathy they have, and what 
patience ! 1 hey would sit from ten o’clock in the morning 

to ten o’clock at night—only a recess of half an hour for a 
meal, and paper after paper read, most of them very trivial 
but they would wait and wait to hear their favourites. 

Dharmapala of Ceylon was one of the favourites. 

. . . He is a very sweet man, and we became very 
intimate during the Parliament. 

A Christian lady from Poona, Miss Sorabji, and the 
Jain representative, Mr. Gandhi, are going to remain 
longer in the country and make lecture tours. I hope they 
will succeed. Lecturing is a very profitable occupation in 
this country and sometimes pays well. 

Mr. Ingersol gets five to six hundred dollars a lecture. 
He is the most celebrated lecturer in this country. 

V. 


VI 

(Translated from Bengali) 

C/o. George W. Hale, Esqr., 
541, DEARBORN .WENUE, CHICAGO, 
28th December, 1893. 

Dear H- 

It is very strange that news of my Chicago lectures has 
appeared in the Indian papers; for whatever I do, 1 try 
my best to avoid publicity. Many things strike me here. 
It may be fairly said that there is no poverty in this 
country. 1 have never seen women elsewhere as cultured 


22 


SWAMI VIVEKANANDA’S WORKS 


and educated as they are here. Well-educated men there 
are in our country, but you will scarcely find anywhere 
women like those here. It is indeed true, that “the God¬ 
dess 1 lerself lives in the houses of virtuous men as 
Lakshmi.” 1 have seen thousands of women here whose 
hearts are as pure and stainless as snow. Oh, how free 
they are ! It is they who control social and civic duties. 
Schools and colleges are full of women, and in our country 
women cannot be safely allowed to walk in the streets ! 

1 heir kindness to me is immeasurable. Since 1 came here 
I have been welcomed by them to their houses. They are 
providing me with tood, arranging for my lectures, taking 
me to market, and doing everything for my comfort and 
convenience. I shall never be able to repay in the least 
the deep debt of gratitude I owe to them. 

Do you know who is the real “Shakti-worshipper” ? 
It is he who knows that God is the Omnipresent Force in 
th(‘ universe, and sees in women the manifestation of that 
Force. Many men here look upon their women in this 
light. Manu, again, has said that gods bless those families 
where women are happy and well-treated. Here men 
treat their women as well as can be desired, and hence 
,they are so prosperous, so learned, so free and so 
energetic. But why is it that we are slavish, miserable 
and dead? 1 he answer is obvious. 

And how pure and chaste are they here ! Few women 
are married before twenty or twenty-five, and they are as 
free as the birds in the air. They go to rr^arket, school and 
college, earn money and do all kinds of work. Those who 
are well-to-do devote themselves to doing good to the 
poor. And what are we doing? We are very regular in 
marrying our girls at eleven years of age lest they should 
become corrupt and immoral. What does cur Manu 
enjoin ? Daughters should be supported and educated 
with as much care and attention as the sons.” As sons 
should be married after observing Brahmacharya up to the 


EPISTLES 


23 


thirtietn year, so daughters also must observe Brahma- 
charya and be educated by their parents. But what are we 
actually doing ? Can you better the condition of your 
women? 1 hen there will be hope for your well-being. 
Otherwise you will remain as backward as you are now. 

11 anybo^.Iy is born of a low caste in our country he is 
gone for ever, there is no hope f«jr him. Why, v/hat a 
tyranny it is ! 1 hero are possibilities, opportunities and 

hope lor every individual in this colmtr 3 ^ lo day he Is 
poor, to-morrow he may become rich and learned and 
respected. Here cveiyone is anxious to help the poor. 
In India there is a howling cry that we are very poor, but 
how many charitable associations are there for the well¬ 
being of the poor ? How many people r * illy weep for the 
sorrows and sufierings of the millions of poor in India? 
Are we men? What are we doing for their livelihood, for 
their improvement? We do not touch them, we avoid 
their company ! Are we men ? I hose thousands of 
Brahmanas—what are they doing for the low, down¬ 
trodden masses of India? ‘‘Don't touch," "Don’t touch," 
is the only phrase that plays upon their lips ! How mean 
and degraded has our eternal religion become at their 
hands! Wherein does our religion lie now? In "Don’t- 
touchism" alone, and nowhere else ! 

I came to this country not to satisfy my curiosity, nor 
for name or fame, but to see if 1 could find any means for 
the support of the poor in India. If God helps me, you 
will Lilow gradually what those means are. 

As regards spirituality, the Americans are far inferior 
to us, but their society is far superior to ours. We will 
teach them pur spirituality, and assimilate what is best in 
their society. 

With love and best wishes. 
Yours, 

ViVEKANANDA. 


24 


SWAMI VIVEKANANDA'S WORKS 


VII 

C/o. George W. Hale, Esqr., 
541, DEARBORN AVENUE, CHICAGO, 
24th January, 1894. 

Dear Friends, 

Your letters have reached me. ! am surprised that so 
much about me has reached you. The criticism of the 
paper you mention is not to be taken as the attitude of the 
American people. That paper is almost unknown here, 
and belongs to what they call a “ blue-nose Presbyterian 
paper,” very bigoted. Still all the ‘‘blue-noses ” are not 
ungentlemanly. I he American people, and many of the 
clergy, arc very hospitable to me. 1 hat paper wanted a 
little notcniety by attacking a man who was being lionised 
by society. fhat trick is well known here, and they do 
not think an^^thing of it. Of course, our Indian mission¬ 
aries may try to make capital out of it. If they do, tell 
them, ” Mark, jew, a judgment has come upon you!” 
I heir old building is tottering to its foundation and must 
come down in spite of th^ir hysterical shrieks. 1 pity 
them—if their means of living fine lives in India Is cut 
down by the influx of oriental religions here. F3ut not one 
of their leading clergy is ever against me. Well, when 
I aiD in the pond ! mu.st bathe thoroughly. 

1 se nd you a newspaper cutting of the short sketch of 
our religion which 1 ead before them. Most of my 

speeches are extempore.I do not require any help 

from India, 1 have plenty here. Employ the money you 
have in printing and publishing this short speech, and 
translating it into the vernaculars, throw it broadcast; that 
will keep before us the national mind. In the meantime 
do not forget our plan of a central college, and the starting 
from it to all directions in India. Work hard. . 

About the women of America, I cannot express my 


EPISTLES 


25 


gratitude for their kindness. Lord bless them. In this 
country, women are the lite of every movement, and 
represent all the culture of the nation, for men are too 
busy to educate themselves. 

I have received K—s letters. With the question 
whether caste shall go or come 1 have nothing to do. My 
idea is to bring to the door of the meanest, the poorest, 
the noble ideas that the humar\ race has developed both 
in and out of India, and let them think for themselves. 
Whether there should be caste or not, whether women 
should be perfec dy free or not, does not concern me. 
“Liberty of thought and action is the or.Iy condition of 
life, of growth and well-being. ’ Where it does not exist, 
the man, the race, the nation must go down. 

Caste or no caste, creed or no creed, any man, or 
class, or caste, or nation, or institution which bars the 
power of free thought and action of an individual—even 
so long as that power does not injure others—is devilish 
and must go down. 

My whole ambition in life is to set in motion a 
machinery which will bring noble ideas to the door of 
everybody, and then let men and women settle their own 
fate. Let them know what our forefathers as well as other 
nations have thought on the most momentous questions of 
life. Let them see specially what others are doing now, 
and then decide. We are to put the chemicals together, 
the crystallisation will be done by nature according to her 
laws. Work hard, be steady and have faith in the Lord. 
Set to work, 1 am coming sooner or later. Keep the motto- 
before you—“Elevation of the masses without injuring 
the religion.” 

Remember that the nation lives in the cottage. But, 
alas! nobody ever did anything for them. Our modern 
reformers are very busy about widow remarriage. Of 
course, I am a sympathiser in every reform, but the fate of 
a nation does not depend upon the number of husbands 


26 


SWAMI VIVEKANANDA^S WORKS 


their widows get, but upon the condition of the masses. 
Can you raise themCan you give them back their lost 
individuality without making them lose their innate spir¬ 
itual nature ? Can you become an occidental of occidentals 
in your spirit of ecjuality, freedom, work and energy, and 
at the same time a Hindu to the very backbone in religious 
culture and instincts? I his is to be done and Wc will do 
it. You are all born to do it. Have faith in yourselves, 
great convicLions are the mothers of great deeds. Onward 
for ever ! Sympathy for the poor, the downtrodden, 
even unto death—this is our u'olto. 

Onward, brave lads ! 

Yours affectionately, 

VlVEKANANDA. 

P. S. Preach the idea ol elevating the masses by 
means of a central college, and bringing education as welt 
as religion to the door of the poor by means of mission¬ 
aries trained in this college. I ry to interest everybody. 

V. 


Dear A-, 


Mil 


NEW YORK, 

9th April 1894 


Secretary Saheb writes me that 1 must come back to 
India because that is my field. No doubt of that. But my 
brother, we are to light a torch which will shed a lustre 
over all India. So let us not be In a hurry ; everything 
will come by the grace of the l.ord. 1 have lectured in 
many of the big towns of America. ... 1 have made a 
good many friends here, some of them very influential. 


EPISTLES 


11 


Of course, the orthodox clergymen are against me, and 
seeing that it is not easy to grapple with me they try to 
hinder, abuse and vilify me in every way. . . . Lord 
bless them ! My brother, no good thing can be done 
without obstruction. It is only those who persevere to 
the end that succeed. ... I believe that the Satya Yuga 
will come when there will be one caste, one Veda, and 
peace and harmony. This idea of Satya Yuga is what 
would revivify India. Believe it. . . . 

Up boys, and put yourselves to the task ! . . . 

Old Hinduism for ever ! .... Up, up. my boys, we 
are sure to win ! 

. . . When once we begin to wod: ve shall have 
a tremendous “boom,” but 1 do not want to talk without 
working. . . . 

Yours, 

With all blessings.. 

VlVEKANANDA. 


IX 


CHICAGO, 

2Sth May, 1894, 

Dear A,- 

1 could not write you earlier because 1 was whirling to 
and fro from New York to Boston. 1 do not know when 
1 am going back to India. It is better to leave everything 
in the hands of Him who is at my back directing me. Try 
to work without me, as if 1 never existed. Do not wait 
for anybody or anything. Do whatever you can. .Build 
your hope on none. . . . 

1 have done a good deal of lecturing here. . . . The 
expenses here are terrible; money has to fly, although 
I have been almost always taken care of everywhere by 
the nicest and the highest families. 


28 


SWAMI VIVEKANANDA'S WORKS 


1 do not know whether I shall go away this summer or 
not. Most probably not. In the meantime try to organise 
and push on our plans. Believe you can do everything. 
Know that the Lord is with us, and so, onward, brave 
souls ! 

I have had enough appreciation in my own country. 
Appreciation or no appreciation, sleep not, slacken not. 
You must remember that not a bit even of our plans has 
f)een as yet carried out. 

Act on the educated young men, bring them together 
and organise them. Great things can be done by great 
sacrifices only. No selfishness, no name, no fame, yours 
or mine, nor my Master’s even ^ Work, work the idea, 
the plan, my boys, my brave, noble, good souls—to the 
wheel, to the wheel put your shoulders ! Stop not to look 
back for name, or fame, or any such nonsense. Throw 
self overboard and work. Remember, “ The grass when 
made into a rope by being joined together can even chain 
a mad elephant.” I he Lord’s blessings on you all! His 
power be in you all—as 1 believe it is already. ‘‘Wake 
up, stop not until the goal is reached,” say the Vedas. 
Lip, up, the long night is passing, the day is approaching, 
the wave has risen, nothing will be able to resist its tidal 
fury. 1 he spirit, my boys, the spirit; the love, my 
children, the love; the faith, the belief; and fear not ! 

I he greatest sin is fear. 

My blessings on all. I ell all the noble souls there who 
have helped our cause that I send ^them my eternal love 
and gratitude, but I beg of them not to slacken. Throw 
the idea broadcast. Do not be proud; do not insist upon 
anything dogmatic; do not go against anything—ours is 
to put chemicals together, the Lord knows how and when 
the crystal will form. Above all, be not inflated with my 
success or yours. Great works are to be done; what is 
this small success in comparison to what is to come ? 
Believe, believe, the decree has gone forth, the fiat of the 


EPISTLES 


29 - 


Lord has gone forth—India must rise, the masses and the 
poor are to be made happy. Rejoice ! ... I he flood 

of spirituality has risen. 1 see it is rolling over the land 
resistless, boundless, all-absorbing. Every man to the 
force, every good will be added to its forces, every hanc^ 
will smooth its way, and glory be unto the Lord ! . 

1 do not require any help. Try to get up a fund, buy 
some magic-lanterns, maps, globes etc., and some chemi¬ 
cals. Get every evening a crowd of the poor and low, 
even the Pariahs, and lecture to them about religion first, 
and then teach them through the magic-lantern and other 
things, astronomy, geography etc., in the dialect of the 
people. Train up a band of fiery young men. I'^ut your 
fire in them and gradually Increase the c ^anisatlon, letting 
it widen and widen its circle. Do the best you can, do not 
wait to cross the river when the water has all run down. 
Printing magazines, papers, etc., are good, no doubt, but 
actual work, my boys, even if infinitesimal, is better than 

eternal scribbling and talking. Call a meeting at B-s. 

Get a little money and buy those things 1 have just now 
stated, hire a hut and go to work. Magazines are 
secondary, but this is primary. You must have a hold on 
the masses. Do not be afraid of a small beginning, great 
things come afterwards. Be courageous. Do not try to 
lead your brethren, but serve them. I he brutal mania for 
leading has sunk many a great ship in the waters of life. 
Take care especially of that, i.e., be unselfish even unto 
death, and work. 1 could not write all 1 was going to say, 
but the Lord will give you all understanding, my brave 
boys. At it, my boys ! Glory unto the Lord ! 

Yours affectionately, 
ViVEKANANDA. 


'30 


SWAM! VIVEKANANDA’S WORKS 


X 

V, S. A. 

nth July, J894. 

DEAr< A-, 

. . . L.earn business, my boy. We will do great 
things yet! Last year I only sowed the seeds ; this year 
1 mean to reap. In the meanwhile, keep up as much 

enthusiasm as possible in India. Let K-go his own way. 

He will come out all right in time. I have taken his 
responsibility. He has a perfect right to his own opinion. 
Make him write for the paper ; that will keep him in good 
temper ! My blessings on him. 

. . . You must send a paper and a letter to Professor 
J. H. Wright of i larvard University, Boston, thanking 
him c s having been the first man who stood as my 
friend. 

... In the Detroit lecture 1 got $ 900, i.e., 

Rs. 2.700. In other lectures. I earned in one, $ 2,500, i.e., 
Rs. 7,500 in one hour, but got only 200 dollars ! I was 
cheated by a roguish Lecture Bureau. 1 have given 
them up. . . . 

1 shall have to print much matter next year. I am 
going regularly to work. ... 1 he sheer power of the will 
will do eve -ything. ... You must organise a society 
which should regularly meet, and write to me about it as 
often as you can. In fact, get up as much enthusiasm as 
you can. Only, beware of falsehood. Go to work, my 
boys, the fire will come to you ! 1 he faculty of organisa¬ 
tion is entirely absent in our nature, but this has to be 
infused. 1 he great secret is.—absence of jealousy. Be 
always ready to concede to the opinions of your brethren, 
and try always to conciliate. That is the whole secret. 
Fight on bravely ! Life is short I Give it up to a great 
cause. . . . V/e must not join any sect, but we must 
sympathise and work with each. . . . Work, work— 
conquer all by your love ! . . . 


EPISTLES 


31 


Fry to expand. Remember the only sign of life is 
motion and growth. . . . Keep on steadily. So far we 
have done wonderful things. Onward, brave souls, we 
will gain ! Organise and found societies and go to work, 
that is the only way. 

At this time oP the year there is not much lecturing to 
be done here, so 1 will devote myself to my pen, and 
write. 1 shall be hard at work all the time, and then, 
when the cold weather comes and people return to their 
homes, I shall begin lecturing again, and at the same time 
organise societies. 

My love and blessings to you all. I never forget any¬ 
body, though I do not write often. Then again, 1 am now 
continuously travelling, and letters have to be redirected 
from one place to another. 

Work hard. Be holy and pure and the fire will come. 

Yours affectionately, 

ViVEKANANDA. 


XI 


U. S. A. 

31st August, 1894. 

Dear A-, 

4: 9ic tC 

I have received a letter from Cat, but it requires a 
book to answer all his queries. So I send him my blessings 
through you and ask you to remind him that we agree to 
differ—and see the harmony of contrary points. So it 
does not matter what he believes in ; he must act. 

Give my love to B-, G. G., K-, Doctor, and to 

all our friends and all the great and patriotic souls, who 


32 


SWAMI VIVEKANANDA’S WORKS 


were brave and noble enough to sink their differences for 
their country’s cause. 

. . . Now organise a little society. . . . You will 
have to take charge of the whole movement, not as a 
leader, but as a servant. Do you know, the least show 
of leading destroys everything by rousing jealousy? . . . 
Work slowly by disseminating the ideas broadcast. . . . 
My sore will in time be a great stronghold of our Mission 
.... Try to collect funds from Mysore and elsewhere 
to build a temple in Madras which should have a library 
and some rooms for the office and the preachers who 
should be sannyasins, and for Vairagis who may chance 
to come. 1 hus we shall progress inch by inch. . . . So 
far you have done well indeed, rny brave boy. All 
strength shall be given to you. . . . 

1 his is a great field for my work, and everything done 
here prepares the way for my coming work in England. . . 

You know the greatest difficulty with me is to keep or 
even to touch money. It is disgusting and debasing. So 
you must organise a society to take charge of the practical 
and pecuniary part of it. 1 have fiiends here who take 
care of all my monetary concerns. Do you see? It will 
be a wonderful relief to me to get rid of horrid money 
affairs. So the sooner you organise yourselves and you 
be ready as secretary and treasurer to enter into direct 
communication with my friends and sympathisers here, 
the better for you and me. Do that quickly, and write to 
me. Give the society a non-sectarian name. 

. . . Great things are in stoie for you. . . . By and 
by 1 hope to make you independent of your college 
work, so that you may, without starving yourself and 
family, devote your whole soul to the work. So work, 
my boys, work! The rough part of the work has been 
smoothened and rounded; now it will roll on better and 
better every year. .And if you can simply keep it going 
well until 1 come to India, the work will progress by leaps 


EPISTLES 


33 


and bounds. Rejoice that you have done so much. When 
you feel gloomy, think what has been done within the last 
year. How, rising from nothing, we have the eyes of the 
world fixed upon us now. Not only India, but the world 
outside, is expecting great things of us. 

. . . Nothing will be able to resist truth and love 
and sincerity. Are you sincere? unselfish even unto 
death? and loving? Then fear not, not even death. 
Onward, my lads ! Ihe whole world requires Light. It 
is expectant ! India alone has that Light, not in rfiagic 
mummeries and charlatanism, but in the teaching of the 
glories of the spirk of real religion—of the highest 
spiritual truth. 1 hat is why the Lord has preserved the 
race through all its vicissitudes unto the y ' jsent day. Now 
the lime has come. Have faith that you are all, my brave 
lads, born to do great things! Let not the barks of 
puppies frighten you, no, not even the thunderbolts of 
heaven, but stand up and work I 

Ever yours, affectionately, 
ViVEKANANDA. 


XII 

U. S. A. 

2Jst September, 1894. 

Dear A-, 

... I have been continuously travelling from place 
to place and working incessantly, giving lectures and 
holding classes, etc. 

I have not been able to write a line yet for my pro¬ 
posed book. Perhaps 1 may be able to take it in hand 
later on. 1 have made some nice friends here amongst the 
liberal people, and a few amongst the orthodox. 1 hope 
to return soon to India. I have had enough of this country, 
V-^3 


34 


SWAM! VIVEKANANDA^S WORKS 


and specially as too much work is making me nervous. 
The giving of too many public lectures and constant hurry 
have brought on this nervousness. ... So you see, 1 will 
soon return. Of course, there is a growing section with 
whom I am very popular, and who will like to have me 
here all the lime. But I think I have had enough of 
newspaper blazoning, and humbugging of a public life. 
I do not care the least for it. 

. . . No large number of men in any country do 
good out of mere sympathy. A few who give money in 
C.hristian lands often do so through policy or fear of hell. 
So it is as in our Bengali proverb, “ Kill a cow and make a 
pair of shoes out of the leather and give them in charity 
to a Brahmana. So it is here, and so everywhere ; and 
then, the Westerners are miserly in comparison to our 
race. I slncer<dy believe that the Asiatics are the most 
charitable race in the world, only they are very poor. 

I am going to live for a few months in New York. 

I hat city is the head, hand and purse of the country, 
()1 course, Boston is called the Brahmanical city, and 
here in America there are hundreds of thousands that 
sympathise with me. . . . 'The New York people are 
very open.. I will see what can be done there, as I 
have some very influential friends. After all, I am getting 
disgusted with this lecturing business. It will take a 
long time for the Westerners to understand the higher 
spirituality. Everything is £. s. d. to them. If a religion 
brings them money or health or beauty, or long life, they 
Will all flock to it, otherwise not. . . . 

Give to B-, G. G. and all of our friends my 

best love. ' 


Yours with everlasting love, 

ViVEKANANDA. 


EPISTLES 


35 


XlII 


U. S. A. 

21st September, 1894. 


Dear K-, 

I am very sorry to hear your determination of giving 
up the world so soon. Fhe fruit falls from the tree when 
it gets ripe. So wait for the time to come. Do not 
hurry. Moreover, no one has the right to make others 
miserable by his foolish acts. \C^ait, have patience, 
everything will come rig ht in time. . . 

Yours v^'th blessings, 

ViVEKANANDA. 


XIV 

u. s. A. 

27th September, 1894. 

Dear A-, 

. . . One thing I find in the books of my speeches 
and sayings published in Calcutta. Some oi them 
are printed in such a way as to savour of political 
views ; whereas I am no politician, or political agitator. 
1 care only for the spirit—when that is right everything 
will be righted by itself. ... So you must warn the 
Calcutta people that no political significance be ever 
attached falsely to any of my writings or sayings. What 
nonsense !....! heard that Rev. Kali Charan Banerji 
in a lecture to Christian missionaries said that 1 was a 
political delegate. If it was said publicly, then publicly 
ask the Babu from me to write to any of the Calcutta 
papers and prove it, or else take back his foolish asser¬ 
tion. This is their^ trick ! I have said a few harsh words 
in honest criticism of Christian Government in general. 


36 


SWAMI VIVEKANANDA^S WORKS 


but that does not mean that I care for, or have any 
connection with politics or that sort of thing. Those who 
think it very grand to print extracts from these lectures, 
and want to prove that I am a political preacher, to them 
I say, “ Save me from my friends.’* 

... 1 ell my friends that a uniform silence is all 
my answer to my detractors. If I give them tit for tat, 
it would bring us down to a level with them. Fell them 
that truth will take care of itself, and that they are not 
to fight anybody for me. They have much to learn yet. 
and they are only children. They are still full of foolish 
golden dreams—mere boys ! 

. . . This nonsense of public life and newspaper 
blazoning has disgusted me thoroughl>. 1 long to go 

back to the 1 limalayan quiet. 

Ever your affectionately. 

ViVF.KANANDA. 


XV 


Dear 


u. s. A. 

29th September, 1894. 


You all have done well, my brave unselfish children. 

1 am so proud of you. . . . Hope and do not despair. 
After such a start, if you despair you are a fool .... 

Our field is India, and the value of foreign apprecia¬ 
tion is in rousing India up. That is all. . . . We must 
have a strong base from which to spread. . . . Do not 
for a moment quail. Everything will come all right. It 
is will that moves the world. 

\ ou need not be sorry, my son, on account of the 
young men becoming Christians. What else can they be 
under the existing social bondages, especially in Madras? 
Liberty is the first condition of growth. Your ancestors 


EPISTLES 


37 


gave every liberty to the soul, and religion giew. They 
put the body under every bondage and society did not 
grow. The opposite is the case in the West—every 
liberty to society, none to religion. Now are falling off 
the shackles from the feet of Eastern society as from 
those of Western religion. 

Each again will have its type ; the religious or intro¬ 
spective in India, the scientific or out-seeing in the West. 
The West wants every bit of spirituality through social 
improvement. The East wants every bit of social power 
through spirituality. Thus it was that the modern reformers 
saw no way to reform but by first crushing out the religion 
of India. They tried and they failed. Why? Because 
few of them ever studied their own r'-ligion, and not one 
ever underwent the training necessary to understand the 
Mother of all religions, I claim that no destruction of 
religion is necessary to improve the Hindu society, and 
that this state of society exists not on account of religion, 
but because that religion has not been applied to society 
as it should have been. This 1 am ready to prove from 
our old books, every word of it. 1 his is what I teach, and 
this is what we must struggle all our lives to carry out. 
But it will take time, a long lime to study. Have patience 
and work. —Save yourself by yourself. 

Yours etc., 

ViVEKANANDA. 

P. S. The present Hindu society is organised only for 
spiritual men, and hopelessly crushes out everybody else. 
Why ? Where shall they go who want to enjoy the world 
a little with its frivolities? Just as our religion takes in all, 
so should our society. This is to be worked out by first 
understanding the true principles of our religion, and then 
appljnng them to society. This is the slow but sure work 
to be done. 


V. 


38 


SWAMI VIVEKANANDA’S WORKS 
XVI 


WASHINGTON, 

23rd October» 1894, 

Dear V-, 

... By this time I have become one of their own 
teachers. They all like me and my teachings. ... 1 

travel all over the country from one place to another, 
as was my habit in India, preaching and teaching. 
Thousands and thousands have listened to me and taken 
my ideas in a very kindly spirit. It is the most expensive 
country, but the Lord provides for me everywhere 1 go. 

With my love to you and all my friends there (Limbdi. 
Rajputana). 

Yours, 

VlVEKANAND\. 


XVII 


WASHINGTON. 

27th October, 1894. 

Dear A-. 

... 1 am doing exactly here what I used to do in 
India. Always depending on the Lord and making no 
plans ahead. . . . Moreover ycu must remember that 1 
have to work incessantly in this country, and that 1 have 
no lime to pul together my thoughts in the form of a book, 
so much so, that this constant rush has worn my nerves, 
and I am leeling it. I cannot express my obligation to 
you, A-, and all my friends in Madras, for the most un¬ 

selfish and heroic work you did for me. I am not an 
organiser, my nature tends towards scholarship and medi¬ 
tation. 1 think 1 have worked enough, now 1 want rest 
and to teach a little to those that have come to me from. 


EPISTLES 


39 


my Gurucleva. You have known now what you can do, 

for it is really you, young men of-, that have done all; 

I am only the figurehead. 1 am a Fyagi monk, 1 only want 
one thing. 1 do not believe in a God or religion which 
cannot wipe the widow’s tears or bring a piece of bread 
to the orphan’s mouth. However sublime be the theories 
however well-spun may be the philosophy—I do not call 
it religion so long as it is confined to books and dogmas. 
The eye is in the forehead and not in the back. Move 
onward and carry into practice that which you are very 
proud to call your religion, and God bless you ! 

Lock not at me, look to yourselves. I am happy to 
have been the occasion of rousing an enthusiasm, lake 
advantage of it, float along with it and everything will 
come right. I..ove never fails, my son; to-day or to-morrow 
or ages after, truth will conquer. Love shall win the 
victciy. Dc you love your fellow-men? Where should 
you go to seek for God—are not all the poor, the miser¬ 
able, the weak, gods? Why not worship them first? Why 
go to dig a well on the shores of the Canges? Believe 
in the omnipotent power of love. Who cares for these 
tinsel puffs of name? I never keep watch of what the 
newspapers are saying. Have you love?—You are omni¬ 
potent. Are you perfectly unselfish? If so, you are 
irresistible. It is character that pays everywhere. It is the 
Lord who protects His children in the depths of the sea. 
Your country requires heroes ; be heroes ! 

Everybody wants me to come over to India. 7 hey 
think we shall be able to do more if I come over. They 
are mistaken, my friend. I he present enthusiasm is only 
a little patriotism, it means nothing. If it is true and 
genuine you will find in a short time hundreds of heroes 
coming forward and carrying on the work. ITierefore 
know that you have really done all, and go on. Look not 
for me. Here is a grand field. What have I to do with 
this ism or that “ism”? 1 am the servant of the Lord, 


40 


SWAMI VIVEKANANDA^S WORKS 


and where on earth is there a better field than here for 
propagating all high ideas Here, where if one man is 
against me, a hundred hands are ready to help me ; here, 
where man feels for man. and women are goddesses f 
Even idiots may stand up to hear themselves praised, and 
cowards assume the attitude of the brave, when everything 
is sure to turn out well, but the true hero works in silence. 
How many Buddhas die before one finds expression ! My 
son, 1 believe in God and I believe in man. I believe in 
helping the miserable. I believe in going even to hell to 
save others. 1 alk of the Westerners, they have given 
me food, shelter, friendship, protection, even the most 
orthodox Christians ! What do our people do when any 
of their priests go to India? You do not touch them even, 
they are MLECHCHHAS I No man, no nation, my son, 
can hate others and live. India’s doom was sealed the 
very day they invented the word MLECHCHHA and stopped 
from communion with others. 1 ake care how you foster 
that idea. It is good to talk glibly about the Vedanta, 
but how hard to carry out even its least precepts \ 

Ever yours with blessings, 

ViVEKANANDA. 

P. 5. I ake care of these two things—love of power 
and jealousy. Cultivate always “ faith in yourself. ” 


XVII 


U. S. A. 

30th November, 1394. 


Dear A-. 

We must organise our forces in the business part of 
our religious body, but on religious matters must strive not 
to make a sect. . . . 


EPISTLES 


41 


If anyone can write a real life of Sri Ramakrishna with 
the idea of showing what he came to do and teach, let him 
do it, otherwise let him not distort his life and sayings. 

. . . Now let K-translate his love, his knowledge, his 

teachings, his eclecticism, etc. This is the theme. The life 
of Sri Ramakrishna was an extraordinary searchlight under 
whose illumination one is able to really understand the 
whole scope of Hindu religion. He was the object-lesson 
of all the theoretical knowledge given in the Shastras. He 
showed by his life what the Rishis and Avataras really 
wanted to teach. The books were theories, he was the 
realisation. This man had in fifty-one years lived the five 
thousand years of national spiritual life, and so raised him¬ 
self to be an object-lesson for future generations. The 
Vedas can only be explained and the Shastras reconciled 

by his theory of Avastha or stages-that we must not only 

tolerate others, but positively embrace them, and that truth 
is the basis of all religion. Now on these lines a most 
impressive and beautiful life can be written. Well, every¬ 
thing in good lime. . . . Push on with your work inde¬ 
pendently. Many come to sit at dinner when it is 

cooked.” Take care and work on. 

Yours ever with blessings, 

ViVEKANANDA. 


XIX 


V. S. A. 

30th November, 1894. 

Dear K-, 

.... As to the wonderful stories published about 
Sri Ramakrishna, 1 advise you to keep clear of them and 
the fools who write them. 1 hey are true, but the fools 
will make a mess of the whole thing, 1 am sure. He had 


42 


SWAMI VIVEKANANDA^S WORKS 


a whole world of knowledge to teach, why insist upo^ 
unnecessary things as miracles really are ! 1 hey do not 

prove anything. Matter does not prove spirit. What 
connection is there between the existence of God, Soul, 
or immortality, and the working of miracles? . . . . 
r^reach Sri Ramakrishna. Pass the Cup that has satisfied 
your thirst. . . . Preach Bhakti. Do not disturb your 
head with metaphysical nonsense, and do not disturb 
others by your bigotry. . . . 

Yours ever with blessings. 

Vl\RKANANl.)\. 


Blf.ssed and Rt I 0\ RD. 

* ❖ 


U. S. A. 

26th December, JS94. 


* 


In reference to me every now and then attacks are 
made in missionary papers (so I hear), but I never care lo 
see them. If you send any of those made in India, I should 
throw them into the waste-paper basket. A little agitation 
was neccRsarv for our work. We have had enough. Pay 
no more attention to what people say about me, whethr r 
good or bad. ^ ou go on with your work and remembei 
that “ Never one meets with evil who tries to do 
good." (Gita). 

Every d<\y the people here are appreciating me. . . . 
Everything must proceed slowly. ... 1 have written to 
you before and I wrhe again, that I shall not pay heed to 
any criticisms or praises in the newspapers. 1 hey are 
consigned to the fire. Do you do the same. Pay no 
attention whatsoever to newspaper nonsense or criticism 


EPISTLES 


43 


Be sincere and do your duty. Everything will come all 
right. Truth must triumph. . . . 

Missionary misrepresentations should be beneath your 
notice. . . . Perfect silence is the best refutation to them, 
and 1 wish you to maintain the same. . . . Make Mr. 

S- the President of your society. He is one of the 

sincerest and noblest men 1 know, and in him, intellect 
and emotion are beautifully blended. Push on in your 
work, without counting much on me ; work on your own 
account. . . . As for me, I do not know when 1 shall go 
back : 1 am working here and in India as well. . . . 

With my love to you all, 

Yours ever with blessings, 

, ViVF.KANANDA. 


XXI 


541, Dearborn avenue, 
CHICAGO, 1894. 

Dear A- 

Your letter iust to hand. . . . Money can be raised in 
this country by lecturing for tv/o or three 3 ^ears. But 1 
have tried a little, and although there is much public 
appreciation of my work, it is thoroughly uncongenial 
and demoralising to me. . . . 

I have read what you .say about the Indian papers, 
and their criticisms, which are natural. Jealousy is the 
central vice of every enslaved race. And it is jealousy 
and want of combination which cause and perpetuate 
slavery. You cannot feel the truth of this remark until you 
come out of India. The secret of Westerners’ success is 
this power of combination, the basis of which is mutual 
trust and appreciation. I he weaker and more cowardly 


44 


SWAMI VIVEKANANDA^S WORKS 


a nation is, so much the more is this sin visible. . . . 
But, my son, you ought not to expect anything from a 
slavish race. I he case is almost desperate no doubt, but 
let me put the case before you all. Can you put life into 
this dead mass—dead to almost all moral aspiration, dead 
to all future possibilities—and always ready to spring upon 
those that would try to do good to them? Can/ you take 
the position of a physician who tries to pour medicine down 
the throat of a kicking and refractory child? . . . An 
American or a European always supports his countrymen 
in a foreign country. . . . Let me remind you again, “Thou 
hast the right to work but not to the fruits thereof.” 
Stand firm like a rock. 1 ruth always triumphs. Let the 
children of Sri Ramakrishna be true to themselves and 
everything will be all right. We may not live to see the 
outcome, but as sure as we live, it will come sooner or 
later. What India wants is a new electric fire to stir up 
a fresh vigour in the national veins. I his was ever, and 
always will be, slow work. Be content to work, and, 
above all, be true to yourself. Be pure, staunch and 
sincere to the very backbone, and everything will be all 
right. If you have marked anything in the disciples of Sri 
Ramakrishna. it is this—they are sincere to the backbone. 
My task will be done .and 1 shall be quite content to die, 
if 1 can bring up and laut^ch one hundred such men over 
India. 1 le, the Lord, knows best. Let ignorant men talk 
nonsense. We neither seek aid nor avoid it—we are the 
servants of the Most High. The petty attempts of small 
men should be beneath our notice. Onward ! Upon ages 
of struggle a character is built. Be not discouraged. One 
word of truth can never be lost; for ages it may be hidden 
under rubbish, but it will show itself sooner or later. 
1 ruth is indestructible, virtue is indestructible, purity is 
indestructible. Give me a genuine man ; 1 do not want 
masses of converts. My son, hold fast ! Do not care for 
anybody to help you. Is not the Lord infinitely greater 


EPISTLES 


45 


than all human help? Be holy—trust in the Lord, depend 
on Him always, and you arc on the right track ; nothing 
can prevail against you. . . . 

Let us pray, ** Lead, Kindly Light —a beam wlH 
come through the dark, and a hand will be stretched forth 
to lead us. I always pray for you: you must pray for me 
Let each one of us pray day and night for the down¬ 
trodden millions in India who are held fast by poverty, 
priestcraft and tyranny—pray day and night for them, 

1 care more to preach religion to them than to the high 
and the rich. 1 am no metaphysician, no philosopher, nay, 
no saint. But 1 am poor, I love the poor I see what they 
call the poor of this country, and how many there are who 
feel for them ! What an immense difference in India ! 
Who feels there for the two hundreu millions of men and 
women sunken for ever in poverty and ignorance ? Where 
is the way out ? Who feels for them ? 1 hey cannot find 

light or education. Who will bring the light to them— 
who will travel from door to door bringing education to 
them? Let these people be your God—think of them, 
work for them, pray for them incessantly—the Lord will 
show you the way. Him 1 call a Mahatman (great soul) 
whose heart bleeds for the poor, otherwise he is a 
Duratman (wicked soul).' Let us unite our wills in conti¬ 
nued prayer for their good. We may die unknown, un¬ 
pitied, unbewailed, without accomplishing anything—but 
not one thought will be lost. It will take effect, sooner or 
later. My heart is too full to express my feeling ; you 
know it, you can imagine it. So long as the millions live 
in hunger and ignorance, I hold every man a traitor who, 
having been educated at their expense, pays not the least 
heed to them ! I call those men who strut about in their 
finery, having got all their money by grinding the poor, 
wretches, so long as they do not do anything for those two 
hundred millions who are now no better than hungry 
savages ! We are poor, my brothers, we are nobodies. 


46 


SWAMI VIVEKANANDA^S WORKS 


but such have been always the instruments of the Most 
High. Fhe Lord bless you all. 

With all love, 

VlVEKANANDA. 


XXII 


U. S. A. 

1894. 

Dvar D-. 

. . . I.ast winter I travelled a good deal in this 
country allhuugh the wcath(‘r w’as very ,cve’^e. 1 thought 
it would be dreadful, but 1 did not find it so after all. . . . 

1 lope, .\our noble work will succeed. You arc a worthy 
servant of Him wlio came, Bahujana-Hitaya Bahujana 
Sukhaya (for the good of the many, for the happiness of 
I he many). 

... 1 he Christianity that is preached in Indux is 
quite different from what one secs here ; you will be 

astonished to hear, D-. that 1 have friends in this 

country amongst the clergy of the Episcopal and even 
Presbyterian churches, who are as broad, as liberal and 
as sincere as you arc in your own religion. The real 
spiritual man is broad everywhere. I lis love forc^ s him 
to be so. (hose to whom religion is a trade are forced 
to become narrow and mischievous by their introduction 
into religion of the competitive, fighting and selfish 
methods of the world. 

Yours ever in brotherly love, 

VlVEKANANDA. 


EPISTLES 


47 


XXUI 

U. S. A. 

1894. 

Dear A-. 

Listen to an old story, A lazy tramp sauntering alo .g 
the road saw an old man sitting at I he door of his house 
and stopped to enquire of him the whereabouts of a 
certain place. “ How far is such and such a village? * he 
asked. f he old man. remained silent. The man repeated 
his query several times. Still there was no ansv/ r. 
Disgusted at ihis, the traveller turned to go away. 

1 he old man then stood up and said. “ i he village of— 
is only a mile from here.’’ “What!” said the tramp, 
Why did you not speak when 1 asked you before?” 
“Because then,” said the old man, “'you seemed so halting 
and careless about proceeding, but now you are starting 
off in good earnest and you have a right to an answer.” 

Will you remember this story, my son ? Go to work, 
the rest will come. “‘ Whosoever not trusting in anything 
else but Me, rests on Me, I suppl}^ him with everything he 
needs.”—The Gita. Ihis is no dream. 

.... 1 he work should be in the line of preaching 
and serving, at the present time. Lhoosc a place of 
meeting where 3 /ou can assemble every week holding a 
service and reading the Lipanishads with the commentaries, 
and so slowly go on learning and working. Everything 
will come to you if you put your shoulders to the 
wheel. , . . 

Now, go to work 1 G-’s miture is of the emotional 

type, you have a level head ; so work together ; plunge 
in ; this is only the beginning. Every nation must save 
itself; we must not depend upon funds from Arnerica for 
the revival of Hinduism, for that is a delusion. To have 
a centre is a great thing ; try to secure such a place in a 
large town like Madras, and go on radiating a living force 
in all directions. Begin slowly. Start with a few lay mis- 


48 


SWAMI VIVEKANANDA’S WORKS 


sionaries ; gradually others will come who will devote 
their whole lives to the work. Do not try to be a ruler. 
He is the best ruler who can serve well. Be true unto 
death. Ihe work we want. We do not seek wealth, 
name or fame. ... Be brave. . . . Endeavour to interest 
the people of Madras in collecting funds for the purpose, 
and then make a beginning. . . . Be perfectly unselfish 
and you will be sure to succeed. . . . Without losing the 
independence in work, show all regards to your superiors. 
Work in harmony. . . . My children must be ready to 
jump into fire, if needed, to accomplish their work. Now 
work, work, work ! We will stop and compare notes 
later on. Have patience, perseverance and purity. 

I am writing no book on Hinduism just now. I am 
simply jotting down my thoughts. 1 do not know if 1 shall 
publish them. What is in books? The world is too full 
of foolish things already. If you could start a magazine on 
Vedantic lines it would further our object. Be positive ; 
do not criticise others. Give your message, teach what 
you have to teach, and there stop. Ihe Lord knows the 
rest .... 

Do not send me any more newspapers, as 1 do not 
notice the missionary criticisms on myself, and here the 
public estimation of m.e is better for that reason. 

... If you are really my children, you will fear 
nothing, stop at nothing. You will be like lions. We must 
rouse India and the whole world. No cowardice. 1 will 
take no nay. Do you understand ? Be true unto death ! 
.... The secret of this is Guru-Bhakti. Faith in the 
Guru unto death ! Have you that ? 1 believe with all my 
heart that you have, and you know that 1 have confidence 
in you,—so go to work. You must succeed. My prayers 
and benedictions follow every step you take. Work in 
harmony. Be patient with everybody. Every one has my 
love. 1 am watching you. Onward ! Onward ! This is 
just the beginning. My little work here makes a big echo 


EPISTLES 


49 


In India, do you know? So I shall not return there in a 
hurry. My intention is to do something permanent here, 
and with that object 1 am working day by day. I am every 

day gaining the confidence of the American people. 

Expand your hearts and hopes, as wide as the world. 
Study Sanskrit, especially the three Bhashyas (Com¬ 
mentaries) on the Vedanta. Be ready, for 1 have many 
plans for the future. Try to be a magnetic speaker. 
Electrify the people. Everything will come to you if you 

ha\e faith. So tell K-, in fact, tell all my children there. 

In time they will do great things at which the world will 
wonder. lake heart and work. Let me see what you 
can do. ... Be true to your mission. Thus far you 
promise well, so go on and do bett^'r and better still. 

. . . Do not fight with people; do not antagonise 
anyone. Why should we mind if Jack and John become 
Christians? Let them follow whatever religion suits them. 
Why should you mix in controversies? Bear with the 
various opinions of everybody. Patience, purity, and 
perseverance will prevail. 

Yours etc., 

ViVEKANANDA. 


XXIV 

CHICAGO, 

llth January, 1895. 

Dear G-. 

Your letter just to hand. . . . The Parliament of 
Religions was organised with the intention of proving the 
superiority of the Christian religion over other forms of 
faith, but the philosophic religion of Hinduism .was able 

to maintain i"s position notwlthstandhig. Dr. B.-^and 

the men of that ilk are very orthodox, and I do not look 
to them for help. . . . ^flie Lord has sent me many friends 
in this country, and they are always on the increase. The 
Lord bless those who have tried to injure me. . . . 1 have 

V-4 


50 


SWAMI VIVEKANANDA’S WORKS 


been running all the time between Boston and New York, 
two great centres of this country, of which Boston may 
be called the brain, and New York, the purse. In both* 
my success is more than ordinary. I am indifferent to 
the newspaper reports, and you must not expect me to 
send any of them to you. A little boom was necessary 
to begin work. We have had more than enough of that. 

I have written to M-, and 1 have given you my 

directions already. Now show me what you can do. No 
foolish talk now, but actual work ; the Hindus must back 
their talk with real work ; if they cannot, they do not 
deserve anything ; that is all. . . . As for me, I want to 
teach the truth : I do not care whether here or elsewhere. 

In future do not pay any heed to what people say 
either for or against you or me. Work on, be lions and 
the Lord will bless you. I shall work incessantly until I 
die, and even after death 1 shall work for the good of 
the world. 1 ruth is infinitely more weighty than untruth ; 
so is goodness. If you possess these, they will make their 
way by sheer gravity. 

. . . I housands of the best men do care for me ; 
you know this, and have faith in the Lord. 1 am slowly 
exercising an influence in this land greater than all the 
newspaper blazoning of me can do. . . . 

It is the force of character, of purity and of truth—of 
personality. So long as I have these things you can feel 
easy ; no one will be able to injure a hair of my head. If 
they try they will fail, sayeth the Lord. . . . Enough of 
books and theories. It is the life that is the highest and 
the only way to stir the hearts of people ; it carries the 
personal magnetism. . . , The Lord is giving me a deeper 
and deeper insight every day. Work, work, work. . . . 
Truce to foolish talk ; talk of the Lord. Life is too short 
to be spent in talking about frauds and cranks. 

You must always remember that every nation must 
save itself ; so must every man ; do not look to others for 


EPISTLES 


51 


help. Through hard work here. I shall be able now and 
then to send you a little money for your work ; but that 
is all. If you have to look forward to that, better Swop 
work. Know also that this is a grand field for my ideas, 
and that I do not care whether they are Hindi’s or 
Mohammedans or Christians, but those that love the Lord 
will always command my service. 

... I like to work on calmly and silently, and 
the Lord is always with me. Follow me. if you will, by 
being intensely sincere, perfectly unselfish, and. above all, 
by being perfectly pure. My blessings go with you. In 
this short life there is no time for the exchange of 
complimen.s. We can compare notes and compliment 
each other to our hearts* content fter the battle is 
finished. Now, do not talk ; work, work, work I 1 do 
not see anything permanent you have done in India—I 
do not see any centre you have made—1 do not see any 
temple or hall you have erected—1 do not see anybody 
joining hands with you. There is too much talk, talk, 
talk I We are great, we arc great! Nonsense ! We are 
imbeciles ; that is what we are ! This hankering after 
name and fame and all other humbugs—what are they 
to me 7 What do I care about them 7 I should like to 
see hundreds coming to the Lord! Where are they? I 
want them, 1 want to see them. You must seek them 
out. You only give me name and fame. Have done 
with name and fame; to work, my brave men, to work I 
You have not caught my fire yet—you do not understand 
me ! You run in the old ruts of sloth and enjoyments. 
Down with all sloth, down with all enjoyments here or 
hereafter. Plunge into the fire and bring the people 
towards the Lord. 

That you may catch my fire, that you may be in¬ 
tensely sincere, that you may die the heroes* death on 

the field of battle—is the constant prayer of- 

ViVEKANANDA. 


52 


SWAMI VIVEKANANDA^S WORKS 


P. S. Tell A-, K-, Dr. B-and all the 

others not to pin their faith on what Tom, Dick and 
Harry say for or against us, but to concentrate all their 
energy on work. 


XXV 

u. s. A. 

12th January, 1895. 

Dear A-. 

. . . Now know once and for all that 1 do not 
care for name or fame, or any humbug of that type. 1 
want to preach my ideas for the good of the world. You 
have done a great work, but so far as it goes, it has only 
given me name and fame. My life is more precious than 
spending it in getting the admiration of the world. 1 
have no time for such foolery. What work have you 
done in the way of advancing the ideas and organising 
in India? None, none, none] 

An organisation that will teach the Hindus mutual 
help and appreciation is absolutely necessary. Five 
thousand people attended that meeting that was held in 
Calcutta, and hundreds did the same in other places, to 
express an appreciation of my work here—well and 
good! But if you asked them each to give an anna, 
would they do it ? 1 he whole national character is one 

of childish dependence. 1 hey are all ready to enjoy food 
if it is brought to their mouth, and even some want it 
pushed down. ... You do not deserve to live if you 

cannot help yourselves. 

1 have given up at present my plan for the education 
of the masses. It will come by degrees. What 1 now 
want is a band of fiery missionaries. We must have a 
College in Madras to teach comparative religions, Sanskrit, 
the different schools of Vedanta and some European 
languages; we must have a press, and papers printed in 
English and in the Vernaculars. When this is done, then 


EPISTLES 


53 


I shall know that you have accomplished something. Let 
the nation show that they are ready to do. If you cannot 
do anything of the kind in India, then let me alone. I 
have a message to give, let me give it to the people 
who appreciate it and who v/ill work it out. What care 
I who takes it? “He who doeth the will of my Father. ’ 
is my own. . . . 

My name should not be made prominent ; it is my 
ideas that 1 want to see realised. The disciples of all 
the prophets have always inextricably mixed up the .deas 
of the Master with the person, and at last killed the ideas 
for the person. The disciples of Sri Ivamakrishna must 
guard against doing the same thing. Work for the idea, 
not the person. The Lord bless you 

Yours ever with blessing, 

VlVEKANANDA. 

P. S. I am sorry you still continue to send me 
pamphlets and newspapers, which 1 have written you 
several times not to do. 1 have no lime to peruse them 
and take notice of them. Please send them no more. 

1 do not care a fig for what the missionaries, or the-s 

say about me. Let them do as they please. The very 
taking notice of them will be to give them importance. 
Besides, you know, I he missionaries only abuse and never 
argue. . . , 

XXVI 

U. S. A. 

23rd January, 1895. 

Dear A-, 

• • <1 • 

I only want men to follow me who will be.true and 
faithful unto death. I do not care for success or non¬ 
success. ... 1 must keep my movement pure, or I will 
have none of it. . . . 

Yours with love, 

Vivekananda. 


54 


SWAMI VIVEKANANDA^S WORKS 


XXVII 

BROOKLYN, 


January, 1895. 

{Written to the American lady whom Swamiji called 
** Dhiramatd/* the **Steady Mother on the 
occasion of the loss of her father.) 

... I had a premonition of your father’s giving up* 
the old body, and it is not my custom to write to anyone 
when a wave of would-be inharmonious Maya strikes 
him. But these are the great turning-points in life, and 
1 know that you are unmoved. The surface of the sea 
rises and sinks alternately, but to the observant soul—the 
child of light—each sinking reveals more and more of the 
depth, and of the beds of pearls and coral at the bottom. 
Coming and going is all pure delusion. The soul never 
comes nor goes. Where is the place to which it shall 
go, when all space is in the soul} When shall be the time 
for entering and departing, when all time is in the soul} 
The earth moves, causing the illusion of the movement 
of the sun ; but the sun does not move. So Prakriti, or 
Maya, or Nature, is moving, changing, unfolding veil after 
veil, turning over loaf after leaf of this grand book—while 
the witnessing soul drinks in knowledge, unmoved, un¬ 
changed. All souls that ever have been, are, or shall be, 
are all in the present tense, and—to use a material simile 

-are all standing at one geometrical point. Because the 

idea of space .does not occur in the soul, therefore all 


that were ours, are ours, and will be 
ours, are always with us, were always 
with us, and will be always with us. 
We are in them. They are in us. 
Take these cells. Though each sepa¬ 
rate, they are all nevertheless in¬ 
separably joined at A B. There they 
are one. Each is an individual, yet 
all are one at the axis A B. None 


EPISTLES ' 


55 


can escape from that axis, and however broken or torn 
the circumference, yet by standing at the axis, we may 
enter any one of the chambers. This axis is the Lord. 
There we are one with Him, all in all, and all in God. 

The cloud moves across the face of the moon, cre^^:ing 
the illusion that the moon is moving. So nature, body, 
matter moves on, creating the illusion that the soul is 
moving. 1 hus we find at last that the instinct (or inspir¬ 
ation?) which men of every race, whether high or low, 
have had to feel, viz., the presence of the departed about 
them, is true intellectually also. 

Each soul is a star, and all stars arc set in that infinite 
azure, that eternal sky. the Lord. There is the root, the 
reality, the real individuality of er4/:h and all. Religion 
began with the search after some of these stars that had 
passed beyond our horizon, and ended in finding them 
all in God, and ourselves in the same place. The whole 
secret is, then, that your father has given up the old 
garment he was wearing, and is standing where he was 
through all eternity. Will he manifest another such 
garment in this or any other world ? 1 sincerely pray that 
he may not, until he does so in full consciousness. I 
pray that none may be dragged anywhither by the unseen 
power of his own past actions. 1 pray that all may be 
free, that is to say, may know that they are free. And 
if they are to dream again, let us pray that their dreams 
be all of peace and bliss. . . . 

Yours etc., 

ViVEKANANDA. 


XXVIII 

54, w. 33rd street, n, y. 
1st Feb., 1895. 

Dear Sister, 

1 iust received our beautiful note. . . . Well, some¬ 
times it is a good discipline to Le forced to work for 


56 


SWAMI VIVEKANANDA*S WORKS 


work’s sake, even to the length of not being allowed to 
enjoy the fruits of one’s labour. ... 1 am very glad of 
your criticisms and am not sorry at all. The other day 
at Miss T-’s I had an excited argument with a Presby¬ 

terian gentleman, who, as usual, got very hot, angry and 
abusive. However, 1 was afterwards severely reprimand¬ 
ed by Mrs. B-for this, as such things hinder my work. 

So, it seems, is your opinion. 

1 am glad you write about it just now, because 1 have 
been giving a good deal of thought to it. In the first 
place, I am not at all sorry for these things—perhaps that 
may disgust you, it may: 1 know full well how good it 
is for one’s worldly prospects to be sweet. 1 do every¬ 
thing to be sweetf but when it comes to a horrible 
compromise with the truth within, then 1 stop. I do not 
believe in humility. 1 believe in Samadars’tvam—same 
state of mind with regard to all. The duty of the ordinary 
man Is to obey the commands of his ” God,” society, but 
the children of light never do so. This is an eternal law. 
One accommodates himself to surroundings and social 
opinion and gets all good things from society, the giver of 
all good to such. The other stands alone and draws 
society up towards him. The accommodating man finds a 
path of roses—the non-accommodating, one of thorns. But 
the worshippers of ” Vox populi ” go to annihilation in a 
moment—the children of truth live for ever. 

1 will compare truth to a corrosive substance of in¬ 
finite power. It burns its way in wherever it falls—in soft 
substance at once, hard granite slowly, but it must. What 
is writ is writ. I am so, so sorry. Sister, that 1 cannot make 
myself sweet and accommodating to every black false¬ 
hood. But I cannot. I have suffered for it all my life, 
but I cannot. I have essayed and essayed. But I cannot. 
At last 1 have given it up. The Lord is great. He will 
not allow me to become a hypocrite. Now let what is 
in come out. I have not found a way that will please 


EPISTLES 


57 


all. and I cannot but be what I am. liue to my own self. 
“ Youth and beauty vanish, life and wealth vanish, name 
and fame vanish, even the mountains crumble into dust. 
Friendship and love vanish. Truth alone abides.” God 
of Truth, be Thou alone my guide ! 1 am too old to 

change now into milk and honey. Allow me to remain 
as 1 am. “Without fear—without shop-keeping, caring 
neither for friend nor foe, do ihou hold on to Truth, 
Sannyasin, and from this moment give up this world and 
the next and all that are to come—their enjoyments and 
their vanities. Truth, be thou alone my guide.” I have no 
desire for wealth or name or fame or enjoyments. Sister 
—they are dust unto me. I wanted to help my brethren. 
I have not the tact to earn money, b*e'‘s the Lord. What 
reason is there for me to conform to the vagaries of the 
world around me and not obey the voice of Truth within? 
The mind is still weak, Sister, it sometimes mechanically 
clutches at earthly help. But I am not afraid. Fear is 
the greatest sin my religion teaches. 

The last fight with the Presbyterian priest and the 

long fight afterwards with Mrs. B-showed me in a clear 

light what Manu says to the Sannyasin—“Live alone, 
walk alone.” All friendship, all love, is only limitation. 
There never was a friendship, especially of women, which 
was not exacting. O great sages ! You were right. One 
cannot serve the God of Truth who leans upon somebody. 
Be still, my soul! Be alone ! and the Lord is with you. 
Life is nothing I Death is a delusion I All this is not, God 
alone is f Fear not, my soul ! Be alone. Sister, the way is 
long, the time is short, evening is approaching. 1 have to 
go home soon. 1 have no time to give my manners a 
finish. 1 cannot find time to deliver my message. You are 
good, you are so kind, I will do anything for you ; and 
do not be angry, 1 see you all are mere children. 

Dream no more I Oh, dream no more, my soul I In 
one word. 1 have a message to give, ^ have no time to be 


58 


SWAMI VIVEKANANDA^S WORKS 


sweet to the world, and every attempt at sweetness makes 
me a hypocrite. I will die a thousand deaths rather than 
lead a jelly-fish existence and yield to every requirement 
of this foolish world—no matter whether it be my own 
country or a foreign country. You are mistaken, utterly 

mistaken, if you think 1 have a work, as Mrs. B-thinks 

—1 have no Work under or beyond the sun. 1 have a 
message and 1 will give it after my own fashion, I will 
neither Hinduise my message, nor Christianise it, nor 
make it any “ ise *’ in the world. 1 will only my-ise it and 
that is all. Liberty —Mukti—is all my religion, and every¬ 
thing that tries to curb it, 1 will avoid by fight or flight. 
Pooh ! 1 try to pacify the priests I I Sister, do not take 

this amiss. But you are babies and babies must submit 
to be taught. You have not yet drunk of that fountain 
which makes “ reason unreason—mortal immortal—this 
world a zero, and of man a God.** Come out if you 
can of this network of foolishness they call this World, 
Ihen 1 will call you indeed brave and free. If you 
cannot, cheer those that dare dash this false God, society, 
to the ground and trample on its unmitigated hypocrisy: 
if you cannot cheer them, pray, be silent, but do not try 
to drag them down again into the mire with such false 
nonsense as compromise and becoming nice and sweet. 

1 hate this world—this dream—this horrible nightmare 
—with its churches and chicaneries, its books and black¬ 
guardisms—its fair faces and false hearts—its howling 
righteousness on the surface and utter hollowness beneath, 
and, above all, its sanctified shop-keeping. What! 
measure my soul according to what the bond-slaves of the 
world say ?—Pooh I Sister, you do not know the 
Sannyasin. “He stands on the heads of the Vedas !** say 
the Vedas, because he is free from churches and sects 
and religions and prophets and books and all of that ilk ! 
Missionary or no missionary, let them howl and attack 
me with all they can, 1 take them as Bhartrihari says, ** Go 


EPISTLES 


59 - 


thou thy ways, Sannyasin I Some will say, who is this 
mad man? Others, who is this Chandala? Others will’ 
know thee to be a sage. Be glad at the prattle of the 
worldlings.** But when they attack, know that “the 
elephant passing through the market-place is always beset 
by curs, but he cares not. He goes straight on his own 
way. So it is always, when a great soul appears there 
will be numbers to bark after him.*’^ 

1 am living with L-at 54 W. 33rd Street. He is 

brave and noble soul, Lord bless him. Sometimes 1 go to 
the G-*s to sleep. 

Lord bless you all ever and ever—Mid may He lead 
you quickly out of this big humbug, the world 1 May 
you never be enchanted by this old witch, the world I 
May Sankara help you! May Uma open the door of 
truth for you and take away all your delusions I 

Yours with love and blessings, 

VlVEKANANDA. 


XXIX 

W. 38 St.. New York, 1895. 

Dear A-, 

. . . Meddle not with so-called social reform, for 
there cannot be any reform without spiritual reform first. 
. . . Preach the Lord—say neither good nor bad about 
the superstitions and evils. . . Do not lose heart, do not 
lose faith in your Guru, do not lose faith in God. So long 
as you possess these three, nothing can harm you, my 
child. 1 am growing stronger every day. Work on, my 
brave boys. 

Ever yours with blessings, 

Vivekananda. 


^ Tulsidas. 


60 


SWAMI VIVEKA^ANDA’S WORKS 


XXX 

U. S. A. 

6th March, 1895. 

Dear A-, 

. . . Do not for a moment think the “Yankees 
are practical in religion. In that the Hindu alone is 
practical, the Yankee in money-making. . . . Therefore 
I want to have a solid ground under my feet before 1 
depart. Every work should be made thorough. . . . You 
need not insist upon preaching Sri Ramakrishna. Propa¬ 
gate his ideas first, though 1 know the world always wants 
the Man first, then the idea. . . . Do not figure out big 
plans at first, but begin slowly, feel your ground, and 
proceed, up and up. 

. . . Work on, my brave boys. We shall see the 
light some day. 

Harmony and peace 1 . . . . Let things slowly grow. 
Rome was not built in a day. The Maharaja of Mysore 
is dead—one of our greatest hopes. Well I the Lord is 
great. He will send others to help the cause. 

Send some Kushasanas (small sitting-mats) if you can. 

\ ours ever with blessings, 

VlVEKANANDA. 


XXXI 


U. S. A. 

4th April, 1895. 

Dear A-, 

You letter just to hand. You need not be afraid of 
anybody s attempting to hurt me. So long as the Lord 
protects me I shall be impregnable. Your ideas of 


EPISTLES 


61 


America are very hazy. . . . This is a huge country, the 
majority do not care much about religion. , . Christianity 
holds its ground as a mere patriotism, and nothing more 
. . . Now m;,' son, do not lose courage. . . . Send me the 
Vedanta Sutras and the Bhashyas (commentaries) of all tne 
sects. . . I am in His hands. V/hat is the use of 
going back to India? India cannot further my ideas. 
This country takes kindly to my ideas. I will go back 
when 1 get the Command. In the meanwhile, do you all 
gently and patiently work. If anybody attacks me, simply 
ignore his existence. . . . My idea is for you to start a 
society where people could be taught the Vedas and the 
Vedanta, with the commentaries. Work on this line at 
present. . . . Know that every time ju feel weak, you 
not only hurt yourself but also the Cause. Infinite faith 
and strength are the only conditions of success. 

Be cheerful. . . . Hold on to your own ideal. . . . 
Above all, never attempt to guide or rule others, or, as 
the Yankees say, “boss” others. Be the servant of all. 

Ever yours with blessings, 

VlVEKANANDA. 


XXXIl 

U. S A. 

2nd May, 1895. 

Dear S-, 

So you have made up your mind to renounce the 
world. I have sympathy with your desire. There is 
nothing so high as renunciation of self. But you must not 
forget that to forgo your own favourite desire for the 
welfare of those that depend upon you is no small 
sacrifice. Follow the spotless life v nd teachings of Sri 


^62 


SWAMI VIVEKANANDA^S WORKS 


^Ramakrishna and look after the comforts of your family. 
You do your own duty, and leave the rest to Him. 

Love makes no distinction between man and man, 
between an Aryan and a Mlechchha, between a Brahmana 
and a Pariah, nor even between a man or a woman. Love 
makes the whole universe as one’s own home. True 
progress is slow but sure. Work among those young men 
who can devote heart and soul to this one duty—the duty 
of raising the masses of India. Awake them, unite them, 
and inspire them with this spirit of renunciation ; it 
depends wholly on the young people of India. 

Cultivate the virtue of obedience, but you must not 
sacrifice your own faith. No centralisation is possible 
unless there is obedience to superiors. No great work can 
be done without this centralisation of individual forces. 
The Calcutta Math is the mam centre ; the members of all 
ether branches must act in unity and conformity with the 
rules of that centre. 

Give up jealousy and conceit. Learn to work unitedly 
for others. This is the great need of our country. 

Yours with blessings, 

VlVEKANANDA. 


XXXIII 

U. S. A. 

6th May, 1895. 

Dear A-, 

This morning 1 received your last letter and the first 
volume of the Bhashya of Ramanujacharya. . . . You 

mention about the lectures of a Mr. L- ... If you had 

heard some of the wonderful stories the orthodox men and 
women here invent against me, you would be astonished. 


EPISTLES 


63 


Now, do you mean to say that a Sannyasin should go 
about defending himself against the brutal and cowardly 
attacks of these self-seeking men and women? I have 
some very influential friends here who, now and then, give 
them their quietus. Again, why should 1 waste my ener¬ 
gies defending Hinduism if the Hindus all go to sleep? 
What are you three hundred millions of people doing 
there, especially those that are so proud of their learning, 
etc. ? Why do you not take up the fighting and leave me 
to teach and preach? Here am 1 struggling day and night 
in the midst of strangers. . . What help does India send? 
Did the world ever see a nation with le?:> patriotism than 
the Indian? If you could send and maintain for a few 
years a dozen well-educated strong men. to preach in 
Europe and America, you would do immense service to 
India, both morally and politically. Every man who 
morally sympathises with India becomes a political friend. 
Many of the Western people think of you as a nation of 
half-naked savages, and therefore only fit to be whipped 
into civilisation. Why don’t you show them to the con¬ 
trary? .... What can one man do in a far distant land? 
Even what I have done, you do not deserve, you 
cowards. . . . 

Hindus that have hitherto come to Western lands have 
too often criticised their own faith and country in order to 
get praise or money. You know that I did not come to 
seek name and fame ; it was forced upon me. Why shall 
I go back to India? Who will help me? . . . You are 
children, you prattle you do not know what. Where are 
the men in Madras who will give up the world to preach 
religion? Worldliness and realisation of God cannot go 
together. 1 am the one man who dared defend his country 
and I have given them such ideas as they never expected 
from a Hindu. There are many who are against me, but 
I will never be a coward like you. There are also 
thousands in the country who are my friends, and hundreds 


64 


SWAMI VIVEKANANDA'S WORKS 


who would follow me unto death ; every year they will 
increase, and if 1 live and work with them, my ideals of 
life and religion will be fulfilled. Do you see? 

I do not hear much now about the Temple Universal 
that was to be built in America; yet I have a firm footing 
in New York, the very centre of American life, and so my 
work will go on. 1 am taking several of my disciples to a 
summer retreat to finish their training in Yoga and Bhakti 
and Jnana, and then they will be able to help carry the 
work on. Now my boys, go to work. 

Within a month 1 shall be in a position to send some 
money for the paper. Do not go about begging from the 
Hindu beggars. 1 will do it all myself with my own brain 
and strong right hand. I do not want the help of any man 
here or in India. . . . Do not press too much the 
Ramakrishna Avalara. 

Now 1 will tell you my discovery. All of religion is 
contained in the Vedanta, that is, in the three stages of 
the Vedanta philosophy, the Dvaita, Visishtadvaita, and 
Advaita ; one comes after the other. 1 hese are the three 
stages of spiritual growth in man. Each one is necessary. 
1 his is the essential of religion: The Vedanta applied to 
the various ethnic customs and creeds of India, is Hindu¬ 
ism. 1 he first stage, i.e., Dvaita, applied to the ideas of the 
ethnic groui^s of Europe, is Christianity ; as applied to the 
Semitic groups, Mohammedanism. I he Advaita as applied 
in its \ oga-perception form, is Buddhism, etc. Now by 
religion is meant the Vedanta ; the applications must vary 
according to the different needs, surroundings and other 
circumstances of different nations. You will find that 
although the philosophy is the same, the Shaktas, Shaivas, 
etc., apply it each to their own special cult and forms. 
Now, in your journal write article after article on these 
three systems, showing their harmony as one following 
after the other, and at the same time keeping off the 
ceremonial forms altogether. That is, preach the philos- 


EPISTLES 


65 


ophy, the spiritual part, and let people suit it to their 
own forms. 1 wish to write a book on this subject, 
therefore I wanted the three Bhashyas, but only one 
volume of the Ramanuja has reached me as yet. 

. . . You know 1 am not much of a writer. 1 am 
not in the habit of going from door to door begging, i 
sit quiet and let things come to me. . . . Now, my 
children, 1 could have made a grand success in the way 
of organising here, if I were a worldly hypocrite. Alas ! 
That is all of religion here; money and name priest, 
money and lust = layman. I am to create a new order 
of humanity here, who are sincere beli'^vers in God and 
care nothing for the world. This must be slow, very 
slow. In the meantime you go on with your work, and 
1 shall steer my boat straight ahead. 1 he journeJ must 
not be flippant but steady, calm and high-toned. . . . Get 
hold of a band of fine steady writers. ... Be perfectly 
unselfish, be steady and work on. We will do great 
things; do not fear. . . . One thing more. Be the servant 
of all, and do not try in the least to govern others. That 
will excite jealousy and destroy everything. . . . Go on. 
You have worked wonderfully well. We do not wait for 
help, we will work it out, my boy, be self-reliant, faithful 
and patient. Do not antagonise my other friends, live 
in harmony with all. My eternal love to all. 

Ever yours with blessings, 

VlVEKANANDA. 

P. S. Nobody will come to help you, if you put 
yourself forward as a leader. . . . Kill self first if you 
want to succeed. 


V-5 


66 


SWAMI VIVEKANANADA^S WORKS 

XXXIV 


NEW YORK, 

14th May, 1895. 

Dear A-, 

• • • • 

Now 1 have got a hold on New York, and I hope to 
get a permanent body of workers who will carry on the 
work when I leave the country. Do you see, my boy, 
all this newspaper blazoning is nothing? 1 ought to be 
able to leave a permanent effect behind me when I go ; 
and with the blessings of the Lord it is going to be very 
soon. . . . Men are more valuable than all the wealth of 
the world. 

You need not worry about me. The Lord is always 
protecting me. My coming to this country and all my 
labours must not be in vain. 

The Lord is merciful, and although there are many 
who try to injure me any way they can, there are many 
also who will befriend me to the last. Infinite patience, 
infinite purity, and infinite perseverance are the secret of 
success in a good cause. 


Ever yours with blessings, 

VlVEKANANDA. 


XXXV 


u. s. A. 

20th May, 1895 

My DEAR S-, 

. . . Now I tell you a curious fact. Whenever 
anyone of you is sick, let him himself or anyone of you 
visualise him in your mind, and mentally say and strongly 


EPISTLES ’ 


67 


imagine that he is all right. That will cure him quickly. 
You can do it even without his knowledge, and even 
with thousands of miles between you. Remember it and 
do not be ill any more. . . . 

1 cannot understand why S-is so miserable on 

account of his daughters* marriage. After all, he is going 
to drag his daughters through the dirty Samsara which 
he himself wants to escape I ! can have but one opinion 
of that—condemnation I I hate the very name of 
marriage, in regard to a boy or a girl. Do you mean 
to say that 1 have to help in putting someone into 

bondage, you fool! If my brother M-marries, 1 will 

throw him off. I am very decided about tnal.... 

Yours in love, 

ViVEKANANDA. 


XXXVl 

19. W. 38th St., New York, 

22nd Jane, 1895, 

Dear K-. 

1 will write you a whole letter instead of a line. 1 
am glad you are progressing. You are mistaken in 
thinking that 1 am not going to return to India ; I am 
coming soon. I am not giving to failures, and here I have 
planted a seed and it is going to become a tree, and it 
must. Only I am afraid it will hurt its growth if I give 
it up too soon. . . . 

Work on, my boy. Rome was not built in a day. 
I am guided by the Lord, so everything will come all 
right in the end. 

With my love ever and ever to you. 

Your sincerely, 

Vivekananda. 


68 SWAMI VIVEKANANDA’S WORKS 

XXXVII 


U. S. A. 

Ist July, 1895^, 

‘Let me tell you, A-, that you have to defend your¬ 

selves. Why do you behave like babies ? If anybody 
attacks your religion why cannot you defend it? As for 
me, you need not be afraid, I have more friends than 
enemies here, and in this country one-third are Christians, 
and only a small number of the educated care about the 
missionaries. Again, the very fact of the missionaries 
being against anything makes the educated like it. They 
are less of a power here now, and are^ becoming less so 
every day. If their attacks pain you, why do you behave 
like a petulant child and refer to me? . . . Cowardice 
is no virtue. 

Here I have already got a respectable following. Next 
year 1 will organise it on a working basis and then the work 
will be carried on. And when I am off to India, 1 have 
friends who will back me here and help me in India too, 
so you need not fear. So long as you shriek at the 
missionary attempts, and jump without being able to do 
anything, I laugh at you,—^you are little dollies, that is 
what you are. . . . What can Swami do for old babies I 1 

1 know, my son, 1 shall have to come and manufac¬ 
ture men out of you. 1 know that India is only inhabited 
by women and eunuchs. So do not fret. I will have to 
get means to work there. 1 do not put myself in the 
hands of imbeciles. You need not worry, do what little 
you can. I have to work alone from top to bottom. . . . 
“ This Atman is not to be reached by cowards.** You 
need not be afraid for me. The Lord is with me, you 
defend yourselves only and show me you can do that 
and 1 will be satisfied; don’t bother me any more with 
what any one says about me. I am not waiting to hear 


EPISTLES 


69 


any fool’s judgment of me. You babies, great results are 
attained only by great patience, great courage and great 

attempts. . . . K-’s mind is taking periodic somersaults. 

1 am afraid. . . . 

The brave alone do great things, not the cowar !s. 
Know once for all, you faithless ones, that 1 am in the 
hands of the Lord. So long as I am pure and His servant, 
not a hair of my head will be touched. . . . Do something 
for the nation, then they will help you, then the nation 
will be with you. Be brave, be brave, man dies but o.u e. 
My disciples must not be cowards. 

Ever yours with love, 

V'iVFXXNANDA. 


XXXVIII 


u. s. A. 

9th July, 1895. 

(Written to the Maharajah cf Khetri) 

. . . About my coming to India, the matter stands 
thus. I am, as your Highness well knows, a man 
of dogged perseverance. I have planted a seed in this 
country ; it is already a plant, and 1 expect it to be a 
tree very soon, 1 have got a few hundred followers. I 
shall make several Sannyasins and then 1 go to India, 
leaving the work to them. The more the Christian priests 
oppose me, the more 1 am determined to leave a 
permanent mark on their country. ... 1 have already 
some friends in London. I am going there by the end 
of August. ... 1 his winter anyway has to be spent 
partly in London, and partly in New York, and then 1 
shall be free to go to India. There will be enough men 
to carry on the work here after this winter, if the Lord 
is kind. Each work has to pass through these stages— 
ridicule, opposition, and then accept mce. Each man who 


70 


SWAMI VIVEKANANDA*S WORKS 


thinks ahead of his time is sure to be misunderstood. So 
opposition and persecution are welcome, only I have to 
be steady and pure and must have immense faith in God, 
and all these will vanish. . . . 

ViVEKANANDA. 


XXXIX 


u. s. A. 
August, 1895. 

By the time this reaches you, dear A-, I shall be 

in Paris. ... 1 have done a good deal of work this year 
and hope to do a good deal more in the next. Don’t 
bother about the missionaries. It is quite natural that 
they should cry. Who does not, when his bread is 
dwindling away? The missionary funds have got a big 
gap the last two years, and it is on the increase. However, 
I wish the missionaries all success. So long as you have 
love for God and Guru, and faith in truth, nothing can 
hurt you, my son. But the loss of any of these is 
dangerous. You have remarked well ; my ideas are 
going to work in the West better than in India. ... I 
have done more for India than India ever did for me. . . . 

I believe in truth, the Lord sends me workers by the scores 
wherever 1 go—and they are not like the. . . . disciples 
either—they are ready to give up their lives for their Guru. 
1 ruth is my God, the universe my country. 1 do not 
believe in duty. Duty is the curse of the Samsari (house¬ 
holder), not for the Sannyasin. Duty is a humbug. 1 
am free, my bonds are cut, what care I where this body 
goes or does not go? You have helped me well right 
along. The Lord will reward you. I sought praise 
neither from India nor from America, nor do 1 seek such 
bubbles. I have a truth to teach, I, the child of God. 
And He that gave me the truth will send me fellow- 


EPISTLES 


71 


workers from the Earth’s bravest and best. You Hindus 
will see in a few years what the Lord does in the West. 
You are like the Jews of old—dogs in the manger, neither 
eat nor give others to eat. You have no religion, your 
God is the kitchen, your Bible the cooking-pots. . . . 
You are a few brave lads. . . . Hold on, boys, no 
cowards among my children. . . Are great things ever 

done smoothly? Time, patience and indomitable will 
must show. 1 could have told you many things that could 
have made your heart leap, but 1 will not. 1 want iron 
wills and hearts that do not know how to quake. Hold 
on. The Lord bless you. 

Ever yours with blessings. 

ViVEICANANDA. 


XL 

(Written to an English friend) 

THOUSAND ISLAND PARK, 

August, 1895, 

Dear-, 

. . . Now here is another letter from Mr. Sturdy. 
1 send it over to you. See how things are being prepared 

ahead. Don’t you think this coupled with Mr. L_’s 

invitation as a Divine call? I think so and am following 

it. 1 am going by the end of August with Mr. L- to 

Paris and then I go to London. 

What little can be done for my brethren and my work 
is all the help I want from you now. I have done my 
duty by my people fairly well. Now for the world that 
gave me this body—the country that gave me the ideas, 
the humanity which allows me to be one of them I 

The older 1 grow the more I see behind the idea of 
the Hindus that man is the greatest of all beings. So say 
the Mohammedans too. The angels were asked by Allah 


72 


SWAMI VIVEKANANDA'S WORKS 


to bow down to Adam. Iblis did not and therefore he 
became Satan. This earth is higher than all heavens ; 
this is the greatest school in the universe ; and the Mars 
or Jupiter people cannot be higher than us, because they 
cannot communicate with us. The only so-called higher 
beings are the departed, and these are nothing but men 
who have taken another body. This is finer, it is true, 
but still a man-body, with hands and feet, and so on. 
And they live on this earth in another Akasha, without 
being absolutely invisible. 1 hey also think, and have 
consciousness, and everything else like us. So they also 
are men, so arc the Devas, the angels. But man alone 
becomes God, and they all have to become men again 
in order to become God. . . . 

Yours etc., 
ViVEKANANDA. 


XLl 

PARIS, 

9lh Sepicmbcr, 1895. 

Dear A-. 

... I am surprised you take so seriously the 
inivSsionaries’ nonsense. ... If the people in India want 
me to keep strictly to my 1 lindu diet, please tell them to 
send me a cook and mont^y enough to keep him. This 
silly bossism withoul: a mite of real help makes me laugh. 
On the other hand, if the missionaries tell you that 1 have 
ever broken the two great vows of the Sannyasin— 
chastity and povert^^ --tell them that they are big liars. 
Please write to the missionary H- asking him cate¬ 

gorically to write you what misdemeanour he saw in me, 
or give vou the names of his informants, and whether the 
information was first-hand or not ; that will settle the 
question and expose the whole thing. . . . 


EPISTLES 


73 


As for me, mind you, 1 stand at nobody’s dictation. 
I know my mission in life, and no chauvinism about me ; 
1 belong as much to India as to the world, no humbug 
about that. 1 have helped you all I could. You must 
now help yourselves. What country has any special claim 
on me? Am I any nation’s slave? Don’t talk any more 
silly nonsense, you faithless ath<'ists. 

1 have worked hard and sent all the money I got to 
Calcutta and Madras, and then after doing all this stand 
their silly dictation I Are you not ashamed ? What do 1 
owe to them ? Do I care a fig for their praise or fear their 
blame? I am a singular man, my son, not even yon can 
understand me yet. Do your work ; if you ran not, stop ; 
but do not try to “boss” me with yo\*: nonsense. I see 
a greater Power than man, or God, or devil, at my back. 
1 require nobody’s help. 1 have been all my life helping 
others. . . . They cannot raise a few rupees to help the 
work of the greatest man their country ever produced— 
Ramakrishna Paramahamsa ; and they talk nonsense and 
want to dictate to the man for whom they did nothing, 
and who did everything he could for them ! Such is the 
ungrateful world I 

Do you mean to say I am born to live and die one of 
those caste-ridden, superstitious, merciless, hypocritical, 
atheistic cowards that 3 ^ou find only amongst the educated 
Hindus? 1 hate cowardice, 1 will have nothing to do 
with cowards or political nonsense. I do not believe in 
any politics. God and truth are the only politics in the 
world, everything else is trash. 

I ann, going to London to-morrow. . . . 

Yours with blessihgs, 

ViVEKANANDA. 


74 


SWAMI VIVEKANANDA^S WORKS 

XLII 


LONEXDN, 

24th October, 1895. 

Dear A-, 

... 1 have already delivered my first address, and 
you may see how well it has been received by the notice 
in the Standard. The Standard is one of the most 
influential conservative papers. 1 am going to be in 
London for a month, then 1 go off to America and shall 
come back again next summer. So far you see the seed 
is well sown in England. . . . 

Take courage and work on. Patience and steady 
work—this is the only way. Go on, remember patience 
and purity and courage and steady work. ... So long 
as you are pure, and true to your principles, you will 
never fail—Mother will never leave you, and all blessings 
will be yours. 

Yours with love, 

ViVEKANANDA. 


XLIIl 


LONDON, 

18th November, 1895. 

Dear A-. 

... In England my work is really splendid, I am 
astonished myself at it. The English people do not 
talk much in the newspapers, but they work silently. I 
am sure of more work in England than in America. 
Bands and bands come and 1 have no room for so many ; 
so they squat on the floor, ladies and all. I tell them to 
imagine that they are under the sky of India, under a 
spreading banyan, and they like the idea. I shall have 


EPISTLES 


75 


to go away next week, and they are so sorry. Some 
think my work here will be hurt a little if I go away so 
soon. I do not think so. 1 do not depend on men or 
things. The Lord alone I depend upon—and He works- 
through me. 

. . . Please everybody without becoming a hypocrite 
and without being a coward. Hold on to vour own ideas 
with strength and purity, and whatever obstruction may 
now be in your way, the world is bound to listen to you 
in the long run. . , . 

I have no time even to die, as the Bengalees say. 

1 work, work, work, and earn my own bread and help 
my country, and this all alone, and then get only criticism 
from friends and foes for all that I Well, you are but 
children. I shall have to bear everything. 1 have sent for 
a Sannyasin from Calcutta, and shall leave him to work 
in London. 1 want one more for America,—1 want my 
own man, Guru-Bhakti is the foundation of all spiritual 
development. 

... I am really tired from incessant work. Any 
other Hindu would have died if he had to work as hard as 
I have to. ... I want to go to India for a long rest. . . . 

Ever yours with love and blessings, 

ViVEKANANDA. 


XLIV 

228 W. 39th St., New York, 
20th December, 1895, 

Dear A-, 

. , . Have patience and be faithful unto death. Do 
not fight among yourselves. Be perfectly pure in money 
dealings. . . . We will do great things yet. ... So long 
as you have faith and honesty and devotion everything 
will prosper. 


76 


SWAMI VIVEKANANDA^S WORKS 


... In translating the Suktas, pay particular atten¬ 
tion to the Bhashyakaras and pay no attention what¬ 
ever to the orientalists. They do not understand a single 
thing about our Shastras. It is • not given to dry 
philologists to understand philosophy or religion. . . . For 
instance, the word ’i"in the Rig-Veda was tran¬ 

slated—“He lived without breathing.** Now, here the 
reference is really to the chief Prana, and 
the root-meaning for unmoved, that is. without vibration. 
It describes the state in which the universal cosmic energy, 
or Prana, remains before the Kalpa begins: i;/de—the 
Bhashyakaras. Explain according to our sages and not 
according to the so-called European scholars. What do 
they know> 

... Be bold and fearless and the road will be clear. 

. . . Mind, you have nothing whatsoever to do with 

the T-s. If you all stand by me and do not lose 

patience, I assure you we shall do great work yet. The 
great work will be in England, my boy, by and by. 1 
feel you sometimes get disheartened, and I am afraid you 

get temptations to play in the hands of the 1-s. Mind 

you, that the Guru-Bhakta will conquer the world—this is 
the one evidence of history. ... It is faith that makes a 
lion of a man. You must always remember how much 
work I have to do. Sometimes 1 have to deliver two or 
three lectures a day—and thus I make my way against 
all odds—hard work ; any weaker man would die. 

. . . Hold on with faith and strength ; be true, be 
honest, be pure, and don’t quarrel among yourselves. 
Jealousy is the bane of our race. 

With love to you and all our friends there,— 

Yours, 

ViVEKANANDA. 


EPISTLES 


77 


XLV^ 

Dear-. 

, . . Our friend was charmed to hear about the 
Vedantic Prana and Akasha and the Kalpas, which 
according to him are the only theories modern science 
C£ui entertain. Now both Akasha and Prana again are 
produced from the cosmic Mahat, the Universal Mind* 
the Brahma or Ishvara. Mr. Tesla thinks he can 
demonstrate mathematically that force and matter are 
reducible to potential energy. I am to go and see him 
next week, to get this new mathematical demonstration. 

It that case, the Vedantic cosmology will be placed 
on the surest of foundations. I am working a good deal 
now upon the cosmology and eschatcl of the Vedanta. 
1 clearly see their perfect unison with modern science, 
and the elucidation of the one will be followed by that 
of the other. I intend to write a book later on in the 
form of questions and answers.'^ The first chapter will 
be on Cosmology, showing the harmony between Vedantic 
theories and modern science. 

Brahman - The Absolute 

Mahat or Ishvara “Primal Creative Energy 

I I 

III I 

Prana and Akasha-Force and Matter 

The eschatology will be explained from the Advaitic 
standpoint only. That is to say, the dualist claims that 
the soul after death passes on to the Solar sphere, thence 
to the Lunar sphere, thence to the Electric sphere. 

^ Written to an Engli.sh friend at the end of 1895 or thereabouts, 
from America, after a conversation with Mr. Tesla, a distinguished 
electrician, on the problem of the relation between Force and Matter. 

2 That is, doctrine of the things—death, judgment, etc. 

This plan was never carried out. But in studying the lectures 
he delivered in London in the year 1896, :t is easy to see that his 
mind was si ill working on the ideas here announced. 


78 


SWAMI VIVEKANANDA^S WORKS 


Thence he is accompanied by a Purusha to Brahmaloka. 
(Thence, says the Advaitist. he goes to Nirvana.) 

Now on the Advaitic side, it is held that the soul 
neither comes nor goes, and that all these spheres or 
layers of the universe are only so many varying products 
of Akasha and Prana. That is to say, the lowest or most 
condensed is the Solar sphere, consisting of the visible 
universe, in which Prana appears as physial force, and 
Akasha as sensible matter. The next is called the Lunar 
sphere, which surrounds the Solar sphere. This is not the 
moon at all. but the habitation of the gods, that is to say, 
Prana appears in it as psychic forces, and Akasha as 
Tanmatras, or fine particles. Beyond this is the Electric 
sphere, that is to say, a condition in which the Prana is 
almost inseparable from Akasha, and you can hardly tell 
whether Electricity is force or matter. Next is the Brahma¬ 
loka, where there is neither Prana nor Akasha, but both 
are merged in the mind-stu^, the primal energy. And 
here—there being neither Prana nor Akasha—the Jiva con¬ 
templates the whole universe as Samashti, or the sum total 
of Mahat or mind. This appears as a Purusha, an abstract 
universal soul, yet not the Absolute, for still there is multi¬ 
plicity. From this the Jiva finds at last that Unity which 
is the end. Advaitism says that these are the visions which 
rise in succession before the Jiva, who himself neither 
goes nor comes, and that in the same way this present 
vision has been ppjected. The projection (Srishti) and 
dissolution must take place in the same order, only one 
means going backward, and the other coming out. 

Now as each individual can only see his own universe, 
that Imiverse is created with his bondage and goes away 
with his liberation, although it remains for others who are 
in bondage. Now name and form constitute the universe. 
A wave in the ocean is a wave, only in so far as it is bound 
by name and form. If the wave subsides, it is the ocean, 
but that name and form have immediately vanished for 


EPISTLES 


79 


ever. So that the name and form of wave could never be 
without the water that was fashioned into the wave by 
them, yet the name and form themselves were not the 
wave. They die as soon as ever it returns to water. But 
other names and forms live in relation to other waves. 1 his 
name-and-form is called Maya, and the water is Brahman. 
The wave was nothing but water all the time, yet as a 
Wave it had the name and form. Again this name and 
form cannot remain for one moment separated from the 
wave, although the wave as water can remain eternally 
separate from name and form. But because the name and 
form can never be separated, they can never be said to 
exist. Yet they are not zero. This is called Maya. 

I want to work all this out carefu'-y, but you will see 
at a glance that I am on the right track. It will take 
more study in physiology, on the relations between the 
higher and lower centres, to fill out the psychology of 
mind. Chitta and Buddhi, and so on. But 1 have clear 
light now, free of all hocus-pocus. . . . 

Yours etc., 
VlVEKANANDA. 


XLVI 

U. S. A. 

17th February, 1896, 

Dear A - , 

. . . TTie work is terribly hard and the more it is 
growing the harder it is becoming. I need a long rest 
very badly. Yet a great work is before me in England 
. . . Have patience, my son—it will grow beyond all your 
expectations. . . . Every work has got to pass through 
hundreds of difficulties before succeeding. Those that 
persevere will see the light, sooner or later. . . . 

1 have succeeded now in rousing the very heart of 
the American civilisation, New York, but it has been a 


■r ^ u I have spent nearly all I had on 
this New York work and in England. Now things are 
in such a shape that they will go on. 

To put the Hindu ideas into English and then make 
out of dry Philosophy and intricate Mythology and queer 
startling Psychology, a religion which shall be easy, 
simple, popular and at the same time meet the require¬ 
ments of the highest minds—is a task only those can 
understand who have attempted it. TTie abstract Advaita 
must become living—poetic—in everyday life ; out of 
hopelessly intricate Mythology must come concrete moral 
forms ; and out of bewildering Yogi-ism must come the 
most scientific and practical Psychology—and all this must 
be put in a form so that a child may grasp it. That is 
my life’s work. The Lord only knows how far 1 shall 
succeed. “To work we have the right, not to the fruits 
thereof.” It is hard work, my boy, hard work ! To keep 
one’s self steady in the midst of this whirl of Kama- 
Kanchana (lust and gold) and hold on to one’s own ideals, 
until disciples are moulded to conceive of the ideas of 
realisation and perfect renunciation, is indeed difficult 
work, my boy. Thank God, already there is great success. 

1 cannot blame the missionaries and others for not under¬ 


standing me—they hardly ever saw a man who did not 
care in the least about women and money. At first they 
could not believe it to be possible ; how could they? 
You must not think that the Western nations have the 
same ideas of chastity and purity as the Indians. Their 
equivalents are virtue and courage. . . . People are now 
flocking to me. Hundreds have now become convinced 
that there are men who can really control their bodily 
desires ; and reverence and respect for these principles are 
growing. All things come to him who waits. May you 
be blessed for ever and ever I 


Yours with love, 

VlVEKANANDA. 


EPISTLES 


81 


XL^/11 

BOSTON, 

23rd Marche 1896. 

Dear A-. 

. . . One of my new Sannyasins is indeed a woman. 
... 1 he others are men. 1 arn ^oinir lo make some more 
in England and lake them ovci lo h-'.iia with me. ITiese 
“white” faces will have more iniluence in India than the 
Hindus—moreover, they are vigorous, the Hindus are 
dead. The only hope of Indie, is from the masses. i he 
upper classes ar<' physically and morally dead. . . . 

My success is due to my popular style—the greatness 
of a teacher consists in the simplicity of his language. 

. . . ! am going to England r- .1 month. 1 am 
afraid 1 have worked too much ; my nerves are almost 
shattered by this long-continued work. I don’t want you to 
sympathise, but only I write this so that you may not expect 
much from me now. Work on, the best way you can. 
1 have very liltle hope of being able to do great things 
now. 1 am glad, however, that a good deal of literature 
has been created by taking down stenographic notes of my 
lectures. Four books arc ready. . . . Well, I am satisfied 
that I have tried my best to do good, and shall ha\ e a clear 
conscience when I retire from work and sit down in a cave. 

With love and blessings to all, 

ViVEKANANDA. 


XLVIll 

U. S. A., 

March, 1896. 

Dear A-, 

. . . Push on with the work. 1 will do all I can. . . . 
if it pleases the Lord, yellow-garbed Sannyasins will be 
common here and in England. Work on, my children. 
Miud, so long as you have faith in your Guru, nothing 


82 


SWAMl VIVEKANANDA’S WORKS 


will be able to obstruct your way. "That translation of the 
three Bhashyas will be a great thing in the eyes of the 
Westerners. 

. . . Wait, my child, wait and work on. Patience, 
patience. ... I will burst on the public again in good 
time. . . . 

Yours with love, 

ViVEKANANDA. 


XLIX 

NEW YORK. 

Nth April 1896, 

Dear Dr. N-, 

1 received your note this morning. As 1 am sailing 
for England to-morrow, I can only write a few hearty lines. 
I have every sympathy with your proposed magazine for 
boys, and will do my best to help it on. You ought to 
make it independent, following the same lines as the 
Brahmavadin, only making the style and matter much 
more popular. As for example, there is a great chance, 
much more than you ever dream of, for those wonderful 
stories scattered all over the Sanskrit literature, to be 
re-written and made popular. That should be the one 
great feature of your journal. I will write stories, as many 
as I can, when time permits. Avoid all attempts to make 
the journal scholarly—the Brahmavadin stands for that— 
and it will slowly make its way all over the world, I am sure. 
Use the simplest language possible and you will succeed. 
The main feature should be the teaching of principles 
through stories. Don’t make it metaphysical at all. ... In 
India the one thing we lack is the power of combination, 
organisation, the first secret of which is obedience. 

... Go on bravely. Do not expect success in a day 
or a year. Always hold on to the highest. Be steady. 
Avoid jealousy and selfishness. Be obedient and eternally 


EPISTLES 


83 


faithful to the cause of truth, humanity and your country, 
and you will move the world. Remember it is the person, 
the life, which is the secret of power—nothing else. Keep 
this letter and read the last lines whenever you feel 
worried or jealous. Jealousy is the bane of all slaves. 
It is the bane of our nation. Avoid that always. All 
blessings attend you and all success. 

Yours affectionately, 

VlVEKANAND^- 


ENGI.AND, 

J4tb July, 1896. 

Dear Dr. N-, 

. . . After all, no foreigner will ever write the English 
language as well as the native Englishman, and the ideas, 
when put in good English, will spread farther than in 
Hindu English. Then again it is much more difficult to 
write a story in a foreign language than an essay. . . . 

You must not depend on any foreign help. Nations, 
like individuals, must help themselves. This is real 
patriotism. If a nation cannot do that, its time has not 
yet come. It must wait. ... The new light must spread 
all over India. With this end you must work. . . . 

... We are awfully behindhand in art, especially in 

that of painting. Make the design of-symbolical and 

simple. It must express the idea of a re-awakening. . . . 
The lotus is a symbol of regeneration. For instance, make 
a small scene of spring re-awakening in a forest, showing 
how the leaves and buds are coming again. Slowly go on, 
there are hundreds of ideas to be put forward. . . 

I am going to Switzerland next Sunday, and shall 
return to London in the autumn and take up the work 
again. ... I want rest very badly, you know. 

Yours with all blessings etc., 

VlVEKANANDA. 


84 


SWAM! VIVEKANANDA’S WORKS 


LI 

SWITZERLAND, 

6ih August, 1896. 

Dear A-, 

. . . Do not be cifraid. Great things are going to be 
done, ijiy chiicl. fake heart. . . . 

Prof. Max Muller writes me very nice letters, and wants 
material for a big book on Sri Ramakrishna’s life. . . . 

Enough of this newspaper blazoning, 1 am tired of 
it, anyhow. Let us go our own wa 3 ' and let fools talk. 
Nothing can resist truth. 

1 am, as you sec, now in Switzerland, and am always 
on the move. I cannot and must r.ot do anything in the 
way of writing, nor much reading either. There is a big 
London work waiting for me from next month. In winter 
I am going back to Indici and will try to set things on 
their feet there. 

My love to all. Work on, brave hearts, fail not— 
no saying nay ; work on—the Lord is behind the work. 
Mahashaktl is W’lth you. 

Yours with love and blessings, 

Vl\ FKVN'-WDX. 


LIl 


SWn/LRLXM). 

Sih August, 1896. 


Dear A-. 

SeveraJ th.lngs are lu'cessary. Fi»st there should be 
stiii t Integiily. Not that I even hint that any of > ou 
would digress fi«^' .t, I'mt the Hindus have a peculiar 


EPISTLES 


85 > 


slovenliness in business matters, not being sufficiently 
methodical and strict in keeping accounts etc. 

Secondly, entire devotion to the cause, knowing that 
your SALVATION depends upon making the Brahmavadin a 
success. Let this paper be your Ishtadevata and then 
you will see how success comes. 1 have already sent for 
Abhedananda from India. . . . Remember that perfect 
purity and disinterested obedience to the Guru are the 
secret of all success. . . . 

A big foreign circulation of a religious paper is 
impossible. It must be supported by the Hindus, if they 
have any sense ol virtue or gratitude left Ic them. 

By the bye, Mrs. Annie Besant invited me to speak at 
her Lodge, on Bhakti. 1 lectured there one night. Col. 
Olcott also was there. I did it to show my sympathy for 
all sects. . . . Our countrymen must remember that in 
things of the Spirit we are the teachers, and not foreigners 
—but in things of the world we ought to learn from them. 

I have read Max Miiller’s article, which is a good 
one, considering that when he wrote it, six months ago, 
he had no materials except Mazumdar’s leaflet. Now he 
writes me a long and nice letter offering to write a book on 
Sri Ramakrishna. I have already supplied him with much 
material, but a good deal more is needed from India. 

Work on I Hold on ! Be brave ! Dare anything 
and everything ! 

... It is all misery, this Samsara, don’t you see f 
Yours with blessings and love. 

ViVEKANANDA. 


86 


SWAMI VIVEKANANDA’S WORKS 
Llll 


SWITZERLAND, 

26th August, 1896. 


Dear N-. 

1 have just now got your letter. 1 am on the move. 
I have been doing a great deal of mountain-climbing and 
glacier-crossing in the Alps. Now 1 am going to 
Germany. 1 have an invitation from Prof. Deussen to 
visit him at Kiel. From thence 1 go back to England. 
Possibly I will return to India this winter. 

What I objected to in the design for-was not only 

its tawdriness, but the crowding in of a number of figures 
without any purpose. A design should be simple, sym¬ 
bolical and condensed. I will try to make a design 
for-in London, and send it over to you. . . . 

The work is going on beautifully, I am very glad to say. 

... 1 will give you one advice however. All 
combined efforts in India sink under the weight of one 
iniquity—we have not yet developed strict business 
principles. Business is business, in the highest sense, and 
no friendship—or as ihe Hindu proverb says “eye-shame” 
—should be there. One should keep the clearest account 
of everything in one’s charge—and never, never apply the 
funds intended for one thing to any other use whatsoever 
—even if one starves the next moment. This is business 
integrity. Next, energy unfailing. Whatever you do let 
that be your worship for the time. Let this paper be 
your God for the time, and you will succeed. 

When you have succeeded in this paper, start verna¬ 
cular ones on the same lines in Tamil, Telugu, Canarese, 
etc. We must reach the masses. The Madrasis are good, 
energetic, and all that, but the land of Sankaracharya has 
lost the spirit of renunciation, it seems. 

My children must plunge into the breach, must 
renounce the world—then the firm foundation will be laid. 


EPISTLES 


87 


Go on bravely—^never mind about designs and other 
details at present— "With the horse will come the reins. 
\C^ork unto death—1 am with you, and when 1 am gone, 
my spirit will work with you. This life comes and goes— 
wealth, fame, enjoyments are only of a few days. It is 
better, far better to die on the field of duty, preaching 
the truth, than to die like a worldly worm. Advance ! 

Yours with all love and blessings, 

VlVEKANANDA. 


LIV 

14, GREY COAT GARDENS, 
Westminster, London, /896. 

Dear A-. 

1 have returned about three weeks from Switzerland 
. . . The work in London is growing apace, the classes 
are becoming bigger as they go on. ... In America there 
is room for twenty preachers on the Vedanta and Yoga. 

. . .Half the United States can be conquered in ten years, 
giver, a number of strong and genuine men. Where are 
they? You are all boobies over there I Selfish cowards, 
with your nonsense of lip-patriotism, orthodoxy and 
boasted religious feeling I The Madrasis have more of 
go and steadiness, but every fool is married. Marriage I 
Marriage I Marriage ! . . . Then the way our boys are 
married nowadays ! ... It is very good to aspire to be a 
non-attached householder, but what we want in Madras 
is not that just now—but non-marriage. ... 

My child, what I want is muscles of iron and nerves 
of steel, inside which dwells a mind of the same material 
as that of which the thunderbolt is made. Strength, 
manhood, Kshatra-Virya + Brahma-Teja. Our beautiful 
hopeful boys—they have everything, ^.nly if they are not 


88 


SWAMl VIVEKANAND'S WORKS 


slaughtered by the millions at the altar of this brutality 
they call marriage. O Lord, hear my wails I Madras 
will then awake when at least one hundred of its very 
heart’s blood, in the form of its educated young men. 
will stand aside from the world, gird their loins, and be 
ready to fight the battle of truth, marching on from 
country to country. One blow struck outside of India is 
equal to a hundred thousand struck within. Well, all 
will come if the Lord wills it. 

. . . Max Miillcr is getting very friendly. I am soon 
going to deliver two lectures at Oxford. 

I am busy writing something big on the Vedanta 
philosophy. I am busy collecting passages from the vaiious 
Vedas bearing on the Vedanta in its threefold aspect. 
You can help me by getting someone to collect passages 
bearing on, first the Advaitic idea, then, the Visishtad- 
vaitic, and the Dvaitic from the Samhitas, the Brahmanas, 
the Upanishads and the Puranas. They should be classified 
and very legibly written with the name and chapter of 
the book, in each case. It would be a pity to leave the 
West, without leaving something of the philosophy in 
book form. 

There was a book published in Mysore in 1 amil 
characters, comprising all the one hundred and eight 
Upanishads ; 1 saw it in Professor Deussen’s library. Is 
there a reprint of the same in Devanagri? If so, send 
me a copy. If not, send me the Tamil edition, and also 
write on a sheet the Tamil letters and compounds, and 
all juxtaposed with its Nagrl equivalents, so that 1 may 
learn the 1 amil letters. . . , 

Mr. Sa^yanadhan, whom I met in London the other 
day, said that there has been a friendly review of my 
Raja Yoga book in the Madras Mail, the chief Anglo- 
Indian paper in Madras. The leading physiologist in 
America, I hear, has been charmed with my speculations. 
At the same time, there have been some in England who 


EPISTLES 


89 


ridiculed my ideas Good I My speculations of course are 
awfully bold, a good deal of them will ever remain mean¬ 
ingless, but there are hints in it which the physiologists 
had better have taken up earlier. Nevertheless, I am 
quite satisfied with the result. “Let then^ lalk badly of 
me if they please, but let them talk,” is mv motto. 

, . . Persevere on, my brave lads. We have only just 
begun. Never despond ! Never say enough ! . . . As 
soon as a man comes over to the West and sees different 
nations, his eyes open. This way 1 get strong workers, 
not by talking, bu‘ by practically showing what we have 
in India and what we have not. 1 wish at least that a 
million Hindus had travelled all over the worM ! 

Yours ev with love, 

ViVF.KANANOA. 


LV 

C/o Miss H. Muii.rr 

AlRl.lE LODGF., RIFX'.FAVAY GARDENS, 
WIMFLF.DON, ENGLAND, 

22nd Scf:>tember, 1896. 

Dear A-, 

... 1 had a beautiful tim.e with Prof. Deussen in 
Germany. Latter, he and 1 came logeiher to London, and 
we have already become grc'at friends. 

... 1 here is A^et a vast untrodden field, namely 
—the writing of the lives and worics of 1 ulsi Das, Kabir, 
Nanak, and of the saints of Soulliern India. They should 
be written in a thorough-going scholarly style, and not 
in a slipshod, slovenly way. In fact, the ideal of the 
paper, apart from the preaching of Vedanta, should be to 
make it a magazine of Indian researca and scholarship, 


90 


SWAMI VIVEKAMANDA’S WORKS 


of course, bearing on religion. You must approach the* 
best writers and get carefully-written articles from their 
pen. . . . Work on with all energy. 

Yours with love, 

VlVEKANANDA. 


LVl 

C/o E. T. Sturdy, Esq., 
39, VICTORIA STREET, LONDON, 
28th October, 1896. 

Dear A-, 

... I am not yet sure what month 1 shall reach 
India. 1 will write later about it. The new Swami^ 
delivered his maiden speech yesterday at a friendly society 
meeting. It was good and 1 liked it ; he has the making 
of a good speaker in him, 1 am sure. 

. . .You have not yet printed the-. . . Again, 

books must be cheap for India to have a large sale ; the 
types must be bigger to satisfy the public. . . . You can 

very well get out a cheap edition of-if you like. 1 

have not reserved any copyright on it purposely. You 

have missed a good opportunity by not getting out the- 

book earlier, but we Mindus are so slow that when we 
have done a work the opportunity has already passed away 

and thus we are the losers. Your-book came out after 

a year s talk ! Did you think the Western people would 
wait for it till Doomsday? You have lost three-fourths 

of the sale by this delay. . . . That H-is a fool, slower 

than you, and his printing is diabolical. There is no use 
in publishing books that way ; it is cheating the public, 
and should not be done. 1 shall most probably return, 
to Ind a accompanied by Mr. and Mrs. Sevier. Miss Muller 
^ Swami Abhedananda. 


EPISTLES 


91 


and Mr. Goodwin. Mr. and Mrs. Sevier are probably 
going to settle in Almora at least for some time, and 
Goodwin is going to become a Sannyasin. He of course 
will travel with me. It is he to whom we owe all our 
books. He took shorthand notes of my lectures, which 
enabled the books to be published. . . . All these lectures 
were delivered on the spur of the moment, without the 
least preparation, and as such, they should be carefully 
revised and edited. . . . Goodwin will have to live with 
me. . . . He is a strict vegetarian 

Yours with love, 

'/iVEKANANDA. 


LVII 

14, Grey Coat Gardens, 

WESTMINSTER, S. W. 
JIth November, 1896. 

Dear A-, 

I shall most probably start on the 16th of Decembei, 
or may be a day or two later. I go from here to Italy, 
and after seeing a few places there, join the steamer at 
Naples. . . . 

The first edition of Raja Yoga is sold out, and a 
second is in the press. India and America are the biggest 
buyers. . . . 

Yours with love and blessings, 

ViVEKANANDA. 


92 


SWAMI VIVEKANANDA'S WORKS 
• LVIll 


39, VICTORIA STREET, 
LONDON, S. W., 

20th November, 1896. 

Dear A-, 

1 am leaving England on the 16th of December for 
Italy, and shall catch the North German Lloyd S. S. Prinz 
Regent Luitpold at Naples. The steamer is due at 
Colombo on the 14th of January next. 1 intend to see 
a little of Ceylon, and shall then go to Madras. 

... Mr. Sevi( r and his wife are going to start a 
place near Almora in the Himalayas which I intend to 
make my 1 limalay in Centre, as well as a ]>iace for Western 
dvsc\\Aes to Wve as Rtabmacbtvrms and Savmyasms. Good- 
h'i ww \'s Vi 

and Vive with me ; he is like a Sannyasiu. 

. . . Miss M Noble of Wimbledon is a great 
worker. . . . 

I am very desirous to reach Calcutta before the birth¬ 
day festival of Sri Ramakrishna. . . . My present plan of 
work is to start two centres, one in Calcutta, and the 
other in Madras, in which to train up young preachers. 
I have funds enough to start the one in Calcutta, which 
being the scene of Sri Ramakrishna’s life-work, demands 
my first attention. As for the Madras one, I expect to 
get funds in India. 

We will begin work with these three centres ; and 
later on, we will get to Bombay and Allahabad. And 
from these points, if the Lord is pleased, w'e will invade 
not only India, but send over bands of preachers to every 
country in the world. That should be our first duty. 
Work on with a heart. 

. . . Now we have got one Indian magazine in 
English fixed. We can start some in the vernaculars also. 
. . . Papers of this kind are supported by a small circle 


EPISTLES 


93 


of followers. . . . The Indian papers are to be supported 
by the Indians. To make a paper equally acceptable to 
all nationalities, means a staff of writers from all nations, 
and that means at least a hundred thousand rupees a 
year. . . . 

You must not forget that my interests are international 
and not Indian alone. . . 

Yours with all love and blessings, 

VlVKKANANPA. 


LIX 

London, 1896. 
ot vW Vec\.v\xc,'Vo\rc ot Dt. Barrows iu 
al V\\e o\ \\\ 

to the Indian Mirror, Cjl<'i’tta. introduced the distinguished 
visitor to his couiilrymon and advised them to give him a 
fitting reception. I Ic wrote among other things as follows:) 

Dr. Barrow? was the ablest lieutenant Mr v. . Boney 
could have selected to carry out successfully his great plan 
of the Congress at the World’s Fair, and it is now a 
matter of history how one of these Congresses scored a 
* unique distinction, under the leadership of Dr. Barrows. 

It was the great courage, untiring industry, unruffled 
patience and neverdailing courtesy of Dr. Barrows that 
made the Parliament a grand success. 

India, its people and their thoughts, have been 
brought more piomlnently before the world than ever 
before, bv^ thaL wonderful gathering at Chicago, and that 
national benefit we certainly owe to Dr. Barrows more 
than to any otlier man at that meeting. 

Moreover, he comps to us in the sacred name of 
religion, in the name of one of the great teachers of 
mankind, and I am sure, his exposition of the system of 
the Prophet of Nazareth would be extremely liberal and' 


94 


SWAMI VIVEKANANDA'S WORKS 


elevating. The Christ-power this man intends to bring to 
India is not that of the intolerant, dominant superior, with 
heart full of contempt for everything else but its own self, 
but that of a brother who craves for a brother s place as a 
co-worker of the various powers already working in India. 
Above all, we must remember that gratitude and hospi¬ 
tality are the peculiar characteristics of Indian humanity, 
and as such. I would beg my countrymen to behave in 
such a manner that this stranger from the other side of 
the globe may find that in the midst of all our misery, our 
poverty and degradation, the heart beats as warm as of 
yore, when the “wealth of Ind“ was the proverb of 
nations, and India was the land of the “Aryas.** 


LX 

{Written to an American lady) 

LONDON, 

J3th December, 1896, 

Dear Madam, 

We have only to grasp the idea of graduation of 
morality and everything becomes clear. 

Renunciation—non-resistance—non-destructiveness—are 
the ideals to be attained through less and less worldliness, 
less and less resistance, less and less destructiveness. Keep 
the ideal in view and work towards" it. None can live in 
the world without resistance, without destruction, without 
desire. The world has not come to that state yet when 
the ideal can be realised in society. 

The progress of the world through all its evils is 
making it fit for the ideals, slowly but surely. The 
majority will have to go on with this slow growth—the 
exceptional ones will have to get out to realise the idea 
in the present state of things. 


EPISTLES 


95 


Doing the duty of the time is the best way, and if it 
is done only as a duty it does not make us attached. 

Music is the highest art, and to those who understcind, 
is the highest worship. 

We must try our best to destroy ignorance and evil. 
Only we have to learn that evil is destroyed by the growth 
of good. 

Yours affectionately, 

ViVEKANANDA. 


LXI 

(Translated from Bengali) 

Rose Bank, 

TI-IE MAHARAJA OF BURDWAN's HODsE. 

Darjeelingy 6th April, 1897. 

(To the Editor, Bharati) 

Honoured Madam, 

I feel much obliged for the Bharati sent by you, and 
consider myself fortunate that the cause to which my 
bumble life has been dedicated, has been able to win the 
approbation of highly talented ladies like you. 

In this battle of life, men are rare who encourage the 
initiator of new thought, not to speak of women who 
would offer him encouragement, particularly in our 
unfortunate land. It is therefore that the approbation of 
an educated Bengali lady is more valuable than the loud 
applause of all the men of India. 

May the Lord grant that many women like you be 
bom in this country, and devote their lives to the better¬ 
ment of their motherland ! 

1 have something to say in regaro to the article you 


96 


SWAMI VIVEKANANDA’S WORKS 


have written about me in the BharatL It is this. It has been 
for the <j!Ood of India that reii-ious preaching in the West 
has been and will be done. It has ever been my conviction 
that we bhnll not be able to lise unless the Wcslern people 
come to our help. In thi*^- country no appreciation of merit 
can yet be found, no financial strength, and what is most 
lannnilaUe of all, there is not a bit of practicality. 

I here are many things to be done, but means are 
wanting in this country. We have brains, but no hands. 
We hav(' lh<' doctrine of Vedanta, but we have not the 
powc'r to reduce it into practice. In our books there is the 
doctrine of universal equal.ly, but in work we make great 
distinctions, it was in India that unsclhsli and disinterested 
work of the most c'xalteu type was pleached, but in 
practice tve aie awfully cruel, awfully heartless—unable 
to ibinl: of anything besides our own inass-of-flcsh bodies. 

^ ('t it is only through the present state of things that it 
is i)ossi])'.(‘ to procof'd to work. I here is no other way. 
Every oiu' has the {^ower to judge of good and evil, but he 
is the hero who undaunted by the waves of Samsara— 
which is lull cd errors, didusions and miseries—willi one 
hand wipt's ihe tears, and with the other, unshaken, shows 
the path of deliverance. On the one hand there is the con- 
servalivt' soc iety, like' a mass of inert mailer; on thc^ other, 
the restless, impatient, fire-darling reformer; the way to 
good lie's between the two. 1 heard in Japan that It was the 
belief of the girls of that country that their dolls would be 
animated if they were loved with all their heart. The 
jai)an('se girl never brc'aks hc'r doll. O you of great fortune, 
I too beli(.‘\ e that India will awake again if anyone could 
love with all his heart the people of the country—bereft of 
the giace of affluence, of blasted fortune, their discretion 
totally lost, down-trodden, ever-starved, quarrelsome and 
K’lis. 1 ii<'n onl\' will India awake, when hundreds of 
large-lieailc'd men and women giving up all desires of 
eiyraing ihe Inxinie^s of life, will long and exert themselves 


EPISTLES 


97 


to their utmost, for the well-being of the millions of their 
countrymen who are gradually sinking lower and lower in 
the vortex of destitution and ignorance. 1 have experienced 
even in my insignificant life that good motives, sincerity 
and infinite love can conquer the world. One single sonl 
possessed of these virtues can destroy the dark designs of 
millions of hypocrites and brutes. 

My going to the West again is yet uncertain ; if 
1 go, know that too will be for India. Where is the strength 
of men in this country? Where is the strength of money? 
Many men and women of the West are ready to do good 
to India by serving even the lowest Chandalas, in the 
Indian way, and through the Indian religion. How many 
such are there in this country? And financial strength ! To 
meet the expenses of my reception, the people of Calcutta 
made me deliver a lecture, and sold tickets ! . . . I do 
not blame nor censure anybody for this, I only want to 
show that our well-being is impossible without men and 
money coming from the West. 

Ever grateful and ever praying to the Lord for your 
welfare,— 

ViVEKANANDA. 


LXII 


ALMORA, 

29th May, 1897, 

My DEAR Doctor S-, 

Your letter and the two bottles containing the 
medicines were duly received. I have begun from last 
evening a trial of your medicines. Hope the combination 
will have a better effect than the one alone. 

. I began to take a lot of exercise on horse¬ 
back, both morning and evening. Sii^ce that I am very 

V—7 


98 


SWAMI VIVEKANANDA^S WORKS 


much better indeed. I was so much better the first week 
of my gymnastics that 1 have scarcely felt so well since 
1 was a boy and used to have J^usti exercises. I really 
began to fee! that it was a pleasure to have a body. Every 
movement made me conscious of strength—every move¬ 
ment of the muscles was pleasurable. That exhilarating 
feeling has subsided somewhat, yet I feel very strong. In 

a trial of strength I could make both G. G. and N-go 

down before me in a minute. In Darjeeling 1 always felt 
that I was not the same man. Here I feel that 1 have no 
disease whatsoever, but there is one marked change. 

1 never in my life could sleep as soon as I got into bed. 

1 must toss for at least two hours. Only from Madras to 
Darjeeling (during the first month) 1 would sleep as soon as 
my head touched the pillow. That ready disposition to 
sleep is gone now entirely, and my old tossing habit and 
feeling hot after the evening meal have come back. 1 do 
not feel any heat after the day meal. There being an 
orchard here, I began to take more fruit than usual as 
soon as I came. But the only fruit to be got here now is 
the apricot. I am trying to get more varieties from Naini 
Tal. There has not been any thirst even though the days 
are fearfully hot. ... On the whole my own feeling is 
one of revival of great strength and cheerfulness, and a 
feeling of exuberant health, only 1 am afraid 1 am getting 
fat on a too much milk diet. Don’t you listen to what 

J-writes. He is a hypochondriac himself and wants 

to make everybody so. I ate one-sixteenth of a barphi 

(sweetmeat) in Lucknow, and that according to J-was 

what put me out of sorts in Almora ! J-is expected 

here in a few days. I am going to take him in hand. By 
the by. I am very susceptible to malarious influences. 
The first week s indisposition at Almora might have been 
caused to a certain extent by my passage through the 
terai. Anyhow I feel very, very strong now. You 
ought to see me. Doctor, when 1 sit meditating in front of 


EPISTLES 


99 


the beautiful snow-peaks and repeat from the Upani- 

shads—sf sr ^ MIHPT i 

—“He has neither disease, nor decay, nor death ; for, 
verily, he has obtained a body full of the fire of Yoga.** 
1 am very glad to learn of the success of the meetings 
of the Ramakrishna Mission at Calcutta. All blessings 
attend those that help in the great work. . . . 

With all love, 

Yours in the Lord, 

ViVEKANANDA. 


LXIIl 


ALMORA, 

1st June, 1897, 

Dear Mr.-, 

The objections you show about the Vedas would be 
valid if the word Vedas meant Samhitas. The word Vedas 
includes the three parts, the Samhitas, the Brahmanas, 
and the Upanishads, according to the universally received 
opinion in India. Of these, the first two portion^, as being 
the ceremonial parts, have been nearly put out of sight ; 
the Upanishads have alone been taken up by all our 
philosophers and founders of sects. 

The idea that the Samhitas are the only Vedas is very 
recent and has been started by the late Swami Dayananda. 
This opinion has not got any hold on the orthodox 
population. 

The reason of this opinion was that Swami Daya¬ 
nanda thought he could find a consistent theory of the 
whole, based on a new interpretation of the Samhitas, but 
the difficulties remained the same, only they fell back on 
the Brahmanas. And in spite of the theories of inter¬ 
pretation and interpolation a good deal still remains. 


100 


SWAMI VIVEKANANDA’S WORKS 


Now if it is possible to build a consistent religion on 
the Sambitas, it is a thousand times more sure that a very 
consistent and harmonious faith can be based upon the 
Upanishads, and moreover, here one has not to go against 
the already received national opinion. Here all the 
Acharyas of the past would side with you, and you have 
a vast scope for new progress. 

The Gita no doubt has already become the Bible of 
Hinduism and it fully deserves to be so, but the person¬ 
ality of Krishna has become so covered with haze that 
it is impossible to-day to draw any life-giving inspiration 
from that life. Moreover, ihs present age requires new 
modes of thought and new life. 

Hoping this will help you in thinking along these lines. 

I am yours with blessings, 

Viveka.n.anda. 

LXIV 

I 

srf suit i 

II 

9ij!W>nfh3in: 

W5?R=!i I aifq 

srahjqtiT” I «W'(?'iTt4«0^q<nswis fenj^rat i 

%n: qif I qkwfe?: ^Isgic^lfh 

“*f tl%g 5| cqTitg% ^r»ra Rlitg 


EPISTLES 


101 


I ^ i jwt a?i 

^sfq 'w 5 Jww, aiTq^ifir,—rJint: 

»TTO: «l?qi=WcI, fqo^^oi g ^ aiTrtTf?r I 

5qfef^^> »Tfqg' JiT^fa. WRfeft^^ ^Tfoft*nj.i wrJtfet 
$TTr«I?rrt sft^TrHT -q^n; ^qgqi CT - 

^rqft:«T3: qq I H g ?rifqf JIcW: • 

qq 5i%q^qt: fq^qq: aq^qrqif^ qqt: ^qT&q?;q«J^oi)?r^q: I 
aiqJtq ^^:,—3ftqqq;qT qr ^qT ^wfqqr m qqr, q qw, 

qqTcWq^T qtq: qsq^, fiti_ $II l % qqrr^ar^rq 

Jirq^qfgra:fqTq.i qq,gq;^qqqqi<tg,qTnqTq;qq5q: —qq t#:, 
qqv 3f>^ 5fq I 5 qqT%qTg^ qq «qqq: fq^l^q: 3fft?qg^q- 
fq^m: qq^q'tq: I anfqra g aulqqnqt 5t\qf ^q^qrq 5fa I 
q^UTsp ^q qq q ?qr i q^qj: qqrqs^sfq qr?fq^- 
qfqqq ?fq q«iiq^ i qq q ^qiq^, qfq g ^qTq\; sngqs^qTg^ifq- 
?5qT^, qfq g ^qigqq: ^qT^qq: qqfg^T^^ I 

qq qqtqj:qqTiq«gt wgfS'rrfqift^qsBft qqgiqfjq^qrsqfqqtq- 
qqq^gg:q^qqq5Tqq>i^ qrqTsqT^qfqsqqwt q^q^i^vq- 
qqqHFqjgq^qq^sq^rl ^qig^tg^Uq^HT qqg ^ q^ I 

^gqg^qq qisjqtq gqiq 'gafqg^q^: . 

fql^q?^: | 


TRANSLATION 
{Written to a disciple) 

ALMORA, 

3rd July, 1897. 


Constant salutation be to Sri Ramakrishna, the Free, 
the Ishwara, the Shiva-form, by whose power we and the 
whole world are blessed. 

Mayest thou live long, O Saralchandra,- 

Those writers of Shastra who do not tend towards 
work say that all-powerful destiny prevails ; but others 


102 


SWAMI VIVEKANANDA'S WORKS 


who are workers consider the will of man as superior. 
Knowing that the quarrel between those who believe in 
the human will as the remover of misery and others who 
rely on destiny is due to indiscrimination try to ascend 
the highest peak of Knowledge. 

It has been said that adversity is the touchstone of 
true knowledge, and this may be said a hundred times 
with regard to the truth: “Thou art That.” This truly 
diagnoses the Vairagya (dispassion) disease. Blessed is 
the life of one who has developed this symptom. In spite 
of your dislike I repeat the old saying, “Wait for a short 
time.” You are tired with rowing ; rest on your oars. 

I he momentum will take the boat !o the other side. This 
has been said in the Gita passage (1\ . 38), “In good 

time, having reached perfection in Yoga, one realises that 
oneself in one’s own heart;** and in the Upanishad, “Im¬ 
mortality can be attained neither by riches nor by progeny, 
but by renunciation alone** (Kaivalya, 2). Here, by the 
word renunciation Vairagya is referred to. It may be of 
two kinds, with or without purpose. If the latter, none 
but worm-eaten brains will try for it. But if the other is 
referred to, then renunciation would mean the withdrawal 
of the mind from other things and concentrating it on God 
or Atman. The Lord of all cannot be any particular 
individual. He must be the sum total. One possessing 
Vairagya does not understand by Atman the individual 
ego but the All-pervading Lord, residing as the Self and 
Internal Ruler in all. He is perceivable by all as the sum 
total. This being so, as Jiva and Ishwara are in e.ssence 
the same, serving the Jivas and loving God must mean one 
and the same thing. Here is a peculiarity: when you 
serve a Jiva with the idea that he is a Jiva, it is Daya 
(compassion) and not Prema (love); but when you serve 
him with the idea that he is the Self, that is Prema. 
That the Atman is the one objective of love is known from 
Sruti, Smriti and direct perception. Bhagavan Chaitanya 


EPISTLES 


103 


was right, therefore, when He said; “Love to God and 
compassion to the Jivas.** This conclusion of the 
Bhagavan, intimating differentiation between Jiva and 
Ishwara, was right, as He was a dualist. But for us, 
Advaitists, this notion of Jiva as distinct from God is the 
cause of bondage. Our principle, therefore, should be 
love, and not compassion. The application of the word 
compassion even to Jiva seems to me to be rash and vain. 
For us, it is not to pity but to serve. Ours is not the 
feeling of compassion but of love, and the feeling of Self 
in all. 

O Sharman, may thine for thy good be Vairagya, 
—the feel of which is love, which unifies all iin qualities, 
cures the disease of Samsara, removes ih ; threefold misery 
inevitable in this phenomenal world, reveals the true 
nature of all things, destroys the darkness of Maya, and 
which brings out the Self-hood of everything from 
Brahma to the blade of grass I 

This is the constant prayer of 
ViVEKANANDA, 

Ever bound to thee in love. 


LXV 

(Written to a Western friend) 

ALMORA, 

9th July, 1897. 

Dear-, 

I am very sorry to read between the lines the des¬ 
ponding tone of your letter, and I understand the cause ; 
thank you for your warning, 1 understand your motive 

perfectly. I had arranged to go with A-to England 

but, the doctors not allowing, it fell through. I shall be 

so happy to learn that H-has met him. He will be 

only too glad to meet any of you. 

I had also a lot of cuttings from different American 


104 


SWAMI VIVEKANANDA^S WORKS 


papers fearfully criticising my utterances about American 
women and furnishing me with the strange news that I 
had been outcasted 1 As if I had any caste to lose, being 
a Sannyasin ^ 

Not only no caste has been lost, but it has consider¬ 
ably shattered the opposition to sea-voyage—my going to 
the West. If I should have to be outcasted, it would be 
with half the ruling princes of India and almost all of 
educated India. On the other hand, a leading Raja of 
the caste to which I belonged before my entering the 
order got up a banquet in my honour, at which were most 
of the brg hugs of that caste. The Sannyasins, on the 
other hand, may not dine with any one in India as it 
would be beneath the dignity of gods to dine with mere 
mortals. They are regarded as Narayanas, while the 

others are mere men. And dear M-, these feet have 

been washed and wiped and worshipped by the descend¬ 
ants of kings, and there has been a progress through the 
country which none ever commanded in India. 

It will suffice to say that the police were necessary to 
keep order if 1 ventured out into the street I That is out- 
casting indeed I Of course, that took the starch out of the 
missionaries, and who are they here Nobodies. We are 
in blissful ignorance of their existence all the time. I had 
in a lecture said something about the missionaries arid the 
origin of that species except the English Chinch gentle¬ 
men; and in that connection had to refer to the very 
churchy women of America and their power of inventing 
scandals. This the missionaries are parading as an attack 
on American women en masse to undo my work there, 
as they well know that anything said against themselves 

will rather please the U. S. people. My dear M_ 

supposing I had said all sorts of fearful things against the 
Yanks would that be paying off a millionth part of 
what they say of our mothers and sisters} * Neptune’s 
waters” would be perfectly useless to wash off the hatred 


EPISTLES 


105 - 


the Christian ‘'Yanks’* of both sexes bear to us “heathens 
of India”—and what harm have we done them? Let the 
“Yanks” learn to be patient under criticism and then 
criticise others. It is a well-known psychological fact 
that those who are ever ready to abuse others cannot be r 
the slightest touch of criticism from others. Then again, 

what do I owe them ? Except your family, Mrs. B-, 

the Leggetts and' a few other kind persons, who else has 
been kind to me? Who came forward to help me worli 
out my ideas? 1 had to work till 1 am at death’s door 
and had to spend nearly the whole of that energy in 
America, so that the Americans may learn to be broader 
and more spiritual. In England 1 worked only six months. 
There was not a breath of scandal savr jne, and that was 
the working of an American woman, which greatly relieved 
my English friends—not only no attacks, but many of the 
best English church clergymen became my firm friends, 
and without asking I got much help for my work, and I am 
sure to get much more. There is a society watching my 
work and getting help for it, and four respectable persons 
followed me to India to help my work, and dozens were 
ready, and the next time 1 go, hundreds will be. 

Dear, dear M-, do not be afraid for me, . . . 

The world is big, very big and there must be some place 
for me even if the “Yankees” rage. Anyhow, I am quite 
satisfied with my work. I never planned anything. I have 
taken things as they came. Only one idea W 2 is burning in 
my brain—to start the machine for elevating the Indian 
masses—and that 1 have succeeded in doing to a certain 
extent. It would have made your heart glad to see how 
my boys are working In the midst of famine and disease 
and misery—nursing by the mat-bed of the cholera- 
stricken Pariah and feeding the starving Chandala—and 
the Lord sends help to me and to them all. “What are 
men?” He is with me, the Beloved, He was when I was 
in America, in England, when 1 was roaming about* 


106 


SWAMI VIVEKANANDA'S WORKS 


unknown from place to place in India. What do I care 
about what they talk—the babies, they do not know any 
better. What I I, who have realised the Spirit and the 
vanity of all earthly nonsense, to be swerved from my 
path by babies* prattle I Do I look like that? 

1 liad to talk a lot about myself because 1 owed that 
to you. 1 feel my task is done—at most three or four years 
more of life are left. I have lost all wish for my salvation. 
I never wanted earthly enjoyments. I must see my 
machine in strong working order, and then knowing sure 
that I have put in a lever for the good of humanity, in 
India at least, which no power can drive back, I will sleep, 
without caring what will be next; and may 1 be born again 
and ^gain, and suffer thousands of miseries so that I may 
worship ihe only God that exists, the only God I believe 
in, the sum total of all souls—and, above all, my God the 
wicked, my God the miserable, my God the poor of all 
races, of all species, is the special object of my worship. 

“He who is in you and is outside of you, who works 
through every hand, who walks through every foot, whose 
body you are, Him worship, and break all other idols. 

“He who is the high and the low, the saint and the 
sinner, the god and the worm. Him worship, the visible, the 
knowable, the real, the omnipresent, break all other idols. 

“In whom there is neither past life nor future birth, 
nor death nor going nor coming, in whom we always have 
been and always will be one. Him worship, break all 
other idols. 

Aye, fools, neglecting the living Gods and His 
infinite reflection with which the world is full, and running 
after imaginary shadows, Him worship, the only visible, 
and break all other idols.” 

My time is short. 1 have got to unbreast whatever 
1 have to say, without caring if it smarts some or irritates 

others. Therefore, my dear M-, do not be frightened 

at whatever drops from my lips, for the power behind me 


EPISTLES 


107 


Is not Vivekananda but He the Lord, and He knows best. 
If I have to please the world, that will be Injuring the 
world ; the voice of the majority is wrong, seeing that they 
govern and the sad state of the world. Every new thought 
must create opposition—in the civilised a polite sneer, ' i 
the vulgar savage howls and filthy scandals. 

Even these earth-worms must stand eiect, even 
children must see light. The Americans are drunk with 
new wine. A hundred waves of prosperity have come and 
gone over my country. We have learned the lesson winch 
no child can yet understand. It is vanity. 1 his hideous 
world is Maya. Renounce and be happy. Give utj the 
idea of sex and possessions. 1 here is no other bond. 
Marriage and sex and money are the ^nly living devils. 
All earthly love proceeds from the body. No sex, no 
possessions ; as these fall off, the eyes open to spiritual 
"vision. The soul regains its own infinite power. . . . 

Yours ever affly., 

VlVEKANAND.4. 


LXVI 

(Written to M, regarding the Leaves from the Gospel 
of Sri Ramakrishna in Bengali) 

DEHRA DUN, 

24th November, 1897. 

My Dear M-, 

Many many thanks for your second leaflet. It is 
indeed wonderful. The move is quite original, and never 
was the life of a great Teacher brought before the' public 
untarnished by the writer’s mind, as you are presenting 
this one. The language also is beyond all praise, so 
fresh, so pointed and withal so plain and easy. 

I cannot express in adequate terms how I have 
•enjoyed the leaflets. I am really in a transport when I read 


108 


SWAMI VIVEKANANDA*S WORKS 


them. Strange, isn’t it? Our Teacher and Lord was sa 
original, and each one of us will have to be original or 
nothing. I now understand why none of us attempted 
his life before. It has been reserved for you, this great 
work. He is with you evidently. 

With all love and Namaiskara, 

VlVEKANANDA. 

P. S. The Socratic dialogues are Plato all over ; you 
are entirely hidden. Moreover, the dramatic part is 
infinitely beautiful. Everybody likes it, here and in the 
West. 


LXVll 

(Translated from a letter written to a Bengali lady) 

DEOCHAR, VAIDYANATII. 

3rd January, 1898, 

Dear Mother, 

Some very important questions have been raised in 
your letter. It is not possible to answer them fully in a 
short note, still I reply to them as briefly as possible. 

(1) Rishi, Muni or God—none has power to force an 
institution on society. When the needs of the times press 
hard on it, society adopts certain customs for self-pre¬ 
servation. Rishis have only recorded those customs. As 
a man often resorts even to such means as are good for 
immediate self-protection but which are very injurious 
in the future, similarly, society also not unfrequentlv 
saves itself for the time being, but these immediate means 
which contributed to its preservation turn out to be 
terrible in the long run. 

For example, take the prohibition of widow-marriage 
in oUr country. Don’t think that Rishis or wicked men 
introduced the law pertaining to it. Notwithstanding the 
desire of men to keep women completely under their 


EPISTLES 


109 


control, they never could succeed in introducing those 
laws without betaking themselves to the aid of a social 
necessity of the time. Of this custom two points should 
be specially observed: 

(a) Widow-marriage takes place among the low^r 

classes. 

(b) Among-the higher classes the number of women 

is greater than that of men. 

Now, if it be the rule to marry every girl, it is difficult 
enough to get one husband apiece ; then how to get, by 
and by, two or three for each? Therefore has society 
put one party under disadvantage, i.e., it does not let 
her have a second husband, who has had one ; if it did, 
one maid would have to go without : nusband. On the 
other hand, widow-marriage obtains in communities 
having a greater number of men than women, as in their 
case the objection stated above does not exist. . It is 
becoming more and more difficult in the West,, too, for 
unmarried girls to get husbands. 

Similar is the case with the caste system, and other 
social customs. 

So, if it be necessary to change any social custom, 
the necessity underlying it should be found out first of all, 
and by altering it the custom will die of itself. Otherwise 
no good will be done by condemnation or praise. 

(2) Now the question is, is it for the good of the public 
at large that social rules are framed, or society is formed? 
Many reply to this in the affirmative ; some again may 
hold that it is not so. Some men, being comparatively 
powerful, slowly bring all others under their control and 
by stratagem, force or adroitness gain their own objects. 
If this be true, what can be the meaning of the statement 
that there is danger in giving liberty to the ignorant? 
What, again, is the meaning of liberty? 

Liberty does not certainly mean the absence of 
obstacles in the pal||^|t BiilST^tlOQalaJbndrftapalth etc.. 


no 


SWAMI VIVEKANANDA^S WORKS 


oy you and me. but it is our natural right to be allowed to- 
use our own body, intelligence or wealth according to our 
will, without doing any harm to others ; and all the mem¬ 
bers of a society ought to have the same opportunity for 
obtaining wealth, education or knowledge. The second 
question is, those who say that if the ignorant and the poor 
be given liberty, i.e., full right to their body, wealth, etc., 
and if their children have the same opportunity to better 
their condition and acquire knowledge as those of the rich 
and the highly situated, they would become perverse—do* 
they say this for the good of the society, or blinded by 
their selfishness? In England too I have heard, “Who will 
serve us if the lower classes get education?” 

For the luxury of a handful of the rich, let millions 
of men and women remain submerged in the hell of want 
and abysmal depth of ignorance, for if they get wealth 
and education, society will be upset! 

Who constitute society? The millions, or you, I, and 
a few others of the upper classes? 

Again, even if the latter be true, what ground is there 
for our vanity that we lead others? Are we omniscient? 

Raise self by self. Let each one work 
out one s own salvation. Freedom in all matters, i.e., 
advance towards Mukti, is the worthiest gain of man. To 
advance oneself towards freedom, physical, mental and 
spiritual, and help others to do so, is the supreme prize of 
man. Those social rules which stand in the way of the 
unfoldment of this freedom are injurious, and steps should 
be taken to destroy them speedily. Those institutions 
should be encouraged by which men advance in the path 
of freedom. 

That, in this life, we feel a deep love at first sight 
towards a particular person who may not be endowed with 
extraordinary qualities, is explained by the thinkers of our 
country as due to the associations of a past incarnation. 

Your question regarding the will is very interesting: 


EPISTLES 


Hi 

it is the subject to know. The essence of all religions 
is the annihilation of desire, along with which comes, 
therefore, of a certainty, the annihilation of the will, for 
desire is only the name of a particular mode of will. 
Why, again, is this Jagat (universe)? Or why are the.se 
manifestations of the will? Some religions hold that the 
evil will should be destroyed and not the good. The 
denial of desire here would be compensated by enjoy¬ 
ments hereafter. This reply does not of course satisfy 
the wise. The Buddhists, on the other hand, say that 
desire is the cause of misery, its annihilation is quite 
desirable. But like killing a man in the effort to kill 
the mosquito on his cheek, they have gone to the length 
of annihilating their own selves in thcl. efforts to destroy 
misery according to the Buddhistic doctrine. 

The fact is, what we call will is the inferior modi¬ 
fication of something higher. Desirelessness means the 
disappearance of the inferior modification in the form of 
will and the appearance of that superior state. That 
state is beyond the range of mind and intellect. But 
though the look of the gold mohur is quite different from 
that of the rupee and the pice, yet as we know for certain 
that the gold mohur is greater than either, so, that highest 
state, Mukti, or Nirvana, call it what you like, though out 
of the reach of mind and intellect, is greater than will 
and all other powers. It is no power, but power is its 
modification, therefore it is higher. Now you vsnll see 
that the result of the proper exercise of the will, first with 
motive for an object and then without motive, is that 
the will-power will attain a much higher state. 

In the preliminary state, the form of the Guru is to 
be meditated upon by the disciple. Gradually it is to be 
merged in the Ishta. By Ishta is meant* the object of 
love and devotion. . . . 

It is very difficult to superimpose divinity on man, but 
one is sure to succeed by repeated efforts. God is in 


112 


SWAMI VIVEKANANDA^S WORKS 


every man, whether man knows it or not ; your loving 
- devotion is bound to call up the divinity in him. 

Ever your well-wisher, 

ViVEKANANDA. 


LXVIII 

THE MATH. 

J5th May, 190L 

Dear S-, 

Your letter from-is quite exciting. 1 have just 

returned from my tour through East Bengal and Assam. 
As usual 1 am quite tired and broken down. 

If some real good comes out of a visit to H. H. 

of-I am ready to come over, otherwise 1 don’t want to 

undergo the expense and exertion of the long journey. 
Think it well over and make enquiries, and write me if 
you still think it would be best for the Cause for me to 
come to see H. H. . . . 

Yours with love and blessings, 

ViVEKANANDA. 


LXIX 

GOPAL LAL VILLA, 
BENARES CANTONMENT, 
9th February, 1902. 

My dear S-, 

... In answer to C-’s letter, tell him to study 

I he Brahma-Sutras himself. What does he mean by the 
Brahma-Sutras containing references to Buddhism? He 
means the Bhashyas, of course, or rather ought to mean, 
and Shankara was only the last Bhashyakara. There are 
references, though in Buddhistic literature, to Vedanta and 
the Mahayana school of Buddhism is even Advaitistic. 
Why does Amara Singha, a Buddhist, give as one of the 
names of Buddha—Advayavadi? C-writes, the word 


EPISTLES 


113 


Brahman does not occur in the Upanishads I Quelle 
betise ! 

1 hold the Mahayana to be the older of the two 
schools of Buddhism, 

The theory of Maya is as old as the Rik Samhlta. 
The Shvetashvatara Upanishad contains the word “Maya * 
which is developed out of Prakriti. I hold that Upanishad 
to be at least older than Buddhism. 

1 have had much light of late about Buddhism, and 
I am ready to prove—(I) that Shiva-worship, in various 
forms, antedated the Buddhists, that the Buddhists tried 
to get hold of the sacred places of the Shaivas but, failing 
in that, made new places in the precincts just iis you find 
now at Bodh-Gaya and Sarnath (Benji s). 

(2) The story in the Agni Purana about Gayasura 
does not refer to Buddha at ail—as Dr. Rajendralal will 
have it—but simply to a pre-existing story. 

(3) That Buddha went to live on Gayasirsha mountain 
proves the pre-existence of the place. 

(4) Gaya was a place of ancestor-worship already, 
and the footprint-worship the Buddhists copied from the 
Hindus. 

(5) About Benares, even the oldest records go to 
prove it as the great place of Shiva-worship ; etc., etc. 

Many are the new facts I have gathered in Bodh- 

Gaya and from Buddhist literature. Fell C-to read 

for himself, and not be swayed by foolish opinions. 

1 am rather well here, in Benares, and if 1 go on 
improving in this way it will be a great gain. 

A total revolution has occurred in my mind about 
the relation of Buddhism and Neo-Hinduism. I may not 
live to work out the glimpses, but I shall leave the lines 
of work indicated, and you and your brethren will have 
to work it out. 

Yours with all blessings and love, 

VlVEKANANDA. 


114 


SWAMI VIVEKANANDA’S WORKS 


LXX 

{Written to a Western lady) 

THE MATH, 

Jane, 1902. 

Dear-, 

... In my opinion, a race must first cultivate a 
great respect for motherhood, through the sanctification 
and inviolability of marriage, before it can attain to the 
ideal of perfect chastity. The Roman Catholics and the 
Hindus, holding marriage sacred and inviolate, have 
produced great chaste men and women of immense 
power. To the Arab, marriage is a contract or a forceful 
possession, to be dissolved at will, and we do not find 
there the development of the idea of the virgin or the 
Brahmacharin. Modern Buddhism—having fallen among 
races who had not yet come up to the evolution of 
marriage—has made a travesty of monasticism. So until 
there is developed in Japan a great and sacred ideal 
about marriage (apart from mutual attraction and love), 
I do not see how there can be great monks and nuns. 
As you have come to see that the glory of life is chastity, 
so my eyes also have been opened to the necessity of 
this great sanctification for the vast majority, in order that 
a few lifelong chaste powers may be produced. . . . 

ViVEKANANDA. 


INTERVIEWS 


I 

AN INDIAN YOGI IN LONDON 

(The Westminster Gazette, 23rd October, 1895) 

Indian philosophy has in recent years had a deep and 
growing fascination for many minds, though up to the 
present time its exponents in this country have been 
entirely Western in their thought and training, with the 
result that very little is really known of the deeper 
mysteries of the Vedanta wisdom, and that little only by 
a select few. Not many have the courage or the intuition 
to seek in heavy translations, made greatly in the interests 
of philologists, for that sublime knowledge which they 
really reveal to an able exponent brought up in all the 
traditions of the East. 

It was therefore with interest and not without some 
curiosity, writes a correspondent, that I proceeded to 
interview an exponent entirely novel to Western people, 
in the person of the Swami Vivekananda, an actual Indian 
Yogi, who has boldly undertaken to visit the Western 
world to expound the traditional teaching which has been 
handed down by ascetics and Yogis through many ages, 
and who in pursuance of this object, delivered a lecture 
last night in the Princes’ Hall. 

The Swami Vivekananda is a striking figure with his 
turban (or mitre-shaped black cloth cap) and his calm 
but kindly features. 

On my inquiring as to the significance, if any, of his 
name, the Swami said:—“Of the name by which 1 am 
now known (Swami Vivekananda), the first word is 
descriptive of a Sannyasin, or one who formally renounces 
the world, and the second is the title 1 assumed—as is 
customary with all Sannyasins—on my renunciation of the 
world ; it signifies, literally, the bliss of discrimination.” 


116 


SWAMI VIVEKANANDA^S WORKS 


‘*And what induced you to forsake the ordinary 
course of the world, Swami?** I asked. 

“I had a deep interest in religion and philosophy from 
my childhood/’ he replied, “and our books teach renun¬ 
ciation as the highest ideal to which man can aspire. It 
only needed the meeting with a great Teacher—Rama- 
krishna Paramahamsa—to kindle in me the final deter¬ 
mination to follow the path he himself had trod, as in. 
him I found my highest ideal realised.” 

1 hen did he found a sect, which you now 
represent?” 

No, replied the Swami quickly. “No, his whole 
life was spent in breaking down the barriers of sectarian¬ 
ism and dogma. He formed no sect. Quite the reverse. 
He advocated and strove to establish absolute freedom 
of thought. He was a great Yogi.” 

I hen you are connected with no society or sect in 
this country? Neither Fheosophical nor Christian Scientist, 
nor any other?” 

“None whatever!” said the Swami in clear and 
impressive tones. (His face lights up like that of a child,, 
it is so simple, straightforward and honest.) “My teaching 
is my own interpretation of our ancient books, in the light 
which my Master shed upon them. 1 claim no super¬ 
natural authority. Whatever in my teaching may appeal 
to the highest intelligence and be accepted by thinking 
men, the adoption of that will be my reward.” “All 
religions,” he continued, “have for their object the 
teaching either of devotion, knowledge, or Yoga, in a 
concrete form. Now, the philosophy of Vedanta is the 
abstract science which embraces all these methods, and 
this it is that 1 teach, leaving each one to apply it to his 
own concrete form. 1 refer each individual to his own 
experiences, and where reference is made to books, the 
latter are procurable, and may be studied by each one 
for himself. Above all, I teach no authority proceeding 


INTERVIEWS 


117 


from hidden beings speaking through visible agents, any 
more than I claim learning from hidden books or manu¬ 
scripts. I am the exponent of no occult societies, nor do 
1 believe that good can come of such bodies. Truth 
stands on its own authority, and truth can bear the light 
of day.” 

“Then you do not propose to form any society, 
Swami?” I suggested. 

“.None ; no society whatever. I teach only the Self, 
hidden in the heart of every individual and common to 
all. A handful of strong men knowing that Self and 
living in Its light would revolutionise the world, even 
to-day, as has been the case by single strong men before, 
each in his day.” 

“Have you just arrived from India?” 1 inquired—► 
for the Swami is suggestive of Eastern suns. 

“No,” he replied, “I represented the Hindu religion 
at the Parliament of Religions held at Chicago in 1893. 
Since then I have been travelling and lecturing in the 
United States. The American people have proved most 
interested audiences and sympathetic friends, and my 
work there has so taken root that 1 must shortly return 
to that country.” 

“And what is your attitude towards the Western 
religions, Swami ?’ * 

“I propound a philosophy which can serve as a basis 
to every possible religious system in the world, and my 
attitude towards all of them is one of extreme sympathy 
—my teaching is antagonistic to none. I direct my atten¬ 
tion to the individual, to make him strong, to teach him 
that he himself is divine, and I call upon men to make 
themselves conscious of this divinity within. That is really 
the ideal—conscious or unconscious—of every religion.” 

“And what shape will your activities take in this 
country?” 

“My hope is to imbue individuals with the teachings 


116 


SWAMl VIVEKANANDA’S WORKS 


to which i have referred, and to encourage them to 
express these to others in their own way ; let them modify 
them as they will ; I do not teach them as dogmas ; truth 
at length must inevitably prevail. 

*‘The actual machinery through which I work is in the 
hands of one or two friends. On October 22, they have 
arranged for me to deliver an address to a British audience 
at Princes’ Hall, Piccadilly, at 8-30 P.M. The event is 
being advertised. The subject will be on the key of my 
philosophy—‘Self-Knowledge.’ Afterwards 1 am prepared 
to follow any course that opens—to attend meetings in 
people’s drawing-rooms or elsewhere, to answer letters, 
or discuss personally. In a mercenary age 1 may venture 
to remark that none of my activities are undertaken for 
a pecuniary reward.’* 

I then took my leave from one of the most original of 
men that 1 have had the honour of meeting. 


II 

INDIA’S MISSION 

(Sunday Times, London, 1896) 

English people are well acquainted with the fact that 
they send missionaries to India’s “coral strands.*’ Indeed, 
so thoroughly do they obey the behest: “Go ye forth 
into all the world and preach the Gospel,’’ that none of 
the chief British sects are behindhand in obedience to the 
call to spread Christ’s teaching. People are not so well 
aware that India also sends missionaries to England. 

By accident, if the term may be allowed, I fell across 
the Swami Vivekananda in his temporary home at 63, St. 
George’s Road, S. W., and as he did not object to discuss 
the nature of his work and visit to England, 1 sought him 
there, and began our talk with an expression of surprise 
at his assent to my request. 


INTERVIEWS 


119 


“I got thoroughly used to the interviewer in America. 
Because it is not the fashion in my country, that is no 
reason why I should not use means existing in any country 
I visit, for spreading what I desire to be known I There 
I was representative of the Hindu religion at the World s 
Parliament of Religions at Chicago in 1893. The Raja of 
Mysore and some other friends sent me there. I think I 
may lay claim to having had some success in America. 
J had many invitations to other great American cities 
Besides Chicago ; my visit was a very long one. for. with 
the exception of a visit to England last summer, repeated 
as you see this year, I remained about three years in 
America. TTie American civilisation is, in my opinion, 
a very great one. 1 find the American mind peculiarly 
susceptible to new ideas ; nothing is rejected because it 
is new. It is examined on its own merits, and stands 
or falls by these alone.** 

“Whereas in England—^you mean to imply some¬ 
thing?** 

“Yes, in England, civilisation is older, it has gathered 
many accretions as the centuries have rolled on. In 
particular, you have many prejudices that need to be 
broken through, and whoever deals with you in ideas 
must lay this to his account.’* 

“So they say. I gather that you did not found any¬ 
thing like a church or a new religion in America.” 

“That is true. It is contrary to our principles to 
multiply organisations, since, in all conscience, there are 
enough of them. And when organisations are created, 
they need individuals to look after them. Now. those 
who have made Sannyasa—that is, renunciation of all 
worldly position, property, and name—whose aim is to 
seek spiritual knowledge, cannot undertake this work, 
which is, besides, in other hands.** 

‘ Is your teaching a system of comparative religion?*’ 


120 


SWAMI VIVEKANANDA'S WORKS 


**It might convey a more definite idea to call it the 
kernel of all forms of religion, stripping from them the 
non-essential, and laying stress on that which is the real 
basis. 1 am a disciple of Ramakrishna Paramahamsa, a 
perfect Sannyasin whose influence and ideas 1 fell under. 
This great Sannyasin never assumed the negative or 
critical attitude towards other religions, but showed their 
positive side—how they could be carried into life and 
practised. To fight, to assume the antagonistic attitude, 
is the exact contrary of his teaching, which dwells on the 
truth that the world is moved by love. You know that 
the Hindu religion never persecutes. It is the land where 
all sects may live in peace and am’ty. The Mohammedans 
brought murder and slaughter in their train, but until their 
arrival peace prevailed. Thus the Jains, who do not 
believe in a God and who regard such belief as a delusion^ 
were tolerated, and still are there to-day. India sets the 
example of real strength, that is, meekness. Dash, pluck, 
fight, all these things are weakness.*" 

“It sounds very like Tolstoy’s doctrine ; it may do- 
for individuals, though personally I doubt it. But how 
will it answer for nations?” 

“Admirably for them also. It was India’s Karma, 
her fate, to be conquered, and in her turn, to conquer 
her conqueror. She has already done so with her Moham¬ 
medan victors: Educated Mohammedans are Sufis, 

scarcely to be distinguished from Hindus. Hindu thought 
has permeated their civilisation; they assumed the position 
of learners. The great Akbar, the Moghul Emperor, 
was practically a Hindu. And England will be conquered 
in her turn. 1 o-day she has the sword, but it is worse 
than useless in the world of ideas. You know what 
Schopenhauer said of Indian thought. He foretold that 
its influence would be as monientous in Europe, when it 
became well known, as the revival of Greek and Latin 
culture after the Dark Ages.” 


INTERVIEWS 


\2\ 


“Excuse me saying that there do not seem many signs 
of it just now.“ 

“Perhaps not,“ said the Swami, gravely. “1 dare say 
a good many people saw no signs of the old Renaissance^ 
and did not know it was there, even after it had come. 
But there is a great movement, which can be discerned by 
those who know the signs of the times. Oriental research 
has of recent years made great progress. At present it is 
in the hands of scholars, and it seems dry and heavy in the 
work they have achieved. But gradually the light of 
comprehension will break.’* 

“And India is to be the great conqueror of the future? 
Yet she does not send out many missionaries to preach 
her ideas. I presume she will wait uuiii the world comes 
to her feet?*’ 

“India was once a great missionary power. Hundreds 
of years before England was converted to Christianity, 
Buddha sent out missionaries to convert the world of Asia 
to his doctrine. The world of thought is being converted. 
We are only at the beginning as yet. The number of those 
who decline to adopt any special form of religion is greatly 
increasing, and this movement is among the educated 
classes. In a recent American census, a large number of 
persons declined to class themselves as belonging to any 
form of religion. All religions are different expressions of 
the same truth ; all march on or die out. They are the 
radii of the same truth, the expression that variety of 
minds requires.” 

“Now we are getting near it. What is that central 
truth?” 

“The Divine within ; every being, however degraded, 
is the expression of the Divine. The Divinity becomes 
covered, hidden from view. 1 call to mind an incident of 
the Indian Mutiny. A Swami, who for years had fulfilled 
a vow of eternal silence, was stabbed by a Mohammedan. 
They dragged the murderer before his victim and cried! 


122 SWAM! VIVEKANANDA'S WORKS 

out, Speak the word, Swami, and he shall die. After 
many years of silence, he broke it to say with his last 
breath: *My children, you are all mistaken. That man is 
Ood Himself.* The great lesson is, that unity is behind 
all. Call it God, Love, Spirit, Allah, Jehovah—it is the 
same unity that animates all life from the lowest animal 
to the noblest man. Picture to yourself an ocean ice¬ 
bound, pierced with many different holes. Each of these 
is a soul, a man, emancipated according to his degree of 
intelligence, essaying to break through the ice.’* 

*T think 1 see one difference between the wisdom of 
the East and that of the West. You aim at producing very 
perfect individuals by Sannyasa, concentration, and so 
forth. Now the ideal of the West seems to be the perfect¬ 
ing of the social state ; and so we work at political and 
social questions, since we think that the permanence of our 
civilisation depends upon the well-being of the people,*" 

“But the basis of all systems, social or political.” said 
the Swami with great earnestness, “rests upon the good¬ 
ness of men. No nation is great or good because Parlia¬ 
ment enacts this or that, but because its men are great and 
good. 1 have visited China which had the most admirable 
organisation of all nations. Yet to-day China is like a 
disorganised mob, because her men are not equal to the 
system contrived in the olden days. Religion goes to the 
root of the matter. If it is right, all is right.” 

“It sounds just a little vague and remote from practical 
life, that the Divine is within everything but covered. One 
can’t be looking for it all the time. 

“People often work for the same ends but fail to 
recognise the fact. One must admit that law, government, 
politics are phases not final in any way. There is a goal 
beyond them where law is not needed. And by the way, 
the very word Sannyasin means the divine outlaw, one 
might say, divine Nihilist, but that miscomprehension 
pursues those that use such a word. All great Masters 


INTERVIEWS ' 


125 


teach the same thing. Christ saw that the basis is not law, 
that morality and purity are the only strength. As for 
your statement that the East aims at higher self-develop¬ 
ment and the West at the perfecting of the social state, 
you do, not of course forget that there is an apparent scir 
and a real self.** 

“The inference, of course, being that we work for 
the apparent, you for the real.*’ 

“The mind works through various stages to attain its 
fuller development. First, it lays hold of the concrete, 
and only gradually deals with abstractions. Look, too, 
how the idea of universal brotherhood is reached. I’irst 
it is grasped as brotherhood within a sect—haid, narrow, 
and exclusive. Step by step we reach broad generalisa¬ 
tions and the world of abstract ideas.** 

“So you think that those sects, of which we English 
are so fond, will die out. You know what the Frenchman 
said, ‘England, the land of a thousand sects and but one 
sauce*.** 

“1 am sure that they are bound to disappear. Their 
existence is founded on non-essentials ; the essential part 
of them will remain, and be built up into another edifice. 
You know the old saying that it is good to be born in a 
church, but not to die in it.*’ 

“Perhaps you will say how your work is progressing 
in England?** 

“Slowly, for the reasons I have already named. When 
you deal with roots and foundations, all real progress must 
be slow. Of course, I need not say that these ideas are 
bound to spread by one means or another, and to many of 
us the right moment for their dissemination seems now to 
have come.** 

Then 1 listened to an explanation of how the work is 
carried on. Like many an old doctrine, this new one is 
offered without money and without price, depending 
entirely upon the voluntary efforts of those who embrace it. 


124 


SWAMI VIVEKANANDA’S WORKS 


TTie Swami is a picturesque figure in his Eastern dress. 
His simple and cordial manner, savouring of anything but 
the popular idea of asceticism, an unusual command of 
English and great conversational powers add not a little 
to an interesting personality. . . . His vow of Sannyeisa 
implies renunciation of position, property, and name, as 
well as the persistent search for spiritual knowledge. 


Ill 

INDIA AND ENGLAND 
(India, London, 1896) 

During the London season, Swami Vivekananda has 
been teaching and lecturing to considerable numbers of 
people who have been attracted by his doctrine and 
philosophy. Most English people fancy that England has 
the practical monopoly of missionary enterprise, almost 
unbroken save for a small effort on the part of France. 
I therefore sought the Swami in his temporary home in 
South Belgravia to enquire what message India could 
possibly send to England, apart from the remostrances 
she has too often had to make on the subject of home 
charges, judicial and executive functions combined in one 
person, the settlement of expenses connected with 
Sudanese and other expeditions. 

“It is no new thing,” said the Swami composedly, 
“that India should send forth missionaries. She used to 
do so under the Emperor Asoka, in the days when the 
Buddhist faith was young, when she had something to 
teach the surrounding nations.” 

Well, might one ask why she ever ceased doing so, 
and why she has now begun again?” 

She ceased because she grew selfish, forgot the 
principle that nations and individuals alike subsist and 

prosper by a system of give and take. Her mission to the 


INTERVIEWS 


125 


world has always been the same. It is spiritual, the realm 
of introspective thought has been hers through all the 
ages ; abstract science, metaphysics, logic, are her special 
domain. In reality, my mission to England is an outcome 
of England’s to India. It has been hers to conquer, to 
govern, to use her knowledge of physical science to her 
advantage and ours. In trying to sum up India’s contribu¬ 
tion to the world, I am reminded of a Sanskrit and an 
English idiom. When you say a man dies, your phrase is, 
*He gave up the ghost,* whereas we say, ‘He gave up the 
body.* Similarly, you more than imply that the body is 
the chief part of man by saying it possesses a soul. 
Whereas we say a man is a soul and possesses a body. 
These are but small ripples on the surf.^ yet they show 
the current of your national thought. I should like to 
remind you how Schopenhauer predicted that the influ¬ 
ence of Indian philosophy upon Europe would be as 
momentous when it became well known as was the 
revival of Greek and Latin learning at the close of the 
Dark Ages. Oriental research is making great progress : 
a new world of ideas is opening to the seeker after truth.” 

“And is India finally to conquer her conquerors?” 

“Yes, in the world of ideas. England has the sword, 
the material world, as our Mohammedan conquerors had 
before her. Yet Akbar the Great became practically a 
Hindu ; educated Mohammedans, the Sufis, are hardly to 
be distinguished from the Hindus ; they do not eat beef, 
and in other ways conform to our usages. Their thought 
has become permeated by ours.” 

“So, that is the fate you foresee for the lordly Sahib? 
Just at this moment he seems to be a long way off it.” 

“No, it is not so remote as you imply. In the world of 
religious ideas, the Hindu and the Englishman have much 
in common, and there is proof of the same thing among 
other religious communities. Where the English ruler or 
civil servant has had any knowledge of India’s literature. 


126 


SWAMI VIVEKANANDA*S WORKS 


especially her philosophy, there exists the ground of 
common sympathy, a territory constantly widening. It is 
not too much to say that only ignorance is the cause 
of that exclusive—sometimes even contemptuous—attitude 
assumed by some.’* 

“Yes, it is the measure of folly. Will you say why 
you went to America rather than to England on your 
mission 

“ 1 hat was a mere accident—a result of the World’s 
Parliament of Religions being held in Chicago at the time 
of the World’s Fair, instead of in London, as it ought ta 
have been. The Raja of Mysore and some other friends 
sent me to America as the Hindu representative. I stayed 
there three years, with the exception of last summer and 
this summer, when I came to lecture in London. 1 he 
Americans are a great people, with a great future before 
them. 1 admire them very much, and found many kind 
friends among them. They are less prejudiced than the 
English, more ready to weigh and examine a new idea, to 
value it in spite of its newness. They are most hospitable 
too : far less time is lost in showing one’s credentials, as 
it were. You travel in America, as 1 did, from city to city, 
always lecturing among fr’ends, 1 saw Boston, New York, 
Philadelphia, Baltimore, Washington, Desmoines. Memphis 
and numbers of other places.’’ 

“And leaving disciples in each of them?’’ 

“Yes, disciples, but not organisations. That is no 
part of my work. Of these there are enough in all con¬ 
science. Organisations need men to manage them ; they 
must seek power, money, influence. Often they struggle 
for domination, and even fight.’’ 

“Could the gist of this mission of yours be summed 
up in a few words ? Is it comparative religion you want 
to preach?’’ 

“It is really the philosophy of religion, the kernel of 
all its outward forms. All forms of religion have an 


INTERVIEWS . 


127 


essential and a non-essential part. If we strip from them 
the latter, there remains the real basis of all religion, which 
all forms of religion possess in common. Unity is behind 
them all. We may call it God, Allah, Jehovah, the Spirit, 
Love ; it is the same unity that animates all life, from its 
lowest form to its noblest manifestation in man. It is on 
this unity that we need to lay stress, whereas in the West, 
and indeed everywhere, it is on the non-essential that men 
are apt to lay stress. They will fight and kill each.otlier 
for these forms, to make their fellows conform. Seeing 
that the essential is love of God and love of man, this is 
curious, to say the least.’* 

“1 suppose a Hindu could never persecute.” 

”He never yet has done so: he is the most tolerant of 
all the races of men. Considering how profoundly religious 
he is, one might have thought that he would persecute 
those who believe in no God. The Jains regard such 
belief as sheer delusion, yet no Jain has ever been perse¬ 
cuted. In India the Mohammedans were the first who 
ever took the sword.” 

“What progress does the doctrine of essential unity 
make in England? Here we have a thousand sects.” 

“They must gradually disappear as liberty and 
knowledge increase. They are founded on the non- 
essential, which by the nature of things cannot survive. 
The sects have served their purpose, which was that of 
an exclusive brotherhood on lines comprehended by those 
within it. Gradually we reach the idea of universal 
brotherhood by flinging down the walls of partition which 
separate such aggregations of individuals. In England the 
work proceeds slowly, possibly because the time is not 
yet ripe for it ; but all the same, it makes progress. 
Let me call your attention to the similar work that England 
is engaged upon in India. Modern caste distinction is a 
barrier to India’s progress. It narrows, restricts, separates*. 
It will crumble before the advance of ideas. 

V-9 


128 SWAMI VIVEKANANDA^S WORKS 

**Yet some Englishmen, and they are not the least 
sympathetic to India nor the most ignorant of her history, 
regard caste as in the main beneficent. One may easily 
be too much Europeanised. You yourself condemn many 
of our ideals as materialistic.’ 

“True. No reasonable person aims at assimilating 
India to England ; the body is made by the thought that 
lies behind it. The body politic is thus the expression of 
national thought, and in India, of thousands of years of 
thought, l o Europeanise India is therefore an impossible 
and foolish task: the elements of progress were always 
actively present in India. As soon as a peaceful govern¬ 
ment was there, these have alwa 5 '^s shown themselves. 
From the time of the Upanishads down to the present day, 
nearly all our great Teachers have wanted to break 
through the barriers of caste, /.e., caste in its degenerate 
state, not the original system. What little good you see 
in the present caste clings to it from the original caste, 
which was the most glorious social institution. Buddha 
tried to re-establish caste in its original form. At every 
period of India’s awakening, there have always been great 
efforts made to break down caste. But it must always be 
We who build up a new India as an effect and continuation 
of her past, assimilating helpful foreign ideas wherever 
they may be found. Never can it be they ; growth must 
proceed from within. All that England can do is to help 
India to work out her own salvation. All progress at the 
dictation of another, whose hand is at India’s throat, is 
valueless in my opinion. The highest work can only 
degenerate when slave-labour produces it. ” 

“Have you given any attention to the Indian National 
Congress movement?’’ 

“I cannot claim to have given much ; my work is in 
another part of the field. But I regard the movement as 
significant, and heartily wish it success. A nation is being 
made out of India’s different races. 1 sometimes think they 


INTERVIEWS 


129 


are no less various than the different peoples of Europe. 
In the past, Europe has struggled for Indian trade, a trade 
which has played a tremendous part in the civilisation of 
the world ; its acquisition might almost be called a turn¬ 
ing-point in the history of humanity. We see the Dutch, 
Portuguese, French, and English contending for it in 
succession. The discovery of America may be traced to 
the indemnification the Venetians sought in the far 
distant West for the loss they suffered in the East.” 

“Where will it end?” 

“It will certainly end in the working; out of India’s 
homogeneity, in her acquiring what we may call demo¬ 
cratic ideas. Intelligence must not remain the monopoly 
of the cultured few ; it will be disseminated from higher 
to lower classes. Education is coming, and compulsory 
education will follow. The immense power of our people 
for work must be utilised. India’s potentialities are 
great, and will be called forth.” 

“Has any nation ever been great without being a 
great military power?” 

“Yes,” said the Swami without a moment’s hesita¬ 
tion, “China has. Amongst other countries, I have 
travelled in China and Japan. To-day, China is like a 
disorganised mob ; but in the heyday of her greatness 
she possessed the most admirable organisation any nation 
has yet known. Many of the devices and methods we 
term modern, were practised by the Chinese for hundreds 
and even thousands of years. Take competitive exam¬ 
ination as an illustration.” 

“Why did she become disorganised?” 

Because she could not produce men equal to the 
system. You have the sayig that men cannot be made 
virtuous by an Act of Parliament ; the Chinese experi¬ 
enced it before you. And that is why religion is of 
deeper importance than politics, since ‘t goes to the root, 
and deals with the essentials of conduct.” 


130 


SWAMI VIVEKANANDA^S WORKS 


**Is India conscious of the awakening that you. 
allude to?** 

“Perfectly conscious. The world perhaps sees it 
chiefly in the Congress movement and in the field of 
social reform ; but the awakening is quite as real in 
religion, though it works more silently.’* 

“ I he West and East have such different ideals of 
life. Ours seems to be the perfecting of the social state.. 
Whilst we are busy seeing to these matters, Orientals are 
meditating on abstractions. Here has Parliament been 
discussing the payment of the Indian army in the Sudan. 
All the respectable section of the Conservative press has 
made a loud outcry against the unjust decision of the 
Government, whereas you probably think the whole affair 
not worth attention.’’ 

“But you are quite wrong,** said the Swami, taking 
the paper and running his eyes over extracts from the 
Conservative journals. “My sympathies in this matter 
are naturally with my country. Yet it reminds one of 
the old Sanskrit proverb: ‘You have sold the elephant, 
why quarrel over the goad?* India always pays. The 
quarrels of politicians are very curious. It will take ages 
to bring religion into politics.** 

“One ought to make the effort very soon all the same.’*^ 
“Yes, it is worth one’s while to plant an idea in the 
heart of this great London, surely the greatest governing 
machine that has ever been set in motion. I often watch 
it working, the power and perfection with which the 
minutest vein is reached, its wonderful system of circula¬ 
tion and distribution. It helps one to realise how great is 
the Empire, and how great its task. And with all the rest, 
it distributes thought. It would be worth a man’s while to 
place some ideas in the heart of this gieat machine, so 
that they might circulate to the remotest part.** 

The Swami is a man of distinguished appearance. 
Tall, broad, with fine features enhanced by his picturesque 


INTERVIEWS 


131 


Eastern dress, his personality is very striking. By birth, 
he is a Bengali, and by education, a graduate of the 
Calcutta University. His gifts as an orator are high. 
He can speak for an hour and a half without a note or 
the slightest pause for a word. 

—C. S. B. 


IV 

INDIAN MISSIONARY’S MISSION TO ENGLAND 
{The Echo, London, IS96) 

... I presume that in his own i ountry the Swami 
would live under a tree, or at most in the precincts of 
a temple, his head shaved, dressed in the costume of 
his country. But these things are not done in London, 
so that I found the Swami located much like other people, 
and, save that he wears a long coat of a dark orange 
shade, dressed like other mortals likewise. He laugh¬ 
ingly related that his dress, especially when he wears a 
turban, does not commend Itself to the London street 
arab, whose observations are scarcely worth repeating. 
I began by asking the Indian Yogi to spell his name 
very slowly. 

« sfe ♦ « 

“Do you think that nowadays people are laying much 
stress on the non-essential?” 

“I think so among the backward nations, and among 
the less cultured portion of the civilised people of the 
West. Your question implies that among the cultured 
and the wealthy, matters are on a different footing. So 
they are ; the wealthy are either immersed in the enjoy¬ 
ment of wealth or grubbing for more. They, and a large 
section of the busy people, say of religion that it is rot, 
«tuff, nonsense, and they honestly think so. The only 


132 


SWAMI VIVEKANANDA^S WORKS 


religion that is fashionable is patriotism and Mrs. Grundy. 
People merely go to church when they are marrying or 
burying somebody.*’ 

“Will your message take them oflener to church 

“1 scarcely think it will. Since I have nothing what¬ 
ever to do with ritual or dogma ; my mission is to show 
that religion is everything and in everything. . . . And 
what can we say of the system here in England > Every¬ 
thing goes to show that Socialism or some form of rule by 
the people, call it what you will, is coming on the boards. 
The people will certainly want the satisfaction of their 
material needs, less work, no oppression, no war, more 
food. What guarantee have we that this, or any civilisa¬ 
tion, will last, unless it is based on religion, on the good¬ 
ness of man } Depend on it, religion goes to the root of 
the matter. If it is right, all is right.” 

‘It must be difficult to get the essential, the meta¬ 
physical, part of religion into the minds of the people. 
It is remote from their thoughts and manner of life.” 

“In all religions we travel from a lesser to a higher 
truth, never from error to truth. There is a Oneness 
behind all creation, but minds are very various. ‘That 
which exists is One, sages call It variously.* What 1 mean 
is that one progresses from a smaller to a greater truth. 
The worst religions are only bad readings of the truth. 
One gets lo understand bit by bit. Even devil-worship 
is but a perverted reading of the ever-true and immutable 
Brahman. Other phases have more or less of the truth 
in them. No form of religion possesses it entirely.” 

“May one ask if you originated this religion you 
have come to preach to England?” 

Certainly not. 1 am a pupil of a great Indian sage,. 
Ramakrishna Paramahamsa. He was not what one might 
call a very learned man, as some of our sages are, but a 
very holy one, deeply imbued with the spirit of the 
Vedanta philosophy. When I say philosophy, I hardly know: 


INTERVIEWS 


133 


whether 1 ought not to say religion, for it is really both. 
You must read Professor Max Muller’s account of my 
Master in a recent number of the Nineteenth Century. 
Ramakrishna was born in the Hooghly district in 1836 
and died in 1886. He produced a deep effect on the 
life of Keshub Chunder Sen and others. By discipline 
of the body and subduing of the mind he obtained a 
wonderful insight into the spiritual world. His face was 
distinguished by a childlike tenderness, profound humility, 
and remarkable sweetness of expression. No one. could 
look upon it unmoved.” 

“Then your teaching is derived from the Vedas?” 

“Yes, Vedanta means the end of the Vedas, the third 
section or Upanishads, containing the i’- ened ideas which 
we find more as germs in the earlier portion. The most 
ancient portion of the Vedas is the Samhita, which is in 
very archaic Sanskrit, only to be understood by the aid of 
a very old dictionary, the Nirukta of Yaska.” 

I fear that we English have rather the idea that India 
has much to learn from us ; the average man is pretty 
ignorant as to what may be learned from India.” 

“That is so, but the world of scholars know well how 
much is to be learned and how important the lesson. 
You would not find Max Muller, Monier Williams, Sir 
William Hunter, or German Oriental scholars, making 
light of Indian abstract science.” 

* * m * 

The Swami gives his lecture at 39, Victoria Street. 
All are made welcome, and, as in ancient apostolic times, 
the new teaching is without money and without price. 
The Indian missionary is a man of exceptionally fine 
physique ; his command of English can only be described 
as perfect. 


S. B. 


134 


SWAMI VIVEKANANDA^S WORKS 


V 

AN HOUR WITH THE SWAMI VIVEKANANDA 
AT MADURA 

(The Hindu, Madras, February, 1897) 

Q .—^The theory that the universe is false seems to be 
understood in the following senses:—(a) the sense 
in which the duration of perishing forms and names is 
infinitesimally small with reference to eternity ; (b) the 
sense in which the period between any two Pralayas 
(involution of the universe) is infinitesimally small with 
reference to eternity ; (c) the sense in which the universe 
is ultimately false though it has an apparent reality at 
present, depending upon one sort of consciousness, in the 
same way as the idea of silver superimposed on a shell, 
or that of a serpent on a rope, is true for the time being 
in effect, and is dependent upon a particular condition of 
mind ; (d) the sense in which the universe is a phantom 
just like the son of a barren woman, or like the horns 
of a hare 

In which of these senses is the theory understood in 
the Advaita philosophy > 

A .—There are many classes of Advaitists and each 
has understood the theory in one or the other sense. 
Sankara taught the theory in the sense (c), and it is his 
teaching that the universe, as it appears, is real for all 
purposes for every one in his present consciousness, but 
it vanishes when the consciousness assumes a higher form. 
You see the trunk of a tree standing before you, and you 
mistake it for a ghost. The idea of a ghost is for the 
time being real, for it works on your mind and produces 
the same result upon it as if it were a ghost. As soon 
as you discover it to be a stump, the idea of the ghost 
disappears. The idea of a stump and that of the ghost 
cannot co-exist, and when one is present, the other is 
absent. 


INTERVIEWS 


135 


Q.—Is not the sense (d) also adopted in some of the 
writings of Sankara? 

A. —No. Some other men who, by mistake, carried 
Sankara's notion to an extreme, have adopted the sense 
(d) in their writings. The senses (a) and (b) are pccul’"ir 
to the writings of some other classes of Advaita 
philosophers but never received Sankara's sanction. 

Q.—What is the cause of the apparent reality? 

A .—What is the cause of your mistaking a stump 
for a ghost? The universe is the same, in fact, but it is 
your mind that creates various conditions for it. 

Q.—What is the true meaning of the statement that 
the Vedas are beginningless and eternal? Does it refer 
to the Vedic utterances or the state* eiits contained in 
the Vedas? If it refers to the truth involved in such 
statements, are not the sciences, such as Logic, Geometry, 
Chemistry, etc., equally beginningless and eternal, for 
they contain an everlasting truth? 

A .—There was a time w'hen the Vedas themselves 
were considered eternal in the sense in which the divine 
truths contained therein were changeless and permanent, 
and were only revealed to man. At a subsequent time, 
it appears that the utterance of the Vedic hymns with the 
knowledge of its meaning was important, and it was held 
that the hymns themselves must have had a divine origin. 
At a still later period the meaning of the hymns showed 
that many of them could not be of divine origin, because 
they inculcated upon mankind performance of various un¬ 
holy acts, such as torturing animals, and we can also find 
many ridiculous'stories in the Vedas. The correct mean¬ 
ing of the statement ‘The Vedas are beginningless and 
eternal' is that the law or truth revealed by them to 
man is permanent and changeless. Logic, Geometry, 
Chemistry, etc., reveal also a law or truth which is 
permanent and changeless, and in that sense they are 
also beginningless and eternal. But no truth or law is 


136 


SWAMI VIVEKANANDA’S WORKS 


absent from the Vedas, and I ask any one of you to point 
out to me any truth which is not treated of in them. 

Q.—What is the notion of Mukti, according to the 
Advaita philosophy, or in other words, is it a conscious 
state? Is there any difference between the Mukti of the 
Advaitism and the Buddhistic Nirvana? 

A .—There is a consciousness in Mukti, which we 
call super-consciousness. It differs from your present 
conciousness. It is illogical to say that there is no¬ 
consciousness in Mukti. The consciousness is of three 
sorts, the dull, mediocre and intense, as is the case of 
light. When vibration is intense, the brilliancy is so very 
powerful as to dazzle the sight itself and in effect is as 
ineffectual as the dullest of lights. The Buddhistic 
Nirvana must have the same degree of consciousness 
whatever the Buddhists may say. Our definition of 
Mukti is affirmative in its nature, while the Buddhistic 
Nirvana has a negative definition. 

Q.—Why should the unconditioned Brahman choose 
to assume a condition for the purpose of manifestation of 
the world’s creation? 

A. I he question itself is most illogical. Brahman is 
Avangmanasogocharain, meaning that which is incapable 
of being grasped by word and mind. Whatever lies 
beyond the region of space, time, and causation cannot be 
conceived by the human mind, and the function of logic 
and enquiry lies only within the region of space, time, and 
causation. While that is so, it is, a vain attempt to ques¬ 
tion about what lies beyond the possibilities of human 
conception. 

Q*—Here and thjere attempts are made to import into 
the Puranas hidden ideas which are said to have been 
allegorically represented. Sometimes it is said that the 
Puranas need not contain any historical truth, but are 
mere representations of the highest ideals illustrated with 
fictitious characters. Take for Instance, Vishnupurana^, 


INTERVIEWS 


137 


Ramayana, or Bharata. Do they contain historical 
veracity, or are they mere allegorical representations of 
metaphysical truths, or are they representations of the 
highest ideals for the conduct of humanity, or are they 
mere epic poems such as those of Homer? 

A .—^Some historical truths is the nucleus of every 
Purana. The object of the Puranas is to teach mankind 
the sublime truth in various forms ; and even if they do 
not contain any historical truth, they form a great authority 
for us in respect of the highest truth which they inculcate. 
Take the Ramayana, for illustration, and for viewing it as 
an authority of binding character, it is not even neces¬ 
sary that one like Rama should have ever lived. The 
sublimity of the law propounded by Ra'- ayana or Bharata 
does not depend upon the truth of any personality like 
Rama or Krishna, and one can even hold that such 
personages never lived, and at the same time take those 
writings as high authorities in respect of the grand ideas 
which they place before mankind. Our philosophy does 
not depend upon any personality for its truth. Thus 
Krishna did not teach anything new or original to the 
world, nor does Ramayana profess anything which is not 
contained in the Scriptures. It is to be noted that 
Christianity cannot stand without Christ, Mohammedanism 
without Mohammed, and Buddhism without Buddha, but 
Hinduism stands independent of any man, and for the 
purpose of estimating the philosophical truth contained in 
any Purana, we need not consider the question whether 
the personages treated of therein were really material 
men or were fictitious characters. The object of the 
Puranas was the education of mankind, and the ‘ sages 
who constructed them contrived to find some historical 
personages and to superimpose upon them all the best 
or worst qualities just as they wanted to, and laid down 
the rules of morals for the conduct of mankind. Is it 
necessary that a demon with ten heads (Dashamukha) 


138 


SWAMI VIVEKANANDA^S WORKS 


should have actually lived as stated in the Ramayana? 
It is the representation of some truth which deserves to be 
studied, apart from the question whether Dashamukha was 
a real or fictitious character. You can now depict Krishna 
in a still more attractive manner, and the description 
depends upon the sublimity of your ideal, but there stands 
the grand philosophy contained in the Puranas. 

Q.—Is it possible for a man, if he were an adept, to 
remember the events connected with his past incarna¬ 
tions? The physiological brain, which he owned in his 
previous incarnation, and in which the impressions of his 
experience were stored, is no longer present. In this 
birth he is endowed with a new physiological brain, and 
while that is so, how is it possible for the present brain 
to gel at the impressions received by another apparatus 
which is not in existence at present? 

Swami .—What do you mean by an adept ? 

Correspondent—One that has developed the hidden 
powers of his nature. 

Swatnt. I cannot understand how the hidden powers 
can be developed. I know what you mean, but 1 should 
always desire that the expressions used are precise and 
accurate. You may say that the powers hidden are un¬ 
covered, It IS possible for those that have uncovered the 
hidden powers of their nature to remember the incidents 
connected with their past incarnations, for their present 
brain had its Beeja (seed) in the Sukshma man after death. 

Q. Does the spirit of Hinduism permit the prosely- 
tism of strangers into it? And can a Brahmin listen to 
the exposition of philosophy made by a Chandala? 

/!.—Proselytism is tolerated by Hinduism. Any 
man, whether he be a Shudra or Chandala, can expound 
philosophy even to a Brahmin. The truth can be learnt 
from the lowest individual, no matter to what caste or 
•creed he belongs. 


INTERVIEWS 


139 . 


Here the Swami quoted Sanskrit verses of high 
authority in support of his position. 

The discourse ended, as the time appointed in the 
programme for hi§ visiting the 1 emple had already 
arrived. He accordingly took leave of the ge^tlem^ 
present and proceeded to visit the I emple. 


VI 

THE ABROAD AND THE PROBLEMS AT HOME 
(The Hindu, Madras, February, 1897) 

Our representative met the Swami ^/ivekananda in the 
train at the Chingleput Station and travelled with him to 
Madras. The following is the report of the interview: — 
“What made you go to America, Swamiji?“ 

“Rather a serious question to answer in brief. I can 
only answer it partly now. Because I travelled all over 
India, 1 wanted to go over to other countries. 1 went to 
America by the Far East.” 

“What did you see in Japan, and is there any chance 
of India following in the progressive steps of Japan?” 

“None whatever, until all the three hundred millions 
of India combine together as a whole nation. The world 
has never seen such a patriotic and artistic race as the 
Japanese, and one special feature about them is this: that 
while in Europe and elsewhere Art generally goes with 
dirt, Japanese Art in Art plus absolute cleanliness. I 
would wish that every one of our young men could visit 
Japan once at least in his lifetime. It is very easy to go 
there. The Japanese think that everything Hindu is great, 
and believe that India is a holy land. Japanese Buddhism 
is entirely different from what you see in Ceylon. It ia 
the same as Vedanta. It is positive and theistic Buddhism, 
not the negative atheistic Buddhism of Ceylon.” 


140 SWAMI VIVEKANANDA^S WORKS 

“What is the key to Japan’s sudden greatness?” 

“ITie faith of the Japanese in themselves, and their 
love for their country. When you have men who are 
ready to sacrifice their everything for their country, 
sincere to the backbone—when such men arise, India 
will become great in every respect. It is the men that 
make the country! What is there in the country ? If 
you catch the social morality and the political morality 
of the Japanese, you will be as great as they are. The 
Japanese are ready to sacrifice everything for their 
country, and they have become a great people. But 
you are not ; you cannot be, you sacrifice everything only 
for your own families and possessions.” 

“Is it your wish that India should become like Japan?” 

“Decidedly not. India should continue to be what 
she is. How could India ever become like Japan, or any 
nation for the matter of that? In each nation, as in 
music, there is a main note, a central theme, upon which 
all others turn. Each nation has a theme: everything 
else is secondary. India’s theme is religion. Social 
reform and everything else are secondary. Therefore, 
India cannot be like Japan. It is said that when ‘the 
heart breaks,’ then the flow of thought comes. India’s 
heart must break, and the flow of spirituality will come 
out. India is India. We are not like the Japanese, we 
are Hindus. India’s very atmosphere is soothing. I 
have been working incessantly here, and amidst this 
work 1 am getting rest. It is only from spiritual work 
that we can get rest in India. If your work is material 
here, you die of—diabetes I” 

“So much for Japan. What was your first experi¬ 
ence of America, Swamiii ?” 

'From first to last it was very good. .With the 
exception of the missionaries and ‘Church-women’ the 
Americans are most hospitable, kind-hearted, generous, 
and good-natured.” 


INTERVIEWS 


HI 


"Who are these 'Church-women’ that you speak of, 
Swamiji?” 

"When woman tries her best to find a husband, 
she goes to all the fashionable sea-side resorts and tries 
all sorts of tricks to catch a man. When she fails in her 
attempts, she becomes, what they call in America, an 
‘old maid,* and joins the Church. Some of them become 
very ‘Churchy.* TTiese ‘Church-women* are awful 
fanatics. They are under the thumb of the priests there. 
Between them and the priests they make hell of earth 
and make a mess of religion. With the exception of 
these, the Americans are a very good people. They 
loved me. and I love them a great deal. 1 felt as if I 
was one of them.** 

“What is your idea about the results of the Parlia¬ 
ment of Religions?** 

“The Parliament of Religions, as it seems to me, 
was intended for a ‘heathen show’ before the world: 
but it turned out that the heathens had the upper hand, 
and made it a Christian show all around. So the Parlia¬ 
ment of Religions was a failure from the Christian stand¬ 
point, seeing that the Roman Catholics, who were the 
organisers of that Parliament, are, when there is a talk 
of another Parliament at Paris, now steadily opposing it. 
But the Chicago Parliament was a tremendous success 
for India and Indian thought. It helped on the tide of 
Vedanta, which is flooding the world. The American 
people—of course, minus the fanatical priests and Church- 
women—are very glad of the results of the Parliament.** 

“What prospects have you, Swamiji, for the spread 
of your mission in England?** 

“There is every prospect. Before many years elapse 
a vast majority of the English people will be Vedantins. 
There is a greater prospect of this in England than there 
is in America. You see, Americans make a fanfaronade 
t>f everything, which is not the case with Englishmen. 


142 SWAMI VIVEKANANDA'S WORKS 

Even Christians cannot understand their New Testament,, 
without understanding the Vedanta. I he Vedanta is the 
rationale of all religions. Without the Vedanta every re¬ 
ligion is superstition ; with it everything becomes religion. 

“What is the special trait you noticed in the English 
character ?“ 

“ I he Englishman goes to practical work as soon as 
he believes in something. He has tremendous energy for 
practical work. There is in the whole world no human 
being superior to the English gentleman or lady. That is 
really the reason of my faith in them. John Bull is rather 
a thick-headed gentleman to deal with. You must push 
and push an idea till it reaches his brain, but once there, 
it does not get out. In England, there was not one 
missionary or anybody who said anything against me ; not 
one who tried to make a scandal about me. To my 
astonishment, many of my friends belong to the Church of 
England. 1 learn, these missionaries do not come from the 
higher classes in England. Caste is as rigorous there as it ia 
here, and the English churchmen belong to the class, of 
gentlemen. 1 hey may differ in opinion from you, but 
that is no bar to their being friends with you ; therefore,. 

I would give a word of advice to my countrymen, whicK 
is, not to take notice of the vituperative missionaries, 
now that I have known what they are. We have- 
‘sized’ them, as the Americans say. Non-recognition is 
the only attitude to assume towards them.’’ 

“Will you kindly enlighten me, Swamiji, on the 
Social Reform movements in America and England?’* 

“Yes. All the social upheavalists, at least the leaders 
of them, are trying to find that all their communistic or 
equalising theories must have a spiritual basis, and that 
spiritual basis is in the Vedanta only. I have been told 
by several leaders, who used to attend my lectures, that 
they required the Vedanta as the basis of the new order 
of things.” 


INTERVIEWS 


143 


•'What are your views with regard to the Indian 
masses?” 

“Oh, we are awfully poor, and our masses are very 
Ignorant about secular things. Our masses are very good 
because poverty here is not a crime. Our masses are not 
violent. Many times I was near being mobbed in 
America and England, only on account of my dress. But 
I never heard of such a thing in India as a man being 
mobbed because of peculiar dress. In every othci 
respect, our masses are much more civilised than the 
European masses.” 

“What will you propose for the improvement of our 
masses?” 

“We have to give them secular eoucation. We have 
to follow the plan laid down by our ancestors, that is, to 
bring all the ideals slowly down among the masses. Raise 
them slowly up, raise them to equality. Impart even 
secular knowledge through religion.” 

“But do you think, Swamiji, it is a task that can be 
easily accomplished?” 

“It will, of course, have gradually to be worked out. 
But if there are enough self-sacrificing young fellows, who 
I hope will work with me, it can be done to-morrow. It 
all depends upon the zeal and the self-sacrifice brought 
to the task.” 

“But if the present degraded condition is due to their 
past Karma, Swamiji, how do you think they could get 
out of it easily, and how do you propose to help them?” 

The Swamiji readily answered: “Karma is the eternal 
assertion of human freedom. If we can bring ourselves 
down by our Karma, surely it is in our power to raise 
ourselves by it. The masses, besides, have not brought 
themselves down altogether by their own Karma, so 
we should give them better environments to work in. 1 
do not propose any levelling of caste?;. Caste is a very 
good thing. Caste is the plan we want to follow. What 
V—10 


144 SWAMI VIVEKANANDA'S WORKS 

caste really is, not one in a million understands. There 
is no country in the world without caste. In India, from 
caste we reach to the point where there is no caste. 
Caste is based throughout on that principle. The plan in 
India is to make everybody Brahmin, the Brahmin 
being the ideal of humanity. If you read the history of 
India you will find that attempts have always been made 
to raise the lower classes. Many are the classes that 
have been raised. Many more will follow till the whole 
will become Brahmin. That is the plan. We have 
only to raise them without bringing down anybody. And 
this has mostly to be done by the Brahmins themselves, 
because it is the duty of every aiistocracy to dig its own 
grave ; and the sooner it does so, the better for all. No 
time should be lost. Indian caste is better than the caste 
which prevails in Europe or America. 1 do not say it 
is absolutely good. Where would you be if there were no 
caste ? Where would be your learning, and other things, 
if there were no caste? There would be nothing left for 
the Europeans to study if caste had never existed ! The 
Mohammedans would have smashed everything to pieces. 
Where do you find the Indian Society standing still? It 
is always on the move. Sometimes, as in the times of 
foreign invasions, the movement has been slow, at other 
times quicker. This is what 1 say to my countrymen. I 
do not condemn them. 1 look into their past. I find 
that under the circumstances no nation could do more 
glorious work. I tell them that they have done well. I 
only ask them to do better.’* 

“What are your views, Swamiji, in regard to the 
relation of caste to rituals^*’ 

“Caste is continually changing, rituals are continually 
changing, so are forms. It is the substance, the principle, 
that does not change. It is in the Vedas that we have to 
study our religion. With the exception of the Vedas every 
book must change. The authority of the Vedas is for all 


INTERVIEWS 


145 


time to come ; the authority of every one of our other 
books is for the time being. For instance, one Smriti is 
powerful for one age, another for another age. , Great 
prophets are always coming and pointing the way to work. 
Some prophets worked for the lower classes, others like 
Madhva gave to women the right to study the Vedas. 
Caste should not go ; but should only be re-adjusted 
occasionally. Within the old structure is to be found life 
enough for the building of two hundred thousand new 
ones. It is sheer nonsense to desire the abolition of caste. 
TTie new method is—evolution of the old.** 

“Do not Hindus stand in need of social reform?” 

“We do stand in need of social reform. At times 
great men would evolve new ideas of progress, and kings 
would give them the sanction of law. Thus social 
improvements had been in the past made in India, and in 
modern times to effect such progressive reforms, we will 
have first to build up such an, authoritative power. Kings 
having gone, the power is the people s. We have, there¬ 
fore, to wait till the people are educated, till they 
understand their needs and are ready and able to solve 
their problems. TTie tyranny of the minority is the worst 
tyranny in the world. Therefore, instead of frittering 
away our energies on ideal reforms, which will never 
become practical, we had better go to the root of the 
evil and make a legislative body, that is to say, educate 
our people, so that they may be able to solve their own 
problems. Until that is done all these ideal reforms will 
remain ideals only. The new order of things is the 
salvation of the people by the people, and it takes time 
to make it workable, especially in India, which has always 
in the past been governed by kings.” 

“Do you think Hindu society can successfully adopt 
European social laws?” 

“No, not wholly. I would say, the combination of 
the Greek mind represented by the external European 


146 


SWAMI VIVEKANANDA^S WORKS 


energy added to the Hindu spirituality would be an ideal 
society for India. For instance, it is absolutely necessary 
for you, instead of frittering away your energy and of tea 
talking of ideal nonsense, to learn from the Englishman 
the idea of prompt obedience to leaders, the absence of 
jealousy, the indomitable perseverance and the undying 
faith in himself. As soon as he selects a leader for a 
work, the Englishman sticks to him through thick and 
thin and obeys him. 14ere in India, everybody wants to 
become a leader, and there is nobody to obey. Every 
one should learn to obey before he can command. There 
is no end to our jealousies ; and the more important the 
Hindu, the more jealous he is. Until this absence of 
jealousy and obedience to leaders aie learnt by the 
Hindu, there will be no power of organisation. We shall 
have to remain the hopelessly confused mob that we are 
now, hoping and doing nothing. India has to learn from 
Europe the conquest of external nature, and Europe has 
to learn from India the conquest of internal nature. Then 
there will be neither Hindus nor Europeans—there will 
be the ideal humanity which has conquered both the 
natures, the external and the internal. AX'^e have developed 
one phase of humanity, and they another. It is the union 
of the two that is wanted. The word freedom which is 
the watchword of our religion really means freedom 
physically, mentally and spiritually.*' 

What relation, Swamiji, does ritual bear to religion?** 
Rituals are the kindergarten of religion. They are 
absolutely necessary for the world as it is now ; only we 
shall have to give people newer and fresher rituals. A 
party of thinkers must undertake to do this. Old rituals 
must be rejected and new ones substituted.** 

Then you advocate the abolition of rituals, don’t 
you?” 

No, my watchword is construction, not destruction. 
Out of the existing rituals, new ones will have to be 


INTERVIEWS 


147 


evolved. There is infinite power of development in every¬ 
thing ; that is my belief. One atom has the power of the 
whole universe at its back. All along in the history of 
the Hindu race, there never was any attempt at destruc¬ 
tion, only construction. One sect wanted to destroy, 
and they were thrown out of India : they were the 
Buddhists. We have had a host of reformers, Sankara, 
Ramanuja, Madhva and Chaitanya—these were great 
reformers, who always were constructive, and built 
according to the circumstances of their time. This is our 
peculiar method of work. All the modern reformers take 
to European destructive reformation, which will never do 
good to anyone and never did. Only once was a modern 
reformer mostly constructive, and lliat one was Raja 
Ram Mohan Ray. The progress of the Hindu race has 
been towards the realisation of the Vedantic ideals. All 
history of Indian life is the struggle for the realisation 
of the ideal of the Vedanta through good or bad fortune. 
Whenever there was any reforming sect or religion which 
rejected the Vedantic ideal, it was smashed into nothing.” 

“What is your programme of work here?” 

“1 want to start two institutions, one in Madras and 
one in Calcutta, to carry* out my plan ; and tliat plan 
briefly is to bring the Vedantic ideals into the everyday 
practical life of the saint or the sinner, of the sage or the 
ignoramus, of the Brahmin or the Pariah.” 

Our representative here put to him a few questions 
relative to Indian politics ; but before the Swami could 
attempt anything like an answer, the train steamed up to 
the Egmore platform, and the only hurried remark that 
fell from the Swami was that he was dead against all 
political entanglements of Indian and European problems. 
The interview then terminated. 


148 


SWAMI VIVEKANANDA^S WORKS 


VII 

THE MISSIONARY WORK OF THE FIRST HINDU 
SANNYASIN TO THE WEST AND HIS PLAN 
OF REGENERATION OF INDIA 

{Madras Times, February, 1897) 

For the past few weeks, the Hindu public of Madras 
have been most eagerly expecting the arrival of Swami 
Vivekananda, the great Hindu Monk of world-wide fame* 
At the present moment his name is on everybody s lips* 
In the school, in the college, in the High Court, on the 
marina and in the streets and bazars of Madras, hundreds 
of inquisitive spirits may be seen asking when the 
Swami will be coming. Large numbers of students 
from the mofussil, who have come up for the University 
examinations are staying here, awaiting the Swami, and 
increasing their hostelry bills, despite the urgent call of 
their parents to return home immediately. In a few days 
the Swami will be in our midst. From the nature of the 
receptions received elsewhere in this Presidency, from the 
preparations being made here, from the triumphal arches 
erected at Castle Kernan, where the “Prophet” is to be 
lodged at the cost of the Hindu public, and from the 
interest taken in the movement by the leading Hindu 
gentlemen of this city, like the Flon’ble Mr. Justice 
Subramaniya Iyer, there is no doubt that the Swami will 
have a grand reception. It was Madras that first 
recognised the superior merits of the Swami and equipped 
him for Chicago. Madras will now have again the 
honour of welcoming the undoubtedly great man who 
has done so much to raise the prestige of his motherland. 
Four years ago, when the Swami arrived here, he was 
practically an obscure individual. In an unknown 
bungalow at St. Thome he spent nearly two months, all 
along holding conversations on religious topics and 
teaching and instructing all comers who cared to listen, 


INTERVIEWS 


149 


to him. Even then a few educated young men with **a 
keener eye’* predicted that there was something in the 
man, “a power’* that would lift him above all others, 
that would pre-eminently enable him to be the leader of 
men. These young men who were then despised as 
“misguided enthusiasts,’* “dreamy revivalists,’’ have now 
the supreme satisfaction of seeing their Swami, as 
they love to call him, return to them with a great 
European and American fame. The mission of the 
Swami is essentially spiritual. He firmly believes ihal: 
India, the motherland of spirituality, has a great future 
before her. He is sanguine that the We^t will more and 
more come to appreciate what he regards as tht' sublime 
truths of the Vedanta. His great mo^to is “Help, and 
not Fight,” “Assimilation, and not Destruction^” 
“Harmony and Peace, and not Dissension.” Whatever 
difference of opinion followers of other creeds may have 
with him, few will venture to deny that the Swami 
has done yeoman’s service to his country in opening 
the eyes of the Western world to “the good in the Hindu.” 
He will always be remembered as the first Hindu 
Sannyasin who dared to cross the sea to carry to the 
West the message of what he believes in as a ^-eligious 
peace. 

A representative of our paper interviewed the Swami 
Vivekananda, with a view to elicit from him an account 
of the success of his mission in the West. The Swami 
very courteously received our representative and motioned 
him to a chair by his side. The Swami was dressed in yel¬ 
low robes, was calm, serene, and dignified, and appeared 
inclined to answer any questions that might be .put to 
^im. We have given the Swami s words as taken down 
in shorthand by our representative. 

“May I know a few particulars about your early life?” 
asked our representative. 

The Swami said;—“Even while 1 was a student at 


150 


SWAMI VIVEKANANDA'S WORKS 


Calcutta, I was of a religious temperament. 1 was critical 
even at that time of my life, mere words would not satisfy 
me. Subsequently 1 met Ramakrishna Paramahamsa, with 
whom 1 lived for a long time and under whom 1 studied. 
After the death of my father 1 gave myself up to travelling 
in India and started a little monastery in Calcutta. 
During my travels, 1 came to Madras, where 1 received 
help from the late Maharajah of Mysore and the Rajah 
of Ramnad.** 

“What made Your Holiness carry the mission of 
Hinduism to Western countries?** 

*‘I wanted to get experience. My idea as to the 
key-note of our national downfall is that we do not mix 
with other nations—that is the one and the sole cause. 
We never had opportunity to compare notes. We were 
Kupa-Mandukas (frogs in a well).** 

“You have done a good deal of travelling in the 
West ?** 

“I have visited a good deal of Europe, including 
Germany and France, but England and America were the 
chief centres of my work. At first 1 found myself in a 
critical position, owing to the hostile attitude assumed 
against the people of this country by those who went there 
from India. I believed the Indian nation is by far the most 
moral and religious nation in the whole world, and it 
would be a blasphemy to compare the Hindus with any 
other nation. At first, many fell foul of me, manufac¬ 
tured huge lies against me by saying that 1 was a fraud, 
that 1 had a harem of wives and half a regiment of 
children. But my experience of these missionaries 
opened my eyes as to what they are capable of doing 
in the name of religion. Missionaries were nowhere in 
England. None came to fight me. Mr. Lund went over 
to America to abuse me behind my back, but people 
would not listen to him. 1 was very popular with them. 
When I came back to England, 1 thought this missionary 


INTERVIEWS 


15 ! 


would be at me, but the Truth silenced him. In England 
the social status is stricter than caste is in India. The 
English Church people are all gentlemen born, which many 
of the missionaries are not. They greatly sympathised 
with me. I think that about thirty English Church clergy¬ 
men agree entirely with me on all points of religious 
discussion. I was agreeably surprised to find that the 
English clergymen, though they differed from me, did not 
abuse me behind my back and stab me in the dark. 
There is the benefit of caste and hereditary culture.” 

“What has been the measure of your success in the 
West 

”A great number of people sympathised with me in 
America—much more than in Engla*'b Vituperation by 
the low-caste missionaries made my cause succeed'better. 
I had no money, the people of India having given me 
my bare passage-money, which was spent in a very 
short time. I had to live just as here on the charity of 
individuals. The Americans are a very hospitable people. 
In America one-third of the people are Christians, but 
the rest have no religion, that is, they do not belong to 
any of the sects, but amongst them are to be found the 
most spiritual persons. T think the work in England is 
sound. If I die to-morrow and cannot send any more 
Sannyasins, still the English work will go on. lire 
Englishman is a very good man. He is taught from his 
childhood to suppress all his feelings. He is thick¬ 
headed, and is not so quick as the Frenchman or the 
American. He is immensely practical. The American 
people are too young to understand renunciation. 
England has enjoyed wealth and luxury for ages.' Many 
people there are ready for renunciation. When I first 
lectured in England I had a little class of twenty or thirty, 
which was kept going when I left, and when I went back 
from America I could get an audience of one thousand. 
In America I could get a much bigger one, as I spent. 


152 


SWAMI VIVEKANANDA'S WORKS 


three years in America and only one year in England ► 

1 have two Sannyasins—one in England and one in* 
America, and I intend sending Sannyasins to other 
countries. 

“English people are tremendous workers. Give them: 
an idea, and you may be sure that that idea is not going, 
to be lost, provided they catch it. People here have, 
given up the Vedas, and all your philosophy is in ther 
kitchen. The religion of India at present is Don t- 
touchism ’—that is a religion which the English people 
will never accept. The thoughts of our forefathers and. 
the wonderful life-giving principles that they discovered,, 
every nation will take. The biggest guns of the English 
Church told me that I was putting Vedantism into the 
Bible. ' The present Plinduism is a degradation. There 
is no book on philosophy, written to-day, in which some¬ 
thing of our Vedantism is not touched upon—even the* 
works of 1 lerbert Spencer contain it. The philosophy of 
the age is Advaitism, everybody talks of it ; only in 
Europe, they try to be original. They talk of Hindus 
with contempt, but at the same time swallow the truths 
given out by the Hindus. Professor Max Muller is a 
perfect Vedantist, and has done splendid work in Vedant¬ 
ism. He believes in re-incarnation.“ 

“What do you intend doing for the regeneration of 
India 

“1 consider that the great national sin is the neglect 
of the masses, and that is one of the causes of our down¬ 
fall. No amount of politics would be of any avail until 
the masses in India are once more well educated, well 
fed, and well cared for. They pay for our education, 
they build our temples, but in return they get kicks. 
They are practically our slaves. If we want to regenerate 
India, we must work for them. 1 want to start two 
central institutions at first—one at Madras and the other 
at Calcutta, for training young men as preachers. 1 have 


INTERVIEWS 


153 


funds for starting the Calcutta one. English people will 
find funds for my purpose. 

“My faith is in the younger generation, the modern 
generation, out of them will come my workers. They will 
work out the whole problem, like lions. I have formulated 
the idea and have given my life to it. If I do not achieve 
success, some better one will come after me to work it out, 
and I shall be content to struggle. The one problem you 
have is to give to the masses their rights. You have the 
greatest religion which the world ever saw, and yoU feed 
the masses with stuff and nonsense. You have the 
perennial fountain flowing, and you give them ditch water. 
Your Madras graduate would not touch a low-caste man, 
but is ready to get out of him the mon lor his education. 
I want to start at first these two institutions for educating 
missionaries, to be both spiritual and secular instructors to 
our masses. They will spread from centre to centre, until 
we have covered the whole of India. T he great thing is to 
have faith in oneself, even before faith in God ; but the 
difficulty seems to be that we are losing faith in ourselves 
day by day. That is my objection against the reformers. 
The orthodox have more faith and more strength in them¬ 
selves, in spite of their crudeness ; but the reformer? simply 
play into the hands of Europeans and pander to their 
vanity. Our masses are gods as compared with those of 
other countries. This is the only country where poverty is 
not a crime. They are mentally and physically handsome ; 
but we hated and hated them till they have lost faith m 
themselves. They think they are born slaves. Give them 
their rights, and let them stand on their rights. This is 
the glory of the American civilisation. Compai^e the 
Irishman with knees bent, half-starved, with a little stick 
and bundle of clothes, just arrived from the ship, with 
what he is, after a few months’ stay in America. He walks 
boldly and bravely. He has come from a country where 
he was a slave to a country where he is a brother. 


‘154 


SWAMI VIVEKANANDA'S WORKS 


“Believe that the soul is immortal, infinite and all- 
powerful. My idea of education is personal contact with 
the teacher—Gurugriha-Vasa. Without the personal life 
of a teacher there would be no education. Take your 
Universities. What have they done during the fifty years 
of their existence) They have not produced one original 
man. They are merely an examining body. The idea 
of the sacrifice for the common weal is not yet developed 
in our nation.** 

“What do you think of Mrs. Besant and Theosophy)” 

“Mrs. Besant is a very good woman. I lectured at 
her Lodge in London. 1 do not know personally much 
about her. Her knowledge of our religion is very limited ; 
she picks up scraps here and there ; she never had time 
to study it thoroughly. That she is one of the most 
sincere of women, her greatest enemy will concede. She 
is considered the best speaker in England. She is a 
Sannyasini. But I do not believe in Mahatmas and 
Kuthumis. Let her give up her connection with the 
Theosophical Society, stand on her own footing and 
preach what she thinks right.** 

Speaking of social reforms, the Swami expressed 
himself about widow-marriage thus: “I have yet to see 
a nation whose faith is determined by the number of 
husbands their widows get.** 

Knowing as he did that several persons were waiting 
downstairs to have an interview with the Swami, our repre¬ 
sentative withdrew, thanking the Swami for the kindness 
with which he had consented to the journalistic torture. 

The Swami, it may be remarked, is accompanied by 
Mr. and Mrs. J. H. Sevier, Mr. T. G. Harrison, a Buddhist 
gentleman of Colombo, and Mr. J. J. Goodwin. It 
appears that Mr. and Mrs, Sevier accompany the Swami 
with a view to settle in the Himalayas, where they intend 
building a residence for the Western disciples of the 
Swami, who may have an inclination to reside in India. 


INTERVIEWS 


155 


For twenty years. Mr. and Mrs. Sevier Kad followed no* 
particular religion, finding satisfaction in none of those 
that were preached ; but on listening to a course of 
lectures by the Swaml, they professed to have found a 
religion that satisfied their heart and intellect. Since then 
they have accompanied the Swaml through Switzerland. 
Germany and Italy, and now to India. Mr. Goodwin, a 
journalist in England, became a disciple of the Swami 
fourteen months ago, when he first met him at New Yoric 
He gave up his journalism and devotes himself to attend¬ 
ing the Swami, and taking down his lectur^c* in shorthand. 
He is in every sense a true “disciple/* saving that he 
hopes to be with the Swami till his death. 


Vlll 

REAWAKENING OF HINDUISM ON A 
NATIONAL BASIS 

(Prabuddha Bharata, September, 1898) 

In an interview which a representative of “Prabuddha 
Bharata** had recently with the Swami Vivekananda, that 
great Teacher was asked: ‘*What do you consider the 
distinguishing feature of your movement, SwamijiT* 

“Aggression,** said the Swami promptly, “aggression 
in a religious sense only. Other sects and parties have 
carried spirituality all over India, but since the days of 
Buddha we have been the first to break bounds and try to 
flood the world with missionary zeal.** 

“And what do you consider to be the function of your 
movement as regards India?’* 

“To find the common bases of Hinduism f nd awaken 
the national consciousness to them. At present there are 
three parties in India included under the term ‘Hindu*— 
the orthodox, the reforming sects of the Mohammedan 


156 


SWAMI VIVEKANANDA'S WORKS 


period, and the reforming sects of the present time. 
Hindus from North to South are only agreed on one point, 
—viz., on not eating beef. 

*‘Not in a com*mon love for the Vedas?” 

“Certainly not. That is just what we want to re¬ 
awaken. India has not yet assimilated the work of 
Buddha. She is hypnotised by his voice, not made alive 
by it.” 

”In what way do you see this importance of Buddhism 
in India to-day?’* 

“It is obvious and overwhelming. You see India 
never loses anything ; only she takes time to turn every¬ 
thing into bone and muscle. Buddha dealt a blow at 
animal sacrifice from which India has never recovered ; 
and Buddha said, ‘Kill no cows,* and cow-killing is an 
impossibility with us.” 

“With which of the three parties you name do you 
identify yourself, Swamiji?” 

“With all of them. We are orthodox Hindus,” said 
the Swami, “but,” he added suddenly with great earnest¬ 
ness and emphasis, “we refuse entirely to identify our¬ 
selves with ‘Don’t-touchism.* That is not Hinduism; it is in 
none of our books ; it is an unorthodox superstition which 
has interfered with national efficiency all along the line.” 

“Then what you really desire is national efficiency?” 

“Certainly. Can you adduce any reason why India 
should lie in the ebb-tide of the Aryan nations? Is she 
inferior in intellect? Is she inferior in dexterity? Can 
you look at her art, at her mathematics, at her philosophy, 
and answer ‘yes* ? All that is needed is that she should 
de-h 3 ^pnotise herself and wake up from her age-long sleep 
to take her true rank in the hierarchy of nations.” 

“But India has always had her deep inner life. Are 
you not afraid, Swamiji, that in attempting to make her 
active you may take from her, her one great treasure?” 

“Not at all. The history of the past has gone to 


INTERVIEWS 


157 


^levelop tKe inner life of India and tKe activity (i.e., tlve 
<)uter life) of the West. Hitherto these have been divergent. 
The time has now come for them to unite. Ramakrishna 
Paramahamsa was alive to the depths of his being, yet op 
the outer plane who was more active > This is the secret. 
Let your life be as deep as the ocean, but let it also be 
•as wide as the sky. 

“It is a curious thing,** continued the Swami, *’that 
the inner life is often most profoundly developed wbcrc 
the outer conditions are most cramping and limiting. But 
this is an accidental—not an essential—association, and it 
we set ourselves right here in India, the world will be 
‘rightened.* For are we not all one>“ 

“Your last remarks, Swamiji, raise another question. 
In what sense is Sri Ramakrishna a part of this awakened 
Hinduism?** 

“That is not for me to determine,*’ said the Swami. 
“I have never preached personalities. My own life is 
guided by the enthusiasm of this great soul ; but others 
will decide for themselves how far they share in this 
attitude. Inspiration is not filtered out to the world 
through one channel, however great. Each generation 
should be inspired afresh. Are we not all God?** 

“Thank you. I have only one question more to ask 
you. You have defined the attitude and function of your 
movement with regard to your own people. Could you in 
the same way characterise your methods of action as a 
whole ?** 

“Our method,” said the Swami, “is very easily 
described. It simply consists in reasserting the national 
life. Buddha preached renunciation. India heard, and 
yet in six centuries she reached her greatest height. The 
secret lies there. The national ideals of India are 
Renunciation and Service. Intensify her in those channels, 
and the rest will take care of itself. The banner of the 


158 


SWAMI VIVEKANANDA'S WORKS 


spiritual cannot be raised too high in this country. In it 
alone is salvation.** 


IX 

ON INDIAN WOMEN—THEIR PAST, PRESENT 
AND FUTURE 

{Prahuddha Bharata, December, 1898) 

It was early one Sunday morning, (writes our repre¬ 
sentative), in a beautiful Himalayan valley, that 1 was at 
last able to carry out the order of the Editor, and call on 
the Swami Vivekananda, to ascertain something of his 
views on the position and prospects of Indian women. 

‘Let us go for a walk,** said the Swami, when I had 
announced by errand, and we set out at once amongst 
some of the most lovely scenery in the world. 

By sunny and shady ways we went, through quiet 
villages, amongst playing children and across the golden 
cornfields. 1 lere the tall trees seemed to pierce the blue 
above, and there a group of peasant girls stooped, sickle 
in hand, to cut and carry off the plume-tipped stalks of 
maize-straw for the winter stores. Now the road led into 
an apple orchard, where great heaps of crimson fruit lay 
under the trees for sorting, and again we were out in the 
open, facing the snows that rose in august beauty above 
the white clouds against the sky. 

At last my companion broke the silence. “The Aryan 
and Semitic ideals of woman,’* he said, “have always 
been diametrically opposed. Amongst the Semites the 
presence of woman is considered dangerous to devotion, 
and she may not perform any religious function, even 
such as the killing of a bird for food: according to the 
Aryan a man cannot perform a religious action without a 
wife.** 


INTERVIEWS 


]59 


“But Swamiji!” said I—startled at an assertion so 
sweeping and so unexpected—“is Hinduism not an Aryan 
faith 

Modern Hinduism, said the Swami quietly, “la 
largely Pauranika, that is, post-Buddhistic in origin. 
Dayananda Saraswati pointed out that though a wife is 
absolutely necessary in the Sacrifice of the domestic fiire, 
which is a Vedic rite, she may not touch the Shalagrama 
shiia, or the household-idol, because that dates from the 
latter period of the Puranas.’* 

“And so you consider the inequality of woman 
amongst us as entirely due to the influence of Buddhism?*’ 

“Where it exists, certainly,’* said th#' Swami, “but we 
should not allow the sudden influx of European criticism 
and our consequent sense of contrast, to make us acquiesce 
too readily in this notion of the inequality of our women. 
Circumstances have forced upon us, for many centuries, 
the woman’s need of protection. This, and not her 
inferiority, is the true reading of our customs.” 

“Are you then entirely satisfied with the position of 
women amongst us. Swamiji?” 

“By no means,” said the Swami, “but our right of 
interference is limited entirely to giving education. Women 
must be put in a position to solve their own problems 
in their own way. No one can or ought to do this for 
them. And our Indian women are as capable of doing 
it as any in the world,” 

“How do you account for the evil influence which 
you attribute to Buddhism?” 

“It came only with the decay of the faith,” said the 
Swami. “Every movement triumphs by dint of some 
unusual characteristic, and when it falls, that point of 
pride becomes its chief element of weakness. The Lord 
Buddha—greatest of men—^weis a marvellous organiser, 
and carried the world by this means. But his religion 
was the religion of a monastic order. It had, therefore, 

V—n 


160 


SWAMI VIVEKANANDA^S WORKS 


the evil eflFect of making the very robe of the monk 
honoured. He also introduced for the first time the com¬ 
munity-life of religious houses and thereby necessarily 
made women inferior to men, since the great abbesses 
could take no important step without the advice of certain 
abbots. It ensured its immediate object, the solidarity of 
the faith, you see, only its far-reaching effects are to be 
deplored.** 

“But Sannyasa is recognised in the Vedas I “ 

“Of course it is, but without making any distinction 
between men and women. Do you remember how 
Yajriavalkya was questioned at the Court of King Janaka? 
His principal examiner was Vachaknavi, the maiden 
orator—Brahmavadini, as the word of the day was. 'Like 
two shining arrows in the hand of the skilled archer,* she 
says, ‘are my questions.* Her sex is not even commented 
upon. Again, could anything be more complete than the 
equality of boys and girls in our old forest universities? 
Read our Sanskrit dramas—read the story of Shakuntala, 
and see if Tennyson's 'Princess* has anything to teach 

U3l“ 

“You have a wonderful way of revealing the glories 
of our past, Swamiji!*’ 

“Perhaps, because I have seen both sides of the 
world,** said the Swami gently, “and 1 know that the 
race that produced Sita—even if it only dreamt of her--has 
a reverence for woman that is unmatched on the earth. 
There is many a burden bound with legal tightness on 
the shoulders of Western women that is utterly unknown 
to ours. We have our wrongs and our exceptions certainly, 
but so have they. We must never forget that all over 
the globe the general effort is to express love and tender¬ 
ness and uprightness, and that national customs are only 
the nearest vehicles of this expression. With regarrl to 
the domestic virtues 1 have no hesitation in saying that 


INTERVIEWS, 161 

our Indian methods have in many ways the advantage 
over all others.*’ 

“Then have our women any problems at all, Swamiji?** 
**Of course, they have many and grave problems, but 
none that are not to ffe solved by that magic word 
‘education.* The true education, however, is not yet 
conceived of amongst us.** 

“And how would you define that?’* 

“1 never define anything,** said the Swami, smiling. 
“Still, it may be described as a development of faculty, 
not an accumulation of words, or, as a training of indi¬ 
viduals to will rightly and efficiently. So shall we bring 
to the need of India great fearless women—women worthy 
to continue the traditions of Sanghcimitta, Lila, Ahalya 
Bai, and Mira Bai—women fit to be mothers of heroes, 
because they are pure and selfless, strong with the strength 
that comes of touching the feet of God. 

“So you consider that there should be a religious 
element in education, Swamiji?” 

“1 look upon religion as the innermost core of 
education,** said the Swami solemnly. “Mind, I do not 
mean my own, or any one else’s opinion about religion. 
1 think the teacher should take the pupil’s starting-point in 
this, as in other respects, and enable her to develop along 
her own line of least resistance.** 

“But surely the religious exaltation of Brahmacharya, 
by taking the highest place from the mother and wife and 
giving it to those who evade those relations, is a direct 
blow dealt at woman?” 

“You should remember,” said the Swami, *‘that if 
religion exalts Brahmacharya for woman, it does exactly 
the same for man. Moreover, your question shows a 
•certain confusion in your own mind. Hinduism indicates 
one duty, only one, for the human soul. It is to seek to 
realise the permanent amidst the evanescent. No one 
presumes to point out any one way in which this may be 


162 


SWAMI VIVEKANANDA^S WORKS 


done. Marriage or non-marriage, good or evil, learning 
or ignorance, any of these is justified, if it leads to the 
goal. In this respect lies the great contrast between it 
and Buddhism, for the latter’s outstanding direction is to 
realise the impermanence of the External, which, broadly 
speaking, can only be done in one way. Do you recall 
the story of the young Yogi in the Mahabharata, who 
prided himself on his psychic powers by burning the 
bodies of a crow and a crane by his intense will, produced 
by anger? Do you remember that the young saint went 
into the town and found first a wife nursing her sick 
husband and then the butcher Dharmavyadha, both of 
whom had obtained enlightenment in the path of common 
faithfulness and duty? ” 

“And so what would you say, Swamiji, to the womeiv 
of this country?” 

“Why, to the women of this country,” said the 
Swami, “I would say exactly what I say to the men. 
Believe in India and in our Indian faith. Be strong and 
hopeful and unashamed, and remember that with some¬ 
thing to take, Hindus have immeasurably more to give 
than any other people in the world.” 


X 

ON THE BOUNDS OF HINDUISM 

(Prabuddha Bharata, April, 1899) 

Having been directed by the Editor, (writes our 
representative), to interview Swami Vivekananda on the 
question of converts to Hinduism, I found an opportunity 
one evening on the roof of a Ganges houseboat. It was 
after nightfall, and we had stopped at the embankment 


INTERVIEWS 


163 


x>f the Ramakrishna Math, and there the Swami came 
down to speak with me. 

Time and place were alike delightful. Overhead the 
stars, and around—the rolling Ganges ; and on one side 
stood the dimly lighted building, with its background of 
palms and lofty shade-trees. 

*‘I want to see you, Swami,** 1 began, “on this matter 
of receiving back into Hinduism those who have been 
perverted from it. Is it your opinion that they should be 
received ?** 

‘‘Certainly,** said the Swami, “the}" can and ought to 
be taken.’’ 

He sat gravely for a moment, tb‘nking, and then re¬ 
sumed. “Besides,** he said, “we shall otherwise decrease 
in numbers. When the Mohammedans first came, we are 
said—I think on the authority of Ferishta, the oldest 
Mohammedan historian—to have been six hundred millions 
of Hindus. Now we are about two hundred millions. 
And then every man going out of the Hindu pale is not 
only a man less, 'but an enemy the more. 

“Again, the vast majority of Hindu perverts to Islam 
and Christianity are perverts by the sword, or the 
descendants of these. It would be obviously unfair to 
subject these to disabilities of any kind. As to the case 
of born aliens, did you say ? Why, born aliens have been 
converted in the past by crowds, and the process is still 
going on. 

“In my own opinion, this statement not only applies 
to aboriginal tribes, to outlying nations, and to almost all 
our conquerors before the Mohammedan conquest, but 
also to all those castes who find a special origin in the 
Puranas. I hold that they have been aliens thus adopted. 

‘‘Ceremonies of expiation are no doubt suitable in 
the case of willing converts, returning to their Mother- 
Church, as it were ; but on those who were alienated by' 


164 


SWAM VIVEKANANDA'S WORKS 


conquest—as in Kashmir and Nepal—or on strangers 
wishing to join us, no penance should be imposed.*’ 

“But of what caste would these people be, Swamiji? 

I ventured to ask. “They must have some, or they can 
never be assimilated into the great body of Hindus. 
Where shall we look for their rightful place?” 

“Returning converts,” said the Swami quietly, will 
gain their own castes, of course. And new people will 
make theirs. You will remember,” he added, “that this 
has already been done in the case of Vaishnavism. 
Converts from different castes and aliens; were all able to 
combine under that flag and form a caste by themselves,. 
—and a very respectable one too. From Ramanuja down 
to Chaitanya of Bengal, all great Vaishnava Teachers have 
done the same.” 

*‘And where should these new people expect to 
marry?” I asked. 

*‘Amongst themselves as they do now,” said the 
Swami quietly. 

“Then as to names,” I enquired. “I suppose aliens, 
and perverts who have adopted non-Hindu names should 
be named newly. Would you give them caste-names, or 
what?” 

“Certainly,” said the Swami, thoughtfully, “there is 
a great deal in a name !” and on this question he would 
say no more. 

But my next enquiry drew blood. “Would you leave 
these new-comers, Swamiji, to choose their own form of 
religious belief out of many-visaged Hinduism, or would 
you chalk out a religion for them?” 

Can you ask that?” he said. “They will choose for 
themselves. For unless a man chooses for himself, the 
very spirit of Hinduism is destroyed. The essence of our 
Faith consists simply in this freedom of the Ishta.” 

I thought the utterance a weighty one, for the man 
before me has spent more years than any one else living,. 


INTERVIEWS 


165 


I fancy, in studying the common bases of Hinduism in a 
scientific and sympathetic spirit—and the freedom of the 
Ishta is obviously a principle big enough to accommodate 
the world. 

But the talk passed to other matters, and then wilh 
a cordial good night this great teacher of religion lifted his 
lantern and went back into the monastery, while I, by the 
pathless paths of the Ganges, in and out amongst her 
crafts of many sizes, made the best of my way back to 
my Calcutta home. 


NOTES FROM LECTURES 
AND DISCOURSES 


NOTES FROM LECTURES 
AND DISCOURSES 

I 

ON KARMA-YOGA 

Isolation of the soul from all objects, mental and 
physical, is the goal ; when that is attained, the soul will 
find that it was alone all the time, and it required no one 
to make it happy. As long as we require someone else 
to make us happy we are slaves. When the Purusha finds 
that It is free, and does not require anything to complete 
Itself, that this Nature is quite unnecessary, then freedom 
(Kaivalya) is attained. 

Men run after a few dollars and do not think anything 
of cheating a fellow-being to get those dollars ; but if they 
would restrain themselves, in a few years they would 
develop such characters as would bring them millions of 
dollars—if they wanted them. Then their will would 
govern the universe. But we are all such fools I 

What is the use of talking of one’s mistakes to the 
world? They cannot thereby be undone. For what one 
has done one must suffer ; one must try and do better. The 
world sympathises only with the strong and the powerful. 

It is only work that is done as a free-will offering to 
humanity and to Nature that does not bring with it any 
binding attachment. 

Duty of any kind is not to be slighted. A man who 
does the lower work is not, for that reason only, a lower 
man than he who does the higher work ; a man should 
not be judged by the nature of his duties, but by the 
manner in which he does them. His manner of doing 


NOTES FROM LECTURES & DISCOURSES 167 


them and his power to do them are indeed the test of a 
man. A shoemaker who can turn out a strong, nice pair 
of shoes in the shortest possible time is a better man, 
according to his profession and his work, than a professor 
who talks nonsense every day of his life. 

Every duty is holy, and devotion to duty is the highest 
form of the worship of God ; it is certainly a source of 
great help in enlightening and emancipating the deluded 
and ignorance-encumbered souls of the Baddhas—the 
bound ones. 

By doing well the duty which is nearest to us, the duty 
which is in our hands now, we make ourselves strongt^r ; 
and improving our strength in this manner step by step, 
we may even reach a state in \v*uch it shall be our 
privilege to do the most coveted and honoured duties in¬ 
life and in society. 

Nature’s justice is uniformly stern and unrelenting. 

The most practical man would call life neither good 
nor evil. 

Every successful man must have behind him some¬ 
where tremendous integrity, tremendous sincerity, and 
that is the cause of his signal success in life. He may not 
have been perfectly unselfish ; yet he was tending towards 
it. If he had been perfectly unselfish, his would have 
been as great a success as that of the Buddha or of the 
Christ. The degree of unselfishness marks the degree of 
success everywhere. 

The great leaders of mankind belong to higher fields 
than the field of platform work. 

However we may try, there cannot be any action 
which is perfectly pure or any which is perfectly* impure, 
taking purity or impurity in the sense of injury or ron- 
injury. We cannot breathe or live without injuring others, 
and every morsel of food we eat is taken from another’s 
mouth ; our very lives are crowding out some other lives. 
It may be those of men, or animals, or small fungi, but 


168 SWAMI VIVEKANANDA^S WORKS 

someone somewhere we have to crowd out. That being 
the case, it naturally follows that perfection can never be 
attained by work. We may work through all eternity, but 
there will be no way out of this intricate maze: we may 
work on and on and on, but there will be no end. 

The man who works through freedom and love cares 
nothing for results. But the slave wants his whipping ; the 
servant wants his pay. So with all life ; take for instance 
the public life. The public speaker wants a little applause 
or a little hissing and hooting. If you keep him in a corner 
without it, you kill him, for he requires it. This is working 
through slavery. To expect something in return, under 
such conditions, becomes second nature. Next comes the 
work of the servant, who requires some pay ; I give this, 
and you give me that. Nothing is easier than to say, 
“I work for work’s sake,” but nothing is so difficult to 
attain. 1 would go twenty miles on my hands and knees 
to look on the face of the man who can work for work’s 
sake. There is a motive somewhere. If it is not money, 
it is power. If it is not power, it is gain. Somehow, some¬ 
where, there is a motive power. You are my friend, and 
1 want to work for you and with you. This is all very 
well, and every moment 1 may make protestation of my 
sincerity. But take care, you must be sure to agree with 
me ! If you do not, I shall no longer take care of you 
or live for you ! This kind of work for a motive brings 
misery. 1 hat work alone brings unattachment and bliss, 
wherein we work as masters of our own minds. 

1 he great lesson to learn is that 1 am not the standard 
by which the whole universe is to be judged ; each man 
is to be judged by his own idea, each race by its own 
standard and ideal, each custom of each country by its 
own reasoning and conditions. American customs are the 
result of the environment in which the Americans live, and 
Indian customs are the result of the environment in which 


NOTES FROM LECTURES & DISCOURSES 169^ 


the Indians are ; and so of China, Japan, England and 
every other country. 

We all find ourselves in the position for which we are 
fit, each ball finds its own hole ; and if one has some 
capacity above another, the world will find that out too. 
in this universal adjusting that goes on. So it is no use 
to grumble. If there is a rich man who is wicked, 
yet there must be in that man certain qualities that 
made him rich, and if any other man has the same 
qualities he will also become rich. What is the use of 
fighting and complaining? That will not Kelp us to better 
things. He who grumbles at the little thing that has fallen 
to his lot to do, will grumble at everything. Always 
grumbling he will lead a miserable life, and everything 
will be a failure. But that man who does his duty as he 
goes, putting his shoulder to the wheel, will see the light, 
and higher and higher duties will fall to his share. 


II 

ON FANATICISM 

ITiere are fanatics of various kinds. Some people are 
wine fanatics and cigar fanatics. Some think that if men 
gave up smoking cigars, the world would arrive at the 
millennium. Women are generally amongst these fanatics. 
There was a young lady here one day, in this class. She 
was one of a number of ladies in Chicago who have built 
a house where they take in the working people and give 
them music and gymnastics. One day this yoiing lady 
was talking about the evils of the world and said she knew 
the remedy. 1 asked, “How do you know?“ and she 
answered, “Have you seen Hull House?” In her 
opinion, this Hull House is the one panacea for all the 
evils that flesh is heir to. This will grow upon her. I am, 


170 


SWAMI VIVEKANANDA^S WORKS 


sorry for her. There are some fanatics in India who think 
that if a wgman could marry again when her husband 
•died, it would cure all evil. This is fanaticism. 

When I was a boy 1 thought that fanaticism was a 
great element in work, but now, as 1 grow older, I find 
'OUt that it is not. 

There may be a woman who would steal and make 
no objection to taking someone else s bag and going away 
with it. But perhaps that woman does not smoke. She 
becomes a smoke fanatic, and as soon as she finds a man 
•smoking, she strongly disapproves of him, because he 
smokes a cigar. There may be a man who goes about 
cheating people ; there is no trusting him ; no woman is 
safe with him. But perhaps this scoundrel does not drink 
wine. If so, he sees nothing good in anyone who drinks 
wine. All these wicked things that he himself does are 
of no consideration. TTiis is only natural human selfish¬ 
ness and one-sidedness. 

You must also remember that the world has God to 
govern it, and He has not left it to our charity. The Lord 
'God is its Governor and Maintainer, and in spite of these 
wine fanatics and cigar fanatics, and all sorts of marriage 
fanatics, it would go on. If all these persons were to die, 
it would go on none the worse. 

Do you not remember in your own history how the 
“Mayflower” people came out here, and began to call 
themselves Puritans? They were very pure and good as 
far as they went, until they began to persecute other 
people, and throughout the history of mankind it has been 
the same. Even those that run away from persecution 
indulge in persecuting others as soon as a favourable 
opportunity to do so occurs. 

In ninety cases out of a hundred, fanatics must have 
bad livers, or they are dyspeptics, or are in some way 
<Iiseased. By degrees even physicians will find out that 


NOTES FROM LECTURES & DISCOURSES 171 


fanaticism is a kind of disease. I have seen plenty of it. 
The Lord save me from it I 

My experience comes to this, that it is rather wise to 
avoid all sorts of fanatical reforms. This world is slowly 
going on ; let it go slowly. Why are you in a hurry? Sleep 
well and keep your nerves in good order ; eat right food, 
and have sympathy with the world. Fanatics only make 
hatred. Do you mean to say that the temperance fanatic 
loves these poor people who become drunkards? A.fanatic 
is a fanatic simply because he expects to get something 
for himself in return. As soon as the battle is over, he goes 
for the spoil. When you come out of the company of 
fanatics you may learn how really to lo^’c and sympathise, 
and the more you attain of love and sympathy, the less 
will be your power to condemn these poor creatures ; 
rather you will sympathise with their faults. It will become 
possible for you to sympathise with the drunkard and to 
know that he is also a man like yourself. You will then 
try to understand the many circumstances that are drag¬ 
ging him down, and feel that if you had been in his place 
you would perhaps have committed suicide. I remember 
a woman whose husband was a great drunkard, and she 
complained to me of his becoming so. 1 replied, ‘‘Madam, 
if there were twenty millions of wives like yourself, all 
husbands would become- drunkards.” 1 am convinced 
that a large number of drunkards are manufactured by 
their wives. My business is to tell the truth and not to 
flatter anyone. These unruly women from whose minds 
the words bear and forbear are gone for ever, and whose 
false ideas of independence lead them to think that men 
should be at their feet, and who begin to howl as soon as 
men dare to say anything to them which they do not like— 
such women are becoming the bane of the world, and it 
is a wonder that they do not drive half the men in it to 
commit suicide. In this way things should not go on. 


172 


SWAMI VIVEKANANDA^S WORKS 


Life is not so easy as they believe it to be ; it is a more^ 
serious business ! 

A man must not only have faith but intellectual faith 
too. To make a man take up everything and believe it, 
would be to make him a lunatic. 1 once had a book sent 
me, which said 1 must believe everything told in it. It said 
there was no soul, but that there were gods and goddesses 
in heaven, and a thread of light going from each of our 
heads to heaven ! How did the writer know all these 
things ? She had been inspired, and wanted me to believe 
it too, and because I refused, she said, “You must be a 
very bad man ; there is no hope for you!“ This is 
fanaticism. 


Ill 

WORK IS WORSHIP 

The highest man cannot work, for there is no binding 
element, no attachment, no ignorance in him. A ship is 
said to have passed over a mountain of magnet ore, and 
all the bolts and bars were drawn out, and it went to 
pieces. It is in ignorance that struggle remains, because 
we are all really atheists. Real theists cannot work. 
We are atheists more or less. We do not see God or 
believe in Him. He is G-O-D to us, and nothing more. 
There are moments when we think He is near, but then 
we fall down again. When you see Him, who struggles 
for whom ? Help the Lord ! There is a proverb in our 
language, “Shall we teach the Architect of the universe 
how to build ?“ So those are the highest of mankind who 
do not work. The next time you see these silly phrases 
about the world and how we must all help God and do 
this or that for Him, remember this. Do not think such 
thoughts ; they are too selfish. All the work you do is 


NOTES FROM LECTURES & DISCOURSES 173 


subjective, is done for your own benefit. God bas not 
fallen into a ditch for you and me to help Him out, by 
building a hospital cr something of that sort. He allows 
you to v/ork. He allow^s you to exercise your muscles in 
this great gymnasium, not in order to help Him but tha'. 
you may help yourself. Do you think even an ant will 
die for want of 3 "our help? Most arrant blasphemy I The 
world does not need you at all. The world goes on, you 
are like a drop in this ocean. A. leaf does not move, the 
wind does not blow without Him. Blessed are we that 
we are given the privilege of working for Him, not of 
helping Him. Cut out this word ‘help’ from ynni mind. 
You cannot help ; it is blaspheming. You aic here your¬ 
self at His pleasure. Do you mean say, you help Him? 
You worship. When you give a morsel of food to the 
dog, you worship the dog as God. God is in that dog. 
He is the dog. He is all and in all. We are allowed to 
worship Him. Stand in that reverent'attitude to the whole 
universe, and then will come perfect non-attachment. 
This should be your duty. This is the proper attitude of 
work. I his is the secret taught by Karma-Yoga. 


IV 

WORK WHTIOUr MOTIVE 

At the forty-second meeting of the Ramakrishna 
Mission held at the premises No. 57, Ramkanta Bose’s 
Street, Baghbazar, Calcutta, on the 20th March, 1898, 
Swami Vivekananda gave an ciddress on “Work without 
Motive,” and spoke to the following effect: — 

When the Gita was first preached, there was then 
going on a great controversy between two sects. One 
party considered the Vedic Yajnas and animal sacrifices 
V—12 


174 


SWAM! VIVEKANANDA'S WORKS 


and such like Karmas to constitute the whole of religion. 
The other preached that the killing of numberless horses 
and cattle cannot be called religion. The people belong¬ 
ing to the latter party were mostly Sannyasins and 
followers of Jnana. I'hey believed that the giving up of 
all work and the gaining of the knowledge of the Self was 
the only path to Moksha. By the preaching of His great 
doctrine of work without motive, the Author of the Gita 
set at rest the disputes of these two antagonistic sects. 

Many are of opinion that the Gita was not written at 
the time of the Mahabharata, but was subsequently added 
to it. I his is not correct. The special teachings of the 
Gita arc to be found in every part of the Mahabharata, 
and if the Gila is to hn expunged, as forming no part of 
it, every other portion of it which embodies tlic same 
teachings should l)e similarly treated. 

Now, what is the meaning of working without motive? 
Nowadays many understand it in the sense that one is to 
work in such a way that neither pleasure nor pain touches 
his mind. If this Vjc its real meaning, then the aninaals 
might be said to work without motive. Some anim£i!s 
devour their own offspring, and they do not feel any pangs 
at all in doing so. Robbers ruin other people b^' robbing 
them of their posse.ssions, but if they feel quite callous to 
pleasure or pain, then they also would be woddng without 
motive. If the meaning of it be such, then one who has 
a stony heart, the worst of criminals, might be considered 
to be working without motive. 1 he walls have no feclihgs 
of pi easure or pain, neither has a stone, and it cannot be 
said that they are working without motive. In the above 
sense the doctrine is a potent instrument in the hands 
of the wicked. I hey would go on doing wicked deeds, 
and would pronounce themselves as working without a 
motive. If such be the significance of working without 
a motive, then a fearful doctrine has been put forth by 
the preaching of the Gita. Certainly this is not the mean- 


NOTES FROM LECTURES & DISCOURSES 175 


ing. Furthermore, if we look into the lives of those who 
were connected with the preaching of the Gita, we should 
find them living quite a different life. Arjuna killed 
Bhishma and Drona in battle, but withal, he sacrificed all 
his self-interest and desires and his lower self niihions 
of times. 

Gita teaches Karma-Yoga. We should work through 
Yoga (concentration). In such concentration in action 
(Karma-Yoga), there is no consciousness of the lower ego 
present. 1 he consciousness tltat 1 am doing this and that 
is never pr<*^( nt when one works through Yoga. Ihe 
Western people do not understand this. I hev say that 
if there be no consciousness of ego, if ih;;, ego is gone, 
how th.cn can a man work? But hen one works with 
concentration, losing all consciousness of oneself, the work 
that is done will be inrinitely better, and this every one 
may liavo experienced in his own life. We perform 
many works subconsciously, such as the digestion of food 
etc., many otheus consciously, and others again by be¬ 
coming immersed in Samadhi as it were, when there is 
no consciousness of the smaller ego. If the painter, losing 
the consciousr.ess of his ego, becomes comp>lctely immers¬ 
ed in his paintiu.g, he will be able to produce masterpieces. 

I he good cook concentrates his whole self on the food- 
material he handles ; he loses all other consciousness for 
the time being. But they are only able to do perfectly a 
single work in this way, to which they are habituated. 

I he Gila tccrches tliat all works should be done thus. He 
who is one with the Lord through Yoga performs all his 
works by becoming immersed in concentration, and does 
not seek any personal benefit. Such a performance of 
work brings only good to the world, no evil can come out 
of it. Those who work thus never do anything for them¬ 
selves. 

The result of every work is mixed with good and evil. 
There is no good work that has not a touch of evil in it. 


176 


SWAMI VIVEKANANDA'S WORKS 


Like smoke round the fire, some evil always clings to 
work. We should engage in such works as bring the 
largest amount of good and the smallest measure of evil. 
Arjuna killed Bhishma and Drona ; if this had not been 
done Duryodhana could not have been conquered, the 
force of evil would have triumphed over the force of good, 
and thus a great calamity would have fallen on the coun¬ 
try. I he government of the country would have been 
usurped by a body of proud unrighteous kings, to the 
great misfortune of the people. Similarly, Sri Krishna 
killed Kamsa, Jarasandha and others who were tyrants, 
but not a single one of his deeds was done for himself. 
Every one of them was for the good of others. We are 
reading the Gita by candle-light, but numbers of insects 
are being burnt to death. 1 hus it is seen that some evil 
clings to work. Those who work without any conscious¬ 
ness of their lower ego are not affected with evil, for they 
work for the good of the world. 1 o work without motive, 
to work unattached, brings the highest bliss and freedom. 

1 his secret of Karma-Yoga is taught by the Lord Sri 
Krishna in the Gita. 


V 

SADI lANAS OR PREPARATIONS TO 
MIGIiER LIFE 

If atavism gains, you go down; if evolution gains, you 
go on. 1 horcfore we must not allow atavism to take 
place. Here, in my own body, is the first work of the 
study. V/e are too bu.sy trying to mend the ways of our 
neiglu:>ours, tnat is the difiiculty. We must begin with 
our own bodies. I he heart, the liver, etc., are all 
atavistic ; bring them back into consciousness, control 
them, so that they will obey your commands and act up 


NOTES FROM LECTURES <§• DISCOURSES 177 


to your wishes. There was a time when we had control 
of the liver ; we could shake the whole skin, as can the 
cow. I have seen many people bring the control back by 
sheer hard practice. Once an impress is made, it is there. 
Bring back all the submerged activities—the vast ocean or 
action. 1 Kis is the first part of the great study, and it is 
absolutely necessary for our social well-being. On the 
other hand, only the consciousness need not be studied 
all the time. 

I hen there is the other part of the study, not so 
necessary in our social life, which ter.Is to liberation. 
Its direct action is to free the soul, to take thn lorch into 
the gloom, to clean out what is behind, to shake it up or 
even defy it, and to make us march onward piercing the 
gloom. That is the goal—the superconscious. Then, 
when that state is reached, this very man becomes divine, 
becomes free. And to the mind thus trained to transcend 
all, gradually this universe will begin to give up its 
secrets ; the book of Nature will be read, chapter after 
chapter, till the goal is attained, and we pass from this 
valley of life and death to that One, where death and life 
do not exist, and we know the Real and become the Real. 

The first thing necessary is a quiet and peaceable life. 
If I have to go about the world the whole day to make 
a living, it is hard for me to attain to anything very high 
in this life. Perhaps in another life I shall be born under 
more propitious circumstances. But if I am earnest 
enough, these very circumstances will change even in this 
birth. Was there anything you did not get which you 
really wanted? It could not be. For it is the want that 
creates the body. It is the light that has bored the holes, 
as it were, in your head, called the eyes. If the light had 
not existed you would have had no eyes. It is sound 
that has made the ears. The object of perception existed 
first, before you made the organ. In a few hundred 
thousand years, or earlier, we may have other organs to 


178 


SWAMI VIVEKANANDA^S WORKS 


perceive electricity and other things. There is no desire 
for a peaceful mind. Desire will not come unless there is 
something outside to fulfil it. The outside something just 
bores a hole in the body, as it v/cre, and tries to get into 
the mind. So, when the desire shall arise to have a 
peaceful, quiet life, where everything shall be propitious 
for the d(ivelopment of the mind, that shall come —you 
may take that as my experience. It may come in 
thousands of lives, but it must come. Hold on to that, 
the desire. You cannot have the strong desire if its object 
was not outside for you already. Of course, you must 
understand, there is a difference between desire and 
desire. The master said, “My child, if you desire after 
God, God shall come to you.” Ihe disciple did not 
understand his master fully. One day both went to baihe 
in a river, and the master said, ‘‘Plunge in,” and the boy 
did so. In a moment the master was upon him, holding 
him down. He would not let the boy conic up. When 
the boy struggled and was exhausted, he let him go. 
“Yes, my child, how did you feel there? ’ “Oh, the desire 
for a breath of air!” ‘‘Do you have that kind of desire 
for God?” ‘‘No, sir.” ‘‘Have that kind of desire for 
God, and you shall have God.” 

That, without which we cannot live, must come to 
us. If it did not come to us, life could not go on. 

If you want to be a Yogi, you must be free, and place 
yourself in circumstances where you are alone and free 
from all anxiety. He who desires for a comfortable and 
nice life and at the same time wants to rcal'se the Self is 
like the fool who, wanting to cross the river, caught hold 
of a crocodile mistaking it for a log of wood. ‘‘Seek ye 
first the Kingdom of God and His righteousness, and all 
these things shall be added unto you.” Unto him comes 
everything who does not care for anything. Fortune is like 
a flirt ; she cares not for him who wants her, but she is 
at the feet of him who does not care for her. Money 


NOTES FROM LECTURES & DISCOURSES 179 


comes and showers itself upon one who does not care for 
it ; so does fame come in abundance, until it is a trouble 
and a burden. They always come to the Master. The 
slave never gets anything. I'he Master is he who can live 
in spite of them, whose life does not depend upon the 
little, foolish things of the world. Idve for an ideal, and 
that one ideal alone. Let it be so great, so strong, that 
there may be nothing else left in the mind ; no place for 
anything else, no time for anything else. 

How some people give all their energies, time, brain, 
body, and cv.^rything, to become rich! They have no 
time for breakfast ! Early in the morning they are out 
and at work ! They die in the attempt—niucty per cent 
of them,—and the rest when they lake money, cannot 
enjoy it. 1 hat is grand ! 1 do not say it is bad to try to 

be rich. It is marvellous, wonderful. Why, what does it 
show? It shows that one can have the same amount of 
energy and struggle for freedom as one has for money. 
We know we have to give up money and all other things 
when we die, and yet, see the amount of energy we can 
put forth for them. But we, the same human beings, 
should we not put forth a thousandfold more stiength and 
energy to acquire that- which never fades, but which 
remains to us for ever? For this is the one great friend, 
our cwn good deeds, our own spiritual excellence, that 
follows us be 5 ^ond the grave. Everything else is left 
behind here with the body. 

1 hat is the one great first step—the real desire for 
the ideal. Everything comes easy after that. That the 
Indian mind found out ; there, in India, men go to any 
length to find truth. But here, in the West, the* difficulty 
is that everything is made so easy. It is not truth, but 
development, that is the great aim. The struggle is the 
great lesson. Mind you, the great benefit in this life is 
struggle. It is through that we pass—if there is any road 
to Heaven, it is through Hell. Through Hell to Heaven 


180 


SWAMI VIVEKANANDA'S WORKS 


is always the way. When the soul has wrestled with 
circumstance and has met death, a thousand times death 
on the way. but nothing daunted has struggled forward 
again and again and yet again—then the soul comes out 
as a giant and laughs at the ideal he has been struggling 
for. because he finds how much greater is he than the 
ideal. 1 am the end, my own Self, and nothing else, 
for what is there to compare to my own Self? Can a bag 
of gold be the ideal of my Soul? Certainly not! My 
Soul is the highest ideal that I can have. Realising my 
own real nature is the one goal of my life. 

There is nothing that is absolutely evil. The devil has 
a place here as well as God, else he would not be here. 
Just as 1 told you, it is through Hell that we pass to 
Heaven. Our mistakes have places here. Go on ! Do 
not look back If you think you have done something that 
is not right. Now, do you believe you could be what you 
are to-day had you not made those mistakes before? 
Bless your mistakes, then. They have been angels 
unawares. Blessed be torture! Blessed be happiness! 
Do not care what be your lot. Hold on to the ideal. 
March on I Do not look back upon little mistakes and 
things. In this battlefield of ours, the dust of mistakes 
must be raised. Those who are so thin-skinned that they 
cannot bear the dust, let them get out of the ranks. 

So, then, this tremendous determination to struggle, 
a hundredfold more determination than that which you 
put forth to gain anything which belongs to this life, is 
the first great preparation. 

And then along with it, there must be meditation. 
Meditation is the one thing. Meditate ! T he greatest 
thing is meditation. It is the nearest approach to spiiilual 
life—the mind meditating. It is the one moment in our 
daily life that we are not at all material—the Soul think¬ 
ing of Itself, free from all matter—this marvellous touch 
of the Soul ! 


NOTES FROM LECTURES & DISCOURSES 18! 


The body is our enemy, and yet is our friend. Which 
of you can bear the sight of misery? And which of you 
cannot do so when you see it only as a painting? Because 
it is unreal, we do not identify ourselves with it ; we know 
it is only a painting ; it cannot bless us, it cannot Hurt rs. 
The most terrible misery painted upon a piece of canvas, 
we may even enjoy ; we praise t^u' technique of the artist, 
we wonder at his marvellous genius, even though the 
scene he paints is most horrible. I hat is the secret ; that 
non-attachment. Be the Witn< ss. 

No breathing, no physical training of Yoga, nothing is 
of any use until you reach to the idea, “1 n^r, the 
Witness.” Say, when the tyrant hand is on vour neck, 
”1 am the Witness! I am the Witnes-' ’ Say, “1 am the 
Spirit ! Nothing external can touch me.” When evil 
thoughts arise, repeat that, give that sledge-hammer blow 
on their heads, ”i am the Spirit! I am the Witness, the 
Ever-Blessed I I have no reason to do, no reason to suffer, 
I have finished with everything, I am the Witness. I am 
in my picture gallery—this universe is my museum, 1 am 
looking at these successive paintings. They are all 
beautiful, whether good or evil. I see the marvellous skill, 
but it is all one. Infinite. flames of the Great Painter!” 
Really speaking, there is naught—neither volition, nor 
desire. He is all. He—She—the Mother, is playing, and 
we are like dolls. Her helpers in this play. Here, She puts 
one now in the garb of a beggar, another moment, in the 
garb of a king, the next moment, in the garb of a saint, 
and again, in the garb of a devil. We are putting on 
different garbs, to help the Mother Spirit ii> Her play. 

When the baby is at play, she will not come even 
if called by her mother. But when she finishes her play, 
she will rush to her mother, and will have no nay. 
So there come moments in our life, when we feel our play 
is finished, and we want to rush to the Mother. Then all 
our toil here will be of no value ; men, women and 


182 


SWA MI VIVEKANANDA^S WORKS 


children—wealth, name and fame, joys and glories of 
life—punishments and successes—will be no more, and 
the whole life will seem like a show. We shall see only 
the infinite rhythm going on, endless and purposeless, 
going we do not know where. Only this much shall we 
say: our play is done. 


VI 

I HE COSMOS AND THE SELF 

Everything in Nature rises from some fine seed-forms, 
becomes grosser and grosser, exists for a certain time, and 
again goes back to the original fine form. Our earth, for 
instance, has come out of a nebulous form which, becom¬ 
ing colder and colder, turned ir\to this crystallised planet 
upon which we live, and in the future it will again go to 
pieces and return to its rudimentary nebulous form. This 
is happening in the universe, and has been through time 
immemorial. 1 his is the whole history of man, the whole 
history of Nature, the whole history of life. 

Every evolution is preceded by an involution. 1 he 
whole of the tree is present in the seed, its cause. I he 
whole of the human being is present in that one proto¬ 
plasm. The whole of this universe is present in the 
cosmic fine universe. Everything is present in its cause, 
in its fine form. I his evolution, or gradual unfolding of 
grosser and grosser forms, is ♦rue, but each case has been 
preceded by an involution. I he whole of this universe 
must have been involuted before it came out, and has 
unfolded itself in all these various forms to be involved 
again once more. Take, for instance, the life of a little 
plant. We find two things that make the plant a unity by 
itself—its growth and development, its decay and death. 
These make one unity, the plant life. So, taking that 
plant life as only one link in the chain of life, we may 


NOTES FROM LECTURES & DISCOURSES 183 


take the whole series, One life, beginning in the proto¬ 
plasm and ending in the most perfect man. Man is one 
link, and the various beasts, the lower animals and plants 
are other links. Now go back to the source, the finest 
particles from which they started, and take the whuie 
series as but one life, and you will find that every evolu¬ 
tion here is the evolution of something which existed 
previously. 

Where it begins, there it ends. What is the end of 
this universe? Intelligence, is it not? The last to come 
in the order of creation, according to the evolutionists, 
was intelligence. That being so, it must be the cause, 
the beginning, of creation also. At the bci.inning that 
intelligence remains involved, and i.. the end it gets 
evolved. The sum total of the intelligence displayed in 
the universe must therefore be the involved universal 
intelligence unfolding itself, and this universal intelligence 
is what we call God, from whom we come and to whom 
we return, as the scriptures say. Call it by any other 
name, you cannot deny that in the beginning there is that 
infinite cosmic intelligence. 

What makes a compound? A compound is that in 
which the causes have combined and become the effect. 
So these compound things can be only within the circle 
of the law of causation ; so far as the rules of cause and 
effect go, so far can wc have compounds and combina¬ 
tions. Beyond that, it is impossible to talk of combina¬ 
tions, because no law holds good therein. Law holds good 
only in that universe which we see, feel, hear, imagine, 
dream, and beyond that we cannot place any idea of law. 
That is our universe which we sense or imagine, and we 
sense what is within our direct perception, and we imagine 
what is in our mind. What is beyond the body is beyond 
the senses, and what is beyond the mind is beyond the 
imagination, and therefore is beyond our universe, and 
therefore beyond the law of causation. The Self of man. 


184 


SWAMI VIVEKANANDA^S WORKS 


being beyond the law of causation is not a compound, is 
not the effect of any cause, and therefore is ever free, and 
is the ruler of everything that is within law. Not being a 
compound, it will never die, because death means going 
back to the component parts, destruction means going 
back to the cause. Because it cannot die, it cannot live, 
for both life and death are modes of manifestation of the 
same thing. So the Soul is beyond life and death. You 
were never born, and you will never die. Birth and death 
belong to the body only. 

1 he doctrine of Monism holds that this universe is 
all that exists ; gross or fine, it is all here ; the effect and 
the cause are both here ; the explanation is here. What is 
known as the particular is simply repetition in a minute 
form of the universal. We get our idea of the universe 
from the study of our own Souls, and what is true there 
also holds good in the outside universe. The ideas of 
heaven and all these various places, even if they be true, 
are in the universe. I'hey altogether make this Unity. 
1 ho first idea, therefore, is that of a Whole, a Unit, 
composed of various minute particles, and each one of 
us is a part, as it were, of this Unit. As manifested beings 
we appear separate, but as a reality we are one. The 
more we think ourselves separate from this whole, the 
more miserable wc become. So, Advaita is the basis of 
ethics. 


Vll 

WHO IS A REAL GURU? 

A real Guru is one who is born from time to time as 
a repository of spiritual force which he transmits to future 
generations through successive links of Guru and Sishya 
(disciple). The current of this spirit-force changes its 
course from time to time, just as a mighty stream of water 


NOTES FROM LECTURES & DISCOURSES 185 


opens up a new channel and leaves the old one for good. 
Thus It is seen that old sects of religion grow lifeless in 
the course of lime, and new sects arise with the fire of life 
in them. Men who are truly wise commit themselves to 
the mercy of that particular sect through which the curr. nt 
of life flows. Old forms of religion are like the skeletons 
of once mighty animals, preserved in museums. They 
should be regarded with due honour. 1 hey cannot satisfy 
the true cravings of the soul for the Highest, just as a dead 
mango-tree cannot satisfy the cravings of a man for 
luscious mangoes. 

The one thing necessary is to be stripped of our 
vanities—the sense that we possess any spnlfual wisdom 
—and to surrender ourselves complc* ly to the guidance 
of our Guru. The Guru only knows what will lead us 
towards perfection. We are quite blind to it. We do not 
know anything. 1 his sort of humility will open the door 
of our heart for spiritual truths. Truth will never come 
into our minds so long as there will remain the faintest 
shadow of Ahamkara (egoism). All of you should try to 
root out this devil from your lu^art. Complete self¬ 
surrender is the only way to spiritual illumination. 


Vlll 

ON ART 

fhe secret of Greek Art is its imitation of Nature even 
to the minutest details ; whereas the secret of Indian Art 
is to represent the ideal. I he energy of the Greek* painter 
is spent in perhaps painting a piece of flesh, and he is so 
successful that a dog is deluded into taking it to be a real 
bit of meat and so goes to bite it. Now, what glory is 
there in merely imitating Nature? Why not place an 
actual bit of flesh before the dog? 


186 


SWAMI VIVEKANANDA'S WORKS 


The Indian tendency, on the other hand, to represent 
the ideal, the super-sensual, has become degraded into 
painting grotesque images. Now, true Art can be com¬ 
pared to a lily which springs from the ground, takes its 
nourishment from the ground, is in touch with the ground, 
and yet is quite high above it. So Art must be in touch 
with Nature—and wherever that touch is gone, Art 
degenerates—yet it must be above Nature. 

Art is—representing the beautiful. 1 here must be art 
in everything. 

The differeirce between architecture and building is 
ll.at the former expresses an idea, while the latter is merely 
c\ structure built on economical principles. 1 he value of 
matter depends solely on its Ccipacities of expressing ideas. 

1 he artislic faculty was highly developed in our Lord 
Sri Fhimakrislma and he used to say that without this 
faculty none can be truly spiritual. 


IX 

ON LANGUAGE 

Simplicity is tire secret. My ideal of language is my 
Master s language, most colloquial and yet most expres¬ 
sive. It must express the thought which is intended to be 
conveyed. 

I he attempt to make the Bengali language perfect in 
60 short a lime will make it cut and dried. Properly 
speaking, it has no verbs. Michael Madhusudan Dutt 
attempted to remedy this in poetry. The greatest poet in 
Bengal was Kavikankana. The best prose in Sanskrit is 
Patanjali s Mahabhashya. There the language is vigorous. 
I he language of Hitopadesha is not bad, but the language 
of fvadambari is an example of degradation. 


NOTES FROM LECTURES & DISCOURSES 187 


The Bengali language must be modelled not after the 
Sanskrit, but rather after the Pali, which has a strong 
resemblance to it. In coining or translating technical terms 
in Bengali, one must, however, use all Sanskrit words for 
them, and an attempt should be made to coin new worTs. 
For this purpose, if a collection is made from a Sanskrit 
dictionary of .ill these technical terms, then it will help 
greatly the constitution of the Bengali language. 


X 

TTIF SANMYASIN 

In explanation of the llerm Saunv isln, the Swami in 
the course of one of his Itclur s m Boston said: — 

When a man has fulfill. d the duties and obligations of 
that stage of life in whicii he is born, and his aspirations 
lead him to seek a sjniilual life and to abandon altogether 
the worldly pursuits of possession, fame, or power, 
when, by the growth of insight into the nature of the 
v/or!d, he secs its impermanence, its strife, its misery, and 
the paltry nature of its prizes, and turns away from all 
these—then he seeks the' 1 rue, the Eternal Love, the 
Refuge. He makes complete renunciation (Sannyasa) of 
all worldly position, propert^^ and name, and wanders 
forth into the world to live a life of selLsacrifice and to 
persistently seek spiritual knowledge, striving to excel in 
love and compassion and to acquire lasting insight. 
Gaining these pearls of wisdom by years of meditation, 
discipline and inquiry, he in his turn becomes a teacher 
and hands on to disciples, lay or professed, who^ may seek 
them from him, all that he can of wisdom and beneficence. 

A Sannyasin cannot belong to any religion, for his is 
a life of independent thought, which draws from all 
religions ; his is a life of realization, rot merely of theory 
or belief, much less of dogma. 


188 


SWAMI VIVEKANANDA^S WORKS 


XI 

THE SANNYASIN AND THE HOUSEHOLDER 

Ihe men of the world should have no voice in the 
affairs of the Sannyasins. The Sannyasin should have 
nothing to do with the rich, hisi duly is with the poor He 
should treat the poor with loving care and serve them 
joyfully with all his might. lo pay respects to the rich 
and hang on them for support has been the bane of all 
the Sannyasin communities of our country. A true 
Sannyasin should scrupulously avoid that. Such conduct 
becomes a public woman rather than one who professes 
to have renounced the world. I low should a man im¬ 
mersed in Kama-Kanchana (lust and greed) become a 
devotee of one whose central ideal is the renunciation of 
Kama-Kanchana ? Sri Ramakrishna wept and prayed to 
the Divine Mother to send him such a one to talk with as 
would not have in him the slighest tinge of Kama- 
Kanchana ; for ho would say, “My lips burn when 1 talk 
with the worldly-minded.*’ I le also used to say that he 
could not even bear the touch of the worldly-minded and 
the impure. 1 he King of Sannyasins (Sri Ramakrishna) can 
never be preached by men of the world. The latter can 
never be perfectly sincere; for he cannot but have some 
selfish motives to serve. If Bhagavan (God) incarnates 
H'lnself as a houseliolder I can never believe Him to be 
sincere. When a householder takes the position of the 
leader of a religious sect, he begins to serve his OAm 
int(Mer,ls in the* name of principle, hiding the former in 
the garb of the latter, and the result is the sect becomes 
rotten lo the core. /Ml religious movements headed by 
householders have shared the same fate. Without renun¬ 
ciation ic'liggon can never stand. 

Here Swarniii was asked—What are we Sannyasins 
to understand by renunciation of Kanchana (wealth)? 
He answered as follows: 


NOTES FROM LECTURES & DISCOURSES 189 


With a view to certain ends we have to adopt certain 
means. These means vary according to the conditions of 
time, place, individual, etc., but the end always remains 
unaltered. In the case of the Sannyasin, the end is the 
liberation of the Self and doing good to humanity 
—^ l”—and of the ways to 
attain it, the renunciation of Kama-Kanchana is the most 
important. Remember, renunciation consists in the total 
absence of all selfish motives and not in mere abstinence 
from external contact, such as avoiding to touch one's 
money kept with another but at the same time enjoying all 
its benefits. Would that be renunciation? For accom¬ 
plishing the two above-mentioned ends, the begging 
excursion would be a great help to a annyasin at a time 
when the householders strictly obeyed the injunctions of 
Manu and other law-givers, by setting apart every day a 
portion of their meal for ascetic guests. Nowadays things 
have changed considerably, especially, as in Bengal, where 
no Madhukari^ system prevails. Here it would be mere 
waste of energy to try to live on Madhukari, and you would 
profit nothing by it. 1 he injunction of Bhlksha (begging) 
is a means to serve the above two ends, which will not be 
served by that way now. . It does not therefore go against 
the principle of renunciation under such circumstances if 
a Sannyasin provides for mere necessaries of life and 
devotes all his energy to the accomplishment of his ends 
for which he took Sannyasa. Attaching too much import¬ 
ance ignorantly to the means brings confusion. The end 
should never be lost sight of. 


1 Literally, 'bee-like.' The system of begging one's food piece¬ 
meal from several houses, so as not to tax the householder, as a bee 
gathers honey from different flowers. 

V—13 


190 


SWAM I VIVEKANANDA'S WORKS 


XII 

THE EVILS OF ADHIKARIVADA 

In one of his question classes the talk drifted on to 
the Adhikarivada, or the doctrine of special rights and 
privileges, and Swamiji in pointing out vehemently the evils 
that have resulted from it spoke to the following effect: — 

With all my respect for the Rishis of yore I cannot 
but denounce their method in instructing the people. They 
always enjoined upon them to do certain things but took 
care never to explain to them the reason why. This 
method was pernicious to the very core, and instead of 
enabling men to attain the end it laid upon their shoulders 
a mass of meaningless nonsense. I heir excuse for keep¬ 
ing the end hidden from view was that the people could 
not have understood their real meaning even if they had 
presented it to them, not being worthy recipients. 

I his Adhikarivada is the outcome of pure selfishness. 
They knew that by this enlightenment of their special 
subject they would lose their superior position of instruc¬ 
tors to the people. Hence their endeavour to support this 
theory. If you consider a man too weak to receive these 
lessons you should try the more to teach and educate him ; 
you should give him the advantage of more teaching, 
instead of less, to train up his intellect, so as to enable him 
to comprehend the more subtle problems. These 
advocates of Adhikarivada ignored the tremendous fact of 
the infinite possibilities of the human soul. Every man 
is capable of receiving knowledge If it is imparted in his 
own language. A teacher who cannot convince others 
should weep on account of his own inability to teach the 
people in their own language, instead of cursing them and 
dooming them to live in ignorance and superstition, setting 
up the plea that the higher knowledge is not for them. 
Speak out the truth boldly, without any fear that it will 
puzzle the weak. Men are selfish ; they do not want 


NOTES FROM LECTURES & DISCOURSES 191 


others to come up to the same level of their knowledge, 
for fear of losing their own privilege and prestige over 
others. Their contention is that the knowledge of the 
highest spiritual truths will bring about confusion in the 
understanding of the weak-minded men, and so the sloka 
goes:— 

II 

“One should not unsettle the understanding of the 
ignorant, attached to action (by teaching them Jnana); 
the wise man, himself steadily acting, should engage the 
ignorant in all work.’* 

I cannot believe in the self-cont’ xlictory statement 
that light brings greater darkness. It is like losing life in 
the ocean of Sachchidananda, in the ocean of Absolute 
Existence and Immortality. How absurd I Knowledge 
means freedom from the errors which ignorance leads to. 
Knowledge paving the way to error ! Enlightenment 
leading to confusion! Is it possible) Men are not bold 
enough to speak out broad truths, for fear of losing the 
respect of the people. They try to make a compromise 
between the real, eternal truths and the nonsensical 
prejudices of the people, and thus set up the doctrine 
that Lokacharas (customs of the people) and Deshacharas 
(customs of the country) must be adhered to. No 
compromise ! No whitewashing ! No covering of corpses 
beneath flowers I Throw away such texts as:— 

—**Yet the customs of the people have 
to be followed.” Nonsense! The result of this sort 
of compromise is that the grand truths are soon^ buried 
under heaps of rubbish, and the latter are eagerly held as 
real truths. Even the grand truths of the Gita, so boldly 
preached by Sri Krishna, received the gloss of compromise 
in the hands of future generations of disciples, and the 
result is that the grandest scripture of the world now 
contains many things which go to lead men astray. 


192 


SWAMI VIVEKANANDA’S WORKS 


This attempt at compromise proceeds from arrant 
downright cowardice. Be bold ! My children should be 
brave, above all. Not the least compromise on any 
account. Preach the highest truths broadcast. Do not 
fear losing your respect or causing unhappy friction. 
Rest assured that if you serve truth in spite of temptation 
to forsake it you will attain a heavenly strength in the 
face of which men will quail to speak before you things 
which you do not believe to be true. People will be 
convinced of what you will say to them, if you can 
strictly serve truth for fourteen years continually, without 
swerving from it. Thus you will confer the greatest 
blessing on the masses, unshackle their bondages and 
uplift the whole nation. 


XIII 

ON BHAKTI-YOGA 

The dualist thinks you cannot be moral unless you 
have a God with a rod in His hand, ready to punish you. 

I low is that } Suppose a horse had to give us a lecture 
on morality, one of those very wretched cab-horses, who 
moves only with the whip, to which he has become 
accustomed; he begins to speak about human beings and 
says that they must be very immoral. Why? “Because 
1 know they are not whipped regularly.’* The fear of 
the whip only makes one more immoral. 

You all say there is a God and that He is an Omni¬ 
present Being. Close your eyes and think what He is. 
What do you find ? Either you are thinking, in bringing 
the idea of Omnipresence in your mind, of the sea, or the 
blue sky, or an expanse of meadow, or such things as you 
have seen in your life. If that is so, you do not mean 
anything by Omnipresent God ; it has no meaning at all 
to you. So with every other attribute of God. What idea 


NOTES FROM LECTURES & DISCOURSES 193 


have we of omnipotence or omniscience? We have none. 
Religion is realising, and 1 shall call you a worshipper of 
God when you have become able to realise the Idea, 
Before that it is the spelling of words and no more. It is 
this power of realisation that makes religion : no amount 
of doctrines or philosophies or ethical books, that you 
may have stuffed into your brain, will matter much—only 
what you are and what you have realised. 

The Personal God is the same Absolute lookci! at 
through the haze of Maya. When we approch Him with 
the five senses, we can see Him only as the Personal God. 

I he idea is that the Self cannot be objectified. ’ low can 
the Knower know Itself? But It can cast a shadow, as it 
were, if that can be called objectificaiion. So the highest 
form of that shadow, that attempt at objectifying Itself, 
is the Personal God. The Self is the eternal subject, and 
we are struggling all the time to objectify that Self. And 
out of that struggle has come this phenomenal universe 
and what we call matter, and so on. But these are very 
weak attempts, and the highest objectification of the Self 
possible to us is the Personal God. This objectification is 
an attempt to reveal our own nature. According to the 
Sankhya, Nature is showing all these experiences to the 
.soul, and when it has got real experience it will know its 
own nature. According to the Advaita Vedantist, the soul 
is struggling to reveal itself. After long struggle, it finds 
that the subject must always remain the subject and then 
begins non-attachment, and it becomes free. 

When a man has reached that perfect state, he is of 
the same nature as the Personal God. “I and my Father 
are one.” He knows that he is one with Brahman, the 
Absolute, and projects himself as the Personal God does. 
He plays—as even the mightiest of kings may sometimes 
play with dolls. 

Some imaginations help to break the bondage of the 
rest. The whole universe is imagination, but one set of 


194 


SWAMI VIVEKANANDA'S WORKS 


imaginations will cure another set. Those that tell us that 
there is sin and sorrow* and death in the world are terrible. 
But the other set—thou art holy, there is God, there is no 
pain—these are good, and help to break the bondage of 
the others. Ihe highest imagination that can break all 
the links of the chain is that of the Personal God. 

To go and say, “Lord, take care of this thing and 
give me that ; Lord, I give you my little prayer and you 
give me this thing of daily necessity ; Lord, cure my 
headache, and all that”—these are not Bhakti. 1 hey are 
the lowest states of religion. They are the lowest form 
o? Karma. If a man uses all his mental energy in seeking 
to satisfy his body and its wants, show me the di(fer>ence 
between him and an animal. Bhakti is a higher thing, 
higher than even desiring heaven. The idea of heaven 
is of a place of intensified enjoyment. I low can that be 
God ? 

Only the fools rush after sense enjoyments. It is easy 
to live in the senses. It is easier to run in the old groove, 
eating and drinking ; but what these modern philosophers 
want to tell you is to take these comfortable ideas and put 
the stamp of religion on them. Such a doctrine is danger¬ 
ous. Death lies in the senses. Life on the plane of the 
Spirit is the only life, life on any other plane is mere death; 
the whole of this life can be only described as a gym¬ 
nasium. We must go beyond it to enjoy real life. 

As long as Touch-me-not-ism is your creed and the 
kitchen-pot your deity, you cannot rise spiritually. All 
the petty differences between religion and religion are 
mere word-struggles, nonsense. Everyone thinks, “This 
is my original idea,” and wants to have things his own 
way. 1 hat is how struggles come. 

In criticising another, we always foolishly take one 
especially brilliant point as the whole of our life and 
compare that with the dark ones in the life of another. 
Thus we make mistakes in judging individuals. 


NOTES FROM LECTURES & DISCOURSES 195 


Through fanaticism and bigotry a religion can be 
propagated very quickly, no doubt, but the preaching of 
that religion is firm-based on solid ground, which gives 
everyone liberty to his opinions and thus uplifts him to a 
higher path, though this process is slow. 

First deluge the land (India) with spiritual ideas, then 
other ideas will follow. 1 he gift of spirituality and 
spiritual knowledge is the highest, for it saves from many 
and many a birth ; the next gift is secular knowledge as it 
opens the eyes of human beings towards that spiritual 
knowledge ; the next is the saving of life, and the fourth 
is the gift of food. 

Even if the body goes in practising Sadhanas (auster¬ 
ities for realisation), let it go ; what oi that? Realisation 
will come in the fulness of time, by living constantly in the 
company of Sadhus. A time comes when one under¬ 
stands that to serve a man even by preparing a chhilam 
of tobacco is far greater than millions of meditations. 
Me who can properly prepare a chhilam of tobacco can 
also properly meditate. 

Gods are nothing but highly developed dead men. 
We can get help from them. 

Anyone and everyone cannot be an Acharya (teacher 
of mankind), but many may become Mukta (liberated). 
The whole world seems like a dream to the liberated but 
the Acharya has to take up his stand between the two 
states. He must have the knowledge that the world is 
true, or else why should he teach? Again, if he has not 
realised the world as a dream, then he is no better than 
an ordinary man, and what could he teach? The Guru 
has to bear the disciple’s burden of sin ; and that is the 
reason why diseases and other ailments appear even in 
the bodies of powerful Acharyas. But if he be imperfect, 
they attack his mind also, and he falls. So it is a difficult 
thing to be an Acharya. 


196 


SWAMI VIVEKANANDA^S WORKS 


It is easier to become a Jivanmukta (free in this 
very life) than to be an Acharya. For the former knows 
the world as a dream and has no concern with it : but an 
Acharya knows it as a dream and yet has to remain in it 
and work. It is not possible for everyone to be an 
Acharya. He is an Acharya through whom the Divine 
Power acts. The body in which one becomes anj Acharya 
is very different from that of any other man. There is a 
science for keeping that body in a perfect state. His is 
the most delicate organism, very susceptible, capable of 
feeling intense joy and intense suffering. He is abnormal. 

In every sphere of life we find that it is the person 
within that triumphs, and that personality is the secret 
of all success. 

Nowhere is seen such sublime unfoldment of feeling 
as in Bhagavan Sri Krishna Chaitanya, the Prophet of 
Nadia. 

Sri Rarnakrishna is a force. You should not think that 
his doctrine is this or that. But he is a power, living 
even now in his disciples and working in the world. 

1 saw him growing in his ideas. He is still growing. Sri 
Rarnakrishna was both a Jivanmukta and an Acharya. 


XIV 

ISHVARA AND BRAHMAN 

In reply to a question as to the exact position of 
Ishvara in Vedantic philosophy, the Swami Vivekananda, 
while in Europe, gave the following definition: 

Ishvara is the sum total of individuals, yet He is an 
Individual, as the human body is a unit, of which each 
cell is an individual. Samashti. or collected, equals God ; 


NOTES FROM LECTURES & DISCOURSES 197 


Vyashti, or analysed, equals the Jiva. The existence of 
Ishvara, therefore, depends on that of Jiva, as the body 
on the cell, and vice versa. Thus, Jiva and Ishvara are 
co-existent beings ; when one exists the other must. Also, 
because, except on our earth, in all the higher spheres, 
the amount of good being vast]3' in excess of the amount 
of evil, the sum total (Ishvara) may be said to be all-good. 
Omnipotence and Omniscience are obvious qualities and 
need no argument to prove, from the very fact of tota^>^^ 
Brahman is beyond both these, and is not a conrlilioned 
state ; it is the enly Unit not composed of many units ; the 
principle which runs through all, from a cell to God, 
without which nothing can exist and whatever is real is 
that principle, or Brahman. When I .^nnk 1 am Brahman, 
I alone exist ; so with others. Iherefore, each one is the 
whole of that principle.’* 


XV 

ON JNANA-YOGA 

All souls are playing, some consciously, some un¬ 
consciously. Religion is—learning to play consciously. 

The same law which holds good in our worldly life 
also holds good in our religious life and in the life of the 
cosmos. It is one, it is universal. It is not that religion 
is guided by one law and the world by another. The flesh 
and the devil are but degrees of difference from God 
Himself. 

Theologians, philosophers and scientists in the West 
are ransacking everything to get a proof that they live 
afterwards ! What a storm in a tea-cup ! There are much 
higher things to think of. What silly superstition is this, 
that you ever die ! It requires no priests or spirits or 


198 


SWAM! VIVEKANANDA’S WORKS 


ghosts to tell us that we shall not die. It is the most self- 
evident of all truths. No man can imagine his own anni¬ 
hilation. The idea of immortality is inherent in man. 

Wherever there is life, with it there is death. Life is 
the shadow of death, and death, the shadow of life. The 
line of demarcation is too fine to determine, too difficult 
to grasp, and most difficult to hold on to. 

I do nob believe in eternal progress, that we are going 
on ever and ever in a straight line. It is too nonsensical 
to believe. I here is no motion in a straight line. A 
straight line infinitely projected becomes a circle. The 
force sent out will complete the circle and return to its 
starting place. 

I here is no progress in a straight line. Every soul 
moves in a circle, as it were, and will have to complete 
it, and no soul can go so low but that there will come a 
time when it will have to go upwards. It may start straight 
down, but it has to take the upward curve to complete 
the circuit. We are all projected from a common centre, 
which is God, and will come back after completing the 
circuit to the centre from which we started. 

Each soul is a circle. I he centre is where the body 
IS, and the activity is manifested there. You are omni¬ 
present. though you have the consciousness of being 
concentrated in only one point. That point has taken up 
particles of matter and formed them into a machine to 
express Itself. I hat through which it expresses itself is 
called the body. You are everywhere. When one body, 
or machine, fails you, the centre moves on and takes up 
other particles of matter, finer or grosser, and works 
through them. Here is man, and what is—God? God is 
a circle, with* circumference nowhere and centre every¬ 
where. Every point in that circle is living, conscious, 
active and equally working. With our limited souls, only 
one point is conscious, and that point moves forward and 
backward. 


NOTES FROM LECTURES & DISCOURSES 199 


The soul is a circle whose circumference is nowhere 
(limitless), but whose centre is in some body. Death is 
but a change of centre. God is a circle whose circum¬ 
ference is nowhere, and whose centre is everywhere. 
When we can get out of the limited centre of body, v'e 
shall realise God, our true Self. 

A tremendous stream is flowing towards the ocean, 
carrying little bits of paper and straw hither and thither 
on it. They may struggle to go back, but in the long run, 
thej- must flow down to the ocean. So you and 1 and all 
Nature are like these little straws carried in mad currents 
towards that ocean of Life, Perfection and God. We may 
struggle to go back, or float against the current and play 
all sorts of pranks, but in the long ru. we must go and 
join this great ocean of Life and Bliss. 

Jnana (knowledge) is “creedlessness”; but that does 
not mean that it despises creeds. It only means that a 
stage above and beyond creeds has been gained. I he 
Jnani (true philosopher) strives to destroy nothing but to 
help all. All rivers roll their waters into the sea and 
become one. So all creeds should lead to Jnana and 
become one. jnana teaches that the world should be 
renounced but not on that account abandoned. To live 
in the world and be not of it, is the true test of renuncia¬ 
tion. 

I cannot see how it can be otherwise than that all 
knowledge is stored up in us from the beginning. If you 
and I are little waves in the ocean, then that ocean is the 
background. 

There is really no difference between matter, mind, 
and Spirit. They are only different phases of experiencing 
the One. This very world is seen by the five senses as 
matter, by the very wicked as hell, by the good as heaven, 
and by the perfect as God. 

We cannot bring it to sense demonstration that 
Brahman is the only real thing ; but we can point out 


200 SWAM! VIVEKANANDA’S WORKS 

that this is the only conclusion that one can come to. 
For instance, there must be this oneness in everything 
even in common things. There is the human generalisa¬ 
tion, for example. We say that all the variety is created 
by name and form ; yet when we want to grasp and 
separate it, it is nowhere. We can never see name or 
form or causes standing by themselves. So this pheno¬ 
menon is Maya—something which depends on the 
nouinenon and apart from it has no existence. Take a 
wave in the ocean. I hat wave exists so long as that 
quantity of water remains in a wave form ; but as soon as 
it goes down and becomes the ocean, the wave ceases to 
exist. But the whole mass of water docs not depend so 
much on its form. The ocean remains, while the wave 
form becomes absolute zero. 

I he real is one. It is the mind which makes it appear 
as many. When we perceive the diversity, the unity has 
gone ; and as soon as we perceive the unity, the diversity 
has vanished. Just as in everyday life, when you perceive 
the unity, you do not perceive the diversity. At the begin¬ 
ning you start with unity. It is a curious fact that a 
Chinaman will not know the difference in appearance 
betwi'en one American and another ; and you will not 
know the difference between different Chinamen. 

It can be shown that it is the mind v/hich makes 
things knowable. It is oiily things which have ceitain 
peculiarities that bring themselves within the range of the 
known and knowable. That which has no qualities is 
unknowable. For Instance, there is some external world, 
X, unknown and unknowable. When I look at it, it Is X 
plus mind. When I want to know the world, my mind 
contributes three quarters of it. The internal world is 
\ plus mind, and the external world X plus mind. All 
differentiation in either the external or internal world is 
created by the mind, and that which exists is unknown 
and unknowable. It is beyond the range of knowledge. 


NOTES FROM LECTURES & DISCOURSES 201 


and that which is beyond the range of knowledge can 
hsive no differentiation. Therefore this X outside is the 
same as the Y inside, and therefore the real is one. 

God does not reason. Why should you reason if you 
know? It is a sign of weakness that we have to go or. 
crawling like worms to get a few facts, and then the 
whole thing tumbles down again. The Spirit is reflected 
in mind and in everything. It is the light of the Spirit 
that makes the mind sentient. Everything is an expression 
of the Spirit ; the minds are so many mirrors. What you 
call love, fear, hatred, virtue, and vice are all reflections of 
the Spirit. When the reflector is base, the reflection is 
bad. 

The Real Existence is without m . ifestation. We 
cannot conceive It, because we sh(nild have to conceive 
through the mind, which is itself a manifestation. Its glory 
is that It is inconceivable. We must remember that in life 
the lowest and highest vibrations of light we do not see, 
but they are the opposite poles of existence. There are 
certain things which we do not know now, but which we 
can know. It is due to our ignorance that we do not 
know them. I here are certain things which we can never 
know, because they are much higher than the highest 
vibrations of knowledge. But we are the Eternal all the 
time, although we cannot know it. Knowledge will be 
impossible there. 1 he very fact of the limitations of the 
conception is the basis for its existence. For instance, 
there is nothing so certain in me as my self ; and yet I can 
only conceive of it as a body and mind, as happy or un¬ 
happy, as a man or a woman. At the same time, I try to 
conceive of it as it really is and find that there is no other 
way of doing it but by dragging it down ; yet I am sure of 
that reality. “No one, O beloved, loves the husband for 
the husband’s sake, but because the Self is there. It is in 
and through the Self that she loves the husband. No one, 
O beloved, loves the wife for the wife’s sake, but in and 


202 


SWAMI VIVEKANANDA'S WORKS 


through the Self.” And that Reality is the only thing we 
know, because in and through It we know everything else; 
and yet we cannot conceive of It. How can we know the 
Knower? If wc knew It, It would not be the knower, but 
the knov/n ; It would be objectified. 

1 he man of highest realisation exclaims, ”1 am the 
King of kings ; there is no king higher than 1. I am the 
God of gods ; there is no God higher than 1 [ I alone 
exist. One without a second.” This monistic idea of the 
Vedanta seems to many, of course, very terrible, but that 
is on account of superstition. 

We are the Self, eternally at rest and at peace. We 
must not weep ; there is no weeping for the Soul. We in 
our Imagination think that God is weeping on His throne, 
out of sympathy. Such a God would not be worth attain¬ 
ing. Why should God weep at all? To weep is a sign 
of weakness, of bondage. 

Seek the Highest, always the Highest, for in the 
I lighest is eternal bliss. If I am to hunt, I will hunt the 
lion. If I am to rob. I will rob the treasur}^ of the king. 
Seek the Highest. 

Oh, One that cannot be confined or described ! One 
that can be perceived in our heart of hearts ! One beyond 
all compare, beyond limit, unchangeable like the blue 
sky ! C^b, learn the /\11, holy one ! Seek for nothing else ! 

Where c hanges of Nature cannot reach, thought 
beyond all thoughts, Unchangeable, Immovable ; Whom 
all books declare, all sages worship ; O holy one, seek for 
nothing else ! 

Beyond compare, Infinite Oneness ! No comparison 
is possible. Water above, water below, water on the right, 
water on the left ; no wave on that water, no ripple, all 
silence, all eternal bliss. Such will come to thy heart. 
Seek for nothing else 1 

Why weepest thou, brother? I here is neither death 
nor disease for thee. Why weepest thou, brother? There 


NOTES FROM LECTURES & DISCOURSES 203 

is neither misery nor misfortune for thee. Why weepest 
thou, brother? Neither change nor death was predicated 
of thee. Thou art Existence Absolute. 

1 know what God is—I cannot speak Him to you. 1 
know not what God is —how can 1 speak Him to you ? But 
seest thou not, my brother, that thou art He, thou art 
He? Why go seeking God here and there? Seek not, 
and that is God. Be your own Self? 

Thou art our Father, our Mother, our dear Friend. 
1 hou bearest the burden of the v/orld. Help us to bear 
the burden of our lives. Thou art our Frieiid, our Lover, 
our Husband, Thou art ourselves ! 


XVI 

WHAT IS THE CAUSE OF ILLUSION? 

The question—what is the cause of Maya (illusion)?— 
has been asked for the last three thousand years ; and the 
only answer is: when the world is able to formulate a 
logical question, we shall answer it. The question is con¬ 
tradictory. Our position is that the Absolute has become 
this relative only apparently, that the Unconditioned has 
become the conditioned only in Maya. By the very 
admission of the Unconditioned, we admit that the 
Absolute cannot be acted upon by anything else. It is 
uncaused, which means that nothing outside Itself can act 
upon It. First of all, if It is unconditioned, It cannot have 
been acted upon by anything else. In the Unconditioned 
there cannot be time, space, or causation. That granted, 
your question will be: “What caused that which cannot 
be caused by anything to be changed into this?” Your 
question is only, possible in the conditioned. But you take 
it out of the conditioned, and want to ask it in the Uncon- 


204 SWAMl VIVEKANANDA'S WORKS 

ditioned. Only when the Unconditioned becomes condi¬ 
tioned, and space, time, and causation come in, can the 
question be asked. V^e' can only say ignorance makes the 
illusion. The question is impossible. Nothing can have 
worked on the Absolute. There was no cause. Not that 
we do not know, or that we are ignorant ; but It is above 
knowledge, and cannot be brought down to the plane of 
knowledge. We can use the words, “I do not know” in 
two senses. In one way. they mean that we are lower than 
knowledge, and in the other way, that the thing is above 
knowledge. The X-rays have become known now. The 
very causes of these are disputed, but we are sure that we 
shall know them. Here we can say we do not know about 
the X-rays. But about the Absolute we cannot know. In 
the case of the X-rays we do not know, although they are 
within the range of knowledge ; only we do not know them 
yet. But, in the other case. It is so much beyond know¬ 
ledge that It ceases to be a matter of knowing. “By what 
means can the Knowei^ be known?” You are always your¬ 
self and cannot objectify yourself. This was one of the 
arguments used by our philosophers to prove immortality. 

If I try to think 1 am lying dead, what have I to imagine? 

I hat 1 am standing and looking down at myself, at some 
dead body. So that 1 cannot objectify myself. 


XVII 

EVOLUTION ^ 

In the matter of the projection of Akasha and Prana 
into manifested form and the return to fine state, there is 

1 Some of the topics which precede and those which follow are 
taken from the answers given by the Swami to questions at afternoon 
talks witii Harvard students on March 22 and 24, 1S96. There have 
also been added notes and selections from unpublished lectures and 
discourses. 


NOTES FROM LECTURES & DISCOURSES 205 


a good deal of similarity between Indian thought and 
modern science. The moderns have their evolution, and 
so have the Yogis. But 1 think that' the Yogis explanation 
of evolution is the better one. The change of one species 
into another is attained by the infilling of nature.” The 
basic idea is that we are changing from one species to 
another, and that man is the highest species. Patanjali 
explains this “infilling of nature” by the simile of peasants 
irrigating fields. Our education and progression simply 
mean taking away the obstacles, and by its own nature 
the divinity will ni.mifest itself. I his does a’,/ay with all 
the struggle for existence. The miserable experiences of 
life are simply in the way, and can be eliminat(‘ci entirely. 
They are not necessary for evolution. *_./en if they did 
not exist, we should progress. It is in the very nature 
of things to manifest themselves. The momentum is not 
from outside, but comes from inside. Each soul is the 
sum total of the universal experiences already coiled up 
there ; and of all these experiences, only those will come 
out which find suitable circum.stances. 

So the external things can only give us the environ¬ 
ments. These competitions and struggles and evils that 
we see are not the effect of the involution or the cause, 
but they are in the way. If they did not exist, still man 
would go on and evolve as God, because it is the very 
nature of that God to come out and manifest Himself. T o 
my mind this seems very hopeful, instead of that horrible 
idea of competition. 1 he more 1 study history, the more 
I find that idea to be wrong. Some say that if man did 
not fight with man, he would not progress. 1 also used to 
think so ; but 1 find now that every war has thrown back 
human progress by fifty years instead of hurrying it 
forwards. The day will come when men will study history 
from a different light and find that competition is neither 
the cause nor the effect, simply a thing on the way, not 
necessary to evolution at all. 

V--14 


206 


SWA MI VIVEKANANDA^S WORKS 


The theory of Patanjali is the only theory 1 think a 
rational man can accept. How much evil the modern 
system causes ! Every wicked man has a license to be 
wicked under it. I have seen in this country (America) 
physicists who say that all criminals ought to be extermin¬ 
ated and that that is the only way in which criminality 
can be eliminated from society. These environments can 
hinder, but they are not necessary to progress. The most 
horrible thing about competition is that one may 
conquer the environments, but that where one may 
conquer, thousands are crowded out. So it is evil at best. 
That cannot be good which helps only one and hinders 
the majority. Patanjali says that these struggles remain 
only through our ignorance, and are not necessary, and are 
not part of the evolution of man. It is just our impatience 
which creates them. We have not the patience to go and 
work our way out. For instance, there is a fire in a theatre, 
and only a few escape. The rest in trying to rush out crush 
one another down. 1 hat crush was not necessary for the 
salvation of the building nor of the two or three who 
escaped. If all had gone out slowly, not one would have 
been hurt. 1 hat is the case in life. The doors are open 
for us. and we can all get out without the competition 
and struggle ; and yet we struggle. The struggle we create 
through our own ignorance, through impatience ; we are 
in too great a hurry. The highest manifestation of 
strength is to keep ourselves calm and on our own feet. 


xvm 

BUDDHISM AND VEDANTA 

T he Wdanta philosophy is the foundation of Buddhism 
and everything else in India; but what we call the Advaita 
philosophy of the modern school has a great many conclu¬ 
sions of the Buddhists. Of course, the Hindus will not 


NOTES FROM LECTURES & ^DISCOURSES 207 


admit that—that is the orthodox Hindus, because to them 
the Buddhists are heretics. But there is a conscious attempt 
to stretch out the whole dootrine;to include the heretics also. 

I he Vedanta has no quarrel with Buddhism. The 
idea of the Vedanta is to harmonise all. With the 
Northern Buddhists we have no quarrel at all. But the 
Burmese and Siamese and all the Southern Buddhists say 
that there is a phenomenal world, and ask what right we 
have to create a noumenal world behind this. The answer 
of the Vedanta is that this is a false statement. The 
Vedanta never contended that there is a nounnenal and a 
phenomenal world. There is one. Seen through the 
senses it is phenomenal, but it is really the noumenal all 
the time. The man who sees the rope does not see the 
snake. It is either the rope or the snake, but never the 
two. So the Buddhistic statement of our position, that 
we believe there are two worlds, is entirely false. They 
have the right to say it is the phenomenal if they like, but 
no right to contend that other men have not the right to 
say it is the noumenal. 

Buddhism does not want to have anything except 
phenomena. In phenomena alone is desire. It is desire 
that is creating all this. Modern Vedantists do not hold 
this at all. We say there is something which has become 
the will. Will is a manufactured something, a compound, 
not a “simple.** There cannot be any will without an 
external object. We see that the very position that will 
created this universe is impossible. How could it? Have 
you ever known will without external stimulus? Desire 
cannot arise without stimulus, or, in modern philosophic 
language, of nerve stimulus. Will is a sort of reaction of 
the brain, what the Sankhya philosophers call Buddhi. 
This reaction must be preceded by action, and action 
presupposes an external universe. When there is no 
external universe,- naturally there will be no will ; and yet, 
according to your theory, it is will that created the 


208 


SIVA MI V/VEKANANDA^S IVOFKS 


universe. Who creates the will? Will is co-existent with 
the universe. Will is one phenomenon caused by the same 
impulse which created the universe. But philosophy must 
not stop there. Will is entirely personal ; therefore we 
cannot go with Schopenhauer at all. Will is a compound 
—a mixture of the internal and the external. Suppose a 
man were born without any senses, he would have no will 
at all. Will requires something from outside, and the brain 
will get some energy from inside ; therefore will is a com¬ 
pound, as much a compound as the wall or anything else. 
We do not agree with the will-theory of these German 
philosophers at all. Will itself is phenomenal, and cannot 
be the Absolute. It is one of the many projections. There 
is something which is not will, but is manifesting itself as 
will. 1 hat 1 can understand. But that will is manifesting 
itself as everything else, 1 do not understand, seeing that 
we cannot have any conception of will, as separate from 
the universe. When that something which is freedom 
becomes will, it is caused by time, space, and causation, 
lake Kant’s analysis. Will is within time, space, and 
causation. 1 hen how can it be the Absolute? One can¬ 
not will without willing in time. 

If we can stop all thought, then we know that we are 
beyond thought. We come to this by negation. When 
every phenomenon has been negatived, whatever remains, 
that is It. 1 hat cannot be expressed, cannot be manifested, 
because the manifestation will be, again, will. 


XIX 

ON THE VED.^NTA PHILOSOPHY 

1 he \ edantist says that a man is neither born nor dies 
nor goes to heaven, and that reincarnation is really a myth 
with regard to the soul. The example is given of a book 


NOTES FROM LECTURES & DISCOURSES 209 


being turned over. It is the book that evolves, not the 
man. Every soul is omnipresent, so where can it come 
or go? These births and deaths are changes in Nature 
which we are mistaking for changes in us. 

Reincarnation is the evolution of Nature and the 
manifestation of the God within. 

The Vedanta says that each life is built upon the past, 
and that when we can look back over the whole past we 
are free. The desire to be free will take the form of a 
religious disposition from childhood. A few years will, 
as it were, make all truth clear to one. Afte»' leaving this 
life, and while waiting for the next, a man is still in the 
phenomenal. 

We would describe the soul in these words: This soul 
the sword cannot cut, nor the spear pierce ; the fire can¬ 
not burn nor water melt it : indestructible, omnipfesent 
is this soul. Therefore weep not for it. 

If it has been very bad, we believe that it will? become 
good in the time to come. T he fundamental principle is 
lhat there is eternal freedom for every one. Every one 
must come to it. We have to struggle, impelled by our 
desire to be free. Every other desire but that to be free 
is illusive. Every good action, the Vedantist says, is a 
manifestation of that freedom. 

I do not believe that there will come a time when all 
the evil in the world will vanish. How could that be? 
This stream goes on. Masses of water go out at one end, 
but masses are coming in at the other end. 

The Vedanta says that you are pure and perfect, and 
that there is a state beyond good and evil, and that is 
your own nature. It is higher even than good. Good is 
only a lesser differentiation than evil. 

We have no theory of evil. We call it ignorance. 

So far as it goes, all dealing with other people, all 
ethics, is in the phenomenal world. As a most complete 
statement of truth, we would not think of applying such 


210 


SWAMI VIVEKANANDA'S WORKS 


things as ignorance to God. Of Him we say that He is 
Existence, Knowledge, and Bliss Absolute. Every effort 
of thought and speech will make the Absolute phenom¬ 
enal and break Its character. 

There is one thing to be remembered: that the asser¬ 
tion—1 am God—cannot be made with regard to the sense- 
world. If you say in the sense-world that you are God, 
what is to prevent your doing wrong? So the affirmation 
of your divinity applies only to the noumenal. If I am 
God, 1 am beyond the tendencies of the senses, and will 
not do evil. Morality of course is not the goal of man, 
but the means through which this freedom is attained. 
Ihe Vedanta says that Yoga is one way that makes men 
realise this divinity. 1 he Vedanta says this is done by 
the realisation of the freedom within and that everything 
will give way to that. Morality and ethics will all range 
themselves in their proper places. 

All the criticism against the Advaita philosophy can 
be summed up in this:—that it does not conduce to sense 
enjoyments ; and we are glad to admit that. 

I he Vedanta system begins with tremendous pessimism, 
and ends with real optimism. We deny the sense optimism 
but assert the real optimism of the Supersensuous. That 
real happiness is not in the senses but above the senses ; 
and it is in every man. The sort of optimism which we 
see in the world is what will lead to ruin through the 
senses. 

Abnegation has the greatest importance in our 
philosophy. Negation implies affirmation of the Real 
Self. The Vedanta is pessimistic so far as it negatives 
the world of the senses, but it is optimistic in its assertion 
of the real world. 

The Vedanta recognises the reasoning power of man 
a good deal, although it says there is something higher than 
intellect ; but the road lies through intellect. 


NOTES FROM LECTURES & DISCOURSES 211 


We need reason to drive out all the old superstitions ; 
and what remains is Vedantism. There is a beautiful 
Sanskrit poem in which the sage says to himself : Why 
weepest thou, my friend? There is no fear nor death for 
thee. Why weepest thou? There is no misery for thee, 
for thou art like the infinite blue sky, unchangeable in thy 
nature. Clouds of all colours come before it, play for a 
moment, and pass away ; it is the same sky. Thou hast 
only to drive away the clouds. 

We have to open the gates and clear the way. The 
water will rush in and fill in by its own nature, because 
it is there already. 

Man is a good deal conscious, partly unconscious, and 
there is a possibility of getting beyond jnsciousness. It 
is only when we become men that we can go beyond all 
reason. The words higher or lower can be used only in 
the phenomenal world, lo say them of the noumenal 
world is simply contradictory, because there is no differ¬ 
entiation there. Man-rnanifestation is the highest in 
the phenomenal world. The V^edantist says he is higher 
than the Devas. The gods will all have to die and will 
become men again, and in the man-body alone they will 
become perfect. ' 

It is true that we create a system, but we have to 
admit that it is not perfect, because the reality must be 
beyond all systems. We are ready to compare it with 
other systems and are ready to show that this is the only 
rational system that can be ; but it is not perfect, because 
reason is not perfect. It is, however, the only possible 
rational system that the human mind can conceive. 

It is true to a certain extent that a system must dis¬ 
seminate itself to be strong. No system has disseminated 
itself so much as the Vedanta. It is the personal contact 
that teaches even now. A mass of reading does not make 
men ; those who were real men were made so by personal 
contact. It is true that there are very few of these real 


212 


SWAMI VIVEKANANDA'S WORKS 


men, but they will increase. Yet you cannot believe that 
there will come a day when we shall all be philosophers. 
We do not believe that there will come a time when there 
will be all happiness and no unhappiness. 

Now and then we know a moment of supreme bliss, 
when we ask nothing, give nothing, know nothing but 
bliss. Then it passes, and we again see the panorama of 
the universe moving before us ; and we know that it is 
but a mosaic work set upon God, who is the background 
of all things. 

The Vedanta teaches that Nirvana can be attained 
here and now, that we do not have to wait for death to 
reach it. Nirvana is the realisation of the Self ; and after 
having once known that, if only for an instant, never 
again can one be deluded by the mirage of personality. 
Having eyes, we must see the apparent, but all the time 
we know what it is ; we have found out its true nature. It 
is the screen that hides the Self, which is unchanging. 
The screen opens, and we find the Self behind it. All 
change is in the screen. In the saint the screen is thin, 
and the reality can almost shine through. In the sinner 
the screen is thick, ar^d we are liable to lose sight of the 
truth that the Atman there, as well as behind the saint’s 
screen. When the screen is wholly removed, we find it 
really never existed—that we were the Atman and 
nothing else, even the screen is forgotten. 

The two phases of this distinction in life are—first, 
that the man who knows the real Self, will not be affected 
by anything ; secondly, that that man alone can do good 
to the world. 1 hat man alone will have seen the real 
motive of doing good to others, because there is only one, 
it cannot be called egoistic, because that would be 
differentiation. It is the only selflessness. It is the per¬ 
ception of the universal, not of the individual. Every case 
of love and sympathy is an assertion of this universal. 

‘Not 1, but thou.” Help another because you are in him 


NOTES FROM LECTURES & PISCOURSES 213 


and he is in you is the philosophical way of putting it. The 
real Vedantist alone will give up his life for a fellow-man 
without any compunction, because he knows he will not 
die. As long as there is one insect left in the world, he is 
living ; as long as one mouth eats, he eats. So he goes 
on doing good to others ; and is never hindered by the 
modern ideas of caring for the body. When a man reaches 
this point of abnegation, he goes beyond the moral 
struggle, beyond everything. He sees in the most learned 
priest, in the cow, in the dog, in the most miserable place.s, 
neither the learned man, nor the cow, nor the dog, nor the 
miserable place, but the same divinity manifesting itsi lf in 
them all. He alone is the happy man; and the man who 
has acquired that sameness has, even m this life, con¬ 
quered all existence. God is pure; therefore such a man 
is said to be living in God. Jesus says, “Before Abraham 
was, I am.” That means that Jesus and others like him are 
free spirits; and Jesus of Nazareth took human form, not 
by the compulsion of his past actions, but just to do good 
to mankind. It is not that when a man becomes free, he 
will stop and become a dead lump; but he will be more 
active than any other being, because every other being 
acts onl}^ under compulsion, he alone through freedom. 

If we are inseparable from God, have we no individu¬ 
ality ? Oh, yes: that is God. Our Individuality is God. 
This is not the individuality you have now ; you are 
coming towards that. Individuality means what cannot 
be divided. How can you call this individuality? One 
hour you are thinking one way, and the next hour another 
way, and two hours after, another way. Individuality is 
that which changes not—is beyond all things, changeless. 
It would be tremendously dangerous for this state to 
remain in eternity, because then the thief would always 
remain a thief and the blackguard a blackguard. If a 
baby died, he would have to remain a baby. The real 


214 


SWAM! VIVEKANANDA'S WORKS 


individuality is that which never changes and will never 
change ; and that is the God within us. 

Vedantism is an expansive ocean on the surface of 
which a man-of-war could be near a catamaran. So in 
the Vedantic ocean a real Yogi can be by the side of an 
idolater or even an atheist. What is more, in the Vedantic 
ocean, the Hindu, Mohammedan, Christian or Parsi are 
all one, all children of the Almighty God. 


XX 

rilF. LAW AND FREEDOM 

1 he struggle never had meaning for the man who is 
free. But for us it has a meaning, because iti is name-and- 
form that creates the world. 

We have a place for struggle in the Vedanta but not 
for fear. All fears will vanish when you begin to assert 
your own nature. If you think that you are bound, bound 
you will remain. If you think you are free, free you 
will be. 

1 hat sort of freedom which we can feel when we are 
yet in the phenomenal is a glimpse of the real but not 
}'et the real. 

1 disagree with the idea that freedom is obedience to 
the laws of nature. I do not understand what it means. 
According to the history of human progress, it is dis¬ 
obedience to nature that has constituted that progress. It 
may be said that the conquest of lower laws was through 
the higher. But even there, the conquering mind was only 
trying to be free ; and as soon as it found that the struggle 
was also through law, it wanted to conquer that also. So 
the ideal was freedom in every case. The trees never 
disobey law. 1 never saw a cow steal. An oyster never 


NOTES FROM LECTURES & DISCOURSES 215 


told a lie. Yet they are not greater than man. This life 
is a tremendous assertion of freedom ; and this obedience 
to law, carried far enough, would make us simply matter, 
—either in society, or in politics, or religion. Too many 
laws are a sure sign of death. Wherever in any society 
there are too many laws, it is a sure sign that that society 
will soon die. If you study the characteristics of India, 
you will find that no nation possesses so many laws as the 
Hindus, and national death is the result. But the Hindus 
had one peculiar idea—they never made any doctrines or 
dogmas in religion ; and the latter has had the greatest 
growth. Eternal law cannot be freedom, because to say 
that the eternal is inside law is to limit it. 

There is no purpose in view with aod, because if 
there were some purpose, He wouM be nothing better 
than a man. Why should He need any purpose? If He 
had any, He would be bound by it. There would be 
something besides Him which was greater. For instance, 
the carpet-weaver makes a piece of carpet. The idea was 
outside of him, something greater. Now where is the idea 
to which God would adjust Himself? Just as the greatest 
emperors sometimes play with dolls, so He is playing with 
this nature ; and what we call laW; is this. We call it law, 
because we can see only little bits which run smoothly. 
All our ideas of law are within the little bit. It is nonsense 
to say that law is infinite, that throughout all time stones 
will fall. If all reason be based upon experience, who 
was there to see if stones fell five millions of years ago? 
So law is not constitutional in man. It is a scientific 
assertion as to man that where we begin, there we end. 
As a matter of fact, we get gradually outside of law,'until 
we get out altogether, but with the added experience of a 
whole life. In God and freedom we began, and freedom 
and God will be the end. These laws are in the middle 
state through which we have to pass. Our Vedanta is the 
assertion of freedom always. The very idea of law will 


216 


SWAMI VIVEKANANDA^S WORKS 


frighten the Vedantist ; and eternal law is a very dreadful 
thing for him, because there would be no escape. If there 
is to be an eternal law binding him all the time, where is 
the difference between him and a blade of grass? We do 
not believe in that abstract idea of law. 

We say that it is freedom that we are to seek, and 
that that freedom is God. It is the same happiness as in 
everything else ; but when man seeks it in something which 
Is finite, he gets only a spark of it. I he thief when he 
steals gets the same happiness as the man who finds it in 
God ; but the thief gets only a little spark, with a mass of 
misery. 1 he real happiness is God. l.ove is God, free¬ 
dom is God ; and everything that is bondage is not God. 

Man has freedom already, but he will have to discover 
it. lie has it, but every moment forgets it. That dis¬ 
covering, consciously or unconsciously, is the whole life 
of every one. Rut the difference between the sage and 
the ignorant man is that one does it consciously and the 
other unconsciously. F.very one is struggling for freedom 
—from the atom to the star. The ignorant man is satisfied 
if he can get freedom within a certain limit—if he can 
get rid of the bondage of hunger or of being thirsty. But 
the sage feels that there is a stronger bondage which has 
to be thrown off. He would not consider the freedom 
of the Red Indian as freedom at all. 

According to our p^hilosophers, freedom is the goal. 
Knowledge cannot be the goal, because knowledge is a 
compound. It is a compound of power and freedom, and 
it is freedom alone that is desirable. That is what men 
struggle after. Simply the possession of power would not 
be knowledge. For instance, a scientist can send an electric 
shock to a distance of some miles ; but nature can send 
it to an unlimited distance. Why do we not build statues 
to Nature then ? It is not law that we want but ability to 
break law. We want to be outlaws. If you are bound 
by laws, you will be a lump of clay. Whether you are 


NOTES FROM LECTURES & DISCOURSES 217 


beyond law or not is not the question ; but the thought 
that we are beyond law—upon that is based the whole 
history of humanity. For instance, a man lives in a forest, 
and never has had any education or knowledge. He sees 
a stone falling down—a natural phenomenon happening 
—and he thinks it is freedom. He thinks it has a soul, 
and the central idea in that is freedom. But as soon as 
he knows that it must fall, he calls it nature—dead, 
mechanical action. I may or may not go into the street. 
In that is my glory as a man. If 1 am sure th^t 1 must 
go there, 1 give myself up and become a machine. Nature 
with its infinite power is only a machine ; freedom alone 
constitutes sentient life. 

The Vedanta says that the idea the man in the 
•forest is the right one ; his glimpse is right, but the 
explanation is wrong. He holds to this nature as freedom 
and not as governed by law. Only after all this human 
experience we will come back to think the same, but in a 
more philosophical sense. For instance, 1 want to go out 
into the street. 1 get the impulse of my will, and then 
1 stop ; and in the time that intervenes between the will 
and going into the street, I am working uniformly. Uni¬ 
formity of action is what we call law. This uniformity of 
my actions, 1 find, is broken into very short periods, and 
so 1 do not call my actions under law. 1 work through 
freedom. 1 walk for five minutes ; but before those five 
minutes of walking, which are uniform, there was the 
action of the will, which gave the impulse to walk. There¬ 
fore man says he is free, because all his actions can be 
cut up into small periods ; and although there is sameness 
in the small periods, beyond the period there is not the 
same sameness. In this perception of non-uniformity is 
the idea of freedom. In nature we see only very large 
periods of uniformity ; but the beginning and end must be 
free impulses. The impulse of freedom was given just at 
the beginning, and that has rolled on ; out this, compared 


218 


SWAMI VIVEKANANDA’S WORKS 


with our periods, is much longer. We find by analysis 
on philosophic grounds that we are not free. But there 
will remain this factor, this consciousness that 1 am free. 
What we have to explain is, how that comes. We will 
find that we have these two impulsions in us. Our reason 
tells us that all our actions are caused, and at the same 
time, with every impulse we are asserting our freedom. 

1 he solution of the Vedanta is that there is freedom inside 
—that the soul is really free—but that that soul’s actions 
are percolating through body and mind, which are not free. 

As soon as we react, we become slaves. A man 
blames me, and 1 immediately react in the form of anger. 
A little vibration which he created made me a slave. So 
we have to demonstrate our freedom. They alone are the 
sages who see in the highest, most learned man, or the* 
lowest animal, or the worst and most wicked of mankind, 
neither a man nor a sage nor an animal, but the same 
God in all of them. Even in this life they have conquered 
relativity, and have taken a firm stand upon this equality. 
God is pure, the same to all. 1 herefore such a sage would 
be a living God. This is the goal towards which we are 
going ; and every form of worship, every action of man¬ 
kind, is a method of attaining to it. The man who wants 
money is striving for freedom—to get rid of the bondage 
of poverty. Every action of man is worship, because the 
idea is to attain to freedom, and all action, directly or 
indirectly, tends to that. Only, those actions that deter 
arc to be avoided. 1 he whole universe is worshipping, 
consciously or unconsciously ; only it does not know that, 
even while it is cursing, it is in another form worshipping 
the same God it is cursing, because those who are cursing 
are also struggling for freedom. They never think that 
in reacting from a thing they are making themselves slaves 
to it. !t is hard to kick against the pricks. 

If we could get rid of the belief in our limitations, it 
would be possible for us to do everything just now. It is 


NOTES FROM LECTUR£S & DISCOURSES 219 


only a question of time. If that is so, add power, and so 
diminish time. Remember the case of the professor who 
learned the secret of the development of marble and who 
made marble in twelve years, while it took nature 
centuries. 


XXI 

THE GOAL AND METHODS OF REALISATION 

The greatest misfortune to befall the world would be 
if all mankind were to recognise and accept but one 
religion, one universal form of worship, one standard of 
morality. This would be the death-blo’. to all religious 
and spiritual progress. Instead of trying to hasten this 
disastrous event by inducing persons, through good or 
evil methods, to conform to our own highest ideal of truth, 
we ought rather to endeavour to remove all obstacles 
which prevent men from developing in accordance with 
tneir own highest ideals, and thus make their attempt vain 
to establish one universal religion. 

The ultimate goal of all mankind, the aim and end 

of all religions, is but one-re-union with God, or, what 

amounts to the same, with the divinity which is every 
man’s true nature. But while the aim is one, the method 
of attaining may vary with the different temperaments of 
men. 

Both the goal and the methods employed for reaching 
it are called Yoga, a word derived from the same Sanskrit 
root as the English “yoke,” meaning “to join,” to join 
us to our reality, God. There are various such Yoga's, or 
methods of union—but the chief ones are—Karma-Yoga, 
Bhakti-Yoga, Raja-Yoga, and Jnana-Yoga. 

Every man must^ develop according to his own nature. 
As every science has its methods, so has every religion. 
The methods of attaining the end of religion are called 


220 


SWAMl VIVEKANANDA^S WORKS 


Yoga by us, and the different forms of Yoga that we teach, 
are adapted to the different natures and temperaments 
of men. We classify them in the following way, under 
four heads:— 

(1) Karma-Yoga—-1 he manner in which a man realises 
his own divinity through works and duty. 

(2) Bhakti-Yoga—I he realisation of the divinity 
through devotion to, and love of, a Personal God. 

(3) Raja-^'oga—The realisation of the divinity through 
the control of rnlnd. 

(4) Jnana-\ oga—1 he realisation of a man’s own 
divinity through knowledge. 

I hese are all different roads leading to the same 
centre—God. Indeed, the varieties of religious belief are 
an advantage, since all faiths are good, so far as they 
encourage man to lead a religious life. The more sects 
there are, the more opportunities there are for making 
successful appeals to the divine instinct in all men. 

Speaking of the world-wide unity, before the Oak 
Beach Christian Unity, Swami Vlvekananda said: — 

All religions are, at the bottom, alike. This is so, 
although the ( hristian Church, like the Pharisee in the 
parable, thanks Caod that it alone is right and thinks that 
all otht'r rv'liglons arc wrong and in need of Christian light. 
Clirislianit}^ must become tolerant before the world will 
be willing to unite with the Christian Church in a common 
charity. God has not left Himself without a witness in 
any heart, and men, especially men who follow Jesus 
Christ, should be willing to admit this. In fact, Jesus 
Christ was willing to admit every good man to the family 
of God. It is not the man who believes a certain some¬ 
thing, but the man who does the will of the Father in 
heaven, who is right. On this basis—being right and 
doing right—the wTole world can unite. 


QUESTIONS AND ANSWERS 


QUESTIONS AND ANSWERS 


DISCUSSION' 

Q.—I should like to know something about the present 
activity of philosophic thought in India. To what extent 
are these questions discussed? 

A .—As I havp said, the majority of the Indian people 
are practically dualists, and the minority are monists. 
The main subject of discussion is Maya and Jiva. When 
I came to this country, I found that the labourers were 
informed of the present condition of politics ; but when 
I asked them—what is religion, and what are the doctrines 
of this and that particular sect, they said: “We do not 
know ; we go to church.” In India if I go to a peasant 
and ask him, “Who governs you?” he says, “I do not 
know ; I pay my taxes.” But if I ask him what is his 
religion, he says, “1 am a dualist,” and is ready to give 
you the details about Maya and Jiva. Me cannot read or 
write, but he has learned all this from the monks and is 
very fond of discussing it. After the day’s work, the 
peasants sit under a tree and discuss these questions. 

Q.—What does orthodoxy mean with the Hindus? 

A .—In modern times it simply means obeying certain 
caste laws as to eating, drinking, and marriage. After 
that the Hindu can believe in any system he likes. There 
was never an organised church in India ; so there was 
never a body of men to formulate doctrines of orthodoxy. 
In a general way, we say that those who believe in the 
Vedas are orthodox ; but in reality we find that many of 

^ This discussion followed the lecture on the Vedanta Philosophy 
delivered by the Swami at the Graduate Philosophical Society of 
Harvard University, U. S. A., March 25, 1896 See Vol. I. 


222 


SWAMI VIVEKANANDA^S WORKS 


the dualistic sects believe more in the Puranas than in the 
Vedas alone. 

Q.—What influence had your Hindu philosophy on 
the Stoic philosophy of the Greeks? 

A .—It is very probable that it had some influence on 
it through the Alexandrians. There is some suspicion of 
Pythagoras’ being influenced by the Sankhya thought. 
Anyway, we think the Sankhya philosophy is the first 
attempt to harmonise the philosophy of the Vedas through 
reason. We find Kapila mentioned even in the \ edas— 
I — ’He who (supports through know¬ 
ledge) the first-born sage Kapila.” 

Q.—What is the antagonism of this thought with 
Western science? 

A .—No antagonism at all. We are in harmony with 
it. Our theory of evolution and of Akasha and Prana is 
exactly what your modern philosophies have. Your belief 
in evolution is among our Yogis and in the Sankhya 
philosophy. For instance, Patanjali speaks of one species 
being changed into another by the infilling of nature— 

only he differs from you in the 
explanation. His explanation of this evolution is spiritual. 
He says that just as when a farmer wants to water his 
field from the canals that pciss near, he has only to lift up 
his gate - 

so each man is the Infinite already, only these bars and 
bolts and difleient circumstances shut him in, but as soon 
as they are removed, he rushes out and expresses himself. 
In the animal, the man was held in abeyance ; but as soon 
as good circumstances came, he was manifested as man. 
And again, as soon as fitting circumstances came, the God 
in man manifested itself. So we have very little to quarrel 
with in the new theories. For instance, the theory of the 
Sankhya as to perception is very little different from 
modern physiology. 

Q.—But your method is different? 


QUESTIONS AND ANSWERS 223 

A. —Yes. We claim that concentrating the powers of 
the mind is the only way to knowledge. In external 
science, concentration of mind is—putting it on something 
external; and in internal science, it is—drawing towards 
one’s self. We call this concentration of mind, Yoga. 

Q. —In the state of concentration does the truth of 
these principles become evident? 

.—The Yogis claim a good deal. 1 hey claim that 
by concentration of the mind every truth in the univer.se 
becomes evident to the mind, both external and internal 
truth. 

Q—What does the Advaitist think of cosmology ) 

A .— The Advaitist would say that all this cosmology 
and everything else are only in Maya, ii. the phenomenal 
world. In truth they do not exist. But as long as we are 
bound, we have to see these visions. Within these visions 
things come in a certain regular order. Beyond them 
theie is no law and order, but freedom. 

Q.—Is the Advaita antagonistic to Dualism? 

A .— I he L^panishads not being in a systematised 
form, it was easy for philosophers to take up texts where 
they liked to form a system. The Upanishads had always 
to be taken, else there would be no basis. Yet we find 
all the different schools of thought in the Upanishads. 
Our solution is that the Advaita is not antagonistic to the 
duallstic. We say the latter is only one of three steps. 
Religion always takes three steps. The first is dualism. 
Then man gets to a higher state, partial non-dualism. 
And at last he finds he is one with the universe. There¬ 
fore the three do not contradict but fulfil. 

Q.—Why does Maya, or ignorance, exist? 

A .—‘Why’ cannot be asked beyond the limit of 
cau.sation. It can only be asked within Maya. We say 
we will answer the question when it is logically formulated. 
Before that we have no right to answer. 

Q.—Does the Personal God belong to Maya? 


224 


SWAMI VIVEKANANDA^S WORKS 


A .—Yes ; but the Personal God is the same Absolute 
seen through Maya. That Absolute under the control of 
nature is what is called the human soul ; and that which 
is controlling nature is Ishvara, or the Personal God. If a 
man starts from here to see the sun, he will see at first a 
little sun ; but as he proceeds he will see it bigger and 
bigger, until he reaches the real one. At each stage of 
his progress he was seeing apparently a different sun; yet 
we are sure it was the same sun he was seeing. So all 
these things are but visions of the Absolute, and as such 
they are true. Not one is a false vision, but we can only 
say they were lower stages. 

Q.—What is the special process by which one will 
come to know the Absolute? 

A .—We say there are two processes. One is the 
positive, and the other, the negative. T he positive is that 
through which the whole universe is going—that of love. 
If this circle of love is increased indefinitely, we reach the 
one universal love. I he other is the “Neti,” “Neti” — 
“not this,” ‘‘not this”—stopping every wave in the mind 
which tries to draw it out; and at last the mind dies, as it 
were, and the Real discloses Itself. We call that Samadhi. 
or super-consciousness. 

Q.— 1 hat would be, then, merging the subject in the 
object ! 

A .—Merging the object in the subject, not merg ng 
the subject in the object. Really this world dies, and I 
remain. 1 am the only one that remains. 

Q.—Some of our philosophers in Germany have 
thought that the whole doctrine of Bhakti (Love for the 
Divine) in India was very likely the result of Occidental 
influence. 

A .—I do not take any stock in that—the assumption 
was ephemeral. 1 he Bhakti of India is not like the 
Western Bhakti. The central idea of ours is that there 
is no thought of fear. It is always, love God. There is 


QUESTIONS AND ANSWERS 


225 


no worship through fear, but always through love, from 
beginning to end. In the second place, the assumption 
is quite unnecessary. Bhakti is spoken of in the oldest of 
the Upanishads, which is much older than the Christian 
Bible. The germs of Bhakti are even in the Samhita (the 
Vedic hymns). The word Bhakti is not a Western word. 
It was suggested by the word Shraddha. 

Q.—What is the Indian idea of the Christian faith? 

A .—That it is very good. The Vedanta will take in 
every one. We have a peculiar idea in India. Suppose 
1 had a child. 1 should not teach him any religion; I 
should teach him breathing—the practice of concentrating 
the mind, and just one line of prayer—nrt prayer in your 
sense, but simply something like this, “I meditate on Him 
who is the Creator of this universe: may He enlighten my 
]nind!’' That way he would be educated, and then go 
about hearing different philosophers and teachers. He 
would select one who, he thought, would suit him best ; 
and this man would become his Guru, or teacher, and he 
would become a Shishya, or disciple. He would say to that 
man, I his form of philosophy which you preach is the 
best ; so teach me,” Our fundamental idea is that your 
doctrine cannot be mine, or mine yours. Each one must 
have his own way. My daughter may have one method, and 
my son another, and I, again, another. So each one has an 
Ishta, or chosen way, and we keep it to ourselves. It is 
between me and my teacher, because we do not want to 
create a fight. It will not help any one to tell it to others, 
because each one will have to find his own way. So only 
general philosophy and general methods can be taught 
universally. For instance, giving a ludicrous example, it 
may help me to stand on one leg. It would be ludicrous 
to you if I said every one must do that, but it may suit 
me. It is quite possible for me to be a dualist and for 
my wife to be a monist, and so on. One of my sons may 


226 SWAMI VIVEKANANDA'S WORKS 

worship Christ or Buddha or Mahomed, so long as he 
obeys the caste laws. That is his own Ishta. 

Q.—Do all Hindus believe in caste? 

A ,— They are forced to. They may not believe, but 
they have to obey. 

Q.—Are these exercises in breathing and concentra¬ 
tion universally practised? 

A .—Yes ; only some practise only a little, just to 
satisfy the rc^qulrements of their religion. The temples in 
India are not like the churches here. 1 hey may all vanish 
to-morrow, and will not be missed. A temple is built by 
a man who wants to go to heaven, or to get a son, or 
something of that sort. So he builds a large temple and 
employs a few priests to hold services there. 1 need not 
go there at all, because all my worship is in the home. 
In every house is a special room set apart, which is called 
the chapel. I he first duty of the child, after his initiation, 
is to take a bath, and then to worship ; and his worship 
consists of this breathing and meditating and repeating 
of a certain name. And another thing is to hold the body 
straight. We believe that the mind has every power over 
the body to keep it healthy. After one has done this, then 
another comes and takes his seat, and each one does it in 
silence. Sometimes there are three or four in the same 
room, but each one may have a different method. I his 
worship is repeated at least twice a day. 

Q.— Ihis state of oneness that you speak of, is it an 
ideal or something actually attained? 

/I .—We say it is within actuality ; we say we realise 
that state. If it were only in talk, it would be nothing. 
I he X'edas teach three things ; this Self is first to be heard, 
then to be reasoned, and then to be meditated upon. 
When a man first hears it, he must reason on it, so that 
he does not believe it ignorantly, but knowingly ; and after 
reasoning what it is, he must meditate upon it, and then 


QUESTIONS AND ANSWERS 


227 


realise it. And that is religion. Belief is no part of 
religion. We say religion is a super-conscious state. 

Q.—If you ever reach that state of super-conscious¬ 
ness, can you ever tell about it? 

A ,—No ; but we know it by its fruits. An idiot, 
when he goes to sleep, comes out of sleep an idiot or 
even worse. But another man goes into the state of medi¬ 
tation, and when he comes out he is a philosopher, a 
sage, a great man. I hat shows the difference between, 
these two states. 

Q.—1 should like to ask, in continuation of Professor 

-'s question, whether you know of any people who 

have made any study of the principles of self-hypnotism, 
which they undoubtedly practised to great extent in 
ancient India, and what has been recently stated and 
practised in that thing. Of course you do not have it so 
much in modern India. 

A .—What you call hypnotism in the West is only a 
part of the real thing. 1 he Hindus call it self-hypnotisa- 
tion. They say you are hypnotised already, and that you 
should get out of it and de-hypnotise yourself. “ I here 
the sun cannot illume, nor the moon, nor the stars ; the 
flash of lightning cannot illume that ; what to speak of this 
mortal fire ! That shining, everything else shines. ” 1 hat 

is not hypnotisation, but de-hypnotisation. We say that 
every other religion that preaches these things as real is 
practising a form of hypnotism. It is the Advaitist alone 
that does not care -to be hypnotised. His is the only 
system that more or less understands that hypnotism comes 
with every form of dualism. But the Advaitist says, throw 
away even the Vedas, throw away even the Personal God, 
throw away even the universe, throw away even your own 
body and mind, and let nothing remain, in order to get 
rid of hypnotism perfectly. “From where the mind comes 
back with speech, being unable to reach, knowing the 
Bliss of Brahman, no more is fear.*” 1 hat is de-hypnotisa- 


228 


SWAMI VIVEKANANDA^S WORKS 


tion. “I have neither vice nor virtue, nor misery nor 
happiness ; 1 care neither for the Vedas nor sacrifices nor 
ceremonies ; 1 am neither food nor eating nor eater, for 
1 am Existence Absolute, Knowledge Absolute, Bliss 
Absolute ; 1 am He, 1 am He.” We know all about 
hypnotism. We have a psychology which the West is 
just beginning to know, but not yet adequately, 1 un 
sorry to say. 

Q.—What do you call the astral body? 

A .— 1 he astral body is what we call the Linga Sharira. 
When this body dies, how can it come to take another, 
body? Force cannot remain without matter. So a little 
part of the fine matter remains, through which the internal 
organs make another body—for each one is making his 
own body ; it is the mind that makes the body. If I 
become a sage, my brain gets changed into a sage’s brain ; 
and die ^ ogis say that even in this life a Yogi can change 
his body into a god-body. 

I he Yogis show many wonderful things. One ounce 
of practice is wordi a thousand pounds of theory. wSo I 
have no right to say that because I have not seen this or 
that thing done, it is false. I heir books say that with 
practice you can get all sorts of results that are most 
wonderful. Small results can be obtained in a short time 
by regular practice ; so that one may know that there is 
no humbug about it, no charlatanism. And these Yogis 
explain the very wonderful things mentioned in all scrip¬ 
tures in a scientific way. 1 he question is, how these 
records of miracles entered into every nation. The man 
who says that they are all false, and need no explanation, 
is not rational. You have no right to deny them until you 
can prove them false. You must prove that they are with¬ 
out any foundation, and only then have you the right to 
stand up and deny them. But you have not done that. 
On the other hand, the Yogis say they are not miracles, 
and they claim that they can do them even to-day. Many 


QUESTIONS AND ANSWERS 


229 


wonderful things are done in India to-day. But none of 
them are done by miracles. There are many books on 
the subject. Again, if nothing else has been done in that 
line except a scientific approach towards psychology, that 
credit must be given to the Yogis. 

Q.—Can you say in the concrete what the manifesta¬ 
tions are, which the Yogi can show? 

A .—The Yogi wants no faith or belief in his science 
but that which ie given to any other science, just enough 
gentlemanly faith to come and make the experiment. The 
ideal of the Yogi is tremendous. 1 have '^.een the lower 
things that can be done by the power of the mind, and 
therefore I have no right to disbelieve that the highest 
things can be done. The ideal of the Yogi is eternal peace 
anci love through omniscience and omnipotence. 1 know 
a Yogi who was bitten by a cobra, and who fell down on 
the ground. In the evening he revived again, and when 
asked what happened, he said: **A messenger came from 
my Beloved.’’ All hatred and anger and jealousy have 
been burned out of this man. Nothing can make him 
react ; he is infinite love all the time, and he is omnipotent 
in his power of love. That is the real Yogi. And this 
manifesting different things is accidental, on the way. 
That is not what he wants to attain. The Yogi says, every 
man is a slave except the Yogi. He is a slave to food, to 
air. to his wife, to his children, to a dollar, slave to a 
nation, slave to name and fame, and to a thousand things 
in this world. The man who is net controlled by any one 
of these bondages is alone a real man, a real Yogi. “They 
have conquered relative existence in this life who are firm- 
fixed in sameness. God is pure and the same to all. 
Therefore such arc said to be living in God.’’ 

Q.—Do the Yogis attach any importance to caste? 

A .—No ; caste is only the training school for 
developed minds. 


un- 


230 


SIVAMI VIVEKANANDA*S WORKS 


Q.—Is there no connection between this idea of super¬ 
consciousness and the heat of India? 

A. —I do not think so ; because all this philosophy 
was thought out fifteen thousand feet above the level of 
the sea, among the Himalayas, in an almost Arctic 
temperature. 

Q.—Is it practicable to attain success in a cold climate? 

A. —It is practicable, and the only thing that is prac¬ 
ticable in this world. We say 3 / 0 U are a born Vedantist, 
each one of you. You are declaring your oneness with 
everything each moment you live. Every time that your 
heart goes oi’t towards the world, you are a true Vedantist, 
only you do not know it. ^"cu are moral without knowing 
wh^' ; and the Vedanta is the philosophy which analysed 
and taught man to be moral consciously. It is the essence 
of all religions. 

Q.—Should you, say that there is an unsocial principle 
iir our Western people, which makes us so pluralistic, and 
that Eastern people are more sympathetic than we are? 

A .—I think the Western people are more cruel, and 
the Eastern people have more mercy towards all beings. 
But that is simply because your civilisation is very much 
more r( cent, h lakes time to make a thing come under 
the inllucnce of mercv. You have a great deal of power, 
and the power of control of the mind has especially been 
very little practised. It will take time to make you gentle 
and good. This feeling tingles in every drop of blood in 
India. If 1 go to the villages to teach the people politics, 
they will not understand ; but if 1 go to teach them 
\ edanta, they will say : *‘Now, Swami, you are all right." 

1 hat Vairagya, non-attachment, is everywhere in India, 
even to-day. We are very much degenerated now ; but 
kings will give up their thrones and go about the country 
without anything. 

In some places the common village-girl with her 
spinning-wheel says, ‘‘Do not talk to me of dualism ; my 


QUESTIONS AND ANSWERS 


231 


spinning-wheel says ‘Soham, Soham’—‘1 am He, 1 am 
He/ ” Go and talk to these people, and ask them why 
it is that they speak so and yet kneel before that stone. 
They will say that with you religion means dogma, but 
with them realisation. “I will be a Vedantist/’ one cT 
them will say, ‘*only when all this has vanished, and I 
have seen the reality. Until then there is no difference 
between me and the ignorant. So 1 am using these stones 
and am going to temples, and so on, to come to realisation. 

1 have heard, but I want to see and realise.” “Different 
methods of speech, different manners of explaining the 
methods of the scriptures—these are only for the enjoy¬ 
ment of the learned, not for freedom.” (Shankara). It 
is realisation which leads us to that edom. 

Q.—Is this spiritual freedom among the people con¬ 
sistent with attention to caste? 

A .—Certainly not. 1 hey say there should be no caste. 
Even those who are in caste say it is not a very perfect 
institution. But they say, when you find us another and 
a better one, we will give it up. They say, what will you 
give us instead? Where is there no caste? In your 
nation you are struggling all the time to make a caste. As 
soon as a man gets a bag of dollars, he says, “1 am one 
of the Four Hundred.” We alone have succeeded in 
making a permanent caste. Other nations are struggling 
and do not succeed. We have superstitions and evils 
enough. Would taking the superstitions and evils from 
your country mend matters ? It is owing to caste that three 
hundred millions of people can find a piece of bread to 
eat yet. It is an imperfect institution, no doubt. But if 
it had not been for caste, you would have had no Sanskrit 
books to study. This caste made walls, around which 
all sorts of invasions rolled and surged, but found it im¬ 
possible to break through. That necessity has not gone 
yet ; so caste remains. The caste we have now is not that 
of seven hundred years ago. Every blow has riveted it. 


232 


SWAM! VIVEKANANDA'S WORKS 


Do you realise that India is the only country that never 
went outside of itself to conquer ? 1 he great emperor 

Asoka insisted that none of his descendants should go to 
conquer. If people want to send us teachers, let them 
help, but not injure. Why should all these people come 
to conquer the Hindus? Did they do any injury to any 
nation ? What little good they could do, they did for the 
world. 1 hey taught it science, philosophy, religion, and 
civilised the savage hordes of the earth. And this is the 
return—only murder and tyranny, and calling them 
heathdn rascals. Look at the books written on India by 
Western people and at the stories of many travellers who 
go there ; in retaliation for what injuries are these hurled 
at them ? 

Q.—What is the Vedantic idea of civilisation? 

A .—You are philosophers, and you do not think that 
a bag of gold makes the difference between man and man, 
What is the value of all these machines and sciences? 

1 hey have only one result ; they spread knowledge. You 
have not solved the problem of want, but only made it 
keener. Machines do not solve the poverty question ; they 
simply make men struggle the more. Competition gets 
keener. What value has Nature in itself? Why do you 
go and build a monument to a man who sends electricity 
through a wire ? Does not Nature do that millions of times 
over? Is not everything already existing in Nature? What 
is the value of your getting it? It is already there. The 
only value is that it makes this development. This uni¬ 
verse is simply a gymnasium in which the soul is taking 
exercise ; and after these exercises we become gods. So 
the value of everything is to be decided by how far it is 
a manifestation of God. Civilisation is the manifestation 
of that divinity in man. 

Q.—Have the Buddhists any caste laws? 

A.—1 he Buddhists never had much caste, and there 
are very few Buddhists in India. Buddha was a social 


QUESTIONS AND ANSWERS 


233 


reformer. Yet in Buddhistic countries I find that there 
have been strong attempts to manufacture caste, only they 
have failed. The Buddhists’ caste is practically nothing, 
but they take pride in it in their own minds. 

Buddha was one of the Sannyasins of the Vedanta 
He started a new sect, just as others are started even to¬ 
day. The ideas which now are called Buddhism were not 
his. They were much more ancient. He was a great man 
who gave the ideas power. I he unique element in Bud¬ 
dhism was its social element. Brahmins and Kshatriyas 
have always been our teachers, and most of the Upani- 
shads were written by Kshatriyas, while the ritualistic 
portions of the Vedas came from the Brahmins. Most of 
our great teachers throughout India ha\ o been Kshatriyas 
and were always universal in their teachings ; whilst the 
Brahmana prophets with two exceptions were very exclu¬ 
sive. Rama, Krishna, and Buddha—worshipped as 
Incarnations of God—were Kshatriyas. 

Q.—Are sects, ceremonies and scriptures helps to 
realisation ? 

A .—When a man realises, he gives up everything. 
The various sects and ceremonies and books, so far as 
they are the means of arriving at that point, are all right. 
But when they fail in that, we must change them. “The 
knowing one must not despise the condition of those who 
are ignorant, nor should the knowing one destroy the faith 
of the ignorant in their own particular method, but by 
proper action lead them, and show them the path to come 
to where he stands.” 

Q.—How does the Vedanta explain individuality and 
ethics ? 

A .—TTie real individual is the Absolute ; this person¬ 
alisation is through Maya. It is only apparent ; in reality 
it is always the Absolute. In reality there is one, but in 
Maya it is appearing as many. In Maya there is this varia¬ 
tion. Yet even in this Maya there is always the tendency 


234 


SWAMI VIVEKANANDA'S WORKS 


to get back to the One, as expressed in all ethics and all 
morality of every nation, because it is the constitutional 
necessity of the soul. It is finding its oneness ; and this 
struggle to find this oneness is what we call ethics and 
morality. Iherefore we must always practise them. 

Q.—Is not the greater part of ethics taken up with 
the relation between individuals ? 

A. — That Is all it is. The Absolute does not come 
within Maya. 

Q.—You say the individual is the Absolute, and 1 was 
going lo ask you whether the individual has knowledge. 

A. — 1 he state of manifestation is individuality, and 
the light in that state is what we call knowledge, lo use, 
therefore, this term k.nowled^c for the light of the Absolute 
is not precise, as the Absolute state transcends relative 
knowledge. 

Q.—Does it include it? 

A. —Yes, in this sense. Just as a piece of gold can 
be changed into all sorts of coins, so with this. The state 
can be broken up into all sorts of knowledge. It is the 
state of super-consciousness, and includes both conscious¬ 
ness and unconsciousness. I he man who attains that 
state has all that we call knowledge. When he wants to 
realise that consciousness of knowledge, he has to go a 
step lower. Knowledge is a lower state ; it is only in 
Maya that we can have knowledge. 


(At the TiVenticth Century Club of Boston^ U. S. A,) 

Q.—Did V edanta exert any influence over Moham¬ 
medanism ? 

A. — I his Vedantic spirit of religious liberality has 
very much affected Mohammedanism. Mohammedanism 
in India is quite a different thing from that in any other 
country. It is only when Mohammedans come from other 


QUESTIONS AND ANSWERS 235 

countries and preach to their co-religionists in India about 
living with men who are not of their faith that a Moham¬ 
medan mob is aroused and fights. 

Q.—Does Vedanta recognise caste? 

A .—The caste system is opposed to the religion of the 
Vedanta. Caste is a social custom, and all our great 
preachers have tried to break it down. From Buddhism 
downwards, every sect has preached against caste, and 
every time it has only riveted the chains. Caste is simply 
the outgrowth of the political institutions of India ; it is a 
hereditary trade guild. Trade competition with Europe 
has broken caste more than any teaching. 

Q.—What is the peculiarity of the Vedas? 

A. —One peculiarity of the Vedas is that they are the 
only Scriptures that again and again declare that you must 
go beyond them. The Vedas say that they were written 
just for the child mind ; and when you have grown, you 
must go beyond them. 

Q.—Do you hold the individual soul to be eternally 
real ? 

A. —The individual soul consists of a man’s thoughts, 
and they are changing every moment. Therefore, it can¬ 
not be eternally real. It is real only in the phenomenal. 
The individual soul consists of memory and thought ; how 
can that be real ? 

Q.—Why did Buddhism as a religion decline in India ? 

A. —Buddhism did not really decline in India ; it was 
only a gigantic social movement. Before Buddha, great 
numbers of animals were killed for sacrifice and other 
reasons ; and people drank wine and ate meat in .large 
quantities. Since Buddha’s teaching, drunkenness has 
almost disappeared, and the killing of animals has almost 
gone. 


V—16 


236 


SWAMI VIVEKANANDA^S WORKS 


(At the Brool^lyn Ethical Society, Brooklyn, U. S. A,) 

Q.—How can you reconcile your optimistic views 
with the existence of evil, with the universal prevalence 
of sorrow and pain? 

A ,—1 can only answer the question if the existence 
of evil be first proved ; but this the Vedantic religion does 
not admit. Eternal pain unmixed with pleasure would be 
a positive evil ; but temporal pain and sorrow, if they have 
contributed an element of tenderness and nobility tending 
towards eternal bliss, are not evils: on the contrary, they 
may be supreme good. We cannot assert that anything 
is evil until we have traced its sequence into the realm of 
eternity. 

Devil worship is not a part of the Hindu religion. The 
human race is in process of development ; all have not 
reached the same altitude. Therefore some are nobler 
and purer in their earthly lives than others. Every one 
has an opportunity within the limits of the sphere of his 
present development of making himself better. We can¬ 
not unmake ourselves ; we cannot destroy or impair the 
vital force within us, but we have the freedom to give it 
different directions. 

Q.—Is not the reality of cosmic matter simply the 
imagining of our own minds? 

A .—In my opinion the external world is certainly an 
entity and has an existence outside of our mental con¬ 
ceptions. All creation is moving onwards and upwards, 
obedient to the great law of spirit evolution, which is 
different from the evolution of matter. The latter is sym¬ 
bolical of, but does not explain, the process of the former. 
We are not individuals now, in our present earthly 
environment. We shall not have reached Individuality 
until we shall have ascended to the higher state, when the 
divine spirit within us will have a perfect medium for the 
expression of its attributes. 


QUESTIONS AND ANSWERS 


237 


Q.—What is your explanation of the problem pre¬ 
sented to Christ, as to whether it was the infant itself, or 
its parents, that had sinned, that it w'as born blind? 

A .—While the question of sin does not enter into the 
problem, 1 am convinced that the blindness was due to 
some act on the part of the spirit of the child in a previous 
incarnation. In my opinion such problems are only 
explicable on the hypothesis of a prior earthly existence. 

Q.—Do our spirits pass at death into a state of 
happiness ? 

A .—Death is only a change of condition: time and 
space are in you, you are not in time and space. It is 
enough to know that as we make our lives purer and 
nobler, either in the seen or the unseen world, the nearer 
we approach God, who is the centre of all spiritual beauty 
and eternal joy. 

Q.—What is the Hindu theory of the transmigration 
of souls? 

A .—It is on the same basis as the theory of conserva¬ 
tion is to the scientist. This theory was first produced by 
a philosopher of my country. The ancient sages did not 
believe in a Creation. A Creation implies producing 
something out of nothing. That is impossible. There was 
no beginning of Creation as there was no beginning of 
time. God and Creation are as two lines without end, 
without beginning, and parallel. Our theory of Creation 
is—“It is, it was, and is to be.“ All punishment is but 
reaction. People of the West should learn one thing from 
India and that is toleration. All the religions are good, 
since the essentials are the same. 

Q.—Why are the women of India not much elevated? 

A .—It is in a great degree owing to the barbarous 
invaders through different ages ; it is partly due to the 
people of India themselves. 

When it was pointed out to Swamiji in America that 
Hinduism is not a proselytising religion, he replied: — 


238 SWAMI VIVEKANANDA'S WORKS 

**I have a message to the West as Buddha had a 
message to the East. ” 

Q,—Do you intend to introduce the practices and 
rituals of the Hindu religion into this country (America)? 

A. —1 am preaching simply philosophy. 

Q.—Do you not think if the fear of future hell-fire 
were taken from man there would be no controlling him? 

A. —No! On the contrary, 1 think he is made far 
better through love and hope than through fear. 

(Selections jrom the Math Diary) 

Q.—Whom can we call a Guru? 

A .—He who can tell your past and future is your Guru. 

Q.—How can one have Bhakti ? 

A. —There is Bhakti within you, only a veil of lust- 
and-wealth covers it, and as soon as that is removed 
Bhakti will manifest by itself. 

Q.—What is the true meaning of the assertion that 
we should depend on ourselves ? 

A. —Here self means the eternal Self. But even 
dependence on the non-eternal self may lead gradually to 
the right goal, as the individual self is really the eternal 
Self under delusion. 

Q.—If unity is the only reality, how could duality 
which is perceived by all every moment have arisen ? 

A .—Perception is never dual ; it is only the representa¬ 
tion of perception that involves duality. If perception 
were dual, the known could have existed independently 
of the knower, and vice versa. 

Q.—How is harmonious development of character to 
be best effected ? 

A. —By association with persons whose character has 
been so developed. 


QUESTIONS AND ANSWERS 


239 


Q.—What should be our attitude to the Vedas? 

A .—The Vedas, i.e., only those portions of them 
which agree with reason, are to be accepted as 
authority. Other Shastras, such as the Puranas etc., are 
only to be accepted so far as they do not go against the 
Vedas. All the religious thoughts that have come subse¬ 
quent to the Vedas, in the world, in whatever part of it, 
have been derived from the X^edas. 

Q.—Is the division of time into four Yugas astro¬ 
nomical or arbitrary calculation? 

A .—There is no mention of such divisions in the 
Vedas. They are arbitrary assumptions of Pauranika times. 

Q.—Is the relation between concepts and words 
necessary and immutable, or* accidental and conventional? 

A .—The point is exceedingly debatable. It seems 
that there is a necessary relation, but not absolutely so, as 
appears from the diversity of language. There may be 
some subtle relation which we are not yet able to detect. 

Q.—What should be the principle to be followed in 
working within India? 

A .—First of all, men should be taught to be practical 
and physically strong. A dozen of such lions will conquer 
the world, and not millions of sheep can do so. Secondly, 
men should not be taught to imitate a personal ideal, 
however great. 

Then Swamiji went on to speak of the corruptions of 
some of the Hindu symbols. He distinguished between 
the path of knowledge and the path of devotion. The 
former belonged properly to the Aryas, and therefore was 
so strict in the selection of Adhikaris (qualified aspirants), 
and the latter coming from the South, or non-Aryan 
sources, made no such distinction. 

Q-—What part will the Ramakrishna Mission take in 
the regenerating work of India? 

A . From this Math will go out men of character who 
will deluge the world with spirituality. This will be 


240 


SWAM I VIVEKANANDA’S WORKS 


followed by revivals in other lines. Thus Brahmins^ 
Kshatriyas, and Vaishyas will be produced. The Shudra 
caste will exist no longer—their work being done by 
machinery. The present want of India is the Kshatriya 
force. 

Q. Is retrograde reincarnation from the human stage 
possible ? 

A. —Yes. Reincarnation depends on Karma. If a 
man accumulates Karma akin to the beastly nature, he 
will be drawn thereto. 

In one of the question-classes (1898) Swamiji traced 
Image-worship to Buddhistic sources. First, there was the 
Chaitya ; second, the Stupa ; and then came the temple 
of Buddha. Along with it arose the temples of the Hindu 
deities. 

Q.—Does the Kundalini really exist in the physical 
body ? 

A .—Sri Ramakrishna used to say that the so-called 
lotuses of the Yogi do not really exist in the human body, 
but that they are created within oneself by Yoga powers. 

Q.—Can a man attain Mukli by Image-worship? 

A. —Image-worship cannot directly give Mukti; it may 
be an indirect cause, a help on the way. Image-worship 
should not be condemned, for, with many, it prepares the 
mind for the realisation of the Advaita which alone makes 
man perfect. 

Q.—What should be our highest ideal of character? 

A .—Renunciation. 

Q.—Flow did Buddhism leave the legacy of corrup¬ 
tion in India ? 

A .—The Buddhas tried to make everyone in India a 
monk or a nun. We cannot expect that from everyone. 

I his led to gradual relaxation among monks and nuns. It 
was also caused by their imitating Thibetan and other 
barbarous customs in the name of religion. They went 


QUESTIONS AND ANSWERS 


241 


to preach in those places and assimilated their corrup¬ 
tions, and then introduced them into India. 

Q.—Is Maya without beginning and end? 

A. —Maya is eternal both ways, taken universally, as 
genus ; but it is non-eternal individually. 

Q.—Brahman and Maya cannot be cognised simul¬ 
taneously. How could the absolute reality of either be 
proved as arising out of the one or the other? 

A. —It could be proved only by realisation. When one 
realises Brahman, for him Maya exists no longer, just as 
once the identity of the rope is found out, the illusion of 
the serpent comes no more. 

Q.—What is Maya? 

A .— 1 here is only one thing, c .d it by any name— 
matter, or spirit. It is difficult or rather impossible to think 
the one independent of the other. This is Maya, or 
ignorance. 

Q.—What is Mukti (liberation)? 

A .— Mukti means entire freedom—freedom from the 
bondages of good and evil. A golden chain is as much a 
chain as an iron one. Sri Ramakrishna used to say that, 
to pick out one thorn which has stuck into the foot, another 
thorn is requisitioned, and when the thorn is taken out, 
both are thrown away. So the bad tendencies are to be 
counteracted by the good ones, but after that, the good 
tendencies have also to be conquered. 

Q.—Can salvation (Mukti) be obtained without the 
grace of God ? 

A. —Salvation has nothing to do with God. Freedom 
already is. 

Q._What is the proof of the self in us not being the 
product of the body, etc. ? 

A.—The ‘ ‘ego*’ like its correlative, “non-ego,” is the 
product of the body, mind, etc. The only proof of the 
existence of the real Self is realisation. 

Q.—Who is a true Jnani, and who is a true Bhakta? 


242 


SWAMl VIVEKANANDA’S WORKS 


A .—-The true Jnani is he who has the deepest love 
within his heart and at the same time is a practical seer 
of Advaita in his outward relations. And the true Bhakta 
(Lover) is he who, realising his own soul as identified with 
the universal Soul, and thus possessed of the true Jnana 
within, feels for and loves everyone. Of Jnana and Bhakti 
he who advocates one and denounces the other cannot be 
either a Jnani or a Bhakta, but he is a thief and a cheat. 

Q,—Why should a man serve Ishvara? 

A .—If you once admit that there is such a thing as 
Ishvara (God), you have numberless occasions to serve 
Him. Service of the Lord means, according to all the 
scriptural authorities, remembrance (Smarana). If you 
believe in the existence of God, you will be reminded of 
Him at every step of your life. 

Q.—Is Mayavada different from Advaitavada? 

A. —No. 1 hey are identical. There is absolutely no 
other explanation of Advaitavada except Mayavada. 

Q.—How is it possible for God who is infinite to be 
limited in the form of a man (as an Avatara)? 

A .—It is true that God is infinite, but not in the sense 
in which you comprehend it. You have confounded your 
idea of infinity with the materialistic idea of vastness. 
When you say that God cannot take the form of a man, 
you understand that a very, very large substance or form 
(as if material in nature), cannot be compressed into a 
very, very small compass. God’s infinitude refers to the un¬ 
limitedness of a purely spiritual entity, and as such, does 
not suffer in the least by expressing itself in a human form. 

Q.—Some say, “First of all become a Siddha (one 
who has realised the Truth), and then you have the right 
to Karma, or work for others,” while others say that one 
should work for others even from the beginning. How 
can both these views be reconciled ? 

—You are confusing one thing with the other. 
Karma means either service to humanity or preaching. 


QUESTIONS AND ANSWERS 


243 


To real preaching, no doubt, none has the right except the 
Siddha Purusha, i.e., one who has realised the Truth. But 
to service every one has the right, and not only so, but 
every one is under obligation to serve others, so long as 
he is accepting service from others. 


CONVERSATIONS 

AND 

DIALOGUES 


CONVERSATIONS & DIALOGUES^—1 

I 


Think of Death Always and New Life Will Come 

WlTHlN—WoRK FOR OTHERS—GoD THE ReFUGE 
[Sri Surendra Nath Das Gupta] 

One day, with some of my young friends belonging to 
different colleges, I went to the Belur Math to see Swamiji. 
We sat round him ; talks on various subjects were going 
on. No sooner was any question put to him than he gave 
the most conclusive answer to it. Suddenly he exclaimed, 
pointing to us, “You are all studying different schools of 
European philosophy and metaphysics and learning new 
facts about nationalities and countries ; can you tell me 
what is the grandest of all the truths in life?” 

We began to think, but could not make out what he 
wanted us to say. As none put forth any reply, he 
exclaimed in his inspiring language: — 

“Look here—we shall all die ! Bear this in mind 
always, and then the spirit within will wake up. Then, 
only, meanness will vanish from you, practicality in work 
will come, you will get new vigour in mind and body, and 
those who come in contact with you will also feel that 
they have really got something uplifting, from you.” 

Then the following conversation took place between 
him and myself : — 

1 These conversations and dialogues are translated from the 
contiibuticnis of Disciples to the Vdbodhun, the Bengali organ of the 
Ramakrishna Mission. 


CONVERSATIONS AND DIALOGUES 245 


Myself:—But, Swamiji, wil! not the spirit break down 
at the thought of death and the heart be overpowered by 
despondency ? 

Swamiji:—Quite so. At first, the heart will break 
down, and despondency and gloomy thoughts will occupy 
your mind. But persist, let days pass like that—and then? 
Then you will see that new strength has come into the 
heart, that the constant thought of death is giving you a 
new life, and is making you more and more thoughtful by 
bringing every moment before your mind’s eye the truth 
of the saying, “V anity of vanities, all is vanity. ” Wait I 
Let days, months and years pass, and you will feel that 
the spirit within is waking up with the strength of a lion, 
that the little power within has transfoimed itself into a 
mighty power I Think of death always and you will 
realise the truth of every word 1 say. What more shall 
1 say in words ! 

One of my friends was praising Swamiji in a low voice. 

Swamiji:—Do not praise me. Praise and censure have 
no value in this world of ours. They only rock a man aa if 
in a swing. Praise 1 have had enough of ; showers of cen¬ 
sure 1 have also had to bear ; but what avails thinking of 
them ! Let everyone go oti doing his own duty, uncon¬ 
cerned. When the last moment arrives, praise and blame 
will be the same to you, to me, and to others. We are here 
to work, and will have to leave all when the call comes. 

Myself: —How little we are, Swamiji ! 

Swamiji:—True I You have well said I Think of this 
infinite universe with its millions and millions of solar 
systems, and think with what an infinite, incomprehensible 
power they are impelled, running as if to touch the Feet 
of the One Unknown—and how little we are ! Where 
then is room here to allow ourselves to indulge in vileness 
and mean-mindedness ? What should we gain here by 
fostering mutual enmity and party-spirit^ Take my advice: 
Set yourselves wholly to the service of others, when 


246 


SWAMI VIVEKANANDA’S WORKS 


you come from your colleges. Believe me, far greater 
happiness would then be yours than if you had had a 
whole treasury full of money and other valuables at your 
command. As you go on your way serving others you 
will, on a parallel line, advance in the path of knowledge. 

Myself: —But we are so very poor, Swamiji I 

Swamiji:—Leave aside your thoughts of poverty! In 
what respect are you poor? Do you feel regret because 
you have not a coach and pair or a retinue of servants at 
your beck and call? What of that? You little know how 
nothing would be impossible for you in life if you labour 
day and night for others with your heart’s blood ! And lo 
and behold ! the other side of the hallowed river of life 
stands revealed before your eyes—the screen of Death 
has vanished, and you are the inheritors of the wondrous 
realm of immortality ! 

Myself:—Oh, how we enjoy sitting before you, 
Swamiji, and hearing your life-giving words ! 

Swamiji:—You see, in my travels throughout India all 
these years, 1 have come across many a great soul, many 
a heart overflowing with loving-kindness, sitting at whose 
feet 1 used to feel a mighty current of strength coursing 
into my heart, and the few words 1 speak to you are only 
through the force of that current gained by coming in 
contact with them I Do not think 1 am myself something 
great! 

Myself :—But we look upon you, Swamiji, as one who 
has realised God ! 

No sooner did 1 say these words than those fascinating 
eyes of his were filled with tears (Oh, how vividly 1 see that 
scene before my eyes even now), and he with a heart over¬ 
flowing with love, softly and gently spoke: “At those 
Blessed Feet is the perfection of Knowledge sought by the 
Jnanis ! At those Blessed Feet also is the fulfilment of 
Love sought by the Lovers ! Oh, say, where else will men 
and women go foi refuge but to those Blessed Feet!’* 


CONVERSATIONS AND DIALOGUES 247 


After a while he again said, ‘Alas ! what folly for men 
in this world to spend theii days fighting and quarrelling 
with one another as they do ! But how long can they go 
on in that way? In the evening of life^ they must all come 
home, to the arms of the mother.” 


The Loss of Shr\ddha in India and Need of Its Revival 
—MEN We Want—Real Social Reform 

[Sri Surendra Nath Sen—from )ate diary] 

Saturday, the 22nd January, 1898. 

Early in the morning I came to Swamiji who was then 
staying in the house of Balaram Babu, at 57, Ramkanta 
Bose Street, Calcutta. The room was packed full with 
listeners. Swamiji was saying. “We want Shraddha, we 
want faith in our own selves. Strength is life, weakness 
Is death. ‘We are the Atman, deathless and free ; pure, 
pure by nature. Can we ever commit any sin? Impos¬ 
sible !’—such a faith is needed. Such a faith makes men 
of us, makes gods of us. It is by losing this idea of 
Shraddha that the country has gone to ruin.” 

Question : —How did we come to lose this Shraddha ? 

Swamiji:—We have had a negative education all along 
from our boyhood. We have only learnt that we are no¬ 
bodies. Seldom are we given to understand that great 
men were ever born in our country. Nothing positive has 
been taught to us. We do not even know how to use our 
hands and feet! We master all the facts and figures con¬ 
cerning the ancestors of the English, but we are sadly 
unmindful about our own. We have learnt only weakness. 

* At the end of one’s whole course of transmigratory existence. 


248 


SWAMI VIVEKANANDA'S WORKS 


Being a conquered race, we have brought ourselves to 
believe that we are weak and have no independence in 
anything. So, how can it be but that the Shraddha is lost? 
The idea of true Shraddha must be brought back once 
more^ to us, the faith in our own selves must be reawaken¬ 
ed, and, then only, all the problems which face our 
country will gradually be solved by ourselves. 

Q.—How can that ever be? How will Shraddha’alone 
remedy the innumerable evils with which our society is 
beset ? Besides, there are so many crying evils in the 
country, to remove which the Indian National Congress 
and other patriotic associations are carrying on a strenuous 
agitation and petitioning the British Government. How 
better can their wants be made known } What has 
Shraddha to do with the matter? 

Swamiji: — 1 ell me, whose wants are those—yours or 
the ruler’s? If yours, will the ruler supply them for yoi\, 
or will you have to do that for yourselves? 

Q.—But it is the ruler’s duty to see to the wants of 
the subject people. Whom should we look up to for 
everything, if not to the King? 

Swamiji:—Never are the wants of a beggar fulfilled. 
Suppose the Government give you all your need, where 
are the men who are able to keep up the things demanded ? 
So rnaf^e men first. Men we want, and how can men be 
made unless Shraddha is there? 

Q.—But such is not the view of the majority, sir. 

Swamiji: —What you call majority is mainly composed 
of fools and men of common intellect. Men who have 
brains to think for themselves are few, everywhere. These 
few men with brains are the real leaders in everything and 
in every department of work ; the majority are guided by 
them as with a string, and that is good, for everything goes 
all right when they follow in the footsteps of these leaders. 

I hose are only fools who think themselves too high to 
bend their heads to anyone, and they bring on their own 


CONVERSATIONS AND DIALOGUES 249 


ruin by acting on their own judgment. You talk of social 
reform? But what do you do? All that you mean by your 
social reform is either widow remarriage or female 
emancipation, or something of that sort. Do you not? 
And these again are directed within the confines of a few 
of the castes only. Such a scheme of reform may* do good 
to a few no doubt, but of what avail is that to the whole 
nation ? Is that reform or only a form of selfishness—some¬ 
how to cleanse your own room and keep it tidy and let 
others go from bad to worse ! 

Q.—Then, 3^ou mean to say that there is no need of 
social reform at all? 

Swamiji:—Who says so? Of course there is need of 
it. Most of what you talk of as social reform does not 
touch the poor masses ; they have already those things— 
the widow remarriage, female emancipation, etc.,—which 
you cry for. For this reason they will not think of those 
things as reforms at all. What 1 mean to say is that want 
of Shraddha has brought in all the evils among us, and 
is bringing in more and more. My method of treatment 
is to take out by the roots the very causes of the disease 
and not to keep them merely suppressed. Reforms we 
should have in many ways ; who will be so foolish as to 
deny it? There is, for example, a good reason for inter¬ 
marriage in India, in the absence of which the race is 
becoming physically weaker day by day. 

Since it was a day of a solar eclipse, the gentleman 
who was asking these questions saluted Swamiji and left, 
saying, “I must go now for a bath in the Ganges. 1 shall, 
however, come another day.’* 


250 


SWAMI VIVEKANANDA'S WORKS 


Ill 

Reconciliation of Jnana Yoga and Bhakti Yoga—God 
IN Good and in Evil Too—Use Makes a Thing Good 
OR Evil—Karma—Creation—God—Maya 

[Sri Surendra Nath Sen—from private diary] 

Sunday, the 23rd January, 1898. 

It was evening and the occasion of the weekly 
meeting of the Ramakrishna Mission, at the house of 
Balaram Babu of Baghbazar. Swami Turiyananda, Swami 
Yogananda, Swami Premananda and others had come 
from the Math. Swamiji was seated in the verandah to 
the east, which was now full of people, as were the 
northern and the southern sections of the verandah. But 
such used to be the case every day when Swamiji stayed 
in Calcutta. 

Many of the people who came to the meeting had 
heard that Swamiji could sing well, and so were desirous 
of hearing him. Knowing this. Master Mahashaya (M.) 
whispered to a few gentlemen near him to request Swamiji 
to sing ; but he saw through their intention and playfully 
asked, “Master Mahashaya, what are you talking about 
among yourselves in whispers? Do speak out.” At the 
request of Master Mahashaya, Swamiji now began in his 
charming voice the song—“Keep with loving care the 
darling Mother Shyama in thy heart. ... “It seemed as 
if a Vina was playing. At its close, he said to Master 
Mahashaya, “Well, are you now satisfied? But no more 
singing! Otherwise, being in the swing of it, 1 shall be 
carried away by its intoxication. Moreover, my voice is 
now spoilt by frequent lecturing in the West. My voice 
trembles a great deal. ...” 

Swamiji then asked one of his Brahmacharin dis¬ 
ciples to speak on the real nature of Mukti. So, the 
Brahmacharin stood up and spoke at some length. A few 


CONVERSATIONS AND DIALOGUES 251 

others followed him. Swamiji then invited discussion on 
the subject of the discourse, and called upon one of his 
householder disciples to lead it ; but as the latter tried to 
advocate the Advaita and Jnana and assign a lower 
place to Dualism and Bhakti, he met with a protest from 
one of the audience. As each of the two opponents tried 
to establish his own view-point, a lively word-fight ensued. 
Swamiji watched them for a while but, seeing that they 
were getting excited, silenced them with the following 
words; — 

Swamiji :—Vi'hy do you get excited in argument and 
spoil everything? Listen! Sri Ramakrishna used to say 
that pure Knowledge and pure Bhakti are one and the 
same. ;\ccording to the doctrine of Lnakti, God is held 
to be “All-Love. ” One cannot even say, “1 love Him,” for 
the reason that He is All-Love. 1 here is no love outside 
of Himself ; the love that is in the heart with which you 
love Him is even He Himself. In a similar way, whatever 
attractions or inclinations one feels drawn by, are all 
He Himself. The thief steals, the harlot sells her body to 
prostitution, the mother loves her child—in each of these 
too is He I One world system attracts another—there also 
is He. Everywhere is He.' According to the doctrine of 
Jnana also, He is realised by one everywhere. Here 
lies the reconciliation of Jnana and Bhakti. When one 
is immersed in the highest ecstasy of Divine Vision 
(Bhava), or is in the state of Samadhi, then alone the idea 
of duality ceases, and the distinction between the devotee 
and his God vanishes. In the scriptures on Bhakti, five 
different paths of relationship are mentioned, by any of 
which one can attain to God ; but another one can very 
well be added to them, viz.,—the path of meditation on 
the non-separateness, or oneness with God. Thus the 
Bhaktas can call the Advaitins Bhaktas as well, but of the 
non-differentiating type. As long as one is within the 
region of Maya, so long the idea of duality will no doubt 


252 


SWAMl VlVmANAm'S WORKS 


or name-and'form, is what 
,W.’L .oe. be,o.d U.» Ma.., d..„ 

only the Oneness is realised, and then man is, neither a 
Dualist nor an Advaitlst—to him all is One. All this 
difference that you notice between a Bhakta and a Jnanin 


is in the preparatory stage—one sees God outside, and 
the other sees Him within. But there is another point: 
Sri Ramakrishna used to say that there is another stage 
of Bhakti which is called the Supreme Devotion (Para- 
bhakti), i.e., to love Him after becoming established in 
the consciousness of Advaita and after having attained 
Mukti. It may seem paradoxical, and the question may 
be raised here why such a one who has already attained 
Mukti should be desirous of retaining the spirit of Bhakti? 
I'he answer is—the Mukta, or the Free, is beyond all 
law ; no law applies in his case, and hence no question 
can be asked regarding him. Even becoming Mukta, 
some, out of their own free will, retain Bhakti to taste 
of its sweetness. 

Q—God may be in the love of the mother for her 
child, but, sir, this idea is really perplexing that God is 
even in the thieves and the harlots in the form of their 
natural inclinations to sin ! It follows then that God is as 
responsible for the sin as for all the virtue in this world. 

Swamiji: —That consciousness comes in a stage of 
highest realisation, when one sees that whatever is of the 
nature of love or attraction is God. But one has to reach 
that state to see and realise that idea for oneself in actual 


life. 

Q.—But still one has to admit that God is also in the 


sin ^ 

Swamiji: —^ ou see, there are, in reality, no such 
different things as good and evil. They are mere con¬ 
ventional terms. The same thing we call bad, and again 
another time we call good, according to the way we make 
use of it. Take for example this lamplight ; because of 


CONVERSATIONS AND DIALOGUES 253 


its burning, we are able to see and do various works of 
utility ; this is one mode of using the light. Again, if you 
put your fingers in it, they will be burnt ; that is another 
mode of using the same light. So we should know tha* 
a thing becomes good or bad according to the way we 
use it. Similarly with virtue and vice. Broadly speaking, 
the proper use of any of the faculties of our mind and 
body is termed virtue, and its improper application or 
waste is called vice. 

I hus questions after questions were put and answered. 
Someone remarked, “The theory that God is even there, 
where one heavenly body attracts another, may or may 
not be true as a fact, but there is no denving the exquisite 
poetry the idea conveys.** 

Swamiji:—No, my dear sir, that is not poetry. One 
can see for oneself its truth when one attains Knowledge. 

From what Swamiji further said on this point, 1 under¬ 
stood him to mean that matter and spirit, though to all 
appearances they seem to be two distinct things, are really 
two different forms of one substance ; and similarly, all 
the different forces that are known to us, whether in the 
material or in the internal world, are but varying forms 
of the manifestation of one Force. We call a thing matter, 
where that spirit force is manifested less ; and living, 
where it shows itself more ; but there is nothing which is 
absolutely matter at all times and in all conditions. The 
same Force which presents itself in the material world as 
attraction or gravitation is felt in its finer and subtler state 
as love and the like, in the higher spiritual stages of 
realisation. 

Q.—Why should there be even this difference relating 
to individual use ? Why should there be at all this 
tendency in man to make bad or improper use of any of 
his faculties? 

Swamiji:—That tendency comes as a result of one’s 
own past actions (Karma) ; everything one has, is of his 


254 


SWAMI VIVEKANANDA’S WORKS 


own doing. Hence it follows that it is solely in the hands 
of every individual to control his tendencies and to guide 
them properly. 

Q.—Even if everything is the result of our Karma, 
still it must have had a beginning, and why should our 
tendencies have been good or bad at the beginning? 

Swamiji:—How do you know that there is a begin¬ 
ning? The Srishti (Creation) is without beginning—this 
is the doctrine of the Vedas. So long as there is God, 
there is Creation as well. 

Q.—Well, sir, why is this Maya here, and whence has 
it come ? 

Swamiji:—It is a mistake to ask why, with respect 
to God ; we can only do so regarding one who has wants 
or imperfections. How can there be any why concerning 
F'lim who has no wants, and who is the One Whole 7 
No such question as “Whence has Maya come? can be 
asked. Time-space-causation is what is called Maya. 
You, 1 and everyone else are within this Maya, and you 
are asking about what is beyond Maya I How can you 
do so while living within Maya? 

Again, many questions followed. The conversation 
turned on the philosophies of Mill, Hamilton, Herbert 
Spencer, etc., and Swamiji dwelt on them to the satisfac¬ 
tion of all. Everyone wondered at the vastness of his 
Western philosophical scholarship and the promptness of 
his replies. 

The meeting dispersed after a short conversation on 
miscellaneous subjects. 


CONVERSATlOm Am Dl;^L0G\3ES ISS 


IV 

Intermarriage among Subdivisions of a Varna— 
Against Early Marriage—The Education That 
India Needs—Brahmacharya 

[Sri Surendra Nath Sen—from private diary] 
Monda\', the 24th January, 1898. 

1 he same gentleman who was asking questions of 
Swamiji on Saturday last came again. He raised again the 
topic on intermarriage and enquired, ‘How should inter¬ 
marriage be Introduced between different nationalities?’ 

Swamiji:—1 do not advise our intermarriage with 
nations professing an alien religion. *• t least for the pre¬ 
sent, that will, of a certainty, slacken the ties of society 
and be a cause of manifold mischief. It is the inter¬ 
marriage between people of the same religion that 1 
advocate. 

Q.—Even then, it will involve much perplexity. Sup¬ 
pose I have a daughter who is born and brought up in 
Bengal, and I marry her to a Mahratti or a Madrasi. 
Neither will the girl understand her husband’s language 
nor the husband the girl’s. Again, the differenc<; in their 
•individual habits and, customs is so great. Such are a few 
of the troubles in the case of the married couple. Then 
as regards society, it will make confusion worse con¬ 
founded. 

Swamiji: —The time is yet very long in coming when 
marriages of that kind will be widel}/ possible. Besides, 
it is not judicious now to go in for that all of a sudde.n 
One of the secrets of work is to go by the way of the 
least possible resistance. So, first of all, let there be 
marriages within the sphere of one’s own caste-people. 
Take for instance, the hidyasthas of Bengal. They have 
several subdivisions amongst them, such, as, the uttar- 
rdrht, dakshin-rdrhi, bartgaja, etc., a.id they do not inter- 


256 SWAMI VIVEKANANDA^S WORKS 

marry with each other. Now, let there be intermarriages 
between the uttar-rarhis and the dakshin-rarhis, and if 
that is not possible at present, let it be between the 
bangajas and the dal^shin-rarhis. Thus we are to build 
up that which Is already existing, and which is in our 
hands to reduce into practice—reform does not mean 
wholesale breaking down. 

Q.—Very well, let it be as you say ; but what cor¬ 
responding good can come of it? 

Swamiji:—Don’t you see how in our society, mar¬ 
riage being restricted for several hundreds of years within 
the same subdivisions of each caste, has come to such a 
pass nowadays as virtually to mean marital alliance 
between cousins and near relations ; and how for this very 
reason the race is getting deteriorated physically, and 
consequently all sorts of disease and other evils are finding 
a ready entrance into it ? 1 he blood having had to 

circulate within the narrow circle of a limited number of 
individuals has become vitiated ; so the new-born children 
inherit from their very birth the constitutional diseases of 
their fathers. I hus, born with poor blood, their bodies 
have very little power to resist the microbes of any disease, 
which are ever ready to prey upon them. It is only by 
widening the circle of marriage that we can infuse a new 
and a different kind of blood into our progeny, so that 
they may be saved from the clutches of many of our 
present-day diseases and other consequent evils. 

Q.—May I ask you, sir, what is your opinion about 
early marriage ? 

Swamiji:—Amongst the educated classes in Bengal, 
the custom of marrying their boys too early is dying out 
gradually. 1 he girls are also given in marriage a year or 
two older than before, but that has been under compul¬ 
sion—from pecuniary want. Whatever might be the 
reason for it, the age of marrying girls should be raised 
still higher. But what will the poor father do? As soon 


CONVERSATIONS AND DIALOGUES 


257 


as the girl grows up a little, every one of the female sex, 
beginning with % the mother down to the relatives and 
neighbours even, will begin to cry out that he must find 
a bridegroom for her, and will not leave him in peace 
until he does so I And, about your religious hypocrites, 
the less said the better. In these days no one hears them, 
but still they will take up the role of leaders themselves. 
The rulers passed the Age of Consent Bill prohibiting a 
man under the threat of penalty to live with a girl of 
twelve years, and at once all these so-called leaders of 
your religion raised a tremendous hue and cry against it, 
sounding the alarm, “Alas, our religion is lost!“ As if 
religion consists in making a girl a mother at the age of 
twelve or thirteen ! So the rulers also naturally think, 
“Goodness gracious! What a religion is theirs! And 
these people lead political agitations and demand political 
rights !“ 

Q.— Then, In your opinion, both men and women 
should be married at an advanced age? 

Swamiji: —Certainly. But education should be im¬ 
parted along with it, otherwise irregularity and corruption 
will ensue. By education I do not mean the present system, 
but something in the line of positive teaching. Mere 
book-learning won’t do. We want that education by which 
character is formed, strength of mind is increased, the 
intellect is expanded, and by which one can stand on one’s 
own feet. 

Q.—We have to reform our women in many ways. 

Swamiji: —With such an education women will solve 
their own problems. They have all the time been trained 
in helplessness, servile dependence on others, and so they 
are good only to weep their eyes out at the slightest 
approach of a mishap or danger. Along with other things 
they should acquire the spirit of valour and heroism. In 
the present day it has become necessary for them also to 


258 SWAMl VIVEKANANDA’S WORKS 

learn self-defence. See how grand was the Queen of 
Jhansi ! ♦ 

Q —What you advise is quite a new departure, and 
it will, I am afraid, take a very long time yet to train our 
women in that way. 

Swamljl;—Anyhow, we have to try our best. We 
have not only to teach them but to teach ourselves also. 
Mere begetting children docs not make a father ; a great 
many responsibilities have to be taken upon one s shoulders 
as well. lo make a beginning in woman’s education: 
our I lindu women easily understand what chastity means, 
because it Is their heritage. Now, first of all, intensify 
that ideal within them above everything else, so that they 
may develop a strong character by the force of which, 
in every stage of their lives, whether married, or single if 
they prefer to remain so, they will not be in the least afraid 
even to give up their lives rather than flinch an inch from 
their chastity. Is it little heroism to be able to sacrifice 
one’s life for the sake of one’s ideal, whatever that ideal 
may be? Studying the present needs of the age, it seems 
imperative to train some of them up in the ideals of 
renunciation, so that they will take up the vow of lifelong 
virginity, fired with the strength of that virtue of chastity 
which is innate in their life-blood, from hoary antiquity. 
.Along with that they should be taught sciences and other 
things which would be of benefit, not only to them but to 
others as well, and knowing this they would easily learn 
these things and feel pleasure in doing so. Our mother¬ 
land requires for her well-being some of her children to 
become such pure-souled Brahmacharins and Brahma- 
charinis. 

Q.—In what way will that conduce to her well-being? 

Swamiji:—By their example and through their 
endeavours to hold the national ideal before the eyes of 
the people, a revolution in thoughts and aspirations will 
take place. How do matters stand now? Somehow, the 


CONVERSATIONS AND DIALOGUES 


259 


parents must dispose of a girl in marriage, if she be nine 
or ten years of age 1 And what a rejoicing of the whole 
family if a child is born to her at the age of thirteen ! If 
the trend of such ideas is reversed, then there is some 
hope for the ancient Shraddha to return. And what to 
talk of those who will practise Brahmacharya as defined 
above—think how mucK Shraddha and faith in themselves 
will be theirs! And what a power for good will 
they be ! 

The questioner now saluted Swamiji and was ready 
to take leave. Swamiji asked him to come now and then. 
“Certainly, sir,” replied the gentleman. “1 feel so much 
benefited ; 1 have heard many new things from you, which 
I have not been told anywhere before.” 1 also went home, 
as it was about time for dinner. 


V 

Madhura-Bhava—Prema—NamakirtanA'—Its Danger— 
Bhakti Tempered with Jnana—.A Curious Dream 

[Sri Surendra Nath Sen—from private diary] 
Monday, the 24th January, 1898. 

In the afternoon I came a^ain to Swamiji and saw 
quite a good gathering round him. The topic was the 
Madhura-Bhava or the way of worshipping God as hus¬ 
band, as in vogue with the followers of Sri Chaitanya. His 
occasional bons mots were raising laughter, when someone 
remarked, “What is there to make so much fun of about 
the Lord’s doings? Do you think that he was not a great 
saint, and that he did not do everything for the good of 
humanity ?” 

Swamiji: —Who is that I Should I poke fun at you 
then, my dear sir ! You only see the fun of it, do you? And 


260 


SWAMI VIVEKANANDA^S WORKS 


you, sir, do not see the lifelong struggle through which 
1 have passed to mould this life after his burning ideal of 
renunciation of wealth an<^ lust, and my endeavours to 
infuse that ideal into the people at large ! Sri Chaitanya 
was a man of tremendous renunciation and had nothing 
to do with woman and carnal appetites. But, in later 
times, his disciples admitted women into their order, 
mixed indiscriminately with them in his name, and made 
an awful mess of the whole thing. And the ideal of love 
which the Lord exemplified in his life was perfectly 
selfless and bereft of any vestige of lust ; that sexless love 
can never be the property of the masses. But the subse¬ 
quent Vaishnava Gurus, instead of laying particular stress 
first on the aspect of renunciation in the Master’s life, 
bestowed all their zeal on preaching and infusing his ideal 
of love among the masses, and the consequence was that 
the common people could not grasp and assimilate that 
high ideal of divine love, and naturally made of it the 
worst form of love between man and woman. 

Q.—But, sir, he preached the name of the Lord Hari 
to all, even to the Chandalas ; so why should not the 
common masses have a right to it? 

Swamiji: —1 am talking not of his preaching, but of 
his great ideal of love-—the Radha-prema,^ with which he 
used to remain intoxicated day and night, losing his 
individuality in Radha. 

Q.—Why may not that be made the common property 
of all? 

Swamiji: —Look at this nation and see what has been 
the outcome of such an attempt. Through the preaching 
of that love broadcast, the whole nation has become 
effeminate—a race of women ! The whole of Orissa has 

' The divine love whieh R'ldh.'i had towards Sri Krishna as the 
Ivord of the universe. 


CONVERSATIONS AND DIALOGUES 261 


been turned into a land of cowards ; and Bengal, running 
after that Radha-prema, these past four hundred years, 
has almost lost all sense of manliness ! The people are 
very good only at crying and weeping ; that has become 
their national trait. Look at their literature, the sure 
index of a nation’s thoughts and ideas. Why, the refrain 
of the Bengali literature for these four hundred years is 
strung to that same tune of moaning and crying. It has 
failed to give birth to any poetry which breathes a true 
heroic spirit! 

Q.—Who are then truly entitled to possess that 
Prema (love)? 

Swamiji:—There can be no love so long as there is 
lust—even a speck of it, as it were, in the heart. None 
but men of great renunciation, none but mighty giants 
among men, have a right to that Love Divine. If that 
highest ideal of love is held out to the masses, it will 
indirectly tend to stimulate Its worldly prototype which 
dominates the heart of man—for, meditating on love to 
God by thinking of oneself as His wife or beloved, one 
would very likely be thinking most of the time of one’s 
own wife—the result is too obvious to point out. 

Q.—Then is it impossible for householders to realise 
God through that path of love, worshipping God as one’s 
husband or lover and considering oneself as His spouse? 

Swamiji:—With a few exceptions ; for ordinary house¬ 
holders it is impossible no doubt. And why lay so much 
stress on this delicate path, above all others? Are there 
no other relationships by which to worship God, except 
this Madhura idea of love ? ^X^hy not follow the four 
other paths, and take the name of the Lord with all your 
heart? Let the heart be opened first, and all else will 
follow of itself. But know this for certain, that Prema 
cannot come while there is lust. Why not try first to get 
rid of carnal desires? You will say—**How is that 


262 


SWAMI VIVEKANANDA’S WORKS 


possible?—1 am a householder.** Nonsense! Because 
one is a householder, does it mean that one should be a 
personification of incontinence, or that one has to live in 
marital relations all ones life? And, after all, how un¬ 
becoming of a man to make of himself a woman, so that 
he may practise this Madhura love I 

Q.— I rue, sir. Singing God’s name' in a party 
(Namakirtana) is an excellent help and gives one a joyous 
feeling. So say our scriptures, and so did Sri Chaitanya 
Deva also preach to the masses. When the k.hole (drum) 
is played upon, it makes the heart leap with such a 
transport that one feels inclined to dance. 

Swaniiji:—-1 hat is all right, but don’t think that 
Kirtana means dancing only. It means singing the glories 
of God, in whatevei way that suits you. I hat vehement 
stirring up of feeling and that dancing of the Vaishnavas 
are good and very catching no doubt, but there is also a 
danger in practising them, from which you must save your¬ 
self. I he danger lies here—in the reaction. On the one 
hand, the feelings are at once roused to the highest pitch, 
tears flow from the eyes, the head reels as it were under 
intoxication—on the other hand, as soon as the Sankirtana 
stops, that mass of feeling sinks down as precipitately as 
it rose. 1 he higher the wave rises on the ocean, the 
lower it fails, with equal force. It is very difficult at that 
stage to contain oneself against the shock of reaction ; 
unless one has proper discrimination, one is likely to 
succumb to the lower propensities of lust, etc. I have 
noticed the same thing in .America also. Many would go 
to church, pray with much devotion, sing with great 
feeling, and even burst into tears when hearing the 
sermons ; but after coming out of church, they would have 
a great reaction and succumb to carnal tendencies. 

Q.—Then, sir, do instruct us which of the ideas 
preached by Sri Chaitanya we should take up as well- 
suited to us, so that we may not fall Into errors. 


CONVERSATIONS AND DIALOGUES 


263 


Swamiji:—Worship God with Bhakti tempered with 
Jnana. Keep the spirit of discrimination along with Bhakti. 
Besides this, gather from Sri Chaitanya, his heart, his 
loving-kindness to all beings, his burning passion for God, 
and make his renunciation the ideal of your life. 

1 he questioner now addressed the Swamiji with 
folded hands, “1 beg your pardon, sir. Now I come to 
see you are right. Seeing you criticise in a playful mood 
the Madhura love of the Vaishnavas, I could not at first 
understand the drift of your remarks ; hence I took 
exception to them.” 

Swamiji:—Well, look here, if we are to criticise at 
all, it is better to criticise God or God-men. If you abuse 
me 1 shall very likely get angry with you, and if 1 abuse 
you, 3^ou will try to retaliate. Isn’t it so> But God or 
God-men will never return evil for evil. 

The gentleman now left, after bowing down at the 
feet of Swamiji. I have already said that such a gathering 
was an everyday occurrence when Swamiji used to stay 
in Calcutta, From early in the morning till eight or nine 
at night, men would flock to him at every hour of the day. 
1 his naturally occasioned much irregularity in the time of 
his taking his meals ; so, many desiring to put a stop to 
this state of things, strongly advised Swamiji not to receive 
visitors except at appointed hours. But the loving heart 
of Swamiji, ever ready to go to any length to help others, 
was so melted with compassion at the sight of such a thirst 
for religion in the people, that in spite of ill health he did 
not comply with any request of the kind. His only reply 
was, “They take so much trouble to come walking all the 
way from their homes, and can 1, for the consideration of 
risking my health a little, sit here and not speak a few 
words to them?” 

At about 4 P.M. the general conversation came to a 
close, and the gathering dispersed, except for a few gentle- 


264 


SWAMI VIVEKANANDA'S WORKS 


men with whom Swamiji continued his talk on different 
subjects, such as England and America, and so on. In 
the course of conversation he said: — 

“1 had a curious dream on my return voyage from 
England. While our ship was passing through the Medi¬ 
terranean Sea, in my sleep, a very old and venerable- 
looking person, Rishi-like in appearance, stood before me 
and said: ‘Do ye come and effect our restoration. I am 
one of that ancient order of Theraputtas which had its 
origin in the teachings of the Indian Rishis. The truths 
and ideals preached by us have been given out by 
Christians as taught by Jesus ; but for the matter of that, 
there was no such personality by the name of Jesus ever 
born. Various evidences testifying to this fact will be 
brought to light by excavating here.’ ‘By excavating which 
place can those proofs, and relics you speak of be found?* 

I asked. The hoary-headed one, pointing to a locality in 
the vicinity of Turkey, said, ‘See here.’ Immediately after, 

I woke up, and at once rushed to the upper deck and 
asked the Captain, ‘What neighbourhood is the ship in 
just now?’ ‘Look yonder,’ the Captain replied, ‘there is 
Turkey and the Island of Crete.’ 

Was it but a dream, or is there anything in the above 
vision ? Who knows ! 


CONVERSATIONS AND DIALOGUES 265 


VI 

Reminiscences—The Problem of Famines in India and 
Self-sacrificing Workers—East and West —Is It Sattva 
OR Tamas —A Nation of Mendicants—The “Give and 
Take’’ Policy—^Tell a Man His Defects Directly but 
Praise His Virtues Before Others—Vivekananda 
Everyone May Become—Unbroken Brahmacharya Is 
THE Secret of Power—Samadhi and Work 


[Sri Priya Nath Sinha] 

Our house was very close to Swamii“s and since we 
were boys of the same section of the town, I often used 
to play with him. From my boyhood I had a special 
attraction for him, and I had a sincere belief that he 
would become a great man. When he became a 
Sannyasin we thought that the promise of a brilliant 
career for such a man was all in vain. 

Afterwards, when he went to America, 1 read in 
newspapers reports of his lectures at the Chicago Parlia¬ 
ment of Religions and others delivered in various places 
of America, and 1 thought that fire can never remain 
hidden under a cloth ; the fire that was within Swamiji 
had now burst into a flame ; the bud after so many years 
had blossomed. 

After a time I came to know that he had returned 
to India, and had been delivering fiery lectures at Madras. 
I read them and wondered that such sublime truths existed 
in the Hindu religion and that they could be explained so 
lucidly. What an extraordinary power he had I Was he 
a man or a god? 

A great enthusiasm prevailed when Swamiji came to 
Calcutta, and we followed him to the Sil’s garden-house, 
on the Ganges, at Cossipore. A few days later, at the 
residence of Raja Radhakanta Dev, the “Calcutta bov” 

V^I8 


266 


SWAMI VIVEKANANDA^S WORKS 


delivered an inspiring lecture to a huge concourse of 
people in reply to an address of welcome, and Calcutta 
heard him for the first time and was lost in admiration. 
But these are facts known to all. 

After his coming to Calcutta, 1 was very anxious to 
see him once alone and be able to talk freely with him as 
in our boyhood. But there was always a gathering of 
eager inquirers about him, and conversations were going 
on without a break; so 1 did not get an opportunity for 
some time, until one day when we went out for a walk in 
the garden on the Ganges side. He at once began to talk, 
as of old, to me, the playmate of his boyhood. No sooner 
had a few words passed between us than repeated calls 
came, informing him that many gentlemen had come to 
see him. He became a little impatient at last and told 
the messenger, “Give me a little respite, my son ; let me 
speak a few words with this companion of my boyhood ; 
let me stay in the open air for a while. Go and give a 
welcome to those who have come, ask them to sit down, 
offer them tobacco and request them to wait a little.“ 

When we were alone again 1 asked him, “Well, 
Swamiji, you are a Sadhu. Money was raised by subscrip¬ 
tion for your reception here, and 1 thought, in view of the 
famine in this country, that you would wire, before 
arriving in Calcutta, saying, ‘Don’t spend a single pice on 
my reception, rather contribute the whole sum to the 
famine relief fund’; but 1 found that you did nothing of 
the kind. How was that?” 

Swamiji:—Why, 1 wished rather that a great enthu¬ 
siasm should be stirred up. Don’t you see, without some 
such thing how would the people be drawn towards Sri 
Ramakiishna and be fired in his name? Was this ovation 
done for me personally, or was not his name glorified by 
this? See, how much thirst has been created in the minds 
of men to know about him I Now they will come to 
know of him gradually, and will not that be conducive to 


CONVERSATIONS AND DIALOGUES 267 


the good of the country? If the people do not know him 
who came for the welfare of the country, how can good 
befall them? When they know what he really was, then 
men —real men—will be made, and when there be such 
men, how long will it take to drive away famines etc., 
from the land ? So 1 say that 1 rather desired that there 
should be some bustle and stir in Calcutta, so that the 
public might be inclined to believe in the mission of Sri 
Ramakrishna ; otherwise what was the use of making so 
much fuss for my sake? What do 1 care for it? Have 
I become any greater now than when I used to play with 
you at your house? I am the same now as 1 was before. 
Tell me, do you find any change in me? 

Though I said, ‘*No, I do not find xnuch change to 
speak of,” yet in my mind I thought, “You have now, 
indeed, become a god.” 

Swamiji continued: “Famine has come to be a con¬ 
stant quantity in our country, and now it is, as it were, 
a sort of blight upon us. Do you find in any other country 
such frequent ravages of famine? No, because there are 
men in other countries, while in ours, men have become 
akin to dead matter, quite inert. Let the people first learn 
to renounce their selfish nature by studying Sri Rama¬ 
krishna, by knowing him as he really was, and then will 
proceed from them real efforts trying to stop the 
frequently recurring famines. By and by I shall make 
efforts in that direction too ; you will see.” 

Myself:—That will be good. Then you are going to 
deliver many lectures here, 1 presume ; otherwise, how 
will his name be preached? 

Swamiji:—What nonsense! Nothing of the kind I 
Has anything been left undone by which his name can 
be known? Enough has been done in that line. Lectures 
won’t do any good in this country. Our educated country¬ 
men would hear them and, at best, would cheer and clap 
their hands, saying “Well done”; that is all. Then they 


268 


SWAMI VIVEKANANDA'S WORKS 


would go home and digest, as we say, everything they 
had heard, with their meal! What good will hammering 
do on a piece of rusty old iron ? It will only crumble into 
pieces. First, it should be made red-hot, and then it can 
be moulded into any shape by hammering. Nothing will 
avail in our country without setting a glowing and living 
example before the people. What we want are some 
young men who will renounce everything and sacrifice 
their lives for their country’s sake. We should first form 
their lives and then some real work can be expected. 

Myself:—Well, Swamiji, it has always puzzled me 
that, while men of our country, unable to understand their 
own religion, were embracing alien religions, such as 
Christianity, Mohammedanism, etc., you, instead of doing 
anything for them, went over to England and America to 
preach 1 linduism. 

Swamiji:—Don’t you see that circumstances have 
changed now? Have the men of our country the power 
left in them to take up and practise true religion? What 
they have is only pride in themselves that they are very 
Sattvika. lime was when they were Sattvika, no doubt, 
but now they have fallen very low. The fall from Sattva 
brings one down headlong into Famas ! That is what has 
happened to them. Do you think that a man who does 
not exert himself at all, who only takes the name of Hari, 
shutting himself up in a room, who remains quiet and 
indifferent even when seeing a huge amount of wrong and 
violence done to others before his very eyes, possesses 
the quality of Sattva? Nothing of the kind, he is only 
enshrouded In dark Tamas. How can the people of a 
country practise religion, who do not get even sufficient 
food to appease their hunger? How can renunciation 
come to the people of a country, in whose minds the 
desires for Rhoga (enjoyment) have not been in the least 
satisfied? For this reason, find out, first of all, the ways 
and means by which men may gel enough to eat and have 


CONVERSATIONS AND DIALOGUES 269 


enough luxuries to enable them to enjoy life a little ; and 
then gradually, true Vairagya (dispassion) will come 
and they will be fit and ready to realise religion in life. 
The people of England and America, how full of Rajas 
they are ! They have become satiated with all sorts ot 
worldly enjoyment. Moreover, Christianity, being a relig¬ 
ion of faith and superstition, occupies the same rank as 
our religion of the Puranas. With the spread of education 
and culture, the people of the West can no more find 
peace in that. Their present condition is such that, giving 
them one lift will make them reach the Sattva. Then 
again, in these days, would you accept the words of a 
Sannyasin clad in rags, in the same degree as you would 
the words of a white-face (Westerner), who might come 
and speak to you on your own religion? 

Myself:—Just so, Swamiji! Mr. N. N. Ghose^ also 
speaks exactly to the same effect. 

Swamiji.—Yes, when my Western disciples after 
acquiring proper training and illumination will come in 
numbers here and ask you: “What are you all doing? 
Why are you of so little faith? How are your rites and 
religion, manners, customs arid morals in any way inferior? 
We even regard your religion to be the highest!”—then, 
you will see that lots of our big and influential folk will 
hear them. Thus they will be able to do immense good to 
this country. Do not think for a moment that they will 
come to take up the position of teachers of religion to you. 
They will, no doubt, be your Guru regarding practical 
sciences, etc., for the improvement of material conditions, 
and the people of our country will be their Guru in every¬ 
thing pertaining to religion. This relation of Guru and 
disciple in the domain of religion will for ever exist 
between India and the rest of the world. 

v\ celebrated barrister, journalist and educationist of Calcutta. 


270 


SWAMI VIVEKANANDA^S WORKS 


Myself :—How can that be, Swamiji? Considering the 
feeling of hatred with which they look upon us, it does not 
seem probable that they will ever- do good to us, purely 
from an unselfish motive. 

Swamiji:—They find many reasons to hate us, and so 
they may justify themselves in doing so. In the first place, 
we are a conquered race, and moreover there is nowhere 
in the world such a nation of mendicants as we are ! The 
masses who comprise the lowest castes, through ages of 
constant tyranny of the higher castes and by being treated 
by them with blows and kicks at every step they took, 
have totally lost their manliness and become like profes¬ 
sional beggars ; and those who are removed one stage 
higher than these, having read a few pages of English, 
hang about the thresholds of public offices with petitions 
in their hands. In the case of a post of twenty or thirty 
rupees falling vacant, five hundred B.A.’s and M.A.’s 
will apply for it ! And, dear me ! how curiously worded 
these petitions are ! “I have nothing to eat at home, sir, 
my wife and children are starving ; 1 most humbly 

implore yen, sir, to give me some means to provide for 
myself and my family, or we shall die of starvation !’* 
Even when they enter into service, they cast all self-respect 
to the winds, and servitude in its worst form is what they 
practise. Such is the condition, then, of the masses. The 
highly-educated, prominent men among you form them¬ 
selves into societies and clamour at the top of their voices : 

“Alas, India is going to ruin, day by day ! O English 
rulers, admit our countrymen to the higher offices of the 
Slate, relieve us from famines and so on, thus rending 
the air, day and night, with the eternal cry of “ Give ’ and 
Give ! The burden of all their speech is, “Give to us, 
give more to us, O Englishmen!** Dear me I what more 
will they give to you? They have given railways, tele¬ 
graphs, well-ordered administration to the country—have 
almost entirely suppressed robbers, have given education 


CONVERSATIONS AND DIALOGUES 271 


in science—what more will they give? What does any¬ 
one give to others with perfect unselfishness? Well, they 
have given you so much ; let me ask, what have you given 
to them in return? 

Myself:—What have we to give, Swamiji ? We pay 
taxes. 

Swamiji:—Do you, really? Do you give taxes to 
them of your own will, or do they exact them by compul¬ 
sion because they keep peace in the country? Tell me 
plainly, what do you give them in return for all that they 
have done for you? You also have something to give them 
that they have not. You go to England, but that is also 
in the garb of a beggar—praying for education. Some go, 
and what they do there at the most is, perchance, to 
applaud the Westerner’s religion in some speeches and 
then come back. What an achievement, indeed ! Why, 
have you nothing to give them? An inestimable treasure 
you have, which you can give—give them your religion,, 
give them your philosophy ! Study the history of the whole 
world and you will see that every high ideal you meet 
with anywhere had its origin in India. From time 
Immemorial India has been the mine of precious ideas to 
human society ; giving birth to high ideas herself, she has 
freely distributed them broadcast over the whole world. 
The English are in India to-day, to gather those higher 
ideals, to acquire a knowledge of the Vedanta, to penetrate 
into the deep mysteries of that eternal religion which 
is yours. Give those invaluable gems in exchange for 
what you receive from them. The Lord took me to their 
country to remove this opprobrium of the beggar that is 
attributed by them to us. It is not right lo go to England 
for the purpose of begging only. Why should they always 
give us alms? Does anyone do so for ever? It is not the 
law of nature to be always taking gifts with outstretched 
hands like beggars. To give and take is the law of nature. 
Any individual or class or nation that does not obey this 


272 


SWAMI VIVEKANANDA’S WORKS 


law never prospers in life. We also must follow that law. 
1 hat is why 1 went to America. So great is now the thirst 
for religion in the people there that there is room enough 
even if thousands of men like me go. They have been for 
a long time giving you of what wealth they possess, and 
now is the time for you to share your priceless treasure 
with them. And you will see how their feelings of hatred 
will be quickly replaced by those of faith, devotion and 
reverence towards you, and how they will do good to your 
country even unasked. I hey are a nation of heroes— 
never do they forget any good done to them. 

Myself:—Well, Swamiji, in your lectures in the West 
you have frequently and eloquently dwelt on our character¬ 
istic talents and virtues, and many convincing proofs you 
have put forward to show our whole-souled love of 
religion ; but now you say that we have become full of 
I arnas ; and at the same time you are accrediting us as 
the teachers of the eternal religion of the Rishis, to the 
world ! How is that ? 

Swamiji:—Do you mean to say that 1 should go about 
from country to country, expatiating on your failings before 
the public ? Should 1 not rather hold up before them the 
characteristic virtues that mark you as a nation? It is 
always good to tell a man his defects in a direct way and 
in a friendly spirit to make him convinced of them, so that 
he may correct himself—but you should trumpet forth his 
virtues before others. Sri Ramakrishna used to say that 
if you repeatedly tell a bad man that he is good, he turns 
in time to be good ; similarly, a good man becomes bad 
if he is incessantly called so. There, in the West, 1 have 
said enough to the people of their shortcomings. Mind, 
up to my time, all who went over to the West from our 
country have sung paeans to them in praise of their virtues 
and have trumpeted out only our blemishes to their ears. 
Consequently, it is no wonder that they have learnt to hate 
us. For this reason 1 have laid before them your virtues. 


CONVERSATIONS AND DIALOGUES 273 


and pointed out to them their vices, just as I am now 
telling you of your weaknesses and their good points. 
However full of Tamas you may have become, something 
of the nature of the ancient Rishis, however little it may 
be, is undoubtedly in you still—at least the framework of 
it. But that does not show that one should be in a hurry 
to take up at once the role of a teacher of religion and go 
over to the West to preach it. First of all, one must com¬ 
pletely mould one’s religious life in solitude, must be 
perfect in renunciation and must preserve Brahmacharya 
without a break. The Tamas has entered into you—what 
of that? Cannot the Tamas be destroyed? It can be 
doPxe in less than no time ! It was for the destruction of 
this Tamas that Bhagavan Sri Ramakri«*hna came to us. 

Myself : —But who can aspire to be like you, Swamiji ? 

Swamiji: —Do you think that there will be no more 
Vivekanandas after 1 die ! That batch of young men who 
came and played music before me a little while ago, whom 
you all despise for being addicted to intoxicating drugs 
and lock upon as worthless fellows, if the Lord wishes, 
each and everyone of them may become a Vivekananda ! 
I here will be no lack of Vivekanandas, if the world needs 
them—thousands and millions of Vivekanandas will 
appear—from where, who knows I fCnow for certain that 
the work done by me is not the work of Vivekananda, it 
is His work—the Lord s own work ! If one governor- 
general retires, another is sure to be sent in his place by 
the Emperor. Enveloped in Tamas however much you 
may be, know all that will clear away if you take refuge 
in Him by being sincere to the core of your heart. * The 
time is opportune now, as the physician of the world- 
disease has come. Taking His name, if you set yourself 
to work. He will accomplish everything Himself through 
you. Tamas itself will be transformed into the highest 
Sattva ! 


274 


SWA MI VIVEKANANDA'S WORKS 


Myself'.—Whatever you may say, I cannot bring my¬ 
self to believe in these words. Who can come by that 
oratorical power of expounding philosophy which you 
have } 

Swamiji:—You don’t know! That power may come 
to all. That power comes to him who observes unbroken 
Brahmacharya for a period of twelve years, with the sole 
object of realising God. 1 have practised that kind of 
Brahmacharya myself, and so a screen has been removed, 
as it were, from my brain. For that reason, 1 need not any 
more think over or prepare myself for any lectures on such 
a subtle subject as philosophy. Suppose 1 have to lecture 
to-morrow ; all that I shall speak about will pass to-night 
before my eyes like so many pictures ; and the next day 
1 put into words during my lecture all those things that 
1 saw. So you will understand now that it is not any 
power which is exclusively my own. Whoever will practise 
unbroken Brahmacharya for twelve years will surely have 
it. If you do so, you too will get it. Our Shastras do not 
say that^nly such and such a person will get it and not 
others I 

Myself:—Do you remember, Swamiji, one day, 
before you took Sannyasa, we were sitting in the house 

of-, and you were trying to explain the mystery of 

Samadhi to us. And when I called in question the truth of 
your words, saying that Samadhi was not possible in this 
Kali Yuga, you emphatically demanded: “Do j^ou want 
to see Samadhi or to have it yourself? 1 get Samadhi 
myself, and 1 can make you have it!“ No sooner had you 
finished saying so than a stranger came up and we did not 
pursue that subject any further. 

Swamiji:—Yes, I remember the occasion. 

Later, on my pressing him to make me get Samadhi. 
he said. “You see, having continually lectured and worked 
hard for several years, the quality of Rajas has become too 
predominant in me. Hence that power is lying covered, 


CONVERSATIONS AND DIALOGUES 275 


as it were, in me now. If 1 leave all work and go to the 
Himalayas and meditate in solitude for some time, then 
that power will again come out in me.” 


VII 

Reminiscences—Pranayama—Thought-reading 
—Knowledge of Previous Births 

[Sri Priya Nath Sinha] 

A day or two later, as 1 was coming out of my house 
intending to pay a visit to Swamiji, 1 met two of my friends 
who expressed a wish to accompany me, as they wanted 
to ask Swamiji something about Pranayama. As 1 had 
heard that one should nol visit a temple or a Sannyasin 
without taking something as an offering, we took some 
fruits and sweets with us, and placed them before him. 
Swamiji took them in his hands, raised them to his head 
and bowed to us before even we made our obeisance to 
him. One of the two friends with me had been a fellow- 
student of his. Swamiji recognised him at once and asked 
about his health and welfare. Then he made us sit down 
by him. There were many others there who had come to 
see and hear him. After replying to a few questions put 
by some of the gentlemen, Swamiji, in the course of his 
conversation, began to speak about Pranayama. First of 
all he explained through modern science the origin of 
matter from the mind, and then went on to show what 
Pranayama is. All three of us had carefully read before¬ 
hand his book called, “Raja-Yoga.” But from what we 
heard from him that day about Pranayama, it seemed to 
me that very little of the knowledge that was in him had 
been recorded in that book. I understand also that what 


276 SWAMI VIVEKANANDA*S WORKS 

he said was not mere book-learning, for who could explain 
so lucidly and elaborately all the intricate problems of 
religion, even with the help of science, without himself 
realising the Truth? 

His conversation on Pranayama went on from half¬ 
past three o’clock till half-past seven in the evening. 
When the meeting dissolved and we came away, my com¬ 
panions asked me how Swamiji could have known the 
questions that were in their hearts, and whether 1 had com¬ 
municated to him their desire for asking those questions. 

A few days after this occasion, 1 saw Swamiji in the 
house of the late Priya Nath Mukherjee, at Baghbazar. 

I here were present Swami Brahmananda, Swami Yoga- 
nanda, Mr. G. C. Chose, Atul Babu and one or two other 
friends. 1 said:—“Well, Swamiji, the two gentlemen who 
went to see you the other day wanted to ask you some 
questions about Pranayama, which had been raised in 
their minds by reading your book on Raja-Yoga some 
time before you returned to this country, and they had 
then told me of them. But that day, before they asked 
you anything, you yourself raised those doubts that had 
occurred to them and solved them! They were very 
much surprised and Inquired of me if 1 had let you know 
of their doubts beforehand.’’ Swamiji replied: “Similar 
occurrences having come to pass many times in the West, 
people often used to ask me, ‘How could you know the 
questions that were agitating our minds?* This knowledge 
does not happen to me so often, but with Sri Ramakrishna 
it was almost always there.” 

In this connection Atul Babu asked him: “You have 
said in ‘Raja-Yoga’ that one can come to know all about 
one s previous births. Do you know them yourself?’’ 

Swamiji:—Yes, 1 do. 

Atul Babu:—What do you know? Have you any 
objection to tell? 


CONVERSATIONS AND DIALOGUES 277 


Swamiji: —1 can know them—I do know them—but 
I prefer not to say anything in detail. 


VllI 

The Art and Science of Music, Eastern and Western 
[Sri Priya Nath Sinha] 

It was an evening in July, 1898, at the Math, in 
Nilambar Mukherjee’s garden-house, Belur. Swamiji with 
all his disciples had been meditating, and at the close of 
the meditation came out and sat in one of the looms. As 
it was raining hard and a cold wind wac. olowing, he shut 
the door and began to sing to the accompaniment of 
tanpurd. 1 he singing being over, a long conversation on 
music followed. Swami Shivananda asked him, “ What 
is Western music like}” 

Swamiji:—Oh, it is very good; there is in it a perfec¬ 
tion of harmony, which we have not attained. Only, to 
our untrained ears it does not sound well, hence we do not 
like it, and we think that the singers howl like jackals. 

I also had the same sort of impression, but when 1 began 
to listen to the music with attention and study it minutely, 

I came more and more to understand it, and 1 was lost in 
admiration. Such is the case with every art. In glancing 
at a highly finished painting we cannot understand where 
its beauty lies. Moreover, unless the eye is, to a certain 
extent, trained, one cannot appreciate the subtle touches 
and blendings, the inner genius of a work of art. What 
real music we have, lies in \irtan and dhrupad ; the rest 
has been spoiled by being modulated according to the 
Islamic methods. Do you think that singing the short and 
light airs oi*tappd songs in a nasal voice and flitting like 
lightning from one note to another by fits and starts are 
the best things in the world of music} Not so. Unless 


278 


SWAMI VIVEKANANDA^S WORKS 


each note is given full play in every scale, all the science 
of music is marred. In painting, by keeping in touch with 
Nature you can make it as artistic as you like ; there is no 
harm in doing that, and the result will be nothing but good. 
Similarly, in music, you can display any amount of skill 
by keeping to science, and it will be pleasing to the ear. 
The Mohammedans took up the different rags and 
ragints after coming into India. But they put such a 
stamp of their own colouring on the art of lappa songs 
that all the science in music was destroyed. 

Q,—Why, Maharaj ? Who has not a liking for music 
in lappa} 

Swamiji: — The chirping of crickets sounds very good 
to some. I he Santals think their music also to be the 
best of all. You do not seem to understand that when one 
note comes upon another in such quick succession, it not 
only robs music of all grace but, on the other hand, creates 
discordance rather. Do not the permutation and combi¬ 
nation of the seven keynotes form one or other of the 
different melodies of music, known as rags and raginis} 
Now, in tappa, if one slurs over a whole melody (rag) 
and creates a new tune, and over and above that, if the 
voice is raised to the highest pitch by tremulous modula¬ 
tion, say, how can the rag be kept intact? Again, the 
poetry of music is completely destroyed if there be in it 
such profuse use of light and short strains just for effect. 

I o sing by keeping to the idea meant to be conveyed by 
a song totally disappeared from our country when tappas 
came into vogue. Nowadays, it seems, the true art is 
reviving a little, with the improvement in theatres, but, on 
the other hand, all regard for rags and raginis is being 
more and more flung to the winds. 

Accordingly, to those who are past-masters in the art 
of singing clhnipad, it is painful to hear tappas. But in 
our music the cadence, or a duly regulated rise and fall 
of voice or sound, is very good. The French detected 


CONVERSATIONS AND DIALOGUES 279 


and appreciated this trait first, and tried to adapt and 
introduce it in their music. After their doing this, the 
whole of Europe has now thoroughly mastered it. 

Q.—Maharaj, their music seems to be pre-eminently 
martial, whereas that element appears to be altogether 
absent in ours. 

Swamiji:—Oh, no, we have it also. In martial music, 
harmony is greatly needed. We sadly lack harmony, 
hence it does not show itself so much. Our music was 
improving steadily. But when the Mohammedans came, 
they took possession of it in such a way that the tree of 
music could grow no further. The music of the 
Westerners is much advanced. They have the sentiment 
of pathos as well as of heroism in their music, which is 
as it should be. But our antique musical instrument 
made from the gourd has been no further improved. 

Q.—Which of the rags and raginis are martial in 
tune? 

Swamiji:—Every rag may be made martial, if it is 
set in harmony and the instruments are tuned accordingly. 
Some of the raginis can also become martial. 

1 he conversation was then closed, as it was time for 
supper. After supper, Swamiji enquired as to the sleep¬ 
ing arrangements for the guests who had come from 
Calcutta to the Math to pass the night, and he then retired 
to his bed-room. 


280 


SWAMI VIVEKANANDA'S WORKS 


IX 

The Old Institution of Living with the Guru—The 
Present University System—Lack of Shraddha— We 
Have a National History—Western Science Coupled 
WITH Vedanta—The So-called Higher Education—The 
Need oi rEcHNicAL Education and Education on National 
L.ines—1he SioRY OF Satyakama — Mere Book-learning 
and Education under Tyagis—Sri Ramakrishna and the 
Pandits— Establishment of Maths with Sadhus in 
Charge of Colleges—Text-books for Boys to Be Com¬ 
piled—-Stop Early Marriage!—Plan of Sending Un¬ 
married Graduates to Japan—The Secret of Japan's 
Greatness—Art, Asiatic and European—Art and Util¬ 
ity—S iYiEs oi Dress— ruE Food Question and Poverty 

[Sri Priya Nath Sinha] 

It was about two years after the new Math had been 
constructed and while ail the Swamis were living there 
that I came one morning to pay a visit to my Guru. Seeing 
me, Swarniji smiled and after inquiring of my welfare, 
etc., said, “You are going to stay to-day, are you not?" 

“Certainly,” I said, and after various inquiries I asked, 
“Well, Maharaj, what is your idea of educating our boys?" 

Swarniji:- -Eiving with the Guru. 

Question : —How ? 

Swan.iji:—In the same way as of old. But with this 
education has to be combined modern Western science. 
Both these ate necessary. 

Q.—Why, what is the defect in the present university 
system ? 

Swarniji:—It is almost wholly one of defects. Why, 
it is nothing but a perfect machine for turning out clerks. 

I would even thank my stars if that were all. But no I See 
how men are becoming destitute of Shraddha and faith. 


CONVERSATIONS AND DIALOGUES 


281 


They assert that the Gita was only an interpolation, and 
that the Vedas were but rustic songs ! They like to 
master every detail concerning things and nations outside 
of India, but if you ask them they do not know even the 
names of their own forefathers up to the seventh genera¬ 
tion, not to speak of the fourteenth ! 

Q.—But what does that matter? What if they do not 
know the names of their forefathers? 

Swamiji:—Don’t think so. A nation that has no 
history of its own has nothing in this world. Do you 
believe that one who has such faith and pride as to feel, 
“I come of noble descent,” can ever turn out to be bad? 
How could that be? That faith in himself would curb 
his actions and feelings, so much so that he would rather 
die than commit wrong. So, a national history keeps a 
nation well-restrained and does not allow it to sink so 
low. Oh, I know you will say, ‘‘But we have not such a 
history I” No, there is not any, according to those who 
think like you. Neither is there any, according to your 
big university scholars ; and so also think those who, 
having travelled through the West in one great rush, come 
back dressed in European style and assert, ‘‘We have 
nothing, we are barbarians.” Of course, we have no 
history exactly like that of other countries. Suppose we 
take rice, and the Englishmen do not. Would you for that 
reason imagine that they all die of starvation, and are going 
to be exterminated? They live quite well on what they 
can easily procure or produce in their own country and 
is suited to them. Similarly, we have our own history 
exactly as it ought to have been for us. Will that history 
be made extinct by shutting your eyes and crying, “Alas I 
we have no history !” Those who have eyes to see, find 
a luminous history there, and by the strength of that they 
know the nation is still alive. But that history has to be 
rewritten. It should be restated and suited to the under- 

V—19 


282 


SWAMI VIVEKANANDA’S WORKS 


Standing and ways of thinking, which our men have 
acquired in the present age, through Western education. 

Q.—How has that to be done? 

Swamiji: —That is too big a subject for a talk now. 
However, to bring that about, the old institution of “living 
with the Guru” and similar systems of imparting educa¬ 
tion are needed. What we want are Western science 
coupled with Vedanta, Brahmacharya as the guiding 
motto, and also Shraddha and faith in one’s own self. 
Another thing that we want is the abolition of that system 
which aims at educating our boys in the same manner as 
that of the man who battered his ass, being advised that it 
could thereby be turned into a horse. 

Q.—What do you mean by that? 

Swamiji:—You see, no one can teach anybody. The 
teacher spoils everything by thinking that he is teaching, 
fhus Vedanta says that within man is all knowledge— ^ 
even in a boy it is so—and it requires only an awakening, 
and that much is the work of a teacher. We have to do 
only so much for the boys that they may learn to apply 
their own intellect to the proper use of their hands, legs, 
ears, eyes, etc., and finally everything will become easy. 
But the root is religion. Religion is as the rice, and every¬ 
thing else, like the curries. Taking only curries causes 
indigestion, and so is the case with taking rice alone. Our 
pedagogues are making parrots of our boys, and ruining 
their brains by cramming a lot of subjects into them. 
Looking from one standpoint, you should rather be grate¬ 
ful to the Viceroy' for his proposal of reforming the uni¬ 
versity system, which means practically abolishing the 
higher education—the country will, at least, feel some 
relief by having breathing time. Goodness gracious I what 

^ Ivonl Cur/nn, who took st(‘ps to raise the standard of university 
education so high, as to make it very expensive and hence almost 
inaccessible to boys of the middle classes. 


CONVERSATIONS AND DIALOGUES 283 

a fuss and fury about graduating, and after a few days all 
cooled down ! And after all that, what is it they learn but 
that what religion and customs we have are all bad, and 
what the Westerners have are all good 1 At last, they 
cannot keep the wolf from the door ! What does it matter 
if this higher education remains or goes? It would be 
better i? the people got a little technical education so that 
they might find work and earn their bread, instead of 
dawdling about and crying for service. 

Q.—Yes, the Marwaris are wiser as they do not accept 
service and most of them engage themselves in some trade. 

Swamiji: —Nonsense ! They are on the way to bring 
ruin to the country. They have little understanding of 
their own interests. You are much better, because you 
have more of an eye towards manufactures. If the money 
that they lay out in their business and with which they 
make only a small percentage of profit were utilised in 
conducting a few factories and workshops, instead of 
filling the pockets of Europeans by letting them reap the 
benefit of most of the transactions, then it would not only 
conduce to the well-being of the country but bring by far 
the greater amount of profit to them, as well. It is only 
the Cabulis who do not care for service—the spirit of 
independence is in their very bone and marrow. Propose 
to anyone of them to take service, and you will see what 
follows ! 

Q.—Well, Maharaj, in case the higher education is 
abolished, will not the men become as stupid as cows, as 
they were before? 

Swamiji: —What nonsense ! Can ever a lion become 
a jackal? What do you mean? Is it ever possible for the 
sons of the land that has nourished the whole world with 
knowledge from time immemorial to turn as stupid as 
cows, because of the abolition of higher education by 
Lord Curzon? 


284 SWAMI VIVEl^ANANDA’S WORKS 

Q.—But think what our people were before the advent 
of the English, and what they are now. 

Swamiji: —Does higher education mean mere study of 
material sciences and turning out things of everyday use 
by machinery ? 1 he use of higher education is to find out 

how to solve the problems of life, and this is what is en¬ 
gaging the profound thought of the modern civilised world, 
but it was solved in our country thousands of years ago. 

Q.—But your Vedanta also was about to disappear? 

Swamiji:—It might be so. In the efflux of time the 
light of Vedanta now and then seems as if about to be 
extinguished, and when that happens, the Lord has to 
incarnate Himself in this human body ; He then infuses 
such life and strength into religion that it goes on again for 
some time with irresistible vigour. 1 hat life and strength 
has come into it again. 

Q.—What proof is there, Maharaj, that India has 
freely contributed her knowledge to the rest of the world? 

Swamiji:—History itself bears testimony to the fact. 
All the soul-elevating ideas and the different branches of 
knowledge that exist in the world are found out by proper 
investigation to have their roots in India. 

Aglow with enthusiasm Swamiji dwelt at length on 
this topic. His health was very bad at the time, and more- 
< r owing to the intense heat of summer he was feeling 
thirsty and drinking water too often. At last he said, 
“Dc:ir Singhi, get a glass of iced water for me please, 1 
shall explain everything to you clearly.’* After drinking 
the iced water he began afresh. 

Swamiji What we need, you know, is to study, 
indcpcndeiu of foreign control, different branches of the 
knowledge that is our own, and with it the English 
language, and Western science ; we need technical educa¬ 
tion and all else which may develop industries, so that 
men, instead of seeking for service, may earn enough to 


CONVERSATIONS AND DIALOGUES 285 


provide for themselves, and save something against a 
rainy day. 

Q.—What were you going to say the other day about 
the tol (Sanskrit boarding school) system ? 

Swamiji:—Haven’t you read the stories from the 
Upanishads ? 1 will tell you one. Satyakama went to live 

the life of a Brahmacharin with his Guru. The Guru gave 
into his charge some cows and sent him away to the forest 
with them. Many months passed by. and when Satya¬ 
kama saw that the number of cows was doubled he 
thought of returning to his Guru. On his way back, one 
of the bulls, the fire, and some other animals gave him 
instructions about the Highest Brahman. When the dis¬ 
ciple came back, the Guru at once saw by a mere glance 
at his face that the disciple had learnt the knowledge of 
the Supreme Brahman. Now, the moral this story is 
meant to teach is that true education is gained by constant 
living in communion with Nature. 

Knowledge should be acquired in that way, otherwise 
by educating yourself in the tol of a Pandit you will be 
only a human ape all your life. One should live from his 
very boyhood with one whose character is like a blazing 
fire, and should have before him a living example of the 
highest teaching. Mere reading that it is a sin to tell a 
lie will be of no use. Every boy should be trained to 
practise absolute Brahmacharya, and then, and then only, 
faith and Shraddha will come. Otherwise, why will not 
one who has no Shraddha and faith speak an untruth > 
In our country, the imparting of knowledge has always 
been through men of renunciation. Later, the Pandits, 
by monopolising all knowledge and restricting it to the 
tols, have only brought the country to the brink of ruin. 
India had all good prospects so long as Tyagis (men of 
renunciation) used to impart knowledge. 

Q.—What do you mean, Maharaj? There 


arc no 


286 


SWAMl VIVEKANANDA’S WORKS 


Sannyasins in other countries, but see how by dint of their 
knowledge India is laid prostrate under their feet! 

Swamiji:—Don’t talk nonsense, my dear, hear what 
1 say. India will have to carry others’ shoes for ever on 
her head if the charge of imparting knowledge to, her sons 
does not again fall upon the shoulders of Tyagis. Don’t 
you know how an illiterate boy, possessed of renunciation, 
turned the heads of your great old Pandits? Once at the 
Dakshineswar Temple the Brahmana who was in charge of 
the worship of Vishnu broke a leg of the image. Pandits 
were brought together at a meeting to give their opinions, 
and they, after consulting old books and manuscripts, 
declared that the worship of this broken image could not 
be sanctioned according to the Shastras and a new image 
would have to be consecrated. I here was, consequently, 
a great stir. Sri Ramakrishna was called at last. He heard 
and asked, “Does a wife forsake her husband in case he 
becomes lame?” What followed? 1 he Pandits were 
.struck dumb, all their Shastric commentaries and learned 
comments could not withstand the force of this simple 
statement. If that was true, why should Sri Ramakrishna 
come down to this earth, and why should he discourage 
mere book-learning so much? That new life-force which 
he brought with him has to be instilled into learning and 
education, and then the real work will be done. 

Q.—But that is easier said than done. 

Swamiji: —Had it been easy, it would not have been 
necessary for him to come. What you have to do now 
is to establish a Math in every town and in every village. 
Can you do that? Do something at least. Start a big 
Math in the heart of Calcutta. A well-educated Sadhu 
should be at the head of that centre and under him there 
should be departments for teaching practical science and 
arts, with a specialist Sannyasin in charge of each of these 
departments. 

Q.—Where will you get such Sadhus? 


CONVERSATIONS AND DIALOGUES 287 


Swamiji:—We have to make and manufacture them. 
So, I always say that some young men with burning 
patriotism and renunciation are needed. None can master 
a thing perfectly in so short a time as the Tyagis will. 

After a short silence Swamiji said, ‘‘Singhi, there are 
so many things left to be done for our country that 
thousands like you and me are needed. What will mere 
talk do ? See to what a miserable condition the country 
is reduced ; now do something! We haven’t even got a 
single book well suited for the little boys. 

Q.—Why, there are so many books of I«hwar Chandra 
Vidyasagar for the boys 1 

No sooner had 1 said this than he laughed out and 
said: Yes, there you read “Ishvai iWirakar Chaitanya 
Svarup”—(God is without form and of the essence of pure 
knowledge) ; “Dubai ati subodh balak”—(Dubai is a very 
good, intelligent boy), and so on—that won’t do. We 
must compile some books in Bengali as well as in English 
with short stories from the Ramayana, the Mahabharata, 
and the Upanishads, etc., in very easy and simple language, 
and these are to be given to our little boys to read. 

It was about eleven o’clock by this time. The sky 
became suddenly overcast, and a cold wind began to blow. 
Swamiji was greatly delighted at the prospect of rain. He 
got up and said, “Let us, Singhi^ have a stroll by the side 
of the Ganges. ” We did so, and he recited many stanzas 
from Meghaduta of Kalidasa, but the one undercurrent of 
thought that was all the time running through his mind 
was, the good of India. He exclaimed, “Look here, Singhi, 
can you do one thing ? Can you put a stop to the marriage 
of our boys for some time?’* 

1 said, “Well, Maharaj, how can we think of that, 
when the Babus are trying, on the other hand, all sorts of 
means to make marriage cheaper?’’ 

Swamiji:—Don’t trouble your head on that score ; 
who can stem the tide of time ! All such agitations will 


288 


SWAMI VIVEKANANDA'S WORKS 


end in empty sound, that is all. The dearer the marriages 
become, the better for the country. What a hurry scurry 
of passing examinations and marrying right off ! It seems 
as if no one Is to be left a bachelor, but it is just the same 
thing again, next year ! 

After a short silence, Swamiji again said, “If I can get 
some unmarried graduates, 1 may try to send them over to 
Japan and make arrangements for their technical educa¬ 
tion there, so that when they come back, they may turn 
their knowledge to the best account for India. What a 
good thing* that would be ! 

Q.—Why, Maharaj, is it better for us to go to Japan 
than to England } 

Swamiji:—Certainly! In my opinion, if all our rich 
and educated men once go and see Japan, their eyes will 
be opened. # 

Q.—How } 

Swamiji: — There, in Japan, you find a fine assimila¬ 
tion of knowledge, and not its indigestion as we have here. 
I hey have taken everything from the Europeans, but they 
remain Japanese all the same, and have not turned 
European ; while in our country, the terrible mania of 
becoming Westernised has seized upon us like a plague. 

I said: “Maharaj, 1 have seen some Japanese paint¬ 
ings ; one cannot but marvel at their art. Its inspiration 
seems to be something which is their own and beyond 
imitation.” 

Swamiji:—Quite so. They are great as a nation 
because of their art. Don’t you see they are Asiatics, as we 
are ) .\nd though we have lost almost everything, yet what 
we still have is wonderful. The very soul of the Asiatic 
is interwoven with art. The Asiatic never uses a thing 
unless there be art in it. Don’t you know that art is, with 
us, a part of religion? How greatly is a lady admired 
among us, who can nicely paint the floors and walls, on 


CONVERSATIONS AND DIALOGUES 


289 


auspicious occasions, with the paste of rice powder ? How 
great an artist was Sri Ramakrishna himself I 

Q.—The English art is also good, is it not? 

Swamiji;—What a stupid lool you are: But what is 
the use of blaming you, when that seems to be the pre¬ 
vailing way of thinking! Alas, to such a state is our 
country reduced ! 1 he people will look upon their own 

gold as brass, while the brass of the foreigner is gold to 
them! 1 his is, indeed, the magic wrought by modern 
education ! Know, that since the time the Europeans have 
come into contact with Asia, they are trying to infuse art 
into their own life. 

Myself:—If others hear you talk like this, Maharaj, 
they will think that you take a pessimistic view of things. 

Swamiji:—Naturally! What else can they think, who 
move in a rut! How 1 wish 1 could show you everything 
through my eyes ! Look at their buildings, how common¬ 
place, how meaningless, they are ! Look at those big 
government buildings ; can you, just by seeing their out¬ 
sides, make out any meaning for which each of them 
stands? No, because they are all so unsymbolical. Take 
again the dress of Westerners: their stiff coats and straight 
pants, fitting almost tightly to the body, are, in our estima¬ 
tion, hardly decent, is it not so? And, oh, what beauty, 
indeed, in that ! Now, go all over our motherland and 
see if you cannot read aright, from their very appearance, 
the meaning for which our buildings stand, and how much 
art there is in them ! The glass is their drinking vessel, 
and ours is the metal ghati (pitcher-shaped) ; which of the 
two is artistic? Have you seen the farmers’ homes in our 
villages ? 

Myself:—Yes, 1 have, of course. 

Swamiji:—What have you seen of them? 

1 did not know what to say. However, 1 replied, 
“Maharaj, they are faultlessly neat and clean, the yards 
and floors being daily well plastered over.’’ 


290 


SWAMI VIVEKANANDA'S WORKS 


Swamiji: —Have you seen their granaries for keeping 
paddy ? What an art is there in them ! What a variety 
of paintings even on their mud walls I And then, if you 
go and see how the lower classes live in the West, you 
would at once mark the difference. Their ideal is utility, 
ours art. 1 he Westerner looks for utility in everything, 
whereas with us art is everywhere. With the Western 
education, those beautiful ghatis of ours have been dis¬ 
carded, and enamel glasses have usurped their place in 
our homes ! Thus, the ideal of utility has been imbibed 
by us to such an extent as to make it look little short of 
the ridiculous. Now what we need is the combination ot 
art and utility. Japan has done that very quickly, and so 
she has advanced by giant strides. Now, in their turn, 
the Japanese are going to teach the Westerners. 

Q.—^Maharaj, which nation in the world dresses best? 

Swamiji: --- I he Aryans do ; even the Europeans admit 
that. } low picturesqueb'- their dresses hang in folds ! The 
royal costumes of most nations are, to some extent, a sort 
of imitation of the Aryans’—the same attempt is made 
there to keep them in folds, and those costumes bear a 
marked difference to their national style. 

By the by, Singhi, leave off that wretched habit of 
wearing those European shirts. 

Q.—Why, Maharaj ? 

Swamiji:—For the reason that they are used by the 
Westerners only as underwear. 1 hey never like to see 
them worn outside. How mistaken of the Bengalees to 
do so ! As if one should wear anything and everything, 
as if there is no unwritten law about dress, as if there is 
no ancestral style to follow ! Our people are outcasted by 
taking the food touched by the lower classes ; it would have 
been very well if the same law applied to their wearing 
any irregular style of dress. Why can’t you adapt your 
dress in some way to our own style? What sense is there 
for your going in for European shirts and coats? 


CONVERSATIONS AND DIALOGUES 291 


It began to rain now, and the dinner-bell also rang. 
So we went in to partake of the Prasada with others. 
During the meal Swamiji said, addressing me: Concen¬ 
trated food should be taken. To fill the stomach with a 
large quantity of rice is the root of laziness. A little while 
after he said again: “Look at the Japanese, they take rice 
with the soup of split-pulses, twice or thrice a day. But 
even the strongly built take little at a time, though the 
number of meals may be more. Those who are well-to-do 
among them take meat daily. Twice a day we stuff our¬ 
selves up to the throat, as it were, and the whole of our 
energy is exhausted in digesting such a quantity of rice ! 

Q.—Is it feasible for us Bengalees, poor as we are, 
to take meat? 

Swamiji:—Why not? You can afford to have it in 
small quantities. Half a pound a day is quite enough. 
T he real evil is idleness, which is the principal cause of 
our poverty. Suppose the head of a firm gets displeased 
with someone and decreases his pay ; or, out of three or 
four bread-winning sons in a family one suddenly dies ; 
what do they do ? Why, they at once curtail the quantity 
of milk for the children, or live on one meal a day, having 
a little popped-rice or so at night! 

Q,—But what else can they do under the circum¬ 
stances? 

Swamiji:—Why can they not exert themselves and 
earn more, to keep up their standard of food? But no! 
They must go to their local dddas (rendezvous) and idle 
hours away! Oh, if they did but know how they waste 
their time I 


292 


SWAM! VIVEKANANDA'S WORKS 


X 

The Discrimination ctf the. Four Castes According to 
Jati and Gun a—Brahmins and Kshatriyas in the 
Wkst—[he Kula-Guru System in Bengal 

[Sri Priya Nath Sinha] 

Once I went to see Swamiji while he was staying in 
Calcutta at the house of the late Balaram Basu. After a 
long conversation about Japan and America, 1 asked him, 
“Well. Swamiji, how many disciples have you in the 
West ?“ 

Swamiji:—A good many. 

Q.— I wo or three thousand? 

Swamiji:—Maybe more than that. 

Q.— Are they all initiated by you with Mantras? 

Swamiji: —Yes. 

Q.—Did you give them permission to utter Pranava 
(Om) ? 

Swamiji: —Yes. 

Q.—Mow did you, Maharaj ? 1 hey say that the 

Shudras have no right to Pranava, and none has except 
the Brahmins. Moreover, the Westerners are Mlechchhas 
not even Shudras. 

Swamiji:—Mow do you know that those whom I have 
initiated are not Brahmins? 

Myself:—Where could you get Brahmins outside 
India, in the lands of the Yavanas and Mlech.hhas? 

Swamiji: —My disciples are all Brahmins ! 1 quite 

admit the truth of the words that none except the Brah¬ 
mins has the right to Pranava. But the son of a Brahmin 
is not necessarily always a Brahmin ; though there is every 
possibility of his being one, he may not become so. Did 
you not hear that the nephew of Aghore Chakravarti of 
Baghbazar became a sweeper and actually used to do all 


CONVERSATIONS AND DIALOGUES 293 

the menial services of his adopted caste? Was he not 
the son of a Brahmin? 

The Brahmin caste and the Brahmanya qualities are 
two distinct things. In India, one is held to be a Brahmin 
by one s caste, but in the West, one should be known as 
such by one’s Brahmanya qualities. As there are three 
Gunas—Sattva, Rajas and Tamas—^so there are Gunas 
which show a man to be a Brahmin, Kshatriya, Vaishya 
or a Shudra. The qualities of being a Brahmin or a 
Kshatriya^ are dying out from the country, but in the West 
they have now attained to Kshatriyahood, from which the 
next step is Brahminhood, and many there are who have 
qualified themselves for that. 

Q,—Then you call Brahmins those who are Sattvika 
by nature ? 

Swamiji:—Quite so. As there are Sattva, Rajas and 
7 amas—one or other of these Gunas more or less—in 
every man, so the qualities which make a Brahmin, 
Kshatriya, Vaishya or a Shudra are inherent in every man, 
more or less. But ac times one or other of these qualities 
predominates in him in varying degrees and is manifested 
accordingly. Take a man in his different pursuits, for 
example: when he is engaged in serving another for pay, 
he is in Shudrahood ; when he is busy transacting some 
piece of business for profit, on his own account, he is a 
Vaishya ; when he fights to right wrongs, then the qualities 
of a Kshatriya come out in him ; and when he meditates 
on God, or passes his time in conversation about Him, 
then he is a Brahmin. Naturally, it is quite possible for 
one to be changed from one caste into another. Other¬ 
wise, how did Vishvamitra become a Brahmin and 
Parasurama a Kshatriya? 

Q.—What you say seems to be quite right, but why 
then do not our Pandits and family-Gurus teach us the 
same thing? 


294 


SWAM/ VIVEKANANDA^S WORKS 


Swamiji:—That Is one of the great evils of our 
country. But let the matter rest now. 

Swamiji here spoke highly of the Westerner’s spirit of 
practicality, and how, when they take up religion also, 
that spirit shows itself. 

Myself: — Irue, Maharaj, 1 have heard that their 
spiritual and psychic powers are very quickly developed 
when they practise religion. The other day Swami 
Saradananda showed me a letter written by one of his 
Western disciples, describing the spiritual powers highly 
developed in the writer through the Sadhanas practised 
for only four months. 

Swamiji: —So you see ! Now you understand whether 
there arc Brahmins in the West or not. You have 
Brahmins here also, but they are bringing the country 
down to the verge of ruin by their awful tyranny, and 
consequently what they have naturally is vanishing away 
by degrees. The Guru initiates his disciple with a Mantra, 
but that has come to be a trade with him. And then, 
how wonderful is the relation nowadays between a Guru 
and his disciple I Perchance, the Guru has nothing to 
eat at home, and his wife brings the matter to his notice 
and says: “Pray, go once again to your disciples, dear. 
Will your playing at dice all day long save us from 
hunger?’ 1 he Brahmin in reply says: “Very well, 
remind me of it to-morrow morning. 1 have come to hear 
that my disciple so-and-so is having a run of luck, and, 
moreover, 1 have not been to him for a long time.” This 
is what your Kula-Guru system has come to In Bengal! 
Priestcraft in the West is not so degenerated, as yet ; it is 
on the whole better than your kind ! 


‘ CONVERSATIONS AND DIALOGUES 


295 


XI 

India Wants not Lecturing but Work—The Crying 
Problem in India is Poverty—Young Sannyasins to 
BE Trained Both as Secular and Spiritual 
Teachers and Workers for the Masses— 
Exhortations to Young Men ro Work 
FOR Others 

(From the Diary of a disciple^) 

Disciple:—How is it, Swamiji, that you do not lecture 
in this country? You have stirred Europe and America 
with your lectures, but coming back here you have kept 
silence. 

Swamiji:—In this country, the ground should be pre¬ 
pared first ; and then if the seed is sown, the plant will 
come out best. The ground in the West, in Europe and 
America, is very fertile and fit for sowing seeds. There, 
they have reached the climax of Bhoga (enjoyment). 
Being satiated with Bhoga to the full, their minds are not 
getting peace now, even in those enjoyments, and they 
feel as if they wanted something else. In this country you 
have not either Bhoga or Yoga (renunciation). When one 
is satiated with Bhoga, then it* is that one will listen to and 
understand the teachings on Yoga. What good will 
lectures do in a country like India which has become the 
birthplace of disq^ase, sorrow and affliction, and where men 
are emaciated through starvation, and weak in mind? 

Disciple:—How is that? Do you not say that ours is 
the land of religion and that here the people understand 
religion as they do nowhere else ? Why then will not this 
country be animated by your inspiring eloquence and yield 
to the full the fruits thereof? 

Swamiji: —Now understand what religion means. The 
first thing required is the worship of the Kurma (tortoise) 

1 The disciple in this and the following cr nversations is Sarat 
Chandra Chakravarti. 


296 


SWAMI VIVEKANANDA'S WORKS 


Incarnation, and the belly-god is this Kurma, as it were. 
Until you pacify this, no one will welcome your words 
about religion. India is restless with the thought of how 
to face this spectre of hunger. The drainage of the best 
resources of the country by the foreigners, the unrestricted 
exports of merchandise, and, above all, the abominable 
jealousy natural to slaves, are eating into the very bones 
and marrow of India. First of all, you must remove this 
evil of hunger and starvation, this constant thought for bare 
existence, from those to whom you want to preach religion; 
otherwise, lectures and such things will be of no benefit. 

Disciple: —What should we do then to remove that 
evil ? 

Swamiji:—First, some young men full of the spirit 
of renunciation are needed—those who will be ready to 
sacrifice their lives for others, instead of devoting them¬ 
selves to their own happiness. With this object in view 1 
shall establish a Math to train young Sannyasins, who will 
go from door to door and make the people realise their 
pitiable condition by means of facts and reasoning, and 
instruct them in the ways and means for their welfare, and 
at the same time will explain to them as clearly as possible, 
in very simple and easy language, the higher truths of 
religion. The mass of people in our country is like the 
sleeping Leviathan. The education imparted by the 
present university system reaches to one,, or two per cent 
of the masses only. And even those who get that do not 
succeed in their endeavours of doing any good to their 
country. But it is not their fault, poor fellows ! As soon 
as they come out of their college, they find themselves 
fathers of several children ! Somehow or other they 
manage to secure the position of a clerk, or at the most, a 
deputy magistrate. This is the finale of education ! With 
the burden of a family on their backs, they find no time to 
do anything great or think anything high. They do not 
find means enough to fulfil their personal wants and inter- 


CONVERSATIONS AND DIALOGUES 


297 


ests,—so what can be expected of them in the way of 
doing anything for others? 

Disciple; —Is there then no way out for us ? 

Swamiji:—Certainly there is. This is the land of 
Religion Eternal. The country has fallen, no doubt, but 
will as surely rise again, and that upheaval will astound 
the world. The lower the hollows the billows make, the 
higher and with equal force will they rise again. 

Disciple : —How would India rise again ? 

Swamiji:—Do you not see? The dawn has already 
appeared in the eastern sky, and there is little delay in the 
sun’s rising. You all set your shoulders to the wheel ! 
What is there in making the world the all in all, and think¬ 
ing of ’’My Samsara, my Samsara” ? Yc xr duty at present 
is to go from one part of the country to another, from 
village to village, and make the people understand that 
mere sitting about idly won’t do any more. Make them 
understand their real condition and say, “O ye brothers, 
all arise ! Awake ! How much longer would you remain 
asleep!” Go and advise them how to improve their own 
condition, and make them comprehend the sublime truths 
of the Shastras, by presenting them in a lucid and popular 
way. So long the Brahmin^ have monopolised religion ; 
but since they cannot hold their ground against the strong 
tide of time, go and take steps so that one and all in the 
land may get that religion. Impress upon their minds that 
they have the same right to religion as the Brahmins. 
Initiate all, even down to the Chandalas, in these fiery 
Mantras. Also instruct them, in simple words, about the 
necessities of life, and in trade, commerce, agriculture, etc. 
If you cannot do this, then fie upon your education and 
culture, and fie upon your studying the Vedas and 
Vedanta I 

Disciple : —But where is that strength in us ? 1 should 
have felt myself blessed if 1 had had a hundredth part of 
your powers, Swamiji. 

V—20 


298 


SWAM I VIVEKANANDA^S WORKS 


Swamiji: —How foolish ! Power and things like that 
will come by themselves. Put yourself to work, and you 
will find such tremendous power coming to you that you 
will feel it hard to bear. Even the least work done for 


others awakens the power within ; even thinking the least 
good of others gradually instils into the heart the strength 
of a lion. 1 love you all ever so much, but 1 would wish 
you all to die working for others—1 should be rather glad 
to see you do that! 

Disciple:—What will become of those, then, who 
depend on me? 

Swamiji: —If you are ready to sacrifice your life for 
others, God will certainly provide some means for them. 
Have you not read in the Gita the words of Sri Krishna? 

“Never does a doer 
of good, O my beloved, come to grief.” 

Disciple:—1 see, sir. 

Swamiji: —The essential thing is renunciation—with¬ 
out renunciation none can pour out his whole heart in 
working for others. The man of renunciation sees all with 
an equal eye and devotes himself to the service of all. 
Does not our Vedanta also teach us to see all with an 


equal eye—why then do you cherish the idea that wife and 
children are your own. more than others? At your very 
threshold, Narayana Himself in the form of a poor beggar 
is dying of starvation ! Instead of giving him anything, 
would you only satisfy the appetites of your wife and 
children with delicacies ? Why, that is beastly ! 

Disciple: — To work for others requires a good deal 
of money at times, and where shall 1 get that? 

Swamiji: —Why not do as much as lies within your 
power? Even if you cannot give to others for want of 
money, surely you can at least breathe into their ears 
some good words or impart some good instruction, can’t 
you? Or does that also require money? 

Disciple:—Yes, sir, that 1 can do. 


CONVERSATIONS AND DIALOGUES 


299 


Swamiji:—But saying, “1 can,” won’t do. Show me 
through action what you can do, and then only shall 1 know 
that your corning to me is turned to some good account. 
Get up, and set your shoulder to the wheel—how long io 
this life for? As you have come into this world, leave some 
mark behind. Otherwise, where is the difference between 
you and the trees and stones? They, too, come into 
existence, decay and die. If you like to be born and to 
die like them, you are at liberty to do so. Show me Ly 
your actions that your reading the Vedanta has been 
fruitful of the highest good. Go and tell all, ‘In every one 
of you lies that Eternal Power,” and try to wake It up. 
What will you do with individual sab ition? 1 hat is 
sheer selfishness. Throw aside your meditation, throw away 
your salvation and such things ! Put your whole heart and 
soul in the work to which 1 have consecrated myself. 

With bated breath the disciple heard these inspiring 
words, and Swamiji went on with his usual fire and 
eloquence. 

Swamiji:—First of all, make the soil ready, and 
thousands of Vivekanandas will in time be born into this 
world to deliver lectures on religion. You needn’t worry 
yourself about that! Don’t you see why 1 am starting 
orphanages, famine-relief works, etc. ? Don’t you see how 
Sister Nivedita, an English lady, has learnt to serve Indians 
so well, by doing even menial work for them? And 
can’t you, being Indians, similarly serve your own fellow- 
countrymen? Go, all of you, wherever there is an out¬ 
break of plague or famine, or wherever the people are in 
distress, and mitigate their sufferings. At the most you 
may die in the attempt—what of that? How many like 
you are taking birth and dying like worms every day? 
What difference does that make to the world at large? 
Die you must, but have a great ideal to die for, and it is 
better to die with a great ideal in life Preach this ideal 
from door to door, and you will yourselves be benefited 


300 


SWAMI VIVEKANANDA*S WORKS 


by it at the same time that you are doing good to your 
country. On you lie the future hopes of our country. I 
feel extreme pain to see you leading a life of inaction. 
Set yourselves to work—to work I Do not tarry—the time 
of death is approaching day by day ! Do not sit idle, 
thinking that everything will be done in time, later on ! 
Mind—nothing will be done that way ! 


Xll 

Reconciliation ok Jnana andBhakti—Sa r-ChiiT-A nanda 
—H ow Sectarianism Originates—Bring in Shraddha 
AND THE Worship oi- Sakti and Avatars—The 
Ideal of the Hero We Want Now, not 
HIE Madhura-bhava—Sri Ramakrishna 
—Avataras 


(From the Diary of a disciple) 


Disciple:—Pray, Swamiji, how can Jnana and Bhaktl 
be reconcllecH We see the followers of the path of devo¬ 
tion (Bhaktas) close their ears at the name of Shankara, and 
again, the followers of the path of knowledge (Jnanis) 
call the Bhaktas fanatics, seeing them weep in torrents, or 
sing and dance in ecstasy, in the name of the Lord. 

Swaimji: — The thing is. all this conflict is in the preli¬ 
minary (preparatory) stages of Jnana and Bhakti. Have 
you not heard Sri Ramakrishna’s story about Shiva's 
demons and F^ama s monkeys?' 

Disciple:--Yes. sir, I have. 


' I here a fight botueen Shiva and Rama Shiva uas 

the (.III a ot Rami, and Rama was the Cum of Shiva. They fou-ht 
but bvramo liimdly again. Hut there was no end to the quarrels a'lid 
wranghngs between the demons of Shiva and the monkeys of Rama ! 


CONVERSATIONS AND DIALOGUES 301 

Swamiji:—But there is no difference between the 
supreme Bhakti and the supreme Jnana. The supreme 
Bhakli is to realise God as the form of Prema (Love) itself. 
If you see the loving form of God manifested everywhere 
and in everything, how can you hate or injure others ? 
That realisation of Love can never come so long as there 
is the least desire in the heart, or what Sri Ramakrishna 
used to say, attachment for Kama-Kanchana (sense- 
pleasure and wealth). In the perfect realisation of Love, 
even the consciousness of one’s own body does not exist. 
Also, the supreme Jnana is to realise the oneness every¬ 
where, to see one’s own self as the self in everything. 
That too cannot come so long as there is the least con¬ 
sciousness of the ego (Aham). 

Disciple:—Then what you call Love is the same as 
supreme Knowledge ? 

Swamiji:—Exactly so. Realisation of Love comes to 
none unless one becomes a perfect Jnani. Does not the 
Vedanta say that Brahman is Sat-Chit-Ananda—the 
Absolute Existence-Knowledge-Bliss ? 

Disciple:—Yes, sir. 

Swamiji: —The word Sat-Chit-Ananda means—Sat, 
i.e., Existence, Chit, i.e. Consciousness, or Knowledge, 
and Ananda, i.e., Bliss, which is the same as Love. There 
is no controversy between the Bhakta and the Jnani regard¬ 
ing the Sat aspect of Brahman. Only, the Jnanis lay 
greater stress on His aspect of Chit, or Knowledge, while 
the Bhaktas keep the aspect of Ananda, or Love, more in 
view. But no sooner is the essence of Chit realised, than 
the essence of Ananda is also realised. Because what is 
Chit is verily the same as Ananda. 

Disciple: —Why then is so much sectarianism pre¬ 
valent in India? And why is there so much controversy 
between the scriptures on Bhakti and Jnana? 

Swamiji: —The thing is, all this waging of war and 
controversy is concerning the preliminary ideals, i.e. those 


302 


SWAMI VIVEKANANDA'S WORKS 


ideals which men take up to attain the real Jnana or 
real Bhakti, But which do you think is the higher—the 
end or the means ? Surely, the means can never be higher 
than the end. Because the means to realise the same end 
must be numerous, as they vary according to the tempera¬ 
ment or mental capacities of individual followers. The 
counting of beads, meditation, worship, offering oblations 
in the sacred fire—all these and such other things are the 
limbs of religion ; they are but the means ; and to attain 
to supreme devotion (Para-Bhakti) or to the highest realis¬ 
ation of Brahman is the pre-eminent end. If you look a 
little deeper you will understand what they are fighting 
about. One says, “if you pray to God facing the East, then 
you will reach Him.” “No.” says another, “you will have 
to sit facing the West, and then only you will see Him.” 
Perhaps someone realised God in meditation, ages ago, 
by sitting with his face to the East, and his disciples at 
once began to preach this attitude, asserting that none can 
ever see God unless he assumes this position. Another 
party comes forward and inquires—“How is that? Such 
and such a person realised God while facing the West, 
and we have seen this ourselves.” In this way all these 
sects have originated. Someone might have attained 
supreme devotion by repeating the name of the Lord as 
Hari, and at once it entered into the composition of the 
Shastra as: — 

I 

|| 

“The name of the Lord Hari, the name of the l.ord 
Hari, the name of the Lord Hari alone. Verily, there is 
no other, no other, no other path than this, in the age 
of Kali.” 

Someone, again, let us suppose, might have attained 
perfection with the name of Allah, and immediately 
another creed originated by him began to spread, and so 
on. But we have to see what is the end to which all these 


CONVERSATIONS AND DIALOGUES 


305' 


forms of worship and other religious practices are intended < 
to lead. The end is the Shraddha. We have not any 
synonym in our Bengali language to express the Sanskrit 
word Shraddha. The Upanishad says that Shraddha 
entered into the heart of Nachiketa. Even with the wova 
Ekagrata (one-pointedness) we cannot express the whole 
significance of the word Shraddha. 1 he word Ekagra- 
nishtha (one-pointed devotion) conveys, to a certain extent,, 
the meaning of the word Shraddha. If you meditate on 
any truth with steadfast devotion and concentration, you 
will see that the mind is more and more tending onwards 
to Oneness, i.e., taking you towards the realisation of the 
Absolute Existence-Knowledge-Bliss. The scriptures on 
Bhakti or Jnana give special advice to jn to take up in 
life the one or the other of such a Nishtha and make it 
their own. With the lapse of ages, these great truths 
become distorted and gradually transform themselves into- 
Deshacharas, or the prevailing customs of a country. It 
has happened, not only in India, but in every nation and 
every society in the world. And the common people, 
lacking in discrimination, make these the bone of conten¬ 
tion and fight among themselves. They have lost sight 
of the end, and hence sectarianism, quarrels and fights 
continue. 

Disciple: —What then is the saving means, Swamiji ? 

Swamiji; —That true Shraddha, as of old, has to be 
brought back again. The weeds have to be taken up by 
the roots. In every faith and in every path, there are, 
no doubt, truths which transcend time and space, but a 
good deal of rubbish has accumulated over them. This 
has to be cleared away, and the true eternal principles 
have to be held before the people ; and then only, our 
religion and our country will be really benefited. 

Disciple:—How will that be effected? 

Swamiji: —^Why, first of all, we have to introduce 
the worship of the great saints. Those great-souled ones 


304 


SWAMl VIVEKANANDA'S WORKS 


who have realised the eternal truths are to be presented 
before the people as the ideals to be followed ; as in the 
case of India—Sri Ramachandra, Sri Krishna, Mahavira 
and Sri Ramakrishna, among others. Can you bring in 
the worship of Sri Ramachandra and Mahavira in this 
country? Keep aside for the present the Vrindavan aspect 
of Sri Krishna, and spread far and wide the worship of 
Sri Krishna roaring the Gita out, with the voice of a lion. 
And bring into daily use the worship of Sakti—the Divine 
Mother, the source of all power. 

Disciple: —Is the divine play of Sri Krishna with the 
Gopis of Vrindavan not good, then? 

Swamiji:—Under the present circumstances, that wor¬ 
ship is of no good to you. Playing on the flute and so 
on will not regenerate the country. We now mostly need 
the ideal of a hero with the tremendous spirit of Rajas 
thrilling through his veins from head to foot—the hero 
who will dare and die to know the Truth—the hero whose 
armour is renunciation, whose sword is wisdom. We want 
now the spirit of the brave warrior in the battle-field of 
life, and not of the wooing lover who looks upon life as 
a pleasure-garden ! 

Disciple:—Is then the path of Love, as depicted in 
the ideal of the Gopis, false? 

Swamiji:—Who says so? Not l! That is a very 
superior form of worship (Sadhana). In this age of tre¬ 
mendous attachment to sense-pleasure and wealth, very 
few are able even to comprehend those higher ideals. 

Disciple:—Then are not those who are worshipping 
God as husband or loverfollowing the proper path? 

Swamiji:—1 dare say not. There may be a few 
honourable exceptions among them, but know, that the 
greater part of them are possessed of dark Tamasika nature. 
Most of them are full of morbidity and affected with ex¬ 
ceptional weakness ! The country must be raised. The 
worship of Mahavira must be introduced ; the Sakti-puja 


CONVERSATIONS AND DIALOGUES 305 


must form a part of our daily practice ; Sri Ramachandra 
must be worshipped in every home. Therein lies your 
welfare, therein lies the good of the country—there is no 
other way. 

Disciple:—But I have heard that Bhagavan Sri Rama- 
krishna used to sing the name of God very much? 

Swamiji:—Quite so, but his was a different case. 
What comparison can there be between him and ordinary 
men? He practised in his life all the different ideals of 
religion to show that each of them leads but to the One 
Truth. Shall you or I ever be able to do all that he has 
done? None of us has understood him fully. So, 1 do 
not venture to speak about him anywhere and everywhere. 
He only knows what he himself really was ; his frame was 
a human one only, but everything else about him was 
entirely different from others. 

Disciple:—Do you, may 1 ask, believe him to be an 
Avatara (Incarnation of God)? 

Swamiji:—Tell me first—what do you mean by an 
Avatara ? 

Disciple:—Why, 1 mean one like Sri Ramachandra, 
Sri Krishna, Sri Gauranga, Buddha or Jesus, etc. 

Swamiji:—I know Bhagavan Sri Ramakrishna to 
be even greater than those you have just named. What 
to speak of believing, which is a petty thing—1 know ! 
Let us, however, drop the subject now ; more of it another 
time. 

After a pause Swamiji continued:—To re-establish 
the Dharma there come Mahapurushas (great teachers of 
humanity), suited to the needs of the times and society. 
Call them what you will, either Mahapurushas, of Ava- 
taras, it matters little. They reveal, each in his life, the 
Ideal. Then, by degrees, shapes are moulded in their 
matrices—MEN are made I Gradually, sects arise and 
spread. As time goes on, these sects degenerate, and 
similar reformers come again—this has been the law flow- 


306 


SWAMI VIVEKANANDA’S WORKS 


ing in uninterrupted succession, like a current, down the 
ages. 

Disciple:—Why do you not preach Sri Ramakrishna 
as an Avatara? You have, indeed, power, eloquence and 
everything else needed to do it. 

Swamiji:—Truly, 1 tell you, I have understood him 
very little. He appears to me to have been so great that, 
whenever 1 have to speak anything of him, I am afraid lest 
1 ignore or explain away the truth, lest my little power does 
not suffice, lest in trying to extol him 1 present his picture 
by painting him according to my lights and belittle him 
thereby I 

Disciple:—But many are now preaching him as an 
Avatara. 

Swamiji:—Let them do so if they like. They are 
doing it in the light in which they have understood him. 
You too can go and do the same, if you have understood 
him. 

Disciple:—1 cannot even grasp you, what to say of 
Sri Ramakrishna ! I should consider myself blessed in this 
life if 1 get a little of your grace. 


Xlll 

Brahman and Differentiation—Personal Realisation of 
Oneness—Supreme Bliss Is the Goal of All—Think: 
Always, I am Brahman—Discrimination and 
Renunciation Are the Means— 

Be Fearless 


(From the Diary oj a disciple) 

Disciple:—Pray, Swamiji, if the One Brahman is the 
only reality, why then exists all this differentiation in the 
world } 


CONVERSATIONS AND DIALOGUES 


307 


Swamiji: —Are you not considering this question from 
the point of view of phenomenal existence ? Looking 
from the phenomenal side of existence, one can, through 
reasoning and discrimination, gradually arrive at the very 
root of Unity. But if you were firmly established in that 
Unity, how from that standpoint, tell me, could you see 
this differentiation ? 

Disciple:—True, if 1 had existed in the Unity, how 
should 1 be able to raise this question of “why *? As 
I put this question, it is already taken for granted that 
I do so by seeing this diversity. 

Swamiji:—Very well. To enquire about *^he root of 
Oneness through the diversity of phenomenal existence, is 
named by the Shastras as V^atireki reasoning, or the pro¬ 
cess of arguing by the indirect method, that is, first taking 
for granted something that is non-existent or unreal as 
existing or real, and then showing through the course of 
reasoning that that is not a substance existing or real. You 
are talking of the process of arriving at the truth through 
assuming that which is not-true as true—are you not? 

Disciple:—To my mind, the state of the existing or 
the seen seems to be self-evident, and hence true, and 
that which is opposite to it seems, on the other hand, to 
be unreal. 

Swamiji:—But the Vedas say, “One only without a 
second. ” And if in reality there is the One only that 
exists—the Brahman—then, your differentiation is false. 
You believe in the Vedas, 1 suppose? 

Disciple:—Oh, yes, for myself 1 hold the Vedas as 
the highest authority ; but if, in argument, one does not 
accept them to be so, one must, in that case, have to be 
refuted by other means. 

Swamiji:—That also can be done. Look here, a time 
comes when what you call differentiation vanishes, and 


308 


SWAM I VIVEKANANOA’S WORKS 


we cannot perceive it at all. 1 have experienced that slate 
in my own life. 

Disciple:—When have you done so? 

Swamiji: —One day in the temple-garden at Dakshin- 
eswar Sri Ramakrishna touched me over the heart, 
and first of all 1 began to see that the houses—rooms, 
doors, windows, verandahs—the trees, the sun, the moon— 
all were flying off, shattering to pieces as it were—reduced 
to atoms and molecules—and ultimately became merged 
In the Akasha. Gradually again, the Akasha also vanished, 
and after that, my consciousness of the ego with it ; what 
happened next 1 do not recollect. 1 was at first frighten¬ 
ed. C oming back from that state, again 1 began to see the 
houses, doors, windows, verandahs and other things. On 
another occasion. 1 had exactly the same realisation by the 
side of a lake in America. 

Disciple:—Might not this state as well be brought 
about by a derangement of the brain? And 1 do not 
understand what happiness there can be in realising such 
a stale. 

Swamiji:—A derangement of the brain! How can 
you Cctll it so. when it comes neither as the result of 
delirium from any disease, nor of intoxication from drink¬ 
ing, nor as an illusion produced by various sorts of queer 
breathing exercises—but W’hen it comes to a normal man 
in full possession of his health and wits? Then again, 
this experience is in perfect harmony with the Vedas. It 
also coincides with the words of realisation of the inspired 
Rishis and Acharyas of old. Do you take me, at last, to 
be a crack-brained man ? (smiling). 

Disciple:—Oh, no, 1 did not mean that of course. 
When there are to be found hundreds of illustrations about 
such realisation of Oneness, in the Shastras, and when you 
say that it can be as directly realised as a fruit in the palm 
of one s hand, and when it has been your own personal 


CONVERSATIONS AND DIALOGUES 309 


experience in life, perfectly coinciding with the words of 
the Vedas and other Shastras—how dare I say that it is 
false? Sri Shankaracharya also realising that state has said, 
“Where is the universe vanished?” and so on. 

Swamiji: —Know—this knowledge of Oneness is v/hat 
the Shastras speak of as realisation of the Brahman, by 
knowing which, one gets rid of fear, and the shackles of 
birth and death break for ever. Having once realised 
that Supreme Bliss, one is no more overwhelmed by 
pleasure and pain of this world. Men being fettered by 
base lust-and-wealth cannot enjoy that Blisa of Brahman. 

Disciple:—If it is so, and if we are really of the 
essence of the Supreme Brahman, the ' vvhy do we not 
exert ourselves to gain that Bliss? Why do we again and 
again run into the jaws of death, being decoyed by^this 
worthless snare of lust-and-wealth? 

Swamiji:—You speak as if man does not desire^ to 
have that Bliss ! Ponder over it, and you will see that 
whatever anyone is doing, he is doing in the hope of 
gaining that Supreme Bliss. Only, not everyone is con¬ 
scious of it and so cannot understand it. That Supreme 
Bliss fully exists in all, frorh Brahma down to the blade 
of grass. You are also that undivided Brahman. This 
very moment you can realise, if you think yourself truly 
and absolutely to be so. It is all mere want of direct 
perception. That you have taken service and work so 
hard for the sake of your wife also shows that the aim 
is ultimately to attain to that Supreme Bliss of Brahman. 
Being again and again entangled in the intricate maze of 
delusion and hard hit by sorrows and afflictions, the eye 
will turn of itself to one’s own real nature, the Inner Self. 
It is owing to the presence of this desire for bliss in the 
heart, that man, getting hard shocks, one after another, 
turns his eye inwards—to his own Self. A time is sure to 
come to everyone, without exception, when he will do 


310 


SWAMl VIVEKANANDA^S WORKS 


so— to one it may be in this life, to another after thousands 
of incarnations. 

Disciple:—It all depends upon the blessings of the 
Guru and the grace of the Lord I 

Swamiji: —The wind of grace of the Lord is blowing 
on, for ever and ever. Do you spread your sail. When¬ 
ever you do anything, do it with your whole heart con¬ 
centrated on it. Think day and night—“1 am of the 
essence of that Supreme Existence-Knowledge-Bliss—what 
fear and anxiety have 1 ? This body, mind and intellect 
are all transient, and That which is beyond these is 
myself.’* 

Disciple:—Thoughts like these come only for a while 
now and then, but quickly vanish, and 1 think all sorts of 
trash and nonsense. 

Swamiji:—It happens like that in the initial stage, 
but gradually it is overcome. But from the beginning, in¬ 
tensity of desire in the mind is needed. Think always— 
“I am ever-pure, ever-knowing and ever-free ; how can 1 
do anything evil ? Can 1 ever be befooled like ordinary 
men with the insignificant charms of lust and wealth?” 
Strengthen the mind with such thoughts. This will surely 
bring real good. 

Disciple:—Once in a while strength of mind comes. 
But then again I think that if 1 would appear at the 
Deputy Magistrateship examination—wealth and name and 
fame would come and 1 should live well and happy. 

Swamiji:—Whenever such thoughts come in the 
mind, discriminate within yourself between the real and 
the unreal. Have you not read the Vedanta? Even when 
you sleep, keep the sword of discrimination at the head of 
your bed, so that covetousness cannot approach you even 
in dream. Practising such strength, renunciation will 
gradually come, and then you will see—the portals of 
heaven are wide open to you. 

Disciple:—If it is so, Swamiji, how is it then that the 


CONVERSATIONS AND DIALOGUES 


311 


texts on Bhakti say that too much of renunciation kills the 
feelings that make for tenderness? 

Swamiji:—Throw away» 1 say, texts which teach 
things like that! Without renunciation, without burning 
dispassion for sense-objects, without turning away from 
wealth and lust as from filthy abominations— if 

—‘‘Never can one attain salvation even in 
hundreds of Brahma's cycles.” Repeating the names of 
the Lord, meditation, worship, offering libations in sacred 
fire, penance—all these are for bringing forth renuncia¬ 
tion. One who has not gained renunciation, know his 
efforts to be like unto those of the man who is pulling at the 
oars all the while that the boat is at anchor. 

“Neither by progeny nor by wealth, 
but by renunciation alone some attained immortality.” 

Disciple: —Will mere renouncing of wealth and lust 
accomplish everything? 

Swamiji: —There are other hindrances on the path 
even after renouncing those two ; then, for example, comes 
name and fame. Very few men, unless of exceptional 
strength, can keep their balance under that. People 
shower honours upon them> and various enjoyments creep 
in by degrees. It is owing to this that three-fourths of the 
Tyagis are debarred from further progress ! For establish¬ 
ing this Math and other things, who knows but that I may 
have to come back again I 

Disciple:—If you say things like that, then we are 
undone! 

Swamiji:—What fear? —“Be fearless, be 

fearless, be fearless!” You have seen Nag Mahashaya— 
how even while living the life of a householder, he is 
more than a Sannyasin ! This is very uncommon ; I have 
rarely seen one like him. If anyone wants to be a house¬ 
holder, let him be like Nag Mahashava. He shines like 
a brilliant luminary in the spiritual firmament of East 


312 


SWAMI VIVEKANANDA'S WORKS 


Bengal. Ask the people of that part of the country to 
visit him often ; that will do much good to them. 

Disciple:—Nag Mahashaya, it seems, is the living 
personification of humility in the play of Sri Rama- 
krishna’s divine drama on earth. 

Swarniji: —Decidedly so, without a shadow of doubt f 
1 have a wish to go and see him once. Will you go with 
me? I love to see fields flooded over with water in the 
rains. Will you write to him? 

Disciple:—Certainly I will. He is always mad with 
joy when he hears about you, and says that East Bengal 
will be sanctified into a place of i>ilgrimage by the dust 
of your feet. 

Swamiji:—Do you know, Sri Ramakrishna used to 
speak of Nag Mahashaya as a “flaming fire”? 

Disciple:—Yes, so I have heard. 

At the request of Swamiji, the disciple partook of 
some prasada, and left for Calcutta late in the evening ; 
he was deeply thinking over the message of fearlessness 
that he had heard from the lips of the inspired teacher-^ 
“I am free!” ”1 am free!” 


XIV 

Rf.nl Nc'iAi ION OK Kama-Kanciiana—God’s Mfrcy Fai.i.s 
ON Tuosf Who Struggle for Reaijsation—LXcondi- 
noNAL Mercy and Brahman Are One 

(From the Diary of a disciple) 

Disciple: —Sri Ramakrishna used to say, Swamiji. 
that a man cannot progress far towards religious realisa¬ 
tion unless he first relinquishes Kama-Kanchana (lust and 


CONVERSATIONS AND DIALOGUES 


313 


wealth). If so, what will become of householders > For 
their whole minds are set on these two things. 

Swamiji:—It is true that the mind can never turn to 
God until the desire for lust and wealth has gone from it, 
be a man, householder or Sannyasin. Know this for a fact, 
that as long as the mind is caught in these, so long true 
devotion, firmness and Shraddha (faith) can never come. 

Disciple:—Where will the householders be, then? 
What way are they to follow? 

Swamiji:—To satisfy our smaller desires and have 
done with them for ever, and to relinquish the greater ones 
by discrimination—that is the way. Without renunciation 
God can never be realised ^ JTfTT ' even if 

Brahma himself enjoined otherwise ! 

Disciple: —But does renunciation of everything come 
as soon as one becomes a monk? 

Swamiji: —Sannyasins are at least struggling to make 
themselves ready for renunciation, whereas householders 
are in this matter like boatmen who work at their oars while 
the boat lies at anchor. Is the desire for enjoyment ever 
appeased? increases ever and ever.” 

Disciple:—Why? May not world-weariness come, 
after enjoying the objects of the senses over and over for 
a long time? 

Swamiji:—To how many does that come? The mind 
becomes tarnished by constant contact with the objects of 
the senses and receives a permanent moulding and impress 
from them. Renunciation, and renunciation alone, is the 
real secret, the Mulamantra, of all Realisation. 

Disciple: —But there are such injunctions of the seers 
in the scriptures as these:— — *To 

restrain the five senses while living with one’s wife and 
children is Tapas.” ^ —“For him 

whose desires are under control, living in the midst of his 
family is the same as retiring into a forest for Tapasya.” 

V—21 


314 


SWAMl VIVEKANANDA'S WORKS 


Swamiji: —Blessed indeed are those who can renounce 
Kama-Kanchana, living in their homes with their family ! 
But how many can do that? 

Disciple:—But then, what about the Sannyasins? Are 
they all able to relinquish lust and love for riches fully ? 

Swamiji:—As I said just now, Sannyasins are on the 
path of renunciation, they have taken the field, at least, to 
fight for the goal ; but householders, on the other hand, 
having no knowledge as yet of the danger that comes 
through lust and gold, do not even attempt to realise the 
Self ; that they must struggle to get rid of these is an idea 
that has not yet entered their minds. 

Disciple:—But many of them are struggling for it. 
Swamiji:—Oh, yes, and those who are doing so will 
surely renounce by degrees ; their inordinate attachment 
for Kama-Kanchana will diminish gradually. But for those 
who procrastinate, saying, “Oh, not so soon ! 1 shall do 

it when the time comes,** Self-realisation is very far off. 
“Let me realise the Truth this moment! In this very life !“ 
—these are the words of a hero. Such heroes are ever 
ready to renounce the very next moment, and to such the 
scripture says—“The moment 
you feel disgust for the vanities of the world, leave it all 
and take to the life of a monk.** 

Disciple: —But was not Sri Ramakrishna wont to say, 
*‘A11 these attachments vanish through the grace of God 
when one prays to Him? ” 

Swamiji:—Yes, it is so, no doubt, through His mercy, 
but one needs to be pure first before one can receive this 
mercy—pure in thought, word and deed ; then it is that 
His grace descends on one. 

Disciple: —But of what necessity is grace to him who 
can control himself in thought, word and deed? For then 
he would be able to develop himself in the path of 
spirituality by means of his own exertions I 

Swamiji:—^The Lord is very merciful to him whom 


CONVERSATIONS AND DIALOGUES 315 


He sees struggling heart and soul for Realisation. But 
remain idle, without any struggle, and you will see that 
His grace will never come. 

Disciple:—Everyone longs to be good, and yet the 
mind, for some inscrutable reasons, turns to evil ! Doe;^' 
not everyone wish to be good—to be perfect—to realise 
■God } 

Swamiji: —Know them to be already struggling who 
desire this. God bestows His mercy when this struggle is 
maintained. 

Disciple:—In the history of the Incarnations, we find 
many persons who, we should say, had led very dissipated 
lives and yet were able to realise God without much trouble 
and without performing any Sadhan^ or devotion. How 
is this accounted for? 

Swamiji:—Yes, but a great restlessness must already 
have come upon them ; long enjoyment of the objects of 
the senses must already have created in these deep disgust. 
Want of peace must have been consuming their very 
hearts. So deeply they had already felt this void in their 
hearts that life even for a moment had seemed unbearable 
to them unless they could gain that peace which follows 
in the train of the Lord's mercy. So God was kind to 
them. This development took place in them direct from 
Tamas to Sattva. 

Disciple:—Then, whatever was the path, they may 
be said to have realised God truly in that way? 

Swamiji:—Yes, why not? But is it not better to enter 
into a mansion by the main entrance than by its doorway 
of dishonour? 

Disciple:—No doubt that is true. Yet, the point is 
established that through mercy alone one can realise God. 

Swamiji:—Oh, yes, that one can, but few indeed are 
there who do so ! 

Disciple:—It appears to me that those who seek to 
realise God by restraining their senses and renouncing lust 


316 


SWAMI VIVEKANANDA'S WORKS 


and wealth hold to the (free-will) theory of self-exertion 
and self-help ; and that those who take the name of the 
Lord and depend on Him are made free by the Lord 
Himself of all worldly attachments, and led by Him to 
the supreme stage of Realisation. 

Swamiji: — True, those are the two different stand¬ 
points, the former held by the Jnanis, and the latter by 
the Bhaktas. Rut the ideal of renunciation is the keynote 
of both. 

Disciple: —No doubt about that I But Srijut Giris 
Chandra Ghose^ once said to me that there could be no 
condition in God’s mercy ; there could be no law for it! 
If there were, then it could no longer be termed mercy. 

1 he realm of grace of mercy must transcend all laws. 

Swamiji: —But there must be some higher law at work 
in the sphere alluded to by G. C. of which we are ignorant. 
Those are words, indeed, for the last stage of develop¬ 
ment, which alone is beyond time, space and causation. 
But, when we get there, who will be merciful, and to 
whom, where there is no law of causation? There the 
worshipper and the worshipped, the meditator and the 
object of meditation, the knower and the known, all 
become one—call that Grace, or Brahman, if you will. It 
is al! one uniform homogeneous entity ! 

Disciple:—Hearing these words from you, Swamiji, 

I have come to understand the essence of all philosophy 
and religion (Vedas and Vedanta) ; it seems as if 1 had 
hitherto been living in the midst of high-sounding words 
without any meaning. 


^ Tho great Bengalee actor-dramatist, a staunch devotee of Sri 
I^anivikrishna. 


CONVERSATIONS AND DIALOGUES 


317 


XV 

The Doctrine of Ahimsa and Meat-eating—The Sattva, 
Rajas, and Tamas in Man—Discrimination of Food 
and Spirituality—‘Ahara’—The Three De¬ 

fects IN Food—Don’t-touchism and Caste- 
prejudices—Plan of Resioring the Old 
Chaturvarna and the Laws of 
THE RisHIS 

(From the Diary of a disciple) 

Disciple:—Pray, Swamiji, do tell ne if there is any 
relation between the discrimination of food taken and the 
development of spirituality in man. 

Swamiji:—Yes, there is, more or less. 

Disciple: —Is it proper or necessary to take fish and 
meat ? 

Swamiji:—Aye, take them, my boy! And if there 
be any harm in doing so, I will take care of that. Look at 
the masses of our country 1 What a look of sadness on their 
faces and what want of courage and enthusiasm in their 
hearts, with large stomachs and no strength in their hands 
and feet—a set of cowards frightened at every trifle ! 

Disciple: —Does the taking of fish and meat give 
strength? Why do Buddhism and Vaishnavism preach 
W: “Non-killing is the highest virtue*’? 

Swamiji:—Buddhism and Vaishnavism are not two 
different things. During the decline of Buddhism in India, 
Hinduism took from her a few cardinal tenets of conduct 
and made them her own, and these have now come to be 
known as Vaishnavism. The Buddhist tenet, “Non-killing 
is supreme virtue,** is very good, but in trying to enforce 
it upon all by legislation without paying any heed to the 
capacities of the people at large, Buddhism has brought 


318 


SWAMI VIVEKANANDA^S WORKS 


ruin upon India. 1 have come across many a “religious 
heron” ^ in India, who fed ants with sugar, and at the 
same time would not hesitate to bring ruin on his own 
brother for the sake of “filthy lucre” I 

Disciple:—But in the Vedas as well as in the laws of 
Manu, there are injunctions to take fish and meat. 

Swamiji:—Aye, and injunctions to abstain from killing 
as well. For the Vedas enjoin ;pfX “Cause 

no injury to any being,” and Manu also has said— 

—“Cessation of desire brings great results.” 
Killing and non-killing have both been enjoined, according 
to the individual capacity, or fitness and adaptability, of 
those who will observe the one practice or the other. 

Disciple:—It is the fashion here nowadays to give up 
fish and meal as soon as one takes to religion, and to many 
it is more sinful not to do so than to commit such great 
sins as adultery. Flow, do you think, such notions came 
into existence) 

Swamiji: —What s the use of your knowing how they 
came, when you see clearly, do you not, that such notions 
are working ruin to our country and our society) Just 
see—the people of East Bengal eat much fish, meat and 
turtle, and they are much healthier than those of this 
part of Bengal. Even the rich men of East Bengal have 
not yet taken to ioochis or chapdtis at night, and they do 
not suffer from acidity and dyspepsia like us. 1 have heard 
that in the villages of East Bengal the people have not 
the slightest idea of what dyspepsia means ! 

Disciple:—Quite so, Swamiji. We never complain of 
dyspepsia in our part of the country. 1 first heard of it 


1 Meaning, religious hyix)crite. The heron, so the story goes, 
gave it out to the hslies that he had forsaken his old habit of catching 
lish and turned highly religious. ?o he took his stand by the brink 
of the water and feigned to be meditating, while in reality he was 
always watching his opportunity to catch the unwary fish. 


CONVERSATIONS AND DIALOGUES 


319 


after coming to these parts. We take fish with rice, 
mornings and evenings. 

Swamiji:—Yes, take as much of that as you can, with¬ 
out fearing ciiticism. The country has been flooded with 
dyspeptic babajis living on vegetables only. That is no 
sign of Sattva but of deep Tamas—the shadow of death. 
Brightness in the face, undaunted enthusiasm in the heart, 
and tremendous activity—these result from Sattva : where¬ 
as idleness, lethargy, inordinate attachment and sleep are 
the signs of Tamas. 

Disciple: —But do not fish and meat increase Rajas 
in man ? 

Swamiji:—That is what I want yon to have, Rajas is 
badly needed just now ! More than ninety per cent of 
those whom you now take to be men with the Sattva 
quality are only steeped in the deepest Tamas. Enough 
if you find one-sixteenth of them to be really Sattvika ! 
What we want now is an immense awakening of Rajasika 
energy, for the whole country is wrapped in the shroud 
of Tamas. The people of this land must be fed and 
clothed—must be awakened—must be made more fully 
active. Otherwise they will become inert, as inert as 
trees and stones. So, 1 say, eat large quantities of fish and 
meat, my boy ! 

Disciple: —Does a liking for fish and meat remain 
when one has fully developed the Sattva quality } 

Swamiji:—No, it does not. All liking for fish and 
meat disappears when pure Sattva is highly developed, 
and these are the signs of its manifestation in a soul: — 
sacrifice of everything for others, perfect non-attachment 
to lust and wealth, want of pride and egoism. The desire 
for animal food goes when these things are seen in a man. 
And where such indications are absent, and yet you find 
men siding with the non-killing party, know it for a 
certainty that here there is either hyprocrisy or a show of 


320 


SWAMI VIVEKANANDA*S WORKS 


religion. When you yourself come to that stage of pure 
Sattva, give up fish and meat, by all means. 

Disciple:—But in the Chhandogya Upanishad there is 
this passage— “Through pure food the 

Sattva quality in a man becomes pure. 

Swamiji:—Yes, 1 know. Shankaracharya has said that 
the word Ahara there means ‘ objects of the senses, 
whereas Sri Ramanuja has taken the meaning of Ahara 
to be “food. ” In my opinion we should take that meaning 
of the word which reconciles both these points of view. 
Are we to pass our lives discussing all the time about the 
purity and impurity of food only, or are we to practise 
the restraining of our senses? Surely, the restraining of 
the senses is the main object; and the discrimination of 
good and bad, pure and impure foods, only helps one, to 
a certain extent, in gaining that end. There are, according 
to our scriptures, three things which make food impure: 
(I) Jati-dosha, or natural defects of a certain class of food, 
like onions, garlic, etc.; (2) Nimitta-dosha, or defects 
arising from the presence of external impurities in it, such 
as dead insects, dust, etc., that attach to sweetmeats 
bought in shops; (3) Ashraya-dosha, or defects that arise 
by the food coming from evil sources, as when it has been 
touched and handled by wicked persons. Special care 
should be taken to avoid the first and second classes of 
defects. But in this country men pay no regard to these 
very two, and go on fighting for the third alone, the very 
one that none but a Yogi could really discriminate ! The 
country from end to end is being bored to extinction by 
the cries, “Don’t touch,” “Don’t touch,” of the non- 
touchism party. In that explusive circle of theirs, too, 
there is no discrimination of good and bad men, for their 
food may be taken from the hands of anyone who wears 
a thread round his neck and calls himself a Brahmin I 
Sri Ramakrishna was quite unable to take food in this 
indiscriminaate way from the hands of any and all. It 


CONVERSATIONS AND DIALOGUES 


321 


happened many a time that he would not accept food 
touched by a certain person or persons, and on rigorous 
investigation it would turn out that these had some parti¬ 
cular stain to hide. Your religion seems nowadays to be 
confined to the cooking-pot alone. You put on one side 
the sublime truths of religion and fight, as they say, for 
the skin of the fruit and not for the fruit itself ! 

Disciple:—Do you mean, then that we should eat 
the food handled by anyone and everyone > 

Swamiji:—Why so? Now, look here. You being a 
Brahmin of a certain class, say, of the Bhaltacharya class, 
why should you not eat rice cooked by Brahmins of all 
classes? Why should you, who belong tc the rdrhi section, 
object to take rice cooked by a Brahmin of the bdrendra 
section, or why should a barendra object to taking your 
rice? Again, why should not the other sub-castes in the 
west and south of India, e.g., the Mahratti, Telingi, 
Kanouji, do the same? Do you not see that hundreds 
of Brahmins and kAyasthas in Bengal now go secretly to 
eat dainties in public restaurants, and when they come 
out of those places pose as leaders of society and frame 
rules to support don’t-touchism ! Must our society really 
be guided by laws dictated by such hypocrites? No, 1 
say. On the contrary we must turn them out. The laws 
laid down by the great Rishis of old must be brought 
back and be made to rule supreme once more. Then 
alone can national well-being be ours. 

Disciple:—Then, do not the laws laid down by the 
Rishis rule and guide our present society ? 

Swamiji:—Vain delusion! Where indeed is that the 
case nowadays? Nowhere have I found the laws of the 
Rishis current in India, even when during my travels 
1 searched carefully and thoroughly. The blind and not 
unoften meaningless customs sanctioned by the people, 
local prejudices and ideas, and the usages and ceremonials 


322 


SWAMI VIVEKANANDA'S WORKS 


prevalent amongst women, are what really govern society 
everywhere ! How many care to read the Shastras or to 
lead society according to their ordinances after careful 
study ? 

Disciple : —What are we to do, then ? 

Swamiji:—We must revive the old laws of the Rishis. 
We must initiate the whole people into the codes of our 
old Manu and Yajnavalkya, with a few modifications here 
and there to adjust them to the changed circumstances of 
the time. Do you not see that nowhere in India now are 
the original four castes (Chaturvarnya) to be found? We 
have to redivide the whole Hindu population, grouping 
it under the four main castes of Brahmins, Kshatriyas, 
Vaishyas and Shudras, as of old. 1 he numberless modern 
subdivisions of the Brahmins that split them up into so 
many castes, as it were, have to be abolished and a single 
Brahmin caste to be made by uniting them all. Each of 
the three remaining castes also will have to be brought 
similarly into single groups, as was the case in Vedic times. 
Without this will the Motherland be really benefited by 
your simply crying, as you do nowadays, “We won’t touch 
you! ; We wont take him back into our caste!’’? 
Never, my boy ! 


SAYINGS 

AND UTTERANCES-1 


SAYINGS AND UTTERANCES-I 


1. Man is born to conquer nature and not to follow it. 

2. When you think you are a body, you are apart 
from the universe; when you think you are a soul, you 
are a spark from the great Eternal Fire; when you think 
you are the Atman, you are All. 

3. The will IS not free—it is a phenomenon bound by 
cause and effect—but there is something behind the will 
which is free. 

4. Strength is in goodness, in puiity. 

5. The universe is—objectified God. 

6. You cannot believe in God until you believe in 
yourself. 

7. The root of evil is in the illusion that we are 
bodies. This, if any, is the original sin. 

8. One party says thought is caused by matter, and 
the other says matter is caused by thought. Both state¬ 
ments are wrong; matter and thought are co-existent. 
There is a third something, of which both matter and 
thought are products. 

9. As particles of matter combine in space, so mind- 
waves combine in time. 

10. To define God is—grinding the already ground; 
for He is the only being we know. 

11. Religion is the idea which is raising the brute 
unto man, and man unto God. 

12. External nature is only internal nature writ large. 

13. The motive is the measure of your work. What 
motive can be higher than that you are God, and that 
the lowest man is also God? 

14. The observer in the psychic world needs to be 
very strong and scientifically trained. 


324 SWAM! VIVEKANANDA’S WORKS 

15. To believe that mind is all» that thought is all, 
is only a higher materialism. 

16. This world is the great gymnasium where we 
come to make ourselves strong. 

17. You cannot teach a child any more than you can 
grow a plant. All you can do is on the negative side— 
you can only help. It is a manifestation from within ; 
it develops its own nature—you can only take away 
obstructions. 

18. As soon as you make a sect you protest against 
universal brotherhood. 1 hose who really feel universal 
brotherhood do not talk much, but their very actions speak 
aloud. 

19. Truth can be stated in a thousand different ways, 
yet each one can be true. 

20. You have to grow from inside out. None can 
teach you, none can make you spiritual. There is no 
other teacher but your own soul. 

21. If in an infinite chain a few links can be ex¬ 
plained, by the same method all can be explained. 

22. 1 hat man has reached immortality who is dis¬ 
turbed by nothing material. 

23. Everything can be sacrificed for truth, but truth 
cannot be sacrificed for anything. 

24. The search for truth is the expression of strength 
—not the groping of a weak, blind man. 

25. God has become man ; man will become God 
again. 

26. It is child s talk that a man dies and goes to 
heaven. We never come nor go. We are where we are. 
All the souls that have been, are, and will be, are on one 
geometrical point. 

27. He whose book of the heart has been opened 
needs no other books. Their only value is to create 
desire in us. They are merely the experiences of others. 


SAYINGS AND UTTERANCES 


325 


28. Have charity towards all beings. Pity those who 
are in distress. Love all creatures. Do not be jealous of 
anyone. Look not to the faults of others. 

29. Man never dies, nor is he ever born ; bodies die, 
but he never dies. 

30. No one is born into a religion, but each one is 
born for a religion. 

31. There is really but one Self in the universe, all 
else is but Its manifestations. 

32. All the worshippers are divided into the common 
masses and the brave few. 

33. If it is impossible to attain perfection here and 
now, there is no proof that we can ain perfection in 
any other life. 

34. If 1 know one lump of clay perfectly, I know all 
the clay there is. This is the knowledge of principles, but 
their adaptations are various. When you know yourself 
you know all. 

35. Personally 1 take as much of the Vedas as agrees 
with reason. Parts of the Vedas are apparently contra¬ 
dictory. They are not considered as inspired in the 
Western sense of the word, but as the sum total of the 
knowledge of God, omniscience. This knowledge comes 
out at the beginning of a cycle and manifests itself ; and 
when the cycle ends, it goes down into minute form. 
When the cycle is projected again, that knowledge is pro¬ 
jected again with it. So far the theory is all right. But 
that only these books which are called the Vedas are this 
knowledge is mere sophistry. Manu says in one place that 
that part of the Vedas which agrees with reason is the 
Vedas, and nothing else. Many of our philosophers have 
taken this view. 

36. Of all the scriptures of the world it is the Vedas 
alone that declare that even the study of the Vedas is 
secondary. The real study is “that by which we realise 


326 


SWAMI VIVEKANANDA*S WORKS 


the Unchangeable.” And that is neither reading, nor 
believing, nor reasoning, but superconscious perception, 
or Samadhi. 

37. We have been low animals once. We think they 

are something different from us. 1 hear Western people 
say: ‘‘The world was created for us.” If tigers could 

write books, they would say man was created for them 
and that man is a most sinful animal, because he does not 
allow him (the tiger) to catch him easily. The worm that 
crawls under your feet to-day is a God to be. 

38. ”1 should very much like our women to have 
your intellectuality, but not if it must be at the cost of 
purity,” said Swami Vivekananda in New York. ‘‘1 admire 
you for all that you know, but 1 dislike the way that you 
cover what is bad with roses and call it good. Intellec¬ 
tuality is not the highest good. Morality and spirituality 
are the things for which we strive. Our women are not 
so learned, but they are more pure. To all women every 
man save her husband should be as her son. 

“lo all men every woman save his own wife should 
be as his mother. When 1 look about me and see what 
you call gallantry, my soul is filled with disgust. Not until 
you learn to ignore the question of sex and to meet on a 
ground of common humanity will your women really 
develop. Until then they are playthings, nothing more. 
All this is the cause of divorce. Your men bow low and 
offer a chair, but in another breath they offer compliments. 
They say. Oh, madam, how beautiful are your eyes! 
What right have they to do this? How dare a man venture 
so far, and how can you women permit it? Such things 
develop the less noble side of humanity. They do not 
tend to nobler ideals. 

We should not think that we are men and women, 
but only that we are human beings, born to cherish and to 
help one another. No sooner are a young man and a 


SAYINGS AND UTTERANCES 


327 


young woman left alone than he pays compliments to her, 
and perhaps before he takes a wife he has courted two 
hundred women. Bah ! If I belonged to the marrying set 
I could find a woman to love without all that! 

“When 1 was in India and saw these things from the 
outside I was told it is all right, it is mere pleasantry, and 
I believed it. But I have travelled since then, and 1 know 
it is not right. It is wrong, only you of the West shut 
your eyes and call it good. The trouble with the nations 
of the West is [hat they are young, foolish, fickle and 
wealthy. What mischief can come of one ci these qualities, 
but when all three, all four, are combined, bewaVe!“ 

But severe as the Swami was upon * 'i. Boston received 
the hardest blow: 

“Of all, Boston is the worst. There the women are 
all faddists, all fickle, merely bent on following something 
new and strange.’* 

39. “Where is the spirituality one would expect in a 
country,*’ he said in America, “that is so boastful of its 
civilisation 

40. Here” and “hereafter” are words to frighten 
children. It is all “here.” To live and move in God, 
even here, even in this body, all self should go out, all 
superstition should be banished. Such persons live in 
India. Where are such in this country (America)? Your 
preachers speak against dreamers. The people of this 
country would be better off if there were more dreamers. 
There is a good deal of difference between dreaming and 
the brag of the nineteenth century. The whole world is 
full of God and not of sin. Let us help one another, let 
us love one another. 

41. Let me die a true Sannyasin as my Master did, 
heedless of money, of women, and of fame I And of 
these the most insidious is the love of fame I 

42. 1 have never spoken of revenge, I have always 
V—22 


328 


SWAMI VIVEKANANDA'S WORKS 


spoken of strength. Do we dream of revenging ourselves 
on this drop of sea-spray ? But it is a great thing to a 
mosquito I 

43. ‘'This is a great land/’ said Swamiji on one 
occasion in America, but 1 would not like to live here. 
Americans think too much of money. They give it pre¬ 
ference over everything else. Your people have much to 
learn. When your nation is as old as ours, you will be 
wiser.’* 

44. It may be that 1 shall find it good to get outside 
of my body—to cast It off like a disused garment. But I 
shall not cease to work! I shall inspire men everywhere, 
until the world shall know that it is one with God. 

day be, is owing to my Master, Sr\ RaTnaWisWa, wYo 
incarnated and experienced and taught this wonderful 
unity which underlies everything, having discovered it 
alike in Idinduism, in Islam, and in Christianity. 

46. Give the organ of taste a free rein, and the other 
organs will also run on unbridled. 

47. Jnana, Bhakti, Yoga, and Karma—these are the 
four paths which lead to salvation. One must follow the 
path for which one is best suited ; but in this age special 
stress should be laid on Karma Yoga. 

48. Religion is not a thing of imagination but of 
direct perception. He who has seen even a single spirit 
is greater than many a book-learned Pandit. 

49. Once Swamiji was praising someone very much ; 
at this, one sitting near by said to him, “But he does not 
believe in you.” Hearing this, Swamiji at once replied: 
“Is there any legal affidavit that he should have to do so? 
He is doing good work, and so he is worthy of praise.** 

50. In the domain of true religion, book-learning 
has no right to enter. 


SAYINGS AND UTTERANCES 


329 


51. The downfall of a religious sect begins from the 
day that the worship of the rich enters into it. 

52. If you want to do anything evil, do it before the 
eyes of your superiors. 

53. By the grace of the Guru, a disciple becomes a 
Pandit (scholar) even without reading books. 

54. There is no sin nor virtue: there is only 
ignorance. By realisation of non-duality this ignorance is 
dispelled. 

55. Religious movements come in groups. Each one 
of them tries to rear itself above the rest. But as a rule 
only one of them really grows in strength, and this, in the 
Jong run, swallows up all the contemporary movements. 

56. When Swami)! was at Ramnad, he said in the 
conxse oi a coiweisation l\\at Sri Rama was l\\e Paramat- 
man and that Sita was the Jivatman and each man’s or 
woman’s body was the Lanka (Ceylon). The Jivatman 
which was enclosed in the body, or captured in the Island 
of Lanka, always desired to be in affinity with the Paramat- 
man, or Sri Rama. But the Rakshasas would not allow it, 
and Rakshasas represented certain traits of character. For 
instance, Vibhishana represented Sattva Guna ; Ravana 
Rajas ; and Kumbhakarna, 1 amas. Sattva Guna means 
goodness ; Rajas means lust and passions, and Tamas 
darkness, stupor, avarice, malice, and its concomitants. 
I hese Gunas keep back Sita, or Jivatman, which is in the 
body or Lanka, from joining Paramatman, or Rama. Sita, 
thus imprisoned and trying to unite with her Lord, receives 
a visit from Hanuman, the Guru or divine teacher, who 
shows her the Lord’s ring, which is Brahma Jnana, the 
supreme wisdom that destroys all illusions, and thus Sita 
finds the way to be at one with Sri Rama, or, in other 
words, the Jivatman finds itself one with the Paramatman. 

57. A true Christian is a true Hindu, and a true 
Hindu is a true Christian. 


330 


SWAMI VIVEKANANDA^S WORKS 


58. All healthy social changes are the manifestations 
of the spiritual forces working within, and if these are 
strong and well adjusted, society will arrange itself ac¬ 
cordingly, Each individual has to work out his own 
salvation ; there is no other way, and so also with nations. 
Again, the great institutions of every nation are the con¬ 
ditions of its very existence and cannot be transformed by 
the mould of any other race. Until higher institutions 
have been evolved, any attempt to break the old ones will 
be disastrous. Growth is always gradual. 

It is very easy to point out the defects of institutions, 
all being more or less imperfect, but he is the real 
benefactor of humanity who helps the individual to over¬ 
come his imperfections under whatever institutions he 
may live. I he individuals being raised, the nation 
and its institutions are bound to rise. Bad customs and 
laws are ignored by the virtuous, and unwritten but 
mightier laws of love, sympathy and integrity take their 
place. Happy is the nation which can rise to the necessity 
of but few law books, and needs no longer to bother its 
head about this or that institution. Good men rise beyond 
all laws, and will help their fellows to rise under whatever 
conditions they live. 

1 he salvation of India, therefore, depends on the 
strength of the individual, and the realisation by each 
of the divinity within. 


man 


WRITINGS—PROSE AND 
POEMS-II 


THE MESSAGE OF DIVINE WISDOM 


The following three chapters were discovered among 
Swami Vivekananda’s papers. He evidently intended to 
write a book and jotted down some points for the work. 


1 Bondage II The Law 

III The Absolute and the Attainment of Freedom 


I 

BONDAGE 

1. Desire is infinite, its fulfilment limited. Desire is 
unlimited in everyone, the power of fulfilment varies. 
Thus, some are more successful than others in life. 

2. 1 his limitation is the bondage we are struggling 
against all our lives. 

3. We desire only the pleasurable, not the painful. 

4. The objects of desire are all complex—pleasure¬ 
giving and pain-bringing mixed up. 

5. We do not or cannot see the painful parts in 
objects, we are charmed with only the pleasurable portion ; 
and, thus grasping the pleasurable, we unwittingly draw 
in the painful. 

6. At times we vainly hope that in our case only the 
pleasurable will come, leaving the painful aside, which 
never happens. 

7. Our desires also are constantly changing—what 
we would prize to-day we would reject to-morrow. The 
pleasure of the-present will be the pain of the future, the 
loved hated, and so on. 


332 SWAMI VIVEKANANDA'S WORKS 

8. We vainly hope that in the future life we shall be 
able to gather in only the pleasurable, to the exclusion of 
the painful. 

9. The future is only the extension of the present. 
Such a thing cannot be 1 

10. Whosoever seeks pleasure in objects will get it, 
but he must take the pain with it. 

I 1. All objective pleasure in the long run must bring 
pain, because of the fact of change or death. 

12. Death is the goal of all objects, change is the 
nature of all objective things. 

13. As desire increases, so increases the power of 
pleasure, so the ^power of pain. 

14. The finer the organism, the higher the culture— 
the greater is the power to enjoy pleasure and the sharper 
are the pangs of pain. 

15. Menial pleasures are greatly superior to physical 
joys. Mental pains are more poignant than physical 
tortures. 

16. The power of thought, of looking far away into 
the future, and the power of memory, of recalling the past 
to the present, make us live in heaven ; they, make us live 
in hell also. 

17. 1 he man who can collect the largest amount of 
pleasuraL'le objects around him is as a rule too unimagin¬ 
ative to enjoy them. 1 he man of great imagination is 
thwarted by the intensity of his feeling of loss, or fear of 
loss, or perception of defects. 

18. We are struggling hard to conquer pain, succeed¬ 
ing in the attempt and yet creating new pains at the same 
time. 

19. We achieve success and we are overthrown by 
failure, we pursue pleasure and we are pursued by pain. 

20. We say we do, we are made to.do. We say we 
work, we are made to labour. We say we live, we are 


THE MESSAGE OF DIVINE WISDOM 333 


made to die every moment. We are in the crowd, we 
cannot stop, must go on—it deserves no cheering. Had it 
not been so, no amount of cheering would make us under¬ 
take all this pain and misery for a grain of pleasure— 
which, alas, in most cases is only a hope I 

21. Our pessimism is a dread reality, our optimism 
is a faint cheering, making the best of a bad job. 


11 

THE LAW 

1. The law is never separate from the phenomena, 
the principle from the person. 

2. The law is the method of action or poise of every 
single phenomenon within its scope. 

3. We get our knowledge of law from the massing 
and welding of changes that occur. We never see law 
beyond these changes. The idea of law as something 
separate from phenomena is a mental abstraction, a con¬ 
venient use of words^ and nothing more. Law is a part of 
every change within its range, a manner which resides in 
the things governed by the law. The power resides in the 
things, is a part of our idea of that thing—its action upon 
something else is in a certain manner—this is our law. 

4. Law is in the actual state of things^r—it is in how 
they act towards each other and not in how they should. 
It might have been better if fire did not burn or water wet, 
but that they do—this is the law and if it is a true law, 
a fire that does not burn or water that does not wet is 
neither fire nor water. 

5. Spiritual laws, ethical laws, social laws, national 
laws—are laws if they are parts of existing spiritual and 
human units and the unfailing experience of the action 
of every unit said to be bound by such laws. 


334 


SWAMI VIVEKANANDA^S WORKS 


6. We, by turn, are made by law and make it, 
A generalisation of what man does invariably in certain 
circumstances is a law with regard to man in that particular 
aspect. It is the invariable, universal human action that is 
law for man—and which no individual can escape—and 
yet the summation of the action of each individual is the 
universal Law. The sum total, or the universal, or the 
infinite, is fashioning the individual, while the individual 
is keeping by its action the Law alive. Law in this sense 
is another name for the universal. The universal is 
dependent upon the individual, the individual dependent 
upon the universal. It is an infinite made up of finite 
parts, c\n infinite of number, though involving the difficulty 
of assuming an infinity summed up of finites—yet for all 
practical purposes, it is a fact before us. And as the law, 
or whole, or the Infinite, cannot be destroyed—and the 
destruction of a part of an infinite is an impossibility, as 
we cannot either add anything to or subtract anything 
from the infinite—each part persists for ever. 

7. Laws regarding the materials of which the body 
of man is composed have been found out, and also the 
persistence of these materials through time has been shown. 
The elements which composed the body of a man a 
hundred thousand years ago have been proved to be still 
existing in some place or other. The thoughts which have 
been projected also are living in other minds. 

8. But the difficulty is to find a law about the man 
beyond the body. 

9. The spiritual and ethical laws are not the method 
of action of every human being. The systems of ethics, of 
morality, even of national laws, are honoured more in the 
breach than in the observance. If they were laws how 
could they be broken ? 

10. No man is able to go against the laws of nature. 


THE MESSAGE OF DIVINE WISDOM 335 


How is it that we always complain of his breaking the 
moral laws, national laws? 

11. The national laws at best are the embodied will 
of a majority of the nation—always a state of things 
wished for, not actually existing. 

12. The ideal law may be that no man should covet 
the belongings of others, but the actual law is that a very 
large number do. 

13. Thus the word law used in regard to laws of 
nature has a very different interpretation when applied to 
ethics and human actions generally. 

14. Analysing the ethical laws of the world and 
comparing them with the actual state of things two laws 
stand out supreme. The one, that of repelling everything 
from us—separating ourselves from everyone—which leads 
to self-aggrandisement even at the cost of everyone else’s 
happiness. The other, that of self-sacrifice—of taking no 
thought of ourselves—only of others. Both spring from 
the search for happiness—one, of finding happiness in 
injuring others and the ability of feeling that happiness 
only in our own senses. The other, of finding happiness 
in doing good to others—the ability of feeling happy, as 
it were, through the senses of others. The great and good 
of the world are those who have the latter power pre¬ 
dominating. Yet both these are working side by side 
conjointly ; in almost everyone they are found in mixture, 
one or the other predominating. The thief steals, perhaps, 
for someone he loves. 


ni 

THE ABSOLUTE AND THE ATTAINMENT OF 
FREEDOM 

I. Om Tat Sat—that Being—Knowing—Bliss. 

(a) The only real Existence, which alone is—every- 


336 


SWAMI VIVEKANANDA^S WORKS 


thing else exists inasmuch as it reflects that real Existence. 

(b) It is the only Knower—the only Self-luminous— 
the Light of consciousness. Everything else shines by 
light borrowed from It. Everything else knows inasm.uch 
as it reflects Its knowing. 

(c) It is the only Blessedness—as in It there is no 
want. It comprehends all—is the essence of all. 

It is Sat-Chit-Ananda. 

(d) It has no parts, no attributes, neither pleasure nor 
pain, nor is it matter nor mind. It is the Supreme, 
Infinite, Impersonal Self in everything, the Infinite Ego 
of the Universe. 

(e) It is the Reality in me. in thee, and in everything 
—therefore, 

' That thou arf* — Tattvamasi. 

1. I he same Impersonal is conceived by the mind as 
the Creator, the Ruler and the Dissolver of this universe, 
its material as well as its efficient cause, the Supreme 
Ruler—the Living, the Loving, the Beautiful, in the 
highest sense. 

(a) 1 he Absolute Being is manifested in Its highest 
in Isvara, or the Supreme Ruler, as the highest and 
omnipotent Life, or Energy. 

(b) 1 he Absolute Knowledge is manifesting Itself in 
Its highest as Infinite Love, in the Supreme Lord. 

(c) The Absolute Bliss is manifested as the Infinite 
Beautiful, in the Supreme Lord. He is the greatest attrac¬ 
tion of the soul. 

The Satifarn-Shivam-Sundarani. 

The Absolute, or Brahman, the Sat-Chit-Ananda, is 
Impersonal and the real Infinite. 

Every existence from the highest to the lowest, all 
manifest according to their degree as—energy (in the 


THE MESSAGE OF DIVINE WISDOM 337 


higher life), attraction (in the higher love), and struggle 
for equilibrium (in the higher happiness). This highest 
Energy-Love-Beauty is a person, an individual, the Infinite 
Mother of this universe—the God of gods—the Lord of 
lords, Omnipresent yet separate from the universe—the 
Soul of souls, yet separate from every soul—the Mother 
of this universe, because She has produced it—its Ruler, 
because She guides it with the greatest love and in the 
long run brings everything back to Herself. Through Her 
command the sun and moon shine, the clouds rain, and 
death stalks upon the earth. 

She is the power of all causation. She energises every 
cause unmistakably to produce the effect. Her will is the 
only law, and as She cannot make a mistake, Nature’s 
laws—Her will—can never be changed. She is the life of 
the law of Karma or causation. She is the fructifier of 
every action. Under Her guidance we are manufacturing 
our lives through our deeds, or Karma. 

Freedom is the motive of the universe, freedom its 
goal. The laws of nature are the methods through which 
we are struggling to reach that freedom, under the 
guidance of Mother. This universal struggle for freedom 
attains its highest expression in man in the conscious 
desire to be free. 

This freedom is attained by the threefold means of— 
work, worship and knowledge. 

(a) Work—constant, unceasing effort to help others 
and love others. 

(b) Worship—consists in prayer, praise and medita¬ 
tion. 

(c) Knowledge—that follows meditation. 


THE BELUR MATH : AN APPEAL 

I he success which attended the labours of the 
disciples of Sri Ramakrishna Paramahamsa in diffusing the 
principles of Hindu religion and obtaining some respect 
for our much abused faith in the West, gave rise to the 
hope of training a number of young Sannyasins to carry 
on the propaganda, both in and out of India. And an 
attempt is being made to educate a number of young men 
according to the Vedic principle of students living in touch 
with the Guru. 

A Math has already been started on the Ganges near 
Calcutta, through the kindness of some European and 
American friends. 

I he work, to produce any visible results in a short 
time, requires funds and hence this appeal to those who 
are in sympathy with our efforts. 

It is intended to extend the operations of the Math, 
by educating in the Math as many young men as the funds 
can afford, in both Western science and Indian spirituality, 
so that in addition to the advantages of a University 
education, they will acquire a manly discipline by living 
in contact with their teachers. 

I he central Math near C alcutta will gradually start 
br inches in other parts of the country as men become 
ready and the means are forthcoming. 

It is a work which will take time to bring forth any 
permanent result and requires a great deal of sacrifice on 
the part of our young men and on those who have the 
means of helping this work. 

We believe the men are ready, and our appeal there¬ 
fore is to those who really love their religion and their 
country and have the means to show their sympathy 
practically by helping the cause. 


ViVEKANANDA. 


THE ADVAITA ASHRAMA, HIMALAYAS^ 


in Whom is the Universe, Who is in the Universe, 
Who is the Universe ; in Whom is the Soul, Who is in the 
Soul, Who is the Soul of man ; knowing Him—and there¬ 
fore the Universe—as our Self, alone extinguishes all fear, 
brings an end to misery and leads to Infinite Freedom. 
Wherever there has been expansion in love or progress in 
well-being, of individuals or numbers, it has been through 
the perception, realisation and the practicalisation of the 
Eternal Truth— The Oneness OF All Beings. “Depend¬ 
ence is misery. Independence is happiness.*' The 
Advaita is the only system which gives unto man complete 
possession of himself, takes off all dependence and its 
associated superstitions, thus making us brave to suffer, 
brave to do, and in the long run attain to Absolute 
Freedom. 

Hitherto it has not been possible to preach this Noble 
fruth entirely free from the settings of dualistic weakness ; 
this alone, we are convinced, explains why it has not been 
more operative smd useful to mankind at large. 

To give this One Truth a freer and fuller scope in 
elevating the lives of individuals and leavening the mass 
of mankind, we start this Advaita Ashrama on the 
Himalayan heights, the land of its first expiration. 

Here it is hoped to keep Advaita free from all super¬ 
stitions and weakening contaminations. Here will be 
taught and practised nothing but the Doctrine of Unity, 
pure and simple ; and though in entire sympathy with all 
other systems, this Ashrama is dedicated to Advaita and 
Advaita alone. 

^ These lines were sent in a letter, IMarch, 1899, by Swamiji, 
for embodying in the prospectus of the Advaita Ashrama, Maya- 
vati, Almora, Himalayas. 


THE RAMAKRISHNA HOME OF SERVICE 
BENARES: AN APPEAL^ 

Dear- 

We beg your acceptance of the past year’s Report of 
the Rairiakrishna Home of Service, Benares, embodying a 
short statement of our humble efforts towards the amelio¬ 
ration, however little, of the miserable state into which a 
good many of our fellow-beings, generally old men and 
women, are cast in this city. 

In these days of intellectual awakening and steadily 
asserting public opinion, the holy places of the Hindus, 
their condition, and method of work, have not escaped the 
keen eye of criticism ; and this city, being the holy of 
holies to all Hindus, has not failed to attract its full share 
of censure. 

In other sacred places people go to purify themselves 
from sin, and their connection with these places is casual, 
and of a few days duration. In this, the most ancient and 
living centre of Aryan religious activity, there come men 
and women, and as a rule, old and decrepit, waiting to 
pass unto Eternal kreedom, through the greatest of all 
sanctifications, death under the shadow of the temple of 
the Lord of the Universe. 

And then there are those who have renounced every¬ 
thing for the good of the world, and have for ever lost 
the helping hands of their own flesh and blood, and child¬ 
hood’s associations. 

They too are overtaken by the common lot of 
humanity, physical evil in the form of disease. 

It may be true that some blame attaches to the 
management of the place. It may be true that the priests 
deserve a good part of the sweeping criticism generally 

1 Letter written by Swainiji, tn accoinpanv iho L.rbt Report 
of the Rainakiishnn Home of S»r\ue, Benares, l’.‘i ruar 


100 1. 


RAMAKRISHNA HOME OF SERVICE, BENARES 341 


heaped upon them ; yet we must not forget the great truth 
—like people, like priests. If the people stand by with 
folded hands and watch the swift current of misery rushing 
past their doors, dragging men, women and children, the 
Sannyasin and the householder, into one common whirl¬ 
pool of helpless suffering, and make not the least effort to 
save any from the current, only waxing eloquent at the 
misdoings of the priests of the holy places, not one particle 
of suffering can ever be lessened, not one ever be helped. 

Do we want to keep up the faith of our forefathers in 
the efficacy of the Eternal City of Shiva towards salvation ? 

If we do, we ought to be glad to see the number of 
those increase from year to year who come here to die. 

And blessed be the name of the Lord that the poor 
have this eager desire for salvation, the same as ever. 

The poor who come here to die have voluntarily cut 
themselves off from any help they could have received in 
the places of their birth, and when disease overtakes them, 
their condition we leave to your imagination and to your 
conscience as a Hindu, to feel and to rectify. 

Brother, does it not make you pause and think of the 
marvellous attraction of this wonderful place of prepara¬ 
tion for final rest? Does it not strike you with a mysteri¬ 
ous sense of awe—this age-old and never-ending stream of 
pilgrims marching to salvation through death? 

If it does—come and lend us a helping hand. 

Never mind if your contribution is only a mite, your 
help only a little ; blades of grass united into a rope will 
hold in confinement the maddest of elephants—says the 
old proverb. 

Ever yours in the Lord of the universe. 

VlVEKANANDA. 


V-~23 


WHO KNOWS HOW MOTHER PLAYS ! 


Perchance a prophet thou—- 
Who knows? Who dares touch 
The depths where Mother hides 
Her silent failless bolts I 
Perchance the child had glimpse 
Of shades, behind the scenes, 

With eager eyes and strained, 
Quivering forms—ready 
1 o jump in front and be 
Events, resistless, strong. 

Who knows but Mother, how. 

And where, and when, they come? 
Perchance the shining sage 
Saw more than he could tell ; 

Who knows, what soul, and when, 
The Mother makes Her throne? 
What law would freedom bind> 
What merit guide Pier will. 

Whose freak is greatest order, 
Whose will resistless law? 

To child may glories ope 
Which father never dreamt ; 

May thousandfold in daughter 
Her powers Mother store. 


TO THE FOURTH OF JULY 

(It is well known that the Swami Vivekananda’s death 
(or resurrection, as some of us would prefer to call it!) 
took place on the 4th of July, 1902. On the 4th of July, 
1898, he was travelling, with some American disciples, in 
Kashmir, and as part of a domestic conspiracy for the 


TO THE FOURTH OF JULY 


343 


celebration of the day—the anniversary of the American 
Declaration of Independence—he prepared the following 
poem, to be read aloud at the early breakfast. The poem 
itself fell to the keeping of Sthira Mata.] 

Behold, the dark clouds melt away, 

That gathered thick at night, and hung 
So like a gloomy pall above the earth ! 

Before thy magic touch, the world 
Awakes. 1 he birds in chorus sing. 

The flowers raise their star-like crowns. 

Dew-set and wave thee welcome fair. 

The lakes are opening wide in love 
1 heir hundred thousand lotus-eyes 
To welcome thee, with all their depth. 

All hail to thee, thou Lord of Light I 
A welcome new to thee, to-day, 

O Sun ! To-day thou sheddest Liberty I 

Bethink thee how the world did wait. 

And search for thee, through time and clime. 
Some gave up home and love of friends, 

And went in quest of thee, self-banished. 

Through dreary oceans, through primeval forests, 
Each step a struggle for their life or death ; 

Then came the day when work bore fruit. 

And worship, love, and sacrifice. 

Fulfilled, accepted, and complete. 

Then thou, propitious, rose to shed 
The light of Freedom on mankind. 

Move on, O Lord, in thy resistless path ! 

Till thy high noon overspreads the world, 

Till every land reflects thy light. 

Till men and women, with uplifted head. 

Behold their shackles broken, and 
Know, in springing joy, their life renewed I 


TRANSLATION OF WRITINGS 
-PROSE AND POEMS-II 


THE EAST AND THE WEST 

Vast and deep rivers, swelling and impetuous, charm¬ 
ing pleasure-gardens by the river banks, putting to shame 
the celestial Nandana-Kanana ; amidst these pleasure- 
gardens rise towering to the sky beautiful marble palaces, 
decorated with the most exquisite workmanship of fine art; 
on the sides, in front, and behind, clusters of huts, with 
crumbling mud-walls and dilapidated roofs, the bamboos 
of which forming their skeletons, as it were, are exposed 
to view ; moving about here and there emaciated figures of 
young and old in tattered rags, whose faces bear deep-cut 
lines of the despair and poverty of hundreds of years ; 
cows, bullocks, buffaloes everywhere—aye, the same 
melancholy look in their eyes, the same feeble physique ; 
on the way-side refuse and dirt:—this is our present-day 
India ! 

Worn-out huts by the very side of palaces, piles of 
refuse in the near proximity of temples, the Sannyasin 
clad with only a little loin-cloth, walking by the gorgeously 
dressed, the pitiful gaze of lustreless eyes of the hunger- 
stricken at the well-fed and the amply-provided:—this is 
our native land ! 

Devastation by violent plague and cholera ; malaria 
eating into the very vitals of the nation; starvation and 
semi-starvation as second nature ; death-like famine often 
daiK ing its tragic dance ; the Kurukshetra (battle-field) of 
malady and misery, the huge cremation-ground, strewn 
with the dead bones of lost hope, activity, joy and 


THE EAST AND THE WEST 


345 


courage and in the midst of that, sitting in august silence, 
the Yogin, absorbed in deep communion with the Spirit, 
with no other goal in life than Moksha: —this is what 
meets the eye of the European traveller in India. 

A conglomeration of three hundred million souls, 
resembling men only in appearance, crushed out of life 
by being down-trodden by their own people and foreign 
nations, by people professing their own religion and by 
others of foreign faiths ; patient in labour and suffering, 
and devoid of initiative, like the slave ; without any 
hope, without any past, without any future ; desirous only 
of maintaining the present life anyhow, however pre¬ 
carious ; of a malicious nature befitting a slave, to whom 
the prosperity of their fellowmen is unbea^ible ; bereft of 
Shraddha, like one with whom all hope is dead, faithless ; 
whose weapon of defence is base trickery, treachery and 
slyness like that of a fox : the embodiment of selfishness ; 
licking the dust of the feet of the strong, withal dealing 
a death-blow to those who are comparatively weak ; full 
of ugly, diabolical superstitions which come naturally to 
those who are weak and hopeless of the future ; without 
any standard of morality as their backbone: —three 
hundred millions of souls such as these are swarming on 
the body of India, like so many worms on a rotten, stinking 
carcase—this is the picture concerning us, which naturally 
presents itself to the English official ! 

Maddened with the wine of ever-acquiring powers ; 
devoid of discrimination between right and wrong ; fierce 
like wild beasts, hen-pecked, lustful ; drenched in liquor, 
having no idea of chastity or purity, nor of cleanly ways 
and habits ; believing in matter only, with a civilisation 
resting on matter and its various applications ; addicted to 
the aggrandisement of self by exploiting others’ countries, 
others wealth, by force, trick and treachery ; having no 
faith in the life hereafter, whose Atman is the body, whose 
whole life is only in the senses and creature comforts: — 


346 


SWAMI VIVEKANANDA^S WORKS 


thus, to the Indian, the Westerner is the veriest demon? 
(Asura), 

These are the views of observers on both sides— 
views born of mutual indiscrimination and superficial 
knowledge or ignorance. The foreigners, the Europeans, 
come to India, live in palatial buildings in the perfectly 
clean and healthy quarters of our towns and compare our 
native ” quarters with their neat and beautifully laid-out 
cities at home : the Indians with whom they come in con¬ 
tact are only of one class—those who hold some sort of 
employment under them. And. indeed, distress and 
poverty are nowhere else to be met with as in India ; 
besides that, there is no gainsaying that dirt and filth are 
everywhere. To the European mind, it is inconceivable 
that anything good can possibly be amidst such dirt, such 
slavery and such degradation. 

We, on the other hand, see that the Europeans eat 
without discrimination whatever they get, have no idea of 
cleanliness as we have, do not observe caste distinctions, 
freely mix with women, drink wine and shamelessly dance 
dt a ball, men and women held in each other’s arms:—-and 
we ask ourselves in amazement what good can there be 
in such a nation? 

Both these views are derived from without, and do 
not look within and below the surface. We do not allow 
foreigners to mix in our society, and we call them 
Mlechchhas ; they also in their turn hate us as slaves and 
call US “ niggers 

In both of these views there must be some truth, 
though neither of the parties has seen the real thing 
behind the other. 

Within every man, there is an idea ; the external man 
is only the outward manifestation, the mere language of 
this idea within. Likewise, every nation has a correspond¬ 
ing national idea. I his idea is working for the world and 
is necessary for its preservation. The day when the 


THE EAST AND THE WEST 


347 


necessity of an idea as an element for the preservation of 
the world is over, that very day the receptacle of that idea, 
whether it be an individual or a nation, will meet destruc¬ 
tion. The reason that we Indians are still living, in spite 
of so much misery, distress, poverty and oppression from 
within and without is that we have a national idea, which 
is yet necessary for the preservation of the world. The 
Europeans too have a national idea of their own, without 
which the world will not go on ; therefore they are so 
strong. Does a man live a moment, if he loses all his 
strength? A nation is the sum total of so many individual 
men; will a nation live if it has utterly lost all its strength 
and activity? Why did not this Hindu race die out, in 
the face of so many troubles and tumults of a thousand 
years? If our customs and manners are so very bad, how 
is it that we have not been effaced from the face of the 
earth by this time? Have the various foreign conquerors 
spared any pains to crush us out? Why, then, were not the 
Hindus blotted out of existence, as happened with men 
in other countries which are uncivilised? Why was not 
India depopulated and turned into a wilderness? Why, 
then foreigners would have lost no time to come and settle 
in India, and till her fertile lands in the same way as 
they did and are still doing in America, Australia and 
Africa? Well then, my foreigner, you are not so strong as 
you think yourself to be ; it is a vain imagination. First 
understand that India has strength as well, has a 
substantial reality of her own yet. Furthermore, under¬ 
stand that India is still living, because she has her own 
quota yet to give to the general store of the world’s 
civilisation. And you too understand this full well, I*mean 
those of our countrymen who have become thoroughly 
Europeanised both in external habits and in ways of 
thought and ideas, and who are continually crying their 
eyes out, and praying to the Europeans to save them— 
‘'We are degraded, we have come down to the level of 


348 


SWAMI VIVEKANANDA’S WORKS 


brutes ; O ye European people, you are our saviours, have 
pity on us and raise us from this fallen state ! And you 
too understand this, who are singing Te Deums and rais¬ 
ing a hue and cry that Jesus is come to India, and are 
seeing the fulfilment of the divine decree in the fulness 
of time. Oh, dear ! No! neither Jesus is come nor 
Jehovah ; nor will they come ; they are now busy in saving 
their own hearths and homes and have no time to come 
to our country. Here is the self-same Old Shiva seated as 
before, the bloody Mother Kali worshipped with the self¬ 
same paraphernalia, the pastoral Shepherd of Love, Sri 
Krishna, playing on His flute. Once this Old Shiva, riding 
on His bull and taboring on His Damaru travelled from 
India, on the one side, to Sumatra, Borneo, Celebes, 
Australia, as far as the shores of America, and on the 
other side, this Old Shiva battened His bull in Tibet, 
China, Japan and as far up as Siberia, and is still doing 
the same. The Mother Kali is still exacting Her worship 
even in China and Japan : it is She whom the Christians 
metamorphosed into the Virgin Mary, and worship as the 
mother of Jesus the Christ. Behold the Himalayas! 

I here to the north is Kailas, the main abode of the Old 
Shiva. I hat throne the ten-headed, twenty-armed, mighty 
Ravana could not shake—now for the missionaries to 
attempt the task ?—Bless my soul ! Here in India will ever 
be the Old Shiva taboring on His Damaru, the Mother 
Kali worshipped with animal sacrifice, and the lovable Sri 
Krishna playing on His flute. Firm as the Himalayas they 
are ; and no attempts of anyone, Christian or other 
missionaries, will ever be able to remove them. If you 
cannot bear them—avaunt! For a handful of you, shall 
a whole nation be wearied out of all patience and bored 
to death ? Why don’t you make your way somewhere else 
where you may find fields to freely graze upon—the wide 
world is open to you ! But no, that they won’t do. Where 
is that strength to do it? They would eat the salt of that 


THE EAST AND THE WEST 


349 


Old Shiva and play Him false, slander Him, and sing the 
glory of a foreign Saviour—dear me 1 To such of our 
countrymen who go whimpering before foreigners—“We 
are very low, we are mean, we are degraded, everything we 
have is diabolical,”—to them we say: “Yes, that may be 
the truth, forsooth, because you profess to be truthful and 
we have no reason to disbelieve you ; but why do you 
include the whole nation in that We} Pray, sirs, what sort 
of good manners is that?” 

First, we have to understand that there are not any 
good qualities which are the privileged monopoly of one 
nation only. Of course, as with individuals, so with 
nations, there may be a prevalence of ceitain good 
qualities, more or less in one nation than in another. 

With us, the prominent idea is Mukti ; with the 
Westerners, it is Dharma. What we desire is—Mukti ; 
what they want is—Dharma. Here the word “ Dharma 
is used in the sense of the Mimamsakas. What is Dharma? 
Dharma is that which makes man seek for happiness in 
this world or the next. Dharma is established on work ; 
Dharma is impelling man day and night to run after and 
work for happiness. 

What is Mukti? That which teaches that even the 
happiness of this life is slavery, and the same is the happi¬ 
ness of the life to come, because neither this world nor 
the next is beyond the laws of nature ; only, the slavery 
of this world is to that of the next as an iron chain is to a 
golden one. Again, happiness, wherever it may be, being 
within the laws of nature, is subject to death and will not 
last ad infinitum. Therefore man must aspire to become 
Mukta ; he must go beyond the bondage of the bbdy ; 
slavery will not do. This Moksha-path is only in India 
and nowhere else. Hence is true the oft-repeated saying 
that Mukta souls are only in India and in no other 
country. But it is equally true that in future they will be 
in other countries as well ; that is well and good, and a 


350 


SWAMI VIVEKANANDA'S WORKS 


thing of great pleasure to us. There was a time in India 
when Dharma was compatible with Mukti. There were 
worshippers of Dharma, such as Vudhisthira, Arjuna, 
Duryodhana, Bhishma and Kama, side by side with the 
aspirants of Mukti, such as Vyasa, Suka and Janaka. On 
the advent of Buddhism, Dharma was entirely neglected, 
and the path of Moksha alone became predominant. 
Hence, we read in the Agni Purana, in the language of 
similes, that the demon Gayasura—that is, Buddha^—tried 
to destroy the world by showing the path of Moksha to 
all ; and therefore the Devas held a council and by 
stratagem set him at rest for ever. However, the central 
fact is that the fall of our country, of which we hear so 
much spoken, is due to the utter want of this Dharma. 

If the whole nation practises and follows the path of 
Moksha, that is well and good ; but is that possible? 
Without enjoyment, renunciation can never come ; first 
enjoy and then you can renounce. Otherwise, if the 
whole nation, all of a sudden, takes up Sannyasa, it does 
not gain what it desires, but it loses what it had into the 
bargain—the bird in the hand is fled, nor is that in the 
bush caught. When, in the heyday of Buddhistic 
supremacy, thousands of Scinnyasins lived in every 
monastery, then it was that the country was just on the 
verge of its ruin ! The Bauddhas, the Christians, the 
Musalmans and the Jains prescribe, in their folly, the 
same law and the same rule for all. That is a great 
mistake ; education, habits, custom.s, laws and rules should 
be different for different men and nations, in conformity 
with their difference of temperament. What will it avaih 
if one tries to make them all uniform, by compulsion? 

1 he Bauddhas declared, “ Nothing is more desirable in 
life than Moksha ; whoever you are, come one and all to 
take it.’ 1 ask, “Is that ever possible?” “You are a 

' Swainiji .\ft('r\\arvls changed this view with rcfiTonce to 
Huddha, as is evident frmn tlie letter he w rede from I^enares to 
one of his Sannyasin disciples. See page 113, Epistle No. Ixix. 


THE EAST AND THE WEST 


351 


householder, you must not concern yourself much with 
things of that sort ; 3 'ou do your Svadharma ”—thus say 
the Hindu scriptures. Exactly so I He who cannot leap 
one foot, is going to jump across the ocean to Lanka in 
one bound! Is it reason? You cannot feed your own 
family or dole out food to two of your fellowmen, you 
cannot do even an ordinary piece of work for the common 
good, in harmony with others—and you are running 
after Mukti ! 1 he Hindu scriptures say, “ No doubt, 

Moksha is far superior to Dharma ; but Dharnia should oe 
finished first of aU.” The Bauddhas were confounded just 
there and brought about all sorts of mischief. Non-injury 
is right. “ Resist not evil ** is a great thing—these are 
indeed®grand principles ; but the Shastr .»3 say, “ Thou art 
a householder ; if anyone smites thee on thy cheek, and 
thou dost not return him an eye for an eye, a tooth for 
a tooth, thou wilt verily be a sinner.” Manu says, “When 
one has come to kill you, there is no sin in killing him, even 
though he is a Brahmin.” (Manu, VIII. 350). This is 

very true, and this is a thing which should not be 

forgotten. Heroes only enjoy the world. Show your 
heroism ; apply, according to circumstances, the fourfold 
political maxims of conciliation, bribery, sowing dissen¬ 
sions and open war, to win over your adversary, and enjoy 
the world—then you will be Dharmika. Otherwise, you 
live a disgraceful life if you pocket your insults, when 
you are kicked and trodden down by anyone who takes 
it into his head to do so ; your life is a veritable hell 

here, and so is the life hereafter. This is what the 

Shastras say. Do your Svadharma—this is truth, the 
truth of truths. This is my advice to you, my beloved 
co-religionists. Of course, do not do any wrong, do not 
injure or tyrannise over anyone, but try to do good to 
others as much as you can. But passively to submit to 
wrong done by others is a sin—with the householder. 
He must try to pay them back in their own coin then 


352 


SWA MI VIVEKANANDA'S WORKS 


and there. The householder must earn money with 
great effort and enthusiasm, and by that must support 
and bring comforts to bis own family and to others, and 
perform good works as far as possible. If you cannot 
do that, how do you profess to be a man? You are not 
a householder even—what to talk of Moksha for you ! ! 

We have said before that Dharma is based on work. 
The nature of the Dharmika is constant performance of 
action with efficiency. Why, even the opinion of some 
Mimamsakas is that those parts of the Vedas which do 
not enjoin work are not, properly speaking, Vedas at all. 
One of the aphorisms of Jaimini runs thus— 

“ The purpose of the Vedas 
being work, those parts of the Vedas that do not deal 
with work miss the mark. * 

By constant repetition of the syllable Om and by 
meditating on its meaning, everything can be obtained 
“ All sins are washed away by uttering the name of the 
Lord”; ‘l ie gets all, who resigns himself to the Will of 
God ”—yes, these words of the Shastras and the sages are, 
no doubt, true. But, do you see, thousands of us are, 
for our whole life, meditating on Om, are getting ecstatic 
in devotion in the name of the Lord, and are crying, 

I hy Will be done, I am fully resigned to Thee,” and 
whai arc they actually getting in return? Absolutely 
nothing I How do you account for this? The reason 
lies here, and it must be fully understood. Whose 
meditation is real and effective ? Who can really resign 
himself to the Will of God ? Who can utter with power 
Irresistible, like that of a thunderbolt, the name of the 
l.ord? It is he who has earned Chittasuddhi, that is, 
whose mind has been purified by work, or in other words, 
he who is the Dharmika. 

Every individual is a centre for the manifestation of 
a certain force. This force has been stored up as the 
resultant of our previous works, and each one of us is 


THE EAST AND THE WEST 


353 


born with this force at his back. So long as this force 
has not worked itself out, who can possibly remain quiet 
and give up work? Until then, he will have to enjoy or 
suffer according to the fruition of his good or bad work, 
and will be irresistibly impelled to do work. When 
enjoyment and work cannot be given up till then, is it 
not better to do good rather than bad works—to enjoy 
happiness rather than suffer misery ? Sri Ramprasad^ 
used to say, “ They speak of two works, ‘ good * and 
* bad *; of them, it is better to do the good.** 

Now what is that good which is to be pursued? The 
good for him who desires Moksha is one, and the good 
for him who wants Dharma is another. This is the great 
truth which the Lord Sri Krishna, th^ revealer of the 
Gita, has tried therein to explain, and upon this great 
truth is established the Varnashrama system and the 
doctrine of Svadharma, etc. of the Hindu religion. 

Pnij+K: II xir. 13.) 

“ He who has no enemy, and is friendly and com¬ 
passionate towards all, who is free from the feelings of 
me and mine, ’ even-minded in pain and pleasure, and 
forbearing,** and other words of like nature, are for him 
whose one goal in life is Moksha. 

II ((iita ii. 3.) 

Yield not to unmanliness, O son of Pritha ! Ill doth 
it befit thee. Cast off this mean faint-heartedness and 
arise, O scorcher of thine enemies.** 

vra sHs^narf^qi^ii (Cita xi. 33.) 

1 Sri Ramprasad was a native of Bengal and a great sage. 
He was a devotee of the (Goddess Kali and an inspired poet. He 
composed many songs in praise of the Deity and in them expressed 
the highest truths of religion in the most simple words. His songs 
are very popular and full of life and devotion. 


354 SWAMI VIVEKANANDA^S M^ORKS 

“ Therefore do thou arise and acquire fame. After con¬ 
quering thy enemies, enjoy unrivalled dominion ; verily 
by Myself have they been already slain ; be thou merely 
the instrument, O Savyasachin (Arjuna).” 

In these and similar passages in the Gita the Lord is 
showing the way to Dharma. Of course, work is always 
mixed with good and evil, and to work, one has to incur 
sin, more or less. But what of that? Let it be so. Is not 
something better than nothing? Is not insufficient food 
better than going without any? Is not doing work, though 
mixed with good and evil, better than doing nothing and 
passing an idle and inactive life, and being like stones? 
The cow never tells a lie, and the stone never steals, but. 
nevertheless, the cow remains a cow and the stone a stone. 
Man steals and man tells lies, and again it is man that 
becomes a god. With the prevalence of the Sattvika 
essence, man becomes inactive and rests always in a state 
of deep Dhyana, or contemplation ; with the prevalence 
of the Rajas, he does bad as well as good works ; and, 
with the prevalence of the Tamas again, he becomes in¬ 
active and inert. Now, tell me, looking from outside, how 
are we to understand, whether you are in a state wherein 
the Sattva or the lamas prevails? Whether we are in the 
state of Sattvika calmness, beyond all pleasure and pain, 
and past all work and activity, or whether we are in the 
lowest Tamasika state, lifeless, passive, dull as dead 
matter, and doing no work, because there is no power in 
us to do it, and are, thus, silently and by degrees, getting 
rotten and corrupted within—I seriously ask you this ques¬ 
tion and demand an answer. Ask your own mind, and 
you shall know what the reality is. But, what need to 
wait for the answer?—The tree is known by its fruit. 
1 he Sattva prevailing, the man is inactive, he is calm, to 
be sure ; but that inactivity is the outcome of the centrali¬ 
sation of great powers, that calmness is the mother of 
tremendous energy. That highly Sattvika man, that great 


THE EAST AND THE WEST 


355 


soul, has no longer to work as we do with hands and feet 
—by his mere willing only, all his works are immediately 
accomplished to perfection. That man of predominating 
Sattva is the Brahmin, the worshipped of all. Has he to 
go about from door to door, begging others to worship 
him ? I he Almighty Mother of the universe writes with 
Her own hand, in golden letters on his forehead, “Worship 
ye all, this great one, this son of Mine, * and the world 
reads and listens to it and humbly bows down its head 
before him in obedience. That man is really— 

315 ST ^ ^’g I 

: SfRft II 

*‘He who has no enemy, and is friendly and compassionate 
towards all, who is free from the feelings of ‘me and mine,* 
even-minded in pain and pleasure, and forbearing.” And 
mark you, those things which you see in pusillanimous, 
effeminate folk who speak in a nasal tone chewing every 
syllable, whose voice is as thin as of one who has been 
starving for a week, who are like a tattered wet rag, who 
never protest or are moved even if kicked by anybody— 
those are the signs of the lowest Tamas, those are the 
signs of death—not of Sattva,—all corruption and stench. 
It is because Arjuna was going to fall into the ranks of 
these men that the Lord is explaining matters to him so 
elaborately in the Gita. Is that not the fact? Listen to 
the very first words that came out of the mouth of the 
Lord—WOT “Yield not to un¬ 

manliness, O Partha ! Ill doth it befit thee I** and then later 
——“Therefore do thoy arise and 
acquire fame.** Coming under the influence of the Jains, 
Bauddhas and others, we have joined the lines of those 
Tamasika people. During these last thousand years, the 
whole country is filling the air with the name of the Lord 
and is sending its prayers to Him ; and the Lord is never 
lending His ears to them. And why should He? When 


356 


SWAMI VIVEKANANDA^S WORKS 


even man never hears the cries of the fool, do you think 
God will? Now the only way out is to listen to the words 
of the Lord in the Gita— TO: “Yield not to 

unmanliness, O Partha 1“ There¬ 

fore do thou arise and acquire fame.” 

Now let us go on with our subject-matter—the East 
and the West. First see the irony of it. Jesus Christ, the 
God of the Europeans, has taught: Have no enemy, bless 
them that curse you ; whosoever shall smite thee on thy 
right cheek, turn to him the other also ; stop all your work 
and be ready for the next world ; the end of the world is 
near at hand. And our Lord in the Gita is saying: Always 
work with great enthusiasm, destroy your enemies and 
enjoy the world. But, after all, it turned out to be exactly 
the reverse of what Christ or Krishna implied. The 
Europeans never took the words of Jesus Christ seriously. 
Always of active habits, being possessed of a tremendous 
Rajasika nature, they are gathering with great enterprise 
and youthful ardour the comforts and luxuries of the 
different countries of the world, and enjoying them to their 
hearts’ content. And we are sitting in a corner, with our 
bag and baggage, pondering on death day and night, and 
ringing ‘Very 

tremulous and unsteady is the water on the lotus-leaf ; so 
is the life of man frail and transient”—with the result that 
it is making our blood run cold and our flesh creep with 
the fear of ^ ama, the god of death ; and Yama, too, alas, 
has taken us at our word, as it were—plague and all sorts 
of maladies have entered into our country. Who are fol¬ 
lowing the teachings of the Gita?—The Europeans! And 
who are acting according to the will of Jesus Christ?—The 
descendants of Sri Krishna I I his must be well under¬ 
stood. 1 he \ edas were the first to find and proclaim the 
way to Moksha, and from that one source, the Vedas, was 
taken whatever any great Teacher, say, Buddha or Christ 
afterwards taught. Now, they were Sannyasins, and there- 


THE EAST AND THE WEST 


357 


fore they “had no enemy and were friendly and com¬ 
passionate towards all. * That was well and good for 
them. But why this attempt to compel the whole world 
to follow the same path to Moksha? “Can beauty be 
manufactured by rubbing and scrubbing? Can anyone be 
made one s own. by entreaties or by force?” What does 
Buddha or Christ prescribe for the man who neither wants 
Moksha nor is fit to receive it?—Nothing! Either you 
must have Moksha or you are doomed to destruction—these 
are the only two ways held forth by them, and there is 
no middle course. You are tied hand and foot in the 
matter of trying for anything other than Moksha. There 
is no way shown how you may enjoy the world a little for 
a time; not only all openings to that are h< vmetically sealed 
to you, but, in addition, there are obstructions put at every 
step. It is only the Vedic religion which considers ways 
and means and lays down rules for the fourfold attainment 
of man, comprising Dharma, Artha, Kama and Moksha. 
Buddha ruined us, and so did Christ ruin Greece and 
Rome ! Then, in due course of time, fortunately, the 
Europeans became Protestants, shook off the teachings of 
Christ as represented by Papal authority, and heaved a sigh 
of relief. In India, Kumarila* again brought into currency 
the Karma-Marga, the way of Karma only, and Sankara 
and Ramanuja firmly re-established the Eternal Vedic 
religion, harmonising and balancing in due proportions 
Dharma, Artha, Kama and Moksha. Thus the nation was 
brought to the way of regaining its lost life ; but India has 
three hundred million souls to wake, and hence the delay. 
To revive three hundred millions—can it be done in a day? 

The aims of the Buddhistic and the Vedic religions are 
the same, but the means adopted by the Buddhistic are not 
right. If the Buddhistic means were correct, then why have 
we been thus hopelessly lost and ruined? It will not do to 
say that the efflux of time has naturally wrought this. Can 
time work, transgressing the laws of cause and effect? 

V—24 


358 


SWAMI VIVEKANANDA'S WORKS 


Therefore, though the aims are the same, the Bauddhas 
for want of right means have degraded India. Perhaps my 
Bauddha brothers will be offended at this remark, and fret 
and fume ; but there’s no help for it ; the truth ought to 
be told and 1 do not care for the result. The right and 
correct means is that of the Vedas—the Jati Dharma, that 
is, the Dharma enjoined according to the different castes, 
—the Svadharma, that is, one’s own Dharma, or set of 
duties prescribed for man according to his capacity and 
position—which is the very basis of Vedic religion and 
Vedic society. Again, perhaps, 1 am offending many of 
my friends, who are saying I suppose, that 1 am flattering 
my own countrymen. Here let me ask them once for all, 
—What do 1 gain by such flattery? Do they support me 
with any money or means? On the contrary, they try 
their best to get possession of the money which I secure 
by begging from outside of India for feeding the famine- 
stricken and the helpless, and if they don’t get it, they 
abuse and slander ! Such then, O my educated country¬ 
men, are the people of my country. ^1 know them too well 
to expect anything from them by flattery. 1 know they 
have to be treated like the insane, and anyone who ad¬ 
ministers medicine to a mad man must be ready to be 
rewarded with kicks and bites ; but he is the true friend 
who forces the medicine down the throats of such and 
bears with them in patience. 

Now, this Jati Dharma, this Svadharma, is the path of 
welfare of all societies in every land, the ladder to ultimate 
freedom. With the decay of this Jati Dharma, this Sva¬ 
dharma, has come the downfall of our land. But the Jati 
Dharma or Svadharma as commonly understood at present 
by the higher castes is rather a new evil, which has to be 
guarded against. They think they know everything of 
Jati Dharma, but really they know nothing of it. Regard¬ 
ing their own village customs as the eternal customs laid 
down by the Vedas, and appropriating to themselves 


THE EAST AND THE WEST 


359 


all privileges, they are going to their doom ! I am not 
talking of caste as determined by qualitative distinction, 
but of the hereditary caste system. 1 admit that the quali¬ 
tative caste system is the primary one ; but the pity is 
qualities yield to birth in two or three generations. Thus the 
vital point of our national life has been touched; otherwise, 
why should we sink to this degraded state? Read in the 
Gita—Sf^TT:— “I should then be 
the cause of the admixture of races, and I should thus ruin 
these beings.** How came this terrible Varna-Shamkarya 
—this confounding mixture of all castes and disappearance 
of all qualitative distinctions? Why has the white com¬ 
plexion of our forefathers now become black? Why did 
the Sattvaguna give place to the prevailin'; 1 amas with a 
sprinkling, as it were, of Rajas in it? That is a long story 
to tell, and 1 reserve my answer for some future occasion. 
For the present, try to understand this, that if the Jati 
Dharma be rightly and truly preserved, the nation shall 
never fall. If this is true, then what was it that brought 
our downfall? That we have fallen is the sure sign that 
the basis of the Jati Dharma has been tampered with. 
Therefore, what you call the Jati Dharma is quite contrary 
to what we have in fact. First, read your own Shastras 
through and through, and you will easily see that what the 
Shastras define as caste-Dharma, has disappeared almost 
everywhere from the land. Now try to bring back the true 
Jati Dharma and then it will be a real and sure boon to 
the country. What I have learnt and understood, 1 am 
telling you plainly. 1 have not been imported from some 
foreign land to come and save you, that 1 should counte¬ 
nance all your foolish customs and give scientifi explana¬ 
tions for them ; it does not cost our foreign friends 
anything, they can well afford to do so. You cheer them 
up and heap applause upon them, and that is the acme of 
their ambition. But if dirt and dust be flung at your 
faces, it falls on mine too? Don t you see that? 


360 SWAMI VIVEKANANDA’S WORKS 

I have said elsewhere that every nation has a national 
purpose of its own. Either in obedience to the Law of 
Nature, or by virtue of the superior genius of the great 
ones, the social manners and customs of every nation are 
being moulded into shape, so as to bring that purpose 
to fruition. In the life of every nation, besides that pur¬ 
pose and those manners and customs that are essentially 
necessary to effect that purpose, all others are superfluous. 

It does not matter much whether those superfluous 
customs and manners grow or disappear ; but a nation is 
sure to die when the main purpose of its life is hurt. 

When we were children, we heard the story of a 
certain ogress who had her soul living in a small bird, and 
unless the bird was killed, the ogress would never die. 
The life of a nation is also like that. Again another thing 
you will observe, that a nation will never greatly grudge 
if it be deprived of those rights which have not much to 
do with its national purpose, nay, even if all of such are 
wrested from it ; but when the slightest blow is given 
to that purpose on which rests its national life, that 
moment it reacts with tremendous power. 

Take for instance the case of the three living nations, 
of whose history you know more or less, viz., the French, 
the English and the Hindu. Political independence is the 
backbone of the French character. French subjects bear 
calmly all oppressions. Burden them with heavy taxes, 
they will not raise the least voice against them ; compel 
the whole nation to join the army, they never complain ; 
but the instant anyone meddles with that political inde¬ 
pendence, the whole nation will rise as one man and 
madly react. “No one man shall be allowed to usurp 
authority over us ; whether learned or ignorant, rich or 
poor, of noble birth or of the lower classes, we have equal 
share in the Government of our country, and in the 
independent control of our society”—this is the root- 


THE EAST AND THE WEST 


361 


principle of the French character. He must suffer, who 
will try to interfere with this freedom. 

In the English character, the “give and take” policy, 
the business principle of the trader, is principally inherent. 
To the English, equity, equal partition of privileges, is ot 
essential interest. The Englishman humbb' submits to the 
king and to the privileges of the iiobilit^^ ; only if he has 
to pay a farthing from his pocket, he must demand an 
account of it. There is the king ; that is all right ; he is 
ready to obey and honour him ; but if the king wants 
money, the Englishman says: “All right, but first let me 
understand why it is needed, what good it will bring ; 
next, 1 must have my say in the matter of how It is to be 
spent, and then I shall part with it.” The iang, once trying 
to exact money from the English people by force, brought 
about a great revolution. They killed the king. 

The Hindu says that political and social independence 
are well and good, but the real thing is spiritual independ¬ 
ence—Mukti. 1 his is our national purpose ; whether you 
take the Vaidika, the Jaina or the Bauddha, the Advaita, 
the Vishishtadvaita or the Dvaita—there, they are all of 
one mind. Leave that point untouched and do whatever 
you like, the Hindu is quite unconcerned and keeps silence; 
but if you run foul of him there; beware, you court your 
ruin. Rob him of everything he has, kick him, call him a 
“nigger” or any such name, he does not care much ; only 
keep that one gate of religion free and unmolested. Look 
here, how in the modern period the Pathan dynasties were 
coming and going, but could not get a firm hold of their 
Indian Empire, because they were all along attacking the 
Hindu’s religion. And see, how firmly based, * how 
tremendously strong was the Mogul Empire. Why? 
Because the Moguls left that point untouched. In fact, 
the Hindus were real prop of the Mogul Empire ; don’t 
you know that Jahangir, Shajahan and Dara Shikoh were 
all born of Hindu mothers? Now then observe—as soon 


362 SWAMI VIVEKANANDA^S WORKS 

as the ill-fated Aurangzeb again touched that point, the 
vast Mogul Empire vanished in an instant like a dream. 
Why is it that the English throne is so firmly established in 
India? Because it never touches the religion of the land 
in any way. The sapient Christian missionaries tried to 
tamper a little with this point, and the result was the 
Mutiny of 1857. So long as the English understand this 
thoroughly and act accordingly, their throne in India will 
remain unsullied and unshaken. The wise and far-seeing 
among the English also comprehend this and admit it— 
read Lord Roberts’s “Forty-one Years in India. 

Now you understand clearly where the soul of this 
ogress is—it is in religion. Because no one was able to 
destroy that, therefore the Hindu nation is still living, 
having survived so many troubles and tribulations. Well, 
one Indian scholar asks: “What is th^ use of keeping the 
soul of the nation in religion ? Why not keep it in social or 
political independence, as is the case with other nations? 

It is very easy to talk like that. If it be granted, for the 
sake of argument, that religion and spiritual independence, 
and soul, God and Mukti are all false, even then see how 
the matter stands. As the same fire is manifesting itself 
in different forms, so the same one great Force is mani¬ 
festing itself as political independence with the French, as 
mercantile genius and expansion of the sphere of equity 
with the English, and as the desire for Mukti, or spiritual 
independence, with the Hindu. Be it noted that by the 
impelling of this great Force, has been moulded the French 
and the English character, through several centuries of 
vicissitudes of fortune ; and also by the inspiration of 
that great Force, with the rolling of thousands of centuries, 
has been the present evolution of the Hindu national 
character. I ask in all seriousness—which is easier, to give 
up our national character evolved out of thousands of cen- 


* Vidr 30th and 31st Chapters. 


THE EAST AND THE WEST 


363 


turies, or your grafted foreign character of a few hundred 
years? Why do not the English forget their warlike habits 
and give up fighting and bloodshed, and sit calm and 
quiet, concentrating their whole energy on making religion 
the sole aim of their life? 

The fact is, that the river has come down a thousand 
miles from its source in the mountains ; does it, or can it 
go back to its source? If it ever tries to trace back its 
course, it will simply dry up by being dissipated in all 
directions. Anyhow the river is sure to fall into the ocean, 
sooner or later, either by passing through open and beauti¬ 
ful plains or struggling through grimy soil, if our national 
life of these ten thousand years has been a mistake, then 
there is no help for it ; and if we try ne^7 to form a new 
character, the inevitable result will be that we shall die. 

But, excuse me if I say that it is sheer ignorance and 
want of proper understanding to think like that, namely, 
that our national ideal has been a mistake. First go to 
other countries and study carefully their manners and con¬ 
ditions with your own eyes—not with others’—and reflect 
on them with a thoughtful brain, if you have it ; then read 
your own scriptures, your ancient literature, travel through¬ 
out India and mark the people of her different parts and 
their ways and habits with the wide-awake eye of an in¬ 
telligent and keen observer—not with a fool’s eye—and 
you will see as clear as noonday that the nation is still 
living intact and its life is surely pulsating. You will find 
there, also, that hidden under the ashes of apparent death, 
the fire of our national life is yet smouldering and that the 
life of this nation is religion, its language religion and its 
idea religion ; and your politics, society, municipality, 
plague-prevention work and famine-relief work—all these 
things will be done as they have been done all along here, 
viz., only through religion ; otherwise all your frantic yell¬ 
ing and bewailing will end in nothing, my friend ! 

Besides, in every country, the mear.s is the same after 


364 


SWAMI VIVEKANANDA^S WORKS 


all, that is, whatever only a handful of powerful men dic¬ 
tate, becomes the fait accompli ; the rest of the men only 
follow like a flock of sheep, that s all. 1 have seen your 
Parliament, your Senate, your vote, majority, ballot ; it 
is the same thing everywhere, my friend. Ihe powerful 
men in every country are moving society whatever way 
they like, and the rest are only like a flock of sheep. Now 
the question is this, who are these men of power in India? 
—they who are giants in religion. It is they who lead our 
society ; and it is they again who change our social laws 
and usages when necessity demands ; and we listen to 
them silently and do what they command. The only 
difference with ours is, that we have not that superfluous 
fuss and bustle of the majority, the vote, ballot and similar 
concomitant tugs-of-war as in other countries. That is all. 

Of course we do not get that education which the 
common people in the West do, by the system of vote and 
ballot, etc., but, on the other hand, we have not also 
amongst us that class of people who, in the name of poli¬ 
tics, rob others and fatten themselves by sucking the very 
life-blood of the masses in all European countries. If 
you ever saw, my friend, that shocking sight behind 
the scene of acting of these politicians—that revelry of 
bribery, that robbery in broad daylight, that dance of 
the Devil in man, which are practised on such occasions, 
—you would be hopeless about man! “Milk gees 
abegging from door to door, while the grog-shop is crowd¬ 
ed; the chaste woman seldom gets the wherewithal to hide 
her modesty, while the woman of the town flutters 
about in all her jewelry ! They that have money have 
kept the government of the land under their thumb, are 
robbing the people and sending them as soldiers to fight 
and be slain on foreign shores, so that, in case of victory, 
their coffers may be full of gold bought by the blood of 
the subject-people on the field of battle. And the subject- 
people? Well, theirs is only to shed their blood. This is 


THE EAST AND THE WEST 


365 


politics ! Don’t be startled, my friend ; don’t be lost in 
its mazes. 

First of all, try to understand this: Does man make 
laws, or do laws make man? Does man make money, or 
does money make man? Does man make name and fame, 
or name and fame make man? 

Be a man first, my friend, and you will see how all 
those things and the rest will follow of themselves after 
you. Give up that hateful malice, that dog-like bickering 
and barking at one another, and take your stand on good 
purpose, right means, righteous courage, and be brave. 
When you are born a man, leave some indelible mark 
behind you. “When you first came to this world, O 
Tulsi^ the world rejoiced and you crieu ; now live your 
life in doing such acts that when you will leave this world, 
the world will cry for you and you will leave it laughing.” 
If you can do that, then you are a man ; otherwise, what 
good are you ? 

Next, you must understand this, my friend, that we 
have many things to learn from other nations. The man 
who says he has nothing more to learn is already ^ at his 
last gasp. The nation that says it knows everything is 
on the very brink of destruction I “As long as I live, so 
long do 1 learn.” But, one point to note here is that when 
we take anything from others we must mould it after our 
own way. We shall add to our stock what others have to 
teach, but we must always be careful to keep intact what 
is essentially our own. For instance, suppose 1 want to 
have my dinner cooked in the European fashion. The 
Europeans sit on chairs, and we are accustomed to squat 
on the floor, when taking food. To imitate the Euro¬ 
peans, if 1 order my dinner to be served on a table and 

' Tulsi was a poet and a devotee—the author of the Hindi 
Ramayana. Here the poet is addressing himself, and the verse tran- 
slatec] is one full of spiritual thought as well as sound advice to 
worldly-minded people. 


366 


SWAMI VIVEKANANDA^S WORKS 


have to sit on a chair more than an hour, my feet will be 
in a fair way of going to Yama*s door, as they say, and 1 
shall writhe in torture ; what do you say to that? So I 
must squat on the floor in my own style, while having their 
dishes. Similarly, whenever we learn anything from others, 
we must mould it after our own fashion, always preserv-* 
ing in full our characteristic nationality. Let me ask, 
‘Does man wear clothes or do clothes make the man? * 
The man of genius in any dress commands respect ; but 
nobody cares for fools like me, though carrying, like the 
washerman’s ass, a load of clothes on my back. 

1 he foregoing, in the way of an introduction, has come 
to be rather long ; but after all this talk it will be easier 
for us to compare the two nations. 1 hey are good—and 
we are also good. “You can neither praise the one nor 
blame the other ; both the scales are equal.” Of course, 
there are gradations and varieties of good, that is all. 

According to us, there are three things in the make¬ 
up of man. There is the body, there is the mind, and 
there is the soul. First let us consider the body, which is 
the most external thing about man. 

First, see how various are the differences with respect 
to the body. I low many varieties of nose, face, hair, 
height, complexion, breadth, etc., there are ! 

1 he modern ethnologists hold that variety of com¬ 
plexion is due to intermixture of blood. Though the hot 
or cold climate of the place to a certain extent affects the 
complexion, no doubt, yet the main cause of its change is 
heredity. Even in the coldest parts of the world, people 
with dark complexions are seen, and again in the hottest 
countries white men are seen to live. The complexion of 
the aboriginal tribes of Canada, in America, and of the 
Eskimos of the Northern Polar regions, is not white. 
While islands, such as Borneo, Celebes, etc., situated in 
the equatorial regions are peopled by white aborigines. 

According to the Hindu Shastras, the three Hindu 


THE EAST AND THE WEST 


367 


castes, Brahmana, Kshatriya, and Vaishya, and the several 
nations outside India, to wit, Cheen, Hun, Darad, Pahlava, 
Yavana and Khash are all Ary as. This Cheen of our 
Shastras is not the modern Chinaman. Besides, in those 
days, the Chinamen did not call themselves Cheen at all. 
There was a distinct, powerful nation, called Cheen, living 
in the north-eastern parts of Kashmir, and the Darads 
lived where are now seen the hill-tribes between IncJia and 
Afghanistan. Some remnants of the ancient Cheen are 
yet to be found in very small numbers, and Daradrsthan 
is yet in existence. In the Rajatarangini, the history of 
Kashmir, references are often made to the supremacy of 
the powerful Darad-Raj. An ancient tribe of Huns 
reigned for a long period in the nortV vvestern parts of 
India. The Tibetans now call themselves Hun, but this 
Hun is perhaps “Hune.** The fact is, that the Huns 
referred to in Manu are not the modern Tibetans, but it 
is quite probable that the modern Tibetans are the pro¬ 
duct of a mixture of the ancient Aryan Huns and some 
other Mogul tribes that came to Tibet from Central Asia. 
According to Prjevalski and the Due d’ Orleans, the 
Russian and French travellers, there are still found in some 
parts of Tibet tribes with faces and eyes of the Aryan 
type. “Yavana” was the name given to the Greeks. There 
has been much dispute about the origin of this name. 
Some say that the name Yavana was first used to designate 
a tribe of Greeks inhabiting the place called “Ionia,” 
and hence, in the Pali writs of the Emperor Ashoka, the 
Greeks are named “Yonas,” and afterwards from this 
“Yona” the Sanskrit word Yavana, was derived. Again, 
according to some of our Indian antiquarians, the' word 
Yavana does not stand for the Greeks. But all these views 
are wrong. The original word is Yavana itself ; for not 
only the Hindus but the ancient Egyptians and the Baby- 
ioinans as well called the Greeks by that name. By the 
word Pahlava is meant the ancient Parsees, speaking the 


368 


SWAMI VIVEKANANDA^S WORKS 


Pahlava tongue. Even no\v, Khash denotes the semi- 
civilised Aryan tribes living in mountainous regions and in 
the Himalayas, and the word is still used in this sense. In 
that sense, the present Europeans are the descendants of 
the Khash ; in other words, those Aryan tribes that were 
uncivilised in ancient days are all Khash. 

In the opinion of modern savants, the Aryans had 
reddish-white complexions, black or red hair, straight 
noses and well-drawn eyes, etc., and the formation of the 
skull varied a little according to the colour of the hair. 
Where the complexion is dark, there the change has come 
to pass owing to the mixture of the pure Aryan blood with 
black races. 1 hey hold that there are still some tribes to 
the west of the Himalayan borders who are of pure Aryan 
[)loocl. and that the rest are all of mixed blood ; otherwise, 
how could they be dark > But the European Pandits ought 
to know by this time that, in the southern parts of India, 
many children are born with red hair, which after two or 
three years changes into black, and that in the Himalayas 
many have red hair and blue or grey eyes. 

Let the Pandits fight among themselves ; it is the 
Hindus who have all along called themselves Aryas. 
Whether of pure or mixed blood, the Hindus are Aryas , 
there it rests. If the Europeans do not like us, Aryas, 
because we are dark, let them take another name for 
themselves—what is that to us? 

Whether black or white, it does not matter ; but of 
all the nations of the world, the Hindus are the handsom- 
es\L and hnest. \n Mature. \ arc\ rvox axv^- 

thing in exaggeration because they belong to my own 
nationality, but this fact is known all over the world. Where 
else can one find a higher percentage of fine-featured men 
and women than in India? Besides, it has to be taken into 
consideration how much more is required in our country 
to make us look handsome than in other countries, because 
our bodies are so much more exposed. In other countries. 


THE EAST AND THE WEST 


369 


the attempt is always to make ugly persons appear beauti¬ 
ful under cover of elaborate dresses and clothes. 

Of course, in point of health, the Westerners are far 
superior to us. In the west, men of forty years old and 
women of fifty years are still young. This is, no doubt, 
^Decause they take good food, dress well and live in a good 
climate, and, above all, the secret is that they do not marry 
at an early age. Ask those few strong tribes among our¬ 
selves and see what their marriageable age is. Ask the 
hill tribes, such as, the Goorkhas, the Punjabees, the Jats, 
and the Afridis, what their marriageable age is. Then 
read your own Shastras—thirty is the age fixed for the 
Brahmana, twentyfive for the Kshatriya, and twenty for 
the Vaishya. In point of longevity and physical and 
mental strength, there is a great difference between the 
Westerners and ourselves. As soon as we attain to forty, 
our hope and physical and mental strength are on the 
decline, while, at that age, full of youthful vigour and 
hope, they have only made a start. 

We are vegetarians—most of our diseases are of the 
stomach ; our old men and women generally die of 
stomach complaints. They of the West take meat—most 
of their diseases are of the heart ; their old men and women 
generally die of heart or lung diseases. A learned doctor 
of the West observes that the people who have chronic 
stomach complaints generally tend to a melancholy and 
renouncing nature, and the people suffering from com¬ 
plaints of the heart and the upper parts of the body have 
aWays Vvope and ^a\\\\ to \.\\e \ast \ t\ve c\\o\eta patient, 
is from the very beginning afraid of death, while the 
consumptive patient hopes to the last moment that he will 
recover ; is it owing to this, my doctor friend may with 
good reasoning ask, that the Indians always talk and think 
of death and renunciation? As yet 1 have not been able 
to find a satisfactory answer to this ; but the question seems 


370 


SWAMI VIVEKANANDA^S WORKS 


to have an air of truth about it, and demands serious 
consideration. 

In our country, people suffer little from diseases of the 
teeth and hair ; in the West, few people have natural, 
healthy teeth, and baldness is met with everywhere. Our 
women bore their noses and ears for wearing ornaments ; 
in the West, among the higher classes, the women do not 
do those things much, nowadays ; but by squeezing the 
waist, making the spine crooked, and thus displacing the 
liver and spleen and disfiguring the form, they suffer the 
torment of death to make themselves shapely in appear¬ 
ance, and added to that is the burden of dress, over which 
they have to show their features to the best advantage. 
Their Western dress is, however, more suited for work. 
With the exception of the dress worn in society by the 
ladies of the wealthy classes, the dress of the women in 
general is ugly. I he sari of our women, and the chogd, 
chdpkdn and turban of our men defy comparison as regards 
beauty in dress. 1 he tight dresses cannot approach in 
beauty the loose ones that fall in natural folds. But all our 
dresses being flowing, and in folds, are not suited for doing 
work ; in doing work, they are spoiled and done for. There 
is such a thing as fashion in the West. Their fashion is in 
dress, ours in ornaments, though nowadays it is entering 
a little into clothes also. Paris is the centre of fashion for 
ladies’ dress and London for men’s. The actresses of 
Paris often set the fashions. What new fashion of dress 
a distinguished actress of the time would wear, the 
fashionable world would greedily imitate. The big firms 
of dressmakers set the fashions nowadays. We can form 
no idea of the millions of pounds that are spent every year 
in the making of dress, in the West. The dress-making 
business has become a regular science—what colour of 
dress will suit with the complexion of the girl and the 
colour of her hair, what special feature of her body should 
be disguised, and what displayed to the best advantage 


THE EAST AND THE WEST 


371 


—these and many other like important points, the dress¬ 
makers have seriously to consider. Again, the dress that 
ladies of very high position wear, others have to wear also, 
otherwise they lose their caste ! This is FASHION. 

1 hen again, this fashion is changing every day, so to 
say; it is sure to change four times with the four seasons 
of the year, and, besides, many other times as well. The 
rich people have their dresses made, after the latest 
fashion, by expert firms ; those who belong to the middle 
classes have them often done at home by women-tailors, 
or do them themselves. If the new fashion approaches 
very near to their last one, then they just change or adjust 
their clothes accordingly ; otherwise, they buy new ones. 
The wealthy classes give away their dresses which have 
gone out of fashion to their dependants and servants. The 
lady’s maids and valets sell them, and those are exported 
to the various colonies established by the Europeans in 
Africa, Asia and Australia, and there they are used again. 
The dresses of those who are immensely rich are all order¬ 
ed from Paris : the less wealthy have them copied in their 
own country by their own dressmakers. But the ladies’ 
hats must be of French make. As a matter of fact, the 
dress of the English and the. German women is not good ; 
they do not generally follow the Paris fashions—except, 
of course, a few of the rich and the higher classes. So, 
the women of other countries indulge in jokes at their 
expense. But men in England mostly dress very well. 
The American men and women, without distinction, wear 
very fashionable dress. Though the American Govern¬ 
ment imposes heavy duties on all dresses imported from 
London or Paris, to keep out foreign goods from the 
country—yet, all the same, the women order their dress 
from Paris, and men, from London. Thousands of men 
and women are employed in daily introducing into the 
market woollen and silk fabrics of various kinds and 
colours, and thousands, again, are manufacturing all sorts 


372 


SWAMI VIVEKANANDA^S WORKS 


of dresses out of them. Unless the dress is exactly up to 
date, ladies and gentlemen cannot walk in the street with¬ 
out being remarked upon by the fashionable. Though we 
have not all this botheration of the fashion in dress in 
our country, we have, instead, a fashion in ornaments, to 
a certain extent. The merchants dealing in silk, woollen 
and other materials in the West have their watchful eyes 
always fixed on the way the fashion changes, and what 
sort of things people have begun to like ; or, they hit upon 
a new fashion out of their own brain, and try to draw the 
attention of the people thereto. When once a merchant 
succeeds in gaining the eyes of the people to the fashion 
brought into the market by him. he is a made man for life. 
At the time of the Emperor Napoleon 111 of France, his 
wife, the Empress Eugenie, was the universally recognised 
Avatar of fashion of the West. The shawls of Kashmir 
were her special favourites, and therefore shawls worth 
millions of rupees used to be exported every year, in her 
time, from Kashmir to Europe. With the fall of Napoleon 
111, the fashion has changed, and shawls of Kashmir no 
longer sell. And as for the merchants of our country, they 
always walk in the old rut. I hey could not opportunely 
hit upon any new style to catch the fancy of the West, 
under the altered circumstances, and so the market was 
lost to them. Kashmir received a severe shock and her 
big and rich merchants all of a sudden failed. 

I his world, if you have the eyes to see, is yours— 
if not, it is mine ; do you think that anyone waits for 
another? 1 he Westerners are devising new means and 
methods to attract the luxuries and the comforts of different 
parts of the world. They watch the situation with ten eyes 
and work with two hundred hands, as it were ; while we 
will never do what the authors of Shastras have not written 
in books, and thus we are moving in the same old groove 
and there is no attempt to seek anything original and new 
and the capacity to do that is lost to us now. The whole 


THE EAST AND THE WEST 


373 


nation is rending the skies with the cry for food and dying 
of starvation. Whose fault is it? Ours! What means are 
we taking in hand to find a way out of the pitiable situa¬ 
tion ? ZERO ! Only making great noise by our big and 
empty talk ! That is all that we are doing. Why not conie 
out of your narrow corner and see, with your eyes open, 
how the world is moving onwards? Then the mind will 
open and the power of thinking and of timely action will 
come of itself. You certainly know the story of the Devas 
and the Asuras. The Devas have faith in their soul, in 
God, and in the after-life, while the Asuras give importance 
to this life, and devote themselves to enjoying this world 
and trying to have bodily comforts in every possible way. 
We do. not mean to discuss here whether the [3eva8 are 
better than the Asuras, or the Asuras than the Devas, but, 
reading their descriptions in the Puranas, the Asuras seem 
to be, truth to tell, more like MEN, and far more manly than 
the Devas ; the Devas are inferior, without doubt, to the 
Asuras, in many respects. Now, to understand the East 
and the West, we cannot do better than interpret the 
Hindus as the sons of the Devas and the Westerners as 
the sons of the Asuras. 

First, let us see about their respective ideas of cleanli¬ 
ness of the body. Purity means cleanliness of mind and 
body ; the latter is effected by the use of water, etc. No 
nation in the world is as cleanly in the body as the Hindu, 
who uses water very freely. Taking a plunge bath is well 
nigh scarce in other nations, with a few exceptions. The 
English have introduced it into their country after coming 
in contact with India. Even now, ask those of our students 
who have resided in England for education, and they will 
tell you how insufficient the arrangements for bathing are 
there. When the Westerners bathe—and that is once a 
week—they change their inner clothing. Of course, now¬ 
adays, among those who have means, many bathe daily 
and among Americans the number is larger ; the Germans 

V-25 


374 


SIVAMI VIVEKANANDA'S WORKS 


once in a week, the French and others very rarely ! Spain 
and Italy are warm countries, but there it is still less I 
Imagine their eating of garlic in abundance, profuse per¬ 
spiration day and night, and yet no bath ! Ghosts must 
surely run away from them, what to say of men ! What 
is meant by bath in the West? Why, the washing of face, 
head and hands, i.e., only those parts which are exposed. 
A millionaire friend of mine once invited me to come over 
to Paris ; Paris, which is the capital of modern civilisation 
—Paris, the heaven of luxury, fashion and merriment on 
earth—the centre of arts and sciences. My friend accom¬ 
modated me in a huge palatial hotel, where arrangements 
for rnealg were in a right royal style, but, for bath—well, 
no name of it. Two days 1 suffered silently—till- at last 
I could bear it no longer, and had to address my friend 
thus: Dear brother, let this royal luxury be with you and 
yours ! I am panting to get out of this situation. Such 
hot weather, and no facility of bathing ; if it continues like 
this, 1 shall be in imminent danger of turning mad like a 
rabid dog. Hearing this, my friend became very sorry for 
me and annoyed with the hotel authorities, and said: 1 
won’t let you stay here any more, let us go and find out 
a better place. Twelve of the chief hotels were seen, but 
no place for bathing was there in any of them. There are 
independent bathing-houses, where one can go and have 
a bath for four or five rupees. Good heavens ! That 
very alternoon I read in a paper that an old lady entered 
into the bath-tub and died then and there I Whatever 
the doctors may say, I am inclined to think that perhaps 
that was the first occasion in her life to come into contact 
with so much water, and the frame collapsed by the 
sudden shock I This is no exaggeration. Then, the 
f^ussians and some others are awfully unclean in that line. 
Starting from Tibet, it is about the same all over those 
regions. In every boarding house in America, of course, 
there is a bath-room, and an arrangement of pipe-water. 


THE EAST AND THE WEST 


375 


See, however, the difference here. Why do we 
Hindus bathed Because of the fear of incurring sin. The 
Westerners wash their hands and face—for cleanliness* 
sake. Bathing with us means pouring water over the body, 
though the oil and the dirt may stick on and show them¬ 
selves. Again, our Sofirthern Indian brothers decorate 
themselves with such long and wide caste-marks that it 
requires perchance the use of a pumice-stone to rub them 
off. Our bath, on the other hand, is an easy matter—to 
have a plunge in, anywhere ; but not so, in the West. 
There they have to put off a load of clothes, and how many 
buttons and hooks and eyes are there ! We do not feel 
any delicacy to show our body ; to them it is awful, but 
among men, say, between father and son, there is no 
impropriety ; only before women you have to cover 
yourself cap-a-pie. 

This custom of external cleanliness, like all other 
customs, sometimes turns out to be in the long run, rather 
a tyranny or the very reverse of Achara (cleanliness). The 
European says that all bodily matters have to be attended 
to in private. Well and good. “It is vulgar to spit before 
other people. To rinse your mouth before others is 
disgraceful. ” So, for fear pf censure, they do not wash 
their mouth after meals, and the result is that the teeth 
gradually decay. Here is non-observance of cleanliness 
for fear of society or civilisation. With us, it is the other 
extreme—to rinse and wash the mouth before all men, or 
sitting in the street, making a noise as if you were sick— 
this is rather tyranny. Those things should, no doubt, be 
done privately and silently, but not to do them for fear 
of society is also equally wrong. 

Again, society patiently bears and accommodates itself 
to those customs which are unavoidable in particular 
climates. In a warm country like ours, we drink glass after 
glass of water ; now, how can we help eructating ; but in 
the West, that habit is very ungentlemanly. But there, if 


376 


SWAMI VIVEKANANDA^S WORKS 


you blow the nose and use your pocket handkerchief at 
the time of eating—that is not objectionable, but with us 
it is disgusting. In a cold country like theirs, one cannot 
avoid doing it now and then. 

We Hindus hold dirt in abomination very much, but, 
all the same, we are, in point of fact, frequently dirty 
ourselves. Dirt is so repugnant to us that if we touch it 
we bathe ; and so to keep ourselves away from it we leave 
a heap of it to rot near the house—the only thing to be 
careful about is not to touch it ; but, on the other hand, 
do we ever think that we are living virtually in hell> 
"l o avoid one uncleanliness, we court another and a greater 
uncleanliness ; to escape from one evil, we follow on the 
heels of another and a greater evil. He who keeps dirt 
heaped in his house isf a sinner, no doubt about that. And 
for his retribution he has not to wait for the next life : it 
recoils on his head betimes— in this very life. 

I he grace of both Lakshmi (goddess of fortune) and 
Sarasvati (goddess of learning) now shines on the peoples 
of the Western countries. They do not stop at the merp 
acquisition of the objects of enjoyment, but in all their 
actions they seek for a sort of beauty and grace. In eating 
and drinking, in their homes and surroundings, in every¬ 
thing, they want to see an all-round elegance. We also 
had that trait once—when there was wealth and prosperity 
in the land. We have now too much poverty, but, to make 
matters worse, we are courting our ruin in two ways— 
namely, we are throwing away what we have as our own, 
and labouring in vain to make others’ ideals and habits 
ours. 1 hose national virtues that we had are gradually 
disappearing, and we are not acquiring any of the Western 
ones either ! In sitting, walking, talking, etc. there was in 
the olden days a traditional, specific trait of our own—that 
is now gone -and withal we have not the ability to take in 
the Western modes of etiquette. Those ancient religious 
rites,, practices, studies, etc., that were left to us, you are 


THE EAST AND THE WEST 


377 


consigning to the tide-waters to be swept away—and yet 
something new and suitable to the exigencies of the time, 
to make up for them, is not striking its roots and becoming 
stable with us. In oscillating between these two lines, 
all our present distress lies. The Bengal that is to be 
has not as yet got a stable footing. It is our arts that 
have fared the worst of all. In the days gone by, our old 
women used to paint the floors, doors and walls of their 
houses with a paste of rice-powder, drawing various beauti¬ 
ful figures ; they used to cut plantain leaves in an artistic 
manner, to serve the food on ; they used to lavish their 
art in nicely arranging the different comestibles on the 
plates. Those arts, in these days, have gradually dis¬ 
appeared, or are doing so. 

Of course new things have to be learnt, have to be 
introduced and worked out ; but is that to be done by 
sweeping away all that is old, just because it is old? 
What new things have you learnt? Not any—save and 
except a jumble of words I What really useful science 
or art have you acquired? Go and see, even now, in the 
distant villages, the old woodwork and brickwork. The 
carpenters of your towns cannot even turn out a decent 
pair of doors. Whether they are made for a hut or a 
mansion is hard to make out ! They are only good at 
buying foreign tools, as if that is all of carpentry ! Alas I 
That state of things has come upon all matters in our 
country. What we possessed as our own is all passing 
away, and yet, all that we have learnt from foreigners 
is the art of speechifying. Merely reading and talking I 
The Bengalees, and the Irish in Europe, are races cast in 
the same mould—only talking and talking, and bandying 
words. These two nations are adepts in making grandilo¬ 
quent speeches. They are nowhere, when a jot of real 
practical work is required—over and above that, they are 
barking at each other and fighting among themselves all 
the days of their life ! 


378 


SWAMl VIVEKANANDA^S WORKS 


In the West, they have a habit of keeping everything 
about themselves neat and clean, and even the poorest 
have an eye towards it. And this regard for cleanliness 
has to be observed, for, unless the people have clean 
suits of clothes, none will employ them in their service. 

I heir servants, maids, cooks, etc., are all dressed in 
spotlessly clean clothes. Their houses are kept trim and 
tidy by being daily brushed, washed and dusted. A part 
of good breeding consists in not throwing things about, 
but keeping them in their proper places. Their kitchens 
look clean and bright—vegetable peelings and such other 
refuse are placed, for the time being, in a separate 
receptacle, and taken, later on, by a scavenger to a 
distance and thrown away in a proper place set apart for 
the purpose. 1 hey do not throw such things about in 
their yards or on the roads. 

1 he houses and other buildings of those who are 
wealthy are really a sight worth seeing—these are, night 
and day, a marvel of orderliness and cleanliness ! Over 
and above that, they cire in the habit of collecting art- 
treasures from various countries, and adorning their rooms 
with them. As regards ourselves, we need not, of course, 
at any rate for the present, go in for collecting works of 
art as they do ; but should we, or should we not, at least 
preserve those which we possess from going to ruin? 
It will take us a long time yet to become as good and 
efficient as they are in the arts of painting and sculpture. 
We were never very skilful in those two departments of 
art. By imitating the Europeans we at the utmost can* 
only produce one or two Ravi Varmas among us ! But 
far better than such artists are our patuas (painters) who 
do the chalchitras^ of our Goddesses, in Bengal. They 
display in their work at least a boldness in the brilliancy 

' I li(* tJiiiliJnhd i'- ail auh-sli.^Hal frame put over the Iinaf^es 
nt (,<i(ls aiul (.nddt'vses, in which are paintcil various pictures ot 
I .luranika legends, hordeo'd with ornamental workmanship. 


THE EAST AND THE WEST 


379 


of their colours. The paintings of Ravi Varma and others, 
make one hide one's face from shame ! Far better are 
those gilded pictures of Jeypur and the chdlchitra of the 
Goddess Durga, that we have had from old times. 1 shall 
reserve my reflections on the European arts of sculpture 
and painting for some future occasion. That is too vast 
a subject to enter upon here. 

Now hear something about the Western art of cooking. 
1 here is greater purity observed in our cooking than in 
any other country ; on the other hand, we have not that 
perfect regularity, method and cleanliness of the English 
table. Every day our cook first bathes and changes his 
clothes before entering the kitchen ; he neatly cleanses 
all the utensils and the hearth with water and earth, and if 
he chances to touch his face, nose or any part of his 
body, he washes his hands before he touches again any 
food. The Western cook scarcely bathes ; moreover, he 
tastes with a spoon the cooking he is engaged in, and does 
not think much of redipping the spoon into the pot. 
Taking out his handkerchief he blows his nose vigorously, 
and again with the same hand he, perchance, kneads the 
dough. He never thinks of washing his hands when he 
comes from outside, and begins his cooking at once. But 
all the same, he has snow-white clothes and cap. May be, 
he is dancing on the dough—why, because he may knead 
it thoroughly well with the whole pressure of his body, no 
matter if the sweat of his brow gets mixed with it f 
(Fortunately nowadays, machines are widely in use for 
the task). After all this sacrilege, when the bread is 
finished, it is placed on a porcelain dish covered with a 
snow-white napkin and is carried by the servant dressed 
in a spotless suit of clothes with white gloves on ; then 
it is laid on the table spread over with a clean tablecloth. 
Mark here, the gloves—lest the man touch anything with 
his bare fingers ! 

Observe ours on the other hand. (^3ur Brahmin cook 


380 


SWAMI VIVEKANANDA’S WORKS 


has first purified himself with a bath, and then cooked 
the dinner in thoroughly cleansed utensils, but he serves 
it to you on a plate on the bare floor which has been 
pasted over with earth and cow-dung ; and his cloth, 
albeit dally washed, js so dirty that it looks as if it were 
never washed. And if the plaintain-leaf, which sometimes 
serves the purpose of a plate, is broken, there is a good 
chance of the soup being mixed up with the moist floor 
and cow-dung paste and giving rise to a wonderful taste ! 

After taking a nice bath we put on a dirty-looking 
cloth, almost sticky with oil ; and in the W^est, they put on 
a perfectly clean suit, on a dirty body, without having had 
a proper bath. Now, this is to be understood thoroughly 
—for here is the point of essential difference between the 
Orient and the Occident. 1 hat inward vision of the Hindu 
and the outward vision of the West, are manifest in all 
their respective manners and customs. The Hindu always 
looks inside, and the Westerner outside. The Hindu 
keeps diamonds wrapped in a rag, as it were ; the West¬ 
erner preserves a lump of earth in a golden casket! The 
I lindu bathes to keep his body clean, he does not care how 
dirty his cloth may be ; the Westerner takes care to wear 
clean clothes—what matters it if dirt remains on his body ! 

I he Hindu keeps neat and clean the rooms, doors, floors, 
and everything inside his house ; what matters it if a heap 
of dirt and refuse lies outside his entrance door ! The 
Westerner looks to covering his floors with bright and 
beautiful carpets, the dirt and dust under them is all right 
if concealed from view! 1 he Hindu lets his drains run 
open over the road, the bad smell does not count much ! 

1 he drains in the West are underground—the hot-bed 
of typhoid fever ! The Hindu cleanses the inside, the 
Westerner cleanses the outside. 

What is wanted is a clean body with clean clothes. 
Rinsing the mouth, cleansing the teeth and all that must 
be done—but in private. The dwelling-houses must be 


THE EAST AND THE WEST 


381 


kept clean, as well as the streets and thoroughfares and 
all outlying places. The cook must keep his clothes clean 
as well as his body. Moreover, the meals must be par¬ 
taken of in spotless cups and plates, sitting in a neat and 
tidy place. Achara, or observance of the established rules 
of conduct in life, is the first step to religion, and of that 
again, cleanliness of body and mind, cleanliness in every¬ 
thing, is the most important factor. Will one devoid of 
Achara ever attain to religion? Don’t you see before 
your very eyes the miseries of those who are devoid 
Achara? Shouldn’t we, thus paying dearly for it, learn 
the lesson? Cholera, malaria and plague have made their 
permanent home in India, and are carrying away their 
victims by millions. Whose fault is it? Ours, to be sure. 
We are sadly devoid of Achara ! 

All our different sects of Hinduism admit the truth 
of the celebrated saying of the Shrutis— 

HSfT —“When the food is pure, then the 

inner-sense gets purified ; on the purification of the inner- 
sense, memory (of the soul’s perfection) becomes steady.” 
Only, according to Shankaracharya, the word Ahara means 
the sense-perceptions, and Ramanuja takes the word to 
mean food. But what is the solution? All sects agree 
that both are necessary, and both ought lo be taken into 
account. Without pure food, how can the Indriyas 
perform their respective functions properly? Everyone 
knows by experience that impure food weakens the power 
of receptivity of the Indriyas, or makes them act in 
opposition to the will. It is a well-known fact that 
indigestion distorts the vision of things and makes one 
thing appear as another, and that want of food makes the 
eye-sight and other powers of the senses dim and weak. 
Similarly, it is often seen that some particular kind of food 
brings on some particular state of the body and the mind. 
This principle is at the root of those many rules which are 
so strictly enjoined in Hindu society—-that we should take 


382 


SWAMI VIVEKANANDA'S WORKS 


this sort, and avoid that sort, of food,—though, in many 
cases, forgetting their essential substance, the kernel, we 
are now busy only with quarrelling about the shell and 
keeping watch and ward over it. 

Ramanujacharya asks us to avoid three sorts of defects 
which, according to him, make food impure. The first 
defect is that of the Jati, i.e., the very nature, or the 
species to which the food belongs, as onion, garlic, and 
so on. I hese have an exciting tendency and, when taken, 
produce restlessness of the mind, or in other words, 
perturb the intellect. The next is that of Ashraya, i.e., 
the nature of the person from whom the food comes. The 
food coming from a wicked person will make one impure 
and think wicked thoughts, while the food coming from a 
good man will elevate one s thoughts. I hen the other is 
Nimitta-dosha, i.e., impurity in food due to such agents in 
it as dirt and dust, worms or hair ; taking such food also 
makes the mind impure. Of these three defects, anyone 
can eschew the Jati and the Nimitta, but it is not easy for 
all to avoid the Ashraya. It is only to avoid this Ashraya- 
dosha, that we have so much of *Don't-touchism’* 
amongst us nowadays. “Don’t touch me !“ “Don’t 
touch me !“ But in most cases, the cart is put before the 
horse, and, the real meaning of the principle being mis¬ 
understood, it becomes in time a queer and hideous 
superstition. In thse cases, the Acharas of the great 
Acharyas, the teachers of mankind, should be followed 
instead of the Lokacharas, i.e., the customs followed by 
the people in general. One ought to read the lives of 
such great Masters as Sri C haitanya Deva and other similar¬ 
ly great religious teachers, and see how they behaved 
themselves with their fellowmen in this respect. .As re¬ 
gards the jati-dosha in food, no other country in the world 
furnishes a better field for its observation than India. I he 
Indians, of all nations, take the purest of foods and, all 
over the world, there is no other country where the purity 


THE EAST AND THE WEST 


383 


as regards the Jati is so well observed as in India. We 
had better attend to the Nimitta-dosha a little more now in 
India, as it is becoming a source of serious evil with us. 
It has become too common with us to buy food from the 
sweets-vendor’s shop in the bazaar, and you can judge for 
yourselves how impure these confections are from the 
point of view of the Nimitta-dosha—for, being kept ex¬ 
posed, the dirt and dust of the roads as well as dead 
insects adhere to them, and how stale and polluted they 
must sometimes be. All this dyspepsia that you notice in 
every home, and the prevalence of diabetes from which 
the townspeople suffer so much nowadays, are due to 
the taking of impure food from the bazaars; and that 
the village-people are not as a rule so subject to these 
complaints is principally due to the fact that they have 
not these bazaars near them, where they can buy at their 
will such poisonous food as loochi, J^achoori, etc. I shall 
dwell on this in detail later on. 

This is, in short, the cold general rule about food. 
But there were, and still are, many differences of opinion 
about it. Again, as in the old, so in the present day, 
there is a great controversy whether it is good or bad to 
take animal food or live only on a vegetable diet, whether 
we are benefited or otherwise by taking meat. Besides, the 
question whether it is right or wrong to kill animals has 
always been a matter of great dispute. One party says 
that to take away life is a sin, and on no account should 
it be done. The other party replies : “A fig for your 
opinion ! It is simply impossible to live without killing.’" 
The Shastras also differ, and rather confuse one, on this 
point. In one place the Shastra dictates, “Kill animals in 
Yajnas,” and again, in another place it says, “Never take 
away life. The Hindus hold that it is a sin to kill animals 
except in sacrifices, but one can with impunity enjoy the 
pleasure of eating meat after the animal is sacrificed in a 
Yajna. Indeed, there are certain rules prescribed for the 


384 


SWAMI VIVEKANANDA^S WORKS 


householder, in which he is required to kill animals on 
certain occasions, such as Shraddha and so on, and if he 
omits to kill animals at those times, he is condemned as 
a sinner. Manu says that if those that are invited to 
Shraddha and certain other ceremonies do not partake of 
the animal food offered there, they take birth in an animal 
body in their next life. On the other hand, the Jains, the 
Buddhists and the Vaishnavas protest, saying, VWe do not 
believe In the dictates of such Hindu Shastras ; on no 
account should the taking away of life be tolerated.** 
Ashoka, the Buddhist emperor, we read, punished those 
who would perform Yajnas, or offer meat to the invited 
at any ceremony. The position in which the modern 
Vaishnavas find themselves is rather one of difficulty. 
Instances are found in the Ramayana^ and the Maha- 
bharata" of the drinking of wine and the taking of meat 


II 

^ ftPtMlft 4>^lbi ^ I 


lunlir.Kiiig Sita witli loth his arms. Kakutstha (Rarna) made lior 
drink jMirc’ Main'va wine, (‘ven as Tndra makes Shachi partake of 
niH tar 

N-rvanis quickly seivc'd llesh-ineat variously dressed, and fruits 
ot \ariou^ kinch for the' use' of Rama. 


^ 3ft II 


lie mercilul to us. (> (Goddess, and I shall, on my return home, 
worship Thee yith a thousand jars of arrack (spirituous liquor) and 
licc' well-dres'^tal with llesh-meat —Ramavana. 


THE EAST AND THE WEST 385 

by Rama and Krishna, whom they worship as God, Sita 
Devi vows meat, rice and a thousand jars of wine to the 
river-goddess, Ganga ! 

In the West, the contention is whether animal food is 
injurious to health or not, whether it is more strengthening 
than vegetable diet or not, and so on. One party says 
that those that take animal food suffer from all sorts of 
bodily complaints. The other contradicts this and says: 
“That is all fiction. If that were true, then the Hindus 
would have been the healthiest race, and the powerful 
nations, such as the English, the Americans and others, 
whose principal food is meat, would have succumbed to 
all sorts of maladies and ceased to exist by this time.” One 
says that the flesh of the goat makes the intellect like that 
of the goat, the flesh of the swine like that of the swine, 
and fish like that of the fish. I he other declares that it 
can as well be argued then that the potato makes a potato¬ 
like brain, that vegetables make a vegetable-like brain— 
resembling dull and dead matter. Is it not better to have 
the intelligence of a living animal than to have the brain 
dull and inert like dead matter? One party says that 
those things which are in the chemical composition of 
animal food are also equally present in the vegetables. 
1 he other ridicules it and exclaims, “Why, they are in the 
air too. Go then and live on air only.” One argues that 
the vegetarians are very painstaking and can go through 
hard and long-sustained labour. The other says, “If that 
were true, then the vegetarian nations would occupy the 
foremost rank, which is not the case, the strongest and 
foremost nations being always those that take animal- 
food.” Those who advocate animal food contend*: Look 

(I saw) both of them (Krishna and Arjuna) drunk with 
IVfadhvasava (sweet spirituous liquor made from Honey), both adorned 
with sandal paste, garlanded, and wearing costly garments and 
beautiful ornaments. 


—Mahabharata, Udyoga Parva, chap. 58, 5. 


356 


SWAMI VIVEKANANDA^S WORKS 


at the Hindus and the Chinaman, how poor they are. 

I hey do not take meat, but live somehow on the scanty 
diet of rice and all sorts of vegetables. Look at their 
miserable condition. And the Japanese were also in the 
same plight, but since they commenced taking meat, they 
have turned over a new leaf. In the Indian regiments 
there are about a lac and a half of native sepoys : sec 
how many of them are vegetarians. The best parts of 
them, such as the Sikhs and the Goorkhas. are never 
vegetarians.” One party says, “Indigestion is due to 
ar^imal food. ’ I he other says: 1 hat is all stuff and 

nonsense. It is mostly the vegetarians who suffer from 
stomach complaints.’ Again: “It may be that vegetable 
food acts as an effective purgative to the system. But 
is that any reason that you should induce the whole world 
to take to itT’ 

Whatever one or the other may say, the real fact, how¬ 
ever, is that the nations who take animal food are always, 
as a rule, notably brave, heroic and thoughtful. The 
nations who take animal food also assert that in those 
days when the smoke from Yajnas used to rise in the 
Indian sky and the Hindus used to take the meat of animals 
sacrificed, then only great religious geniuses and intellec¬ 
tual giants were born among them ; but since the drifting 
of the Hindus into the hahaji s vegetarianism, not one 
great, original man arose from amidst them. Taking this 
view into account, the meat-eaters in our country are 
afraid to give up their habitual diet. The Arya Samajists 
are divided amongst themselves on this point, and a con¬ 
troversy is raging within their fold—one party holding 
that animal food is absolutely necessary, and the opposite 
parly denouncing it as extremely wrong and unjust. 

In this way, discussions of a conflicting character, 
giving rise to mutual abuses, quarrels and fights, are going 
on. .After carefully scrutinising all sides of the question, 
and setting aside all fanaticism that is rampant on this 


THE EAST AND THE WEST 


387 


delicate question of food, I must say that my conviction 
tends to confirm this view—that the Hindus are, after 
all right; 1 mean that injunction of the Hindu Shastras, 
which lays down the rule that food, like many other things, 
must be different according to the difference of birth and 
profession ; this is the sound conclusion. But the Hindus 
of the present day will neither follow their Shastras nor 
listen to what their great Acharyas taught. 

To eat meat is surely barbarous and vegetable food 
is certainly purer—who can deny that? For him surely 
is a strict vegetarian diet, whose one end is to lead solely 
a spiritual life. But he who has to steer the boat of his 
life with strenuous labour through the constant life-and- 
death struggles and the competition of this world must of 
necessity take meat. So long as there will be in human 
society such a thing as the triumph of the strong over the 
weak, animal food is required, or some other suitable 
substitute for it has to be discovered ; otherwise, the weak 
will naturally be crushed under the feet of the strong. It 
will not do to quote solitary instances of the good effect of 
vegetable food on some particular person or persons: 
compare one nation with another and then draw conclu¬ 
sions. 

The vegetarians, again, are also divided amongst 
themselves. Some say that rice, potatoes, wheat, barley, 
maize and other starchy foods are of no use ; these have 
been produced by man, and are the source of all maladies. 
Starchy food which generates sugar in the system is most 
Injurious to health. Even horses and cows become sickly 
and diseased if kept within doors and fed on wheat and 
rice; but they get \^ell again if allowed to graze frefely on 
the tender and grpwing herbage in the meadows. There is 
very little starch^ substance in grass and other green edible 
herbs. The orang-outang eats grass and nuts and does 
not usually eat potato and wheat, but if he ever does so, 
he eats them before they are ripe, i.e., when there is not 


388 


SWAMI VIVEKANANDA'S WORKS 


much starch in them. Others say that taking roast meat 
and plenty of fruit and milk is best suited to the attainment 
of longevity. More especially, they who take much fruit 
regularly, do not so soon lose their youth, as the acid of 
fruit dissolves the foul crust formed on the bones which is 
mainly the cause of bringing on old age. 

All these contentions have no end ; they are going on 
unceasingly. Now, the judicious view admitted by all in 
regard to this vexed question is, to take such food as is 
substantial and nutritious, and at the same time, easily 
digested. I he food should be such as contains the greatest 
nutriment in the smallest compass, and be at the same 
time quickly assimilable ; otherwise, it has necessarily to 
be taken in large quantity, and consequently the whole 
day is required only to digest it. If all the energy is spent 
only in digesting food, what will there be left to do other 
works } 

All fried things are really poisonous, d'he sweets- 
vendor’s shop is Death’s door. In hot countries, the less 
oil and clarified butter (ghee) taken the better. Butter 
is more easily digested than ghee. There is very little sub¬ 
stance in snow-white flour ; whole-wheat flour i,s good as 
food, kor Bengal, the style and preparation of food that 
are still in vogue in our di.stant villages are commendable. 
What ancient Bengali poet do you find singing the praise 
of loochi and /^achoon? These loochis and /^achoons 
have been introduced into Bengal from the North-Western 
Provinces ; but even there, people take them only occa¬ 
sionally. I have never seen even there anyone who lives 
mainly on things fried in ghee day after day. The chaube 
wrestlers of Muttra are, no doubt, fond of loochis and 
sweetmeats, but in a few years, the chaubeji s power of 
digestion is ruined, and he then has to drug himself with 
the appetising preparations called churans. 

1 he poor die of starvation because they can get nothing 
to eat, and the rich die of starvation because what they 


THE EAST AND THE WEST 


389 


take is not food. Any and every stuff eaten is not food ; 
that is real food which, when eaten, is well assimilated. 
It is better to fast rather than stuff oneself with anything 
and everything. In the delicacies of the sweetmeat shops 
there is hardly anything nourishing ; on the other hand, 
there is—poison! Of old, people used to take those 
injurious things only occasionally ; but now, the towns¬ 
people, especially those who come from villages to live 
in towns, are the greatest sinners in this respect, as 
they take them every day. What wonder is there that 
they die prematurely of dyspepsia ! If you are hungry, 
throw away all sweets and things fried in ghee into the 
ditch, and buy a pice worth of moorhi (popped rice)—that 
will be cheaper and more nutritious food. It is sufficient 
food to have rice, dal (lentils), whole-wheat chapatis (un¬ 
fermented bread), fish, vegetables and milk. But dal has 
to be taken as the Southern Indians take it that is, 
the soup of it only; the rest of the preparation give to the 
cattle. He may take meat who can afford it, but not 
making it too rich with heating spices, as the North-West¬ 
ern people do. The spices are no food at all ; to take 
them in abundance is only due to a bad habit. Dal is a 
very substantial food but h^rd to digest. Pea-soup pre¬ 
pared of tender peas is easily digested and pleasant to 
the taste. In Paris this pea-soup is a favourite dish. First, 
boil the peas well, then make a paste of them and mix 
them with water. Now strain the soup through a wire- 
strainer, like that in which milk is strained and all the outer 
skin will be separated. Then add some spices, such as 
turmeric, black pepper, etc., according to taste, and broil 
it with a little ghee in the pan—and you get a pleasarit and 
wholesome dal. The meat-eaters can make it delicious 
by cooking it with the head of a goat or fish. 

That we have so many cases of diabetes in India is 
chiefly due to indigestion; of course there are solitary in¬ 
stances in which excessive brain work is the cause, but 

V-~-26 


390 SWAMI VIVEKANANDA’S IVOKKS 
\ 

with the majority it is indigestion. Pot-belly is the fore¬ 
most sign of indigestion. Does eating mean stuffing one¬ 
self? Thai much which one can assimilate is proper food 
for one. Growing thin or fat is equally due to indiges¬ 
tion. Don’t give yourself up as lost because some 
symptoms of diabetes are noticeable in you ; those are 
nothing in our country and should not be taken seriously 
into account. Only, pay more attention to your diet so 
that you may avoid indigestion. Be in the open air as 
much as possible, and take good long walks and work 
hard. The muscles of the leg should be as hard as iron. 
If you are in service take leave, when possible, and make 
a pilgrimage to the Badarikashrama in the Himalayas. If 
the journey is accomplished on foot through the ascent and 
descent of two hundred miles in the hills, you will see that 
this ghost of diabetes will depart from you. Don’t let 
the doctors come near you ; most of them will harm you 
more than do any good ; and so far as possible, never 
take medicines, which in most cases kill the patient sooner 
than the illness itself. If you can, walk all the way from 
town to your native village every year during the Puja 
vacation. To be rich in our country has come to be synony¬ 
mous with being the embodiment of laziness and depend¬ 
ence. One who has to walk being supported by another, 
or one who has to be fed by another, is doomed to be 
miserable—is a veritable invalid. He who eats cautiously 
only the finer coating of the loochi^ for fear that the whole 
will not agree with him. is already dead in life. Is he a 
man or a worm, who cannot walk twenty miles at a stretch? 
Who can save one who Invites illness* and premature death 
of his own will? 

And as for fermented bread, it is also poison, don’t 
touch it at all I Flour mixed with yeast becomes injurious. 
Never take any fermented thing ; in this respect the pro¬ 
hibition in our Shastras of partaking of any such article of 
food is a fact of great importance. Any sweet thing which 


THE EAST AND THE WEST 


391 


has turned sour is called in the Shastras Shukta, and 
that is prohibited to be taken, excepting curd, which is 
good and beneficial. If you have to take bread, toast it 
well over the fire. 

Impure water and impure food are the cause of all 
maladies. In America, nowadays, it has become a craze 
to purify the drinking water. 1 he filter has had its day 
and is now discredited, because it only strains the water 
through, while all the finer germs of diseases such as 
cholera, piague, remain intact m it ; moreover, the 
filter itself gradually becomes the hotbed of these germs. 
When the filter was first introduced in Calcutta, for five 
years, it is said there was no outbreak of cnolera ; since 
then it has become as bad as ever, for the reason that 
the huge filter itself has now come to be the vehicle of 
cholera germs. Of all kinds, the simple method that 
we have of placing three earthen jars one over another 
on a three-footed bamboo frame, is the best ; but every 
second or third day the sand and charcoal should be 
changed, or used again after heating them. The method 
of straining water through a cloth containing a lump of 
alum in it, that we find in vogue in the villages along the 
banks of the Ganges in the vicinity of Calcutta, is the 
best of all. 1 he particles of alum taking with them all 
earth and impurities and the disease germs, gradually 
settle at the bottom of the deep jar as sediment ; this 
simple system brings into disrepute pipewater, and excels 
all your foreign filters. Moreover, if the water is boiled 
it becomes perfectly safe. Boil the water when the 
impurities are settled down by the alum, and then 
drink it, and throw away filters and such other' things 
into the ditch. Now in America, the drinking water is 
first turned into vapour by means of huge machines ; 
then the vapour is cooled down into water again, and 
through another machine pure air is pressed into it, 
to substitute that air which goes out during the process 


392 


SWAMI VIVEKANANDA^S WORKS 


of vaporisation. This water is very pure and is used in 
every home. m 

In our country, he who has some means, feeds his 
children with all sorts of sweets and ghee-fried things, 
because, perchance, it is a shame—just think what the 
people will say!—to let them have only rice and 
chapatis ! What can you expect children fed like that 
to be but disproportionate in figure, lazy, worthless idiots, 
with no backbone of their own> The English people, 
who are so strong a race, who work so hard day and 
night, and whose native place is a cold country—even 
they hold in dread the very name of sweetmeats and 
food fried in butter ! And we, who live in the zone of 
fire, as it were, who do not like to move from one place 
to another—what do we eat?— loochis, k.achooris^ sweets, 
and other things, all fried in ghee or oil 1 Formerly, our 
village zemindars in Bengal would think nothing of 
walking twenty or thirty miles, and would eat twice- 
twenty koi-fish, bones and all—and they lived to a 
hundred years. Now their sons and grandsons come to 
C.alcutta and put on airs, wear spectacles, eat the sweets 
from the bazaars, hire a carriage to go from one street 
to another, and then complain of diabetes—and their 
life is cut short ; this is the result of their being *‘civilised, 
Calcutta-ised people. And doctors and Vaidyas hasten 
their ruin too. They are all-knowing, they think they 
can cure anything with medicine. If there is a little 
flatulence, immediately some medicine is prescribed. 
Alas, it never enters into the heads of these Vaidyas to 
advise them to keep away from medicine, and go and 
have a good walk of four or five miles, or so. 

1 am seeing many countries, and many ways and 
preparations of food ; but none of them approaches the 
admirable cooking of our various dishes of Bengal, and 
it is not too much to say that one would like to take 
rebirth for the sake of again enjoying their excellence. 


THE EAST AND THE WEST 


393 


It is a great pity that one does not appreciate the value 
of teeth when one has them# Why should we imitate 
the West as regards food—and how many can afford 
to do so? The food which is suitable in our part of 
the country is pure Bengali food, cheap, wholesome, and 
nourishing, like that of the people of Eastern Bengal. 
Imitate their food as much as you can ; the more you 
lean westwards to copy the modes of food, the worse 
you are, and the more uncivilised you become. You are 
Calcutta-ites, civilised, forsooth : carried away by the 
charm of that destructive net which is of your own 
creation, the bazaar sweets. Bankura has consigned its 
popped-rice to the river Damodar, its k.aldi ddl has been 
cast into the ditch, and Dacca and Vikrampur have 
thrown to the dogs their old dishes—or in other words, 
they have become “civilised” I You have gone to rack 
and ruin, and are leading others in the same path, you 
townspeople, and you pride yourselves on your being 
“civilised” I And these provincial people are so foolish 
that they will eat all the refuse of Calcutta and suffer 
from dyspepsia and dysentery, but will not admit that 
it is not suiting them, and will defend themselves by 
saying that the air of Calcutta is damp and “saline” ! 
They must by all means be townspeople in every 
respect! 

So far, in brief, about the merits of food and other 
customs. Now I shall say something in the matter of 
what the Westerners generally eat, and how by degrees 
it has changed. 

The food of the poor in all countries is some species 
of corn ; herbs, vegetables, and fish and meat fall within 
the category of luxuries and are used in the shape of 
chutney. The crop which grows in abundance and is 
the chief produce of a country, is the staple food of its 
poorer classes ; as in Bengal, Orissa, Madras, and the 
Malabar coasts, the prime food is rice, pulse and vege- 


394 


SWAMI VIVEKANANDA'S WORKS 


tables, and sometimes, fish and meat are used for chutney^ 
only. The food of the w^-to-do class in other parts of 
India is chapatis (unfermented bread) of wheat, and rice, 
and of the people in general, mainly chapatis of bazro, 
marhu6, janar, jhingora and other corns. 

All over India, herbs, vegetables, pulse, fish and 
meat are used only to make tasteful the roti (unfermented 
bread), or the rice, as the case may be, and hence they 
are called in Sanskrit, “Vyanjana,” i.e., that which sea 
sons food. In the Punjab. Rajputana and the Deccan, 
though the rich people and the princes take many kinds of 
meat every day, yet with them even, the principal food 
Is roti or rice. He who takes daily one pound of meat, 
surely takes two pounds of chapatis along with it. 

Similarly in the West, the chief foods of the people 
in poor countries, and especially of the poor class in the 
rich parts, are bread and potatoes ; meat is rarely taken, 
and, if taken, is considered as a chutney. In Spain, 
Portugal, Italy, and in other comparatively warm 
countries, grapes grow profusely and the wine made of 
grapes Is very cheap. Ihese wines are not intoxicating 
(i.e., unless one drinks a great quantity, one will not get 
Intoxicated), and are very nutritious. The poor of those 
countries, therefore, use grape juice as a nourishment 
instead of fish and meat. But in the northern parts of 
pAirope, such as Russia, Sweden and Norway, bread 
made of rye, potatoes and a little dried fish form the 
food of the poor classes. 

I he food of the wealthy classes of Europe, and of 
all the classes of America is quite different, that is to 
say, their chief food is fish and meat, and bread, rice 
and other, things are taken as chutney. In America 
bread is taken very little. When fish is served, it is 
served by itself, or when meat is served, it is served by 
itself, and is often taken without bread or rice. There¬ 
fore, the plate has to be changed frequently ; if there 


THE EAST AND THp WEST 


395 


are ten sorts of food, the plate has to be changed as 
many times. If we were to#,take our food in this way, 
we should have to serve like this—suppose the shu^fa 
(bitter curry) is first brought, and, changing that plate 
dal is served on another ; in the same way the soup 
drives ; and again a liule rice by itself, or a few loochis, 
so on. One benefit of this way of serving is that 
a litt.- only of many varieties is taken, and it saves one 
from toting too much of anything. The French take 
coffee, one or two slices of bread and butter in the 


morning, and meat, etc., in a moderate way about 
midday, an^, the principal meal comes at night. With 
the Italians ai\^ Spaniards, the custom is the scime as 
that of the f reixrh. The Germans eat a good dc.^ five 
or six tines a day with more or less meat evei their'* 
the English three times, tlu breakfast being rati--" ’'''cc>ver 
but tea or cq:^^ between : and the Ani^dcan? 
times, but the ,eal is rather large every tluVe, with 
of meat. n countries, the principal theal is. 

however, dinner he rich have French cooks and have 
food cooked after ^ ^ 

little sa te . ^ ^ some sort of chutney or vege- 

table—this is y wa>^£ stimulating the appetite ; soup 
follows . then, “cco ^ present-day fashion, 

fruit , next comes s . meat-curry : after which 

a joint of roast meat, ano.^h it gome vegetables; after¬ 
wards, game birds, or ve.^^_ 
finally, delicious ice-cream.^^ 

the wine is changed every t. changes-and 

hock, claret and iced chami 

’ are served with the 

different courses. I ne spoon < , i r i 

aiiiercuL , , . . , , knife and fork are 

also changed each time with the Af,._„ 

coH.. wllW milk, .nj liquor.*'- < 17 ''- 

are brought in. and smoking come. ^ 


the variety of wines served with the 
greater will the host be regarded as a 


. The greater 
.^us dishes, the 


396 


SWAMl VIVEKANANDA'S WORKS 


man of fashion. As much money is spent over there in 
giving a dinner as would ruin a moderately rich man 
of our country. 

Sitting cross-legged on a wooden seat on the ground, 
with a similar one to lean his back against, the Arya 
used to take his food on a single metal plate, placed on 
a slightly-raised wooden stool. The same custom is ^till 
in vogue in the Punjab. Rajputana, Maharashtra and 
Gujerat. I he people of Bengal, Orissa, Telinjra and 
Malabar, etc., do not use wooden stools to put the plates 
on, but take their food on a plate or a p/antain-leaf 
placed on the ground. Even the Maharaja/i of Mysore 
does the same. The Mussulmans sit on a large, white 
sheet when taking their food. The Eurmese and the 
' Siir' plates on the ground and sit sup- 

'hcMiisclves on their knees anti feet only, and not 
. . ‘‘Ir hay;r-bes He the Indans. The Chinamen 

» chairs., Vlth their dishes j>/aced on a table, and 
use spC’Ons and wooden chop-st/oks in taking their food. 
In the olden times, the Roma/’s and Greeks had a table 
before them and, reclining on a couch, used to eat their 
food with their fingers. The Europeans, sitting on chairs, 
used to take their food with their fingers also, from the 
table : now they have spoons and forks. The Chinese 
mode of eating is really an exercise requiring skill. As 
our pan (bctel)-venJors make, by dexterity of hand, two 
separate pieces of thin iron-sheets work like scissors in 
the trimming of pan leaves, so the Chinese manipulate 
two sticks between two fingers and the palm of the right 
hand, in such a way as to make them act like tongs to 
carry the vegetables up to their mouths. Again, putting 
the two together, and holding a bowl of rice near the 
mouth, they push the rice in with the help of those sticks 
formed like a little shovel. 

The primitive ancestors of every nation used to eat, 
»t is said, whatever they could get. When they killed 


397 


THE EAST AND THE WEST 

\ _ 

a big animal, they would make it la^i- 

a month 

would not reject it even after it rotten. Then 

gradually they became civilised and l|^arnt cultivation. 
Formerly, they could not get their every day by 

hunting and would, like the wild gorge them¬ 

selves one day and then starve four (ty- five days in the 
week. Later they escaped that, for could get their 

food every day, by cultivation : but l4 remained a ^stand¬ 
ing custom to take with food someth|ing like rotten meat 
or other things, of the old days. Primarily, rotten meat 
was an indispensable article of food ^ now that or some¬ 
thing else in its place became, like the sauce, a favourite 
relish. The Eskimos live in the snowy regions, where 
no kind of corn can be produced ; their daily food is 
fish and flesh. Once in a way when they lose their 
appetite, they take just a piece of rotten flesh to recover 
their lost appetite. Even ik>. v, Europeans do not im¬ 
mediately cook wild birds, game and venison, while fresh, 
but they keep them hanging till they begin to smell a 
little. In Calcutta the rotten meat of a deer is sold out 
as soon as brought to the market, and people prefer some 
fish when slightly rotten. In some parts of Europe, the 
cheese which smells a little is regarded as very tasty. 
Even the vegetarians like to have a little onion and 
garlic ; the Southern Indian Brahmin must have them in 
his cooking. But the Hindu Shastras prohibited that too ; 
the taking of onions, gadic, domestic fowl and pork is 
a sin, to one caste (the Brahmin) ; they that would take 
them would lose their caste. So the orthodox Hindus 
gave up onions and garlic, and substituted in their place 
asafoetida, a thing which is more strikingly offensive in 
smell than either of the other two ! The orthodox 
Brahmins of the Himalayas similarly took to a kind of 
dried grass smelling just like garlic ! And what harm 
in that> The Scriptures do not say anything against taking 
these things I 


398 


SWAMI VIVEKJ‘'^ANDA’S WORKS 


•’ Every reli'-’"^- some rules regarding the 

taking of certain a^Jods. and the avoiding of others ; only 
Christianity is an Exception. The Jains and the Bauddhas 
will by no means\‘«'^« fi®*' o’’ ^he Jains, again, 

will not even eat potatoes, radishes, or other vegetable 
roots, which grow «underground, lest in digging them up 
worms are killed. ^'ey will not eat at night lest some 
insect,get into their^ mouths in the dark. The Jews do 
not cal fisK that liavf- ao scales, do not eat pork, nor the 
animals that are not,' cloven-hoofed and do not ruminate. 
Again, if milk or ;i\ny preparation of milk be brought 
into the kitchen whr‘r^ fish or flesh is being cooked, the 
Jews will throw awe.^ everything cooked there. For this 
reason, the oitliodox 'jews do not eat the food cooked 
by other nations, lake the Hindus, too, they do not 
take flesh which is simply slaughtered and not offered 
!o Cjod. in Fk ngal and ^F 1 C Punjab, another name of 
flesh that is offered (o the Goddess is Mahaprasada, lit., 
tlie “gr('at offering.’’ I he Jews do not eat flesh, unless it 
is Mahaprasada, i.e., unless it is properly offered to God. 

I Fence, th(\y, like the I lindus, are not permitted to buy 
flesh at any and every shop. 1 he Mussulmans obey naany 
rules .similar to the Jews, but do not, like them, go to 
exlremes ; they do not take milk and fish or flesh at the 
same meal, and do not consider it so much harm if they 
ait‘ i'l lire same kitchen, or if one touches another. 

I here is inncFi similarity respecting food between the 
F lindus and the Jews. I he Jews, however, do not take 
wild boar, which the 1 lindus do. In the Punjab, on 
account of the deadly cpiieo.sity between the hiindus 
and the Mussulmans, the former do what the latter will 


not, and the wild boar has come to be one of the very 
essential articles of food with the Hindus there. With 
the Rajputs, hunting the wild boar and partaking of its 
flesh is rather an aCt of Dharma. The taking of the 
flesh of even the domesticated pig prevails to a great 


THE EAST AND THE WEST 


399 


extent in the Deccan, among all castes except the 
Brahmins. The Hindus eat the wild fowl (cock or hen), 
but not domesticated fowls. 

The people of India from Bengal to Nepal and in 
the Himalayas as far as the borders of Kashmir, follow 
the same usages regarding food. In these parts, the 
customs of Manu are in force to a large extent even up 
to this day. But they obtain more especially in the parts 
from Kumaon to Kashmir than in Bengal, Behar, 
Allahabad or Nepal. For example, the Bengalees do not 
eat fowl or fowl’s eggs, but they eat duck’s eggs ; so 
do the Nepalese ; but from Kumaon upwards, even that 
is not allowed. 1 he Kashmiris eat with pleasure eggs of 
the wild duck, but not of the domesticated bird. Of the 
people of India, beginning from Allahabad, excepting in 
the Himalayas, they who take the flesh of goat take fowl 
as well. 

All these rules and prohibitions with respect to food 
are for the most part meant, no doubt, in the interests 
of good health ; of course, in each and every instance, 
it is difficult accurately to determine which particular 
food is conducive to health and which is not. Again, 
swine and fowls eat anything and everything and are 
very unclean ; so they are forbidden. No one sees what 
the wild animals eat in the forest ; so they are not dis¬ 
allowed. Besides, the wild animals are healthier and less 
sickly than the domesticated ones. Milk is very difficult 
of digestion, especially when one is suffering from acidity, 
and cases have happened v/hen even by gulping down 
a glass of milk in haste, life has been jeopardised. Milk 
should be taken as a child does from its mother’s breast ; 
if it is sucked or sipped by degrees, it is easily digestible, 
otherwise not. Being itself hard of digestion, it becomes 
the more so when taken with flesh ; so the Jews are prohi¬ 
bited from taking flesh and milk at the same meal. 

Tbe foolish and ignorant mother who forces her baby 


400 


SVVAMI VIVEKANANDA’S WORKS 


to swallow too much milk beats her breast in despair 
within a few months, on seeing that there is little hope 
of her darling s life I The modern medical authorities 
prescribe only a pint of milk even for an adult, and that 
is to be taken as slowly as possible ; and for babies a 
‘feeding-bottle * is the best means. Our mothers are too 
busy with household duties, so the maid-servant puts the 
crying baby in her lap and not unfrequently holds it 
down with her knee, and by means of a spoon makes 
it gulp down as much milk as she can I And the result 
is that generally it is afflicted with liver complaint and 
seldom grows up—that milk proves to be its doom ; only 
those that have sufficient vitality to survive this sort of 
dangerous feeding attain a strong and healthy manhood. 
And think of our old-fashioned confinement rooms, of 
the hot fomentations given to the baby, and treatments 
of like nature. It was indeed a wonder and must have 
been a matter of special divine grace that the mother and 
the baby survived these severe trials and could become 
strong and healthy ! 

Civilisation in Dress 

In every country the respectability of a person is 
determined, to a certain extent, by the nature of the dress 
he wears. As our village-folk in Bengal say in their 
patois, “1 low can a gentleman be distinguished Irom one 
of low birth unless his income is known?” And not only 
income, “Unless it is seen how one dresses oneself, how 
can it be known if one is a gentleman?” This is the same 
all over the world, more or less. In Bengal, no gentle¬ 
man can walk in the streets with only a loin-cloth on : 
while in other parts of India, no one goes out of doors but 
with a turban on his head. In the West, the French have 
all along taken the lead in everything—their food and 
their dress are imitated by others. Even now, though 
different parts of Europe have got different modes 


THE EAST AND THE WEST 401 

of clothes and dress of their own, yet when one earns 
a good deal of money and becomes a “gentleman,” he 
straightway rejects his former native dress and substitutes 
the French mode in its place. The Dutch farmer whose 
native dress somewhat resembles the paijamas of fhc 
Kabulis, the Greek clothed in full skirts, the Russ 
dressed somewhat after the Tibetan fashion—as soon 
as they become “genteel”, they wear French coats and 
pantaloons. Needless to speak of women—no sooner 
do they get rich than they must by any means have their 
dresses made in Paris. America, England, France and 
Germany are now the rich countries in the West, and 
the dress of the people of these countries, one and all, 
is made after the French fashion, w> ich is slowly and 
surely making its way into every part of' Europe. The 
whole of Europe seems to be an imitation of France. 
However, men’s clothes are better made nowadays in 
London than Pairs, so men have them “London-made”, 
and women in the Parisian style. I hose who are very 
rich have their dresses sent from those two places. 
America enforces an exorbitant tax upon the importation 
of foreign dresses ; notwithstanding that, the American 
women must have them from Paris and London. This, 
only the Americans can afford to do, for America is now 
the chief home of Kuvera, the god of wealth. 

The ancient Aryans used to put on the clhooti and 
chadar.^ The Kshatriayas used to wear trousers and 
long coats, when fighting. At other times they would 
use only the dhooti and chadar ; and they wore the 
turban. The same custom is still in vogue, except in 
Bengal, among the people in all parts of India ; they are 
not so particular about the dress for the rest of the body, 

* Dhooti is a Bengali name for a piece of cloth about four or 
five yards long, worn by the Indians round the loins instead of 
breeches, and chadar is a piece of cloth three yards long, used as 
a loose upper garment. 


402 


SWAMI VIVEKANANDA’S WORKS 


but they must have a turban for the head. In former 
times, the same was also the custom both for the man 
and the woman. In the sculptured figures of the Bud¬ 
dhistic period, the men and the women are seen to wear 
only a piece of Kaupin. Even Lord Buddha s father, 
though a king, is seen in some sculptures, .sitting on a 
throne, dressed in the same way ; so also the mother, 
only she has, in addition, ornaments on her feet and 
arms ; but they all have turbans 1 I he Buddhist 
Emperor, Dharmashoka, is seen sitting on drum-shaped 
.seat, with only a dhooti on, and a chadar round his 
neck, and looking at damsels performing a dance before 
him ; the dancing girls are very little clothed, having only 
short pieces of loose material hanging from the waist ; 
but the glory is—that the turban is there, and it makes 
the principal feature of their dress. The high officials of 
the State who attended the royal court, are, however, 
dressed in excellent trousers and chogas, or long coats. 
When the King Nala was disguised as a charioteer in 
the service of the King f^ituparna, he drove the chariot 
at such a tremendous speed that the chadar of the king 
l^ituparna was blown away to such a distance that it 
could not be recovered ; and as he had set out to marry, 
or join a Svayamvara, he had to do so, perchance, without 
a chadar. The dhooti and chadar are the time- 
honoured dress of the Aryans. Hence, at the time of 
the performance of any religious ceremony, the rule 
among the Hindus even now is to put on the dhooti and 
the chadar only. 

I he dress of the ancient Greeks and Romans was 
dhooti and chadar, —one broad piece of cloth and an¬ 
other smaller one made in the form of the toga, from 
which the word choga is derived. Sometimes they used 
also a shirt, and at the time of fighting, trousers and coats, 
I he dress of the women was a long and sufficiently broad, 
square-shaped garment, similar to that formed by sewing 


THE EAST AND THE WEST 


403 


two sheets lengthwise, which they slipped pver the head 
and tied round, once under the breast and again round 
the waist. 1 hen they fastened the upper pai^s which were 
open, over both the arms by means of large pins, in 
much the same way as the hill-tribes of the northvrn 
Himalayas still wear their blankets. [here was a chadar 
over this long garment. 1 his dress was very simple and 
elegant. 

From the very old days, only the Iranians used shaped 
dresses. Perhaps they learnt It from the Chinese. f he 
C'hinese were the primeval teachers of civilisation in dress 
and other things pertaining to various comforts and 
luxuries. From time immemorial, the Chine;<‘ took their 
meals at a table, sitting on chairs, • Ji many elaborate 
auxiliaries, and wore shaped dresses of many varieties— 
coat, cap, trousers, and so on. 

On conquering Iran, Alexander gave up the old Greek 
dhooii and chadar and began using trousers. At this, his 
Greek soldiers became so disaffected towards him. that 
they were on the point of mutiny. But Alexander was 
not the man to yield, and by the sheer force of his 
authority he introduced trousers and coats as a fashion in 
dress. 

In a hot climate, the necessity of clothes is not so 
much felt. A mere Kaupin is enough for the purpose of 
decency ; other clothes serve more as embellishments. 
In cold countries, as a matter of unavoidable necessity, 
the people, when uncivilised, clothe themselves with the 
skins of animals, and when they gradually become 
civilised, they learn the use of blankets, and by degrees, 
shaped dresses, such as pantaloons, coats, and' so on. 
Of course it is impossible in cold countries to display the 
beauty of ornaments, which have to be worn on the bare 
body, for if they did so they would suffer severely from 
cold. So the fondness for ornaments is transferred to, 
and is satisfied by, the niceties of dress. As in India the 


404 


SWA MI VIVEKANANDA'S WORKS 


fashion in ornaments changes very often, so in the West 
the fashions in dress change every moment. 

In cold countries, therefore, it is the rule that one 
should not appear before others without covering oneself 
from head to foot. In London, a gentleman or a lady 
cannot go out without conforming himself or herself ex¬ 
actly to what society demands. In the West, it is im¬ 
modest for a woman to show her feet in society, but at 
a dance it is not improper to expose the face, shoulders, 
and upper part of the body to view. In our country, on 
the other hand, for a woman to show her face is a great 
shame, (hence that rigorous drawing of the veil), but not 
so the feet. Again, in Rajputana and the Himalayas they 
cover the whole body except the waist! 

In the West, actresses and dancing-girls are very 
thinly covered, to attract men. 1 heir dancing often means 
exposing their limbs in harmonious movements accom¬ 
panied by music. In our country, the women of gentle 
birth are not so particular in covering themselves 
thoroughly, but the dancing-girls are entirely covered. In 
the West, women are always completely clothed, in the 
day-time ; so attraction is greater in their being thinly 
covered. Our women remain in the house most of the 
time, and much dressing themselves is unusual ; so with 
us, attraction is greater in their fully covering themselves. 
In Malabar, men and women have only a piece of cloth 
round their loins. With the Bengalees it is about the same, 
and before men, the women scrupulously draw their veils, 
and cover their bodies. 

In all countries except China, 1 notice many queer and 
mysterious ideas of propriety—in some matters they are 
carried too far, in others again, what strikes one as being 
very incorrect is not felt to be so at all. 

The Chinese of both sexes are always fully covered 
from head to foot. The Chinese are the disciples of Con¬ 
fucius, are the disciples of Buddha, and their morality is 


THE EAST AND THE WEST 


405 


quite strict and refined. Obscene language, obscene 
books or pictures, any conduct the least obscene—and 
the offender is punished then and there. 1 he Christian 
missionaries translated the Bible into the Chinese tongue. 
Now, in the Bible there are some passages so obscene as 
to put to shame some of the Puranas of the Hindus. 
Reading those indecorous passages, the Chinamen were 
so exasperated against Christianity that they made a point 
of never allowing the Bible to be circulated in their coun¬ 
try. Over and above that, missionary women we^iring 
evening dress and mixing freely with men issued invita¬ 
tions to the Chinese. The simple-minded Chinese were 
disgusted, and raised a cry, saying: Oh, iiorror ! 1 his 

religion is come to us to ruin our yo' ig boys, by giving 
them this Bible to read, and making them fall an easy 
prey to the charms of these half-clothed wily women ! 
This is why the Chinese are so very indignant with the 
Christians. Otherwise, the Chinese are very tolerant to¬ 
wards other religions. I hear that the missionaries have 
now printed an edition, leaving out the objectionable 
parts ; but this step has made the Chinese more suspicious 
than before. 

Again, in the West, ideas of decency and etiquette 
vary in accordance with the different countries. With the 
English and Americans they are of one type, with the 
French of another, with the Germans again differ¬ 
ent. The Russians and the Tibetans have much in com¬ 
mon ; and the 1 urks have their own quite distinct customs, 
and so on. 

Etiquette and Manners 

In Europe and America, the people are extremely 
particular in observing privacy, much more than we are. 
We are vegetarians, and so eat a quantity of vegetables, 
etc., and living in a hot country we frequently drink one or 
two glasses of water at a time. The peasant of the Upper 

V~27 


406 


SWAMI VIVEKANANDA^S WORKS 


Provinces eats two pounds of powdered barley, and then 
sets to drawing and drinking water from the well every 
now and again, as he feels so thirsty. In summer we keep 
open places in our house for distributing water to the 
thirsty, through a hollowed bamboo stem. These ways 
make the people not so very particular about privacy ; 
they cannot help it. Compare cowsheds and horses’ 
stables with lions’ and tigers’ cages. Compare the dog 
with the goat. The food of the Westerners is chiefly meat, 
and in cold countries they hardly drink any water. Gentle¬ 
men take a little wine in small glasses. The French detest 
water ; only Americans drink it in great quantities, for 
their country is very warm in summer. New York is even 
hotter than Calcutta. 1 he Germans drink a good deal of 
beer, but not with their meals. 

In cold countries, men are always susceptible to catch¬ 
ing cold, so, they cannot help sneezing ; m warm countries 
peop:)le have to drink much water at meals, consequently 
we cannot help eructating. Now note the etiquette: if you 
do that in a Western society, your sin is unpardonable ; 
but if you bring out your pocket-handkerchief and blow 
your nose vigorously, it will see nothing objectionable in 
that. With us, the host will not feel satisfied, so to say, 
unless he sees you doing the former, as that is taken as a 
sign of a full meal ; but what would you think of doing the 
latter when having a meal in the company of others? 

In England and America, no mention of indigestion 
or any stomach complaints you may be suffering from, 
should be made before women ; it is a different matter, 
of course, if your friend is an old woman, or if she is 
quite well known to you. They are not so sensitive about 
these things in France. The Germans are even less 
particular. 

English and American men are very guarded in their 
conversation before women ; you cannot even speak of a 
“leg.” 1 he French, like us, are very free in conversation ; 


THE EAST AND THE WEST 


407 


the Germans and the Russians will use vulgar terms in the 
presence of anybody. 

But conversations on being in love are freely carried 
on, between mother and son, between brothers and sisters 
and between them and their fathers. 1 he father asks the 
daughter many questions about her lover (the future bride¬ 
groom) and cuts all sorts of jokes about her engagement. 
On such occasions, the French maiden modestly hangs 
down her head, the English maiden is bashful, and the 
American maiden gives him sharp replies to his face. 
Kissing and even ambrace are not so very objectionable ; 
these things can be talked of in society, but in our country, 
no talk, nor even an indirect hint of love affairs, is per¬ 
missible before superior relations. 

I he Westerners are now rich people. Unless one’s 
dress is very clean and in conformity with strict etiquette, 
one will not be considered a gentleman and cannot 
mix in society. A gentleman must change his collar and 
shirt twice or thrice every day ; the poor people, of course, 
cannot do this. On the outer garment there must not be 
stains or even a crease. However much you may suffer 
from heat you must go out with gloves, for fear of getting 
your hands dirty in the streets, and to shake hands with 
a lady with hands that are not clean is very ungentleman¬ 
like. In polite society, if the act of spitting or rinsing the 
mouth or picking the teeth be ever indulged in—the 
offender will be marked as a Chandala, a man of low caste, 
and shunned I 

The Dharma of the Westerners is worship of Shakti— 
the Creative Power regarded as the Female Principle. 
It is with them somewhat like the Vamachari’s* worship 
of woman. As the Tantrika says: ”On the left side the 
women ... on the right, the cup full of wine ; in front, 
warm meat with ingredients. . . .the Tantrika religion 
is very mysterious, inscrutable even to the Yogis.” It is 
this worship of Shakti that is openl> and universally prac- 


408 


SWAMl VIVEKANANDA^S WORKS 


tised. T he idea of motherhood, i.e., the relation of a son to 
his mother, is also noticed in great measure. Protestant¬ 
ism as a force is not very significant in Europe, 'where 
the religion is, in fact, Roman Catholic. In the religion, 
Jehovah, Jesus, and the Trinity are secondary ; there, the 
worship is for the Mother—She, the Mother, with the 
( hild Jesus in her arms. The emperor cries “ Mother,” 
the field-marshal cries “Mother,” the soldier with the flag 
in his hand cries “ Mother,” the seaman at the helm cries 
Mother,” the fisherman in his rags cries “Mother,” the 
beggar in the street cries “Mother!” A million voices, 
in a million ways, from a million places—from the palace, 
from the cottage, from the church, cry “ Mother,” 
Mother.” “Mother I” Everyw^^ere is the cry “Ave 
Maria ;” day and night, “Ave Maria.” “Ave Maria I” 
Next is the worship of the woman. This worship of 
Shakti is not lust, but is that Shakti-Puja, that worship of 
the Kumari (virgin) and the Sadhava (the married woman 
whose husband is living), which is done in Benares, Kali- 
ghat and other holy places. It cs the worship of the Shakli, 
not in mere thought, not in imagination, but in actual, 
visible form. Our Shakli-worship is only in the holy places, 
and at certain times only is it performed ; but theirs is 
in every place and always, for days, weeks, months and 
years. Foremost is the woman's state, foremost is her 
dress, her seat, her food, her wants and her comforts ; 
the first honours in all respects are accorded to her. Not 
to speak of the noble-born, not to speak of the young and 
the fair, it is the worship of any and every woman, be 
she an acquaintance or a stranger. This Shakti-worship the 
Moors, the mixed Arab race, Mohammedan in religion, 
first introduced into Europe, when they conquered Spain 
and ruled her for eight centuries. It was the Moors who 
first sowed in Europe the seeds of Western civilisation and 
Shakti-worship. In course of time, the Moors forgot this 
Shakti-worship and fell from their position of strength. 


THE EAST AND THE WEST 


409 


culture and glory, to live scattered and unrecognised in 
an unnoticed corner of Africa, and their power and 
civilisation passed over to Europe. The Mother, leaving 
the Moors, smiled Her loving blessings on the Christians 
and illumined their homes. 


France— Paris 

What is this Europe? Why are the black, the bronze, 
the yellow, the red inhabitants of Asia, Africa and America 
bent low at the feet of the Europeans ? Why are they the 
sole rulers in this Kali-Yuga? To understaiid this Europe, 
one has to understand her through France, the fountain¬ 
head of everything that is highest in the West. The 
supreme power that rules the world is iLurope, and of this 
Europe the great centre is Paris. Paris is the centre of 
Western civilisation. Here, in Paris, matures and ripens 
every idea of Western ethics, manners and c^t^j0s, 
or darkness, good or evil. This Paris is like^ v^st oceffin^^ 
which there is many a precious gem, cora 
in which, again, there are sharks and othei' rapaci^u^ 
animals, as well. Of Europe, the central fieldfOT^^^writ, 
the Karma-kshetra, is Prance. A picturesque country, 
neither very cold nor very warm, very fertile, weather 
neither excessively wet nor extremely dry, sky clear, sun 
sweet, elms and oaks in abundance, grass-lands 
charming, hills and rivers small, springs delightful. 
Excepting some parts of China, no other country in the 
world have 1 seen that is so beautiful as France. That 
play of beauty in water, and fascination in land—that 
madness in the air—that ecstasy in the sky ! Nature so 
lovely—the men so fond of beauty I The rich and the poor, 
the young and the old, keep their houses, their rooms, 
the streets, the fields, the gardens, the walks, so artistically 
neat and clean—the whole country looks like a picture. 
Such love of Nature and art have I seen nowhere else, 
^except in Japan. The palatial structures, the gardens 


in 

and 

sea 


410 


SWAMI VIVEKANANDA^S WORKS 


resembling the Nandan-kanan of Indra, the groves, even? 
the larmer’s fields—everywhere and in everything an 
attempt at beauty, an attempt at art, remarkable, and 
effected with success, too. 

Prom ancient times, France has been the scene of 
conflict between the Gauls, the Romans, the Franks and 
other nations. After the destruction of the Roman Empire,, 
the Pranks obtained absolute dominion over Europe. 

I heir King, Charlemagne, forced Christianity into Europe, 
by the power of the sword. Europe was made known in 
Asia by these Pranks. Hence we still call the Europeans 
Pranki, Feringi, Planki or Filinga, and so on. 

Ancient Greece, the fountain-head of Western civilisa¬ 
tion, sank into oblivion from the pinnacle of her glory, 
the vast empire of Rome was broken into pieces by the 
dashing waves of the barbarian invaders—the light of 
Europe went out ; it was at this time that another bar¬ 
barous race rose out of obscurity in Asia—the Arabs. 
With extraordinary rapidity, that Arab tide began to spread 
pver the different parts of the world. Powerful Persia had 
to kiss the ground before the Arabs and adopt the Moham¬ 
medan religion, with the result that the Mussulman religion 
took quite a new shape ; the religion of the Arabs and 
the civilisation of Persia became intermingled. 

With the sword of the Arabs, the Persian civilisation 
began to disseminate in all directions. That Persian 
civilisation had been borrowed from ancient Greece and 
India. PTom the East and from the West, the waves of 
Mussulman invaders dashed violently on Europe, and along 
with them also, the light of wisdom and civilisation began 
dispersing the darkness of blind and barbarous Europe. 

I he wisdom, learning and arts of ancient Greece entered 
into Italy, overpowered the barbarians, and with their 
quickening impulse, life began to pulsate in the dead body 
of the world-capital of Rome. The pulsation of this new 
life took a strong and formidable shape in the city of 


THE EAST AND THE WEST 


411 


Florence—old Italy began showing signs of new life. This 
is called the Renaissance, the new birth. But this new 
birth was for Italy only a rebirth ; while for the rest of 
Europe, it was the first birth. Europe was born in 
the sixteenth century A.D. i.e., about the time wK^*n 
Akbar, Jehangir, Shahjahan and other Mogul Emperors 
firmly established their mighty empire in India. 

Italy was an old nation. At the call of the Renais¬ 
sance, she woke up and gave her response, but only to 
turn over on her side in bed, as it were, and fall fast asleep 
again. For various reasons, India also stirred up a little 
at this time. For three ruling generations from Akbar, 
learning, wisdom and arts Ciune to be much esteemed in 
India. But India was also a very c ’ . nation ; and for 
some reason or other, she also did the same as Italy and 
slept on again. 

In Europe, the tide of revival in Italy struck the power¬ 
ful, young and new nation, the Franks. The torrent of 
civilisation flowing from all quarters into Florence and 
there uniting, assumed a new form ; but Italy had not the 
power within herself to hold that stupendous mass of 
fresh energy. The revival would have, as in India, ended 
there, had it not been for the good fortune of Europe that 
the new nation of the Franks gladly took up that energy, 
and they in the vigour of their youthful blood boldly 
floated their national ship on the tide ; and the current of 
that progress gradually gathered in volume and strength 
—from one it swelled into a thousand courses. The other 
nations of Europe greedily took the water of that tide 
into their own countries by cutting new channels, and 
increased its volume and speed by pouring their oWn life¬ 
blood into it. That tidal wave broke, in the fulness of 
time, on the shores of India. It reached as far as the coast 
of Japan, and she became revitalised by bathing in its 
water. Japan is the new nation of Asia. 

Paris is the fountain-head of European civilisation, as 


412 


SWAMl VIVEKANANDA’S WORKS 


Goniookhi is of the Ganges. This huge metropolis is a 
vision of heaven on earth, the city of constant rejoicing, 
the Sadanandanagari. Such luxury, such enjoyments, such 
mirthfulness are neither in London, nor in Berlin, nor any¬ 
where else. I rue, there is wealth in London and in New 
York, in Berlin there is learning and wisdom ; but nowhere 
is that French soil, and above all, nowhere is that genius 
of the Frenchman. Let there be wealth in plenty, let 
there be learning and wisdom, let there be beauty of 
Nature also, elsewhere—but where is the MAN? This 
remarkable F r^. nch charcicter is the incarnation of the 
ancient Greek, as it were, that had died to be born again 
— always joyful, always full of enthusiasm, very light and 
silly, yet again ('xceedingly grave, prompt and resolute to 
do (^very woik, and again despondent at the least resist¬ 
ance. But that despondency is only for a moment with 
the Frenchman, his face soon after glowing again with 
flesh hope and trust. 

1 he Paris university is the model of European univer¬ 
sities. All the Academics of Science that are in the world 
are Imitations of the French Academy. Paris is the first 
1<M( her ot the founding of colonial empires. The terms 
used in military art in all languages are still mostly French. 

1 he style and diction of French writings are copied in 
all the F.uropean languages. Of science, philosophy and 
art, this Paris is the mine. Everywhere, in every respect, 
iheit' is imitation of the Fiench. As if the French are the 
townspeople and the other nations are only villagers com¬ 
pared with them ! What the French initiate, the Germans, 
the English and other nations imitate, may be fifty or 
twenty-five years later, whether it be in learning, or in 
art, or in social matters. This French civilisation reached 
Scotland, and when the Scottish king became the king of 
England, it awoke and roused England ; it was during 
the reign of the Stuart Dynasty of Scotland that the Royal 
Society and other institutions were established in England. 


THE EAST AND THE WEST 


413 


Again, France isjthe home of liberty. From here, the 
city of Paris, travelled with tremendous energy the power 
of the People, and shook the very foundations of Europe. 
Prom that time, the face of Europe has completely chang¬ 
ed, and a new Europe has come into existence. Liberie. 
Eqalite, Fraternite, is no m*ore heard in France ; she is now 
imitating other ideas and other purposes, while the spirit 
of the French Revolution is still working among the other 
nations of Europe. 

One distinguished scientist of P^ngland told me the 
other day that Paris was the centre of the world, and that 
the more a nation would succeed in establishing its con¬ 
nection with the city of Paris, the more would that nation’s 
progress in national life be achieved. * hough such asser¬ 
tion is a partial exaggeration of fact, yet it is certainly 
true that if anyone has to give to the world any new idea, 
this Paris is the place for its dissemination. If one can 
gain the approbation of the people of Paris, that voice 
the whole of Europe is sure to echo back. The sculptor, 
the painter, the musician, the dancer, or any artist, if he 
can first obtain celebrity in Paris, acquires very easily the 
esteem and high appreciation of other countries. 

We hear only of the darker side of this Paris in our 
country—that it is a horrible place, a hell on earth. Some 
of the English hold this view ; and the wealthy people of 
other countries, in whose eyes no other enjoyment is possi¬ 
ble in life than the gratification of the senses, naturally see 
Paris as the home of immorality and enjoyments. 

But it is the same in all the big cities of the West, such 
as London, Berlin, Vienna, New York. The only differ¬ 
ence is—in other countries the means of enjoyment are 
commonplace and vulgar, but the very dirt of civilised 
Paris is coated over with gold leaf. To compare the 
refined enjoyments of Paris with the barbarity in this 
respect of other cities is to compare the wild boar’s 


414 


SWAMI VIVEKANANDA^S WORKS 


wallowing in the mire with the peacock s dance when 
spreading its feathers out into a fan. 

What nation in the world has not the longing to enjoy 
and live a life of pleasure? Otherwise why should those 
who get rich hasten to Paris of all places? Why do kings 
and emperors assuming another name come to Paris and 
live incognito and feel themselves happy by bathing in 
this whirlpool of sense-enjoyment? 1 he longing is in all 
countries, and no pains are spared to satisfy it ; the only 
difference is, the French have perfected it as a science, 
they know how to enjoy, they have risen to the highest 
rung of the ladder of enjoyment. 

Lven then, most of the vulgar dances and amusements 
are for tire foreigner ; the French people are very cautious, 
they never waste money for nothing. All those luxuries, 
those expensive hotels and cafes, at which the cost of a 
dinner is enough to ruin one, are for the rich foolish 
foreigner. 1 he French are highly refined, profuse in 
etiquette, polished and suave in their manners, clever in 
drawing money from one s pocket, and when they do they 
laugh in their sleeve. 

Resides, there is another thing to note. Society, as it is 
among the Americans, Germans and the English, is open to 
all nations, so the foreigner can quickly see the ins and 
outs of it. After an acquaintance of a few days, the 
.American will invite one to live in his house for a while ; 
the Germans also do the same ; and the English do so 
after a longer acquaintance. But it is very different with 
the French ; a Frenchman will never invite one to live 
with his family unless he is very intimately acquainted 
with him. But when a foreigner gets such an opportunit 3 % 
and has occasion and time enough to see and know the 
family, he forms quite a different opinion from what he 
generally hears. Is it not equally foolish of foreign¬ 
ers to venture an opinion of our national character, 
as they do, by seeing onb”^ the low quarters of Calcutta? 


THE EAST AND THE WEST 


413 


So with Paris. The unmarried women in France are as 
well guarded as in our country, they cannot even mix free¬ 
ly in society ; only after marriage can they do so in com¬ 
pany with their husbands. Like us. their negotiations for 
marriage are carried on by their parents. Being a jolly 
people, none of their big social functions will be com¬ 
plete without professional dancers, as with us perform¬ 
ances of dancing-girls are given on the occasions of 
marriage and Puja. Living in a dark foggy country, the 
English are gloomy, make long faces and remark that such 
dances at one’s home are very improper, but at a theatre 
they are all right. It should be noted here that their 
dances may appear improper to our eyes, but not so with 
them, they being accustomed to the: 1 he girl may, at 

a dance, appear in a dress showing the neck and shoulders, 
and that is not taken as improper ; and the English and 
Americans would not object to attending such dances, but 
on going home, might not refrain from condemning the 
French customs I 

Again, the idea is the same everywhere regarding the 
chastity of women, whose deviation from it is fraught with 
danger, but in the case of men it does not matter so much. 
The Frenchman is, no doubt, a little freer in this respect, 
and like the rich men of other countries cares not for 
criticism. Generally speaking, in Europe, the majority of 
men do not regard a little lax of conduct as so very bad, and 
in the West, the same is the case with bachelors. The 
parents of young students consider it rather a drawback 
if the latter fight shy of women, lest they become effemin¬ 
ate. The one excellence which a man must have, in 
the West, is—courage. Their word “ virtue ” and our 
word “ Viratva ” (heroism) are one and the same. Look 
to the derivation of the word “virtue ” and see what 
they call goodness in man. For women, they hold chastity 
as the most important virtue, no dotibt. One man marry¬ 
ing more than one wife is not so injurious to society as 


416 


SWAMI VIVEKANANDA^S WORKS 


a woman having more than one husband at the same time, 
for the latter leads to the gradual decay of the race. 
1 herefore, in all countries good care is taken to preserve 
the chastity of women. Behind this attempt of every 
society to preserve the chastity of women is seen the hand 
of Nature. 1 he tendency of Nature is to multiply the 
population, and the chastity of women helps that tendency. 
1 herefore, in being more anxious about the purity of 
women than of men, every society is only assisting Nature 
In the fulfilment of her purpose. 

1 he object of my speaking of these things is to im¬ 
press upon you the fact that the life of each nation has 
a moral purpose of its own, and the manners and customs 
of a nation must be judged from the standpoint of that 
purpose. 4 he Westerners should be seen through their 
eyes ; to see them through our eyes, and for them to see 
us with theirs—both these are mistakes. The purpose of 
our life is quite the opposite of theirs. I he Sanskrit name 
for a student, Brahmachari, is synonymous with the 
Sanskrit word Kamajit.' Our goal of life is Moksha ; how 
can that be ever attained without Brahrnacharya, or 
absolute continence? Hence it is imposed upon our boys 
and youths as an indispensable condition, during their 
studentship. The purpose of life in the West is Bhoga, 
enjoyment ; hence much attention to strict Brahrnacharya 
is not so indispensably necessary with them as it is with us. 

Now, to return to Paris, There is no city in the world 
that can compare with modern Paris. Formerly it was 
quite different from what it is now—it was somewhat like 
the Bengali quarters of Benares, with zigzag lanes and 
streets, two houses joined together by an arch over the 
lane here and there, wells by the side of walls, and so on. 
In the last Exhibition they showed a model of old Paris, 
but that Paris has completely disappeared, by gradual 

^ (>no whc has full control over his passions. 


THE EAST AND THE WEST 


417 


changes ; the warfare and revolutions through which the 
city has passed have, each time, caused ravages in one 
part or another, razing everything to the ground, and again, 
new Paris has risen in its place, cleaner and more extensive. 

Modern Paris is, to a great extent, the creation of 
Napoleon III. Me completed that material transformation 
of the city which had already been begun at the fall of 
the ancient monarchy. I he student of the history of 
France need not be reminded how its people were op 
pressed by the absolute monarchs of h ranee prior to the 
French Revolution. Napoleon 111 caused himself to be 
proclaimed Emperor by sheer force ot arms, wading 
through blood. Since the first French Revolution, the 
French people were always rickle a^' ! thus a source of 
alarm to the Empire. Hence the Emperor, in order to 
keep his subjects contented, and to please the ev^er- 
unstable masses of Paris by giving them work, went on 
continually making new and magnificent public roads and 
embankments, and building gateways, theatres and many 
other architectural structures, leaving the monuments of 
old Paris as before. Not only was the city traversed in 
all directions by new thoroughfares, straight and wide, 
with sumptuous houses raised or restored, but a line of 
fortification was built doubling the area of the city. Thus 
arose the boulevards, and the fine quarters of d’Antin 
and other neighbourhoods, and the avenue of the Champs 
Elysees, which is unique in the world, was reconstructed. 
This avenue is so broad that down the middle and on 
both sides of it run gardens all along, and in one place it 
has taken a circular shape which comprises the city front, 
towards the West, called Place de la Concorde. Round 
this Place de la Concorde are statues in the form of women 
representing the eight chief towns of France. One of these 
statues represents the district of Strasburg. This district 
was wrested from the hands of the French by the Germans 
after the battle of 1870. The pain of ihis loss the French 


418 SWAMI VIVEKANANDA^S WORKS 

have not yet been able to get over, and that statue is still 
covered with flowers and garlands offered in memory of 
its dead spirit, as it were. As men place garlands over 
the tombs of their dead relations, so garlands are placed 
on that statue, at one time or another. 

It seems to me that the Chandni Chauk of Delhi might 
have been at one time somewhat like this Place de la 
C'oncorde. Here and there columns of victory, triumphal 
arches and sculptural art in the form of huge statues of 
men and women, lions, etc., adorn the square. 

A very big triumphal column in imitation of 1 rojan’s 
('olumn, made of gun-metal (procured by melting 1,200 
guns), is erected in Place Vendome in memory of the great 
hero, Napoleon 1 ; on the sides are engraved the victories 
of his reign, and on the top is the figure of Napoleon 
Bonaparte. In the Place de la Bastille stands the Column 
of July (in memory of the Revolution of July, 1789) on the 
site of the old fortress, “ 1 he Bastille, ’ afterwards used 
as a State prison. Here were imprisoned those who in¬ 
curred the king’s displeasure. In those old days, without 
any trial or anything of the kind, the king would issue a 
warrant bearing the royal seal, called “Leffre de Cachet/' 

I hen, without any enquiry as to what good acts the victim 
had done for his country, or whether he was really guilty 
or not, without even any question as to what he actually 
did to incur the king’s wrath, he would be at once thrown 
into the Bastille. If the fair favourites of the kings were 
displeased with anyone, they could obtain by request a 
Lettre de Cachet"^ from the king against that man, and 
the poor man would at once be sent to the Bastille. Of 
the unfortunate who were imprisoned there, very few ever 
came out. When, afterwards, the whole country rose as 
one man in revolt against such oppression and tyranny, 
and raised the cry of “Individual liberty, All are equal. 


^ A royal warrant. 


THE EAST AND THE WEST 


419 


No one is high or low, ’ the people of Paris in their mad 
excitement attacked the king and queen. 1 he very first 
thing the mob did was to pull down the Bastille, the sym¬ 
bol of extreme tyranny of man over man, and passed the 
night in dancing, singing and feasting on the spot. 1 he 
king tried to escape, but the people managed to catch 
him, and hearing that the father-in-law of the king, the 
Emperor of Austria, was sending soldiers to aid his son- 
in-law, became blind with rage and killed the king and 
the queen. The whole French nation became mad in the 
name of liberty and equality—F ranee became a republic 
—they killed all the nobility whom they could get hold of, 
and many of the nobility gave up their titles and rank 
and made common cause with the subject people. Not 
only so, they called all the nations of the world to rise 
—“Awake, kill the kings who are all tyrants, let all be 
free and have equal rights.” Then all the kings of Europe 
began to tremble in fear lest this fire might spread into 
their countries, lest it might burn their thrones, and hence, 
determined to put it down, attacked France from all 
directions. On the other side, the leaders of the French 
Republic proclaimed, “Our native land is in peril, come 
one and all,” and the proclamation soon spread like the 
flames of a conflagration throughout the length and 
breadth of France. The young, the old, the men, the 
women, the rich, the poor, the high, the low, singing their 
martial song. La Marseillaise, the inspiring national song 
of France, came out—crowds of the poor French people, 
in rags, barefooted, in that severe cold, and half-starved— 
came out with guns on their shoulders— • • • 

^ —for the destruction of the wicked and 

the salvation of their homes—and boldly faced the vast 
united force of Europe. The whole of Europe could not 
stand the onrush of that French army. At the head and 
front of the French army, stood a hero at the movement 
of whose finger the whole world .rembled. He was 


420 


SWAMI VIVEKANANDA^S WORKS 


Napoleon. With the edge of the sword and at the point 
of the bayonet, he thrust “Liberty, Equality and Frater¬ 
nity ’ into the very bone and marrow of Europe—and thus 
the victory of the tri-coloured Cocarde was achieved. 
Later, Napoleon became the Emperor of France and 
successfully accomplished the consolidation of the French 
Empire. 

Subsequently, not being favoured with an heir to the 
throne, he divorced the partner of his life in weal and 
woe, the guiding angel of his good fortune, the Empress 
Josephine, and married the daughter of the Emperor of 
Austria. But the wheel of his luck turned with his deser¬ 
tion of Josephine, his army died in the snow and ice 
during his expedition against Russia. Europe, getting this 
opportunity, forced him to abdicate his throne, sent hin7 
as an exile to an island and put on the throne one of the 
old royal dynasty. I he wounded lion escaped from the 
island and presented himself again in France ; the whole 
of France welcomed him and rallied under his banner, and 
the reigning king fled. But this luck was broken once for 
all, and it never returned. Again the whole of Europe 
united against him and defeated him at the battle of 
Waterloo, Napoleon boarded an English man-of-war and 
surrendered himself ; the E.nglish exiled him and kept him 
as a life-long prisoner in the distant island of St. Helena. 
Again a member of the old royal family of France was 
reinstated as king. Later on, the French people became 
restless under the old monarchy, rose in rebellion, drove 
away the king and his family and re-established the Re¬ 
public. In the course of time a nephew of the great 
Napoleon became a favourite with the people, and by 
means of intrigues he proclaimed himself Emperor. He 
was Napoleon 111. For some time his reign was very 
powerful ; but being defeated in conflict with the Ger¬ 
mans he lost his throne, and France became once more 


THE EAST AND THE WEST 


421 


a republic ; and since then down to\he present day she 
has continued to be republican. 

The theory of evolution, which is the foundation of 
almost all the Indian schools of thought, has now made 
its way into the physical science of Europe. It has been 
held by the religions of all other countries except India 
that the universe in its entirety is composed of parts dis¬ 
tinctly separate from each other. God, Nature, man— 
each stands by itself, isolated from one another ; likewis'". 
beasts, birds, insects, trees, the earth, stones, metals, etc., 
are all distinct from one another ; God created them 
separate from the beginning. 

Knowledge is to find unity in the midst of diversity— 
to establish unity among things which ppear to us to be 
different from one another. That particular relation by 
which man finds this sameness is called Law. 1 his is 
what is known as Natural Law. 

I have said before that our education, intelligence 
and thought are all spiritual, all find expression in religion. 
In the West, their manifestation is in the external—in the 
physical and social planes. I hinkers in ancient India 
gradually came to understand that that idea of separate¬ 
ness was erroneous, that there was a connection among 
all those distinct objects—there was a unity which 
pervaded the whole universe—trees, shrubs, animals, men, 
Devas, even God Himself ; the Advaitin reaching the 
climax in this line of thought declared all to be but the 
manifestations of the One. In reality, the metaphysical 
and the physical universe are one, and the name of this 
One is Brahman ; and the perception of separateness is 
an error—they called it Maya, Avidya or nescience. 
This is the end of knowledge. 

If this matter is not comprehended at the present day 
by anyone outside India—for India we leave out of 
consideration—how is one to be regarded as a Pandit? 
However, most of the erudite men in the West are coming 

V—28 


422 


SWAMI VIVEKANANDA^S WORKS 


to understand this, their own way—through physical 
science. But how that One has become the many— 
neither do we understand, nor do they. We, too, have 
offered the solution of this question by saying that it is 
beyond our understanding, which is limited. They, too, 
have done the same. But the variations that the One has 
undergone, the different sorts of species and individuality 
It is assuming—that can be understood, and the enquiry 
into this is called Science. 

So almost all are now evolutionists in the West. As 
small animals through gradual steps change into bigger 
ones, and big animals sometimes deteriorate and become 
smaller and weaker, and in course of time die out—so also, 
man is not born into a civilised state all on a sudden ; 
in these days an assertion to the contrary is no longer 
believed in by anybody among the thoughtful in the West, 
especially because of the evidence that their ancestors were 
in a savage state only a few centuries ago, and from that 
state such a great transformation has taken place in so 
short a time. So they say that all men must have gradually 
evolved, and are evolving from the uncivilised state. 

Primitive men used to manage their work with 
implements of wood and stone; they wore skins and leaves, 
and lived in mountain-caves or in huts thatched with leaves 
made somewhat after the fashion of birds* nests, and thus 
somehow passed their days. Evidence in proof of this is 
being obtained in all countries by excavating the earth, and 
also in some few places, men at that same primitive stage 
are still living. Gradually men learnt to use metal—soft 
metals such as tin and copper, and found out how to make 
tools and weapons by fusing them. The ancient Greeks, 
the Babylonians and the Egyptians did not know the use 
of iron for a long time—even when they became com¬ 
paratively civilised and wrote books and used gold and 
silver. At that time, the Mexicans, the Peruvians, the 
Mayas and other races among the aborigines of the New 


THE EAST AND THE WEST 


423 


World were comparatively civilised and used to build large 
temples ; the use of gold and silver was quite common 
amongst them, (in fact the greed for their gold and silver 
led the Spaniards to destroy them). But they managed 
to make all these things, toiling very hard with flint 
implements—they did not know iron even by name. 

In the primitive stage, man used to kill animals and 
fish by means of bows and arrows, or by the use of a net, 
and live upon them. Gradually, he learnt to till the ground 
and tend the cattle. Taming wild animals, he made them 
work for him, or reared them for his own eating, when 
necessary ; the cow, horse, hog, elephaiit, camel, goat, 
sheep, fowls, birds, and other animals became domesti¬ 
cated ; of all these, the dog is the first blend of man. 

So, in course of time, the tilling of the soil came 
into existence. 1 he fruits, roots, herbs, vegetables and 
the various cereals eaten by man are quite different now 
from what they were when they grew in a wild state. 
Through human exertion and cultivation wild fruits gained 
in size and acquired toothsomeness, and wild grass was 
transformed into delicious rice. Constant changes are 
going on, no doubt, in Nature, by its own processes. New 
species of trees and plants, birds and beasts, are being 
always created in Nature through changes brought about 
by time, environment and other causes. Thus, before the 
creation of man. Nature was changing the trees, plants 
and other animals by slow and gentle degrees, but when 
man came on the scene, he began to effect changes with 
rapid strides. He continually transported the native 
fauna and flora of one country to another, and by crossing 
them various new species of plants and animals were 
brought into existence. 

In the primitive stage there was no marriage, but 
gradually matrimonial relations sprang up. At first, the 
matrimonial relation depended, amorgst all communities. 


424 


SWAMI VIVEKANANDA^S WORKS 


on the mother. There was not much fixity about the 
father, the children were named after the mother ; all the 
wealth was in the hands of the women, for they were to 
bring up the children. In the course of time, wealth, the 
women included, passed into the hands of the male 
members. I he male said, “All this wealth and grain are 
mine ; 1 have grown these in the fields, or got them by 
plunder and other means ; and if anyone dispute my 
claims, and wants to have a share of them, I will fight him.” 
In the same way he said, “All these women are exclusively 
mine ; if anyone encroach upon my right in them, 1 will 
fight him.” 1 hus, there originated the modern marriage 
vsystem. Women became as much the property of man as 
his slaves and chattels. I he ancient marriage custom was 
that the males of one tribe married the women of another ; 
and even then the women were snatched away by force. 
In course of time, this business of taking away the bride 
by violence dropped away, and marriage was contracted 
with the mutual consent of both parties. But every custom 
leaves a faint trace of itself behind, and even now v/e find 
in every country a mock attack is made on such occasions 
UV30U the Widegroom. In Bengal and Europe, handfuls of 
nee are ^t\rown aX \\\e\>r\^egtooTn, an^ 
the bride s women friends abuse the bridegroom’s party 
calling them names, and so on. 

Society began to be formed and it varied according to 
diiferenl countries. 1 hose who lived on the seashore 
mostly earned their livelihood by fishing in the sea, those 
on the plains by agriculture. The mountaineers kept large 
Hocks of sheep, and the dwellers in the deserts tended 
goats and camels. Others lived in the forests and main¬ 
tained themselves by hunting. The dwellers on the plains 
learned agriculture ; their struggle for existence became 
less keen ; they had time for thought and culture, and thus 
became more and more civilised. But with the advance 
of civilisation their bodies grew weaker and weaker. The 


THE EAST AND THE WEST 


425 


difference in physique between those who always lived in 
the open air and whose principal article of food was 
animal diet, and others who dwelt in houses and lived 
mostly on grains and vegetables, became greater and 
greater. The hunter, the shepherd, the fisherman, turned 
robbers or pirates whenever food became scarce, and 
plundered the dwellers in the plains. Ihese, in their 
turn, united themselves in bands of large numbers for the 
common interest of self-preservation ; and thus little king- 
doms began to be formed. 

The Devas lived on grains and vegetables, were civil¬ 
ised, dwelt in villages, towns and gardens, and wore woven 
clothing. The Asuras dwelt in the hills and mountains, 
deserts or on the seashores, lived on animals, and the 
roots and fruits of the forests, and on what cereals they 
could get from the Devas in exchange for these or for 
their cows and sheep, and wore the hides of wild animals. 

I he Dev as ^ were weak in body and could not endure 
hardships ; the Asuras,^ on the other hand, were hardy 
with frequent fasting and were quite capable of suffering 
all sorts of hardships. 

Whenever food was scarce among the Asuras they 
set out trom tVieir Vii\\s and seasViores, to plunder towns and 
villages. At times they attacked the Devas for wealth and 
grains, and whenever the Devas failed to unite themselves 
m large numbers against them, they were sure to die at 
the hands of the Asuras. But the Devas being stronger 
in intelligence commenced inventing all sorts of machines 
for warfare. The Brahmastra, Garudastra, Vaishnavastra, 
Shaivastra—all these weapons of miraculous power 
belonged to the Devas. The Asuras fought with ordinary 
weapons, but they were enormously strong. They defeated 

^ The terms ‘Devas' and ‘Asuras’ are userd throughout here in 
thr sense in which they arc used in the C.ita, i.e., races in which the 
I)ai\i (divine), or the Asuri (Non-divine), qualities preponderate. 
\hde Srimad-Bhagavad-Gita. chapter XVi. 


426 


SWAMI VIVEKANANDA^S WORKS 


the Devas repeatedly, but they never cared to become 
civilised, or learn agriculture, or cultivate their intellect. 
If the victorious Asuras tried to reign over the vanquished 
Devas in Svarga, they were sure to be outwitted by the 
Devas* superior intellect and skill, and, before long, turned 
into their slaves. At other times, the Asuras returned to 
their own places, after plundering. The Devas, whenever 
they were united, forced them to retire, mark you, either 
into the hills or forests, or to the seashore. Gradually each 
party gained in numbers and became stronger and stronger: 
millions of Devas were united, and so were millions of 
Asuras. Violent conflicts and fighting went on, and along 
with them, the intermingling of these two forces. 

From the fusion of these different types and races our 
modern societies, manners and customs began to be 
evolved. New ideas sprang up and new sciences began 
to be cultivated. One class of men went on manufacturing 
articles of utility and comfort, either by manual or intel¬ 
lectual labour. A second class took upon themselves the 
charge of protecting them, and all proceeded to exchange 
these things. And it so happened that a band of fellows 
who were very clever undertook to take these things from 
one place to another and on the plea of remuneration for 
this, appropriated the major portion of their profit as their 
due. One tilled the ground, a second guarded the produce 
horn being robbed, a third took it to another place, and 
a fourth bought it. The cultivator got almost nothing ; he 
who guarded the produce took away as much of it as he 
could, by force ; the merchant who brought it to the 
market took the lion’s share ; and the buyer had to pay out 
of all proportion for the things, and smarted under the 
burden ! 1 he protector came to be known as the king ; 

he who took the commodities from one place to another 
was the merchant. These two did not produce anything 
—but still snatched away the best part of things, and 
made themselves fat by virtually reaping most of the fruits 


THE EAST AND THE WEST 


427 


of the cultivator’s toil and labour. The poor fellow who 
produced all these things had often to go without his 
meals and cry to God for help ! 

Now, with the march of events, all these matters grew 
more and more involved, knots upon knots multiplied, a^^d 
out of this tangled network has evolved our modern com¬ 
plex society. But the marks of a bygone character persist 
and do not die out completely. 1 hose who in their former 
births tended sheep or lived by fishing or the like, take to 
habits of piracy, robbery and similar occupations in I heir 
civilised incarnations also. With no forests to hunt in, no 
hills or mountains in the neighbourhood on which to lend 
the flock—by the accident of birth in a civilised society, 
he cannot get enough opportunity for -Ither hunting, fish¬ 
ing or grazing cattle—he is obliged therefore to rob or 
steal, impelled by his own nature ; what else can he do? 
And the worthy daughters of those far-famed ladies^ of 
the Pauranika age, whose names we are to repeat every 
morning—they can no longer marry more than one hus¬ 
band at a time, if they want to, and so they turn unchaste. 
In these and other ways, men of different types and 
dispositions, civilised and savage, born with the nature 
of the Devas and the Asur.as, have become fused together 
and form modern society. And that is why we see, in 
every society, God playing in these various forms—the 
Sadhu Narayana, the robber Narayana, and so on. 
Again, the character of any particular society came to be 
determined as Daivi (divine) or Asuri (non-divine) 
quality, in proportion as one or the other of these two 
different types of persons preponderated within it. 

The whole of the Asiatic civilisation was first evolved 
on the plains near large rivers and on fertile soils—on the 
banks of the Ganges, the Yangtse-Kiang and the 
Euphrates. The original foundation of all these civilisa- 

1 Aha]ya, Tara, Mandodari, Kunti and Draupadi. 


428 


SWAMI VIVEKANANDA’S WORKS 


tions is agriculture, and in all of them the Daivi nature 
predominates. Most of the European civilisation, on the 
other hand, originated either in hilly countries or on the 
seacoasts—piracy and robbery form the basis of this 
civilisation ; there the Asuri nature is preponderant. 

So far as can be Inferred in modern times, Central 
Asia and the deserts of Arabia seem to have been the 
home of the Asuras. Issuing from their fastnesses, these 
shepherds and hunters, the descendants of the Ausras, 
being united in hordes after hordes, chased the civilised 
Devas and scattered them all over the world. 

Of course there was a primitive race of aborigines in 
the c:ontinent of Europe. I hey lived in mountain-caves, 
and ihe more intelligent among them erected platforms by 
planting sticks in the comparatively shallow parts of the 
water and built houses thereon. They used arrows, spear¬ 
heads, knives find axes, all made of flint, and managed 
every kind of work with them. 

Gradually the current of the Asiatic races began to 
break forth upon Europe, and as its effects some parts 
became comparatively civilised ; the language of a certain 
people in Russia resembles the languages of Southern 
India. 

Rut for the most part these barbarians remained as 
barbarous as ever, till a civilised race from Asia Minor 
coiupiered the adjacent parts of Europe and founded a 
high order of new civilisation: to us they are known as 
\ avanas, to the Europeans as Greeks. 

Afterwards, in Italy, a barbarous tribe known as the 
Romans conquered the civilised Etruscans, assimilated 
their culture and learning, and established a civilisation of 
their own on the ruins of that of the conquered race. 
Gradually, the Romans carried their victorious arms in all 
directions ; all the barbarous tribes in the south-west of 
Europe came under the suzerainty of Rome ; only the bar¬ 
barians of the forests living in the Northern regions retained 


THE EAST AND THE WEST 


429 


their independence. In the efflux of time, however, the 
Romans became enervated by being slaves to wealth and 
luxury, and at that time Asia again let loose her armies of 
Asuras on Europe. Driven from their homes by the on¬ 
slaught of these Asuras, the barbarians of Northern Europe 
fell upon the Roman Empire, and Rome was destroyed. 
Encountered by the force of this Asiatic invasion, a new 
race sprang up through the fusion of the European bar¬ 
barians with the remnants of the Romans and Greeks. At 
that time, the Jews being conquered and driven away fiom 
their homes by the Ramans, scattered themselves through¬ 
out Europe, and with them their new religion, Christianity 
also spread all over Europe. All these different races, 
and their creeds and ideas, all these '‘fferent hordes of 
Asuras, heated by the fire of constant struggle and warfare, 
began to melt and fuse in Mahamaya’s crucible ; and from 
that fusion the modern European race has sprung up. 

I hus, a barbarous, very barbarous European race 
came into existence, with all shades of complexion from 
the swarthy colour of the Hindus to the milk-white colour 
of the North, with black, brown, red, or white hair, black, 
grey or blue eyes, resembling the fine features of face, the 
nose and eyes of the Hindus, or the flat faces of the 
Chinese. For some time they continued to fight among 
themselves ; those of the North leading the life of pirates 
harassed and killed the comparatively civilised races. In 
the meantime, however, the two heads of the Christian 
Churches, the Pope (in French and Italian, Pape^) of Italy 
and the Patriarch of Constantinople, insinuating them¬ 
selves, began to exercise their authority over these brutal 
barbarian hordes, over their kings, queens and peoples. 

On the other side, again, Mohammedanism arose in 
the deserts of Arabia. The wild Arabs, inspired by the 
teachings of a great sage, bore down upon the earth with 


^ Pronounced as Pdp. 


430 


SWA MI VIVEKANANDA'S WORKS 


an irresistible force and vigour. That torrent, carrying 
everything before it, entered Europe from both the east 
and the west, and along with this tide the learning and 
culture of India and ancient Greece were carried into 
Europe. 

A tribe of Asuras from Central Asia known as the 
Seljuk 1 artars, accepted Mohammedanism and conquered 
Asia Minor and other countries of Asia. The various 
attempts of the Arabs to conquer India proved unsuccess¬ 
ful. 1 he wave of Mohammedan conquest, which had 
swallowed the whole earth, had to fall back before India. 
I hey attacked Sindh once, but could not hold it ; and 
they did not make any other attempt after that. 

But a few centuries afterwards, when the Turks and 
other I artar races were converted from Buddhism to 
Mohammedanism—at that time they conquered the Hindus 
Persians, and Arabs, and brought all of them alike under 
their subjection. Of all the Mohammedan conquerors of 
India, none was an Arab or a Persian ; they were all 
1 inks and I artars. In Rajputana, all the Mohammedan 
invaders were called 1 urks, and that is a true and historical 
fact. I he Charans of Rajputana sang ' turuganlio hadhi 
jor "— “ 1 he I urks arc very powerful ”—and that was true. 
1 rorn Kutubucldin down to the Mogul Emperors—all of 
them are I artars. I hey are the same race to which the 
1 ibetans belong ; only they have become Mohammedans 
and changed their flat round faces by intermarrying with 
the I lindus and Persians. They are the same ancient 
races of Asuras. Even to-day they are reigning on the 
thrones of Kabul, Persia, Arabia and Constantinople, and 
the Gandharis (natives of Kandahar) and Persians are still 
the slaves of the lurks. 1 he vast Empire of China, too, 
is lying at the feet of the Manchurian Tartars ; only these 
Manchus have not given up their religion, have not 
become Mohammedans, they are disciples of the Grand 
Lama. These .Asuras never care for learning and cultiva- 


THE EAST AND THE WEST 


431 


tion of the intellect ; the only thing they understand is 
fighting. Very little of the warlike spirit is possible with¬ 
out a mixture of that blood; and it is that Tartar blood 
which is seen in the vigorous, martial spirit of Northern 
Europe, especially in the Russians, who have three-fourlhs 
of Tartar blood in their veins. The fight between the 
Devas and the Asuras will continue yet for a long time to 
come. The Devas marry the Asura girls and the Asuras 
snatch away Deva brides—it is this that leads to the 
formation of powerful mongrel races. 

The 1 artars seized and occupied the throne of the 
Arabian Caliph, took possession of Jerusalem, the great 
Christian place of pilgrimage, and other places, would not 
allow pilgrims to visit the holy sepulcV:and killed many 
Christians. The heads of the Christian churches grew 
mad with rage and roused their barbarian disciples through¬ 
out Europe, who in their turn inflamed the kings and their 
subjects alike. Hordes of European barbarians rushed 
towards Asia minor to deliver Jerusalem from the hands 
of the infidels. A good portion of them cut one another’s 
throats, others died of disease, while the rest were killed 
by the Mohammedans. However, the blood was up of 
the wild barbarians, and no sooner had the Mohammedans 
killed them than they arrived in fresh numbers—with that 
dogged obstinacy of a wild savage. They thought nothing 
even of plundering their own men, and making meals of 
Mohammedans when they found nothing better. It is 
well known that the English king Richard had a liking for 
Mohammedan flesh. 

Here the result was the same, as usually happens in a 
war between barbarians and civilised men. Jerusalem and 
other places could not be conquered. But Europe began 
to be civilised. The English, French, German and other 
savage nations who dressed themselves in hides and ate 
raw flesh, came in contact with Asiatic civilisation. An 
order of Christian soldiers of Italy and other countries. 


432 


SWAMI VIVEKANANDA'S WORKS 


corresponding to our Nagas, began to learn philosophy ; 
and one of their sects, the Knights Templars, became con¬ 
firmed Advaita V^edantists, and ended by holding 
Christianity up to ridicule. Moreover, as they had amassed 
enormous riches, the kings of Europe, at the orders of the 
Pope, and under the pretext of saving religion, robbed 
and exterminated them. 

On the other side, a tribe of Mohammedans, called 
the Moors, established a civilised kingdom in Spam, 
cultivated various branches of knowledge and founded the 
first university in Europe. Students flocked from all parts, 
from Italy, France, and even from far-off England. The 
sons of royal families came to learn manners, etiquette, 
civilisation and the att of war. Houses, temples, edifices 
arfd other architectural buildings began to be built after 
a new style. 

But the whole of Europe was gradually transformed 
into a vast military camp—and this is even now the case. 
When the Mohammedans conquered any kingdom, their 
king kept a large part for himself, and the rest he distribut¬ 
ed among his generals. 1 hese men did not pay any rent 
but had to supply the king with a certain number of 
soldiers in liin<' of need. Thus the trouble of keeping a 
standing army always ready wa.s avoided, and a powerful 
aiiny was created, which served only in time of war. This 
same idea still exists to a certain extent in Rajputana, and 
it was brought into the West by the Mohammedans. The 
Fairopeans took this system from the Mohammedans. But 
whereas with the Mohammedans there were the king and 
his groups of feudatory chiefs and their armies, and the 
rest, the body of the people, were ordinary subjects who 
were lelt unmolested in time of war—in Europe, on the 
other hand, the king and his groups of feudatory chiefs 
were on one side, and they turned all the subject-people 
into their slaves. Everyone had to live under the shelter 
of a military feudatory chief, as his man, and then only 


THE EAST AND THE WEST 


433 


was he allowed to live—he had to be always ready to 
fight at any time, at the word of command. 

What is the meaning of the “Progress of Civilisation,” 
which the Europeans boast so much about ? The meaning 
of it is the successful accomplishment of the desired 
object by the justification of wrong means, i.e., by making 
the end justify the means. It makes acts of theft, false¬ 
hood, and hanging, appear proper under certain circum¬ 
stances ; it vindicates Stanley’s whipping of the hungry 
Mohammedan guards who accompanied him, for stealing 
a few mouthfuls of bread ; it guides and justifies the well 
known European ethics which says, “Get out from this 
place, I want to come in and possess it,’’- the truth of 
which is borne out by the evidence o' history, that wher¬ 
ever the Europeans have gone, there has followed the 
extinction of the aboriginal races. In London, this “pro¬ 
gress of civilisation” regards unfaithfulness in conjugal 
life, and, in Paris, the running away of a man, leaving 
his wife and children helpless and committing suicide, 
as a mistake and not a crime. 

Now compare the first three centuries of the quick 
spread of the civilisation of Islam with the corresponding 
period of Christianity. Christianity, during its first three 
centuries, was not even successful in making itself known 
to the world ; and since the day when the sword of Con¬ 
stantine made a place for it in his kingdom, what support 
has Christianity ever lent to the spread of civilisation, 
either spiritual or secular? What reward did the Christian 
religion offer to that European Pandit who sought to prove 
for the first time that the Earth is a revolving planet? 
What scientist has ever been hailed with approval and 
enthusiasm by the Christian Church? Can the literature 
of the Christian flock consistently meet the requirements 
of legal jurisprudence, civil or criminal, or of arts and trade 
policies? Even now the “Church” does not sanction the 
diffusion of profane literature. Is it possible, still, for a 


434 


SWAMI VIVEKANANDA'S WORKS 


man who has penetrated deep into modern learning and 
science to be an absolutely sincere Christian? In the New 
Testament there is no covert or overt praise of any arts and 
sciences. But there is scarcely any science or branch of 
art that is not sanctioned and held up for encouragement, 
directly or indirectly, in the Koran, or in the many passages 
of the Hadis, the traditional Sayings of Mohammed. The 
greatest thinkers of Europe—Voltaire, Darwin, Buchner, 
Flammarion, Victor Hugo, and a host of others like them 
—are, in the present times, denounced by Christianity, 
and are victims of the vituperative tongues of its orthodox 
community. On the other hand, Islam regards such people 
to be believers in the existence of God, but only wanting 
in faith in the Prophet. I.et there be a searching 
investigation into the respective merits of the two religions 
as regards their helpfulness, or the throwing of obstacles 
in the path of progress, and it will be seen that wherever 
Islam has gone, there it has preserved the aboriginal 
inhabitants—there those races still exist, their language and 
their nationality abide even to the present day. 

Where can Christianity show such an achievement ) 
Where are, today, the Arabs of Spain, and the aboriginal 
races of America? What treatment are the Christians 
according to the European Jews? With the single excep¬ 
tion of charitable organisations no other line of work 
in Europe is in harmony with the teachings of the 
Gospel. Whatever heights of progress Europe has attained, 
every one of them has been gained by its revolt against 
Christianity—by its rising against the Gospel. If Christianity 
had its old paramount sway in Europe to-day, it would 
have lighted the fire of the Inquisition against such 
modern scientists as Pasteur and Koch, and burnt Darwin 
and others of his school at the stake. In modern Europe, 
C hristianity and civilisation are two different things. 
Civilisation has now girded up her loins to destroy her 
old enemy, Christianity, to overthrow the clergy, and to 


THE EAST AND THE WEST 435 

wring educational and charitable institutions from 
their hands. But for the ignorance-ridden rustic masses, 
Christianity would never have been able toi a moment to 
support its present despised existence, and would have 
been pulled out by its roots ; for the urban poor are, 
even now, enemies of the Christian Church! Now 
compare this with Islam. In the Mohammedan countries, 
all the ordinances are firmly established upon the Islamic 
religion, and its own preachers are greatly venerated by 
all the officials of the State, and teachers of other religions 
also are respected. 

I he European civilisation may be likened to a piece 
of cloth, of which these are the materials: its loom is 
a vast temperate hilly country on the seashore ; its cotton, 
a strong warlike mongrel race formed by the intermixture 
of various races ; its warp is warfare, in defence of one’s 
self and one’s religion. The one who wields the sword 
is great, and the one who cannot, gives up his independ¬ 
ence and lives under the protection of some warrior’s 
sword. Its woof is commerce. The means to this civilisa¬ 
tion is the sword, its auxiliary—courage and strength, its 
aim—enjoyment here and hereafter. 

And how is it with us ? 1 he Aryans are lovers of 

peace, cultivators of the soil, and are quite happy and 
contented if they can only rear their families undisturbed. 
In such a life they have ample leisure, and therefore 
greater opportunity of being thoughtful and civilised. Our 
King Janaka tilled the soil with his own hands, and he 
was also the greatest of the knowers of T ruth, of his time. 
With us, Rishis, Munis and T ogis have been born from the 
very beginning ; they have known from the first that the 
world is a chimera. Plunder and fight as you rnay, the 
enjoyment that you are seeking is only in peace, and 
peace, in the renunciation of physical pleasures. Enjoy¬ 
ment lies not in physical development, but in the culture 


436 


SWAMI VIVEKANANDA'S WORKS 


of the mind and the intellect. It was the knowers who 
reclaimed the jungles for cultivation. 

1 hen, over that cleared plot of land was built the 
V'edic altar ; in that pure sky of Bharata, up rose the sacred 
smoke of Yajnas ; in that air breathing peace, the Vedic 
Mantras echoed and re-echoed—and cattle and other 
beasts grazed without any fear of danger. The place of 
the sword was assigned at the feet of learning and Dharma. 
Its only work was to protect Dharma and save the lives 
of men and cattle. I he hero was the protector of the 
weak in danger—the Kshatriya. Ruling over the plough 
and the sword was Dharma, the protector of all. He is 
the King of kings ; he is ever-awake even while the world 
sleeps. Everyone was free under the protection of Dharma. 

And what your European Pandits say about the 
Aryan’s swooping down from some foreign land, snatching 
away the lands of the aborigines and settling in India by 
exterminating them, is all pure nonsense, foolish talk ! 
Strange, that our Indian scholars, too, say amen to them ; 
q^nd all these monstrous lies arc being taught to our boys ! 

1 his is very bad indeed. 

1 am an ignoramus myself ; 1 do not pretend to any 
scholarship ; but with the little that 1 understand, I strongly 
protested against these ideas at the Paris Congress. I have 
been talking with the Indian and European savants on the 
subject, and hope to raise many objections to this theory 
in detail, when time permits. And this 1 say to you, to 
our Pandits, also—you are learned men, hunt up your 
old books and scriptures, please, and draw your own 
conclusions. 

Wherever the Europeans find an opportunity, they 
exterminate the aborigines and settle down in ease and 
comfort on their lands ; and therefore they think the 
Aryans must have done the same! The Westerners 
would be considered wretched vagabonds if they lived in 
their native homes depending wholly on their own internal 


THE EAST AND THE WEST 


437 


resources, and so they have to run wildly about the world 
seeking how they can feed upon the fat of the land of 
others, by spoliation and slaughter ; and therefore they 
conclude the Ar 3 ^ans must have done the same ! But 
where is your proof ? Guess-work ? Then keep your 
fanciful guesses to yourselves ! 

In what Veda, in what Sukta, do you find that the 
Aryans came into India from a foreign country? Where 
do you gel the idea that they slaughtered the wild 
aborigines ? What do 3 "Ou gain by talking such nonsense ? 
Vain has been your study of the Ramayana ; why manu¬ 
facture a big fine story out of it ? 

Well, what is the Ramayana? Ike conquest of the 
savage aborigines of Southern India by the Aryans ! 
Indeed ! Ramachandra is a civilised Aryan king, and 
with whom is he fighting? With King Ravana of Lanka. 
Just read the Ramayana. and you will find that Ravana 
was rather more and not less civilised than Ramachandra. 
1 he civilisation of Lanka was rather higher, and surely 
not lower, than that of Ayodhya. And then, when were 
these Vanaras “monkeys” and other Southern Indians 
conquered? They were all, on the other hand, f^ama- 
chandra’s friends and allies. Say which kingdoms of 
Vali and Guhaka were annexed by Ramachandra ? 

It was quite possible, however, that in a few places 
there were occasional fights between the Aryans and the 
aborigines ; quite possible, that one or two cunning Munis 
pretended to meditate with closed eyes before their sacri¬ 
ficial fires, in the jungles of the Rakshasas, waiting, how¬ 
ever, all the time to see when the Rakshasas would xhrow 
stones and pieces of bone at them. No sooner had this 
been done than they would go whining to the kings. 

I he mail-clad kings armed with swords and weapons of 
steel would come on fiery steeds. But how long could 
the aborigines fight with their sticks and stones ? So they 
were killed or chased away, and the kings returned to 

V—29 


438 


SWAMI VIVEKANANDA^S WORKS 


their capital. Well, all this may have been, but how does 
this prove that their lands were taken away by the Aryans ? 
Where in the Ramayana do you find that? 

The loom of the fabric of Aryan civilisation is a vast, 
warm, level country, interspersed with broad, navigable 
rivers, d he cotton of this cloth is composed of highly 
civilised, serni-civilised and barbarian tribes, mostly Aryan. 
Its warp is Varnashrarnachara,’ and its woof, the conquest 
of strife and competition in Nature. 

And may I ask you, Europeans, what country you 
have evt‘r raised to better conditions? Wherever you 
have found weaker races, you have exterminated them by 
the roots, as it were. You have settled on their lands, 
and they are gone for ever. What is the history of j^our 
Am erica, your Australia and New Zealand, your Pacific 
Islands and South Africa? Where are those aboriginal 
races there today? I hey are all exterminated, you have 
killed them outright, as if they were wild beasts. It is 
only where you have not the power to do so, and there 
only, that other nations are still alive. 

Rut India has never done that. 1 he Aryans were 
kind and generous ; and in their hearts which were large 
and unbounded as the ocean, and in their brains gifted 
with superhuman genius, all these ephemeral, and 
ap)parently pleasant but virtually beastly processes, never 
(ound a place. And 1 ask you, fools of my own country, 
would there have been this institution of X^arnashrama, if 
the Aryans had exterminated the aborigines in order to 
settle on their lands? 

1 he object of the peoples of Europe is to exterminate 
all, in order to live themselves. The aim of the Aryans 
is to raise all up to their own level, nay, even to a higher 

‘ I h(' old Aiv.ui of tlio iour castes and stages of life. 

I he foiiner comprise the Iki'dimin. Kshatriva, Vaisya and Shudra, 
<ind file Hr.ihmacharya (student life). Carliasthya (householder’s 

life). Vanaprastha (hermit lihd. and Sannvasa (life of renunciation) 


THE EAST AND THE WEST 


439 


level than themselves. 1 he means of European civilisa¬ 
tion is the sv/ord ; of the Aryans, the division into different 
\ arnas. This system of division into different Varnas is 
the stepping-stone to civilisation, making one rise higher 
and higher in proportion to one’s learning and cuiiure. 
In Europe, it is everywhere victory to the strong, and 
death to the weak. In the land of Bharata, every social 
rule is for the protection of the weak. 


3rw7?rf 

Lai Bahadur Shastri National Academy of 
Administration Library 

mussoorie/*?^ 

sr^rf^cT #0 /Acc- No. ^ ^ 
¥^i fTT m 'TfW 

Please return this book on or before the 
date last stamped below. 


Due 

Date 


?T^T 

Borrower's 

No. 


Due 

Date 


Borrower’s 

No. 


294.55»5 
VIv 6th.ed v.5 


LBSNAA 


\U^ . LIBRARY 

LAL BAHADUR 8HASTRI 

^.icNittonal Academy of Administration 

MUSSOORIE 


Aecesslea Na. . 

1. Books are issued for 18 days only but 
may have to bo recalled earlier if urpen* 
lly required. 

2. Alt over-due charge of 25 Raise per day 
per volume will be charged. 

8. Books may be renewed on request» at 
the discretion of the Librarian. 

4. PerlodlcalSt Rare and Reference books 
nray not be Issued and may be consul¬ 
ted only In the Library. 

5. BiMrfie lostf defaced or Injured In any 
way eban have to be replaced or He dou¬ 
ble prieo eball bo paid by the borrower. 

/rwitt chM B mo¥lng
