Lectures on Man: His Place in Creation, and in the History of the Earth (Carl Vogt (edited by James Hunt), 1864)
================================================================================================================
Vogt's 1864 English lectures — the most influential materialist synthesis of human origins before Darwin's Descent, arguing the ape-man case in full. Public domain. Source: Internet Archive (lecturesonmanhis00vogtuoft)


publications  of  tfjc

^ntljrojjologital  Sotirfjr  of  f  oitbon.


LECTURES    ON    MAN

VOGT.


?

ft.


LECTURES    ON    MAN:


HIS


PLACE  IN  CREATION,  AND  IN  THE  HISTORY

OF  THE  EARTH.


BY


Dr.     CARL    VOGT,

PROFESSOR   OF   NATURAL    niSTORY  IN   THE   UNIVERSITY    OF    GENEVA,   FOREIGN  ASSOCIATE

OF   THE  ANTHROrOLOGICAL   SOCIETY  OF   PARIS,  AND    HONORARY   FELLOW

OF   THE   ANTHROPOLOGICAL   SOCIETY   OF   LONDON.


EDITED    BY


JAMES     HUNT,

PH.D.,   F.S.A.,   F.R.S.L.,   F.A.S.L.,

FOREIGN    ASSOCIATE    OF    THE   ANTHROPOLOGICAL   SOCIETY    OF   PARIS,   HONORARY  FELLOW   OF    THE

ETHNOLOGICAL   SOCIETY  OF  LONDON,   CORRESPONDING    MEMBER   OF   THE    UPPER   HESSE

SOCIETY   FOE   NATURAL  AND    MEDICAL   SCIENCE,   PRESIDENT   OF   THE

ANTHROPOLOGICAL   SOCIETY   OF  LONDON.


LONDON:

PUBLISHED    FOR   THE    ANTHROPOLOGICAL    SOCIETY,    BY

LONGMAN,   GREEN,   LONGMAN,   AND   ROBERTS,

PATERNOSTER  ROW.

1864.


T.   RT011ARDS,    37,    GREAT  QUEEN  STREET.      W.C.


TO

Dr.    PAUL    BROCA,

SECRETAIRE      GENERAL      DE      LA      SOCIETE      D'AN  THROPOLOGIE     DE     PARIS,

HONORARY     FELLOW      OF      THE      ANTHROPOLOGICAL     SOCIETY     OF      LONDON,

PROFESSEUR  AGEEGE  A  LA  FACULTE  DE  HEDECINE  DE  PARIS,  CHIRURGIEN

A    l'hOPITAL    SALPETRIERE,    VICE    PRESIDENT    DE    LA    SOCIETE

DE    CHIRURGIE    DE    PARIS,    AND    HONORARY   FELLOW

OF  THE  ETHNOLOGICAL  SOCIETY  OF  LONDON.

My  dear  Dr.  Broca,

Your  kind  permission  to  dedicate  the  following
translation  to  you,  affords  me  the  opjjortunity  which  I
have  long  desired  of  expressing  my  sense  of  the  honour
which  your  personal  friendship  confers  upon  me  ;  and  at
the  same  time  enables  me  to  testify  my  appreciation  of,
and  admiration  for,  the  incalculable  services  which  your
zeal  and  ability  have  rendered  to  the  noblest  of  all  sci-
ences, the  science  of  Man — Anthropology.

To   those    unacquainted    with   your   labours*  for  this
young  science  in  France,  and  their  triumphant  results,

*  The  following  list  of  Professor  Broca's  scientific  works,  especially  bearing
on  the  science  of  Man,  will  give  some  little  idea  of  his  industry,  although
they  constitute  but  a  small  part  of  what  that  accomplished  Anthropologist
has  published  during  the  last  few  years  : —

Recherches  sur  VEthnologie  de  la  France,  dans  "Mem.  de  la  Soc.  d'Anthrop.,"
t.  1,  p.  1,  a  56,  Paris,  18G0,  gr.  in  8vo.  Tire  a  part,  brochure  de  56  pages
avec  une  carte.  Memoire  sur  VHybridite  et  sur  la  Disti?iction  des  Especes  Ani-
mates, "Journ.de  Physiol.,"  1858,  t.  i,  p.  432-471,  p.  684-729;  1859,  t.  ii,
p.  218-250,  et  p.  345-390.  Resume  desfaits  relatifs  aux  Croisements  des  Chiens,
de  Loups,  de  Chacals,  et  de  Renards,  "Journ.  de  Physiol.,"  1859,  t.  ii,  p.
390-396.  Sur  les  principaux  Hybrides  du  genre  Equus,  sur  I'Heredite  des
C'aracteres  chez  les  metis  et  sur  la  Fecondite  des  Mules,  "  Journ.  de  Physiol.,"
1859,  t.  ii,  p.  250-258.  Memoire  sur  les  Phenomenes  d'Hybridite  dans  le  genre
liumain,  "  Journ.  de  Physiol.,"  1859,  t.  ii,  p.  601-625,  et  1860,  t.  iii,  p.  392-439.
Sur  V Influence  durable  de  certains  Croisements  de  Races,  "  Bull,  de  la  Soc.
d'Anthrop.,"  1859,  t,  i,  p.  19-26.  Sur  les  capsules  surrenales  d'un  Negre,  ibid.,
t.  i,  p.  30.     Sur  les  Races  primitives,  contemporaincs  de  Vtpoque  dite  du  Dili'-


VI  DEDICATION.

a  recapitulation  of  them  here  would  sound  more  like
a  panegyric,  than  the  simple  recital  of  what  one  man
has  accomplished.  I  am  therefore  glad  that  the  majority
of  those  who  will  peruse  this  volume  are  already  ac-
quainted with  what  you  have  done  for  the  establishment
of  Anthropology  in  your  own  country,  and  will  join  with
me  in  a  public  recognition  of  your  valuable  services  to
science  generally,  and  also  in  paying  homage  to  the  noble
example  you  have  set  to  lovers  of  truth,  and  students
of  mankind  throughout  the  world.

Some  seven  years  since,  when  I  first  had  the  honour

vium,  ibid.,  t.  i,  p.  70-70,  p.  87-92.  Instructions  pour  le  Senegal,  ibid.,  t.  i,
p.  121-137.  Tire  a  part,  brocli.  in-8vo  de  16  p.  Bemarques  sur  les  Langues
Polyne'siennes,  ibid.,  I860,  t.  i,  p.  250-255.  Documents  relatifs  aux  Croisements
des  Races  tres  differentes,  ibid,  t.  i,  p.  255-264.  Sxir  le  Defaut  de  perfeclibilite
de  certaines  Races,  ibid.,  t.  i,  p.  337-342,  p.  368-376.  Sur  le  volume  et  la  forme
du  Cerveau,  suivant  les  individus  et  suivant  les  Races,  ibid.,lS61,  t.  ii,  p.  139-
204,  ct  301-321.  Tire  a,  part,  brochure  in-8vo  de  75  pages.  Sur  les  Poids
relatif  du  Cerveau  des  Francais  et  des  Allemands,  ibid.,  p.  441-446.  Rapport  sur
les  fouilles  Pratiquces  dans  Vancien  Cim&tiere  des  Celestins,  Publie  par  la  Ville
de  Paris  :  Paris,  1850,  in-4to,  19  pages.  Sur  des  Cranes  provenant  d'un  Cime-
tiere  de  la  Cite,  anterieur  au  sine  siecle,  "  Bull,  de  la  Soc.  d'Anthrop.,"  1861,
t.  ii,  p.  501-513.  Sur  la  Capacity  des  Cranes  Parisiens  des  diverses  epoques,
ibid.,  1862,  t.  iii,  p.  102-116.  Ces  deux  niemoires  ont  ete  tires  a  part,  bro-
chure in-8vo  de  32  pages.  Memoire  sur  le  Craniographe  et  sur  quelques-uncs
de  ses  Applications,  dans  "  Mem.  de  la  Soc.  d'Anthrop.,"  t.  i,  p.  349-378.
Tire  a  part,  brochure  gr.  in-8vo,  de  30  pages,  avec  1  pi.  Sur  la  Ddtermination
des  Points  singuliers  de  la  Vottte  du  Crane  qui  limiient  les  angles  auriculaires,
"  Bull,  de  Soc.  d'Anthrop.,"  1862,  t.  iii,  p.  17-24.  Sur  les  Proportions  Rela-
tives du  Bras,  de  I'avant-bras  et  de  la  Clavicule  chez  les  Negres  et  les  Euro-
pi:ens,  ibid.,  t.  iii,  p.  162-172.  Tire  a,  part,  brochure  in-8vo  de  12  pages.  La
Linguistique  et  V Anthropologic,  "  Bull,  de  la  Soc.  d'Anthrop.,"  1862,  t.  iii,  p.
264-319.  Tire  a,  part,  brochure  in-8vo  de  55  pages.  Sur  les  Projections  de  la
Tcte  et  sur  un  nouveau  Procide  de  CephalomHrie,  "  Bull,  de  la  Soc.  d'An-
throp.," t.  iii,  Novembre  1862.  Tire  a  part,  brochure  in-8vo  de  30  pages.
Sur  les  CaracUres  du  Crane  des  Basques,  "  Bull,  de  la  Soc.  d'Anthrop.,"  t.
iii,  Decembre  1862.  Tire  a  part,  brochure  in-Svo  de  15  pages.  Second  Me-
moire sur  les  Caracteres  du  Crane  des  Basques,  "  Bull,  do  la  Soc.  d'Anthrop.,"
Fevricr  1S63,  t.  iv.  Instructions  Generates  pour  les  Recherches  Anthropologiqucs
( Auatomie  et  Physiologie). — "Mem.  de  la  Soc.  d'Anthrop.,"  Par.,  vol.  ii,  in
the  press.


DEDICATION.  VI I


of  being  introduced  to  you,  by  our  late  lamented  col-
league, Dr.  Robert  Knox,  I  held,  as  you  may  remember,
the  office  of  Honorary  Secretary  to  the  Ethnological
Society  of  London.  Most  heartily  did  I  welcome  the
birth  of  your  society,  on  behalf  of  that  of  which  I  was
then  an  officer,  believing  at  that  time,  the  Societe  d'An-
thropologie  de  Paris  to  be  merely  an  Ethnological  So-
ciety under  another  name.  In  watching  the  develop-
ment of  your  Society  and  tracing  the  vastness  of  its
extent  and  objects,  under  the  administration  of  yourself
and  your  illustrious  colleagues,  I  soon  perceived  that
pure  Ethnology  merely  formed  a  part  of  the  grand  science
then  inaugurated  by  you.  With  the  most  intense  plea-
sure and  admiration,  I  witnessed  the  gradual  establish-
ment and  progress  of  your  Society,  endeavouring  at  the
same  time  with  all  my  power  to  incite  the  Ethnological
Society  to  similar  efforts.  This  attempt,  however  (truth
compels  me  to  record),  proved  a  signal  failure — a  circum-
stance which  caused  me  disappointment  at  the  moment,
but  which  I  now  consider  fortunate  ;  for  I  soon  became
aware  that  Anthropology  and  Ethnology  could  never  be-
come synonymous  terms,  inasmuch  as  the  latter  merely
constitutes  a  part  of  the  comprehensive  science  of  An-
thropology.

I  am  glad  to  state  that,  at  the  present  time,  this
profound  distinction  is  fully  admitted  by  unbiassed
persons  in  England.  My  failure,  however,  in  arousing
the  Ethnological  Society  from  its  torpor,  was  not  attri-
butable to  this  confusion  of  terms,  the  matter  not  having
then  received  public  attention  in  this  country,  but
arose  entirely  from  the  opposite  views  held  by  myself
and  my  colleagues  as  to  the  objects  of  the  Ethnological
Society,  and  its  duties  as  a  scientific  body.


Vlll  DEDICATION.


The  stand-point  claimed  for  the  science  of  Ethnology
by  the  late  Dr.  Knox,  by  Captain  R.  F.  Burton,  the
present  senior  Vice-President  of  the  London  Anthropo-
logical Society,  by  myself,  and  by  some  others,  was  that
of  a  grave,  erudite,  and  purely  scientific  study,  requiring
the  most  free  and  serious  discussion,  especially  on  anat-
omical and  physiological  topics,  for  the  elucidation  of
the  many  difficult  problems  arising  out  of  the  subjects
brought  forward.  This,  however,  was  far  from  being  the
opinion  of  a  large  and  powerful  section  of  the  Society,
headed  by  my  venerable  friend,  Mr.  John  Crawfurd.
The  party  under  his  leadership  desired  to  place  the
Ethnological  Society  on  a  footing  with  the  Royal  Geogra-
phical Society,  and  to  render  its  meetings  fashionable
and  popular  by  the  admission  of  ladies.  You  will,  doubt-
less, smile  at  the  strange  idea  of  admitting  females  to
a  discussion  of  all  Ethnological  subjects.  However,  the
supporters  of  the  "  fair  sex"  won  the  day,  and  females
have  been  regularly  admitted  to  the  meetings  of  the
Ethnological  Society  during  the  past  three  years.

Even  now  the  advocates  of  this  measure  do  not  admit
their  error,  nor  do  they  perceive  how  they  are  practi-
cally hindering  the  promotion  of  those  scientific  objects
which  they  continue  to  claim  for  their  society.  On  the
contrary,  they  rejoice  at  their  victory,  and  Mr.  Crawfurd
has  publicly  on  more  than  one  occasion  ascribed  the  suc-
cess which  attended  the  Ethnological  Society  under  his
regime  to  the  admission  of  ladies.

Apart  from  this  fatal  mistake, you  will  readily  understand
that  other  important,  and  indeed  vital  differences,  existed
as  to  the  mode  in  which  such  a  society  should  be  conducted.
Finding  myself,  therefore,  unable  to  give  my  cordial  sup-
port to  a  society  whose  apparent  objects  were  so  utterly


DEDICATION.  IX


at  variance  with  my  own  views — views  in  which  I  was
not  without  supporters — the  idea  occurred  to  me  of
establishing  in  this  country  a  really  scientific  society,
which,  taking  yours  as  a  model,  might  become  worthy  of
a  great  nation.

Here,  my  dear  sir,  I  will  pause  :  what  we  have  achieved
is  already  known  to  you  ;  what  we  hope  to  do  I  trust
you  will  live  to  see  in  a  great  degree  accomplished.  I
cannot  however,  dismiss  the  subject  of  the  formation
of  our  Society,  without  a  hearty  acknowledgement  of
the  kindness  and  encouragement  received  by  myself  and
my  fellow-workers,  from  you  and  your  able  colleagues
when  our  plan  was  first  mentioned  to  you.  As  a  body,
we  shall  not  easily  forget  the  valuable  assistance  you  then
rendered  us  ;  and  from  myself,  personally,  your  kind  and
friendly  advice  on  all  occasions  calls  for  a  still  warmer
acknowledgment.

I  am  aware  that  in  France,  and,  indeed,  throughout
Europe,  an  impression  prevails  that  the  science  of  Anthro-
pology is  now  formally  recognised  in  this  country.
That  this  is  correct  to  a  certain  extent,  is  proved
by  the  nourishing  condition  of  the  London  Anthropo-
logical Society.  Still,  after  what  I  have  before  stated,
you  will  not  be  surprised  to  learn  that  there  are
some  eminent  scientific  men  in  England  who  believe,
or  profess  to  believe,  that  the  sciences  of  Anthropology  and
Ethnology  are  identical.  I  feel  ashamed  to  mention,  that
at  the  last  annual  meeting  of  the  British  Association
for  the  Advancement  of  Science,  at  Bath,  it  was  not  only
contended  that  Anthropology  and  Ethnology  were  syno-
nymous terms,  and  that  both  sciences  had  the  same  aim
and  object,  but  recognition  wTas  denied  to  Anthropology
as  a  science,  on  the  plea  that  Ethnology  was  an   older


DEDICATION.


and  a  prettier  word  !  These  were  the  profound  reasons  as-
signed for  the  exclusion  of  a  science  represented  by  a
society,  which  numbers  nearly  five  hundred  members,
from  the  yearly  scientific  congress  of  the  country.

You  will  thus  perceive,  my  dear  colleague,  that  as  yet
this  country  is  behind  your  own  in  the  appreciation  of  our
science,  although  some  progress  has  been  made  in  this
direction  during  the  past  few  years.  We  shall,  therefore,
still  look  to  you  for  encouragement  and  assistance,  and
so  long  as  we  receive  your  sympathy  in  our  work,  we
shall  not  fail  to  labour.  We  shall  not,  of  course,  rest  until
a  formal  recognition  of  our  science  is  afforded  to  us  bv  the
British  Association,  and  I  know  we  may  rely  on  your
kind  assistance  to  promote  this  end.  AVe  are  confident
that  a  fall  recognition  must  come  in  time,  but  we  would
gladly  be  spared  the  contention  and  ill  feeling  which  are
both  prejudicial  and  derogatory  to  scientific  men.

I  will  not  enlarge  here,  my  dear  sir,  either  on  your
future  work  or  our  own.  May  you  long  -live  to  further
the  cause  of  science,  and  to  deserve  the  gratitude  and
esteem  of  your  fellow- workers,  and  especially  of

Your  faithful  and  obliged  Colleague,

JAMES  HUNT.

Ore  House,  near  Hastings,

November  28th,  1864.


EDITOR'S    PREFACE.


The  great  reputation  which  Professor  Vogt  enjoys  in
Germany  as  a  naturalist  and  as  an  independent  thinker,
and  the  favourable  reception  of  many  of  his  works*  by
the  scientific  men  of  Europe,  has  induced  the  Council  of
the  Anthropological  Society  of  London  to  publish,  with
the  sanction  of  the  author,  a  translation  of  his  recent  work
entitled  "  Vorlesungen  uher  den  Menschen,  seine  SteUung
in  der  Schopfung  und  in  der  Gesehichte  der  Erde."

*  As  none  of  Professor  Vogt's  works  have,  to  my  knowledge,  been  trans-
lated into  English,  it  may,  perhaps,  not  be  out  of  place  to  give  here  a  bio-
graphical sketch  of  our  author,  which  is  condensed  from  Meyer's  "  Grosses
Conversations  Lexicon :" —

Carl  Vogt,  the  eminent  naturalist  and  parliamentary  orator,  was  born  at
Giessen,  July  5,  1817.  He  received  his  education  first  at  the  Gymnasium,
and  subsequently  at  the  University  of  Giessen,  where  he  studied  chemistry
under  Liebig.  In  1835,  he  followed  his  father — the  celebrated  author  of
Pharmaco-Dynamics — to  Berne,  where  he  studied  physiology  under  Valentin.
Having  taken  his  degree  as  Doctor  of  Medicine,  he  repaired  to  Neufehatel,
where  he  pursued  the  study  of  zoology  and  geology  in  conjunction  with
Agassiz.  He  then,  on  the  recommendation  of  Liebig,  became  Professor  of
Zoology  in  the  University  of  Giessen,  which  he  left  on  the  breaking  out  of  the
revolution  of  1848.  Having  been  elected  a  member  of  the  German  Parliament,
where  he  always  voted  with  the  opposition,  he  fled,  after  the  failure  of  the
Baden  insurrection,  to  Switzerland,  settled  at  Berne,  until  he  was,  in  1852,
appointed  Professor  of  Geology  in  the  University  of  Geneva.  Besides
numerous  contributions  to  scientific  journals,  Professor  Vogt  is  the  author
of  many  sterling  works,  among  which  are  the  following : — Recherches  sur
Vembryogrnie  de  Salmoncs,  1843 ;  Im  Gebirg  und  auf  den  Gletschern,  1844 ;
Lehrbuch  der  Geologic  und  PetrefaMenkunde,  1846;  Ocean  und  Mittelmeer,
1847;  Untersuchungen  iiber  Thierstaaten,  1851;  Zoologische  Brief e :  Lehrbuch
der  Zoologie,  1853-51,  2  vols.;  Bilder  aus  dem  Thicrleben,  1852;  KoMerglaube
und  Wissenschaft,  1855;  Die  Kunslliche  Fischzucht,  1859 ;  Grundriss  der  Geol-
ogic, 18G0.


xii  editor's  preface.


One  of  the  great  objects  contemplated  by  the  An-
thropological Society  is  the  publication  in  the  English  lan-
guage of  all  important  foreign  works  bearing  on  the  present
state  of  the  science  of  man.  It  was  considered  by  the
Council  of  the  Society  that  this  work  afforded  a  good  illus-
tration of  the  popular  treatment  of  Anthropology  in  Ger-
many, and  that  it  contained  facts  so  useful  to  the  student
as  to  warrant  its  publication.  And  here  it  may  be  stated,
that  whilst  the  presence  of  so-called  sceptical  opinions  will
perse  never  induce  the  Anthropological  Society  to  publish  a
work  under  its  auspices,  neither  will  such  views,  according
to  the  catholic  principles  upon  which  the  society  is  founded,
prove  a  bar  to  the  introduction  to  the  public  of  a  work
otherwise  valuable.  It  is  especially  necessary  to  men-
tion this,  on  account  of  the  polemical  character  of  parts
of  the  present  work.  The  author  is  not  simply  a  fearless
writer,  but  his  tone  will,  I  imagine,  occasionally  be  offensive
both  to  the  general  and  scientific  reader.  I  had  some
conversation  with  Professor  Vogt  on  this  subject,  and  he
gave  his  sanction  to  such  alteration  being  made  as  I
thought  most  desirable.  I  accordingly  omitted  a  few  pas-
sages which  I  did  not  think  in  good  taste.  On  pro-
ceeding with  my  labour  I  found  that  to  cancel  all  the
passages  which  might  offend,  would  be  entirely  to
alter  the  character  of  the  work  ;  these  few  passages  have
therefore  been  printed  as  an  appendix.  I,  moreover,
felt  that  the  author  had  entrusted  me  with  a  most
dangerous  power,  which,  if  abused,  would,  render  the
translations  published  by  the  society  comparatively
useless.  The  Fellows  of  the  Anthropological  Society
of  London  are  happily  neither  women  nor  children  ;
and  1  have  not,  therefore,  felt  it  my  duty  to  encumber
the  work  with  notes  expressive  of  my  views  on  matters  of


editor's  preface.  xiii

opinion,  and  thus  become,  in  addition  to  editor,  critic  and
commentator.  If  the  work  had  not  been  published  under
the  auspices  of  the  society,  I  might  have  felt  it  my  duty  to
state  where  I  differed  from  the  author  ;  but  under  actual
circumstances,  I  have  only  done  so  when  I  considered  there
was  an  absolute  necessity,  or  where  the  discovery  of  new
facts  had  invalidated  the  author's  conclusions.

Nor  do  I  think  it  necessary  here  to  advance  my  own
views  respecting  some  Anthropological  questions  upon
which  this  work  treats.  I  need  only  say  that  I  am  willing
to  accept  such  of  the  facts  as  shall  on  future  inquiry
prove  to  be  true.  Possibly,  no  man  will  agree  with  all
the  conclusions  arrived  at  by  Professor  Vogt,  but  I  am
quite  ready  to  accept  such  of  his  opinions  as  can  be
logically  deduced  from  well-ascertained  facts.

While,  however,  I  hold  both  myself  and  the  society
entirely  free  from  any  responsibility  as  to  the  author's
asserted  facts  or  deductions,  I  should  not  be  doing  my
duty  as  Editor  if  I  were  not  to  make  some  excuse
for  the  attacks  made  by  him  on  theological  dogmas.  In
Germany  men  of  science  and  theologians  look  upon  one
another  with  a  mutual  contempt,  while  in  this  country
scientific  men  entertain  respect  for  theologians,  and  the
latter  fortunately  have  a  profound  admiration  for  students
of  science,  and  (when  properly  educated)  have  not  the
effrontery  to  combat  the  teachings  of  pure  inductive
science.  In  Germany,  too,  science  is  used  as  a  political
engine  to  overthrow  the  arrogant  assumptions  of  kingcraft
and  priestcraft,  from  the  evil  influence  of  which  we  now  in
Enoland  suffer  little.

If  M.  Vogt  had  been  an  Englishman  I  should  certainly
have  highly  censured  a  man  of  such  profound  and
extensive  views  for  wasting  his  energies  in   attacking


xiv  editor's  preface.

the   opinions  of  theologians  (as  such)  respecting  scien-
tific facts  or  scientific  deductions.

Sometimes  the  author  conveys  the  impression  that  he
writes  merely  with  a  view  of  destroying  belief  in  generally
received  theological  dogmas.  I  cannot  think  this  impres-
sion to  be  well  founded,  and  the  list  of  his  published
writings  will  show  that  M.  Vogt  has  really  been  a  hard-work-
ing scientific  student.  Scientific  men  naturally  have  a  con-
tempt for  those  who  study  theology  with  a  view  to  attack
the  deductions  of  men  of  science  :  but  it  is  equally  con-
temptible for  a  man  to  study  and  write  on  science  with
the  view  to  overthrow  theological  dogmas.  The  search
after  truth  is  the  only  object  the  scientific  student  ought
to  keep  in  view.

The  author  of  this  work  will  have  the  misfortune  to
find  opponents  amongst  those  who  agree  with,  and  those
who  differ  from,  him.  M.  Vogt  expresses  himself  with
very  great  freedom  when  he  happens  to  differ  from  any
of  his  scientific  brethren,  and  the  exposure  of  the  foibles
of  his  fellow- workers  seems  to  afford  him  infinite
pleasure  and  satisfaction.  But  all  who  know  the  author
will  entirely  acquit  him  of  malice  ;  and  his  conduct,  un-
like that  evinced  in  some  of  the  quarrels  of  scientific  men
in  this  country,  is  not  the  result  of  bad  temper.

At  the  same  time  I  cannot  but  express  my  regret  that
the  accomplished  author  has  spoken  of  our  much  respected
countryman, Professor  Owen,  in  the  manner  he  has  done.  I
equally  regret  his  remarks  on  Dr.  Pruner-Bey  and  M.  A.  de
Quatrefages,  and  dissent  from  his  interpretation  of  the
conduct  of  Dr.  Falconer  respecting  the  Abbeville  jaw.  I
think,  also,  that  Prof.  Vogt  has  not  sufficiently  acknow-
ledged his  obligations  to  many  English  men  of  science,
amongst  whom  I  would  especially  name  Mr.  Prestwich,


editor's   PREFACE.  XV

Sir  Charles  Lyell,  and  Mr.  John  Evans.  Had  the  work
assumed  a  more  systematic  form,  this,  perhaps,  would
not  have  happened.

In  Lecture  X  it  will  be  seen  that  the  author  has  un-
fortunately accepted  the  wild  speculation  of  Professor
Huxley  respecting  the  resemblance  of  the  Neanderthal
calvaria  to  that  of  the  Australian.  The  important  observ-
ations of  Dr.  Barnard  Davis  respecting  the  synostotic  con-
dition of  this  fragment  bid  fair  to  solve  the  question  by
showing  that  the  Neanderthal  skull  is  merely  an  abnormal
relic,  and  that  all  the  theories  founded  thereon  as  to
the  extreme  savage  state  of  the  primitive  inhabitants  of
Europe  are  utterly  worthless.

Prof.  Vogt  acknowledges  that,  to  a  great  extent,  he  is
willing  to  accept  the  conclusions  of  England's  great  modern
naturalist,  Charles  Darwin  ;  but,  unlike  many  of  that  pro-
found observer's  followers  in  this  country,  he  entirely
repudiates  the  opinions  respecting  man's  unity  of  origin
which  a  section  of  Darwinites  in  this  country  are  now
endeavouring  to  promulgate.  The  author's  views  on  this
point  I  hold,  in  the  present  state  of  science,  to  be
especially  sound  and  philosophical :  and  I  hope  that  this
work  may  help  to  counteract  the  inconsistent  and  an-
tiquated doctrines  now  being  taught  by  one  of  our
government  Professors  respecting  the  small  distinction
which  exists  between  the  members  of  the  genus  Homo.

Nor  is  the  author,  like  some  of  our  fellow  countrymen,
afraid  to  accept  the  logical  consequences  of  his  opinions
respecting  transmutation  and  development.  On  the  con-
trary, none  can  charge  M.  Vogt  with  ambiguity  as  to  his
real  sentiments.  From  his  opponents  I  hope  he  will
receive  the  credit  of  being  honest  and  open  in  the  ex-
pression of  his  opinions,  although  few  may  agree  with


xvi  editor's  preface.

the  tone  he  adopts.  I  think,  moreover,  M.  Vogt  is  a  less
dangerous  foe  to  the  generally  received  theological
opinions  of  the  day,  than  some  other  men  of  science,  who
express  themselves  with  more  reserve,  but  with  far  less
honesty.

The  scope  of  the  present  work  is  great,  and  the
author  treats  his  subject  with  such  a  comprehen-
sive grasp,  and  in  such  an  interesting  manner,  that  he
can  scarcely  fail  to  elicit  the  admiration  of  both  friend
and  foe.

It  must  be  strictly  borne  in  mind  that  this  work  is  not
put  forward  as  a  text-book  on  the  subject,  but  simply  as
a  specimen  of  the  popular  treatment  of  Anthropology  in
Germany,  and,  in  my  opinion,  it  contrasts  very  favour-
ably with  anything  of  a  similar  nature  which  has  ap-
peared in  this  country.

The  woodcuts  are  chiefly  those  used  in  the  original,  the
exceptions  being  a  drawing  of  the  Abbeville  jaw,  which
in  the  German  version  was  taken  from  the  sketch  of  M.
Oswald  Dimpre,  but  which  has  now  been  cut  from
a  photograph  presented  to  the  Anthropological  Society
by  M.  A.  de  Quatrefages.  The  delineation  of  the  sutures
in  the  woodcut  of  the  Neanderthal  calvaria  in  Lecture
XIII,  has  also  been  altered  to  agree  with  the  description
sent  bv  Dr.  Fuhlrott  to  Dr.  Barnard  Davis.

In  the  present  translation,  the  German  text  (with  the
exception  of  some  corrections  and  additions  by  the  author)
has  been  followed  as  closely  as  possible  :  but  there  were
some  forms  of  expression,  so  utterly  intractable  when  at-
tempted to  be  rendered  into  English,  that  when  intelligible,
they  have  been  sometimes  adopted  in  preference  to  the
removal  of  all  traces  of  foreign  idiom  and  colouring.  In
works  of  this  description  it  is    advisable   to  render,  not


editor's  preface.  xvii

merely  the  substance  of  the  author's  opinion,  but  also,
to  some  extent,  the  mode  in  which  he  conveys  them.

In  conclusion,  I  would  beg  to  remind  the  reader  that  the
present  translation  is  one  of  a  large  and  extensive  series
of  works,  some  of  which  contain  opinions  diametrically
opposed  to  the  conclusions  of  this  book.  The  Council  of
the  Anthropological  Society,  having  allotted  to  each  Fel-
low who  is  willing  to  undertake  the  task,  a  volume  for
translation,  it  has  afforded  me  great  pleasure  to  assist  in
such  a  vast  project,  which  cannot  fail  to  give  considerable
impulse  to  the  study  of  Anthropology  in  this  country.
I  am  aware  there  are  some  men  in  England  who  totally
object  to  this  free-trade  in  science,  and  who  believe
themselves  authorities  on  certain  scientific  questions,
and  that  no  one  else  should  dare  to  enter  upon  what  they
consider  to  be  their  preserves.  I  hope  that  this  book
may  help  to  demolish  such  feudal  ideas,  which  are  totally
unworthy  of  the  lover  of  truth  and  science.

I  hope  that  my  readers  will  agree  with  me  that  Prof.
Vogt  has  produced  a  most  interesting,  suggestive,  and
useful  volume  ;  and  one  which  I  trust  may  assist  in  the
elucidation  of  some  of  the  great  problems  of  Anthro-
pological Science.

4>,  St.  Martin's  Place,  Trafalgar  Square,
London.     December  1st,  1864.


a


CONTENTS.


PAOE

Dedication      -  -  -  -  .  .  -v

Editor's  Preface  -  -  -  -  -  -       xi

Contents  -----._     xix

Author's  Preface  -  -  -  -  -  l

LECTUEE  I.

Introduction. — Difficulties  of  the  subject. — Materials. — Collections  of
Crania. — Skeletons. — Anatomy  of  the  Eaces. — Man  to  be  studied
like  any  other  Mammal. — Objections  of  Theologians. — Morton  and
Bachman. — Comparative  Study  of  Domestic  Animals. — Antiquity
of  the  Human  Species. — Objections  of  Naturalists. — Eesearches  of
Boucher  de  Perthes  -  -  -  -  -      5

LECTUEE  II,

Method  of  investigation. — Mixed  Types. — Average  Man  and  Skull. —
Use  of  the  French  Metrical  System. — Scherzer  and  Schwarz's
System  of  Measurement. — Craniometry. — Fixed  Points  in  the
Skull. — Choice  of  the  Thinnest  Places. — Busk's  System  of  Mea-
surement.— Aeby's  System. — Horizontal  and  Vertical  Planes. — Ee-
lation  of  the  Skull  to  the  Face. — Camper's  Facial  Angle. — Mea-
surement of  the  Base  and  Vault  of  the  Cranium. — Welcker's  •
System  of  Measurement. — Cranial  Angle  j  Skull ;  Net. — Von  Baer's
Nomenclature-  for  Cranial  Forms. — Coronal  View :  Longheads,
Medium  Heads,  and  Short  Heads. — Profile  View:  Prognathism
and  Orthognathism. — Anterior  and  Posterior  View  :  Tower  Heads,
Pyramidal  Heads,  and  Eoof  Heads. — Scherzer-Schwarz's  Scheme.
— Tables  of  Cranial  Measurements  after  Virchow,  Welcker,  Von
Baer,  and  Busk       -  -  -  .  .  -19

LECTUEE  III.

Pictorial  representations. — Ethnic  portraits  generally  Caricatures. —
Photographic  Drawings. — Perspective  delineations. — Geometrical
Drawings  after  Lucae. — Instruments  recpiired. — Casts. — Casts  of
the  internal  Cranial  surface. — Proportions. — Sexual  differences  in
the  formation  of  the  Cranium. — Examination  of  the  Brain. —
Weight. — Weight  of  the  Brain  in  relation  to  the  body. — Estima-
tion of  the  Cranial  Capacity. — Method  and  results. — Broca's
researches  on  Parisian  Skulls. — Increase  of  Cranial  Capacity  in
relation  to  Civilisation  ...  -       7:5

6


XX  CONTENTS.

LECTUEE  IV.

Structure  of  the  Brain. — Elementary  Constituents  of  Brain-substance.
— Cerebellum. — The  primitive  Brain. — The  Cerebrum  the  seat  of
intellectual  activity. — Localisation  of  individual  functions. — Ap-
plication to  Phrenology. — The  Cerebral  Lobes. — The  Convolutions :
their  relation  to  the  Intellect  and  the  Size  of  the  Body. — The
development  of  the  Convolutions,  and  their  arrangement  according
to  Gratiolet  and  Wagner. — Huschke's  Opinions. — Comparative  In-
vestigation of  various  Cerebral  Forms. — The  Cerebral  Cavities. —
Dispute  about  them,  especially  in  England        -  -  -      93

LECTUEE  V.

Examination  of  other  parts  of  the  body. — The  Pelvis  :  the  Extremities.
— The  Skin ;  its  coloration,  structure,  perspiration,  and  hair. — The
soft  parts. — The  Face. — Eyes,  nose,  mouth,  lips,  cheeks,  ears,  and
chin. — Internal  organs         -  -  -  -  -      118

LECTUEE  VI.

Comparison  of  the  Structure  of  Man  with  that  of  the  Ape. — Differ-
ences. —  Defencelessness.  —  Erect  position.  —  Equilibrium  of  the
Skull. — Free  mobility  of  the  Anterior  Extremities. — Formation  of
the  Pelvis. — Proportions  of  several  parts  of  the  body. — Proportion
of  the  Cranium  to  the  Face. — Development  of  the  Jaws. — Propor-
tion of  the  Cranial  Angles. — Cubic  capacity  of  the  skulls  of  Men,
Idiots,  and  Apes. — Herr  Bischoff  and  the  Idiots. — Nose,  inter-
maxillary Bone,  and  Teeth. — Signification  of  the  Diastemata. —
Structure  of  the  Pelvis. — Proportions  of  the  Limbs. — Hands  and
Feet. — Differences  in  the  Form  of  the  Brain. — Dispute  between
Owen  and  Huxley. — Eesearches  of  Gratiolet  and  Wagner. — Eela-
tions  of  the  Transition  Convolutions  and  the  Operculum. — Devel-
opment of  the  Brain. — Form  of  the  Brain  in  Microcephali.  -    132

LECTUEE  VII.

Comparison  of  Negro  and  German. — Bodily  proportions  of  the  Negro. —
Skull. — Pelvis. — Proportions  of  extremities  :  arm,  hand,  leg,  foot. —
Internal  Parts. — Brain. — Face. — Deviations  from  the  normal  type.
— Differences  of  Colour. — Insensibility  of  the  Negro. — Babies,  and
their  development. — Eemarkable  change  about  the  period  of  pu-
berty.— Mental  Inferiority  of  the  Negro. — Constancy  of  differ-
ences.— Eesemblance  to  the  Brute. — Intermediate  form  between
Man  and  Ape. — Microcephali. — The  Aztecs        -  -  -    171

LECTUEE  VIII.

Comparative  Examination  of  two  species  of  monkey,  Cebus  albifrons
and  Cebus  apella. — Skull  and  Brain. — Other  parts. — Affinities  in
Nature. — Families. — Definition  of   Species,  Variety,  and  Eace. —


CONTENTS.  Xxi

Inbreeding  of  Eaces  and  Species. — Mutability  of  Species. — Classi-
fication of  Mankind. — Eelation  to  the  Ape. — The  Human  Kingdom
according  to  Geoffroy  Saint-Hilaire  and  Quatrefages. — Objections    203

LECTUKE  IX.

Primeval  period  of  Mankind. — Discovery  of  Human  Eemains  associated
with  those  of  Extinct  Animals. — Cuvier's  Objections. — Human  Ee-
mains in  Caverns. — Formation  of  Caverns. — Stalactites. — Osseous
breccia. — Preservation  of  Bones. — Mode  in  which  the  Caverns  were
filled. — The  Extinct  Cavern  Inhabitants. — Extinct  and  Living
Species. — Extinction  of  some  species  within  the  Historical  Period.
— Schmerling's  Discoveries. — The  Cavern  of  Engis. — Caverns  of
Lombrive  and  Lherme. — Grottoes  of  Arcy. — Grotto  in  the  Neander
Valley. — Grotto  of  Aurignac  ....    232

LECTUEE  X.

Human  Eemains  from  Denise,  near  Puy. — Fraudulent  speculations. —
Diluvium  in  the  Somme  Valley. — Flint  Implements. — Human  Jaw.
— Diluvium  of  Joinville. — Diluvium  of  Hoxne. — Brazilian  Caverns.
— Alluvium  of  North  America. — Civilisation  of  Primitive  Peoples.
— Skulls  of  Engis  and  the  Neander  Valley. — Proportions  of  these
Crania  compared  to  those  of  living  races  of  Mankind  and  Apes      -    262

LECTUEE  XL

The  Diluvial  Period. — Eevolutions  and  Transitions. — Glacial  forma-
tion.— Boulder-Clay. — Old  Alluvium. — Terminal  Moraines  and  Er-
ratic Blocks. — Slate-Coal,  and  its  Formation. — Ice-sea  and  Glacial
Formation  in  the  North — In  England. — Table  of  Diluvial  Strata.
— Length  of  Time. — Chronological  Calculations  in  the  Deltas  of  the
Mississippi  and  the  Nile. — Impossibility  of  a  Universal  Deluge.     -    308

LECTUEE  XII.

Stone  Period  in  the  North. — Eefuse-heaps. — Peat-bogs. — Graves  in
Denmark  and  Mecklenburg. — Grotto  of  Chauvaux. — Pile-works  on
the  Swiss  lakes  and  moors. — Civilisation  of  the  Stone  Period. —
Agriculture  of  the  Pile-builders. — Skull  of  Meilen. — Pile-works
in  Italy. — Chronological  Calculations  of  Morlot,  Gillieron,  and
Troyon. — Pious  Fancies  of  the  latter  ...    333

LECTUEE  XIII.

Distinctive  Characters  of  the  Cavern-  and  Stone-Period. — Skulls  of
Denmark. — Arching  of  the  Forehead. — Apostle-Skulls  of  Switzer-
land, and  their  Age. — The  Jaw  of  Moulin-Quignon.— Skulls  of
Lombrive  compared  with  those  of  the  present  Basques. — Danish
Stone-Skulls  compared  with  the  present  Lapps. — Skull  of  Meilen. —
Eelation  to  the  present  Swiss  Skulls. — Eomanic  Short-Heads. —


XX11  CONTENTS.

Relation  to  the  Etruscans. — The  Oldest  Domestic  Animals. — The
Dog. — Swine. — Wild  Hog,  and  Marsh-Hog. — Horned  Cattle  :  Urus,
Bison,  long-fronted,  and  curved-horned  Cattle. — The  Sheep. —
The  Goat.— The  Horse.— Cultivated  Plants        -  -  -    37C

LECTURE  XIV.

Transmission  of  Characters. — Natural  Races. — Theory  of  Nathusius.
— Objections  to  it. — Distinction  between  Races  and  Species. —
Transformation  of  Varieties  into  Races  and  real  Species. — Influ-
ence of  Time. — Raceless  Animals. — Mongrels  and  Hybrids. — Their
Propagation.  — Wolf-Dogs.  —  Buck-Sheep.  —  Rabbit-Hares.  —Their
Breeding. — Conclusions  and  Inferences  from  the  preceding  facts    -    402

LECTURE  XV.

The  Tradition  of  Adam. — Geographical  Distribution  of  Human  Races.
— Constancy  of  their  Characters  in  the  course  of  time. — Pliability
of  Races. — Development  of  the  Skull  by  Civilisation. — Degenera-
tion of  Races. — An  Example  from  Ireland. — Modifications  of  Ne-
groes in  America,  Yankees,  Jews. — Time  requisite  for  such  modi-
fications.— Intermixture  of  Races. — Differences  in  Prolificacy  in
various  Mongrels. — Intermixture  of  White  Races  between  them-
selves.— Mulattoes  in  South  Carolina  and  Louisiana. — Hombron's
Remarks. — Indians  and  Whites. — Whites  and  Malays. — Whites
and  Polynesians. — Whites  and  Australians. — Inferences  regarding
the  Original  Diversity  of  the  Human  Races,  and  the  Products  of  '
Intermixture. — Direct  Divine  Influence,  according  to  Dr.  Sagot    -    423

LECTURE  XVI.

Origin  of  Organic  Nature. — Differences  between  the  Organic  Kingdoms
and  their  sub-Divisions. — Origin  of  Organic  Cells. — Theory  of
Darwin. — My  change  of  Opinion. — Creation  of  Species. — Muta-
bility of  Type. — Consequences  of  this  Theory. — Adaptation  and
Fixation  of  Types. — Practical  Conception  of  Species. — Variation
in  Adaptation  and  Slowness  of  Transformation.  —  Present  and
Former  Transition  Types. — Cebus. — Bears. — The  Greek  Monkey
of  the  Tertiary  Period. — Exclusive  Views  of  Cuvier  and  Agassiz. —
Rarity  of  Transition  Forms. — Progression  and  Retrogression. —
Fundamental  Plan  in  the  Structure  of  Animals. — No  single  Original
Organic  Form. — Derivation  of  the  Human  from  the  Ape  Type. —
Derivation  of  the  three  Anthropoid  Apes  from  three  different
Families. — The  various  original  Human  Races  must  be  derived
from  different  Ape  Families. — Lamentations  of  Moralists  -    443


AUTHOR'S    PREFACE.


One  of  the  objects  of  the  Useful-Knowledge  Society  of  the
canton  of  Neufchatel  is  to  advance  popular  education  by  means
of  public  lectures,  which  are  delivered  during  the  winter,  not
merely  in  Neufchatel — the  chief  town — but  also  in  the  in-
dustrious Jura,  in  Lode,  Chaux-de-fonds,  and  the  valley  of
Travers,  as  well  as  in  the  villages  on  the  wine-producing  slopes
of  the  lake,  in  all  which  places  they  are  attended  by  intelligent
and  attentive  audiences.  Natural  science,  the  history  of  Switzer-
land, political  economy,  and  social  life,  are  the  chief  subjects
treated  of.  In  localities  where  spacious  rooms  cannot  be  ob-
tained, the  use  of  the  church  is  readily  granted;  nor  has  it
occurred  to  any  one  to  consider  this  a  desecration  any  more
than  the  Icelander  objects  to  the  stranger  finding  a  night's
shelter  in  the  church.  The  success  of  this  Useful-Knowledge
Society,  it  is  true,  only  dates  from  the  period  when  Neuf-
chatel, having  ceased  to  be  a  Prussian  principality,  became  a
canton  of  the  Swiss  Confederation.  It  is  very  probable  that,  in
that  happy  period  when  a  Prussian  general,  with  a  few  knights
of  the  red  eagle  governed  the  countiy,  the  lamentations  of
those,  who  condemn  every  result  of  science  which  does  not
agree  with  the  ancient  Jewish  lawbook,  would  have  prevailed
and  suppressed  this  society.

The  invitation  of  the  Society  to  deliver  some  lectures  on
subjects  at  present  engaging  my  attention,  induced  me  to  give
to  my  investigations  the  present  form.  The  subject-matter  is
connected  with  those  studies  which,  though  with  many  interrup-
tions, I  have  continued  since  the  time  of  the  struggles  to  which
Kohlerglaube  und  Wissenschaft*  owes  its  origin.    I  cannot  deny

*  Superstition  and  Science,  a  controversial  work  by  the  author,  which  has
passed  through  four  editions  in  Germany. — Editor.

B


2  author's  preface.

that  since  that  time  some  of  my  views  have  undergone  a
partial  change,  not  on  the  main  points,  but  only  upon  second-
ary questions,  which  in  their  very  change  but  confirm  former
results.

Whilst  preparing  the  first  part  of  these  lectures  for  publica-
tion, I  had  an  opportunity  of  making  use  of  two  recent  works
treating  of  the  same  subject.  The  one,  Sir  Charles  LyelPs  Anti-
quity of  Man,  the  other,  Professor  Huxley's  instructive  and  at-
tractive treatise,  Man's  Place  in  Nature.  Ly  ell's  book  afforded
me  the  pleasure  of  seeing  the  Glacial  theory,  which  at  G  ottingen
is  to  be  buried  again,  revived  and  acknowledged  by  such  high
authority.  There  is  also  found  in  it  a  collation,  though  a  some-
what imperfect  one,  of  facts  which  undeniably  establish  the
high  antiquity  of  man  upon  the  globe.  I  have  been  enabled  in
the  second  part  of  this  work  to  offer  additional  facts,  owing  to
the  steady  support  of  my  scientific  friends,  Aeby,  Claparede,
Desor,  Fuhlrott,  Gastaldi,  His,  Huxley,  Morlot,  Pictet,  Quatre-
fages,  Spring,  Valentin,  Broca,  Busk,  Collomb,  Keller,  Messi-
komer,  Schild,  and  Schwab.  It  was,  moreover,  my  good  fortune
to  be  permitted  to  examine  and  to  take  the  outlines  of  the  only
two  perfect  skulls  which  have  hitherto  been  found  associated
with  the  reindeer  and  the  aurochs  in  caverns,  I  am  indebted
for  the  use  of  these  invaluable  relics  to  the  kindness  of  their
discoverer  and  owner,  Dr.  Garrigou,  of  Toulouse,  who  was  so
obliging  as  to  bring  the  skulls  to  Geneva  himself.

As  the  printing  of  this  work,  which  was  published  in  Ger-
many in  parts,  was  somewhat  delayed,  opportunity  was  afforded
me  to  correct  it  and  render  it  more  complete  in  several  parti-
culars, partly  by  further  researches  of  my  oavu,  partly  by  further
communications  from  my  friends.  The  additions  and  remarks
thus  rendered  necessary  in  the  German  edition  have  been  in-
corporated in  the  text  of  the  English  translation.

But  during  this  time  attacks  have  not  been  wanting — we  must
always  be  prepared  for  them.  If  they  grow  out  of  a  scientific
soil,  they  cannot  but  be  useful,  by  laying  bare  weak  points  and
stimulating  to  their  correction ;  but  if  they  proceed  from  that
soil,  from  which  the  lilies  of  innocence  and  the  palms  of  con-
ciliation  should  spring  up,  where,  however,  nothing  but  the


author's  preface.  3

marsh-trefoil  of  credulity  and  the  poisonous  water-hemlock  of
calumniation  grow,  they  deserve  no  attention.

M.  Frederic  de  Rougement,  one  of  the  champions  of  Prussia,
in  Neufchateh,  has  relieved  his  oppressed  heart  by  an  in-
dignant outcry,  under  the  title,  Man  and  the  Ape,  or  Modern
Materialism.  This  publication  has,  I  believe,  been  translated
into  German,  and  published  by  the  Missionary  Society  of  Neuf-
chatel.  Whoever  takes  an  interest  in  it,  may  read  the  history  of
a  storm  in  a  tumbler  of  water,  and  how  the  indignation  of  the
faithful  of  Neufchatel,  caused  by  my  lectures,  subsided  after
hearing  the  prelections  of  Rougemont.

Rougemont  and  myself  are  old  acquaintances.  More  than
twenty  years  ago  I  saw  him  mount  the  rostrum — ' '  the  Deluge"
under  his  arm — to  refute  Dubois  de  Montpereux  and  Agassiz,
who  looked  upon  Noah's  flood  as  a  local  phenomenon  of
Armenia.  I  then  heard  him  at  a  public  lecture  explain  the
creation  of  Eve  from  Adam's  rib,  and  why  God,  in  his  infinite
wisdom,  had  selected  the  rib  in  particular,  and  no  other  part
of  Adam's  body.  "  He  took  no  piece  of  the  head — woman
would  then  have  had  too  much  intelligence ;  he  took  no  piece
of  the  legs — woman  would  have  been  too  much  on  the  move ;
he  took  a  piece  near  the  heart,  that  woman  should  be  all
love"  !

It  would,  perhaps,  have  required  more  profound  inves-
tigations than  Rougemont  can  command  to  refute  my  views
from  a  sc  entitle  standpoint.  He  preferred,  therefore,  to  make
an  attack  on  Materialism  on  general  grounds.  The  description
of  the  monstrous  doctrines  of  this  modern  aberration  is  taken
from  the  book  of  a  certain  Boehner.  At  first  I  imagined  this
to  be  a  misprint  for  Buclmer,  when,  to  my  astonishment^  I
found  that  it  was  the  production  of  a  parson,  directed  against
Materialism.  This  appears  to  me  as  if  one  were  to  take  Luther's
doctrines  from  the  works  of  Eck  and  then  proceed  to  confute
them.

It  is  written  altogether  in  the  old  manner.  The  world,
history,  morality,  the  whole  structure  of  moral  order  perishes —
just  as  during  the  ages  of  superstition ;  only  rattling  skeletons
have  by  M.  de  Rougemont  been  advantageously  replaced  by

B  2


4  author's  preface.

offensive  corpses,  which  the  Materialists  trade  in  and  make
manure  of.     I  see  no  other  difference.

M.  Schleiden,  who  so  successfully  combated  Materialism  in
Dresden,  that  he  converted  his  whole  audience  to  it,  also  felt
bound  to  read  a  lecture  on  man.  In  spite  of  all  the  trouble  I
took,  I  derived  no  instruction  from  it,  merely  finding  in  it  some
newspaper  paragraphs  seasoned  with  Fries'  philosophical  sauce.

The  reader  will  observe  that  I  have  strictly  confined  myself
to  the  animal  kingdom,  and  specially  to  such  animals  as  stand
next  to  man,  and  have  entirely  omitted  the  vegetable  kingdom,
with  which  I  confess  I  am  not  so  conversant.     Had  I  included
plants,  I  certainly  should  not  have  neglected  to  mention  two
most   important   treatises   which   have    recently   appeared   in
favour    of  Darwin's    theory.      I    allude    to  A.   de   Candolle's
Treatise  on  Oaks,  and  Naudin's  prize  essay  on  Hybridity  in  the
Vegetable  Kingdom.    Both  arrive  at  the  conclusion  that  species
have  arisen,  and  still  arise,  from  each  other  by  modification.
Naudin  expressly  states,  that  variety,  race,  and   species  are
merely  different  terms  designating  progressive  changes,  the
intimate  connection  of  which  is  undeniable.     When  one  of  the
greatest  experts  in  the  investigation  of  species,  after  a  most
careful  examination  of  the  various  species  of-  oak,   and  sup-
ported by  colossal  materials,  arrives  at  the  same  conclusion  as
an  industrious  naturalist  who  has  tried  thousands  of  crossings,
and  specially  devoted  himself  to  the  production  of  hybrids,  the
Darwinian  theory  must  be  more  than  an  ingenious  dream,  and
less  destructive  of  science  than  certain  zealots  are  apt  to  believe.
The  Anthropological  Society  of  London,  on  the  publication  of
the  first  part  of  these  lectures,  did  me  the  honour  of  nominating
me  one  of  its  Corresponding  Members,  and  subsequently  ex-
pressed a  wish  that  the  English  edition  of  the  book  should
appear  under  its  auspices.     To  this  Society,  which  prosecutes
important  scientific  subjects  with  such  great  zeal,  I  feel  bound
to  express  my  warm  thanks,  and  more  especially  to  its  Presi-
dent, Dr.  James  Hunt,  and  its  Foreign  Secretary,  Mr.  Alfred
Higgins.

C.  VOGT.
London,  April  4th,  1864.


LECTURE     I.

Introduction. — Difficulties  of  the  subject. — Materials. — Collections  of  Crania.
— Skeletons. — Anatomy  of  the  Races. — Man  to  be  studied  like  any  other
Mammal. — Objections  of  Theologians. — Morton  and  Bachman. — Compa-
rative Study  of  Domestic  Animals. — Antiquity  of  the  Human  Species. —
Objections  of  Naturalists. — Researches  of  Boucher  de  Perthes.

Gentlemen, — Surely  there  is  not  a  more  inciting  subject
than  the  study  of  man  himself.  Involuntarily  we  apply  to  all
our  actions  the  knowledge  of  man,  long  ago  insisted  upon  by
the  oracle  of  Delphi.  It  is  the  starting-point  from  which
we  proceed,  and  the  standard  by  which  we  measure  the  phe-
nomena occurring  in  nature.  But  as  it  frequently  happens
to  the  inhabitant  of  any  particular  region,  that  he  neglects
the  curiosities  of  the  spot  where  he  was  born  and  nurtured,
to  which  the  stranger  pays  especial  attention;  so  most  per-
sons neglect  to  fathom  their  own  nature,  and  thus  fail  to
establish  a  basis  for  further  progress.  There  are  but  few  who
search  out  man ;  not,  indeed,  like  the  ancient  philosopher,
lantern  in  hand,  and  only  in  the  market-place,  but  everywhere ;
and  there  are  still  fewer  who  dare  to  give  a  candid  and  unvar-
nished account  of  the  results  of  their  investigations.  Most
men  look  upon  themselves  as  incarnations  of  the  generic
idea  man,  and  remain  under  the  delusion  that  they  know
themselves.  The  same  phenomenon  occurs  in  the  history  of
science.  In  ancient  times,  the  science  of  man  was  limited  to
the  inquiry  into  some  particular  functions  of  his  organism  and
the  action  of  the  brain.  The  material  basis  was  only  occa-
sionally and  superficially  considered,  like  the  region  in  which
man  lived.  It  is  only  with  great  trouble  that  we  can  collect
from  ancient  authors  a  few  scattered  notices,  which  may  throw
some  light  on  questions  now  deemed  of  the  greatest  import-
ance. The  opening  of  a  single  grave  containing  a  well-pre-
served skeleton,  arms,  and  ornaments,  affords  more  information


LECTURE    I.

as  regards  the  physical  and  mental  condition  of  the  people  to
which  the  exhumed  belonged,  than  ten  authors  of  antiquity
who  may  have  described  that  people.  It  is  only  by  degrees
that  we  have  been  led  to  search  for  a  proper  basis  on  which  to
found  the  science  of  man.

The  object  which  I  have  proposed  to  myself  in  these  lectures
is,  to  make  you  acquainted  with  the  latest  results  obtained
from  the  study  of  the  natural  history  of  man,  with  his  relation  to
other  animals,  his  antiquity  upon  the  globe,  and  the  primitive
state  of  the  human  species.  Many  of  these  questions  I  have
already  aphoristically  touched  upon  in  a  polemical  treatise,
published  some  years  ago.  If  this  treatise  had  no  other  merit,
it  at  any  rate  opened  questions  which  are  intentionally  passed
over  in  silence,  or  made  party  questions.  As  is  well  known,
an  Athenian  legislator  imposed  a  fine  on  any  citizen  who  did
not  profess  to  belong  to  some  political  party.  Similarly  there
occur  periods  in  the  history  of  science,  when  public  opinion
forces  the  inquirer  to  espouse  a  party,  and  neglect  is  followed
by  punishment.  For  inquiry  fer  se,  yielding  neither  results
nor  increase  of  the  knowledge  of  mankind,  seems  to  me  as
little  meritorious  as  the  digging  of  a  hypochondriac  which  has
for  its  sole  object  to  equalise  the  circulation  of  his  blood.  It
is  only  when  digging  the  soil  leads  to  the  production  of  fruit,
that  it  becomes  meritorious.

The  questions  I  intend  to  discuss  offer  peculiar  difficulties,
to  which  I  must  draw  your  attention,  lest  from  the  paucity  of
the  results  you  should  hastily  draw  the  conclusion  that  insuf-
ficient pains  have  been  taken  to  elucidate  certain  points.  The
study  of  the  natural  history  of  man,  like  a  giant  with  a  thousand
ai-ms,  embraces  almost  every  branch  of  human  knowledge,  and
the  deeper  wo  penetrate,  the  more  intricate  appear  the  paths
which  may  lead  to  the  goal.  The  subject  is  not  man,  con-
sidered as  an  abstract  being :  the  inquiry  extends  to  millions
of  men  scattered  over  the  earth,  their  physical  peculiarities,
their  present  and  former  relations  to  each  other,  and  stretches
back  to  a  time  when  man  scarcely  left  more  traces  of  his  ex-
istence than  the  savage  beast  which  inhabited  the  same  region.
From  the  results  obtained  we  must,  then,  draw  inferences  con-


LECTURE    I.  7

cerning  the  relations  of  the  races  of  mankind  to  each  other,
their  intermixture,  their  descent  and  propagation,  their  relation
to  other  creatures,  especially  to  the  higher  mammals ;  and
also,  the  changes  which  air,  climate,  and  mode  of  life,  have  pro-
duced in  man  in  his  struggle  for  existence.

It  is  clear  that  the  difficulties  attending  an  investigation  of
this  kind  are  very  great,  so  that  in  spite  of  all  efforts  we  are
only  on  the  threshold  of  our  inquiry.  Man  is  scattered  all
over  the  globe,  and  everywhere,  even  in  the  remotest  regions,
numerous  intermixtures  have  taken  place,  by  which  the  pos-
sibly original  purity  has  been  more  or  less  impaired.  More-
over, a  science,  if  it  is  to  draw  unimpeachable  inferences,  re-
quires fundamental  principles  mathematically  certain,  and  these
can,  in  this  our  field,  be  but  very  slowly  obtained.  Dii-ect  inves-
tigation can  only  be  applied  to  individuals.  If  we  have  to  deter-
mine the  characteristics  of  a  tribe,  a  people,  a  race,  a  species,  we
can  only  ascertain  them  by  taking  the  mean  of  numerous  observa-
tions and  measurements  of  individuals.  We  all  know  that  the
characteristic  peculiarities  of  a  people,  the  Germans  and  French,
for  instance,  cannot  be  determined  from  a  superficial  acquaint-
ance with  single  individuals  at  a  table  d'hote,  but  that  a  long
intercourse  with  all  the  various  classes  of  a  nation  is  requisite
for  the  formation  of  a  proper  estimate.  And  yet  here  we  have
only  an  individual  perception  of  peculiarities  for  which  there  is
no  certain  standard,  the  estimate  of  which  frequently  depends
on  the  disposition  of  the  observer.  But  when,  as  in  our  case,
we  have  to  do  with  physical  peculiarities,  actual  measurement
comes  into  play,  and  it  alone  can  lead  to  useful  results.  The
first  step  is  to  examine  the  whole  physical  conformation,  espe-
cially the  most  characteristic  parts ;  head,  skull,  brain,  hand,
and  foot ;  not  in  a  few,  but  in  a  great  many  individuals,  and  in  this
way  to  eliminate  individual  peculiarities,  and  give  prominence  to
such  as  are  common  to  the  great  majority.  Now,  anyone  who
knows  the  difficulties  we  meet  with  in  this  respect,  even  in  our
civilised  countries,  where  the  materials  are  at  hand,  will  readily
conceive  that  they  are  increased  when  such  inquiries  are  to  be
carried  on  in  distant  regions  among  savage  nations.  Quetelet,
the  eminent  director  of  the  Brussels  Observatory,  has  been  occu-


8  LECTURE    I.

pied  many  years  in  investigating,  with  meter  and  balance,  the
laws  of  human  growth  in  Belgium,  and  in  thus  constructing,  so
to  speak,  what  he  calls  "  the  average  man,"  as  obtained  from  the
mean  of  a  great  number  of  individual  observations.  And  yet
these  measurements  and  weights  apply  only  to  a  small  stock,  in-
habiting but  a  little  corner  of  the  globe,  and  exhibiting  but
few  of  the  relative  proportions  of  the  bodily  organs.

Very  recently,  Professor  Welcker  of  Halle  has  attempted  to
construct,  from  a  comparatively  small  number  of  crania,  the
normal  skull  of  the  Germanic  stock,  or  in  other  words,  to  find
out  the  peculiarities  belonging  to  most  German  skulls ;  and
though  thirty  normal  male,  and  as  many  female  skulls  have
been  measured  and  registered,  still  this  number  is  not  sufficient
to  yield  an  absolutely  certain  average.  Recollect,  now,  that
investigations  of  the  same  nature  as  these,  which  required
years,  though  confined  to  a  small  district,  are  to  bo  extended
to  all  parts  of  the  globe,  with  a  view  to  the  acquisition  of
such  data  as  we  possess  with  respect  to  Belgian  recruits  and
German  skulls,  and  contrast  with  this  the  inadequacy  of  the
means  we  at  present  possess  of  obtaining  the  materials  needful
for  our  inquiry.  The  travelling  naturalist,  even  when  he  sails
in  the  Novara,  under  the  Austrian  flag,  may  congratulate
himself  if  here  and  there  soldiers,  porters,  sailors,  or  loose
women  offer  themselves  for  examination,  or  if  the  chiefs  of
some  tribes  allow  themselves  to  be  photographed.  In  southern
parts,  where  nakedness  is  not  deemed  indecent,  observation  is
in  this  respect  facilitated ;  but  in  the  north,  where  the  climate
forces  man  to  cover  the  body  with  skins  night  and  day,  as  among
the  Esquimaux,  Samoiedes,  and  Tschuktshes,  permission  to  view
the  naked  body  is  not  so  readily  conceded.  And  finally,  where
shall  we  find  naturalists  dwelling  for  many  years  among  foreign
races,  in  order  to  secure  opportunities  for  comparative  researches  ?

We  shall  see  in  the  course  of  these  lectures,  that  the  cranium,
the  most  important  part  of  the  osseous  system,  containing
as  it  does  the  organ  of  the  mind,  deserves  the  closest  examina-
tion. Many  naturalists,  like  Blumenbach  at  Gottingen,  Morton
in  America,  and  others,  have  devoted  much  of  their  time  to  the
formation  of  collections  of  crania,  representing  the  various  types


LECTURE    I.  9

and  races  of  mankind.  Even  here  the  difficulties  we  meet  with
are  great.  It  is  hardly  feasible  in  the  times  we  live  in  to  cut
oft'  the  heads  of  the  living ;  and  to  despoil  the  graves  of  the  dead
is  in  most  civilised  countries  considered  a  crime,  and  severely-
punished.  Pious  ignorance  even  now  declaims  against  dissec-
tion, and  it  is  not  so  very  long  since  English  anatomists  were
driven  to  employ  resurrection-men,  and  were  indirectly  the
cause  of  murders  being  committed.  We  must,  therefore,  not
wonder  that  the  procuring  of  skulls  in  uncivilised  countries  is
not  unattended  with  danger,  and  that  we  succeed  only  in  ex-
ceptional cases  in  collecting  a  sufficient  number  of  skulls  of  any
stock  to  enable  us  to  draw  just  inferences  from  comparison.

The  industry  and  perseverance  of  some  observers  have  brought
together  comparatively  large  collections  of  crania,  of  which,
however,  the  origin  is  frequently  doubtful.  Thus,  for  instance,
it  is  frequently  impossible  to  say  definitely  whether  the  skull  is
that  of  a  male  or  female ;  and  yet  the  differences  between  the
male  and  female  skull  are  not  insignificant.  In  the  more  civi-
lised races  the  difference  is  as  great  as  between  the  skulls  of
the  same  sex  in  different  races  ;  and,  as  there  is  but  littlo
difference  in  this  respect  in  the  Negro  and  other  inferior  races,
the  determination  of  the  sex  becomes  more  uncertain  as  we  ap-
proach the  inferior  races  of  humanity.

As  regards  the  rest  of  the  skeleton,  the  materials  become
still  more  scanty.  It  is  easy  to  carry  off  skulls,  but  a  skeleton
requires  more  care.  Nine  out  of  every  ten  sailors  still  believe  that
a  skeleton  or  a  coffin  on  board  brings  bad  luck,  and  under  such
circumstances  they  are  apt  to  mutiny  if  a  storm  breaks  out.
And  yet  many  parts  of  the  skeleton  require  to  be  examined,
such  as  the  structure  of  the  hands,  feet,  the  form  of  the  pelvis,
— all  these  can  only  be  determined  by  numerous  observations.

The  skull  is  chiefly  important  from  its  investing  the  brain  so
closely,  that  its  chief  features  are  impressed  on  the  inner  surface
of  the  cranium.  The  brain  deserves,  above  all,  a  close  investi-
gation, in  examining  the  organisation  of  thinking  beings.  It
has  even  been  proposed  to  classify  mammals  according  to  their
cerebral  structure.  The  ideal  of  an  anatomy  of  races,  which
Professor   Wagner,   of  Gottingen,  promises  the  public  in  the


10  LECTURE    I.

preface  of  every  new  work  he  publishes,  but  which  seems  not
to  have  advanced  further  than  a  collection  of  materials,  such
an  ideal,  I  repeat,  would  undoubtedly  comprise  a  close  exami-
nation of  all  racial  brains,  founded  on  minute  dissection.  But
we  are  as  yet  far  from  such  a  consummation.  Here  and  there
some  European  anatomist  succeeds  in  obtaining  a  black  sub-
ject for  dissection,  but  want  of  acquaintance  with  his  genea-
logy, which  can  only  be  traced  through  one  or  two  generations*
of  slaves  imported  from  Africa,  may  give  rise  to  the  suspicion
that  transportation  into  another  climate,  and  the  change  in
mode  of  life  and  civilisation,  may  already  have  modified  the
original  structure  of  the  body,  and  specially  of  the  brain  as  the
organ  of  mental  activity,

You  will  from  these  few  remarks  easily  form  some  concept
tion  of  the  difficulties  under  which  the  naturalist  labours,  in
the  process  of  determining  not  merely  the  physical  but  also  the
psychological  nature  of  man.  The  material  is  only  obtained
in  scanty  fragments,  and  these  are  capable  of  elaboration  in
so  many  different  ways,  that  the  labours  of  predecessors  cannot
always  be  appropriated.

When,  having  overcome  these  difficulties  and  procured  some
materials,  we  try  to  apply  the  results  obtained,  there  rise
from  the  depth  of  society  other  phantoms  which  must  be  com-
bated. The  whole  inherent  pride  of  human  nature  revolts  at
the  idea  that  the  lord  of  the  creation  is  to  be  treated  like  any
other  natural  object. f  No  sooner  does  the  naturalist  discover
the  resemblance  of  some  higher  mammals,  such  as  the  ape,  to
man,  than  there  is  a  general  outcry  against  the  presumptuous  au-.
dacity  that  ventures  to  touch  man  in  his  inmost  sanctuary.  The
whole  fraternity  of  philosophers,  who  have  never  seen  monkeys
except  in  zoological  gardens,  at  once  mount  the  high  horse,
and  appeal  to  the  mind,  the  soul,  to  reason,  to  consciousness,
and  to  all  the  rest  of  the  innate  faculties  of  man,  as  they  are
refracted  in  their  own  philosophical  prisms.      This  mode  of

*  And  even  then  with  no  certainty. — Editor.

f  This,  no  doubt,  is  quite  true  of  the  masses  of  mankind ;  but  such  feel-
ings are  not  shared  in  by  either  the  philosophic  or  the  truly  scientific  mind. —
Editor.


*•


LECTURE    I.  1  1

reasoning  resembles  that  of  my  old  teacher  Wilbrand,  in
Giessen,  who  until  his  death,  which  took  place  about  twenty
years  ago,  protested  against  the  circulation  of  the  blood.
"  Which,"  he  asked,  on  examining  a  candidate  for  honours,
"  is  more  preferable — the  mental  or  the  physical  eye  ?"  Woo
to  the  candidate  who  replied  "  the  bodily  eye  :"  he  was  plucked
at  once.  Of  necessity  the  candidate  answered  the  mind's  eye.
"  Well,  then/'  continued  the  professor,  "  mental  inspection
must  be  superior  to  physical  inspection ;  if,  therefore,  you  say
that  you  have,  by  the  aid  of  the  microscope,  seen  the  circula-
tion of  the  blood  with  your  bodily  eye,  and  I  tell  you  that  I
have  seen  the  impossibility  of  the  circulation  with  my  mind's
eye,  it  follows  that  I  am  right  and  you  are  wrong."  In  the
same  way  our  philosophers  observe  with  the  mind's  eye,  and
when  they  call  to  their  aid  the  imagination,  which,  according
to  Carriere,  "  is  a  direct  inspiration  from  above — which  per-
ceives the  divine  thoughts  in  nature,  and  represents  a  transi-
tion of  universal  thoughts  into  the  thought  of  the  individual  •"■
when,  I  say,  these  imaginative  philosophers,  come  forth  as  G  od-
inspired  prophets,  we,  ordinary  mortals,  must  bow  down  our
heads,  and  confess  that  our  results  are  only  the  fruit  of  human
labour,  and  not  the  emanations  from  a  supreme  being  entirely
unknown  to  us.

These  idle  speculations  have  had  the  effect  of  confusing  and
perplexing  even  unprejudiced  inquirers,  so  that  we  meet  with
the  most  striking  contradictions,  and  must  take  every  possible
care  that  we  do  not  fall  into  them  ourselves.  A  kind  of  system
of  double  entry,  much  lauded  formerly  though  with  small  suc-
cess, makes  again  its  appearance  under  a  different  form.  Thus
we  find  that  the  same  naturalist  declares  in  the  same  page,
that  the  physical  differences  between  man  and  the  ape  are  just
sufficient  to  constitute  mankind  a  family  which  must  be  placed  at
the  head  of  the  order  of  apes  ;  whilst,  on  the  other  hand,  man's
intellectual  faculties  are  so  essentially  distinct,  that  he  must  form
a  separate  kingdom,  like  the  animal  and  vegetable  kingdom.*
In  order  to   show  you  the   contradictions    that    arise  in   this

*  Quatrefages. — Editok.


12  LECTURE    I.

matter,  when  we  abandon  the  basis  of  exact  science,  I  will
just  quote  the  opinion  of  another  not  less  celebrated  natura-
list, who  opines  that  the  mental  faculties  of  a  chimpanzee
compared  with  those  of  a  Bosjesman*  exhibit  only  a  difference
in  degree,  but  that  the  structure  of  the  human  brain  differs
greatly  from  that  of  the  ape.f  These  opposite  views  pro-
ceeded solely  from  the  desire  to  place  man  above  the  ape.  J
The  one  of  these  inquirers  has  forgotten  to  tell  us  how  it  is
possible  that  man  with  a  monkey  brain  could  conceive  human
thoughts ;  and  the  second  has  not  told  us  how  a  human  brain
can  produce  apish  thoughts.  If  the  brain  be  the  organ  of  the
mind,  the  function  must  always  be  consonant  with  the  structure.
This  is  only  one  aspect  of  the  question.  If  the  human  spe-
cies, as  it  is  scattered  over  the  globe,  be  considered  as  a
whole,  we  are  immediately  struck  by  the  differences  which  the
various  races  exhibit.  There  can  be  no  doubt  that  the  investiga-
tion of  these  differences  is  within  the  province  of  the  naturalist,
and,  however  much  our  pride  may  revolt  against  it,  there  is  no
other  method  than  that  followed  in  zoology.  The  degree  of  the
variations  is  very  important,  as  it  furnishes  us  with  a  standard
for  ascertaining  the  relations  in  which  the  various  races  stand
to  each  other.  This  we  shall  illustrate  by  an  .example.  Cats,
like  the  human  race,  are  found  in  all  parts  of  the  world  ;  every
where,  excepting  in  the  extreme  north,  we  find  beasts  of  prey
belonging  to  this  type.  But  at  the  first  glance  we  perceive  that
they  greatly  differ.  No  man  will  confound  lions,  tigers,  panthers,
cats,  and  lynxes,  and  it  is  just  as  impossible  to  confound  Negroes,
Mongolians,  and  Caucasians.  On  close  examination,  however,
there  occur  in  the  feline  family,  as  well  as  in  the  human  family,
intermediate  types,  which  engender  doubts.     The  spotted  cats,

*  This  is  an  allusion  to  a  note  inserted  by  Prof.  Owen  in  the  Journal  of  the
Proceedings  of  the  Linnean  Society  for  1857,  p.  20.  The  author's  words  are  that
we  are  unable  to  "  appreciate,  or  conceive  of  the  distinction  between  the
psychical  phenomena  of  a  chimpanzee  and  of  a  Bosjesman,  or  of  an  Aztec  with
arrested  brain  growth."  The  comparison  is  therefore  made  between  the
psychological  phenomena  of  the  chimpanzee  and  the  Bosjesman  "with
arrested  brain  growth,"  and  not  between  the  chimpanzee  and  the  Bosjesman
in  a  normal  state. — Editor.

f  R.  Owen. — Editor.

X  An  author  may  hold  such  opinions  without  any  '*  desire"  to  place  man
above  the  ape. — Editor.


LECTURE    I.  1  o

which  were  formerly  included  in  the  panther  type,  run  into  a
variety  of  forms,  which  differ,  more  or  less,  in  the  number  and
arrangement  of  the  spots,  the  length  and  hairiness  of  the  tail,
the  variations  in  the  dental  system  and  the  skull ;  in  short,  by  a
variety  of  marks  known  only  to  the  minute  observer,  which,
however,  enable  the  inquirer  with  more  or  less  certainty  to
determine  whether  they  are  merely  accidental  variations  or
permanent  forms.  Let  us  confess  at  once,  that,  in  all  wild
animals,  the  estimation  of  these  variations,  and  their  conse-
quent classification,  depends  much  on  the  predilections  of  tho
observer,  so  that  what  one  declares  to  be  a  species  another  takes
to  be  only  a  variety.  The  accumulation  of  facts  leads  generally
to  the  result,  that  some  decidedly  different  forms  are  laid  down
as  species,  round  which  the  less  differing  forms  are  grouped  as
varieties.  Though  the  validity  of  many  species  is  still  dis-
cussed, and  though  many  definitions  of  species  have  been  given
without  any  satisfactory  result,  still  these  discussions  stimulato
the  progress  of  science.

It  is  somewhat  different  as  regards  the  science  of  man :  here
was  a  field  in  which  the  result  at  which  science  was  to  arrive  was
prescribed.  One  Adam,  one  ancestor,  one  Noah  with  three  sons  as
secondary  ancestors — these  were  the  premises  forced  upon  scien-
tific inquiry,  without  the  assumption  of  which  the  naturalist  was
unceremoniously  sent  to  a  place  we  need  not  mention.  In  tho
former  case  we  had  to  do  with  philosophers,  who  in  their  acade-
mical gowns  only  talk  to  a  select  audience,  but  here  we  had
against  us  the  whole  clergy,  with  their  faithful  sheep  and  butting
rams — a  state  of  things  which  can  only  be  appreciated  from  expe-
rience. Do  not  think  that  I  only  speak  from  my  own  experience.
Dr.  Morton,  an  eminent  name  among  naturalists,  an  es-
teemed physician  of  Philadelphia,  devoted  himself  to  the  study
of  American  craniology.  After  many  years  study  he  arrived
at  the  conclusion  that  the  human  family  consisted  of  distinct
species,  and  could  not  possibly  have  descended  from  the  same
Adam,  and  this  result  he  published.  A  parson,  the  Rev.  Dr.
Bachman,  in  Charleston,  took  great  offence  at  this.  As  is  the
custom  with  priests,  Bachman  first  writes  a  friendly  letter
to  Morton,  informing  him  that,  being  of  a  different  opinion,  it


14  LECTURE    I.

will  be  his  duty  to  write  against  him,  but  hoping  that  this  will
not  interrupt  their  friendship,  as  he  still  considers  his  friend
Morton  an  ornament  to  science.  Dr.  Bachman  straightway
publishes  a  work  in  which  he  clearly  betrays  the  greatest
ignorance  of  the  subject.  But  what  is  this  to  a  man  full  of
faith  ?  In  spite  of  his  ignorance,  his  reverence  arrogantly  attacks
Morton,  as  his  biographer  says,  in  a  bombastic  and  declamatory
style.  Morton  replies  in  gentlemanly  dignified  terms,  repeating
his  arguments,  and  sustaining  them  scientifically.  This  greatly
irritates  his  reverence;  he  now  accuses  Morton  of  being  at  the
head  of  a  conspiracy  which  had  its  branches  in  four  cities  of  the
Union,  and  whose  sole  object  was  the  overthrow  of  a  doctrine
closely  connected  with  the  faith  and  hope  of  the  Christian  for  this
world  and  for  eternity.  Infidelity,  he  continues,  was  the  neces-
sary result  of  Morton's  views,  which  must  be  energetically  op-
posed. This  took  place  in  1 850.  Morton's  death  in  the  following
spring  put  an  end  to  the  dispute ;  but  do  we  not  hear  similar
sounds  from  Goettingen,  and  are  they  not  the  echo  of  the
priestly  objurgation  wafted  across  the  Atlantic  Ocean  ?

The  question  with  regard  to  the  differences  of  human  races
not  merely  affects  the  basis  of  theology,  but  the  most  interest-
ing and  difficult  problems  of  natural  history;  When  we  have
to  decide  whether  these  differences  are  original,  or  acquired
in  the  lapse  of  time,  the  closest  examination  is  requisite,
not  merely  as  to  man's  historical  development  upon  the  globe,
but  as  to  the  influence  of  surrounding  media.  We  must
ascertain  what  may  be  the  effect  of  the  climate  and  the  mode
of  life  to  which  man  may  be  exposed  in  his  migrations ;  how
far  deficiency  or  abundance  of  aliment,  certain  habits,  the
gradual  elevation  to  a  higher  civilisation  may  have  changed
the  original  character,  or  entirely  effaced  it,  so  as  to  be  no
longer  recognisable ;  how  far  intermixture  between  several
races,  intentional  or  accidental,  may  have  given  rise  to  new
forms.  Here  it  is  not  man  alone  who  is  to  be  considered,  but
other  creatures,  specially  the  domestic  animals  which  are  im-

*  For  particulars  of  those  statements  see  Dr.  Patterson's  Memoir  of  Morton/
in  Types  of  Mankind,  p.  53. — Editor.


LECTURE    I.  1'5

mediately  under  man's  control,  and  the  forms  of  which  he
endeavours  to  alter  according  to  his  wants.

This  part  of  the  question — perhaps  the  most  interesting —
has  given  rise  to  the  greatest  controversy.  Very  recently  this
subject  has  again  been  handled  by  Darwin,  the  eminent  natu-
ralist, and  we  shall  in  the  sequel  have  to  treat  of  his  theory  of
the  origin  of  species.  Here  I  may  say  this  much,  that,
though  I  do  not  adopt  this  theory  with  all  its  inferences,  it
yet  appears  to  me  to  be  nearer  the  truth  than  any  other,  and  I
do  not  hesitate  to  say  that  I  accept  it  with  regard  to  nearly
allied  types.

I  have  already  observed  that  our  question  has  also  its  his-
torical, or,  if  you  like,  its  geological  side,  which  cannot  be
neglected,  although  we  again  run  the  danger  of  turning  the
milk  of  human  kindness  into  poison,  and  Christian  love  into
grim  hatred.  When  we  desire  to  study  the  influence  which
the  natural  conditions  exercise  upon  man,  we  must  go  back  as
far  as  possible  into  the  history  of  the  human  race,  since  the  lapse
of  time  is  a  factor  which  must  always  be  kept  in  view.  We  must
necessarily  form  an  alliance,  not  merely  with  the  historian
and  antiquary,  but  with  the  geologist ;  we  must  appropriate
their  results,  and  apply  these  to  the  solution  of  our  problem.
Here,  also,  the  difficulties  are  numerous.  The  delusions  and
mystifications  to  which  antiquaries  are  exposed,  have  yielded
materials  to  the  novelist.  But  in  this  maze  the  right  path
has  been  detected ;  and  as  the  testimony  of  Egyptian  antiquities
shows  that  the  civilisation  of  mankind  reaches  further  back
than  the  period  assigned  to  Adam  by  the  Jewish  lawgiver,
we  are  at  once  justified  in  declaring  that  the  antiquity  of  man
reaches  back  to  a  period  when  extinct  animals  peopled  our
continent,  and  that  this  period  exhibits  a  state  of  civilisation
which  can  scarcely  bear  comparison  with  that  of  the  aborigines
of  Australia.

One  might  suppose  that  the  question  regarding  the  anti-
quity of  man  on  the  globe  concerns  science  only ;  such,  how-
ever, does  not  seem  to  be  the  case.  The  Christian  theologum
immediately   discovers  that  it  is  a  more  presumption  of  the


16  LECTURE    I.

layman  to  assign  to  the  Mosaic  Adam  a  recent  period  in  his-
tory, and  to  assert  that  there  had  existed  a  previous  civilisa-
tion, in  which  man  knew  not  the  use  of  metals,  and  prepared
his  tools  and  weapons  from  flints  and  bones.

We  must  not,  however,  lay  the  blame  altogether  on  theolo-
gians; the  reproach  must  also  be  extended  to  the  representatives
of  science,  though  in  a  lesser  degree.  In  consequence  of  the
dicta  of  some  eminent  naturalists  at  the  time  when  the  facts
were  less  numerous,  the  opinion  generally  prevailed  that  man
belonged  to  the  most  recent  geological  epoch,  and  had  only
existed  in  the  present  condition  of  the  globe.  The  remains  of
extinct  animals  intermixed  with  human  bones,  had,  no  doubt,
been  found ;  but  these  facts  had  either  been  ignored,  or  very  in-
differently investigated.  To  such  an  extent  did  the  belief  in  the
late  appearance  of  thea higher  animals  prevail,  that  the  existence
of  fossil  apes  in  the  tertiary  strata  was  denied.*  Soon,  however,
the  facts  accumulated,  and  they  were  all  the  more  readily  accepted
as  they  were  thought  to  relate  to  apes  only.  Just  read  the  lamen-
tations of  that  enthusiastic  inquirer  Boucher  de  Perthes,  as  to  the
trouble  he  had  to  induce  some  few  unprejudiced  naturalists
merely  to  inspect  the  beds  from  which  he  extracted  flint
hatchets.  "  Practical  people,"  he  observes,  "  smiled,  shrugged
their  shoulders,  and  would  not  look  at  the  implements ;  in  one
word,  they  were  afraid  of  a  heresy.  And  when  the  facts
became  so  patent,  that  each  could  verify  them  for  himself,  I
met,"  says  he,  "with  a  greater  obstacle  than  opposition,
sarcasm,  and  persecution — the  silence  of  contempt.  The  facts
were  no  longer  denied,  they  were  buried  in  oblivion.  Then
followed  explanations  more  wonderful  than  the  facts  them-
selves ;  the  stone  hatchets,  it  was  said,  were  the  products  of
fire ;  they  had  been  thrown  up  by  a  volcano  in  a  fluid  state,
and,  falling  into  water,  had,  in  cooling,  assumed  the  shape  of
hatchets.  Others  said  it  was  intense  cold  that  burst  the  flints
into  fragments  resembling  knives  and  hatchets.     Then,  again,

*  Even  by  Cuvier.  It  was  not  until  four  years  after  his  death  that  the
first  fossil  apes  were  discovered. — Editor.


LECTURE    I.  17

that  the  workmen  had  chipped  the  flints  and  imbedded  them.*
All  these  objections  I  did  not  much  care  for,  but  what  vexed
me  most  was,  the  obstinate  refusal  to  examine  the  facts,  and
the  use  of  the  expression,  '  It  is  impossible  !'  before  people  had
taken  the  trouble  to  ascertain  whether  it  was  actually  so."

The  distrust  with  which  antiquarian  researches  are  fre-
quently received  by  physicists,  may  have  had  its  share  in  the  re-
ception which  gave  rise  to  these  jeremiads.  But  science  has  no
written  code,  and  every  fact  finds  a  way  for  itself  if  zealously
advocated.  Boucher  de  Perthes  at  length  succeeded  in  inducing
some  geologists  to  visit  the  valley  of  the  Somme,  when  he  showed
them  the  flint  implements^  situ.  These  observers  created  some
sensation  in  the  learned  societies  of  Paris  and  London ;  the  sub-
ject was  discussed,  and  the  facts  verified,  so  that  there  exists  no
longer  any  doubt.  But  in  theology,  Tubal- Cain  still  occupies
his  place  as  the  first  worker  in  metal,  and  whoever  does  not
believe  it  is  not  only  now  and  for  ever  lost,  but  is  publicly
brandedf  as  an  infidel.

The  great  antiquity  of  the  domestic  animals,  and  their  rela-
tions to  man,  are  of  particular  interest,  as  they  exhibit  more
than  man  the  influence  of  nature.  As  man  can  act  upon  them
by  breeding  and  aliment  according  to  his  will,  he  is  enabled  to
alter  the  given  forms  in  a  manner  which  it  seems  scarcely  possible
could  happen  by  natural  means.  If,  then,  in  tracing  the  changes
they  have  undergone  since  the  most  remote  times,  it  could  be
proved  that  the  various  races  into  which  our  domestic  animals
are  divided,  are  either  the  descendants  of  one  original  stock,
or  the  products  of  intermixture  between  several  original  spe-
cies, we  should  no  doubt  obtain  analogies  of  as  much  value
as  many  of  the  conclusions  derived  directly  from  the  human
species.

You  observe  then,  Grentlemen,   that  the   field  of  these  in-

*  See  on  this  subject  the  Anthropological  Review,  vol.  i,  p.  80. — Editor.

f  It  is  certainly  little  to  the  credit  of  our  "  enlightened"  age,  that  men  of
science  are,  even  in  our  own  country,  still  exposed  to  coarse  epithets  and  the
imputation  of  sordid  motives,  if  they  advance  any  doctrines  at  vai-iance  with
preconceived  ideas.  Like  the  Brahmin  who  smashed  to  pieces  the  unoffend-
ing  microscope,  which  showed  him  living  beings  in  his  vegetable  food ;  so
the  vehemence  of  such  self-sufficient  assailants  rises  in  proportion  as  the
facts  advanced  cannot  be  disproved.— Editor.


18  LECTURE    I.

quiries  is  more  extensive  than  might  be  supposed.  It  will  be  my
object  not,  indeed,  to  touch  upon  all  the  facts,  but  merely  upon
those  possessing  real  importance  as  regards  the  inferences  to  be
drawn  from  them.  In  fulfilling  our  task  we  shall  care  very  little
about  the  dust  we  may  raise,  or  about  religious  and  political
prejudices  which  we  shall,  perhaps,  be  obliged  to  take  by  the
horns  and  cast  aside.  It  concerns  us  very  little  whether  the
existence  of  Adam,  Tubal-Cain,  and  Noah  is,  or  is  not,  verified
by  our  researches.  It  is  indifferent  to  us  whether  the  Democrats
of  the  Southern  States  find  in  our  investigations  a  confirmation
or  a  refutation  of  their  assertion,*  that  slavery  is  approved  of
and  ordained  by  God ;  or  whether  the  Yankee  can  fairly  infer
from  our  inquiides  that  he  is  quite  justified  in  his  proud  refusal
to  sit  in  the  same  room,  or  to  ride  in  the  same  railway  carriage
with  the  Negro,  though  he  does  not  refuse  to  eat  what  the
Negro  has  cooked.  We  shall  advance  straight  forward,  heed-
less of  the  yelping  behind  us.

*  There  is  no  doubt  that  the  greater  part  of  the  democrats  look  upon  slavery
as  a  divine  institution.  Many  believe  that  it  is  supported  by  the  history
and  teaching  of  the  Bible.  Most,  however,  of  the  slaveholders  of  the  South
look  upon  their  slaves  as  a  great  charge  which  they  have  inherited  from
their  forefathers.  They  believe  that  the  Neg-ro  is  mentally  only  a  child,  and
quite  incapable  of  living  happily  and  naturally  in  juxtaposition  with  the
white  European,  except  in  a  state  of  complete  subordination  and  subjection.
Many  slaveholders  assert  they  would  be  very  glad  to  part  with  their  slaves,  if
they  could  be  taken  entirely  away;  but  they  refuse  to  "free"  them  and
allow  them  to  become  a  miisance,  and  an  eyesore. — Editor.


19


LECTURE     II.

Method  of  investigation. — Mixed  Types. — Average  Man  and  Skuil. — Use  of
the  French  Metrical  System. — Scherzer  and  Schwarz's  System  of  Mea-
surement.— Craniometry. — Fixed  Points  in  the  Skull. — Choice  of  the
Thinnest  Places. — Busk's  System  of  Measurement. — Aeby's  System. —
Horizontal  and  Vertical  Planes. — Relation  of  the  Skull  to  the  Face. —
Camper's  Facial  Angle. — Measurement  of  the  Base  and  Vault  of  the
Cranium. — Welcker's  System  of  Measurement. — Cranial  Angle  ;  Skull ;
Net. — Von  Baer's  Nomenclature  for  Cranial  Forms. — Coronal  View  :
Longheads,  Medium  Heads,  and  Short  Heads. — Profile  View :  Pro-
gnathism and  Orthognathism. — Anterior  and  Posterior  View :  Tower
Heads,  Pyramidal  Heads,  and  Eoof  Heads.  —  Scherzer  -  Schwarz's
Scheme. — Tables  of  Cranial  Measurements  after  Virchow,  Welcker,  Von
Baer,  and  Busk.

Gentlemen, — A  proper  method  of  investigation  is  frequently
of  greater  value  than  the  investigation  itself.  This  axiom  emi-
nently applies  to  natural  science.  A  fixed  plan,  which  will
prevent  digression  and  enable  other  inquirers  to  pursue  the  same
path,  is  of  special  value.  In  speaking  therefore  in  this  place
of  the  methods  which  ought  to  be  followed  in  order  to  arrive  at
any  results  in  the  study  of  the  natural  history  of  man,  I  do  so
under  the  firm  conviction  that  only  an  insight  into  the
methods  of  investigation  can  enable  us  to  estimate  its  re-
sults. We  must,  however,  confess  that  it  is  only  within  a
very  recent  period  that  investigations  on  a  proper  system  have
been  commenced,  and  that  some  inquirers  have  agreed  upon
uniformity  of  method.

There  can  be  no  doubt  that  the  object  of  our  inquiry  is  sub-
ject to  a  variety  of  changes,  resulting  partly  from  individual
disposition,  from  the  lapse  of  time  and  from  external  influ-
ences, so  that  every  investigation  has  necessarily  many  defects,
arising  from  a  variety  of  sources.  The  original  disposition
which  parents  transmit  to  their  offspring,  varies  extremely  even
in  children  of  the  same  father  and  mother — the  moi*e  so  the

c  2


20  LECTURE    II.

longer  the  interval  between  the  births  of  the  offspring.     The
development   of  life  from  birth  to    death    depends  on  many
conditions,  which,  though   following  a    certain    law,  are    still
subject    to    many    oscillations.       Not   merely    the   body   as    a
whole,  but  each  part  individually,  every  bone  and  every  organ
has  its   own  law   of  development   and   decay.      Sex,  climate,
dwelling-place,   alimentation,    and    occupation,    all  have   their
influences.     In   proceeding  further,    other   important    sources
of   error    arise   which    increase  the  difficulties.     Let   us,    for
instance,   assume  that  we  are  investigating   the  question    of
human  races,  and  that  we  confine  our  researches  to  the  skull ;
that  we  take  the  German  skull  as  a  standard  for  measurement
and  comparison,  as  we  have  many  of  these  at  our  disposal.   But
where  is  the  guarantee  that  this  skull,  which  every  German  ana-
tomist may  declare  to  be  a  well  formed  German  skull,  belonged  to
one  of  pure  German  blood  ?    Where  is  the  spot  on  German  soil
where  there  has  not  been,  or  at  least  might  not  have  been,  an  in-
termixture of  the  most  various  races  ?    Have  not,  from  the  most
remote  times,  Asiatic  and  European  peoples  chosen  Germany
as  their  battle-field ;  and,  as  Venus  always  accompanies  Mars,
have  they  not  left  their  traces  in  the  blood  of  their  descend-
ants ?      And,    independently    of   these    invasions,    are    there
not  many  districts  in  Germany  where  for  centuries   different
tribes   dwelt  side  by   side,   until  both  became  fused,   or   the
weaker  were  absorbed  in  the  stronger  ?    Have  we  not  the  most
evident  proofs  that  the  Germans,  of  whose  habitation  in  the  oak
forests  our  patriotic  songs  speak,  were  only  the  third  invaders,
who  subjected  and  absorbed  two  peoples,  the  previous  occu-
pants of  the  German  soil  ?     Do  not  the  Sclavonic  historians
claim  two-thirds  of  Germany  as  their  inheritance,  from  which
they  have  been  displaced  by  cunning  and  violence  ?     Where,
then,   in   that  historical   or   antediluvian  mixture    now    called
Germany,  is  the  spot  where  we  may  find  the  genuine,  unmixed,
pure  German  square  head — the  tete  carrde  as  the  French  call  it  ?
Certainly  no  one  can  give  a  definite  answer  to  this  question,
and  every  one  will  admit  that  the  possibility  of  intermixture  in
preceding  generations  cannot  be  denied.

As  with  the  Germans,  so  it  is  with   every  people  on   the


LECTURE    II.  2  I

globe.  Traditions,  historical  facts,  physical  peculiarities,  point
to  extensive  intermixtures,  which  either  affected  the  purity  of
the  original  stock,  or  perhaps  gave  rise  to  a  new  race.  How
are  we  to  get  out  of  this  maze  ?  Can  we  possibly  discover  a
method  which  may  diminish  the  sources  of  error,  and  lead  to
more  certain  results  ?

Natural  philosophy,  and  its  allied  sciences,  have  long  since
solved  this  problem,  and  it  only  remains  to  apply  the  same
method  to  our  investigations.  Where  inquiries  necessarily  in-
volve many  sources  of  errors,  these  can  only  be  reduced  to  their
minimum  by  frequently  repeating  the  observations  and  measure-
ments, so  that  we  obtain  from  the  mass  of  experiments  an  aver-
age representing  a  law.  The  greater  the  number  of  individual
facts  accumulated,  and  the  more  strictly  they  are  defined,  by
selecting,  for  instance,  cases  of  the  same  sex,  age,  and  condi-
tion, the  more  exact  will  be  the  results.  Let  us  illustrate  this
by  an  example.  In  countries  where  conscription  is  in  force,  all
males,  excepting  cripples,  are  measured  during  their  twenty-first
year,  and  those  are  excluded  who  do  not  possess  the  prescribed
military  height.  We  can  thus  determine  the  average  height
of  the  males  of  twenty-one  years  of  age  in  certain  countries.  It
is  clear  that  great  errors  would  arise  if  only  a  hundred  recruits
were  measured ;  for  these  may  be,  as  for  example,  in  France,
either  from  Alsace,  Brittany,  or  Provence,  which  are  inhabited
by  three  different  stocks  varying  in  stature.  But  after  the  mea-
surement of  a  thousand  recruits  from  different  regions,  the
calculation  of  the  mean  height  will  be  less  liable  to  error ;  and
by  further  measurement  of  all  the  conscripts  of  a  certain
year  the  result  will  be  singularly  near  the  truth.  Still,  even
such  a  proceeding  may  prove  somewhat  fallacious,  as  a  parti-
cular year  may  be  distinguished  by  special  peculiarities.  Thus,
it  is  a  fact  that  during  a  famine  fewer  children  are  born,  and
these  are,  on  the  average,  weaker  and  less  developed  than  those
born  during  other  periods.  But  by  extending  the  measure-
ments to  a  number  of  years,  even  this  source  of  error  will  be
greatly  diminished,  and  the  result  very  nearly  approach  the
truth.

I  have  purposely  selected  this  example  to  show  what  striking


22  LECTURE    II.

results  may  be  obtained  by  the  most  unpromising  means,  the
moment  we  know  how  to  group  and  handle  a  number  of  data
properly.  It  is  from  the  recruiting  tables  of  France  that  one
of  the  most  ingenious  writers  on  the  Natural  History  of  Man,
Paul  Broca,  has  deduced  the  distribution  of  the  large-sized
Kimri  or  Gaels,  and  the  small-sized  Celts  in  France,  and
indicated  the  districts  where  these  tribes  have  preserved  their
purity,  and  those  where  they  have  become  intermixed.

You  thus  perceive,  gentlemen,  that  in  examining  either  in-
dividual characters  or  separate  races,  we  must  apply  the  prin-
ciples adopted  in  physics,  meteorology,  and  the  allied  sciences.
Exact  measurements  and  weights,  expressible  in  figures,  and
applicable  to  numbers  and  masses,  can  alone  afford  a  basis  for
scientific  accuracy.  Everything  that  rests  merely  upon  personal
predilection  or  individual  conception  must  only  be  added  as  flesh
and  skin  to  the  skeleton,  afforded  by  measurement  and  weight.
In  ordinary  cases,  measurement  and  weight  form  the  generally
received  standard ;  in  others,  the  standard  has  yet  to  be  found.
Attention  has  rightly  been  called  to  the  necessity  of  devising
a  table  of  colours  for  the  estimation  of  the  coloration  of  the
skin  and  hair  (like  the  cyanometers  for  the  sky),  in  order
to  obviate  the  confusion  prevailing  among  naturalists  as  regards
the  shades  in  the  different  races,  some  of  which  are,  by  one
writer,  described  as  of  olive  colour,  and  by  another,  as  of  dark
coppery-brown.*  It  must,  however,  be  admitted,  that  there
are  many  difficulties  in  the  preparation  of  standard  colour-
tables  calculated  to  lead  to  satisfactory  results.

If  we  are  to  devote  our  attention,  before  all  things,  to  what  can
be  measured  and  weighed,  the  living  man  is  the  first  object  which
demands  our  investigation.  The  "  average  man"  of  Europe  hav-
ing been  determined  by  Quetelet,  his  system  is  now  applied  to
races.  Hitherto,  such  observations  have  only  been  made
during  three  voyages  in  distant  parts  of  the  world.  Burmeister
applied  this  method,  to  a   limited  extent,  to  the  Negroes  in

*  The  Anthropological  Society  of  London,  acting  in  concert  with  the  Paris
Socie'td  d'Anthropologie,  are  about  to  bring  out  some  tables  of  this  description ;
and  these  will  be  accompanied  by  some  general  instructions  which  are  to  be
sent  to  all  the  fellows,  correspondents,  and  local  secretaries  of  the  society
in  different  parts  of  the  world. — Editor.


LECTURE    II.  23

Brazil ;  Drs.  Scherzer  and  Schwarz,  on  a  large  scale,  during  the
voyage  of  the  Novara ;  and  the  brothers  Schlagintweit  in
India.  Burmeister  has  published  the  results,  if  not  the  details,
of  his  measurements ;  the  observations  of  the  latter  travellers
have,  to  my  knowledge,  not  yet  been  published  in  their  en-
tirety. Since  the  story  of  the  colossal  idols  of  Thibet,  the
scientific  reputation  of  the  brothers  Schlagintweit  is  not  such
as  to  warrant  implicit  faith  in  their  conclusions ;  so  that  we
must  adopt  the  Novara  expedition  as  the  starting-point  of  a
scientific  investigation  of  human  races  in  distant  regions.

It  is  a  matter  of  primary  importance  to  establish  a  uniform
standard  of  measurement,  so  that  we  may  compare  the  results
obtained  by  a  variety  of  observers,  without  any  necessity  of
reduction.  Most  observers,  with  the  exception  of  the  English,*
now  use — and  quite  properly — the  French  measure  and  weight,
the  metre  and  the  kilogramme  ;  and  it  is  surprising  that  so  dis-
tinguished a  naturalist  as  Karl  Ernst  von  Baer  should  adopt  the
English  standard,  which  is  not  even  fixed,  some  dividing  the
foot  into  ten,  others  into  twelve,  inches.  By  the  way,  gentle-
men, the  great  reputation  of  the  English,  as  practical  people,
rests  on  as  small  a  foundation  as  any  other  flattery,  and  it  is
precisely  the  things  of  common  life  that  prove  this  most  evi-
dently. During  the  Crimean  war,  we  saw  the  stiff  and  formal
English  perish  from  frost  and  hunger,  though  they  had  abundant-
provisions  at  a  small  distance ;  whilst  the  more  handy  French,
with  much  scantier  material  at  their  disposal,  contrived  to  make
themselves  exceedingly  comfortable. f  It  is  just  the  same  in
social  life.  There  is  not  a  more  senseless  metrical  and  monetary
system  than  the  English.     Without  calculation  you  cannot  re-

*  The  English,  have  certainly  hitherto  used  their  own  measures ;  but  the
inconvenience  of  this  course  is  so  fully  appreciated  by  myself  and  brother
members  of  the  Council  of  the  Anthropological  Society  of  London,  that  we
have  decided  to  do  all  we  can  to  introduce  French  measurements,  into
all  our  researches  and  investigations.  The  author  is  not,  apparently,  aware
of  the  difficulty  of  obtaining  any  mutual  action  on  the  part  of  English
men  of  science.  The  Anthropological  Society — as  a  young  institution— is
fortunately  free  from  the  trammels  and  hereditary  prejudices  which  too  often
are  successful  barriers  to  the  introduction  of  foreign  methods.— Editor.

f  This  is,  to  a  great  extent,  true ;  but  the  causes  of  the  great  mor-
tality of  the  English  troops  in  the  Crimea  are  also  in  some  measure  to  be
;i  <-;ibed  to  the  want  of  training  of  our  young  soldiers,  a  large  proportion  of
whom  besides  were  suffering  from  the  effects  of  syphilitic  disease.— Editor.


24


LECTUKE    II.


duce  lines  to  inches,  and  inches  to  feet.  The  foot  has  no  de-
finite relation  to  the  mile,  nor  the  latter  to  the  degree  of  lati-
"  tude.  Pounds,  ounces,  and  scruples  vary  for  different  objects,
just  as  formerly  apothecary  and  market-weight  were  in  use  in
Germany;  and  they,  also,  cannot  be  reduced  without  cal-
culation, and  have  n*>  relation  to  the  measurements  of  solids
and  liquids.  This  nonsense  even  extends  to  the  thermometer,
the  Fahrenheit  scale  being  the  only  one  in  use.  How  simple,
compared  with  all  this,  is  the  French  system  !  How  easily  is  it
applied  in  making  calculations  and  noting  the  results.

After  this  digression,  let  us  return  to  our  subject.  It  is  no
small  task  to  measure  a  living  man.  On  looking  at  the  sys-
tematic scheme  made  use  of  by  Scherzer  and  Schwarz*  in
the  Novara  expedition,  we  find  that  it  takes  several  hours  to
note  in  the  register  the  seventy-eight  data  required.  In  the
general  part,  the  age,  name  and  sex  of  the  individual,  colour  and
structure  of  the  hair,  the  growth  of  the  beard,  colour  of  the  eyes,
and  other  peculiarities,  are  noted  first ;  then  the  number  of  pul-
sations, the  strength,  by  means  of  Regnier's  dynamometer,  and
finally,  the  weight  and  height  of  the  naked  body,  are  deter-
mined. Next  follow  the  measurements  of  the  head,  the  trunk,
and  the  extremities ;  twenty-one  of  them  relate  to  the  head,
seventeen  to  the  trunk,  and  twenty  to  the  extremities.  I  can-
not particularise  them  here;  those  who  wish  to  render  them
more  complete,  or  criticise  them,  must  make  themselves
familiar  with  them  by  practical  manipulation.  This  much
may  be  said,  that  the  scheme  gives  a  tolerably  complete  repre-
sentation of  the  body  measured,  and  thus  attains  the  object  in
view,  as  far  as  is  practicable.

The  first  requisite  for  every  measurement  is  that  fixed  points
should  be  discovered,  which  may  easily  be  found  in  all  objects  of
the  same  kind,  and  to  determine  the  lines  and  planes  from  which
further  points  may  be  determined.  Such  requisites  seem  at  first
sight  very  easy  to  obtain ;  but  on  examination  they  will  be  found
attended  with  so  many  difficulties,  that  we  need  not  wonder  at

*  I  have  added  to  this  lecture  Messrs.  Schwarz  and  Scherzer's  scheme,
which  is  so  arranged  that  every  instrument  is  only  laid  aside  after  it  has
answered  all  its  purposes.


LECTURE    II.  25

the  difference  of  opinion  in  the  matter.  Measurement  on  the
living  individual  is,  of  course,  only  external,  and  we  all  know
how  human  beings  differ  in  dimensions,  owing  to  aliment,
condition  of  life,  and  constitution ;  as  far  as  possible,  the
measurements  on  the  living  body  must  be  confined  to  those
parts  where  the  bones  are  nearest  the  skin,  or  where  aper-
tures exist  which  either  lead  to  internal  organs,  or  present
fixed  positions.  Let  us  apply  this  first  principle  to  that  part
which  is  of  the  greatest  importance  to  us,  namely,  the  head.
In  most  cases,  the  skull  and  the  lower  jaw  are  so  near  the  skin
that  their  shape  may  easily  be  felt.  The  base  of  the  cranium
alone  is  inaccessible,  and  its  important  proportions  can  only  be
determined  on  the  prepared  skull.  Of  the  various  apertures  in
the  cranium,  the  external  auditory  opening  is  the  one  which  sup-
plies all  the  conditions  required  for  a  central  point.  The  aperture
of  this  canal  is  sufficiently  narrow  to  render  it  easy  to  determine
its  centre,  and  it  corresponds  very  nearly  with  the  aperture
in  the  dried  skull,  so  that  all  measurements  from  this  point
may  be  transferred  from  the  living  individual  to  the  cranium,
and  vice  versa.  We  may,  therefore,  boldly  assert  that  any
system  of  measurement  which  does  not  include  the  external
auditory  opening  as  one  of  its  most  important  fundamental
points,  is  faulty  and  imperfect.

The  external  margin  of  the  orbit,  corresponding  to  the  outer
angle  of  the  eye;  the  centre  of  the  process  to  which  the  muscles
of  the  neck  are  attached ;  the  root  of  the  nose;  the  junction  be-
tween the  septum  of  the  nose  and  the  upper  lip,  which  bears  a  cer-
tain relation  to  a  bony  process  called  the  anterior  nasal  spine;  the
terminal  point  of  the  upper  jaw  between  the  two  middle  incisors ;
the  central  point  of  the  projecting  chin,  so  characteristic  of
man  ;* — all  these  points  are  easily  determined  in  the  cranium,
and  form  a  net  of  triangles,  by  means  of  which  all  other  mea-
surements may  be  effected.  I  merely  indicate  the  principle
without  giving  details ;  but  you  will  agree  with  me  that  it  is
to  be  regretted  that  many  recent  measurements  are  of  such  a
kind  as  to  preclude  their  comparison  with  measurements   on

*  And  some  Indian  monkeys. — Editor.


26  LECTURE    II.

living  men.  Thns  while  von  Baer,  for  instance,  with  many
others,  measures  the  diameter  of  the  skull  from  the  lowest
point  of  the  forehead,  the  so-called  glabella,  to  the  most  pro-
jecting point  of  the  occiput,  Weleker  takes  the  frontal  emi-
nences, which  are  situated  higher  up  and  cannot  be  exactly
determined  either  in  the  living  or  the  dead  skull,  as  his  start-
ing-j3oints,  so  that  both  these  measurements  are  liable  to
great  objections,  both  on  the  score  of  usefulness  and  accuracy;
this  much,  moreover,  is  certain,  that,  even  if  they  could  be
accurately  determined,  they  are  not  comparable  with  each
other.

There  is  another  circumstance,  as  von  Baer  justly  observes,
which  must  be  attended  to  in  cranial  measurements,  namely,
the  unequal  thickness  of  the  skull  in  various  parts,  so  that  in
order  to  obtain  an  approximative  idea  of  the  internal  capacity  of
the  cranium,  we  must  select  the  points  where  the  bone  is  thin-
nest, and  avoid  the  prominences,  which  are  especially  liable  to
be  modified  by  the  action  of  the  attached  muscles.

On  each  side  of  the  human  skull  there  is  a  curved  line,  the
so-called  temporal  ridge,  which  marks  the  limits  of  the  tem-
poral muscle.  The  more  this  muscle — the  chief  masticating
muscle — is  developed,  the  higher  up  is  the  line,  and  the  broader
the  space  between  the  zygomatic  arch  and  the  cranium.  The
development  of  this  muscle  is  sometimes  so  great  that  in  many
animals  its  fibres  have  no  room  for  attachment  to  the  side  of
the  skull,  and  a  crest  is  formed  on  the  vertex  to  serve  for  at-
tachment. The  development  of  the  temporal  ridge  and  the
breadth  of  the  zygomatic  arch  are,  therefore,  in  direct  propor-
tion, both  depending  on  the  development  of  the  temporal
muscle.  Now,  it  is  this  muscle  which  especially  effects  the
perpendicular  action  of  the  jaw ;  whilst  the  lateral  motions  of
the  jaws,  for  the  grinding  of  the  food,  are  effected  by  other
muscles.  The  latter  are  greatly  developed  in  vegetable  feeders,
such  as  ruminants,  whose  lower  jaw  acts  like  a  millstone.  The
perpendicular  motion  especially  obtains  in  carnivora.  We  thus
necessarily  arrive  at  the  result,  that  nations  living  chiefly  on
animal  food  exhibit  more  developed  temporal  ridges  and  broader
curved  zygomatic  arches  than  vegetable  feeders  ;  the  latter  pus-


LECTURE    II.  27

sessing,  also,  flatter  zygomatic  arches,  and  therefore  narrower
faces,  and  perhaps  also  longer  sknlls.*  It  is  clear,  therefore,
that  the  advice,  to  avoid  prominences  and  to  select  the  thinnest
parts  of  the  skull,  should  certainly  be  attended  to  in  estimating
the  internal  capacity  of  the  cranium ;  whilst,  on  the  other
hand,  the  development  of  lines  and  crests  is  of  importance,
as  affording  indications  for  distinguishing  races.  For  the  ques-
tion may  also  be  asked,  has  any  given  race  strongly  developed
temporal  ridges  because  it  is  carnivorous  ?  or,  is  it  carnivorous
because  of  the  great  development  of  these  ridges  and  of  the
muscles  of  mastication  ?

Still,  it  is  very  difficult  practically  to  follow  Von  Baer's
well  meant  advice.  The  thinnest  part  of  the  cranium  is  just
the  centre  of  the  temple,  which  is  covered  by  the  temporal
muscle  :  but  this  point,  though  well  known  even  in  common
life  from  the  danger  attending  a  blow  on  this  spot,  can  neither
in  the  living  nor  the  dead  subject  be  determined  with  that
accuracy  requisite  for  measurements ;  whilst  those  spots
nearest  the  skin  generally  correspond  with  the  ridges  and
muscular  projections.  The  objection  which  may  be  made  to
so  many  methods,  viz.,  their  inapplicability  to  both  the
living  and  dead  subject,  applies  also  to  the  otherwise  ra-
tional method  lately  proposed  by  Professor  Busk  of  London.
This  mode  of  measurement  is  based  essentially  upon  a  fixed
vertical  line  passing  through  the  centre  of  the  auditory  open-
ing, and  drawn  from  the  vertex  at  the  point  where  the
sagittal  and  coronal  sutures  meet.  The  selection  of  the  ex-
ternal aperture  of  the  ear  as  the  starting-point  of  the  radii
and  angles  is  unobjectionable ;  but  the  perpendicular  line  can
hardly  be  determined  with  accuracy.  In  many  skulls  the  exact
point  can  only  be  guessed  at,  as  the  sutures  are  frequently
denticulated  to  such  an  extent  that  the  exact  spot  in  which  they
meet  may  be  outside  the  central  line,  and  consequently  either
before  or  behind  the  point.  It  is,  moreover,  impossible
to  find  this  point  on  the  living  head ;  and  as  all  other  lines
depend  upon  the  vertical,  Busk's  method  of  measurement  can-

*  This  is  a  very  ingenious  theory,  but  must  be  pronounced  to  be  as  yet
mere  speculation. — Editor.


28  LECTURE    II.

not  be  applied  to  the  living  body.  It  is,  moreover,  difficult  to
apply  this  method,  as  the  explanations  are  so  brief  and  imper-
fect,* notwithstanding  the  illustrative  figures.  I,  however,  give
the  table  and  some  illustrations,  as  the  method  contains  the
germ  of  a  rational  system  of  measurement.

A  new  method  of  cranial  measurement,  proposed  quite  re-
cently by  Prof.  Aeby  of  Berne,  is  founded  on  the  use  of  a
base  line,  the  posterior  end  of  which  coincides  with  the  central
point  of  the  anterior  margin  of  the  foramen  magnum.  The
other  extremity  of  this  base  line  must  be  sought  for  at  the
anterior  margin  of  the  plate  of  the  ethmoid,  which  is  easily
accessible  in  a  skull  sawn  through  longitudinally,  but  is  more
difficult  to  determine  in  the  entire  skull  on  account  of  the
hidden  position  of  the  ethmoid  bone.  "  Externally,"  says
Aeby,  "  this  point  generally  corresponds  with  the  lower  mar-
gin of  the  frontal  bone,  where  it  joins  the  nasal  process  of  the
superior  maxillary  bone ;  still  it  must  be  borne  in  mind  that
the  suture  in  question  may  remove  higher  up  or  lower  down  in
different  individuals.  The  point  may  be  obtained  with  great
certainty  by  connecting  the  foramina  ethmoidalia  by  a  straight
line,  and  producing  it  in  front  until  it  intersects  the  suture  be-
tween the  above-mentioned  process  and  the  lachrymal  bone.
Regard  must  be  had  to  the  possibly  abnormal  course  of  this
suture.  Here,  then,  we  have  the  anterior  end  of  our  base  line,
which  embraces  the  whole  space  where  the  cerebral  and
the  facial  portion  adjoin  each  other."  The  base  line  obtained
in  this  way  is  produced  backwards  and  forwards,  and  the  whole
system  of  measurement  is  founded  upon  it.  A  plane  placed
perpendicularly  upon  it,  longitudinally  bisecting  the  skull,  is
called  the  median  plane,  and  in  this  plane  various  ordinates
are  measured  which  run  upwards  towards  the  surface  of  the
cerebral  portion,  or  downwards  to  points  of  the  facial  portion
of  the    skull.       Upon  both   the  terminal  points  of  the  base

*  This  is  scarcely  a  fair  criticism  of  Professor  Busk's  method,  which  chiefly
errs  on  account  of  its  diffuseness  and  prolixity.  The  author  does  not  seem
to  be  acquainted  with  the  tables  circulated  by  Messrs.  Quekett  and  Busk
many  years  ago  ;  or  with  Mr.  Busk's  paper  on  "  A  Systematic  Mode  of  Cra-
niometry," in  Transactions  of  Ethnological  Society,  vol.  1,  new  series,  p.
341. — Editor.


LECTURE    II.  29

line,  the  absolute  measure  of  which  is  in  comparison  always
assumed  as  unity,  two  perpendicular  ordinates  are  erected,
and  the  space  between  both  extreme  points  equally  divided  by
two  other  ordinates.  Other  perpendiculars  are  then  drawn
through  the  most  prominent  points  of  the  frontal  and  occipital
bones,  and  also  through  the  posterior  border  of  the  foramen
magnum,  so  that  we  have  upon  the  base  line,  at  various  dis-
tances, seven  perpendiculars,  by  which  the  contour  of  the
curve,  described  by  the  median  plane  on  the  surface  of  the
skull,  can  be  determined  with  sufficient  exactness  to  be  used  for
graphic  delineation.  Less  attention  is  paid  by  Aeby  to  the  facial
portion ;  it  is  determined  by  three  lines  which  are  drawn  to  the
points  of  the  nasal  bones,  to  the  upper  jaw  above  the  roots  of
the  incisors,  and  to  the  posterior  border  of  the  bony  palate.
The  development  of  the  skull  in  breadth  and  height  is  repre-
sented by  three  transverse  sections  perpendicular  to  the  base
line.  The  hindmost  of  these  is  placed  at  equal  distances  be-
tween the  external  auditory  opening  and  the  articulation  of
the  jaw ;  the  central  one  at  the  point  of  greatest  constriction
behind  the  orbits,  while  the  anterior  one  joins  the  zygomatic
processes  of  the  frontal  bone,  where  they  join  the  frontal  pro-
cesses of  the  zygoma.  All  these  planes  are  measured  by  equi-
distant ordinates,  like  the  median  plane.  All  measurements
being  reduced  to  the  base  line  as  unity,  Aeby  obtains  compa-
rable numbers  ;  and  by  multiplying  the  measurements  he  eli-
minates individual  deviations,  and  reducing  them  to  an  average,
obtains  for  each  race,  for  each  species,  a  definite  mean  number,
and  also  comparable  reduced  normal  skulls,  capable  of  being
arranged  in  series.

Aeby  gives  the  following  resume  of  his  measurements  and
calculations  in  the  Transactions  of  the  Basle  Society  of  Na-
turalists : — "  I  expected  to  obtain  from  the  median  plane  in
particular,  definite  starting-points  for  the  scientific  division  of
human  races ;  I  was  therefore  not  a  little  surprised  to  find  just
the  contrary.  If  a  close  examination  of  more  than  five
hundred  skulls  from  all  parts  of  the  earth  entitles  one  to  ex-
press an  opinion,  then  I  must  say,  most  decidedly,  that  the
normal  skulls  of  all  races  essentially  agree  with  one  another  as


30  LECTURE    II.

regards  the  median  plane,  and  that  in  this  respect  the  ex-
tremest  dolichocephaly  and  brachycephaly  show  no  difference
whatever.  The  variations  to  which  the  occiput  is  subject  are
in  some  cases  so  abnormal  and  so  great,  even  within  individual
limits,  that  they  cannot  be  regarded  as  influencing  the  general
law.  Opposed  to  this  constancy  of  the  median  plane,  the  dif-
ferences in  the  frontal  planes  are  the  more  striking.  Here  the
cranial  forms  decidedly  separate  into  narrow  and  broad.  Each
is  distributed  into  particular  regions;  the  former  belonging  to
the  southern,  the  latter  to  the  northern,  hemisphere.  Africa
and  Polynesia,  with  New  Holland,  offer  the  narrowest,  Eu-
rope, with  Northern  Asia,  the  broadest,  forms  of  skulls.
Southern  Asia  is  intermediate  between  both  divisions,  not
merely  because  its  inhabitants  (Chinese  and  Javanese,  for
instance)  possess  generally  a  medium  breadth  of  skull ;  but
also  especially  because  some  districts  repeat  the  type  of  the
most  decided  narrow  skulls  (e.  g.  Hindu),  others,  that  of  the
broad  skulls  (some  islands  in  the  vicinity  of  Java) .  It  is  re-
markable that  the  G  reenlanders,  though  a  high  northern  people,
possess  the  most  decidedly  narrow  skulls  which  exist.  How
it  is  in  the  rest  of  America  I  am  unable  to  say,  as  I  had  not
sufficient  materials  at  my  disposal.  Both  types  seem  repre-
sented. Some,  at  least,  of  the  Brazilian  peoples  are  narrow-
headed  ;  whilst  the  Botocudos  and  the  Indians  of  the  North  are
more  or  less  decidedly  broad-headed.  The  measurements,  as
already  stated,  all  refer  to  the  reduced  skull,  and  are,  therefore,
independent  of  absolute  size.  I  have  not  succeeded  in  finding
a  definite  law  of  development  for  the  latter.

"  All  differences,  therefore,  of  the  human  cranial  form  de-
pend essentially  on  the  difference  in  the  development  of  breadth.
Platycephaly  stands  opposed  to  leptocephaly,  though  connected
with  it  by  gradual  transitions.  The  uniform  development  of
the  median  plane  in  the  whole  human  species,  appears  to  me  a
fact  of  the  greatest  interest.  Not  less  important  seems  to  me
the  observation  that  ethnic  differences  do  not  much  obtain  in
childhood ;  for  between  the  infantile  skulls  of  Negroes  and  Eu-
ropeans I  find  the  greatest  accordance.  Median  planes  and
frontal  planes  cover  each  other  completely ;  an  important  fact


LECTURE    II.  31

in  the  estimation  of  narrow  and  broad  skulls  :  both  originate
from  the   same  point,  but  in  such  a  manner  that  whilst  the
growth  of  the  latter  proceeds  at  a  uniform  rate  in  all  directions,
that  of  the  former  is  confined  to  transverse  expansion.      In
this  we  find  an  accord  with  the  type  of  development  of  the
lower  creatures.     I  have  already  elsewhere  drawn  attention  to
the  similarity  of  all  foetal  cranial  forms.     I  am  now  prepared
to  lay  it  down  as  a  general  law,  that  a  cranial  form  occupies  a
higher  rank  accordingly  as  it  advances  by  uniform  peripheral
development  from  the  foetal  form ;  and  that  it  stands  lower,
accordingly  as  the  growth  is  confined  to  certain  directions  and
points.     From  this  point  of  view,  the  narrow  skull  must  be
considered  as  a  lower  type.     Of  course,  no  inference  must  be
drawn  from  this  as  to  the  mental  capacity  of  the  possessor  of
such  a  skull.     We  will  not  leave  unmentioned  that  possibly
the  same  position  may  be  assigned  to  the  most  decided  broad
skulls.     Some   of  these,   at  least   (e.  g.  the  Tunguse),  have  a
tendency  to  vertical  flattening.     But  if  this  be  considered  as
arising  from  the  predominance  of  the  growth  in  width,  we  have
the  reverse  of  the  type  of  development  of  the  narrow  skull.
The  most  perfect  form  would  accordingly  be  the  intermediate
one ;  and  it  is,  perhaps,  not  without  significance  that  this  form
is  the  inheritance  of  those  peoples  who    have    accomplished
most  in  the  province  of  intellect."

I  must  freely  confess  that  I  do  not  perfectly  understand  one
point  in  this  deduction.  If  ' '  the  uniform  development  of  the
median  plane"  means  that  the  area  of  the  vertical  section  is,  in
proportion  to  the  base  line,  the  same  in  all  normal  skulls,  the
result  would  be  of  considerable  importance,  and  might  be  ex-
pressed in  other  words, — that  the  diminution  of  the  frontal
part,  for  instance,  is  compensated  by  the  occipital  part,  and
vice  versa.  It  appears  to  me,  however,  that  the  estimation  of
the  median  plane,  from  the  few  ordinates  measured,  must  pre-
sent considerable  difficulties.  But  if  the  meaning  is,  that  the
individual  ordinates,  calculated  upon  the  base  line,  are  equal  to
each  other,  then  I  must  express  my  disbelief,  and  should  re-
gard it  as  a  fundamental  defect  in  the  whole  system  of  mea-


32  LECTURE    II.

surement,  that  it  cannot  show  such  differences  as  are  found  in
the  development  of  the  forehead  and  the  vertex.

If  we  return  from  this  digression  to  the  investigation  of  the
normal  base  line,  upon  which  measurement  must  depend,  we
find  the  same  difficulties  in  determining  a  universal  horizontal
plane,  as  in  determining  the  normal  vertical  one.  In  perfect
repose  the  head  is  balanced  upon  the  topmost  vertebra,  the
so-called  atlas,  but  as  is  easily  seen,  this  equilibrium  is  dis-
turbed both  in  the  living  subject  and  in  the  dead  skull,  in  the
most  various  ways.  If,  however,  the  above  position  is  assumed
as  the  normal,  then  selecting  as  the  starting-point  the  aperture
of  the  ear,  the  horizontal  line  passes  nearly  through  the  centre
of  the  nasal  aperture,  a  little  above  the  point  of  the  nose,  in
the  living  man.  A  horizontal  line  must,  therefore,  be  assumed
(its  importance  will  be  seen  in  the  sequel),  which  can  be  de-
termined by  its  terminal  points,  though  it  causes  the  head  to
deviate  slightly  from  the  natural  position.

The  half-dozen  anthropologists  who  met  at  Gottingen,  in  the
autumn  of  1861,  had  a  lively  discussion  with  regard  to  the
line,  or  rather  the  plane,  which  ought  to  be  assumed  as  the
horizontal.  One  proposed  the  zygomatic  arch ;  another,  a  plane
passing  across  the  occipital  foramen ;  a  third,  a  line  from  the
auditory  aperture  to  the  base  of  the  nasal  aperture.  The  zygo-
matic arch  is  never  quite  straight;  the  direction  of  the  hori-
zontal line  passing  through  it  must  frequently  be  taken  more  ac-
cording to  the  feeling  than  actual  measurement.  Even  if  we
could  succeed  in  laying  a  plane  exactly  across  the  occipital  fora-
men— a  task  of  considerable  difficulty  on  account  of  its  form —
it  cannot  be  determined  in  the  living  head,  and  as  this  plane
is  so  short,  every  error  would  be  magnified  by  the  necessary
prolongation  of  it.  The  only  horizontal  plane  which  can  be
termed  rational  is  that  between  the  two  aural  apertures  and
the  bottom  of  the  nasal  apertures,  and  which  may  be  deter-
mined both  on  the  living  head  and  on  the  skull.  The  hori-
zontal line  drawn  in  this  way,  between  two  fixed  points,
easily  determinable  both  on  the  living  head  and  dead  skull,  has
moreover  the  advantage  of  representing  one  of  the  lines  of  Cam-
per's facial  angle,  which  has  been  long  in  use,  and  although  defec-


LECTURE    II.


33


tive  in  many  respects,  does  not  at  all  deserve  the  neglect  with
which  it  has  been  treated  in  some  recent  works.  As  regards  the
estimation  of  this  angle,  as  well  as  of  some  others  which  can
only  be  taken  on  the  dry  skull,  it  will  be  necessary  to  make
some  further  observations.

Fig.  1.     Cranium  of  an  Australian  in  profile,  after  Lucae,


The  osseous  framework  of  the  head  is  composed  of  two
intimately  connected  parts :  the  cranium  proper,  containing
the  brain,  and  forming  a  firmly  closed  box  with  a  few  aper-
tures only,  through  which  the  spinal  cord,  nerves,  and  blood-
vessels obtain  access  to  the  brain;  and  the  face,  containing
spaces  for  the  more  important  organs  of  sense  and  the  en-
trances to  the  respiratory  and  digestive  organs.  On  compar-
ing the  formation  of  the  head  in  man  and  brute,  we  see,  at  the
first  glance,  that  in  the  former  the  skull-cap,  and  consequently
the  enclosed  brain,  predominates  considerably  over  the  face,
which  appears  like  an  appendage  to  the  skull.  For  we  must  bear
in  mind,  that  in  normal  skulls  a  plane  drawn  from  the  upper
margin  of  the  eyebrows  through  the  aural  apertures,  passes  to
the  posterior  edge  of  the  occipital  foramen;  that  is  to  say,
almost  entirely  within  the  internal  cranial  space,  and  that  when
the  head  is  thus  divided  into  two  parts,  the  upper  portion  con-

D


34


LECTURE    II.


tains  the  brain,  the  lower  the  face.  If  the  dried  skull  is  looked
at  without  the  lower  jaw,  the  disproportion  is  still  more  strik-
ing-. The  forehead,  which,  according  to  artistic  notions,  con-
stitutes so  essential  a  part  of  the  countenance,  belongs  to  the
skull,  and  not  to  the  face ;  it  is,  in  fact,  one  of  the  most
important  parts  of  the  cerebral  cranium,  and  must  be  particu-
larly attended  to  in  investigating  the  peculiarities  of  the  struc-
ture of  man.

Let  us  now  compare  the  formation  of  the  human  head  with
that  of  any  other  animal,  and  we  shall  find  two  essential
differences  depending  on  the  proportions  of  the  two  parts.
The  cranium  proper  is  in  man  absolutely  larger  than  in  the
brute,  in  which  the  face  frequently  occupies  more  space  than
the  brain-case ;  in  man,  too,  the  face  is,  to  a  certain  extent,  a
sort  of  appendage,  fastened  on  under  the  cranium,  whilst  in
the  animal  the  cranial  cavity  lies  rather  behind  the  face.  In
man  the  roof  of  the  orbits,  upon  which  the  anterior  lobes  of
the  brain  rest,  forms  nearly  a  horizontal  plane ;  in  the  animal
it  may  be  nearly  vertical.  In  man  a  perpendicular  line  drawn
from  the  root  of  the  nose  falls  usually  upon  the  canine  tooth ;
in  the  animal  upon  the  posterior  molars.

Fig.  2.     Skull  of  the  Weeper  Monkey,  Cebus  apetta,  in  profile.


In  man  the  forehead  is  arched  forward;  in  the  animal,  on  the


lecture  ii.  :;.")

contrary,  tlie  face  projects  in  a  muzzle,  whilst  the  forehead  and
the  cranium  recede.  Camper  endeavoured  to  express  this
relation  by  his  facial  angle.  The  more  the  muzzle  projects  and
the  forehead  recedes,  the  more  acute  must  be  the  angle  formed
by  two  lines,  one  of  which  is  drawn  from  the  aural  aperture  to
the  margin  of  the  upper  jaw,  and  the  other  from  the  jaw  to  the
most  prominent  point  of  the  forehead.  It  is  true,  Gentlemen,
that  the  facial  angle  does  not  altogether  answer  its  purpose ;  it
is  true  that  Camper  did  not  definitely  determine  it,  so  that
some  take  the  angle  at  the  nasal  spine,  others  at  the  alveolar
margin.  It  is  also  true  that  there  are  skulls  in  which  the  pro-
jecting snouts  depend  almost  entirely  upon  the  formation  of
the  jaws.  In  many  cases,  too,  the  eyebrows  are  very  promi-
nent, such  prominence  depending  not  upon  the  development
of  the  brain,  but  upon  that  of  the  frontal  sinuses,  which  are
connected  with  the  nose.  But,  granting  all  these  objections,
it  must  be  admitted  that  similar  ones  may  be  made  to  most
other  measurements,  and  that  conclusions  as  to  the  general
proportions  of  a  skull  cannot  be  deduced  from  a  single  measure-
ment. Cainper's  angle  alone  cannot  afford  a  valid  standard  of
the  relative  proportions  of  skull  and  face,  still  it  fairly  repre-
sents these  proportions,  and  should  in  no  case  be  neglected.

It  must  not  be  forgotten  that  all  these  observations,  which
have  for  their  object  the  determination,  not  merely  of  the
external  form  of  the  head,  but  of  the  proportions  of  its  parts,
have  to  be  made  chiefly  on  the  dead  skull,  and  not  on  the
living  head.  The  real  proportions  can  only  be  ascertained
when  the  skull  is  bisected,  so  that  both  the  right  and  left
halves  may  be  inspected  and  measured  internally  and  ex-
ternally. As  I  cannot  expect  you  to  be  acquainted  with
anatomical  details,  I  venture  to  offer  a  few  explanations,  which
I  shall  endeavour  to  make  as  short  as  possible.

The  basis  of  the  cranium,  upon  which  the  brain  rests,
consists  essentially  of  four  bones :  the  occipital,  the  sphe-
noid, the  ethmoid,  and  the  frontal.  By  the  aperture  in  the
occipital  the  spinal  cord  reaches  the  brain;  the  optic  nerve
passes  through  the  sphenoid  to  the  eye,  and  the  olfactory
through  the  ethmoid  bone.     We  ueed  not  notice  the  frontal

d  2


36


LECTURE    II.


bone,  as  it  merely  assists  in   supporting    the   anterior  lobes
and  can  scarcely  be  considered  as  belonging  to  the  base  of  the

Fi°\  3.     Base  of  skull,  inner  surface;  calvarium  removed.

I


a.  The  frontal  sinuses  connected  with  the  nasal  cavity,  b.  The  ethmoid  bone,
with  the  crista  galli  and  cribriform  plate  for  the  passage  of  the  olfactory  nerves.
c.  Anterior  fossa,  roof  of  the  orbit,  d.  Frontal  bone.  e.  Anterior  clinoid  process.
/.  Great  wing  of  the  sphenoid  bone.  g.  Body  of  the  sphenoid  bone ;  depres-
sion of  the  sella  turcica,  h.  Posterior  clinoid  process,  i.  Squama  of  the
temporal  bone.  k.  Body  of  the  occipital  bone.  I.  Parietal  bone.  m.  Petrous
portion  of  the  temporal,  o.  Occipital  foramen,  p.  Cerebellar  fossa,  q.  Occi-
pital squama.

brain.  The  central  parts,  or  bodies,  of  the  occipital,  sphenoid,
and  ethmoid  bones,  correspond  to  vertebras,  which,  however,
are  considerably  modified  in  their  structure.  The  ethmoid  bone
exhibits,  though  imperfectly,  the  form  of  a  vertebra  without
peripheral  parts ;  the  occipital  bone,  on  the  contrary,  represents
a  perfect  vertebra,  having  not  merely  articulating  surfaces  for
the  succeeding  vertebra,  the  so-called  atlas,  but  forming  the  fora-
men magnum,  by  which  the  continuation  of  the  spinal  cord  enters
the  cranium.  The  sphenoid  bone  finally  represents  an  interme-
diate shape,  its  body,  on  the  one  hand,  being  a  continuation  of


LECTURE    II.  37

the  occipital  bone,  and  the  wings,  on  the  other  hand,  which
assist  in  closing  the  orbits  and  the  temporal  fossa?,  forming  side
pieces,  and  at  least  tending  towards  the  formation  of  an  arch.
Fig.  4.     Base  of  skull  viewed  externally.


a.  The  palatine  process  of  the  superior  maxillary  forms  with  d.  the  hori-
zontal plate  of  the  palate  bone,  the  bony  palate.  6.  Zygomatic  process  of
the  superior  maxillary  forms  with  c.  the  zygoma,  and  g.  the  zygomatic  pro-
cess of  the  temporal  bone,  the  zygomatic  arch.  e.  Temporal  fossa,  formed
chiefly  by  the  greater  wing  of  the  sphenoid.  /.  Posterior  nasal  spine,  h.
Vomer,  i.  Body  of  the  basilar  bone,  formed  of  the  confluent  bodies  of  the
sphenoid  bone  (in  front)  and  the  occipital  bone.  k.  Styloid  process  of  the
temporal  bone.  I.  Glenoid  fossa  for  the  condyle  of  the  lower  jaw.  m.  Py-
ramid of  the  petrous  portion.  n.  Mastoid  process  of  the  temporal  bone.
o.  Articular  surfaces  of  the  occipital  bone.  p.  Posterior  inferior  angle  of  parietal
bone.  q.  Lambdoid  suture,  r.  Foramen  magnum,  s.  Squama  of  the  occi-
pital bone.  t.  Inferior  curved  line.  u.  Occipital  crest,  v .  Superior  curved
line.    w.  Occipital  protuberances.

The  vault  of  the  cranium  is  completed  by  the  arched  bones
termed  the  temporal,  parietal,  and  frontal,  which  are  joined  to-
gether by  sutures.  It  is  important  to  know  the  course  of  these
sutures.  On  looking  at  the  skull  from  above,  there  is  seen  on
the  vertex  a  transverse  suture  which  separates  the  frontal  from


38


LECTUKE    II.


the  two  parietal  bones — the  sutwra  coronalis.*  The  two  parietal
bones  are  separated  by  a  longitudinal  suture  (the  sutura  sagit-
talis).f  In  the  earliest  stages  of  existence  this  suture  is  con-
tinued to  the  root  of  the  nose  and  thus  divides  the  frontal  bone
into  two  symmetrical  halves,  but  in  normal  skulls  the  aperture
is  closed  before  birth  ;  in  some  broad  heads  the  frontal  suture
remains  during  life.  The  sagittal  suture  terminates  in  the  oc-
ciput, where  it  touches  a  triangular  suture  which  separates  the
occipital  from  the  parietal  bones,  and  is  called  the  lambdoid
suture.

The  cranial  bones  are  developed  at  the  expense  of  a  cartila-

Fig.  5.  Outline  of  an  adult  skull  with  persistent  frontal  suture,  top  view,
after  Welcker.  The  positions  of  the  two  fontanelles  are  marked  by  dotted
lines,  as  well  as  the  outlines  of  the  bones  as  they  are  developed  in  the  new-
born child.


a.  Frontal  suture,  b.  Coronal  suture,  c.  Lambdoid  suture,  d.  Sagittal
suture,  e.  Anterior  Fontanelle.  /.  Posterior  fontanelle.  g.  Frontal  protu-
berances, i.  Occipital  protuberance  (not  visible),  k.  Frontal  bone.  I.  Pa-
rietal bone.     to.  Occipital  bone.

*  "  Fronto-parietal"  suture. — Editor,      f  "  Interparietal''  suture. — Editor.


LECTURE    II.  39

ginous  or  membranous  base  from  separate  osseous  points,  some
of  which  are  symmetrically  placed  on  both  sides  of  the  median
line,  others  lie  in  the  central  line.  Increasing  in  growth — the
laws  of  which  Welcker  has  recently  established, — the  bones  ap-
proach each  other  and  are  finally  connected  by  sutures.

Thus  it  is  well  known  that  in  new-born  children  the  sutures
are  not  closed  on  the  top  of  the  head :  the  openings  are  the  so-
called  fontanelles.  The  anterior  or  the  large  fontanel! e  is  of  an
oblong  shape,  and  corresponds  to  the  junction  of  the  sagittal
and  coronal  sutures,  the  posterior,  triangular  in  shape,  is  situated
at  the  junction  of  the  sagittal  and  lambdoid  sutures.  These
fontanelles  usually  close  in  the  course  of  the  first  year.  The
frontal  suture  closes  sooner.  Synostosis  of  the  sphenoid  and
occipital  bone  frequently  takes  place  at  maturity,  so  that  some
anatomists*  have  described  them  as  one  bone.  All  these  sutures
are  often  closed  in  old  age.  Premature  closing  is  frequently
the  cause  of  the  arrest  of  cerebral  development.  The  order  in
which  the  sutures  close  appears  to  be  connected  with  the
development  of  individuals  and  races,  as  we  shall  see  in  the
sequel.

Some  of  the  osseous  points  from  which  the  cranial  bones  are
developed  may  be  observed  as  prominences  in  the  adult  skull.
This  is  not,  however,  always  the  case ;  in  some  crania  they  are
obliterated,  in  others  very  perceptible.  Such  are  the  frontal
eminences  (tubera  frontalia)  above  the  eyebrows,  the  parietal
protuberances  (tubera  parietalia),  and  the  occipital  prominence
(tuber  occipitale)  in  the  centre  of  the  squama  occipitis.  These
prominences  are  very  distinct  in  the  infant,  and  if,  as  is  done  in
the  annexed  figures,  the  outlines  of  the  embryonal  bones  are
marked  on  the  adult  skull,  and  the  corresponding  prominences
superposed,  we  obtain  a  good  idea  of  the  growth  of  the  respec-
tive bones  from  birth  to  adult  age.

The  base  of  the  head  formed  by  the  three  cranial  vertebras  is
of  great  importance,  as  it  determines  the  development  of  the
cranium,  as  well  as  that  of  the  face ;  the  cranium,  as  regards
development  and  interpretation,  being  only  a  radiation  of  the
parietal  parts  of  the  base,  and  the  face  being  appended  to  them,

*  Meckel  especially. — Editor.


40


LECTURE    II.


every  change  in  the  development  and  juncture  of  these  three
fundamental  bones  must  necessarily  influence  both  parts  of  the

Fig.  6.     Side  view  of  the  skull,  as  in  preceding  figure,     a.  to  m.  have  the

same  signification.


n.  Squama  of  temporal  bone.  o.  Mastoid  process,  p.  External  auditory-
aperture,  q.  Temporal  ridge,  r.  Zygomatic  arch.  s.  "Wing  of  the  sphe-
noid bone.  t.  Zygoma  (cheek  bones).  u.  Upper  jaw.  v.  Nasal  spine.
w.  Orbit,     x.  Nasal  bone.     y.  Nasal  suture,     z.  Glabella.

head,  inasmuch  as  these  in  a  certain  degree  represent  the  two
arms  of  a  lever  which  finds  its  central  point  in  these  bones.
On  inspecting  a  skull  sawn  through,  so  as  to  divide  these
bones  longitudinally  through  the  centre,  we  perceive  that  they
do  not,  at  all  events,  in  normal  skulls,  present  a  straight
line,  but  an  angular  surface,  the  centre  of  which  is  in  a  depres-
sion of  the  sphenoid  bone  called  the  "Turkish  saddle"  (sella
turcica).  Upon  this  "saddle"  rests  an  appendage  of  the
brain  situated  almost  in  the  centre  of  the  lower  surface  of  the
cerebral  mass.  In  the  same  spot  where  the  angle  is  formed,
that  peculiar  cartilaginous  body  the  chorda,  terminates  what
served  as  the  central  point  for  the  formation  of  the  vertebras
of  the  embryo  at  the  earliest  period.    It  has  been  observed  that


LECTURE    II.


41


in  all  higher  vertebrate  embryos,  there  is  at  this  spot  a  con-
siderable curvature  of  the  cerebral  axis,  by  which,  at  a  time
when  scarcely  the  first  foundation  of  the  face  exists,  the  anterior
part  of  the  head  is  bent  like  the  anterior  phalanx  of  a  finger
when  we  close  the  fist.  Though  this  original  curvature  in  the
embryo  is  subsequently  diminished  both  by  the  growth  of  the
face  and  the  brain,  there  still  remains,  even  in  mature  age,
a  trace  of  this  formation  so  characteristic  of  the  higher  verte-
brates. The  region  in  the  vicinity  of  the  sella  turcica,
and  the  bones  connected  therewith,  are,  then,  in  many  re-
spects the  apex  of  the  angle,  the  central  point  on  which  the
skull  and  face  turn,  and  of  the  greatest  importance  in  the  study
of  them.     To  Professor  Virchow  belongs  the  merit  of  having

Fig.  7.     Vertical  section  in  the  median  plane  of  the  skull  of  a  very  ortho-
gnathous  German,  after  Welcker.


a.  Parietal  bone.  6.  Cantle  of  saddle,  c.  Turkish  saddle  (sella  tvircica).
d.  Pommel  of  saddle  (olivary  process),  e.  Frontal  protuberances.  /.  Frontal
sinus,  g.  Nasal  bone.  h.  Nasal  cavity,  i.  Anterior  nasal  spine,  k.  Dental
margin  of  the  superior  maxillary.  I.  Osseous  palate,  m.  Foramen  magnum.
n.  Occipital  squama,     o.  Body  of  occipital  bone.    p.  Cerebral  cavity.

The  lines  continued  beyond  the  skull  by  dots  are  measuring-lines,  which
are  explained  in  the  Table,  and  indicate  at  the  same  time  the  angles  of  the
facial  quadrangle,  they  enclose — 1.  Fronto-nasal  angle  and  Line  ne.  2.
Dental  angle  and  line  b  x.  3.  Line  n  x.  4.  Line  b  e  and  foraminal  angle.
Line  n  b  and  n  b  =  length  of  the  cranial  vertebrae,  according  to  Virchow.
See  Table  No.  6.


42


LECTURE    II.


first  pointed  out  the  importance  of  the  relations  of  these  bones
to  cerebral  and  cranial  development,  and  of  having  shown  that
the  size  and  position  of  the  so-called  sphenoid  angle  are  ab-
solutely requisite  for  examining  the  skull  and  face — a  truth
which  has  been  very  recently  confirmed  by  Welcker' s  numerous
measurements.

In  fact,  Welcker  has  shown  that  the  more  the  sphenoid  bone
is  bent,  that  is  to  say,  the  smaller  the  sphenoid  angle,  the  more
perpendicular  is  the  position  of  the  teeth,  and  that  the  sphenoid
angle  becomes  larger  in  proportion  to  the  greater  obliquity  of
the  incisors  produced  by  the  enlargement  of  the  facial  bones.
Besides  this,  Welcker  has  proved  that  the  measurement  of  this
angle,  which  is  determined  by  three  points,  namely,  the  root
of  the  nose  at  the  juncture  of  the  nasal  and  frontal  bone,  the  an-
terior margin  of  the  occipital  foramen,  and  the  "  pommel  of  the
saddle"  (olivary  process) ;  he  has  proved,  I  say,  that  this  angle
and  its  development  in  man  is  an  excellent  corrective  of  Cam-
per's facial  angle,  as  well  as  a  distinctive  character  between
man  and  ape.     I  will  explain  the  matter  further.

In  the  infant,  the  head  and  cranium  are  proportionately  very
Fig.  8.     Vertical  section  of  the  skull  of  a  new-born  child,  after  Welcker.


Description  the  same  as  in  the  preceding  figure,  except,  in  addition,  q,  anter
fontanelle,  r  posterior  fontanelle.


lor


LECTURE    II.


43


large,  the  forehead  is  arched,  the  brain  more  developed,  so  to
speak,  than  any  other  part  of  the  body ;  the  jaws  especially  are
remarkably  slightly  developed,  the  teeth  are  absent.  During
the  first  year,  the  growth  is  accordingly  greater  in  the  face

Fig.  9.     Vertical  section  of  the  skull  of  Cebus  apella,  natural  size.     Descrip-
tion the  same  as  in  the  two  preceding  figures.


than  in  the  cranium.  Hence  it  follows  that  Camper's  facial
angle  is  larger  in  the  child  than  in  the  adult ;  and  if  the  facial
angle  were  to  be  the  sole  measure  of  cerebral  development  and
of  intelligence,  the  child  would  be  intellectually  in  advance  of


44  LECTURE    II.

the  adult.  But  it  is  different  with  the  angle  of  the  sella,  which
is  more  obtuse  in  the  child  than  in  the  adult,  so  that  in  this  re-
spect the  correct  proportion,  is  established.  But  according  to
Welcker's  researches,  there  is  a  great  difference  as  regards  the
formation  of  this  angle  between  man  and  even  the  ape  nearest
allied  to  him.  It  is  well  known — and  we  shall  subsequently  re-
vert to  this  point — that  in  the  most  anthropoid  apes,  the  chim-
panzee, gorilla,  and  orang,  the  young  animal  in  every  respect
resembles  man  more  than  the  adult,  and  that  this  relapse
to  the  semblance  of  the  brute,  consists  essentially  in  the  fact
that  the  cranium  remains  stationary  as  regards  cerebral  capa-
city ;  whilst  the  jaws  and  the  whole  face  are  greatly  developed,
and  project  in  the  form  of  a  muzzle.  In  correspondence  with
this,  we  find  that,  e.  g.,  in  the  orang  the  angle  of  the  sella  is
the  more  obtuse  the  older  the  animal  is;  whilst,  on  the  contrary,
in  man  this  angle  is  smaller  in  the  adult  than  in  the  child.
"  If,"  says  Welcker,  "  the  skulls  are  arranged  according  to
Camper's  angle,  the  skull  of  the  infant,  contrasted  with  that  of
any  animal,  occupies  a  higher  place  than  the  skull  of  the  adult ;
but  if  the  skulls  are  arranged  according  to  the  increasing
size  of  the  angle  of  the  sella  the  series  stands :  man,  woman,
child,  animal.'"

If  a  fourth  point  be  added  to  the  three  which  mark  the  angle
of  the  sella,  namely  the  nasal  spine,  and  if  these  points  are
connected  by  lines,  we  obtain  an  irregular  quadrangle,  which
pretty  nearly  circumscribes  the  whole  face,  exclusive  of  the
lower  jaw,  and  the  form  of  which  depends  on  the  development
of  the  bones  and  their  curvatures.  The  four  corners  of  this
quadrangle  might  be  termed  the  sella-angle,  the  nasal-angle,
the  dental-angle,  and  the  foraminal-angle ;  and  we  may,  by
comparing  these  angles  in  different  individuals  and  races,
discover  important  and  constant  proportions  in  direct  relation
to  the  development  of  the  face  and  the  base  of  the  skull.  A
diagonal  of  the  facial  quadrangle,  drawn  from  the  anterior
margin  of  the  occipital  foramen  to  the  root  of  the  nose,  and  of
which  the  length  can  be  easily  estimated  in  either  opened
or  unopened  skulls,  is   so  far  important,  that  it  corresponds


LECTURE    II.  45

with  the  axis  of  the  curved  cranial  base,  and  thus,  by  its  rela-
tive length  or  shortness,  indicates  the  curvature  of  this  axis.

Whilst  by  means  of  the  facial  quadrangle,  and  a  few  trans-
verse diameters,  the  face  can  easily  be  characterised  in  its  chief
features,  the  difficulty  is  much  greater  as  regards  the  cranium
proper.  This  hollow  case  presents  so  many  deviations  from
the  oval  form,  the  various  points  on  which  the  measurement  is
based  are  so  easily  misplaced,  that  it  is  extraordinarily  difficult
to  establish  a  system  of  diameters,  radii,  and  angles  universally
applicable  to  all  crania.  Huschke,  in  a  big  book  containing
much  that  is  valuable  as  well  as  much  that  is  singular,  has  not
only  proposed,  but  carried  out  on  several  specimens,  a  formal
triangulation  of  the  skull,  by  means  of  which  he  endeavours
to  calculate  the  area  of  the  cranial  bones  and  their  relative
development.  His  object  was  to  find  the  superficial  extent  of
the  three  cranial  vertebras,  which,  in  accordance  with  a  natural-
philosophical  idea  which  Carus  has  specially  defended,  bears  a
special  relation  to  the  intellectual  functions.  No  one  has
hitherto  followed  this  path,  and  we  doubt  whether  any  one
will  pursue  the  same  method  by  reason  of  the  irregularity  of
the  cranial  bones,  and  the  numerous  sources  of  error  incidental
to  the  system,  nor  does  the  development  of  the  individual
cranial  vertebrae  stand  in  constant  proportion  to  that  of  the
brain  and  its  lobes.

Welcker  has  selected  for  the  designation  of  the  measure-
ments of  the  skull  a  geometrical  construction,  which  he  terms
the  cranial  net,  resembling  the  reticulated  designs  used  in
making  paper  and  pasteboard  figures  of  crystals.

Though  a  figure  composed  of  triangles  and  squares  cannot
give  a  correct  representation  of  the  skull  and  face,  the  cranial
nets  still  exhibit  such  characteristic  forms  and  peculiarities,
that  they  afford  us  considerable  assistance  in  determining
cranial  measurements.

At  the  meeting  of  anthropologists  in  Gottingen,  Von  Baer
justly  observed,  that  however  many  measurements  are  tabu-
lated, they  cannot  stand  in  the  place  of  general  impressions
made  by  the  skull  itself  examined  from  various  points  of  view,
and  that  it  would  be  well  to  agree  upon  the  designation  of
definite  characteristic  forms,  as  is  done  in  botany  with  regard


46


LECTURE    II.


Fie.  10.  Cranial  net,  after  Welcker.  The  measures  are  taken  from  an
asymmetrical  skull.  The  lines  of  which  the  diagram  is  composed  have  the
same  names  as  in  the  table  at  the  conclusion  of  the  lecture.


nu


f.  Frontal  protuberances,  p.  parietal  protuberances,  z.  Zygomatic  pro-
cess of  frontal  bone.  in.  Mastoid  process,  o.  Occipital  protuberances.  1.
Superior  cranial  quadrangle.  2.  Frontal  quadrangle.  3.  Basal  quadrangle.  4  and
5.  Lateral  trapezia.   6.  Superior,  7,  inferior,  8  and  9,  lateral,  occipital  triangles.

to  the  shapes  of  leaves  and  flowers.  Welcker  also  admits  that
many  important  peculiarities  of  parts  situated  between  the
points  of  measurement,  can  only  be  determined  by  a  very  com-
plicated process,  e.  g.,  the  shape  of  the  frontal  profile,  the
degree  of  elevation  of  the  various  eminences,  the  circumfer-
ence of  the  skull,  &c. ;  and  that,  for  all  these  particulars,
pictorial  representations  and  full  and  lucid  descriptions  must
supplement  the  measurements.


LECTURE    II.  47

According  to  Von  Baer  the  following  characteristic  relations
with  regard  to  form,  may  be  pointed  out  in  the  aspect  of  skulls
from  different  points  of  view  :

The  vertical  view  {norma  verticalis)  was  designated  by  the
venerable  Blumenbach  as  highly  important  and  characteristic,
although,  strange  to  say,  there  is  not  a  single  figure  of  this
kind  to  be  found  in  his  decades  of  views  of  the  cranium.
"Very  frequently,"  says  Von  Baer,  "  the  form  of  the  cranium
viewed  from  above,  is  oval,  if  the  transition  from  the  frontal
bone  to  the  zygoma  is  kept  out  of  view.  The  shape  is  some-
times very  like  that  of  a  common  hen's  egg,  that  is,  simply
oval,  sometimes  broadly  oval,  sometimes  longer,  narrowly  oval.
In  the  broad  form  the  rounded  part  in  front  is  frequently
wanting,  the  forehead  is  not  arched  transversely,  but  is  broad
and  flat ;  in  others,  especially  the  short-heads,  this  form  occurs
in  the  occiput  j  there  are  anteriorily  and  posteriorily  shortened
oval  shapes ;  and  if  forehead  and  occiput  are  equally  flattened,
and  the  sides  slightly  compressed,  there  results  the  form
which  has  been  termed  quadrate."  But  sometimes,  especially
among  the  long-heads,  the  occipital  region  is  found  as  pointedly
arched  as  the  forehead,  so  that  no  true  broad  end  exists,  a
form  which  Baer  designates  not  quite  correctly  as  elongated
oval.  And,  finally,  there  are  forms  very  closely  resembling  the
elliptical,  though  the  largest  transverse  diameter  is  always  a
little  behind  the  centre.

But  this  vertical  view  is  of  special  importance,  as  exhibit-
ing, at  a  glance,  the  proportion  of  the  longitudinal  to  the
transverse  diameter  of  the  cranium.  This  proportion  is,  in
fact,  so  important,  that  recent  French  authors*  term  it  the
cephalic  index  (indice  eephalique) ,  and  designate  it  by  a  single
cipher,  which  is  obtained  by  assuming  the  longitudinal  dia-
meter =  100,  and  reducing  the  transverse  diameter  to  this
denomination ;  cephalic  index  =  80,  means,  therefore,  that
assuming  the  longitudinal  diameter  to  be  100,  the  transverse
is  80.  As  Welcker  observes,  Blumenbach  designated  the
Negro  and  the  Calmuck  skull  as  the  extremes  of  cranial  form,
and  he  added,  that  a  model,  made  of  wax  (better,  now-a-days,

*  Especially  Broca. — Editor.


48


LECTURE    II.


of  gutta-percha)  of  the  Caucasian,  would,  by  lateral  pressure,
assume  a  Negroid  shape,  whilst,  by  antero-posterior  pressure,
it  would  assume  a  shape  like  that  of  the  Calmuck.

Fig.   11.     Top  view  of  the  skull  of  an  Australian,  after   Lucae.     Dolicho-
cephalic, elongated  oviform  shape.


Fit*.  12.     Top  view  of  the  skull  of  a  Little-Eussian,  after  Von  Baer.     Re-
markably brachycephalic,  quadrate  form  of  skull.


LECTURE    II.  49

Retzius  made  use  of  this  character,  and  founded  upon  it  his
division  of  peoples  into  long-heads  (dolichocephali),  and  short-
heads  (brachycephali) .  This  division  was  first  founded  upon
an  examination  of  Swedish  and  Sclavonian  skulls,  and,  in  these
cases,  Retzius  gave  the  proportion  of  the  two  diameters  as
follows  :  in  Swedes,  the  greatest  length  to  the  greatest  breadth,
as  1000: 773,  that  is  nearly  as  9: 7  ;  in  Sclavonians,  as  1000:888,
or  nearly  as  8  :  7.  It  must,  however,  be  admitted  that  Ret-
zius' measurements  were  confined  to  a  few  skulls,  which  he
selected  as  typical,  and  that  he  estimated  the  cranial  shape
rather  from  the  general  impression  of  the  aspect  of  skulls
than  by  exact  measurements.  It  must  also  be  kept  in  view,  that
though  Retzius  only  applied  these  various  forms  to  distinguish
different  tribes,  e.  g.,  Swedes  and  Sclavonians,  Finns  and  Lapps,
he  expressly  says  that  both  these  cranial  forms  are  to  be  found
in  every  one  of  the  assumed  chief  races.

Welcker  has  more  closely  examined  this  question,  and
proved,  by  numerous  measurements,  that  long-  and  short-
heads  represent  the  extreme  forms,  but  that  between  these
there  are  many  nations  presenting  gradual  transitions,  so  that
a  third  group  must  be  interposed,  which  might  be  called
orthocephali.*  Welcker  has  measured,  as  far  as  he  could,  a
considerable  series  of  skulls,  with  the  interesting  result,  that
the  different  stocks  diverge  constantly,  and  within  somewhat
wide  limits,  from  one  common  centre,  but  that  the  variations
are  of  nearly  equal  extent  on  both  sides,  and  appear  to  be
greater  in  proportion  to  the  commixture  of  the  race.  Thus,
the  variation  among  Lapps,  Cossacks,  ancient  Greeks  and
Romans,  Hindus,  Esquimaux  and  Australians,  are  but  very
slight ;  much  greater  among  Italians,  Germans,  Russians,
and  Finns ;  and  greatest  among  the  Buggese  and  French,  on
whose  cranial  forms  the  Frankish  invaders  had  a  considerable
influence.  Broca's  measurements  of  skulls,  taken  from  old
and  recent  Parisian  cemeteries,  yielded  similar  results.  The
unquestionable  intermixture  of  the  inhabitants  of  Paris,  from


*  This  remark  has  been  made  by  Broca  before  Welcker ;  Broca  proposed  a
better  name,  "  middle  -heads"  (mesaticephali),  which  we  shall  use  in  pre-
ference.

E


50  LECTURE    II.

the  earliest  origin  of  that  city,  is  easily  detected  in  the  series
of  skulls,  including  long-,  short-,  and  middle-heads,  the  oldest
of  which  date  from  the  time  of  the  Carlovingians.  The  ex-
tension of  the  series  may,  in  future  measurements,  afford  a
standard  for  the  degree  of  intermixture,  and  the  confinement
of  variation  in  size  within  narrow  limits  be  reararded  as
a  proof  of  the  purity  of  a  stock.  Taking  the  tables  of
Welcker  as  a  basis,  and  assuming  the  longitudinal  diameter  of
the  skull  ==  100,  the  following  results  are  obtained  for  the
various  races :  where  the  mean  of  the  transverse  diameter  is
below  72,  they  may  be  termed  long-heads ;  where  it  exceeds  81,
short-heads  ;  where  it  varies  between  74  and  81,  middle-heads.
Setting  aside  the  old  Peruvians,  among  whom  the  heads  of
children  were  artificially  deformed,  to  such  an  extent  that  the
transversal  diameter  sometimes  exceeded  the  longitudinal,
the  series  of  decided  brachycephali  includes  the  Lapps,  Macas-
sars, Madurese,  Bashkirs,  Turks,  and  New-Italians  ;  among  the
dolicJwcephali,  are  comprehended  the  Nukahivans,  Hindus,  Es-
quimaux, Negroes,  Australians,  Kaffirs,  Bushmen,  and  Hotten-
tots, who  reach  the  highest  standard  of  dolichocephaly,  so  that
one  of  the  skulls  measured  exhibits  the  simian  proportion  of  63
for  the  transverse  diameter.  The  series  of  mesaticephali  may
be  arranged  as  follows,  those  with  the  shortest  heads  first,  and
those  with  the  longest  heads  last :  Germans,  Russians,  Bug-
gese,  Sumatrans,  Calmucks,  Javanese,  French,  Cossacks,  Jews,
Gipsies,  Moluccans,  Indians,  Chinese,  Finns,  ancient  Greeks,
ancient  Romans,  Brazilians,  Dutch.  One  might  almost  be  led
to  conclude  from  this  table  that  the  most  favourable  conditions
for  civilisation  are  to  be  found  in  the  intermediate  position
between  the  two  extremes,  a  conclusion  which  would  be  flat-
tering to  the  French,  as  they  form  nearly  the  centre  of  the
mesaticephali,  just  as  they  consider  themselves  as  the  centre
of  civilisation.  But  we  shall  see  in  the  sequel  that  there  are
other  conditions  which  exercise  a  definite  influence.

The  lateral  view  or  profile  best  exhibits  a  proportion
which  may  also  be  observed  from  above,  namely,  the  relation
of  the  cranium  to  the  face,  and  especially  the  projection  or  re-
trocession of  the  jaws.     We  have  seen  that  the  projection  of


LECTURE    II.


51


the  face  impresses  an  animal  character  upon  the  physiognomy ,
a  circumstance  which  has  long  since  been  taken  into  considera-
tion in  craniology.

Fig.  13.     The  skull  of  a  Negro  in  profile  as  a  type  of  prognathism.


On  looking  at  a  characteristic  Hottentot  or  Negro  skull  in
profile,  the  face  projects  like  a  muzzle,  and  the  incisors  are
obliquely  inserted,  so  that  their  edges  meet  as  at  projecting
angles.  On  viewing  a  German  skull,  on  the  contrary,  we  see
that  the  incisors  meet  perpendicularly ;  and  that  on  closing  the

Fig.  14.     The  skull  of  a  Tatar  in  profile,  after  Von  Baer.     Orthognathous,
and  at  the  same  time  a  mesaticephalic  head  of  round  shape.


E  2


52


LECTURE    II.


mouth  the  lower  incisors  are  a  little  behind  the  superior,
whilst  in  the  Negro  they  are  rather  in  advance.  This  forma-
tion, the  orthognathous,  has  been  accordingly  distinguished
from  the  prognathous,  and  it  has  been  observed  generally
that  this  development  of  the  jaws  is  in  direct  relation  to  the
intellectual  capacity  of  a  people,  the  prognathous  being  con-
fined to  the  lowest  races  of  man.  Welcker  has  subjected
this  difference  to  measurement  by  taking  the  -angle  foi^med
at  the  root  of  the  nose  by  the  central  line  of  the  base  of  the
skull  or  the  diagonal  of  the  facial  quadrangle,  and  the  line
drawn  from  the  root  of  the  nose  to  the  nasal  spine  as  the
measure  of  the  position  of  the  jaws.

Fig.  15.     Ancient  Helvetian  skull,  viewed  from  behind.*


According  to  him,  the  following  peoples  are  prognathous,
all  the  rest  being  orthognathous  :  Kaffirs,  Australians,  Ne-
groes, Bashkirs,  Hindus,  New  Hollanders,  Hollanders,  Bra-
zilians,   Cossacks,    and    Sumatrans.      I   must   also    add    that


*  This  skull,  which  was  discovered  with  Roman  antiquities  near  Geneva,
belongs  undoubtedly  to  the  Helvetian  type.


LECTURE    II.  53

Welcker  distinguishes  the  extremely  orthognathous  as  opistho-
gnathous  (or  with  retreating  teeth),  a  distinction  which  does
not  seem  to  me  quite  justifiable.

Besides  this  position  of  the  jaws  which  is  connected  with  the
curvature  of  the  cranial  basis,  the  length  of  which  seems  to  in-
crease in  proportion  to  the  projection  of  the  jaw ;  the  side  view
also  gives  us  a  general  idea  of  the  roundness  of  the  skull,  the
arch  of  the  forehead,  the  development  of  the  occiput,  the  eleva-
tion of  the  vertex,  and  the  proportion  of  the  perpendicular  to
the  longitudinal  diameter.  Just  those  points  in  which  the
human  cranium  differs  most  from  that  of  the  animal,  as,  for
example,  the  projection  of  the  brain  and  its  anterior  lobes  over
the  face,  in  connexion  with  an  arched  and  more  or  less  per-
pendicular forehead,  are  best  seen  in  a  side  view,  and  this  view
must,  therefore,  in  no  way  be  neglected.

The  posterior  view  (Norma  occipitalis)  and  the  anterior
view  (Norma  frontalis)  supplement  each  other,  and  I  cannot  do
better  than  quote  the  words  of  von  Baer  on  this  point :  "  If,"
says  Baer,  "  we  place  a  skull  so  that  the  assumed  horizontal
line  corresponds  with  the  visual  axis  of  the  observer  and  ex-
amine the  skull  at  a  distance  from  behind,  it  will  sometimes  be
found  that  with  a  full  development  of  the  parietal  eminences
and  a  roof-shaped  vertex,  the  outline  assumes  the  shape  of  a
pentagon.  Although  this  pentagon  never  exhibits  sharply
defined  angles,  still  the  figure  is  often  very  plain,  generally
rather  broad  than  high,  and  may  be  briefly  described,  accord-
ing as  the  angles  are  rounded  or  sharp,  the  lateral  planes
straight,  arched,  shorter  or  longer.  The  rounding  of  the
angles  is,  however,  not  unfrequently  so  great  that,  leaving
out  of  notice  the  mastoid  processes,  which  often  recede,  or
are  elevated  so  as  to  be  scarcely  perceptible,  the  outline
is  elliptical  instead  of  pentagonal.  The  ellipsis  is  usually
rather  high  than  broad,  rarely  the  reverse,  and  still  more
rarely  is  the  difference  between  the  perpendicular  and  the
horizontal  axis  so  slight,  that  the  aspect  may  be  termed
circular.  This  outline  is  as  variable  as  it  is  perceptible,  so
that  we   must  not   expect  to  find  it  always  similar,  even   in


54  LECTURE    II.

unmixed  races.  The  general  proportions,  however,  are  the
same,  and,  regard  being  had  to  the  variations,  they  will  be
easily  recognised."

The  view  from  behind  best  gives  the  proportion  between
the  height  and  the  breadth  of  the  skull,  which  is  specially
important  in  the  estimation  of  the  capacity  of  the  cavity.  Not
less  important  is  the  flattening  or  roof-shaped  form  of  the
vertex,  which  is  best  seen  from  behind.  There  are  heads
which  tower  up,  and  terminate  either  in  a  platform  or  a  pointed
roof.  We  sometimes  meet  with  children  in  whom  skulls  of
this  shape  are  evidently  the  result  of  some  morbid  process,
which,  however,  does  not  seem  to  interfere  with  the  health  or
intelligence  of  the  individual.  In  some  tribes  such  "  tower-
heads"  (pyrgocephali) ,  are  characteristic,  and  to  be  regarded
as  the  result  of  normal  formation.  There  are,  also,  pyramidal
heads,  where  the  parietal  planes  meet  in  a  point,  whether  the
cranium  be  viewed  from  before,  behind,  or  in  profile.  Pri chard
observed  that  such  pyramidal  heads  are  specially  prevalent
among  the  nomadic  tribes  of  Asia  and  America ;  but  he  also
included  among  them,  as  von  Baer  justly  observes,  those
peoples  in  whom  the  parietal  planes  do  not  meet  in  a  point,
but  in  a  long  ridge,  and  which  might,  therefore,  be  called
"rafter-heads"  (tectocephali) .  It  is  true,  a  rafter-shaped  head,
such  as  possessed  by  the  Esquimaux,  for  example,  much  re-
sembles a  pyramidal  head  when  viewed  in  front  or  behind,
because  the  ridge  coincides  with  the  line  of  sight ;  but  a  view
of  the  side  immediately  shows  the  difference.  Unfortunately,
von  Baer  has  chosen  for  this  rafter-shaped  skull  the  term
cross-shaped,  or  rhomboidal,  which  does  not  appear  to  me
suitable.

The  anterior  view  of  the  skull  best  indicates  the  relation  of
the  face  to  the  anterior  lobes  of  the  brain,  as  well  as  the  various
diameters  of  the  face.  The  development  of  the  frontal  eminences
and  of  the  ridges  over  the  eyebrows,  the  form  and  position
of  the  orbits,  the  shape  of  the  nasal  apertures,  the  prominence
of  the  cheekbones — all  these  proportions  appear  to  be  of  great
importance  for  the  estimation  of  ethnic  peculiarities.


LECTURE    II.  55

Fig.  16.     Skull  of  an  Australian,  front  view,  after  Lucae.


Fig.  17.     Helvetian  skull,  viewed  from  below.


The  examination  of  the  skull  from  below  appears  to  be  of  great
importance  when  we  consider  that  the  curvature  of  the  basilar
plane,  and  the   position  of  the  occipital  foramen  indicate  the


56


LECTUEE    II.


greater  or  lesser  animal  resemblance  of  a  skull.  The  position
of  the  foramen  magnum  forward  or  backward,  the  distance  of  its
anterior  border  from  the  posterior  margin  of  the  osseous  palate
and  the  alveolar  mai'gin  of  the  lower  jaw,  the  breadth  and  curva-
ture of  the  zygomatic  arch,  the  distance  of  the  articular  cavities
of  the  lower  jaw,  the  distance  and  curvature  of  the  mastoid  pro-
cesses, the  direction  of  the  auditory  openings,  and  the  curva-
ture of  the  petrous  portion  of  the  temporal,  the  height  and
breadth  of  the  posterior  nostrils — all  these  proportions  deserve
the  fullest  consideration.  The  very  complicated  structure  of
the  base  of  the  skull  does  not,  however,  admit  of  a  defimte
terminology  of  the  parts  similar  to  that  applied  to  the  other
views  of  the  cranium.  We  shall  have  to  recur  to  some  points
touched  upon  here  in  our  next  lecture.


TABLE  OP  MEASUREMENTS  BY  SCHEEZEK  AND  SCHWAKZ.


I.    GENERAL    OBSERVATIONS.


Name,  Sex,  Native  Country,  Occupation,  Shape  and  Growth  of  Beard,  etc.


1.  Age  of  the  individual  measured       -

2.  Colour  of  hair  ......

3.  Colour  of  eyes  ......

4.  Number  of  pulsations  in  a  minute  -  -  -  -

5.  Weight  .......

6.  Pressing  power  (force  manuelle)  measured  with  the  dy-

namometer of  Regnier        -

7.  Lifting  power  (force  renale),  ditto        ditto

8.  Total  height  .......


No.  of  the  Sys-
tematic Series.


4
5


/
8


II.    MEASUREMENTS    WITH    THE    PLUMMET    AND    METER-SCALE.

9.  Distance  of  the  commencement  of  the  growth  of  hair  on

the  forehead  from  the  perpendicular          ...  9

10.  „        of  the  root  of  the  nose  from  the  perpendicular  -  10

11.  „        of  the  anterior  nasal  spine  from  the  perpendicular  1 1

12.  „        of  the  point  of  the  chin  (mental  process)  from

the  perpendicular                 -             -             -             -             -  12

13.  ,,        from  the  root  of  the  nose  to  its  tip           -            -  13

14.  „       from  the  tip  of  the  nose  to  the  anterior  nasal  spine  14


LECTURE    II.  ,:,7

III.    MEASUREMENTS    WITH    THE    CALLIPERS.

No.  of  the  sys-
,  -     t^-  i  n  ,,  •    ■      n,-.        ,  .  .  tematic  series,

lo.  Distance  iroin  the  point  of  the  chin  to  the  commencement

of  growth  of  hair    -  -  -  .  .  -17

16.  „        from  the  point  of  the  chin  to  the  root  of  the  nose        15

17.  „  from  the  point  of  the  chin  to  the  anterior  nasal
spine  .......         if;

18.  Distance  from  the  point  of  the  chin  to  the  vertex  -        19

19.  „       from  the  point  of  the  chin  to  the  crown  of  the  head        21

20.  „  from  the  point  of  the  chin  to  the  external  occi-
pital protuberance  ------        23

21.  „  from  the  point  of  the  chin  to  the  external  au-
ditory opening  ......         25

22.  „  from  the  point  of  the  chin  to  the  angle  of  the
lower  jaw     .......        27

23.  Prom  the  root  of  the  nose  to  the  vertex      -  -  -        20

24.  Distance  from  the  root  of  the  nose  to  the  crown  of  the  head        22

25.  „  from  root  of  the  nose  to  the  external  occipital
protuberance  ......        24

26.  „  from  the  nasal  root  to  the  external  auditory
opening        .......        26

27.  „        from  the  nasal  root  to  the  angle  of  the  lower  jaw        28

28.  „        from  the  place  where  the  hair  begins  to  grow  to

the  incisura  jugularis  sterni  -  -  -  -         18

29.  „  from  the  external  occipital  protuberance  to  the
seventh  cervical  vertebra — the  measurements  28  and  29
must  be  taken  with  the  head  in  the  same  position,  i.  e.,

the  natural  one       ......        5(j

30.  „        from  one  external  auditory  opening  to  the  other         30

31.  „        of  the  uppermost  points  of  attachment  of  the  ear        31

32.  Greatest  distance  between  the  zygomata,  or  zygomatic

arches*  .......32

33.  Distance  between  the  external  corners  of  the  eyes  -        33

34.  „        between  the  internal  corners  of  the  eyes  -        34

35.  „        between  the  points  of  attachment  of  the  lobes

of  the  earf  -------         35

36.  Breadth  of  the  nose  -  -  -  -  -         36


*  The  following  measurements  may  then  be  made.  From  the  point  taken
by  the  callipers  on  the  zygoma  to  the  commencement  of  the  growth  of  the
hair  on  the  forehead,  in  the  median  line,  and  also  to  the  point  of  the  chin.
By  this  the  most  prominent  point  of  the  cheek  bone  in  the  facial  plane  may
be  determined.

t  Measure  also  the  breadth  of  the  forehead  in  the  horizontal  line : —

(a)  From  one  part  of  the  linea  semicircularis,  which  may  be  felt  like  a
crista  beneath  the  skin,  to  the  other.  The  spot  where  the  convexity  in  front
is  greatest  should  be  selected.

(6)  In  the  same  horizontal  measure  the  greatest  breadth  of  the  forehead,
from  the  beginning  of  the  growth  of  the  hair,  from  one  temple  to  the  other.


58..  LECTURE    II.

No.  of  the  sys-
tematic series.

37.  „         of  the  mouth  -  -  -  -  -37

38.  Distance  between  the  angles  of  the  lower  jaw-bone  -        38

39.  „  from  the  seventh  vertebra  of  the  neck  to  the
semi-lunar  notch  of  the  sternum  (incisura  jugularis
sterni)  .......        40

40.  Transverse  diameter  from  one  middle  line  of  the  axilla

above  the  mamma  to  the  other      -  -  -  -        43

41.  Distance  from  the  sternum  to  the  vertebral  column  -         44

42.  „        from  one  anterior  superior  spine  of  the  ilium  to

the  other      -------49

43.  „        from  one  trochanter  major  to  the  other  -         50

IV.    MEASUREMENTS    WITH    THE    MEASURING    TAPE.

44.  Circumference  of  the  head  around  the  external  occipital

protuberance  ------        29

45.  Circumference  of  the  neck   -  -  -  -  -        39

46.  From  the  greater  tuberosity  of  one  humerus,  in  a  horizon-

tal line  across  the  chest,  to  the  other        -  -  -        41

47.  Distance  from  one  middle  line  of  the  axilla,  above  the

mamma,  to  the  other  -  -  -  -  -42

48.  Circumference  of  the  thorax  at  the  same  place       -  -         45

49.  Distance  from  one  nipple  to  the  other  -  -  -         46

50.  Circumference  of  the  waist  -  -  -  -         47

51.  Distance  from  one  anterior  superior  spine  of  the  ilium  to

the  other      ..........        48

52.  „  from  the  trochanter  major  to  the  anterior  supe-
rior spine  of  the  ilium  (on  the  same  side)  -  -         66

53.  „  from  the  most  prominent  point  of  the  sternal
articulation  of  the  clavicle  to  the  anterior  spine  of  the
ilium  .----.-51

54.  „  from  the  most  prominent  point  of  same  articula-
tion to  the  umbilicus  -  -  -  -  -         52

55.  „  from  the  umbilicus  to  the  upper  ridge  of  the  sym-
physis pubis  ------         53

56.  „        from  the  fifth  lumbar  vertebra,  along  the  crest

of  the  ilium  and  the  inguinal  fossa)  to  the  symphysis  pubis         54

57.  „        from  the  seventh  vertebra  to  the  terminal  point

of  the  os  coccygis    -  -  -  -  -  -57

58.  „  from  one  summum  humeri  across  the  back  to  the
other  --  ---.-55

59.  „  from  the  summum  humeri  to  the  external  con-
dyle of  the  humerus  -  -  -  -  -         58

60.  „  from  the  external  condyle  of  the  humerus  to  the
styloid  process  of  the  radius  across  the  extensor  side      -         59

61.  „  from  the  styloid  process  of  the  radius  across  the
back  of  the  hand  to  the  articulation  of  the  metacarpal
bone  of  the  middle  finder  -  -  -  -60


LECTURE    II.  59

No.  of  the  sys-
tematic series.
G2.  Distance  from  the  same  articulation  to  the  top  of  middle

finger  .......        61

G3.  Breadth  of  hand         ......        62

64.  Greatest  circumference  of  the  upper  arm  (round  the  biceps)         63

65.  „  „  of  the  forearm  -  -  -         64

66.  Smallest  circumference  of  the  same  -  -  -        65

67.  Distance  from  trochanter  major  to  the  external  condyle

of  the  femur  ......         67

68.  „        from  the  external  condyle  of  the  femur  to  the
external  malleolus  ------        68

69.  „        from  the  inferior  margin  of  the  symphysis  pubis

to  internal  condyle  of  femur  -  -  -  -         69

70.  „        from  the  internal  condyle  of  the  femur  to  the  in-
ternal malleolus       ------        70

71.  Greatest  circumference  of  the  thigh             -             -  -  71

72.  Smallest  circumference  of  the  thigh              -             -  -  72

73.  Circumference  of  the  knee-joint       -             -             -  -  73

74.  Greatest  circumference  of  the  calf  -            -            -  -  74

75.  Smallest  circumference  of  the  lower  part  of  the  thigh

above  the  malleoli  ------        75

76.  Length  of  foot  ------         76

77.  Circumference  of  the  foot  around  the  instep  -  -        77

78.  „  of  the  metatarsal  joints      -  -  -        78

For  the  better  understanding  of  the  following  synoptical
tables  of  the  craniometrical  systems  of  Virchow,  Welcker,  C.
E.  von  Baer,  and  Busk,  and  of  the  accompanying  figures,  I
add  the  subjoined  explanations.

I  have  only  cited  systems  requiring  the  simplest  instruments,
such  as  a  rule  about  25  centimetres  in  length,  a  measuring
tape  about  60  centimetres  long,  a  common  pair  of  compasses,
callipers,  a  beam  compass,  arranged  like  a  shoemaker's  mea-
sure, having  a  horizontal  bar  of  25  centimetres  in  length,  and
two  vertical  arms  one  of  which  is  fixed  at  the  end,  the  other
sliding  along  the  beam.  Such  complicated  instruments  as
those  designated  cephalographs  or  cephalometers  seem  to  me
too  much  of  a  good  thing.

As  Welcker' s  system  is  but  a  further  development  of  that  of
Virchow,  the  middle  column,  which  gives  the  determining
points  of  the  measures,  refers  to  both  systems,  just  as  the
measures  of  the  figures  refer  to  both  systems.


60


LECTURE    II.


I  have  endeavoured  by  lines  to  represent  in  the  figures  sucli
measures  as  figures  will  admit  of.  Most  of  the  circumferences
can,  however,  be  only  demonstrated  on  the  skull  or  on  models.
The  letters  and  ciphers  belonging  to  the  measures,  as  marked
in  the  Tables,  are  always  placed  at  the  continuations  of  the
respective  measurements  outwards.


Fig.  18.     Side  view  of  a  Helvetian  skull  from  a  Eoruan  grave  near  Geneva,
with  Welcker-Vircliow  measurements.

C.  C.     Camper's  facial  angle  after  one  method  :  ear,  nasal  spine,  forehead.


The  figures  18,  20,  22,  24,  26,  represent  the  measurements
of  Yirchow  and  Welcker.  Welcker' s  measurements  are  plain
in  the  figure,  and  dotted  in  the  continuation  towards  the
letters.  Virchow's  measurements,  in  as  far  as  they  differ
from  those  of  Welcker,  are  dotted  in  the  figure  and  plain
in  their  continuations.

The  figures  19,  21,  23,  25,  27,  represent  the  measurements


LECTURE    II.


61


of  von  Baor  and  Busk  ;  those  of  the  latter  are  plain  in  the
figure,  and  dotted  outwards ;  Baer's  are  dotted  in  the  figure
and  plain  outside.

Fio-.  19.     Side  view  of  a  Negro  skull,  with  Baer-Busk  measurements.

C.  C.     Camper's  facial  angle  after- the  other  method  :  ear,  alveolar  margin  of

the  upper  jaw,  forehead.


02


LECTURE    II.


VlRCHOW.


Welcker.


Names.


Kefer.
to  the
figures


Wanting.


Wanting.


Longitudinal
Circumference.

Frontal  suture.


Sagittal  suture.


Occipital
squama.


Length   of  the
vertebral  bodies.


Coronal
suture.

Lambdoid
suture.


right
left

right
left


Wanting.    «


Diagonal
Circumference.


Direction  and  Points  determining
the  measurements.


CIRCUMFERENCES.

Around  the  frontal  and
occipital  protuberances.

That  part  of  the  horizon-
tal  circumference  which
is  enclosed  within  the
coronal  sutures.

The  central  line  of  the
whole  skull.

From  the  nasal  suture  to
the  coronal  suture.

Length  of  the  sagittal
suture.

To  the  posterior  margin
of  the  occipital  foramen
in  Virchow  to  the  ante-
rior margin  in  Welcker.

Anterior  margin  of  the
occipital  foramen  to  na-
sal suture  in  a  straight-
line.

Anterior  transverse  cir-
cumference.

Posterior  transverse  cir-
cumference.

In  a  straight  line  from
the  margin  of  the  zygo-
matic process,  over  the
aural  aperture,  to  the
same  point  on  the  other
side  over  the  base  of
the  skull.

Between  the  same  points
over  the  skull.

From  the  aural  aperture
to  the  anterior  fonta-
nels.


Ilefer.
to  the
figures


la.


n.  c.


c,  1.


Lb.


n.  b


Names.


Horizontal  Cir-
cumference.

Frontal   Cir-
cumfei'ence.


Vertical   longi-
tudinal circum.


Portions    of
the  vertical
longitudinal
circumfer-  ■
ence.


Wanting.


Wanting.


j.b.'

Ba-"^
sal.

Trans-

3.

verse  cir-
cumfer-
ence.

j.  c.

Up-
per. J

Wanting.

LECTURE    II.


63


Carl  Ernst  von  Baer.


Names.


Horizontal     cir-

cumf,  wanting.


Longitudinal
circumference.


Chord    of   the
longitudinal
ch'cumference.


Length    of  cra-
nial vertebra?.


Occipital    cir-
cumference.


Internal  circum-
ference.


Refer

..    "  Directions  and  Points  determininc;

to  the  ,., , , 4_

figures


the  measurements.


4
5

6
6  a.


CIRCUMFERENCES.

Across  the  glabella  and
the  greatest  prominence
of  the  occiput.


As  in  Virchow  and
Welcker.


8


From  the  anterior  mar-
gin of  the  occipital  fora-
men to  the  foramen  ca?  -
cum.

I  From  the  posterior  mar-
gin of  the  mastoid,  at
the  same  height  as
the  aural  aperture,  to
the  same  point  on  the
other  side  across  the
vertex.

In  the  bisected  skull  on
the  inner  side,  from  the
foramen  caecum  along
the  arch,  to  the  foramen
magnum.


References  to  Busk's   Sys-
tem, and  other  remarks.


Horizontal  circum-
ference.


Longitudinal      cir
cumference.


Wanting  in  all
others.


64


LECTURE    II.


Fig.  20.


Front  view  of  the  Helvetian  skull — Welcker-Virchow.


laz


VlRCHOW.


Welcker.


Names.


Longitudinal
diameter.

A.


Longitudinal
diameter.

B.


Wanting.


Vertical  dia-
meter.

A.


Vertical  dia-
meter.

B.


Refer,
to  ti.e
figures


10.


11.


Direction  and  Points  determining
the  measurements.


I  Refer.
I  to  the
'figures!


12.


13.


DIAMETERS.

From  the  nasal  suture  to
the  point  of  the  lamb-
doid  suture.

From  the  glabella  to  the
greatest  occipital  pro-
tuberance.

From  the  middle  between
the  frontal  protuber-
ances to  the  occipital
protuberances.

From  posterior  border  of
occipital  foramen  to  the
anterior  point  of  the
sagittal  suture.

From  the  anterior  margin
of  the  foramen  magnum
to  highest  point  of  vert  ex.


Names.


Wanting.


Wanting.


Longitudi  nal
diam.   Diamct.
of    horizontal
circumference.


Wanting.


Vertical    dia-
meter.


LECTUltE    II.
Fig.  21.     Front  view  of  a  Kaffir  skull.     Baer-Busk.

If


05


Carl  Ernst  von  Baer.


f

Names.

liefer,
to  the
figures

Direction  and  Points  determining
the  measurements.

References  to  Busk's  System,
and  other  remarks.

DIAMETERS.

•

Longitudinal

9

Same  as  Virchow's  lon-

Length ?

diameter.

gitudinal  diameter  b  11.

Wanting.

Vertical  height.

10

From  the   horizontal  to

The     horizontal     is

the  highest  point  of  the

the   plane   of  the

vault  of  the  cranium.

zygomatic  arch.

Height.

11

Same    as    Virchow    and
Welcker.

Height  ?

Width.

12

Extreme  breadth.

Breadth  ?

F


66


LECTURE    II.


VlECHOW.


Wblcker.


Names.


Refer.
to  the
figures


Transverse  dia-
meter. Lower
frontal.

Upper  frontal.

Temporal.
Upper  parietal.
Lower  parietal.
Occipital.
Mastoid.


14

15
16
17

18
19
20


Direction  and  Points  determining
the  measurements.


Between  the  margins  of
the  zygomatic  processes
of  the  frontal  bone.

Between  the  frontal  pro-
tuberances.

Between  the  points  of  the
alisphenoids.

Between  the  parietal  pro-
tuberances.

Above  the  middle  of  the
squamous  suture.

Betw.  the  posterior  infer,
angles  of  parietal  bones.

Between  the  points  of  the
mastoid  processes.


Refer-
to  the
figures


Z.  Z.


f.   f.


p.  p


s.


m.m.


Names.


Wanting.


Transverse
diameter.

Wanting.


Fig.  22.     Top  view  of  the  Helvetian  skull.     Welcker-Vircliow.


J


LECTURE    II.


67


Carl  Ernst  Von  Baer.


Names.


Greatest  width
of  forehead.

Least  width  of
forehead.

Parietal  width.
Occipital  width.


Refer,
to  the
figures


13


14


15


16


Directions  and  Points  determining
the  measurements.


DIAMETERS.

In  the  coronal  suture  at
the  widest  spot.

Anywhere.


Same  as  Welcker  and
Virchow.

Between  the  two  points
of  the  mastoid  through
which  the  occipital  cir-
cumference 7  passes.


References  to  Busk's  System,
and  other  remarks.


Greatest    frontal
width.

Least  frontal  width .
Parietal  width  ?
Occipital  width.


Fig.  23.     Top  view  of  Negro  skull.     Baer-Busk.

10


v  -1


G8


LECTURE    II.


VlRCHOW.


Welcker.


■^  r


Names.


Wanting.


Refer,
to  the
figures


Refer
Direction  and  Points  determining         .,

the  measurements.  IJ°

figures


OBLIQUE    MEASUREMENTS,
To  be  taken  on  both  right  &  left  sides.

From  the  frontal  protu-
berances to  the  parietal
protuberances.

From  frontal  protuberan-
ces to  zygomatic  process.

From  mastoid  process  to
parietal  protuberance.

From  mastoid  process  to
zygomatic  process.

From  parietal  protuber-
ance to  occipital  pro-
tuberance.

From  mastoid  process  to
occipital  protuberance


/,.


m.  p


m.  z


p.o.


m.o.


Names.


The  lines//,  pjp,  and/p,  on  "1  Upper     cranial


both  sides  form  the  .  .  .  J
The  lines  //,  z  z,  and  fz,  on  i

both  sides  form  the  .  .  .  j
The  lines  zz,  mm,  and  mz  on

both  sides  form  the


:}


quadrangle
Frontal

quadrangle.

Basal  quad-
rangle.


Fig.  24.


Base  of  the  Helvetian  skull.
Z


.  ?/l  //I'


lecture  ii.
Carl  Ernst  von  Baer.


GO


Names.


Foraminal
radius.


Frontal  radius.


Occipital  radius.


Refer

to  the
figures


17


18


19


Direction  and  Points  determining

the  measurements.


RADII.

From  the  anterior  mar-
gin of  the  foramen  mag-
num to  the  point  where
the  occiput  is  arched
most.

From  the  meatus  audi-
torius  to  the  glabella.

From  the  meatus  audi-
torius  to  the  point  of
greatest  arching  of  the
occiput.


References  to  Dusk's  System,
and  other  remarks.


Frontal  radius  ?


Occipital  radius.


Fig.  25.     Base  of  Kaffir  skull.


70

LECTURE    II.

Virchow.                                       Welckeb.

„    A               .          ...    „                                                                                                 A

r-          -■                                                      ,  ,                                                                   \

Names.

Kefer.
to  the

Refer
Direction  and  Points  determining     .      .    '

the  measurements.

Names.

figures

ngures

ANGLES.

--

Between   a    line    drawn
from  the  anterior  bor-
der of  the  foramen  mag-
num (b)  to  the  root  of

At  the  root  of

.......

the  nose  («),  and  a  se-

n

(Nasal  angle.)

cond   line   drawn    from

the  nasal  spine  (x)   to

Not  more  de-

the  root   of    the    nose

finitely  fixed.  '

The  three  points,  b,  n,  x,

Facial  triangle.

Between  two  fines  drawn

Angle   at    the

from  the  points   b   and

e

epliippiam

n  to  the  ephippium  (e).

(sella  angle).

The  three  points,  b,  e,  n,

give  the

Basal  triangle.

Fig.  26.     Occipital  view  of  the  Helvetian  skull.


fP


LECTURE    II.


71


Fig.  27.     Vertical  section  of  the  skull  of  an  Australian,  after  Lucae.


Busk's  System  of  Measurement.
See  figures  19,  21,  23,  25,  27 ;  pages  61,  65,  67,  69,  71.


Name.


CIRCUMEERENCES.

Circumference.
Longitudinal  arc.

Frontal  transverse  arc.
Vertical  transverse  arc.
Parietal  transverse  arc.
Occipital  transverse  arc.
Longitudinal  frontal  arc,
Longitud.  parietal  arc.
Longitud.  occipital  arc.


Direction  and  Points  determining  the  Measurements.
Preferences  to  Vircuow  and  Welcker.


Refer,
to  the
figures


Nasal  suture  to  the  posterior  margin

of  the  foramen  magnum.
•  .  •  •  •

The  two  meati  auditorii.

All  these  circumferences  of  arcs  are
taken  in  the  direction  of  the  radii
of  the  same  names.


o

4
5
G
7
8
9


72


LECTURE    II.


Names.


DIAMETERS.

Length.

Breadth.

Height.
Least  frontal  breadth.
Greatest  frontal  breadth
Parietal  breadth.
Occipital  breadth.
Orbital  breadth.
Zygomatic  breadth.
Ethmoidal  breadth.

RADII.

Frontal  radius.
Vertical  radius.
Parietal  radius.
Occipital  radius.
Fronto-nasal  radius
Maxillary  radius
Horizontal  plane


Direction  and  Points  determining  the  Measurement.
References  to  Vircnow  and  Welcker.


Upper  parietal  diameter,  V.  pp. ;  W.  ?
Occipital  diameter,  Virchow  ?  .
Lower  frontal  diameter,  V.,  zz,  W.  ?


All  radii  are  taken  from  the  meatus
auditorius.    •

Glabella.

To  anterior  point  of  sagittal  suture.


To  nasal  suture.

To  alveolar  margin  of  the  upper  jaw.

Through  the  floor  of  the  nasal  cavity


Refer,
to  the
figures


10

11

12
13

14
15
16
17
18
19


20
21
22
23
24
25
H.


73


LECTUEE     III.

Pictorial  representations. — Ethnic  portraits  generally  Caricatures. — Photo-
graphic Drawings. — Perspective  delineations. — Geometrical  Drawings
after  Lucae. — Instruments  required. — Casts. — Casts  of  the  internal  Cra-
nial surface. — Proportions. — Sexual  differences  in  the  formation  of  the
Cranium. — Examination  of  the  Brain. — Weight. — Weight  of  the  Brain
in  relation  to  the  body. — Estimation  of  the  Cranial  Capacity. — Method
and  results. — Broca's  researches  on  Parisian  Skulls. — Increase  of  Cranial
Capacity  in  relation  to  Civilisation.

Gentlemen, — Before  proceeding  to  those  investigations  which
relate  to  the  internal  capacity  of  the  cranium,  and  to  the
central  organ  of  the  nervous  system,  I  have  to  offer  some
observations  on  pictorial  and  plastic  representations,  which,
in  addition  to  descriptions  and  measurement,  form  essential
elements  in  instruction.  Much  discussion  has  recently  taken
place  as  to  the  mode  in  which  the  skull  should  be  portrayed,
and  as  the  principles  of  cranial  delineation  apply  to  other
objects  of  natural  history,  a  few  words  on  this  subject  may  not
be  out  of  place.

It  cannot  be  denied  that  most  ethnic  delineations  which
have  recently  appeared,  whether  of  living  men  or  of  skulls,
have  veiy  little  or  no  value.  Many  of  the  drawings  from
living  individuals  are  perfect  caricatures  unconsciously  per-
petrated by  the  artist,  since  even  the  practised  painter,  in
order  to  give  prominence  to  the  individual  resemblance,  ex-
aggerates the  features  peculiar  to  the  individual.  These
features  are  frequently  not  those  characteristic  of  the  race,  as
such  j  often,  too,  just  those  features  which  belong  to  the  race,
and  which  strike  the  painter,  are  too  much  exaggerated ;  and
frequently  the  race  peculiarities  are  suppressed  in  order  per-
fectly to  effect  the  resemblance  to  the  individual.

Independently  of  these  disadvantages,  the  position  in  which
the  head,   or  the   cranium,   is  to  be  portrayed,  is  of  special


H


LECTURE    III.


importance.  For  purposes  of  comparison  (and  all  pictorial
representations  used  in  natural  historical  researches  must  be
comparable  inter  se),  strictly  geometrical  drawings  are  requi-
site, as  they  admit  of  the  object  which  is  to  be  compared  with
the  delineation  being  brought  into  the  same  position  in  which
the  drawing  has  been  taken.

For  the  delineation  of  the  living  head  there  are  mostly  only
two  aspects  which  can  be  relied  upon,  viz.,  the  profile  and  the
full  front  view,  and  these  the  artist  rarely  selects.  With
regard,  then,  to  ethnic  portraits  taken  from  life,  we  may  boldly
assert  that  most  of  them  have  no  scientific  value,  but  are  more
likely  to  mislead  and  to  direct  our  attention  to  subordinate
points.*  I  say  this,  not  only  with  regard  to  the  position  of
the  subject,  but  also  to  the  management  of  the  light  which,  in
photography,  constitutes  the  most  essential  element,  and  by
means  of  which  prominent  parts  may  be  entirely  suppressed,
and  insignificant  parts  rendered  prominent.  The  travelling
naturalist  who  undertakes  such  investigations,  should,  there-
fore, be  a  very  expert  photographer  to  overcome  such  diffi-
culties. If  this  be  effected,  there  can  be  no  doubt  that  photo-
graphy is  the  best  means  of  obtaining  ethnic  pictures  in  great
numbers ;  as  science  requires,  in  order  to  establish  the  mean
type,  not  individual  characteristic  faces,  but  a  multitude  of
them.

Photography,  in  which  the  ray  of  light,  subject  to  un-
alterable physical  laws,  takes  the  picture,  and  not  the  err-
ing hand  of  man,  is  the  only  means  of  obviating  one  of
the  greatest  obstacles  in  the  study  of  anthropology,  by  en-
abling us  to  compare  objects  separated  by  time  and  space.
The  soft  parts  of  the  head  and  the  whole  body  are,  in  many
cases,  of  considerable  importance.  I  need  only  mention  the
shape  of  the  nose,  the  lips,  the  aperture  of  the  eyes,  the  posi-
tion and  shape  of  the  ear  and  the  lobule,  as  well  as  of  the
beard  and  the  hair.  But  most  of  these  parts  are  perishable,
and    cannot  be  preserved  in    their  original    form.      Without


*  With  regard  to  living  individuals,  photography  is  undoubtedly  one  of
the  most  invaluable  aids  to  study,  provided  it  is  skilfully  used.


LECTURE    III.  75


photography,  it  is  only  the  subjective  conception  of  the  de-
signer which  can  serve  as  a  means  of  comparison.  Generally
we  cannot  place  races  side  by  side.  Naturalists  sail  or  steam
round  the  world ;  they  observe  one  race  or  tribe,  then,  after
weeks,  or  perhaps  months,  they  see  another,  and,  from  memo-
randa and  sketches,  try  to  discover  resemblances  and  to  in-
stitute comparisons.  The  zoologist,  who  is  required  to  institute
a  comparison  between  two  similar  animals — the  one  from
Africa,  the  other  from  Asia — and  to  determine  from  memoiy,  or
from  notes  and  drawings,  whether  or  not  they  belong  to  the
same  species,  shrugs  his  shoulders  and  says,  "  Show  me  the
animals  side  by  side,  or  at  least  the  skin  and  the  skeleton,  but
do  not  ask  anything  unreasonable."  Nevertheless,  this  demand
is  frequently  made  of  the  anthropologist.  Though  photography
cannot  place  the  races  themselves  side  by  side,  it,  to  a  certain
extent,  supplies  the  want  of  them  by  the  exactness  of  its
delineations.

With  regard  to  the  delineation  of  the  skull,  there  are  two
points  of  view,  and  the  opinions  of  naturalists  vary  accord-
ingly. If  the  object  be  to  obtain  figures  which  are  to  repre-
sent the  character  of  the  skull  and  its  peculiarities,  so  as  to
strike  us  at  the  first  glance,  perspective  delineation,  which  is
to  be  obtained  most  perfectly  by  means  of  photography,  is  to
be  preferred  above  all  others,  as  it  best  renders  the  peculiar
physiognomy  of  the  original.  But  when  a  recent  author  re-
commends, in  the  portraiture  of  the  skull,  positions  of  half  or
one-third  profile,  accordiug  as  either  of  these  positions  is  most
characteristic,  it  seems  to  us  a  mistake,  because  one  of  the
chief  objects  of  delineation,  viz.,  comparison,  is  ignored.  When
Welcker,  for  instance,  gives  a  skull  with  an  open  frontal
suture  and  widely-distant  orbits  four-fifths  full  face,  and  some-
what inclined  to  the  left  side,  we  cannot  see  that  such  a  dis-
torted position  better  represents  the  peculiarities  of  formation
depending  on  open  sutures,  the  position  of  the  eyes,  &c,  than
a  full  front  view.  If  we  compare  with  these  the  excellent
photographic  delineations  of  Von  Baer,  it  can  easily  be  seen,
that  even  in  strictly  geometrical  positions,  the  char;ut eristics
of  cranial  formation  can  be  better  rendered  than  by  the  method
just  mentioned.


76  LECTURE    III.

But  if  it  be  requisite  to  have  drawings  which  are  not  merely
comparable  but  measurable,*  then  the  geometrical  method
recommended  by  Dr.  Lucae,  of  Frankfurt,  must  be  applied.
This  consists  simply  in  this,  that  the  object  is  not  drawn  from
a  fixed  point  of  view,  so  that  the  rays  of  light  emanating
from  it  meet  in  the  eye  as  in  the  summit  of  a  cone,  but  that,
on  the  contrary,  the  eye  constantly  changes  its  position,  and
forms  the  representation  of  the  object  by  means  of  the  parallel,
horizontal,  or  vertical  rays  emanating  from  it.  In  per-
spective delineation,  which  is  also  that  of  the  photographic
instrument,  the  individual  parts  of  the  body  to  be  depicted
are  greatly  foreshortened,  according  as  they  form  projections
or  depressions ;  in  the  geometrical  delineation  everything  is  in
the  place  which  it  occupies  in  the  original,  with  regard  to  the
plane  upon  which  the  image  is  projected.  The  various  cranial
measures  reducible  to  a  plane,  may  certainly  be  measured  on
such  geometrical  drawings  with  compass  and  meter-scale ;  but
only  these — and  when  Lucae  asserts  that  these  measurements
can  supply  the  place  of  actual  measurements  on  the  skull  itself,
we  can  only  ascribe  such  an  assertion  to  his  exaggerated
predilection  for  a  method  which  certainly  is  not  without  its

advantages,  t

It  must  also  be  admitted  that  geometrical  drawing  offers
very  great  difficulties  to  any  one  who  is  accustomed  to  ordinary
drawing,  and  that  in  practising  it  one  must  abandon  all  the
rules  one  has  hitherto  followed,  and  consent  to  become  a  mere
machine,  which  does  nothing  but  mark  with  pencil  or  pen  the
point  which  indicates  the  perpendicular  ray.  Lucae  has  re-
commended two  instruments,  one  constructed  by  himself,  the
other  by  a  Herr  Wirsing.  In  both  the  fundamental  principle  is
the  same  :  a  diopter  fastened  to  a  perpendicular  arm  is  placed
upon  a  horizontal  glass  plate,  beneath  which  is  the  object.

*  Compare  Crull.,  Be  Cranio  ejnsque  ad  faciem  ratione,  8vo,  Groningen,
1810.— Editob.

t  Lucae  does  not  propose  to  substitute  measurements  from  geometrical
dra wings  for  measurements  taken  on  the  skull  itself;  he  merely  says,  speak-
ing of  the  difficulty  and  uncertainty  in  obtaining  several  necessary  cranial  .
dimensions,  "  that  they  can  be  taken  on  such  drawings  with  greater  rajridity
and  certainty  than  in  very  many  cases  from  nature  itself."  See  Morphologic
der  Rassenschtidel,  Frankfurt,  a.  M.,  1864,  part  ii,  p.  3. — Editor.


LECTURE    III.  77


In  Lucac's  instrument  the  perpendicular  ray  is  given  by  the
intersection  of  two  crossed  threads,  the  point  of  the  pen  having
to  be  placed  in  the  same  vertical  line  as  the  point  of  the  object
to  bo  delineated.  In  Wirsing's  instrument  the  point  of  the
pen  is  fixed  perpendicularly  under  the  minute  aperture  of  the
diopter.  The  glass  plate  being  adjusted  in  the  horizontal
plane,  and  the  skull  so  placed  that  the  plane  upon  which  the
delineation  is  to  be  projected,  runs  parallel  with  the  glass  plate,
we  draw  the  lines  and  points  upon  the  glass  plate,  by  moving
the  instrument  thereon  in  the  requisite  directions.

I  possess  Lucae's  instrument,  and  having  practised  with  it
for  some  time,  must  say  that  one  may,  in  a  comparatively  short
time,  obtain  by  it  a  correct  outline,  which  is,  however,  some-
what coarse,  as  the  glass  plate  but  imperfectly  takes  up  the
liquid  whether  it  be  common  or  lithographic  ink.  In  the  prac-
tical use  of  this  instrument  it  is  especially  requisite  to  pay
attention  to  the  distribution  of  the  light.  Whilst  for  other
drawing  purposes  a  side  light  is  preferred,  and  studios  have
only  one  large  window  for  the  proper  distribution  of  light  and
shadow,  geometrical  drawings,  on  the  other  hand,  should  be
taken  in  a  glass  house,  where  all  is  light,  and  there  is  no
shadow.  The  fine  aperture  of  the  diopter,  too,  through  which
we  look,  cuts  off  so  much  light,  that  when  the  light  comes  in
from  one  side,  the  black  threads,  or  the  point  to  be  drawn
on  the  darker  side  of  the  object  is  invisible,  and  we  thus  have
an  imperfect  drawing.  To  obviate  this,  I  have  often  artificially
illuminated  the  dark  side  by  means  of  a  candle  or  a  lamp ;  but
this  is  only  a  poor  expedient,  and  becomes  further  objection-
able on  account  of  the  glass  plate  often  becoming  heated.
A  mirror  conveniently  arranged  will,  as  Lucae  rightly  observes,
serve  the  same  purpose.  Though  geometrical  drawing,  so
long  as  it  is  given  in  natural  size,  admits  of  some  measure-
ments being  taken  as  easily  as  on  the  object  itself,  it  cannot
be  denied  that,  to  common  observation,  it  presents  an  appa-
rently incorrect  image,  and  that  our  common  mode  of  viewing
objects  corresponds  more  to  the  perspective  than  the  geo-
metrical. Strictly  speaking,  it  corresponds  to  neither,  and
stereoscopic  views  alone  can  render  the  image  of  the  skull  .-is


78  LECTURE    III.

we  see  it  with  our  eyes.  Many  years,  however,  will  elapse
before  they  will  be  used  for  scientific  purposes ;  until  then,
naturalists  must  agree  to  apply  photography  for  ordinary
delineation,  and  the  geometrical  method  for  drawings  which
are  required  to  be  comparable  by  measurement.

Casts,  as  well  of  living  persons  as  of  dried  skulls,  if  they
are  carefully  prepared,  may,  in  many  cases,  entirely  supply  the
place  of  the  originals.  In  the  case  of  nations  who  shave  the
whole,  or  nearly  the  whole,  head,  complete  casts  of  the  head
may  be  taken  from  the  living.  The  masks  are  generally  less
useful  than  the  casts  of  the  head,  as  the  forced  positions  of  the
closed  eyes  and  lips,  as  well  as  the  unpleasantness  of  the  con-
traction of  the  drying  gypsum,  contorts  the  features.

It  cannot  have  escaped  you,  that  the  various  cranial  measure-
ments by  compass,  measuring-tape,  and  rule,  give  but  an
imperfect  idea,  and  indeed  only  some  of  the  principal  dimen-
sions of  the  head.  If  both  the  exterior  and  interior  of  the  skull
are  to  be  represented  completely  by  measurements  of  this  sort,
a  very  great  number  of  measurements  must  be  taken,  which
would  be  objectionable,  owing  to  the  necessary  indefiniteness  of
their  terminal  points.  Other  means  had  therefore  to  be  contrived
to  measure  the  internal  capacity  of  the  skull,  with  a  view  to  the
formation  of  conclusions  as  to  the  development  of  the  brain
and  its  component  parts.  The  various  substances  used  for
this  purpose  may  be  divided  into  two  categories :  such  as
serve  to  indicate  the  capacity  of  the  skull,  irrespective  of  the
size  and  shape  of  individual  parts ;  and  such  as  show  this
shape  and  the  proportion  of  the  individual  parts  to  each  other.
Tiedemann  closed  the  apertures  of  the  cranium  with  wax,
placed  it  upon  the  vertex,  and  then  filled  the  cavity  with
millet  seed,  shaking  them  till  they  were  at  the  level  of  the
occipital  foramen.  He  then  weighed  them,  and  using  them
for  other  similar  measurements,  he  obtained  weights  which,
though  comparable  with  each  other,  could  not  be  adopted  by
other  observers,  there  being  no  certainty  that  the  millet-seeds
used  by  them  were  of  the  same  size  or  degree  of  dryness*  as

*  Sand,  of  a  recognised  specific  gravity,  and  carefully  dried,  is  the  sub-
stance most  frequently  employed  in  England. — Editor.


LECTURE    III.  79

those  used  by  Tiedemann.  Morton  used  peppercorns  or  shot,
and,  instead  of  weighing,  he  measured  them,  by  which  ho
obtained  the  advantage  that  measure  corresponded  to  measure
and  not  to  weight.  Huschke  used  water,  measuring  the
quantity  requisite  for  filling  the  skull ;  here,  of  course,  the
temperature  of  the  water  must  be  attended  to.  The  results
thus  obtained  I  shall  presently  indicate.

There  can  be  no  doubt  that  skull  and  brain  exercise  a  reci-
procal influence  as  regards  development ;  that  they  grow  with
each  other,  but  that  the  details  of  the  superficial  formation
depend  on  the  mechanical  action  of  the  brain.  The  inner
surface  of  the  skull  represents,  therefore,  the  impress  of  the
surface  of  the  brain,  but,  be  it  understood,  of  the  brain  invested
with  its  integuments.  Now,  the  hard,  external  membrane  of
the  brain,  the  so-called  dura  mater  of  anatomists,  forms  a  cover-
ing, which  passes  above  the  inequalities  and  the  convolutions
without  entering  into  the  depressions  which  separate  them.  A
cast,  filling  the  cranial  cavity,  and  preserving  its  shape  after
removal,  will  therefore  represent  only  the  coarser  features  of
the  brain,  but  not  the  minute  details.  There  has  been  a  great
deal  of  dispute  as  to  the  substance  best  fitted  for  this  purpose.
To  supply,  says  Huschke,  the  want  of  brains  of  various  na-
tions, I  have  made  wax  models  from  the  crania  of  a  Carib,
Cossack,  etc.,  which  afford  some  idea  of  the  convolutions.
Wagner  used  gypsum,  Lucae  glue ;  the  latter  is  of  opinion
that  there  is  no  substance  more  suitable  for  rendering  the
form,  size,  and  circumference  of  the  brain.*  Gypsum  has,
however,  the  advantage  of  retaining  the  form  of  the  effusion,
whilst  glue  only  retains  it  for  a  few  days.  Both  sub-
stances have  the  disadvantage  of  uniting  with  water  in  dif-
ferent quantities,  and   consequently  vary  in  weight.     Hence,


*  Compare  Flower  on  "  The  Brain  of  Siamang,"  Nat.  Hist.  Rev.,  1863,  for
details  of  the  method  employed  by  him  in  the  preparation  of  the  series  of
casts  in  the  Royal  College  of  Surgeons  by  the  use  of  a  composition  of  glue
and  treacle. — Editor.

In  the  second  part  of  Zur  Morphologie  der  Rasscnschiidel,  Frankfurt,  1864,
Lucae  recommends  the  use  of  seed,  as  he  finds  that  the  specific  gravity  of
the  glue-casts  varies  so  greatly,  even  when  taken  from  the  same  liquid  mass,
that  it  is  quite  impossible  to  determine  the  volume  of  the  brain  by  means  of
Buch  casts  with  anything  like  accuracy. — Editor.


80  LECTURE    III.

the  different  parts  of  the  same  plaster,  or  glue,  casts  may  be
compared  with  each  other,  but  not  different  gypsum,  or  glue,
casts,  made  at  different  times  and  with  different  materials.
The  most  unobjectionable  substance  in  this  respect  would  be  a
metallic  alloy  which  melts  at  the  boiling-point  of  water.  We
could  then  obtain,  not  merely  the  external  form,  but  also  the
weight,  the  specific  gravity  of  the  alloy  having  been  deter-
mined. I  do  not,  however,  intend  to  take  out  a  patent  for  the
discovery  of  a  material  for  taking  casts  of  the  skull  cavity;
for,  if  we  go  a  little  further  into  the  matter,  we  find  that  it  was
not  an  anatomist,  but  a  physicist,  who  deserves  the  credit  of
having  first  made  use  of  such  a  substance.  Lichtenberg,  in
the  famous  auction  catalogue  of  the  curiosities  of  a  deceased
gentleman,  mentions  a  butter-dish  in  the  form  of  a  skull,
having  the  inner  surface  of  the  cover  so  modelled  that  it  im-
pressed upon  the  butter  the  exact  form  of  the  brain  !

The  measurements  of  Welcker  have  shown  that,  in  the
structure  of  the  skull,  a  tendency  generally  prevails  to  estab-
lish, even  when  there  is  a  considerable  variation  in  total  mass,
a  nearly  equal  internal  capacity.  There  also  exists  a  certain
proportion  between  the  size  of  the  skull  and  that  of  the  body,
although  the  proportion  is  not  always  the  same  for  different
degrees  of  stature.  Thus,  though  giants  have  generally  a
lai'ger  skull  than  dwarfs,  it  is  proportionally  smaller  in  the
former  than  in  the  latter.  Besides,  the  large  skulls  incline
rather  to  length,  at  the  same  time  decreasing  in  width ;  while
small  skulls  become  more  rounded,  thus  acquiring  that  form
which,  for  a  given  external  surface,  affords  the  largest  internal
space.  From  long  skulls  of  considerable  size  we  may,  there-
fore, generally  infer  that  their  possessors  were  tall,  muscular
men,  and  it  is  known  that  among  the  Negroes,  who  are
characteristically  long-headed,  we  frequently  meet  with  strik-
ingly athletic  forms.

This  will  be  the  proper  place  to  make  some  remarks  on
sexual  differences  which  occur  within  the  same  species  and
variety,  and  which  have  hitherto  not  received  the  attention
they  deserve.  You  are  aware  that,  in  the  animal  kingdom,
there  are  many  instances  in  which  this  difference  is  so  great,


LECTURE    III.  81

that  both  sexes  would  not  be  included  in  the  same  genus,  much
less  in  the  same  species,  if  their  relations  to  each  other  were
not  ascertained.  It  would  have  occurred  to  no  naturalist  to
associate  the  beautifully  decorated  cock  pheasant  or  peacock
with  their  plainer  mates,  if  their  sexual  relations  were  not
known,  and  I  might  quote  hundreds  of  instances  occurring
among  mammals  and  the  anthropoid  apes,  in  which  sufficient
sexual  differences  occur  to  justify  their  arrangement  in  dif-
ferent species.  Thus  it  is  with  the  orang,  the  baboon,  howling
monkey,  and  other  apes,  more  or  less  approaching  man  in  struc-
ture. When,  therefore,  Welcker  justly  observes,  that  the  skulls
of  man  and  woman  are  to  be  separated,  as  if  they  belonged  to
two  different  species,  and  that  they  differ  in  their  proportions
more  than  many  typical  or  race  skulls,  he  gives  expression  to  a
fact  in  nowise  peculiar  to  the  human  species,  but  one  that  finds
its  counterpart  in  the  mammalia,  and  especially  in  the  anthropoid
apes.  According  to  Welcker,  the  female  skull  is  smaller,  both
as  regards  horizontal  circumference  and  internal  capacity,  and
the  weight  of  the  brain  corresponds  with  this.  The  female
skull  exhibits,  according  to  Welcker's  measurements,  the  fol-
lowing proportions,  assuming  the  male  =100  throughout: —
circumference  =  96*6;  capacity  =  89-7;  weight  of  brain  =  89*9.
The  outlines  of  the  female  head  are  rounder ;  the  facial  portion
of  the  skull,  especially  the  jaws  and  the  base  of  the  skull,
smaller,  the  latter  being  especially  narrower  in  the  posterior
section.  The  base  is  at  the  same  time  more  extended,  the
sella-angle  larger;  and  there  is  developed  in  the  female  a
striking  tendency  to  prognathism  as  well  as  to  dolichocephaly.
We  may,  therefore,  say  that  the  type  of  the  female  skull  ap-
proaches, in  many  respects,  that  of  the  infant,  and  in  a  still
greater  degree  that  of  the  lower  races ;  and  with  this  is  con-
nected the  remarkable  circumstance,  that  the  difference  be-
tween the  sexes,  as  regards  the  cranial  cavity,  increases  with
the  development  of  the  race,  so  that  the  male  European  excels
much  more  the  female  than  the  Negro  the  Negress.  Welcker
confirms  this  statement  of  Huschke  from  his  measurements
of  Negro  and  German  skulls ;  more  observations  are,  how-
ever, requisite  before  it   can   be   accepted  as   generally  true.

a


82  LECTURE    III.

If  it  were  proved  to  be  correct,  it  would  furnish  an  interesting
indication  of  the  influence  of  civilisation  and  mode  of  life  on
the  development  of  races.  It  has  long  been  observed  that,
among  peoples  progressing  in  civilisation,  the  men  are  in  advance
of  the  women  ;  whilst  amongst  those  which  are  retrograding,  the
contrary  is  the  case.  Just  as,  in  respect  of  morals,  woman  is  the
conservator  of  old  customs  and  usages,  of  traditions,  legends,
and  religion ;  so  in  the  material  world  she  preserves  primitive
forms,  which  but  slowly  yield  to  the  influences  of  civilisation.
We  are  justified  in  saying,  that  it  is  easier  to  overthrow  a
government  by  revolution,  than  alter  the  arrangements  in  the
kitchen,  though  their  absurdity  be  abundantly  proved.  In  the
same  manner  woman  preserves,  in  the  formation  of  the  head,
the  earlier  stage  from  which  the  race  or  tribe  has  been  devel-
oped, or  into  which  it  has  relapsed.  Hence,  then,  is  partly
explained  the  fact,  that  the  inequality  of  the  sexes  increases
with  the  progress  of  civilisation.  To  this  must  be  added  the
circumstance,  that  the  lower  the  state  of  culture,  the  more
similar  are  the  occupations  of  the  two  sexes.  Among  the
Australians,  the  Bushmen,  and  other  low  races,  possessing  no
fixed  habitations,  the  wife  partakes  of  all  her  husband's  toils,
and  has,  in  addition,  the  care  of  the  progeny.  The  sphere  of
occupation  is  the  same  for  both  sexes ;  whilst  among  the  civi-
lised nations,  there  is  a  division  both  in  physical  and  mental
labour.  If  it  be  true  that  every  organ  is  strengthened  by  ex-
ercise, increasing  in  size  and  weight,  it  must  equally  apply
to  the  brain,  which  must  become  more  developed  by  proper
mental  exercise.

Passing  now  to  the  brain  itself,  we  have  already  remarked
that  an  opportunity  for  comparative  ethnological  investigations
is  rarely  met  with.  The  organ  is  so  soft,  so  dependent  in  its
form  on  its  integuments,  that  its  general  measurements  can
neither  be  taken  from  the  fresh  nor  the  indurated  brain,  but
only  from  casts,  with  any  degree  of  accuracy.  On  merely  re-
moving the  calvarium,  leaving  the  brain  in  the  skull,  we  can
only  take  measurements,  such  as  the  longitudinal  and  trans-
verse diameters,  which  are  just  as  easily  obtainable  from  the
calvarium.     If  the  brain  be  removed,  we  find  that  it  sinks  and


LECTURE    III.  83

becomes  flattened  by  its  own  weight;  in  short,  changes  its
form,  despite  of  all  efforts  to  support  it.  The  mass  is  so  rapidly
decomposed,  that,  in  order  to  study  the  various  parts,  it  must
be  indurated  in  some  such  fluid  as  spirits  of  wine.  In  short,
there  are  a  variety  of  circumstances  which  render  comparative
investigations  of  this  organ  specially  difficult,  so  that  we  must
proceed  with  the  greatest  accuracy  and  caution .

The  weight  of  the  brain  has  been  especially  taken  into  con-
sideration, and  the  investigations  of  the  English  have,  in  this
respect,  been  conducted  on  a  much  larger  scale  than  those  of
the  French  and  the  Germans.  Thus  Dr.  Boyd  weighed  not
merely  the  brains,  but  also  the  other  organs,  of  2,086  males
and  1,061  females  of  all  ages;  whence  it  resulted  that  in  the
adult  the  male  brains  varied  from  1,366  to  1,285  grammes,  and
the  female  brains  from  1,238  to  1,127  grammes,  so  that  the
highest  cerebral  weight  of  the  female  is  much  less  than  the
lowest  in  the  male.  Among  the  insane  (528  cases  were  inves-
tigated) the  variations  in  the  weight  of  the  brain  are  much
greater  than  among  such  as  died  from  other  diseases ;  and  it
seems  to  us  that  such  investigations  ought  to  be  pursued  on  an
extensive  scale,  and  in  detail.  There  are  cerebral  diseases,  or
psychical  disturbances,  such  as  mania,  connected  with  great
exaltation  of  cerebral  activity ;  whilst  there  are  other  mental
states  in  which  the  cerebral  activity  is  evidently  diminished.
Very  possibly  the  greater  variation  in  weight  may  depend  on
such  alternate  conditions ;  but  this,  however,  can  only  be
clearly  ascertained  from  a  great  number  of  observations.  Thus,
in  Wagner's  tables  of  the  weights  of  various  brains  we  find  by
the  side  of  intellectually  gifted  men  such  as  Cuvier,  brains  of
insane  and  hydrocephalic  subjects,  in  whom  the  cerebral  sub-
stance itself  was  evidently  affected.

Regarding  the  question  of  the  possible  development  of  the
brain,  it  becomes  important  to  note  the  relation  of  the  size
and  weight  of  the  cerebral  mass  to  the  intelligence  of  the  in-
dividual. It  has  been  generally  observed,  that  highly  gifted
individuals  possess  a  comparatively  large  skull,  an  opinion
which  prevails  among  the  people  generally,  especially  in  France.
I  have,  hundreds  of  times,  heard  the  expression,  "  a  good  head,

a  2


84  LECTURE    III.

a  capital  head,"  which  did  not  apply  to  the  performances  of
the  person,  but  merely  to  the  external  shape ;  and  I  have  con-
vinced myself,  by  actual  inquiry,  that  the  common  people  draw
their  inferences  as  to  the  intellectual  capacity  from  the  size
and  shape  of  the  skull,  and  especially  of  the  forehead.  In
fact,  actual  measurements  have  shown  that  many  highly  gifted
individuals,  among  whom  I  may  mention  Cuvier,  Schiller,  and
Napoleon  I,  possessed,  in  proportion  to  their  height,  very  large
skulls,  and  consequently  highly  developed  brains.

Wagner,  of  Gottingen,  has  published  a  rather  large  table  of
cerebral  weights,  among  which  may  be  found  those  of  many
highly  gifted  persons ;    and  he  has  based   on   this  table  the
assertion,  that  there  is  no  good  ground  for  the  above  theory,
inasmuch  as   the   brains  of  Hausmann   and   Tiedemann,  who
occupied  an  eminent  position  in  science,  were  under  the  aver-
age weight.     Exceptions,  however,  only  prove  the  rule ;  and
besides,  both  the  abovenamed  philosophers  died  at  a  great  age
from  exhaustion  of  the  vital  powers,  in  consequence  of  which
all   organs,   and   certainly   the  brain  also,   became  atrophied.
Observations  have  not,  however,  been  sufficiently  numerous  to
justify  the  positive  assertion  of  the  diminution  of  the  brain  in
old  age,  though  the  possibility  of  such  a  thing  in  man,  as  well
as  in  apes,  is  undeniable.     I  have  before  me  two  skulls  of  the
same  species  of  baboon  ;  one  belonged  to  a  male  which  perished
at  the  period  of  dentition  ;  the  other,  to  another  male  which  had
reached  maturity.     The   internal  capacity  of  the  young  skull
is  not  only  relatively,  but  absolutely  larger  than  that  of  the  old
animal,*  so  that  unless  it  depended  upon  individual  variation,
the  old  skull  must  have  suffered  a  reduction.    Such  a  reduction
can,  of  course,  only  be  positively  established  by  a  great  number
of  measurements,  for  which  I  have  not  the  means.     The  same
relation  seems,  however,  to  obtain  among  other  apes.     Thus,
Welcker  gives  delineations  of  three  orang  skulls,  f  which,  on
close  examination,  show  that  the  youngest  skull  has  apparently
the  largest  internal  cranial  capacity.     But  if  such  be  the  case,
there  is  no  reason  why  the  diminution  of  the  skull,  which  com-

*  Similar  instances  amongst  apes  are  very  frequent. — Editor.
f  Compare  Brooke,  Owen,  and  Wallace. — Editor.


LECTURE    III.  85

mences  at  an  earlier  period  in  the  ape,  should  not  take  place
in  advanced  age  in  man.

Parchappe,  who  has  made  a  number  of  cranial  measurements
on  his  own  system,  asserts  that  the  cranium  increases  up
to  the  fiftieth  year,  but  considerably  diminishes  after  the
sixtieth ;  that  the  diminution  takes  place  especially  in  the
frontal  region,  corresponding  to  the  anterior  cerebral  lobes,  and
that  the  frontal  sinuses  enlarge  after  the  sixtieth  year.  Theile
has  observed,  that  that  sphere  of  life  in  which  we  especially
look  for  intelligence  embraces  two  classes  of  intelligence ;  the
one  original ;  the  other,  acquired  by  education,  and  which,
under  lower  social  conditions,  would  not  have  risen  above  the
common  level.  A  distinction  must  certainly  be  made  between
creative  minds,  such  as  that  of  Gauss,  which  open  new  roads  to
science,  and  such  minds  as  that  of  Hausmann,  which  proceed  in
the  beaten  path,  and  whose  names,  though  occupying  high  posi-
tions during  life,  soon  disappear  from  the  history  of  science.
We  must  not  forget  that  the  solution  of  this  question  is,  as
Welcker  observes,  to  a  certain  extent  invidious.  Anthropo-
logists, with  large  heads,  may  feel  inclined  to  adopt  one  view,
whilst  those  less  favoured  will  accept  the  opposite  theory.

There  is  no  doubt  that,  in  every  race  and  species  of  man
and  animals,  there  obtains  a  definite  law  as  regards  the  pro-
portion and  weight  of  the  brain  to  that  of  the  body ;  but  this
can  only  be  determined  from  numerous  observations.  At  all
events,  it  is  certainly  erroneous  to  lay  down  absolute  rules  as
to  the  proportion  between  the  weight  of  the  brain  and  of  the
body.  The  weight  of  the  body  varies,  as  is  well  known,
greatly  according  to  the  nutrition  and  nutritive  decomposition
to  which  an  animal  is  exposed.  If  the  increase  during  fatten-
iug,  or  the  diminution  during  starvation,  affected  all  parts  in  a
similar  degree,  the  proportion  of  the  weight  of  the  brain  to
that  of  the  body  would  remain  the  same.  We  know,  however,
that  such  is  not  the  case ;  and  the  accurate  investigations  of
Chossat  have  shown  that  the  brain  is  just  the  very  organ  which
proportionally  loses  least  weight  from  starvation.  The  poorer
the  alimentation  of  an  animal,  the  greater  is  the  proportional
weight  of  the  brain,  and  the  greater  should  be  its  intellectual
function   if  it   depended   on    such  a   condition.       Hunger,   no


8(3  LECTURE    III.

doubt,  sharpens  the  wits  as  well  as  the  teeth,  and  according
to  Horace,  growing  fat  is  a  mark  of  incipient  stupidity.

Formerly,  the  opinion  prevailed  that  man  possessed  a  brain
absolutely  heavier  than  that  of  any  other  animal.  This  is  true
as  regards  most  animals ;  but  intelligent  colossals — such  as
the  elephant,  and  we  may  also  add,  the  whale — soon  proved
the  axiom  to  be  unfounded.  If,  it  was  then  said,  it  be  not  the
absolute,  it  is  the  relative,  weight.  The  weight  of  man's  body
compared  with  that  of  his  brain  is,  on  the  average,  as  36  to  1  ;
whilst  in  the  most  intelligent  animals  it  is  rarely  above  100  to  1.
Whilst  in  the  former  case  it  was  the  giants,  it  was  now  the
dwarfs  of  creation  which  upset  the  axiom.  The  host  of  small
song  birds  vary  as  regards  this  proportion,  within  limits
which  far  exceed  the  normal  proportion  in  the  human  race.
The  small  American  monkeys,  too,  exhibit  a  proportionally
heavier  brain  than  that  of  the  lord  of  creation.  If,  then,  the
weight  of  the  brain  is  to  be  compared  with  any  other  numerical
factor  in  the  body,  it  can  only  be  a  measure  of  length,  which,
although  subject  to  variation,  is  so  in  a  much  less  degree,  and
it  might,  perhaps,  be  best  to  adopt  the  length  of  the  vertebral
column  as  the  standard.  On  adopting  the  whole  length  of  the
body,  that  of  the  legs  is  included,  and  it  is  just  the  length  of
the  legs  which  exhibits  the  greatest  variations.  The  trunk  of
man  varies  much  less,  and  this  offers  a  much  more  accurate
standard.  Moreover,  measurements  of  the  whole  length  of
the  human  body  can  never  be  compared  with  those  of  mam-
mals, none  of  them  possessing  an  erect  stature,  but  their  pos-
terior limbs  forming  invariably  a  greater  or  lesser  angle  with
the  axis  of  the  vertebral  column.

We  possess  at  present  only  the  weights  of  the  brains  of  the
tribes  of  central  Europe, — Germans,  French,  and  English, —
in  any  considerable  numbers,  and  these  are  so  arranged  that
they  require  further  critical  sifting.  The  table  furnished  by
Wagner  is  a  crude,  undigested  mass ;  and  those  who  would
draw  inferences  from  it  must  subject  it  to  a  close  sifting,  as
sex,  age,  and  diseases  are  curiously  intermixed.  This  much
may,  however,  be  inferred  from  it,  that  although  there  is  no
definite  mathematical  proportion,  there  is  an  approximative
relation  between  the  weight  of  the  brain  and  the  development


LECTURE    III.  87

of  intelligence ;  and  Broca  has  shown,  from  Wagner's  table,
that,  excepting  the  brain  of  Hausmann,  all  the  brains  of  noted
or  celebrated  individuals  excelled  the  average  weight  of  those  of
unknown  persons,  and  that  the  brains  of  Wagner's  colleagues,
-weighed  by  himself,  occupy  the  first  rank  in  the  series,  if  ar-
ranged according  to  weight.  This  is  a  point  of  very  great
importance ;  for  after  all,  only  such  brains  as  have  been  weighed
by  the  same  observer,  after  the  same  method,  can  be  compared
with  each  other.  A  difference  of  fifty  grammes  or  more  may
easily  be  caused  by  the  way  in  which  the  brain  is  prepared ;
and  in  most  cases  experimenters  give  no  clear  explanation  of
their  mode  of  preparing  the  brain  previous  to  weighing.  Whilst,
then,  men  occupying  the  same  rank  of  intelligence  may  have
brains  of  different  weights,  and  privileged  individuals  may
sometimes  possess  lighter  brains  than  others  who  are  noways
distinguished  from  the  common  horde,  it  still  remains  an
established  fact  that,  generally  speaking,  there  is  an  approxi-
mative relation  between  cerebral  weight  and  intelligence,  and
that  the  determination  of  this  relation  should  on  no  account
be  neglected.

The  result  of  these  investigations  enables  us  definitely  to
assert,  that  a  certain  weight  of  brain  is  requisite  for  the  mani-
festation of  intellectual  faculties  ;  that  idiocy  and  mental  weak-
ness begin  below  this  weight ;  and  that  this  weight,  as  regards
the  white  race,  or  central  European  nations,  is  about  a  kilo-
gramme for  the  male,  and  900  grammes  for  the  female.  We  shall
recur  to  this  point  when  treating  of  the  relation  of  idiots  with
arrested  cranial  and  cerebral  development  to  the  simian  type.

I  have  purposely  stated,  that  the  lowest  normal  weight  quoted
only  applies  to  the  central  European  peoples ;  whether  to  the
white  race  in  general  is  yet  doubtful.  The  more  we  specialise
in  such  matters  the  better;  and  as  it  is  scarcely  determined
whether  the  white  race  forms  really  a  united  whole,  or  is  not  a
mixture  of  various  species,  it  is  as  well  to  confine  ourselves
strictly  to  data  before  us.  Direct  investigations  relating  to
other  races,  which  no  doubt  have  their  peculiar  standard,
we  do  not  yet  possess.  We  are  necessarily  confined,  for  the
present  at  least,  to  measurements  of  the  internal  capacity  of
the  skull.     Even  with  regard  to  this,  erroneous  results  were


88


LECTURE    III.


formerly  propagated  by  Tiedemann.  Supported  by  few  and
erroneously  interpreted  observations,  Tiedemann  asserted  that
the  cranial  capacity  of  the  Negro  was  not  less  than  that  of  the
European,  and  this  assertion  was  naturally  turned  to  profitable
account  by  monogenists.  More  numerous  measurements  are
now  available,  and  their  results,  as  far  as  they  are  known  to  me,
I  have  arranged  in  the  following  table.  They  have  all  been
taken  according  to  Morton's  method,  by  filling  the  skull  with
small  shot,  and  ascertaining  the  measure  in  cubic  centimeters.

CRANIAL  CAPACITY  IN  VARIOUS  RACES.


No.  of

Volume  in

No.

People.

skulls
measd.

cubic  centi-
meters.

Observers.

Remarks.

1

Australians.

8

1228-27

Aitken  Meigs.

2

Polynesians.

1230

Morton.

3

Hottentots.

1230

33

4

33

3

1233-78

Aitken  Meigs.

5

Peruvians.*

152

1233-78

33

*  [With  artificially

6

JS

1246

Morton.

compressed  skulls.

7

Oceanic  Negroes.

2

1253-45

Aitken  Meigs.

— Editor.]

8

Mexicans.

1296

Morton.

9

Americans  in  general.

341

1315-71

Aitken  Meigs.

10

Negroes  borninAme-
rica.

12

1323-90

>>

11

Malays.

1328

Morton.

12

Mexicans.

25

1338-65

Aitken  Meigs.

13

Greenlander.

1

1340

Welcker.

14

Chinese.

1345

Morton.

15

Negroes  in  general.

76

1347-66

Aitken  Meigs.

16

)>

1361

Morton.

17

Ancient  Peruvians.

1361

>>

18

Negroes  bornin  Africa

64

1371-42

Aitken  Meigs.

19

Wild  Indians.

164

1376-71

33

20

Parisians,    from     a
common  grave.

35

1403-14

Broca.

Skulls  of  the  19th
century.

21

Parisians   from    the
Cimetiere  des  In-
nocents.

117

1409-31

33

Skulls  of  the  12th
to  the  18th  century.

22

Esquimaux.

1410

Morton.

23

Parisians  of  the  12th
century.

115

1425-98

Broca.

From  a  Vault.

24

Caucasians  in  general

1

1427

Aitken  Meigs.

25

Malays.

1

1430

Welcker.

26

Germans.

30

1448

j»

27

Parisians  of  the  19th
century.

125

146153

Broca.

28

An  glo- Americans .

7

1474-65

Aitken  Meigs.

29

Parisians    from    pri-
vate graves.

90

1484-23

Broca.

Skulls  of  the  19th
century.

30

Parisians  from  La
Morgue.

17

1517

9f

The  same.

31

Germans  in  general.

38

1534-127

Aitken  Meigs.

32

Brachycephale,
from  Meudon.

1

1540

Broca.

From  a  Dolmen.

33

English.

5

1572-95

Aitken  Meigs.

LECTURE    III.  89

This  list  requires  some  explanation.  The  results  arrived  at
by  Morton  and  Aitken  Meigs  have  been  obtained,  to  a  great
extent  at  all  events,  from  the  same  skulls,  namely,  from  Morton's
collection  of  crania,  which  was  purchased  by  the  Academy  of
Science  in  Philadelphia,  and  has  since  then  received  but  few  addi-
tions. Some  of  the  differences  between  the  above  observers  may
have  arisen  from  the  circumstance  that  the  measures  originally
given  in  English  cubic  inches,  were  differently  reduced  to  cubic
centimeters.  These  measurements,  as  well  as  those  of  Welcker,
were  made  with  small  shot,  with  which  the  cranium  was  filled,
and  shaken  until  no  more  could  be  introduced.

Broca  has  observed,  that  no  exact  measurement  is  obtained
by  this  method,  the  differences  arising  when  the  same  skull  is
measured  several  times,  amounting  to  from  twenty  to  thirty-
five  cubic  centimeters,  owing  to  the  fact  that,  in  many  skulls,
some  parts  of  the  internal  cavity  of  the  cranium  rise  above  the
level  of  the  occipital  foramen,  through  which  the  shot  is  intro-
duced. Broca,  therefore,  by  means  of  a  long  cuneiform  in-
strument, presses  the  shot  in  every  direction,  until  no  more
can  be  introduced.  His  results,  though  comparable  with  each
other,  present  therefore  somewhat  higher  numbers.  Again,
the  skulls  examined  by  the  American  observers  were  selected
specimens,  whilst  those  of  Broca  were  obtained  from  disturbed
churchyards.

Broca  availed  himself  of  the  rare  opportunity  of  examining
a  number  of  skulls  which  were  found  in  Paris,  on  laying  the
foundation  of  the  new  Tribunal  cle  Commerce,  in  a  vault,  at  a
depth  of  three  meters,  at  a  spot  which  was  already  covered
with  houses  at  the  time  of  Philip  Augustus.  The  crania  must
therefore,  at  the  latest,  date  from  the  twelfth  century,  many  of
these  possibly  from  the  Carlovingian  period.  They  certainly
belonged  to  individuals  of  the  higher  ranks,  as  they  were  found
in  closed  vaults ;  and  they  present  two  distinct  types, — long-
heads and  short-heads,  as  well  as  a  larger  number  of  medium-
heads,  which  possess  the  least  capacity ;  whilst  the  long-heads
occupy,  in  this  respect,  the  middle  position  between  the  me-
dium- and  the  short-heads,  the  latter  occupying  the  highest
position.  All  these  skulls  are  marked  as  Parisians  of  the
twelfth  century  in  the  table.


90  LECTURE    III.

A  second  series  of  skulls  was  obtained  by  Broca  from  an  old
churchyard,  Gimetihre  des  Innocents,  which  was  opened  under
Philip  Augustus  in  the  twelfth  century,  and  used  up  to  the
eighteenth  century.  Finally,  a  third  series  was  obtained  from
a  more  recent  churchyard,  the  Gimetihre  de  VOuest,  used  from
1 788  to  1  824.  The  skulls  are  indicated  in  the  table  as  Parisi-
ans of  the  nineteenth  century.  Both  these  churchyards  served
chiefly  for  the  poorer  classes  ;  but  Broca  was  enabled  to  form
three  series  of  the  skulls  of  the  Gimetihre  de  VOuest;  namely,
crania  from  the  pit,  in  which  the  bodies  were  buried  after
having  been  exposed  in  the  Morgue,  and  which  consequently
belonged  chiefly  to  suicides,  and  unknown  persons  accidentally
killed ;  skulls  from  the  common  pit  where  paupers  were  buried ;
and  lastly,  skulls  from  private  graves,  for  the  preservation  of
which  a  fee  was  exacted,  and  which  consequently  were  the
skulls  of  people  of  some  means,  who,  it  may  be  assumed,  were
better  educated  than  the  others.

On  comparing  Broca' s  results,  we  find  first  that  the  skulls  of
suicides  exhibit  the  highest  average,  which  may,  perhaps,  be
explained  by  the  fact  that  in  most  of  these  cases  cerebral  dis-
eases may  have  been  the  cause  of  the  act  of  self-destruction.
But  what  is  more  striking  is  the  difference  between  the  skulls
obtained  from  the  common  pit  and  those  from  private  graves ;
for  it  amounts  to  above  eighty  cubic  centimeters, — a  large
amount,  considering  that  the  total  capacity  does  not  amount
to  1,500  cubic  centimeters.  We  may  hence  infer  that  indivi-
duals engaged  in  art  and  science  possess  a  higher  cranial  capa-
city than  mere  labourers, — a  result  which  is  confirmed  by  other
observations  to  which  we  shall  recur.

Broca's  observations  yield,  moreover,  the  remarkable  result,
that  the  cranium  of  the  Parisian  population  has,  in  the  course
of  centuries,  gained  in  capacity.  On  comparing  the  skulls  of
the  twelfth  with  those  of  the  nineteenth  century,  we  find  that
the  capacity  has  increased.  This  single  fact  may,  perhaps,  not
be  sufficient  to  establish  a  rule ;  but  it  affords  an  index,  and  if
supported  by  other  facts,  we  shall  be  justified  in  inferring  that,
by  progressive  civilisation  the  cranial  capacity  of  a  race  may,
in  the  course  of  centuries,  become  gradually  increased.


LECTURE    III.  91

It  might  be  maintained,  that  the  variable  cranial  capacity
presented  in  these  observations  was  the  result  of  the  intermix-
ture of  various  tribes  which  have  settled  in  Paris.  No  doubt
there  is  nowhere  a  more  mixed  population  than  in  such  a
capital ;  but  a  single  glance  at  such  a  population  is  sufficient
to  show  that  the  variation  pervades  all  ranks,  and  that  the
labouring  population  of  Paris  is  nearly  as  much  mixed  as  the
higher  classes.  All  the  peoples  of  Europe  furnish  their  quota,
the  losses  of  which  are  constantly  supplied  by  fresh  immigra-
tions. As  it  is  at  the  present  time,  so  it  was  600  and  1000
years  ago :  Celts,  Germans,  Slavonians,  Romans,  already  then
migrated  to  the  Seine,  and  the  cranial  forms  of  the  vaults  of
the  twelfth  century  show  that  the  intermixture  was  then  the
same  as  now.

If  the  table  be  examined  with  regard  to  races,  it  exhibits
the  remarkable  fact  that  all  European  nations,  without  excep-
tion, have  a  cranial  capacity  of  more  than  1,400  cubic  centi-
meters ;  whilst,  of  non-Europeans,  only  the  Esquimaux  and
Malays  exceed  that  measure.  The  former  stand  near  the  line
of  separation ;  whilst  the  Malay  skull  measured  by  Welcker
occupies  an  intermediate  position  amongst  European  nations
very  near  the  Germans.  Some  doubts  exist,  however,  con-
cerning this  measurement,  since  it  differs  more  than  100  cubic
centimeters  from  the  measurements  of  Malay  skulls  made  by
Morton, — an  amount  of  difference  so  large  that  it  can  scarcely
be  attributed  to  individual  peculiarity  alone.  Welcker's  Malay
skull  may  possibly  not  have  been  that  of  a  pure  Malay,  but  of
a  cross-breed  who  had  European  blood  in  his  veins.  In  the
environs  of  the  Dutch  possessions  in  the  Sunda  islands,  there
are,  probably,  few  Malays  whose  pedigrees  do  not  exhibit  the
intermixture  of  European  blood.

Setting  aside  these  minor  exceptions,  we  find  that  there  is
an  almost  regular  series  in  the  cranial  capacity  of  such  nations
and  races  as,  since  historical  times,  have  taken  little  or  no  part
in  civilisation.  Australians,  Hottentots,  and  Polynesians,  na-
tions in  the  lowest  state  of  barbainsm,  commence  the  series ;
and  no  one  can  deny  that  the  place  they  occupy  in  relation  to
cranial  capacity  and  cerebral  weight  corresponds  with  the  de-


92  LECTUEE    III.

gree  of  their  intellectual  capacity  and  civilisation.  Our  table,
no  doubt,  is  very  imperfect  and  incomplete,  for  it  neither  ex-
hibits the  sex  and  age,  nor  the  stature  of  the  populations,  the
measurement  of  whose  skulls  is  given.  Still  it  is  an  index,
and  an  important  one,  showing  at  the  first  glance  that  such  in-
vestigations form  a  basis  for  the  superstructure  of  a  scientific
natural  history  of  man.

I  must  not  omit  to  draw  your  attention  to  a  point  worthy  of
particular  notice.  According  to  Aitken  Meigs'  measurements,
the  cranial  capacity  of  Negroes  born  in  Africa  is  considerably
more  than  that  of  the  American  slaves.  Is  this  the  effect  of
that  cursed  institution  which  degrades  men  to  the  condition  of
chattel,  and  deprives  them  of  that  liberty  which  alone  can  lead
to  a  higher  development  ?  As  slavery  exercises  an  equally  in-
jurious influence  on  the  master,  it  might  perhaps  be  possible,
by  a  compai'ative  examination,  to  show  a  similar  relation  as  re-
gards the  cranial  capacity  of  the  inhabitants  of  the  free  and
of  the  slave  states  of  North  America.  The  recent  tremendous
butcheries  may  afford  abundant  materials  for  such  investiga-
tions. Let  the  materials,  then,  be  made  use  of  before  they
find  their  way  into  the  bone  mills  and  manufactories  of  artificial
manure.


93


LECTURE    IV.

Structure  of  the  Brain. — Elementary  Constituents  of  Brain-substance. — Ce-
rebellum.— The  primitive  Brain. — The  Cerebrum  the  seat  of  intellectual
activity. — Localisation  of  individual  functions. — Application  to  Phreno-
logy.— The  Cerebral  Lobes. — The  Convolutions  :  their  relation  to  the  In-
tellect and  the  Size  of  the  Body. — The  development  of  the  Convolutions,
and  their  arrangement  according  to  Gratiolet  and  Wagner. — Huschke's
Opinions. — Comparative  Investigation  of  various  Cerebral  Forms. — The
Cerebral  Cavities. — Dispute  about  them,  especially  in  England.

Gentlemen, — Whatever  opinion  we  may  entertain  regarding
the  intellectual  functions,  whether  they  be   regarded  as  the
manifestations  of  an  independent  soul  by  the  intermediation  of
the  nervous  system,  or  as  the  functions  of  the  nervous  system
itself  and  its  parts,  we  are  always  reduced  to  the  necessity  of
considering  the  brain  as  the  organ  from  which  the  intellectual
functions  proceed.     Every  disturbance  in  the  cerebral  struc-
ture, by  whatever  agency  it  may  be  produced,  is  immediately
reflected  in  the  intellectual  functions  ;    it  may  even  be  pre-
dicted, in  many  instances,  that  laceration  will  be  followed  by
certain  effects,  and  even  every  change  in  the  cerebral  circula-
tion immediately  influences  cerebral  activity.     If  this  be  true,
and  no  one  can  doubt  it,  for  stupor  and  epileptic  fits  may  be
produced  experimentally  in  any  animal,  we  can  easily  imagine
that  the  structure  of  the  brain  and  its  component  parts  stands
in  the  most  intimate  relation  to  the  development  of  the  in-
tellectual function,  and  that  this  mode   of  relation  may  be,
though   at  present   only  approximatively,    ascertained.       The
structure  of  the  brain  is  exceedingly  complicated ;  there  is  no
oro-an  in  the  human  body  which,  consisting  of  comparatively
so  few  elementary  constituents,  possesses  so  great  a  variety  of
parts  which,  by  their  shape,  internal  structure,  and  position,


94


LECTURE    IV.


plainly  prove  that  they  exercise  different  functions,  though  we
have  not  yet  succeeded  in  determining  them.

On  turning  our  attention  first  to  the  constituent  elementary
forms,  we  find  in  the  brain  of  man  and  animals  two  groups  of
substances,  a  grey  substance,  more  or  less  blackish  or  yellowish,
appearing  to  the  naked  eye  as  a  uniform  mass,  and  a  white
substance  apparently  distinguished  from  the  other  by  being
composed  of  fibres  which  run  in  various  directions.  The  grey
substance  consists  of  cells  containing  nuclei  and  finely  granu-
lated matter,  from  which  issue  processes  subdivided  into  very
delicate  threads,  which  either  form  delicate  networks  or  are  lost
in  the  fibres  of  the  white  substance.  These  nerve-cells  (see
fig.  28)  exhibit  a  variety  of  forms  which  are  probably  connected
with  their  respective  functions,  an  hypothesis  rendered  more
probable  by  the  fact,  that  the  grey  substance  no  doubt  origi-

Fig.  28.     Multipolar  Cells,  with  Processes  in  the  Human  Brain.


1.  Cell,  the  process  of  which,  a,  becomes  the  cylinder-axis  of  the  sheathed
primitive  fibre,  b.  2.  Two  cells,  a  and  b,  connected  by  processes.  3.  Three
cells,  a,  connected  by  commissures,  b,  sending  forth  nerve  fibres,  c,  4.  Mul-
tipolar cells,  with  much  more  black  pigment.


LECTURE    IV.  9<J

nates  nervous  activity,  whilst  the  white  substance  acts  as  a  con-
ductor. All  the  fibres  of  the  white  substance,  all  the  nerves
entering  the  brain,  terminate  in  the  grey  ganglia  and  masses
scattered  in  the  centre  of  the  brain  or  on  its  surface.  It  fol-
lows, then,  that  in  the  question  of  the  relation  of  cerebral  struc-
ture to  mental  development,  the  grey  substance  and  the  parts
chiefly  composed  of  it,  demand  our  special  attention.

Now  it  does  not  admit  of  a  doubt  that  many  of  the  grey
nuclei  in  the  interior  of  the  brain,  are  not,  strictly  speaking,
connected  with  the  mental  functions,  but  only  with  the  organs
of  sense.  Just  as  in  the  spinal  cord  the  grey  matter  has  different
functions,  one  mass  presiding  over  sensation  and  another  over
motion,  so  are  there  in  the  brain  grey  nuclei  whose  relation  to
particular  functions  can  be  determined.  In  that  part  of  the
spinal  cord  which  enters  the  cranium  by  the  occipital  foramen,
and  is  then  called  the  medulla  oblongata,  there  are  situated
the  grey  nuclei  which  preside  over  the  respiratory  and  the
cardiac  movements ;  more  in  front  are  other  parts  which  have
been  experimentally  proved  to  be  related  to  the  movements  of
the  body  and  to  the  organs  of  sense.  These  parts  are  in  our
investigations  only  so  far  interesting  in  that  the  senses  may  be
more  developed  in  some  races  than  in  others.  Although,  how-
ever, the  acuteness  of  the  senses  in  some  savage  tribes  excites
our  astonishment,  it  appears  to  be  rather  the  result  of  train-
ing than  of  an  original  endowment,  since  individuals  belonging
to  civilised  races,  whose  calling  as  hunters  or  mariners  requires
constant  practice,  soon  acquire  the  same  acuteness  of  per-
ception.

On  examining  a  human  brain  at  the  base,  we  see  in  the
centre  a  nearly  white  mass  ascending  through  the  large  occip-
ital aperture,  which  must  be  divided  in  order  to  remove  the
brain  from  the  cranium.  This  is  the  medulla  oblongata,  in  the
interior  of  which  we  see  several  grey  ganglia,  and  from  the
edges  of  which  issue  several  cerebral  nerves,  as  the  vagus
which  proceeds  to  the  heart,  the  lungs,  and  stomach.  In  front
it  is  continued  in  a  bridge-shaped  structure  termed  the  pons
Varolii,  composed  of  transverse  fibres,  and  from  which  emerge
fascias  of  white  matter,  which,  entering  the  hemispheres,  are


96


LECTURE    IV.


termed  the  crura  cerebri.  All  the  white  parts,  with  their  con-
tinuations, in  front  and  above,  and  concealed  in  the  cerebral
mass,  may  be  termed  the  primitive  brain,  inasmuch  as  this  is  the
original  portion  which  is  first  of  all  deposited  during  the  de-
velopment of  the  brain  in  the  embryo.  The  great  mass  of  the
brain  consists,  as  shown  by  comparative  anatomy,  of  arched
parts  which  gradually  grow  from  the  primitive  brain  and  unite
in  the  median  line,  so  that  in  the  interior  of  the  brain  there  re-
mains still  a  system  of  cavities,  the  size  of  which  diminishes  in
proportion  to  the  development  of  the  cerebral  mass.

Fig.  29.     Base  of  tlie  Human  Brain.


Base  of  the  Brain.  1.  Anterior  lobe.  2.  Middle  lobe.  3.  Posterior  lobe
of  the  cerebral  hemisphere.  4.  Hemispheres  of  the  cerebellum.  5.  Vermi-
form process  of  cerebellum.  6.  Flocculus.  7.  Longitudinal  fissure.  8.  Ol-
factory nerves  (first  pair).     9.  Exit  of  the  olfactory  nerve  from  the  brain.

10.  Crossing  of  the  optic  nerves.     Chiasma  nervorum  opticorum  (second  pair).

11.  Tuber  cinereum.  12.  Corpora  mammillavia.  13.  Oculomotor  (third
pair).  14.  Pons  Varolii.  15.  Crura  cerebelli.  16.  Trigeminal  nerve  (fifth
pair):  immediately  before  it,  the  fourth  pair:  N.  patheticus,  or  tro-
chlearis.  17.  Abducens  (sixth  pair).  18.  Facial  and  auditory  nerve :  N.  faci-
alis and  N.  acousticus  (seventh  and  eighth  pair).  19.  Pyramidal  bodies  of
the  medulla ;  at  their  sides,  outwardly,  the  olivary  bodies.  20.  Glosso-pha-
ryngeal  nerve,  vagus  and  accessory  nerves  (ninth,  tenth,  and  eleventh  pair).
21.  N.  hypoglossus  (twelfth  pair).     22.     First  cervical  nerve.


LECTURE    IV.


07


Physiological  experiments  have  proved  that  it  is  the  primitive
brain  only  which  possesses  sensibility;  that  all  cerebral  nerves
spring  only  from  the  grey  ganglia  it  contains,  and  that  this
part  is  mainly  connected  with  sensation  and  motion.

On  further  examining  the  base  of  the  brain  we  perceive  im-
mediately above  the  primitive  brain  on  both  sides  of  the  medulla
a  mass  divided  into  lobes  and  laminse.  This  is  the  cerebellum,  so
little  developed  in  man  and  most  apes,  that,  on  being  viewed
from  above,  it  seems  entirely  covered  by  the  brain  proper.

If  a  vertical  section  be  made  through  the  cerebellum,  the
medullary  substance  is  seen  covered  with  grey  matter,  produc-
ing a  tree-like  figure,  which  the  old  anatomists  designated  the

Fig.  30.     The  Brain  of  the  so-called  Hottentot-Venus  :  top  view,  after

Gratiolet.


L.  Longitudinal  fissure,
fissure.    F.  Frontal  lobe.    P.
lobe.     Po.  Pons  Varolii.     C.


R.  Rolando's  fissure.  V.  Posterior  transverse
Parietal  lobe.  O.  Posterior  lobe.  T,  Temporal
Cerebellum.      V.  M.  Medulla  oblongata:

II


98  LECTURE    IV.

tree  of  life,  arbor  vitiv.  The  white  fibres,  called  the  crura
cerebelli,  connecting  the  cerebellum  with  the  encephalon,  are
sensitive;  not  so  the  foliated  parts.  From  all  experiments
hitherto  made,  the  cerebellum  seems  to  be  chiefly  connected
with  motion.  If  it  be  destroyed  on  one  side  only,  paralytic
phenomena  are  observed,  in  which  the  body  rolls  towards  the
opposite  side  ;  if  the  whole  cerebellum  is  destroyed,  the  verte-
bral column,  and  consequently  the  whole  body,  loses  the
power  of  equilibrium,  the  animal  oscillates,  the  walk  resem-
bles that  of  an  intoxicated  person,  all  the  motions  are  irregular
and  without  any  harmony.  The  same  facts  are  observed  in
diseases  in  which  the  cerebellum  is  by  any  cause  affected.  The
relation  of  the  cerebellum  to  the  sexual  functions,  ascribed  to
it  by  Gall,  and  which  has  become  an  axiom  in  phrenology,  has
not  been  confirmed  by  experience.

It  results  from  these  facts,  that  the  examination  of  the  cere-
bellum would  contribute  but  little  to  the  elucidation  of  the
questions  before  us,  inasmuch  as  that  part  of  the  encephalon
cannot  be  proved  to  be  connected  with  the  intellectual  functions.

There  remains  now  the  brain  proper,  which  constitutes  by  far
the  largest  mass  of  the  encephalon,  covering  all  other  parts  on
being  viewed  from  above,  and  at  once  distinguished  by  the
singular  convolutions  on  the  surface.  The  cerebrum  is  divided
into  two  hemispheres  by  a  process  of  the  dura  mater  termed
the  falx.  Another  process  of  the  same  membrane,  termed  the
tentorium,  extends  horizontally  between  the  cerebrum  and  the
cerebellum.  Thus  the  cerebrum  constitutes,  as  it  were,  a
separate  whole  which,  as  comparative  anatomy  teaches,  has
overgrown  and,  so  to  say,  suppressed  all  other  cerebral  parts.
This  overgrowth  increases  in  the  lower  animals  accordingly  as
they  approach  the  human  conformation.  In  the  lowest  verte-
brates, fishes,  the  cerebrum  is  only  a  grey  knot,  situated  in  front
of  the  other  ganglia  of  the  cerebral  stem,  and  in  the  same  line.
But  the  cerebrum  swells  out  like  an  inflated  india-rubber  pouch
in  the  higher  vertebrates,  gradually  covering  the  grey  ganglia
of  the  primitive  brain,  and  the  imperfectly  arched  forms  of
the  originally  separated  meso-cephalon,  which  are  known  by
the  name  of  thai  a,  mi  uptiei  and  tiibereula  quadrigemina;  it  then


LECTURE    IV.  99


passes  above  the  cerebellum  and  gradually  covers  it  with  its
lower  surface.  A  section  along  the  course  of  the  zygomatic
arch,  dividing  the  skull,  would  almost  exactly  coincide  with  the
under  surface  of  the  cerebrum.  The  cerebellum  would  not  be
touched  in  such  a  section,  as  it  lies  in  the  part  of  the  occiput
covered  by  the  insertions  of  the  muscles  of  the  neck.

The  mass  of  the  cerebrum  is  insensible  ;  only  the  crura  and
the  tubercula  quadrigemina  are  sensitive.  In  wounds  of  the
head,  when  the  brain  is  exposed,  the  surface  may  be  touched
or  portions  removed,  without  the  manifestation  of  any  pain.
On  the  other  hand,  experiments  performed  on  animals,  espe-
cially birds,  have  proved  that  the  cerebrum  is  manifestly  the
sole  seat  of  intelligence.  Pigeons  may  be  kept  alive  for  weeks
after  the  removal  of  the  hemispheres.  You  will  find  a  sum-
mary of  such  experiments  in  my  Physiological  Lectures  (3rd
edition,  p.  316).  But  these  phenomena  prove  that  an  animal
deprived  of  its  brain  continues  to  live,  in  a  deep  sleep  as  it
were.  The  power  of  motion  remains  as  well  as  combined
muscular  action  to  a  limited  extent ;  pain  is  felt,  and  certain
movements  are  made  to  avoid  it ;  but  the  animal  is  undoubt-
edly in  a  state  of  stupor,  in  a  certain  dreamy  condition  which
admits  of  no  consciousness.  There  is  no  combination  of  the
sensations  to  manifest  the  feelings.  The  animal,  as  an  ob-
server remarks,  might  die  of  starvation  before  a  well-filled
trough,  as  the  want  of  food  does  not  induce  the  motion  requi-
site for  feeding.

The  cerebrum  is  thus  unquestionably  the  seat  of  intelligence,
consciousness,  and  will,  consequently  of  all  intellectual  ac-
tivity. The  white  fibres  contained  in  it  serve  probably  for
connecting  the  individual  grey  parts ;  for  they  are,  like  them,
insensible.  The  question  now  is,  whether  the  different  intellec-
tual functions  are  confined  to  different  parts  of  the  brain,  and
if  so,  to  what  parts  ?

Experiments  on  animals  furnish,  in  this  respect,  only  unsatis-
factory results.  If  the  hemispheres  are  removed  in  slices,  the
phenomena  of  stupor  become  gradually  more  manifest.  The
removal  of  one  entire  hemisphere  presents  no  remarkable  re-
sult ;  whence  it  may  be  concluded  that  the   remaining   hemi-

ii  -1


100  LECTURE    IV.

sphere  may,  for  a  certain  time  at  least,  perform  all  requisite
functions.  All  that  is  observed,  is  that  the  cerebral  activity  is
sooner  exhausted  than  in  the  uninjured  brain,  so  that  it  is
merely  the  quantity  and  not  the  quality  of  the  function  which
is  affected.  Some  physiologists  have,  not  unreasonably,  asserted
that  such  an  interchanging  of  activity  of  the  two  cerebral  hemi-
spheres may  and  does  occur  also  in  the  living  man,  and  that  one
hemisphere  may,  to  a  certain  extent,  go  to  sleep  and  refresh
itself,  whilst  the  other  half  is  in  a  state  of  activity.  The  facts,
however,  upon  which  this  assertion  is  based,  are,  as  yet,  insuf-
ficient for  the  establishment  of  such  a  theory.

Neither  wounds  in  the  head  nor  cerebral  diseases  have  hith-
erto yielded  satisfactory  evidence  as  regards  the  localisation  of
the  intellectual  faculties  in  individual  parts  of  the  cerebrum.
The  question  has  been  much  discussed  whether  speech,  or,
rather,  the  capacity  for  producing  articulate  sounds  expressing
thoughts,  is  localised  in  the  anterior  lobes  of  the  brain,  and
cases  have  been  adduced  in  which  a  morbid  condition  of  those
parts  was  concomitant  with  loss  of  speech.  But  the  fact  that
one  hemisphere  may  act  vicariously  for  the  other,  has  been  lost
sight  of,  and  also  that  it  is  but  rarely  that  both  hemispheres
are  equally  affected.  This,  however,  is  clearly  the  requisite
condition  for  estimating  such  a  case,  for  that  function  which  is
destroyed  by  disease  on  one  side  may  be  preserved  on  the  other,
and,  though  sooner  exhausted,  would,  for  a  time,  be  performed
in  its  integrity.  Cases  are  by  no  means  rare  of  persons  hav-
ing lost  a  quantity  of  cerebral  substance  from  one  hemisphere
by  wounds,  and  who,  though  exhibiting  no  actual  diminution
in  their  intellectual  functions,  were  compelled  frequently  to
rest  after  any  mental  exertion,  as  their  mental  energy  was
sooner  exhausted.

Since  direct  observations  yield  but  scanty  results,  we  may
be  permitted  to  appeal  to  conditions  which  may  indirectly  con-
tribute towards  the  elucidation  of  the  question.  The  results
of  such  investigation  certainly  do  not  possess  the  same  validity
as  those  drawn  from  direct  observation.  Still,  they  are  of
some  value  and  should  not  be  neglected.

There  are   normal  conditions  in  which  certain  parts  of  the


LECTURE    IV.  101

brain  are  less  developed  than  others,  and  such  conditions  may
be  noted  in  the  analysis  of  the  intellectual  functions.  We
may  thus,  perhaps,  find  that  in  individuals  of  high  intellect,
this  or  that  lobe  of  the  cerebrum  is  more  developed  than
another  ;  that  the  convolutions  on  the  surface  are  more  dis-
tinctly and  differently  marked  in  eminent  persons  than  in  per-
sons of  lower  rank.  Such  investigations  may  embrace  the
different  races  of  mankind,  and  animals  also,  though  we  must
not  forget  that  the  inferences  and  analogies  become  more  de-
ceptive in  proportion  as  we  go  further  off  from  the  human
type.  We  may  also  call  to  our  aid  cases  in  which,  from  arrest
of  development,  the  brain  has  preserved  the  foetal  type,  in
consequence  of  which  the  intellectual  life  approaches  that  of
the  animal.  A  close  examination  of  the  cerebral  structure  of
such  idiots  may  teach  us  which  are  the  special  parts  arrested
in  their  development,  and  by  comparing  with  the  obtained  data
the  various  manifestations  of  intellectual  activity,  we  may,
perhaps,  arrive  at  some  conclusions  as  regards  the  functions  of
individual  parts  of  the  brain.

The  so-called  science  of  phrenology  rests,  as  is  well  known,
upon  such  inferences,  which,  however,  labour  under  the  great
drawback  that  on  the  one  hand  the  capacities  are  to  be  marked
on  the  outer  table  of  the  skull,  and,  on  the  other  hand,  a  local-
isation is  claimed  which  in  no  ways  corresponds  either  with  the
intellectual  faculties,  or  with  the  details  of  the  cerebral  struc-
ture. However  correct  the  fundamental  principle  of  phre-
nology may  be,  that  individual  functions  must  correspond  to
individual  parts  of  the  organ,  the  inferences  drawn  from  it  are
none  the  less  exceedingly  erroneous.  On  viewing  the  brain
from  above,  each  hemisphere  appears  as  one  mass  ;  exhibiting,
indeed,  convolutions  and  intermediate  sulci,  but  no  actual  divi-
sion. It  is  different,  however,  when  we  view  the  brain  from
the  sides  or  from  below.  In  the  latter  case  we  immediately  per-
ceive in  the  anterior  part  a  deep  fissure  which  runs  from  the
anterior  margin  of  the  cerebellum  to  the  corresponding  margin
of  the  cerebrum,  and  separates  two  lobes  which,  when  the
brain  is  viewed  laterally,  extend  far  lower  down  than  the  anterior
lobes.     The  basis  of  the  anterior,  or  frontal  lobes,  as  we  shall


102


LECTURE    IV.


call  them,  rests  upon  the  roof  of  the  orbits,  whilst  the  lower
or  temporal  lobes  fill  up  a  deep  cavity  formed  by  the  sphenoid
and  temporal  bones  in  the  base  of  the  cranium,  on  both  sides
of  the  sella  Turcica.  Again,  on  viewing  the  human  brain
from  below,  the  posterior  margin  of  the  hemisphere  is  seen
to  project  beyond  the  cerebellum,  thus  forming  a  prolongation
which  is  called  the  posterior  lobe.  Finally,  there  may,  in  this
posterior  lobe  be  distinguished  a  middle  or  parietal  lobe  which
is,  however,  the  least  marked  of  all.

Fig.  31.     Brain  of  the  celebrated  mathematician,  Gauss,  side  view,

after  Wagner.


8.  Sylvian  fissure.     R.  Fissure  of  Eolando.     C.  Cerebellum.    F.  Frontal
lobe.     P.  Parietal  lobe.     O.  Posterior  lobe.     T.  Temporal  lobe  of  cerebrum.

On  viewing  the  brain  from  the  side,  the  deep  fissure  which
separates  the  temporal  from  the  frontal  lobe  is  seen  to  divide
into  two  branches,  one  of  which,  rising  almost  perpendicularly,
is  gradually  lost  in  the  mass  of  the  frontal  lobe  ;  the  other  takes
at  first  a  horizontal  direction,  and  is  lost  between  the  convolu-
tions in  the  mass  of  the  temporal  lobe.  This  fissure,  termed
the  Sylvian,  is  important,  because,  under  all  circumstances,  it
clearly  indicates  the  division  between  the  frontal  and  the  pari-
etal lobes.  Viewed  from  above,  the  brain  seems  to  consist  of
three  parts  :  the  anterior,  the  parietal,  and  the  posterior  lobes.
Viewed  from  the  side,  there  would  be  added  the  temporal  lobe,
and  a  small  concealed  lobe,  called  the  island  or  the  central  lobe,


LECTURE    IV.  103

which  is  not  visible  externally.  It  may  be  seen  by  separating
the  margins  of  the  Sylvian  fissure,  and  removing  parts  of  the  pa-
rietal lobe  which  cover  it.  Though  the  formation  of  this  inter-
mediate lobe  seems  peculiar  to  the  cerebral  structure  of  man
and  the  ape,  not  having,  to  our  knowledge,  been  met  with  in
other  animals,  it  need  not  further  occupy  our  attention,  since
the  comparative  anatomy  of  the  brain,  as  far  as  races  are  con-
cerned, is  as  yet  in  its  infancy.

Many  attempts  have  been  made  to  connect  the  development
of  the  several  cerebral  lobes  with  the  mental  qualification
of  individuals  and  races,  but  with  scanty  success.  The  three
cranial  vertebras,  namely,  the  frontal,  temporal,  and  occipital,
have  been  connected  with  the  development  of  the  three  prin-
cipal lobes,  so  that  some  authors  distinguish  frontal,  parietal,
aud  occipital  races,  in  proportion  as  either  of  these  regions
predominate.  Some  have  proceeded  still  further,  naming  the
races, — "Men  of  the  day,  men  of  the  twilight,  and  men  of
the  night,"  with  the  very  acute  remark  that  the  forehead  of
man  corresponded  to  day ;  but  the  occiput  to  the  shady  or
night  side  of  nature.  Even  north  pole  and  south  pole,  and
the  point  of  magnetic  indifference,  have  played  their  parts  in
these  vertebral  theories ;  from  the  analyses  of  which  I  must
beg  to  be  excused,  as  the  times  in  which  we  five  are  not  much
given  to  such  speculations  as  these.  The  actual  facts  obtained
from  investigations  of  the  kind  seem  to  amount  to  this,  that
the  anterior  or  frontal  lobes  are  intimately  connected  with
mental  development.  Height,  breadth,  and  shape  of  this  part
must  be  taken  into  special  consideration  in  forming  an  esti-
mate of  intellectual  capacity.

The  development  of  the  convolutions  on  the  surface  of  the
brain  is  of  particular  importance.  As  already  observed,  the
whole  surface  of  the  cerebrum  is  covered  with  a  layer  of  grey
matter,  beneath  which  the  white  substance  appears.  If  the
convolutions  are  broad,  the  white  substance  penetrates  to
their  centre ;  if  small  or  imperfect,  they  are  formed  wholly  of
grey  matter.  The  very  delicate  vascular  membrane  which
covers  the  brain  enters  into  the  sulci.  The  dura  mater  is
stretched  over  the  convolutions,  so  that  the  internal  surface  of


104  LECTURE    IV.

the  cranium  presents  only  indistinct  impressions  of  the
larger  convolutions.  The  coarser  the  convolutions,  and  the
broader  the  furrows  which  separate  them,  the  more  distinct  is
their  impress  on  the  internal  surface  of  the  cranium.  The  cast
of  a  skull  by  means  of  a  plastic  mass  which  retains  its  form,  is
but  an  imperfect  substitute  for  a  view  of  the  brain  itself  and
its  convolutions.

The  convolutions  contribute  to  increase  the  quantity  of  grey
substance.  Just  as  in  the  secreting  glands  the  secreting  sur-
face is  increased  in  size  by  the  subdivision  of  the  originally
si?nple  bag  into  tubes,  so  the  cerebral  substance,  by  its  com-
plicated windings,  secures  a  surface  considerably  exceeding
that  of  the  internal  space  of  the  skull.  Now,  if  it  be  time
that  the  grey  substance  alone  is  the  source  of  nervous  action ;
if  it  be  farther  true  that  the  superficial  grey  matter  is  inti-
mately connected  with  mental  activity,  whilst  the  internal  grey
nuclei  are  rather  connected  with  the  phenomena  of  sensation ;
then  it  follows  that  the  multiplicity  of  the  convolutions  is  con-
nected with  the  development  and  increase  of  the  intellectual  ca-
pacity, the  substratum  of  which  is  the  increased  quantity  of
grey  matter.  The  convolutions  have  been  compared  to  the
figure  which  would  be  produced  by  forcing  a  bag,  possessing  a
larger  surface  than  the  interior  of  the  skull,  into  the  cranium.
The  comparison  may  be  pursued,  and  it  may  be  said  that  the
more  grey  substance  we  force  into  a  skull  the  greater  the  intellec-
tual capacity,  which  would  lead  to  the  inference  that  an  animal
must  be  more  intelligent  in  comparison  with  another  in  proportion
as  the  convolutions  are  more  complicated,  and  the  furrows  deeper.

If  this  principle  is  adopted  in  its  crudity,  a  single  glance  at  the
convolutions  in  the  brainof  the  mammalian  series  will  be  sufficient
to  overthrow  it.  It  is  true  that  in  some  of  the  lower  mammals,
e.g., in  the  edentata  and  marsupials,no  convolutions  are  observed,
whilst,  with  few  exceptions,  they  exist  in  all  carnivorous  ani-
mals and  largely  in  the  apes.  But,,  on  closer  examination,  we
find  that  within  the  orders  which  possess  convolutions  their
development  seems  to  be  connected  with  the  size  of  the  body.
Now  it  certainly  cannot  be  maintained  that  all  larger  animals
are  more  intelligent  than  the  smaller,  and  when  it  is  considered


LECTURE    IV.  105

that  the  brains  of  the  ass,  the  sheep,  and  the  ox,  all  of  which,
in  fables,  are  the  representatives  of  stupidity,  are  more  convo-
luted than  those  of  the  beaver,  the  cat,  and  the  dog,  the  axiom
connecting  the  convolutions  with  intelligence  seems  to  have  re-
ceived a  hard  blow.

Happily,  mathematics  will  assist  us  here.  On  compar-
ing two  bodies  of  similar  form  but  of  different  size,  their
respective  volumes  vary  as  the  cube  of  their  diameters,  whilst
the  proportion  of  the  surfaces  is  as  the  square  of  the  diameters,
or,  in  other  words,  the  volume  of  a  body  increases  more  rapidly
than  the  surface,  and  this  more  rapidly  than  the  diameter.
Every  artillerist  knows  well  that  a  twelve-pounder,  though
thrice  as  heavy  as  a  four-pounder,  does  not  nearly  possess
a  diameter  thrice  as  large.

In  applying  this  principle  to  the  head,  and  specially  the  cra-
nium of  animals,  it  will  be  seen  that  in  every  natural  group  or
order  of  mammals  the  head,  and  especially  the  cranial  capacity,
stands  in  a  certain  relation  to  the  body,  which  is  nearly  constant
in  the  various  species.  The  head  of  the  tiger  and  the  lion  bears
the  same  proportion  to  the  body  as  does  that  of  the  cat,
although  the  size  of  the  animals  is  so  different.  It  follows
hence  that  the  volume  of  the  cerebral  mass  of  the  tiger  stands
in  the  same  proportion  to  the  body  as  does  that  of  the  cat ;
that  the  surface  of  the  internal  cranial  capacity  is  proportion-
ately smaller  in  tho  larger  animal,  and  that  consequently  in
order  to  secure  a  similar  surface  of  grey  matter,  it  must  be
convoluted  in  the  large  animal,  whilst  it  may  remain  smooth
in  the  small  animal.  We  might,  therefore,  infer  from  the
above  geometrical  axiom,  that  if  in  two  species  of  animals  of
the  same  size  and  the  same  normal  structure,  the  convolutions
are  differently  developed,  this  development  is  connected  with
the  development  of  intelligence,  whilst  animals  of  unequal  size
are  less  capable  of  comparison  with  each  other  in  proportion
as  their  respective  sizes  differ.  When,  therefore,  man,
whose  skull  is,  in  proportion  to  the  body,  larger  than  that  of
the  largest  animals,  excels  all  the  rest  in  the  richness  and
variety  of  the  cerebral  convolutions,  it  is  manifestly  in  har-
mony with  his  intelligence,  in  which  he  also  far  excels  the  rest.


10(5  LECTURE    IV.

In  instituting  comparisons,  they  must  be  confined  to  very
nearly  allied  groups  :  man  can  only  be  compared  with  man  ;  ape
with  ape ;  the  extension  of  this  comparison  to  other  animals  is
not  admissible.  On  examining  the  order  of  apes,  for  instance,
the  influence  of  size  is  seen  with  the  greatest  distinctness.
Thus  the  small  leonine  tamarin  and  the  marmoset  monkeys  have
no  convolutions,  the  scarcely  larger  squirrel  and  tailed  monkeys
have  but  few,  whilst  the  large  anthropoid  apes,  the  orang,
chimpanzee,  and  gorilla,  have  very  convoluted  brains.

The  old  anatomists  paid  but  little  attention  to  the  arrange-
ment of  the  convolutions,  specially  as  it  was  soon  found  that
they  were  not  symmetrical  on  both  sides.  The  sinuosities  were
thus  considered  as  accidental,  or,  as  one  naturalist  observed,
as  a  confused  mass  of  intestines,  so  that  draughtsmen  repre-
sented them  in  anatomical  plates  entirely  conventionally.
Modern  researches  have,  however,  shown  that,  amidst  this  appa-
rent confusion,  there  exists  a  certain  regularity,  a  definite
plan,  which  had  not  been  detected  for  the  simple  reason  that
inquiries  extended  to  man  only,  in  whom  this  irregularity  of
the  convolutions  reached  the  highest  degree.  Naturalists  were
in  the  same  position  as  amateurs  in  architecture,  who  are  un-
able to  make  out  the  ground-plan  on  account  of  the  overloaded
ornamentation  of  a  structure.

No  sooner  was  attention  directed  to  animals  and  the  more
simple  phenomena  analysed,  than  it  became  apparent  that  for
every  family  or  order  there  existed  a  special  plan,  as  regards
the  arrangement  of  the  convolutions,  entirely  characteristic  of
the  orders  and  easily  traceable  in  the  highest  as  well  as  in
the  lowest  forms.  In  the  unconvoluted  brain  of  a  small  lion-
monkey  (Simia  rosalia,  Geoffry),  there  is  exhibited  the  same
fundamental  plan  of  arrangement  as  in  the  convoluted  brain  of
the  orang,  and  the  incomparably  more  convoluted  brain  of  man.

I  may  be  allowed,  perhaps,  to  dwell  for  a  moment  on  this
result  of  recent  investigation.  There  is  no  doubt  whatever
that,  according  to  the  fundamental  plan  of  his  brain,  man  be-
longs to  the  ape.  "  On  comparing,"  says  Gratiolet,  ' '  a  series
of  human  and  simian  brains,  we  are  immediately  struck  with
the  analogy  exhibited  in  the  cerebral  forms  in  all  these  creatures.


LECTURE    IV.  107

The  convoluted  brain  of  man  resembles  the  smooth,  brain  of
the  Ouistitis  in  the  characteristics  of  a  rudimentary  olfactory
bulb  ;  a  posterior  lobe,  which  entirely  covers  the  cerebellum  ;
a  perfectly  marked  Sylvian  fissure,  and  a  posterior  cornu  in  the
lateral  ventricle  of  the  brain."  [Gratiolet  might  have  added  a
fifth  character,  the  existence  of  a  central  or  intermediate  lobe,
which  occurs  in  all  apes.]

"  These  characters,"  continues  Gratiolet,  "  coexist  only  in
man  and  the  ape.  The  cerebellum  is  uncovered  in  all  other
animals  ;  we  mostly  find  an  enormous  olfactory  bulb,  as  in  the
elephant;  and  with  exception  of  the  makis  (Lemuridce)  no
animal  presents  a  fissure,  like  the  Sylvian,  with  an  enclosed
central  lobe.

"  Thus,  there  is  a  cerebral  form  peculiar  to  man  and  ape ;
and  so  in  the  cerebral  convolutions,  wherever  they  appear,
there  is  a  general  unity  of  arrangement,— a  plan,  the  type  of
which  is  common  to  all  these  creatures.

"  This  uniformity  in  the  arrangement  of  the  convolutions  in
man  and  ape  deserves,  in  the  highest  degree,  the  attention  of
naturalists.  Thus,  in  the  makis  {Lemuridce) ,  cats,  dogs,  bears,
in  short,  in  all  families  a  peculiar  type  of  convolution  is  found.
Each  of  these  families  has  its  own  character;  and  we  can
arrange  the  different  species  within  any  group  by  examining
the  convolutions."

So  far  Gratiolet.  It  seems  to  me  to  follow  necessarily  from
these  words,  that  it  is  requisite  to  study  the  convolutions  more
closely,  since,  as  we  shall  see,  their  development  is,  no  doubt,
connected  with  that  of  the  human  type  and  also  with  intelligence.
In  order  to  proceed  upon  a  definite  basis,  it  is  best  to  com-
mence with  a  side  view,  and  to  start  from  the  S}dvian  fissure,
which  is  most  distinctly  marked  in  all  human  and  ape-brains
(see  fig.  31).  As  already  observed,  the  Sylvian  fissure  divides
into  two  branches  :  an  anterior,  nearly  perpendicular ;  and  a  pos-
terior, nearly  horizontal,  which,  however,  usually  turns  upwards,
so  that  the  Sylvian  fissure,  on  the  whole,  takes  the  form  of  a
V.  Between  these  two  branches  there  is  thus  marked  off  a  por-
tion which  might  be  called  the  lateral  middle  lobe,  which  some
authors  include  in  the  frontal,  and  others  in  the  parietal  lobe.


108


LECTURE    IV.


Upon  these  lateral  central  lobes,  two  convolutions  always  pro-
ceed from  the  point  of  the  V  upwards,  extending  to  the  longi-
tudinal fissure  of  the  hemispheres,  where  they  terminate  about
the  centre  of  the  sagittal  suture,  that  is  to  say,  at  the  vertex.
These  two  convolutions  form  at  their  base  the  covering  of  the


Fig.  32.     Side  view  of  tlie  brain  of  the  Hottentot-Venus.


V.M.


The  following  designations  apply  to  this  as  well  as  to  all  following  figures
of  the  brain  in  these  Lectures.  F.  Frontal  lobe.  P.  Parietal  lobe.  0.  Pos-
terior lobe.  T.  Temporal  lobe.  Po.  Pons  Varolii.  C.  Cerebellum.  V.  M.
Medulla  oblongata.

S.  Sylvian  fissure.  R.  Fissiu-e  of  Rolando.  V.  Vertical  transverse  fissure.
L.  Longitudinal  fissure.     P.  S.  Parallel  fissure.

A.  Anterior  central  convolution.

B.  Posterior      „  „

■*         a1  Upper  fold  of  the  convolutions  of  the  frontal  lobe.

a?  Middle  fold  of  the  convolutions  of  the  frontal  lobe.

a3  Lower  fold  of  the  convolutions  of  the  frontal  lobe.

h1  Upper  fold  of  the  convolutions  of  the  parietal  lobe.

b2  Middle  fold  of  the  convolutions  of  the  parietal  lobe.

63  Lower  fold  of  the  convolutions  of  the  parietal  lobe.

c1  Upper  fold  of  the  convolutions  of  the  temporal  lobe.

c2  Middle  fold  of  the  convolutions  of  the  temporal  lobe.

c3  Lower  fold  of  the  convolutions  of  the  temporal  lobe.

cl1  Upper  fold  of  the  convolutions  of  the  posterior  lobe.

<P  Middle  fold  of  the  convolutions  of  the  posterior  lobe.

d3  Lower  fold  of  the  convolutions  of  the  posterior  lobe.


LECTURE    IV.  109

central  lobe;  hence  they  have  been  called  the  central,  or  interme-
diate, convolutions.  They  are  separated  by  a  deep  fissure,  which
is  easily  seen  in  most  brains,  even  when  viewed  from  above.

We  look  upon  these  central  convolutions  as  an  important
part  of  the  brain ;  but  we  cannot  agree  with  the  meritorious
Huschke  when  he  says,  "  After  what  I  have  shown  of  the  de-
velopment of  the  convolutions,  there  can  be  no  doubt  that  the
point  of  indifference  in  each  hemisphere  is  to  be  found  in  the
central  convolutions.  Their  central,  indifferent  signification  is
known  by  their  central  position  (in  the  centre  of  the  sagittal
suture),  their  great  size,  and  the  depth  of  the  central  fissure
which  separates  them,  their  simplicity  and  regularity,  and
finally,  from  their  manifold  connexions  with  their  six  to
eight  arms,  which  radiate  to  different  sides,  like  wires  bring-
ing telegraphic  messages  from  all  parts  of  our  mental  organs  to
these  chief  convolutions,  or  receiving  orders  from  thence.  Here
is  the  watershed  whence  the  longitudinal  convolutions  flow  north
and  south,  forward  and  backwards;  or  the  common  bed  into  which
the  different  branches  empty  themselves.  With  their  formation
in  the  ape,  the  brain  enters  the  last  stage  of  development  until
it  arrives  at  its  perfection  in  man,  beyond  which  stage  it  cannot
pass,  having  gained  the  object  of  its  development, — a  distinct
point  of  indifference  with  its  connecting  poles.  In  those  mam-
mals in  which  these  large  convolutions  are  absent,  the  two  poles
are  like  the  anterior  and  posterior  halves  of  three  superimposed
horseshoes  fused  together.  In  the  brain  of  man,  they  first
become  divided  by  a  partition  in  the  shape  of  central  convolu-
tions,— -just  as  the  heart  does  not  reach  its  highest  stage  of
development  until  a  septum  is  acquired,  so  that  red  and  black
blood  are  divided  from  each  other.  The  great  influence  of  this
polarity  of  the  blood  is  shown  by  animal  heat.  The  organism,
hitherto  cold-blooded,  becomes  in  the  class  of  birds,  almost  at
once,  warm-blooded.  A  similar,  though  as  yet  unknown  in-
fluence must  be  exercised  on  the  mechauism  of  nervous  activity
by  the  central  convolutions.  Determination,  acuteness,  perspi-
cuity, greater  unity  of  psychical  life  must  be  connected  with  it."
Really,  this  is  carrying  polarisation  a  little  too  far.  Let  us
return  to  our  convolutions.


110  LECTURE    IV.

Turning  from  the  anterior  central  convolutions  in  a  forward
direction,  we  usually  find  the  whole  frontal  lobe  covered  with  a
number  of  convolutions,  which  generally  stand  more  or  less  per-
pendicular to  the  anterior  central  convolution,  that  is,  more  or
less  horizontal.  The  convolutions  nearest  to  the  longitudinal
fissure  mostly  proceed  from  the  beginning  of  the  central  con-
volution, so  that,  to  a  certain  extent,  they  appear  as  an
appended  lobe.  We  might  fairly  assume  three  stories  of  these
complicated  frontal  convolutions ;  the  ground  floor  (a3)  rests  im-
mediately upon  the  roof  of  the  orbits,  whilst  the  upper  story  (a1)
touches  the  top  of  the  forehead.  In  poorly  convoluted  brains,
these  windings,  viewed  from  the  side,  present  three  distinct
superimposed  folds ;  in  richly  convoluted  brains  they  appear  as
closely  intertwined  plaits,  rendering  the  separation  into  three
stories  more  difficult.

The  remarkable  differences  exhibited  by  brains  are  especially
shown  in  these  convolutions,  above  all,  in  those  of  the  upper
and  middle  (a2)  fold.  The  length  of  the  frontal  lobe  varies
greatly,  so  that  the  fissure  of  Rolando  changes  its  place  either
in  a  forward  or  backward  direction.  The  complication,  also,
in  the  shape  and  arrangement  of  these  convolutions  differs,
not  only  in  individuals,  but  even  in  the  two  hemispheres  of  the
same  brain.  The  younger  Wagner  has  endeavoured  to  express
these  conditions  by  measuring  the  surface  of  the  convolutions,
and  also  the  development  of  the  furrows  separating  them.  The
surfaces  were  measured  by  being  covered  with  square  pieces  of
paper  four  millimeters  long,  thus  covering  sixteen  square
millimeters, — a  method  evidently  much  more  open  to  errors
than  another  in  which  small  slips  of  paper  are  pressed  into  the
sulci  to  estimate  their  depth.

As  it  may  be  assumed,  as  a  general  principle,  that  the  extent
of  subdivision  of  the  frontal  lobe  gives  the  measure  of  the
degree  of  convolution  of  the  whole  brain,  these  measurements
have  been  confined  to  the  frontal  lobe  and  to  only  a  few  brains;
but  they  yield  important  results  nevertheless.  Assuming  the
absolute  length  of  all  the  sulci  of  the  frontal  lobo  of  the  brain
of  the  mathematician  Gauss  =  100,  we  obtain  for  the  brain  of
Fuchs,  the  physician,  96  ;   for  a  woman  of  twenty-nine,  about


LECTURE    IV.  ]  ]  1

whoso  intelligence  nothing  is  said,  85  ;  for  the  brain  of  a  com-
mon day-labourer  named  Krebs,  73  ;  and  for  the  brain  of  an
idiot  who  died,  aged  twenty-six,  only  15,  a  diminution  which,
as  you  will  observe,  tallies  with  the  hypothesis,  that  great  de-
velopment of  the  frontal  convolutions,  and  consequently  of  the
convolutions  generally,  is  connected  with  the  development  of
intelligence.

We  may  here  observe  that  Wagner  has  also  in  the  case  of
twelve  brains  endeavoured  to  ascertain  the  proportion  between
the  measured  convex  surface,  the  extent  of  which  also  depends
upon  the  development  of  the  sulci,  and  the  cerebral  weight.
As  a  general  result  it  appears  that  the  heavier  the  brain,  the
greater  is  the  development  of  the  surface ;  but  that  in  the
female  sex  the  lesser  weight,  already  alluded  to,  is  compensated
by  a  larger  development  of  surface.  Omitting  from  the  twelve
the  three  female  brains,  and  having  regard  only  to  the  eight
male  brains  (the  twelfth  belonged  to  an  idiot)  we  find  a  similar
compensation  in  the  male  brain  which,  according  to  weight  oc-
cupies the  fifth,  but  according  to  surface  the  third  place.  This
condition  is,  however,  more  strikingly  exhibited  in  females,
since  the  heaviest  female  brain  in  the  whole  list  occupies  but
the  eighth  place,  whilst,  with  regard  to  surface,  it  occupies  the
second  place.  In  the  same  way  the  female  occupying  the  tenth
place  would  advance  to  the  ninth,  and  the  one  occupying  the
eleventh  would  advance  to  the  eighth.  Subjoined  is  Wagner's
table,  in  which  the  brains  are  arranged  in  a  double  series  ac-
cording to  weight  and  according  to  surface,  so  as  to  present
their  relative  proportions  as  clearly  as  possible  : —


No.

1.  (Dirichlet)  -

2.  (Fucks)

3.  (Gauss)

\V(

sight  in  Grammes.

1520
1499
1492

Convrx  surface  in  squares
of  16  square  millimeters.

2553

2489
2419

4.  (Hermann)

-

1358

-

-

2406

5.  Male   -

-

1340

-

-

2451

0.  Male    -

-

1330

-

-

2309

7.  Male   -

8.  Female

-

1273
1254

-

-

2117
2498

9.  (Hausmann)

-

1226

-

-

2065

10.  Female

-

1223

-

-

2272

11.  Female

-

1185

-

-

2300

12.  Microcephalo

-

300

-

-

896

112


LECTURE    IV

No.

1.  (Dirichlet)  -

2.  Female

Convex  surface  in  square -i
of  16  square  millimeters.

2553

249S

We

ght  in  Grammes

1520
1254

3.  (Fuchs)

4.  Male

-

2489
2451

-

-

1499
1340

5.  (G-auss)

-

2419

-

-

1492

6.  (Hermann)

-

2406

-

-

1358

7.  Male   -

-

2309

-

-

1330

8.  Female

-

2300

-

.

1185

9.  Female

-

2272

-

-

1223

10.  Male   -

-

2117

-

-

1273

11.  (Hausmann)

-

2065

-

-

1226

12.  Microcepliale

-

896

-

-

300

Wagner  remarks,  very  justly,  that  this  series  is  far  too  imper-
fect, and  the  number  of  measurements  too  small  to  draw  from
them  absolutely  correct  inferences.  The  whole  series  never-
theless indicates  that  a  compensation  may  exist,  that  it  pro-
bably does  exist  in  females,  and  that  it  may  also  extend  to
races  which,  like  the  Hindoos,  to  a  certain  extent  exhibit
the  female  type  in  their  small,  and  not  very  capacious  skulls.

On  examining  the  convolutions,  situated  behind  the  central
convolutions  on  the  surface  of  the  brain,  and  which  form  the
parietal  lobe,  it  is  seen  that  they  proceed  from  the  posterior
central  convolutions.  They  have  the  appearance  of  notched
rolls,  which  may  also  be  divided  into  three  stories,  the  upper-
most (b  )  forming,  as  it  were,  only  a  fold  of  the  central  convolu-
tion. On  viewing  the  brain  from  the  top,  this  upper  story  reaches
a  small  transverse  fissure,  the  perpendicular  posterior,  or  inner
cerebral  fissure  (V),  which  has  only  a  small  superficial  extent
in  man,  but  penetrates  the  more  deeply  into  the  interior.  The
great  importance  of  this  fissure  is  shown  partly  by  its  early
appearance  in  the  foetus,  immediately  after  the  appearance  of
the  Sylvian  fissure  and  that  of  Rolando,  when  there  is  scarcely
any  trace  of  the  other  furrows  as  anfractuosities  of  the  frontal
lobe ;  and  further,  by  the  fact  that  in  the  ape  it  can  be  dis-
tinctly traced  far  over  the  side,  separating  the  occipital  from
the  parietal  lobe,  so  that  the  first  forms  a  characteristic  flap
which,  overlapping  the  posterior  margin  of  the  parietal  lobe,
covers  some  convolutions  which  in  man  lie  on  the  surface.

The  second  or  middle  convolution  of  the  parietal  lobe  (h~),


LECTURE    IV.  113

which  is  mostly  only  seen  in  a  side  view  of  the  brain,  usually
joins  a  curve,  like  a  bent  finger,  around  the  parallel  fissure,
which  will  be  mentioned  further  on  when  speaking  of  the  tem-
poral region,  whence  Gratiolet  calls  it  the  bent  convolution,
j)li  courbe.

The  third,  or  lower  parietal  convolution  (bs),  generally  ap-
pears in  the  shape  of  a  triangular  knob,  wedged  in  between
the  branches  of  the  horizontal  arm  of  the  Sylvian  fissure,  and
corresponds  in  its  position  pretty  nearly  to  the  parietal  emi-
nence of  the  skull.

The  convolutions  of  the  temporal  lobe  are  generally  simple,
and  can  only  be  distinctly  seen  in  a  side  view.  The  superior
edge  of  the  lobe,  as  already  observed,  is  bounded  by  the  hori-
zontal branch  of  the  Sylvian  fissure.  On  the  lobe,  parallel
with  this,  there  is  a  fissure — the  parallel  fissure  (P.  8.) — which
stretches  far  back  towards  the  posterior  lobe  and  the  perpen-
dicular fissure,  and  separates  the  upper  story  of  the  temporal
convolutions  (c1)  from  the  intermediate  (c2) .  A  second  smaller
furrow  separates  the  middle  story  from  the  lower  («3),  which
rests  on  the  base  of  the  skull.  In  poorly  convoluted  brains,
these  stories  are  scarcely  at  all  notched  on  their  margins ;  but
in  richly  convoluted  brains,  the  notches  become  secondary
fissures,  which,  however,  are  rarely  sufficiently  deep  to  efface
the  original  tripartition  of  the  lobe.

The  occipital  lobe  seems,  in  every  respect,  the  most  difficult
as  regards  the  systemisation  of  its  convolutions.  As  in  the
human  brain,  its  limit  is  only  indicated  by  a  very  small  per-
pendicular fissure,  it  runs  without  any  visible  separation  into
the  parietal  and  temporal  lobes.  It  is,  moreover,  very  small,
the  convolutions  are  mostly  very  irregular  and  unsymmetrical ;
whilst,  on  the  contrary,  in  the  ape  it  is  well  defined  by  the
great  development  of  the  perpendicular  fissure.

On  the  margins  of  the  lobes,  Gratiolet  distinguishes  four
so-called  transition  convolutions  {plis  de  passage),  of  which
the  first,  or  upper — which  Wagner  calls  the  first  convolution  of
the  posterior  lobe  (d1),  adjoining  the  central  line,  behind  the
first  parietal  convolution — sends  forth  some  folds  towards  the
posterior  lobe,  which  Gratiolet  terms  the  upper  story  of  the

i


114  LECTURE    IV.

convolutions  of  the  posterior  lobe.  The  three  other  transition
convolutions  of  Gratiolet  are  included  by  Wagner  in  the  middle
story  (d?)  ;  and  he  also  distinguishes  beneath  this  a  third,  but
not  distinctly  developed  story  (f/3),  which  rests  immediately
upon  the  cerebellum.

Gratiolet,  by  extending  his  observation  to  the  brains  of  apes,
has  shown  the  special  importance  of  these  transition  convolu-
tions. In  these  animals,  in  consequence  of  the  greater  depth
of  the  perpendicular  fissure,  the  anterior  border  of  the  pos-
terior lobe  becomes  gradually  a  flap  which,  by  overlapping  the
parietal  lobe,  covers  more  or  less  the  transition  convolutions.
This  flap,  which,  in  its  inner  surface,  has  a  very  characteristic
structure,  must  be  lifted  back  in  order  to  see  these  transition
convolutions  in  the  closed  fissure  into  which  they  seem  to  have
sunk.  Gratiolet  has  even  attempted  to  advance  this  formation
as  a  peculiar  characteristic,  distinguishing  the  simian  from  the
human  brain.  He,  however,  omitted  to  take  into  consideration
that  the  formation  of  this  flap  increases  in  the  ape  but  very
gradually  ;  that  the  plis  de  passage  are  very  inconstant,  fre-
quently differing  on  both  sides,  so  that,  according  to  another
observer,  if  we  merely  keep  in  view  the  arrangements  of  these
convolutions,  the  two  hemispheres  might  belong  to  different
species ;  and  finally,  that  there  are  apes  in  which  all  transition
convolutions  lie  as  much  on  the  surface  as  in  man,  and  which
would,  therefore,  have  to  be  considered  as  human,  if  these
convolutions  were  really  indicative  of  the  human  character.
These  apes  are,  according  to  Gratiolet' s  own  observations,  the
Ateles  which  stand  next  to  the  howling  monkeys.

For  the  better  understanding  of  the  discussions  on  the  dis-
tinction between  man  and  ape,  I  must  allude  to  some  points
regarding  the  minute  structure  of  the  brain  which  have  re-
cently gained  a  special  importance.

As  already  mentioned  at  the  beginning  of  this  lecture,  the
hemispheres  are  developed  from  the  brain-trunk  by  arches
which,  at  first,  proceed  along  the  parietes  of  the  skull  and
deposit  substance  internally,  until  both  parts,  the  brain-trunk
and  the  brain-vault,  are  so  connected  that  only  a  system  of
cavities  remains,  which  cavities  have  received  the  name  of
ventricles.


LECTURE    IV.


115


In  hydrocephalous  children,  the  fluid  is  chiefly  accumulated
in  these  cavities,  which  thus  become  enormously  expanded ;  in
the  normal  state,  these  cavities  are  merely  fissures  whose  lips
nearly  touch.  On  removing  the  hemispheres  by  horizontal  sec-
tions, or  on  making  a  perpendicular  section  parallel  with  the
central  line,  we  soon  reach  the  largest  system  of  cerebral  cavi-
ties, the  so-called  lateral  ventricles,  which  are  separated  in  the
centre  by  a  thin  double  septum,  but  are  very  symmetrically
formed.  In  each  of  these  singularly  curved  cavities  there  are
distinguished  three  so-called  horns ;  an  anterior  or  frontal
horn,  which  extends  into  the  frontal  lobe  and  overlies  the  cor-
pus striatum  ;  a  lateral  horn,  which  curves  downwards  into  the
temporal  lobe,  and  exhibits  in  its  interior  a  club-shaped  emi-


cct


Fig.  36.  Human  brain  viewed  from  above.  The  right  hemisphere  re-
moved down  to  the  lateral  ventricles.  The  description  of  the  left  side  is  the
same  as  in  the  preceding  figures.  On  the  right  side,  c  s  indicates  corpus
striatum,  forming  the  floor  in  the  anterior  corner  of  the  ventricle,  c  a,  Cornu
ammonis,  curving  into  the  lateral  corner  of  the  ventricle,  hm,  Hippocampus
minor,  forming  the  floor  of  the  posterior  cornu.

i2


116


LECTUKE    IV.


nence,  the  so-called  cornu  Ammonis ;  and  finally,  a  posterior
horn,  which,  slightly  curved,  enters  the  posterior  lobe,  and
contains  a  small  eminence,  which  has  received  several  dozens
of  names,  those  most  in  use  being  the  little  Amman's  horn,  the
Hippocampus  minor,  and  the  Galcar  avis  (ergot  de  Morand
among  the  French.)

On  removing  the  hemispheres  from  above,  the  anterior  and
posterior  horns  and  the  hippocampus  minor,  and  their  junction
with  the  descending  cornu,  as  well  as  the  choroid  plexus,  are
plainly  discerned.  In  vertical  lateral  sections,  the  connexion
of  the  horns  and  the  extension  of  the  middle  cornu  can  be
easily  followed.

I  was  compelled  to  enter  into  these  details,  because  one  of
the  greatest  anatomists  of  modern  times,  Richard  Owen,  has
maintained  that  the  sole  characteristics  of  the  human  brain  are
to  be  found  in  the  existence  of  a  posterior  lobe,  of  a  posterior
cornu,  and  a  hippocampus  minor,  and  in  spite  of  accumulated


Fig.  37.     Drawing  of  the  brain  of  a  Chimpanzee,  after  Marshall ;  descrip-
tion and  preparation  precisely  the  same  as  in  the  preceding  figure.


CO,


LECTURE    IV.  117

proofs  to  the  contrary,  obstinately  denied  the  existence  of  these
parts  in  the  brain  of  the  ape.

The  new  school  of  English  naturalists,  which  seemingly  does
not  entertain  as  much  respect  as  Owen  for  the  Established
Church  and  its  doctrines,  has  opposed  him  ;  and  for  some  years
past  there  has  been  at  the  annual  meetings  of  the  British
Association  a  regular  duel  between  Huxley  and  Owen,  about
which  the  Times  and  other  journals  furnish  as  conscientious
reports  as  the  sporting  papers  do  about  the  pugilistic  encoun-
ters in  honour  of  Old  England.  No  great  results  have  been
obtained  from  these  duels.  But  in  order  to  show  which  party
is  supported  by  facts,  I  have  introduced  a  photograph  of  the
brain  of  a  chimpanzee,  after  Marshall,  reduced  to  the  same
size  as  the  preceding  figure,  and  marked  with  the  same  letters.
Compare  them,  and  you  will  be  surprised.


118


LECTURE    V.

Examination  of  other  parts  of  the  body. — The  Pelvis :  the  Extremities. —
The  Skin;  its  coloration,  structure,  perspiration,  and  hair. — The  soft
parts. — The  Face. — Eyes,  nose,  mouth,  lips,  cheeks,  ears,  and  chin. —
Internal  organs.

Gentlemen, — Whenever  we  find  a  decided  and  persistent
variety  in  any  essential  part  of  an  animal  organism,  we  may
be  sure  we  shall  trace  its  influence  in  the  other  organs.
Though  characters  of  species  frequently  present  themselves
preferentially  in  some  particular  organ ;  still,  as  a  certain  har-
mony pervades  the  whole  structure,  there  will  be  corresponding
peculiarities  in  other  organs.

We  are  frequently  able  to  trace  the  connexion  of  such
changes  within  the  animal  body ;  but  in  most  cases  we  must
be  content  simply  to  acknowledge  the  fact  of  such  changes
in  the  organism,  without  being  able  to  trace  the  causes  which
produced  them.  Thus,  we  may  readily  understand  that  there
must  be  some  connexion  between  a  certain  form  of  the  cranium
and  that  of  a  pelvis,  since  the  head  of  the  child  nmst,  at  birth,
pass  through  the  pelvis ;  whilst,  on  the  other  hand,  we  cer-
tainly cannot  understand  why,  in  such  or  such  a  race,  the
foot  should  be  flatter,  the  arm  longer,  and  nose  broader.  Fre-
quently, such  distinguishing  marks  seem  to  be  formed  accord-
ing to  a  leading  idea,  a  general  plan.  Very  often,  however,
all  attempts  to  refer  these  phenomena  to  design,  or  to  any
other  determining  causes,  are  unsuccessful.  At  all  events,
variations  are  found  in  the  body  generally  as  soon  as  they  have
been  proved  to  exist  in  any  particular  organ,  and,  to  a  certain
extent,  they  afford  a  criterion  of  the  importance  of  the  varia-
tion to  which  the  individual  organ  has  been  subjected.  When,
therefore,  we  have  to  determine  what  characters  are  of  primary
importance  in  the  study  of  man,  as  an  object  of  natural  history,


LECTURE    V.  119

we  must  bear  in  mind  that,  next  to  the  skull  and  brain,  the
skeleton  of  the  trunk  and  limbs  demands  our  attention,  as  the
relative  proportion  of  the  several  regions  of  the  body  entirely
depends  upon  the  skeleton.

Thus,  when  we  learn  that  certain  tribes  of  South  America,
e.  g.  the  Quichuas  inhabiting  the  plateaux  of  the  Andes,  are
distinguished  by  an  extraordinary  development  of  the  thorax,
giving  to  these  people  a  peculiar  aspect,  there  is  good  reason
for  especially  remarking  the  structure  of  the  vertebral  column,
the  ribs,  and  the  sternum,  as  it  may  be  assumed  that  charac-
teristic differences  in  this  respect  may  occur  in  various  races.
This  very  instance,  however,  shows  how  careful  we  must  be  in
at  once  assigning  plausible  causes  for  such  peculiarities.  "  The
Quichuas,"  it  was  said,  "  live  upon  the  plateaux  of  the  Cordil-
leras, in  a  comparatively  rarefied  atmosphere.  They  are  like
all  mountaineers,  agile,  ascend  mountains  without  much  fatigue,
and  experience  no  difficulty  in  breathing,  such  as  is  felt  in  as-
cending Mont  Blanc.  It  is  not  surprising  that  their  chests  have
gradually  expanded  and  acquired  a  larger  volume,  since  they
have  to  inspire  a  larger  volume  of  rarefied  air  than  the  inhabit-
ants of  the  plains,  in  order  to  obtain  an  equal  amount  of
oxygen."  The  conclusion  is,  in  point  of  fact,  unobjectionable ;
but  unfortunately,  nature  breaks  the  whole  chain  of  reasoning
by  placing  in  the  Siberian  plains,  along  the  shores  of.  the
Arctic  Sea,  populations  whose  chests  are  not  less  developed
than  those  of  the  Quichuas.  And  thus  it  is  with  many  other
peculiarities  attributed  to  climate,  mode  of  life,  and  other  in-
fluences ;  for  we  find,  on  closer  examination,  that  peoples
living  under  entirely  different  external  influences  present  the
very  same  peculiarities.

As  already  stated,  the  pelvis  is  the  part  which  most  cor-
responds to  the  skull,  and  by  means  of  which  we  may  most
reasonably  hope  to  arrive  at  some  conclusion  as  regards  ethnic
peculiarities.  It  is  composed  of  several  bones  grown  together
into  one  piece  in  the  adult,  but  sepai-ated  by  sutures  up  to  the
seventh  year.  These  bones  have  received  the  names  of  the
iliac,  ischiac,  and  pubes  ;  they  form  a  kind  of  ring,  closed
in  front  by    fibrous  cartilage,    and  behind,  by  the  broad  and


120


LECTURE    V.


connected  vertebrae  called  the  os  sacrum.  The  pelvis  re-
presents a  funnel-shaped  body,  curving  forwards,  upon  which,
when  the  body  is  in  an  upright  position,  the  intestines  partially
rest,  and  to  which  the  thigh  bones,  which  support  the  whole
body,  are  articulated.

In  the  pelvis,  as  in  the  skull,  the  sexual  differences  are  very
evident,  but  they  are  more  distinct  in  the  former,  as  this  part
of  the  skeleton  is  so  immediately  connected  with  parturition.

Fig.  37.     Normal  Pelvis  of  a  Male  European,  front  view.

I


-c


a.  Sacrum,      b.  Ilium,      c.  Acetabulum,      d.  Symphysis  pubis.

ischii.


e.  Tuber


The  female  pelvis  is  always  lighter  and  thinner  than  that  of
the  male,  and  the  diaphanous  spots  in  the  ilium  especially  are
larger  and  apparently  thinner.  In  the  female,  the  transverse
dimension  predominates ;  in  the  male,  the  longitudinal.  The
iliac  bones  are  more  expanded  in  the  female  than  in  the  male.
The  superior  pelvic  aperture  is  nearly  heart-shaped  in  the  male ;
in  the  female,  it  is  transversely  oviform.  The  lower  aperture
is,  in  every  respect,  relatively  and  absolutely  larger  in  the
female  than  in  the  male.  The  ischia,  as  well  as  the  acetabula
for  the  femur,  are  more  widely  separated ;  hence,  the  female
thigh  has  a  greater  inward  inclination  than  that  of  the  male.


LECTURE    V.  121

There  is  no  doubt  that,  even  in  European  nations,  there
exist  pelvic  variations,  which  are  certainly  connected  with  the
formation  of  the  cranium.  Just  as  we  find  in  cranial  measure-
ments that  extreme  forms  occur  which  are  normal  in  distinct
races,  as  for  instance,  among  Germans  we  find  long  heads  at-
taining almost  the  dimension  of  the  negro-head ;  so  we  find
pelvic  forms  among  Europeans  approaching  those  of  other
races.  There  can,  however,  be  no  doubt  that  an  exact  method,
as  recommended  for  the  measurement  of  crania,  will  show  the
existence  of  a  normal  form  characteristic  of  each  race,  both
for  the  male  and  the  female,  around  which  all  deviations,  to
their  furthest  limits,  may  be  grouped.  Professor  Weber,  of
Bonn,  has  distinguished  four  chief  forms  of  the  pelvis :  the
oval,  the  round,  the  square,  and  the  cuneiform ;  and,  according
to  him,  the  oval  prevails  among  Europeans,  the  round  among
native  Americans,  the  square  among  the  Mongols,  and  the
cuneiform  among  the  black  races.  The  distinction  of  these
forms,  and  their  applicability  to  races,  may  be  open  to  objec-
tion, on  the  ground  that  sometimes  only  two  or  three  specimens
were  examined.  On  studying  the  animal  series,  there  can  be
no  doubt  that  the  shape  of  apertures,  in  which  the  accoucheur
is  especially  interested,  and  which  Professor  Weber  has  taken
as  the  basis  of  his  classificatisn,  should  not  be  taken  as  the  sole
standard  of  pelvic  formation,  but  that  the  entire  structure
should  be  taken  into  account,  and  especially  such  parts  as
relate  to  the  position  of  the  young.

It  is  the  iliac  bones,  and  their  expansion  in  length  and  breadth,
which  deserve  especial  attention  in  this  connexion,  and  we
should  accordingly  have  to  distinguish  two  forms  of  the  pelvis,
— the  flat,  key-shaped,  and  the  long,  cuneiform  shape.  On
considering  the  pelvic  sexual  difference  from  this  standpoint,
it  is  easily  seen  that  the  normal  male  pelvis  approaches  the
animal  type,  whilst  the  female  pelvis  most  represents  the  hu-
man type.  I  shall,  in  the  sequel,  have  an  opportunity  of
showing  that  this  resemblance  to  the  brute  is,  like  other  cha-
racters, most  marked  in  the  cuneiform,  lengthened  pelvis  of
the  negro  and  negress.

The  form  and  the  proportion  of  the  extremities  are  not  less


122  LECTURE    V.

important.  The  characteristic  peculiarity  of  the  genus  homo
consists,  as  we  shall  show  in  another  lecture,  not  merely  in  the
existence  of  hands,  but  rather  that  he  has  only  two  hands,  and
only  two  feet  which  carry  the  whole  body.  In  consequence  of
this,  the  proportion  of  the  extremities  to  each  other  is  quite
different  from  that  of  the  most  anthropoid  apes.  The  arms,
not  destined  for  support,  but  merely  for  work,  become  shorter
and  thinner  in  proportion  to  the  legs,  the  bones  and  the
muscles  of  which  become  highly  developed.  In  common  life,
we  are  accustomed  to  look  only  at  the  shape  of  hands  and  feet,
a  well-formed  hand  and  foot  being  considered  the  greatest  or-
naments of  a  fine  figure.  But  the  length  of  the  arms  and
legs,  the  proportion  of  the  upper  to  the  forearm,  and  of  the
thigh  to  the  leg,  are  of  importance  in  distinguishing  the  human
type  from  the  nearest  anthropoid  ape,  as  well  as  in  the  charac-
terisation of  races  and  their  special  peculiarities.

We  shall  have  another  opportunity  of  explaining  in  what
manner  this  resemblance  to  the  ape,  as  regards  hands  and  feet,
is  shown,  which  must  be  sought  not  merely  in  the  length  of
the  thin  fingers,  the  flatness  of  the  foot,  the  mobility  of  the
long  toes,  and  the  position  of  the  great  toe,  but  also  in  the
inclination  of  the  extremities,  and  in  their  position  on  the
ground.  When  the  ape  walks  upright,  which  happens  but
rarely,  he  walks  in  a  manner  different  from  that  of  man,
namely,  upon  the  external  edge  of  the  sole,  not  upon  the
whole  surface,  an  inclination  which  is  observed  in  the  child,
and  is  more  evident  the  younger  the  embryo  is.  There
is  thus  in  the  child  a  certain  resemblance  to  the  brute ;  and
every  tendency  to  such  a  formation,  every  approach  to  a
similarity  between  hands  and  feet,  which  might  be  found  in
human  races,  deserves  particular  attention.  For  we  must  not
forget  that,  during  the  first  period  of  the  human  embryo,  as
in  all  embryos,  the  extremities  perfectly  resemble  each  other,
being  of  the  shape  of  spatulated  plates,  which  receive  their
development  at  a  later  period.

The  colour  of  the  skin  and  the  hair  has  always  been  con-
sidered as  an  important  distinctive  mark  of  the  races  of  man-
kind, because  it  at  once  strikes  the  eye.     It  is  undeniable,  that


LECTURE    V.


12:}


the  various  gradations  through  all  tints,  from  yellow,  copper-
colour,  and  brown,  to  jet  black,  are  scattered  over  the  globe,
and  that  irrespective  of  climatic  conditions.  Generally  speaking,
brown  and  black  peoples  are  met  with  in  hot  countries,  fair
and  yellow  races  in  the  temperate  zones  ;  but  there  is  no
general  rule,  and  the  many  exceptions  prove  that  climatic  con-
ditions and  the  sun  exercise  but  a  secondary  influence.

As  regards  the  skin,  its  structure  is  not  essentially  different
from  that  of  mammals,  and  in  the  various  races  of  mankind  it
only  differs  in  the  grouping  of  some  structural  elements,  but
not  by  the  development  of  special  tissue  elements.  It  has
been  declared,  absurdly  enough,  that  the  layers  of  the  skin  in
the  respective  races  should  exhibit  different  tissue  elements,  if
there  really  existed  different  species  of  mankind,  in  forgetful-
ness  of  the  fact,  that  it  would  be  exceedingly  difficult  to  detect
such  fundamental  differences  in  many  different  genera  and
orders  of  mammals.     Let  anyone  try  to  establish  the  differ-


i-


ng. 38.  Sectional  view  of  the  skin  of  a  white  man.  a.  Superficial  horny
layer,  b.  Rete  inucosuin.  c.  Papillae  of  the  corium  ;  the  middle  with  a  tac-
tile corpuscle,  the  rest  with  vascular  meshes,  d.  Vessels,  e.  f.  Efferent
ducts  of  the  sudoriferous  glands,     g.  h.  Fat.     i.  Nerves.


124  LECTURE    V.

euce  in  the  tissue  elements  of  the  skin  of  the  dog  and  the  ape,
and  if  this  be  found  impossible,  will  anyone  maintain  that
these  creatures  belong  to  the  same  species  ?  We  even  go  fur-
ther, and  maintain  that  the  skin  of  two  known  species  of
animals,  which  belong  to  the  same  genus  and  family,  would,
in  the  special  arrangement  of  the  tissue  elements,  not  exhibit
such  great  differences  as  are  found  in  the  white  man  and  the
negro.

The  human  skin  consists  of  two  layers, — the  dermis  and  the
epidermis;  the  latter  is  again  composed  of  two  layers, — the
mucous  layer  (rete  mucosum),  and  the  horny  or  scarf-skin.
The  cells  in  the  mucous  layer  are  round  and  nucleated,  which,
by  development  from  beneath,  become  flattened,  forming  a
layer  lying  close  upon  the  papillary  layer  of  the  dermis.  The
horny,  or  scarf-skin,  is  the  product  of  the  cells  of  the  mucous
layer,  which,  by  evaporation  of  their  fluid  contents  and  by
attrition,  become  flattened,  and  finally  form  a  membranous
scale.

The  colour  of  the  skin  is  mainly  due  to  the  deeper  cells  of
the  rete  mucosum,  the  nuclei  of  which  are  brown  at  first,
owing  to  the  deposition  of  pigment  corpuscles.  These  cor-
puscles increase,  so  that  in  some  spots  the  whole  cells  seem  to
be  filled  with  a  black  pigment.  In  the  white  races,  there  are
only  certain  parts,  the  mammary  gland  and  the  scrotum,  which
present  such  a  dark  tint,  which  evidently  is  not  caused  by
sunlight.  We  find  a  similar  coloration  in  freckles,  and  in  some
morbid  states  the  whole  body  may  become  nearly  black.  Some
years  ago,  there  was  observed  in  Switzerland,  during  a  very
severe  winter,  a  peculiar  form  of  disease  in  vagrants  and
trampers,  characterised  by  a  negro-like  colouration  of  the  skin,
not  in  such  exposed  parts  as  the  face  and  the  hands,  but  upon
the  abdomen  and  the  chest.

As  regards  the  structure  of  the  skin  in  the  various  races,  I
may  quote  the  words  of  that  competent  observer,  Kolliker,
"  In  the  negro,  and  other  coloured  races,  only  the  epidermis  is
coloured,  the  true  skin  being  the  same  as  in  the  European  ;
the  pigment  is,  however,  much  darker  and  more  abundant.
In  the  negro,  in  whom  the  epidermis,  as  regards  the  arrange-


LECTURE    V.


12.:


ment  and  size  of  the  cells,  is  the  same  as  in  the  European,
the  deepest  columnar  cells  of  the  mucous  layers  are  the
darkest,  forming  a  contrast  with  the  lighter  dermis.  Then
come  cells  which  are  lighter,  though  still  brown,  and  which
especially  accumulate  between  the  papillae,  but  are  also  found
in  the  top  and  sides  of  them;  finally,  in  approaching  the
scarf-skin  they  become  yellow  and  pale.  All  these  cells,  ex-
cepting the  membranous,  are  coloured  throughout,  and  espe-
cially the  parts  around  the  granules,  which,  in  the  lower  cellular
laminae,  are  by  far  the  blackest  parts  of  the  cells.  In  the
negro,  the  scarf-skin  has  also  a  yellowish  or  brownish  tint.  I
find  in  the  yellow  skin  of  a  Malay  head,  in  the  Anatomical
Collection  of  Wiirzburg,  the  same  as  in  the  dark-coloured
scrotum  of  a  European.  Accordingly,  the  epidermis  of  the
coloured  races  is  not  essentially  different  from  that  of  the
coloured  spots  in  the  whites,  and  even  almost  entirely  agrees
with  the  skin  in  particular  spots  (aureola).

Fig.  39.     Section  of  the  Skin  from  the  femur  of  a  Negro,  much  magnified,

after  Kolliker.


a.  Papillse  of  the  corium.     b.  Lowest  black -coloured  cells  of  the  rete  mu-
cosum.     c.  Lighter-coloured  cells  of  the  rete  mucosum.     d.  Epidermis.

Cutaneous  perspiration,  like  colour,  has  a  peculiar  character,
which,  in  certain  races,   cannot  be  got  rid  ofj   even  by  Ilav


126  LECTURE    V.

greatest  cleanliness.  These  ethnic  odours  must  not  be  con-
founded with  such  as  are  evidently  the  result  of  alimentation,
and  which  vary  in  the  same  races.  An  Italian  or  Provencal,
eating  garlic,  onions,  and  celery  will,  no  doubt,  emit  an  odour
different  from  the  Norwegian  or  Icelander  who  lives  on  fish,
blubber,  and  rancid  butter  ;  still,  the  odour  may  be  removed  by
a  different  mode  of  life.  It  is  not  so  with  the  specific  odour  of
the  negro,  which  persists,  wash  or  feed  the  negro  as  you  like.
It  resembles  entirely  the  odour  of  the  musk-animal,  and  de-
pends upon  the  peculiar  secretion  of  the  sudorific  glands,
which,  however,  in  their  structure,  are  similarly  arranged  as
in  other  races,  though  they  are  larger  and  more  numerous.

The  comparative  anatomy  of  races  has,  certainly,  hitherto
not  thrown  much  light  upon  skin  peculiarities,  such  as  the
peculiar  velvety  texture  of  the  skin  of  the  negro.  This  may,
perhaps,  result  from  the  larger  number  of  sudorific  and  seba-
ceous glands,  and  partly  from  the  greater  development  and
length  of  the  papillge.

Abnormal  shades  of  colour,  such  as  are  seen  in  albinos,  afford
very  little  explanation.  In  exceptional  cases,  the  pigment
peculiar  to  the  race  is  absent  in  some  individuals  belonging  to
it.  Such  conditions  may,  no  doubt,  be  transmitted,  though  it
frequently  occurs  that  the  young  relapse  into  the  colour  of  the
original  stock.  Though,  by  inbreeding  of  such  white  indivi-
duals as  mice  and  rabbits,  and  by  careful  exclusion  of  indivi-
duals relapsing  to  the  primitive  colour,  a  permanent  variety
may  be  formed  in  which  the  pigment  is  absent,  we  must  not
forget  that  Albinos  occur  in  every  race ;  and  Negro-Albinos
do  not  in  the  least  resemble  the  Caucasian,  but  only  the  Cau-
casian-Albino, and  him  only,  as  regards  colour,  and  in  nothing
else.  A  morbid  condition,  long  known  to  Europeans  before  it
was  observed  in  other  races,  cannot  possibly  establish  a  transi-
tion from  one  race  into  another.

The  hair  fully  deserves  all  the  attention  it  has  received,
some  authors,  indeed,  having  made  it  the  basis  of  a  classifica-
tion of  mankind.  Thus  I.  Geoffroy  St.  Hilaire  assumes  two
principal  groups  of  mankind.  The  straight-haired  (Leiotrichi),
including  the  white,  yellow,  brown,  and  red  races ;  and  woolly-


LECTURE    V.  127

haired  (Ulotrichi),  including  Negroes,  Negrillos,  or  the  black
races  of  the  South  Sea,  the  Hottentots,  and  the  Bushmen.
The  distinction  is,  perhaps,  not  sufficiently  marked,  and  inter-
mediate forms  may  be  found,  such,  for  instance,  as  that  shown
by  some  South  Sea  peoples,  and  called  by  the  French  tetes  en
vatroiville  (mop-headed).

Be  this  as  it  may,  this  much  is  certain,  that  essential  cha-
racters may  be  found  in  the  hair.  Even  the  distribution
of  this  ornament  differs  remarkably.  Whilst  in  the  Negro
and  the  Mongol  we  find  scarcely  a  trace  of  hair,  excepting  on
the  head,  the  armpits,  and  the  genitals,  while  even  the  down
regularly  found  in  the  European  is  wanting,  we  find  a  small,
nearly  extinct  tribe  of  the  Kuril  islands, — the  Ainos, — whose
body  is  so  completely  covered  with  shaggy  hair,  that  it  gave
rise  to  the  Japanese  tradition,  that  the  Aino  mothers  suckled
young  bears,  which  gradually  became  men.  The  distribution
of  the  hair  may  thus,  perhaps,  also  form  a  subordinate  cha-
racter of  the  human  type.  Geoffroy  St.  Hilaire  has  justly
called  attention  to  the  fact,  that  there  is  no  animal  in  which
the  distribution  of  the  hair  is  so  unequal  as  in  man,  in  whom
the  greater  part  of  the  body  is  naked,  or  only  covered  with
down;  whilst  the  hair  on  the  head,  especially  in  females,
reaches  a  much  greater  length  than  in  any  other  animal.  An-
other circumstance  has  been  observed,  that  man  is  more  hairy
in  front  than  on  the  back ;  whilst  in  all  mammals,  in  harmony
with  their  posture,  the  back  is  more  hairy  than  the  belly.  The
distribution  of  the  hair,  as  well  as  its  length,  should,  therefore,
be  borne  in  mind.

It  appears,  also,  that  there  are  differences,  not  merely  in  the
distribution,  but  also  in  the  structure  of  the  hair.*  The  hair
of  the  straight-haired  human  races  is  cylindrical ;  the  section
under  the  microscope  appears  perfectly  circular,  and  provided
with  a  medullary  canal.  Not  so  the  hair  of  the  Negro,  which
is  flattened,  so  that  its  section  exhibits  an  elongated  ellipsis,  in
the  axis  of  which  no  medullary  canal  is  seen.    It  is  this  lateral

*  See  M.  Prunei^Bey's  most  important  nieinoir,  "  De  la  Clievelure  comme
caracteristiqne  des  Races  Huniaines,"  recently  published  in  the  Memoires  de
la  Societe  d' Anthropologic  de  Paris,  vol.  ii,  p.  1,  transl.  in  Anthrop.  Rev.,  No.  iv.


128


LECTURE    V.


compression  which  effects  the  peculiar  frizzling  of  the  hair,
owing  to  its  not  taking  place  exactly  in  the  direction  of  the
longitudinal  axis  of  the  hair,  but  ascending  in  spirals,  so  that
the  hair  resembles  a  spiral  spring,  which  always  returns  to  its
shape  when  drawn  out.

The  arrangement  of  the  soft  paets  is  not  less  necessary  for
the  characterisation  of  the  various  human  races.  The  distri-
bution of  the  muscular  apparatus  upon  the  trunk  and  the  limbs
becomes  very  important  in  relation  to  the  corresponding  ar-
rangement in  the  ape.  The  pendulous  abdomen  of  some  of
the  lower  races,  among  whom  a  mature  man  resembles,  in  this
respect,  a  Caucasian  woman  who  has  had  a  large  family,  shows
an  approximation  to  the  ape,  as  do  also  the  want  of  calves,
the  flatness  of  the  thighs,  the  pointed  form  of  the  buttocks,
and  the  leanness  of  the  upper  arm,  observed  in  other  races.
The  observer  must,  no  doubt,  be  careful  not  to  assume,  as
original  race  differences,  changes  produced  by  famine,  etc.
The  Australians,  Bushmen,  and  some  less  known  American
tribes,  have  a  severe  struggle  for  existence.  Their  increase  is
impossible  on  account  of  privations,  and  if  subject  to  further
injurious  influences,  the  tribe  becomes  extinct.  In  such  cases
we  find  some  characters,  such  as  deficiency  of  muscle,  to  be
the  consequence  of  the  condition  under  which  the  tribe
has  lived  for  many  years,  and  we  must  be  careful  how  we  infer
an  original  character  from  them.  But  when,  as  in  many
Negro  peoples,  we  find  that  food  is  possessed  in  abundance,
the  muscular  apparatus  may  very  properly  be  included  in  the
series  of  distinctive  characters.

The  features  depend  less  on  external  influences.  Even  the
general  form  of  the  face,  and  the  proportions  of  its  component
parts,  are  frequently  characteristic  to  an  extraordinary  degree.
There  are  faces  of  a  perfect  oval  form,  the  chin  representing
the  pointed,  and  the  forehead  the  obtuse,  end  of  an  egg-
There  are  some  which  present  the  form  of  an  elongate  ellipsis ;
while  others  present  the  aspect  of  a  pentagon,  or  of  a  pyramid,
or  a  square  with  round  corners,  the  angles  being  formed  by
the  cheekbones.  We  then  come  to  the  proportions  of  the
several  parts  of  the  face.     In  the  well-formed  European,  the


LECTURE    V.  129

three  segments,  the  frontal,  the  nasal,  and  the  lower  part  of
the  face,  are  nearly  all  of  equal  breadth,  the  forehead  predo-
minating in  the  European.  In  other  races  the  proportions
vary ;  sometimes  it  is  the  nasal  segment,  sometimes  the  lower
facial  segment  which,  receding  or  advancing,  stamps  a  peculiar
character  upon  the  face.

Just  as  the  form  of  the  orbits  in  the  skull,  so  in  the  face,  the
form,  the  size,  and  the  position  of  the  eye,  and  its  appendages,
must  be  taken  into  consideration.  As  is  well  known,  some
peoples,  as  the  Chinese  and  Japanese,  are  distinguished  by
the  peculiarity  of  the  aperture  of  the  eye,  the  outer  angle
of  which  has  an  oblique,  upward  direction.  This  character
is,  by  the  artists  of  these  peoples,  exaggerated  for  the
purpose,  as  it  seems,  of  exhibiting  its  beauty,  as  contrasted
with  the  red-haired  barbarians.  We  should  also  pay  attention
to  the  development  of  the  third  eyelid,  which,  in  the  white
races,  is  only  indicated  by  the  small  fold  in  the  internal  angle
of  the  eye.  This  third  eyelid  is  generally  considerably  larger
in  mammals,  though  never  developed  into  a  perfect  nictitating
membrane,  as  in  birds.  There  is  no  doubt  that  in  some  tribes,
especially  among  Negroes  and  Australians,  the  nictitating
membrane  is  not  smaller  than  in  apes,  so  that  these  peoples
exhibit  an  approach  to  the  animal  type.  In  unmixed  tribes,
the  size  of  the  cornea  in  proportion  to  the  apple  of  the  eye,
as  well  as  the  colour  of  the  iris,  are  as  characteristic  as  in  the
various  species  of  animals  ;  whilst  intermixture  produces  essen-
tial differences  in  this  respect,  as  well  as  regards  the  colour  of
the  hair.

The  size  and  shape  of  the  nose  equally  presents,  in  unmixed
nations,  characteristic  peculiarities.  In  some  cases,  the  nose
is  prominent,  straight,  or  curved ;  in  some,  thick,  bulbous ;
in  others,  broad,  flat,  like  that  of  the  ape.  The  position  of
the  nostrils  varies  accordingly.  On  viewing  a  Caucasian  face
from  below,  the  nostrils  form  two  nearly  rectangular  tri-
angles, the  hypotenuses  of  which  are  turned  outwards ;  whilst
the  septum  of  the  nose  forms  a  perpendicular  line  common  to
the  two  triangles.  On  taking  a  similar  view  of  the  Negro
face,  the  nostrils  present  only  a  transverse  aperture,  or  the

K


130


LECTURE    V.


figure  of  a  horizontal  eig-lit  united  in  the  middle  by  the
nasal  septum.  Xow,  it  is  just  these  original  ethnic  forms  of
the  nose  which  seem  in  a  high  degree  permanent,  and  likely  to
recur  in  intermixtures.  Thus,  in  all  American  mongrels,  the
sharp-backed,  thin,  projecting  eagle  nose  of  the  redskins  is
one  of  those  characters  which  persist  longest,  and  indicate  the
source  of  the  intermixture.

The  form  and  size  of  the  mouth,  the  shape  of  the  lips,  and
the  cheees,  are  features  not  less  characteristic.  There  are
peoples  with  such  wide  mouths  that  the  cheeks  seem  to  split
up  to  the  ears ;  there  are  others  with  lips  so  puffed  up  that  the
red  parts  nearly  reach  the  nose,  and  seem  to  cover  the  chin.
It  may  be  objected  that  such  forms  are  sometimes  developed
among  ourselves ;  but  here  again  I  must  observe,  that  such
deviations  do  certainly  occur  among  mixed  populations,  whilst
in  pure  races  the  form  of  the  soft  parts  is  nearly  the  same  in
all  individuals ;  hence,  they  resemble  each  other  more  than
individuals  of  mixed  and  civilised  races.

The  projection  or  recession  of  the  ceus,  as  well  as  the  form
of  this  projection,  is  not  less  worthy  of  our  attention,  being
one  of  the  essential  characters  of  human  nature.  The  broad
square  chin  of  many  nomades  in  the  interior  of  Asia  is  in
striking  contrast  to  the  pointed  chin  of  the  Semitics,  and  the
apish  chin  of  the  Xegro,  which  has  hardly  any  projection
at  all.

Finally,  we  must  not  neglect  the  ears.  The  remarkably
small,  thick,  projecting  and  gristly  ear  of  the  Xegro  presents
a  striking  contrast  to  the  large,  broad,  but  thin  ear  of  the
Tatars  and  Calmucks,  which  presents  some  resemblance  to  the
large  ear  of  the  Chimpanzee.

Not  much  can  be  said  with  regard  to  the  internal  orgaxs,
the  peculiarities  of  which  are  less  known  than  those  of  the
external  form.  Still,  there  are  some  indications,  chiefly  refer-
ring to  the  Xegro,  which  we  shall  consider  in  the  sequel,  show-
ing that  here,  also,  differences  exist  as  great  as  those  observed
in  different  species  of  mammals  belonging  to  the  same  genus.

I  cannot  quit  this  subject  without  drawing  your  attention  to
the  great  difficulties  attending  the  description  of  the  external


LECTURE    V.  131

peculiarities  of  living  men.  Dress,  habits,  and  manners,  are
apt  to  produce  ideas  which  do  not  correspond  to  the  reality,  or
are  evidently  exaggerated.  It  has  been  said  that  we  cannot
imagine  a  Turk  without  a  shaven  head,  or  a  Chinese  without
his  pigtail  and  wide  breeches.  This  circumstance  shows  the
necessity  of  studying  the  comparative  natural  history  of  man-
kind in  the  originals,  and  not  from  hearsay.

I  must  also  impress  upon  you,  that  the  more  mixed  the  races  are
which  occupy  our  attention,  the  more  numerous  must  be  our  ob-
servations, and  the  more  searching  our  inquiry  into  particulars.
A  hundredfold  greater  exertions,  more  numerous  measurements,
drawings  and  photographs  are  required,  to  extract  from  the  great
hotch-potch  of  European  intermixtures  the  original  types,  than
are  necessary  to  point  out  the  peculiarities  in  pure  types.
"\\  hilst  it  is  the  individual  character  which  strikes  us  at  once
in  the  European,  the  sight  of  a  Bashkir  impresses  us  with  the
general  race  type ;  and  whilst  among  the  latter  the  unpractised
eye  cannot  easily  distinguish  one  individual  from  another,  we
are  in  the  European  frequently  doubtful  as  to  the  stock  to
which  he  belongs.  I  recollect  how  my  grandmother  amused
us  children  by  her  stories  of  the  war  of  liberation,  and  her
description  of  the  faces  of  our  liberators,  which  came  from  the
eastern  steppes,  under  the  Eussian  banner,  which,  by  the  way,
they  left  us  as  the  banner  of  German  politics,  whilst  they
carried  back  the  spoils  of  the  citizens  into  their  steppes.  She
told  us  how  they  rushed  into  the  kitchen,  how  they  opened
their  wide  mouths  garnished  with  tremendous  teeth,  and
winked  with  their  obliquely  set  eyes.  Each  appeared  a  wolf,
and  only  a  wolf, — no  individuality  was  distinguishable;  they
seemed  to  be  all  formed  after  the  same  model, — Bashkirs  and
Calmucks, — ancient,  very  ancient,  nobility  of  pure  and  un-
mixed stock  from  the  Asiatic  cradle  of  mankind  !


K  'I


132


LECTURE    VI.

Comparison  of  the  Structure  of  Man  with  that  of  the  Ape. — Differences. —
Defencelessness. — Erect  position. — Equilibrium  of  the  Skull. — Free  mo-
bility of  the  Anterior  Extremities. — Formation  of  the  Pelvis, — Propor-
tions of  several  parts  of  the  body. — Proportion  of  the  Cranium  to  the
Face. — Development  of  the  Jaws. — Proportion  of  the  Cranial  Angles. —
Cubic  capacity  of  the  skulls  of  Men,  Idiots,  and  Apes. — Herr  Bischoff
and  the  Idiots. — Nose,  intermaxillary  Bone,  and  Teeth. — Signification
of  the  Diastemata. — Structure  of  the  Pelvis. — Proportions  of  the  Limbs.
— Hands  and  Feet. — Differences  in  the  Form  of  the  Brain. — Dispute
between  Owen  and  Huxley. — Researches  of  Gratiolet  and  Wagner. —
Relations  of  the  Transition  Convolutions  and  the  Opercidum. — Develop-
ment of  the  Brain. — Form  of  the  Brain  in  Microcephali.

Gentlemen, — In  the  preceding  lectures,  I  have  directed
your  attention  to  the  method  of  investigation,  and  to  certain
points  which  must  be  particularly  attended  to  in  researches
regarding  the  races  of  mankind.  With  few  exceptions,  I  have
confined  my  remarks  to  man,  and  have  only  glanced  at  the
relation  of  the  superior  animals  standing  next  to  man,  in  order
that  we  might  more  easily  succeed  in  solving  the  problems
presented  to  us.

But  however  desirable  it  might  be,  in  some  respects,  to  con-
fine our  attention  to  man ;  it  is,  on  the  other  hand,  impossible
to  neglect  the  relations  in  which  man  stands  to  the  brute  crea-
tion. This  is  the  more  necessary,  as  it  is  our  object  to  show
that  such  relations  do  exist,  and  that  they  are  sufficiently
strong  to  connect  man  indissolubly  with  the  animal  world,  of
which  he  is  only  the  last  and  highest  development,  and  not
the  separate  product  of  a  special  creative  act.  By  examining,
therefore,  the  relation  of  man  to  the  ape,  by  pointing  out  the
similitudes  which  establish  the  closest  analogy  to  this  highest
type  of  mammals,  by  showing  the  differences  which,  on  scien-


LECTURE    VI.  133

tific  principles,  induce  us  to  separate  the  human  type  from  the
ape  type,  not  merely  as  a  genus,  but  as  a  Family  and  Order,
or,  at  least,  sub-Order,  we  may  advance  a  step  towards  the
knowledge  of  our  own  nature,  and  acquire  a  basis  for  further
researches.  We  shall  preferentially  keep  to  those  differences
which,  rightly  or  wrongly,  have  been  set  up,  leaving  the  fea-
tures of  resemblance,  which  certainly  predominate,  in  abeyance
for  the  present.  We  shall  give  weight  to  the  anatomical
characters  above  everything  else.  At  philosophical  and  re-
ligious arguments,  by  which  even  naturalists  sometimes  en-
deavour to  support  their  systems,  we  shall  only  cast  occasional
glances.  It  will  not  concern  us  much  that  Schopenhauer
places  the  difference  between  man  and  ape  in  the  Will,  whilst
Bischoff,  of  Munich,  places  it  in  self-consciousness.

Let  us  first  examine  the  human  structure  in  general.  Every
animal,  we  are  told,  has  some  weapon  of  defence  or  offence ;
man  alone  has  none.  "  The  intelligent  observer,"  so  it  is
asserted,  "  cannot  fail  to  perceive  that  it  is  in  reference  to  this
point  that  the  Creator  has  implanted  in  the  human  organism
the  germ  of,  and  necessity  for,  the  development  of  the  faculties
with  which  it  is  endowed."

It  is  true,  man  has  no  horns ;  his  canine  teeth  are  neither
large  nor  formidable,  neither  are  his  nails  claws.  But,  on
the  other  hand,  is  the  axiom  generally  true,  that  all  animals
are  armed  ?  In  what  respect  are  the  weapons  of  the  chim-
panzee superior  to  those  of  man  ?  Its  canine  teeth  are
scarcely  longer,  and  certainly  not  intended  for  attack ;  its  nails
are  just  as  flat ;  its  forehead  just  as  devoid  of  horns.  When
attacked,  the  animal  acts  like  an  unarmed  man ;  it  scratches,
bites,  strikes,  throws  stones  or  branches  of  trees,  and  finally
runs  away  if  it  cannot  save  itself  in  any  other  way.  Hundreds
of  other  species  of  apes  are  in  the  same  condition  as  the  chim-
panzee. Has  this  defencelessness  of  the  chimpanzee  caused
him  to  become  one  of  the  lords  of  the  creation  ?  Are  the
faculties  of  the  hornless  sheep  or  the  doe  more  developed  be-
cause of  their  defenceless  state  ?  or  shall  we  say  that  the  sheep
has  a  weapon,  because  it  butts  with  its  hard  skull  ?  and  if  this
were  so,  does  not  the  Negro  use  his  skull,  of  ivory-like  hard-


134  LECTURE    VI.

ness,  in  the  same  manner  ?  Does  he  not  knock  down  his
adversary  by  striking  him  in  the  breast  with  his  head  ?  and  do
not  two  Negroes,  when  fighting,  butt  one  another  like  con-
tending rams  ?  We  cannot,  therefore,  accept  the  exceptional
state  of  man  in  this  respect,  nor  the  inference  drawn  from  it,
though  it  has  been  assumed  by  ancient  authors.  The  older
the  opinion,  the  older  is  the  error.

There  is,  however,  an  exceptional  condition,  an  essential  at-
tribute of  human  nature,  aud  one  which  distinguishes  the
bimana  from  all  other  mammals,  namely,  the  upright  posture.
The  main  characters  of  the  human  structure  are  in  harmony
with  this  position ;  they  partly  stand  to  each  other  in  the  rela-
tion of  cause  and  effect.  It  is  true  that  an  upright  posture
cannot  be  said  to  be  entirely  confined  to  man  to  the  exclusion
of  the  rest  of  the  animal  kingdom ;  for  among  birds  there  are
some,  as  the  penguin  and  the  auk,  which  stand  and  walk  as
uprightly  as  mau.  Here,  however,  there  are  other  structural
relations  which  occasion  this  posture.  Man  is  absolutely  dis-
tinguished from  the  animals  most  closely  related  to  him  struc-
turally, the  apes,  by  the  erect  posture,  which  is  only  assumed
by  the  latter  transiently,  or  in  consequence  of  training.

The  proportionally  large  skull,  with  its  contents,  rests  in
equilibrio  on  the  points  of  support  afforded  by  the  vertebral
column.  The  arrangement  exhibited  by  the  articulating  sur-
faces of  the  so-called  atlas,  and  of  the  second  cervical  vertebra,
the  axis,  almost  seems  to  have  been  the  model  for  such  mecha-
nical contrivances  as  are  used  to  secure  the  horizontal  position
of  the  mariner's  compass  or  of  ship  lamps.  Two  articular
surfaces  on  the  upper  side  of  a  ring,  i.  e.,  the  first  cervical
vertebra,  the  atlas,  as  anatomists  call  it, — transverse  articular
surfaces  on  the  under  side  of  the  same  ring, — a  projection
serving  as  an  axis  on  which  the  ring  turns — the  head  is
balanced  on  this  mechanism,  and  has  its  motions  free  in  all
directions.  The  muscles,  tendons,  and  ligaments  are  so  at-
tached, that  the  slightest  effort  is  sufficient  for  the  re-establish-
ment of  the  disturbed  equilibrium.  When  we  find  in  the
animal  world  a  heavy  head  on  the  top  of  the  spinal  column,  we
also  find  a  development  of  the  spinous  processes  of  the  cervical


LECTURE    VI.  135

vertebras,  to  wliicli  is  attached  the  lig  amentum  nuchce  inserted
in  the  occiput.  A  well-proportioned  skull  will  be  in  equilibrio
when  supported  on  the  two  articular  surfaces  at  the  base  near
the  occipital  foramen ;  if  the  jaws  project  forwards,  as  in  the
prognathous  negroes,  the  occiput  becomes  elongated  in  order
to  establish  the  equilibrium.  Not  so  in  the  mammalia.  In
the  natural  position  of  most  of  these,  the  axis  of  the  vertebral
column  runs  parallel  with  the  horizontal  plane  of  the  pelvis ;
whilst  in  man  it  forms  with  it  nearly  a  right  angle.  The  axis
of  the  head,  again,  forms  in  mammals  a  right  or  an  obtuse
angle  with  the  axis  of  the  vertebral  column ;  its  direction  is
perpendicular,  and  the  long  jaws  form  the  arm  of  a  lever  which
draws  the  head  still  more  downwards  and  forwards.  The  elastic
ligamentum  nuchas  is  then  developed  as  a  counterpoise ;  and
even  in  the  most  anthropoid  apes,  the  orang  and  chimpanzee,  but
especially  in  the  formidable  gorilla,  we  find  the  cervical  spines
prominent,  and  provided  with  powerful  muscles  and  ligaments.
With  all  this,  the  position  of  the  occipital  foramen  itself  is
closely  connected,  as  we  shall  see  in  the  comparative  structure
of  the  skull.

The  relations  of  the  thorax  and  pelvis  may  also  be  explained
by  the  erect  posture.  The  transverse  diameter  of  the  human
chest  is  greater  than  the  antero-posterior,  the  reverse  of  the
proportion  in  mammals.  The  chest  of  man  is  flattened  in  front
and  behind,  and  arched  on  the  sides ;  that  of  the  mammal  is
laterally  compressed,  with  a  cuneiform  inclination  towards  the
sternum  and  the  backbone.  The  arms  and  hands  of  man  hang
down  by  the  sides  freely,  and  are  thus  unconfmed  in  their
movements,  and  adapted  to  the  manifold  purposes  which  their
not  being  used  to  aid  the  support  of  the  body,  enables  them
to  subserve.  For  in  all  mammals,  in  which  the  hand  is  not
transformed  into  an  instrument  for  flying  or  into  a  fin,  the  an-
terior limb  always  serves  as  a  support  in  locomotion.  This  is
the  case  even  in  the  most  anthropoid  apes.

In  the  ape  the  anterior  hand  as  well  as  the  posterior  is  used
for  climbing ;  and  when  the  animal  moves  on  the  ground,  it
supports  itself  on  the  closed  fist,  when,  from  the  length  of  the
arms,  it  assumes  a  more  or  less  half  erect  position.    But  every-


136  LECTURE    VI.

where  in  the  animal  world,  as  Milne-Edwards  has  most  convinc-
ingly shewn,  the  division  of  labour  is  an  index  of  perfection.
An  animal  which  has  four  limbs  apparently  destined  for  the
same  end,  as  is  the  case  with  the  horse  and  the  sheep,  is  in
this  respect  inferior  to  the  animal  in  which  the  anterior  limb
is  at  the  same  time  a  prehensile  organ,  as  in  the  squirrel  and
the  beaver.  The  ape,  whose  four  limbs  are  provided  with
hands,  stands  in  this  respect  a  step  below  man,  in  whom  the
legs  are  exclusively  adapted  for  locomotion,  and  the  hands
exclusively  prehensile  organs.  The  more  special  the  function
of  an  organ,  the  more  perfect  it  is  :  the  greater  the  number  of
purposes  an  organ  has  to  subserve  in  the  animal  economy,  the
more  imperfectly  will  they  be  performed.  Hence,  though  the
hand  is  in  every  respect  a  more  perfect  organ  than  the  merely
locomotive  foot,  the  multiplication  of  hands  must  still  be  con-
sidered a  mark  of  defective  organisation,  since  each  of  these
hands  is  at  the  same  time  a  locomotive  and  prehensile  organ,
whilst  the  restriction  of  both  these  functions  to  two  diiferent
sets  of  organs  is  a  step  towards  perfection.

The  breadth  of  the  hips,  and  the  pelvis,  which  forms  their
osseous  support,  is  still  more  connected  with  erect  stature  than
the  width  of  the  thorax.  The  bowels  suspended  in  the  thoracic
and  abdominal  cavities  press  downwards.  The  pressure  of  the
thoracic  contents  is  partially  neutralised  by  the  diaphragm
which  separates  the  cavity  of  the  chest  from  that  of  the  abdo-
men ;  but  the  whole  weight  of  the  intestines,  including  liver
and  spleen,  rests  upon  the  pelvis.  This  latter  expands  like  a
dish  ;  the  iliac  bones  become  broad  and  flat,  excavated  above
and  arched  downwards  and  outwards  ;  so  that  the  name  "  pel-
vis," or  basin,  is  perhaps  one  of  the  best  chosen  in  anatomy.
In  animals,  on  the  other  hand,  the  pelvis  bears  but  little  of  the
weight  of  the  bowels  ;  and  just  that  part  which  does  bear  it,
namely  the  symphysis  pubis,  is  in  man  least  concerned  in  this
respect.  The  weight  rests,  in  the  animal,  upon  the  central
line  of  the  chest  and  the  belly,  the  pelvis  chiefly  serving  as  the
fulcrum  of  the  hind  legs.  Hence  the  pelvis  presents  no  ex-
tended surfaces,  but  becomes  long  and  narrow ;  the  parietal
parts  resemble  the  shoulder-blades,  which  serve  as  supports  to


LECTURE    VI.


137


the  fore  legs.     The  greater  the  mass  which  the  pelvis  has  to
support,  the  broader  and  more  dish-shaped  does  it  become.

Fie  40      Pelvis  of  a  Male  Chimpanzee,  reduced  to  the  same  length  as  the
human  pelvis,  fig.  37.     The  description  is  the  same.


Thus  we  see  in  the  female,  besides  its   relation  to  parturition,
that  the  pelvis  is  also  large,  because  periodically  it  has  to  bear,
in  addition,  the  contents  of  the  gravid  uterus.     To  the  width
of  the  pelvis   must  be   added   the   powerful   muscles  of  the
haunches  and  the  buttocks,  which  proceed  from  the  pelvis  to  the
thighs.     No  animal  presents  such  a  rotundity  and  fulness  of
the  buttocks ;  no  ape  such  a  cylindrical,  gradually  diminishing
thigh  ;  and  we  are  justified  in  saying  that  man  only  possesses
thighs.     The  muscles  of  the  leg  are  in  man  so  accumulated  as
to  form  a  calf,  whilst  they  are  in  the  ape  more  equally  distri-
buted;   still   transitions  are   not  wanting,   since    one    of  the
greatest  characteristics  of  the  Negro  consists  in  his  calfless
leg.

The  proportions  of  individual  parts  of  the  body,  and  specially
of  the  limbs,  are  not  less  worthy  of  notice.  The  arm  of  man  is
proportionally  shorter,  the  leg  longer  and  stronger,  than  in  the
ape.  If  a  man  is  placed  in  the  posture  of  a  quadruped,  he
must  stretch  out  his  arms  ;  but  he  must  bend  his  legs  if  he  is


138  LECTURE   VI.

to  bring  his  vertebral  column  into  a  horizontal  position  parallel
with  the  ground.  In  the  ape  both  limbs  are  either  of  equal
length,  or  the  leg  is  shorter  than  the  arm,  which  in  some  species
reaches  an  extraordinary  length.  Thus  the  orang  shews  his
affinity  to  the  gibbon  (Hylobates),  a  native  of  the  same  country,
by  the  length  of  the  arms,  which  reach  down  to  the  ankle ;
whilst  in  the  chimpanzee  they  reach  only  the  middle  of  the  leg,
in  the  gorilla  the  knee,  and  in  man  only  the  middle  of  the  thigh.
On  the  other  hand,  the  articular  surfaces  of  the  arm,  specially
at  the  wrist,  are  so  arranged  that  a  much  greater  mobility  for-
wards and  backwards  is  effected.  Nevertheless,  the  long  arms
as  well  as  the  legs  of  the  ape,  though  they  are  deficient  in  mus-
cular rotundity,  possess  much  greater  strength  than  those  of
man :  thus  it  is  a  gymnastic  feat  for  a  man  to  hang  for  a  con-
siderable time,  or  to  draw  himself  up  by  the  arm ;  but  with  the
ape  this  is  an  ordinary  and  by  no  means  fatiguing  posture.
In  the  quadruped  every  Hmb  shares  almost  in  the  same  degree
the  burden  of  the  body.  Only  leaping  animals,  such  as  hares
and  kangaroos,  resemble  man  in  some  degree  in  the  length  and
strength  of  the  legs,  even  much  excelling  him,  as  the  short-
ened fore  legs  are  out  of  proportion  to  the  colossal  hind  legs.
Here,  however,  a  number  of  organic  conditions  cooperate  to
prevent  any  closer  comparison.  The  great  development  of  the
tail  in  leaping  animals,  as  a  sort  of  balancing  pole ;  the  deve-
lopment of  the  foot;  the  simple,  long,  metatarsal  bones  and
toes, — exhibit  a  fundamentally  different  type  which  cannot  be
compared  with  that  of  man.  Thus  man  possesses,  as  contrasted
with  the  ape,  a  distinctive  character  in  the  strength,  rotundity,
and  length,  of  the  leg  ;  especially  of  the  thighs,  which  in  most
animals  are  considerably  shortened  in  proportion  to  the  leg.

On  proceeding  to  a  closer  examination  of  the  separate  parts,
the  head  with  its  component  parts,  cranium,  and  face,  first  fixes
our  attention.  I  have  already,  in  a  preceding  lecture,  pointed
out  that  in  man  super-position  predominates  ;  while  in  the  ape
a  juxta-position,  or  rather  a  position  of  one  part  in  front  of  the
other,  prevails ;  that  the  (anatomical)  face  included  between
the  eyebrows  and  the  chin  is  only  a  small  appendage  of  the
human  cranium,  which  expands  in  every  direction,  above  the


LECTURE    VI.  139

Fig.  41.     Side  view  of  the  Skull  of  an  ancient  Helvetian.


eyebrows  as  forehead,  on  the  sides  as  temples,  above  the  occi-
pital foramen  as  neck,  in  order  to  obtain  space  for  the  dispro-
portionately large  brain ;  whilst  in  the  ape  the  cerebral  space
is  more  receding,  the  forehead  is  flattened,  and  the  occipital
foramen  placed  further  back;  so  that  in  the  lowest  apes  it  reaches
the  limit  of  the  base,  and  in  the  other  animals  is  placed  at  the
posterior  surface  of  the  skull.

Fig.  42.     Side  view  of  the  Skull  of  an  aged  Chimpanzee.


140


LECTURE    VI.


Camper's  facial  angle  varies  in  man  from  70  degrees  to
85  degrees;  and  there  is  probably  no  instance  of  a  normal
human  skull  known  where  it  is  as  low  as  64  degrees.  In  the
Negro  skull  here  depicted  the  angle  amounts  to  67  degrees ;
and,  according  to  Geoffroy  St.  Hilaire,  the  skulls  of  the  Makoias
or  Namakas,  a  South  African  tribe,  sent  to  the  Paris  Museum
by  Delalande,  have  a  facial  angle  of  only  64  degrees  ;  whilst  it
decreases  in  the  adult  chimpanzee  to  35  degrees,  in  the  orang
to  30  degrees ;  though  when  these  animals  are  young,  and  the
jaws  undeveloped,  it  frequently  reaches  60  degrees.  On  the
other  hand  a  small  American  ape,  the  saimiri  (callithrix  sciurea),
as  regards  organisation,  is  far  more  remote  from  man,  but  very
human-like  in  behaviour  in  some  respects  (it  weeps  readily,
for  instance)  ;  has  a  facial  angle  of  65  to  6Q  degrees ;  so  that  it
completely  fills  up  the  gap.    Equally  decided  are  the  differences

Fig.  43.     Skull  of  an  aged  Chimpanzee,  top  view.


observed  in  the  development  of  the  jaws.  The  temporal
muscles  which  raise  the  jaws  must  be  stronger  in  the  apes,
inasmuch  as  they  have  to  move  a  longer  lever,  independently
of  the  greater  development  of  the  jaws  in  width.     Hence  the


LECTURE    VI.


141


temporal  fossae  are  so  deep  in  the  ape-skull  that  it  seems  as  if
the  skull  had  been  grasped  from  above,  behind  the  eyebrows,
and  forcibly  compressed  :  hence  the  zygomatic  arches  are  more
distant,  and  the  temporal  ridges,  to  which  are  attached  the
fibres  of  the  masseter  muscles,  rise  more  towards  the  vertex
and  farther  behind  the  aperture  of  the  ear.  In  some  anthro-
poid apes,  as  in  the  gorilla  and  orang,  there  is  observed,  in
advanced  age,  simultaneously  with  the  increased  size  of  the
jaws,  a  prominent  ridge,  a  sort  of  crest,  on  the  cranium,  pre-
senting a  larger  surface  for  the  attachment  of  the  masseter
muscles  ;  so  that  in  these  apes  the  whole  skull  is  covered  with
muscles,  while  in  man  it  is  in  most  parts  only  covered  by  the
scalp.

Fig.  44.     Base  of  the  Skull  of  an  ancient  Helvetian.


Closely  connected  with  the  development  of  the  jaws,  is  the
position  of  the  zygomatic  arches  and  of  the  occipital  foramen  ;
and  this  is  at  once  observed  in  the  examination  of  the  base  of
the  skull.  In  human  skulls  the  zygomatic  arch  always  lies  in
the  anterior  half  of  the  longitudinal  diameter.     The  external


142


LECTURE    VI.


aperture  of  the  ear,  where  it  terminates,  is  situated,  even  in  the
Negro,  in  the  middle  of  the  longitudinal  diameter,  and  even

Fig.  45.     Base  of  a  Kaffir  Skull.


I


more  forward  in  the  higher  races ;  but  in  the  anthropoid  apes
the  aperture  is  situated  farther  back,  and  the  distance  to  the
end  of  the  jaw  is  greater  than  to  the  hindmost  occipital  promi-
nence ;  while  the  zygomatic  arch  reaches  the  posterior  half  of
the  longitudinal  diameter,  and  frequently  extends  to  the  last
third  of  the  length  of  the  skull.  The  large  occipital  foramen  is
also  thrown  back.  In  the  ape  it  is  situated  in  the  posterior
third  of  the  skull ;  in  man  it  lies  usually  in  the  centre,  or  even
a  little  forward, — a  difference  to  which  Daubenton  long  since
drew  attention,  and  which  has  been  fully  confirmed  by  subse-
quent researches.

We  must  here  direct  your  attention  to  the  relations  of  the


LECTURE    VI.


143


angles  which  can  be  measured  on  the  skull  when  bisected  lon-
gitudinally, and  which,  as  already  explained  in  a  previous  lee-
Fig.  46.     Base  of  a  Skull  of  an  old  Chimpanzee.


ture,  are  of  great  importance  for  estimating  the  proportions  of
the  cranium  to  the  face  and  jaws.  The  sella,  or  sphenoid  angle,
is,  as  shown  by  Welcker,  always  smaller ;  and  consequently  the
base  of  the  cranium  more  bent,  in  man  than  in  the  ape,  though
transitions  do  exist.

The  nasal  angle  increases  with  the  sphenoid  angle,  as  may
be  seen  in  the  following  table  taken  from  Welcker :


Cranium.

Nusal  Angle.

Sphenoid  Angle

Mean  of  30  male  Germans

66-2

134

Idiot  aged  44  (Halle  Collection)

67-9

138

Three  Negroes

67-6

138

Idiot  aged  31  (Gottingen)

80

145

Chimpanzee

—

149

Three  other  Negroes  ...

74-9

150

Young  Orang

98

155

Swine  Ape  (Inuus  nemestrinus)

...       102

170

Old  Orang

...       104

174

Eoll  Ape  (Cebus  apella)

...       103

180

144


LECTURE    VI.


"With  the  extension  of  the  cranial  basis,  which  also  obtains
in  the  gorilla, — in  which,  according  to  Owen,  the  sella  turcica
is  less  depressed  than  in  the  chimpanzee, — is  undoubtedly  con-
nected the  internal  capacity  of  the  skull.  The  occipital  fora-
men, as  well  as  the  minor  apertures  through  which  the  cranial
nerves  pass,  are  all  larger  in  proportion  to  the  cranial  space
than  in  man ;  a  natural  consequence  of  the  greater  size  of  the
spinal  cord  and  the  nerves  in  proportion  to  the  cerebral  hemi-
spheres.

The  internal  cranial  capacity  and  certain  of  the  chief  measure-
ments are,  according  to  Owen,  as  follow :


Length  of  Skull

Length  of    cerebral

space

Height    of   cerebral

space

Contents  of  cerebral

space    in    cubic

inches


English'
men.


In.  lines

7.  4.
6.  6.
5.  6.

96


Malay.


86


Negroes


Austt  a-
lians.


In.  lines

8.  0.
6.  3.
5.

75


Gorilla.


Orang.


In.  lines  In.  lines

11.  10.   9.  0.


5.  1.
3.  3.

30


4.  3.
3.  5.

28


Chim-
panzee.


28


Despite  the  equality  in  height  which  may  exist  between  the
gorilla  and  the  Australian,  the  cranial  capacity  is  one  and  a
half  times  larger  in  the  latter  than  in  the  former ;  a  proportion
so  much  the  more  favourable  for  the  Austral  Negro,  as  in  the
gorilla  the  legs  are  proportionally  shorter,  and  consequently
the  trunk  larger  and  more  powerful.  The  limits  may,  however,
be  brought  closer  together  ;  for  the  smallest  human  skull,  not
idiotic,  measured  by  Morton,  had  a  capacity  of  63  cubic  inches,
whilst  the  largest  gorilla  cranium  recently  measured  possesses
only  a  capacity  of  34^  cubic  inches.

These  measurements  afford,  moreover,  an  important  insight
into  the  relative  proportions  of  the  skeletons  of  the  head  and
face.  If  we  assume  the  entire  length  of  the  skull  =  100,  and
then  express  the  proportion  in  which  the  length  of  the  cerebral
space,  that  is  to  say,  of  the  brain  itself,  stands  to  the  length  of
the  skull, we  obtain  the  following  numbers  :  Europeans  =89*1;
Austral  Negroes  =  78*7;  orang  =  47" 7;  gorilla  =  45"9;  whence


LECTURE    VI.


145


we  obtain  for  the  proportion  of  the  facial  skeleton  the  following
numbers  :  Europeans  =  10'9  ;  Austral  Negroes  =  21'3  ;  orang
=  52-3.;  gorilla  =  54-1.

Fig.  47.     Skull  of  an  Idiot,  after  Owen,  side  view.


Fig.  48.     Skull  of  an  Idiot,  after  Owen,  base  view.


Thus  from  every  point  of  view  there  always  presents  itself  a
great  interval  between  man  and  ape  in  the  conformation  of  the
skull,  occasioned  by  the  relative  proportion  of  the  cranial  and


]  45  LECTURE    VI.

facial  parts.  As  we  have  seen,  the  length  of  the  cerebral  space
extends  in  no  anthropoid  ape  to  one  half  of  the  whole  length
of  the  head ;  whilst  in  man,  even  in  the  lowest  races,  the  length
of  the  facial  part  constitutes  only  an  unimportant  fraction,
which  in  the  Australian  does  not  amount  to  a  quarter  of  the  whole
length.  There  are,  no  doubt,  Negro  heads  in  which  the  quarter
is  reached,  and  even  slightly  exceeded,  inasmuch  as  the  genuine
Negro  has  a  proportionately  much  longer  and  narrower  skull
than  the  Austral  Negro ;  but  the  gap  can  only  be  filled  up  by
those  unfortunate  creatures  born  as  idiots,  and  known  by  the
name  of  mieroccphali, — their  defective  formation  of  brain  and
cranium  not  being  produced,  as  in  cretins,  by  disease  after
birth,  but  by  an  original  arrest  of  cerebral  development.  In
such  creatures,  sometimes  the  offspring  of  normal  parents,  and
of  which  the  so-called  Aztec  children  are  instances,  we  find  all
the  intermediate  proportions  between  the  cerebral  and  the
facial  skull  that  can  be  imagined.

In  mentioning  idiots,  I  come  into  collision  with  a  mighty
authority,  not  unlike  the  fragile  clay  pot  with  the  iron  kettle.
Addressing  his  Munich  audience,  Prof.  Bischoff  says :  "  Com-
parisons have  been  made  with  diseased  and  degenerate  men  as
they  appear  in  the  shape  of  microcephali,  idiots,  and  cretins.
The  error  thus  committed  is  palpable,  since  these  unfortunates
are  not  men  at  all,  but  monstrosities ;  the  saddest  thing  about
them  being  that  they  possess  human  shape  without  being  men."
We  should  like  to  ask  where  man  ends  and  monstrosity  begins  ?
Is  a  man  with  a  cleft  iris  no  man,  but  only  a  monstrosity  ?  Is
that  citizen  of  Hamburg  who,  some  years  since,  travelled  about
to  exhibit  his  cleft  sternum,  through  which  the  heart  could  be
felt,  a  man,  or  only  a  monstrosity  ?  Is  the  unfortunate  being
who  is  born  without  arms,  and  has  to  paint  with  his  feet ;  who
converses  with  you  in  your  own  language,  and  is  a  cheerful,
intelligent,  and  witty  companion  (we  have  known  such  cases, —
and  the  instance  of  Ducornet,  who,  though  deficient  in  hands,  be-
came a  painter,  is  well  known) ,  is  he  no  man  because  he  has  only
stumps  ?  And  if  all  these  individuals  are  men,  which  no  person
can  doubt,  why  should  individuals  with  malformed  brains  (as  much
an  organ  of  the  body  as  the  eye,  sternum,  or  limb)  not  be  men  ?


LECTURE    VI.  I   I  <

No  doubt  we  ought  not  to  compare  abnormal  with  normal
conditions,  still  we  may  often  avail  ourselves  of  them  for  expla-
nation and  elucidation ;  and  it  is  only  in  this  sense  that  I  men-
tion them  here,  as  being-,  to  a  certain  extent,  a  key  to  the
process  through  which  the  human  skull  rises  from  the  ape  to
the  human  type.

Let  us  return  to  our  subject.  On  examining  the  facial  por-
tion of  skulls  we  find  a  great  difference  between  man  and  ape
in  the  conformation  of  the  nasal  bones  and  the  mode  of  their
connexion.  In  the  ape  the  nasal  bones  are  broad,  depressed,
mostly  grown  together  in  the  middle ;  the  nasal  apertures  con-
sequently oblique,  or  in  form  of  a  horizontal  8,  and,  viewed
from  below,  parallel  with  the  apertures  of  the  eyes.  But  in  the
gorilla  the  middle  of  the  nasal  suture  rises  in  the  form  of  a
little  crest ;  and  in  the  Negro  the  nose  is  so  depressed  that  the
difference  between  the  two  formations  is  scarcely  perceptible.
It  is  remarkable  that  there  is  also  an  analogy  between  the
Austral  Negro  and  the  gorilla  as  regards  the  internal  nasal
cavities, — the  frontal  sinuses  which  are  met  with  in  all  other
races,  causing  the  projection  of  the  region  between  the  eye-
brows. These  cavities,  which  are  so  enormously  developed  in
the  elephant,  are  absent  both  in  the  Australian  and  the
gorilla,  though  they  exist  in  the  other  anthropoid  apes.

The  incisors  are  inserted,  in  all  mammals  which  have  them,
in  a  special  bone,  the  intermaxillary,  which  is  generally  recog-
nisable throughout  life,  and  remains  separated  by  sutures  from
those  parts  of  the  maxillary  bones  which  contain  the  canine
teeth  and  the  molars.  The  elements  from  which  the  inter-
maxillary is  developed  exist  also  in  man,  and  are  plainly  per-
ceptible in  the  foetus.  But  it  soon  becomes  confluent  with  the
other  bones,  so  that  even  in  the  new-born  infant  the  sutures  are
generally  obliterated,  and  the  union  with  the  upper  jaw  complete.

At  the  beginning  of  this  century,  when  the  history  of  deve-
lopment had  as  yet  made  little  progress,  the  absence  of  the
intermaxillary  was  considered  as  a  specific  human  character ;
and  Goethe,  assisted  by  that  excellent  anatomist,  Loder  of  Jena,
took  great  trouble  to  point  out  the  error.  At  present  it  is  orfly
the  early  union  which   can   be  cited;   but  even  this  has  its

l2


148


LECTURE    VI.


degrees.  We  sometimes  find  in  young  Negro  skulls,  as  well
as  in  skulls  of  idiots  (see  figure  48,  p.  145),  traces  of  the  max-
illary suture ;  and,  moreover,  the  sutures  in  apes  are  obliterated
at  various  ages.  Thus  the  sutures  remain  open  in  the  gorilla
to  an  advanced  age,  and  are  only  closed  in  the  oldest  skulls,
whilst  in  the  chimpanzee  the  union  takes  place  immediately
after  the  change  of  teeth.  I  have  now  before  me  skulls  of  the
same  age,  of  the  genus  cebus,  in  which  the  teeth  had  just  been
shed.  In  one  genus  (cebus  apella)  the  intermaxillary  is  plainly
separated;  in  the  other  (cebus  albifrons)  the  union  with  the
maxillary  is  so  perfect  that  there  is  no  trace  of  any  suture.

Fig.  49.     Base  of  the  Skull  of  Cebus  Apella,  with  the  Maxillary  Suture.


LECTURE    VI.


149


The  formation  of  the  rows  of  teeth,  and  of  the  teeth  them-
selves, is  closely  connected  with  the  projection  of  the  muzzle
(prognathism),  which  in  the  ape  reaches  a  far  higher  degree
than  in  the  lowest  human  races  ;  the  palate  becomes  long  and
narrow ;  the  rows  of  teeth,  on  the  whole,  parabolic  instead  of
elliptic ;  the  teeth  themselves  are  distinguished  by  their  size,
hardness,  and  whiteness.  The  formation  of  their  crowns,  of
the  cusps  of  the  molars,  and  of  the  chisel-like  edge  of  the
incisors,  is  so  extremely  similar,  that  it  is  possible  to  be  in
doubt  about  a  single  tooth,  as  to  whether  it  is  human  or
simian ;  but  the  doubt  is  no  longer  possible  when  the  whole
row  of  teeth  can  be  inspected.  It  is  specially  the  canine  teeth
which  in  apes  destroy  the  harmony  of  the  dental  structure.

Fig.  50.     Base  of  the  Skull  of  Cebus  albifrons. — The  Maxillary  Suture  is

obliterated.


150


LECTURE    VI.


The  pointed  crowns  are  frequently  grooved,  so  that  in  some
baboons  they  resemble  short,  curved  daggers.  They  rise  above
the  level  of  the  other  teeth,  so  that  it  would  be  impossible  for
the  mouth  to  be  perfectly  closed  were  there  not  gaps  for  the
reception  of  the  projections  of  the  canine  teeth  :  indeed,  in  the
upper  jaw  of  all  ape-skulls  there  is  a  gap,  or  diastema,  between
the  canine  tooth  and  the  incisors ;  in  the  lower  jaw  there  is  a
diastema  between  the  canine  and  the  first  molar  tooth;  and
even  where  the  canine  tooth  is  least  developed,  as  in  the  chim-
panzee, this  gap  is  plainly  seen;  but  is  very  large  in  the
gorilla  and  in  the  baboon.  At  the  same  time  the  prominence
of  the  muzzle  towards  the  nose  indicates  the  comparatively

Fig.  51.     Base  of  a  Kaffir  Skull,  with  a  Simian  Diastema.


Vp~-


16


If


large  and  strong  root  of  the  canine  tooth.     But  as  there  is
great  variation  in  the  general  structure  of  the  ape,  so  shall  we


LECTURE    VI.  151

find  many  transitions  to  the  human  structure.  The  canine
tooth  generally  rises  a  little  above  the  level  of  the  others ;  but
frequently  it  is  considerably  higher,  and  in  closing  the  mouth
is  received  into  an  imperfect  gap  formed  by  the  summits  of  the
opposite  teeth.  We  moreover  observe,  though  rarely,  such
gaps  in  human  skulls,  otherwise  perfectly  normal,  as  in  the
Kaffir  skull  from  the  Erlangen  Collection,  figured  in  Wagner's
Atlas  of  Comparative  Anatomy,  and  which  we  here  reproduce.
(See  fig.  51.)  A  series  of  skulls  exhibiting  similar  abnormities,
with  such  occurring  in  other  parts,  might  afford  some  indica-
tions as  to  the  original  stock;  just  as  Darwin  has  directed
attention  to  the  dark  transversal  rings  sometimes  observed  on
the  feet  of  horses,  which  apparently  indicate  descent  from  a
stock  common  to  the  zebra,  quagga,  and  other  striped  wild
species  of  horses ;  so  might  the  occurrence  of  dental  gaps
among  Kaffirs  and  other  inferior  races  indicate  their  earlier
common  origin.  We  must,  however,  not  infer  that  an  unbroken
row  of  teeth  is  a  distinctive  human  character.  Thus  in  the
anoplotherium,  a  pachydermatous  fossil  animal,  found  near
Montmartre,  there  may  be  seen  a  perfectly  unbroken  row  of
teeth  formed  of  incisors,  canines,  and  molars.  This,  at  any
rate,  proves  that  an  even  set  of  teeth  does  not  form  a  distinc-
tive human  character.

The  lower  jaw  is  in  the  anthropoid  apes  massive,  and  the
horizontal  arm  much  longer,  broader,  and  stronger,  than  in
man  ;  but  the  projection  which  forms  the  chin  is  absent.  The
chin  may  therefore  be  considered  as  a  human  character,
though  it  recedes  gradually  in  the  lower  prognathous  races
approaching  the  ape  type.

The  double  curvature  which  is  so  striking  in  the  vertebral
column  of  man,  is  entirely  lost  in  the  apo,  where  the  spinous
processes  of  the  cervical  vertebras  are  longer,  stronger,  and
appear  simple  at  the  points,  whilst  in  man  they  are  divided
by  a  shallow  groove.

The  Pelvis  presents  great  variations.  However  narrow  and
elongated  the  human  pelvis  may  be,  it  never,  in  this  respect,
resembles  that  of  the  ape,  in  which  the  iliac  bones  rise  verti-
cally and  incline  to  the  sacrum,  whilst  in  man  they  spread  out


152


LECTURE   VI.
Fig.  52.     Side  view  of  Male  Pelvis.


Fig.  53.     Pelvis  of  a  Male  Chimpanzee,  side  view.


The  description  is,  in  figs.  52  and  53,  the  same.  a.  Ilium,  b.  Third
lumbar  vertebra,  c.  Fourth  lumbar  vertebra,  d.  Acetabulum,  e.  Os  pubis.
f.  Femur,     g.  Tuber  ischii.     h.  Coccyx.


LECTURE    VI.  153

in  the  form  of  a  dish.  Whilst  the  form  of  the  superior  portion
of  the  pelvis,  as  already  observed  at  the  beginning  of  this
lecture,  seems  to  be  regulated  by  the  burden  of  the  bowels,  the
lower  portion  is  closely  connected  with  parturition  and  the
form  of  the  head  which  is  to  pass  through  its  aperture.  Now
the  long,  narrow,  and  thin  head  of  the  young  ape  can  easily
pass  through  a  narrow  pelvis,  whilst  the  more  rounded  human
head  requires  a  wider  diameter  in  every  direction.

On  examining  now  the  Limbs  we  find  both  in  their  propor-
tions and  their  relations  to  each  other  a  marked  difference.
Whilst  the  leg  of  man,  as  the  sole  organ  of  support,  is  heavier
and  more  massive  in  its  component  bones,  the  leg  of  the  ape
resembles  the  anterior  limb.  In  man  the  thigh  bone  (femur)
is  the  longest  and  heaviest  of  the  whole  skeleton ;  in  the  chim-
panzee the  humerus  equals  it  in  length,  in  the  gorilla  it  slightly
exceeds  it,  and  in  the  orang  it  does  so  greatly.  The  chimpan-
zee in  a  forced,  erect  position,  which  he,  like  the  other  apes,
never  assumes,  can  reach  the  knee  with  the  end  of  the  middle
finger ;  and  the  orang  can  reach  its  ankles  without  bending.
The  difference  becomes  still  greater  when  we  study  the  propor-
tion of  the  parts.  Assuming  the  length  of  the  humerus  to  be
=  100,  the  length  of  the  radius  in  the  white  man  is  =  75*5,  in
the  chimpanzee  =  90"  8;  the  length  of  the  hand  in  the  white
man  =  52*9 ;  in  the  chimpanzee,  73'4 ;  and  in  the  other  apes,
specially  in  the  orang,  these  proportions  are  still  more  striking.
The  humerus  is  therefore  proportionately  shorter  in  the  ape
than  in  man,  but  the  forearm  and  the  hand  are  longer.  Accord-
ing to  Professor  Aeby's  measurements,  which  have  not  yet
been  published  in  detail,  the  gorilla  alone  among  the  apes
entirely  agrees  with  man  as  regards  the  dimensions  of  the  upper
extremities.  The  other  anthropoid  apes,  however,  differ  greatly
from  man  in  this  respect.  Now  compare  the  hand  of  the  chim-
panzee (fig.  54)  with  its  long,  narrow  fingers,  thin,  insignifi-
cant thumb,  long,  narrow,  flat  palm,  in  which  the  ball  of  the
thumb  scarcely  projects,  with  your  own  broad  hand,  its  power-
ful thumb  and  well  developed  ball,  the  projecting  cushions  on
the  lower  surface  of  the  fingers'  ends  ;  and  you  will  at  once,
even  without  examining  the  skeleton,  perceive  the  great  differ-


154


LECTURE    VI.


ence  in  the  development  of  the  hands  in  the  two  genera.  But
now,  instead  of  the  hand  of  the  chimpanzee,  take  that  of  the
gorilla.  Its  breadth  and  the  thickness  of  the  thumb  so  much
approach  that  of  man,  that,  as  Huxley  justly  observes,  there  is
more  dissimilarity  between  the  hand  of  the  orang,  which  has
one  bone  more  in  the  carpus,  and  that  of  the  gorilla,  than
between  the  hand  of  the  gorilla  and  that  of  man.  It  is  not
necessary  to  shew  farther  how  the  gorilla,  with  regard  to  his
limbs,  presents  a  perfect  transition  from  the  ape  to  man.  If
an  isolated  arm  of  the  gorilla  were  found  in  a  fossil  state,  it
would  unhesitatingly  be  ascribed  to  a  species  of  man ;  just  as
the  cranium  of  a  microcephalus  would  be  regarded  as  a  new
species  of  ape.  The  difference  is  still  more  marked  in  the  leg,
not  so  much  as  regards  the  relative  length  of  the  several  parts
as  in  the  internal  structure.    Assuming,  again,  the  length  of  the

Fig.  54.     Hand  of  the  Chimpanzee :  the  palm.


LECTURE    VI.


155


femur  =  100,  the  European  presents  the  following  proportions  :
tibia  =  82*5;  foot  =52*9;  whilst  in  the  chimpanzee  the  pro-
portion for  the  tibia  is  =  80 ;  but  for  the  foot,  72*8.  Here
the  extremity  of  the  limb  acquires  the  greatest  length.

This  organ,  compared  with  the  human  foot,  is  a  real  hand.
True,  the  fingers  are  somewhat  shorter,  the  thumbs  larger  and
thicker  than  in  the  anterior  hand ;  but  still  it  is  a  hand,  with
a  flat  lower  surface,  well-separated,  moveable,  drawn-out  fingers,
with  opposable  thumbs,  and  a  long  furrowed  palm.  On  com-
paring a  sketch  of  this  hand  with  that  of  a  human  foot,  we
first  perceive  that  Burmeister  was  right  in  designating  (Geolo-
gische  Bilcler)  the  foot  the  specific  character  of  humanity.  The
strength  and  length  of  the  great  toe,  which  generally  exceeds
in  man  those  of  the  other  toes ;  the  smallness  and  imperfection
of  the  other  toes,  which  can  generally  be  moved  only  together,

Fig.  55.     Foot  of  Chimpanzee :  the  sole.


156


LECTURE    VI.


not  separately;  the  projecting  anterior  cushions,   formed  by
the  bones  of  the  metatarsus ;  the  vaulted  juncture  of  the  meta-

Fig.  56.     Skeleton  of  the  Human  Foot,  top  view.


tarsus  with  the  tarsus,  which  equalises  the  weight  of  the  body
upon  the  whole  arch,  favouring  the  raising  of  the  foot  and  the
elasticity  of  the  sole ;  the  narrow  but  high  heel,  which  projects
but  little  backwards ; — all  these  peculiarities  in  the  structure
of  the  human  foot  constitute  it  an  important  organ  as  regards
the  characters  differentiating  man  and  ape.  But  here,  too,  we
must  not  forget  that  connecting  links  exist.  The  foot  of  the
gorilla  is  more  anthropoid  than  that  of  any  other  ape,  and  the
foot  of  the  Negro  more  ape-like  than  that  of  the  white  man.
The  bones  of  the  tarsus  in  the  gorilla  exactly  resemble  those
in  the  Negro ;  the  ape  has  the  same  broad,  flat,  low  heel ;  the
large  toe  is  thicker  and  longer  than  in  the  other  apes,  but  the
toes,  on  the  whole,  are  longer,  more  moveable,  and  the  thumb
more  opposable.  "  The  posterior  limbs  of  the  gorilla,"  says
Huxley,  "  terminate  in  a  real  foot,  with  a  moveable  great  toe.
It  is  a  prehensile  foot,  if  you  like,  but  no  hand, — a  foot  which
differs  from  that   of  man,  not  in  any  fundamental   character,


LECTURE    VI.  157

but  in  mere  proportions  in  the  degree  of  mobility,  and  in  the
secondary  arrangement  of  its  parts."

Fig.  57.     Foot  of  Gorilla,  after  Huxley.


Still,  we  must  bear  in  mind  that  the  ideas  "  hand"  and
' '  foot"  may  be  very  differently  conceived,  and  that  they  run
into  each  other.  Whilst  most  anatomists  consider  the  essen-
tial part  of  the  idea  "  hand"  to  be  the  opposability  of  the
thumb,  I.  Geoffroy  St.  Hilaire  justly  observes,  that  many
species  of  apes  of  the  Old  and  New  World,  as  the  colobus  and
ateles,  have  no  thumb  at  all,  or  only  a  rudimentary  one  in  the
anterior  limbs,  and  that  the  opposable  thumb  is  in  apes  always
more  developed  in  the  hind  limb  than  in  the  anterior  one,
whilst  the  reverse  is  the  case  in  man.  Whilst,  therefore,
Huxley  restricts  the  notion  hand  so  much,  that  he  terms  the
posterior  extremity  of  the  gorilla  a  prehensile  foot,  Geoffroy
St.  Hilaire  calls,  on  the  contrary,  every  extremity  a  hand,
though  it  be  thumbless,  provided  it  has  long  and  flexible
fingers,  capable  of  prehension.  According  to  this  definition,
most  birds,  especially  parrots,  also  possess  hands.

We  now  proceed  to  some  internal  organs,  and  especially  to


158  LECTURE    VI.

the  brain.  Within  the  last  few  years,  as  I  have  previously
stated,  there  have  been,  as  regards  the  central  organ  of  the
nervous  system,  two  contending  parties  in  the  field.  The
question  was  : — Does  the  brain  of  the  ape,  in  its  fundamental
plan  and  its  parts,  differ  from  the  human  brain  ?  This  ques-
tion has  greatly  agitated  the  scientific  world ;  and  though  it
now  seems  decided  by  the  clearest  evidence,  we  still  find,  as
frequently  occurs  in  the  history  of  science,  the  standard-bearer
of  one  side  vainly  defending  his  position.  This  reminds  us  of
the  anecdote  of  Thenard,  who,  in  a  lecture  on  chlorine,  had
among  his  auditors  Berzelius,  the  only  chemist  who  insisted
upon  the  compound  nature  of  chlorine.  "  On  one  side,"  ob-
served Thenard,  "  we  see  the  whole  army ;  on  the  other  side,
a  single  man,  whom,  however,  this  once  only,  the  army  refuse
to  follow,  but  who  outweighs  them  all,  whoever  they  may  be."
So,  too,  we  may  say  here :  all  against  one, — but  the  one  is
Richard  Owen.

Man  has  neither  absolutely  nor  relatively  the  largest  and
heaviest  brain  among  the  mammals.  The  large  aquatic  mam-
mals, as  the  whale,  firmer,  sword-fish,  large  dolphins,  and  the
elephant  among  land  animals,  have  brains  of  more  than  two  to
three  pounds  in  weight.  The  small  American  monkeys,  the
sajou,  sai,  and  saimiri,  have,  in  proportion  to  the  body,  a  rela-
tively larger  brain,  which,  in  man,  is  1  :  36,  and  in  the  former
as  1  :  13,  1  :  24  :  25.  Although  the  emaciation  of  monkeys
which  die  in  menageries  is  very  great ;  still,  this  much  has
been  proved  by  the  weighing  of  their  brains,  that  man  pos-
sesses no  advantage  as  regards  the  cerebral  mass.

On  the  other  hand,  his  brain  is  much  larger  in  relation  to
the  spinal  cord  and  the  cerebral  nerves ;  and  the  cerebrum  is
also  lai'ger  in  relation  to  the  cerebellum.  Even  in  this  respect
the  lower  races  approach  the  animal  structure,  and  the  Negro
is  as  much  distinguished  from  the  white  man,  by  the  compara-
tive thickness  of  the  spinal  cord  and  the  nerve  trunks,  as  the
ape  is  from  the  Negro.

I  shall  do  myself  the  pleasure  of  making  you  acquainted
with  the  present  state  of  the  dispute  among  naturalists  con-
cerning the  cerebral  structure  of  man  and  ape.     I  confess,  the


LECTURE    VI.  159

pleasure  is  rather  a  malicious  one.  We  see  how  they  play  hide
and  seek  in  three  or  four  corners ;  how,  when  obliged  to  leave
one  corner  for  another,  the  player  finds  another  player  who
cries  out  to  him,  "  You  can't  stay  here ;'  find  another  corner."
"  The  human  character,"  exclaims  one  philosopher,  "  lies  not
in  the  developed  form  of  the  adult,  but  in  the  mode  of  devel-
opment" ;  immediately  there  comes  another,  who  says,  "  Non-
sense !  the  character  lies  in  certain  parts  which  are  peculiar  to
man."  "  False  !"  replies  a  third,  "  the  ape,  also,  has  these
parts ;  it  is  the  general  type  which  constitutes  the  difference."
"Wrong  again!"  says  a  fourth,  " that  is  exactly  the  same
in  both, — but  the  brain  does  not  constitute  the  difference ;  'tis
the  mind  !"  " Mind,  spirit  ?"  asks  a  fifth,  "there  is  no  quali-
tative difference,  only  a  quantitative  one ;  but  the  structure, —
the  parts, — there  it  is  !"

"  In  man,"  says  Owen, ' '  the  brain  presents  an  ascensive  step
in  development,  higher  and  more  strongly  marked  than  that  by
which  the  preceding  sub-class  was  distinguished  from  the  one
below  it.  Not  only  do  the  cerebral  hemispheres  overlap  the
olfactory  lobes  and  cerebellum,  but  they  extend  in  advance  of
the  one,  and  further  back  than  the  other.  Their  posterior  de-
velopment is  so  marked,  that  anatomists  have  assigned  to  that
part  the  character  of  a  third  lobe, — it  is  peculiar  to  the  genus
Homo;  and  equally  peculiar  is  the  posterior  horn  of  the  lateral
ventricle,  and  the  hippocampus  minor,  which  characterise  the
hind  lobe  of  each  hemisphere.  Peculiar  mental  powers  are
associated  with  this  highest  form  of  brain,  and  their  conse-
quences wonderfully  illustrate  the  value  of  the  cerebral  cha-
racter ;  according  to  my  estimate  of  which  I  am  led  to  regard
the  genus  Homo  as  not  merely  the  representative  of  a  distinct
Order,  but  of  a  distinct  sub-Class  of  the  Mammalia,  for  which
I  propose  the  name  of  Aechencephala."

Huxley  replies  to  this  : — "  I  shall  prove,

"  1 .  That  the  third  lobe  is  neither  peculiar  to,  nor  character-
istic of  man,  seeing  that  exists  in  all  the  higher  quadrumana.

"  2.  That  the  posterior  cornu  of  the  lateral  ventricle  is  neither
peculiar  to,  nor  characteristic  of  man,  inasmuch  as  it  also
exists  in  the  higher  quadrumana.


160


LECTURE    VI.


"  3.  That  the  hippocampus  minor  is  neither  peculiar  to,  nor
characteristic  of  man,  as  it  is  found  in  certain  of  the  higher
quadrumana."

Fig.  58.     Top  view  of  brain  of  the  Chimpanzee,  after  Marshall.


c  a.


On  the  right  side,  the  ventricle  with  the  posterior  cornu,  are  laid  open.
For  description,  compare  figures  30  and  36.

The  English  now  begin  energetically  to  study  the  anatomy
of  the  simian  brain ;  Marshall  dissects  a  chimpanzee ;  Rol-
leston,  an  orang;  Huxley,  an  ateles ;  preparations,  drawings,
and  photographs  are  made,  and — Huxley's  assertions  remain
unshaken.  Owen  appeals  to  older  drawings  of  Tiedemann,
Van  der  Kolk,  and  Vrolik,  to  support  his  negative  opinion ;
whilst  his  opponents  appeal  to  the  same  works  to  prove  their
positive  opinion.  But  this  is  too  much  for  the  phlegmatic
Dutchmen.  "Mr.  Owen,"  they  write,  "has  been  carried
away  by  his  desire  to  upset  the  theory  of  Darwin  (of  which


LECTURE    VI.  161

Messrs.  Schrceder  Van  der  Kolk  and  Vrolik  are  not  over  fond),
and  we  believe  him  to  be  in  error.  In  order  to  prove  that
the  Negro  brain  rises  at  once  without  any  transitionary  stage
above  that  of  the  anthropoid  apes,  Mr.  Owen  asserts  that
the  posterior  lobe  of  the  hemispheres,  the  posterior  cornu  of
the  lateral  ventricle,  and  the  pes  hippocampi  minor,  which
exist  in  the  Negro  brain,  are  absent  in  the  former."  The
Dutch  anatomists  now  maintain  that  they  have  found  and  de-
lineated all  these  parts,  and  that  singularly  enough,  whilst
praising  the  correctness  of  the  sketches,  he  by  a  contradictio
in  adjecto  denies  the  existence  of  these  parts ;  they  mention
the  researches  of  Huxley,  Marshall,  and  Rolleston,  and  are
glad  to  observe  that  they  agree  with  their  own.  "  We  also
are  glad,"  they  say,  "that  the  zoological  gardens,  now-a-days,
so  easily  furnish  us  with  the  necessary  materials  for  com-
parison. An  error,  which  formerly  would  have  been  per-
petuated, is  now  more  easily  removed;  but  we  feel  grieved
when  we  compare  the  assertions  of  Mr.  Owen  with  the  results
obtained  by  the  above  eminent  naturalists,  which  confirm  our


own/'


And  thus  Owen's  characteristic  marks  of  the  human  brain
are  broken  to  pieces ;  and  Wagner,  of  Gottingen,  observes
very  justly,  "  I  could  never  understand  how  comparatively
insignificant  cerebral  parts,  which  vary  in  individual  human
brains,  e.  cj.  longer  or  shorter  posterior  cornua  of  the  lateral
ventricles,  presence  of  the  pes  hippocampi  minor,  nay,  some
single  or  double  medullary  globules  (eminentice  candicantes) ,
could  be  urged  to  be  distinctive  marks  of  the  human  brain,  as
distinguished  from  that  of  the  anthropoid  apes."

This  being  disposed  of,  the  convolutions  are  taken  to  task.
These,  it  is  said,  are  in  man  rounder,  more  complicated,  more
numerous,  and  less  symmetrical.  All  this  is  very  true;  but
like  the  proportions  which  the  nerve-trunks,  the  spinal  cord,
and  the  cerebellum,  bear  to  the  brain,  they  furnish  only  rela-
tive and  quantitative,  but  not  qualitative  differences .

With  regard  to  the  general  arrangement  of  the  convolu-
tions, Gratiolet  expresses  himself  as  decidedly  as  concerning  the
general  cerebral  structure.     "  On  comparing  a  series  of  human

M


162  LECTURE    VI.

and  ape  brains/'  says  this  author,  "  we  easily  detect  the  re-
markable analogy  of  the  cerebral  form  in  all  these  creatures.
The  folded  brain  of  man,  and  the  smooth  brain  of  the  Ouistiti,
resemble  each  other  by  a  fourfold  character, — a  rudimentary
olfactory  bulb,  a  posterior  lobe  covering  the  cerebellum,  a  well
marked  Sylvian  fissure,  and  a  posterior  cornu  of  the  lateral
ventricle.

"  These  characters  co-exist  only  in  man  and  the  ape.  In
all  other  animals  the  cerebellum  remains  (partly)  uncovered;
in  most,  even  in  the  elephant,  there  is  an  enormous  olfactory
bulb ;  and,  excepting  the  makis  (lemur),  no  other  animal  pre-
sents the  Sylvian  fissure.

"  Thus  there  is  in  man  and  ape  a  peculiar  cerebral  form  ;  and
there  is  also  in  all  these  creatures  a  general  type  in  the  ar-
rangement of  the  cerebral  convolutions.  This  resemblance  of
man  and  ape  in  the  arrangement  of  the  convolutions  is  worthy
the  attention  of  the  philosopher.  There  is  equally  a  particular
type  of  the  cerebral  convolutions  in  bears,  cats,  dogs,  makis,
in  short,  in  all  natural  families  of  animals.  Each  of  these
families  has  its  normal  type ;  and  in  each  of  these  groups  the
species  may  be  connected  solely  according  to  the  character  of
the  cerebral  convolutions."

Wagner  fully  agrees  with  Gratiolet.  "  The  fundamental
development  of  the  lobes  in  the  large,  lesser,  and  central
brain ;  the  limitation  of  the  lobes  in  the  cerebrum  to  inter-
mediate, frontal,  parietal,  occipital,  and  temporal  lobes,  are  in
the  quadrumana,  as  well  as  in  man,  arranged  according  to  the
same  plan ;  and  so  are  the  chief  fissures  between  them, — the
Sylvian,  Kolando's,  the  occipital  fissure,  the  overlapping  of  the
cerebellum  by  the  v; ell- developed  posterior  lobe  of  the  cerebrum;
all  this  gives  more  or  less,  to  the  lowest  simian  brain,  a
striking  physiognomical  resemblance  to  the  human  brain."

There  is,  then,  nothing  more  to  be  said  on  this  point ;  the
general  plan  is  and  remains  the  same,  and  I  cannot  prove  it
better  than  by  placing  some  drawings  of  human  and  simian
brains  in  juxtaposition.  But  there  are  certain  people  who
never  give  in.  Distinctive  characters  must  exist ;  how  can
you   otherwise  explain   man's  exceptional  position  ?    or   how


LECTURE    VI.


163


can  you  otherwise  separate  him  from  the  animal  kingdom  ?
If  man,  both  in  his  mental  qualifications  as  well  as  in  his  cere-
bral functions,  possesses  not  merely  a  something  more  (what  no
one  denies),  but  something  else  not  existing  in  other  animals,
which  he  must  have  if  he  is  to  be  capable  of  religion,  of  salvation,
and  of  immortality ;  then  there  should  be  something  in  his
brain,  were  it  only  an  organ  of  faith  !

Fig.  59.     Brain  of  Macacus  silenus,  upper  surface,  after  G-ratiolet.


Fig.  60.     Side  view  of  the  same ;  the  operculum  is  reflected  to  display  the
subjacent  transition  convolutions.


1        (       f


T


The  description  in  both  figures  is  the  same  as  in  the  Chimpanzee  brain,
fig.  58  (compare  figures  30  and  36).  K,  operculum ;  x,  transition  convolution
covered  by  the  operculum.

M  2


164  LECTURE    VI.

Prof.  Wagner  finds  such  an  organ — with  Gratiolet.  "  The
superior  apes  approach  man  gradually  as  regards  richness  of  con-
volution, depth  of  fissures,  and  the  presence  of  the  gyri  breves
in  the  central  lobe  of  the  island,  and  greater  asymmetry,  etc.
But  they  are  far  behind  man  as  regards  the  preponderance  of
the  large  hemispheres,  especially  as  regards  their  proportions
to  the  cerebellum ;  and  there  are  distinctive  differences  in  the
arrangement,  size,  and  limitation  of  the  posterior  lobes,  which
are  always  more  developed  in  the  ape  and  cover  a  portion  of
the  convolutions,  which  Gratiolet  terms  plis  de  passage  (trans-
ition lobes) ."  In  a  note  to  this,  Wagner  observes,  ' '  The
posterior  lobes  of  the  apes  do  not  admit  of  a  strict  reduction  of
their  convolutions  to  man.  That  I  have  done  so  by  way  of  essay
in  my  tables,  and  have  paid  no  particular  attention  to  Gratiolet' s
plis  de  passage,  was  done  in  order  to  establish  a  more  simple
terminology,  which  may  be  useful  in  cerebral  dissections."

I  have  distinguished  some  of  the  above  words  by  italics  to
show  how  contradictory  they  are.  First,  it  is  said,  the  poste-
rior lobes  have  a  remarkable  resemblance,  then  they  exhibit  a
striking  difference  ;  and  how  ?  The  only  human  character
which  Wagner  is  able  to  find,  the  cap-like  covering  of  the
transition  convolutions,  he  estimates  so  little  as  to  omit  it
altogether,  simply  for  the  sake  of  the  terminology  in  dissections.

Let  us  now  return  to  Gratiolet,  from  whom  the  facts  are  bor-
rowed. "  The  shape,  says  this  author,  of  the  brain  is  known.
Its  elevation,  the  breadth  of  the  frontal  lobe,  the  anterior
portion  of  which,  instead  of  becoming  pointed,  is  formed  by  a
surface  which  corresponds  to  the  expansion  of  the  frontal  bone.
The  depression  of  the  Sylvian  fissure,  the  richness  and  com-
plication of  the  secondary  convolutions  distinguish  at  first
sight  the  human  from  the  simian  brain.

"  Yet  in  spite  of  these  differences,  however  great  and  charac-
teristic they  may  be,  when  we  compare  the  proportions  of  the
individual  parts,  there  still  remain  between  the  human  and
the  simian  brain  such  analogies  that  a  general  description  is
sufficient  for  both."

Further  on  he  says,  "  This  is  an  essential  chai-acter ;  in  man
all  transition  convolutions  are  superficial."     This  fact  is  signi-


LECTURE    VI.  1G5

ficant  in  the  highest  degree,  when  the  question  applies  to  the
comparison  of  the  cerebral  convolutions  in  man  and  the  ape.
In  fact : —

1.  In  the  chimpanzee  the  posterior  lobe  is  large  and  the
operculum  well  marked.  The  upper  transition  convolution  is
wanting,  the  second  is  covered.

2.  In  the  orang  the  posterior  lobe  is  moderate  and  its  oper-
culum imperfect.  The  superior  transition  convolution  is  large
and  superficial,  the  second  covered.

3.  In  man  the  posterior  lobe  is  much  reduced,  the  oper-
culum is  absent.  The  two  superior  transition  convolutions
are  large,  undulating',  and  both  superficial.

"  Does  not  this  regular  gradation  tell  its  own  tale  V

The  question  does  not  turn  here  on  the  two  superior  transi-
tion convolutions,  which  are  both  in  apes  and  men  superficial
and  uncovered ;  but  on  the  two  superior,  and  not  even  on
both  of  them,  but  on  the  second,  for  the  superior  is  in  the
orang  as  in  man,  uncovered,  superficial,  and  free.  Then  there
is  the  operculum,  which,  though  imperfect,  exists  in  the  orang.
I  now  write  in  my  note  book  :  Man  is  distinguished  from  the
ape  by  the  absence  of  an  imperfect  operculum  and  by  the
second  transition  convolution  being  uncovered.  I  may  here
apply  Wagner's  observation  that  we  can  hardly  consider
insignificant  variations,  as  the  second  plis  de  passage,  which,
in  some  cases,  as  Dareste  (another  convolution  student)
maintains,  may  in  the  same  individual  differ  in  both  hemi-
spheres, as  characteristic#marks  of  man.  But  I  console  myself
by  studying  my  Gratiolet,  and  I  read  of  the  devil's  ape  (ateles
Beelzebuth).  "We  easily  recognise  the  posterior  lobe,  it  is
of  moderate  size  ;  anteriorly  its  limits  are  badly  defined.  The
external  vertical  fissure  is  in  fact  obliterated  by  the  develop-
ment of  the  transition  convolutions,  which  are  very  large  and
all  superficial.

"  This  circumstance  is  most  important,  as,  hitherto,  we  have
only  found  it  in  man."

But  is  it  not  remarkable  that  Gratiolet,  in  the  second  part
of  his  Essay,  which  treats  of  the  American  apes  (the  devil's
and  the  capuchin  ape  belong  to  the  new  world),  establishes


166  LECTURE    VI.

by  facts  the  fallacy  of  his  assertions  in  the  first  part  ?  Is  it  not
still  more  remarkable  that  Wagner,  who  studies  this  treatise,
makes  extracts  and  long  comments  on  it,  adheres  to  the  first
part  without  reading  the  second,  despite  that  the  underlined
passages  are  also  rendered  prominent  in  the  original  ?  And  is
it  not  most  remarkable  that  M.  Gratiolet,  in  the  year  1860,
that  is  to  say  ten  years  after  he  had  submitted  his  memoir  to
the  Academy,  has  so  entirely  forgotten  his  own  results,  that  he
straightway  lays  down  the  maxim,  that  the  superficiality  of  the
second  transition  convolution  is  "  an  absolute  peculiar  cha-
racter of  man?  "

But  Gratiolet  tells  us  further,  "In  the  adult  state  the  ar-
rangement of  the  cerebral  convolutions  is  in  the  two  groups
(man  and  ape)  the  same,  and  in  this  respect  there  is  no  suffi-
cient ground  for  separating  man  from  the  animal.  But  in
the  ape  the  convolutions  of  the  spheno-temporal  lobe  appear
(during  the  development  of  the  embryo  m  utero)  first,  and
those  of  the  frontal  lobe  last ;  whilst  in  man  the  frontal  lobe
convolutions  appear  first,  and  the  spheno-temporal  convolutions
last.  Here,  therefore,  the  same  series  of  developments  are
from  alpha  to  omega,  and  there  from  omega  -to  alpha.  From
these  facts  it  necessarily  results  :  that  no  arrest  of  develop-
ment can  render  the  human  brain  more  resembling  that  of  the
ape  than  it  already  is.  This  result  is  perfectly  confirmed  by
the  brains  of  the  microcephali/'

Let  us  examine  these  alleged  facts.  The  first  relates  to  the
history  of  the  development  of  man  and  ape.  Is  this  difference
so  absolutely  great  ?  It  certainly  only  depends  on  the  circum-
stance that  in  man  the  frontal  lobe  is  more  developed,  that  the
formative  action  is  greater  in  that  region.  On  this  point
Wagner  justly  remarks,  "  However  much  we  may  adopt  Gra-
tiolet's  asserted  development  differences,  there  still  obtains
a  decided  similarity  (analogy  and  homology)  in  the  stages  of
cerebral  development  in  man  and  the  stages  of  development  in
the  lowest  monkeys  up  to  the  highest  anthropoid  apes.  It  is
true  that  the  frontal  lobes  in  man  have  already  in  the  first
stages  a  certain  peculiarity,  specially  in  the  early  formation  of
the  sulci.     But  there  is   a  decided  resemblance  between  the


LECTURE    VI.  107

nearly  smooth  hemispheres  in  the  fifth  month  of  the  human
foetus  and  the  unconvoluted  brains  of  the  small  clawed  mon-
keys. There  is  also  a  decided  resemblance  in  the  greater  sym-
metry and  scantiness  of  the  convolutions  of  both  hemispheres,
the  poor,  compact,  less  furrowed  and  undivided  frontal  convo-
lutions in  the  human  foetus  in  the  sixth  and  seventh  month  on
the  one  side,  and  a  number  of  superior  apes  up  to  the  anthro-
poid apes  on  the  other."

I  would  finally  ask  whether  this  development  law  has  been
traced  in  all  races  ?  As  far  as  I  am  aware,  no  anatomist  has
examined  Negro  and  Hottentot  embryos  of  the  fifth  and
seventh  month.  But  we  also  know  that  skull  and  brain  are
so  intimately  connected,  that  they  condition  each  other ;  we
know,  and  Gratiolet  has  pointed  it  out,  that  the  Negro  skull
follows,  as  regards  the  closing  of  the  sutures,  a  different  law
from  the  skull  of  the  white  man ;  that  the  frontal  and  coronal
sutures,  as  in  the  ape,  close  earlier  than  the  posterior  suture,
whilst  the  reverse  is  the  case  in  the  white  man.  Would  it
then  be  so  very  hazardous  to  assume  that  this  same  simian
development  of  the  skull  in  the  Negro  extends  also  to  the
brain  ?

The  second  point  refers  to  the  microcephali.  These  unfor-
tunate creatures  who,  according  to  Bischoff,  are  not  men,  will
just  prove  to  us  that  the  human  brain  preserves  its  type  under
all  circumstances.

The  cerebral  form  of  the  microcephali  consists  essentially  in
an  arrest  of  development,  which,  however,  does  not  equally
affect  the  whole  brain,  but  chiefly  the  frontal  lobes.  The
brain  of  all  microcephali  hitherto  examined  has  in  the  anterior
parts  the  same  type  as  that  of  the  anthropoid  apes,  being-
arrested  in  that  stage  "  in  which  the  embryonal  human  brain
exhibits  less  developed  convolutions  and  sulci,  as  is  always
observed  in  simian  brains."  In  the  posterior  part  the  micro-
cephalous brain  is  even  behind  the  simian  type.  The  cere-
bellum is  not  perfectly  covered  by  the  posterior  lobe,  whilst
in  all  apes  it  is  covered.  This  condition  reminds  us  of  the
brain  of  the  carnivora,  and  the  form  of  the  foetus  between  the
third  and  fourth  month.


168


LECTURE    VI.


We  are  now  told  that  the  projection  of  the  cerebellum  is
caused  by  the  defective  development  of  the  posterior  lobe,
which  is  a  decided  character  of  man.  "  In  the  brain  of  our
microcephalus,"  sajs  Wagner,  "it  may  in  our  cast  be  seen
that  the  posterior  and  parietal  lobes t  are  reduced;"  and  in
another  passage,  "  The  examination  of  seven  or  eight  micro-
cephalous brains  showed  that  the  atrophy  of  the  convolutions


Fig.  61.


Tlie  brain  of  an  idiot,  aged  26,  described  by  Theile.  The  length
of  the  hemispheres  is  reduced  to  the  same  length  as  that  of  the  chimpanzee,
fig.  58.  The  ventricle  on  the  right  side  is  laid  open.  The  description  is  the
same  as  in  figures  60  and  30.


cct,.


and  the  masses  chiefly  affected  the  posterior  lobes  and  the  pos-
terior portions  of  the  parietal  lobes."  "  The  microcephalic
brain  has  just  in  its  posterior  part  not  the  least  resemblance
to  the  Simian  brain ;  it  is  a  thoroughly  human  type,  but  atro-
phied."

Now,  gentlemen,  I  have  taken  the  trouble  to  subject  these
proportions  to  measurement,  and  as  I  had  no  materials  at


LECTURE    VI.  1G9

command  I  have  measured  M.  Wagner's  delineations.  I  have,
in  the  engraved  brains  of  a  microcephalia  and  a  chimpanzee,
measured  two  distances  on  the  left  side — the  first  from  the
apex  of  the  brain  to  the  vertical  fissure  which  separates  the
posterior  lobe,  the  second  from  the  above  fissure  to  the  end  of
the  posterior  lobe.  I  find  for  these  measures,  in  the  chim-
panzee :  length  of  the  anterior  lobe  =  76  millimetres ;  of  the
posterior  lobe  =  21  millimetres; — in  the  microcephalus  :  length
of  anterior  lobe  =  75  millimetres  ;  of  the  posterior  lobe  =20
millimetres.  I  further  find  from  Wagner's  measurements  of
the  cerebral  surface,  that  it  is  to  the  surface  of  the  posterior
lobe:  mean  in  eight  males  =  100  :  16'2;  that,  on  the  con-
trary, in  the  microcephalus,  the  proportion  is  =  100  :  68'5  ;
that,  therefore,  the  posterior  lobe  presents  a  surface  four  times
greater  in  the  microcephalus  than  in  the  adult  man ;  that,
therefore,  the  idiot  has  a  posterior  lobe  at  least  as  much  deve-
loped as  the  ape.

Result. — The  posterior  lobe  is  in  the  microcephalus  just  as
large  as  in  the  ape ;  the  idiot  has  in  proportion  to  the  cere-
brum exactly  as  large  a  posterior  lobe  as  the  chimpanzee.
The  idiot  has  not  the  deep  transversal  fissure,  nor  the  opercu-
lum of  the  chimpanzee,  but  no  more  has  the  devil's  ape,  and  it
cannot  be  said  that  the  human  embryo  could  lapse  into  the
chimpanzee,  whilst  its  posterior  lobe  resembles  that  of  the
devil's  ape  as  closely  as  one  egg  resembles  another.  Here,
therefore,  the  size  and  form  of  the  posterior  lobe  is  exactly  as
in  the  ape  ;  the  cerebrum,  the  anterior  and  posterior  lobes,
have  the  simian  type.

The  cerebellum  is  not  quite  in  the  same  condition,  as  it  pro-
jects behind.  But  this  only  results  from  its  size,  being  less
arrested  it  approaches  the  normal  human  cerebellum,  having
become  too  large  in  proportion  to  the  arrested  cerebrum.  This
also  can  be  shown  by  the  measurements  by  Wagner  of  the
brains  of  four  microcephali  and  an  old  orang.

Mean  of  the  4  Microcephali.  Orang.

Length  of  ccrebrurn      -         -         110"25         -  -  101

Breadth  of  cerebrum     -         -  79'25         -  -  10S

Breadth  of  cerebellum  -  78-7.".        -  -  86


170  LECTURE    VI.

In  short,  the  microcephalic  brain  has,  by  arrest  of  develop-
ment, which  advances  from  behind  in  a  forward  direction,
become  strikingly  analogous  in  the  general  arrangement  of
its  parts  to  the  simian  brain,  and  none  of  the  assertions  which
recognise  in  it  a  particular  type  are  consistent  with  truth.

The  difference  between  the  brain  of  the  microcephalus,  who
is  only  an  abnormally  formed  man,  and  that  of  the  lowest  race
we  know,  the  brain  of  a  bushman's  wife,  which  according  to
Gratiolet  would  have  produced  idiocy  in  a  white  man,  is  thus
greater  than  the  difference  between  the  brain  of  an  idiot  and
that  of  an  ape.  The  idiot  who  has  remained  stationery  in  a
primary  stage,  stands  nearer  to  the  ape  than  to  his  progenitor.
The  distance  which  his  brain  has  to  pass  to  perfect  human  de-
velopment is  greater  than  the  distance  it  has  passed  from  the
simian  stage.  Thus,  everywhere  we  find  only  variation,  inter-
mediate stages  which  certainly  do  not  all  lead  to  the  same
point,  but  run  to  and  fro  in  different  directions.


171


LECTURE     VII.

Comparison  of  Negro  and  German. — Bodily  proportions  of  the  Negro. —
Skull. — Pelvis. — Proportions  of  extremities  :  arm,  hand,  leg,  foot. —
Internal  Parts. — Brain. — Face. — Deviations  from  the  normal  type. —
Differences  of  Colour. — Insensibility  of  the  Negro. — Babies,  and  their
development. — Remarkable  change  about  the  period  of  puberty. — Mental
Inferiority  of  the  Negro. — Constancy  of  differences. — Eesemblance  to
the  Brute. — Intermediate  form  between  Man  and  Ape. — Microcephali. —
The  Aztecs.

Gentlemen, — By  a  scientific  investigation  of  the  facts,  we
have  arrived  at  the  conviction  that   essential  differences  be-
tween man  and  the  highest  anthropoid  apes  do  exist — differ-
ences sufficiently  important  to  induce  us  to  assign  to  man  a
distinct  rank  in  the  animal    kingdom,   but  by   no  means    so
great  as  to  obliterate  the  close  affinity  subsisting  between  man
and  the  animals  standing*  next  to  him.     We  have  in  these  in-
vestigations,  to  some  extent,  idealised  both  man  and  ape  with-
out noticing  the   differences  obtaining  within  each  of  these
groups,  and  have  only  endeavoured  to  establish  for  each  the
abstract  collective  conception  which  these  various  forms  com-
pose.    We  have  preferentially  paid  attention  to  the  heads  of
these  groups.     Among  the  apes  we  chiefly  noticed  the  anthro-
poid group,   and  among  the  human    group    the  white    race.
But  here  already  we   soon  detected  that  even  among  these
groups  there  appeared  forms  which,  on  comparison,  might  be
separated ;  and  that  as  among  the  superior  apes,  the  orang,
gorilla,  and  chimpanzee,  represent  three  types,  which  in  cer-
tain parts  of  their  organisation  approached  man's  structure,
and  in  others  deviate  from  it ;    so   there  appear  within  the
human  group  different  types,  which  in  some  points  approach
the  simian,  and  in  others  the  highest  human  type.  We  shall,  in
the  investigation  of  these  facts  adopt  the  same  method  we
have  hitherto  followed.    We  now  no  longer  oppose  the  generic


172  LECTURE    VII.

conception  a man"  to  that  of  "ape";  but  we  compare  two
well  defined  human  types  in  order  to  determine  the  characters
which  distinguish  these  typical  organisms.  We  select  for  this
purpose  the  two  extreme  human  types,  namely,  the  Negro  and
the  German,  and  comparing  them  side  by  side,  as  regards  all
their  peculiarities,  we  may  ascertain  the  degree  of  their  differ-
ential character.  The  result  thus  obtained  we  shall  in  our
next  lecture  compare  with  what  we  may  be  able  to  deduce
from  the  comparison  of  two  acknowledged  simian  types.  It
will  then  be  seen  whether  the  sum  of  the  differences  existing
between  two  human  races  is  greater  or  less  than  that  obtain-
ing between  two  kinds  of  apes,  the  separation  of  which  into
two  species  is  recognised  by  all  naturalists.  It  will  also  be
seen  whether  we  mete  by  the  same  measure,  by  assuming  in
apes  a  difference,  and  in  man  the  unity  of  species.

I  know  full  well  that  this  method  will  be  objected  to.  You
select,  it  will  be  said,  the  Negro  and  the  German,  who,  by
your  own  confession,  stand  at  the  extreme  limits  of  the  human
group,  and  you  will  probably  select  two  species  of  apes  which
are  closely  allied,  belonging  to  the  same  genus  and  only  sepa-
rated by  some  slight  variations.  We  should  not  be  surprised
if  you  find  greater  differences  between  Negro  and  German
than  between  the  two  apes.  I  reply  to  this  :  species  is  spe-
cies, and  there  is  but  one  zoological  science,  the  principles  of
which  must  apply  equally  to  man  and  ape,  and  what  in  one  of
these  types  is  called  species  must  not  in  the  other  be  called
race  or  variety.  If,  then,  the  differences  between  Negro  and
German  should  be  greater  than  those  between  the  capuchin
ape,  the  ccbus  apella  or  the  sajou,  it  would  follow  that  either
the  two  human  types  must,  like  those  of  apes,  belong  to  two
different  species,  or  the  two  acknowledged  different  species
of  apes  must  only  form  one  species.

Let  us  now  proceed  in  our  investigations.

The  Negro  is  on  the  average  shorter  than  the  German,  the
mean  length  of  his  body  being  61-(j<j  inches.  Six  Negro
skeletons  yielded  as  their  mean  length  160  centimetres;  whilst
as  many  European  skeletons  gave  above  172  centimetres.
There  are  no  doubt  athletic  forms  occurring  among  Negroes,


LECTURE    VII.  173

and  some  tribes  among  the  blacks,  just  as  among  the  whites,
are  distinguished  by  a  high  stature;  but  even  these  exception-
ally tall  Negroes  never  reach  the  length  of  the  tall  tribes
among  the  Germans  or  Anglo-Saxon  races,  and  no  such  giants
will  be  found  even  in  the  most  privileged  black  tribes,  as  are
occasionally  found  among  the  whites.

The  proportions  in  the  corporeal  structure  greatly  differ.
The  trunk  is  smaller  in  proportion  to  the  extremities,  specially
to  the  arm,  which  in  the  Negro  reaches  below  the  middle  of
the  femur.  Most  Negroes  can,  without  stooping,  reach  with
the  finger's  end  the  region  above  the  knee-cap.  The  neck  is
short,  the  cervical  muscles  very  powerful,  but  the  shoulders
are  narrower  and  less  strong  than  in  the  white.  There  is  a
certain  resemblance  in  the  form  of  the  neck  to  that  of  the
gorilla,  to  which  the  remarkable  development  of  the  cervical
muscles,  combined  with  the  shortness  and  curvature  of  this
part,  gives  something  of  the  aspect  of  a  bull's  neck.  Surely  it
is  for  this  reason  that  the  Negro  always  carries  his  burden  on
the  head,  rarely  upon  the  shoulders  or  back ;  and  it  is  for  this
reason  that  he,  like  a  ram,  uses  his  hard  skull  in  a  fight.  The
chest  is  narrow,  the  antero-posterior  is  almost  equal  to  the
transverse  diameter,  which  predominates  in  the  German;  the
belly  is  relaxed  and  pendulous,  and  the  navel  situated  nearer
the  symphysis  pubis  than  in  the  European.  Even  in  muscular
Negroes  the  arms  are  less  rotund,  the  hips  narrow,  the  thighs
laterally  compressed,  the  calves  lean.  The  Negro  rarely  stands
quite  upright,  the  knees  are  usually  bent,  and  the  legs  fre-
quently bandy.  Hands  and  feet  are  long,  narrow,  and  flat,
and  form  the  least  attractive  features  in  the  Negro  figure.

Most  of  these  external  characteristics  remind  us  irresistibly
of  the  ape  :  the  short  neck,  the  long  lean  limbs,  the  projecting
pendulous  belly — all  this  affords  a  glimmer  of  the  ape  beneath
the  human  envelope.  Such  similarities  are  equally  detected  on
examining  the  structure  of  individual  parts.  Commencing
with  the  skeleton,  we  find  that  the  bones  are  always  beautifully
white  and  hard,  almost  like  ivory.  The  angles  and  rims  are
always  more  marked,  and  the  contour  of  the  individual  bones
coarser  than  in  the  European.


174


LECTURE    VII.


The  skull  is  usually  elongated,  narrow  at  the  forehead,  the
central  line  of  the  vertex  rather  depressed,  the  parietal  sur-
faces flattened,  the  greatest  breadth  being  in  the  posterior
third.  The  Negro  skull  is  the  purest  type  of  the  long  skull
with  receding  forehead.  On  this  small  and  narrow  receding
frontal  bone  the  superciliary  arches  are  moderate,  the  frontal
eminences  little  marked,  the  nasal  process  broad,  correspond-
ing with  the  broad  flat  nose.  The  temporal  fossas  are  deep  in
front,  but  flat  and  lengthened  backwards.     On  looking  at  the

Fig.  62.     Skull  of  the  Negro,  top  view.


skull  from  above,  it  seems  as  if  it  had  been  compressed  behind
the  orbits.  The  parietal  bones  are  proportionately  much  larger
than  the  frontal  bone  and  the  occipital  squama,  which  are
usually  small  and  short.  The  sutures  are  usually  fine  but
small,  the  Wormian  bones,  which  in  the  European  are  fre-
quently found  in  the  lambdoid  suture,  are  rare  exceptions  in  the
Negro.  The  base  of  the  cranium  is  long,  the  occipital  foramen
rather  long  than  broad  and  situated  behind  the  centre  of  the
line  drawn  from  the  alveolar  margin  of  the  upper  jaw  to  the


LECTURE    VII.


175


most  projecting  rim  of  the  occiput.  The  basilar  bone  is  long
and  narrow,  but  the  mastoid  processes,  as  well  as  the  petrous
bone,  are  generally  strong  and  thick,  the  brims  of  the  occipital
foramen  rise  above  the  flattened  base.  The  facial  skull  is  re-
markably large  in  proportion  to  the  cerebral  skull.

Fig.  63.     Kaffir  Skull,  base.


The  orbits  are  wide,  funnel-shaped,  their  lower  margin  verv
thick,  rounded  and  projecting,  the  nasal  bones  short,  narrow,
almost  square,  the  nasal  apertures  broad,  with  rounded  angles,
the  nasal  spine  is  scarcely  indicated,  the  upper  jaws  drawn
outward,  usually  provided  with  knobs  corresponding  to  the
canine  teeth,  the  cheekbones  usually  form  prominent  angles.
According  to  Pruner-Bey,  we  may  distinguish  three  kinds  of
prognathism.  In  the  lowest  degree  the  alveolar  arch  is  elliptic
instead  of  parabolic,  outwardly  convex,  but  the  incisors  are
perpendicularly  inserted,  so  that  the  prognathism  is  confined
to  this  jaw.  In  the  second  degree  the  incisors  are  oblique,
but  are  in  the  same  line  with  the  jaw ;  whilst  in  the  third  de-
gree they  form  an  obtuse  angle  at  their  insertion  and  exhibit


176


LECTURE    VII.


projecting  edges.  But  in  no  case  is  the  prognathism  of  the
Negro  solely  confined  to  the  position  of  the  teeth  and  their  cavi-
ties, it  is  the  jaw  which  constantly  contributes  towards  the  pro-
jection of  the  muzzle.  An  interval,  though  of  small  extent,  is
not  rarely  seen  in  the  upper  jaw  between  the  incisors  and  the

Fig.  64.     Negro  Skull,  side  view.


canine  teeth.  Soemmering  found  in  some  Negro  skulls  a  sup-
plemental molar  in  the  upper  jaw;  two  anomalies,  which  to
our  knowledge,  have  never  been  observed  in  Germanic  skulls.
This  diastema  reminds  us  of  the  ape  in  general.  The  additional
molar  in  the  upper  jaw,  by  which  such  Negroes  have  thirty-
four  instead  of  thirty-two  teeth,  reminds  us  of  the  American
monkeys  in  particular,  which  have  thirty-six  teeth,  the  increase
extending  to  the  lower  jaw.

The  osseous  palate  is  not  only  absolutely  longer,  but  abso-
lutely broader  than  in  the  white,  and  these  circumstances  indi-
cate the  exceptionally  great  development  of  the  jaws  in  general.
The  zygomatic  arches  are  curved  and  wide,  so  that  the  tern-


LECTURE    VII.  177

poral  muscles,  presiding  over  the  motion  of  the  massive  lower
jaw,  and  filling1  the  whole  temporal  fossae,  are  larger  and  more
powerful  in  the  Negro  than  in  the  White.  The  lower  jaw  is,  in
fact,  far  more  powerful  and  massive  than  in  the  white;  the
chin  is  retracted,  broad,  and  rounded ;  the  horizontal  branch  of
the  lower  jaw  is  very  long ;  the  vertical  broad  and  short,  and
forming  an  obtuse  angle,  so  that  a  considerable  force  can  be
exerted.  The  size  of  the  teeth,  which  are  broad,  long,  and  of
glittering  whiteness,  corresponds  to  this.  The  substance  of
the  teeth  is,  moreover,  far  harder  than  in  the  European,  so
that  they  are  not  so  easily  used  up.  I  know  dentists,  who
partly  owe  their  reputation  to  the  circumstance  that  during
their  stay  in  America  they  procured  sacksfull  of  Negro  teeth,
with  which  they  supplied  the  gums  of  our  European  ladies, —
an  operation  which  could  be  the  more  easily  effected,  since  the
female  European  skull  resembles  much  more  the  Negro  skull
than  that  of  the  European  male.

On  further  examining  the  proportion  the  cerebral- skull  bears
to  the  facial-skull,  the  simiousness  in  the  Negro  is  exhibited  by
the  greater  development  of  what  may  be  called  apposition.  The
elongation  of  the  skull,  its  narrowness  in  the  anterior  part,
the  recession  of  the  forehead,  cause,  as  it  were,  the  brain  to
slide  back  from  the  face,  whence  the  roofs  of  the  orbits  appear
more  oblique  than  in  the  European,  and  resemble  the  form
seen  in  most  mammals.  The  funnel-shape  of  the  orbits  is
caused  by  this  formation.  The  internal  cranial  capacity  is,
despite  of  its  elongation,  considerably  smaller  than  in  the
German,  the  difference  amounting  to  nearly  100  cubic  centi-
metres or  more,  according  to  some  measurements  already
given.

The  facial  angle  of  Camper  amounts  in  the  Negro  to  70-75
deg.,  it  may  sink  to  65,  whilst  in  the  German  it  is  rarely
below  80,  and  frequently  a  few  degrees  higher.  In  the  Ger-
man the  saddle-angle  (epliippium)  is  134  deg.,  in  the  Negro,
138-150  ;  the  angle  on  the  root  of  the  nose,  in  the  German  6Q
deg.,  is  in  the  Negro  above  70  up  to  77.

On  examining  the  other  parts  of  the  skeleton,  we  are  at
once  struck  by  the  fact  that  the  S-shaped  curve  of  the  verte-

N


178


LECTURE    VII.


bral  column  is  less  distinct  in  the  Negro  than  in  the  White,
the  column  approaching  in  its  arrangement  that  of  the  ape.
The  pelvis  is  further  distinguished  by  its  length  and  narrow-
ness. All  the  diameters  of  the  small  pelvis,  through  which
the  head  of  the  child  must  pass,  are  considerably  smaller  in
the  Negro.  This  applies  specially  to  the  large  diameter,  and
we  may  say  that,  on  the  whole,  the  pelvis  of  the  Negress  (for
in  the  female  sex  this  part  of  the  pelvis  is  much  more  spacious
than  in  the  male),  as  regards  the  smallness  of  its  diameter,
resembles  the  pelvis  of  the  white  man.  This  is  not  surprising,
as  the  head  of  the  Negro  child  presents  already  at  birth  all
the  characters  of  its  race  in  the  narrow  and  elongated  head,
and  accordingly  we  find  the  narrow  pelvis  adapted  to  this
form.

The  pelvis  of  the  male  Negro,  compared  with  that  of
the  white  man,  appears  larger,  the  iliac  bones  not  broad  key-
shaped,  and  so  that  the  upper  parts  lean  on  the  sacrum  almost
like  the  shoulder  blades  on  the  superior  extremities.  The
length  of  the  extremities,  and  specially  the  proportions  of  the
separate  parts,  are  of  particular  importance.*


*  I  give  here  the  proportions  of  the  parts  composing  the  extremities,  as-
suming the  total  length  of  the  body  to  be  =  100,  and  expressing  the  length
of  the  component  parts  in  per  cents,  we  obtain  the  following  numbers,  ac-


cording  to  Burnieister's  measurements : —


MALES.

FEMALES.

Europeans.

Negroes.

Europeans.

Negroes.

Superior  extremity

Upper  arm

45-5

18-9

15-9

10-6

51-5

26-75

24-7

15-15

44-6

18-15

14-77

11-5

51-9

27-8

25-8

15

46
19
14-3
9-5
*49-2
27
23-8
14-3

48-8

20

16-7

11-7

51-7

28-3

26-1

15-7

Fore-arm

Hand

Inferior  extremity

Thigh

Leg

Foot

By  calculating  in  the  same  way,  Pruner-Bey's  measurements  of  the  skeleton,
we  obtain  the  following  corresponding  numbers,  which,  as  the  author  himself
observes,  lay  no  claim  to  perfect  correctness,  as  the  total  length  partly  de-
pends on  the  manner  in  which  the  skeletons  are  mounted.


LECTUKE    VII.


179


The  arm  by  itself  is  perhaps  somewhat  longer  than  that  of
the  European ;  still  there  are  several  Negro  tribes,  in  which
the  proportion  of  the  total  length  to  that  of  the  arm  is  nearly  the
same.  But  the  proportion  of  the  individual  parts  to  each  other
varies :  the  humerus  of  the  Negro  is  proportionately  shorter,
the  forearm  proportionally  longer  than  in  the  German.  This
proportion  is  in  the  subjoined  table  apparent  at  once,  and  this,
as  has  long  been  observed,  is  a  decided  approach  to  the  animal
type.  The  humerus  exceeds,  in  all  human  races  as  well  as  in
the  anthropoid  apes,  the  bones  of  the  forearm  in  length ;  but
this  predominance,  which  is  greatest  in  the  white  race,  dimi-
nishes in  the  black,  and  sinks  still  further  in  the  anthropoid
apes.  In  the  American  apes  the  predominance  is  already
reversed,  so  that  from  the  monkeys  through  the  whole  animal
kingdom  the  upper  arm  is  shorter  than  the  lower  arm.  Con-
nected with  this  is  a  greater  leanness  and  a  more  equalised  dis-
tribution of  the  muscular  fibres,  so  that  the  rotundity  of  the
upper  arm  partly  produced  by  the  development  of  the  biceps,
and  the  spindle-shape  of  the  forearm,  is  not  seen  in  the  Negro,
both  parts  presenting  in  their  whole  length  nearly  the  same
thickness.*


Euro-
peans.

Euro-
Negroes,    peans.  1

Negroes.

Euro-
peans. 2

Negroes.  3

Euro-
peans.

Humerus

Radius

Hand

19-58
14-78
10-94
27-29
22-45
14-51

19-54
15-32
11-58
27-94
23-80
15-40

107-83
103-37
101-62
105-10
100-17
102-04

The  corre-
sponding ne-
gro limb   is
everywhere
adopted  =
100.

100-2
96-5
94-47
97-68
96-43
94-3

100
78-7
59-3

100
85-2
54-8

100
75-5
52-9

100
82-5
52-9

Thigh  (femur)..
Leg  (tibia)
Foot

1  This  series  is  calculated  according  to  the  absolute  numbers  of  mea-
surement.

2  This  series  is  calculated  according  to  the  proportional  numbers  of  the
first  two  columns.

3  This  series  shows  the  proportions  of  the  middle  and  terminal  members
to  the  first  member,  which  is  assumed  =  100.


*  According  to  Aeby's  measurements,  the  details  of  which  are  not  yet
published,  the  individual  races  and  peoples  are  not  distinguished  as  regards
the  proportions  of  the  limbs  and  their  parts.  The  difference  in  length  of
the  forearm  of  the  European  and  the  Negro  does  not  amount  even  to  one
per  cent.,  and  even  this  slight  difference  may,  perhaps,  be  reduced  by  further
and  more  extended  measurements.


N  2


180  LECTURE    VII.

To  the  long  lean  forearm  is  joined  a  hand  which  has  a  deci-
dedly simious  character.  Though  the  stature  of  the  Negro  and
the  Negress  is  on  the  average  a  few  inches  below  that  of  the
White,  the  hand  of  both  sexes  is  always  absolutely,  mostly  an
inch  or  more  longer  than  that  of  the  white  race.  Besides  this,
the  hand  is  narrow,  the  fingers  long  and  thin,  the  cushion  of
the  third  phalanx  scarcely  perceptible,  the  nails  narrow,  flesh
coloured,  rounded  at  the  end,  but  much  arched.  The  palm  is
flat,  the  thumb-ball  scarcely  prominent,  the  coloration  lighter
than  on  the  dorsum.  The  thumb  is  narrow  and  long,  but  weak,
and  reaches  in  the  black  to  the  middle  of  the  second  finger
and  sometimes  beyond.  All  these  characters  of  the  hand  de-
cidedly approach  those  of  the  simian  hand,  which  is  equally
distinguished  by  narrowness,  long  fingers  with  curved  nails,
and  slight  difference  between  the  thumb  and  the  other  fingers.

The  disproportion  between  the  limbs  is  still  more  developed
in  the  Negress,  in  whom  the  arm  is  absolutely  longer  than  in
the  male,  whilst  the  upper  arm  is  absolutely  shorter.  I  will,
however,  not  dwell  on  this,  and  bearing  in  mind  that  between
the  two  sexes  of  the  same  species  differences  may  and  do  pre-
vail greater  than  between  the  same  sexes  of.  different  species,
I  shall  keep  to  the  male  sex.  We  may  be  sure  that,  whenever
we  perceive  an  approach  to  the  animal  type,  the  female  is
nearer  to  it  than  the  male,  hence  we  should  discover  a  greater
simious  resemblance  if  we  were  to  take  the  female  as  our
standard.

The  leg  exhibits  the  same  proportions  as  the  arm.  The  leg
of  the  Negro  is  proportionately  somewhat  longer  than  that  of
the  European ;  not  the  femur,  but  the  tibia  and  the  foot.
Hence  it  is  that  the  ends  of  the  fingers  seem  to  reach  farther
down  than  in  the  White,  as  the  knee  is,  from  the  shortness  of
the  thigh,  brought  nearer  the  trunk.  The  femoral  bones  as
well  as  the  fibula  seem  curved  outward,  so  that  the  knees  are
more  apart  from  each  other  than  in  the  White.  This  mainly
arises  from  the  narrowness  of  the  pelvis,  by  which  the  articu-
lating surfaces  of  the  heads  of  the  femoral  bones  approximate
the  central  axis  of  the  body.  There  is  also  a  peculiar  arrange-
ment in  the  muscles  of  the  legs,  which  appear  thin,  calfless,  and


LECTURE    VII.  181

laterally  compressed.  The  whole  leg  has  the  appearance  of  a
wooden  leg  covered  with  skin,  from  the  absence  of  fleshy
muscles.

The  foot  of  the  Negro,  says  Burrueister,  produces  a  dis-
agreeable impression.  Everything  in  it  is  ugly  :  the  flatness,
the  projecting  heel,  the  thick  fatty  cushion  in  the  inner
cavity,  the  spreading  toes.  Let  us  examine  these  characters.
We  have  seen  that  the  character  of  the  human  foot  lies  mainly
in  its  arched  structure,  in  the  predominance  of  the  metatarsus,
the  shortening  and  equal  direction  of  the  toes,  among  which
the  great  toe  is  remarkably  long,  but  not  like  the  thumb  op-
posable. In  every  public  bath  you  may  observe  the  following
marks  left  by  the  wet  feet :  a  round  spot  behind  correspond-
ing to  the  heel,  in  front  a  transverse  spot  almost  pear-shaped,
the  thick  part  inwards,  formed  by  the  ball.  Sometimes  there
is  a  small  line,  corresponding  to  the  external  margin  of  the
foot,  running  towards  the  heel-spot,  but  rarely  reaching  it ;
the  anterior,  or  ball-spot,  corresponds  to  the  articulations
between  the  toes  and  the  metatarsus ;  the  toes  in  standing
leave  no  marks,  but  do  so  in  progression.  The  whole  middle
part  of  the  foot  does  not  touch  the  ground.  Persons  with  flat
feet,  in  whom  the  middle  of  the  sole  touches  the  ground,  are.
bad  pedestrians,  and  are  rejected  as  recruits.  If  the  same  rule
were  applied  to  Negro  regiments,  the  Pacha  of  Egypt  could
not  have  placed  his  soldiers  at  the  disposal  of  the  Emperor  of
the  French  for  the  Mexican  Expedition.  The  Negro,  says  an
American  song,  cited  by  Burmeister,  makes  with  the  cavity  of
his  foot  a  hole  in  the  ground.  The  Negro  is  a  decided  flat-
foot,  which,  indeed,  may  be  seen  also  in  the  skeleton,  but
much  better  in  the  living  man,  as  the  fat  cushion  on  the  sole
not  only  fills  up  the  whole  cavity  but  projects  beyond  the
surface,  so  that  the  ball  and  the  heel  do  not  exactly  lie  on  the
same  plane  with  this  pad.  The  toes  of  the  foot  are  longer,
narrower,  more  moveable  and  spreading  than  in  the  European,
the  great  toe  somewhat  shorter  than  the  second,  but  long
and  narrow  and  more  removed,  so  that  here  we  have  aarain  a
decided  approach  to  the  form  of  a  hand.  But  as  we  have  seen
the  formation  of  a  foot  instead  of  a  hand  is  an  essential  human


182  LECTURE    VII.

structural  character,  and  it  is  specially  the  foot  of  the  go-
rilla, or  if  you  like,  the  posterior  hand,  which  also  in  other
respects  presents  a  decided  similarity  to  the  foot  of  the
Negro.

With  respect  to  the  internal  organs,  I  shall  chiefly  quote  the
remarks  of  Pruner-Bey,  who,  as  the  physician  of  the  Viceroy
of  Egypt,  has  ample  opportunities  for  observation.  "  Soemmer-
ing," says  Pruner, ' '  had  already  remarked  that  in  the  Negro  the
peripheral  nerves  are  very  large  and  thick  in  proportion  to  the
volume  of  the  brain.  This  fact  is  rendered  particularly  evident
by  the  excellent  preparation  of  M.  Jacquard  in  the  Paris
Museum.

"  The  narrow  and  elongated  brain  always  presents  on  the
surface  a  brown  coloration,  resulting  from  a  considerable  in-
jection of  venous  blood.  (Other  observers  attribute,  in  our
opinion  with  greater  probability,  this  dark  colour  to  a  greater
deposition  of  pigment  both  in  the  grey  matter  and  in  the
arachnoid  membrane) .  The  superficial  veins  are  very  thick ;
the  grey  substance  presents  internally  a  clear  brown  colora-
tion ;  the  white  substance  is  yellowish ;  the  cortical  grey  sub-
stance, which  covers  the  hemispheres,  is  less  thick  than  in
the  white.  Viewed  in  front  the  brain  presents  a  rounded
apex ;  viewed  from  above  the  parts  seem  coarser  and  less
manifold  than  in  the  white.  The  anterior  and  parietal  convo-
lutions seem  less  deep,  flattened,  excepting  the  third  convolu-
tion, which  rather  protrudes  on  the  frontal  surface.  On  tracing
the  convolutions  backwards,  we  find  fewer  of  those  parietal
folds  which  render  the  brain  of  the  white  a  perfect  labyrinth.
The  convolutions  on  the  middle  lobe  seem  raised,  but  massive
and  coarse ;  the  posterior  lobe  always  appeared  to  me  as  flat-
tened on  the  top  as  the  anterior  lobe  is  at  the  base.  In  the
side  view  it  is  specially  the  direction  of  the  Sylvian  fissure
which  has  engaged  the  attention  of  anatomists.  I  myself  have
never  been  able  to  detect  in  this  respect  an  essential  difference
between  the  brain  of  the  Negro  and  that  of  the  Egyptian,
though  I  placed  them  side  by  side.  The  part  above  the  corpus
callosum  is  comparatively  less  raised,  the  cerebellum  less  an-
gular than  in  the  European,  the  vermis  and  the  pineal  gland


LECTURE    VII.  183

are  very  large.     The  cerebral  mass  is  undoubtedly  firmer  and
more  consistent  in  the  Negro  than  in  the  White.

"  In  the  brain  of  the  Negro  the  central  gyri  are  like  those
in  a  foetus  of  seven  months,  the  secondary  are  still  less  marked.
By  its  rounded  apex  and  less  developed  posterior  lobe  the
Negro  brain  resembles  that  of  our  children,  and  by  the  protu-
berance of  the  parietal  lobe,  that  of  our  females.  The  shape
of  the  brain,  the  volume  of  the  vermis  and  of  the  pineal  gland,
assign  to  the  Negro  brain  a  place  by  the  side  of  that  of  a
white  child."

Huschke  mentions  some  other  differences.  The  Sylvian  and
Rolando  fissures  are  more  perpendicular  than  in  the  brain  of
the  European ;  the  anterior  lobes  are  shorter,  the  gyri  coarser,
the  chief  anterior  convolution  broad,  but  all  without  islands.
Huschke  arrives  at  the  conclusion  that  in  the  Negro  brain  both
the  cerebrum  and  the  cerebellum,  as  well  as  the  spinal  cord,
present  the  female  and  infantile  European  as  well  as  the
simious  type.  The  resemblance  of  the  Negro  brain  to  that  of
the  European  female  would  be  still  greater  if  they  were  not
distinguished,  the  former  by  its  length,  the  latter  by  its  breadth.

I  possess  no  Negro  brain,  and  I  must  confess  that  I  have  no
confidence  in  the  old  representations,  chiefly  for  this  reason  ;
that  the  convolutions,  so  important  in  our  researches,  are,  in
the  figures  of  old  authors,  such  as  Tiedemann  and  Soemmering,
not  very  faithfully  rendered.  But  on  examining  the  brain  of
the  Hottentot  Venus,  an  excellent  representation  of  which  is
given  by  Gratiolet,  and  which  by  breadth  and  shortness  de-
viates from  the  Negro  brain,  but  exhibits  in  other  respects  the
same  type ;  and  comparing  it  with  the  brain  of  a  German  and
that  of  an  anthropoid  ape  (see  fig.  65-67),  I  find  a  remarkable
resemblance  between  the  ape  and  the  lower  human  type,  spe-
cially with  reference  to  the  development  of  the  temporal  lobe.
The  simplicity  of  the  parallel  fissure,  the  arrangement  of  the
gyri,  accord  so  much  with  those  of  the  orang,  that  the  brain  of
this  bushwoman  would  certainly  be  rather  placed  by  the  side
of  the  ape  than  of  the  white  man,  were  there  not  a  decided  dif-
ference in  the  form  of  the  posterior  lobe  and  the  operculum  at
its  end.     The  frontal,  parietal,  and  temporal  lobes  are,  by  their


184


LECTURE    VII.


coarse  simple  gyri,  decidedly  simious,  still  the  brain  of  tliis
woman  belongs  to  the  human  type  by  the  size  of  the  hemi-
spheres and  the  character  of  the  posterior  lobe.

Fig.  65.     Profile  of  the  Brain  of  the  Hottentot  Venus.


ir.M.


Fig.  66.     Profile  of  the  Brain  of  Gauss.


&


Of  the  other  internal  organs  Pruner-Bey's  remarks  are  as
follows  : —

"  The  eyeball  is  at  least  as  large,  if  not  larger,  than  in  the


LECTURE    VII.  185

European ;  the  cornea  comparatively  small  and  flattened ;  the
pigment  abundant ;  the  iris  dark  brown  mixed  with  yellow  ;  the
retina  very  firm.  The  glandular  system  is  much  developed,
both  upon  the  skin  and  in  the  internal  mucous  membrane  ;
hence  the  intestinal  canal  has  an  uneven  aspect,  specially  in  the
stomach  and  the  large  intestines.  The  mucous  membrane  is  very

Fig.  67.     Profile  of  the  Brain  of  the  Orang.


r.M.


The  description  of  the  figures  is  the  same  as  in  figs.  31,  32.

thick  and  fatty.  All  the  abdominal  glands  are  large,  specially
the  liver  and  the  supra-renal  glands.  These  organs  seem
gorged  with  venous  blood.  The  bladder  lies  higher  up  than
in  the  European ;  the  large  seminal  vesicles  were  always,  even
in  sections  made  shortly  after  death,  filled  with  a  turbid  grey-
ish fluid..  The  penis  is  always  disproportionally  large.  The
blood  is  always  thick,  black,  and  glutinous ;  it  never  is  in
bleeding  projected  in  an  arch,  but  adheres  to  the  vessel,  whilst
the  serum  is  more  or  less  dark  yellow.  The  lungs  are  compa-
ratively less  expanded  than  the  abdominal  organs,  they  are
frequently  filled  with  a  black  deposit,  and  are  pressed  back  by
the  stomach,  liver,  and  spleen.  Black  pigment  spots  are  fre-
quently met  with  on  the  tongue,  the  palate,  and  the  conjunc-
tiva,  as   well  as  in  the  mucous  membrane  of   the  intestinal


186  LECTURE    VII.

canal.  The  fat,  as  well  as  all  fibrous  and  cellular  tissues,  the
periosteum,  and  the  conjunctiva,  have  always  a  yellow  colora-
tion. The  mucous  membranes  of  the  mouth,  nose,  etc.,  are  of
a  cherry  red,  but  the  lips  of  a  bluish  colour.  Excepting  the
masseter,  the  aural  and  the  laryngeal  muscles,  the  development
of  the  other  muscles  is  not  proportioned  to  the  weight  of  the
bones.  In  colour  they  are  never  so  bright  red  as  in  the  Euro-
pean, but  rather  yellowish  or  brownish.

"  The  face  of  the  Negro  is  flat  and  narrow,  frequently
pointed  downwards,  whilst  the  cheek  bones  and  the  posterior
parts  of  the  cheek  covered  by  the  masseters  are  prominent,  so
that  it  seems  as  if  the  cheeks  had  been  compressed  in  front.
The  aperture  of  the  eye  is  narrow,  horizontal,  and  both  eyes
are  wide  apart.  From  this  depressed  and  wide  nasal  root
proceeds  a  broad,  flat,  upturned  nose,  the  apertures  of  which
are  so  placed  that  viewed  from  below  they  seem  to  run  parallel
with  the  aperture  of  the  eyes.  The  ears  are  remarkably  small,
the  posterior  margin  much  curved,  the  lobules  small,  but  ap-
parently thick  and  cartilaginous.  The  superior  part  of  the
face,  with  its  retreating  narrow  forehead,  low  vertex,  and  pro-
minent orbital  margins,  resembles  perhaps  more  the  simian
face  than  the  lower  part  with  the  projecting  teeth,  the  white
even  of  which  is  the  more  marked  from  the  contrast  with  the
brown  or  violet  lips  and  the  black  face."

I  know  well  enough  that  the  description  of  the  Negro-type,
as  here  given,  is  that  which,  so  to  say,  represents  the  purest
type,  and  that  there  are  many  Negro  tribes  in  which  some  of
these  characters  are  less  distinct.  Pruner-Bey  summarises  these
deviations  as  follows  : — "We  must  admit,"  he  says,  "that  the
inferior  orbital  margins  are  frequently  narrow  and  retreating ;
that  the  nose  becomes  longer  and  more  prominent ;  that  the
lips,  turned  up  in  some  tribes,  are  only  full  in  others;  that  pro-
gnathism diminishes,  without  however  disappearing  entirely,
that  the  aperture  of  the  eye  becomes  wider;  that  the  hair,
short  and  woolly  in  most,  grows  longer;  that  the  transverse
diameter  of  the  chest  becomes  enlarged  ;  that  even  the  pelvis,
though  much  more  rarely,  acquires  more  rounded  outlines ;
that  the  limbs  acquire  more  harmonious  proportions ;  that  the


LECTURE    VII.  187

hips,  thighs,  and  legs  become  more  fleshy  and  the  foot  more
arched ;  but  as  regards  the  crowning  of  the  work,  i.  c,  the
skull,  specially  the  cerebral  skull,  all  the  variations  in  the
Negro  race  remain  and  are  confined  within  limits  which
deserve  our  attention.  In  the  Arian  race  the  skull  presents
three  fundamental  types  :  the  elongated  form  (producing  in
some  exceptional  cases  slight  prognathism)  which  approaches
the  boundary  of  the  Negro-type ;  the  short  and  round  form,
approaching  the  Turanian  race  ;  and,  finally,  the  typically
beautiful  oval  form,  which  seems  to  have  resulted  from  a  com-
bination of  the  two  former.  Nothing  like  this  is  to  be  found
in  the  Negro ;  his  skull  is,  and  remains,  elongated,  it  is  ellipti-
cal or  cuneiform,  but  never  round;  the  facial  skull  may  ap-
proach the  pyramidal  form  by  a  greater  distance  between  the
cheek-bones,  and  may  in  this  respect  resemble  that  of  the
Kaffirs  and  of  the  Bechuanas,  but  no  more.  Still,  there  is  in
Gall's  collection  the  skull  of  an  Austrian,  the  outlines  of  which
correspond  to  the  Negro  type,*  and  Meigs  mentions  a  Negro
skull  in  Morton's  collection,  which,  apart  from  a  slight  pro-
gnathism, might  be  taken  for  an  European  skull,  as  this  emi-
nent craniologist  himself  admitted.  But  assuming  that  these
exceptional  skulls  belonged  to  individuals  of  pure  descent,  there
would  still  remain  sufficient  characters — both  in  the  living  and
the  skeleton — to  distinguish  such  individuals  from  the  Negro,
the  White,  or  from  any  other  race.

"  This  also  applies  to  the  regular  Caucasian  features,  with
which  some  travellers  have  endowed  certain  Negro  peoples.
Among  many  thousand  Negroes  who  have  come  under  my  own
observation,  there  was  not  one  who  could  lay  claim  to  it.

"  Similar  variations  may  also  occur  as  regards  the  colour  of
the  skin.  The  deep  velvety  black  is  very  rarely  met  with.
There  are  gradations  from  brown  to  grey,  which  latter  colour
imparts  to  the  individuals  a  cadaverous  aspect.  Though  the
pigment  of  the  Negro  seems  to  be  the  same  substance  as  the
colouring  matter  in  freckles  and  the  tanned  skin  of  the  Euro-


*  In  the  anatomical  collection  of  Bern  there  is  the  skull  of  a  murderer,
which,  on  a  superficial  view,  appears  to  me  to  possess  more  of  the  Negro
type  than  any  white  skull  I  have  yet  seen. — C.  V.


188  LECTURE    VII.

pean,  it  cannot  be  asserted  that  an  European  can  be  so  browned
by  the  sun,  by  exposure,  or  by  affections  of  the  liver,  as  to  ac-
quire even  a  light  Negro  skin.  The  equalised  colour  both  in
the  covered  as  well  as  in  the  exposed  parts,  independently  of
other  characters,  makes  a  distinction  between  them  very  easy."

As  regards  the  acuteness  of  the  senses,  the  Negro  stands
far  below  the  white  race,  and  by  no  means  confirms  the  opinion
which  attributes  to  savages  and  peoples  living  in  a  state  of
nature  more  acute  senses.  The  eyes  are  frequently  rather
dim,  and  the  flattened  cornea  seems  rather  to  favour  long-
sightedness than  short-sightedness.  Smell,  taste,  or  hearing
do  not  seem  highly  developed.  The  Negro,  however,  shows
great  talent  for  plain  cookery  and  vulgar  music,  so  that  in
America  nearly  all  the  cooks  and  musicians  are  men  of  colour.
Touch  is  not  very  delicate,  the  finger  cushions  being  less  de-
veloped in  the  black  ;  "  but,"  says  Primer,  "  the  most  re-
markable phenomenon  relates  to  coencesthesis,  as  regards  the
Negroes  apparent  insensibility  to  pain.  We  have  never  seen
the  least  spontaneous  expression  of  pain  ;  in  the  hospitals  we
see  Negroes  suffering  from  the  gravest  diseases  cowering  on
their  couches  without  taking  any  notice  of  the  attending  phy-
sicians. As  a  slave,  he  is  more  communicative,  without,  how-
ever, exhibiting  greater  sensibility  to  pain.  Mishaps,  or  bad
treatment  will  draw  from  the  Negress,  the  child  and  even  the
adult  Negro,  an  abundant  flow  of  tears,  but  physical  pain  never.
The  Negro  frequently  resists  surgical  operations,  but  having
once  agreed  to  submit,  he  fixes  his  eye  on  the  instrument  and
the  hand  of  the  surgeon  without  the  least  mark  of  pain  or  im-
patience, though  his  lips  become  blanched  and  the  perspiration
runs  down  his  body  during  the  operation.  As  we  see,  the
Negro  is  a  born  stoic,  certainly  more  from  disposition  than
from  habit  or  education."

Even  with  regard  to  the  development  of  the  Negro  child,  I
can  do  no  better  than  follow  this  experienced  Egyptian  physi-
cian. "  The  Negro  child,"  says  Pruner-Bey,  "  is  born  without
prognathism,  but  with  a  totality  of  features  which,  though
characteristic  for  the  soft  parts,  are  not  yet  expressed  in  the
skull.     The  Negro,  the  Hottentot,  the  Australian,  the  New


LECTURE    VII.  189

Caledonian,  do  riot,  with  regard  to  the  osseous  system,  ex-
hibit the  differences  which  arise  subsequently.*  The  new-born
Negro  child  has  not  the  colour  of  its  parents ;  it  is  reddish
nut-brown,  and  the  redness  is  less  vivid  than  in  the  case  of  a
new-born  white  child.  The  colour  soon  becomes  slate-grey,  and
more  or  less  rapidly  corresponds  to  that  of  the  parents,  ac-
cording to  the  surrounding  media  among  which  the  child  grows
up.  In  the  Sudan  the  development  of  the  colouring  matter  is
generally  finished  within  a  year,  in  Egypt  within  three  years.
The  hair  of  the  Negro  child  is  at  first  rather  chestnut-brown
than  black,  it  is  straight,  and  only  curled  at  the  ends.  I  have
not  been  able  exactly  to  determine  the  extent  of  the  fontanelles,
but  there  does  not  seem  to  exist  a  measurable  difference  in
this  respect  from  those  of  the  white  child."  (Burmeister  re-
marks concerning  the  differences  in  new-born  children.  "  The
hair  is  not  crisp  or  black,  but  is  of  a  chestnut  colour,  and  has  a
silky  fineness.  In  growing,  it  becomes  gradually  darker,  and
more  crisp,  until  the  time  the  child  learns  to  walk,  when  the
hair  is  perfectly  woolly.  This  reminds  me  of  the  down  of
young  birds  in  relation  to  the  feathers  of  the  hen.")

11  The  first  dentition,"  continues  Pruner-Bey,  ' '  commences
nearly  at  the  same  time  as  with  us ;  I  have,  however,  also  ob-
served cases  of  premature,  as  well  as  of  retarded  dentition.
Lactation  lasts  never  less  than  two  years.  On  the  completion
of  the  first  dentition,  we  perceive  already  in  the  skull  the
peculiar  characters  :  the  raised  central  line  in  the  forehead,
the  retreating  chin,  the  slightly  projected  upper  jaw,  the  flat
nose,  the  dazzling  whiteness  of  the  teeth,  the  prominent  occi-
put. The  young  Negro  possesses,  however,  a  pleasant  phy-
siognomy up  to  puberty,  which  commences  in  girls  betAveen
the  tenth  and  thirteenth,  and  in  boys  between  the  thirteenth


*  This  opinion  of  Pruner-Bey  seems  to  me  hazardous,  and  not  founded  on
sufficient  observation.  I  have  had  no  opportunity  of  examining  a  new-born
Negro-child ;  but  in  Blumenbach's  Decas  Craniorum  there  is  such  a  figure,
which,  at  the  first  glance,  shows  the  great  length  and  narrowness  of  the
cranium,  as  well  as  prognathous  jaws.  When  we  take  into  consideration  the
narrowness  of  the  pelvis  of  the  Negress,  it  must  follow  that  the  skull  of  the
newborn  Negro  should  present  dimensions  different  from  that  of  the  Arian
child.


190  LECTURE    VII.

and  fifteenth  year.  This  is  followed  by  a  rapid  transformation
in  the  forms  and  proportions  of  the  skeleton.  The  transforma-
tion proceeds  differently  in  the  cranium  and  the  face ;  the  jaws
predominate  without  an  adequate  compensation  in  the  cranium.
It  is  not  meant  that  there  is  exactly  an  arrest  of  development ;
but  that  the  race  difference  consists  in  the  different  growth  of
individual  parts.  Whilst  in  the  white  man  the  gradual  increase
of  the  jaws  and  the  facial  bones  is  not  only  equalled  but  ex-
ceeded by  the  development  or  rather  enlargement  of  the  brain,
and  specially  of  the  anterior  lobes ;  the  reverse  is  the  case  in
the  Negro.  The  muscles  subservient  to  animal  life  cause  a
compression  on  the  sides,  which  is  but  little  resisted  by  the
brain.  In  this  way  the  cranium  obtains  the  shape  previously
described.  As  everything  in  the  organism  is  harmonious,  this
theory  of  cranial  formation  may  be  contested,  but  the  mode  in
which  the  sutures  close  furnishes  an  important  commentary  on
these  phenomena.  The  central  frontal  suture  closes  in  the
Negro  in  early  youth,  as  well  as  the  parietal  part  of  the  coronal
suture.*  With  advancing  age  the  central  portion  of  the  coro-
nal suture,  the  saggital  suture,  and  all  parietal  sutures  close,
nearly  simultaneously,  as  I  have  observed  in  skulls  from  East
Africa.  The  lambdoid  suture  remains  open  the  longest,  speci-
ally at  the  apex.  At  the  base  of  the  cranium  we  find,  on  the
contrary,  the  suture  between  the  sphenoid  and  the  occipital
bone  still  open,  and  the  suture  between  the  incisors  is  not
only  seen  in  the  Negro  child,  but  in  many  old  Negro  skulls.
Generally  speaking,  the  sutures  in  the  Negress  close  sooner
than  in  the  Negro.

"Prognathism  may, perhaps,  be  partly  considered  as  the  result
of  the  action  of  the  lower  jaw  on  the  concentric  arch  of  the  upper
jaw.  At  any  rate,  the  mode  of  its  direction  towards  the  temporal
bone  contributes  to  it ;  for  I  have  found  this  formation  princi-
pally in  races  where  the  sockets  for  the  lower  jaw  are  broad
and  less  deep,  whilst  the  heads  are  flat  or  at  least  elliptical.
This  agrees  with  a  greater  or  lesser  harmony  of  the  rows  of

*  In  the  numerous  skulls  I  have  examined,  there  occurred  but  a  single
exception.  The  progress  of  the  closure  of  the  sutures  seems  to  me  to  differ
generally  according  to  the  form  of  the  long  or  short  skulls.


LECTURE    VII.  191

teetli.  Such  a  condition  facilitates  the  movements  in  a  forward
direction  ;  whilst  in  skulls,  in  which  the  sockets  are  deep  and
narrow,  the  motion  is  more  vertical.  I  am  fully  aware  that  this
explanation  is  not  very  satisfactory,  and  I  ask  myself  whether
prognathism  is  not  rather  the  expression  of  a  relapse  into  the
animal  form."

(Thus  far  Pruner-Bey.  On  our  part  we  have  no  doubt  the
latter  explanation  is  the  correct.  Everything  is  in  harmony  in
an  organism,  and  we  might  as  well  say,  the  socket  and  the
head  of  the  bone  must  be  flat  because  the  upper  jaw  projects
and  the  lower  jaw  is  long,  as  to  assume  the  reverse.  More-
over, carnivora  whose  jaws  move  only  in  a  perpendicular  direc-
tion, possess  very  elliptical  articulating  heads  of  the  lower  jaw.)

It  is  undeniable  that  the  sudden  metamorphosis  which  at  the
time  of  puberty  takes  place  in  the  Negro,  is  not  only  inti-
mately connected  with  psychical  development,  but  is  a  repe-
tition of  the  phenomena  occurring  in  the  anthropoid  apes.  In
them  also  the  skull  presents,  until  the  second  dentition,  a
remarkable  resemblance  to  the  human  skull,  the  cerebral  por-
tion being  arched  and  the  jaws  but  little  projecting.  From
that  time  the  cerebral  skull  remains  stationary,  the  internal
capacity  no  way  increases ;  the  ridges  and  crests  only  are
developed  together  with  the  muzzle,  which  projects  from  under
the  cranium  until  it  acquires  the  form  seen  in  old  apes.  And
with  this  the  mental  development  proceeds  pari  passu.  Young
orangs  and  chimpanzees  are  good-natured,  amiable,  intelligent
beings,  very  apt  to  learn  and  become  civilised.  After  the
transformation  they  are  obstinate  savage  beasts,  incapable  of
any  improvement.

And  so  it  is  with  the  Negro.  The  Negro-child  is  not,  as
regards  the  intellectual  capacities,  behind  the  white  child.  All
observers  agree  that  they  are  as  droll  in  their  games,  as  docile
and  as  intelligent  as  white  children.  Where  their  education  is
attended  to,  and  where  they  are  not,  as  in  the  American  Slave
States,  intentionally  brought  up  like  cattle,  it  is  found  that  the
Negro  children  in  the  schools,  not  only  equal  but  even  surpass
the  white  children  in  docility  and  apprehension.  But  no  sooner
do  they  reach  the  fatal  period  of  puberty  than,  with  the  closure


192  LECTURE    VII.

of  the  sutures  and  the  projection  of  the  jaws,  the  same  process
takes  place  as  in  the  ape.  The  intellectual  faculties  remain
stationary,  and  the  individual — as  well  as  the  race — is  inca-
pable of  any  further  progress.

The  grown  up  Negro  partakes,  as  regards  his  intellectual
faculties,  of  the  nature  of  the  child,  the  female,  and  the  senile
White.  He  manifests  a  propensity  to  pleasure,  music,  dancing,
physical  enjoyments,  and  imitation,  while  his  inconstancy  of
impressions  and  all  the  feelings  are  those  of  the  child.  Like
the  child,  the  Negro  has  no  soaring  imagination,  but  he  peoples
surrounding  nature,  and  endows  even  lifeless  things  with
human  or  supernatural  powers.  He  makes  himself  a  Fetish  of
a  piece  of  wood,  and  believes  that  the  ape  remains  dumb  lest
he  should  be  compelled  to  work.  The  general  rule  of  the
slaveholder  is,  that  slaves  must  be  treated  like  neglected  and
badly  brought  up  children.  The  Negro  resembles  the  female
in  his  love  to  children,  his  family,  and  his  cabin ;  he  resembles
the  old  man  in  his  indolence,  apathy,  and  his  obstinacy.
Temperate  in  common  things,  the  Negro  becomes  intemperate
if  not  kept  within  certain  bounds.  He  knows  not  steady
work,  cares  little  for  the  future ;  but  his  great  imitative  in-
stinct enables  him  to  become  a  skilful  workman  and  artistic
imitator.  In  his  native  country  the  Negro  is  shepherd  or
agriculturist ;  some  tribes  understand  working  metals  ;  others
carry  on  trade,  not  without  cunning.  Some  tribes  have
founded  states,  possessing  a  peculiar  organisation ;  but,  as  to
the  rest,  we  may  boldly  assert  that  the  whole  race  has,  neither
in  the  past  nor  in  the  present,  performed  anything  tending  to
the  progress  of  humanity  or  worthy  of  preservation.  As  a
proof  in  favour  of  the  artistic  and  scientific  capacity  of  the
Negro,  we  find  cited  in  nearly  all  works  the  instance  of  Mr.
Lille  GeofFroy  of  Martinique,  an  engineer  and  mathematician
and  corresponding  member  of  the  French  Academy.  The  fact
is,  that  the  mathematical  performances  of  the  above  gentleman
were  of  such  a  nature  that,  had  he  been  born  in  Germany  of
white  parents,  he  might,  perhaps,  have  been  qualified  to  be
mathematical  teacher  in  a  middle-class  school,  or  engineer  at
a  railway ;  but  having  been  born  in  Martinique  of  coloured


LECTURE    Vll.  193

parents,  lie  shone  like  a  one-eyed  man  among  the  totally  blind.
M.  Lille  Geoffroy,  besides,  was  not  a  pure  Negro,  but  a  Mulatto.

Having  thus,  in  our  investigation  regarding  the  differences
between  Negro  and  White,  shown  that  there  are  certain  con-
stant and  easily  detected  distinctive  characters  ;  and  having
further  seen  that  the  differences  are  in  the  Negro  mostly  re-
ducible to  an  animal  or  simious  resemblance,  there  arise  now
two  important  questions  to  be  discussed.

The  first  question  refers  to  the  permanence  of  the  differences.
Is  it  possible  that  these  may  become  obliterated  by  any  influ-
ences in  nature,  that  is  to  say,  without  an  intermixture  of
races,  so  that  the  Negro  may  by  elevating  influences  become
metamorphosed  into  a  White,  or  the  White  by  depressing
causes  be  transformed  into  a  Negro  ?

The  second  question  refers  to  animal  resemblance.  Are  we
able  to  point  out  the  gradations  which  bridge  over  the  gulf
which  still  exists  between  the  Negro  and  the  ape,  and  follow
them  step  by  step  from  the  anthropoid  ape  to  the  Negro,  and
from  the  Negro  to  the  white  man  ?

As  regards  the  first  question,  I  shall  have  an  opportunity
of  discussing  it   in  connection  with  other  phenomena,  which
will  prove  that  in   the  various    races   there  is   an   immanent
fixed    character,  which    by    external    influences    is    liable  -to
change  with  certain  limits  only.     As  far  as  our  observations
extend,  we  are  unable  to  say  that  the  changes  have  essentially
altered  the  character.     The  Egyptian  monuments,  which  show
us   the  Negro   as  he  was  thousands  of  years  ago,  contempo-
raneous, probably,  with  the  Biblical  Adam,  contain  excellent
representations  of  the  present  Negro  ;  and  yet  the  black  race
has  since  that  time  existed  in  that  country  by  the   side  of
another  type — the  genuine  Egyptian,  which  has  also  remained
unchanged.     With  the  exception  of  the  tanning  of  the  skin,
the  white  man  in  Africa  never  exhibits  an   approach  to  the
Negro-type.     Again,  in  America,  where  the  black  race  has  for
some  time  been  acclimatised,  we  find  that  a  somewhat  lighter
colour  in   the  North  is  the  only  effect  which  the  climate  has
produced  in  more  than  a  hundred  years.     As  far  as  we  can
trace,  neither  these  nor  other  races  have  undergone  greater

o


194  LECTURE    VII.

changes  than  other  species  of  animals  transplanted  to  other
regions,  and  must,  therefore,  according  to  principles  at  present
prevalent,  be  looked  upon  as  different  species  with  permanent
types.  The  case  is  altered  when  viewed  from  a  higher  stand-
point, as  we  shall  show  in  the  sequel.

With  regard  to  the  second  question,  an  answer  resting  upon
satisfactory  observations  is  as  yet  impossible.

It  is  only  a  few  years  since  the  gorilla,  of  whose  existence
no  one  knew,  was  discovered  in  the  forests  of  Western  Africa.
This  is,  as  regards  the  form  of  the  hands  and  feet,  the  most
anthropoid  among  the  three  great  tailless  apes;  whilst  as  regards
the  cranium  and  brain,  it  stands  lower  than  the  orang  and  the
chimpanzee.  The  possibility  of  finding  apes  which,  as  regards
cerebral  and  cranial  structure,  approach  man  as  the  gorilla  in
the  structure  of  the  limbs,  cannot  be  denied,  but  in  the  absence
d(f  the  fact  it  would  be  foolish  to  form  any  conclusions.  It  is  less
probable  that  human  races  will  be  found  which  approach  the
ape  more  than  the  lowest  existing  human  races.  The  globe
has  been  too  much  explored  to  countenance  such  hopes.  The
desire  of  society  drives  the  savage  from  his  hiding  places,  into
which  the  ape  retreats.  The  ape  avoids  discovery,  man  seeks  it.

There  may,  however,  have  existed  intermediate  forms ,  which
in  the  lapse  of  time  have  become  extinct.  We  shall  have  to
speak  on  this  point  when  treating  of  petrifactions,  the  fossil
man,  and  the  primitive  condition  of  the  human  race,  which
reaches  further  back  than  history,  tradition,  and  mythology.
This  much  we  may  here  observe,  that  fossil  remains  of  monkeys
have  been  found,  which  at  first  were  considered  as  belonging
to  man ;  and  that,  on  the  other  hand,  a  cranium  has  been
found  in  the  Neander- Valley  near  Diisseldorf,  which  has  more
of  the  simian  type  than  any  other  known  race-skull.  But
though  this  is  at  present  merely  an  indication,  we  may  hope
that  other  discoveries  will  be  made,  the  more  so  as  it  is  only
within  the  last  few  years  that  Europe  has  been  well  explored.

Where  the  normal  form  leaves  us  in  the  lurch  as  regards  our
investigations,  we  have  a  right  to  avail  ourselves  of  abnormal
forms,  where  we  may  reap  a  rich  harvest.  I  do  not  hesitate  to
uphold  against  Bischoff  and  Wagner,  and  even  against  Johannes


LECTURE    VII.  195

Miiller,  that  microcephali  and  bom  idiots  present  as  perfect  a
series  from  man  to  the  ape  as  may  be  wished  for ;  and  I  con-
sider it  my  duty  here  to  make  an  addition  to  a  previous  state-
ment concerning  the  cerebral  structure  of  these  unfortunates.

I  shall  keep,  with  reference  to  the  skull,  to  the  description  by
Theile  of  a  twenty-six  year  old  idiot,  whilst  as  regards  the
psychical  phenomena,  the  classical  treatise  of  Leubuscher,  on
the  so-called  Aztecs,  furnishes  us  with  excellent  materials.  The
drawing  of  the  skull  of  an  idiot  I  take  from  Owen,  as  the  base
is  also  given,  agrees  in  all  but  a  few  details  with  that  given  by
Theile  of  his  "  ape-man".  I  have  compared  about  twenty
cases  of  congenital  idiocy,  which  must  not  be  confounded  with
cretinism,  and  I  find  the  following  results.

This  congenital  idiocy  is  manifestly  an  arrested  brain  deve-
lopment chiefly  affecting  the  anterior  portion.  The  form  of
the  cranium  adapts  itself  to  that  of  the  arrested  brain.  The
development  of  such  individuals  proceeds  very  slowly,  they
learn  to  walk  only  in  the  fifth  or  sixth  year,  their  brothers  and
sisters  are  frequently  healthy,  and  so  are  the  parents,  though
perhaps  not  distinguished  by  great  intellectuality.  In  some
cases,  however,  there  are  in  the  same  family  besides  healthy
also  several  idiotic  children,  the  malformation  being  in  such
cases  due  to  some  hidden  cause.  These  idiots  are  frequently,
though  not  always,  dwarfs  like  the  Aztecs.  The  stooping  walk,
with  their  curved  knees,  not  unlike  the  walk  of  the  ape,  makes
them  appear  less  tall  than  they  really  are.  Among  the  adult
idiots,  of  whom  we  possess  a  minute  description,  some  are  of
average  size,  as  the  two  Johns  examined  by  J.  Miiller,  and  the
two  idiots  of  Gottingen  and  Jena  described  by  Wagner  and
Theile.  Such  unfortunates  usually  die  early.  Of  twenty  cases,
however,  which  I  noticed,  eight  reached  the  twentieth  year — a
proportion  not  very  unfavourable.

The  impression  produced  by  these  individuals  is  decidedly
simious,  so  that  the  authorities  even  describe  it  as  such.  The
arms  seem  disproportionately  long,  the  legs  short  and  weak.
The  head  is  that  of  the  ape ;  the  skull  cap  is  covered  with
thick  woolly  hair ;  the  forehead  nearly  absent ;  the  eyes  stare
from  projecting  orbital  margins  ;   the  nostrils  are  wide  ;    the

0  2


196


LECTURE    VII.


lower  portion  of  the  face  muzzle-shaped  ;  the  teeth  obliquely
set,  frequently  more  oblique  than  should  be,  owing  to  the  large
size  of  the  tongue.

Fig.  68.     Negro  skull,  side  view.


Fig.  69.     Idiot  skull,  side  view.


As  regards  the  head  particularly,  it  is  disproportionately
small  in  comparison  with  the  body,  the  diminution  chiefly
affecting  the  cranium  proper.  Viewed  in  profile,  the  face  oc-
cupies as  large  a  space  as  the  cranium.  The  large  osseous
pad  above  the  root  of  the  nose,  the  projecting  jaws,  the  facial


LECTURE    VII.


197


angle  of  about  53-56  deg. ;  all  these  characters  are  decidedly
simious.  When  viewed  from  below,  the  large  occipital  fo-
ramen  situated  farther  back,   the  long  parabolic  palate,  the

Fig.  70.     Kaffir  skull,  base.


Fig.  71.     Idiot  skull,  base.


198  LECTURE    VII.

open  basilar  suture,  as  well  as  the  traces  (in  Owen's  skull)  of
the  intermaxillary  suture,  all  these  strike  us  at  the  first  glance
as  animal  characters.

Fig.  72.     Chimpanzee  skull,  side  view.


We  need  only  place  the  skulls  of  the  Negro,  chimpanzee
and  idiot  side  by  side,  to  show  that  the  idiot  holds  in  every
respect  an  intermediate  place  between  them.  The  only  human
characters  which  the  idiot  shows  in  his  skull  are  the  gapless
serried  teeth,  and  the  somewhat  projecting  chin.  The  closure
of  the  sutures  must  by  no  means  be  considered  as  the  cause  of
the  arrested  cerebral  development.  In  most  old  idiots  the
sutures  of  the  upper  surface  are  still  movable,  those  on  the
sides  are  frequently  closed,  whilst  at  the  base  they  are  open  as
in  the  ape.  The  occiput  is  sometimes  square,  at  times  round,
but  very  large  compared  to  the  forehead  ;  the  internal  pro-
cesses of  the  skull  bear  so  far  an  infantile  character,  from  their
being  rounded,  never  sharply  angular.

We  may,  therefore,  summarise  the  idiotic  forms  by  stating,
that  in  their  brains  and  skulls  the  resemblance  to  the  human
standard  has  been  diminished  by  the  arrested  development  of
the  anterior  cerebral  lobes,  and  that  only  the  secondary  human
character,  the  serried  set  of  teeth  and  the  projecting  chin,  have
been  preserved.  If  a  fossil  microcephalic  skull  were  found,
without  a  lower  jaw  and  an  upper  row  of  teeth,  every  naturalist*

*  Query. — Editor.


LECTURE    VII.


199


would  at  once  declare  it  to  be  the  cranium  of  an  ajpe,  as  in  such
a  mutilated  skull  there  would  not  be  found  the  least  character-
istic mark  which  would  justify  an  opposite  inference.


Fig.  73.


Chimpanzee  skull,  viewed  from  below.


We  possess  the  measurements  of  the  two  so-called  Aztecs —
the  Mulatto  dwarfs  ;  the  boy  then  being  about  sixteen  or
seventeen,  the  girl  thirteen  to  fourteen  years  old.  I  have  cal-
culated these  measurements  in  the  same  way  as  those  given  of
the  Negro  and  European,  and  having  compared  them  with  two
anthropoid  apes,  the  chimpanzee  and  the  orang,  obtained  the
following  values.     The  proportion  of  the  length  is


Chiraj

tanzee.

Orang.

Aztecs.

Old.

Young.

Old

Young.

Boy.

Girl.

Of  the  vertebral  column  to

that  of  the  arm  =:  100. . .

136-5

163-5

158-5

167-7

119-7

115-1

Of  the  vertebral  column  to

that  of  the  leg  =  100...

98-8

115-2

90-4

96-7

122-8

115-3

Of  the  upper  arm  to  that

of  the  forearm  =  100...

93

85-7

102

99

66-7

67-7

Of  the  upper  arm  to  that

of  the  hand  — 100

77-5

87

78-1

82

52-8

62-5

Of  the  thigh  to   that   of

the  leg  —  100

76-5

78-9

81-8

81-4

102-5

108-1

Of  the   thigh   to  that   of

the  foot—  100

74-2

76-3

97-5

109-3

50

48-7

Of  the  arm  to  that  of  the

leg  — 100

72-4

70-6

57

57-6

102-5

104-4

200  LECTURE    VII.

The  human  character  of  the  Aztecs  is  clearly  shown  by  the
proportional  length  of  the  vertebral  column  to  that  of  the
limbs  in  general,  as  well  as  from  the  relative  proportions  of
the  limbs  to  each  other ;  the  arm  is  proportionally  shorter,  the
leg  longer.  Even  in  its  parts  the  arm  exhibits  the  human
type,  not  so  the  leg.  The  thigh  is  remarkably  small  compared
with  the  leg,  the  length  of  which  exceeds  that  of  the  anthro-
poid, and  resembles  that  of  the  inferior  apes.  The  same
proportion  which,  from  the  predominance  of  the  cerebellum,
almost  places  the  idiot  among  the  apes,  obtains  also  here  as
regards  the  shortness  of  the  thigh  and  the  length  of  the  leg.

Here,  therefore,  we  find  human  and  animal  character  so  in-
termixed, that  they  might  be  taken  as  the  results  of  a  hybrid
production.

Let  us  now  cast  a  glance  at  the  vital  phenomena  of  these
miserable  beings.  There  are  scarcely  any  sexual  manifesta-
tions, the  parts  remaining  in  the  infantile  condition ;  still  there
are  some  idiots  with  normal  generative  organs.  The  move-
ments are  rapid  but  unsteady,  the  walk  is  tripping.  Many  of
them  never  learn  properly  to  use  their  hands.  There  is  in
them  a  restless  activity ;  their  attention  is  easily  excited  and
as  quickly  obliterated ;  memory  is  defective ;  they  are  fond  of
play,  but  caunot  share  the  amusements  of  other  children,  as
they  are  unable  to  learn  them ;  they  are  tolerated  like  domes-
tic animals.  Most  of  them  manifest  their  wants  by  shrill  sounds,
which  their  attendants  understand,  just  as  the  hunter  distin-
guishes the  cries  of  animals  and  the  gestures  of  his  dogs.
Most  of  them  cannot  acquire  articulate  language.  The  Aztecs
pronounced  some  few  words  they  had  learned.  Mulleins  micro-
cephalus,  in  whom  the  arrest  of  development  does  not  appear
to  have  been  so  decided  as  in  most  others,  could  pronounce
some  articulate  words,  and  even  simple  sentences,  such  as
"  Koppe  dute  well !"     (My  head  aches.)

Leubuscher  says  of  the  Aztecs  : — "  They  possess  memory
for  such  things  as  greatly  excited  their  attention,  for  persons
who  have  been  long  about  them.  When  I  measured  them  the
boy  recollected  earlier  proceedings  of  this  kind.  .  .  .  After  the
lapse  of  eight  days  he  well  recollected  the  previous  process,  so


LECTURE    VII.  201

that  on  my  questioning  him  what  I  had  done,  he  described
the  lines  round  his  head.  But  having  interrupted  my  visits
for  several  days  he  had  forgotten  me  and  all  the  rest,  as  had
also  the  girl.  The  extent  of  their  intellectual  capacity  does  not
surpass  that  of  an  eighteen  months'  child,  and,  may  be,  falls
below  it.  What  we  are  accustomed  to  call  ideas  they  probably  do
not  possess,  as  this  degree  of  intellectual  development  can  only
be  formed  upon  the  basis  of  individual  self-consciousness."

E,.  Wagner  is  of  opinion  that  a  minute  analysis  of  the  psy-
chical phenomena  in  various  idiots  might  yield  important  re-
sults as  regards  intellectual  activity  in  general.  There  is  no
doubt  about  this,  nor  that  some  of  these  idiots  may,  by  careful
training,  be  raised  in  the  intellectual  scale.  This  much  re-
sults, however,  from  the  known  facts,  that  the  intellectual
capacity  is  closely  connected  with  the  cranial  and  cerebral
structure,  and  that  it  never  reached  a  stage  admitting  of  a
well  articulated  language.  Most  of  these  idiots  are  unable  to
articulate  words,  some  few  succeed  in  pronouncing  simple
sentences.  But  so  do  the  parrot  and  the  raven,  which  ani-
mals too,  both  by  tone  and  pronunciation,  render  their  words
significant.  A  domestic  animal  can,  like  the  idiot,  be  trained
to  cleanliness,  in  this  respect  they  are  therefore  equal.  There
is  no  trace  of  such  decided  human  characters,  as  ideas,  a
higher  intelligence,  and  abstraction — not  even  of  such  primi-
tive notions  of  good  and  evil,  nor  of  those  original  moral
qualities  as  induce  some  modern  French  authorities  to
claim  for  man  a  separate  kingdom.  In  many  respects  the
idiots  stand  below  the  animal :  they  are  more  helpless  than
the  latter,  are  unable  to  procure  food  for  themselves,  aud  to
preserve  their  life  without  assistance.  Their  whole  appearance
is  simious.  The  deficient  forehead,  the  protruding,  glossy,
rolling  eyes,  the  projecting  muzzle,  the  stooping  posture,
the  long  arms  (Gottingen  idiot)  and  short  legs,  the  minute
analogies  in  the  cranial  and  cerebral  structure,  the  restless-
ness, the  spasmodic  twitches,  the  shrillness  of  the  notes  of
pleasure  or  anger, — who  does  not  here  detect  the  ape  ?

There  are  no  doubt  individual  human  characters,  to  which  I
add  the  distribution  of  the  hair,  the  form  of  the  hands  and


202  LECTURE    VII.

feet — but  we  have  not  asserted  that  the  microcephalus  is
actually  an  ape  ;  only  that,  if  these  few  characters  which  mani-
fest the  human  type  were  wanting,  nothing  would  remain  to
distinguish  the  idiot  from  the  ape.  When  then  Wagner
from  these  few  characters  infers  "  that  the  human  type  is
manifested  in  all  corporeal  organs  of  microcephalia"  he  is
"  running  a-muck"  against  scientifically  demonstrated  facts.
There  is  here  undoubtedly  a  mixture  of  human  and  simious  cha-
racter, the  latter  being  produced  by  an  arrested  development  of
the  foetus  in  utero,  forming  thus  an  intermediate  stage  between
ape  and  man,  produced  by  the  progress  of  the  laws  of  the
development  of  human  genus.  If  now  it  be  possible  that  man
by  arrest  of  development  may  approximate  the  ape,  the  for-
mative law  must  be  the  same  for  both ;  and  so  we  cannot  deny
the  possibility  that  just  as  man  may  by  arrest  of  development
sink  down  to  the  ape,  so  may  the  ape  by  a  progressive  de-
velopment approximate  to  man.


203


LECTUEE     VIII.

Comparative  Examination  of  two  species  of  monkey,  Cebus  albifrons  and
Cebus  apella. — Skull  and  Brain. — Other  parts. — Affinities  in  Nature. —
Families. — Definition  of  Species,  Variety,  and  Race. — Inbreeding  of
Eaces  and  Species. — Mutability  of  Species. — Classification  of  Mankind.
— Relation  to  the  Ape. — The  Human  Kingdom  according  to  Geoffroy
Saint-Hilaire  and  Quatrefages. — Objections.

Gentlemen, — It  has  ever  been  the  custom  to  mete  with  a
different  measure  according  to  the  object  to  be  measured  and
the  disposition  of  the  measurer.  Sooner  or  later,  however,
the  fraud,  even  if  it  be  a  pious  fraud,  is  detected  and  refuted.
This  is  more  readily  effected  in  science,  which  acknowledges
no  other  authority  but  its  own  laws  resting  upon  well  observed
facts.  My  object  in  this  lecture  is  to  apply  to  apes  the  same
method  which  we  have  followed  as  regards  man.  We  shall
select  for  this  purpose  two  species  of  apes  genei^ally  acknow-
ledged as  such,  and  shall  examine  their  distinctive  characters.
As  already  observed  in  a  previous  lecture,  it  is  perfectly  indif-
ferent what  species  are  selected,  as,  considering  the  great
analogy  in  the  physical  structure  of  man  and  ape,  the  charac-
ters of  the  same  parts  are  to  be  considered.  Had  we  descended
to  the  lower  orders  and  classes  of  the  animal  kingdom,  it
might  have  been  objected  that  the  great  modifications  in
structure  would  require  the  application  of  different  principles.
This  does  not  apply  to  the  ape,  and  if  it  can  be  shown  that
such  and  such  characters  force  us  to  assume  different  species  in
apes,  the  same  characters  must  lead  to  the  assumption  of  dif-
ferent species  in  the  human  group.

By  mere  accident,  and  not  by  choice,  I  have  come  into  pos-
session of  two  species  of  the  American  Cebus  (Rollaffen) .  This
genus  is  very  numerous  ;  it  is  spread  over  the  whole  South


204


LECTURE    VIII.


American  continent  inhabited  by  simious  tribes,  and  exhibits
such  a  variety  in  form,  that  it  is  difficult  to  distinguish  the
different  species  merely  by  their  external  appearance.  The
cebus  presents  in  this  respect  difficulties  not  unlike  those  at-
tending the  investigation  of  mankind,  since  every  species  ex-
hibits such  a  diversity  in  form,  that  by  some  they  are  considered

Fig.  74.     Skull  of  the  brown  Sajou  {Cebus  apetta),  top  view.


as  separate  species,  by  others  as  varieties  or  races.  It  is,
however,  our  object  not  only  to  ascertain  whether  the  cebus
albifrons  (Weisstirnige  Rollaffe)  is  only  a  variety  of  the  common
Capuchin  ape,  or  a  separate  species  ;  but  also  to  discover  by
what  characters  this  species  may  be  distinguished  from  the
common  brown  sajou  {cebus  apella).  That  they  belong  to
different   species   is   undoubted.      The   brown   and   the  white


LECTURE    VIII.


205


fronted  cebus  belong  to  two  different  divisions  of  the  genus
cebus.  The  first,  according  to  Girbel,  belongs  to  the  species
possessing  five  ribless  lumbar  vertebrae,  a  compact  structure,
a  thick  globular  head,  powerful  teeth,  large  canines,  short
limbs  and  tail ;  whilst  the  white  fronted  Capuchin  ape  belongs
to  the  species  possessing  six  ribless  lumbar  vertebras,  small

Fig.  75.     Skull  of  the  Cebus  albifrons,  top  view.


canine  teeth,  and  a  slender  structure.  We  thus  find  here
more  than  a  simple  specific  difference,  so  that  some  natural-
ists felt  justified  in  establishing  two  sub-genera ;  neverthe-
less I  selected  these  two  species  simply  because  in  the  Geneva
Collection  I  found  two  male  skulls  of  the  same  age  and
size.

The  Roll-apes  (Cebus)  possess  a  long  hairy  roll-tail.      The


206  LECTURE    VIII.

body  is  long  and  slender,  the  limbs  powerful,  the  eyes  small,
the  muzzle  short,  the  head  roundish,  so  that  among  all
American  apes  they  most  resemble  man — a  resemblance  which
is  increased  by  their  having  around  the  face  tufts  of  hair
resembling  whiskers  and  beard.  It  is  only  the  fiat  nose  which
mars  the  human  likeness.  The  four  hands  are  equally  deve-
loped, the  hand  itself  is  long  and  narrow,  but  the  thumb  of  the
posterior  hand  is  longer  and  stronger  than  that  of  the  anterior.
The  dental  system  consists  of  four  chisel-shaped  incisors,  two
large  projecting  and  somewhat  curved  canine  teeth,  presenting
deep  grooves  on  the  inner  side,  and  twelve  molars  in  each  jaw,
so  that  the  number  of  teeth  amounts  to  thirty-six.  The  molars
diminish  in  breadth  backwards,  so  that  the  hindmost  is  small
and  almost  rudimentary  compared  with  the  other.

We  shall  first  examine  the  external  aspect.  The  brown
Cebus  reaches  to  the  size  of  a  cat,  and  presents  in  middle  age
a  yellowish  brown  colour,  somewhat  brighter  on  the  belly,
whilst  the  vertex,  the  cheeks,  forearm,  hands  and  legs  are  dark
brown  or  black.  The  face  has  a  tinge  of  violet,  the  eyebrows
are  long,  on  the  short  forehead  is  brown  hair  so  stiff  that  the
animal  seems  on  a  side  view  to  be  provided  with  two  horns.
The  ear  is  covered  with  long  soft  hair  ;  the  beard  is  of  a  paler
shade.

The  Cebus  albifrons  was  met  with  by  Humboldt  near  the
cataracts  of  the  Orinoco,  and  is  by  most  zoologists  considered
a  mere  variety  of  the  Capuchin  monkey.  The  face  is  bluish
grey,  forehead  and  eyemargins  white,  the  body  dark  grey  on
the  back,  of  a  lighter  shade  on  the  thorax  and  belly,  the  limbs
yellowish -white,  the  vertex  brownish -grey,  so  that  the  animal
seems  to  wear  a  cap  on  the  head.  The  ears  are  very  hairy.
The  common  Capuchin  monkey,  to  which  this  variety  is  said
to  belong,  greatly  resembles  the  Cebus  as  regards  colour.

The  skull  presents  in  both  species  exactly  the  same  shape.
Viewed  from  above,  we  see  an  elongated  oval,  having  its
greatest  breadth  in  the  posterior  part  corresponding  to  the
large  occipital  foramen.  We  must  here  certainly  make  allow-
ance for  the  projection  of  the  mastoid  processes,  the  upper  brims
of  which  are  continuations  of  those  of  the  zygomatic  arches.


LECTURE    VIII.


207


I  shall  presently  give   the   exact  measurements,  here  I  shall
only  notice  a  few  characters.

On  viewing  the  skull  from  above,  that  of  the  brown  Cebus  is
distinguished  by  the  rising  of  the  temporal  fossa  above  the
Fig.  7G.     Skull  of  Cebus  apella,  side  view.


Fig.  77.     Skull  of  Cebus  albifrons,  side  view.


margin  of  the  temporal  line,  passing  behind  the  whole  length
of  the  superior  orbital  brim,  and  producing  in  the  middle  of
the  forehead  a  depression  which  causes  the  orbital  ridge  to


208


LECTURE    VIII.


project.  The  temporal  line  is  thereby  less  distinct  and  runs
nearly  parallel  with  the  central  line,  until  with  a  sudden  curve
it  reaches  the  point  of  junction  between  the  lambdoid  and
temporo-occipital  sutures.  In  the  white-fronted  Cebus,  on  the
contrary,  the  temporal  line  proceeds  from  about  the  middle  of
the  superior  oi'bital  margin,  and  rises  in  a  curve  towards  the
central  line,    so   that  between  the  two  temporal  lines  there

Fig.  78.     Base  of  skull  of  the  Brown  Cebus.


remains  only  a  space  of  a  centimetre,  it  then  turns  abruptly  to
roach  the  same  point  as  in  the  former  species.  In  this  way
there  is  formed  on  the  forehead  a  triangular  space,  smooth  and
somewhat  arched,   differing  considerably   from   the   depressed


LECTUEE    VIII.


209


forehead  of  the  brown  Cebus.  As  regards  the  rest,  the  shape
of  the  cranial  bones  and  the  course  of  the  sutures  is  the  same
in  both.

On  viewing  the  skull  from  the  side,  scarcely  auy  differ-
ences are  noticed  excepting  those  mentioned.  The  posterior
projection  of  the  temporal  bone,  which,  so  to  speak,  continues


Fig.


79.     Skull  of  Cebus  albifrons,  base.


the  zygomatic  process,  is  less  prominent  in  the  brown  Cebus,
but  shows  behind  it  a  deeper  depression  than  in  the  albifrons.
The  zygomatic  arch  is  higher  and  thinner  in  the  brown  Cebus ;
in  the  albifrons  rounder  and  thicker.  The  skull  of  the  albi-
frons is  more  equally  arched,  whilst  it  is  somewhat  depressed
in  the  middle  in  the  brown  Cebus  ;  in  the  latter  the  occipital
squama  is  nearly  horizontal,  in  the  foi'mer  it  inclines  inwards.

P


210


LECTURE    VIII.


On  examining  the  skulls  in  front,  the  orbits  of  the  brown
Cebus  appear  larger  and  wider ;  in  the  albifrons  they  are
rounder,  smaller,  and  the  margins  thicker  and  more  massive.
The  maxillary  region,  specially  around  the  nose,  appears  nar-
rower in  the  brown  Cebus,  and  rather  compressed  behind  the
projecting  root  of  the  canine  tooth,  which  has  a  downward
direction ;  whilst  in  the  albifrons  it  is  oblique,  thicker,  but  less
long  and  sharp.  The  two  characteristic  grooves  on  the  inner
side  of  the  canine  tooth  are  in  the  brown  Cebus  deeper  than
in  the  other  species.

On  viewing  the  base  of  the  skull  (see  figs.  78,  79),  it  seems
in  the  albifrons  on  the  whole  broader,  more  massive,  and  better
developed  in  all  its  parts  than  in  the  brown  Cebus,  in  which
the  palate  is  longer  and  narrower,  the  front  teeth  more  pro-
jecting, and  the  zygomatic  arch  more  curved.  No  difference  is
seen  in  the  arrangement  or  form  of  the  molar  teeth,  but  the
petrous  bones  are  more  prominent  in  the  albifrons.

TABLE    OF    MEASUREMENTS    OF    THE    CEBUS    IN    MILLIMETERS.


1

2

3

4

5

6

7
8

9
10

11

12

13

14

15
16
17

18


Longitudinal  circumference  from  posterior  margin  of

occipital  foramen  magnum  to  alveolar  margin
From  anterior  margin  of  occipital  foramen  to  nasal

suture  ......

Prom  posterior  brim  of  occipital  foramen  to  alveolar

margin  ------

From  anterior  brim  of  occipital  foramen  to  alveolar

margin  ------

From  anterior  brim  of  occipital  foramen  to  basilar

suture  ------

From  anterior  brim  of  occipital  foramen  to  posterior

margin  of  palate      -
Length  of  palate         -----
Greatest  length  of  skull  from  alveolar  margin  to

occiput  ------

Length  from  nasal  suture  to  occiput

Greatest  breadth  of  a  vertical  plane  through  the

centre  of  the  occipital  foramen      -
Transverse  diameter  on  the  posterior  margin  of  the

zygomatic  arch        -
Transverse  diameter  on  the  lowest  point  of  the  tem-
poral fossa    ------

Distance  between  the  zygomatic  arches

Distance  between  the  inner  margins  of  the  external

auditories     ------

Breadth  of  palate        -

Greatest  diameter  passing  between  the  eyes

Breadth  of  the  septum  -

Height  of  nasal  aperture       -


Albifrons.

Apella.

.    150

148

54

52

72-5

73

60-5

60

15

13

31

32

29

28

90

91-5

77

74

54

51

51

50

40

41

62

57

31

32

19

18

42

44

5

5

17

11

LECTURE    VIII.  211

You  perceive  from  these  details,  that  the  skulls  of  these  two
species,  Avhich  some  would  distinguish  as  two  sub-genera,  are
much  more  like  each  other  than  the  skulls  of  most  human
races  and  even  tribes.  We  should,  in  fact,  detect  much  wider
differences  between  the  dolichocephalous  skull  of  a  Swede  and
the  brachycephalous  cranium  of  a  Eussian  ;  between  that  of  a
Hottentot  or  an  Austral  Negro  ;  between  that  of  a  Irokese
and  a  Botocudo ;  though  all  these  various  tribes  are  all  in-
cluded in  one  race.  We  are  even  able  to  point  out  greater
differences  between  individuals  belonging  to  the  same  stock,
and  it  would  be  easy  for  me  to  show  by  the  juxtaposition  of
the  skulls  of  a  Graubiinden,  Zurich,  or  Bernese  man,  that
these  skulls  of  Swiss  tribes  differ  more  from  each  other  than
those  of  the  apes  we  have  described.  Even  an  inexperienced
individual  would  find  it  easier  to  separate  these  human  skulls
in  a  collection  than  to  assign  the  above  ape- skulls  to  different
species.

No  skeletons  of  the  two  species  of  apes  are  at  my  disposal,
I  cannot  therefore  furnish  you  with  the  measurements  of  the
limbs  and  other  parts.  According  to  Giebel  the  skeleton  of
the  Cebus  is  distinguished  by  greater  solidity,  that  of  the
large  Capuchin  monkey  being  more  elegant  and  slender.  This
is  seen  in  the  ribs,  the  lumbar  vertebras,  pelvis,  and  sternum,
in  short,  in  all  parts  of  the  skeleton.  Besides  this  the  Cebus
has  only  five  lumbar  and  twenty-four  caudal  vertebras,  whilst
the  Capuchin  has  six  lumbar  and  twenty-five  caudal  vertebras,
corresponding  with  the  greater  length  of  the  tail.

Having  no  internal  parts  at  hand,  I  give  two  brains  from
Gratiolet's  well  known  treatise.  These  brains  belong  to  a
simian  group  of  the  old  world,  which  has  by  zoologists  been
divided  into  various  subgenera.

The  Macacus  silenus,  which  inhabits  Ceylon,  has  a  short  tail,
whilst  the  Oercopithecus  cethiops,  originally  probably  a  native  of
Senegambia,  has  a  very  long  tail.  I  have  given  also  side  views
of  the  brains,  and  have  in  the  first  figure  turned  back  the
operculum  of  the  posterior  lobe,  in  order  to  show  the  transition
gyri  beneath  it.  I  shall  not  enter  into  any  details,  as  even  a
superficial  inspection  shows  that  the  form  of  the  brain  and  its

p2


212


LECTURE    VIIT.


parts,  the  arrangement  of  the  lobes,  of  the  convolutions  and
their  sulci  are  so  similar,  as  to  amount  only  to  individual  dif-
ferences. In  the  cercopithecus  the  margins  of  the  gyri  are  a
little  more  notched  and  arched,  so  that  there  exists  an  indica-

Fig.  80.     Brain  of  Wanderoo  (Macacus  Silenus),  top  view.


Fig.  81.     Cercopithecus  cethiops,  top  view  (Tlie  Mangabey).


tion  of  greater  complexity  in  the  convolutions,  which  is  further
developed  in  other  apes.     Apart  from  this  the  differences  are


LECTURE    VIII.


213


so  slight,  that  they  might  in  so  delicate  an  organ  be  ascribed
more  or  less  to  a  difference  in  observation.  Now  compare  with
these  the  brains  of  the  Hottentot  Venus  and  the  German  as
given  before.     We  may  leave  the  inference  to  common  sense.

Fig.  82.     Brain  of  Macacus  Silenus,  side  view.


0


Fig.  83.     Brain  of  Cercopithecus  cethiops,  side  view.


The  description  of  the  figs.  80-83  is  the  same  as  in  the  preceding  brain  figures.

It  is  unnecessary  to  say  more  on  this  subject.  Any  person
may  select  any  two  well  characterised  races  of  mankind,  and
having  by  comparison  formed  a  scheme,  let  him  proceed  in  the
same  way  in  the  comparison  of  two  well  marked  species  of
apes.  The  unprejudiced  observer  cannot  fail  to  find,  as  we
have  done,  that  the  sum  of  the  differences  between  two  species
of  apes,  is  in  no  case  greater,  and  in  many  cases  much  less


214  LECTURE    VIII.

than  those  obtaining  between  two  races  of  mankind,  and  he
will  arrive  at  the  conclusion  that  the  races  of  mankind  must
either  be  considered  as  different  species,  or  the  species  of  apes
must  be  designated  races.  But  what  is  to  become  of  systematic
zoology,  if  the  long  and  short-tailed  species  of  apes,  differing
so  much  in  external  form  that  they  have  even  been  divided
into  genera,  are  to  constitute  only  varieties  or  races  ?  All
systematic  natural  history  would  go  to  ruin,  and  all  simiada3,
from  the  lowest  ouistiti  up  to  the  gorilla,  would  be  fused  into
one  whirlpool,  which  would  swallow  up  man  and  all  his  races.

But  we  must  now  pause  before  proceeding  further.  You
may  justly  complain  that  I  have  as  yet  given  no  definition  of
species  or  genus,  of  race  or  variety,  and  that,  therefore,  you
are  perfectly  indifferent,  whether  the  systemisers  look  upon  wolf
and  dog,  ass  and  horse,  Negro  and  White,  as  so  many  genera,
species,  races  or  varieties,  provided  the  analogies  or  differ-
ences are  so  well  established  as  to  enable  us  to  distinguish  the
respective  animals.

In  some  respects  it  might  matter  very  little  whether  Negro
and  Mongol  are  placed  in  the  same  chest  labelled  "Man;"  for
the  classification  of  the  animal  kingdom  is  nothing  but  an
arrangement  of  animals  in  chests,  drawers,  and  pigeon-holes.
But  the  question  acquires  importance  if  by  the  expression
species  we  understand  a  permanent  type  with  fixed  limits,
which  may  admit  of  an  ideal  but  not  of  a  material  relation  to
other  species.  It  is  therefore  of  importance  for  us  to  establish
whether  any  particular  form  we  meet  with  constitutes  an
independant  species  or  not.

We  can  at  first  only  examine  such  animal  forms  individu-
ally ;  but  the  results  we  may  obtain  are  insufficient,  as  each
individual  has  its  own  more  or  less  marked  peculiarity.  We
are  therefore  necessarily  led,  on  the  one  hand,  to  search  for  the
sum  of  analogies,  and  on  the  other,  for  the  differences,  and
to  infer  from  the  results  the  degrees  of  affinity  subsisting
between  the  individual  beings.

Nature  points  out  such  affinities.  Family  bonds  exist  as
much  in  the  animal  kingdom  as  in  the  human  species,  and  arc
frequently  in  the  former  stronger  and  more  lasting  than  in  the


LECTURE    VIII.  215

latter.  In  most  cases,  it  is  true,  this  family  life  in  animals
extends  only  to  one  generation ;  for  when  the  young  are  able
to  support  themselves,  they  separate  from  the  parents,  and  the
family  connection  is  severed.  Every  year,  or  even  a  shorter
period,  brings  a  new  family,  which  again  separates,  to  become
perhaps  the  heads  of  another  family.  It,  however,  occasionally
happens,  as  is  the  case  with  bears,  that  the  eldest  of  the
young  remains  at  home,  being  appointed  nurse  to  the  younger
generation,  and  is  severely  chastised  by  the  mother  if  it
neglects  any  of  its  duties.  Wherever  the  families  remain
together,  the  society  enlarges  and  a  division  of  labour  obtains,
so  that  the  existence  of  the  individual  frequently  depends  on
family  life.  The  herds  of  deer,  antelopes,  and  buffaloes  are
probably  only  the  members  of  one  family  grown  up  together
and  led  by  the  oldest  member  of  the  herd.  In  such  societies
the  family  bonds  are  slender  enough  ;  but  it  is  different  in
such  social  animals  as  bees,  ants,  etc.,  in  which  the  individuals
possess  different  forms  and  organisations,  according  to  the
part  they  play  in  their  domestic  economy.

The  development  of  the  young  presents  a  series  of  con-
ditions greatly  differing  from  those  of  advanced  age,  and  a
very  close  examination  is  requisite  for  becoming  convinced
that  an  animal  in  the  larval  state  is  transformed  into  a  subse-
quent mature  form.  These  deviations  are  so  great,  that  up
to  Cuvier's  time  certain  animals  were  classified  when  young
as  mollusca,  and  in  the  adult  state  among  the  articulata.
There  are  also  the  sexual  differences.  We  have  seen  that  in
man  the  physical  differences  between  male  and  female  are  in
every  respect  greater  than  the  differences  existing  between
individuals  of  the  same  sex  in  different  races  ;  and  we  also
know  that  in  many  animals  the  sexual  differences  are  so  great,
that  the  closest  examination  is  requisite  to  establish  their  rela-
tions to  each  other.

In  the  lower  animals  we  observe  a  series  of  development
stages,  which  only  terminate  after  several  generations,  so  that
not  the  child  (so  to  speak)  but  the  grandchild  resembles  the
parents ;  and  there  exist,  probably,  more  complicated  family
connections,  by  which  individuals  seem  to  return  to  the  origi-
nal form  by  a  roundabout  way.


216  LECTUEE    VIII.

Tlie  range  of  divergence  is  as  yet  far  from  being  exhausted.
Every  one  knows  that  children  of  the  same  parents,  though
possessing  a  family  likeness,  are  never  perfectly  alike,  that
even  twins  or  animals  of  the  same  litter  still  exhibit  pecu-
liarities which  enable  us  to  distinguish  them.  The  range  may
be  wide  without  transgTessing  the  limits  which  separate  the
normal  from  the  abnormal  structure,  and  this  is  specially  the
case  when  the  parents  themselves  occupy  the  limits  of  the
normal  structure.  Reserving  the  details  for  another  occasion,
I  would  here  merely  draw  your  attention  to  the  fact  that  such
peculiarities  may  be  transmitted  through  several  generations.
Thus  there  are  families  in  which  supernumerary  or  webbed
fingers  have  been  transmitted  through  several  generations,
until  frequent  intermixture  with  normally  formed  individuals
has  led  to  the  obliteration  of  such  abnormities.

To  characterise  the  family  the  naturalist  must  study  all
these  possible  deviations,  and  it  is  clear  that  in  the  absence  of
direct  observation  he  is  liable  to  many  errors.  Natural  history
furnishes  many  instances  of  the  separation  of  parents-  and
offspring,  young  and  old,  male  and  female,  until  direct  obser-
vation clearly  established  their  relationship.

Having  now  arrived  at  the  first  stage,  namely,  the  recogni-
tion of  a  certain  type  belonging  to  all  individuals  derived  from
a  certain  stock,  we  must  proceed  further  and  acknowledge
that  this  type  may  also  belong  to  a  number  of  individuals,
which,  as  far  as  we  can  trace,  are  not  descended  from  the  self-
same stock.  Thus,  for  instance,  taking  into  account  the  pre-
sent condition  of  the  globe,  we  cannot  understand  how  the
trout  north  of  the  Alps  can  belong  to  the  same  stock  as  those
south  of  the  Alps,  separated  as  they  ever  have  been  by  insur-
mountable mountains  ;  or  how  the  chamois  of  the  Pyrenees
can  be  directly  related  to  those  of  the  Alps,  separated  as  they
are  by  plains  equally  inaccessible  to  the  mountain  animals.
And  yet  the  sum  of  resemblances  is  so  great  that  these  animals
might  unhesitatingly  be  included  in  the  same  stock  if  their
descent  were  not  known  to  us.  We  recognise  a  type  with
certain  definite  characters  which  we  term  species,  and  which
we  might  define  as  follow : — all  individuals  possessing  such


LECTURE    VIII.  217

common  characters,  which  mark  them  as  actual  or  possible
descendants  from  the  same  parent  stock,  belong  to  the  same
species.

Let  us  for  the  present  adopt  this  definition  and  keep  to
obseiwation,  which,  in  most  cases,  is  unable  to  trace  actual
descent,  but  must  attend  to  the  characters  of  the  individuals.
We  find  in  a  certain  region  a  type  of  animals, — a  good  species,
as  naturalists  would  call  it, — which  is  easily  recognised ;  we
collect  a  number  of  such  individuals,  we  dissect  them,  we  ob-
serve their  development,  compare  them  so  as  to  obtain  a  per-
fect knowledge  of  the  species.  The  question  arises  now,  is
the  type  we  have  so  closely  studied  universal  and  unalterable  ?

Observation  teaches  that  this  question  must  be  answered  in
the  negative.     We   find   almost  all  naturalists  agreeing  that
species  has  a  wide  range,  in  which  the  characters  of  the  indi-
viduals composing  it  are  changed.     In  all  books  aud  treatises,
varieties  are  mentioned  which  are  subordinate  to  species.    But
as  regards  the  term  variety,  and  the  notion  to  be  attached  to
it,  its  limits  and  relation  to  species,  the  opinions  are  conflict-
ing ;  some  authors  calling  that  a  variety  which  others  term  a
species.    Linnseus  defined  variety,  as  any  alteration  produced  by
an  accidental   cause;  Geoffroy    St.  Hilaire  terms  a  variety  a
simple  anomaly  which  does  not  obstruct  the  performance  of
any  function.     We  may,  perhaps,  ask  what  is  the  limit  of  this
simple  deviation ;  and  as  no  general  rule  can  be  given,  it  will
depend  on  the  judgment  of  the  observer  what  limits  he  assigns
to  variety.     We  find,  in  point  of  fact,  that  each  type  and  each
species  has,  in  this  respect,  its   own  laws ;  that   a   deviation
which  is  insignificant  in  the  one  may  be  great  in  another.     It
is,  consequently,  very  difficult  to  lay  down  a  general  definition
of  variety,  the  more  so  as  an  accidental  abnormity  may  become
normal  by  its  permanence.     Let  us  examine  this  subject.     By
some  accidental  influence  a  short-legged  ram  is  produced  in  a
long-legged  flock.     This  is  an  accidental  abnormity  confined
to   one  individual, — the   case  is  an  exceptional  one,  and  the
naturalist  does  not  look  upon  this  individual  as  constituting  a
variety.     But  this  ram  has  descendants ;  the  local  conditions,
let  us  assume,  favour  the  propagation  of  short-legged  sheep


218  LECTURE    VIII.

(in  the  case  I  have  in  view  it  was  done  by  the  interference  of
man).  The  short  legs  become  numerous,  and  constitute  a
large  proportion  in  the  number  of  sheep  of  that  region.  We
now  possess  a  variety  which,  by  naturalists,  is  considered  the
product  of  local  influences.  The  variety  is  now  described  as
the  short-legged,  and  in  the  museums  placed  side  by  side  with
the  long-legged  sheep ;  and  the  name  of  variety  seems  the
more  justifiable,  since,  among  the  lambs  produced  by  the  short
legs,  there  are  always  some  with  longer  legs,  which  seems  a
relapse  into  the  original  type.

In  the  above  case,  it  was  the  advantage  of  the  proprietor
to  possess  short-legged  sheep  unable  to  surmount  the  fences.
He  therefore  interfered ;  he  coupled  his  short-legged  ram  with
his  shortest-legged  descendants,  purged  his  flock  from  all  the
long  legs,  and  thus  he  obtained,  in  the  course  of  time,  a  short
legged  race,  which  is  now  spread  over  North  America.  Now,
in  the  course  of  time  the  births  of  long-legged  lambs  have
become  rare  among  the  short-legged  sheep,  and  the  abnormity
has  become  permanent,  so  that  man  has  first  formed  a  variety,
and  finally  a  race, — for  races  are  defined  constant  varieties,
whose  characters  are  permanently  propagated.

What  man  has  done  here,  nature  does  everywhere.  We
may  consider  every  species,  with  its  distinguishing  characters,
as  the  product,  to  a  great  extent,  of  the  influences  acting  upon
it.  Every  day  in  the  life  of  an  individual  is  a  struggle  for
existence.  The  individuals  will  be  best  developed  where  the
struggle  is  easy.  The  conditions  of  life  vary  for  each  species ;
hence  each  species  will  best  thrive  in  one  or  several  centres,
but  will  degenerate  or  become  extinct  in  others.  We  usually
consider  that  the  type  of  a  species  which  is  developed  under
the  most  favourable  conditions ;  we  consider  as  varieties  or
races  such  forms  as  under  less  favourable  conditions  have  de-
viated. The  mussels  peculiar  to  the  seas  of  our  temperate
zone  become  smaller,  and  are  differently  marked  at  the  limits
of  their  region,  be  it  north  or  south.  They  miss  the  con-
ditions requisite  for  their  growth,  and  are  no  longer  seen.
lint  among  the  mussels  on  the  German  and  French  coasts
there  are  some  which  increase  in  size  as  they  move  towards


LECTURE    VIII.  210

the  north ;  such  are  the  mussels  which  find  their  vital  con-
ditions in  the  arctic  sea,  in  Greenland  and  Spitzbergen,  where
they  acquire  their  full  development.  Among  the  arctic  mussels
on  the  French  coast,  a  particular  type  has  been  established,
which,  having  become  permanent  as  an  independent  race,  no
mussels  are  now  produced  with  the  size  or  the  markings  of  the
arctic  type.  The  smaller  the  region  tenanted  by  a  certain
species,  the  more  defined  is  its  type ;  the  wider  the  region,
the  greater  the  number  of  races  and  varieties.  That  which
here  interests  us  most  is  the  inference  that  the  abnormal  form,
and  generally  any  deviation  from  any  given  type,  by  whatever
influences  it  may  have  been  produced,  may,  by  propagation
and  transmission,  give  rise  to  a  variety,  and  that  this  variety
may,  by  the  constancy  of  its  distinguishing  characters,  become
a  race,  and  be  propagated  as  such.

With  regard  to  propagation,  we  observe  a  difference  among
races,  some  becoming  obliterated  in  the  progress  of  inter-
mixture with  other  races ;  whilst  some  impart  their  peculia-
rities to  their  descendants  for  many  generations.  Every  dog-
fancier  knows  that  the  blood  of  a  Newfoundland  dog  is  almost
indestructible, — that  one  crossing  is  sufficient  to  perpetuate
some  of  the  characters  through  many  generations.  But  it  is
also  known  that  the  Newfoundland  dog  belongs  to  a  race  very
probably  the  product  of  the  country  where  it  is  found,  and  of
the  natural  conditions  of  that  country,  and  that  this  race  may
justly  be  considered  as  a  well-marked  species.  Those  who
include  all  dogs,  from  the  Dingo  of  Australia  to  the  Polar  dog,
iu  one  species,  will  only  look  upon  the  Newfoundland  dogs  as
a  race  which  is  distinguished  above  many  others  by  the  con-
stancy of  its  characters.

It  is  looked  upon  as  characteristic  of  races  or  varieties  that
they  admit  of  crossing,  and  that  their  descendants  are  in-
finitely prolific.  We  shall,  for  the  present,  consider  this  axiom
as  established,  though  we  cannot  help  observing  that  the
proofs  are  not  complete,  and  that  some  results  in  the  breeding
of  domestic  races  do  not  accord  with  it.  This  much  seems
establi shed,  that  in  proportion  as  races  become  constant,  the
difficulty  in  pairing  them  increases,  and  that  in  the  free  stale


220  LECTURE    VIII.

races  manifest  as  much  antipathy  to  each  other  as  so-called
species,  so  that  extraordinary  circumstances,  or  the  interference
of  man,  is  necessary  to  overcome  that  antipathy  in  order  to
effect  the  crossing.

Species,  according  to  Linnseus,  is  the  corner-stone  upon
which  systematic  natural  history  rests.  Linnseus  considers
species  as  an  originally  created  form.  Buffon,  whose  opinions
oscillated,  taught  that  all  individuals  which  produce  a  prolific
offspring  belong  to  one  species,  and  according  as  authors  at-
tached more  weight  to  propagation  or  classification,  the  agree-
ment in  characters,  or  the  production  of  prolific  descendants,
became  the  centre  around  which  the  definition  turned.  Thus
Andreas  Wagner  includes  under  one  species  all  individuals
which  produce  prolific  descendants,  without  any  regard  to
external  characters ;  so  that  the  same  man  who  assumed
hundreds  of  species  of  animals,  from  mere  differences  in  their
fur,  would  at  once  include  wolf,  jackal,  and  the  domestic  dog,
in  the  same  species,  if  it  could  be  shown  that  they  produce,  in
crossing,  prolific  descendants.  Agassiz,  on  the  contrary,
rejects  prolificacy  of  offspring  as  a  distinguishing  mark  of
species,  which  he  constructs  solely  from  external  characters
and  their  relations  to  surrounding  nature.

The  real  cause  of  such  discrepancies  must  be  sought  for  in
the  practical  treatment  of  science,  and  the  tendency  attributed
to  it.  The  reason  why  some  embrace  one,  and  others  a  dif-
ferent theory,  is  that  the  results  are  conflicting  if  you  start
from  any  assumed  axiom.  Allow  me  to  explain  this  point.
We  may  boldly  assert  that,  among  the  many  thousand  species
now  known,  the  number  of  which  will,  in  the  course  of  time,
rise  to  a  million,  there  are  not  one  hundred  whose  inbreeding
has  been  traced  so  far  as  to  enable  us  to  assert  that  they  are
infinitely  prolific ;  we  cannot  even  in  the  strictest  sense  assert
this  of  our  domestic  animals,  and  still  less  of  wild  animals.
As  regards,  therefore,  the  great  majority  of  species,  as  Giebel
has  proved,  propagation  is  purely  hypothetical.  You  will  also
observe  that,  in  discussions  on  the  establishment  of  new
species,  the  faculty  of  propagation  is  taken  into  account.
Men  dispute  about  the  value  or  worthlessness  of  distinctive


LECTURE    VIII.  221

characters,  and  compare  these  with  such  as  are  considered
as  decisive  in  similar  species ;  but  they  never  think  of  insti-
tuting experiments  in  regard  to  the  propagation  of  the  dif-
ferent species ;  and  thus  two  naturalists,  though  perfectly
agreed  about  the  definition  of  species,  may  entertain  different
opinions  as  regards  the  application  of  the  definition,  so  that
one  assumes  ten  different  species  where  the  other  only  sees
one  species  with  ten  varieties.  In  living  nature,  the  specific
character  of  propagation  might  be  discoverable ;  but  in  extinct
animals, — those  thousands  of  species  which  have  disappeared
from  the  surface  of  the  earth  and  are  only  known  to  us  from
their  relics, — such  proofs  cannot  be  given ;  and  palaeontology
would  be  deprived  of  a  basis  if  species  could  only  be  deter-
mined by  propagation,  and  not  by  distinctive  characters.

There  can  thus  be  no  doubt  that  practically  it  is  only  the
distinguishing  chai'acters  which  must  guide  us ;  whilst  the
test  of  propagation  can  only  be  applied  to  man,  the  domestic
animals,  and  some  others  standing  next  to  man.  But  when
we  try  to  combine  the  distinguishing  characters  with  the  re-
sults of  propagation,  we  meet  with  the  most  glaring  contra-
diction, inasmuch  as  certain  animals  produce  a  fertile  progeny,
and  yet  differ  far  more  from  each  other  than  those  which  pro-
duce sterile  hybrids.  Giebel  has  scientifically  demonstrated
that  the  races  of  dogs  which  produce  a  fertile  progeny  present
in  size,  hair,  colour,  the  structure  of  the  skeleton,  the  number
of  toes,  the  formation  of  the  skull  and  teeth,  much  greater
differences  than  the  horse  and  the  ass,  which  produce  sterile
hybrids.  Such,  therefore,  as  consider  all  dogs  as  races  of  one
species,  must  admit  that,  as  regards  the  distinctive  characters,
the  races  of  some  species  may  be  more  remote  from  each  other
than  species, — an  admission  which  upsets  all  systematic  natural
history.

Species  has  been  characterised  as  a  permanent  type ;  and  it
can  easily  be  shown  that  such  naturalists  as  assume  this  im-
mutability theoretically,  are  practically  forced  to  assume  va-
rieties and  races.  Species  has  also  been  spoken  of  as  an
original  type,  something  primitive  and  fundamental  j  and  3^et
it  must  be  confessed  that,  in  the  history  of  the  earth,  species


222  LECTURE    VIII.

have  arisen  arid  have  perished  like  the  flowers  in  summer.
Species  has  further  been  defined  as  a  collection  of  individuals
who  transmit  their  characters  regularly  and  indefinitely ;  hut
it  has  not  been  considered  that  thousands  of  species  have  be-
come extinct,  some  of  them  even  in  historical  times,  specimens
of  which  are  only  to  be  seen  in  our  museums.  To  cite  only
one  instance  of  this  kind,  I  would  mention  that  the  great  auk
(Aha  impennis) ,  which  formerly  inhabited  Denmark,  and  in
1842  still  existed  in  Iceland,  is  now  entirely  extinct,  so  that
only  some  twenty  of  their  skins  are  preserved  in  different
museums.  Species,  then,  is  alterable  by  external  influences,
and  arises  and  perishes  like  individuals.

On  more  closely  examining  the  definitions  of  race  and
species,  sanctioned  by  usage,  it  may  be  reduced  to  an  historical
basis.  We  assume  races  where  we  know,  or  think  we  know,
their  common  origin ;  we  assume  species  where  their  origin  is
hidden  in  the  past.  We  assume  races  in  domestic  animals
where,  by  our  interference,  we  have  succeeded  in  producing
varieties.  We  assume  races  in  mankind,  because  we  believe
we  have  evidence  that  the  differences  in  form  have  arisen  in
historical  times.  No  man  would  certainly  have  doubted  the
specific  difference  in  mankind,  if  the  unity  of  the  human
species  had  not  to  be  defended  at  any  price, — if  a  tradition  had
not  to  be  supported  in  opposition  to  the  plainest  facts, — a
tradition  which  has  been  the  more  venerated  because  it  runs
counter  to  positive  science.

As  regards  species,  then,  we  hold  fast  by  the  principle  that
the  genus  Homo  consists  of  several  species,  which  deviate  from
each  other  as  much,  if  not  more,  than  most  simiadce ;  and  if
the  principles  of  systematic  zoology  are  to  be  of  any  value,
they  must  be  as  applicable  to  the  human  as  to  the  simious
species.

With  regard  to  general  classification,  we  distinguish  genera,
families,  orders,  classes,  provinces,  and  kingdoms ;  the  latter
being  the  great  divisions  constituting  the  animal,  the  vege-
table, and  the  mineral  kingdom,  comprehending  all  existing
forms.  We  shall  now  examine  the  relations  in  which  the
species  of  mankind  stand  to  this  classification.


LECTURE    VIII.  223

That  all  human  races  belong  to  the  same  genus  admits  of
no  doubt.  The  sum  of  characters  which  connect  the  white
with  the  black,  on  the  one  hand,  and  separate  him,  on  the
other,  from  the  most  anthropoid  ape,  are,  by  the  admission  of
all  naturalists,  so  great,  that  they  determine  a  separation  as  a
genus  and  a  family.  But  now  opinions  diverge.  Whilst  some
would,  according  to  zoological  characters,  consider  the  human
genus  as  a  family  of  the  simious  type ;  others  would  consider
man  as  constituting  a  separate  kingdom,  of  the  same  value  as
the  vegetable  and  animal  kingdom.  Let  us  shortly  examine
these  theories.

It  is  undeniable  that,  in  the  human  and  the  simious  struc-
ture, one  fundamental  plan  is  perceptible,  which  is  well  marked
in  most  parts.  The  formation  of  the  brain,  the  structure  of
the  skeleton,  the  position  of  the  bowels, — all  indicate  this
fundamental  plan.  But  within  this  fundamental  plan,  which
is  as  plain  as  that  in  the  carnivora  and  ruminants,  there  occur
deviations,  such  as  we  have  explained  in  a  former  lecture ;  and
the  question  is  whether  these  deviations  are  sufficiently  great
to  justify  a  separation  from  the  ape,  or  whether  in  the  ape
family  itself  there  obtain  differences  as  great  as  between  man
and  ape.

Naturalists  distinguish  from  the  apes  proper  so-called  half-
apes  (prosimice),  which,  as  regards  the  form  of  the  limbs  and
hands,  are  perfect  apes,  but  are  distinguished  by  form  of  skull,
brain,  and  teeth.  The  hands  are  generally  well-developed ;
only  the  forefinger  of  the  posterior,  and  sometimes  that
of  the  anterior  extremities,  is  provided  with  claws,  adapted
for  scratching  out  the  insects  from  fissures.  These  de-
viations would  scarcely  render  a  separation  necessary,  as
greater  differences  in  the  formation  of  the  hands  occur  also  in
European  and  American  apes,  in  some  of  which  the  thumb  in
the  fore  extremities  is  either  entirely  absent  or  curtailed  to  a
stump.  The  differences  in  the  structure  of  skull,  brain,  and
teeth  seem,  however,  sufficiently  important  to  justify  a  separa-
tion of  the  prosimice  from  the  apes  proper.  The  cranium  is
round  and  small,  the  muzzle  prominent ;  the  teeth  scarcely
resemble   those  of  the   apes,  they  are  serried,   exhibiting  no


224  LECTURE    VIII.

gap,  as  seen  in  most  apes ;  the  superior  incisors  are  stunted,
the  lower  projecting  nearly  horizontally,  in  short,  according  to
the  dental  formation,  the  prosimice  seem  to  belong  to  the  in-
sectivorous mammalia.  Also,  with  regard  to  cerebral  structure,
they  approach  the  insectivora  ;  they  possess  no  posterior  lobe,
but  an  olfactory  bulb,  not  possessed  by  the  former;  they  have,
however,  like  the  apes,  a  Sylvian  fissure.  The  prosimice  are
usually  considered  as  a  sub-order,  from  the  formation  of  the
limbs,  which  certainly  are  simious ;  but  as,  despite  the  re-
semblance of  limbs,  insectivora  are  separated  from  carnivora,
the  prosimise  might  also  be  separated  from  the  ape,  and  placed
among  the  insectivora.  Whilst,  therefore,  many  naturalists
look  upon  the  prosimice  as  a  family  of  the  primates  or  quadru-
mana,  and  others  make  a  sub-order  of  them,  we  might,  on  the
ground  of  their  dental  and  cerebral  structure,  claim  for  them
a  separate  order.

The  same  conditions  occur  in  mankind.  The  chief  differ-
ences consist  in  the  structure  of  the  skull,  brain,  and  teeth ;
whilst  the  differences  in  the  extremities,  though  sufficiently
characteristic,  occupy,  as  regards  importance,  only  a  secondary
rank.  The  great  preponderance  of  the  cranium  over  the  facial
part,  the  development  of  the  anterior  lobes  #and  the  convolu-
tions, the  serried  teeth,  would  alone  secure  for  man  a  position
above  the  apes,  such  as  is  assigned  to  the  latter  above  the  pro-
simice. When  to  this  is  added  the  peculiar  structure  of  the  feet,
a  distinction  which  is  not  obliterated  by  the  prehensile  foot  of
the  gorilla,  the  separation  of  the  human  genus  from  the  ape  is
as  justifiable  as  the  establishment  of  a  separate  order  for  the
pJiocidce,  which,  as  regards  cerebral  and  dental  structure,  be-
long to  the  carnivora,  but  claim  a  separation  on  account  of  the
development  of  their  extremities.

Our  opinion  as  regards  the  classification  of  mankind  is,  that
it  is  of  the  same  value  as  that  of  the  apes,  and  that  both  be-
long to  a  common  type  in  the  series  of  mammals.

It  may  be  said  that  no  modern  author  lays  such  stress  as  we
do  upon  the  zoological  differences  prevailing  among  mankind  ;
for  the  sub-class  which  Owen  would  create  for  it,  is,  with  the
material  facts  of  cerebral  formation  upon  which  it  was  founded,


LECTUEE    VIII.  225

gone  the  way  of  all  flesh.  But  recently  Wo  Frenchmen,
Geoffroy  St.  Hilaire  and  Quatrefages,  have  attempted  to  deter-
mine the  position  of  man,  not  according  to  the  peculiarities  of
his  organisation,  but  according  to  qualities  external  to  the
physical  organism.  I  shall  offer  some  observations  on  this
subject  after  quoting  the  remarks  of  the  respective  authors.
Isidore  Geoffroy  St.  Hilaire  says  :  "  Sensation  and  motion  alone
constitute  the  animal ;  and  all  efforts  to  render  the  definition
more  perfect,  by  adding  other  characteristics,  only  render  it
less  philosophical  and  correct.  The  characters,  derived  from
the  structure  of  the  animal,  at  once  distinguished  from  others
derived  from  its  qualities,  are  neither  essential  nor  constant,
and  can  by  no  means  rank  with  the  attributes  of  sensation
and  spontaneous  motion.

"It  is  in  this  way  that  the  chief  objection  to  the  esta-
blishment of  a  human  kingdom  is  removed.  Let  us  abandon
to  the  subdivisions  of  natural  history  those  structural  charac-
ters by  which  every  being  is  distinguished.  The  true  know-
ledge of  the  great  divisions  of  nature,  of  provinces  and
kingdoms,  lies  in  a  different  sphere.  The  animal  is  distin-
guished from  the  plant  by  peculiar  faculties,  which  are  oblite-
rated where  animality  ceases,  and  it  is  by  virtue  of  these  only
that  it  belongs  to  a  separate  kingdom.  Even  so  is  man
separated  from  the  animal  kingdom  by  his  incomparably  higher
qualities  and  capacities, — by  the  intellectual  and  moral  facul-
ties, which  are  added  to  sensation  and  motion;  and  it  is  by
these  that  he  constitutes  the  highest  division  in  nature, — the
human  empire,  above  the  animal  kingdom.

"  The  plant,"  continues  Geoffroy,  "  lives, — the  animal  lives
and  feels ;  man  lives,  feels,  and  thinks."  In  another  passage
the  distinctive  character  of  man  is  said  to  consist  in  "  intelli-
gence ;"  in  other  sentences,  again,  it  is  said,  "  Moral  life  is,  in
the  human  kingdom,  added  to  vegetative  and  animal  life;"
and  again,  ' '  there  may  be  degrees  in  the  development  of  the
vital,  sensitive,  and  intellectual  qualities ;  but  there  is  nothino-
intermediate  between  life  and  non-life, — feeling  and  insensi-
bility,—thinking  and  not  thinking."  Thus,  the  animal,  ac-
cording to  Geoffroy,  does  not  think,  —man  alone  thinks ;  the


226  LECTURE    VIII.

question  is,   therefore,   disposed  of;  yet  we  cannot  conceive
how  so  monstrous  an  assertion  can  be  sustained.

Quatrefages  is  more  cautious.  He  says,  "  Shall  we  find  the
characters  of  the  human  kingdom  in  the  intellectual  capacity?
Certainly,  the  comparison  of  the  mental  development  of  man
with  the  rudimentary  intelligence  of  even  the  most  gifted
animals,  never  suggested  itself  to  me.  The  interval  between
brute  and  man  is,  in  this  respect,  so  great  that  a  perfect  differ-
ence between  them  was  admissible.  But  this  is  no  longer
tenable.  The  animal  does  possess  intelligence ;  and  though
their  fundamental  capacities  are  less  developed,  they  neverthe-
less exist ;  the  animal  feels,  wills,  remembers,  deliberates,  and
the  correctness  of  its  judgment  seems  frequently  miraculous ;
whilst  the  very  errors  which  the  animal  commits  give  evidence
that  its  judgments  are  not  the  mere  results  of  a  blind  and  neces-
sary impulse.  We,  moreover,  observe  great  inequalities  in  the
various  groups  of  animals.  Thus,  among  the  vertebrata,  we
see  that  birds  much  excel  fishes  and  reptiles,  but  are  much  in-
ferior to  mammals.  It  would,  therefore,  not  be  surprising
if,  among  the  latter,  we  were  to  find  some  animal  possessing  a
much  higher  intelligence ;  this  would  only  be  a  progress,  but
no  fundamentally  new  phenomenon.

"  What  we  observe  of  intelligence  in  general,  applies  also
to  its  highest  manifestation, — language.  Man,  it  is  true,  alone
possesses  articulate  language  ;  but  two  classes  of  animals  pos-
sess voice.  They,  like  ourselves,  produce  tones  which  express
feelings  and  thoughts,  and  which  are  not  only  understood
by  individuals  of  the  same  species,  but  even  by  man.  The
hunter  learns  quickly  to  understand  what  is  called  the  lan-
guage of  birds  and  beasts;  nor  does  it  require  a  long  ap-
prenticeship to  distinguish  their  sounds  of  love,  passion,  pain,
or  alarm.  This  kind  of  language  is,  no  doubt,  very  ru-
dimentary, consisting,  it  might  be  said,  of  mere  interjections,
but  it  is  sufficient  to  establish  the  mutual  relations  of  these
creatures.  But  does  this  language  differ  fundamentally
from  that  of  man  by  the  mechanism  of  its  production,  its
object,  and  its  results  ?  Anatomy,  physiology,  and  ex-
perience   teach    that    it    does    not ;    here,    also,    we    find    a


LECTURE    VIII.  227

progress, — an  immense  development,  but  nothing  absolutely
new.

"  Finally,  as  regards  the  qualities  of  the  heart,  which  partly
depend  on  instinct  and  partly  on  intelligence,  we  find  their
manifestations  in  the  animal  as  we  find  them  in  man.  The
animal  loves  and  hates ;  it  is  known  how  greatly  many  of  them
are  attached  to  their  young,  and  how  strong  is  the  instinctive
hatred  with  which  some  animals  pursue  each  other.  It  is
known  how  the  congenital  faculties  may  be  further  developed
by  training.  We  also  find  among  our  domestic  animals  indi-
vidual characters,  as  we  find  among  men.  We  all  know  how
docile  and  goodnatured  some  dogs  are,  and  how  vicious  and
irritable  others.  Man  and  brute  resemble  each  other,  perhaps,
most  as  regards  character.

"Where,  then,  shall  we  find  this  something  new  which  is
absent  in  the  animal  and  belongs  exclusively  to  man,  and
which  would  justify  the  establishment  of  a  separate  kingdom  ?
In  order  to  overcome  this  difficulty  we  shall  follow  the  natur-
alist, and  examine  all  the  characters  of  the  being  to  which  we
are  to  assign  a  place.  We  have  hitherto  directed  our  attention
chiefly  to  the  organic,  physiological,  and  intellectual  characters
of  man ;  we  must  now  consider  him  in  his  moral  aspect :
here  we  find  two  fundamental  features  which  have,  as  yet,
escaped  our  notice.

"  We  find  in  every  society,  possessing  a  language  sufficiently
developed  to  express  abstract  ideas,  words  designating  virtue
and  vice,  good  and  evil.  Where  language  fails  in  this  respect,
we  find  opinions  and  habits  which  plainly  show  that  the
notions  exist,  though  not  expressed  in  the  vocabulary.  Even
among  the  most  savage  peoples  and  tribes  to  which,  by
general  consent,  is  assigned  the  lowest  rank  in  humanity,  we
see  public  or  individual  actions  performed,  which  show  that
man  recognises  something  above  what  is  physically  good  or
evil.  Among  nations  farther  advanced,  the  whole  political
economy  rests  upon  this  basis.

"  The  abstract  idea  of  moral  good  and  evil  thus  exists  in
every  human  society ;  nothing  leads  us  to  suppose  that  it  also
exists  in  animals :  here,  then,  we  have  the  first  character  of

q2


228  LECTURE    VIII.

the  human  kingdom.  In  order  to  avoid  the  word  conscience,
which  is  frequently  taken  in  too  restricted  a  sense,  I  call  morality
that  quality  which  furnishes  man  with  the  above  notions,  just
as  we  term  sensibility  that  quality  which  perceives  impressions.

"  There  are  other  allied  conceptions  which  are  found
in  all,  even  the  smallest  and  most  degraded,  societies  of
man.  Everywhere  man  believes  in  another  world  different
from  ours,  in  mysterious  beings  of  a  higher  nature,  which
must  be  feared  or  worshipped;  in  a  future  life  after  the
destruction  of  the  body;  in  other  words,  the  notions  of  a
deity  and  a  future  life  prevail  as  generally  as  those  of  good
and  evil.  However  faint  these  ideas  may  be,  they  everywhere
give  rise  to  important  facts.  From  such  notions  arise  a
number  of  habits  and  usages  which,  even  among  the  most
savage  peoples,  are  the  equivalents  of  the  greater  manifesta-
tions among  civilised  peoples.

"  Never  has  anything  similar  or  analogous  been  observed  in
animals ;  we  find,  therefore,  in  the  existence  of  these  concep-
tions a  second  character  of  the  human  kingdom,  and  designate
the  sum  of  the  qualities  which  furnish  man  with  these  notions,
— religiousness."

So  far  Quatrefages.  As  will  be  perceived,  he  is  more  in
accordance  with  the  facts  than  his  late  colleague,  Geoffroy ;  for
he  acknowledges  that  the  animal  possesses  all  the  intellectual
faculties, — that  it  thinks,  considers,  communicates  with  its
fellows ;  in  short,  that  the  mental  qualities  are  the  same  as  in
man,  and  differ  only  in  degree.  But  according  to  him,  mo-
rality and  religiousness  are  something  perfectly  distinct  and
new ;  and  as  they  occur  only  in  man,  they  form  an  essential
character,  which  distinguishes  him  from  the  brute.  Let  us
examine  these  assertions.

We  shall  assume,  for  a  moment,  that  what  Quatrefages
terms  religiousness  is  found  among  all  peoples,  without  excep-
tion ;  still,  this  would  not  prove  it  to  be  a  new  mental  quality
in  man.  It  would  simply  prove  that  man  forms  ideas  concern-
ing certain  phenomena  which  he  cannot  fathom,  which  the
animal,  from  its  inferior  mental  capacity,  is  not  induced  to
take   into    any  consideration.      The    idiotic    cretin    takes   no


LECTURE    VIII.  229

notice  of  thunder ;  the  simple  minded,  in  ignorance  of  the
cause,  fears  it;  the  heathen  imagines  a  thunder-god;  the
Christian,  also,  believes  that  God  speaks  in  thunder;  whilst
the  intelligent  man  produces  himself  thunder  and  lightning
when  provided  with  the  proper  apparatus.  This  is  the  usual
-march  of  religious  ideas ;  and  I  know  of  no  sufficient  reason
for  endowing  the  human  race  with  religiousness  as  an  exclusive

quality.

E,.  Wagner  vindicated  this  religious  quality,  and  even
thought  that  there  was  an  organ  of  faith  in  man.  The  germ,
at  least,  of  a  belief  in  some  mysterious,  higher  power  exists,
also,  in  animals.  The  dog  is  evidently  afraid  of  spectres,  quite
as  much  as  the  Breton  or  the  Basque ;  every  out-of-the-way
phenomenon  not  explained  to  it  by  its  nose,  renders  even  the
most  courageous  dog  a  coward.  I  knew  a  grove  which  the
peasants  firmly  believe  to  be  haunted  by  a  fiery  spectre,
and  prove  it  by  the  alleged  fact  that  dogs  which  have  passed
the  night  in  it  will  not  re-enter  it.  It  is  the  fear  of  the
apparently  supernatural  which  is  the  germ  of  religious  ideas ;
and  this  fear  is  developed  in  a  high  degree  in  our  domestic
animals,  the  dog  and  the  horse.  The  germ  of  these  ideas,
as  well  as  of  others  allied  with  it,  being  by  man  developed
into  a  system,  becomes  a  faith.  Mathematics  has  just  as
much  claim,  as  this  belief  in  the  supernatural,  to  be  considered
an  exclusive,  fundamental  quality  of  man.  No  animal  knows
mathematics,  geometry ;  but  there  are  animals  which  can
count,  though  only  up  to  a  few  ciphers ;  and  this  is  the  germ
of  the  whole  edifice  which  man  has  erected,  and  by  means  of
which  he  has  measured  the  celestial  spaces.  In  the  same  way,
the  animal  has  no  faith,  but  it  fears  something  unknown  ;  and
is  it  not  the  fear  of  something  unknown — the  fear  of  God —
from  which  man  has  developed  his  religion  ?

With  regard  to  morality,  or  the  idea  of  good  and  evil,  it
cannot  be  maintained  that  it  exists  absolutely  in  man.  It
always  corresponds  to  the  condition  of  society;  it  is,  in  one
word,  the  result  of  the  social  condition.  Whilst  in  the
civilised  world  it  is  a  capital  crime  for  the  son  to  kill  his
old    decrepit  father,   there  are   Indian  tribes  where   such  an


230  LECTUEE    VIII.

action  is  considered  praiseworthy.  The  notions  of  good  and
evil  arise  from  the  wants  of  society  and  the  relations  of  in-
dividuals to  each  other.  Now  if  this  be  true,  it  is  equally
certain  that  the  notion  of  good  and  evil  is  as  much  prevalent
in  social  animals  as  in  human  societies.  The  first  step  in
society  is  the  family ;  the  notions  of  good  and  evil  consist,  as
regards  the  child,  chiefly  in  obedience  towards  the  parents,
and  as  regards  the  parents,  in  caresses  or  punishment.  Ob-
serve now  in  a  cat  or  bear  family,  the  behaviour  of  the  young
and  their  education  by  the  parents,  and  say,  whether  it  is  not
the  image  of  a  human  family  in  all  its  manifestations  of  good
and  evil.  I  grant  it  is  cat  morality  and  bear  morality  which  is
impressed  upon  the  young,  still  it  is  a  morality,  and  the  kitten
which  does  not  come  when  the  mother  calls  it,  the  two-year-
old  bear  who  does  not  properly  tend  his  brothers  and  sisters,
is  as  much  scolded  and  cuffed  as  our  dear  little  ones  when  they
neglect  the  first  moral  and  Christian  duty — filial  obedience.

With  regard  to  animal  societies,  I  beg  to  quote  an  extract
from  Dr.  Brehm's  u  Illustrirte  Thierleben"  (illustrations  of
animal  life)  : —

"  The  most  gifted  male  member  of  a  horde  of  apes  becomes
the  leader.  This  dignity  is,  however,  not  conferred  upon
him  by  '  universal  suffrage' ;  he  only  obtains  it  after  having
conquered  the  other  male  competitors.  The  longest  teeth  and
the  strongest  arms  decide.  Whoever  does  not  voluntarily
submit,  is  bitten  and  knocked  about  until  he  listens  to  reason.
The  crown  belongs  to  the  strongest,  and  his  wisdom  lies  in  his
teeth.  The  strongest  apes  are  usually  the  oldest,  to  which  the
younger  and  less  experienced  must  defer.  The  leader  demands
and  enforces  implicit  obedience.  Chivalrous  behaviour  is  not  his
affair;  he  takes  the  reward  of  love  by  storm.  No  female  member
of  the  horde  must  carry  on  any  love  affair.  His  eyes  are  sharp,
and  his  discipline  severe ;  he  won't  take  a  joke  in  his  amours.
The  females  who  should  commit  themselves,  are  so  cuffed
that  they  take  care  not  to  offend  again ;  the  youthful  ape
which  intrudes  into  the  harem  of  his  Sultan  is  treated  much
worse."

*     *     *     *     *     *     "  As  for  the  rest,  the  leader  performs


LECTURE    VIII.  231

his  functions  with  great  dignity.  The  esteem  which  he  enjoys
imparts  a  certain  independence  to  his  character  which  is  want-
in  a-  in  the  rest.  He  is  moreover  much  flattered,  and  the
females  are  anxious  to  grant  him  the  highest  favours.  They
are  very  zealous  to  free  his  hairy  garment  from  troublesome
parasites,  and  he  receives  this  homage  with  the  dignity  of  a
Pacha,  whose  favourite  slave  strokes  his  feet.  On  the  other
hand,  he  watches  carefully  over  the  security  of  his  subjects.
He  surveys  every  corner ;  he  trusts  no  one,  and  so  he  is  always
the  first  to  discover  any  danger."

We  do  not  understand  how  far  the  difference  between  the
morality  in  this  simian  society,  depending  on  the  will  of
the  leader,  and  that  of  a  horde  of  Australians,  in  which  the
strongest  equally  lays  down  the  law,  is  sufficiently  important
to  base  upon  it  a  new  kingdom.  Theoretical  absolutism  knows
no  other  morality  than  the  will  of  the  ruler.  He  makes  the  laws,
he  establishes  the  faith,  he  determines  the  morality  ;  whoever
acts  or  teaches  differently  may  be  punished  or  killed.  Does
the  morality  of  an  absolute  theoretical  despotism  then  greatly
differ  from  that  prevailing  in  a  simian  society.

Thus  this  distinguishing  category  of  Quatrefages  cannot  be
sustained.  These  two  French  authors  have  undertaken  im-
possibilities— to  find  qualities  without  any  material  substratum.
Where  the  organisation  is  formed  after  the  same  type,  the
qualities  and  functions  resulting  from  it  must  exhibit  the
same  fundamental  unity.

Before  quitting  this  subject,  I  would,  for  the  benefit  of  those
who  wish  to  erect  for  man  a  special  throne,  quote  the  following
words  of  Wundt : — "  Animals  are  creatures  whose  intelligence
differs  from  men  only  by  the  degree  of  development.  There
exists  between  man  and  brute  no  wider  gulf  than  is  to  be
found  within  the  animal  kingdom  itself.  All  animated  or-
ganisms form  a  chain  of  connected  beings  without  an  in-
terval. An  antiquated  psychology,  with  its  great  variety  of
mental  faculties,  draws  here  and  there  lines  of  demarcation.
When  we  have  succeeded  in  representing  mental  life  as  a
whole,  we  are  bound  to  admit  that  everything  animated  forms
a  part  of  the  whole."


LECTURE    IX.

Primeval  period  of  Mankind. — Discovery  of  Human  Remains  associated
with  those  of  Extinct  Animals. — Cuvier's  Objections. — Human  Remains
.in  Caverns. — Formation  of  Caverns. — Stalactites. — Osseous  breccia. —
Preservation  of  Bones. — Mode  in  which  the  Caverns  were  filled. — The
Extinct  Cavern  Inhabitants. — Extinct  and  Living  Species. — Extinction
of  some  species  within  the  Historical  Period. — Schmerling's  Discoveries.
— The  Cavern  of  Engis.^Caverns  of  Lombrive  and  Lherrne.— Grottoes
of  Arcy. — Grotto  in  the  Meander  Valley. — Grotto  of  Aurignac.

Gentlemen, — We  now  turn  from  the  living  to  the  dead.
There  is,  perhaps,  no  subject  of  inquiry  more  interesting*  than
the  primeval  period  of  the  human  species,  which  reaches
further  back  than  written  documents  or  tradition,  and  to
which  we  can  only  obtain  a  clue  by  the  discovery  of  human
remains  or  objects  of  human  industry.  The  methods  used  in
historical  investigations  are  inapplicable  here,  and  we  are  fully
justified  in  asserting  that  it  is  no  longer  the  historian  and  the
antiquary,  but  the  geologist  alone,  who  is  entitled  to  give  an
opinion  on  the  primitive  ages,  deduced  from  geological  pre-
mises. The  traces  which  primitive  peoples  have  left  behind,
the  remains  which  testify  to  their  existence,  are  only  so  far
distinguished  from  those  of  extinct  species  of  animals,  that
with  their  bones  and  teeth  are  found  associated  objects  of
industry,  which  sufficiently  prove  that  man,  even  at  the  earliest
period,  applied  his  mind  to  multiply  the  means  with  which
nature  had  endowed  him  for  the  struggle  of  existence.  The
hyama  cracks  bones  by  the  power  of  its  jaws.  Man  breaks
them  with  stones  to  obtain  the  marrow.  The  beast  defends
itself  with  horns,  teeth,  and  claws,  given  to  it  by  nature ;  man
endeavours  to  manufacture  arms  and  tools  of  bone,  horn,  and
stones,  and  constant  attention  directed  to  these  objects  leads  him
on  towards  civilisation.     Animals  enjoy  the  warmth  of  fire  if


LECTURE    IX.  233

they  accidentally  meet  with,  it ;  man  alone  keeps  it  up,  so  as  to
render  it  serviceable  for  various  purposes.  As  far  as  our
investigations  reach  into  the  recondite  past,  we  find  associated
with  human  bones  and  teeth  objects  of  art,  though  rudely
fashioned,  tools  of  wood,  stone,  horn,  bones,  and  half-baked
clay,  together  with  coals,  which  prove  that  man  knew  the  use  of
fire.  But  there  are  no  traditions,  no  legends  which  can  serve  as
guides  in  reference  to  the  first  period  of  human  existence.  Even
in  the  oldest  civilised  countries,  where  from  the  earliest  period
monuments  and  statues  speak  in  hieroglyphics,  whence  great
scholars  have  endeavoured  to  collect  the  old  traditions  and  to  de-
cipher the  primitive  history  of  the  country — even  in  these  oldest
traditions  there  is  no  trace  of  a  pre-historic  non-metallic  period
of  which  stone  hatchets  and  pile-structures  testify.  It  is  only
the  position  of  these  relics,  their  relation  to  the  beds  upon
which  they  rest,  or  by  which  they  are  covered,  their  association
with  other  vegetable  and  animal  remains,  which  can  afford
any  clue  to  the  relation  of  the  primitive  man  to  the  external
world,  his  mode  of  life,  alimentation,  dress,  habitation,  cus-
toms, manners,  and  social  condition.

The  field,  as  you  will  observe,  is  very  extensive ;  the  way  to
it  is  dark ;  knowledge  difficult.  From  the  fragments  of  the
scenery  after  the  theatre  is  burned  down,  we  are  to  guess  the
pieces  which  have  been  played ;  from  the  remains  of  those  who
have  perished  we  are  to  say  what  part  they  played.  Wherever  we
cast  our  glance,  there  is  uncertainty  and  doubt ;  it  is  only  with
the  greatest  caution  that  we  can  grasp  a  guiding  thread  which
in  this  labyrinth  may  lead  us  to  a  starting  point.  The  least
mistake  in  observation  may  engender  an  innumerable  series  of
errors  ;  every  unfounded  or  illogical  deduction  may  lead  us  so
much  astray  that  return  becomes  impossible.  But  the  most
dangerous  rocks,  against  which  the  vessel  of  the  inquirer  must
inevitably  be  wrecked,  are  the  traditional  prejudices  of  church
dogmas  and  biblical  exegesis.  Whosoever  here  attempts  any
mediation  is  at  once  carried  into  a  whirlpool  of  absurdities,
from  which  no  degree  of  prowess  as  an  oarsman  is  able  to
extricate  him.  But  the  greater  the  difficulties,  the  gTeater  the
satisfaction  of  the   inquirer  who  may    succeed   in   raising   a


234  LECTURE    IX.

structure  upon  the  foundation  of  facts — a  structure  which  may
brave  both  the  attacks  of  criticism  and  the  serpent  tooth  of
hatred.  In  proportion  as  error  is  easy,  so  is  our  admiration
sincere  for  such  men  as  devote  their  industry  and  their  minds
to  throw  light  into  the  Egyptian  darkness.

It  is  my  object  to  lead  you  at  once  into  the  remotest  anti-
quity known  to  us,  and  I  shall  treat  in  this  lecture  of  fossil
man.  Not  of  fanciful  stone-forms,  or  skeletons  of  unknown
animals ;  not  of  that  petrified  horseman,  designed  upon  a  block
of  sandstone  at  Fontainebleau,  and  about  which  they  quarrelled
in  Paris  forty  years  ago  ;  not  of  the  salamander  of  Oeningen,
which  Scheuchzer  took  to  be  the  remains  of  a  four  years  old
child,  and  under  a  portrait  of  which  a  theologian  wrote  the
touching  lines — "  Melancholy  skeleton  of  a  poor  sinner,  soften
the  stony  heart  of  the  present  generation ! "  I  shall  say
nothing  of  such  mistakes,  but  shall  treat  of  real  and  undoubted
human  remains,  found  associated  with  extinct  species  of  ani-
mals, and  petrified  animal  bones,  in  strata  whose  great  age  is
undoubted.

I  have  here  indicated  the  limitation  which  the  expression
"  petrified"  or  "  fossil"  must  undergo,  if  it  is  to  be  correctly
applied.  The  question  is  not  whether  human  bones  are  more
or  less  penetrated  by  solutions  of  petrifying  salts,  or  more  or
less  deficient  in  organic  matter ;  the  question,  on  the  contrary,
is  whether  the  primitive  man  saw  animals  different  from  such
as  now  exist  in  our  country  ;  whether  he  hunted  other  beasts
than  such  as  inhabit  our  forests ;  whether  he  dwelt  upon  a  sur-
face which  has  changed  since  the  historical  period ;  whether
he  survived  convulsions,  which  destroyed  a  number  of  animals.

Until  a  recent  period,  this  question  was  unconditionally
answered  in  the  negative.  Cuvier  laid  it  down,  that  the
occurrence  of  human  remains  along  with  bones  of  extinct
animals  was  unproved  ;  that  the  facts  adduced  rested  upon
error;  that  the  petrified  GTuadaloupe  skeletons  were  recent
formations ;  and  that  fossil  human  bones  would  not  be  found
associated  with  those  of  extinct  animals.  As  is  usually  the
case  when  some  great  authority  lays  down  a  law,  so  it  was
here.     The  facts  discovered,  here  and  there,  were  neglected,


LECTURE    IX.  235

considered  as  errors,  and  everthing  relating  to  fossil  man
was  set  aside.  When,  however,  latterly,  there  were  found
products  of  art,  stone  hatchets  in  beds  containing  bones  of
extinct  animals,  the  attention  was  again  directed  to  the  results
formerly  obtained  in  the  exploration  of  grottoes  and  fissures.
The  methodical  examination  of  such  spots  was  now  carried  on
with  renewed  zeal,  and  though  but  a  comparatively  short
period  has  elapsed  since  these  studies  were  recommenced,  the
results  obtained  are  great.  But  before  touching  upon  the
discovery  of  human  remains  in  caverns,  grottoes,  and  fissures,
I  must  offer  some  few  observations  on  certain  geological  phe-
nomena and  important  facts  pertaining  to  this  inquiry.

It  has  been  repeatedly  and  justly  observed  that,  there  is
scarcely  any  solid  rock  upon  the  earth  which  is  not  somehow
torn  or  split ;  it  has  even,  with  some  exaggeration  perhaps,
been  maintained,  that  there  is  not  a  block  found  of  the  size  of
one  cubic  meter  which  does  not  show  some  fissure.  These
fissures  are  generally  very  fine,  and  frequently  newly  cemented
by  trickling  water.  Thus,  in  dark-coloured  chalks,  we  frequently
find  a  network  of  white  calcareous  veins  representing  the
original  fissures.  The  lodes  which  are  sterile  or  filled  with
ore,  are  but  large  fissures  of  this  kind,  which  have  gradually
been  filled  with  the  deposit  of  mineral  matter.  In  these
deposits,  again,  are  found  cavities  not  filled  up.  Fissures  quite
empty  are  also  frequently  seen.  In  other  instances,  it  may  be
seen  how  the  trickling  water  not  only  furnished  crystalline
deposits,  but  that  clay,  earth,  sandstone,  and  pebbles  have  been
introduced  into  the  fissures.  Nothing  is  more  frequent  than
to  find  such  deposits  in  the  fissures,  so  that  the  margins  of
the  crevices  do  not  exactly  correspond,  and,  if  the  fissure  be
not  perpendicular,  there  are  alternate  contractions  and  expan-
sions. Neither  is  it  rare  to  find  fragments  of  the  surrounding-
rocks  filling  the  fissures  ;  and  there  are  even  mountains  and
hills  presenting  the  aspect  of  heaps  of  irregular  superposed
blocks  with  intermediate  fissures,  whose  form  and  size  is  con-
stantly changing  under  the  influence  of  atmospheric  action.

Whilst,  on  the  one  hand,  the  trickling  waters  form  in  most
stones  crystalline    deposits,   it   is    undoubted    that    they  also


236


LECTURE    IX.


extract  from  the  rocks  certain  elements,  and  that  this  extrac-
tion is  nowhere  greater  than  in  the  gypseous  and  chalk
mountains;  because  in  these  latter  the  dissolving  power  of
simple  water  is  augmented  by  the  addition  of  carbonic  acid,
which  is  found  in  all  atmospheric  waters.  For  this  reason,  a
deposit  will  be  specially  formed  in  such  fissures,  where  a
small  quantity  of  water  trickles  down  slowly  and  partly  evapo-
rates, whilst,  on  the  contrary,  where  large  quantities  of  water
pass  through  rapidly,  the  fissure  becomes  rather  enlarged  by
the  removal  of  its  contents.  The  origin  of  the  large  cavities
in  horizontal  fissures  is,  however,  mainly  attributable  to  the
falling  in  of  beds  deprived  of  their  supports,  which  thus  form
wide  spaces  in  the  interior  of  the  mountains.

All  these  phenomena,  from  the  finest  crack  to  the  largest
cavern,  are  closely  connected ;  their  formation  being  confined
neither  to  time  nor  place  ;  the  filling  up  depending  on  local
.conditions.  Where  there  is  no  access  for  the  water  from  above,
it  can  only  enter  from  the  sides  or  springs  which  may  rise  up
from  beneath.  If  there  be  external  apertures,  springs,  brooks,
and  streams  may  enter  and  form  a  subterraneous  river  system,
as  actually  existing  in  many  spots,  but  nowhere  so  well  deve-
loped as  in  Carinthia  and  the  Krain  on  the  platform  above
Trieste,  where  is  found  a  series  of  subterranean  lakes  connected
by  rivers,  partly  navigable,  and  inhabited  by  various  animals.

It  is  customary  to  make  a  distinction  between  crevices  of
little  width,  running  more  or  less  perpendicularly;  grottoes,
which  are  but  short  cavities,  with  externally  wide  apertures ;
and  caverns,  consisting  of  a  succession  of  vaults,  connected  by
narrow  channels.  The  grottoes,  or  balmen  as  they  are  called,
(probably  from  a  Celtic  word)  in  Switzerland,  South  Germany,
and  France,  frequently  owe  their  origin  to  soft  beds  of  marl,
carried  off  from  beneath  the  harder  lime  beds,  which  now  cover
them  ;  they  are  often  only  the  inlet  of  caverns  cut  off  by  the
closure  of  the  fissure.  Caverns,  on  the  contrary,  are  sometimes
of  surprising  dimensions,  extending  in  some  cases  for  miles
under  the  ground,  frequently  containing  chambers  one  hundred
feet  in  height,  and  as  many  in  diameter.  These  chambers  are
not  always  situated  in  the  same  plane,  but  have  to  be  reached


LECTURE    IX.  23"J

from  above  or  from  below  by  ladders,  and  the  entrance  is
sometimes  so  narrow  that  it  requires  to  be  enlarged  before  a
person  can  pass  through.

Having  thus  shortly  described  the  formation  of  the  crevices,
grottoes,  and  caverns,  let  us  glance  at  their  internal  condition.
Most  of  these  caverns  are  found  in  the  chalk  formation  of  old
and  recent  origin.  The  Devonian  and  carboniferous  limestone
of  Ireland,  England,  Belgium,  and  Westphalia;  the  magnesian
limestone  of  the  Hartz  mountains  ;  the  Jura  limestone  of
France,  Germany,  and  Switzerland;  the  chalk  and  the  num-
mulitic  masses  of  the  Pyrenees,  Alps;  and  Apennines  contain
caverns,  some  of  which  have  acquired  sufficient  celebrity  to
attract  numbers  of  travelling  sight-seers.  What  first  strikes
such  tourists  is  the  curious  form  of  the  stalactites,  which  by
torchlight  assume  most  fantastic  shapes.  These  stalactites
are  but  the  crystalline  deposits  of  the  trickling  water  which
hold  lime  in  solution,  and  they  appear  brown  or  yellowish
according  as  the  water  is  impregnated  with  clay  or  earth.
The  size  of  these  stalactites  gives  no  certain  clue  to  their
age.  The  deposits  vary  even  in  the  same  cave  according  to
the  quantity  and  quality  of  the  water.  Bones  and  pebbles  are
rarely  found  in  the  stalactites.  This  only  occurs  when  the
cavern  is  entirely  covered  with  deposits ;  when  the  stalactite
mass  forms  only  a  crust  in  the  roof  and  the  walls,  but  does  not
hang  down  in  the  form  of  icicles.

The  lime  water  trickling  down  from  the  roof  or  the  walls,
forms  a  crust  on  the  floor  of  the  cave,  which,  in  contra-distinc-
tion  to  that  on  the  roof,  is  called  the  stalagmite  crust.  Corre-
sponding to  the  spots  where  a  larger  quantity  of  water  has
trickled  down,  there  are  eminences  and  columns  which  fre-
quently unite  with  those  which  hang  down  from  above.

There  are  grottoes  without  stalactites.  Such  caves  as
contain  but  few  stalactites  are  best  adapted  for  further
researches.

Beneath  the  stalagmite  crust  are  usually  found  deposits  of  a
so    called    osseous    earth.     This   is   usually  a   yellowish  fatty
earth,  a  clay  mixed  frequently  with   sand,  often  exhibiting
kind  of  stratified  form.     In  or  beneath  this  clay  pebbles  arc


238  LECTUEE    IX.

found,  which  must  have  come  from  a  distance,  as  they  belong
to  different  formations  from  those  found  in  the  vicinity  of  the
cavern.  The  clay  is  either  loose,  or  so  penetrated  with  lime
that  it  forms  a  solid  cement,  which  can  only  be  split  with  a
chisel.  At  times  there  are  found  angular  stones,  mostly  de-
tached fragments  from  the  walls  of  the  cavern.  The  deposit
of  this  ossiferous  clay  is  frequently  very  thin,  but  in  some
cases  so  abundant,  that  it  is  stated  that  in  the  grotto  of  Ban-
well  in  England,  one  chamber  fifteen  meters  high  is  nearly
filled  with  this  ossiferous  mud.

We  are,  in  fact,  perfectly  justified  in  designating  this  cave
clay,  mostly  of  a  reddish  tinge,  which  is  only  reached  by
piercing  through  the  hard  stalactite  deposit,  as  osseous  clay;
for  in  it  we  find  frequently  a  considerable  quantity  of  bones.
Besides  these  bones,  to  which  we  shall  presently  advert,  we
meet  in  the  clay  land  and  freshwater  snails,  which  belong  to
species  still  existing  in  the  same  spot.

The  bones  lie  in  this  clay  pell-mell,  without  any  trace  of
order.  The  skulls  are  usually  separated  from  the  lower  jaws,
the  other  bones  of  the  skeleton  lie  scattered  about.  Skeletons
complete  in  the  relative  positions  of  the  parts  have  probably
never  been  found ;  even  such  a  discovery  as  that  made  in  the
cave  of  Brixham,  where  all  the  bones  of  the  posterior  leg  of  a
bear  were  found  in  their  proper  position,  is  a  rare  exception.
It  seems,  however,  that  in  most  cases  the  bones  had  been  in-
troduced into  the  caves  more  or  less  with  the  flesh  attached,  as
most  of  them  have  preserved  their  sharp  angles  and  margins ;
others,  however,  have  manifestly  been  transported  and  rounded,
whilst  others,  again,  are  split  up,  just  as  if  they  had,  previous  to
their  introduction,  been  long  exposed  to  the  action  of  the
atmosphere.  In  many  caverns,  bones  have  been  found  evi-
dently gnawed  or  cracked,  while  some  presented  manifest
traces  of  having  been  worked  by  man.

The  preservation  of  bones  gives  no  clue  to  their  age.
Where  the  stalactite  roof  is  wanting,  and  the  mud  remained
dry,  the  bones  are  so  decayed  that  they  crumble  into  dust  on
being  touched.  Where  there  is  a  stalagmite  floor,  they  are  in
a  better  state  of  preservation,  and  have   even  conserved  the


LECTURE    IX.  239

organic  matter  they  contained  at  first.  In  most  cases,  how-
ever, the  bones  have  lost  the  greater  portion  of  it,  and  adhere
to  the  tongue — a  quality  which  formerly,  but  erroneously,
was  considered  as  the  characteristic  mark  of  a  fossil.  In  the
fissures  filled  with  bones  which  are  found  in  the  Mediter-
ranean region,  the  red  clay,  as  well  as  the  bones,  is  frequently
so  impregnated  with  lime  as  to  form  a  true  breccia,  which
must  be  blasted  with  gunpowder,  and  whence  the  bones  are
only  hewn  out  with  considerable  force.

The  clue  to  the  period  in  which  the  deposits  in  the  fissures
and  caves  took  place,  must  be  furnished  by  the  bones  and
other  remains.  Animals  of  the  same  species  lived  in  the  same
geological  epochs,  which  no  doubt  lasted  for  an  incalculable
series  of  years ;  animals  of  the  same  species  belong,  therefore,
to  the  same  geological  chronology.  It  can,  however,  be  easily
shewn,  that  similar  conditions  may  prevail  in  different  geological
epochs,  and  produce  the  same  effects.  When  the  small  tunnel
between  Morges  and  Iverdun  was  commenced,  there  were
found  in  the  yellow  limestone,  which  belongs  to  the  lower  chalk
system,  crevices  filled  up  with  brown-red  osseous  clay,  the
traces  of  which  are  still  visible  at  the  southern  entrance  of  the
tunnel.  The  bones  contained  therein  belonged  to  pachyder-
mata  of  the  tertiary  period,  and  were  mostly  identical  with  the
species  found  in  the  gypsum  of  Montmartre  near  Paris.  These
bones  were  consequently  much  older  than  those  usually  found
in  ossiferous  caves.  On  the  other  hand,  in  1860,  on  the  Stoss
in  the  Muotta  valley  in  Canton  Schwytz,  near  a  place  called
"  Barentross,"  5,042  feet  above  the  level  of  the  sea,  a  cave  was
discovered  in  which  a  whole  bear  family,  consisting  of  six
animals  old  and  young,  lay  buried  in  a  bed  of  clay  two  feet
thick  covered  with  a  crust  of  lime  tufa  half  an  inch  in  thickness.
"  The  bones  themselves/'  says  Riitimeyer,  "  are  also  covered
with  a  thin  tufa  crust,  and  are  in  excellent  preservation.  Some
are  in  possession  of  the  College  of  Schwytz,  others  in  that  of
Landamman^?// derMauer  in  Brunnen.  The  largest  skeleton  lay
in  an  outstretched  position,  the  two  anterior  extremities  seem-
ingly broken  off  by  a  fragment  of  rock  which  fell  from  the  roof.
The  largest  skull  which  I  saw  in  Brunnen  measured  285  milli-


240  LECTURE    IX.

meters  from  the  foramen  magnum  to  the  incisive  alveoli,  and
200  millimeters  in  width  at  the  level  of  the  zygomatic  arches,
and  thus  must  have  belonged  to  a  very  large  animal.  A  larger
skull  is  said  to  be  in  the  College  of  Schwytz.  The  well-pre-
served teeth  rendered  it  easy  to  ascertain  that  the  skull  be-
longed to  a  brown  bear.  Significant  is  the  circumstance,  that
the  locality  where  this  bear  cave  is  situate  is  called  upon
the  maps  '  Barentross/  from  '  Troos/  alnus  viridis,  which  tree
is  abundant  there,  a  circumstance  which  indicates  a  recent
habitation  of  the  cave."  Here,  therefore,  is  an  osseous  deposit
of  a  comparatively  recent  date,  at  any  rate  much  more  so  than
the  deposits  usually  found  in  caves.

Before  proceeding  to  the  age  of  these  deposits,  I  must  be
permitted  to  say  a  few  words  on  the  mode  in  which  these  caves
were  filled  up.  The  bones  are  generally  those  of  beasts  of
prey.  In  Europe,  to  which  portion  of  the  globe  these  remarks
apply,  it  is  chiefly  the  bones  of  bears  and  of  hygenas  which
have  been  found.  These  two  animals  inhabit  caves,  and  as  is
proved  by  the  cave  in  the  Stoss,  they  may  have  been  over-
whelmed by  the  falling  in  of  blocks  of  stone,  and  thus  buried
in  the  clay.  This  could,  however,  have  happened  to  but  few
individuals,  though  several  successive  generations  of  such
animals  may  have  inhabited  the '  same  cave ;  but  the  circum-
stance that  thousands  of  individuals  are  found  buried  together
in  such  caves,  shows  that  other  causes  must  have  been  at  work.
There  are  proofs  that  some  caves  were  inhabited  by  carnivora,
who  introduced  bones  to  feed  their  young,  which  was  especially
done  by  the  hyeenas,  whose  coprolites  contain  undigested
bones.  The  bears,  though  they  also  inhabit  caves,  to  which
they  retire  chiefly  for  hybernation,  did  not  introduce  bones.
Again,  large  collections  of  bones  are  found  in  cavities  which
can  only  be  reached  by  ladders,  to  which  no  living  animals
could  have  had  access.  Hence  but  few  caves  are  entirely  filled
up  with  the  bones  of  its  former  inhabitants,  some  remains  must
therefore  have  been  introduced  by  some  other  causes.

Sick  and  dying  animals  usually  retire  to  caves  and  fissures,
to  die  or  to  recover.  Many  bones  have  been  found  showing
that  the  animals  had  been  wounded  or  that  the  bones  were


LECTUEE    IX.  241

carious  or  otherwise  diseased.  Schmerling  has  described  a
series  of  such  diseased  bones  found  in  the  Belgian  caves.
Soemmering  described  a  hyena  skull  the  parietal  portion  of
which  had  been  bitten,  and  afterwards  partially  healed.  Such
animals  may  also  have  furnished  their  contingent  of  cave  bones.

But  if  these  three  causes  were  thoroughly  established,  we
ought,  as  in  the  cave  at  the  Stoss,  to  find  entire  skeletons  of
the  carnivora.  But  so  little  is  this  the  case,  that  caves  which
have  been  completely  explored  furnished  bones  of  several  indi-
viduals, but  rarely  all  the  bones  belonging  to  the  same  skeleton.
We  shall  recur  to  this  fact  when  speaking  of  human  bones.

There  remains,  then,  as  regards  most  caves,  only  the  assump-
tion that  the  bones,  together  with  pebbles,  shells,  and  other
relics,  have  been  carried  into  the  caves  by  water.  If  the  bones
show  traces  of  having  been  rolled,  or  bleached,  or  dried,  they
may  have  been  introduced  in  that  condition.  Where  they  are
better  preserved,  they  were  probably  floated  pieces  of  putrefy-
ing carcasses.  As  the  mouths  of  caves  and  grottoes  are  fre-
quently several  hundred  feet  above  the  valleys,  we  are  justified
in  assuming  that  in  certain  localities  the  watermark  was  much
higher  than  it  is  now,  and  that  the  brooks  carried  a  larger
quantity  of  water.  In  many  caves  the  deposition  must  have
been  effected  very  gradually,  as  shewn  by  the  stratification  of
the  mud  intermixed  with  layers  of  sand  and  pebbles.  In  other
caves  the  deposition  was  more  irregular,  and  probably  effected
under  the  influence  of  cross  streams.  The  small  size  of  the
pebbles  shows,  however,  that  the  current  could  not  have  been
very  violent.  Violent  currents  may  have  occurred,  but  only
in  few  localities.  That  caves  containing  no  pebbles  have  been
but  very  gradually  filled  with  mud  by  the  introduction  of  the
melting  snow  waters  is  proved  by  the  cave  at  the  Stoss,  which  is
situated  at  a  height  and  in  a  locality  where  the  idea  of  a  brook
cannot  be  entertained,  and  which  nevertheless  has  within  a
comparatively  short  time  been  filled  with  a  layer  of  mud  two
feet  in  thickness.

On  examining  the  remains  of  such  species  as  have  hitherto
been  found  in  caves  and  the  so-called  diluvium,  we  first  obtain
the  fact,  that  a  great  number  of  species,  and  particularly  such


242  LECTURE    IX.

as  furnish  the  greater  number  of  bones,  are  those  of  extinct
animals.  To  these  belongs  the  powerful  cave  bear  (TJrsus
spelceusj,  whose  skull  is  distinguished  from  the  present  species
by  its  great  size,  the  constant  absence  of  the  small  gap-teeth,  the
curved  forehead  and  the  prominent  frontal  eminences,  forming
a  ridge  upon  the  forehead.  Though  Blainville  considers  all
the  remains  of  bears  found  in  caves  as  of  the  same  species  and
identical  both  with  the  brown  bear  of  Europe,  and  the  grey
and  the  black  bear  of  North  America  and  Europe,  all  other
naturalists  have  given  as  the  results  of  their  labours  that  the
difference  between  the  cave  bear  and  the  present  living  species
is  greater  than  that  obtaining  between  existing  different  species,
so  that  we  must  either  assume  that  all  living  bears  belong  to
the  same  species,  or  that  the  cave  bear  represents  an  extinct
species.  Along  with  the  remains  of  the  cave  bear  there  are
found,  though  rarely,  skulls  which  seem  to  form  a  transition
to  the  brown  bear.

The  cave  hyena  (Hycena  spelcea),  also,  is  an  extinct
species.  It  was  larger  and  more  powerful  than  the  spotted
hyasna  of  the  Cape,  the  remains  of  which  have  recently
been  found  in  Sicilian  caves.  In  caves  of  southern  France
were  also  found  the  remains  of  a  hysena  resembling  the  striped
species.  The  cave  lion  (Felis  spelcea),  which  in  size  and
strength  excelled  the  present  species  of  lions  and  tigers,  is  also
extinct.  It  is  found  up  to  the  Harz,  whilst  an  extinct  species
of  large  cats  (Felis  antiqua)  resembling  the  panther  or  leopard,
has  hitherto  been  only  found  in  the  Franconian  Jura  and  south
of  it.

To  the  extinct  rodents  belongs  a  beaver,  (Troguntherium
Cuvieri)  the  skull  of  which  is  larger  by  one-fifth  than  that  of
the  present  species ;  a  hare  (Lepus  diluvianus)  which  is  found
in  the  region  of  the  Mediterranean,  and  seems  to  occupy  an
intermediate  place  between  the  hare  proper  and  the  piping  or
calling  hare,  (Lagomys)  at  present  confined  to  northern  Asia,
some  species  of  which  formerly  existed  in  central  Europe,  but
are  now  extinct ;  a  squirrel-like  rodent,  (Sciurus  prisms)  which
is  essentially  distinguished  from  other  species  of  squirrels,  and
a  digging  mouse,  (Arvicola  hrecciensis)  almost  the  only  con-
tents of  osseous  fissures  in  Sardinia ;   even  among  the  insec-


LECTURE    IX.  243

tivora,  which  excepting  in  the  formation  of  the  teeth,  are  nearly
allied  to  the  rodentia,  a  species  of  shrew  (Sorex  similis),  for-
merly native  in  Sardinia,  now  perfectly  extinct,  has  been  found.

Among  the  ruminants  the  deer  species  were  well  represented,
and  belong  to  the  extinct  animals.  The  splendid  Irish  peat
deer  (Cervus  euryceros),  which  in  size  equalled  the  reindeer,
and  possessed  enormous  antlers,  whose  size  and  weight  seemed
out  of  proportion  to  that  of  the  animal ;  the  gigantic  deer
(Cervus  somonensis)  which  occurs  in  northern  France,  and
some  less-known  species  found  in  French  caves,  are  all  extinct.
So  too  are  certain  antelopes  (Antelope  Ghristoli  and  dichotoma)
found  in  caves  of  the  south  of  France,  a  wild  goat  (Ibex  Ceven-
narum)  of  the  Cevennes,  and  other  two  species  of  oxen  (Bos
primigenius),  of  which  we  shall  speak  when  treating  of  domes-
tic animals.

Of  all  extinct  species  the  pachydermata  have  excited  the
greatest  attention.  No  horses,  of  which  an  extinct  species
(Equus  fossilis)  has,  however,  been  discovered  in  France ;  but  of
the  hippopotamus,  rhinoceros,  and  elephants,  some  perfectly
preserved  carcasses,  especially  of  the  latter,  have  been  found  as
far  north  as  the  coast  of  the  Arctic  sea.  There  existed  probably
several  species  of  extinct  river  horses  (Hippopotamus  Pent-
landi,  major,  minor)  extending  to  England  and  Russia,  which
could  as  easily  have  supported  themselves  in  the  marshy  lakes
and  large  rivers  of  the  diluvial  period,  as  they  can  now  in
central  Africa.  In  Europe  we  find  two*  different  species  of  ele-
phants ;  the  one  of  which  (Elephas  meridionalis)  was  essentially
confined  to  the  Mediterranean  region,  where  it  occurs  along
with  a  rhinoceros  (Rhinoceros  leptorhinus) ,  which  resembles
the  double-horned  rhinoceros  of  the  Cape ;  whilst  the  other
species,  the  mammoth  (Elephas  primigenius) ,  and  another
species  of  rhinoceros  (Rhinoceros  tichorhinus) ,  carrying  two  horns
upon  a  nose,  supported  by  an  osseous  septum,  was  enabled  by
a  warm  hairy  coat,  which  is  wanting  in  the  present  species,  to

*  Sir  Charles  Lyell,  in  his  recent  address  to  the  British  Association  at
Bath,  makes  the  following  observations  on  this  point :  "We  have  now,  there-
fore, evidence  of  man  having  coexisted  in  Europe  with  three  species  of  ele-
phants, two  of  them  extinct  (namely,  the  Mammoth  and  the  Elephas  antiquus),
and  a  third,  the  same  as  that  which  still  survives  in  Africa." — Editor.

R  2


244  LECTURE    IX.

support  existence  in  the  northern  regions.  It  seems  remark-
able that  an  elephantine  species,  the  mastodon,  which  in  the
alluvial  formations  of  North  America  replaces  the  elephant,
is  also  represented  in  Europe  by  a  species  (Mastodon  angusti-
dens)  which  appears  in  the  old  layers  of  the  tertiary  period.

We  shall  presently  have  to  examine  whether  these  various
species,  which,  excepting  the  mastodon,  resemble  the  present
living  species,  have  become  extinct  at  the  same  period.

All  other  species  hitherto  found  in  caves  and  the  alluvium,
agree  with  the  existing,  excepting  in  size,  which  seems  to
increase  in  the  older  bones.  It  has,  however,  been  justly
observed,  that  this  character  is  insufficient  for  the  distinction  of
species,  as  it  frequently  depends  on  the  abundance  of  food,  and
facility  of  procuring  it.  One  of  the  bear  skulls  found  at  the
Stoss,  far  exceeds  in  dimensions  any  of  the  brown  bear  recently
found ;  yet,  in  the  bear  menagerie  of  Berne,  they  have,  accord-
ing to  Rutimeyer,  brought  up  bears  which  attained  an  equally
colossal  size.  Pictet  seems,  therefore,  perfectly  justified  in
declining  to  assume  difference  of  species  from  the  mere  size
of  the  fossil  bones.  On  examining  the  list  of  bones  hither-
to found,  we  observe  that  almost  all  mammals  of  the  present
fauna  of  Europe,  excepting  some  few  and  not  easily  to  be
distinguished  species,  or  manifestly  imported  domestic  animals,
were  represented  in  the  diluvial  period,  so  that  the  fauna  of
Europe  was  richer  then  than  it  is  now.  Pictet  enumerates  all
these  species,  and  shows  that  but  a  few  small  species  are  want-
ing, and  that,  even  recently,  species,  such  as  the  porcupine  and
the  moufflon,  the  ancestor  of  our  domestic  sheep,  have  been
discovered  in  Italy.  There  can,  therefore,  be  no  doubt,  that
most  living  species  existed  in  the  diluvial  period ;  though  it  is
going  too  far  to  deduce  from  this  that  no  new  creation  or
origin  of  species  had  occurred  within  or  since  the  diluvial
period.  In  the  same  way  as  the  extinct  species  disappeared
at  different  periods,  so  may  the  present  existing  species  have
arisen  at  different  times,  though  within  the  same  great  epoch.

As  regards  living  species,  the  remains  of  which  are  also
found  in  the  caves  and  alluvial  mountains  of  central  Europe,
there  is,  again,  found  a  difference,  in  so  far  as  many  of  these
species  have  changed  their  habitat,  and  have  entirely  withdrawn


LECTURE    IX.  245

from  tlie  region  they  previously  occupied.  Tin's  phenomenon
is  not  peculiarly  striking",  as  it  is  repeated  within  historical
times.  The  deer,  the  beaver,  the  ibex,  formerly  plentiful  in
Switzerland,  have  now  entirely  disappeared.  The  wolf  is  ex-
terminated in  England  ;  the  bear  is  so  in  the  greater  part  of
Germany.  On  casting  a  glance  at  this  departure  of  species,  it
seems  singular,  that  most  of  such  as  formerly  inhabited  central
Europe  have  retreated  northward ;  that  consequently  at  the
diluvial  period  there  existed  in  the  heart  of  Europe  a  fauna,
the  remains  of  which  are  at  present  only  found  in  the  north.
These  northern,  but  formerly  central-European  animals,  in-
clude the  glutton,  the  icebear,  hamster  marmot,  the  lemming,
the  reindeer,  the  elk,  the  aurochs,  the  musk  ox,  the  walrus.
Some  of  these  species  are  apparently  becoming  extinct,  as  the
bison  (Bison  Eurojocms) ,  of  which  there  exists  only  a  single  herd
in  a  Polish  forest.  Others  hover,  as  it  were,  on  the  boundary
of  the  German  continent,  as,  for  instance,  the  elk,  which  inha-
bits only  a  small  portion  of  the  coast  of  the  Baltic,  but  is  found
in  Scandinavia,  and  Russia :  others  have  retreated  to  the
Arctic  circle,  as  the  lemming,  glutton,  and  reindeer ;  others,
again,  now  inhabit  the  icy  mountain  regions,  as  the  chamois,
marmots,  and  ibex.  Whilst  among  the  extinct  species  types
are  found,  which  are  at  present  confined  to  regions  south  of  the
Mediterranean,  as  lions,  hyeenas,  and  riverhorses;  we  find  among
the  departed  species  scarcely  a  well-founded  instance  of  a  re-
treat to  the  south ;  and  as  regards  the  extinct  species,  as  the
elephant  and  the  rhinoceros,  we  may  conclude  that  they  retired
to  the  north,  step  by  step,  until  they  found  the  limits  of  their
existence  in  Northern  Siberia.  This  view  is  supported  by  the
fact  that  the  "  collared  lemming"  (Lemrnus  torquatus),  at  pre-
sent existing  in  the  highest  north  beyond  the  forest  region,  is
now  only  found  in  the  ossiferous  fissures  of  Northern  Germany,
but  never  further  south.

Since,  then,  of  the  extinct  species,  the  cognates  of  which  at
present  inhabit  southern  climates,  some  had  by  their  woolly
skin  been  enabled  to  support  the  cold,  it  gives  rise  to  the
presumption,  that  other  species,  with  whose  bones  only  we
are  acquainted,  but  of  whose  integuments  nothing  is  known,
may  have  been  similarly  protected  from  the  cold.     As  it  is


246  LECTURE    IX.

further  known,  that  the  tiger  of  south  Asia  makes  excursions  to
Siberia,  up  to  the  50  deg.  north  latitude,  and  even  in  regions,
as  in  the  Amoor,  where  the  mean  temperature  in  the  winter  is
—  20  deg.  R. ;  and  as  we  may  suppose  that  the  cave  tiger  was
equally  enabled  to  support  the  cold ;  and  as  even  the  hyaenas,
which  inhabit  northern  Africa,  are  found  on  the  highest  ridges
of  the  Atlas  mountains,  covered  in  winter  with  ice  and  snow,  we
are  fully  justified  in  concluding-,  that  from  the  beginning  of  the  di-
luvial period  there  reigned  in  central  Europe  a  much  lower  tem-
perature than  at  present,  and  that  the  animals,  with  the  increase
of  heat,  at  least  partially  retired  northward,  following  the
temperature  to  which  they  had  been  accustomed  in  central
Europe.  A  considerable  portion  of  central  Europe  may,  at
the  beginning  of  the  diluvial  period,  have  presented  the  same
aspect  as  the  damp  and  marshy  plains  of  Poland,  Lithuania,
and  Siberia  do  now.

We  have  to  some  extent  wandered  from  our  subject.  In
endeavouring  to  give  you  a  sketch  of  the  society  in  which  the
primitive  man  lived,  and  showing  the  conditions  in  which
human  remains  are  found  in  caves  and  fissures,  I  have  invo-
luntarily digressed  to  describe  the  climate  of  the  period  which
these  remains  indicate.  Let  us  then  return  to  our  starting
point,  and  examine  the  caves  and  fissures  in  relation  to  the
remains  they  contain.

History  shows  that  caverns  were  at  all  times  either  places
of  refuge,  or  habitations  for  more  or  less  civilised  peoples.  The
ancients  speak  of  troglodytes,  or  cave  dwellers,  in  Asia  Minor,
Greece,  and  Italy.  Christian  and  heathen  assemblies,  when
subject  to  persecutions  on  account  of  their  religion,  were  held
in  forests  and  caverns.  Caesar  gave  orders  to  his  lieutenant
Crassus  that  the  Gauls  should  be  shut  up  in  the  caverns  of
Aquitania  and  destroyed,  just  as  the  famous  warrior  Pelissier
smoked  out  the  Arabs  who  objected  to  having  French  civilisa-
tion forced  on  them.

Certain  caves  and  fissures  served  as  places  for  execution,  the
criminals  being  thrown  down  and  abandoned  to  a  miserable
fate  ;  other  caves  were  used  as  burial  places.  Most  caves  and
grottoes  serve  even  now  as  places  of  refuge  for  shepherds  in
tempestuous  weather,  or  even  as  temporary  dormitories.     It  is


LECTURE    IX.  247

thus  not  surprising  that  in  many  grottoes  and  caverns  are
found  human  bones  or  objects  of  art  and  industry  from  remote
periods  to  the  present  time.  Thus  in  the  cave  of  Mialet  near
Anduze  in  the  Cevennes  were  found  fragments  of  pottery,
Roman  lamps,  the  statuette  of  a  senator  in  his  toga,  in  yellow
burnt  clay,  also  Roman  antiquities  with  polished  stone  hatchets
and  other  stone  weapons  which  belonged  to  an  earlier  period.
In  one  part  of  the  grotto  was  a  grave  filled  with  human  bones
dug  in  a  sandy  clay  containing  bones  of  the  bear.  In  other
spots  of  alluvial  soil  were  found  objects  of  art  manifestly  more
recent  than  the  ossiferous  clay  which  it  covered.  In  the  back-
ground of  the  grotto  were  seven  or  eight  bear  skulls  so  sur-
rounded by  stone  blocks,  which  had  become  detached  from  the
roof,  as  to  resemble  a  monumental  group.  There  is  no  doubt
that  all  these  objects  must  belong  to  a  later  period,  as  it  is
historically  proved  that  at  the  time  of  the  dragoonades  of
Louis  XIV,  the  persecuted  Protestants  worshipped  in  this
cave.  I  merely  cite  this  example  to  show  that  such  late  depo-
sits occur  partly  above  and  partly  between,  and  in  the  osseous
clay  itself,  in  the  absence  of  a  stalactite  roof,  or  if  it  has  been
subject  to  the  exploration  of  intruders.  But  all  these  recent
intermixtures  in  the  caves  may  be  easily  detected  on  careful
examination.

The  finding  of  human  bones  in  the  same  condition  as  the
animal  bones  is  different  when  they  are  met  with  imbedded  in
clay  showing  no  sign  of  having  been  disturbed,  and  when  they
are  intermixed  with  the  bones  of  extinct  animals  covered  by  a
stalactite  roof  imbedded  in  stalagmite,  so  that  bear-  and  human
bones  are  cemented  in  one  mass.  In  such  cases,  and  especially
if  the  discovery  is  made  by  careful  and  trustworthy  observers,
there  can  be  no  doubt  that  man  who  was  buried  with  the  bear
also  lived  with  him.  To  establish  this  fact,  I  shall  cite  a  few
instances  which  inspire  us  with  confidence  from  the  character
of  the  observers,  and  which  will  assist  us  in  our  investigations,
as  regards  the  origin  of  mankind  and  the  different  races.

Dr.  Schmerling  of  Liege  published  in  1833  a  classical  work
on  the  caves  of  his  own  country.  Each  of  these  caves,  some
of  which  have   now   disappeared  by   being  quarried  out,  was


248  LECTUEE    IX.

minutely  explored  by  him  and  some  of  them  emptied  of  their
contents,  and  each  bone  separately  examined.  Schmerling
observes  on  the  condition  of  the  fossil  human  bones  in  his  pos-
session : — "  They,  like  the  thousands  of  bones  which  I  have
collected  within  a  short  time,  are  characterised  by  the  degree
of  their  decomposition,  which  is  quite  the  same  as  that  of  the
extinct  animals.  All,  with  few  exceptions,  are  broken ;  some
are  rounded,  as  is  frequently  observed  in  other  bones.  The
fractures  are  transverse  or  oblique ;  nowhere  a  trace  of  being
gnawed ;  the  colour,  varying  from  yellow  to  black,  does  not
differ  from  that  of  other  bones.  These  are  all  lighter  than
fresh  bones,  excepting  such  as  are  covered  with  a  layer  of  chalk
tuff  or  have  their  cavities  filled  with  such  a  deposit,"

The  most  important  object  in  Schmei'ling's  collection  is  the
upper  part  of  a  skull  from  the  eyebrows  to  the  occipital
foramen,  which  was  found  in  the  cavern  of  Engis  at  the  depth
of  1J-  meter,  in  an  osseous  breccia  one  meter  in  width,  1^  me-
ter in  height,  attached  to  the  wall  of  the  cave.  The  earth
which  covered  this  skull  showed  no  trace  of  having  been  dis-
turbed ;  it  contained  the  remains  of  small  animals,  teeth  of  the
rhinoceros,  horse,  of  hyamas,  bears,  and  ruminants,  which  sur-
rounded the  skull  on  all  sides.  In  order  to  reach  the  cave,
Schmerling  and  his  companions  had  to  descend  by  means  of  a
rope  attached  to  a  nearly  perpendicular  rocky  wall.  In  a  sort
of  antechamber  five  meters  in  width,  six  meters  high,  and
seventeen  meters  deep,  was  seen  near  the  opening  of  the  cave
a  layer  of  osseous  earth  two  meters  in  thickness.  In  this  were
found,  besides  the  usual  animal  bones,  an  incisor,  a  vertebra,
and  a  finger  bone,  all  human,  together  with  several  stone
hatchets  of  triangular  shape.  A  little  beneath  this  cave  was
a"  second  aperture  leading  to  another  chamber,  twelve  meters
deep,  five  meters  high,  and  four  meters  wide ;  this  again  led
into  a  semicircular  gallery  which  contained  many  bones,  and
terminated  in  a  narrow  fissure  preventing  any  further  advance.
There  is  on  the  other  side  a  rising  gallery  leading  into  a  small
hall,  which  seems  filled  with  osseous  earth.  Here  it  was  that
the  skull,  which  we  shall  henceforth  call  the  Engis  skull,  was
discovered.     Besides  this,  was  found  the  skull  of  a  younger


LECTURE    IX.  249

individual  at  the  bottom  of  the  cave,  and  also  an  elephant's
tooth.  This  skull  was  entire,  but  when  Schmerling  tried  to
lift  it  up  it  fell  into  dust  excepting  some  pieces  of  the  jaws.
The  other  human  bones  found  by  Schmerling,  clavicle,  radius,
and  carpus,  as  well  as  bones  of  the  foot,  did  not  excite  so  much
interest,  but  they  showed  that  they  belonged  to  three  different
individuals.  Schmerling  had  the  whole  cave  emptied,  but  he
did  not  succeed  in  finding  the  component  parts  of  the  whole
skeleton.  In  front  of  the  aperture  of  the  cave  was  osseous
earth,  covered  with  a  luxuriant  vegetation.  It  was  thus  cer-
tain that  only  separate  putrid  portions  of  human  bodies  had
been  carried  into  the  cave  by  the  waters  along  with  the  bones
of  bears.  The  difficulty  of  access  and  the  absence  of  certain
bones  render  the  assumption  that  several  human  bodies  had
been  buried  in  the  cave  impossible.

In  another  cave,  that  of  Engihoul,  there  were  also  found,
and  under  the  same  conditions,  the  remains  of  at  least  three
individuals.  Here  were  only  found  some  insignificant  cranial
fragments,  though  a  large  quantity  of  the  bones  of  the  extre-
mities. There  was  also  found  a  piece  of  the  radius  and  of  the
elbow  cemented  together  by  stalactite,  and  Schmerling  calls
attention  to  the  fact  that  all  conditions,  including  the  peculiar
distribution  of  the  bones,  were  quite  the  same  as  with  the
bones  of  other  animals.

In  Southern  France  there  runs  along  the  Pyrenees  a  chain
of  low  chalk  mountains,  which  are  remarkably  torn  up  and
fissured.  Two  caves  found  in  this  range,  namely  the  caves  of
Lombrive  and  Lherm,  Department  of  Ariege,  have  recently
acquired  importance  by  the  discovery  of  entire  skulls  and  re-
markable implements.  I  give  you  the  details,  because  a  pam-
phlet published  at  Toulouse  by  Messrs.  Rames,  Garrigou,  and
Filhol  does  not  seem  to  have  excited  any  attention,  and  also
because  I  was  fortunate  enough  to  examine  two  skulls  which
Dr.  Garrigou  brought  to  Geneva.  It  is  the  more  surpi'ising
that  Lyell  should  have  taken  no  notice  of  this  discovery,  as  we
know  that  he  has  at  least  heard  of  it,  and  as  this  discovery  is
in  every  respect  more  important  than  many  others  made  in
England  which  excited  so  much  attention.


250


LECTURE    IX.


The  cave  of  Loinbrive,  say  the  authors,  is  about  4,000
meters  iu  length.  It  consists  of  a  series  of  wide  halls,  which
are  connected  by  long  and  narrow  passages.  Here  and  there
are  side  galleries.  In  some  parts  the  roof  is  so  low  that  we
must  creep  through.  The  entrance  has  been  widened  by  a
small  tunnel.  Tourists  have  for  a  long  time  visited  the  cave  on
account  of  the  stalactite  formations.  The  ground  and  the  walls
Fig.  84.     Section  of  the  Cave  of  Lombrive.


o,  b.  Section  of,  passing  through  the  Cave.  c.  Interior  of  the  Cave.
1.  Stalactites.  2.  Stalagmite  crust  of  the  floor.  3.  Ossiferous  clay.  4.
Plastic  clay.     5.  Gravel,  with  small  pebbles.     6.  Large' rolled  stones.

exhibit  traces  of  having  been  scooped  by  water,  presenting
stripes,  furrows,  and  deposits  of  gravel,  sand,  mud,  and  bluish
clay.  The  deposits  are  also  found  in  the  small  side  grottoes,
which  frequently  lie  above  the  level  of  the  chief  cave.  They
contain  bones,  and  are  here  and  there  covered  by  stalagmite,  the
surface  of  which  resembles  the  surface  of  the  sea  ruffled  by  a
light  breeze.

The  cave  has  two  entrances,  at  a  little  distance  from  each
other,  through  which  the  waters  escaped,  in  a  direction  indi-
cated by  a  gradual  elevation  of  the  floor  of  the  cave  backward,
but  especially  by  a  perpendicular  precipice,  which  abruptly
divides  the  cave  into  two  portions.  Five  fire-escape  ladders  are
requisite  to  ascend  this  precipice.  Above  it  there  is  a  long
narrow  passage,  from  which  but  little  water  escaped,  so  that
the  posterior  and  wider  portions  of  the  cave  formed  at  one  time
a  large   pond,   in  which  the  most  interesting   deposits   were


LECTURE    IX.  251

formed.  The  floor  of  the  cave  still  shows  a  small  pond,  on  the
right  side  of  which  was  formerly  an  opening.  There  the  de-
posits of  pebbles  and  mud  rose  to  the  roof,  forming  a  large  cone,
which  obstructed  the  fissure  through  which  the  waters  entered.

The  cave  lies  far  above  the  influence  of  the  present  state  of
the  waters,  on  the  declivity  of  a  steep  mountain,  in  which,
among  others,  open  also  the  remarkable  caves  of  Sabard  and
Niaux,  which  are  on  the  same  level,  show  the  same  deposits,
and  were  probably  connected  at  an  earlier  period.  In  the
valley  of  Vicdessos,  above  the  village  Niaux,  are  seen  well-
characterised  diluvial  formations,  composed  of  the  same  ele-
ments as  those  in  the  caves.

The  deposits  in  the  cave  consist  of  regular  layers  of  rolled
stones,  sand,  clay,  and  mud,  which  are  very  distinctly  seen  in
the  background  of  the  caverns  where  the  stalactite  roof  is
wanting.

Large  rolled  stones,  sometimes  a  meter  in  diameter  and
rather  disconnected,  form  the  lowest  stratum  (6,  fig.  84),  some-
times resting  immediately  upon  the  jura  lime,  sometimes  upon
the  stalagmite.  Where  this  layer  is  exposed,  it  resembles  the
bed  of  a  forest  brook,  upon  which  walking  is  rendered  difficult
(5,  fig.  84).

These  two  layers  of  rolled  stones  contain  all  specimens  of  the
rocks  of  the  Pyrenees  ;  they  are  identical  with  the  rolled
stones  of  the  diluvium  of  the  adjoining  valleys,  where  are  also
found  rolled  fragments  of  stalactite.

Above  these  rolled  stones  lies  a  stratum  of  grey  plastic  clay,
(4,)  which  is  preserved  in  but  few  spots,  having  been  washed
off  in  the  rest.

A  fine  ferruginous  and  calcareous  sand,  a  real  loam  (3),
forms  the  uppermost  layer  of  the  diluvial  deposit ;  it  fills  up
the  parietal  grooves,  and  even  the  grottoes,  to  a  height  of  ten
meters  above  the  level  of  the  cave.  In  some  spots,  where
there  was  a  rotary  motion,  it  forms  considerable  elevations.
In  this  loam,  and  sometimes  in  its  stalagmite  incrustation,  lie
human  bones  intermixed  with  those  of  carnivorous  and  herbi-
vorous animals,  namely,  of  the  brown  bear,  urus,  reindeer,
stag,  horse,  and  some  undetermined  species  of  a  small  kind  of


252  LECTUKE    IX.

ox,  and  a  species  of  dog  differing  from  the  fox  and  jackal.  The
bones  are  chiefly  found  in  close  intermixture  in  the  middle  of
the  cave,  in  a  large  gallery,  where  there,  no  doubt,  existed  a
small  lake.  All  these  bones  present  the  same  physical  and
chemical  characters,  being  light,  sonorous,  and  friable,  adher-
ing to  the  tongue,  of  the  same  colour,  and  containing  the  same
amount  of  nitrogen.  Many  bones  are  broken  in  pieces  and
rolled,  especially  in  the  case  of  the  skulls,  some  still  covered  with
flesh,  which,  by  its  decomposition,  imparted  a  disgusting  odour
to  the  osseous  breccia.  In  a  calcareous  breccia,  formed  of
broken  and  rolled  bones  of  several  hundred  individuals,  there
was  a  whole  skull,  and  near  it  some  broken,  not  rolled,  frag-
ments of  bone,  belonging,  probably,  to  the  same  individual.
A  second  smaller  skull  has  since  been  found.  Among  objects
of  art  may  be  mentioned  some  perforated  canine  teeth,  which
were  probably  worn  as  amulets  or  trophies.

These  skulls,  which  we  shall  describe  presently,  and  which
at  any  rate  are  almost  the  best  preserved  we  possess,  belong
to  a  period  in  which  the  reindeer,  the  urus,  and  the  old  bear,
resembling  the  brown  bear,  lived  in  the  Pyrenees,  but  when
the  cave -bear  and  the  cave-hyasna  had  already  diaappeared.
These  skulls  are  therefore  not  so  old  as  those  found  in  the
Belgian  caverns.

In  the  same  Department  is  the  cave  of  Lherm,  of  but  little
depth,  but  with  narrow  or  wide  passages  in  every  direction.  The
walls  are  bare,  but  here  and  there  covered  with  large  protu-
berances. Nowhere  are  furrows  or  channels  indicative  of  the
passage  of  water  to  be  seen.  The  bottom  is  almost  every-
where covered  with  a  thick  layer  of  red  mud,  containing  no
rolled  stones,  but  is  in  many  places  covered  with  a  hard  crys-
talline stalagmite.  The  entrance  to  the  cave,  obstructed  by
large  blocks,  leads  into  a  gallery,  the  stalactites  of  which  can
be  easily  detached,  whilst  the  mud  is  only  present  in  small
heaps.  The  gallery  divides  into  two  passages,  the  right  lead-
ing down  a'terrace  into  a  wide  hall,  to  which  some  side  grottoes
impart  an  irregular  form.  From  the  roof  hang  down  some
stalactites ;  the  thick  red  mud  is  covered  with  stalagmite ;
there  is  mud  in  the  side  grottoes  of  the  same  kind,  but  without


LECTURE    IX.  253

stalagmite.  The  passage  to  tlie  left  is  narrow  and  winding-,
leading  almost  horizontally  to  an  abrupt  precipice,  beneath
which  a  large  hall  opens,  the  roof  being  formed  by  loose  blocks
which  threaten  to  fall  at  any  moment.  The  floor  of  this  cave
is  very  declivitous.  On  the  elevated  spots  are  large  heaps  of
ossiferous  mud,  and  in  the  depression  there  is  a  bed  of  osseous
mud  incrusted  with  thick,  smooth,  and  uniform  stalagmite.
In  the  most  precipitous  spots  there  is  a  threefold  alternation  of
mud  and  stalagmite.

In  this  ossiferous  mud  were  found,  along  with  teeth,  shoul-
derblade,  arm  and  foot  bones  of  man,  a  number  of  bones  of  the
cave  bear,  the  old  brown  bear,  some  few  remains  of  the  cave
hyasna,  cave  lion,  dog,  wolf,  and  some  species  of  deer.  Of
the  cave  bear  there  were  seven  skulls,  fifty  half  lower  jaws,
above  300  teeth  and  all  the  bones  of  the  skeleton,  and  some
bones  of  embryos.  The  human  teeth  were  found  in  a  thin
mud  layer  intermixed  with  hyena  and  bear  teeth,  under  a  thick
stalagmite  covering  which  was  so  crystalline  that  when  struck
with  the  hammer  it  split  into  large  crystalline  planes.  This
crust  had  never  been  disturbed.  Besides  the  human  remains
were  found  evidences  of  human  industry  :  a  triangular  flint
knife,  a  round  bone  of  the  cave  bear  which  had  been  trans-
formed into  a  cutting  instrument,  three  lower  jaws  of  the  cave
bear,  the  ascending  rami  of  which  were  perforated  for  the  pur-
pose of  hanging  them  up,  and  the  trochings  of  a  deer  carved
and  pointed.  The  most  remarkable  weapons  however  con-
sisted of  twenty  half  jaws  of  the  cave  bear,  from  which  the
ascending  ramus  had  been  struck  off  and  the  body  of  the  lower
jaw  had  been  so  carved  that  it  presented  a  convenient  handle.
The  projecting  canine  tooth  thus  formed  a  hook  which  might
serve  as  a  weapon,  or  a  hoe  for  digging  up  the  earth.  Had
we  found,  say  the  authors,  but  one  sample  of  these  singular
tools  it  might  have  been  objected  that  it  was  merely  accidental,
but  having  found  twenty,  all  worked  in  the  same  manner,  how
can  we  speak  of  accident  ?  We  are  moreover  enabled  to  fol-
low the  method  by  which  the  primitive  man  gave  this  form  to
the  jaw.  In  each  of  the  twenty  jaws  may  be  seen  the  traces
of  incisions  made  with   the  edge  of  a  badly   sharpened  flint


254  LECTURE    IX.

knife.  From  the  absence  of  rolled  stones  and  the  condition  of
the  mud,  which  contains  many  excrements  of  hyenas,  as  well  as
traces  of  coals  and  fire,  the  authors  conclude  that  beasts  and
human  beings  inhabited  the  cave  of  Lherm  alternately,  but
that  at  all  events  man  lived  simultaneously  with  the  extinct
cave  beasts,  since  he  worked  their  bones  into  weapons  and
tools.     No  valid  objection  can  be  made  to  this  deduction.

A  convincing  proof  of  man  having  been  the  contemporary  of
the  cave  bear  has  been  furnished  by  the  exploration  of  the
grottoes  of  Arcy  near  Avallon  in  the  Department  of  the  Yonne.
M.  de  Vibraye,  who  explored  these  grottoes,  the  largest  of
which  attains,  including  its  halls,  a  length  of  876  meters,  whilst
the  second  or  the  fairy  grotto  in  which  most  bones  are  found
reaches  only  150  meters  in  length,  distinguishes  in  these  caves
three  kinds  of  deposits.  The  lowest  deposit,  intermixed  with
rolled  stones  from  the  granite  of  the  Morvan,  lies  immediately
upon  the  Jurassic  lime,  in  which  the  cave  is  imbedded,  it  fills  up
depressions  and  thus  forms  a  stratum  of  variable  thickness.

There  are  found  in  it  the  cave  bear,  the  cave  hyasna,  the  rhino-
ceros with  a  bony  septum,  the  mammoth,  the  river-horse,  the
urus  and  the  horse.  In  this  lower  stratum,  which  has  a  mean
thickness  of  about  one  meter  fifty  centimeters-,  was  found,  among
a  large  accumulation  of  bones  chiefly  belonging  to  cave  bears,  a
human  lower  jaw,  and  subsequently  a  human  tooth.  The  jaw,
externally,  resembles  exactly  the  bones  of  the  cave  bear,  which,
however,  have  mostly  a  thin  carbonaceous  crust,  the  result,
probably,  of  the  decomposition  of  the  skin  and  the  soft  parts
still  attached  to  them.  The  middle  layer  of  about  seventy-five
centimeters  in  thickness  consists  almost  entirely  of  calcareous
fragments  from  the  mountain.  The  red  cement  which  connects
the  lower  stratum  of  rolled  stones,  forms  here,  only  an  in-
crustation of  the  fragments.  In  this  second  middle  layer,  bear
and  hysena  bones  are  no  longer  met  with,  but  numerous  bones
of  ruminants,  including  those  of  the  reindeer.  Quite  on  the
top  is  a  very  irregularly  disposed  stratum  of  marly  clay,  of
white-yellow  colour,  fatty  and  soapy  to  the  touch.

Though  the  jaw,  found  under   such   circumstances,  gives  no
clue  as  to  the  race,  it  affords,  nevertheless,  like  the  Belgian


LECTURE    IX.  255

caves,  an  irrefragable  proof  that  the  middle  stratum  of  Arcy,
with  its  bones  of  ruminants  and  the  reindeer,  corresponds  to
that  stratum  of  Lombrive  in  which  the  skull  was  found.

Let  us  now  turn  to  Germany.

In  a  valley  of  the  Diissel,  near  Elberfeld,  in  the  so-called
Neanderthal,  which  forms  a  wild  fissure  in  lime  stone,  there
was  a  little  grotto,  about  fifteen  feet  in  length,  ten  feet
broad,  and  eight  feet  high,  opening  in  an  almost  perpendicular
rock  60'  above  the  level  of  the  valley.  From  the  top  the  cave
could  be  reached  by  a  steep  path  which  led  to  a  small  ledge
where  the  grotto  opened.  The  Neander  ravine  has  been  used
as  a  marble  quarry,  and  the  left  side  which  contains  the  grotto
is  nearly  exhausted.  The  progress  of  the  quarry  led  to  the
exploration  of  the  grotto.  There  was  found  in  it  a  stone-hard
layer  of  loam,  presenting  a  horizontal  surface  without  calcareous
sinter,  but  with  fragments  of  brown  rolled  gravel,  a  dilu-
vial deposit  which  occurs  in  all  caves  and  grottoes  of  the
Diissel  valley,  and  contains,  in  some  places,  bones  of  the  bear,
as  in  Sundwich  and  Honnethal.  In  this  ossiferous  mud,  con-
taining rolled  gravel,  two  feet  below  the  surface  were  found  the
bones  of  a  human  skeleton,  with  the  skull  lying  in  the  same
horizontal  plane  towards  the  entrance.  The  loam  adhered  so
strongly,  that  the  workmen  took  no  notice  of  the  bones,  but
scattered  them  about,  believing  them  to  be  the  bones  of  bears,
until  Prof.  Fuhlrott  of  Elberfeld,  to  whom  we  are  indebted
for  an  account  of  this  discovery,  declared  them  to  be  human,
and  saved  from  further  destruction  the  cranium,  the  femoral
and  humeral  bones,  a  clavicle,  a  portion  of  the  pelvis,  the
scapula,  and  several  fragments  of  the  ribs.  The  bones  adhere
strongly  to  the  tongue  and  are  covered  on  the  surface  with
minute  spots,  which,  under  the  magnifying  glass,  proved  to  be
groups  of  dendritical  markings,  as  also  seen  upon  the  bear  bones
of  the  neighbouring  caves.  Though  these  markings  afford  no
absolute  proof  of  antiquity,  such  arborescent  infiltrations  of
metallic  matter  have  also  been  observed  in  Roman  bones,  and
as  dendrites  may  be  rapidly  formed  under  favourable  circum-
stances by  the  introduction  from  the  loam  of  salts  of  iron
and  manganese,  they  still  furnish  an  important  indication,  inas-


256  LECTURE    IX.

much  as  the  bones  of  the  cave-bear  and  the  elephant,  imbedded
in  the   same  loam,  present   similar   dendritic  crystallisations.
"This  indication/'  says  Fuhlrott,  "is  confirmed  by  the  circum-
stance, that  the  country  between  the  Diissel  valley  and  the
neighbouring  railroad  station,   Hochdahl,   to  the  level  of  the
margins  of  the  Neanderthal  ravine,  is  covered  with  a  stratum  of
loam  fifteen  feet  thick,  which  seems  identical  with  the  loam  of
all  the  grottoes  and  caves  which  contained  human  bones.     That
this  loam  bed  belongs  to  the  diluvial  period  is,  apart  from  other
reasons,  confirmed  by  the  last  palasontological  discovery  in  that
spot  by  the  mammoth  remains,  which  were  found  December  27,
1858,  in  one  of  the  Dornap  lime-stone  quarries  (on  the  Steele-
Yohwinkel  railroad),  about  thirteen  feet  under  the  surface  in  a
fissure  fourteen  inches  wide,  which  was  filled  up  with  a  loamy
mass,  analogous  to  that  of  Hochdahl.     These  mammoth  remains
shew  that  the  inclosing  mass  belongs  to  the  diluvium.     Now,
since  the  Dornap  (Devonian)  lime-stone  forms  the  eastern  con-
tinuation of  the  Neanderthal  lime-bed,  and  as  the  spot  where
the  mammoth  remains  were  found  is  scarcely  more  than  four
miles  distant  from   the  Neanderthal,  it  becomes  more   than
probable  that  the  respective  loam  deposits  in  the  fissures  and
grottoes  of  both  localities  have  the  same  geological  origin,  and
both  belong  to   the   diluvial  period.      But   if  the    mammoth
remains    are    undoubted   fossils,   then  the   human  bones  im-
bedded in  the  same  diluvial  mass  may  also  be  fossil,  and  we  are
thus   sorely  tempted  to  assign  to   the  human  race,  perhaps  to
a  primitive  form  of  it,  as  high  an  antiquity  as  to  the  antedilu-
vian pachydermata."

The  decomposing  corpse  was  undoubtedly  washed  into  the
grotto  along  with  the  loam  and  the  rolled  gravel,  when  the
waters  stood  high,  and  as  there  is  no  trace  of  a  more  recent
deposition,  and  the  age  of  the  loam  is  sufficiently  proved  by
the  presence  of  bear  and  mammoth  bones  found  in  this
loam,  and  as,  moreover,  this  skull  presents  peculiar  characters,
which  distinguish  it  from  all  modern  skulls,  there  can  be  but
little  doubt  that  the  owner  of  that  skull  lived  at  the  time  of
the  mammoth  and  the  cave  bear.  We  shall  term  this  skull,  to
be  described  hereafter,  the  Neander  skull.


LECTURE    IX.  257

There  are,  to  my  knowledge,  no  human  remains  at  present
known  to  which  may  be  ascribed  a  higher  antiquity.  The
human  remains  found  by  Esper  and  Rosenmuller,  in  the  Fran-
conian  caves;  by  Schlotheim,in  the  gypsum  quarries  of  Kostritz,
in  Saxony ;  the  remains  which  Marcel  de  Serres,  de  Christol,
and  Tourtual,  dug  out  from  the  caves  near  Montpellier,  are
either  lost  or  inaccessible  to  examination.  Concei-ning  the
structure  of  all  these  skulls,  I  found  but  one  notice  in  a  paper
by  Schaaffhausen,  entitled,  "Contributions  to  the  knowledge  of
the  oldest  race  skulls,"  according  to  which  Link  is  said  to  have
found  amongst  Schlotheinr's  collection  a  skull  with  a  remarkably
flattened  forehead.  In  all  these  researches,  particular  attention
must  be  paid  to  the  age  of  the  human  bones,  which  must  be  in-
ferred from  the  animal  bones  associated  with  them.  In  this
respect  we  find,  even  in  the  few  human  cave  skulls,  from  pre-
historical  times,  important  differences.  Thus  the  Engis  and
Neander  skulls  belong  to  an  earlier  period ;  those  of  Lombrive
to  a  later  period  of  the  same  epoch.  In  all  these  cases  the
conditions  under  which  the  bones  were  found  are  identical.  The
human  corpses  were  washed  into  the  caves  along  with  the  animals
they  lived  with,  and  imbedded  in  the  same  mud.

There  are  other  caves  which  furnish  decisive  evidence,  that
they  served  as  burial  or  fire-places,  where,  besides  the  remains,
flint  weapons,  coals,  and  worked  bones,  are  found  intermixed
with  fresh  bones,  or  such  as  served  for  food.  One  of  the  most
interesting  of  such  caves  has  been  recently  described  by  Lartet.

In  the  vicinity  of  Aurignac,  in  the  department  of  the  Haute
Garonne,  is  a  hill  of  nummulitic  limestone,  called  the  beech
mountain.  At  present  no  beeches  are  found,  nor  exists  there
any  tradition  of  their  having  formerly  flourished  there.  On
the  slope  of  this  eminence,  about  thirteen  to  fourteen  meters
above  the  brook,  is  seen  the  entrance  to  a  grotto,  about  three
meters  wide  and  two  and  a-half  meters  deep.  The  entrance
to  this  grotto  was  formerly  concealed  by  a  heap  or  talus.
The  sportsmen  knew  that  there  was  a  hole  into  which  the
rabbits  escaped  when  pursued  by  the  dogs.  A  labourer,  em-
ployed to  repair  the  neighbouring  road,  one  day  introduced
his  hand  into  the  hole  and  extracted  from  it  a  large  bono.     He

s


258  LECTURE    IX.

at  once  suspected  the  existence  of  a  cave,  and  having  removed
a  portion  of  the  talus,  he  came,  after  a  few  hours  work,  to  a
thin  slab  of  sandstone,  placed  vertically,  which  completely,
with  exception  of  the  hole  used  by  the  rabbits,  closed  the
opening,  which  led  to  an  arched  recess  containing  a  number  of
human  bones.  Amongst  the  bones  extracted  were  two  entire
skulls,  which  afterwards  could  not  be  recovered.  The  workman
talked  of  his  discovery,  the  curious  flocked  to  the  spot,  there
was  great  agitation ;  and  as  nothing  can  be  more  disagreeable
to  the  Imperial  governors  than  agitation,  the  mayor  of  Auri-
gnac  ordered  all  bones  to  be  collected  and  to  be  re-interred  in
the  parish  cemetery.  Had  it  been  a  common  provincial  village
mayor  who  gave  such  an  order,  constituting,  as  it  were,  a
crime  against  science,  we  might  have  pitied  his  ignorance ;
but  this  undertaker,  we  are  sorry  to  say,  was  a  doctor  of
medicine  !  In  short,  the  bones  were  interred  after  the  mayor
had  ascertained  that  they  belonged  to  seventeen  different  indi-
viduals ;  and  when  Lartet,  after  the  lapse  of  eight  years,  visited
the  place,  no  man  in  the  whole  community  could  or  would
inform  him  where  these  bones  had  been  interred,  so  that  these
relics,  so  interesting  to  science,  seem  lost  for  ever.

Besides  the  human  bones  were  found  some  teeth  of  large
mammals,  distinguished  by  Lartet  as  the  grinders  of  the  horse
and  aurochs,  canines  of  the  hyaena  and  cave  lion,  and  fox's
teeth.  There  were  also  found  small  perforated  discs,  appa-
rently made  from  the  shell  of  a  species  of  cardium,  which  could
be  strung  together  as  a  necklace.

When  Lartet,  in  the  autumn  of  1860,  visited  the  grotto,
then  only  half  a  meter  in  height,  there  was  on  the  floor  a  layer
of  loose  earth,  which  contained  some  human  and  animal  bones,
as  well  as  flint  implements.  This  layer  extended  beyond  the
arched  sepulchre,  and  it  remained  doubtful  whether  the  slab
of  sandstone  which  served  as  a  door,  was  fixed  or  only  placed
there.  At  all  events  the  upper  layer  was  the  same  within  and
without  the  cave,  and  it  is  probable  that  the  slab  was  removed
after  every  burial.  From  the  dimensions  of  the  grotto  and
the  number  of  bodies,  Lartet  concluded  that  they  had  been
placed  in  a   crouching  attitude,  like  the  Peruvian  mummies.


LECTURE    IX.


259


The  grotto  was  subsequently,  under  Lartet's  supervision,  ex-
plored layer  by  layer,  and  yielded  the  following  results  : —

In  front  of  the  grotto  the  inequalities  of  the  rock  had,  by
slabs  of  sandstone,  been  transformed  into  a  kind  of  hearth,

Fig.  85.     Section  of  the  Grotto  of  Aurignac.


1.  The  inner  vault.  2.  The  rabbit-burrow  which  led  to  the  discovery  of
the  grotto.  3.  Human  bones.  4.  Rubbish,  with  bones  and  implements  in-
side the  grotto.  5.  Rubbish  outside  the  grotto.  6.  Deposit  of  cinders.  7.
Rock.  8.  Talus  of  gravel,  which  concealed  the  slab  of  sandstone,  10,
Placed  vertically  against  the  entrance.  9.  Slope  of  the  hill  covered  with
gravel.

upon  which  was  a  layer  of  ashes  and  charcoal,  about  fifteen
to  twenty  centimeters  thick.

The  sandstone  slabs,  which  formed  this  rude  hearth,  showed
here  and  there  the  effect  of  the  fire.  The  layer  of  charcoal
thinned  off"  towards  the  grotto,  and  did  not  actually  reach  it.
In  this  layer  were  found  many  teeth  of  herbivora,  and  hun-
dreds of  fragments  of  bones,  some  of  which  were  carbonised,
while  the  greater  part  were  manifestly  broken  and  gnawed  by
large  carnivorous  beasts.  As  also  coprolites  of  hyaenas  were
met  with  in  the  same  layer,  Lartet  concludes  that  the  long
bones  had  been  broken  by  man  for  the  sake  of  the  marrow,
and  that  the  remains  of  his  repast  were  taken  advantage  of  by
hyaenas.  This  conclusion  is  supported  by  the  discovery  in  the
layer  of  ashes  and  charcoal  of  about  100  flint  knives  with  which
the  incisions  upon  the  bones  were  made.  These  flint  knives
were  probably  manufactured  on  the  spot,  as  in  the  neighbour-
hood of  the  hearth  were  found  the  nuclei  of  some  blocks  from

s2


260  LECTURE    IX.

wliicli  splinters  had  been  struck  off,  and  a  round  pebble  with  a
central  depression  on  each  side,  a  portion  of  a  kind  of  rock  not
found  in  this  part  of  the  Pyrenees.  There  were  also  found
two  roundish  pebbles  with  angular  facets  which  may  have
served  as  slingstones,  besides  a  number  of  implements,  arrow-
heads, and  knives  made  of  reindeer  horn.  There  were  also
discovered  the  canine  tooth  of  a  young  cave-bear  singularly
worked  on  the  outside  and  perforated  in  its  whole  length,
worked  reindeer  horns,  and  disjointed  laminas  of  a  mammoth
molar  from  which  the  enamel  had  been  detached.

In  the  rubbish  which  covered  the  interior  of  the  sepulchral
vault  were  found,  as  already  observed,  some  few  human  bones,
the  most  finished  flint  implements,  the  best  worked  reindeer
horns,  some  well  preserved  bones  of  herbivora  neither  broken
nor  gnawed,  and  a  large  number  of  teeth  and  jaws  of  carnivora.
But  nowhere  existed  any  cranial  fragments  of  mammals  ;  and  it
was  quite  evident  that  the  remains  of  carnivora  had  been  intro-
duced into  the  sepulchre  for  a  special  purpose.

Lartet  gives  a  list  of  the  animals  whose  remains  could  be
identified.  The  list  includes  from  eighteen  to  twenty  foxes,
five  to  six  cave-bears  and  cave  hyaenas,  three  wolves,  one  to
two  badgers,  and  some  few  teeth  of  the  cave-lion  (Fells  spelceaj ,
the  wild  cat,  the  pole-cat,  and  the  common  bear.  Among  the
herbivora  he  found  twelve  to  fifteen  aurochsen  (Bison  EuropceusJ,
as  many  horses,  ten  to  twelve  reindeer,  which  thus  constituted
the  chief  food  of  man  in  that  region ;  whilst  of  the  roe  there  were
only  three  or  four,  and  of  the  mammoth,  the  rhinoceros,  the  wild
hog,  and  the  gigantic  Irish  deer,  there  were  scarcely  any  remains
of  each  specimen.  It  appears  that  these  few  bones  were  those  of
swift  animals  as  well  as  of  the  pachydermata,  which  could  not
at  that  period  be  easily  overcome  by  man ;  for  the  bones  of  the
rhinoceros,  which  were  found  split  and  deprived  of  their  mar-
row, belonged  to  a  very  young  animal.

There  is  no  doubt  that  the  interior  of  the  grotto  of  Aurignac
served  as  a  sepulchre,  whilst  at  the  entrance  there  was  a  hearth.
It  is  probable  that  teeth  and  jaws  of  the  beasts  of  prey,  which
an  individual  had  killed  in  his  lifetime,  were  buried  with  him
as  trophies,  or  may  be  to  provide  him  with  aliment  during  his


LECTURE    IX.  261

voyage  to  another  world,  as  is  the  custom  with  many  primitive
peojjles.  In  any  case,  this  grotto  furnishes  another  proof  that
man  was  the  contemporary  of  extinct  animals,  upon  which  he
fed,  and  that  consequently  the  age  of  mankind  reaches  back
to  a  very  remote  period.

In  the  ossiferous  caves  of  Brazil,  explored  by  Lund  with  so
much  perseverance,  there  were  also  found  amongst  the  remains
of  extinct  animals  human  skulls  with  receding:  foreheads.
These  skulls,  as  far  as  I  know,  have  not  been  closely  examined
nor  compared  with  the  races  now  inhabiting  South  America.

Is  it  necessary  for  me  to  enumerate  all  those  caves,  in  which,
it  is  true,  no  human  bones  were  found,  but  the  products  of  man's
industry,  flint  and  horn  implements  and  hatchets,  &c,  among
the  teeth  and  bones  of  extinct  animals  in  the  same  condition
deep  in  the  ossiferous  loam,  deep  under  the  stalagmite  ?  The
conditions,  with  slight  differences,  are  everywhere  the  same,
so  that  the  proofs  would  be  mere  repetitions.  If  the  evidences
could  be  refuted  as  regards  one  cave,  it  would  affect  them  all.
As  such,  however,  is  not  the  case ;  as  the  evidence  is  irrefra-
gable not  merely  with  respect  to  the  explored  caves  of  Italy,
France,  Germany,  and  England,  but  also  as  regards  the  caves
in  North  and  South  America,  we  may  confidently  assert  that
the  facts  obtained  from  the  exploration  of  caves  and  grottoes
are  sufficient  to  prove  that  man  existed  at  the  beginning  of  the
diluvial  period,  and  was  the  contemporary  of  the  extinct
animals.


262


LECTURE    X.

Human  Eemains  from  Denise,  near  Puy. — Fraudulent  speculations. — Dilu-
vium in  the  Somme  Valley. — Flint  Implements. — Human  Jaw. — Dilu-
vium of  Joinville. — Diluvium  of  Hoxne. — Brazilian  Caverns. — Alluvium
of  North  America. — Civilisation  of  Primitive  Peoples. — Skulls  of  Engis
and  the  Neander  Valley. — Proportions  of  these  Crania  compared  to
those  of  living  races  of  Mankind  and  Apes.

Gentlemen, — We  have,  in  the  preceding  lecture,  given  an
accumulation  of  proofs  that  man  existed  contemporaneously
with  the  extinct  animals  in  the  so-called  diluvial  period.  But
as  the  deposits  in  fissures  and  caves  always  present  some  extra-
ordinary mysterious  character,  it  may  not  be  out  of  place  to
examine  such  human  remains  as  are  found  in  alluvial  formations,
in  the  open  soil,  where  we  shall  meet  with  some  additional  im-
portant facts  in  relation  to  the  age  of  the  strata.

In  1844  an  account  was  published  of  the  discovery  of  a
human  skeleton,  or  rather  of  several  human  bones,  in  a  volcanic
block,  found  in  the  vicinity  of  Puy,  on  the  slopes  of  the  extinct
volcano  Denise.  The  remains  consisted  chiefly  of  two  pieces
of  the  upper  jaw,  the  frontal  part  of  the  forehead,  some  other
cranial  parts,  a  lumbar  vertebra,  a  portion  of  the  radius,  and
two  metatarsal  bones.  The  block  itself  consisted  of  light
porous  tuff,  in  which  the  bones  are  imbedded,  and  behind  which
is  a  harder  stone,  consisting  of  alternate  layers  of  clayish
lava.  Blocks  of  a  similar  kind,  a  product  of  the  last  eruption
of  the  now  extinct  volcano,  are  frequently  met  with  in  volcanic
alluvia ;  they,  perhaps,  formed  at  first  mudstreams,  which,  on
drying  up,  became  more  condensed.  In  these  tuff  blocks,  in
the  vicinity  of  the  town  of  Puy,  are  found  the  mammoth  and
the  rhinoceros  with  a  bony  nasal  septum,  whilst  in  the  other
tuffs,  which  evidently  belong  to  older  eruptions  of  the  same
volcano,  other  animals  occur,  which,  according  to  French
naturalists,  belong  to  an  older  Fauna.  The  human  bones  found
in  Denise  thus  belong  to  the  same  period  as  the  bones  of  the


LECTURE    X.  263

Belgian  caves,  which  were  contemporaneous  with  the  mammoth
and  cave  bear.  The  bones  are,  unfortunately,  insufficient  to
determine  the  primitive  race  of  Auvergne.  The  preserved
cranial  bones  do  not,  however,  shew  any  great  deviation  from
the  form  at  present  obtaining  in  that  region.  According  to  all
appearance,  for  hitherto  they  have  not  been  closely  examined,
they  most  closely  resemble  the  cranial  type  represented  in  the
caves  of  Lombrive.

No  sooner  was  attention  excited,  and  the  importance  of  the
Denise  discovery  established,  than  fraudulent  speculation  laid
hold  of  it.     There   are,  at  present,   blocks  in  the  possession
of  some  persons,  into  which  the  bones  have  been  inserted  arti-
ficially, and  an  eminent  naturalist  of  that  county,  M.  Bravard,
informed  the  Geological  Society  of  France  that  he  had  detected
a  skilful  workman  in  the  act  of  so  introducing  them.     From
this  it  has  been  inferred  that  the  block  first  found  was  also  a
counterfeit,  but  its  authenticity  is  now  established.     Cases  of
this  kind  need  not  surprise  us.     No  sooner  is  a  discovery  made
than  collectors  flock  to  the  spot,  the  English  specially,  offering
high  prices.     There  are  some  quarries  which  yield  the  owner
more  by  their  petrifactions  than  by  the  building  materials  they
yield.     The  greater  the  demand  the  higher  the  price,  and  the
greater  the  inducement  to  deception  and  fraud.     The  workmen
themselves  now  fabricate  the  desired  articles,  or  produce  some-
thing new,  in  which  they  are  as  inventive  as  were  the  monks
of  the  convent  Bheinau,  who,   of  the  slabs  of  Oeningen,  with
fossil  fishes  and  salamanders,   compounded  the  most  fantastic
creatures.     A  similar  case   occurred  recently  in  Switzerland.
When  the  railroad  near  Concise  was  in  course  of  construction,
there  was  found  in  the  Lake  of  Neufchatel  a  pile  structure  of  the
stone  period,   from  which  were  extracted  a  large  number  of
bones  of  deer  in  all  stages  of  workmanship.     When  the  work-
men, who  at  first  took  little  notice  of  these  objects,   found
out  that  antiquaries  pounced   upon   them    like   hawks    upon
sparrows,  they  raised  the  prices,  and  when  the  articles  became
scarce   they   provided    themselves    with    worked    staghorns.
Many  an  antiquary  was  thus  taken  in.      Mr.  Troyon,  the  con-
servator of  the  Museum  of  Lausanne,  purchased  in  good  faith


264  LECTURE    X.

a  whole  collection  of  these  articles  and  exhibited  them  in  the
Museum,  where  the  fraud  was  detected  by  some  more  acute
observers.  This  fraud,  however,  as  little  invalidates  the
genuineness  of  the  first  articles  found,  as  the  fabrication  of  old
pictures,  statues,  and  mosaics,  which  is  now  so  successfully  car-
ried on  in  Italy,  can  diminish  the  value  of  the  genuine  original
antiquities.

Let  us  return  to  our  subject.  The  volcanoes  of  Auvergne
and  the  Rhine,  which  in  prehistoric  times  vomited  forth  mighty
streams  of  lava  and  ashes,  have  become  extinct  since  the  time
of  the  mammoth,  cave  bear,  and  the  reindeer.  The  volcanic
tuff,  enclosing  the  above-named  animals,  is  contemporaneous
with  the  deposit  in  the  caves.  The  fossil  man  of  Denise  is,
however,  as  far  as  we  know,  the  only  human  relic  found  in  this  tuff.

In  the  diluvium  of  France  and  England,  on  the  other  hand,
have  been  found  so  many  stone  and  bone  implements,  that  they
deserve  our  attention,  as  their  discovery  has  given  the  first
impulse  to  researches  in  this  new  direction.  We  may,  how-
ever, observe  at  once  that,  excepting  one  lower  jaw,  the  anti-
quity of  which  is  still  contested,  no  human  fossil  bones  have
been  found  in  the  diluvium,  but  only  implements,  so  that  the
race  question  remains  unsolved.  It  is  just  possible  that  some
old  graves,  such  as  those  discovered  in  Mecklenburg,  of  which
more  hereafter,  belong  to  that  period ;  but  the  contemporaneity
is  far  from  being  established,  and  further  researches  are  needed.

In  the  North  of  France,  especially  in  Picardy,  the  soil  is
chiefly  composed  of  white  chalk,  containing  in  its  horizontal
strata  regular  layers  of  flints.  In  former  times,  when  flints,
alike  for  purposes  of  peace  and  war,  possessed  a  high  value,
which  they  retained  until  the  invention  of  lucifers  and  percus-
sion caps,  there  were  in  Picardy  and  the  Champagne  large  flint
manufactories  which  procured  their  material  from  the  subsoil.
We  shall  see  that  this  manufacture  of  flint  implements  dates
from  the  remotest  antiquity.

This  chalk  formation  was,  no  doubt,  at  a  former  period
covered  by  tertiary  formations,  thus  forming  an  almost  uniform
plateau  which  gradually  thinned  off  towards  the  sea.  These
tertiary  formations  were  mostly  of  a  sandy  nature,  and  thus  it


LECTUEE    X.  265

was  that  every  brook  gradually  washed  off  the  tertiary  forma-
tion and  transformed  its  harder  parts  into  rolled  pebbles.
Hence  we  only  find  the  tertiary  formation  at  a  distance  from
rivers,  specially  from  the  main  stream  of  the  Somme,  upon  the
plateau,  and  mostly  covered  by  the  old  diluvium,  a  fatty  clay
or  brick  earth,  itself  mostly  derived  from  the  destruction  of  the
tertiary  formation,  and  forming  an  extremely  fertile  bed  about
five  feet  thick,  which  contains  no  fossils.  Into  this  old  diluvium,
as  well  as  into  the  tertiary  strata,  and  deep  into  the  chalk,  have
the  streams  and  brooks  dug  their  beds ;  and  the  valley  in  which
each  of  these  streams  flows,  a  valley  of  comparatively  consider-
able width,  is  thus  bordered  on  both  sides  by  a  chain  of  hills,
the  slopes  of  which  towards  the  stream  consist  of  white  chalk,
above  which  at  some  distance  is  spread  out  the  fertile  loam,
while  beneath  lie  the  sandy  tertiary  strata.  The  bed  of  the
Somme,  near  Amiens,  is  nearly  a  mile  in  width,  but  enlarges
considerably  from  below  Abbeville  down  to  St.  Valery.  In
this  river-bed,  as  well  as  in  the  neighbouring  valleys,  occur  form-
ations which  are  manifestly  more  recent  than  the  excavation
of  the  river  bed,  the  tertiary  strata,  and  the  alluvial  formation
of  the  platform.  These  formations  within  the  old  river  valleys
claim    our  special  attention,  as  they  contain  human   remains.

Fig.  86     Section  of  the  Valley  of  the  Somme,  at  Abbeville,  after  Prestwich.


<J\.--


8.  The  river  Somme.  M.  Sea-level.  1.  Peat  in  the  valley.  2.  Subjacent
Letten.  3.  Flint  gravel  reposing  upon  chalk.  4.  Grey  diluvium,  with  bones
and  hatchets.  5.  Calcareous  loam  or  loess.  6.  Brown  clav  and  vegetable
sod.     7.  Chalk.

On  the  sides  of  the  valley  there  are  comparatively  very  slight
deposits  of  rolled  gravel,  marl,  sand  and  clay,  forming  two
different  terraces,  to  distinguish  which  a  practised  eye  is  requi-
site. In  the  lowest  terrace,  from  twenty  to  forty  feet  thick,  there
is  immediately  beneath  and  upon  the  chalk  a  layer  ten  to  fourteen


266  LECTURE    X.

feet  thick  of  coarse,  white,  chalky  sand,  with  flints  but  little
rolled,  about  three  inches  in  diameter,  intermixed  with  many-
flint  balls,  washed  forth  unbroken  from  the  chalk,  and  forming
a  confused  bed  in  which  layers  of  fine  sand  alternate  with  sandy
marl.  In  the  fine  sandy  layers  are  frequently  found  sea-  and
fresh-water  shells  still  existing  in  the  district,  excepting  a  spe-
cies fGyrena  fluminalisj ,  which  at  present  is  only  met  with  in
the  Nile  and  some  parts  of  High  Asia,  namely  in  Cashmir.
Here  and  there  the  fresh  water  shells  are  intermixed  with  the
strand  mussels  of  the  sea  which  still  live  in  a  neighbouring
canal,  showing  that  the  sea  made  frequent  irruptions  far  into
the  land.  Besides  this,  there  are  found  in  this  inferior  bed  of
the  lower  terrace,  in  immediate  contact  with  the  chalk  soil,
fossil  bones,  and,  associated  with  them,  flint  implements,  of
which  more  anon.  The  bones  found  in  this  bed  are  generally
those  of  the  mammoth,  the  rhinoceros  with  a  bony  septum,  the
fossil  horse,  the  aurochs,  the  gigantic  deer,  the  reindeer,  the
cave  lion,  the  cave  hyaena,  and  other  extinct  cave  beasts.

This  older  stratum  generally  presents  an  irregular  surface,
with  eminences  and  depressions,  as  seen  in  all  beds  deposited
by  the  irregular  flow  of  the  waters.  Above  it  lies  fine  white
silicious  sand,  with  rounded  pebbles  and  thin  beds  of  marl,  in
which  also  here  and  there  some  fragments  of  the  bones  of  ex-
tinct animals  are  met  with.  This  bed  has  manifestly  been
deposited  at  a  later  period  ;  it  has  a  mean  thickness  of  six  feet,
and  contains  no  other  petrifactions.

Upon  this  lies  a  bed  of  brown  clay,  mixed  with  a  few  angu-
lar flints,  filling  up  the  depressions  in  the  surface  of  the  second
bed,  and  passing  here  and  there  into  an  ochrous  sand  which
contains  no  fossils.  The  surface  is  even,  and  covered  with  a
layer  of  common  earth  of  considerable  thickness.  Old  graves
occasionally  found  in  this  terrace  sometimes  pass  through  the
superior  brown  clay  bed  to  the  white  sand  bed,  but  never  reach
its  bottom.  They  are  known  at  once,  being  filled  with  brown
earth  and  human  bones.

The  upper  terrace  is  similarly  constructed,  so  that  it  is  not
easy  to  point  out  any  difference.

The  central  parts  of  the  valleys  are  generally  filled  with  peat


LECTURE    X.  267

bogs,  reaching  occasionally  a  thickness  of  thirty  feet  or  more.
These  peat  moors  have  been  distinguished  as  old  and  recent.
The  old  peat  bed  is  said  rarely  to  be  more  than  one  meter
thick.  There  are  found  in  it  in  every  direction  trunks  of  alders,
oaks,  firs,  hazels,  and  bones,  specially  of  the  beaver  and  the
common  bear.  This  old  peat  is  in  some  spots  covered  with
sand  dunes.  It  reposes  upon  a  bed  of  sand  and  gravel  resting
upon  chalk,  from  which  it  is  separated  by  a  layer  of  brown  or
black  impervious  marly  clay.

In  our  endeavours  to  decipher  from  the  above  description
the  history  of  the  valley  of  the  Somme,  we  arrive  at  the  con-
clusion, that  this  valley  was  excavated  after  the  deposit  of  the
alluvia  on  the  table  land;  that  the  terraces  had  at  a  later  period
been  formed  by  smaller  streams,  after  which  a  temporary  in-
crease of  water  in  the  streams  caused  these  terraces  to  be
washed  off,  so  that  they  are  only  preserved  in  certain  spots ;
that  the  rolled  gravel  and  the  marly  clay  which  now  form  the
bottom  of  the  peat  bogs,  are  the  deposits  of  the  waters  which
scooped  the  valleys,  after  which  the  formation  of  the  peat  com-
menced. The  formation,  however,  of  the  old  peat  in  the  vici-
nity of  the  sea  has  frequently  been  interrupted  by  the  irruption
of  the  sea,  which  covered  it  with  sand.

The  alluvial  formations  upon  the  platform  correspond  with
those  which  the  Parisian  geologists  term  diluvium  des  plateaux.
The  lower  bed  of  the  terraces,  with  the  pebbles,  large  blocks,
elephant  bones,  and  flint  implements,  corresponds  to  the  grey
diluvium  of  Paris  (Diluvium  gris)  ;  the  upper  layer,  with  its
silicious  sand  and  gravel,  to  the  red  diluvium  of  the  French
(Diluvium  rouge)  ;  the  brown  layer  to  loam  or  loess.

Must  I  repeat  the  touching  story  of  how  Boucher  de  Perthes,
a  meritorious  but  somewhat  eccentric  antiquary  of  Abbeville,
first  found  the  singular  flints  in  the  grey  diluvium,  how  he
went  with  his  discovery  a-begging  from  door  to  door,  and
found  no  hearing ;  how,  at  length,  some  of  his  neighbours,  and
next  some  Englishmen,  became  interested,  until  Amiens,  Ab-
beville, St.  Acheul,  Menchecourt,  and  other  localities  of  the
valley  of  the  Somme  became  the  resort  of  geological  and  archaeo-
logical pilgrims,  who  visited  these  places  either  to  be  convinced


268  LECTURE    X.

or  to  gather  new  facts,  whilst  not  a  few  allowed  themselves  to
be  overreached  by  the  workmen,  who  soon  established  a  regular
manufactory  of  flint  implements.  It  must  be  admitted  that
the  coolness  with  which  the  news  of  the  discovery  was  at  first
received,  was  partly  due  to  the  exaggerations  of  the  discoverer,
from  which  charge  he  is  not  altogether  free  even  now  ;  for  he
sees  in  some  of  these  worked  flints  rude  delineations  of  human
and  animal  heads,  and  in  others  instruments  for  cutting  the
hair  and  nails.  We  may  reasonably  doubt  whether  art,  in  its
rudest  beginning,  included  hair-dressing  in  the  primeval  epoch
of  the  human  species.

I  shall  pass  over  the  desperate  attempts  made  to  explain
away  the  formation  of  these  implements.  They  afford  a
melancholy  proof  of  that  disposition  to  regain,  at  any  price,
even  at  the  expense  of  common  sense,  a  lost  position.  It  is
proved,  beyond  any  doubt,  that  these  flints  have  been  fabricated
by  man's  hand ;  that  they  owe  their  origin  to  no  other  cause ;
that  they  lie  in  beds  which,  since  their  deposition,  have  never
been  disturbed  ;  and  that  they  unquestionably  date  from  the
same  period  as  that  of  the  extinct  animals.

Let  us  now  examine  the  flint  implements. .  They  are  very
rudely  fabricated,  and  manifestly  split  off  from  the  flint  stones
found  in  the  district.  Two  stones  were  struck  against  each
other  until  one  was  shattered,  and  such  splinters  collected  as
appeared  suitable  for  being  worked.  As  the  flint  pebbles  have
a  round  or  oval  form,  it  is  natural  that  the  splinters  should  more
or  less  exhibit  the  same  shape,  and  that  the  centre  of  the  pieces
should  be  thicker,  and  present  an  edge  lengthwise.  Flint  has
nearly  the  same  fracture  as  glass.  On  some  of  the  stone
hatchets  is  seen  the  crust  which  flints  imbedded  in  chalk
always  present.  These  instruments  were  either  not  finished,
or  the  workmen  found  that  condition  suitable  for  their  pur-
pose, and  so  left  them  as  they  were.  The  edges  are  mostly
sharp.  There  can  be  no  doubt  but  these  implements  have
been  manufactured  on  the  spot,  or  in  the  vicinity,  as  they
are  but  little  rolled.  This  assumption  is  further  supported
by  the  circumstance  that  the  hatchets  are  mostly  found  at
the  base  of  the  formation  in  large  quantities,  as  during  the


LECTURE    X.


209


few  years  tliat  attention  has  been  drawn  to  this  subject  many
thousands  have  been  extracted  from  the  Somme  valley.  It
is  this  quantity  which  affords  additional  evidence  of  their
being  worked,  for  a  single  sample  may  have  been  the  effect
of  accident,  but  not  so  many  thousands.

Three  forms  have  been  distinguished.  The  so-called  knives
or  flakes  (eclats)  are  the  least  worked;  they  are  thin  elongated
pieces,  with  cutting  edges,  running  to  a  more  or  less  sharp
point,  and  manifestly  the  result  of  few  blows.

Fig.  87.     Flint   Knife   in  the  Geneva  Museum,  presented  by  Boucher  de

Perthes.     Surface  and  Profile.


Among  the  splinters  caused  by  the  breakage  of  large  flints,
such  were  selected  as  resemble  the  blade  of  a  knife,  which
were  used  for  cutting  meat,  skinning  animals,  &c,  as  is  also
shewn  by  the  worked  bones  of  which  we  have  spoken,  and
which  still  shew  the  indentations  made  by  their  flint  knives.

The  two  other  forms  are  more  finished ;  they  are  spear-  or
lance-shaped.  The  lance-shaped  are  longer,  some  eight  inches
in  length,  finely  pointed,  thicker,  and  more  massive  at  the
broad  end,  so  as  to  form  a  sort  of  a  handle.  The  instru-
ments of  oval  shape  have  been  mostly  worked  by  gentle  blows.
From  the  form  and  workmanship,  as  well  as  from  comparison
with  pieces  of  a  later  period,  which  are  more  perfect,  it  may
be  shewn  that  these  implements  served  for  wedges.    The  savages


270


LECTURE    X.


Fig.  88.     Oval-shaped  Stone  Hatchet,  sharpened.   Both  from  the  same  place.

Or


a;


a.  The  original  Chalk  Crast.
Fig.  89.     Lance-shaped  Stone  Hatchets.     Surface  and  Profile.


in   the   islands   of  the   Pacific,   who,   when    discovered,  were
ignorant  of  the  use  of  metal;  the  Indians  of  North  and  South


LECTURE    X.  271

America,    all   worked    and   made    use    of    similar    flint    im-
plements.

The  condition  of  the  stone  hatchets  found  in  the  valley  of  the
Somme  also  bears  evidence  of  their  great  activity.  As  already
observed,  many  of  the  implements  are  encrusted  with  the  same
film  as  the  flint  in  its  chalky  bed.  All  those  made  from
dark  grey  flint  show  also  a  coloration  (called  by  the  French  la
patine),  more  or  less  penetrating  into  the  interior  and  corre-
sponding to  that  of  the  gravel  in  the  same  strata.  In  some
spots  it  is  white,  in  others  yellow  or  dark  brown.  This  colora-
tion extending  to  all  the  edges  and  surfaces,  and  penetrating
equally  into  the  interior  structure,  furnishes  ample  evidence
that  the  period,  during  which  the  tools  have  lain  in  the  strata,  is
of  equal  duration  with  that  of  the  broken  gravel  forming
part  of  the  same  bed.  In  some  spots  the  surfaces  have
dendrites  like  those  on  the  Neanderthal  skull ;  these,  however,
furnish  no  absolute  proof  of  great  age.

Beside  the  stone  hatchets  no  other  traces  of  human  industry
were  found  excepting  some  small  round  bodies  perforated  in
the  centre,  which  are  fossils  found  in  the  chalk,  and  known
by  the  name  Coscinopora  globularis.  At  first  it  was  suggested
that  the  hole  was  artificial,  until  it  was  found  that  many  of
them  still  imbedded  in  the  chalk  were  equally  perforated;
the  central  portion,  being  of  a  more  spongy  texture,  had
probably  been  scooped  out  during  decomposition.  As  rows  of
them  have  been  found  in  juxtaposition,  it  is  probable  that  these
bodies  had  been  strung  together  as  beads  and  worn  as  orna-
ments, which  is  the  more  likely,  as  some  of  these  beads,  belong-
ing to  a  later  period,  have  been  found  which  were  evidently
artificially  bored.

Human  bones  have  long  been  sought  for,  but  in  vain,  and
Lyell,  who  possesses  a  mania  for  explaining  everything,  did
not  neglect  this  opportunity  of  writing  an  explanatory  treatise
on  the  absence  of  human  fossils  in  the  valley  of  the  Somme.
But  at  last  a  human  jaw  was  found  at  Moulin  Quignon,  near
Abbeville  (March  29).

The  jaw  was  carefully  removed  by  Boucher  de  Perthes  from
the  lowest  bluish  ferruginous  stratum,  resting  immediately  upon
the  chalk.     Ono  of  the  molars  is  still  in  the  jaw,  the  socket  of


272


LECTURE    X.


the  last  molar,   which  must  have  been  lost  during  life,   was
closed  up,  the  other  open  alveoli  were  filled  with  sand.      The

Fig.  90.     The  Moulin-Quignon  Jaw,  outside  view,  from  M.  de  Quatrefages'

photograph.


Fig.  91.     The  Moulin-Quignon  Jaw,  inside  view,  from  M.  de  Quatrefages'

photograph.


jaw  had  the  same  black  coating  as  the  hatchets  found  in  the
gravel.       The    form  of  the  jaw  presents    many   peculiarities.


LECTURE    X.


273


The  angle  formed  between  the  ascending  and  the  horizontal
ramus  is  very  open,  the  ascending  ramus  very  low  and  broad,
its  head  uncommonly  round,  and  the  posterior  margin  curved
inwards,  as  in  the  marsupials.  All  these  characters  may
separately  be  met  with  in  some  European  skulls,  but  they  are
never  found  in  such  combination.  Doubts  respecting  the
authenticity  of  this  jaw,  raised  chiefly  by  English  naturalists,
have,  after  a  long  investigation,  been  removed,  as  we  shall  show
hereafter.  The  jaw  of  Moulin  Quignon  is  the  first,  and  hitherto
the  only  human  fossil  obtained  from  the  stratified  diluvium,
and,  from  the  combination  of  many  characters,  no  doubt
belongs  to  a  peculiar  race,  which  cannot  be  determined  until
more  such  discoveries  are  made.

The  proceedings  of  the  above  congress  excited  general  interest
and  gave  rise  to  different  interpretations.  The  members  them-
selves did  not  seem  quite  clear  as  to  the  results  obtained.  Dr.
Falconer,  for  instance,  had  no  sooner  crossed  the  Channel  than
he  began  to  raise  doubts  against  what  he  could  not  well  deny
in  France  in  presence  of  the  facts.  I  feel,  therefore,  bound
to  enter  into  further  particulars  concerning  the  points  at  issue.

The  succession  of  the  beds  in  the  spot  where  the  jaw  was
found  is  represented  in  the  subjoined  figure.

Fig.  92.     Section  of  the  Beds  at  Moulin-Quignon,  after  O.  Diinpre.


a


-*»     ^^

k

==r8fj|||lPl|g§

g^*^^Bj^~g^Kzgp£^-^-:--\

^.~  **^    . '  •  ■  _  ..  -  "_:'  ■        r^z^Z-

s-^^gfc                SHk

S

IBliiiHHBBl

~s~

N'^LUL_Ei

a.     <

;    i

it

274  LECTUEE    X.

Thickness  in  metres.

1.  Vegetable  earth        -----    0-30

2.  Grey  undisturbed  sand,  with  broken  flints  -  -     0-70

3.  Yellow  argillaceous  sand,  mixed  with  large  and  little  rolled

flints,  below  which  is  a  bed  of  grey  sand  without  flints  -     1-50

4.  Yellow  ferruginous  sand,  mixed  with  less  thick  but  more

rolled  flints,  below  which  is  a  bed  of  less  yellow  sand.
In  this  bed  Boucher  de  Perthes  found  fragments  of  a
tooth  of  the  Mammoth,  and  some  flint  hatchets  -     T70

5.  Black  argillo-ferruginous  sand,  colouring  and  sticking  to

the  hand ;  small  pebbles,  more  rolled  than  in  the  higher
beds.  In  this  bed  were  found  flint  hatchets,  and  the  hu-
man jaw.  a.  Marks  the  spot  where  Quatrefages  found  two
flint  hatchets  in  the  presence  of  the  Congress,  b.  The
spot  where  Boucher  de  Perthes  found  a  flint  hatchet :
and  c.  where  he  found  the  jaw,  March  28, 1863.  d.  Is  the
spot  where  Dr.  Falconer  found  another  hatchet,  April  14,
in  the  presence  of  the  Congress  -  -  -    0-50


Thickness  of  the  alluvium     -         -     4-70
6.    A  bed  of  chalk  with  an  irregular  surface.

The  objections  raised  by  Elie  de  Beaumont,  Perpetual  secre-
tary of  the  French  Academy,  deserve  some  special  notice ;  in
order  to  obviate  misapprehension,  I  shall  state  them  nearly  in
his  own  words  :  "  I  am  of  opinion,"  says  this  geologist,  "  that
the  alluvial  deposits  excavated  from  the  gravel  pit  at  Moulin-
Quignon  do  not  belong  to  the  diluvium  proper.

"  In  my  opinion  this  apparent  diluvial  formation  belongs  to

such  deposits  as  I  have  formerly  called  alluvium

These  formations  are  synchronous  with  the  formation  of  peat,
and  may,  like  it,  contain  human  bones  and  the  products  of
human  industry ;  but  such  deposits  which  represent  a  kind
of  post  diluvium,  and  are  formed  by  detached  fragments,
transported  by  atmospheric  influences,  thunderstorms,  snow,
frost,  and  rain,  may  contain  what  the  small  diluvial  deposits
collected  on  the  surface  or  the  fissures  of  the  rocks  contain,
namely,  bones  and  teeth  of  elephants,  etc.,  which  belong  to  such
bodies  as  are  less  apt  to  be  destroyed  by  atmospheric  influ-
ences or  transportation.

"  The  men  and  elephants,  the  bones  of  which  are  found  in
such  deposits,  need   not,  therefore,    have   been   contempora-


LECTUEE    X.  275

neous,  and  the  different  state  of  their  cartilages  appears  to  me
to  prove  that  they  belong  to  different  epochs.  With  regard  to
the  flint  implements,  it  seems  to  me  natural  to  assign  them  to
the  stone  period  of  the  Swiss  pile  works.  Since  now  these
pile  works  are  co-ordinate  with  the  present  level  of  the  lakes,
they  must  necessarily  be  post-diluvian,  for  in  all  the  Swiss
lakes,  even  those  whose  beds  were  not  excavated  by  the  erratic
or  diluvian  phenomenon  (if  there  be  such),  we  can  only  date
back  the  present  level  of  the  waters  to  the  last  effects  of  this
mighty  phenomenon,  which  left  the  bed  of  every  lake  in  that
condition  in  which  we  see  it  at  present.

"  I  do  not  think  that  man  co-existed  with  the  mammoth ;  I
still  adhere  in  this  respect  to  Cuvier's  opinion.  Cuvier's  opi-
nion is  that  of  a  genius,  and  has  hitherto  not  been  refuted."

Milne-Edwards,  the  celebrated  professor  of  zoology,  imme-
diately replies,  that  he  will  give  no  opinion  respecting  the  age
of  the  beds  at  Moulin-Quignon,  which  concerned  the  geolo-
gists ;  but  as  regards  the  contemporaneity  of  man  and  the
extinct  animals,  he  must  formally  declare  that  it  rests  not
merely  upon  the  discovery  at  Moulin-Quignon,  but  upon  a
great  number  of  facts  ascertained  in  different  countries.

Quatrefages  also  declares  that,  though  for  a  long  time  he  ad-
hered to  the  view  of  Cuvier,  he  now  entertained  a  different
opinion.

According  to  all  observations  which  I  have  cited  in  this
work,  there  can  really  be  no  doubt  on  this  subject.  It  is  well
known  that  more  recent  alluvial  formations  contain  well  pre-
served remains  of  destroyed  beds  ;  nothing,  for  instance,  is
more  common  than  to  find  in  the  strata  immediately  overlying
chalk,  whether  they  belong  to  the  tertiary  or  more  recent  for-
mations, flints  and  silicious  petrifactions  from  the  chalk  bed.
Why,  then,  should  not  detached  elephant  and  human  bones
be  found  intermixed  in  a  recent  diluvium  ?  No  doubt,  such
may  be  the  case ;  but  when  such  discoveries  are  made  in
the  most  different  localities,  when  not  merely  rolled  and  worn
away  fragments  of  bones,  but  connected  parts  which  manifestly
must  have  been  covered  with  flesh,  are  found  associated  with
human  bones  and  numerous  remains  of  man's  industry ;  if  these

t  2


276


LECTUKE    X.


animal  bones  bear  traces  of  workmanship,  effected  when  they
were  in  a  fresh  state,  the  aspect  is  changed.  Were  it  possible
to  expunge  from  science  the  discoveries  of  Schmerling,  Lartet,
and  many  others,  the  jaw  of  Moulin-Quignon  might,  as  is  sug-
gested by  Beaumont,  be  considered  a  perfectly  isolated  case.
But  as  these  facts,  perhaps  unknown  to  the  celebrated  acade-
mician, are  on  record,  it  is  impossible  to  treat  a  multitude  of
facts  as  a  collection  of  exceptions.

With  regard  (apart  from  this  jaw)  to  the  parallelism  of  the
stone  hatchets  of  the  valley  of  the  Somme  (and,  by  the  way,  of
many  other  localities)  with  the  pileworks  of  the  Swiss  stone
period,  it  will  excite  both  in  the  archaeologist  and  palasontolo-
gist  a  smile  of  incredulity;  in  the  antiquary,  because  the
hatchets  of  the  diluvium  bear  traces  of  different  and  more  rough
workmanship,  whilst  the  Swiss  implements  indicate  a  much
higher  culture  and  a  more  recent  epoch ;  in  the  anatomist,  be-
cause the  Swiss  pile-works,  as  Riitimeyer  has  shown,  present
a  different  Fauna,  in  which  there  is  no  trace  of  extinct  species,
and  which  are  perfectly  distinct  from  those  of  the  diluvial  de-
posits. Whoever  has  read  with  attention  the  accumulative  evi-
dence given  in  a  previous  lecture,  will  find  that  I  need  not  here
prove  again  that  the  ingenious  opinion  of  Cuvier,  if  it  was
such,  has  been  in  every  respect  refuted,  and  that  the  parallel-
ism of  the  deposits  of  the  Somme  valley  with  the  Swiss  pile-
works  has  turned  out  an  unfortunate  attempt  void  of  any
foundation.

We  shall  pass  on  now  to  the  geological  aspect  of  the  ques-
tion. I  shall  here  summarise  the  assertions  of  Elie  de  Beau-
mont, and  those  of  his  opponents  whose  names  are  of  not  less
weight  in  geology.

In  a  note  read  August  10th  before  the  French  Academy,  Elie
de  Beaumont  expresses  himself  thus: — "  My  theory  rests  chiefly
on  the  distinction  between  the  real  or  Alpine  diluvium  and  cer-
tain gravel  deposits  which,  like  those  of  Moulin-Quignon,  more
or  less  resemble  the  diluvium.

"  I  attribute  the  origin  of  the  latter  to  the  effect  of  still
acting  forces,  the  action  of  which  has,  in  my  opinion,  been  mo-
mentarily interrupted  by  the  diluvial  phenomena,  whilst  other


LECTURE    X.  277

geologists,  in  opposition  to  my  opinion,  ascribe  even  the  dilu-
vium to  still  acting  forces.  ^Reference  has  been  made  to  pre-
sent agents,  only  in  another  form  than  mine  ;  the  origin  of  the
sandbank  of  Moulin-Quignon  has  been  ascribed  either  to  the
action  of  floating  iceblocks  stranded  in  the  Somme  creeks,  or
to  the  various  level-changes  of  the  general  mass  of  the  conti-
nent. It  does  not  seem  to  me  justifiable  to  assume  such  grand
phenomena  for  the  explanation  of  such  small  effects,  but  I
must  be  permitted  to  observe,  that,  if  the  sandbank  of  Moulin-
Quignon  really  owes  its  origin  to  either  of  these  two  different
phenomena,  it  manifestly  does  not,  in  my  opinion,  belong  to
the  real  diluvium.

"  It  is  equally  manifest  that  if  this  same  sandbank  of  Moulin-
Quignon  is  the  product  of  a  mixture  of  the  elements  of  the  grey
and  the  red  diluvium,  it  cannot  belong  to  the  grey  diluvium,
which  is  the  proper  alpine  diluvium,  and  which,  I  agree  with
Cuvier  in  considering  as  corresponding  to  the  extinction  of  the
fossil  elephant  and  as  preceding  the  apparition  of  man.

"  Attempts  have,  nevertheless,  been  made  to  prove  that  I
am  wrong  in  distinguishing  the  gravel  of  Moulin-Quignon,  as
well  as  many  other  deposits  of  flint,  sand,  and  loam  upon  the
platforms  of  Picardy,  from  the  Alpine  diluvium,  and  my  views
have  been  criticised  because  I  very  simply  had  recourse  for' the
formation  of  these  deposits  to  thunderstorms,  frost  and  snow
as  the  acting  causes.  I  shall  oppose  to  these  critics  a  few
ciphers.

"  1 .  The  sandbank  of  Moulin-Quignon  lies,  according  to  Bou-
cher de  Perthes,  thirty  meters  above  the  level  of  the  Somme,
near  Abbeville,  consequently  thirty-nine  meters  above  the  level
of  the  sea.  At  a  distance  of  less  than  two  kilometers  there  are
spots  which,  according  to  the  map,  have  an  elevation  of  sixty-
one,  sixty-three,  and  sixty-seven  meters ;  at  a  distance  of  less
than  three  kilometers  there  is  one  spot  eighty  meters,  and  at
five  kilometers  are  spots  one  hundred  meters  high.  Taking
into  consideration  the  difference  of  elevation  in  proportion  to
distance,  it  will  be  found  that  the  declivities  from  these  points
towards  the  sandbank  of  Moulin-Quignon  all  exceed  the  hun-
dredth or  0,  34'  22",  58,  that  is  to  say  that  this  fall  is  ten  times


278  LECTURE    X.

greater  than  the  upper  limit  of  the  fall  of  the  navigable  rivers,
and  that  this  fall  even  exceeds  that  of  the  Isere,  Arve,  and
Bruche  in  the  Vosges,  where  these  rivers,  in  the  vicinity  of
their  sources,  flow  with  great  rapidity,  causing  great  devasta-
tions. All  that  is  required  is  a  heavy  fall  of  snow  or  rain  for
the  waters  to  effect  similar  devastations  upon  the  undulating
and  loosely  connected  stony  platforms  of  Picardy.  Who  could
thus  undertake  to  determine  the  limits  of  the  greatest  effects
of  this  kind,  which  might  have  been  produced  on  the  environs
of  Abbeville  since  the  stone  period  ?

"  It  has  been  particularly  pointed  out  that  the  sandbank  of
Moulin-Quignon  is  older  than  the  peat  of  the  banks  of  the
Somme.  This  gravel  deposit  seems  indeed  to  date  from  the
stone  period,  whilst  the  peats  of  northern  France  are  partly
more  recent  than  the  Roman  roads.  If  this  be  true,  it  is  easily
understood  how  the  bones  of  the  elephant  and  the  rhinoceros
may  have  undergone  the  removal  which  produced  these  and
other  deposits.  They  were  then  less  petrified  and  less  fragile
than  now ;  it  remains  nevertheless  true,  that  the  deposit  at
Moulin-Quignon,  as  well  as  the  peats,  have  been  formed  by
still  acting  causes,  and  belong,  like  the  peat,  to  the  present
period.

"  This  gravel  bank  is  composed  of  such  variable  deposits,
which  have  been  formed  and  are  still  forming  on  the  surface  of
the  earth  by  the  agency  of  atmospheric  influences,  and  which
I  designate  by  the  name  of  alluvium  of  the  slopes,  in  contra-
distinction to  the  fluviatile  alluvium  which  forms  the  planes  of
the  valleys.  The  alluvium  on  the  slopes  is  very  abundant  in
the  north  of  France  on  account  of  the  composition  of  the  ter-
tiary strata  covering  the  chalk,  in  the  mass  of  which  the  undu-
lations of  the  ground  enter.

"  The  alluvia  on  the  slopes  are  forming  daily  during  every
fall  of  rain  ;  some  are  formed  in  the  garden  of  the  Luxemburg,
where  the  sand  is  scattered  upon  the  paths,  expressly  as  it  were,
to  produce  this  little  phenomenon.  The  alluvium  on  the  slopes,
that  in  the  valleys,  and  the  peats,  are  to  be  considered,  in  their
totality,  essentially  synchronous.

"  I  will  not  enter  into  further  particulars,  but  wait  until  the


LECTUEE    X.  279

jaw  found  at  Moulin-Quignon  has  been  analysed.  I  find,  with
Boucher  de  Perthes,  that  this  analysis  can  afford  no  absolute
solution,  but  I  also  share  the  opinion  of  the  English  savants,
that  the  analysis  of  a  bone,  found  in  a  doubtful  position,  is
essential.  The  natural  chronometer,  such  as  the  D  lines,  the
river-deltas,  and  the  waterfalls,  yield  no  absolute  measures.
The  disappearance  of  the  animal  matter  of  a  bone,  is  in  itself
a  kind  of  natural  chronometer,  which,  though  it  must  be
reduced  to  its  fair  value,  is  not  to  be  neglected.  I  should  be
glad  to  see  the  jaw  of  Moulin-Quignon  chemically  compared,
not  only  with  fossil  bones  from  the  real  diluvium,  but  with
human  bones,  extracted  from  Gaelic  or  Gallo-Roman  graves,
and  also  with  bones  preserved  in  the  catacombs  of  Paris."

Before  proceeding  further,  I  beg  to  offer  a  few  remarks.  As
late  as  in  the  month  of  May,  Elie  de  Beaumont  asserted  the
synchronism  of  the  peat  and  the  gravel  bank  of  Moulin-Qui-
gnon, and  supported  his  view  by  the  circumstance  that  human
bones,  wood,  horn,  stone,  bronze,  and  iron  implements  have  all
been  found  in  the  peat.  But,  it  seems,  in  the  month  of  August,
Moulin-Quignon  becomes  considerably  older,  but  still  remains
in  the  same  epoch,  being  thrust  back  to  its  beginning,  the  stone
period,  whilst  the  peat  is  advanced  to  the  Roman  period.  It
would  be  just  the  same  to  assert  that  Homer  and  King  Otto
were  contemporaries  because  they  belong  to  the  same  epoch,
namely,  the  historical  period  of  the  Greeks.

Elie  de  Beaumont  goes  further.  Moulin-Quignon  is  formed
by  still  acting  forces ;  the  Alpine  diluvium,  on  the  contrary,  is
formed  by  other  causes  which  momentarily  interrupted  the
forces  still  acting  in  nature.  Here  is  the  rub.  The  present
theory  is  that  the  diluvial  period  was  of  a  very  lengthened
duration,  and  also  that  the  present  forces,  glaciers,  and  waters,
were  in  continued  action,  and  that  the  diluvial  period  merged
into  the  present  without  any  perceptible  interruption,  and  that,
as  we  have  shewn,  the  extinct  animals  died  off  very  gradually,  or
retired,  or  were  transformed  into  present  species.  The  whole
theory  of  Elie  de  Beaumont,  regarding  the  Alpine  diluvium,  is
founded  upon  an  error  of  fact.

He  has  mistaken  beds  of  Nageljluhe  (conglomerate  of  the


280  LECTURE    X.

Alps),  interposed  between  molasse  strata,  for  diluvium,  and  lias
compared  these  beds,  for  wliich  no  fossils  have  yet  been  found,
to  the  alluvium  of  the  valleys  where  elephant  bones  have  been
met  with.  Hence  this  transposition  of  the  diluvium  into  another
epoch ;  hence  this  repudiation  of  still  acting  forces,  as  regards
the  above  formations,  for  which  he  invokes  unknown  forces,
which  cannot  at  present  be  traced  in  nature.

As  regards  the  slopes,  there  is  a  small  point  which  must  not
be  forgotten,  namely,  that  the  motion  of  water  does  not  merely
depend  upon  the  fall,  but  also  upon  the  mass,  and  that  a
navigable  river  flows  down  more  rapidly  than  a  small  brook,  and
that  rain  water  remains,  to  a  certain  extent,  stationary.

With  respect  to  chemical  analysis,  it  may  be  said  that  the
amount  of  organic  matter  only  then  furnishes  a  kind  of  natural
chronometer  when  the  respective  bones  are  found  in  the  same
positions.  If  this  be  not  the  case,  the  chemical  analysis  has
scarcely  any  importance,  as  those  influences,  which  deprive  the
bones  of  their  animal  matter,  act  with  greater  intensity  in  one
locality  than  in  another.

The  note  of  Elie  de  Beaumont,  which  we  have  rendered  ver-
batim, is  partly  an  answer  to  the  communication  of  Hebert,
laid  before  the  academy  in  May,  which  I  also  subjoin.  Hebert
is  intimately  acquainted  with  the  environs  of  Paris,  and  has,
with  other  geologists,  taken  part  in  the  Scientific  Congress.

"  The  celebrated  Secretary  of  the  Academy  of  Sciences,"
writes  Hebert,  "  ought  to  have  noticed  that  we  were  specially
occupied  in  investigating  this  question ;  that  we  are  far  from
confounding  the  various  accumulations  of  conglomerates ;  that
we  have  shirked  no  difficulties ;  but  that  these  difficulties  do
not  invalidate  the  facts  that  man  has  existed  in  France  since
the  beginning  of  the  quaternary  or  diluvial  period.

"  With  regard  to  the  special  locality  of  Moulin-Quignon,  I
have  declared  at  Abbeville,  that  this  conglomerate,  consisting
partly  of  broken  or  entire  and  frequently  large  flints,  which
seem  to  have  come  from  the  subjacent  chalk,  and  are  cemented
together  in  a  brown  firm  clay,  which  here  and  there  contains
sandy  parts ;  I  have  declared,  I  say,  that  this  formation  does
not,  in  my  opinion,  belong  to  the  lower  diluvium,  which  occurs


LECTURE    X.  281

at  St.  Acheul,  near  Amiens,  at  Menchecourt,  and  other  localities
in  the  vicinity  of  Abbeville,  and  in  which  flint  implements  are
found  associated  with  the  bones  of  the  mammoth  and  rhinoceros
tichorhinus.

"  I  therefore  consider  the  deposits  of  Moulin-Quignon  of  a
more  recent  origin,  and  incline,  in  this  respect,  to  the  opinion
of  Elie  de  Beaumont ;  but  this  learned  geologist  adds,  that
this  deposit  is  synchronous  with  the  formation  of  the  peat,  with
which  I  cannot  agree.  The  stratification  at  a  much  higher
level,  the  nature  of  this  stratification  which  indicates  the  action
of  water  in  rapid  motion,  do  not  admit  of  a  relation  between
the  phenomenon  to  which  this  deposit  owes  its  origin,  and  the
conditions  which  gave  rise  to  the  peat.  The  peat  formation  is,
in  my  opinion,  much  more  recent,  and  in  it  the  waters  present
relations  similar  to  the  present,  and  which  would  be  vainly
sought  for  in  the  conditions  which  may  be  inferred  from  the
flint  deposits  at  Moulin-Quignon.

"  I  consequently  rank  this  formation  among  the  diluvium,
but  I  have  declared  on  the  spot  that  I  cannot  exactly  determine
its  constitution,  as  may  be  done  with  the  well  known  deposits
of  Menchecourt  and  St.  Acheul.

"  To  render  the  subject  more  plain,  I  crave  permission  to
describe  the  phenomena  of  the  diluvium  in  the  north  of  France
as  established  by  geologists  who  have  specially  studied  this
subject.

"  1.  Excavation  of  our  present  valleys  by  erosion,  a  work  of
long  duration,  which  required  large  masses  of  water.

"  2.  Development  of  the  Fauna  of  the  mammoth  upon  the  so
formed  soil  of  France,  which  was  covered  with  forests  inhabited
by  the  elephants  and  rhinoceros,  forests  of  which  scarcely  any
traces  are  left,  whilst  the  animals  which  inhabited  them  have
left  their  bones  in  the  soil.

"Formation  of  the  lower  alluvium  of  our  valleys,  by  streams,
gravel  below,  sand  above,  with  numerous  relics  of  mammoth,
rhinoceros  tichorhinus,  and  flint  hatchets,  in  the  valley  of  the
Somme.  These  deposits  have  filled  up  the  previously  scooped
out  valleys  to  a  height  of  ten  to  fifteen  meters,  so  that  at  Paris
they  rise  thirty-five  to  forty  meters  above  the  level  of  the  sea.


282  LECTURE    X,

This  portion  of  the  alluvium  is,  on  account  of  its  colour,  fre-
quently called  grey  diluvium.

"  3.  Deposition  of  calcareous  loam,  called  loess,  which  always
contains  lime  knolls  of  the  same  shape,  whether  on  the  banks
of  the  Rhine  or  at  Paris,  which  overlies  the  preceding  stratum,
and  marks  a  new  phasis  in  the  quaternary  period.

"  4.  Formation  of  a  gravelly  deposit,  the  broken  flints  of  which
are  cemented  in  red  loam  and  quartzose  sand,  which  contains  no
organic  remains,  is  never  clearly  stratified,  and  lies  partly  upon
the  grey  diluvium,  partly  upon  the  loess,  as  may  be  plainly
seen  in  the  vicinity  of  the  new  church  of  the  Quartier  de  Deux
Moulins,  or  upon  the  calcaire  grossier,  as  may  be  seen  on  the
platform  of  Maison  Blanche  and  Montrouge.

"  This  deposit,  usually  called  the  red  diluvium,  which  was
previously,  but  erroneously,  believed  to  be  overlaid  by  the
loess,  lies  mostly  in  channels,  which  are  scooped  out  in  the  sub-
jacent strata.  All  geologists  know  the  singular  bag-like  de-
pressions, which  sometimes  form  well-shafts  of  five,  ten,  and
fifteen  meters  in  depth,  intersecting  both  solid  and  moveable
stone  masses.  These  also  are  the  effects  of  different  pheno-
mena of  the  quaternary  period.

"When  the  subjacent  diluvial  strata,  where  they  are  in  contact
with  the  deposit,  show  no  excavation,  there  are  seen  in  the
bottom  one  or  two  horizontal  layers  of  firm  brown  or  reddish
clay,  which  sometimes  contains  a  layer  of  ferruginous  sand  ;
and  if  bag-shaped  depressions  are  present,  this  clay  lines  their
walls,  and  thus  envelopes  the  red  diluvium,  which  it  separates
at  the  same  time  from  the  loess  and  the  grey  diluvium.

"  The  red  diluvium  spreads  generally  over  the  ground  and
the  side  walls  of  our  partly  filled  up  valleys ;  and  rises  in  the
vicinity  of  Pai'is  to  a  height  of  at  least  sixty-five  meters,  but
does  not  reach  the  heights  attained  by  the  loess.

"  5.  The  surface  of  the  red  diluvium  was  itself  washed  off  by
the  waters,  which  stratified  its  upper  masses,  and  mixed  it
with  grey  loam.     This  deposit  is  still  seen  at  the  gate  of  Ivry.

"  6.  After  these  successive  processes  our  valleys  were  again
scooped  out,  but  manifestly  under  new  conditions.  The  de-
posits hitherto  mentioned  adhered  to  the  walls  of  the  valleys,


LECTURE    X.  283

and  the  form  of  the  ground  surface  became  what  it  is  now ;
though  in  these  newly  scooped  out  valleys  numerous  other
geological  processes  took  place,  the  investigation  of  which  has
scarcely  commenced,  but  which,  unquestionably,  assign  this
final  excavation  to  a  very  remote  period.

"  The  grey  and  red  diluvium  are  found  with  all  their  cha-
racteristics at  St.  Acheul,  Menchecourt,  and  in  many  other
places  of  the  Somme  valley ;  loess  also  occurs  there,  but  in  a
very  rudimentary  form.

"  The  numerous  flint-hatchets  which  testify  to  the  existence
of  man  in  the  beginning  of  the  quaternary  period,  have  been
found  in  the  grey  diluvium,  which  is  covered  by  its  double
undisturbed  mantle.

"  This  deposit  of  Moulin-Quignon  shows  neither  the  cha-
racters of  the  grey  nor  of  the  red  diluvium,  but  seems  to
be  the  result  of  a  mixture  of  both,  produced  by  disturbed
waters  ;  perhaps,  by  the  same  waters  which  scooped  out  the
valleys.

"  The  last  excavation  was,  perhaps,  not  a  simple  phenome-
non ;  for  the  deposit  of  Moulin-Quignon  is,  as  has  been  shown,
intersected  by  vertical,  natural  shafts,  resembling  those  pro-
duced by  the  red  diluvium  ;  but  differing  so  far  that  the  latter,
as  seen  at  St.  Acheul  and  Paris,  are  filled  with  the  red  dilu-
vium, whilst  those  of  Moulin-Quignon  are  filled  with  a  mani-
festly more  recent  clayish  matter,  resembling  vegetable  soil.
This  is,  perhaps,  an  indication  of  a  seventh  phase  in  the  quater-
nary period.

"  The  formation  of  the  peat  deposits  must,  in  my  opinion,  be
placed  in  an  epoch  subsequent  to  the  above  periods.

"  In  conclusion,  I  would  just  observe  that  the  natural  shafts,
which  intersect  the  gravel  brook  of  Moulin-Quignon,  can  no
ways  be  considered  as  having  favoured  the  introduction  of  the
jaw  in  question  to  the  bottom  of  the  deposits."

"  The  jaw  was  situate  in  a  bed  of  black  flint,  perfectly  dis-
tinct from  the  shafts,  and  the  ferruginous  substance  had
filtered  through  a  fissure  which  pervades  the  whole  mass  from
the  surface  down  to  the  bottom,  and  which  was  itself  filled
with  the  same  ferruginous  mass,  which  it  had  carried  down  at


284  LECTURE    X.

an  indefinite,  but  at  all  events  very  remote  period.  The
coloration  and  the  incrustation  of  the  jaw  is  accordingly  a
pure  accident,  but  just  on  that  account  a  guarantee  against
deception.'"

So  far  Hebert.  We  learn  from  it  that  the  Parisian  geolo-
gist, like  ourselves,  considers  the  diluvial  period  to  have  been
of  long  duration,  during  which  a  number  of  phenomena  suc-
ceeded each  other,  which  required  loug  periods  of  time.  There
is  no  question  here  of  supernatural  forces  no  longer  acting,
which  are  imagined  only  by  such  as  cannot  convince  them-
selves that  slight  forces  may,  within  a  proportionate  length  of
time,  produce  extraordinary  effects.  The  position  of  the  loess
immediately  upon  the  grey  diluvium  does  not  seem  so  strange
to  us  ;  it  may  be  parallelised  with  the  loess  at  Cannstadt,  so  rich
in  bones  of  the  elephant.

The  following  is  a  report  of  the  concluding  part  of  a  Lecture
delivered  by  M.  D'Archiac,  Professor  of  Geology  in  the  Jar  din
cles  Plantes,  on  the  19th  of  June.

"  Whatever  be  the  authenticity  ascribed  to  the  human  jaw
of  Moulin-Quignon,  this  discovery  possesses  only  a  secondary
importance.  It  is  a  very  simple  fact,  confirming  other  proofs,
which  by  their  number  and  universality  have  a  much  greater
value.  If  the  flint  hatchets  cannot  be  ascribed  to  accident ;  if
they  are  really  the  products  of  human  industry,  however  rude  ;
if  they  must  be  held  to  furnish  as  irrefragable  evidence  for  the
existence  of  man  before  the  formation  of  these  deposits,  as  the
bones  of  the  mammoth,  the  rhinoceros,  the  hippopotamus,  and
of  the  cave  lion,  bear  and  hyasna,  furnish  for  the  existence  of
these  animals,  it  becomes  of  little  importance  whether  or  not
the  remains  of  man  are  found  in  these  deposits.

"  The  question  is  answered  by  the  fact  itself,  and  it  is  of
secondary  importance  whether  the  sand  and  gravel  of  Moulin-
Quignon  are  quaternary  or  not.  The  essential  result,  the
theoretical  point  which  predominates  over  all  others,  namely,
the  antiquity  of  man  and  his  co-existence  with  the  extinct
species  of  large  mammals,  loses  nothing  of  its  value,  if  it  be
founded  only  upon  the  products  of  human  industry,  instead
of  the  discovery  of  human  skeletons."


LECTURE    X.  285

"  What  has  been  said  of  the  caverns  of  Liege,  and  what  we
shall  say,  is  quite  sufficient  to  answer  satisfactorily  the  other
part  of  the  question.

"  From  the  facts  before  us  we  cannot,  in  the  present  state
of  our  knowledge,  but  assume,  that  the  flint  hatchets  of  the
environs  of  Amiens  and  Abbeville  are  situated  in  undisturbed,
essentially  quaternary  beds,  along  with  the  bones  of  extinct
species,  and,  unless  peculiar  circumstances  come  to  light,  we
must  also  assume  that  the  jaw  of  Moulin-Quignon  dates  from
that  period.

"  We  must  here  touch  upon  a  point,  hitherto  but  little
noticed;  I  mean  the  determination  of  the  age  of  these  de-
posits, or  rather  of  the  rank  they  occupy  in  the  quaternary
series.  To  what  time  of  this  period,  disturbed  by  so  many
phenomena,  do  these  beds  correspond  ?

"  This  determination  appears  to  us  at  present  easy,  unless
we  search  for  comparisons  in  the  south  [in  the  Alpine  dilu-
vium, C.  V.],  where  they  do  not  occur,  and  where  we  cannot
estimate  their  value  ;  but  when  we  proceed  to  the  north-east,
the  Netherlands,  where  the  whole  quaternary  series  stands  in
its  true  relation  to  the  upper  tertiary  strata,  both  above  and
below  the  present  sea  level,  or  still  better,  when  we  proceed
more  northwards  to  the  eastern  counties  of  England.

"  The  deposits  of  clayish,  sandy  or  flinty  conglomerates,
which  are  found  in  the  basin  of  the  Somme  and  in  all  the  small
brook-valleys  which  run  from  the  Oise  direct  to  the  sea,  all  lie
directly  upon  the  chalk,  and,  excepting  those  cases  where
lower  tertiary  formations  interpose,  we  see  no  intermediate
deposit  which  may  enable  us  to  estimate  the  immense  time
which  must  have  elapsed  between  those  deposits  which  are  at
present  superimposed  upon  each  other.

"  But  on  the  other  side  of  the  Channel,  the  flint  hatchets,
which  are  identical  with  those  of  the  Somme  valley,  he  in  fresh
water  strata  deposited  in  the  cavities  of  the  boulder  clay.  This
is  shown  by  the  sections  in  the  environs  of  Hoxne  in  Suffolk,
Bedford,  and  the  coast  of  Norfolk,  near  Mundesley.  These
sections  prove  that  the  fresh-water  formations  are  more  recent
than  the  quaternary  marine  deposits  of  England,  Scotland,  and


286  LECTURE    X.

Ireland,  and  consequently  much  younger  than  the  Norfolk
crag,  the  accumulations  of  bones  of  the  JEl&phas  meridionalis
and  antiquus.

"  What  is  the  animal  world  which  characterises  the  beds  in
which  traces  are  found  of  a  rude  industry  the  genuineness  of
which  cannot  be  easily  doubted  ? — land  and  fresh  water  shells,
which,  with  few  exceptions,  still  inhabit  these  regions,  pachy-
dermata,  ruminants,  and  carnivora;  namely, Elephas primigeniits
and  antiquus,  Rhinoceros  tichorhimis,  Hippopotamus  major,  Cer-
vus  tarandus,  Oervus  megaceros,  Bos  primigenius  and  moschatus,
Equus  fossilis,  Felis  spelwa,  Hyosna  spelcea,  JJrsus  spelmus,  etc.
That  is  to  say  exactly  that  assemblage  of  species  which  we
find  in  the  fiuvio-marine  beds  of  Menchecourt,  in  the  sandy  and
flinty  alluvium  of  localities  near  Abbeville  and  Amiens,  as  well
as  in  the  valley  of  the  Oise  near  Chauny.

"  The  analogy  of  these  Faunce  on  both  sides  of  the  Channel
is  still  more  strikingly  proved  by  the  occurrence  near  Menche-
court of  the  Corbicula  consohrina  or  fltiminalis,  which  occurs
from  Grays  Thurrock,  on  the  left  bank  of  the  Thames,  up  to
Hull  on  the  Humber,  and  is  also  found  in  the  borings  of  Ostend.

"  The  remains  of  this  Fauna  of  invertebrate  and  vertebrate
animals  were  found  in  the  great  deposit  of  sand,  clay,  and
rolled  flints,  which  extends  over  the  east  and  south  of  England,
and  which  there,  as  on  the  coutinent,  was  in  some  places  suc-
ceeded by  a  gravelly  clayish  deposit  which  corresponds  to  the
older  alluvium.

"  In  now  comparing  the  results  obtained  on  the  other  side
of  the  Channel  with  the  deposits  of  the  Somme  valley,  we  must
necessarily  consider  the  latter  as  not  much  older  than  the  fresh
water  formations  of  the  south  of  England,  and  contemporaneous
with  such  strata  as  beyond  the  Channel  contain  the  Fauna  of
those  large  mammals  which  lived  during  the  quaternary  period.
The  deposits  of  the  Somme  valley  and  the  basin  of  the  Oise
are  thus  younger  than  the  boulder-clay,  than  the  Norfolk  crag,
and  belong  in  fact  to  the  phenomena  which  occurred  in  the
second  glacial  period.

"  Thus,  on  the  one  hand,  the  comparison  of  these  deposits
with  those  of  the  adjoining  departments  in  the  east,  where  the


LECTURE    X.  287

relation  of  the  strata  to  each  other  is  more  evident,  permits  us
to  determine  the  period  to  which  they  belong ;  and,  on  the
other  hand,  this  comparison  with  those  in  Belgium,  England,
and  Holland  points  out  to  us  the  place  they  occupy  in  the
series  of  deposits  of  this  period.

"  We  may,  therefore,  with  Worsaae,  distinguish  two  stone
periods.  The  one,  antediluvian,  characterised  by  rudely  hewn
Hints,  precedes  these  last  quaternary  deposits ;  the  second,
the  later  or  pre-historic  period,  the  weapons  and  implements  of
which  indicate  a  less  barbarous  condition,  comprehends  the
time  when  the  population  in  Denmark  accumulated  the  kitchen-
middens,  and  that  of  Switzerland,  Ireland,  and  other  regions
built  the  pile  works."

The  reader  is  now,  from  these  extracts  from  Elie  de  Beau-
mont, Hebert,  and  d'Archiac,  enabled  to  draw  his  own  conclu-
sion. As  far  as  I  am  concerned,  I  am  glad  to  find  that  I,
simultaneously  with  d'Archiac,  and  quite  independently,  have
arrived  at  the  same  results,  namely :  that  the  appearance  of
man  on  the  continent  (independent  of  Desnoyers'  discoveries,
which  were  then  unknown  to  us)  occurred  in  the  period  after
the  deposit  of  the  boulder-clay.

You  may  easily  imagine  that  the  search  for  stone  hatchets
and  flint  tools  as  found  in  the  valley  of  the  Somme,  extended
soon  to  other  parts.  Similar  discoveries  were  presently  made
in  other  spots.  If  I  preferentially  mention  those  made  by
Crosse  in  the  neighbourhood  of  Paris,  the  reason  is,  that  the
stratification  has  been  closely  examined  and  determined.
Charles  D'Orbigny  thus  describes  the  section  of  the  diluvium
at  Joinville,  about  six  miles  from  Paris  : —

Upon  the  fresh  water  chalk  of  St.  Ouen,  which  belongs  to
the  tertiary  formation,  rests  a  layer  of  about  two  meters,
seventy  centimeters  in  thickness,  of  so-called  grey  diluvium,
with  granitic  pebbles,  intermixed  with  large  erratic  blocks,  in
which,  besides  bones  of  mammals  and  teeth  of  the  mammoth
and  rhinoceros,  are  found  fragments  of  sea-  and  river-shells
from  the  subjacent  tertiary  cretaceous  strata.  Upon  this  grey
diluvium  reposes  a  bed  of  white  marly  sand,  about  seventy
centimeters  thick,  in  which  are  found  marly  knolls,  as  in  the


288  LECTURE    X.

loess ;  and  which  contains,  besides  some  fragments  of  mam-
mals and  reptiles,  a  large  quantity  of  well-preserved  land  and
fresh  water  shells,  of  which  thirty- seven  species  have  been  de-
termined, all  of  which  still  occur  in  the  surrounding  country,
or  in  the  south  of  France.  These  shells  were,  no  doubt,  de-
posited in  a  lake,  which  extended  far  beyond  both  banks  of
the  Seine.  Above  the  fresh  water  stratum  lies  another  of
grey  diluvium,  half  a  meter  in  thickness,  containing  granitic
and  porphyritic  pebbles,  but  only  a  few  fragments  of  fresh  water
snails,  which  seem  to  have  been  washed  up  from  the  subjacent
stratum.  Then  comes  a  marly  sandy  layer  of  grey  colour,  with
but  few  pebbles,  without  shells,  seventy-five  centimeters  thick,
and  then  comes  the  red  diluvium  of  quartzose  sand  with  pebbles,
for  which  the  chalk  flints  and  the  granite  porphyry  of  Morvan
have  furnished  the  materials,  which  are  coloured  and  cemented
by  the  red  ferruginous  marly  clay.  This  red  diluvium,  which  thus
partly  consists  of  the  same  elements  as  the  grey  diluvium,
reaches  a  thickness  of  seventy  centimeters,  and  lies  imme-
diately beneath  the  loam  or  loess,  which  is  here  only  thirty
centimeters  thick,  though  in  many  places  much  thicker,  and
covered  by  vegetable  soil.  In  the  lowest  stratum  of  the  grey
diluvium  in  a  suburb  of  Paris,  at  La  Motte  Piquet,  Grosse
found,  amidst  numbers  of  bones  of  the  elephant,  rhinoceros,
and  the  horse,  flint  hatchets  of  the  same  kind  as  those  of
Amiens.  One  of  these  hatchets  was  attached  by  sand  to  a
bone,  so  that  there  was  no  doubt  that  both  were  imbedded
together.

Since  that  time  a  number  of  similar  discoveries  have  been
made  in  England,  of  which  I  shall  only  mention  such  as  de-
monstrate the  parallelism  of  the  respective  beds  with  those  of
France.

In  1801  John  Frere  communicated  a  paper  to  the  English
Society  of  Antiquaries,  in  which  he  reports  that  he  has  found,
at  Hoxne,  near  Diss,  in  Suffolk,  worked  flints  at  a  depth  of
twelve  feet  in  a  stratified  soil,  which  had  been  dug  up  for  brick
earth.  Under  a  foot  and  a-half  of  vegetable  earth  was  clay  seven
and  a-half  feet  thick,  and  beneath  this  a  layer  of  white  fine  saud,
one  foot  thick,  with  shells,  and  under  this  two  feet  of  gravel,  which


LECTURE    X.


289


contained  the  worked  flints.  Frere  found  also  in  the  horizon-
tal strata  the  jawbones  and  teeth  of  a  large  animal  unknown
to  him ;  and  saw  five  or  six  hatchets  within  the  space  of  a
square  yard.

Fig.  93.     Section  at  Hoxne,  after  Prestwich.


M.  M.  Sea-level.  1.  Higher  level  sand  overlying  the  basin.  2.  Upper
sand  of  the  basin.  3.  Lower  sand  with  bones  and  hatchets.  4.  Peaty  clay
for  brick-making.     5,  Boulder  clay.     6.  Sand  and  gravel.     7.  Chalk.

Prestwich  very  recently  examined  this  spot,  and  found  the
pit  from  which  some  hatchets  were  extracted,  but  no  bones.
Among  the  bones  found  there  at  an  earlier  period,  were  those
of  the  elephant,  the  horse,  and  the  deer.  A  minute  examina-
tion established  the  fact  that  the  chalk  at  the  bottom  is  here
covered  with  sand  and  gravel,  upon  this  lies  the  lower  glacial
drift,  which  extends  over  nearly  the  whole  of  England  and
Scotland,  namely,  boulder  clay  and  large  blocks,  which  came
from  the  north,  specially  from  Norway.  In  this  clay  a  basin
seems  to  have  been  scooped  out,  the  lowest  bed  of  which  is
formed  of  a  peaty  and  clayey  stratum,  impervious  to  water.
In  this  black  stratum  fragments  of  the  oak,  yew,  and  fir  have
been  recognised.  Upon  this  bed  lie  the  sand  and  gravel
which  contain  bones  of  mammals,  stone  hatchets,  with  fresh
water  shells,  amongst  which  the  common  river  shell,  valvata
piscinalis,  abounds ;  nor  are  the  common  pond  snails  wanting.
Finally,  this  fresh- water  basin  is  overlaid  by  a  layer"  of  sand
and  gravel  of  apparently  very  recent  origin.

Similar  discoveries  have  been  made  in  other  English  coun-
ties.  I  shall  not  dwell  on  these,  but  would  merely  draw  your
attention  to  the  fact  that  all  these  beds  are  deposited  above
that  clay  stratum,  with  pebbles  and  blocks,  which  the  English
term  glacial  drift,  or  boulder-clay.  Whilst  in  all  localities  in
France  where  these  implements  are  found,  one  stratum,  corre-
sponding to  the  glacial  drift  formation,  is  entirely  absent,  or  at

u


LECTURE    X.

least  not  demonstrated,  it  is  plainly  seen  in  England,  and
niay,  therefore,  serve  for  comparison  with  the  discoveries
in  Switzerland,  where  glacial  formations  play  an  important
part.  I  must  also  observe  that  in  some  beds  in  England,
in  conjunction  with  the  bones  of  the  mammoth  and  the  rhino-
ceros, have  been  found  bones,  not  only  those  of  the  reindeer,
but  also  of  the  mush-ox  ;  and  that  remains  of  this  animal,
which  has  now  retired  to  Xorthem  America,  on  the  confines  of
the  Arctic  region,  have  also  been  found  in  the  old  alluvium  of
the  Kreuzberg-  near  Berlin,  as  well  as  in  the  vallev  of  the  Oise,
at  Chauny  in  France — another  proof  of  the  retreat  of  the
diluvial  Fauna  to  the  north.

Having  thus  treated  of  the  remains  found  in  caves  and  the
diluvium  in  Europe,  which  prove  man  to  have  been  the  con-
temporary of  extinct  animals,  we  may  be  permitted  to  cast  a
glance  at  what  has  been  done  in  other  parts  of  the  world.  I
must  here  mention,  in  the  first  place,  the  Brazilian  caves,
which  have  been  so  successfully  explored  by  Dr.  Lund.  The
circumstances  were  almost  entirely  the  same  as  in  Europe.
There  were  the  same  deposits,  the  red  ossiferous  clay  covered
with  stalagmite,  and  the  caves  abounding  with  animal  bones,
mostly  belonging  to  species  now  extinct.  But  these  extinct
species  are  as  closely  allied  to  those  which  at  present  exist  in
S  nth  America,  as  the  cave-bear  and  the  cave-hya?na  is  to  the
now  existing  bear  and  hyama.  The  peculiar  character  which
distinguishes  the  South  American  Fauna  has  been  preserved.
There  are  marsupials,  antbears,  lamas,  armadilloes,  as  they
still  exist  in  South  America.  It  is  probable  that  when  inves-
tigations shall  be  earned  on  by  as  many  inquirers  as  is  the
case  in  Europe,  the  list  of  these  peculiar  species  will  be  con-
siderably enlarged.  Be  this  as  it  may,  this  much  is  certain,
that  even  in  Brazil  man  was  the  contemporary  of  the  extinct
animals,  and  that  the  human  remains  found  by  Lund  were  in
the  same  condition  as  those  of  the  extinct  animals.  Unfortu-
nately Dr.  Lund's  crania  have  not,  as  far  as  I  know,  been
closely  examined.  According  to  one  observer  they  possess  the
type  of  the  American  skulls,  which,  in  my  opinion,  does  not
amount  to   much,   as  a   great   many  different   types  occur  in


LECTURE    X.  291

America.  There  are  prognathous  and  orthognathous  crania,
dolichocephalic  and  brachycephalic  skulls  even  amongst  the
existing  Indians.

In  Australia,  where  cave  deposits  of  extinct  marsupials  are
found;  in  Xew  Zealand,  where  the  bones  of  those  extinct
gigantic  birds,  the  moas,  are  found  in  large  quantities,  exist
as  well  the  most  convincing  proofs  of  the  co-existence  of  man
with  extinct  species  of  animals.  "We  do  not  attach  much
weight  to  the  moa,  as  there  are  traditions  among  the  Indians
of  their  having  fought  them,  so  that  the  species  appears  to
have  been  but  recently  exterminated.

The  alluvial  formations  of  Xorth  America  also  show  that  man
was  the  contemporary  of  extinct  animals.  Lyell  reports  nearly
as  follows  :  "At  Natchez  there  is  a  fine  range  of  bluffs,  several
miles  long  and  more  than  two  hundred  feet  in  perpendicular
height,  the  base  of  which  is  washed  by  the  river.  The  lower
strata,  laid  open  to  view,  consist  of  gravel  and  sand,  destitute
of  organic  remains,  except  some  wood,  siliciiied  corals,  and
other  fossils,  which  have  been  derived  from  older  rocks,  whilst
the  upper  sixty  feet  are  composed  of  yellow  loam,  presenting,
as  it  wastes  awav,  a  vertical  face  towards  the  river.  From
the  surface  of  this  clayey  precipice  project  in  relief  the  perfect
shells  of  land  snails,  of  the  genera  Helix,  HeUdna,  P
Cyclostoma,  Achatina3  and  v  vnea.  These  shells,  of  which
we  collected  twenty  species,  are  all  specifically  identical  with
those  now  inhabiting  the  valley  of  the  Mississippi.

"  The  resemblance  of  this  loam  to  the  fluviatile  silt  of  the
valley  of  the  Ehine,  between  Cologne  and  Basle,  which  is
generally  called  '  Loess/  and  Lehm  is  most  perfect.

"  In  both  countries  the  genera  are  the  same,  and  as,  in  the
ancient  alluvium  of  the  Ehine,  the  loam  sometimes  passes  into
a  lacustrine  deposit,  containing  shells  of  the  genera  Limneus,
Planorbis,  and  Cyclas,  so  I  found,  at  Washington,  about  seven
miles  inland  or  eastward  from  Xatehez,  a  similar  passage  of
the  American  loam  into  a  deposit  evidently  formed  in  a  pond
or  lake.  It  consisted  of  marl,  containing  the  shells  of  Li
Planorbis,  Paludina,  Physa,  and  Gyelas,  specifically  agreeing
with  the  testacea  now  inhabiting  the  United  States.     With  the

i-  2


292  LECTURE    X.

land  shells  before-mentioned  are  found,  at  different  depths  in
the  loam,  the  remains  of  the  mastodon ;  and  clay  immediately
under  the  loam,  and  above  all  the  sand  and  gravel  entire
skeletons  of  the  Megalonyx,  associated  with  the  bones  of  the
horse,  bear,  stag-,  ox,  and  other  quadrupeds,  for  the  most  part,
if  not  all,  extinct  species.  This  great  loamy  formation,  with
terrestrial  and  freshwater  shells,  extends  horizontally  for  about
twelve  miles  inland  or  eastward  from  the  river,  forming  a  plat-
form about  two  hundred  feet  above  the  great  plain  of  the
Mississippi.  In  consequence,  however,  of  the  incoherent  and
destructible  nature  of  the  sandy  clay,  every  streamlet  flowing
over  what  must  originally  have  been  a  level  table  land,  has  cut
out  for  itself,  on  its  way  to  the  Mississippi,  a  deep  gully  or
ravine.

"  This  excavating  process  has,  of  late  years,  proceeded  with
accelerated  sjoeed,  specially  in  the  course  of  the  last  thirty  or
thirty-five  years.  Some  attribute  the  increased  erosive  action
to  the  partial  clearings  of  the  native  forest,  a  cause,  of  which
the  power  has  been  remarkably  displayed,  as  before  stated,
within  the  last  twenty  years  in  Georgia.  Others  refer  the  change
mainly  to  the  effects  of  the  great  earthquake  of  New  Madrid,
in  1811-12,  by  which  this  region  was  much  fissured,  ponds
being  dried  up  and  many  land-slips  caused.

' '  In  company  with  Dr.  Dickeson  and  Colonel  Wailes  I  visited
a  narrow  valley,  hollowed  out  through  the  shelly  loam,  recently
named  "  the  mammoth  ravine,"  from  the  fossils  found  there.
Colonel  Wiley,  a  proprietor  of  that  part  of  the  State  of  Missis-
sippi, who  knew  the  country  well  before  the  year  1812,  assured
me  that  this  ravine,  although  now  seven  miles  long,  and  in
parts  sixty  feet  deep,  with  its  numerous  ramifications,  has  been
entirely  formed  since  the  earthquake.  He  himself  had  ploughed
some  of  the  land  exactly  over  one  spot  which  the  gully  now
traverses.

"  A  considerable  sensation  was  recently  caused  in  the  public
mind,  both  in  Amei'ica  and  Europe,  by  the  announcement  of
the  discovery  of  a  fossil  human  bone,  so  associated  with  the
remains  of  extinct  quadrupeds  in  "  the  mammoth  ravine"  as
to  prove  that  man  must  have  co-existed  with  the  Megalonyx


LECTURE    X.  293

and  its  contemporaries.  Dr.  Dickeson  showed  me  the  bone  in
question,  admitted  by  anatomists  to  be  part  of  a  human  pelvis,
being  a  fragment  of  the  os  innominatum.  He  felt  persuaded
that  it  had  been  taken  out  of  the  clay  underlying  the  loam,  in
the  ravine  alluded  to,  about  six  miles  from  Natchez.  I  ex-
amined the  perpendicular  cliffs  which  bound  a  part  of  this
watercourse,  where  the  loam,  unsolidified  as  it  is,  retains  its
verticality,  and  found  landshells  in  great  number  at  the  depth
of  about  thirty  feet  from  the  top.  I  was  informed  that  the
fossil  remains  of  the  mammoth  (a  name  commonly  applied  in
the  United  States  to  the  mastodon)  had  been  obtained,  toge-
ther with  the  bones  of  some  other  extinct  mammalia,  from
below  these  shells  in  the  undermined  cliff.  The  bones  were
stained  or  black,  and  were  in  the  same  condition  as  the  fossil
bones  of  other  mammals  with  which  they  were  found."  Never-
theless, Lyell  was  then  of  opinion  that  the  bone  might  have
been  dislodged  from  some  old  Indian  grave  near  the  top.
Now,  he  observes,  such  a  theory  would  not  be  resorted  to  if
the  bones  belonged  to  any  other  animal,  but  as  this  discovery
of  a  human  pelvis  was  the  first  he  ever  heard  of,  he  ventured
an  explanation  which  he  at  present  is  not  inclined  to  insist  upon.
On  reviewing  all  these  discoveries,  we  are  forced  to  admit  that
the  facts  are  few  in  number,  though  they  furnish  us  with  some
starting  points,  which  deserve  our  attention.  We  are  entitled
to  assume  that  the  cave  population,  in  which  the  carnivora  pre-
dominate, was  contemporary  with  the  elephant  and  the  rhino-
ceros, whose  remains  are  chiefly  found  in  the  stratified  alluvial
formation.  The  appearance  of  both  may  have  been  simulta-
neous, though  they  may  have  become  extinct  at  different
epochs.  We  must  take  into  particular  consideration,  that  just
from  the  appearance  of  the  cave-bears  and  the  mammoth  dates
an  uninterrupted  chain  of  phenomena  reaching  down  to  the
present  period :  that  at  different  periods  species  became  ex-
tinct or  were  exterminated  by  man,  whilst,  perhaps,  some  new
species,  though  few  in  number,  were  developed.  It  is,  there-
fore, not  surprising,  that  if  man  appeared  on  the  scene  simul-
taneously with  the  cave-bear  and  the  mammoth,  some  species
of  mankind   should  also  have  become   extinct,  whilst  others


294  LECTURE    X.

were  preserved,  propagated,  and  further  developed.  I  shall,
in  the  next  lecture,  have  to  treat  of  the  relation  of  man  to  sur-
rounding nature,  as  well  as  of  the  development  of  the  so-called
diluvial  period  and  its  sub-epochs.  This  lecture  I  shall  con-
clude with  some  observations  on  the  condition  of  primitive
peoples,  and  the  relation  of  their  race  to  existing  races.

As  regards  the  primitive  culture  of  man,  it  was  manifestly
confined  within  very  narrow  limits.  The  Belgian  and  West-
phalian  caves,  the  sepulchre  in  Aurignac,  the  alluvial  formations
can  alone  give  some  clue.  No  other  implements  of  that  period
have  come  to  hand,  except  some  rude  stone  weapons  bearing  as
yet  no  trace  of  any  polish.  Though  these  have  only  been
found  in  spots  where  they  were  originally  fabricated,  still  it  is
somewhat  striking  that  of  that  period  none  of  better  work-
manship are  found,  none  of  them  have  a  handle  of  staghorn  or
bone,  as  seen  in  tools  belonging  to  a  later  period.  Even  the
bear-jaws  fashioned  into  weapons  show  no  trace  of  polish,  as
seen  in  those  of  a  more  recent  period.  The  pieces  are  simply
struck  off  as  if  with  a  sharp  stone.

With  respect  to  aliment,  we  have  no  trace  of  any  other  than
animal  food.  Nowhere  do  we  find  any  traces  of  vegetable
food,  not  even  hooks  or  nets  for  the  capture  of  fish.  Man
attacked  his  prey  like  the  wild  animals,  by  cunning,  speed,
or  strength,  so  that  with  his  simple  stone  weapons  he  even
mastered  the  young  rhinoceros.  Man  provided  his  dress  from
the  skins  of  animals,  which  he  sewed  together  with  sinews
by  means  of  needle-shaped  bones.  His  dwelling  was  probably
a  nest  or  a  hut,  constructed  of  boughs,  perhaps,  but  little
better  than  those  constructed  by  the  anthropomorphous  apes.
This  primitive  man  possessed  no  domestic  animals,  and  no-
where is  there  any  trace  found  of  them.  The  dog  seems  to
have  been  the  first  animal  which,  at  a  later  period,  became
attached  to  man.

This  is  the  paradisiacal  state  of  the  primitive  man,  so  far  as
it  is  known  to  us,  as  narrated  by  those  silent  witnesses,  the
stones  and  bones.  From  such  a  low  condition,  compared  to
which  that  of  the  so-called  savages  of  the  old  and  new  world
is  a  refined  civilisation,  has  the  human  species  gradually  ex-


LECTURE    X.


295


tricated  itself,  in  a  bitter  struggle  for  existence,  which  it  was
well  able  to  maintain,  by  being  gifted  with  a  larger  amount  of
brain  and  intelligence  than  that  possessed  by  the  surrounding
animal  world.

But  even  this  amount  of  intelligence  was  comparatively  but
a  moderate  one,  as  shown  by  the  crania  dating  from  that
period.  We  possess  but  two  imperfect  specimens  of  this  kind
— the  skull  of  the  Neanderthal  and  that  of  Engis,  which  we
shall  now  examine.

The  skull  of  Engis,  of  which,  thanks  to  Dr.  Schmerling  of
Liege,  Geneva  possesses  a  fine  cast,  is  more  perfect  than  the
Neander  skull ;  for  on  the  right  side,  besides  the  frontal  bone
and  the  parietal  bone,  the  greater  part  of  the  occipital  and
mastoid  process,  with  the  meatus  auditorius,  are  well  pre-
served ;  whilst  of  the  Neander  skull  we  only  possess  the  roof

Fig.  94.     Engis  Skull  in  Profile.


of  the  cranium,  the  facial  bones  being  entirely  absent,  and  the
base  of  the  skull  destroyed.  This,  no  doubt,  is  very  unfor-
tunate, as  regards  the  proper  estimation  of  the  skull.  Thus  it
is  impossible  positively  to  determine  whether  the  skull  was
prognathous  or  orthognathous,  though  the  presumption  is  that
it  was  prognathous.  As  little  can  the  form  of  the  face  be
determined,  still  less  the  formation  of  the  angles  at  the  base
of  the  skull.  We  must,  then,  rest  satisfied  with  what  we
possess,  and  draw  our  deductions  accordingly.


296


LECTURE    X.


The  Engis  skull  is  of  medium  size  and  belonged  to  an  aged
subject,  for  the  sutures  are  here  and  there  obliterated,  the
coronal  suture  especially.  Possibly  the  skull  is  that  of  a
female,  as  the  bones  are  thin  in  comparison  with  those  of  the
Neander  skull.  Viewed  from  above,  the  skull  presents  a
longish  oval  form  ;  its  greatest  width  is  in  the  posterior  third  ;
the  apex,  somewhat  obtuse  and  rounded,  is  in  the  forehead.
It  is  decidedly  a  long  head,  for  the  greatest  length  to  the
greatest  width  is  as  100  to  70"  1,  a  proportion  which,  accord-
ing to  Welcker's  table,  approaches  nearest  the  Esquimaux
skull,  and  is  scarcely  different  from  that  of  the  Negro  and
Austral-Negro.  This  length  and  narrowness  of  the  skull,
with  the  small  elevation  of  the  forehead  and  the  form  of  the
orbits  so  widely  apart,  induced  Schmerling  to  characterise  it
as  an  Ethiopian  skull,  which  at  that  time  was  the  more  excus-
able as  but  little  attention  had  yet  been  paid  to  the  Australian

Fig.  95.     Top  view  of  Eng-is  Skull.


race.  The  Engis  skull,  however,  is  at  once  easily  distin-
guished from  that  of  the  genuine  Negro  by  its  slight  curva-
ture behind  the  orbits,  where  the  Negro  head  seems  com-
pressed ;  consequently,  too,  by  the  lesser  depth  of  the  temporal


LECTURE    X.  297

fossae  and  by  the  form  of  the  occipital  part  of  the  skull,  which
in  the  Negro  is  more  globular.  Viewed  from  above,  well  cha-
racterised Negro  heads  appear  more  simious  than  the  Engis
skull.

"  The  front  view,"  says  Huxley,  "  shows  that  the  roof  of  the
skull  was  very  elegantly  and  regularly  arched,  and  that  the
greatest  transverse  diameter  was  a  little  less  below  the  parietal
protuberances,  than  above  them.  The  forehead  cannot  be
called  narrow  in  relation  to  the  rest  of  the  skull,  nor  can  it
be  called  a  retreating  forehead.  On  the  contrary,  the  antero-
posterior contour  of  the  skull  is  well  arched,  so  that  the  distance
along  that  contour,  from  the  nasal  depression  to  the  occipital
protuberance,  measures  about  13*75  inches.  The  transverse
arc  of  the  skull,  measured  from  one  auditory  foramen  to  the
other,  across  the  middle  of  the  sagittal  suture,  is  about
thirteen  inches.     The  sagittal  suture  itself  is  5*5  inches  long.

"  The  supraciliary  prominences  or  brow-bridges  are  well,
but  not  excessively,  developed,  and  are  separated  by  a  median
depression.  Their  principal  elevation  is  disposed  so  obliquely,
that  I  judge  them  to  be  due  to  large  frontal  sinuses.

<l  If  a  line  be  drawn,  joining  the  glabella  with  the  occipital
protuberance,  no  part  of  the  occipital  region  projects  more  than
one-tenth  of  an  inch  behind  the  posterior  extremity  of  -that
line,  and  the  upper  edge  of  the  auditory  foramen  is  almost  in
contact  with  a  line  drawn  parallel  with  this  upon  the  outer  sur-
face of  the  skull.  A  transverse  line  drawn  from  one  auditory
foramen  to  the  other,  traverses,  as  usual,  the  fore  part  of  the
occipital  foramen.  The  capacity  of  the  interior  of  this  frag-
mentary skull  has  not  yet  been  ascertained."

Thus  far  Huxley ;  to  whose  description  I  would  add,  that
assuming  the  hue  from  the  occipital  protuberance  to  the  gla-
bella to  be  horizontal,  the  cranium  is  so  arched  that  its  greatest
height  would  fall  behind  a  perpendicular  drawn  upon  it,  through
the  meatus  cmditorius,  and  that  the  slight  vaulting  of  the  oc-
ciput, as  well  as  low  position  of  its  protuberance,  give  it  a
significant  character.  Though  not  a  very  striking  occurrence
in  civilised  skulls,  it  is  so  in  the  skull  of  a  savage,  to  find  the
muscular  lines  and  ridges  so  little  developed,  especially  when


298  LECTURE    X.

we  compare  them  with  those  of  the  Neander  skull.  As  to  the
rest  I  agree  with  Professor  Huxley,  who  says  : — "  I  confess
that  I  can  find  in  the  remains  of  the  Engis  skull  no  character,
which,  if  it  were  a  recent  skull,  would  give  any  trustworthy
clue  to  the  race  to  which  it  might  appertain.  Its  contours  and
measurements  agree  very  well  with  those  of  some  Australian
skulls  which  I  have  examined ;  and  especially  has  it  a  tendency
towards  that  occipital  flattening,  to  the  great  extent  of  which,
in  some  Australian  skulls,  I  have  alluded.  But  all  Australian
skulls  do  not  present  this  flattening,  and  the  supraciliary  ridge
of  the  Engis  skull  is  quite  unlike  that  of  the  typical  Aus-
tralian.

"  On  the  other  hand,  its  measurements  agree  equally  well
with  those  of  some  European  skulls."  (According  to  Welcker's
table,  there  is  not  one  European  skull  which,  as  regards  the
proportion  of  length  to  breadth,  can  be  compared  with  the
Engis  skull.)  "  And  assuredly  there  is  no  mark  of  degrada-
tion about  any  part  of  its  structure.  It  is,  in  fact,  a  fair
average  human  skull,  which  might  have  belonged  to  a  philo-
sopher, or  might  have  contained  the  thoughtless  brain  of  a
savage."

From  the  materials  at  my  command,  I  cannot  altogether
agree  with  these  last  remarks  of  Huxley.  The  exceptional
length  and  narrowness  of  the  cranium,  with  its  slight  elevation,
conditions  a  proportionately  small  internal  capacity.  It  is  the
projection  of  the  approximated  frontal  eminences  which  makes
the  forehead  appear  arched.  But  from  these  frontal  protu-
berances the  arched  line  to  the  vertex  is  rather  flat,  and  conse-
quently the  anterior  lobes  of  the  brain  but  little  developed.
These  proportions,  however,  concern  only  the  individual  deve-
lopment of  the  cerebral  mass.  The  essential  character  for
determining  the  race  lies  in  the  proportion  of  the  length  to  the
breadth,  and  in  this  respect  the  Engis  skull  is  one  of  the  most
ill-favoured,  beast-like,  and  simious  skulls  we  know  of.  In
Welcker's  list  there  are,  no  doubt,  some  very  few  (probably
belonging  to  females)  exceptionally  long  skulls  of  Europeans,
which  approach  or  even  exceed  the  length  of  the  Engis  skull,
namely,  one  French,  one  Dutch,  and  two  Finnish  skulls.     But


LECTURE    X.


299


these  skulls  differ  so  widely  from  those  of  their  cognates,  that
they  can  only  be  considered  as  abnormal  exceptions.  Still  it
is  somewhat  sticking  that  the  Dutch  skulls  are,  on  the  whole,
longer  than  those  of  all  other  Europeans,  and  specially  of  the
Germanic  peoples,  an  indication,  perhaps,  of  the  commixture
of  the  oldest  race  with  its  typical  cranial  form  with  the  peoples
now  inhabiting  these  parts.

In  my  opinion,  which  is,  certainly,  not  founded  on  numerous
investigations,  this  Engis  skull  holds  an  intermediate  place
between  that  of  the  Australian  and  the  Esquimaux.  Of  the
latter,  it  possesses  the  comparatively  thin  bones,  the  scantily
developed  brows,  the  height  of  the  profile  in  the  posterior  part,
and  the  proportion  of  the  diameters.  Of  the  first,  it  has  the
oval  form  of  the  cranium,  the  rounding  of  the  parietal  line,  the
flat  forehead,  and  the  outline  of  the  roof  of  the  cranium.  I
know  of  no  living  cranial  form  which  perfectly  agrees  with  that
of  the  Engis  skull,  but  I  have  in  some  Swiss  crania  (of  the
fourth  and  fifth  century)  near  Biel,  Grenchen,  and  Solothurn,
seen  forms  much  resembling  the  Engis  skull  even  in  the  chief
measurements.


Fig.  96.


The  Neander  Skull  in  Profile,  after  a  plaster  cast.


The  Neander  skull,  of  which  the  Geneva  museum,  thanks  to
Prof.  Fuhlrott,  possesses  a  cast,  differs  in  many  respects  from
the  Engis  skull,  though  it  resembles  it  in  some.  I  shall  give
the  description  in  the  words  of  Prof.  Schaaffhausen,  who  first
anatomically  examined  it.  "  The  cranium  is  of  unusual  size,  and
of  a  long  elliptical  form.     A  remarkable  peculiarity  strikes  us


300


LECTURE   X.


at  once  in  the  extraordinary  development  of  the  frontal  sinuses,
by  which  the  supraciliary  ridges  coalescing  in  the  middle  be-
come so  prominent,  that  above,  or  rather  behind  them,  the
frontal  bone  presents  a  considerable  depression,  whilst  a  hollow
is  also  formed  in  the  region  of  the  root  of  the  nose.  The  fore-
head is  narrow  and  flat,  but  the  middle  and  posterior  portions
of  the  cranial  arch  are  well  developed.  The  semicircular  line,
indicating  the  upper  attachment  of  the  temporal  muscle,  though
not  strongly  developed,  ascends  to  more  than  half  the  height
of  the  parietal  line.  On  the  right  orbital  ridge,  is  observed  an
oblique  furrow  indicative  of  some  injury  received  during  life ;
upon  the  right  parietal  bone  is  a  depression  of  the  size  of  a
pea.  The  coronal  and  sagittal  sutures  are  on  the  exterior
nearly,  and  on  the  inside  of  the  skull  entirely  effaced.  The
lambdoidal  is  open ;  the  frontal  is  indicated  externally  by  a
slight  ridge,  and  where  it  joins  the  coronal,  this  ridge  also  be-
comes slightly  protuberant.  The  sagittal  sature  is  grooved,
and  above  the  angle  of  the  occipital  bone ;  the  parietal  bones
are  depressed.

Fig.  97.     Neander  Skull,  top  view.


LECTURE    X.  301

"  There  is  no  valid  reason  for  considering  the  enormous  deve-
lopment of  the  frontal  sinuses  in  the  remarkable  Neander  skull
as  an  individual  or  pathological  abnormity ;  it  is  unmistak-
ably a  racial  type,  and  stands  in  physiological  connexion  with
the  striking  thickness  of  the  bones  of  the  skeleton,  exceeding
by  one-third  their  usual  strength.  This  expansion  of  the
frontal  sinuses,  which  are  appendages  to  the  respiratory  organs,
indicates  both  strength  and  endurance  in  muscular  activity,  as
shown  also  by  the  development  of  all  the  ridges  and  processes
to  which  the  muscles  are  attached.  That  large  frontal  sinuses
have  this  signification  is  confirmed  by  other  observations.
Pallas  distinguishes  by  this  mark  the  wild  from  the  tamed
horse.  According  to  Cuvier,  it  distinguishes  the  fossil  cave
bear  from  the  living  species  ;  according  to  Eoulin,  the  wild
boar  from  the  domesticated  hog,  the  chamois  from  the  goat,
and,  finally,  the  bony  and  muscular  bulldog  from  all  other
species  of  dogs.  To  determine  the  facial  angle,  which,  accord-
ing to  Owen,  is  in  the  large  apes  rendered  difficult  by  the
projecting  orbits,  is  in  our  skull  rendered  more  so  by  the
absence  of  the  nasal  spine  and  the  auditory  meatus.  But  if
the  horizontal  plane  be  taken  from  the  remaining  portions
of  the  orbital  plates,  and  the  ascending  line  is  made  to  touch
the  surface  of  the  frontal  bone,  behind  the  prominence  of  the
supraciliary  ridges,  the  facial  angle  amounts  to  no  more  than
56°.  Unfortunately,  no  portion  of  the  facial  bones,  so  import-
ant for  determining  the  form  and  expression  of  the  head,  has
been  preserved.  The  cranial  capacity,  compared  with  the  great
strength  of  the  corporeal  structure,  apparently  indicates  a
small  cerebral  development.  The  skull  holds  nearly  thirty-one
ounces  of  millet  seed,  and  as  from  the  proportion  of  the  want-
ing bones  six  more  ounces  should  be  added,  the  contents  of
the  whole  cranial  cavity  might  be  taken  as  thirty-seven  ounces.

"Tiedemann  estimates  the  cranial  capacity  of  Negros  at  forty,
thirty-eight,  and  thirty-five  ounces  of  millet  seed.  The  cranium
holds  rather  more  than  thirty-six  ounces  of  water,  which  cor-
responds to  a  capacity  of  l,033-24  cubic  centimeters.  Huschko
estimates  the  cranial  capacity  of  a  Negress  at  1,127  cubic
centimeters;  that  of  an  old  Negro  at  1,146  cubic  centimeters.


302  LECTURE    X.

The  capacity  of  Malay  skulls,  measured  with  water,  equalled
thirty-six  to  thirty-three  ounces;  whilst  in  the  diminutive
Hindoos  it  diminishes  to  twenty-seven  ounces.

"  Under  whatever  aspect,"  says  Huxley,  "  we  view  this  cra-
nium, whether  we  regard  its  vertical  depression,  the  enormous
thickness  of  its  supraciliary  ridges,  its  sloping  occiput,  or  its  long
and  straight  squamosal  suture,  we  meet  with  ape-like  characters,
stamping  it  as  the  most  pithecoid  of  human  crania  yet  dis-
covered. But  Professor  Schaaffhausen  states  that  the  cranium
in  its  present  condition  holds  1,033*24  cubic  centimeters  of
water,  or  about  sixty-three  cubic  inches ;  and  as  the  entire
skull  could  hardly  have  held  less  than  an  additional  twelve
cubic  inches,  its  capacity  may  be  estimated  as  at  about  seventy-
five  cubic  inches,  which  is  the  average  capacity  given  by
Morton  for  Polynesian  and  Hottentot  skulls."

"  So  large  a  mass  of  brain  as  this  would  alone  suggest  that
the  pithecoid  tendeucies,  indicated  by  this  skull,  did  not  ex-
tend deep  into  the  organisation ;  and  this  conclusion  is  borne
out  by  the  dimensions  of  the  other  bones  of  the  skeleton  given
by  Professor  Schaaffhausen,  which  show  that  the  absolute
height  and  relative  proportions  of  the  limbs  were  quite  those
of  an  European  of  middle  stature.  The  bones  were,  indeed,
stouter,  but  this  and  the  great  development  of  the  muscular
ridges  noted  by  Dr.  Schaaffhausen  are  characters  to  be  ex-
pected in  savages.  The  Patagonians,  exposed  without  shelter
or  protection  to  a  clhnate  possibly  not  very  dissimilar  from
that  of  Europe  at  the  time  during  which  the  Neanderthal  man
lived,  are  remarkable  for  the  stoutness  of  their  limb  bones.

"  In  no  sense,  then,  can  the  Neanderthal  bones  be  regarded
as  the  remains  of  a  human  being,  intermediate  between  man
and  apes.  At  most  they  demonstrate  the  existence  of  a  man
whose  skull  may  be  said  to  revert  somewhat  towards  the
pithecoid  type — just  as  a  carrier,  or  a  pouter,  or  a  tumbler,
may  sometimes  don  the  plumage  of  its  primitive  stock,  the
columba  llvia.  And,  indeed,  though  truly  the  most  pithecoid
of  known  human  skulls,  the  Neanderthal  cranium,  is  by  no
means  so  isolated  as  it  appears  to  be  at  first,  but  forms  in
reality  the  extreme  term  of  a  series  leading  gradually  from  it


LECTURE    X.


303


to  the  highest  and  best  developed  of  human  crania;  on  the
one  hand,  it  is  closely  approached  by  the  flattened  Australian
skulls  of  which  I  have  spoken,  from  which  other  Australian
forms  lead  as  gradually  to  skulls  having  very  much  the  type  of
the  Engis  skull;  and,  on  the  other  hand,  it  is  even  more
closely  affixed  to  the  skulls  of  a  certain  ancient  people
who  inhabited  Denmark  during  the  stone  period,  and  were
probably  either  contemporaneous  with  or  later  than  the
makers  of  the  '  refuse  heaps',  '  Kjokkenmoddings'  of  that
country.

"  The  correspondence  between  the  longitudinal  contour  of
the  Neanderthal  skull,  and  that  of  some  of  the  skulls  from  the
tumuli  at  Borreby,  very  accurate  drawings  of  which  have  been
made  by  Mr.  Busk,  is  very  close.  The  occiput  is  quite  as
retreating,  the  supraciliary  ridges  are  nearly  as  prominent,  and
the  skull  is  as  low.  Furthermore,  the  Borreby  skull  resembles
the  Neanderthal  form  more  closely  than  any  of  the  Australian

Fig.  98.     Skull  from  a  Tumulus  at  Borreby  :  Danish  Stone  Period.


skulls  do,  by  the  much  more  rapid  retrocession  of  the  fore-
head. On  the  other  hand,  the  Borreby  skulls  are  all  some-
what broader,  in  proportion  to  their  length,  than  the  Neander-


304  LECTURE    X.

tlial  skull,  while  some  attain  that  proportion  of  breadth  to
length  (80  :  100)  which  constitutes  brachycephaly."

Fully  agreeing  with  these  observations,  I  will  only  add  some
few  remarks.  The  least  developed  skull  of  Borreby  (see  fig.
98)  stands  far  above  the  Neander  skull  by  the  arched  elevation
of  the  middle  head,  but  differs  from  it  entirely  by  the  form  of
the  occiput  and  the  great  breadth  of  the  skull,  which  renders
it  decidedly  brachycephalous.  The  only  distant  similarity  be-
tween these  two  types  consists  in  the  flattening  of  the  fore-
head and  the  projection  of  the  eyebrows.  Apart  from  size,  the
forehead  of  the  Neander  skull  is  that  of  an  idiot  or  micro-
cephalus.  Up  to  the  occiput,  which  presents  different  pro-
portions, the  profile  of  the  idiot,  which  Owen  delineated  for
comparison  with  the  chimpanzee  (see  fig.  47,  p.  145),  cor-
responds with  that  of  the  Neander  skull.  As  surely  as  a  man
of  the  white  race  with  a  brain  like  that  of  the  Hottentot
Venus,  justly  remarks  Gratiolet,  would  be  an  idiot,  so  surely
would  a  white  man  with  a  Neander  skull  be  an  idiot  in  the
midst  of  his  more  gifted  race.

But  apart  from  the  height  of  the  skull,  the  development  of
the  forehead  and  eyebrows,  I  still  find  a  great  similarity  be-
tween the  Engis  and  the  Neander  skulls,  which  becomes  striking
when  viewing  them  from  above.  The  Engis  skull  is  somewhat
narrower;  its  length  in  proportion  to  its  breadth  being  10  :  7,
which  in  the  Neander  skull  is  100  :  72  ;  but  in  other  respects
we  have  the  same  lines,  the  same  general  form.  Taking  now
into  consideration  that  the  female  skull  is  on  the  average
smaller  than  the  male ;  that  it  is  narrower  and  longer ;  that  its
roof  considerably  predominates  over  the  base  ;  that  its  bones
are  thinner,  and  that  the  muscular  attachments  as  well  as  the
eyebrows  are  always  less  developed ;  and  considering  further
their  simultaneous  appearance  in  the  same  region,  and  the
oscillations  which  the  Austral-Negros  also  show  in  the  deve-
lopment of  the  eyebrows,  the  forehead,  and  the  height  of  the
skull,  I  arrive  at  the  rather  hazardous  conclusion  that  both
skulls  belong  to  one  and  the  same  race,  and  that  the  Neander
skull  belonged  to  a  muscular  but  stupid  male,  while  the  Engis
skull,  perhaps,  belonged  to  an  intelligent  woman.


LECTURE    X.


305


The  examination  of  the  cast  taken  from  the  internal  surface
of  the  Neander  skull,  kindly  sent  me  by  Professor  Fuhlrott,
fully  confirms  the  opinion  derived  from  the  inspection  of  the
bones.  As  already  stated,  some  at  least  of  the  principal  con-
volutions of  the  cerebral  surface,  as  well  as  the  vessels  and
the  so-called  Pacchionian  glands,  leave  impressions  upon  the
inner  surface  of  the  skull  and  admit  of  some  comparisons.

On    comparing    the    side-view   with   that    of    the    external
surface,  reduced  to  the  same  scale,  namely,  fig.   94,   or  the
top   view   with.  fig.   95,  we   are   immediately   struck   by   the
difference  in  size,  which  is  mainly  the  result  of  the  great  thick-
Fig.  99.     Cast  of  the  cerebral  surface  of  the  Neander  Skull,  side  view.


Fig.  100.


Same  cast  viewed  from  above.


ness  of  the  cranial  bones.     Professor  Schaaffhausen,  of  Bonn,
who  compared  this  cast  with  that  of  an  Austral-negro,  has  the


306  LECTURE    X.

following  observations  in  the  Transactions  of  the  Natural  His-
tory Society  of  the  Lower  Rhine.  "  This  cast  shows  the  greatest
similarity,  as  regards  cerebral  development,  to  that  of  an
Australian,  placed  by  the  side  of  it.  The  proportions  in  the
former  are,  as  regards  size,  rather  more  favourable  than  in  the
latter.  But  the  difference  in  the  cranial  shape  is  also  exhibited
in  the  form  of  the  brain.  The  length  of  the  hemispheres  of
the  Neander  skull  amounted  to  1 73,  the  width  of  the  anterior
lobes  to  112  ;  the  greatest  width  of  the  brain  130,  the  greatest
height  of  the  brain  above  a  line  connecting  the  extreme  points
of  the  anterior  and  posterior  lobes,  67  millimeters.  These
extreme  measures  are  in  the  brain  of  the  Austral-negro  :  164  ;
100  j  125;  77.  Lucae  found,  that  although  the  brain  of  Euro-
peans is  on  the  average  300  grammes  heavier  than  that  of  the
Australian,  that  of  the  former  is  neither  in  length  nor  in  height
much  greater  than  that  of  the  latter,  but  exceeds  it  much  in
width.  It  is  noteworthy  that  this  difference  in  race  type  is
traceable  in  the  remotest  period,  when  there  were,  in  our  parts
of  the  globe,  men  who  stood  in  the  same  intellectual  scale  as
the  living  Australian  savage."

I  have  had  a  cast  taken  of  the  cranium  of  a  Swiss  skull
in  the  Museum  of  Bern,  which  I  have  called  an  "  Apostle
skull,"  and  which  is  at  the  service  of  my  friends.  The
greatest  length  of  the  hemispheres  of  this  cast  is  180;  width
of  the  anterior  lobes  110;  greatest  width  of  brain  127;
greatest  height,  which,  on  account  of  the  greatly  developed
Pacchionian  glands,  cannot  be  exactly  ascertained,  about  63
millimeters.  On  reducing  these  numbers,  on  the  assumption  of
the  greatest  length  =  100,  we  obtain  the  following  comparable
proportions  : —

Cast.

Neander  skull

Australian

Apostle

I  know  not  whether  these  measures  can  be  really  considered
as  measures  of  the  cerebral  development — for  if  this  be  the
case,  the  Neander  skull  would  in  every  respect  stand  above
those  of  the  Australian  and  the  Apostle  skull ;  whilst,  accord-


ength.

Wid

tL  of  anter
lobes.

ior    Greatest  width.

Height

100

-

64-7

78-6

38-9

100

-

60-9

76-2

46

100

-

61-1

70-5

35

LECTURE    X.  307

ing  to  the  general  form,  the  reverse  is  the  case,  at  least  as
regards  the  relation  of  the  Neander  skull  to  the  Apostle  skull.

On  viewing  the  Neander  cast  from  the  side,  the  frontal  lobe
seems  remarkably  small  and  separated  from  the  vertical  convo-
lutions by  a  deep  depression,  across  which  the  large  blood-
vessel of  the  cerebral  membrane  ascends  nearly  perpendicularly.
At  the  same  time,  the  imprints  of  the  convolutions  are  compara-
tively broad  and  coarse — like  those  in  the  Hottentot  Venus,
whilst  these  very  convolutions,  which  are  indicative  of  the  con-
voluted state  of  the  whole  brain,  are  more  numerous  and  more
curved  in  the  Apostle  skull,  nay,  were  on  the  surface  of  the
frontal  lobe  so  fine,  that  they  left  only  an  undulating  mark.
We  observe  the  same  condition  in  the  lower  parietal  temporal
lobe,  where  at  least  two  floors  are  as  plainly  indicated  as  in  the
Orang  and  the  Hottentot  Venus.

Not  less  remarkable  is  the  break  in  the  posterior  lobe  pro-
vided with  some  few  coarse  convolutions — a  break  which  is  so
considerable,  that  we  might  be  induced  to  believe  that  the
transverse  occipital  fissure  is  developed  in  the  same  manner  as
in  the  ape.  This  break  is  also  seen  when  viewed  from  above.
Over  the  apex  of  the  right  occipital  lobe  the  lateral  venous
sinus  winds  up  to  the  vertical,  as  Schaaffhausen  justly  contends,
against  Huxley's  opinion.  The  characters  of  cerebral  develop-
ment, still  recognisable,  thus  indicate  a  very  degraded  human
race,  approaching  the  simian  type.

But  whom  did  this  primitive  race  of  Europe  resemble  most  ?
— the  Australian,  the  most  disgusting  type  of  living  savages  !
Poor  Adam  !     Poor  Eve  !*

*  The  author's  sarcasm  on  this  occasion  is  not  based  on  any  well  ascer-
tained fact.  There  is  no  character  in  the  Neanderthal  skull  to  show  that  it
belonged  to  the  Australian  or  any  other  race.  Much  less  is  there  any  rea-
son to  suppose  that  this  skull  represents  the  primitive  race  of  Europe  :  with-
out wishing  to  dispute  in  the  least  that  it  may  be  of  a  very  high  antiquity.
With  respect  to  the  race-characters  of  the  Neander  calvarium,  Dr.  J.  Barnard
Davis,  a  most  competent  and  painstaking  observer,  has  just  given  his  opi-
nion in  these  emphatic  words : — "  The  peculiar  form  of  this  Neanderthal
example,  I  am  satisfied,  is  the  result  of  a  synostosis,  and  is  not  in  any  way
to  be  regarded  as  a  race-character."  See  Memoirs  read  before  the  Anthropo-
logical Society  of  London,  vol.  i,  1864 :  Triibner  and  Co. — Editor.


x2


308


LECTUEE    XL

The  Diluvial  Period. — Revolutions  and  Transitions. — Glacial  formation. —
Boulder-Clay. — Old  Alluvium. — Terminal  Moraines  and  Erratic  Blocks.
— Slate-Coal,  and  its  Formation. — Ice-sea  and  Glacial  Formation  in  the
North — In  England. — Table  of  Diluvial  Strata. — Length  of  Time. —
Chronological  Calculations  in  the  Deltas  of  the  Mississippi  and  the  Nile.
— Impossibility  of  a  Universal  Deluge.

Gentlemen, — Our  investigations  concerning  man's  appear-
ance upon  the  globe  have,  indeed,  furnished  us  with  a  clue  as
to  the  geological  period  in  which  that  event  occurred,  but
leave  us  in  the  dark  as  to  the  determination  of  the  year  or  cen-
tury. With  regard  to  the  geological  period,  we  may  state  at
once  that  it  is  the  last  period  we  treat  of,  since  which  there  has
apparently  been  no  interruption  down  to  the  present  time.  We
possess,  at  present,  no  facts  for  determining  the  age  of  human
fossils  calculated  by  centuries  or  millenniums.  All  that  we  are
entitled  to  say  is,  that  these  remains  are  very  old,  reaching  far
beyond  the  time  assigned  by  current  traditions  and  legends
concerning  man  and  the  creation  of  the  earth.  When  treating
of  more  recent  remains  we  shall  have  an  opportunity  of  men-
tioning the  attempts  which  have  been  made  chronologically  to
determine  the  age  of  some  relics  from  the  overlying  strata  in
which  they  were  found.  For  the  present,  we  shall  consider
the  geological  period  in  which  man  first  appeared.

I  must  begin  with  a  confession.  There  was  a  time  when
the  history  of  the  earth  was  construed  from  individual,  inde-
pendent periods,  separated  from  each  other  by  mighty  revolu-
tions. It  was-  assumed  that,  during  the  intervening  periods  of
rest,  a  new  creation  arose,  propagating  and  accumulating  until
the  crust  of  the  earth  suddenly  bursting,  chains  of  mountains
were  formed,  vast  regions  became  submerged,  and  sea-
covered  tracts  laid  bare.     After  every  revolution,  which  des-


LECTURE    XI.  309

troyed  every  living  being,  a  new  creation  took  place  with  more
perfect  forms,  according  to  a  premeditated  plan  by  tlie  inter-
ference of  a  personal  creator.  I  confess  that  the  simplicity,
clearness,  and,  so  to  speak,  mathematical  precision  with  which
this  theory  was  propounded  by  the  highest  authorities  greatly
captivated  me  in  my  younger  years — excepting,  perhaps,  the
idea  of  the  interference  of  a  personal  creator,  which  I  found  at
all  times  difficult  to  reconcile  with  the  laws  of  sound  reasoning.
If  this  creator,  as  Eolle  alleges,  is  the  keystone  of  the  whole
system,  my  disbelief  in  his  interference  has  probably  contri-
buted to  my  speedy  rejection  of  the  whole  theory.  A  con-
tinued examination  of  these  questions  from  every  point  of
view,  and  a  thorough  investigation  of  the  facts  upon  which  any
part  of  the  theory  rests,  led  me  and  the  majority  of  my  contem-
poraries to  the  conviction  that  there  were  no  such  independent
periods  in  the  history  of  the  earth,  but  only  a  gradual  develop-
ment. Here  and  there,  temporary  and  local  convulsions  may
have  occurred,  but  these  were  confined  to  comparatively  small
regions  of  the  surface  of  the  earth,  and  nowise  extending  their
destructive  effects  over  the  whole  globe.  The  various  species
of  living  beings,  plants,  and  animals,  did  not  become  extinct  at
once,  like  fire  at  the  approach  of  the  Fohn  (a  moist  south  wind
on  the  lakes  of  Switzerland),  and  rekindled  after  its  passage.
Species  are  constantly  disappearing  from  the  list  of  living
beings ;  but  new  ones  arise,  and  the  aspect  of  the  remains  of
extinct  life  in  the  strata  changes  as  gradually  as  that  of  the
species  at  the  present  time.  Instead  of  sudden  revolutions,  I,
on  the  contrary,  merely  behold  infinitely  long  periods  of  time,
during  which  the  effects  of  apparently  small  forces,  acting  in
the  smallest  visible  proportions,  gradually  accumulate  until,  sud-
denly as  it  were,  they  reveal  their  might.  It  would  lead  us
too  far  to  enter  upon  this  subject  more  fully ;  but  I  felt  bound
to  touch  upon  it,  to  prevent  misapprehension  of  what  follows.

The  end  of  the  tertiary  period,  which  we  do  not  separate
from  the  present  by  a  shai^ply  defined  line,  but  by  a  broad  trans-
itional margin,  was,  doubtless,  distinguished  by  a  somewhat
warmer  climate,  from  that  which  at  present  obtains  in  central
Europe,  and  which  is,  by  the  way,  rather  exceptional  when  com-


310  LECTURE    XI.

pared  with  other  regions  of  the  earth.  Whilst  in  the  middle  of
the  tertiary  period,  palms  were  growing  in  Switzerland,  and  high
Californian  pine  trees  in  Iceland,  the  end  of  the  tertiary  period
was  marked  by  a  number  of  evergreen  plants,  with  a  temperature
in  Switzerland  like  that  of  Italy ;  on  the  shores  of  the  Medi-
terranean neither  plants  nor  animals  show  the  evidence  of  any
conditions  which  might  have  been  detrimental  to  the  life  of
man  in  the  tertiary  period.  Just  as  at  present,  man  can  live  in
the  same  climate  as  the  ape,  the  hippopotamus,  the  elephant,
and  the  rhinoceros,  so  could  he  have  existed  side  by  side  with
these  animals  and  their  corresponding  Flora  in  the  tertiary
period.  That  human  fossils  may,  at  some  future  time,  be
found  in  the  tertiary  strata,  is  rendered  probable  by  the  dis-
coveries of  M.  Desnoyers,  member  of  the  French  Academy,
who  found  traces  of  the  existence  of  man  in  strata  older  than
the  quaternary  deposits.  These  consist  in  striae,  or  incisions,
some  very  fine,  which  were  apperently  produced  by  the  aid  of
flint  knives,  upon  the  bones  of  large  animals,  found  in  a  sand-
bed  of  St.  Prest,  near  Chartres,  on  the  banks  of  the  Eure.

"  The  sand-beds  of  Saint-Prest,"  says  Laugel,  in  his  descrip-
tion of  the  departments  of  Eure  et  Loire,  in  1860 — that  is  to
say,  at  a  time  when  the  dispute  about  the  relative  age  of  the
diluvial  beds  had  not  yet  commenced,  and  consequently  there
was  no  motive  for  ascribing  to  these  strata  a  greater  or  less
antiquity — "  the  sand-beds  of  Saint-Prest  have  nothing  what-
ever to  do  with  the  diluvial  deposits  proper,  which,  on  their
part,  are  connected  with  the  excavation  of  the  valleys.  They
fill  up  a  lateral  depression  which  must  have  existed  before  the
excavation  of  the  Eure  valley.  The  section  of  the  sand-pit
presents,  beneath  a  thick  layer  of  surface  clay  first,  banks  of
gravel,  then  beds  of  white  sand  containing  pebbles,  and  at  the
bottom  beds  of  very  fine  white  sand.  In  the  whole  sand-pit,
excepting  these  lower  fine  sand-beds,  there  are  found  large
worn-down  blocks  of  flint,  sand-stone,  sometimes  a  siliceous
conglomerate  ;  some  veins  in  the  lower  parts  contain  also  por-
tions of  felspar,  mixed  with  transparent  quartz."

The  sand-pit  of  Saint-Prest  contains,  in  the  lowest  part,
imbedded  in  the  fine   sand,  a  large  number  of  the  bones  of


LECTURE    XI.  311

extinct  animals;  among  others  a  species  of  elephant,  rhinoceros,
hippopotamus,  large  stag,  horse,  ox,  three  species  of  deer,  and
a  large  rodent,  which  seems  to  have  held  an  intermediate  posi-
tion between  the  beaver  and  the  paca ;  the  remains  of  species
of  pachydermata  :  Elephas  meridionalis,  Rhinoceros  leptorhinus
and  Hippopotamus  major,  agree  perfectly  with  the  species
found  in  the  vicinity  of  Asti,  in  the  Arno  valley,  and  in  the  so-
called  Norwich-crag ;  strata  which  undoubtedly  lie  beneath
the  diluvial  beds  proper,  and  have  hitherto  been  considered  as
belonging  to  the  most  recent  tertiary  formations.

These  three  species  differ  entirely  from  the  mammoth
(Elephas primigeniusj  ;  the  rhinoceros  (Rhinoceros  tichorhinus)  ;
and  the  diluvial  hippopotamus ;  just  as  the  Megaceros  Garnu-
torum  differs  from  the  Megaceros  Hibemicus,  and  the  horse
from  the  diluvial  horse,  belonging  probably  to  that  species
from  the  Arno  valley,*  which  is  known  by  the  name  of  Equus
plicidens.  Lyell,  in  his  work  which  appeared  in  1863,  still
asserts  that  the  Elephas  meridionalis  had  not  yet  been  found
associated  with  man.

Now  if  it  could  be  proved  that  the  bones  in  the  deposits  of
Saint-Prest  bear  indeed  the  traces  of  the  human  hand,  which
markings  must  have  been  made  before  the  deposition  of  these
bones  in  these  old  sand-beds,  then  the  age  of  mankind  is  necessa-
rily removed  beyond  the  diluvial  epoch,  and  further  back  into  the
tertiary  period.  An  unprejudiced  person  will  not  feel  surprised
at  this ;  there  are  no  sufficient  reasons  against  the  assumption
that  man  may  have  lived  in  the  tertiary  period  in  countries
inhabited  by  elephants,  rhinoceros,  oxen,  horses,  and  apes.

Desnoyers  found,  on  some  bones  which  he  extracted  from
the  sand-pit,  and  subsequently  upon  all  the  bones  preserved  in
collections,  traces  of  incisions,  consisting  mostly  of  transverse,
straight,  curved,  or  elliptical  strias.  Upon  the  cranium  of  an
elephant  he  found  a  triangular  cavity,  apparently  produced  by
the  point  and  barb  of  a  flint  arrow.  The  skulls  of  the  large
deer  seem  all  to  have  been  broken  by  a  blow  upon  the  frontal
bone  at  the  root  of  the  horns.     The  antlers  are  broken  in  pieces

*  And  common  in  English  deposits. — Editor.


312  LECTURE    XI.

to  serve  as  handles,  some  were  longitudinally  split  for  the  sake
of  the  marrow.  Similar  characters  have  been  observed  in  the
kitchen-middens,  as  well  as  in  the  bones  of  the  Swiss  pile
works.

Desnoyers's  discovery  was  confirmed  by  leading  men  in  sci-
ence. It  is  true  that  MM.  Robert  and  Bayle  objected  (evidently
to  save  the  theory  of  Beaumont)  that  the  scratches  on  the  bones
in  the  collection  of  the  Ecole  des  Mines  of  Paris  had  been  made
by  the  preparer  of  the  specimens,  who  scratched  off  the  ad-
hering sand  with  a  chisel.  Desnoyers  found,  however,  no  dif-
ficulty in  proving  that  the  objection  was  puerile,  for  four
reasons  :  because  the  bones  not  in  the  Ecole  des  Mines  have  all
the  same  strias ;  because  the  bones  taken  directly  from  the
sand-pit  also  have  them ;  because  in  these  notches  there  are
sandgrains,  and  therefore  the  bones  must  have  been  thus
marked  before  they  were  imbedded ;  and,  finally,  because  the
said  white  sand  adheres  so  little  to  the  bones,  that  no  chisel,
but  only  a  little  water,  is  required  to  cleanse  the  bones.

As,  however,  Desnoyers's  discoveries  must  as  yet  be  consi-
dered as  isolated,  we  are  still  justified  in  asserting  that,  gene-
rally speaking,  man  has  only  appeared  in  Europe  and  North
America  during  the  so-called  diluvial,  post-pliocene,  or  quater-
nary period.

There  is  ample  evidence,  that  this  last  period  was  accom-
panied with  a  considerable  refrigeration  of  our  hemisphere,
which  increased  so  much  that  at  a  certain  period  the  whole  of
Switzerland,  the  Scottish  Highlands,  Scandinavia,  and  a  por-
tion of  North  America  were  covered  with  ice.  The  question
now  arises  :  Did  man  exist  in  France,  Belgium,  and  England
before  or  after  this  glacial  period  ?  The  question  is  so  far  in-
teresting, that  in  case  of  man's  pre-existence  the  glacial  period
may  have  put  a  stop  to  his  existence  in  the  aforesaid  regions.
But  let  us  examine  the  geological  conditions  apart  from  man.

Everywhere  in  Scandinavia,  North  America,  and  England,
as  well  as  in  the  vicinity  of  the  Alps,  we  meet  with  a  formation
which  is  generally  called  glacial-loam  or  boulder-clay.  This
formation,  of  marl  or  plastic  clay,  which  in  all  countries  is  used
in  brickmaking,  is  spread  over  the  surfaces  in  layers  of  varying


LECTURE    XI.  313

thickness.  It  overlies  the  platforms,  follows  the  slopes  of
mountains  down  to  the  valleys,  it  forms  frequently  the  bottom
which  prevents  rivers  from  further  excavating  the  valleys  ;  it
contains  in  the  North  large  angular  erratic  blocks,  or  rounded,
scratched,  and  striated  rolled  stones  in  the  vicinity  of  the  Alps
and  the  Scandinavian  mountains.  Where  the  formation  re-
poses upon  solid  rocks,  the  latter  are  polished,  grooved,  and
striped  like  the  rocks  passed  over  by  a  glacier.  Most  geolo-
gists of  the  present  day  agree  as  to  the  origin  of  this  formation.
It  is  the  glacial  loam  produced  by  the  grinding  of  the  rock
under  the  weight  of  the  moving  ice  masses,  which  also  pro-
duced the  scored  stones.  Where  these  latter  only  exist,  it  is
the  lower  moraine  which  so  presents  itself;  but  where  large
blocks  occur,  then  either  the  earth-moraine  has  coalesced  with
the  fundamental  moraine,  or  the  angular  blocks  have  been
carried  upon  the  moving  ice  masses  and  deposited  in  the  loam.

On  taking,  for  the  present,  this  formation  as  a  starting
point,  we  find  that  but  few  land  and  fresh-water  deposits  are
known  which  intervene  between  this  formation  and  the  tertiary
period.  That  the  tertiary  period  did  not  suddenly  enter  the
glacial  epoch,  seems  to  be  proved  by  the  condition  of  those
tertiary  strata  known  in  England  as  "  crag."  There  was  also
found,  near  Cromer,  on  the  Norfolk  coast,  a  group  of  beds
underlying  the  glacial  loam,  but  characteristically  distinct  from
the  tertiary  period.  There  are  sunken  forests  which,  in  many
spots,  are  exposed  at  low  water.  The  roots  of  the  broken  off
trunks  are  still  in  their  natural  position,  and  the  loam  in  which
they  are  imbedded  is  black  from  the  intermixture  with  vege-
table matter.  The  fir,  pine,  yew,  alder,  oak,  and  sloe  grew
here  in  a  marshy  soil,  in  which  the  white,  and  yellow  water
lilies,  marsh-trefoil,  frogsbit,  and  other  aquatic  plants  of  our
present  Flora,  were  found.  There  were  also  discovered  fossil
bones  of  three  species  of  elephants,  of  the  mammoth,  rhino-
ceros, hippoj^otamus,  of  the  extinct  large  beaver,  of  horses,
oxen,  deer,  the  common  beaver,  and  the  water  rat,  of  the  wal-
rus, the  narwhal,  large  whales  whose  carcasses  had  been  washed
ashore.

This  fresh-water  formation,  the  insects  and  shells  of  which


314  LECTUKE    XI.

belong  to  living  species,  must  therefore  be  separated  from  other
diluvial  formations,  in  so  far  as  it  contains  along  with  extinct,
many  of  the  existing  species,  and  the  plants,  at  all  events,
are  of  the  same  kind  as  are  found  in  the  later  deposits  above
the  glacial  loam.  The  spread  of  the  glaciers,  therefore,  does
not,  as  hitherto  believed,  mark  a  new  epoch,  a  new  section  in
the  history  of  the  earth  ;  it  only  changed  temporarily  the  as-
pect of  the  earth,  of  the  Fauna  and  Flora,  where  it  occurred.
After  the  retirement  of  the  glaciers  and  the  Arctic  sea  to  its
present  northern  confines,  the  antecedent  condition  was  re-
established ;  the  Fauna  and  Flora  returned  to  their  native
district,  excepting  some  species  which  became  extinct.  We
are,  however,  far  from  asserting  that  no  new  species  arose
after  the  retirement  of  the  glaciers.  Desor  has  with  great
acumen  shown  the  fallacy  of  such  an  assumption,  and  if  we
accept  the  theory  of  the  transformation  of  species,  there  is  no
reason  why  this  metamorphosis  should  not  proceed  as  well  in
the  present  as  it  did  in  periods  gone  by.

Let  us  now  examine  the  various  deposits,  which  have  occurred
since  the  glacial  period,  and  let  us  commence  with  Switzerland,
where  the  comparison  with  the  process  still  in  action  in  the
Alpine  chain  gives  a  clue  to  the  origin  of  the  above  phenomena.
The  glacial  loom  is,  in  that  country,  a  more  or  less  grey  or
bluish  clay,  without  any  trace  of  stratification,  and  in  which,
near  the  Alps  and  almost  on  the  whole  plains  of  Switzerland,
are  found  polished  and  furrowed  stone  boulders.  This  forma-
tion is  obviously  connected  with  the  large  angular  erratic  blocks
on  the  slopes  of  the  Jura,  which,  on  the  Chasseron,  in  "VVaad-
tand,  rise  to  1,600  meters  above  the  level  of  the  sea,  or  1,000
meters  above  that  of  the  lakes.  It  is  now  generally  admitted
that  these  blocks  have  been  deposited  by  the  glaciers,  which
have  spread  over  almost  the  whole  plain  of  Switzerland,  and  Swiss
geologists  have  succeeded  in  nearly  determining  the  limits  of
these  old  glaciers  which  reached  far  up  the  Jura.  I  must  refer
you  to  the  map  of  Escher  von  der  Linth,  which  you  will  find  in
my  text-book  as  well  as  in  my  Principles  of  Geology,  and  in
which  the  limits,  which  these  glaciers  reached  at  the  time  of
their  greatest  expansion,  are  marked.


LECTURE    XI.  315

Morlot,  with,  wliose  deductions,  as  regards  two  glacial  epochs,
I  do  not  agree,  has,  nevertheless,  very  clearly  shewn  the
connection  between  the  blocks  and  the  glacial  clay.  Such
enormous  masses  of  ice  must,  by  their  under  surfaces,  produce
a  corresponding  quantity  of  till,  hence  the  glacial  clay  is  found
in  immense  quantities  near  the  Alps,  for  instance,  near  the  lake
of  Geneva,  where  it  is  forty  feet  deep.  It  is  also  clear,  that  at
a  time  when  the  ice  masses  reached  the  highest  cliffs  of  the
Jura,  no  angular  blocks  could  have  been  deposited  upon  the
level  land,  and  that  the  lower  blocks  on  the  Jura  must  belong
to  the  period  of  recession,  during  which  the  formation  of  the
glacial  clay  continued  as  long  as  the  motion  of  the  glaciers
upon  the  soil.  But  it  is  not  less  clear,  that  at  the  time  of  this
greatest  extension,  but  few  Alpine  pinnacles  rose  above  the
Swiss  ice-sea;  that,  consequently,  but  comparatively  few  blocks
could  be  transported  upon  the  ice,  and  therefore  no  perfect
moraines  could  be  formed,  as  is  the  case  with  smaller  glaciers
which  receive  the  detritus  from  more  extensive  rocky  tracts.

Upon  this  glacial  clay  in  Western  Switzerland  we  find,  in
many  places,  considerable  beds  of  pebbles,  gravel,  and  sand,
which  are,  by  the  infiltrated  lime,  so  cemented  together  as  to
form  a  species  of  gompholith.  The  pebbles  frequently  attain
the  size  of  a  man's  head,  or  even  larger.  They  show  no  traces
of  grooves  or  strias,  but  are  simply  rounded  and  clean ;  nowhere
is  clay  or  marl  attached  to  them ;  they  are  manifestly  rounded
by  the  action  of  water.  One  of  the  finest  specimens  of  such
deposits  may  be  seen  near  Geneva,  where  the  heights  of  St.
Jean  and  the  woods  of  Lancy,  through  which  the  bed  of  the
Rhone  runs,  consist  of  such  old  alluvia,  which  are  also  found  in
great  extent  in  most  other  parts  of  Switzerland.  Of  particular
deposits  of  this  kind  in  Eastern  Switzerland  I  shall  speak  on
another  occasion.

It  is  clear  that  these  old  alluvia  could  only  have  been  depo-
sited after  the  retreat  of  the  glaciers  towards  the  Alps.  As
the  retreat  of  a  glacier  is  effected  by  the  melting  of  its  mass,
which  necessarily  produces  an  accumulation  of  water,  it  is
evident  that  the  recession  of  colossal  glaciers  gave  rise  to  tur-
bulent streams,  which  here  and  there  excavated  their  beds,  but


316  LECTURE   XI.

in  other  places  formed  temporary  lakes.  This  retreat  of  the
glaciers  was  manifestly  a  very  complicated  phenomenon,  as  the
main  features  of  the  formation  of  the  soil,  as  they  exist  at
present,  were  already  extant  (by  which  assertion  we  deny  what
has  recently  been  asserted,  namely,  that  the  glaciers  at  the
period  of  their  greatest  extent  scooped  out,  in  the  soft  molasse
soil,  valleys  and  lake  basins) .  The  glaciers  remained  longer
in  the  valleys  and  the  basins,  and  sent  forth  branches  between
the  molasse  hills  already  free  from  ice.  It  must  further  be
taken  into  consideration  that  such  a  retreat  was  never  uniform.
The  alternation  of  colder  or  warmer  years,  and  consequent
variations  of  the  limits  of  glaciers  and  of  their  elevation  are
common  phenomena,  and  the  history  of  our  Alps  speaks  of
meadows  and  fields,  alternately  covered  with  or  free  from
glaciers.  Many  accurate  local  investigations  are  requisite
before  we  shall  possess  a  full  account  of  the  retreat  of  the
glaciers  in  Switzerland,  though  we  have  a  general  notion  of  its
main  features.

The  retreat  of  the  glaciers  is  evident  at  some  distance  from
the  Alps,  in  the  great  valleys  and  lake  basins,  where  the  ice
continued  as  such  for  a  longer  period.  In  the  immediate
vicinity  of  the  lakes  of  Geneva,  Sempach, -Zurich,  Hallwyl,
Greifen,  and  Pfaffikon,  in  the  valleys  of  the  Aar  near  Berne,  of
the  Reuss  near  Bremgarten,  of  the  Limmath  near  Baden,  may
be  seen  terminal  morains,  which  testify  to  the  preservation  of
the  glaciers  in  the  lake  basins  and  deeper  valleys.

Morlot  very  justly  observes,  that  this  persistence  of  the  ice
must  have  continued  for  a  considerable  time,  as  some  of  these
moraines  are  of  immense  size.  But  this  preservation  must
have  been  attended  with  same  phenomena  which  accompany
the  retreat  of  glaciers.  Glaciers  which  stretch  forth  their  icy
tongues  through  the  basin  of  the  lake  of  Geneva,  up  to  Geneva
and  Nyon,  which  penetrated  the  Reuss  valley  up  to  Mellingen,
the  Limmath  valley  up  to  Baden,  and  probably  filled  up  the
basin  of  the  lake  of  Constance,  must  necessarily  have  produced
larger  masses  of  water  than  the  present  dwarfs,  which  cannot
transgress  the  limits  of  the  inner  Alps.  The  same  alluvial
formation  was  deposited  in  front  and  on  the  sides  of  these


LECTURE    XI.  317

glaciers,  and  above  these  formations  angular  blocks  were  de-
posited and  pushed  forward  by  the  extreme  end  of  the  glacier.
Escher  has  shown,  that  in  the  whole  district  of  Burgdorf,
Wangen,  and  Langenthal,  westward,  and  eastward  over  Brugg
to  Eglisau,  there  is  such  an  alluvial  formation,  in  which  are
seen  blocks  floated  by  the  ice  from  several  basins ;  but  where
they  were  transported  by  the  solid  ice,  they  are  less  in  num-
ber. In  the  vicinity  of  these  ice-tongues,  which  persisted
during  the  retreat,  have  been  found  lake  basins  produced  in
the  manner  described.  The  waters  may  at  that  time,  as  Mor-
lot  assumes,  have  been  one  hundred  and  fifty  to  one  hundred
and  eighty  feet  above  their  present  level,  and  then  gradually,
when  the  retreat  recommenced,  after  forming  several  terraces
of  about  one  hundred  and  then  fifty  feet  above  their  present
height,  may  have  ultimately  descended  to  their  present  level.

Finally,  there  commenced  a  further  retreat  after  the  stop-
page. Several  terminal  moraines  show  that  this  retreat  was
not  effected  without  fresh  halting  places  which  correspond
with  the  alluvial  terraces  on  the  plains,  and  each  of  these
stoppages  may  have  continued  for  a  long  period,  for  here  also
we  find  moraines  of  remarkable  size,  which  required  a  long-
time for  their  formation.  That  during  this  whole  period  of
retrogression,  the  formation  of  glacial  clay,  of  alluvia,  of  rolled
pebbles,  and  the  transportation  of  angular  blocks  upon  float-
ing icebergs,  continued  uninterruptedly,  is  undeniable.

I  am  fully  aware  that  my  theory  is  in  antagonism  with  that
of  many  geologists,  who  assume  two  separate  ice  periods,  be-
tween which  the  older  alluvia  are  said  to  have  been  deposited.
Morlot,  Collomb,  and  many  others,  especially  English  authors,
defend  this  dualism,  whilst  Desor  has  always  insisted  upon
the  unity  of  the  glacial  period.  Both  parties  agree  as  to  the
facts,  but  not  as  regards  their  explanation.  The  old  alluvium,
no  doubt,  overlies  everywhere  the  old  glacial  clay  with  the
polished  rolled  stones,  and  equally  without  doubt,  above  this
old  alluvium  lie  angular  blocks  intermingled  with  glacier  clay
and  recent  alluvium.  The  stratification  of  the  terminal  moraines
in  the  valleys  and  lake  basins  of  level  Switzerland  above  and
upon  the  old  alluvium  is  however  nowhere  demonstrated,  and


818  LECTURE    XI.

it  seems  to  me  that  we  are  justified  in  assuming,  that  such
blocks  as  rest  upon  the  old  alluvium  have  not  been  transported
directly  by  glaciers,  but  by  floating  ice  blocks.  If,  indeed,  the
glaciers  had  any  influence  upon  the  soil,  as  asserted  by  some
English  authors,  the  influence  must  have  been  proportionate  to
the  acting  mass.  A  glacier  measuring  several  thousand  feet  in
thickness,  which  must  be  assumed  to  account  for  the  blocks
found  on  the  Jura,  must  have  scooped  the  soil  rather  deep,
whilst  an  extremity  of  a  glacier  scarcely  100  feet  thick,  might,
for  some  short  distance,  pass  over  a  gravelly  soil  without  dig-
ging deeply  into  it.  Charpentier,  I  believe,  cites  such  an  in-
stance in  Wallis,  where,  after  the  stay  of  the  extremity  of  a
glacier  for  a  number  of  years  upon  vegetable  earth,  immediately
after  the  retreat  perennials  appeared,  as  if  the  glacier  had  ex-
ercised no  influence  upon  the  soil.  But  it  must  be  considered
that  this  can  only  apply  to  the  extremity  of  a  comparatively
very  small  and  thin  glacier.  We  may,  therefore,  assume  that
in  some  spots  during  the  retreat,  not  merely  a  stoppage  but
sometimes  an  advance  took  place,  during  which  the  extremity
of  a  glacier  passed  a  certain  distance  above  the  previously  de-
posited old  alluvium  and  also  deposited  blocks.  But  we  can-
not believe  that  the  glaciers  spread  again  in  this  manner  over  a
great  portion  of  Switzerland,  as  in  this  case  they  would  from
their  weight  and  size  have  necessai'ily  scooped  out  all  the  older
drift  and  alluvial  formations,  and  destroyed  all  the  loose  sand
and  gravel  masses.

In  East  Switzerland  we  meet  with  various  phenomena,  con-
ditioned by  the  existence  of  buried  forests  and  peat  bogs.  In
the  vicinity  of  Utznach  and  Durnten,  on  the  lake  of  Zurich,  and
near  Morschwyl,  on  the  lake  of  Constance,  there  are  consider-
able beds  of  slate-coal,  which  manifestly  belong  to  the  period
we  speak  of,  having  originated  from  the  peat  bogs,  which  have
been  overwhelmed  and  compressed  by  enormous  masses  of
drift.  This  peat  bed  consists  mostly  of  mosses  and  reeds,
rushes  and  marsh-trefoil,  upon  which,  at  first  pines,  and  then
firs  and  birches,  grew.  The  disposition  of  these  layers  is  as
follows  : —

The  subsoil  of  the  whole  region  is  formed  by  molasse,  the


LECTURE    XI.  319

beds  of  which  are  somewhat  vertical.  Upon  the  heads  of  these
beds  rests  slate  clay  of  considerable  thickness  with  boulders,
and  large  angular  blocks,  so  that  this  clay  manifestly  corre-
sponds to  the  glacial  clay.  The  existence  of  these  large  angu-
lar erratics,  hitherto  unnoticed,  in  the  lower  clay  beds,  has
recently  been  clearly  demonstrated  by  Messikomer's  examin-
ation of  pile  buildings.  Then  come  coals  in  horizontal  strata
nearly  twelve  feet  thick,  and  upon  the  coals,  drift  with  clay  and
rounded  blocks,  and  upon  them  angular  erratics,  which,  in  our
opinion,  have  been  floated  and  not  directly  deposited  by  gla-
ciers. The  substratum  had  hitherto  not  been  sufficiently
attended  to,  hence  it  was  believed  that  the  coal  beds  had  been
formed  before  the  glacial  extension ;  but  Messikomer's  re-
searches have  shown  that  the  coals  overlie  the  glacial  clay,  and
had  therefore  been  formed  immediately  after  the  retreat  of  the
glaciers,  after  which  they  were  covered  with  the  old  alluvium
and  floated  erratics.

On  comparing  the  coal  beds  of  England  with  those  of
East  Switzerland,  they  appear  at  first  sight  so  strikingly  iden-
tical, that  it  leads  to  the  belief  that  they  belong  to  the  same
period,  and  were  formed  simultaneously  either  before  or
after  the  glacial  extension.  But  as  such  is  not  the  case,  and
as  the  two  respective  formations  are,  on  the  contrary,  separated
from  each  other  by  the  glacial  period,  it  follows  that  this  glacial
extension  must  have  been  an  intermediate  event,  which  even
in  countries  where  it  occurred  produced  no  important  change.
There  is  no  doubt,  as  we  shall  presently  see,  that  there  have
been,  specially  in  the  North,  great  changes  produced  in  the
level  of  various  regions.  It  is  probable,  that  at  least  before
the  commencement  of  the  glacial  period,  if  not  immediately
after  it,  England  and  the  north  of  France,  Denmark  and  Nor-
way were  connected,  whilst,  on  the  other  hand,  large  districts
towards  the  east,  now  dry  land,  were  under  water.  With  the
increase  of  cold  in  the  north,  the  northern  population  retreated
southward,  an  immigration  rendered  evident  by  the  present
composition  of  the  Fauna  of  the  German  Ocean  and  the  Baltic.
Again,  with  the  cold  it  retreated,  as  we  have  shown,  towards
the  north.     Such  immigrations  and  emigrations,  like  the  phy-


320  LECTURE    XI.

sical  changes   of  the   surface,  and   the   transposition   of  clay,
gravel,  sand,  etc.,  require  long  periods  of  time.

Every  person  who  carefully  examines  the  enormous  accumu-
lations which  the  glaciers  and  the  rivers,  sprung  from  them,  have
deposited  upon  Swiss  soil,  must  admit  that  only  a  long  series
of  centuries,  the  number  of  which  can  scarcely  be  estimated,
could  have  effected  them.  This  assertion  may  be  proved  by
the  estimation  of  some  individual  factors  of  the  beds.  We
have  seen  that  the  coal  bed  of  Diirnten  forms  but  a  moderate
intermediate  stratum  in  the  so-called  diluvial  beds.  This
stratum  at  its  greatest  thickness,  reaches  about  twelve  feet,  or
rather,  ten,  for  in  many  places  there  are  intermediate  seams  of
letten.  "  This,  its  greatest  thickness,"  says  Heer,  "  may
enable  us  to  calculate  the  period  of  time  requisite  for  the  for-
mation of  this  bed.  From  the  mode  and  manner  of  the  com-
pression of  the  stems  of  the  trees,  from  a  comparison  of  the
carbonaceous  constituent  of  slate-coal  with  that  of  the  peat,  it
follows  that  these  coal  beds,  when  in  the  condition  of  peat,
ought  to  have  been  six  times  thicker,  that,  consequently,  the
above  coal-bed  of  ten  feet  thickness  must  have  originated  from
the  compression  of  a  peat-bed  sixty  feet  high.  Assuming,  on
the  average,  an  increase  of  one  foot  of  peat  within  a  century,
we  obtain  6,000  years.

"Another  mode  of  calculation  leads  to  the  same  result.
An  acre  of  slate-coal  ten  feet  thick  contains,  according  to
Mine- Superintendent  Stokar-Escher,  96,000  hundred- weights
of  carbon.  On  assuming  that  an  acre  of  peat-land  produces
annually  fifteen  quintals  of  carbon,  6,400  years  would  be
required  for  the  formation  of  the  above-mentioned  coals.  The
assumption  of  an  annual  production  of  fifteen  quintals  of  car-
bon (based  upon  the  assumption  that  a  foot  of  peat  is  formed
within  a  century),  is  rather  too  high  than  too  low,  for  accord-
ing to  Liebig's  interesting  researches,  an  acre  of  wood  plantation
produces  annually  but  ten  quintals  of  carbon,  in  which  case  the
formation  of  the  above  coal-bed  required  9,600  years."

In  these  calculations  it  is  certainly  assumed  that  the  climatic
conditions  resembled  those  at  present  existing.  As  the  same
species  of  plants,  which  now  produce  peat,  formed  the  slate-coal,


LECTURE    XI.  321

there  is  no  reason  to  suppose  that  the  climate  differed  widely
from  the  present ;  at  any  rate,  it  may  be  safely  assumed  that
thousands  of  years  were  required  for  the  formation  of  the  afore-
said beds.

But  whether  six  or  ten  thousand  years  were  requisite  for  their
formation,  these  slate-coals  occupied  but  a  small  fraction  of  the
diluvial  period.  They  overlie  thick  glacial  clay,  and  are  them-
selves covered  with  flint  and  sand-banks,  thirty  feet  high  and
with  floated  glacial  blocks  on  the  top.  Despite  of  the  immense
period  of  time  which  separates  these  coal  deposits  from  histori-
cal time,  during  which  not  even  the  thin  stratum  of  vegetable
earth  was  completely  formed,  these  coal  formations  still  belong
to  our  geological  period,  though  to  the  beginning  of  it  ;  for  we
have  seen  that  there  grew  in  them  the  same  marsh  and  peat
plants,  and  the  same  trees,  as  are  still  extant  in  that  region.
We  should,  nevertheless,  add,  that  there  occur  some  species,  as
the  hazel,  which  differ  from  living  species ;  but  the  same
character  which  manifests  itself  in  the  animal  world  shews
itself  also  in  the  vegetable  kingdom.  Some  species  have
become  perfectly  extinct,  others  have  retreated  northward,
or  to  the  mountains,  but  most  continue  to  live  in  the   same


region.


The  coal  beds  in  eastern  Switzerland  are  specially  interest-
ing on  account  of  the  animal  world  they  contain.  Small  fresh-
water snails  of  still  living  species  are  as  abundant  as  small
marsh-beetles,  whose  glittering  wing-sheaths,  often  closely
compressed,  form  the  surface  of  the  beds.  There  occur,  also,
coleoptera,  which  belong  to  extinct  species,  like  the  trunk-
beetle,  etc.  There  were  also  found  teeth  of  the  deer  and  bear,
remains  of  the  elephant  and  rhinoceros  (not  of  the  mammoth
and  the  rhinoceros  with  a  bony  septum),  but  of  an  elephant
resembling  the  Asiatic  (El&phas  antiquusj ,  and  the  rhinoceros
with  a  semi-osseous  septum  (Rhinoceros  l&ptorhinusj ,  both  of
which  occur  with  the  bones  of  man,  but  seem  to  have  become
extinct  at  an  earlier  period  than  their  hairy  cognates.  From
this  fact  follows  the  deduction,  confirmed  indeed  by  the  strati-
fication, that  the  slate  coals  of  eastern  Switzerland  had  been
formed  upon  the  glacial  clay  immediately   after  the   retreat   of

Y


322  LECTURE    XI.

the  glaciers,  that  the  old  thin  alluvium  covered  them,  and  that,
consequently,  the  beds  in  which  occur  the  mammoth  and  the
rhinoceros  with  the  bony  septum,  are  of  a  somewhat  later  date
than  the  slate-coal  beds.

We  now  make  a  long  stride  to  the  north,  where  the  glacial
formations  attained  the  greatest  extent.

Kjerulf  very  properly  directs  our  attention  to  the  observations
of  Rink,  who  passed  several  years  in  Greenland,  where  he
studied  the  ice  of  the  interior,  the  so-called  ^iceblink."  There
we  find  a  continent  not  less  in  extent  than  the  whole  Scandina-
vian peninsula,  covered  with  an  ice-crust  1,000  feet  in  thickness,
moving  from  the  interior  towards  the  west  coast.  This  mass
of  ice,  laden  with  stone  blocks,  advances  slowly  but  steadily
towards  the  west  coast,  where  it  breaks  up  into  large  fragments,
which,  in  the  form  of  icebergs,  often  of  colossal  dimensions,
are  carried  by  the  sea  currents  in  definite  directions,  even  to  the
Azores.  They  gradually  melt,  and  deposit  their  freight  at  the
bottom  of  the  sea.

The  same  phenomenon  formerly  occurred  in  Norway,  Sweden,
and  Finland.  The  country  lay  shrouded  beneath  an  enormous
ice-mass,  which  carried  its  substratum  of  pebbles  and  gravel
into  the  sea.  The  whole  rocky  mass  of  Norway  was  polished
and  grooved,  but  the  frozen  sea,  which  surrounded  this  pre-
historic Greenland,  stood  at  a  lower  level  than  at  present,  for
in  many  places  the  dragged  surfaces  stretch  far  out  beneath  the
present  sea-level.  Though  this  circumstance  alone  may  not  be
sufficient  to  explain  the  refrigeration  of  the  northern  continent
to  the  same  degree  as  that  of  Greenland,  the  greater  elevation
of  the  land  above  the  sea  may  have  contributed  to  it.  When-
ever the  tracts  of  the  glaciers  show  beneath  the  present  sea-
level,  the  waters  must  have  been  lower,  for  the  ice  is  melted
and  undermined  by  them,  as  shown  by  the  polar  glaciers  at
ebb  tide.

The  sea  rose,  the  land  became  warmer,  the  ice-shroud  melted,
the  highest  ridges  showed  their  pinnacles,  the  ice  broke  into
separate  glaciers,  which  continued  to  fill  up  the  valleys.  Now
we  find  moraines  as  in  our  present  glaciers  ;  medial  and  terminal
moraines ;   walls,  the  extremities  of  which  now  stretch  towards


LECTUEE    XI.  323

the  sea,  or  are  found  as  terminal  barriers  in  the  valleys.  The  sea
rose  about  five  hundred  feet ;  for  up  to  this  height  we  find
deposits  of  molluscs,  which  belong  to  the  Arctic  sea.  These
enormous  ice-masses  furnished,  at  the  same  time,  large  streams,
which  here  and  there  obstructed  by  the  terminal  embankments
of  the  glaciers,  formed  large  inland  lakes,and  depositedthe  finely-
ground  material,  carried  by  them,  in  the  form  of  loam,  marl,  and
sand-clay.  The  sea  on  the  one  hand,  and  the  inland  lakes  on  the
other,  worked  on  the  masses  deposited  by  the  ice;  the  glaciers
brought  down  erratic  blocks,  and  these  were  either  directly  or
indirectly,  after  floating  on  the  icebergs,  deposited  upon  the
banks.  Thus  the  present  period  was  gradually  induced,  when
glaciers  stretch  to  the  sea  in  but  few  spots,  but  rise  in  other
places  considerably  above  the  sea-level,  and  where  in  the
valleys  a  milder  climate  prevails.

This  pre-historic  history  is  no  romance ;  it  is  derived  from
actual  facts  and  the  deductions  therefrom.  The  facts  are  thus
summarised  by  Kjerulf :

"  What  is  the  prevalent  order  of  the  glacial  deposits  ?  Quite
at  the  bottom,  where  they  could  not  be  washed  away,  are  sand
and  pebbles.  This  is  '  sheuer-s and'  (scoring-sand),  and  '  scheur-
stelne'  (scoring-stones).  This  is  the  material  which,  pressed
by  the  ice,  was  carried  above  the  rocks.  These  blocks  should
be  examined,  if  we  wish  to  estimate  the  direction  of  the  mo-
tion. But  as  for  the  most  part  they  are  smaller,  much  broken,
and  frequently  rounded,  they  are  termed  pebbles  (rolled
stones),  though  this  is  an  incorrect  name,  they  should  there-
fore be  distinguished  as  c  scheuer-steine.'  They  are  not
rolled,  but  have  been  crushed  against  each  other,  and  being
inserted  into  the  ice,  like  diamonds  in  the  glazier's  pencil,
they  have  drawn  lines  and  furrows  upon  the  stones.  Above
this  '  scheuer-sand'  and  the  pebble  banks  He  the  various  kinds
of  clay,  first,  calcareous,  marly  clay,  in  districts  accessible  to
the  glacial  waters  which  brought  down  the  ground  up  lime  and
clay  from  the  Silurian  beds ;  next  above,  the  shell-clay,  where
the  elevation  was  not  too  high ;  then  comes  brick-clay,  without
shells,  derived  probably  from  the  period  when  the  flood  from

y2


324  LECTURE    XI.

the  interior  was  at  its  highest ;  then  comes  sand,  and,  quite  at
the  top,  loam.

"  The  large  erratics  lie  above  the  banks  of  pebbles,
loam,  and  sand ;  they  are  in  Scandinavia,  in  a  less  degree,
deposited  by  floating  ice-rafts,  but  mostly  directly  by  the
glaciers."

"  We  have  thus  before  us  a  period,  a  real  ice-period,  and  an
ice-sea,  which  washed  the  glacial  coasts  of  Scandinavia  and  Fin-
land, then  constituting  one  continent.  But  the  proofs  of  such
an  Arctic  sea  apply  not  only  to  this  ice  continent.  The  north
German  plains,  from  Holland  to  Russia,  are  covered  with
blocks,  pebbles,  and  drift,  all  of  which  are  derived  from  Scan-
dinavia and  Finland,  the  southern  boundary  of  which  is  along
the  elevation  of  the  land,  which  is  limited  by  the  Weser  moun-
tains, the  Hartz,  the  Bohemian,  and  Giant  mountains.  In  the
east,  the  tracts  of  these  erratic  blocks  wind  through  the  Russian
lowlands  towards  the  Ural  so  regularly  around  Finland  that
they  describe  almost  a  circle.  This  is  the  dispersion  circle,  so
to  speak,  of  this  ice  sea,  within  which  the  blocks  carried  by  the
icebergs  were  stranded,  and  the  mere  circumference  of  this
block  line  shows,  that  at  the  time  of  the  greatest  extension  of
the  ice  sea,  the  Scandinavian-Finnish  continent  was  an  island,
whilst  a  broad  ice  arm  connected  the  present  Polar  sea,  and
the  White  sea  with  the  Baltic."

In  the  whole  extent,  from  the  North  American  continent
down  to  New  York,  in  England  and  Scotland,  in  Scandinavia
and  Finland,  in  Russia,  as  far  as  the  steppes  of  Petschora
(Peczora),  are  found  the  same  formations,  the  polished,  striated,
and  furrowed  surfaces,  the  gravel  banks,  and  above  them  the
clays,  marls,  with  specific  northern  marine  molluscs,  or  with
species  which  attain  their  proper  size  only  in  the  north,  but
which  diminishes  in  the  south.

Sars  has,  by  his  minute  investigations,  succeeded  in  deter-
mining the  highest  level  of  the  ancient  ice-sea,  and  the  periods
of  retreat,  whilst  Loven  proved  that  Denmark  was  connected
with  Norway,  that  the  White  sea  must  have  been  connected
with  the  Baltic  by  a  broad  arm,  which  wound  round  Finland,
and  that  the  Swedish  Wener-  and  Wetter-lakes,  now  several


LECTURE    XI.  325

hundred  feet  above  the  Baltic,  must  have  been  connected  with
this  ice  sea,  as  several  species  of  Crustacea  still  inhabit  these
lakes,  the  relics  of  this  ice  population.  Already,  in  1846,  my
friend  Desor  had  proved,  in  a  treatise,  that  there  prevails  the
greatest  analogy  between  the  phenomena  in  the  north  and  those
of  the  Alps,  and  that  the  peculiarities  which  distinguish  the
northern  phenomena  are  due  to  the  alterations  in  the  level,  by
which  the  sea  on  the  Scandinavian  coasts  rose,  then  again  gra-
dually subsided  down  to  the  present  time,  during  which  the
elevation  of  the  Scandinavian  soil  is  still  continuing.  During
the  last  period  there  were  formed,  as  in  Switzerland,  here  and
there,  glacial  necks,  which  produced  those  confusedly  stratified
ridges  upon  the  surface  of  which  lie  angular  blocks  known  by
the  name  of  "  Oesars."  In  the  interior  of  the  high  valleys,
just  as  in  the  lake  basins  of  Switzerland,  were  heaped  up  mo-
raines, which  at  times  attain  a  great  size.  All  this  has  been
confirmed  by  Martins,  so  that  we  can  add  nothing  fresh  as  re-
gards the  north.

The  process  was  the  same  in  the  North-American  continent,
with  this  difference,  that  but  little  of  the  land  was  there  sub-
merged under  the  sea,  but  large  fresh  water-lakes  were  formed,
the  deposits  of  which  prove  that  the  present  lakes  on  the  Ca-
nadian boundary  are  only  the  remnants  of  the  inland  fresh
water  lakes.

On  turning  to  England,  we  find  an  analogous  series  of  phe-
nomena. At  the  bottom,  boulder-clay  resting  here  and  there
upon  fresh  water  formations,  alluvium,  and  pebbles  ;  above
them,  in  the  mountainous  regions,  as  in  Scotland  and  Wales,
moraines  testifying  of  glaciers  which  descended  into  the  valleys.
Everywhere  the  same  phenomena  in  the  same  succession,  only
so  far  modified,  that  in  the  north  it  is  the  sea,  in  the  south  it
is  the  fresh  water  which  predominates  in  its  action.

The  following  table  shows  on  the  one  hand  the  synchronism
of  the  glacial  clay  in  different  countries,  and  on  the  other  hand
the  synchronous  appearance  of  the  mammoth  (Elejphas  primi-
genius),  and  the  rhinoceros  tichorhinus,  which  in  some  parts  of
the  European  continent  were  the  contemporaries  of  man.


326


LECTURE    XI.


SYNCHRONAL    TABLE    OP    DILUVIAL


Scandinavia.

Great  Britain.

Belgium,  North
Germany.

Kitchen    refuse
(Kjokken  -  model-
ings). _
Older  Pine  Period
of  the  turf-moors

Loam.

Modern    allu-
vium.

Loam.

Mecklenburg-
graves  ?

Upper    Moraines
in  the  valleys.

Pebbles     in      the
lower  valleys.
Oesars.

Sand,  with  freshwater  snails.
Elephas  primigenius,  Rhinoceros
ticJwrhinus.

Stone  hatchets,  near  Hoxne,
Icklingham,  on  the  Ouse.

Caves,    with     Ursus    spelmis,
Hyaena  spelcea,  and  hatchets.

Caves  of  Liege
witKEJlep  has  pri-
migenius, Rhino-
ceros tichorhinus,
Ursus  spel.,  etc.

Man  of  Engis,
Engihoul,  and
Neanderthal.

Greatest  height  of

the  Ice- Sea.
Bed  with   glacial

molluscs.

Clay,  with  wood  (oaks,   yew,
pine),  near  Hoxne.

Old    alluvium    (drift),    with
pebbles.

Clays,  with  glacial  molluscs,
on  the  Clyde.

Blocks  of  the
North  -  German
plain  transport-
ed from  Scandi-
navia.

Glacial  tracts  be-
neath the  present
sea  -  level,    with
scoring  stones.

Glacial     clay      with     blocks
(boulder-clay) .

Sunken    forest    and    fluvio-
marine   formations,   near  Cro-
mer, with  Elephas  cmtiquus  and
meridionalis,  Rhinoceros  etruscus,
etc.,  with  oaks,  yews,  firs,  etc.

LECTURE  XI.


327


FORMATIONS  DOWN  TO  THE  PRESENT  TIME.


Valleys  of  the  Seine,
Sonirue,  Yonne,  etc.

Vogesen,
Vosges.

Rhine  Valley  and
South  Germany.

Switzerland.

Caves  of  Lombrive
with    man,    Ru-
rochs,    rein-deer,
etc.

Diluvium  rouge.

Loess  and  clay  of
Paris,  Amiens,  Ab-
beville, etc.

Loam    and    modern
alluvia.

Diluvium  gris  with
Elepih.  primigen.,
Rhin.  tichorhinus,
Man  of  Amiens,
Abbeville,  Paris,
etc.

Caves  with   Ursus
spelceus,      Hycena
spelcea,  etc.

Terminal

moraines

in  the

valleys.

Loess  and  loam
of  the    Rhine-
valley,    of    the
Neckar  -  valley,
witbJ^Zep  .prim.,
L'hin.tichor.,  etc.
Terminal  mo-
raines   in     the
Black  Forest.

Stratified  diluvium
with  Eleplias  prim i ge-
nius, Rhinoceros  ticho-
rhinus, etc.

Older  alluvia.

Terminal  moraines
near  Zurich,  Sempach,
Bern,  Geneva,  etc.

Diluvium    of    the
plateaux.

Vosge-
gravel.

Vosge-&  Black-
Forest  gravel.

Slate- coal  with  Ele-
phas   antiquus,  Rhino-
ceros leptorhinus,  near
Diirnton,     Utznach,.
Morshwyl.

Alpine
gravel.

Gravel  of  the
Bavarian     pla-
teau.

Glacial  clay  and  marl
with  blocks  and  scor-
ing stones.

Erratic  blocks  on  the
Jura.

Greatest  glacial  ex-
tension.

328  LECTURE    XI.

Our  table  embraces  only  the  earliest  appearance  of  human
remains  in  Belgium,  the  north  of  France,  and  the  south  of
England,  phenomena  which  are  well  attested.  The  animal
world,  which  is  associated  with  man  in  the  pile-buildings  of
Switzerland,  for  instance,  leaves  no  doubt  that  man  settled  in
these  regions  at  a  much  later  date,  where,  as  proved  by  the
caves  of  Besancon  and  in  Appenzell,  the  cave-bear  existed,
which  in  Belgium  was  the  contemporary  of  man.  We  have
thus,  in  the  earliest  geological  period  of  man,  some  indications
of  the  migrations  and  spread  of  mankind ;  for  this  much  at
least  results  from  the  skulls  found,  that  the  oldest  human  re-
mains found  in  Switzerland  belong  to  a  different  race,  which
cannot  have  immigrated  from  Belgium.

In  whatever  way  we  examine  the  facts,  we  are  constantly
led  to  the  inference  that  the  so-called  diluvial  period  lasted  an
incalculably  long  time,  during  which  considerable  elevations
and  subsidences  of  land  and  sea,  and  many  alterations  of  the
surface  of  the  globe  and  its  inhabitants,  plants  and  animals,
took  place    both  in   restricted   localities    and   large   districts.

That  man  appeared  in  our  hemisphere  only  in  the  course  of
this  long  period,  and  that,  hitherto,  no  traces  have  been  found
of  man's  earlier  appearance  is  an  admitted  fact;  but  whether  man
appeared  before,  or  after  the  last  glacial  extension  on  our  conti-
nent is  still  an  open  question.  After  a  careful  examination  of  the
facts,  we  adhere  to  the  latter  alternative,  as  we  have  only  found
proofs  of  man's  appearance  after  the  great  glacial  period,  after
the  formation  of  the  glacial  clay  in  Scandinavia,  England,  and
Switzerland.  We  are,  however,  quite  ready  to  abandon  this
position,  and  to  assume  a  greater  antiquity  of  man,  as  soon  as
human  remains  are  found  under  the  glacial  clay  or  under
undisturbed  tertiary  strata.

This  difference  of  opinion  renders  man  chronologically  nei-
ther older  nor  younger.  Whether,  or  not,  an  intermediate  glacial
period  occurred,  an  immense  period  of  time  was  requisite  to
heap  up  drift  thirty  feet  high  "above  the  worked  flints,  specially
as  this  accumulation  proceeds  but  very  slowly.

We  must  confess  that  all  the  efforts  hitherto  made  to  deter-
mine the  period  in  time  of  man's  first  appearance  have  hitherto
been  unsuccessful.     We  must,  however,  mention  them,  though


LECTURE    XI.  329

they  refer  to  human  remains  of  a  considerably  more  recent
date  than  the  stone  hatchets  and  the  jaw  of  Amiens,  or  the
skulls  of  the  Belgian  caves.

One  of  these  calculations  is  founded  on  the  Delta  of  the
Mississippi.  The  alluvial  deposits  must  have  been  continued
for  an  indefinite  period ;  for  near  New- Orleans,  at  a  depth  of
six  hundred  feet,  the  bottom  of  the  deposits  had  not  been
reached.  The  plain  on  which  New  Orleans  stands  rises  only
nine  feet  above  the  level  of  the  sea,  and  the  excavations  made
pass  far  below  the  sea  level.  In  these  excavations  are  seen
superimposed  beds  of  cypress  forests  (Taxodium  disticltumj.
On  laying  the  foundations  for  the  gas-works,  the  Irish  navvies
had  to  give  up  the  task,  as  they  had  to  dig  out  wood  instead
of  soil.  They  were  replaced  by  woodcutters  from  Kentucky,
who  cut  their  way  down  through  four  superimposed  layers.
The  lowest  was  so  old,  that  the  wood  cut  like  cheese.  The
section  of  the  banks  also  showed  sunken  forests,  whilst  stately
live  oaks  grew  upon  the  banks,  indicating  that  the  surface  had
not  changed  for  years.

In  that  part  of  Louisiana  where  the  water-height  presents
greater  differences  than  in  New-Orleans,  Dickeson  and  Brown
have  traced  ten  distinct  cypress  forests  at  different  levels  below
the  present  surface.  These  groups  of  trees,  the  live-oaks' on
the  banks,  and  the  successive  cypress  forests,  are  superimposed
upon  each  other,  as  may  be  seen  in  many  places  in  the  vicinity
of  New  Orleans.

Dr.  Bennet  Dowler  has  made  an  interesting  computation  as
regards  the  emergence  of  New-Orleans,  in  which  these  cypress
forests  play  an  important  part.  He  divides  the  history  of  this
event  into  three  epochs  :

"  1.  The  era  of  colossal  grasses  and  waving  prairies,  as  seen
in  the  lagoons,  lakes,  and  the  sea  coast.

"  2.  The  era  of  the  cypress  basins.

"  3.  The  era  of  the  present  live-oak  bank."

Many  districts  on  the  Mississippi  show  that  the  development
from  the  water  proceeds  in  the  order  named.  First  appear  the
grasses,  then  the  cypress,  and  finally  the  live-oak.  Assuming
an  elevation  of  five  inches  in  a  century  (the  rate  of  the  Nile


330  LECTURE    XI.

deposits),  we  obtain  1,500  years  for  the  era  of  aquatic  plants
until  the  cypress  era.  Supposing  ten  feet  to  represent  the
size  of  one  generation  of  trees,  we  obtain  a  period  of  5,700
years  as  the  age  of  the  oldest  trees  now  growing  in  the  basin,
for  they  measured  from  ninety-five  to  one  hundred  and  twenty
rings  of  annual  growth  to  an  inch  ;  and  according  to  the  lowest
ratio,  a  tree  of  ten  feet  in  diameter  will  yield  5,700  rings  of
annual  growth.  Though  many  generations  of  such  trees  may
have  grown  up  and  perished  in  the  delta  of  the  Mississippi,
Dr.  Dowler,  to  avoid  all  cavilling,  has  only  assumed  two  suc-
cessive growths,  including  that  now  standing  :  this  gives  for
two  cypress  generations  the  age  of  11,400  years.

The  maximum  age  of  the  oldest  trees  on  the  live-oak  bank
is  estimated  at  1,500  years ;  one  generation  only  is  counted.
Thus  we  obtain  the  folio  wing-  data  : —

Era  of  aquatic  plants        ....       1,500  years.
Era  of  cypress  basin         ....    11,400    „
Era  of  live-oak  platform  ....       1,500    „


Total  period    -         -     14,400

Each  sunken  forest  must  have  had  a  period  of  rest  and
gradual  depression,  estimated  as  equal  to  the  era  of  live-oaks,
which  of  course  occurred  only  once  in  the  series.  We  then
certainly  keep  within  the  limits  of  probability  in  assuming  each
period  of  elevation  to  have  been  equivalent  to  the  one  above
arrived  at,  and  as  there  were  at  least  ten  such  changes  we  reach
the  following  result : —

Last  emergence  as  above  -  14,400  years.

Ten    elevations    and    depressions,   each
equal  to  the  last  emergence  ...  144,000    „


Total  age  of  the  Delta        -  158,400

In  the  excavation  of  the  gas  works,  burnt  wood  was  found
at  the  depth  of  sixteen  feet,  and  at  the  same  depth  the  work-
men found  the  skeleton  of  a  man.  The  skull  lay  beneath  the
roots  of  a  cypress  tree  belonging  to  the  fourth  forest  below  the
surface.  It  was  in  good  preservation,  but  the  other  bones
crumbled  into  pieces  on  being  touched.  The  cranium  no  doubt
belonged  to  the  American  type.


LECTURE    XI.  331

Assuming,  as  above,  the  present  era  at  14,400  years,  and
adding  three  subterraneous  groups,  each  equal  to  the  living,
(leaving  out  the  fourth,  in  which  the  skeleton  was  found),  that
is  to  say  43,200,  we  obtain  a  total  for  the  age  of  the  skeleton
of  57,500  years."

The  data  requisite  for  this  computation  are  so  simple  that
the  result  can  scarcely  be  cavilled  at.

Between  1851  and  1854,  two  sets  of  shafts  and  borings  were
sunk  in  Egypt,  the  one  in  the  latitude  of  Heliopolis,  where  the
valley  is  sixteen  miles  broad,  the  other  near  Memphis,  where
the  valley  is  but  five  miles  broad.  All  the  remains,  such  as
land-shells  and  bones,  belonged  to  living  species,  bones  of  the
ox,  hog,  dog,  camel,  and  ass,  were  very  common.

There  were  also  found  pieces  of  burnt  brick  and  pottery,  one
piece  at  a  depth  of  sixty  feet.  If  now  it  be  correct  that  the
increase  of  Nile-mud  is  at  the  rate  of  five  inches  in  a  century
(in  the  Delta  the  rate  of  deposit  is  less,  namely,  2\  inches),
then  the  piece  of  burnt  brick,  found  at  a  depth  of  sixty  feet  in
the  Nile-mud,  would  be  12,000  years  old,  which  can  scarcely
surprise  us,  as  the  Egyptian  King  Menes  lived  about  5,000  years
before  Christ,  and  before  him  Egypt  had  attained  a  high  degree
of  civilisation,  and  possessed  at  least  two  important  cities,
Thebes  and  This.  If  7-8,000  years  ago,  that  is  to  say,  at  the
time  of  the  biblical  Adam,  flourishing  cities  were  standing,  we
need  not  wonder  that  some  thousands  of  years  before  the
existence  of  these  cities,  the  art  of  brickmaking  was  known.

The  discoveries  in  the  peat-bogs,  specially  of  Denmark,
where,  as  in  the  Delta  of  the  Mississippi,  superimposed  gene-
rations of  forests  are  met  with,  consisting  of  trees,  at  present
not  existing  in  Denmark,  also  testify  to  a  high  antiquity,  though
I  am  not  aware  that  any  attempts  have  been  made  to  compute
the  duration  of  the  turf-moors  from  the  annual  rings  of  the
trees.

The  great  antiquity  of  man  reaching  back  to  the  period  of  the
cave-bear,  being  thus  established,  it  is  as  easy  to  prove  that  man,
the  contemporary  of  the  cave-bear,  cannot  have  immigrated  from
afar.  The  structure  of  his  cranium  presents  no  resemblance  to
that  of  any  European  race,  still  less  to  any  Asiatic ;  for  in  Asia,


332  LECTURE    XI.

and  specially  in  Central  Asia,, — the  supposed  cradle  of  huma-
nity,— the  short  form  of  head  predominates,  and  if  longheads
are  found  they  bear  no  resemblance  to  the  longheads  of  the
caves.  At  most,  it  might  be  assumed  that  Paradise  was  situ-
ated somewhere  in  Australia,  whence  these  ancestors,  of  a
simious  type,  emigrated.  It  is  not  our  business  to  pursue
speculations  of  this  kind.

There  is,  however,  one  matter  to  which,  before  I  conclude
this  lecture,  I  would  draw  your  attention.  There  exists  not  a
single  fact  which  in  any  way  indicates  a  general  flood,  a  deluge,
which  reached  the  highest  pinnacles,  destroying  all  living  beings
excepting  such  of  our  ancestors  as  found  refuge  in  the  Ark
of  Noah.  We  find,  indeed,  everywhere  phenomena  indicative
of  a  greater  height  of  the  waters,  but  they  nowhere  rose  very
high  above  the  valleys,  still  less  did  they  cover  the  summits  of
the  highest  mountains.  Nowhere  are  there  traces  of  sudden
flood-catastrophes,  everywhere  we  merely  observe  the  slow
workings  of  such  forces  as  still  act.  We  have  thus  everywhere
an  opportunity  of  making  observations  which  induce  us  to  con-
sider the  tradition  of  a  general  deluge  as  a  myth.  Many  times
has  it  been  pointed  out  that  the  loose  cones  of  volcanoes,  built
up  of  scoriae  and  ashes,  specially  of  the  extinct  volcanoes  of
Auvergne  and  the  Rhine,  could  never  have  resisted  the  force  of
a  general  flood ;  nevertheless,  within  the  sight  of  these  cones,
which  must  have  existed  at  a  more  remote  period,  the  old  tale
is  constantly  repeated.  The  sun  is  now  left  in  peace ;  he  no
longer  walks  the  heavens  but  remains  fixed.  Shall  we  have  to
protest,  as  in  the  former  case,  for  two  centuries,  before  they
give  up  the  opening  of  the  flood-gates  of  heaven  and  the  foun-
tains of  the  deep,  to  drown  "sinful  beast  and  man"?


333


LECTURE     XII.

Stone  Period  in  the  North. — Refuse-heaps. — Peat-bogs. — Graves  in  Den-
mark and  Mecklenburg. — Grotto  of  Chauvaux. — Pile-works  on  the  Swiss
lakes  and  moors. — Civilisation  of  the  Stone  Period. — Agriculture  of  the
Pile-builders. — Skull  of  Meilen.— Pile-works  in  Italy. — Chronological
Calculations  of  Morlot,  Gillieron,  and  Troyon. — Pious  Fancies  of  the
latter.

Gentlemen, — In  pursuing  our  investigations  concerning-  the
relics  of  man,  we  first  turn  to  the  North,  which  furnishes  us  with
most  of  the  facts  belonging  to  the  pre-historic  period  of  huma-
nity. It  is  but  the  traditions  of  a  comparatively  modern  period
which  direct  us  to  the  East,  and  which  induce  us  to  search  in
High  Asia  or  India  for  the  cradle,  not  of  humanity,  but  of  such
tribes,  or  rather  languages  of  the  tribes,  which  now  inhabit
Europe.  As  regards  the  events  of  a  period  reaching  further
back,  we  find  no  connection  with  Asia,  but  traces  of  an  inter-
course between  the  north  and  north-west  with  central  Europe
and  Switzerland.  The  discovery  of  northern  antiquities  has
thrown  much  light  on  the  earliest  period  of  mankind  accessible
to  us,  and  has  been  the  more  productive,  because  the  in-
vestigations of  the  facts  have  not  been  carried  on  exclusively
by  antiquaries,  but  by  naturalists  also,  who  with  singular  in-
dustry and  ingenuity  knew  how  to  avail  themselves  of  appa-
rently insignificant  facts,  for  the  explanation  of  the  most
difficult  problems.  The  name  of  Steenstrup,  who  was  also
well  versed  in  other  branches  of  natural  history,  shines  here  in
full  splendour.  I  shall  give  you  the  results  obtained  by  him,
Forchhammer,  and  Worsaae,  as  contained  in  the  condensed
and  excellent  account  of  Morlot,  since  the  original  is  in  Danish,
and  it  cannot  be  expected  of  us  naturalists  that  we  should  be
acquainted  with  the  languages  of  all  minor  nations.

On  several  spots  on  the  coast  of  northern  Denmark,  specially


334  LECTURE    XII.


in  the  vicinity  of  the  Fjords,  where  the  surf  is  moderate  and
immediately  on  the  sea  shore,  a  few  feet  above  the  present
level,  may  be  seen  shells-mounds,  three,  five,  and  even  ten
feet  high,  extending  in  length  to  above  one  thousand  feet,  with
a  breadth  of  one  hundred  and  fifty  to  two  hundred  feet.  Here
and  there  these  heaps  lie  around  a  free  space,  which  seems  to
have  been  a  place  of  habitation ;  it  is  only  by  way  of  exception
that  these  heaps  are  found  on  the  land  at  a  distance  from  the
coast,  or  much  above  the  level  of  the  sea.  These  shell-banks
are  not  formed  by  nature,  which  would  indicate  a  greater
height  of  the  water.  But  few  species  are  found,  all  in  the
adult  state,  species  which  do  not  inhabit  the  same  depth.
These  shells  are  intermixed  with  broken  bones  of  animals,  flint
implements,  coarse  pottery,  coals,  and  cinders.  There  is  no
doubt  that  these  heaps  are  kitchen-refuse ;  that  a  people  dwelt
there  who  lived  on  molluscs  and  animal  food,  and  cast  away
the  shells  and  bones.  The  northern  scholars  thus  termed
these  mounds  KjoJcJcenmoddinger  (kitchen-refuse),  by  which
name  they  are  now  generally  known.  In  some  spots  there  is
seen  upon  these  accumulations  a  thin  layer  of  gravel  and
pebbles,  deposited  by  the  sea,  but  mostly  they  are  covered
with  vegetable  earth  and  green  sward.

The  exploration  of  these  refuse-heaps  led  to  the  following
results  : — Of  vegetable  matter,  but  few  fragments  of  burnt
wood  are  found.  Here  and  there  are  seen  peculiar-looking
heaps  of  ashes,  which  from  the  large  quantity  of  manganese
they  contain,  seem  to  be  derived  form  the  Zostcra  marina,  a
sea  plant  which,  some  centuries  ago,  was  still  burnt  in  that
country  for  the  extraction  of  the  salt.  These  mounds  testify
thus  to  a  similar  industry  in  a  remote  period.  Among  the
shells  the  most  common  is  the  oyster  (Ostrea  edulis),  the
cockle,  mussel,  and  periwinkle  (Gardium  cdide,  Mytilus  edulis,
Litorina  litorea)  all  which  are  eaten  at  the  present  day,  and  still
inhabit  the  same  sea,  but  are  now  not  so  large,  and  have  in
some  parts,  where  these  mounds  occur,  entirely  disappeared.

That  the  decrease  and  disappearance  of  these  edible  molluscs
is  to  be  attributed  to  the  fisheries  cannot  well  be  assumed ;  but
even  the  diminution  of  the  salt  in  the  Baltic,  to  which  the  above


LECTURE    XII.  335

effect  is  attributed,  does  not  seem  to  us  a  satisfactory  explana-
tion. The  Eomans  succeeded  in  transplanting  oysters  into  the
freshwater  lakes  near  Naples,  where  they  still  live  and  propa-
gate, and  even  mussels  and  periwinkles  thrive  well  in  brackish
water  as  well  as  in  lakes  periodically  filled  with  fresh  water.
The  cause  of  the  phenomenon  must  therefore  be  sought  else-
where :  in  that  slow  transformation  and  alteration  of  the  sea-
bottom,  which  has  been  found  in  oyster  beds,  and  which  is
chiefly  produced  by  tubicolce,  which  overgrow  the  oyster  beds
and  destroy  them.

Besides  the  shells  mentioned  above,  there  are  found  others
of  species  still  living  in  the  Danish  waters,  though  in  smaller
quantities,  such  as  Buccinum  reticulatum  and  undatum  ;  Venus
pullastra,  which  do  not  seem  to  have  been  much  relished  by
these  old  mussel-eaters.

But  few  remains  of  the  crab  are  found,  but  many  of  the
herring,  cod,  lemon  sole  fPleuronectes  limandaj,  the  eel,  the
latter  being  chiefly  found  where  it  abounds  at  present.  Of  birds,
besides  several  species  of  wild  ducks  and  geese,  are  found  the
remains  of  the  wild  swan,  woodcock,  and  the  great  auk  (Alca
iu/pennisj,  which  died  out  (Iceland  its  last  refuge)  in  1842.
The  capercailzie  (Tctrao  urogallusj  is  no  longer  seen  in  Den-
mark, as  the  firs,  on  the  sprouts  of  which  it  fed  in  the  Spring',
have  now  mostly  disappeared,  whilst  formerly  they  were  very
abundant,  as  shown  by  the  exploration  of  the  peat  bogs.  The
swan  comes  to  Denmark  in  the  Winter  only,  proceeding  in
Summer  further  north  to  Iceland ;  but  as  even  the  auk,  which
took  refuge  there,  was  formerly  in  all  the  Northern  Seas,  in
Denmark,  the  Faroe  Islands,  and  the  Hebrides,  very  abundant,
there  is  nothing  against  the  assumption  that  the  swan  formerly
passed  his  summers  in  Denmark.  Small  land  birds  were  not
found,  the  common  fowl  was  entirely  absent.

Of  quadrupeds,  the  bones  found  belonged  to  the  stag,  the
roe,  the  wild  hog,  the  beaver,  the  seal,  and  the  now  extinct
(  urochs  '  (Bos  jorimigeniusj ,  which  seems,  among  our  present
races,  to  have  left  as  his  progeny  the  heavy  Fricsland  cow.  Of
the  LithuanianBison,  or  Auerochs  (Bosurus,  or  BisonEuropant x)
which  is  a  distinct  species,  and  formerly  spread  over  all  Europe,


336  LECTURE    XII.

there  have  been  traces  found  in  the  peat  bogs,  but  not  in  the
kitchen-heaps.  It  is  remarkable,  that  the  reindeer,  the  elk,  and
the  hare,  which  no  doubt  then  existed  in  Denmark,  are  also
absent ;  on  the  other  hand,  bones  of  the  wolf,  the  fox,  the  lynx,
martin,  the  otter,  the  wild  cat,  the  hedgehog,  and  the  water-rat
are  met  with.  The  only  domestic  animal  was  the  dog,  a  race
resembling  the  setter,  the  existence  of  which  is  also  proved  by
the  circumstance  that  only  the  long  bones  of  birds  are  found,
which  these  dogs  usually  reject.

All  tubular  bones  are  broken,  or  split  open  lengthwise  to  get
at  the  marrow,  and  if  the  cavity,  as  in  ruminants,  is  divided  by
a  septum,  the  blows  are  given  on  both  sides.     The  marrowless
bones  are  unbroken,  but   gnawed,   specially  where  they  are
covered  with  cartilage.     The  teeth  impressions  are  partly  those
of  doers  as  well  as  of  man.     All  animals  seem  to  have  served
for  food ;   for  the  bones  of  carnivora,  and  even  of  the  dog,  are
split  like  those  of  ruminants.     The  meat  was  either  boiled  or
roasted ;  for  in  the  kitchen-heaps  are  found  stones  of  the  size
of  a   closed  fist,  arranged  so  as  to  form  a  hearth  about  two
feet  in  diameter,  around  which  coals  and  ashes  are  seen.     There
are  also  pieces  of  coarse  pottery,  made  by  the  hand ;    the  clay
is  mixed  with  angular  pebble  fragments.     There  are  also  found
in  these  kitchenmiddens  rude  flint  tools,  hatchets,  wedges,  and
knives,  the  incisions  of  which   can  be  easily  traced  upon  the
bones.     It  was  at  first  believed  that  the  people  of  these  kitchen-
middens were  ignorant  of  the  mode  of  sharpening  and  polishing
their  implements,  but  as  some'  well  worked  tools  were  found,
and  the  incisions  upon  the  bones  are  so  deep  that  they  could
only  have  been  made  by  sharp  instruments,  it  is  probable  that
the  people  of  that  period  only  used  the  rude  flints  for  opening
shells  or  breaking  bones,  considering  their  finer  instruments
too  valuable  to  be  used  for  such  a  purpose.

The  turf  moors  of  Denmark  supplement  the  evidence  derived
from  the  kitchenmiddens.  Besides  the  meadow  moors,  in  and
near  the  water  basins  of  the  valleys,  and  the  high  moors
scattered  upon  the  plain  formed  of  mosses,  there  are  in
Denmark  peculiar  little  forest  moors  (Slwvmose),  which  fill  up
deep  hollows  in  the  subjacent  boulder  formation.     On  the  steep


LECTUEE    XII.  337

walls  of  these  funnel-shaped  pits,  frequently  above  thirty  feet
in  depth,  grew,  at  the  time  of  their  formation,  trees  which  sank
so  gradually  that  the  tops  are  turned  towards  the  centre  of  the
bog.  In  the  centre  of  the  bog  there  is  generally  at  the  bottom
a  clay  bed,  then  a  stratum  of  turf,  frequently  mixed  with
lime  and  microscopic  plants,  above  which  lies  the  proper
moss-peat.  Firs  grew  sometimes  upon  these  moors,  but  did  not
seem  to  thrive,  and  were,  at  a  later  period,  replaced  by  the
common  moor-shrubs  Vaccinnium  oxycoccos  and  uh'ginosum,  the
Erica  tetralix  and  vulgaris,  the  birch,  elder,  and  hazel.  Around
the  borders  of  the  bogs,  where  large  trees  grew,  the  forest
vegetation  presents  a  remarkable  change.  There  we  find  firs
fl'inus  sylvestrisj  of  great  height,  often  three  feet  in  diameter,
which  are  only  distinguished  from  our  common  firs  by  a  thicker
bark.  The  rings  indicate  an  age  of  several  centuries.  This  fir
no  longer  grows  in  Denmark,  nor  has  it  existed  there  within
historical  times,  nor  is  there  any  tradition  that  it  was  ever  known
to  the  inhabitants  of  Denmark.  These  firs  frequently  stood  so
thick  that  by  falling  into  the  bogs  they  formed  a  kind  of  floor.

The  firs  disappeared  and  were  supplanted  by  oaks  fQuercus
robur  sessiliflora) ;  stately  trees,  often  four  feet  in  diameter;  these
have  also  disappeared,  or  nearly  so.  In  the  upper  layer  of  the
peat  is  found  the  summer  oak  fQuercus  jpedunculataj ,  with  the
birch,  the  hazel,  and  the  alder.  At  present  the  Danish  forests
are  formed  by  the  common  beech,  which  is  not  found  in  the
surface  of  the  forest  bogs.  The  presence  of  the  woodcock  in  the
kitchenmiddens  proves  that  the  people  who  formed  them  lived
during  the  fir-period,  and  that  since  then  the  oak  vegetation
also  passed  away,  the  remains  of  which  are  found  in  the  forest
bogs,  and  which  has  been  superseded  by  the  beech.  Fir-trunks
were  found  worked  by  the  hand  of  man,  and  between  these  trunks
flint  implements,  which  establish  the  parallel  with  the  kitchen-
middens, whilst  in  the  turf-moors,  which  correspond  with  the
oak  period,  fine  bronze  tools  were  found.

Human  bones  were  neither  found  in  the  kitchenmiddens  nor
in  the  peat-bogs  of  the  fir-period ;  but  graves  were  discovered
composed  of  large  stone  blocks,  in  which  only  stone-  and  bone-
implements  were  found.     The  skulls  found  in  these  graves  are

z


338


LECTURE   XII.


remarkably  small  and  very  round,  the  occiput  short,  the  orbits
very  small,  the  supraciliary  ridges  much  projecting,  the  nasal
bones  very  prominent.

Fig.  101.     Borreby  Skull  of  the  Stone  Period  (Denmark),  after  Busk.


Fig.  102.     Borreby  Skull,  top  view.


LECTURE    XII.


339


Between  the  supraciliary  arches  and  the  nasal  bones  there  is
a  depression  large  enough  to  receive  the  index  finger  of  an  adult.
The  forehead  is  usually  flat  and  retreating,  though  not  so  much
as  in  the  Neander  skull.  The  mean  proportion  of  length  to  width
in  twenty  skulls  is,  according  to  Busk's  table,  which  he  kindly
sent  me,  as  100  :  78.  The  vestiges  of  the  facial  muscles  are
strongly  marked,  the  alveolar  margins  prominent,  the  teeth  used
up  obliquely.  The  skulls  resemble  the  Lapp  skulls  by  their  rotun-
dity and  smallness,  but  are  distinguished  by  the  depth  of  the
nasal  suture  and  the  oblique  position  of  the  anterior  dental
margins.  They  resemble,  at  all  events,  no  other  European  race
than  that  high  Northern  people,  or  perhaps  the  Fins,  whose
customs  are  indicated  by  the  builders  of  the  kitchenmiddens.

A  comparison  of  these  skulls  of  the  stone  period  with  the  Lapp
skull  on  the  one  nand,  and  the  Romanic  skull  on  the  other,
yields  the  subjoined  results  :

Fig.  103.     Skull  of  a  Lapp,  top  view,  after  Busk.


On  comparing  the  top  of  this  Lapp  skull  with  that  of  a  stone-
period  skull  of  Borreby  (fig.  101),  and  the  Romanic  skull  (fig.
127)  a  series  is  presented  in  which  the  Lapp  occupies  the  middle.
In  all  these  three  skulls  the  zygomatic  arches  are,  in  this  posi-
tion, scarcely  visible ;  the  forehead  behind  the  eyes  is  thus  pro-

z  2


340  LECTURE    XII.

portionately  wideband  the  temporal  fossae  are  but  little  depressed
in  the  upper  portion  towards  the  vertex.  The  Romanic  skull
is  the  widest ;  were  it  not  for  the  slight  depression  towards  the
zygomatic  arches  and  the  narrowness  of  the  forehead,  the  con-
tour of  the  head  would  be  nearly  circular.  The  Lapp  occupies
the  intermediate  place  ;  the  contour  of  his  head  corresponds  to
that  of  a  short  thick  egg,  with  a  flattened  and  narrowed
anterior  end.  The  malar  bones  at  their  junction  with  the
zygoma  project  more,  and  on  this  account  render  the  aspect  of
the  frontal  region  wider.  Whilst  in  the  Romanic  skull  the
posterior  contour  forms  a  flat  arch  somewhat  depressed  in  the
centre,  it  is  in  the  Lapp  more  curved  and  somewhat  projecting
in  the  central  line.  The  greatest  width  of  the  Romanic  skull
is  in  a  backward  direction  almost  opposite  the  last  quarter  of
the  central  longitudinal  line  of  the  skull,  wnilst  in  the  Lapp  it
is  in  the  last  third  of  that  line.

The  stone  skull  (fig.  102)  is  still  narrower  than  the  Lapp
skull,  and  by  the  projection  of  the  supraciliary  arches  which  is
wanting  both  in  the  Romanic  and  the  Lapp  skull,  the  front  part
of  the  oval  which  forms  its  contour  is  nearly  as  wide  as  the  pos-
terior section.  The  zygomatic  arches  project  somewhat  more  ;
the  temporal  lines  are  more  deepened;  the  frontal  protuberance
forms  a  continuous  col  before  the  contour  of  the  receding  nar-
row forehead.  All  this  indicates  a  greater  muscular  develop-
ment, which,  however,  but  little  influences  the  cranial  structure,
which  is  decidedly  longer  and  narrower;  the  greatest  width  is
almost  in  the  middle,  but  not  so  pronounced  as  in  the  Lapp  and
the  Romanic  skull.

The  proportions  of  the  head  measurement  confirm  this  view:
the  mean  in  the  stone  skulls  measured  by  Busk  is  =  78,  2 ;  in
the  Lapps  =  87,  8 ;  in  the  Romanic  =  92,  1.

I  must,  however,  observe  that  the  differences  between  the
stoue  skulls  of  various  localities  and  the  different  sexes  are  by
no  means  insignificant.  The  skulls  of  Borreby  are  the  widest
the  mean  of  the  head-measure  being  =  81,  3 ;  the  skulls  from
other  localities  are  narrower,  the  mean  being  =  75,  1 ;  whilst
the  supposed  female  skulls  are  =  79,  8.

On  viewing  these  heads  in  profile,  there  is  also  found  no  slight


LECTURE    XII.


341


difference.  The  Lapp  head  approaches  more  decidedly  the
stone  skull  of  Borreby  (see  fig.  101)  than  the  Eomanic  skull
(see  fig.  126).

Fig.  104.     Profile  of  a  Lapp  Skull,  after  Busk.


It  is  true  that  in  the  Lapp  skull  the  frontal  protuberance  is
scarcely  indicated;  the  forehead  is  much  higher  and  more
arched,  the  vertex  more  situated  in  front,  the  occiput  more  pro-
jecting, and  there  is  something  like  a  break  in  the  lambdoid
suture ;  the  nasal  root  is  less  drawn  in,  and  the  front  teeth  are
perpendicular,  whilst  in  the  Borreby  skull,  the  alveolar  mar-
gins of  the  upper  jaw  shew  a  decided  tendency  to  prognathism,
which,  if  the  teeth  were  not  wanting,  would  be  plainly  seen ;
but  it  must  not  be  forgotten  that  the  skull  of  Borreby  which  I
give  is  that  which  presents  these  characters  in  the  greatest
degree,  and  that  in  the  rich  collection  of  drawings  from  the
stone  period,  kindly  sent  me  by  Professor  Busk,  I  find  some
which  almost  exactly  correspond  to  the  Lapp  skull.  Thus,
apart  from  size,  which  is  somewhat  greater  in  the  stone  skull,
a  female  skull  of  Borreby,  marked  No.  1,  all  but  covers  in
profile  the  Lapp  skull.


342


LECTURE    XII.


The  Eomanic  skull  (fig.  126)  maintains  also  here  a  sepa-
rate position.  The  high  arching  of  the  forehead,  the  uniform
curvature  of  the  vertex,  the  steep  descent  of  the  occiput,
the  compactness  of  the  base,  the  acclivous  direction  of  the
upper  jaw  and  the  mastoid  processes,  distinguish  it  at  the
first  glance ;  and,  viewed  in  profile,  it  appears  almost  as  the
polar  opposite  of  the  stone  skull.  The  position  also  of  the
foramen  magnum,  which  is  not  seen  in  our  drawiugs,  is  more
backward  in  the  Eomanic  skull  than  in  the  stone-  and  Lapp-
skulls.

The  Lapps  present  thus  in  their  cranial  structure  a  greater
affinity  with  the  stone-period  people  than  with  the  Romanic-
type  ;  and  the  latter  must  have  undergone  a  much  greater
alteration  than  the  former,  if  both  types  are  to  be  derived
from  the  primitive  people  of  the  northern  stone-period.

There  can  be  no  doubt  that  during  the  stone-period,  as  it  is
called  by  archaeologists,  when  metals  were  unknown,  the  north
had  attained  to  a  certain  degree  of  civilisation.  This  is  partly
proved  by  the  finished  tools  made  of  stone,  bones,  and  wood,
found  in  the  peat  bogs,  and  by  the  old  graves,  all  of  which
bear  a  common  character,  being  a  chamber  formed  of  large
stone  blocks,  in  which  the  corpse  was  deposited  or  placed  in  a
crouching  position.  Upon  this  chamber  large  masses  of  stone
were  heaped,  and  thus  arose  those  large  mounds  which  attract
the  attention  of  the  traveller  in  the  northern  plains,  mounds
frequently  overgrown  with  high  trees — oaks  or  beeches.  In
many  places,  besides  Switzerland,  the  custom  prevails  for
wayfarers  to  place  upon  the  grave  of  one  accidentally  killed  a
stone  or  a  handful  of  earth.  Possibly,  a  similar  custom  may
have  obtained  among  the  ancient  stone-peoples,  and  may  have
contributed  to  these  accumulations  above  the  graves.

Whether  bronze  was  introduced  by  a  distinct  race,  or  whether
the  art  of  making  it  was  discovered  by  the  stone-people,  must
for  the  present  remain  undecided.  No  skulls  of  the  bronze
age  have  as  yet  been  discovered,  probably  from  the  custom
then  prevalent  of  burning  the  bodies  and  preserving  the  ashes
along  with  the  arms  and  other  tools  of  the  deceased.  It  was
at  the  iron  period   that  the  burial  of  bodies  recommenced,


LECTURE    XII.  3  l;I

whence  are  derived  those  long  heavy  skulls,  which  differ
entirely  from  those  of  the  stone-age.

The  Lapp  people  of  the  stone-period,  if  we  may  so  call
it,  inhabited  not  merely  Denmark  and  Scandinavia,  but  no
doubt  also  the  north  of  Germany.  Discoveries  made  in  Meck-
lenburgh  furnish  the  clearest  evidence  for  such  an  assumption.
I  shall  give  you  a  description  of  them  nearly  in  the  words  of
Dr.  Schaaffhausen,  who  also  gives  a  minute  description  of  the
skulls  found.

"  There  was  found  near  Plan  in  Mecklenburg,  in  the  gravel,
six  feet  under  the  surface  of  the  soil,  a  human  skeleton,  in  a
crouching,  almost  kneeling-,  posture,  with  implements  made  of
bone,  a  hatchet  made  of  staghorn,  two  wild  boar  tusks  which
had  been  cut  off,  and  three  incisors  of  a  stag,  perforated  at
the  root.  This  grave  was  considered  to  belong  to  a  very  re-
mote period,  as  it  was  neither  protected  by  stones,  nor  were
there  any  implements  of  stone,  iron,  or  pottery  present.  Dr.
Lisch,  struck  by  the  abnormal  projection  of  the  supraciliary
region,  observed,  that  the  cranial  formation  indicated  a  very
remote  age,  in  which  man  occupied  a  very  low  position  in  the
stage  of  development,  and  that  the  grave  probably  belonged
to  an  autochthonous  people.  The  skull  and  the  skeleton
having  been  broken  to  pieces  by  the  workmen,  I  had  some
difficulty  in  cementing  the  twenty-two  fragments  sent  to  me.
Notwithstanding  the  great  similarity  between  the  form  of  the
forehead  of  this  skull  and  that  of  the  Neander-skull,  the  pro-
minence of  the  supraciliary  arches  is  greater  in  the  latter,  and
is  confluent  with  the  superior  orbital  margin,  which  is  not  the
case  in  the  former.  The  skulls,  however,  are  essentially  dis-
tinguished by  their  general  form,  which,  in  the  latter,  is  long-
elliptical,  and  in  the  former,  rounded.  In  the  Plau-skull,  a
portion  of  the  upper  jaw,  with  the  teeth,  and  the  whole  lower
jaw,  have  been  preserved;  it  is  orthognathous.  The  bones
are  thick  but  very  light,  and  adhere  strongly  to  the  tongue.
The  muscular  attachments  on  the  occiput,  above  the  mastoid
process,  are  strongly  developed;  the  sutures  of  the  cranium
are  wholly  unossified ;  the  last  upper  molar  on  the  right  side
has  not  yet  broken  through ;   the  teeth  are  worn  away ;  in


3-44  LECTURE    XII.

some  of  tlie  molars,  tlie  entire  crowu  lias  almost  disappeared ;
the  lower  canine  teeth  are  much  larger  than  the  incisors,  and
rise  above  the  row  of  teeth ;  the  foramen  incisivum  in  the
upper  jaw  is  very  large,  exceeding  in  width  four  millimeters.
The  ascending  ramus  of  the  lower  jaw  rises  at  a  right  angle,
and  is  broad  and  short.  The  muscular  attachments  are  also
well  marked  on  the  lower  jaw.  On  the  right  parietal  bone  is
an  elongated  depression  as  from  a  blow.  The  proportional
dimensions  are  as  follows  : —

Millimeters.
Cranial  circumference  over  the  supraciliary  ridges  and  the  semicircular

lines  of  the  occiput                  .....  445
From  the  root  of  the  nose,  over  the  vertex,  to  the  superior  semicircular

line            -                 -                 -                 -                 -                 -                 -  320

From  the  root  of  the  nose,  over  the  vertex,  to  the  occipital  foramen      -  380

Length  of  skull  from  the  glabella  to  the  occiput       -                 -                 -  1G8

Breadth  of  the  frontal  bone  -  107
Height,  from  a  line  connecting  the  temporal  borders  of  the  parietals,

to  the  middle  of  the  sagittal  suture     -                 -                 -  80

From  occipital  foramen  to  the  same  point                   ...  122

Width  of  the  occiput  from  one  parietal  protuberance  to  the  other          -  138

Width  of  base  from  one  mastoid  process  to  the  other                -                 -  155

Thickness  of  the  frontal  and  parietal  bones  in  the  middle       -                 -  9

The  cranial  capacity,  measured  by  millet-seed,  amounts  to  36  ounces,  3£
drachms,  Prussian  apothecaries'  weight."

A  similar  discovery  was  made  near  Schwaan,  in  Mecklen-
burg, but  the  cranium  is  far  from  being  so  well  preserved  as
that  of  Plau.  I  might  here  mention  some  discoveries  in  the
Baltic  provinces  of  Russia,  described  by  Dr.  Kutorga,  had  not
his  authenticity  been  found  to  be  rather  suspicious.  The  skulls
in  question  were  found  in  the  Government  of  Minsk,  in  the
sand  of  an  old  river-bed.

I  must,  however,  dwell  at  greater  length  on  a  discovery
made  by  Dr.  Spring,  a  distinguished  professor  of  the  Univer-
sity of  Liege,  more  than  ten  years  ago,  which  has  not  at-
tracted the  attention  it  deserves,  and  to  which  I  have  already
alluded  in  my  work  Kohlerglaube  und  Wissenschaft.  On  the
banks  of  the  Meuse,  near  Chauvaux,  about  one  hundred  feet
above  the  present  level  of  the  river,  there  was  a  small  grotto,
or  fissure,  with  two  ossiferous  beds,  separated  from  each  other
by  stalagmite.     There  was  first  a  stratum  of  decomposed  and


LECTURE    XII.  345

almost  dissolved  small  bones,  about  a  decimeter  thick.  This
was  covered  with  a  stratum  of  stalagmite  one  to  two  centi-
meters in  thickness ;  then  came  a  mass  of  broken  bones,  near
a  conglomerate  of  large  pebbles,  cemented  by  stalagmite.  The
bones  showed  no  trace  of  having  been  rolled,  but  were  so
much  decomposed  that  they  crumbled  into  pieces.  Above
these  broken  bones,  the  fractured  surfaces  of  which  were  clean,
there  was  another  stalagmite  crust,  about  forty-five  centi-
meters thick,  covered  by  a  stratum  of  loam  of  variable  thick-
ness. Many  of  the  bones,  though  very  friable,  had  retained
nearly  all  their  organic  substance ;  but  they  were  strongly  im-
pregnated with  carbonate  of  lime.

Amongst  the  bones  of  the  upper  stratum  there  were  a  large
number  of  human  intermingled  with  animal  bones.  The
majority  of  human  bones  was  found  at  the  entrance  to  the
grotto ;  shin-bones,  thighs,  arm-bones,  bones  of  the  carpus
and  tarsus,  of  fingers,  toes,  ribs,  jaws,  and  cranial  bones,
all  broken,  and  a  large  number  of  teeth  fallen  out  from  their
sockets.

"  All  the  long  bones/'  says  Spring,  "  were  broken  either
in  the  middle  or  at  the  ends ;  the  lower  jaws  were  more
abundant  than  any  other  skull-bones  ;  and  I  possess  a  piece,
as  large  as  a  paving-stone,  which  contains  five  human  jaws,
amongst  which  there  is  the  jaw  of  a  child  from  seven  to  eight
years  of  age,  the  period  of  the  second  dentition.

"  I  possess  many  fragments  of  parietal,  temporal,  and  occi-
pital bones.  I  saw  on  the  spot  the  parietal  half  of  an  entire
skull,  but  it  was  impossible  to  extract  it  without  breaking  it
up.  On  account  of  the  extremely  fragile  nature  of  these
bones,  I  examined  this  skull  before  I  ventured  to  give  the  first
blows.  This  examination,  as  well  as  that  of  other  characteristic
bones,  convinced  me  that  I  had  before  me  a  race  differing
from  the  present  inhabitants  of  western  and  central  Europe.
The  race  equally  differs  from  the  old  Germanic  as  well  as  from
the  Celtic  races,  which  I  had  opportunities  of  examining  in
various  collections  of  skulls.

"This  skull  was  very  small,  both  absolutely  aud  in  proportion
to  the  development  of  the  jaw;    the  forehead  was  flattened,


3-46  LECTURE    XII.

the  nostrils  wide,  the  alveolar  arches  projecting,  the  incisors
oblique,  the  facial  angle  scarcely  exceeding  70  deg.  I  venture
to  assert  that  these  characters  resemble  those  of  the  Negro
and  Indian  more  than  those  of  any  race  now  inhabiting  Eu-
rope. To  judge  from  the  length  of  the  thigh  and  the  tibia,
this  must  have  been  a  stunted  race,  perhaps  only  five  feet
high,  about  the  height  of  the  Greenlanders  and  Lapps.

"Amongst  this  great  number  of  bones,  there  was  not  one
which  could  be  assigned  to  an  aged  or  even  to  a  strong  mus-
cular individual ;  all  the  bones  belonged  to  females,  youths,
and  children."

Spring  obtained,  also,  a  parietal  bone  fractured  by  some
blunt  instrument.  The  instrument  which  caused  the  injury
was  in  the  same  piece  of  stalagmite ;  it  was  a  rudely  manu-
factured stone  hatchet,  without  any  perforation  for  a  handle ;
another  stone  hatchet  was  also  discovered.

The  animal  bones,  which  lay  about  intermixed  with  the
human  bones,  were  in  exactly  the  same  condition.  All  the
lono-  bones  were  broken  ;  but  those  which  contain  no  marrow
were  entire.  There  were  many  teeth  of  beasts  of  prey,  some
boars'-teeth,  but  none  of  deer,  or  any  other  ruminant ;  which
is  the  more  reuiaivkable  as  human  teeth,  and  -the  long  bones  of
the  large  ruminants,  were  very  abundant.

Another  surprising  circumstance  is  that,  with  the  exception
of  a  fragment  of  the  lower  jaw  of  a  sheep  or  roe,  neither  cra-
nium, nor  horns  or  antlers  of  a  stag,  boar,  ox,  or  aurochs  were
found.  The  bones  are  those  of  the  deer,  ox,  sheep,  roe,  boar,
dog,  fox,  marten,  and  hare;  some  bones  of  the  ox  and  stag
are  so  large  that  they  might  be  assigned  to  the  aurochs  and
elk.  In  addition  to  these  bones  were  found  cinders,  pieces  of
charcoal,  and  small  fragments  of  burnt  clay.

Spring  concludes,  and,  as  it  appears,  with  much  reason,  that
the  bones  of  Chauvaux  are  the  remains  of  a  cannibal  feast, —
an  opinion  which  he  founds  on  the  similar  condition  both  of
the  human  and  the  animal  bones,  all  of  which  are  broken  for  the
sake  of  the  marrow,  and  upon  the  circumstance  that  all  human
bones  belong  to  young  individuals,  whose  flesh  was,  no  doubt,
preferred  on  such  festive  occasions.     Dr.  Spring  also  quotes


LECTURE    XII.  3  17

some  old  authors  to  show  that,  in  Belgium  and  Gaul,  human
sacrifices  and  cannibalism  continued  down  to  the  time  of  the
Romans.  The  short  and  imperfect  description  of  the  skull,
though  insufficient  to  indicate  the  race,  gives  at  least  evidence
that  it  differed  entirely  from  the  contemporaneous  race  which
inhabited  Denmark  and  North  Germany.

Whilst  the  discovery  of  Boucher  de  Perthes,  which  directed
attention  to  the  antiquity  of  man,  slowly  made  its  way,
that  of  Dr.  Keller,  made  at  Meilen,  near  Zurich,  in  1853  and
1854,  burst  upon  the  world  like  a  thunder-clap.  The  water
being  very  low,  this  circumstance  was  taken  advantage  of  to
erect  some  walls  for  the  recovery  of  a  piece  of  land  from  the
dried  up  bottom  of  the  lake.  There  was  seen  on  the  surface
a  yellowish,  grey  mud,  about  one  to  two  feet  thick  ;  below
this,  a  bed  of  sandy  clay,  two  to  two  and  a  half  feet  thick,  in
which  were  imbedded  the  heads  of  piles  and  a  number  of
stone  hatchets,  clubs,  hammers,  and  flint  implements.  In-
struments of  bone,  horn,  and  wood,  rude  vessels  of  unburnt
clay,  a  bead  of  amber,  a  bronze  clasp,  broken  hazelnuts,  fir
branches,  and  finally  the  roof  of  a  human  skull  and  several
skeletons,  were  found  in  this  bed,  denominated  by  Keller  "the
culture-bed."  The  piles  stuck  in  the  old  lake  bottom,  which,
like  the  uppermost  stratum,  consisted  of  light  coloured  letten,
but  contained  no  other  articles.  Keller  soon  perceived  the
great  importance  of  his  discovery.  He  saw  at  once  that  he
had  before  his  eyes  a  pre-historical  building  of  a  people  igno-
rant of  the  use  of  metal,  and,  as  regards  civilisation,  standing
in  the  same  scale  as  the  northern  stone-people.  No  sooner
did  this  discovery  become  known,  than  similar  discoveries
were  made  in  Germany,  Italy,  and  France,  and  we  can  say
that  there  exists  in  the  plains  of  Switzerland,  between  the
Jura  and  the  Alps,  no  lake  or  peat-bog  which  does  not  present
traces  of  such  pile-buildings.  The  zeal  with  which  these  in-
vestigations were  carried  on,  has  brought  many  a  singular
phenomenon  to  light,  and  whilst  the  reports  of  F.  Keller,  of
which  the  fifth  has  now  appeared,  are  models  of  clearness,  we
may  characterise  the  huge  volume  of  Troy  on  (Lcs  Habitations
Lacustres)  as  a  pious  novel,  resting,  like  the  now  favourite


348


LECTURE    XII.


historical   novels,    upon    foundations   borrowed    from    Moses*
family  chronicle  of  the  Jewish  tribes.

Fig.  105.     Section  of  a  Pile-work  in  the  Lake.


1,  Kocky  bottom.    2.  Lake.     3.  Mud-bed.
bed.      5.  Stone-bill  of  tbe   Stone   Period.
Period.


4.  Whitish-grey-,  or  old  Mud-
6.  Culture-bed  of  the   Bronze


Let  us  return  to  the  facts.  There  are  pile-works  situated
on  the  shores  of  the  lakes,  at  some  distance  from  the  water,
covered  by  sand,  loam,  or  calcareous  sinter,  which  have  been  long
known  to  fishermen,  who  attached  their  nets  to  them.  In  some
few  spots  the  water  stands  thirty  feet  above  the  piles  farthest  in
the  lake,  but  the  height  of  the  water  is  generally  much  lower.
In  the  lakes  of  western  Switzerland  it  has  been  observed  that
those  pile-buildings,  in  which  no  metal  is  found,  are  nearer  the
shore  and  less  under  water,  whilst  others,  where  metal,  and
specially  bronzes  are  found,  are  situated  at  a  greater  distance
as  well  as  greater  depth.

Fig.  106.     Section  of  a  Pile-Building  in  a  Peat-moss.


1.  Vegetable  earth.  2.  Light  peat.  3.  Thick  peat,  with  old  trees  at  the
bottom.  4.  Culture-bed  with  the  piles  imbedded  in  the  white  bottom.  5.
6.  Sand-bed.     7.  Coarse  gravel,  flints.     8.  Present  lake-level.

The  pile-works  in  the  turf-moors  are  always  found  in  spots,
where  formerly  a  lake  existed,  which  even  now  shows  in  the
middle  of  the  moor  traces  of  its  former  extension.  So  it  is
in  Moosseedorf,  Wauwyl,  Robenhausen  on  the  Pfaffikon  lake,


LECTURE    XII.  349

and  many  other  places.  There  is  usually  found  upon  the  bot-
tom of  the  turf-moor,  above  the  gravel  and  sand  of  the  old
alluvium,  which  in  some  parts  of  Switzerland  contains  bones
of  the  elephant,  the  so-called  white  bottom  (blanc  fond),  a
calcareous  bed,  consisting  of  snail-shells  reduced  to  powder,
belonging  to  still  existing  species.  Into  this  white  bottom,
which  corresponds  to  the  lower  letten  of  Meilen,  the  piles  are
driven,  and  at  Wauwyl  one  pile  was  found  driven  ten  feet  into
the  old  bed  of  the  lake.  Upon  this  white  bottom  lies  the  peat
generally  five  to  six  feet  thick,  but  in  some  spots  it  reaches
twenty  feet.  The  stone  and  bone  implements  of  the  "  culture-
bed"  usually  lie  upon  the  white  bottom  under  the  peat,  in
which  no  trace  of  antiquities  has  been  found.  The  broken
bones,  the  implements,  in  short,  the  whole  material  constitut-
ing the  culture-bed,  form  the  lowest  stratum  of  the  peat  bed.
If  relics  of  the  historical  period,  such  as  Roman  coins,  are
found,  as  at  Moosseedorf,  they  are  situated  higher  up,  whilst
those  of  the  middle  ages  lie  immediately  under  the  vegetable
earth.  The  pile-works  at  Wauwyl  consisted  of  five  floors
formed  of  superimposed  rounded  beams  connected  with  the
upright  piles.  The  lowest  of  these  floors  rests  upon  the  bed
of  the  lake.  The  thickness  of  all  the  layers  amounts  to  about
three  feet.  Two  separate  platforms  are  frequently  connected
by  round  beams  passing  from  the  upper  to  the  lower  floor,
leaving  channels  between  them.  Neither  notches,  mortises,
ligatures,  or  other  contrivances  were  traced,  which  would  have
required  more  perfect  instruments.  In  some  places  we  are
induced  to  believe  that  the  platform  could  easily  rise  and  sink
with  the  water.  The  space  between  the  layers  of  the  trees
is  filled  up  with  clay  and  branches.  Here  and  there  vertical
piles  are  found,  the  top  of  which  is  burnt  in  the  shape  of  a
cone.  Upon  this  terrain,  as  far  as  it  has  been  explored,  we
are  able  to  trace  a  rectangular  plain  92'  in  length  and  50'  in
width,  which  seems  to  have  been  covered  with  platforms  of
different  heights.  Round  this  square,  which  may  perhaps  be
considered  as  the  habitation  of  a  family,  are  seen  frequently
irregular  vertical  piles  without  any  intervening  horizontal
beams.


350  LECTURE    XII.

These  facts  enable  us  to  form  some  definite  deduction  regard-
ing the  age  of  the  pile-works.  The  alluvial  formation  in  which,
in  certain  Swiss  districts,  are  found  the  remains  of  the  ele-
phant and  the  rhinoceros,  lies  beneath  the  white  bottom  into
which  the  piles  are  driven.  It  follows,  therefore,  that  the
white  bottom  must  have  attained  a  thickness  of  several  feet
before  the  pile-works  were  erected,  inasmuch  as  the  piles  are
only  driven  into  this  layer  and  not  into  the  gravel.  But  for
the  formation  of  such  a  lake-bed,  consisting  of  an  enormous
mass  of  shells,  many  centuries  were  requisite,  for  we  know  that
though  mussels  and  snails  frequently  abound  in  freshwater,  still
many  years  are  required  for  the  formation  even  of  a  thin  bed.
Thus  the  settlements  in  Switzerland  are  much  more  recent
than  the  beds  of  Amiens  and  the  cave  beds  in  which  human
remains  have  been  found.  Nevertheless,  they  reach  back  to  a
remote  period,  which  has  no  history,  the  age  of  which  may
perhaps  be  approximatively  estimated  by  the  growth  of  the  peat
which  has  overgrown  these  pile-works.  Hitherto  we  possessed
no  correct  standard  for  the  growth  of  peat.  The  calculations
hitherto  made  rest  upon  no  certain  foundations,  as  the  up-
heaving of  the  peat  soil  has  been  erroneously  taken  for  its
growth.

The  great  number  of  pile-works  successively  discovered  in
Switzerland,  though  they  possess  many  features  in  common,
differ  specifically  with  respect  to  the  metals  and  other  imple-
ments found  in  some  of  these  pile- works.  It  is  undeniable
that  in  East- Switzerland  there  are  numerous  pile-works  in
which  none,  or  but  few,  metals  are  found,  whilst  on  the  con-
trary, in  West- Switzerland  there  are  many  such  works  which
contain  objects  of  the  bronze  or  both  periods,  whilst  in  some
have  been  found  iron  tools,  and  even  Roman  coins.  To  draw,
as  Troyon  has  done,  a  geographical  line,  is  inadmissible,  and
some  settlements  afford  clear  indications  that  they  have  been
inhabited  during  the  whole  period  and  successively  enlarged.
Notwithstanding  this,  we  are  able  to  distinguish  the  stone-  from
bronze-period  buildings,  first  by  their  depth,  and  secondly  by
the  modes  in  which  the  piles  are  worked,  independently  of  the
objects  found  in  them.    The  piles  of  the  stone-period  are  much


LECTURE    XII.  351

thicker  than  those  of  the  bronze-period ;  they  are  mostly
trunks,  one  foot  in  diameter,  partly  incised  at  the  ends,  and
forcibly  broken  off;  split  trunks  are  rarely  found.

The  piles  of  the  bronze-period  are  much  thinner,  only  about
four  inches  thick ;  the  trunks  are  frequently  split  into  four
parts,  the  tops  rise  several  feet  above  the  ground,  whilst  those
of  the  stone-period  are  hidden  by  the  accumulation  of  stones.
As  far  as  I  know,  there  has  not  been  discovered  any  pile-work
overgrown  by  peat  which  belongs  to  the  bronze  period.  Thus,
we  may  distinguish  as  belonging  to  the  stone-period  the  pile-
works  at  Moosseedorf,  Wauwyl,  Meilen,  Eobenhausen,  Wan-
gen,  and  the  numerous  settlements  on  the  Lake  of  Constance.
Pile-buildings  which  continued  in  unbroken  succession  from
the  stone — through  the  bronze-period,  are  those  at  Concise,
Staffis  (Estavayer),  Hageneck,  and  some  other  settlements  on
the  lakes  of  Bienne  and  Neufchatel.  There  are  further  pile-
works  which  contain  iron-tools,  like  the  celebrated  Steinberg
on  the  Lake  of  Bienne.  There  are  also  numbers  of  settle-
ments on  the  lakes  of  Geneva  and  Neufchatel,  and  also  near
Sempach,  which  have  only  yielded  bronzes  ;  and,  finally,  there
is  one  pile-work  which  has  only  furnished  iron  articles,  namely,
that  of  La  Tene,  near  Marin,  on  the  Lake  of  Neufchatel.

Many  of  these  habitations  have  undoubtedly  been  destroyed
by  fire,  as  in  some  places  the  burnt  piles  are  still  found.
Messikomer  concluded  from  the  direction  of  the  scattered
cinders  and  coals,  that  at  Moosseedorf  the  fire  took  place
during  a  violent  storm,  like  the  fire  of  Grlarus.  In  other  set-
tlements there  was  no  trace  of  fire,  and  when  it  is  considered
how  easily  huts  and  stores  built  of  wood  may  burn  down,  we
think  archaeologists  have  gone  too  far  when  they  combine  the
introduction  of  metal  with  the  irruption  of  a  new  people,  and
thus  explain  the  burning  down  of  the  old  habitations.  Ac-
cording to  Troyon,  the  pile-works  of  the  stone-period  have
been  partly  burnt  down  by  a  people  coming  from  the  East,  who
introduced  bronze,  but  have  been  repaired  and  inhabited  by
them  until  another  people,  also  coming  from  the  East,  the
Helvetians,  arrived  with  iron  swords,  who,  in  their  turn,  burnt
the  bronze  villages,  and  also  partly  re-inhabited  them.


352  LECTURE    XII.

M.  Troyon  seems  to  have  discovered  the  primitive  Orsini
shells,  clay-balls  filled  with  pitch,  which  were  thrown  upon  the
pile-works.  Keller  remarks  on  this  point,  "  It  is  a  pity  that
when  Troyon  published  his  Habitations  Lacustres,  the  many
lake  stations  in  which  Roman  implements  are  found  were
unknown  ;  he  would,  doubtless,  have  proved  a  third  conquest
of  the  country,  and  a  third  burning  of  the  pile-buildings,  and
the  decimation  of   the  population  as   the    concluding   act  of

the  drama."

On  examining  such  stations  as  belong  to  the  stone  and
bronze  period,  it  is  found  that  the  stone-period  pile-work
forms,  as  it  were,  the  nucleus  around  which  the  piles  of  the
bronze  period  extend  and  are  progressive  in  depth.  There
are,  according  to  Desor,  piles  of  the  bronze  period  four  to  six
inches  in  diameter,  thirty  feet  deep  below  the  mean  height  of
the  water  level,  which  are  driven  in  ten  feet  into  the  bed  of
the  lake.  These  piles  supported  platforms,  as  at  Wauwyl,
above  the  water,  and  if  we  assume  the  height  of  these  plat-
forms at  four  feet  and  the  imbedding  only  at  six  feet,  it  yields
a  total  length  of  forty  feet  for  a  pile  four  inches  in  diameter,
which  must  have  been  driven  in  through  a  depth  of  thirty  feet
water.  This  appears  to  me  no  slight  task  even  for  an  engi-
neer of  our  own  time,  but  for  an  architect  of  the  bronze  period
a  manifest  impossibility.  We  conclude  hence,  that  at  the
period  of  the  erection  of  the  stone  piles  the  waters  stood  as
high  as,  or  eveu  a  few  feet  higher,  than  at  present,  but  that
they  gradually  retreated,  which  forced  the  pile  builders  to
follow  the  water.  It  is  by  this  subsidence  of  the  waters  that
in  the  smaller  lakes  many  pile-works  were  exposed,  and  then
abandoned,  after  which  they  were  overgrown  with  peat,  which
must  have  been  rather  dry  as  it  contained  in  its  lower  strata
much  wood.  The  waters  rose  again  at  a  later  period,  the  pile-
works  were  submerged  in  the  water  or  buried  under  the  gradu-
ally accumulating  peat.  The  surface  of  the  water  must  have
undergone  various  changes,  so  that  the  pile  builders  were
either  obliged  to  follow  the  water  or  to  settle  on  the  land.

Possibly  the  first  stone-period  buildings  or  stone  hills,  as  they
might  be  called,  were  only  artificial  islands,  like  the  so-called


LECTURE    XII.  353

crannags  in  Ireland,  of  which  we  possess  a  sample  in  the
small  lake  of  Inkwyl,  near  Solotkurn,  which  were  used  for
fishing  and  festivals,  but  rarely  for  habitations.  Some  of  the
pile-works  were  no  doubt  inhabited,  at  least  during  a  certain
period;  subsequently  they  were  perhaps,  as  Desor  surmises,
used  as  provision  stores.  Desor  remarks  :  "  It  is  only  neces-
sary to  look  at  the  objects  found  in  any  station  to  be  convinced
that  they  have  not  been  wilfully  thrown  into  the  water.  Pots
filled  with  provisions  are  found  in  some  spots,  which  have
neither  fallen  in  accidentally,  nor  come  there  in  consequence
of  an  attack  on  the  proprietors,  for  in  the  latter  case  we  should
find  some  human  remains.  The  bronze  articles  are  nearly
new,  the  pots  entire,  the  provisions  well  arranged,  and  accord-
ing to  the  opinion  of  experienced  explorers,  a  rich  booty  is
only  obtained  where  the  piles  are  burnt.  These  places  were
thus  probably  magazines  which  were  burnt  accidentally ;  and
the  habitations  constructed  of  brushwood  and  clay,  one  of  which
was  found  on  the  Ebersberg  near  Zurich,  were  in  the  vicinity
of  the  land."

I  must  confess,  gentlemen,  that  since  I  have  visited  the
North,  this  view  seems  to  me  much  more  probable  than  the
habitation  theory.  In  the  North,  the  water  is  the  high  way.
The  populations  dwelling  on  the  Fjords  hold  intercourse  by
way  of  water,  the  stores  stand  upon  piles,  and  the  merchandise
is  transferred  to  the  boats  and  ships  from  these  stores.  The
fishermen  and  the  Lapps,  who  frequently  come  from  a  consi-
derable distance,  cook,  eat,  and  sleep  upon  the  wooden  piers
which  surround  these  stores.  It  is  not  improbable  that,  at
the  earliest  period,  the  conditions  were  similar  in  Switzer-
land. Most  of  the  roads  along  the  lakes  have  only  been  made
very  recently,  so  that  even  down  to  our  own  century  the  inha-
bitants of  the  shores  could  only  hold  communication  by  means
of  boats.

It  is  very  possible  to  trace  in  the  industry  and  the  whole
condition  of  these  pile  populations  a  progressive  civilisation.
Thus  the  implements  on  the  lake  of  Constance  are  very  rude
and  clumsy  in  shape,  whilst  some  of  the  objects  of  Concise
will  bear  comparison  with  some   of  the  best  finished  articles

A  A


354  LECTURE    XII.

found  in  the  north.  Concise  also  shows  a  greater  richness  in
domestic  animals,  specially  a  peculiar  stock  of  cow,  which  has
not  been  found  in  the  east.  An  antiquary  once  told  me,  that
the  inhabitants  of  one  district  were  probably  peasants,  whilst
the  others  belonged  to  an  industrial  aristocracy.  This  dif-
ference may  depend  either  on  the  locality  or  on  the  periods,
which  are,  however,  not  distinctly  separate,  but  merely  indi-
cate slow  and  progressive  civilisation.  Notwithstanding  the
scantiness  of  the  materials,  it  must  be  admitted  that  culture  had
attained  a  certain  development,  bearing  testimony  to  the  acute-
ness,  energy,  and  endurance  of  this  primitive  people.  They
knew  how  to  work  the  stone  without  metal  tools,  and  to  use  it
according  to  its  nature  for  different  purposes.  Thus  the  harder
molasse  served  for  whetstones  and  handmills  ;  the  serpentine,
for  hammers  and  hatchets.  The  hard  pebbles  served  for  cutting
tools.  Several  kinds  of  stones  were  imported  from  a  distance,
flints  from  the  chalk  beds  of  France,  perhaps  also  nephrite  from
the  East.  With  regard  to  this  substance,  which  is  but  rarely
met  with  in  Switzerland,  there  prevail  great  doubts.  Though
nephrite  is  now  imported  from  the  East,  it  is  not  known  in
what  part  it  is  most  abundant.  It  is,  moreover,  by  no  means
certain  whether  the  hatchets  made,  according  to  antiquaries,
of  nephrite,  are  really  constructed  of  this  mineral,  and  not
rather  of  an  exceptionally  hard  serpentine,  or  a  tough  felspar,
which  Saussure  formerly  called  jade.  It  is  also  possible  that,
in  the  conglomerates  which  contain  so  many  stones  foreign
to  the  north  side  of  the  Alps  (as,  for  instance,  porphyry),  this
material  of  Swiss  so-called  nephrite-hatchets  may  yet  be
found.  It  is  very  desirable  that  all  minerals  used  by  the
pile  builders  should  be  more  carefully  studied  than  they
hitherto  have  been.  An  analysis  of  this  kind  has  taught  us
the  mode  by  which  the  erratic  blocks  have  been  carried  by  the
glaciers  down  into  the  valleys,  and  in  this  way  we  may  obtain
some  clue  as  to  the  mode  in  which  the  pile  builders  communi-
cated with  other  peoples.

It  belongs  to  a  special  branch  of  archaeology  to  trace  the  mode
of  working  the  mineral;  how  it  was  fastened  to  a  handle  of
wood  or  staghorn,  how  the  wood  was  split  and  carved,  how  the


LECTURE    XII.  355

bones-  were  fashioned  into  arrow-heads,  needles,  hooks ;  how
the  teeth  were  perforated  to  serve  as  ornaments.  It  is  of  par-
ticular interest  for  us  to  know  that  the  pile-builders  were  not
only  cattle-breeders,  and  had  domesticated  several  races,  but
became  also  in  process  of  time  agriculturists.  The  chase  was,
no  doubt,  at  first,  the  principal  means  of  obtaining  food,  but
gradually  vegetable  food  supplanted  a  purely  animal  diet.  I
shall  quote  the  remarks  of  Professor  Heer,  in  every  respect  a
competent  judge,  on  the  agriculture  of  our  pile-builders,  as
published  in  Keller's  report,  and  also  Riitimeyer's  investiga-
tions concerning  the  domestic  animals.

"Wheat  is  most  common,  having  been  found  at  Meilen,
Moosseedorf,  and  Wangen ;  in  the  latter  place  many  whole  ears
were  found,  as  well  as  heaps  of  grain.  The  grains  are  free
from  husk,  and  of  the  same  form  and  size  as  our  present
wheat.  Ears  of  the  six-rowed  barley  (Hordeum  hexastichonj ,
differing  from  common  barley  (Hordeum  vidgare,  W.J  by  the
number  of  rows  and  smaller  size  of  the  grains,  were  numerous.
According  to  Alph.  de  Candolle,  the  six-rowed  barley  was  the
species  most  cultivated  in  antiquity  (by  the  Egyptians,  Greeks,
and  Romans).  In  the  ears  of  Wangen,  the  longest  and  best
preserved  ear  has  ten  to  eleven  grains  in  a  row.  The  grains  are
smaller,  shorter,  and  nearer  to  each  other  than  that  now  grown.
They  are  (without  the  husk)  two-and-a-half  lines  long,  and
scarcely  one-and-a-half  line  broad,  whilst  that  now  grown  has
grains  of  a  length  of  three  lines,  and  has  almost  the  same
breadth.

"  The  cereals  were  probably  kept  in  large  clay  vessels,  of
which  many  fragments  are  found.  These  buildings  were  pro-
bably destroyed  by  fire,  so  that  the  cereals  became  carbonised,
which  conduced  to  their  preservation  in  the  wet  mud.  All  the
cereals  of  that  remote  period  are  in  a  carbonised  state,  and,
when  cleaned  from  the  mud,  present  a  shining  black  colour.
We  thus  perceive  that  the  above  cereals  have  been  cultivated
in  our  country  much  earlier  than  has  been  generally  supposed.
It  is,  moreover,  known  how  the  cereals  were  prepared  for
alimentation.  As  these  peoples  had  no  mills,  they  used  round
smoothed  stones,  between  which  the  corn  was  crushed,  hence

aa2


356  LECTURE    XII.

these  stones  are  called  corn-crushers.  They  are  found  in
large  quantities  in  almost  all  lake  villages.  The  grains  were
probably  first  roasted,  then  crushed,  and  put  into  pots,  after
which  the  mass  was  moistened,  and  then  eaten.  This  mode  of
preparing  cereals  was  found  in  use  among  the  natives  of  the
Canary  Islands  at  the  time  of  the  Spanish  conquest.  The
Spaniards  adopted  and  have  preserved  it  to  this  day.  The
grain  is  first  roasted  in  ovens,  then  crushed,  and  kept  in  goat-
skins. This  gofio,  as  the  prepared  meal  is  called,  still  consti-
tutes the  bread  of  the  common  people  of  the  Canaries,  and
may  be  considered  as  the  oldest  mode  of  preparing  cereals.
Hence,  amongst  ancient  peoples  roasted  barley  is  a  sacred  cereal,
which  plays  an  important  part  in  all  sacrifices.

"  The  rearing  of  plants  pre-supposes  the  cultivation  of  the
soil ;  how  this  was  effected  is  unknown  to  us,  as  no  agricul-
tural implements  have  been  found  in  the  oldest  settlements.
Crooked  tree-branches  were  probably  used  as  ploughs ;  how
the  cattle  were  fed  we  know  not.

"  Horticulture  reaches  as  far  back  as  agriculture.  Carbon-
ised apples  and  pears  were  found;  they  are  cut  into  two,  rarely
into  four  slices,  manifestly  to  serve  as  a  provision  in  winter.
The  pears  found  in  Wangen  are  a  kind  of  forest  pears,  called
c  ackras/  and  of  small  size.  Apples  are  much  more  common
not  only  in  Wangen,  but  in  Robenhausen,  on  the  Pfaffiken
Lake,  and  at  Concise,  on  the  Neufchatel  Lake.  They  all  agree
in  size  and  form,  are  perfectly  round,  with  large  cores  and
long  stalks,  which  were  not  found  attached  to  the  apples,  but
near  them.  Several  kinds  of  apples  grow  in  our  forests  which
agree  with  the  smallest  sorts  found  in  the  pile-works.  Whether
these  trees  were  at  that  period  cultivated,  or  whether  the  fruit
was  gathered  from  the  forest  trees,  cannot  easily  be  determined."

Professor  Heer  is  inclined  to  adopt  the  former  view,  because
among  the  trunks  intended  to  be  cut  for  blocks  there  were
some  of  apple  trees.  We  should  consider  this  as  a  proof  to
the  contrary,  inasmuch  as  a  tree  cultivated  for  the  fruit  it  bears
is  not  used  for  other  purposes.  Professor  Heer  is  further  of
opinion  that  the  cereals  and  the  fruit  trees  have  been  obtained
from  an  Asiatic  people,   and  that  the  fruits  had  degenerated


LECTURE   XII.  357

in  our  forests.  It  appears  to  me  that  the  experiments  made
by  Faber  to  transform  a  species  of  grass  (Jffigilops)  into  wheat
sufficiently  indicate  that  cereals  may  easily  have  originated  in
our  country,  instead  of  having  been  imported  from  Asia.  All
deductions  as  to  the  importation  of  cereals  and  fruit  from  Asia
are  made  from  what  happened  at  later  periods,  when,  no  doubt,
the  better  species,  but  not  the  originals  of  these  cultivated
plants  were  introduced.  If  indeed  cereals,  and  apples  and
pears,  had  been  imported  from  Asia,  we  cannot  understand  why
hemp  and  the  vine,  which  certainly  are  natives  of  Asia  Minor,
were  not  introduced  at  the  same  time.  A  stimulating  and  intoxi-
cating fruit  like  the  grape  would  certainly  have  been  preferred
to  crab-apples.  "  Stones  of  the  wild  plum  and  Prunus
padus"  continues  Heer,  "seeds  of  raspberries  and  blackberries,
shells  of  hazel  and  beech  nuts,  are  met  with  in  abundance  in
the  mud,  showing  that  these  forest  fruits  served  as  food.  The
aliment  of  these  peoples  thus  consisted  of  cereals,  fruit,  fish,
game,  and  domestic  animals ;  and,  no  doubt,  the  milk  of  the
latter  was  also  made  use  of.  The  cheese  obtained  from  the
milk  was  probably  put  into  pots,  and  placed  in  a  chimney-flue.
Pots  are  found  perforated  at  the  bottom :  these  could  not  have
been  used  for  containing  fluids,  but  were  adapted  for  the  pre-
servation of  cheese,  allowing  the  whey  to  escape.  In  the  Swiss
cottages  the  cheese  is  frequently  wrapped  up  in  linen  rags,  and
hung  up  in  the  flue  to  dry ;  there  the  pots  were  used  instead
of  linen.  However  great  the  resemblance  of  the  bread  of  the
pile-works  to  carbonised  bread,  there  would  still  be  some
doubts  were  they  not  removed  by  remnants  of  the  bran  and
the  well-preserved  wheat  grains  in  the  pieces.  The  bran  was
not  removed,  and  the  grains  but  imperfectly  crushed.  The
whole  mass  was  probably  kneaded,  and  baked  between  heated
stones.  Judging  from  the  crust,  the  bread  had  probably  a
disc-shape ;  it  had  small  pores  much  smaller  than  in  our
wheaten  bread,  reminding  us  of  rye  bread ;  but  no  rye  has  as
yet  been  found  in  the  pile-works,  nor  did  the  people  understand
how  to  make  the  dough  rise."

Finally,  the  pile-builders  cultivated  to  a  great  extent  the
short    flax    still    grown    in    North-western    Switzerland,    and


358  LECTURE    XII.

manufactured  of  it  not  only  thread,  lines,  and  ropes,  but  by
means,  probably,  of  a  very  simple  loom,  various  textures,  as
well  as  mattings.  Hemp  was  unknown  to  them,  another  proof
against  the  introduction  of  cultivated  plants  from  the  East.
They  may  have  used  skins,  but  the  preparation  of  leather
seems  to  have  been  unknown,  as  but  few  badly-preserved
pieces  are  found  in  the  pile-buildings.  Boats  made  from
single  large  trunks  prove  that  they  navigated  the  rivers  and
lakes,  whilst  the  position  of  the  pile-buildings  on  the  lakes
shows  that  they  were  acquainted  with  the  prevailing  winds.

That  the  introduction  of  metals,  though  it  took  place  very
gradually,  must  have  been  productive  of  an  essential  progress
in  civilisation  is  clear  enough.  But  what  has  been  stated  con-
cerning the  stone-period  shows  that  we  have  to  do  with  a  race
capable  of  every  mental  effort — a  race  which  effected  with
small  means  all  that  acuteness,  patience,  and  industry  could
effect.  The  analysis  of  the  remains  of  a  skull  of  Meilen,  the
only  one  found  in  a  pile-work  belongiug  to  the  stone-period,
confirms  this  view.  The  piece  consists  of  the  roof  of  the  cra-
nium, the  frontal  bone,  the  parietal  bone,  the  occipital  squama,
and  a  fragment  of  the  temporal  bone ;  the  lower  part  of  the  skull
and  face  and  all  the  facial  bones  are  wanting.  The  dimensions
of  the  parts  agree  exactly  with  those  of  the  present  Swiss
skull  of  a  youth ;  it  belongs  evidently  to  the  same  stock  and
the  same  race.  It  is  also  remarkable  that  this  cranial  type
persists  through  all  subsequent  periods,  though  other  cranial
types  from  the  pre-Roman  period  down  to  the  middle  ages  and
the  present  time  coalesce  with  it.

No  trace  of  a  copper  age,  which,  according  to  some  archae-
ologists, always  precedes  that  of  bronze,  has  hitherto  been
found  in4  Switzerland.  The  copper  for  Swiss  bronzes  has
undoubtedly  been  obtained  from  Alpine  copper-ore,  that  is  to
say,  on  the  spot,  as,  according  to  Fellenberg's  researches,  it
contains  nickel,  which  always  occurs  in  these  ores,  but  is
absent  in  northern  bronzes.  Since  in  eastern  Europe,  espe-
cially in  the  Lower  Danube  districts,  copper  implements
abound,  the  bronze  cannot  have  been  imported  from  the  East,
otherwise  copper  would  also  have  been  imported ;  nor  would


LECTURE    XII.


359


they  have  fetched  tin  from  foreign  parts  for  the  purpose  of
alloying  it  with  copper.  The  alloy  with  tin,  and  the  discovery
of  pieces  of  chemically  pure  tin/ indicate  rather  Belgium  and
Cornwall  as  the  countries  where  bronze  was  invented.

Fig.  107.     Skull  of  Meilen,  top  view,  after  a  drawing  by  Professor  His.


Fig.  108.     The  same  Skull  in  Profile.


Since  the  discovery  of  pile-works  in  Switzerland  many  simi-
lar discoveries  have  been  made  in  other  parts.

I  consider  those  found   in  Italy  to  possess  peculiar  interest.


300


LECTURE    XII.


Those  discovered  by  Gastaldi  and  Strobel  testify  that  also  in
the  ancient  district  of  civilisation  there  existed  in  pre-historical
times  a  stone  and  a  bronze  period,  of  which  the  oldest  Italian
authors  and  the  Romans  had  not  the  least  idea.  My  friend
Desor  justly  observes,  that  garrulous  Pliny,  who  had  a  villa  on
the  Lake  of  Como  in  the  immediate  vicinity  of  such  pile-
works,  would  certainly  have  noticed  them  had  any  tradition
respecting  them  existed  among  the  people.  But  every  trace  of
such  a  tradition  had  already  disappeared  when  the  Etruscan
pre-Roman  civilisation  unfolded  its  blossoms  in  Italy.  I  regret
that  I  cannot  enter  into  further  particulars  with  regard  to
Italian  researches,  which  have  furnished  us  with  relics  and
skulls  from  the  stone  and  bronze  periods,  and  well  deserve  an
attentive  study.

Attempts  have  been  made  to  determine  the  period  in  which
the  pile-works  of  the  stone  period  have  been  erected ;  but,  as
we  have  already  observed,  it  is  impossible  to  find  in  tradition
and  legend  any  starting  points  leading  to  historical  dates.  It
is,  therefore,  only  feasible  to  proceed  as  in  geology,  namely,
by  taking  into  account  the  relative  position  of  the  strata.
Whilst  in  historical  chronology  years,  months,  and  days  are  to
be  determined,  geological  chronology  lays  no  claim  to  such
exactness,  as  it  embraces  periods  of  time  in  which  such  dates
are  mere  vanishing  points.  Still,  attempts  of  this  kind  deserve
acknowledgment,  though  they  repose  upon  a  fluctuating  basis,
and  yield  results  which  cannot  be  determined  exactly  within
thousands  of  years.

Morlot  was  the  first  who  made  such  an  attempt.  In  the
vicinity  of  Villeneuve,  on  the  lake  of  Geneva,  the  mound
formed  by  a  torrent,  la  Tiniere,  was  opened  in  a  railway  cut-
ting one  thousand  feet  in  length  and  thirty-two  and  a  half  feet
deep.  The  internal  structure  was  thus  laid  bare,  and  appeared
perfectly  regular.  In  the  centre  lie  large  rolled  blocks,  some
as  much  as  three  feet  in  diameter ;  on  both  sides  the  alluvial
material  becomes  thinner  and  finer.  Three  layers  of  vegetable
soil  were  cut  through  at  different  depths,  which  must  at  one
time  have  formed  the  surface  of  the  cone ;  they  were  inter-
posed at  regular  intervals,  between  the  alluvium,  parallel  to
each  other  and  the  present  surface  of  the  cone.


LECTURE    XII.  361

Tlie  upper  layer  was  4 — 6  inches  thick,  and  about  four  feet
below  the  present  surface  ;  in  it  were  found  angular  pieces
of  Roman  tiles,  and  an  obliterated  Roman  bronze  coin.

The  second  layer  was  six  inches  thick,  and  lay  at  a  depth
of  ten  feet ;  it  contained  some  fragments  of  unvarnished  clay
mixed  with  sand  and  a  tweezer  made  of  bronze.

The  lowest  layer  was  about  6 — 7  inches  thick,  at  a  depth
of  nineteen  feet.  In  it  were  rude  pottery,  pieces  of  charcoal,
broken  animal  bones,  a  collection  which  indicates  the  stone
period,  though  certainly  the  end  of  it,  as  Riitimeyer,  after  an
examination  of  the  bones,  believes  that  they  belong  to  a  later
period  than  the  stone  epoch.  "  Besides  numerous  remains  of
man,"  says  Riitimeyer,  "  there  were  some  of  the  domesticated
dog,  pig,  sheep,  and  cow,  perfectly  resembling  the  present
species,  but  differing  widely  from  those  of  the  stone  period.
It  was  not  merely  the  recent  aspect  of  these  bones,  but  the
great  difference  between  these  races  of  dogs  and  swine  and
those  of  the  pile-works,  which  testifies  that  these  bones  are
later  additions  to  the  relics  of  primitive  human  industry."  No
stone  or  horn  implements  were  found,  which  might  have
thrown  some  light  on  this  point.

Morlot's  calculation  is  founded  on  the  regularity  of  the
structure  of  the  above  cone,  and  the  uniformity  of  its  growth.
The  Romans,  he  observes,  came  into  the  country  fifty-eight
years  before  Christ,  after  the  battle  of  Bibracte.  In  the  year
563,  after  Christ,  Tauredunum  was  destroyed  by  the  fall  of  a
mountain,  and  already,  a  century  before,  the  Burgundians,
who  did  not  burn  their  bricks,  had  put  an  end  to  Roman  do-
minion. The  Roman  layer  is,  therefore,  at  the  utmost  eighteen
centuries,  and  at  least  thirteen  centuries  old.  Assuming  now
that  the  torrent  had  since,  that  time  deposited  about  four  feet
(1,14  meter),  and  that  this  accumulation  proceeded  from  the
remotest  time  at  a  uniform  rate,  we  obtain  for  the  bronze-
bed  an  antiquity  of  at  least  twenty-nine,  and  at  most  of  forty-
two  centuries  ;  for  the  stone  period,  a  period  of  at  least  forty-
seven,  and  at  most  seventy  centuries ;  and  for  the  whole  cone,
about  one  hundred  centuries.

I  must  here  observe,  that  in  the  layer  of  the  stone  period


362  LECTUEE    XII.

a  hunian  skeleton  was  found,  with  a  very  small,  thick,  and  round
skull,  which,  from  the  measurements  of  a  M.  Montagne,  is
said  to  have  presented  the  type  of  a  brachycephalic  Mongol
skull.  I  have,  unfortunately,  been  unable  to  learn  anything  of
the  fate  of  this  skull,  and  as  far  as  I  know,  my  colleagues  His
and  Riitimeyer  are  equally  in  the  dark  on  this  subject.

Pruner-Bey  lately  published  in  the  bulletins  of  the  Paris
Anthropological  Society  some  details  concerning  this  skull,
apparently  in  his  possession,  which  I  must  notice  here.

"  The  skull,"  says  Pruner-Bey,  "  measures  129  millimeters  in
length,  the  thickest  part  of  the  roof  measuring  1 2  millimeters
in  diameter  ;  the  forehead  is  absent,  it  flies  off  behind  the
orbital  arches,  which  are  much  developed,  as  in  the  ape.  As
the  superior  orbital  ridge  is  quite  straight,  we  may  conclude
that  the  external  angle  of  the  eyelids  was  drawn  up  as  in  the
Chinese.  Orbits  very  wide ;  frontal  bones  very  narrow  ;  nasal
bones  projecting ;  superior  jaw  drawn  forward  ;  surface  of  the
molars  flattened  by  wear  ;  large  and  wide  foramen  magnum
placed  much  forward  ;  flattened  articular  head  ;  auditory
meatus  of  fair  diameter  ;  nasal  fossas  very  thick  ;  occipital
squama  rounded  with  very  projecting  ridges  for  the  attachment
of  muscles  ;  cerebellar  cavities  very  broad  and  deep.

"  Remark.  Sight  and  smell  seem  to  have  been  power-
fully developed  in  this  individual ;  and  if  the  cerebellum  be
connected  with  muscular  activity,  he  must  have  been  very
nimble.

"  This  shortheaded  type  is  even  at  present  found  among  the
populations  inhabiting  the  banks  of  the  Lake  of  Geneva  and
the  Rhone,  and  Von  Baer  found  it  very  prevalent  among  the
population  of  the  Grisons.  There  we  come  to  ancient  Rhastia,
which  leads  by  the  gorges  and  southern  declivities  of  the  Alps
down  to  Etruria."

I  have  cited  this  note  in  order  to  show  how  little  science  is
served  by  such  descriptions.  There  is,  in  fact,  here  not  a
single  character  applicable  in  any  way  to  those  Helvetian
skulls  known  to  us  as  decided  types  of  brachycephaly.  Unless
there  be  a  misprint  in  the  longitudinal  measure,  the  skull
measured  by  Pruner-Bey  must  be  that  of  an  idiot  or  a  child,


lecture  xir.  363

for  all  skulls  measured  by  Von  Baer  and  myself  have  a  longitu-
dinal diameter  of  at  least  170  millimeters.  In  all  the  Romanic
(Helvetian)  skulls  I  have  seen,  amounting  to  several  hundreds,
the  forehead  rises  almost  perpendicularly,  whilst  the  supraci-
liary  arches  are  scarcely  developed,  and  the  frontal  bone  is  at
least  in  the  posterior  region  very  wide,  and  presents  only,  as
Von  Baer  remarks,  a  local  constriction  behind  the  eyes.  The
occipital  squama  descends  also  almost  perpendicularly,  its
muscle  ridges  are  but  little  developed,  and  the  foramen  mag-
num is,  on  the  contrary,  placed  farther  back,  whilst  the  arti-
cular surfaces  are  much  projecting.  This  backward  position  of
the  foramen  magnum  is  so  great  that  Von  Baer  considers  it  as
a  decided  approach  to  the  animal  form.

The  notice  of  Pruner-Bey  does  not  even  afford  a  certain
indication  whether  the  said  skull,  from  the  alluvial  cone  of  the
Tiniere,  near  Villeneuve,  is  really  a  short  head,  as  the  trans-
verse diameter  is  not  mentioned  at  all.  But  all  the  other
characters  are  so  opposed  to  those  of  the  well-known  Romanic
(Helvetian)  skulls,  that  I  must  decidedly  reject  Pruner-Bey's
unfounded  inferences  as  to  their  supposed  similarity.

I  must  here  add,  that  in  other  passages  Pruner-Bey  compares
a  Helvetian  skull  to  that  of  Meilen,  which,  as  we  have  seen,
has  nothing  in  common  with  the  Romanic  cranial  type.  I  very-
much  doubt  whether  by  this  Helvetian  cranium  he  meant  that
of  Tiniere,  for  there  the  following  measurements  are  given  for
this  Helvetian  skull: — Length,  195  millimetres;  width,  145;
which  would  give  for  the  head-measure  74- <5,  corresponding
to  that  of  what  we  have  termed  "  apostle-heads."  It  is  indeed
difficult  for  an  unprejudiced  person  to  find  the  guiding  thread
in  this  Pruner-Beyish  labyrinth.

Such  calculations  are  open  to  various  objections.  Despite
of  all  apparent  regularity,  the  deposits  of  a  mountain  torrent
are  never  quite  regular.  One  single  flood,  in  consequence  of  a
storm,  may  bring  more  material  than  will  be  deposited  regu-
larly in  long  periods,  and  this  material  will  be  deposited  accord-
ing to  its  gravity  on  the  sides  as  regularly  as  that  gradually
accumulating.  The  computation  as  regards  the  Roman  bed,
which   forms   the   basis  of  the  whole   calculation,  is   as   ques-


364  LECTURE    XII.

tionable  as  that  of  the  stone-period,  the  bones  of  which  are
certainly  of  a  more  recent  date.

Gillieron,  who  discovered  in  the  vicinity  of  the  Zihl-bridge,
near  NeufcMtel,  a  pile-work  of  the  stone-period,  arrived  at
similar  results.  The  "culture  bed"  has  a  thickness  of  at  least
five  feet,  and  lies  below  a  layer  of  black  mud,  above  which  is  a
bed  of  loam  about  five  and  a  half  feet  thick,  in  which  many
freshwater  snails  are  found.  The  pile-work,  which  is  visible
in  the  Zihl  when  the  water  is  very  low,  was  in  the  vicinity  of
the  spot  where  the  former  connection  belrween  the  Neufchatel
and  Biel  Lake  is  narrowest,  and  amounts  to  at  most  400
metres.  The  lakes,  according  to  Gillieron,  retreated  slowly,
and  the  intervening  space  through  which  now  the  Zihl  flows
was  gradually  filled  up  by  moss  and  peat.

This  retreat,  no  doubt,  took  place  very  slowly,  as  the  fine
alluvial  mud  is  everywhere  regularly  levelled  and  stratified.  If
now  we  were  enabled  to  find  an  historical  standard  of  this  re-
treat, it  might  be  applied  to  the  whole  distance  from  the  pile
work  to  the  Biel  Lake,  a  distance  of  12,800  Swiss  feet,  which
Gillieron  only  estimates  at  three  kilometres.  But  in  the  vicinity
of  the  Biel  Lake  (Lake  of  Bienne)  was  built  the  old  Abbey  of
St.  John  between  1090  and  1106,  so  we  may  assume  the  date
1100.  A  document,  prepared  a  century  later,  grants  to  the
convent  the  right  of  fishery  from  the  poplars  growing  on  the
shore  of  the  lake,  but  which  poplars  no  longer  exist.  At
present  the  convent  is  375  metres  distant  from  the  shore.
Gillieron  now  assumes  that  the  Abbey  was  built  near  the  water,
and  that  this  distance  affords  a  measure  for  the  alluvia  accu-
mulated within  750  years.  For  greater  certainty,  he  does  not
measure  the  distance  from  the  convent  to  the  pile-work,  but
to  the  point  from  which  the  lake  regularly  retreated,  and,
assuming  the  distance  to  be  3,000  metres,  he  calculates
that  6,000  years  at  least  were  required  for  the  retreat  of
the  lake.

I  say  at  least  6,000  years,  for  the  assumption  that  the  con-
vent was  built  on  the  margin  of  the  lake  is  incorrect,  but  that
the  convent  people  built  at  some  distance  from  the  lake,  and
that  the  poplars,  though  nearer  the  water,  were  also  planted


LECTURE    XII.  365

at  some  distance  as  a  protection  against  the  north-east  wind,
which  throws  the  waves  far  up  the  shore.  But  if  the  basis
upon  which  the  computation  rests  becomes  narrower,  by  the
assumption  that  convent  and  poplars  stood  at  some  distance
from  the  water,  the  time  which  the  lake  required  to  retreat  is
increased  in  an  inverse  ratio.  Assuming  that  the  poplars
stood  at  the  edge  of  the  water,  about  100  meters  from  the
convent,  the  lake  was  within  seven  centuries  only  filled  up
275  meters,  and  required  8,000  years  for  its  retreat;  and,
assuming  200  metres  distance  between  the  poplars  and  the
convent,  which  might  be  supported  by  the  mention  made  of
the  poplars  in  the  document  on  fishing,  which  poplars  stood  at
some  distance,  we  obtain  13,000  years  for  the  retreat  of  the
lake.  At  all  events,  the  assumption  of  the  least  of  the  above
periods  again  shows  that  the  Biblical  Adam  and  his  chronology
falls,  between  the  piles,  into  the  water.

An  attempt  to  save  the  chronology  must  be  made,  and  pious
M.  Troyon  does  not  shrink  from  attempting  it.  In  the  vicinity
of  Yverdun  is  seen,  in  the  middle  of  the  peat,  a  rocky  island
about  400  feet  high,  called  the  Chamblon,  at  the  foot  of  which,
about  eight  to  ten  feet  below  the  peat,  was  discovered  a  pile-
work  with  stone  hatchets.  The  distance  between  the  pile-work
and  the  lake  is,  according  to  Troyon,  5,500  feet.  Yverdun,  the
Roman  Eburodunum,  is  built  upon  a  dune  extending  over  the
turf.  According  to  Troyon,  the  lake  is  said  in  the  Roman
period  to  have  washed  the  town;  at  present  it  is  2,500  feet
distant  from  it.  A  simple  comparison  shows  that  if  the  lake
has  in  1,500  years  retired  2,400  feet,  it  must  have  required
3,300  years  to  retire  from  the  pile  work,  and  so  Biblical
chronology  is  saved.

Unfortunately  there  are  also  sceptics  in  the  faithful  Canton
of  Vaud,  and  a  M.  Jayet,  who  for  many  years  has  inhabited
and  explored  the  above  district,  finds  but  little  difficulty  in
upsetting  the  whole  of  this  orthodox  computation.

"The  peat  in  the  vicinity  of  Chamblon,"  says  Jayet,  "pre-
sents a  rare  peculiarity ;  it  is  divided  into  two  layers,  which  are
separated  by  a  thick  stratum  of  mud,  evidently  deposited  by
the  lake.     The  piles  found  in  the  upper  peat  layer  arc  em-


366  LECTURE    XII.

bedded  in  this  mud.  The  pile-works  thus  belong  to  an  older
period  than  the  upper  peat,  and  to  a  later  period  than  the
lower  peat  with  its  mud  covering.  It  is  just  this  lower
peat  bed  which  is  connected  with  the  lake  formations  of  the
plains.

"If,  then,  the  calculation  of  M.  Troyon  be  correct,  both  the
formations  which  he  compares  should  be  of  the  same  kind,
which  is  not  the  case.  Nothing  is  more  simple  than  the
formation  of  the  sandy  alluvia  between  Yverdun  and  the  lake,
which  are  formed  by  the  sand  brought  by  the  streamlets  to  the
lake,  and  which  the  billows  cast  upon  the  low  banks ;  nothing,
on  the  other  hand,  is  more  complicated  than  the  plain  between
Chamblon  and  the  lake.  To  the  alluvia  which  first  raised  and
filled  the  bed  of  the  lake,  three  successively  formed  dunes,  and
two  peat  beds,  have  been  added,  which  are  separated  from
each  other  by  a  layer  of  mud.  This  complicated  stratification
required  a  much  longer  time,  and  the  thirty-three  centuries  of
M.  Troyon  are  quite  inadequate  for  the  chronology  of  the
pile  works."

I  must  here  add,  that  the  calculations  of  Troyon  and  Gil-
lieron  are  founded  upon  an  erroneous  basis.  It  is  impossible
to  calculate  the  time  of  the  retreat  from  the  horizontal  distance ;
it  is  the  vertical  distance  which  is  to  be  attended  to.  Let  us
imagine  a  flat  lake-basin  a  few  kilometers  in  length,  gradually
drying  up.  Around  this  lake  are  certain  structures.  The
surface  of  the  water  having  sunk  two  feet,  a  space  one  kilo-
meter in  diameter  is  dried  up  at  one  end.  A  structure  is  now
raised  near  the. present  water  level.  The  lake  sinks  again  two
feet,  and  in  one  thousand  years  the  last  structure  is  a  kilo-
meter from  the  shore.  But  the  lake-basin  is  narrow  ;  and  of
the  older  structures,  situated  two  feet  higher,  it  would  only  be
the  most  distant  which  would  furnish  a  correct  result  in  cal-
culating its  age — all  others  would  yield  a  false  date,  as  they
lie  800,  600,  or  perhaps  only  100  meters  in  a  horizontal  dis-
tance from  the  recent  structures.  Gillieron  would  thus  obtain
a  different  result  were  he  to  found  his  calculation  upon  the
nearer  Neufchatel  lake,  and  Troyon  would,  for  a  pile-work  on
the  southern  bank  of  Chamblon,  instead  of  the  northern,  have


LECTURE    XII.  367

obtained  a  result  which  would  have  thrown  the  age  of  this
second  pile-work  far  beyond  the  time  of  the  Biblical  Adam.

The  only  trustworthy  basis  for  computation,  is  the  vertical
increase  of  the  peat  in  the  districts  where  pile-works  are  buried
in  the  peat.  For  this  we  have  at  present  unfortunately  no
starting  points  ;  my  inquiries  on  this  point  of  many  naturalists
have  not  yielded  any  important  fact  in  this  respect.

I  cannot,  however,  leave  this  subject  without  presenting  you
with  a  short  summary  of  the  absurdities  in  which  man  becomes
entangled  when  he  attempts  to  force  the  facts  furnished  by
nature  into  the  narrow  frame  of  the  Jewish  family  chronicle.
I  take  the  book  of  Troy  on  (Les  Habitations  Lacustres) ,  and
summarise  thus.  After  the  deluge,  the  peoples  of  Asia  com-
mence their  march  to  populate  the  whole  earth.  No  doubt,
the  art  of  building  upon  the  water  was  first  invented  in  the
dry  highlands  of  Asia.  The  first  settlers,  the  post-diluvial
squatters,  sprung^  from  the  blood  of  Japhet,  naturally  march
along  river- valleys  and  the  coasts.  They  bring  with  them  large
herds  of  domesticated  animals.  The  travellers  on  the  coast
are  frequently  stopped  by  the  mouths  of  the  rivers ;  the  tra-
vellers in  the  valleys  are  delayed  by  marshes  or  rocks.  The
land  must  be  explored,  and  the  domesticated  animals  must  be
protected  from  the  wild  beasts.*  They  therefere  made  them-
selves rafts  for  protection. f  Such  a  raft  having  been  built,
it  is  not  readily  abandoned,  as  it  forms  a  refuge  for  the  old  and
young.  They  have,  therefore,  rafts  which  are  fixed  when  they
have  a  stoppage.  "  From  rafts,"  says  Saint  Troyon,  "  to  ship-
building is  certainly  a  wide  leap ;  but  the  old  tradition  of  the
deluge,  and  the  ark  of  Noah  which  floated  upon  the  waters,  had
been  preserved,  and  this  tradition  gave  hints  as  to  the  fasten-
ing of  the  trunks  requisite  for  constructing  a  raft.  If  a  family
abandoned  a  migratory  life,  the  raft  acquired  the  character  of
a  permanent  habitation.  But  where  the  waves  proved  too
strong,  the  people  naturally  hit  upon  the  idea  of  changing  the

*  That  these  wild  beasts,  which  also  came  from  the  ark  of  Noah,  should
have  spread  more  rapidly  than  privileged  man,  and  should  have  threatened
him  in  his  resting  places,  I  cannot  well  understand. — C.  V.

t  How  could  these  rafts  protect  them  from  the  ice-bears  and  phoca?,  which
are  excellent  swimmers,  and  were  also  in  the  ark  of  Noah. — C.  V.


368  LECTURE    XII.

raft  into  a  platform  raised  on  piles  above  the  water,  so  that
the  billows  could  not  reach  it,  and  this  is  the  origin  of  the
pile- works/''

Thus  the  squatters  travel  leisurely  from  east  to  west,  from
Asia  to  Europe,  along  the  coasts  and  up  the  rivers.  It  is,
however,  thinks  Troyon,  difficult  to  say  whether  the  first  inha-
bitants of  Switzerland  ascended  the  Rhone  or  passed  over  the
Rhine.  We  much  fear  that  this  question  will  remain  unsolved,
but  we  should  like  to  know  how  these  clumsy  rafts  could  have
ascended  a  river,  which  feat,  between  Seyssel  and  Geneva,
cannot  be  effected  by  steamers.  But  as  faith  removes  moun-
tains, rafts  can  no  doubt  ascend  the  Rhone.

There  is  another  hard  nut  for  Bible  believers  to  crack,
namely  the  knowledge  of  metals.  The  stone  people  of  Europe
knew  of  no  metal.  But  Tubalcain,  the  Biblical  Vulcan,  was
an  artificer  in  brass  and  iron  before  the  Mosaic  deluge,  and
as,  according  to  the  sage  remark  of  Troyon,  man  must  acquire
by  labour  all  that  is  requisite  for  his  comfort,  he  cannot  have
commenced  with  being  a  blacksmith.  "But,"  continues  M.
Troyon,  "we  need  only  imagine  these  first  migrations  towards
the  West,  to  comprehend  how  a  people  can  lose  the  knowledge
of  metals.  There  is  no  doubt  that  these  families,  at  their
departure  from  Asia,  possessed  metallic  instruments,  but  their
nomadic  life  did  not  permit  them  to  work  mines,  to  establish
forges,  or  to  acquire  the  social  organisation  requisite  for  dif-
ferent handicrafts.  The  further  these  families  penetrated  into
unknown  regions,  the  ways  behind  them  were  cut  off,  and
they  were  no  longer  able  to  communicate  with  the  centres  of
Oriental  civilisation."  Thus  the  poor  people  necessarily  forgot
the  working  of  metal  and  had  recourse  to  stones.

At  a  later  period  came  the  Bronze  people,  also  from  Asia,
and  killed  their  unfortunate  predecessors,  burnt  their  huts,
and  established  themselves,  worshipping  the  moon.  There
were  discovered  some  pieces  of  clay  or  stone  in  the  form  of  a
crescent  belonging  to  the  Bronze  period ;  these,  it  was  said,
indicated  moon  worship.  These  things  were  perhaps  only
head-pillows,  for  many  people  even  now  use  a  crescent-shaped
block  of  wood  or  stone  for  a  pillow.


LECTURE    XII.  369

But  the  Bronze  people*  were  also  punished  for  their  forget-
fulness.  Tubal-Cain  was  an  artificer  in  brass  and  iron,  and
the  Hebrew  word  "Barsal"  in  Genesis  means  iron,  and  no
other  metal.  Thus  Noah's  brother,  and  the  whole  family  of
Noah,  were  acquainted  with  brass  (bronze)  and  iron.  The
Stone  people  forgot  during  their  migrations  both  metals,  and
used  horn  and  stone.  They  kept  their  nephrite  hatchets,  but
threw  away  their  bronze  knives  and  iron  hatchets,  and  forgot
their  use.  The  Bronze  people  kept  their  bronze  knives,  but
cast  away  the  iron  tools  and  forgot  their  use.  That  was  a
great  misfortune ;  for,  after  having  long  dwelt  in  the  habita-
tions of  their  forgetful  Stone  brothers,  the  vengeance  of  God
came  over  them,  for  the  bigheaded  Helvetians,  also  from  Asia,
came  over  them,  slew  them,  and  burnt  them  out.

0  sancta  simplicitas  !


*  It  is  scarcely  necessary  to  remind  the  reader  that  bronze-people,  stone-
people,  stone-skulls,  are  mere  abbreviations  for  peoples  and  skulls  belonging
to  the  bronze  or  stone  period. — Editor.


B  B


370


LECTUEE    XIII.

Distinctive  Characters  of  the  Cavern-  and  Stone-Period.  Skulls  of  Den-
mark.— Arching  of  the  Forehead. — Apostle-Skulls  of  Switzerland,  and
their  Age. — The  Jaw  of  Moulin-Quignon. — Skulls  of  Lombrive  compared
with  those  of  the  present  Basques. — Danish  Stone-Skulls  compared  with
the  present  Lapps. — Skull  of  Meilen. — Relation  to  the  present  Swiss
Skulls. — Romanic  Short-Heads. — Eelation  to  the  Etruscans. — The  Oldest
Domestic  Animals. — The  Dog. — Swine. — "Wild  Hog;  and  Marsh-Hog. —
Horned  Cattle :  TJrus,  Wisent,  long-fronted,  and  curved-horned  Cattle. —
The  Sheep.— The  Goat.— The  Horse.— Cultivated  Plants.

Gentlemen, — We  considered  in  a  preceding  Lecture  the
conditions  under  which  the  primitive  man  existed  in  Europe.
In  arriving  at  the  conclusion  that  he  co-existed  with  the
extinct  animals  of  the  so-called  diluvial  period,  reaching  far
beyond  any  historical  data,  we,  at  the  same  time,  obtained
the  result,  at  least  as  regards  the  oldest  skulls,  that  such
cranial  formations  as  those  of  Engis  and  the-  Neanderthal,  are
at  present  no  longer  met  with  in  European  races.  A  cursory
comparison  of  later  skulls  of  the  South  of  France,  and  of  the
sepulchres  of  the  stone  period  of  Denmark,  equally  showed
that  those  parts  must  have  been  inhabited  by  other  races,
whose  cranial  formation  differs  so  much  from  those  first  men-
tioned, that  a  descent  in  the  direct  line  is  hardly  conceivable.
We  intend  to-day  to  pursue  this  inquiry,  and  endeavour  to
trace  the  connection  of  these  various  phenomena,  aided  by  an
examination  of  domestic  animals  and  their  development.

I  have  already  observed  that  the  distinguishing  character  of
the  two  cave-skulls  lies  in  the  extraordinary  length  of  the
whole  skull,  in  the  comparatively  small  width  which  falls
behind  the  region  of  the  parietal  prominences,  and  in  the
peculiarly  attached  occiput,  which  in  one  of  these  skulls,
viewed  from  above,  presents  almost  a  straight  line  of  the
lambdoidal  suture,  whilst,  in  the  other,  this  line  presents  the


LECTUKE    XIII.


371


usual   triangular  form.       A    minute   examination   of  the    two

skulls  led  me  to  conclude  that  they  belong-  to  the  same  race,

Fig.  109.     Neander- Skull,  top  view.


Fig.  110.     Engis  Skull,  top  view.


bb2


372


LECTURE    XIII.


though  the  development  of  the  supraciliary  ridges,  and  the
arching  of  the  cranial  roof,  seemed  to  present  at  the  first
glance  great  differences.

With  regard  to  the  formation  of  the  supraciliary  ridges,  the
prominence  of  which,  though  not  always,  yet  in  this  case  de-
pends on  the  dimensions  of  the  frontal  sinuses  ;  there  is  no
doubt  that  they  are  also  usually  connected  with  the  greater
development  of  the  crests,  ridges,  and  muscular  force  in  general,
and  are  thus  an  attribute  of  the  male  sex.  Professor  Schaaff-
hausen  cites  numerous  examples  which  prove  that  this  connec-
tion exists  both  in  animals  and  man.  It  will  be  found  in
living  persons  that  the  imperceptible  transition  of  the  forehead
into  the  supraorbital  margins  is  chiefly  seen  in  women,  whilst
the  projecting  eyebrows,  frequently  separated  from  the  fore-
head by  a  deep  groove,  is  peculiar  to  muscular  males.  The
same  observations  may  be  made  on  old  skulls  in  which  the

Fig.  111.     Skull  of  Borreby,  Denmark  (Stone-Period),  side  view,  after  Busk.


development  of  the  supraorbital  prominences  greatly  differs,
though  all  other  characters  are  perfectly  identical.  Thus,
Professor  His,  of  Basle,  communicates  to  me  the  interesting


LECTURE   XIII.  373

case  of  two  old  skulls  found  in  a  "Waadtland  (Vaud)  grave,  which,
as  may  be  inferred  from  the  surrounding  bones,  belonged  the  one
to  a  male,  the  other  to  a  female ;  the  male  skull  had  remarkably
prominent  supraciliary  arches,  whilst  in  the  female  skull  the
forehead  was  quite  smooth  without  prominent  ridges.

Mr.  Busk  has  kindly  sent  me  a  list  of  the  measurements  of
twenty  Danish  skulls  of  the  stone-period,  with  many  other
perfectly  exact  drawings.  Proceeding  on  the  principle  that
the  female  skull  is  smaller  than  the  male  skulls,  I  discarded
from  the  list  as  female  skulls  all  such  as  exhibited  the  smallest
longitudinal  diameter.  I  now  compared  the  figures,  and
found  that  those  which  I  had  put  aside  as  female  skulls  had
smooth  foreheads,  whilst  the  male  skulls  possessed  prominent
supraorbital  ridges,  some  of  them  to  such  an  extent,  that
they  might  be  placed  side  by  side  with  the  Neander  skull,
whilst  the  skull  marked  by  Busk  as  a  female  skull  presented
no  trace  of  any  protuberance,  and  in  the  flattening  of  the
supraciliary  arches  exceeds  even  the  Engis  skull.  It  is,  more-
ever,  known  that  in  monkeys,  which  are  distinguished  by  the
size  of  the  supraciliary  arches,  the  latter  are  only  developed
with  advancing-  age,  which  is  also  the  case  in  man.  As
now  the  female  skull  always  preserves  a  certain  amount  of
the  characters  of  the  child,  so  that  the  male  skull,  about
puberty,  scarcely  differs  from  the  adult  female  skull,  this  cir-
cumstance is  equally  in  favour  of  my  view,  according  to  which
the  development  of  the  supraciliary  arches  ought  not  to  be
considered  as  a  race, — but  as  an  individual  and  sexual  cha-
racter. I  must,  however,  qualify  this  assertion  so  far,  that  I  do
not  mean  to  insist  that  such  an  enormous  projection  of  the
supraciliary  arches  as  those  in  the  Neander  skull  can  occur  in
all  races.  But  wherever  there  exists  in  any  race  a  tendency  to
such  a  projection,  it  will  only  be  met  with  in  males,  and  per-
haps exceptionally  in  some  masculine  women,  with  a  strongly
developed  muscular  system,  but  not  in  typical  women.

The  second  essential  difference  between  the  Engis  and  the
Neander  skull  consists  in  the  arching  of  the  forehead  and  the
roof  of  the  cranium.  The  Neander  skull  is  so  flat,  that  it
might  belong  to  an  idiot ;  the  Engis  skull,  on  the  contrary,


374


LECTURE    XIII.


though  it  presents  a  low,  narrow,  and  but  little  capacious  fore-
head, might  still,  according  to  Huxley's  opinion,  have  belonged
to  a  naturalist.  But  on  carefully  examining  the  general  out-
line which  both  skulls  show  as  regards  the  curvature,  we  find
that  it  agrees  to  a  considerable  extent.

Fig.  112.     Neander-Skull.


Pig.  113.     Engis  Skull.


This  line  ascends  gently  and  uniformly  from  the  frontal  pro-
minence to  the  vertex,  which  lies  further  back,  nearly  above
the  mastoid  process.  From  this  vertical  spot  the  curve  de-
scends backwards  in  the  same  oblique  line.  The  mode  of
formation  is  exactly  the  same  in  both,  though  the  height  of
the  arch  is  much  greater  in  the  Engis  skull.  But  these  pecu-
liarities find  their  analogues  when  we  compare  larger  series  of
skulls  of  both  sexes  belonging  to  the  same  race.


LECTURE    XIII.


375


Professor  Huxley  has  very  justly  drawn  attention  to  the
fact,  that  the  arching  of  the  forehead  and  the  skull  greatly
varies  in  Australians,  and  it  does  not  appear  to  me  by  any
means  improbable  that  in  the  lower  races,  where  the  long  and
fiat  skull  of  the  adult  must  be  developed  out  of  the  roundish  and
arched  skull  of  the  child,  the  female  has  a  skull  higher  arched
though  narrower  than  that  of  the  male.  The  drawings  of
Busk  lead  to  the  same  result ;  all  the  male  skulls  without  ex-
ception stand,  as  regards  the  arching  of  the  forehead  and  the
skull,  far  behind  the  female  skulls  which  come  from  the  same
locality  and  belong  to  the  race  of  the  stone  period.

Fig.  114.     Skull  of  an  Austral- Negro,  after  Lucae,  side  view.


It  has  been  generally  asserted  that  among  the  present  Eu-
ropean cranial  forms,  there  was  not  one  which  any  way  ap-
proached that  of  the  above  cave  skulls  ;  and,  in  point  of  fact,
the  Dutch  only  show  a  distant  approximation,  inasmuch  as  they
possess  the  longest  skulls  in  Europe.  I  was,  therefore,  not  a
little  surprised  to  find,  in  the  Anatomical  Museum  of  Berne,  the
roof  of  a  cranium,  ticketed  as  having  been  found  near  Biel,
which  Professor  Valentin  placed  at  my  disposal,  and  which,  on
examination,  might  be  pronounced  the  twin  brother  of  the
Neander  skull !  The  projecting  supraciliary  ridge,  the  de-
pression   in    the    forehead,    the    flat  ascending    arch    of   the


376


LECTURE    XIII.


cranium,  the  backward  vertex,  with  its  steep  declivity  towards
the  neck,  were  all  present ;  the  length  was  nearly  the  same,
the  width  less,  so  that  this  cranium  is  the  smallest  known  to


Fig.  115.


Skull  in  the  Museum  of  Bern,  top  view.


me.  Viewed  from  above,  the  form  is  the  same,  though  the
bones  of  the  Bernese  skull  are  all  smaller  and  thinner.  The
anterior  frontal  prominence  is  transversely  cut  off,  and  the
occiput  projects  in  such  a  manner  that  we  have  the  figure  of  a
drawn-out  pentagon  with  a  posterior  rounded  apex.  It  was
evident  that  I  had  before  me  the  roof  of  a  cranium  which
belonged  to  the  same  race-type,  and  as  regards  form  and  size,
was  intermediate  between  the  Engis  and  Neander  skull.

You  may  easily  imagine  that  this  circumstance  puzzled  me
not  a  little,  and  that  I  spared  no  trouble  to  discover  some
particulars  as  to  the  finding  of  this  skull,  which  has  been  for
more  than  thirty  years  in  the  collection  of  the  museum.  My
endeavours  were  fruitless.  The  Bernese  skull  remained  a
riddle  as  regards  the  place  of  its  discovery.  The  old  ticket  put
upon  it,  probably  by  Albrecht  Meckel,  pointed  out  its  resem-
blance to  the  skull  of  a  Dutchman  born  at  Leyden,  and  deli-
neated by  Blumenbach.


LECTURE    XIII.


377


On  comparing  the  drawings  of  many  skulls  from  old  graves
and  pile-works  of  Switzerland  made  by  Prof.  His,  avo  both
were  struck  with  the  resemblance  of  some  of  these  long  skulls
to  my  Bernese  skull.

Fig.  116.     Long-Skull  of  Hohberg,  near  Solothurn,  after  a  drawing  by  His.


One  of  these  skulls  was  in  Basle ;  another  had  been  dug  out
by  Hugi,  twenty  years  ago,  in  Hohberg,  about  three  miles
from  Solothurn ;  a  third  belonged  to  the  collection  of  Colonel
Schwab  in  Biel,  and  was  found  in  a  pile-work  on  the  lake. .

We  had  now  some  starting  points  for  further  inquiries.  A
journey  to  Biel  and  Solothurn  furnished  us  with  further  par-
ticulars, and  gave  us  at  the  same  time  an  opportunity  of
examining  about  two  dozen  old  skulls,  which  Dr.  Schild  had
dug  out  at  Grenchen,  and  presented  by  him  to  the  museum
of  Solothurn,  the  director  of  which,  Prof.  Lang,  had  the  kind-
ness to  place  them  at  my  disposal.  Even  among  these  Swiss
skulls  of  Grenchen,  there  were,  by  the  side  of  broad  Swiss
skulls  of  the  present  type,  two  narrow  skulls  which  I  studied.

The  archgeological  question  was  soon  solved  by  M.  Amiet,
the  learned  town  clei^k  of  Solothurn.  The  graves  opened  by
Hugi,  in  the  Hohberg,  contained  large  ear-rings  and  bracelets
of  bronze,  strings  of  amber  beads,  and  light  blue  opaque  glass
pearls,  iron  swords,  one  with  a  silver  ring  and  an  old  inscrip-
tion signifying,  according  to  Professor  Mommsen  of  Zurich,


378  LECTURE   XIII.

Renatus.  These  graves  belong,  according  to  Amiet,  from
their  contents,  undoubtedly  to  the  end  of  the  Roman  period,
that  is  to  say,  to  the  end  of  the  fourth  or  beginning  of  the
fifth  century,  about  which  time  Christianity  was  introduced  in
Switzerland.

A  similar  ring  was  found  in  the  graves  of  Grenchen,  which
thus  belong  to  the  same  period.

The  skull  of  Schwab's  collection  came  from  a  pile-work  in
the  vicinity  of  the  effluence  of  the  Scheuss,  from  the  lake
of  Bienne,  which  hitherto  has  only  furnished  Roman  antiquities.

All  the  narrow  skulls  of  this  kind  known  to  me,  where
the  spots'  where  they  were  found  had  been  well  examined,
thus  belong  to  the  same  period, — the  period  of  the  decline  of
the  Roman  empire  and  the  introduction  of  Christianity  in
Switzerland.  They  are  in  small  proportions  mixed  with  other
skulls  which,  as  comparative  examination  teaches,  have  pre-
served their  type  from  a  comparatively  recent  period  down  to
the  present  day.  We  are  thus  permitted  to  suppose  that  these
narrow  skulls  which  approach  the  simian  type  must  have
belonged  to  immigrants,  who  arrived  only  in  small  numbers,
and  whose  type  was  not  propagated  but  soon  disappeared.
But  we  can  trace  no  other  immigration  at  .that  period  than
that  of  Christian  missionaries  who,  according  to  tradition,  came
principally  from  Ireland.  It  is  not  so  very  improbable  that
the  new  religion,  before  which  the  flourishing  Roman  civilisa-
tion relapsed  into  a  state  of  barbarism,  should  have  been  intro-
duced by  people  in  whose  skulls  the  anatomist  finds  simious
characters  so  well  developed,  and  in  which  the  phrenologist
finds  the  organ  of  veneration  so  much  enlarged.  I  shall,  in
the  meanwhile,  call  these  simious  narrow  skulls  of  Switzerland
"  Apostle  skulls,"  as  I  imagine  that  in  life  they  must  have
resembled  the  type  of  Peter  the  Apostle,  as  represented  in
Byzantine-Nazarene  art.

The  jaw  of  Abbeville,  the  characters  of  which  we  have  already
described,  can  in  nowise  serve  for  the  determination  of  race
characters.  The  wide  open  angle  formed  by  its  rami,  may
perhaps  indicate  prognathism,  just  as  the  Engis  and  Neander
skulls  probably  belonged  to  a  prognathous  race,  but  no  certain


LECTURE    XIII.


379


inference  can  be  drawn.  I  have  three  of  the  abovementioned
"  Apostle  skulls/'  found  in  three  different  places,  before  me,
whose  facial  bones  are  so  far  preserved  that  the  profile  is  per-
fectly recognisable.  The  arching  of  the  forehead  is  in  the  skulls
of  Biel,  Hohberg,  and  Grenchen  considerably  greater,  and  the
forehead  fuller  and  more  prominent  than  in  the  old  cave  skulls.
The  insertion  of  the  nose  presents  a  peculiar  character,  as  even
in  such  skulls  as  have  no  frontal  prominences  there  is  a  deep
depression  in  which  the  nose  is  almost  horizontally  inserted.
The  front  teeth  are  certainly  rather  oblique,  but  not  so  much
as  to  be  considered  a  special  deviation  from  the  type  of
European  skulls.

On  comparing  these  skulls  with  those  of  the  cave  of  Lom-
brive,  we  find  the  greatest  possible  difference.

Fig.  117.     Skull  from  the  Cave  of  Lombrive,  side  view.


The  two  skulls  sent  me  by  Dr.  Garrigou  are  well  preserved,
partly  covered  with  tufa.  The  bones  of  the  skulls  arc  re-
markably light,  dry  to  the  touch,  porous,  and  adhere  to  the
tongue.  The  smaller  skull  belongs  to  a  child  of  about  nine
years,  just  on  the  point  of  changing  the  canine  and  the  first
molar  tooth.  The  large  skull  has  such  graceful  outlines,  that
it  probably  belonged  to  a  woman.  The  teeth  show  that  this
ancient  people  suffered  as  much  from  toothache  as  the  present
generation.     Two  of   the  molars   were    carious,   a   third    hud


380


LECTURE    XIII.


fallen  out,  and  the  socket  filled  up.  The  teeth  were  worn  down
in  the  same  manner  as  observed  in  mummies  and  other  ancient
peoples,  very  much  so  for  an  indicated  age  of  about  thirty  years.
In  my  opinion,  this  premature  decay  is  probably  connected  with
the  use  of  that  coarse  bread,  which  contains  a  large  quantity
of  stony  particles,  and  which  was  partaken  of  by  most  ancient
peoples.  The  black  bread  of  the  Westphalians  (pumpernickel)
and  the  flat  cakes  of  the  Norwegians  seem  both  the  offspring
of  the  bakings  of  antiquity,  the  remains  of  which  are  found  in
the  Swiss  pile-works.

The  shape  of  the  crania  of  Lombrive  is  on  the  whole  a  noble
one.  The  forehead  is  high,  arched,  and  slides  into  the  nose
with  a  scarcely  perceptible  projection  of  the  supraciliary  arches.
The  crown  of  the  head  is  nearly  above  the  auditory  aperture.

Fig.  118.     Skull  of  Cave  of  Lombrive,  top  view.


The  occiput  is  somewhat  protruding.  The  temporal  fossae
are  deep  in  the  antei"ior  part,  but  rather  flattened  in  the  poste-
rior region,  whilst  the  temporal  line  extends  further  upwards.
The  facial  portion  of  the  skull  is  very  small,  the  front  teeth
scarcely  diverge  outwards,  so  little,  indeed,  that  most  German
female  skulls  would  show  a  more  oblique  direction.  Viewed
from  above  (fig.  118),  the  skull  appears  short,  oviform,  with
broad  zygomatic  arches,  and  a  considerable  transverse  diameter,


LECTURE    XIII.  381

which  passes  in  front  of  the  parietal  protuberances,  and  about
the  centre  of  the  longitudinal  diameter.  In  point  of  fact,  the
proportion  of  the  greatest  length  to  the  greatest  width  in  the
adult  skull  is  100  :  77 ;  but  in  the  young  skull  as  100  :  82*6 — a
proportion  which  need  not  surprise  us,  as  the  young  skull  is
much  rounder  than  the  adult  skull.  The  adult  skull  thus  pre-
sents proportions  as  in  Jewish  and  Gipsy  skulls,  which,  accord-
ing to  Welcker,  are  equal  in  this  respect.

On  viewing  the  skull  in  front,  the  orbits  seem  very  deep,  and
the  roof  so  arched  that  the  superior  orbital  margin  presents  a
sharp  edge.  The  orbits  are  at  the  same  time  wide  and  almost
square,  the  nasal  cavity  is  narrow  and  high,  the  forehead  pro-
minent in  the  centre,  but  sloping  rather  abruptly  on  the  sides,
so  that  the  vertex  has  almost  the  form  of  a  rounded  house-
roof.  Viewed  from  behind,  the  skull  appears  pentagonal,  the
mastoid  processes  forming  the  inferior,  the  parietal  promi-
nences the  superior  angles,  and  the  sagittal  suture  a  sharp
edge.

In  the  absence  of  a  large  collection,  it  was  impossible  for  me
to  determine  which  type  these  crania  most  approach.  They
are,  at  all  events,  of  such  a  character  that  they  need  not  be
ashamed  to  appear  amongst  those  of  other  Caucasian  peoples.
In  Dr.  Broca' s  opinion,  which  is,  however,  founded  more  on
first  impression  than  on  minute  examination,  these  skulls
resemble  most  the  present  Basques,  who  still  inhabit  the
country  in  which  the  cave  is  situated.  But  these  Basques  are
just  the  most  remarkable  people — islands,  if  we  may  use  that
term — which  exist  on  the  earth,  differing  in  every  respect  from
all  the  surrounding  peoples.  They  possess  a  language,  the
analogue  of  which  has  only  been  met  with  in  America.  The
Basques  are  as  yet  an  unsolved  problem ;  they  cannot  possibly
have  come  from  Asia.*

*  Since  the  time  Broca  favoured  ine  with  this  communication,  he  has
availed  himself  of  the  rare  opportunity  of  examining  sixty  undoubted  Basque
skulls,  which  were,  under  his  own  direction,  dug  out  from  the  churchyard  of
a  Spanish  village.  This  examination,  we  may  say,  is  a  model  of  an  ex-
haustive treatise.

Not  content  with  the  usual  division  into  short,  middle,  and  long  heads,
Broca  interposes  two  other  categories,  which  we  shall  term  semi-long  and
semi-short  heads.     According  to  this  division,  the  pure  long-heads  measure


382  LECTURE    XIII.

This  resemblance,  if  it  should  be  confirmed,  would  at  any
rate  furnish  us  with  some  clue  relative  to  the  age  of  this
Basque  stock,  which,  -with  its  physical   constitution,  its  lan-

at  most  75  ;  the  head  measure  of  the  semi-long  is  comprised  between  75  and
77*77,  i.  e.  between  six-eighths  and  seven-ninths;  the  middle-heads  from
77*77,  i.  e.  from  seven-ninths  to  eight-tenths;  the  semi-short  heads,  between
80  and  83 ;  and  finally,  the  genuine  short-heads  comprise  all  measurements
exceeding  83.  According  to  this  division  there  would  be,  among  the  sixty
Basque  skulls,  nine  pure  long-heads,  twenty  semi -longheads,  nineteen  middle
heads,  twelve  semi-shortheads,  but  not  one  genuine  shorthead,  so  that  the
mean  lies  in  the  semi-longheads  ;  and  the  Basques  possess  a  proportionally
longer  skull  than  the  present  Parisians,  whilst  the  cranial  capacity  is  also
greater, — a  fact  which  cannot  altogether  be  connected  with  the  development
of  intelligence,  but  is  probably  the  result  of  racial  difference.

Everyone  is,  of  course,  at  liberty  to  fix  the  limits  of  the  various  propor-
tions in  head  measurements  according  to  his  pleasure ;  still  it  is  to  be  re-
gretted that  no  agreement  exists  as  to  the  signification  of  the  various  terms.
In  fact  it  has  come  to  this,  that  any  person  who  uses  the  terms  short,  middle,
and  longheads,  must  be  asked  in  what  sense,  and  according  to  what  author,
he  wishes  these  terms  to  be  understood.

Broca,  however,  advances  a  step  further,  and  from  his  measurements,  the
terminal  points  of  which  can  be  determined  with  great  exactness,  he,  with
Gratiolet,  arrives  at  the  conclusion  that  two  types  of  dolichocephaly  must  be
distinguished :  the  frontal  dolichocephalic,  to  which  belong  the  German
races,  and  the  occipital  dolichocephalic,  comprising  the  African  and  Oceanic
Negroes.  In  other  words,  in  the  former,  it  is  the  frontal  region,  and  espe-
cially the  frontal  bone ;  in  the  latter,  it  is  the  occipital  region,  which  is  espe-
cially lengthened;  and  in  this  way  conditions  the  predominance  of  the  lon-
gitudinal diameter.

In  order  to  give  these  proportions  a  definite  term  of  measurement,  Broca
connects  the  auditory  apertures  by  a  bine  which  passes  over  the  posterior
point  of  the  frontal  bone  ;  or,  in  other  words,  he  draws'  upon  the  skull  the
diagonal  circumference  of  Virchow  (see  page  62),  which  has  the  same  di-
rection. This  diagonal  circumference  represents  a  section  which  divides
the  fore  from  the  back  skull,  which  can  thus  be  compared.  Broca  now  finds
that  although  the  Basque  skulls  are  longer,  wider,  and  higher,  than  the
Parisians,  still  the  so-parted  off  foreskull  is  less  developed  in  the  Basques
than  in  the  Parisians,  so  much  that  even  in  circumference  it  is  absolutely
smaller  by  six  millimetres.  From  other  measurements  Broca  conies  to  the
conclusion  that  the  dolichocephaly  of  the  Basques  rests  mainly  upon  the
disproportionate  development  of  the  posterior  cerebral  lobe.

"  In  proving,"  continues  Broca,  "  that  the  Basques  present  the  characters
of  occipital  dolichocephaly,  I  have,  in  my  opinion,  also  proved  that  between
them  and  the  Indo-Germanic  longheads  there  obtains  a  great  difference.
As  among  the  European  races  I  found  no  points  for  comparison,  and  being
reminded  that  this  kind  of  dolichocephaly  belongs  essentially  to  the  Ameri-
can race,  I  studied,  by  comparison,  the  cranial  forms  of  the  Basques,  the
Parisians,  and  the  Negroes."

From  these  comparisons,  into  the  particulars  of  which  we  cannot  enter,
Broca  finally  concludes  : — "  The  Basques  much  approach  the  African  long-
heads ;  they  much  resemble  the  Negroes  by  the  form  of  the  cerebral  skull,
which  in  this  respect  deviates  but  little  from  the  orthognathous  African  races.

"  I  must,  however,  add  that  the  Basques  differ  from  all  African  races,  even
the  whitest  and  most  orthognathous,  by  the  smallness  of  their  upper  jaw,
the  slight  development  of  the  cerebellar  protuberance,  and  the  relative
shrinking  of  the  occipital  protuberance.  These  characters  equally  distin-
guish the  Basques  from  the  European  races.


LECTURE    XIII.


:;s::l


guage  foreign  to  the  Indo-Germanic  stock,  its  customs  and
manners,  has  been  preserved  in  that  corner  of  the  globe  which
it  still  inhabits.  We  are  almost  tempted  to  ask  whether,
instead  of  that  supposed  emigration  from  Asia  and  Europe  to
America,  we  might  not  rather  assume  an  emigration  from
America  to  the  Bay  of  Biscay,  perhaps  by  way  of  the  connect-
ing land  between  Florida  and  our  own  continent,  which  is  now
submerged  in  the  sea,  but  which,  according  to  all  probability,

Fig.  119.     Skull  of  Borreby,  side  view.


was  at  least  in  the  middle  tertiary  (miocene)  period  still  above
water.

For  my  own  part,  I  have  arrived  at  the  conclusion  that  the


"  I  conclude,  hence,  that  in  searching  for  the  origin  of  the  Basques  out  of
the  Basque  country,  their  ancestors  will  be  found  neither  among  the  Celts,
nor  the  rest  of  the  Indo-European  nations,  but  that  our  investigations  must
be  directed  towards  Northern  Africa.  Europe  was  at  a  remote  period,  no
doubt,  connected  with  Africa ;  we  need,  therefore,  not  feel  surprised  to  find
affinities  between  the  primitive  inhabitants  of  both  parts  of  the  world,  even
if  ;t  were  not  known  that  many  migrations  had,  in  ancient  times,  taken
place  across  the  Straits  of  Gibraltar."

I  would  add  to  this  last  hypothesis,  that  the  former  connexion  of  the
Pillars  of  Hercules  is  rendered  probable  by  many  facts,  among  which  I  may
mention  the  existence  of  wild  monkeys  of  the  same  species  as  those  which  in-
habit, side  by  side  with  the  Eiff  pirates,  the  opposite  coast.


384  LECTURE    XIII.

skulls  of  Lombrive  belong  to  a  race  differing  entirely  from
Belgo-Khenish  cave-skulls.  All  the  characters  are  so  opposed,
that  a  descent  of  the  Lombrive  skulls  from  those  of  Engis,
or  any  affinity  between  them,  is  inadmissible.  We  do  not
deny  that  a  long  period  had  elapsed  between  the  time  in
which  the  man  of  Engis  and  the  Neanderthal  fought  with  the
cave-bear,  to  that  epoch  when  the  man  of  Lombrive  hunted
the  reindeer.  But,  on  the  other  hand,  it  can  scarcely  be
assumed,  that  considering  these  generations  of  men  to  have
lived  in  the  same  conditions,  such  a  period  of  time  should  have
sufficed  to  produce  such  a  radically  different  race.

Passing  from  these  skulls  to  those  of  the  Stone  period  of
Denmark,  which  appear  to  me  to  belong  to  a  later  age,  I  find
again  a  thorough  difference  in  the  general  characters.

As  already  stated,  Mr.  Busk,  a  distinguished  naturalist  of
London,  kindly  furnished  me  with  an  elaborate  table  of  mea-
surements of  twenty  skulls,  half  of  this  number  having  been
found  at  Borreby,  and  the  rest  in  six  different  places.  Seven
skulls  of  Borreby  were  represented  by  masterly  drawings  in
the  most  various  aspects,  so  that  I  am,  as  regards  the  mate-
rials, as  well  provided  as  is  possible  in  the  absence  of  the
originals.  The  heads  are,  on  the  whole,  not  too  small,
for  their  greatest  longitudinal  diameters  vary  between  6*58
and  7,  8  English  inches,  consequently  about  171  to  195
millimeters,  and  at  all  events  the  length  and  breadth  of  these
heads  exceed  those  of  the  Lapps  with  which  they  have  been
compared.  Setting  aside  those  whose  longitudinal  diameter
seems  to  indicate  youth  or  the  female  sex  (there  are  six  such
skulls),  we  have  a  series  of  fourteen  adult  skulls,  the  length  of
which  oscillates  between  7*2 :  7*8,  that  is  about  six-tenths
English  inches,  or  fifteen  millimeters,  namely  from  180  to  195.
This  certainly  is  an  important  agreement,  which,  like  the
forms  of  the  heads  in  general,  leads  to  the  conclusion  that  there
was  a  great  uniformity  in  this  old  stock.

On  examining  the  proportion  of  length  to  the  width,  we
find  that  the  oscillation  is  greater,  taking  the  length  at  100,  it
is  71  '8  to  85'  7 ;  that  is  nearly  14  per  cent.  But,  again,  setting
aside  the  skulls  of  the  young  and  the  females,  of  which  the


LECTURE    XIII.  385

latter  occupy  the  intermediate  place  and  the  childi*en  possess-
ing the  roundest  heads  the   extreme  of  the   series,  we  obtain
the  striking  result  that  seven  Borreby  skulls  have  a  remark-
Fig.  120.     Borreby  Skull,  top  view.


able  agreement,  and  represent  the  widest  heads,  their  measure-
ment being  from  802  to  82'6,  whilst  all  other  skulls  found
elsewhere  measure  less,  and  some  even  are  decided  narrow
heads.  Whether  the  archaeological  designation  is  here  in
fault,  or  whether  there  existed  a  geographically  different  stock,
cannot  be  decided  from  the  facts  at  hand.  It  is  very  possible
that  even  at  that  period  there  existed  in  some  districts  of
Denmark  a  mixture  of  narrow  heads  and  short  heads,  as  at
Meudon,  where  in  an  old  sepulchre  under  a  dolmen  both  types
were  found  well  represented.

Be  this  as  it  may,  the  skulls  of  Borreby,  which  we  take  as  the
special  types  of  the  Danish  skulls  of  the  Stone  Period,  appear
decidedly  braehy cephalic.  Their  mean  measurement  amounts  to
81 -3,  and  occupies  in  Welcker's  table  an  intermediate  place  be-
tween the  Germans,  Russians,  and  Turks.  The  skull  is  generally
well  rounded,  the  forehead  rather  flat,  but  not  badly  developed  j

c  c


38(3  LECTURE    XIII.

still  there  are  just  in  this  respect  considerable  differences.    The
supraciliary  ridges  are  very  prominent  in  the  males,  and  the
depression  between  them  and  the  nose  is  very  deep,  as  is  the
groove  above  the  ridges,  whilst  in  the  females  the  forehead
seems  to   slide  without  any  perceptible   depression  into  the
rather  projecting  pug-nose.    The  greatest  elevation  of  the  skull
is  almost  perpendicularly  above  the  external  meatus  auditorius,
and  viewed  in  profile  the  skull  is  in  its  posterior  part  uniformly
arched.     In  but  few  skulls  can  there  be  detected  a  tendency
to  prognathism ;  in  most  of  them  the  front  teeth  are  perpen-
dicular.    Viewed  from  above,  the  skulls  appear  broadly  elliptic,
the  anterior  portion  being  nearly  as  rounded  as  the  posterior.
The  greatest  width  is  in  the  posterior  third,  about  the  region
of  the  parietal  prominences.     The  zygomatic  arches  are  short,
but  curved  outwardly.     Viewed  in  front,  the  forehead  appears
low  but  uniformly  arched ;  viewed  at  the  back,  the  angles  of
the  pentagon  seem  rounded  so  as  to  form  a  circular  line.     In
fact,  no  further  particulars  are  requisite  to  establish  that  these
skulls  also  present  a  particular  type,  that  they  nowise  agree
either  with  the  skulls  of  Lombrive  or  with  those  of  Engis  and
the  Neanderthal,  but  that  they  belong  to  a  separate  race,  which
inhabited  Denmark  at  the  remotest  period.

The  cranial  fragment  of  Meilen,  in  the  Canton  of  Zurich,  is
the  only  human  relic  from  the  Swiss  stone  period  possessing
any  important  relation  to  the  determination  of  race.  It  is  un-
fortunately so  imperfect  that  it  affords  no  certain  index  as
regards  the  shajDe  of  the  skull;  still  it  affords  some  clue  to
certain  proportions.  His,  of  Basle,  describes  this  fragment  as
follows  :  The  forehead  appears  moderately  high,  finely  arched ;
the  supraciliary  arch  is  greatly  developed ;  the  semicircular
line  around  the  temporal  fossa  is  but  faintly  marked.  The
occiput  is  roundish,  but  unsymmetrical ;  of  the  spine  and  the
ridge  of  the  occipital  bone  there  are  only  the  vestiges  ;  the
superior  semicircular  line  is  hardly  recognisable ;  downwards
it  appears  as  a  faint  osseous  ridge.  These  conditions  do  not
seem  to  indicate  that  the  skull  belonged  to  a  muscular
individual.

The  Meilen  skull  belonged,  in  fact,   to  a  child  apparently


LECTURE    XIII.


387


fourteen  to  sixteen  years  old.  "  On  account  of  the  apparent
obliteration/'  writes  His,  "  of  a  portion  of  the  sagittal  suture,  I
was  still  doubtful,  but  now  I  have  found  that  by  moistening
the  skull  this  obliteration  is,  indeed,  only  so  in  appearance.     I

Fig.  121.     Skull  of  Meilen,  in  Profile,  after  His.


Pig.  122.     Skull  of  Meilen,  top  view.


have  at  the  same  time  received  from  Altdorf  the  entire  skull  of  a
child  of  our  Helvetian  (or  as  we  call  it)  the  lion-type,  which  in
the    drawing   and   measurements    exactly  covers    the  Meilen

cc2


388


LECTURE    XIII.


skull,  on  the  drawing  of  winch  also  the  child  skull,  from  the
bronze-station  of  Auvernier,  now  in  possession  of  Desor,  can
be  so  placed  that  they  perfectly  correspond.

"  On  a  close  comparison  with  the  skulls  in  the  Basle  collec-
tion, it  becomes  evident  that  the  fragment  before  us  is  allied
to  the  cranial  forms  now  prevalent  in  German  Switzerland.
Our  collection  possesses  only  the  small  number  of  eight  normal
Swiss  skulls,  which  have  been  obtained  from  the  cantons  Basle,
Berne,  Schaffhausen,  and  Zurich,  besides  a  skull  from  Biinden
of  a  different  shape.  The  eight  Swiss  skulls  are  all  distin-
guished by  their  comparatively  great  width  and  moderate
length ;  they  appear,  in  general,  considerably  higher  than  our
pile-work  skulls ;  still  there  are  two  skulls,  of  Schaffhausen
aud  Zurich  females,  which  in  height  do  not  exceed  the  height
of  the  pile-works'  skulls."

Prof.  His  further  justly  observes,  that  neither  the  skull  of
Meilen  nor  the  Swiss  skulls  present  the  decided  characters  of
dolichocephaly  or  brachycephaly,  but  are  more  allied  to  the
brachycephalic  shape  by  the  great  width  of  the  occiput.  In
the  Meilen  skull  the  proportion  of  length  to  width  is  100  :  83*2,
by  which  this  cranium,  as  the  Swiss  crania  in  general,  ap-
proaches the  crania  of  the  Lapps,  in  whom,  according  to
Welcker's  table,  the  proportion  is  100  :  84,  and  who  are  now
generally  considered  brachycephali.  The  same  type  of  pro-
portionally large  and  wide  heads  with  prominent  supraciliary
arches,  square  forehead,  broad  and  projecting  parietal  promi-
nences, and  projecting  occiput,  has  been  at  all  times  the  domi-
nant form  of  all  Swiss  skulls.  Undoubted  crania  from  pile-
works  which  contained  only  bronze  objects,  specially  a  young
cranium  found  in  Corcelettes,  now  in  possession  of  my  friend
Desor,  in  Neufchatel,  possess  the  same  characters  as  the  skulls
found  in  more  recent  graves.

The  skull  taken  from  a  Eoman  grave  near  Geneva,  belongs,
as  I  have  since  convinced  myself  by  comparison,  undoubtedly  to
that  type  ;  it  is  consequently  a  Swiss  skull  of  the  Roman  period.
Among  thirteen  skulls  of  Grenchen,  from  which  I  excluded
four  children — and  female  skulls,  besides  two  decidedly  narrow
skulls,  the  remainder  gave  the  mean  proportion  of  83"8,  and


LECTURE    XIII.


339


thus  belonged  to  tlie  same  type.     Professor  His  is  of  the  same
opinion.     "  We  thus  possess,"  he  observes,  "  in  the  pile-woi*ks

Fig.  123.     Profile  of  a  Helvetian  Skull  from  a  Eoman  grave  near  Geneva.


Fig.  124..     The  same  Helvetian  Skull  viewed  from  above.


of  the  stone,  bronze,  and  iron  periods  but  one  type,  the  Hel-
vetian, which  has  been  transmitted  to   the  present  period,  so


390


LECTURE    XIII.


that  Troyon's  theory  of  the  succession  of  different  pile-peoples
becomes  very  doubtful.  There  remain  only  the  children's  skulls
of  Plan  d'Essert  and  a  fragment  of  an  old  skull  of  Wallis,  both
in  possession  of  Troyon,  which  certainly  do  not  belong  to  the
Helvetian  type,  but  to  our  square  so-called  Dissentis  type,  and
which  according  to  Troyon  belongs  to  the  bronze  period.

Further  researches  will  show  whether  the  Swiss  skull  really
has  a  tendency  to  an  open  frontal  suture  persisting  in  advanced
age.  Several  skulls  of  Grencken  present  this  peculiarity,
which  is  also  shown  in  a  skull  sent  me  by  Colonel  Schwab,

Fig.  125.     Back  view  of  the  Helvetian  Skull  of  Geneva.
Well  developed  Os  Incce.


which  was,  according  to  the  assertion  of  the  workmen,  found
in  the  vicinity  of  Biel  in  a  railway  cutting,  at  a  depth  of
eighteen  feet  in  the  sand,  but  which  perhaps  had  rolled  down.
I  may  here  state  that  this  persistence  of  the  frontal  suture  is,
according  to  Gastaldi,  found  in  many  old  skulls  dug  out  near
Modena.

There  seems  also  in  these  Swiss  skulls  to  exist  a  tendency  to
the  separation  of  the  lambdoid  suture.  The  skull  from  the
vicinity  of  Geneva  has  that  isolated  piece  of  bone  at  the  point
of  this  suture,  which  was  formerly  considered  as  peculiar  to
Peruvian  skulls,  and  hence  called  the  bone  of  the  Inca  (Os
Incce).     I  saw  the    same  thing  in  some  other  skulls  of  Biel


LECTU11E    XIII.  391

and  Grenchen,  also  lai'ge  Wormian  bones  in  the  lateral  wings
of  this  suture.

When  Professor  His  looks  upon  it  as  an  important  and
interesting  fact,  that  since  the  pile-work  period,  the  cranial
form  has  not  in  our  country  essentially  deviated  from  the
original  type,  it  merely  confirms  my  own  observations  on
ancient  skulls.

The  Rheno-Belgian  skulls  find  their  cognates  in  the  long
and  narrow  heads  of  the  Dutchmen  who  still  inhabit  the  flat
lands.  The  skulls  of  Lombrive  are  allied  to  those  of  the  mo-
dern Basques,  the  stone  skulls  of  Denmark  are  allied  to  those
of  the  Lapps  and  Fins,  who  have  been  driven  to  the  north.
The  stone  skulls  of  Switzerland  present  the  type  dominant  in
that  country  at  all  periods.  Even  the  existence  of  a  short-
headed  race,  of  which  the  relics  are  found  in  some  graves  in
Wallis  and  Waadtland,  need  not  surprise  us  when  we  assume
that  this  present  Romanic  type  has,  from  the  stone-period,  been
as  prevalent  in  Eastern  Switzerland  as  the  Helvetian  type  in
Central  and  Western  Switzerland,  and  that  across  the  St.
Gothard  and  on  the  banks  of  the  Lake  of  Geneva  it  gave  the
hand  to  the  Helvetian  type.  Pruner-Bey,  as  stated  in  another
note,  thinks  he  has  recognised  this  brachy cephalic  type  on  the
Waadtland  banks  of  the  Lake  of  Geneva,  which,  according  to
him  is  also  the  type  of  the  skull  from  the  Tiniere  cone  ;  and,  if
this  view  of  Pruner-Bey  is  correct,  which  by  the  way  cannot  be
quite  inferred  from  his  description,  we  obtain  thereby  an  addi-
tional proof  in  favour  of  the  remarkable  constancy  of  cranial  forms
even  in  very  limited  localities.  We  thus  find  in  the  oldest  pre-
historic times  every  where  very  diversified  races  as  distinct  in
form  as  Negros  and  Europeans  are  at  present ;  but  nowhere  do
we  find  any  proofs  of  migrations  or  radiations  from  a  common
centre  over  the  habitable  globe.  Though  the  short-heads
might  be  derived  from  Asia,  it  would  not  apply  to  the  narrow
heads,  which  claim  the  highest  antiquity,  as  no  such  heads
are  met  with  in  Asia.  Thus,  the  facts  we  adduce  from  the
earliest  periods,  merely  represent  man  as  an  original  product
of  the  soil  he  then  inhabited  and  still  inhabits.  In  every  such
old  race  there  is  presented  a  remarkable  constancy  of  form,  the


392


LECTURE    XIII.


fundamental  type  of  which  is  not  obliterated,  though  various
intermixtures  have  taken  place  with  later  immigrants.

The  constancy  of  form  extends  even  to  apparently  trifling-
circumstances.  When  Von  Baer,  in  his  treatise  on  Romanic
skulls,  says  that  the  Alemannic  stock  had,  generally,  a  wider
and  shorter  skull  than  the  Franconian  or  Hessian,  it  is  perfectly
correct;  but  it  should  be  added,  that  there  obtain  great  dif-
ferences even  within  the  Alemannic  stock ;  thus  the  Suabian
skulls  are  much  shorter  and  rounder  than  those  of  the  neigh-
bouring Swiss,  which  are  so  much  distinguished  by  their
angular  form  and  greater  length,  that  the  skulls  of  the  battle-
chapel  of  Dornach  can  be  easily  distinguished  and  separated
accordingly.

It  would  be  a  great  mistake  to  believe  that  there  occur  in
Switzerland  no  other  types  than  those  mentioned,  and  which
are  perhaps  as  old  as  the  cranium  of  Meilen,  or  perhaps  the
remains  of  later,  though  still  pre-historical  immigrations.
Baer  has  drawn  attention  to  that  remarkable  brachycephalic
form  which  occurs  in  the  Grisons,  and  of  which  I  here  give
some  outlines  of  the  skull  of  a  very  aged  man,  taken  from  a

Fig.  126.     Romanic  Head  of  the  Grisons  in  Profile.


Geneva  churchyard,  now  in  possession  of  my  colleague,  Profes-
sor Claraparede.


LECTURE    XIII.


393


The  greatest  width  of  this  skull  lies  immediately  above  the
auditory  apertures,  and  is  so  considerable  that  it  almost  equals
the  length,  the  difference  being  only  a  few  millimeters.

Fig.  127.     Eomanic  Head  of  the  Grisons,  top  view.


From  the  vertex,  situated  in  the  centre  of  the  sagittal  suture,
the  occiput  descends  almost  perpendicularly  to  the  occipital
spine.  The  line  of  the  cranial  vertebras  is  comparatively  very
short ;  the  occipital  foramen  is,  by  the  disproportionately  short
neck,  placed  very  far  back,  so  that  the  skull  is  not  balanced
upon  the  articulating  surfaces.  On  viewing  the  skull  from
above,  it  presents  a  very  broad  oval,  the  apex  of  which  is
towards  the  forehead.  Von  Baer  has  raised  the  question
whether  these  remarkable  short-heads,  which  are  found  in  their
purity  in  the  higher  mountains  of  the  Grisons,  may  not  owe
their  origin  to  the  old  Etruscans.  Why,  they  differ  as  night
from  day ;  the  few  old  Etruscan  skulls  authenticated  as  such,
and  preserved  in  Italy,  are  decided  narrow-heads.  We  have
but  few  facts  enabling  us  to  give  an  opinion  on  the  commixture
of  different  types  amongst  the  Etruscans.  As  in  the  Grisons,
along  with  the  skulls,  the  marsh  sheep  and  the  marsh  hog
(Sus  palustris),  both  of  which  were  domestic  animals  in  the


394  LECTURE    XIII.

stone-period,  have  been  preserved,  it  may  reasonably  be  in-
ferred, that  the  Romanic  skull-type  had  originally  existed  in
that  district  of  the  Alps,  at  the  same  time,  and  by  the  side  of
that  entirely  distinct  people,  which  erected  the  pile-works  on
the  lakes  and  marshy  plains.

Whilst  these  human  races,  we  have  hitherto  considered,  have
furnished  us  with  proofs  that  they  had  inhabited  the  same  soil
from  pre-historic  down  to  historical  times,  and  when  we  find
no  traces  of  their  having  left  their  earlier  habitations  for  adven-
turous migrations  to  Europe,  we  should  expect  something  si-
milar as  regards  domestic  animals.  As  the  domesticated  animal
is  more  dependent  on  man  than  man  on  the  animal,  we  are  justi-
fied in  supposing  that  domestic  animals  are  equally  the  pro-
ducts of  the  soil  which  they  inhabited  together  with  man,
and  that  the  original  domestic  animals  which  man  subjected
should  be  the  descendants  of  wild  species  then  existing  in  that
region.  It  will  be  necessary  to  consider  such  domestic
animals  so  far  as  they  throw  light  on  this  question.  I
cannot  do  better  than  give  you  the  interesting  results  of
the  researches  of  Riitimeyer,  and  I  shall  frequently  quote
his  own  words.

The  oldest  domestic  animal  now  known  was  undoubtedly
the  dog,  which  is  found  both  in  the  Danish  kitchen-middens,
and  the  Swiss  pile-works.  This  oldest  dog  belongs,  according  to
Riitimeyer,  to  a  middle-sized  race,  of  light  elegant  structure,
with  rounded  cranium,  large  orbits,  short-pointed  snout,  and
moderately  developed  regular  rows  of  teeth.  This  dog,  which
might  be  called  the  marsh-dog  (Oanis  palustris)  resembles  in
its  size  and  slender  limbs  both  the  setter  and  the  hound.  The
former  as  regards  the  transverse  diameter  of  the  skull,  and  the
latter  as  regards  the  general  outlines  and  the  longitudinal  dia-
meter. This  house-,  or  turf-dog,  of  the  stone-age,  must  be
considered  as  perfectly  distinct  a  race  from  the  wolf  and
the  jackal,  the  pretended  progenitors  of  the  present  domestic
dog.  As  it  is  found  both  in  Denmark  and  Switzerland,  there
can  be  no  doubt  it  was  a  canine  race  peculiar  to  Europe,  which
man  first  subjected,  aud  used  it  for  the  chace,  and  subsequently
to  guard  his  flocks.     In  support  of  this  view,  Riitimeyer  men-


LECTUllE    XIII.  395

tious  the  circumstance  that  dog-bones  are  rarely  found  broken
for  the  sake  of  the  marrow,  as  is  the  case  with  all  other  bones  of
animals  which  served  as  food,  and  that  most  dog-skulls  belonged
to  old  animals,  whence  he  infers  that  only  in  case  of  necessity
were  dogs  eaten,  and  that  they  were  allowed  to  live  to  an
advanced  age.  In  the  metal  period,  there  appear,  both  in
Denmark  and  Switzerland,  larger  and  stronger  races  of  dogs,
approaching  the  wolf-dog  or  the  bull-dog  in  their  dentition,
rather  than  the  marsh-dog ;  and  which  certainly  may  have  been
imported.  The  constancy  of  the  characters  of  the  marsh-dog,
the  perfect  conformation  of  its  remains  found  in  various  places,
its  specific  difference  from  the  wolf,  fox,  and  jackal,  support
the  assertion  that  the  great  variety  of  canine  races  is  not  the
result  of  the  transformation  of  a  single  species,  but  of  the
intermixture  of  many  different,  but  nearly  allied,  species.

Riitimeyer  distinguishes  two  well  characterised  races  of  the
swine  family  of  the  stone-period.  The  proper  wild  hog  (Sus
scrofa),  the  propagation  of  which  has  been  checked  by  civilisa-
tion, but  which  then  extended  over  all  Europe,  and  the  much
smaller  animal,  the  marsh-  or  turf-hog  (Sits  jpalustris),  which  is
distinguished  by  various  other  characters,  so  that  it  must  be
looked  upon  as  a  well  marked  distinct  species.  The  wild  marsh-
hog  had  probably  a  more  limited  sphere  than  the  wild  hog  proper,
for  whilst  the  former  has  hitherto  only  been  met  with  in  Switzer-
land, remains  of  the  latter  are  frequently  found  in  the  Danish
kitchen-middens.  On  the  other  hand,  the  Danish  kitchen-mid-
dens contain  no  traces  of  the  domestication  of  the  swine,  or
indeed,  any  other  animal,  excepting  the  turf-dog;  nor  have  there
in  some  of  the  oldest  stations  of  Switzerland,  as  at  Wangen
and  Mosseedorf,  been  found  any  bones  of  hogs  bearing  the
character  of  domestication.  In  stations  of  a  later  period,  the
domesticated  marsh-hog  is  met  with,  and  though  at  first  the
bones  of  the  domesticated  hog  are  less  numerous  than  those  of
the  wild  boar,  the  proportion  is  soon  changed,  showing  that  in
consequence  of  its  great  fecundity,  which  it  shares  with  all
swine  species,  the  breeding  of  the  marsh-hog  soon  became  of
essential  importance  to  the  pile-builders.  Riitirneyer  further  con-
siders that  as  a  wild  animal,  the  marsh-hog  had  become  extinct


396


LECTURE    XIII.


before  the  historical  period,  but  that  it  agrees  in  its  characters
so  much  with  the  middle  tertiary  hog,  that  this  race  may  have
descended  from  it.  As  the  hogs  from  the  caves  and  the  allu-
vial formations  agree  so  greatly  with  the  wild  hog,  the  latter
and  better  armed  type,  which  appeared  later,  would  have  sup-
planted the  older  and  weaker  race,  had  not  man  taken  it  under
his  protection,  and  so  preserved  it  to  this  day.  There  is  even
now  bred  in  Graubiinden,  Uri,  and  Wallis  a  small,  round-
backed,  short-legged  race,  with  short  erect  ears,  short  thick
snout,  long  bristles,  and  of  uniformly  black  or  reddish  brown
colour,  the  osseous  and  dental  structure  of  which  agrees  with
that  of  the  marsh-hog.  It  is  therefore  highly  probable  that
this  race  is  descended  from  the  extinct  wild  marsh-hog,  and
that  by  domestication  it  acquired  a  more  sloping  forehead,  a
shorter  occiput,  and  less  curved  zygomatic  arches.  The  Indian
or  the  Siam  hog,  which  in  Asia  is  not  found  in  a  wild  state,
but  is  a  widely- spread  domestic  animal  is  said  to  approximate
most  nearly  the  tamed  marsh-hog.  Still  the  material  for  com-
parison (a  drawing  of  a  skull  by  Daubenton)  placed  at  the
disposal  of  Rutimeyer,  is  so  scanty  that  nothing  certain  can
be  inferred.  The  wild  hog  was  undoubtedly  the  ancestor  of
most  central-European  large-eared  domestic  swine.  During
the  stone-period  it  was  in  a  wild  state  ;  it  is  only  in  Concise,
the  NeufcMtel  lake,  where,  as  already  stated,  the  civilisa-
tion of  the  stone-age  was  at  its  acme,  that  relics  of  the  domes-
tication of  the  wild  hog  were  found.  "  I  must  confess,"  says
Rutirneyer,  "  that  the  scanty  traces  of  the  tamed  wild  hog,  by
the  side  of  the  abundant  relics  of  the  tamed  marsh-hog,  seem
rather  in  favour  of  the  introduction  of  a  new  race  into  Concise,
than  in  favour  of  the  domestication  of  the  wild  hog  by  the
lake  dwellers,  the  more  so  as  at  Concise  traces  of  the  cow
belonging  to  the  trochoceros  race  appear,  which  are  absent  in
the  earlier  pile-works."

Be  this  as  it  may,  the  domestication  of  the  common  wild
hog,  which  inhabits  Europe  and  the  shores  of  the  Mediterra-
nean, is  not  derived  from  Asia,  where  other  wild  hog  races
exist,  but  originated  in  Europe — possibly,  as  we  shall  pre-
sently see,  in  the  regions  of  the  Mediterranean.  We  have
here  a  repetition  of  the  phenomena  in  the  canine  race,  namely,


LECTURE    XIII.  397

that  the  present  races  are  descended  from  originally  distinct
species,  which  intermixed  with  each  other  and  with  various
foreign  types.

As  regards  horned-cattle,  there  occur  in  the  pile-works  of
the  stone  period  two  wild  species  of  gigantic  size,  the  Urus  (Bos
primigeniusj  and  Wisent  ( Bison  EuropceusJ,  whilst  the  Urus
only  has  hitherto  been  found  in  the  Danish  kitchenmiddens,
and  the  different  beds  of  France  (Amiens,  Aurignac)  associated
with  the  remains  of  man.  The  Urus  was  unquestionably  a
contemporary  of  the  mammoth  and  of  the  rhinoceros  with  the
bony  septum,  the  teeth  of  it  having  been  found  with  those  of
other  species  of  elephants  and  rhinoceros  (Rhinoceros  l&ptorhi-
nusj ,  in  the  slate  coals  of  Diirnten.  In  earlier  pile-works,
the  bones  of  wild  animals,  such  as  those  of  deer,  are  much
more  abundant  than  those  of  cattle,  but  subsequently  the
latter  preponderate,  a  proof  that  the  settlers  gradually  turned
from  the  chase  to  agriculture.  According  to  Riitimeyer's  re-
searches, the  Frisian  race  of  oxen,  which  in  size  are  not  much
behind  their  gigantic  progenitors,  are  descendants  from  the
urus.  It  almost  seems  as  if  the  domestication  of  the  urus,
which  was  hunted,  according  to  the  Nibelungen  song,  in  the
forests  of  Worms,  was  merely  attempted  in  the  stone  period,
but  soon  abandoned  in  favour  of  other  races.  In  the  north,
however,  the  breeding  was  continued  down  to  recent  times,
and  produced  in  marshy  regions  that  race  which  even  now
exceed  in  size  all  other  bovine  races.

The  Bison,  Aurochs  or  Wisent,  has  evidently  a  more  limited
sphere  than  the  urus ;  its  relics  have,  as  yet,  not  been  found
associated  with  those  of  the  mammoth  and  the  rhinoceros — it
is  only  in  the  peat  that  they  occur  with  those  of  the  Irish  elk.
The  Wisent  has  never  been  tamed,  though  it  was  in  histo-
rical times  spread  over  central  Europe,  and  is  mentioned  by
the  side  of  the  Urus  in  Siegfried's  Chase  (Nibelungen  song).
The  Bison  always  was  a  chase  animal ;  it  still  exists  in  the  forest
of  Bialowice  in  a  single  herd  of  about  eight  hundred  animals,
which,  no  doubt,  has  been  much  diminished  during  the  present
insurrection.

"Under  the  name  Bos  longifrons,"  says  Riitimeyer,  "Owen  has


398  LECTURE    XIII.

described  the  relics  of  a  small  species  of  oxen  which  are  fre-
quently found  in  postpliocene  strata  in  England  associated
with  the  bones  of  the  elephant  and  rhinoceros,  and  in  the  peat
bogs  of  Ireland  with  those  of  Irish  elk  (Megaceros  HibemicusJ,
and  in  more  recent  formations  with  those  of  the  common  stag
and  Roman  antiquities.  Owen  supposes  it  to  be  the  original
stock  of  the  small  short-horned  and  hornless  cattle  which  are
bred  in  the  highlands  of  Scotland  and  Wales  under  the  name
of  kyloes  and  runts,  which  in  Owen's  opinion,  constituted
the  tamed  cattle  of  the  Britons  before  the  Roman  invasion."
Owen  had  previously  given  to  this  species  the  better  name  of
Bos  brachyceros,  whilst  Rutimeyer  named  it  the  marsh-cow.
The  small  slender-footed  species,  which  appeared  earlier  in
England  and  Scandinavia,  and  was  distinguished  by  its  com-
paratively short  and  thick  horns,  was  by  the  oldest  inhabitants
of  Wangen  and  Mosseedorf,  during  the  stone  period  alone,
domesticated  along  with  the  urus  and  some  other  races.  The
small  uniformly  coloured  race  of  Switzerland,  the  so-called  brown
cattle,  the  breeding  of  which  on  account  of  the  richness  of  the
milk  has  reached  the  highest  perfection  in  Schweitz,  is  no  doubt
descended  from  the  above,  and  perhaps  also  that  race  now
very  common  in  Algiers  and  the  north  of  Africa.

In  Concise  and  Chevraux  on  the  Neufchatel  lake  were  found
remains  of  an  ox,  with  flat,  almost  square  forehead  and  nearly
semicircular  horns,  the  size  of  which  is  about  one-third  less
than  that  of  its  wild  progenitor,  but  in  other  respects  it  resem-
bles that  large  species  from  the  diluvium  of  Arezzo  and  Siena
known  by  the  name  of  Bos  trochoceros  (curved-horned  cattle) .

It  thus  appears  that  this  species  of  oxen  had  been  imported
into  the  above-mentioned  civilised  settlements  from  Italy,  but
they  were  not  bred  there,  and  left  in  Switzerland  no  permanent
progeny.  Whether  the  cow-race  now  spread  in  Central  Italy
be  descended  from  the  old  stock  is  worth  investigation ;  but
their  importation  affords  a  significant  proof  of  the  intercourse
of  the  later  pile -builders  with  Italy.

Besides  these  three  races,  or  rather  species  (when  their
remains  were  found  in  the  diluvium,  they  were  called  well
marked  species — but   since   they  were  recognised  in  a  tamed


LECTURE    Xlfl.  399

condition  they  are  again  called  races)  there  is  a  fourth  species
in  Switzerland,  the  wild  progenitors  of  which  are  found  in  the
peat  moors  of  Southern  Sweden  and  England,  along  with  the
Urus  and  Bison,  and  which  is  called  Bos  frontosus.  It  is
distinguished  by  the  convexity  of  the  forehead  between  the
eyes,  by  long  and  outwardly  curved  horns,  it  is  smaller  than  the
Urus,  but  larger  than  the  marsh-cow.  It  is  absent  in  the  pile-
buildings  and  in  the  peat  bogs,  but  is  now  represented  in
Switzerland  by  the  so-called  spotted  cattle  (the  Simmen  or
Saanenthal  race),  and  has  thus  been  introduced  within  histori-
cal times,  very  probably,  from  the  North.

"  In  the  stone-period,"  says  Riitimeyer,  "  we  find  a  sheep,
which,  by  its  small  size,  slender  extremities,  and,  still  more,
by  its  upright,  short,  goat-like  horns,  differs  from  the  com-
mon existing  ovine  races.  Wauwyl  alone  furnished  remains  of
large  and  curved-horned  animals.  The  rarity  of  horns  ren-
ders it  impossible  to  explain  the  supplanting  of  those  short-
horned  animals  by  the  present  race.  On  examining,  however,
the  bones  of  Chavannes,  Echalens,  &c,  we  find  that  in  the
middle  ages  large  curved-horned  animals  were  widely  spread."
This  peculiar  small  sheep,  with  coarse  wool,  may  be  called  the
turf  sheep.

A  wild  stock,  from  which  the  goat-horned  turf-sheep  might
have  been  derived,  no  longer  exists,  whilst  the  curved-horned
sheep,  to  which  belong  all  domesticated  races,  might  have  had
as  its  progenitor  the  Mediterranean  Mouflon  and  the  Asiatic
Argali.  On  the  other  hand,  there  were  found  in  the  caves  of
the  South  of  France,  specially  at  Lunel-Viel  the  remains  of  a
sheep  resembling  the  turf-sheep  of  the  stone-period,  so  that
the  species  reaches  back  to  the  oldest  period  of  the  human  race,
as  human  bones  were  also  found  in  this  cave.  Again,  in  the
most  northern  islands  of  England, — the  Shetland  and  Orkney
Islands,  as  well  as  in  the  mountainous  regions  of  Wales,  and
finally,  also  in  the  Grisons,  there  is  a  race  of  sheep  bred,  the
skulls  of  which  correspond  in  size,  form,  and  shape  of  horns  to
those  of  the  turf-sheep  of  the  stone-period.  There  seems,
therefore,  no  doubt  that  the  wild  turf-sheep  was  a  native  of
Central  Europe,  that  it  was  soon  subjected  by  man,  but  that  it


400  LECTURE    XIII.

•was  subsequently  supplanted  by  the  importation  of  the  curved-
horned  sheep,  which  excelled  it  alike  by  a  finer  wool  and  the
flavour  of  its  flesh.

In  the  pile-works  of  the  stone-period  the  goat  is  much  more
frequently  met  with  than  the  sheep ;  but  in  the  later  settle-
ments the  proportion  is  reversed.  It  is  the  same  race  which
at  present  exists  in  Switzerland,  which  may  have  been  wild  at
one  period.

"  Horse  bones/'  says  Riitinieyer,  "  are  in  the  pile-works  of
the  stone-period  much  more  rare  than  the  remains  of  man,  and
as  we  cannot  imagine  the  horse  to  have  been  buried  with  man
outside  the  pile-works,  we  can  only  conclude  that  the  horse
was  wanting  to  the  early  pile-builders,  and  even  occurs  but
sparingly  in  the  later  settlements  of  the  same  periods  ;  so  much
so  that  I  am  led  to  suppose  that  the  few  horse  relics  found  in
Bobenhausen,  Wauwyl,  &c,  have  been  introduced  into  the
pile-works  as  booty ;  the  mode  of  life  of  the  pile-builders
seems  scarcely  compatible  with  horse-breeding.

"  It  is  almost  superfluous  to  add,  that  all  the  horse-remains
found  are  those  of  the  domestic  species,  and  entirely  distinct
from  the  fossil  horse."

The  teachings  of  the  cultivated  plants  are  analogous  to  those
derived  from  human  and  animal  relics.  Apples  and  pears,
prunes  and  hazel-nuts,  raspberries,  bilberries,  &c,  were  mani-
festly eaten  and  partly  cultivated  by  the  pile-builders.  What
they  specially  planted  was  wheat,  barley,  and  flax,  the  seeds  of
which  may  also  have  served  for  food,  whilst  the  fibres  served
for  various  textures.  The  grains  of  the  wheat  are  much
smaller  than  those  of  the  wheat  now  cultivated.  Barley  in
the  old  settlements  was  six-rowed,  in  the  later  settlements
it  was  also  found  two-rowed.  Eye,  oats,  and  hemp,  which,
according  to  botanists,  are  natives  of  the  East,  whence,  as
many  believe,  the  pile-builders  had  emigrated,  are  entirely
absent.  "  We  may  assume,"  says  Dr.  Christ,  "  that  the
pile-inhabitants,  true  autochthons  of  our  country,  liave  never
visited  the  rye  and  oats  districts,  that  is  to  say,  Eastern  Europe,
whilst  wheat  and  barley,  perhaps,  came  from  the  south.  Wheat
was  at  all  events  the  first  cereal  cultivated  by  man  in  our
northern  regions."


LECTURE    XIII.  401

The  introduction  of  both  these  cereals  from  the  south  appears
to  us  any  thing  but  proved.  Barley,  of  all  cereals,  grows
further  northward ;  it  may,  therefore,  even  in  such  an  inhos-
pitable country  as  Switzerland  must  have  been  at  the  pile-
work  period,  have  grown  wild;  and  it  is  just  as  probable  that
wheat,  which  is  only  a  cultivated  wild-growing  cereal,  may  have
been  improved  by  cultivation,  as  appears  proved  by  the  small-
ness  of  the  grains  in  the  old  ears.

The  result  of  all  researches  touched  upon  in  this  Lecture  evi-
dently shows  that  man,  with  his  whole  domestic  economy,
including  the  useful  plants  and  domestic  animals,  was  deve-
loped on  the  soil,  where  he  left  his  earliest  traces ;  that  he
there  procured  his  means  of  subsistence,  and  that  it  was  only
at  a  subsequent  period  that  he  came  in  contact  and  intermixed
with  other  races  of  mankind  developed  in  another  region.
The  facts,  as  far  as  they  are  known,  establish  merely  the  origi-
nal difference  of  mankind,  and  that  man,  the  domestic  animals,
and  the  useful  plants  were  natives  of  the  soil  where  they  were
developed.     Beyond  this  all  is  tradition  and  hypothesis.


D  D


402


LECTURE    XIV.

Transmission  of  Characters. — Natural  Eaces. — Theory  of  Nathusius. — Ob-
jections to  it. — Distinction  between  Races  and  Species. — Transformation
of  Varieties  into  Eaces  and  real  Species. — Influence  of  Time. — Eaceless
Animals. — Mongrels  and  Hybrids. — Their  Propagation. — Wolf-Dogs. —
Buck-Sheep. — Eabbit-Hares.  —Their  Breeding.—  Conclusions  and  Infer-
ences from  the  preceding  facts.

Gentlemen — In  discussing  the  questions  concerning  the
origin  of  the  groups,  races,  and  species  composing  the  animal
creation,  including  man,  the  consideration  of  natural  generation
always  occupies  the  foreground.  The  existence  of  the  whole
animal  creation  in  its  various  forms  and  species,  depends  solely
on  normal  propagation,  as  the  existence  of  every  living  being-
is  limited  by  death.  It  is  the  more  requisite  to  enter  into
particulars  regarding  these  questions,  as  the  views  on  the
origin  of  mankind  and  animals,  their  affinity,  descent,  and
their  transformation  in  the  course  of  time,  depend  on  the  so-
lution of  the  above  questions.

There  can  be  no  doubt  that  both  sexes,  male  and  female,
co-operate  in  the  generation  of  the  higher  animals,  and  that
the  characters  of  the  parents  are  transmitted  to  their  offspring.
We  have  seen  that  the  family  forms  the  basis  of  the  various
groups  in  the  animal  world,  and  just  as  every  individual  pos-
sesses some,  though  frequently  insignificant  peculiarities,  which
impress  upon  him  the  stamp  of  individuality,  so  does  the  family
present  special  characters  which  enable  the  observer  to  trace
their  origin.  It  has  been  said  that  the  distinction  of  indivi-
duals extends  only  to  domestic  animals,  that  in  other  ani-
mals there  exist  no  peculiarities  by  which  we  can  distinguish
the  individuals,  and  I  have  even  lately  seen  some  religious  tracts
in  which  this  assertion  is  used  as  a  proof  of  the  exceptional
position  of  man  in  creation.    Every  taxidermist  at  any  museum


LECTURE    XIV.  403

can  easily  refute  such  an  assertion,  and  prove  that  in  a  herd  of
wolves,  for  instance,  the  individual  difference  is  as  great  as  in
a  flock  of  sheep  propagated  by  inbreeding.  If  the  assertion
of  perfect  resemblance  were  well  founded,  no  collector  would
take  the  trouble  to  make  a  selection.  There  obtains,  there-
fore, an  individuality  in  the  whole  animal  kingdom  just  as  in
mankind  and  the  domestic  animals,  and  if,  in  common  life,  we
pay  no  attention  to  it,  it  is  because  we  see  no  use  in  so  doing.

The  transmission  of  individual  characters,  which  distinguish
not  merely  the  species,  but  also  the  family  and  the  individual,
is  thus  one  of  those  facts  which  must  have  a  general  influence
on  the  forms  of  the  animal  kingdom,  and  it  is  the  transmission
of  peculiarities  distinguishing  the  individual  which  has  become
such  a  powerful  lever  in  improving  the  breeds  of  our  domestic
animals.

Virchow  has  recently,  in  an  excellent  treatise,  raised  the
question  whether  the  sum  of  characters  transmitted  is  always
the  same  ?  As  was  expected,  he  arrived  at  the  conclusion
that  this  neither  is  nor  can  be  the  case,  for  the  simple  reason,
that  a  change  of  the  established  family-type  would  thereby  be
rendered  impossible.  The  possibility  of  any  alteration  rests
upon  this  :  that  the  hereditariness  embraces  an  undeterminable
sphere  of  characters,  the  extent  of  which  can  only  be  learned
by  experience.  It  is  frequently  impossible  to  predict  whether
this  or  that  animal,  possessing  otherwise  some  excellent  qua-
lities, may  not  transmit  to  its  progeny  some  germ  of  disease,
which  only  breaks  out  at  a  later  period,  while  apparently
inferior  animals  produce  a  stock  suitable  for  the  purpose  of  the
breeder.

I  have  in  a  preceding  lecture  explained  that  the  word  "race"
in  the  sense  in  which  it  is  used,  cannot  be  separated  from  the
notion  "  species,"  since  the  constancy  in  the  transmission  of
characters,  the  resistance  against  external  influences,  and  the
adaptation  to  surrounding  media,  are  frequently  as  great  in  races
as  in  the  so-called  species,  and  may  be  traced  back  to  remote
antiquity,  as  is  done  in  species.  The  term  "race"  expresses,
perhaps,  only  a  theological  idea.  Applied  to  domestic  animals
it  is  often  used  as  equivalent  to  species,  as  it  was  known  that

pd2


404  LECTURE    XIV.

these  races  had  partly  arisen  by  the  interference  of  man,  whilst
for  the  origin  of  species  the  direct  interference  of  a  creator  was
assumed.

"  On  comparing/'  says  Nathusius,  "  the  existing  forms  of
domestic  animals  proper,  we  are  met  by  a  decided  contrast :
we  acknowledge  races  so  far  firmly  established,  when  we  find
a  large  number  of  individuals,  representing  by  resemblance
and  common  characters  definite  groups,  originally  more  or  less
confined  to  certain  localities,  which  have  in  historical  times
remained  unaltered.  Such  animals  constitute  natural,  geogra-
phically established  races.  In  contrast  to  them  we  have  arti-
ficial or  cultivated  races.

"  By  these  we  understand  those  domestic  animals  which  are
cultivated  and  developed  by  the  interference  of  the  science  of
rural  economy.  They  owe  their  origin  either  to  natural  races
— to  so-called  inbreeding — by  the  coupling  of  such  individuals
as  are  distinguished  by  some  excellent  qualities  ;  or  by  the  cross-
ing of  different  natural  races,  in  which  the  individual  character
plays  a  more  important  part  than  the  race-character.  The
descent  of  the  artificial  races  is  thus  of  secondary  importance ;
they  have  no  natural  home,  but  are  dependent  on  the  state  of
rural  economy.  The  term  '  full  blooded'  is  commonly  considered
as  equivalent  to  cultivated  race ;  but  the  definition  of  this
word,  now  so  much  in  use,  based  upon  the  notion  of  unity  of
race,  is  erroneous.

"  Natural  races  must  be  characterised  by  zoological  charac-
ters, though  we  must  not  forget  that  we  have  before  us  not
species,  but  varieties,  and  that  sharply  defined  limits  are  not
applicable  to  transitional  forms  ;  yet,  such  transitional  forms  are
always  present ;  for  variableness  conditions  the  notion  of  race."
(Within  equally  wide  limits  is  the  notion  of  species ;  for  varia-
tions, i.e.  extraordinary  forms,  which  are  not  constantly  propa-
gated, occur  also  in  species, — e.  g.  in  fox,  Cebus,  lion,  panther,
etc. — as  well  as  in  races.)

"  The  assumption  that  all  domestic  animals  proper,  and
specially  the  natural  races,  are  derived  from  this  or  that  wild
original  stock,  neither  is  nor  ever  will  be  proved.  Still  the
assumption  is  considered  so  well  founded,  that  we  rarely  hear


LECTURE    XIV.  405

any   doubt   expressed   upon   this    point.     There   is,  however,
another  theory  equally  founded  upon  experience.

"Neither  of  these  opposite  assumptions  can,  however,  be
decided  by  experiment ;  the  correctness  of  either  lies  beyond
the  province  of  systematic  natural  history  ;  the  solution  pertains
to  another  province,  which  cannot  be  opened  by  the  sensual
keys  of  science.

"  The  opposite  assumption  then  is,  that  there  are  created
domestic  animals.  The  condition  of  domestic  animals  may
possibly  be  a  specific  not  an  acquired  quality,  just  as  the  life
of  animals  in  the  forest,  or  in  the  steppe,  is  a  specific  not  an
acquired  quality.  Those  who  believe  that  man  is  not  a  gradu-
ally developed  animal,  but  a  creature  animated  by  the  breath
of  God,  cannot  find  it  strange  that  there  are  animals  which,  at
their  creation,  were  not  merely  endowed  with  the  capacity  for
domestication,  but  were,  for  the  use  of  man,  at  once  created
domestic  animals.

1 '  There  is  a  theory  which  scouts  the  word  '  creation/  which
knows  of  no  creation,  but  only  of  a  so-called  development  from
the  primitive  mud  ;  from  this  quarter  we  expect  the  reproach  of
simplicity.  Our  view,  by  acknowledging  that  experimental
science  has  its  limits,  includes  the  assumption  of  a  peculiar
quality  for  the  racial  differences  of  mankind,  according  to
which  neither  the  notion  of  species  nor  of  variety  is  applicable
to  man  as  applied  to  the  organic  creation  in  general.  When,
therefore,  we  speak  of  human  races  and  domestic  races,  these
notions  of  race  may  be  founded  upon  a  peculiar  principle  of  dif-
ferentiation exclusively  belonging  to  these  created  forms.  The
relation  of  the  domestic  animals  to  man  renders  it  intelligible
that  such  a  distinguishing  principle  is  applicable  to  both.  If
in  the  notion  of  race,  applicable  to  man  and  domestic  animals,
Ave  only  attend  to  qualities  furnished  by  observation,  and  to  the
exclusion  of  all  other  qualities  observed  in  species  and  varieties,
many  difficulties  will  be  solved  in  the  contest  concerning  the
unity  of  mankind  and  the  descent  of  domestic  animals.  There
is  thus  in  what  we  term  races  no  longer  any  question  about  the
production  of  hybrids  between  species,  about  the  incapacity  of
real  hybrids  to   propagate   themselves  regularly  ;  there  is  no


406


LECTURE    XIV.


longer   any    question    about   pliancy    of   species,    nor    about
stability  of  varieties.

"  Without  attempting  to  fatliom  the  question  here  raised,  I
would  only  mention  once  more,  that  those  animals  which  have
been  domesticated  within  historical  times  are  not  included  in
our  considerations.  It  is  conceivable,  though  not  demonstra-
ble, that  some  domestic  animals  originated  from  a  wild  parent
stock,  and  that  consequently  the  hog  does  not  belong  to  primi-
tive domestic  animals.  Even  the  question  of  the  relapse  of
domesticated  animals  into  the  wild  state,  of  which  the  swine
afford   so  many  instances,  must  not  divert  us  from  our  theme.

"  Such  a  theory  leads  us  to  primitive  or  original  races ;  but
the  question  concerning  their  origin,  their  unity,  or  plurality,  in
every  animal  species,  lies  beyond  the  limits  of  observation."

This  long  extract  from  Nathusius,  plainly  shows  that  a
single  deviation  from  the  right  path  of  inquiry  leads  to  a
number  of  wrong  conclusions.  In  order  that  man  should
correspond  to  the  religious  idea  of  being  a  special  being,  pro-
duced by  a  direct  divine  interference,  he  is  thrust  into  an
exceptional  position.  But  as  it  is  observed  that  the  domestic
animals  and  their  natural  races  stand  in  evident  relation  to
human  races  and  stocks,  and  as  specially  as  regards  generation
and  propagation  the  conditions  are  nearly  identical,  it  becomes
requisite  to  assume  for  the  domestic  animals  also  an  exceptional
position.  The  intelligence  of  man,  they  say,  has  done  nothing
for  the  domestication  of  animals ;  they  have  been  created  as
such  for  the  use  of  man.  But  then  comes  that  somewhat  fatal
objection,  that  within  historic  times  man  has  domesticated
many  wild  species.  I  shall  hei-e  only  mention  the  turkey,
which  even  now  occurs  wild  in  North  America,  the  domestica-
tion of  which  dates  only  two  centuries  back.  The  exception,
therefore,  does  not  apply  to  this  nor  other  domestic  animals,
nor  to  the  efforts  of  the  Acclimatisation  Society  ;  it  only  applies
to  animals  tamed  in  pre-historic  times,  of  which  we  know
nothing.  But  here  again  we  are  met  by  the  fact,  that  the  de-
scent of  the  large-eared  swine  from  the  wild  boar  can  hardly
be  denied ;  consequently  the  hog  too  forms  no  exception.  But
how  about  the  Frisian  cow,  the  curved-horned  cattle,  the  large-


LECTURE    XIV.  407

horned  sheep,  whose  descent  from  the  Urus,  the  curved-horned
ox  of  the  diluvium  of  Italy,  the  Mouflon,  is,  as  we  have  seen,
undeniable  ?  Which  are  then  the  domestic  animals  entitled  to
claim  a  place  by  the  side  of  man  ?  None,  certainly,  but  those
whose  fossil  relics  have  not  yet  been  found  in  the  diluvial
formations,  or  the  older  tertiary  strata  !  Whilst  thus  every
day  brings  forth  new  discoveries,  and  makes  known  to  us
another  domestic  animal,  the  origin  of  which  we  may  trace  to
species  found  in  the  wild  or  a  fossil  state,  we  are  told  to  claim,
for  the  few  domestic  animals  of  whose  origin  we  have  no  data,
an  exceptional  position,  merely  for  the  purpose  of  supporting  a
by  no  means  well  founded  tradition  concerning  the  origin  of
mankind.

Nathusius,  no  doubt,  tells  us:  "The  solution  of  the  question,
whether  or  not  a  domestic  animal  descends  from  a  wild  species
can  be  determined  neither  by  observation  nor  by  experiments,
as  the  discovery  of  the  truth  lies  beyond  the  means  of  science''' !
We  doubt  whether  this  principle  will  be  adopted  by  natural-
ists. If,  as  regards  the  domestic  animals  and  their  cognate
wild  species,  constituting  by  far  the  most  important  subjects
of  natm^al  history,  we  are  referred  to  faith  instead  of  ob-
servation, all  experimental  science  is  at  an  end.

But  let  us  return  to  our  starting  point.  The  observations
oh  the  transmission  of  characters,  made  by  breeders,  have,  not
yet  reached  such  a  stage  that  we  can  infer  from  them  gene-
rally valid  laws ;  they  have,  nevertheless,  yielded  some  definite
results.  According  to  Nathusius,  the  transmission  of  characters
in  an  artificially  bred  animal  is  independent  of  its  origin  (( gene-
rically  by  the  quality  of  its  characters — individually  by  the
proportion  of  these  characters,  in  reciprocal  action  with  the
condition  of  the  vital  organs  and  the  energy  of  their  functions ;
nay,  some  physiologically  abnormal,  or  diseased  organs  and
their  functions,  may  be  the  condition  for  the  desired  trans-
mission of  characters  (for  the  formation  of  fat,  deformity  of
legs  in  badger-dogs,  (Basset,  Buffon)  etc.) ."

These  principles  being  admitted,  there  can  be  no  doubt,
that  from  this  transmission  of  individual  characters  forms
may  arise  which  are  as  distant  from  the  primitive  form,  as  other


408  LECTURE    XIV.

original  forms  which  we  distinguish  as  well-established  species."
And  this  is  really  the  case.  If  at  this  day  the  badger-dog
were  only  found  in  a  fossil  state,  that  is  to  say,  in  a  condition
which  would  give  us  no  clue  as  to  the  origin  of  its  deformed  legs,
every  naturalist  would  at  once  declare  it  a  distinct  species  of
dog.  The  Urus,  the  marsh-cow,  the  curved-horned  cattle,  were
all  by  naturalists,  like  Cuvier,  Owen,  Nilsson,  and  others,  distin-
guished as  different  species  so  long  as  they  were  only  found  in
the  diluvial  formations  of  various  countries,  and  until  the  present
races  of  cattle  were  proved  to  be  their  descendants.  Concern-
ing these  races,  all  physiologists,  ignorant  of  their  connection
with  the  extinct  races,  maintained  that  they  all  belonged  to
the  same  species — the  Bos  taurus,  and  tried,  with  much  inge-
nuity, to  prove  that  they  must  all  have  originated  from  the
same  parent  stock.  This  proof  was  founded  upon  the  circum-
stance that  the  artificial  breeds,  the  production  of  which
occurred  in  historical  times,  differ  not  less  in  their  characters
than  the  older  races,  the  origin  of  which  is  lost  in  obscurity.
They  were  perfectly  right  as  regards  the  latter  point;  they
only  failed  to  draw  a  correct  inference,  namely,  that  the  same
sum  of  distinctive  characters  which  seems  to  us  sufficient  for
the  establishment  of  a  species,  could  also,  within  historical
times,  have  been  produced  by  individual  transmission ;  that  it
is,  therefore,  in  the  power  of  man,  and  of  present  nature,  to
produce  from  existing  species  new  varieties,  races,  and  real
new  species.

Just  as  the  artificial  breeds  depend  on  their  profitableness,
being  only  preserved  by  the  selection  of  such  individuals  as
are  in  the  fullest  possession  of  useful  qualities,  so  will
the  natural  race,  produced  by  the  individual  transmission
of  some  prominent  characters,  be  only  preserved  and  further
developed  when  these  qualities  are  in  accordance  with  the
requirements  of  the  animal  in  its  struggle  for  existence.
Artificial  and  natural  races  run,  in  this  respect,  perfectly
parallel,  and  the  only  discoverable  difference  seems  to  be  that
man,  though  he  cannot  use  unnatural  means,  has  the  power  of
selecting,  in  preference,  some  natural  influences.     Let  us  just


LECTURE    XIV.  409

consider  the  mode  in  which  man  proceeds  in  the  production  of
any  race.     He  finds   some  animal  which   appears   to   him  to
possess   some  useful  qualities ;    he  couples  this  with  another
animal   of  the  opposite   sex  possessing  nearly  identical  qua-
lities.    The   breed  thus  obtained  is  fed  and  nurtured  in  such
a    manner    as    to    improve,   if  possible,    the    desired    charac-
ters.     In    the    second    generation   he    again    selects    animals
possessing  the   desired  qualities  in  the   highest  degree ;    he
pairs  them  with  each  other,  or  with  the  parent  stock,  or,  in
later  generations,  with  the  preceding  generations,  until  he  has
attained  his  object.     Is   the  process  different  in  nature  ?     It
is    certainly,   in  so  far  as  the  same    starting   point   is    given
hundreds,  perhaps  thousands,  of  times  without  further  develop-
ment, because  the  selection  in  breeding  can  be  easily  effected
by  the  interference   of   man.      But   as  qualities  which  prove
advantageous  to  the  individual  in  the  struggle  for  existence
also  endow  it  with  superior  generative  powers,  this  superiority
will  produce   the  same  result  in   nature,  though  at  a  slower
rate  than  when  effected  by  man  by  exclusive  selection.     Thus,
with  regard  only  to  the  higher  mammals,  it  is  well  known  that
there  is  scarcely  any  species  in  which  there  does  not  exist  a
kind  of  courting,  leading  frequently  to  fierce  combats  between
a  number  of  males  for  a  certain  female,  after  which  the  con-
queror carries  home  his  bride.     Upon  this  fact  rests  probably
the  continuance  of  the  species  in  the  highest  development  of
which  it  is  capable.    But  since  every  individual  better  endowed
for  the  struggle  for  existence,  will  transmit  his  superior  qual-
ities,   it   follows    that    his    offspring  will  gradually   attain   an
ascendancy,  and  displace  the  less  privileged  individuals,  until
finally  it  becomes  the  sole  representative  of  the  race.     Thus
the  same  effects  which  man,  by  his  intelligence,  produces  in  the
shortest  time,  namely,  by  the  application  of  the  most  favourable,
and  the  exclusion  of  noxious  influences,  are  equally  produced  by
nature,  the  length  of  time  supplying,  to  a  certain  extent,  the
place  of  human  intelligence.     Just  as  in  the  chemical  trans-
formations which  take  place  in  the  bowels  of  the  earth,  length  of
time  is  the  mysterious  factor,  so  is  it  the  agent  in  the  production
of  organic  forms,  which,  by  apparently  insignificant  changes,  is


410  LECTURE    XIV.

finally  conducive  to  a  permanently  altered  type.  But  this
circumstance,  that  for  the  formation  and  permanency  of
natural  races  and  species,  a  long  period  of  time  is  requisite,
leads  us  back  to  the  consideration  of  a  question  which  occupies
a  prominent  position  in  artificial  breeding'.  The  breeders  still
debate  whether  age,  constancy,  and  purity  of  blood  are  the  essen-
tial elements  in  transmission,  or  whether  the  quality  of  the  in-
dividual be  not  the  predominating  agent.  Since  even  accidental
defects,  supernumerary  fingers,  arrest  of  development,  are
transmitted  and  persistent  through  several  generations,  it
appears  that  individuality  stands  in  the  first  rank.  Never-
theless the  length  of  time  during  which  a  race  has  maintained
itself  is  of  the  greatest  importance,  as  the  probability  of  trans-
mission is  greater  in  proportion  to  the  purity  of  blood  and
the  duration  of  the  race.  This  is  proved  by  the  influence  of
grandparents,  which  is  so  strikingly  manifested.  When  it  is
said  that  the  influence  of  the  grandparents  upon  the  grand-
children is  essentially  an  indirect  one,  the  assertion  is  too
restricted  in  presence  of  the  fact  that  frequently  the  grand-
children exhibit  qualities  possessed  by  the  grandparents  only
and  not  by  the  parents.  One  of  my  friends  has  a  bitch  of  the
St.  Gothard  breed,  which,  excepting  a  narrow  white  spot
upon  the  chest,  is  perfectly  black.  Two  brothers  of  this  bitch
were  spotted  light  brown.  The  mother  was  black,  the  father
yellowish-brown.  The  bitch,  having  been  covered  by  a  perfectly
black  dog  of  the  same  race,  produced  a  litter  of  five  puppies,
three  of  which  were  black  with  white  spots  upon  the  chest,
and  two  with  yellowish-brown  spots  like  the  grandfather.  The
peculiarity  of  the  grandfather  was  here  not  transmitted  to  the
child  but  to  some  of  the  grandchildren.  If  cases  of  this  kind
are  authenticated,  and  I  can  vouch  for  this  one,  as  I  possess  one
of  the  puppies,  and  have  seen  the  mother  and  the  brothers,  then
it  is  clear  that  even  in  the  purest  blood  there  are  sometimes  re-
lapses to  the  ancestral  stock,  the  qualities  of  which  are  deemed
extinct,  and  that,  on  the  other  hand,  natural  races  and
species  maintain  their  characters  even  in  crossings  with  great
pertinacity,  so  that  they  may  re-appear  in  succeeding  genera-
tions.    Thus  all  dog-breeders  know  that  the  blood  of  a  New-


LECTURE    XIV.  411

foundland  clog,  a  descendant  probably  of  a  native  wild  species,
which  was  not  tamed  at  the  beginning  of  the  seventeenth
century,  is  truly  indestructible,  so  that,  after  ten  generations
its  characters  may  still  be  detected  in  the  cross  breeds  with
other  races.  Darwin  very  justly  observes,  that  the  coloured
rings  on  the  feet,  and  transverse  stripes  frequently  seen  in
bred-horses,  which  are  not  observed  in  preceding  generations,
may  perhaps  be  traces  reminding  us  of  their  origin.  My
friend  Desor  directed  my  attention  to  the  fact,  that  in  the
young  of  perfectly  black  cats,  the  pedigree  of  which,  during
several  generations,  was  known,  the  primary  fur  was  always
of  a  lighter  shade,  and  presented  a  striped  appearance,  as
in  the  wild  cat,  and  it  was  only  after  the  lapse  of  a  year  that
the  fur  became  perfectly  black  without  presenting  any  stripes.

Thus  all  facts  combine  to  show,  that  by  the  side  of  individual
influences,  there  is  in  transmission  another  factor,  namely
length  of  time,  which  gradually  establishes  a  certain  type
best  adapted  for  a  constant  struggle  for  existence,  and  which  is
the  more  permanent  the  longer  the  conditions  for  existence
remain  unaltered.  But  the  greater  the  fixity  of  this  type,  the
greater  the  demarcation  from  allied,  and  its  hostility  to  other
types ;  the  gulf  which  separates  it  from  the  latter  was  incon-
siderable at  first,  but  it  gradually  enlarged  until  it  became  im-
passable.

Whilst  thus  the  significance  both  of  the  natural  and  artificial
races  of  pure  blood  is  certainly  very  great,  we  consider  it  at
the  same  time  a  step  in  a  forward  direction  made  by  Nathusius
in  distinguishing  "  raceless  animals;"  which,  according  to
this  author,  have  arisen :  "  Either  by  the  transportation  of
natural  races  from  their  native  country  to  foreign  parts,  not
offering  them  the  same  conditions  for  development,  and  where
their  racial  type  was  altered,  without  the  assumption  of  a  fixed
typical  form ;  or  by  the  crossing  of  different  natural  races,
which  in  their  progress  are  not  led  to  a  typical  form  ;  or,  also,
when  artificial  races  are  not  attended  to  with  the  requisite
care,  so  that  by  hunger  and  other  deprivations  they  relapse
into  their  original  state."

That  from  this  chaos  of  raceless  animals,  partly  by  natural


412  LECTURE   XI V.

influences,  and  partly  by  artificial  breeding,  new  well  charac-
terised races  and  species  may  arise  admits  of  no  doubt.  In  the
raceless  animals  of  the  first  category  which  are  produced  by
transplantation  into  other  regions,  that  formative  process  takes
place  which  we  have  just  characterised  and  by  which  a  fixed
type  is  gradually  produced  corresponding  to  the  altered  con-
ditions. In  so-called  degenerate  animals,  which  by  want  of
care  approach  the  original  form,  this  racelessness  must  cease
when  the  relapsing  process  attains  its  limits ;  so  that  of
the  three  cases  established  by  ISTathusius  two  have  only  a
temporary  limited  value,  whilst  the  third  —  the  racelessness
produced  by  the  crossing  of  different  races,  is  more  generally
applicable.

Let  us  now  examine  more  closely  this  point  concerning
mongrels  and  hybrids,  for  which  purpose  we  must  return  to
the  terms  "  variety  and  species."

Every  naturalist  who  has  critically  examined  the  question  of
species  has  arrived  at  the  conviction,  that  the  conception  of
species  does  not  always  consist  in  a  definite  sum  of  distinctive
characters  ;  but  that,  on  the  contrary,  in  each  group  both  the
sum  of  the  characters  as  well  as  the  chief  characters  differ  es-
sentially. We  possess  genera  in  which  every  species  has  as
sharply  incised  characters  as  an  antique  gem  ;  there  are  others
(especially  genera  with  many  species)  in  which  the  species  as  it
were  coalesce,  and  can  only  with  difficulty  be  distinguished,
frequently  grouping  themselves  around  a  centre,  so  that  within
one  genus  several  principal  species  arise,  around  which  other
species  place  themselves.  These  groups  of  allied  species  arise
by  their  possessing  some  chief  character  in  common,  whilst  some
other  characters  may  differ  in  allied  species.  The  sum  of  the
distinctive  characters,  as  well  as  their  quality,  has  in  every
type  we  examine  its  particular  laws,  which  cannot  be  generally
formalised.  But  we  have  seen  that  both  quality  and  sum  of
distinctive  characters  may  in  different  races  be  as  great  and
even  greater  than  in  different  species.  The  characters  can
thus  only  serve  for  determining  the  races,  when  we  admit  that
race  and  species  are  identical,  and  inseparable  conceptions.

But  we  are  told :   Species  have  persisted  since  times  imme-


LECTURE    XIV.  413

morial,  not  so  races  •  species  have  always  propagated  in  the
same  manner,  races  have  been  formed  under  our  own  eyes  ;
species  are  imperishable  types,  races  disappear  as  they  have
come.  We  were  enabled  to  show  that  all  these  distinctions
lost  their  significance  through  modern  researches;  that  the
chief  races  of  our  domestic  animals  trace  their  origin  as  far
back  as  the  wild  species  which  surround  us ;  that  they  have  pro-
pagated exactly  in  the  same  constant  manner  as  these  wild
species  ; — that  finally  wild  species  have  disappeared  from  the
creation  like  tamed  races ;  that  consequently  all  distinctions
vanish,  and  that  race  and  species  are  in  this  respect  perfectly
identical.

Thus  there  remain  only  the  conditions  resulting  from  gene-
ration. Races,  it  is  said,  can  interbreed  and  produce  a  progeny
indefinitely  prolific.  Species,  it  is  said,  sometimes  interbreed,
but  their  progeny  is  sterile,  if  not  in  the  first,  certainly  in  sub-
sequent generations.

This  principle,  if  firmly  established,  leads,  it  is  believed,
to  the  inference,  that  all  races  spring  from  a  single  stock,  but
all  species  from  different  primary  stocks.  Let  us  first  examine
how  it  is  with  the  species,  and  let  us  confine  ourselves  to  the
mammals  which  stand  nearest  to  man.

There  can  be  no  doubt  that  animals  even  in  a  wild  state
pair  or  endeavour  to  copulate  with  races  not  allied  to  their
own,  such  is  especially  the  case  with  males  driven  away  by
stronger  rivals,  who,  in  the  impossibility  of  gratifying  the
sexual  desire  with  females  of  their  own  species,  pair  with  those
of  other  species  with  whom  they  frequently  come  in  contact.
This  phenomenon  resembles  that  of  the  adoption  of  the  young
of  other  species  by  a  mother  deprived  of  her  own  progeny.
Connexions  of  this  kind  have  been  observed  between  dog  and
swine,  stag  and  cow ;  but  it  was  always  found  that  in  species
so  remote  from  each  other  there  was  no  issue,  which  is  fre-
quently impossible  from  incompatible  organic  structure.  We
may,  therefore,  from  actual  observation,  consider  it  as  a  law,
that  copulation  between  remote  species  differing  in  structure
is  either  impossible,  or,  at  all  events,  sterile.

Allied  species  may  copulate  and  produce  bastards.     This  is


414  LECTURE    XIV.

frequently  effected  by  the  interference  of  man,  when  generally
some  tricks  are  required  to  deceive  the  male  and  so  to  conquer
its  aversion  to  a  female  of  a  different  species.  The  stallion
who  is  to  cover  a  she-ass  is  frequently  first  excited  by  the  pre-
sence of  a  mare,  for  which  at  the  proper  moment  the  she-ass
is  substituted.  The  same  manoeuvre  is  often  resorted  to,  to
induce  thorough-bred  stallions  to  cover  plough  horses.  They
frequently  refuse,  until  one  of  their  favourite  mares  is  pro-
duced, after  which  they  are  deceived  in  the  above  manner.
But  though  in  common  cases,  the  interference  of  man  is  requi-
site for  the  production  of  hybrids  on  a  larger  scale,  there  are
a  sufficient  number  of  cases  known  of  the  occurrence  of  hybrid-
ity  in  a  wild  or  semi-wild  state.  Dog  and  she-wolf,  fox  and
bitch,  dog  and  jackal,  ibex  and  goat  are  authenticated  instances
of  this  kind.

The  hybrids  present  in  the  average  a  mixture  of  the  physical
and  mental  characters  of  the  parents.  There  persists,  how-
ever, a  certain  individuality,  as  the  intermixture  does  not  affect
the  separate  organs  in  equal  proportions.  The  description  of
wolf-dogs  as  given  by  Buffon,  shows  very  clearly  how  far  this
difference  may  extend  to  the  young  of  a  single  fitter.

Whilst  thus  the  production  of  bastards  with  characters
equally  remote  from  those  of  both  parents  may  take  place  with
or  without  the  interference  of  man,  the  question  whether  inter-
mediate species  may  arise  is  not  thereby  solved.  It  is  not
merely  requisite  that  the  hybrids  should  be  able  to  inter-
breed, but  that  their  progeny  should  be  prolific  so  that  the
species  may  be  continued ;  for,  unless  this  were  the  case,  the
new  species  would  become  extinct.  Supposing  that  the  hybrids
are  not  prolific  between  themselves,  but  are  so  with  the  parent
stock,  the  hybrid  character  would,  after  a  few  generations,
become  again  obliterated.  Let  us  suppose  a  wolf-dog,  half-
wolf,  half-dog,  covering  a  bitch.  The  offspring  is  now  only
one-fourth  wolf  and  three-fourth  dog,  and  if  this  three-quarter
dog  and  his  progeny  are  crossed  with  bitches,  the  quantity  of
wolf-blood  must  finally  be  so  much  reduced  as  to  be  no  longer
perceptible.  Traces  of  such  an  intermixture  will  now  and
then  appear  in  some  of  the  descendants,  which,  perhaps,  may


LECTURE    XIV.


415


present  some  wolf- character,  just  as  a  race-horse  may  show
zebra  stripes  about  the  feet;  but,  generally  speaking,  the
hybrid  race  disappears,  and  is  absorbed  in  the  original  stock.

Experience  now  teaches  that  fertility  among  hybrids  differs
in  a  remarkable  degree ;  that  each  species  has  its  own  law  ;
that  there  obtains  even  a  difference  with  regard  to  the  sexes  of
the  same  species.  The  he-goat  pairs  readily  with  the  sheep,
and  produces  hybrids  which,  according  to  Buffon,  are  per-
fectly prolific.  The  ram,  on  the  other  hand,  copulates  unwill-
ingly with  the  goat;  and,  according  to  the  same  naturalist,
there  never  is  any  issue.  The  probable  production  of  prolific
young,  as  Broca  justly  observes,  by  no  means  depends  on  the
external  resemblance  of  characters.

The  greyhound  and  poodle  dog  are,  both  externally  as  well
as  in  the  structure  of  the  bones,  much  more  dissimilar  than
horse  and  ass  (though  greyhound  and  poodle  are  considered
races  of  the  same  species,  but  horse  and  ass  as  different  spe-
cies), and  yet  the  former  produce  fertile,  and  the  latter  a  sterile
progeny.  Observation  alone  can  furnish  us  with  data;  and  obser-
vation, we  must  confess,  extends  at  present  to  but  few  species.
There  are  cases  in  which  the  sexual  function  of  hybrids  is
extremely  limited,  in  which  the  bastards  may  copulate,  but  are
sterile.  Mules  may  sometimes  produce  young,  but  they  must
be  covered  by  a  horse  stallion,  and  the  progeny  are  usually
sterile,  and  possess  little  viability.  This  example,  which  is
the  oldest  and  best  known,  is  the  only  one,  and  may  be  consi-
dered as  exceptional.  Mule  breeding  has  been  carried  on  in
the  East  from  the  remotest  antiquity,  and  it  was  reserved  to
the  enlightened  government  of  King  Otho  of  Greece  to  ignore
a  thousand  years'  experience,  and  to  import  from  Portugal,  at
a  great  expense,  mule  stallions  for  the  improvement  of  mule
breeding  in  Greece.  This  example  of  sterile  hybrids  is  con-
stantly quoted  by  those  who  maintain  "  all  hybrids  are  gene-
rally sterile  in  the  first  or  the  next  following  generations."

Broca  cites  an  instance  of  a  limited  hybrid  production  be-
tween the  American  bison  and  the  European  cow.  The  bison
readily  covers  the  cow,  whilst  the  domestic  bull  manifests  an
aversion  to  the  bison-cow.     The  progeny  from  such  a  connec-


416  LECTURE    XIV.

tion,  which  the  Americans  term  " half-blood  buffaloes"  (they
call  the  bison  buffalo),  have  the  body  of  a  cow,  but  the  curved
back  (without  the  hunch),  the  colour,  the  head,  and  the  mane
of  the  bison.  The  hybrids  seem  inter  se  but  little  fertile,  but
if  the  half-blood  is  crossed  with  the  parent  stock  a  quarter
hybrid  is  obtained,  which  is  very  prolific,  and  produces  a  per-
manent hybrid  species  which,  with  all  its  characters,  is  indefi-
nitely fertile.  This  too  is,  at  present,  the  only  known  instance
of  a  semi-fertile  hybrid  progeny,  in  which  the  bastards  produce
inter  se  a  sterile  generation,  but  after  being  crossed  with  the
parent  stock  produce  a  species  fertile  between  themselves  and
the  parent  stock.

The  cases  in  which  hybrids  are  fertile  and  produce  a
constant  mongrel  race  are  abundant.  As  cases  of  this  kind
are  contested  with  the  greatest  obstinacy,  I  shall  quote  a  few
from  the  description  given  by  Broca.

Experiments  by  Buffon  : — ' '  A  young  she-wolf,  scarcely  three
days'  old,  was  found  in  a  forest  by  a  peasant,  who  sold  it  to  the
Marquis  Spontin-Beaufort,  by  whom  she  was  brought  up.  She
became  so  tame  that  she  was  taken  out  hunting.  When  a
year  old  she  became  so  savage  as  to  kill  fowls  and  cats,  attack-
ing dogs  and  sheep,  so  that  she  had  to  be  chained.  One  day
she  bit  the  coachman  so  dangerously  that  he  was  laid  up  for
six  weeks.

"First  litter.— On  the  28th  of  March,  1773,  this  she-wolf
was  first  covered  by  a  pointer,  of  whom  she  was  very  fond.
The  act  of  coition  took  place  repeatedly  during  a  fortnight.
Seventy  days  after  the  first  coition,  June  6,  1773,  she  cast  four
whelps,  three  males  and  one  female.

"  Second  litter. — A  single  male  remained,  which  was  brought
up  with  his  sister.  On  December  30,  1775,  at  the  age  of  two
and  a  half  years  coition  took  place  between  them,  and  sixty-
three  days  after,  on  the  3rd  of  March,  1776,  the  bitch  cast
four  whelps,  two  males  and  two  females.

"  Third  litter. — A  couple  of  this  second  litter  was  sent
by  Marquis  de  Spontin  to  Buffon,  who  kept  them  first  at
Paris,  and  subsequently  at  his  country  seat.  Both  animals
were  brought  up  together,  and  carefully  watched  to  prevent


LECTURE    XIV.  417

their  intermixture  with  other  dogs.  Coition  took  place  De-
cember 31,  1778,  when  they  were  two  years  and  ten  months'
old,  and  after  sixty-three  days  the  bitch  cast  seven  whelps.
The  keeper  took  up  the  whelps  to  examine  them,  immediately
after  which  the  enraged  mother  killed  and  devoured  all  those
the  keeper  had  touched.     There  remained  but  one,  a  female.

Fourth  Litter.  This  female  was  brought  up  with  its  parents
in  a  large  vault,  into  which  no  other  animal  was  admitted.  At
the  beginning  of  1781,  when  about  two  years  old,  the  young-
bitch  was  covered  by  her  father,  and  cast  in  the  course  of  the
spring  four  whelps,  two  of  which  she  devoured.  There  thus
remained  one  pair,  of  whose  fate  we  learn  nothing.  The
French  revolution  probably  interrupted  these  experiments.

The  hybrids  of  he-goat  and  sheep,  which  we  term  "  buck-
sheep,"  (chabins  by  the  French),  are  bred  in  large  numbers  in
Chile,  as  their  long-haired,  half-woolly  fleece,  known  by  the
name  of  "  pellons,"  is  much  sought  after  for  bedding,  carpets,
and  saddle-cloths.  The  buck-sheep  of  the  first  generation
have  the  form  of  the  mother  and  the  hairy  coat  of  the  father.
The  hair  is,  however,  almost  as  stiff  as  those  of  the  he-goat,  so
that  the  fleeces  are  but  little  valued.  These  bastards  are  conse-
quently not  bred  from,  though  they  are  perfectly  prolific  between
themselves;  a  small  number  only  is  retained  for  further  breeding.
The  buck-sheep  which  furnish  the  most  valuable  skins,  are  those
of  the  second  generation,  and  are  obtained  by  the  crossing  of
the  male  buck  sheep  with  ewes.  These  half-blood  buck-sheep
are,  as  far  as  we  know,  indefinitely  prolific ;  but  after  three  or
four  generations  their  direct  descendants  undergo  a  modifica-
tion which  diminishes  their  commercial  value  :  their  hair  be-
comes thicker  and  harder,  thus  approaching  that  of  the  goat,
which  is  the  more  remarkable  as  these  half-blood  buck-sheep
are  one-fourth  goat  and  three-fourth  sheep,  and  are  thus  much
nearer  the  sheep  than  the  goat.  Still  more  remarkable  is  it,
that  in  order  to  re-endow  the  succeeding  generations  with  fine
and  soft  hair,  the  females  must  be  crossed  with  the  males  of
the  first  blood.  We  thus  obtain  a  mongrel,  with  three-eighth
goat  blood  and  five-eighth  sheep  blood,  which  does  not  stand
so  near  to  the  sheep  as  its  mother,  and  yet  possesses  a  softer

E  K


418  LECTURE    XIV.

fleece,  the  excellence  of  which  is  preserved  through  several
generations.  The  buck-sheep  exactly  resemble  our  domestic
cross  breeds,  which  after  some  generations  lose  some  of  their
useful  qualities,  which  can  be  recovered  by  a  fresh  crossing
within  the  race.  The  fertility  of  the  buck-sheep  is  not
limited,  as  the  crossing  is  not  effected  with  the  parent  stock,
but  on  the  contrary  with  hybrids.

Fox  and  bitch,  jackal  and  bitch,  ibex  and  she-goat,  camel
and  dromedary,  llama  and  alpaca,  vicuna  and  alpaca,  all  produce
mongrels  productive  between  themselves  and  infinitely  prolific,
some  of  which,  as  the  bastards  of  the  dromedary  and  the  camel,
are  more  valued  than  the  parent  stocks.  We  cannot  enter  into
particulars,  excepting  in  one  instance  which  has  recently  ac-
quired some  importance  in  its  industrial  aspect,  we  allude  to
the  breeding  of  hybrids  of  the  hare  and  the  rabbit  as  carried
on  in  France.

M.  Roux,  of  Angouleme,  took  young  hares  from  three  to
four  weeks  old  and  brought  them  up  with  tame  rabbits  of  the
same  age.  The  rabbits,  who  had  never  seen  a  male  hare,
looked  upon  them  as  their  natural  mates,  and  so  did  the  young
hares  as  regards  their  female  companions,  although  they  did  not
seem  so  familiar.  In  order  to  prevent  fierce  combats,  the
males  must  at  puberty  be  separated  and  a  few  females  given
to  each.  The  crossing  is  thus  easily  effected,  specially  at  night,
as  the  hare  never  approaches  the  female  when  under  observa-
tion. The  wild  doe-hare  casts  usually  only  four  young ;  the
rabbit  from  eight  to  twelve ;  the  rabbit  covered  by  a  hare  from
five  to  eight.      The  prolificacy  is  thus  intermediate.

The  half-blood  hares,  the  progeny  of  the  first  crossing,  re-
semble more  the  rabbit  than  the  hare.  Their  fur  has  scarcely  any
reddish  tint,  the  grey  being  the  predominating  colour.  The  ears
are  somewhat  longer  than  in  the  rabbit,  as  also  are  the  hind  legs  ;
the  facial  expression  is  less  wild  and  timid.  They  are  nearly
as  large  as  their  parents,  so  that  without  close  observation
they  might  be  taken  for  rabbits.  M.  Roux  found  no  advantage
in  breeding  this  race,  though  they  are  perfectly  prolific  be-
tween each  other.  If  these  half-blood  males  are  crossed  with
tamed  doe    hares,  animals    are   produced   resembling   almost


LECTURE    XIV.  410

entirely  the  tamed  hare.  This  breed  also  presented  no
practical  advantage.  It  is  different  with  the  recrossing  with
the  male  hare.  The  quarter  hares  of  the  second  blood,  the
progeny  of  a  hare  and  a  half-blood  female,  are  stronger,
finer,  and  larger  than  the  original  stock.  These  bastards
of  the  second  blood,  three-quarter  hare  to  one  quarter
rabbit,  resemble  their  grandmother  rabbit  as  much  as  their
father  hare,  so  that  they  might  be  taken  as  half-blood  bastards
if  their  pedigree  were  not  known.  The  characters  of  the  rab-
bit thus  predominate  over  those  of  the  hare,  probably  because
the  mother  was  a  rabbit.  In  an  accidental  cross  breed  in  Italy
between  male  rabbit  and  doe  hare,  the  particulars  of  which
have  not  reached  us,  the  young  rather  resembled  the  hare.

The  quarter  hares  are  prolific  between  themselves,  but  only
in  a  limited  degree,  casting-,  like  wild  hares,  only  from  two  to
five  young.  To  render  them  more  prolific,  M.  Roux  recrossed
them  with  half-blood  does.

We  shall  term  this  new  product  three-eighth  hares.  They  are
as  fine  as  three-quarter  hares,  and  much  more  prolific  ;  they
cast  five  to  eight  young,  which  are  more  easily  brought  up  than
rabbits,  grow  fast,  and  are  productive  after  four  months.  The
female,  like  the  doe-hare  and  the  rabbit,  brings  forth  after
thirty  days,  suckles  the  young  for  about  three  weeks,  and
receives  again  the  male  seventeen  days  after  delivery,  so  that
five  litters  may  easily  be  obtained  within  a  year.  This  three-
eighth  race  is  that  which  M.  Roux  breeds  in  preference,  as  it
requires  no  more  provender  than  the  rabbit,  and  yields  more
meat.  A  yearling  "house-hare"  commonly  weighs  six  pounds,  a
wild  hare  eight  pounds,  a  three-eighth  hare  eight  to  ten  pounds;
some  attain  twelve  and  fourteen  pounds,  and  one  weighed  six-
teen pounds.  The  three-eighth  hares  acquire  with  advancing
age  a  fine  fur,  which  frequently  fetches  a  franc,  being  of  a
reddish  grey  colour,  and  of  the  same  consistency  as  that  of  the
wild  hare.  The  market  price  of  a  three-eighth  hare  is  about
two  francs,  whilst  that  of  a  rabbit  is  only  one  franc.  The  flesh
is  white,  like  that  of  the  wild  rabbit,  but  of  excellent  flavour,
resembling  that  of  the  turkey.

These  three-eighth  hares  have  a  thicker  head  than  the  rab-

E  E  2


420  LECTURE    XIV.

bits,  a  shy  expression,  larger  eyes,  apparently  placed  nearer
the  nose,  the  hind  legs  are  longer,  almost  as  long  as  in  the
hare ;  the  fore  legs  are  both  absolutely  and  relatively  longer
than  in  the  rabbit.  The  ears  are  almost  as  long  as  in  the  hare,
but  singularly  enough,  in  all  the  young  and  in  most  of  the  old,
sometimes  the  left  sometimes  the  right  ear  is  pendulous,  whilst
the  other  ear  is  erect.

The  breeding*  of  these  three-eig'hth  hares  has  been  carried
on  since  1850,  and  assuming  but  five  litters  per  annum,  we
have  now  arrived  at  the  sixtieth  generation,  without  the  hybrids
having  shown  any  marked  change  in  their  external  condition
or  diminution  of  their  generative  powers.  Here  then  we  have
a  proof  that  two  acknowledged  different  species  may  produce
indefinitely  prolific  descendants,  preserving  the  same  characters.
The  three-eighth  hai*es  have  thus  become  a  constant  species,
with  definite  characters,  which  are  propagated  indefinitely,
and  thus  present  all  the  marks  of  a  zoological  species.  We
will  admit  that  it  is  an  artificial  species,  which  probably  would
not  have  been  formed  in  a  wild  state,  it  being  known  that  wild
rabbits  and  hares  are  hostile  to  each  other  in  this  state ;
and  that  the  rabbits,  though  smaller  and  apparently  weaker,
drive  away  the  hares  ;  hence  German  sportsmen  look  upon  them
as  vermin  which  must  be  destroyed.  They  are  rarely  eaten  in
Germany;  while  in  France  the  wild  rabbit  is  considered  a  delicacy.
We  will  also  admit  that  three-eighth  hares,  when  set  at  liberty
amongst  wild  rabbits  and  hares,  may  lose  their  intermediate  cha-
racter, and  by  recrossing  may  be  absorbed  in  the  parent  stock,
although  we  possess  no  certain  proof  of  that.  But  what  bearing-
has  all  this  upon  the  point  in  question  ?  Is  the  fact  hereby
altered  that  a  new  species  has  been  produced  by  the  crossing
of  two  species,  both  of  which  are  kuown  to  us  in  the  wild
state,  and  one  of  which  has  been  tamed,  whilst  the  other,
in  Germany,  namely,  the  hare,  has  never  been  domesticated  ?

Races,  it  has  been  said,  are  distinguished  from  species  by
the  production  of  mongrels,  which  are  indefinitely  prolific;
but  on  closely  examining  this  point  it  will  be  found  that  the
assertion  is  without  foundation.

There  are  cases  where  coition  between  individuals  belong-in  a-


LECTURE    XIV.  421

to  the  same  race  is  impossible.  As  little  as  can  the  wolf  copu-
late with  the  Fennec  of  the  Sahara,  as  little  can  a  bulldog  pair
with  the  small  hairless  African  or  the  Bolognese  lap-dog  :  it
is  a  physical  impossibility.  Breeders  are,  moreover,  aware,
that  certain  races  can  only  be  made  to  pair  with  the  greatest
difficulty,  that  the  prolificacy  of  the  mongrels  soon  diminishes,
and  that  the  race  becomes  extinct,  whilst  other  races  pair
readily  and  are  prolific.  "  There  are  qualities/'  says  Nathu-
sius,  "  which  are  incompatible ;  hence  every  crossing  does
not  lead  to  a  fusion  of  characters."  There  are  accordingly
crossings  which  can  never  become  constant.  In  other  words,
there  are  races  which  are,  but  with  difficulty,  productive  be-
tween each  other,  and  there  are  others  in  which  the  fertility  is
limited  to  a  few  generations.

The  aversion  existing  between  allied  species  in  the  wild
state  has  also  been  considered  of  importance.  We  have
seen  that  this  aversion  is  frequently  overcome,  especially  by  the
males  ;  but  we  know  also  that  it  increases  with  the  difference
of  the  race.  Rengger  states  expressly,  that  the  cats  imported
into  Paraguay,  which  are  now  essentially  changed,  but  whose
importation  is  historically  proved,  have  a  decided  aversion  to
European  cats,  and  can  only  with  difficulty  be  brought  to  pair
with  them.  "  Birds  of  a  feather  flock  together"  is  an  old  pro-
verb, and  applicable  to  the  whole  animal  world.  It  appears  to
me  highly  probable  that  were  the  Swytz  and  the  Saanen  races
of  our  common  cattle  set  at  liberty  they  would  not  intermix  ;
but  that  each  race  would  select  its  own  grazing  districts,  and
not  intrude  upon  those  of  the  other  race.  Possibly,  the  larger
Saanen  race  may  supersede  the  weaker  Swytz  race,  but  no
voluntary  intermixture  would  take  place.

On  summarising  the  facts  obtained  in  this  field  of  inquiry,
we  are  justified  in  concluding  that,  as  regards  production  and
propagation,  there  exists  no  difference  whatever  between  species
and  races ;  that  there  are  both  races  and  species  unable  to  pro-
pagate inter  se ;  that  there  are  some  which  only  propagate
with  difficulty  ;  and  again  others  which  easily  produce  prolific
hybrids,  and  thus  give  rise  to  new  species  and  races.  Expe-
rience, however,  also  teaches,  that  races  and  species  intermix


422  LECTURE   XIV.

with  greater  difficulty  the  more  distinctly  the  characters  are
impressed  by  the  stamp  of  time.

The  chaos  of  raceless  animals,  which  have  not  yet  received
this  stamp,  exists  not  merely  in  races  but  in  wild  species,  and
it  will  be  worth  the  zoologist's  while  to  bear  this  idea  in  mind,
in  the  classification  of  wild  animals  and  species.  When  I  con-
sider the  numerous  varieties  and  species  assumed  in,  for  in-
stance, the  South  American  genus  Cebus ;  when  we  see  that
every  naturalist  differently  conceives  and  differently  groups
the  numerous  allied  forms,  the  conviction  obtrudes  on  me  that
we  have  before  us  a  raceless  multitude  which  oscillates  between
different  centres,  like  the  multitude  of  raceless  half-tamed  or
wild  dogs  of  the  East,  between  the  old  pure  races  or  species.

But  when  we  consider  the  conduct  of  the  so-called  species
and  races  on  the  whole,  we  constantly  observe  an  important
difference,  which  does  not  prevent  us  from  establishing  some
few  generally  valid  laws.  Just  as  there  are  species  which  re-
main the  same  in  all  zones  and  have  undergone  no  change  in
the  course  of  thousands  of  years,  so  are  there  again  other  spe-
cies which,  transported  into  other  climates,  are  essentially
transformed.  The  one  may  be  said  to  be  composed  of  unyield-
ing, the  other  of  flexible  materials.  In  the  same  way  do  we
observe  species^  as  far  as  history  can  trace  them,  despite  of
their  resemblance,  dwelling  side  by  side  without  intermixture,
preserving  the  same  peculiarities,  without  giving  rise  to  a
mongrel  race.  Other  species,  on  the  contrary,  which  at  a  re-
mote period  were  perfectly  distinct  species,  intermixed,  pro-
duced prolific  mongrels,  and  formed  raceless  masses,  common
root  stocks,  so  to  speak,  giving  rise  to  new  races  and  species.
Finally,  there  may  be  other  species,  which,  though  originating
from  such  common  root-stocks,  departed  from  them,  and  ac-
quiring distinct  characters,  became  hostile  to  their  brothers.

That  similar  processes  take  place  within  the  human  genus,
and  human  races,  I  shall  endeavour  to  show  in  my  next  lecture.


423


LECTUEE     XV.

The  Tradition  of  Adam. — Geographical  Distribution  of  Human  Races. —
Constancy  of  their  Characters  in  the  course  of  time. — Pliability  of  Races
— Development  of  the  Skull  by  Civilisation. — Degeneration  of  Races. —
An  Example  from  Ireland. — Modifications  of  Negroes  in  America,  Yan-
kees, Jews. — Time  requisite  for  such  modifications. — Intermixture  of
Races. — Differences  in  Prolificacy  in  various  Mongrels. — Intermixture
of  White  Races  between  themselves. — Mulattoes  in  South  Carolina  and
Louisiana. — Hombron's  Remarks. — Indians  and  Whites. — Whites  and
Malays. — Whites  and  Polynesians. — Whites  and  Australians. — Infer-
ences regarding  the  Original  Diversity  of  the  Human  Races,  and  the
Products  of  Intermixture. — Direct  Divine  Influence,  according  to  Dr.
Sagot.

Gentlemen — As  far  as  our  traditions  go,  however  far  back
they  reach  into  the  remotest  antiquity,  we  observe  that  wher-
ever peoples  migrated  to,  and  discovered  unknown  countries,
they  found  human  beings,  who  appeared  to  them  not  less
strange  than  the  animals  and  plants  they  met  with.  There
are  but  few  small  islands  which,  from  the  nature  of  the  soil,
their  distance  from  any  country,  the  inhospitality  of  the  cli-
mate, presented  obstacles  to  habitation,  and  thus  form  an
exception  to  the  general  rule.  The  larger  islands,  as  well  as
all  parts  of  the  continents  under  the  hottest  and  coldest  climates,
were,  by  navigators  or  conquerors,  always  found  inhabited.
Even  religious  legends,  which  have  for  their  object  the  origin
of  mankind  and  the  history  of  a  privileged  race,  even  these
legends  indicate  that  at  the  creation  of  the  first  pair  the  world
was  already  peopled,  an  indication  given  even  in  the  Bible.
After  the  murder  of  Abel,  Cain  was  the  only  child  of  Adam  ;
Seth  and  the  other  sons  and  daughters  mentioned  in  the
Bible  not  being  yet  born.  Notwithstanding  this,  Cain  takes
his  wife  with  him  in  his  flight  and  immediately  lays  the  foun-
dation of  a  new  city,   after  having  received  the  mark  on  his


424  LECTURE    XV.

forehead  so  that  nobody  should  kill  him.  This  mark  could
only  have  been  intended  for  men,  for  the  wolf  kills  also  marked
sheep.  But  where  Cain  could  have  obtained  a  wife,  or  peopled
a  city  (at  the  time  of  Adam)  must  always  remain  a  mystery,
unless  we  assume  that  the  history  of  Adam  is  no  more  than  a
legend  intended  to  prove  the  specific  excellence  of  the  Jewish
race.

I  merely  allude  to  this  to  show  that  the  only  fact  from  which
we  can  start,  is  that  of  the  original  dispersion  of  mankind  upon
the  earth,  and  the  original  difference  of  races  spread  over  the
surface  of  the  earth.  However  much  we  may  indulge  in  theo-
logical speculations  on  the  origin  and  differences  of  mankind,
however  weighty  proofs  may  be  adduced  for  the  original  unity
of  the  human  species,  this  much  is  certain,  that  no  historical,  nor,
as  we  have  shown,  geological  data  can  establish  this  dream  of
unity.  However  far  back  our  eye  reaches,  we  find  different
species  of  man  spread  over  different  parts  of  the  globe.

The  geographical  distribution  of  mankind  corresponds  more  or
less  with  that  of  animals,  though  not  within  such  narrow  limits
as  those  drawn  by  Agassiz.  Each  race  or  species  corresponds
to  the  general  conditions  of  the  country,  climate,  and  the  sur-
rounding animal  or  vegetable  world;  and  the. laws  of  distribu-
tion in  general  show  the  same  shades  which  we  find  in  the  rest
of  organic  nature.  As  there  are  animals  inhabiting  a  very
limited  district  which  they  never  leave,  so  are  there  species  of
mankind  who  are  limited  to  a  small  space.  Again,  as  there
are  species  of  animals  spread  over  large  tracts,  and  enabled  to
support  the  heat  of  the  tropics  as  well  as  the  cold  temperature
of  the  north,  so  are  there  species  of  mankind  presenting  the
same  power  of  adaptation  to  external  media.  Boudin  has  en-
deavoured to  show,  that  of  all  known  human  races  there  is  but
one,  namely,  the  Jewish  race,  which  can  easily  become  accli-
matised in  all  the  zones  of  both  hemispheres,  and  can  maintain
itself  without  intermixture  with  the  native  race,  whilst  all  other
European  races  transported  from  a  temperate  to  a  hot  climate
would  in  the  course  of  time  become  extinct,  unless  supplied  by
immigration  from  the  mother  country,  because  the  deaths
always  exceed  the  births.     Hence  it  follows  that,  excepting  a


LECTURE    XV.  425

few  favoured  races  which,  as  far  as  is  known,  may  inhabit  the
whole  globe,  the  rest  are  more  or  less  confined  within  certain
limits  which  they  cannot  without  impunity  transgress.  But
these  laws  now  prevailing  in  the  physical  world  are  applicable,
no  doubt,  to  remote  periods,  in  which  the  present  conditions
existed ;  and,  as  the  facts  relating  to  the  existence  of  man  upon
the  earth  teach  us  that  the  conditions  were  not  changed,
neither  can  the  laws  of  distribution  of  the  human  race  have
undergone  any  material  change.

Not  merely  the  difference  of  races,  but  also  their  constancy
in  the  course  of  time,  is  perfectly  established.     We  have  en-
deavoured to  show  that  these  characters  may  be  traced  back
beyond  the  historical  period  up  to  the  pile-works,  the  stone-
period,  and  the  diluvial  formations.     The  Egyptian  monuments
show  that  already  under   the   twelfth    dynasty,    about    2,300
years  before  Christ,  Negroes  had  been  imported  into  Egypt ;
that  slave  hunts  had,  as  now,  taken  place  under  several  dynas-
ties, as  proved  by  the  triumphal  processions  of  Thotmes  IV,
about  1700  B.C.,  and  Rameses  III,  about  1300  B.C.     There  are
seen  long  processions  of  Negi^oes,  whose  features  and  colour
are  faithfully  rendered ;  there  are  seen  Egyptian  scribes  regis-
tering slaves  with  their  wives  and  children ;   even  the  down
upon  the  heads  of  the  latter  may  be  distinguished.     There  are
also    seen    many    heads    presenting    the    characters  of  Negro
tribes  inhabiting  the  south  of  Egypt,  and  which  the  artist  dis-
tinguishes   as   such   by  a    superadded   lotos-stalk.       But   not
only  the  Negroes,  but  also  the  Nubians  and  the  Berbers,  as
well  as  the  old  Egyptians,  are  always  depicted  with  those  cha-
racteristic peculiarities  which  have  been  preserved  to  this  day.
"The  peasants  of  the  Nile  valley/'  says  Broca,  "  now  termed
Fellahs,   have  preserved  the  type  of  the   ancient   Egyptians,
which  is  the  more  remarkable,  as  they  have  since  the  Arab
conquest  intermixed  with  the  stock  of  the  conquerors.     The
identity  of  the  modern  Fellahs  with  the  Egyptians  of  the  time
of  the  Pharaohs  has  been  shown  by  Morton  by  the  comparison
of  their  skulls;"  and  Jomard  confirms  this  as  follows:  "On
looking  at  the  agricultural  labourers  of  Esne,  Ombos,  Edfii,  or
of  the  district  of  Selsele,  one  is  apt  to  imagine  that  the  images


426  LECTURE   XV.

on  the  monuments  of  Latopolis,  Onibos,  or  Apollonipolis
Magna,  have  detached  themselves  from  the  walls  and  descended
into  the  plains."

The  same  constancy  of  characters  can  be  traced  in  the  other
races  with  which  the  Egyptians  came  in  contact.  The  Jews
are  as  easily  recognisable  as  the  Tatars  and  Scythians  with
whom  Eameses  III  was  at  war.  In  the  same  way  we  observe
upon  the  Assyrian  and  Indian  monuments  the  characters  of
such  races  as  still  inhabit  these  regions,  so  that  the  constancy
of  race  characters  is  everywhere  rendered  evident.  But  the
example  of  Egypt  teaches  also  that  slight  changes  of  climate,
as  well  as  limited  intermixture,  have  an  insignificant  influence
on  the  character  of  a  race.  For  more  than  four  thousand
years  have  Negroes,  Berbers,  and  Egyptians  inhabited  the  same
Nile  valley,  and  propagated  there  without  any  essential  change
in  their  characters.  At  a  later  period  there  was  an  immigration
of  Greeks,  Persians,  Arabs,  and  Turks,  still  without  changing
the  original  stock.  These  conquerors  added  but  a  small  per-
centage to  the  existing  population,  and  stood  to  it  nearly  in
the  same  relation  as  limited  intermixture,  which,  by  recrossing
with  the  parent  stock,  is  absorbed  in  it,  or  leaves  only  a  slight
residue.

Whilst  thus  the  constancy  of  the  natural  races  of  mankind
is  established  beyond  any  doubt,  we  must,  on  the  other  hand,
not  forget  that  most  of  them  possess  a  certain  flexibility,  and
show,  when  transplanted  into  different  media,  certain  changes
which  are  the  result  of  their  adaptation  to  new  conditions.  As
it  is  upon  this  point  that  the  advocates  for  the  unity  of  the
human  species  base  their  arguments,  we  are  compelled  to
scrutinise  the  respective  facts.

Let  us,  at  the  outset,  remember  that  many  races,  though
they  remain  on  the  same  spot,  are  apt  to  undergo  certain
changes,  the  result  of  progressive  civilisation.  It  is  chiefly
the  height  of  the  skull,  and  the  development  of  the  frontal
region,  which  is  thereby  affected,  by  which  the  internal  capa-
city of  the  cranium,  and  the  cerebral  mass  itself  are  increased.
We  have  already  pointed  out,  that  in  races  capable  of  civilisa-
tion,  the  anterior   sutures  remain  open  longer,  and  are  ob-


LECTURE    XV.  427

literated  at  a  later  period  than  the  posterior;  the  reverse
being*  the  case  in  races  incapable  of  high  culture.  We  have
shown  that,  according  to  Broca,  the  Parisian  skulls  have,  in
the  course  of  centuries,  acquired  a  greater  internal  cranial
capacity.  We  have  further  shown  that  the  cave  and  stone-
period  skulls  are  unfavourably  distinguished  by  the  indifferent
development  of  the  frontal  region.  The  height  of  the  forehead
and  the  skull  cannot,  therefore,  be  adopted  as  a  permanent
race  character,  since  it  may  change  in  the  course  of  time  and
give  to  the  profile  a  different  aspect.  Food,  if  appropriate,
may  also  have  its  influence,  by  rendering'  a  people  larger  and
more  muscular.  The  same  characters  which  distinguish  care-
fully-bred domestic  animals  from  their  parent  stock,  may  also
be  obtained  in  man  by  continued  culture.  There  can  be  no
doubt  that  the  prosperous  and  wealthy  classes  of  human
society  are,  on  the  whole,  physically  finer  and  stronger  than
the  lowest  classes,  who  are  much  exposed  to  misery  and  want.
It  is  further  unquestionable  that  those  classes  which,  in  succes-
sive generations,  follow  mental  occupations,  possess  a  greater
development  of  the  skull  than  the  ignorant  masses  who  are
engaged  in  the  meanest  occupations.  We  should  by  no  means
feel  surprised  to  hear  it  established  by  comparative  observa-
tions, that  the  squirearchy  of  the  Mark  Brandenburg,  which
for  centuries  have  had  no  other  ambition  than  to  wear  the  king's
livery,  possess  a  smaller  cranial  capacity  than  the  intelligent
Berliners.

In  the  same  way  as  culture,  wealth,  aliment,  and  particular
occupations  may  develope  a  cultured  race  from  a  natural  race,  so
may  the  deprivation  of  such  influences  reduce  a  cultured  race
to  its  primary  condition.  Hunger  and  anxiety  will  do  more,
by  adding  morbid  characters,  which  may  be  transmitted  through
several  generations,  until  existence  itself  becomes  endangered.
I  shall  cite  for  this  purpose  a  remarkable  instance  of  this  kind,
which  is  quoted  in  the  Dublin  University  Magazine  : —

"  On  the  plantation  of  Ulster,  and  on  the  successes  of  the
British  against  the  rebels  in  1641  and  1689,  multitudes  of  native
Irish  were  driven  from  Armagh  and  the  south  of  Down  into
the  mountainous  tract,  extending  from  the  Barony  of  the  Flews


428  LECTURE    XV.

eastward  to  the  sea.  The  same  race  was,  on  the  other  side  of
the  kingdom,  driven  into  Leitrim,  Sligo,  and  Mayo.  Ever
since  that  time  these  people  have  been  exposed  to  the  bad
effects  of  hunger  and  ignorance,  the  two  great  demoralisers  of
the  human  race.  The  descendants  of  these  refugees  can  still
be  distinguished  from  their  cognates  in  Meath  and  other  dis-
tricts. They  have  open  projecting  mouths,  with  prominent  teeth,
and  exj30sed  gums,  high  cheek  bones,  depressed  noses,  and  pre-
sent barbarism  on  their  frout.  We  thus  see  in  Sligo  and  the
north  of  Mayo  the  consequences  of  a  $wo  hundred  years'  misery
upon  the  whole  physical  structure,  an  example  of  deteriora-
tion by  known  causes,  which  offers  some  compensation  by  its
impoi'tance  for  the  future,  in  shewing  the  sufferings  through
which  former  generations  have  passed.  They  are  on  the
average  five  feet  two  inches  high,  big  bellied,  bandy-legged ;
their  clothes  a  bundle  of  rags — thus  walk  about  the  spectres
of  a  people  in  the  daylight  of  civilisation,  as  representatives
of  Irish  misery  and  ugliness ;  a  people  once  well  grown,  able-
bodied,  and  handsome.  In  other  parts  of  the  island,  where
the  people  have  undergone  no  such  degradation,  the  same
race  furnishes  the  finest  models  of  human  beauty  and  strength,
both  physically  and  mentally."

"  Every  reader,"  adds  Quatrefages  to  this  description,  "  who
is  any  way  acquainted  with  the  distinguishing  characters  of
mankind,  will,  with  the  exception  of  the  colour,  recognise  here
the  character  ascribed  to  the  lowest  Negroes,  and  the  degene-
rate Australian  tribes."  And  further  :  "  These  two  different
groups,  one  of  which  reminds  us  of  the  lowest  races  of  Aus-
tralia ;  and  the  other,  which  will  bear  comparison  with  any
white  race,  are  they  really  of  the  same  race  ?  We  answer
no.  The  Irishman  of  Meath  alone  represents  the  old  stock,
the  surrounding  media  have  for  him  remained  the  same,  and
he  is  unaltered.  The  Irishman  of  Flews,  on  the  contrary,
placed  under  different  conditions,  has  changed,  and  formed  a
new  race,  derived  from  the  old,  which  corresponds  to  the
media  which  produced  it.  There  are  now  in  these  adjoining
districts  two  races."     Thus  far  Quatrefages.

Let  us  examine  this  point.     And,  first,  we  must  remember


LECTURE    XV.  429

that  party  spirit  speaks  here,  painting  the  condition  of  the
Irish  in  as  gloomy  colours  as  possible,  and  probably  assuming
some  few  ragged  and  broken-down  beggars  as  the  type  of
the  whole  race.  But,  assuming  the  description  to  be  correct,
it  is  so  imperfect  and  defective,  that  we  can  scarcely  con-
ceive how  such  a  cautious  writer  as  Quatrefages  can  find  in
it  a  description  of  the  Australian  savage.

No  person  has  examined  such  a  degenerate  Irish  skull,  and
shown  hoW  far  it  deviates  from  other  Irish  skulls,  or  approaches
the  characteristic  form  of  the  Australian  skulls.  The  whole
description  resembles  as  closely,  if  not  more  so,  that  of  the
semi-cretins,  as  they  are  found  by  hundreds  in  poor  moun-
tainous districts.  The  projecting  teeth,  the  pendulous  belly,
the  thick  noses,  puffy  lips,  are  always  the  attendants  on
scrofula,  that  wide-spread  disease  which  is  produced  by  damp
dwellings,  bad  food,  want  of  care,  and  similar  causes.  That
there  has  been  degeneration  in  these  poor  creatures  is  unques-
tionable ;  that  neglect  has  changed  the  noble  horse  into  a  little
rough,  thick-bellied  mustang  is  certain  ;  but  just  as  by  proper
care  the  noble  Andalusian  horse  may  be  developed  from  the
mustang,  so  may  the  scrofulous  Irish  emigrant  from  Sligo  to
America,  by  proper  alimentation,  be  made  to  resemble  in  his
successors  the  Irishman  of  Meath.  Nothing  in  the  whole
description  proves  that  any  of  the  characteristic  features  of
the  Irish  or  Celtic  skull  had  been  obliterated.  We  have,
therefore,  before  us  changes  such  as  are  experienced  by  civil-
ised races,  when  the  conditions  requisite  for  preserving  that
civilisation  begin  to  fail.

We  are,  however,  as  already  stated,  far  from  denying  certain
modifications  in  races  produced  either  by  hunger  and  misery,
or  by  transplantation  to  a  foreign  climate.  We  simply  main-
tain, that  these  changes  are  in  most  human  species  but  trifling,
that  they  stand  in  proportion  to  the  flexibility  of  the  race,  and
that  most  races  possess  so  little  flexibility  that, .  on  being-
transported  to  a  foreign  climate,  they  perish  rather  than  adapt
themselves  to  the  new  influences.

The  first  and  most  common  influence  of  climate  shows  itself
in  a  diminution  of  generative  power  in  both  sexes,  which,  by
diminishing  the  number  of  births,  even  if  they  balance  the


430  LECTURE   XV.

number  of  deaths,  must  necessarily  lead  to  final  extinction.
The  Mamelukes  in  Egypt  could  only  maintain  themselves  by
the  purchase  and  importation  of  slaves,  as  their  own  pro-
geny, notwithstanding  all  care,  perished.  Despite  of  all  advan-
tages enjoyed  by  English  married  soldiers  in  India,  they  never
succeeded  in  rearing  a  sufficient  number  for  drummers  and
fifers.  The  Dutch  established  iu  Java  become  sterile  with
women  of  their  own  race,  and,  if  they  have  any  children,  the
whole  family  regularly  becomes  almost  extinct  with  the  ap-
pearance of  grandchildren.  As  generative  capacity  is  the  last
development  of  the  organism,  which  is  only  unfolded  when  all
conditions  of  existence  are  present,  so  is  it  the  first  function
which  fails,  and  soon  ceases  under  hostile  influences.  As  in
man,  so  is  it  in  animals,  many  of  which,  though  apparently  in
excellent  health,  no  longer  propagate  in  captivity.  Many
assertions  of  sterility  of  mongrels  and  hybrids,  founded  on
experiments  in  zoological  gardens  and  menageries,  rest  merely
upon  this  diminution  of  generative  power,  observed  also  in
wild  species,  which  are  very  prolific  in  a  state  of  liberty.

Let  us  now  examine  the  changes  which  certain  races  are
said  to  have  undergone,  in  which  transplantation  into  other
countries  has  produced  no  diminution  of  generative  power,
and  where  thus  the  conditions  requisite  for  the  formation  of  a
new  race  existed.  First  of  all  are  mentioned  the  Negroes,
who,  imported  into  Southern  and  Central  America,  are  very
prolific  on  that  continent.  The  Northern  slave-states,  Virginia
and  Kentucky,  carry  on  the  trade  of  slave-breeders,  just  as  in
our  own  country  there  are  cattle-breeders.  Here  we  have
abundant  materials  for  observation.  Some  authors  assert,  in
fact,  that  the  Negroes  imported  into  America,  in  successive
generations,  gradually  approach  the  white  race.  "  The  Negro
children  of  pure  race,"  says  Reiset,  "born  in  the  Antilles,
have  all  the  characters  of  the  Negro,  but  somewhat  more
faintly  developed.  The  colour  and  the  hair  remain  the  same,
but  the  muzzle  diminishes,  and  in  all  other  respects  the
Creole-negro  approaches  the  white."  "  The  Negroes  of  the
United  States,"  says  Reclus,  "  have  by  no  means  the  same
type  as  the  Negroes  in  Africa;  their  skin  is  rarely  velvety,
though  all  their  ancestors  were  imported  from  Guinea.    They


LECTURE    XV.  431

have  no  such  projecting  cheekbones,  thick  lips,  flat  noses,
thick  wool,  brutish  physiognomies,  and  so  acute  facial  angles,
as  their  brethren  in  the  old  world.  In  the  course  of  some
one  hundred  and  fifty  years  they  have,  as  regards  their
external  aspect,  passed  over  more  than  a  quarter  of  the  dis-
tance which  separates  them  from  the  white  race."

On  summarising  all  these  observations  and  adding  the
blanching  of  the  skin,  I  must  ask  what  are  the  characters  for
the  remaining  three-fourths  of  the  distance  which  the  Negro
has  yet  to  traverse,  and  whether  the  slight  changes  enumerated
above  really  indicate  an  approach  to  the  white  race,  or  whether
they  are  merely  such  changes  as  the  Negroes  undergo  even  in
their  own  country  with  advancing  civilisation  ?  There  are
leaden-grey  Negroes  in  Africa,  Negroes  with  but  moderately
puffed  up  lips,  with  more  prominent  noses,  less  woolly  hair  and
less  brutish  aspect,  with  less  prominent  cheek-bones  and  less
acute  facial  angle,  than  the  Guinea  Negroes  possess,  which  re-
present the  low  Negro-type  in  general.  Though  we  would  not
maintain  that  all  the  peoples  of  central  Africa  have  sprung
from  the  same  common  stock,  we  know  at  least  so  much  from
the  descriptions  of  African  travellers,  as  to  enable  us  boldly  to
assert  that  each  of  the  above  quoted  slight  changes  occur  as
much  in  Africa,  without  any  contact  with  the  whites,  without
any  transportation  across  the  sea,  and  are  developed  amongst
the  Negroes  themselves.  The  proof  for  our  assertion  is  easily
found :  the  extract  from  Pruner-Bey\s  article  on  Negroes,
which  we  gave  in  a  preceding  lecture,  confirms  our  view,  as
Pruner-Bey  has  only  examined  African  Negroes  in  Africa.
But  supposing  these  changes  to  take  place  only  in  America,
do  these  changes,  upon  which  so  much  value  is  set,  affect  any
of  the  essential  features  of  the  organisation,  especially  the  skull
and  the  skeleton  ?  Have  any  of  these  gentlemen  compared
a  slave-skull,  I  will  not  say  of  a  hundred  and  fifty  years  ago,
but  one  of  only  three  preceding  generations,  with  that  of  a  native
Negro  skull  ?  And  how  do  these  observations  agree  with
the  measurements  of  Aitken  Meigs,  who  assigns  to  American
slave-skulls  less  capacity  than  to  the  skulls  of  Negroes  born
in  Africa  ?

We  might  say  still  more  :  was  either  of  these  observers,  such


432  LECTURE    XV.

as  Lyell,  Reiset,  Reclus,  in  a  condition  to  compare  lai'ge  num-
bers of  recently  imported  African  Negroes  with  as  many
Creole  Negroes,  as  since  1808  no  more  slaves  have  been  im-
ported into  America,  so  that  the  observations  were  only  made
forty  years  after  the  above  period  ?  And  finally,  what  guaran-
tee have  these  gentlemen  for  the  pure  descent  of  these  Negroes  ?
We  know  the  brutality  of  the  slaveholders,  who  not  only  claim
the  jus  primce  noctis,  but  also  the  first  child,  and  who  with  de-
testable cruelty,*  and  with  an  utter  disregard  of  every  human
feeling,  recross  such  bastards  with  the  black  race  and  keep
them  in  slavery.

The  American  Anglo-Saxons,  or  Yankees,  are  also  cited  as
an  instance  of  change  of  characters.  "  Already,  after  the
second  generation,"  says  Pruner-Bey  in  Quatrefages,  "  the
Yankee  presents  features  of  the  Indian  type.  At  a  later
period,  the  glandular  system  is  reduced  to  the  minimum  of  its
normal  development.  The  skin  becomes  dry  like  leather,  the
colour  of  the  cheeks  is  lost,  and  is  in  males  replaced  by  a  loamy
tint,  and  in  females  by  a  sallow  paleness.  The  head  becomes
smaller  and  rounder,  and  is  covered  with  stiff  dark  hair ;  the
neck  becomes  longer,  and  there  is  a  greater  development  of
the  cheek  bones  and  the  masseters.  The.  temporal  fossae
become  deeper,  the  jaw  bones  more  massive,  the  eyes  lie  in
deep  approximated  sockets.  ,The  iris  is  dark,  the  glance  is
piercing  and  wild.  The  long  bones,  especially  in  the  superior
extremities,  are  lengthened,  so  that  the  gloves  manufactured  in
England  and  France  for  the  American  market  are  of  a  particu-
lar make  with  very  long  fingers.  The  female  pelvis  approaches
that  of  the  male."  c '  America,"  adds  Quatrefages,  "  has  thus
altered  the  Anglo-Saxon  type,  and  produced  from  the  English
race  a  new  white  race  which  might  be  called  the  Yankee  race."

We  have  nothing  to  say  against  this  ;  for  we  also  believe  that
America  dries  up  the  skin  and  reduces  the  fat, — an  effect
to  which  all  the  above  differences  might  be  reduced.  That
the  head  becomes  smaller,  we  utterly  deny ;  the  exact  cranial

*  The  author  evidently  writes  in  entire  ignorance  of  the  real  facts,  and
the  credulity  which  he  has  here  shown  in  believing  the  stories  put  forward
by  the  "  philanthropists"  of  Exeter  Hall,  and  the  absurd  fictions  of  Mrs.
Beecher  Stowe,  is  the  more  remarkable,  as  Prof.  Vogt  is  not  given  to  believe
without  some  reliable  evidence. — Editor.


LECTURE    XV.  433

measurements  by  Morton  contradict  this  assertion  categorically,
by  showing  that  the  skull  of  the  Yankee  is  as  large  as  that
of  the  Eno-lishman.  Thus  the  alleged  differences  are  reduced
to  a  minimum,  and  are  the  less  to  be  depended  upon,  as  the
Anglo-Saxon  race  is  itself  a  mongrel  race,  produced  by  Celts,
Saxons,  Normans,  and  Danes,  a  raceless  chaos  without  any
fixed  type;  and  the  descendants  of  this  raceless  multitude  have
in  America  so  much  intermixed  with  Frenchmen,  Germans,
Dutch,  and  Irish,  as  to  have  given  rise  to  another  raceless
chaos,  which  is  kept  up  by  continued  immigration.  We  can
readily  believe  that  from  this  chaos  a  new  race  is  gradually
forming.  The  facts  at  hand  are,  however,  by  no  means  so
decisive  as  to  justify  us  in  considering  these  characters  as
constant.  We  must,  moreover,  add  that  the  German  families,
who  have  been  settled  in  Pennsylvania  quite  as  long  as  the
Anglo-Saxons,  and  have  kept  their  race  pure,  do  not  present
the  transition  into  the  Yankee  type,  but  preserve  that  of  their
stock.  The  so-called  Anglo-Saxon  race,  which,  in  point  of
fact,  is  no  real  race,  as  no  fixed  type  has  been  produced  by  its
manifold  intermixtures  with  foreign  peoples,  that  so-called
race  has,  certainly,  undergone  some  alterations  in  a  foreign
climate,  whilst  the  fixed  Germano- Saxon  race,  which  main-
tains itself  with  great  tenacity  in  its  old  dwelling  places  in
Germany,  has  not  changed  even  in  America.  Here  again
we  have  that  difference  in  the  conduct  of  old  fixed  and  new
formed  races  already  touched  upon.

The  Jews  also  have  been  cited  as  a  proof  of  alteration,  even
though,  as  is  here  the  case,  the  stock  is  kept  pure.  It  is  true
we  find,  chiefly  in  the  North,  in  Russia  and  Poland,  Germany
and  Bohemia,  a  tribe  of  Jews  frequently  with  red  hair,  short
beard,  pug  nose,  small  grey  cunning  eyes,  massive  trunk,
round  face  and  broad  cheek  bones,  resembling  many  Scla-
vonian  tribes  of  the  North.  In  the  East,  on  the  contrary,  and
about  the  Mediterranean,  as  well  as  in  Portugal  and  Holland,
we  find  the  Semitic  stock  with  long  black  hair  and  beard,  large
almond-shaped  eyes  with  a  melancholy  expression,  oval  face
and  prominent  nose ;  in  short,  that  type  represented  in  the
portraits  of  Rembrandt.     In  Africa  finally,  on  the  Red  Sea  in

F  F


434  LECTURE    XV.

Abyssinia,  we  find  a  Jewish  nation,  which  despises  trade,
carries  on  agriculture  and  other  handicrafts,  and  is  seemingly
not  distinguishable  from  the  other  peoples  of  the  country.
They  themselves  derive  their  descent  from  the  mythical  Queen
Sheba,  who  is  said  to  have  visited  Solomon,  when  she  and  her
household  embraced  Judaism.

The  Jews,  it  was  thought,  thus  afford  a  proof  of  the  depend-
ence of  the  stock  on  the  climate,  in  as  much  as  in  the  North
they  approached  the  Sclavonian,  in  the  Mediterranean  the
Oriental,  and  in  the  South  the  Abyssinian  type.  The  proofs
are,  however,  insufficient.  On  the  Eed  Sea  the  Jews  had  settle-
ments from  a  remote  period  where,  before  Mohammed,  they
ruled  in  small  districts,  and,  contrary  to  their  usual  custom,
made  many  proselytes.  The  investigations  of  Jewish  scholars,
especially  those  of  Dr.  Ascher,  made  in  Abyssinia,  have  shown
this  conversion,  but  no  affinity  of  race.  All  Jewish  scholars
agree  also  that  both  types  have  existed  from  the  remotest
period,  so  that  some  reduce  them  to  the  multitude  of  people
which  accompanied  the  Jews  on  their  departure  from  Egypt,
and  passed  with  them  through  the  Red  Sea;  though  it  is
rather  surprising  that  this  rabble  too  (the  Hebrew  expression
still  used  among  the  Jews)  should  also  have  been  worthy  of  the
particular  protection  of  their  own  God.  Thus  the  differences
obtaining  between  Jews  seem  to  result  rather  from  original  tribe
peculiarities  than  from  change  of  localities.  Another  argu-
ment in  favour  of  this  view  is,  that  the  Jews  of  the  Oriental
type  expelled  from  Portugal,  who  for  several  centuries  have
been  settled  in  Holland,  have  preserved  their  peculiarities
unaltered ;  whilst,  on  the  other  hand,  in  the  East,  the  two  Jew-
ish types  lived  also  for  centuries  side  by  side  in  the  same  climate
and  conditions,  and  preserved  their  respective  characters.

We  must,  however,  as  regards  these  changes,  not  lose  sight
of  a  point  which  seems  to  us  of  considerable  importance.
"  It  required,"  says  Quatrefages,  "  scarcely  two  centuries  to
transform  the  Irish  Celt  into  a  kind  of  Australian  ;  two  cen-
turies and  a  half,  at  most  ten  or  twelve  generations,  have
sufficed  to  change  the  Anglo-Saxon  into  a  Yankee.  We  may
thus  infer  the  effects   which  numbers  of  centuries,  hundreds


LECTURE    XV.  IfJ.j

of  generations,  may  produce  in  man,  nay,  must  have  produced,
when  the  savage  or  semi-barbarous  populations  knew  not  how
to  protect  themselves  from  the  influences  of  the  new  climate,
when  they  had  to  struggle  against  animal  and  vegetable  nature,
against  the  physico-chemical  forces  which  predominated.  How
much  more  destructive  must  at  that  time  have  been  the
struggle  for  life  than  it  is  now  for  those  travelling  pioneers
whose  courage  we  so  much  admire.  And  how  much  more
durable  and  deeper  must  be  the  ti-aces  of  those  struggles."

It  appears  to  me  that  many  facts  are  here  confounded  which
ought  to  be  separated.  The  struggle  for  existence  in  a  new
country  may  be  deadly,  because  the  number  of  deaths  ex-
ceeds that  of  births,  and  then  there  can  be  no  question  of  a
change  of  race,  for  it  becomes  extinct  !  Or,  again,  the  strug-gle
is  not  S3  deadly,  that  is  to  say,  the  number  of  births  exceeds
that  of  deaths,  and  the  race  adapts  itself  to  the  new  conditions.
This  is  done  within  a  few  generations,  when  a  condition  is
established  corresponding  to  the  altered  vital  condition.  We
have  for  this  the  clearest  proofs  in  the  domestic  animals  which
are  transplanted  to  foreign  climates.  Hog,  sheep,  cat,  and  dog
have  thus  within  a  few  generations,  in  southern  climates,  passed
through  such  changes  as,  for  instance,  the  Egyptian  goose  in
Europe.  After  that  change,  which,  as  stated,  was  effected
within  a  few  generations,  and  the  race  was  acclimatised,  no
further  modification  took  place.  And  we  may  easily  convince
ourselves  that  it  must  be  so.  For  if  modifications  are  requisite
to  live  in  a  foreign  climate,  these  modifications  must  be  rapidly
accomplished  to  preserve  the  race  from  threatened  destruc-
tion. If  then,  we  say,  that  a  race  which  has  undergone  modi-
fications within  a  few  generations,  must  for  that  reason  undergo
a  corresponding  sum  of  alterations  at  a  subsequent  period  ;  if
we  were  to  establish  a  quasi  rule  of  three,  and  say :  since  this,
this  race  has  within  three  generations  experienced  %  altera-
tions, consequently  it  must  within  thirty  generations  have  under-
gone 10  x  alterations,  as  Quatrefages  would  put  it,  we  commit  a
scientific  error,  and  excite  hopes  which  can  never  be  realised.

We  thus  infer  that  all   instances  which   have  been   cited  of
changes  in   races  of  pure   descent,   by  the   mere  influence  of

V  V  2


436  LECTURE    XV.

changed  media,  emigration  into  foreign  countries,  etc.  are
insignificant,  and  do  not  affect  the  essential  race- characters.
These  modifications,  therefore,  which  we  by  no  means  entirely
deny,  do  not  in  any  way  explain  the  differences  in  the  human
species.  As  we,  always  in  accordance  with  the  facts,  must
assume  a  fundamental  difference  of  races  as  our  starting  point,
the  crossing  question  now  presents  itself.  Here,  as  with  do-
mestic animals,  the  question  was  simply  answered  by  the  state-
ment, that  all  races  of  mankind  can  interbreed,  and  that  their
mongrels  are  indefinitely  prolific.  But  on  closer  examination  it  is
found  that  the  same  conditions  present  themselves  as  in  other
animals,  specially  domestic  animals  ;  namely,  that  there  are
crossings  which  are  sterile  ;  others  in  which  the  bastards  are
but  little  fertile  inter  se,  but  more  so  with  the  parent  stock ;
and  again,  there  are  others  which  are  between  themselves
indefinitely  prolific.

There  can  be  no  doubt  that  the  various  white  races  which
have  intermixed  in  Europe  and  Asia  are  infinitely  prolific.
Though  by  close  examination  we  may,  from  this  commixture,
pick  out  the  original  stocks  of  which  the  civilised  peoples  are
composed  ;  still  all  European  peoples  are  more  or  less  inter-
mixed, the  proofs  of  which  glimmer  forth  from  beneath  their
respective  characters.  Now  these  populations  of  Europe  in-
crease everywhere ;  but  nowhere  do  we  find  a  pure  unmixed
stock  or  race ;  it  thus  admits  of  no  doubt,  that  the  mongrels
of  the  white  race  are  indefinitely  fertile.

It  is  not  quite  so  in  the  commixture  of  races  more  removed
from  each  other.  The  connections  of  Whites  with  negresses
are  fruitful,  and  their  issue — the  mulattoes — are  prolific  both
between  each  other  and  with  the  parent  stock.  It  is  true  that
race  prejudices  interfere  with  the  connection  of  mulattoes  be-
tween themselves,  as  the  mulatto  woman  prefers  rather  to  be
the  concubine  of  a  white  man  than  the  wife  of  a  black,  and
considers  it  an  honour  to  have  a  child  by  a  white  man ;  whilst,
on  the  other  hand,  the  mulatto  spares  no  effort  to  obtain  a
white  wife,  and  only  returns  to  the  black  parent  stock  by  com-
pulsion. Thus  it  comes  to  pass  that,  in  speaking  of  mulattoes,
we  find  only  the  mongrels  of  the  first  blood,  for  by  recrossing


LECTURE    XV.  437

they  are  ultimately  absorbed  in  one  of  the  parent  stocks.  It
might  also,  taken  strictly,  be  boldly  asserted  that  there  exists
no  proof  for  the  infinite  pi-olificacy  of  mulattoes  between  each
other  ;  and  it  might  even  be  maintained  that  they  or  their
descendants  must  necessarily  be  sterile  between  each  other,
inasmuch  as  nowhere  can  successive  generations  of  such  mu-
lattoes be  shown  to  exist.  It  would,  indeed,  be  difficult  to  find
in  any  country  a  single  instance  of  grandchildren  of  a  mulatto
by  pure  inbreeding ;  whilst,  on  the  contrary,  the  mongrels,  by
recrossingv,  exist  in  all  possible  gradations,  so  that  a  number
of  terms  have  been  invented  in  transatlantic  countries  to
designate  these  crossbreeds.

The  connections  between  negro  and  a  white  female  seem  to
be  less  prolific,  for  anatomical  reasons,  which  appear  to  be  well
founded.  That  they  are  productive  at  times  there  is  no  doubt,
but  the  cases  are  so  rare,  that  we  possess  no  facts  as  regards
the  bastards  so  produced.

The  distribution  of  the  parental  characters  in  Mulattoes  and
human  mongrels  in  general,  seem  to  differ  as  much  as  in
animals.  Sometimes  the  Mulattoes  resemble  more  the  White,
and  sometimes  more  the  Negro.  Thus  Lislet-Geoffroy,  the
mathematician,  though  the  son  of  a  Frenchman  and  a  Negress,
presented  physically  nearly  all  the  characters  of  the  Negro.
Quatrefages  tells  a  story  of  a  black  servant  who  had  married  a
white  woman,  and  found  on  his  return  from  a  journey  that  his
wife  had  given  birth  to  a  child  so  white,  that  he  would  not
acknowledge  it  until  the  midwife  showed  him  some  black  spots
on  the  body.  A  Doctor  Parsons,  who  saw  the  child,  authen-
ticates this  case.  It  is  very  probable  that  neither  the  father
nor  the  Doctor  had  ever  seen  a  new-born  Negro  child,  and
were  therefore  not  aware  that  the  dark  colour  is  only  gradu-
ally developed.

Some  American  authors  assert  that  they  have  ascertained  a
difference  in  the  fertility  of  the  Mulattoes,  according  as  the
white  fathers  belong  to  different  stocks.  Nott  observes  that
in  South  Carolina  the  Mulattoes  are  shorter  lived  and  less  fit
for  hard  labour  than  the  Whites  and  the  Negroes ;  that  the
Mulatto  women  are  very  delicate  and  subject  to  many  chronic


438  LECTUJBE    XV.

diseases  ;  tliat  they  are  bad  wet  nurses  and  frequently  miscarry  ;
that  their  children  die  young,  and  that  the  Mulattoes  are  less
fertile  inter  se  than  with  their  parent  stocks.  But  Nott  found
subsequently  that  these  inferences,  though  correct  as  regards
South  Carolina,  did  not  apply  to  Louisiana  and  the  banks  of
the  Mississippi;  hence  he  concluded  that  the  Latin  races  of
Europe  produced  with  the  Negro  race  mongrels  more  viable
than  the  Anglo-Saxons.  This  fact  seems  also  to  have  been
established  as  regards  Jamaica,  colonised  by  the  English,  for
the  Mulattoes  do  not  seem  to  thrive  there,  whilst  on  the
islands  colonised  by  the  French,  Spaniards,  and  Portuguese
the  Mulattoes  show  the  same  vitality  as  in  Louisiana.  At-
tempts have  been  made  to  explain  these  differences  from  local
influences,  but  it  would  be  very  strange  if  the  English  should,
by  mere  chance,  have  chosen  such  spots  as  are  destructive  to
Mulattoes,  whilst  the  Latin  races  should  have  selected  those
districts  which  are  favourable  to  their  development.

It  may  happen,  that  in  the  intermixture  of  certain  races,  the
prolificacy  is  increased  in  the  same  degree  as  in  the  inbreeding
of  half-  and  three-eighth  hares.  Hombron,  cited  by  Quatre-
fages,  observes  on  this  point :  "During  the  four  years  which
I  passed  in  Brazil,  Peru,  and  Chile,  I  amused  myself  with
observing  the  curious  intermixtures  of  Negroes  with  the
natives.  I  have  even  noted  down  the  number  of  children  in
many  households,  of  Whites  with  Negresses,  Whites  and
American  women,  Negroes  with  American  natives,  and  Negroes
inter  se.  In  our  colonies  the  Whites  are  only  moderately
prolific  with  Negresses ;  they  are,  however,  very  prolific  with
Mulatto  women,  and  so  are  Mulattoes  inter  se.  I  can  affirm  that
the  marriages  between  European  men  and  American  women
furnish  the  greatest  average  number  of  children ;  then  come
Negro  and  Negress ;  then  Negro  and  American  female.  The
scanty  fertility  of  Americans  between  themselves  depends
probably  on  the  moderate  development  of  their  sexual  in-
stinct." The  latter  reason,  by  the  way,  means  as  much  as  if
we  were  to  say  that  the  reason  why  the  Arabs  drink  so  little  is
that  they  feel  but  little  thirst.  The  intercourse  of  the  Latin
race  with  the  Indian  seems  to  be  remarkably  fertile ;  for  the


LECTURE    XV.  439

South  American  States,  almost  exclusively  populated  by  Span-
iards and  Portuguese,  are  now  chiefly  inhabited  by  a  mongrel
race,  the  issue  of  that  intermixture.  These  mongrel  races
may  certainly  be  partly  considered  as  perfectly  raceless  masses.
No  constant  type  has  as  yet  been  formed,  probably  because
there  is  a  continuous  re-crossing  with  either  of  the  parent
stocks  and  their  direct  descendants.  But  we  should  not  feel
surprised  to  see  a  new  race  gradually  developed,  which  might
be  compared  to  the  hare-rabbits.  That  these  cross-breds  of
Indians  and  Whites  are  not  wanting  in  culture,  and,  in  certain
respects,  are  superior  to  the  aborigines,  as  well  as  the  Creoles,
is  best  shown  by  the  present  war  in  Mexico,  where  the  Re-
public, under  the  leadership  of  a  mongrel  (Juarez),  offers  a
heroic  resistance  to  a  well-disciplined  army.

We  know  but  little  concerning  the  intermixture  of  European
nations  with  South- Asiatics  and  Malays.  Despite  the  great  num-
ber of  connections  between  the  Dutch  men  and  Java  women,
which  generally  prove  fertile,  and  the  products  of  which  are
called  "Liplaps,"  no  mongrel  race  has  been  produced ;  as  little
as  in  India,  so  that  in  both  colonies  the  belief  prevails  that
these  mongrels  become  sterile  inter  se  in  the  third  generation.

The  fertility  of  Europeans  with  Polynesians  is  attested  by
the  history  of  Pitcairn  island,  where  from  a  few  English  sailors
and  some  Tahitian  women  a  small  mongrel  race  of  about  two
hundred  individuals  originated,  who  are  favourably  distin-
guished by  bodily  conformation,  muscular  power,  and  intelli-
gence. But  this  instance  is  to  some  extent  invalidated  by  the
circumstance,  that  even  upon  islands  where  there  is  much  in-
tercourse between  ship- crews  and  native  women  no  mongrel
race  has  been  formed,  whilst  the  natives  themselves  diminish
and  apparently  approach  extinction.

The  connections  between  whites  and  Australian  females
seem  to  be  the  least  prolific  of  all.  According  to  Broca,
only  a  single  bastard  has  been  mentioned  by  many  travellers.
Whilst  the  terms  designating  in  America  the  numerous  cross-
breeds form  no  small  vocabulary,  and  whilst  the  English
in  Australia  and  New  South  Wales  have  a  number  of  nick-
names for  the  varieties  of  white  colonists,  there  is  no  term


440  LECTURE    XV.

indicating  the  cross-breed  between  European  and  Australian,
nor  is  there  any  administrative  law  as  regards  such  bastards.
' '  We  may  therefore,"  continues  Broca,  ll  assume  it  as  a  fact,
that  cross-breeds  of  Europeans  and  native  Australian  women
are  very  rare.  This  fact  is  so  much  opposed  to  the  usual
theory  of  the  interbreeding  of  human  races,  that  it  is  worth
while  to  examine  whether  there  may  not  be  other  than  physio-
logical causes  for  it."  Broca  then  shows  that  sexual  inter-
course between  Europeans  and  Australian  women,  so  far  from
being  rare,  is,  on  the  contrary,  very  frequent,  for  the  simple
reason  that  there  are  but  few  European  females ;  he  further
proves  that  the  bastards  are  not,  as  has  been  asserted,  killed,
and  that,  in  spite  of  numerous  connections  of  this  kind,  there
exist  so  few  mongrels,  that  we  possess  no  information  concern-
ing their  physical  and  mental  characters,  and  their  prolificacy.
In  the  presence  of  such  facts,  we  cannot  be  surprised  that  this
degree  of  sterility  occurs  in  such  races  as,  both  by  physical
conformation  as  well  as  by  distance,  are  far  remote  from  each
other.  The  objections  to  these  facts  by  Quatrefages  are  so
weak  that  they  require  no  refutation.  Even  if  it  were  true
that  the  Australians  kill  the  bastards  who  with  their  mothers
return  to  their  tribe,  it  might  at  the  same  time  be  fairly  as-
sumed that  all  European  fathers,  who  produce  children  with
Australian  women,  are  not  such  monsters  as  to  expose  them  to
certain  death.  We  cannot  suppose  such  an  abnegation  of
every  human  feeling  to  have  existed  even  among  the  first
criminal  population  of  Australia.

In  now  casting  a  retrospective  glance  at  the  changes  pro-
duced by  external  influences  and  by  intermixture  in  the  various
races  inhabiting  the  globe,  we  arrive  at  certain  conclusions
which  may  be  fairly  inferred  from  the  facts  at  hand.

1 .  The  differences  in  the  human  genus  which  we  may  desig-
nate either  races  or  species,  (both  terms  appear  to  me  as
regards  natural  races  perfectly  identical),  these  differences  are,
as  far  as  we  can  trace  them,  original  and  have  in  the  course  of
time  been  transmitted  unchanged  upon  the  same  soil.

2.  The  changes,  which  these  original  species  can  undergo
by  external  influences  of  any  kind,  are  so  slight  that  they  can-
not be  compared  with  the  primary  differences.


LECTUKE    XV.  441

3.  The  raceless  masses  produced  by  transportation  into  a
foreign  climate  may,  by  pure  imbreeding,  give  rise  to  a  new
human  race  or  species,  the  characters  of  which  might,  indeed,
become  fixed  after  a  few  generations,  but  would  require  a  very
long  period  of  time  before  they  can  acquire  that  constancy
which  distinguishes  the  original  species  of  mankind.

4.  The  various  species  of  mankind  present  in  crossing  dif-
ferent degrees  of  fertility.  Most  of  them  are  between  each  other
indefinitely  prolific,  as  also  are  their  descendants ;  in  some  the
fertility  is  so  limited,  that  no  mongrel  race  can  be  produced  by
them.

5.  The  mongrel  races  gradually  attain  by  inbreeding  that
constancy  of  characters  which  distinguishes  the  original  race,
so  that  from  this  commixture  new  species  may  arise.

6.  Heterogeneous  races  have  by  intermixture  given  rise  to
raceless  masses — peoples  which  present  no  fixed  characters,
and  form,  so  to  speak,  dispersive  circles  around  the  original
species,  which  at  their  points  of  contact  become  confluent.

I  cannot  deny  that  these  views  are  not  exclusively  derived
from  what  is  observed  in  man,  but  chiefly  from  what  is  seen
in  domestic  and  wild  animals.  But  this,  if  I  am  not  mistaken,
gives  greater  weight  to  them.  We  are  not  so  blind  as  to
maintain,  that  the  original  species  of  mankind  can  undergo  no
change  by  the  influence  of  surrounding  media.  We  neither
deny  intermixture  nor  the  mongrel  races  to  which  it  has  given
rise,  but  we  are  unable  to  perceive  that  their  existence  can
entirely  obliterate  the  original  difference,  or  afford  a  proof  for
an  original  unity,  which  is  opposed  to  all  known  facts.  Again
we  neither  deny  the  disappearance  and  extinction  of  well  cha-
racterised races,  nor  the  rise  of  new  races  and  species  from  the
commixture  of  existing  species,  intensified  perhaps  by  the  influ-
ence of  external  media.  All  this  is  confirmed  by  the  facts  ob-
served in  the  rest  of  the  animal  world.  For  the  development  of
this  view  we  certainly  as  little  require  supernatural  influences,  or
direct  interference  of  foreign  forces,  as  Laplace  required  a
divine  interference  for  celestial  mechanics,  an  hypothesis  which
a  modern  pious  defender  of  the  unity  of  species,  in  the  face  of
all  facts,  advances  in  this  manner  :


412  LECTURE    XV.

"  I  am  of  opinion  that  during  a  period,  probably  of  several
centuries,  after  God  had  multiplied  the  languages,  separated
the  various  tribes  which  spoke  different  languages,  and  distri-
buted these  peoples  over  the  surface  of  the  globe,  He  endowed
in  the  course  of  generations  each  race,  as  it  became  a  nation,
with  a  peculiar  external  character.  In  appointing  to  each
stock  a  dwelling  place,  God  also  endowed  it  with  a  capacity  to
live  either  in  the  arctic,  temperate,  or  torrid  zone ;  He  also
taught  them,  or  assisted  them,  in  their  invention  of  means  to
satisfy  their  wants,  and  finally  presented  them  with  useful
plants  proper  to  the  climate,  and  which  do  not  grow  wild."

This  is  the  explanation  of  Doctor  Sagot,  who  in  this  manner
reconciles  the  diversity  of  mankind  with  Biblical  unity.  If
God  really  fed  the  animals  in  the  ark  of  Noah  with  food  from
heaven,  all  difficulties  are  at  an  end.  If  all  natural  conditions
and  facts  which  oppose  a  myth  are  to  be  removed  by  a  direct
divine  interference,  natural  science  is  useless.  We  have  not
arrived  yet  at  this  point  in  the  civilised  world,  although  some
eyes  are  turned  in  that  direction.


443


LECTURE    XVI.

Origin  of  Organic  Nature. — Differences  between  the  Organic  Kingdoms  and
their  sub-Divisions. — Origin  of  Organic  Cells. — Theory  of  Darwin. — My
change  of  Opinion. — Creation  of  Species. — Mutability  of  Type. — Con-
sequences of  this  Theory. — Adaptation  and  Fixation  of  Types. — Prac-
tical Conception  of  Species. — Variation  in  Adaptation  and  Slowness  of
Transformation. — Present  and  Former  Transition  Types. — Cebus. —
Bears. — The  Greek  Monkey  of  the  Tertiary  Period. — Exclusive  Views  of
Cuvier  and  Agassiz. — Rarity  of  Transition  Forms. — Progression  and
Retrogression. — Fundamental  Plan  in  the  Structure  of  Animals. — No
single  Original  Organic  Form. — Derivation  of  the  Human  from  the  Ape-
Type. — Derivation  of  the  three  Anthropoid  Apes  from  three  different
Families. — The  various  original  Human  Paces  must  be  derived  from
different  Ape  Families. — Lamentations  of  Moralists.

Gentlemen, — The  desire  of  man  to  inquire  into  the  origin  of
all  things  produces  daily  fresh  attempts  of  ascending  the  scale
leading  in  that  direction.  Faith  has  in  this  respect  an  easy
task ;  it  builds  upon  some  old  myth  a  system  which  points  to
an  unknown  beyond.  The  path  of  science  is  more  rugged,  as
it  must  steadily  keep  to  the  principle,  not  to  depart  from  the
facts  and  the  limits  fixed  by  observation  and  experiment.  The
further  back  science  proceeds,  the  more  necessary  is  it  to  use
caution  in  drawing  inferences  from  the  facts,  and  the  greater
should  be  the  candour  in  confessing  the  gaps  which  are  every
where  met  with ;  not  for  the  reason  that  no  created  being  can
penetrate  into  the  sanctuary  of  Nature,  but  simply  because  the
facts  and  observations  are  so  numerous  that  they  cannot  be
mastered  by  one  individual.

The  origin  of  organic  nature  has  always  attracted  the  atten-
tion both  of  the  professional  naturalist  and  the  general  student.
Observation  teaches  that  every  organic  being  owes  its  origin  to
parents,  which  are  again  the  product  of  other  parents ;  no
where  is  there  an  interruption  in  the  series,  so  that  notwith-
standing all  assertions  to  the  contrary,  the  production  of  organic
beings   from   original  elements  has   hitherto  failed.     However


444  LECTURE    XVI.

glad,  to  tell  the  truth,  I  might  be  to  accept  the  theory  of  spon-
taneous generation  ;  however  illogical  it  appears  to  nie  to
assume  for  the  production  of  organic  beings  a  special  force  in
nature,  which  we  observe  nowhere  else ;  however  natural  it
may  be  to  search  in  this  primeval  generation  for  the  starting
point  of  organic  creation,  which  might  then  have  developed
itself  in  various  directions  by  the  influence  of  various  causes ;
I  must  on  the  other  hand  confess,  that  only  the  most  stringent
proofs  could  induce  me  to  adopt  it.  If  this  be  forthcoming  I
shall  accept  it  most  willingly  ;  till  then,  I  must  acknowledge
the  existence  of  this  gap  in  our  science,  though  I  entertain  the
hope  that  we  shall  finally  succeed  in  filling  it  up.

Organic  creation,  considered  in  its  totality,  presents  a  remark-
able diversity.  The  chief  kingdoms  of  nature,  the  vegetable
and  animal  kingdoms,  appear  sharply  separated  from  each
other.  Even  within  these  kingdoms  there  are  some  divisions
so  dissimilar  in  structure  and  fundamental  plan,  that  again  we
imagine  a  gulf  to  exist  between  them.  It  is,  however,  soon
perceived  that  there  are  some  groups  which  have  a  closer
connection;  that  the  similarities  of  structure  grow  out  during
the  development  of  the  individual ;  that  the  groups  related  to
each  other  proceed  from  a  common  fundamental  form,  from
which  these  diversities  very  gradually  arise.

It  was  no  small  triumph  for  microscopic  science  when
Schwann  proved  that  all  the  tissues,  whether  vegetable  or
animal,  owe  their  origin  to  certain  elementary  forms  which  he
called  cells, — a  fact  now  generally  admitted.  There  exists  at
present  no  doubt  with  regard  to  the  development  of  every
vegetable  or  animal  organism  from  a  single  cell, — from  the  egg.
There  are  organisms,  both  vegetable  and  animal,  consisting  of
one  cell  only,  which  is  endowed  with  all  capacities  requisite
for  life  and  propagation.  All  other  organisms,  however  com-
plicated they  may  be,  are  merely  masses  of  cells,  differently
shaped  and  grouped,  and  have  all  been  developed  from  one
primordial  cell.

Whilst  thus  the  unity  of  the  fundamental  plan  in  the  struc-
ture of  the  vegetable  and  animal  world  is  no  longer  doubtful ;
whilst  it  is  manifest  that  there  are  a  number  of  primitive  organ-


LECTURE    XVI.  4  15

isms    which    occupy   an    intermediate    position    between    the
vegetable  and  animal  world,  and  thus  apparently  constitute  a
connecting  link  between  the  two  kingdoms,  we  must,  on  the
other  hand,  not  forget  that  "  cell"  is  only  an  abstract  notion,  and
that  there  prevail  many  diversities  in  the  individual  cells  of
the  various  organisms  and  their  respective  organs — differences
which  must  be  considered  as  original,    and  which    therefore
from  the  very  beginning  impart  to  the  organisms  arising  from
them  a  special  direction  in  development.     If,  therefore,  it  be
said  that  all  organisms  arise  from  a  single  cell,  and  that  this
cell  is  the  fundamental  and  primordial  form  of  the  organism,
it  is  perfectly  correct ;    but  if  it  be  attempted  to  reduce  all
existing   organisms   to   one   primordial   elementary  cell,  from
which  they  may  have  been  developed,  the  axiom  is  false.      Not
only    do    organisms    that    stand   in    an    intermediate  position
between  animals  and  plants  consist  of  different  kinds  of  cells ;
not  only  are  these  cells  developed  in  a  different  mode,  so  that
we  are  able  to  distinguish  diffei*ent  species  of  these  organisms  ;
but  also  those  egg-cells  from  which  the  more  compound  organ-
isms are   developed,  show,  from  the  beginning,  a  fundamental
difference   both  in  form  and  subsequent   development.     The
attempts,  therefore,  to  reduce  the  whole  organic  world  to  one
fundamental  form,  so  to  speak,  to  one  pinmordial  cell,  from
which  all  organisms  have  been  developed  in  different  directions,
are  as  futile  as  the  assumption  of  those  naturalists  who  con-
sider  that  the    whole    organic   creation  had  been    developed
from  an  elementary  plastic   matter,  the   so-called   primordial
slime.      In    assuming  the    possibility  that    by    the    co-opera-
tion of  some  forces — as  yet  unknown  to  us — an  organic   cell
may  be  produced  from  chemical  elements,  it  is  clear  that  the
slightest  change  in  the  action  of  these  elements  must  effect  a
change  in  the  product,  that  is  to  say  in  the   cells  produced.
But  as  it  is  impossible  to  assume  that  on  the  whole  surface  of
the  earth  the   same  causes  have  acted,   and  are  still  acting,
under  the  same  conditions  and  with  the  same  intensity  in  the
production  of  such  elementary  cells,  the   deduction   is  clear,
namely,  that  the  original  cells  from  which  the  organisms  were
developed  must  have  possessed  diversified  forms  and  a  different


446  LECTURE    XVI.

capacity  for  further  development,  so  that  the  actual  diversities
were  conditioned  by  differences  in  the  primary  forms.

In  bringing  before  you  this  hypothesis, — for  as  yet  it  is  no
more, — I  do  so  to  prove  to  you  that  even  on  the  assumption  of
a  gradual  development  of  such  types,  as  we  find  both  in  exist-
ing and  extinct  species,  we  are  not  led,  as  so  often  asserted,
to  an  original  unity  of  the  whole  organic  world ;  but  that  we
must,  on  the  contrary,  acknowledge  that  in  that  abstract  unity,
termed  a  cell,  there  must  necessarily  have  existed  an  original
difference, — such  as  that  existing  in  the  organisms  interme-
diate between  plant  and  animal.  But  just  in  this,  as  appears
to  me,  lies  another  reason  for  the  assumption  that  the  organic
world  might  have  been  developed  from  such  a  beginning.  If
it  be  difficult  to  conceive  how  the  great  diversity  of  organic
types  could  have  been  developed  from  a  common  soil;  it  can,
on  the  other  hand,  not  be  denied  that  an  intrinsic  difference  in
the  constitution  of  this  soil  may  have  given  rise  to  the  diver-
sities of  the  types  sprung  from  it.

The  theory  of  the  gradual  development  of  types  from  pri-
marily common  forms,  has  recently,  with  much  ingenuity,
been  advocated  by  Darwin,  after  it  had  been  formerly  advanced
by  French  and  German  naturalists,  and  especially  by  Lamarck,
though  in  a  different  form.  This  theory,  as  then  advanced,
certainly  found  in  me  a  violent  and  sincere  opponent ;  but  as
it  is  now  propounded,  I  must  confess  that  it  appears  to
me  to  afford,  better  than  any  other  theory,  a  clue  to  the
affinity  of  individual  types,  and  it  seems  in  every  respect  a
step  in  advance  towards  the  knowledge  of  truth.  When  I
opposed  the  doctrine  of  the  gradual  transformation  of  types,
I  was  certainly  much  prejudiced  by  received  opinions,  which
obtrude  upon  anyone  engaged  in  scientific  researches.  The
sharp  contrast  apparently  existing  between  species,  the  sys-
tematic distribution  and  strict  division  of  the  different  groups,
must  necessarily  have  a  similar  influence  upon  a  young  stu-
dent, as  that  produced  by  the  contrasts  which  he  finds  in
living  characters.  And  just  as  in  daily  life  we  gradually  be-
come convinced  that  there  exist  no  human  beings  absolutely
good  nor  absolutely  bad, — that  life  and  society   oscillate  be-


LECTURE    XVI.


417


tween  two  extremes, ;  so  do  we  find,  in  the  investigations  of
the  forms  of  the  animal  world  and  their  development  from  the
egg,  that  here  also  the  contrasts  diminish,  and  that  there
exist  a  number  of  forms  which  may  well  have  been  derived
from  each  other.  Isidore  Geoffroy  Saint-Hilaire  has  pointed
out  how  the  views  of  Buffon,  as  regards  the  limits  and  fixation
of  the  conception  of  species,  gradually  changed  ;  how,  at  first,
he  ventured  upon  a  hard  definition  which  admitted  of  no
flexion,  and  how  he  gradually  adapted  it  to  the  facts  which  he
had  gathered  through  life,  and  which  he  was  wise  enough  not  to
reject  because  they  clashed  with  his  theory.  I  also  lay  claim  to
the  benefit  derived  from  continued  self-instruction,  as  regards
the  change  of  my  opinion.

Darwin  endeavours  to  show  that  every  animal  and  every
plant  sustains  a  constant  struggle  for  existence,  that  it  has  to
contest  for  space,  aliment  and  propagation,  not  only  with  the
surrounding  physical  agents,  but  with  the  whole  organic
world,  in  which  every  other  individual  has  the  same  rights  to
space,  aliment,  and  propagation.  Every  germ,  every  egg,
has  a  claim  to  life,  but  not  every  egg  is  developed,  nor
every  germ  unfolded.  Most  succumb  in  this  struggle,  some
sooner,  some  later ;  that  individual  only,  which  by  itself  or  by
association  is  strong  enough  to  issue  from  this  battle  as  victor,
is  enabled  to  live  and  to  enjoy  life.

The  question  now  arises,  whether  an  adaptation  of  the  indi-
vidual as  well  as  of  its  progeny  to  the  conditions  of  existence
can  take  place  ?  The  question  is,  whether  this  adaptation  by
continued  improvement,  continued  breeding,  if  we  may  thus
express  it,  can  lead  to  transformations  which  may  compel  us  to
acknowledge  these  products  as  new  types.  On  this  point  most
naturalists  differ  in  opinion.

The  prevailing  opinion,  hitherto,  was,  that  species  are  fixed
normal  types,  which  may  undergo  changes  within  a  very  limited
sphere  ;  that  they  were  the  expression  of  a  definite  realised
idea  ;  that  they  were  the  sepai-ate  unchangeable  materials  from
which,  according  to  a  creative  plan,  the  structure  of  the  organic
world  had  been  erected.  It  was  also  asserted  that  species  can
indeed  perish,  but  cannot  be  transformed;  that  from  time  to


448  LECTURE    XVI.

time  the  organic  world  is  destroyed,  after  which  a  new  crea-
tion takes  place  after  an  improved  plan  by  a  divine  "fiat."

I  have  already  stated  that  the  idea  of  a  Creator,  who  from
time  to  time  destroys  the  furniture  of  the  earth,  and  supplies  a
new  one,  was  repugnant  to  my  notions.  I  said  No  !  I  cannot
believe  this.  But  as  I  had  no  better  theory  to  offer,  I  was
obliged  to  confess,  like  Kunol,  the  professor  of  Theology  at
Giessen,  who,  having  lectured  for  a  fortnight  on  the  resurrec-
tion of  Christ,  during  which  time  he  had  exhausted  the  mani-
fold hypotheses  of  theologians  on  that  subject,  concluded  as
follows  :  "  To  tell  the  truth,  gentlemen,  I  must  confess  we
know  nothing  at  all  about  it."

Darwin  starts  from  the  mutability  of  types.  He  instances
not  merely  the  domestic,  but  also  wild  animals  and  plants  in
support  of  his  theory.  In  the  struggle  for  existence,  he  con-
tends, every  animal  must  endeavour  to  attain  that  relative
perfection  which  enables  it  to  sustain  that  struggle.  The
transmission  of  characters,  which  is  undeniable,  and  even  that
of  individual  characters,  which  is  also  established,  renders  it
possible  that  such  peculiarities,  which  are  advantageous  to  this
struggle,  may  also  be  transmitted  to,  and  further  developed  in
the  offspring.  There  thus  arises  a  breed  by  natural  selection,
which  in  some  privileged  individuals  acquires  a  particular  fixed
type.  In  this  manner,  that  is  to  say,  by  continued  and  unin-
terrupted transmission  arise  new  varieties,  races,  and  species  ;
and  as  this  transformation  process  is  continued  through  long
periods  of  time,  the  production  of  such  natural  selections  may,
at  last,  so  much  deviate  from  each  other,  that  they  represent
genera,  families,  orders,  classes,  and  kingdoms.

It  is  not  surprising  that  Darwin's  theory,  of  which  I  have
given  you  but  an  imperfect  sketch,  has  excited  much  opposi-
tion. Coarse  attacks  were  directed  against  this  naturalist,  the
author  of  sterling  works.  At  present,  the  opponents  have  given
up  refuting ;  for  as  there  is  much  in  this  theory  that  cannot
be  refuted,  they  confine  themselves  to  calling  Darwin's  theory
a  dream,  an  ingenious  hypothesis,  a  dazzling  firework,  and
think  they  have  done  for  a  work  fraught  with  such  momentous
consequences.


LECTURE    XVI.  449

These  consequences  are  certainly  formidable  in  some  re-
spects. There  can  be  no  doubt  that  Darwin's  theory  ignores  a
personal  creator,  and  his  direct  interference  in  the  transforma-
tion and  creation  of  species,  there  being  no  sphere  of  action  for
such  a  being.  Given  the  first  starting  point — the  first  organism
— all  existing  organisms  are  subsequently,  by  natural  selection,
developed  from  it  in  a  continuous  manner  through  all  geolo-
gical periods  by  the  simple  laws  of  transmission.  There  arise
no  new  species  by  any  creative  interference ;  none  disappear
by  a  divine  mandate  of  destruction,  since  the  natural  course  of
things,  the  process  of  development  of  all  organisms  and  of
the  earth  is  amply  sufficient  for  the  production  of  all  these  phe-
nomena. Even  man  is  neither  a  distinct  creature,  formed  in  a
special  manner,  and  differently  from  all  other  animals,  nor  pro-
vided with  a  special  soul  and  endowed  with  a  divine  breath  of
life — he  is  only  the  highest  product  of  a  progressive  natural
selection,  and  descends  from  the  simious  group  standing  next
to  man.

Darwin,  it  must  here  be  stated,  has  nowhere  in  his  work
touched  upon  these  sequences,  so  that  from  the  richness  of
materials,  and  the  logical  treatment  of  the  leading  idea,  the
work  met  at  first  with  a  very  favourable  reception  in  England
— a  country  so  much  attached  to  Biblical  traditions.  But  when
it  was  perceived  upon  what  base  the  theory  rests,  the  storm
broke  forth  from  all  quarters  of  the  compass ;  nor  has  the
agitation  as  yet  subsided.  But  we  must  not  be  disconcerted
by  attacks  of  this  kind ;  let  us  then  pursue  our  investigations.

If  it  be  once  established,  that  species  may  generally  success-
fully intermix  and  produce  prolific  mongrels ;  if,  on  the  other
hand,  it  is  ascertained  that  for  their  adaptation  to  surrounding
conditions  they  may  undergo  changes,  the  limits  of  which  are
not  yet  determined,  there  are  two  ways  open  in  which  new
forms  may  arise.  There  exists  no  doubt  a  conservative  ele-
ment in  the  fixation  of  characters  in  unchanged  external
media,  otherwise  the  transformation  would  be  infinite  for
every  type.  Darwin  has,  perhaps,  taken  too  little  notice  of
this  element,  as  his  chief  object  was  to  establish  mutability,
which  hitherto  had  been  denied.

G  G


450  LECTURE    XVI.

We  have  seen  that  the  notion  of  '  species'  neither  is  nor
can  be  fixed,  and  that  practically  every  author  conceives  it
differently.  Any  one  who  has  seen  the  conchological  collection
in  the  Paris  Jardin  des  Plantes,  must  have  observed  twenty
or  thirty  species  ticketed  as  races  or  varieties,  which  in  the
British  Museum  are  arranged  as  well  characterised  indepen-
dent species.  Each  of  these  scientific  institutions  defends  its
own  theory  on  apparently  sufficient  grounds.  The  one  points
out  the  transition  forms  ;  the  other  the  distinctive  marks  in
these  forms.  But  this  is  not  the  only  instance  in  which  natu-
ralists differ ;  and  in  approaching  man,  I  shall  here  touch
upon  the  ape.  By  the  side  of  some  well  characterised  species,
about  which  all  are  agreed,  there  are  others,  e.  g.  the  capu-
chin, the  brown  Cebus,  the  howling  monkey,  and  even  the
orang,  which  by  different  authors  are  divided  into  dozens  of
species  ;  so  that  it  may  be  asserted  that  the  views  as  regards  the
specification  of  monkeys  disagree  quite  as  much  as  those  concern-
ing that  of  mankind.  Here,  therefore,  the  principle  of  muta-
bility must  play  an  important  part,  and  there  must  exist  a
series  of  forms  which  stand  in  the  closest  relation  to  each
other.  All  naturalists  admit,  that  species  occupy  only  a
limited  sphere  of  distribution,  which  may  be  wider  or  nar-
rower, and  within  which  they  arrive  at  the  greatest  perfection;
but  that  at  the  boundaries  of  these  spheres,  these  species  de-
generate, that  is  to  say,  assume  other  forms  in  order  to  adapt
themselves  to  altered  conditions.  That  this  mutability  might
go  much  further  and  transgress  the  limits  usually  drawn
for  species,  we  have  already  shown  in  the  races  of  domestic
animals,  which  are  in  fact  species.

From  the  same  example  we  have  also  learned  that  when  the
surrounding  media  are  unchanged,  the  production  of  new
species  can  only  be  effected  by  intermixture  of  allied  species.
At  first,  the  issue  of  such  commixtures  will  be  raceless  masses,
the  characters  of  which  have  no  particular  constancy ;  but  by
degrees  fixed  characters  are  evolved  from  such  masses,  which
produce  a  constant  race, — a  typical  species.

It  is  clear  that  so  long  as  the  surrounding  media  remain  the
same,  a  typically  fixed  species  will  experience  but  little  change,


LECTURE    XVI.  451

but  will  have  its  characters  more  fixed.  It  hence  is  explained
that  the  old  species,  the  relics  of  which  we  find  in  the  alluvium,
and  the  species  which  existed  5,000  years  ago  in  Egypt,
the  mummies  of  which  we  find  in  the  graves,  have  not  changed
since  that  period,  but  represent  the  same  types  now  as  then.
Just  as  there  are  species  which  in  the  present  creation  are
scattered  over  a  considerable  tract  of  inhabitable  climates,
and  which  for  their  acclimatization  require  only  insignificant
modifications,  so  are  there  types,  which  during  geological
changes  have  remained  unaltered  till  the  present  period.  The
genus  IAngula  has  thus  been  pointed  out,  as  having  remained
unchanged  since  the  deposition  of  the  oldest  Silurian  beds  to
the  present  period,  and  as  being  represented  in  almost  all
strata  by  several  species  differing  but  little  from  each  other.
Here  we  find  a  remarkable  constancy,  but  I  cannot  look  upon
this  as  a  proof  against  Darwin's  theory.  The  error  is  con-
stantly committed  of  applying  the  conditions  found  in  some
species  to  the  whole  animal  kingdom,  and  forcing  it  into  a
strait  jacket  which  the  variety  in  nature  does  not  tolerate.
Though  the  mutability  and  adaptation  to  external  conditions
be  a  possibility,  it  is  no  absolute  necessity  for  all  types,  as
little  as  the  number  of  these  changes,  requisite  for  adaptation,
is  the  same  in  all  types.  We  know  that  some  species  cannot
be  acclimatized  at  all,  others  are  easily  acclimatized  :  some
cannot  undergo  the  slightest  change  without  perishing,  while
others  experience  important  alterations  before  they  become
adapted  to  the  new  conditions.  And  so,  in  the  history  of  the
earth,  there  must  necessarily  exist  similar  differences,  in-
asmuch as  certain  species  and  types  last  only  short  periods
and  then  perish  •  others  keep  pace  with  the  changes  of  sur-
rounding media,  and  undergo  comparatively  great  alterations.
Others,  again,  require  only  insignificant  modifications  for  their
preservation.

Although  the  changes  which  we  now  observe  in  creation  are
inconsiderable  and  insignificant,  we  must  not  forget  that  the
history  of  the  earth  extends  over  a  series  of  ages  of  which
we  have  no  conception,  and  that  this  eternity  (for  we  cannot
term  it   otherwise)   comprises  an  immense  series  of  changes,

gg2


452  LECTURE    XVI.

carried  on  slowly,  but  which,  in  their  totality,  exceed  anything
we  are  able  to  observe  within  the  span  of  time  open  to  our
view.  The  upheavings  and  subsidences  of  continents,  the
altered  proportions  of  land  to  sea,  the  gradations  of  climates,
in  short,  all  changes  on  the  surface  of  the  earth  made  known
to  us  by  geology,  have  not  been  effected  by  sudden  convulsions,
but  have  been  gradually  and  impercepibly  produced.  The
changes  in  the  animal  world  have  proceeded  pari  passu,  and
while  many  inflexible  races  have  perished,  others  have  been
transformed,  and  thus  present  a  series  of  changes,  the  terminal
points  of  which  deviate  so  much,  that  families,  orders,  classes,
might  have  issued  from  them.

It  has  long  been  acknowledged  that  the  actual  creation  re-
presents by  no  means  an  ideal  whole,  the  members  of  which
are  harmoniously  connected,  and  that  it  can  only  be  considered
in  its  ensemble  by  including  the  extinct  animals.  What  in  the
present  animal  world  appears  as  perfectly  distinct  becomes
cemented  by  the  transitions  represented  in  extinct  animals,
so  that  every  new  discovery  adds  an  intermediate  link  in  the
series  of  forms.  Just  as  in  the  external  animal  world,  no
definite  boundary-line  can  be  drawn  between  fishes  and  am-
phibia, inasmuch  as  the  genera  Lepiclosiren  and  Protopterus
present  the  most  evident  transitional  forms,  so  that,  according
as  a  naturalist  considers  this  or  that  character  the  more  essen-
tial, they  are  by  one  author  included  in  fishes,  by  another  in
amphibia,  so  it  is  with  a  multitude  of  transitional  forms  found
among  organic  remains.  'The  boundary-line  between  amphibia
and  reptiles,  which  may  be  drawn  in  the  present  creation,  no
longer  exists  when  we  look  at  the  singular  family  of  Laby-
rinthodonts,  which  extends  to  both.  The  boundaries  be-
tween herbivorous  Cetacea  and  Pachydermata,  between  these
latter  and  ruminants,  are  removed  by  the  Dinotherium  and  the
Dichobune.  The  feathered  reptile*  of  Soleuhofen  indicates  that
nature  is  able  to  bridge  over  the  gulf  between  reptiles  and
birds.  The  existence  of  these  transition  forms  is  undeniable
— their  significance  does  not  consist  merely  in  the  filling  up  of

*  Proved  satisfactorily  to  have  been  a  bird  with  a  long  series  of  caudal
vertebrae. — Editor.


LECTURE    XVI.  453

an  ideal  gap,  but  in  the  establishment  of  real  intermediate
forms,  which,  by  gradual  unfolding  and  transformation,  de-
velope  themselves  from  lower  forms  and  approach  the  higher — ■
an  approximation  which  here  succeeded  only  up  to  a  certain
point,  but  is  accomplished  in  the  more  perfect  forms.

But,  we  are  told,  these  intermediate  forms  certainly  fill  up
the  gap  between  great  divisions,  but  the  minuter  transitions,
which  might  teach  us  the  process  of  this  transformation,  are
entirely  wanting.  We  ought  to  be  able  to  trace  these  transi-
tions step  by  step,  both  in  living  and  fossil  species.  As  regards
Hving  species,  this  would  not  be  very  difficult.  Place  side  by
side  the  skulls  of  the  various  species  of  the  genus  Cebus,  and
see  whether  you  cannot  establish  a  perfect  series  of  minute
changes  in  form,  as  in  dogs  or  cattle.  The  transitions  are
then  rendered  as  evident  as  they  are  in  a  series  of  Orang  skulls
of  different  ages  in  the  extreme  forms  of  the  round  young
head,  and  the  long  extended  head  of  the  old  orang.  With
regard  to  fossil  skulls,  need  I  instance  those  of  bears  ?  The
great  cave-bear,  with  its  prominent  brow-ridge  and  its  convex
elevations  on  the  forehead,  is  certainly,  as  A.  Wagner  has
shown,  a  distinct  species,  just  as  our  present  brown  bear ;  but
are  there  no  intermediate  forms,  such  as  the  JJrsus  arctoideus,
which,  though  it  attains  the  size  of  the  cavern-bear,  has
neither  its  frontal  eminences,  nor  such  thick  bones  ?'  then
there  is  the  JJrsus  Leodiensis,  which  is  smaller  than  the  cavern-
bear,  aud  shows  no  such  frontal  eminences ;  there  is  also  the
JJrsus  priscus,  smaller  than  the  cave-bear,  but  resembling  in
profile  the  still  smaller  brown  bear;  and  finally  the  brown
bears  found  in  the  caverns  of  Switzerland,  the  skulls  of  which
show  a  gigantic  size,  approaching  that  of  the  cave-bear.  All
these  transitional  forms  are  very  rare.  We  possess  only  a  few
specimens  of  each,  whilst  skulls  of  cavern-  and  of  brown-bears
are  collected  by  hundreds.  The  large,  savage,  and  formidable
cavern  bear  corresponds  with  the  conditions  which  surrounded
him,  in  the  same  manner  as  the  living  brown  bear  corresponds
with  existing  conditions.  The  transition  from  the  cave-period  to
the  present,  perhaps,  took  place  within  a  comparatively  short
time,  consequently  the  transitional  forms,  indicating  the  raceless
oscillations  between  two  fixed  types,  are  very  rare,  compared


454  LECTURE    XVI.

with,  those  extreme  forms  which  we  acknowledge  as  indepen-
dent species.

I  hasten  to  another  example,  which  concerns  us  more  par-
ticularly.

Cuvier  never  had  an  opportunity  of  seeing  a  fossil  monkey ;
at  that  time  there  had  not  been  a  fragment  of  one  found.  Even
on  theoretical  grounds,  Cuvier  contested  the  existence  of
fossil  monkeys.  "  At  present,"  says  Albert  Gaudry,  "  we
know,  besides  those  found  in  Greece,  ten  other  species  :  two
from  South  America,  three  from  Asia,  five  from  Europe  (where
at  present  no  monkeys  exist).  All  these  species  have  been
determined  from  very  imperfect  remains,  the  bones  being  very
rare.  In  Greece  the  fossil  monkeys  are  more  abundant.  The
excavations  I  was  commissioned  to  make  by  the  Academy  pro-
duced twenty  skulls  of  these  animals,  several  jaws  and  bones
of  different  parts  of  the  body,  so  that  I  was  enabled  to  compose
a  drawing  of  the  whole  skeleton."  After  quoting  the  remarks
of  A.  Wagner,  the  first  discoverer,  and  those  of  Lartet  and
Beyrich  on  the  fossil  monkey,  which  Wagner  considered  as
an  intermediate  form  between  Semnopithecus  and  Hylobates,  he
continues  :  "  My  last  investigations  had  a  remarkable  result  ;
they  prove  that  the  limbs  of  the  Greek  monkey  differ  greatly
from  those  of  the  Semnopithecus.  The  Greek  monkey  (called
Mesopithecus)  resembles  in  its  skull  the  Semnopithecus ,  but  in
its  limbs  the  Macacus.

"  This  is  a  perfectly  transitional  type,  which  connects  two
genera  perfectly  distinct  in  the  present  creation.  When  we  had
before  us,  not  merely  a  fragment  of  a  jaw  (as  is  the  case  of  most
fossil  mammals  registered  in  the  catalogues),  but  perfect  skulls,
we  were  apt  to  believe  the  Greek  monkey  a  Semnopithecus.
This  was  an  error.  Had  we,  on  the  contrary,  had  before  us
not  a  single  bone  but  all  the  bones  of  the  limbs,  we  might  have
assigned  them  to  the  Macacus ;  this  also  would  have  been  an


error."


I  repeat  with  Gaudry  :  Is  this  not  a  perfect  transition  form
between  two  distinct  genera,  the  head  a  Semnopithecus ,  the
body  a  Macacus  ?  We  know  not  whether  this  new  species,
which  in  Greece  abounded  in  the  tertiary  period,  was  developed


LEJTUEB    XVI.  455

from  the  crossing  of  both  elements,  or  perhaps  by  natural
selection ;  no  person  can  decide  how  this  form  arose  ;  but  that
the  intermediate  form  exists  in  such  a  shape  that  it  might  have
been  the  result  of  cross-breeding  cannot  be  doubted.  That  this
race  acquired  the  requisite  capacity  for  existence  is  rendered
evident  by  its  frequent  occurrence  in  a  country  where  at  present
no  monkeys  exist,  where,  therefore,  by  subsequent  changes  in
the  surrounding'  media  the  existence  of  these  animals  was  ren-
dered  impossible.

There  exist  thus  intermediate  forms  of  minute  transitions  and
regular  transformations.  The  example  of  the  Greek  monkey
shows  that  the  whole  structure  must  be  known,  and  that  it  is
not  sufficient  to  study  the  skull  or  the  dentition  to  detect  such
intermediate  forms,  and  that  for  this  reason  our  knowledge  of
fossil  forms  is  too  fragmentary  for  us  always  to  find  them  out.

We  are  certainly  told  not  to  make  deductions  from  the  un-
known. I  agree  with  this  perfectly.  I  do  not  assert  that
because  an  intermediate  form  has  been  discovered  between
Semnopithecus  and  Macacus,  there  must  be  one  found  between
the  Semnopithecus  of  the  old  world  and  the  Oebus  of  the  new  ;
but  I  also  maintain,  that  in  our  fragmentary  knowledge  we
must  not,  where  our  knowledge  is  for  the  moment  at  fault,  say,
thus  far  and  no  further  !  It  is  scarcely  thirty  years  since
Cuvier  said  :  There  exists  no  fossil  monkey,  and  none  can
exist :  there  is  no  fossil  man,  and  there  can  be  none  ;  and  yet
to-day  we  speak  of  fossil  monkeys  as  of  old  acquaintances,
and  trace  back  fossil  man,  not  only  to  the  diluvium,  but  to
recent  tertiary  formations,  though  some  obstinate  persons  still
assert  that  Cuvier's  principle  cannot  be  controverted.  It  is
scarcely  twenty  years  since  I  learned  from  Agassiz  :  Transition
beds,  palgeozoic  formations  =  Empire  of  Fishes ;  there  are  no
reptiles  in  this  period,  nor  could  have  existed,  as  it  would
have  been  contrary  to  the  plan  of  creation.  Secondary  for-
mations (Trias,  Jura,  Chalk)  =  Empire  of  Reptiles.  There  are
no  mammals,  nor  could  be,  for  the  same  reason  as  above.  Ter-
tiary strata  =  Empire  of  Mammals ;  there  are  no  human  beings
nor  could  have  been.  Present  creation  =  Empire  of  Man.
Where  is  at  present  this  exclusive  plan  of  creation  ?  Reptiles
in  the  Devonian  strata,  reptiles  in  coal ;  farewell  then  Empire


456  LECTURE    XVI.

of  fishes  !  Mammals  in  the  Jurassic  formation,  mammals  in  the
Purbeckliniestone,which  some  consider  asbelonging  to  the  lowest
chalk.  Adieu,  then,  Empire  of  reptiles !  Man  in  the  upper  tertiary
strata ;  man  in  the  diluvium  ;   good-bye  Empire  of  mammals  !

The  proof  of  one  well-attested  transitional  form  includes  the
possibility  of  all  other  transitional  forms,  but  not  their  necessity
or  actual  existence.

I  must  now  draw  your  attention  to  another  point  rendered  evi-
dent by  these  examples.  The  transitional  forms  between  the  two
bear  species  with  fixed  characters — the  cave  bear  and  the  brown
bear,  are  as  rare  as  the  two  species  themselves  are  abundant.  One
portion  of  them  seems  also  to  have  been  intermediate  in  time,
since  the  colossal  brown  bears  from  the  Alpine  caverns  of  Swit-
zerland are  more  recent  than  the  cave-bear,  which  is,  according  to
Wagner,  also  the  case  as  regards  the  Vrsus  prisms,  whose  head
is  found  along  with  the  lower  jaw,  and  thus  probably  deposited
by  standing  water,  whilst  the  cave-bear  skulls  are  never  found
so  connected.  But  apart  from  this  circumstance,  we  must
notice  the  rarity  of  such  transitional  forms.  There  is  no  doubt,
if  the  change  of  surrounding  media  occurs  within  a  compara-
tively short  time,  the  transformation  of  the  type  must  keep
pace  with  it.  We  have  alluded  to  this  when  speaking  of  the
domestic  animals  introduced  into  South  America.  The  modi-
fication of  type  experienced  by  cats  in  Paraguay,  swine  in
Chile  and  the  Brazils,  and  the  sheep  in  the  same  regions,  in
consequence  of  a  sudden  transplantation,  were  effected  within  a
few  generations.  The  transformed  type  was  soon  adapted  to
the  climate,  and  has  now  assumed  a  stationary  form.  Unfor-
tunately our  knowledge  refers  only  to  the  exterior,  and  not-
withstanding the  great  interest  attached  to  this  question,  no
naturalist  has  yet  compared  the  skulls  of  the  European  domes-
tic animals,  acclimatized  in  South  America,  with  those  of  the
parent  stocks  bred  in  Europe.  Admitting  that  striking  dif-
ferences do  exist,  that  the  skull  of  the  swine,  for  instance,
has  become  shorter  and  higher,  the  snout  thicker,  the  tusks
more  curved,  so  that  the  South  American  domestic  pig  repre-
sents, even  in  the  skeleton,  a  new  and  easily  distinguished
species.  Admitting  all  this,  where  do  we  find  the  transi-
tional form  which  led  to  this  result  ? — Nowhere  !     The  millions


LECTURE   XVI.  457

of  cattle,  horses,  and  pigs  which  now  populate  the  exten-
sive tracts  of  South  America,  either  in  a  wild  or  semi-domes-
ticated state,  are,  as  is  historically  proved,  the  descendants  of
some  few  imported  specimens.  The  first  generations,  now
found  in  small  numbers,  had  to  struggle  for  their  existence
in  the  foreign  climate  until  the  acclimatization  process  was
completed.  Only  after  the  race  has  been  brought  into  har-
mony with  surrounding  media  does  it  begin  to  multiply  ra-
pidly ;  only  when  it  has  become  typical  does  the  number  in-
crease up  to  millions.  But  as  to  the  transitional  forms  of  the
few  individuals  of  few  generations,  where  are  we  to  find  them  ?
Who  is  to  disinter  them  from  the  soil  ?  The  two  species,  the
original  and  the  derived,  are  not  apparently  linked  by  an  inter-
mediate form,  as  nobody  can  show  them ;  yet  they  did  exist,
for  the  transition  has  taken  place  within  historic  times,  and
is  historically  authenticated.

Is  the  process  different  in  wild  animals  ?  Let  us  assume
that  the  transformation  of  the  bear  has  taken  place  during  the
glacial  period,  which,  as  we  have  shown,  was  only  an  in-
cident of  the  so-called  diluvial  period.  There  is  no  doubt
that  most  of  the  cave-bears  perished  by  the  advance  of  the  ice,
which  deprived  them  of  their  means  of  subsistence,  and  pre-
vented their  emigration  into  other  regions.  But  some  few  of
these  animals  were  preserved ;  their  successive  generations
adapted  themselves  to  the  new  conditions ;  their  wildness
-  diminished ;  their  means  of  subsistence  changed,  and  they
became  smaller  in  size,  until  the  change  was  effected  and  the
cave-bear  transformed  into  the  brown-bear  which,  now  adapted
to  the  new  external  conditions,  multiplied  greatly.  But  the
transitional  forms — the  witnesses  of  the  fierce  struggle  for
existence  during  changing  conditions — must  they  not  be  far
less  numerous  than  the  typical  species  which  form  the  terminal
points  of  this  struggle  ?

Thus  it  will  always  be,  if  the  surrounding  media  change
within  a  comparatively  short  time.  The  transitional  forms  re-
duced to  a  few  individuals,  will,  among  the  number  of  typical
species  adapted  to  external  conditions,  disappear,  and  it  will
only  be  owing  to  a  happy  accident  if,  here  and  there,  a  speci-
men of  them  be  found.


458  LECTURE    XVI.

The  case  is  altered  when  the  changes,  in  consequence  of
geological  metamorphoses,  are  very  slow.  The  adaptations
which  these  infinitesimal  changes  require,  and  which  only
become  visible  in  their  effects  by  the  accumulations  of  thou-
sands of  years ;  these  adaptations  are  as  slight  as  the  cause
which  produces  them,  and  they  will  consequently  produce
such  a  number  of  gradual  transitional  forms  that  an  infinite
number  of  specimens  are  required  to  connect  the  extreme
ends  of  the  change.  Do  we  not  behold  this  in  nature  ?  Do
we  not  see  species  of  one  group  of  strata  slide  into  another ;
that  is  to  say,  pass  through  a  long  series  of  development
stadia  in  order  gradually  to  assume  a  form  which  differs  from
the  original  form,  not  sufficiently,  indeed,  to  be  distiuguished
under  all  circumstances,  and  yet  enough  to  justify  its  distinc-
tion by  the  prefix  sub  (e.  g.,  Terebratula  triquetra,  and  sub-
triquetra)  from  that  found  in  another  group  of  strata  ?  Have
we  not  seen  the  changes  which,  by  the  gradual  elevation  of
Sweden  and  Norway,  have  taken  place  in  the  Fauna  of  the
coasts  ?  Can  we  forget  what  Loven  has  shown,  that  by  the
separation  of  the  Wener-  and  Wetter-lakes  from  the  sea  with
which  they  were  formerly  connected,  most  species  of  this  ice-
sea  perished,  but  some  craw-fish  have  preserved  themselves  in
these  lakes  gradually  filled  up  with  fresh  water,  and  have  so
adapted  themselves  to  the  changed  medium,  that  though  the
original  type  can  be  detected,  peculiarities  of  form  have  been
developed  establishing  an  essential  transformation  ?  Does  not
this  example  show  us  what  all  investigations  concerning  petri-
factions teach,  that  there  exists  nowhere  a  thorough  separation
between  two  groups  of  strata,  but  that  some  individual  species,
more  or  less  in  number,  and  more  or  less  changed,  pass  from
one  stratum  into  another  ?

We  have  seen  that  fixed  species  may  alter  under  changed
conditions,  and  that  this  alteration  of  the  surrounding  media
is  an  essential  lever  for  the  production  of  those  oscillating
types  which  pass  under  the  name  of  raceless  animals.  We
have  further  learned  that  the  fixed  t}rpes  interbreed  less
readily  the  more  constant  that  type.  Is  it  not,  hence,  evident
that  the  production   of  new  mongrel  races  must   take  place


LECTURE    XVI.  459

at  that  period  when,  by  the  change  of  surrounding  media,  the
fixity  of  the  type  is  broken  and  produces  that  raceless  soil
from  which  the  various  types  spring  up,  partly  by  inter-
mixture and  partly  by  adaptation,  in  order  to  become  again
fixed  types  ?     -

It  appears  to  me  that  in  this  way  may  be  explained  both  the
renewal  of  creation  in  different  epochs,  as  well  as  the  extinc-
tion of  most  species  at  the  same  periods,  and  also  the  fixity  of
types  during  long  periods  intervening  between  renovation
epochs,  and  further  the  development  of  more  perfect  types
from  the  raceless  masses  which  arise  in  the  beginning  of  the
renovation  period.  There  may,  in  many  respects,  be  progress,
arrest,  or  retrogression.  Thus  the  type  of  the  Ammonites  seems
to  us  a  more  perfect  type  than  that  of  the  Nautilus,  neverthe-
less the  former  became  extinct  at  the  end  of  the  chalk  period.
The  cavern-bear  was  more  of  a  beast  of  prey  than  his  de-
scendant the  brown  bear,  and  this  can  hardly  be  called  a
progress.

Acquainted  as  we  are  with  the  retrogressive  metamorphosis
in  animals,  namely,  how  an  animal  may  in  its  earliest  youth
have  a  more  perfect  structure  than  at  a  later  age,  why  may  we
not  imagine  a  similar  process  taking  place  during  the  adapta-
tion to  changed  conditions  which  no  longer  permit  the  type
to  continue  in  its  former  perfection  ?  Why  should  not
types  become  gradually  fixed  by  their  adaptation  to  changes,
and  modify  their  sensitive  and  locomotive  apparatus,  which
can  no  longer  be  used  as  formerly,  when  they  moved  under
different  conditions,  by  which  their  senses  and  limbs  acquired
a  certain  perfection  ?  Modifications  of  this  kind  which,  from
an  anatomical  standpoint,  must  be  considered  as  a  retrogres-
sion, may,  under  given  circumstances,  be  as  advantageous  in
the  struggle  for  existence  as  the  transformation  of  the  palmatod
feet  of  the  larvae  of  certain  parasitic  Crustacea  into  hooks  and
claws  is  advantageous  for  their  subsequent,  so  to  speak,  seden-
tary life.

But  whilst  we  thus  proceed  hand  in  hand  with  observation,
we  must  not  forget  that  transformation  by  adaptation,  or  by
intermixture,  is  still  confined  within  certain  limits  which  are


460  LECTURE    XVI.

impassable.  Thus  we  see  that  the  gulf  between  fishes  and  rep-
tiles has  been  filled  up ;  that  that  between  reptiles  and  birds  is
beginning  to  fill ;  that  some  points  have  been  gained  to  support
a  bridge  over  the  gulf  between  reptiles  and  mammals,  the
more  so  as  in  all  vertebrate  animals  we  perceive  a  unity  of
structure  and  a  similarity  in  the  fundamental  plan,  manifesting
itself  in  the  unfolding  of  forms,  as  well  as  in  the  development
of  the  stages,  which  the  embryos  of  the  higher  animals  have  to
pass  through  from  the  beginning  of  their  existence  until  they
arrive  at  maturity.  But  from  the  Yertebrata  to  the  Inverte-
brata  I  can  find  no  guide,  nor  have  I  any  idea  by  what  adapta-
tion or  intermixture  intermediate  forms  can  arise,  which  may
lead  from  the  Mollusca  and  Articulata  to  the  Yertebrata.  It  is
moreover  well  known  that  the  lowest  vertebrate  we  are  ac-
quainted with, — the  Ampliioxus  lanceolatus ,  is,  as  regards  the
development  of  all  its  organs,  so  far  behind  that  of  the  higher
Mollusca  and  Articulata,  that  the  transition  from  one  of  these
better  developed  types  into  that  of  this  vertebrate  would  include
a  series  of  retrogressions,  from  which  nevertheless  is  said  to
have  issued  the  beginning  of  a  structure  capable  of  the  highest
development.  In  other  words,  I  see  here  the  vertebrate  type,
with  man  as  its  highest  development,  commencing  with  an
animal,  which,  as  regards  the  perfection  of  its  organs,  is
excelled  by  most  worms,  and  much  more  so  by  most  Mollusca
and  Articulata,  which  in  some  instances  attain  the  highest
development  of  which  the  structural  plan  of  the  Articulata  is
capable.  I  should  thus  find  myself  face  to  face  with  an  inso-
luble enigma,  if  I  were  not  permitted  to  recur  to  the  conclu-
sion I  have  arrived  at,  namely,  the  assumption  of  an  original
difference  in  the  primary  germs  from  which  the  animal  kingdom
has  been  developed.

On  following  the  animal  structure  in  its  downward  direction,
we  certainly  find  that  the  Articulata,  step  by  step,  reach  the
worms,  and  these  again  approach  the  Infusoria  so  closely,  that
some  naturalists  include  the  latter  in  the  former.  On  the  other
hand,  the  Mollusca  approach  the  Eadiata,  there  being  some
forms  which  naturalists  include  in  either  of  the  above  divisions,
so  that  even  here   an  original  difference  shews  itself.     These


LECTURE    XVI.  461

fundamental  differences  cannot,  in  my  opinion  he  reasoned
away,  nor  can  I  comprehend  their  development  from  one  ori-
ginal form.  What  I  can  understand  is  this,  that  each  of  the
plans  may,  in  its  increasing  simplification,  be  traced  back  to  an
ideal  original  form  of  organic  development — the  cell ;  and,  as
I  have  already  observed,  it  appears  to  me  very  probable  that
the  elementary  cells  have  from  the  beginning  been  differently
constituted,  which  differentiation  is  manifested  in  the  develop-
ment of  the  fundamentally  different  structural  plan,  which  is
recognised  in  the  animal  kingdom.  I  repeat,  I  am  far  from
adopting  either  a  formal  original  substance  or  one  cell  form  as
the  fundamental  type  and  beginning  of  the  whole  organic  crea-
tion. As  I  find  in  the  present  creation  animals  and  plants  con-
sisting of  a  single  cell,  which  present  a  different  composition,
different  forms,  and  a  different  mode  of  life  and  of  propagation,
I  do  not  see  why  the  primary  single-celled  organisms  which
might  have  arisen  from  the  elementary  substances  should  all
have  possessed  the  same  form,  quality,  and  capacity  for
development.

It  is  sufficient  for  me  to  have  shewn  that  an  original  diffe-
rence may  exist  by  the  side  of  modification  and  adaptation,
that  both  must  supplement  each  other  in  order  to  render  intel-
ligible the  picture  presented  by  organic  nature.

Let  us  after  this  digression  return  to  our  theme,  the  origin
of  man  and  his  descent  from  the  ape.

The  course  of  lectures  which  I  conclude  this  day,  had  for  its
object  the  indication  of  the  kind  of  studies  requisite  in  order  to
arrive  at  certain  results.  I  have  endeavoured  to  show  in  what
respects  the  organisation  of  man  differs  or  agrees  with  that  of
the  ape.  I  endeavoured  to  indicate  the  fundamental  plan  in
the  structure  of  the  individual  organs,  which  is  evidently  the
same  in  man  and  ape.  But  whilst  insisting  on  the  identity  of
the  plan,  I  pointed  out  the  difference  in  its  execution,  in  the
same  manner  as  a  teacher  of  architecture  may  demonstrate  the
unity  of  the  plan  in  several  Gothic  cathedrals,  whilst  at  the  same
time  he  points  out  the  diversity  of  its  execution  in  the  respective
minsters.  I  have  proved  to  you  that  the  differences  between  some
human  races  are  greater  than  those  subsisting  between  some  ape


462  LECTURE    XVI.

species ;  that,  therefore,  we  are  justified  in  assuming  different
species  in  mankind,  just  as  in  several  domestic  animals  of  high
antiquity.  I  touched  upon  the  antiquity  of  mankind,  and  pointed
out  the  differences  in  the  human  species,  which,  at  the  beginning
of  the  stone-period,  inhabited  the  earth.  We  then  glanced  at
the  origin  of  new  races  and  species,  and  arrived  at  the  conclusion,
that  transformation,  adaptation,  natural  selection,  are  processes
in  nature  explanatory  of  the  various  forms  of  which  the  organic
world  consists.  We  may,  therefore,  now  proceed  to  discuss  the
last  question, — namely,  whether  the  theory  of  the  derivation  of
the  human  type  from  the  simian  group  is  scientifically  admissible.
The  existing  materials  for  bridging  over  the  gulf  between
man  and  ape  I  have  placed  before  you.  I  have  shown  in  what
points  the  three  anthropoid  apes  establish  the  similarity ;  in
what  respects  the  races  of  mankind,  and  especially  the  Negro,
approach  the  ape-type,  without,  however,  completely  reaching
it.  I  have  demonstrated  that  the  oldest  cave-skulls  known
to  us  decidedly  approach  the  ape-type,  both  by  the  elongated
form  and  the  low  arching  of  the  skull.  I  have,  finally,  di-
rected your  attention  to  the  microcephali,  those  congenital  idiots,
not  as  constituting  a  separate  species,  as  some  of  my  detractors
make  me  say,  but  as  a  morbid  arrest  of  development,  which
indicates  one  of  the  stages  which  the  human  embryo  must  ne-
cessarily pass  through,  and  which  now  in  its  abnormity  repre-
sents that  intermediate  form,  which  at  a  remote  period  may
have  been  normal.  I  remind  you  on  this  occasion  of  what  I
said  concerning  these  microcephali,  together  with  Gaudry's
remark  on  the  Greek  monkey.  Just  as  Gaudry  observed  that
the  whole  skull  of  the  Greek  monkey  would  constitute  it  a
Semnojnthecus  had  not  the  limbs  been  found,  which  present
the  type  of  the  macacus,  so,  I  remarked,  might  the  skull  of  a
microcephalus,  found  in  a  fossil  state,  in  the  absence  of  the
jaws  be  mistaken  for  that  of  an  ape,  until  the  discovery  of  the
limbs  should  establish  the  human  type.  But  as  it  is  certain
that  the  mici'ocephalus,  with  his  arrested  development,  is  not
suited  for  propagation,  it  is  neither  the  only  possible  nor  the
only  imaginable  intermediate  form  between  man  and  ape.  But
this  arrest  which  the  brain  experienced  in  its  forward  inarch,
is  the  simian  stage.      This   abnormal   creature,  this  arrested


LECTURE    XVI.  4G3

monstrosity  of  the  present  creation,  fills  up  the  gap  which  can-
not be  bridged  over  by  normal  types  in  the  present  creation,
but  may  be  so  by  some  future  discoveries.

We  are  told  that  intermediate  forms  have  not  been  found,  and
we  admit  this.  But  when  it  is  added  that  none  can  be  found,
the  history  of  the  last  ten  years,  with  all  its  discoveries  relating
to  man  and  the  ape,  tells  a  different  tale.  Twenty  years  ago
fossil  monkeys  were  unknown,  now  we  know  nearly  a  dozen ;
who  can  tell  that  we  may  not  in  a  few  years  know  fifty  ?  A
year  ago  no  intermediate  form  between  Semnopithecus  and
Macacus  was  known,  now  we  possess  a  whole  skeleton  ;  who
can  assert  that  in  ten,  twenty,  or  fifty  years  we  may  not  pos-
sess intermediate  forms  between  man  and  ape  ?

But  whilst  we  assume  the  actual  descent  of  the  human  race
from  the  apes,  and  believe  that  the  differences  between  both,
which  will  become  greater  by  the  further  development  of  man,
are  the  result  of  selection  and  intermixture,  we  must,  on
the  other  hand,  decidedly  repudiate  an  inference  we  are
charged  with,  and  which  consists  in  this,  that  we  must  neces-
sarily come  back  to  the  original  unity  of  mankind,  and  con-
sider Adam  as  an  intermediate  form  between  ape  and  man.
"  The  changes  in  the  history  of  science/'  says  Councillor  R.
Wagner,  "  have  a  remarkable,  almost  comic,  aspect,  when  we
look  at  the  fierce  contest  now  raging  between  mono-genists
and  poly-genists,  as  they  call  in  France  the  advocates  for  one
or  many  parent  stocks  of  mankind.  Three  years  ago,  just
before  Darwin's  book  appeared,  the  theory  of  the  possibility  or
probability  of  the  different  races  of  mankind  having  descended
from  a  single  pair  was  considered  as  perfectly  antiquated,  and
as  having  lagged  behind  all  scientific  progress,  whilst  now,  to
judge  from  the  applause  with  which  Darwin's  theory  is  re-
ceived, there  is  nothing  more  certain  than  the  inference  that
both  ape  and  man  had  for  their  single  progenitor  a  form  inter-
mediate between  ape  and  man."*

We  crave  pardon,  Sir  Councillor  ;  never  was  there  a  more  in-
correct inference,  and  when  you  advise  us  "  to  let  this  question
rest  for  the  present,  as  it  cannot  be  scientifically  solved,"  you

*  Since  the  above  was  written,  Prof.  Eud.  Wagner  lias  departed  this  Hie. — En.


464  LECTURE    XVI.

should  not  have  been  the  first  to  raise  it ;  for  as  far  as  I  know,
no  Darwinist,  if  we  must  call  them  so,  has  either  raised  that
question  or  drawn  the  above  inference,  for  the  simple  reason
that  it  neither  accords  with  the  facts  nor  their  consequences.*

It  is  easy  to  prove  our  assertion  as  regards  man  and  ape.

The  ape-type  does  not  culminate  in  one,  but  in  three  anthro-
poid apes,  which  belong  to  at  least  different  genera.  Two  of
these  genera,  the  orang  and  the  gorilla,  must  at  all  events  be
divided  into  different  species ;  there  are  perhaps  some  varieties
of  them  which  form  dispersive  circles,  like  some  around
certain  races  of  man.  Be  this  as  it  may,  this  much  is  certain,
that  each  of  these  anthropoid  apes  has  its  peculiar  characters
by  which  it  approaches  man ;  the  chimpanzee,  by  the  cranial
and  dental  structure ;  the  orang,  by  its  cerebral  structure  ;  the
gorilla,  by  the  structure  of  the  extremities.  None  of  these
stands  next  to  man  in  all  points, — the  three  forms  approach  man
from  different  sides  without  reaching  him.

I  say  "from  different  sides."  For,  in  point  of  fact,  these
three  anthropoid  apes  do  not  rise  above  the  same  fundamental
form  from  which  they  branch  off;  but  they  sprang  from  different
ape  families  which  we  must  consider  as  having  run  parallel.
Gratiolet  has,  as  regards  cerebral  structure,  followed  up  this
subject.  I  shall  not  enter  into  details  which  must  be  studied  in
his  treatise,  but  I  shall  give  here  the  conclusions  he  arrived  at.

(C  On  comparing  the  brain  of  the  orang  with  that  of  other
brains,"  says  Gratiolet,  "we  are  bound,  on  account  of  the  size
of  the  anterior  lobe,  the  relative  smallness  of  the  posterior  lobe,
and  the  development  of  the  superficial  transition  convolution
(plis  de  passage) ,  to  place  the  orang  at  the  head  of  the  gibbons
and  the  Semnopitheci,  of  which  any  one  may  easily  convince
himself  on  comparing  the  respective  brains  drawn  with  scru-
pulous exactness.

"  These  analogies  are  the  more  remarkable,  as  they  lead  to
the  same  result  as  the  examination  of  external  characters."

The  orang,  considered  as  the  highest  gibbon,  has  a  "gibbon's
brain,  only  richer,  more  developed,  in  a  word,  brought  nearer
perfection."

*  This  is  quite  true,  although  the  author  is  mistaken  respecting  there  being
no  Darwinist  advocates  for  unity  :  I  have  alluded  to  this  in  the  Preface. — Ed.


LECTURE   XVI.  465

Of  the  chimpanzee,  Gratiolet  remarks,  "  On  comparing  his
brain  with  that  of  the  true  Macacus,  and  specially  of  the  ma-
got,  it  is  impossible  for  us  to  reject  the  analogies  presented  by
this  comparison.  The  examination  of  the  skull  and  face  con-
firms these  analogies  by  new  ones.

"  When,  therefore,  we  put  aside  every  preconceived  theory,
and  keep  solely  to  the  facts,  we  are  irresistibly  led  to  the  con-
clusion :  The  chimpanzee  brain  is  a  perfected  Macacus  brain.

"  In  other  words  :  the  chimpanzee  stands  in  the  same  rela-
tion to  the  Macacus  and  the  baboon,  as  the  orang  to  the  gibbon
and  the  Semnopithecus."  Of  the  gorilla,  finally,  he  says  :  "  The
gorilla  is  a  mandrill,  just  as  the  chimpanzee  is  a  Macacus  and
the  orang  a  gibbon.  The  absence  of  a  tail,  the  existence  of  a
broad  sternum,  the  peculiar  locomotion,  not  upon  the  palmar
surface  of  the  fingers,  but  upon  the  dorsal  surface  of  the  second
phalanx,  are  indeed  characters  they  possess  in  common ;  but
however  important  these  may  be,  they  do  not  permit  the  ap-
proximation of  these  three  genera.  As  heads  of  three  different
series,  these  apes  still  preserve  the  characters  of  the  groups  to
which  they  belong,  although  they  possess,  if  I  may  so  express
myself,  common  insignia  of  their  high  dignity."

No  valid  objection  can  be  raised  to  these  deductions  of  Gra-
tiolet, in  presence  of  the  facts ;  but  these  facts  prove  our
assertions,  that  the  higher  developed  forms  of  different  parallel
series  of  apes  approach  man  from  different  sides.  Let  us
imagine  the  three  anthropoid  apes  continued  to  the  human
type, — which  they  do  not  reach  and,  perhaps,  never  will  reach ;
we  shall  then  see  developed  from  the  three  parallel  series  of
apes,  three  different  primary  races  of  mankind,  two  dolicho-
cephalic races  descended  from  the  gorilla  and  chimpanzee,  and
one  brachycephalic  descended  from  the  orang  ; — that  descended
from  the  gorilla  is,  perhaps,  distinguished  by  the  development
of  the  teeth  and  the  chest ;  that  descended  from  the  orang  by  the
length  of  the  ai-ms  and  light-red  hair ;  and  that  issued  from  the
chimpanzee,  by  black  colour,  slender  bones,  and  less  massive
jaws.

When,  therefore,  we  look  upon  the  apes  and  their  develop-
ment as  proceeding  from  different  parallel  series,  the  assumption

ir  n


466  LECTURE    XVI.

of  only  one  intermediate  forin  between  man  and  ape  is  unjusti-
fiable, inasmuch  as  we  know  in  our  present  creation  three
different  sources  for  such  intermediate  forms.

Schroder  van  der  Kolk  and  Vrolik  agree  with  us  in  this
respect,  although  they  are  opposed  to  Darwin's  theory.  "  We
know/'  they  say,  "  no  species  of  apes  which  forms  a  direct
transition  to  man.  If  man  is  to  be  derived  from  the  ape,  we
must  search  for  his  head  amongst  the  small  monkeys  which
group  themselves  around  the  Cebus  and  the  Ouistitis ;  for
his  hand  we  must  go  to  the  chimpanzee ;  for  his  skeleton,
to  the  Siamang ;  for  his  brain,  to  the  orang,  [and  I  add,
for  his  foot,  to  the  gorilla] .  Putting  aside  the  difference  in
the  teeth,  it  is  manifest  that  the  general  aspect  of  the
skull  of  a  Cebus,  of  a  Ouistiti,  or  some  other  cognate  mon-
keys, resembles,  though  in  miniature,  more  the  skull  of  man
than  the  skull  of  an  adult  gorilla,  chimpanzee,  or  orang.  The
carpus  of  the  chimpanzee,  [and  of  the  gorilla],  has  the  same
number  of  bones  as  that  of  man,  whilst  that  of  the  orang  is
distinguished  by  those  singular  intermediary  bones  found  in  all
other  moukeys.  The  skeleton  of  the  Siamang  resembles  by  its
sternum,  the  shape  of  the  thorax,  the  ribs,  and  the  pelvis,  much
more  that  of  man,  than  that  of  the  gorilla,  chimpanzee,  and
the  oranof ;  and  our  researches  have  also  shown  that  the  brain  of
the  orang  stands  nearer»to  that  of  man  than  the  brain  of  the  chim-
panzee. It  would  thus  be  requisite  to  collect  the  human  cha-
racters from  five  different  apes,  from  one  of  America,  from  two
of  Africa,  from  one  of  Borneo,  and  from  one  of  Sumatra ;  the
primitive  relations  of  man  are  accordingly  so  scattered,  that  we
can  hardly  believe  in  one  common  stock."

It  is  just  this  plurality  of  characters  which  confirms  us  in
our  view.  If  the  Macaci  in  the  Senegal,  the  baboons  on  the
Gambia,  and  the  gibbous  in  Borneo  could  become  developed
into  anthropoid  apes,  we  cannot  see  why  the  American  apes
should  not  be  capable  of  a  similar  development !  If  in  dif-
ferent regions  of  the  globe  anthropoid  apes  may  issue  from
different  stocks,  we  cannot  see  why  these  different  stocks
should  be  denied  the  further  development  into  the  human
type,  and  that  only  one  stock  should  possess  this  privilege ;  in


LECTURE    XVI.  467

short,  we  cannot  see  why  American  races  of  man  may  not  be
derived  from  American  apes,  Negroes  from  African  apes,  or
Negritos,  perhaps,  from  Asiatic  apes  !

On  examining  the  species  of  mankind  and  their  history,  we
arrive  at  similar  results.  We  have  traced  the  plurality  of
species,  not  merely  in  the  historic,  but  also  in  the  pre-
historic period ;  we  have  shown  that  no  existing  species  present
a  greater  contrast  than  did,  e.g.,  the  cave-men  of  Belgium  and
the  Rhenish  provinces,  and  the  Lapps  of  the  stone-period.
This  plurality  and  diversity  which  we  find  in  the  primitive
races  of  Europe — that  is  to  say,  upon  a  very  limited  space,
will  also  be  found  in  the  primitive  races  of  other  parts  of  the
world.  At  all  events,  all  the  facts  which  carry  us  back  to  the
oldest  history  of  Asia,  Africa,  and  America  admit  of  no  other
inference.

But  if  this  plurality  of  races  be  a  fact,  as  well  established
as  their  constancy  of  characters,  despite  of  the  many  inter-
mixtures through  which  the  natural  primitive  races  had  to
pass ;  if  this  constancy  be  another  proof  for  the  great  antiquity
of  the  various  types,  for  their  occurrence  in  the  diluvium,  or
even  in  older  strata — then  all  these  facts  do  not  lead  us  to  one
common  fundamental  stock,  to  one  intermediate  form  between
man  and  ape,  but  to  many  parallel  series,  which,  more  or  less
locally  confined,  might  have  been  developed  from  the  various
parallel  series  of  the  apes.

It  is  not  unworthy  of  notice  that  the  fossil  apes  of  the  ter-
tiary period,  from  which  man  perhaps  might  have  issued,  are
much  more  widely  spread  than  the  present  monkeys,  and  that
they  follow  in  their  distribution  the  same  laws  as  at  present.
The  monkeys  found  in  Europe,  as  high  up  as  England,  are  all
narrow-nosed,  whilst  those  found  in  American  caves  are  all  flat-
nosed.  The  difference  between  the  Fauna  of  the  Old,  and  that
of  the  New  World,  as  now  observed,  existed  already  then — there
was  no  road  which  led  from  South  America  to  Europe.  But  if
apes  became  developed  into  men,  they  had  in  the  old  world  a
range  from  the  equator  up  to  England,  and  could  thus  form
the  autochthonic  races  upon  the  various  spots,  where  we  have
found  the  oldest  species  of  mankind.     This  assumption  equally


468  LECTURE   XVI.

leads  us  to  an  original  plurality  of  mankind,  not  to  their  deri-
vation from  a  single  stock,  but  from  tlie  various  twigs  of  that
tree,  so  rich  in  branches,  which  we  surround  with  the  order  of
primates  or  apes.

Here  again,  gentlemen,  you  will  observe  the  agreement  in  de-
meanour of  the  now  distinct  types.  The  simian  type  parts  in
various  directions ;  it  first  divides  into  two  chief  branches —
monkeys  of  the  old,  monkeys  of  the  new  world — each  of  these
main  branches  produces  twigs  which  seem  more  and  more  to
part  from  each  other.  But  on  arriving  at  perfection  the  ends
of  the  twigs  turn  again  towards  each  other,  so  that  from  the
fundamentally  distinct  families  of  the  gibbons,  Macaci,  and
baboons  are  developed  the  three  anthropoid  apes,  which,  by  a
number  of  common  characters  stand  considerably  nearer  each
other  than  the  groups  of  which  they  are  the  heads.  Does  not
the  history  of  man  present  something  similar  ?  The  further
back  we  go  in  history  the  greater  is  the  contrast  between  indi-
vidual types,  the  more  opposed  are  the  characters — the  most
decided  longheads  immediately  by  the  side  of  the  most  decided
shortheads.  Our  savage  ancestors  stand  opposed  to  each  other
— stock  against  stock,  race  against  race,  species  against  spe-
cies. By  the  constant  working  of  his  brain,  man  gradually
emerges  from  his  primitive  barbarism  ;  he  begins  to  recognise
his  relation  to  other  stocks,  races,  and  species,  with  whom  he
finally  intermixes  and  interbreeds.  The  innumerable  mongrel
races  gradually  fill  up  the  spaces  between  originally  so  dis-
tinct types,  and,  notwithstanding  the  constancy  of  characters,
in  spite  of  the  tenacity  with  which  the  primitive  races  resist
alteration,  they  are  by  fusion  slowly  led  towards  unity.

My  task  is  finished,  believing  that  I  have,  as  far  as  was  in
my  power,  attained  the  object  I  had  in  view.  But  before  con-
cluding, I  feel  bound  to  address  a  few  words  to  friends  and
opponents.

The  lamentation  over  the  destruction  of  all  faith,  morality,
and  virtue  ;  the  woeful  cry  about  the  endangered  existence  of
society,  which  years  ago  forced  me  to  take  up  my  pen,  is  heard
again — but  this  time  it  is  in  the  French  tongue.  The  pulpits
of  the  orthodox  churches,  the  pews  of  the  pietistic  oratories,


LECTURE    XVf.  469

the  platforms  of  the  missions,  the  chairs  of  the  consistories,
resound  with  the  pretended  attacks  on  the  foundations  of  human
existence  made  by  materialism  and  Darwinism.  They  feel
surprised,  that  people  with  such  views  can  be  good  citizens,
honest  men,  good  husbands  and  fathers.  There  are  priests,
who,  while  defrauding  the  state  of  taxes,  mount  the  pulpit  and
preach  :  that  when  materialists  and  Darwinists  do  not  commit
all  sorts  of  crimes,  it  is  not  from  righteousness  but  from
hypocrisy.

Let  them  rage  !  They  require  the  fear  of  punishment,  the
hope  of  reward  in  a  dreamt-of  beyond,  to  keep  in  the  right
path — for  us  suffices  the  consciousness  of  being  men  amongst
men,  and  the  acknowledgment  of  their  equal  rights.  We  have
no  other  hope  than  that  of  receiving  the  acknowledgments  of
our  fellow-men ;  no  other  fear  than  that  of  seeing  our  human
dignity  violated — a  dignity  we  value  the  more,  since  it  has
been  conquered  with  the  greatest  labour  by  us  and  our  ances-
tors, down  to  the  ape.

To  our  friends  we  return  thanks  for  their  support,  and  con-
clude with  an  anecdote.

In  a  satirical  journal,  edited  by  my  late  friend,  Fritz  Jenni,
called  Der  Guckkasten  (The  Show-box),  there  is  a  picture  of  a
cowkeeper  with  his  milk-cans,  and  before  him  a  cur,  barking
furiously.  Says  the  milkman,  "  Thou  barkest !  Thou  always
barkest  !  Thou  barkest  at  all  the  dogs  !  Thou  barkest  at  me,
and  barkest  till  thou  hast  done  barking,  and  canst  bark  no
more  \"

Then  let  them  bark,  till  they  can  bark  no  more.


THE    END.


APPENDIX.

The  following  are  the  passages  omitted  from  the  text,  to  which  allusion  is
made  in  the  Editor's  preface,  p.  xii  : —

P.  122,  line  16  from  top  :—

"  When  Sir  Walter  Scott,  in  some  of  his  novels,  describes  some  Highland
robber,  distinguished  by  a  disproportionate  length  of  his  arms  reaching
down  to  the  knee,  which  enabled  him  better  to  handle  his  sword,  he  praises
the  ape  type  in  man,  just  as  the  pious  painter  of  the  Byzantine  school  and
our  present  Nazarenes  act  in  depicting  their  Saviours  and  Madonnas,  with
their  courts  of  saints,  with  long  narrow  ape-hands  and  feet,  and  orang-utan
pelves,  which  warrant  the  immaculate  conception,  since  no  human  head
co^ild  pass  through."

P.  147,  line  6  from  top  : —

"  Herr  Bischoff  proceeds  further  :  the  Esquimaux,  Botocudos,  New  Zea-
landers,  etc.,  whose  appearance  is  certainly  in  many  respects  not  superior
to  that  of  animals,  have  been  appealed  to  ;  or  instances  have  been  cited  of
so-called  wild  men,  who,  lost  in  the  forest  in  early  youth,  have  grown  up
amongst  the  brutes,  and  became  so  degenerate,  that  on  being  found  they
exhibited  scarcely  any  trace  of  a  higher  self-consciousness.  Perhaps  Herr
Bischoff  only  calls  those  men  who  attend  his  lectures  at  Munich,  or  have
implicit  faith  in  the  transformation  of  urea."

P.  165,  line  4  from  bottom  : —

"  Properly  speaking,  my  human  character  is  here  gone  to  the  devil !  No
operculum, — no  covered  transition  convolution !  To  the  devil  with  that
devil's  ape  !*  But  we  see  -how  nature  indicates  here  that  the  devil  stands
nearest  to  man  !  It  is  remarkable  enough  that  the  Capuchin  stands  by  the
side  of  the  devil.  In  the  Capuchin  ape,  the  superior  transition  convolution
is  absent ;  the  second  is  superficial  in  its  whole  extent, — the  operculum
almost  null.

"  Tables  are  frequently  iiseful.  I  present,  therefore,  a  synopsis  of  that  ex-
cellent character  of  man, — the  operculum  and  the  convolutions  : —


Part  of  Brain.

Man.

Devil's  Ape.

Capuchin  Ape.

Orang.

Chimpan-
zee.

Posterior  lobe

Operculum

Superior  transition

convolutions    . . .

Second    transition

Small.
Absent.

Superficial

Superficial

Moderate.
Absent.

Superficial

Superficial

Very  short.
Almost  absent

Absent.

Superficial.

Moderate.
Imperfect.

Superficial

Covered.

Large.
Perfect.

Absent.

Covered.

"  Receipt  resulting  from  this  Table  : — Melt  the  Devil,  and  the  Capuchin  in
ape-shape,  together,  and  you  have  the  Man !  Nature  seems  to  be  very
sarcastic  !"


*  The  monkey  in  question  is  best  known  as  the  Marimonda  (Ateles  Belze-
buth).  Englishmen  apply  the  name  "devil-monkey"  to  the  Cuxio  (Pithecia
Satanas) . — Editor.


INDEX    OF     SUBJECTS.


Abel,  423

Abbeville,  265

Abyssinia,  434

Adam,  13,  16

Adult  skull,  38

Alpine  diluvium,  274,  et

seq.
Alsace,  21

Ape  and  man,  12,  464
Angle,  facial,  35,  140
„      nasal,  143
„      sphenoidal,  143
Anthropoid  apes,  465
Animals,   sensibilitv  of,

99

„        societies,  230
Apostle  skull,  306
Apples,  carbonised,  356
Arbor  vitse,  98
Arm,  179
Armenia,  3
Archencephala,  159
Aurignac,  257
Armagh,  Irish  in,  427
Arcy,  grotto  of,  254
Australian  skull,  33,  48,

49,  52,  55,  71,  91,  375
Australian  hybrids,  440
Average  man,  the,  22
Auk,  great,  222
Aztec,  12,  146,  195,  199


Base  line,  the,  28
Base  of  skull  (inner),  36
„  (outer),  37

Bashkirs,  52
Basis  cranii,  35
Base  of  brain,  96
Bascme  skulls,  381
Bears,  242,  244,  453
Berne  skulls,  375
Bimana,  134
Bison,  397
Borreby  skull,  303,  336,

369,  385
Bosjesman,  12


Brachycephalic,  49,  50,
385

Brahmin,  17

Brain,  weight  of,  83,  111,
133

Brain,  structure  of,  93

Brazil  caves,  261,  290

Brazilians,  50,  52

Britanny,  21

British  Association  con-
troversies, 117

Bronze  period,  368,  369

Buggese,  49,  50

Butter-dish,  a,  80


Cain,  423
Callithrix,  140
Calmucks,  50,  131
Camper's  angle,  35
Canis,  394

Capacity  of  skull,  37,  88
Caricatures,  73
Carlovingians,  50,  88
Casts  of  skull,  78
Cats  in  Paraguay,  421
Cavern  remains,  2,  237,

246
Cebus,  34,  43,  148,  149,

203  et  seq.  422
Celts,  22

Cells,  multipolar,  94
Cell,  primordial,  444
Cemetery  skulls,  90
Cercopithecus,  211
Cerebral  surface  of  Ne-
anderthal skull,  305
Cerebrum,  96
Cerebellum,  96
Chabins,  417
Characters  of  peoples,  7
Chauvaux  grotto,  344
Cephalic  index,  47
Cheeks,  130

Child,  skull  of  Chinese,
50


Chimpanzee,  12, 139, 140,

143,  160,  198
Chin,  133
Christian     missionaries,

378
Church,  use  of,
Circulation  of  the  blood,

11
Climate,    influence     of,

428
Colours,  tables  of,  22
Concise,  354
Conscription,   its    influ-
ence, 21
Constance,  354
C  on  volutions  of thebrain,

113,  163
Convolutions,  104
Copper  age,  358
Corpora    quadrigeniina,

98
Coronal  view  of  skull,
Coscinopora    globularis,

271
Cossacks,  49,  50,  52
Cowkeeper,  anecdote  of,

469
Crag  deposits,  313
Crania,  collections  of,  9;

measurements  of,  25 ;

capacity  of,  tables,  88
Crannoges,  353
Creation,  405
Creator,  a  personal,  449
Crimean  war,  23
Cyrena  fluniinalis,  266


Danish  skulls,  373
Darwinian   theory,  the,

449
Delineation  of  the  skull,

75
Democrats,  18
Development,  215
Difficulties  encountered


472


INDEX.


by  the  practical  ana-
tomists, 9
Diopter,  use  of,  76
Diluvial    beds,    275,    et

seq.,  326
Dispute  on  the  cerebral

characters  of  man  and

ape,  158
Diminution  of  the  brain

in  old  age,  84
Divergence,    range    of,

216
Dolichocephalic,  48,  49,

50
Domestic  animals,  17
Down,  Irish  in,  427
Dura  mater,  98
Diissel,  255
Dutch,  50
Dynamometer,  the,  24


Ears,  130

Egypt,  425

Egyptian  antiquities,  15,

193
Egyptian  goose,  435
Engis  skull,  248,  295
Esquimaux,  8,  49
Ethnic  portraits,  73
Etruscans,  393
Eye,  aperture  of,  129


Facial  angle,  35
Falx,  98
Features,  128
Female  skull,  81
Fennec,  the,  421
Finns,  49
Flax,  358
Flint  flakes,  268
Flint  implements,  16
Fontanelles,  42
Foot,  155,  156,  157
Foot  of  Negro,  151
Foramen  magnum,  36
Fossil,  definition  of,  234
French,  49,  50
Frontal  sinuses,  301


Gauss,  the  mathemati-
cian, 184

Gauls,  22

Geneva,  skull  from,  52,
60,  388

Geometrical  drawings,
75

Geological  system,  455


Germanic   skull,    8,   49,

50,  174
German    intermixtures,

20
Gibraltar,  383
Gipsies,  50
Glacial  formations,  322

„       clay,  326
Goat  and  sheep,  417
Gorilla,  foot  of,  157

„.      194
Gottingen  meeting,  the,

32,  45
Greeks,  49
Grisons,  392
Gypsuni,  use  of,  79


Hair,  126

Hand  of  the  Chimpan-
zee, 154

Hares,  418

Helvetian  skull,  52,  60,
66,  68,  70, 139, 141,  389

Hindus,  49,  52

Hips,  breadth  of,  136

Hollanders,  50

Horizontal  plane,  28,  32

Hottentot  Venus,  97, 108,
184

Hottentot,  51,  91

Hoxne,  288

Human  kingdom,  the,
11,  225

Hybrids,  414,  436

Hyaenas,  242,  et  seq.

Hylobates,  138


Iceblink,  322

Ice-sea,  level  of,  325

Icelander,  1

Idiot,  145,  168',  195,  201

Index,  cephalic,  47

Indians,  50

Individual  peculiarities,

7
Instruments  required  for

craniometry,  59
Intermaxillary  bone,  147
Intermixture  of  races,  20
Internal  organs,  131
Ireland,        missionaries

from,  378
Irish  in  Armagh,  427
Italians,  49


Japhet,  367
Javanese,  50
Jews,  50,  433


Joinville,  section  at,  287
Jus  primce  noctis,  '432


Kaflir  skull,  65,  69,  142,

150, 175,  197
Kimris,  or  Gaels,  22
Kjokkenmoddings,  303
Kohlerglaube    und    Wis-

senschaft,  1

Lapps,  49,  339
Lateral  ventricles,  115
Leptocephaly,  30
Lherm  cave,  252
Liege  caves,  247
Limbs,  153
Lion  monkey,  106
Lips,  130

Lombrive  remains,  249,
379,  380

Macacus,  211,  455

Malay  skulls,  91

Man,  the  study  of,  5

Mangabey,  211

Materialism,  3

Mathematician,   brain
of,  102

Measurements,   tables
of,  56,  62,  76

Medial  plane,  the,  29

Medulla  oblongata,  95

Megaceros,  398

Meilen   skull,   347,  359,
387

Menchecourt,  fauna  at,
286

Mesaticephali,  51

Methods     of   investiga-
tion, 19

Metrical  systems,  23

Microcephali,  166,  199

Mississippi,  326,  292

Models,  wax,  19

Modena,  skulls,  from,  390

Molar,   a  supplemental,
176

Moluccans,  50

Monkeys,  fossil,  454

Monogenists,  463

Moosseedorf,  348

Moraines,  316

Moral  instincts,  226

Mosaic  Adam,  16

Moulin-Quignon  j  aw,  2  72

Mouth,  130

Mulattos,  437

Mules,  46

Multipolar  cells,  94


INDEX.


473


Naked  body,  8
Natchez,  291
Neanderthal  skull,  194,

255,  299,  305,  369
Negro,  18,  51,  61,  66,  92,

125,  172,   181,  et  seq.,

189,  196,  301,  437
Net,  cranial,  46
Neufchatel,      Useful

Knowledge  Society  of,

its  objects,  1
New  Hollanders,  52
Noah's  flood,  3,  13,  367
Norfolk  crag,  286
Norma  frontalis,  53
Norma  occipitalis,  53
Norma  verticalis,  47
Normal  German  skull,  8
Nose,  shape  of,  129
Novara,  the  expedition

of,  8,  23,  24

Oeningen   salamander,

234
Oksars,  325
Olivary  process,  42
Optic  thalanii,  98
Orang,  185
Organ  of  faith,  163
Origin  of  species,  15
Origin  of  man,  468
Orsini  balls,  352
Orthognathic  skull,41,51
Os  Incae,  390
Oviform  shapeof  skull,  48


Pachydermata,  243
Paraguay,  421
Parisian  skulls,  49,  88,

427
Pears,  carbonised,  356
Peat  bogs,  336
Pelvis,  119, 137, 167, 178,

293
Pennsylvania,  434
Persistent  sutures,  38
Peruvians,  50
Philanthropists,  432
Photography,  74
Phrenology,  101,  293
Pile-works,  349
Plane,  horizontal,  41,  et

seq.
Plane,  vertical,  26
Plateau  of  the   Andes,

119
Platycephaly,  30
Plau    in    Mecklenburg,

343


Plis  de  passage,  114
Polarisation,  103, 109
Polygenists,  453
Polynesians,  91
Primitive  brain,  the,  96
Primitive  man,  294
Profile  drawings,  75
Prognathism,  175
Prosiinite,  223
Puy  remains,  262
Pyramidal  heads,  54
Pyrgocephali,  54

Quadrate  skull,  48
Quichuas,  119

Eabbits,  416
Races,  20,  402
Kafter-heads,  54
Rameses  II,  426
Refuse-heaps,  334
Religious  sense,  228
ResuiTection-men,  9
Rhine,  valley  of,  291
Robenhausen,  348
Rodents,  extinct,  242
Romans,  49,  50
Roof-heads,  54
Ruminants,  extinct,  243
Russia,  Little,  48
Russians,  49

Saint-Prest  beds,  310
Sajous,  204,  etseq.
Salamander  of  (Eningen,

234
Samoieds,  8
Sand,  use  of,  78
Schwaan  skull,  349
Sclavonian  skulls,  49
Sella  turcica,  40
Semnopithecus,  455
Seth,  423

Sexual  differences,  81
Shells,  collections  of,  450
Shot,  use  of,  79
Siamang,  brain  of,  79
Side  view  of  brain,  102
Skin  of  man,  123
Skull,  capacity  of,  tables,

88
Slate  coal,  321
Slaveholders,  432
Sleep,  217,  399,  417_
Soluthum  skull,  377
Somme  valley,  17,  265
South   American  fauna,

290
Southern  States  of  Ame-
rica, 18


Species,  4,  216,  402

Sphenoid  bone,  bent,  42

Stone-period,  333,  369

Stalactites  and  stalag-
mites, 237

Sumatran,  50,  52

Sus  scrofa  et  palustris,
395

Sutures  of  the  skull,  38,
75

Swedish  skulls,  49

Switzerland,  315

Swytz  cattle,

Sylvian  fissure,  102

Synchronal  table  of  dilu-
vial formations,  326

Syphilitic  diseases,  23

Tatar  skull,  51

Temporal  muscle,  its  ac-
tion, 26

Tectocephali,  54

Tete  carree,  the,  20

Theology,  its  basis,  14

Thibet,  colossal  idols  of,
23

Thickness  of  the  skull,26

Thorax,  135

Time,  lapse  of,  a  factor,
15

Tiniere  mound,  360

Tower  heads,  54

Triangulation  of  the
skull,  25

Transitional  links,  453

Tschuktchis,  8

Tubal  Cain,  17,  368,  369

Crus,  397

Vaud,  canton  of,  365
Vertebral  division  of  the

skull,  103
Vertical  line,  the,  27

Wanderoo,  211
Wax  models,  79
Wauwyl,  348
Weeper  monkey,  34
Weight  of  the  brain,  83,

111
Wheat,  ancient,  355, 400
Wisent,  397

Yankee,  skull  of,  433
Yverdun,  365

Zoological  comparisons,

75
Zygomatic  arches,  141
i  i


474


INDEX     OF    AUTHORS.


Aeby,  2,  28,  153,  179
Agassiz,  2,  424,  455
Amiet,  377
Ascher,  433


Bachman,  13

Baer,  von,  23,  26,  45,  47,

48,  51,  53,  54,  59,  61,

63,  65,  67,  69,  75, 392
Bayle,  312
Beaumont,  Elie  de,  274,

279,  287
Berzelius,  158
Beyrich,  454
Bischoff,   133,    146,  167,

194
Blainville,  242
Bluinenbach,  8,  47,  189
Boehner,  3
Boucher  de  Perthes,  16,

17
Boyd,  83
Bravard,  263
Brehm,  230
Broca,  2,  22,  47,  49,  86,

88,  389,  424,  427,  438,

443
Brooke,  84
Brown,  329
Buchner,  3
Buffon,  220,  414
Burmeister,  22,  155, 178,

181
Busk,  2,  27,  28,  59,  61,

63,   65,   71,   303,   338,

341,  372,  384


Csesar,  246
Camper,  32,  35,  177
Candolle,  De,  4
Carriere,  11
Cams,  45
Chossat,  85
Christ,  400


Christol,  257
Claparede,  2,  392
CoUomb,  317
Crull,  76

Cuvier,  16,  83,  215,  234,
275,  408,  454


Dareste,  165
D'Archiac,  284,  287
Davis,  Barnard,  307
Darwin,  4,  15,  152,  411,

446,  449,  463
Decandolle,  355
Delalande,  140
Desor,  2,  317,  353,  360,

388,  411
Desnoyers,  287,  310
Dickeson,  293,  329
Dinipre,  273
D'Orbigny,  287
Dowler,  329
Dubois  de  Montpereux,  2


Eck,  3

Edwards,  Milne,  275

Esper,  257


Faber,  357

Falconer,  273

Filhol,  249

Flower,  79

Forchhammer,  333

Frere,  288

Fries,  4

Fuchs,  110

Fuhlrott,  2,  254,  299,  305


Gall,  187

Garrigou,  2,  249,  379
Gastaldi,  2,  360
Gaudry,  454,  462
Gauss,  84,  102,  110


Geoffroy,  106,  126,  157,
193,  225

Geoffroy,  L.,  437

Giebel,  205,  211,  220

Gillieron,  364

Gothe,  147

Gratiolet,  97,  106,  107,
113, 114,  163, 165,  166,
183,  211,  304,  464


Hausmann,  85,  87
Hebert,  280,  287
Heer,  320,  355,  356
His,  2, 359,  372,  377, 387,

388
Hugi,  377
Huschke,   79,    81,    108,

183,  206,  301
Huxley,  2,  117,  154,  156,

159, 160,  297,  307, 372


Jacquard,  182
Jayet,  364,  365
Jenni,  469
Jomard,  424
Juarez,  438


Keller,  2,  347,  352,  355

Kjerulf,  322

Kolk,  Schroder  von  der,

160
Kolliker,  124,  125
Kunol,  446
Kutorga,  344


Laugel,  310
Laplace,  438
Lartet,  258,  276,  454
Lay,  377

Leubuscher,  195,  200
Licktenberg,  80
Liebig,  320


INDEX   OF   AUTHOKS.


475


Link,  257

Linnaeus,  220

Linth,  Escher  von,  314

Loder,  147

Loven,  325,  458

Lucae,  32,  48,  55,  71,  75,

79,  306,  375
Lund,  290
Luther,  3
Lyell,  Sir  C,  2,  243,  271,

291,  311,  432


Marshall,  116,  160  .
Meckel,  39,  376
Meigs,  88,  92,  187
Messikomer,  2
Mommsen,  377
Montagne,  362
Morlot,  2,  315,  317,  333,

360
Morton,  8, 12,  76, 88, 144,

425,  433
Midler,  195,  200


Nathusius,  404,  407,  412
Nauclin,  4
Nilsson,  408


Otho,  415

Owen,  12,  84,  116,  144,
159,  195,  304,  397,  408


Parsons,  437

Patterson,  12

Perthes,  Boucher  de,267,

271,  277,  279
Pictet,  2,  244


Prestwich,  265,  289
Pruner-Bey,     127,    175,
178,  182,  184, 188, 189,
191,  362,  391,  430


Quatrefages,  2,  11,  225,
231,  272,  275,  428,  432
Quekett,  28
Quetelet,  7,  22


Eameses,  248
Eeclus,  430
Eegrner,  24
Eeiset,  432
Eengger,  421
Eembrandt,  433
Eetzius,  48
Eobert,  312
Eolle,  309
Eolleston,  160
Bosenmuller,  257
Bougemont,  3
Eoux,  418

Eutimeyer,  239, 244, 276,
355,  360,  324,  397

Sagot,  442
Sais,  324
Schaaffhausen,  257,  299,

302,  305,  307,  343,  372
Scherzer,  23,  56
Scheuchzer,  234
Schild,  2,  377
Schlagintweit,  23
Schleiden,  4
Schlotheim,  257
Schinerling,     241,    247,

276,  295
Schopenhauer,  133


Schroder  van  der  Kolk,

466
Schwab,  2,  377,  390
Schwarz,  23,  56
Serres,  257
Sommering,  182
Spring,  2,  344
Steenstrup,  333
Strobel,  360


Thenard,  158
Thiele,  168, 195
Tiedemann,  76,  88,  160
Tourtual,  257
Troyon,    347,   350,    365,
367


Valentin,  2,  375

Vibraye,  254

Virchow,  41,  56,  59,  60,

62,  64,  66,  68,  70,  382
Vrolik,  160,  466


Wagner,  9,  79,  83,  84,
86,  102,  111,  113,  151,
161,  162,  163, 194,  201,
220,  228,  453,  463

Wallace,  84

Weber,  121

Welcker,  8,  26,  38,  41,
46,  47,  49,  53,  59,  60,
62,  64,  66,  68,  70,  75,
80,  84,  91,  143,  296,
298,  379

Wilbrand,  11

Wirsing,  76

Worsaae,  333

Wundt,  231


T.   IUCHAhDS,   37,   GREAT   (jUEEN    ST11EET.


ERRATA.

PAGE

125    line

17

from  top

for  aureola

read  areola.

170      „

11

from  top

„   stationery

yy

stationary.

190      „

20

yy

...       „   saggital

yy

sagittal.

205      „

2

3)

„    Girbel

yy

Giebel.

297      „

17

S)

„   brow  bridges

yy

brow  ridges

353  top  line

„    crannags

yy

crannoges.

384      „

15

from  bottom      „   7,  8

J3

7-8.

307  bottom  line  . . .

„   vol.  i, 1864

JJ

'  vol.  i,  1865.

392  bottom  line  ...

„  Claraparede

yy

Claparede.

397      „

6

from  top

„  Wisent

*>

Bison.

4,  ST.  MARTIN'S  PLACE,  TRAFALGAR  SQUARE.


HIS  SOCIETY  is  formed  with  the  object  of  promoting
the  study  of  Anthropology  in  a  strictly  scientific  manner.
It  proposes  to  study  Man  in  all  his  leading  aspects,
physical,  mental,  and  historical ;  to  investigate  the  laws
of  his  origin  and  progress ;  to  ascertain  his  place  in
nature  and  his  relations  to  the  inferior  forms  of  life  ;  and
to  attain  these  objects  by  patient  investigation,  careful  induction,  and
the  encouragement  of  all  researches  tending  to  establish  a  cle  facto
science  of  man.  No  Society  existing  in  this  country  has  proposed  to
itself  these  aims,  and  the  establishment  of  this  Society,  therefore,  is  an
effort  to  meet  an  obvious  want  of  the  times.

This  it  is  proposed  to  do  :

First.  By  holding  Meetings  for  the  reading  of  papers  and  the
discussion  of  various  anthropological  questions.

Second.  By  the  publication  of  reports  of  papers  and  abstracts  of
discussions  in  the  form  of  a  Quarterly  Journal ;  and  also  by  the
publication  of  the*  principal  memoirs  read  before  the  Society,  in
the  form  of  Transactions.

Third.  By  the  appointment  of  Officers,  or  Local  Secretaries,  in  dif-
ferent parts  of  the  world,  to  collect  systematic  information.  It  will
be  the  object  oC  the  Society  to  indicate  the  class  of  facts  required,
and  thus  tend  to  give  a  systematic  development  to  Anthropology.

Fourth.  By  the  establishment  of  a  carefully  collected  and  reliable
Museum,  and  a  good  reference  Library.

Fifth.  By  the  publication  of  a  series  of  works  on  Anthropology  which
will  tend  to  promote  the  objects  of  the  Society.  These  works  will
generally  be  translations ;  but  original  works  will  also  be  admis-
sible.

Translations  of  the  following  works  are  now  ready.

Dr.  Theodor  Waitz.     Anthropology  of  Primitive  Peoples.     First  Part.    Edited

from  the  German  by  J.  Frederick  Collingwood,  Esq.,  F.E.S.L.,  F.G.S.,  Hon.

Sec.  A.S.L.,  with  corrections  and  additions  by  the  Author.     Price  16s.
Broca,  Dr.  Paul.     On  the  Phenomena  of  Hybridity  in  the  Genus  Homo.     Edited

from  the  French  by  C.  Carter  Blake,  Esq.,  F.G.S.,  F.  and  Assistant  Secretary

A.S.L.    Price  5s.
Pouchet,  Georges.     On  the  Plurality  of  the  Human  Bace.      Edited,  from  tho

French    (Second   Edition),   by   H.   J.   C.  Beavan,  Esq.,  F.R.G.S.,    F.A.S.L.

Price  7s.  Cd.
Carl  Vogt.     Lectures  on  Man :  his  place  in  Creation  and  in  the  History  of  the

Earth.    Edited  by  Dr.  James  Hunt,  F.S.A.,  F.R.S.L.,  Pres.  A.S.L.    Price  lGs.

b


The  following  work  is  also  in  the  press,  and  will  be  delivered  to  the
Fellows  of  the  Society  early  in  January  1865.

Blumenbach,   J.    F.,    The   Life,   and    Anthropological    Treatises,    of.      By   T.
Bendyshe,  Esq.,  M.A.,  F.A.S.L.
The  publication  of  the  following  works  is  contemplated  : —

Ketzius,  Professor.     The  Anthropological  Works  of.     Edited  by  A.  Higgins,

Esq.,  Hon.  For.  Sec.  A.S.L.
Gratiolet.      Memoire   sur  les   Plis   Cerebraux  de  1' Homme   et   des  Primates.

4to,  Paris,  1855.    Edited  by  Dr.  Daniel  H.  Tuke.
A.  de  Quatrefages.      Unite  de  l'Espece  Humaine.     Edited  by   G.  F.  Rolph,

Esq.,  F.A.S.L.     Svo.     Paris,  1861.
The   Anthropological  Papers  contained  in  the  Comptes  Rendus  des  Seances  de
l'Academie  des  Sciences.    Edited  by  George  E.  Roberts,  Esq.,  F.G.S.,  F.A.S.L.
Dr.  Theodor  Waitz,  Professor  of  Philosophy   in  the   University  of  Marburg.
Anthropologic  der  Naturvolker.     1SG1.     Second  part.     Edited  by  J.  Frederick
Collingwood,  Esq.,  F.G.S.,  F.R.S.L.,  Hon.  Sec.  A.S.L.
Von  Baer,  Carl  Ernst,  The  Anthropological  Works  of.

Gosse.     Memoire  sur  les  Deformations  Artificielles  du  Crane.     Svo.     Paris,  1855.
Bory  de  St.  Vincent.     Essai  zoologique  sur  le  genre  humain.    2  vols.    Paris,

3rd  ed.,  1836.     Edited  by  S.  E.  Bouverie-Pusey,  Esq.,  F.A.S.L.,  F.E.S.
Crull.     Dissertatio  anthropologico-medica  de  Cranio,  ejusque  ad  faciem  ratione.

Svo.     Groningen,  1810.
Lucas,  Prosper,  Dr.    Traite  sur  rheredite.    2  vols.

An  Encyclopaedia  of  Anthropological  Science.     Edited  by  T.   Bendyshe,  Esq.,

M.A.,  F.A.S.L.,  and  other  Contributors.

Sixth.     By  the  appointment,  from  time  to  time,  of  various  Committees

authorised  to  report  to  the  Society  on  particular  topics  which  may

be  referred  to  them ;    the  results  of  such  investigations  being  in

all  cases  communicated  to  the  Society.

OFFICERS    AND    COUNCIL    FOR    1864.

President.
James  Hunt,  Esq.,  Ph.D.,  F.S.A.,  F.R.S.L.,  Foreign  Associate  of  the  Anthropological

Society  of  Paris,  etc.
Vice-Presidents.
Captain  Richard  F.  Burton,  H.M.  Consul  at  Santos,  etc.-
Sir  Charles  Nicholson,  Bart.,  D.C.L.,  LL.D.,  F.G.S.,  etc.
The  Duke  of  Roussillon.


Honorary   Secretaries.
J.   Frederick  Collingwood,  Esq.,  F.R.S.L.,  F.G.S.,  Foreign  Associate  of  the  Anthi'o-

pological  Society  of  Paris.
George  E.  Roberts,  Esq.,  F.G.S.,  Foreign  Associate  of  the  Anthropological  Society

of  Paris.
Honorary    Foreign    Secretary.
Alfred  Higgins,  Esq.,  Foreign  Associate  of  the  Anthropological  Society  of  Paris.

Treasurer.
Richaid  Stephen  Cbarnock,  Esq.,  Ph.D.,  F.S.A.,  F.R.G.S.,  Foreign  Associate  of  the

Anthropological  Society  of  Paris.

COUNCIL.

Hugh  J.  C.  Beavan,  Esq.,  F.R.G.S.
T.  Bendyshe,  Esq.,  M.A.

W.  Bollaert,  Esq.,  Corr.  Mem.  Univ.  Chile,  and  Ethnological  Socs.  London  &  New  York.
S.  Edwin  Collingwood,  Esq.,  F.Z.S.
George  D.  Gibb,  Esq.,  M.A.,  M.D.,  LL.D.,  F.G.S.,  &c.
Professor  G.  W.  Leitner,  Ph.D.,  M.A.,  F.R.A.S.,  &c.
S.  E.  Bouverie-Pusey,  Esq.,  F.E.S.

W.  Winwood  Reade,  Esq.,  F.R.G.S.,  Corr.  Mem.  Geographical  Society  of  Paris.
C.  Robert  des  Ruffieres,  Esq.,  F.G.S.,  F.E.S.
Dr.  Berthold  Seemann,  F.L.S.
William  Travers,  Esq.,  F.R.C.S.

W.    S.   W.   Vaux,  Esq.  M.A.,  F.S.A.,  F.  and   Hon.   Sec.    R.S.L.,  Presideut  of  the
Numismatic  Society  of  London.


Curator,  Librarian,  and  Assistant  Secretary.
C.  Carter  Blake,  Esq.,  F.G.S.,  Foreign  Associate  of  the  Authropol.  Society  of  Paris,  etc


The  Terms  of  Membership  for  the  first  five  hundred  Fellows  (who
will  be  called  Foundation  Fellows)  are  Two  Guineas  per  annum,
which  will  entitle  every  Fellow  to  admission  to  the  Meetings,  one  copy
of  the  Quarterly  Journal,  the  Memoirs  of  the  Society,  and  a  Volume
(or  Volumes)  of  the  Translations  printed  by  the  Society.  Life  Mem-
bers, Twenty  Guineas.

Further  particulars  will  be  forwarded  on  application  to  the  Honorary
Secretaries.

The  following  papers,  amongst  others,  will  be  laid  before  the  Society
in  the  Session  1864-5.

C.  Carter  Blake,  Esq.,  F.G.S.     Report  on  the  Anthropological  Papers  read  at  the

Bath  Meeting  of  the  British  Association.
Captain  Burton,  V.P.A.S.L.     Notes  on  Certain  Facts  connected  with  the  Dahomans.
T.  W.  Pritchard,  Esq.,  F.R.G.S.,  F.A.S.L.,  On  Viti  and  its  Inhabitants.
W.  Bollaert,  Esq.,  On  the  Astronomy  of  the  Bed  Man  of  the  New  World.
Dr.  Barnard  Davis,  F.S.A.    The  Neanderthal  Skull;  its  peculiar  formation  considered

anatomically.
Samuel  Laing,  Esq.,  F.G.S. ,  On  the  Prehistoric  Remains  of  Caithness.
George  E.  Roberts,  Esq.,  F.G.S.,  Hon.  Sec.  A.S.L.,  On  the  Discovery  of  a  large

Kistvaen  in  the  Muckle  Heog,  in  the  island  of  Unst,  Shetland,  containing  Urns  of

Chloritic  Schist;  with  notes  upon  the  Human  Remains  by  C.  Carter  Blake,  F.G.S.
George  E.  Roberts,  F.G.S.,  Hon.  Sec.  A.S.L.,  On  Prehistoric  Hut  Circles.
Dr.  T.  W.  Smart  (communicated  by  Dr.  James  Hunt,  Pres.A.S.L.)     On  some  Ancient

Skulls.
Dr.  Bird,  On  Remains  from  the  British  Tumuli  at  Cheltenham.
Gastaldi  (Cavaliere  Bartolomeo.)     New  Notes  upon  Objects  of  high  Antiquity  found  in

the  Turbaries  and  Marl  Beds  of  Italy.     Translated  from  the  Italian  by  Charles

Harcourt  Chambers,  Esq.,  M.A.
T.  W.  Pritchard,  Esq.,  On  the  Physical  and  Psychological  Characters  of  the  Viti

Islanders.
W.  T.  Pritchard,  Esq.,  F.R.G.S.,  F.A.S.L.,  Notes  on  Certain  Anthropological  Matters

connected  with  the  South  Sea  Islanders.
T.  Bendyshe,  Esq.,  M.A.,  F.A.S.L.,  On  the  Materials  for  Anthropological  Study.
Geo.  E.  Roberts,  Esq.,  F.G.S.,  Hon.  Sec.  A.S.L.,  On  the  Discovery  of  Bones  of  Bear,

Megaceros,  and  other  Animals,  cut  and  sawn  by  flint  implements,  in  a  Gravel

Deposit  at  Richmond,  Yorkshire.
Edward    Lund,   Esq.,   F.R.C.S.E.    (communicated  by  Dr.  F.    Royston   Fairbank,

F.A.S.L.),  On  the  Discovery  of  Syphilis  in  a  Monkey  (Macacus  Sinicus).
E.  Sellon,  Esq.     On  the  Linga  Puja,  or  Phallic  Worship  of  India.
Dr.  John  Shortt.     An  Account  of  some  rude  Tribes,  the  supposed  Aborigines  of

Southern  India.
Dr.  John  Shortt,  On  the  Leaf -wearing  Tribes  of  India.
G.  Krefft,  Esq.     On  Australian  Skulls.

K.  R.  H.  Mackenzie,  Esq.,  F.S.A.     Notes  on  Fetish  Worship  in  Egypt.
W.  Bollaebt,  Esq.,  F.A.S.L.,  On  the  Maya  Alphabet.
G.  D.  Gibb,  Esq.,  M.D.,  LL.D.,  F.G.S.,  On  the  Larynx  of  the  Negro.
Dr.  Harley,  On  the  Poisoned  Arrows  of  Aboriginal  Man.
Viscount  Milton,  F.R.G.S.,  On  Californian  Kjokkenmoddings.
Dr.  James  Hunt,  F.S.A.,  F.R.S.L.,  Pres.  A.S.L.,  On  the  Principles  of  Anthropological

Classification.
A.  Higgins,  Esq.,  Hon.  For.  Sec.  A.S.L.,  On  the  Orthographic  Delineation  of  the  Skull.
T.  Bendyshe,  Esq.,  M.A.,  F.A.S.L.,  On  Early  Anthropology.
W.  Bollaert,  Esq.,  F.A.S.L.,  Introduction  to  the  Anthropology  of  America.
E.  Burnet  Tylor,  Esq.,  F.R.G.S.,  F.A.S.L.,  On  some  British  Kjokkenmoddings.
C.  Carter  Blake,  Esq.,  F.G.S.,  F.A.S.L.,  On  the  Cranioscopy  of  South  American

Nations.
C.  Carter  Blake,  Esq.,  F.G.S.,  F.A.S.L.,  On  the  Form  of  the  Lower  Jaw  in  tho  Races

of  Mankind.
Dr.  Murie,  On  the  Stature  of  Tribes  inhabiting  tho  Nile  Valley.
R.  S.  Charnock,  Esq.,  Ph.D.,  F.S.A.,  F.A.S.L.,  On  the  People  of  Andorra.
J.  F.  Collingwood,  Esq.,  F.R.S.L.,  F.G.S.,  On  Race-Antagonism.


PUBLICATIONS   OF   THE    ANTHROPOLOGICAL    SOCIETY.
Now  Ready,  in  1  vol.,  8vo.,  pp.  400,  price  10s.,  cloth,

Waitz's  Introduction  to  Anthropology.
Edited,  from  the  First  Volume  of  Anthropologic  der  Naturvolker,  by
J.  FREDERICK  COLLINGWOOD,F.R.S.L.,  F.G.S.,  F.A.S.L.,  Foreign  Associate
of  the  Anthropological  Society  of  Paris,  Honorary  Secretary  of  the  Anthro-
pological Society  of  London.

Extract  of  a  Letter  from  the  Author  to  the  Editor.
"I  have  received  your  translation  of  the  first  volume  of  my  'Anthropologic  der
Naturvolker,'  and  hasten  to  return  you  my  heartfelt  thanks  for  the  great  care  and
assiduity  which  you  have  bestowed  on  the  task.  I  am  fully  cognisant  of  the
great  difficulties  you  have  to  contend  with,  especially  as  my  style,  as  alluded  to
in  your  preface,  possesses  many  peculiarities,  so  that  even  German  men  of
science  consider  the  reading  of  my  books  rather  hard  work.  All  these  difficulties
you  have  surmounted  with  the  greatest  skill,  so  as  to  render  my  work,  as  it
appears  to  me,  into  very  pleasing,  readable  English."


OPINIONS    OF    THE    PRESS.


"A  more  felicitous  selection  could  not,
we  conceive,  by  any  possibility  have  been
made  than  the  very  one  which  has  re-
sulted in  the  publication  of  the  book
lying  before  us.  For  within  the  com-
pass of  the  first  volume  of  Dr.  Waitz's
Anthropologic  der  Naturvolker  is  com-
pacted together  the  most  comprehen-
sive and  exhaustive  survey  of  the  new
science  yet  contributed,  we  believe,  in
any  tongue  to  European  literature.  To
the  English  public  generally,  however,
it  is  a  book  almost  unknown,  saving  and
excepting  alone  by  reputation.  Al-
though merely  a  translation  from  the
German,  therefore,  the  work  is  virtually,
if  not  an  original  work,  a  perfectly  new
work  to  the  mass  of  readers  in  this
country.  So  far  as  this  same  rapidly
executed  work  of  translation  can  be
compared  and  collated  with  the  original,
it  appears  to  be  a  version  singularly
faithful  and  accurate. . . .  The  book,  as  it
now  appears,  is  a  work  of  especial  value,
and  also  one  of  very  peculiar  interest.
It  thoroughly  fulfils  its  design  of  afford-
ing the  reader  of  it,  within  a  single
volume,  the  very  best  epitome  any-
where to  be  found  of  what  is  the  actual
'present  state'  of  anthropological  sci-
ence in  Christendom.  Dr.  Waitz  takes
a  far  wider  range  within  his  ken  than
Prichard  and  Nott  and  Gliddon  com-
bined."— The  Sun,  Dec.  14,  18C3.

"  The  volume  in  every  page  exhibits
great  research  ;  it  abounds  with  inter-
esting speculation,  all  tending  the  right
way,  and  the  information  it  presents  is
happily  conveyed  in  a  popular  manner."
— Morning  Advertiser,  Nov.  16,  1863.


"  So  comprehensive  is  the  view  taken
by  the  author  of  all  that  pertains  to
man.thatamereenumeration  even  of  the
leading  topics  of  the  work  is  beyond
our  space,  and  we  must  content  our-
selves with  recommending  its  perusal  to
such  of  our  readers  as  are  interested  in
the  subject,  with  the  assurance  that  it
will  well  repay  the  trouble." — Weekly
Dispatch,  Nov.  29,  1863.

"This  handsomely  printed  volume
discusses  at  great  length  and  with
much  ability  the  question  as  to  the  races
of  man.  .  .  .  At  the.hands  of  Dr.  Waitz  it
has  met  with  calm  consideration,  and  in
its  English  dress  will  prove  botli  inter-
esting and  instructive.  It  displays
great  research,  and  contains  a  large  ex-
tent of  highly  interesting  matter." —
Liverpool  Albion,  Nov.  9,  1863.

"  From  such  a  bill  of  fare,  our  readers
will  be  able  to  judge  that  the  work  is
one  of  value  and  interest.  ...  It  is  of
the  nature  of  a  review,  arriving  at  a
comprehensive  and  proportional  esti-
mate, rather  than  at  minute  accuracy
of  detail,  such  as  may  be  sought  else-
where in  each  department." — Medical
Times,  Dec.  26,  1863.

"  Crammed  as  full  of  hard  facts  as
wellnigh  400  pages  of  large  8vo.  can
contain  ;  all  these  facts  attested  by  foot-
note authorities  marshalled  knee-deep
at  the  bottom  of  every  page;  with  a  list
of  contents  so  copious  as  to  eclipse
everything  of  the  kind  in  any  recent
scientific  volume,  and  yet  followed  by
an  index  more  minute  and  ample ;  this
work  is  a  magazine  of  the  infaut  science
of  Man;  a  model  of  German  industry,


PUBLICATIONS    OF    THE    ANTHROPOLOGICAL    SOCIETY.


erudition,  and  philosophical  devotion  ;
and  a  credit  to  the  Society  which  has
sent  forth,  in  a  shape  so  serviceable,
what  might  otherwise  have  proved  a
tantalising  mass  of  learned  collectanea.
.  .  .  We  have  perused  this  translated
volume  with  alternate  wonder  and
amazement  at  its  strange  assemblage
of  facts,  its  curious  classifications,  its
marvellous  revelations  of  human  pecu-
liarities ;  and  we  do  not  hesitate  to  say
that  more  food  for  speculation,  a  more
cosmopolitan  and  comprehensiveglance
over  all  the  developments  of  savage  and
civilised  man  has  been  collected  here,
than  could  have  been  dreamed  of  by  those
who  may  not  have  given  it  a  perusal." —
Dorset  County  Chronicle,  Nov.  18, 18G3.

"  Dr.  Waitz  would  appear  to  have
collected  together  all  the  authorities
and  contradictory  statements  of  former
writers.  .  .  .  The  present  work  will  be
hailed  with  pleasure  by  all  who  are  in-
terested in  the  study  of  anthropology,
and  will,  it  is  hoped,  induce  a  more
universal  acquaintance  with  the  sci-
ence."— Observer,  Nov.  8,  1863.

"  The  Anthropological  Society  of
London  have  done  well  in  publishing
a  translation  of  Dr.  Waitz's  Anthropo-
logic der  Naturvolker,  of  which  this
volume  is  the  first  instalment.  Dr.
Waitz's  work  is  by  far  the  most  com-
plete that  exists  on  the  subject  of
which  it  treats.  It  is  the  fullest  col-
lection of  facts,  interwoven  with,  and
made  to  bear  upon,  all  the  theories
(and  their  name  is  legion)  which  have
been  advanced  in  explanation  of  the
endless  diversities  and  resemblances
that  exist  among  mankind.  Dr.  Waitz
himself  is  wedded  to  no  particular
theory,  and  in  this  volume,  at  least,
advances  none,  but  he  points  out  with
great  clearness  the  effects  that  may  be
fairly  attributed  to  the  various  in-
fluences, external  and  internal,  physical
and  psychical,  which  affect  the  human
form  and  national  character." — The
Press,  Dec.  5,  1863.

"  This  volume  will  help  to  put  the
science  of  anthropology  in  a  proper
light  before  the  scientific  men  of  this
country.  Whatever  faults  we  may  have
to  find  with  this  work,  we  feel  sure  that
its  publication  marks  an  epoch  in  the
study  of  anthropology  in  this  country.
The  anthropologist  can  now  say  to  the
inquirer,  Read  and  study  Waitz,  and
London  :  Longman,  Green,


you  will  learn  all  that  science  has  yet  to
reveal." — Anthropolo[/icalRevieiv,No.3.

"  The  Anthropological  Society  de-
serve great  praise  for  the  energy  and
activity  they  display  in  prosecuting
their  object.  .  .  .  We  find  in  this  volume
a  fair  statement  and  discussion  of  the
questions  bearing  on  the  unity  of  man
as  a  species,  and  his  natural  condition
He  gives  a  very  clear  account  of  the
different  views  held  on  these  questions,
and  a  full  collection  of  the  facts,  or
supposed  facts,  by  which  they  are  sup-
ported. The  chief  fault  of  the  book  is,
indeed,  this  very  fulness  and  fairness  in
collecting  all  that  can  be  said  on  both
sides  of  a  question. . . .  We  must  regard
the  work  as  a  valuable  addition  to  the
books  on  this  subject  already  in  our
language,  and  as  likely,  by  the  thought
and  inquiry  it  must  suggest,  to  promote
the  great  end  of  the  Society — a  truer  and
higher  knowledge  of  man,  his  origin,
nature,  and  destiny." — The  Scotsman,
Dec.  7,  1863.

"  We  need  hardly  say,  that  it  is  quite
out  of  our  power  to  give  any  detailed
account  of  this  volume.  It  is  itself  a
volume  of  details.  Its  nature,  charac-
ter, and  value,  may  be  gleaned  from
the  criticism  bestowed  upon  it  by  the
Anthropological  Society,  and  by  the
fact  of  its  being  their  first  offering  to
their  members.  There  can  be  no  doubt
that  it  is  the  best  epitome  of  matters
anthropological  now  contained  in  our
language;  and  will  be  of  great  service
to  the  student  as  a  book  of  reference."
— British  Medical  Journal,  December
26,1863.

"  The  difficulties  which  a  reader
experiences  who  studies  Waitz's  original
German  version — difficulties  attendant
on  the  involution  of  his  style,  and  the
frequent  mistiness  of  his  forms  of
expression  —  vanish  in  the  English
edition,  which  also  differs  from  its
German  prototype,  inasmuch  as  the
embarrassing  references  which  Waitz
intercalated  in  his  text  are  prudently
cast  down  by  Mr.  Collingwood  to  the
foot  of  the  page.  .  .  .  The  student  will
but  have  to  read  it  through,  in  order  to
feel  himself  endowed  with  an  enormous
power  of  acquired  facts,  which,  if  he
duly  assimilates,  will  enable  him  to
wield  a  tremendous  weapon  in  contro-
versy against  the  unskilled  anthropo-
logist."— Reader,  November  7,  18G3.

and  Co.,  Paternoster  Row.


PUBLICATIONS    OF    THE    ANTHROPOLOGICAL    SOCIETY.
Now  ready,  in  1  vol.  8vo,  pp.  1:14,  price  5s.,  cloth.

On  the  Phenomena  of  Hybridity  in  the  Genus
HOMO.  By  Dr.  PAUL  BROCA,  Secretaire  General  a  la  Socieie
dAnthropologie  de  Paris.  Edited,  with  the  permission  of  the  Author,  by
C.  CARTER  BLAKE,  F.G.S.,  F.A.S.L.


OPINIONS     OF

"  Although  the  author  of  the  essay
can  scarcely  be  supposed  to  have  satis-
fied himself — much  less  to  have  satis-
fied his  scientific  readers — that  he  has
arrived  at  any  certain  and  well-ground-
ed conclusion,  he  deserves  the  credit  of
having  written  with  some  research  and
acumen.  It  is  evident  that  the  writer
of  the  book  has  a  strong  bias  to  the
polygenist  theory  of  the  origin  of  man-
kind, but  although  we  do  not  agree  with
him  in  his  principal  deductions  and
statements,  we  willingly  allow  his  work
to  be  an  able  monograph  on  a  highly-
interesting  and  curious  subject,  and  one
that  will  well  repay  perusal." — Medical
Times,  March  1864.

"  While  we  find  fault  with  the  con-
clusions at  which  M.  Broca  arrives,  we
cannot  deny  that  he  has  given  to  the
student  of  Anthropology  a  very  valuable
collection  of  information  on  an  almost
unexplored  subject.  We  have  only  to
guard  ourselves  from  being  led  away  by
the  specious  fallacies  of  his  reasoning,
and  we  shall  find  before  us  a  wide  field
of  thought  and  a  subject  of  enquiry  al-
most inexhaustible.  We  need  only  add
that  the  English  edition  has  been  pre-
pared with  great  care,  and  reflects  ex-
treme credit  upon  its  indefatigable
editor." — Tablet,  June  4,  18G4.

"  This  is  a  work  on  a  very  abstruse
and  much-debated  question,  and  the
author  has  brought  to  bear  upon  its
elucidation  a  vast  amount  of  scientific
research,  being  the  results  of  observa-
tions in  almost  every  part  of  the  world."
— Observer,  April  It),  18(5-4.

"  It  is  wonderful  what  solid  and  valu-
able information  has  been  here  com-
pacted together  within  less  than  one
London :  Longman,  Green,


THE     PRESS.

hundred  pages  octavo.  Another  work
of  very  considerable  value  has  thus
been  added  to  the  list  of  publications
now  commenced,  with  a  prospect,  let  us
hope,  of  fast  multiplying  into  a  sub-
stantial library,  under  the  auspices  and,
more  than  that,  under  the  careful  su-
pervision and  at  the  direct  instance  of
the  Society  of  our  London  Anthropolo-
gists."— Sun,  April  7th,  1804.

"  As  a  statement  of  the  argument  on
both  sides  of  a  subject  very  difficult  of
investigation,  Dr.  Broca's  treatise  is
most  acceptable,  although  we  are  by  no
means  satisfied  that  he  lias  entertained
all  the  causes  which  may  be  concerned
in  influencing  the  fertility  of  races,  inter
se,  in  his  estimate." — London  Iievietv,
June  4,  1804.

"  The  whole  subject  is  too  obscure  to
warrant  us  in  advocating  either  the  one
view  or  the  other ;  but  we  can  recom-
mend those  who  wish  to  make  them-
selves acquainted  with  the  present  state
of  our  information  on  the  question  to
study  the  able  treatise  before  us." —
Scotsman,  June  25,  1864.

"  It  may  be  stated  that  the  present
volume  is  the  only  one  which  completely
investigates  the  subject  of  human  hy-
bridity  The  volume  is  an  addition

to  scientific  lore  ;  we  have  no  doubt  that
the  members  of  our  various  learned
societies  will  appreciate  its  worth,  and
experience  the  same  pleasure  in  reading
the  translation  which  Mr.  Blake  states
he  received  when  he  first  perused  the
original.  It  is  dedicated  as  a  testimony
of  respect  and  friendship  to  Richard
Owen,  F.R.S." — Morning  Advertiser,
May  2,  1864.

and  Co.,  Paternoster  Row.


Price  Is.,  pp.  60,


On  the  Negro's  Place  in  Nature.  Read  before
the  Anthropological  Society  of  London,  November  17th,  1863.  By  James
Hunt,  Ph.D.,  F.3.A.,  F.R.S.L.,  Foreign  Associate  of  the  Anthropological  Society
of  Paiis,  President  of  the  Anthropological  Society  of  London.

London  :  Tiiubner  and  Co.,  60,  Paternoster  Row.


PUBLICATIONS    OF    THE    ANTHROPOLOGICAL    SOCIETY.
Now  ready,  in  1  vol.  8vo,  pp.  172.  price  7s.  (id.  cloth,

of    the    Human    Race :     by

>UCHET,  M.D.,  Licentiate  of  Nat.  Science,  Coir.  Mem.
Anthrop.  Soc.  of  London.     Translated  and  Edited  from  the  Second  Edition,  by


r|  lie    Plurality

X      GEORGES  POUCH


HUGH    J.  C.  BEAVAN,    Esq.,   F.B.G
Barrister-at-Law.

OPINIONS     OF

"  This  book,  which  has  already  had
considerable   success    in   France,    has
been  translated  for  the  publishing  com-
mittee of  the   Anthropological  Society
of  London,  and  the  task  confided  to
Mr.  Beavan  lias  been  accomplished  with
care  and  intelligence.     It  is  probably
the  first  work  of  the  kind  which  has
ever  been  given  to  the  English  literary
world  in  a  convenient  and  popular  form,
and,  though  it  contains  many  peculiar
thoughts  and  principles  widely  differing
from  the  opinions  of  the  general  public,
it  will  certainly  be  read  with  great  in-
terest.    There  is  much  clearness  and
even  brilliancy  in  M.  Pouchet's  style,
though  the  expressions  are  often  very
peculiar,  but  all  will  admit  that  it  is  a
well-considered  book,  and  full   of  im-
portant matter." — Observer,  Oct.  1,1864.
"  The  work  of    M.  Pouchet  is  very
brief,  and  yet  it  is  full  of  interest,  and,
in  the  course  of  some  couple  of  hundred
pages,  discusses  all  the  more  prominent
and  exciting  topics  in  the  physical  his-
tory of  man,  bringing  to  bear  upon  them
much  curious  information,  and  throw-
ing over  all  the  charm  of  a  most  plea-
sant and  vigorous  style." — London  Ee-
yiew,  Oct.  22,  1864.

"  This  slender  volume,  which  professes
to  teach  a  great  many  wonderful  things,
is  one  of  the  publications  of  the  An-
thropological Society.  It  is  the  work  of
a  French  savant,  Dr.  Pouchet,  who,  like
all  Frenchmen,  is  brilliant,  antithe-
tical, confident,  and  superficial.  We
have  neither  space  nor  time  to  enter
here  into  the  controversy  which  this
book  provokes,  but  merely  to  notice  the
manner  in  which  it  has  been  translated
and  edited  by  Mr.  Beavan.  Without
having  the  original  by  us  for  the  pur-
poses of  comparison,  we  can  see  that
the  translation  is  cleverly  done,  and
that  the  epigrammatic  terseness  of  the
French  literary  style  is  admirably  pre-
served in  the  translation.  The  editing
consists  of  a  sufficient  supply  of  explan-
atory footnotes,  a  proof  that  the  work
has  been  done  in  a  careful  scholarly
manner,  and  not  with  that  haste  and
slovenliness  which  disfigure  too  many


S.,    F.A.S.L.


of    the   Middle   Temple,


THE     PRESS.

To  those  who  take  an  interest  in  anthro-
pological investigations  Mr.  Beavan's
Pouchet  will  be  a  'handy -book'  of
considerable  value." — United  Service,
Gazette,  Nov.  19,  1864.

"  Ranging  himself  in  the  ranks  of  be-
lievers in  original  diversity  of  race,  M.
Pouchet  here  reviews  the  evidence  for
and  against  this  theory,  and  states  in
his  Recapitulation  that '  Since  we  have
found  that  man  is  comparable  in  all
points  to  animals,  we  ought  to  seek  for
him  and  for  them  a  common  origin,
and  the  difficulty  of  admitting  an  initial
miracle  has  led  us  to  the  idea  of  evolu-
tion.' .  .  .  The  work  is  published  for  the
Anthropological  Society,  and  to  students
of  that  science  it  will  be  welcome  and
useful."  —  Weekly  Dispatch,  Oct.  23,
1864.

"  The  work,  from  its  largeness  of  il-
lustration, cannot  but  interest  those
who  may  nevertheless  protest  against
the  writer's  conclusions  as  vigorously
as  his  editor  feels  obliged  to  do." —
Globe,  Oct.  31,  1864.

"  This  work  is  published  by  'The  An-
thropological Society,'  and  is  one  of
those  remarkable  treatises  which  give
rise  to  so  much  discussion  in  the  pre-
sent times,  inasmuch  as  it  treats  of  the
subject  of  the  development  of  the  hu-
man family  from  more  than  one  source
with  considerable  cleverness,  although
not  with  arguments  sufficiently  forcible
or  unanswerable  to  convince  those,  who
are  resolved  to  adhere  to  the  simplicity
of  the  Mosaic  definition.  That  there
are  many  infidel  notions  expressed  in
M.  Georges  Pouchet's  original  text,  the
translator  does  not  hesitate  to  assert.
Indeed,  he  is  frequently  at  the  pains  to
demolish  their  fallacy,  and  expose  many
other  faults  of  the  author,  discrimi-
nating with  considerable  tact  between
what  is  deserving  of  consideration  and
what  is  manifestly  insidious  and  falla-
cious. The  treatise  is  not  a  book  for
the  multitude,  but  rather  for  the  learned
and  scientific,  and  may  be  pronounced
to  be  clever  and  dexterous  rather  than
sound  and  convincing." — Bell's  Messen-
ger, Oct.  8,  1804.


of  our  translations  from  the  French.

London  :  Longjian,  Green,  and  Co.,  Paternoster  Row.


PUBLICATIONS    OF    THE    ANTHROPOLOGICAL    SOCIETY.


In  the  Press,  and  will  be  published  early  in  January  1865.

MEMOIRS

READ    BEFORE   THE

ANTHROPOLOGICAL    SOCIETY   OF    LONDON,

COMPRISING  THE   FOLLOWING  :  —

I.  On    the   Negro's   Place   in   Nature.      By   James  Hunt,   Ph.D.,   F.S.A.,

F.R.S.L.,  FA.S.L.,  President  of  the  Anthropological  Society  of  London.

II.  On  the  Weight  of  the  Brain  in  the  Negro.     By  Thomas   B.  Peacock,

M.D.,  F.R.C.P.,  F.A.S.L.
III.  Observations  on   the  Past  and  Present  Populations  of  the  New  World.

By  W.  Bollaert,  Esq.,  F.A.S.L.
IV.  On  the  Two  Principal  Forms  of  Ancient  British   and  Gaulish    Skulls.
By  J.  Thurnam,  Esq.,  M.D.,  F.A.S.L.     (With  Lithographic  Plates  and
Woodcuts.)
V.  Introduction  to   the   Palaeography  of  America.     By  W.  Bollaert,  Esq.,

F.A.S.L.
VI.  Viti  and  Its  Inhabitants.     By  W.  T.  Pritchard,  Esq.,  F.R.G.S.,  F.A.S.L.
VII.  On  the  Astronomy  of  the  Bed  Man  of  the  New  World.     By  W.  Bollaert,
Esq.,  F.A.S.L.
VIII.  The  Neanderthal  Skull :    its  peculiar  formation  considered  anatomically.
By  J.  Barnard  Davis,  M.D.,  F.S.A.,  F.A.S.L.
IX.  On  the  Discovery  of  a  large  Kistvaen  in  the  Muckle  Heog,  in  the  Island  of
Unst,  Shetland,  containing  Urns  of  Chloritic  Schist.     By  George  E.
Roberts,  Esq.,  F.G.S.,  Hon.  Sec.  A.S.L.     With  Notes  upon  the  Human
Remains.     By  C.  Carter  Blake,  Esq.,  F.A.S.L.,  F.G.S.
X.  Notes  on  some  facts  connected  with  the  Dahomans.      By  Capt.  Richard

F.  Burton,  V.P.A.S.L.
XL  On  the  Physical  and  Psychological  Characters  of  the  Viti  Islanders.     By

W.  T.  Pritchard,  Esq.,  F.R.G.S.,  F.A.S.L.
XII.  On  the  Linga  Puja,  or  Phallic  Worship  of  India.     By  E.  Sellon,  Esq.
XIII.  On    Certain    Anthropological    Matters    connected    with   the   South   Sea

Islanders.     By  W.  T.  Pritchard,  Esq.,  F.R.G.S.,  F.A.S.L.
XIV.  New  Notes  upon  Objects  of  high  Antiquity  found  in  the  Turbaries  and
Marl  Beds  of  Italy.    By  Cavaliere  Bartolomeo  Gastaldi.    Translated
from  the  Italian  by  Charles  Harcourt  Chambers,  Esq.,  M.A.,  F.A.S.L.
London  :  Trubner  and  Co.,  60,  Paternoster  Row.

PUBLICATIONS    OF   THE    ANTHROPOLOGICAL   SOCIETY.

In  the  Press.

Blumenbach  (J.  F.),  Lives  and  Anthropological
TREATISES  of,  including  the  De  Generis  Humatii  Varietate  Nativa,  etc.
Translated  and  Edited  by  T.  Bendyshe,  Fellow  of  King's  College,  Cambridge.

London  :  Longman  and  Co.,  Paternoster  Row.

.         _

Price  6d. ,

Introductory  Address  on  the  Study  of  Anthro-

J.  POLOGY,  delivered  before  the  Anthropological  Society  of  London,  February
24th,  1803.  By  James  Hunt,  Ph.D.,  F.S.A.,  F.R.S.L.,  Foreign  Associate  of  the
Anthropological  Society  of  Paris,  President.

London  :  Trubner  and  Co.,  60,  Paternoster  Row.

Price  fid.,

Annual  Address  to  the  Anthropological  Society
OF  LONDON,  Jan.  5th,  1864.  By  JAMES  HUNT,  Ph.D.,  F.S.A.,
F.R.S.L.,  Foreign  Associate  of  the  Anthropological  Society  of  Paris,  President  of
the  Anthropological  Society  of  Loudon.

London :  Trubner  and  Co.,  60,  Paternoster  Row.


ANTHEOPOLOGICAL     REVIEW,

AND

Journal  of  the  Anthropological  Society  of  London.


VOL.   I  NOW  BEADY,   PRICE   Ws.


CONTENTS.


On  the  Study  of  Anthropology.    By  Dr.  James

Hunt,  F.S.A.,  President  A.S.L.
Wild  Men  and  Beast  Children.     By  E.  Burnet

Tylor,  P.A.S.L.
On  the  Tribes  of  Loreto  in  Northern  Peru.

By  Professor  Raimondi.     Translated  froni

the  Spanish  by  William  Bollaert,  F.A.S.L.
A   Day  with   the  Fans.     By  Captain  R.  P.

Burton,  H.M.  Consul  at   Fernando   Po,

and  V.P.A.S.L.
On  the  Difference  between  Man  and  the  Lower

Animals.  By  Theodor  Bischoff.  Translated

from  the  German.
Summai-y  of  the  Evidence  of  the  Antiquity

of  Man.     By  Dr.  James  Hunt.
Huxley  on  Man's  Place  in  Nature.
Jackson  on  Ethnology  and  Phrenology.
Lyell  on  the  Geological  Evidence  of  the  An-
tiquity of  Man.
Wilson's  Pre-historic  Man.
Pauly's  Ethnographical  Account  of  the  Peoples

of  Russia.
Commixture  of  the  Races  of  Man.     By  John

Crawfurd,  Esq.,  F.R.S.
Burton's  Prairie  Traveller.
Owen  on  the  Limbs  of  the  Gorilla.
Man  and  Beast.     By  Anthropos  (C.    Carter

Blake).
Dunn's  Medical  Psychology.
Human  Remains  from  Moulin-Quignon.  By  A.

Tylor, Esq.,  F.G.S. (WithanTllustraMon.)
Notes  of  a  Case  of  Microcephaly.     By  R.  T.

Gore,  Esq.,  F.A.S.L.
Notes   on  Sir  C.  Lyell's  Antiquity  of  Man.

By  John  Crawfurd,  Esq.,  F.R.S.
Falconer  on  the  reputed  FossilMan  of  Abbeville
Miscellanea  Anthropologica.
Journal    of   the  Anthropological    Society   of

London.
On  the   Science    of    Language.      By   R.    S.

Charnock,  Esq.,  F.S.A.,  F.A.S.L.
Fergusson  on  the  Influence  of  Race  on  Art.
On  the  Creation  of  Man  and  Substance  of  the

Mind.    By  Prof.  Rudolph  Wagner.
Pictet  on  the  Aryan  Race.
Ethnological  Inquiries  and  Observations.     By

the  late  Robert  Knox,  M.D.
On  the  Application  of  the  Anatomical  Method

to   the   Discrimination    of   Species.     By

the  same.
On  the  Deformations  of  the  Human  Cranium,

supposed  to  be  produced  by  Mechanical

Means.     By  the  same.
History  of  the  Proceedings  of  the  Anthropo-
logical  Society   of  Paris.      By   M.    Paul

Broca,  Secretary-General.
On  the  supposed  increasing  Prevalence  of  Dark

Hair  in  England.    By  John  Beddoe,  M.D.,

F.A.S.L.
The    Abbeville    Fossil    Jaw.      By  M.  A.   de

Quatrefages.    Translated  by  G.  F.  Rolph,

Esq.
Miscellanea  Anthropologica.


On  Cerebral  Physiology.

Seemann  on  the  Inhabitants  of  the  Fiji  Islands.
By  A.  A.  Fraser,  Esq.,  F.A.S.L.

The  relation  of  Man  to  the  Inferior  Forms  of
Animal  Life.  By  Charles  S.  Wake,
Esq.,  F.A.S.L.

Proceedings  of  Anthropological  Society  of  Paris

Anthropology  at  the  British  Association : —
Dr.  Hunt  on  Anthropological  Classifica-
tion ;  Mr.  Carter  Blake  on  South  Ameri-
can Cranioscopy ;  Dr.  Hunt  on  the  Negro ;
Mr.  W.  Turner  on  Cranial  Deformities :
Mr.  Duckworth  on  the  Human  Cranium
from  Amiens ;  Professor  King  on  the
Neanderthal  Skull ;  Dr.  Embleton  on  the
Anatomy  of  a  Young  Chimpanzee ;  Mr.
Carter  Blake  on  Syndactyly ;  Mr.  Roberts
and  Professor  Busk  on  a  Cist ;  Mr.
Crawfurd  on  the  Commixture  of  Man ;
Dr.  Camps  on  Troops  in  India ;  Dr.
Murray  on  Instinctive  Actions;  Mr.
Samuelson  on  Life  in  the  Atmosphere ;
Mr.  Glaisher  on  the  Influence  of  High
Altitudes  on  Man ;  Mr.  Hall  on  the  Social
Life  of  the  Celts ;  Mr.  Petrie  on  the
Antiquities  of  the  Orkneys  ;  Lord  Lovaine
on  Lacustrian  Human  Habitations  ;  Pro-
fessor Beete  Jukes  on  certain  Markings
on  the  Horns  of  Megaceros  Hibemicus ;
Mr.  Crawfurd  on  Sir  C.  Lyell's  Antiquity
of  Man ;  Professor  Phillips  on  the  An-
tiquity of  Man ;  Mr.  Godwin-Austen  on
the  Alluvial  Accumulation  in  the  Valleys
of  the  Somme  and  Ouse ;  Mr.  Wallace
on  Man  in  the  Malay  Archipelago ;  Mutu
Coomara  Swamy  on  the  Ethnology  of
Ceylon ;  Mr.  Crawfurd  on  the  Origin  of
the  Gypsies ;  Mr.  Crawfurd  on  the  Celtic
Languages  ;  Mr.  Charnock  on  Celtic  Lan-
guages ;  Personal  Recriminations  in  Sec-
tion D  ;    Concluding  Remarks.

Waitz's  Introduction  to  Anthropology.

Kingsley's  Water  Babies.

Lunacy  and  Phrenology,  by  C.  Carter  Blake,
Esq.,  F.G.S.,  F.A.S.L.

The  Rival  Races ;  or,  the  Sons  of  Joel.

Ramsay  on  Geology  and  Anthropology.

Baruch  Spinoza.

Anthropology  in  the  Nursery.

Miscellanea  Anthropologica.

Journal  of  the  Anthropological  Society:
Tylor  on  Human  Remains  from  Moulin-
Quignon  ;  Schvarcz  on  Permanence  of
Type;  Wake  on  Man  and  the  Lower
Animals;  Bollaert  on  Populations  of  the
New  World;  Marshall  on  Microcephaly;
Busk  on  Human  Remains  from  Chatham  ;
Bendyshe  on  Anglo-Saxon  Remains  from
Barrington ;  Charnock  on  Science  of  Lan-
guage; Winwood  Reade  on  Bush  Tril  cs
of  Equatorial  Africa;  General  Meeting  of
the  Society;  Carter  Blake  or.  Antiquity
of  the  Human  Race.


LONDON:  TRUBNER  &  CO.,  60,  PATERNOSTER  ROW.


ANTHROPOLOGICAL      REVIEW

AND

Journal  of  the  Anthropological  Society  of  London.


VOL.    II  NOW  READY,   PRICE   16s.


CONTENTS.


On  the  Human  Hair  as  a  Race-Character.
By  Dr.  Pruner  Bey.

Pott  on  the  Myths  of  the  Origin  of  Man  and
Language.

Italian  Anthropology.

On  the  Scytho-Cimmerian  Languages'.

Notes  on  Scalping.     By  Richard  F.  Burton.

Eenan  on  the  Shemitic  Nations.

Abnormal  Distortion  of  the  Wrist.  By  Charles
H.  Chambers.

Human  Eemains  from  Lough  Gur,  County
Limerick.

Danish  Kitchen-middens.  By  Charles  H.
Chambers.

Miscellanea  Anthropologica.

Inquiry  into  Consanguineous  Marriages  and
Pure  Eaces.     By  Dr.  E.  Dally.

Peyrerius,  and  Theological  Criticism.  By
Philalethes.

Miscegenation.

Anthropology  in  its  Connection  with  Che-
mistry.

Savage  Africa.

Ethnology  and  Phrenology  as  an  Aid  to  the
Biographer.     By  J.  W.  Jackson.

Proceedings  of  the  Anthropological  Society
of  Paris.

Correspondence.

Miscellanea  Anthropologica.

On  the  Distinction  between  Man  and  Ani-
mals.    By  Philalethes.

On  the  Phenomena  of  Hybridity.

Thoughts  and  Facts  contributing  to  the
History  of  Man.

On  the  Importance  of  Methodical  Classifica-
tion in  American  Eesearches.  By  A.
De  Bellecombe.  Translated  by  W.  H.
Garrett,  Esq.,  F.A.S.L.

Anthropotomy.

Doyle's  Chronicle  of  England.

Anthropological  Documents  of  the  State  of
New  York.  By  George  E.  Eoberts,  Esq.,
P.G.S.,  Hon.  Sec.  A.S.L.

Doherty's  Organic  Philosophy.

Proceedings  of  the  Anthropological  Society
of  Paris.

The  Fossil  Man  of  Abbeville  again.

Miscellanea  Anthropologica.

Notes  on  Waitz's  Anthropology.  By  Captain
E.F.  Burton,  V.P.A.S.L.

Bain  on  the  Senses  and  the  Intellect.

The  Gipsies  in  Egypt.  By  Alfred  vonKremer.

On  the  Ideas  of  Species  and  Eace  applied  to
Man  and  Human  Society.  By  M.  Cournot.

Slavery.     By  James  Eeddie,  Esq.,  F.A.S.L.

Anthropology  at  the  British  Association.
a.d.  1864.

Burton's  Mission  to  Dahome.  By  W.  Win-
wood  Eeade,  F.A.S.L.,  F.E.G.S.

Miscellanea  Anthropologica.


Journal  of  the  Anthropological  Society:
Carter  Blake  on  the  Anthropological
Papers  read  at  Newcastle  ;  G.  E.  Eoberts
and  Professor  Busk  on  the  Opening  of  a
Cist  of  the  Stone  Age ;  Captain  Eustace
W.  Jacob  on  Indian  Tribes  of  Vancouver's
Island ;  Dr.  James  Hunt  on  the  Negro's
Place  in  Nature ;  C.  E.  Markham  on
Quartz  Cutting  Instruments  from  Chan-
duy  ;  G.  E.  Eoberts  on  Mammalian  Bones
from  Audley  End  ;  A.  Bryson  on  Arrow
Heads  from  the  Bin  of  Cullen  ;  Dr.  F.  E.
Fairbank  on  Flint  Arrow  Heads  from
Canada ;  Count  Oscar  Eeichenbach  on
the  Vitality  of  the  Negro  Eace ;  General
Meeting  of  the  Society;  President's  An-
nual Address ;  E.  Lee  on  the  Extinction
of  Eaces  ;  T.  Bendyshe  on  the  Extinction
of  Eaces;  Dr.  C.  G.  Cams  on  the  Con-
struction of  the  Upper  Jaw  of  a  Green-
lander;  C.  Carter  Blake's  Report  on  the
same  subject;  Jas.  Reddie  on  Anthro-
pological Desiderata;  Rev.  J.  M.  Joass
on  some  Pre-historic  Dwellings  in  Boss-
shire,  with  an  Introduction  by  George  E.
Eoberts  ;  C.  Carter  Blake  on  the  alleged
Peculiar  Characters,  and  assumed  Anti-
quity of  the  Human  Cranium  from  the
Neanderthal ;  Alfred  E.  Wallace  on  the
Origin  of  Human  Eaces,  etc. ;  Schlagint-
weit  on  some-  Ethnographical  Casts,
etc. ;  Dr.  Shortt  on  the  Domber :  Pike
on  the  Place  of  the  Science  of  Mind  and
Language  in  the  Science  of  Man ;  Guppy
on  the  Capabilities  of  the  Negro  for
Civilisation  ;  Farrar  on  the  Universality
of  Belief  in  God,  and  in  a  Future  State ;
Farrar  on  Hybridity  ;  Burton  and  Carter
Blake  on  Skulls  from  Annabom  in  the
West  African  Seas ;  Thurnam  on  the
Two  Principal  forms  of  Crania  in  the
Early  Britons ;  Bollaert  on  the  Palaeo-
graphy of  the  New  World;  Bendyshe
on  the  Precautions  which  ought  to  have
been  taken  to  ensure  the  health  of  British
Troops  had  any  been  sent  to  Copen-
hagen ;  Roberts  and  Bolton  on  the  Kirk-
head  Cave,  near  Ulverstone  ;  Blake  and
Roberts  on  Human  Remains  from  Peter-
borough ;  Bollaert  on  the  Alleged  Intro-
duction of  Syphilis  from  the  New  World ;
Gibb  on  Extreme  Hypertrophy  of  the
Skull ;  Roberts  and  Carter  Blake  on  a
Jaw  from  Buildwas  Abbey,  Salop ;  Carter
Blake  on  Human  Remains  from  Kent's
Hole,  Torquay ;  Carter  Blake  on  Human
Remains  from  a  Bone  Cave  in  Brazil ;
Broca  on  Skulls  from  the  Basque  Pro-
vinces, and  from  a  Cave  of  the  Bronze
Period  ;  Pusey  on  the  Negro  in  Relation
to  Civilised  Society.


LONDON  -.    TRUBNER    &    CO.,    60,    PATERNOSTER    ROW.


i


fflflimiiii.
